Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 

/^y^6.>5>5\^ 

L 

HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 

FROM THE 

Subscription Fund 

BEGUN IN i8;S 

- — ■— 

1 

WL 

^' 

CHAUCER^S 

77?^^ TISE ON THE ASTROLABE. 

CHAUCER^S 

TREA TISE ON THE ASTROLABE. 

THE .TREATISE 

ON THE ASTEOLABE, 

Y/ 

EDITED 

WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTEATI0N3. 

sr 

ANDREW EDMUND BRAE. 

"And to his Mime that called was Lowys 
He nude ■ treatise full noble ood of gret p: 

.fl LONDON : 

JOHN KUSSELL SMITH, 

36, 80 HO SQUARE. 

MDOOCLXX. 

101 

^ A 

tv 

RAftVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY 

CONTENTS 

ISTBQDUCflDSI 
ExFLAHAXIOai or THE 

TheProlume ..... 
Description of ike Astrolabe . 

The G0NCLUS10K& 

L The Sun's Place 
n. Taking Altitudes 
ni. The Day of the Month 
lY. The Hour of Day or Night and the Ascendant 
y. The Technical Ascendant 
VL The Mean of Almicanteis 
VIL Twilight 
VIIL The Diumal Arke 
IX. The Conversion of Horns 
X. The Vulgar Day 
XL Hours Inequale by Day and Night 
XIL Equal Hours . 
XIIL Planetary Hours 
XrV. Oblique Ascension 
XY. Declination of a Point in the Ecliptic 
XVI. Latitude of Construction 
XYII. Meridian Altitude 
XYIIL Sun's Place in the Ecliptic 
XIX. Similar Days . 
XX. Similar Points in the Ecliptic . 
XXL Stars Indeterminate 
XXIL Stars Determinate 
XXIIL Elevation of the Pole . 
XXIY. Terrestrial Latitude . 
XXY. Altitude of the Pole . 
XXYL Terrestrial Latitude . 
XXYIL Right and Oblique Ascensions* 
XXYIII. Bight Ascension of Signs 
XXIX. Oblique Ascension of Signs 
XXX. The Cardinal Points . 
XXXI. Celestial Latitudes 

1 

. 19 

33 

33 

33 

33 

35 

37 

37 

38 

38 

38 

39 

39 

40 

41 

41 

41 

42 

42 

42 

43 

43 

44 

46 

40 

46 

47 

48 

48 

49 

6C 

60 

1 

CTONTSNTS 

• 

PAGE. 

XXXII. 

Azimuth at Bising . . . . .51 

XXXIII. 

Points of the Compass 

. 52 

XXXIV. 

Bearing of a Conjunction 

. 52 

XXXV. 

Azimuth in Altitude . 

. 53 

XXXVI. 

Celestial Longitudes . 

. 53 

XXXVII. 

Motion Direct or Retrograde . 

• 

. 53 

XXXVIIL 

Equations of Houses . 

. 64 

XXXIX. 

Equations of Houses . 

. 66 

XL. 

Meridional Line 

. 55 

XLL Terrestrial Longitude . 

. 56 

XLIL 

(Apochryphal 1) 

. 67 

Practice of Umbra Recta and Umbra Versa 

. 59 

APPENDIX 

Reprints. 

L The Pilgrimage to Canterbury . 
II. The Arke of Artificial Day 

III. Astronomical Evidence. 

IV. The Star Min Al auwH . 
V. Tests of Positions 

Notes on the Reprints. 

A. The Halfe Cours in Aries 

B. The Zodiacal Signs 

C. The Angle Meridional . 

D. The Star Min Al auwi . 

65 

68 
71 
74 
79 

81 
84 
86 
88 

Essays. 

On the Meaning of Chaucer's Prime 
On the Carrenare. 
On Shippbs Oppostbrbs . 

90 
101 
106 

EREATA. 

Page 5, line 2, for " 1798 '* read '* 1598." 

Page 56, Conclusion XL.-^The alteration made in the text of this Con* 
elusion, as explained in the foot-note, is unnecessary. For the 
apparatus may have been intended for the Winter and not for tlie 
Summer Solstice, in which case the original proportion of one quarter 
of the shadow for the gnomon would be sufficiently correct. 

Page 46, in foot note, for "pp. 28, 24," lead pp. 9, 10. . 

Page 88, in Note D^ passim, for " min al away," read min al auw4. 

Page 91, line 30, for " coeval," read coeval. 

Page^94, line 20, for "jeutaculnm," read jentaculum. 

Paee Line 

5 

2 

21 

fi 

4J1 

2 

PRINTER'S AND OTHER ERRORS. 

For 17«3 read 1598. 

For one to one read owre to oicre. 

Insert the following p»ragraph, which is in tvery edition, printed and MS., 

but was acndentally oonitted here — 

"And everieh of tht^se signes bath ref>pecte to a certeyn parcell of the 
bodie of a man and hath it in goveruannce. As Aries hath thyn hed« and 
Taurus thy neeke and thy throte, Gemini thyne armholes and thyne armes, 
and so forth as shall be showed more plain in the flfte partye of this tretys. 
The Zodiak the which is partye of the eyght spere overkenrith the equi- 
noctial and he everkenrith him ageyn in evene partes, and that one half 
declineth southward and that other northward as plainlie declareth the 
tretys of the spere." 
33 21 For *' when thou liste," read • when ihie liste.' 

[But see ' Knighrs Tale ' 1183, where the Corpus MS. has ' thou list' ami 

the Lansdowne MS. the same.] 
Transpose, and read " the laste chapter of the fowerth partye." 
In foot-note add, '* Bat it must be said that Steven's ' teching ' is supported 
by several MSS." 

For * signet ** read * line meridional.' 
For nere re&d/krtker. 
And for the first note substitute 

*' Stevens properly changed nere of the MSS. into/itri^cr." 

In the 6th line of the second footnote deme " the two first of the terms are 
transposed,'^ and substitute " <Ae dijffe^eTtee of the points multiplied hy the 
letigih of the scale is the first term, the second is the distance beticeen the 
nations, the third is the product qfone point multiplied by the cther^ and the 
fourth is the altitude required** 
For • John de Belethus ' read * Joannes Belethus.' 
For *jeutaculnm' read jentaculara. 
For ' Thomas ' read Francis, 

4() 

4 

4U 

56 

21 

62 

9 

90 

23 

94 

20 

99 

22 

( 

ihttrotiuctton. 

iTHOUGH the Treatise on the Astrolabe is, in some respects, the 
most interesting of Chaucer's works — inasmuch as it brings us 
into familiar and ahnost domestic communion with his individm\l 
self, while he describes to his ^'lytel sonne," with delightful 
simplicity and in the most inartificial language, the sort of scientific know- 
edge which in those early days, even more than at present, was considered 
necessary to a gentleman's education — yet it has received so little care and 
attention from the editors of his works, that, since the edition of Urry, in 
1721, it has not been included in any modem reprint And even then, Urry 
did little more than blindly copy from preceding editions, without any 
attempt to explain, amend, or illustrate the text. 

Several years ago (in 1851) I published a series of papers explanatory of the 
astronomical allusions of Chaucer in the Canterbury Pilgrimage. These I 
shall reprint in an Appendix to this volume — if for no better reason — to shew 
the length of time my attention has been given to the subject, as well as to 
rescue the papers themselves from the oblivion of ephemeral publication. In 
the preparation of those papers I had necessarily recourse to Chaucer's Treatise 
on the Astrolabe, as printed in Urry's edition of the works, and I found it in 
such a deplorably faulty and neglected state, that the necessity of rectifying 
such parts as I then required awakened in me a desire to re-edit the whole. 
And although various causes had prevented the fulfilment of this object until 
the present time, it had never been lost sight of. For it appeared very evident 
to me then— and I have seen no reason since to alter the opinion — that a 
direct connection may be traced between the subject I was then engaged upon, 
namely, the astronomical evidence of date in the Canterbury Tales, and this 
Treatise on the Astrolabe. The date of the Pilgrimage, as I then endeavoured 
to shew, was 1388, and the avowed date of this Treatise is 1391 : it seems then 
an almost unavoidable inference, — that we owe this practical treatise to the 
preparative study of the subject undertaken by Chaucer for the purpose of in- 
venting and verifying his intended astronomical phenomena in diversifying 
the incidents of his Canterbury Pilgrimage. 

B 

2 INTRODUCTION. 

And yet this intere&tieg attempt on the part of an imaginative poet to ren- 
der science familiar in what may be termed one of our earliest and simplest 
popular treatises, is that portion of Chaucer's works which, of all others, Ms 
editors have most culpably misimderstood and neglected. 

Nor is it in the editing only of former printed editions of this little treatise 
that it appears to have been read with strange absence of care and intelligence ; 
the same fate has attended it when only incidentally alluded to. For example, 
J. Thompson, in his " Life of Geofl&y Chaucer," prefixed to Urry's edition of 
the works, writes : — 

** He (Chaucer) retired to Woodstock ; and weary of a long series of hurry, 
noise, danger, and confusion, he shifted it for quiet and the calm pleasure of a 
studious safety, which produced his excellent Treatise of the Astrolabe, which 
is calculated for the latitude of Woodstock, being a small matter different (as 
he says) from that of Oxford." 

This last assertion ** (ow he says)" Thompson attempts to support by referring 
in a foot note to this passage in Chaucer's text, infra, page 47. 

'^ I suppose that the sonne is thilk day at none 38 degrees of heyght ; abate 
then 38 degrees out of 90, so leveth ther 52 ; then is 52 degrees the latitude. 
I saye not this but for ensample, for wel I wote the latitude of Oxenforde is 
certayne minutes lesse." 

It seems hardly credible that any person of average intelligence could, even 
in carelessness, so misapprehend this expression, " certaine minutes lesse," 
when it is so plain that it is Chaucer's reservation for having expressed the 
latitude of Oxford in round numbers a9^52 degrees, instead of that more exact 
latitude of fifty-one degrees and fifty minutes he elsewhere assigns to it. And 
yet, in the face of this, and in the face of Chaucer's express declaration to his 
son that he presents him with '' A sufficient astrolabie compowned after the 
latitude of Oxenforde," his biographer gravely declared, as a historical fact, that 
this same Astrolabe was calculated for the latitude of Woodstock. 

I have met with another ^reference to Chaucer's astrolabe, which might have 
been valuable as an illustration had it not been vitiated by similar mis-read- 
ing. It occurs in a paper by Mr. Burrow, in the Appendix to the second 
volume of Asiatic Researches (anno 1789), ** I compared an astrolabe in the 
Nagry character (brought by Dr. Mackinnon from Jynagur) with Chaucer's 
description, and foimd them to agree most minutely ; even the centre-pin, 
which Chaucer calls * the horses,' had a horse's head upon it." Now Chaucer 
does not call the centre-pin " the horsefe" ; what he says is—" thorowe which 
pin ther goeth a lytel wedge which is cleped the Horse." So that this compa- 
rison with the Indian Astrolabe, which might have been so interesting, becomes 
of no value, in the uncertainty as to what part of it it was in which Mr. Bur- 
row really did see the horse's head. 
Whether the wedge-like form of a horse's head was given to this cross-pin. 

INTRODUCTION. 

and thereon the likeness farther engraved by way of ornament, or whether 
some other fancy suggested the name, it is certain it was very generaUy given 
to it ; the Arabs called it Al-^heras, a name also given to the knight's-piece at 
Chess, which, as everyone knows, is but a horse's head. The use of the wedge, 
when thrust through the great centre-pin, was to twitch up and render immov- 
able during observation certain adjustable plates in the interior of the instru- 
ment. Through these plates the centre-pin passed, and was janmied against 
them by the wedge : but it is not clear from Chaucer's description how this 
was done, nor on which side of the plate the wedge was appHed. And, in ad- 
dition to these difficulties, it cannot be supposed that a loose pin, merely 
wedged in, would afford anything like an invariable centering for a radial in- 
dex, on which so much of the correctness of such an instrument woidd depend, 
On these points I shall hazard a conjecture when I come to describe the several 
details. 

The adjustable plates just mentioned are called by Chaucer ^ the plates for 
divers clymates " — *.«., for divers latitudes : of which that particular plate 
required for the observer's locality would be selected ; and being placed upper- 
most and adjusted to a proper position, would be there secured by the insertion 
and jamming of the centrepin. Thus it would become '' the plate vmder the 
rete/* as Chaucer calls it when describing its construction for the latitude of 
Oxford. 

It is interesting to find these plates confirmed and illustrated in ''The 
Arabian Nights," by mention of the Barber's astrolabe ** of eeven platet.*' But 
this is only in Mr. Lane's translation, the corresponding description in Gkdland's 
version being " un astrolabe bien pipopre ;" and in " The Book of 1000 Nights 
and One Night " — a translation by Henry Torrens published in Calcutta in 
1838, the same passage is rendered — ** An aetroldbe and it had seven iides 
mmmted with siluerJ' Thus confirming in some degree Mr. Lane's translation ; 
which, however, is greatly to be preferred, coinciding as it does so closely with 
Chaucer's description. Mr. Lane, moreover, renders his translation still more 
valuable as an illustration, by the following note to the passage : — 

'' The astrolabe is more commonly used by the Arabs than any other instru- 
ment for astronomical observations. It is generally between four and six 
inches in diameter. It consists of a circular plate with a graduated rim, 
within which fit several thinner plates ; and of a limb, moving on a pivot in 
the centre, with two sights. The plates are engraved with complicated diagrams, 
&c., for various calculations. The instrument is held by a ring, or by a loop 
of cord attached to the ring, during an observation : and thus its own weight 
answers the same purpose as the plumb line of the quadrant (which the Arabs 
sometimes use in its stead) : the position of the moveable limb, with the 
sights, marking the required altitude." — Lan^s Arabian Nights, chap, v., 
note 67. 

4 INTRODUCTION. 

Here again it Ib to be regretted that the writer of this description of the 
Arabian astrolabe had not a more practical knowledge of such instnunents than is 
evinced by his calling the index a Umb : because the term limb, being derived 
from Ivmbui, is practically appropriated to the circular rim, and never to the 
radial index. He would then, doubtless, have given a more detailed and more 
reliable account; and would not have fallen into the strange mistake, in 
another note to the same passage, of asserting : — 

'' A degree is four minutes ; it would have been more proper, therefore, to 
have said eight degrees and two minutes, than seven degrees and six minutes." 
— (/&u2., note 60). 

This note seems to have proceeded from some unaccountable mental confu- 
sion between d^rees of arc and minutes of time : and, although Mr. Lane 
makes no allusion to Chaucer or his astrolabe, yet this division of a degree into 
four minutes might seem curiously enough to have had Chaucer for its authority 
in the following passage of this treatise — " and every degre of this bordure con- 
teineth foure minutes.'* But then Chaucer takes good care to add — '' that is 
to saie foure minutes of an hour " — a necessary distinction. I do not mention 
these slight mistakes in a spirit of criticism, but simply because it would not 
have been possible to quote these notes at all without noticing in some way 
these mistakes in them. When Chaucer wrote " every degree containeth foure 
minutes," he was comparing together two different accounts — ^but when Mr. 
Lane wrote, *^ A degree is four minutes," it is plain from the context that he 
meant in one and the same account. 

In describing the degrees of the outer border Chaucer again inculcates the 
necessary distinction between time and arc : — 

** And I have said five of these degrees maken a mile-waie and thre mile- 
waie maken an hour : and every degre of this border conteyneth foure minutes, 
and every minute fourtie secondes.*' 

Kerefaurtie is a palpable error, the correction of which to foure renders the 
meaning perfectly plain — i,e,, every fifteen degrees of the outer border contain 
(or are equivalent to) one hour of tlie inner (or time circle) : every d^ree of 
the outer border is equal to four minutes of the inner : and every minute of the 
outer to/otM* seconds of the inner. 

There can be no doubt that this is the substance of what Chaucer wrote ; yet 
in all the MSS. that I have examined, and in all the printed copies previous 
to Speght's second edition in 1602, the last five words are-^" and every minute 
Ix secondes." In Speght's second edition, which professed to be an amended 
copy of the first, this ** Ix " was changed into fourtie ; a still greater error, 
which was copied into 1687, and into Urry's edition of 1721. If the change had 
been from Ix to xl, both being in roman numerals, it would appear to have been 
a mere accidental transposition of the numerals, but that explanation is 

\rred by the substituted number being printed at length " fourtie." Therefore 

INTRODUCTION. 5 

the only way to account for the change is to suppose that Speght^ in the interval 
between 1798 and 1602, may have seen some MS. with the correct reading 
" foure," and converted it into fourtie. 

Another and a far more unaccountable error of the printed copies occurs in 
Chaucer's Vllth Conclusion : — 

" The nadyre of the sonne is thylk degre that is opposyte to the degre of the 
Sonne in the 320 signe." 

So in Thynne's, and in all other printed copies previous to Speghf s first 
edition of 1598 ; in which, for some incomprehensible reason, he printed " in 
the zxiii signe" ! But in his second edition of 1602 — as if he regretted his 
departure from the older copies — he restored, in his amended teict, '^ the 320 
eigne," in which he was again JTollowed by 1687, and by Urry in 1721. 

Now, this changing and rechanging show an amount of deliberation over this 
error that renders its repetition and persistence doubly astonishing. Because 
even if these editors had been ignorant of such a common place fact as that 
there are only twelve signs altogether in the zodiac, they might have learnt it 
from Chaucer in the very work they were engaged in editing. They all boast 
of having compared their text with many MSS., and yet there is no manuscript 
— ^none, at least, that has come under my observation — that would not in this 
case have given the right reading, which, it is scarcely necessary to say, is '^ in 
the VII signe."* 

Although there are many manuscripts in the British Museum containing 
poetical works of Chaucer. I could discover only three in which this prose Treatise 
on the Astrolabe is to be found. Of these, that which is apparently the most 
ancient is numbered 23002 (additional MSS.). It is a comparatively recent 
acquisition, having been purchased for the Museum at Mr. Dawson Turner's 
sale in 1859. It does not differ greatly from the other MSS., except in the 
omission of some portions and the transposing of others. Altogether although 
it may assist the text in some few cases, it cannot be looked upon as a faithful 
or reliable copy. 

The second is a Sloane MS. 314, chiefly remarkable for an assertion on the 
fly-leaf that it is in the hand- writing of Chaucer himself ! And this was so 
far credited by the Rev. Samuel Ascough, who compiled the Catalogue of the 
Sloane Manuscripts in the British Museum, that he copied the assertion in his 
catalogue and added — "if it is not in Chance's own writing, it is nearly of the 
same age." — But in this opinion he was surely mistaken : for, if there were no 
other refutation of it, the rude and ill executed diagrams which are incorporated 
with the text of this MS. are evidently copied from Stoeffler's book, De Fahrica 
Astrolahii, which did not appear till the year 1513 (see infra, in description of 

« ** Nam in septimo signo fit solstitium a bruma : in septimo bruma a solstitio : in sep-> 
timo equinoctium ab equinoctio." — AuLUS Gellius, iii., 10. 

6 INTRODUCTION. 

Plate II, the note upon Chaucei^s Scale of Umbra Recta and Versa, which is 
single, while that of Stoeffler is doable ; and I take that to be one test by 
which copies from Stoeffler may be detected.) 

The third is also a Sloane MS., No. 261, and is very interesting, in so much 
that although never printed it was evidently written and prepared for the press 
with a view to publication. It has a r^;ular tide, dedication, and address to 
the reader : emendations of, and comments upon the text ; and it is illustrated 
by pen-and-ink diagrams similar to those in 314, and certainly also derived 
firom Stoefflei's book. But the most remarkable circumstance attending these 
two manuscripts is that 314 was obviously in the possession of him who wrote 
261 — probably the very origLoal from which he copied it. For on the margins 
of 314 are corrections and remarks in the handwriting of 261 : or, if the identity 
of the hand writing be disputed, then there are references in the one to certain 
alterations made in the text of the other which place the fact beyond all 
reasonable doubt. From these circumstances attending its preparation the MS. 
261 possesses ahnost the authority of a printed book zealously edited ; and 
indeed it is very much more correct than any of the printed copies. And since 
a comparison with it would unquestionably have corrected some of the more 
glaring errors of Urry's edition, it is no slight reproach to him that he not 
only had this MS. in his hands, but he left a record of that fact by inscribing 
on the fly-leaf this autograph memorandum " This MS. belongs to Dr. Sloane, 
T. Urry, 1709." The title of this MS. is *' T^ Conclusions of the Astrolahie 
eompyUd hy Geoffry Chaucer newlye amendyd," But while it has every other 
requisite for a printed book, it is singular that no date is any where affixed to it ; 
and as that is a very interesting particular I shall be at some pains to establish 
it from the Dedication, which is as follows : — 

" To the righte honorable and his verrie good lorde Edwarde earle of Devoshier 
Walter Stevins wissheth continuall encrease of honoure." 
" When I had amended this lyttell worke (my right honorable lorde) which I 
now offer unto yower good lordship ; me thought my labours therein wolde not 
onely be allowed of as manye as delyte in those wyttie conclusions of the 
Astrolabie, but also not unthankefull to your exceeding wisdome ; who 
amongst your other vertuous studies hath had a great felicitie and pleasure ia 
these mathematicall practises also; which thinges especiallie moveth me to 
dedicate this my lytell travaile unto youre lordship. And although I confess 
this to be so slender and simple an offer for youre excellencye, yet it may please 
you to take it as an argumente of the faithfull good will and humble harte I 
owe to your honour which God advance and encrease even as your vertues and 
worthiness right well deserve." 

Now it so happens that this dedication to Edward Earl of Devonshire affords 
a very close determination of the date. There are only three noblemen, aU of 
the House of Courteney, to whom the name Edward, and the title Earl of 
Devonshire could apply. 

INTRODUCTION. 7 

The first Edward succeeded to the title upon the death of his grand£ttther 
Hugh in 1419. 

The second Edward received the title from Henry VII after the battle of 
Bosworth. He survived till 1509 ; hut could not have been the object of the 
Dedication, since Stoeffler's book, which is referred to in Stevins' MS., was not 
written till 1510, nor printed till 1513. 

The third Edward was that unfortunate young nobleman, the great grand- 
son of the preceding, whose father Henry, after having been created Marquis 
of Exeter by Henry YHI, was attainted and executed in the same reign. 
Thereupon this son Edward, then a hoy of twelve years old, was imprisoned 
and so remained during his whole youth and early manhood, imtil released 
and restored in blood by Queen Mary in 1553. But even then Ms liberty 
was of short duration, for in little more than two years he was again im- 
prisoned and only finally released to go into a sort of voluntary exile wherein 
he died at Padua in 1556. He does not appear to have ever borne his 
father's title of Marquis of Exeter, although he is so sidled by Collins, 
Conrthope, and others; and it is necessary to the complete identification 
of the dedication to show that these authorities are wrong. In contemporaiy 
chronicles he is invariably called Earl of Devonshire : and in the funeral oration 
pronoimced at his obsequies in Padua by Dr. Thomas Wylson, wherein, if ever, 
all the honours and dignities to which he had been entitled would be declared — 
and wherein his parents were severally mentioned as Marquis and Marchioness 
of Exeter ; he is spoken of all through as Comes DevonisQ. Thus, when the 
favours are enumerated which Queen Maty had conferred upon him, they are 
thus particularized : - 

"Libertatemdonavit, decus restauravit, et ad dignitatem summam evexit, 
sic ut pientissima Beginsa opera Comes Devonias ab omnibus salutaretur.^ 

But the most conclusive proof that this Edward was never Marquis of Exeter 
is found in the Calendar of State Papers, Domestic Series, edited by Mr. Bobert 
Lemon. In this there is a list of upwards of 120 letters to and from this 
Edward Courtnay during his absence abroad, up to his death at Padua ; and in 
all these letters he is styled by himself and by others Earl of Devonshire. 
Some of these letters are from his own mother, the Marchioness of Exeter, and 
upon one, dated Nov. 8, 1555, there is this autographic address : 

" To my son the erle of Deffonsher thys be dely vred." 
Now, besides showing that the title Earl of Devonshire was the proper one for 
a dedication to this young nobleman, it has been desirable to establish it for 
another reason, and that is, that it narrows the date of the dedication to the 
short interval of three years between his creation to the title of Earl of Devon- 
shire in 1553 and his death in 1556. Because, had the dedication been written 
before his legal restoration, while yet a prisoner, the title given to him ilien by 
his dependents would be one of compliment and courtesy, and in that case it 
would assuredly have been the title his father had borne — Marquis of Exeter. 

8 INTRODUOnOK. 

It only remains to establish the probability, or indeed the certainty, that it 
was to this young nobleman Walter Stevins dedicated his Manuscript of the 
Conclusions of the Astrolabie. Of this there are three very sufficient presump- 
tive proofs : 

1. The mention of Stoeffler's book, which limits the date in one direction to 
1513 ; and the absence of any Earl of Devonshire named Edward after 1556 
which limits it in the other. 

2. The probability derived from the studious character of this young nobleman, 
of whom Dr. Wylson, in the funeral oration already mentioned, spoke in 
these terms : — 

^'Nec angustia loci, nee solitudo, nee amissio libertatis ilium a litteris 
avocaret. CTnde tam avide philosophiam arriepat^ et tantas in ea progres- 
siones faciebat, nemo ut illi ex principibus par esset.. Neque in hoc 
solum laudabili studio seipse exercuit, sed intima natursd scrutatus 
mysteria : mathematicorum labyrinthum intravit fructu summo et voluptate 
singulari." 

A curious resemblance may be observed in these concluding words to a 
passage in the dedication — " who, amongst your other vertuous studies, 
hath a great felicitie and pleasure in those mathematical practises also." 

3. The following note subjoined in the MS. to that passage in Chaucer's treatise 
wherein the vernal equinox is attributed to the 12th March. " Albeit in 
Chaucer's time upon the 12 dale of March the sonne entred into the hedde 
of Aries, yet in oure time you shall finde that the sonne entreth therein on 
the 10th daie of the same moneth." 

It so happens that there is a rather curious evidence that the 10th March was 
generally received about the middle of the sixteenth century as the day of the 
vernal equinox. Puttenham, in his " Arte of English Poesie," treats the 10th 
March as so notoriously identified with the vernal equinox, that he censures a 
poef s particular assignment of that day to it as an unnecessary redundancy. 
" For if," says he, " the thing or person they go about to describe by circum- 
stance be by the writer's improvidence otherwise bewrayed, it loseth the grace 
of a figure, as he that said : 

" The tenth of March when Aries received 
Dan Phoebus' raies into his homed head " — 

* intending to describe the spring of the yeare which every man knoweth of 
himself hearing the day of March named. The verses be very good, the figure 
nought worth, if it were meant in periphrasis for the matter. That is, the 
season of the yeare which should have been covertly disclosed by Ambage was 
by and by blabbed out by naming the day of the moneth." 

Lib. iii. " Of Ornament." 

Puttenham, as was too often his wont, gives no reference or clue by which 
the quotation thus criticised could be identified ; but with a little research I 

INTBODTJCnON. 9 

haTe ascertamed that it is one of Gteoige Gascoigne's poems, and may be found 
in his " Hearbes,'' printed about 1576.* Now^ unless the association of the 
equinox with the 10th of March had been very notorious, and of long standing 
there would have been no point in Puttenham's critidsm. The question here 
is not what really was the actual day of the equinox in any given year, but 
-wh&t was popularly and generally supposed to be the day. 

These accumulated proofe preclude all reasonable doubt that Walter Stevins 
wrote this MS. about 1655, and dedicated it to Edward Earl of Devonshire, the 
last of those names. The views and pretensions of the writer will best appear 
in his own words in an address which immediately follows the dedication 
already quoted, and which is also worth transcribing, for the additional reason 
that many of the remarks made in it upon the state of the text of the Treatise 
on the Astrolabe, in the writer's time, are as applicable to it now as they were 
three centuries ago : — 

" When I happenyd to look upon the conclusions of the Astrolabie compiled 
by Gefiray Chaucer and founde the same corrupte and false in so many and 
Bondrie places that I doubted whether the rudeness of the worke were not a 
greater sclander to the authour than trouble and offense to the readers, I dyd 
not a lytell mervell if a book should come oute of his handes so imperfect and 
indigest whose other workes weare not onely rekoned for the best that ever 
weare set forthe in oure english tonge, but also weare taken for a manifest 
argument of his singular witte and generalitie in all kindes of knowledge. 
However be it when I called to remembrance that in his prohem he promised 
to sette forthe this worke in five partes, whereof weare never extante but those 
two first partes onely, it made me to believe that either the work was never 
fynisshed of the authour, or els to have ben corrupted sens by some other 
meanes, or what other thynge might be the cause thereof, I wiste not Never 
the lesse understanding that the worke, which before lay al neglected, to the 
profit of no man and discourage of many, might be toumed to the commoditie 
of as manye as hereafter should happen to travayl in that parte of knowledge 
I thowght it a thinge worthe my laboure if I could sette it in better order and 
frame. Which thinge however I have done it let be thine indifferent judge- 
ment which heretofore have readen th' other setting forth ; or liste to repaire 
this and that together ; wherein I confess that besides the amendinge of verie 
many words, I have displaced some conclusions, and in some places where the 

* <' This tenth of March, when Aries reoeyn'd 
Dan Phoebas rayes iato his homed head : 
And I my selfe by learned lore perceyu'd 
That Ver approcht and frostie winter fled ; 
I crost the Thames, to take the cherefuU ayre 
In open feeldes, the weather was so fayre," &o. 

I 

10 INTBODTTOnON. 

sentences weare imperfite I have supplied and filled them as necessitie required. 
As for some conclusions I have altered them, and some have I cleane put out 
for utterly fjolse and untrew ; as namely the conclusion of direction and retro- 
gradacion of planetes and the conclusions to know the longitudes of starres 
whether thei be determinate or indeterminate in the Astrolabie. The conclu- 
sion to know with what degree of the zodiack any planet ascendeth on the 
horizon whether his latitude be northe or southe — ^as the meanyng of the same 
conclusion was most hardeset by reason of the imperfitenes thereof, so in 
practise I found him most false — as he shall find that list to take the like 
paines. Notwithstandii^, this have I done not challenging for myself but 
reidsing and leaving to worthie Chaucer his one praise for this worke, which if 
it had come parfite into oure handes (no doubt) would have merited wonderfull 
praise. As for me if I have done any thing therein it shall suffice if the lovers 
of wittie Chaucer do adopt my good will and entente. VikXB." 

It will be seen in the course of the present reprint that I do not by any 
means adopt all the alterations and additions made by Stevins. But as his zeal 
in the work is unquestionable, and as he has judiciously corrected many of the 
more glaring errors of the printed editions (of which no less than three — 1532, 
1542, and 1545— had been published shortly before he prepared his MS.), his 
corrections are worthy of being noted in the margins. 

Of the conclusions specially mentioned by him towards the close of the fore- 
going address, namely : " The conclusion of direction and retrogradacion of 
planetes " (XXXVIIth of this edition), and '* the conclusions to know the longi- 
tudes of sterres whether thei be determinate " (XXII) " or indeterminate *' (XXI) 
— ^he has omitted the first and last, — or, as he expresses it, " cleane put out for 
utterly false and untrew " — but he has inadvertently retained XXII, although 
coupled by himself with XXI in the same sentence. He also specially mentions 
"The conclusion to know with what degree of the zodiack any planet ascendeth 
on the horizon whether his latitude be northe or southe " (XLII) ; and this he 
retains and endeavours to render practicable by certain additions and altera- 
tions of his own devising. 

Now it seems probable that Stevins, in dealing with these Conclusions, was 
not actuated by any judgment of his own, but was influenced by Stoeffler*s book, 
with which he was well acquainted. It is certain that the three Conclusions 
declared by him to be " utterly false and untrew " are three out of seven propo- 
sitions which Sloeffler especially condemns. These three, as numbered in his 
list of seven, are : — 

" IV. Inquirere an planeta sit directus aut anomalus sive retrogradus." 
" V. Perscrutari in quo gradu signi sit qusDlibet Stella fixa, in reti descrlpta 
(Le., determinate), 

"VII. Determinare signum et gradum cujuslibet steUsQ fixx, in aranea nmi 
podtce " (i.e., indeterminate). 

INTEODUCnON. 11 

Now these are, almost literally, Chaucer's XXXVIIth, XXIInd, and XXIst, 
while his XLIInd, which Stevins retains, is not expressly denounced by 

Stoeffler. 

My opinions respecting these Conclusions are stated in the notes subjoined 

to them. That which Stevins has retained (the XLIInd) is the only one that I 

absolutely repudiate and deny to be Chaucer's. It is quite foreign to his 

manner of going to work in his other conclusions ; and he expressly defers, in 

his Proem, the subject of this problem to the fourth part of this treatise : 

which fourth part was either too laborious a task for him to complete, or, if 

completed, was afterwards lost The object of the XLIInd conclusion, the last 

of the astronomical series, is : — 

" To knowe with what degree of the Zodiake that any planet ascendeth on 
the onzonte whether his latitude be north or south." 

And at the end of the conclusion there is a special instruction to be observed 
in finding "the arysing of the Mone." Now Chaucer, in his Proem, says : — 

" The fourthe partye shall be a theorike to declare the mevyng of the celes- 
tiale bodyes, with the causes : the which fourthe partye in special shal shewe, 
in a table of the very mevynge of the Moone, from one to one, every daye and 
every signe, after thin almanacke. Upon the which table there folio weth a 
canon sufficyent to teche, as wel in maner of workynge in the same conclusions, 
as to knowe in ov/re orizonte with which degre of the Zodiac the Mone ariseth in any 
latytude, and the a/rysynge of any phmete after his latytude fro the eclyptike lyne" 

Now, it may be observed that these concluding words are almost identical 
with the XLIInd Conclusion ; and it is not improbable that that conclusion 
was invented and interpolated in after times in an attempt to realize this pro- 
blem by the Astrolabe, independently of the tables to which it was relegated 
by Chaucer. Had Chaucer himself attempted to do this, he would never have 
had recourse to the clumsy machinery described, — ^which, I repeat, is quite foreign 
to his manner of going to work. There is no scale of latitude — " fro the eclyptike 
lyne *' — ^upon the Astrolabe ; and it is not stated in the problem whence the 
distance of the compass points is to be obtained : if from the meridional almi- 
canters, there would be no necessity for the points of the compasses and the waxed 
labels for Chaucer would have arrived at the same result in a far simpler way ; 
he would have brought the degree of the planets' longitude to the meridional 
line (as in Conclusion XV), and finding the given latitude, above or below the 
ecliptic, in the almicanters, he would lay the label on it and mark it thereon 
with a " prycke of inke :" he would then " turn the rete about joyntly with the 
label," and bringing the mark to the horizon would observe with what degree of 
the zodiac it would arise. But Chaucer seems to have been quite aware that 
such a process would not give the true place of the planet (although it would 
be just the same as that obtained by the ponderous method described in XLIIj ; 
and, therefore, he properly reserved this conclusion for determination by tables 
of planetary motions. 

12 INTBODUCnON. 

When the period at which Chaucer wrote is taken into consideration, and 
that after all he was but an amuxtefwr astronomer, his general correctness is 
something admirable. The latitude assigned by him to Oxford differs by 
scarcely more than four minutes &om its rigid determination at the present 
time as noted in the Nautical Almanac : and so sensitive was he on the score 
of its correctness that when, for the sake of brevity, he had increased it by only 
ten minutes, he takes care to explain his having done so — " for wel I wote the 
latitude of Oxenforde is certayne minutes lesse." (See amie, page 2) Compare 
this with a professed and pretentious astronomer (Stoeffler) who, a hundred 
years later, in his " Tabida Begionvm, Provincia/rumy et Oppidorvm Insigniorwm 
Ev/ropoB " (wherein, by the way, he ignores London altogether), makes both 
latitude and longitude of Oxford more than a degree too much : or with 
Stoeffler^s pupil, Sebastian Munster, the cosmographer, who declares the obli- 
quity of ecliptic to be 23 degrees only ; and who, as if to show that it was no 
slip of the pen, assigns the longest day of 24 hours to the latitude of sixty 
seven degrees. 

Now, the most remarkable anomaly attributable to Chaucer, is his adoption 
of 23^ 60' as the obliquity of the ecliptic ; that being very much in excess of 
its known quantity in his time. 

He says it is " after Ptholemy,'* which again is disputable on the ground that 
Ptolemy's obliquity was 23« 51' 20". 

But M. Delambre, in his Astronomie Andenne (VoL I., pp. 87-88) shows, in 
an elaborate argument, that Ptolemy borrowed his obliquity from Eratosthenes, 
who had stated the ratio of the double obliquity to the circumference of the 
whole circle to be as 11 to 83 ; which ratio, worked out by Ptolemy literally f 
produced his obliquity above named. But, M. Delambre remarks, Eratos- 
thenes had only intended, by 11 to 83, an approximate ratio to express an 
observed double obliquity of forty-seven degrees and two-thirds— sixths of 
degrees being the nearest approach his instruments were capable of. Now it 
is certainly remarkable that Chaucer's obliquity of 23^ SO' is not Ptolemy's but 
is the half of 47^ 40'. 

In an essay upon the meaning of Chaucer's prime, which will be found at 
the end of this volume, I produce another example of the general accuracy of 
his astronomical results, and deduce from it a conclusive argument in favour of 
an important correction of the text in " The Nonne's Preest's Tale." 

Indeed, these researches into the astronomy of Chaucer are of great import- 
ance to the text of his poetical works. 

In the first part of this Treatise {infra page 27) I have altered "eighte 

spere," of the copies, into ninthe speere, as applicable to *' the firste mevyng 

of the firste mevable." Now, my justification for so doing happens to affect 

very materially an uncertain reading of a passage in The Frankelein's Tale ; 

vhich again reciprocates the benefit by confirming in its context the propriety 

IKTEODDOnOH. 

13 

of the alUiation alluded to : while at the same time it ehowB veiy concluidvely 
vliat its own reading ought to be. The paasi^ is as foUowa ia TTrwhitf b edition, 
and in all the editions previous to his : — 

And bj his eighte speres in his werking 

He knew fnl wel how fer Alnath was shove 

Fro the hed of thilke fix Aries above 

That in the ninthe spere considBTed is. 

The FranktUin't Tab, 11591. 
But the two latest editors, Mr. Wri^^t and Mr. Morris, botli pnnt "thre" and 
"(onrtlie,'' respectively, for etghU and ntnffte. No doubt the alteration has the 
authority of the MS. selected hj these editors as their original ; bat thete 
cannot be a more convincing proof of its error than this diagram of the nine 
spheres, which is copied from a Treatise on the SpheK b; Sacro Boaco, edited 
hy Melancthon in 1638, but written hj Sacro Bobco about a century and a half 
before Chaucer ; and the diagram has every appearance of being a facsimile 
from the original MS. 

riGURA 08TENDENS 

ditlribationem £ ordxiufm 
S^iararwm Ccdutivm. 

14 iifTBODncnoN. 

Here the Earth is in the centre, and around it are the nine spheres — viz., 
Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the Fixed Stars — denoted 
by the black ground with stars and the white band above it with the signs of 
the zodiac — and, lastly, the Ninth sphere, exterior to all. 

The two last are very remarkable in being both distinguished by the signs of 
the zodiac, one by symbols and the other by effigies. And it must be observed 
that it is to the ninth sphere the effigies are given, a further proof, if any were 
necessary, that the animal configurations were attributed to the true ecliptiCf 
and not to the stars which originally composed them. (See Note A in the 
Appendix.) Each of these zodiacs is divided in twelve equal parts ; another 
proof that unequal divisions by constellations were not regarded in the middle 
ages. 

The divisions in the ninth sphere diverge from those in the eighth by about 
one fifth of each sign, which very nearly agrees with the amount of precession 
fixed by Ptolemy, who made the longitude of the first star in his constellation 
Aries six degrees and a half from the equinoctial point. 

Now this diagram of the spheres has a direct bearing upon the text of The 
Frankeleyn's Tale ; not in the amount of the deviation, but in showing how the 
comparison between the two spheres might indicate to the astrologer ** how fer 
Alnaih vfos shove/* Alnath, being a fixed star, was in the eighth sphere, while 
'' the hed of thilk fixe Aries above " was in the ninth sphere. Surely nothing 
could more plainly express this process by comparison of the two spheres than 
the passage in question : — 

And by his eighte spere in his werching 
He knewe ful wel how fer Alnath was shove 
Fro the heed of thilk fixe Aries above 
That in the ninthe spere considred is. 

That is, he knew, — ^by the extent of the divergence between the divisions of the 
eighth and ninth spheres as shown in this diagram (or in some similar one in 
accordance with the precession at the time). For the ninth sphere was that of 
the equinoctial points, and as these were carried forward by the effect of pre- 
cession in the same direction as the diurnal revolution, by so much was the 
ninth sphere supposed to exceed in swiftness the eighth and all the rest ; drag- 
ging them forward, as it were, and causing them, in appearance, to strive back 
in a contrary direction :— r 

" firste mevyng cruel firmament. 

With thy diurnal swough that crowdest ay 

And hurlest al fro est to Occident 

That naturally wold holde another way." 

Man of Lawe^s Tale, 4715. 
Therefore the readings eighte and ninthe in the Frankelein's Tale are clearly 
correct, while thre a.nd.fourthe convert the passage into unintelligible nonsense. 

INTEODUCTION. 1 5 

In another essay subjoined to this yoliune, wherein I endeavour to shew 
that by ^^ the Carrenare " in the Booke of The Dutchesse, Chaucer meant the 
gulf of II CamarOf in the Adriatic sea, there will be found an extract from 
Sebastlaii Munster's Cosmographie, describing the intermittent lake near Zirck- 
nitz, in very nearly the same terms as a modem account of the same lake which 
appeared in the French periodical, " Cosmos," and was thence translated into 
"The Student," of September, 1869. That a phenomenon so singular and so 
apparently dependent upon accidental causes should be so little changed after 
the lapse of centuries, is extremely interesting. 

I have also reprinted in this volume a series of papers, contributed by me to 
" Notes and Queries," in 1851, upon Chaucer's astronomy in the Canterbury 
Tales ; a subject intimately germane to this Treatise on the Astrolabe. The 
few modifications in the views I then expressed which have occurred to me in 
a reperosal^ I have explained in additional notes to those papers. 

A. E. B. 
Leeds, December y 1869. 

EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. 

The lines and circles of the Astrolabe being stereographic projections on the 
plane of the equator, may either be drawn by construction, as practised and 
explained by Stoeffler, or calculated by trigonometrical formulae. The first 
method is rude and uncertain, depending upon ruled lines and their points of 
intersection, often at very acute angles. The second method is by far the 
more correct, being distances and radii calculated to any desired degree of exact- 
ness, and set oflf with precision from a scale of equal parts. It is by this 
second method that the following diagrams have been prepared. 

Plate L Represents the front face of the outer or principal plate, serving as 
a frame to the other parts, and called by Chaucer "the Moder." It is " ihick- 
est at the bryrikea, that is, the utmost ryng vnih degrees y. and al the myddel vnthin 
the ryng shall he thynner to receyve the plates for diverse clymates, amd also the 
rethe." 

The hollow part thus formed is called by Chaucer " the wombe ;" and the 
graduation of the outer circle of degrees, and of the inner hour-circle where 
the hours are denoted by the letters of the alphabet, is described in the text 

Plate II, Represents the back or reverse side of the same plate. All the 
circles, scales, and divisions are marked upon it as described by Chaucer, with 
the exception of " the names of the holie daies in the Ealender and the letters 
A.RC. on which thei fallen." These I have omitted for two reasons : first, 
because their selection and distribution must be purely arbitrary and conjectu- 
ral, since Chaucer does not specify them. Second, because any such names 
and letters, without being of any real use to the illustration of the instrument, 
would have very much crowded and encumbered the drawing. Had it been 
necessary, however, to realize this part of the description, the most probable 
source for these names would be the old mnemonic lines known in medisBval 
times as the ** Cisio Janus/* 

It was on this reverse side of the plate that the radial index, with sights, 
revolved, for taking altitudes, celestial and terrestrial ; and the following is the 
manner in which I imagine the index may have been centred so as to be inde- 
pendent of the movable centre-pin. A fixed solid boss may have been raised 
upon the plate, around the central hole, which, when truly turned, both inte- 
riorly and exteriorly, may have received the centre-pin in its interior and the 
index upon its exterior. Such a centring for an index stretching across the 

EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. 17 

diameter of a ciicle, may be seen in the best sort of circtdar protractors, where 
the centre is perforated for the purpose of adjusting it to a point marked i%>on 
the paper beneatL In this way, and in no other that I can see, the centre- 
pin might be wedged against the rim of the boss without interfering with the 
free motion of the index. 

It is not clear from Chaucer's description of '* the taheV* whether it also re- 
volved upon a centre, or whether it was detached, and used merely as a straight 
edge. I think the latter is the more probable ; and that it was adjusted by the 
eye to a true diameter by its fiducial edge, which Chaucer calls its point It 
is in this way I have represented it in Plates Y. and YI., by a single straight 
line drawn diametrically across the centre. If, however, any person should 
prefer to believe that the label, like the index, revolved upon a centre, there 
can be no difficulty in imagining a prolongation of the head of the centre-pin, 
upon which both the rete and the label might turn. But Chaucer's descrip- 
tion of tiie label is (page 31) : — "Then thou hast a label that is shapen like 
a rule," (t.e., like an index), " sam that it is straight, and hath no plates " 
(sights) " on either ende ; but with the small point of the forsaied label shalt 
thou," etc. 

" Swve that it is straight,** can only mean that the fiducial edge was in one 
continuous straight line uninterrupted by any centaing." 

The Scale, as I have drawn it, requires especial remark. It is represented 
by Stoeffler, in depicting his own Astrolabe, and by MSS. 314 and 261 in de- 
picting Chaucer's, as double ; that is, extending on both sides, east and west of 
the vertical line. Now there is nothing in Chaucer's description to warrant 
this double extension. His words are (page 25) : — 

" Under the crosse line is markyd the scale, in maner of two squires, or els 
in manner of two ledders ; that serveth by his XXII pointes, and by his 

devisions, of full many a subtil conclusion." In this description the XXII 

pointes are clearly tiie eleven steps or grades on each scale, numbered I to XI, 

which constitute its resemblance to a ladder : the Xllth is common to both 

scales and is not numbered. Were any further proof needed that the two MSS. 

above mentioned are sufficiently modem to have been copied in some 

particulars from Stoeffler, their representations of double scales in opposition 

to Chaucer's description would famish it. Because, as I have remarked in a 

note to Chaucer's description, (infra page 25), the error of transposing umbra 

recta and umbra versa, putting each where the other ought to be, (which is 

common to all the printed copies and to MSS. 314 and 23002), also exists in 

Stoeffler's corresponding description in his own book : and I may add that in 

all probability it originated there, and was thence copied into edition 1532, and 

80 was transmitted to every succeeding edition. For it is not at all likely 

that such an obvious error should originate independently in two different 

treatises on the same subject. 

Stevins saw this error and avoided it in his own MS. and he also corrected 

O 

18 EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. 

it in the margin of MS. 314, hj drawing his pen across versa and writing 
recta at the side. Whether the error really existed in MSS. anterior to Stoeffler^s 
book can only be decided by comparison with some manuscript of unquesUon- 
able antiquity ; in which, if the same error be present, then the only alternative 
will be to suppose that Stoeffler copied from some source common to both. 

Platb III. — ^The Bete. This is sufficiently explained in the text, p. 29. 

It is only necessary to add that the ribs which stretch from the margin and 

converge to the pole of the ecliptic, thus forming the net work of the rete, are 

so drawn as to be circles of longitude for the beginning of each of the twelve 

signs of the Zodiac. 

Plate IV. — ^* The circles under the rete" for the Latitude of Oxford. 
These circles are fully explained in the text, pp. 26 — 29. 

Plates V and VI.-r-The object of tiiese two plates, which represent the two 
observations described by Chaucer in the IVth conclusion, pp. 33 to 35, is to 
place them in contrast for the purpose of demonstrating that the star which 
Chaucer calls Alhabor, in the second observation, was Bigel, and not Sirius 
as has been hitherto dogmatically assumed. 

First it may be seen, in plate V, that the sun is in a very favourable position 
for observation — that is, about mid-way between the horizon and the meridian 
on the eaistem side ; and, in plate VI, that the star Bigel occupies almost 
exactly the same position on tiie western side. This similarity of position 
must have been Chaucer's aim. Now Sirius, at the time stated, would be 
much nearer to the meridian — so near, indeed, as to closely border upon that 
proximity to it which Chaucer expressly condemns in this very conclusion. 
But, moreover, Sirius, at the stated time would not be at the required edtitude 
of 18 degrees : and Stevins, in attempting to reconcile this difficulty, went so 
far as to alter the time of the observation from — '^passed seven of the cloche ^ 
space of eleven degree/' {i,e, 44 minutes) into *' passed eight of the clocke Hhe apace 
of certaine minutes," 

The second proof is derived from Chaucer's description of the star, which is, 
— "amionge an hepe of stars it liked me to take the altitude of the faire white 
starre that is cleped Alhabor.** A glance at the heavens, or at any celestial 
map will show at once the justness of this description as applied to Bigel, but 
its utter inapplicability to Sirius : there is no constellation more bnlliantly 
furnished than Orion, nor a more solitary one than Cams Major. 

And the third proof is derived from Fretagh's Arabic Lexicon, VoL ii, p. 
127. where may be found the Arabic name " Bijil al Habor. Nomen stellse 
magnsB et lucidsa, p in pede Ononis." 

After this, no further argument need be urged, I shall merely point out that 
in Plate VI, the position of Bigel is marked .by the common intersection of its 
circles of longitude and latitude with the almicanter of 18 degrees. 

In projecting these circles I have assumed for Bigel in the year 1390, a lon- 
gitude of 68^ 15', and a latitude of 31<^ 23' South. 

C ^M-icceth tJ^^>^<^ca/H'- . 

Plate E. 

Zitho Whi'°iu2ii!ScBa5S. London 

Plate H 

THE RETE OR ZODIAKE. 

Altvobsir OL Lyrot 

AbrjjudiF oc Cygnt 

McurJcah ocPegiLsi 

Abruttyu (X ArLetis 

AloihuL ji Pafsei 

^hxtbor^P Oriorvis 

AVkaJCb 
Alphjetob 

a S cor pit 

oc Cor.Soyecihis 

Al/rcunvUv oc Bootis 

AlkaixL ^ UrsotMoforis 

JjTALoLscuL ^ocL ex}yiis 
Alqornisob — OC CanLsMmoris 

THE PLATE U:NDER THE RETE 

PlGLte V 

DioLgrouru of Ckcuvucer's First Ensample . 

f of tJve, Siuru.j 

Pl8Lti« "V5 

Diougrounu oF Ckouuucer's Second jErbsample 
(of tkeSiarBigii, ccJledyfy hiiro AUioifor) 

*^. 

'CJe €ontlmiom of tfte ^moluUt. 

3Bi^ (Seoss"^^ e»a«^ce»^ 

THE PKOHEME. 

|YTEL LOwyS my sone, I perceyve wel by certeyn 
evydences thyn abyUte to lerne sciences touchinge nom- 
bres and proporcions and also wel consydre I thy besye 
prayer in special to leme the tretys of the Astrolabie. 
Then forasraoche as a philosopher sayeth he wrappeth hym in his 
frende that condiscendeth to the ryghtful prayers of his frende, 
therefore I have gyven thee a suflicient astrolabye for oure 
horizont compowned after the latytude of Oxenforde : Upon the 
which by medyacion of this lytel tretys I purpose to teche thee 
a certayn nombre of conclusions pertayning to this same instru- 
ment I saye a certayn nombre of conclusions for three causes. 
The firste cause is this : Truste wel that alle the conclusions that 
have ben founden, or elles possiblye might be founde in so noble an 
instiTiment as is the astrolabye, ben unknowen perfitly to any mortal 
man in this region as I suppose : another cause is this, that sothely 
in any tretyse of the astrolabye that I have y-sene ther ben some 
conclusions that wol not in alle thinges perfourme ther behestes ; 
and some of hem ben too harde to thy tender age of ten yere to 
conceyve. 

rphis tretyse, devyded in five partes, wil I shewe thee undyr 
"^ lighte reules and nakyd wordes in englissh — for latyn ne canste 
thou not but smal, my litel sone. But nevertheless suffyseth to 
thee these trewe conclusions in englissh as wel as suffyseth to the 
noble clerkys grekes these same conclusions in greke ; and to the 
arabiens in arabike, and to jewes in hebrew, and to latyn folk in 

20 THE PBOHEME. 

latyn : which latyn folk hadde hem first out of other divers Ian. 
gages, and wrote hem in ther own tonge, that is to saien, in latyn. 
And God wote that in alle these langages and in many mo have 
these conclusions ben sufficiently lemed and taughte and yit by 
divers reules, right as dyvers pathes leden dyvers folk the right 
weye to Some. 

VTow wol I pray mekely every discrete person that redeth or 
"*• hereth this lytel tretyse to have my rude endyting excused, 
and my superfluite of wordes, for two causes : the first cause is, for 
that curious endyting and harde sentens is ful hevy at onys for 
suche a childe to leme : and the second cause is this, that sothely 
me semeth better to writen unto a child twise a gode sentens than 
he forlete it ones. And Lowis if it be so that I shewe thee in my 
lyth englysh as trewe conclusions touchinge this matyr, and not 
only as trewe but as manye and as subtile conclusions as ben 
yshewed in latyn in any comune tretise of the astrolabye conne 
me the more thanke and praye God save the Kyng that is lord of 
this langage, and alle that him fayth bereth and obeyeth, everich in 
his degre the more and the lasse. But consydereth wel that I ne 
usurpe not to have founden this werk of my labour or of myn 
engyn : I n'am but a lewd compilatour of the labour of olde astro- 
logiens, and have it translated in myn englysh only for thy doctryne : 
and with this swerd shal I sleen envye, 

T^HE FIRSTE PAETYE of this tretyse shal shewe the figures and 
the membres of thyn astrolabye, bicause that thou shalte 
have the greter knowinge of thjme owne instrument. 

rpHE SECONDB PABTYE shal teche thee to werken the verray prac- 
■^ tike of. the forsayde conclusions as ferforth and also narrow 
as may be shewed in so smale an instrument portatife aboute. 
For wel wote every astrologien that smallest fractions ne wol not 
be shewed in so smale an instrument as in subtile tables calculed 
for a cause. 

rpHE THBIDDE PAETYE shal conteyne dyvers tables of longitudes 
■^ and latitudes of sterres fyxe in the astrolabye. And tables 
of the declinacions of the sonne. And tables of the longitudes 
of cities and tounes. And tables as wel for the governaunce of the 
clokke as for to finde the altitude meridiane, and many an other 

THE PROHEME. 21 

notable conclusion after the kalenders of the reverente clerkes 
frere John Somme and frere N. Lenne * 

^HE FOURTHE PAETYE shal be a theorike to declare the meving 
of the celestiale bodyes, with the causes; the whiche fourthe 
partye in special shal shewe in a table the verray mevyng of the 
mone from one to one, every daye, and every signe after thyn 
almanak. Upon the whiche table ther followeth a canon sufl&cient 
to teche as wel in maner of working in the same conclusions as to 
knowe in cure orizonte with whiche degre of the Zodiake the Mone 
aryseth in eny latitude, and the arysing of eny planete after his 
latitude fro the ecliptike lyna 

^HB FYFTE PARTYE shal bcu an introductorie after the statutes of 
oure doctours, on which thou maiest leme a grete parte of the 
generalle rules of theorike in astrologye. In which fiffce partie thou 
shalt finde tables of equacions of houses after the latitude of Oxen- 
ford ; and tables of dignitees of pltaettes and othere notefuUe 
thinges if God vouchesauf and hys mpthir the mayde, mo than I 
betote. 

* Nicolaus de Lynna, *.«., of Lynn, in Norfolk, was a noted astrologer in 
the reign of Edward III., and was himseK a writer of a treatise on the Astro- 
labe. See Bale — ^who mentions "Joannes Sombe*' as the collaborateur of 
Nicolaus — " Istos ob eorum eraditionem mnltiplicem, non vulgaribus in suo 
Astrolabio celebrat laudibus Galfridus Chaucer posta lepidissinius." — Bale 
(edit 1648), p. 162. 

I^ere SnlKetj^ tj^e $(o|&eme* 

THE FIRSTE PARTYE 

|)etoett) tie jTisuteg anti tje iWem 
fitej; of t|)ptt ^fiitrolaljpt 

«ie Iftgng, I^J^^fliiNE ASTEOLABYE hath a eyng to 

putten on thy thombe on Vaj righte 
honde in taking the heyght of thynges. 
And take kepe forasmuch as from hence- 
forward I wol clepe the heyght of every thing that 
is take by the reule the altitude withouten mo words. 
This ryng renneth in a manor of a toret set fast in 
the mothir of thyn Astrolaby e in a rume, or a space, 
that it distourbeth not the instrument to hangen 
after the right centure. 

®J)e iWolier. rphe moder of thyn astrolabie* is thickest by the 

brinkes, that is, the utmost ryng with degrees; 
and all the myddle within the ryng shall be 
thynner to receve the plates for divers clymates, 
and also for the rethe that is shape in manner of a 
net or elles after the webbe of a loppe. 

^his moder is devyded on the bakkhalfe with a 
^ lyne that cometh discendyng fro' the ryng 
down to the netherest bordure, the which lyne 
fro the forsaied ryng unto the centre of the large 
hole-amidde, is cleped the South lyne or elles 
the lyne merydyonal : and the remenaunt of this 

• This description of "the moder" is twice repeated in all the copies ; the 
first time as an addition to the preceding description of the ring with which it 
has properly no connexion, and from which I have expunged it, retaining only 
this separate paragraph. 

THE FIGX7BE3 AND TIIB MBMBBSa 

23 

lyne doune to the bordure is cleped the North 
lyne or elles the lyne of mydnyght. 

/^verthwarte this forsaied long lyne there cros- ©Je ©rojJSJ Sinest. 

^^ seth hym an other lyne of the same length 

fro est to west: of the which lyne from a lytel 

crosse in the bordure nnto the centre of the large 

hole is cleped the est line or eUes the line orientale : 

and the remenaunt of the line fro the foresaied 

centre* unto the bordure is y-cleped the west line, 

or the line occidentale. 

"VTow hast thou heer the foure quarters of thyn 
•^ astrolabye devyded after the foure principale 
plages or quarters of the firmament. 

<9tttartet$( 

of tj^f 

ipitmament* 

T 

'he est-side of thyn astrolabie is cleped the 
righte side, and the west side is cleped the 
lyfte side. Forgete not this, litel Lowys. Put 
the ring of thyn astrolabye upon the thombe of 
thy righte hande and then wil his right side be 
toward thy lyfte side and his lyft side wil be 
toward thy righte side: and take this reule 
generale as wel on the bakk as on the wombe 
syde. Upon the ende of this est line, as I first 
Baide, is ymarked a litel cros, whereas evermore 
generally is consydred the entryng of the est 
degre in the which the sonne aryseth. 

Tj^ro the litel cros up to the ende of the meridio- ®5e IBcgteetf 
^ nal line, undyr the ryng, shalte thou finde the »«^ ^^ nombw 
bordure devyded with xc degrees and by that »ttgnme» 

same proporcion is every quarter of thyn astro- 
labye devyded : over the whiche degrees ther been 
nombres of augrim that devyden thilke same 
degrees from five to five, as sheweth by longe 
strikes betwene;"f- [of whiche longe strikes the 
space betwene conteyneth a mile-waie : and every 
degre of thilke bordure conteyneth foure minutes, 
that is to sale, foure minutes of an hour.] 

* I have here substituted " cenin'e " for " oriental " of the copies. 

t Nombres of augrim, i.e., Arabic figures. Stevens omitted the words in 
brackets — I think correctly ; for they properly apply only to the other face of 
the instrument. 

24 

THE FIGVBE8 AND THE BOBMBBEB. 

®it ntmt% TTnder the compase of thilke degrees ben wretyn 
•*^ tpf Jbtgne$. tJ |.jjg names of the twelve signes, as Aries, 

Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, libra, Scorpio, 
Sagittarius, Capricomus, Aquarius, Pisces. And 
the nombres of the degrees of these signes ben 
wretyn in augrira above, and with longe devysions 
ftom five to five devyded, from the tyme that the 
signe entreth, unto the last ende. But understande 
wel that these degrees of signes ben everych of 
hem consydred of Ix minutes, and every mynute 
of Ix secondes, and so forth unto smale fractions 
infynite, as sayeth Alcabucius.* And knowe wel 
that a degre of the bordure conteineth foure 
minutes ; and a degre of a signe conteineth Ix 
minutes : and have this in mind. 

Vbt Setcle 
of tit ^^ti. 

VText this, foUoweth the cercle of the daies, 
^ figured in maner of the degrees, that con- 
tainen in nombre thre hundred threescore and 
five: devyded also with longe strikes from five 
to five, and the numbres of augrim wretyn under 
the cercle. 

CJe ttamj|$( "VText the cercle of daies, followeth the cercle of 
of tje iWottetJe5i.-L^ ^j^^ twelve names of the monethes ; that is to 

saie, Januarius, Februarius, Marcius, Aprill, Mains, 
Junius, Julius, August, September, October, No- 
vember, December. These monethes taken ther 
names, some for properties, and some by statutes 
of Emperours, and some by other Lordes of Eome. 
Eke of these monethes, as liked to Julius Caesar 
and Caesar Augustus, some were compowned of 
divers nombres of daies as July and August. 
Then hath Januarius xxxi daies, Februarius 
xxviii, Marcius xxxi, April xxx, Maie xxxi, 
Junius xxx, Julius xxxi, August xxxi, September 
xxx, October xxxi, November xxx, December 

* Et unumquidque istorum signorum dividitur in 30 partes equales qufi& 
•adus vocantur. Et gradus dividitur in 60 minuta; et minutum in 60 
nda ; et secundum in 60 tertia ; similiterque sequuntur quarta ; similiter 
linta ; ascendendo usque ad infinita." Alchabitii, Di£E*ia 1™*- 

N 

THE VIGUBB8 AKD THE MEMBBES. 25 

xxxl* Nathelesse although that Julius Gsesar 
toke two dales out of Feverire and put hem 
in bis moneth of July ; and Augustus Caesar 
cleped the moneth of Auguste after hys name, 
and ordeined it of one and thirtie dales: yet 
truste wel that the Sonne dweUeth therefore 
never-the-more ne-the-lesse in one sygne than 
in an other. 

^r^hen foloweth the names of the holy-dales m the ®ftf 

•*- Kalender and next hem the letters of the 1^lfi«^afi«f. 
A.B.C. on which thei fallen. 

ext the forsaid cercle of the A.B.C., undyr the Vbt Sbtalt. 
overthwarte lyne, is markyd the Scale, in 
maner of two squires or elles in manner of two 
ledders, that serveth by hys twenty two polnctes, 
and hys devisions, of ful many a subtill conclusion. 
Of this forsaied scale, fro the crosse lyne unto the 
verie angle is cleped Umbra Veksa and the nethyr 
partie Umbea Eecta, or elles Umbba Extensa.-(- 

nnhen haste thou a brode reule that hath on every WJe Umle. 

ende a square plate percyd with certayne 
holes, some more and some lasse, to receyve the 
stremes of the sonne by day, and eke by media- 
cion of thyn eye to knowe the altitude of the 
sterres by night. 

rphen is ther a large pyn, in maner of an exiltre Wfte Vw^ 
"^ that goth thrugh the hole amyd, that halte the 
tables of the clymates in the rete in the wombe of 
the moder; throw which pyn ther goth a litel 

♦ It ifl worthy of remark that Stevins here inserts in his MS., by way of 
illustrating. the text, those well-known lines, "Thirtie dais hath September," 
&c., adding, " Lo, verses of the nomber of the dais in the usuall monetks of 
y^ kalendar." This is, I think, an earlier date than has hitherto been discovered 
for these lines. 

t In all the copies, printed and MS., except that of Stevins, these terms are 
reversed : except also Sloane MS. 314, in which the same error, which originally 
existed in it also, has been corrected in the margin, pr6bably by Stevins. And 
it is very remarkable that Stoeffler, who perhaps never saw Chaucer's treatise 
should yet, in his description of this part of the Astrolabie, have precisely tl 
same error of reversal of terms in both his text and his illustrative drawing, 

26 

THB nOUBES AND THB MEMBKK8. 

Vbf JFottte 
Auatteris of ibf 

Vbt Begteetf 

of tie 

90otOtttf* 

wedge the which ia cleped the hors that streyneth 
alle these partes togeder. This forsaied gret pyn, 
in maner of an exiltre, is imagined to be the 
pole artike in thyn Astrolabye. 

nphe wombe side of thyn Astrolabye also is 
■^ devided with a longe cross in fonre quarters 
fro the est to west, and fro the south to north, 
from righte side to lyfte side, as is the bakksyde. 
The bordure of whiche wombe side is devided fro 
the poynt of the est line imto the poynt of the 
south line undyr the lyng in xc degrees ; and by 
the same proporcion is every quarter devided as 
is the bakkside that amounteth thro huudred 
sixtie degrees. And understande wel that the 
degrees of this bordure ben answerynge and 
consentynge to the degrees of the equinoctial 
that is devided in the same nombre as every 
other cercle in the highe hevene. 

rphis bordure is devided also with xzxiii letters 
"*" and a smale cros aboute the south line that 
sheweth the xxiv houres equale of the clokke. 
And I have seide five of these degrees maken a 
mile-waie, and thre mile-wai maken an hour : and 
every degre of this bordure conteyneth foure 
minutes, and every minute foure* secondes. Now 
have I tolde thee Jbwise for the more declaracion. 

Vietit. 

rphe plate under the Eete is descryved with thre 
cercles, of whiche the leest is cleped the cercle 
of Cancer ; bicause that the hed of Cancer toumeth 
evermore concentrikq uppon. the same cercle. In 
this hed of Cancer is the gretest declynaciou 

-Tfi A ktffium ^^o^^w^^ ^f ^^^ Sonne, and therefore is he cleped 

Solsticium of Somer: which declynacyon, after 
Ptholemy is xxiii degrees and fyfty minutes, as 
wel in Cancer as in Capricome. This cercle of 
Cancer is cleped the tropike of somer, of tropos. 

of isomer* 

* In editt. 1602, 1687, and in Urry's, this is misprinted "fowertie secondes.^* 
In the earlier piinted editt., and also in Steyins' and other MSS. it is *'lx 
secondes" See page 4 supra in Introduction. 

THB FIGITSn AMD THE HKHKIHCHu 27 

that is to seyn, ayenwaid; for Uien bcgynnetti the 
Sonne to passe fio nswaid. 

The myddyl cercle in widenesse of these Ihie 
is cleped the ceide Eqninoctiale, i^pon whidi 
toumeth evennore the heddes of Aries and libnL 
And nnderstonde wel that evennore thys cerole 
equinoctial tonmeth jnstlie fix) the venay est to 
the verray west, as I have shewed in the speere 
solide. 

This same cercle is cleped also the 'EquaJUna or V}k 

wayer of the day ; for whan the sonne is in the €f t««tow. 
hede of Aries or libra than ben the dayes and 
nightes y-like of length in al the world, and 
therefore ben these two signes called eqninoctis. 

And al that meveth within these heddes of Aries 
and libra ben ycalled northward, and al that 
mevith withoat tiiese heddes his movyng is cleped 
southward, as firo the equinoctial Take kepe of 
this latitude north and south and foigete it not. 

By this cercle equinoctial ben considered the Vbt xxi( 
xxnr houres of the clokke — ^for evermore the .1^5?*.^* 
arising of xv d^rees of the equinoctial maketh an 
hour equale of the clokka 

This Equinoctial is cleped the midway of the 
firste mevyng or elles of the sonne. Also it is 
cleped girdel of the firste mevyng for it departeth 
the firste movable in two like partyes even dis- 
taunt fro the poles of this world. And note that 
the firste mevygn of the firste movable is cleped 
mevyng of the [ninthe] speere, which mevying is 
fro est to west and ageyn into est.* 

The widest of these thre cercles principale is 
cleped the cercle of Capricorn [bicause that the 

t|^ eiofcke. 

* I have endeavoured by transposing some of the parts of this paragraph, 
and by changing " eighte" (sphere) of the copies into rdnthe, to restore tlie 
sense. My reasons for this last alteration are given in the Introduction (supra 
p. 14) The " firste movyng of the first mevable" which sounds so tauto- 
logical may be explained by the two movings, first and second, into wliich 
Ptolemy divided the Primum Mobile, See the marginal note to The Man r 
Lawe's Tale 4715 in the Lansdown MS. reprinted by the Percy Society, 
edited by Mr. Wright, Vol. i, page 213. 

28 

THB FIGUBBS AND THB MElfBBES. 

head of Capricome]* toumeth evermore concen- 
trike uppon the same cercle. In the hede of this 
foresaied Capricome is the gretest declinacion 
southward of the sonne and therefore it is cleped 
Vjfte <Sboteticimni Solsticium of winter. This cercle of Capricome 
of SBintn. is also cleped the tropike of winter, for thanne 

begynneth the sonne to come ageyn to usward. 

Kit 

TTppon this forsaied plate ben compassed cer- 
^ teyne cercles that highten Almicanteras : of 
whiche some of hem semen perfite cercles and some 
semen imperfite. The centure that standeth amydst 
the narrowest cercle is cleped the Signetf And 
the netherest cercle [or the firste cercle, is cleped 
Vj^e Oriiont the orizonte, that is the cercle]! that devideth 

the two emisperies, the partye of the heven above 
the yerthe and the partye beneth. These almican- 
teras be compouned by two and two, al be it so 
that on diveres astrolabyes some almicanteras ben 
devided by one, and some by two, and some by 
thre, after the quantite of the astrolabye. This 
foresaied signet is y-magined to be the verray 
poynt over the crowne of thy heed, and also this 
signet is the veiTay pole of the orizonte in every 
region. 

Vbe ifbignet. 

Tj^rom this signet, as it semeth, ther comen croked 
"*■ strikes, like to the clawes of a loppe, or elles 
like to the worke of a woman's calle, inkerving 
overthwart the almicanteras; and these same 
Wbt fl|imttt(f$, strikes or devisions ben cleped Azimutes:§ and 

they deviden the orizonte on thyne astrolabye in 
xxrv devisions. And these azimutes serve to 
knowe the costes of the firmament ; and to other 

* These words are not in the copies. I have taken them from the corre- 
sponding description of Cancer, just before ; which Stevins also adopted. 

t Stevins invariably but very improperly, altered tignet to Zenith See notes 
to conclusions XVI and XXXII.) 

X The words in brackets are not in the printed copies : they are supplied 
n th.e MSS. 

F(F these azimuths, see Note to Conclusion XXXIII. page 52. 

N' 

T 

!pS FIOUBES AND THE MEICBKES. 29 

conclusions — as for to knowe the signet* of the 
Sonne and of every sterre. 

ext these azimutes, undyr the cercle of Can- ®5e ^lanetarg 
cer, ben the twelve devisions embolite, moche l^oureji. 
like to the shape of the azimutes, that shewen the 
spaces of the houres of the Planets. 

he Eete of thyn astrolabye, which is thy Zo- ®5e l&etl^e* 
diake, shapen in maner of a net, or of a lop 
webbe, after the olde descripcion, which thou 
maiest tourne up and doune as thiself liketh, 
conteynth certayn nombre of sterres fixe, with 
ther longitudes and latitudes determinate, if it 
so be that the maker have not erred. The 
namys of the sterres ben wretyn in the margin 
of thy rete, there as they sitte ; of the whiche 
sterres, the smale poynt is cleped the centure. 
And understonde that aUe the sterres sittynge ®&^ Starred 
within the Zodiake of thyn astrolabie ben cleped arw^» 

sterres of the north, for they arisen by the north- 
est lyne : and al the remenaunt fixed out of the 
Zodiake ben i -cleped sterres of the south, — but 
I saie not that they arisen aUe by the south-est 
lyne, witnesse of Aldebaron and also Algomisa. 
Generally understonde this reule, that thilke 
sterres that ben cleped sterres of the north 
arysen rather then the degre of ther longitude, 
and all the sterres of the south arysen aftyr 
the degre of ther longitude, that is to saien, 
sterres in thyn astrolabie. 

''he mesure of longitude of sterres is y-taken in 
the lyne ecliptike of heven ; undyr the whiche 
lyne when the sonne and the mone ben lyne right, 
elles in the superficie of this lyne, thanne is the * 

eclips of the sonne or of the mone : as I shall 
declare and eek the cause why. But sothelie the 
ecliptike lyne of the zodiake is the utterest bor- 
dure of the Zodiacke there thy degrees ben markyd. 
The zodiake of thyn astrolabie is shapen as a 

T 

* Here " Signet'' means the azimuthal point, or bearing. 

30 

THE FIOUBES AND THB M1SMBBES.4 

Vit 9UtAafu. 

compace which that conteyneth a large brede as 
after the quantite of thyn astrolabye, in ensample 
that the zodiake of hevene is ymagined to be a 
superficies conteyning the latitude of twelre de- 
grees whereas al the remenaunt of cercles in 
heven ben ymagined verray lines withouten any 
latitude. 

A myddes the celestial zodiake is imagined a 
•^^ lyne which that is cleped the ecliptike lyne, 
under the whiche lyne is evermore the way of the 
Sonne. Thus ben there sixe degrees of the zodiake 
on that one side of the lyne, and six degrees on 
that other.* 

rphe zodiake is devyded in twelve principale 
-*• devisions that departen the twelve signes : 
and, for the streightnes of thyn astrolabye, thanne 
is every smale devision in a signe y-parted by two 
degrees and two, I mene degrees conteyning Ix 
minutes. And this hevenish zodiake is cleped 
the cercle of the signes or the cercle of bestes ; 
for zodiake in language of greeke souneth bestys 
in latyne tonga And in the zodiake ben the twelf 
signes that have names of bestes : bicause whan 
the Sonne entreth in eny of the signes he taketh 
the propertie of soche bestes: or elles for that 
the sterres that there ben fixe ben disposed in 
signe of bestes, or in shape like be8tes,f or elles 
when planetes ben under the signes thei transmue 
us by ther influence, operacions, and effectes like 
to operacions of bestys. And understonde also 
that when an hote planet cometh into an hote 
signe thanne encreaseth his hete, and if a planet 
be colde thanne amenuseth his coldnes bicause of 
the hote signe: and by this conclusion maiste 
thou taken ensample in aUe signes be thei moiste 

* There is some confusion here between the celestial zodiac and the instru- 
''ntal zodiac of the astrolabe ; six degrees on each side of the ecliptic cannot 
the latter, for Chaucer had, a few lines before, described the ecliptic 
"^e instrument as " the utterest bordure of the zodiake." 
Note B, in appendix, page 84. 

i 

THB FIGURES AND THE HEMBBES. 31 

or drie, movable or fixe, Tekeningthe qualite of 
the planetes as I first saied. 

rphanne haste thou a Label that is shapen like a Vbt Xaiel. 
"^ reule save that it is streight and hath no 
plates on eythere ende : but with the smale poynt 
of the foresaied label shalte thou calcule the 
equacions in the bordure of thyn astrolabye as by 
thyn almurie. 

rphyn Albcubie is cleped the denticle of Capri- Vjftf fllmucie oc 
"^ com or elles the Calculere. This same almurie Sw^Htle of 
is set fixe in the hed of Capricorn, and it serveth ^"pwoni. 
of many a necessarie conclusion in equacion of 
thynges, as shal be shewed. 

I^ete £nDir$ 4e JfivSit Pittse. 

nv 

THE SECONDE PABTYE 

»iom of t^T^n ^i^trolat^e. 

L To finde the degre in the which the sonne la daie by daie 

aftyr his course about. 

ICKON and knowe which is the daie of the moneth and 
laie thy lewle upon the same daie, and then will the 
verrey poynt* of thy rewle sitten in the bordure upon 
the degre of the sonne. Ensample as thus : the yere 
of oure Lord a thousand thre hundred ninetie and one, the 
xii daie of March, at middaie^ I would knowe the degre of the 
sonne. 

I sought in the bakke halfe of myne astrolabie and founde the 
cercle of the daies the which I knewe by the namys of the moneths 
wrytten undyr the same cercle. Tho laied I my rewle over the 
foresaied daie and founde the point of my rewle in the bordure 
upon the first degre of Aries, a littel within the degre : and thus 
knewe I this conclusion An other daie I would knowe the degre 
of my sonne, and this was at middaie in the xiii daie of December, 
I founde the daie of the moneth in maner as I saied : tho laied I 
my rewle upon the foresaied xiii daie and founde the poinet of my 
rewle upon the first degre of Capricome a littel within the degre : 
' *^hen hadde I of this conclusion the full experience. 

B and elsewhere, by the poirU, or small point, of the Rule, Chaucer 
r means its fiducial edge : and the same remark applies to the 

i 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 33 

II. To knowe the altitude of the sonne, eyther of celestiale bodies. 

Oette the ryng of thyne astrolabie upon thy ryghte thombe and 
toume thy lyfte syde again the light of the sonne and remeve thy 
rewle up and downe till the streme of the sonne shyne through 
bothe holes of the rewle : loke then how many degrees this rewle is 
areised fro the littel crosse upon the Est lyne and take there the 
altitude of thy sonne. And in this same wise maiest thou knowe 
by nighte the altitude of the mone or of the brighte sterres. 

This chapiter is so general ever in one that there nedeth no more 
declaracion ; but forget it not. 

III. To knowe [by] the degre of the sonne, and of thy zodiake\^ \ , 

the daies in the backsyde of thyne Astrolabie.* 

r I ^hen if thou wilte wete the reckenyng to knowe whiche is the daie, 

in thy kalender, of the moneth that thou art in, laie [the rule 

of] thyne astrolabye, that is to saien the alidatha, upon the. degre of 

sonne and he shall shew thee the daie of the monethe in thy kalender. 

IV. To knowe every tyme of the daie, by light of the sonne, and 
every t3ane of the night by the sterres fixe ; and eke to knowe 
by night or by daie the degre of the signe that ascendeth on 
th' est orizonte which is cleped comenly the ascendent. 

rilake the altitude of the sonne when thou liste, as I have said, 
■^ and sette the degre of the sonne, in case that it be before the mid- 
del of the daie, among thyn almicanteras on the est syde of thyne 
astrolabie : and if it be after the middel of the daie sette the 
degre of the sonne upon the west syde. Take this maner of settyng 
for a generall reule, ones for ever. 

And when thou haste isette the degre of the sonne upon as 
many almicanteras of height, as was the sonne taken by thy reule. 

* This third conclusion was evidently meant to be converse to the first con- 
clusion. The object of the first was to find the place of the sun in the ecliptic 
for any given day and month — so the object of this should be to find, con- 
versely, the month and day for any given place of the sun. This intention is 
plain from the first two lines which remain unchanged. But in all the copies 
printed and MS. that I have examined, this sense is reversed by a stupid and 
incongruous confusion of terms, by which the proposition is made to appep 
repetition of the first conclusion instead of its converse. I have endeavf 
to restore the original intention by altering in the title the place of the w 
brackets and by retransposing the terms at the end as indicated by f 
Btevins omits this conclusion altogether. J) 

34 THE CONCLUSIONS. . 

laie over thy label upon the degre of the sonne and then woU the 
point of the label sitten in the bordure upon the very tide of the 
daie. Ensample as thus : The yere of oure Lorde a thousand thre 
hundred ninetie and one, the twelveth daie of March, I would knowe 
the tide of the daie. I toke the altitude of my sonne and founde that 
it was XXV degrees and xxx minutes of height of the bordure in the 
bakksyde : tho tourned I myne astrolabie, and bicause it was before 
middaie I tourned my rete and sette the degre of the sonne, that is 
to saie the firste degre of Aries, in the righte side in myne astrolabie, 
upon the xxv degre and xxx minutys of height emong my almi- 
canteras. Tho laied I my label upon the degre of my sonne and 
founde the point of my label in the bordure on the capital letter 
that is cleped an X : tho reckened I all the capitale letters fro the 
lyne of midnight unto the foresaied letter X, and founde it was nine 
of the clocke of the daie. Tho loked I over my Est orizont and 
found there the twentieth degre of Geminus* ascending, which that 
I toke for myne ascendente. And in this wise hadde I the experi- 
ence for evermore in which maner I should knowe the tide of the 
daie, and eke myne ascendent. 

Tho would I wete, that same night following, the hour of the 
night, and wrought in this wise : Among an hepe of sterres fixe 
it liked me to take the altitude of the faire white sterre that is 
cleped Alhabor, and founde her sytting on the west side of the 
lyne of middaie, eightene degrees of heyth taken by my reule on 
the bakksyde. 

Then sette I the centure of this Alhabor upon eightene degrees 
emong my almicanteras, upon the west side, bicause that she was 
found upon the west side. Tho laied I my label over the degre of 
the sonne, that was discended under the west orizont, and rekened 
alle the letters capiiales fro the lyne of middaye unto the poynt 
of my label in the bordure and founde that it was after none, 
passed seven of the clokke the space of eleven degrees.-}- Then 

* ^^ Twelveth degree of Geminus" in all the printed copies ; but, in the MSS., 
" the twentieth degree ;" which last is correct. See the diagram of the position 
of the astrolabe in this observation, in Plate V. 

+ *' Eleven degrees'' ; that is, forty-four minutes in time. Stevins, in his MS., 
very unwarrantably altered this time to — ** past eight of the clocke certaine 
minutes " — his reason for doing so being obviously to reconcile the observation 
with the position of the star Sirius, then and since erroneously assumed to be 
Chaucer's star Alhabor. But I have asserted and proved that Chaucer's Alha- 
bor, in this conclusion, was no other than the star Rijel (jS Orionis). See Plate 
VI., and its explanation, supra page 18. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 35 

loked I doune uppon my est orizont and founde there twenty* 
degrees of Libra ascending whom I toke for myn ascendant : and 
thus lemede I ones for ever to knowe in which maner I should come 
to the hour of the night and to myne ascendent as nerely as maie 
be taken by so smal an instrument. 

But natheles this reule in general wil I warne thee of for ever, — 
ne make thou never non ascendent at none of the daye : [ne canste 
thou nat] take a juste ascendent of thyne astrolabie and have sette 
justlie- a clokk when any celestial body, by which thou wenest 
goveme thilke thynges, ben neigh the southe lyne : for truste wel 
when the sonne is nere the meridionale lyne the degre of the sonne 
renyth so long concentrike upon thyne almicanteras that sothly 
thou shalte erre fro the juste ascendent. The same conclusion 
sale I by my centure of my sterre fixe by the nighte : and moreover 
by experience I wote wel that for oure orizont fro eleven of the 
clokke unto one, in takiiig the juste ascendent in a portatife 
astrolabye, it is to harde to knowe. I mene fro eleven of the 
clokke before none til one of the clokke next following. -f" 

[All the printed editions, of which there were no less than eight, from 
1532 to 1721, insert a conclusion in this place which is a plain interpola- 
tion, or rather a repetition almost word for word of a preceding conclusion 
(No. III). I have not found it in any MS., and its re-appearance in. 
edition after edition of the printed copies is a curious exposure of the 
want of care and discrimination with which these editions were bhndly 
copied one from another, notwithstanding the boast in some of them of 
having been " compared with many valuable MSS.^'] 

T 

l^ V. Special declaracion of the Ascendent. 

'he ascendent, sothelie, as well in all nativities, as in questions, 
and as in eleccions of tymes, is a thyng which that these 
astrologiens gretlie observen. Wherefore me semeth convenient, 
sens I speke ofihe ascendent, to make of it a special declaracion. 
■ The ascendent, sothelie, to take it at the largest, is thilke degre that 

ascendeth at any of these foresaied tymes on the Est orizont : and 
therefore if that any planet ascende at thilk same time, in the fore- 
said same degre of his longitude, men saie that thilk planet is in 
horoscope. But sothelie the hous of the ascendent, that is to saie 

* Eighteen degrees of Libra would be more correct, and probably what 
Chaucer wrote. 
' t In the case of a star or planet, Chaucer of course means within fifteen 

tflegrees on either side of the meridian. 

36 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

the firste hous, or the Est angle, is a thyng more brode and large : 
for, after the statutes of the Astrologyens, what celestial body that 
is V degrees above thilk degre that ascendeth on the orizont, or 
within that nombre, that is to saien, nere the degre that ascendeth, 
yet reckyn thei thilk planet in the ascendent : and what planet 
that is undyr thilk degre that ascendeth the space of xxv degrees 
yet saien thei that planet is like to hym that is the hour [lord ?] 
of the ascendent* 

But sothelie if he passe the boundes of the foresaide spaces 
above or beneth, thei saien that thilke pianette is fallyng fro the 
ascendent : yet saien these Astrologiens that the ascendent, and 
eke the lord of the ascendent, maie be schapen for to be fortunate 
or infortunate, as thus : a fortunate ascendent clepen thei when 
that no wicked planet of Saturne or Mars, or els the Taile of the 
Dragon is in the hous of the ascendent, ne that no wicked planet 
have no aspecte of enmitie uppon the ascendent. But thei will 
caste that thei have fortunate planet in ther ascendent, and yet in 
his felicitie, and then sale thei that it is weL Furthermore thei 
saine that fortune of an ascendent is the contrarie of these foresaide 
thinges. The lord of the ascendent saine thei that he is fortunate 
when he is in gode place for the ascendent; and eke the lord of the 
ascendent is in an angle, or or in a succedent, where he is in his 
dignitie and comforted with frendly aspectes receved ; and eke that 
he maie seen the ascendent not retrograde ne combost, ne joined 
with no shrew in the same signe, ne that he be not in his discen- 
cion, ne reigned with no planet in his discencions, ne have uppon 
hym none aspect infortunate ; and then thei saien that he is wel. 

Nathelesse these ben observaunces of judicial matter and rites 
of Painims, in whiche my spirit hath no faith, ne knowyng of ther 
horoscopum : for thei saien that every signe is departed in thre 
evene partes by x degrees, and the ilke porcion thei clepen a Face : 
and although a planet have a latitude fro the Ecliptike yet saien 

* Here Chaucer digresses into technical astrology : but since he expressly 
disclaims any knowledge of it, it is not necessary to discuss his meaning. The 
number of the degrees, however, of the ascendant above and beneath the 
horizon, being obviously taken from the Tetrabiblos of Ptolemy, the following 
numbers in the Latin translation will serve to justify the numbers in the text. 

** Quinque gradibus qui super horizontem ante ipsum ascenderunt usque ad 
viginti quinque qui ad ascend endum remanserint." Lib. iii. (f)e Loco Prorogatore) I ^ 

All the printed copies and MSS. have xv instead of xxv for the last number : 
Stevins has 15 in both places. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 37 

some folk so that the planet arise in that same signe with any 
degre of the foresaied face in which his longitude is reckened, yet 
is that planet in horoscopo, be it in nativities or in eleccion. 

O VI. To knowe the verie equacion of the degrees of the Sonne, if it 
so be that it falle betwixt two almicanteras. 

TC^or as moche as the almicanteras of thyn astrolabie ben com- 
pouned by two and two, whereas some almicanteras in sondrie 
astrolabies ben compouned by one, or elles by two, it is necessarie 
to thy lernyng to teche thee first to knowe and werke with thyn 
own instrument. Wherefore when that the degre of the sonne 
falleth betwene two almicanteras, or elles if thyrie almicanteras 
ben graven with overgrete a poynt of a compace (for bothe these 
thinges maie cause errour as wel in knowing the tide of the daye 
as of the verray ascendent) thou must werken in this wyse : sette 
the degre of the sonne uppon the heigher almicantera of bothe and 
waite wel where the almurie toucheth the bordure and sette ther a 
prick of ynke ; sette adoun agayn the degre of the sonne uppon 
the nethyr almicantera of bothe and sette there another pryck : 
remeve than thy almurie in the bordure even amiddes bothe 
pry ekes and this wol leden justlie the degre of the sonne to sitte 
betwene bothe the almicanteras in his ryghte place, 

Laye thanne thy label on the degre of the sonne and finde in 
the bordure the verray tyde of the daye or of the nyghte. And 
also verraily shalt thou finde upon thyn este orizont thyn ascen- 
dent. 
« 

1^ VII. To knowe the spring of the dawning and the ende of the 
evenyng ; the whiche ben cleped the two crepusculis. 

Oette the nadyr of thy sonne upon eyghtene degrees of height 
amonge thyn almicanteras on the west side, and laye thy 
labell on the degre of the sonne ; and then shall the point of thy 
labell shewe the spring of the dale : also sette the nadyr of the 
sonne upon the eyghtene degrees of heyght among thine almican- 
teras on the est side, and laye over thy labell upon the degre of 
the sonne, and with the point of thy label finde in the bordure 
the ende of thy evenyng, that is, verie night. The nadyr of the 
sonne is thilke degre that is opposyte to the degre of the sonne in 
the Vllth signe*, as thus: every e degre of Aries by order is nadyr 

♦ For the extraordinary errors of the printed editions in this place, see the 
Introduction, page 7. 

38 TEE CONCLUSIONS. 

to everye degre of Libra by order ; and Taurus to Scorpion ; Ge- 
mini to Sagittarius ; Cancer to Capricorn ; Leo to Aquary ; Virgo 
to Pisces. And if any degre in thy Zodiake be dark, hys nadyr 
shall declare hym. 

^( VIII. To knowe the arche of the daye that some folk callen the 
daye artificialle, fro the sonne arysing tyl it goo downe. 

Oette the degre of the sonne upon thyn est orizonte and laie thy 
label on the degree of the sonne and at the point of thy label in 
the bordure sette a pryck : turne than thy rete about tyl the degre 
of the sonne sytte upon the west orizonte and laie thy label upon 
the same degre of the sonne, and at the poinct of thy label sette 
another pryck. Eeken than the quantyte of tyme in the bordure 
betwixe bothe pr}'ckes and take there thyn arche of the daie. The 
remnaunt of the bordure undyr the orizonte is the arche of the 
nyghte. Thus maiest thou reken bothe arches of everye porcion 
where that thou likest: and by this maner of werkyug maiest 
thou se how longe that any starre fyxe dwelleth above the erthe 
fro the tyme that he riseth tyl he goo to reste. But the daie na- 
turelle, that is to saien 24 houres, is the revolucion of the equinoc- 
tial with as moche partye of the zodiake as the sonne of hys pro- 
per mevynge passeth in the menewhile. 

K' 

IX. To turn the houres inequalles into houres equaUes. 

nowe the nombre of the degrees in the houres inequaUes and 
departe hem by fiftene and take there thyne houres equalles.* 

^ X. To knowe the quantyte of the daye vulgare, that is to say, fro 
the spryng of the daye unto the very nyght. 
nowe the quantyte of thyne crepusculis as I have it taught thee 
in the chapiter before, and adde hem to the arche of the daye 

K- 

* This conclusion is very suspicious, and is probably an interpolation. If 
Chaucer himself had written it, he would not afterwards condemn it as 
superfluous : " The quantytes of houres equalles ben departed alredy in the 
bordure of thyn astrolabye — what nedeth auy more declaradon" — See 
Xllth Conclusion. It is, moreover, out of place, since the reader knows 
nothing, as yet, oi houres inequalles. Stevins shows that he saw this last objec- 
tion by his having removed this conclusion, and placed it after those in which 
houres inequalles are explained. Another suspicious feature in this conclusion 
is its awkward intrusion in this place between the Vlllth and Xth, which 
ought to be consecutive, as required by Chaucer's words in the Xth : — " as I 
have taught thee in the chapiter before," meaning the Vllth, which should be 
changed so as to immediately precede the Xth. 

bv THE CONCLUSIONS. 39 

artificiall, and take there the space of al the whole day vulgare un- 
to the very nyght. In the same maner mayst thou werke to 
knowe the vulgare nyght [by abating the same crepuseulis from 
the arche of the nyghte].* 

1 XI. To knowe the houres inequalles by daye, , 

^— TTnderstonde wel that these houres inequales ben cleped houres of 

the pianettes : and understonde wel that sometyme ben they 
longer by daye than they be by nyght, and sometyme the contrarye. 
But understande thou wel that evermore generally the hour ine- 
quale of the daye with the hour inequale of the nyght conteinetli 
3j) degrees of the bordure ; the which bordure is evermore answer- 
inge to the degrees of the equinoctiall. Wherefore departe the 
arche of the daye artificiall in 12 and take there the quantyte of 
the houre inequale by daye ; and if thou abate the quantyte of the 
houre inequale out of SO^f" degrees then shall the remenaunt per- 
forme the houre inequale of the nyght. 

/ 1 XII. To knowe the quantyte of houres equalles. 

n^he quantytes of houres equalles, that is to saien the houres of 
the clokke, ben departed by fyftene degrees alredy in the bor- 
dure of thyn astrolabye as wel by nighte as by daye generally for 
evermore. — what needeth any more declaracion. Wherefore whan 
thou liste to knowe how many houres of the clokke ben passed, or 
[how many]J of these houres ben to comen fro soche a tyme to 
soche a tyme by daye or by nighte, knowe the degre of thy sonne 
and laye thy label on it [and bring it to the este orizont and take 
^ there the tyme of the sonne arysing by thy label in the bordure],|| 

* Stevins saw the want which I have here supplied in brackets ; hut he 
remedied it by the addition of an entirely new conchision as follows. "To know 
^ the quantity of the vulgar night. Take away both crepuscles from the arche 

of the night, and the vulgar night onlye remayneth." Now this interpolation 
of Stevins shows the probability of the IXth being also the work of some pre- 
vious interpolator. 

t 360 degrees in the printed copies. So also Stevins, only that he puts 
" houres '* in the plural, which apparently lessens the error. 

t Substituted for " any parte of any'' of the printed copies. 

II I have inserted this clause (in brackets) as necessary not only to the sense, 
but because there is no other conclusion that teaches the time of sun-rise : an 
^ omission the more remarkable because the point of the sun's arising is referred 

' to in the very next sentence, and again in the following conclusions. 

40 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

thanne tume thy rete aboute joyntlie with thy label and with the 
point of it recken in the bordure fro the sonne arysyng unto the 
same place there thou desirest by daye as by nyghte. This conclu- 
sion woll I declare in the fowerthe partye of the laste chapiter of 
this tretyse so openly that there shal lacke no word that nedeth 
declaracion. 

1 1/' XIII. Speciall declaracion of the houres of the pianettes. 

TTnderstonde wel that evermore fro the arysying of the sonne tyl it 
^ go to rest, the nadyr of the sonne shall shewe the houre of the 
planet; and fro that tyme forward al the nyght tyl the sonne 
aryse ; then shall the very degre of the sonne shewe the howre of 
the planet. Ensample as thus ; the 13 daye of March fel upon a 
Satyrday peraventure, and at the arysyng of the sonne I founde 
the seconde degre of Aries syttynge upon myn Est orizonte al be 
it was but lytel. Then founde I the seconde degre of Libra na- 
dyre of my sonne, discendynge on my West orizonte, upon which 
West orizont every daye generally at the sonne arysyng entreth 
the hour of any planet undyr the foresaied West orizonte, after the 
whiche planete the daye bereth his name, and endeth in the nexte 
strike of the planete undyr the foresaied Weste orizonte : and ever 
as the sonne clymbeth upper and upper, so goth hys nadjrre downer 
and downer, and echinge* fro such strikes the houres of the pia- 
nettes by order, as they sytten in heven. The fyrst hour inequale 
of every satyrday is to Saturne, and the second to Jupiter, the 
thyrd to Mars, the fourth to the Sonne, the fyfth to Venus, the 
syxt to Mercurius, the seventh to the Mone, and then ayen the 
eyghth to Saturne, the nyneth to Jupiter, the tenth to Mars, the 
eleventh to the Sonne, the twelfth to Venus. And nowe is my 
sonne gon to reste as for that satyrdaye ; Than sheweth the very 
degre of the sonne the hour of Mercury entryng under my west 
orizont at even : And nexte hym succedeth the Mone, and so forth 
by order, planete after planete, in hour after hour al the nyght 
longe tyl the sonne aryse. Nowe riseth the sonne the Sunday by 
the morowe, and the nadyr of the sonne upon the west orizont shew- 
eth me the entryng of the hour of the foresaied sonne. And in this 
maner succedeth planete undyr planete fro Saturn unto the Mone, 

* Stevins, not understanding this word echinge, changed it in his MS. to 
teachinge : but it has every appearance of being a genuine word, and the verb 
" to eche " is found in such a comparatively modem authority as Bailey's Dic- 
tionary He^re it seems to mean adding one by one, or deahng out. 

S' 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 41 

# and fro the Mone up ageyn to Saturn, hour aftyr hour generally, 
and thus knew I this conclusion. 

^ XIV. To knowe with which degre of the Zodiake any sterre fyxe, 
in thyn astrolabye, aryseth upon the Est orizonte, although 
• the orizonte be in anothyr sygne. 

I ette the centure of the sterre upon the Est orizonte and loke what 
degre of any signe that sytteth upon the same orizonte at the 
same tyme : and understonde wel that with the same degre ariseth 
the same sterre. 

And this mervaylous arysing with a straunge degre in another 
sygne is bycause the latitude of the sterre fyxe is eyther north or 
south fro the Ecliptike.* For sothely the latitudes of planetes ben 
comenly rekenyd fro the ecliptike bycause that none of hem de- 
clineth but fewe degrees fro the brede of the Zodiake. And take 
gode kepe of thys chapiter of arysing of celestiall bodyes, for 
trusteth wel that neyther Mone, neyther sterre, in oure embolyfe 
orizonte that aryseth with the same degre of his longitude save in 
• one case, and that is when thei have no latitude fro the eclyptike 
lyne. But nevertheles somtyme is everiche of these planetes undyr 
the same lyne. 

^/Q XV. To knowe the declinacyon of any degre in the Zodiake fro 

the equinoccial cercle. 

[ette the degre of any signe upon the lyne meridional and reken 
his altytude in the almicanteras fro the Est orizonte up to the 
same degre sette in the forsaied lyne, and sette there a prycke : turne 
up thy rete and sette the hed of Aries or Libra in that same 
merydyonal lyne and sette there another prycke ; and when 
this is done consyder the altitudes of hem bothe : for sothely 
the difference of thilke altytude is the declynacyon of thilke degre 
fro the equinoctial. And if it so be that thilke degree be northward 
fro the equinoctiall than is hys declynacyon north, and if it be south- 
^ ward than it is south. 

^J I XVI. To knowe for what latytude in any region the almicanteras 

in thy tables ben compowned. 

* In all MSS. and printed copies that I have examined this word is " Equi- 
noctial,'' and the next word " But." These I have altered into Ecliptike and For 
respectively : not so much because ot the expression " latitude," which Chau- 
cer often uses in the sense of declination ; but because the problem necessarily 
requires the star's divergence from the ecliptic, while with the equinoctial it 
p might coincide, and still be within the conditions of the problem. 

S' 

42 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

"Deken how many degrees of almicanteras, in the meridionall 
■^ line, be from the circle, equinoctiale unto the signet ;* or els 
from the pole artike unto the north orizont : and for so grete a 
a latitude, or so smale a latitude is the table compouned. 

/3 XVII. To knowe the altytude of the sonne in the myddes of the 

daye, that is cleped the altytude meridian. 

Oette the degre of thy sonne upon the lyne meridionale and reken 
^^ how many degrees of abnicanteras ben betwixe thyn Est ori- 
zonte and the degre of thy sonne and take there thin altitude 
meridian ; that is to sain, the highest degre of the sonne as for 
that daye. So mayest thou knowe in the same lyne the highest 
degre+ that any sterre fyxe clymbeth by nyght : this is to saine that 
when any sterre fyxe is passed the lyne meridionall, than begyn- 
neth it to discende ; and so doth the sonne. 

S' 

/•' XVIII. To knowe the degre of the sonne by the rete for a maner 

curyosyte. 

[eke busely with thy rule the highest of the sonne in myddes of 
the daye ; tourne than thyn astrolabie, and with a prycke of 
ynk marke the nombre of the same altitude in the lyne meridio- 
nale. Tourne than thy rete about tyl thou finde a degre of thy 
zodiake accordyng with the prycke ; that is to sain, syttyng on the 
prycke — and in sothe thou shalt finde but two degrees in al the 
zodiake of that condycyon, and yet thilke two degrees ben in divers 
sygnes. Than mayst thou lightly by the seson of the yere knowe 
the signe in whiche is the sonne. 

/ S XIX. To knowe which day is like to other in lengthe throughout 

the yere. 

oke whiche degrees ben lyke [far] from the hedes of Cancer and 
Capricorn ; and loke when the sonne is in any of thilke de- 
grees ; than ben the dayes lyke of length ; that is to sain — that as 
long is that day in that moneth as was soche a daye in soche a 
moneth, there varieth but lyttel. Also if thou take two dayes natu- 
relles in the yere ylike farre from eyther point of the equinoctial 
in the opposite partyes ; than as long is the day artificial on that 
one day, as on that other ; and eke the contrarie. 

♦ Signet, i.e., Zenith ; pronounced with the French silent g, and sometimes 
written synet or sinet by Chaucer (See page 45). 
t In all the copies this word is " lyne" It ought manifestly to be " degre,'* 

L 

r 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 4j3 

rv? XX. This chapter is a maner declaracion to conclusions that 

followeth. 

TTnderstande wel that thy zodiake is departed in two* halfe 
^ circles, from the hed of Capricorn unto the hed of Cancer, and 
ayenwarde from the hed of Cancer unto the hed of Capricorn. The 
hed of Capricorn is the lowest poinct where as the sonne goth 
in winter, and the hed of Cancer is the highest poinct in which the 
Sonne goth in sommer. And therefore understande wel that any 
two degrees that ben ylike far from any of these two hedes truste 
wel that thilke two degrees ben of lyke declinacion, be it southward 
or northward, and the dayes of hem ben lyke of length, and the 
nyghtes also ; and shadowes ylyke, and the altitudes ylyke at myd- 
day for ever. 

1 7 XXI. To knowe the verrey degre of any maner sterre strange, 
after his altitude."!" Though he be indeterminate in thyn astro- 
labye sothely to the trouth thus he shal be knowe. 

n^ake the altitude of thy sterre when he is on the Est syde of the 

lyne meridional as nygh as thou mayest gesse, and take that 

ascendant anone right by some maner sterre fyxe which thou know- 

* Sicia MSS. The printed copies have " into halfe circles.*' 

f This word is latitude in all the copies — an obvious error, since the chief 
object of the problem is longitude. But as the transposition of the first two 
letters is the commonest of all errors, and as altitude makes very good sense as 
one of the principal elements of the problem, I have substituted it as the most 
probable original. This is one of the Conclusions that Stevins " cleane put out 
for utterly false and untrew," possibly because he could not understand it, or 
because it was one of those denounced by Stoeffler. It is true that it is 
not strictly correct in theory — because a mean of two ascendants is not neces- 
sarily the ascendant of the mean of their relative culminating points. But 
the method is sufficiently correct for practical purposes with an instrument so 
imperfect in itself as the Astrolabe : provided that the interval between the 
equal altitudes be short, a condition which Chaucer seems to have had in view 
when he directs the first altitude to be taken on the east side of the meridian 
" as nygh as thou may'st gesse.^ If the interval were not more than an hour 
the greatest error in the result could not exceed a degree of longitude — much 
less than might arise from the other sources of error to which such an observation 
would be exposed. It must be observed that the longitude of which Chaucer 
speaks was not, as at present, referred to the Pole of the ecliptic ; but was that 
degree of the ecliptic that came to the meridian with the star. This was 
" Longitude secundum cceli mediationem" and was still in use* long after Chau- 
cer's time. Also it must be observed that Chaucer makes no distinction be- 
tween latitude and dechnation but treats both these terms as synonymous. 

44 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

est ; and forget not the altitude of the firste sterre ne thyn ascen- 
dente. And when that thys is done aspye dilygently when this 
first sterre passeth anythyng to the south westward and cacche 
hiTTi anone ryght in the same nombre of the altitude on the west 
syde of thys lyne meridional as he was caught on the est syde, and 
take newe ascendente anone right by some maner sterre fyxe the 
which that thou knowest, and forgete not this second ascendant. 
And when this is done, reken thou howe many degrees ben bitwixe 
the first ascendent and the second ascendent, and reken wel the 
myddel degre betwix bothe ascendentes ; and sette thilke myddel 
degre upon thyn Est orizonte : and then loke what degre sitte upon 
the lyne meridional and take there the very degre of the eclip- 
tike in whiche the sterre standeth for the tyme. For in the 
ecliptike is the longitude of a celestiale body, rekoned even fro 
the hed of Aries unto the ende of Pisces ; and his latitude is 
rekened after the quantyte of his declinacion north or south 
toward the poles of this worlde. As thus : if it be of the sonne, 
or any fyxe sterre, reken his latitude or his declynacion fro the 
equinoctial circle; and if it be of a planete reken than the 
quantite of his latitude from the ecliptike lyne. Albeit so that 
from the equinoctial maye the declinacion or the latitude of any 
body celestiale be rekened after the sight,* north or south, and 
after the quantite of his declinacion ; and yet so maye the lati- 
tude or declynacion of any body celestiall, save only of the sonne, 
after his sight, and after the quantite of his declinacion, be 
rekened from the ecliptike lyne, fro which lyne all planetes some- 
tyme decline north or south save only the forsaied sonne. 

XXII. To knowe the degrees of longitude of fyxe sterres after that 
thei be determinate in thin astrolabye if it so be that they 
ben trewly sette. 

* It is difficult to interpret ^^ after the sights It is just possible it may 
mean according to visual observation : or it may be that sight is a copy-error 
for height = culmen = meridian altitude. The passage in which it occurs, unless 
some part of it has been lost, merely declares that latitude or declination may 
be reckoned from either the equinoctial or the ecliptic ; except in the case of the 
sun, when it must be from the equinoctial only. Then, reading " declinacion " 
in that place as simply deviationy the sense might be : — The latitude of any 
-•elestial body may be reckoned from the equinoctial, north or south, after its 

'•^ht, and after the quantity of its deviation, &c. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 45 

Oette the centre of thy sterre upon the lyne merydional and take 
^ kepe of thy Zodiake and loke what degre of any signe sytte 
upon the same lyne meridional at the same tyme, and take there 
the degre in which the sterre standeth. And with the same 
degre cometh the same sterre into the same lyne fro the orizonte.* 

3^ XXIII. To knowe in special the altitude of our centre, I mene 

after the latitude of Oxenforde and the hight of our Pole. 

TTnderstande wel that as farre is the hed of Aries or Libra in the 
^ equinoctial from our orizonte as is the synet from the pole 
artike ; and as hie is the pole artike from the orizonte as the 
equinoctial is ferre fro the synet. I preve it thus by the latitude 
of Oxenforde : understande wel that the height of our pole artike 
from our north orizonte is 61 degrees and 50 minutes ; than is the 
synet from the pole artike 38 degrees and 10 minutes : than is the 
equinoctial from our sinet 51 degrees and 50 minutes: than is our 
south orizonte from our equinoctial 38 degrees and 10 minutes. 

Understande wel this rekening, also forget not that the sinet is 
90 degrees of height from the orizont, and our equinoctial is 90 
degrees from our pole artike. Also this shorte rule is sothe, that 
the latitude of any place-f- in a region is the distaunce from the 
sinet unto the equinoctial. 

^ 3" XXIV. To prove evidentlye the latytude of any place in a region 

by the preflfe of the hyght of the pole artike in that same 
place. 

Tn some wynters nyght, when the fii'mament is clere and thick 
sterred, wayte a time tyl that any ster fixe sitte line right 
perpendiculer over the pole artike and clepe that ster A; and 
wayte another ster that sytte line right under A and under the 
pole and clepe that ster F : and understande wel that F is not 
considred but onely to declare that A sytteth over the pole. Take 
than anone right the altitude of A from the orizonte and forget it 

* Stevins, according to his Preface, intended to reject this conclusion also 
(supra, pp. 23, 24} ; nevertheless it is certainly included in his MS. With the 
longitude used by Chaucer, as explained in a preceding note, there is nothing 
in this conclusion to be objected to. The last clause is a necessary consequence 
of that kind of longitude ; since both star and degree lie upon the same circle 
of declination, which, in the astrolabe, is projected in a straight line from the 
horizon to the pole. 

•^ Sicia Stevins. All other copies have '* planet" 

46 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

not. Let A and F go farewel tyl agaynst the dawning a gret while ; 
and come then agayne and abyde tyll that A is even under the pole 
and under F ; for sothely then wol F sytte over the pole. Take 
than eftsones the altitude of A from the orizonte and note as wel 
the second altitude as the first altitude. And when that thys is 
done reken how manye degrees that the first altitude of A. exceeded 
his second altitude and take halfe the ilke porcion that is exceeded 
and adde it to his second altitude and take there the elevacion of 
the pole and eke the latitude of thy region. For these two ben of 
one nombre, that is to sain, as many degrees as thy pole is elevat 
so moche is the latitude of thy region. Ensample as thus : 
Peraventiire the altitude of A in the evening is 82 degrees of 
height, than will the second altitude in the dawning be 21 ; that is 
to saine, lesse by 61 than was his first altitude at even. Take than 
the halfe of 61 and adde to it 21 that was his second altytude, and 
than hast thou the height of the pole and the latitude of thy 
region.* But understonde wel, to preve this conclusion, and many 
another fair conclusion, thou mayst have a plomet hanging on a 
lyne higher than thy hed, on a perche, and that lyne mote hange 
even perpendiculer betwixe the pole and thyne eye: and than 
shalte thou se yf A sytte even over the pole and over F at even, 
and also if F sytte even over the pole and over A at daye. 

7 ({ XXV. Another conclusion to preve the hyght of the pole artike 

from the orizont. 

♦ The two stars a and p, Urs89 Majoris, stiU called the pointers, were, in 
Chaucer's time, much more nearly in a direct line with the north pole than at 
present ; and nothing would prevent their being the stars intended by Chaucer, 
but that they are both at the same side of the pole. One of them, however, 
might be, and no doubt was, his star A ; and F, the star under the pole, was 
as certainly Polaris, at that time nearly four degrees from the pole, and almost 
exactly in a direct line passing through it to the stars first named. Now the 
discrepancies in the various copies are confined to the upper altitude : some 
making it 92 and others 62 degrees ; but they all agree in the lower altitude, 
21 degrees, and as that is just consistent with p Ursae Majoris, in the lat. of 
51^ SCjitmay be safely assumed that the upper altitude ought to be 82 degrees, 
which I have consequently placed in the text. The respective right-ascensions 
of these two stars at either side of the pole were 157 and 338 degrees — that is, 
within less than a degree of being diametrically opposite — and when it is con- 
sidered that these places have been carried back by tabular corrections through 
nearly five centuries, and that Chaucer's observation of verticality was by 
plumb-line and naked eye, the approximation is remarkable and quite suificient 
to warrant the correction in the text. 

THE CONCfLUSIONS. 47 

npake any sterre fyxe that never descendetli under the orizont in 
-*" thilke region, and consyder his hyghest altitude and his lowest 
altitude from the orizont, and make a nombre of these altitudes ; 
take than and abate halfe that nombre [from his hyghest altitude] 
and take there the elevacion of the pole artike in that same region. 

XXVI. Another conclusion to preve the latitude of a region that 
ye ben in. 

TTnderstande wel that the latytude of any place in a region is 
^ verely the space betwyxe the signet of hem that dwellen there 
and the equinoctiall circle, north, or south, taking the mesure in 
the merydyonall line as sheweth in the almicanteras of thin 
astrolaby ; and thilke space is as moche as the pole artyke is hie 
in the ssftne place fro the orizont. And than is the depressyon of 
the pole antartyke beneth the orizonte the same quantite of space, 
neither more ne lesse : than, if thou desire to know this latitude 
of the region, take the altitude of the sonne in the myddle of the 
daye, when the sonne is in the hed of Aries or of Libra, for than 
movethe the sonne in the lyne equinoctial, and abate the nombre 
of that same Sonne's altitude out of 90 degrees and than is the 
remnaunt of the nombre that leveth the altitude of the region : as 
thus — I suppose that the sonne is thilke daye at noon 38 degrees 
of heyght, abate, than, 38 degrees out of 90 so leveth ther 52, than 
is 52 degrees the latitude. I saye not this but for ensample, for 
wel I wote the latitude of Oxenforde is certain minutes lesse. 
Nowe if it so be that thu thinketh too long a tarying to abyde til 
that the sonne be in the hed of Aries or Libra, than waite when 
that the sonne is in any other degre of the zodiake and consider if 
the degre of his declinacion be northward from the equinoctial ; 
abate than from the Sonne's altytude at none the nombre of his 
declinacion, and than hast thou the height of the hedes of Aries 
and Libra : as thus : — my sonne, peraventure, is in the 10 degre 
of Leo, almost 56 degrees of height at none, and his declinacion is 
almost 18 degrees northward from the equinoctial ; abate than 
thilke 18 degrees of declinacion out of the altitude at none, than 
leveth 38 degrees — lo there the height of the hed of Aries or Libra 
and thyn equinoctial in that region. Also if it so be that the 
Sonne's declinacion be southward from the equinoctial, adde than 
thilke declinacion to the altitude of the sonne at none and take 
there the hedes of Aries and Libia and thyn equinoctiall. Abate 
than the height of the equinoctial out of 90 degrees and than leveth 

48 THE CONCLTJBIONS. 

there 52 degrees ; that is the distaunce of thb region from the equi- 
noctiaL [Or take the highest altitude]* of any sterre fyxe that thou 
knowest and take [or add his declinacion]* from the same equinoc- 
tial lyne, and werke after the maner aforesaid. 

XXVII. Declaracion of the ascencions of signes as well in the 
circle directe as in oblique. 

rphe excellence of the sphere solid, amonges other noble conclu- 
sions, sheweth manifest the divers ascencions of signes in 
divers places, as wel in right circles as in embolyfe circles. [A 
right circle or horizon have those poeple that dwell under the 
equinoctial line]f and evermo the arche of the daye and the arche 
of the night is there ylike longe ; and the sonne twise every yere 
passeth through the signet over hed ; and 2 sommers and 2 wynters 
in a yere have these forsayd peple ; and the almycanteras in their 
astrolabie ben straight as a line. And note that this right orizont — 
that is cleped orizont rectum — devideth the equinoctial into right 
angles : and the embolife orizont, wheras the pole is enhaunced 
upon the orizonte, overcometh the equinoctial in embolife angles. 

The utilitie to knowe the ascencions of signes in the right circle 
is this : truste wel that by mediacyons of thilke ascencions, these 
astrologiens by their table and ther instrumentes knowen verely 
the ascencion of every degre and minute in al the zodiake in the 
embolife circle, as shal be shewed. These auctours writen that 
thilke signe is cleped of right ascencion with which the more part 
of the circle equinoctial! and the lesse part of the zodiake ascendeth; 
and thilke signe ascendeth embolyfe with which the lesse of the 
equinoctial and the more part of the zodiake ascendeth. 

XXVIII. This is the conclusion to knowe the ascensions of signes 
in the right circle, that is, drculus diredus, 

Oette the hed of what signe thu lyste to knowe the ascendyng on 
^^ the right circle, upon the lyne meridional! and wayte where 
thine almurie toucheth the bordure, and set there a prycke : toume 

* The words in the first brackets are added as a necessary connection with 
the preceding matter ; and those in the second brackets as substitutes for th6se 
unintelligible words which occupy their place in the MSS. and printed copies — 
** the nether elongation lengthening.'* 

t I have added these words, in brackets, to supply the evident hiatus : and 
I have altered the relative places of several of the passages in order to render 
them more congruous and consecutive. 

THE CONCLUSION& 49 

than thy rete westward til the ende of the forsaide signe sitte upon 
the meridional lyne; and eftsones wayte where thine almurie 
toucheth the bordui^e and sette there another prycke. Eeken than 
the nombre of degrees in the bordure betwixe bothe pryckes, and 
take than the ascencion of the signe in the right circle ; and thus 
maist thou werk with every porcion of the zodiake. 

XXIX. To knowe the ascencions of signes in the embolife circle 
in every region : I mene in drculo obliquo, 

Oette the hed of the signe, which as thu liste to knowe his 
^ ascencion, upon the est orizonte, and wayte where thine 
almury toucheth the bordure, and sette there a prycke ; tourne than 
thy rete upwarde til the ende of the same sygne sitte upon the 
est orizonte and waite eftsones whereas thine almury toucheth the 
bordure, and sette there another prycke : reken than the nombre 
of the degrees in the bordure betwixe bothe pryckes and take there 
the ascension of the signe in the embolyfe circle. And understande ' 
wel that aUe the signes in the zodiake from the hed of Aries unto 
the ende of Virgo ben cleped signes of the north from the 
equinoctial ; and these signes arisen betwixe the verray Est and 
the verray North in oure orizont generally for ever. And aUe the 
signes from the heed of Libra unto the ende of Pisces ben cleped 
signes of the South fro the equinoctial, — and these signes arisen 
evermore betwixe the verray Est and the verray South in oure 
orizont. Also every signe betwixe the hed of Capricorn unto the 
ende of Gemini ariseth in oure orizonte in lesse than two houres 
equalles; and these same signes from the hed of Capricorn unto 
the end of Gemini ben called tortuous signes, or croked signes, fop 
thei arysen embolife in oure orizonte : And these croked signes ben 
obedient to the signes that ben of the righte ascension. These 
signes of righte ascension ben fro the heed of Cancer unto the ende* 
of Sagittary ; and these signes arisen more upright than dothe the 
othere, and therefore they ben called soveraine signes, — and every 
of hem ariseth in more space than in two houres : of whiche 
signes Gemini obeyeth to Cancer, and Taurus to Leo, and Aries to 
Virgo, Pisces to Libra, Aquarius to Scorpio, and Capricorn to 
Sagittary. And thus evermore two signes that ben like farre from 
the hed of Capricorn obeyeth every of hem to other. 

* " Hed** in printed copies. 

E 

50 THB CONCLUSIONS. 

XXX. To knowe justly the foure quarters of the world, as Est, 
West, South, and North. 

nj'^ake the altitude of thy sonne when thou liste, and note well 
■** the quarter of the world in which the sonne is from [for] the 
tyme by the asymutes : toume then thine astrolaby and sette the 
degre of the sonne in the almicanteras of his altitude on thilke 
syde that the sonne standeth, as is in maner of taking of houres ; 
and laye thy labeU on the degre of the sonne, and reken howe 
many degrees of the hordure* ben bytwene the lyne meridional! 
and the point of thy label, and note wel the nombres. Tourne 
than agayne thyne astrolabie and set the point of thy grete rule, 
there thou takest thin altitudes, upon as many degrees in hys 
bordure from his meridional as was the pointe of thy labell from 
the lyne meridional on the wombe syde. Take then thyne astro- 
labye with bothe handes sadly and slyly and let the sonne shine 
through bothe holes of thy rule and slyly in thilke shyning laye 
thine astrolabye couche adoune even upon a playne ground ; and 
than wyl the meridionall lyne of thin astrolabye be even south, 
and the est lyne wiU lye even est, and the west lyne west, and 
the north lyne north, so that thou worke softely and avisely in the 
couchynge. And thou hast thus the foure quarters of the 
firmamente. 

XXXI. To knowe the altitudef of Pianettes from the way of the 
sonne, whether they ben north or south fro the way afore- 
saide. 

I 

oke, when a planet is on the lyne meridional, yf that her altitude 
-^ be of the same height that is the degre of the sonne for that 
daye and than is the planet in the very way of the sonne and hath 
no latitude. And yf the altitude of the pianette be hyer than the 
degre of the sonne, than is the planet north from the way of the 
sonne a quantite of latitude as sheweth by thine almycanteras : 
and yf the altitude be lesse than the degree of the sonne, than is 

* Here I have not hesitated to substitute " degrees of the hordure/* for " de- 
grees of the sonne" because it is probably a mistake of the copyist ; but I do 
not attempt to alter the fundamental error, which appears to be Chaucer's own, 
of taking the sun's hour angle to be equal to his azimuth from the south. 

t Stevens reads latitude^ but the word in the text may stand ; for, although 
the alteration is probably right, yet the whole proposition is bo erroneous that 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 51 

the pianette south from the waye of the sonne soche a quantite of 
latitude as sheweth by thine almicanteras. This is to saine, from 
the waye of the sonne in everye place of the zodiake, for on the 
morowe the sonne wyU be in another degre. 

XXXII. To knowe the signet* for the arising of the sonne ; that is 
to saine, the partie of the orizonte in which the sonne ariseth. 

Thou muste first consider that the sonne ariseth not [alwayes] in 
the verie Est, but sometyme in the North-Est, and sometyme in 
the South-Est : sothely the sonne ariseth nevermore in the verie 

this single correction would be of no importance. It is difficult to believe that 
Chaucer could have entertained such an extraordinary misconception as is 
implied in this conclusion ; and yet since it is the same in all the copies, and 
since, moreover, the error seems so consistent throughout that no supposition 
of misprint or miscopying can account for it, I do not attempt to amend it. Its 
falseness will be apparent when it is considered that at the summer solstice the 
meridian altitude of the sun is at its highest, but that at midnight of the same 
day a planet on the meridian, if in the ecliptic, or way of the sun, so far from 
being " of the same heighte thcU is ike degre of the sonne for that daye,^' would be 
47 degrees lower, or the whole breadth of the tropics. What Chaucer really 
intended was, no doubt, to compare the altitude of the planet with that of the 
culminating point of the ecliptic at the time of observation. 

It is curious that Stevins should have seen that there was an error, and yet, 
in an attempt to amend it, should have committed a still greater blunder 
himself : his note to " way of the sonne " is as follows — " The way of the 
Sonne is taken heere for the circuit that the sonne maketh every day by force 
of the first movable firom east to west ; and not for the ecliptike, as in other 
places it is used." That is, he would have the way of the sun in this proposi- 
tion to mean a parallel to the equinoctial ; which, in the example already men- 
tioned, would be the circle called the tropic of Cancer. But to imagine a 
planet at midnight in that circle, with the sun in the summer solstice, would 
be to assign to the planet a latitude from the ecliptic of 47 degrees, a worse 
blunder tian the other. The only way in which it seems possible to render the 
conclusion correct is by the following addition, in brackets, which, after all, is 
not very extensive : — " Look, when a planet is in the line meridional, if that 
her altitude be of the same height that is the sun for that day [when he is in 
the same sign and degree that is the planet], then is the planet in the very way 
of the sun and hath no latitude." 

But, of course, the other parts of the Conclusion should be altered in con- 
fonnity. 

* Wherever signet occurs in this or the following conclusions, Stevins altera 
it to zenith; but very improperly (see note to conclusion xvL). It is worthy 
of note that zmith, in the time of Stevins and Stoe:ffier, was used with the same 
double application as the signet of Chaucer — ^not only to the vertex, but also to 
any point in the horizon or equinoctial. 

52 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

Est in our orizont but if he be in the hed of Aries or libra. Now 
is thine orizont departed into xxiiii parties, or minutes, by tliine 
asymutes ; in significacion of xxiiii partes of the woride : though it 
be so that shipmen reken all the parties in xxxii 

Then is there no more but waite in the whiche minute that the 
Sonne entreth at his arising and take there the signet of the rising 
of the Sonne. 

XXXIII. The manor of devision [of the horizont] of thine astro- 
labie is thus enjoyned: as in this case* 

Thirst, it is devided in fowre plages principallie, with the line that 
cometh fro Est to West and then with another line that goeth 
from South to North : then is it devided in smale parties, or minutes, 
as Est, and Est by South where that is the first minute above the 
Este line ; and so forth fro partie to partie till that thou come again 
to the Est line. Thus thou might .understande the signet of every 
sterre — in whiche partie he ariseth. 

XXXIV. To knowe in which partie of the firmament is the con- 
junction. 

/Consider the tyme of the conjunction, by the Kalender ; as thus, 
^^ how many houres that the conjunction is fro middaye of the 
daye before, as sheweth the canon of the kalender. Eekene then 
that nombre in the bordure of thine astrolabie, as thou were wont 
to doe in knowyng of the houres of the day or of the night, 
and lay thy labeU over the degre of the sonne : then will the poinct 

* Stevins makes this conclusion a part of the preceding ; to which, indeed, 
it seems supplementary : but not more so than to the original description of 
the azimuths at page 28. Chaucer's xxiv azimuths were : — 

1. East. 7. South. 13. West. 19. North. 

2. E. by S. 8. S. by W. 14. W. by N. 20. N. by E. 

3. S.E. by E. 9. S.W. by S. 15. N.W. by W. 21. N.E. by N. 

4. S.E. 10. S.W. 16. N.W. 22. N.E. 

5. S.E. by S. 11. S.W. by W. 17. N.W. by N. 23. N.E. by E. 

6. S. by E. 12. W. by S. 18. N. by W. 24. E. by N. 
These azimuths, or minutes, were each of 15 degrees, and their names are 

indicated by Chaucer himself by calling *' East by South — the first minute above 
the Est line — and so forth fro partie to partie till that thou come again to the 
Est line." 

The concluding words in the title of this 33rd conclusion — " as in this case"" 
should probably be, as in these casesy — referring to the several propositions re-, 
specting azimuths which precede and follow it. In Stevins, minute is altered 
everywhere to aximuth, but quite unnecessarily. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 63 

of the labell sitte upon the houre of the conjunction. Loke then 
on which minute the degre of the sonne sitteth, and in that partie 
of the firmament is the conjunction. 

XXXV. To knowe the signet of the altitude of the sonne. 

nnhis is no more to saie but any time of the daie take the altitude 
of the sonne and by the minute in which he standeth thou 
might se in which partie of the firmament he is : and in the same 
wise might thou se by night any sterre whether he sitte est, west, 
or south, or any part betwixe, after the name of the minute in 
which the sterre standeth. 

XXXVI. To know sothlie the longitude of the Mone, or any pia- 
nette, that hath no latitude, for the tyme, fro the ecliptike 
line.* 

n^ake the altitude of the Mone and rekene thyne altitude up 
among thyne almicanteras on which side that the Mone stand- 
eth, and sette there a pryck. . Take then anone, right uppon the 
Mone's side, the altitude of any sterre fyxe that thou knowest and 
sette his centre upon his altitude among thyne almicanteras there 
the sterre is founden ; wayte than of which degre the zodiake is, to 
which the pryck of the altitude of the Mone [applies]f and take 
there the degre in which the Mone standeth. This conclusion is 
verray sothe if the sterres in thine astrolabye standeth after the 
trouth. Some tretises of the astrolabie maketh none exception 
whether the Mone have latitude or none, nor whether side of the 
Mone the altitude of the sterre be found. And note, if the Mone 
she we herself by daye than maist thou werche the same conclusion 
by the sonne as wel as by the sterre fixe. 

XXXVII. This is the werching of the conclusion to knowe whe- 
ther any planet be directe or retrograde. 

rpake the altitude of any sterre that is cleped a planete and note 
it wel : anone right take the altitude of some sterie fixe that 
thou knowest and note it wel also : and come ageyn the thirde or 
fourthe night next following, for then thou shalte perceve wel the 
nievyng of the Planet whether he meve forward or bakkward : and 
waite wel then whan the starre fixe is in the same altitude that 

* Slightly altered from the copies, which have ^^fro the tyme of the ecliptike 

line.'' 
t Or, which degree of the zodiac is cut by the almicanter of the Moon's 

altitude. 

54 THE C0NCXU6I0NS. 

she was when thou toke the firste altitude of the foresaid planet 
and note it weL For truste wel if so it be that the Planet be in 
the riglite side* of the meridioual line so that his second altitude be 
less than the firste altitude was, thanne is the planet direct : and 
if he be in the west side in that condicion, thanne is he retrograde. 
And if so be that this Planet be in the est side wlien his altitude 
is take so that the seconde altitude be more than his firste altitude 
thanne is he retrograde : and if he be in the west side of the line 
meridionale than is he direct. But the contrary moving of these 
parties is the cours of the Mone, for, sothelie, the Mone moveth the 
contrary fro other pianettes in her ecliptick line but in none other 
manor. 

. [This is another of the conclusions denounced by Stoeffler and omitted 
by Stevins. The fatal objection to it, apparently overlooked by Chaucer^ 
is that a change of the planet's declination might affect its altitude and 
vitiate the result. In other respects the method is very ingenious. But it 
is not easy to account for the concluding paragraph, which states that " the 
Mone moveth the contrary fro other planets in her ecliptick line.'' The 
moon's motion in the ecliptic is direct, like that of the sun ; and as it is 
impossible to suppose Qhaucer unmindful of that very obvious fact, the pas- 
sage must be either hopelessly corrupt or else altogether interpolated.] 

XXXVIII. The conclusion of equacions of bowses after the astro- 
labie. 

Oette the beginning of the degre that ascendeth upon the ende of 
the viii houre inequale, than will the line of the seconde 
bowse sitte upon the line of Midnight. Eemeve then the degre 
that ascendeth and sette hym upon the ende of the x houre inequale, 
then will the beginnyng of the thirde bowse sitte upon the Midnight 
line. Bring up again the same degre that ascendeth first, and set 
hym upon the Est orizonte and then will the beginning of the 
fowerth bowse sitte upon the Midnight line. Take then the nadyr 
of the degre that ascendeth first and sette hym upon the ende of 
the ii houre inequale, and then will the beginnyng of the fifte 
bowse sitte upon the Midnight line. Take then the nadire of the 
ascendent and sette hym upon the ende of the iiii houre inequale 
and then will the beginnyng of the sixte bowse sitte upon the 
Midnight line. The beginnyng of the seventh bowse is nadire of 
the ascendent ; and the beginnyng of the eyghth bowse is nadire 
of the second ; and the beginnyng of the nineth bowse is nadire of 
the third ; and the beginnyng of the tenth bowse is nadire of the 

* That is, the east side of the meridian. Vide supra, page 23. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 55 

iiii; and the beginnjmg of the 'leventh howse is nadire of the 
fyfte ; and the beginnyng of the xii howse is nadire of the vi 
howse. 

XXXIX. An other maner of equacions of Howses by the 
astrolabye. 

^ake thyne ascendente, and then thou haste the foure angles ; 
for wel thou woste that the opposite of thine ascendente, that 
is to saie the beginnyng of the seventh howse, sitte upon the west 
orizonte : and the beginnyng of the tenthe howse sitte upon the 
line meridionall, and his opposite upon the line of midnight. 
Then laie thy labellupon the degre that ascendeth and rekene then 
fro the poinct of thy labell all the degrees in the bordure til that 
thou come to the meridional line, and departe all thilke degrees 
into thre evene partes and take there the evene porcions of thre 
other howses. Laie thy labell over every of these thre parties, and 
then thou might see by the labell in the zodiake the beginning of 
these thre howses fro the ascendente, that is to saie, the twelveth 
next above the ascendente, and then the eleventh howse, and the 
X howse upon the meridional line as I first saied. The same wise 
werch fro the ascendent doune to the line of midnight ; and thus 
thou haste thre howses, that is to saie, the beginning of the second, 
the third, and the fowerth howse : than is the nadire of these thre 
howses the beginnyng of these thre that foloweth [the seventh : 
and the nadire of the eleventh, and the twelveth, is the beginnyng 
of the two that foUoweth the fourth].* 

XL. To finde the line meridionale to dwell fixe in any certain 
place. 

^T^ake a round plate of metall, for warpyng the borderf the better, 
and make thereupon a juste compace a little within the bor- 
dure ; and laie this rounde plate upon an evene ground or some 
evene stone or on an even stock fixe in the ground, and laie it even 

i^^ 

* I have added this passage, in brackets, because after the mention of the 
2nd, the 3rd, and the 4th, " the thre howses that foloweth " would be the 
5th, 6th, and 7th ; but that would be very different from Chaucer's meaning as 
fully explained in the preceding conclusion. 

t Border =broder (broader) i.e., on account of warping, the broader (or 
thicker) the better. There is an example of broad, applied to thickness of 
rim, in broad wheeled wagon. Stevins also has broder. 

56 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

by a rule. In the centre of the compace sticke an even pinne or 
a wire upright, the smaller the better, and sette thy pinne or thy 
wire by a plumme-rule's ende upright even : and let this pinne he 
7M lenger than three-quarters* of thy diameter of the corrvpace : and 
wayte bysyly aboute tenne or eleven of the clocke when the sonne 
sheweth, when the shadow of the pynne entreth any thing within 
the circle of the compace one here brede,f and make there a pryck 
with ynke. Abide then, still waityng on the sonne, after one of 
the clocke til that the schadowe of the pinne or of the wire passe 
any thyng out of the circle or compace be it never so little, and 
sette there a pryck. Take then a compace and mesure even the 
middle betwixe both pryckes and sette there a pryck. Take then 
a rule and drawe a strike even fro the pinne unto the middle pryck, 
and take there the line meridionale for evermore as in the same 
place : and if thou drawe a crosse [line] over thwarte the compace 
justlie over the line meridionall, then haste thou Est and West, 
and per consequens the oppositife, that is, South and North. 

XLI. Discripcion of the Meridionale line, and of the longitudes 
and latitudes of cities and tounes as well as of Climates. 

rphis line meridionale is but a maner discripcion of a line yma- 
"*• gined that passeth upon the Poles of the world, and by the 
signet over hede : and it is cleped the signet, for in what place that 
any man is at any time of the yere whan the sonne by mevyng of 
the firmament cometh to his meridianale place, thanne is it the 
verray middaie that we clepe None, and therefore is it cleped 
the line of Middaie. Than take hede that evermore of. two 
citees, or of two tounes, of whiche the one approcheth neerer 
the Est than doth the other toune, truste wel that thilke two 
tounes have diveres meridians. Take kepe also that the arche 
of the Equinoctial that is conteyned and bounded betwene the 

* I have here substituted three-quarters for " a quarter," and omitted " fro 
the pinne," in the words " thy diameter of the compace fro the pinne,'* which 
would mean the radius. Now a quarter of the radius would be an eighth of 
the diameter, a preposterous proportion. But with 9 to 6 as the ratio of the 
gnomon to the shadow, as I have made it, the altitude of the sun is 56^ 18' 
about the summer solstice at an hour and a half, or an hour and three-quarters, 
before noon ; which very well agrees with Chaucer's ten or eleven of the clock, 
and was, beyond all reasonable doubt, what he intended. [Stevins omits alto- 
gether the words in italics, and so avoids the difficulty.] 

t One hair's breadth. 

.THE CONCLUSIONS. .57 

two meridians is cleped the longitude of the Tonne. And if it 
so be that two tonnes have meridian y-like, or one meridian, 
thanne is the distaunce of hem bothe like ferre.* And in this 
maner thei channge not the meridian, but sothlie thei chaunge 
ther alimancanteras, for the haunsing of the Pole and the dis- 
taunce of the Sonne. 

The longitude of a clymat maye be cleped the space of the yerth 
fro the beginnyng of the firste clymat unto the laste ende of the 
same climat even direct against the pole artike ; thus sale some 
aucthours.i" 

And some clerkes saie that if men clepe the latitude of a contrej 
the arche meridian that is conteined or intercepte betwixe the 
signet and the Equinoccial, then, thei saie, that the distaunce fro 
the Equinoccial unto the ende of the clymate even ayenst the pole 
artike is the longitude of the clymate fro south. 

[Here I think the astronomical conclusions to be attributed to Chaucer 
himself ought properly to end. As to the one other that remains, the 
XLIInd, I am convinced it was not written by him, and I have fully 
explained my reasons for that opinion in the Introduction (p. 11). I there 
fore make no attempt to amend it. But I shall print it verhatim from 
Urry's edition : giving it, however, the benefit, such as it is, of Stevins' 
alterations and additions by noting them at foot of each page.] 

(XLII.) To knowe with what degree of the Zodiake that any 
Planet ascendeth on the orizonte where his latitude be 
North or South. 

"IT'nowe by thyne Almanacke the degre of the Ecliptike of any 
signe in which that the pianette is rekened for to be, and that 
is cleped the degre of his longitude. And knowe also the degre of 
his latitude fro th' ecliptike North or South, and by these ensamples 
folowing in especialle thou maieste wirche with every signe of the 
Zodiake. The longitude peraventure* of Venus, or of an other 

* An important part of the text appears to be wanting here, which if not 
recovered from other MSS., will be much to be regretted — as depriving us of a 
knowledge of what Chaucer considered to be the first meridian — ^whether the 
Gaditanae or the Fortunate Isles. 

t Stevins very improperly changed " longitude " into latitvde at the begin- 
ning of this sentence, for in the next paragraph Chaucer fully explains in what 
sense longitude is to be imderstood. 

X This word is center in the printed copies. 

68 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

planet was ^ of Capricome, and the latitude of 'hem Northward 
* degrees fro the Ecliptike line, then toke I subtil compas and 
cleped the one poinct of my compace A, and that other F, then toke 
I the poinct of A and set in the ecliptike line ^ and my Zodiake 
in the degre of the Longitude of heddes * that is to sale in the 
ende^of Capricome, and then set I the poinct of F upward in 
the same signe bicause that the altitude® was North upon the 
latitude of Venus, that is to saie in the^ degre fro the hed of 
Capricome, and thus have I the® degrees betwixe my two 
prickes*, then laied I downe softlie my compace and set the 
degre of the longitude upon the^® Orizont, then toke I and 
waxed my labell in maner of a paire of tables to receve distinctly 
the pricke of my compace, then toke I this foresaid labell and laid 
it fixe over the degre of my longitude, then toke I up my compace 
and " the poinct of A in the waxe of my labell as I coud gesse 
over th' ecliptike line in th' ende ^^ of the longitude. I set the 
poinct^* over endlonge on the labell upon the space of the 
latitude inwarde, and on the Zodiake, that is to say Northward fro 
the ecliptike : (then laide I doune my compace and loked well in 
the waie upon th' ecliptike of A and F) " then toumed I my 
rete till that the pricke of F sate upon the orizont, then sawe I 
well that the bodye of Venus in her^* latitude of degrees 
septentrionale ascendeth (in the ende of degre) ^' fro the hed of 
Capricome. And note that in this maner thou mightest werch 
with any latitude septentrionall in al signes : but sothly the 
latitude Meridionall of a planet in Capricorn maie not be take 
bicause of the little space betwixe the ecliptike and the bordure 
of the Astrolabie, and sikerly in al other signes it maie be take. 
Also the degre peraventure of Jupiter, or of any other pianette was 
in the first degre of Pisces in longitude and his latitude was^'' 
degrees Meridionall. Then toke I the poinct of A and set it in the 
first degree of Pisces in th* ecliptike, then set I the poinct downward 
of F in the same signe ^^ bicause that the latitude was south ^* 

1 Here Stevins inserts " in the hedd" ^ Inserts " 2/* 8 for " and/" sub- 
stitutes "o/.** 4 demit "o/ heddes" 6 for ^^ende" substitutes ^^hedd" 
« corrects by erasure to ** latitude" 7 in serts " Seconde," 8 for " the " substitutes 
^' two.** 9 substitutes '^pointesJ* lo inserts *^ east,* n inserts "sette** 
12 for *^ ende** substitutes ^^ degree** 13 inserts "o/ jP,"and demit "over'* 
14 demit all within parenthesis, is for " her** substitutes " this" W demit all 
within parenthesis, and substitutes " loith the ende of Sagittarre a certaine of 
degrees." 17 inserts "3." i^ for "same" substitutes "nexte!* 18 inserts 

00NC5LUSI0NS. 59 

degrees, that is to saie fro tte hed of Pisces, and thus have I ^ 
degrees betwixe both prickes. *^ Then set I the degre of the 
longitude upon the orizont, then toke I my labell and laied him 
fixe upon the degre of longitude, then set I the poinct of A on my 
labeU even over the ecliptike line on the ende of the ^ degre of 
the longitude and I sette the poinct of F endelong on my labeU 
the space of ^? degrees of the latitude outwarde fro the Zodiake, 
that is to saie southwarde fro the Ecliptike towarde the bordure, 
and then tourned I my rete, tU the poincte of F sate upon the 
orizont, then sawe I weU that the bodie of Jupiter in his latitude 
of 2* degrees meridionall, ascendeth with the ^^ degre of Pisces 
in horoscope, And in this maner thou maiest werche with any 
Latitude, as I saied first, save in Capricome. 

And thou wilte plie this crafte with the arysing of the Mone, 
loke thou reken well the ^ course of ^ houre by houre, for 
she dweUeth in a degre of her Longitude but a little while, as thou 
woste well : but neverthelesse if thou legen well her verie mevyng 
by the tables, or after her course, houre by houre, thou shalte doe 
well inough. 

[The Pratike of Umbra Eecta and Umbra Versa: 

To knowe the heyght of toures and other thynges by the Scale on 

the bakk-syde of thyne astrolabye.]* 

1. Umbra Eecta. If thou might come to the base of the towre if | 
in this maner shalt thou werke. Take the altitude of the towre 
with both holes, so that the rule lie even on a poinct. Ensample 
as thus : thou seest hym through the poinct of fewer : then mete I 
the space betwixe thee and the towre, and I find it twentie fote : 
then beholde I how fewer is to twelve and I find it is the thirde 
parte of twelve : right so, the space betwixe thee and the towre is 

"3." 20 inserts «3.'' 2i substitutes "pointes."' 22. demit ''mde of the.'' 
23 inserts " 3/ 24 inserts " 3." 26 inserts " 6th." 26 for « the '' substitutes 
"W." 27 demit"©/." 

* I have no authority for these few lines of introductory title, but they seem 
absolutely necessary to break the abruptness of the change from the astrono- 
mical portion ; and there can be no doubt that some such introductory matter 
must have formed part of the original. 

60 THE G0HCLUSIOK8. 

the thirde part of the altitude of the towre : then thrise twentie 
fote is the highest of the towre, with the addicion of thine owne 
hodie fro thyne eye. If the rule fall on five then [as five is to twelve 
so is the space betwixe to]* the heyght of the towre. 

u^ IL Umbra Versa. If thou maiest not come to the base of the 
towre and thou fixe hym through the nombre of one ; sette there 
a pryck at thy fote : then go nere the towre and se hym through 
the poinct of two, and sette there an other pry ok : and then beholde 
howe one hath hym to twelve, and thou shalte finde that he hath 
hym twelve sithes : then behold how two have hym to twelve and 
thou shalte finde it sixe sithes, [the difference is sixe] and 
therefore the space betwixe the two pryckes is sixe times thyne 
altituda And note that at the first altitude of one, thou settest a 
pryck ; and afterward when thou seest hym through at two, there 
thou settest a pryclj ; then thou findest betwene Ix fote : then thou 
shalte finde thattenne is the sixth part of sixty : then is tenne fote 
the altitude of the towre. But if it fall upon an other poinct, as 
thus : it faUeth on sixe at the seconde takyng, when [at the first] 
it falleth on three : then shalt thou finde that sixe is the second 
part of twelve, and three is the fowrthe parte of twelve : [the 
difference is two] that is to saie the space betwixe the two pryckes 
is twise the heyght of the towre. And if the difference were three, 
then would it be three times the heythe. Et sic de singulis,^ 

u*^ III. Umbba Eecta. An other maner of werching by umbra recta. 
If thou maiest not come by the base of the towre, wirche in this 
wise : sette thy rule upon one, tyll thou se the altitude, and set 
at thy fote a prycke ; and then set thy rule upon two, and so doe 
in the same maner : then loke what is the difference betwixe one 
and two, and thou shalte finde that it is one : then mesure the 
space betwixe the two pryckes, and that is the twelveth part of 
the altitude of the towre — and so of all other. 

IV. Umbba Eecta. If thy rule fall upon the eighte poinct, on 

* These words in brackets I have substituted for "is five times twelve" of the 
printed copies, which are obviously erroneous. Stevins gets over the difficulty 
by omitting the last part altogether. 

+ The numbers and measurements in the foregoing problem are sadly 
mangled in the various copies. I have inserted such numbers and made 
such alterations (denoted by brackets) as seem nearest to the requirement of 
the context and yet are consistent with correctness. 

THE CONCLUSIONS. 61 

the right shadowe, then make the figure of 8: then loke howe 
moche space of the fete is betwixe thee and the towre, and 
multiplie that by twelve : and when thou hast multiplied it by 
that same nombre, than devide it by the nombre of eighte and 
kepe the- residue, and adde thy heyght unto thyne eye to the 
residue and that shall be the verie heighte of the towre. And 
thus maiest thou worche on the same side from one to twelve. 

V. Umbra Eecta. Another maner of werkyng upon the same 
side. Loke upon what poinct thy rule falleth when thou seest 
the toppe of the towre through the two holes, and then mete the 
space from thy fote to the base of the towre : and right as the 
nombre of the poinct hath himseK to twelve, right so the mesure 
betwixt thee and the towre hath hymself to the height of the 
same towre. Ensample as thus : I sette the case thy rule fall upon 
eight, then is eight two thirde partes of twelve, so is the space 
two thirde partes of the towre. 

YI. Umbra Versa. To knowe the heyght by the poinct of 
Umbra Versa. K the rule fall upon iii when thou seest the toppe 
of the towre, sette a pryck there thy fote standeth, and go nere 
tyl thou maiest se the same toppe at the poinct of iiii, and sette 
there an other pryck ; then mete how many fote is betwixe the 
two pryckes, and the height up to thine eye, and that shaU be the 
the height of the towre. And note that iii is the fowerth part of 
xii, and iiii is the thirde parte of xii. Nowe passeth iiii the 
nombre of iii by distaunce of i, therefore the same space, with 
thy height to thy eye, is the height of the towre. And if it were 
so that there were two or three distaunces in the nombres, so 
should the mesure betwixe the pryckes be twise or thrise the 
height of the towre. 

VII. Umbra Eecta. To knowe the height if thou maiest not 
come to the base of the thynge. Set thy rule upon what poinct 
thou wilte, so that thou maist se the toppe of the thinge through 
the two holes, and make a mark there thy fote standeth, 
and go nere or ferther tyl thou maieste se it through an other 
poinct, and make there an other marke : and loke what difference 
is betwixe the two poinctes in the scale : and right as that differ- 
ence hath hym to xii, right so the spaces betwixe the two markes 
hath hym to the height of the thing. Ensample : I sette the 
case that thou seest it through the poinct of iiii, and after at the 

62 THE CONCLUSIONS. 

poinct of iiL Nowe passeth the nombre of iiii the nombre of iii 
the distance of i : and right as this difference of one hath hymself 
to xii, right so the mesure betwixe bothe the markes hath hym to 
the height of the same thing, puttyng thereto the height of thyself 
to thine eye. And thus maiest thou werke from i to xii. 

VIII. Umbra Versa. Furthermore, if thou wilte knowe in 
umbra versa by the crafte of umbra recta, I suppose thou takest 
thine altitude at the poinct of iiii and makest a mark, and then 
thou goest nere* tyl thou haste it at the poincte of iii and makest 
there an other mark ; then must thou devide 144 by 4 ; the nombre 
that Cometh thereof shall be 36 ; and after, divide 144 by 3, and 
the nombre that cometh thereof is 48 : then loke what difference is 
betwixte 36 and 48, and that shalte thou finde is 12 : and right as 
12 hath hym to 12 so the space betwixte the two pryckes hath 
hym to the altitude of the thynge.-|" 

* Stevins, not understanding this problem, changed '* nere " into "further J' 
t In this last problem, what Chaucer means by "the crafte " of umbra recta, 
is what we should call the stating, or the order in which the terms of the pro- 
portion are presented. In lunbra recta the first term is the difference between 
the observed points of the scale, the second is the distance between the stations, 
the third is the length of the scale, and the fourth is the altitude of the object re- 
quired ; but in Umbra Versa the two first of these terms are transposed. Therefore, 
in order to take the altitude by the points of umbra versa, and yet perform 
the computation by the proportion of umbra recta, it is necessary to convert 
the points of the one into equivalent points of the other : and this is done 
reciprocally in both scales by dividing the points of each into the square of its 
whole scale : or, as Chaucer has it, into 144, the square of 12. 

Ende of Seconde Partye. 
(Cceteiw Demnt) 

Qppenirtjr* 

EEPEINTS OF PAPEES ON THE 

ASTRONOMY OF CHAUCER 

m " THE CANTEEBUEY TALES." 

WITH ADDITIONAL NOTES. 

€SiS^^S 

ON THE MEANING OF CHAUOEE'S PEIME, 
ON THE CAEEENARE, 
ON SHIPPES OPPOSTEEES. 

1 

J 

I. 

THE PILGRIMAGE TO CANTERBUEY. 

'' Whan that Aprille with his shoures soote 
The drought of March hath perced to the roote 
And bathed every veyne in such licour 
Of which vertu engendred is the flour : — 
When Zephirus eek with his swete breeth 
Inspired hath in every holt and heeth 
The tendre croppes, and the yonge Sonne 

Hath in the Ram his halfe cours y-ronne : 

***** 

Thanne longen folk to gon on pilgrimages 

***** 
***** 

Bifel that in that seson on a day." 

Prologue. 

I quote these lines because I wish to show that Tyrwhitt, in 
taking them as indicative of the very day on which the journey to 
Canterbury was performed, committed a great mistake. 

The whole of the opening of the prologue, down to the line last 
quoted, is descriptive, not of any particular day, but of the usual 
season of pilgrimages ; and Chaucer himself plainly declares, by 
the words " in that season, on a day " — that the day is as yet in- 
definite. 

But because Tyrwhitt, who, although an excellent literary critic, 
was by no means an acute reader of his author's meaning, was 
incapable of appreciating the admirable combination of physical 
facts by which Chaucer has not only identified the real day of the 
pilgrimage, but has placed it, as it were, beyond the danger of 
alteration by any possible corruption in the text, he set aside 
these physicaLfacts altogether, and took in lieu of them the seventh 
and eighth lines of the prologue quoted above, which I contend, 
Chaucer did not intend to bear any reference to the day of the 
journey itself, but only to the general season in which it was un- 
dertaken. 

But Tyrwhitt, having seized upon a favourite idea, seems to have 
been determined to carry it through at any cost, even at that of 

F 

66 APPENDIX. 

altering the text from ** the Ram " into " the Bull :" and T fear that 
he can scarcely be acquitted of unfair and intentional misquotation 
of Chaucer's words, by transposing " his halfe cours " into " half 
his course." which is by no means an equivalent expression. Here 
are his own words : 

" When he (Chaucer) tells us that * the shoures of April had p&rced to the rote 
the drought of March' (ver. 1, 2), we must suppose, in order to allow due time 
for such an operation, that April was far advanced ; while, on the other hand, 
the place of the sun, 'having just run half his course in the Ram* (ver. 7, 8), 
restrains us to some day in the. very latter end of March. This difficulty may, 
and, I think, should, be removed by reading in ver. 8, the Bull, instead of the 
Rau. All the parts of the description will then be consistent with themselves, 
and with another passage (ver. 4425), where, in the best M3S., the eighte and 
twenty day of April is named as the day of the journey to Canterbury.'* — Intro- 
ductory Discourse. 

Accordingly, Mr. Tyi'whitt did not hesitate to adopt in his text the 
twenty-eighth of April as the true date, without stopping to exa- 
mine whether that day would, or would not, be inconsistent with 
the subsequent phenomena related by Chaucer. 

Notwithstanding Tyrwhitt's assertion of a difficulty only remov- 
able by changing the Earn into the Bull, there are no less than 
two ways of understanding the seventh and eighth lines of the 
prologue so as to be perfectly in accordance with the rest of the 
description. One of these would be to suppose the sign Aries divided 
into two portions (not necessarily equal in the phraseology of the 
time), one of which would appertain to March, and the other to 
April — and that Chaucer, by " in the Eam his halfe cours," meant 
the last, or the Ajpril half of the sign Aries. But I think a more 
probable supposition still would be to imagine the month of April, 
of which Chaucer was speaking, to be divided into two " halfe cours," 
in one of which the .sun would be in Aries, and in the other in 
Taurus ; and that when Chaucer says that " the yonge Sonne had 
in the Ram his halfe cours yronne," he meant that the Aries half of 
tJie month of April -had been run through, thereby indicating in 
general terms some time approaching to the middle of April 

Both methods of explaining the phrase lead eventually to the 
same result, which is also identical with the interpretation of 
Chaucer's own contemporaries, as appears in its imitation by Lyd- 
gate in the opening of his '* Story of Thebes :" — 

" Whan bright Phebus passed was the Eam, 
Midde of Aprill, and into the Bull came." 

APPENDIX. 67 

And it is by no means the least remarkable instance of want of 
perception in Tyrwhitt, that he actually cites these two lines of 
Lydgate's as corroborative of his own interpretation^ which places the 
sun in the middle of Taurus, 

I enter into this explanation, not that I think it necessary to 
examine too curiously into the consistency of an expression which 
evidently was intended only in a general sense, but that the ground- 
lessness of Tyrwhitt's alleged necessity for the alteration of " the 
Earn '' into " the Bull " might more clearly appear * 

t have said that Tyrwhitt was not a competent critic of Chau- 
cer's practical science, and I may perhaps be expected to point out 
some other instance of his failure in that respect than is afforded 
by the subject itself. This I may do by reference to a passage in 
"The Marchante's Tale," which evinces a remarkable want of per- 
ception not only in Tyrwhitt, but in all the editors of Chaucer that 
I have had an opportunity of consulting. 

The morning of the garden scene is said in the,text to be " er 
that days eight were passed of the month of Juil " — but a little 
further on, the same day is thus described : — 

" Bright was the day and blew the firmament, 
Phebus of gold his stremes doun hath sent 
To gladden every flour with his warmnesse ; 
He was that time in Geminis, I gesse. 
But litel fro his declination 
In Cancer." 

How is it possible that any person could read these lines and not 
be struck at once with the fact that they refer to the 8th of June 
and not to the 8th of July ? The sun would leave Gemini and 
and enter Cancer on the 12th of June ; Chaucer was describing 
the 8th, and with his usual accuracy he places the sun " but litel 
fro " the summer solstice ! 

Since " Juil " is an error common perhaps to all previous editions, 
Tyrwhitt might have been excused for repeating it, if he. had been 
satisfied with only that : but he must signalise his edition by insert- 
ing in the Glossary attached to it — ** Juil, the month of Juli/y' refer- 
ring, as the sole authority for the word, to this very line in question 
of « The Marchante's Tale 1" 

Nor does the proof, against him in particular, end even there ; 
he further shows that his attention must have been especially 
drawn to this garden scene by his assertion that Pluto and Proser-, 

* See Note A at the end. 

68 APPENDIX, 

pine were the prototypes of Oberon and Titania ; and yet he failed 
to notice a circumstance that would have added some degree of 
plausibility to tlie comparison, namely, that Chaucer's, as well as 
Shakspeare's, was a Midsummer Dream, 

It is, perhaps, only justice to Urry to state that Tie appears 
to have been aware of the error that would arise from attributing 
the sun's presence in the sign Gemini to the month of July. The 
manner in which the lines are printed in his edition is this : — 

" ere the dayis eight 
Were passid, er' the month July befiU." 

It is just possible to twist the meaning of this into the eighth of the 
Kalends of July, by which the blunder would be in some degree 
lessened ; but, inasmuch as the sun, in Chaucer's time, would leave 
Gemini on the 12th of June, and the eighth of the Kalends of 
July was not till the 24th of June, such a reading would be as 
foreign to Chaucer's astronomy as the lines themselves are to his 
poetry. 

[Pub. April 26, 1851.] 

II. 
THE ARKE OF ARTIFICIAL DAY. 

Before proceeding to point out the indelible marks by which 

Chaucer has, as it were, stereotyped the true date of the journey 

to Canterbury, I shall clear away another stumbling-block, still 

more insurmountable to Tyrwhitt than his first difficulty of the 

" halfe cours" in Aries, viz., the seeming inconsistency in statements 

(1.) and (2.) in the following lines of the prologue to the Man of 

Lawe's tale : — 

( " Oure hoste saw wel that the bright sonne, 
(1.) -\ The arke of his artificial day, had ironne 

( The fourthe part and halfe an houre and more. 

And saw wel that the shadow of every tree 
Was as in length of the same quantitie, 
That was the body erecte that caused it, 
And therefore by the shadow he toke his wit 
\^') ^ That Phebus, which that shone so clere and bright, 
Degrees was five and fourty clombe on hight, 
And for that day, as in that latitude 
It was ten of the clok, he gan conclude." 

APPENDIX. 69 

The difficulty will be best explained in Tyrwhitt^s own words : — 

** Unfortunately, however, this description, though seemingly intended to 
be 80 accurate, will neither enable us to conclude with the MSS. that it was 
* ten of the cloche* nor to fix upon any other hour ; as the two circumstances 
just mentioned are not found to coincide in any part of the 28th, or of any 
other day of April, in this climate." — Introductory Diacoursey § xiv. 

In a foot-note, Tyrwhitt further enters into a calculation to show 
that, on the 28th of April, the fourth part of the day and half an 
hour and more (even with the liberal allowance of a quarter of an 
hour to the indefinite phrase " a7id more ") would have been com- 
pleted by nine o'clock a.m. at the latest, and therefore at least an 
hour too soon for coincidence with (2.). 

Now, one would think that Tyrwhitt, when he found his author 
relating facts, " seemingly intended to le so accurate*^ would have 
endeavoured to discover whether there might not be some hidden 
meaning in them, the explaining of which might make that con- 
sistent, which, at first sight, was apparently the reverse. 

Had he investigated with such a spirit, he must have discovered 
that the expression " arke of the artificial day " could not, in this 
instance, receive its obvious and usual meaning of the horary dura- 
tion from sunrise to sunset — 

And for this simple reason : That such a meaning would pre- 
suppose a knowledge of the hour — of the very thing in request — and 
which was about to be discovered by " our hoste," who " toke his 
wit " from the sun's altitude for the purpose ! But if he knew 
already that the fourth part of the day i^ time had elapsed, he must 
necessarily have also known what that time was, without the neces- 
sity of calculating it ! 

Now Chaucer, whose choice of expression on scientific subjects 
is often singularly exact, says, " Our hoste saw that the sonne," &c. ; 
he must therefore have been referring to some visible situation : 
because, afterwards, when the time of day has been obtained from 
calculation, the phrase changes to "^aw conclude*' that it was ten 
of the clock. 

It seems, therefore, certain that, even setting aside the question 
of consistency between (1.) and (2.), we must, upon other grounds, 
assume that Chaucer had some meaning in the expression " arke of 
the artificial day," different from what must be admitted to be 
its obvious and received signifination. 

To what other ark, then, could he have been alluding, if not to 
the horary diurnal ark ? 

70 APPENDIX, 

I think, to the Azimuthal Arch of the Hobizon included 
between the point of sunrise and that of sunset 1 

The situation of any point in that arch is called its bearing ; it 
is estimated by reference to the points of the compass ; it is there- 
fore visually ascertainable : and it requires no previous knowledge 
of the hour in order to determine when the sun has completed the 
fourth, or any other, portion of it. 

Here, then, is priind fade probability established in favour of 
this interpretation. And if upon examination, we find that it also 
clears away the discrepancy between (1.) and '(2.), probability 
becomes certainty. 

Assuming upon evidence which I shall hereafter explain, that 
the sun's declination, on the day of the journey, was 13" 26' North, 
or thirteen degrees and a half, — the sun's bearing at rising, in the 
neighbourhood of London, would be E.KE., at setting W.N.W. ; 
the whole included arch, 22-4^ ; and the time at which the sun would 
complete one-fourth, or haye the bearing S.E. by E., would be about 
20 minutes past nine a.m:., — ^thus leaving 40 minutes to represent 
Chaucer's " half an hour and more ! " 

A very remarkable approximation — which converts a statement 
apparently contradictory, into a strong confirmation of the deduc- 
tion to be obtained from the other physical facts grouped together 
by Chaucer with such extraordinary skill ! 

On the other hand, it is impossible to deny that the " hoste's " 
subsequent admonition to the pilgrims to make the best use of their 
time, warning them that " the fourthe partie of this day is gon," 
seems again to favour the idea that it is the day's actual horary 
duration that is alluded to. 
[Pub May 3, 1851.] 

POSTCRIPT IN 1869. 

The necessary study of Chaucer's Treatise on the Astrolabe, 
which I have gone through in editing it, has enabled me to suggest 
an explanation of this seeming anomaly. In observing " the arche 
of the day that some folk callen the day artificiale." — Conclusion 
VIII, page 31. Chaucer would see at the same time the sun's 
azimuth at rising and setting. And he would take the fourth of the 
included arch in azimuth as the fourth of the day in time, because 

APPENDIX. 71 

it appears by Conclusion XXX, page 51, that he was under the 
mistaken idea that the azimuth is equal to the hour-angle. 

III. 
ASTKONOMICAL EVIDENCE. 

Unless Chaucer had intended to mark with particular exact- 
ness the day of the journey to Canterbury, he would not have 
taken such unusual precautions to protect his text from ignorant or 
careless transcribers. We find him not only recording the altitudes 
of the sun, at different hours, in words ; but also corroborating those 
words by associating them with physical facts incapable of being 
perverted or misunderstood. 

Had Chaucer done this in one instance only, we might imagine 
that it was but another of those occasions, so frequently seized upon 
by him, for the display of a little scientific knowledge ; but when 
he repeats the very same precautionary expedient again, in the 
afternoon of the same day, we begin to perceive that he must have 
had some fixed purpose ; because, as I shall presently show, it is 
the repetition alone that renders the record imperishable. 

But whether Chaucer really devised this method for the express 
purpose of preserving his text, or not, it has at least had that effect 
— for while there are scarcely two MSS. extant which agree in the 
verbal record of the day and hours, the physical circumstances 
remain, and afford at all times independent data for the recovery or 
correction of the true reading. 

The day of the month may be deduced from the declination of 
the sun ; and, to obtain the latter, all the data required are, 

1. The latitude of the place. 

2. Two altitudes of the sun at different sides of noon. 

It is not absolutely necessary to have any previous knowledge of 
the hours at which these altitudes were respectively obtained, 
because these may be discovered by the trial method of seeking 
two such hours as shall most nearly agree in requiring a declina- 
tion common to both at the known altitudes. Of course it wiU 
greatly simplify the process if we furthermore know that the obser- 
vations must have been obtained at some determinate intervals of 
time, such, for example, as complete hours. 

72 APPENDIX. 

Now, in the Prologue to the " Canterbury Tales/' we know that 
that the observations could not have been recorded accept at com- 
plete hours, because the construction of the metre will not admit 
the supposition of any parts of houi-s having been expressed. 

We are also satisfied that there can be no mistake in the alti- 
tudes, because nothing can alter the facts, that an equality between 
the length of the shadow and the height of the substance can only 
subsist at an altitude of 45 degrees ; or that an altitude of 29 de- 
grees (more or less) is the nearest that will give the ratio of 11 to 6 
between the shadow and its gnomon. 

With these data we proceed to the following comparison : 

Forenoon altitude 45". 

Afternoon 

altitude 29^ 

Hour. 

Declin. 

Honr. 

Declin. 

XI A.1C 

8^ 9'N. 

II P.M. 

3^ 57' S. 

x„ 

13^ 27' „ 

Ill „ 

3^ 16' N. 

IX „ 

22^ 34' „ 

IV „ 

13^ 26' „ 

VIII „ 

Impossible. 

V „ 

Impossible. 

Here we immediately select " X a.m." and " IV p.m." as the only 
two items at all approaching to similarity ; while, in these, the 
approach is so near that they differ by only a single minute of a 
degree ! 

More conclusive evidence therefore could scarecely exist that 
these were the hours intended to be recorded by Chaucer, and that 
the sun's declination, designed by him, was somewhere about thirteen 
degrees and a half North. 

Strictly speaking, this declination would more properly apply to 
the 17th of April, in Chaucer's time, than to the 18th ; but since 
he does not profess to critical exactness, and since it is always 
better to adhere to written authority, when it is not grossly and 
obviously corrupt, such MSS. as name the 18th of April ought to 
be respected ; but Tyrwhitt's " 28th," which he states not only as 
the result of his own conjecture but as authorised by " the best 
MSS.," ought to be scouted at once. 

In the latest edition of the " Canterbury Tales " (a literal reprint 
from one of the HarL MSS., for the Percy Society, under the super- 
vision of Mr. Wright), the opening of the Prologue to "The Man 
of Lawes Tale " does not materially differ from Tyrwhitt's text, 
excepting in properly assigning the day of the journey to " the 
eightetene day of April;" and the confirmation of the forenoon 
altitude is as follows : — 

APPENDIX. 73 

" And sawe wel that the schade of every tree 
Was in the lengthe the same quantite, 
That was the body erecte that caused it." 

Bat the afternoon observation is thus related : — 

" By that the Manciple had his tale endid, 
The Sonne fro the southe line is descendid 
So lowe that it nas nought to my sight, 
Degrees nyne and twenty as in hight. 
Ten on the clokke, it was as I gesse, 
For eleven foote, or litil more or lesse, 
My schadow was at thilk time of the yere, 
Of which feet as my lengthe parted werB, 
In sixe feet equal of proporcioun/' 

In a note to the line "Ten on. the clokke'* Mr. Wright ob- 
serves, 

" Ten, I have not ventured to change the reading of the Harl. MS., which 
is partly supported by that of the Lands. MS., than,^^ 

If the sole object were to present an exact counterpart of the 
MS., of course even its errors were to be respected : but upon no 
other grounds can I understand why a reading should be preserved 
by which broad sunshine is attributed to ten o^clock at night ! Nor 
can I believe that the copyist of the MS., with whom the error must 
have originated, would have set down anything so glaringly absurd, 
unless he had in his own mind some means of reconciling it with 
probability. It may, I believe, be explained in the circumstance 
that " ten " and " four," in horary reckoning, were convertible terms. 
The old Eoman method of naming the hours, wherein noon was 
the sixth, was long preserved, especially in conventual establish- 
ments : and I have no doubt that the English idiomatic phrase 
" o'clock " originated in the necessity for some distinguishing mark 
between hours of the clock reckoned from midnight, and hours of 
the day reckoned from sunrise, or more frequently from six A.M. 
With such an understanding, it is clear that ten might be called 
four, and four ten, and yet the same identical hour be referred to ; nor 
is it in the least difl&cult to imagine some monkish transcriber, 
ignorant perhaps of the meaning of " o'clock," might fancy he was 
correcting, rather than corrupting, Chaucer's text, by changing 

" foure " into " ten." 

I have, I trust, now shown that all these circumstances related 
by Chaucer, so far from being hopelessly incongruous, are, on the 
contrary, harmoniously consistent ;- • that they all tend to prove 
that the day of the journey to Canterbury could not have been 

7rt APPENDIX. 

later than the 18th of April ; — ^that the times of observation were 
certainly 10 A.M. and 4 p.m. ; — that the " arke of his artificial day'* 
is to be understood as the horizontal or azimuthal arch ; — and that 
the " halfe cours in the Earn " alludes to the completion of the last 
twelve degrees of that sign, about the end of the second week in 
April. 

There yet remains to be examined the signification of those three 
very obscure lines which immediately follow the description, already 
quoted, of the afternoon observation : 

" Therewith the Mones exaltacioim 
In mena Libra, alway gan ascende 
As we were entryng at a townes end." 

It is the more unfortunate that we should not be certain what it 
was that Chaucer really did write, inasmuch as he probably in- 
tended to present, in these lines, some means of identifying the 
year, similar to those he had previously given with respect to the 
day. 

When Tjo-whitt, therefore, remarks, " In what year this hap- 
pened Chaucer does not inform us " — ^he was not astronomer enough 
to know that if Chaucer had meant to leave, in these lines, a record 
of the moon's place on the day of the journey, he could not have 
chosen a more certain method of informing us in what year it 
occurred. 
[Fuh, May 17, 1851.] 

IV. 
THE STAR MIN AL AUWA. 

" Adam Scrivener, if ever it thee befall 
Boece, or Troilus, for to write new. 
Under thy long locks mayst thou have the scall 
But, after my making, thou write more trew ; 
So oft a day I mote thy worke renew, 
It to correct, and eke to rubbe and scrape, 
And all thorow thy neghgence and rape.** 

ChatLcer to his own Scrivener, 

If, during his own lifetime, and under his own eye, poor Chaucer 
was so sinned against as to provoke this humorous malediction 
upon the head of the delinquent, it cannot be a matter of surprise 
that, in the various hands his text has since passed through, many 
expressions should have been perverted, and certain passages 

APPENDIX. 75 

wholly misunderstood. And when we find men, of excellent 
judgment in other respects, proposing, as Tyrwhitt did, to alter 
Chaucer's words to suit their own imperfect comprehension of his 
meaning, it is only reasonable to suspect that similar mistakes 
may have induced early transcribers to alter the text wherever, to 
their wisdom, it may have seemed expedient. 

Now I know of no passage more likely to have been tampered 
with in this way than those lines of the prologue to the Persoiie's 
Tale, alluded to at the close of my last communication. Because, 
supposing (which I shall afterwards endeavour to prove) that 
Chaucer really meant to write something to this eflfect : ** There- 
upon, as we were- entering a town, the moon's rising, with Min al 
auwi in Libra, began to ascend (or to become visible)," — and 
supposing that his mode of expressing this had been, 

" Therewith the mone's exaltacioun, 
In libra men alawai gan ascende, 
As we were entrying at a towne's end :" 

— in such a case, what can be more probable than that some 
ignorant transcriber, never perhaps dreaming of such a thing as 
the Arabic name of a star, would endeavour to make sense of these, 
to him, obscure words, by converting them into English. The 
process of transition would be easy ; " min " or " men " requires 
little violence to become '* mene " (the modern *' mean " with its 
many significations), and "al auw§." (or "alwai," as Chaucer would 
probably write it) is equally identical with " alway." The mis- 
placement of " Libra " might then follow as a seeming necessity ; 
and thus the line would assume its present form, leaving the 
reader to understand it, either with Urry, as, " I mene Libra," that 
is, I refer to Libra ; — or with Tyrwhitt : " In mene Libra," that is, 
in the middle of Libra. 

Now, to Urry's reading, it may be objected that it makes the 
thing ascending to be Libra, and does not of necessity imply the 
moon's appearance above the horizon. But since the rising of the 
moon is a visible phenomenon, wliile tliat of Libra is theoretical, it 
must have been to the former Chaucer was alluding, as to something 
witnessed by the whole party as they 

" Were entrying at a towne's end f 

or otherwise this latter observation would have no meaning. 

The objection to Tyrwhitt's reading is of a more technical nature 
— the moon, if in the middle of Libra, coidd not be above the horizon, 

76 APPENDIX. 

in the neighbourhood of Canterbury, at four o'clock P.M., in the 
month of April. Tyrwhitt, it is true, would probably smooth away 
the difficulty by charging it as another inconsistency against his 
author; but I — and I hope by this time such readers of these 
notes as are interested in the subject — have seen too many proofs 
of Chaucer's competency in matters of science, and of his commen- 
tator's incompetency, to feel disposed to concede to the latter such 
a convenient method of interpretation. 

But there is a third objection common to both readings — that 
they do not satisfactorily account for the word "alway;" for 
althougli Tyrwhitt endeavours to explain it by continually y " was 
continually ascending," such a phrase is by no means intelligible 
when applied to a single observation. 

For myself, I can say that this word " alway " was, from the 
first, the great difficulty with me — and the more I became con- 
vinced of the studied meaning with which Chaucer chose his other 
expressions, the less satisfied I was with this ; and the more con- 
vinced I felt that the whole line had been corrupted. 

In advocating the restoration of the reading which I have already 
suggested as the original meaning of Chaucer, I shall begin by 
establishing the jprohahility of his having intended to mark the 
moon's place by associating her rising with that of a known fixed 
star — a method of noting phenomena frequently resorted to in 
ancient astronomy. For that purpose I shall point out another 
instance wherein Chaucer evidently intended an application of the 
same method for the purpose of indicating a particular position 
of the heavens ; but first it must be noted, that in alluding to the 
Zodiac, he always refers to tlie signs, never to the constellations — 
in fact, he does not appear to recognise the latter at aU !* Thus, 
in that palpable allusion to the precession of the equinoxes, in 
the Frankeleine's Tale — 

" He knew ful wel how fer Alnath was shove 
From the hed of thilke fixe Aries above." 

— by the hed of Aries, Chaucer did not mean the os frontis of the 
Earn, whereon Alnath still shines conspicuously, but the equinoc- 
tial point, from which Alnath was shove by the extent of a whole 
si-jn. 

* See Note B at the end. 

APPENDIX. 77 

This being premised, I return to the indication of a point in the 

ecliptic by the coincident rising of a star ; and I contend that such 

was plainly Chaucer's intention in those lines of the Squire's Tale 

wherein King Cambuscan is described as rising from the feast : — 

" Phebus hath left the angle meridional, . 
And yet ascending was the heste real, 
The gentle Leon, mth his AMryan" 

Which means that the sign Leo was then in the horizon — the pre- 
cise degree being marked by the coincident rising of the star 
Aldryan. 

Speght's explanation of " Aldryan,*' in which he has been copied 
by Urry and Tyrwhitt, is — " a star in the neck of the lion." What 
particular star he may have meant by this, does not appear : nor 
am I at present within reach of probable sources wherein his autho- 
rity, if he had any, might be searched for and examined ; but I 
have learned to feel such confidence in Chaucer's significance of 
description, that I have no hesitation in assuming, until authority 
for a contrary inference shall be produced, that by the star "Al- 
dryan " he meant Eegulus, not the neck, but the heart of the lion — 

1st. Because it is the most remarkable star in the sign Leo. 

2nd. Because it was, in Chaucer's time, as it now is, nearly upon 
the line of the ecliptic. 

3rd. Because its situation in longitude, about two-thirds in the 
sign Leo, just tallies with Chaucer's expression "yet ascending," — 
that is, one-third of the sign was still below the horizon. 

Let us examine how this interpretation consists with the other 
circumstances of the description. The feste-day of this Cambus- 
can was " The last idus of March " — that is, the 15th of March — 
" after the yere " — that is, after the equinoctial year, which had 
ended three or four days previously. Hence the sun was in three 
degrees of Aries — confirmed in Canace's expedition on the follow- 
ing morning, when he was " in the Eam foure degrees yronne," and 
his corresponding right ascension was twelve minutes. Now, by 
"the angle meridional" was meant the two hours inequall imme- 
diately succeeding noon (or while the " 1st House " of the sun was 
passing the meridian), and these two hours may, so near the equi- 
nox, be taken as ordinary hours. Therefore, when " Phoebus hath 
left the angle meridionall," it was two o'clock p.m., or eight hours 
after sunrise, which, added to twelve minutes, produces eight 
hours twelve minutes, as the ascending point of the equinoctial. 
The {vscending point of the ecliptic would consequently be twenty 

78 APPENDIX. 

d^rees in Leo, or within less than a degree of the actual place 
of the star Regulus, which in point of fact did rise on the 
15 th of March, in Chaucer's time, almost exactly at two in the 
afternoon* 

Such coincidences as these could not result from mere accident ; 
and, whatever may have been Speght's authority for the location of 
Aldryan, I shall never believe that Chaucer would refer to an infe- 
rior star when the great " Stella Regia " itself was in so remarkable 
a position for his purpose ; assuming always, as a matter of course, 
that he referred his phenomena, not to the country or age wherein 
he laid the action of his tale, but to his own. 

This, then, is the precedent by which I support the similar, and 
rather startling interpretation I propose of these obscure words 
" In mena Libra alway." 

There are two twin stars, of the same magnitude, and not far 
apart, each of which bears the Arabic title of Min al auwa ; one 
(P Virginis) in the sign Virgo — the other (5 Virginis) in that of 
Libra. 

The latter, in the south of England, in Chaucer's time, would 
rise a few minutes before the autumnal equinoctial point, and 
might be called Libra Min al auw^ either from that circumstance, 
or to distinguish it from its namesake in Virgo. 

Now on the 18th of April this Libra Min al auwS, would rise in 
the neighbourhood of Canterbury at about half-past three in the 
afternoon, so that by four o'clock it would attain an altitude of 
about five degrees — not more than sufi&cient to render the moon, 
supposing it to have risen with the star, visible (by daylight) to 
the pilgrims " entrying at a towne's end." 

It is very remarkable that the only year, perhaps in the whole 
of Chaucer's lifetime, in which the moon could have arisen with 
this star on the 18th of April, should be the identical year to which 
Tyrwhitt, reasoning from hiHorical evidence alone, would fain attri- 
bute the writing of the Canterbury Tales, . (Vide Introductory Dis- 
course, note 3.) 

On the 18th of April, 1388, Libra Min al auwft, and the moon, 
rose together about half-past three p.m. in the neighbourhood of 
Canterbury ; and Tyrwhitt, alluding to the writing of the Canter- 
bury Tales, "could hardly suppose it was much advanced before 
1389 r' 

*See note C, at the end. 

APPENDIX. 79 

Such a coincidence is more than remarkable — it is convincing : 
especially when we add to it that 1388 is the very date that, by 
a slight and probable injury to the last figure, might become the 
traditional one of 1383 ! 

Should my view, therefore, of the true reading of this passage in 
Chaucer be correct, it becomes of infinitely greater interest and impor- 
tance than a mere literal emendation, because it supplies that which 
has always been supposed wanting to the Canterbury Tales, viz., 
some means of identifying the year to which their action ought to be 
attributed. Hitherto, so unlikely has it appeared that Chaucer, 
who so amply furnishes materials for the minor branches of the 
date, should leave the year unnoted, that it has been accounted for 
in the supposition that he reserved it for the unfinished portion of 
his performance. But if we consider the ingenious though some- 
what tortuous methods resorted to by him to convey some of the 
other data, it is by no means improbable that he might really have 
devised this circumstance of the moon*s rising as a means of at 
least corroboratimg a date that he might intend to record afterwards 
in more direct terms. 

I acknowledge that, from the first, if I could have discovered a 
a probable interpretation of " mene " as an independent word, I 
should have preferred it rather than that of making it a part of the 
Arabic name, because I think that the star is sufficiently identified 
by the latter portion of its name, " Al auwa," and because the pre- 
servation of " mene " in its proper place in the line would afford a 
reading much less forced than that I was obliged to have recourse to. 
Perhaps some Arabic scholar will explain the name " Min al 
auwS,," and shew in what way the absence of the prefix '* Min " 
would affect it.* 
[Puh. May 31, 1851.] 

V. 
TESTS OF POSITIONS. 

As a conclusion to my investigation of this subject, I wish to 
place upon record the astronomical results on which I have relied 
in the course of my observations, in order that their correctness 

*See Note D, at the end. 

80 APPENDIX. 

may be open to challenge, and that each reader may compare the 
actual phenomena rigidly ascertained, with the several approxima- 
tions arrived at by Chaucer. 

And when it is recollected that some at least of the facts 
recorded by him must have been theoretical — ^incapable at the 
time of actual observation — it must be admitted that his near 
approach to truth is remarkable ; not the less so that his ideas on 
some points were certainly erroneous ; as, for example, his adoption, 
in the Treatise on the Astrolabe, of Ptolemy's obliquity of the 
ecliptic in preference to the more correct value assigned to it by 
the Arabians of the middle ages. 

Assuming that the true date intended by Chaucer was Saturday, 
the ISth of April, 1388, the following particulars of that day are 

those which have reference to his description : — 

H. M. 

Ei ht f Of the Sun at noon 2 17*2 

* ° . -< Of the Moon at 4 p.m 12 57 

Ascension ( of the Star (5 Virginis) 12 25 

o / 

"N" rth C Of the Sun at noon 13 47*5 

-pv y^ .. -< Of the Moon at 4 p.m 4 49*8 

-^®^^^^™^ ( Of the Star (5 Virginis 6 433 

r Of the Sun at 10 a.m 45 15 

Alt't de 3 Of the Sun at 4 p.m 29 15 

^ Of the Moon at 4 p.m 4 53 

( Of the Star at 4 p.m 4 20 

Azimuth Of the Sun at rising 112 30 

H. M. 

^ Of the Sun at half Azimuth 9 17 a.m. 

Apparent J Of the Sun at Altitude of 45^ 9 58 a.m. 

Time 1 Of the Sun at Altitude of 29^ 4 2 p.m. 

' Of Moon's entrance to Libra 3 45 p.m. 

IPub. June 28, 1861.] 

THE "HALPB COUES" IN THB'EAM' 81 

NOTE A. 

(C 

and the yonge sonne 

Hath in the Ram his halfe cours y-ronne."— Page 67. 

I ain in a manner compelled to invite a comparison between this 
reprint of what was written and published by me so far back as 
1851, and a claim advanced on the part of the Eev. W. W. Skeat, 
of Cambridge — that he, in 1868, was the first to protest against 
Tyrwliitt*s proposal to read " tJie Bull instead of the Bam " in the 
above lines : for notwithstanding that Mr. Skeat did, at one time, 
publicly acknowledge that this claim of his had been groundless 
(Notes and Queries, 24th Oct., 1868), yet he afterwards permitted 
it to be reasserted, and apparently acquiesced in attempts to confer 
upon it great literary notoriety in connection with his name. It 
was made a prominent theme of congratulation for the members of 
the Ea/rly Eru/lish Text Society in its Annual Report for 1869 : and 
it was proclaimed, with a rather exuberant prefatory flourish, in 
the " Temporary Preface " sent out in May, 1869, with the first 
issue of publications by the Chaucer Society. But although I am 
thus driven to assert once more my long prior right to this 
correction of Tyrwhitt, it is not from any overweening pride in it, 
for I was not, I confess, at all impressed with its value, untQ 
enlightened by the high importance I now find attributed to it as 
the discovery of another person : — 

" The greatest gain of late times as to the Prologue is clearly Mr. Skeat's 
showing that Chaucer^s Ram of line 8 is not the blunder for Bull that Tyrwhitt 
and his followers supposed it to be ; but is quite right.'* 

" A vote of thanks to Mr. Skeat from all Chaucerians is hereby recorded.*' 

(" Temporary Preface,*' page 89.) 

This is followed by a reprint in full of Mr. Skeat*s letter to Notes 
and Queries of 19th September, 1868 ; but his disQ^imer, which 
appeared in the same periodical a few weeks later, is not noticed. 
I fear Mr. Skeat himself cannot be wholly acquitted of having 
supervised this partial republishing of his letters : and I say so on the 
evidence of a superadded foot-note, not in the original, which 
nevertheless appears with the signature W. W. S. on page 104 of 
this " Temporary Preface ;" and that foot-note clearly refers to an 
incidental remark in the remonstrance from me (N. and Q., 10th 
Oct., 1868), which had elicited his disclaimer on the 24th of the 
same month. 

H 

82 THE *'HALFE COURS " IN THE BAM. 

Now, while Mr. Skeat's protest against Tyrwhitt is identical 
with mine, the manner in which he would explain the existing 
text is essentially different ; and it is necessary, in defence of my 
own interpretation, that I should show the errors of his. He 
would inflict upon Chaucer a more injurious imputation than even 
Tyrwhitt's — namely, an unintelligible jumbling together of the 
signs, of the Zodiac, with the constellations of the same names. 
He states that by the sun's halfe cours in the Eam Chaucer did 
not mean the sign so called but the constellation ; and that since 
the middle of the constellation, in Chaucer's time, preceded the 
middle of the sign by twenty degrees, that number added to 15 of 
Aries would produce the 5th degree of Taurus, the sun's place on 
the 17th April. But, if that were Chaucer's meaning, what are we 
to think when we come to The Squire's Tale, and find there an 
almost exact repetition of the same phrase — "the yonge sonne 
that in the Eam was foure degrees y-ronne ?" By parity, these 
four degrees should be advanced to twenty-four. But twenty-four 
degrees in Aries would be the sun's place for the sixth of April, 
whereas Chaucer declares it is the sixteenth of March (that is, the 
day succeeding "the last idus of March"). Therefore Mr. Skeat's 
interpretation would impute to Chaucer that by the same form of 
words he means a constellation in one place and a sign in the 
other, with a difference between the two meanings of twenty 
degrees of longitude ! 

Mr. Skeat makes no attempt to show by any authority other 

than " a glance at a modem celestial glohe^^ what would have been 

Chaucer's estimate of the constellation Aries ? — ^where he would 

place its beginning, where its middle, — or where its termination ? 

The only allusion, I believe, in Chaucer's works to precessional 

separation, is the passage in the Frankelein's Tale quoted by me 

in 1851 :— 

" He knewe ful wel how ferre Alnath was shove 
Fro the hed of thilke fixe Aries above." 

and if any conclusion can be drawn from this, it is that he consi- 
dered the star a Arietis to be the beginning of the constellation : 
therein differing from Ptolemy who almost excluded Alnath by 
ranking it with the outsiders. It is needless to say that Alnath 
is not the star with which the constellation begins upon "a 
modern celestial glohe^ 

The overlap of half a sign into each month, and reciprocally of 
half a month into each sign, which was my interpretation of the 

THE "HALFB COURS " IN THE RAM. 83 

term "halfe cours," bad no doubt become, in Cbaucer's time, a 

conventional association arising from the still surviving habit of 

regarding the beginning of each sign as coincident with the middle 

of each month. It is so placed in the Treatise on the Chilindre 

translated and published by Mr. Brock ; and it is so placed by 

Sacro Bosco, an English astronomer of the 13th Century, who wrote 

a small treatise " De Anni Eatione" in the year 1244 : — 

" Si in quo gradu cujushbet signi sit Sol scire volueris, numero dierum men- 
sis prseteritorum adde 15, et si resultent 30, vel minor nmnerus, in tali gradu 
signi ad mensem pertinentis est Sol," &c. 

Now even this expression " dd mensem pertinentis^^ throws some 

light upon Chaucer's choosing to refer the sun's place in April to 

his completed passage through Aries rather than to his absolute 

presence in Taurus. Each sign was supposed to belong to that 

month in which it ended. Or as Sacro Bosco expresses it— 

" Nam signum detur mensi quem fine meretur.'' 

I confess I cannot imagine a plainer or more completely satisfying 

explanation of the " halfe cours" in the Eam, than the overlap 

into April of the half sign Aries ; through which it is said — (a few 

days after the middle of that month) — the sun hath yronne. 

So obviously true does that interpretation appear to me, that I 
think it superfluous at present to support it by the further 
argument that Chaucer did not recognize the zodiacal constellations 
at all as apart from the signs. I shall, however, in another note, 
recur to that position ; which, of itself, would be sufficient to refute 
Mr. Skeat's interpretation. 

And although I have assumed, for the sake of argument, that 
Chaucer would consider Alnath to be the initial star of the constel- 
lation Aries, yet I am convinced that he was not alluding to the 
constellation, in the passage quoted from the Frankelein's Tale, but 
only to the individual star, as indicating by its removal from the 
equinoctial point the extent of precession. (On this subject see 
Introduction p. 14.) 

It may be seen above, that in the same communication wherein 
I originally exposed the error of Tyrwhitt's ** Bull," I pointed out 
another error, the misreading, in the standing text of the Canterbury 
Tales (10007), of Juil for Juin — on the ground that the sun could not 
be "in Geminis" on the 8th oiJuly in Chaucer's time. By a singular 
coincidence Mr. Skeat also supplemented his communication on the 
same subject by a similar reference to the same line in The Mar- 
chaunt's Tale. He, however, would defend the error by asserting 
that the sun, though not in the sign, " would be in the constellation 

84 THE ZODIACAL SIGNS. 

Gemini — as so expressly stated by our poet." In tliis Mr. Skeat is 
unfortunately not correct. Por the sun now leaves the constellation 
Gemini, as shown by " a modem celestial globe," on the 17th of 
July ; which, when decreased by 14 (according to Mr. Skeat's own 
Vu - fr method of reduction to Chaucer's tmie), would result in the 3rd of 
July ; several days before the day named in the present text of 
The Marchaunfs Tale, 

NOTE B. 

" In alluding to the zodiac he always refers to 
the signs, never to the constellations.'' — [p. 76.] 

I intimated in the preceding note that I should recur to this 

assertion with the truth of which I am still, in 1869, perfectly 

satisfied. In fact the ignoring of the old misplaced and unequal 

constellations, in order that the names, fables, and attributes which 

had been associated with them in relation to the zodiac might be 

transferred to the equal divisions of the ecliptic called signs, seems 

to have become the practice long before Chaucer. And a much 

wiser and more sensible practice it was than the confusing double 

identities of signs and constellations which were reverted to in 

later times — solely, perhaps, to take advantage of the convenience 

presented by Ptolemy's constellations in classifying and cataloguing 

the fixed stars and comparing their positions with those assigned 

to them by him. Sacro Bosco describes the zodiac almost in the 

same words afterwards used by Chaucer (supra p. 30). 

** Zodiacus a ^wiy, quod est vita, quia secundum motum planetarum sub illo 
est omnis vita in rebus inferioribus : vel dicitur a ^coStov, quod est animal, 
quia cum dividatur in duodecim partes eequales queelibet pars appellatur 
signum, et nomen habet speciale a nomine alicujus animalis, propter proprie- 
tatem aliquam convenientem tarn ipsi quam animali : vel. propter disposi- 
tionem stellarum fixarum in illis partibus admodumhujusmodi animalium.'' — 

This description clearly ignores any groups of zodiacal stars 
other than those in the signs. 

The fictions of animal configuration were originally typical of 
the seasons ; and when in course of time, the seasons had moved 
away amongst the stars, it would doubtless appear only reasonable 
that those animal identities should move away with them and 
become associated with new stars. What else could Sacro Bosco 
mean by explaining the animal nomenclature of the signs .by 
'* vropter dispositionem stellarum in illis partihvs^' — i.e., in the duo- 

im partes eequales he had just described, and of which he says — 

THE ZODIACAL 8IQNS. 85 

" qucdibet pars appellatv/r signum ?" And what else could Chaucer 
mean when, in like manner explaining why tlie signs should have 
names of hestes, he repeats the same description almost verbatim— 
" or else for that the stars that there ben fixe ben disposed in figure 
of bestes or schape like bestes*' ? This assigning of groups of stars 
to the signs is wholly incompatible with any idea of other groups 
of stars as constellations. 

In the Teseide of Boccaccio, from which Chaucer took so much 
of his Ejiight's Tale, the following stanzas very aptly exemplify 
the entire transfer of the animal identity from the constellation to 
the sign :■:— 

Febo salendo cogli suoi cayalli, 
Dal ciel teneva I'liiuile animale 
Che Europa portd sanza intervalli 
Lk dove il nome suo dimora avale ; 
E con lui insieme graziosi stalli 
Venus facea de' passi con che sale 
Perch^ luceva il cielo tutto quanto : 
E Ammon con Pesce dimorava intanto. 

Da qnesta Heta vista deUe stelle 
Prendie la terra graziosi effetti, — 

Libro terzo 6. 6. 

Here the sign Taurus is not only an animal, but the very ^*umile 
animaW that bore off the daughter of Agenor, she : — 

*' That made great Jove to humble him to her hand 
When with his knees he kist the Cretan strand ." 

[ It is worthy of note that Shakespeare and Boccaccio should both use the 
same' expression humble : But surely Shakespeare must have written 
Tyrian and not Cretan strand. When Jove landed in Crete he was no 
longer hvmhle,'] 

Boccaccio*s description is astrological. The Sun and Venus in 
conjunction in Taurus, and Jupiter sextile in Pisces : constituting 
the lieta vista, or happy aspect of the stars. This proves that it is 
the sign is referred to and not the constellation, since Astrology 
deals only with the signs. And if further proof were needful it 
would be found in the allusion to the graziosi stalli, or fair halls of 
Venus, her mansion being the sign Taurus. 

Chaucer has a somewhat similar allusion to the sign Taurus as the 
Cretan Bull, in the Prologue to his " Legende of Goode Women ;" 
where, on the " firste morwe of May *' he speaks of the sun — 

** That in the brest was of the beete that day 
That Agenores doghtre ladde away." — 113-14. 

86 THB ZODUCAL SIGNS. 

By the breast of Taurus 'he could not mean the star so called by 
Ptolemy, which would be four or five degrees in advance of the 
sun*s place on the 1st of May. He probably meant it as a general 
term for the Pleiades, the cosmical rising of which was of old 
the harbinger of summer — since the advent of summer is his 
theme : — 

" Welcome Boiner oure govemour and lorde." — 170. 
Again, in'^Chaucer's poem, " The Complaynt of Mars and Venus," 
he allegorically describes a conjunction of the Sun with Venus and 
Mars, in Taurus. Venus had made an assignation with Mars in 
her "nexte paleys" — i.e., the sign Taurus, as mentioned above. 
Her chamber " depeynted was with white boles grete," — emble- 
matic of Taurus — in which, as in the old fable, the Sun surprises her 
with Mars, by entering into Taurus — " thys twelve dayes of Avrille " 
— a date that of itself is sufficient to prove that it is the sign Taurus 
is alluded to. The adjoining sign to Taurus is Gemini, and Gemini 
is a mansion of Mercury just as Taurus is of Venus. It is needless 
to say that Mercury is Cylleniiis, and when Phoebus so rudely 
bursts into Venus* chamber she escapes into Mercury's : 

" Now fleeth Venus into Cyllenius tour 
With voide cours, for fere of Phebus lyght." 

Or, as Boccaccio hath it, "Perch^ lucevail cielo tutto quanto." It 
was by the unravelling of this little astronomical allegory that I 
was enabled to declare, in 1851, that Cyllenius is the proper and 
obvious reading of " Ciclinius," an unintelligible name with which 
the above two lines are always printed — although I am not aware 
that the correction has been as yet adopted by any editor of Chau- 
cer's poetical works. 

NOTE C. 

" Phebas hath left the angle meridional 
And yet ascending was the beste real 
The gentle Lion."— Page 77. 

If it could be known with any certainty what Chaucer meant by 
the angle meridional in this place, there would be no difficulty in 
determining at what time the sun would leave it on any given day 
and what the ascendant would be at that moment. 

In technical astrology the angle meridional is the tenth house, the 

ANGLE MERIDIONAL. 87 

beginning of which is that point of the ecliptic then on the meridian, 
as Chaucer himself teaches in his XXXIXth problem {ante, page 
55). If this were the meaning of the expression in the present 
instance the sun would have left the angle meridional the moment 
he had passed the meridian or point of noon : and the coincident 
ascending point of the ecliptic (on the 15th March, in Chaucer's 
time, and with his latitude and obliquity) would be almost exactly 
in the beginning of the sign Leo. 

But this interpretation is open to two objections : — 
First, the words "yet ascending was the beste reale," would 
imply that the sign Leo had been already ascending for some inde- 
finite time : and if " yet ascending " is a true reading, it is not easy 
to see how any other meaning than previous continuance can be 
given to it. 

Second, twelve o'clock at noon seems too early in the day for a 
royal birth-day banquet to be concluded ; especially one so elabo- 
rately prepared as King Cambuscan's — 

Of which if I shal tellen al the array 
Than wold it occupye a soiners day. 

A feast of many courses — ^unusually prolonged by the interlude of 
the knight on the brazen horse^who had his speech to recite, his 
offerings to present, and his toilette to m^ke ere he could join the 
banquet, which was not finally concluded 'till the king " rose from 
the bord." 

All this seems inconsistent with noon. For assuming that the 
ordinary dinner time was at prime, which I shall elsewhere show 
to be nine o'clock A.M., set-feasts of even minor ceremony were 
generally later. As,'^ for example, that family entertainment to 
which Creseide was entrapped by Pandarus, which, without any 
assigned reason 

" the faire Queen Heleine 

Shope her to ben an hour after the pryme." — ^T. C. ii., 1667. 

It was the consideration of these two objections that induced 
me, in 1851, to adopt two o'clock p.m., when Eegulus was on the 
horizon, as the break up of King Cambuscan's feast. And I should 
still hold to that opinion if it were in my power to justify by any 
technical reference the explanation I then gave of Angle Meri- 
dional. 

But, as I cannot do that, I am free to acknowledge that the twelve 
o'clock hypothesis, based upon the absolute astrological meaning of 

88 ANGLE MEBIDIONAL. 

angle meridional, now appears to me to be the unavoidable inter- 
pretation. And I am the more inclined to believe it to be the true 
one from finding a star in the ascendant quite as favourably 
situated for twelve o'clock as Eegulus was for two. 

That star is the southern Asellus (5 Cancri) which, like Eegulus, 
was and is almost on the line of the ecliptic, and it would rise with 
the first degree of the sign Leo at two or three minutes past 
noon on the day in question, the 15th of March about the year 
1390. 

The only way at present in which I can reconcile this star with 
the name Aldryan, which purports to be the name given by Chau- 
cer as that of the coincident ascendant, is by supposing that 
Aldryan-may possibly be a substitution for Hamaran, which is the 
Arabic name of 5 Cancri, and which would rhyme equally well with 
Cambuscan. 

NOTE D. 

" Perhaps some Arabic scholar,'' &c. — Page 79. 

I am not aware that this invitation was ever responded to : but I 
have myself examined " Hyde's commentary on Ulugh Beigh," and 
therein I found the star 8 Virginis with the Arabic name " min al 
away "attached to it, and translated by Dr. Hyde, " De latratore 
sen vociferatore," min being represented by the preposition de^ 
which is no doubt its obvious and literal meaning. Nevertheless, 
being still convinced that some more significant explanation might 
be discovered, and observing that the same prefix min was also 
applied to four or five other stars, all of which are mansions of 
the moon, and to no others; I suspected that mm must in some 
way have been a form or abbreviation of the Arabic Menzil, 
mansio Lunce. And this opinion was strengthened by finding in 
Fretagh's Arabic Lexicon, iv. 214, " Mina, ex licentia poetica pro 
Manazil, mansionesJ' 

No doubt this is a plural where we want a singular, — but I 
think it gives sufiicient authority to assume that there might 
also have been an abbreviation of the singular menziL At all 
events, there is another word Mind, the signification of which is 
a port or harbour for ships, a meaning not altogether remote from 
" a station or stage in a journey." And when the changes of 
signification that occur in course of time in all living languages 

THE STAR MIN-AL-AUWA. 89 

are taken into account, the absence in modem lexicons of the 
precise definition of mina required for this reading is no very 
conclusive reason against it. 

If such an explanation be admitted for " min al away^* the 
passage in Chaucer might be read in this way : — 

" then with the mone's exaltation 

In min al auway Libra gan ascend ;" 

that is, coincident with the moon's rising in her mansion al away, 
Libra gan ascend : being virtually the same position as that laid 
down by me in 1851, although explained on different, and, I think, 
on better ground. 

Sir WiUiam Jones (Works, vol i., 346) has the following : — 

^' Menzil, or the place of alighting, properly signifies a station or stage, and 
hence is used for an ordinary day's journey ; and that idea seems better apphed 
than mansion to so incessant a trayeUer as the Moon ; the menazilul kamar, 
or lunar stages of the Arabs, have twenty-eight names in the following order, 
the particle al being understood before every word." 

It is unnecessary to follow Sir William Jones through the whole 
list of twenty-eight mansions; it is sufi&cient to observe that 
amongst them are : — 

2nd Butain, c Arietis, called Min Butain 

11th Zubrah, Leonis, „ Min al Zubra 

13th Awwa, B Virginis „ Min al Auwa 

20th Naiim, y Sagittarii „ Min al Naiim 

22nd Dhabili, P Capricomis, „ Min al Dabih 

Now the frequent recurrence of this same prefix Min to so many 
of the manazil is surely a presumptive proof that it was a name 
special to that designation. If it simply signified the preposition 
of, it would have been applied to other stars or constellations in 
the firmament as well as to these. 

And that Chaucer was well acquainted with these mansions 
sufficiently appears in The Frankelein's Tale, where the Astrologer's 
book 

" .1 spoke moche of operacions 

Touching the eight and twentie mansions 
That longen to the Mone.^' 

90 

ON THE MEANING OF CHAUCER'S PRIME. 

The various allusions in Chaucer's works to prime as a certain 
time in the day are apparently so contradictory, that it seems 
impossible to assign any single hour that shall satisfy them aU. 
I am inclined to believe that in the common phraseology of the 
time there were at least two different periods of the day called 
prime — one in the forenoon, and another in the afternoon — and 
that both were considerably later in the day than the time usually 
attributed to prime in supposed conformity with canonical regula- 
tion. I do not pretend to assert that an earlier prime may not 
have been intended by Chaucer in any of the passages wherein it 
is mentioned : what I wish to say is, that I have met with none 
that may not equally well be reconciled with one or other of the 
primes I am about to assume. 

What are called " canonical hours " are in themselves extremely 
vague and uncertain, often varying with the rules of the different 
religious orders. Some authorities declare that prime was at 
absolute sunrise ; others at conventional sunrise, which was six 
o'clock all the year round ; and others, again, at seven o'clock 
a.m., when the first hour was noted ; for it seems a reasonable 
deduction that where noon was sexta, five hours before noon should 
be prima. 

John de Belethus, who wrote on ritual observance about the 
end of the twelfth century, in his chapter, " Cur septies in die 
laudemus Dominum," likens the seven canonical hours of the day 
to the seven ages of human life : and it is to the second age 
(Shakespeare's school-boy) that he assigns prime : 

" Per matutinas landes representatur infantia : per primam pueritia : per 
tertiam adolocentia : per sextam juventus : per nonam setas virilis : per 
vesperas senectus : per completorium setas decrepita ac finis hmnanae vitse." 

But the same writer in his next chapter apportions the twelve 
ordinary hours as follows : — 

" Sub prima horas duas complectimur ipsam videlicet primam et secundam ; 
sub tertia tres, ipsam tertiam et quartam et quintam : sub sexta itidem tres 
ipsam sextam septimam et octavam : vesperse representant undecimam : com- 
pletorium duodecimam.'' 

Here are all the twelve hours accounted for, but only six out of 
the seven canonical divisions before enumerated. In appearance, 

ON THB MBANIKQ OF CHAUCEB'S PRIHB. 91 

nothing can be more distinct and specific, but in reality nothing 
can be more ambiguous. Where is infantia i did it precede sun- 
rise, the birth of the day, or did decrepitude not begin until after 
dissolution at sunset ? At which end of the day was the overlap ? 
Were the several points of time, tertia, sexta, nona, &c., initial or 
terminal to the hour spaces of the same names ? Did the three-hour 
division, comprising sexta, septima, and octava, begin at noon or 
at some time previous to noon ? These are some of the difficulties 
that beset the subject of canonical hours, and render them so 
indeterminate. Much of the uncertainty is caused by the use of 
Latin ordinal numbers in a cardinal sense, which must always tend 
to ambiguity when the arbitrary meanings conventionally attaching 
to them have become lost or forgotten. It is the fate of the horary 
reckoning of the Eomans themselves, leaving the true interpretation 
of Martial's distribution of hours and employments ever open to 
dispute. 

It is fortunate that the meaning of Chaucer's prime may be 
determined without reference to the uncertain prime of the canoni- 
cal hours. But before entering into its discussion it is necessary to 
eliminate the very erroneous notion recently introduced (see notes 
to the Preface of Mr. Brock's translated " Treatise on the GMLvndre^ 
and to page 19 of Mr. Furnivall's " Temporary Preface,^*) that 
planetary, or unequal, hours were employed by Chaucer in his 
estimation of prime. 

That he thoroughly understood such hours in theory is most 
certain, — as is shown in the way he introduces them into his story 
of Palamon and Arcite, as well as in the explanation he gives of 
them in the Xlth and Xlllth Conclusions of his Astrolabe, — 
but it is equally certain that he neither practised them in ordinary 
life himself, nor attributed their practice to any time coeval with 
his own. 

If ever he would do so it would most assuredly be in the 
Nun's Priest's Tale in the natwal announcement of hours by 
Chanticleer, who knew the time " by kinde and by none other 
lore." But, so far from doing so, he indicates the contrary, not only 
by direct assertion, but by throwing in, with his usual love of 
collateral corroboration, a little scientific fact which places his 
intention beyond aU possibility of cavil : — 

" Wei Bikerer was his crowyng in his logge 
Than is a clok, or an abbay orologge, 

92 ON THE BQSAKIKG 09 CHAXJCSB'S PBIMB. 

By nature knew he ech ascencionn 

Of equinoxial in thilke toun ; 

For whan degrees fyftene were ascendid 

Thenne crewe he, it might not be amendid." 

It is not so much the mention of clock or orologe in these 
lines, although that is significant enough, as the assigning to each 
hour fifteen degrees of the equinoctial that is so absolutely 
decisive of equal hours. 

It is doubtful whether Chaucer would have so well understood 
even the theory of unequal hours if he had not made them an 
object of special study for the purpose of his Knight's Tale, into 
which the introduction of these hours was all his own, there 
being no allusion to them in Boccaccio's Teseide : for so com- 
pletely were those hours forgotten long before his time that John 
Holywood (J. de Sacro Bosco), who was a regular professor of the 
sciences of which Chaucer was but an amateur, gives this gi*ossly 
absurd mis-description of them in his libellus " De Anni Eatione" 
written in 1244 : — 

** Hora est vigesima-quarta pars diei natoralis. Horarum vero alia naturalia 
alia SBquinoctiaHs. Naturalia est spacium temporis quo medietas signi perori- 
tur. ^quinoctialis yero est 15 graduum circuli SBquinoctialis supra horizontem 
ascensio.'' 

That is to say, a natural or unequal hour is the ascension above the 
horizon of 15 degrees of the ecliptic ; and an equal hour is the 
ascension of 15 degrees of the equinoctial : a very pretty antithesis 
but monstrously untrue. How untrue, is best seen in the fact that 
in April, when " houres inequaW ought to be long^ haK the sign 
Taurus would ascend in little more than half an ordinary hour — 
while in October, when those hours ought to be shorty haK the 
sign Scorpio would be nearly three times as long in ascending. 
Such an extraordinary misdescription shows that in the thirteenth 
century "houres inequaU" had become so obsolete in common 
life that their nature was forgotten and misunderstood. 

It may be said that Sacro Bosco in so describing the duration of 
what he called hora naturalis did not mean the hour that Chaucer 
caUs " houre inequall.'* Be it so : in that case his silence 
respecting such hours is quite as significant and proves equally 
well their desuetude in his time. 

Tyrwhitt, with all his blunders of astronomical interpretation,* 

* One of these has not, I think, been noticed. In the Merchant's Tale, line 

ON THB MBAim^Q OF OHATTCEB'S PKIMB. 93 

did not attribute unequal hours to Chaucer's time ; although he 
understood these hours well and fully explained them in two of the 
best notes in his whole series. Why they should be imputed now 
is not very apparent, — ^unless, perhaps, it is because Mr. Brock's 
chilindre is constructed for a twelve-hour division of the day. But 
that instrument has nothing in common with Chaucer except its 
name, and even that is mentioned by him only in metaphorical 
allusion, as I shall shew hereafter. 

The several MS. descriptions of the chelindrus, one of which has 
been so well printed and translated by Mr. Brock, were probably 
copies, with slight variations, furnished from one convent to ano- 
ther, for the purpose of teaching the construction of an instrument 
to regulate their religious services. 

The twelve-hour division of the day was long held in religious 
veneration on account of its supposed inculcation in St. John xi. 9, 
with reference to which Venerable Bede writes : 

**XII horc9 diem complent, Domine attestcmte, qui ait, nonne duode- 
cim horsB, etc. Ubi quamvis allegoric^ ee diem, discipulos horas, appellaye* 
litr 

The "Abbey Orologe " would announce equal hours to the external 
world, but for religious matters some special guide to unequal 
hours would be all the more necessary from their total disuse in 
ordinary life. 

I have now, I trust, cleared away the encumbrance of unequal 
hours from the discussion of Chaucer's prime, — and indeed it is a 
matter of surprise to me how any one could have associated them 
in the face of the plain declaration in The Nun's Priest's Tale, that 
prime occurred at one of Chanticleer's equinoctial hours ; — in the 
month of May, too, when the lengthening of unequal hours would 
occasion a sensible difference in the reckoning. But of this an- 
nouncement of prime by Chanticleer I shall have occasion to 
speak hereafter. 

Of the two primes, mentioned by me at the commencement, I 
assume that the first was at nine o'clock, A.M., and that it was iden- 
tical in time with what the Italians called terza. Of this identity 

0761, Tyrwhitt altered *'two of taure" into "ten of taure," and so printed it; 
explaining in a note to that line that he did so because the motion assigned to 
the moon in four complete days exceeded the mean motion in that time ! As 
if Chancer was necessarily confined to the mean motion : or, as if a true motion 
to the same extent, in the same time, as that stated by him, were not to be 
seen in every almanac. 

94 ON THS MEAKINQ OF OHAUCEB'S PBIME. 

the definition of that word in Florio's Italian Dictionary — " Terza, 
the third in order : also the hour that Priestscall Prime." — ^is one 
presumption. Another arises- from Boccaccio, in his Decameron, 
frequently referring to Terza the same incidents that Chaucer refers 
to Prime : thus terza is the. dinner-time appointed for the person- 
ages of the Decameron just as prime is associated with dinner hy 
Chaucer. Another point of resemhlance is that the true time of 
terza seems to be as much a matter of uncertainty with the Italians 
as prime is with us. In their great national dictionary, Delia 
Crusca, it is presented with the same unsatisfactory explanation — 
" Utui deir ore canonicJie,'^ — word for word the explanation of prime 
by our own dictionaries. But in the old French translation of the 
Decameron by Antoine Le Ma5on, which went through so many 
editions in the sixteenth century, terza is invariably rendered 
* neuf heitres." 

Nine o'clock in the morning may appear to us now a strange 
hour for dinner ; but it is the name deceives us, for although cal- 
led dinner, the meal was in truth breakfast — ^breakfast of that sub- 
stantial kind "a la fourchette'' In the Promptorium "Dynner" is 
defined sls jeutaculum as well asprandium ; and Du Cange tells us 
(inv. dejejunare) that "disner" is but an abbreviation of "des- 
jeuner." 

Another feature of identity between Boccaccio's terza and Chau- 
cer's prime, is the frequent use by the former of the phrase mezza 
terza, which appears to be an exact counterpart of Chaucer's " half 
way prime." And here again we are met by the same uncertainty 
of meaning. The Delia Crusca entirely ignores the phrase ; and 
Le Ma5on, so invariable in his rendering of terza, Ls all abroad in 
respect of mezza terza. Under the same circumstances he gives it 
several different interpretations — " Sur les sept ou huict heures '' — 
"Entresix et sept heures" — "Entre sept et huict heures," — &c. 
' One point, however, of absolute certainty may be gathered from 
Boccaccio's context — ^that mezza terza was antecedent to terza in 
time. 

Tyrwhitt, in his note upon " half-way prime," suggests that it 
was half-past seven o'clock, in which he was probably right ; but 
then he supposed prime to be at six o'clock A.M., and consequently 
the earlier. He cites a passage from the " Modus tenendi Parlia- 
mentum," in which it is stated that Parliament was to assemble on 
ordinary days at " hora mediae primse " but on festivals at " hora 
prima," on account of divine service, Hence Tyrwhitt would un- 

ON THE liEANING OF OHAUCEB'S PRDIE. 95 

derstand that Parliament was to assemble earlier on festival days, 
whereas, in my opinion, the obvious meaning of the rule is that 
the sitting was to be jpostjponed on festivals until after divine ser- 
vice : which it would be if prime be understood as nine o'clock, in 
complete analogy with the Italian phrases. 

I have now to consider Dan Johan's prime in " The Shipman's 
Tale," where one thing at least is certain, that he associates it with 
" dinner," that is, nine o'clock, A.M. But then he says that it is 
prime by his chilindrey which some people understand as the result 
of absolute instrumental observation of the time then present But 
thdt it could not be ; because the time then present was consider- 
ably earlier than dinner-time, to permit of its preparation, and of 
the intervening celebration of mass. It is therefore infinitely easier 
to understand the mention of the chilindre as purely metaphorical. 
It is just like one of Chaucer's humorous touches to imagine the 
monk alluding to his own cylindrical casing, and calling it his 
chilindre : 

" let us dine as sone as ever you maye 

For by my chilindre it is pryme of daye." 

There is a counterpart, though a very poor one, of the same joke in 
Middleton's play of " The Changeling :" — 

« What hour is it, LoUio V 

" Towards belly-hour, Sir." 

" Dinner-time, thou meanst, twelve o'clock." 

That the metaphorical interpretation was that which was for- 
merly put upon Dan Johan's chilindre is obvious from the substi- 
tution of " stomach " quoted by Mr. Morris as " the reading of one 
MS." 

The chilindre, or cylinder, seems to have been a very common 
instrument for several centuries before and after Chaucer's time. 
There is an engraving of one almost identical with the figure prefixed 
to Mr. Brock's translation (except that it represents an instru- 
ment some six centuries later in time and for the latitude of 
Paris) in the French "Encyclopedic Methodique," where it is entitled 
" Cylindre mont6 et pieces qui le composent :" and in the de- 
scription of the same instrument by Dom Bedos it is called 
"LeCyKndrePortatif." 

It is evident, therefore, that the name " chelindrus " was not 
particularly special to this instrument, but merely a variation in 
spelling. In the words quoted by Mr. Brock from Stoeffler — 
** velut est umbra stili in pariete aut chilindro " — chilindrus is not 

96 ON THE MEANING OF CHAUCEB'S PRIME. 

more special than paries — ^the distinction is merely between the 
cylindrical surface of a pillar, on which a. dial was often drawn, 
and a flat wall. There is even " cTieliiidrus vide cylindrus " in Francis 
Holyoke's Dictionary, with no other speciality than a garden 
roller. 

Great praise is undoubtedly due to Mr. Brock for having by 
his reprint and translation of the Treatise on the Chilindre 
brought into notice such a capital gloss of Dan Johan's expres- 
sion; but in no other sense can the instrument it describes be 
considered as specially associated with Chaucer. Its construc- 
tion is for a time at least two centuries earlier than his — when 
the beginning of each sign was coincident with the middle of 
each month. And yet in the following note to page 47 of Mr. 
Brock's translation, that very peculiarity, indicative as it is of 
the age of the instrument's construction, seems to be imputed to 
its rudeness and imperfection ; — 

" In Chaucer's time Aries rose on the twelfth of March, not on the fifteenth, 
and similarly for other signs. Hence arises an inaccuracy in th€ use of the 
cylinder." 

The last conclusion is not very clearly expressed, but it probably 
means that an inaccuracy would arise if the instrument were used 
in Chaucer's time. Of course there would — the same sort of inac- 
curacy that would arise from the use, this year, of last year's alma- 
nac. But, since the instrument was not constructed for Chaucer's 
time it seems scarcely a matter for remark that it does not agree 
with it. In another note on the last page an erroneous latitude and 
obliquity of ecliptic are attributed to the instrument, and that, too, 
in a conjectural sort of a way, as if any doubt ought to exist as to 
these elements when they are so very plainly indicated in the 
description. The solstitial altitudes, upper and lower, being given, 
half their sum is the co-latitude and half their difference is the 
obliquity. These altitudes are 6l ? 34' and 14^ 26' respectively, 
so that the latitude is 62 degrees, and the obliquity 23^-34' And if 
this were not a sufficient indication, the equinoctial altitude is stated 
in another place to be 38 degrees, equal, of course, to the co-la- 
titude. 

But return to the subject of prime. Enough has been probably 
said respecting the forenoon prime at nine o'clock A.M. : and as to that 
in the afternoon, I assume that it was at one p.m. And I rest this 
assumption, — 

Firstly, upon the probability that, when the initial of horary 

ON THE MEANING OF GHAUOBB'S PBIME. 97 

notation was transferred from sunrise to noon, the term prime would 
from analogy be transferred with it ; or, in other words, that where 
hour one was reckoned prima would be considered applicable. 

Secondly, upon the excellent interpretation which the supposi- 
tion of prime at one p.m. confers upon two passages of Chaucer's 
text that cannot otherwise be so well explained. The first is that 
passage in Troilus and Creseide. Book v., 472 : — 

" The letters eek which she in olde time 
Had him y-sent, he would alone rede 
An hundred sithe atwixe noon and prime." 

The inconsolable Troilus — 

" When he was ther as no man might him here,** 

is bemoaning in secret the loss of his mistress : but he is visiting 
amongst strangers in Sarpedon's house : what better time, then, 
could he choose to read over her old letters alone, than the hour oi 
noon-tide siesta between twelve and one ? 

The second is that passage in The Squiere's Tale where the 
narrator exclaims — at a time which must have been in the after- 
noon — 

** I wol not tarien you for it is prime." 

I am aware that this line has been otherwise explained by the 
assumption that the journey to Canterbury could not have been 
performed by the pilgrims in a single day, and that The Squiere's 
Tale might be related at an early hour of some other day. But to 
that hypothesis I cannot subscribe. Not only I disbelieve that such 
important incidents as baitings at nights, and assemblings in the 
mornings, could have been intended by the author, and yet not the 
slightest allusion be made to them ; but I should esteem any 
attempt to test, by setious investigation on the mere score ot 
distance, the practical possibility of performing the pilgrimage to 
Canterbury in one day, or in two, or in three, to be about as wise 
as a similar inquiry would be into the stages made by Imogen in 
her ride to Milford Haven — and about as likely to lead to a 
satisfactoiy determination. 

I have said that I am not aware of any mention of prime by 
Chaucer that may not be referred to one or other of those I have 
assumed. There is, however, one mention of it in The Nun's 
Priest's Tale to which I have before alluded, and which it is 
more especially necessary to discuss, because, although at first sight 
it seems to require an earlier hour than nine o'clock A.M., it turns 

98 ON THE MEANING OP CHAUCEB'S PEIME. 

out, when properly investigated, to be the strongest possible cor- 
roborative of that hour — and because it tends to settle an un- 
certain text by showing the incorrectness of a reading first intro- 
duced by Urry, continued by Tyrwhitt, and repeated by every 
modem editor of the Canterbury Tales in preference to one which, 
though rejected by Twyrwhitt himself, was declared by him to be 
" the reading of the greatest part of the MSS." The month and 
day on which Chanticleer's catastrophe befell is of no further im- 
portance at present than as corroborating the longitude of the sun 
in Taurus; which is, say, 21^ degrees, equivalent to 18 J degrees of 
North Declination. And with that declination, what we are con- 
cerned with is the altitude of the sun, as indicating the hour of 
prime, assuming the latitude to be that of Chaucer's Astrolabe. 

This altitude, as printed in the editions of Urry, Tyrwhitt, 
Wright, and Morris, is :— 

" Twenty degrees and oon and more i-wis," 

and to this line Tyrwhitt appends the following note — 

*' The reading of the greatest part of the MSS., is fourty degrees. But this 
is evidently wrong ; for Chaucer is speaking of the altitude of the sun at, or 
about, prime — i.e. six o'clock a.m. See ver. 15203. When the sun is in 22*^ 
of Taurus, he is 21° high about three-quarters after six a.m/' 

Here one scarcely knows which to admire most-— that Tyrwhitt 
should consider three-quarters of an hour a sufficiently near ap- 
proach for Chaucer to make to an intended astronomical position — 
or that he (Tyrwhitt) should assume " six o'clock a.m/' for prime 
when seven would have been so much nearer to the result of his 
own calculation ! 

But neither six o'clock, nor seven — neither three-quarters, nor 
one quarter of an hour — ^will satisfy those who will follow and are 
capable of understanding the precision with which Chaucer has 
determined similar problems in the IVth Conclusion of his Treatise 
on the Astrolabe. 

In the present case the latitude and obliquity of Chaucer's instru- 
ment being known, the sun's place in the ecliptic, together with 
his altitude, are given to find the hour of prime : the sun's place 
being further confirmed by the mention of the month and day. 

There can be no doubt that Chaucer intended, by all these pre- 
cise elements, to make a little display of his astronomical know- 
ledge ; and, therefore, when there is a choice of reading ^ it is clearly 
due to his text that preference should be given to that reading 

ON THE MEANING OF CHAUOER'S PRIME. 99 

from which the nearest approximation may be obtained to the same 
degree of correctness he has shown elsewhere. It was this consi- 
deration that induced me to examine the result of a calculation at 
the higher altitude of the alternate reading — 

" Fourty degrees and oon, and more i-wis," 

and I had the satisfaction to find a resulting hour for prime of 
nine o'clock AM, almost to the minute. 

After this, there surely can be no reasonable doubt that ** fourty," 
and not " twenty," is, on its own merits, the true reading of the first 
word in this line; even if it were not corroborated by Tyrwhitt's' 
acknowledgment that it is " the reading of the greatest part of the 
MSS. :" and even if it had not been the reading of all the printed 
editions anterior to Urry's. 

The false reading in altitude was probably introduced by echo 
from the line above ; or by the officious alteration of some early 
scribe who, like Tyrwhitt, might fancy that, at prime, the snn must 
necessarily be at a low altitude, as if the line — 

" Cast up his eyes to the brighte sonne," 

did not, of itself, bespeak a high altitude. 

I had already written these remarks before I became aware that 
the reading I am contending for had been strenuously advocated 
by Mr. Thomas Thynne, son of the first editor ef the collected 
works of Chaucer in 1532, and himself the possessor of many MSS. 
His " Animadversions upon Chaucer's Works " have been edited by 
Dr. Kingsley, and printed by the Early English Text Society, in 
1865. 

Francis Thynne was apparently unconscious of the powerful 
support his reading would receive from the astronomical position of 
the sun in connexion with prime. But it must be observed that the 
object of his correction was not to increase the altitude but to decrease 
the number of degrees in Taurus which then stood dXfourty-one in 
aU editions (his father's included) anterior to his "Animadversions," 
written in 1599 : for it is a singular fact that, whereas in modem 
editions both quantities are printed twenty-one, in Thynne's time 
both quantities were ^rmi^di fourty-one. And it is also singular that 
whereas I have attributed the modem repetition to " echo from the 
quantity above," Mr. Thynne should have attributed the repetition 
in his time to a somewhat similar cause : — 

" But although there be no misnaminge of the signe, yet yt is true the 

100 ON THE IfEAKIKO OF OHAUCER'S PBIME. 

degrees of the rigne are misieckoned ; the enor whereof grewe becanse the de- 
gree of the dgne ia made eqnall with the degree of the sonne ascended above 
the norixon." 

He then proceeds : — 

" But to remedye all this, and to correct yt accordinge as Chattcer sett yt 
downe in myne and other written copies ; and that yt may stande with all 
mathematicall proportione, whiche Chaucer knewe and observed there, the 
print must be corrected after those written copies (whiche I yet holde for sounde 
'till I maye disprove them) having these wordes : 

^ when that the month in whiche the worlde beganne, 
that hight Marche, when god first made manne, 
was complete, and passed were also 
since marche begonne thirty dayes and two 
befell that Chanteclere in edl his pride 
his seven wives walkinge him beside 
cast vp his eyen to the bright sonne 
that in the signe of Tannu had yronne 
Twentye degrees and one*and somewhat moore 
And knewe by kynde and by noone other loore 
That yt was pryme, and crewe witb blisful steven 
The Sonne, quoth he, is clomben vp on heaven 
Fortye degrees and one, and moore, y wis,'' &c. 

This extract is precisely copied as it appears in the reprint; 
and I quote it because it just comprises the passage which I 
might have cited (with somewhat diflFerent spelling and arrange- 
ment) to illustrate my own argument. It ought to be noted that 
in the fourth line "begonne" is used by Thynne in the sense 
of poMed hy, as a conjectural emendation of " beganne." Had he 
suggested had gone instead of begone the emendation would, I 
thiuk, be better and more probable. His argument — ^that any 
further time added to a month complete, with the word " also,** 
must necessarily be applied at the end of the complete month 
and not at its beginning — is excellent, and, I think, unanswer- 
able. Suppose, for example, the time to be added is two days, 
expressed in this way : — ^When the month caUed March was 
complete, and also two days since March began, — it would be 
stark nonsense. And, if that be true for two days, it is not less 
true for thirty-two or sixty- two. The point from which also 
must start, is that previously arrived at, — that is, March 'com- 
plete. Having declared March to be complete we cannot undo it 
again and go back to its commencement. Such is the substance 
of Francis Thynne's argument. 

THE MEANING OF OHAUCEB'S PBIME. 101 

TyrwHtt saw this when he framed the line : — 

" Sithen March ended, thritty dayes and two." 

But Francis Thynne's suggestion (slightly varied) is nearer to the 
original and retains " since :" — 

'^ Since Marche had gone thirty dayes and two." 

Mr. Morris adopts : — 

'< Since March beganne twa monthes and dayes two." 

which, though it amounts*to the same thing, is nothing but a com- 
promise to retain " beganne" at the expense of direct contradiction 
to "afeo." 

But I have not as yet exhausted. all the evidence in support 
of Chaunteclere's prime being Nine o'clock a.m. The "Cole- 
fox ful of sleigh iniquitee." 

'' The same nighte thargh the hegge brast 
Into tbe yard, ther Chaunteclere the faire 
Was wont, and eek his wives, to. repaire, 
And in a bed of wortes stUle he lay 
Til it was passed undem of the day — 
Waiting his time on Chaunteclere to falle." 

Now the acknowledged gloss of uTidem is nine o'clock A.M., and 
just before the catastrophe Chanticleer had announced prime. 
Therefore, either the story is not consistent, or prime and undem 
were synchronical. But if prime was nine o'clock A.M. then must 
the sun's altitude at prime on the 2nd May in Chaucer's 
time be 

Fourty degrees and oon and more y-wis. 

THE CAREENAEE. 

I have lately seen a very extraordinary interpretation of a 
passage in Chaucer's " Booke of the Duchesse" which more parti- 
cularly attracted my notice because I have long had a notion of 
my own respecting the same passage. 

It is that in which the well known crux occurs — ** Go hoodless 
into the drie see and come home by the Carrenare," and it occurs 
in a sort of monody spoken by a disconsolate knight upon his lost 

102 THE CABRENABE. 

mistress, who would not, he says, practise the heartless wiles 
resorted to by others of her sex to attract admirers and display 
the power of their charms : — 

" Hyr lust to holde no wight in honde 
Ne, be thou siker, she wolde not fonde 
To holde no wight in balaunce 
By halfe word ne by countenaunce ,* 
Ne sende men into Walekye 
To Pruise ne into Tartarye 
To Alisaundre ne into Turkye 
And bid him faste : anone that he 
Go hoodless into the drye see 
And come home by the Carrenare." 

1018—1028. 

Upon this, the author of a book, published last year, called 
** Chaucer's England" comments as follows : — 

'' The last three lines are banter : q, d. ' nor send him to fetch her a pound 
of green cheese from the moon." 

the lines so described being spoken by a knight whose grief for 
the loss of his mistress is so overwhelming that — 

" It was great wonder that nature 
Might suffre any creature 
To have such sorwe and be not ded." 

But the comment continues : — 

** It may perhaps be for want of vision, but I confess that I see no obscurity 
here. Of course the ' dry sea' is an absurdity, it was meant to be so. As for the 
word carrenare, it is a stumbling-block, but not a worse stumbHng-block than 
some other adapted, modified, or mangled words in Chaucer. 1 take it to be bad 
Italian for carrier or caravan. If we suppose the word to have been written 
earrattare, it is scarcely very bad Italian. The proper word would be 
carrettiere a carter ; but carretta means cart, and carrettare, formed from that 
for the sake of the rhyme, is not very outrageous license, compared with other 
things of the same kind to be found in Chaucer and poets of the time." 

Chaucei^s England, Vol. 1. p. C2. 

I have quoted this curious comment at full length from the 
impossibility of doing it justice with less, and because it affords a 
fair specimen of the S(5rt of criticism to which this word has been 
exposed. We are to suppose that the lady is eulogized for not 
being disposed to order her knight to come home by the caravan, 
or, as she might say in these days, by the omnibus : but it does 
^ not appear why it should be a virtue to refrain from that very 

THE CABEENARE. 103 

harmless injunction ; and it is equally difficult to understand how 
the "scarcely very bad Italian" word carrettare can have been 
adopted " for the sake of the rhyme" when the rhyme required 
is to the English word ware. 

Now, independently of the grave nature of the subject, the 
banter and green-cheese point of view is the last from which these 
injunctions should be regarded, when it is recollected how prone 
some of the dames of chivalry were to exact from their " Servants*^ 
cruel and dangerous proofs of their valour and devotion. As, for 
example, that fair lady who dropped her glove into the arena 
before a raging lion, in order that her knight, the famous Don 
Miguel Ponce de Leon (for he obtained the surname by the ex- 
ploit) might descend and recover it. 

The beautiful and amiable lady belauded in Chaucer's dream 
was of a different nature — " She ne used no such knack^s smale" — 
but if the ladies with whom she is contrasted are not spoken of 
in earnest where would be the force of the comparison ? The part- 
ing injunction shows a full determination that it was to be no 
joke : — 

" And, Sir, be now right ware 
That I may of you here saien 
Worshippe, or that ye come ageyn.'* 

Moreover, the dangers to be encountered by the wight are in 
keeping with the known wars of the time. Pruise, where the 
Teutonic knights were waging a savage and sanguinary crusade — 
Walakye — ^Tartaric — Turkye — Alisaundre ! And it is significant of 
the real nature of the enterprises that they are nearly the same as 
those attributed to The Knight in the Prologue to the Canterbury 
T^des. 

Now my interpretation of the Carenare is that it is the gulf of \ 
the Camaro in the Adriatic. 

II Camaro, the chamel-hole : so called because of its reputed 
destructiveness of human life. 

Chaucer's residence in Italy would make him well acquainted - 
with the character of this gulf (now called II Quamero) : and if it 
is true that he visited Padua, he would have been in the very place 
to hear of it. It is, indeed, from a Paduan writer, Palladio Negro, 
that the Abb^ Fortis quotes — "E regione Istrise, sinu Palatico, 
quern nautse carnarium vocitant," &c., showing, by this translation 
of the name into the Latin equivalent carnariurriy that Camaro was 

104 THE CABBENABE. 

not merely a name, but a nickname expressive of its fatal reputa- 
tion.* 

But the most conclusive description is by Vergier, Bishop of 
Capo d'Istria, as quoted by Sebastian Munster in his " Cosmogra- 
phie,** page 1044 (Basle Edition). 

''Par dega le gouffre enrag^ lequel on appeUe vulgairement Camaiie, 
d'autantque le plus souvent on le volt agit^ de tempestes horribles ; et 1^ 
s'englontissent beaucoup de navires et se perdent plusienrs homines." 

If it be objected that carnaro is not carrenare, it is an objection 
that might be shown in many ways to be of no moment. The 
shortest answer is perhaps this, — that if Palladio Negro might 
translate the epithet into Latin, so might Chaucer into English 
from his own "Careyn" — careynare — to rhyme with i(;are in the 
line following. 

It may be that Chaucer was reminded of the fatal character of 
the Carnaro by Dante's allusion to it iu the Inferno (ix. 112) : 

1(3 • " a Pola presso del carnaro 

• K^- Fanno i sepolcri tutto il luogo varo " — 

which at all events shows that it was at that time a byword of 
danger and destruction. 

It is a singular coincidence that on the same page of Munster 
wherein he quotes the description of the Carnaro there should be 
an account of a neighbouring inland lake, intermittent every half 
year, which might, in its dry season, be the " drie sea " coupled 
with the Carrenare by Chaucer. I do not, however, suggest it 
with anything like the same confidence that I do the Carnaro : 
because " drie sea " is a description so wide and uncertain, and is 
consequently open to so many different interpretations, that unless 
some special reference should be discovered to throw light upon it 
it is scarcely capable of more than the loosest suggestion. The 
following is a translation of Munster's description : — 

" It is said that there is a lake near the city of Labac, adjoining the plain of 
Zircknitz, which in winter time becomes of great extent, and abounds in fish 
of great size, that are taken with spears two or three ells in length. But in 
summer the water drains away — the fish expire — the bed of the lake is 
ploughed up — com grows to maturity — and, after the harvest is over, the 

* We, too, on the coast of England have our ^^ShcmbUs" — a dangerous 
shoal off the Bill of Portland being so called. 

THE CAREEN ABB. 105 

waters return with the approach of winter, the lake is again filled, and the fish 
reappear. The Angspourg merchants have assured me of this, and it has been 
since confirmed to me by Vergier, the Bishop of Cappodistria ." 

Now it must be recollected that, although this account was 
written a century and a haK after Chaucer, yet since this lake, 
according to a modem observation, published only the other day, 
and alluded to in my Introduction, is very nearly in the same state 
now, after the lapse of twice that time, it is a fair presumption 
that it also existed long before Chaucer : and there is no knowing 
what marvellous tales respecting it, and of the peculiar danger of 
traversing it hoodless, may have been popularly current in Italy 
when Chaucer was there. But then the difficulty is that the same 
might be said of any arid sandy desert that might be metaphorically 
called a dry sea. Consequently I only suggest this account of the 
lake at Zircknitz for what it may be worth, with whatever pre- 
sumptive support it may derive from its proximity to the Camaro. 
In the modern account the lake is stated to be ten leagues in length 
and one in breadtL A journey through it would necessarily be 
unwholesome ; and as there must be an absence of all shade in the 
dry bed of an intermittent lake, danger from sunstroke might arise 
from going into it hoodless. 

There is another possible interpretation of "drie sea." A frozen 
sea might be so called. And from a passage in Warton's History 
of English Poetry, Vol. I., page 461, it seems that to encounter 
severe cold hoodless was a feat in amatory chivalry. " It was a 
crime to wear fur on a day of the most piercing cold, or to appear 
with a hood, cloak, gloves, or muff." 

SHIPPES OPPOSTERES. 

As my interpretation of this expression (Knight's Tale, 2017) 
was published in the Athenaeum newspaper in 1867 without my 
concurrence, and consequently without that support it might have 
received from my own explanation and advocacy, I take this 
opportunity to republish it, together with some of the reasons 
which have induced me to abide by it. 

My interpretation is that the meaning of opposter is — opposer = 

106 SHIPPES OPPOBTERES. 

opposite = antagonist ; and that the feminine plural form of oppos- 
teres was given to it by Chaucer in order to render it an absolutely 
literal representative of the hellatrices of Statins and the bellatrici 
of Boccaccio. 

Such an interpretation would establish a remarkable consistency 
of expression in all three versions : each being compounded with a 
qualifying noun substantive used adjectively in its feminine plural 
form: — 

Carinae bellatrices ... Statins, Threbaid, vii. 57 

Navi bellatrici... Boccaccio, Teseide, vii. 37 

Shippes opposteres ... Chaucer, Knight's Tale, 2017 

It has, I believe, been objected that the formation of this word 1 
opposteres from the verb oppose, with the feminine Anglo-Saxon i 
estres would not be consistent with the strict rules of composition. 
But if the word is in every other respect exactly suitable, are we to 
bind over Chaucer, in his word-craft, to strict conformity with our 
notions of proper composition? Will such objectors explain the 
formation of the word divinistre, in line 2811 of the same Knight's 
Tale ? 

. But there is another way of answering the objection — by asking 
what should prevent Chaucer from forming opposter from opponOy 
in the same way that imposter, or impostor, has boon formed from 
impono ? The French have composteur for what we call composing- 
stick ; and if we were to follow their example, and establish corn- 
poster, who could demur to it ? Granting, then, that Chaucer might 
have framed opposter, the addition of a feminine e is all my inter- 
pretation requires. 

Either explanation of the word ought to be sufficient to justify 
its acceptance, when it furnishes such an appropriate and probable 
solution of this long-pending crux in Chaucer's text. The identity 
of expression which it would complete in all three languages is, in 
my opinion, a very strong argument in its favour. Finding the 
compound of Statins so literally reproduced by Boccaccio, it is in 
the highest degree probable that Chaucer would desire to shew 
that he could produce an exact equivalent in his own language : 
for that he was as intimately acquainted with Statins as he was 
with Boccaccio may be proved almost to demonstration by a com- 
parison of certain identities of description common to him and 
Statins, but which having no existence in Boccaccio's text, could 
not have been derived from it. 

For example, Chaucer describes the House of Mars : — 
" downward from an hille under a bente." — Knighfs Tale, 1981. 

i} 

1' 

i3 

J ,' 
I 

i 

SHIPPES OPPOSTBRES. 107 

Statius places it under Mount Hsemus, in Thrace : — 

" adverso domua immansxieta sub Heemo." — TheUxdd, vii. 42. 

Boccaccio makes no mention of hill or mountain. 

Again Chaucer describes, — 

" The dores were alle of Athamante eteme." — K,T, 1990. 

Statius, " adamante perenni — ^fores" — T.vii 68. 

Boccaccio (in the Milan edition of the Teseide) 

" le porte a dnr diamante." — vii. 32. 

Chaucer, " The statue of Mars upon a carte stood." — K,T. 2041. 
Statius. " Ipse (Mars) subit curru." — T. vii. 70. 
Boccacdo, No corresponding expression. 

Chaucer, " The cartere over ryden with his carte 

Under the wheel ful lowe he lay adoun."— ^.T. 2022. 

Statius. **Et vacui currus, protritaque curribus ora." — T. vii. 56. 

Boccaccio. " T voti carri, e li volti guastatL" — T. vii. 37. 

Here " uTider the wheel " and *'protrita curribus " convey the same 
idea ; but the line from the Teseide is a mere catalogue — Boccaccio 
speaks of damaged countenances, but he omits the cause of them. 

It is needless to cite more of these parallels : enough has been 
shown to prove that Chaucer must have had independent recourse 
to the text of Statius as well as to that of Boccaccio, and, therefore, 
that he had a double inducement to the formation of " Shippes 
opposteres,'* as I have interpreted it. This double reference is also 
a complete answer to the absurd notion that he might have read 
hellatrici as hallatrici. 

When Chaucer represents these shippes opposteres as " hrervt,^ he 
does not originate the burning — he only transfers it from the in- 
censis urbibus'' and ''terre arse" of Statius and Boccaccio: and it 
cannot be denied that it was a most judicious alteration. 

Contending ships mutually in flames is a fine and effective em- 
blem of war, and one that might well be depicted in mural embel- 
lishment : but when Tyrwhitt explained " hoppesteres " as female 
hoppers, or dancers, and thought burning ships " dancing on the 
Waves ' would be a poetical idea, he omitted to explain how that 
lively mption was to be represented on the walls of the oratory : 
for it must be recollected that the emblematic objects which in 
Statius are real, in Boccaccio partly real and partly istoriati, are in 
Chaucer wholly pictorial. 

108 8HIPFE8 OPPOSTEBES. 

In the existing text of the Knight's Tale I have always felt 
perplexed and dissatisfied with the frequent repetition, in the first 
person, of I saw and saw I; as though Chaucer had intended to 
make the Knight say that he had himself seen those oratories, 
prepared by Theseus for a temporary purpose so many ages before. 
This would be such a useless and unmeaning anachronism that, 
rather than believe it genuine, I suspect a corruption in the MS. 
I think we have a key to what Chaucer really did write in the 
preceding description of the oratory to Venus: — 

First, in the temple of Venus mayst thou see 
Wroght on the wal— &c.— 1918. 

Mat/st thou see, — that is, the Knight is presenting the picture 
to the mind's eye of his hearers. Now, the substitution of ye J 
for I, in the similar descriptions of the oratories of Mars and 
Diana would continue the same figure of speech: — 

Ther saugh ye first the derk imaginyng. — 1995. 
Yet saugh ye brent the shippes opposteres. — 2017. 

And so of the rest, there being no place where substitution of 7/e 
might not be as easily made as in these two examples : and when 
it is recollected that the pronoun I was sometimes spelled Y or 
even Yc, it will not appear improbable that some early scribe, per- 
haps Adam Scrivener himself, misread ye for yc, and under that 
idea copied it as /. It even appeal's that the sound of I was repre- 
sented by the letters ye — as may be seen in "The Legende of 
Goode Women": — 

" The daisie, or elles the ye of day," (184). 

SO that the substitution of the wrong pronoun might have occurred 
either through the eye or the ear. 

There are certain humorous touches in Chaucer's description of 
the House of Mars, such as : — 

The cook i-scalded for al his longe ladel^ 
which seem as though he were slyly quizzing the pompous descrip- 
tions of Statins and Boccaccio : and the same remark applies to his 
joke at their hyperbolic enumeration of the various trees cut down 
to construct the funeral piles, when he throws in amongst his trees 
the whippul'tree ! or, as we might say, the axle-tt^ There have 
been many grave discussions as to the species to which the 
whippul-tree belonged : a point that may perhaps be ascertained 
about the same time as the proper growth and culture of the axle- 
tree. _ ^ 

• '*','% \ 

The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 

Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 

c=3 ^Aase handle with care. 
[Ij ^TialiK \o\i for helping to preserve 

collections at Harvard.
