This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 

uhia.VoTV<i.a»."Bucl<  Uy. 

y^eH 

ARISTOTLE'S 

TREATISE  ON  RHETORIC, 

LIT£RALLY  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK. 

AN  ANALYSIS  BY  THOMAS  HOBBES,  AND  A  SERIES  OF  QUESTIONS. 

NEW  EDITION,  TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED,  A  SUPPLEMENTAKY 

ANALYSIS  CONTAINING  THE  GBJSEK 

DEFINITIONS. 

THE  POETIC  OF  ARISTOTLE, 

LITERALLY  TRANSLATED,  WITH  A   SELECTION  OP   NOTES, 
AN  ANALYSIS,  AND  QUESTIONS. 

BY 

THEODORE  BUCKLEY,  B.A. 

or  CHRIST  CHVRCH. 

LONDON:  :^;^-% 

HENRY  G.  BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  .QAKI^EN, 

MDCCCLVIL  .*%"  ^    "'' 

'  ^  ^     JOHN    CHILDS  AND  SON,   PRINTERS. 

TO  THE  READER 

Ix  this  third  edition^  the  translation  of  Aristotle's  Rhe- 
toric has  been  again  carefully  compared  with  the  Greeks 
and  revised  and  corrected  throughout.  Numerous  ex- 
planatory and  illustratiTe  notes  have  also  been  added ; 
as  well  as  a  marginal  analysis,  which  it  is  presumed  will 
be  found  of  much  service  to  the  reader. 

The  famous  Thomas  Hobbes*  Brief  of  the  Art  of 
Rhetorick,  "  containing  in  substance  all  that  Aristotle 
hath  written  in  his  three  books  on  that  subject,"  and 
forming  the  best  summary  of  this  noble  science,  has 
been  again  reprinted  from  the  scarce  edition  published 
at  London  in  1681.  A  body  of  Analytical  Questions, 
for  self-examination,  has  also  been  appended. 

With  these  improvements,  the  Editor  confidently 
hopes  that  the  present  volxime  will  be  found  to  contain, 
not  only  the  most  faithful  version  of  the  Rhetoric  of 
Aristotle,  but  the  best  helps  for  the  due  understanding 
and  retaining  the  sense  thereof. 

Oafordj  November,  1846. 

In  the  present  new  edition  of  the  Oxford  version  of  the 
Rhetoric,  it  has  been  thought  advisable  not  to  interfere 
either  with  the  text,  notes,  or  Questions,  all  being  of 
acknowledged    excellence.     But,  as   Hobbes,   by  the 

IV  TO   THE   READER. 

quaintness  of  his  Analysis,  at  times  lost  sight  of  the 
precise  character  of  the  original  definitions,  an  Appen- 
dix has  been  added,  containing  the  very  words  of 
Aristotle,  connected  by  such  remarks  as  "jvere  necessary 
to  preserve  clearness,  and  furnishing  such  passages  as 
should  be  almost  learnt  by  heart. 

The  new  translation  of  the  Poetic  is  an  attempt  to 
unite  the  closeness  of  Taylor  with  the  perspicuity  of 
Twining,  upon  whose  versions  it  has  principally  been 
based.  A  copious  selection  from  the  notes  of  the  last 
named  scholar  has  been  added,  together  with  a  few  ne- 
cessary ones  from  recent  sources  by  the  present  Editor, 

Theodore  Alois  Buckley, 

Christ  Church 

ARISTOTLE'S 

TREATISE  ON  RHETORIC. 

BOOK  I.~CHAP.  I. 

That  Rhetoric,  like  Logic,  is  conversant  tvith  no  definite 
class  of  subjects  ;  thcttit  is  useful ;  and  that  its  business 
is  not  absolutely  to  persuade,  hut  to  recognise  topics  fitted 
to  persuade. 

Rhetokic*  is  the  counterpart  of  logic  ^;  since  both  1.  Rheto- 
we  conversant  with  subjects  of  such  a  nature  as  it  is  "*^  ^a^T 
the  business  of  all  to  have  a  certain  knowledge  of,  and  i^c. 
which  belong  to  no  distinct  science.     "Wherefore  all  2. 
men  in  some  way  participate  of  both  3;  since  all,  to  a 

'  Aristotle  appears  to  have  contemplated  a  much  greater  ya- 
riety  of  occasions  for  the  exercise  of  his  'PrjTopu^,  than  we 
consider  proper  to  that  ill-defined  art,  or  habit,  or  faculty, 
vaguely  called  rhetoric.  In  fact,  according  to  him,  any  man 
who  attempts  to  persuade  another,  under  whatever  circum- 
stances, and  with  whatever  object,  may  be  said  to  exercise 
prrropiKii,  , 

^  Muretus  explains  the  passage  as  conveying  a  censure  on 
Plato,  who  extolled  logic,  but  compared  rhetoric  to  cookery — 
6\lftnroiriTiKrj.  He  therefore  would  have  it  convey  this  mean- 
ing, "  Rhetoric  is  the  counterpart,  not  of  cookery,  as  Plato 
asserts,  but  of  his  own  favourite  science,  dialectics."  See  also 
note  *»,  p.  23. 

'  Sir  P.  Sidney,  arguing  that  all  arts  are  but  attempts  to. 
methodise  natural  subjects,  says,  that  "  the  rhetorician  and  lo- 
gician, considering  what  in  nature  will  soonest  prove  and  per- 
suade, thereon  give  artificial  rules,  which  are  still  compressed 
within  the  circle  of  a  question,  according  to  the  proposed  mat- 
ter."   Defense  of  Poetry. 

B 

/« 

ARISTOTLE'S 

That  we 
can  re- 
duce them 
to  a  sys- 
tem. 

3.  Stric- 
tures on 
previous 
systems. 

certain  extent,  attempt,  as  well  to  sift,  as  to  maintain 
an  argument ;  as  well  to  defend  themselves,  as  to  im- 
peach *.  Now,  of  the  multitude^,  some  do  this  at  ran- 
dom ;  others,  by  reason  of  practice,  from  habit ;  but  as 
it  is  possible  either  way,  it  is  plain  that  the  case  will 
admit  of  our  reducing  these  things  to  a  system.  For  we 
are  at  liberty  to  speculate  on  the  ciauses  of  the  success, 
as  well  of  those  who  from  practice,  as  of  those  who  on 
the  spur  of  the  moment,  [attempt  eithcE  to  convince 
or  to  persuade].  And  every  one  will  be  antecedently 
prepared  to  acknowledge  that  an  undertaking  of  this 
description  is  the  business  of  art^. 

Hitherto,  however,  such  as  have  compiled  systems 
of  oratory  have  executed  a  very  trifling  part  of  it ; 
for  the  means  of  making  credible^  alone  come  pro- 

*  'E^cTa^eii;  Kal  xnrix'^t'Vy  qua  Logicians  ;  &.vo\oyil<rQai  koI 
KaTtiyop&lvj  quk  Rhetoriciana :  so  that  the  faculties  which  form 
the  basis  of  each  of  these  arts  appear  to  be  natural  to  every 
man.  Zeno  elegantly  illustrated  the  distinction  between  the 
two  by  a  simile  taken  from  the  hand.  The  close  power  of 
Logic  he  compared  to  the^^,  or  hand  compressed;  the  diffuse 
power  of  Rhetoric  to  the  palm,  or  hand  open.    Cicero,  Orator. 

*  The  vulgau:  can  give  reasons  to  a  certain  degree,  and  can 
examine,  after  a  manner,  the  reasons  given  them  by  others. 
And  what  is  this  but  Natural  Logic?  If  therefore  these 
efforts  of  theirs  have  an  effect,  and  nothing  happen  without  a 
cause,  this  effect  must  of  necessity  be  derived  from  certain 
principles.  The  question  then  is,  What  these  principles  are ; 
for  if  these  can  once  be  investigated,  and  then  knowingly  ap- 
plied, we  shall  be  enabled  to  do  by  rule  what  others  do  by 
hazard;  and  in  what  we  do,  as  much  to  excel  the  uninstructed 
reasoner,  as  a  disciplined  boxer  surpasses  an  untaught  rustic. 
Harris's  Philosophical  Arrang.  ch.  i. 

*  An  effect  is  produced ;  sometimes  indeed  accidentally^  and 
sometimes  from  the  person's  having  been  habituated  to  that 
which  he  attempts.  Now  if  we  can  ascertain  and  methodise 
the  causes  of  this  his  success,  so  as  to  insure  the  success  of 
subsequent  attempts,  we  shall  have  constructed  something 
similar  to  an  art :  for,  in  some  points,  chance  and  art  are  not 
unlike ;  whence  the  verse  of  Agatho ; — 

Tixi'tJ  Tvxnv  e<rrep^«,  Kal  twx*?"  Tix^rtv, 

See  Eth.  Nich.  vi.  4. 
'  ni<ms. — ^If  the  translation  of  this  word  shall  appear  fre- 
quently to  be  vague  and  indeterminate,  the  reader  is  requested 
to  observe  that  we  have  no  equivalent  expression  in  English ; 
for  it  is  conceived  that  "proof**  (the  usual  translation)  always 
implies  something  qualified  to  convince  the  understanding ; 

CHAP.  I.]  RHETORIC.  3 

perly  within  the  sphere  of  the  art,  but  other  points  are 
merely  adscititious.     On  the  subject  of  enthymems,  Neglect  of 
however,  which  in  point  of  fact  is  the  very  body  of  *^^  '^'*'" 
proof,  these  men  say  not  a  word ;  while  on  points 
foreign  to  the   subject  they  busy  themselves  most 
mightily.  Now  the  feeling  of  ill-will®,  pity,  and  anger,  4.  Hence 
and  the  like  emotions  of  the  mind,  appertain  not  to  the  ^^g^^ 
case,  but  refer  to  the  judge ;  so  that  if,  in  regard  to  all  the  pas- 
judicial  prooesses,  matters  were  regulated  as  they  now  aons. 
are  in  some  states,  (and  more  particularly  in  such  as 
are  well  constituted,)  these  spokesmen  would  not  have 
a  word  to  say.     And  every  one  [approves  the  regula-  6. 
tion],  whether  they  think  that  the  law  should  hold  this 
language,  or  whether  they  avail  themselves  of  the  rule, 
and  positively  forbid  to  speak  irrelevantly  to  the 
case  ;  just  as  they  do  in  the  Areopagus,  observing 
this  usage  properly  enough.    For  it  is  not  right  that 
an  orator  should  bias  the  judge  by  winning  him  on  to 
anger,  or  pity,  or  jealousy ;  since  it  is  equally  absurd 
as  though  one  were  to  make  a  ruler  crooked  which 
he  is  about  to  use®.     It  is  further  evident  that  the  6. 
pleader's  business  is  nothing  more  than  to  prove  the 
matter  of  fact,  either  that  it  is,  or  is  not  the  case ; 
that  it  has,  or  has  not  happened.     But  as  to  the 
question  whether  it  be  important  or  trifling,  just  or 

whereas  Aristotle  designates  by  the  word  "jrtffris,  every  thing 
which  has  a  tendency  to  per  made  the  wiU.  It  is  not,  however,  , 
meant  to  be  denied  that  proof  {properly  such)  frequently  has, 
and  always  ought  to  have,  a  tendency  to  persuade  ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  it  would  be  too  much  to  say  that  it  is  the  only  thing 
which  is  qualified  to  do  so.  Vide  Mitcheirs  Aristoph.  vol.  i. ; 
Pal.  Diss.  p.  72 ;  ibid.  p.  75. 

®  For  a  similar  use  of  the  word  ^io/3oX»;,  cf.  Thucyd.  lib.  i. 
C.  127. — oi)  fiivTOL  TocovTOtf  ^XiTi^ov  vaQtiv  &v  airrdv  towto, 
Btrov  dia^oXiiu  otativ  ahTto  trpdv  t^v  iroXti/. 

•  KpiTTi^  TOW  vSfiov  KOLvtev,  Aristotle  employs  the  same  me- 
taphor in  his  Ethics  : — tow  yiip  adp'urroVf  aopurroi  koX  6  KaKotv 
iaTiv,  &airtp  kuI  t^v  Ae<rBia9  olKodofiijif  6  /u^Xu^iiiw*  Kavwtr' 
iT/oos  yap  TO  cxh/Au.  t«0  Xidov  fitTaKivtiTaif  koI  ou  fjJvu  6  ico- 
va>v.     Lib.  V.  c.  10.    See  Lucretius,  iv.  516. — 

Denique  ut  in  fabrica,  si  prava  est  regula  prima, 
Mormaque  si  fallax  rectis  regionibus  exit, 
•  ••«•• 

Omnia  mendose  fieri  atqiie  obstipa  necesse  est,  etc. 
B   2 

4  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

unjust,  whatever  questions  of  this  nature  the  legis-. 
lator  has  not  determined ;  on  these  the  judge  must 
somehow  or  other  make  up  his  mind  of  himself  and 
not  take  instructions  on  them  from  the  parties  at  is- 
7.  Rea-     sue.     It  would  then  be  most  admirably  adapted  to 
*^litti^^  the  purposes  of  justice,  if  laws   properly   enacted 
possible     were,  as  far  as  circumstances  admitted,  of  themselves 
should  be  to  mark  out  all  cases,  and  to  abandon  as  few  as  pos- 
ju^  *^®  sible  to  the  discretion  of  the  judge.     And  this  be- 
*  ist.  cause,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  easier  to  get  one  or  a 
few  of  good  sense,  and  of  ability  to  legislate  and  ad- 
2nd.  judge,  than  to  get  many  ^^ :  and  next  to  this,  legisla- 
tive enactments  proceed  from   men   carrying   their 
views  a  long  time  back ;  [or,  from  men  who  have 
reflected  on  the  subject  for  a  long  time  ;]  while  judi- 
cial decisions  are  madp  off  hand  ;  so  that  it  is  diffi- 
cult for  persons  deciding  under  these  circumstances 
3rd.  to  assign  what  is  just  and  expedient :  and,  what  is 
most  of  all  to  the  point,  is  this,  that  the  award  of  the 
legislator    is  not   particular  nor  about  present  cir^ 
cumstances,  but  about  what  is  future  and  general ; 
whereas  the  member  of  a  popular  assembly  and  the 
judge  decide  on  points  actually  present  and  definite  ; 
and  under  their  circumstances,  feelings  of  partiality, 
and  dislike,  and  personal  expediency,  will,  in  many 
instances,  antecedently  have  been  interwoven  with 
the  case  ;  and  to  such  a  degree,  that  one  is  no  longer 
able,  adequately,  to  contemplate  the  truth,  and  that 
personal  pleasure  or  pain  throws  a  shade  over  the 

*®  As  the  yoTing  man  can  learn  consequences  (ort)  ere  he 
discovers  principles,  (^iot*,  Eth.  lib.  i.,)  so  can  most  men  bet- 
ter judge  of  individual  cases  by  StKavrLKri  4>p6vrj<ri9,  than  frame 
laws  by  vofiodtTiicfi  <f>p6vr\eri^,  (Eth.  lib.  vi.)  And  this  is  proved 
by  the  universal  bias  of  orators  to  individual  cases  founded  on 
law.  To  borrow  an  illustration  from  the  arts,  we  may  say, 
that  as  a  person  placed  in  the  centre  of  a  landscape  has  a  fuller 
view  of  any  individual  object  in  it  than  the  painter  himself, 
but  loses  proportionately  the  general  effect ;  so  the  judge  can 
discern  all  the  particulars  of  a  given  case,  but  cannot,  as  the 
legislator  who  contemplates  at  a  distance,  view  so  well  the 
general  bearings  and  effects  of  any  law  when  united  or  con- 
trasted with  others.    Cf.  also  the  Ethics,  lib.  v.  c.  1. — <5p0w« 

CHAP.  I.]  RHETORIC.  5 

judgment.     In  r^ard,  then,  to  other  particulars,  as  I  8.  But 
observed,  it  is  right  to  leave  the  judge  a  discretion  in  of  ^J*'^^ 
as  fevsr  as  possible^*:  but  questions  of  fact,  whether  etc.  must 
it  has  or  has  not  taken  place,  will  or  will  not  happen,  J«  ^^^  ^ 
does  or  does  not  exist ;    all  such  it  is  necessary  ^^  to 
abandon  to  the  discretion  of  the  judges  ;  since  it  is  not 
possible  that  the  legislator  ever  should  foresee  them. 

If  these  things  be  so,  it  is  plain  that  they  embrace  9. 
in  their  systems  matters  foreign  to  the  subject,  who 
give  us  explanations  of  the  other  points,  as  for  in- 
stance— ^what  the  proem,  and  the  narration,  and  the 
other  divisions,  ought  severally  to  embrace :    for  in 
these  treatises  they  busy  themselves  about  nothing 
else,  except  how  to  render  the  judge  of  a  certain  dis- 
position ;  while  on  the  subject  of  those  means  of 
persuasion,  recognised  by  art,  they  discover  nothing  ; 
and  yet  this  is  the  source  whence  an  orator  may  be- 
come a  good  reasoner.     And  it  is   for  this   reason  lo.  Rea- 
that,  notwithstanding  the  same  system  is  conversant  sons  why 
about  deliberative  and  judicial  cases,  and  although  ^r  j^JJi!' 
the  business  of  the  senate  is  more  honourable,  and  cial  to  de- 
embraces   higher   social  interests,  than  that  whose  Hberative 
subject  is  merely  the  transactions  of  individuals ;  yet  ^^  ^' 
about  the  former  they  say  not  one  word,  while  all 
undertake  to  frame  systems  of  judicial  pleading. 
And*^  they  are  not  without  a  reason  for  this,  since 

»»  Cf.  Hooker,  v.  §  9,  p.  36. 

^^  It  is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  any  human  legislator 
should  determine  on  the  infinite  number  of  possible  cases ;  or  ' 
that  he  should  not,  with  regard  to  some,  be  an  unsafe  guide  to 
our  decisions :  for  the  last  of  these  inconveniences  we  have  a 
remedy  in  iirieiKtia ;  since  equity  is,  as  he  subsequently  de- 
scribes it,  ^6  T9V  Idiov  vofjLov  Kul  ytypafifiivov  eXXei/x/ia,  and 
Td  'trapit  Tov  ysypa/i/iivov  vofxov  SiKaiov. — lib.  i.  c.  xiii.  §  13. 
And  again  in  the  Ethics,  ivavopdotfux  vofiov^  ^  iWeCirti  did  tA 
KaBoXoVf  V.  10. 

*^  This  error  is  a  consequence  on  the  one  mentioned  before, 
§  3 :  from  the  disregard  there  noticed  of  the  enthymem  and 
iri<rTtff,  orators  are  naturally  led  to  attach  themselves  to  that 
branch  of  public  speaking  which  requires  enthymem  least;  and 
such  is  judicial  pleading,  inasmuch  as  the  cause  there  rests 
mainly  on  evidence,  properly  so  called,  on  the  aTixvai  v'umix. 
Aristotle  himself  gives  as  another  reason  for  this  preference, 
the  greater  ease  of  judicial  oratory.  (Vide  lib.  iii.  c.  xvii.  §  10.) 

6  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  i. 

in  deliberative  speeches  it  is  less  wortb  while  to  state 
matters  foreign  to  the  subject,  and  a  deliberative 
speech  admits  less  of  malicious  sophistry  than  judi- 
cial pleading,  but  is  more  widely  interesting ;  for 
here  the  judge  [i.  e.  the  senator]  decides  on  questions 
which  nearly  interest  himself,  so  that  no  more  is  ne- 
cessary than  to  prove  that  the  question  stands  just  as 
he,  the  adviser,  asserts.  In  judicial  questions,  how- 
ever, this  is  not  sufficient,  but  it  is  worth  while  to 
engage  the  hearer ;  for  the  decision  is  about  a  case 
which  does  not  affect  himself:  so  that  the  judges, 
looking  to  their  own  gratification,  and  listening  with 
a  view  to  amusement,  surrender  themselves  up  to 
the  pleaders ;  and,  strictly  speaking,  do  not  fulfil  the 
character  of  judges^*.  On  which  very  account  the 
law,  in  many  places,  as  I  before  remarked,'  forbids 

And  this  he  proves,  first,  because  that  which  has  been  is  plain 
to  all,  even  to  diviners ;  secondly,  the  orator  having  law  for  a 
premiss,  the  demonstration  is  easier.  To  these  reasons  may  be 
added  one  which  the  master  of  Alexander  would  not  willingly 
have  allowed,  namely,  the  loss  of  liberty  to  Greece,  and  the 
consequent  loss  of  all  interest  in  deliberative  questions,  to  men 
whose  future  fates  were  totally  out  of  their  own  power. 

"  A  writer  in  the  Quarterly  Review^  No.  26,  after  contrasting 
the  perplexity  of  English  law  with  the  simplicity  of  Athenian 
jurisprudence,  says,  "  This  simplicity  in  the  law  made  it  the 
orator*8  business  less  to  hunt  for  cases  and  precedents  than  to 
discriminate  character ;  less  to  search  for  errors  in  %  bill  than 
for  flaws  or  errors  in  a  witness's  life  or  testimony.  And  the 
prevalence  of  this  practice  may  be  inferred  from  a  subsequent 
passage  in  this  book,  (c.  ix.  §  38,)  where  Isocrates  is  mentioned 
as  an  adept  in  the  comparison  of  characters^  "  which,"  says 
Aristotle,  "  he  used  to  do  to  further  his  familiarity  with  jttdicml 
pleading"  To  this  we  may  subjoin  the  following  remarks  of 
Mitford  on  a  speech  by  Alcibiades :  "  The  multitude  ordinarily 
composing  an  Athenian  court  of  justice  was  so  great,  that  the 
pleaders  always  addressed  it  as  under  the  impulse  of  the  same 
interests,  and  subject  to  the  same  feelings  as  the  general  as- 
sembly, and  equally  without  responsibility.  Impartiality  was 
never  supposed ;  the  passions  were  always  applied  to ;  and  it 
never  failed  to  be  contended  between  the  parties,  which  could 
most  persuade  the  jurors  that  their  interest  was  implicated  with 
his,  and  that  by  deciding  in  his  favour  they  would  be  gainers.** 
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  v.  p.  94.  So  also  Xenophon,  in  his  Athe- 
nian Republic,  C.  i.  §  13. — Ii/ts  toIs  diKaarrrjpion  ov  tov  ducaiov 
avTOii  fjiiX.ti  fiaXkov  h  tov  owTots  £u/x^t/)oi/TOS. 

CHAP.  I.]  RHETORIC.  7 

the  saying  any  thing  irrelevant ;  but  there  [in  deli- 
berative assemblies]  the  judges  are,  of  themselves, 
careful  enough  of  this. 

But  as  it  is  plain  that  an  artificial  system  is  con-  11.  Rea- 
versant  about  the  means  of  making  credible,  and  as  ^e^oS^ 
this  is  a  sort  oi  proof ^  (because  we  are  then  most  per-  cian  will 
suaded  when  we  conceive  that  the  point  has  been  probably 
proved^)  but  the  proof  of  rhetoric  is  enthymem,  (and  J®g^  j^^^. 
this,  to  speak  generally,  has  the  most  sovereign  effect  torician. 
of  aU  the  means  of  persuasion  ;)  and  the  enthymem 
is  a  sort  of  syllogism  ;  since  too  it  is  the  province  of 
logic  to   consider  equally  every  sort  of  syllogism, 
whether  of  that  art  as  a  whole,  or  of  some  particular 
branch  of  it ;  then,  these  points  being  admitted,  it  is 
evident  that  the  man  best  able  to  consider  the  ques- 
tion, out  of  what  sources  and  how  the  syllogism  arises, 
will  moreover  be  in  the  highest  degree  capable  of 
employing  enthymems  ;  provided  he  make  himself 
acquainted,  besides  his  logic,  with  the  kind  of  sub- 
jects about  which  enthymems    are  conversant,  and 
what  differences  they  exhibit  as  compared  with  the 
syllogism  of  logic.     Because  it  belongs  to  the  same 
faculty  of  the  mind  to  recognise  both  truth  and  the 
semblance  of  truth  ;  and  more  than  this,  mankind 
have  a^^  tolerable  natural  tendency  toward  that  which 
is  true ;  and,  in  general,  hit  the  truth ;  wherefore  an 
aptness  in  conjecturing  probabilities  belongs  to  him 
who  has  a  similar  aptness  in  regard  to  truth.     It  is 
plain,  then,  that  other  rhetoricians  embrace  in  their 
systems,  points  foreign  to  the  subject,  and  what  rea- 
sons they  have  for  inclining  to  the  subject  of  judi- 
cial pleading  in  preference  to  the  other  branches  of 
rhetoric. 

But  rhetoric  is  useful,  because  truth  and  justice  12.  Utili- 
are  in  their  nature  stronger  than  their  opposites  ;  so  g,of 
that  if  decisions  be  made,  not  in  conformity  to  the  prov^T^ 
rule  of  propriety,  it  must  have  been  that  they  have  1st. 
been  got  the  better  of,  through  fault  of  the  advocates 
themselves  :  and  this  is  deserving  reprehension.   Fur-  2nd. 

1*  nt<l>vKa<riv  lKavSt9,  haye  tuUuraUy  a  considerable  aptitude 
toward  what  is  true. 

8  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

tbermore,  in  the  case  of  aome  people,  not  even  if  we 
had  the  most  accurate  scientific  knowledge,  would  it 
be  easjT  to  persuade  them  were  we  to  address  them 
through  the  medium  of  that  knowledge ;  for  a  scien- 
tific discourse,  it  is  the  privilege  of  education  [to.  ap- 
preciate], and  it  is  impossible  that  this  [should  ex- 
tend to  the  multitude  ^^] ;  but  we  must  construct  our 
means  of  persuasion,  and  our  addresses,  through  the 
medium  of  ordinary  language ;  as  in  fact  I  stated  in 
my  Topics,  **  on  the  manner  of  communicating  with 

Srd.  the  multitude."  Again,  too,  we  ought  to  be  able  to 
persuade  on  opposite  sides  of  a  question ;  as  also  we 
ought  in  the  case  of  arguing  by  syllogism :  not  that 
we  should  practise  both,  for  it  is  not  right  to  persuade 
to  what  is  bad ;  but  in  order  that  the  bearing  of  the 
case  may  not  escape  us,  and  that  when  another 
makes  an  unfair  use  of  these  re^isonings,  we  may  be 
able  to  solve  them.^*^  Now,  of  all  the  other  arts,  there 
is  not  one  which  embraces  contraries  in  its  conclu- 
sions ;  but  logic  and  rhetoric  alone  do  this ;  for  they 
are  both  in  an  equal  degree  ^®  conversant  about  con- 
traries; not,  however,  that  these  contrary  subjects 
present  equal  facilities :  but  the  true  and  better  side 
of  the  question  is  always  naturally  of  a  more  easy 
inference,  and  has,  generally  speaking,  a  greater  tend- 

4th.  ency  to  persuade.  To  illustrate  further  the  utility 
of  rhetoric,  it  were  absurd,  if,  while  it  is  disgraceful 

*•  The  communication   of  ideas  requires  a  similitude   of 
thought  and  language :  the  discourse  of  a  philosopher  would 
yibrate  without  effect  on  the  ear  of  a  peasant.    Gibbon's  De- 
cline and  Fall,  c.  I.  note  90. 
"  In  the  words  of  Falconbridge,  let  the  orator  resolve  to 

** smack  of  observation ; 

Which,  though  I  will  not  practise  to  deceive, 
Yet,  to  avoid  deceit,  I  mean  to  learn." 
1*  Riccobon  remarks,  that  a  person  may  at  first  be  inclined 
to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  assertion  that  Rhetoric  and  Logic 
alone  recognise  contraries ;  seeing  that  music,  for  instance,  re-> 
cognises  harmony  and  discord ;  grammar,  the  improprieties 
and  the  proprieties  of  language,  etc.  This  doubt  is  however 
removed,  he  says,  by  the  word  S/xoiatv,  for  these  alone  recog- 
nise with  eqttal  propriety  each  of  the  two  contraries ;  whereas 
other  arts  apply  more  strictly  to  one  than  to  another. 

CHAF.  I.]  RHETORIC.  9 

for  a  man  not  to  be  able  to  assist  himself  hj  bis  per- 
son, it  were  not  disgraceful  to  be  unable  to  do  this  bj 
his  speech,  which  is  more  &  peculiarity  of  man  than 
the  exercise  of  the  body^^     If,  however,  [any  one  13.  Ob- 
should  object 20]  that  a  person,  unfairly  avaihng  him-  Jl^^st 
self  of  such  powers  of  speaking,  may  be,  in  a  very  the  abuse 
high  degree,  injurious ;   this  is  an  objection  which  of  it  an- 
will  lie  in  some  degree  against  every  good  indis-  ^^^    ' 
criminately,  except  virtue ;  and  with  especial  force 
against  those   which   are    most    advantageous,   as 
strength,  health,  wealth,  and  generalship.     Because, 
employing  these  fairly,  a  person  may  be  beneficial  in 
points  of  the  highest  importance ;  and,  by  employing 
them  unfairly,  may  be  equally  injurious. 

That  rhetoric,  then,  is  conversant  not  with  any  one  14.  End 
distinct  class  of  subjects,  but  like  logic  [is  of  universal  ^  r^^ 
applicability],  and  that  it  is  useful,  is  evident ;  as  also  ric. 
that  its  business  is  not  absolute  persuasion  ^^,  but  to 
consider  on  every  subject  what  means  of  persuasion 
are  inherent  in  it ;  just  as  is  also  the  case  in  every 

19  This  is  an  ^  minori  argument,  to  understand  the  full  force 
of  which  we  ought  to  bear  in  mind  the  great  importance  at- 
tached to  the  dvyafus  dytavio-TiKii  by  the  Greeks. 

*>  Non  tamen  idoirco  crimen  ]iber  omnis  habebit : 

Nil  prodest  quod  non  laedere  possit  idem. 
Igne  quid  utilius  ?    Si  quis  tamen  urere  tecta 

Comparat,  audaces  instruit  igne  manus. 
Eripit  interdum,  modo  dat  medicina  salutem, 

Qusque  juvahs  monstrat,  quaeque  sit  herba  nocens. 
Et  latro,  et  cautus  praecingitur  ense  viator : 

Ille  sed  insidias,  hie  slbi  portat  opem. 
Discitur  innocuas  ut  agat  facundia  causas : 

Protegit  haec  sontes,  immeritosque  premit. 

Ovid.  Trist.  Ub.  ii.  1.  265. 

*i  Having  told  us  what  we  may  expect  from  Rhetoric,  he 
now  tells  us  what  we  are  not  to  expect  from  it.  Persuasiou, 
though  the  «ndy  is  not  the  dufy  of  rhetoric :  "  Officium  eftu 
faeuUatit  videtur  ease,  dieere  appoeite  a^  perawidenditm :  Finis, 
pertuadere  dictions,^'  (Cicero  de  Inv.)  In  the  arts  whose 
foundation  is  conjectural  [trToxa^TiKal  rixvat],  among  which 
we  must  class  rhetoric,  if  the  artist  had  done  aU  that  Uie  case 
admitted,  his  duty  was  conceived  to  have  been  fulfilled,  and 
he  was  entitled  to  commendation  though  he  had  entirely  failed 
of  success. 

10  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

other  art :  for  neither  is  it  the  duty  of  medicine  to 
render  its  patient  healthy^  but  to  bring  him  on  as  far 
ag  the  case  admits ;  for  it  is  nevertheless  very  possi- 
ble to  treat  properly  even  such  as  may  be  incapable 
of  again  partaking  of  health  :  and  besides  this  [it  is 
evident]  that  it  belongs  to  the  self-same  art  to  ob- 
serve both  the  real  and  seeming  means  of  persuasion ; 
just  as  it  is  incumbent  on  logic  to  consider  syllogisms 
Differ-      and  apparent  syllogisms.     And  this  is  the  case,  be- 
ence  in      cause  the  character  of  sophist  does  not  consist  in  the 
R^toS    faculty^  [for  the  logician  possesses  this  as  well  as  he], 
as  regards  but  in  his  fixed  design  [of  abusing  it**].     Here  [in 

^  That  he  is  consistent  in  thus  classifying  characters  accord- 
ing to  their  moral  prineipleSy  will  appear  from  his  application 
of  the  appellation  'AXa^ciu/  by  the  same  rule  in  the  Ethics : 
OiiK  kv  T-^  Swdfiii  i<rriv  6  dXaH^tttv,  dW*  iv  tij  wpoaipiati. 
Ethics,  iy*  c.  7. 

•*  In  order  more  fully  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  rhetoric, 
Aristotle  has  considered  it  throughout  this  chapter  as  analogous 
to  logic.  Each,  he  says,  is  founded  on  a  faculty  naturally  pos- 
sessed by  all  men ;  each  is  useful,  and  applicable  with  equal 
propriety  to  any  class  of  subjects  whaterer.  Besides  this,  lo- 
gic and  rhetoric  alone,  of  all  arts,  are  equally  conyersant  with 
opposite  inferences ;  and  of  course  with  sound  and  specious 
arguments  (whether  in  the  form  of  syllogism  or  enthymem). 
Now  as  logic  and  rhetoric  are  in  their  own  nature  indifferent 
to  truth  or  falsehood,  it  must  require  an  act  of  choice  in  either 
case  to  select  the  former  or  the  latter,  and  the  constant  repeti- 
tion of  that  choice  will  ultimately  form  a  corresponding  habit. 
Hence  the  itaXiicriKd^  may  be  considered  as  ivvdfin  o-o^xo-t^v, 
and  the  <ro<f>i(rrr\^  as  dvvd/iBi  iiaXiKTucdi.  But  when  logic  is 
prostituted  to  the  support  of  false  propositions,  by  &e  bad 
principles  (the  irpoafpeorts)  of  its  professors,  it  is  branded  with 
the  name  of  sophistry,  and  the  persons  who  so  misapply  it  are 
called  sophists :  whereas,  in  the  case  of  rhetoric,  no  such  dis- 
tinction in  reference  to  the  principles  of  its  professors  ever  ob- 
tained ;  but  the  name  of  orator  is  enjoyed  equally  by  all  who 
are  masters  of  the  art,  whether  they  exercise  it  fairly  or  not, 
IvravOa  fikv,  ttrrai  6  fiku  kotA  ttiv  lirto-nj/ui/i/,  6  ii  fcaTdf  t^w 
nrpoaiptaiv,  'PnTcup.  A  reason  for  this  distinction  may  per- 
haps be  furnished  from  the  nature  of  the  subject-matter  re- 
spectively. The  subject-matter  of  logic  is  AXtjOis,  which  is 
uniform,  absolute,  and  admits  not  of  degrees.     Hence  the  so- 

Ehistical  logician  may  fairly  be  supposed  aware  of  the  fallacy 
e  uses,  and  is  stigmatized  accordingly.  But  the  subject-mat- 
ter of  rhetoric  being  -rd  bfioiov  tw  aXnO",  (v.  §  1 1,)  orirtBapdv, 
has  many  and  various  degrees,  from  the  lowest  presumptiou 

CHAP.  II.]  RHETORIC.  11 

rhetoric],  however,  the  pne  who  is  considered  in  re-  the  name 
ference  simply  to  his  knowledge  of  the  art,  as  well  as  **^*^® 
he  who  is  considered  in  reference  to  his  moral  prin-  q^ 
ciples,  is  indiscriminately  designated  an  orator.  But  in 
logic,  a  sophist  is  called  so  in  reference  to  his  moral 
principles ;  a  logician,  however,  without  reference  to 
his  principles,  simply  as  regards  the  faculty  he  is 
master  of. 

However,  commencing  from  this  point,  let  us  at-  15. 
tempt  to  treat  of  the  system  both  from  what  sources 
and  in  what  manner  we  shall  be  able  to  attain  the 
proposed  objects ;  having  then  once  more,  as  at  the 
outset,  defined  what  this  art  is,  let  us  treat  of  what 
remains. 

CHAP.  II. 

Definition  of  Rhetoric, — EiV6c :— ^Sijftetov :— TtKr/i^piov  :— 
their  differences, — Example, 

Let  us  define  rhetoric  to  be,  "  A  faculty  of  consider-  1.  Defini- 
ing  all  the  possible  means  of  persuasion  on  every  sub-  B^J^^ric. 
ject ;"  for  this  is  the  business  of  no  one  of  the  other 
arts,  each  of  which  is  fit  enough  to  inform  or  persuade 
respecting  its  own  subject ;  medicine,  for  instance, 
on  what  conduces  to  liealth  or  sickness  ;  and  geome- 
try, on  the  subject  of  relations  incidental  to  magni- 
tudes ;  and  arithmetic,  on  the  subject  of  numbers  ; 
and  in  the  same  way  the  remaining  arts  and  sciences. 
But  rhetoric,  as  I  may  say,  seems  able  to  consider  the 
means  of  persuasion  on  any  given  subject  whatso- 
ever.   And  hence  I  declare  it  to  have  for  its  province, 
as  an  art,  no  particular  limited  class  of  subjects.    Now  2.  Two 
of  the  means  of  effecting  persuasion,  some  originate  ^^^^^^ 
in  the  art,  others  independently  of  it.   By  inartificial  — ijn-«x- 

voi,  art)^- 
up  to  moral  certainty.     Here  then  a  fallacy  is  not  so  easily  "<'»• 
diBcoTerable,  eyen  by  the  orator  himself;  and  candour  re- 
quires us  not  to  brand  as  moral  what  after  all  may  be  merely 
mental  imperfection  in  the  speaker. 

12  ARISTOTLE'S  [boox  i. 

I  mean  whatever  are  not  furnished  forth  by  our  own 
means,  but  which  are  in  existence  already,  as  wit- 
nesses, torture,  deeds,  and  all  of  this  kind  ;  by  artifi- 
daly  such  as  may  be  got  up  by  means  of  the  system, 
and  by  our  own  talents.  So  that  as  regards  these, 
we  have  to  employ  the  one  class,  to  discover  the 
other. 
3.  Of  means  of  persuading  by  speaking  there  are 
three  species  ^ :  some  consist  in  the  character  of  the 
speaker  ;  others  in  the  disposing  the  hearer  a  certain 
way ;  others  in  the  thing  itself  which  is  said,  by  rea- 
son of  its  proving,  or  appearing  to  prove  the  point. 
4.  i.  Cha-  [Persuasion  is  effected]  by  means  of  the  mora/ cAarcu;- 
racter  of  ^  when  the  speech  shall  have  been  spoken  in  such 
er.  ^^  a  way  as  to  render  the  speaker  worthy  confidence  : 
for  we  place  confidence  in  the  good  to  a  wider  extent, 
and  with  less  hesitation,  on  all  subjects  generally ; 
but  on  points  where  no  real  accuracy  exists,  but  there 
is  room  for  doubt,  we  even  entirely  confide  in  them. 
This  feeling,  however,  should  arise  by  means  of  tJie 
speech^  and  not  by  reason  of  its  having  been  precon- 
ceived that  the  speaker  is  a  certain  kind  of  man.  For 
it  is  not  true,  as  some  treatise-mongers  lay  down  in 
their  systems,  of  the  probity  of  the  speaker,  that  it 
contributes  nothing  to  persuasion  ;  but  moral  charac- 
ter nearly,  I  may  say,  carries  with  it  the  most  sove- 
5.ii.Feel-  reign  efficacy  in  making  credible*.  [Persuasion  is 
^^Stor^^  effected]  through  the  medium  of  the  hearers^  when 
they  shall  have  been  brought  to  a  state  of  excitement 
under  the  influence  of  the  speech ;  for  we  do  not, 
when  influenced  by  pain  or  joy,  or  partiality  or  dis- 
like, award  our  decisions  in  the  same  way ;  about 
which  means  of  persuasion  alone,  I  declare  that  the 

1  nt<rTst«  hik  Tov  Xoyow,  or  artificial,  of  three  kinds,  kv  rtS 
^0ei  TOW  XiyovTov — iv  rep  Tdv  dicf>oaTi)s  diadBivai  irtos — iu  avrtS 
T<fi  \6yw, 

'  In  80  high  estimation  did  Menander  hold  the  mantier  of 
an  address,  that  he  attributed  the  whole  effect  to  it ; — rpo-ro* 
I(r6'  6  tnidtiiv  TOV  Xiyovrtny  oi  \6yo9.  And  as  Plutarch  ob- 
serves upon  this  line,  koI  Tp6iro9  fAkvoSv  Kai  Xoyov  9i  TPO'1102 
AIA'  AOTOY.  De  Audiend.  Poet.  t.  i.  Op.  Mor.  p.  125. 
edit.  Wyttenb. 

CHAP.  II.;;  RHETORIC.  13 

system-mongers  of  the  present  day  busy  themselves. 
On  the  subject  of  these,  however,  some  light  will  be 
affi>rded,  when  I  speak  on  the  subject  of  the  passions. 

Men  give  credit  from  the  force  of  what  is  said,  6.  iii.  The 
when  out  of  the  means  of  persuasion  which  attach  to  ^l^h  it- 
each  subject,  we  evince  the  truth,  or  that  which  ap- 
pears so.     Now  as  persuasion  is  effected  by  these  7.  Rheto- 
means,  it  is  plain  that  it  will  be  the  privilege  of  him  ^  ^  off- 
who  is  able  to  draw  inferences  syllogistically,  and  to  Dialectics 
take  a  full  view  of  the  subject  of  morals,  and  of  the  and  Poli- 
virtues,  and  thirdly  of  the  passions,  both  what  each  ^**- 
of  the  passions  is,  of  what  nature  it  is,  and  from  what 
causes  it  is  engendered,  and  how  r  so  that  the  fact  is, 
that  rhetoric  is,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of  off-shoot  of  logic, 
and  of  that  department  of  moral  philosophy  which  it 
is  fair  to  call  the  science  of  social  life  \     Whence  rhe- 
toric is  invested  with  the  costume*  of  that  science, 
as  well  as  its  professors,  partly  from  inexperience, 
partly  arrogance,   and   in  part  from  other  human 
causes  ;  because,  as  I  stated  at  the  outset,  it  is  a  sort 
of  subordinate  division  of  logic,  and  portraiture  of  it ; 
neither  of  them  being  a  science  of  any  one  definite 

*  IIoXiTiictif.  For  an  explanation  of  this  term — an  enumer- 
ation of  the  various  arts  which  he  comprehends  under  it — and 
for  an  account  of  the  estimation  in  which  he  holds  it,  see 
Ethics,  lib.  i.  c.  2. 

*  'Tiro^vftTat.  So  blind  are  men  to  this  affectation  of  rheto- 
ric and  its  professors,  that  he  who,  having  had  no  occasion  for 
the  display  of  his  persuasive  powers,  other  than  the  ordinary 
course  of  affairs  presents,  would  be  accused  of  great  arrogance 
were  he  to  talk  of  having  exercised  rhetoric.  Now  Aristotle, 
so  far  from  holding  a  person  guilty  of  presumption  for  such  an 
use  of  the  term,  would  rather  retort  on  the  accuser  the  charge 
of  ignorance  of  its  true  import.  For  with  a  view  to  invest  their  • 
art,  and  of  consequentje  themselves,  with  an  air  of  dignity,  the 
professors  of  rhetoric,  said  he,  would  have  the  world  think 
(some  of  them,  pooi^  creatures,  Si*  cnraidsvirlav)  that  it  was  ap- 
plicable esBcluHvely  to  such  cases  as  are  of  hi^h  concernment  ' 
to  society.  This  in  part  is  true ;  rhetoric  is  iropo</)U£s  t^« 
IIoXtTcIav :  but;  as  Majoragius  observes,  "  Virgulta  magnam 
quidem  cum  arboribus  quibus  adnascuntur  habent  similitudi- 
nem,  et  remm  naturam  redolent.  Sed  tamen  multo  sunt  infe- 
riora,  nsqw  tarn  uteres  fructus  ferunt."  So  far  prevalent  is  this 
notion  to  this  very  day,  that  we  only  apply  this  word  by  way 
of  ridicule  to  persuasion  on  ordinary  topics. 

14  ABISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

subject,  as  to  what  may  be  its  nature ;  but  both  being 
certain  faculties  for  furnishing  ourselves  with  argu- 
ments. Now  on  the  subject  of  the  powers  of  the 
two,  and  their  mutual  relation^  nearly  enough  has 
been  said. 

8.  Subdi-       With  regard  to  means  of  persuading  by  proving, 

vision  of  ••  •-•i»i* 

nrioTtis     ^^  appearing  to  prove  your  point,  just  as  in  logic  one 
iv  aiiTii    is  induction,  another  syllogism,  another  apparent  syl- 
T«!i^<T? :  logism,  so  also  is  the  case  here  in  rhetoric ;  for  its 
meml  iif"  example  is  an  induction,  its  enthymem  a  syllogism ; 
Example,  and  enth3anem  I  call  rhetorical  syllogism ;  example, 
rhetoriccd  induction.     Now  all  orators  effect  their  de- . 
monstrative  proofs  by  allegation  either  of  enthymems 
or  examples,  and,  besides  these,  in  no  other  way 
whatever.     So  that  if  it  be  incumbent  on  you  to  prove 
with  regard  to  any  thing  or  person  inform  of  syllo- 
gism or  induction,  it  cannot  but  be  (as  is  evident  from 
Analytics)  that  each  of  these  will  be  essentiaUy  the 
same  as  each  of  the  former  (enthymem  and  induction). 

9.  Ex-      And  what  the  difference  is  between  example  and  en- 
anip^e.      thymem  is  plain  from  the  Topics,  where>  on  the  sub- 
ject of  syllogism  and  induction,  it  has  been  stated 
before,  that  the  proving  that  such  or  such  is  the  fact 
in  many  and  similar  cases,  is  called  in  the  other  art, 

Befini-      induction ;    in  this,  example.      But  when,  certain 
s^u  °^      points  having  been  granted,  there  results,  by  virtue 
gum.         o^  these,  something  else  over  and  above  these,  by 
virtue  of  their  existence,  either  as  generals  or  parti- 
culars ;  this  process  is,  in  that  art,  called  syllogism  ; 

10.  Vari-  in  this,  enthymem*.  Ehetoric,  it  is  plain,  enjoys  each 
of  sTC^-*  advantage ;  for  [with  respect  to  it]  the  case,  in  this 
ing.  treatise,  is  the  same  as  in  the  Methodica  has  been 

'  stated  of  logic ;  the  speeches  of  orators®  abounding, 
some  in  examples,  others  in  enthymems  ;  and  orators 
themselves  being  in  the  same  way,  some  fond  of  ex- 
ample, others  of  enthymem'.     Eeasonings,  however, 

'  Or,  each  style  of  rhetoric  has  its  peculiar  advantage. 

•  'PtjTo/)«£a,  the  words  of  an  orator,  modelled  according  to 
rhetoric,  whose  object  it  is  to  persuade ;  versus,  \6y<n^  the 
woriis  of  a  logician,  modelled  according  to  logic,  whose  object 
it  is  to  convince. 

CHAP.  ii.J  RHETORIC.  15 

conduoted  through  the  medium  of  example,  are  not 
less  calculated  to  persuade ;  but  those  of  which  en- 
thymem  is  the  characteristic  are  rather  applauded^. 
But  I  will  hereafter  explain  what  is  the  cause  of  this, 
and  how  we  are  to  use  each  species  of  proof:  let  us, 
at  present,  distinguish  more  clearly  respecting  these 
proofs  themselves.     Now  forasmuch  as  that  which  11.  Rhe- 
carries  persuasion  with  it,  does  so  in  reference  to  ^^^^JJe 
some  one ;  and  either  is,  immediately  on  being  enun-  nriQavdv 
ciated,  actually  of  a  nature  to  persuade,  and  enforce  for  a  class, 
belief  5  or  [has  its  effect]  from  its  appearing  to  prove  df^^iJ^" 
through  the  medium  of  such  [as  compose  the  former 
class] ;  and  as  no  art  considers  particular  cases ;  me- 
dicine for  example,  what  is  wholesome  for  the  indi- 
viduals, Socrates  or  Callias,  but  what  is  so  for  any 
person  of  such  a  constitution ;  for  this  question  comes 
within  the  province  of  art,  hut  particulars  are  infinite, 
and  cannot  be  known  :  so  neither  will  rhetoric  con- 
sider probability  in  reference  to  particular  individuals ; 
what,  for  instance,  is  probable  to  Socrates  or  Callias, 
but  that  which  is  so  to  persons  such  as  they  are ;  just 
in  the  «ame  way  as  logic,  for  that  art  does  not  draw 
conclusions  in(Uscriminately  from  any  subjects ;  for 
some  things  there  are  which  appear  probable  even  to 
a  madman ;  [yet  you  never  would  dream  of  arguing 
about  them ;]   but  it  supplies  itself  from  subjects  P^  draws 
which  require  reasoning,  as  does  rhetoric  from  sub-  pu^from 
jects  which  are  usual  matters  of  deliberation.     Its  subjects  of 
business  then  is  respecting  points  about  which  we  de-  delibera- 
liberate,  and  have  no  art  specially  conversant,  and  i2.^*Audi- 
before  auditors  of  such  abilities  as  are  not  able  to  take  ence  held 
a  connected  view  of  reasonings,  conducted  through  ^^/ 

"f  Oopvpovvrai.  Twining,  in  his  notes  on  the  Poetic,  quot- 
ing a  subsequent  passage  of  this  Treatise,  in  which  this  word 
again  occurs,  (ii.  23,)  translates  it,  "  are  applauded,"  and  ob- 
serves, that  "  the  commentators  strangely  mistake  the  sense  of 
this  word  here,  and  in  lib.  i.  c.  2.  They  render  it  absurdly, — 
vehementiu8  percellunt—perturbant  maxime.  Whether  an  au- 
dience be  pleased  or  displeased,  to  any  great  degree,  noise  is 
equally  the  consequence;  and  the  word  ^opv^ttv  is  used, 
sometimes  for  the  uproar  of  approbation,  and  sometimes  for 
that  of  disUker 

16  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

many  stages,  nor  to  deo  ce  an  argument  from  remote 
principles.     Now  we  aoliberate  on  subjects  "which 
appear  to  admit  of  having  themselves  in  either  of  two 
ways :  for  on  questions  which  cannot,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances, past,  present,  or  future,  be  otherwise ; 
on  these,  I  say,  no  one  deliberates,  at  least  not  while 
he  apprehends  them  to  be  such^;  for  by  such  a  deli- 
13.  Hence  beration  nothing  is  gained.     And  you  may  draw  your 
inff^ilf^'    conclusions  and  inferences,  sometimes  from  premises 
<ri;\\eXo-  which  you  havc  arrived  at  by  former  syllogisms ;  and 
yivjiivuiv  sometimes  from  propositions,  not  syllogistically  de- 
Zov/bevaa  ^^^^^  ^u*  requiring  such  a  process  by  reason  of  their 
lengthy,     not  being  probable  at  first  sight ;  but  of  these  pro- 
*    x^       cesses,  it  is  impossible  that  the  former  should  not  be 
ylvTwT    ^^^  *o  follow  up;  by  reason  of  its  prolixity  (for  your 
fikv^tofii-  hearer^  is  supposed  to  be  a  man  of  merely  ordinary 
^^f^^_      understanding),  and  the  latter  defective  in  persuasive 
yt<r/LioO,     efficacy,  by  reason  of  its  not  being  deduced  out  of 
bein^  un-  principles  either  acknowledged,  or  probable  ;  so  that 
^^^^SetDbe  ^^  ^^  necessary  that  both  the  enthymem  and  example 
avoided,     should  be  conversant  about  points  which,  generally 
speaking,  admit  of  being  otherwise,  (the  example  an- 
swering to  induction,  and  /the  enthymem  to  syllo- 

•  A  man  under  a  mistaken  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  subject 
may  possibly  deliberate  on  a  question,  the  nature  of  which  is 
fixed  and  necessary.  Still,  however,  as  long  as  he  remains 
under  this  impression,  the  subject  relatively  to  him  is  of  a  con- 
tingent nature. 

•  Cicero  gives  a  similar  caution  : — "  Hsbc  nostra  oratio 
muUiUudinis  etft  auribus  accommodanda,  ad  oblectandos  animos, 
ad  impellendos,  ad  ea  probanda  quae  non  aurificis  statera,  sed 
quadam  populari  trutina  examinantur.**  De  Orat.  lib.  ii.  We 
may  further  prove  that  this  precept  has  its  foundation  in  na- 
ture, by  quoting  the  words  of  a  celebrated  modem  writer,  who, 
at  least  in  penetration  and  knowledge  of  mankind,  had  few 
superiors :  "  The  receipt  to  make  a  speaker,  and  an  applauded 
one  too,  is  short  and  easy.  Take  common  sense  quantum  suf- 
Jicit;  add  a  little  application  to  the  rules  and  orders  of  the 
House ;  throw  obvious  thoughts  in  a  new  light,  and  make  up 
the  whole  with  a  large  quantity  of  purity,  correctness,  and 
elegance  of  style.  Take  it  for  granted  that  by  far  the  greatest 
part  of  mankind  neither  analyse  nor  search  to  the  bottom ; 
they  are  ineapable  of  penetrating  deeper  than  the  tur/ace/* 
Lord  Chesterfield's  Letters. 

CHAP,  ii.l  RHETORIC.  17 

gism,)  and  be  deduced  out  ^f  feiy,  and  frequently  out 
of  fewer  intermediate  propc^itions  than  the  sjllogism, 
in  its  original  form,  consisted  of.  For  if  any  of  these 
be  kncA^n,  it  is  not  necessary  to  mention  it ;  for  the 
hearer  of  himself  makes  this  addition.  For  example, 
in  order  to  convey  the  information  that  Dorieus  was 
conqueror  in  a  contest  where  a  chaplet  is  the  prize ; 
it  suffices  to  say,  that  he  conquered  in  the  Olympic 
games  :  but  as  to  the  circumstance  that,  having  con- 
quered at  Olympia,  he  got  a  chaplet,  there  is  no  ne- 
cessity ^Dr  adding  it,  because  every  one  knows  it. 

But  as  the  necessary  premises  out  of  which  the  14.  En- 
syllogisms  <tf  rhetoric  are  formed  are  very  few,  (for  thymems 
the  majority  of  questions  about  which  decisions  and  duced  ei- 
consideration  are  exercised  admit  of  being  otherwise ;  ther  from 
because  men  deliberate  and  consider  on  the  subjects  ^^f^.**' 
of  human  conduct,  and  all  conduct  is  of  this  con- 
tingent nature,  nor  is  a  single  branch,  I  may  say,  of 
these  subjects  necessary,)  and  it  cannot  but  be  that 
you  should  deduce  contingent  conclusions  from  pre- 
mises whose  nature  is  such ; .  and  necessary  ones, 
&om  necessary;    (this  is  evident  to  us  from  the 
Analytics :)  I  say,  since  this  is  the  case,  it  is  plain 
that  the  premises  out  of  which  enthymems  are  de- 
duced, will  be  some  of  them  necessary,  Imt  the 
greatest  part  contingent:   for  enthymems  are  ad- 
duced from  probabilities  ^^  (elictira)  and  signs  ((n^fifca). 
And  thus  it  follows  of  necessity,  that,  of  these,  each 

^  In  despair  <^  finding  adequate  English  expressions  for  the 
words  <lic^«  and  arifitiov,  I  haTe  acquiesced  in  the  usual,  but 
erroneous  translation.  At  the  risk  of  incurring  the  charge  of 
prolixity,  the  following  are  given  as  the  most  popular  ways  of 
explaining  this  difficult  subject.  Dr.  Whately  considers  this 
**a  diyision  of  arguments  according  to  the  relation  of  the  sub- 
ject-matter of  the  premises  to  that  of  the  iconclusion."  The 
cIk^v  (or  ^coTi  of  Aristotle)  he  takes  to  be  an  a  priori  argu- 
ment, which  may  be  employed  io  account  for  the  fact  supposed 
granted.  The  <nj/ii««w  (or  Bri  of  Aristotle)  and  example, 
arguments  which  could  not  be  so  employed :  vid.  Rhetoric,  p. 
116.  Others,  again,  maintain  that  the  tntftuop  is  an  argument 
to  prove  past  matters,  the  eU^  to  prove  fiiture.  The  majority 
of  commentators,  however,  consider  the  •Ixdv  and  o^fiBtoy  as 
propositions  in  different  matter :  thus, — 
0 

18  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

respectivelj  is  identified  with  each  of  the  former. 
15.  Defi-   For  probability  is  what  usually  happens,  not  abso- 

•  ctK^,  in  contingent  matter,         vti/Asloy  in  necessary  iiatter. 
in  the  ratio  of  an  uniyer-  | 

sal  to  a  particular.  , 

As  a  particular        As  an  universal 
to  an  universal.         to  a  particular. 

(Illicit  process 
of   tiie    minor 
term,)   hence 
inconclusive. 

'dvayKaiov  or  TtK»    [firi  dvayKoiov  &»m- 

fjL^puiv,  (Conclu-     vvfjLov,  (Inconclu- 

"  sive,   and   only    i  sive,  tiie   middle 

assailable  in  the     term    not    being 

^premises.)  (^distributed.) 

Another  explanation,  founded  on  three  passages,  the  first  in 
the  Analytics ;  the  second  by  Cicero  (de  Inv.  i.  30) ;  the  third 
in  Quintilian,  (v.  c.  iz.  10,)  adopted  by  Majoragius,  is  as  fol- 
lows :'The  trrifitiov  is  some  tensible  factf  either  attested  by  sense 
or  reducible  thereto,  not  a  general  truth ;  hence  it  will  be  the 
minor  premiss  in  the  enthymem,  not  the  mqfor,  the  tnifinofntniff 
or  thing  signified  by  it,  being  the  conclusion,  and  as  the  latter 
is  known  solely  through  and  by  the  former,  there -is  always  a 
real  or  supposed  connexion  between  them. 

1st.  The  thing  tignified  may  be  contained  in  the  sign  which 
implies  not  only  that,  but  something  more.  The  latter  then, 
as  regards  the  rormer,  will  stand  in  the  ratio  of  a  whole  to  its 
part ;  as  individual  or  particular  nature  to  common  or  generic : 
what  is  definite  always  containing  or  implying  more  than  what 
is  indefinite  (on  which  principle  we  are  told  in  logic  that  the 
species  is  more  of  a  whole  than  a  genus).  Hence  it  is  defined, 
ctfv  Twv  KuBtKatrrov  ti  irp^c  t6  fca6oX.ov,  and  is  called  dvayieuiou 
or  TtK/i^piov,  Hence  Quintilian,  observing  the  conclusiveness 
of  this  argument,  denies  it  the  name  of  argument  at  all: 
"  Non  sunt  arghmenta,  quia  ubi  ilia  sunt,  quaestio  non  est  ;*' 
an  error  resembling  that  made  by  certain  modem  philosophers, 
who  deny  the  utility  of  logic  because  the  premises  of  a  syllo- 
gism virtually  imply  the  conclusion. 

2nd.  The  thing  tignijied  may  not  be  contained  or  implied  in 
the  tign.  The  latter  being  more  vague  and  indefinite  than  the 
former ;  bearing  to  the  thing  signified  the  ratio  of  a  part  to  the 
.  whole,  as  common  or  generic  nature  to  individual  or  particular, 
C0V  T«v  KadoXov  Ti  <irp6«  t^  Kork  juipov.  This  enthymem  ap- 
pears in  the  same  mood  as  the  first,  scilicet,  Barbara,  but  in 
the  second  figure,  hence  an  illicit  process  of  the  minor  term. 
Note,  that  as  the  atfjuetov  is  always  the  minor  and  the  thing 
signified  the  conclusion,  the  relation  here  spoken  of  as  aa^oKovi 
and  KaTdt  tiipo9f  must  be  understood  not  of  the  logical  relation 
in  the  syllogism  between  the  msgor  premiss  and  the  conclusion, 
but  of  the  relation  between  two  things,  one  specific,  the  other 
general.    Now  in  the  tUdt  enthymem,  on  the  contrary,  the 

CHAP.  II.]  RHETORIC.  19 

lutely  so,  however,  as  some  define  it,  but,  at  any  rate, 
that  which,  in  contingent  matter,  has  itself  so  to- 
wards that  with  respect  to  which  it  is  probable,  as 
an  umversal  to  a  particular  ^K     But  of  the  signs,  one  16.  Three 

relation  of  ciici}«  and  the  conclusion  (JKctvo  irpdv  8  lU^*)  is  the 
strict  logical  relation  of  unirersal  to  particular,  or  of  a  generic 
law  to  its  application  in  an  individual  instance.  The  cUo* 
therefore  is  the  tnqfar  premiss,  not  the  minor. 

We  see  that  the  universal  major  in  the  crtifitiov  enthymem 
cannot  be  the  vrifitioy  itself,  because  it  is  detached  from  any 
particular  relation,  and  involves  no  particular  deduction :  nor 
yet  is  this  major,  though  universal>  an  tUd^,  being  dir\St9  and 
totally  true,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  very  meaning  of 
the  word  "  probable."    ^ 

Again,  though  the  minor  premiss  of  the  *Ik69  enthymem 
contains  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  a  viifAtiov,  for  to  con- 
stitute a  sign  it  must  point  to  something  else  equally  necessary 
with  itself;  a  condition  not  fulfilled  by  the  «l#f^«  enthymem 
conclusion.  Still  there  is  so  much  affinity  between  the  minor 
premiss  of  the  tlxdv  enthymem,  and  the  dvwvvfiov  vniitiov,  that 
by  converting  the  major  premiss,  with  the  addition  of  the  word 
"  probably"  to  the  copula,  we  shall  change  the  vnii%lov .mio 
an  «iic^«  of  low  degree :  e.  g. 

All  who  have  a  fever  bre&the  Those  who  breathe  hard  pro" 
hard.  bahly  have  a  fever. 

This  man  breathes  hard.  This  man  breathes  hard. 

This  man  has  a  fever.  This  m^  probably  has  a  fever. 

And  this  affinity  perhaps  led  Quintilian  to  confound  Aristotle's 
&»t0tnffio»  ffijfitiov  with  his  clicd«.  (lib.  v.  c.  ix.  §  8.)  It  is  this 
kind  of  "  sign"  and  the  argument  deducible  from  it,  which 
constitutes  what,  in  criminal  cases,  is  called  circumstantial 
evidence. 

Aristotle  mentions  another  sprt  of  trtifitlov  (§18)  which 
comes  out  a  syllogism  in  the  third  figure,  with  an  universal 
conclusion,  and  hence  its  error  is  an  illicit  process  of  the  mi- 
nor term.  The  principle  on  which  this  syllogism  proceeds  is 
an  imperfect,  precarious  induction,  and  endeavours  to  deduce 
a  general  truth  from  a  particular  instance.  The  ratio,  there- 
fore, of  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified,  is  as  one  to  allj  This, 
it  will  be  observed,  is  a  new  signification  of  the  terms  xaOoXov 
and  itaB*  2«ca<rTov,  but  one  which  they  will  obviously  admit,  and 
borne  out  by  the  example  he  adduces. 

The  above  explanation  has  been  given  rather  at  length,  be- 
cause it  is  not  generally  so  well  known  as  the  others,  nor  .so 
easy  to  follow. 

"  The  usuid  definition  of  tlK6v  is  considered  by  Aristotle  as 

too  vague ;  he  limits  it,  therefore,  to  contingent  matter,  and 

would  have  it  stand  in  such  a  relation  to  the  conclusion  to  be 

drawn,  as  an  universal  to  a  particular.    For  instance,  the 

c  2 

20  AlOSTOTLE'B  [boot  i. 

different    has  the  Same  ratio  as  a  particular  to  aa  uuiTeraal ; 

•ort»o{     ^Q  other,  as  an  univer^  to  a  particular :  and  of 

arifiiia,     ^j^^^  ^j^^  ^^^  wWch  18  necessarilj  conclusiTe,  I  call 

reKfiiffHoy ;  but  the  other,  which  is  aot  necessary,  has 

no  name  assigned  to  it  in  reference  to  its  difference 

17.  T«#c-  [as  a  species].  Now  by  necessary  propositions,  I 
fi^piov.      mean  tlrose  out  of  which  a  sjUogism  is  adduced ;  and 

hence  this  kind  of  signs  is  called  reKfivpioy,  for  when 
thej  think  it  impossible  to  do  awaj  what  has  been 
stated,  people  then  esteem  that  they  adduce  a  reic/197- 
pioy ;  the  point  having  been  eyinced  and  cimcluded; 
for,  according  to  the  old   language,  rixfiap  is  the 

18.  <rt}-  same  as  '^  a  boundary. ^  Again,  there  is  one  sign 
fitia  dvw-  whose  ratio  is  as  that  of  a  particular  to  an  univers^ : 
'^^"'        thus,  were  one  to  assert,  for  instance,  that  "The 

wise  are  just ;  because  Socrates  was  wise  and  just ;" 
this  then  is  a  sign,  but  it  may  be  done  away,  even 
supposing  the  premiss  stated  to  be  true  ;  for  it  vio- 
lates the  rules  of  syllogism,  as  to  the  other  *^,  when, 
for  instance,  a  ^rson  ^eges  as  a  sign  that  a  man  is 
sick,  his  being  in  a  fever  ;  or  says  a  woman  has  had 
a  child,  because  she  has  milk ;  this  is  a  necessary 
sign  ;  which  very  one  of  the  signs  alone  amounts  to 
a  TiKfiiipiov  ;  since  it  alone,  if  the  premiss  be  true, 
cannot  be  done  away.  The  other  sign  is  in  the  ratio 
of  an  universal  to  a  particular  j  as  if,  for  instance, 

Corinthians  at  Athens  state  as  an  cUdv,  that  the  Corcyrseans 
were  addicted  to  piracy,  their  slimming  alliances  widi  other 
states,  because  those  who  would  become  pirates  study  secrecy ; 
but  this  broad  fact  is,  when  compared  with  the  single  case  of 
the  Corcyraeans,  as  an  universal  to  a  particular,  or  as  a  whole 
to  a  part,  pirates  being  one  class  only  of  the  many  who  study 
secrecy  as  a  veil  to  crime.  It  is  moreover  a  case  in  contingent 
matter;  for  those  who  study  secrecy,  may  or  may  not  be  ad- 
dicted to  piracy. 

>•  TtKfiiripkov,  the  other  species  of  ^fitiov:  e.  g.  **  tJt  mihi 
Platonis  illud,  seu  quis  dixit  alius,  perelegans  esse  videatur ; 
(^uem  cum  ex  alto  ignotas  ad  terras  tempestas  et  in  desertum 
littus  detulisset,  timentibus  caeteris  propter  ignorationem  lo- 
corum,  animadvertisse  dicunt  in  arend.  geometricas  formas 
quasdam  esse  descriptas;  quas  ut  vidisset,  exclamavisse  ut 
bono  essent  animo ;  videre  enim  se  hominum  vestigia ;  quae 
videlicet  ille  non  ex  agri  consitur^,  quam  cemebat,  sed  ex  doc- 
.  trinae  indiciis  interpretabatur."    Cic.  de  Rep.  c.  xvii.  p.  52. 

CHAP,  n.]  BHETORIC.  21 

one  were  to  sa^  it  was  a  siga  that  aman  has  a  fevev, 
because  he  lH!eatbes  thickly.    Bat  this,  eivea  granting 
the  premiss  be  true,  may  be  done  away :  for  it  is 
▼ery  poesible  that;  oae^  who  has.  not  a  fe^^er  should 
breathe  thickly.  Now  what  is  probability,  what  sign, 
and  what  7«^4pior,  and.  in  what  tihey  differ,  has     ' 
been  explained :  buit  iti  the  Analytics  [these  seyend 
gradations  of  proof]  as  wdil  as  the  leasoBS  why  some 
are  not  correctly  inferred^  and  others  are,  have  beat 
distioctLy  stated,  with  greater  cleamess,^^   As  to  exr  19.  Ex- 
ample, it  has  beea  sfiated.  that  it  is  aa  induction^  and  ^^^'.^ 
induction  on:  what  kind:  of  subjects  ;  and  its  ratio  is-Lduc^ 
neil^or-  that  of  a.  part  to  a  whole,  nor  of  a  whole  to  a  tion. 
part,  nor  of  a^  whole,  to  a  whole :  but  example  is  in  «» /itpo9 
the  ratio  of  a  part  to  a  part  ^\  of  a  similar  case  to  a  J^^*  "*" 
similar,  when,  both  conung  under  the  same  genus, 
the  one  case  happens  to  be  better  known  than  the 
other,     f^or  instance,  jou  assert,  that  Dionysius,  in 
asking  a  guard,  has  views,  of  setting  up  a  tyranny; 
because  Pisistratos  before  him,  when  designing  this^ 
began  to  ask  for  a.  body  guard,  and  when  he  got  it^ 
established  himself  as  tyrant ;  so  too.  did*  Theogenes^ 
at  Megaza.    And  all  other  persons  who  have  acted 
ifi  tills  way,  and  with,  whom  your  audience  are  ao^ 
quainted,  become  examples  against  Dionysius,  with 
respect  tO;  whom  they  cb  not  yet  know  whether  he 
be  aakinig  a  guard  withi  this  intention :  and  all  these 

»•  In  the  Analjrtics;  he  aays^  "the-clKde  is  trporcuriv  li/^o^, 
but  the  <rty/iMu>v.pn>£e8ae8  to  be  irp6*raai9  chrod^AicTucif,  wheUiefr 
necessaxy  or  probable.  Now  an  enthymem  (he  continues)  is 
an  imperfect  syllogism,  consisting  of  lUo'Ta  and  <rt}/4eia,  and 
the  latter  are  assumed  in  three  ways,  according  to  the  number 
of  the.figvnu  of  ireilDgism  (for  Arastotle  made;  only  tiktteeX  the 
first)  second,  and  third  of  logic.  In  all  these  the  <nifitiov  is  the 
nimv  (i.  e.  the  aigvunentumv  or.  minor  proposition),  but  the 
first  alone,  is  £Xim-<W  AnalytiCi.  Prion  lib.  ii.  o.  xxlz.  MtUk 
Biponi, 

*^  Not  as  a  pajct  to  a  whole,  £as  that  wo«ld.  bet  mtf^uou ;  nor 
as  a  'vdiole  U>  a  part,  for  that  would,  be  Teic^Hjpiov :  nor  aa  a 
whole  to  a. whole*,  for  that  would^  be  iiraycM^^.  (which,  when 
perfect,  ieasons.fiN)ia  a  whole  taken  indmdmUy  to  the  same 
taken.  «o22e0tfM>e^).  Example  therefore  is  in  the  ratio  of  a  part 
toapart 

22 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  I. 

20.  Two 
different 
sorte  of 
enthj- 
mem. 

21 

Ist.   TO- 

cases  come  under  the  same  general  premiss '^  that  be 
who  is  laying  schemes  to  set  up  a  tjrannj,  asks  a 
guard.  Now  then  the  points  have  been  stat^  out  of 
which  the  proofs  which  have  an  ur  of  demonstration 
are  adduced. 

The  difference  of  enthymems  is  considerable,  and 
has  remarkably  escaped  nearly  every  writer :  it  is, 
too,  a  difference  the  very  same  as  exists  between  syl- 
logisms in  logic :  for  some  enthymems  there  are  of 
applicability  equal  to  that  of  rhetoric  itself,  in  the 
same  way  that  in  logic  some  syllogisms  are ;  others, 
according  to  the  extent  of  other  arts  ^  and  faculties, 
existing,  some  already,  and  others  not  yet  comprised 
by  rules.  And  hence  those  who  employ  them  both 
escape  the  observation  of  their  hearers,  and  if  they 
handle  them  more  than  is  right,  pass  out  of  their  pro- 
per characters  as  mere  orators.  This  however  will 
become  clearer,  if  stated  more  in  detail    I  call  those 

*^"*'  forms  of  reasoning**  properly  logical  or  rhetorical,  in 

reference  to  which,  I  use  the  expression  places;  such 
are  those  which  apply  with  equal  advantage  to  ques- 
tions of  justice,  and  natural  philosophy,  and  of  the 
philosophy  of  social  life,  and  to  numerous  other  sub- 
jects which  differ  in  species.  The  place  for  instance, 
of  greater  and  less ;  for  there  will  not  be  a  whit  more 
advantage  in  deducing  a  syllogism  or  an  enthymem 
from  this  place,  on  a  question  of  justice  or  of  natural 
philosophy,  than  on  any  other  subject  whatsoever; 

2iicL  ciaf|.  and  yet  there  are  questions  specificsdly  distinct.  But 
I  call  peculiar,  all  those  reasonings  which  arise  out  of 
propositions  conversant  with  each  species  and  genus 
of  subjects;  for  instance,  there  are  propositions  on 
subjects  of  natural  philosophy*^  out  of  which  neither 

»»  By  the  tA  aW6  ylvot'ia  understood  a  common  circmn- 
stance  and  property  of  nature ;  by  the  t^  o^t^  Kad6\jov,  the 
general  proposition  in  reference  to  all  such  cases. 

>•  AiaKtKTiKobv  koI  priropiKoit^,  i.  e.  SO  exactly  correspond- 
ing, in  point  of  extent,  to  these  arts,  as  to  be  applicable  as 
often,  and  with  as  little  limitation,  as  they  are  themselves. 

>7  Tliis  appears  evident  enough ;  yet  the  whole  system  of 
judicial  astrology  and  the  planetary  influences  was  nothing 
more  than  an  attempt  of  the  kind. 

CHAP.  II.]  RHETOBIC.  23 

enthjmem  nor  sjllogism  could  be  constructed  respit- 
ing morals;  and  on  this  subject,  again,  there  are 
others  out  of  which  will  arise  no  reasoning  respecting 
natural  philosophy ;  this  is  also  the  case  equally  on 
every  subject.  Now  the  first-mentioned  reasonings 
(the  Toiroi)  will  render  a  man  informed  on  no  class  of 
subjects,  for  thej  are  about  no  distinct  subject-matter : 
as  to  the  other  (tSio),  the  orator,  in  proportion  as  he 
makes  the  bett;er  ^*  selection  of  propositions  peculiar, 
will  imperceptibly  produce  a  science  different  from 
mere  rhetoric  or  logic  *® ;  for,  if  he  light  on  first  prin- 
ciples, thenceforth,  it  will  no  longer  be  rhetoric  or 
logic  which  he  is  employing,  but  that  science  whose 
principles  he  embraces. 

The  greatest  number  of  enthymems  are  constructed  22. 
out  of  these  peculiar  propositions,  which  are  particu- 
lar and  limited;  and  from  the  universal  ones,  the 
less.     Just  then  as  I  did  in  the  Topics,  so  here  must 
I  make  a  distinction  of  the  peculiar  ^  propositions  and 
places  of  enthymems,  whence  we  are  to  deduce  them. 
Now  I  mean  by  «Kiy,  those  propositions  which  are 
peculiar  to  the  several  kinds  of  rhetoric ;  by  T&woiy 
those  which  are  common  alike  to  all.     Let  us  then  ddti  first 
treat  of  the  special  propositions  before  the  others,  discussed. 
Let  us,  however,  first  ascertain  the  kinds  of  rhetoric 
itself ;  in  order  that  having  distinguished  them  as  to 

>•  BeXr/ai, .  ie.  better,  qui  the  art  in  question  is  concerned ; 
—though  as  regarded  by  the  logician  or  rhetorician,  they  will  be 
in  &ct  tDorse,  inasmuch  as  they  tend  to  merge  these  nculties, 
whose  characteristic  is  unirersal  applicability,  in  that  particu- 
lar art  from  whence  the  irporaatu  happen  to  be  deduced. 

*•  We  may  here  mention  that  dtaX«irr*#c^  is  not  quite  what 
we  understand  by  logic,  but  seems  rather  to  have  been  the 
faculty  of  convertaiion,  which  the  ancients  cultiyated  as  a  sci- 
ence, and  of  which  logic  was  a  species.  "  Zeno,  the  Eleatic, 
divided  his  dialectics  into  three  parts :  on  consequences,  i/ow* 
TTivu  and  ipiVTiidi,"  Whately's  Logic.  Diog.  Laert.  in  Pla- 
tone,  52,  {  87. 

*^  He  here  designates,  by  the  name  tliri,  those  propositioDS 
of  limited  applicability  which  he  had  before  called  wia ;  those, 
in  fact,  which  he  considers  as  contradistinguished  from  the 
Tf>«ro»  or  general  arguments,  which  he  tells  us  are  applicable 
to  a  range  of  subjects  as  little  limited  as  the  subjects  of  rheto- 
ric itself. 

U  AErSTOTLB'S  [boos  i. 

their  number,  we  m&j  separstelj  ascertain  the  ele-> 
ments  of  perooasion  and  propoaitionB  pecoliiir  to 
each^^ 

GHAP.  IIL 

Se  shows  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  ^Rhetoric  ;  what  is. 
the  end  of  each  ;  and  on  what  subfect  we  must  provide 
ourselves  with  propositions, 

1.  An  era-  Thb  speeiesr  ef  rhetoric  are  three  in  number,  for  of 
tion  pre-  go  many  descriptions- are  the  hearers  of  orations ;  be- 
S3^*^  cause  an  oration  is  constituted  of  three  things,  of  the 
things :  speaker,  and  of  the  subject  about  which  he  speaks, 
Jpeaker-  "***  ^^  *^®  person  to  whom;  and  to  him  it  is  that 
2nd,  a  ^he  end  of  the  speech  ha»  its  reference  ;  I  mean  to 
subject :  the  hearer.  The  hearer  must  of  necessitj  be  either 
^1^*  an  unconcerned  hearer,  or  a  judge;    and  a  judge 

2.  Hear-  either  of  things  past  or  to  come;  one  then  acts  as 
g*^  judge  respecting  what  is  yet  to  happen,  as  the  mem- 
gorts.  ^^  ^  9  popular  assembly ;  the  other  respecting  what 

has  Already  taken  place,  as  the  president  of  a  court 
of  justice ;  the  other  respecting  the  abilities  of  the 

3.  Hence  orator,  as  the  unconcerned  hearer  ^  Thus,  then, 
^?r^  there  will  necessarily  result  three  kinds  of  (H^tions, 
rhetoric;  the  deliberative,  judicial,  and  demonstrative^.  The 
Delibera-  business  of  deliberation  is  partly  exhortation,  partly 
diSa/^  dissuasion  ;  for  invariably  those  who  in  their  indivi- 
Epiddc-  ^^^  capacities  simply  advise,  and  those  who  publicly 
tic.  harangue,  effect  one  of  these  objects.  The  business 
BusineBs.  ^  judicial  rhetoric  is  partly  accusation,  partly  de- 
fence ;  for  the  Htigants  must  of  cotorse  do  one  or  the 
other  of  these  things. .   Of  demonstrative  the  busi- 

4.  Time     ness  is  partly  praise,  partly  blame.     Moreover  the 

^  Of.  lib.  ii.  c.  22,  }  IS:  <rw*xcu>v  di  Xly«  ical  toirw  iiAv 
fi^/iaTos  t6>  aiyro  ;  and  Ub.  ii.  O.  26»  §'  1 :  th)  yitp  ahr^  \i'ym 
vToixMv  Kal  Toiroy. 

>  Both  heareis  are  interested;  but  iha  ^8«p<W  is  a  speeola*^ 
tive,  the  wptT^v  a  practical,  auditor. 

«  Vide  Quarterly  Review,  July,  1822,  No.  Ut.  vol.  27,  p.  391, 

OHAr.  ni.J  BHETORIC.  25 

time  proper  to  eaobr  of  these  respecdyely  is,  to  the 
d^berative  orator,  the  yWwre;  for  ki  exhorting  or 
disBoading,  he  advises  respecting  things  future  ^^  The 
time  proper  to  a  judicial  pleader  is  the  past ;  for  it^ 
is  ever  on  tiie  subject  of  actions  aireadt/'  done^  that 
tiie  one  partj  accuses,  and  the  other  defends^  To> 
the  demonetratsYe  ovatov  the  present  time  is  the  most, 
appropriate,  for  it  isin  reference  to  qualities  actuallj? 
poasessed  ^at  all  either  praise  or  blames  Orators^ 
howevery  do  verj  frequently  avail  themselves  of 
other  timee;  as  well  1^  awakening  a  recollection  of 
what  has  already  happened,  as  by^  anticipating  what 
ift  likdj  to  happen.  The  end  of  each  of  these  5.  and  end 
branches  is  di^reat,  and,  as  belonging  to;  three  sub-  ^^^^^ 
jectS)  is  itself  triple. 

The  object  of  the  deliberative  orator  is  the  expe** 
dient  and  inexpedient ;;  for  he  who  recommends,  ad- 
vises yott  to  adopt  the  better  measure ;  but  he  who* 
dissuades,,  divert?  you  from  the  worse;  the;  ot^er 
considerations  either  of  justice  and  iajustice^  of 
hoQonr  or  disgrace^  he  adjoins  by  the  way,  in  addi- 
tion to  these  two.  The  object  of  the  judicial  pleader 
is  JQsdee  and  injustice  y  but  he  also  embraces  by  the 
way  tiiose  other  considerations*  Theoltdect  of  those 
who  praise  and  blame  is  honour  and  disgrace.;  and 
these  also  refer  other  considerations  to  th^  two. 

But  we  mf^  take  as  a  sign  that  what  I  have  stated  6.  Proof 
is  the  particular  olgect  of  each,  the  feet  that  there  fii>^fect. 
ave  tines  whea  they  wiU  not  feel  inclined  even  to 
raise  a  question  abcmt  the  ot&er :  the  litigant,^  for 
example,  will  not  always  deny  that  the  feet  has  taken 
place,  w  that  it  has  hurt  the  other  party ;  but  he 

*  *'  Passion  may  be  an  mueh  excited  by  the  omtor's  reaaon-. 
ings  on  a  fiitaze  events  as  on  one  past;  and  indeed  the  future,, 
csteris  paribus,  produces  the  greater  effect  on  us,  as  that  to 
■which  we  are  approaching,  and  what  every  moment  gives  us 
tile  added  interest  in^  whieh  it  takes  from  the  past.  But  Ithen 
the  past  has  the  eounteibalaneiiig  privilege  of  being  aoscerptiblet 
of  infinitely  better  testimony  and  evidence^  from  memory*  pre- 
sent effects,  etc. ;  memory,  indeed,  the  great  eye  of  the  mind, 
unlike  that  of  the  body,  sees  all  we  have  left  behind^  and  no- 
thing before  ik"    CampbeUr  Phil,  ef  Bhet 

26  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

nerer,  under  an^  cireumstances,  wouM  admit  that  he 
has  been  guilty  of  injustice  toward  him ;  for  then 
would  there  be  no  need  of  a  judicial  decision.  In  the 
sanie  way  the  deliberatiye  orator  verjr  often  aban- 
dons the  other  considerations  ;  but  as  to  the  point 
that  he  is  advising  what  is  disadvantageous,  or  dis- 
suading from  what  is  useful,  this  will  he  never  admit ; 
but  it  frequently  happens  that  (on  a  question  of  in- 
vasion) thej  do  not  trouble  themselves  to  make  out 
that  the  subjugating  a  neighbouring  people  is  not  in- 
consistent with  justice.  Just  so  those  who  praise 
and  blame  do  not  consider  whether  the  person's  con- 
duct has  been  advantageous  or  disadvantageous  ;  nay, 
they,  in  many  instanees,  set  it  down  on  the  score  of 
praise,  that,  overlooking  his  own  interests,  he  wrought 
some  deed  of  honour :  thus  they  praise  Achilles,  be- 
cause he  came  to  aid  the  cause  of  his  comrade  Pa- 
troclus,  with  fuU  knowledge  that  himself  was  fated 
to  die ;  it  being  in  his  power,  [by  withholding  that 
aid,]  to  live.  To  him,  however,  a  death  such  as  this 
was  the  more  honourable  prize :  but  to  live  would 
have  been  advantageous. 
7.  The  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  plain  that  the  orator 

each  d^  must  first  be  in  possession  of  propositions  on  the  sub- 
must        JGCt  of  each  of  these  divisions,  separately;  for  the 
have  KOI'  TeKfirfpia,  the  probabilities  and  signs,  are  degrees  of 
^dt^tvT    P''^^  available  to  rhetoric  generaUy,     It  is  necessmry 
because  syllogism,  in  general,  is  made  up  of  proposi- 
tions, and  the  enthymem  is  a  syllogism  made  up  of 
the  propositions  which  have  been  mentioned. 

8.  And  as  it  cannot  be  that  what  is  impossible  should 
ever  heretofore  have  been  done  or  should  ever  be 
done  hereafter,  but  what  is  possible,  only :  as  again 
it  cannot  be  that  what  has  not  happened,  or  that 
what  is  never  about  to  happen,  ever  should,  the  one 
have  been  already  done,  the  other  be  about  to  be 
done  :  it  becomes  necessary  for  the  deliberative,  ju- 
dicial, and  demonstrative  orator  to  have  propositions 
on  the  subject  of  possibility  and  impossibility ;  and 
on  the  questions,  whether  a  fact  has  or  has  not  hap- 

9.  pened,  will  or  wiU  not  take  place.     And  further. 

CHAP.  III.]  RHETORIC.  27 

since  all,  as  well  in  praising  as  in  blaming,  as  well  in 
exhorting  as  in  dissuading,  as  well  in  accusing  as  in 
defending,  attempt  to  evince  not  only  the  points  I 
liave  mentioned,  but  likewise  to  prove  respecting  this 
good  or  bad,  this  honourable  or  dishonourable,  this 
just  or  unjust,  that  it  is,  moreover,  either  great  or 
small,  whether  speaking  of  the  things  independentlj, 
or  comparing  them  respectively  one  with  another : 
as  this  is  the  case,  it  is  plain  that  it  will  be  necessary 
to  have  propositions  respecting  the  degrees  of  great 
and  small,  of  greater  and  less,  as  vrell  general,  as  pe- 
culiar to  each  division :  what  good,  for  instance,  is 
greater  or  less,  what  deviation  from  justice,  or  what 
conformity  to  it ;  and  so  in  the  same  way  also  re- 
specting the  other  subjects.  The  points  then  have 
been  stated,  respecting  which  it  will  be  absolutely 
necessary  to  get  at  propositions.  We  must,  after  this, 
make  a  <£stinction  between  each  of  these  respectively  ; 
the  questions,  for  instance,  about  which  deliberation 
is  conversant ;  those,  too,  about  which!  demonstra- 
tive rhetoric  is  concerned ;  and,  thirdly,  those  about 
which  judicial. 

CHAP.  IV. 

The  QuesHonB  relative  to  which  that  Orator  shotdd  he  in 
possesdon  of  PrcpositionSt  who  is  about  to  adtfise  on 
points  of  the  highest  concernment 

FiBST,  then,  we  must  ascertain  what  kind  of  good  \'J^^ 
or  evil  it  is  respecting  which  the  deliberative  orator  tiveoiSop 
gives  his  advice ;  for  we  have  seen  that  it  is  not  about  adTises  on 
every  kind,  but  about  such  as  may  or  may  not  befall  ^^^jects, 
us*.     Such  however  as  either  has  or  will  have  an  2.notne- 
existence  of  necesniy;  such,  again,  as  it  is  impossible  ®**®*^» 
should  exist  or  be  produced ;  respecting  every  such 
description  [of  good  or  evil]  there  never  is  any  de- 

'  ThiB  limitation  was  established  in  cap.  ii.  §  12.    He  de- 
velopes  this  point  more  fully,  Nich.  £th.  iii.  cap.  3. 

28  ARISTOTLE'S  I^book  i» 

3.  nor  on  liberation:  BMther,  in  fact,  is  there  aboat  every  one 

aU  tibat  ^y^u  ^f  eaniingent  subjects ;  for  of  goods  which  ma^r 
are  con-  ,       ^^       «*'         '.^        ,m        ., 

tii^ent;    0^  ^^7  ^ot  accrue^,  some  exist  natwrmfi^  otha»  are 

produced  by  chance,  on  the  subject  of  which  it-is  not 

worth  while  to  deliberate ;  bat  evidently  [he  is  etm- 

fined  to  subjects]  about  which  men  resolve ;  of  which 

character  are  all  such  as  are  of  a  nature  t»  bet  refiNnied 

but  where  to  ourselves,  and  the  first  principle  of  whose  careation 

J^P'*"  is  in  our  own  power ;  for  in  ddiberation  we  carry 

power  of   on  our  views  thus  far^  viz.  till  we.  shall  aaeertain 

perform-    whether  the  achiev^nent  of  the  object  be  possible  to 

ance.  ^ «  »  « 

"***•        us  or  not  \ 

4.  Minute  Now,  to  enumerate  in  accurate  detail,  and  to  di- 
flioni^ere  ^^®  ^^  separate  species,  every  subject  about  which 
to  be  men  are  wont  to  interest  themselves ;  to  enter  idone* 
aroided;  over  into  minute  distincti<H3tftconf<Nnnable  to  the  stand* 
Se'^pro^  ard  of  trutii  to  the  very  utmost  tiiat  the  subject  ad- 
Tince  of  mits  it ;  these  inquiries  it  is  not  necessary,  on  the 
rhetoric,    present  occasion,  to  institute,  by  reason  that  th^  be* 

long  not  to  the  art  of  rhetoric,  but.  to  some  art  whose 
province  is,  in  a  more  peculiar  manner,  intellect,  and 
truth  ^;  and  because  many  speculations  more  than 
are  proper  to  this  art  have  already  been  assigned  to 
6.  which  it.  For  that  remark  is  true,  which  I  have  before 
uponLe  ™**^®»  *^**  rhetoric  is  made  up  of  the  science  of 

'  H&v  ivitxoiiivwv  KoX  ytyvtadai  Koi  fi^.  It  may  be  well  to 
remark  of  this  expression,  which  has  occurred  so  ouen  already, 
and  will  much  more  frequently  in  the  sequel,  that.it  i».  Aristo- 
tle's usual  appellatiYie  £6r  thing|»  oonMngant,  Uiings  which  may 
at  weU  happen  aa  not.    He  has  himself  defined  it  thus— X<y« 

Tos  d'  virdpxti»9  oudeif  iv^at,  iUSt  rolrr  a66»aTov.  AnaL  Pri.  lib* 
i.  c.  13.  I  call  that  a  contingent,  which  not  being  necessary, 
but  beihg  supposed  to  be,  there  will  folldw  nothing  imposBible 
itom  such  a  supposition. 

'  "  Inciditur  omuls,  jam  dsliberatio^  si  intetUgitnr  non  posse 
fieri,,  ant  si  necessitas  afifertur.'*  Cicero  de  Ocat*  IL  For  aa 
account  of  things,  dwarA  nfitv,  yid.  lib.  ii.  c.  19. 

*  Such  minute  research,  as  it  tends  rather  to  bewilder,  mnist 
•f  necessity  be  excluded  fcom  ihetoric,  which  is  always  sup- 

of  education. 

OHAP.  IV.]  RHETORIC.  ^ 

logic^,  and  of  that  branch  of  the  science  of  «odal  life  analytical 
•  which  recognises  the  subject  of  morals ;  and  it  partly  JS-^^  . 
resembles  logic,  partly  the  declamations  of  the  so-  enceg;*"' 
phists:  and  in  exact  proportion  as  one  shall  attempt  6.  and 
to  get  up  logic  or  rhetoric,  not  as  they  are  general  ^^^ 
faaiMeSy  but  as  distinct  sciences,  he  will  unwittingly  not  as  a 
do  away  their  nature  by  his  encroaching,  in  the  act  feculty 
of  80  tricking  them  out,  upon  sciences  of  certain  d^*  ^J^  ^ 
vnle  subject-matter,  and  not  of  words  alone.     Let  us,  Tiates 
however,  even  on  the  present  occasion,  discuss  such  ^™  ^^ 
points  as  it  4s  worth  while  to  enlarge  upon,  and  7^  * 
which  still  reserve  the  more  full  consideration  for  -,. 
the  science  of  social  life :  for  nearly  all  the  questions  gions  for 
on  which  men  deliberate,  and  on  which  the  delibera-  the  em- 
tive  orator  harangues,  those  at  least  of  the  highest  jJ^^^S^ 
concernment,  are  in  number  Jive^;  and  these  are  ratiyeora- 
questions  ofjfinance,  o£war  aiwi  peace,  and  again  re-  ^^-^ 
specting  the  safeguard  of  the  terriiory,  and  respect-  2,  Joxl- 
ing  imports  arid  exports,  and  also  respecting  legisla'  fioi.    3. 

So  that  it  will  be  fitting  that  the  orator,  who  is  5]  Zo^u  * 

nbout  to  give  his  advice  on  the  subject  of  the ^nanc6  8.  i.  iro- 

of  the  state,  be  acquainted  with  its  revenues,  both  ^o*-   Fi- 
^  nanoM. 

*  The  analytical  science  seems  to  have  been  the  analysis  ot 
ari^ments. 

*  All  society  supposes  Jaw  (vQfioi)  •  the  first  object  of  which 
is  .the  support  of  its  inhabitants  internally  {'rpo<^)  ;  and  the 
second  its  ierritory  externally  (<^wXaic^) ;  in  maintaining  which 
taar  (iroXe/xos)  must  some  time  or  other  be  unavoidable,  and  to 
cany  that  on,  fixed  revenues  (ir<Jpat)  are  requisite.  We  may 
trfosorve,  then,  a  regular  gradation  in  these  five  questions; 
&ough  in  his  examination  of  them  w/bistotle  |Mreceeds  analy- 
tically, and  takes  that  which  first  presents  itself  in  civilized 
society ;  namely,  the  ways  and  means.  Xenophon  also,  in  his 
•Memorabilia,  represents  Socrates  as  using  nearly  Ihe  same  fire 
•snbjects  and  arrangement,  when  dissuading  Glaucon,  a  yoimg 
Athenian,  from  a|temptmg  politics  too  earl^.  Perhiyps  Aris- 
totle may  have  borrowed  the  hint  from  him.  Cf.  Xenoph. 
Hem.  lib.  iii.  c.  6 :  and  a  translation  of  the  whole  passage  in 
the  posthumous  works  of  Dr.  Franklin,  vol.  v.  p.  77.  Lond. 

.  1819.  The  reader  will  find  an  instance  of  Tpo</>^  practised  by 
the  piratical,  states  of  Greece,  in  Thucydides,  lib.  i.  c.  5,  and 
of  w6poi  in  the  first  tax  levied  at  Rome,  when  the  militia  were 
turned  into  a  standing  axmy,  during  the  war  with  Veii.  Livy, 
lib.  iv. 

30  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

what  and  how  great  thej  may  be ;  in  order  that^  if 
anj  branch  is  overlooked,  it  may  be  added  to  the  • 
rest ;  and,  if  any  be  in  default,  it  may  be  augmented. 
Moreover  he  should  be  acquainted  with  the  whole 
expenditure  of  the  state,  that  if  any  expense  be  su- 
perfluous it  may  be  curtailed ;  if  any  too  high,  it  may 
be  reduced.  For  men  become  more  wealthy,  not 
only  by  adding  to  their  capital  stock,  but  by  detract- 
ing from  their  expenses  as  welL  These,  however,  are 
points  which  we  must  not  only  learn  from  our  own 
experience  as  individuals  ;  but,  with  a  view  to  de- 
liberation on  these  subjects,  one  ought  to  be  qualified 
by  a  research  into  the  discoveries  made  by  other 
people. 
9.  ii.  iro-  Respecting  questions  of  war  andpecuie,  the  orator 
Xe^os  Kal  must  uecds  be  acquainted  with  the  force  of  the  state, 
W^and  ^^^  great  it  actually  is  already,  and  how  great  it 
peace.  admits  of  becoming ;  of  what  description  also  it  is 
already,  and  what  additions  admit  of  bein'g  made  to 
it.  Moreover  he  should  know  both  what  wars  the 
state  has  been  engaged  in,  and  how  it  has  conducted 
them.  This  must  he  needs  know,  not  in  relation  to 
his  own  state  only,  but  as  regards  frontier  states 
also ;  particularly  in  the  case  of  those  with  whom 
^  there  is  a  likelihood  of  being  at  war,  in  order  that 
toward  the  more  powerful,  pacific  measures  may  be 
held,  and  that  in  regard  to  the  weaker,  it  may  rest 
with  his  own  state  to  make  war  or  not.  He  should 
also  be  acquainted  with  the  description  of  force  which 
belongs  to  each  state,  whether  it  resemble  or  difi^i^^ 
from  his  own ;  for  it  is  possible,  even  in  this  respect, 
to  secure  an  advantage  to  yourself,  or  to  have  one 
taken  by  the  enemy.  In  order  to  all  which  things, 
the  orator  must  necessarily  have  considered  with  at- 
tention the  wars,  not  of  his  own  state  only,  but  those 
also  of  others,  what  has  been  their  issue ;  for  it  is 
natural  that  from  similar  causes  similar  results  should 
accrue. 

f  See  this  point  touched  on  by  Pericles,  Thucyd.  i.  141 
where  he  declares  the  Peloponnesians  to  be  -roXtfiiitf,  fiii  irp^n 
Ofioiav  dvTtirapacrKiOtiVf  Aduvaroi, 

CH^r.  lY.]  RHETORIC.  31 

Moreover  as  regards  the  scffeguard  of  the  terri"  10.  iii.  </>u- 
toryy  it  should  not  escape  his  attention  how  that  is  ^^^* 
preserved ;  but  he  must  be  acquainted  as  well  with  goard  of 
the  numbers,  as  the  nature  of  the  garrisons,  and  with  the  ooun- 
the  positions  of  the  strong  holds :  this  it  is  impossi-  ^* 
ble  that  one  not  acquainted  with  the  country  should 
know.     But  known  it  must  be,  in  order  that  if  any 
garrison  be  weak,  it  may  be  reinforced ;  if  any  be 
unnecessary,  it  may  be  done  awdy,  and  the  force 
may  rather  maintain  positions  strictly  adapted  to 
defence. 

Again,  on  the  subject  of  pravisiany  the  orator  11.  !▼. 
should  know  how  great  a  consumption  is  sufficient  to  '^^' 
subsist  the  state,  and  of  what  kind  that  is  which  fdon,  i.  e. 
arises  at  homey  and  what  is  imported;   and  those  imooru 
nations  whose  exports  there  is  need  of,  and  those  to  ^^^' 
whose  markets  he  wants  to  import  his  home  produc- 
tions, in  order'  that  commercial  treaties  and  agree- 
ments may  be  entered  into  with  them.     [All  this 
should  the  orator  be  acquainted  with],  because  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  strictly  to  preserve  your  citi- 
zens from  any  ground  of  quarrel  in  two  of  their 
relations,  viz.  in- respect  to  those  physically  their  su- 
periors ^  and  those  who  may  be  serviceable  in  afore- 
mentioned points. 

Thus  much  then  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the 
deliberative  orator  should  be  able  to  consider,  in 
order  to  the  security  of  the  state ;  neither  is  an  at-  12.  t.  vo- 
tention  to  legislation  the  least  essential ;  for  in  its  ^Jj^tj^ 
legislative  enactments  stands  the  safety  of  the  state.  ^^ 
Aad  thus  it  becomes  requisite,  both  that  he  should 
know  how  many  forms  of  government  there  are,  and 
what  system  of  things  is  expediei^t  for  each ;  and 
what  things,  as  well  peculiar  to  the  government,  as 
opposite  to  it,  have  a  natural  tendency  to  destroy 
it*.     I  talk  of  a  government  being  destroyed  by 

*  He  giyes  hints,  §  9,  about  what  is  necessary,  oirw9  irp^ 
td»  To^  Kpitrow  •Iptivevtrrai. 

*  For  a  statement  of  the  things,  peculiar  to  democracy  and 
oligarchy,  which  hare  a  tendency  to  destroy  them,  see  ihe 
speeches  of  Megabyzus  and  Darius,  on  the  question  of  the  con- 

38  ARISTOTLE'S  1= 

things  peculiar  to  itse^;  becaa8e,inth  the  exception 
i£  the  most  excellent  form  of  goinemment,  every 
,      other,  by  being  relaxed  or  strained  too  macfa,  de- 
stroys itselfl     Thus  a  democracy,  not  onfy  when 
relaxed,  but  even  whoi  overstrained,  grows  weaker, 
and  thus  will  at   last  be  brought   an  oligarchy. 
Just  as  hookedness  or  flatness  of  the  nose,  not  only 
approach  the  mean  in  proportion  as  they  relax  from 
the  excess,  but  also,  when  they  become  excessiv^ 
hooked  or  flat,  dispose  the  nostrils  in  such  a  way  as 
no  longer  so  resemble  the  nasal  organ. 
18.      It  is  serviceable  moreover  with  -a  view  to  legida^ 
tiony  to  apprehend  not  only  what  constitutton  is  ex- 
pedient, by  deriving  your  view  &om  eircnmstanoes 
past,  but  to  become  acquainted  a3so  with  the  consti* 
tution  of  ot^er  states,  and  to  y^hat  kind  of  t^mstifta- 
The  ac-     tions  what  sort  of  measures  are  adapted.     Thus  it  is 
counts       plain,  that  accounts  of  travellers  are  of  use  with  a 
trsTellers  ^i^^  ta  legifidation ;  for  hence  we  are  «ble  to  ascer- 
of  foreign  tain  what  the  laws  of  otiier  nations  are ;  and  with  a 
aSo^u^^  view  to  debates  on  matters  of  state,  the  researches  erf 
ful.  those  who  vmte  on  human  conduct  are  useful :  aU 

these  points  however  form  part,  not  of  i^etoiic,  hot 
of  the  science  of  social  life. 

So  many  then  are  the  questions  of  hdghest  oofn- 
cem  touching  which  the  dediberatiTe  orator  must  be 
in  possession  of  propositions.  We  will,  however, 
again  <]tiscuss  the  elements  out  <rf  which  it  is  proper 
to  exhort  and  dissuade,  as  well  on  these  as  on  other 
questions. 

stitution  fittest  far  Persia,  after  the  assassination  of  Smerdia, 
the  Magian  usurper.  Herodot.  iii.  81, 82.  See  also  Eth.  Nich. 
viii.  10. 

CHAP,  v.]  RHETORIC.  33 

CHAP.  V. 

The  Objects  at  which  Orators  should  aim  in  exhorting  or 
disstiading. —  WTiat  Happiness  is  ;  and  whence  its  con- 
stituents are  deduced. 

Nearly  every  one  individually,  and  all  men  in  ge-  i.  Happi- 
neral,  have  some  object,  at  which  directing  every  aim,  ^^^  *^® 
they  both  choose  and  avoid ;  and  this,  to  speak  sum-  object, 
marily,  is  happiness^  and  its  constituents.     Let  us  2. 
then,  for  the  sake  of  getting  at  a  received  standard, 
ascertain  what  happiness,  generally  speaking,  is ;  and 
what  are  its  constituents ;  for  on  the  subject  of  it, 
and  what  conduces  to  it,  and  of  its  opposites,  exhorta- 
tion or  dissuasion  is  always  conversant ;  and  this,  be- 
cause we  needs  do  the  things  which  procure  it  or  any 
of  its  constituents,  or  which  render  it  greater  from 
having  been  less,  and  refrain  from  doing  the  things 
which  destroy  or  impede  it,  or  produce  its  opposites. 

Let  happiness  then  be  defined  to  be  good  fortune  3.  Foxir 
in  conjunction  with  virtue^,— or,  independency  of  life,  ^^^'c  > 
—or,  the  life  which  is  most  pleasant,  accompanied  by 
security, — or,  abundance  of  property  and  slaves,  with 
power  to  preserve  and  augment  it ;  for  mankind  al- 
low either  one  or  more  of  these  things  to  amount 
nearly  to  happiness.     If  then  happiness  be  such  as  I  4. 
have  described,  its  constituents  must  necessarily  be — 
1st,  noble  birth  ^,  many  and  excellent  friends,  wealth, 
a  good  and  numerous  offspring,  a  good  old  age  ;  and 
moreover  personal  excellencies;   as  health,  comeli- 
ness, strength,  stature,  ability  in  the  games ;  character ; 

*  The  end  of  deliberation  is  tA  <rvfi<t>£potfTa,  of  action 
tviaifiovia. 

'  The  first  of  these  is  the  opinion  of  the  Socratic  school ;  the 
second,  of  the  Stoics ;  the  third,  of  the  Epicureans ;  the  last, 
the  popular  one.  See  a  similar  description,  Hooker,  v.  §  76, 
p.  413. 

'  Of  these,  the  first  enumerated  as  far  as  "  character  "  in- 
clusive, may  be  considered  dvvdfitu :  the  two  next,  **  honour 
and  good  fortune,"  as  Tlfiia:  the  last,  namely,  "virtue  and* its 
constituents,"  as  iiratiferii,  according  to  the  mode  of  philo- 
sophic division  mentioned  in  the  Ethics,  lib.  i.  c.  12. 

Goods  are 
internal 
or  exter- 
nal. 

6.  Exter- 
nah- 

1st.  High 
birth, 
i.  Na- 
tional. 

ii.  Indi- 
Tidual. 

6.  Good 
offspring, 
i.  Public. 

ii.  Pri- 
vate. 

34  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

— 2nd,  honour,  good  fortune ; — 3rd,  virtue,  and  its 
constituents,  prudence,  courage,  justice,  temperance. 
Thus  furnished,  one  would  be  most  independent,  were 
both  external  and  internal  goods  his  own ;  for  besides 
these  there  are  no  others.  But  the  internal  goods 
are  mental  and  personal ;  the  external,  noble  birtb, 
friends,  wealth,  and  distinction.  We  deem,  moreover, 
that  power  and  good  fortune  ought  to  be  present,  for 
thus  would  life  be  most  independent.  Wherefore, 
let  us  ascertain  what  each  of  these  advantages  is. — 
Noble  birth  then  is,  in  the  case  of  a  nation  or  state, 
their  being  aborigines  ^  or  at  least  ancient  possessors, 
and  for  their  fu*st  leaders  to  have  been  illustrious,  and 
indeed  for  many  to  have  been  bom  from  among  them 
illustrious  on  the  score  of  things  which  men  emulate. 
Considered  in  reference  to  individuals,  noble  birth  is 
derivable  from  male  or  female  ancestry,  and  legiti- 
macy on  both  sides  ;  and,  just  as  in  the  case  of  a  state, 
to  have  had  the  first  of  their  line  well  known  on  the 
score  of  virtue,  wealth,  or  any  other  valued  quality; 
and  for  many  of  their  kindred  to  have  been  illustri- 
ous, as  well  men  as  women,  as  well  young  as  old  : — 
we  cannot  be  at  a  loss  for  ^e  constituents  of  a  good 
and  numerous  progeny.  As  referred  to  theeomipon- 
wealth  ;  a  good  offspring  will  be,  youth  who  are  nu- 
merous and  accomplished.  Accomplished  in  respect 
to  personal  excellence,  as  stature,  comeliness,  strength, 
ability  in  the  games :  and  as  to  that  of  the  mind, 
temperance  and  courage ;  these  all,  in  their  two  di- 
visions, are  excellencies  of  the  young.  In  reference 
to  individuals,  a  good  and  numerous  offspring  con- 
sists in  your  own  children  being  numerous,  and  they, 
as  well  male  as  female,  such  as  I  have  described. 
The  excellence  of  females  in  regard  to  person,  is 
beauty  and  stature  ;  in  regard  to  the  mind,  temper- 
ance and  fondness  for  employment,  without  meanness: 
— and  we  ought,  as  well  individually  as  collectively, 

*  J[t  was  the  boast  of  liie  Athenians  that  they  were  a^Tox^o- 
ire« ;  and  in  reference  to  this  Cicero  says  of  their  state,  "  Quae 
vetustate  ea  est,  ut  ipsa  ex  sese  suos  cives  genuisse  dicatur." 
Orat.  pro  L.  FUcoo. 

CHAP,  v.]  RHETORIC.  35 

in  respect  both  to  men  and  women,  to  see  that  each 
of  these  qualities  exists.  Since  all  states  among 
whom  the  regulations  regarding  women  are  bad  (as 
is  the  case  among  the  Lacedsemonians),  enjoy  scarcely 
the  half  of  happiness. 

The  constituents  of  wealth  are,  plenty  of  money,  7.  Wealth 
the  being  master  of  lands  and  seats,  with  the  posses-  ^^^  ^» 
sion  moreover  of  personal  property  of  live  stock  and 
slaves,  such  as  are  remarkable  for  number,  stature, 
and  comeliness ;  and  all  these  should  be  secure,  and 
respectable,  and  useful.     The  useful  are  of  that  de-  i.  <i<r<^a- 
scription  rather  which  are  profitable ;  the  respectable,  ^'^^^^ 
which  conduce  to  enjoyment.     But  by  profitable  I  elpia. 
mean  those  out  of  which  the  rent  arises ;  by  those  iii-  xp^ 
conducing  to  enjoyment,  all  out  of  which  arises  no-  *'''***• 
thing  (that's  worth  mentioning  at  least)  beyond  their 
mere  use.     The  definition  of  security  is  the  having 
possession  there,  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
enjoyment  of  the  property  is  one's  own.     The  essen- 
tisds  of  a  property  then  exist,  when  the  right  of 
alienating  is  in  one's  hands :  I  understand  by  aliena- 
tion either  gift  or  sale.     But,  in  a  Word,  the  being 
rich  stands  more  in  enjoyment  than  in  possession ; 
for  the  active  employment  and  the  use  of  such  means 
is  wealth. 

Goodness  of  character  is  the  apprehension  of  man-  8.  Good- 
kind,  that  you  are  a  worthy  person,  or  in  possession  ^^^^ 
of  something  of  such  a  kind  that  all  men  ,aim  at  it, 
or  at  least  the  generality,  or  the  good,  or  the  well- 
judging.     Honour  is  an  evidence  of  your  having  a  9.  Hon- 
eharacter  for  beneficence ;  and  those  are  honoured  **^* 
with  justice,  and  in  an  eminent  degree^,  whose  bene- 
ficence has  already  been  exercised :  not  but  that  he, 
too,  is  honoured  who  simply  has  the  power  to  benefit. 
Beneficence  relates  either  to  the  safety,  and  the  - 
causes,  whatever  they  are,  of  the  existence  of  its 
object,  or  to  his  wealth,  or  to  any  other  goods  whose 
acquisition  is  not  easy,  whether  it  be  so  generally, 
or  at  that  place  or  time.  For  many  meet  with  honour 

'  Aristotle's  ol  cvepycrtiKOTcc  may  be  found  beautifully 
enumerated  in  the  book  of  Ecclesiasticus,  chap.  44. 
D  2 

36        *  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

in  consequence  of  things  apparently  trifling ;  but  then 
it  is  the  manner  or  the  time  [of  conferring  the  benefit] 
which  is  the  reason.  The  constituent  parts  of  honour 
are  sacrifices, — ^monumental  inscriptions,  in  metre  or 
prose, — ^rewards, — consecrated  pieces  of  ground  ^ — 
precedence, — ^public  burial, — ^statues, — ^pensions  from 
the  stato;  those  received  among  barbarians  are — 
prostration, — giving  place  ^.  The  presents  also  usual 
among  each  people  are,  with  them,  respectively  marks 
of  honour ;  for  a  present  is  at  once  the  gift  of  pro- 
perty, and  a  mark  of  honour.  Wherefore  it  is  that 
the  avaricious  are  equally  desirous  of  these,  as  the 
ambitious ;  because  they  convey  to  both  that  which 
they  desire,  since  at  once  it  is  a  property,  the  object 
which  the  avaricious  desire,  and  includes  honour,  the 
object  of  the  ambitious. 
10.  Inter-  The  excellencies  of  the  body  are  health  ;  and  that 
^  in  such  a  degree  as  for  us  to  be  exempt  from  sick- 

Health,  ness,  while  we  have  the  free  exercise  of  the  body. 
For  many  are  in  a  state  of  health,  indeed,  whom, 
like  Herodicus*,  no  one  would  feel  inclined  to  con- 
gratulate on  the  score  of  health,  by  reason  of  their 
depriving  themselves  of  most,  if  not  all,  the  enjoy- 
ments proper  to  man. 
11.  Comeliness  is  different  according  to  the  several 
Beauty,  gg^g  j^^^  ^j^^  comeliness  of  a  youth,  is  the  having 
a  body  useful  in  enduring  toils,  whether  those  of  the 
course,  or  of  personal  exertion,  himself  being  plea- 
sant withal  to  look  upon  with  a  view  to  delight.  On 
which  account  those  who  practise  the  pentathlum  are 
most  comely,  inasmuch  as  they  are  formed  for  violent 

*  Instanced  in  the  compliment  paid  to  the  memory  of 
Brasidas  at  AmphipoUs,  Thucyd.  v.  Hooker,  v.  §  34,  p.  133 : 
and  §  47,  p.  179. 

y  Here  perhaps  we  may  mention  a  remarkable  compliment 
paid  to  fallen  yalour  by  the  civil  law ;  a  father  of  three  sons 
was  entitled  to  conside^ble  immunities,  which  continued  to 
him  even  after  their  death,  if  they  had  fallen  in  battle :  **  Hi 
enim  qui  pro  Republic!  ceciderunt  in  perpetuimi  per  gloriam 
vivere  intelliguntur."  Instit.  lib.  ii.  tit.  xxv.  6  1.  Hooker, 
u.  p.  293. 

•  Herodicus  was  a  physician,  B.  C.  440. 

CHAP,  v.]  BHETORIC.  37 

exertion,  and  swiftness  as  well.     But  the  comeliness 
of  one  who  has  attained  life's  prime,  is  a  person 
adapted  to  the  fatigues  of  war,  with  an  aspect  to  be 
looked  upon  with  pleasure  tempered  by  awe.     That 
of  the  old  consists  in  the  body  being  capable  of  the 
-fatigues  which  it  needs  must  undergo,  and  exempt 
withal  from  pain,  by  reason  that  it  has  none  of  the 
afflictions  by  which  an  old  age  is  disfigured.  Strength  X2. 
is  the  capability  of  moving  another  at  will :  you  move  Strength 
another,  of  course,  either  by  dragging,  or  shoving, 
or  lifting,  or  crushing  him  ;  so  that  the  man  who  is 
endowed  with  strength,  is  requisitely  so  for  some, 
if  not  for  all  these  purposes.     Excellence  of  stature,  13.  sta- 
is  the  exceeding  the  generality  in  height,  substance,  ture. 
and  breadth,  in  such  a  ratio  as  not,  by  reason  of  that 
excess,  to  render  one's  motions  more  tardy.     Gym-  14.  Gym- 
nastic excellence  of  person  is  made  up  of  stature,  ^^^^  ex- 
strength,  and  speed;   for  the  swift  is  also  endued  ^ 
with  strength  :  for  he  who  is  able  to  throw  out  his 
legs  in  a  particular  way,  and  move  them  rapidly, 
and  in  a  forward  direction,  is  fit  for  running ;  but 
he  who  can  crush  and  grapple  with  an  adversary, 
is  fit  for  wrestling  ;  while  Ke  who  can  send  him  for- 
ward by  a  blow,  is  the  man  for  boxing :  but  if  any 
'  be  endued  with  the  two  latter  qualifications,  he  is  fit 
for  a  pancratiast ;  while  he  who  has  all  three  may 
contend  in  the  pentathlum. 

A  good  old  age  is  an  old  age  slow  in  approach,  un-  15.  Good 
attended  by  pain  ;  for  neither  is  it  a  good  old  age  if  ®^^  ^®' 
one  grows  rapidly  old  ;  nor  if  he  does  so  slowly,  in- 
deed, but  painfully :  this  blessing,  however,  is  of  the 
number  both  of  the  excellencies  of  the  body  and  of 
fortune.  For  one  who  is  neither  unmolested  by  sick- 
ness, nor  endued  with  strength,  will  not  be  exempt 
from  sufferings ;  and  his  days  will  be  but  few,  and 
those  not  void  of  pain :  nor  without  good  fortune 
will  he  hold  out  at  all.  Indeed,  independently  both 
of  strength  and  health  there  is  means  of  long  life  ; 
for  many,  without  the  excellencies  of  the  body,  are 
long-lived.  But  accuracy  of  statement  on  these  sub- 
jects makes  nothing  to  our  present  purpose. 

38  ARISTOTLE'S  [boos  i. 

16.  In  what  number  and  excellence  x>f  friencU  consists 
Frienda.  |g  not  doubtful,  it  having  been  distinctly  stated,  re- 
specting a  friend,  that  he  is  a  friend  who  exerts 
himself  to  do  for  another  whatever  he  esteems  good 
for  him,  solely  for  the  other's  sake.  He  to  whom 
many  are  so  affected,  has  numerous  friends ;  he  to 
whom  worthy  men,  has  excellent  friends. 

17.  Good       Grood  fortune  is  the  accession,  and  actual  pos- 
fortune,     gession,  either  of  all,  of  most,  or  the  greatest  of  those 

goods  of  which  chance  4s  the  cause.  Now  chance  is 
the  cause  of  some  things  about  which  there  are  arts 
conversant^;  of  many  things,  too,  unrecognised  by 
art ;  for  instance,  of  whatever  things  nature  is  a 
cause ;  for  it  is  possible  that  they  should  happen  con- 
'  trarily  to  nature  :  for  art  is  a  cause  of  health  ;  na- 
ture, of  comeliness  and  stature.  In  a  word,  those 
goods  proceed  from  chance,  about  which  envy  is  felt  ^®. 
Chance  is  also  a  cause  of  those  goods  which  baffle  all 
calculation  ;  when,  for  instance,  one  is  handsome,  the 
rest  of  whose  brothers  are  ugly  ;  or  when  every  one 
else  overlooked  a  treasure,  and  he  found  it ;  or  if  a 
weapon  hit  one's  neighbour  and  not  one's  self;  or  if 
he  idone,  who  used  always  to  frequent  a  place,  did 
not  come  there,  while  they  who  came  then  ovly  were 
destroyed ;  for  all  such  things  appear  to  be  pieces  of 
good  luck. 

18.  Vir-        As  to  moral  excellence,  since  that  topic  is  most 
***®'  intimately  connected  ¥dth  praise  ",  we  must  lay  down 

distinctions  respecting  it  when  we  treat  of  the  sub- 
ject of  praise.  It  is  then  plain  at  what  objects  we 
ought  to  aim  in  exhorting,  as  likely  to  take  place,  or 

'  On  the  affinity  of  art  and  chance,  see  Eth.  Nich.  ti.  4..— 
T«x»^  •rwxn*'  e<rr«pf «,  kox  tmx»I  tiyiynif,     Agatho. 

The  affinity  appears  to  consist  in  this,  that  arts  very  often 
owe  their  origin  to  chance ;  as  the  capital  of  the  Corinthian 
pillar,  for  instance,  from  a  basket  of  acanthus  flowers ;  and 
painting  from  tracing  a  shadow  on  the  wall.  Compare  also 
the  FoeticS)  ch.  ri.  where  he  deduces  poetry  from  the 
ai^cwrxtdidcrfAorra  or  extemporaneous  effusions  of  it«  rude 
Notaries. 

w  cf.  ch.  X.  §  12. 

"  The  subject  of  Epideictic  Rhetoric. 

CBAP.  yu]  RHETORIC.  39 

already  in  existence ;  and  what  in  dissuading,  for 
thej  are  the  contraries  of  these. 

CHAP;  VL 

Of  the  Good  and  Expedient  treated  generally. 

Since  the  expedient  is  the  object  proposed  to  the  de-  1.  The  de- 
liberative orator,  and  as  all  form  their  conclusions,  Ji'jeratr^e 
not  about  the  end  itself,  but  about  the  means  con-  yises  on  ' 
ducive  to  that  end  ;  as  moreover  these  are  all  things  "  the 
which  are  expedient  in  reference  to  human  conduct  ^®^',.' 
(now  every  thing  expedient  is  a  good),  we  shall  have  he  must 
to  ascertain  certain  elementary  propositions,  on  the  kno^  the 
subjects  of  the  good  and  the  expedient  in  general.      Jo^^' 

Let  good,  then,  be  defined  to  be,  1.  Whatever  is  2. 
an  object  of  choice  independently,  for  its  own  sake ; 
2.  and  for  the  sake  of  which  we  choose  something 
else,  3.  What  every  thing  aims  at^  or  every  thing 
which  has  perception,  or  which  has  intelligence ;  or 
every  thing  would  aim  at,  were  it  possessed  of  intel- 
ligence. 4.  Whatever  intelligence  would  award  to 
each.  5.  Whatever  the  intelligence  conversant  with 
every  instance*  awards  to  each,  that  to  each  indi- 
vidual is  his  good.  6.  That  which  being  present,  one 
is  well  disposed  and  independent     7.  Lidependency. 

8.  Whatever  produces  or  preserves  such  advantages  ^; 

9.  and  that  on  which  they  are  consequent.   10.  What- 
ever, too,  has  a  tendency  to  prevent  or  destroy  their 
opposites.  Now,  things  are  consequent  in  two  ways  ;  3.  Conse- 
for  either  lliey  may  be  consequent  simultaneously  or  q^ences 
subsequendy. — Knowledge,  for  instance,  is  a  conse-  foid.^ 
quent  on  learning  subsequently;  Hfe  is  so  on  health 
simultaneously.     Again,  things   are  productive  in  Things 

*  This  principle,  which  he  insists  on  even  in  his  moral  trea- 
tises, is  peculiarly  adapted  for  a  test  in  rhetoric ;  where,  if  the 
subject  be  only  reconciled  to  this  standard  of  previous  opinion, 
the  end,  persuasion,  is  forthwith  answered. 

•  Hooker,  v.  §  65,  p.  306. 

40 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  I. 

are  pro- 
ductive 
in  three 
ways. 

4.  Indis- 
putable 
goods. 

three  wajs^ ;  first,  in  the  way  that  the  being  healthy 
is  productive  of  health,  or  as  food  is  so  of  health, 
or  as  exercise  is,  because  usually  it  does  produce 
health. 

These  things  being  laid  down,  it  must  be  of 
course  that  acquisitions  of  good,  and  the  exemptions 
from  evil,  are  good ;  for  on  the  one  is  consequent 
the  non-possession  of  evil  simultaneously ;  on  the 
other,  the  possession  of  good  subsequently. 
^.  And  the  acquisition  of  a  greater  instead  of  a  less 
good ;  of  a  less  evil  instead  of  a  greater ;  for  this  be- 
comes an  acquisition  of  the  one  and  an  exemption 
from  the  other,  in  the  ratio  of  the  excess  of  the 

6.  greater  above  the  less.  The  virtues  also  must  of 
course  be  a  good,  for  in  reference  to  them  are  their 
possessors  well-disposed* ;  they  are  also  productive  of 
goods,  and  bear  on  moral  conduct :  respecting  each, 
however,  severally  what,  and  of  what  kind  it  is, 

7.  must  be  distinctly  treated.  It  must  be  also  that 
pleasure  is  a  good,  for  all  living  things  naturally  de- 
sire it.  Thus,  too,  things  pleasant  and  honourable 
must  needs  be  good ;  for  the  first  are  productive  of 
pleasure ;  while,  of  things  honourable,  some  are 
pleasant,  and  the  rest  are  by  themselves  objects  of 

8.  choice  on  their  own  account.  So  that  to  speak  of 
them  severally,  it  must  be  that  the  following  things 
are  good. — Happiness;  for  it  is  both  an  object  of 
choice  by  itself,  and  independent,  and  for  the  sake  of  it 

9.  we  choose  many  things.  Justice,  courage,  temperance, 

•  First,  continuous ;  second,  discrete ;  third,  contingent 

*  We  may  observe  of  Aristotle's  seyeral  enumerations  of 
«Wti,  that  he  usually  refers  a  few  instances  of  earliest  occur- 
Tence  to  the  respective  definitions  or  axioms  at  the  outset  of 
the  subject,  by  virtue  of  which  they  belong  to  the  class  to 
which  h6  assigns  them.  Thus,  in  the  enumeration  of  good 
here  instituted,  he  refers  to  his  general  canons  of  good  which 
have  just  been  admitted ;  e.  g.  virtue  may  be  classed  among 
goods,  by  virtue  of  def.  5  and  7.  It  would  be  useful  to  pur- 
sue the  comparison,  if  not  through  all  the  instances  quoted,  at 
least  through  the  greater  part  of  them ;  since  it  will  at  once 
serve  the  purpose  of  impressing  on  the  memory  his  leading  ex- 
amples, and  of  helping  us  to  a  fuller  acquaintance  with  his 
theory. 

CHAP.  VI.]  RHETORIC.  41 

magnanimitj,  magnificence,  and  other  habits  of  that  10, 
sort;  for  they  are  excellencies  of  the  soul; — and  health 
and  comeliness,  and  things  of  that  sort,  for  thej  are 
excellencies  of  the  body,  and  productive  of  many 
things  ;  health,  for  instance,  both  of  pleasure  and  of 
life ;  and  it  seems,  on  this  account,  to  be  the  very 
best  possession,  because  it  is  the  cause  of  two  things, 
which  the  generality  of  men  value  most,  viz.  of  plea- 
sure and  life : — ^Wealth ;  because  it  is  an  excellence  of  y. 
possession,  and  productive  of  many  things.  A  friend  12. 
and  friendship;  for  a  friend  is  an  object  of  choice 
independently,  and  productive  of  many  advantages. 
Honour,  character ;  for  they  are  pleasant,  and  pro-  13. 
ductive  of  much ;  and  there  is  usually  consequent  on 
them  the  actual  possession  of  the  qualities,  on  ac- 
count of  which  the  subject  is  honoured.    Ability,  in  14. 
speaking  and  acting ;  for  all  such  powers  are  produc- 
tive of  good.   Again,  high  genius,  memory,  readiness  15. 
in  learning,   quickness   of   thought,    and    all   such 
qualities  ;  for  these  faculties  are  productive  of  good ; 
and  in  the  same  way  all  the  arts  and  sciences.     And  16. 
life ;  for  were  no  other  good  consequent  on  it,  of  itself 
it  is  an  object  of  choice.     And  that  which  is  ju^t,  17. 
for  it  is  a  kind  of  general  advantage.     Such,  then, 
are  the  things  which  are  good,  as  it  were  confessedly. 

But  in  the  case  of  questionable  goods,  your  reason-  I8.  Di»- 
ings  will  be  deduced  from  these  formulae, — ^that  of  J^^® 
which  the  contrary  is  an  evil,  is  itself  a  good  ;  as  is  fg^* 
that  of  which  the  contrary  is  expedient  to  an  enemy  : 
for  example,  if  your  being  cowards   be  above  all 
things  expedient  to  your  enemies,  it  is  plain,  that  to 
the  citizens  your  cdurage  will  be  above  all  things 
beneficial.     And,  in  a  word,  whatever  be  the  things  20. 
which  the  enemy  desires  and  in  which  they  rejoice, 
the  contrary  of  those  things  appear  beneficial ;  and 
hence  was  it  well  said  ; — 

"  Priam  surely  would  exult,"  etc.    II.  a,  1.  255  *« 

•  See  Otho's  speech  to  the 'soldiers  on  Vitellius's  usurpation 
Mter  the  murder  of  Galba :— Si  Vitellio  et  satellitibus  ejus 
fUgendi  fkcultas  detur,  quern  nobis  animum,  quas  mentes 
imprecentur ;  quid  aliud  quam  seditionem  et  discordiam  opta- 
^«nt?    Tacit.  Hist.  i.  84. 

42  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

And  yet  this  case  does  not  always  hold,  thoagh  it 
does  generally  ;  for  there  is  no  reason  why  the  self- 
same things  should  not,  at  times,  be  expedient  to  two 
hostile  parties ;  from  which  comes  the  saying  that 
evils  bring  men  together^,  when  the  same  thing  hap- 

21.  pens  to  l^  injurious  to  both.  That  too  is  a  good, 
which  is  not  in  excess^ ;  but  whatever  exceeds  what 

22.  it  ought,  is  an  eviL  And  that  on  account  of  which 
much  toil  or  expense  has  been  bestowed,  for  already 
will  it  have  appeared  to  be  a  good ;  and  we  already 
conceive  of  every  such  thing  as  of  an  end,  aijid  as  an 
end  of  many  efforts  ;  but  the  end  is  a  good ;  and  on 
this  principle  rests  the  force  of  Hhut  appeal, 

"  It  were  in   accordance  forsooth  with  Priam's  heartiest 
prayer;"  11.  ft  1.176. 

and  of  this, 

"  Base  indeed  is  it  to  remain  so  long  ;**  11.  /},  1.  298. 
and  that  of  the  proverb  of 

"  Brealdng  the  pitcher  at  the  yery  door." 

Vide  Erasmi  Adagia  II.  i.  75. 

23.  That  too  of  which  many  are  desirous,  and  which 
appears  to  be  disputed  for  ;  because  that  of  which  all 
are  desirous,  was  laid  down  to  be  a  good ;  the  gener- 
ality, however,  have  the  appearance  of  being  all 

24.  And  that  which  is  recommended ;  because  no  one  re- 
commends that  which  is  not  good^.  And  that  which 
your  enemies  and  the  bad  recommend;  for  all,  as  it 
were,  already  acknowledge  it  when  even  they  do 
who  are  ill  affected ;  for  solely  on  account  of  its  being 
plainly  such  will  these  acknowledge  it^:  and  in  ex- 

'  So  Shakspeare  quotes  the  provex^,  '*  Misery  makes  a  man 
acquainted  with  strange  bedfellows." 
^  A  good  which  requires  no  qualification ;  e.  g.  moral  truths. 
'  To  desire  evil  as  evil,  and  feel  pleasure  in  it  as  such,  is 
perfectly  unnatural.    Hence  St.  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  ch.  i.  ver.  32,  sums  up  the  iniquity  of  the  Gentile 
world  in  this  one  word ;  that  not  only  did  they  in  person  com- 
mit the  enormities,  but  '*  had  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them." 
'  Virgil  therefore  could  not  have  praised  Mneaa  more  than 
when  he  makes  Diomede  say, — 

—  Stetunus  tela  aspera  contra, 
Contulimusque  manus :  experto  credite,  quantus 
In  clypeum  assurgat,  quo  turbine  torqueat  hastam.   Mr, 

CHAP.  VI.}  RHETORIC.  43 

actly  the  same  way  they  are  held  to  be  but  paltry 
characters  [and  with  these  even  their  friends  find 
fault,  and  idl  good  men]  with  whom  their  enemy 
finds  no  fault :  on  which  very  principle  the  Corin- 
thians conceived  themselves  to  have  been  scandalized 
by  Simonides  introducing  in  his  verses,      * 

••  Troy  finds  no  fault  with  the  Corinthians*®."* 

And  that  is  a  good  which  any  who  are  practically  wise,  25. 
whether  among  men  or  women,  have  preferred ;  in- 
stanced in  Minerva's  choice  of  Ulysses  ;  Theseus*  of 
Helen  ;  and  the  Groddesses*  of  Paris  ^^;  and  Homer's 
of  Achilles.  In  a  word,  all  objects  of  determined  26. 
choice  are  good.  And  men  detefminately  choose  to 
do  both  the  things  which  have  been  mentioned,  and 
those  which  are  evil  to  foes  and  good  to  friends  ;  and 
those  which  are  possible — these  are  varied  in  two 
ways  ;  such  as  may  be  done,  and  such  as  may  easily  27. 
be  done^^.  .  Easy  things  are  such  as  are  done  either 
without  pain,  or  in  a  short  time  ;  for  diflSiculty  is  de- 
fined in  reference  either  to  the  pain,  or  length  of 
time.  And  men  choose  what  is  done  as  they  wish  ; 
and  they  wish  what  either  is  in  no  respect  an  evil,  or 
in  a  less  degree  than  it  is  good.  This  will  occur  in  the 
case  of  unjust  action,  where  the  punishment  either 
escapes  notice  or  is  trifling  :  and  such  actions  as  are  2^. 
peculiar  ;  as  no  one  has  done  ;  or  which  are  extra- 
ordinary, for  thus  is  their  value  greater :  and  those 
things  which  have  an  adaptation  to  ourselves ;  of 
which  kind  are  things  belonging  to  us  in  respect  of 
family,  and  power.  Things  too  which  men  consider 
are  wanting  to  the  completion  of  something  else ;  for 

**  Glaucus  the  Lycian,  who  was  of  Corinthian  descent,  as- 
sisted the  Trojans,  consequently  Simonides  meant  to  praise 
them ;  hut  from  the  known  bias  of  this  writer  to  "  censure  in 
^Iwgmse,"  (of  which  another  instance  may  be  foimd,  lib.  iii. 
ch.  2,)  the  Corinthians  might  very  fairly  suspect  his  purpose. 

"  Vid.  ii.  c.  23,  §  12,  sub  fin.  trtpl  'AXtfai^pow,  "  Sv  al  9ial 
"rpoUpufoif." 

"  Vid.  c.  xii.  §  1 ,  tlTt  av  XaOsIv  irpa^avrcv,  h,  fih  Xo6ovT«e, 
M^l  3ovvat  dlKtiv,  K,  T.  X. 

44  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

be  they  ever  so  trifling  ^^  they  in  no  less  degree  de- 
29.  termine  on  patting  them  in  execution  :  and  things 
easily  brought  about ;  for  they  are  possible,  inas- 
much as  they  are  easy :  but  things  easily  brought 
about,  are  such  as  every  one,  or  many,  or  our  equals, 
or  our  inferiors,  have  succeeded  in.  Whatever  gra- 
tifies one's  friends,  or  will  be  disliked  by  one's  foes. 
Every  thing,  too,  which  they  whom  we  admire  de- 
liberately set  about.  Things  toward  which  men  are 
well  fitted  by  nature,  and  about  which  they  have  ex- 
perience ;  for  they  suppose  they  shall  more  easily 
succeed  in  them.  Things  too  which  no  bad  man 
does ;  for  they  are  the  rather  commendable.  What 
people  happen  to  be  desirous  of ;  for  not  only  does  it 
appear  pleasant,  but  it  is  viewed  in  the  more  fayour- 
80.  able  light ^*.  And  men  more,  particularly  choose  on 
deliberation  the  things  in  reference  to  vhich  they 
severally  are  of  a  certain  disposition ;  the  ambitious, 
for  instance,  if  the  object  be  victory  ;  the  avaricious, 
if  it  be  money  ;  and  other  characters  in  the  same  way. 
On  questions  then  of  good  and  of  expediency,  we 
must  deduce  our  means  of  persuading  from  hence. 

CHAP.  VII. 

On  the  mbject  of  the  greater  Ooody  and  the  more  expedient 
Measures, 

1.  The  But  as  the  advocates  of  opposite  measures,  while 
loodmust  *^®y^  ^^  many  instances  allow  both  to  be  expedient, 
bedis-  dispute  nevertheless  on  the  question  which  is  the 
cussed.      more  so;  we  shall  have  next  to  speak  of  greater  good, 

2.  Defini-  and  what  is  in  a  higher  degree  expedient.  Let  ex- 
tionofthe  cess,  then,  be  defined  to  be,  as  much  and  yet  more; 
Srex^^  *^6  ^^^g  exceeded,  however,  to  be  that  comprised 
ceeded. 

*'  So  Horace O  !  si  angulus  ille 

Proximus  accedat,  qui  nunc  denormat  agellum ! 

"  If  seen  through  the  deceitful  medium  of  desire. 

CHAP.  Til.]  RHETORIC.  45 

within  the  excess.  Again,  greater  and  more^  are 
terms  relative  always  to  some  particular  less  thing :  ^ 
but  great  or  small,  much  or  Httle,  have  reference  to 
the  size  of  things  generally.  And  that  which  is  great 
exceeds ;  but  that  which  is  deficient  is  small ;  and  of 
the  terms  much  and  little  in  the  like  manner. 

Now  as  we  call  that  good,  which,  independently,  3.  Differ- 
for  its  own  sake,  and  not  on  account  of  any  thing  else,  ^*/^f  *" 
is  an  object  of  choice  ;  that,  too,  which  every  thing  S©  great- 
desires  ;  and  which,  if  invested  with  intelligence  and  er  good. 
practical  wisdom,  every  thing  would  choose  ;  as  also 
what  is  preservative  or  productive  of,  or  on  which 
such  things  are  consequent ;  and  as  that,  with  a  view 
to  which  we  act,  is  the  end  ;  and  as  an  end  is  that 
for  whose  sake  every  thing  else  is  done :  but  that  is 
good  to  a  man's  self  which  has  these  affections  in  re- 
ference to  himself:  this  being  the  case,  it  must  be 
that  plurality  is  a  greater  good  than  one  or  a  few, 
provided  that  one  or  those  few  be  enumerated  in  con- 
junction with  it*;  for  it  then  exceeds  them,  and  the 
within  comprised  one  or  few  is  exceeded.     And  if  the  4. 
greatest  individual  of  one  species  exceed  the  great- 
est individual  of  another,  then  also  will  the  first  spe- 
cies itself  exceed  the  second.*      And,  vice  versa, 
wherever  one  species  exceeds  another,  the  greatest 

*  Greater f  in  reference  to  quantity  contimunUy  or  magnitude » 
more,  in  reference  to  quantity  diacrete,  or  multitude. 

'  The  meaning  of  this  passage  appears  to  be  this, — that 
wliile  all  terms  designating  quantity  are  relative,  the  gram- 
matical degrees  of  comparison  imply  relation  to  certain  objects 
then  more  immediately  before  us.  Those  who  are  puzzled  by 
this  doctrine  of  excess  and  defect,  had  better  take  Victorius's 
hint,  and  illustrate  each  remark  by  an  example  from  numbers. 

*  This  qualification  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  truth  of 
the  position;  for  it  may  happen,  if  the  plurality  be  not  of 
things  of  the  same  species  as  the  less  number,  that  the  less 
number  is  of  higher  yalue  than  the  greater.  Five  guineas  are 
"  a  greater  good  "  than  two,  i.  e.  the  greater  number  than  the 
less,  of  things  of  the  same  species ;  yet  it  does  not  therefore 
follow  that  five  farthings  are  better  than  two  guineas,  for  there 
the  less  number  is  not,  as  in  the  first  case  it  was,  virtually  enu- 
merated in  the  greater.    Compare  Ethics,  lib.  i.  c.  vii.  \  8. 

*  Or,  as  Lord  Bacon  expresses  it,  "  That  kind  is  altogether 
hut,  whose  excellence  or  pre-emincnee  is  best." 

46  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

individual  of  the  exceeding,  exceeds  the  greatest  in- 
dividuals of  the  exceeded  species :  for  example,  if  the 
greatest  man  he  greater  than  the  greatest  woman, 
then  will  also  men,  in  gederal,  he  greater  than  women ; 
and  if  men  generally  he  greater  than  women,  then 
will  also  the  greatest  man  he  greater  than  the  greats 
est  woman ;  for  the  excesses  of  species,  and  of  the 
greatest  individuals  under  them,  have  a  common  ra- 
6,  tio.^  When  one  thing  is  a  consequence  of  another, 
hut  that  other  thing  is  not  a  consequence  of  it ;  (now, 
things  are  consequent,  recollect,  either  mnuUaneonshf 
or  subsequently,  or  virtually ;)  then  is  thai  of  which 
the  other  is  a  consequence  the  (greater  good;  hecause 
the  enjoyment  of  the  consequent  is  inherent  in  the 
enjoyment  of  the  other.  Things  are  consequent  si- 
multaneously, as  life  on  health  ;  hut  it  is  not  conse- 
quent on  life :  and  suhsequently,  as  knowledge  on 
learning ;  virtually,  as  larceny  on  sacrilege ;  for  the 
man  who  has  committed  sacrilege  would  he  ready  also 

6.  to  steal.  Things  which  exce^  the  same  thing  in  a 
greater  degree  [than  itself],  are  greater* ;  for  of  ne- 

7.  oessity  they  exceed  even  the  greater.  Things  produc- 
tive of  a  greater  good  are  greater,  for  this  would  he 
hy  virtue  of  their  hdng  productive  of  something 
greater.  That,  too,  the  productive  cause  of  which  is 
greater,  is  likewise  greater ;  for  if  that  which  is 
healthy,  he  preferable  to,  and  a  greater  good  than, 
that' which  is  pleasant;  then  also  will  health  he  su- 

8.  perior  to  pleasure.  As  also  that  which,  independently 
of  any  thing,  is  preferable,  is  superior  to  that  which 
is  not  preferable  independently :  thus  strength  is 
above  things  conducing  to  health ;  for  the  latter  are 
not  sought  on  their  own  account,  while  the  former  is, 

9.  the  which  was  assumed  as  a  criterion  of  good.  And 
should  one  object  he  an  end,  the  other  not  an  end ; 

'  As  is  the  excess  of  the  male  abore  the  female  sex,  so  is 
the  excess  of  the  greatest  man  above  the  greatest  woman ;  and 
oonversely,  as  is  the  excess  of  the  greatest  man  above' the  great- 
est woman,  so  is  the  excess  of  the  male  above  the  female  sex. 

'  £.  g.  Eight  exceeds  two  by  six,  which  is  also  greater  than 
the  original  nmnber  two. 

CHAP,  vn.]  EHETORIC.  47 

for  the  one  is  for  the  Bake  of  something  else,  the  other, 
for  its  own  sake ;  thus  is  exercise  inferior  to  a  good 
habit  of  body''.     That  too  is  a  greater  good  which  in  10. 
a  less  degree  stands  in  need  of  any  one  or  more  things 
as  accessions,  for  it  is  in  a  higher  degree  independent : 
now  that  is  said  less  to  need  accessions,  which  needs 
such  as  either  are  fewer  or  more  easily  obtained. 
And  whenever  one  thing  does  not  exist,  nor  can  pos-  H* 
sibly  be  brought  into  existence  independently  of  ano- 
ther, but  that  other  can  without  it ;  then  that  which 
needs  not  the  accession,  is  more  independent,  and  thus 
shows  itself  to  be  a  greater  good.     Again,  if  one  be  12. 
a  principle  and  the  other  not ;  and  for  the  same  rea- 
son, if  one  be  a  cause,  the  other  not ;  since  without  a 
cause  or  principle,  existence  or  production  is  impos- 
sible®.    And  of  goods  both  proceeding  from  princi- 
ples, that  is  the  greater  good  which  arises  from  the 
higher  principle ;  as  also  that  is  the  greater  good  which 
originates  in  the  higher  of  two  causes.     And,  vice 
versa^  that  of  two  principles  which  is  the  principle  of 
the  greater  good,  is  greater ;  and  that  of  two  causes 
which  is  the  cause  of  the  greater,  is  itself  greater. 
It  is  evident  then  from  what  has  been  said,  that  it  is  13.  The 
possible  for  a  thing  to  appear  the  greater  both  ways  ;  j^^^ 
for  supposing  this  to  be  a  principle,  and  the  other  ie  made 
not,  it  will  appear  the  greater^ ;  as  also  will  it,  sup-  to  appear 
posing  it  not  to  be  a  principle*^  while  the  other  is ;  ^tS>d^ha 

di&rent 
^  Man's  -will  hath  two  several  kinds  of  operation,  the  one  ways, 
natural  or  necessary,  whereby  it  desireth  simply  whatsoever  is 
good  in  itself,  and  Runneth  as  generallv  all  things  which  hurt ; 
the  other  deliberate,  when  we  therefore  embrace  things  as 
good,  because  the  eye  of  understanding  judgeth  them  good  to 
that  end  which  we  simply  desire.  Thus  in  itself  we  desire 
health,  physic  only  for  health's  sake ;  and  in  this  sort  special 
reason  oftentimes  causeth  the  will  by  choice  to  prefer  one  thing 
before  another,  etc.     Hooker,  v.  6  48.  p.  186. 

*  ^PX*i  is  the  beginning  of  a  thing,  oItiov  the  cause ;  the 
latter  consequently  is  prior  to  the  former.  In  a  plant,  the  seed 
is  the  Apx^,  the  vegetative  power  the  aWioif. 

*  By  the  rule  which  states  the  principle  to  be  superior  to 
tiiat  which  is  not  so. 

^  That  is,  supposing  it  to  be  an  end ;  for,  by  a  former  rule, 

48  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

because  the  end,  and  not  the  principle,  was  above 
stated  to  be  the  greater.  Just  like  the  sajing  of  Le- 
odamus  in  impeaching  Callistratus,  ''  that  the  man 
who  devised  the  deed  was  worse  than  he  who  exe- 
cuted it ;  for  had  he  not  devised  it,  the  other  could 
not  have  executed  it:"  and  conversely,  against  Cha- 
iHias,  he  argued  that  ''  the  agent  was  worse  than  the 
deviser ;  for  had  there  not  been  an  agent,  it  would 
not  have  been  realized  in  action,  because  people  de- 
vised plots  on  this  very  account,  that  others  may 

14.  execute  them."  The  more  rare  good  is  greater  than 
the  abundant  ^^;  thus  gold  is  better  than  steel,  not- 
withstanding that  it  is  less  useful ;  for  the  acquisition, 
by  reason  of  its  being  more  difficult,  is  greater.  And 
in  another  view,  the  abundant  is  better  than  the  rare, 
for  the  enjoyment  of  it  exceeds  that  of  the  other  ; 
for  the  idea  of  often  exceeds  that  of  seldom;  whence 

16.  it  is  said,  "Water  ^^  is  the  best  of  things :"  and,  in  a 
word,  the  more  difficult  is  superior  to  the  easier  ac- 
quisition, for  it  is  more  rare.  In  another  point  of 
view,  the  easier  is  above  the  more  difficult ;  for  it  has 

16.  itself  as  we  wish.  That  also  is  the  greater  good,  the 
contrary  of  which  is  the  greater  evil ;  as  is  also  that 
of  which  the  deprivation  is  the  greater  loss.  Virtue, 
too,  is  greater  than  what  is  not  positive  virtue,  and 
vice  than  what  is  not  positive  vice ;  for  the  former 

17.  severally  are  ends,  the  latter  are  not  ends.  Causes, 
the  productions  of  which  are  more  becoming  or  more 
disgraceful,  are  themselves  of  greater  importance. 

ends  are  siiperior  to  means :  thus,  by  one  rule  the  superiority 
is  assigned  to  ends,  and  by  anotiier  to  principles.  So  that, 
whichever  side  you  take,  you  will  have  something  to  allege. 

"  On  this  principle  Aristotle  argues  in  his  Poetics  for  the 
superiority  of  the  fable  above  the  other  five  constituents  of  the 
drama,  inferring  its  superior  %Dorth  from  its  superior  difficulty 
and  rarity,     "  Quae  rara,  cara." 

*•  Perrault,  the  French  critic,  misled  possibly  by  this  very 
passage,  impotently  ridiculed  Pindar  for  the  Iriteness  of  this 
idea:  being  ignorant  that  the  poet  alluded  to  the  philosophy  of 
Thales,  who  borrowed  and  taught  the  Phcenician  doctrine, 
that  water  was  the  principle  of  all  things.  Vide  Wharton  on 
Pope,  vol.  i.  p.  132. 

» 

CHJlP.vii.]  '     RHETORIC.  49 

Also  of  whatever  things  the  excellencies  and  defici- 
encies are  of  greater  importance,  of  them  are  also 
the  productions  of  greater  importance :  since  results 
stand  to  each  other  in  the  same  ratio,  as  their  several 
causes  and  principles ;  and,  vice  versa,  causes  and 
principles,  in  the  ratio  of  their  several  results.  Things,  18 
the  excess  of  which  is  preferable  or  more  becoming, 
as  accuracy  of  sight  is  preferable  to  that  of  smelling, 
for  sight  is  preferable  to  smelling ;  and  the  being 
greatlj  attached  to  friends  is  more  becoming  than  to 
be  greatlj  attached  to  money  ^^^  so  that  attachment 
to  friends  is  more  becoming  than  fondness  for  money. 
And  conversely,  too,  the  excesses  of  better  feelings  are 
themselves  better ;  and  of  the  more  becoming,  them- 
selves, more  becoming :  as,  too,  are  those  things  of  19. 
which  the  desires  are  better  or  more  becoming ;  for 
the  greater  desire  is  of  the  greater  object:  and,  for 
the  same  reason,  the  desires  which  fasteapn  the  more 
excelteiit  and  becoming  objects,  are  themselves  more 
excellent  and  becoming.  Again,  where  the  sciences  20. 
are  more  grave  or  becoming,  there  the  subject-matter 
also  is  more  grave  and  becoming ;  for,  as  is  the  science, 
so  is  its  truth ;  for  each  science  takes  cognisance  of  its 
peculiar  truths :  and  analogous  to  this  precedence  of 
subjects  is  that  also  of  the  sciences,  winch  recognise 
graver  and  more  becoming  subjects,  above  the  rest  j 
for  the  same  reasons.  And  that  which  men  of  practi-  21. 
cal  wisdom,  or  every  person,  or  the  generality,  or  the 
majority,  or  the  best  of  men  have,  or  would  have 
pronounced  to  be  a  greater  good;  that  of  course 
must  be  such,  either  absolutely,  or  so  far  at  least  as 
they  decided  conformably  to  their  prudence.  This, 
too,  is  a  .test  available  in  common  to  the  other  ques- 
tions about  good ;  for  their  substance,  quantity,  and 
quality,  have  themselves  so  as  science  and  prudence 
may  direct ;  on  this  subject  however  we  have  treated. 
For  that  has  been  defined  to  be  good  which  every 

*'  T^  ^iXtTaipov  elvat  koX  ^6  <l>L\o')(pi^fjiarov  ;  i.  e.  the  being 
affected  by  these  several  feelings  to  such  a  degree,  that  they 
become  a  leading  feature  of  the  character ;   in  which  case, 
there  is  an  tnrtpoxnt  as  it  were,  of  the  feelingsw 
E 

50  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

being,  if  fraught  with  prudence**,  would  choose; 
wherefore  it  is  evident,  that  what  prudence  pronounces 

22.  good  in  a  high  degree  is  a  greater  good.  Also  that 
which  belongs  to  the  better  men,  either  absolutely,  or 
in  respect  of  their  being  better ;  as  courage  is  better 
than  strength.  Also  what  the  better  man  would 
make  the  object  of  his  choice,  either  absolutely  or  in 
respect  of  its  being  better;  as,  the  suffering  rather 
than  the  doing  an  injury,  for  this  would  he  choose 

23.  who  is  more  just.  And  that  which  conduces  more  to 
pleasure  rather  that  what  conduces  less;  because 
every  being  pursues  pleasure,  and  is  desirous  of  en- 
joying it  for  its  own  sake ;  now  it  is  in  reference  to 
this,  that  the  good  and  the  end  have  been  defined : 
that  is  said  to  conduce  more  to  pleasure,  which  is 
conducive  to  it  with  less  alloy  of  pain,  and  for  a 

24.  greater  length  of  time.  That  which  is  more  becom- 
ing rather  than  what  is  less  so ;  for  the  becoming  ei- 
ther is  that  which  tends  to  please,  or  is  desirable  on 

25.  its  own  account.  Whatever  things  people  prefer 
being  the  causes  of  to  themselves  or  to  their  friends, 
those  are  greater  goods ;  but  whatever  they  would 

26.  least  wish,  are  greater  evils.  Things  whose  duration 
is  long,  rather  than  those  whose  duration  is  short ; 
and  those  which  are  more  secure,  rather  than  those 
which  are  less  so :  for  there  is  an  advantage  in  their 
enjoyment ;  of  the  former,  in  respect  to  time ;  of  the 
latter,  from  their  being  at  will :  for  the  enjoyment 
of  what  is  secure  is  more  in  their  power  whenever 

27.  they  wish.  And  as  are  the  terms  arising  from  con- 
jugates and  similar  infleptions,  so  are  the  qualities 
they  denote ;  for  example,  if  courageousfy  be  an  idea 
more  noble  and  desirable  than  temperately^  courage 
will  also  "be  something  more  noble  than  temperance^ 
and  the  idea  of  a  man's  being  courageous  than  of  his 

28.  being  temperate.  What  every  one  chooses  is  better 
than'  what  some  do  not,  as  also  is  the  choice  of  a  ma- 

,  jority  better  than  that  of  a  minority ;  for  as  that  was 
supposed  a  good  which  all  desire,  so  that  is  propor- 

.    "  Whence  it  follows  that  prudence  is  competent  to  decide 
on  the  nature  of  good. 

CHAP.  Yii.]  RHETORIC.  51 

tionately  greater  which  is  more  desired.  That,  too, 
which  litijgants  or  foes,  judges,  or  arbitrators  selected 
by  judges,  prefer,  is  better ;  for  in  one  case  the  deci- 
sion is  equivalent  to  that  of  all  mankind ;  and  in  the 
other,  men  of  authority  and  information  actually  do 
pronounce.  And  sometimes  good  is  greater  in  which  29. 
all  participate ;  for  not  to  participate  in  it  is  a  dis- 
grace :  while  at  others,  that  is  which  none,  or  which 
few  share  with  you ;  for  it  is  more  rare.  Things  30. 
more  commended,  because  more  becoming;  and  in 
the  same  way  things  are  better  to  which  belongs  the 
greater  honour,  because  honour  is  as  a  kind  of  esti- 
mate of  worth.  Those  things  again  are  more  hein- 
ous on  which  are  imposed  the  greater  punishments. 
Again,  what  is  greater  than  things  confessedly  or  ap-  31. 
parently  great,  is  itself  superior  in  greatness.  And 
the  same  objects,  when  separated  into  their  several 
constituents,  have  an  air  of  superior  greatness,  for 
the  excess  of  a  plurality  of  objects  is  conspicuous. 
Whence  the  poet  says  that  Meleager's  wife  persuaded 
him  to  rise  up  to  the  war  by  entering  into  detail : — 

"  She  paints  the  horrors  of  a  conquer'd  town, 
The  heroes  slain,  the  palaces  o'erthrown, 
The  matrons  ravish'd,  the  whole  race  enslaved**." 

Iliad  ix.  705. 

Again,  the  condensing  and  accumulating  of  circum- 
stances in  the  way  Epicharmus  used  to  do,  is  produc- 
tive of  effect,  and  that  on  the  same  principle  as  their 
separation;  viz.  because  the  condensing  of  them 
evinces  great  excess,  and  for  the  further  reason,  that 
it  appears  a  principle  and  a  cause  of  great  results. 
But  as  that  is  greater  which  is  more  rare  and  difficult,  32. 
circumstances  both  of  opportunity,  and  age,  and 
place,  and  time,  and  strength,  produce  great  effect. 

*'  Another  striking  instance  of  the  effect  produced  by  a  de- 
tail of  circumstances  may  be  foimd  in  the  Septem  contra 
Thebas  of  JEschylus,  302,  ed.  BL— 

olicrp6if  yAp  iroXiv  &d* 

iayvy iaif  di'dt  irpoicnlfac^  k.  t.  X. 

and  in  Biirke's  speech  on  the  Nabob  of  Arcot's  Debts,  Works, 
▼ol.  ii.  p.  480 :  see  also  Sheridan's  celebrated  speech  against 
Warren  Hastings. 

B  2 

52  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

For  an  exploit  beyond  one's  strength,  and  age,  and 
equals,  if  achieved,  or  if  under  snch  circamstanoes, 
at  such  a  place  or  time,  will  gain  importance  whether 
it  be  good,  or  honourable,  or  just,  or  the  opposite. 
Whence  originated  tke  inscription  of  the  Olympic 
victor,  ^^ Formerly^  indeed^  with  a  rough  basket  ^®  am 
my  shoulders^  I  tised  to  carry  fish  from  Argos  to 
Tegea^  [Simonides.]  And  on  this  proceeds  that 
encomium  of  Iphicrates  [who  was  the  son  of  a  shoe- 
maker] on  himself,  when  he  said,  ^^From  what  begin" 

33.  nings  have  ^ese  things  been  realised /**  That,  too, 
which  is  innate  is  superior  to  what  is  adscititious, 
from  its  greater  difficulty ;  wherefore  the  poet  says, 

34.  "  Of  myself  am  I  taught  *'."  And  the  greatest  part 
of  what  is  great ;  as  Pericles  said  in  his  funeral  ora- 
tion ^\  "  That  the  youth  were  swept  from  the  city^ 
just  as  the' springy  were  it  to  be  withdrawn  from  the 

35.  yearP  That,  too,  is  more  precious  which  is  available 
in  the  greater  need ;  as  in  old  age,  or  sickness,  for 
instance.  And  of  two  means,  that  more  immediately 
conducing  to  the  end.  That  whose  qualities  have 
direct  reference  to  one's  sel^  than  those  which  are 
general.  What  is  possible,  rather  than  what  is  im- 
possible ;  for  the  one  attaches  to  one's  self,  the  other 
not.  And  things  which  are  comprised  in  the  end  ^^ 
of  life;  for  things  conducing  to  the  end  partake  in  a 

36.  greater  degree  of  the  nature  of  ends.  Things  having 
reference  to  truth  rather  than  to  opinion : — as  a  de- 
finition of  matter  of  opinion  we  may  take  what  one, 
likely  to  escape  observation,  would  not  choose  to  do : 
and  on  this  principle  the  receiving  good  would  appear 
more  desirable  than  the  doing  it ;  since  one  would 

10  clfirtXXa  is  properly  the  yoke  which  -was  laid  across  the 
shoulder,  from  which  the  basket  hung. 

1'  Horn.  Odyss.  xxii.  347. 

*•  Whether  we  suppose  the  i'frtTa<f>iov  to  have  been  lost,  or 
feel  inclined  to  charge  Aristotle  with  a  lapnta  inemoiri€B,  so  it 
is  that  the  words  are  not  attributed  to  Pericles  in  any  work 
which  has  come  down  to  us.  'I'he  same  illustration  was  used 
by  Gelon,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  to  the  deputies  from  the  states  of 
Greece,  who  implored  his  assistance.     Herodotus,  Tii.  162. 

^  TfeXov,  the  end  or  object  of  life :  cvdai/AoWa  scilicet. 

CHAP.  vii.J  RHETORIC.  53 

choose  the  first  even  cthould  it  be  nnobserTed ;  with 
respect  however  to  the  doing  good,  that  it  seems  no 
one  ftbout  to  be  unnoticed  would  choose^.  Those  37. 
things,  too,  are  better,  of  which  men  prefer  the  real 
possession  to  the  appearance ;  for  thej  have  a  nearer 
reference  to  truth :  on  which  principle  some  argue 
that  justice  is  a  trifling  good,  because  it  is  better  for 
it  to  appear,  than  merely  to  exist  ^*:  in  respect  to 
health,  however,  this  is  not  the  case.  That  which  38. 
is  conducive  to  the  greater  number  of  uses ;  as  what 
conduces  to  life,  to  happy  life,  to  pleasure,  and  to 
noble  conduct ;  wherefore  health  and  wealth  appear 
the  highest  goods,  for  these  include  every  thing. 
That  which  is  accompanied  by  less  pain,  and  on  39. 
which  pleasure  is  attendant;  for  the  good  is  more 
than  merely  single,  since  it  is  realised  both  in  the 
positive  pleasure,  and  in  the  absence  of  pain.  And 
of  two  goods,  that  which,  added  to  the  same  good, 
renders  the  sum  greater.  That,  too,  whose  presence  40. 
does  not  escape  us,  rather  than  that  which  does  ^ ; 
for  such  approach  reality ;  whence  the  being  really 
rich  will  seem  a  greater  good  than  the  appearance  of 
being  so.  That,  too,  which  is  held  dear,  is  a  greater  41. 
good : — ^whether,  as  in  some  cases,  it  be  single ;  or,  as 
in  others,  accompanied  by  more :  on  which  account 
the  punishment  is  not  equal,  in  the  case  of  putting 
out  the  eye  of  a  person  who  has  but  one^,  and  of 

*>  A  strikingly  ostentatious  principle  of  benevolence  this : 
but  it  is  one  which  an  exact  observance  of  human  nature,  even 
now  that  it  has  met  the  rebuke  of  Divine  wisdom,  will  perhaps 
too  fully  justify  Aristotle  in  laying  down. 

'*  According  to  the  argument  of  the  sophist  Thrasymachus. 
Plato.  Rep.  lib.  i. 

■*  I  have  thus  ventured  to  understand  w/nos  with  Xavdavti ; 
for  it  appears  the  simplest  way  of  getting  over  the  difficulty 
which  is  caused  by  the  illustration,  which  would  appear  better 
adapted  to  one  of  the  former  tldri  than  to  this. 

^  Zaleucus  established  among  the  Loorians  the  law  of  re- 
taliation, "  an  eye  for  an  eye."  But  on  one  occasion  a  man 
with  a  single  eye  being  threatened  witli  blindness  by  his  enemy, 
procured  a  clause  to  be  added,  denouncing  the  loss  of  both 
eyes  to  him  who  deprived  another  of  his  only  one.  Demosth. 
Cont  Timocr.  p.  744. 

54  ARISTOTLE'S  [boox  i. 

one  who  has  two  eyes  ;  for  there  is,  in  the  one  case, 
a  deprivation  of  the  dearest  object  2*. 

The  sources  then  from  which,  in  exhortation  and 
dissuasion,  we  must  deduce  our  means  of  persuading, 
have  nearly  been  enumerated. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

On  Forms  of  Oovemment; — wJiat  and  how  many  they  are  : 
— and  on  the  end  of  e<ich, 

1.  Rea-     The  means  of  greatest  and  most  paramount  import- 

the^dl-^^   ance  with  a  view  to  be.ing  able  to  persuade  and  give 

liberatiTe  advice  in  a  becoming  style,  is  the  having  made  one's 

oratwr       self  master  of  all  the  forms  of  government ;  and  the 

Slow  go-  ^a^Jig  clearly  distinguished  their  several  practices, 

vem-         and  legal  principles,  and  interests :  for  all  men  are 

ments.       persuaded  by  what  is  advantageous ;  but  that  which 

■  is  preservative  of  the  constitution,  is  absolute  ex- 

2.  pediency  ^     And  further,  the  dictum  of  the  authori- 

*!•  tative   power   of  the  state,  is   itself  authoritative. 

But  the  authorities  are  distinguished   according  to 

the  forms  of  government  under  which  they  exist ;  for 

**  Dr.  Paxr,  quoting  the  following  passage  from  the  Politics, 
**  6vp  yckp  iarlv  &  fiaXicrrra  iroitX  Ki^Siadai  Toiti  dudpuiirovi  Kal 
(f>t\siVf  TO  Tt  Idiov  Koi  TO  dyavtiTdv**  remarks : — **  I  suspect 
that  dyairtjTdi/  here  means  more  than  carum,  it  may  be  ren- 
dered unicum,  atque  adeo  carum.  Aristotle,  in  lib.  i.  c.  7, 
Rhetor,  says  of  the  eye,  destroyed  in  him  who  had  only  one, 
dyairrirdv  d4>ripfjTai, :  see  Hen.  Stephens's  Thesaurus:  but  I 
should  observe,  that  in  the  margin  of  Aristotle,  Kdl  fiovou  are 
^dded,  perhaps,  as  explanatory.  Upon  the  word  dyamjToi*  in 
SS.  for  fiovoyiint,  see  Suidas  and  Hesychius  in  v.  and  the 
notes.*'     Spital.  Sermon,  notes,  p.  39. 

*  Td  aa^ov  iroXiTtiav  appears  with  Aristotle  to  have  been 
equivalent  to  abstract  expediency ;  and  he  therefore  cannot  be 
charged  with  a  violation  of  his  own  rule  against  entering  into 
particulars  on  any  subject  as  peculiar  to  rhetoric,  because 
every  question  of  expediency  will  ultimately  be  viewed  in 
reference  to  the  constitution  under  which  the  parties  live  :  at 
any  rate  the  question  is  treated  merely  in  a  popular  way — 
dinKpi^toTui  yap  iv  rots  iroXiTtKOts. 

CHAP,  vin.]  RHETORIC.  55 

ns  many  forms  of  goyemment  as  there  are,  so  many 
are  the  authorities. 

Now  there  are  four  forms  of  government ;  demo-  3.  Four 
cracy,  oligarchy,  aristocracy,  and  monarchy.     So  that  ^'^"^• 
the  authoritative  and  judicial  functions  wiU  be  merely 
one  constituent  of  these,  or  the  whole.     Democracy  4.  Demo- 
is  a  form  of  government^,  in  which  men  apportion  ^^^^7- 
out  the  magistracies  to  themselves  by  lot.     But  an  Oligar- 
oligarchy,  in  which  those  only  who,  from  the  valua^  ^^7- . 
tion  of  property,  are  entitled.     Aristocracy,  in  which  Aristo- 
those  l?ear  magistracy  who  can  conform  to  the  con-  *^'*^^' 
stitutional  plan  of  education.     By  such  education  I 
mean  that  established  by  the  law :  for  those  who  ad- 
here to  the  principles  of  the  law,  are  the  men  who,  in 
an  aristocracy,  hold  magistracies;  and  it  must  be 
that  these  should  appear  the  best,  whence  this  form 
of  government  took  its  name.     Monarchy  is  that  form  Mon 
in  which,  conformably  to  its  name,  one  man  is  su-  *"^**y- 
preme ;  and,  of  monarchies,  those  which  are  held  by 
conformity  to  some  limitations  are  kingdoms,  but  the 
unlimited  are  tyrannies^. 

Neither  should  the  ends  of  the  respective  forms  of  5.  End« 
government  escape  us ;  for  men  choose  whatever  con-  ^^^. 
duces  to  the  end.     The  end  then  of  a  democracy,  is  ment 
liberty ;  of  an  oligarchy,  it  is  wealth ;  of  an  aristocra- 
cy, the  institutions  relating  to  education  and  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  law ;  the  end  of  a  tjrranny,  is  the  protec- 
tion of  the  tyrant's  person*.     It  is  evident  then,  if 

'  In  the  Ethics  (lib.  viii.  c.  10)  democracy  is  not  stated  as    . 
a  distinct  form,  but  merely  as  a  deviation  (ira/»eic/3ao't«)  from 
timocracy,  or  iroXtTcta  h  k'Kh  TifirifidTwv. 

*  HapiK^airit  /Sao-iXeiav  fikv  Tvpavpiv'  Hfk^m  yap  fiovapxtai. 
Ibid. 

*  We  find  a  remarkable  proof  of  this  in  the  account  ^ven 
by  Herodotus  of  the  anxiety  of  the  Persians  for  the  personal 
safety  of  Xerxes  after  the  battle  of  Salamis ; — o6k  oCt«  ir«pi 
rSiv  iftuv  &y(P6fitvoi,  c^9  irepi  ain-if  iSipj^  6titiatuovTt9,  viii.  99. 
A  remarkable  expression  occurs  in  Sophocles  from  -wrhich  the 
same  inference  may  be  drawn ;  (Edipus,  asking  Greon  why 
the  murder  of  Laius  had  not  been  more  fully  investigated, 
thus  expresses  himself : 

KaKdu  dk  iroiov  ifiiroiwv,  TYPANNIA02 

"Oirreo  xeirovat}«,  tlpyt  tout'  iJQtidipai ; — (Edip.  Tyran.  128. 

56  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

men  fix  their  choice  by  reference  to  the  end,  that  we 
must  accurately  distinguish  the  respective  practices, 
laws,  and  interests  of  each  form. 
6.  The  But  as  means  of  persuasion  originate  not  in  argu- 

speaker     mentative  oratory  alone,  but  in  such  also  as  bears  an 
^^^        impress  of  character ;  for  it  is  from  the  speaker's  ap- 
these  con-  pearing  a  man  of  certain  character  that  we  trust  him; 
stitation-  ^^^^^  jg  ^^  ^^j^  |f  j^^  appears  an  honest  man,  or  well 
in  o^     affected^,  or  both :  as  this  is  the  case,  it  will  be  ne- 
to  impress  cessary  for  us  to  be  masters  of  the  character  of  each 
CT8  wit^'a  ^^^"^  ^^  government;  for  the  character  which  is  pe- 
good-will  culiar  to  each,  must  needs  be  most  available  to  per- 
towards     suasion  in  addressing  each.     These  points,  however, 
will  be  ascertained  by  means  of  the  same  information ; 
for  the  character. will  manifestly  be  conformable  to 
the  choice ;  now  the  settled  choice  has  reference  to 
the  end. 
7,      Thus  then  have  the  objects  which  we  ought  to  aim 
at  in  exhorting  and  dissuading,  as  probable  or  actu- 
ally in  existence ;  the  sources,  too,  out  of  which  we 
must  draw  our  means  of  proof  on'  the  subject  of  the 
expedient,  and  on  the  subject  moreover  of  the  cha- 
racter and  legal  principles  belonging  to  the  forms  of 
government ;    and   the  means   by  which,  and  the 
manner  how,  we  shall  have  facilities  on  such  ques- 
tions :  all  these  points  have  been  discussed,  so  far  as 
was  within  the  scope  of  the  present  occasion.     For 
accuracy  of  detail  on  these  points  has  been  observed 
in  the  Politics. 

Where  we  may  observe,  that  not  simply  is  the  person  of  the 
tyrant  spoken  of,  but  the  very  government  itself,  as  thou^^h  it 
had  fallen  with  him. 

*  It  is  required  (lib.  ii.  c.  1)  that  he  be  further  possessed 
of  4>p6vttoK.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  these  qualities  must 
be  evinced  by  the  speech,  and  not  simply  be  taken  for  granted 
from  a  previous  knowledge  of  the  man.  See  Pearson  on  the 
Creed,  Art.  i.  p.  5. 

CHAP.  IX.]  BHETORIC.  57 

CHAP.  IX. 

On  the  subject  of  Virtue  and  Vice,  the  honourable  and  dis- 
gracejkd  ; — Out  of  what  considerations  praise  and  blame 

Let  us  next  speak  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  of  the  l.  The 
honourable  and  disgraceful;  because  these  are  the  ^^]j|^J^_^' 
objects  of  the  orator  who  praises  or  blames^;  and  tic  oratory 
because  it  will  happen  that,  in  speaking  of  these  discTiased. 
subjects,  we  shall  at  the  same  time  throw  light  on 
the  means  by  which  we  may  ourselves  be  conceived 
to  be  of  a  certain  turn  of  character,  which  was  stated 
to  be  the  second  means  of  effecting  belief;  since  we 
shall  be  able,  by  the  application  of  the  same  points, 
to  render  ourselves  or  others  deserving  belief  on  the 
score  of  moral  excellence.     But  as  there  frequently  2. 
are  instances,  as  well  in  sober  earnest  as  without  it, 
of  praising  not  men  or  gods  only,  but  even  inani- 
mate objects,  and  any  animal  whatever,  as  it  may 
happen ;   we  must  here,  in  the  same  way  as  before, 
ascertain  propositions  on  these  subjects  also.     Let  us 
then,  so  far  as  may  serve  for  a  specimen,  discuss 
these  subjects. 

That  then  is  honourable,  which,  while  it  is  an  3.  t6  ku- 
object  of  choice  on  its  own  account,  is  commendable  »^^^ 
also ;  or  which,  being  good,  is  pleasant,  simply  be-  two  w^s. 
cause  it  is  good.     But  if  the  honourable  be  this, 
virtue  must  necessarily  be  honourable;   for,  being 
good.  It  is  commendable.     And  virtue,  as  it  should  4.  Perfect 
seem,  is  a  faculty  tending  to  provide  us  with  goods  ^^^^ 
and  preserve  them  to  us ;  a  faculty  moreover  capable  gtituent 

of  benefiting:  in  many  and  important  cases ;  of  bene-  parta  are 
is^  'J  •!_•     A    •  x9    honoTir- 

fitmg,  m  a  word,  every  object  m  every  respect 2.  ^^,1^ 

^  As  praise  is  the  proper  reward  of  virtue,  so  are  blame  and 
disgrace  proper  to  vice ;  in  order  that  the  world  may  be  warned 
by  the  example  of  the  one,  and  excited  to  emulate  that  of  the 
other :  aptT6,  ydip  itraiviofiiim,  iivdpov  cov,  Ai^frai, 

^  Aristotle  never  omits  an  opportunity  of  inculcating  this 
wholesome  lesson,  that  the  practice  of  virtue  conduces  to  our 
true  interest.    Its  necessity  in  bodies  politic,  as  being  emi- 

58  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  i 

5.  The  constituent  parts  of  virtue  are  justice,  courage, 
temperance,  magnificence,  magnanimity,  liberality, 

6.  placability,  prudence,  wisdom ;  and  it  must  needs  be, 
that  those  virtues  are  the  highest  which  are  the 
most  beneficial  to  others,  if  at  least  virtue  be  (as  it 
was  defined)  a  faculty  capable  of  benefiting  on  this 
account,  men  honour  in  the  greatest  degree  the  just 
and  brave ;  for  justice  and  courage  are  useful  to 
them,  the  one  in  war,  and  the  other  in  peace '.  Next 
is  liberality  ;  for  the  liberal  are  profuse,  and  do  not 
wrangle  with  people  about  money,  the  object  which 
the  rest  of  the  world  hanker  after  more  than  any 

7.  thing.  Now  justice  is  the  virtue  by  which  each  has 
his  own,  as  the  law  prescribes:  injustice,  however, 
is  that  habit  by  which  some  take  the  property  of 

8.  others  in  contravention  to  law.  Courage,  that  by 
which  men  are  ready  to  achieve  honourable  exploits 
in  the  midst  of  danger,  conformably  to  the  direction 
of  and  in  subservience  to  law*:  cowardice,  however, 

9.  is  its  contrary.  But  temperance  is  a  virtue  by 
which  men  carry  themselves  so,  in  respect  to  the 
pleasures  of  the  body,  as  the  law  directs  ;  intemper- 

10.  ance,  however,  is  its  contrary.  But  liberality  tends 
to  benefit  in  pecuniary  matters ;    stinginess  is  its 

11.  contrary.  Magnanimity  is  that  virtue  which  is  apt 
to  confer  important   benefits ;    narrowness  of  soul 

nently  v6  trutXpv  liiv  troXiTsiav^  is  thus  stated  in  another  of  his 
works  :  'Eo-Tt  6*  ovdtv  kv  tois  iroXtTiKois  dwaTdv  'wpaj^ai  dvtu 
Tou  TToXov  Ttva  ilvaiy  \iyo9  Sk  olov  airovdaiop,  T6  8k  airoviaiou 
ilvaty  Io-tI  t6  tAs  aptTdt  ex^tif.     Magn.  Mor.  lib.  i.  c.  1. 

^  In  the  Ethics  he  places  liberality  first ;— ^iXovin-at  <fx^86v 
/iaXtq-Ta  ol  eXtvdipioi  twv  air'  df/BTtji  it^i\ip.oi  y&p  tovto  6k 
iv  T»j  Sotret.  Eth.  Nich.  ir.  1.  Courage  may  be  ranked  first, 
because  on  occasions  we  may  be  disqualified  from  th6  exercise 
of  other  virtues  if  this  be  wanting. 

*  Consistently  with  the  doctrine  held  in  the  Ethics,  he  does 
not  admit  every  sort  of  daring  to  the  praise  of  courage.  For 
of  some  persons,  whose  daring  is  at  first  sight  not  inconsider- 
able, it  is  true,  as  Juvenal  remarks — 

Justa  pericli 
Si  ratio  est  et  honesta,  timent  pavidoque  gelantur 
Pectore,  nee  tremulis  possunt  insistere  plantis : 
Fortem  animum  prsestant  rebus,  quas  turpiter  audent. 

Sat.  vi.  94. 

CHAP.  IX.]         •  RHETORIC.  59 

is  its  opposite,  lltagnificence  is  the  virtue  which  12. 
produces  grandeur  in  expenditures : — ^again,  narrow- 
ness of  soul  and  meanness  are  opposed.  Prudence  13. 
however  is  an  intellectual  virtue,  by  conforming  to 
which  men  have  the  faculty  of  actually  determining 
on  the  subjects  of  the  good  and  evil^  which  has 
been  mentioned  as  entering  into  happiness. 

Enough  has  been  said  on  the  subject  of  virtue  and  14. 
vice  in  general,  and  of  their  constituent  parts,  to  suit 
the  present*^  occasion  :  respecting  the  other  points,  n-a  KaXd 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  discerning  what  they  are  ;  for  ®?^®'' 
it  is  plainly  necessary  both  that  the  productives  of 
virtue  should  be  honourable  (because  they  have  re- 
ference to  virtue),  ^d  also  the  fruits  of  virtue  ;  of 
which  kind  are  both  the  indications  and  actions  of 
virtue ;  but  as  the  indications  and  all  actions  or  suf-  15. 
ferings  of  a  good  man  are  honourable,  it  will  neces- 
sarily follow  that  all  exploits  of  courage  whatever, 
and  all  indications  of  courage,  that  all  conduct,  in 
a  word,  which  has  been  marked  with  courage  is 
honourable;  and  so  of  things  just  and  conforming 
to  justice,  so  far  at  least  as  actions  are  concerned : 
(but  as  relates  to  sufferings  this  is  not  the  case ; 
for  in  this  single  instance  of  all  the  virtues,  does 
it  occur  that  what  is  conformable  to  justice  is  not 
invariably  honourable,  but  in  the  case  of  suffering 
punishment,  that  which  is  justly  suffered  is  in  a 

*  Alluding  to  the  division  made  in  the  Ethics  of  virtues  into 
those  of  the  iirtOv/uf^rtfcov  and  \6yov  ix^^  aipoi  of  the  soul ;  the 
former  whereof  is  the  subject  of  the  moral,  the  latter  of  the  in- 
UUeeiual  virtues.     Vid.  Eth.  i.  13. 

•  'H  fxkv  (ppomitrii  irtpl  tci  xoifjTea  Bpovi  airroli  Tidtitra, 
PhQo,  p.  35,  Allegor.  ed.  Par, 

'  Those  who  have  not  read  the  Ethics  will  be  surprised  to 
hear  that  the  virtues  which  he  here  despatches  in  one  section, 
should  there  occupy  a  book  and  a  half.  This  popular  discus- 
sion of  them  is,  as  far  as  it  goes/ conformable  to  the  more  phi- 
losophical view  taken  in  the'oUier  treatise,  except  in  respect 
to  the  criterion  which  is  assigned  of  the  comparative  excellence 
of  each  virtue,  viz.  /i*«yi<rTos  tlvai  apcTas  tAs  toTs  aWotv  XP»J- 
<rifM»TaToi9 ;  and  that  stated  §  23- — at  inroXautrriKat,  ak\oi9 
fiSWovj  K,  T.  \.  Such  a  test,  however  inadequate  to  the  views 
of  the  philosopher,  is  good  enough  for  the  orator,  since  it  is  - 
one  in  which  nine-tenths  of  the  world  will  acquiesce. 

60  ARISTOTLE'S  •  [book  i. 

higher  degree  disgraceful  than  what  is  unjustly^;) 

and  90  likewise  in  respect  to  the  other  virtues. 

16.  Whatever  actions  have  national  distinctions  as  their 

reward  are  honourable,  or  whatever  have  such  dis- 

17.  Every  tinctlons  rather  than  monej.  Whatever  things,  among 

fiom^t^^  those  which  are  objects  of  choice,  one  does,  not  for 

selfish       his   own   sake.     And  whatever  things  which  ab- 

principle    stractedlj  viewed  are  good,  one  haa  achieved  for  his 

abl^^^^'  country's  sake,  overlooking  his  own  interest.  Things 

good  in  their  own  nature ;  things  which  are  good, 

but  not  to  one's  self ;  every  thing  of  that  kind  being 

18.  chosen  on  its  own  account     Whatever  things  admit 

of  being  realized  to  one  wh^i  dead,  rather  than  in 

his  life-time ;  for  that  which  appertains  to  one  in  his 

life,  rather  carries  the  idea  of  its  being  for  one's  self. 

19-  Whatever  actions  are  for  the  sake  of  others ;  for  they 

20.  are  not  so  much  for  one's  own  sa^e.  And  as  many 
instances  of  successful  management  as  occur  where 
others  are  concerned,  and  where  one's  self  is  not ;  and 
this  particularly  respecting  benefactors,  for  it  then 
is  just.  Benefits,  too,  are  honourable  ;  for  they  at- 
tach not  to  one's  self.  And  the  contraries  of  all 
cases  in  which  men  feel  a  delicacy ;  for  men  are  sens- 
ible of  delicacy  both  in  mentioning,  or  doing,  or  in- 
tending any  thing  disgraceful ;  just  as  Sappho  has 
expressed  in  verse  on  the  occasion  of  Alcteus'  saying, 
*^  I  would  say  something,  but  delicacy  restrains  me." 
"If  thou  entertainedst  a  desire  of  speaking  things 
either  good  or  honourable,  and  were  not  thy  tongue 
teeming  with  the  utterance  of  some  evil ;  shame  had 
not  suffused  thine   eyes,   but  thou  wouldest  have 

21.  spoken  what  was  fit."  Otjects  for  which  men  are 
keenly  anxious  without  being  affected  by  fear^,  are 
honourable ;  for  men  are  thus  affected  respecting 

•  The  pasaage  from  'wradti  to  ddUtat  must  be  considered  M  a 
note ;  and  the  words  KarA  tAs  aWai^aMraArot^^  considered  as 
the  conclusion  of  the  sentence  preceding  it. 

'  Victorius  cites  an  anecdote  of  Themistocles,  preserved  by 
Cicero,  as  illustrative  of  this  remark.  **  Noctu  ambulabat  in 
publico  Themistocles,  quod  somnum  capere  non  posset :  qus- 
rentibusque respondebat,  MiUiadis tropait  se  e  aomno excitari" 
Tusc.  iy.  19.    It  will  be  needless  to  remark,  that  "  nobl* 

OHAP.  nc]    <  RHETORIC.  61 

goods  which  tend  to  reputation.  Those  virtues  and  22. 
their  fruits  are  honourable  in  a  higher  degree,  which 
belong  to  8nl)jects  naturally  more  excellent  ^^;  as,  for 
example,  those  of  a  man  are  higher  than  those  of  a 
woman.  And  those  which  are  of  a  nature  to  be  en-  23. 
joyed  by  others,  rather  than  by  ourselves;  the  prin- 
ciple on  which  the  just  and  justice  are  honourable. 

Thus,  the  taking  vengeance  on  a  foe  rather  than  24.  Re- 
the  being  reconciled ;  both  because  to  compensate  is  J^J|J^ 
just,  and  what  is  just  is  honourable**;  and  further,  able. 
because  it  belongs  to  the  courageous  man  never  to  be 
worsted.     Both  victory  ind  national  distinction  are  25. 
of  the  number  of  things  honourable;  for > they  are 
desirable,  though  unattended  by  lucre,  and  evince 
more  than  ordinary  virtue ;   and  the  memorials  of 
cme's  name;  and  what  partakes  of  these  respective 
characters  more  decidedly,  is  also  more  decidedly 
honourable.     Again,  things  which  do  not  follow  one 
in  his  life;  and  whatever  honour  is  attendant  on; 
that  which  presents  features  of  vastness ;  that,  too, 
is  honourable  in  a  higher  degree  which  belongs  to 
one's  self  cUone,  for  it  is  longer  remembered.     And  26. 
possessions  unattended  by  profit,  for  they  are  more 
becoming  a  gentleman  *^ ;  and  whatever  is  peculiarly 
esteemed  among  each  people,  is  honourable.     Every  Badges 
badge  of  what  is  held  commendable  in  each  nation :  are^n- 
at  Lacedaemon*^,  for  instance,  it  is  honourable  to  wear  ^^"*  *' 

minds"  alone  can  be  sensible  of  this  high  excitement — dywvla. 
And  Thucydides  on  hearing  Herodotus  read  his  History. 

*®  The  greatness  and  dignity  of  all  manner  of  actions  is 
measured  by  the  worthiness  of  the  subject  from  which  they 
proceed,  and  of  the  object  whereabout  they  are  conversant. 
Hooker,  Eccles.  Pol.  t.  §  6,  p.  23. 

*^  This  is  a  striking  instance  of  that  species  of  sophistry  by 
which  our  unenlightened  reason  reconciles  us  to  the  gratifica- 
tion of  our  worst  passions ;  and  we  should  learn  from  it  to 
glory  in  that  heavenly  wisdom  which  has  taught  us'  "  to  do 
good  to  those  who  hate  us,  to  pray  for  those  who  despitefriUy 
use  us  and  persecute  us." 

^  *E\tvdipiaf  tA  fifi  itpdv  dwdXavaiv.     See  cap.  ▼.  §  7. 

^  This  idea  appears,  in  ancient  times,  to  have  been  very 
prevalent ;  a  singular  instance  of  its  influence  is  mentioned  in 
Stobiens :  **  Hap'  'IvdoU  k&w  t»«  airotrrzptfifi  iav&iovy  h  irapa- 
icarad^Ktis,  oitK  im  Kpl<rW  aX\*  aifTov  alTiarai  oinamu&at. 

62 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  X. 

27. 

28.  We 
must  re- 
gard ap- 
parent 
good 
qualities 
asr^. 

long  liair^^y  because  it  is  the  badge^of  a  free  man, 
since  it  is  not  easy  for  a  man  with  long  hair  to  do 
any  servile  work.  And  the  not  .exercising  any  vulgar 
craft ;  for  it  belongs  to  a  gentleman  not  to  live  in 
dependence  on  another  ^^.  And  we  must  take  for 
granted  that  qualities,  akin  to  real  ones,  are  actually 
identified  with  them,  and  this  with  a  view  as  well  to 
praise  as  to  blame ;  for  instance,  taking  the  cautious 
man  to  be  a  cold-hearted,  designing  fellow ;  or  a, sim- 
pleton to  be  a  good  kind  of  man ;  and  the  man  who 
is  dead  to  feeling,  to  be  of  a  mild  disposition :  and 
in  a  word,  we  must  make  fc  selection,  invariably  on 
the  most  favourable  side,  out  of  the  qualities  con- 
comitant on  the  character  of  each ;  making  out  the 
passionate  and  furious  to  be  men  void  of  all  duplicity  ; 
and  the  self-willed  to  be  magnificent  and  dignified : 
and  such  as  are  in  excess,  to  be  in  the  virtuous 
mean ;  the  rash,  for  instance,  to  be  brave ;  the  pro»- 
fuse,  liberal  ^^;  for  it  will  both  seem  to  be  the  case 

h  Hk  tixvItov  tnnp&va^  X^^P^  ^  64>Ba\fi6v  Bav&rip  X^rjfiiovTai. 
'r6v  Sk  fiiyitrra  adtici}(rain-a,  6  fiatriXibv  KtXtuti  KiipaiTdai.t  <0C 
iorx<4Tn«  ou<nt9  TavTfit  drifiiav.     Parr,  Spit.  Serm.  p.  146. 

^*  The  Lacedemonians  used  to  wear  their  hair  long,  in  com- 
memoration of  the  victory  obtained  by  Othryades  and  his  two 
comrades  over  the  three  Argive  champions,  for  the  land  at 
Thyrea.  Herodot.  i.  82.  Or  perhaps,  being  inconvenient  to 
those  engaged  in  servile  occupations,  length  of  hair  might  be 
considered  as  a  badge  of  the  more  noble  pursuits  of  the  wearer. 
Collins  has  a  fine  allusion  to  this  practice  in  the  opening  of  his 
Ode  to  Liberty :—  * 

Who  shall  awake  the  Spartan  fife, 

And  call  in  solemn  sounds  to  life 

The  youths,  tohose  locks  divinely  apreadingt 

LUte  vernal  hyacinths  in  sullen  hue. 
At  once  the  breath  of  fear  and  virtue  shedding^ 
Applauding  Freedom  loved  of  old  to  view  ? 

Among  the  Franks,  the  privilege  of  wearing  the  hair  long  was 
peculiar  to  the  princes  and  their  descendants,  the  rest  of  the 
nation  being  obliged  to  shave  the  hinder  part  of  the  head. 
Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall,  c.  xxxv.  note  17,  and  Agathias 
quoted  in  Heraldic  Anomalies,  vol.  i.  p.  1^. 

"  Aristotle,  in  his  Ethics,  makes  this  remark  of  the  firya- 
Xo^vxos,  observing,  irpAv  dXkov  fiii  ivvaoBat  Jijy,  aW*  ^  irpos 
<p(\o»'  dovXiKdv  ydp.  iv.  3. 

*•  Horace  recommends  an  innocent  use  of  this  sort  of  so- 
phistry among  friends,  as  a  preservative  of  firiehdship— 

CHAP.  IX.]  BHETORIC.  63 

to  the  nine-tenths  of  the*  world,  and  will  afford  room 
for  deducing  a  piece  of  false  reasoning  out  of  the 
niotives  of  the  agent ;  for  if  one  rush  into  danger 
where  there  is  no  necessity,  much  more  .should  it 
seem  that  he  will,  where  it  is  honourable^';  and  if 
a  man  be  lavish  on  all  who  fall  in  his  way,  surely  he 
will  also  be  so  on  his  friends ;  for  to  benefit  all  is  an 
excess  of  virtue.     We  ought  to  consider  also  before  30.  We 
whom  our  panegjrric  is  pronounced  ;  for,  as  Socrates  p^st  see 
used  to  remark,  "  It  is  no  difficult  thing  to  panegjrrise  presence 
Athenians  in  the  presence  of  Athenians."    We  must  our  com- 
also  assert  that  what  is  valued  by  each  auditory,  is  ^^^^ 
to  be  essentially  valuable ;  what,  for  instance,  either  held. 
Scythians  or  Lacedaemonians  or  philosophers  value : 
and,  in  short,  to  refer  to  the  class  of  things  really 
honourable,  whatever  is  held  in  esteem;   since  by 
virtue  Of  their  being  so  esteemed,  they  appear  to 
approximate  closely  that  class.     Again,  Whatever  is  31. 
natural  under  such  circumstances,  for  instance,  if 
one's  actions  be  worthy  of  his  ancestors  or  his  own 
former  achievements ;  since  the  additional  acquisition 
of  glory  tends  to  happiness,  and  is  honourable.   Like-   ^ 
wise  every  action  contrary  to  what  is  natural  to  one, 
so  it  be  on  one  side  of  what  is  better  and  honourable ; 
as  when  one  in  good  fortune  has  been  moderate,  or 
magnanimous  in  adversity ;  or  has  becoifie  better  and 
easier  to  be  won  over  in  proportion  as  he  became 
greater.    Of  this  nature  was  the  appeal  of  Iphicrates, 
"  From  what  beginnings  to  what  have  I  attained !  ** 
And   that  of  the  Olympic  conqueror,   "  Formerly 
bearing  on  my  shoulders  a  rough  basket,"  etc.     And 
that  of  the  epitaph  by  Simonides,  "  Though  daughter, 
wife,  and  sister  of  tyrants  *®,"  etc. 

Vellem  in  amicitia  sic  erraremus,  et  isti 
Errori  rirtus  nomen  posuisset  houestum,  etc. 

Opinor 
Haec  res  et  jungit,  junctos  et  servat  amicos. 

Sat.  i.  3,  41. 
"  That  is,  under  the  direction  of  the  law,  to^  o  v6n<n  KtKtvti^ 
KoX  tnriipiriK6t  TtS  vo/xtp.  }  7. 

**  The  epitaph  was  on  Archedice,  daughter  of  Hippias,  and 
wife  of  Oantides,  tyrant  of  Lampsacus.     See  Thucyd.  vi.  59. 

64  ARISTOTLE'S  Lbook  i. 

32.  We         But  as  commendation  arises  ont  of  moral  conduct, 

T^*^  th  t  *°^  ^*  *®  *  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  good  man  to 

the  person  &ct  On  principle  ^^y  we  most  endeavour  to  put  the  ob- 

praised     jecfr  of  our  commendation  in  the  light  of  one  who  has 

^prk^^  acted  on  principle.     Now  his  appearing  tb  have  acted 

ciple.         so  in  manj  instances  will  be  serviceable  with  a  view 

to  this  ;  wherefore  coincidences  and  fortuitous  oc^ 

currences  must  be  assumed  as  done  on  principle :  and 

should  many  and  like  circumstances  be  alleged,  it  will 

33.  appear  to  be  a  sign  of  virtue  and  principle.     Now 
de^el     commendation  is  language  exhibiting  greatness  in  the 

case  of  virtue ;  we  should  therefore  give  this  further 
proof  of  the  actions  of  him  we  commend,  that  they 
are  of  this  character.  Encomium^,  however,  i» of  ac- 
tions; (and  circumstances  concur  to  the  enforcing 
persuasion,  as  excellence  of  birth  and  education ;  for 
it  is  probable  that  a  person  so  brought  up,  -vmL  be  of 
such  a  character;)  and  hence  we  pass  encomia  on 
those  who  have  acted.  And  a  man's  actions  are 
signs  of  his  habit ;  since  we  commend  even  the  man 
who  has  not  acted,  if  we  believe  him  to  be  of  such  a 

34.  character.  But  felicitation  (/laicapKT/ioc),  and  con- 
gratulation {th^aifjLoyifffjLoc),  are  synonymous  the  one 
to  the  other ;  but  are  not  so  to  the  other  two :  buf 
felicitation  comprehends  them,  just  as  happiness  com- 
prehends virtue. 

35.  Com-  Demonstrative  and  deliberative  oratory  have  one 
ofepideS-  P^^°*  ^^  common ;  for  whatever  you  would  suggest  to 
tic  and  de-  a  man  in  giving  advice,  that,  by  a  change  of  the  dic- 
liberative  tion,  becomes  an  encomium  *^     When,  therefore,  we 

oratory. 

*'  See  Ethics,  lib.  ii.  c.  4.  AiKuicas  fi  ata<pp6vto9  frpdrTeTai 
iAv  6  Trp&TTwu  trM9  iyatv  trpaTTri'  trp&n-ov  fxku  iAv  etdci»«,  lireiT* 
iav  irpoaipovfjLsvoif  kcu  irpoaipov/jLivos  Si*  avrAy  to  dk  rpiTOv  Kai 
idi/ jSejSatoiv  Kal  &fitTaKivnrai9  cxeov  irpaTTt?*  and,  in  fact,  unless 
the  Ka\&  be  done  under  some  restriction  of  principle,  mode, 
and  propriety,  they  lose  their  character,  as  Zonaras  has,  on 
another  occasion,  observed :  "Oxi  ov  Ka\6v  otuv  fxii  koXw^  yi- 
vrirai :  in  Can.  Apost.  66,  quoted  in  Hooker,  at  the  end  of  book  i. 

**  On  the  subject  of  lyKvajunov  and  cttoii/os,  see  Eth.  Nich.  i. 
12,  where  he  is  inquiring  whether  commendation  or  praise  be 
more  appropriate  to  happiness : — 6  fikv  liratvo?  t^«  dpfrfj^, 
trpaKTiKol  ydp  Tutv  xaXoii/  dird  toutijs'  tA  Sk  iyKutfiia  tSov  Ip' 
yuiVy  ouoican  Kai  Ttou  crMfiaTiKcoVy  kuI  tSov  xlfvxiKutv. 

*•  Laudes  nonnullse  a  voluntate  bona  cum  reverentia  con- 

CHAP,  fx]  RHETORIC.  65 

know  what  a  man  ought  to  do,  and  what  kind  of  per-  36. 
son  he  should  be,  it  is  necessary,  if  we  would  state 
this,  in  the  form  of  advice,  to  transpose  and  change 
the  sentiment  in  its  diction :  for  instance,  suppose  we 
are  aware  that  we  are  not  to  think  highly  of  goods 
obtained  by  chance,  but  of  those  obtained  by  our  own 
means.  Thus  expressed  the  sentiment  has  the  force 
of  a  mggestUm  ;  but  thus,  of  commeridation,  '*  think- 
ing highly,  not  of  goods  which  were  his  by  chance, 
but  those  obtained  by  his  own  means."  So  that, 
when  you  wish  to  commend,  see  what  you  would 
suggest  in  advising ;  and  when  to  advise,  see  what 
you  would  commend.  But  the  diction  will  of  neces-  37. 
sity  be  reversed,  when  there  has  been  submitted  to 
change  an  idea  which  in  one  form  is  prohibitive,  in 
another  is  not  prohibitive. 

We  must  avail  ourselves  also  of  amplification  in  38.  Am- 
many  cases :  thus,  if  a  man  has  done  a  thing  alone,  ^^5^^^°^ 
or  first,  or  with  few  to  share  it,  or  even  if  it  be  a  used; 
thing  which  he  has  done  more  than  any  other ;  these 
all  are  circumstances  of  honour.  The  topic  also 
which  is  deducible  from  times  and  seasons ;  these  are 
circumstances  contrary  to  what  is  natural.  Also  if 
a  man  has  often  succeeded  in  the  same  thing ;  for  this 
is  a  feature  of  greatness,  and  originates  not  in  chance, 
but  will  appear  to  arise  through  his  own  means. 
Also  if  orations  commendatory  and  exhorting  to 
emulation  have  been  founded  and  got  up  on  his  ac- 
count ;  if  also  he  be  one  on  whom  an  encomium  was 
first  passed,  as  it  was  on  Hippolochus ;  and  the  hav- 
ing a  statue  set  up  in  the  forum  first  occurred  to 
Harmodius  and  Aristogiton :  and  in  the  same  way 
we  use  amplification  with  opposite  views ;  and  should 
you  not  abound  in  topics  bearing  on  your  subject 
himself,  you  should  set  him  in  comparison  with 
others ;  which  Isocrates  used  to  do  from  his  familiar- 
ity with  judicial  pleading.     You  should  compare  the  and  cbm- 

jiincta  profidscuntur,  quae  sane  laudum  formula  Principibus  et 
Viiis  quibuscunque  dignioribus  debetur :  Laudando  pnseipere : 
cum  scilicet  apud  illos  praedicando  quales  sint,  humiliter  mo- 
neas  quales  esse  debeant.    Bacon's  Essayd,  De  Laude. 
F 

66  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

parison  of  person  of  whom  you  speak,  with  men  of  character ; 
character.  fQj  {^  is  a  feature  of  amplification,  and  honourable, 

if  he  be  better  than  the  good. 
39.  Am-        Amplification  falls  in  easily  with  demonstrative 
plification  oratory;  for  its  essence  is  the  being  above  medi- 
dSctic^*"   ocritj.     On  which  account  we  should  make  a  coin- 
oratory,     parison  with  the  generality  of  men,  if  we  cannot 

with  men  of  character ;  since  the  being  above  the 

40.  average  seems  to  indicate  virtue.  In  a  word,  of  all 
the  formulae  common  to  each  branch  of  rhetoric,  am- 
plification best  suits  demonstrative ;  for  the  orator 
takes  the  actions  for  granted,  and  it  thus  femains 

Example  only  to  invest  them  with  greatness  and  beauty.  £x- 
^*®  ^  ample  2^,  however,  suits  deliberative  ;  because  we 
enthy-  '  there  decide,  by  arguing  of  the  future  from  what  has 
memju-  gone  before.  EnAymem,  however,  suits  judicial; 
m^  ora-  gjj.  ^yj  reason  of  its  not  being  clear,  the  past  most 

especially  leaves  room  for  assignment  of  reasons  and 

demonstration. 

41.  Nearly  all  the  sources  out  of  which  praise  and 
blame  are  deduced,  and  on  what  sort  of  things  we 
ought  to  have  an  eye  in  praising  and  blaming,  the 
means  too  by  which  encomia  and  reproaches  are  pro- 
duced, are  these  :  for  being  possessed  of  these  points, 

^  For  the  general  principles  upon  wluch  Examples  influ- 
ence us,  and  their  peculiar  adaptation  to  deliberative  cases, 
see  book  ii.  chap.  20.  Meanwhile  let  us  anticipate  our  author's 
discussion  of  the  subject,  and  quote  a  few  words  of  a  modem 
writer  to  show  how  completely  this  vehicle  of  proof  is  adapted 
to  the  purpose  of  the  orator,  whose  demonstrations  should  al- 
ways be  as  little  laboured  as  possible. — "  Our  lives  in  this 
world  are  partly  guided  in  rules,  and  partly  directed  by  ex- 
amples. To  conclude  out  of  general  rules  and  axioms  by  dis- 
course of  wit  our  duties  in  every  particular  action,  is  both 
troublesome,  and  many  times  so  full  of  difficulty,  that  it  maketh 
deliberations  hard  and  tedious  to  the  wisest  mezl.  Whereupon 
we  naturally  all  incline  to  observe  examples,  to  mark  what 
others  have  done  before  us,  and,  in  favour  of  our  own  ease, 
rather  to  follow  them,  than  to  enter  into  a  new  consultation,  if 
in  regard  of  their  virtue  and  wisdom  we  may  but  probably 
think  they  have  waded  without  error.  So  that  the  willingness 
of  men  to  be  led  by  example  of  others,  both  discovereth  and 
helpeth  the  imbecility  of  our  judgment."  Hodker,  Ecc.  Pol. 
V.  §  65,  p.  307. 

CHAP.  X.]  RHETORIC.  67 

their  contraries  are  plain ;  for  blame  is  deduced  from 
the  opposite  sources. 

CHAP.  X. 

The  number  and  nature  of  the  Sources  out  of  which  the 
Orator  must  construct  his  reasonings  in  Accusation  and 
Defence^ 

It  will  be  for  me  next  to  speak  of  the  number  and  l.  Judl- 
nature  of  the  sources  out  of  which  the  orator  must  ^  ®'*'_ 
construct  his  reasonings,  touching  accusation  and  de-  dderedhi 
fence.     Now  we  must  ascertain  three  points  ;  one,  three 
what  and  how  manj  are  the  objects  for  the  sake  of  2^*f*xhe 
which  men  act  unjustl^r ;  the  second,  how  themselves  motiyes. 
are  disposed ;  and  the  third,  towards  persons  of  what  ^:  The 
character  and  of  what  disposition  they  do  so  act.         ti^  of  thf 

Let  us  then,  after  defining  the  acting  unjustly,  a^^ents. 
speak  in  order  of  the  rest.     Let  the  acting  unjustly  "^-  T^®" 
be  defined  to  be,  the  voluntary  ^  commission  of  hurt  ^^ed. 
in  contravention  of  law.     Now  law  is  either  general  3.  In- 
or  peculiar.     The  peculiar  law  I  call  that,  by  whose  ^[J^®  ^®" 
written   enactments   men   direct  their  polity:    the  Divirion  ' 
general^  whatever  unwritten  rules  appear  to  be  recog-  p^Jj^- 
nised  among  all  men.     Men  are  voluntary  agents  in  J^  ®^^ 
whatever  they  do  wittingly,  and  without  compulsion,  ii.  Par- 
Men,  therefore,  do  not  every  thing  on  fixed  princi-  Ocular, 
pie,  which  they  do  wittingly :  but  whatever  they  do 
on  fixed  principle,  that  they  do  wittingly ;  because 
no  one  is  ignorant  of  that  which  he  chooses  on  princi- 
ple.    Now,  the  principles  by  whose  motion  men  de-  4.  Two 

*  Rewards  and  punishments  do  always  presuppose  some- 
thing willingly  done  well  or  ill ;  without  which  respect,  though 
we  may  sometimes  receive  good  or  harm,  yet  then  the  one  is 
only  a  benefit  and  not  a  reward,  the  other  simply  a  hurt  and 
not  a  punishment.  From  the  sundry  dispositions  of  man's 
wiU,  tohich  is  the  root  of  all  hit  actions,  there  groweth  variety 
Ji  the  sequel  of  rewards  and  punishments,  which  are  by  these 
and  the  like  rules  measured :  Take  away  the  will,  and  all  acts 
are  equal :  That  which  we  do  not,  and  would  do,  is  commonly 
accepted  as  done.  Hooker,  i.  {  9,  p.  239. 
F   2 

68  ARISTOTLB*S  [book  i. 

causes  of   liberatelj  choose  to  hurt  and  do  evil  in  contravention 
injustice,    of  law,  are  depravity  and  moral  weakness^;  for  if 
praTity.     ^^7  *re  depraved  either  in  one  or  more  respects,  it  is 
li,  Incon-  in  reference  to  that  point,  on  which  they  artf  so  de- 
tinence.     prayed,  that  they  are  guilty  of  injustice.     The  illi- 
heral  man,  for  instance,  on  the  subject  of  money ; 
the  intemperate,  touching  the  pleasure  of  the  body ; 
and  the  effeminate,  respecting  objects  of  ease  ;  and 
the  coward,  respecting  danger ;  (for  it  is  by  reason 
of  fear  that  men  abandon  their  comrades  in  danger ;) 
the  ambitious  man,  on  the  score  of  honour ;  the  hasty 
man,  by  reason  of  anger  ;  the  man  eager  to  excel,  on 
account  of  victory;  the  vindictive,  for  the  sake  of 
revenge ;  a  silly  man,  owing  to  his  being  mistaken 
on  points  of  right  and  wrong  ;  a  man  of  effrontery, 
from  his  contempt  of  character.     And  in  other  cha- 
racters in  the  same  way  each,  [goes  Wrong]  respect- 
6.  ing  his  own  particular  weakness.     But  my  meaning 
on  these  matters  will  be  evident  from  what  has  been 
already  said  on  the  subject  of  the  virtues,  and  from 
what  hereafter  will  be  stated  on  the  subject  of  the 
passions.    It  merely  remains  for  me  to  state  on  what 
account,  how  effected,  and  toward  whom,  men'' do 
commit  injustice. 
6.  The  First,  then,  let  us  distinctly  enumerate  the  objects, 

motives  of  which  desiring,  or  which  avoiding,  we  set  about  in- 
proSed*    justice' :  because  it  evidently  should  be  considered 
from         by  the  plaintiff  how  many,  and  what  sort  of  those 
things,  from  a  desire  of  which  men  wrong  their 
neighbours,  have  an  existence  on  the  side  of  his  ad- 
versary ;  and  by  the  defendant  again,  what,  and 

'  Cf.  James,  chap.  i.  15. 

*  How  complete  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  man  does  this 
disquisition  display ;  and  how  admirable  a  key  is  here  afforded 
to  all  the  operations  of  the  human  heart !  This  branch  of 
knowledge  1^  always  been  insisted  on  as  essential  to  those 
employed  in  judicial  investigations. — Thus,  Bolingbroke, 
speaking  of  the  education  of  lawyers,  says,  "  They  must  pry 
into  the  secret  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and  become  well 
acquainted  with  the  whole  moral  world,  that  they  may  discover 
the  abstract  reason  of  all  laws,"  etc.  Stud,  of  Hist.  p.  353 : 
edit.  4to. 

CHAP,  x]  RHETORIC.  69 

what  number  of  these  things  do  not  so  exist.     Now  7.  the  mo- 
all  men  do  all  things  either  of  themselves,  or  not  of  tivesofall 
themselves.     The  things  which  they  do  not  of  them-  action. 
selves,  they  do  either  by  chance,  or  from  necessity  ; 
and  the  things  done  by  necessity,  they  do  either  by 
compulsion,  or  by  nature.     Sb  that  all  things  what- 
soever which  men  do  not  of  themselves,  they  do  either 
by  chance,  or  from  compulsion,  or  by  nature.  Again, 
the  things  which  they  do  of  themselves,  and  of  which 
they  are  themselves  the  causes,  some  they  do  through 
custom,  and  others  through  natural  desire  ;  and  this 
partly  through  this  desire  influenced  by  reason,  and 
in  part  through  it  devoid  of  reason.     Now  the  act  of  8. 
*  wishing  is  desire  accompanied  by  reason,  fixing  on 
some  good  as  its  object ;  because  no  one  wishes  for 
any  thing  other  than  what  he  conceives  to  be  a  good. 
The  desires  devoid  of  reason,  are  anger  and  appetite. 
So  that  all  things  whatever  which  men  do,  they  ne-  These  are 
cessarily  do  from  seven  causes  ;  by  chance,  compul-  seven  m 
sion,  nature,  custom,  will,  anger,  or  appetite.     But  i  chance. 
to  carry  on  distinctions  in  reference  to  age,  or  habits,  ii.  Com- 
or  whatever  else  enacts  itself  in  conduct,  were  su-  ^^^* 
perfluous.     For,  granting  that  it  happens  to  young  ture. 
men  to  be  passionate,  it  is  not  by  motion  of  their  j^.  Cus- 
youth  that  they  act  thus,  but  by  motion  of  anger  and  y.^^in, 
appetite :  neither  is  it  by  motion  either  of  wealth  or  vi  Anger. 
poverty,  simply,  but  (in  the  case  of  the  poor)  it  is  on  ^^P^®" 
account  6f  their  neediness  that  it  happens  that  they  9. 
cherish  an  appetite  for  wealth ;  and  (in  the  case  of 
the  rich)  on  account  of  their  having  the  means,  that 
they  risk  an  appetite  for  unnecessary  pleasure ;  and 
these  persons  will  act  neither  by  motion  of  their 
wealth  nor  of  their  poverty,  but  by  motion  of  appe- 
tite.    And  in  exactly  the  same  way,  the  just  and  un- 
just, and  all  such  as  are  said  to  act  conformably  to 
habits,  will  in  reality  act,  under  all  circumstances,  by 
motion  of  these  principles  ;  for  they  on  the  impulse 
either  of  reason  or  of  passion ;  but  some  from  good 
manners  and   passions,   others  from  the  contrary. 
Still,  however,  it  happens  that  on  habits  of  this  par-  10. 
ticular  character,  principles  of  action  the  same  in 

70  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

character  are  consequent ;  and  on  those  of  that  kind, 
principles  also  of  that  kind.  For  on  the  temperate 
man  perhaps  forthwith,  by  motion  of  his  temper- 
ance, are  attendant  good  opinions  and  appetites  re- 
specting pleasures  ;  but  on  the  intemperate,  the  con- 

11.  trary  on  these  same  subjects.  For  which  reason  we 
must  wave  distinctions  of  such  a  kind ;  but  we  must 
consider,  on  what  conditions  ^  what  principles  of 
conduct  are  wont  to  follow :  for  it  is  not  ordained, 
(in  the  nature  of  things,)  that,  if  a  man  be  white  or 
black,  or  tall  or  short,  principles  of  this  or  that  kind 
should  be  attendant  on  him ;  but  if  he  be  young  or 
old,  just  or  unjust,  here  some  difference  begins ;  and 
so,  in  a  word,  in  the  case  of  all  contingent  circum- ' 

^  stances  whatever,  which  produce  a  difference  in  the 
tempers  of  men,  for  instance,  a  man's  seeming  to 
himself  to  be  rich  or  poor,  fortunate  or  unfortunate ; 
in  all  these  cases  there  will  be  some  essential  differ- 
ence.    Of  this,  however,  we  will  speak  hereafter ;  let 

12.  us  now  treat  first  of  the  renlaining  points.  Things 
i.  Chanel,  proceed  from  chance  which  are  of  such  kind  that 

their  cause  is  not  definite  ^  and  are  produced  in  the  ab- 
sence of  any  final  motive,  and  that  neither  invariably, 
nor  usually,  nor  in  any  prescribed  order.  My  mean- 
ing on  these  subjects  will  be  plain  from  the  definition 

13.  of  chance.  All  those  things  exist  ncOuraUy  whose 
ii.  Na-  cause  is  internal  and  ordinate ;  for  they  turn  out,  either 
*^^*®*         invariably  or  generally,  in  the  same  way ;  shice  there 

is  no  need  of  an  accurate  inquiry  on  results  contrary  to    * 

nature,  whether  they  be  produced  conformably  to  a 

certain  nature,  or  any  other  cause.     It  would  appear, 

U.  too,  that  chance  is  the  cause  of  such  results.  All 
iii.  Com- 

*  He  here  first  informs  us  that  he  shall  not  make  his  exclu- 
sion so  rigid  as  he  had  above  stated,  but  will  admit  yotOh  and 
tuge,  etc.  to  a  particular  consideration,  as  holding  an  important 
influence  over  character,  though  ttiat  influence  ought  philo- 
sophically to  be  referred  to  one  of  the  seven  above-mentioned 
^principles ;  while  every  thing  else  which  people  choose  to  fix 
upon  as  a  principle  of  conduct  will,  on  examination,  prove  to 
be  merely  secondary ^  and  to  act  mediately  through  one  or  other 
of  the  seven. 

»  Vid.  chap.  v.  §  17. 

CHAP.  X.]  RHETORIC.  71 

things  originate  in  compulsion,  which  are  produced 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  agents  themselves, 
contrary  to  their  inclination  and  reason.     In  habit  15. 
originates  every  thing  which  men  do  because  they  ^^*  ^*^^*- 
have  often  done  it  before.     From  toiU  proceed  what-  16. 
ever  of  the  forementioned  goods  appear  to  be  useful,  ^'  ^^^• 
either  as  an  end  or  as  conducing  to  the  end,  when  it 
is  by  reason  of  such  their  usefulness  that  they  are  real- 
ized in  action :  for  even  the  intemperate  do  some  things 
which  are  useful ;  but  not  on  account  of  their  useful- 
ness, but  on  account  of  pleasure.  Through  the  medium  17. 
of  anger  apd  excited  feeling  arise  acts  of  vengeance.  ^  ^.nger. 
Now,  between  revenge  and  punishment  there  is  a  dif- 
ference ;  for  punishment  is  for  the  sake  of  the  sufferer, 
but  revenge  for  that  of  the  person  inflicting  it,  in  or- 
der that  he  may  be  satiated®.    On  what  subjects  this 
excitement  of  feeling  exists,  will  therefore  be  plain  in 
my  treatise  of  the  passions.  But  all  such  things  as  ap-  18. 
pear  pleasant  are  produced  in  action  on  the  impulse  V^-  Appe- 
of  appetite.     But  that  which  is  familiar  and  has  be-  ^^^' 
come  habitual,  is  of  the  number  of  things  pleasant ; 
for  many  things  there  are,  even  among  such  as  are 
not  pleasant  naturally,  which,  when  men  have  been 
habituated  to,  they  do  with  pleasure.     So  that,  to  Th^e 
speak  in  one  word  comprehending  the  whole,  every  J^^otaves 
thing  whatsoever  which  men  do  of  their  own  proper  compre-  ^ 
motion,  either  is  good,  or  apparently  good ;  pleasant,  hended 
or  apparently  pleasant.     But  as  they  act  voluntarily  ^^^ 
in  whatever  they  do  of  their  own  motion,  and  invo-  pleasure. 
luntarily  in  whatever  they  do  not  of  their  own  motion ; 
all  things  whatsoever  in  respect  to  which  they  act 
voluntarily,  will  be  either  good  or  apparently  good ; 
pleasant  or  apparently  pleasant.    For  I  also  set  dow^ 
the  getting  quit  either  of  evils  or  apparent  evils,  and 
the  getting  a  less  evil  in  exchange  for  a  greater,  in 
the  class  of  goods ;  because  they  are  in  a  certain  way 
desirable  things.     And,  among   things  pleasant,  I 
likewise  set  down  the  getting  quit  of  things  bringing 
pain,  or  appearing  to  do  so ;  or  the  getting  things 

'  Reyenge  is  a  kind  of  wild  justice.    Bacon's  Essays. 

72  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

less  so,  in  exchange  for  such  as  are  so  in  greater  de- 
gree. 
19.  What      We  have  therefore  to  ascertain  the  number  of  things 
oljrjerts  ^   pleasant'  and  of  what  kinds  they  are.     Now  on  the 
^t^  ^*    subject  of  what  is  useful,  something  has  been  already 
therefore,  said  in  my  treating  of  deliberative  rhetoric  ;  but  on 
Ss^assed.  ^®  subject  of  what  is  pleasant  let  us  treat,  banning 
at  this  point.     As  to  the  definitions,  you  must  deem 
them  to  be  adequate  £to  my  purpose]  if  they  be  found, 
on  each  subject,  exempt  from  obscurity,  though  not 
accurately  precise. 

CHAP.  XL 
What  things  are  pleasant. 

1.  Imme-  Let  it  be  laid  down  by  us,  that  pleasure  is  a  certain 
^te  mo-  motion  of  the  soul,  and  a  settlement  of  it,  at  once 
inj^ce  rapid  and  perceptible,  into  its  own  proper  nature ; 
consider-  and  that  pain  is  the  contrary.  If  then  pleasure  be  a 
^•.  ^®J"  thing  of  this  nature,  it  is  plain  that  whatever  is  pro- 
pleasure,    ductive  of  the  disposition  I  have  described,  is  plea- 

2.  Pain  is  sant ;  while  every  thing  of  a  nature  to  destroy  it,  or 
t^Taoris.    produce  a  disposition  the  opposite  to  it,  is  painfuL  ^ 

3.  A  re-  Generally  speaking,  therefore,  it  is  necessary,  both 
version  to  that  the  being  in  progress  toward  a  state  conform- 
p?«^?    able  to  nature,  should  be  pleasant ;  and  that,  in  the  * 

highest  degree,  when  those  feelings,  whose  original 
is  conformable  to  it,  shall  have  recovered  that  their 
nature  ;  and  habits,  because  that  which  is  habitual 
becomes  by  that  time  natural,  as  it  were ;  for,  in  a 
certain  way,  custom  is  like  nature,  because  the  idea 
.  oi  frequency  is  proximate  to  that  of  always ;  now  na- 
ture belongs  to  the  idea  of  alwaysy  custom  to  that  of 

^  In  all  judicial  questions  a  knowledge  of  the  constituents  of 
pleasure  will  be  of  essential  service ;  for  they  all  suppose  some 
wrong  done,  and  therB  is  no  man  doth  a  wrong  for  the  wrong's 
sake,  but  thereby  to  purchase  himself  proJU,  or  pleasure^  or 
honour^  or  the  Wee,    Bacon's  Essays. 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  73 

often.     What  is  not  compulsory,  also,  is  pleasant ;  for  4.  All 
compulsion  is  contrary  to  nature.    Wherefore  acts  of  freedom 
necessity  are  painful ;  and  it  has  been  truly  remark-  gtraint. 
ed,  "  Every  act  of  necessity  is  in  its  nature  painful." 
It  muj9t  be  also  that  a  state  of  sedulous  attention, 
anxiety,  the  having  the  mind  on  the- stretch,  are 
painful,  for  they  all  are  acts  of  necessity,  and  con- 
strained, unless  they  have  become  habitual ;  *  but  it  is 
custom   which,  under  such  circumstances,  renders 
them  pleasant.    The  contraries  of  these  must  also  be 
pleasant ;   wherefore,  relaxation  of   mind,  leisure, 
listlessness,  amusements,  and  intervals  of  rest,  rank 
in  the  class  of  things  pleasant ;  for  none  of  these  has 
any  thing  to  do  with  necessity.     Every  thing  of  6.  Appe- 
.  which  there  is  an  innate  appetite,  is  pleasant ;  for  ^^^^^ 
appetite  is  a  desire  of  what  is  pleasant    Now,  of  ap- 
petites, some  are  irrational,  others  attended  by  reason. 
I  call  all  those  irrational,  which  men  desire,  not  from  Irration- 
any  conception  which  they  form :  of  this  kind  are  all  ^• 
which  are  said  to  exist  naturally,  as  those  of  the 
body ;  thirst  or  hunger,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of 
sustenance ;  and  the  appetite  of  sustenance  in  every 
kind.     And  the  appetites  connected  with  objects  of 
taste,  and  of  lust,  and,  in  fact,  objects  of  touch  gener- 
ally ;  the  appetite  of  fragrant  odours,  too,  as  connect- 
ed with  smelling,  and  hearing,  and  sight.    Appetites  RationaL 
attended  by  reason,  are  all  those  whatsoever  which 
men  exercise  from  a  persuasion :   for  many  things 
there  are  which  they  desire  to  behold,  and  possess, 
on  hearsay  and  persuasion.      Now,  as  the  being  6.  Hope 
pleased  stands  in  the  perception  of  a  certain  affec-  aadme- 
tion,  and  as  imagination  is  a  kind  of  faint  perception,  ^^^t? 
there  wiU  attend  on  him  who  exercises  either  me- 
mory or  hope,  a  kind  of  imagination  of  that  which  is 
the  object  of  his  memory  or  hope ;  but  if  so,  it  is 
plain  that  they  who  exercise  memory  or  hope,  cer- 
tainly feel  pleasure,  since  they  have  also  a  perception. 
So  that  every  thing  pleasant  consists  either  in  the  7. 
perception  of  present  objects,  or  in  the  remembrance 
of  those  which  have  already  been,  or  in  the  hope  of 
such  as  are  yet  to  be ;  for  men  exercise  perception 

74  '  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

on  present,  memory  on  past,  and  hope  on  future  ob- 

8.  jects.  Now  the  objects  of  memory  are  pleasant,  not 
only  such  as  at  the  moment  while  present  were 
pleasant,  but  some  even  which  were  not  pleasant, 
should  their  consequence  subsequently  be  honour- 
able and  good  ;  and  hence  this  saying,  "  But  it  is 
indeed  pleasant  for  a  man,  when  preserved,  to  re- 
member his  toils  ;"  and  this,  "  For  after  his  suffer- 
ings, a  man  who  has  suffered  much,  and  much 
achieved,  is  gladdened  at  the  recollection."  But  the 
reason  of  this  is,  that  to  be  exempt  from  evil   is 

9.  pleasant  ^  And  all  objects  are  pleasant  in  hope, 
which  appear  by  their  presence  either  to  delight  or 
benefit  in  a  great  degree ;  or  to  benefit,  without 
giving  pain.  In  a  word,  whatever  objects  by  their 
presence  delight  us,  do  so,  generally  speaking,  as  we 
hope  for,  or  remember  them.  On  which  account, 
too,  the  feeling  of  anger  is  pleasant ;  just  as  Homer 
has  remarked  of  anger  in  his  poem,  "  That  which 
with  sweetness  far  greater  than  distilling  honey  as 
it  drops  ;"  for  there  is  no  one  who  feels  anger  where 

^  the  object  seems  impracticable  to  his  revenge  ;  nor 

with  those  far  their  superiors  in  power  do  men  feel 

anger  at  all,  or  if  they  do,  it  is  in  a  less  degree. 

^         10.  There  is  also  a  kind  of  pleasure  consequent  on  most 

appetites;   for  either  in  the  recollection  that  they 

» have  enjoyed  them,  or  in  the  hope  that  they  shall 

enjoy  them,  men   are  affected  and  delighted  by  a 

certain  pleasure :  thus  men  possessed  by  fevers  feel 

delight,  amid  their  thirst,  as  well  at  the  remembrance 

how  they  used  to  drink,  as  at  the  hope  of  drinking 

11.  yet  again.     Lovers,  too,  feel  delight  in  conversing, 

writing,  and  composing  something,  ever  about  the 

object  beloved  ;   because,  in  all  those  energies,  they 

have  a  perception,  as  it  were,  of  the  object  they  love. 

Criterion   And  this  is  in  all  cases  a  criterion  of  the  eommence- 

of  loYc.      ment  of  love,  when  persons  feel  pleasure  not  only  in 

the  presence  of  the  object,  but  are  enamoured  also  of 

12.  Sor-     it  when  absent,  on  memory ;  wherefore,  even  when 

row.  .  ,       .,  .  . 

*  Suave  man  magno,  turbantibus  aequora  veiitis, 

Alterius  procul  e  terra  spectare  dolorem,  etc.    Lucretius. 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  75 

pain  arises  at  absenoe>  nay  in  the  midst  of  mourning, 
and  the  very  dirge  of  death,  there  yet  arises  within 
us  a  certain  pleasure.     For  the  pain  is  felt  because 
the  object  is  not  present ;  but  the  pleasure  consists  in 
remembering  and  seeing,  as  it  were,  both  the  person, 
abd  what  he  used  to  do,  and  the  kind  of  character  of 
which  he  was.     Whence  has  it  been,  said,  and  with 
probability  enough,  "Thus  spake  he,  and  excited 
within  them  all  a  desire  of  lamentation."     Also  the  13.  Re- 
avenging  one's  self  is  pleasant*;  for  the  getting  of  that  ^®°8^®- 
is  pleasant,  the  failing  to  get  which  is  painful :  now 
the  angry  do  feel  pain  in  an  excessive  degree  if  they 
be  not  avenged  ;  but  in  the  hope  of  revenge  they  take 
pleasure.     Again,  to  overcome  is  pleasant,  not  to  the  14.  Vic- 
ambitious  only,  but  even  to  all ;  for  there  arises  an  ^ry. 
imagination  of  superiority,  for  which  all,  either  in  a 
faint  or  more  violent  degree,  have  an  appetite.     But  l5.Hence, 
since  to   overcome  is   pleasant,  it  must  follow  of  a™^- 
course,   that  amusements  where   there  is  field  for  ^^^  ' 
rivalry,  as  those  of  music  and  disputations,  are  plea- 
sant ;  for  it  frequently  occurs,  in  the  course  of  these, 
that  we  overcome ;  also  chess,  ball,  dice,  and  draughts. 
Again,  it  is  the  same  with  respect  to  amusements 
where  a  Hvely  interest  is  taken  ^;  for,  of  these,  some 
become  pleasant  as  accustomed  to  them ;  others  are 
pleasant  at  first ;  for  instance,  hunting  and  every 
kind  of  sporting ;  for  where  there  is  rivalry,  there 
is  also  victory ;  on  which  principle  the  disputations 
of  the  bar  and  of  the  schools  are  pleasant  to  those 
who  have  become  accustomed  to  them,-  and  have 
abilities.     Also  honour  and  good  character  are  most  16.  Hon- 
pleasant,  by  reason  that  an  idea  arises,  that  one  is  ^^  *^? 
such  as  IS  the  good  man ;  and  this  in  a  greater  de- 
gi*ee  should  those  people  pronounce  one  such,  who 

*  See  book  ii.  chap.  2,  {  1. 

'  If  tliis  rendering  for  the  word  i<nrovia<rfiiini  be  not  that 
which  the  Greek  might  first  suggest,  yet  it  is  that  which  seems 
best  to  suit  the  context ;  for  sporting  and  hunting  do  not  very  y 
well  accord  with  our  ideas  of  grave  and  serious  amusements, 
though  exercised  as  they  were  by  the  Greeks,  as  mere  pre- 
paratives for  the  labours  of  military  duty,  they  might  justly 
deserve  serious  attention. 

76  ARISTOTLE'S  [book    i. 

lie  think  spes^  truth :  snch  ar^  those  immediatelj 
about  one,  rather  than  those  who  are  more  removed ; 
familiar  friends,  and  acquaintances,  and  one's  fellow 
citizens,  rather  than  those  who  are  at  a  distance; 
the  present,  rather  than  a  future  generation  ;  a  man 
of  practical  wisdom,  rather  than  a  mere  ignoramus ; 
many,  than  a  few ;  for  it  is  more  likely  that  these  I 
have  mentioned  will  adhere  to  the  truth,  than  that 
the  opposite  characters  will :  since  one  has  no  anxiety, 
about  the  honour  or  the  opinions  of  such  as  one 
greatly  despises,  children  and  animals  for  instance, 
not  at  least  for  the  sake  of  such  opinion  itself ;  but 
if  one  is  anxious  about  it,  then  it  is  on  account  <^ 
17.  something  else.  A  friend,  too,  ranks  among  things 
Friends,  pleasant ;  for  the  affection  of  love  is  pleasant ;  since 
there  is  no  lover  of  wine,  who  does  not  delight  in 
wine:  also  the  having  affection  felt  toward  one  is 
pleasant ;  for  there  is  in  this  case  also  an  idea  of  one's 
being  an  excellent  person,  which  all  who  have  any 
sensibility  to  it  are  desirous  of;  now  the  having 
affection  felt  for  you  is  the  being  beloved  yourself, 

18.  Being  on  your  own  account.  Also  the  being  held  in  admir- 
**^^  •  ation  is  pleasant,  on  the  very  account  of  being  hon- 
riattery.   oured  by  it.     Flattery  and  the  flatterer  are  pleasant ; 

since  the  flatterer  is  a  seeming  admirer  and  a  seeming 

19.  Ha-     friend**     To  continue  the  same  course  of  action  is 
bitual  ac-  aigo  pleasant ;  for  what  is  habitual  was  laid  down  to 
20.° Va-     ^®  pleasant.    To  vary  is  also  pleasant ;  for  change  is 
riety.        an  approach  to  what  is  natural :  for  sameness  pro- 
duces an  excess  of  a  stated  habit ;  whence  it  has 
been  said,  "  In  every  thing  change   is  pleasant*." 
For  on  this  principle,  whatever  occurs  at  intervals 
of  time  is  pleasant,  whether  persons  or  things;  for 

*  It  may  be  interesting  to  compare  the  grounds  on  which 
Dr.  Johnson  considered  flattery  pleasant  with  these  of  Aris- 
totle. The  Doctor's  words  are,  "  Flattery  pleases  very  gener- 
ally. In  the  first  place,  the  flatterer  may  think  what  he  says 
to  be  true ;  but,  in  the  second  place,  whether  he  thinks  so  or 
-  not,  he  certainly  thinks  those  whom  he  flatters  of  consequence 
enough  to  be  flattered."  Boswell's  Life,  A,  D.  1775,  ^t.  66, 
p.  86,  vol.  iii. 

«  Eurip.  Orest.  234. 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  77    x 

it  is  a  variation  of  present  objects ;  and  at  the  same 
time  that  which  occurs  merely  at  intervals  possesses 
the  merit  of  rarity.     Also  learning  and  admiration,  21.  Leam- 
generallj  speaking,  are  pleasant ;  for  under  admira-  ^J^^^ 
lion  exists  a  desire  [to  learn],  so  that  what  is  admired 
is  desired ;  and  in  the  act  of  learning  there  is  a  set- 
tlement into  a  state  conformable  to  nature.  To  benefit  22.  To  do 
and  to  be  benefited  are  also  of  the  number  of  plea-  ^eive 
sant  things  ;  for  to  be  benefited,  is  to  get  what  peo-  good. 
pie  desire  ;  but  to  benefit,  is  to  possess  and  abound  ; 
things,  the  both  of  which  men  desire.     And  because 
a  tendency  to  beneficence  is  pleasant^,  it  is  also  plea- 
sant to  a  man^to  set  his  neighbour  on  his  legs  again, 
and  to  put  a  finish  to  that  which  was  deficient  in 
some  particular.     But  as  the  acquisition  of  know-  23. 
ledge  is  pleasant,  and  the  feeling  admiration,  and  ^^  ' 
such  things ;  that,  too,  must  necessarily  be  pleasant 
which  has  been  expressed  in  imitation,  as  in  painting.  Fainting 
sculpture,  and  poetry :  also,  every  thing  is  pleasant  ^^^ 
which  has  been  correctly  imitated,  although  the  ori-  Poetry. 
ginal  object,  of  which  it  is  the  imitation,  may  not  in 
itself  be  pleasant ;  for  one  does  not  feel  pleasure  on 
that  account;  but  there  is  an  inference  that  '^this 
means  that:"   and  thus  it  happens  that  we  learn 
something.    Also  sudden  revolutions^  and  the  being  24.  Re- 
saved  from  danger  narrowly;  for  all  these  are  cases  J^"««- 
exciting  admiration.     Again,  since  that  is  pleasant  escapes. 
which  is  conformable  to  nature,  and  things  which  are  25.  simi- 
akin  are  respectively  conformable  to  nature,  every  Jj^^J^S? 
thing  like  and  akin,  speaking  generally,  is  pleasant ;  ty  to  na- 
ture and 
ourselves. 

*  This  principle  of  pleasure  has  been  thus  developed  by 
Hooker :  *'  As  to  love  them  of  whom  we  receive  good  things 
is  a  duty,  because  they  satisfy  our  desires  in  that  which  else 
we  should  want ;  so  to  love  thorn  on  whom  toe  bestow  is  nature, 
because  in  them  we  behold  the  effecte  ofqurown  virtue." — Ecc. 
Pol.  V.  §  63,  p.  285.  See  also  what  is  said  towards  the  end  of 
this  chapter,  of  the  love  borne  towards  whatever  is,  in  any 
sense,  an  Ipyov  of  own — as  children,  works  of  genius,  etc. 

■^  '"Ewl  fik  trtpurtTtia  ii  cis  t6  ivatrrlov  twv  trpa-rTOfiivtap 
fitrafioXii,  K.T.X.  Poet.  21.  Twining  explains  it  to  be, 
"  when,"  in  a  drama,  "  the  things  that  are  doing  have  an  effect 
the  very  reverse  of  which  is  expected  from  them."  ii.  77. 

78     '  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

as  man  to  man,  horse  to  horse,  and  youth  to  youth. 
"Whence  also  these  proverbs  originate:  "  FeUows  in 
age,  delight;" — "Whatever  is  similar;" — "Beasts 
recognise  their  species ;" — "  Birds  of  a  feather  flock 
26.  together ; "  and  every  other  saying  of  this  sort.  But 
as  every  thing  like  and  akin  is  delightful  to  it,  and 
'  as  every  one  stands  to  himself  in  this  relation  in  a 
most  special  manner,  all  must  be,  more  or  less,  lovers 
of  themselves ;  for  all  these  qualities  do  in  a  par- 
ticular manner  exist  in  reference  to  self.  But  as  all 
are  lovers  of  themselves,  that  necessarily  which  is 
their  own  must  be  pleasant  to  all ;  as,  for  instance, 
their  sayings  and  productions.  On  which  account 
men  are  in  general  fond  of  flatterers  and  lovers,  and 
are  ambitious  and  fond  of  children ;  for  children  are 
their  own  production®.  It  is  also  pleasant  to  put  a 
finish  to  what  is  deficient^;  for  it  became  by  that 

27.Power.  time  one's  own  production.  And  as  rule  is  the  most 
pleasant  of  all  things,  the  appearing  to  be  wise  is 
also  pleasant ;  for  knowledge  is  a  principle  of  power ; 

Wisdom,   and  wisdom  is  a  knowledge  of  many  subjects,  and 

Censure,  those  commanding  admiration.  Moreover,  as  men 
in  general  are  ambitious,  the  power  of  rebuking  one's 

28.  Dwell-  neighbour  must  needs  be  pleasant.   Also  the  pausing 

ingon       Qjj  ^Yj^q^  province  in  which  he  appears  to  be  best 

one  8  cwn 

excellen-  when  compared  with  his  own  powers  in  other  re- 
spects;  just  as  Euripides  remarks,  "And  this  he 
plies,  allotting  the  greatest  part  of  each  day  to  it, 

"  One  passion  is  often  productive  of  another:  examples  are 
without  number ;  the  sole  difficulty  is  a  proper  choice.  I  be- 
gin with  self-love,  and  the  power  it  hath  to  generate  love  to 
children.  Every  man,  beside  making  part  of  a  greater  system, 
like  a  comet,  a  planet,  or  satellite  only,  hath  a  less  system  of 
his  own,  in  ike  centre  of  which  he  represents  the  sim,  darting 
his  fire  and  heat  all  around ;  especially  upon  his  nearest  con- 
nexions: the  connexion  between  a  man  and  his  children, 
fundamentally  that  of  cause  and  effect,  becomes,  by  the  addi- 
tion of  other  circumstances,  the  completest  that  can  be  among 
individuals ;  and  therefore  self-love,  the  most  vigorous  of  all 
passions,  is  readily  expanded  upon  children.  Lord  Karnes's 
Elements  of  Criticism,  chap.  ii.  part  1,  §  5. 

*  The  completion  of  what  has  been  left  unfinished  was  be- 
fore staled  to  be  pleasant  on  another  prmciple.     See  §  22. 

cies. 

CHAP.  XII.]  RHETORIC.  79 

in  which,  himself  being  compared  with  himself,  he 
appears  most  excellent." 

In  a  similar  way,  since  amusement  ranks  among  29. 
pleasant  things,  and  as  every  relaxation  and  laughter  Laughter. 
is  of  the  number,  things  ridiculous  must  therefore  of 
course  be  pleasant,  as  well  persons  as  expressions  and 
productions.  But  on  the  subject  of  the  ridiculous,  a 
detailed  discussion  has  been  entered  into  in  the 
Poetics  ^^  Let  thus  much  have  been  said  on  the  sub- 
ject of  things  pleasant ;  from  the  contraries  of  these 
things,  what  is  painful  will  be  evident.  These, 
then,  are  the  objects  for  the  sake  of  which  men  act 
unjustly. 

CHAP.  XII. 

18- 

lat 

With  what  Dispositions  men  commit  Injustice,  in  what 
instances,  and  towards' whom. 

Let  us  now  state  with  what  dispositions  men  commit  l.  ns* 
injustice,  and  towards  whom  they  do  so.     As  regards  *^^57**' 
themselves  then,  it  is  when  they  think  the  thing  is  agents  of 
one  possible  to  be  done,  and  possible  to  themselves ;  injustice, 
and  either  that,  in  doing  it,  they  shall  escape  detec-  ^°g'J{'* 
tion,  or,  if  they  do  not  escape  it,  that  they  shall  not  when  it' 
suffer  punishment,  or  that  they  shall  indeed  suffer  seems  poj 
a  punishment,  but  that  the  damage  thereby  incur-  ^^  gj*^ 
red  will  be  less  than  the  gain,  either  to  themselves  escape  de- 
or  those  for  whom,  they  have  a  regard.     Now  the  tection. 
subject  of  things  which  appear  possible,  and  those  2. 
which  appear  impossible^  will  be  explained  in  the  se- 
quel; for  these  are  points  applicable  in  common  to 
all  kinds  of  rhetoric  ^     Now  as  to  their  own  advan- 
tages, those  men  think  they  are  in  the  highest  degree 
likely  to  commit  injustice  with  impunity,  who  are  of  The 
ability  in  speaking,  and  men  of  the  world,  and  such  talented, 
as  have  experienced  many  a  forensic  contest     If, 

^  In  one  of  the  books  which  has  unfortunately  been  lost.  - 
His  definition  of  it  is,  al<rxp6v  dv^v  \wfipov. 
*  They  are,  in  fact,  roirot,  ii.  19. 

80  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  t. 

The  pow-  too,  they  happen  to  have  manj  friends.     If  they  be 
erful.        rich*.     And  more  particularly  do  they  think  they 
can  get  off,  if  they  be  themselves'  possessed  of  the 
forestated  qualities ;  and  if  they  be  not  themselves  so 
qualified,  yet  if  they  have  friends,  or  supporters,  or 
associates^  of  such  talents,  then  also  they  think  to 
get.  off ;  for  these  are  the  endowments,  by  aid  of 
which  men  are  able  both  to  act,  to  escape  detection, 
4.1f  likely  and  avoid  punishment^.     Again,  if  they  be  friends, 
?^S^    either  of  the  injured  party,  or  of  the  ju<%e ;  because 
friends  are  off  their  guard  against  injustice,  and  are 
moreover  appeased  before  prosecuting  their  revenge. 
But  the  judges  gratify  their  friends,  and  either  alto- 
gether let  them  off,  or  amerce  them  in  a  trifle. 
6.  Such  as      People  likely  to  escape  detection,  are  those  the  very 
Sesto^e  ^PP^^'^*®  ^^  character  to  the  charge ;  as,  a  man  of  per- 
charge,      sonal  imbecility,  on  a  charge  of  assault ;  or  one  poor 
etc.  and  deformed,  on  a  charge  of  adultery.     Again,  cir- 

cumstances exceedingly  palpable,  and  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  world ;  for  these  are  unobserved,  by  reason 
6.  that  no  one  would  think  of  them  at  all.  Acts,  too, 
of  such  enormity  and  such  a  character  that  no  one 
would  presume ;  for  in  regard  to  these  also  men  are 
off  their  guard :  for  it  is  against  crimes  which  are 

•  He  remarks,  in  his  Politics,  the  general  tendency  to  insub- 
ordination and  disobedience  to  laws  observable  in  the  rich  and 
prosperous  ; — ol  fikv  kv  virtpoxBu^  ^vrvxnfuaTiay  oirres,  UrxytKt 
KoX  'M'XouToVt  Kal  (piXotVf  Kul  T&v  oiWotv  tw»toio6t(iov,  dpx^<^at' 
ovTt  PovXovrai  odre  liriaTavTai,  Polit.  iv.  c.  11.  Upon  the 
same  principle  Tacitas  remarks,  "  Opes  principibus  infenaas." 
Ann.  lib.  zi.  c.  1. 

'  In  the  Ethics,  where,  in  speaking  of  BovXcvo-cs,  he  limito 
its  sphere  first  and  generally  to  things  possible,  he  remarks- 
Award  dkf  &  di*  vfiStv  ylvoiTo  av.  tA.  ii  BiH  tS»»  <p[X.wv  6i*  hft-Stv 
TT&s  kvriv  h  yip  ApX^  «*'  if/itr.    Eth.  Nich.  iii.  3. 

^  The  Thessalonian  Menon,  in  Xenophon,  courted  the 
friendship  of  men  in  power  with  this  yiew :  ^iXo«  t\  Ifiovktro 
elvai  ToT«  fxiyitrrov  Svvauivois,  <fva  'ASikcov  /lii  Sidolti  Suctiv. 
Anab.  lib.  ii.  c.  6.  Tid.  infra. 

'  The  vast  assistance  to  be  derived  from  friends  and  sup- 
porters by  those  who  are  under  accusation,  may  be  illustrated 
by  the  following  strong  expressions  of  Augustus,  who  said, 
"  Cunctari  se,  ne,  si  superesset,  eriperet  legUna  reum;  sin  de- 
esset,  dmtUuere,  ac  pr€Bdamnar9  amieum  viderthtr"    Sueton. 

CHAP,  xii.]  RHETORIC.  81 

ordinary,  as  it  is  against  bodily  infirmity  of  an  usual 
kind,  that  men  set  themselves  on  their  guard ;  but  as 
to  cases  in  which  no  one  yet  has  been  afflicted,  no 
one  is  cautious.  Also  those  people  are  open  to  at-  7. 
tack,  to  whom  no  one  is  an  enemy,  or  to  whom  many 
are ;  for  in  the  one  case  the  aggressors  think  to  escape 
detectlbn  from  their  not  being  on  their  guard ;  and 
in  the  other,  they  escape  from  its  not  seeming  likely 
that  they  would  make  an  attempt  on  people  ever  on 
their  guard,  and  from  their  having  ever  at  hand  the 
plea,  that  they  never  could  have  been  so  mad  as  to 
attempt  it.     Those  again  are  likely  to  act  unjustly,  8.  Such 

who  have  at  hand  means  of  concealing  or  changing  ^  ^^.ve 

^1  ^T.'j  i«j«  means  of 

property,  places  to  hide,  or  any  easy  means  of  dispos-  conceal- 
ing of  it.   All  those  persons,  too,  who,  if  they  do  not  ment. 
escape,  having  nevertheless  means  of  setting  aside  the 
sentence,  or  of  tedious  delay,  or  of  corrupting  the 
judges ;  and  who,  if  the  fine  be  imposed,  can  yet  set 
aside  its  payment,  or  put  it  off  a  length  of  time,  or  who, 
from  their  neediness,  have  nothing  to  lose.     All,  too,  9.  Where 
who  have  the  gain  clearly  in  view,  or  great,  or  close  *^®™  ^ 
at  hand ;  while  the  loss  is  trifling,  indistinct,  and  at  a  |^. 
distance.     Also*  any  one  to  whom  the  punishment  is 
not  adequate  to  the  advantage ;  of  which  kind  a  tyranny 
seems  to  be.  All,  again,  in  whose  case  the  commission  lO.  Where 
of  injustice  is  an  act  of  gain,  while  the  punishment  is  5^®  P"^' 
mere  opprobrium.     So,  on  the  contrary,  are  they  j^onlTop- 
whose  unjust  acts  lead  to  a  kind  of  credit,  (as  if  it  probnum. 
should  happen  for  one,  in  their  commission  to  avenge 
a  father  or  mother,  as  was  the  case  of  Zeno,)  while 
the  punishment  leads  merely  to  fine,  banishment,  or 
something  of  that  kind ;    for  both  descriptions  of 
persons  act  unjustly  ;  however,  they  are  not  the  same 
in  character,  but  the  very  opposite^     Persons,  too,  u.  The 
who  have  often  escaped  notice,  or  who  have  not  been  ^ndetect- 
ponished.     People  who   have  often  met  with  ill  ^he  nn- 
success ;  for  these,  like  persons  engaged  in  warlike  lucky. 
operations,  are  of  a  disposition  to  renew  the  contest. 
Every  one  also  to  whom  the  pleasant  is  immediate,  12.  Where 
while  the  painful  is  subsequent ;  or  if  the  object  be  t^^e  plea- 
gain,  while  the  loss  is  subsequent ;  for  all  inconti-  J^diat^ 
o 

82  ,  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  i. 

nent  persons  are  thus  affected :  now  incontinence  is 
conversant  about  all  objects  whatsoever  which  men 

13.  Or  desire^.  And  on  the  contrary,  persons  are  wont  to 
^^  act  unjustly  in  cases  where  the  painful  or  loss  is 
when  re-  immediate,  but  the  pleasant  and  expedient  is  subse- 
mote.        quent,  and  slow  in  presenting  itself;  for  continent 

persons,  and  such  as   have  rathei;  more  practical 

14.  Where  wisdom,  pursue  objects  of  this  kind.  Wherever, 
mo^r  *^»  *  person  may  appear  to  have  acted  by  chance, 
will  he  at-  by  necessity,  natural  bent,  or  habit ;  and,  in  a  word, 
trihuted.  to  be  guilty  of  erroTy  not  of  injustice.  Also  m  what- 
ever cases  it  may  happen  that  one  would  meet  with 

16.  Men  equity.  Again,  whatever  persons  are  iil  want :  now 
P-JJ^*-  men  are  in  want  two  ways ;  for  either  they  want 
want  ne-  necessaries,  like  the  poor ;  or  something  in  excess, 
cessariea.  just  as  the  rich^.  People,  too,  of  exceedingly  good 
wa^gu-  character,  or  such  as  are  utterly  destitute  of  charac- 
pNerflui-  ter  ;  the  first,  on 'the  principle  that  they  shall  not 
?fi**M  appear  the  culprits  ;  the  last,  that  they  shall  not  be 
of  good*^  a  whit  worse  off  as  to  character.  Thus  affected 
character,  in  themselves,  then,  it  is  that  men  attack  their 
Men  of^  neighbours.  .     ,         . 

racter.  -But  they  act  unjustly  against  persons,  and  on  ac- 

17.  The  count  of  objects,  of  the  following  descriptions.  Per- 
ScTOsedto  ^^^^  ^^^  possess  things  which  themselves  are  in  need 
ii\in8tice  of,  be  it  for  necessaries,  for  superfluity,  or  for  sensual 
are :  such  enjoyment :  people  who  are  at  a  distance,  and  those 
Se  de-  ^^^  *^®  ^^^  5  ^^^  *^®  means  of  getting  at  the  one  are 
sired  ob-  quick,  and  the  vengeance  of  the  others  is  slow ;  as  on 
is^Th  *^^*e,  for  instance,  who  plunder  Carthaginians*:  and 

The  near  *  Although  incontinence,  properly  so  called,  is  excited  by  a 
Umited  description  of  objects,  yet  there  is  a  feeling  analogous 
to,  and,  in  the  vague  language  of  the  world,  synonymous  with 
it,  which  may  be  excited  bv  any  objects  whatsoever ;— w-woXijx- 
Tcov  fiovov  aKpaalav  koI  kyKp&Ttiav  civai,  ^ris  ecTTi  iripl  to. 
ain-k  Tfi  vta^povvvrf  koX  t^  aKoXao'ia.  Tlipl  6k  Ovfidv,  Koff 
inotonrra  Xiyofitv,  Eth.  Nich.  vii.  4.  This  is  another  of  the 
many  instances,  in  which  Aristotle  supposes  the  rhetorician  to 
take  a  popular  view  of  his  subject. 

^  Exilis  domus  est  ubi  non  et  multa  supersunt.  Hor.  Ep. 
Ub.  i.  6, 45. 

*  This  may  have  been  a  proverbial  expression  fdr  desig- 
nating any  attacJf  on  a  remote  object;  since,  considered  in 

CRAP.  XII.]  RHETORIC.  83 

men  who  are  not  cautious,  nor  apt  to  be  on  their  19. 
guard,  but  are  of  a  disposition  to  repose  confidence  ; 
for  it  is  easy  enough  to  elude  all  such.     Also  towards  The  indo- 
such  as  are  of  an  indolent  turn;  for  to  prosecute  is  the  ^®"*- 
part  of  a  man  who  is  strenuous.  Against  such  also  as  Those 
have  a  delicate  sense  of  honour ;  for  these  are  not  apt  ^^u*^® 
to  squabble  about  gain  :  and  again,  those  who  have  gense  of 
been  wronged  by  many  already,  yet  without  their  pro-  honour, 
secuting  ;  as  though  these  were,  in  the  words  of  the  ^' 
proverb,  "  a  prey  to  very  Mysians®."     Both  against  21.  The 
those  who  never  yet  have  been  wronged,  and  those  5^°^?' 
who  frequently  have  been,  men  are  wont  to  act  un-  harmed, 
justly  ;  both  being  off  their  guard,  the  first  under  the 
idea  that  they  never  shall  be  wronged,  the  last  as 
though  they  should  not  be  wronged  any  more  :  also  23.  Those 
against  those  who  have  had  imputations  thrown  on  ^^ 
their  chiaracters,  or  who  are  open  to  it ;  for  such  peo- 
ple, from  a  fear  of  the  judges,  do  not  take  on  them- 
selves to  effect  persuasion,  neither,  in  fact,  are  they 
able  ;  of  which  class  are  all  who  are  disliked  and  en- 
vied.    Men  act  unjustly  also  towards  those  against  23.  Such 
whom  they  have  any  pretext,  on  the  part  either  of  JJ^J^* 
their  ancestors,  themselves,  or  friends,  that  they  have 
wrought  ill,  or  intended  it,  either  against  themselves, 
or  their  ancestors,  or  those  for  whom  they  have  a  re- 
gard ;  for,  as  the  proverb  goes,  "  Malice  wants  only 
an  excuse."     Against  friends  ^^  and  against  enemies  24. 
are  acts  of  injustice  committed  ;  for  against  the  first  £^^^' 
it  is  easy^^  against  the  others  pleasant:  also  against 

reference  to  Greece  under  the  then  unperfect  state  of  naviga- 
tion, Carthage  was  an  object  not  easily  got  at. 

'  The  Mysians  were  so  effeminate  and  imwarlike,  that  their 
neighbours  made  encroachments  on  their  territory  with  im- 
punity, so  that  they  became  proverbial  through  Greece. 

^  Some  traits  in  the  chiuracter  of  the  Thessalian  Menon,  as 
given  by  Xenophon,  will  serve  to  illustrate  Aristotle's  cata- 
logue of  these  objects  of  villany.  Of  Menon  it  was  remarked, 
TOW  fill,  TON  nOAEMIQN  icr^fiaiTiif  ovk  iirtfiovXivf — x«^*" 
itdvyikp  tSiTo  ftli/ac  Td  TON  *YAATTOMENQN  XafiBdviLv  — 
rd  SiTQif  «IAQN  fiomn  tStro  cMii;aiorip^<rTOv'A4>YAAKTA 
Xa/u/3dvety.  Kal  Bvotn  fikv  dv  aloBdvoiTo  iirtopKovi  Kai  diiKOVf, 
»« ti  anrXiafiiifow  2<^o/3eiTO'  toU  d*  6<riotv  Kal  aXf}0ft»av  dvKOvariy 
fi»«  dvdvipou  i'TtipaTo  x/>^o'6at.     Anab.  lib.  ii.  c.  6. 

"  Upon  this  principle  the  remark  of  Demonax  was  grounded 
G  2 

84  ARISTOTLE'S  Iboox  i. 

The  those  who  are  friendless,  and  those  who  are  not  of 

fi^ndleas.  ability  in  speaking  or  acting ;  because  these  either  do 
wh^are  ^^^  ^  ^  attempt  to  prosecute,  or  are  reconciled,  or 
not  elo-  bring  nothing  to  the  point :  also  against  those  whom 
2c^e  ^^  ^*  ^^^  °^*  P*^  ^  ^  waiting  in  watch  for  the  sentence 

25.  Those  of  court,  or  the  payment  of  the  fine ;  for  instance, 
who  can-  foreigners  and  mechanics ;  for  people  under  these  cir- 
?o  wtdt*^  cumstances  are  reconciled  for  a  trifle,  and  are  easily 

26.  The  hushed.  People,  too,  who  themselves  have  been 
ui^wt.      guilty  of  injustice  in  many  instances,  or  in  cases  of 

the  very  character  under  which  they  now  are  wronged ; 
because  it  appears  to  approximate  in  some  degree  to 
non-commission  of  injustice,  when  a  person  sh^l  have 
been  wronged  in  a  particular,  in  which  he  is  himself 
wont  to  be  guilty ;  it  is,  I  mean,  as  if  one  were  in- 
solently to  assault  the  person  of  a  man  who  is  himself 
27.  in  the  habit  of  being  insolent.  Those  also  get  in- 
jured who  have  wrought  ill,  or  who  possessed,  or  do 
now  possess,  an  inclination  to  do  so,  or  who  are  about 
to  do  so  ;  for  the  act  involves  what  is  pleasant  and 
honourable ;  and  it  appears  to  approximate  to  non- 
28,  commission  of  injury :  those,  too,  in  injuring  whom, 
a  man  gratifies  his  friends,  those  he  admires  or  loves, 
on  whom  he  is  in  dependence,  or,  in  a  word,  all  at 
whose  control  he  lives,  and  at  whose  hands  it  happens 

29.  Our  he  will  meet  with  equitable  consideration.  Men  also 
enemies,    y^^j^g  those  with  whom  they  have  ground  of  quarrel, 

and  have  been  previously  at  variance,  as  Calippus 
did  in  the  case  about  EMon ;  for  acts  of  this  nature 
seem  to  approximate  to  a  non-commission  of  injus- 

30.  Those  tice :  and  those  who  are  on  the  eve  of  being  injured 

jnst  on  \yy  others,  should  we  not  do  so  ourselves ;  since*  this 
the  point      '' 

T&v  <t>l\ti»»,  Toin  fiiv  yAp  ixPftov^  ^BdioTt9  <f>v\daaroirrai'  toTc  dk 
«(>i\ot9  dvtwyfiivoi  tlai,  Kot  ylifovrai  <r^aXepoi   kuI   eucitijSou- 

AcvToc.  Nor  did  this  escape  the  penetration  of  that  keen  ob- 
senrer  of  human  nature,  Tacitus  :  Quibus  deerat  inimicus,  per 
anUcoa  oppressi.  Hist.  i.  3.  Pomponium  Flaccum,  veterem 
stipendiis,  et  arct&  cum  rege  amiciti^,  eo  aceommodcUiorem  ad 
failendumy  ob  id  maxime  Moesis  prsefecit.  Ann.  ii.  66.  To 
this  purpose,  too,  is  the  maxim  of  P.  Syrus,  Mage  cavenda 
est  amicorum  invidUa,  qvLBxa  insidias  hostium.  See  also  Pro- 
verbs, iii.  29. 

CHAP.  XII.]  RflETORIG.  85 

admita  no  longer  anj  deliberation ;  just  as  ^nesi-  of  being 
demus  is  said  to  have  sent  presents  of  cups  *^  to  Gelon  ^^^ 
after  he  had  reduced  some  state,  because  he  had  gotten    ^      ^"* 
the  start,  himself  being  on  the  eve  of  attempting  it. 
Injurers  attack  those,  also,  by  injuring  whom  they  31.  Those 
will  be  enabled  to  do  many  acts  of  justice,  as  though  ^^y^J^n 
they  could  easily  amend  their  error ;  just  as  Jason  compen- 
the  Thessalian  said,  "  that  in  some  particulars  one  »*«. 
must  needs  act  with  injustice,  in  order  to  his  being 
able  to  do  many  deeds  of  justice^':"  again,  they  attack  ?2«  Men 
people  in  those  particulars,  in  regard  to  which,  all  or  ^t^  the 
most  persons  usually  act  wrong  ;  because  here  they  articles 
think  to  meet  with  fellow  feeling :  in  regard  also  to  "J^®S^*^ 
particulars  easy  to  conceal,  of  which  nature  are  arti-  33. 
cles'  quickly  consumed,  victuals  for  instance ;  or  ar- 
ticles admitting  a  ready  change,  either  in  shape,  co- 
lour, or  composition  ;  or  which  it  is  easy  to  put  out 
of  sight  in  a  variety  of  places ;  of  which  sort  are  34.  Port- 
articles  easily  portable,  and  hidden  in  small  places ;  ^  ^' 
articles  also  the  like  to  which,  or  some  undistinguish-  35.  Diffi- 
able  from  them,  have  previously  been  in  the  posses-  id^^ed. 
sion  of  the  individuals  who  thus  violate  justice.  Where 
Men  injure,  moreover,  in  regard  to  such  particulars,  ^?  l*J*y 
as  the  injured  parties  have  a  delicacy  in  mentioning ;  ^^l  de- 
thus  in  assaults  on  females  intimately  connected,  or  lica^  in 
on  themselves,  or  on  their  children :  in  all  cases,  too,  jP^h   ^ 
in  regard  to  which  the  prosecuting  party  would  ap-  subject, 
pear  litigious ;  of  this  nature  are  trifling  things,  and  J^®'f.  ^* 
those  in  which  people  sympathize  and  forgive.  ^mis  to 

demand 
"  The  amoBement  of  the  icoTxa/5os  had  become  so  popular  justice, 
at  the  Grecian  banquets,  that  persons  who  practised  it  with 
superior  dexterity  were  presented  with  rewards,  Korra/Jeia,- 
supposed  by  some  commentators  to  have  been  a  sort  of  cups 
or  vessels  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  the  game.  See 
Meursius  de  Ludis  Vet.  Orsec.  p.  28,  v.  KoTTo/3tor/no«.  Vid. 
Athenae,  foL  666,  ubi  de  Cottabo.     Critias  ibid. : 

KoTToj3o«  Ik  ^iKtXrif  larl  ■vOotfdt,  iicirpeiri«  ipyov' 
^Oif  aKoirdv  iff  XaTaywv  rota  ifa0i<rro/ti«6a. 

See  Victorius,  and  also  Barnes's  note  on  Frag.  105,  in  his 
edition  of  Anacreon. 

"  Thus,  too,  the  Jesuits  contended  that "  evil  might  be  done 
in  order  to  produce  good.'* 

86  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

The  dispositions  then  under  which,  the  objects  for 
whose  sake,  and  the  person  towards  whom,  men  act 
unjustly,  and  why  they  do  so,  are  nearly  these  which 
I  have  stated. 

^l 

CHAR  XIII. 

Of  Acta  of  Injustice  J  and  Matters  of  Equity, 

1.  All  in-  CoMMENGiNa  from  this  point,  let  me  mark  in  detail 
o£UL  ^^  ^^  which  conform  to,  or  which  violate  justice, 
a^pamst  Now  right  and  wrong  have  been  defined  in  reference 
^*^*Tii  *^  ^^  kinds  of  law,  and  in  a  twofold  way  also  in'  re- 
particTi-  gwd  to  those  persons  to  whom  they  refer*.  Law*, 
lar.  now,  I  understand,  to  be  either  peculiar  or  universal ; 

^  .iiOTa  peculiar,  to  be  that  which  has  been  marked  out  by 
each  people  in  reference  to  itself,  and  that  this  is 
partly  unwritten,  partly  written.  I  call  that  law  uni- 
versal, which  is  conformable  merely  to  dictates  of  na- 
ture ;  for  there  does  exist  naturally  an  universal  sense 
of  right  and  wrong',  which,  in  a  certain  degree,  all 

»  Vid.  Eth.  Nick.  V.  7. 

'  The  description  of  Law  given  by  Demosthenes  is,  perhaps, 
the  most  perfect  and  satisfactory  that  can  either  be  found  or 
conceived :  01  di  vofioi  t6  iiKaiov  xal  t6  Ka\6v  xal  t6  a-vfupi- 
pov  ^ovKovraiy  Kal  tovto  ^ifToDo-i*  xai  iirtiddtv  tvpeQij  koivov 
TovTo  irp6<rrayfia  dirediix^V*  irairitf  tvov  koa  bfxoiov.  koI  tovt 
i<rrl  vofxoi,  eJ  irdirras  irpoo-ijicei  7ret6e<r0at,  Sia  'jtoXX.A,  xai  fia- 
Xttrd',  ^Tt  "jras  Itrrl  vo/jlov  tvprjiia  fiiv  Kal  SStpov  OiSav^  doy/xa  ^ 
dpBpunrtav  <l>po»iuuVt  tTravopdm/Aa  dk  tSuv  eKOvolatv  Kal  dKovoLwt 
dfiapTtjfidTuiff  iroXcioc  6i  <rvtf6^Kti  koiv^'  ko6'  ijv  ira<ri  'TfKNrqicci 
^yv  ToU  Iv  Ty  iro\«(.  The  design  and  object  of  laws  is  to 
ascertain  what  is  just,  honourable,  and  expedient;  and  when 
that  is  discovered,  it  is  proclaimed  as  a  general  ordinance, 
equal  and  impartial  to  all.  This  is  the  origin  of  law,  which, 
for  various  reasons,  all  are  under  an  obligation  to  obey,  but 
especially  because  all  law  is  the  invention  and  gift  of  Heaven, 
the  sentiment  of  wise  men,  the  correction  of  every  offence,  and 
the  general  compact  of  the  state ;  to  live  in  conformity  with 
which  is  the  duty  of  every  individual  in  society.  Orat.  i.  contr. 
Aristogit.     Notes  on  Blackstone. 

*  This  law  of  nature,  being  coeval  with  mankind,  and  dic- 
tated by  God  himself  is  of  course  superior  in  obligation  to  any    I 

OHAP.  xin.J  RHETORIC.  87 

intuitively  divine,  even  shoald  no  intercourse  with 
each  other,  nor  anj  compact  have  existed^;  which 
sentiment  the  Antigone  of  Sophocles  enters  uttering, 
that  it  was  just,  namely  to  hury  Polynices,  though  de- 
nounced, since  this  by  nature  was  a  deed  of  justice : 
"  For  by  no  means  is  it  for  this  or  the  next  day  mere- 
ly that  this  maxim  is  in  force,  but  for  ever ;  nor  is 
there  any  one  who  knows  from  whom  it  proceeded  *. 
And  as  Empedocles  says  on  the  subject  of  not  slaying 
that  which  has  life :  for  this  maxim  is  not  right  here, 
and  wrong  there,  "  but  a  principle  of  law  to  all,  it  is 
extended  uninterruptedly  throughout  the  spacious 
firmament  and  boundless  light."  And  as  Alcidamas 
remarks  in  the  Messeniac  oration. 

As  to  the  persons  also  in  reference  to  whom  right  3. 
and  wrong  have  been  defined,  a  twofold  distinction 
has  been  made^;  for  that  which  we  ought  to  do  and  Injustice 
to  leave  undone,  exists  in  rieference  either  to  the  com-  ¥^°^ 
munity,  or  to  an  individual  member  of  it.  And  hence  munity." 
we  may,  as  regards  acts  of  justice,  and  the  contrary, 
violate  justice  or  adhere  to  it  in  two  ways ;  for  we 
may  do  so  in  reference  either  to  an  individual,  or 
to  the  community :  for  the  man  who  is  guilty  of  Injustice 
adultery,  or  of  an  assault,  injuries  some  individucU;  JP^^i. 
but  he  who  will  not  bear  arms  injures  the  commu-  ^1^^^ " 

other.  It  is  binding  over  all  the  globe,  in  all  countries,  and  at 
all  times :  no  human  laws  are  of  any  validity,  if  contrary  to 
this ;  and  such  of  them  as  are  valid  derive  all  their  force  and 
all  their  authority,  mediately  or  immediately,  from  this  original. 
Blackstone,  Comment.  Introduct.  §  2,  p.  41. 

*  See  the  subject  of  natural  law  admirably  illustrated  in  the 
first  book  of  Hooker's  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  §  8,  9. 

»  Thus  Lord  Hale  says  of  the  common  law  of  England, 
"  The  original  of  the  common  law  is  as  undiscoverable  as  the 
head  of  the  Nile."    Hist.  Com.  Law,  55. 

•  Wrongs  are  divisible  into  two  sorts  or  species,— private 
wrongs  and  pubUo  wrongs.  The  former  are  an  infringement  or 
privation  of  the  private  or  civil  rights  belonging  to  individuals, 
considered  as  individuals,  and  are  therefrom  frequently  termed 
civil  injuries.  The  latter  are  a  breach  and  violation  of  public 
rights  and  duties,  which  afiect  the  whole  community,  con- 
sidered as  a  community,**  etc.  BUckstone's  Commentaries, 
b  iii.  c.  1. 

88  ARISTOTLE^S  [book  i. 

4.  Now  as  all  acts  of  violating  justice  have  been  dis* 
tinguished,  and  as  some  of  them  are  against  the  com- 
munity, and  others  against  one  or  more  individual 
members  of  it,  let  me,  after  reverting  to  what  the  8af* 

6.  feringii\justice  is,  explain  the  rest.  Now  to  be  injured, 
is  to  suffer  injustice  at  the  hands  of  a  willing  agent; 

6.  for  commission  of  injustice  has  been  previously  de- 
fined to  be  a  voluntary  act  As  however  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the  person  injured  should  be  hurt,  and  in- 
voluntarily hurt.  Now  what  hurt  is  will  be  evident 
from  what  has  gone  before ;  for  things  good  and  evil 
have  been  distinctly  spoken  of  above,  and  voluntary 
acts  also ;  namely,  that  they  are  all  things  done  know- 

7.  ingly.  So  that  all  grounds  for  complaint  must  exist, 
necessarily  in  reference  either  to  the  community,  or 
to  individual  interests ;  the  agent  being  either  uncon- 
scious, or  unwilling,  or  willing  and  conscious ;  and 
[in  the  last]  of  these  cases,  acting  either  on  deliberate 

8.  choice,  or  on  the  impulse  of  passion.  Now  I  shall 
treat  on  the  subject  of  anger  in  my  discussion  of  the 
passions ;  but  it  has  been  above  explained  under  what 
circumstances,  and  with  what  dispositions,  men  act  on 
deliberate  principle. 

9.  We  But  as  people,  while  they  acknowledge  their  hav- 

^^  th  ^^^  acted  in  such  a  way,  very  frequently  will  not  ac- 
definition  knowledge  the  designation  in  the  indictment,  or  the 
of  theya-  view  of  the  case  on  which  the  indictment  turns  :  a 
of*SijuB^  man  will  avow,  for  example,  his  having  taken  a 
tice.  thing,  but  not  his  having  stolen  it;  that  he  struck 

the  first  blow,  but  yet  did  not  insult;  that  he  co- 
habited, but  did  not  commit  adultery ^  with  the  woman 
in  question ;  or  that  he  stole,  but  was  not  guilty  of 
sacrilege^  for  it  was  not  consecrated  property ;  or  that 
he  did  till  beyond  his  boundary,  but  encroached  not 
uj^on  public  land ;  or  conversed  with  the  enemy,  but 
was  yet  not  guilty  of  trectson:  it  wiU,  for  these  rea- 
sons, be  necessary  to  lay  down  definitions  on  these 
matters  ;  as  to  what  essentially  constitutes  theft^  in- 
suit,  and  adultery;  in  order  that,  if  we  wish  to  show 
that  they  really  do  or  do  not  exist,  we  may  be  able 
10.  to  set  the  right  of  the  case  in  a  true  light.     Now  all 

OHAP.xiii.]  •      RHETORIC.       •  89 

these  questions,  as  to  a  matter  being  unjust  and  cri- 
minal, or  not  unjust,  do  in  fact  constitute  the  ground 
of  inquiry ;  for  the  criminalitj  and  injustice  of  the  act 
stands  essentially  in  the  deliberate  principle  on  which 
it  is  done  ;  and  this  sort  of  terms  marks,  over  and 
above  the  matter  of  fact,  the  principle  also  of  the  . 
agent ;  the  terms,  assault  and  felony,  for  instance ;  for 
because  a  man  has  struck  another,  he  will  not  under 
all  circumstances  have  assaulted  him,  but  if  he  has 
done  so  with  a  view  to  something,  as  with  a  view  to 
treat  him  with  disrespect,  or  to  his  own  gratification  : 
neither,  supposing  a  man  has  taken  privily,  has  he 
been  guilty,  in  every  case,  of  larceny ;  but  if  he  took 
it  to  the  injury  of  another,  or  in  order  to  appropriate 
it  to  himself,  then  indeed  he  has  been  guilty  of  larceny. 
The  case  too  is  similar  respecting  other  terms  de- 
signating crimes  to  what  has  been  remarked  respect- 
ing these. 

But  as  there  were  two  species  of  things  right  and  11. 
wrong  ;  for  one  was  of  written  prescript,  the  other  of 
unwritten  law ;  now  those  on  the  subject  of  which 
the  laws  speak  a  written  language  have  been  treated 
of ;  and  of  those  arising  from  unwritten  law  there  are  The  un- 
two  kinds.     And  these  are,  the  one  class  which  is  ^^f*"^ 
always  in  proportion  to  the  excess  of  vice  or  virtue  twofold ; 
of  the  agent,  on  which  are  consequent  either  cen-  12.  i.  xaB* 
sures  and  praises,  or  deprivation  of  rank  and  marks  ^^p^o- 
of  distinction  and  public  grants  ;  thus,  for  instance,  T^ejcai*' 
the  being  grateful  to  a  benefactor,  and  the  repaying  «caictas. 
with  kindness  one  who  has  been  kind  to  yourself,  and 
the  having  an  inclination  to  aid  one's  friends,  and 
whatever  other  duties  are  of  this  kind :  the  other  iL  t6  tov 
class,  are  the  supplement^  of  the  peculiar  and  written  '*"»«'  'f"' 
law  of  states ;  for  the  equitable  should  seem  to  be  JS^outX- 
somewhat  just.     And  equity  is  that  idea  of  justice,  Xet/i/na, 
which  contravenes  the  written  law.®     And  this  con-  **'  eqiuty. 

13. 

f  'EIIANOTeOMA  pofiov,  j  iWiiirti  diA  t6  KaOoKov, 
Ethics,  V.  10.  "  The  correctioii  of  thai,  wherein  the  law  (by 
reason  of  its  nniyersality)  is  deficient."  Grotius  de  ^Equi- 
Ute,  §  3. 

*  We  see  in  contracts,  and  other  dealings  which  daily  pass 

90  ARISTOTLE'S  [i 

tradiction  happens,  partly  indeed  againfit  the  will, 
and  partly  unth  the  will  of  the  legislator :  it  then 
happens  against  his  will,  when  the  question  may  have 
escaped  his* notice  ;  but,  with  his  will,  whenever  he 
has  it  not  in  his'  power  accurately  to  make  distinc- 
tion, but  it  is  necessary  that  he  pronounce  univer- 
sally, though  the  case  be  not  so  absolutely  without 
exceptions,  but  generally  only.  Thus  also  in  respect 
to  all  cases  about  which,  by  reason  of  their  infinitude, 
it  is  not  easy  to  make  distinctions ;  such,  with  regard 
to  wounding  with  steel,  are  the  distinctions  as  to  the 
size  and  nature  of  the  instrument,  for  an  age  would 
U.  fail  one  in  the  enumeration.  Be  it  then  that  the  case 
admits  not  such  distinctions,  yet  if  one  must  needs 
enact  a  law  respecting  it,  he  cannot  do  otherwise  than 
speak  in  general  terms  ^;  so  that  one  who  has  so 
much  as  a  ring  on  his  finger,  and  lifts  up  his  hand  and 
strikes  you,  does  by  the  letter  of  the  written  law 
stand  guilty,  and  acts  unjustly ;  but  in  real  truth  he 
does  not  act  unjustly^®;  and  this  is  the  equity  of  the 

between  man  and  man,  that,  to  the  utter  undoing  of  some, 
many  things  by  strictness  of  law  may  be  done,  which  equity 
and  HONEST  meaning  forbiddeth.  Not  that  the  law  it  unjust, 
hut  imperfect;  nor  equity  againat,  but  above  the  law,  binding 
men*8  consciences  in  things  which  the  law  cannot  retich  unto, 
"Will  any  man  say  that  the  virtue  of  private  equity  is  opposite 
and  repugnant  to  that  law,  the  silence  whereof  it  supplieth  in  all 
such  private  dealing  ?  No  more  is  public  equity  against  the 
law  of  public  affaira;  albeit,  the  one  permit  unto  some,  in 
special  considerations,  that  which  the  other,  a^eeably  with 
general  rides  of  justice,  doth  in  general  sort  forbid.  For,  sith 
all  good  laws  are  the  voices  of  right  reason,  which  is  the  in- 
strument wherewith  God  will  have  the  world  guided,  and  im- 
possible it  is  that  right  should  withstand  right ;  it  must  follow 
that  principles  and  rules  of  justice,  be  they  never  so  generally 
uttered,  do  no  less  effectually  intend,  than  if  they  did  plainly 
express,  an  exception  of  all  particulars,  wherein  their  literal 
practice  might  any  wag  prejudice  equity.  Hooker,  b.  v.  §  9,  p.  35. 

'  AZtiov  S',  <»t«  6  fiiu  v6fL09  KaBoXov  vas*  inpl  iviwif  dk  oi&x 
olov  Tk  dpQSfi  elirctv  KaOokov.  Arist.  Ethics,  v.  10.  Compare 
the  whole  chapter  with  what  is  said  above. 

^^  Not  without  singular  wisdom,  therefore,  it  hath  been  pro- 
vided, that  as  the  ordinary  course  of  common  affairs  is  dis- 
posed of  by  general  laws,  so  likewise  men's  rarer  incident  ne- 
cessities and  utilities  should  be  with  special  equity  considered. 
Hooker,  b.  v.  c.  9,  p.  35. 

CHAP,  xni.]  RHETORIC.  91 

case.     Now  if  equity  be  what  it  has  been  stated  to  15.  Equi- 
be,  it  will  be  evident  what  kind  of  things  are  equit-  ^  ^5|^ 
able,  and  what  not  so  ;  also  what  kind  of  persons  are  feeling.  ~ 
not  equitable.     Since  in  whatever  cases  one  is  bound 
to  have  a  fellow-feeling,  these  are  all  cases  of  equity. 
Again,  equity  is  the  not  esteeming  faults  and  crimes  16. 
of  equal  guilt,  nor  accidents,  and  faults.     Now  acci" 
dents  are  whatever  things  happen  against  all  calcula- 
tion, and  proceed  not  from  criminal  principle ;  and 
faults  are  whatever  things  do  not  happen  against  cal- 
culation, nor  proceed  from  criminal  principle  ;  but 
crimes  are  whatever  things,  not  falling  out  contrary 
to  calculation,  proceed  from  criminal  principle;  for 
the  things  which  are  done  through  desire,  proceed 
from  criminal  principle.     Equity  sAso  is  the  having  a  17.  In 
sympathy  for  human  failings  ;  and  the  having  an  eye,  J^^*" 
not  to  the  law,  but  to  the  lawgiver;  and  not  to  the 
language^  but  to  the  intention  of  the  lawgiver  *^  And  18.  In 
not  to  the  conduct,  but  to  the  principles  of  the  agent ;  Jj^^^_*** 
not  to  his  conduct  in  one  particular,  but  to  its  whole  tive  more 
tenor.     Not  what  kind  of  person  he  has  been  in  this  *^°^  ^® 
instance,  but  what  he  has  always  shown  himself,  or  ^ ' 
generally  at  least.     The  having,  too,  a  remembrance 
of  the  good  one  has  received,  rather  than  of  the  ill ; 
of  the  good  one  has  received,  rather  than  what  one 
has  done ;  though  injured,  to  endure  it  patiently ;  to 
prefer  a  decision  by  argument,  rather  than  by  re- 
course to  action :   a  wish  to  proceed  to  arbitration,  19.  Will- 
rather  than  to  judicial  decision,  for  the   arbitrator  J^^iSe^ 
looks  to  what  is  equitable,  the  judge  to  what  is  law ; 
and  in  order  to  this  it  was  that  arbitration  was  in- 
troduced, in  order,  namely,  that  equity  might  prevail. 
So  far  then  for  our  distinctions  on  the  subject  of  what 
is  equitable. 
» 

'*  Therefore  the  Bolognian  law,  mentioned  by  Puffendorf* 
which  enacted,  "  that  whoever  drew  blood  in  the  streets  should 
be  punished  with  the  utmost  severity/*  was  held  after  long  de- 
bate not  to  extend  to  the  surgeon,  who  opened  the  vein  of  a 
person  that  fell  down  in  the  street  with  a  fit.  Blackstone, 
Comment.  Introd.  {  2,  p.  61.  For  a  variety  of  such  cases,  see 
Rhet.  ad  Herennium,  lib.  1.  c.  ii.  etc. 

92  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

CHAP.  XIV. 
Of  the  Degrees  of  GuiU. 

1.  Greater  Thosb  acts  of  injustice  are  greater  in  degree,  which 
**^®^®  proceed  from  the  greater  principle  of  injustice^;  and 
arising  on  fhis  account  the  most  trifling  are  the  greatest ;  as 
from  the  charge  which  Callistratus  laid  against  Melenopns^ 
priadple    *^**  ^^  ^^^  defrauded  the  builders  of  the  temple  in 

^  '  his  accounts,  to  the  amount  of  three  half  farthings 
of  consecrated  property ;  but  in  the  case  of  justice, 
things  are  more  or  less  just  in  a  contrary  ratio  ^. 
Now  these  criteria  arise  from  the  actions  virtually 
exceeding ;  for  he  who  stole  three  half  farthings  of 
consecrated  money  would  cheat  one  in  any  thing. 
The  degree  of  an  act  of  injustice  is  decided  then, 
sometimes  on  this  principle,  at  others  on  that  of  the 

2.  Where  harm  done.  Those  also  are  very  flagrant,  for  which 
^^is^nof  '  ^^  punishment  is  an  equivalent,  but  of  which  every 
equivar  one  falls  short ;  as  also  that  which  there  is  no  means 
lent.  of  healing ;  for  such  a  case  is  difficult  and  impracti- 
cable :  also  where  the  injured  party  can  get  no  re- 
dress in  court ;  for  the  evil  is  without  cure,  because 

3-  Where  chastisement  and  a  judicial  sentence  are  a  cure.     If 

ju^"      the   party  suffering,  and  who  was  wronged,  hath 

partyhath  grievously  injured  himself^;  for  then  the  man  who 

wronged  gi^  the  wrong  deserves  punishment  in  a  still  greater 
himself  in   i  *     .        e^     -,      ■»  .11  >ii»«i 

conse-       degree ;  just  as  Sophocles  said  when  pleading  in  be- 

quence.     half  of  Euctemon,  who,  on  being  insolently  assaulted, 

slew  himself ;  "  that  he  would  price  the  deed  at  no 

*  See  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall,  c.  44,  at  note  188.  Mea- 
sure of  Guilt,  vol.  viii.  p.  98. 

'So  much  for  the  standard  of  injtutice;  for  it  is  evident 
that  any  man  who  is  sufficiently  depraved  to  cheat  you  for  a 
farthing,  would  not  scruple  to  do  so  for  a  larger  sum.  But  in 
the  contrary  habit  of  the  mind,  a  contrary  ratio  holds,  in  the 
case  of  conforming  to  rules  of  justice — tA  IXAx^^'*''^*  i\dxi<rra ; 
for  a  man  may  be  very  honest  in  minor  transactions,  who 
.  would  not  scruple  to  cheat  you  if  a  greater  temptation  were 
thrown  in  his  way. 

'  As  in  the  case  of  Lucretia :  her  killing  herself  was  an 
aggravation  of  the  guilt  of  Tarquin. 

CHAP.  XIV.]  RHETORIC.  93 

less  cost  than  the  sufferer  had  prized  himself  at/' 
Crimes,  too,  of  which  the  present  criminal  has  alone  4.  Where 
been  guilty,  or  he  first,  or  very  few  besides.     Also  ^^^^' 
the  being  frequently  guilty  of  the  same  enormity.  w^thS 
Any  thing  too  on  account  of  which  new  prohibitory  first. 
and  penal  statutes  have  been  sought  out,  and  intro- 
duced ;  as  at'  Argos  they  punish  any  one  on  whose 
account  a  law  may  have  been  enacted,  and  those  on 
account  of  whom  the  prison  was  erected.     That  act  5.  The 
of  injustice  also  is  greater,  which  is  of  a  more  brutal  ^^ 
character.     That  too  which  proceeds  more  immedi- 
ately from  malice  aforethought.     That  too  which,  as 
they  hear  of,  people  are  affected  by  drecul,  rather 
than  compassion.    And  the  rhetorical  expedients  for 
exaggeration  are  as  follows ; — "  he  hath  swept  away 
or  overleaped  many  principles  of  justice,"  as  oaths, 
the  plighting  of  his  hand,  pledges  of  fidelity,  and 
marriage  contracts  ;  for  there  is  an  excess  by  the 
ratio  of  many  crimes.     And  its  being  on  the  very  6.  Those 
spot  where  criminals   receive  punishment ;   which  *?^®^ 
they  do  who  bear  false  witness ;  for  where  would  he  of  punish- 
not  be  ready  to  act  wrong,  if  at  least  he  does  so  even  ment. 
in  the  judgment  hall*?     Those  deeds  too  on  which 
shame  is  most  especially  felt.     Also  if  the  party  has 
injured  him  at  whose  hands  he  has  been  benefited : 
for  he  is  guilty  in  more  than  one  way,  both  in  that 
he  does  him  torong,  and  in  that  he  d^d  not  good  to 
Mm.     Also  the  man  who  has  violated  the  unwritten  7.  Viola- 
principles  of  right ;  for  it  belongs  to  a  man  of  supe-  ^^^^^ 
rior  excellence  to  be  just  unconstrainedly ;  now  what 
is  of  written  prescript  is  done  of  necessity,  but  not  so 
what  is  unwritten.   Taking  it  in  another  way,  it  is  a 
feature  of  aggravation  if  it  be  in  violation  of  written  and  writ- 
law  ;  for  you  may  say,  the  man  who  is  unjust  in  mat-  *®^  ^^' 
ters  where  is  room  for  apprehending  punishment,  and 
on  which  loss  attends,  surely  would  be  likely  to  be 

*  Among  the  aggravations  of  affrays  by  the  law  of  England 
one  is,  "  Where  a  respect  for  the  particular  place  ought  to  re- 
strain and  regulate  men*9  behaviour,  more  than  in  common 
ones ;  as  in  the  king's  court,  and  the  like."  Blackstone,  b. 
iv.  c.U,  §5. 

94  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  i. 

unjust  in  respect  of  matters  on  which  no  loss  is  con- 
sequent. Thus,  then,  the  greater  and  less  degrees  of 
injustice  have  been  treated  of. 

CHAP.  XV. 

Itespecting  Proofi  originating  independently  of  Art, 

l.artxvoi  It  comes  next  to  the  subject  just  treated  of,  for  me 
irto-Tsit.     ^  j.yjj  ^^gj,  ^^  proofs  which  are  called  inartificial ; 

2.  Five  in  because  these  are  peculiar  to  judicial  oratory  ^  And 
number.    ^^^  ^^^  j*^^  ^^  number,  viz.  laws,  witnesses,  deeds, 

torture,  oaths. 

3.  i.  Laws.      First,  then,  let  me  speak  of  Laws^  in  what  way 

an  orator,  in  exhorting  or  dissuading,  and  in  accus-* 
ing  or  defending,  is  to  turn  them  to  his  purpose. 

4.  Argu-  Because  it  is  plain,  that  if  the  written  law  be  op- 
Seora^r  P^^®^  *^  ^^^  case,  he  must  avail  himself  of  the  uni- 
te whom  versal  law,  and  of  topics  of  equity,  as  more  absolutely 
the  writ-  just ;  and  he  must  argue  that,  really  "  to  act  to  the 
is  op^^  best  of  his  judgment  2,"  is  to  decline  an  implicit  adher- 
posed.       ence  to  written  prescript :  he  must  insist,  moreover, 

^  that  equity  remains  for  ever,  and  varies  not  at  any 

'  time,  neither  does  the  universal  law,  for  this  is  "in 

conformity  to  nature  ;  but  that  the  written  law  does 

frequently  vary ;  whence  it  was  said  in  the  Antigone 

^  He  here  apologizes  for  his  violation  of  the  proposed  ar- 
rangement, in  treating  of  the  arixvai,  ir^crretv,  before  he  has 
fiiUy  despatched  the  ivrixvai.  'In  fact,  the  former  class  of 
nrivTtii  are  so  nearly  confined  to  judicial,  that  their  introduc- 
tion, though  a  little  out  of  place,  as  an  appendix  to  the  subject 
of  judicial  rhetoric,  is  very  appropriate.  Not,  however,  but  that 
»£<rr«ifi  of  this  class  may  be  avsiilable  in  deliberative  oratory ; 
and  indeed  Aristotle  himself  seems  to  hint  as  much  in  using 
the  words  frporpiirovra  Kal  diron-piirotrra  (expressions  peculiar 
to  deliberation)  >  as  well  as  Katriyopovvra  xai  dvokoyovfitvov, 

'  The  judges  were  bound  by  oath,  first,  to  an  adherence  to 
the  laws,  and  in  cases  unrecognised  by  law,  to  exercise  their 
best  judgment,  {yv&tir\  h  dpt<rrri :)  this,  as  Aristotle  here  ob- 
serves, left  grounds  for  the  appeal  of  an  orator. 

CHAP.  XV.]  RHETORIC.  95 

of  Sophocles ;  for  she  is  defending  herself  because 
she  acted  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  Creon,  but  not 
in  opposition  to  the  universal  law^,  "  for  these  are 
not  of  this  or  of  the  next  day  merely,  but  ever  exist ; 
their  prescript  would  I,  not  for  the  sake  of  any  one, 

.^     He  must  insist,  also,  that  justice  is  some-  7. 

thing  substantially  true  and  expedient,  but  not  so 
that  mere  seeming  of  justice,  so  that  neither  is  the 
written  law,  for  it  does  not  the  duty  of  law.     And 
that  the  judge  is,  as  it  were,  an  assay-master,  that 
he  may  distinguish  between  counterfeit   and  real 
ideas  of  justice.     And  that  it  is  the  part  of  a  better  8. 
man  to  employ  and  abide  by  the  unwritten  law  than 
the  written.      He  should  also  observe,  if  the  law  9. 
which  stands  in  his  way  be  at  variance  with  any  ap- 
proved law,  or  be  itself  at  variance  with  itself ;  thus 
sometimes  one  law  directs  that  whatever  men  shall 
have  covenanted  should  be  valid ;  another  forbids  that 
they  should  covenant  any  thing  contrary  to  the  law. 
Observe,  also,  whether  it  be  equivocal,  so  that  you  10. 
may  wrest  it  to  your  purpose,  and  discover  to  which 
construction  either  justice  or  expediency  will  best 
adjust  itself ;  then  let  him  avail  himself  of  that  law. 
And  if  the  circumstances  under  which  the  law  was  11. 
enacted  be  no  longer  remaining^,  but  the  law  itself 
is  remaining,  he  should  endeavour  to  make  this  clear, 
and  battle  against  it  on  this  ground.    But  should  the  12.  Argu- 
written  law  be  in  favour  of  his  case,  the  orator  then  JJ^  o/**^ 
must  state  that  '*  the  best  of  one's  judgment"  is  in-  whose 
serted,  not  for  the  sake  of  a  judge's  deciding  contrary  side  is  the 
to  the  law,  but  in  order  that,  if  he  be  ignorant  of  JJ^^ 
what  the  law  directs,  he  may  not  forswear  himself. 
He  should  insist  also,  that  no  one  chooses  good  in  the 
abstract,  but  what  is  so  to  himself;  and  that  there  is 
no  difference  between  a  law  not  enacted  and  one  not 
put  in  force.     And  he  should  observe  that,  in  other 
arts,  it  advantages  not  for  one  to  indulge  himself  in 
such  over-wisdom ;  as,  for  example,  in  respect  of  a 

'  Abready  quoted  in  chap.  13,  }  2. 

^  *  Vide  the  arguments  adduced  in  iayonr  of  Catholic  eman- 
cipation. 

96 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  1. 

13.  2nd. 
Onwit- 

which 
are  two- 
fold. 

i.  iraXai- 
ol 
ii.  irpo- 

14.  Wit- 
nesses of 
the  future 
are  sooth- 
sayers. 
Proverbs 
are  wit- 

pbjsician  ;  for  there  the  errors  of  his  physician  do 
not  so  greatly  hurt  a  man,  as  the  habituating  himself 
to  disobey  him  who  has  the  direction  of  his  health. 
And  that  the  seeking  to  be  wiser  than  the  law,  is  the 
very  thing  which  in  well-approved  laws  is  prohi- 
bited. And  on  the  subject  of  laws  let  such  be  our 
distinctions. 

But  to  the  subject  of  Witnesses:  witnesses  are 
twofold,  some  ancient,  others  modern  *,  and  of  these 
some  are  partners  in  the  risk,  others  are  uninvolved 
in  it.  I  mean  by  ancient  witnesses,  both  poets  and 
all  other  illustrious  persons  whose  decisions  are  opea 
to  the  world ;  as,  for  example,  the  Athenians  em- 
ployed Homer  as  their  witness  in  the  matter  of 
Saiamis ;  and  the  people  of  Tenedos  but  recently 
employed  Periander  the  Corinthian,  against  the 
people  of  Sigseum ;  Cleophon,  also,  employed  the 
Elegies  of  Solon  against  Critias,  saying,  that  the 
family  of  old  time  was  a  dissolute  one,  for  Solon 
would  never  otherwise  have  said,  "  Go,  bid  my 
Critias,  with  his  yellow  locks,  to  listen  to  his  father." 
Such,  then,  are  the  witnesses  on  the  subject  of  the 
past. '  But,  respecting  the  future,  we  have  also 
soothsayers ;  thus  Themistocles  insisted  that  they 
were  to  engage  by  sea,  alleging  the  expression  the 
wooden  wall*.  Moreover,  proverbs  also  are  testi- 
monies, according  to  what  has  been  stated  above  ^; 
as,  if  one  were  going  to  advise  another  not  to  make 
an  old  man  his  friend,  the  proverb  testifies  to  that 
point,  "Never  benefit  an  old  man  ;"  also  as  to  the 
taking  oiF  the  children  whose  parents  one  has  slain, 
"Foolish  is  he  who  having  slain  the  father  shall 

»  npoo'^aTot  seems  to  imply  viv&  Toce  witnesses,  those  from 
whom  oral  testimony  may  be  gained,  and  perhaps  for  that 
reason  applied  to  signify  modern  in  general. 

®  See  Herodotus,  Polymnia,  143. 

■^  That  is,  according  to  his  declaration  that  any  known  de- 
cisions of  illustrious  persons  might  be  of  service  in  proof. 
Now  proverbs  have  the  advantage  of  being  universally  known, 
and  are  acquiesced  in  by  all  as  the  decisions  of  men  of 
prudence  at  least.  Vater  explains  the  passage  differently: 
vid.  Animadv. 

CHAP.  xv.J  RHETORIC.  97 

leave  the  son   behind®."       Modern   witnesses   are  15.  Mo- 
all  those  people  of  note  who  have  passed  an  opi-  dern^t- 
nion   on  any  point ;    for  these   their   opinions   are  partake  of 
useful  to  those  who  are  debating  on  the  same  ques-  the  risk, 
tions ;  as  Eubulus,  for  instance,  in  the  trial  against 
Chares,  availed  himself  of  that  saying  of  Plato,  in 
reference  to  Archibius,  that' "  the  avowal  of  being 
wicked  has  gained  ground  in  the  city."     Also  those 
who  participate  the  risk,  should  they  appear  to  falsify. 
Witnesses,  however,  of  this  class,  prove  merely  such  16.  and 
points  as  these;   whether  the   fact  has  or  has  not  2^^^^^^* 
taken  place  ;  whether  it  be  in  existence  or  not ;  but  f^^t. 
as  to  the  further  question  of  its  character^  they  are  not 
at  all  witnesses  ;  on  the  questions,  for  instance,  whe- 
ther a  thing  be  just  or  unjust,  expedient  or  preju- 
dicial.    But  witnesses  who  are  at  a  distance®  are  17. 
very  credible,  even  touching  questions  of  this  nature. 
But  ancient  witnesses  are  of  supreme  credibility  ^**,  Most  an- 
because  they  are  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption.  ^ostCTe^ 
But  in  reference  to  testimony  the  following  may  be  dible. 
adduced  as  confirmations  of  proof,  by  the   orator,  Argu- 
namely,  who  has  no  witnesses :  it  should  be  insisted  j^^iits  for 
that  the  judge  ought  to  decide  from  probabilities,  has  no 
and  that  this  is  the  spirit  of  his  oath,  "  to  the  best  witnesses: 
of  his.  judgment."     Let  him  also  say  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  lead  probability  astray  on  the  score  of 
money ;  and  that  probability  never  is  detected  bear- 
ing false  testimony.     But  it  must  be  urged  by  him  and  for 
who  h<is  witnesses,  against  him  who  has  them  not,  ^  ^^** 
that  neither  is  probability  amenable  to  trial;    and 
that  there  would  be  no  need  at  all  of  offering  testi- 
mony, if  it  were  enough  to  consider  matters  on  the 
ground  of  reasonings  only.     And  testimony  is  partly  18.  Testi- 

•  Vid.  Herodot.  i.  155.     Cyrus  is  apprehensive  of  constant         ^ 
annoyance  if  he  should  not  enslave  the  Lydians : — o/notus  ydp 

fioj,  vvv  vc  i^aivofiaL  irfKoifiKtvaty  cos  it  rts  traripa  diroicTtivaif 
T&it  'n-alotau  aif-rov  ibtiffaiTO. 

•  By  the  ol  dtrmoty  he  should  seem  to  imply  both  ol  iraXatol, 
and  ol  iicrd^  irpp<r<t>a'roi'  the  first  removed  by  time,  the  last  by 
their  being  unconcerned  in  the  present  question,  which  may  be 
considered  in  one  sense  as  a  distance  in  point  of  interest  at  least. 

*•  T6   ix  'JToSStv  o(yr*   oirritriTmi  Kai   TtrifxriTCU    d<f>06vwv. 
Gregor.  Naz.  iv  Srtx.     Hooker,  vol.  ii.  p.  26. 
H 

98  ARISTOTLE'S  book  i. 

either  for  in  reference  to  one's  self,  partly  in  reference  to  the 
o^®!f  *!S  adversary  ;  partly  to  fact,  partly  to  moral  character, 
versaxy.  "  Insomuch  that  it  is  plain  that  we  can  never  be  at  a 
loss  for  testimony  to  suit  our  purpose  ;  for  if  there 
be  not  at  hand  any  such  testimony,  bearing  on  the 
case  itself,  as  is  either  admitted  on  our  own  part,  or 
opposed  to  our  adversary,  we  still  may  have  enough, 
bearing  on  the  subject  of  moral  character,  with  a 
vieV  either  to  our  own  excellence  of  character,  or 

19.  our  adversary's  depravity.  Whatever  else  we  allege 
on  the  subject  of  witnesses,  as  to  their  being  friendly, 
inimical,  or  indifferent,  of  good  character,  or  bad,  or 
neither  particularly,  and  whatever  other  distinctions 
of  this  kind  there  happen  to  be,  must  be  alleged  from 
the  same  places  out  of  which  we  adduce  enthymems. 

20.  But  on  the  subject  of  Deeds,  pleading  is  useful  so 
^-          far  as  regards  enhancing  or  depreciating  their  au- 
Deeds.       thority,  or  showing  them  to  be  valid,  or  void ;  in  show- 
ing, if  they  exist  on  your  own  side,  that  they  are  de- 
serving credit  and  valid  ;  if,  however,  they  be  on  your 

21.  To  be  adversary's  side,  in  showing  the  contrary.     Now  in 
treated  as  Q^der  to  set  them  out  as  deserving  credit  or  undeserv- 

witnesses 

Argu-       i°g  it>  there  is  no  difference  from  the  process  respect- 

ments  for  ing  witnesses.  For  of  whatever  characters  those  who 

hMiW   *^*^®  subscribed,  or  had  the  custody  ^^  of  the  deeds, 

on  his       happen  to  be,  of  the  same  authority  will  the  deeds 

>ide.  themselves  also  be.     "When,  however,  the  deeds  are 

acknowledged  to  have  been  made,  we  must,  in  case 

they  be  on  our  side,  aggrandize  their  authority ;  for 

a  deed  is  law,  private  and  particular  ^^.     And  deeds 

^*  Thus  it  is  one  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  validity  of 
the  prophecies  of  our  Saviour's  coming,  that  they  are  con- 
tained in  books  of  vhich  the  Jews,  who  are  the  enemies  of 
Christianity,  had  the  custody.  See  Home's  Sermon  on  "  The 
case  of  the  Jews."    . 

^'  Law  is  essentially  distinguished  from  deeds  or  private 
compacts,  in  that  it  is  a  rule ;  "for  a  compact  is  a  promise 
proceeding  from  us,  law  is  a  command  directed  to  us.  The 
language  of  a  compact  is,  *  I  will,  or  will  not,  do  this ; '  that  of 
a  law  is,  '  Thou  shalt,  or  shalt  not,  do  it.'  It  is  true  there  is 
an  obligation  which  a  compact  carries  with  it,  equal  in  point 
of  conscience  to  that  of  a  law ;  but  then  the  original  of  the 
obligation  is  different.    In  compacts  we  ourselves  determine 

CHAP.  XV.]  RHETORIC.  99 

do  not  make  valid  the  law,  but  the  law  makes  valid 
those  deeds  which  are  conformable  to  law.     And,  in 
short,  the  law  is  itself  a  sort  of  deed  ;  so  that  who- 
ever casts  discredit  on,  or  does  away  deeds,  does  away, 
in  fact,  with  law.     Moreover  the  greater  part  of  the  22. 
bargains  of  men,  and  their  voluntary  transactions,  are 
carried  on  by  means  of  deeds :  so  that  if  these  become 
invalid,  the  intercourse  of  mankind  with  each  other 
is  subverted.    And  it  is  easy  enough  to  discover  what  23.  Argu- 
other  topics  are  adapted  to  the  purpose.    But  should  JJ^^^JJ^ 
the  deeds  be  opposed  to  you,  and  on  the  side  of  your  has  them 
adversary,  these  arguments  will  be  to  your  purpose  :  not  on  his 
— ^first,  those  with  which  one  would  contend  against  *  ®* 
a  law  which  made  against  him ;  for  it  is  absurd  if  we 
think  we  are  not  bound  to  obey  the  laws,  unless  well 
enacted,  and  if  the  legislators  have  been  guilty  of  mis- 
taking their  point,  but  yet  hold  it  necessary  to  abide 
by  mere  deeds.     Next  to  argue  that  the  judge  is  an  24. 
arbiter  of  what  is  just,  that  he  ought  therefore  to  re- 
gard, not  the  matter  of  the  deed,  but  something  par- 
taking more  of  justice.    And  that  it  is  not  possible  to 
alter  what  is  just,  either  by  fraud  or  force  ;  for  it  has 
an  existence  in  the  nature  of  things  ^^  :  deeds,  how-  25. 
ever,  are  made  both  by  persons  who  are  imposed  on, 
and  those  who  are  compelled  to  make  them.  Observe, 
moreover,  whether  it  be  in  opposition  to  any  written 
law,  or  any  universal  principle  of  right,  and  to  the 
principles  of  justice  and  honour;  whether  again  it 
be  opposed  to  other  later  or  earlier  deeds ;  for  either 
the  later  are  valid,  and  the  earlier  invalid ;   or  the 
earlier  are  correct,  and  the  later  have  been  obtained 
by  stratagem ;  urging  whichever  of  these  cases  may 
happen  to  suit  the  purpose.     Have  an  eye  moreover 
to  the  matter  of  expediency,  whether  the  deed  stand 
in  any  respect  in  the  way  of  the  judges,  and  every 
other  such  consideration,  for  these  may  also  be  easily 
discovered. 

and  promise  what  shall  be  done,  before  we  are  obliged  to  do 
it ;  in  laws  we  are  obliged  to  act  without  ourselves  determining 
or  promising  any  thing  at  all."  Blackstone,  Comment.  Introd- 
}  2,  p.  45.  "  Vid.  Ethics. 

H   2 

100  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  i. 

26.  Torture  is  a  kind  of  evidence,  and  appears  to  cany 

4th.  Tor-  -vrith  it  absolute  credibility,  because  a  kind  of  con- 
kind  of      straint  is  applied.     Now,  it  is  not  at  all  difficult  re- 
evidence,   specting  this  to  discern  those  considerations  which 
When  on  the  cause  admits  of,  and  to  set  them  forth  ;  out  of 
our  side,    which,  should  the  torture  be  on  our  side,  it  is  possi- 
ble to  enhance  its  value,  bv  insisting  that  of  all  evi- 
When       dence  this  alone  is  true.     Should  it  be,  however,  op- 
J^"^*      posed  to  us,  and  on  the  side  of  our  adversary,  one 
may  do  away  with  the  very  truth,  by  declaiming 
against  every  sort  of  torture ;  for  that  men,  when 
'    constrained,  speak  falsehood  no  less  than  truth,  and 
will  persist  in  not  speaking  the  truth ;  and  will  easily 
falsify,  as  being  likely  the  sooner  to  get  off:  ^*  and 
one  ought  to  have  it  in  his  power  to  allege,  over  and 
above  all  these  considerations,  some  actual  instances, 
which  the  judges  are  acquainted  with,  besides  topics 
such  as  I  have  described. 

27.  On  the  subject  of  oaths  we  may  make  a  four-fold 
O^tha-  <iivision  ;  for  a  party  either  tenders  an  oath,  and  ac- 
four-fbld  cepts  it ;  or  he  does  neither  ;  or  he  does  the  one,  and 
division  not  the  Other ;  that  is,  he  either  tenders,  but  does 
"^^®-    .^  not  accept  it ;  or  accepts,  but  does  not  tender  it.^^ 

ii.  Moreover,  it  may  happen  in  a  different  way  from  tliis 
^'  still,  supposing  the  oath  to  have  been  previously 
^*  taken  by  this  or  that  party. 

28.  1.  Now,  an  advocate  does  not  tender  an  oath  on 

tiie^^   the  ground  that  men  easily  forswear  themselves ;  and 

refuses  to  because  the  other  party  will  take  it,  and  never  repay ; 

tender       but  that  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  judges,  if  his  ad- 
theoath.  ^  J      &     » 

*^  The  Pandects  (lib.  xlviii.  tit.  xviii.)  contain  the  senti- 
ments of  the  most  eminent  civilians  on  the  subject  of  torture. 
They  confine  it  tO/  slaves ;  and  Ulpian  acknowledges,  that 
"  Res  est  fragilis,  et  periculosa,  et  quae  veritatem  fallet.** 

**  However  strangely  this  wrangling  for  the  administration 
of  oaths  may  sound,  at  the  present  day,  when  they  are  uni- 
formly insisted  on,  yet  in  the  early  periods  of  our  own  history 
the  evidence  for  accused  persons  against  the  king  could  not  be 
examined  on  oath, — nor  till  the  reign  of  Anne  could  any  one 
accused  of  felony  produce  witnesses  on  oath.  Edin.  Review, 
No.  Ixxxix.  Art.  3,  p.  79,  80.  It  was  not  till  so  late  as  the 
reign  of  Anne,  that  the  English  courts  were  authorized  to  ad- 
minister an  oath  to  persona  called  by  a  prisoner  on  his  defence. 

CHAP.  XV.]  RHETORIC.  101 

versary  does  not  take  the  oath,  will  give  a  verdict 
against  him  :  that  he  esteems  the  risk  which  depends 
on  the  judges  the  preferable  one,  for  in  them  he  re- 
poses confidence,  but  in  his  adversary,  none. 

2.  But  an  advocate  declines  accepting  it  on  the  29, 
ground  of  its  being  an  oath  for  a  pecuniary  object ;  ^'  ^©^^ 
and  because,  if  he  were  a  worthless  fellow,  he  would  to  accept 
forswear  himself  without  more  ado ;  since  it  were  it. 
better  surely  to  be  a  villain  for  some  object,  rather 

than  for  none ;  for  if  he  but  take  the  oath,  he  will 
gain  his  caus^,  if  he  decline  taking  it,  he  will  not. 
Thus,  then,  his  not  taking  it  will  be  from  virtuous 
motives,  not  from  fear  of  forswearing  himself;  here, 
too,  the  saying  of  Xenophanes  is  in  point,  viz.  that 
this  sort  of  appeal,  made  by  an  impious  man  to  a 
pious,  is  not  fair,  but  is  just  such  an  one,  as  if  a  ro- 
bust fellow  were  to  challenge  an  infirm  man,  either 
to  strike  him,  or  to  get  beaten  himself. 

3.  If,  however,  he  accepts  it,  the  advocate  alleges  30. 
that  he  feels  confidence  in  himself,  but  none  in  his  |j^-  When 
adversary.    Let  him  also  declare,  inverting  the  saying  jt®  ^'^^^ 
of  Xenophanes,  that  it  is  fair  enough  if  the  impious 

man  tenders  the  oath,  and  the  pious  man  takes  it ; 
also,  that  it  is  surely  a  strange  thing  that  a  man 
should  be  unwilling  himself  to  take  an  oath,  in  a 
question  about  which  he  calls  on  the  judges  to  give 
their  verdict  on  oath. 

4.  If,  however,  he  tenders  the  oath,  let  him  insist  31. 
that  a  willingness  to  intrust  the  question  to  the  gods  j^*.^®*' 
is  a  matter  of  piety ;  and  that  his  adversary  need  jt.    ^  ^" 
call  on  no  other  judges,  since  he  throws  the  decision 

of  the  case  into  his  own  hands ;  and  that  an  unvrill- 
ingness  to  take  an  oath,  in  a  question  about  which 
he  calls  upon  other  people  to  swear,  is  absurd. 

Now,  as  it  is  thus  plain  hoW  we  are  to  speak  in  32.  Argu- 
reference  to  each  [of  the  four  simple  cases],  it  will  2®^*^  ^°^ 
also  be  plain  how  we  are  to  speak  when  taking  them  take^n- 
conjointly ;  supposing,  for  instance,  either  that  your-  jointay. 
self  are  willing  to  take  the  oath,  but  not  to  tender  it ; 
or,  if  you  tender  it,  but  are  not  willing  to  take  it ;  or 
if  you  are  inclined  both  to  take  it  and  to  tender  it ; 

102  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  [book  i. 

or  to  do  neither;  for  these  cases  must  be  made  up  of 
those  above  mentioned,  so  that  our  reasonings  must 
also  be  made  up  of  those  above  stated. 
Argfu-  But  if  a  former  oath,  and  that  contradictory  of 

anTra^    your  present,  has  been  taken  by  yourself,  you  have 
Tiousoath  to  make  out  that  it  is  not  perjury;  for  injustice  is 
has  been    essentially  voluntary,  and  perjury  is  injustice;  but 
that  which  is  done  under  constraint,  or  deceit,  is 
33.  Per-    involuntary,  [and  therefore  not  unjust.]     Here  then 
jury.         ^g   jjj^y.  in|;j.Q^a(^  the  saying  aft>out   perjury,  viz. 
'^  that  it  is  a  thing  not  of  the  tongue,  but  of  the 
mind."    If,  however,  an  oath  of  this  description  shall 
have  been  taken  by  your  adversary,  declare,  "that 
he  who  abides  not  by  what  he  has  sworn  to,  subverts 
every  thing  which  is  established ;  for  this  is  the  rea- 
son that  judges  administer  the  law  only  on  oath:" 
exclaim,  too,  "  that  these  men  are  calling  on  you, 
judges,  to  abide  by  those  oaths,  by  virtue  of  taking 
which  you  give  your  verdict ;  and  do  they  not  them- 
selves abide  by  them  ?"    And  whatever  else  one  may 
'  allege  in  way  of  amplification.     So  much,  then,  for 
the  subject  of  proof  not  originated  by  art. 

BOOK    II. 

CHAP.  I. 

The  necessity  of  investing  the  Judge  with  a  favxmrahle 
feeling. 

The  materials,  then,  from  which  we  must  exhort  1.  Discus- 
and  dissuade,  praise  and  blame,  accuse  and  defend,  ^^^\^ 
the  notions  also  and  propositions,  useful  in  order  to  ^^  ^a*/" 
render  these  points  credible,  are  those  [which  we  tou\*- 
have  discussed] :  for  respecting  these  questions,  and  Y***^***- 
out  of  these  sources,  are  enth3rmems  deduced,  so  that 
an  orator,  thus  provided,  maj  speak  on  each  separate 
department  of  questions.     But  as  rhetoric   has  in  2. 
view  the  coming  to  a  decision  (for  in  deliberative 
oratory,  the  assembly  arrive  at  decisions ;   and  the 
sentence  of  a  court  of  justice  is  ipso  facto  a  decision) ; 
it  is  necessary  to  look  not  only  to  your  speech,  in 
what  way  that  will  be  of  a  character  to  convince  and 
persuade,  but  also  to  invest  yourself  with  a  certain 
kind  of  character,  and  the  judge  with  a  certain  kind 
of  feeling.     For  it  is  a  point  of  great  consequence,  3. 
particularly  in  deliberative  ^  cases ;  and,  next  to  these, 
in  judicial ;  as  well  that  the  speaker  seem  to  be  a  man 
of  a  certain  character,  as  that  his  audience  conceive 
him  to  be  of  a  certain  disposition  toward  themselves; 
moreover  it  is  of  consequence  if  your  audience  chance 
to   be  themselves  also  disposed  in  a  certain  way. 

*  Those  subjects  about  which  dellberatiye  oratory  is  con- 
cerned, least  of  all  admit  any  thing  like  absolute  certainty,  for 
we  can  only  form  conjectures  of  what  will  be  from  what  has 
been;  and  Aristotle  has  already  told  us,  **  that  men  lend  a 
readier  and  more  implicit  belief  to  the  good  on  all  questions 
whatsoeyer ;  but  on  those  whose  nature  precludes  our  arriving 
at  certainty,  but  compels  us  to  remain  in  doubt,  we  rely  en- 
tirely on  them."    Book  i.  chap.  ii.  {  4. 

104 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book   II. 

4.  Now,  as  to  a  speaker's  appearing  to  be  himself  of  a 
'  certain  character,  this  point  is  more  available  in  de- 
liberations :  'but  the  disposing  the  auditor  in  a  certain 
way,  in  judicial  cases  ;  for  things  do  not  show  them- 
selves in  the  same  light  to  persons  affected  by  love 
and  by  hatred,  nor  to  those  under  emotions  of  anger, 
as  to  those  who  are  disposed  to  placability;  but  they 
appear  either  utterly  different  in  character,  or  at  least 
different  in  degree.  For  to  a  judge  who  is  affected 
by  love  toward  the  party  respecting  whom  he  pro- 
nounces his  decision,  that  party  appears  either  not  at 
all  to  be  unjust,  or  to  be  so  in  a  very  trivial  degree. 
To  a  judge,  however,  who  is  affected  by  hatred,  the 
case  has  a  contrary  appearance.  So  also  to  a  person 
who  is  eager  and  sanguine,  the  proposed  object,  if 
pleasant,  takes  the  appearance,  as  well  of  being  likely 
to  accrue,  as  of  being  likely  to  prove  really  a  good  ; 
while  by  one  who  is  indifferent  and  reluctant,  the 
opposite  view  is  taken. 
5.  Three  Now,  there  are  three  causes  of  a  speaker's  deserv- 
for  tih****  ing  belief ;  for  so  many  in  number  are  the  qualities 
orator's  on  account  of  which  we  lend  our  credit,  independent- 
ly of  proof  adduced ;  and  these  are  prudence,  moral 
excellence,  and  the  haying  our  interests  at  heart  ^; 
(for  men  are  fallacious  in  what  they  allege  or  advise 
by  reason,  either  of  all,  or  some,  of  these  causes ;  for 
el  either,  from  want  of  ability,  they  do  not  rightly  ap- 
prehend the  question ;  or,  rightly  apprehending  it, 
from  their  depravity,  they  do  not  tell  you  what  they 
think ;  or,  being  men  both  of  ability  and  moral  ex- 
cellence, they  have  not  your  interests  at  heart,  on 
which  account  it  is  possible  they  should  not  give  you 
the  best  advice,  though  fully  known  what  is  best ;) 
and  besides  these  there  is  no  other  :  it  follows  there- 
fore, of  course,  that  the  speaker  who  appears  to  pos- 
sess aU  these  qualities,  is  considered  by  his  audience 
7.  The      as  deserving  credit^.     Now  the  means  by  which  men 

^  See  Pericles*s  defence  of  himself,  Thucyd.  ii.  60;  and 
above,  book  i.  chap.  viii.  §  6. 

'  A  celebrated  scholar  of  the  present  day,  after  having  de- 
scribed the  eloquence  of  Mr.  Fox,  as  remarkably  characteAzed 

beUef. 
i.  <l>p6vr\' 

ii.  dpsT^. 
iii.  idvoia. 

CHAP.  I.]  KHETORIC.  105 

may  appear  virtuous  and  prudent,  are  to  be  derived  two  first 
from  what  has  been  laid  down  on  the  subject  of  the  diwuseed 
virtues  ;  for  it  is  by  help  of  the  very  same  things,    ®  °^* 
that  an  orator  may  invest  himself,  and  any  one  else, 
in  a  certain  character.     The  subject  of  feeling  an  in-  8.  The 
terest,  and  of  friendliness,  must  be  discussed  in  my  l**^^ 
treatise   of   the  passions,    commencing   henceforth,  by  the 
Passions^  however  are,  all  emotions  whatsoever,  on  emotions, 
which  pain  and  pleasure  are  consequent,  by  whose  ^^ 
operation,  undergoing  a  change,  men  differ  in  respect  therefore 
to  their  decisions:  for  instance,  anger,  pity,  fear,  ^.^^°'^" 
and  whatever  other  emotions  are  of  such  a  nature,  ^  ^ 
and  those  opposed  to  them.     But  it  will  be  fitting  to  9.  The 
divide  what  I  have  to  say,  respecting  each,  into  three  ?^^.^^^2S 
considerations;  to  consider,  respecting  anger,  for  ex-  j^totiire© 
ample,  how  those  who  are  susceptible  of  anger  are  heads  in 
affected;  with  whom  they  usually  are  angry;  and  ®^^"^" 
on  what  occasions.     For,  granted  that  we  be  in  pos-  i. 
session  of  one,  or  even  two  of  these  points,  and  not  ii.. 
of  .them  all,  it  wiU  be  impossible  for  tis  to  kindle  ^' 
anger  in  the  breast ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  rest  of  the 
passions  in  a  similar  w^y.     In  the  same  way,  then, 
as  on  the  subjects  treated  of  above  I  have  separately 
drawn  up  the  several  propositions,  so  let  me  do  in  re- 
spect of  these  also,  and  make  my  distinctions  ac-   ^ 
cording  to  the  manner  specified. 

CHAP.  IL 

Persons  against  whom  Anger  is  felt  ^  and  hy  whom,  and  why. 

Let  anger  be  defined  ^  to  be  "  a  desire  accompanied  i.  Anger 
by  pain  of  a  revenge  which  presents  itself,  on  ac-  defined. 

by  irttrris  ijbiKti,  proceeds  thus — "  Hac  de  causa,  quos  audienti 
mihi  motus  adhibere  voluit,  illi  semper  in  animo  oratoris  im- 
press! et  inusti  esse  videbantur."  Parr's  Pref.  to  Bellenden, 
p.  12,  edit.  1787. 

*  The  definition,  given  more  briefly  in  the  Ethics,  is  "  oI« 
Ivfrai  ^Soini  h  Xwirif.**     Eth.  Nich.  ii.  5.       , 

*  'Optj^ii  dirriXinr^ff^ois.    Eth.  Nich. 

106  ARISTOTLE'S  [book   ii. 

count  of  an  apparent  slight  from  persons  acting  to-  * 
ward  one's  self,  or  some  of  one's  friends,  unbecom- 

2.  Anger  ingly."  Now,  if  anger  be  this,  it  must  be  that  he 
^^J*  who  is  affected  by  anger,  is  so  affected  invariably  to- 
^e^^.  wards  some  individual  (for  instance,  towards  Cleon), 
vidual,  but  not  towards  mankind^  generally :  and  this,  be- 
spec^!  cause  the  individual  has  already  wrought  some  indig- 
nity, either  on  himself  or  some  of  his  friends,  or  in- 

Is  attend-  tends  doing  so.     It  must  be  also  that  there  is  a  sort 
edwith     q£  pleasure  consequent  on  all  anger,  arising  out  of 
p  easure.    ^^^  j^^^  ^^  avenging  one's  self  ^;  for  the  idea  of  at- 
taining what  one  desires  is  pleasant ;  and  no  one  is 
desirous  of  objects  which  appear  impracticable  to  him ; 
and  he  who  is  under  the  affection  of  anger  is  desirous 
of  objects  which  appear  practicable  to  him.    "Where- 
fore it  has  been  happily  remarked  of  anger,  that  it  is, 
"  Far,  far  too  dear  to  every  mortal  breast, 
Sweet  to  the  soul,  as  honey  to  the  taste  ^.*' 

Because  a  sort  of  pleasure  is  consequent  on  it,  as  well 
on  this  account,  as  because  men  linger  in  thought  on 
compassing  revenge.  Now  the  phantasy  which  then 
arises  excites  a  pleasure  within  us,  as  do  the  phanta- 

3.  We  sies  of  dreams.  But  as  a  slight  is  the  operation  of  an 
feel  anger  opinion  conceived  of  an  object  which  appears  not 
count  of  a  worth  consideration  (for  we  esteem  things  absolutely 
supposed  bad,  and  those  which  are  good,  and  what  conduces  to 
^°^'       them,  to  be  worth  some  consideration ;  that  however 

which  is  mere  nothing,  or  absolutely  trivial,  we  con- 
Three  ceive  worth  none).  There  are  three  species  of  slight, 
species  of  contempt,  vexatiousness,  and  contumely :  for  he  who 
L  KaTa****  nianifests  contempt  is  guilty  of  a  slight,  since  men 
^povtitTK.  contemn  whatever  they  think  worth  nothing,  and 
ii.  irrnpt'  -^hat  is  worth  nothing,  they  slight.  Again,  he  who 
2i'*2^pt«.  IS  vexatious  appears  to  contemn,  for  vexatiotisness  is 
4.  a  thwarting  another's  wishes,  not  that  any  thing  may 

accrue  to  the  person  himself  who  so  impedes,  but  in 

•  Compare  lib.  i.  c.  xi.  §  9,  ovith  yAp  SpyC^iToi  t«  adw- 

vdTtpf  K,  T.  X. 

^  Compare  book  i.  chap.  xi.  §  13 ;  and  also  book  i.  chap.  x. 
6  17.  This  is  expressed  in  the  Ethics,  lib.  iii.  c.  viii.  Kai  oi 
audpwroi  dri  dpyi^ofitvoi  /iku  dkyouo'i,  Tifiwpovfievoi  i*  hdotrrai. 

*  Pope's  translation  of  Homer. 

CHAP.  II.]  RHETORIC.  107 

Order  that  something  maj  not  accrue  to  that  othei'. 
Since,  then,  he  slights  not  with  a  view  to  any  ad^ 
vantage  to  himself,  it  is  plain  that  he  conceives  you 
can  neither  hurt  him,  (for,  if  he  did,  he  would  be 
afraid,  and  would  not  be  guiltj  of  slight,)  nor  can 
benefit  him  in  any  respect  worth  mentioning,  since 
he  would  otherwise  hold  you  in  consideration,  in  order 
to  become  your  friend.^  He,  too,  who  acts  contume-  5, 
Uously  manifests  slight ;  for  contumely  is  the  doing 
and  saying  those  things  about  which  the  person  who 
is  the  subject  of  this  treatment,  has  feelings  of  deli- 
cacy, not  with  a  view  that  any  thing  should  accrue 
to  himself  other  than  what  arises  to  him  in  the  act, 
but  in  order  that  he  may  be  gratified ;  for  they  who 
requite  an  injury,  do  not  act  contumeliously,  but  take 
revenge.  Now  the  cause  of  the  pleasure  felt  by  those  6. 
who  act  contumeliously,  is  that,  by  injuring,  they. 
conceive  themselves  to  be  more  decidedly  superior : 
on  which  account  young  men  and  the  rich  are  given 
to  contumely,  for  in  manifesting  the  contumely,  they 
conceive  themselves  superior.  To  contumely  belongs 
the  withholding  of  respect ;  but  he  who  withholds 
respect,  manifests  slight ;  for  that  which  is  of  no 
value,  is  h^ld  in  no  consideration,  either  good  or  bad. 
On  which  principle  Achilles,  in  his  anger,  says,  "  He 
hath  withheld  from  me  respect,  for  he  hath  seized 
and  possesses  my  prize  himself,  having  taken  it  from 
me."  And  again,  "  Like  some  unregarded  vaga- 
bond;" as  though  he  were,  on  this  account,  affected 
by  anger.  Now  people  think  it  becoming  that  they  7. 
should  be  looked  up  to  by  their  inferiors,  whether 
in  birth,  power,  or  moral  excellence,  or  generally 
speaking,  in  whatever  respect  one  may  happen  to  be 

^  It  is  an  essential  feature  of  vexatiousness,  and  in  fact  of 
every  species  of  slight,  that  there  is  a  total  absence  of  any  self- 
ish motive  on  the  part  of  him  who  offers  it ;  the  appearance  of 
any  such  motive  having  actuated  him,  would  be  a-  salvo  to  the 
pride  of  him  who  is  made  the  subject  of  such  treatment ;  but 
to  be  exposed  to  an  opinion  that  one  is  utterly  beneath  con- 
sideration {j^o^a  iref>l  tb  fitidtvo^  dj^u>v  iffaivofiEvov)^  is  a  reflec- 
tion to  which  no  person,  actuated  by  the  common  feelings  of 
-   oar  nature,  ever  can  submit. 

108  ARISTOTLE'S     '  [book  ii. 

much  superior :  thus  the  rich  man  thinks  to  be  looked 
up  to  by  the  poor,  in  regard  to  money ;  also  the  man 
who  has  B,  faculty  of  speaking,  by  him  who  is  desti- 
tute pf  it,  in  the  case  of  speaking ;  and  he  who  thinks 
himself  worthy  to  bear  office,  by  him  who  deserves 
to  be  subject  to  rule.     "Whence  it  has  been  said, 

"  Beware  !  for  dreadful  is  the  wrath  of  kings  :** 
and  in  another  place, 

"  *Tis  sure  the  mighty  will  revenge  at  last :" 

for  they  feel  indignant'  by  reason  of  their  superiority. 
8.  Moreover  [men  think  it  becoming  that  they  should 
be  looked  up  to]  by  those  at  whose  hands  they  think 
they  ought  to  receive  good ;  and  these  are  such  as 
they  have  benefited,  or  continue  to  benefit,  whether 
'    in  their  own  persons,  or  as  instruments  of  any  one, 
.  and  whom  any  of  their  relatives  have  benefited,  or 
wish,  or  did  wish  to  benefit. 
9.  With         1.  From  hence  it  is  by  this  time  manifest  both  un- 
what  fe^-  ^gp  what  ajffections  as  regards  themselves,  and  with 
how'riSi-  what  objects,  and  for  what  reasons,  men  feel  anger. 
ated,  men  For  as  regards  themselves,  it  is  when  they  happen  to 
are  angry,  y^  aggrieved,  since  he  who  is  aggrieved  is  anxious 
for  something.  Now  a  man  [will  feel  thus  aggrieved], 
as  well  on  any  person's  clashing  with  him  in  regard 
to  any  object,  directly;  when  he  is  thirsty,  for  exam- 
ple, in  regard  to  drinking :  as  also  should  they  not 
directli/ clash,  yet  will  he  appear  to  do  the  same  thing ; 
and  if  a  person  thwarts,  or  does  not  co-operate  with 
one,  and  if  a  person  annoys  one  in  any  respect,  when 
thus  circumstanced,  one  feels  anger  against  all  these. 
10.  On  which  account  people  who  are  ill,  in  .poverty,  love, 
thirst,  in  a  word,  who  are  under  desire,  and  fail  of 
success,  these  all  are  fretful  and  irritable,  and  parti- 
cularly with  those  who  slight  their  present  condition : 
the  sick  man,  for  example,  is  annoyed  by  those  who 
slight  him  in  regard  to  his  disease :  the  poor  man  too, 
with  those  who  do  so  in  regard  to  his  poverty ;  and 
the  warrior,  in  regard  to  war ;  the  lover,  in  regard  to 
'  love ;  and  in  other  cases  similarly,  for  each  one  has 
the  way  paved  to  the  feeling  anger  in  each  case,  by 

CHAP.  II.]  »    RHETORIC.  109 

the  passion  which  exists  in  his  mind.  Again,  a  man  n. 
is  nettled  should  he  happen  to  be  expecting  the  very 
opposite  of  what  results ;  for  that  pains  one  more 
deeply  which  falls  out  very  unexpectedly ;  just  in  the 
same  ratio  as  that  which  is  very  unexpected  de- 
lights, should  it  be  what  one  wishes  for.  On  which 
account  seasons,  times,  dispositions,  and  ages,  which 
class  of  them  are  readily  excited  to  anger,  and  when, 
and  how,  will  be  plain  from  this  which  I  have  said  ; 
also  it  will  be  plain  that  they  are  then  excited  with 
greater  readiness,  when  more  immediately  influenced 
by  these  circumstances.  As  then  regards  the  persons 
themselves,  under  these  dispositions  it  is  that  they 
are  readily  excited  to  anger. 

2.  But  people  feel  anger  towards  those  who  laugh  12.  To- 
at  them  excessively,  and  gibe,  and  scoff  at  them,  for  ^J^ 
these  treat  them  with  contumely  ;  with  such  also  as  men  feel 
hurt  them  in  all  particulars,  of  such  a  nature  as  are  anger. 
tokens  of  contumely :  these  c^f  course  must  be  such  as 
neither  are  in  requital  for  any  thing,  or  beneficial  to 
those  who  are  the  agents  ^;  for  this  is  enough  to  make        * 
it  appear  to  be  an  act  solely  of  contumely :  towards  13. 
those  also  w^ho  underrate  and  despise  what  themselves 
take  a  warm  interest  in ;  thus  all  those  who  are  fond 
of  philosophy,  are  angry  if  any  one  undervalues  phi- 
losophy ;  so,  too,  they  who  embrace  the  notion  of  an 
universal  idea^,  are  nettled  if  a  person  despises  the 
doctrine;  and  as  regards  other  things  in  a  similar 
manner.    But  all  this  will  be  felt  much  more  keenly,  14. 
if  these  persons  suspect  that  the  qualities  so  under- 
rated do  not  really  belong  to  them,  or  not  completely, 
or  not  firmly,  or  that  they  do  not  appear  to  belong  to 
them ;  since,  if  they  conceive  themselves  to  be  very 
strong  in  the  points  on  which  they  happen  to  be  ral- 
lied, they  do  not  regard  it^  and  anger  is  felt  to- 

•  Here  also  Aristotle  maintains  the  absolute  exclusion  of  any  ' 
thing  like  self-interest  as  characteristic  of  this  species  of  ^Xt- 
ywpTa.    See  note  on  the  last  chapter. 

7  Alluding  to  Plato's  doctrine  of  ideas,  which  Aristotle  him- 
self 80  warmly  controverted.     See  Eth.  Nich.  i.  6. 

•  See  chap.  It.  §  14,  where  he  says,  we  are  fond  of  those 
who  praise  us  on  points  where  we  esteem  ourselTes  weak. 

110  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

wards  friends,  in  a  greater  degree  than  towards  such 

15.  as  are  not  friends ;  because  people  conceive  it  to  be 
more  fitting  to  receive  good  at  their  hands  than  not : 

16.  also  towards  those  who  have  been. in  the  habit  of 
honouring  or  bestowing  consideration  on  them,  if, 
on  the  contrary,  they  do  not  keep  on  the  same  terms 
with  them ;  because  people  conceive  themselves  de- 
spised by  them,  for  otherwise  they  would  do  as  be- 

17.  fore.  Towards  those  also  who  do  not  requite  a  kind- 
ness, or  who  do  not  return  an  equivalent,  towards 
those  also  who  thwart  them,  if  they  be  inferiors ;  for 
these  all  appear  to  despise  them,  the  latter  as  though 
they  were  their  inferiors,  the  former  as  though  [the 

18.  kindness  had  been  received]  from  inferiors.  Men 
feel  it  also  in  a  greater  degree  towards  persons  of  no 
account,  should  they  slight  them ;  for  anger'  is  sup- 
posed to  arise  from  a  slight,  and  to  exist  towards 
persons  whose  conduct  misbecame  them ;  now  it  be- 
comes inferiors  to  make  no  manifestation  of  slight. 

19.  Towards  friends,  anger  is  felt  if  they  do  not  or  speak 
not  well ;  and  still  more  so  if  they  do  the  contrary ; 
also  if  they  should  not  perceive  us  to  be  in  want, 
just  as  the  Plexippus^  of  Antipho  was  angry  with 
Meleager;  for  not  to  perceive  this  is  a  token  of 
slight,  since  in  regard  to  those  for  whom  we  feel 

20.  deference,  this  does  not  escape  our  notice:  towards 
those  also  it  is  felt  who  exult  in  their  misfortunes ; 
and,  in  a  word,  towards  such  as  are  in  good  spirits 
amid  their  misfortunes ;  for  this  marks  either  a  foe,  - 
or  one  who  manifests  slight :  towards  those  also  who 
do  not  care  if  they  give  us  pain ;  wherefore,  men  feel 
anger  towards  those  who  announce  evil  tidings*®. 

21.  Against  those  also  is  anger  felt  who  either  readily 
listen  to,  or  scrutinize  our  failings ;  for  they  r^emble 
persons  who  slight  us,  or  who  are  our  enemies ;  since 

•  a  friend  sympathizes  with  one,  and  all  men,  as  their 
22.  To-     peculiar  failings  are  scrutinized,  feel  pain.     More- 

•  Plexippus  was  a  brother  of  Althaea,  Meleager's  mother, 
and  a  character  in  a  play  of  Antipho's,  now  lost. 
••  And  the  first  bringer  of  unwelcome  news 

Hath  but  a  losing  office.  Shakspeare. 

THAP.  II.]  .  RHETORIC.  Ill 

over  men  feel  anger  towards  those  who  slight  them  wards 
in  the  presence  of  five  descriptions  of  persons,  viz.  in  *S**?1^^** 
the  presence  of  those  whom  they  emulate,  whom  they  them  be- 
admire,  by  whom  they  are  desirous  of  being   ad-  fore  per- 
mired,  in  whose  presence  they  are  alive  to  delicacy  ^^^e- 
of  feeling,  and  before  those  who  have  a  delicacy  of  scriptions. 
feeling  towards  them ;  if  before  these  any  one  should  i-  wliom 
slight  them,  they  feel   anger  more   sensibly :   with  i^!^  ^^^' 
those  also  do  men  feel  angry  who  slight  them  in  such  ii.  Whom 
respects,  as  it  is  disgraceful  for  them  not  to  stand  up  ^f7  ^~ 
in  defence  of ;  in  regard  to  parents,  for  instance,  or  ijj^  By 
children,  wives,  or  persons  in  subjection :  with  those,  whom 
too,  who  make  no  return  of  favours ;  for  the  slight  ^^^lld^ 
then  is  contrary  to  what  is  becoming  :  and  with  those  mired, 
who  play  off  sarcasms  upon  them  when  seriously  en-  iv.  Before 
gaged ;  for  sarcasm  has  an  air  of  contempt :  also  with  Steywe 
those  who  benefit  others,  if  they  do  not  also  benefit  sensible  of 
them ;  since  this  also  carries  an  air  of  contempt,  the  delicate 
not  thinking  them  worthy  what  all  are  worthy  of.  vT  Before 
Also  the  letting  a  man  escape  our  memory  is  a  thing  those  who 
very  apt  to  provoke  anger ;  for  example,  the  nearly  J^j^®  * 
forgetting  even  his  name,  since  forgetfulness  seems  of  feeling 
to  be  an  indication  of  slight ;  because  forgetfulness  towards 
arises  from  disregard,  and  disregard  is  a  kind  of  ^®"^* 
slight.    Now,  it  has  been  told  you  against  whom  men  24! 
feel  anger,  and  under  what  dispositions,  and  why^^  25. 
It  evidently  will  be  needful  for  an  orator  to  work  up  27] 
his  audience  by  his  speech,  into  such  a  frame  of  mind 
as  that  under  which  m.en  are  prone  to  anger,  and  his 
adversary,  too,  as  being  obnoxious  to  that  on  account 
of  which  men  feel  anger,  and  as  being  such  an  one  as 
people  feel  anger  against. 

"  Vide  this  chapter,  §  3. 

112  ARISTOTLE'S  [book   ii. 

CHAP.  III. 

27ie  Persons  susceptible  of  Placability ^  also  those  towards 
whom,  and  the  occasions  on  which  it  is  felt. 

1.  As  the  feeling  anger  is  the  opposite  of  being  ap- 
peased, and  anger  itself  of  placability,  we  must  as- 
certain with  what  dispositions  men  are  placable, 
towards  whom  they  are  thus  affected,  and  by  what 

2.  Placa-  means  they  are  appeased.  Let  placability,  then,  be 
fi^^  ^®'   defined  to  be  "  a  su  bsiding  and  appeasement  of  anger  ^'* 

3.  To-  Now,  if  men  feel  anger  towards  those  who  slight 
wards  them,  and  if  slight  be  voluntary,  it  is  plaiil  that  they 
whom  are  placable  in  regard  to  those  who  do  no  such  thing, 
placable,    ^r  who  either  do  so,  or  appear  to  do  so,  involuntarily  : 

4.  towards  those  also  who  wish  the  contrary  of  what 
they  do ;  and  those  who  behave  in  the  same  way 
toward  themselves  also,  for  no  one  seems  likely  him- 
6.  The  re-  self  to  be  guilty  of  slight  towards  himself.     Men 
pentant.    ^^  ^^^^  disposed  also  towards  such  as  acknowledge 
and  repent  of  their  guilt ;  for  taking  their  feeling 
of  pain  for  what  they  have  done  as  a  punishment, 
they  are  appeased: — there  is  proof  of  this  in  the 
case  of  chastising  servants ;  for  we  chastise  more  vio- 
lently those  who  contradict  us,  and  deny  their  guilt ; 
but  towards  such  as  acknowledge  themselves  to  be 
justly  punished,  we  cease  from  our  wrath  ^;  the  rea- 
son of  which  is,  that  the  denial  of  what  is  evident 
is  a  sort  of  impudence,  and  impudence  is  slight  and 
contempt:  therefore  we  are  not  alive  to  sense  of 
shame,  in  regard  to  those  whom  we  despise  very 
6.  The      much.     Men  are  thus  disposed  also  towards  those 
humble,     -^ho  humble  themselves  before  them^,  and  do  not 

'  This  passion,  different  from  all  the  others,  supposes  the 
previous  existence  of  another  in  the  mind,  the  emotions  of 
'  which  it  may  be  said  to  allay  more  properly,  than  to  be  itself 
an  emotion.     Rochefoucault,  Maxim  328. 

*  "  A  soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath." 

'  See  the  instance  of  Ahab's  humiliation  of  himself,  (1  Kings 
xxi.  27,)  and  that  of  the  Ninevites,  (Jonah  iii.  5,  etc.,)  to 
which  we  may  add  David. 

CHAP,  in.]  RHETORIC.  113 

contradict  their  imputations ;  for  they  appear  to  ac- 
knowledge themselves  inferior  ;    but  inferiors  fear 
us,  and  no  one  who  fears  is  guilty  of  slight.     But 
the  fact  that  anger  ceases  towards  such  as  humble 
themselves,  even  dogs  evince  by  their  not  biting 
those  who  sit  as  suppliants.     Placability  is  also  felt  7.  Those 
towards  such  as  are  earnestly  attentive,  where  they  ^^  ^ 
are  themselves  attentive ;  for  they  think  themselves  to  us. 
regarded  with  attention,  and  not  despised :  towards 
such  as  [^subsequently  to  their  manifesting  slight]  8. 
have  gratided  us  in  more  important  points,  and  with 
those  who  implore  us,  and  deprecate  our  .anger ;  for 
these  are  more  humble:   towards  those  also,  who  9. 
are  not  given  to  contumely,  nor  to  jeering  one ;  and 
who  do  not  manifest  slight  towards  any  one,  or  to- 
wards those  alone  who  are  not  good  men,  and  not 
towards  such  as  we  ourselves  are.     In  a  word,  we  10. 
should  consider  the  subject  of  placability,  from  the 
opposite  of  the  doctrine  of  anger.     Once  more,  it  Js  Whom  we 
felt  towards  those  whom  men  fear,  or  have  a  delicacy  ^®"' 
toward ;  for  so  long  as  they  are  thus  affected,  they 
are  not  influenced  by  anger ;  since  it  is  impossible 
to  feel  anger  and  fear  at  the  same  time.      Again,  11.  To- 
people  either  do  not  feel  anger  at  all,  or  feel  it  in  a  JJ^  *^® 
less  degree,  towards 'those  who  have  themselves  act-  ^*^* 
ed  under  the  influences  of  anger  ;  for  these  appear 
to  have  acted,  not  from  any  motive  of  slight ;  for  no 
one  who  is  angry  with  you  slights  you  ;  since  slight  12. 
is  unattended  by  pain,  anger,  however,  is  so  attend- 
ed.    Thus  are  they  also  disposed  towards  such  as  re- 
gard them  with  respect. 

It  is  evident,  also,  that  men  are  placable,  when  in  a  In  what 
frame  of  mind  contrary  to  the  feeling  of  anser ;  thus  situations 
in  amusements,  in  mirth,  in  festivity,  amid  rejoicings,  apt  to  he 
or  a  course  of  success  and  of  gratification,  or,  in  a  placable, 
word,  when  in  a  state  of  freedom  from  pain,  and  amid  ^^JJ^ 
chastened  pleasure  and  virtuous  hope.     Those,  too, 
who  have  suffered  some  time  to  elapse,  and  are  not 
fresh  from  the  influence  of  anger ;  for  time  makes 
anger  cease  ^.     Also  vengeance  previously  taken  on  13.  When 

*  Gleon  was  aware  of  this  when  he  exclaimed  against  a 

I 

114  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

venge-  one  object  allays  the  anger  felt  against  another,  even 
ance  has  jf  ^^  be  more  violent.  For  which  reason,  Philocrates, 
taken.  when  some  one  asked  him  "  how  it  was,  as  the  popu- 
lace were  enraged  with  him,  that  he  did  not  make  his 
defence,"  very  justly  said,  "  I  will  not  do  it  yet." — 
"But  when  will  you?" — "I  will  do  it,  when  I  see 
some  one  else  criminated."  For  people,  after  they 
have  exhausted  their  anger  on  some  other  object^ 
become  placable ;  which  happened  in  the  case  of  Er- 
gophilus ;  for  the  populace,  though  more  indignant 
with  him  than  with  Callisthenes,  yet  acquitted  him, 
because,  on  the  day  before,  they  had  condemned  Cal- 

14.  listhenes  to  death.  Men  are  thus  disposed  if  they 
have  convicted  the  object,  and  if  he  have  suffered  a 
greater  ill  than  they,  with  all  their  anger,  would  have 
themselves  inflicted ;  for  they  think  they  have  got- 
ten, as  it  were,  their  revenge.  Again,  if  they  are 
aware  that  they  are  themselves  unjust,  and  suffer  de- 

15.  servingly^;  because  anger  is  not  felt  at  what  is  just; 
for  in  that  case  men  no  longer  conceive  themselves 
sufferers  contrary  to  what  is  becoming;  but  anger 
was  defined  to  be  such  a  feeling.  On  which  account 
we  should  preface  punishment  with  a  sort  of  lecture ; 
for  thus  even  slaves  feel  less  indignant  at  being  pun- 

'^^*  ^^^'^  ished.      Moreover  they  are  thus  disposed,  if  they 

L  iiweiS-  conceive  that  the  sufferer  will  not  perceive  that  he  is 

ble.  punished  by  them,  and  in  return  for  what  they  have 

have  suffered ;  for  anger  is  felt  against  individuals : 

second  hearing  of  the  Mitylenseans ; — OavfiaT^u  ftkv  *rSav  ypovov 
iuvrpi^iiv  ifiiroiii<rdvTMVf  B  Itrrl  irpdi  t&v  ifSimiKOTtau  fiaWov. 
6  y&p  iradti>v  Ttf  Spdvavri  dfi^XvTipa  t^  opyy  itrtj^ipxtTai. 
Thucyd.  iii.  38. 

Xpouoi  yhp  tvfiap^v  3'«05.  Soph.  Elec.  179, 
'  Well  illustrated  in  Richard  the  First's  pardon  of  Bertrand 
de  Gourdon,  on  his  death-bed: — "Wretch,"  said  the  king, 
"  what  have  I  ever  done  to  you  to  oblige  you  to  seek  my  life  ? " 
"  What  have  you  done  to  me  ? "  coolly  replied  Uie  prisoner : 
"  you  killed,  with  your  own  hands,  my  father  and  my  two 
brothers;  and  you  intended  to  have  hanged  myself,"  etc. 
Richard,  struck  with  the  reasonableness  of  this  reply,  and 
humbled  by  the  near  approach  of  deatli,  ordered  Gourdon  to 
be  set  at  liberty,  and  a  sum  of  money  to  be  given  to  him. 
Hume. 

CHAP,  m.]   -  RHETORIC.  115 

and  this  is  plain  from  the  definition.  Hence  is  it 
said  in  the  poem  with  great  propriety,  "  Go,  say  'twas 
Ulysses,  subverter  of  cities,"  etc. ;  as  though  the  hero 
had  not  been  revenged,  unless  Polyphemus  perceived 
both  by  whom®,  and  in  return  for  what''^,  he  suffered. 
So  that  men  are  not  angry  with  any  who  are  no  longer 
sensible ;  neither  any  longer  with  those  who  are  dead®, 
as  being  persons  who  have  endured  the  extremity  of 
suffering ;  nor  with  those  who  will  not  be  susceptible 
of  pain,  nor  feel  the  punishment  inflicted,  a  point  of 
which  those  affected  by  anger  are  desirous.  On 
which  account  the  poet,  wishing  to  restrain  Achilles 
from  his  anger  against  Hector  now  that  he  is  dead, 
aptly  says,  "  In  his  madness  he  is  vexing  a  senseless 
clod."  It  is  evident  that  arguments  must  be  deduced  17.  How 
from  the  topics*  here  furnished,  by  those  who  would  J^®^^ 
appease  their  audience ;  by  working  up  the  hearers  pease  the 
themselves  into  feelings  such  as  I  have  described ;  audience. 
and  those  with  whom  they  are  enraged,  either  as  ob- 
jects of  fear,  or  as  deserving  reverence,  or  as  persons 
who  have  benefited  them,  or  as  having  been  involun- 
tary agents,  or  as  now  exceedingly  pained  at  what 
they  have  done. 

•  Thus  Gloucester,  in  Henry  VI., 

Down,  down  to  hell,  and  say — I  sent  thee  thither,  etc. 
7  Again,  in  the  ^neid,  the  hero  tells  Tumus, 
Pallas  te  hoc  vulnere,  Pallas 
Immolat. 

•  Tiava  dvtrfiiiftia  t«  /Ji<»  tovtw  orvvairoTiBeTat.  Synes. 
Quoted  in  Hooker,  v.  §  7,  vol.  ii.  p.  26.  Compare  Byron's 
tragedy  of  the  Two  Foscari,  act  t.  last  scene : 

Babbarigo  {to  2x>redano)  .-rWhat  art  thou  writing, 
With  such  an  earnest  brow,  upon  thy  tablets  ? 
LoBEOANO  {pointing  to  the  Doge* 8  body), — ^That  he  has  paid 
me.* 

•  "L*  ha  pagata.'*  An  historical  fact;  see  History  of  Venice,  by  P. 
Dams,  p.  411,  yoI.  ii. 

I  2 

116  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ti. 

CHAP.  IV. 

The  Characters  towards  whom  men  entertain  friendly  feel- 
ings, or  haired;  and  the  reasons  why. 

1.  Let  us  discuss  the  characters  towards  wh<»n  mea 
bear  friendly  feelings,  and  hatred,  and  the  reasons 
why  they  do  so;  setting  out  with  a  definition  of 
friendliness  and  the  act  of  cherishing  this  feeling. 

2.  Defini-  Let  the  bearing  firiendly  feeling,  then,  be  defined  to 
feiendH-  ^  "*^®  wishing  a  person  what  we  think  good,  fw 
ness.  *       his  sake  and  not  for  our  own,  and,  as  far  as  is  in  our 

power,  the  exerting  ourselves  to  procure  it."  And  a 
friend  is  he  who  entertains  and  meets  a  return  of  this 
feeling.^  And  those  people  consider  themselves 
friends  who  consider  themselves  to  stand  thus  affected 
towards  each  other. 

3.  To-  These  considerations  being  laid  down,  of  necessity 
wards  j^  must  be,  that  one  who  participates  in  another's  joy 
feel^i?.^^  at  good  fortune,  and  in  his  sorrow  at  what  aggrieves 

him,  not  from  any  other  motive,  but  simply  for  his 
sake,  is  his  friend.     For  every  one,  when  that  hap- 
pens which  he  wishes,  rejoices ;  but  when  the  con- 
trary happens,  all  are  grieved.     So  that  the  pain  and 
pleasure  men  feel  are  an  indication  of  their  wishes. 
4.  Those,  too,  are  friends,  to  whom  the  same  things  are 
become  by  this  time  good,  and  the  same  evil ;  those, 
too,  who  are  friends  and  foes  to  the  same  persons,  for 
these  must  necessarily  desire   similar  objects.     So 
that  he  who  wishes  for  another  what  he  does  for 
5.  Bene-    himself,  appears  to  be  a  friend  to  that  other.     Men 
factors,      j^jyg  j^igQ  tiiQge  ^hQ  iiaye  benefited  either  themselves, 
or  those  for  whom  they  have  a  regard ;  whether  in 
important  particulars,  or  with   readiness  2,   and  for 
their  own  sakes,  or  those  whom  they  deem  willing  to 
6.  benefit  them.    Again,  people  love  the  friends  of  their 
friends,  and  such  as  cherish  friendly  feelings  towards 

'  Thus  the  feeling  discussed  in  the  Ethics  is  called  tijvoia  iv 
avTiirvtroiSoiTi  fiii  \avddvovtra,     Eth.  Nich.  viii.  2. 
*  Bis  dat,  qui  cito  dat. 

CHAP.  IV.}  RHETORIC.  117 

those  for  whom  they  do  themselves ;  likewise  those 
who  are  loved  by  such  as  are  beloved  by  themselves ; 
those  also  who  are  enemies  to  the  same  people,  and  7. 
who  hate  those  whom  they  hate  themselves,  and 
those  who  are  hated  by  those  who  also  are  hated  by 
themselves ;  for  to  all  these  the  same  objects  seem 
good  as  to  themselves ;  so  that  they  wish  for  things 
which  are  good  to  them,  both  which  were  laid  down 
to  be  characteristic  of  a  friend.     Moreover  men  love  8. 
those  who  benefit  them  in  regard  to  money  matters, 
and  the  security  of  life;   on  which  account  people  The  brave 
honour  the  liberal  and  brave.     They  love  also  the  ^  ^^®' 
jaaty  of  which  character  they  esteem  those  who  do  9.  The 
not  live  at  the  cost  of  others,  such  are  all  whoJ^^* 
are  supported  by  their  bodily  labour,  and  of  these 
are  husbandmen,  and  among  the  rest  handicraftsmen  Husband- 
in  particular.     They  love  also  the  temperate,  for  ^^^ 
they  are  not  unjust ;  and  those  who  are  disengaged     ^ 
from  business,  for  the  same  reason.     We  love  also  IL 
those  of  whom  we  wish  to  become  the  friends,  should 
they  appear  to  de^re  it  also*     Of  this  sort  are  those 
who  are  good  in  respect  to  moral  excellence,  and 
men  of  approved  character,  either  among  all  men,  or 
among  the  best  men,  or  those  who  are  held  in  admir- 
ation by  ourselves,  or  who  themselves  admire  us. 
Again,  we  love  those  who  are  pleasant  c6mpanions  12.  Com- 
for  passing  time,  or  spending  a  day  with ;    of  this  panions, 
description  are  the  good-tempered,  and  such  as  are  ^ 
not  fond  of  chiding  those  who  err,   and  are  not 
quarrelsome  or  contentious  ^     For  all  people  of  this 
sort  are  fond  of  dispute ;   but  such  as  are  fond  of 
dispute  give  us  the  idea  of  desiring  the  opposite  of 

'  The  character  given  by  Clarendon  of  Sir  Edward  Herbert 
(afterwards  Earl  of  Montgomery),  one  of  the  favourites  of 
James  I.,  seems  to  answer  to  Aristotle's  description  of  a  per- 
son likely  to  conciliate  friendship : — **  He  pretended  to  no 
other  qualifications  than  to  understand  horses  and  dogs  veiy 
well ;  which  his  master  loved  him  the  better  for,  (being  at  his 
firat  coming  to  England  very  jealous  of  those  who  had  the  re- 
putation of  great  parts,)  and  to  be  believed  Monest  and  gen^T" 
out,  which  made  him  many  friends,  and  left  him  no  enemy." 
Clarendon's  History,  voL  L  p.  59. 

118  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n 

13.  what  ^e  do.  Also  those  who  have  a  happy  turn  in 
passing  and  taking  a  joke  ;  for  both  seem  bent  on  the 
same  things  as  their  neighbours,  being  able  both  to 
endure  being  rallied   and   neatly  rallying  others*. 

14.  Men  love  also  those  who  praise  their  good  qualities, 
and  particularly  such  as  they  apprehend  not  to  belong 

15.  Those  to  them :  also  those  who  are  neat  in  their  appearance, 
neat^m      their  dress,  and  their  whole  manner  of  living.    Also 
16.  those  who  do  not  reproagh  them  with    errors,  nor 
their  own  benefits;   for  both  these   descriptions  of 
17.  The    people  have  an  air  of  reproving  them.   People  admire 
forgiving,  jflso  those  who  forget  old  grievances ;   and  who  do 
not  treasure  up  grounds  of  quarrel,  but  are  easily  re- 
conciled ;  because  of  whatever  disposition  they  show 
themselves  towards  others,  people  naturally  think  they 

18.  will  prove  to  be  of  towards  themselves  also :  as  also 
those  who  do  not  talk  scandal,  nor  inform  themselves 
of  the  ills  either  of  their  neighbours  or  themselves, 
but  of  their  good  points  only ;   for  this  is  the  con- 

19.  duct  of  a  good  man.     We  are  friendly  disposed  also 
.  towards  those  who  are  not  at  cross  purposes  with 

us  when  angry,  or  seriously  engaged ;  for  all  such 
people  are  fond  of  dispute :  towards  those  also  who 
comport  themselves  seriously  towards  us ;  thus,  for 
instance,  those  who  admire  us,  or  consider  us  worthy 

20.  men,  and  take  a  pleasure  in  our  society,  and  who  are- 
thus  affected  in  regard  particularly  to  points  about 
which  ourselves  are  desirous  to  be  admired,  or  to  ap- 

21.  pear  excellent  or  agreeable :  as  also  towards  our 
equals,  and  those  who  have  the  same  objects  in  view, 
supposing  they  do  not  cl^ash  with  us®,  and  that  their 
livelihood  arise  not  from  the  same  profession,  for  thus 

♦  See  Eth.  Nich.  ir.  8. 

*  So  long  as  we  are  imitated  at  a  respectful  distance : 

Non  ita  certandi  cupidus,  quam  propter  amorem 
Quod  te  imitari  aveo :  Lucretius,  iii.  5. 

our  pride  is  flattered;  but  when  this  imitation  has  been  so  suc- 
cessfully continued  as  to  resemble  competition,  ovx  envy  is 
quickly  awakened.  To  this  point  Rochefoucault  well  ob- 
serves,— "  Those  who  endeavour  to  imitate  us  we  like  much 
better  than  those  who  endeavour  to  equal  us.  Imitation  is  a 
sign  of  esteem,  but  competition  of  envy."    Maxims,  No.  113. 

CHAP.  IV.]  RHETORIC.  119 

arises  an  instance  of  the  proverb,  "  Potter  hates  pot- 
ter^."    We  stand  thus  affected  towards  those  also  22.  Those 
who  are  desirous  of  the  same  objects  with  ourselves,  ^^^' 
and  which  it  is  possible  for  us  to  participate  in  as 
well  as  them ;    otherwise  the  same  collision  takes 
place  in  this  case :  towards  those  also,  in  regard  to  23. 
whom  men  have  themselves  in  such  a  way  as,  while 
they  do  not  hold  them  cheap,  not  to  feel  shame  on 
mere  matters  of  opinion.     With  this  feeling  do  peo-  24. 
pie  regard  those  also  in  refepect  to  whom  they  feel 
shame  about  matters  really  shameful :  and  those  be- 
fore whom  they  are  studious  to  stand  approved,  and 
by  whom  they  wish  to  be  emulated,  yet  without  be- 
ing envied,  all  these  men  either  love  as  friends,  or 
wish  to  become  their  friends ;  also  those  with  whom  25. 
they  would  co-operate  toward  some  good,  were  it  not 
that  greater  ills  are  likely  thereby  to  befall  them- 
selves :  and  such  as  regard  with  friendly  feeling,  the  26.  Such 
absent  equally  with  the  present;  on  which  account  ^J*^^ 
all  love  those  who  manifest  this  disposition  in  regard 
to  the  dead.     Also  men  entirely  love  those  who  are 
particularly  zealous  for  their  friends  and  never  aban- 
don them ;  for  eminently  beyond  all  the  good,  people 
love  those  who  are  good  (zs  friends.     They  also  love  27.  The 
those  who  do  not  dissemble  towards  them ;  of  this  ^"^^^• 
class  are  such  as  mention  their  own  failings ;  for  it 
has  been  said  already,  that  before  friends  we  feel  no 
shame  about  mere  matters  of  opinion ;  if,  then,  he 
who  is  so  ashamed  has  not  the  feelings  of  a  friend, 
the  man  who  is  without  such  shame  bears  a  resem- 
blance to  one  who  has  friendly  feelings.     Also  we 
love  those  who  do  not  inspire  us  with  fear,  and  be- 
fore whom  we  feel  confidence ;  for  no  one  loves  a 
person  whom  he  fears  ^.     But  the  species  of  friend-  28.  Three 
ship  are  companionship,  intimacy,  relationship,  and  ^^'^jf 
the  like.     And  the  efiicient  causes  of  friendship  are  ship. 
gratuitous  benefits,  the  rendering  a  service  unsoli-  29.Caiiae8 
cited,  and  the  not  disclosing  it  after  it  has  been  ren-  ll^^"^^' 

•  Two  of  a  trade  can  ne*er  agree! 

^  There  is  no  fear  in  love ;  but  perfect  love  casteth  out /«ar. 
1  John  iy.  18. 

130  ARISTOTLE*S  [bocx  n. 

dered  ;  for  tbas  done  the  favour  appears  to  be  solely 

for  the  sflike  of  your  friend  himself,  and  from  no  other 

motive. 

30.      The  subject  of  hatred,  however,  and  of  bearing  it, 

may,  it  is  plain,  be  considered  by  taking  the  contra* 

and  of      ries.    But  the  efficient  causes  of  hatred  are  anger, 

^'''^'      vexatiousness,  calumny. 

31.  Six  1.  Now  anger  arises  out  of  something  which  has 

Sompari-  reference  to  ourselves ;  hatred,  however,  even  inde- 
son  b&-  pendently  of  any  thing  .hnving  reference  to  ourselves, 
tween  an-  gince  if  we  conceive  a  person  to  be  of  a  certain  de- 
Sati^.  scription,  We  bear  hatred  towards  him.  2.  And  our 
anger  invariably  has  reference  to  individual  objects, 
as  to  Callias^  or  Socrates ;  but  hatred  may  be  borne 
even  to  whole  classes;  for  every  one  hates  the  cha- 
racter of  a  thief  and  an  informer.-  3.  Again,  the  one 
feeling  is  to  be  remedied  by  time ;  the  other  is  in- 
curable. 4.  Also  the  first  is  a  desire  of  inflicting /Mitit 
on  its  object,  the  last  of  doing  him  deadly  harm;  for 
the  angry  man  wishes  to  be  felt^  to  him  who  bears 
hatred  this  matters  not ;  and  all  things  which  give 
pain  may  be  felt ;  but  what  does  harm  in  the  highest 
degree,  is  least  capable  of  being  felt,  for  instance,  in- " 
justice  and  folly,  for  the  presence  of  vice  does  not  at 
all  pain  [him  to  whom  it  is  present].  5,  And  anger  is 
attended  by  pain,  hatred  is  not ;  for  he  who  is  affect* 
ed  by  anger  is  pained,  but  he  who  is  affected  by 

'  Gallias  is  attacked  by  Ltician  in  his  dialogue,  entitled 
Tcficbjf  fi  Mt(rctifOpanro9,  where  Mercury,  taxing  Plutus  with  not 
going  to  those  who  deserre  riches,  says.  *Xpi<mUr\v  KaTaXnrdnf 
linroviKto  Kal  Ka\\l<f  irpotrjut.  p.  232,  Scrip.  Graec. ;  and 
several  times  in  Aristophanes. 

'  So  chap.  iii.  }  16.  It  was  remarked  that  a  man  who  is 
affected  by  anger  does  not  consider  that  he  has  his  revenge, 
unless  the  object  perceive  both  at  whose  hands,  and  in  return 
for  what,  he  suffers.  From  this,  as  from  many  otlier  of  its 
distinctive  characteristics,  anger  will  be  confessed  to  be  a 
more  generous  passion  than  hatred.  To  this  purpose  Lord 
Bacon  well  remarks,  that  "  Some,  when  they  take  revenge, 
are  desirous  the  party  should  know  whence  it  cometh :  this  is 
the  more  generous ;  for  the  delight  seemeth  to  be  not  so  much 
in  doing  the  hurt,  as  in  making  Uie  party  repent ;  but  base  and 
cr&fty  cowards  are  like  the  arrow  that  flieth  in  the  dark." 
Essays :  Of  Revenge. 

CBAP.  v.]  RHETORIC.  121 

hatred  is  not.     6.  The  former,  too,  had  many  iUs 
hefallen  the  object  of  his  anger,  might  be  inclined  to 
pity  him ;  the  latter  woald  not,  in  anj  case ;  for  the 
former  wishes  the  object  of  his  anger  to  suffer  in  his 
tarn,  the  latter  desires  the  extinction  of  the  object  of 
his  hate^^    Out  of  these  heads,  then,  it  is  plain  that  32.  These 
the  orator  may  both  prove  those  to  be  friends  and  ^®«^  ^^ 
enemies  who  really  are  such,  and  render  such  those  to^ue.^ 
who  are  not,  and  maj  do  away  the  assertions  of 
people  on  the  subject,  and  may  draw  over  those  who 
hesitate  whether  an  act  was  done  from  motives  of 
anger  or  hatred,  to  whatsoever  side  he  may  fix  on. 

CHAP.  V. 

17ie  fudure  qflfear^  and  the  objects  which  excite  it,  and  the 
dispesitiotis  under  which  men  are  afraid. 

The  sort  of  things  which  men  fear,  and  the  persons  1.  Fear 
whom,  and  under  what  affections  as  regards  them-  defined, 
'selves,  will  thus  become  plain.  Now,  let  fear  be  de- 
fined to  be  "  A  sort  of  pain  or  agitation,  arising  out 
of  an  idea  that  an  evil,  capable  either  of  destroying 
or  giving  pain,  is  impending  on  us.**  People  do  not 
fear  every  eviP;  for  example,  a-  man  does  not  fear 
lest  he  shall  become  unjust  or  stupid ;  but  people  fear 
all  those  evils  whose  effect  is  either  a  considerable 
degree  of  pain,  ,or  destruction,  and  these,  provided 
they  be  not  far  removed,  but  give  one  the  idea  of 
being  close  at  hand,  so  as  to  be  on  the  eve  of  hap- 
pening^; for  they  do  not  fear  that  which  is  very  far 

'®  Qnem  oderunt,  perisse  expetunt    Ennius  ap.  Cic.  de  Off. 

'  It  is  essential  to  that  evil  which  is  the  object  of  fear,  that' 
it  seem  qualified  to  destroy  or  inflict  pain.  It  must  be  in  fact 
such  an  evil  as  anger  would  inflict,  rather  than  which  hatred 
would. 

*  This  is  the  description  of  evil  against  which  the  brave 
man  must  arm  himself,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  Ethics, 
bva  Odtparov  liri^ipti  inroyvia  Svra.     Eth.  Nich.  iii.  6. 

122  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

off:  for  all  know  that  thej  shall  die ;  but  since  the 

event  is  not  near,  they  pay  no  attention  to  it. 

2.  Objects      If  then  fear  be  this,  it  must  follow  that  all  those 

which  oc-  things  are  to  be  feared  which  appear  to  possess  great 

power  either  of  destroying,  or  of  hurting,  in  points 

whose  tendency  is  toward  considerable  pain.     On 

which  account  even  the  symptoms  of  such  things  are 

alarming,  for  the  evil  Appears  to  be  at  hand ;  since 

this  in  fact  is  danger,  viz.  "the  approach  of  what 

3.Danger.  excites  fear."   Of  this  description,  however,  are  both 

the  hatred  and  the  anger  of  those  who  have  it  in  their 

power  to  do  us  any  harm^;  for  it  is  evident  that  they 

have  both  the  will  and  the  power,  so  that  they  are 

4.  In-       not  far  from  doing  it.     Also  injustice,  possessed  of 
justice.      power ;  for  [it  is  evident  that  it  does  not  want  inclin- 
ation to  do  harm]  since  it  is  from  settled  inclination 

5.  Insult-  that  the  unjust  man  is  unjust.     Also  insulted  virtue, 
ed  Tirtue.  invested  with  power ;  for  it  is  evident  that,  invaria- 
bly, when  it  is  insulted,  it  determines  on  a  requital, 

6.  The      and  now  it  has  the  power  of  exacting  one.     The 
fear  of  our  f^j^j,  g^jg^  q£  those  who  have  the  power  of  doing  us 

any  harm,  is  itself  an  object  to  be  dreaded ;  for  any 
one,  in  such  circumstances,  will  of  course  be  pre- 
pared against  us. 

7.  But  as  men  in  general  are  depraved,  and  may  be  . 
prevailed  on  by  gain,  and  are  timid  amid  dangers ;  it 
is,  generally  speaking,  a  fearful  thing  to  be  at  the 

Accom-    *  disposal  of  another'.      So  that  iwcomplices  in  any 
plices.       deed  of  guilt  are  to  be  feared,  lest  either  they  should 

8.  denounce  you,  or  abandon  you  to  trial.  Also  those 
who  have  the  power  to  act  unjustly,  are  always  ob- 
jects of  fear  to  such  as  may  be  attacked  by  injustice  ; 
for,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  a  man  when  he  has  the 
power,  perpetrates  the  injustice.     Also  those  who 

*  Compare  c.  19,  §  19.  See  Dr.  Johnson's  motives  for  sup- 
pressing some  of  Savage's  remarks  on  the  great :  "  What  was 
the  result  of  Mr.  S.'s  inquiry,  though  he  was  not  accustomed 
to  conceal  his  discoveries,  it  may  not  be  entirely  safe  to  relate, 
because  the  persons  whose  characters  he  criticised  are  power- 
ful; AND  POWER  AND  RESENTMENT  ARE  SELDOM  STRANGERS," 

etc.    Life  of  Savage,  p.  336. 

CHAP,  v.]  RHETORIC.  123 

have  been  wronged  ^  or  who  conceive  themselves  to  The 

have  been  wronged ;  for  they  are  ever  on  the  watch  ^"^o»ged. 

for  an  opportunity  [of  retaliating].     Also  those  who 

have  wronged  others \  if  possessed  of  power,  are  to 

be  feared,  from  their  apprehension  of  being  retaliated 

on ;  for  cases  of  this  kind  were  laid  down  to  be  such 

as  to  excite  alarm.     Those,  too,  who  are  rivals  for  9.  Rivals. 

the  same  objects,  and  which  it  is  not  possible  should 

accrue  to  both,  for  people  are  ever  at  variance  with 

those   towards  whom   they   stand  on   thi^  footing. 

Those  who  are  objects  of  fear  to  our  superiors,  are 

also  objects  of  fear  to  ourselves ;  for  much  more  will 

they  be  able  to  injure  us,  than  our  superiors :  and  for  10. 

the  same  reason  [we  needs  must  fear  those]  whom 

our  superiors  fear®.    Men  dread  those  also  who  have 

already  annihilated  persons  superior  to  themselves ; 

and  those  who  have  attacked  their  inferiors;   for, 

either  they  are  already  deserving  fear,  or  they  will 

become  so  by  being  aggrandized  in  power.      And  11. 

among  those  who  have  been  wronged,  or  are  enemies, 

or  opponents,  it  is  not  the  passionate,  and  those  who 

speaJiL  their  minds  freely,  who  are  to  be  dreaded  ;  but  The  mild 

the  mild,  the  dissembling,  and  the  insidious  ;  for  they  ^^w 

give  us  to  doubt,  whether  they  be  not  close  upon  us,  etc.:  more 

ao  that  they  are  never  clearly  known  to  be  too  far  off  *^^  ^'^^'^- 
^  ,       •'  ''  edthan 

to  reach  us.  the  hasty. 

*  "  It  is  too  common  for  those  who  have  unjustly  suffered 
pain,  to  inflict  it  likewise  in  their  turn  with  the  same  injustice, 
and  to  imagine  that  they  have  a  right  to  treat  others  as  they 
have  themselves  been  treated."    Ibid.  p.  339. 

*  If  the  maxim  of  Tacitus  be  true — "  Proprium  humani  in- 
genii  esiodUae  quern  Isseris ;"  then  surely  Aristotle's  position, 
that  they  are  to  be  feared,  wUl  follow  as  a  corollary  from  it ; — 

Quem  metuunt  oderunt, 
Quern  oderunt,  perisse  expetimt.   Ennius  apud  Cic.  de  Offic. 

*  Victorius,  wishing  to  show  that  this  is  not  **  a  distinction 
without  a  difference,"  remarks,  that  by  4>o^tpoi)^y  the  term  used 
in  the  former  case,  we  are  to  understand  persons  evidently 
possessed  of  that  which  all  the  world  knows  to  be  dreadful : 
whereas,  in  the  latter  case,  Aristotle  alludes  to  persons,  whose 
power  not  being  quite  so  manifest,  we  fear  only  because  we 
see  those  people  fear  it,  whose  means  of  resistance  are  superior 
to  our  own. 

124  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

12.  Oreat-  But  all  those  circumstanoes  which  exeite  fear,  have 
ert  objects  n  g^ill  greater  tendency  to  do  soj  in  respect  of  which 

should  a  man  have  comniitted  a  mistake,  it  is  not  pes* 
sihle  for  him  to  recover  himself,  hut  which  either  are 
impracticable  altogether,  or  which  cannot  be  correct- 
ed by  himself,  but  bj  his  enemies  only :  as  have  those 
also  which  we  have  no  means,  or  no  easy  means,  of 
Fear  and  averting.  So  that,  to  speak  generally,  all  those  things 
K^^T  ^"^  *<^  ^  feared,  which,  happening  or  being  likely  to 
happen  in  the  case  of  others,  excite  compassion.  The 
circumstances  then  of  fear,  and  which  men  are  alarm- 
ed at,  those  at  least  of  greatest  importance,  are,  as  I 
may  say,  nearly  those  which  I  have  enumerated :  and 
now  let  me  state  under  what  dispojsitions,  as  regards 
themselves,  men  are  susceptible  of  fear. 

13.  ?ow  Now,  if  fear  be  attended  by  an  apprehension  of 
^1^^  suffering  some  destructive  evil,  it  is  plain  that  none 
that  feel  of  those  who  consider  that  they  shall  not  suffer  any 
fear.         thing,  is  subject  to  fear ;  and  that  no  one  is  subject 

to  it,  in  regard  to  those  things  which  he  does  not  con* 
sider  that  he  shall  suffer;  nor  in  regard  to  those 
persons  at  whose  hands  he  does  not  apprehend  any 
thing ;  nor  at  a  time  when  he  is  without  apprehen- 
sions. It  must  follow,  therefore,  that  those  are  sub- 
ject to  fear,  who  apprehend  they  shall  suffer  some- 
thing, and  this  in  regard  to  the  persons  at  whose 
hands,  and  the  things  which,  and  at  the  times  when, 
14.  they  so  apprehend.  But  neither  are  those  who  iffe, 
and  who  think  themselves  to  be,  in  the  midst  of  great 
good  fortune,  at  all  apprehensive  of  suffering  any 
thing,  (on  which  account  they  are  contvimelious,  con- 
temptuous, and  rash;  but  it  is  wealth,  strength, 
number  of  friends,  power,  which  renders  men  of  this 
temper,)  nor  those  who  think  that  already  they  have 
suffered  the  sum  of  all  that  is  horrible  ^  and  whose 
feelings  have  been  chilled  with  respect  to  what  awaits 
them,  just  as  those  who  have  been  already  beaten  on 
the  rack;  but  [in  order  to  the  existence  of  fear] 
there  must  needs  arise  some  hope  of  safety,  about 

Fuisset ; 

Quern  metui  moritura  f        Mn.  ir.  603. 

CHAP,  v.]  RHETORia  125 

which  men  feel  the  painful  anxiety^;  and  this  is  a 
proof  of  it,  that  fear  makes  men  deliberate ;  and  yet 
BO  one  deliberates  about  that  which  is  utterly  hope- 
less. So  that,  when  it  shall  better  serve  our  cause  15. 
that  the  audience  be  affected  by  fear,  we  must  set 
them  off  as  persons  liable  to  suffer,  inasmuch  as  others 
of  greater  power  have  suffered,  and  also  to  show  that 
their  equals  are  or  have  been  exposed  to  sufferings ; 
and  this,  at  the  hands  of  persons  from  whom  they 
would  not  have  apprehended  it,  and  such  things,  and 
at  times  when  they  would  not  have  apprehended  it. 

But  since  on  the  subject  of  fear,  it  is  plain  what  it  16.  Confi- 
is ;  and  on  the  subject  of  things  exciting  fear,  and  «®^  ^®* 
also  with  what  dispositions  men  experience  it ;  from 
this  it  wiU  be  plain  both  what  confidence  is,  and  on 
what  points  men  are  confident,  and  with  what  dis- 
positions ;  for  both  confidence  itself  is  the  o'j^posite  of 
fear,  and  what  inspires  it  is  the  opposite  of  what  ex- 
cites fear ;  so  that  it  is  the  hope  of  things  conducive 
to  safety,  accompanied  by  an  idea  that  they  are  near ; 
and  of  things  to  be  feared,  that  they  either  do  not 
exist,  or  are  at  a  distance. 

But  these  are  circumstances  inspiring  confidence ;  17.  Cir- 
to  have  danger  afar  off,  and  that  in  which  we  may  l^^g 
confide,  near :  also  means  of  recovering  from,  or  of  that  ere- 
averting  loss,  whether  these  be  numerous,  or  valua-  *^  ^^^ 

*  Thus  Seneca  ;•<-"  Desines  timers,  si  sperare  desieris." 
"  I  have  often  thought,  that  after  a  man  has  taken  the  resolu- 
tion to  kill  himself,  it  is  not  courage  in  him  to  do  any  thing, 
however  desperate,  because  he  has  nothing  to  fear.  When  a 
man,  either  from  fear,  or  pride,  or  conscience,  or  whatever 
motive,  has  resolved  to  kill  himself;  when  once  the  resolution 
is  taken,  he  has  nothing  to  fear.  He  may  then  go  and  take 
the  king  of  Prussia  by  the  nose  at  the  head  of  his  army.  .He 
cannot  fear  the  rack  who  is  resolved  to  kill  himself.  When 
Eustace  Budgell  was  walking  down  to  the  Thames,  determined 
to  drown  himself,  he  might  if  he  pleased,  without  any  appre- 
hension of  danger,  have  turned  aside  and  first  set  fire  to  St. 
James's  palace."— Boswell's  Johnson,  A.  D.  1773;  Mi,  64. 
Satan,  in  his  address  to  the  sun,  says, — 

So  farewell  hope,  and  with  hope  farewell /Mr, 
Farewell  remorse ;  all  good  to  me  is  lost. 

Par.  Lost,  lib.  iv.  108. 

126  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  ii. 

ble,  or  both :  again,  should  we  never  have  been  in- 
jured, nor  have  ourselves  injured  others ;  also,  if  we 
have  no  rival  at  all  j  or  should  those  we  have,  be  de- 
void of  power ;  or,  supposing  they  have  power,  should 
they  be  our  friends  ;   or  should  they  have  benefited 
us,  or  have  been  themselves  benefited  by  us ;   or 
should  those,  to  whom  the  same  things  are  an  object 
as  to  ourselves,  be  more  numerous  than  those  to  whom 
they  are  not,  or  more  powerful,  or  both  at  once. 
18.  Per-        But,  as  regards  themselves,  people  feel  confidence 
fe^^TOofi-  ^^^"^  ^^"8  affected  :  should  they  conceive  themselves 
dence.       to  have  been  often  successful,  and  this  without  hav- 
The  sue-    ing  suffered  ;  or  should  they  often  have  fallen  into 
^^    '      danger,  and  have  escaped®:  for  there  are  two  ways 
in  which  men  become  dead  to  apprehension,  either 
from  never  having  experienced,  or  from  being  pos- 
sessed of  resources  against  calamity ;  just  as,  in  the 
case  of  danger  by  sea,  both  those  who  never  expe- 
rienced a  storm  feel  confidence  as  to  the  result,  and 
those  who  from  their  experience  possess  resources 
19.  against  ii;.     Men  feel  it  also,  when  the  case  does  not 
alarm  their  equals,  nor  their  inferiors,  nor  those  to 
whom  they  conceive  themselves  superior ;  but  they 
conceive  thus  of  those  whom,  either  absolutely  in  their 
own  persons,  or  virtually  in  the  persons  of  their  su- 
20.  The     periors  or  of  their  equals,  they  have  overcome.  And 
nch,  etc.    again^  if  they  conceive  there  belong  to  themselves,  in 
greater  number  and  degree,  those  things  in  which, 
when  they  have  the  advantage,  men  are  objects  of 
fear ;  and  these  are,  store  of  wealth,  and  strength  in 
respect  to  retainers,  and  friends,  and  territory,  and 
warlike  preparation,  either  aU  together,  or  the  most 

'.  It  is  on  this  topic  that  JEneas  rests  his  consolation  to  his 
distressed  followers. 

O  socii,  (neque  enim  ignari  sumus  ante  malorum,) 

0  pout  graviora ;  dabit  Deus  his  quoque  finem. 
Vos  et  Scyllsam  rabiem  penitusque  sonantes 
Adcesfcis  scopulos :  tos  et  Cyclopia  saxa 
Experti.  Mn,  i.  198. 

So  Lord  B3rron  in  the  Giaour : 

Though  far  and  near  the  buUets  hiss, 

1  'ye  scaped  a  bloodier  hour  than  this. 

CHAP.  VI.]  RHETORIC.  127 

important  of  them.     Also,  if  they  have  not  wronged  The  inno- 
any  one,  or  not  many,  or  not  any  of  such  a  character  ^®^*- 
as  men  are  apprehensive  of.   And,  in  a  word,  if  their  21. 
account  stands  well  with  heaven,  as  well  in  other  re- 
spects, as  in  what  regards  omens  and  oracles*®:  be- 
cause anger  is  a  thing  which  inspires  confidence ; 
and  the  being  free  from  the  commission  of  injustice, 
while  you  are  wronged  yourself,  is  productive  of 
anger  ;  and  the  deity  is  supposed  to  aid  such  as  have 
been  wronged.    [Once  more,  people  feel  confidence]  22.  Such 
when,  being  the  first  aggressors,  they  think  they  can  as  think 
suffer  nothing,  or  shall  not,  or  shall  succeed  at  last,  selyes  sc- 
And  of  the  subject  of  what  inspires  confidence  and  ciirel 
fear,  we  have  spoken. 

CHAP.  VI. 

Touching  what  points  men  are  alive  to,  or  insensible  to, 
Delicacy  of  Feeling  ;  towards  whom  ;  and,  as  regards 
themselves,  with  what  dispositions. 

The  points  about  which  men  feel  delicate,  or  are  in-  1. 
sensible  to  such  feelings,  and  towards  whom,  and 
with  what  dispositions,  will  be  manifest  from  what 
follows.     Now,  let  sense  of  shame  be  defined  to  be  2.  Defini- 
"  a  kind  of  pain  and  agitation  about  evils  present,  ^^^. 
past,  or  to  come,  which  appear  to  tend  to  loss  of  cha-  of  impu- 
racter."     And  impudence  to  be,  "  a  sort  of  neglect  deuce. 
and  callousness  about  these  points." 

Now,  if  the  sensibility  defined  be  actually  sensi-  3.  The 
bility  to  shame,  it  must  follow  that  a  man  is  affected  ^^^^**^* 
by  it,  on  the  occurrence  of  evils  of  a  kind  which  ap-  shame  is 
jiear  to  be  disgracefi^l,  either  to  himself,  or  those  for  &!*• 

*•  Aristotle  is  here  giving  us  the  reasons  why  the  two  last- 
mentioned  descriptions  of  persons  are  confident:  those  who 
never  injured  any,  because  it  is  natural  to  them  to  feel  anger, 
which  is  in  itself  a  source  of  confidence ;  and  those  who  are 
well  with  heaven,  from  their  reliance  on  me  protection  of  the 
gods.  The  last  case  is  beautifully  exemplified  in  the  con- 
fidence felt  by  Nicias  in  Sicily. 

128  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

whom  he  has  a  regard :  and  such  are  all  results  of 
depravity  whatsoever ;  for  example,  the  casting  away 
one's  shield,  or  the  turning  to  flight,  for  this  pro- 
Coward-    oeeds  from  cowardice ;  and  the  withholding  a  deposit  ^ 
^^®'       ^  from  a  person,  for  it  is  the  result  of  injustice.     And 
'  that  cohabitation  with  those  with  whom  we  ought 
not,  or  where,  or  when  we  ought  not,  [is  a  source  of 
Intern-      shame ;]  for  it  is  the  result  of  intemperance :   as  is 
perance.    ^^  ^he  deriving  gain  from  paltry,  mean,  or  imprac- 
Mean-  ^  t^cable  sources,  as  from  the  poor,  for  instance,  or 
ness.         fi^ni  the  dead ;  whence  also  the  proverb,  "  to  pillage 
even  from  the  dead:"  for  it  is  the  result  of  a  sor^d 

6.  hankering  after  lucre,  and  of  meanness.  It  is  also  a 
source  of  shame  for  a  person,  who  has  the  means, 
not  to  contribute  his  aid  in  money  matters,  or  to  do 
so  in  a  minor  degree ;  and  for  one  to  be  assisted  by 

7.  those  in  less  easy  circumstances  than  himself;  and 
for  one  to  borrow  himself,  when  his  friend  appears 
to  be  asking  a  loan  ;  and  to  ask  a  further  loan,  when 
he  would  recall  a  former ;  and  the  recalling  a  former 
loan  when  he  asks  another  ;  and  the  praising  a  thing 
to  such  a  degree  as  to  seem  to  ask  for 'it;  and  the 
persisting  no  less,  though  often  foiled ;  for  these  are 

8.  AduU- alL  indications  of  meanness.      And  the  praising  a 
^^^'         person  in  his  presence  is  a  token  of  adulation ;  and 
the  praising  a  man's  good  points,  while  you  slur  over 
his  failings ;  or,  when  one  is  grieved,  the  exhibiting 
grief  in  an  inordinate  degree,  and  whatever  other 
conduct  is  of  a  similar  kind,  [is  a  source  of  shame,] 
9.  because  it  manifests  adulation.     [It  is  also  shameful] 
not  to  sustain  toils  which  those  who  are  advanced  in 
'years,  or  who  live  delicately,  or  who  are  of  higher 
rank,   or,  in  a  word,   which  they  sustain  whose 
strength  is  inferior  to  your  own ;  because  all  these 
10.  are  indications  of  effeminacy :  and  so  it  is  to  be  be- 
nefited by  another,  and  that  frequently ;  or,  to  re- 

*  Spartano  caidam  respondit  Pythia  yates : 
■    Hand  impuiiitum  quondam  fore,  quod  dubitaret 
Depositum  retinere,  etc.  Juv.  xiii.  139. 

See  the  account  of  the  deposit  left  by  a  Milesian  with  Glau- 
cus  the  son  of  Epicydes.    Uerodot  yI.  86. 

CHAP.  VI.]  RHETORIC.  129 

proach  a  person  with  his  obligations  to  you;  for 
they  are  all  indications  of  a  mean  and  abject  spirit. 
Again,  to  talk  about  one's  self,  and  to  be  one's  own  11.  Vani- 
trumpeter ;  and  to  assert  that  to  be  one's  own  which  *y* 
belongs  to  another ;  for  these  are  indications  of  arro- 
gance. In  the  same  way,4oo,  in  the  several  other 
instances  of  moral  depravity,  both  their  results,  their 
indications,  and  the  like  attendant  circumstances,  are 
all  subjects  of  shame ;  for  they  are  disgraceful,  and 
make  one  ashamed.  And  to  the  afore-mentioned  we  12. 
may  add,  the  non-participation  in  those  creditable 
qualities  which  either  every  body,  or  all  our  equals, 
or  the  greatest  part  of  them,  partake  of.  By  equals 
I  mean,  fellow  countrymen,  citizens,  those  of  the 
same  age,  relations ;  in  a  word,  those  with  whom  we 
are  on  an  equality  ;  for  [when  a  thing  is  so  general] 
the  non-participation  in  it  begins  to  be  disgraceful ; 
for  instance,  the  not  having  been  educated^,  at  least 
in  a  certain  degree,  and  so  in  tfa^  case  of  other 
deficiencies ;  but  the  disgrace  of  all  these  things  be- 
comes much  greater,  should  they  appear  to  be  want- 
ing by  cur  awn  fault ;  for  thus,  they  are  more  pro- 
perly the  result  of  depravity  should  one  be  himself 
the  cause  of  what  has  attached  to  him,  or  does  now, 
or  is  likely  so  to  attach.  Again,  men  are  sensible  to  13. 
feelings  of  shame,  when  they  are  suffering,  have  suf- 
fered, or  are  about  to  suffer  any  thing  of  such  a  na- 
ture, as  tends  to  loss  of,  respect,  and  disgrace :  and 
these  are  all  services  consisting  in  the  lending  one's 
self  either  personally,  or  in  any  shameful  action 
where  there  is  an  idea  of  suffering  insult :  and  what- 
ever administers  to  intemperance,  whether  it  be  vo- 
luntary, or  not :  and  submission  to  violence,  if  invo- 

*  It  was  by  a  somewhat  similar  consideration  that  Dr. 
Johnson  refuted  the  argument  of  those  who  opposed  the  edu- 
cation of  the  poor  on  the  ground  of  its  raising  their  ideas  above 
their  sphere  of  life.  **  If,"  said  he,  "  a  few  only  are  educated, 
it  is  a  distinction,  and  those  few  may  be  proud ;  if  it  be  general, 
it  ceases  to  b^  a  distinction,  and,  of  course,  to  be  a  ground  of 
pride.  And  the  contrary  will  be  the  result ;  for  instead  of  its 
being  ground  oi  pride  that  a  man  has  been  educated,  it  will  be 
matter  of  «Aam«  if  he  has  not."    BosweU's  Life. 

130 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  II. 

14.  Per- 

sons  in 

whose 

presence 

men  feel 

shame. 

Whom 

they 

esteem. 

15. 

16.  Ad- 
mire. 

17.  Their 
equals. 

18.  Those 
with 
whom 
they 
must  live. 

19.  The 
innocent. 

luntaiy ;  for .  sueh  submission,  without  defending 
one's  self,  proceeds  from  an  unmanlj  character,  and 
fi*om  cowardice.  These  then,  and  the  like  to  these, 
are  the  things  about  which  men  are  sensible  of  shame. 
But  as  the  sense  of  ahame  is  an  idea  entertained  of 
loss  of  character ;  and  of  this  loss,  in  itself  alone,  with- 
out reference  to  its  consequences  ;  and  as  no  one  re- 
gards the  opinion,  except  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
hold  it ;  it  must  follow  that  a  man  is  thus  sensible  in 
regard  to  those  for  whom  he  has  an  esteem.  But  he 
will  have  an  esteem  for  those  who  admire  him,  and 
whom  he  does  himself  admire,  and  by  whom  he  wishes 
'to  be  admired,  and  in  regard  to  whom  he  feels  emu- 
lation, and  whose  opinion  he  does  not  hold  cheap. 
Now,  people  wish  to  be  admired  by,  and  do  them- 
selves admire,  all  those  who  possess  any  of  those 
goods  which  are  valued ;  or  from  whom  they  happen 
to  be  very  much  in  want  -of  getting  something  of 
which  they  have  the  disposal ;  for  instance,  those  who 
are  in  love.  But  people  have  their  emulation  excited, 
in  reference  to  their  equals ;  and  they  hold  in  consi- 
deration the  prudent  ^  as  being  men  who  adhere  to 
truth ;  of  this  description  are  men  of  education,  and 
9uch  as  are  advanced  in  years.  Also  actions  done  in 
the  eyes  of  the  world  and  in  public  [excite  our  shame], 
and  hence  the  proverb,  that  "  Shame  dwells  in  the 
eyes."  On  this  account,  people  are  more  sensible  of 
shame  before  those  with  whom  they  are  always  likely 
to  be  present,  and  those  who  fix  their  attention  on 
them,  for  both  these  are  instances  of  being  before  the 
eyes  of  persons  :^again,  they  are  sensible  of  it  be- 
fore those  who  are  not  open  to  charges  on  the  same 
points  ;  for  their  sentiments,*  it  is  evident,  are  the  op- 
posite of  their  own :  before  those  also  who  do  not 
make  allowances  for  such  as  appear  to  be  faulty ;  for 
errors  which  a  man  commits  himself,  these  he  is  said 

•  01  (ppoififioi,  more  properly,  men  of  the  world.  Such  a 
character  Cicero  seems  to  have  had  in  view,  according  to  Vic- 
torius,  when  he  says,  **  qui  est  versattu  in  rebus ,  vel  usu,  quern 
aetas  denique  affert,  vel  auditione  et  c8gitatione,  quce  studio  et 
diligentia  precurrit  aetatem."    Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  30. 

CHAP.  VI.]  RHETORIC.  131 

not  to  take  amiss  in  his  neighbours ;  so  that  he  evi- 
dently will  take  amiss  such  as  he  does  not  commit 
himself :  and  before  those  who  are  fond  of  divulging  20.  Tat^ 
what  they  know  to  the  world ;  for  whether  a  man  ^^^^ 
does  not  think  one's  conduct  faulty,  or  does  not  divulge 
ity  makes  no  difference.  But  persons  likely  to  di- 
vulge [what  they  know  to  one's  discredit]  are  such 
as  have  been  injured,  from  their  being  anxiously  on 
the  watch  to  retaliate ;  and  those  who  are  slanderers 
generally;  for  if  they  speak  ill  even  of  those  who  are 
not  culpable,  much  more  will  they  of  those  who  are: 
as  are  also  those  who  are  on  the  look-out  for  the 
errors  of  their  neighbours,  for  instance,  jesters,  and 
the  poets  of  the  old  comedy ;  for  these  are  in  some 
sense  slanderers,  and  fond  of  divulging.  Again,  [men 
are  sensible  of  shame]  before  those  with  whom  they 
never  met  with  a  repulse ;  for  they  are  disposed  to- 
wards them  as  admirers.  On  which  account  men 
have  a  sense  of  shame,  even  towards  those  who  ask 
any  thing  for  the  first  time,  as  having  never  yet  for- 
feited their  good  opinion  in  any  points.  And  of  this 
description  are  both  those  who  have  lately  sought  to 
be  our  friends,  for  they  have  observed  our  excellent 
qualities ;  and  hence,  the  reply  of  Euripides  to  the 
Syracusans  is  a  good  one*;  and,  of  our  old  acqkiomt' 
anceiy  those  who  know  no  ill  of  us.  And  men  are  21. 
sensible  of  shame  not  only  about  the  things  them- 
selves which  have  been  mentioned  as  delicate  points, 
but  even  about  the  indications  of  them ;  for  instance, 
not  only  about  licentious  conduct,  but  also  about  all 
indications  of  it ;  not  only  in  doing  what  is  disgrace- 
ful, but  even  in  mentioning  it*.  And  in  the  same  22. 
way  they  are  sensible  of  shame,  not  only  before  those 
who  have  been  mentioned,  but  before  those  also  who 

*  It  appears  that  Euripides  had  been  sent  to  Sicily  as  am- 
bassador, but  finding  the  Syracusans  inclined  to  reject  his 
proposals  for  a  peace,  he  told  them,  "  that  they  surely  ought  to 
nave  some  respect  for  a  people  who  held^  them  in  such  high 
consideration,  particularly  as  this  was  their  first  request." 
'  Quod  faetu  foedum  est,  idem  est  et  dictu  turpe. 
Oh  yhp  abiav  icrd*  B,  fin^k  Spdv  kuXov, 

Sophoc.  CEd.  Tyr.  1409. 
k2 

132  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

will  be  likelj  to  disclose  their  conduct  to  them,  as  for 
Servants,  instance,  their  servants  or  their  friends.  In  brief, 
^'  however,  people  are  not  at  all  sensible  of  shame  be- 
fore those  whose  opinions,  in  regard  to  their  justness, 
they  hold  cheap ;  for  no  one  feels  shame  before  chil- 
dren and  brutes :  nor  do  men  feel  it  about  the  same 
points  when  before  acquaintances,  as  before  strangers ; 
but  when  before  acquaintances  tbej  feel  it  on  points 
reaU^  shameful^;  but  before  strangers  on  matters 
merely  sanctioned  by  custom. 

24.  How  As  regards  themselves,  men  would  be  likely  to  be 
nSen^  sensible  of  shame  under  these  dispositions  5  first,  if 
shame.      there  should  really  exist  any  so  affected  towards  them^ 

selves,  as  I  described  those  to  be,  in  regard  to  whom 
they  feel  shame.    And  these  were  either  those  whom 
they  hold  in  admiration,  or  by  whom  themselves  are 
held  in  admiration,  or  by  whom  they  are  desirous  of 
being  admired,  or  of  whom  they  are  petitioning  some- 
thing which  they  wiU  not  be  likely  to  get,  if  not  men 
When  the  of  character.    Ajid  if  these  be  either  actual  spectators 
J^^^     (just  as,  on  the  question  of  the  allotment  of  Samos  to 
oa.  colonists,  Cydias  introduced  in  his  harangue  to  Ihe 

ecclesia;  for  he  put  it  to  the  Athenians  to  imagine 
that  the  Greeks  were  standing  round  as  actucd  specta^^ 
torSy  and  not  as  mere  future  hearers^  of  the  decree 
which  they  might  pass) ;  or  should  persons  of  this 
description  be  near,  or  be  likely  soon  to  be  aware  of 
their  conduct :  and  on  this  account  persons  in  misfor* 
tune,  do  not  wish  even  to  be  seen  by  those  who  once 
deemed  them  happy ;  for  they  who  thus  deem  of  us 

25.  When  are  admirers.  And  when  they  have  attached  to  them 
discredit    ^j^at  throws  discredit  on  the  conduct  and  the  actions, 

'  tach.  '  either  of  themselves,  or  of  their  ancestors,  or  any 
others  with  whom  in  any  way  they  are  closely  con- 
nected ;  and,  in  one  word,  all  in  whose  behalf  they 
are  sensible  of  shame ;  and  these  are  the  above-men- 
tioned, and  those  who  stand  in  any  relation  to  them, 

'  He  told  us  ahoTe  (chap.  it.  §  23),  that  those  people  were 
usually  regarded  as  friends  "  before  whom  we  feel  no  delicacy 
on  matters  of  mere  opinion,  though  far  from  disregardmg  their 
opinions." 

CHAP.  VI.]  KHETORIG.  1^3 

whose  tutors  or  advisers  they  have  been^.     And  if  26.  With 
there  be  others,  their  equals,  with  whom  they  are  at  ^^\ 
rivahry ;  for,  from  a  feeling  of  shame,  on  account  of  ^ 
persons  of  this  description,  men  both  do  and  leave 
undone  very  many  things.     Again,  when  people  are  27.  When 
likely  to  be  seen,  and  openly  to  be  engaged  before  S^^j^^ 
those  who  are  privy  [to  their  disgrace],  they  become  **"fif'^*®®"' 
in  a  higher  degree  susceptible  of  shame.-  And  hence 
the  poet  Antiphon,  just  as  he  was  going  to  be  beaten  « 

cm  the  rack  by  Dionysius,  observing  those  who  were 
about  to  be  executed  with  bim  muffing  themselves 
up  as  they  went  through  the  gate,  said,  "Why  do 
you  muffle  yourselves  up ; — ^is  it  lest  any  of  these  pre- 
sent should  see  you  to-morrow?" 

Thus  much  then  on  the  subject  of  the  i^ense  of 
shame;  but  of  insensibility  to  it,  we  shall  evidently 
know  enough  from  t]^e  contraries. 

CHAP.  VII. 

Those  towards  whom  people  feel  Gratitude  :  on  what  oeca- 
none  ;  and^  as  regards  themselves^  with  what  dispositions. 

Thb  persons  towards  whom  men  feel  gratitude,  and  1. 
the  occasions  on  which,  and  with  what  dispositions 
on  their  own  part,  will  be  plain  to  us,  after  we  have 
defined  gratuitous  benevolence.    Now,  let  gratuitous  2.  Definl- 

tionof 

^  The  Stoics  had  observed  this  feeling  of  carrying  our  views  ^  ^*'* 
onward  to  posthumous  glory ;  and  found  the  love  of  glory  the 
most  difficult  of  all  passions  to  eradicate : — ^t^  Koi  iax^'rof 

\dKK  di*  airrtiv  Airodvofiivtav  auTti  irpoirivx'^'rai  Tfi  \lfvx^,  Sim- 
plicius  in  Comm.  ad  Epicteti,  cap.  48.  Tacitus,  in  speaking 
of  the  great  love  of  fame  manifested  by  Helvidius  Priscus,  jus-  \ 

tifies  him,  by  observing  that  EUam  sapieniibus  cupido  glorim 
novissima  exuUur.  Hist.  iv.  6.  A  mode  of  expression  which 
strongly  brings  to  our  recollection  the  passage  in  Milton's 
Lyeidast 

Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise, 
That  last  infinnity  of  noble  mind.  Lycid.  70 

134  ARIST0TLE:S  [book  ir. 

benevolence  *  be  "  that  conformably  to  which,  he  who 
has  the  power  is  said  to  confer  a  benefit  on  one  who 
needs  it,  not  in  return  for  any  thing,  nor  in  order  that 
any  thing  may  accrue  to  him  who  so  confers  it,  but 
th^t  some  benefit  may  arise  to  the  object."  But  it 
becomes  great  should  it  be  conferred  on  one  who  is  in 
extreme  want^,  or  if  the  boon  be  great  and  difficult 
of  attainment,  or  at  a  crisis  of  a  certain  description, 
or  if  the  giver  has  bestowed  it  alane^  or  first,  or  in  a - 
8.  greater  degree  than  any  other.  Wants  are  however 
our  desires  of  these ;  such  particularly  as  are  attend- 
ed by  paip  on  failing  of  their  objects ;  and  of  this 
description  are  our  lusts,  as  for  instance,  love.  Again, 
such  as  arise  in  the  suffering  of  the  body,  and  in  dan- 
ger ;  for  both  the  man  who  is  exposed  to  danger,  and 
who  suffers  pain,  is  anxious  for  something.  On  which 
account,  those  who  stand  by  us  in  poverty  and  ban- 
ishment, should  they  confer  even  trifling  benefits, 
wiU  yet  have  gratified  us  by  reason  of  the  greatness 
of  our  need,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  time ;  take 
the  instance  of  him  who  gave  but  a  mat  [to  a  beggar] 
4.  in  the  Lycaeum.  It  is  necessary,  then,  that  our  obli- 
gation have  reference,  if  possible,  by  all  means  to 
some  case  of  this  sort,  but  if  not,  to  some  one  of  equal 
or  greater  need.  So  that,  as  it  is  evident  both  when, 
and  in  what  cases,  an  act  of  free  benevolence  takes 
place,  and  how  the  parties  are  affected,  it  is  plain  that 
out  of  these  principles  we  must  get  up  our  speech, 
showing  that,  as  regards  the  one  party,  they  were  or 
are  exposed  to  pain,  or  want  of  this  description,  and 
as  regards  the  other,  that  in  such  their  want  they  as- 
sisted them  by  administering  some  boon  of  this  de- 
scription. 
6.  How  And  it  is  also  evident,  by  recurring  to  what  topics 
^e  ^i^tor  ^g  jQj^y.  ^Q  away  the  obligation,  and  make  our  audi- 

*  This  chapter  presents  considerable  difficulty  from  the 
double  meaning  of  which  the  word  x&pi^  is  capable.  See 
Schradet's  Note,  Animadv. 

*  Hence  the  yalue  of  the  aid  sent  by  the  Athenians  to  the 
Lacedemonians,  when  the  Helots  had  possessed  themselres  of 

«  lUiome 

wise. 

CHAP,  vii.]  RHETORIC.  135 

ence  insensible  of  grateful  feelings';  for  either  we  rest  the 
may  urge  that  they  are  or  were  assisting  them,  for  audience 
their  own  sakes,  and  this  was  supposed  not  to  be  free  grateful 
benevolence ;  or  are  doing  so  just  because  it  fell  out  feelings, 
by  chance,  or  because  they  were  compelled  to  do  so ;  ^'  other- 
or  that  they  paid  back  a  debt,  but  did  not  bestow  a 
gift,  and  this  as  well  if  the  party  was  conscious  of 
his  having  been  so  indebted,  as  if  he  was  not ;  be- 
cause there  is  in  both  cases  the  idea  of  a  quid  pro 
quo;  so  that  neither  on  this  view  of  the  case  will 
any  gratitude  be  felt.     We  should  also  examine  the  6. 
point  under  all  the  predicaments ;  for  free  benevo- 
lence stands  in  thisj  either  that  that  particular  thing 
was  given,  or  in  such  quantity,  or  of  such  a  quality, 
or  as  to  the  time  when,  or  the  place  where,  it  was 
given.     And  we  may  adduce  it  as  a  sign  to  suit  this 
purpose,  if  the  parties  in  question  have  refused  a  l^ss 
favour ;  and  if  they  have  conferred  on  an  enemy  either 
the  same  favour,  or  an  equal  one,  or  a  greater ;  for 
then  it  will  be  evident  that  they  did  it  not  for  our 
sakes.     Or,  if  he  wittingly  has  given   something 
paltry^;  for  no  one  acknowledges  that  he  stands  in 
need  of  what  is  paltry. 

And  now  have  my  sentiments  respecting  benevo- 
lence, and  the  want  of  it,  been  explained. 

*  The  ease  with  which  impressions  of  gratitude  might  be 
effaced,  appears  to  hare  been  fuHy  conceived  by  that  French 
statesman,  who  said,  when  he  granted  a  farour,  "  J*  ai  fait  dix 
micantentt,  et  un  ingrat." 

*  Horace  sneers  at  this  kind  of  liberality. 

Quo  more  pyris  resci  Calaber  jubet  hospes, 

*  Tu  me  fecisti  locupletem. — Vescere  sodes. — 
Jam  satis  est — At  tu  quantum  vis  toUe. — Benigne. — 
Non  invisa  feres  pueris  munuscula  parvis. — 

^    Tam  teneor  done,  quam  si  dimittar  onustus. — 
Ut  libet:  "  fiacporcis  hodie  comedenda  relinquM." 

Ep.  Ub.  i.  7,  14. 

136  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  u. 

CHAP.  yiir. 

}   Let  us  explain  the  circumstances  which  excite  pity ; 
and  the  persons  whom  men  pity;  and,  as  regards 

2.  Defini-  themselves,  with  what  dispositions.     Now  let  pitj  be 
pS  ^^      defined  to  be  ^,  "  a  sort  of  pain  occasioned  by  an  evil 

capable  of  hnrting  or  destroying^,  appearing  to  be- 
fall one  who  does  not  deserve  it,  which  one  may 
himself  expect  to  endure  ^  or  that  some  one  connect- 
ed with  him  will;  and  this  when  it  appears  near: 
for  it  evidently  is  necessary  that  a  person  likely  to 
feel  pity  should  be  actually  such  as  to  deem  that, 
either  in  his  own  person,  or  of  some  one  connected 
with  him,  he  may  suffer  some  evil,  and  that  an  evil 
of  9uch  a  description  as  has  been  stated  in  the  defini- 
tion, or  one  similar  to  it,  or  nearly  equivalent  to'it^. 

3.  Per      On  which  account  neither  do  those  who  are  abso- 

>  GrirfforlheeakmiiyofamaihniM'pnx^andeiriiethfi^ 
the  inuiffinatum  that  the  like  calamity  may  befall  himself j  and 
therefore  it  is  called  also  eompaseion,  and,  in  the  phrase  of  the 
present  time,  a  feUow-feelinff :  and  therefore,  for  calamity 
arriving  from  great  wickedness  liie  best  men  have  the  least 
pity ;  and  for  the  same  calamity  those  men  hate  pity,  that 
think  Uiemselves  least  obnoxious  to  the  same.  Hobbes's  Le- 
viathan. See  Rochefoucault's  Maxims,  No.  342,  where  the 
'  above  is  quoted  in  the  note. 

'  The  evil  in  the  case  of  pity  is  of  the  saote  character  as 
was  stated  to  be  the  object  of  fear.  In  fact,  whatever  when 
befalling  another  excites  pity,  in  one's  own  case  excites  fear. 
Vid.  chap.  v.  §  12. 

*  It  is  on  tms  principle  that,  in  the  Poetics,  describing  the 
character  best  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  tragedy,  and  in  whose 
sufferings  we  shall  be  most  likely  to  take  an  interest,  he  ex- 
cludes an  absolutely  vicious  character ; — aVpay wroraTw  y^p 
TouTO  ierri'  vdvTtou  ovSkv  ydp  ex**  ^^  ^"*  ovrt  yAp  ipiXdifdpw 
m-ovf  owT«  IXtttvdvy  oSrt  €ftofiip6v  i<rri.  And  a  little  after  he 
gives  the  reason  of  this : — tXtov  pXv  'rtpl  -rdv  ava^iov  <^6^o%  6k 
irtpl  t6v  o/Aotov,  §  25. 

*  Perhaps  the  whole  germ  of  Aristotle's  doctrine  on  this 
subject  may  be  traced,  however  briefly  expressed,  in  the  cele- 
brated sentence  of  Terence,  '*  Homo  sum ;  humani  nihil  ^  me 
alienum  puto.*' 

CHAP,  vm.]  RHETORIC.  137 

lutelj  lost,  fed  pity ;  for  these  think  thej  shall  no  «>»"  "^^o. 
longer  be  exposed  to  suffering,  for  their  sufferings  are  ^  ^^^* 
past ;  nor  those  who  esteem  themselTes  excessively 
happy,  but  these  wax  insolent ;  for  evidently,  if  they 
esteem  every  good  to  be  realized  to  them,  they  also 
esteem  their  lot  to  be  incapable  of  suffering  any  evil ; 
fidnce  this  also  enters  into  the  number  of  goods.    But  4. 
of  this  description,  viz.  such  as  think  they  may 
yet  suffer  evil,  are  both  who  already  have  suffered 
and  escaped^;  and  those  advanced  in  years,  as  well 
hy  reason  of  their  prudence,  as  of  their  experience : 
and  the  weak ;  and  those  who  are  rather  timid ;  and 
men  of  education,  for  these  calculate  life's  contingen- 
cies aright ;  and  those  to  whom  belong  parents  ^  or  5. 
ehildren,  or  wives,  for  these  attach  to  one's  self,  and 
ore  liable  to  suffer  the  above-mentioned  evils.   Those  6.  and  do 
do  not  feel  pity  who  are-  under  the  excitements  of  ^L^^^ 
eoun^e,  for  instance,  under  anger  or  confidence ;  for 
these  feelings  little  calculate  the  future :  nor  do  those 
feel  pity  who  are  under  insolent  dispositions^;  for 
these  persons  also  calculate  little  of  suffering  any 
thing :  but  those  who  are  of  the  mean  temperament 
between  these  are  svsceptibleof  pity :  and  those  again 
are  not  susceptible  of  it  who  are  vehemently  affected 
by  fear ;  for  such  as  are  horror-struck  do  not  feel 
pity®,  by  reason  of  its  being  akin  to  an  evil  which 
comes  home  to  themselves.     Also  people  are  suscep-  7. 
tible  of  pity,  should  they  esteem  some  persons  to  be 
good;  for  he  who  esteems  no  one  to  be  such^,  will 

•  So  Dido,  *'  Haud  ignara  mali  miseris  succurrere  disco.** 
'  Exemplified  in  Priam*8  appeal  to  Achilles : 

Mvncrai  trarp^  mloy  dtol^  iinctKtX'  'AviXXeO, 
TifXiJCov,  &cirtp  iyuw,  le.  r.  \.  1L  xxiv.  486. 

'  Sophocles,  CBd.  Tyr.  873 : — l>fipi9  ^vrcvet  r^amnv.  With 
die  tame  view  of  human  nature  Aristotle,  when  he  says  that 
persons  affected  by  pleasure  are  disposed  to  placability,  quali- 
fied his  expression  by  the  exclusion  of  wanton  insolence ; — 
ol  cr  niov^  fiii  v/3pt(rrtK^,  Kal  cr  iXvUt  ivuiKii'  cap.  iii.  §  12. 

•  Lear,  Act  v.  sc.  iii. : 

This  judgment  of  the  heayens,  which  makes  us  tremble, 
Touches  us  not  with  pity. 

•  Thus  the  old,  from  their  experience  of  the  depiarity  of 

138  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

think  every  one  deserving  of  evil.  And  in  a  word, 
every  one,  when  he  is  so  affected  as  to  call  to  his 
recollection  the  fact,  that  evils  of  such  a  character 
have  befallen  either  him^  or  his,  or  tq  apprehend  that 
they  may  befall  either  him  or  his.  And  now  it  has 
been  stated  with  what  dispositions  men  feel  pity. 
8.  Cir-  The  circumstances  which  excite  their  pity  wiU  be 

stonced      evident  from  the  definition :  for  whatever  things,  of 
which  ex-  the  number  of  those  which  cause  pain  and  anguish, 
cite  pity,    have  a  tendency  to  destroy,  are  all  such  as  to  cause 
pity:   again,  every  thing  whose  tendency  is  utter 
,  abolition ;    also  aU  those  evils  which  involve  the 
quality  of  greatness,  and   of  which  chance  is  the 
9.  cause  ^^.     But  the  evils  whose  characteristic  is  great 
anguish  and  destruction,  are  as  follows :  death,  as- 
saults, personal  injuries,  and  age,  and  sickness,  and 

10.  want  of  food.  And  the  evils  of  which  chance  is  the 
cause,  are,  absolute  want,  or  fewness  of  friends,  (on 
which  account  even  the  being  torn  from  friends  and 
familiars  is  a  circumstance  to  be  pitied,)  ugliness,  in- 
firmity, deformity,  and  the  circumstance  that  some 
evil  befalls  one  from  a  source  whence  it  were  becom- 
ing for  some  good  to  have  arisen ;  and  the  frequent 
occurrence  of  a  similar  thing :  and  the  accession  of 
some  good,  when  one  has  already  passed  his  suffer- 
ings ;  as  for  example,  the  gifts  of  the  king  were  sent 

11.  down  to  Diopithes  after  he  was  dead";  and  the  fact 
either  that  no  good  has  accrued,  or  of  tJiere  being  no 
enjojrment  of  it  when  it  has  arrived.  These,  tiben, 
and  the  like,  are  the  circumstances  on  account  of 
which  men  feel  pity. 

12.  Per-        But  people  are  sensible  of  pity  toward  their  ac- 
*^ti^d*^  quaintances,  if  they  be  not  of  extremely  close  con- 
nexion, but  about  such  they  feel  just  as  they  do  about 
themselves  when  on  the  eve  of  suffering :  and  on  this 

man,  are  less  susceptible  of  pity  than  the  young,  whose  inexpe- 
rience judges  well  of  human  nature.    See  chapters  xii.  and  xiii. 

^^  For  chance  in  a  great  measure  excludes  the  idea  of  the 
person's  deserving  the  eyil  he  suffers. 

**  In  the  last  act  of  The  Gamester  there  is  a  fine  illustration 
of  this ;  where  Beverley  hears  of  his  succession  to  the  inherit- 
ance just  as  he  has  drank  poison. 

CHAP.  VIII.]  RHETORIC.  '  139 

account  Amasis^^  as  thej  say,  did  not  shed  a  tear 
over  his  son  when  he  was  heing  led  to  execution,  hut 
he  did  over  his  ^friend  who  was  asking  an  alms ;  for 
this  was  a  circumstance  to  call  for  pity;  the  other, 
to  excite  horror.  For  horror  is  distinct  from  pity,  Horror  is 
and  has  a  tendency  to  expel  pity  from  the  hreast,  ^^pL 
and  is  frequently  availahle  to  produce  a  contrary  ef-  13. 
feet*'.  Still  men  feel  pity  while  the  evil  is  yet  ap- 
proaching. And  they  feel  it  towards  their  equals, 
whether  in  age,  in  temper,  in  habits,  in  rank,  or  in 
family ;  for  in  all  these  relations,  the  evil  is  seen  with 
greater  clearness  a^  possible  to  befall  also  one's  self. 
For  we  must  here  also  assume  generally,  that  what- 
ever people  fear  in  their  own  case,  that  they  pity  as 
happening  in  the  case  of  others.  But  as  the  disasters  1^* 
which  excite  pity  always  appear  to  be  close  at  hand, 
while,  as  to  those  removed  at  the  distance  of  ten 
thousand  years,  men  neither  in  the  expectation  of 
them,  if  fiiture^  nor  in  the  remembrance  of  them,  if 
pcist^  are  sensible  of  pity  at  all,  or  at  least  not  in  an 
equal  degree ;  this  being  the  case,  it  must^ follow  that 
those  characters  which  are  got  up.  with  the  aid  of 
gesture,  and  voice,  and  dress,  and  of  acting,  generally 
have  the  greater  effect  in  producing  pity**.  For 
thus,  by  setting  the  evil  before  our  eyes,  as  either 

IS  Perhaps  AristoUe  quoted  from  memory ;  and  it  is  not  im- 
probable that  he  may  have  been  mistaken  as  to  the  person  to 
whom  he  attributes  this  conduct,  since  Herodotus  relates  the 
gtory,  not  of  Amasis,  but  of  his  son  Psammenitus ;  who  re- 
marks, in  perfect  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  philo- 
sopher, tA  imIv  olicriia — fiijw  kckA  h  &<rrt  di/aicXafeiif,  Herod, 
iii.  14.  Siee  the  conduct  of  Gelimer,  the  Vandal  king  of  Africa» 
who  burst  into  laughter  at  his  interview  with  Belisarius  after 
the  loss  o#  his  kingdom  and  liberty.  Gibbon,  Dec.  and  Fall, 
chap.  41,  note  31. 

1'  On  this  principle  is  founded  one  of  his  criteria  of  excess 
of  criminality,  viz.  if  the  recital  of  tit  effecte  produce  fearin^ 
gtead  of  pity ; — B  ol  dKoiovrst  ^o/Sovvrac  fii^Xoif,  h  i\tova^, 
fitV^ov,  lib-  i.  c.  xiv.  §  5. 

u  'E<rrl  fikit  oiu  t6  <^o/3ep^v  Kal  i\ttiif6v  Ikttjv  i^ffttot  ytvco-- 
6ai,  Poet.  {  27.  See  a- very  pleasant  paper  of  Addison's  on 
this  subject.  Spectator,  No.  42.  "  We  know  the  effect  of  the 
skull  and  black  hangings  in  The  Fair  Penitent^  the  scaffold  in 
Venice  Preeerved,  the  tomb  in  Borneo  and  Juliet"  etc.  Twining. 

140  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

being  on  the  eve  of  taking  place,  or  as  halving  hap- 
pened, men  make  it  appear  to  be  close  at  hand. 

15.  Likewise  things  which  have  just  taken  place,  or 
quickly  about  to  do  so,  have  on  this  very  aceoont  a 

16.  greater  tendency  to  excite  pity.  Also  the  indications 
and  actions  of  persons  ;  for  instance,  the  garments  ^^ 
of  those  who  have  suffered,  and  other  things  of  that 
sort.  And  the  expressions  of  those  under  suffering, 
for  instance^  of  those  already  in  act  of  dying.  And 
especially  is  it  a  circumstance  to  move  pily,  that  while 
in  these  crises  the  persons  have  borne  themselves 
virtuously  ^^.  For  ^  these  circumstances  produce 
pity  in  a  higher  degree  from  its  appearing  near;  also, 
the  fact  of  the  person's  being  unworthy,  and  his  dis- 
aster appearing  in  view  before  our  eyes. 

CHAP.  IX. 
Of  IndigtmUon. 

1.  Indig.   To  pity  is  opposed,  most  directly,  that  feeling  which 

^^'^^P-  men  call  indignation ;  for,  to  the  feeling  i^iii  at  un- 

pity.         deserved  ndsfortudMy  is  opposed  in  a  certain  way  the 

Definition  feeling  pain  at  undeserved  good  fortune^  and  it  ori- 

of  it.         ginates  in  the  same  disposition;  and  these  feelings 

2.  are  both  those  of  a  virtuous  disposition.     For  we 

ought  to  sympathize  with,  and  to  pity  those  who  are 

undeservedly  unfortunate ;  and  to  feel  indignant  at 

those  who  are  undeservedly  fortunate ;  for  whatever 

happens  contrary  to  desert  is  unjust ;  and  on  this 

account  we  make  indignation  an  attribute^even  of 

'*  Witness  the  effect  of  Antony's  di8{day  of  the  robe  of  Caesar 
stained  with  his  blood.    Julius  Cssar. 

"  Illustrated  in  the  effect  produced  by  Polyxena's  resigna- 
tion and  anxiety  to  preserre,  even  in  death,  the  decorum  of 
female  deMcacy : — 

il  dl  KaX  l^rtn^fTKOwr*,  ^fimt 
iroWiiv  jToovoiay  tlx^v  thtrx^fim^  ireircTy, 
K(ivirrouv\  &  icpvirTccv  Sfifiar*  ipaivtuf  XP****'* 

Buiip  Uec«ba,563. 

CHAP.  IX.]  RHETORIC.  141 

the  gods^      It  should  seem,  too,  that  eiiTj  stands  3.  Enw 
oj^osed  to  pity  in  the  same  way,  as  appearing  to  be  2*^?!® 
akin  to,  and  in  fact  the  same  thing  as,  indignation  ;      ^^  ^' 
and  jet  it  really  is  distinct.     For  envy  is  also  a  pain  Definition 
causing  agitation,  it  also  is  felt  at  good  fdrtane,  not,  ^^  ^^* 
howeTer,  at  the  good  fortune  of  the  undeserving 
[only],  but  of  equals  and  fellows^.     The  feeling, 
however,  in  all  cases  equally  [of  envy  and  of  indig- 
nation], must  exist  [in  the  breasts  of  those  affected 
by  it],  not  because  any  difference  will  be  likely  to 
accrue  to  themselves,  but  on  account  of  their  neigh- 
bour, solely  as  regards  himself.     For  no  longer  will 
the  one  feeling  be  envy,  and  the  other  indignation, 
but  fear,  should  the  pain  and  agitation  exist  on  this 
aeconnt,  viz.  because  some  evil  will  probably  result 
to  themselves  from  the  good  fortune  of  the  other. 

But  it  is  plain  that  opposite  feelings  will  be  conse-  4.  Oppo- 
quent  on  these  passions :  for  he  who  feels  pain  at  ^^^^ 
those  who  are  undeservedly  unfortunate,  wiU   feel  conse- 
pleasure,  or  at  least  be  unaffected  by  pain,  at  those  OJ^ent  on 
who  are  unfortunate  under  different  circumstances^:  ei^tions. 
ioT  instance,  no  good  man  would  feel  pain  about  par- 
ricides and  murderers  when  they  meet  with  punish- 
ment ;  since  we  ought  to  feel  joy  at  such. occurrences  ; 
and  so  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  deservedly  for- 
tunate ;  for  both  are  instances  of  justice,  and  cause 
the  good  man  to  rejoice,  since  it  must  be  that  he  has 
a  hope  that  what  has  been  realized  to  his  equal,  will  5.  Both 
be  realized  also  to  himself,  and  these  are  all  feelings  ^.^^^^ 

pity. 
^  Thus  Herodotus  attributes  the  turn  in  the  fortunes  of 
Croesus  to  his  having  incurred  the  divine  indig^nation  : — Mcr^ 
^oKtova  olxofABvov^  2Xa/3c  Ik  Bbov  vc/uecrts  fityaKrf  tLpoXaov'  W9 
tlKOa-aif  oTt  ivofiurt  itovTdv  tlvat  it^dfrnirmv  diraifrwv  dXfiiMTa' 
rov.    Herodotus,  i.  34. 

*  The  envious  and  indignant  have  this  in  common,  viz.  the 
good  fortune  of  their  neighbour,  as  the  object  of  their  respect- 
ive passions ;  and  ihe  absence  of  any  apprehension  as  to  the 
degree  in  which  their  own  circumstances  may  be  affected  by 
such  good  fortune ;  for  the  moment  they  begin  to  calculate  the 
probability  of  any  detriment  arising  to  themselves  therefrom, 
the  feeling,  ceasing  to  be  any  longer  envy  or  indignation,  will 
have  become  fear. 

*  That  is,  deservedly. 

14*2  ABISTOTLB'S  [book  n. 

of  the  same  disposition ;  and  their  opposites,  of  the 
opposite  dispositions.  Since  the  same  man  who  ex^ 
ults  in  misfortane^  is  also  envious ;  for  anj  who  feels 
pain  at  the  accession  and  acquisition  of  any  good, 
that  persoh  necessarily  must  rejoice  when  that  good 
is  in  act  of  heing  withdrawn  and  lost.  On  which 
account  these  feelings  are  all  of  them  ohstacles  to 
pity ;  hut,  among  themselves,  they  differ  for  the  fore- 
going reasons,  so  that  all  are  alike  available  with  a 
view  to  render  a  thing  not  an  object  of  pity. 
6.  Peiv  On  the  subject  of  indignation,  then,  let  us  first 

excitrin-  ''***®  ^*^®  *^®  persons  are  with  whom  men  feel  in- 
digna-       dignant,  the  occasions  on  which,  and,  as  regards 
tioJi-         themselves,  with  what  dispositions ;  then,  after  these, 
7>  of  other  points.     But  the  subject  will  be  plain  from 
what  has  already  been  said  ;  for  if  indignation  be  a 
feeling  pain  on  a  man's  appearing  to  be  undeservedly 
fortunate,  it  will  be  evident  in  the  first  place  that  it 
is  not  possible  to  feel  indignation  in  the  case  of  every 
8.  Not      good.     For  there  is  no  one  who,  if  another  be  just, 
rachas      Qp  brave,  or  shall  make  acquisitions  of  virtue,  will 
raladvan-  ^^  indignation  at  that  other  ;  for  neither  is  pity  felt 
tages,  but  at  the  contraries  of  these  qualities^:  but  it  is  about 

I  *  "Eirixa*p««f««f*«,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  "  Ethica  Mag- 

na," x'^^P^'^^'^^'i  is  one  of  the  extremes  between  which  Vc/ico-iv 
is  said  to  exist :  the  other  extreme  is  tftBovspla,  an  aptitude  to 
feelings  of  envy.  Speaking  of  the  "  great  power  and  force " 
of  the  Greek  language,  a  late  translator  of  the  Agamemnon  of 
^schylus  remarks,  that  "  One  word  would  sometimes  require 
for  its  translation  a  whole  sentence  of  modem  language ;  as, 
for  instance,  *EirtxaiptKcucia,  a  dupontion  to  feel  pleature  at 
the  misfortunet  of  others  ;  which  makes  a  sentence,  and  con- 
stitutes a  maxim  in  Rochefoucault,  "  II  y  a  tot^jours  dans  le 
malheur  d'autrui  quelque  chose  qui  ne  nous  deplait  pas ;"  and 
adds  in  a  note,  that  Lord  Bacon  (Essays)  has  beauti^ly 
touched  on  this  disposition  :  "  There  is  a  natural  malignity ; 
for  there  be  that  in  their  nature  do  not  affect  the  good  of 
others."  Preface  to  Symmons's  translation  of  the  Agamemnon. 
'  Pity  is  not  felt  at  the  cUteence  of  these  qualities  from  any 
one,  because  they  cannot  be  absent  without  being  deservedly 
so ;  and  it  is  essential  to  pity  that  its  object  be  undeservedly 
exposed  to  that  inconvenience  which  he  suffers ;  on  the  other 
hand,  indignation  cannot  be  felt  at  Hheir  preaenee^  because  it  is 
the  distinguishing  feature  of  moral  advantages  that  they  cannot 
bS  possessed,  wiUiout  being  deserved. 

CHAP.  IX.]  ^  RHETORIC.  ^  143 

wealth  and  power   and  the  like  possessions  [that  those  of 
people  feel  indignant],  and  in  a  word,  about  all  those  fo^^^i^* 
things  of  which  the  good  are  deserving,  and  such  as 
are  naturally  possessed  of  advantages ;    as,  for  ex- 
ample, of  high  birth,  of  beauty,  and  advantages  of 
that  description. ,  But  as  what  is  ancient  seems,  in  a  9. 
certain  sense,  akin  to  what  is  natural,  it  must  follow, 
that  men  are  indignant,  in  a  greater  degree,  at  those 
who  possess  the  very  same  good,  if  they  be  recently 
possessed  of  it,  and  are  by  its  means  in  good  circum- 
stances, [than  with  those  who  have  long  possessed 
it.]     For  those  who  have  recently  become  rich  give  Such  as 
greater  pain  than  those  who  have  long  been  rich,  and  ?^®^^j|^ 
by  right  of  birth.     And,  in  the  same  way,  persons 
in  office,  and  men  of  power,  and  possessed  of  numer- 
ous friends,  and  of  good  children,  and  any  good  of 
this  description ;  and  likewise  if,  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  these,  there  should  accrue  to  them  any 
further  good :  here,  too,  those  of  recent  wealth,  who 
by  means  of  their  wealth  get  into  office,  give  greater 
pain  than  those  who  have  been  wealthy  of  old.     And 
in  a  similar  manner  in  the  case  of  the  others.     But  lo.  They 
the  reason  of  this  is,,  that  while  the  one  sort  appear  ^®^  ^ 
to  possess  what  is  their  own,  the  others  do  not ;  for  whattiiey 
that  which  appears  ever  to   have  held   this  rank,  haTeno 
seems  to  involve  an  idea  of  truth  ;  insomuch  that  the  "^^*  ***• 
others  seem  to  possess  what  does  not  belong  to  them. 
And  as,  of  the  goods,  each  does  not  become  any  one  11.  Such 
who  may  accidentally  present  himself,  but  there  is  a  *®  ^*^®  ^ 

auv  firoou. 

certain  proportion  and  idea  of  adaptation ;  for  ex-  incongru- 
ample,  splendour  in  respect  of  armour,  is  not  adapted  ously. 
to  a  man  whose  virtue  is  justice,  but  to  him  who 
possesses  courage ;  and  splendid  marriage  feasts  are 
not  adapted  to  those  of  recent  wealth,  but  to  those  of 
high  birth:  therefore  if  any  one,  though  he  may  be 
a  good  man,  meet  with  a  possession  which  is  not 
adapted  to  him,  we  should  feel  indignant ;  as  also 
with  an  inferior  who  disputes  with  his  superior ;  and 
particularly  if  he  does  so  on  the  very  points  in  which 
he  is  inferior.  Whence  also  this  was  remarked  by 
Homer :  ^'  He  missed  engaging  with  Ajax  the  son  of 

144  ABISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

Telamon ;  for  Jupiter  was  indignant  because  he  was 
Such  as     fain  to  engage  a  hero  his  superior^."     But,  if  it  be 
^^?b^    not  on  the  same  grounds,  we  feel  indignant  if  an  in- 
jects ferior  challenge  a  superior,  even  on  any  grounds ; 
-w^hich  ad-  for  instance,  if  a  musician  were  to  dispute  with  a 
o^pj^^  just  man,  for  justice  is  superior  to  music.     The  per- 
son, sons  then  with  whom,  and  the  reasons  why  men  feel 
indignant  will  be  evident  from  this;  for  they  are 
these  or  others  of  the  same  description. 
12.  Men        As  regards  themselves,  men  have  a  tendency  to  in- 
feelm^-  ^igw^tion,  if  they  deserve  and  have  acquired  the 
nation,      highest  goods;    for  the  circumstance  of  those  not 
their  equals  being  thought  worthy  of  equal  advan- 
13.  tages,  is  not  just.     Next,  they  feel  it,  if  they  chance 
to  be  good  and  excellent  persons;    for  they  both 
14.  The    judge  aright,  and  hate  what  is  unjust.     Again,  if 
ambi-        they  be  ambitious  and  desirous  of  certain  objects,  and 
°^'        especially  should  they  be  ambitious  about  those  things 
15.  which  others  who  are   undeserving   obtain.     And 
those,  in  a  word,  who  think  themselves  worthy  those 
things,  of  which  they  do  not  esteem  osiers  worthy, 
are  apt  to  feel  indignant  at  those  others,  and  about 
those  very  objects.     On  which  account  slaves,  sony 
fellows,  and  men  devoid  of  ambition,  are  not  liable 
to  feelings  of  indignation,  since  there  is  nothing  of 
16.  On      which  they  think  themselves  worthy.     And  from  this 
what  00-    it  £g  evident  on  what  occasions  of  misfortunes,  or  ill 
men  feel    luck,  or  failure  of  success,  persons  ought  to  rejoice, 
indig-        or  at  least  to  be  unaffected  by  pain ;  for,  from  what 
'**^*-        has  been  stated,  the  contraries  will  be  evident     So 
that  should  the  speech  have  wrought  up  the  judges 
into  this  disposition,  and  should  it  have  shown  that 
those  who  claim  to  be  pitied,  and  that  the  circum- 
stances under  which  they  claim  it,  are  undeserving 
pity,  and  really  deserving  not  to  gain  it,  it  -will  be 
impossible  for  the  judges  to  feel  pity. 

'  The  remark  is  made  of  Cebriones,  II.  ii.  v.'  542 ;  where, 
however,  the  second  line  quoted  by  Aristotle  does  not  occur. 

CHAP.  X.]  .  RHETORIC.  145 

CHAP.  X. 

Of  Envy, 

It  is  plain  also  on  what  occasions,  with  whom,  and'  l.  Envy. 
with  what  dispositions  men  feel  envy,  if  in  truth 
envy  be  *^  a  sort  of  pain  at  apparent  gtK>d  fortune.  Its  defini- 
touching  the  above-mentioned  goods  ^  in  the  case  of  ^^^- 
eqaals,  not  in  order  that  any  thing  may  happen  to 
one's  self,  and  simply  on  account  of  their  [being  thus 
fortunate]:"  for  those  who  have,  or  seem  to  have 
equals,  will  be  the  people  to  be  envious.    1  mean  by  2. 
equals,  those  who  are  like  in  circumstances  of  birth, 
connexions,  age,   habits,   character,   and  property. 
They,  too,  will  be  envious  who  fall  but  little  short  of  Men  like- 
poBsessing  all*:   hence  those  who  are  carrying  on  ly  to  feel 
mighty  projects,  and  those  who  are  prosperous,  are  thow 
envious ;  for  they  think  that  every  one  is  carrying  off  within  a 
what  belongs  to  theni.     Again,  those  who  are  re-  ^^^. 
markably  esteemed  on  any  account,  and  particularly  mit. 
on  account  of  their  wisdom  or  happiness.      And  3* 
those  who  are  ambitious  are  more  given  to  envy  than  The  am- 
those  who  are  devoid  of  ambition. ,  And  those  who  ^^^^^us. 
make  a  show  of  wisdom,  for  they  are  ambitious  on  the  The  wise. 
score  of  wisdom.     An^  in  a  word,  those  who  in  any 
respect  are  ambitious  of  glory  are  given  to  envy  in 
that  respect.   And  the  narrow-miiided ;  for,  to  them,  The  nar- 
every  thing  appears  of  consequence.  Snded 

The  goods  respecting  which  men  feel  envy  have  4  objects 
been  told  you ;  for  all  those  things  whatsoever,  about  which  ex- 
which  men  are  eager  for  praise,  and  ambitious,  whe-  ^*®  ®^^- 

'  See  §  7  and  8  of  the  last  chapter,  where  he  eicclndes  mo- 
ral excellence  from  the  number  of  tiie  goods  which  excite  in- 
dignation; and  in  justification  of  their  exclusion  m  that  place 
it  may  be  observed,  that  the  simple  fact  of  their  being  pos- 
sessed is  proof  of  their  being  deserved.  And  their  exclusion 
from  the  subjects  of  envy  may  be  justified  by  the  consideration' 
that  the  envioas  will,  in  general,  esteem  moral  excellence 
scarcely  worth  troubling  themselves  about. 

s  See  the  parable  of  the  ewe  lamb,  addressed  by  Nathan  to 
David. 

L 

146  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii.. 

ther  thej  be  productions  or  acquisitions,  and  re- 
specting which  they  are  desirous  of  renown,  and  all 
cases  of  good  luck ;  about  all  these  nearly  is  envy 
felt ;  and  particularly  about  such  of  them  as  the  in- 
dividuals are  themselves  desirous  of,  or  think  thej 
ought  themselves  to  possess,  or  those  things  in  the 
possession  of  which  they  are  themselves  superior,  or 
deficient  in  a  trifling  degree. 

5.  Men         Again,  it  is  evident  with  whom  men  are  envious  ; 

b^^ied.  ^^^  ^*^  heen  already  stated  in  connexion  [with 

what  has  gone  before];  since  men  envy  those  who 

Equals,  come  near  them  in  time,  and  place,  and  age,  and  cha- 
racter ;  whence  the  saying,  "  kindred  too  is  conscious 

Rivals,  of  envy^"  Men  also  envy  those  with  whom  they 
are  at  rivalry ;  for  they  are  rivals  of  those  above- 
mentioned  ;  but  of  those  who  existed  ten  thousand 
years  back,  or  who  may  live  ten  thousand  years 
hence,  or  who  are  already  dead,  of  these  no  one  is 
the  rival ;  nor  again  of  those  who  live  at  the  Pillars 
of  Hercules^;  nor  of  those  of  whom,  in  the  opinions 
either  of  themselves  or  of  others,  they  are  greatly  the 
inferiors ;  nor  again  of  those  to  whom  they  conceive 
themselves  to  be  in  a  great  degree  superior ;  with  the 
like  indifference  do  they  regard  those  [at  all  en- 
6.  gaged]  in  pursuits  of  this  description.  And  as  men 
are  affected  by  ambition  in  regard  to  rivals,  and 
competitors,  and  all,  in  a  word,  who  are  eager  after 
the  same  objects,  it  must  follow  that  they  envy  these 
in  an  especial  manner ;  whence  the  saying,  '*  potter 

7.  The  envies  potter."  And  those  who  either  succeed  with 
^®^     difficulty^  or  do  not  succeed  at  all,  envy  those  who 

8.  Those  succeed  quickly.  Again,  they  envy  those  whose  ac- 
whose  quisitions  and  success  are  a  reproach  to  themselves, 
*^St  "  *"^  these  are  those  who  are  near  them,  or  their 
proachto  equals;  for  it  becomes  evident  that  they  do  them- 
us.  selves  fail  of  success  through  their  own  fault,  so  that 

'  This  apophthegm  should  seem  to  justify  the  caution  of 
Cleobulus, — KX.«o/3owXo«  b  Aivdiot  ifittni&tU  itiro  Ttvov  Ttwa  iti 
fiaXivra  <j>v\dTTB<rdat ;  elircv,  n-my  fikv^<i>iX<ov  t6»  <^Q6vo¥,  tS»v 
il  kyPpStv  fiiv  eir(/3ovX^v.     Stobeus. 

*  np^v  Toit9  Ik  nrod&tf,  ibdown  oi/dtU  <b6eTai»  Philo.  Hooker, 
V.  §  2,  p.  26. 

CHAP.  XL]  RHETORIC.  147 

this,  galling  them,  produces  envy.     And  those  who  9. 
either  possess  or  have  acquired  that  which  it  would 
become  themselves  to  possess,  or  which  themselves 
had  at  one  time  acquired ;  at  least  the  old,  on  this 
account,  envy  the  young.    And  those  who  have  been  10. 
at  considerable  expense  on  an  object,  envy  those  who 
have  expended  little  on  the  same  object.     But  it  is  11. 
evident  both  with  whom,  and  on  what  occasions,  and 
with  what  dispositions  people  of  this  sort  feel  plea- 
sure ;  for  they  will  be  delighted,  having  in  the  con- 
trary circumstances  that  very  temper,  the  which 
being  without,   they  are  pained.     So  that  if  the  Theora- 
judges  themselves  shall  have  been  wrought  up  into  ^^^  ®^' 
this  disposition,  while  those  who  lay  claim  to  our  enTy^will 
pity  or  to  the  acquisition  of  some  good,  are  such  as  remove 
have  been  described,  it  is  evident  that  they  will  not  ^^^' 
obtain  pity  at  the  hands  of  those  on  whom  they  de- 
pend for  it. 

CHAP.  XL 
Cf  Emulatum. 

Hence  likewise  it  will  be  evident  both  with  what  1.  Emii- 
dispositions,  and  in  regard  to  what  objects,  and  of  ^^°^ 
whom,  persons  are  emulous.     Because  if  emulation  its  defini- 
be  "  a  sort  of  pain  at  the  apparent  ^  presence  of  goods  ^^^ 
which  are  held  in  honour,  and  which  admit  of  one's 
gaining  them  himself,  in  the  case  of  those  naturaUy 
our  equals ;  felt,  not  because  they  are  present  to  an- 
other, but  because  they  are  not  likewise  present  to 
one's  self,"  (on  which  very  account  emulation  is  a  vir-  It  is  a  "vir- 
tuous feeling,  and  belongs  to  virtuous  people,  whereas  * 
envy  is  a  depraved  feeling,  and  belongs  to  persons 
who  are  depraved :  for  the  one>  by  motion  of  his  emu- 

*  The  merely  apparent  presence  of  this  description  of  goods 
is  sufficient  to  excite  emulation.    The  character  of  the  goods 
which  this  passion  has  as  its  object  is  entirely  different  from 
that  which  excites  eniry  and  indignation. 
L  2 

tuoiis 
emotion. 

148 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book   u. 

Penons 
likely  to 
feel  emu- 
lation. 

The' 
young 
andhiffh- 
spirited. 

2.  Thorn 

whom 

others 

3.  Whose 
ancestry 
or  rela- 
tions are 
worthy. 

4.  Things 
which  are 
objects  of 
emula- 
tion. 
Virtues. 

Goods. 

Wealth, 
etc 

6.  Per- 
sons who 
are  ob- 
jects of 
emula- 
tion. 

6.  AU 
whom 
men  wish 
to  resem- 
ble, 

lation,  sets  himself  to  acquire  tlie  good ;  while  the 
other,  hj  motion  of  his  envy,  sets  himself  to  cause 
the  dispossession  of  his  neighbour).  It  must  be,  then, 
that  persons  who  deem  themselves  worthy  of  goods 
which  they  do  not  possess,  are  apt  to  feel  emulation  ; 
since  no  one  arrogates  to  himself  that  which  appeara 
impossible :  and  hence  the  young  and  the  high-spirit- 
ed are  thus  affected ;  and  also  those  to  whom  belong 
goods  of  such  a  description  as  to  be  worth  the  atten- 
tion of  men  in  repute ;  these  are  wealth,  number  of 
friends,  offtce,  and  whatever  other  goods  are  of  this 
kind  ;  for  men  feel  emulous  of  such  goods ;  as  though, 
because  they  properly  belong  to  such  as  are  men  of 
yirtuons  dispositions,  it  were  matter  of  absolute  right 
that  themselves  should  be  virtuous.  Again,  those  are 
emulous  whom  others  esteem  worthy  of  such  goods : 
and  those  again  whose  ancestors^  or  relations,  or  in- 
timate friends,  or  whose  tribe  or  city  is  held  in  es- 
teem about  any  point,  such  persons  are  apt  to  feel 
emulation  on  that  point ;  for  they  think  they  belong 
properly  to  them,  and  that  themselves  are  worthy  of 
them. 

But  if  those  goods  are  matter  of  emulation  which 
are  held  in  esteem,  it  must  of  course  follow  that  the 
virtues  are  of  this  description ;  and  whatever  things 
have  a  tendency  to  aid  and  benefit  others ;  since  peo- 
ple honour  virtuous  people,  and  those  who  benefit 
them :  likewise  that  ail  goods  whatsoever,  the  enjo^* 
ment  of  which  accrues  to  one's  neighbours,  are  of  this 
sort ;  for  instance,  wealth,  and  beauty,  rather  than 
health. 

And  it  will  also  be  evident  who  the  persons  are 
who  are  objects  of  emulation ;  since  they  who  possess 
these,  and  the  like  goods,  t>ecome  objects  of  emulation ; 
these  goods  are  such  as  have  been  mentioned,  for  ex- 
ample, courage,  wisdom,  sovereignty ;  for  those  who 
are  sovereigns  have  a  power  of  benefiting  many. 
Grenerals,  orators,  all,  in  fact,  who  have  abiUties  this 
way  [are  objects  of  emulation].  And  those  whom 
many  wish  to  resemble,  or  who  have  many  acquaint- 
ances, or  many  friends.  Or  those  whom  many  admire, 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  ^  149 

or  whom  they  do  themselves  admire.     And  those  on  7.  or  ad- 
whom  are  pronounced  the  praises  and  encomia  of  "^®- 
poets  and  panegyrists^.     Persons,  however,  of  a  con-  Contempt 
trarj  description,  men  despise;  for  contempt  is  the  ^^^^" 
contrary  of  emulation ;  and  the  despising  of  the  heing  ^Oa- 
emulous.    And  it  must  he  that  persons  so  affected  as  tion. 
to  emulate  certain  persons,  or  to  he  themselves  oh- 
jects  of  emulation,  are  apt  to  feel  contempt  for  those 
things  and  persons  who  possess  evils  the  contraries 
of  those  goods  which  are  the  olgects  of  emulation. 
On  which  account  men  frequently  despise  the  fortun- 
ate, when  their  good  fortune  is  unconnected  with 
those  goods  which  are  held  in  esteem. 

Of  the  means,  then,  hy  which  the  passions  are  ex- 
cited in  the  hreast,  and  are  allayed,  one  of  the  sources' 
out  of  which  means  of  persuasion  arise,  of  these  we 
now  have  treated. 

CHAP.  XII. 

Cfihe  Pomona  and  Habits  ofihe  Young^. 

Let  us  next  go  over  in  detail  the  dispositions^  of  LCharac- 
men ;  considering  of  what  kind  of  a  turn  they  are,  in  ^^^d. 
reference  to  their  passions,  hahits,  ages,  and  fortunes. 

•  This  description  of  orators  were  justly  said  to  be  XoyoypA- 
^OA,  i^oyovv  y/MD^eiv;)  indeed  it  appears  from  the  third  book, 
that  epideictic  orations  in  general  were  intended  rather. for  j9«- 
rtual  than  recitation.  Speaking  of  the  style  of  epideictic 
orators,  he  remarks,  t6  ipyov  ai/Tnv  Avdyvmviv,  lib.  iii.  cap. 
xii.  §  6. 

•  Viz.  vtmt  iroOtjTuc^,  the  third  branch  of  iri<mit  Ivrlxvri- 
See  book  i.  chap.  ii.  §  3,  4,  5. 

'  This  discussion  of  the  dispositions  of  persons,  under  a  few     • 
of  the  most  striking  circumstance^  of  life,  was  promised  in  the 
first  book  (chap.  x.  §  11). 

•  "  The  word  ^n,  taken  in  its  utmost  extent,  includes  epety 
thing  that  is  habitual  and  characterise  ;  but  it  is  often  used  in 
a  limited  sense,  for  the  habitual  temper  or  disposition"  Twin- 
ing. Probably  "  humour"  in  the  sense  in  which  it  has  been 
defined  by  Ben  Jonson,  comes  nearer  to  ^do9  than  any  word 
in  our  language : — 

2.  Vary 
iniheir 
i.  Paa- 
sions. 
ii.  Habits. 

iii.  Ages, 
iv.  For- 
tunes. 

3.  Cha- 
racter of 
the 

young. 
Ardent. 

Incon- 
stant. 

Irritable. 
6. 

Ambi- 
tious. 

7.  San- 
guine. 

150  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

I  call  anger,  lust,  and  the  like,  by  the  name  pas- 
sions; a  subject  of  which  we  have  treated  above.,  Bj 
the  name  habits^  I  designate  virtues  and  vices  :  and 
of  these-  we  have  treated  above,  both  as  to  the  points 
on  which  men  form  deliberate  choice,  and  that  to  which 
they  give  birth  in  action.  And  the  ages  are  youth, 
prime,  and  old  age.  ^j  fortune  I  mean,  high  birth, 
and  wealth,  and  abilities,  and  their  opposites;  and, 
in  one  word,  good  and  bad  fortune. 

Now  the  young  are  in  their  dispositions  prone  to 
desire,  and  of  a  character  to  effect  what  they  desire. 
And  they  are  in  the  highest  degree  apt  to  pursue  the 
pleasures  of  love  above  all  desires  about  which  the 
body  is  concerned,  and  in  these  they  are  incontinent. 
But  they  are  prone  to  change,  and  fastidious  in  the 
objects  of  their  desires.  And  they  desire  with  earn- 
estness, but  speedily  cease  to  desire ;  for  their  wishes 
are  keen,  without  being  durable ;  just  like  the  hunger 
and  thirst  of  the  sick.  And  they  are  passionate  and 
irritable,  and  of  a  temperament  to  follow  the  impulse. 
And  they  cannot  overcome  their  anger ;  for  by  reason 
of  their  ambition  they  do  not  endure  a  slight,  but 
become  indignant,  and  fancy  themselves  injured :  and 
they  are  ambitious  indeed  of  honour,  but  more  so  of 
victory ;  for  youth  is  desirous  of  superiority,  and  vic- 
tory is  a  sort  of  superiority.  And  of  both  these  are 
they  desirous  in  a  higher  degree  than  of  gain ;  but 
least  of  all  are  they  desirous  of  gain^,  by  reason  of 
their  having  never  yet  experienced  want;  just  ac- 
cording to  the  proverbial  saying  of  Pittacus  to  Am- 
phiaraus*.     And  they  do  not  view  things  in  a  bad 

When  some  one  peculiar  quality 
Doth  so  possess  a  man,  that  it  doth  draw 
All  his  affects,  his  spirits,  and  his  powers, 
In  their  conductions,  all  to  run  one  way. 
This  may  be  truly  said  to  be  a  humour. 
Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour :  where  see  Whalley's  note. 

'  Power  pleases  the  violeht  and  proud :  wealth  delights  the 
placid  and  timorous.  Youth  therefore  flies  at  power,  and  age 
grovels  after  tiches.  Johnson's  Journey  to  the  Hebrides, 
p.  344. 

^  It  is  not  known  what  this  saying  of  Pittacus  was. 

CHAP.  XII.]  RHETORIC.  151 

light,  but  in  a  good,  by  reason  of  their  pever  having 
yet  been  witnesses  of  much  depravity.     And  they  Credu- 
are   credulous,  from   their  never  having  yet   been   ^^' 
much  imposed  on.     And  they  are  sanguine  in  their  8. 
expectations ;   for  like  those  who  are  affected   by 
wine,  so  the  young  are  warmed  by  their  nature ;  and 
at  the  same  time  from  their  having  never  yet  met 
-with  many  repulses.     Their  life,  too,  for  the  most  Their  life 
part,  is  one  of  hope;  for  hope  is  of  that  which  is  ^o^^** 
yet  to  be,  while  memory  is  of  that  which  is  passed : 
but  to  the  young  that  which  is  yet  to  be,  is  long ;  but 
that  which  has  passed,  is  short ;  for  in  the  early  days 
of  life  they  think  they  remember  nothing,  while  they 
hope  for  every  thing;  and  they  are  easily  imposed 
on,  for  the  reason  which  has  been  stated;  because 
they  soon  cherish  expectation.     And  they  are  brave  9.  Rash, 
rather  to  an  excess ;  for  they  are  irritable  and  san- 
guine, qualities,  the  one  whereof  cancels  fear,  and 
the  other  inspires  courage ;  for  while  no  one  who  is 
affected  by  anger  ever  is  afraid,  the  being  in  hope  of 
some  good  is  a  thing  to  give  courage.    And  they  are  10.  Bash- 
bashful  ;  for  they  do  not  as  yet  conceive  the  honour-  *^ 
able  to  be  any  thing  distinct,  but  they  have  been 
educated  only  under  the  established  usage  of  the 
state.    And  they  are  high-minded ;  for  they  have  not  11;  High- 
as  yet  been  humbled  by  the  course  of  life,  but  are  «P"^*®^- 
unexperienced  in  peremptory  circumstances :  again, 
high-mindedness  is  the  deeming  one's  self  worthy  of 
much ;  and  this  belongs  to  persons  of  sanguine  ex- 
pectations.    And  they  prefer  succeeding  in  an  hon-  12.  With 
ourable  sense  than  in  points  of  expediency ;  for  they  Jo^oiij. 
live  more  in  conformity  to  moral  feeling  than  to  mere 
calculations^;  and  calculation  is  of  the  expedient, 
moral  excellence,  however,  of  that  which  is  honour- 
able.   Again,  they  are  fond  of  friends  and  companions  13.  Social 
rather  than  of  their  other  compeers  in  age,  by  reason 
of  their  delighting  in  social  intercourse,  and  of  their 
not  yet  deciding  on  any  thing  in  reference  to  what  is 

•  Aoyi<rfid9  is  that  one  of  the  seven  causes  of  human  action 
which  least  affects  the  young.  They  usttaUy  act  from  Srvfioi  or 
itridufxia. 

152  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  xi 

expedient ;  ao  that  thej  do  oot  decide  on  their  friends 

14.  Their  [upon  that  principle].     And  all  their  errors  are  on 
errors  are  the  side  of  excess  and  too  great  earnestness,  in  oon- 
2de  of      travention  of  Chilo's  rule ;  for  the  young  carry  every 
excess.      thing  to  an  excess ;  for  their  friendships  are  in  ex- 
cess, their  hatreds  are  in  excess,  and  they  do  every 
thing  else  with  the  same  degree  of  earnestness ;  they 
think  also  that  they  know  every  thing,  and  firmly 
asseveriite  that  they  do ;  for  this  is  the  cause  of  th^ 

15.  Their  .pushing  every  thing  to  an  excess.  And,  in  their 
insults  trespasses,  they  trespass  on  the  side  of  wantonness, 
chievous  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  malice.  They  are  likewise  prone  to  pity, 
not  ma-  from  th^r  conceiving  every  one  to  be  good,  and 
Ucious.  more  worthy  than  in  fact  he  is^;  for  they  measure 
piu\  ^       others  by  the  standard  of  their  own  guiltlessness  ;  so 

that  they  conceive  them  to  be  suffering  what  they  do 

16.  Are  Jttot  deserve.  And  they  ve  foijd  of  mirth,  on  which 
5™^*^y  account  they  are  also  of  a  facetious  turn^;  for  face- 

^    ^^'  tiousness  is  chastened  forwardness  of  manner. 
Such,  then,  is  the  disposition  of  the  young. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Of  the  Pasdoni  as^d  HdbUa  of  those  advanced  in  Life, 

1.  Charac-  BuT  those  who  are  advanced  in  life,  and  who  have 
olL**^  *^®  passed  their  prime,  are  of  dispositions  in  most  points 

'  Vide  note  *,  cha^.  ziii.  p.  154. 

7  £&TpaircXoi.  I  know  no  word  in  our  language  of  similar  ^ 
mora/ signification  in  which  the  metaphorical  allusion  to  Tp&Vof,  ' 
the  film,  or  easy  adaptation  of  manner,  is  preserved,  unless  in- 
deed Minshew  be  correct  in  his  etymology  of  Buxome^  which, 
according  to  Mm,  is  dejired  from  the  German  word  booghtaemt 
i.  FLEXiLis,  and  refers  to  the  article  pliant  for  further  explan- 
ation. If  this  etymology  be  true,  then  Milton's  expression, 
buxom,  bfythe,  and  debonnaire,  though  applied  rather  to  female 
than  manly  grace,  will  convey  a  notion  of  what  is  here  in- 
teaded  by  Aristotle.  But  see  Minshew,  p.  106,  edit.  1627. 
In  the  Ethics,  b.  4,  he  compares  tifrpaTrtXia  to  gracefulness  of 
person ;  which,  in  conformity  with  the  notions  of  most  ancient 
writers,  he  seems  to  think  only  duicoverable  in  motion^  not  in 
reit.    Compare  also  *'  Onto,  or  a  Dialogue  on  Beauty." 

CHAP.  XIII.]  RHETORIC*  153 

the  very  opposite  of  these.     Since  by  reason  of  their 
having  lived  manj  ye^urs,  and  ihaving  been  deceived 
in  a  greater  number  of  instances,  and  having  mis- 
taken, by  reason,  too,  that  the  miyority  of  human 
afifairs  are  but  worthless,  they  neither  positively  as-  The  old 
severate.any  thing,  and  they  err  in  every  thing  more  ^^^^ubt- 
on  the  side  of  defect  than  they  oaght.     And  they  2. 
always   "mppase/'  but  never   ^hnow^  certainly; 
and,  questioning  every  thing,  they  always  subjoin  a 
^^perhaps^'^  or  a  *^pombfy/*    And  they  talk  of  every  Indeci- 
thing  in  this  undecisive  tone,  asserting  nothing  de-  ^^^®* 
cisively.     And  they  are  apt  to  view  things  in  an  8.  View 
un&vourable  light ;  for  a  disposition  thus  to  view  ^^^'^ 
things,  is  the  jud^ng  of  every  thing  pn  the  worse  nde. 
aide.      Moreover  diey  are  apt  to  be  suspicious  from  S^spi- 
distrust^  and  they  are  distrustful  from  their  expe-  ^^^' 
rienoe.     And  on  this  account  they  neither  love  nor  4. 
hate  with  great  earnestness ;  but,  conformably  to  the  Cautioiu, 
remark  of  Bias,  they  both  love  as  though  about  to 
hate,  and  hate  as  though  about  to  love.    And  they  5,  Cow- 
are  pusillanimous,  from,  their  having  been  humbled       ^* 
by  the  course  of  Hfe ;  for  they  raise  tfadur  desires  to 
nothing  great  or  vast,  but  to  things  only  which  con- 
duce to  support  of  life.     And  they  are  illiberal ;  for  6.  lUibe- 
property  is  one  of  the  necessaries ;  and  they  are  9t  '^' 
the  same  time  aware,  from  their  experience,  of  the 
difficulty  of  its  acquisition,  and .  of  the  ease  with 
which  it  is  lost.     And  they  are  timid  and  apprehen-  7.  Tiimd. 
sive  of  every  thing ;    for  their  disposition  is  the 
reverse  of  that  of  the  young ;  for  they  have  been 
chilled  by  years,  but  the*  young  are  warm  in  their 
temperament ;  so  that  their  age  has  paved  the  way 
to  timidity ;  for  fear  is  a  certain  kind  of  chill.    And  8.  Tena- 
ih^  are  attached  to  life,  and  particularly  at  its  last  ^^^  ^^ 
dosing  day,  from  the  circumstance  that  desire  is  of 
some  object  which  is  absent,  and  that  men  more  espe- 
eially  desire  that  of  which  they  stand  in  need.     And  9.  Selfish. 
they  have  self-love  more  than  is  fitting  ;  for  this  too 
is  a  kind  of  littleness  of  spirit.     And  they  live  in  a 
greater  degree  than  they  ought  by  the  standard  of 
expediency,  and  not  of  what  is  honourable,  by  reason 

154  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

of  their  self-love :  for  what  is  expedient  is  good  rela- 
tively, to  one's  self ;  but  what  is  honourable  is  good 

10.  De-  absolutely.  And  they  are  insensible  to  shame,  rather 
spiseap-  ^y^^^  liable  to  be  affected  by  it;  for  on  account  of 
auces.       their  not  holding  equally  in  esteem  the  honourable 

11.  De-  and  the  expedient,  they  despise  appearances.  Again, 
gponding.  they  are  not  easily  inspired  with  hope,  on  account  of 

their  experience ;  for  the  majority  of  things  are  but 
paltry ;  wherrfore  the  gener^ity  turn  out  inferior  to 
the  expectation ;  and  once  more  on  account  of  their 

12.  Their  timidity  [they  are  apt  to  despond].  And  they  live 
^mem^  more  in  memory  than  in  hope ;  for  the  remnant  of 
ry.  life  is  brief,  but  what  has  passed  is  considerable ;  and 

hope  indeed  is  of  what  is  to  come ;  whereas  memory- 
is  of  things  gone  by :  the  very  reason  this,  of  their 
garrulity ;  for  they  never  cease  talking  of  that  which 
has  taken  place,  since  they  are  delighted  in  awaken- 

13.  Weak  ing  the  recollections  of  things.  And  their  anger  is 
b^ tk^''  ^®®°»  ^"*  faint.  And  their  desires  have,  some,  aban- 
doned them,  the  others  are  faint ;  so  that  neither  are 
they  liable  to  the  influence  of  desire,  nor  apt  to  act 
in  conformity  to  it,  but  with  a  view  to  gain ;  on 
which  account  men  of  this  age  appear  to  be  naturally 
temperate,  for  both  their  desires  have  relaxed,  and 

Lire  firom  they  are  enslave^  to  gain.  And  they  live  more  by 
^^^^"     calculation^  than  by  moral  feeling ;  for  calculation  is 

14.  Err  of  expediency,  but  moral  feeling  is  of  virtue.  And, 
ontheside  in  their  trespasses,  they  trespass  on  the  side  of  ma- 

15.  Are^  ^^®»  ^^^  of  wanton  insolence. .  The  old  have  more- 
apt  to  over  a  tendency  to  pity,  but  not  on  the  same  principle 
pity»         with  the  young ;  for  the  latter  are  thus  disposed  from 

their  love  of  human  nature,  the  former  from  their 
from  imbecility;  since  they  consider  the  endurance  of 
weakness,  gygpy  calamity  at  hand  to  them,  and  this  was  laid 
Queni-      down  as  a  principle  of  pity  ^.    Whence  they  are  que- 

'  Their  principles  of  action  are  the  rery  contraries  of  those 
which  principally  influence  the  young ;  edos  and  Xoyivfio^  be- 
ing the  usual  springs  of  action  in  the  man  of  advanced  life. 

'  The  two  leading  principles  of  pity  were  stated  to  be,  a  eon" 
vicHon  that  the  tufferer  is  undeserving  what  he  suffers^  and  that 
you  consider  yourself  liable  to  be  placed  in  similar  circumstances. 
It  was  un  the  former  of  these  principles  that  the  young  were  stated 

lous. 

CHAP,  xiv.l  RHETORIC.  155 

rulous,  and  neither  facetious,  nor  fond  of  mirth  ;  for 
querulousness  is  the  very  reverse  of  fondness  for 
mirth. 

Such,  then,  are  the  dispositions  of  the  young,  and  16.  How 
of  those  in  advanced  life^     So  that,  as  all  welcome  ^^^' 
an  address  worded  to  their  own  disposition,  and  a  these  cha- 
speaker  who  resembles  themselves,  it  is  clear  by  em-  rasters. 
ploying  his  oration  in  what  way  the  orator  will  ap- 
pear of  this  description,'  as  regards  himself  and  what 
he  says. 

CHAP.  XIV. 

Of  the  Dispositions  of  Persons  in  their  mature  Age. 

Those  who  are  in  their  prime  will,  it  is  evident,  be  l.Charao- 

in  a  mean  in  point  of  disposition  between  these,  sub-  ^^^® 

tracting  the  excesses  of  each :  being  neither  rash  in 

too  great  a  degree,  (for  rashness  is  of  this  description, 

i.  e.  in  excess^)  nor  too  much  given  to  fear,  but  keep-  They  are 

ing  themselves  right  in  respect  to  both.     Neither  >»ode»te. 

placing  confidence  in  all,  nor  distrusting  all,  but  judg- 

ing  rather  in  conformity  to  the  truth.     Neither  living 

with  a  view  solely  to  what  is  honourable,  nor  with 

a  view  only  to  expediency,  but  with  a  respect  to  both. 

And  conformed  neither  to  penurious  parsimony,  nor 

to  extravagance,  but  to  what  is  fitting.     With  the  3. 

same  equality  do  they  carry  themselves  also  in  respect 

to  anger  and  to  desire.     And  they  are  of  a  tempering  Are  spi- 

coolness  joined  with  spirit,  and  are  spirited  not  with-  '^^^^^j^ 

to  be  apt  to  pity ;  because  they  take  a  fayourable  view  of  hu- 
man nature.  The  old  are  equally  liable  to  be  affected  by  that 
passion,  but  it  is  on  the  latter  principle ;  for  though  they  view 
human  nature  in  an  unfavourable  light,  yet  have  they  so  strong 
a  sense  of  their  own  liability  to  suffering,  that  they  are  led  to 
commiserate  others.  Compare  chap.  riii.  §  Z ;  and  chap.  xii.  §  15. 
'  In  the  Rambler,  No.  196,  the  change  of  sentiments  usual 
as  men  advance  from  youth  to  age  is  beautifully  traced ;  and 
the  vhole  paper  affords  a  striking  illustration  of  the  subject 
treated  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapter. 

156  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  n. 

out  ftemperate  coolness :   for  in  the  joung  and  in 
elderly  persons  these  qualities  are  separated ;  since 
the  young  are  spirited,  and  of  an  intemperate  rash- 
ness, while  elderly  persons  are  of  a  ehastened  spirit^ 
and  timid.     And  thus,  in  a  word,  whatever  advan- 
tages youth  and  age  have  divided  between  them,  the 
middle  age  possesses  both ;  and  in  whatever  respects 
they  are  either  in  excess  or  defect,  in  all  these  it  holds 
a  mean  and  what  is  fitting.   * 
4.  Prime       But  the  body  is  in  its  prime  from  the  age  of  thirty 
^ebodr    *^  ^^®  ^^^  thirty;  and  the  mind  about  the  age  of 
and  mind,  forty-nine.     Let  thus  much,  then,  have  been  said  re- 
specting youth,  and  old  and  mature  age,  and  the  dis- 
positions which  they  severally  are  of. 

CHAP.  XY. 
The  characteristie  BtspomHons  of  Persona  ofhi§k  hirih. 

1.  Charao-  BuT  let  US  treat  of  tiie  goods  of  fortune  jaext  in  order, 
Sfwh^  so  many  of  them  at  least  as  inj9uience  the  dispositions 
birth.        of  men  in  any  particular  way. 

2.  Ambi-  Now  it  is  the  disposition  of  high  birth,  that  its  posv 
tious.        oessor  is  more  ambitious  than  others ;  for  all,  when 

any  possession  is  realized  to  them,  are  wont  to  ac- 

Contemp-  cumulate  upon  it.     But  high  birth  is  nobility  of  an- 

tuous.       cestry ;  and  it  is  apt  to  indulge  in  contempt  even  of 

those  who  are  as  good  as  its  own  ancestors  ;  because 

distinctions,  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  remote, 

rather  than  recent,  are  held  in  greater  esteem,  and 

-    afford  a  ready  plea  for  arrogance. 

3.  Dis-  But,  nohle^  is  an  appellation  referring  to  excellence 
beSf^  of  birth ;  whereas,  generous  refers  to  one's  not  de- 
the  noble  generating  from  the  nature  [of  his  ancestry]  ;  which, 
and  gem-  generally  speakipg,  is  not  the  case  with  the  noble, 
r?"*  but  the  majority  of  them  are  ordinary  persons.  For 
neraSons  there  is  a  kind  of  richness  of  produce  in  the  genera- 
of  man      tions  of  man,  just  as  there  is  in  that  which  arises  from 

CHAP.  XVI.]  rhetoric:  157 

the  land ;  and  at  times,  should  the  stock  be  good,  compared 
there  arise  ina  family  at  intervals  extraordinary  per-  totheaofl 
sons ;  and  afterwards  it  again  relaxes.  And  a  fami- 
ly of  brilliant  talent  run  wild  into  dispositions  bor- 
dmng  on  madness^;  as  in  the  instances  of  the 
descendants  of  Alcibiades,  and  Dionysius  the  elder : 
and  one  of  sedate  wisdom,  into  stupidity  and  dul- 
ness ;  as  in  the  instances  of  the  descendants  of  Ci- 
mon,  and  Pericles,  and  Socrates. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

I7ie  Disposiiiona  consequent  on  Wealth, 

Amr  one,  without  any  great  penetration,  may  distin-  i.  Charac- 
guish  the  dispositions  consequent  on  wealth ;    for  ^^  ^J  **^® 
[its  possessors]  are  insolent  and  overbearing,  from  J^igZ* 
being  tainted  in  a  certain  way  by  the  getting  of 
their  wealth.     For  they  are  affected  as  though  they 
possessed  every  good;    since  wealth  is  a  sort  of 
standard  of  the  worth  of  other  things  ;  whence  every 
thing  seems  to  be  purchaseable  by  it.     And  they  2. 
are  affectedly  delicate  and   purse-proud;   they  are  FastidL- 
thus  delicate  on  account  of  their  luxurious  lives,  and  o^* 
the  display  they  make  of  their  prosperity.    They  are  Puwe- 
purse-proiidi  and  violate  the  rules  of  good  breeding^,  pro^d. 

*  TAavtKmTipa, "  In  connexion  with  this  word  it  should  be 
borne  in  mind,  that  the  Greeks  were  accustomed  to  consider 
every  kind  of  enthusiastic  impetuosity  as  a  species  of  madnett. 
See  Twining  on  the  Pontics,  note  140. 

*  SoXotKoi,.the  inhabitants  of  Soli  in  Cilicia,  whose  corrup- 
tions of  the  Greek  language  became  proverbial.  The  word 
was  used  also  to  designate  those  who  were  guilty  of  impro- 
piiiety  in  conduct,  as  well  as  in  expression,  Massinger,  in*  enu- 
merating some  instances  of  ill  breeding,  uses  the  expression. 

He  ne'er  observed  you 
To  twirl  a  dish  about,  you  did  not  like  of, 
All  being  pleasing  to  you ;  or  to  take 
A  say  of  venison  or  stale  fowl  by  your  nose, 
Which  is  a  solecism  at  another's  table,  etc. 

Unnatural  Combat,  act  iii.  sc.  1. 
See  too  Ben  Jonson's  Fox,  vol.  iii.  p.  275. 

158  ARISTOTLE'S  [book   ii. 

Presum-    from  the  circumstance  that  every  one  is  wont  to 
^S'  dwell  upon  that  which  is  beloved  and  admired  by 

him,  and  because  they  think  that  others  are  emulous 
of  that,  of  which  they  are  themselves.  But  at  the 
same  time  they  are  thus  affected  reasonably  enough  ; 
for  many  are  they  who  need  the  aid  of  men  of  pro- 
-perty.  Whence,  too,  that  remark  of  Simonides 
addressed  to  the  wife  of  Hiero  respecting  the  wealthy 
and  the  wise ;  for  when  she  asked  him,  '*  whether  it 
were  better  to  have  been  born  wealthy  or  wise,"  he 
replied,  "wealthy;  for,"  he  said,  "he  used  to  see 
the  wise  hanging  on  at  the  doors  of  the  wealthy." 

3.  Arro-    And  [it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  rich]  that  they 
plwewid  esteem  themselves  worthy  of  being  in  office;   for 
power.      they  consider  themselves  possessed  of  that  on  ac- 
count of  which  they  are  entitled  to  be  in  office.  And, 
in  a  word,  the  disposition  of  the  rich  is  that  of  a  fool 
amid  prosperity. 

4.  DMTer-  However,  the  dispositions  of  those  who  are  but 
twe^n  ttie  lately*  rich,  and  of  those  who  have  been  so  from  of 
newly  old,  are  different ;  inasmuch  as  those  who  have  re- 
rich  and  cently  become  rich'  have  all  these  faults  in  a  greater 
have  been  *"^  *  worse  degree ;  for  the  having  recently  become 
so  from  of  rich  is  as  it  were  an  inexpertness  in  wealth.  And 
^^^  they  are  guilty  of  offences,  not  of  a  malicious  nature, 

but  such  as  are  either  offences  of  contumely  or  in- 
temperance ;  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  assault  or 
adultery. 

'  It  is  on  this  principle  that  Glytenmestra  congratulates  Cas- 
sandra on  being  the  slave  of  an  ancient  family,  rather  than  one 
recently  advanced  in  the  world : —      ^ 

dpx<t^<yfrko6Ttov  9t<nroT&p  iroWri  X^P^^' 
oi  6*,  oihroT*  iXiritravTt^t  fifiTiaap  KoKSii, 
&fioi  Tc  douXoi'S  irarra,  Koi  trap<k  trTddfifiv. 

iGsch.  Agam.  1010. 

Vide  illustrations  in  Symmons's  Translation,  p.  97.    See 
Johnson's  Life  of  Savage,  p.  338,  vol.  vii.  edit.  1823,  of  his 
works;  Examples,  etc.     See  ^sch.  Prom.  Vinct.  35. 
tf-roe  ik  Tpaxvs,  omt  dv  viov  xpa-r^. 

CHAP.  ZYZi.]  RHETORIC.  159 

CHAP.  xvn. 

Of  the  Dispositions  of  Men  in  Power,  and  of^  Fortunate. 

And  in  the  same  way  on  the  subject  of  power,  the  !•  Charac- 
most  striking  almost  of  its  dispositions  are  evident ;  ^^^^^ 
for  of  these  power  has  some  in  common  with  wealth,  resembles 
and  others  which  are  better.     For  men  in  power  are  ^®  jjj*  *» 
more  ambitious  and  more  manlj  in  their  dispositions  ^  jj^q^ 
than  the  wealthy;  from  their  aiming  at  all  duties  ambi- 
whatsoever,  which  from  their  power  they  have  the  ^^^» 
means  of  discharging.     And  they  are  less  given  to  manly. 
trifling,  because,  from  a  necessity  of  looking  carefully  2. 
to  their  power,  they  are  constrained  to  a  diligent  at-  ^ij^^^ 
tention.     And  they  comport  themselves  with  a  dig-  4.  Are 
nity  which  is  conciliatory  rather  than  repulsive ;  for  dignified. 
their  claims  for  dignity  render  them  more  conspicuous ; 
on  which  account,  they  bear  themselves  moderately  : 
but  conciliatory  dignity  is  a  softened  and  graceful 
sedateness.     And,  if  they  do  transgress  the  bounds 
of  right,  it  is  not  in  smaU  points,  but  in  those  which 
are  of  importance,  that  they  are  guilty. 

But  good  fortune,  according  to  its  constituents,  is  5.  Charao- 
of  the  disposition  of  the  states  which  have  been  de-  J^Jjl^j^ 
scribed ;  since  those  which  appear  to  be  the  greatest 
instances  of  good  fortune  resolve  themselves  ulti- 
mately into  these  states :  and,  besides  these,  to  the 
excellence  of  one's  progeny,  and  to  personal  advan- 
tages.    But  men  are  usually  more  overbearing  and  6.  Oyer- 
inconsiderate  in  consequence  of  prosperity.     But  one  ^"ing. 
disposition,  and  that  most  excellent,  is  a  concomitant 
of  good  fortune,  viz.  that  the  fortunate  are  lovers  of 
the  gods,  and  are  disposed  toward  the  deity  with  a  Yet  re- 
sort of  confidence,  in  consequence  of  the  goods  which  ^o^- 
have  accrued  to  them  from  fortune. 

The  subject,  then,  of  the  dispositions  as  they  con- 
form to  age  and  to  fortune  has  been  discussed ;  for 
from  the  opposites  of  my  remarks  the  opposite  sub- 
jects will  be  evident ;  the  subject,  for  example,  of  the 
disposition  of  a  poor,  or  unfortunate  person,  or  of  one 
out  of  |)ower. 

160  AUrSTOTLE'S  [book  n 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

That  there  are  some  Topics  common  to  att  the  species  of 
Oratory, 

1.  That  Bttt  since  the  use  of  persuasive  orations  his  a  refer- 
*^Sdn*  ence  to  the  forming  a  decision  (since  on  questions 
Koti/A  which  we  are  acquainted  with,  and  have  decided  on, 
iUti'  there  is  no  further  need  of  an  oration) ;  and  as  this  is 
their  use,  whether  addressing  his  speech  to  a  single 
iudividual,  the  speaker  endeavours  to  exhort  or  dis- 
suade (which  they  do  who  admonish  or  persuade ; 
since  lliat  iitdividual  is  in  no  less  degree  a  judge; 
because  the  person  [be  he  who  he  may],  whomsoever 
we  want  to  persuade  is,  once  for  all,  a  judge) ;  and 
also  if  one  be  speaking  against  an  adversary,  or  on 
any  supposed  question,  it  has  equally  [a  reference  to 
decision]  ;  (for  one  needs  must  employ  a  speech,  and 
sweep  away  objections  against  which,  as  against  an 
adversary,  he  directs  his  address);  this  is  just  as  much 
the  case  in  demonstrative  oratory  (since  the  speech 
commends  itself  to  the  listener  just  as  though  to  a 
judge).  But  he  alone  is  stricUp  a  judge,  who  decides 
on  the  questions  at  issue  in  civil  ^  controversies :  since 
both  forensic  questions,  and  those  on  which  men  de- 
liberate, are  agitated  as  to  how  they  stand.  But  of 
dispositions,  as  they  are  affected  by  the  constitutions 
of  states,  we  have  spoken  above.  So  that  the  means 
will  now  have  been  distinctly  unfolded,  both  how, 
and  by  the  use  of  what  things,  we  may  render  our 
addresses  ethical. 
2.  But  as  there  was,  in  each  species  of  orations,  a  cer- 
tain distinct  end  proposed ;  and  as  respecting  all  of 
them  some  ideas  and  propositions  have  been  ascer- 
tained, out  of  which  the  deliberative,  demonstrative, 
and  judicial  orators  deduce  their  means  of  persuading ; 
and  as,  in  addition  to  these,  the  means  by  which  it  is 
possibk  for  us  to  render  our  speeches  ethical,  have 
been  developed ;  it  merely  remains,  that  we  go  over 

*  Under  the  word  iroXtTifcSv,  he  seems,  according  to  Victo- 
rlus,  to  embrace  judicial  as  well  as  deliberative  questions; 

CHAP.  XVIII.]  RHETORIC.  161 

in  detail  the  topics  which  are  common  to  the  three 
species  of  oratory^:   for  it  is  necessary  that  every  3.  They 
orator  should  connect  with  his  speech  the  topics  of  ^^ber!^ 
possibility  or  impossibility ;  and  for  some  it  will  be  LThepos- 
necessary  to  attempt  to  show  that  certain  things  will  ?^^®  °^ 
take  place,  and  for  others  that  they  have  taken  place.  S^^**^' 
And  again,  the  topic  of  greatness  is  common  to  all  4.  u.Whe- 
oratory  ;  for  every  orator,  whether  he  exhort  or  dis-  ^^^ 
suade,  praise  or  blame,  accuse  or  defend,  avails  him-j  or  has  not  • 
self  of  amplification  and  diminution.  taken 

Let  us  also,  after  these  points  have  been  explained,  ^^^^g. 
attempt  to  treat  of  enthymems  in  general  (if  we  are  theritwni 
in  possession  of  any  thing  on  the  subject)  and  of  ex-  ^Y^^^?^' 
amples ;  in  order  that  by  subjoining  what  remains  g^^Jt  and 
we  may  make  good  our  original  proposal.  smalL 

But  of  these  common  topics,  amplification  is  most 
congenial  to  demonstrative  oratory,  as  has  been  re- 
marked ;  possibility,  as  relating  to  the  past,  to  ju- 
dicial^; since  on  what  hcts  been  its  decision  is  made ; 
but  possibility,  as  relating  to  the  future,  is  most  con- 
genial to  deliberative. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

Of  Things  Possible  and  Impossible. 

First,  then,  let  us  speak  of  things  possible  and  those  l.  First  of 
which  are  impossible.  ^  V^- 

If  then  it  be  possible  that  one  contrary  should  ex-  inTpSSsi- 
ist,  or  be  called  into  existence,  the  other  contrary  will  ble. 
also  appear  to  be  possible ;    for  instance,  if  it  be  Ji^®. P^*' 
possible  for  a  man  to  be  convalescent,  it  also  is  whidi^the 
possible  for  him  to  be  sick ;  for  the  effective  power  contrary 
of  contraries,  inasmuch  as  they  are  contraries,  is  the  "P^^^^^®* 

•  We  may,  if  we  please,  consider  this  as  the  dirodoat^  of  the 
sentence ;  and  all  the  previous  clauses  as  so  many  distinct  pa- 
tentheses;  as  the  author  of  the  Analysis  has  done,  p.  101. 

'  This  discussion  of  possibility  was  promised  in  the  course 
of  what  he  said  on  judicial  oratory,  book  i.  chap.  xii.  §  2. 
K 

162  ARISTOTLE'S  Lbook  ii. 

2.  The  same.  If,  of  two  similar  things,  the  one  be  possible, 
^^  the  other  which  is  similar  will  be  possible  also.  II' 
more  dif-  *^®  ^^'^^  difficult  be  possible,  so  will  also  that  whicK 
ficult.        is  easier.     And  if  it  be  possible  for  a  thing  to  be  pro- 

4.  The  ^    duced  in  a  state  of  excellence  or  beauty,  it  also  is 
cellent. ".  possible  for  it  to  be  produced  under  general  circum- 
stances ;  for  it  is  more  difficult  for  a  building  to  be 

5.  The  be-  made  beautiful,  than  simply  a  building.  And  in 
8*™"^*    whatever  case  the  commencement  is  possible,   the 

fulfilment  also  is  possible^:  for  of  things  which  are 
impossible,  none  either  take  place  or  begin  to  do  so ; 
for  instance,  it  neither  is  the  case,  that  the  diameter 
of  a  square  is  commensurable  with  the  side,  neither 
The  end.  will  it  ever  begin  to  be  so.  Also,  wherever  the  ful- 
filment is  possible,  so  is  the  commencement ;   since 

6.  The  every  thing  proceeds  from  a  beginning.  And  if  the 
subee-  subsequent  in  being  or  production  be  possible,  so  also 
^^^'^        is  the  antecedent :  if,  for  example,  it  be  possible  that 

a  man  should  be  produced,  so  also  is  it  that  a  child 
should,  since  it  is  antecedent  in  its  production :  again, 
if  it  be  possible  for  a  child,  so  is  it  also  for  a  man  to 
be  produced ;  on  the  principle  that  the  former  is  a 

7.  Things  commencement.  Things  likewise  are  possible,  of 
which  we  ^hich  there  is  a  naturid  love  or  desire ;  for  no  one 

loves  what  is  impossible,  neither  desires  it,  for  the 

8.  Snb-  most  part  at  least.  Also,  any  thing  which  is  the 
jectsof art  gubject  of  an  art  or  science,  is  pos«ible  both  to  exist 

q\  and  to  be  produced.     Likewise  any  thing  whatso- 
ever, the  principle  of  whose   production  resides  in 
those  whom  we  can  compel  or  persuade ;  such  are 
those  whose  superiors,  or  lords,  or  friends  we  are. 
lO.Where  And  wherever  the  parts  are  possible,  so  also  is  the 
^parts^  w^o/e.    Wherever  again  the  whole  is  possible,  so  also 
ble,  80  is    are  the  parts^  generally  speaking :  for  if  the  latchet, 
thewhole.  the  forepart,  and  the  upperleather  of  the  shoe  admit 
of  being  brought  into  being,  so  also  do  the  shoes 
themselves :  and  if  the  shoes,  then  also  the  latchet, 

1  Thus  it  is  argued,  that  if  all  may  receive  the  dpxh  of  re- 
generation, baptism;  all  may  receive  its  tcXov,  salvation. 
Baptism  is  expressly  called  by  St.  Basil,  dpxh  /mI  j^co^s  t6 
fidirrurfia,    De  Spir.  Sanct.  c.  10. 

CHAP.  XIX.]  RHETORIC.  163  ^ 

the  forepart,  and  upperleather^;  also,  if  the  genus  be  11.  If  the 
of  the  number  of  things  possible,  so  also  will  be  the  ^^'^g 
species ;   and  if  the  species,  so  also  the  genus :   for  species ; 
example,   if  a  vessel  can  be  produced,    so  can  a  *^^^*^® 
trireme;  and  if  a  trireme,  so  can  a  vessel.     And  if,  J2.    **  ' 
of  things  which  have  a  natural  relation  to  each  other, 
the  one  be  possible,  so  is  also  the  other ;   as  if  the 
double  be  possible,  so  also  is  the  half ;    and  if  the 
half,  80  also  is  the  double.     And  if  a  thing  admits  of  ^-^^ 
being  brought  into  being  without  art  or  preparation,  J^  ^^ 
a  fortiori  it  will  admit  of  it  by  the  help  of  art  and  inih  art 
attention.     On  which  principle  too  it  has  been  re- 
marked by  Agatho,  "  Yes,  truly,  in  some  things  you 
must  fare  just  as  fortune  goes  ;  other  things  there  are 
which  attach  to  us  by  necessity  and  art/*    Also,  if  l^-.  If  i»- 
any  thing  be  possible  to  persons  who  are  worse,  or  d*Jit,'th^ 
our  inferiors,  or  less  prudent,  much  more  will  it  also  can  mipe- 
be  possible  to  their  opposites  ;  just  as  Isocrates  said,  'iora. 
that  "  it  would  be  strange  if  Euthynus  learnt  it,  and 
he  were  not  able  to  find  it  out." 

With  regard,  however,  to  things  impossible,  it  is  16.  Things 
plain  that  they  result  from  the  contraries  of  the  Stewretiie 
above-mentioned  principles.  opposite. 

Questions  as  to  the  actual  occurrence  of  any  thing,  16.  Sc- 
are to  be  viewed  under  the  following  considerations.  S|w^ 
For,  in  the  first  place,  if  that  which  had  a  less  natural  taken 
tendency  to  occur,  has  occurred  ;  then  may  that  have  pl*<»« 
occurred  which  had  a  greater  tendency.    And  if  that  17.  When 
which  is  wont  to  take  place  subsequently,  has  taken  q^^^'^ 
place,  that  also  has  taken  place  which  usually  does  happen- 
primarily  :  if,  for  instance,  a  man  has  forgotten,  then  ed. 
also  must  he  at  some  time  have  learnt  that  [of  which 
he  is  now  forgetful].     Also,  if  a  man  was  able  and  18.  If  the 
willing,  he  achieved  the  deed ;  for  all  men  when,  being  J^^" 
willing,  they  have  power,  proceed  to  act ;  for  there  is 
nothing  in  their  way.  If,  moreover,  a  man  was  willing 
and  had  no  external  impediment.     If,  again,  the  act  19.  And 

*  The  admirers  of  Sterne  will  do  well,  on  reading  this  pas- 
sage, to  borrow  a  hint  from  him,  and  consult  *the  learned  Al- 
bertus  Rubenius  upon  it,  or  at  least  some  one  of  the  many  great 
authorities  mentioned  chap.  19,  vol.  ri.  of  Tristram  Shandy^ 
M  2     • 

164  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

under  the  was  possible,  and  he  was  under  the  inHaence  of  an- 
influence  ger^     And  if  it  was  possible,  and  he  [the  person  in 
or  d^e.  question]  was  influenced  by  lust ;  for,  generally  speak- 
ing, men,  if  they  have  the  power,  execute  that  of 
which  they  are  desirous ;  the  bad  from  weakness  of 
principle ;  and  the  virtuous  because  they  desire  ob- 
20.  If  he  jects  compatible  with  virtue.    Also,  if  a  man  was  on 
wasonttie  ^jjg  point  of  bringing  the  thing  into  action  and  of 
ingit,etc.  doing  it ;  since  the  probability  is,  that  he  who  was  on 
21.  the  eve  of  acting,  did  moreover  really  act.     Also,  if 
all  those  things  have  taken  place  which  naturally  oc- 
cur, either  as  preparatory  to,  or  on  account  of  the  oc- " 
currence  in  question ;  as  for  instance,  if  it  has  light* 
ened,  it  has  also  thundered ;  and  if  he  attempted  it, 
he  has  also  achieved  it.     And  if  all  those  things 
which  naturally  occur  subsequently,  and  that  on  ac- 
count of  which  the  deed  is  done,  have  taken  place, 
then  has  also  the  prior  to  them  and  that  which  is  the 
cause  taken  place :  if,  for  instance,  it  has  thundered, 
it  has  also  lightened ;  and  if  he  acted,  he  also  attempt- 
ed.    Of  all  this  number  there'  are  some  thus  subse- 
quent of  necessity;  others  however  merely  generally, 
22.Thiiig8      With  regard,  however,  to  the  non-occurrence  of 
J^^^    things,  the  considerations  applicable  will  be  plain  from 
happened  the  contraries  of  those  above  stated. 
Bxe  to  be        Also  with  regard  to  what  will  happen,  matters  will 
SomtiSe    1^<^™®  evident  from  the  same  considerations;   for 
opposite,    that  which  is  within  the  power  and  the  wishes  of  any 
l^^y.^    one  will  take  place.     Also  things  which  are  subjects 
^       23.  ^^  ^^8*>  anger,  and  reasonings,  accompanied  by  power  *. 
happen    '  On  this  account,  too,  if  persons  be  on  the  onset  or  on 
^te^faie  *^®  ^^®  ^^  doing  any  thing,  it  will  be  done :  for,  ge- 
^Lions.    nerally  speaking,  things  which  are  on  the  point  of 
taking  place  occur,  rather  than  those  which  are  not. 
24.  If  the  Also,  if  all  those  things  have  preceded  which  natur- 
J^*^      ally  occur  before ;  for  instance,  if  it  lowers,  there  is 
haye  hap-  ft  probability  that  it  will  rain.    Also,  if  that  has  hap- 
pened,      pened  which  is  on  account  of  the  thing  in  question, 

'  Compare  chap.  y.  §  3,  4. 

4  Fulmen  est  ubi  cum  potestate  habitat  iracondia*    Publius 
Syrus. 

CHAP.  XIX.  ]  RHETORIC.  166 

it  is  probable  that  that  will  also  happen ;  for  instance, 
if  there  be  a~  foundation,  it  is  pl^bable  that  there  will 
also  be  a  house. 

The  subject,  of  greatness  and  smallness  in  regard  26. 
to  affairs,  also  of  the  degrees  of  greater  and  less,  and  ^**^  ^^  * 
of  things  great  and  small  in  general,  is  clear  to  us  from  great  and 
what  has  been  said.  For,  in  the  discussion  of  deliber-  ^maH 
ative  oratory,  the  doctrine  of  the  greatness  of  goods 
has  been  stated,  and  respecting  the  greater  and  less 
in  the  ahstrcust    So  that  as  with  respect  to  each  class 
of  speeches  the  proposed  end  is  a  good ;  (for  instance, 
the  expedient, — -the  honourable, — and  the  just  5)  it  is 
evident  that  by  every  orator,  his  means  of  amplifica- 
tion are  to  be  arrived  at  through  the  medium  of  these. 
But  to  institute,  besides  this,  a  further  inquiry  into  27. 
the  subject  of  greatness  and  of  excess  in  the  abstract, 
is  to  talk  idly ;  since  particular  cases  are  more  com- 
pletely applicable  to  use  than  mere  generalities. 

On  the  subject,  then,  of  what  is  possible  and  im- 
possible,— and  whether  the  fact  has  or  has  not  oc- 
curred,— wiU  or  wiU  not  occur,  and  moreover  on  the 
subject  of  greatness  and  smallness  in  regard  to  affairs, 
let  thus  much  have  been  said. 

CHAP.  XX. 

Cf  Examples  ,• — how  many  species  there  are  of  them,  in 
what  manner,  and  when  toe  are  to  employ  them. 

It  remains  that  I  treat  of  the  means  of  effecting  1.  Exatn- 
persuasion  which  are  common  to  every  class  of  ;3ub-  ^^^ 
jects,  since  I  have  already  treated  of  such  as  are 
peculiar.     And  these  common  means  of  persuasion 
are  two  in  species,  example  and  enthymem :  for  the 
sentiment  is  part  of  an  enthymem.    Liet  us  then  first  2.  A  en- 
treat of  example ;  for  the  example  is  correspondent  ^®!Jf  "^' 
to  induction ;  and  induction  is  a  principle. 

But  of  examples  there  are  two  species;  for  one  Twosorts. 

166 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  II. 

Ist  Quot- 
ing real 
instances. 
2ncL  Fa- 
bricating 
them. 
3.  This 
latter  is 
subdi- 
vided into 
i.  trapa- 

li.  \<Jyos. 
Example. 

4.  Illus- 
tration. 

o.  Fable. 

species  of  example  is  the  quoting  real  matters  of  fact 
which  have  actually  taken  place ;  another  is  the  fabri- 
cating them  yourself:  and  of  this  method,  one  species 
is  illustration,  the  other  fable ;  like  those  of  -^op 
and  the  African  legends.  Again  ^,  example  is  some- 
what of  this  description,  as  if  one  were  to  assert  that 
the  state  ought  to  set  itself  in  order  against  the  king, 
and  not  to  aUow  him  to  make  himself  master  of  Egypt ; 
and  this,  because  aforetime  Darius  passed  not  into 
Greece,  before  that  he  had  seized  that  country ;  but ' 
when  he  had  seized  it,  he  passed  across ;  so  that  the 
present  king,  should  he  seize  Egypt,  will  pass  over ; 
on  which  account  he  is  not  to  be  permitted. 

Illustration  is  of  the  nature  of  Socrates's  dis- 
courses :  for  instance,  were  one  to  say  that  it  is  not 
fitting  that  magistrates  chosen  by  lot  should  be  in 
office ;  for  it  is  just  the  same  thing  as  though  one 
were  to  pick  out  wrestlers  by  lot ;  not  taking  such 
as  are  able  to  contend,  but  those  on  whom  the  lot 
may  fall:  or  as  though  men  were  to  draw  lots  for 
that  person  of  the  crew  whom  it  might  befit  to  take 
the  helm ;  as  if  it  became  the  person  on  whom  the 
lot  fell,  and  not  him  who  understood  the  art. 

But  fable  is  such  as  that  of  Stesichorus  in  opposi- 
tion to  Fhalaris,  and  that  of  JBsop  in  behalf  of  the 
demagogue.  For  Stesichorus,  when  the  citizens  of 
Himera  had*  chosen  Phalaris^  general  with  absolute 
powers,  and  were  on  the  eve  of  assigning  him  a  body 
guard,  after  other  things  which  he  said,  related  to 
them  a  fable :  "  That  a  horse  was  sole  master  of  a 
meadow ;  but  that  on  a  stag's  coming  in  and  spoiling 
the  pasture,  in  his  wish  to  be  avenged  of  the  stag, 
he  asked  some  man  whether  he  should  be  able,  in 

*.  He  here  applies  the  generic  term  to  the  species  first  men- 
tioned, viz.  the  citing  actual  matters  of  fact. 

*  Bentley  seems  to  suspect  this  story  as  applying  to  Fhala- 
ris, "  because,"  says  he,  "  Conon,  a  writer  in  Julius  Caesar's 
time,  gives  us  the  very  same  narrative ;  but,  instead  of  Fhala- 
ris, he  says  it  was  Gelon  that  Stesichorus  spoke  of.  And  the 
circumstances  of  Gelon's  history  seem  <o  countenance  Conon ; 
for  Gelon  was  in  great  favour  and  esteem  with  the  Himerse- 
ans."    Conon,  Narrat.  42.     Bentl.  in  Fhalaris,  p.  38. 

CHAP.  XX.]  RHETORIC.  167 

conjunction  with  him,  to  chastise  the  stag.  The  man 
said  [that  he  would  be  able]  if  he  would  take  the 
bit,  and  himself  were  to  mount  him  with  his  darts. 
When,  however,  he  had  agreed  to  this,  and  the  man 
was  mounted,  the  horse,  instead  of  being  revenged, 
was  himself  already  the  slave  of  the  man.  And  in 
the  same  way  do  you  also  (says  he)  look  to  it,  lest, 
in  your  wish  to  avenge  yourselves  on  your  enemies, 
you  suffer  in  the  same  way  as  the  horse ;  for  already, 
through  your  choice  of  a  commander  with  independ- 
ent power,  you  have  the  bit  in  your  mouths:  but 
if  you  assign  him  a  body  guard,  and  permit  him  to 
mount  into  the  saddle,  you  will  become,  from  that 
moment  forth,  the  slaves  of  Phalaris." 

And  JEsop,  when  pleading  at  Samos  in  behalf  of  a. 
a  demagogue  who  was  tried  for  his  life,  said,  "  That 
a  fox  in  crossing  a  river  was  thrust  out  of  her  course 
into  a  drain,  and  that,  being  unable  to  get  out,  she 
was  harassed  for  a  long  time,  many  horse  leeches 
'  having  got  hold  of  her ;  but  a  hedgehog  wandering 
by,  when  he  saw  her,  taking  compassion  on  her, 
asked  whether  he  should  pick  off  the  horse  leeches 
Trom.  her ;  that  the  fox  however  would  not  permit 
him ;  but  on  his  asking  why,  she  replied,  *  Because 
these  are  indeed  already  filled  from  me,  and  now 
suck  but  a  little  blood ;  if,  however,  you  should  pick 
them  off,  others,  who  are  hungry,  coming  up  will 
drain  off  the  little  blood  which  remains.  But  (said 
he).  Oh  Samians,  thus  also  does  this  man  no  longer 
injure  you ;  for  he  is  wealthy :  should  you,  however, 
put  him  to  death,  others  who  are  poor  will  come, 
who  will  exhaust  you  while  they  filch  the  public 
money." 

'  But  fables  are  adapted  to  deliberative  oratory,  and  7.  Fables 
possess  this  advantage ;  that  to  hit  upon  facts  which  JJ^t^^^J^f 
have  occurred  in  point  is  difficult ;  but  with  regard  ^eratlTe 
to  fables  it  is  comparatively  easy.     For  an  orator  orator; 
ought  to  construct  them  just  as  he  does  his  illustra- 
tions, if  he  be  able  to  discover  the  point  of  similitude, 

a  thing  which  will  be  easy  if  he  be  of  a  philosophical 

r 

168  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

8.  being  turn  of  mind^.  Gases,  then,  in  the  sliape  of  fables, 
easy.         ^re  the  easier  to  bring  forward ;  but  those  are  more 

availing  with  a  view  to  deliberation,  which  are  put 
upon  the  ground  of  facts ;  because,  generallj  speak- 
ing, the  future  resembles  the  past^. 

9.  He  who  It  will,  moreover,  be  right  for  one  who  has  not 
^^^*  enthjmems  to  employ  his  examples  like  positive 
memswill  proofs;  since  the  persuasive  efficacy  of  your  speech 
uae  exam-  will  be  produced  by  them :  but  one  who  possesses 
proofe,  [enthymems]  should  employ  them  like  evidence,  put- 
and  put  ting  them  forward  after  his  enthymems,  in  way  of  a 
^edifirat.  conclusion.  Because,  if  they  be  put  first,  they  bear 
ha^Tn-^  resemblance  to  induction;  and  induction,  except  in 
thymems  few  instances,  is  not  proper  to  rhetoric;  whereas 
^^l^M  w^®'^  P^t  ^^  ^^  ^  ^^y  *^©y  resemble  evidence ;  and 
testemo-  a  witness  in  every- case  influences  belief.  On  which 
nies,  and  account,  there  is  moreover  a  necessity  imposed  on 
j^  them  j^Ijj^  ^j^^  p^^g  them  first  of  citing  many ;  for  him, 

however,  who  states  them  in  conclusion  even  one  is 
sufficient ;  for  a  credible  witness,  though  nut  single, 
is  serviceable. 

The  number,  then,  of  the  species  of  examples, 
how  many  they  are,  and  how  and  when  they  are  to 
be  used,  has  been  stated. 

•  He  again  remarks  on  the  facility  here  ascribed  to  minds 
of  a  philosophical  turn,  when,  in  speaking  of  metaphors,  he 
remarks,  t6  6fioiov  kal  kv  iroKh  SUxova-i  SritapelVf  tvvroxov,  lib. 
ill.  cap.  xi.  §  5. 

*  This  is  the  principle  on  which  he  has  all  along  recom- 
mended example  as  more  peculiarly  available  to  the  views  of 
the  deliberative  orator.  At  the  end  of  his  illustrations  of  the 
subject  of  demonstrative  rhetoric,  after  stating  amplification  to 
be  more  proper  to  it  than  either  of  the  other  common  means 
of  persuasion,  he  says,  tA  Trapadiiyfiara  tolv  avfi^pvXsvrriKoii'' 
Ik  y&p  tS>v  irpoyvyovoTtev  tA  /i{k\ovTa  KorafiavrtvofAivoi  Kpi^ 
vofiev,  lib.  i.  cap.  ix.  6  40.  Neither,  says  he,  (cap.  iv.  §  8,) 
ought  the  orator  to  rely  on  the  result  of  his  own  observation, 

*     d\k*  difayKoiou  Kai  *r5tv  irapA  Totv  ^XXo(«  Bvptj/iivwv  ItrropiKov 
civat,  irpo9  T^v  irspl  Tovrtav  ovfji^ovKriv, 

CHAP,  zxi.]  RHETORIC. 

CHAP.  XXI. 

Of  Moral  Sentiment8y — what  ihey  are^  and  of  how  many 
speciesi — June  they  are  to  be  emphyedf-^and  what  advan^ 
tagea  they  possess^ 

On  the  subject  of  the  use  of  maxims,  after  it  has  l.  Maxim, 
been  stated  what  a  maxim  is,  it  will  most  easily  be-  y^^f^^' 
come  clear  both  in  what  cases,  on  what  occasions,  and 
what  persons  it  befits  to  avail  themselves  of  the 
enunciation  of  maxims  in  their  speeches. 

Now  the  maxim  is  an  assertion,  and  yet  not  re-  2.  Itsdefi- 
specting  particulars,  as  what  kind  of  person  Iphi-  ^ution. 
crates  was,  but  on  some  general  subject ;  neither  is 
it  on  every  general  subject  ^,  as,  that  what  is  straight 
is  opposed  to  what  is  curved ;  but  it  is  respecting  as 
many  subjects  as  moral  conduct  is  concerned  about, 
and  as  are  objects  of  choice  or  avoidance  in  acting. 
So  that,  as  the  enthymem  is  a  form-  of  reasoning  Condu- 
nearly  [confined]  to  this  description  of  subjects,  both  ^^^  ®^ 
the  conclusions  of  enthymems  and  their  premises,  thymems 
after  the  syllogistic  form  has  been  done  away,  be-  are  max- 
come  maxims^.     Take  an  instance :  "  A  man  who  is  ^^°^' 

'  Having  told  you  that  maxims  are  certain  general  propo- 
sitions, he  cautions  you  against  supposing  that  every  general 
proposition  deserves  this  appellation.  For  example,  mathe- 
matical truths  are  asserted  in  propositions,  general  enough  it 
is  true,  which  however  do  not  come  up  to  the  notion  which 
Aristotle  would  have  you  form  of  the  yvwfiii,  I  hardly  know 
whether  it  be  allowable  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  Aristotle 
from  a  popular  comedy ;  but  those  readers  who  remember  the 
School  for  Scandal,  may  probably  derive  some  illustration  of 
this  subject  firom  the  '  aentimenta*  there  put  in  the  mouth  of 
Joteph  Surface; '  e.  g.  "  The  heart  that  is  conscious  of  its  own 
integrity,  is  ever  slow  to  credit  another's  treachery."  Act  iv. 
scene  3. 

'  In  other  words,  the  maxim  is  to  the  enthymem  what  pro- 
positions are  to  syllogisms.  Not  to  every  enthymem  does  the 
ypwfiri  hold  this  relation,  but  to  such  only  as  are  conversant 
with  "  the  actions  and  passions  of  common  life."  Aristotle 
has  not  ventured  to  tell  us  that  aU  enthymems  relate  to  these 
subjects ;  he  says  only  that  "  nearly "  aU  of  them  are  so  con- 
versant ;  irepl  toioAtwv  ivrl  ax^iov. 

170  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

in  his  sound  mind  never  ought  to  educate  his  chil- 
dren so  as  to  be  too  highly  skilled'.**  Now  this  is  a 
maxim:  but  if  the  reason,  and  the  cause  why  he 
should  not  do  so,  be  added,  the  whole  [conjointly]  will 

become  an  enthymem;  thus,  " — for  besides 

the  indolence  which  they  contract,  they  will  attach 
to  themselves  the  bitter  jealousy  of  the  citizens." 
Again,  this  :  "  There  is  not  a  man  who  in  every 
respect  is  happy*:"  and  the  following:  "There  is 
not  one  of  all  mankind  who  is  free^'*  are  maxims: 
and  the  last  becomes  an  enthymem,  if  added  to  the 

following  proposition,  " for  either  he  is  the 

slave  of  mqney  or  of  fortune.*' 
S.Maxims      If,  then,  the  maxim  be  what  it  has  been  described, 
^^  ^^  there  will  necessarily  be  four  kinds  of  maxims :  for 
either  they  will  be  toith  the  annexed  reason,  or  tnth^ 
4.  i  fier*  out  it.     Now  the  maxims  which  need  proof  are  all 
ildvtv*''  ®"^^  ^  assert  any  thing  which  contravenes  received 
iwiXoyou,  opinion,  or  is  doubtful ;  but  those  which  state  nothing 
contrary  to  people's  notions  [do  well  enough]  with- 
5.  out  the  addition  of  proof.     And  of  these  last  it  can- 
not but  be  that  some  will  need  no  proof®,  from  their 
having  heen  prevumsfy  known  ;  as,  "  The  best  thing 
for  a  man,  as  it  seems  to  me  at  least,  is  health  ;'*-^be- 
cause  to  nine-tenths  of  mankind  this  seems  to  be  the 
case :  and  that  others  simultaneous^  with  their  being 
uttered  become  evident  to  such  as  turn  their  attention 
to  them ;  as,  "  There  is  no  lover  who  does  not  always 
6.  Those   love.**     And  again,  of  those  which  have  proof  sub- 
T^ovm  J®^^®^  some  are  a  part  of  an  enthymem,  just  as,  "  A 
eititier,       man  who  is  in  his  sound  mind  never  ought,"  etc. 
irt.  part    Others  are  essentially  enthymems,  and  not  part  of 
thym^"    *^  enthymem  ;   the  which   obtain  more  than  any 
or  2iid.  '  other  species.     And  these  are  all  those  in  which  the 
^"*^y"      reason  for  what  is  asserted  appears  wrought  in,  as 

•  Euripides,  Medea,  294. 

^  From  a  lost  drama  of  Euripides,  entitled  Sthenobcea. 
'  Euripides,  Hecuba,  864. 

•  I  have  ventured  thus  to  render  t ir/Xoyos ;  for  that  such  is 
Aristotle's  meaning,  is  evident  from  his  having  himself  used 
dird^ci^tv,  at  the  beginning  of  the  section,  to  denote  the  same 

thing. 

OHAP.  XXI.]  RHETORIC.  171 

in  this  maxim:  ^' Being  yourself  a  mortal,  do  not  These  last 
cherish  immortal  wrath:*' — for  the  assertion  that,  are  most 
**  one  ought  not  always  to  cherish  wrath,"  is  a  maxim ; 
that,  however,  which  is  added,  viz.  "because  you 
are  a  mortal,**  states  the  reason  why.  Similar  to 
which  is  the  following :  "  It  is  fitting  that  a  mortal 
conceive  mortal  notions,  not  that  a  being  destined  to 
death  should  think  of  what  is  immortal  ^.'* 

From  what  has  been  said  it  has  then  become  evi-  7.  Maxims 
dent,  as  well  how  many  the  species  of  maxims  are,  ^ent  miist 
as  also  to  what  kind  of  subjects  they  are  severally  have  the 
adapted.     For  on  subjects  which  may  be  questioned,  ^*2^^ 
or  contravene  received  opinions,  the  orator  must  not  or^gub- 
use  those  without  the  reason  annexed ;  but  let  him  joined, 
either,  prefixing  the  reason,  use  the  conclusion  as  a 
maxim,  thus — "  For  my  part,  as  then  it  neither  is 
good  to^  be  exposed  to  envy,  nor  to  be  indolent,  I 
assert  that  it  is  not  good  to  be  educated  ;**  or,  stating 
this  [which  here  is  the  conclusion]  first,  subjoin  that 
which  was  prefixed®.     Observing  that  on  subjects 
which  do  not  contravene  received  opinions,  but  are 
doubtful,  that  he  annex  the  reason  why  as  concisely 
as  possible.     And  on  subjects  such  as  these  the  8.  With 
apophthegms  of  the  Lacedaemonians  are  very  suit- 
ably and  sayings  which  have  an  air  of  mystery ;  as 
if  one  were  to  apply  that  which  Stesichorus  said  be- 
fore the  Locrians,  "  that  they  ought  not  to  be  inso- 
lent, lest  their  cigalas  should  sing  upon  the  ground®.** 
The  employment  of  maxims  becomes  him  who  is  9.  Maxims 

7  So  also  says  Horace : — 

Quid  aetemis  minorem 
Consiliis  animum  fatigas?    Od.  ii.  11,  11. 
A  notion,  by  the  way,  which  Aristotle  controverts  elsewhere, 
Nich.  Eth.  X.  7. 

•  To  state  the  rule  in  the  words  of  Hobbes,  it  is  this — "  A 
sentence  not  manifest  ought  to  be  either  inferred  or  confirm- 
ed ;  inferred^  (as  in  the  text,)  confirmed  thus, — A  wise  man 
will  not  have  hit  children  over-learned,  (prefixing  what,  in  the 
former  disposition,  had  been  put  last,)  teeing  too  mttch  learning 
both  tqftent  a  man*t  mind,  and  procuret  him  envy  among  hit 
feJlow^tizent"  (and  tubjoining  -what  before  had  been  prefixed.) 

*  Meaning,  lest  their  country  should  be  so  utterly 'devastated 
as  that  not  a  tree  would  remain  for  a  cigala  to  sit  upon. 

concif>e 
ness. 

172  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

suit  the  rather  advanced  in  life ;  and  particularly  as  respects 
^^^'  subjects  about  which  each  happens  to  be  well  inform- 

ed ^®.  Since  for  one  not  so  advanced  in  age  to  sport 
maxims  is  bad  taste,  just  as  it  is  for  him  to  have  re- 
course to  fables:  and  the  use  of  them  on  subjects 
about  which  one  is  ignorant  is  silly,  and  argues  a 
want  of  education.  There  is  a  sufficient  sign  of  the 
^  truth  of  this ;  for  the  boors  of  the  country  are  of  all 
other  people  most  fond  of  hammering  out  maxims, 
10.  and  set  them  forth  with  great  volubility.  Also  the 
stating  generally  a  maxim  which  is,  in  fact,  not  ge- 
neral, is  most  especially  befitting  in  appeals  to  the 
feelings,  and  in  the  act  of  exciting  indignation ;  and 
then  either  at   the  beginning,  or  after  the  proof, 

11.  Com-  Again,  it  is  proper  to  avail  one's  self  of  maxims 
mon  ones  '^hich  are  current  and  common,  if  they  .be  of  any 
^^^^^      service ;  for  from  their  being  common  they  appear  to 

be  correct,  as  though  every  one  acknowledged  their 
truth  ^^:  thi^  one,  for  instance,  (if  the  orator  be  ex- 
horting persons  to  face  the  hazard,  though  they  have 
not  sacrificed,)  "  One  omen  there  is  which  is  best,  to 
defend  one's  country ;" — or  to  face  it,  though  they  be 
few  in  number, — "  Mars  is  common ;"  and  to  cut  off 
the  children  of  their  foes,  what  though  they  have 
done  no  injury, — "  He  is  a  fool  who,  after  slaying  the 
father,  still  spares  the  child  ^*." 

12.  Old  Some  old  sayings  too  are  maxims;  for  example, 
sayings.  ^^^  expression,  "Next  neighbour  to  an  Athenian." 
^ood  to*  ^^  ^®  ^^  proper  to  quote  maxims  which  even  contra- 
S)ntra-  vene  the  current  sayings,  (I  mean  by  current  sayings 
vene  a  such  as  this,  "  Know  thyself ;"  or  this,  "  Too  much 
mSim^    of  one  thing  is  good  for  nothing ;")  whenever  your 

moral  character  may  be  likely  to  show  itself  to  greater 
advantage,  or  the  thing  spoken  is  said  in  an  impas- 

*<>  A  young  man  ought  not  to  use  maxims. 
"  On  the  principle, — Vox  populi  est  vox  Dei. 
^  So  thought  Lee's  hero,  Caesar  Borgia,  for  he  tells  Ma- 
duavel  in  the  tragedy, 

•Tis  not  my  way  to  lop,  for  tl^en  the  tree 
May  sprout  again ;  but  root  him,  and  he  lies 
Never  to  bluster.  Act  v.  so.  2. 

CHAP.  XXI.]  RHETORIC.  173 

sioned  manner.  The  speaking  in  an  impassioned 
manner  is,  as  if  one  in  a  passion  were  to  assert,  "  that 
it  was  a  falsel^ood  that  one  ought  to  know  himself; 
at  least,  this  man,  had  he  known  himself,  would  never 
have  claimed  to  be  your  general  *'."  ,  The  moral  cha- 
racter appears  better  [when  we  contradict  a  maxim] 
thus,  "it  does  not  become  men,  as  some  assert,  to 
love  as  though  they  were  about  to  hate,  but  to  hate 
as  though  they  were  about  to  love."  And  we  ought  W. 
to  give  a  manifestation  of  our  moral  principle  by 
means  of  the  diction  we  employ,  otherwise  to  subjoin 
the  reason ;  for  instance,  either  stating  the  sentence 
thus,  "we  ought  to  love,  not  as  they  tell  us,  but  as 
though  always  about  to  love,  for  the  other  is  the  part 
of  an  insidious  man :"  or  thus,  "  the  common  maxim 
does  not  please  me ;  for  it  is  the  duty  of  the  true 
friend  at  leiEist  to  love  as  though  he  were  always  about 
to  love."  "  Nor  again  [does  this  please  me]^' that  we 
ought  to  carry  nothing  to  excess ;  since  'tis  our  duty 
to  hate  the  wicked  at  least  to  the  very  extreme." 

They  contribute,  too,  a  considerable  aid  to  our  15.  Max- 
orations  :  first  owing  to  the  vanity  of  the  audience ;  ^^^^  * 
for  they  feel  a  pleasure  if  one,  speaking  generally,  if^From 
happens  to  hit  upon  ideas  which  they  hold  on  any  gratifyiiig 
particular  point     My  meaning,  however,  will  be  ^f  t^e""*^ 
plain  in  this  way,  as  also  the  manner  in  which  we  audience. 
ought  to  catch  at  them ;  for  the  maxim,  as  has  been 
stated,  is  an  assertion  universally,  and  men  feel  de- 
lighted when  that  is  asserted  universally,  which  they 
happen  previously  to  have  taken  up  as  their  opinion 
upon  particulars.     If,  for  instance,  a  man  chanced  to 
have  bad  neighbours  or  children,  he  would  hail  the 
man  who  should  say,  "nothing  is  more  annoying 
than  dwelling  near  people,"  or,  "nothing  is  more  silly 
than  to  beget  children." 

"  The  "words  probably  of  some  panegyrist  of  Iphicrates, 
who,  in  the  warmth  of  declamation,  must  have  produced  a 
very  great  effect  by  contradicting  a  maxim  so  generally  re- 
ceived, and  which  bore  an  authority  more  than  human,  (e  ccelo 
descendit  TvwOt  o-caur^v,)  while  at  the  same  time  he  placed 
the  merit  of  the  general  in  a  most  striking  light.  For  the 
original  obscurity  of  Iphicrates,  see  book  L  chap,  vii  $  32. 

,    174  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  u. 

So  that  we  should  form  a  guess,  some  how  or  other, 
as  to  the  opinions  which  our  audience  happen  to  have 
taken  up  with ;  then  to  speak  on  these  subjects  ge- 
16.  nerally  conformably  to  them.     This  one  advantage 
^^:  "^y    the  application  of  maxims  must  needs  possess,  and 
Seech  an  another  superior  to  it ;  for  it  gives  our  orations  an 
airofcha-  air  of  character.     But  those  orations  bear  'an  im- 
""^'*       press  of  character  in  which  the  principle  is  manifest. 
And  all  maxims  produce  this  effect  by  reason  of  the 
speaker's  asserting  universally  on  things  which  are 
the  objects  of  deliberate  choice :  so  that  should  the 
maxims  be  good,  they  make  the  speaker  also  to  ap- 
pear a  man  of  worthy  character. 

Such,  then,  be  our  discussion  on  the  subject  of  the 
maxim,  of  its  nature,  its  species,  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  to  be  employed,  and  the  advantages  which  it 

CHAP.  XXII. 
Of  EnthyfnemB, 

1.  Enthy-  Let  US  speak  generally  of  enthymems,  in  what  way 
moms.       ^g  ought  to  seek  for  them,  and  afterwards  of  the 
topics,  (rtJn-ot,)  for  the  nature  of  the  two  is  respect- 
ively different*. 
2.      It  has  been  stated  before,  that  the  enthymem  is  a 
kind  of  syllogism,  also  in  what  way  it  is  a  syllogism, 
and  in  what  respect  it  differs  from  the  syllogism  of 
3.  i.  They  logic ;  for  we  should  make  our  conclusions  without 
must  not  taking  up  our  assumptions  either  many  stages  back, 
fetched     or  all  of  them  together:  the  one  process  from  its 
length  is  obscure  ;  the  other,  from  its  stating  what  is 
plain,  is  waste  of  words. 

And  this  is  the  reason  why  men  of  no  education 
have  more  persuasive  influence  over  the  mob  than 

'  See  the  argument  founded  on  the  distinction  between  them, 
chap.  XX vi.  §  1. 

CHAP,  xxu.]  RHETORIC.  175 

men  of  high  acquirements,  as  the  poet^  says,  *'that 
the  unlearned  speak  more  in  unison  with  tha  feelings 
of  the  mob ;"  for  the  latter  address  them  in  common 
and  general  points,  the  former,  from  the  store  of  their 
information,  in  a  manner  which  comes  home  to  them. 
So  that  w^  are  not  to  found  our  address  on  any  thing  ii.  They 
which  may  seem  to  the  purpose,  but  on  certain  defi-  "^^^^ 
nite  points ;  such,  for  example,  as  seem  right  to  the  nite 
judges,  or  those  whose  opinions  they  acknowledge ;  points. 
and  the  reason  for  this  is,  that  it  will  appear  to  be 
the  case  either  to  all  or  most  of  them  :  moreover  we  iii.  Our 
should  draw  our  conclusions  not  only  from  necessary,  *^P^*^^^" 
but  also  from  contmgent  premises*.  be  drawn 

First,  then,  you  ought  to  be  aware  that  it  is  neces-  both  ne- 
sary,  respecting  every  subject  on  which  you  have  to  ^^^con^ 
speak  and  to  draw  conclusions,  whether  it  be  through  tingently. 
the  medium  of  the  rhetorical  syllogism  ^  or  of  any  4.  We 
other  whatsoever,  to  be  masters  either  of  all  or  some  ^**  ^ 
of  the  facts  inherent  in  it :  for  having  none  of  them,  f^cts  of 
you  will  not  be  able  to  draw  your  inferences  from  any  the  case  in 
thing  5.     My  meaning  is  this :  how  shall  we  be  able  ^'J/ ^^ 
to  give  advice  to  the  Athenians,  whether  they  ought  oratory. 
to  go  to  war,  without  being  informed  what  their  forces  6.  Delibe- 
are,  whether  naval  or  military,  or  both ;  and  these  in  ^^^^' 
how  great  numbers ;  also  what  are  their  resources ; 
or  their  allies  and  enemies ;  and  yet  further,  what 
former  wars  they  have  waged,  and  in  what  manner, 
and  other  points  of  this  description :  or  how  to  eulo-  6.  Epi- 
gize  them,  unless  we  be  informed  of  the  sea-fight  at  deictic. 
Salamis,  or  the  battle  at  Marathon,  or  the  exploits 
achieved  by  them  in  behalf  of  the  Heraclidae,  or  some 
other  such  points ;  for  it  is  on  the  real  or  apparent 
honourable  traits  attaching  to  each  object  that  all 
orators  found  their  panegyrics.     And  in  the  same  7. 

•  Euripides,  Hippolytus,  989. 

'  We  should  allege  not  TtKfinpta  alone,  but  elfcora  as  well. 

*  IIoXtTtKoc  <rv\Xoyi<rfi69  means  the  syllogism  peculiar  to 
riietoric.    Victor,  vid.  Animady. 

'  Aristotle  has  himself  given  an  outline  of  the  kind  of  in- 
formation which  ought  to  be  possessed  with  a  view  to  speaking 
on  five  of  the  most  important  questions  of  deliberative  oratory, 
book  i.  cl^p.  4. 

176  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

way  it  is  on  their  opposites  that  they  ground  their 
reprehension,  always  looking  out  for  any  thing  of  that 
nature  which  either  attaches,  or  appears  to  attach,  to 
the  subject ;  suppose  [the  case  of  a  censure  passed  on 
the  Athenians]  because  they  subjected  the  Greeks  to 
themselves,  and  reduced  to  a  state  of  servitude  the 
people  of  -^gina  and  Potidaea,  who  were  their  allies 
against  the  barbarian,  and  bore  off  the  prize  of  high- 
est worth  ^;  and  every  other  transaction  of  this  nature, 
and  whatever  other  such  error  may  attach  to  them. 
Judicial.  And  in  the  same  way  those  orators  who  accuse  and 
defend,  construct  their  accusations  and  defences  on  a 

8«  view  of  existing  circumstances^:  there  is  no  differ- 
ence in  your  pursuing  this  process,  whether  it  be  re- 
specting Athenians  or  Lacedaemonians,  men  or  gods. 
For  in  advising  Achilles,  or  in  praising  or  blaming 
him,  in  accusing  and  defending  him,  we  must  assume 
the  traits  which  attach,  or  appear  to  attach,  to  his 
character;  in  order  that  from  among  their  number 
we  may,  in  so  praising  or  blaming  him,  allege  what- 
ever things  honourable  or  base  attach  to  him;  and  in 
accusing  or  defending  him,  whatever  things  just  or 
unjust;  and  in  advising  him,  whatever  is  beneficial 

9.  or  injurious.  And  in  a  similar  manner  respecting 
any  business  whatsoever;  as,  respecting  justice,  the 
question  whether  it  be  expedient  [must  be  discussed] 
on  the  ground  of  what  appertains  to  justice  or  ex- 
10.  pediency.  So  that  as  all  men  appear  thus  to  con- 
struct their  proofs,  whether  they  draw  their  inferences 
with  greater  accuracy  or  remissness,  (for  they  do  not 
make  their  assumptions  out  of  every  subject,  but 
from  those  circumstances  which  are  inherent  in  each 
question,)  and  by  reason  that  it  is  manifestly  im- 
possible otherwise  to  prove ;  it  is  evident,  then,  that 
it  is  necessary,  as  I  said  in  the  Topics,  to  be  in  pos- 

•  Herodotus,  viii.  93. 

^  Haying  illustrated  his  meaning  by  two  examples,  taken 
respectively  from  subjects  of  deliberative  and  demonstrative 
rhetoric,  he  concludes  with  a  third  from  the  subjects  recognised 
by  judicial;  it  being  his  great  object  to  keep  awake  in  the 
memory  of  the  reader  the  original  grand  division  of  questions. 

CHAP,  xxn.]  RHETORIC.  177 

8e8sion  of  certain  select  propositions  on  points  which 
may  occur,  and  are  most  ^convenient :    and    [it  is  H.  The 
evident]  that  the  orator  should  conduct  his  inquiry  ^^g^j^e 
respecting  questions  which  arise  on  the  sudden  in  the  the  pecu- 
same  manner,  not  turning  his  view  aside  to  indefinite  ^ 
points,  hut  to  the  actual  points  of  the  case  which  the  P^"^*^* 
oration  is  concerning ;  and  emhracing.  in  his  sketch 
the  greatest  number  he  is  able,  and  those  coming  the 
nearest  to  the  point ;  for  in  proportion  as  he  is  master 
of  the  greater  number  of  the  things  inherent  in  the 
case,  by  so  much  the  easier  will  it  be  to  effect  proof ; 
and  in  proportion  as  these  are  the  nearer  to  the  point, 
in  the  very  same  proportion  will  they  be  more  peculiar, 
and  less  vague.     By  vctgue  I  mean,  the   praising  12. 
Achilles  because  he  is  a  man,  and  one  of  the  deified 
heroes,  and  made  war  against  Troy ;  for  these  are 
points  attaching  to  a  thousand  others  beside :  so  that 
such  an  orator  no  more  praises  Achilles  than  he  does 
Dioined.     But  by  peculiar  I  mean,  those  which  be- 
fall no  one  else  than  to  Achilles,  for  instance,  the 
slaying  Hector,  the  bravest  of  the  Trojans ;    and 
Cycnus,  who,  being  himself  invulnerable,  prevented 
all  the  forces  from  landing ;  and  that  he  joined  the 
expedition  the  youngest,  and  without  being  bound  by 
an  oath ;  and  whatever  other  topics  are  of  this  de- 
scription.    One  element  of  enthymems,  then,  is  that  The  topic 
of  selection;  and  this  is  the  first  which  partakes  of  of  selec- 
the  nature  of  topics. 

And  now  let  us  state  the  elements  of  enthymems ;  13. 
(but  hj  place^  and  element  of  an  enthymem  I  mean 
the  same  thing).    First,  however,  let  us  treat  of  those  14.  Two 
points  concerning  which  it  is  necessary  first  to  speak.  ^^  °^ 
For  of  enthymems  there  are  two  species ;   the  one  mems : 
species  are  confirmative,  that  such  is  or  is  not  the  inKTiKA. 
feet ;  and  the  other  refutative :  and  they  differ  just  *^*'^^*«^- 
as,  in  logic,  the  syllogism  and  the  elenchus  differ. 
And  the  confirmative  enthymem  is  the.  deducing  a  15. 
conclusion  from  acknowledged  premises ;  the  refuta- 

'  Cum  penrestigare  argumentum  aliquod  yolumus,  focoa  nosse 
debemus:  sic  enim  appellatee  sunt  hae  quasi  sedes,  e  quibus 
argnmenta  promuntur.    Cicero,  Topic.''cap.  iL 
N 

178  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

tive,  howeyer,  is  the  deducing  sn  inference  which  is 

16.  not  admitted.  Now  the  gencural  arguments  nearly  on 
each  class  of  subjects  necessary  and  useful  to  be 
known  are  in  our  possession ;  for  propositions  have 
been  selected  on  each  [branch  of  rhetoric] ;  so  that 
the  topics  out  of  which  one  must  allege  his  enthj- 
mems,  whether  on  questions  of  good  or  evil,  just  or 
unjust,  honourable  or  dishonourable,  select  points 
moreover  respecting  the  dispositions,  the  passions, 
and  the  habits,  having  been  collected  above,  are  like^ 
wise  actually  before  us.  . 

17.  But  let  us,  in  a  different  manner,  further  make  as- 
sumptions respecting  all  the  classes  of  rhetoric,  and 
putting  a  mark  on  them  severally  as  we  proceed, 
state  both  the  refutative  and  confirmative  elements, 
as  well  as  those  of  apparent  enthymems,  which,  how- 
ever, are  not  really  enthymems,  for  neither  in  truth 
are  they  [the  elements  of  actual]  syllogisms.  When 
these  points  have  been  elucidated,  we  shall  discuss*the 
subject  of  starting  objections  to  enthymems,  and  the  ' 
means  of  their  solution,  from  what  sources  we  ought 
to  itdduce  them.  , 

CHAP.  XXIII. 
Elements  of  Enthymems. 

1.  i.  Ele-  There  is  one  element  of  confirmative  enthymems, 
S^i^*  derivable  from  contraries;  for  we  should  consider, 
Ties.  whether  the  contrary  quality  be  inherent  in  the  con- 

trary subject ;  doing  away  the  argument  [grounded 
thereon]  if  it  be  not  inherent ;  and  if  it  be  inherent, 
founding  one  thereon  ourselves :  for  example,  the  ar- 
gument that  "  Temperance  is  good,  because  intem- 
perance is  injurious:"  or,  as  it  is  in  the  Messeniac* 
oration,  "  If  war  be  the  cause  of  our  present  trou- 

»  An  oration  spoken  by  Alcidamas  in  behalf  of  ,tlie  Messe- 
nians,  referred  to  above,  i.  13,  &  3.  See  the  Sophism.  flWt- 
bras,  P.  ii.  c.  u.  §  123. 

CHAP,  xxin.]  RHETORIC.  179 

bles,  of  coarse  we  shall  put  ourselves  right  again 
with  the  return  of  peace."  And,  "  If  in  truth  it  be 
not  just  to  be  angry  with  those  who  unwUUngly  do 
US  harm;  neither,  if  one  on  compulsion  shall  do 
good  to  anj  one,  is  it  his  duty  to  be  grateful  to  him." 
And,  *^  If  to  speak  falsely  is  among  men  available 
to  persuade ;  there  is  no  anomaly  in  supposing,  on 
the  contrary,  that  many  things  which  are  true  fail  of 
being  believed." 

Aiiother  is  derivable  from  conjugate  inflectUms^;  2.  ii.  Of 
for  the  qualities  must  either  be  inherent  consistently,  J^^*^^* 
or  not  at  all;  for  example,  the  argument,  that  ''the  tions.' 
jnst  is  not  in  every  case  a  good,  for  then  also  would 
that  which  is  justly  be  well ;  now  it  is  not,  however, 
desirable  to  die  justly  \ 

Another  from  relatives;  for  if  to  one  party  attach  3. 
the  idea  of  his  having  acted  honourably  or  justly,  4o  ^J^^^ 
the  other  also  will  attach  that  of  having  suffered 
[honourably,  etc.].  Also,  \^U>  command  be  just,  so 
also  is  the  having  executed  [the  command]  ;  for  ex- 
ample, just  as  that  farmer  of  the  revenue,  Diomedon  *, 
said  of  the  revenues,  ''If  it  be  not  base  for  you  to 
put  them  up  for  sale,  neither  is  it  for  us  to  purch€ue 
them."  And  if  the  idea  that  he  has  suffered  justly 
or  hoYiourably  be  on  the  side  of  the  patient,  so  wiU 
it  also  be  on  that  of  the  agent;  and  if  on  that  of  the 
agent,  then  also  on  that  of  the  patient.  There  is, 
however,  in  this  way  of  arguing,  room  for  passing 
off  some  false  reasoning^:  for  if  the  person  has  justly 
Buffered  any  thing,  he  indeed  has  justly  been  a  suf- 
ferer, but  perhaps  not  so  at  your  hands.     On  which 

'  See  book  i.  7,  §  27.  Hobbes  calls  this  coffnomtnation,  or 
aJSniiy  of  words. 

*  See  book  i.  9,  §  15. 

*  Cicero  illustrates  this  "place"  by  a  similar  example: 
"  yam  si  JUtodiis  tttrpe  rum  est  portorium  loearet  nee  Herma- 
creonU  quidem  turpe  eet  eondueere"     De  Inven.  lib.  i. 

^  Upon  this  £Eillacy  the  reasoning  of  Cleon  was  grounded  in 
the  debate  about  the  Mitylenaeans ;  and  Dioclotus,  in  his  re- 
ply, uniformly  striyes  at  exposing  it,  while  he  urges,  that  how- 
ever they  might  merit  death,  the  Athenians  were  not  the  peo- 
ple who  should  inflict  it.  Thucyd.  lib.  iii. 
N   2 

180  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii 

account  we  should  view  the  question  separately, — 
whether  the  patient  deserve  to  suffer,  and  whether 
the  agent  have  a  right  to  inflict  the  suffering ;  that 
done,  Uy  employ  the  facts  in  whatever  way  may  suit 
our  purpose:   for  at  times,  considerations  of  this 
kind  do  not  harmonize ;  just  as  in  the  Alcmaeon  of 
Theodectus,  "  Did  no  man  hate  thy  mother  ?  "  In  his 
reply  he  tells  her,  that  it  is  fittipg  to  consider  the 
,       points  taken  separately  ;  and  when  Alphesiboea  asks 
how,  taking  her  up,  he  says,  *'  That  she  indeed  de- 
served death,  they  did  decree ;  but  at  the  same  time 
that  I  ought  not  to  be  the  slayer."     And  just  so  the 
trial  respecting  Demosthenes,  and  of  the  persons  who 
slew  Nicanor.     For  when  they  had  been  adjudged  to 
have  slain  him  justly,  it  appeared  that  he  had  also 
been  justly  put  to  death.    Again,  respecting  the  per- 
son who  met  his  death  at  Thebes,  respecting  whom 
some  one  bade  the  question  be  decided,  whether  he 
were  deserving  death ;  as  though  it  were  not  unjust 
to  slay  one  who  deserved  to  die. 
4.      Another  element  is  derivable  from  the  relations  of 
iv.  From  greater  and  less^;  for  instance :  "  If  not  even  the  gods 
com^-    Jjj^j^  every  thing,  hardly  I  should  suppose  do  men  ;" 
three        for  it  is  to  say,  that  if  the  quality  be  not  inherent  in 
•^Yf  -     *^**  which  would  more  ntUuratty  possess  it ;  then  it 
\wn.   '    is  evident,  that  in  that  which  would  less  naturaJty 

possess  it,  it  is  not  inherent, 
ii.  a  mi-        And  the  argument,  that  *'  he  assaults  his  neigh- 
nori.         hours,  who  even  does  so  to  his  father  ;'*  is  derived 
from  the  element,  if  die  less  probability  exist,  so  also 
does  the  greater;  [which  is  available]  in  reference  to 
whether  of  the  two  points  it  may  be  needful  to  prove, 
whether  that  it  is  or  is  not  the  fact. 
5.  iii.  By       And  again,  hy  parity  of  reasoning,  when  it  is  said, 
parity  of    u  j^^  jg  thy  father  to  be  pitied  in  that  he  has  lost  his 
ing.    '      children,  and  is  not  in  truth  CEneus  who  has  lost  his 
noble  offspring  ?  "  and  the  argument,  "  If  indeed  The- 
seus committed  no  wrong,  neither  did  Paris;"  and, 
"  If  Tyndarus*  sons  did  not  act  uiyustly,  neither  did 

®  The  argument  oi  fortiori. 

CHAP,  xxin.]  RHETORIC.  181 

Paris  ;"  and  this,  "  Suppose  Hector  did  slay  Patro- 
clus,  Paris  slew  Achilles ;"  and  this,  "  If  other  artists 
are  not  to  be  held  cheap,  neither  are  philosophers ;" 
and,  "If  generals  are  not  held  cheap  because  they 
are  frequently  vanquished,  neither  are  sophists ;"  and 
that,  "  K  it  behoves  an  individual  to  have  a  care  for  , 
your  glory,  it  also  behoves  you  to  regard  that  of 
Greece." 

Another  element  arises  from  the  consideration  of  fi-"^- From 
iime'^,  as  Iphicrates  urged  in  his  oration  against  Har-  ^^^  ^ 
modius,  "  that  if  before  my  doing  it,  I  had  claimed  to 
have  the  honour  of  a  statue,  ye  would  have  granted 
it ;  wiU  ye  not  then  grant  it  me  now  that  I  have 
achieved  it? — ^Do  not,  therefore,  engage  yourselves 
under  promises,  when  about  to  receive ;  and,  when 
you  have  experienced  the  benefit,  withdraw  them." 
And,  on  another  occasion,  in  reference  to  the  The- 
bans  permitting  Philip  to  pass  through  into  Attica, 
the  argument  that,  "  if,  before  his  aiding  them  against 
the  Phocians,  he  had  claimed  a  passage,  they  would 
have  promised ;  it  were  then  an  absurd  thing,  if,  be- 
cause he  threw  himself  on  them,  and  had  confidence 
in  them,  they  should  not  let  him  march  through®/* 

Another  element  is  deduced  from  assertions  made  7. 
respecting  yourself  retorted  upon  your  adversary;  JJior^nff 
and  the  term  is  of  exceeding  service,  as  is  exemplified  assertions 

^  Under  this  head  he  considers  both  Time  generally,  and  also 
Opportunity  (icai/>^«),  which,  however,  have  been  thus  distin- 
guished— Xp6»09  iffTiv  iv  iS  Kaipd^f  xal  Kat/oov,  i»  ea  -Xfiovov  ou 
tro\v9,  Hippocrates,  in  Priecept.  61.  Kaipdi  again  has  been 
described  as  6  7rpo<r<f>vri9  Kai  ap/Aodto«  tKaerrtp  "xpovov. 

'  A  striking  instance  of  appeal  to  this  topic  occurs  in  Mac- 
beth, act  i. 

Ijody  Maebeih, then  you  were  a  man ; 

Nor  time,  nor  place, 

Did  then  adhere,  and  yet  you  would  make  both : 
They  have  made  themselves,  and  that  their  fitness  now 
Does  unmake  you. 
See  also  Thucyd.  book  i.  140 ;  ii.  6.    Demosthenes  frequently 
employs  this  topic,  as  in  Olynth.  iii.  t£vo  xpovovy  h  riva  xaipdv, 
&  aviptv  A6t)iraioi,  tou  irdpoirrov  /StXrw  $ii'»'et'»'t.     The  force  of 
the  appeal  thus  made  cannot  be  better  illustrated  than  by  the 
frequency  of  its  employment. 

182  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

on  your  in  the  Teucer;  one  too  it  is  of  which  Iphicrates 
adyer-  availed  himself  against  Aristophon,  when  he  put  the 
question  home  to  him,  whether  he  would  betray  the 
fleet  for  a  bribe ;  and  on  his  denying  that  he  would, 
then  said  he,  "  Would  you,  who  are  Aristophon,  not 
betray  them,  and  shall  I,  who  am  Iphicrates  ?**  You 
ought,  however,  to  be  dealing  with  an  opposite  party, 
who  appears  in  a  greater  degree  to  have  been  guilty 
of  injustice;  otherwise  it  would  appear  ridiculous, 
were  any  one  laying  an  accusation  against  an  Aris- 
tides,  to  allege  this  ;  but  it  ought  always  to  tend  di- 
rectly to  the  discredit  of  him  who  lays  the  impeach- 
ment ;  for,  generally  speaking,  the  plaintiiF  presumes 
himself  better  than  the  defendant ;  this  notion,  then, 
it  behoves  us  to  refute.  And  generally  it  is  absurd 
when  one  chides  in  another  what  he  does  himself,  or 
would  feel  inclined  to  do  ;  or  exhorts  him  to  do  what 
he  does  not  himself,  neither  would  be  induced  to  do. 
8.  Another  place  is  from  definitions^;  as,  "  that  the 
defini-^^'^  genius  is  nothing  else  than  either  the  deity,  or  his 
tion.  production.  And  yet  whoever  conceives  the  exist- 
ence of  the  production  of  a  deity,  must  necessarily 
think  at  the  same  time  that  gods  are  in  existence  *®." 
And,  as  Iphicrates  said,  ''that  that  man  was  most 
noble  who  was  the  best ;  for  that  there  did  not  at- 
tach any  nobility  to  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  be- 
fore they  had  achieved  some  noble  exploit."  And 
his  proof  that  himself  was  more  nearly  akin  to  them, 
by  saying,  "  At  any  rate  my  deeds  are  more  akin  to 
those  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton,  than  yours 
are"."  And,  as  was  said  in  that  speech  about  Paris, 

'  In  addition  to  the  instances  of  recourse  to  this  topic  quoted 
in  the  text,  -we  may  mention  that  of  expediency  in  tiie  speech 
of  the  Plateeans  (Thucydides,  iii.  56) ;  and  one  used  by  Alci- 
biades  in  his  speech  at  Sparta,  vi.  89,  trap  t6  ivaifrtovnievov  rip 
dvvavTevovTi,  SrifAov  6vofia<rraly  k.  t.  \. 

*®  One  of  the  arguments  used  by  Socrates  to  prove  his  be- 
lief in  the  existence  of  gods ;  for  if,  as  was  granted,  he  held 
the  existence  of  his  attending  spirit  {r6  Sai/Aoviov),  then  neces- 
sarily must  it  either  be  itself  a  god»  or  at  least  a  divine  pro- 
duction.   See  Plato,  Apolg.  Socr. 

11  See  the  concluding  chapter  of  Tacitus's  Life  of  Agiicola. 

CHAP,  xxm.]  RHETORIC.  183 

"  All  will  be  free  to  acknowledge  that  the  intempevate 
do  not  acquiesce  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  single  person.** 
And  the  reason  on  account  of  which  Socrates  refused 
to  go  to  Archelaus,  "  because,"  said  he,  "  it  is  a  dis- 
grace for  one  who  has  been  treated  well  to  be  unable 
to  make  a  retort  on  terms  of  equality,  just  as  it  would 
be  for  one  who  has  been  treated  ill"  For  all  these 
deduce  their  inferences  about  the  points  respecting 
which  they  speak,  after  having  defined  and  ascer- 
tained the  question. 

Another  element  is  deducible  from  the  number  of  9. 
senses  in  which  a  word  may  be  taken,  as  in  the  Topics  ^^^^ 
respecting  the  acceptations  of  the  word  rightly.    An-  ber  of 
other  from  taking  the  different  bearings  of  the  case ;  meMiings 
as,  "  If  all  act  unjustly  for  three  objects,  for  the  sake  J^^® 
either  of  this,  or  this,  or  this,  and  from  two  of  these  10. 
motives  it  is  impossible  that  he  should  have  acted ;  ^-  ^^^ 
but  that  he  acted  on  the  third,  not  even  the  accusers  vision" 
themselves  allege." 

^Another  from  indtictiony  as  may  be  illustrated  from  ii. 
the  oration  respecting  Peparethus,  to  establish  that  f  From 
women  every  where  discern  truly  respecting  their  tion!*^ 
children ;.  because  first  at  Athens  the  mother  made 
the  matter  clear  to  Mantias,  the  orator,  when  under- 
taking a  suit  against  his  son ;  and  again  at  Thebes, 
when  Ismenias  and  Stilbon  were  at  issue  on  the  point, 
the  Dodonian  woman  proved  the  child  to  be  the  son 
of  Ismenias;  and  on  this  account  they  considered 
Thessaliscus  to  be  the  son  of  Ismenias.  And  again, 
from  the  law  of  Theodectes,  "  If  people  do  not  give 
their  own  horses  in  charge  to  those  who  manage  those 
of  others  afaiiss,  nor  [their  ships]  to  those  who  over- 
turn the  ships  of  others ;  neither  ought  we,  if  in 
every  case  it  happens  in  the  same  way,  to  employ 
those  who  but  ill  protect  the  safety  of  others,  for  our 
own  protection."  And,  as  Alcidamas  asserted,  that 
*^  all  pay  honour  to  the  wise,  at  least  the  Parians 
honoured  Archilochus,  what  though  he  was  a  calum- 
niatoi^  of  them ;  and  the  Chians,  Homer,  who  was 
not  their  citizen ;  the  Mitylenaeans,  Sappho,  though 
she  was  a  woman ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  of 

184  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

all. people  are  the  least  attached  to  learning,  made 
Chilon  one  o£  their  senators ;  the  Greeks  of  Italy 
also  honoured  Pythagoras,  and  the  people  of  Xiiaiii- 
psacus  buried  Anaxagoras,  though  a  foreigner^   and 
honour  him  even  to  this  daj ;  the  Athenians  a^ain 
were  prosperous  while  thej  abode  by  the  laws  of 
Solon,  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  while  by  thos^  of 
Ljcurgus  ;   also  at  Thebes,  at  the  time   that   the 
magistrates  were  men  of  learning,  the  state  enjoyed 
prosperity." 
12.      AjiQther  element  of  enthymems  is  derivable  from  a 
M.  From  former  decision  of  the  same,  a  similar,  or  opposite 
decisions,  question ;  more  especially  indeed  if  all  men  so  decide, 
and  that  uniformly ;  and  otherwise,  [if  not  all,3  but 
the  majority ;  or  the  wise,  either  all,  or  most  of  them  ; 
or  the  good;  or  if  the  very  judges  themselves,  or 
those  whom  they  approve,  or  those  in  opposition  to 
whom  they  cannot  decide  (as  for  instance  those  on 
whom  they  depend)  ;  or  those  contrary  to  whom  it  is 
not  becoming  to  decide ;  for  instance,  a  god,  or  a  fa- 
ther, or  teacher,  [happen  so  to  have  decided].     Just 
on  the  principle  of  the  appeal  of  Autocles  to  Mixide- 
mides,  ^^  whether  it  beseemed  the  awful  goddesses  to 
render  an  account  to  the  Areopagus,  and  not  Mixi- 
demides  ?"     Or,  as  Sappho  insisted,  "that  to  die  was 
an  evil,  the  gods  having  so  decided ;  since  [had  it 
not  been  so]  they  would  themselves  have  died ;"  or 
as  Aristippus  told  Plato  when  he  asserted  something, 
as  he  thought,  rather  dogmatically,  "  Yet,"  said  he, 
*'  our  companion  at  least  held  no  such  thing,"  mean- 
ing Socrates.     And  Hegesippus,  having  first  con- 
sulted the  oracle  at  Olympia,  put  the  question  second- 
ly at  Delphi, — ^whether  he  [Apollo]  was  of  the  same 
opinion  as  his  father ;  as  though  it  were  disgraceful 
to  contradict  a  father.     And  of  Helen,  as  Isocrates 
wrote  ^^,  that  "  she  was  worthy,  since  indeed  Theseus 
judged  her  so."     And  of  Paris,  "  whom  the  goddesses 

"  "Eypa^J/gp,  because  demonstrative  orations  were  seldom 
composed  for  dehvery,  but  rather,  as  we  should  say,  for  the 
closet,  book  iii.  c.  12,  §  6,  ^  /uev  iirtditicriK^  Xe^ts  ypa<l>iKU' 
rifni,  T«J  yd/»  epyoar  avr^v  dvayvmvit.     See  note  chap.  ad.  \  7. 

CHAP,  xxiii.]  RHETORIC.  185 

preferred  *3;"  and  of  Evagar&Sy  as  Isocrates  says,  that 
must  needs  be  virtuous,  "since  Conon,  when  un- 
fortunatelj  passing  bj  every  one  else,  came  to 
Evagoras." 

Another  element  arises  from  an  enumeradan  of  13. 
parts;  as  in  the  Topica,  "what  kind  of  motion  the  ^^f^^ 
soul  is ;  it  is  either  of  this,  or  that  description."   And  meration 
an  instance  occurs  in  the  Socrates  of  Theodectes:  of  parts. 
"  Toward  what  temple  hath  he  been  guilty  of  im- 
piety ?  whom  of  the  gods  which  the  ritual  of  our 
state  acknowledges,  hath  he  not  honoured?" 

Another  consists  in,  Since,  in  the  generality  of  in-  14.^ 

stances,  it  happens  that  on  the  same  circumstances  ^*^^°™ 
/       .    "-^  ,      ,  ,  't      1      "^6  conse- 

somewhat  is  conseqtient  whether  good  or  evil,  the  guents. 

exhortation  or  dissuasion  by  means  of  these  conse- 
quences, the  accusation  or  defence,  the  praising  or 
blaming;  for  instance,  on  education  is  consequent 
envy,  which  is  an  evil ;  and  the  being  wise,  which  is  a 
good:  [on  the  one  hand  then  you  may  assert  that]  men 
should  not  seek  to  be  educated,  because  it  is  not  good 
to  be  envied ;  [on  the  other  that]  it  is  fitting  to  be 
educated,  for  it  is  good  to  be  wise.  In  this  topic  ^*, 
with  the  addition  o^  that  on  possibility,  and  the  other 
[nniversal  means  of  proof],  as  they  have  been  stated, 
consists  the  system  of  Calippus. 

Another  occurs,  when  we  want  to  exhort  or  dis-  if 
suade  respecting  two  propositions,  and  those  opposed  ^g'^^f**"^ 
to  each  other ;  and  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  foremen-  lemma. 
tioned  argument  in  the  case  of  both.    The  difference 
[between  this  and  the  element  last  mentioned]  is,  that 
in  it  the  opposition  is  merely  between  any  proposi- 
tions which  may  happen,  it  here  holds  between  con- 
traries :  for  instance,  a  priestess  was  endeavouring  to 
prevent  her  son  from  becoming  a  public  speaker ; 

"  See  book  i.  chap.  vi.  §  26 ;  where,  in  stating  that  to  be 
good  wMch  is  an  object  of  preference,  he  cites  these  two  in- 
stances. 

^*  It  is,  however,  a  mode  of  argument  sometimes  so  falla- 
cious, that  we  may  say  with  Ovid, 

careat  successibus  opto 

Quisquis  ab  eventu  ftuctBk  notanda  putat 

Phyllis  Demoph. 

186  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

because,  said  she,  **  If  on  the  one  hand  you  speak 
what  is  just,  men  will  hate  jou  ;  if  what  is  unjust, 
the  gods"  [Here  then  it  might  be  retorted],  there- 
fore you  ought  to  become  a  public  speaker ;  for,  "  if 
you  speak  what  is  just,  the  gods  will  love  you ;  if 
what  is  unjust,  men  ^K"  And  this  is  equivalent  to 
the  proverb  "  of  buying  dirt  as  well  as  salt/*  And 
the  retortion  is  this,  when  on  each  of  two  contraries 
good  and  evil  is  consequent,  they  being  respectively 
opposed. 

16.  Another  arises  from  the  circumstance,  that  men  do 
S'  d^"^-  ^^*  approve  the  same  things  privately  as  before  the 
eiit  mo-  '  world ;  but  when  in  public,  they  praise  beyond  all 
tives  of  things  what  is  just  and  honourable ;  but  within 
maiikind.  themselves  they  prefer  what  is  expedient :  the  orator 

should  endeavour  to  infer  whichever  suits  his  pur- 
pose, for  this  element  is  of  sovereign  use  in  exposing 
anomalies  of  opinion. 

17.  Another  element  is  deducible  from  the  analogy  of 
i^From  results ;   as  Iphicrates  urged  when  they  compelled 

°^*  his  son  to  serve  who  was  under  the  standard  age,  be- 
cause he  was  tall,  that  "  if  they  esteem  great  children 
as  men,  they  assuredly  will  vote  small  men  to  be 
children."  And  Theodectes,  in  the  oration  respect- 
ing the  law,  asked,  "  Do  ye  make  the  mercenaries, 
such  as  Strabax  and  Charidemus,  citizens  on  account 
of  their  virtue,  and  will  ye  not  make  exiles  of  those 
among  the  mercenaries  who  have  committed  these 
intolerable  acts?" 

18.  Another  arises  out  of  the  argument,  that  if  the  re- 
xviiFrom  guj^  be  the  same,  the  principle  from  which  it  arises 
laxity  of  will  be  the  same ;  just  as  Xenophanes  used  to  argue, 
conse-  that  "  they  are  equally  guilty  of  impiety  who  assert 
quents.      ^^^  ^^^  g^^  ^^^.g  produced,  &s  those  who  assert  that 

they  die ;  for  in  both  cases  it  happens  that  in  some 
period  or  other  the  gods  do  not  exist."  And  generally 

><  See  an  instance  of  this  mode  of  arguing  used  by  Tiresias, 
Euripides,  Phoenissae,  968.  Of  this  kind  is  also  the  argument 
of  Gamaliel :  "  If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will 
come  to  nought ;  but,  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it." 
Acts  y.  38,  39. 

CHAP,  zxiii.]  RHETORIC.  187 

assuming  that  the  result  of  each  act  is  in  every  case 
identified  with  it.  [Take  this  argument  as  an  illus- 
tration] :  "  Ye  are  about  to  pronounce,  not  respect-  . 
ing  Socrates,  but  respecting  the  pursuit  in  general, 
whether  it  be  right  to  addict  one's  self  to  philosophy." 
And  this,  ''that  the  giving  earth  and  water  is  the 
being  slaves."  And  ''that  the  participating  in  the 
common  peace  is  the  performing  of  what  is  enjoined.'* 
Now  we  are  to  take  whichever  side  may  suit  our  pur- 
pose. 

Another  may  be  deduced  from  the  circumstance,  19., 
that  the  same  persons  do  not  choose  the  same  things  ^^  ^^ 
subsequently  as  before,  but  contrariwise ;  as,  for  in-  mconosfr- 
stance,  this  appeal : — "  If,  when  in  banishment,  we  e>icy  of 
fought  that  we  might  return ;  shall  we,  now  that  we  ^^^ 
have  returned,  take  to  flight,  in  order  that  we  may 
not  fight  ^^?"     For  one  while  they  chose  abiding  in 
their  country  at  the  expense  of  fighting  ;  at  another, 
the  possibility  of  avoiding  fighting  at  tiie  expense  of 
non-continuance  in  their  native  land. 

Another  element  which  may  be  resorted  to  is,  the  20. 
assertion  that  a  thing  either  exists  eft  was  produced,  ^^nJ]^ 
for  the  sake  of  that  for  which  it  might  have  existed  or  a  possible 
been  produced ;  as  if  some  one  were  to  give  a  person  ®^^  "  *^® 
any  thing,  in  order  that  by  taking  it  from  hjm  he 
may  annoy  him.  Whence  also  it  has  been  said,  "  To 
many,  fortune,  not  bearing  them  good  will,  gives  • 
great  good  luck ;  but  it  is  in  order  that  they  may  re- 
ceive the  more  conspicuous  calamities  ^'^"    And  this 
from  the  Meleager.of  Antiphon :  "  Not  in  order  that 
they  might  slay  the  beast,  but  that  they  may  become 
witnesses,  before  Greece,  of  Meleager's  valour."  And 
that  insinuation  in  the  Ajax  of  Theodectes,  "that 
Diomede  chose  Ulysses,  not  as  any  compliment,  but 
in  order  that  his  attendant  might  at  the  same  time  be 
his  inferior."     For  it  is  very  possible  that  he  did  so 
on  this  account. 

Another,  common  both  to  the  judicial  and  de-  21. 
libera tive  orators,  is  the  consideration  of  the  motives  "^i^^ 

'*  From  an  Oration  by  Lysias. 

"  Evertere  domoa  tolas  optantibus  ipsis  Dii  iacUes. 

188  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii 

ing  the      which  Stimulate  or  retard  men,  and  the  objects  with 
motiveB.     ^  yj^^  ^  which  they  both  act  and  avoid ;  for  these 
are  such  as,  if  thej  be  actually  in  existence,  we  needs 
must  proceed  to  action ;  for  instance,  if  the  under- 
taking be  possible,  and  easy,  and  beneficial,  eitheivto 
the  person  in  question  himself,  or  to  his  friends,  or 
pernicious  to  his  enemies,  and  entailing  loss  on  them ; 
or  if  the  loss  be  less  than  the  object  proposed^®. 
And  it  is  upon  these  considerations  that  orators  ex' 
hort,  and  on  their  opposites  that  they  dissuade  ;  more- 
over they  both  d^end  and  accuse  upon  the  ground  of 
these  considerations ;  they  rest  their  defences  on  those 
which  are  used  to  dissuade^  and  their  accusations  on 
those  used  to  exhort^^.  The  whole  system  of  Calippus, 
as  well  as  that  of  Pamphilus,  is  nothing  more  than 
this  element 
22.      Another  is  deducible  from  circumstances  which 
m^From  appear  to  have  taken  place,  but  which  are  improba- 
which  is    ble,  on  the  ground  that  they  would  not  seem  to  be 
incredible  facts,  had  they  not  well  nigh  occurred  or  actually 
yet  true.    ^^^^  ^^ ,  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  j^^^^  ^  ^^^  Stronger  claim  to 

belief ;  for  men  apprehend  as  truths  either  facts  or 
probabilities ;  if  then  it  be  passing  belief,  and  not 
probable,  it  will  be  true^;  for  at  idl  events,  it  is  not 
on  account  of  its  likelihood  and  plausibility  that  it 
has  this  appearance  of  being  the  case.  Just  as  An- 
•  drocles  of  th^  burgh  Fithos,  said  in  his  impeachment 

"  npay/xa :  by  this  word  he  designates  the  object  of  desire 
and  pursuit.    Victor. 

*'  That  is  to  say,  those  very  same  faculties  which  the  deli- 
berative orator  would  employ  in  exhorting  a  person  to  act, 
would,  if  existing  in  reference  to  one  under  accusation^  be 
turned  against  him  by  the  judicial  speaker  as  circumstances 
confirmatiye  of  suspicion.  And,  vice  verati^  the  circumstances 
of  difficulty  attending  the  undertaking,  which  would  be  em- 
ployed to  diamade  from  its  attempt,  might  be  alleged  'in  de- 
fence of  an  individual  under  suspicion,  as  points  of  the  case 
which  render  his  guilt  improbable. 

^  The  argument  may  be  formally  stated  thus :  Men  believe 
either  what  is  actual  fact,  or  probable ;  this  is  believed ;  this 
therefore  is  either  fact,  or  probable ;  it  is  not  probable,  there- 
fore it  is  fact.  It  is  needless  to  observe  that  the  slight  possi- 
bility, that  it  may  be  neither  one  nor  the  other,  is  completely 
slurred  over. 

CHAP,  xxiii.]  RHETORIC.  189 

of  the  law,  when  the  multitude  were  tumultuous  as 
he  spoke,  "  The  laws  require  some  law  to  set  them 
right,  for  the  very  fishes  require  salt ; "  and  yet  it  is 
neither  likely  nor  plausible  that  creatures  bred  in  the 
brine  of  the  sea  should  require  salt.  "  Nay,  the  olive 
lees  require  oil,"  and  yet  it  is  a  fact  not  to  be  credited, 
that  the  very  things  from  which  oil  is  produced  should 
Inquire  oil." 

Another  element,  Reputative,  is  the  consideration  23.  Refo- 
of  contradictions ;  if  there  occur  any  contradiction  ^^®  ®^®" 
under  all  the  circumstances  of  time,  conduct  ^^  say-  l  From 
ings,  and  the  like.    And  this  independently,  respect-  consider- 
ing your  adversary,  as  "  He  tells  you  that  he  loves  c^^^c- 
you,  yet  did  he  conspire  with  the  thirty  [tyrants]  ;"  tions. 
or  independently  respecting  yourself,  "  He  tells  you 
that  I  am  litigious,  but  is  not  able  to  prove  that  I 
have  brought  any  action  into  court;"  or  respecting 
both  yourself  and  the  adversary  distinctly,  "This 
man   never  lent  any  thing,  but  I  have  ransomed 
many  of  you." 

Another,  applicable  to  those  who  have  been  calum-  24. 
niated,  or  who  appear  so,  whether  men  or  actions,  is  "*  ^^ 
the  explaining  the  cause  of  the  mistaken  notion ;  for  tion. 
there  is  some  circumstance,  on  account  of  which  it 
appears  to  be  the  case ;  for  example,  when  a  certain 
woman  had  \come  in  contact  with  her  son,  she  seemed 
from  her  embracing  him  to  have  had  connexion  with 
the  youth ;  when,  however,  the  circumstance  which 
caused  it  had  been  stated,  the  charge  was  quashed. 
And   as  in  the  Ajax  of  Theodectes,  Ulysses  tells 
Ajax  why,  though  he  is  braver  than  Ajax,  he  does 
not  seem  so. 

Another  is  derived  from  the  cause,  if  that  be  in  25. 
existence,  arguing  that  the  effect  is  also ;  and  should  ^Jl,^ 
it  not  exist,  tiiat  neither  does  the  effect.     For  cause,  from 

•*  Thus  M.  Livius  Salinator  having  at  one  period  narrowly 
escaped  conyiction  for  embezzlement,  afterwards,  when  he  was 
made  Censor,  disfranchised  all  the  tribes  except  that  by  whose 
vote  he  had  been  acquitted,  "  quod  aut  prius  se  injuste  con- 
demnassent ;  aut  postea  tantos  houores  non  recte  tribuissent." 
Aur.  Victor,  de  viris  illus. 

190  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  ii. 

eaiue  to  and  that  of  which  it  is  the  canse,  exist  conjointly, 
®?®**^2?  *°^  nothing  exists  without  a  cause.  Just  as  Leoda- 
'  mas  in  his  defence,  when  Thrasyhulus  accused  him, 
hecause  he  had  been  inscribed  with  infamy  on  a  pil- 
lar in  the  Acropolis,  but  erased  it  in  the  time  of  the 
thirty  tyrants,  urged,  "that  it  was  not  possible,  be- 
cause the  thirty  tyrants  would  put  greater  confidence 
in  him,  while  his  hatred  toward  ^e  democracy  re- 
mained inscribed  in  public.** 

26.  Another  is,  the  observing  whether  the  thing  re- 
rij.  Fioin  gpecting  which  the  party  is  deliberating,  or  acting, 
whe^^  o^  has  acted,  did  or  does  admit  of  being  on  another 
the  fact     and  better  footing ;  iSince  it  will  become  evident  that, 

hji^been  ^^  *^*®  ^  *^®  ^^*®®>  ^®  ^^  ^^*  acted ;  since  no  one  vo- 
donebet-  luntarily,  and  of  his  own  knowledge,  deliberately 
*«'•  chooses  what  is  bad.     This,  however,  involves  a  fal- 

lacy ;  for  in  many  cases  it  becomes  clear  [only]  when 
too  late,  how  it  might  have  been  managed  better, 
whereas  it  was  before  unknown. 

27.  Another,  which  occurs  when  any  thing  anomalous 
T.  From  to  former  acts  is  about  to  be  done,  is  the  considering 
maly  of  ^he  both  in  connexion;  just  as  Xenophanes  advised 
the  pre-  the  people  of  Elea,  when  they  asked  him  whether 
Se*™^***  they  should  sacrifice  and  sing  a  dirge  to  Leucothea** 

or  not,  "  if  they  conceived  her  to  be  a  deity,  not  to 
sing  a  dirge ;  but  if  a  human  being,  not  to  sacrifice." 

28.  Another  element  is,  the  accusing  or  defending  on 
^'  ^'bT  *^®  ground  of  errors  committed ;  for  instance,  in  the 
fore"om-  Medea  of  Carcinus,  some  persons  accuse  her  because 
mitted.      she  slew  her  children,  [alleging]  that  at  all  events 

they  were  not  forthcoming ;  for,  respecting  the  send- 
ing away  her  children,  Medea  tixu  in  fault:  she, 
however,  defends  herself  [alleging  that,  if  any  one], 
she  would  have  murdered  Jason,  not  her  children ; 
which  in  truth  had  she  done,  she  would  have  erred 
in  not  doing  the  other.  And  this  element  and  spe- 
cies of  enthymem  constitutes  the  whole  of  that  system 
of  Theodorus,  which  is  first. 
..      29.      Another  is  deducible  from  the  name ;  as  Sophocles 

^  Ino,  Cadmi  filia,  nonne  Leucothea  nominata  a  Graecis, 
Matuta  habetur  a  nostris  ?    Cicero,  Tusc.  i.  12. 

CHAP.  XXIII.]  RHETORIC.  191 

sajs,  "  Steel  in  truth  you  are,  and  bear  the  name."  the 
And  as  they  are  wont  to  say  in  their  praises  of  the  ^^^  ^^ 
gods**;    and   as  Conon  used  to  call   Thrasybulus,  the  term, 
"rash  in  counsel,"  (9paffv/3ovXoc) ;    and  Herodicus 
told  Thrasymachus,  "  You  are  always  .rash  in  fight, 
(Opoffvfjtaxos) ;  and  Polus,  "  You  always  are  a  colt," 
(IlayXoc) ;  and  Draco  the  legislator,  that  ''  his  laws 
were  not  those  of  a  man,  but  of  a  dragon^*;  for  they 
were  harsh,"     And  as  the  Hecuba  of  Euripides  says 
of  Venus,  "  The  very  name  of  the  goddess  rightiy 
begins  with  folly  ^."    And  as  Charemon  says,  "Pen- 
tbeus,  rightly  named  from  the  calamities'^  awaiting 
him." 

Refutative  enthymems,  however,  are  more  in  re-  30.  Rea- 
pute  than  the  confirmative ;  by  reason  of  the  refutative  refot^ve 
enthymem  being  a  setting  contraries  briefly  together ;  enthy- 
and  because  tlungs  when  put  in  contrast  are  more  =aem8  are 
palpable  to  the  auditor.     Of  all  forms  of  reasoning,  ^pSe* 
however,  as  well  confirmative  as  refutative,  those  than  con- 
produce  the  greatest  effect^,  which  are  of  such  a  de-  fi™^**^«- 
scription  that,  on  the  commencement  of  their  enun- 
ciation, men  anticipate  the  conclusion,  yet  without 
their  being  superficial ;  for  the  hearers  on  their  own 
parts,  feel  a  pleasure^,  in  having  of  themselves  anti- 

*3  Though  he  does  not  inform  ub  what  mode  of  praise  this 
is  to  which  he  alludes,  we  may  infer  that  it  consisted  in  pun- 
tUng  on  their  respective  appellations  as  often  as  the  case  ad- 
mitted it. 

**  In  this  solitary  instance  of  all  the  tissne  does  our  language 
admit  of  preserving  the  pun  of  the  (Higinal ;  and  this,  while  it 
will  serve  sufficiently  to  illustrate  our  author's  meaning,  will' 
not  leave  him  any  great  cause  to  regret  that  he  has  lost  the 
force  of  the  others. 

^  Folly,  in  Greek  d^poirvvn.  The  tragedian  seems  to  have 
strained  the  etymology  of  *A4>podirri  to  suit  his  purpose. 
However,  there  are  no  liberties  which  pimsters  and  theorists 
will  not  take.  The  words  occur  in  the  Troades,  990.  Byron, 
speaking  of  love,  says,  "  Begun  in  Folly,  closed  in  Tears." 
Giaour. 

«  Uiydta. 

^  Bopvfiovirrai :  respecting  this  word,  see  a  note,  book  i. 
chap.  2. 

*  For  the  principles  on  which  this  pleasure  arises,  see  b.  i. 
.1,  }  21,  on  the  ground  that  the  apptehension  of  them  is  &cili- 

192  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  n. 

cipated  it ;  and  [next  to  these  may  we  class]  all  those, 
hj  which  the  hearers  are  left  behind,  just  so  much  as 
that  they  apprehend  them  simultaneously  with  their 
having  been  enundated. 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

Elements  of  Apparent  Bnthymems, 

1.  Falla-   Just  as  it  is  possible  that  [one  form  of  reasoning] 
^^ems   ™*y^  ^  ^  syllogism,  and  that  another,  without  really 
being  such,  may  appear  to  be  so ;  even  so  it  must 
needs  be  with  respect  to  the  enthymem  also,  that  one 
description  should  really  be  enthymems,  and  another 
not,  however  they  may  ctppear  to  be ;  for  the  enthy- 
mem is  a  species  of  syllogism. 
2.      But  the  elements  of  these  apparent  enthymems  are, 
th^  ^c-"^  ^^^  derivable  from  the  diction :  and  of  this,  the  first 
tion  of"     kind  is,  as  in  logic,  the  asserting  your  last  proposition 
twokinds.  with  all  the  air  of  a  conclusion,  althoij^h  you  have 
iiiffl^-  ^©duced  no  [legitimate]  inference  at  all :  thus,  "  So 
elusion      and  so  is  assuredly  not  the  case,  necessarily,  therefore, 
not  in-      go  and  so  is."     And  the  expressing  yourself  in  the 
®"^  *       course  of  your  reasonings  concisely  and  pointedly ; 
for  this  kind  of  style  is  the  very  province  of  the  en- 
thymem, and  this  kind  of  fallacy  is,  it  is  probable, 
that  which  is  [demonstrated]  "  the  result  of  the  style 
of  the  diction ;"  but  the  stringing  together  the  heads 
of  many  syllogisms,  is  a  good  expedient  with  a  view 
to  expressing  yourself  with  all  the  air  of  syllogism  in 
your  style ;  thus,  "  that  he  preserved  some,  avenged 
others,  emancipated  the  Greek  people."    For  each  of 
these  propositions  has  been  demonstrated  from  others ; 
and  when  they  are  put  in  conjunction,  it  appears  that 
ii.  Am-     something  results  ever  from  them.     Another  kind 

biguous     arises  from  similarity  of  names,  as  the  assertion,  that 

terms,  etc.  ''  '  ' 

tated,  and  our  admiration  excited ;  and  {  27  on  the  principle 
that  TO  aoif>dv  ioKsiv  ^du.  For  our  self-admiration  is  gratified 
by  so  easily  perceiving  the  drUl  of  the  speaker. 

CHAF'.  xxiv/  BHETORIO.  1931 

^'^the  mouse  is  an'  excellent  animal,  being' that  from' 
which  the  noost  esteemed  of  all  rites  have  derived 
their  name ;"  for  of  all  rites,^  the  mysteries  are  held  m 
most  esteem.  Or,  if  any  one  in  praidii]:g  a  dog,  were 
to  embrace  in  his  panegyric  the  dog  in  the  hea^^ns^ 
tft  Fan ;  because  Pindar  thus  addresses  him,  "  O 
blesBed  being,  whom'  the^  inhabitants  of  Olympus  call 
the  all- various  dog  of  the  mighty  goddess."  Or  the 
srgixing,  that  ^'  it  is  a  most  disgraceful  thing,  that 
there  should  be  not  ev«n  a  dog  in  the  house ;  and 
therefore  it  is  evident  that  a  dog  is  honourable." 
And  the  assertion,  that  Mercury  is  "commttnieative*' 
above  all  the  gods,  because  Mereury  akne  is  called 
^^common.'*  And  the  stating  that  Xc^yoc,  speech,  isr 
most  excellent ;  because  the  good  are  worthy  of  Xiyocv 
etteemj  not  of  wealth :  for  the  words  (Xoyoii:  ^(corv) 
are  not  used  in  a  single  sense; 

Another  [element  of  fallaey]  is  the  asserting' con^^  3. 
jointly  what  i«  true  separately ;  or  separately,  what  ^^^m™ 
i»  true  conjointly ;  for  as  it  appears  to  be  the  same  and  com- 
thing,  what  though  in  many  instances  it  be  not  the  position. 
aame^  the  orator  should  practise  whatever  method  is 
more  available  to  his  purpose.     The  seCying  of  Eu* 
thydemns  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  an  instance 
of  this;  the  deelaration,  for  instaitce,  that  ''he  knetv 
there  was  a-  galley  in  the  Piraeus  V'  ^o^  he  knew  each 
[separate  fact  of  his  assertion].     And  tb  dedare  of 
one  who  knows  the  constituent  letters,  'Vthat  he  knows 
the  verse *;"  for  the  verse  is  the  same  thing.     Again, 
the  saying  that  '*  as  twice  so^much  is  prcjudiei^  h» 
denied  that  the  one  was  wholesome ;  for  it  is  absurd 
that  two  good  things  should  constitute  one  that  is 
noxious."     Thus  enunciated,  it  is  adapted  to  refuta- 
Hon;  but  thus  it  is  confirmathe;  ''for  two  evils^do 
not  constitute  one  good,"  etc.     But  the  whole  topic 

*  An  instance  of  tha  flagrant  absurdity  which-  may  arise 
from  taking  coy^btn^/jr-  what  is  ixne  only  separately :  Eutikyde- 
mns  knew  there  were  galleys  in  existence,  and  he  was  in  the 
Pinens  when  he  had  this  knowledge ;  he  knew  therefoite  that 
there  were  gaUe3rs  in  the  Piraeus,  i.  e.  he  being  in  tihe  Pirfi&us* 

*  Of  iMa  nature  was  the  sneering  recommendation-  of  a 
Dictionary  as  a  book  of  genercU  information, 

O 

194  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

is  replete  wih  fallacy.  Such  again  is  the  saying  of 
Polycrates  respecting  Thrasybulus,  that  he  had  de- 
posed thirty  tyrants^;*'  for  he  takes  them  conjointly. 
Or,  as  in  the  Orestes  of  Theodectes,  from  distinct 
cases,  "  It  is  just  that  she  who  has  slain  her  husband 
should  die ;  as  also  that  a  son  at  least  should  avenge 
his  father.  Now,  are  not  these  the  very  things  that 
have  been  done  ?  "  for,  taking  the  cases  conjointly, 
perhaps  it  is  no  longer  just.  This  may  also  come 
under  the  fallacy  of  omission,  for  it  is  not  explained 
"  by  whom  [she  should  be  put  to  death]." 

4.  Another  element  is  the  doing  away  or  establishing 
Su»era^  a  point  by  exaggeration*:  and  this  occurs  when, 
tion.         without  having  shown  that  [the  prisoner]  has  really 

committed  the  crime,  [the  accuser]  proceeds  to  ex- 
aggerate it  ;  for  this  fallacy  causes  it  to  appear  (when 
the  accused  employs  the  exaggeration)  that  he  has 
not  done  the  deed ;  or,  (supposing  it  be  the  accuser 
who  gets  into  a  passion,)  that  he  has  done  it.  Thus 
then  there  is  no  enthymem ;  for  the  hearer  is  sophis- 
tically  brought  over  to  a  belief  either  that  [the  ac- 
cused] has  or  has  not  done  it,  without  any  proof 
having  been  adduced. 

5.  Another  is  the  argument  drawn  from  a  sign',  for 
4th.  From  this  also  is  illogical;  as  if  one  were  to  say,  "Lovers 

ixrr/^itov,  ^^^  ^^  advantage  to  states;  for  the  love  of  Har- 
modius  and  Aristogiton  deposed  the  tyrant  Hip- 
parchus."  And  if  one  were  to  say,  "  Dionysius  is 
a  robber,  for  he  is  a  wicked  man ; "  for  this  also  is 
illogical,  because  not  every  wicked  man  is  a  thief, 
although  every  thief  is  a  wicked  man. 

'  The  fallacy  consists  in  this,  that  it  leads  you  to  suppose 
that  Thrasybuhis  had  destroyed  thirty  distinct  tyrannies,  where- 
as he  had  in  fact  only  suppressed  one,  the  power  of  which  hap- 
pened to  be  shared  between  thirty  different  individuals. 

*  This  is  the  first  of  the  fallacies  which  are  independent  of 
the  diction,  and  may  be  termed,  for  the  sake  of  distinction, 
real  or  material  fallacies. 

'  Meaning  of  course  the  specific  ctifitlov,  for  no  fallacy  can 
result  from  the  TtKfiiipioVf  yid.  book  i.  chap.  ii.  §  16.  This 
fallacy  he  has  elsewhere  denominated  Td  nrapdt.  ttiv  dyvotay 
TOW  iXiyxov, 

CHAP,  xxiv.]  RHETORIC.  195 

Another  is  the  arguing  from  an  accidental  cir-  6. 
cumstance;  exemplified  in  that  which  Polycrates^  ^-^^P™ 
said  about  mice,  that  '^  thej  lent  their  aid  bj  gnaw-  dents  of  a 
ing  through  the  [enemy's]  bowstrings."      Or  sup-  thing. 
posing  one  to  declare,  ^^that  the   being  bidden  to 
sapper  is  the  most  honourable;   for  Achilles  was 
wroth,  on  account  of  his  not  being  invited  by  the 
Greeks  at  Tenedos : "  he  however  was  enraged,  as 
though  he  was  treated  with  disrespect,  and  this 
occurred  upon  his  not  being  invited. 

Another  arises  from  establishing  the  consequent ;  7. 
as  in  the  oration  respecting  Paris,  [it  is  contended]  ^JtiM^ 
that  **  he  is  of  a  noble  spirit ;    because,  despising  that  as  a 
the  society  of  many,  he  abode  on  Ida  by  himself;"  logical 
for,  because  the  noble-spirited   are  thus   disposed,  ^^^|^ 
he,  too,  it  should   seem,  is  noble-spirited.     Again,  not. 
"  Since  he  is  both  foppish  in  his  dress,  and  strolls 
about  by  night,  he  is  an  adulterer;"  because  adul- 
terers  are  persons   of  such   habits'^.       Similar  to 
this  is  also  the  argument,  that  'Uhe  poor,  because 
they  dance   and,  sing   in   the  temples  ;    and  that 
exiles,  because  it  is  permitted  them  to  dwell  where 
they  list,  [are  happy.]"     For  as  these   advantages 
belong  to  those  who  appear  to  be  happy ;  they  too 
would  appear  to  be  happy,  to  whom  they  belong. 
Moreover,  the  case  varies  with  the  circumstances  of 
the  transaction;   on  which  account, ^the   argument 
falls  *ander  the  charge  of  omission. 

Another  arises  from  stating  as  a  cause  that  which  8- 
in  fact  is  not ;  [arguing],  for  instance,  on  its  having  isgeVtw* 
happened  "simultaneously,"  or  "after;"  for  men  do  that  as  a 
assume  that  what  occurs  "  mbseqitently,^  [occurs]  ^^f\ . 
"  by  means  of^  [that  which  preceded],   and   more  ^qi\ 
especially  those  engaged  in   state  affairs ;   just  as  cause. 
Demades  [insinuated]  "that  the  administration  of 

^  This  Polycrates  was  one  of  the  Sophists ;  he  was  men- 
tioned aboTe  (§3).  The  circumstance  respecting  the  mice  is 
recorded  by  Herodotus,  ii.  141. 

7  The  fallacy  in  this  instance  arises  from  taking  the  simple 
converse  of  a  universal  affirmative  proposition ;  as  also  in  the 
instance  cited  §  5. 

o  2 

1^  AB^TOTLEtS  [book  n. 

Demosthenes  wan  the  cause  of  all  ^dr  misfortunes  : 

because  a  war  happened  after  it.** 

9.      Another,  &om  the  omission  of  th^  ^^when"  and. 

f^'^l^  '* manner  how;"  for  instaoeej  the  Mrgument  "that 

sion  of      Paris  carried  off  Helen  justly ;  because  firee  ehoi€& 

prticu-     j^Mi  been  given  her  by  her  father®;"  fear  very  pos- 

^"'         sibly  it  wa3.  not  [granifced}  for  a.  contiiftuaiEkcey  but 

at.  first  naevely ;  because  so  far  only  was  sbe  at  h^r 

fether'a  disposal.     Or  if  any  one  were  to  say,,  "that 

^e  striking  free  men  was.  ap  insult  :"*  because  under 

all  circumstances  this  is  not  the  case^  bat  when  one 

begins  the  violence. 

10.  Again,  a»  in.  the  disputations  of  the  ,Soph)s%  therer 
^^^j?^"*  arises  an  apparent  syllogism  from  stating  l^n^  ab" 
^^^'^*^"    solutely  or  not  absolutely,  but  conditiooaUy ;  as  [it  i» 

contended]  in  logie^  that. "what  is  ac nonentity,  does 
exist;.  b0cause'  a  nonentity  eaasts  as  a  nonentity;" 
and  that  "  what  is  unknown  is  known^  fer  it  is>  Anoini 
to  be  unknown®;'*  just  so  in  rhetoric  also,  we  have 
an,  i^parent  enthymem  from  what  is  not  absolutelyi 
probable,  but  condUionaily  prob0.b]e.  This,  liowever, 
is.  not  universaUy  the  case ;  as  in  truth  Agatho  re* 
marks,  "  Perhaps  some  one  will  be  inclined  to  assert 
tJbdo  to  be.  probable,  that  many  improbabilities  wiU 
bejEall  men :"  foir  that  which  is  contrary  to  probability 
does  occur ;  so  that  even  what  is  contrary  to  pcobar 
hility  is  probable  ^^;  this,  however,  m  not  thef  case 
absoltUely  ;  but  just  as  in  sophistical  disputation^  it 
is  the  omissioia  of  the  circumstances  of  extent^  rela- 
tion».  and  f^ace,  which  produQes  the  imposition ;  so 
also  here  [in  rhetoric]*  it  results  from  the  things 
being  probable  not  absolutely,  but  conditionally  pro- 

11.  bable.  The  system  of  Coras  is  constructed  upon 
this  topiq :  for  supposing  your  client,  without  being 
open  to  the  charge,  as  for  instance,  being  infiro^ 

*  See  Euripides,  Iphig.  in  Aul.  66. 

^  See  the  epigram,  which,  alluding  to  Socrates^s  declara- 
tion^ **  that  he  knew  nothing,"  concludes  thus,. 

Hoc  aliquid  nihil  est,  hoc  nihil  ett  aliguid, 

*•  Compare  the  words  of  &ir  PhQip  Sidney,  that  **  a.  watukr 
is  no  wander  in  a  wonderful  eut^C* 

CHAP,  xxrv-l  RHETORIC.  .  197 

should  be  under  &  charge  for  an  assault,  [you  haT« 
grounds  for  your  defence,]  because  the  case  is  not 
probable :  and  if  he  be  open  to  the  ^arge,  from  hi» 
teing,  for  exam^,  a  powerfel  man,  [stiil  you  may 
defend  him]  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  likely,  be- 
cause it  was  sure  to  seem  to  be  likely*^.  And  so  also 
respecting  all  other  caises,  for  he  needs  must  be  either 
open  to  the  imputation  or  not  Both  cases  then  ap*- 
pear  to  be  likely ;  but  the  one  is  likely  [absoluiefy^ 
the  other  M>t  ubiolutely,  but  so  as  has  been  explained. 
And  this  is  [the  secret]  "<rf  making  the  worse,  the 
better  side^^/'  ^^^  hence  mankind  were  justly  in-  Sophis 
dignant  at  the  annunciation  of  BrotagOTas  ";  for  it  is  ^^^^^ 
an  imposition,  and  not  the  real,  but  an  apparent  pro-  ^"*' 
bability,  and  has  a  place  in  no  art  except  rhetoric^ 
«nd  the  art  of  disputation.  And  now  the  subject  of 
^nthymems,  as  well  real  as  apparent,  ha«  been  dis- 
caesed. 

CHAP.  XXV. 
The  Solution  of  Argument, 

It  follows  that  I  s^eak  of  the  modes  of  disengi^ng  1.  Solu- 
one's  seAf  from  arguments.     They  are  either  the  meet-  ^^^  ^^- 
ing  them  with  contradictory  arguments,  or  starting  an  t^JHrays. 
objection^.    Now  as  to  the  meeting  them  with  counter  Contra- 
dictory. 

**  Compare  lib.  i.  cap.  adi.  §  5,  tA  \lap  Iv  ^ai/epw,  #c.  f .  X. 

*■  There  were  some  persons  who  charged  Socrates  with  do* 
ing  this,  and  thence  concluded  that  he  was  a  person  dangerous 
to  the  state — «<m  *riff  Swicp^rtTV,  Av^p  ^<Hp69t  tA  t«  iJivritapa 
<f>poim6rTfi9,  Kal  tA  vtrd  ynv  travra  dv«^t}7*ifKeir«,  KA^I  T^ON 
"HTTQ  A'OrON  KPB'ITTQ  nO^QN*  Plato  Apol.  So<*.  $  2. 
-Compare  also  the  dialogue  of  the  two  Xoyoc,  in  the  Clouds  of 
Aristophanes. 

*'  Protagoras  Abderites,  Prodicus  €eitui,  Hippias  Eltus, 
ahiqne  nmlti  doeere  ise  profitebantur  airogantibus  sane  verbis, 
"  quenutdmodum  causa  inferior^  ita  enim  loquebantur,  dicendo 
Jieri  superior  po98et."    Cicero,  Brut.  c.  viii.    T«m»  4XX«wf«x- 

vwv  ohdifiia  TcuHzpria  tfvXX.oytteT«(,  i.  i.  f  1'2. 
^  *AvTiav\Xoyi<Tfi69  is  a  syllogism,  whose  co 

conclusion  is  con- 

198  .  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

aigu-        arguments,  it  is  evident  that  we  may  do  it  on  the 
Obf **'      ground  of  the  same  topics  [as  were  given  for  refuta- 
tioMT      tion]:  for  the  arguments  arise  out  of  probahilities, 
2.  and  many  things  which  appear  likely  are  opposed  to 
each  other. 
3.  Objec-       Objections,  however,  (as  was  stated  in  the  Topics,) 
f  Mf  ^    are  started  in  four  ways :  1.  for  either  it  may  be  from 
the  same  subject :  2.  from  a  similar :  3.  or  an  op- 
posite [to  that  from  which  the  adversary  argues]:  4. 
4.  or  from  points  already  decided.     By  deriving  your 
let.  From  objection  from  the  same  source,  I  mean  that,  sup- 
toui^^    posing  the  enthymem  were  respecting  love,  "  that  it 
was  a  good  feeling ;"  there  would  be  a  twofold  ob- 
i.  Gener-  jection ;  for  it  [might  be  started]  asserting  generally 
«lly-       .  that  "  every  want  is  bad :"  or  particularly^  that  "  the 
ciilL^'   proverbial  expression  Caunian  laves^  would  not  haw. 
'  5.  arisen  had  there  not  been  some  wicked  loves."  Again, 
^^''tJ^  an  objection  is  alleged  on  the  ground  of  a  contrary 
Jy,  ^        fact ;  as,  if  the  enthymem  was  this,  "  The  good  man 
benefits  all  his  friends;"  [and  the  objection,]  ''But 

6.  the  bad  man  do'es  not  hurt  all  his."     And  on  the 
3^.-  ^J^  ground  of  similar  cases  ^;  if  the  argument  be,  "  Those 
case.         who  have  been  treated  ill  always  hate ;"  [the  objec- 
tion,] that ''  those  who  have  been  treated  well  do  not 

7,  always  love*."  And  again,  the  decisions  of  men  of 
4th.  From  celebrity :  thus,  suppose  one  brought  forward  the  ar- 
cided.   ^  gument,  that  "we  ought  to  have  some  feeling  for 

those  who  are  intoxicated,  because  they  err  ignorant- 
ly*:"  this  objection  [may  be  started],  that  "Pittacus 

tradictoiy  of  that  adduced  by  your  oppbnent :  iwirravK  is  the 
showing  that  his  reasonings  are  fallacious  either  in  matter  or 
form. 

'  Alluding  to  the  loves  of  BybUs  and  her  brother  Caunus. 
See  Ovid.  Metaph.  ix.  453. 

•  Or  to  use  the  English  phrase,  **  by  parity  of  reasoning." 

^  Yictorius  remarks,  that  "  however  at  first  sight  this  in- 
stance would  seem  to  be  one  of  iv<rravi^  ii  dnri  Tou  cvavr/ou, 
it  is  not  inapplicable  to  the  present  case,  inasmuch  as  the  in- 
jured stand  to  the  ii\jurers  in  a  relation  ninUar  to  that  in  which 
the  benefited  stand  to  their  benefactors, 

*  The  question  how  far  Ayvowv  may  be  considered  a  free 
agent,  is  discussed  in  the  Nicomachsean  Ethics,  Ub.  iii.  cap.  i. 
5 ;  and  Hooker,  book  L 

CHAP.  XXV.]    ..  RHETORIC.  199 

18  not  therefore  entitled  to  praise,  otherwise  he  would 
not  in  his  enactments  have  imposed  higher  fines,  in 
case  the  party  committed  the  error  while  intoxicated." 

But  as  all  reasonings  [of  the  orator]  are  derived  8-  Rea- 
from  four  sources,  and  these  four  are  probability,  ex-  SSivS 
ample,  proof  positive  (reKfiripiov),  and  signs ;  and  as  from  four 
the  reasonings  drawn  from  what  is  usual,  or  appears  ?^^S*^ 
to  be  so,  are  drawn  from  probabilities,  while  those  biuty? 
drawn  by  inference  from  similarity  of  circumstances,  ii.  Exam- 
whether  in  one  or  more  instances,  (when  the  speaker  R?®* 
embracing  what  is  general,  then  infers  particulars,)  uiptov. 
exist  by  virtue  of  example ;  while  those  again  which  iv.  <r»;- 
are  inferred  from  what  is  necessary  and  fact,  are  '****'*'• 
founded  on  proof  positive ;  and  lastly,  as  those  drawn 
from  what  does  or  does  not  hold  good,  whether  uni- 
versally or  particularly,  result  from  signs,  [it  being 
remembered]  that  probability  is  not  what  always^ 
but  what  iLSually  occurs ;  it  is  plain  that  it  is,  in 
every  case,  possible  to  get  rid  of  reasonings  such  as 
these  by  starting  an  objection.     The  solution  is,  how-  9.  Solu- 
ever,  [sometimes]  apparent,  and  not  always  real ;  *^<*^  ^^ 
for  the  objector  does  not  do  it  away  on  the  ground  \^q. 
of  its  not  being  probable^  but  on  that  of  its  not  being  times  fel- 
necessary^.     Wherefore  it  always  happens,  that  the  la<^o^- 
defendant  has  the  advantage  of  the  accuser,  by  means  Jf '„J^e  ^ 
of  this  piece  of  sophistry.     For  as  the  accuser  con-  service  to 
structs  his  proof  by  means  of  probabilities  (the  task  defendant 
of  getting  rid  of  the  positive  certainty  being  by  no  plaintiff, 
means  the  same  [in  point  of  difficulty],  as  that  of 
getting  rid  of  the  probability  of  the  charge) ;  and  as 
that  which  is  merely  probable,  is  invariably  open  to 
an  objection ;  (for  it  otherwise  would  not  be  a  pro- 
bability, but  invariable  and  necessary ;)  and  if  this 
method  of  solution  have  been  adopted,  the  judge 
supposes  either  that  it  does  not  amount  to  a  proba- 
bility, or  at  least  that  he  ought  not  to  decide,  having 
been  imposed  upon  in  the  way  mentioned  above; 

•  The  orator  must  therefore  show  on  which  side  the  greater 
probability  lies.  "  There  are  objections,"  said  Dr.  Johnson, 
"  against  a  plenum,  and  objections  against  a  yacuum ;  yet  one 
of  Uiem  must  be  right."    Whately. 

K»  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ii. 

because  [in  fact]  he  is  not  lx>und  to  pronounce  on 
positiTe  proofs  aloney  but  also  on  probabilities,  which 
is  the  spirit  of  the  oath,  "  that  he  will  decide  to  the 
best  of  his  judgment ;"  wherefore  that  will  not  be  a 
satisfactory  ob^ction  which  rests  merely  on  the  ab- 
sence  o£  proof  ponHve,  but  it  is  further  incumbent 
on  the  objector  to  get  rid  of  the  probetbUity;  this, 
howevw,  will  be  the  case,  if  the  objection  be  proba- 
11,  ble  in  a  higher  degree;  (and  it  may  be  so  in  two 
ways,  either  on  the  score  of  time,  or  of  the  nature  of 
the  case ;  and  pre-eminently  so,  if  in  both  these 
particulars ;)  for  if  in  the  mjgority  of  instances  it  be 
as  you  state,  then  it  is  a  greater  probability. 

12.  Speci-      Signs  'also,  and  the  reasonings  deduced  from  them, 
fie  «g^     may  be  got  rid  of,  eren  if  they  be  facts,  as  was  stated 
able.         ^  f^Q  ^9t  Book ;  for  it  is  clear  to  us  from  the  Ana- 
lytics that  every  sign  is  illogical. 

13.  Solu-       The  same  method  of  solution  applies  to  reasonings 
«mp^""  &"^"^<*®<1  ^^  example  as  to  those  on  probabilities ;  for 

if  we  have  a  single  instance  in  contravention,  it  has 
been  answered^,  [sufficiently  to  show]  that  it  is  not 
necessary ;  or  that  in  the  majority  pf  instances,  and 
those  of  more  frequent  occurrence,  the  case  is  other- 
wise. If,  however,  it  be  the  case  more  frequently, 
and  in  the  majority  of  instances,  we  must  contend 
that  the  present  is  not  the  case  in  point,  or  that  its 
application  is  not  in  point,  or  that  it  has  some  differ- 
ence at  all  evaits. 

14.  TBK'        But  proofs  positive  (Tttcpipia),  and  the  reasonings 
refeteWe   g'^^^'^^^^l  JOin  them,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  get  rid  of, 
except  by  at  least  not  on  the  plea  of  inconclusiveness ;  this  is 
«««^il"^    clear  to  us  from  the  Analytics :  it  remains  for  us  to 
^^y®"     show  that  what  is  asserted  is  not  the  case®;  if,  how- 
ever, it  be  clear  both  that  it  is  true  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  and  that  it  is  a  proof  positive  of  the  point,  from 
that  moment  it  becomes  irrefragable ;  for  thenceforth 
it  is  plain  from  demonstration. 

^  That  is  to  say,  by  a  X^^irw  ^aivo/tUvt). 
'  As  we  cannot  object  to  the/orm  of  the  reasoning,  our  odIt 
resource  is  to  attack  Uie  matter.:  to  deny  the  premises. 

GBAP.  xxyi.1  RHETOaiC.  2&i 

CHAP.  XX\I.       - 

Cff  Amplifieatum  and  ExttnuaHen, 

Amplification  and  extenuation  are  not  elements  of  1.  Ampli- 
entlyjrmems,  (by  topic  and  element  I  mean  ihe  same  ^^t«op- 
thing,)  since  the  element  and  the  topic  is  that  under  posite  not 
^Rrhich  msmy  enthjmems  fall .;  whereas  amplification  i'o»o*>t^t 
and  extenuaifcion  are   [themselves]  enthjmems  for  ^enu^ 
siuxwing  that  a  thing  is  great  or  little,  like  those  for 
showing  that  it  is  good  or  bad^  just  or  uiyust,  or 
falls  under  either  of  the  other  denominations.     And  2. 
tliese-are  all  the  questions  about  which  syllogisms  and 
enthymems  are  conversant;  so  that  unless  each  of 
these  be  a  topic  of  an  enthymem^  amplification  and 
extenuation  are  not.  , 

Neither,  again,  are  the  topics  which  are  available  3.  Enthy- 
to  solution  of  enthymems,  at  all  different  in  species  re^tion 
from  those  employed  in  their  construction :  for  it  is  and  con- 
evident  that  he  effects  solution  who  either  proves  finnjtion 
[something  contrary],  or  states  an  objection,  and  they  game  in 
establish  a  counter  proof  of  the  contrary ;  thus,  "  If  kind. 
one  has  argued  that  a  fact  has  taken  place,  the  other 
argues  that  it  has  not ;"  or  ^'  if  one  argues  that  it  has 
not,  the  other  insists  that  it  has."     So  that  this  will 
not  amount  to  a  difference ;  for  both  employ  the  same 
vehicles  of  proof,  inasmuch  as  they  each  allege  en- 
thymems to  show  that  it  is,  or  is  not  the  case. 
*  But  the  objection  is  not  an  enthymem,  but  is,  as  4.  Objee- 
was  stated  in  the  Topics,  the  stating  some  opinion  ^^^nthy- 
'  from  which  it  will  appear  that  no  legitimate  inference  mem.  De- 
has  been  arrived  at,  or  that  [the  opponent]  has  as-  finition  of 
sumed  some  false  proposition.  v<rra<ri9. 

Thus  much,  then,  on  the  subject  of  examples,  and  5. 
maxims,  and  enthymems^,  and,  in  a  word,  all  the 

^  In  taking  leave  of  a  series  of  terms  which  have  occuired 
hitherto  so  fireqnently,  we  may  as  well  remark  that  examples, 
maxims,  enthymems,  etc.  denote  the  particular  modification  of 
the  proof,  or  the  shape  ia  which  it  is  served  up,  tnthout  refer^ 

202  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  [book  iu 

means  of  persuasion  which  address  themselves  to  the 
understanding,  both  the  sources  whence  we  may- 
furnish  ourselves  plentifully  with  them,  and  the 
means  by  which  we  may  effect  their  solution*.  It 
remains  for  us  to  go  over  the  subject  of  style  and  ar- 
rangement ^ 

ence  to  itt  degree  of  validity :  while  probability,  signs,  tzKii/ipia, 
etc.  refer  to  its  degree  of  yalidity,  tmthout  regard  to  the  ehapm 
or  manner  in  which  the  proof  is  conveyed. 

*  Haying  now  despatched  the  first  and  most  important  of 
the  three  grand  dirisions  of  his  work,  viz.  the  subject  of  iciirrvs^ 
it  only  remains  to  discuss  the  remaining  two,  Xc^tc  and  ^0.^1%. 
In  fact,  haying  told  the  speaker  what  he  is  to  say,  he  has  now 
only  to  tell  how  he  is  to  say  it. 

•  The  subjects  of  -rtoris,  Xl^ts,  and  ra^te,  it  will  be  recol- 
lected, constitute  the  widest  and  moat  general  arrangement  of 
his  work.    See  book  iii.  chap.  1.  §  1. 

BOOK  III. 

CHAP.  I. 

Of  the  Parts  of  JRhetoric. 

As  there  are  three  points  which  ought  to  be  handled  1.  Three 
respecting  a  speech ;   one,  as  to  the  sources  out  of  ^^^^ 
-wrhich  will  arise  means  of  persuasion ;  a  second,  re-  v'httk. 
specting  the  styh;  a  third,  how  we  ought  to  arrange  ^^|.'** 
the  parts  of  a  speech.     On  the  subject  of  the  means  xhe  two 
of  persuasion  much  has  been  said,  as  well  as  to  how  last  to  be 
many  the  sources  are  out  of  which  [they  arise],  name-  treated. 
ly,  that  they  are  three ;  also,  what  is  the  nature  of 
these  sources,  and  why,  they  are  no  more :   for  all 
those  who  decide,  are  persuaded  either  by  being  them- 
selves impressed  in  a  certain  way,  or  from  conceiving 
the  speakers  to  be  men  of  a  certain  character,  or  from 
the  matter  of  fact  having  been  proved  ^ 

It  has  been  stated  also  with  respect  to  enthymems, 
whence  we  are  to  furnish  ourselvesf  with  them ;  for 
[of  those  sources],  some  are  elementary  propositions, 
peculiar  [to  the  several  branches  of  rhetoric]  ;  others 
are  places  [of  universal  applicability].  It  follows  that  2. 
we  treat  of  the  subject  of  style ;  for  the  mere  being 
in  possession  of  what  one  ought  to  say  is  not  enough ; 
but  it  is  moreover  necessary  that  we  deliver  it  as  we 
ought ;  [and  the  doing  this]  contributes  much  to 
your  speech's  appearing  to  be  of  a  certain  character. 

Now  that  by  which  its  nature  is  first,  was,  con-  3.  viroKpi- 
formably  to  nature,  investigated  the  first ;  viz.  whence  «"*«  J<** 
these  things  derive  their  persuasive  efficacy :  next  to  ^^  ^' 
this,  was  the  disposition  of  them  in  the  speaking: 
and  thirdly,  [arose  an  inquiry]  of  the  greatest  con- 

^  See  book  i.  chap.  ii.  §  3. 

264  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

sequence,  but  which  never  yet  has  been  handled,  on 
the  subject  of  deliyery;  for  it  was  introduced  into 
tragedy  and  the  public  recitations  at  a  late  period, 
since  at  first  ^  the  poets  used  themselves  to  sustain 
the  dialogue^  in  their  tragedies.    It  is  therefore  plain 
that  some  such  power  exists  in  relation  to  rhetoric, 
as  well  as  to  poetry ;  which  [as  connected  with  the 
latter  art]  Glauco  the  Teian,  and  some  others,  have 
4.  It  con-  treated  of.     And  it  depends  on  the  voice,  as  to  how 
^^^      we  ought  to  manage  it  in  reference  to  each  several 
things.      passion ;  when,  for  instance,  we  should  employ  a  loud, 
uiy^.    when  a  low,  and  when  a  moderate  pitch  ctf  voice; 
^^u'    "^^^^  ®^  *^  manner  in  which  we  should  employ  its 
tones,  viz.  the  acute,  the  grave,  and  the  intermediate; 
and  on  certain  rhythms  in  ref^ence  to  •each ;  for  the 
points,  in  reference  to  whkh  they  conduct  their  in- 
quiries, are  three,  viz.  the  loudness  of  the  voice,  the 
fitness  of  its  tones,  and  its  rhythm.    Now  these  pro^ 
ficients  bear  away  i^arly  all  the  prizes  in  ike  di^ut«- 
ations ;  aaid  as  in  the  other  contests^  the  actors  now 
produce  a  greater  efiect  liian  the  poets,  so  likewise 
do  they  in  civil  causes,  owing  to  the  depravity  of 
6,  No  art  States.     There  is  not  yet  howev^  any  system  com*- 
^fled*™"    P^^®^  respecting  these  paints,  (since  even  the  subject 
^.     ^^    of  stylek.was  brought  forward  at  a  late  pemd,)  and,  if 
rightly  conceived  of,  it  appears  an  ornament  adapted 
to  vulgar  tastes^;  but  as  die  whole  ^subject  of  rhetoric 

*  That  the  two  departments  of  author  and  actor  were  united 
in  the  same  person,  is  asserted  also  by  Horace,  Art.  Poet.  277, 
and  by  Plutarch,  ^^iarawro  t6v  Oivmvf  airrdv  (nroKfMfOfiiimVf 
&airsp  id<n  ^v  rdts  iraXaiois, 

.  '  That  v-jToicpiT^c  came  to  designate  an  actor  from  the  «ir- 
cumstance  of  his  sustaining  the  dialogue  with  the  dtiorus,  may 
be  evinced  by  reference  to  the  etymology  of  the  word.  Its 
snccessiTe  jneaaings  have  been  clearly  traced  in  the  Quarterly 
Bwieto :  "  'T'roKpcT^,  Qui  rstpottdeta  ab  ittrmcpia/tvdaif  re- 
spondere,  Homer,  Herodot.  Hiatrio,  quia  prime  tragoediae  statu 
histrio  Chore  respondebat.  Suidas,  o  vvoKpi»6fievo9  tm  x^P^* 
ISimulator,  quia  Mstriones  :fictas  partes  tuebanlur."  No.  xliT. 
Art  2,  p.  326. 

*  Those  ior  the  prize  in  the  tragic  games. 

*  ^opTiKov,  It  appears  from  Twining's  excellent  illustra- 
tions of  the  meaning  of  this  word,  that  it  is  used  to  imply  any 
thing  extravagant,  violent,  overcharged,  outr^  : — as  applied  to 

CHAP.  I.]  RHETOBIC.  205 

lias  vdfereQee  to  opinion,  we  srhould'  pay  attention  to- 
U^  not  as  to  a  subject  of  absolute  propriety,  but  as 
one  of  necessity ;  for  as  to  mere  matter  of  justice 
we  ought  not  to  inquire  further  on  the  subject  of 
speeehea  than  so  as  to  avoid  giving  pain^  at  the  same 
tune  that  we  do  not  delight ;  for  the  rale  of  right  is,, 
thftt  the  contest  be  carried  on  by  means  of  the  facta 
l^bemaelves  ;  ao  that,  except  the  proof,  aAl  the  rest  is 
auperfhious^;  but  it  is  notwithstanding,,  as  has.  been  It^influ- 
atotedy  a.  point  of  great  mofnent,  i»  consequence  of  ®°f^ 
the  weak  judgment  of  the  auditor.  The  subject  of  §|**^ 
style,  however,  has  some  necessary  though  trifling 
elaim  on  our  attention  in  every  system ;  for  the  ex- 
piressing:  one's  sdLf  in  this  or  that  way  makes  some  dif-^ 
ference  with  a  view  to  exhibiting  the  subject  cleaffly, 
]M>t  however  to  so  great  a  degree  [as- i&  generally  sup-^ 
poaed^ :  all  these  points  are  however  mere  ide^.  suadr 
have  a  reference  to  the  auditor ;  wherefore  it  is  that 
no  one  teaches  geometry  in  sueh  a  style. 

This  art  then,  be  it  introduced  when  it  may  ^,  will 
produce  the  same  effect  as  that  of  acting.    And  some  7. 
to  a  small  extent  have  already  made  an  effort  to  treat 
of  it;  Thrasymachus,  for  instance,  on  the  excitement 
(^  campctssum.     Again,  th&  being  qualified  for  de-  P^^^^fJ 
Hvery  is  a  gift  of  nature,  and  rather  without  the  ^^ 
province  of  art ;  the  subject  of  style,  however,  is 
elearly  reducible  to  wi  art     Wherefore  rewards  are 
bestowed  in  turn  on  those  who  a«e  proficients  in  this, 
just  as  there  are  on  those  rhetoricians  [who  cdaom] 

persons,  it  means  tr&ublMome,  tiresome,  etc,  or  insolent,  over- 
bearing, etc.,  synonymdusly  "with  <fci*«Xeu0epos,  pdvav<ro9,  popu- 
lar, low,  vulgar,  iUtberal,  etc*  Atheneens,  in  speaking  of  the 
rc^jection  of  Hippoclides,  one  of  the  suitors  of  Agarista,- d»agh^ 
ter  of  Clisthenes,  king  of  Sicyon^  attributes  it  to  the  diagast 
conceived  by  her  father  at  him,  OOPTIKQS.  dpy^v&ntvov  (see 
Horodot  vi.  129).  Aristotle  himself  classes  the  <t>opTiKol  with 
tlie  fit»fM\6xpi',  (Bth.  Nich.  iy*.  8,)  and  with  the  ol  vvXAol 
(ibid.  i.  5).  It  is  in  fact,  (to  adopt  an  expression  of  Pope's,) 
any  thing  levelled  to  please  the  populace. 

*  B.  L  C.  1.  }  10;  oitiiu  akXo  &Uy'w\fi»  <iro^s(£at  Sr*.  oOrwt 

IVCA. 

7  *YTr6Kpiait :  for  he  clearly  foresees  that  firom  its  obvious 
importance  it  must  eyentuaUy  become  an  a4iunGt  of  zhetorici 
as  it  has  lUready  become  of  dramatic  exhibitions. 

206  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in 

on  the  ground  of  delivery ;  for  written  orations  in- 
fluence more  by  means  of  their  style  than  through 
the  sentiment. 

8.  Poets  Now  the  poets,  as  was  natural,  began  to  make  a 
rodtation  ^^^^  ^ipon  the  subject  at  first ;  for  words  are  imita- 
and  deli-  tions,  and  the  voice,  of  all  our  parts,  is  the  most 
very  with  imitative®;  on  which  account  also  these  arts  were 
success,     constructed,  both  that  of  recitation,  and  of  acting, 

9.  Hence  and  of  others  too.  But  as  the  poets,  though  what 
tSci^lT  *^®y  ^^^  ^^  ^®T  frivolous,  appeared  to  acquire 
adopted  their  reputation  by  means  of  their  style ;  on  this 
the  florid  account  the  first  style  [of  rhetoric]  was  formed  on 
^g         that  of  poetry,  witness  the  style  of  Gorgias;  and 

even  at  the  present  time  the  majority  of  ignorsBt 
people  fancy  that  such  orators  speak  most  delight- 
fully :  this  however  is  not  the  case,  but  the  style  of 
poetry  and  that  of  prose  is  distinct,  and  the  result 
shows  it ;  for  not  even  the  writers  of  tragedy  them- 
selves any  longer  employ  the  same  turn  of  diction, 
But  have  but  just  as  they  have  passed  from  trochaic  to  iambic 
^^^*^y  metre  ^,  because  the  latter  is  most  like  prose  of  all 
quished     the  Other  metres  ;  so  have  they  also  relinquished  all 
it,  as  the   those  terms  which  are  foreign  to  the  style  X)f  convers- 
^^^e    **^on,  with  which  however  the  early  writers  used  to 
also  done,  embellish  [their  works],  and  which  even  at  the  pre- 
sent day  are  employed  by  those  who  write  in  heroic 
metre;    wherefore  it  is  ridiculous  to  imitate  the 
tragedians,  who  in  their  own  case  no  longer  employ 
that  turn  of  diction. 
10.      So  that  it  is  evident  that  we  need  not  discuss  with 
minuteness  all  points  soever  which  it  is  possible  to 
treat  of  under  the  head  of  style,  but  so  many  only  as 
belong  to  such  an  art  as  we  are  speaking  of:  the 
other  part  of  the  subject  has  been  spoken  of  in  my 
treatise  on  Poetry. 

'  So  that  of  course  the  poet,  whose  business  was  imitation, 
would  immediately  put  in  requisition  these  two  most  obvious 
sources  of  it. 

^  The  trochaic  metre  occurs  frequently  in  the  plays  of  JSs- 
chylus,  the  m.ost  ancient  of  the  tragedians  extant,  particularly 
in  the  Persse ;  as  also  in  those  of  Euripides,  especially  in  the 
Fhoenissae  and  Orestes ;  but  in  those  of  Sophocles,  rarely,  if 
ever. 

CHAP,  ih]  RHETORIC.  207 

CHAP.  ir. 

On  Excellence  of  Style  as  made  up  of  single  Words, 

Lbt  this  then  have  been  discussed :  and  let  excel-  I.  Excel- 
lence of  style  be  defined  to  consist  in  its  being  clear  ;  |!^{^^ 
(a  sign  of  this  is  this,  that  the  diction,  unless  it  make^  ^edtobe 
the  sentiment  clear,  will  not  effect  its  purpose  ^;)  and'  the  t6 
neither  low,  nor  above  the  dignity  of  the  subject,  but  *^**^*'- 
in  good  taste ;  for  the  style  of  poetry  indeed  is  not 
low,  yet  it  is  not  becoming  in  prose. 

Of  nouns  and  verbs  ^  those  which  are  in  general  use  2.  Wordg 
produce  the  effect  of  clearness :  to  prevent  its  being  t^*  ^^ 
low,  and  to  give  it  ornament,  there  are  other  nouns  duce^pS^' 
which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  Poetics,  for  a  de-  spicuity. 
parture  [from  ordinary  acceptations]  causes  it  to  ap- 
pear more  dignified  ;  for  men  are  affected  in  respect 
of  style  in  the  very  same  way  as  they  are  towards 
foreigners   and   citizens.      On   which  account  you  3.  To  ele- 
should  give  your  phrase  a  foreign^  air ;  for  men  are  ^*^^1® 
admirers  of  things  out  of  the  way,  and  what  is  an  ob-  use  ^eVo, 

'  "  Perspicuity  consists  in  the  using  of  proper  tenns  for  the  ®  ' 
ideas  or  thoughts  which  he  would  haye  pass  from  his  own . 
mind  into  that  of  another  man.  It  is  this  that  gives  them  an 
easy  entrance ;  and  it  is  with  delight  that  men  hearken  to 
those  whom  they  easily  imderstand ;  whereas  what  is  obscurely 
said,  dying  as  it  is  spoken,  is  usually  not  only  lost,  but  creates 
a  prejudice  in  the  hearer,  as  if  he  that  spoke  knew  not  what 
he  said,  or  was  afraid  to  have  it  understood."  Locke,  Some 
Thoughts  concerning  Reading  and  Study,  vol.  iv.  p.  601. 

*  As  Aristotle  proceeds  henceforth  to  a  complete  analysis  of 
the  subject  of  style,  he  first  considers  it  in  reference  to  the 
single  toords  of  which  it  is  made  up  {i^  «*»  vvviirrriKt,  §  5), 
wMch  occupies  him  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  chapter..  He  then 
considers  it  as  made  up  of  whole  sentences  ;  the  means  of  in- 
vesting these  «eith  dignity,  of  adapting  them  to  the  subject,  of 
constructing  them  to  please  the  ear,  and  as  addressed  to  the 
inteUeci;  and  concludes  with  enumerating  their  several  ele- 
gancies. First,  then,  he  considers  the  beauties  of  style  as  de- 
pending on  single  toords, 

*  Should  the  epithet /or^t^rn,  as  applied  to  a  quality  of  style, 
not  be  immediately  apprehended,  it  may  be  well  to  recollect 
that  it  means  the  excellence  opposed  to  the  fault  which  wo 
designate  homeliness. 

aoa  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook:  in. 

ject  of  admiration  is  pleasant^.     Now  in  the  case  of 
metrical  compositions,  there  are  many  things  which 
produce  this  effect,  and  there  are  very  becoming,  be- 
cause both  the  subject  and  the  person  stand  more 
apart  [from  ordinary  life];  in  prose,  however,  these 
helps  are  much  fewer,  for  tiie  subject  is  less  eajdted : 
since  even  in  that  art  were  a  slave,  or  a  mere  youth, 
or  [any^  one,  in  fact^  m  speaking]  of  n&ere  tcides  to 
express  hin»9elf  in   terms,  of  studied  omamftiift,  it 
would  be  rather  unbecoomig ;  but  here  too  [as  va. 
•    poetry]  the  rule  of  good  taste  is,,  that  your  style  be 
4.  We      lowered  or  raised   according  to  the  subjects      Oxk 
"^^o^^"  which  account  we  must  escape  observation  ini  dqing 
art.  this,  and  not  appear  to  speak  in  a.  studied  manner, 

but  naturally,  for  the  one  is  of  a  tendency  W  pecsuade, 
the  other  is  the  very  reverse*;  because  people  put 
themselves  on  their  guard,  >as:  though  against  one  who 
has  a  design  upon  them,  just  as  they  would  against 
adulterated  wine.  [Let  your  style  then  be  such]  as 
was  the  case  with  the  voice*  of  Theodoru»  as  comi> 
pared  with  that  of  the  other  actors®^  for  it  a^>eared 
to  be  that  of  the  character  which  was  speaking,  theirs 
Si  however  Were  foreign  &om  the  character.  And  the 
deceit  is  neatly  passed  off  if  on«  frame  his  nomen- 
clature upon  a  sdection  from  ordinary  conversadoo ; 
the  thing  which  Euripides^  does,  and  first  gave  the 
hint  of.. 
Words  to  As  howevar  nouns  and  verbs  are  [the  materiiEdfi] 
be  but       ^  which  the  speech  is  made  up,  and  as  nouns  admit 

^  This  was  asserted  book  t.  chap.  11,  §  23,  24. 

*  Ubicwnque  ara  oatentaiurt  v€rit€»  abesse  videHtr,  QuintlL 
Instit.  X.  3.    ArtiB  est  celare  artem. 

'  Harris  seems  to  haTS  had  this  passage  in  view  when  he 
wrote  the  following:  "  Tis  in  writing  as  in  acting;  the  best 
writers  are  like  our  late  admired  Garrick.  And  bow  did  that 
able  genius  employ  his  art  7  Not  by  a  Ysmottentathw  of  any 
one  of  his  powers,  but  by  a  latent  use  of  them  eM  iuisuch  an 
exhibiti'on  of  nature,  that,  while  we  were  present  in  a  theatre^ 
and  only  beholding  an  actor,  we  could  not  help-  tiiinking  our<* 
selves  in  Denmaiic'  with  Hamlet,  or  in  Bbsworth  Field  with 
Rtchaid."    Philolog.  Inq;.  P.  ii.  c.  4. 

7  In  this  practice,  Euripides  stands  remarkably  opposed  to 
his  predecessor  ^schylus. 

CHAP.  11.]  KHETORIC.  209 

80  many  specks  as  have  been  examined  in  the  Poetics,  sparingly 
out  of  the  number  of  these  we  must  employ  but  spar-  g?^^^^' 
ingly,  and  in  very  few  places,  exotic^  and  compound 
words,  and  those  netofy  coined;  where  they  may  be  ' 
employed  I  will  state  hereafter^:  the  reason  [of  the/ 
restriction]  has  been  mentioned,  viz.  because  they  re- 
pnovo  your  style  [from  that  <rf  common  life]  more 
than  is  consistent  with  good  taste.     "Words  however -6.  Words 
of  ordinary  \jse,  and  in  their  origimd  acceptatums  ^®,  '^"P^*^>  ^'^j 
.and  me^aph&rs,  are  fdone  available  in  the  style  of  to Jo/Soi, 
prose :  a  proof  [that  this  is  the  £act,  is]  that  these  are  proper  for 
the  only  words  which  all  persons  employ ;  for  every  P"*^* 
body  oarries  on  conversation  by  means  of  metaphors^ 
and  words  in  their  primary  sense,  and  those  of  ordi- 
nary use.     Thus  it  is  plaip  that,  if  one  should  have 
constructed  his  style  well,  it  will  be  both  of  a  foreign 
character,  and  that  [the  art  of  the  orator]  may  still 
elude  observation,  and  [the  style  itself]  will  have  the 

•  rXSTTo :  "  any  word  that  belongs  either  to  another  lan- 
guage, or  another  dialect  of  the  same  language,  and  that  is  not 
x^turaJized  by  common  and  popular  use."    Twining. 

•  In  the  seventh  chapter  he  says,  that  they  may  be  used 
-with  effect  when  you  would  assume  the  language  of  high  ex- 
citement :  see  §  11. 

w  Ki/pta  are  words  in  genercd  use,  opposed  to  yXwrrot,  out- 
landish expressions.  OUs£a,  words  in  their  primary  and  literal 
acceptations,  opposed  to  fitTa<popal^  words  transferred  from 
their  primary  meaning  to  some  analogous  meaning.  Many 
words  are  Kvpia  which  yet  are  not  oiKiia,  In  fact,  of  ihe  thre^ 
divisions  theoi<c«fa  are  necessarily  the  fetoest ;  since  ihe  proper 
and  original  designations  of  individual  objects  cannot  extend 
to  a  number  sufficiently  great  to  answer  all  the  purposes  of 
language ;  the  resources  of  which  must  therefore  be  augmented 
by  metaphorical  transfer.  Even  these  words  in  time  become 
80  naturalized  by  common  use  as  no  16nger  to  have  any  thing 
"  of  the  effect  of  metaphor  upon  the  hearer.  On  the  contrary, 
like  proper  terms "  {plKtia)^  "  they  suggest  directly  to  his 
mind,  without  the  intervention  of  any  image^  the  ideas  which 
the  speaker  pr()posed  to  convey  by  tiiem."  Philos.  of  Rhet. 
vol.  i.  p.  185,  186.  From  those  sounds  which  we  hear  on 
small  or  on  coarse  occasions,  we  do  not  easily  receive  strong 
impressions,  or  delightful  images ;  and  words  to  which  we  are 
nearly  strangers  [terms  of  art,  etc.],  whenever  they  occur, 
draw  that  attention  on  themselves  which  they  should  transmit 
to  things.  Johnson's  Life  of  Dryden,  vol.  vL  p.  395,  edit. 
1823.  Vid.  the  whole  passage. 
P 

210  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

advantage  of  clearness ;  this  however  was  laid  down 
T.Equivo-  to  be  the  perfection  of  rhetorical  language.  But  of 
^!  words  all  nouns,  those  which  are  equivocal  suit  the  purposes 
sophist,  ^^  *^®  sophist,  for  by  their  help  he  effects  his  falla- 
svnonyms  cies,  while  synonyms  are  of  use  to  the  poet ;  I  mean 
the  poet.  ti^esQ  which  are  both  synonyms  and  of  common  usage, 
as  vropevriadat  and  fiahii^eivy  for  these  two  are  both  of 
common  usage  and  synonymous  to  each  other. 

The  nature  then  of  each  of  these  varieties,  and 
how  many  species  of  metaphor  there  are,  and  also 
that  this  ornament  is  of  the  greatest  effect,  as  well  in 
poetry  as  prose,  has  been  explained,  (as  I  have  ob- 

8.  Meta^    served  above,)  in  the  Poetics.     In  prose  *^  however 
??J2^**  f     we  should  bestow  the  greater  attention  on  them,  in 

'  proportion  as  an  oration  has  to  be  made  up  of  fewer 
adjuments  than  a  metrical  composition.  Moreover 
the  metaphor  possesses  in  an  especial  manner  [the 
beauties  of]  clearness  and  sweetness,  with  an  air  of 
being  foreign  ^^;  and  it  is  not  possible  to  derive  it 
from  any  other  person  ^\ 

9.  i.  Must  You  must  however  apply,  in  the  case  both  of 
^ua\o-  ®pi<^^6ts  and  metaphors,  such  as  are  appropriate ;  and 
yiav,  this  will  depend  on  their  being  constructed  on  prin- 
ciples of  analogy,  otherwise  they  will  be  sure  to  ap- 
pear in  bad  taste ;  because  contraries  show  themselves 
to  be  such,  particularly  when  set  by  each  other.  But 
you  must  consider,  as  a  purple  garment  becomes  a 

**  ITpeoxa  fikv  ovv  fitTafpopaiv  yjpr\<rriov'  aZTai  yiip  /idXurra 
Kai  ridovijv  avfi^aXKouraL  TOts  \oyoiv,  Kai  /ueyeOos, — fxfi  /ittrroi 
WKvaXi,    Demetr. 

"  **  As  to  metaphorical  expression,  that  is  a  great  excellence 
in  style,  when  it  is  used  with  propriety,  for  it  gives  you  two 
ideas  for  one; — conveys  the  meaning  more  luminously,  and 
generally  with  a  perception  of  delight.**  Boswell*s  Johnson, 
-fit.  68.  . 

^^  Aristotle  seems  to  subjoin  this  as  tiie  crowning  praise  of 
metaphor ;  for  he  has  already  told  us  that,  that  is  a  good  the 
principle  of  which  centres  in  ourselves ;  so  also,  in  the  Tcpica, 
he  lays  down  that  o  fin  i<m  vap*  aXKov  iropiaaaBai  as  a  greater 
good  ^  o  icrri  trap*  aWov.  In  the  third  book  of  the  Nicoma- 
chsean  Ethics  he  employs  a  similar  topic  of  praise :  o  nrap*  ctI- 
pov  fi^  olou  re  Xa^iXv^  firi^k  fiadttv.  See  also  book  i.  c.  7,  §  33, 
of  the  present  treatise. 

CHAP.  11.]  RHETORIC.  2U 

youth,  what  is  equally  so  to  an  old  man ;   since  the 
same  garment  does  not  become  [both]. 

And  if  you  wish  to  embellish  your  subject,  see  10. 
you  deduce  your  metaphor  from  such  things  coming  a*i)S^ 
under  the  same  class  as  are  better;  and  if  to  cry  it  ckssifto 
down,  from  such  as  are  worse :  I  mean,  as  the  cases  f^'ijft 
are  opposed  and  come  under  the  same  genus,  that  the  ^  lower  tf 
saying,  for  example,  of  a  beggar,  that  "he  prays^^  to  debase. 
and  of  one  who  is  praying,  that  "  he  begs^^^  (both 
being  species  of  asking,)  is  to  do  the  thing  which  has 
been  mentioned ;  just  as  Iphicrates  called  Callias  "  a 
mere  collector  to  the  goddess,  and  not  a  bearer  of  the 
torch'^     He  however  replied,  "that  he  must  needs 
be  uninitiated  himself,  or  he  would  not  call  him  a 
coUector,  but  a  bearer  of  the  torck,^     For  these  are 
both  services  connected  with  the  goddess ;  the  one 
however  is  respectable,  while*the  other  is  held  in  no 
repute.     And  some  one  [speaks  of  the  courtiers  of 
Dionysius  as]  Dionysian  parasites ;  •  they  however 
call  themselves  artificers  **.     And  these  expressions 
are  both  metaphors ;  the  one  of  persons  who  would 
depreciate,  the  other  the  contrary.     Even  robbers, 
now-a-day,  call  themselves  purveyors  **.     On  which 
principle  we  may  say  of  a  man  who  "  has  acted  un- 
jusdyj^  that  he  "  is  in  error;*'   and  of  one  who  "is 
in  error^*  that  he  "  has  ajcted  unjusdy,^     Again,  of 
one  who  has  stolen,  both  that  has  taheUy  [in  way  of 
diminution,]   and  that  has  ravaged  [in  exaggera- 

"  dkiowvoKokaKa^,  This  term,  by  which  the  tribe  of  flat- 
terers seem  to  have  been  exposed  to  ridicule  on  the  stage 
(KoXaiccc  ToD  Aiovvalov)f  was  ingeniously  enough  borrowed 
from  the  name  of  the  patron  of  the  theatre,  Ai6vv<ro9;  they 
however  thought  proper  to  exchange  one  theatrical  appellation 
for  another  more  respectable,  and  dignified  themselves  by  the 
name  Ttx^iTat.  This,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  Latin  term, 
artifieea,  seems  to  have  been  more  commonly  applied  to  actors, 
musicians,  etc.  See  Keuchen,  note  on  Com.  Nep.vita  Cha* 
briae,  c.  i.  By  the  way,  this  sort  of  metaphorical  embellish-* 
ment  appears  not  to  be  unusual  in  the  present  day,  if  it  be  true 
(as  we  are  told)  that  the  important  personage  who  directs  the 
culinary  operations  in  great  families  be  entitled  the  artist, 

*'  Compare  Thucyd.  b.  i.  tub  init, 
p2 

2^8  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

tion^^].  But  the  sapng,  as  the  Telephus  cf  Euripides 
dbeSy  '*  that  he  hrds  it  o'er  th«  oars,  and  knding  in 
Myaa,"  etc.,  is  out  of  taste ;  for  the  expression, 
**  lording  it  over,**  is  above  the  dignity  of  the  sub- 
ject;  [the  rhetorical  artifice]  then,  is  not  pahaied 

11.  off".  There  will  also  be  a  fault  in  the  syllables, 
iii.  The  unless  thej  are  sngnificant  of  a  grateful  sound ;  for 
mast^  instance,  Dionjsius,  sumaaned  Chaloous*®,  in  his 
attended  elegies,  calls  poetry,  **  the  clangor  of  Calliope,"  be- 
^'           tause  both  are  vocal  sounds  ;  liie  metaphor,  however, 

is  a  paltry  one,  and  couched  in  uncouth  expressions  ^^. 

12.  Again,  our  metaphors  should  fwt  be  far-fetched  ; 
nothdfu-  ^°*  ^®  should  mat^  the  transfer,  on  the  principle  ^ 
fetched*  '  tEissigning  names  out  of  the  number  of  Mndred  o^b- 

jects,  and  such  as  are  the  same  in  species,  to  objects 
ivhich  are  unnamed,  of  which  however  it  is  dear, 
simultaneously  with  their  being  uttered,  that  Ihsj 
are  akin,  as  in  that  approved  enigma, 

■"  A  man  I  once  beheld,  [and  wondering  yiew'd,] 
Who,  on  another,  brass  with  fire  had  glmed*^:** 

Twining. 

fbr  the  operation  is  undesignated  by  any  name^^  and 
both  are  species  of  attaching ;  wherefore  the  writer 
called  the  application  of  the  cupping  instrument,  a 
gluing.  And,  generally  speaking,  it  is  possible  out 
of  neatly  constructed  enigmas  \^  extract  excellent 
metaphors :  because  it  is  on  the  principles  <^  metaphor 

"  See  book  i.  chap.  13,  §  9,  10. 

'7  Is  too  glarinj^  is  seen  through. 

^®  Were  it  not  uat  Plutarch  attributes  this  surname  of  Dio- 
nysius  ('*  the  Brazen")  to  a  suggestion  of  his  for  employing 
brass  currency  at  Athens,  the  specimen  here  quoted  mi^t  lead 
us  to  suppose  that  he  derived  the  appellation  from  some  cha- 
racteristic harshness  of  style. 

^'  'A<r»)/uo«  ^C0i>4,  Yox  quee  yel  form&  yel  8i,gnificatione  turpis 
est.    Em.  Lex.  Tec. 

^  This  enigma  is  ingenious,  and  means  the  operation  of  eup- 
ping,  performed  in  ancient  days  by  a  machine  of  brass.  Phi^ 
lolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  10. 

**  Metaphor  took  its  rise  from  the  poverty  of  language.  Men, 
not  finding  upon  every  occasion  words  ready  made  for  their 
ideas,  were  couipelled  to  have  recourse  to  words  analogofda, 
and  transfer  them  from  their  original  meaning,  to  the  meaning 
then  required."     Philolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  10. 

CHAP.  II.]  RHETORIC.  213 

that  men  constrtret  enigmas;  bo  that  it  is  evident, 

that  [if  the  enigma  be  a  good  one]  the  metaphor  has 

been  properly  borrowed. 

The  transfer  also  should  be  made  from  objects  13. 

which  are  beautiful;  beauty  however  of  words  con-  ^ust  be 

sists,  as  Licymnius  observes^  in  the  sound  or  in  the  borrowed 

idea  cx>nveyed ;  as  does  also  their  inel^ance.     And  ^^ 

there  is  moreover  a  third  *2,  which  does  away  the  so-  objects. 

phistical  doctrine ;  since  it  is  not  the  fact,  as  Bryso  Beauty  of 

argues,  "  that  no  one  speaks  inelegantly,  if  indeed  ^^^^ 

the  using  one  expression  instead  of  another,  carries  {j^  the 

with  it  the  same  meaning:"  for  this  is  a  fallacy;  sound. 

because  some  words  are  nearer  in  their  ordinary  J^f  J^** 
..11         11  "^    Ine  ap- 

acceptations,  more  assmiilated,  and  have  more  pecu-  plication. 
liar  foree  of  setting  the  object  before  the  eyes  than 
others.  And  what  is  more,  one  word  represents  the 
object  under  different  circumstances  from  another; 
so  that  we  may  even  on  this  principle  lay  it  down, 
that  one  word  has  more  or  less  of  beauty  and  inele- 
gance than  another:  for  although  both  words,  [at 
the  same  time,]  express  [properties  which  are]  beau- 
tiful, as  well  as  such  as  are  inelegant ;  yet  they  either 
express  them  not  ^a  they  are  beautiful,  or  not  ^a 
they  are  inelegant;  or  granting  they  do,  yet  they 
express  them,  the  one  in  a  greater,  the  other  in  a 
less  degree.  But  we  are  to  deduce  our  metaphors 
from  these  sources ; — from  such  as  are  beautiful  either 
in  sound,  in  meaning,  or  [in  the  image  they  present] 
to  the  sight,  or  any  other  sense.  And  there  is  a  dif- 
ference, in  the  saying,  for  instance,  "the  rosy-Jingered 
Aurora;"  rather  than  "the  purple-^nger&i ;"  car, 
what  is  still  worse^  "  the  crinuon-Jingered" 

Also  in  the  case  of  epithets^  it  is  very  possible  to  1^»  Epi- 
derive  one's  epithets  from  a  degrading  or  disgraceful  ^sed  in^ 
view  of  the  case ;  for  instance,  "  the  murderer  of  his  the  same 
mother^:**  and  we  may  derive  them  from  a  view  on  ''^^y' 

**  We  may  perhaps  term  this  third  beauty  of  words,  deUcaey 
in  their  application. 

**  Nominibus  moUire  licet  mala ;  ftuca  vocetur 
'    Nignior  Illyrica  cui  pioe  oangiuB  erit,  etc. 

Ovid.  Ar.  Am.  L  iL 

214 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book    III. 

the  better  side ;  as,  the  avenger  of  his  father."  And 
Simonides^^  when  the  victor  in  a  race  by  mules 
offered  him  a  trifling  present,  was  not  disposed  to 
write,  as  though  feeling  hurt  at  writing  on  demi- 
asses;  when,  however,  he  offered  a  sufficient  present, 
he  composed  the  poem — 

Hail !  Daughter  a  of  the  generoiw  Horse, 

That  skims,  like  wind,  along  the  coursCf  etc.    Harris. 

15.  uTTo-  and  yet  they  were  daughters  of  asses  as  well.  Again, 
Kopiafiov.  it  is  possible  to  express  the  self-same  thing  diminu- 
tively. And  it  is  the  employment  of  diminutives 
which  renders  both  good  and  evil  less ;  just  as  Aris- 
tophanes jests  in  "  The  Babylonians ;"  using,  instead 
of  gold,  "  a  tiny  piece  of  gold ;"  instead  of  "  a  gar- 
ment," "  a  little  garment ;"  instead  of  "  reproach," 
"  puny  reproach ;"  and  instead  of  "  sickness,"  "  slight 
indisposition."  We  ought,  however,  to  be  careful, 
and  always  keep  to  the  mean  in  both  cases. 

1.  Four 
causes  of 
a 

styled 
i.  Com- 
pound 
words. 

CHAP.  III. 

On  Frigidity  of  Style, 

Fmgiditt^,  as  dependent  on  the  style,  consists  in 
four  points.  In  the  use  of  compound  words ;  like 
Lycophron^,  where  he  says,  "the  many-faced  hea- 
ven," and  "  the  mighty-topped  earth,"  and  "thenar- 
row-pathed  shore."  And  as  Gorgias  used  the 
expression,  "  a  beggarly-mused  flatterer,"  and  "  the 
strictly-bound-by-oath  and  fully-sworn  men."  Or 
like  Alcidamas,  [who  talks  of]  "  the  soul  replete  with 
anger,  and  the  visage  waxing  fire-coloured."  Again, 

**  See  Bentley  on  Phalaris,  p.  156.  Zanclseans  and  Messe- 
nians. 

^  Having  in  the  last  chapter  discussed  the  beatOiea  of  style 
as  dependent  on  single  words,  he  now  proceeds  to  consider  its 
defectSy  as  they  arise  from  the  single  words  employed ;  see  note 
on  chap.  ii.  §  2. 

•  This  Lycophron  was  a  sophist,  and  is  not  to  be  con^unded 
with  the  poet  who  flourished  under  Ptolemy  Philadelphus. 

CHAP.  III.]  RHETORIC.  215 

"he  supposed  their  zeal  would  he  completion-work- 
ing;'* and  "he  settled  a  completion-working  per- 
suasiveness of  speech ;"  and  "  the  azure-hued  level  of 
the  main."  For  all  these  expressions,  by  reason  of 
their  being  compounded,  appear  poetical^. 

This,  then,  is  one  cause :  also  the  employment  of  2.  ii.  Use 
foreign  idioms  is   one ;   as  when   Lycophron  calls  ^^^^^ 
Xerxes,  "  prodigious  hero,"  and   Sciron,  "  baneful 
man^;"  or  Alcidamas,  when  he  says,  "gamboUings  in 
poetry,"  and  "  nature's  improbity,"  and  "  whetted  by 
unrestrained  rage  of  soul." 

A  third  description  of  frigidity  consists  in  the  em-*  8.  iiL  Epi- 
plyment  of  epithets  either  too  long,  out  of  place,  or  ^^  ^ 
too  frequent ;  for  in  poetry,  indeed,  it  is  becoming  frequent, 
enough  to  say  "  white  milk ;"  in  prose,  however,  it  is  ^^  ®^*  **^ 
rather  bad  taste.     Some  also,  should  there  be  a  su-  ^ 
perabundance  of  them,  betray  [the  rhetorician's  art], 
and  make  it  evident  that  the  whole  is  a  mere  made-up 
thing ;  this,  however,  you  may  occasionally  avail  your- 
self of,  since  it  produces  a  departure  from  the  ordinary 
style,  and  renders  the  diction  foreign.  Yet  ought  we 
to  aim  at  the  mean ;  for  [the  too  free  indulgence  in 
the  licence]  does  more  ham  than  the  speaking  care- 
lessly; for  the  one  has  no  beauty,  the  other  has 
[jH)siiive']  fault.    Hence  it  is  that  the  writings  of  Al- 
cidamas appear  frigid ;  for  he  employs  epithets  not 
as  the  seasoning,  but  as  the  food,  with  such  profusion 
does  he  scatter  them,  and  those  both  too  long,  and 
where  the  meaning  is  self-evident :  thus,  he  does  not 
say  the  sweat,  but  "the  moist  sweat ^:"  nor  to  the 

'  Take  the  following  specimen :  "  To  so  vast  a  height  did 
the  never-too-much-to^'ecctoUed  reputation  of  this  eximious 
man,"  etc.  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  Jewel.  See  also  "  The 
Rejected  Addresses ; "  Art.  "  Address  of  the  Editors  of  the 
Morning  Post." 

*  The  expression  in  the  original  alludes  to  Sinnis,  a  famous 
robber,  whose  peculiar  method  of  torture  it  was  to  bind  his 
Tictims  to  the  boughs  of  trees  forcibly  bent  together,  and  sud- 
denly loosened,  so  that  the  yiolence  of  their  reflex  tore  the 
limbs  from  their  bodies.  However  a  Siwiv  Avrip  was  probably 
not  more  elegant  in  Greek,  than  the  expression  "a  Turpin" 
is  considered  in  English. 

^  Victorias  thinks  that  Boccaccio,  in  his  Decameron,  has 

216  ARISTOTLE'd  [book  hi. 

Isthmifim  games,  but  ^'to  Isfhmns'  full  assemblage:" 
nor  does  he  speak  of  laws ;  but  of  "  the  laws,  the 
sovereigns  of  states :"  nor,  of  the  race ;  but  of  "  the 
soul*8  rapid  impulse:"  not*  of  a  museum;  bat  of 
"  taking  nature's  museum  with  you :"  and  of  "  rueful 
care  of  the  soul."  Nor  does  he  speak  of  favour ;  but 
of  "  the  fabricator  of  a  whole  people's  favour :"  and  of 
"  a  dispenser  of  the  pleasure  of  his  audience."  [He 
Would  not  tell  you]  of  branches;  but  '^amid  the 
branches  of  the  wood  did  he  eonceal  it :"  nor,  that  he 
covered  his  person ;  but  ^'  the  nakedneis  of  his  per-» 
son :"  and  of  "  desire  the  counter-rival  of  the  soul :" 
(lor  this  is  at  once  a  compound  word  and  an  epithet, 
so  that  it  becomes  poetry.:)  and  of  "such  an  iU- 
omen'd  excess  of  improbity."  -  Hence  those  who  ex- 
press themselves  with  this  poetic  air,  produce  by  their 
want  of  taste  both  the  ridiculous  and  the  frigid,  and 
from  their  loquacious  prosing,  become  deficient  in 
clearness ;  for  whenever  one  unnecessarily  obtrudes 
any  thing  on  an  auditor  who  already  apprehends  him, 
putting  an  end  to  all  perspicuity,  he  produces  ob-*^ 
scurity. 

People,  howeter,  do  employ  compounds,  when  the 
Com-  subject  is  without  a  proper  appellative,  and  the  com-> 
wot3«  position  is  easily  effected:  for  instance  ^* pastime ^ 
suited  to  ^^  ^  ^^  occur  frequently,  it  is  decidedly  poetical. 
Dithjr-  Wherefore  a  style  characterized  by  compounds,  is 
^^,  most  available  to  the  Dithyrambio  poets;  for  such 
exotic  to  words  are  sonorous :  exotic  words  are  most  useful  ta 
«pic;  me-  ^pi©  poets ^;  for  they  have  something  dignified  and 
thedn^  superb:  metaphor  however  to  iambic  verse ;  for  [dra- 
ma, matists]  now  employ  it,  as  has  been  already  stated. 
4.  ir.  Im-  Moreover,  fourthly,  frigidity  originates  in  metaphor ; 
j^P^'  for  there  are  even  metaphors  which  are  unbecoming : 
phon.       some,  from  their  being  ridiculous^;  for  the  writers  of 

employed  too  proftisely  this  poetical  ornament.    Comment,  in 
Demet.  Phal. 
'  May  we  not  instance  Milton's  HihtaitrMf 
f  A  striking  instance  of  this  occurs  in  two  well-known  lines, 
in  which  Winter  is  said, 

"  To  glaze  the  lakes,  and  bridle  up  the  floods. 
And  perriwiff  with  toool  the  bald-pate  woods." 

CHAP.  III.]  RHETOHrc.  217 

comedy  employ  metfi^hor :  others,  from  their  beiag 
too  dignified,  and  bating  too  great  an  air  of  tragedy^; 
and  should  they  be  far-fetched,  they  beisome  mdistinot ;; 
Bke  Gorgias,  [when  he  talks  of]  ^ingg  a0  wan,  and 
[again]  a»  t^iadj/,  **  You  have  s&wn  in  ahame,  and 
reaped  in  ruin ;"  for  this  has  too  much  the  air  of 
poetry.  And  as  Alcidama«,  [who  calls]  "philosophy 
the  rampart  of  the  laws  ;*'  and  "  the  Odyssey  a  beau*^ 
fiful  mirror  of  human  life^*"  Again,  "introducing 
Ho  such  gambolling  in  poetry :"  since  all  these  ex-* 
pressiotis,  for  the  reasons  aboye-mentioned,  are  des- 
titute of  persuasive  efficacy.  But  what  Gorgias  said 
On  a  swallow,  when  in  its  flight  it  had  muted  on  him, 
was  in  the  best  style  of  tragedy ;  for  he  exclaimed^ 
"  Oh !  fie  Philomela;''  for  to  a  bird,  indeed,  the  act 
was  not  unbecoming,  to  a  young  lady,  however,  it  would 
have  been.  So  that  he  reproached  her  neatly  enough^ 
speaking  of  her  ad  what  she  kad  been,  not  as  what 
she  th^  tMM. 

CHAP.  IV, 
Of  Smile. 

This  dmile^  too,  is  in  fact  metaphor ;  for  the  diifer-  i.  Sinule: 
ence  is  trifling :  for  when  [the  poet]  says  of  Achilles,  }^n^^' 
"  Like  ^  lion  he  leaped  on  them,"  it  is  a  simile ;  but  a  meta- 
when  he  says,  "  A  very  lion  he  leaped  on  them,"  it  is  P^^r. 
8  metaphor :  for  since  both  are  brave,  [the  poet,] 

'  Such  was  the  language  of  the  poet  who,  describing  the 
footmen's  flambeaux  at  the  end  of  an  opera,  sung  or  said^ 
Now  blazed  a  thousand /kuninff  tuns,  and  bade 

Grim  night  retire. 

Harris,  Philolog.  Inq. 
'  However  correct  Mr.  Harris'^  tadte  may  be  in  considering 
this  an  elegant  metaphor,  it  seems  extraordinary  that  hie  should 
quote  the  passage  thus :  "  AcoortUng  to  AHstotIs,  the  Odyssey 
of  Homer  was  elegantly  called  by  Alcidamas,  xaKdv  ivQpvnrlvov 
filov  KUToirrpoift  etc."  Philolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  10.  SuKly 
Aristotle  does  not  consider  this  as  an  slegant  metaphor. 

218  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

making  the  transfer,  baa  spoken  of  Achilles  as  a  lion. 

2.  Is  UM-  The  simile  is  useful  too  in  prose,  though  seldom,  since 
J^J^        it  carries  with  it  the  air  of  poetry.     And  you  must 

introduce  them  just  as  you  would  metaphors ;  for 
they  are  metaphors  differing  in  that  particular  which 
has  been  stated  K 

3.  In-  The  following  are  similes  ;  viz.  that  which  Andro- 
^J^°^  tion employed  against  Idrieus,that  "he  was  like  pup- 
pies loosed  from  their  chain ;"  for  they  rushing  at 
people  bite  them,  and  Idrieus,  too,  now  that  he  was 
dischai^ed,  was  a  dangerous  person.  Again,  as  The- 
odamus,  in  a  shmle^  compared  Archidamus  to  £ux- 
enus,  without  his  knowledge  of  geometry;  on  the 
principles  of  similar  ratios :  for  [conversely]  Euxenus 
would  be  Archidamus,  had  [the  latter]  a  knowledge 
of  geometry.  Also  the  instance  which  occurs  in  the 
Politeia  of  Plato,  that  those  who  spoil  the  dead  are 
like  young  dogs,  "which  bite  the  stone,  without 
touching  the  person  who  throws  it."  Also  the  [si- 
mile] which  he  employed  against  the  populace,  "  that 
it  was  like  a  pilot,  strong  indeed,  but  rather  deaf.'* 
And  of  the  metres  of  poets,  "  they  are  like  those  in 
the  prime  of  youth  who  are  without  beauty ;"  for  the 
latter  having  lost  their  freshness,  and  the  former  their 
numerical  arrangement,  are  no  longer  like  the  same 
thing.  Also  the  simile  of  Pericles  against  the  Samians, 
[who  said]  "they  were  like  young  children,  who  indeed 
accept  the  sop,  but  still  cry :"  and  against  the  Boeo- 
tians, that  "they  were  like  holm-oaks;  for  these 
holm-oaks  are  cut  down  by  their  own  means  ^,  as 
were  also  the  Boeotians,  in  their  contests  with  each 

*  Viz.  the  insertion  of  the  particle  denoting  similitude,  *Q£ 
\imv,  instead  of  \iwv  liropova-eu, 

•  Victorius's  conjecture  as  to  the  means  whereby  these  trees 
destroy  themselves  appears  rather  forced.  May  there  not  be 
some  allusion  to  the  original  of  the  lately  discovered  fable  of 
Phedrus ;  in  which  the  trees,  having  been  made  to  dispute 
about  providing  a  handle  for  the  woodman's  axe,  after  seeing 
the  fatal  use  he  makes  of  the  present,  acknowledge  that  they 
deserve  that  destruction  which  they  had  provided  for  them- 
selves ?  The  Latin  fabulist  himself  seems  to  think  that  his 
master,  ^sop,  had  carried  matters  too  far  in  making  trees 
speak,  since  he  deems  it  necessary  to  apologize : 

CHAP.  IV.]  RHETORIC.  219 

other."  And  what  Demosthenes  used  before  the  po- 
pulace, that  **  it  is  like  those  who  are  sea-sick  when 
on  board."  So,  too,  Democritus  likened  the  orators 
to  nurses,  "  who,  swallowing  the  sop  themselves,  be- 
smear the  infants  with  spittle."  And  in  the  same  way 
Antisthenes  likened  Cephisidotus  the  slim  to  frank- 
incense, for  ^'in  its  consumption  it  spreads  universal 
delight." 

[  Thus  the  simile  is  metaphor],  for  it  is  free  to  you 
to  enunciate  all  these  both  as  metaphors  and  as  si- 
miles.    So  that  it  is  plain  that  as  many  as,  when 
enunciated  as  metaphors,  are  approved,  will  also  be- 
come similes;    and  [vice  versa]  the  similes,  when 
unthout  the  note  [of  similitude],  will  become  meta- 
phors.    But  the  metaphor,  which  is  constructed  on  4.  Meta- 
the  principle  of  similar  ratios,  ought  always  to  admit  j^g^ad- 
of  paying  back  [the  borrowed  term*]  ;  as  also  in  other  mit  of 
cases,  and  in  that  of  [metaphor],  from  species  to  spe-  P^^^ 
des :  for  instance,  if  a  cup  be  called  "  the  shield  of  borrowed 
Bacchus,"  it  is  also  proper  to  call  a  shield  '^  the  cup  term. 
t>f  Mars."     Of  these  materials,  then,  is  a  discourse 
made  up. 

CHAP,  V. 

On  the  Necessity  of  speaking  the  Language  with  Purity. 

But  purity  in  speaking  your  language  ^  is  the  found-  1.  Purity 
ation  of  all  style ;  and  this  depends  on  five  particu-  J^**^^?^ 
lars.     First,  on  the  connective  particles^,  whether  on^ve 

"  Calumniari  si  quia  autem  voluerit,  points. 

Quod  arborea  log^ntur"  etc.    Pheed.  Prol.  lib.  i. 
'  A  metaphor  is  said  dm-airodidoarBatf  when  it  may  be  tn« 
verted:  for  Instance,  just  as  you  would   call  a  pilot,  "  the 
ruier  of  his  yessel ; "  so  may  you  call  a  ruler,  "  the  pilot  of  the 
state."    Em.  Lex. 

*  Aristotle  having  in  the  last  three  chapters  giyen  us  the 
necessary  information  respecting  the  materiala  of  style,  its  sin- 
gle woriu,  proceeds  now  to  treat  of  the  arrangement  of  those 
materials  in  whole  sentences. 

*  One  is  surprised  to  find  another  great  critic  of  antiquity 

220  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ui. 

2.  L  On  one  pfltj  them  bcick  or  not^  ju»t  as  they  are  of  a  na- 
n^ctive'  ^^^^  ^  precede  or  fellow,  aod  as  each  requires  ;  thus, 
particles,    alikough  and  on  my  part,  reqaire  yet  and  on  kupart 

[to  follow^  them].  And  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  re- 
turn of  tiie  one  to  the  other  while  it  is  yet  reoollect- 
ed,  and  not  to  suspend  them  at  too  great  interrak : 
neither  should  we  [insert  another]  connective  before 
making  a  return  to  the  connective  which  ahready  hna 
a  claim  on  us ;  for  in  very  few  instances  is  this  ap- 
propriate^  "But  I,  after  he  spoke  to  me^  for  Cleoo. 
came  up  beseeching  me  and  putting  it  to  me,  went^ 
taking  them  along  with  me:"  for  in  these  words 
many  connectives,  are  thrown  in  before  the  first  con- 
uective  has  been  paid  back ;  and  if  the  interval  be- 
tween the  words  "  /"  and  "  ta««#"  be  great,  a  want 
of  clearness  takes  place.    One  source  then  gf  correct- 

3.  ii.  In  ness  originates  in  the  connectives.  And  a  second^  in. 
using  the  expressing  yourself  in  the  appropriate  terms,  and 
tinct,  and  J^^*  ^^  generals  K  A  third,  in  terms  which  are  not 
notvague.  ambiguoQS :  this,  however,  only  when  you  do  not  de- 
te  ^  not  ^^^''*^®^7  choose  the  opposite;  the  very  thing  whidr 
ambigu-  they  do,  who,  whilst  they  have  nothing  to  say,  yet 
ous.  affect  to  say  something  marvellous ;  for  such  persons, 

in  their  invention  of  somewhat  to  say,  give  vent  to 
these  terms,  just  as  Empedocles  did.  For  the  cir- 
cumlocution by  its  length  imposes  on  people,  and  the 
auditors  are  affected  in  the  very  self-same  way  as  the 
populace  in  transactions  with  soothsayers ;  for  when 
they  utter  their  ambiguities,  they  yield  assent  as 
they  go  on;  [as  in  the  famous  oracle],  "Croesus 
having  crossed  the  Halys  will  overthrow  a  mighty 
empire.''  And  it  is  because  the  chance  of  mistake  is 
less,  that  soothsayers  express  themselves  in  generals 
on  their  subject:  for  in  "even  and  odd*"  he  will 
more  frequently  be  right  who  cries  [only  generally^ 

declaring  it  unnecessary  to  be  very  patticular  in  this  respect : — 
Yp4  a  Kal  Tobv  <rvvdi<rfiou9  fifi  fidXa  avTairadi9o<rdai  &Kpifi&9, 
otov  Tcp  fikvf  t6  di.     Demet.  Phal.  irept  ipfirjvBlav,  §  53. 

•  By  ToTs  irepUxovatv  is  meant,  not  eireumlocuHonSf  but  the 
use  of  a  general  instead  of  a  particular  term,  as  ipvBp6v  in  the 
place  of  <t>oivt^,  which  of  course  much  weakens  the  idea. 

*  Ludere  par  impar.     Hbr.  Sat.  lib.  ii.  3,  248. 

CHAP,  v.]  HHETORIC.  221 

either  "  evefP  or  "  odd^  than  one  who  would  \s:pecify\ 
the  exact  number ;  and  60  oae  who  predicts  siniply 
-that  a  thing  will  happen,  than  he  who  would  subjoin 
when^.  (>»  which  account  the  soothsayers  never  add 
the  further  distinction  of  "  when,^  All  these  errors 
then  are  similar ;  so  that,  unless  it  be  with  a  view  to 
Bome  such  end,  they  are  to  be  avoided. 

The  fourth  essential  is  the  preserving  tiie  distinc-  5.  iv.  In* 
laon  which  Protagoras  marked  out  between  the  gen-  genSew.^' 
ders  of  nouns,  viz.  masculine,  fc^rainine,  and  neuter ; 
for  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  these  correspond 
correctly.     Thus,   "She,  having  come  and  having 
conversed,  departed.*^ 

The  fifth  consists  in  correctly  quoting  the  plural,  ^  ▼•  I^ 
dual,  and  singular  numbers.     "They,  coming  up,  aiunbew!' 
commenced  beating  me." 

In  a  word,  the  written  style  ought  to  be  easily  ^^^  Sp- 
read and  understood ;  and  in  these  requisites  it  is  JJ^es. 
the  same  [as  that  of  recitation] ;  the  very  qualities  i.  Style 
however  these  which  numerous  connectives  do  not  J^^*  *^ 
possess :   neither  the  compositions  which  it  is  not  read  ^d 
easy  to  point,  as  those  of  Heraclitus.     For  the  point-  to  xmder- 
ing  of  Heraclitus'  works  is  quite  a  task,  from  its  !?^^* 
being  far  from  clear  whether  words  refer  to  those  ^^^  ^^ 
w^hich  precede  or  those  which  follow  them^      For  pendon 
example,  in  the  beginning  of  his  work,  "  Of  reason  ^^^^" 
existing  always  men  are  ignorant:"   for  it  is  not 
clear  to  which  branch  of  the  sentence  we  should 
point  off  the  "  always.* 

This  moreover  produces  a  solecism ;  the  failure  "^-  ^  ^ 
in  paying  back  the  idea,  if,   [in  the  case  of  two  Sonrf 
words,]  you  do  not  bring  each  under  an  expression  more  than 
adapted  to  both^:  for  example,  to  the  words  "  colour  ^^  ^**"^ 

'  Hence  the  distin^sliing  superiority  of  the  prophecies  of 
our  Saviour's  coming ;  for  in  them  not  the  simple  fact  alone, 
but  the  very  period  at  which  it  should  occur  was  specified. 

*  We  can  no  where  find  a  more  striking  instance  of  the  wamt 
of  clearness  to  which  a  neg-lect  of  these  cautions  gires  rise, 
than  in  book  ii.  chap.  18,  of  the  worthy  Stagyrite's  own  work. 

^  Or,  to  take  his  own  illustration,  in  speaking  of  ike  otQeeU 
of  dif^rent  «en«M,  be  carefol  not  to  annex  a  verb  which  de- 
notes the  operation  of  one  sense  alone.    This  is  well  exposed 

wemuBt 

222  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi, 

use  a  verb  or  sound,"  the  expression  "seeing"  has  not  a  com- 
bfe^to  all  ^^^  reference ;  whereas  the  expression  "  perceiving" 
iy.  There  has.  Again,  sentences  become  indistinct,  if,  delay- 
must  be  ing  to  thrust  in  many  intermediate  remarks,  you  do 
pare^e-  °^*  P^*  ^^*  ^^^  staite  [what  naturally  comes  first]. 
sea.  For  example,  "  For  I  intended,  after  I  had  conversed 

with  him  on  this  and  that  subject,  and  so  od,  to 
depart:"  not,  [stating  it  naturally  thus,]  "For  I 
intended  to  depart;"  and  afterwards  introducing, 
"  after  I  ha'd  conversed  on  this  and  that,  and  so  on." 

1.  Eleya.  CHAP.  VI. 

tion  pro- 
duced by  On  Elevation  of  Style, 

seven  ex- 

rtj^'  The  following  expedients  contribute  to  elevation  of 
the  defi-  the  style,  viz^-— the  employing  the  definition  instead 
nition  in  of  the  noun ;  saying,  for  instance,  not  "  a  circle," 
th^noun.  ^"*  "  *  plane  superficies,  whose  circumference  is  at 
The  re-  all  points  equidistant  from  the  centre."  f  he  reverse, 
verse  pro-  however,  viz.  the  use  of  the  noun  instead  of  the  de- 
ruptness.   finition,  contributes  to  abruptness. 

2.  Again,  [the  avoiding  either,]  if  it  be  indelicate  or 
iiiff  dther'  ^°^ecoming  ;  i.  e.  using  the  noun,  if  the  indelicacy 
if  out  of  *  be  in  the  definition ;  or  the  definition,  if  it  be  in  the 
****«•        noun. 

lusSation  Also,  the  illustration  of  the  subject  by  metaphor 
bv  meta-  ismd  epithets,  guarding,  however,  against  what  savours 
•^*ite^  of  poetry.  And  the  putting  what  is  but  single  as 
4f*iy.®By  many,  the  thing  which  the  poets  do:  though  the 
using  the  haven  be  but  one,  yet  they  tell  you  of  "  Grecian 
th^^^-  tavens ;"— and,  "the  letters'  many-opening  folds ^" 
lar.  Also,  the  not  bringing  all  your  words  under  a 

in  the  Spectator : — "  I  have  known  a  hero  compared  to  a  thun- 
derbolt, a  lion,  and  the  sea ;  all  and  each  of  them  proper  meta- 
phors for  impetuosity,  coutage,  or  force.  But  by  bad  manage- 
ment it  hath  so  happened,  that  the  thunderbolt  hath  overflowed 
its  banks ;  the  lion  hath  been  darted  through  the  skies ;  and 
the  billows  have  rolled  out  of  the  Libyan  desert"  No.  595. 
*  Eurip.  Iph.  in  Taur.  727. 

6.  V.  As- 

CHAP,  vi]  RHETORIC.  2^3 

common  particle,  but  assigning  to  each  its  own :  signing 
"  This  woman,  this  my  wife."  And  the  expressing  ***  ^^^ 
yourself  with  a  connective  ;  but  if  abruptly,  without  distinct 
a  connective  indeed,  though  not  unconnectedly ;  for  particle. 
instance,  "  Having  departed  and  having  spoken  to  ^  xJsinjr 
him ;"  or,  "  having  departed,  I  spoke  to  him."  connec- 

The  precept  of  Antimachus,  too,  is  of  service,  viz.  Ij^^*  ^^t 
the  drawing  your  expressions  from  absent  qualities^,  ly^^?' 
which  he  does  in  celebrating  the  hill   Teumessus,  out  them, 
[commencing,]  "  There  is  a  certain  little  hill  visited  7-  ^  ^y 
by  the  winds^;"  for  thus  the  subject  is  carried  on  to  q^ties. 
infinity.     And  this  expedient  holds  good  alike  in  the 
case  of  qualities  which  are  good,  and  such  as  are 
bad^  just  as  the  subject  has  them  not,  in  whichever 
way  it  may  be  of  service.     Hence  the  poets  deduce 
their  expressions*,  the  ** stringless "  and  the  "lyre- 
less  melody ; "  for  they  build  their  epithets  on  priva- 
tives.     And  this  expedient  is  also  approved  in  ana- 
logical metaphors;    for  instance,  the  saying  of  "a 
trumpet,"  that  it  is  a  "  lyreless  harmony." 

'  How  much  may  be  made  of  a  mere  summary  of  negations, 
•will  readily  be  acknowledged  by  those  who  have  read  Roches- 
ter's poem  on  Nothing ;  and  another  in  Latin  on  the  same 
subject  (if  subject  it  may  be  called),  by  Passerat,  a  poet  and 
critic  of  the  sixteenth  century,  in  France.  This  last  is  usually 
subjoined  to  Johnson's  Life  of  Rochester. 

'  These  words,  it  will  be  observed,  do  not  in  themselves  ' 

afford  an  instance  of  the  precept  here  recommended ;  but,  as  it 
appears  thai  the  work  of  Antimachus  was  well  known,  they 
were  probably  intended  as  a  hint  at  a  passage  in  which  an 
illustration  was  to  be  found.  Of  Aristotle's  quotations  in  ge- 
neral, it  may  be  remarked  that,  however  naturally  we  might 
expect  to  meet  with  beautiful  passages,  in  illustration  of  the 
several  beauties  of  style  which  he  successively  discusses,  they 
present  but  a  series  of  allusions  (now  obscure  and  scarcely  in- 
telligible), to  passages  which  were  easily  accessible  to  his  au- 
dience, but  which  have  been  lost  to  us  amid  the  general  wreck 
of  ancient  literature.    See  Victorius's  remark,  cap.  iii.  §  3. 

«  Whether  in  praising  or  blaming. 

'  It  should  be  remembered  that  these  negative  epithets  are 
very  common  to  the  Greek  poets.  Victorius  points  out  many 
instances :  as,  KZfiov  di/auXoTaTov,  Eurip.  Phoen.  818 ;  Qiavov 
dfiuKx^vTop,  Orest.  319 ;  fitiwrripot  A^OtyicTou,  iEsch.  Eumen. 
245 ;  diTTtpoU  TrotTnfia.criVy  ibid.  250,  etc.  There  is  a  fine  in- 
stance of  this  negative  mode  of  explaining  a  metaphor  in  Isaiah, 
li.  21. — "  Thou  drunken,  but  not  with  vfihe.**    Twining. 

2H  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in. 

CHAP.  VIL 

Of  the  becoming  in  SfyU, 

1.  "Wliat  Style  will  possess  th^  qualitjof  being  in  good  t^ste^ 
tutMffood  *^  ^*  ^  expressive  at  onoe  of  feding  «fid  ebar«cter, 
taste  m  and  in  proportion  to  ^  the  subjjQct^matter.  This  {hto- 
style .»«»  portion,  however,  is  preserved,  provided  the  style  be 
^adnruSi,  iJi^ither  careless  on  questions  of  dignity,  nor  dignii&ed 
itOtK^ :  *  on  such  as  are  mean :  neither  to  a  mean  word  let  or- 
""4iW^  nameut  be  superadded ;  otherwise  it  appears  mere 
to^the  ^  burlesque ;  ss  Cleophon  uses  to  do ;  fc»^  be  has  ex- 
subject-  pressed  aome  things  equally  ridiculously,  as  thomgh 
"^**«'-  ^  .he  were  to  say,  ^' August  fig-tree." 
3.  nraeri''  But  [the  Style]  e^ressive  of  feeling,  supposing 
Tucn  ren-  the  case  be  one  oi  assault,  is  the  style  of  a  man  in  a 
auSenM  passion ;  if,  however,  it  be  one  of  loathsomeness  and 
gvmpa-  impiety,  the  expressing  yourself  with  disgust  and 
thetic.  painful  caution ;  if,  however,  the  case  demand  praise, 
with  exultation ;  if  pity,  with  submission ;  and  so  on 

4.  in  the  other  cases.  And  a  style  which  is  appropriate, 
moreover,  invests  the  subject  with  persuasive  efficacy. 
For  the  mind  is  cheated  into  a  persuasion,  that  the 
orator  is  speaking  with  sincerity,  because,  under  such 
circumstances,  men  stand  affected  in  that  manner. 
So  that  people  suppose  things  to  be  even  as  the 
speaks:  states  them,  what  though,  in  reality,  they  are 

5.  not :  and  the  hearer  has  a  kindred  feeling  with  the 
orator,  who  expresses  himself  feelingly,  even  should 
he  say  nothing  to  the  purpose ;  availing  themselves 
of  which,  many  bear  down  their  hearers  in  the  storm 
of  passion. 

6.  ^OiK^  But  moreover,  this  mode  of  showing  by  means  of 
renders  signs  is  expressive  of  character ;  because,  on  every 
app^ri-  condition  and  habit  of  life,  is  oonsequent  a  language 
ate  to  the  suited  to  it.  I  use  the  expression  condition,  in  refer-^ 
audience.  ^^^^  ^  ^^  Stage  of  life ;  as  youth,  manhood,  or  age ; 
and  [to  the  sex],  as  man,  or  woman ;  and  [to  na- 

^  Might  we  borrow  an  expression  from  the  lan^age  cf  the 
painter,  we  qhould  any,  "  in  proper  keeping  with" 

OHAP-vii.]  RHETORIC.  225 

tion],  as  Lacedaemonian,  or  Thessalian.     [I  mean]  7. 
by  habits,  those  conformablj  to  which  one  is  of  a 
certain  character  in  life;  for  it  is  not  according  to 
every  habit  that  the  life  assumes  a  certain  character : 
if  then  one*  express  himself  in  the  language  appro- 
priate to  the  habit,  he  will  produce  the  effect  of  being 
characteristic ;  for  a  rustic  and  a  man  of  education, 
will  express  themselves  neither  in  the  same  words, 
nor  in  the  same  manner.     And  the   auditors   are 
affected,  in  some  way,  by  that  feeling  of  which  the 
declaimers  avail  themselves,  till  it  nauseates  ;   [put- 
ting it  to  their  audience  thus],  "who  knows  not?" — 
''all  men  know  it."     For, the  auditor  acknowledges 
with  a  kind  of  confusion,  that  he  participates  [in  that 
information]  which  all  the  rest  of  the  world  possess. 
The  employment  of  them  opportunely,  or  inoppor-  8.  Oene- 
tunely,  is,  however,  a  consideration  common  to  every  ^  "^®'- 
species  [of  ornament] ;  but  for  every  excess  [in  them  J,  9.  We 
there  is  that  corrective  which  is  in  the  mouth  of  every  ™^8t  cor- 
body ;  for,  of  yourself,  you  should  append  a  reproof  ^^^ 
on  yourself ;  for  it  appears  in  reality  [an  ornament],  it  were. 
at  least  since  the  use  of  it  does  not  escape  the  notice  of 
the  speaker  himself.     Further,  the  speaker  is  not  at  10.  We 
once  to  employ  every  thing  which  is  proportionate ;  "*^^ 
for  thus  the  hearer  has  the  deceit  passed  off  on  him.  ^?ect  ^ 
I  mean  that,  if  the  terms  be  harsh,  he  is  not  to  em-  the  rules 
ploy  a  harsh  tone  and  expression  of  countenance,  and  ^^^^ 
the  other  peculiarities  [of  harshness] :  if  this  caution 
be  not  observed,  [our  artifices]  severally  appear  what 
they  really  are.     But  if  he  employ  some  and  not 
others,  without  observation  he  produces   the  same 
effect.     Still,  if  expressions  of  softness  be  uttered 
harshly,  and  such  as  are  harsh  with  softness,  they 
become  divested  of  efficacy  to  persuade.     But  com-  11.  We 
pound  words,  and  a  plurality  of  epithets,  and  foreign  ^j^^* 
idioms,  are  appropriate  chiefly  to  one  who  speaks  pound 
under  the  excitement  of  some  passion  ; — ^for  with  one,  words  ex- 

!for  instance,]  who  is  affected  by  anger,  we  have  a  ^it^®* 
iellow-feeling  in  his  calling  his  wrongs   "heaven- 
measuring,"  or  "prodigious :"  they  are  so,  too,  when 
one  is   sdready  master  of  his  audience,   and  has 
Q 

226  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

wrought  them  up  to  enthusiasm,  either  hj  panegyric 
or  invective,  by  [the  excitement]  of  anger  or  friendly 
feeling  ;  the  whi9h  Isocrates  does  in  "  The  Panegy- 
ric," near  the  conclusion ;  " — ^the  record  and  remem- 
brance ;"  and,  "  men  who  had  the  spirit — "  For 
the  speaker,  in  a  transport  of  enthusiasm,  gives 
utterance  to  expressions  such  as  these ;  so  that  the 
audience  also^  being  forsooth  similarly  affected  them- 
selves, readily  welcome  them.  Wherefore  they  are 
adapted  to  poetry;  for  poetry  is  the  language  of 
enthusiasm. 

It  is,  then,  either  in  this  way  [that  we  are  to  em- 
ploy poetical  expressions],  or  in  irony;  as  Grorgias 
was  in  the  habit  of  doing ;  and  [as  Socrates  does]  in 
the  Phaedrus  [of  Plato]. 

CHAP.  VIII. 
Of  Mf/thm. 

1.  The      The  modelling  of  the  diction  should,  however,  be 
style  must  neither  metrical  nor  without  rhythm^:  for  the  first 
rhythm,    ^^  ^^  persuasive  efficacy  (since  it  appears  to  have 
but  not     been  got  up),  and  at  the  same  time  it  also  draws  off 
metre.       j-^-j^g  attention] ;  for  it  causes  one  to  fix  his  attention 
on  the  similarities  of  cadence,  when  they  will  recur 
again ;  just  in  the  way  that  little  children  anticipate 
the  crier ;   (for  when  he  demands, — "  Whom  does 
this  freedman  choose  as  his  patron?" — [they  ex- 
claim], "  Cleon :")  that,  however,  which  is  without 
2.  rhythm,  has  no  measure.  The  diction  ought,  however, 
to  be  measured,  yet  without  metre ;  for  what  is  desti- 
tute of  measure  is  displeasing  and  indistinct.     But 
by  number  all  things  are  measured ;  and  in  model- 
ling the  diction,  the  number  is  rhythm  ^  of  which 

^  In  pursuance  of  that  systematic  plan  which  we  have  re- 
marked that  Aristotle  has  adopted  in  considering  the  subject 
of  style,  he  -proceeds  here  to  treat  of  it  as  addressed  to  the  ear, 
*  *  "  Rhythm  differs  from  ms^^  inasmuch  as  rhythm  is  pro- 

CHAP.  Till.]  RHETORIC.  227 

the  metres  are  certain  divisions^.    Hence  the  sentence  3. 
should  possess  rhythm,  though  not  metre;  for  then 
it  will  become  verse ;  and  its  very  rhythm  should  be 
without  preciseness.     This,  however,  will  be  the  case 
if,  up  to  a  certain  point,  it  be  preserved. 

But  of  the  rhythms,  the  heroic  is  stately,  and  not  4. 
adapted  to  conversation,  and  deficient  in  v.aried  ca-  Miythms 
dence ;  the  iambic,  however,  is  the  very  style  of  the  kinS^*^^' 
multitude ;  whence  it  is  that  persons  in  conversation  Heroic. 
give  utterance  to  iambic  lines,  most  of  all  metres,  ^"^bic. 
But  [in  a  speech]  there  should  be  a  degree  of  stateli- 
ness  and  departure  from  [the  ordinary  phrase].     Yet  Trochaic, 
the  trochaic  metre  is  too  tripping**;  and  all  tetrame- 
ters show  it ;  for  tetrameters  are  a  kind  of  dancing 
rhythm  ^.    But  the  paean  remains,  which  orators,  com-  Paean, 
mending  with  Thrasymachus,  began  to  employ ;  they 
were  not,  however,  able  to  explain  what  it  was.    Yet 
the  paean  is  the  third,  and  comes  next  to  those 
[rh3rthms]  which  have  been  mentioned ;  for  it  is  as 
three  to  tvjo.     But  of  the  former  [rhythms,  the  ratio  Ratios  of 
is]  of  the  one,  [the  heroic,]  as  one  to  one;  of  the  ^Lj^^g 
others,  [the  iambic  and  trochaic,]  as  two  to  one^.  But     ^^  * 

pordon  applied  to  any  motion  whatever ;  metre  is  proportion, 
applied  to  the  motion  of  toorda  spoken"  Harris.  "  The 
rhythm  of  a  dactyl  and  anapaest  is  the  same ;  the  metre  is  dif- 
ferent. The  distinction  is  similar  to  that  of  permutations  and 
combinations  in  arithmetic."  Scale,  Analysis  of  Greek  Me* 
tres.  Metre,  in  short,  cannot  exist  independently  of  articuktte 
sounds  ;  while  rhythm  may  be  heard  in  any  proportionate  suc- 
cession of  sounds ;  as  in  the  ringing  of  hammers  on  an  anvil, 
or  the  flapping  of  the  wings  of  a  bird. 

'  Metre  is  distinctly  stated,  in  the  Poetic,  to  be  a  species  of 
rhythm.  Harris  also  says,  "  All  metre  is  rhythm,  yet  all 
rhythm  is  not  metre."     Philolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  2. 

*  Twining  illustrates  it  by  the  following  line ; — 

"  Jolly  mortals,  fill  your  glasses ;  noble  deeds  are  done 
by  wine." 
<  ILopioKiKUTtpov — ^namby-pamby :  K6p6a^  was  a  species  of 
immodest,  lascivious  dance. 

*  As  the  Greeks  considered  a  long  syllable  as  equivalent  to 
two  times,  and  a  short  only  to  one,  two  short  syllables  were  of 
coarse  equivalent  to  one  long ;  so  that,  in  either  of  the  feet  of 
which  heroic  metre  is  composed,  a  ratio  of  equality  exists ; 
(for  instance,  in  the  dactyl,  ~  :  "^  : :  2  :  1  and  1 ;  or,  in  the 
spondee,  ~ :  " : :  2 : 2.)    The  same  observation  will  explain  the 

<J2 

228  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in. 

next  to  these  ratios  ranks  that  of  whole  and  half^; 

5.  The  and  this  is  the  p»an.  The  others  then  are  to  be 
wean  is  to  abandoned  for  the  reasons  stated,  and  because  they 
ed.'^      '  are  resolvable  into  verse :  the  psean  is,  however,  to 

be  retained;  since  out  of  that  only  rhythm,  of  all 
which  have  been  mentioned,  it  is  not  possible  to  con- 
struct any  metre ;  so  that  [in  employing  it]  most  of 
all  rhythms,  an  orator  will  elude  detection*. 

At  present,  indeed,  the  orators  employ  one  paean, 
[as  well  in  concluding]  as  on  opening ;  the  conclu- 
sion, however,  ought  to  differ  from  the  opening  [of  a 

6.  Two  speech].  And  there  are  two  species  of  paeans,  op- 
'^^^  ^^  posed  to  each  other ;  whereof  the  one  is  adapted  to 
^S^fiwt  *^«  opening,  (just,  in  fact,  as  they  employ  it ;)  this  is 
suited  to  that  one  of  which  the  long  syllable  is  first,  and  the 
the  open-  ^j^j.^  g|j^j^  ^^^^  ^^  ^1^^  ^^^  j-^^g  ^^  ^Yie  word]  AoXoyeVIc, 

The  se-  and  XpvtreoKdfta.  The  Other,  however,  contrariwise, 
cond  to  is  that  whereof  the  three  short  syllables  are  first,  and 
diLioi^     the  long  at  the  end,  [as  in  the  conclusion  of  the  Hne] — 

ratio  of  the  iambus,  (":"::  1 : 2,)  and  the  trochee  (':**::  2 : 1). 
Now  the  peean  C^"  :  ~  : :  3  :  2)  holds  a  mean  ratio  between 
that  of  the  heroic  metre  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  the 
iambic  and  trochaic  respectively  on  the  other ;  the  ratio  of  the 
former  being  merely  that  of  equality,  while  the  ratio  of  the 
latter  was  too  much  in  excess. 

▼  *H/uioX(o9 — sesquiduplex — a  whole  and  half  besides; — 
"  Necesse — partem  pedis  aut  squalem  esse  alteri  parti ;  aut 
altero  tanto,  aut  sesqui  esse  majorem.  Ita  fit  agualis,  dacty- 
lus ;  duplex,  iambus ;  aesquiplex,  peeon." — Cicero,  Orat.  c.  56. 

*  Though  the  illustrations  already  given  have  been  perhaps 
too  prolix,  I  cannot  forbear  transcribing  the  following  passage 
from  Harris,  in  illustration  of  the  whole  subject : — "  The 
rhythm  of  the  heroic  foot  is  one  to  one,  which  constitutes,  in 
music,  what  we  call  common  time ;  and  in  musical  vibration, 
what  we  call  the  unison.  The  rhythm  of  the  iambic  is  one  to 
two,  which  constitutes,  in  music,  what  we  call  triple  time; 
and  in  musical  vibration,  what  we  call  the  octave.  The 
rhythm  next  to  these,  is  that  of  two  to  three,  or  else  its  equiva- 
lent, three  to  two ;  a  rhythm  compounded  of  tiie  two  former 
times  united;  and  which  constitutes,  in  musical  vibration, 
what  we  call  thejlfth.  'Twas  here  then  they  discovered  tKe 
foot  they  wanted ;  that  foot  which,  being  neither  the  heroic 
nor  the  iambic,  was  yet  so  far  connected  with  them,  as  to  con- 
tain virtually  within  itself  the  rhythme  of  them  both."— Phi- 
lolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  2. 

CHAP.  IX.]  RHETORIC.  229 

Mcrdk  a  yav  Hia-rd  t*  &Ktav6v*  ii<f>&vt<ri  vv^. 

Afterwards  night  obscured  both  earth,  and  water,  and  ocean. 

This  [paean]  makes  a  good  conclusion ;  whereas  *the 
short  syllable,  owing  to  its  being  incomplete,  renders 
the  sentence  mutilated.  But  it  is  right  to  break  off 
with  a  long  syllable,  for  your  conclusion  to  be  clearly 
marked,  not  by  means  of  the  amanuensis,  nor  merely 
by  annotations  on  the  margin,  but  by  means  of  •  the 
rhythm. 

That,  then,  the  diction  should  be  conformable  to 
rhythm,  and  not  deficient  in  it,  the  particular  rhythms 
too  which  will  render  it  so  conformable,  and  these 
under  what  arrangement,  have  heen  stated. 

CHAP.  IX. 

Cf  Style  continuous  and  its  opposite  \ 

The  style  must  needs  be  either  continuous,  and  united  1.  Style 
by  means  of  connectives,  just  like  the  protracted  odes  "  2L^^^ 
of  the  dithyrambic  poets  ^;  or  refiex,  and  like  the  a^o/Ilj;n> 
antistrophic  odes  of  the  old  poets.  KOfrt- 

Now  the  continuous  style  is  the  old  style,  as,  "  This  "^^f^' 
is  the  exposition  of  the  historical  research  of  Hero-  2.  i.  elpo- 
dotus,  of  Thurium*,"  etc.    For  formerly  indeed  every  t^^K^y  <"■ 

rupted. 

>  ^tyle  is  here  considered  as  addressed  to  the  Intellect  of  the 
auditor. 

3  At^it  tlpofilutit  in  which  the  sentence  has  no  other  unity 
than  that  which  copulatives  give  it,  nor  any  other  measure 
than  the  completion  of  the  sense,  and  the  necessity  of  taking 
breath ;  or,  as  Cicero  in  few  words  so  admirably  describes  it, 
"  ilia  sine  intervalUs  loquacitas  perennis  et  profluens.*'  This 
Aristotle  compares  to  what  he  calls  the  dva^Xal  in  dithyram- 
bic poetry;  meaning,  I  think,  evidently  the  long,  irregular, 
protracted  odes  of  the  more  modem  dithyrambic  poets:  for 
the  word  dvafioXii,  here,  does  not,  I  believe,  signify  exordium, 
procemium,  as  usually  understood,  but  was,  probably,  the  name 
by  which  &6al  fiaxpal  xal  iroXvtiStU  were  distinguished,'  etc. 
— ^Twining,  note  17, 

'  Herodotus,  though  a  native  of  Halicamassus,  went  latterly 
as  a  colonist  to  Thurium. 

230  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  iil 

Defini-  one  employed  it,  but  now  very  few.  I  call  that 
tionofit.  continuous,  which  in  itself  has  no  termination, 
should  not  the  circumstance  under  narration  have 
been  terminated.  But  it  is  unpleasant,  from  its 
being  indefinite;  for  all  like  to  descry  the  end. 
Wherefore  it  is  that  racers  pant  and  faint  away  jtist 
at  the  turn  ;  for  before,  while  they  have  the  goal  in 
view  before  them,  they  do  not  tire.  The  continuous 
style,  then,  is  this. 

3.  Reflex  But  the  rejlex  is  that  which  consists  of  periods. 
■*yl®^      I  call  a  period  a  form  of  words  which  has  independ- 

'     ently  in  itself  a  beginning  and  ending,  and  a  length 
easily  taken  in  at  a  glance.   A  diction  of  this  descrip- 
tion is  pleasing,-  and  easily  conveys  information  :  now 
ispleaa-     it  is  pleasing  from  its  being  the  opposite  of  that 
^^*  which  is  indefinite^;  and  because  the  hearer  all  along 

supposes  that  he  is  securing  something,  from  the  cir- 
cumstance that  something  is  constantly  finished  oif 
for  him ;  but  the  not  foreseeing  nor  despatching  any 
Easily  re-  thing  is  unpleasant :  and  it  easili/  conveys  informa' 
member-  ^-^^^  because  it  is  easily  remembered ;  this,  however, 
is  the  case,  because  the  diction  which  consists  of  pe- 
riods has  number,  which  of  all  things  is  most  easily 
recollected.  And  hence  every  one,  remembers  verse 
better  than  prose ;  for  it  has  numbers  by  which  it  is 

4.  Thepe-  measured.  The  period  ought  also  to  be  terminated 
fin^h^"^  with  the  sense,  and  not  to  be  interrupted  like  this 
with  the    verse  of  Sophocles, — 

tense.  4  « While  other  sentences  are  indefinite,  and  (like  a 

geometrical  right  line)  may  be  produced  indefinitely,  the  period 
(like  a  circular  line)  is  always  circumscribed,  returns  and 
terminates  at  a  given  point.  In  other  words,  while  other  sen- 
tences, by  the  help  of  common  copulatives,  have  a  sort  of 
boundless  effusion,  the  constituent  parts  of  a  period  have  a 
sort  of  reflex  union,  in  which  union  the  sentence  is  so  far  com- 
plete, as  neither  to  require,  nor  even  to  admit  a  further  exten- 
sion. Readers  find  a  pleasure  in  this  grateful  circmt,  which 
leads  them  so  agreeably^  to  an  acquisition  of  knowledge." 
Harris,  Philolog.  Inq.  P.  ii.  c.  4.  He  quotes  the  commence- 
ment of  his  own  Hermes  and  Philosophical  Arrangements, 
with  the  opening  of  Cicero's  Offices,  Demosthenes'  Oration 
concerning  the  Crown,  and  that  of  the  Panegyric  by  Isocrates, 
(whom  he  calls  the  father  of  periods,)  as  instances  of  period- 
ical style. 

OHAP.  IX.]  RHETORIC.  231 

"  This  is  Calydon,  land  of  the  territory  of  Pelops*." 
For  by  dividing  it  is  possible  to  understand  the  con- 
trary [of  the  fact],  as  in  the  case  of  the  instance 
cited,  that  Calydon  is  in  Peloponnesus. 

A  period  either  consists  of  claitses,  or  is  simple.  5.  A  pe- 
But  the  period  consisting  of  clauses  is  a  mode  of  ^ther  in 
speech  perfect  and  distinct,  and  easily  pronounced  dauses  or 
at  a  breath;  not,  however,  at  the  point  of  division,  simple. 
like  the  fore-mentioned  period,  but  altogether.    And 
a  clause  is  one  subdivision  of  it.    By  a  simple  period, 
I  mean  one  consisting  of  a  single  clause. 

But  neither  the  clauses  nor  the  periods  ought  to  6.  They 
be  either  curtailed  or  prolix ;  for  their  brevity  often  ^^^^* 
causes  the  hearer  to  feel  a  hitch ;  since  it  needs  must  tailed. 
be,  if  while  he  is  yet  [in  thought]  hastening  onward, 
that  limit  of  termination  which  he  conceives  within 
himself  happens  to  be  thrown  back  by  the  speaker's 
ceasing,  that  a  kind  of  hitch,  as  it  were,  occurs,  owing 
to  the  impulse  backward.     Those,  however,  which  Nor  pro- 
are  prolix  cause  the  hearer  to  be  left  behind ;  just      * 
as  they  who  make  the  turn  too  far  on  the  outside  of 
the  goal,  for  they  don't  keep  up  with  those  walking 
with  them^;  and  in  a  similar  way,  periods  which  are 
prolix  grow  into  an  oration,  and  are  something  like 
a  desultory  ode''.     So  that  that  occurs  which  Demo- 
critus,  the  Chian,  joked  Melanippides  about,  viz.  that 
he  produced  desultory  odes  instead  of  antistrophes. 
"A  man  in  framing  a  nuisance  for  others,  frames 
one  for  himself;  and  long  tedious  odes  are  the  great- 
est nuisance  to  him  who  produces  them®;"  for  it  is 
appropriate  enough  to  hold  such  language  as  this 
respecting  the  framers  of  prolix  clauses.     But  those 
which  are  brief  in  their  claufces  do  not,  in  fact,  be- 
come periods  ;  therefore  they  draw  on  the  hearer  by 
fits  and  starts. 

*  This  line  is  found  quoted  by  Lucian,  as  taken  from  a 
drama  of  Euripides,  no  longer  extant,  entitled  Meleager. 

'  Probably  an  English  sergeant  would  have  illustrated  this 
by  a  column  wheeling  into  line. 
^  See  the  note  on  §  1  of  this  chapter. 

*  A  neat  parody  this  on  Hesiod,  0pp.  et  D.  y.  263. 

232  ABISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

7.  Style         Of  Style  which  consists  of  periods,  one  species  is 
^eWa&^  merely  divided  [by  disjunctives],  another  has  an  an- 
iifiprifiiini  tithesis.     Simply  divided,  as,  "  I  have  often  felt  sur- 
er dvTi-    prised  at  those  who  convened  the  general  assemblies 
KUfitmi.    ^^9  established  the  gymnastic  contests."  The  style, 
however,  which  hcu  antithesis,  is  that  in  which,  in 
each  clause,  either  there  is  one  contrary  put  in  con- 
junction with  another,  or  the  same  is  linked  in  con- 
nexion with  contraries :  as,  "  They  benefited  both,  as 
well  those  who  remained  behind,  as  those  who  joined 
the  expedition;  since  they  made  acquisitions  for  the 
latter  more  than  they  possessed  at  home ;  while  to 
the   former  they  abandoned,  in  what  remained   at 
home,  a  full  competence.^  The  ideas  set  in  opposition 
are, — staying  behind, — joining  the  expedition ;  com- 
petence,— ^more.     [And  in  this  sentence]  :  "  So  that 
both  to  those  who  wanted  money,  and  to  those  who 
desired  to  enjoy  it,^  etc.     Here  enjoyment  stands  op- 
posed to  acquisition.     And  again :  ^'  It  happens  fre- 
quently in  these  cases,  that  while  the  prudent  fail, 
the  simple  succeed.*^ — "  Forthwith,  indeed,  they  claim- 
ed the  prize  of  highest  valour,  and  not  long  after  they 
gained  the  sovereignty  of  the  sea." — "  That  he  sailed, 
indeed,  through  the  main  land,  and  marched  across 
the  sea;  joining  vnth  a  bridge  the  ^Hellespont,  while 
he  channelled  through  mount  Athos."  Again :  "  That, 
citizens  though  they  were  by  birth,  they  were  yet  de- 
prived by  law  of  their  franchise  in  the  cityj^ — "  While 
some  of  them  miserahly  perished,  others  were  dis- 
^  gracefully  preserved,^     Again :  "  That  privately,  in- 
deed, he  employed  barbarian  slaves ;  while  in  public 
he  allowed  many  of  the  allies  to  be  in  slavery  :*' — 
8.  "  Either  they  would  possess  it  while  alive,  or  leave  it 
behind  when  dead."     Again,  the  expression  which 
some  one  made  use  of  against  Pitholaus  and  Lyco^ 
phron  in  the  court:  "They  sold  you,  indeed,  when 
they  were  at  home ;  but  when  they  were  come  to  us, 
*  they  w^ere  themselves  bought^ — For  all  these  [anti- 

theses] produce  the  fore-mentioned  effect. 

*  **  In  hoc  loco  t6  KaX  non  tarn  coptdandi,  quam  discemendi 
vim  habet.*'    Emest.  Lex.  Tech. 

CHAP.  IX.]  RHETORIC.  233 

And  a  style  of  this  description  is  pleasing,  because 
contraries  are  most  easily  apprehended,  and,  when 
set  by  each  other's  side,  they  become  still  more  easy 
of  apprehension :  and  because  they  bear  a  resemblance 
to  a  reasoning  process ;  for  the  elenchiis  is  an  infer- 
ence of  contraries.    Such,  then,  is  antithesis  :~-^hut  an  9.  Equi- 
equipaise  occurs  if  the  clauses  be  equal ;  and  allitera-  J.^^^^ 
ttofiy  if  each  of  the  clauses  have  its  extremities  simi-  o-i?. 
lar :  and  [this  similarity]  it  needs  must  have  either  Allitera- 
at  the  beginning  or  ending ;  and  the  beginning  al-  ]^^^'^ 
ways  has  original  words  [similar  ^^];  but  the  ending,  fioiwrtft. 
either  last  syllables  [which  are  similar],  or  inflections 
of  the  same  word,  or  the  same  word  itself.    [Instances 
of  alliteration]  at  the  beginning,  are  as  follow  ^^: 

*ATPdu  yhp  iKa^tv  *A.VT6v  trap^abrovy 
For  he  received  from  him  land  untill'd. 

Awprrrol  t*  'EIIEXovto,  trapA^ptiToi  t*  'ETIEctf'ortv, 
By  presents  pleased,  by  words  appeased. 

And  at  the  ending,  thus : 

'O40f|<rav  airrdv  -roiitov  t«toKENAI,  dXV  aWov  alriw  yeyo- 

NENAI. 
They  thought  that  he  was  the  father,  but  that  there  was  a 

cause  for  it 

'£y  irXc£<rrat«  <^povTI2I,  Kal  iv  iXaxitrraiv  iXirlSI. 
Anxiety  at  the  highest,  hope  at  the  lowest. 

Inflections  of  the  same  word, — "What !  give  him  a 
brazen  statue  who  did  not  deserve  a  brass  farthing  ?" 
The  same  word, — "In  his  life  you  spoke  ill  of  him, 

'®  If  you  would  produce  alliteration  at  the  eommencement 
of  a  clause,  you  must  employ  words  which,  in  their  original 
form  and  premoualy  to  any  inflection,  are  similar ;  since  in  that 
situation,  a  similarity  will  fail  of  striking  you  which  depends 
merely  on  one  or  two  syllables  at  the  end  of  the  words,  such 
as  may  be  found  to  exist,  in  a  greater  or  lesser  degree,  between 
dU  nouns  of  the  same  declension,  etc.  (e.  g.  Latin  nouns  of  the 
third  declension  ending  in  o) ;  at  the  conclueion,  however,  of 
a  clause,  a  weaker  and  less  striking  similarity  will  suffice. 
Compare  his  fir»t  example  with  those  following  the  words 

"  As  no  English  words  occur  to  me  which  will  at  once  ex- 
empliiy  the  alliteration,  and  prove  a  literal  translation  of  the 
Greek,  I  h&ve  set  down  the  original  words  as  I  find  them. 
They  have  been  given  in  Latin  thus, — AGRum  accepit 
^GRum  ab  ipto. 

234  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ra. 

and  now  after  his  death  you  write  iU.**  And  on  a 
single  syllable, — "  What  ill  would  you  have  suffercc?, 
if  you  had  witnessed  an  indolent  man  ?" 
Same  ^  And  it  is  possible  for  the  same  words  to  possess,  at 
ma^have  *^®  same  time,  all  these ;  and  for  the  same  example  to 
antithe-  be  both  an  antithesis,  equipoised,  and  having  rhyme. 
8is,  equi-  gut  the  heads  of  periods  have  nearly  been  enumerat- 
rhyme  at  ^  ^^  ^7  Rbetoric  to  Theodectes.  Also  there  are 
once.  false  antitheses,  such  as  Epicharmus  was  in  the  habit 
fmti^e!^  of  making :  as,  "  Once  was  I  in  their  [country]  ; 
ge^  once  was  I  among  them." 

CHAP.  X. 

WTience  are  quoted  the  Elegancies  and  approved  Bea/uties 
of  Style. 

l.Elegan-  BuT  as  a  detail  of  these  subjects  has  been  given,  we 
cies  and     must  State  whence  the  elegancies  and  approved  beau- 
bSutiS     *^®®  C^^  style]  are  derived.     Now  the  power  of  in- 
of  style,     venting  them  belongs,  either  to  the  man  of  high  na- 
tural genius,  or  to  one  of  talent  chastened  by  discipline; 
but  to  exhibit  the  sources  of  them  is  the  business  of 
this  system;   wherefore,  let  us  treat  of,  and  fully 
Enumerate  them. 
2.  The  And  let  this  be  our  fundamental  principle :  for  the 

*^^^tei  receiving  information  with  ease,  is  naturally  pleasing 
principle  to  all ^;  and  nouns  are  significant  of  something;  so 
is  /ideij-  that  all  those  nouns  whatsoever  which  produce  know- 
*'"•  ledge  in  the  mind,  are  most  pleasing.     Now,  the  fo- 

reign expressions  are  unintelligible;   and  words  of 
Metaphor  common  use  we  already  understand.     But  the  meta- 
^oduces    pjjQj.  jjj  ^Ylq  highest  degree  produces  this  effect  [of 
*  giving  pleasure] ;   for  when  the  poet  calls  old  age 

"stubble,"  he  produces  in  us  a  knowledge  and  in- 

'  See  this  principle  of  pleasure  stated  in  book  i.  c.  11,  §  23. 
Again,  (book  ii.  c.  24,  §  30,)  refutatire  enthymems  are  prefer- 
red to  confirmatiTe  on  the  same  principle,— d*<i  t6  <rvvay«oyii» 
ivairrlmv  cli/at  iv  MIKPQ. 

CHAP.x.]  RHETORIC.  235 

formation  by  means  of  a  common  genus';  for  both 
are  past  their  prime.  Now,  the  similes  of  the  poets  3-  and 
also  produce  the  same  effect ;  on  which  account,  should  "' 
they  be  neatly  managed,  an  elegance  strikes  you. 
For  the  simile,  as  has  been  remarked  before*,  is  me- 
taphor with  the  difference  of  the  addition  [of  a  par- 
ticle denoting  similitude] ;  on  which  account  it  is  less 
pleasing,  because  more  at  length:  and  it  does  not 
assert  that  "  this  is  that ;"  the  mind  therefore  does 
not  at  all  require  it*. 

It  cannot  but  be,  then,  both  that  the  style  and  the  ^J^'^ 
arguments  which  render  the  act  of  information  rapid,  produce 
are  elegant ;  on  which  account,  neither  are  superfi-  rapid  /xa- 
cud  arguments  held  in  approbation ;  (for,  by  super-  ^J»*^"  ^® 
ficial,  I  mean  such  as  are  obvious  to  every  one,  and 
which  require  no  search;)  nor  those  which,  when 
stated,  are  not  understood^:  but  all  those  whatsoever 
which  are  apprehended,  either  simultaneously  with 
their  being  uttered,  (supposing  even  that  no  previous 
knowledge  of  them  existed,)  or  by  which  the  intellect 
is  a  little  left  behind ;  for  there  accrues,  as  it  were,  a 
piece  of  information ;  in  the  two  former  cases,  how- 
ever, none. 

As  far,  then,  as  respects  the  meaning  of  what  is  5.  The  ex- 
said,  reasonings  of  this  description  are  approved ;  but  JJ^be 
as  to  the  expression,  if  they  be  worded  (in  figure)  antitheti- 
antithetically^;  as,  'Meeming  the  common  peace  of  <^' 

*  **  By  the  genua  ;  that  is,  where  the  eommon  quality  which 
constitutes  the  likeness  immediately  occurs/'  etc.  Twining. 
This  metaphor,  according  to  the  distinction  of  the  Poetic, 
would  be  called  hir*  cidoDs  <irl  eldos — ^from  one  epecies  of  things 
decayed  to  another. 

*  In  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  book. 

^  For  the  mind,  hurrying  on  to  obtain  further  information 
respecting  the  object  in  question,  without  pausing  to  ascertain 
what  it  is  like  or  equctl  to,  desires  only  to  know  what  it  really 
is.    See  chap.  4,  {  1. 

'  The  case  with  these  two  descriptions  of  argument  is  the 
same  as  with  the  yXw-rrat  and  Kvpia  dvo/iara  respectirely. 
With  this  passage  compare  book  ii.  c.  24,  §  30. 

*  The  consideration  of  o<rreTa  having  been  ranged  unde^  the 
heads  of  their  iiavoia  and  Xi^c«,  he  proceeds  here  to  subdivide 
his  discussion  of  X^^is,  in  reference  to  its  whole  sentences. 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[book  ui. 

Three 
thin^  to 
be  aimed 
at:  metar 
phor,  an- 
tithesis, 
personifi- 
cation. 
7.  Meta- 
phors are 
ioTirfold: 
analc 
ones 
best, 

the  rest,  a  very  war  to  their  individual  interests  :** 
here  "  war "  is  opposed  to  "  peace ;"  and  (in  single 
words)  if  they  possess  metaphor,  and  this  neither  far- 
fetched, for  it  will  be  difficult  to  view  it  in  connexion  ; 
nor  superficial,  for  it  produces  no  effect :  and,  more- 
over, if  they  place  the  object  before  your  eyes ;  for  it 
needs  must  be,  that  one  sees  more  clearly  what  is  ac- 
tually in  the  course  of  being  done,  than  what  is  ctbout 
to  be.  We  ought  then  to  aim  at  three  things,  meta- 
phor, antithesis,  and  personification^. 

But  of  metaphor,  which  is  fourfold,^  that  species 
is  in  the  highest  degree  approved  which  is  construct- 
ed on  similar  ratios ;  just  as  Pericles  said,  ^'that  the 
youth  which  had  perished  in  the  war,  had  so  vanished 
from  the  city,  as  if  one  were  to  take  the  spring /ram 
the  year^."  And  Leptines,  speaking  of  the  Lacedae- 
monians, "  that  he  would  do  aU  in  his  power  to  pre- 
vent Greece  from  being  deprived  of  an  eye."  And 
Cephisodotus,  when  Chares  was  eager  to  present  the 
accounts  about  the  Olynthiac  war,  grew  nettled,  and 
said,  "  Now  that  he  has  got  the  populace  vnth  their 
necks  in  a  haUer,  he  is  endeavouring  to  present  his 
accounts."  Again,  when  he  once  was  exhorting  the 
Athenians,  as  they  were  going  for  provisions,  to  go 
to  Euboea  for  them,  he  said,  "  the  decree  of  Miltiades 
should  go  forth  to  the  eocpeditUm,^  And  Iphicrates, 
when  the  Athenians  had  made  a  league  with  Epidau* 
rus  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  coast,  was  indig- 
nant, and  exclaimed  that,  ^'  of  themselves  they  had 

(i.  e.  its  figure^  <rx»J/*a,)  or  its  single  words,  (i.  e.  what  is 
usually  called  trope), 

^  From  the  variety  of  words  by  which  ivipytia  has  been 
rendered,  "personification"  has  been  selected,  as  approaching 
the  nearest  to  the  correspondent  expression,  irp6  SfifidTwv. 
The  effect  is  produced  by  representing  inanimate  objects  as 
the  agents  in  any  thing :  thus,  "  pontem  indignatua  Araxes." 
See  the  next  chapter. 

•  A  metaphorical  word  is  a  word  transferred  firom  its  proper 
sense,  either  from  genua  to  apecies,  or  from  apeciea  to  genua,  or 
firom  one  apeciea  to  another,  or  in  the  way  of  analogy.  Poet, 
xxi.  transl.  by  Twining.     See  chap.  2,  §  14,  seq. 

^  See  book  i.  7,  §  34.  Herodotus  puts  a  similar  expression 
in  the  mouth  of  Gelon,  book  vii.  162. 

CHAP.  X.]  RHETORIC.  237 

cut  off  the  very  provision  of  the  war."     And  Pitho-  Varioug 
laus  called  [the  state  yacht]  Paralus,  "the  mace  of  ^^^ 
the  populace  ;'*  and  Sestus,  "  the  corn-chest  of  the  proved 
Piraeus.*'     And  Pericles  hade  them  away  with  ^gina,  ™et»- 
"  the  eye-sore  of  the  Piraeus."     And  Moerocles  said,  ^  ^"* 
"  that  he  was  no  more  a  knave  than  the  other,"  nam- 
ing some  good  sort  of  man ;  "  since  that  person  in- 
deed played  the  rogue  at  the  rate  of  thirty  per  cent, 
himself  however  merely  at  ten  per  cent  usury^^,^ 
And    that  iamhic  verse  of  Anaxandrides  on  his 
daughters,  who  were  long  in  getting  married :  "  The 
virgins  have  forfeited   the  nuptial  recognisance^^, ^ 
And  that  saying  of  Polyeuctus  ahout  one  Speusippus, 
who  was  struck  by  apoplexy,  "  that  he  was  unable  to 
keep  quiet,  bound  as  he  was  by  fortune  in  a  complete 
pillory  of  a  disease."     Cephisodotus,  too,  used  to  call 
the  triremes,  "painted  corn-mills :^^  as  did  the  Cynic 
Diogenes  the  taverns,  "the  public  tahles^^  of  Athens." 
^sion,  too,  used  the  expression,  ^^ pouring  out  the 
city  into  Sicily,"  (for  this  is  metaphorical,  and  sets 
the  object  before  the  eyes,)  "  so  that  all  Greece  ex- 
claimed ;"  and  this  too  is  in  a  certain  way  a  metaphor, 
and  personifies.     And  as  Cephisodotus  bade  them  be 

'•  The  highest  rate  of  interest  (tokov)  permitted  among  the 
Greeks  appears  to  have  been  one  third  of  the  principal 
(eirtVpiTos) ;  the  lowest  rate  which  was  luual  was  one  tenth 
merely  of  the  principal  (iirt5ticaTo«) :  so  that  Moerocles  was 
less  a  villain  than  this  cirtetic^s,  in  the  same  ratio  in  which  ten 
per  cent,  was  less  usurious  than  three  and  thirty.  The  meta- 
phor, however,  is  stated  by  some  as  resulting  from  the  com- 
parison of  the  ratio  of  character  to  the  ratio  of  usury ;  and  by 
others,  from  the  application  of  the  general  word,  iroviiptvetrdaty 
to  the  transactions  of  usurers  in  particular.  It  will  be  ob- 
served, that  in^translating  iiriTptrov,  the  round  numbers  have 
been  taken. 

*^  Addison,  too,  classes  certain  of  his  fair  readers  (though 
certainly  differently  circumstanced  from  the  daughters  of  Anax- 
andrides) under  the  metaphorical  appellation  of  **  demurrers" 
borrowed  from  the  English  legal  nomenclature.  See  Specta- 
tor, No.  89. 

"  ^tidiTiOf  the  public  tables  of  Lacedfemon,  remarkable  for 
their  plainness  and  frugality :  so  that,  in  saying  that  the  only 
^ctdiria  of  Athens  were  its  taverns,  Diogenes  conveyed  a  most 
bitter  sarcasm  against  the  manners  of  its  citizens. 

238  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ui. 

on  their  guard,  "  lest  tbey  rendered  their  very  popu- 
lar assemblies  so  many  rowsi^  just  as  Isocrates,  also, 
[used  the  expression]  of  persons  "  making  a  row  in  the 
general  convention."  And  as  in  the  funeral  speech 
[of  Lycias],  "  there  was  reason  for  Greece  to  shear 
her  locks  over  the  grave  of  those  who  fell  at  Salamis, 
since  her  liberty  had  been  buried  jointly  with  their 
valour  -r  for  had  he  said  that  "  there  was  reason  she 
should  weep,  her  liberty  having  been  buried  with 
them ;"  it  would  indeed  have  been  a  metaphor,  and 
have  given  personification;  but  the  words,  "their 
valour,"  "  her  liberty,"  convey  a  kind  of  antithesis. 
And,  as  Iphicrates  said,  "  The />a/A  of  my  arguments 
is  through  the  midst  of  the  actions  of  Chares :"  the 
metaphor  here  is  on  similar  ratios,  and  the  expres- 
sion, "  through  the  midst,"  produces  personification. 
Also  the  saying,  "  that  he  challenged  dangers  to  be 
his  allies  against  dangers,"  is  both  a  personification 
and  a  metaphor.  And  Lycoleon,  pleading  for  Cha- 
brias,  said,  "  [What,  not  pardon  him]  out  of  a  respect 
for  the  suppliancy^^  of  his  brazen  statue:"  for  in  the 
then  crisis  it  was  a  metaphor,  but  not  always ;  but 
the  personification  [was  perpetual]  ;  for  pending  hi» 
trial  the  statue  acts  as  suppliant,  the  inanimate  as  an 
animated  object, — "  that  memento  of  the  exploits  of 
the  state."  Again,  "  Making  it  their  study ^  by  every 
means,  to  think  meanly ;"  [this  is  metaphorical,]  since 
study  is  with  a  view  to  advance  [not  to  diminish]. 
And  the  expression  that  "  Grod  has  kindled  the  intel- 
lect flw  a  light  m  the  soul ;"  for  both  in  a  certain  sense 
illuminate. — "  For  we  put  no  period  to  our  wars,  but 
put  them  off;"  since  both  putting  off,  and  a  peace  of 

'^  Ghabrias  seems  to  hare  been  the  first  who  ordered  his 
troops  to  assume  a  kneeling  position  in  receiving  the  charge  of 
an  enemy :  at  the  time  when  he  adopted  this  manoeuvre!  he 
headed  some  Athenian  troops  auxiliary  to  the  Boeotians,  and 
completely  succeeded  in  repulsing  the  forces  of  AgesUaus. 
This  improvement  in  tactics  seems  to  have  been  so  favourably 
received,  that  statues  were  decreed  him  to  be  erected  in  the 
attitude  of  kneeling.  *0  ii  Xafipla^  iroWStv  avreS  nrtnrpaytiiviav 
Kard  iroXefioVfiirl  toutm  n&KurTu  iarifiViAeTO  TtS  crTpaTTiynfia^if 
Kol  Ta«  viro  ToD  Srifiou  ooQeicrai  abxt^  KoQicrraptv  kxo^va^  tovto 
Td  orxnfJM.    Diodorus  Siculus,  15. 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  239 

this  description,  are  alike  things  of  the  future.  And 
again,  the  declaring  "  that  a  truce  was  a  trophy  more 
splendid  than  those  won  in  war ;  since  the  latter  was 
the  result  of  a  trivial  occurrence  or  a  single  accident, 
the  former  were  the  result  of  the  whole  tenour  of 
the  war ;"  for  both  [agree  in  being]  indications  of 
■victory.  And,  that  "  states  pay  a  heavy  punishment 
to  the  censure  of  mankind;"  iov  punishment  \^  a  sort 
of  hurt  consonant  to  justice  ^^. 

Thus,  then,  it  has  been  stated  that  the  elegancies 
result  from  metaphor  constructed  on  similar  ratios, 
and  from  personification. 

CHAP,  XI. 
Of  Personifkation, 

But  it  must  be  stated  what  we  mean  by  the  expres-  1.  Per- 
sion,  "  setting  forth  to  the  eyes,**  and  in  doing  what  J?^^"  ' 
this  effect  results.     I  mean,  then,  that  those  expres-  presents 
sions  which  represent  the  object  as  in  action,  do  all  the  object 
of  them  produce  the  setting  before  the  eyes :  for  in-  ^J^^ 
stance,  the  sajdng  of  "  a  good  man,"  that  he  is  "  a  2. 
cube  ^,'*  is  a  metaphor ;  for  both  are  perfect ;  but  this 
does  not  personify :  whereas  the  speaking  of  one  as 
"  having  his  prime  yet  blooming,"  is  a  personification. 
And  this,  '* — ^but  you  just  as  a  thing  let  loose,"  is  a 
personification.  Aiid  [in  the  line]  "  Then  the  Greeks 
springing  forth  with  their  feet*; — ^  the  expression, 
"  springing,"  is  both  a  personification  and  a  metaphor, 
for  it  expresses  rapidity.     Again,  as  Homer  has  in 

"  We  cannot  forbear  adding  to  this  long  catalogue  the 
metaphor  used  by  Herodotus,  in  speaking  of  the  scheme  for 
the  defence  of  Peloponnesus,  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  inva- 
sion, by  throwing  a  wall  across  the  Isthmus  :  his  words  are, 
that  even  many  cloaks  of  walls  would  be  insufficient ; — ei  Ktd 
iro\kol  Tiixifov  KI6QNE2  ritrav  iXiikafiivoif  k.t.X.  Book 
vii.  c.  139. 

>  See  the  expression,  £th.  Nich.  book  i.  c.  10. 

*  See  Eurip.  Iph.  in  Aul.  80. 

240  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  hi. 

many  places  employed  it,  the  putting  inanimate 
things  as  animate,  by  means  of  a  metaphor ;  and  in 
all  from  their  producing  personification,  they  are 
approved;  as  in  these  instances': 

"  Back  to  the  plain  still  roU'd  the  ahameleaa  stone." 
Again, 

"  The  arrow  ./few."    And,  "  Eager  to  wiog  its  way," 
And, 

*'  Deep  fix'd  in  earth,  eager  their  hlood  to  drain." 
And, 

'*  Right  through  his  breast  th'  impetuoua  weapon  sped." 
For  in  all  these  instances,  the  objects,  from  their 
being  animated,  appear  personified ;  for  the  expres- 
sions, shamelessnesSy  and  eagerness,  and  the  rest, 
are  personifications.  These,  however,  has  he  ap- 
pended by  means  of  the  metaphor  from  analogy :  for 
as  the  stone  is  to  Sisyphus,  so  is  he  who  is  insensible 
of  shame,  to  the  object  in  regard  to  which  he  is  so 

4.  And  insensible.  He  does  this,  too,  in  his  approved  similes, 
■*°"^®?-     in  the  case  of  inanimate  objects  ;  as, 

"  The  waves  behind  impel  the  waves  before, 

Wide  rolling,  foaming  high,  and  tumbling  to  the  shore*." 

for  he  produces  every  thing  in  life  and  action.  But 
personification  is  an  imitation  [of  nature*]. 

5.  Meta-  But  it  is  fitting  to  draw  your  metaphors,  as  has 
phorsto  ijgen  stated,  from  terms  which  are  appropriate  and 
Sl^^be  ^  i^ot  obvious ;  just  as  in  philosophy,  also,  it  is  the 
appropri-  privilege  of  one  who  conjectures  happily,  to  discern 
n^'^*  the  point  of  similitude®;  as  when  Archytas  observes, 
vious.        ^'  that  an  arbitrator  and  an  altar  are  the  same,"  since 

'  These  passages  sereially  stand  as  follows :  (1.)  Od.  xi 
597.  (2.)  II.  xiii.  587.  (3.)  II.  iv.  126.  (4.)  II.  xi.  573. 
(5.)  II.  XV.  542. 

*  Pope's  translation,  II.  xiii.  (of  the  original),  line  799. 

*  And,  if  an  imitation,  necessarily  pleasing.  See  this  prin- 
ciple of  pleasure  stated,  book  i.  c.  11,  §  23. 

«  In  speaking  of  the  /oAfe,  he  attributed  this  faculty  of 
catching  such  features  of  resemblance  as,  vnthout  immediately 
etrikingy  are  yet  appropriate  (olireia  /lii  <f>dvtpa)f  to  those  of  a 
philosophic  turn  of  mind : — t6  Bfioiov  hp^v^  Svtp  pdov  i^riv  Ik 
<t>i\o<ro4>iav.    Lib.  ii.  cap.  20,  §  7. 

CHAP.  XI.]  HHETORIC.  241 

to  both  does  the  party  who  has  been  wronged  fly 
for  refuge.  Or  if  one  were  to  say,  "  that  an  anchor 
and  a  pot-hanger  were  the  same ;"  for  both  are  some- 
what the  same,  but  they  differ  in  the  circumstance 
of  suspending  from  above  and  below.  Again,  the 
expression,  "the  states  have  been  levelledy*  is  the 
same  in  objects  widely  differing,  equality  both  in 
power  and  in  superficies. 

Also  the  greatest  number  of  elegancies  arise  from  6.  They 
metaphor,  and  from  additionally  deceiving  the  hear-  the  h^ 
er^;  for  the  point  becomes  more  clear  that  he  has  ers  agree- 
learnt  something,  from  the  meaning  being  the  oppo-  ^^^y* 
site  [of  what  it  was  supposed],  and  the  mind  seems 
to  say,  "  How  true  is  this  I  I  however  was  wrong." 
And  the  elegancies  of  proverbial  expressions  arise 
from  one's  meaning  not  what  he  says ;  for  instance, 
the  words  of  Stesichorus,  that  "the  grasshoppers 
shall  chirp  on  the  ground®."     Also  ideas  neatly  put 
enigmatically,  are  for  the  same  reason  pleasing ;  for 
there  is  an  acquisition  of  knowledge,  and  a  metaphor 
is  introduced.     Again,  that  embellishment  which  Para- 
Theodorus  calls,  "saying  out-of-the-way  things;"  ^°^®** 
this,  however,  occurs  when  the  sentiment  is  paradox- 
ical, and  (as  he  has  it)  does  not  square  with  previous 
opinion^;  just  on  the  same  principle  as  in  jokes, 
words  submitted  to  a  slight  change.    An  effect  which  Jests 
those  jests  also  produce,  which  depend  on  the  change  ]^^^^^  *^ 

f  Besides  the  ornament  of  metaphor,  by  leading  the  hearer,  ' 
throughout  the  sentence,  to  expect  something  yery  different 
from  what  you  really  mean,  and  undeceiving  him  only  by  the 

last  word;  e.  g.  "Quid  hinc  abest  nisi  res et  virtus f" 

Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  70.  Here  you  expect  a  panegyric ;  the  last 
wolrd  converts  the  whole  into  reproach.  Of  this  description, 
too,  are  the  following  lines  of  Pope : — 

"  Here  thou^  great  Anna !  whom  three  realms  obey, 

Dost  sometimes  counsel  take,  and  sometimes tea  !  ** 

Rape  of  the  Lock,  iii.  7. 

The  precept  may  be  further  illustrated  by  Porson's  insidious 
commendation  of  Blackmore's  poetry : — "  He  will  be  read  when 
Homer  and  Milton  are  forgotten, — hui  not  Oil  then" 

'  Already  quoted,  ii.  21,  §  8. 

'  Probably  the  English  word  humour  would  best  designate 
this  quaintness  of  Theodorus. 

B 

irap  viro 

242  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in. 

of  a  letter,  for  they  deceive  [the  hearer's  anticipa* 
tion]  :  it  happens  also  in  metre ;  for  it  terminates  not 
in  the  way  in  which  the  hearer  supposed ;  thus, 

He  proceeded  wearing  under  his  feet — ckilblaina  *®. 
Whereas  the  hearer  was  imagining  that  ^^sandals^^ 
{viliKa)y  would  be  the  word".  This,  however,  as 
soon  as  it  is  uttered,  ought  to  be  clear.  But  these 
changes  of  a  letter  cause  the  speaker  to  say,  not  what 
the  word  expresses,  but  what  its  inversion  signifies : 
as  in  the  jest  of  Theodorus,  on  Nicon  the  lyrist, 
"Thee  did  a  Thracian  — "  (Bpamj);  for  what  he 
pretends  to  say  is,  "  It  annoys  (Gparret)  you  ^^,"  and 
deceives  the  audience ;  wherefore  to  one  who  has 
caught  it,  the  joke  is  pleasing ;  since  if  one  is  not 
aware  that  he  is  a  Thracian,  it  will  not  appear  to 
7.  P«iw.  be  a  beauty.  Again,  -the  expression,  you  wish  him 
ireptrai  [i.  e.  either  to  side  with  Persia — to  ruin  him]. 
Both  meanings,  however,  should  be  in  point,  and  so 
also  in  the  case  of  the  elegancies ;  thus  the  saying, 
"  The  sovereignty  (apxh)  of  the  sea,  was  not  the  be- 
ginning {apxh)  of  evils  to  the  Athenians;  since  it 
was  a  gain  to  them."  Or,  as  Isocrates  says,  "that 
its  sovereignty  (apxd)  was  to  the  city  a  beginning 

*^  See  note  1,  at  p.  88,  of  Carrington's  translation  of  Aris- 
tophanes' Plutus ;  where  a  similar  surprise  arises  from  the  use 
of  liTii/es  instead  of  tKpivriv. 

^^  This  is  sometimes  aptly  enough  termed  irapdi  irpocdoKiap, 
haffUng  the  expectation, 

^'  Nicon,  it  seems,  was  the  son  of  a  T-hradan  slave ;  and 
Theodorus,  conveniently  mistaking  the  word  OpifcrrH  for 
OparrEI,  takes  an  opportunity  of  tauntiiig  him  with  his  low 
birth.  Opd'rrm,  probably  contracted  from  TopaTrw.  Vid. 
Blomfield  in  iEschyl.  Prom.  Vinct.  649.  There  are  on  record 
two  excellent  replies  to  taimts  of  this  nature ;  one  made  by 
Mnestheus,  son  of  Iphicrates,  who  declared  that  he  esteemed 
his  mother  above  his  father, — "  Nam  Pater,  quantum  in  se 
fuit,  Thracem  me  genuit:  contra  ea,  mater  Atheniensem ;" 
(Com.  Nep.  Iphic.  3 ;)  where  it  should  be  observed,  that  Rut- 
gersius,  for  contra  ea  mater,  proposes  to  read  cum  Thraca  ma^ 
ter.  The  other  is  attributed  to  Timotheus,  who  having  the 
condition  of  his  mother  as  a  Thracian  slave  thrown  out  against 
him  as  a  reproach,  replied,  "  But  to  her  I  owe  it  that  I  am 
Conon's  son."    Athenaeus,  lib.  xii. 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  243 

{apxri)  of  evils."  For  in  either  acceptation,  that  is 
stated  which  one  did  not  imagine  he  would  say.;  and 
that  it  is  true,  is  acknowledged.  For  to  assert  that  a 
beginning  is  a  beginning^  shows  no  great  wisdom ; 
but  he  repeats  [the  word  apx*)]*  not  in  this  sense, 
but  differently ;  and  he  does  not  repeat  the  same 
iipxh  which  he  first  said,  but  in  a  different  sense. 
And  in  all  these  cases,  if  one  introduce  the  term  8.  - 
appropriately  under  an  equivocation  or  metaphor, 
thea  there  is  wit ;  for  instance,  there  is  no  bearing 
Baring^K'  here  the  speaker  denies  the  correspond- 
ence of  signification,  but  appropriately  enough,  if 
[the  person  alluded  to]  be  disagreeable."  Again, 
"  You  cannot  become  more  a  stranger  [Jcvoc],  than 
becomes  you  as  a  guest  [Jcvoc],"  or  not  in  a  greater 
degree  than  you  ought,  which  is  the  same ;  and  "  it 
becomes  not  a  stranger  [ftVoc]  always  to  be  a  guest 
[Jcyoc]."  For  the  meanings  here  abo  are  different. 
The  same,  too,  is  that  commended  saying  of  Anax- 
andrides,  "  It  is  honourable  to  die  before  doing  aught 
worthy  death ;^^  for  it  is  the  same  as  saying,  "It  is 
worthy  a  man  to  die  when  he  is  not  worthy  to  suffer 
death ;"  or,  "  It  is  worthy  a  man  to  die  when  he  is 
not  worthy  [the  punishment]  of  death ;  or,  when  he 
has  not  committed  acts  worthy  that  punishment." 
Now'  the  form  of  the  diction  of  these  sentences  is  the  9. 
same ;  but  in  proportion  as  [the  idea]  happens  to  be 
enunciated  in  fewer  words  and  with  antithesis,  in  the 
same  proportion  is  it  more  approved.  And  the  rea- 
son is,  that  the  information  becomes  by  means  of  the 
antithesiSy  fuller;  by  means  of  brevity ^  more  rapid. 
Such  sentiments  ought  always  to  have  either  some  10.  There 
one  of  whom  they  are  said,  or  happiness  of  expres-  J^^^p^ 
sion  (if  what  you  say  [would  appear]  earnest,  and  son  to 
not  mere  idle  remark) ;  for  it  is  possible  to  have  one  whom 
of  those  qualities  without  the  other:  for  instance,  appTyT^* 
"You  ought  to  die  without  having  committed  an 
error;"  [the  sentiment  is  just  enough],  but  [the  ex- 
pression] is  not  elegant :  "  A  deserving  man  should 

''  So,  too,  the  Latins,  Lepidua  non  lepidns. 
B   2 

-244  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in. 

marrj  a  deserving  woman;"  but  this  is  not  ele- 
gant ^^;  but  if  it  possess  both  qualities  at  the  same 
time,  as  "  It  is  worthy  a  man  to  die  while  he  is  not 
worthy  of  suffering  death."  But  in  proportion  as  a 
sentence  possesses  the  greater  number  of  these  orna- 
ments, in  the  same  proportion  does  it  appear  more 
elegant;  if,  for  instance,  the  words  be  metaphors, 
and  metaphors  of  such  a  species  ^^  and  if  there  be 
antithesis,  and  equipoise  of  clauses,  and  if  it  have 
personification. 

11.  ,  Similes  also,  as  has  been  uniformly  stated  in  the 
^™^^rt  foregoing,  are  in  some  way  approved  metaphors ;  for 
of  meta-  they  always  are  expressed  in  two  terms,  like  the  ana- 
phor.        logical  metaphor ;   thus,  ," the  shield"  we  say,  " is 

the  cup  of  Mars ;"  the  bow, "  a  stringless  lyre."  Thus, 
then,  persons  express  the  metaphor  not  unaccom- 
panied ;  whereas  the  calling  a  bow,  "  a  lyre ;"  or  a 
shield   '^a  cup,"  is  without  accompanying  explan- 

12.  ation  ^^.  And  on  this  principle  men  construct  their 
similes ;  for  instance,  that  of  a  flute-player  to  an 
ape,  and  of  a  near-sighted  person  to  a  sputtering 

13.  lamp ;  for  both  contract  themselves.  But  the  excel- 
lence will  exist  when  there  is  a  metaphor ;  for  you 
may  represent  by  a  simile  the  shield  as  ''  the  cup  of 
Mars,"  and  a  ruin  as  ^*  the  rags  of  a  house ;"  and  the 
saying  of  Niceratus,  that,  ''  he  was  himself  a  Philoc- 
tetes  bitten  by  Fratys,"  as  Thrasjrmachus  drew  the 
simile  when  he  saw  Niceratus,  who  had  been  beaten 
by  Pratys  in  a  contest  of  rhapsodists^^,  with  his  hair 

^*  As  far  as  the  expression  is  concerned,  this  instance  seems 
to  possess  the  necessary  elegance ;  but  it  is  deficient  in  the 
second  requisite,  yiz.  tJ  irpdv  ov  XtyeTot. 

'*  The  metaphor  constructed  on  similar  ratios  (iccrr*  Jivako* 
yiav)  is  here  alluded  to :  see  chap.  10,  §  7. 

'^  In  the  Poetic,  he  says  that,  m  the  case  of  the  analogical 
metaphor,  "  sometimes  the  proper  term  is  also  introduced,  be- 
sides its  relative  term ;"  and  this,  with  a  view  to  guard  the 
metaphor  from  any  incidental  harshness  or  obscurity :  with 
such  an  adjimct,  the  metaphor  ceases  to  be  cLx\oD«:  e.  g. 
4n,&Kf\  'A/oeov — ^thus  expressed,  the  metaphor  is  ovx  ciirXous ; 
but  if  stated  simply  ^laXij,  it  is  &ir\ov9.  See  Twining,  notes 
184, 189,  on  the  Poetic. 

>7  With  a  yiew  to  elucidate  the  simile  of  Thrasymachus,  it 

CHAP.  XI.]  RHETORIC.  245 

long  and  disordered,  and  hiQ  person  still  neglected. 
In  which  points,  if  they  be  not  neatly  managed,  the 
poets  most  frequently  get  hissed  off,  even  should 
they  in  other  respects  stand  high.  I  mean  when  the 
poet  replies  [to  his  particle  of  similitude  thus], 
"Like  parsley  he  has  crooked  legs." — "Like  Phi- 
lammon  on  the  bench,  struggling  with  the  ball"  [or, 
with  Corycus].  And  all  such  expressions  are  si- 
miles ;  but  that  similes  are  metaphors  has  frequently 
been  stated. 

Proverbs  also  are  metaphors  from  species  to  spe-  14.  And 
cies :  thus  if  any  one,  as  though  likely  to  experience  J^^^ 
a  benefit,  should  himself  introduce  a  measure  and 
afterwards  suffer  loss  from  it,  then  one  exclaims, 
"  As  the  Carpathian  fetched  the  hare  ^®  I "  for  both 
.parties  have  experienced  the  thing  in  point.  Now 
the  sources  whence  these  elegancies  are  deduced,  and 
the  cause  why  [they  are  pleasing],  has  nearly  been 
told  you. 

Again,  hyperboles  which  are  recognised  are  meta-  15.  So  too 
phors ;   as  that  about  a  person  with  a  black  eye :  ^^yp«r- 
"  You  would  have  thought  him  a  basket  of  mulber- 
ries ;"  for  the  part  beneath  the  eye  is  somewhat  suf- 
fused with  blood:  but  this  is  greatly  forced.     But 
the  [simile  with  the  expression  of  similitude]  just  cw, 
SQ  and  so,  is  hyperbole,  differing  merely  in  the  dic- 
tion.     ^^Like  Philammon  on  the  bench  struggling 
with  the  ball,"  [becomes   hjrperbole   thus ;]  "  You 
would  have  thought  he  was  Philammon  struggling 
with  the  ball."     "Zt^c  parsley  he  has  crooked  legs," 
[thus  arranged  becomes  an  hyperbole ;]  "  I  thought 
not  that  he  had  legs,  but  parsley  stalks,  so  crooked 
were  they."     But  hyperboles  suit  wifh  the  temper-  16. 
ament  of  the  young,  for  they  evince  a  vehemence  of 

has  been  conjectured  that  the  story  of  Philoctetes  might  have 
been  the  subject  of  this  rhapsodical  declamation. 

'*  The  island  of  Carpathus  being  destitute  of  hares,  one  of 
the  inhabitants  brbught  over  some  of  these  animals,  which 
prored  so  fatally  proUfic  as  to  consume  all  the  crops  in  the 
island ;  and  the  Carpathians  became  more  anxious  to  extirpate 
them  than  they  had  ever  been  for  their  introduction. 

346  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

temper ;  (on  which  accpuDt  the  angry  most  frequently- 
utter  them ;  [thus  Achilles  in  his  wrath  exclaims,] 

Though  bribes  were  heap'd  on  bribes,  in  number  more 

Than  dust  in  fields,  or  sands  along  the  shore, 

•  •••«• 

Atrides'  daughter  never  shall  be  led, 

An  ill-match*d  consort  to  Achilles'  bed ; 

Like  golden  Venus  though  she  charm'd  the  heart, 

Or  Tied  with  Pallas  in  the  works  of  art^^.  Pope. 

The  Attic  rhetoricians,  too,  particularly  employ  this 
figure ;)  on  which  account  for  a  man  in  advanced  life 
to  utter  them  is  bad  taste. 

CHAP.  XII. 

That  a  distinct  Style  is  apprcpriate  to  each  Species  of 
Ithetoric. 

1.  Differ-  NEITHER  ought  it  to  escape  us,  that  to  each  kind  of 

ent  styles  rhetoric  is  adapted  a  pecidiar  style  ;  for  neither  are 
are  suit-       ,  ,        -,»■»•        t  t  r ,  i,  t*  a» 

able  to      the  Style  which  is  adapted  to  writing  and  that  of  dis- 

each  sort   putation  the  same,  nor  the  style  of  deliberative  and 

of  oratory,  ^j^^^^  ^^  judicial  rhetoric.     But  it  is  necessary  to  be 

acquainted  with  both  [the  first  and  the  second]  :  for 

the  one  consists  in  knowing  the  purity  of  language  ; 

the  other  in  the  not  being  obliged  to  sit  mute,  if  one 

wish  to  communicate  any  thing  to  others  ;  the  very 

predicament  in  which  they  who  know  not  how  to 

2.  The  write  are  placed.  But  the  style  of  writing  is  the  most 
written  precise :  that  of  disputation  partakes  more  of  declam- 
B^st  pre-  ation ;  and  of  it  there  are  two  species,  the  one  conveys 
dae;  that  the  impress  of  character,  the  other  of  feeling.  And 
putation  ^^^^  actors  choose  this  description  of  drama,  and  the 
most  de-  poets  this  sort  [of  actors].  But  poets  fit  for  perusal 
chunato-  are  carried  about  with  us,  like  Choeremon,  for  he^  is 
o?*t5S  ^  as  nicely  finished  as  a  rhetorician ;  and,  of  the  Dithy- 
kinds,       rambic  poets,  Licymnius. 

^®*^»  _  Thus  also,  on  comparing  speeches  together,  those 
iciT.      *  «  Iliad,  ix.  385— 388. 

CHAP.  XII.]  RHETORIC.  247  - 

adapted  to  writing  appear  jejune  when  delivered  at 
disputations  ;  while  those  of  the  declaimers,  excellent 
as  they  were  when  delivered,  seem  mere  common- 
place in  the  closet ;  and  the  reason  is,  that  in  disputa- 
tion [these  things]  are  appropriate  enough.    On  which  Dedanui- 
account,  compositions  framed  for  declamation,  inas-  ^tions' 
much  as,  when  abridged  of  their  declamation,  they  do  whenread 
not  produce  their  effect,  appear  ridiculous :  thus,  the  appear  ri- 
omission  of  connectives,  and  frequent  repetitions,  in         °^"*" 
a  written  style  are  justly  exploded;  yet  in  the  style 
of  disputation  even  the  rhetoricians  employ  them,  for 
they  are  adapted  to  declamation.     Yet  it  is  necessary  3. 
in  repeating  the  same  thing  to  vary  the  expression ; 
which  indeed  opens  away,  as  it  were,  to  declamation : 
[e.  g.]  "  This  is  he  who  robbed  you ;  this  is  he  who 
defrauded  you ;  this  is  he  who  at  last  endeavoured  to 
betray  you."     Just  as  Philemon  the  actor  used  to  do 
in  the  *'  Grerontomania"  of  Anaxandrides,  when  Rha- 
damanthus  and  Palamedes  speak ;  and  in  the  opening 
scene  of  the  "  Devotees  "  [in  the  recurrence  of]  the 
word  L     For  if  one  does  not  give  these  passages  with 
declamation,  it  becomes  [a  case  in  point  with  the  pro- 
verb] "  Stiff  as  one  carrying  a  beam."     And  so  also  4. 
where  connectives  are  wanting,  "I  came,  I  met,  I 
besought  him ;"  for  you  needs  must  give  it  with  de- 
clamation, and  not,  as  though  simply  saying  one  thing, 
enunciate  it  with  the  same  manner  and  tone.     There 
is,  moreover,  a  ciertain  peculiarity  which  omissions  of 
connectives  possess;  for  it  strikes  one  that,  in  an  - 
equal  length  of  time,  many  things  have  been  stated  ; 
for  the  connective  makes  many,  one ;  so  that  if  it  be 
taken  away,  it  is  evident  that  on  the  contrary  one 
will  be  many.     It  possesses,  then,  amplification ;  '*  I 
came,  I  conversed  with,  I  besought,"  being  many, — 
•**he  seems  to  overlook  all  I  have  said,  all  I  now  say." 
Homer  is  desirous  of  producing  this  effect  in  the 
lines : 

"  Three  ships  with  Nireus  sought  the  Trojan  shore, 

Nireust  whom  Aglae  to  Charopus  bore, 

Nirew,  in  faultless  shape  *,"  etc.  Porx. 

»  Iliad,  u.  671. 

248  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

For  of  whom  a  great  deal  is  said,  that  man  must  needs 
be  spoken  oi  frequently ;  and  therefore  if  one  be 
spoken  of  frequently,  it  appears  that  a  great  deal  has 
been  said  of  him.  So  that  the  poet  mentioning  him 
only  once,  by  help  of  this  sophism  am^^ifies  the  cha- 
racter, and  has  excited  a  recollection  of  him,  though 
he  no  where  subsequently  mentions  him. 

5,  De-  Now  the  deliberative  style  is  exactly  like  sketch- 
SwriSte  ^^^  *  ^^^  ^°  proportion  as  the  crowd  is  larger,  the 
s^teh-  ^  ▼iew  is  taken  from  a  greater  distance ;  on  which  ac« 
ing,  and  count,  in  the  one  as  well  as  in  the  other,  productions 
rote^*""  ®^  ^^  exquisite  finish  are  superfluous,  and  look  worse 
Judicial  ^^^^  Others.  But  the  judicial  is  a  thing  of  greater 
style  more  nicety :  and  in  a  still  higher  degree  where  it  is  be- 
P"^®*^'      forp  a  single  judge ;  for  least  of  all  is  this  within  the 

reach  of  rhetorical  artifice  ;  since  the  peculiar  points 
of  the  case  are  more  easily  concentrated  to  the  view, 
than  what  is  merely  external :  and  the  heat  of  dis- 
putation is  out  of  the  question,  so  that  the  decision 
is  fair  and  clear.     And  on  this  account  the  same 
speakers  are  not  approved  in  all  these  kinds;  but 
where  there  is  most  of  declamation,  there  least  of  all 
is  accuracy :  this,  however,  is  the  case  where  power 
of  voice  is  requisite,  and  particularly  if  a  consider- 
able power, 
Epideic-        The  demonstrative  style,  however,  is  most  adapted 
tic  style     ^  writing ;  for  its  purpose  is  perusal :  second  to  it 
suited  to    L^n  this  adaptation]  is  the  judicial, 
writing.         But  to  draw  any  further  distinctions  on  the  sub- 
d^^next  J®^^  ^^  style,  that  it  ought  to  be  pleasing  and  mag- 

6.  Con-     nificent,  is  superfluous :  for  why  should  it  be  such 
elusion  of  rather  than  temperate  and  liberaJ,  or  if  there  be  any 
diTteion^    other  moral  virtue?     For  that  the  foregoing  rules 
Bcil.Xc^c«.  will  cause  it  to  be  pleasing  is  manifest,  if  indeed  ex- 
cellence of  style  has  been  correctly  defined: — for 
with  a  view  to  what  must  it  be,  [according  to  our 
definition,]  "clear  and  not  mean,  but  4n  good  taste  f" 
For  should  it  become  prosing,  it  is  no  longer  clear, 
neither  if  it  should  be  too  concise.     But  it  is  plain 
that  the  mean  is  appropriate.     And  the  foregoing 
precepts  will  cause  its  being  pleasing,  should  the 

CHAP.  XIII.]  RHETORIC.  249 

ordinarj  expressions  have  been  judiciously  blended 
"with  the  foreign,  and  should  rhythm  [not  be  want- 
ing],  and  the  persuasive  influence  resulting  from 
good  taste. 

The  subject  of  style  has  then  been  treated^,  as  well 
generally,  respecting  all  the  specie^  of  rhetoric,  as 
particularly,  respecting  each.  But  it  yet  remains  to 
treat  of  arrangement. 

CHAP.  XIII. 
Of  the  Farts  of  a  Speech. 

The  parts  of  a  speech  are  two ;  for  it  is  necessary  to  1.  Two 
Uate  the  case  about  which  it  is,  and  to  prove  it.  ^^]^^* 
Wherefore  for  one,  after  stating,  not  to  prove  it,  or 
to  proceed  to  prove  it  without  a  previous  statement, 
is  out  of  the  question:  for  whoever  proves,  proves 
something ;  and  he  who  makes  a  previous  statement, 
makes  such  statement  with  a  view  to  subsequently 
proving  it.     And  of  these  parts,  the  one  is  the  state-  2.  State- 
ment, the  other  the  proof;  just  as  though ^  one  were  ^^^ 
to  make  a  division  into  problem  and  demonstration.  3.  Diyi- 
But  the  divisions  which  they  now  usually  make  are  mom 
ridiculous ;  for  narration  is  a  kind  of  peculiarity  to  ^j^^  ^ 
judicial  speeches  alone ;  for  how  can  there,  in  de-  writers 
monstrative  and  deliberative  speeches,  be  any  narra-  censured, 
tion  such  as  they  speak  of,  or  any  reply,  confutation 
of  an  adversary,  or  any  peroration  of  points  selected 
for  display  of  character  ? 

But  exordium,  contrast  of  argument,  and  recapi- 
tulation^, do  then  only  occur  in  deliberative  speeches 

*  Thus  ends  the  second  branch  of  the  grand  diyision  of  the 
work ; — irltrri^ — Xil^i^ — rd^i*.     See  the  last  note  on  book  ii. 

*  That  is,  to  adopt  the  language  of  mathematicians,  tiie 
statement  corresponds  to  their  problem,  the  proof  to  their  de-- 
motutraiion.  It  will  readily  be  observed  that  irimt  is  here 
used  in  a  sense  different  from  that  which  it  has  hitherto  pre- 
seryed. 

*  Est  et  illud  repetendi  genus  quod  semel  proposita  iterat  et 
dividit : — 

250  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

when  an  altercation  happens  ;  for,  considered  as  ac- 
cusation and  defence,  they  frequently  [admit  these 
branches],  but  not  in  their  character  of  a  piece  of 
Perora-     advice.     But  the  peroration,  moreover,  is  not  an  es- 
S^a^^*     sential  of  every  judicial ;  for  instance,  if  the  speech 
neceraary.  he  a  short  one,  or  the  case  easy  to  be  remembered. 
For  it  is  usual  to  detract  only  from  what  is  prolix. 
The  necessary  divisions,  then,  are  the  statement  and 
the  proofs 

4.  Enu-  The  essential  divisions  then  are  these;  but  the 
"f^'^rta^  greatest  number  are,  exordium,  statement,  proo^ 
of  them,    peroration.    The  confutation  of  an  adversary  belongs 

to  the  proof;  and  the  contrast  of  arguments  is  an 
amplification  of  one's  own,  so  as  to  be  a  kind  of 
branch  of  the  proof ;  for  one  who  does  this  proves 
something :  but  not  so  either  exordium  or  peroration  ; 
but  [the  latter]  refreshes  the  recollection. 

5.  No  fur-  But  should  one  draw  distinctions  with  regard  to 
tinctiaas  ^^^>  that  will  be  the  case  which  the  followers  of 
to  be  Theodorus  used  to  do,  there  will  be  a  narration  dis- 
drawn.      tJnct  from  post-narration,  and  prse-narration,  together 

with  refutation,  and  post-refutation.  But  the  writer 
should  affix  a  title  only  after  marking  out  a  distinct 
species  and  difference  ^  otherwise  it  becomes  mere 
emptiness  and  trifling ;  just  like  Licymnius,  who  in 
his  treatise  gives  the  titles,  irruption — digression — 
ramifications,  etc. 

Iphitus  et  Pelias  mecum ;  quorum  Iphitus  evo 
Jam  grarior,  Pelias  et  viUnere  tardus  Ulixi. 

JSneid,  11.  435. 
'EIIANOAOI!  dicitux  Grsec^,  nostri  regressionem  vocant. 
Quintil.  ix.  3,  36 — apud  Em.  Lex.  Techn. 

'  It  should  be  carefully  borne  in  mind,  that  Aristotle  ad- 
mits only  these  two  branches  as  essential  to  every  speech. 
His  reasons  for  superadding  exordium  and  peroration  will  be 
developed  in  the  sequel. 

^  Without  sucJi  a  restn^int,  a  rhetorician  may  go  on  oc?  m- 
finiium  drawing  distinctions  where  no  difierence  exists. 

CHAP.  XIV.]  RHETORIC.  .251 

CHAP.  XIV. 

Of  the  Exordium, 

Now  the  exordium  is  the  commencement  of  the  1.  The 

speech;  which  in  poetry  is  the  prologue,  and  in  the  r^^/^blS 

performances  on  the  pipe,  the  prelude :  for  these  are  the  pro- 

aU  commencements,  and,  as  it  were,  an  opening  of  J?»^e  and 

the  way  for  what  is  to  succeed.  lude^'^ 

The  prelude,  then,  corresponds  to  the  exordium  of  Proocmi- 

demonstrative  speeches;  for  the  performers  on  the  ^^g[^t£g 

pipe,  using  as  a  prelude  any  piece  whatever  which  oratory 

they  are  able  to  execute  with  skill,  connect  the  whole  resembles 

by  an  inserted  passage :    and  so  in  demonstrative  ^1/'^^ 

speeches  ought  we  to  write ;  for  the  speaker  ought,  connected 

after  stating  whatever  he  lists  ^  straightway  to  em-  ^th  ^e 

ploy  the  insertion,  and  link  it  [to  the  body  of  the  ^^^^J. 

speech].     Which  indeed  all   do,   having   as   their  ort/uov. 

model  the  exordium  of  the  Helen  of  Isocrates :  for  ^^^ 
,  ,  •       1  TT  1       Helen  of 

there  exists  no  very  near  connexion  between  Helen  isocrates. 

and  the  artifices  of  sophists^.     At  the  same  time,  if 
the  exordium  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  subject,  there 
is  this  advantage,  that  the  whole  speech  is  not  of  one 
uniform  character.    But  the  exordia  of  demonstrative  2.  "nie 
speeches  are  derived  from  praiscy  or  from  blame,  ^^y^^ 
(like  Gorgias  in  the  Olympic  oration,-r"  Men  wor-  derived 
thy,  O  Greeks,  of  admiration  among  many ;"  for  he  ^^ 
is  eulogizing  those  who  instituted  the  general  assem-  ^^  t^ree 
blies :   Isocrates,  however,  blames  them,  ''  because  sorts  of 
they  distinguish  by  prizes  the  excellencies  of  person,  oratory, 
while  for  those  who  are  wise  they  propose  no  re- 
ward ;")  and  thirdly,  from  suggesting  advice  ;  for  in-  S. 
Stance,  "  — ^because  it  is  fitting  to  honour  the  good," 
on  that  account  [the  orator]  himself  also  speaks  the 
praises  of  Aristides,  or  such  characters  as  neither 
enjoy  reputation,  nor  are  worthless,  but  as  many  as, 
though  they  be  excellent  persons,  are  obscure ;  just 

^  There  is,  in  demonstratlye  rhetoric,  no  limitation  as  to  the 
source  whence  the  exordium  is  to  be  derived. 
*  In  a  reprehension  of  which  this  exordium  is  employed. 

25a  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ra. 

as  was  Paris,  the  son  of  Priam :  for  thus  the  orator 
4.  conveys  advice.  Again  [we  may  borrow  demon- 
strative exordia]  from  those  proper  to  judicial  rhe- 
toric, i.  e.  from  appeals  to  the  auditor,  in  case  the 
speech  be  respecting  any  thing  revolting  to  opinion, 
or  difficult,  or  already  noised  abroad  among  many,  so 
as  to  obtain  his  pardon :  as  Choerilus  begins^  *'  Now 
after  every  thing  has  become  public.** 

The  exordia,  then,  of  demonstrative  rhetoric  arise 
from  these  sources, — ^from  praise,  blame,  exhortation, 
dissuasion,  and  appeals  to  the  hearers.     The  inserted 
connective  clauses  may  be  either  foreign  or  appro- 
priate to  the  subjeiBt. 
6.  The  ex-      With  regard  to  the  exordia  of  judicial  rhetoric,  we 
ju^dS^^  must  assume  that  they  are  equivalent  to  the  opening 
oratoij      scenes  of  dramas,  and  the  exordia  of  epic  poems ;  for 
resembles  the  commencement  of  dithyrambic  poetry  resembles 
lo™'ofa  demonstrative  exordia, — "on  account  of  thee,  thy 
play.         gifts,  thy  spoils."     But  in  the  drama,  and  in  epic 
6.  It  must  poetry,  the  commencement  is  an  intimation  of  the 
declajo      subject,  that  the  hearer  may  foresee  what  the  story  is 
the  object  about,  and  that  his  mind  may  not  be  in  suspense ;  for 
spe^h       whatever  is  indeterminate  bewilders  us.     He  .then 
who  puts,  as  it  were,  into  the  hand  the  beginning  of 
the  clue,  causes  him  who  holds  it  to  follow  on  the 
story.     On  this  account  we  have, — 
**  Sing,  muse,  the  wrath,"  etc. 
"  The  man,  O  muse,  resound,"  etc. 

"  This  too  declare ;  from  Asia's  coasts  afar, 
How  upon  Europe  burst  the  mighty  war." 

And  the  tragedians  give  some  insight  into  the  plot  of 
the  drama,  if  not  forthwith,  as  Euripides  does,  yet 
they  give  it  some  where  at  least  in  the  opening  scene ; 
just  as  also  does  Sophocles; — "Polybus  was  my  fa- 
ther^!" And  comedy  in  the  same  way.  The  most 
necessary  business  of  the  exordium,  and  this  is  pecu- 
liar to  it,  is  to  throw  some  light  on  the  end  for  the 
sake  of  which  the  speech  is  made.  For  which  very 
reason,  if  this  be  evident,  and  the  case  a  brief  one, 

»  (Bdipus  Tyr.  774. 

CHAP.  XIV.]  RHETORIC.  253        "^ 

we  need  not  employ  an  exordium.     The  other  species  7.  Other 

which  speakers  employ  are  correctives,  and  general*:  e^<*rdia 

-  *^,  ,1        1/*  *i  ii«*      *ure  an  an- 

these  are,  however,  deduced  from  1.  the  speaker  him-  tidote  to 

self  5  2.  his  hearer;  3.  the  subject;  4.  and  from  the  weariness. 
adversary.     Every  thing- whatsoever  which  refers  to  \^^^^^^' 
the  doing  away  or  the  casting  an  aspersion  of  charac-  Kefuta- 
ter,  has  a  relation  to  one's  self  or  the  adversary.   But  ^^  ^^ 
these  things  are  not  done  exactly  in  the  same  way :  for  \^  iS*^ 
by  one  speaking  on  a  defence,  whatever  tends  to  asper-  posite  re- 
sion  of  character  should  be  put  first ;  but  by  one  who  ^^^  ^^_ 
is  laying  an  accusation,  in  his  peroration.     And  the  er  and^ad- 
reason  why  is  not  indistinct ;  for  it  is  necessary  that  versary. 
one  who  is  making  a  defence,  when*  he  is  about  to  in-  ^^5o?S* 
troduce  himself,  should  sweep  away  every  stumbling-  when 
block ;  so  that  the  prepossession  against  you  must  first  P^^?^^ 
be  removed :  by  him,  however,  who  raises  the  un-  ^^  ® 
favourable  impression,  let  it  be  raised  in  winding  up, 
in  order  that  ^he  judges  may  the  rather  recollect  it. 

The  correctives,  however,  which  refer  to  the  hearer,  ii.  U  tov 
are  drawn  out  of  conciliating  his  good  will,  and  in-  ^^^"J'**'' 
flaming  him  with  anger,  and  occasionally  from  attract-  ment  of 
ing  his  attention,  or  the  reverse ;  for  it  is  not  at  all  ^e  ^ear- 
times  convenient  to  render  him  attentive,  for  which  tJ^ting 
reason  many  endeavour  to  induce  them  to  laughter,  his  atten- 
But  all  thesewillconducetotractability  [on  the  judge's  ^^»  ^^ 
part],  if  one  wishes  it,  as  does  also  the  showing  one's  ^^1^, 
self  a  person  of  character ;  for  to  such  do  people  the 
rather  give  heed.     But  men  are  attentive  to  objects 
of  importance,  of  a  peculiar  description,  or  deserving 
admiration,  or  pleasing.     Hence  we  ought  to  throw 
in  a  hint  that  the  speech  is  concerning  subjects  of 
this  nature.     But  if  you  would  have  them  not  atten- 
tive, hint  that  the  matter  is  trifling,  concerns  them 
not,  or  is  disgusting.     But  it  ought  not  to  escape  our  8.  All 
observation,  that  the  whole  of  this  is  foreign  to  the  ^^^ 
subject ;  for  they  are  addressed  to  a  hearer  of  sorry  howeyer 

4  'larpedfiaTa,  a  sort  of  abtidotes  to  enntU  and  lisHesaness 
of  the  auditory,  which  are  literally  so  general  (koivA)  as  not 
only  to  be  unlimited  to  the  exordia  of  either  branch  of  rhetoric, 
but  as  to  admit  of  being  introduced  at  will  into  any  part  of  the 
speech.    See  §  9. 

254  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  in. 

are  ex-      taste,  and  one  who  lends  an  ear  to  points  foreign  to 
^"^''^    the  subject ;  for  if  the  hearer  be  not  of  this  character, 
iubject.     there  is  no  need  of  exordium,  except  so  far  as  to  state 
the  matter  summarily,  that,  like  a  body,  it  may  have 
a  head. 
9.      Again,  the  business  of  exciting  attention  is  common 
^^ Ae^"  ^  *^  *^®  divisions  of  a  speech,  wherever  it  may  be 
attention  necessary ;  for  the  audience  relax  their  attention  any 
is  com-      where  rather  .than  at  the  beginning.    For  which  rea- 
pMts^f     ^^  ^*  ^^  ridiculous  to  range  this  head  at  the  begin- 
a  speech,   ning,  when   more  particularly  every  one  is  at  the 
summit  of  attention.     So  that,  whenever  it  is  conve- 
nient, we  may  use  the  formulary,  "  Lend  me  jour 
whole  attention,  for  the  question  does  not  affect  me 
any  more  than  yourselves;"  and  this  one, — "for  I 
will  relate  to  you  a  thing  so  strange,  so  wonderful, 
as  you  never  yet  heard."    But  this  is  just  what  Pro- 
dicus  says  he  used  to  do, — "  whenever  the  audience 

10.  happen  to  nod,  to  insert,  by  the  bye,  a  display  of  his 
penteconta-drachmial    demonstration^."      But    that 

'     these  things  are  referred  to  the  hearer  not  in  his  pro- 
per capacity  as  such,  is  evident ;  for  all  create  unfa- 
^     vourable  impressions  or  do  them  away  in  their  ex- 
ordia :  as,  "  O  king,  I  confess  indeed,  that  not  with 
haste,"  etc.^:  and  again,  "  Why  such  long  preludes'." 
Those  They,  too,  employ  exordia  who  have,  or  appear  to 

^^**wor^  have,  the  worse  case ;  for  it  is  better  to  pause  any 
side  em-  where  than  on  the  case  itself.  On  which  account 
ploy  ex-  servants  tell  not  what  is  asked  them,  but  all  the  cir- 
**'  *•        cumstances,  and  make  long  preambles. 

11.  But  the  means  out  of  which  we  must  conciliate 
have  been  stated,  and  each  other  point  of  that  na- 
ture®: and,  as  it  is  well  remarked  by  the  poet, "  Grant 
that  I  may  reach  the  Phoeacians  a  friend  and  object 
of  their  compassion  ;'*  we  ought,  therefore,  to  aim  at 

•  Prodicus  professed  to  teach  a  mode  of  reasoning  with  uni- 
versal success  in  all  descriptions  of  cases :  the  premium  on 
initiation  being  fifty  drachms,  he  called  it  HetmjKovrddpaxtiov, 
Plato  in  Cratyl. 

^  Sophocles,  Antig.  223. 

'  Euripides,  Iph.  in  Taur.  1162. 

*  See  book  ii.  chap.  1,  }  5. 

CHAP.  XIV.]  KHETORIC.  255 

these  two  objects.     And  in  demonstrative  orations,  A  compli- 
you  should  cause  the  hearer  to  suppose  that  he  is  ^^^^p^^^^ 
praised  simultaneously  with  the  subject,  either  in  his  the  audi- 
own  person  or  his  family,  or  in  his  maxims  of  con-  enoe. 
duct,  or  at  least  somehow  or  other.     For  true  it  is, 
as  Socrates, remarks,  that  "To  praise  Athenians  be- 
fore an  Athenian  audience  is  no  difficult  thing,  how- 
ever it  may  be  in  the  presence  of  Lacedaemonians  ^" 

But  the  exordia  of  deliberative  rhetoric  are  derived  Exordia 
from  thpse  of  judicial :  but  this  species  has  them  na-  Sberatiye 
turally  least  of  all  the  three ;  for  indeed  the  audience  oratory 
are  aware  of  the  subject ;  and  the  case  needs  no  ex-  waited 
ordium  except  1.  on  account  of  the  speaker  himself;  fourcawes. 
2.  or  his  opponent;  or  3.  if  the  audience  conceive  of  i.  Onac- 
the  importance  of  the  matter  otherwise  than  he  could  J?^^*  ^_ 
wish,  thinking  it  either  too  serious  or  too  trifling :  ©r. 
with  a  view  to  which  objects  respectively  there  is  a  ii*  On  ac- 
necessity  for  either  exciting  or  doing  away  a  prejudice,  the^- 
or  for  amplification  or  diminution.      On  account  of  versary. 
these  things  there  is  need  of  exordium ;  4.  or  other-  P*  To 
wise  for  the  sake  of  ornament;  since  without  it  a  SiehSffer 
speech  appears  hastily  got  up.     Of  this  sort  was  the  with  the 
panegyric  of  Gorgias  on  the  Eleans ;  for  without  any  ^^^ 
thing  like  the  preluding  display  of  gesture  and  atti-  iv.  For' 
tude  in  the  Gymnasium,  he  begins  forthwith, — "  O  the  sake 
Elis,  city  blest  by  fortune !«  ^^^^^ 

CHAP.  XV. 

Topics  for  removing  Imputations  to  your  Prejudice, 

Touching  the  subject  of  an  imputation  cast  upon  l.  Topics 
you,  one  means  of  removing  it  will  be  the  recurring  Jl^r. 
to  those  topics,  by  means  of  which  one  might  do  away  sions. 

^  This  sentiment  has  been  already  quoted,  book  i.  chap.  9, 
{  30,  in  illustration  of  the  mle  Sicoirciv  Tap*  oU  6  2xatvoc.  The 
remark  of  Socrates  may  be  found  in  Plato's  Menexenus,  but 
differently  expressed. 

256  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m. 

i.  Re-  any  surmises  prejudicial  to  him ;  for  it  matters  not 
^^^  ,  whether  they  be  entertained  in  consequence  of  the 
able  im- '  allegations  of  any  one  or  not.  So  that  this  topic  is 
pressioiis.  Universally  applicable. 

2.  iLCon-  Another  mode  is,  the  confronting  it  like  a  point 
Se^*^  under  litigation,  [arguing]  either  that  it  is  not  the 

case,  or  is  not  hurtful,  or  not  to  the  particular  indi-> 
vidnal;  or  that  it  is  not  of  such  importance, .  or  not 
unjust,  or  not  considerable,  or  not  disgraceful,  or  of 
no  consequence ;  for  in  points  of  this  description  the 
question  originates :  just  as  Iphicrates  argued  against 
Nausicrates ;  for  he  pleaded,  that  he  did  what  the 
prosecutor  alleged,  and  indeed  hurt  him,  but  yet  did 
not  act  unjustly.  Or  confessedly  acting  unjustly  he 
may  offer  some  equivalent :  e.  g.  though  hurtful,  yet 
was  it  honourable  ;  though  painful,  yet  was  it  bene- 
ficial ;  by  some  other  such  expedient. 

3.  iii.  By  Another  method  is,  the  arguing  that  the  action  is 
extenu^-  merely  a  fault,  or  an  error  \  or  that  it  was  necessary ; 
eiCTise!      ^^^^  ^  **^®  P^^*  ^^  Socrates,  "  that  he  trembled,  not 

as  the  calumniator  alleged,  that  he  might  appear  an 
old  man,  but  of  necessity ;  since  his  eighty  years  of 
age  did  not  overtake  him  of  his  own  choice."  And 
you  may  attempt  a  commutation  of  motives ;  e.  g. 
"  that  he  did  not  wish  to  hurt,  but  to  do  this  or  that, 
and  not  what  the  accuser  insinuated ;  but  that  it  so 
happened  that  hurt  was  sustained.  But  that  it  were 
fair  enough  to  hate  him,  had  he  acted  purposely  with 
a  view  to  this  taking  place." 

4.  ir.  By       Another  mode  is,  the  considering  whether  the 

'^®^^™^--  prosecutor  has  either  now  or  formerly,  in  his  own 
nation  of    ^  •     xi.   ^    im.*  •  i.         •        i      j  • 

the  ac-      person,  or  m  that  of  his  connexions,  been  involved  m 

cuser.  the  charge.     Another,  whether  others,  whom  they 

oomni^  themselves  acknowledge  not  liable  to  the  imputation, 

son  with  he  also  comprehended ;   for  instance,  if  he  acknow- 

others.  ledge  an  adulterer  to  be  exempt  from  the  charge, 

6.  Ti.  By  surely  then  abo  is  this  or  that  person.     Another 

Sag  wl^"  <50U8ists  in  ascertaining  whether  he  has  cast  any  false 

ther  the  imputations  on  others ;  or  whether,  like  the  party  in 

'  For  the  distinctions  between  dnapr^fiaTa  and  drvxii/xara, 
see  book  i.  chap.  15,  §  16. 

CHAP.  XV.]  RHETORIC.  257 

the  present  case,  any  other  has  calumniated  persons,  accuser 
or  whether,  without  direct  imputation,  any  ever  were  ^^"^^ 
suspected  who  have  yet  appeared  innocent.    Another,  calumnia- 
in  raising  a  counter  prejudice  against  the  calumni-  tor  before. 
ator ;   for  it  is  absurd^  if,  while  the  man  is  himself  Jii^g  a 
Yoid  of  credit,  his  words  obtain  it.     Another,  in  in-*  counter 
quiring  whether  a  decision  has  been  already  made ;  F®J?.^*'|* 
just  as  Euripides  did  in  reply  to  Hygisenon,  who,  in  tie^air 
an  action  of  Antidosis,  accused  him  as  being  an  im-  has  been 
pious  person,  inasmuch  as  exhorting  to  perjury  he  5^-5^ 
wrote, — "  The  tongue  hath  sworn,  but  the  mind  is 
unsworn  2;"  for  Euripides  argued,  "that  by  bringing  i 

into  court  the  decisions  of  the  Dionysiac  contest  he 
acted  unjustly;   for  there  he  had  given,  or  would 
give  an  account,  should  he  wish  to  impeach  him." 
Another,  in  impeaching  calumny  itself,  as  to  how  9.  ix.  By 
great  an  evil  it  is ;  and  this  because  it  produces  de-  ^^^^^im- 
cisions  foreign  to  the  point,  and  that  it  relies  not  on  a^nst 
the  strength  of  its  case.  calumny 

But  the  citing  presumptive  signs  isa  topic  common  Jj^i^tinir 
to  both  parties :  thus,  in  the  Teucer,  Ulysses  insinu-  the  pre- 
ates  that  "  he  is  of  kin  to  Priam ;  for  [his  mother]  sumptive 
Hesione  was  Priam's  sister."     He,  however,  replies  ^^'in^ 
on  the  ground  that,  "  Telamon,  his  father,  was  the  fm  to 
enemy  of  Priam,  and  that  he  did  not  denounce  the  ^^ 
spies." 

Another,  peculiar  to  an  accuser,  is,  for  one  after  lO-  p 
bestowing  short  praise  to  censure  at  great  length,  S^fuSi 
putting  forward  great  virtues  briefly,  or  very  many  to  blame 
[which  are  not  relevant],  then  to  censure  in   one  ^J^^- 
point  which  bears  home  upon  the  case.     Such  me-  ^^  ^T" 
thods  are  the  most  crafty  and  malignant ;   for  they  cuser. 
attempt  injury  by  means  of  one's  virtues,  by  blend- 
ing them  with  a  man's  failings. 

But  it  is  a  resource  common  to  the  calumniator  ^-  By 
and  one  who  meets  a  calumny,  that,  as  it  is  possible  ^'^^^ 
for  the  same  action  to  have  been  done  from  many  tiyes 
motives,  by  the  calumniator,  indeed,  facts  should  be  ^^*^^ 
taken  in  a  bad  sense,  as  he  makes  his  selection  of  ^^^|^.' 
motives  on  the  worse  side ;  while  by  the  respondent 
3  Hippolytus,  612. 

258  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

it  should  be  made  on  the  better.  Take,  for  instance, 
the  fact  that  Diomede  chose  Ulysses :  one  will  say 
it  was,  '*  because  he  conceived  Ulysses  to  be  the 
bravest ; "  the  other,  that  "  it  was  not,  but  because 
he  alone  could  not  become  a  rival,  such  a  poltroon 
was  he." 

Thus  much,  then,  on  the  subject  of  imputations. 

CHAP.  XVL 
Of  the  Narration, 

1.  The      In  demonstrative  speeches  the  narration  is  not  given 

f"™*^®^  in  continuity,  but  in  scattered  portions  ;  for  one  must 
inepideic-  ^i    "^  V.^.  ^     i»      !.•  i.  ^i.  i. 

ticOTatory  go  over  the  actions  out  ot  which  the  speech  arises : 
is  not  con-  for  a  speech  is  a  kind  of  compound,  having  one  por- 
but^d^     tion,  indeed,  independent  of  art,  [since  the  speaker  is 
jointed,     not  at  all  the  cause  of  the  actions  themselves,]  and 
another  portion  originating  in  art ;  and  this  last  is 
either  the  showing  that  it  is  fact  should  it  be  incredi- 
ble, or  such  either  in  character  or  degree,  or  in  show- 
2.  ing  all  these  points  at  once.     Owing  to  this,  there  are 
times  when  one  ought  not  to  narrate  every  fact  suc- 
cessively ;  because  this  mode  of  exposition  is  difficult 
to  remember.     From  some,  then,  establish  the  cha- 
racter for  courage,  from  others  for  wisdom,  and  from 
others  for  justice.     The  one  style  of  narration  is  too 
simple ;  the  other  has  the  grace  of  variety,  and  is  not 
8.  so  void  of  elegance.     But  you  have  only  to  awaken 
the  recollection  of  facts  well  known ;  on  which  ac- 
count, many  subjects  will  stand  in  no  need  of  narra- 
tion :    supposing,   for   instance,   you   would  praise 
Achilles,  because  all  are  acquainted  with'  his  actions ; 
but  you  must  employ  them  at  once.     But  in  praising 
Critias,  an  orator  must  narrate;  for  not  many  are 
acquainted  with  his  exploits. 
4.  In  ju-       But  now  people  tell  us,  ridiculously  enough,  that 
wTOtion*  *^®  narration  should  be  rapid.    And  yet  I  would  say, 
must         as  did  one  to  a  baker,  who  inquired  *' whether  he 

CHAF.  XVI.]  RHETORIC.  259 

should  knead  his  hread  hard  or  soft,''  —  "What,"  make  the 
said  he,  "  is  it  then  impossible  to  knead  it  properly  ?"  5||^^ 
And  so  here  [in  rhetoric  a  mean  is  to  be  observed].         * 
For  one  should  not  narrate  at  too  great  length,  just 
as  he  should  not  make  too  long  an  exordium,  nor 
state  his  proofs  [too  fully].     For  neither  in  this  case 
does  propriety  consist  either  in  rapidity  or  concise- 
ness, but  in  a  mean  betwixt  both:  and  this  is  the 
stating  just  so  much  as  will  make  the  matter  clear, 
or  as  will  cause  one  to  conceive  that  it  has  taken 
place,  or  that  the  party  has  inflicted  hurt,  or  com- 
mitted injustice,  or  that  the  case  is  of  that  importanoe 
which  the  speaker  wishes  to  establish;  and  to  the 
opposite  party  the  opposite  points  will  avail.     And  5.  and 
an  orator  should  narrate,  by  the  bye,  such  incidents '^^^j^®^ 
as  conduce  to  his  own  excellence :  thus,  *'  I  all  along  in  fayour 
used  to  instruct  them  in  what  was  just,  bidding  them  °^^® 
not  to  abandon  their  children,"— or,  to  the  villany  ^^ 
of  the  other  party ; —  "  — ^but  he  replied  to  me,  that 
wherever  he  might  be  he  should  have  other  children." 
Which,  Herodotus  sayS,  was  the  reply  of  the  Egyp- 
tians on  their  revolting  ^     Or  whatever  is  pleasing 
to  the  judges. 

In  the  case  of  a  defendant,  the  matter  wiU  be  more  J  The 
brief;  the  points  for  dispute  being,  either  that  it  has  ^^^f^, 
not  taken  place,  or  is  not  hurtful,  or  not  unjust,  or  ration  is 
not  of  such  importance.     So  that  on  acknowledged  ^™^» 
points  he  need  not  pause,  unless  they  conduce  in 
some  degree  to  the  objects  suggested ;  e.  g.  if  the 
fact  be  acknowledged,  but  its  injustice  disputed. 
Moreover,  you  should  mention  as  already  done  those  7. 
things  which,  in  the  course  of  being  done,  failed  of 
producing  pity  or  horror.      The  story  of  Alcinous 
is  an  instance,  which  is  despatched  to  Penelope  in 
sixty  verses.     And  as  Phayllus  does  in  the  circle^ 
and  the  opening  scene  of  the  CEneus.     The  narra-  8.  and 
tion  should  also  convey  a  notion  of  the  character :  ^"j^f* 
this  will  be  secured,  if  we  know  what  gives  rise  to  press  of 
the  moral  character.      One  source  is  the  manifesta-  chwacter. 
tion  of  deliberate  choice ;  and  of  what  kind  is  moral  Jj^ai^est- 
^  See  Herodotus,  ii.  30. 
s  2 

260  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ui. 

ing  moral  character  we  ascertain  from  knowing  of  what  kind 
purpose,    ^jjjg  jg .  jyj^  q£  wYktit  Idiid  thc  deliberate  choice  is, 
from  being  acquainted  ¥rith  its  proposed  end.  Hence 
the  doctrines  of  mathematics  have  no  display  of  cha- 
racter, for  neither  have  they  deliberate  choice ;  and 
this  for  that  they  have  not  the  influence  of  motive^: 
but  the  Socratic  discourses  [have  this  display],  for 
9.  they  treat  concerning  subjects  of  this  kind.     But 
liBynar-  those  things  convey  a  notion  of  character,  which  is 
Secoi?   consequent   upon  the    several    characters';    e.   g. 
comitant    "Whilst  Saying  this  he  began  to  hasten  off;"  for 
^^^-     this  manifests  a  hardihood  and  rusticity  of  character, 
^  3y*     And  be  cautious  not  to  speak  coldly  as  from  the  un- 
speaking    derstanding  merely,  as  orators  do  now-a-days,  but 
with  feel-  33  though  from  the  deliberate  choice  *.     "  I,  for  I 
wished  and  deliberately  preferred  this ;  and  if  I  pro- 
,  fit  nothing  by  it,  then  it  is  the  more  honourable :" 
for  the  one  is  characteristic  of  a  prudent*,  the  other 
of  a  good  man :  since  [the  proposed  end]  of  the  pru- 
dent consists  in  pursuing  the  expedient ;  of  a  good 
man,  in  pursuing  what  is  honourable.     And  should 
any  circumstance  be  incredible,  you  must  subjoin  the 
reason ;  as  Sophocles  does.     He  furnishes  an  exam^- 
pie  in  the  Antigone,  that  she  mourned  more  for  her 
brother  than  for  a  husband  or  children ;  for  these,  if 
lost,  might  again  be  hers. 

"  But  father  now  and  mother  both  being  lost, 
A  brother's  name  can  ne'er  be  hail'd  again  f." 

*  See  the  next  chapter,  §  8. 

'  Using,  in  fact,  the  <rntiiiov  of  the  action  as  an  evidence  of 
the  thought,  or  taking  the  result  of  the  feeling  for  the  feeling 
itself;  as  Pericles  does  when  alluding  to  the  morose  looks  of 
the  Lacedaemonians,  a  process  which,  though  ingenious,  yet 
often  leads  to' a  fallacy. 

^  Which  is  %oill  regulated  by  the  understandinff.  See  Nich. 
Eth.  book  iii.  chap.  2,  3,  etc. 

'  That  is,  the  prudent  speak  from  the  dictates  of  the  under- 
standing solely,  the  good  on  the  impulse  of  deliberate  choice, 

'  Sophocles,  Antigone,  911.  See  the  speech  of  the  wife  of 
Intaphemes  to  Darius,  on  asking  the  life  of  a  brother  in  pre- 
ference to  those  of  her  husband  or  children ;— 'Q  /9o<riX«w,  di^p 
filir  fiot  &»  SXA.09  yivovTOf  el  6aiu.v»»  idiXoiy  xal  tixva  aWoL,  ci 
Tavra  airofidXoifii'  iraTpdt  ik  kuI  fiitrpdi  oitK  cri  /acD  ^cooirrcav, 
d6s\<pB6s  U.V  ceWos  obitvl  Tpotrto  ylvoiro,     Herodotus,  Thalia, 

CHAP.  XVI.]  RHETORIC.  261 

But  if  you  should  hare  no  reason  to  offer,  then  avow 
**  that  you  are  well  aware  that  you  speak  what  ex- 
ceeds belief,  but  that  such  is  your  nature :"  for  the 
world  discredit  a  man*s  doing  any  thing  voluntarily, 
except  what  is  expedient. 

Again,  draw  your  remarks  out  of  those  things  10-  L^^t 
which  are  indicative  of  the  passions  ;  narrating  both  rationbe 
their  attendant  circumstances,  and  those  which  the  vaOnrt- 
audience  know,  and  which  attach  peculiarly  either  to  *^» 
the  speaker  himself  or  his  adversary : — "  He,  having 
scowled  at  me,  departed."     And  as  JSschines  said 
of  Cratylus,  '^  that  whistling  and  snapping  his  fin- 
gers— :"   for  they  have  a  tendency  to  persuade: 
therefore  these  things  which  they  know,  become 
indices  of  that  which  they  do  not  know.      Such  in- 
stances one  may  get  in  abundance  out  of  Homer : — 
"  Thus  Penelope  spoke,  and  the  old  woman  covered 
her  face  with  her  hands  ^:"  for  those  who  are  begin- 
ning to  shed  tears  cover  their  eyes.     And  forthwith  aiid^0«Ml 
insinuate  yourself  as  a  person  of  a  certain  character, 
in  order  that  they  may  look   upon  you  as  one  of 
such  a  description,  and  your  adversary  [as  the  re- 
verse]: but  beware  of  observation  as  you  do  it.  And 
that  it  is  easy  to  effect  this  we  may  observe  in  those 
who  report  any  thing  to  us ;  for  respecting  the  com- 
munication (of  which  as  yet  we  know  nothing^  we 

cap.  119.  See  the  reply  of  Robert  Duke  of  Normandy  to 
William  Rufus,  justifying  himself  for  allowing  him  to  get  water 
during  the  siege  at  Mont  St.  Michael : — "  How  am  I  to  blame  ? 
should  I  have  suffered  our  brother  to  die  of  thirst,  what  other 
have  we  if  we  had  lost  him  ? "  Lord  Lyttleton,  vol.  i.  p.  111. 
Compare  the  words  of  Edward  I.  on  hearing  at  the  same  time 
of  the  death  of  his  father  and  infant  son,  **  that  the  death  of  a 
ton  was  a  loss  which  he  might  hope  to  repair;  the  death  of  a 
/other  was  a  loss  irreparable."  Hume.  And  the  lines  quoted 
in  "  the  Antiquary,"  vol.  iii.  chap.  11 : — 

He  turned  him  right  and  round  again, 
Said,  Scorn  na  at  my  mither ; 
Light  loves  I  may  get  mony  a  aoe, 
But  minnie  ne'er  anither. 

^  Odyssey,  book  xix.  361. 

262  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  hi. 

Still  catch  a  kind  of  guess®.     But  the  narration  must 
be  carried  on  in  different  parts,  and,  in  some  in- 
stances, even  at  the  commencement. 
11.  Nai>        But  in  deliberative  speeches  narration  occurs  least 
lewt^iaed  ®^  *^'  because  no  one  narrates  respecting  what  is  yet 
in  de-        to  be :  if,  however,  there  should  be  any  narration,  it 
liberative  ^u  be  respecting  things  which  have  already  happen- 
oratory.     ^^  ^^^^^  ^^^  recoUection  of  them  having  been  awak- 
ened, the  judges  may  determine  better  on  the  future ; 
the  orator  either  reprehending  or  praising  them :  but 
he  is  not  then  performing  the  ftinctions  proper  to  him 
as  an  adviser.     If,  however,  the  thing  narrated  be 
incredible,  see  you  promise  to  state  a  reason  for  it 
immediately^,  and  to  submit  it  to  whom  they  please  : 
like  the  Jocasta  of  Carcinus  in  his  GSdipus,  who  al- 
ways keeps  promising  when  he  who  was  seeking  out 
her  son  inquires  of  her:   and  the  Haemon  of  So- 
phocles *®. 

CHAP.  XVII. 
Of  the  Proof. 

1.  Proof  Proof  should  be  demonstrative ;  and  the  points  of 
orato*^*^  dispute  being  four,  you  must  demonstrate  by  pro- 
four  ducing  proof  respecting  the  particular  point  at  issue : 
points.  thus,  if  the  adversary  question  the  fact^  you  must  at 
^  ®  the  trial  produce  proof  of  this  point  above  the  rest ; 
ii.  The  should  it  be  that  he  did  no  hamiy  then  of  that  point ; 
"iw^ef.  and  so  should  he  urge  that  the  action  is  not  of  the 
degree,  importance  supposed,  or  that  it  was  dion^  justly:  [and 
it  must  be  done  in  the  latter  cases]  exactly  in  the 
same  way  as  if  the  inquiry  were  respecting  the  mat- 

•  See  the  Trachinia^  of  Sophocles,  rerse  869,  where  part  of 
the  Chorus  conjecture,  from  the  dejected  looks  of  the  nurse  as 
she  approaches,  that  some  calamity  is  about  to  be  announced. 

*  An  instance  of  this  occurs  in  the  statement- of  finance 
which  Pericles  laid  before  the  Athenians,  to  substantiate  the 
hopes  which  he  had  held  out  to  them.    Thucyd.  ii.  13. 

^  See  the  Antigone,  635,  etc. 

CHA.P.  xvii.]  RHETORIC.  263 

ter  of  fact.     And  let  it  not  escape  us  that  in  this  sin-  2.  iy.  Tbe 
gle  inquiry,  it  must  needs  be  that  one  party  is  guilty  * :  *^^+^ 
for  it  is  not  ignorance  which  is  to  blame,  as  though  of  the 
any  were  to  dispute  on  a  point  of  justice.     So  that,  action. 
in  this  inquiry,  the  circumstance  should  be  employed ;  ^* 
but  not  in  the  other  [three]. 

But,  in  demonstratiire  rhetoric,  amplification,  for  In  epi- 
the  most  part,  will  constitute  the  proof,  because  the  ™*^^*^ 
facts  are  honourable  and  useful ;   for  the  actions  made  by 
should  be  taken  on  credit  ^  since,  even  on  these  sub-  2?P^*^ 
jects,  a  speaker  on  very  rare  occasions  does  adduce 
proof,  if  either  the  action  be  passing  belief,  or  if  an- 
other have  the  credit  of  it'. 

But,  in  deliberative  speeches,  the  orator  may  either  4.  In  de- 
contend  that  the  circumstances  will  not  take  place,  or  ^^^^ 
'that  what  he  directs  will  indeed  take  place,  but  that  obeerve 
it  is  not  just,  or  not  beneficial,  or  not  in  such  a  degree.  ^^  fi^- 
And  it  will  be  well  for  him  to  observe  whether  any  ^yera^* 
falsehood  appears  in  the  extraneous  observations  of  rv,  for 
his  adversary ;   for  these  appear  as  so  many  con-     ^^^'J 
vincing  proofs,  that  he  is  false  in  the  case  of  the  other  J^  p^^f 
more  important  statements. 

And  example  is  best  adapted  to  deHberative  rhe-  5,  Exam- 
toric ;  while  enthymem  is  more  peculiar  to  judicial*.  ^^^tJl^i, 
For  the  formef  is  relative  to  the  future ;  so  that  out  it 
of  what  has  been  heretofore,  we  needs  must  adduce 
examples :  the  latter  respects  what  is  or  is  not  mat- 
ter of  fact,  to  which  belong  more  especially  demon- 
stration and  necessity ;  for  the  circumstances  of  the 
past  involve  a  necessity.     The  speaker  ought  not,  6.  How 
however,  to  bring  forward  his  enthymems  in  a  con-  ^^'a^ 
tinuod  series,  but  to  blend  them  by  the  way ;  should  to  be  used. 

he  not  do  this,  they  prove  an  injury  one  to  the  other.  Not  in  a 

series. 
^  He  states  the  same  doctrine  in  the  Nich.  Eth.  y.  2 : — 
pv  ydp  &<nrcp  iv  T0I9  avpaWdy/iao'i  irepl  tov  yiyvlodai  dftipKr- 
finrovaiv  S>v  d»ayKr\  t6v  irtpou  tlucu,  yioyfQripbv  av  fiii  6itk  XifOtjir 
aird  dpunriVy  k,  t.  X. 

•  "  For  the  facts  are  taken  for  granted ;  so  that  it  only  re- 
mains to  invest  them  with  grandeur."    Book  i.  chap.  9,  §  40. 

'  Victorius  notices  the  nse  of  the  phrase  alriav  tx'^iu  in  a 
good  sense. 

*  He  asserts  this,  and  assigns  the  reason;  at  the  end  of  his 
consideration  of  demonstratiye  rhetoric,  book  i.  c.  9,  §  40. 

264  ARISTOTLE'S  Ibook  hi. 

for  there  is  some  limit  on  the  score  of  qaantitj  too  i^^ 
''  Oh  friend,  since  you  have  spoken  just  so  much  as  a 
prudent  man  would  *;'*  but  the  poet  does  not  say,  ^ 
7-  Not  on  such  a  quality.  Neither  should  you  seek  after  en- 
jecte^  thymems  on  every  subject ;  otherwise  you  will  be 
doing  the  very  thing  which  some  philosophers  do, 
who  infer  syllogistically  conclusions  in  themselves 
better  known,  and  more  readily  commanding  belief^ 
than  the  premises  out  of  which  they  deduce  them. 

8.  Nor  to  And  when  you  would  excite  any  passion,  do  not  em- 
emotioM^  ploy  an  enthymem ;  for  either  it  will  expel  the  paa- 
or  pas-  sion,  or  the  enthymem  will  be  uttered  to  no  purpose ; 
sions.        for  the  emotions  which  happen  at  the  same  time  expel 

each  other,  and  either  cancel  or  render  one  or  the 
other  feeble.  Neither  when  one  aims  at  speaking 
vrith  the  effect  of  character,  ought  he  at  all  to  aim 
at  the  same  time  at  enthymem;  fdr  demonstration 
possesses  neither  an  air  of  character,  nor  deliberate 

9.  But  choice.  But  a  speaker  should  employ  maxims  alike 
JJJI^^  in  narration  and  in  proof;  for  it  has  ai^  expression 
Tised  in  of  character :: — "  Yes ;  I  delivered  it,  even  knowing 
the  proof  that  one  ought  never  to  repose  implicit  confidence/* 
ratioBu^*    And  if  one  speak  with  a  view  to  excite  passion : — 

^^And  injured  though  I  be,  yet  I  do  not  repent; 
for  the  gain^  indeed,  is  on  his  side,  •but  justice  on 
mine." 

10.  Rea-  And  deliberative  is  more  difEicult  than  judicial 
J^*^^  rhetoric,  and  probably  enough, — ^because  it  respects 
tive  is  ibe  future ;  whereas,  in  the  latter,  the  question  is 
more  dif-  respecting  the  past,  which  has  already  become  matter 
hS^dS"'  ^^  absolute  science,  even  to  diviners,  as  Epimenides 
oratory,  the  Cretan  used  to  say ;  for  he  did  not  exercise  his 
\  ^  ft"*  ^^  ^^  ^^  divination  r^pecting  things  yet  to  be,  but 
^^  *  respecting  those  which  had  already  happened  indeed, 
ii.  Judi-    but  which  were  obscure :  again,  in  judicial. questions, 

*  The  words  of  Menelaus  to  Pisistratus,  the  son  of  Nestor. 
Odyssey,  lib.  iv.  204.  The  force  of  the  illustration  here  seems 
to  be  this :  iht  poet,  no  less  than  the  philosopher,  thought  it 
no  small  praise  to  know  when  to  ttop;  so  that,  without  allusion 
to  the  prudence  of  what  had  been  said,  (to  the  category  of 
quality f  ToiavTa,)  he  conunonds  him  merely  on  the  score  of  its 
due  qttantity. 

CHAP.  XVII.]  RHETORIC.  265 

there  is  the  law  as  the  basis  of  reasonings  |  but  for  dal  on- 
one  who  has  something  wherewith  to  begin,  it  is  ^"^1^ 
easier  to  discover  means  of  proof.    Neither  has  [de-  ba^.^'  * 
liberative  rhetoric]  many  opportunities  of  digression ;  iii.  The 
none,  for  instance,  in  reference  to  an  adversary,  or  delibera- 
respecting  one's  self,  or  in  order  to  excite  passion^;  tor  cannot 
but  it  possesses  these  opportunities  least  of  all  the  di^ess  so 
three  branches,  unless  it  depart  from  its  proper  pro-  ®*^y- 
vince.     If,  then,  you  are  at  a  loss,  you  should  do 
what  the  rhetoricians  at  Athens  do,  and  particularly 
Isocrates ;  for  in  the  course  of  deliberative  speaking 
he  accuses  the  LacedsBmonians,  for  instance,  in  the 
panegyric,  and  Chares  in  the  speech  about  the  alli- 
ance.    But  in  demonstrative  speaking,  you  should  11. 
insert  praise  in  the  speech  by  way  of  episode,  as  Iso- 
crates does,  for  he  all  along  keeps  introducing  some- 
thing.   And  that  saying  of  Grorgias,  *'  That  he  never 
failed  of  something  to  say/'  is  nothing  more  nor  less 
thaiu  this :  for  if  he  be  speaking  of  Achilles,  he 
praises  Peleus,  then  ^acus,  t^en  his  goddess  mother, 
and  80,  too,  valour  in  the  abstract ;  or  he  does  some- 
thing or  another  in  this  strain. 

Now  the  language  of  one  who  possesses  proof,  12.  Ifyou 
should  be  both  fraught  with  the  impress  of  charac-  ^^^  ^^  , 
ter,  and  fitted  to  convey  the  proof.     But  if  you  pos-  gpeak 
sess  not  enthymems,  let  it  convey  an  impression  of  ^OikSk 
your  character ;  and  the  show  of  goodness  more  befits  ^^^^^ 
a  virtuous  man,  than  accuracy  of  speech.  «««. 

But  of  enthymems  the  refutcUive  are  more  ap-  F?2**^^* 
proved  than  the  confirmative'^:  because  in  the  case  I's.  R^fo.* 
of  as  many  as  produce  redtictio  ad  absurdum,  it  is  tative  en 
more  plain  that  a  conclusion  has  really  been  arrived  ^^^ ™* 
at ;  for  opposites,  when  set  by  each  other,  are  more  than  con- 
clearly  recognised.  firmativa 

*  Now,  according  to  the  early  part  of  this  work,  all  this  is 
done  easily  enough  injudicial  cases,  since  there  the  judge  has 
no  personal  interest,  and  easily  resigns  himself  to  the  speaker ; 
but  in  deUberative  rhetoric,  every  one  addressed  is  supposed, 
more  or  less,  to  have  an  interest  in  the  question  at  issue,  and 
is  therefore  more  jealous  of  the  speaker's  artifice.  Book  i.  c. 
1,6  10. 

^  See  book  ii.  chap.  23,  {  30. 

266  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  iii. 

14.  Mode  Touching  reasonings  directed  against  the  adver- 
Sair^^our  ^^^'  ^^^^  *^  ^^*  ^^  ^^^  thing  different  in  species ; 
adver-  but  it  belongs  to  the  province  of  proof  to  do  away 
"a^-  his  arguments,  some  by  starting  an  objection,  others 
The  fint  by  contrary  inference®.  And  the  speaker  who  be- 
mas^Sve  S"^^*  ought,  both  in  deliberative  and  judicial  rhetoric, 
his  proo&  first  to  state  his  own  proofs ;  and  subsequently  to  meet 
ti^^  ^  objections  by  doing  them  away,  or  by  treating  them 
o^w-  '^^b  contempt  beforehand.  But  should  the  points 
tions.  objected  to  be  many,  first  he  must  confront  the  objec- 
tions, as  did  Callistratus  in  the  Messeniac  assembly ; 
for  previously  having  swept  away  what  his  adver- 
saries would  be  likely  to  allege  in  this  way,  he  then 
16.  The  spoke  on  his  own  part.  But  the  last  speaker  should 
^^^P^'  speak  first  what  makes  against  the  adversary's  speech, 
refute  the  doing  it  away,  and  drawing  opposite  inferences ;  and 
adver-  particularly  should  his  arguments  have  been  well 
^meiS,  received.  For  just  as  one's  mind  does  not  cordially 
and  draw  receive  a  person  on  whom  a  slur  has  been  previously 
^F^^  cast ;  in  the  same  way  neither  does  it  favourably  listen 
enceg.  ^  ^  Speech,  if  the  opposite  speaker  appear  to  have 
The  rea-  spoken  truly.  It  is  necessary,  then,  to  gain  a  footing 
son  why.  j^j  ^^^  hearer's  mind  for  the  intended  speech ;  and  it 
I  will  be  gained  if  you  sweep  away  objections :  where- 

fore a  speaker,  having  combated  either  all,  or  the 
most  important,  or  the  most  approved  arguments  of 
his  adversary,  or  those  which  readily  admit  a  con- 
trary inference,  is  in  this  way  to  substantiate  his 
own  case: — 

"  The  fame  o'  th*  Goddesses  I  '11  first  defend,— 
******* 
For  Juno  and •." 

In  this  she  first  lays  hold  of  the  most  silly  point. — 

Thus  much,  then,  of  proof. 

16.  Cha-       But  as  to  the  effect  of  character,  since  the  saying 
racterof  '  /     & 

•  Compare  book  ii.  chap.  25,  §  1,  2. 

•  See  the  Troades  of  Euripides,  969,  where  Hecuba,  reply- 
ing to  the  defence  made  by  Helen,  lays  hold  of  that  part  of  it 
which  seemed  to  insinuate  that  the  three  goddesses  had  been 
instrumental  to  her  abandonment  of  her  husband ; — a  point 
which,  it  will  readily  be  perceived,  was  E*r EAErKTON. 

CHAP.  XYii.]  RHETORIC.  267 

some  things  respecting  one's  self,  either  is  invidious,  the  speak- 
er involves  prolixity,  or  a  liability  to  contradiction ;  ^J^^^g^ 
and  respecting  another,  either  slander  or  rusticity ; —  by  iutoo- 
it  behoves  one  to  introduce  another  as  speaking :  the  ducing  a 
thing  which  Isocrates  does  in  the  speech  respecting  ^^  ^^' 
Philip,  and  in  the  Antidosis;  and  as  Archilochus 
conveys  reproof,  for  he  introduces  the  father  saying, 
in  an  iambic  line  respecting  his  daughter,  *^  There  is 
not  any  thing  which  may  not  be  expected,  nothing 
which  may  be  affirmed  impossible  on  oath ;"  and 
Charon,  the  mechanic,  in  that  iambic  whode  begin- 
ning is,  "I  regard  not  the  wealth  of  Gyges;"  and 
as  Sophocles  introduces  Haemon  pleading  in  behalf  of 
Antigone  to  his  father,  as  though  another  character 
were  speaking. 

But  it  is  necessary  sometimes  to  alter  the  form  of  17.  En- 
our  enthymems,  and  to  make  them  into  maxims  ^<^:  ^^®^_* 
for  example,  '*It  behoves  men  of  sense  to  come  to  slonallyto 
reconciliation   while  yet   successful ;   for  thus  will  ^  altered 
they  be  the  greatest  gainers."     But,  in  enthymematic.  ^.°^^' 
farm,  it  is  thus :  "  If  persons  ought  then  to  be  recon- 
ciled when  the  reconciliation  will  be  most  to  their 
advantage  and  profit,  they  should  be  reconciled  while 
yet  they  dre  successful." 

CHAP.  xvm. 

Of  Interrogation  and  MidmUe, 

But  respecting  interrogation,  it  is  the  happiest  time  1.  Inter- 
for  employing  it  when  an  admission  has  been  made  ^^^**JJ; 
in  such  a  way,  that  a  single  further  question  being  be  em- 
put,  an  absurdity  occurs :  thus  Pericles  asked  Lam-  P^°g®J- 
pon  respecting  the  initiation  to  the  rites  of  [Ceres]  Jj^^®*^ 
the  protectress ;  and  on  his  saying,  '^  That  it  was  not  surdity 
possible  for  him,  an  uninitiated  person,  to  hear  it,"  ^  ^«- 
—he  asked  "Whether  he  knew  himself?**  when 
»  See  book  ii.  chap.  21,  {  2. 

268  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  m, 

he  said  he  did,  [Pericles  subjoined,]  "  And  how  do 
you  know  who  are  uninitiated?" 
2.      Next  to  this  is  the  crisis,  when  [of  two  points] 
ii.  When  q^q  |g  clear,  and  it  is  manifest  to  the  party  putting 
chwion*'^'  the  question,  that  his  adversary  will  concede  the 
will  be      other;  for  one  ought,  after  having  ascertained  by 
^J^^'  inquiry  the  one  proposition,  not  to  interrogate  fur- 
ther respecting  the  point  which  is  clear,  but  state 
'  the  conclusion.     Just  as   Socrates,  when   MeletnB 
denied  that  he  believed  in  the  gods,  iCsked  *^  Whether 
he  asserted  the  being  of  any  demon  ? "     When. he  al- 
lowed that  he  had,  Socrates  asked,  *<  Whether  these 
demons  were  not  either  sons  of  the  gods,  or  some- 
thing of  divine  nature  ?"  .  And  when  he  allowed  it, 
"  Is  there,  then,"  said  he,  ^^  one  who  thinks  that  sons 
of  the  gods  exist,  and  not  the  gods  themselves  ?  " 
...        3.      Again,  when  one  is  likely  to  exhibit  the  adversary 
tie  opp^  *®  speaking  contradictions,  or  somewhat  revolting  to 
nentjnust  general  opinion. 

^i^dict  Fourthly,  when  he  may  not  be  able  to  rid  himself 
*4^  of  the  question  otherwise  than  by  a  sophistical  an- 
iv.  When  swer  :  for  if  he  answer  in  this  way,  thtit  it  is,  and  is 
our^TOv^  ^^^  ^^  P^^y  **>  ^^  partly  is  no*,-— or,  one  way  it 
nent  to  ^9  another  way  is  not;  the  hearers  hoot  him  off,  be- 
sonbisti-    ing  at  a  loss  for  his  meaning. 

swers!"  Under  any  other  circumstances  do  not  attempt  in- 

Caution     terrogation  ;  for  should  the  party  interrogated  start 

as  to  in-     gjj  objection  to  the  question,  you  appear:  to  have 

tionsf *'     ^®^  overcome :  since  it  is  not  possible  to  put  many 

questions  by  reason  of  the  imbecility  of  the  hearer. 

On  which  account  we  ought,  as  much  as  possible,  to 

compress  even  our  enthymems. 

5.  How         But  one  must  give  his  answers  to  equivocal  ques- 

aneoiSv^  tions  with  a  distinction^,  and  not  concisely;  and  to 

cal  ques-    what  seems  a  contradiction,  by  directly  offering  an 

tion.         explanation,  in  the  reply,  before  the  interrogator  can 

tincJon!^  put  the  next  succeeding  question,  or  draw  the  in- 

ii.  By  an-  ference  he  aims  at ;  for  it  is  no  difficult  thing  to 

ticipation. 

.  *  See  the  answer  of  oar  Sayiour  to  the  captious  question  of 
the  Pharisees,—"  What  thinkest  thou  P  Is  it  lawlul  to  give 
tribute  unto  Cassto,  or  not  ?  "    Matt  xxii.  17—22. 

CHAP.xviii.]        *         RHETORIC.  269 

foresee  on  what  the  speech  turns.    Be  this,  however, 
and  the  means  of  answering,  clear  to  us  from  the 
Topics.     And  as  to  a  party  drawing  his  conclusion,  6.  iii.  By 
if  his  question  produce  that  conclusion,  you  are  to  ^^^    *" 
assign  the  cause  :  as  Sophocles,  when  questioned  by 
Fisander,  "Whether  it  had  been  his  opinion,  as  it 
had  of  the  other  commissioners,  to  establish  the- four 
hundred,"  acknowledged  that  it  had. — "But  how," 
rejoined  the  other,  "seemed  it  not  to  you  to  be 
wrong  ?"     He  said  it  did.     "  Did  you  not,  then,  do 
that  which  was  wrong?"     "Yes,  forsooth,"  replied 
he,  "  for  I  had  no  better  alternative.'*     And  as  the 
Lacedaemonian,  when  called  to  an  account  respecting 
his  ephorship,  on  having  the  question  put,  "  Whether 
the  rest  appeared  to  him  to  have  perished  justly," 
said  they  did.   "  Then,"  retorted  the  other,  "  did  you 
not  enact  the  same  things  as  they  ?  "    And  when  he 
acknowledged  that  he  had,  "Would  not  you  also," 
asked  the  other,  "justly  perish?"     "No,  indeed," 
said  he,  "  for  they  did  this  on  a  bribe ;  I  did  not,  but 
merely  from  judgment."     Wherefore  one  ought  not  Noques- 
after  the  conclusion  to  put  a  further  question,  nor  to  ^^^^^ 
put,  interrogatively,  the  conclusion  itself,  unless  the  ^Se  con-^ 
truth  lies  abundantly  on  our  side.  cliision. 

But  with  respect  to  Ridicule^  inasmuch  as  it  seems  7.  Ridi- 
to  possess  a  kind  of  use  in  disputation ^  and  as  "one  JJj}®»  ^^ 
ought,"  says  Gorgias,  "  to  mar  the  grave  earnestness 
of  our  adversary  by  ridicule,  and  his  ridicule  by  sober 
earnestness,"  making  the  remark  justly  enough, — it 
has  been  stated  in  the  Poetic'  how  many  species  of 
ridicule  there  are;  whereof,  some  befit  the  gentle- 
man, others  do  not :  so  that  each  must  see  to  it  that 
he  take  that  which  befits  himself.  But  the  playing 
a  man  off  is  more  gentlemanly  than  buflfoonery ;  for 
the  former  produces  the  ridicule  for  his  own  sake, 
the  buffoon  for  that  of  another. 

•  "  Ridiculum  acri 

Fortius  et  melius  plemmque  secat  res."  Hob.  Sat.  1. 10, 14. 

»  See  book  i.  chap.  11,  §  29. 

270  ARISTOTLE'S  [book  ni. 

CHAP.  XIX. 
Of  the  Peroratian. 

1.  Pero-  The  peroration  is  composed  of  four  things :— of  get- 
™nSt8  of  ^^^S  '^^^  hearer  favourable  to  one's  self,  and  lU-diB- 
four  posed  towards  the  adversary;  and  of  amplification 
things.      and  extenuation ;  and  of  placing  the  hearer  under  the 

^  influence  of  the  passions ;  and  of  awakening  his  re- 
iii  collection. 
•  w    ^^'      ^^^  *^*®^  showing  yourself  to  be  on  the  right  side, 
must^in-    *"^^  7^^^  adversary  on  the  wrong,  it  naturally  follows 
cline  the    to  praise  and  blame,  and  to  give  the  last  finish.    And 
hearers      ^^^  ^f  ^^^  things  the  Speaker  ought  to  aim  at,  either 
ably.  "      to  show  that  he  is  good  relatively  to  them,  [the  audi- 
ence,] or  is  so  absolutely ;  and  that  the  other  party 
is  bad,  either  relatively  to  them,  or  absolutely.    And 
the  elements,  out  of  which  one  ought  to  get  up  per- 
sons as  of  such  characters,  have  been  stated ;  both 
whence  one  should  establish  them  as  bad,  and  whence 

2.  ii.  We  as  good.  Next  to  this,  these  points  having  been 
plify^"  ^^®*^y  sliown,  it  follows  naturally  to  amplify  or 
dimmish,  diminish :  for  the  facts  must  needs  be  acknowle<J^edj 

if  one  be  about  to  state  their  quantity ;  for  the  in- 
crease of  bodies  is  from  substances  previously  exist- 
ing. But  the  elements,  out  of  which  one  must 
amplify  and  diminish,  are  above  set  forth. 

3.  iii.  We  ,  Next  to  this,  the  facts  being  clear  both  as  to  their 
dte  the'  '^^t'*''^  *^^  degree,  it  follows  that  we  excite  the 
hearers,     hearer  to  passion ;  such  as  are,  pity,  terror,  anger, 

hatred,  envy,  emulation,  and  contentiousness :  the 
elements  of  these  also  have  been  stated  above. 

4.  iv.  We  So  that  it  merely  remains  to  awaken  a  recollection 
al^en  ^^  ^^**  ^^  ^^^  before  stated.  And  this  we  are  to 
the  me-  do  here,  in  the  way  in  which  some  erroneous  teach- 
»0JT'        ers  say  we  should  in  the  exordium :  for  in  order  that 

the  facts  may  be  readily  perceived,  they  bid  us  state 
them  frequently.  Now  there  [in  the  exordium]  in- 
deed we  ought  to  state  the  case  at  full,  in  order  that 
it  may  not  be  unknown  to  the  hearer  upon  what  the 

CHAP.  XIX.]  RHETORIC.  271 

triil  turns;  here,  however,  [in  the  peroration,] 
merely  the  means  by  which  it  has  been  proved,  and 
that  summarily. 

The  commencement  of  the  peroration  will  be,-  that  ^-  The 
one  has  made  good  what  he  undertook ;  so  that  it  will  §0^^^ 
be  to  be  stated,  as  well  what  one  has  adduced,  as  for  assertthat 
what  reasons.     And  it  is  expressed  either  by  means  the  or«^ 
of  a  juxtaposition  with  the  adversary's  statements ;  S^y^ 
and  draw  the  comparison  either  between  every  point  his  point, 
whatsoever,  which  both  have  stated  relative  to  the  ^®  "^^•* 
same  thing;  or  else  ^not  by  a  direct  opposition.    "He,  ^^J- 
indeed,  on  this  subject  said  so  and  so ;  but  I  so  and  ments 
90,  and  for  such  reasons.*'     Or,  by  a  kind  of  banter-  ^l^^ 
ing:    thus,  "He  said  so  and  so,  and  I  so  and  so."  ponent^ 
And,  "  What  would  he  do,  had  he  proved  this,  and  fitlier 
not  the  other  point ! "   Or  by  interrogation :— "  What  ^""bjr^S^ 
has  not  been  fully  proved  on  my  side  ? "  or,  "  What  terrogA* 
has  this   man   established?"      Either  in  this  way,  ^^^' 
then,  must  the   speaker   conclude,  or  he  must,  in 
natural  order,  so  state  his  reasoning  as  it  was  origin- 
ally stated ;  and,  again,  if  he  pleases,  he  may  state 
distinctly  that  of  the  adversary's  speech.     And,  for  6.  The 
the  close,  the  style  without  connectives  is  becoming,  Sje^ft 
in  order  that  it  maybe  a  peroration,  not  an  oration^:  suitahle 
I  have  spoken, — you  have  heard, — the  case  is  in  tothfeper- 
your  hands, — ^pronounce  your  decision  K  oration. 

>  See  the  conclusion  of  Lysias'  oration  against  Eratosthenes. 

'  It  cannot  fail  of  being  obserred  how  neatly  Aristotle  em- 
ploys this  his  concluding  chapter,  as  at  once  an  illustration  of 
the  subject  and  a  farewell  to  the  reader. 

A    BRIEF 

AET  OF  EHETOEICK5 

CONTAIKING  IN  SUBSTANCE  ALL  THAT  ABI8T0TLE  HATH  WEITTEN 
IS  HIS  THBEE  BOOKS  ON  THAT  SUBJECT. 

THOMAS  HOBBES, 

OF  MALMSBURY. 

REPRINTED  FR09C  THE  EDITION  PRINTED  AT  LONDON  Df  1681. 

A  BRIEF 

ART   OF    RHETORICK. 

BT 

THOMAS   HOBBES. 

BOOK  I.-CHAP.  I. 

That  JRhetorick  is  an  Art  consisting  not  only  in  moving 

the  Passions  of  the  Judge;  but  chiefly  in  Proofy. 

And  that  this  Art  is  Prq/Uable. 

We  see  that  all^men  naturally  are  able  in  some  sort  to  accuse 
and  exctise:  some  by  chance;  but  some  by  method.  This 
method  may  be  discovered :  and  to  discover  Method  is  all  one 
with  teaching  an  Art  If  this  Art  consisted  in  Criminations 
only,  and  the  skill  to  stir  up  the  Judges,  Anger,  Envy,  Fear, 
JPity,  or  other  affections;  a  Rhetorician  in  well  ordered  Com- 
monwealths and  States,  where  it  is  forbidden  to  digress  from 
the  cause  in  hearing,  could  have  nothing  at  all  to  say.  For 
all  these  perversions  of  the  Judge  are  beside  the  question. 
And  that  which  the  pleader  is  to  shew,  and  the  Judge  to  give 
sentence  on,  is  this  only :  *  Tis  so :  or  not  so.  The  rest  hath 
been  decided  already  by  the  Law-maker ;  who  judging  of  uni- 
versals,  and  future  things,  could  not  be  corrupted.  Besides, 
'tis  an  absurd  thing,  for  a  man  to  make  crooked  the  Ruler  he 
means  to  use. 

It  consisteth  therefore  chiefly  in  Proofs;  which  are  Infer- 
ences :  and  all  Inferences  being  Syllogismes,  a  Logician,  if  he 

T  2 

276  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

would  observe  the  difference  between  a  plain  SytlogismCy  and 
an  Enthymeme^  (which  is  a  RhetoricaU  Syll(^iisme,)  would 
make  the  best  Rhetorician,  For  all  Syllogismes  and  Inferences 
belong  properly  to  Logick;  whether  they  infer  truth  or  pro- 
bability :  and  because  without  this  Art  it  would  often  come  to 
pasSy  that  evil  men  by  the  advantage  of  natural  abilities,  would 
carry  an  evil  cause  against  a  good ;  it  brings  with  it  at  least 
this  profit,  that  making  the  pleaders  even  in  skill,  it  leaves 
the  odds  only  in  the  merit  of  the  cause.  Besides,  ordinanlj 
those  that  are  Judges,  are  neither  patient,  nor  capable  of  long 
Scientijical  proofs,  drawn  from  the  principles  through  many 
Sylhgismes;  and  therefore  had  need  to  be  instructed  by  the 
Rhetorically  and  shorter  way.  Lastly,  it  were  ridiculous,  to 
be  ashamed  of  being  vanquished  in  exercises  of  the  body,  and 
not  to  be  ashamed' of  being  inferior  in  the^  wertue  of  well  ex- 
pressing the  mind. 

CHAP.  II. 

7%e  Dejmition  ofMetlnick. 

Rhetorick,  is  that  Faculty,  by  which  we  understiEmd  what 
will  serve  our  turn,  concerning  any  Subject  to  win  belief  in 
the  hearer. 

Of  those  things  that  beget  belief ;  some  reqiiire  not  the  help 
of  Art;  as  Witnesses^  EvtcknceSy  aad^  the  like,  which  we  in- 
vent not,  but  make  use  of.;  and  some  require  Asct,  and  are  in- 
vented by  us. 

The  belief  that  proceeds  from  our  Invention,  comes  partly 
from  the  behaviour  of  the  speaker;  partly  from  ^e  passions 
of  the  hearer:  but  especially  from  the  proof »  of  what  we 
alledge. 

Proofs  9ix%  in.  Rhetorick;  eit\mr  Examples-yOV  Enthymemes, 
as  in  Logickf  Inductions^  or  SyUoyismesi  For  an  Example 
is  a  short  InductUm^  and*  an.  Enthymeme  a  short  Syllogistne; 
out  of  which  are  left  as  superfluous^  that  which  is  supposed 
to  be  necessarily  understood  by  the  hearer;  to  avoid  pro- 
lixity, and  not  to  consume  the  time  of  publick  business  need- 
lessly *. 

*  And  it  might  be  added,  in  order  to  gratify  fJie  pride  of  the  auditor 
by  leaving  it  to  him  to  supply  the  defioieney. 

CHAP,  ni.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  277 

CHAP.  HI. 
Of  ihe  several  kinds  of  Ortdiom :  <md  tf  0he  Principles  of  IBhetorich. 

In  all  Orations,  the  Hearer  does  either  hear  only ;  or  judge  also. 

If  he  hear  only,  that's  one  kind  of  Oration,  and  is  called  Z>c- 
monstrative. 

If  he  judge,  he  must  judge  either  of  that  which  is  to  come; 
or  of  that  which  is  paat.  . 

If  of  that  which  is  to  come,  there's  another  kind  of  Oration, 
and  is  called  DeMbercttive. 

If  of  that  wliieh  is  past ;  then  'tis  a  third  kind  of  Oration, 
called  Judicial, 

So  thece  are  three  kinds  of  Orattons ;  Biemonstrative,  Ju- 
dicial, Dd^erati^. 

To  which  belong  their  proper  times.  To  the  Demonstra- 
tive,  the  Present;  To  the  Judicial,  the  Pa^t ;  and  to  tiie  De- 
liberative, the  time  to  come. 

And  their  proper  Offices.  To  thfe  DdiberoMve,  Exhorta- 
tion and  Dehoviation,  To  the  Jitdiddi,  Accusastion  and  De- 
fence^    And  to  the  Demonstrative,  Praising  and  Dispraising, 

And  their  proper  ends.  To  the  DeUberative,  to  Prove  a 
thing  Profitable,  or  Unprqfitahle,  To  the  JvxSicial,  Just,  or  Un- 
just,    To  the  Demonstratifoe,  Honourable,  or  Dishonourable. 

The  Principles  of  Rhetorich  out  of  which  Enihymemes  are 
to  be  drawn ;  are  the  common  Opinions  that  men  have  con- 
cerning Profitable,  and  Unprofitable ;  Just,  and  Unjust; 
HonourahlCi  and  Dishonourable;  which  aie  the  points  in  the 
several  kinds  of  Orations  questionable.  For  as  in  Logick,  where 
eaiain  and  infallible  knowledge  is  the  eoope  of  our  proof,  the 
Principles  must  be  aU  n^aUible  Trutks :  so  in  Rhetorich  tiie 
Principles  must  be  common  Opinions,  such  as  the  Judge  is 
already  possessed  with :  because  the  end  of  Rhetorich  is  vic- 
tory ;  which  consists  in  having  gottea  Belief. 

And  because  nothing  is  Prq^table,  UnprofitaMe,  Jttst,  Un- 
jtist.  Honourable,  or  Dishonourable,  but  what  has  been  done, 
or  is  to  be  done;  and  nothing  is  to  be  done,  that  is  not  possible: 
and  because  there  be  degrees  of  Profitable,  Unprofitable,  Jtist, 
Unfust,  Honourable,  and  Dishonourable;  an  Orator  must  be 
ready  in  o^ier  Principles ;  namely,  of  what  is  done  and  not 

278  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

done;  possible  and  not  possible;  to  come  and  not  to^ome;  and 
what  is  Greater^  and  what  is  Lesser;  bgth  in  general,  and 
particularly  applyed  to  the  thing  in  question  ;  as  what  is  more 
and  few,  generally ;  and  what  is  more  profitable^  and  less  pro- 
Jitahle^  etc.  particularly. 

CHAP.  IV. 

Of  the  Subject  of  Deliberatives  ;  and  the  Abilities  that  are  required 
of  him,  that  will  deliberjate  of  Business  of  State. 

In  Deliberatives  there  are  to  be  considered  the  Stibject,  where- 
in, and  the  Ends  whereto  the  Orator  exhorteth,  or  from  which 
he  dehorteth. 

The  Subject  is  always  something  in  our  own  power,  the 
knowledge  whereof  belongs  not  to  Ehetorick,  but  for  the  most 
part  to  the  Politicks ;  and  maybe  referred  in  a  manner  to 
these  five  heads. 

1 .  Of  levying  of  Monet/.  To  which  point  he  that  will  speak 
as  he  ought  to  do,  ought  to  know  before-hand,  the  revenue  of 
the  State,  how  much  it  is,  and  wherein  it  consisteth  ;  and  also 
how  great  are  the  necessary  charges  and  expences  of  the  same. 
This  knowledge  is  gotten  partly  by  a  man's  own  experience, 
partly  by  relations,  and  accounts  in  writing. 

2.  Of  Peace  and  War,  Concerning  which  the  Counsellor 
or  Deliberator,  ought  to  know  the  strength  of  the  Common- 
wealth ;  how  much  it  both  now  is,  and  hereafter  may  be :  and 
wherein  that  power  consisteth.  Which  knowledge  is  gotten, 
partly  by  experience,  and  relations  at  home ;  and  partly  by  the 
sight  of  wars,  and  of  their  events  abroad. 

3.  Of  the  Safeguard  of  the  Country.  Wherein  he  only  is 
able  to  give  counsell,  that  knowdsthe  forms,  and  number,  and 
places  of  the  Garrisons.  \ 

4.  Of  Provision.  Wherdn  to  li^peak  well,  it  is  necessary 
for  a  man  to  know  what  is  sufficient  to  maintain  the  State ; 
what  Commodities  they  have  at  home  growing;  what  they 
must  letch  in  through  ^need ;  and  what*  they  may  carry  out 
through  abundance. 

5.  Of  making  Laws.  To  which  is  necessary  so  much  Po- 
litical^ or  Civil  Philosophy^  as  to  know  what  are  the  several 
kinds  of  Governments  ;  and  by  what  means,  either  from  with- 

CHAP,  v.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  279 

out  or  fcgim  witliin,  each  of  those  kinds  is  preserved,  or  de- 
stroyed. And  this  knowledge  is  gotten,  partly  by  observing 
the  several  Governments  in  times  past,  by  History  ;  and  part- 
ly by  observing  the  Government  of  the  times  present  in  se- 
veral Nations,  by  Travel. 

So  that  fo  him  that  will  speak  in  a  Councell  of  State,  there 
is  necessary  this ;  History ^  Sight  of  TFars,  Travel,  Know- 
ledge of  the  Revenue,  Expences,  Forces,  Havens,  Garrisons, 
Wares,  and  Provisions  in  the  State  he  lives  in ;  and  what  is 
needful  for  that  State,  either  to  export  or  import 

CHAP.  V. 

Cfthe  Ends  which  the  Orator  in  Deliberatives,  propoundeth,  whereby 
to  exhort,  or  dehort. 

An  Orator  in  Exhorting  always  propoundeth  Felicity,  or  some 
part  of  Felicity  to  he  attained  by  the  actions  he  exhorteth  unto  : 
and  in  Dehortation  the  contrary. 

By  FeUcity,  is  meant  commonly.  Prosperity  with  vertue,  or 
a  continual  content  of  the  life  with  surety.  And  the  parts  of 
it  are  such  things  as  we  call  good^  in  body,  mind,  or  fortune ; 
such  as  these  that  follow. 

1.  NobiUty.  Which  to  a  State  or  Nation  is,  to  have  been 
antient  inhabitants  ;  and  to  have  had  most  antiently,  and  in 
most  number,  famous  Generals-  in  the  Wars,  or  men  famous 

for  such  things  asfaU  under  emulation.  'And  to  a  private  man, 
to  have  been  descended  lawfully  of  a  Family,  which  h&th  yielded 
most  antiently,  and  in  most  number,  men  knoum  to  the  World 
for  vertue,  riches,  or  any  thing  in  general  estimation. 

2.  Many  and  good  Children.  Which  is  also  publick  and 
private.  Publick,  when  there  is  much  youth  in  the  State  en- 
duedwith  vertue,  (namely,  of  the  body,  stature,  beauty,  strength, 
and  dexterity :  Of  the  mind,  valour,  and  temperance).  PW- 
vate,  when  a  man  ha^  many  such  Children,  both  Male^  and 
Female.  The  vertues  commonly  respected  in  Women,  are  of 
the  body,  Beauty,  and  Stature ;  Of  the  mind,  Temper^ce,  and 
Houswifery,  without  Sordidness. 

3.  Riches.  Which  is.  Money,  Cattel,  Lands,  Houshold- 
stuffe  ;  with  the  power  to  dispose  of  them. 

4*   Glory.  Which  is,  the  reputation  of  Vertue,  or  of  the 

280  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

possession  of  jf^ch  ihrngs  ,as  ail,  or  most  snefst^or  fpise  men 
desire,  * 

5.  Honowr,  TVihich  is,  the  gHory  ofhen^ttfig,  or  heimg  able 
to  benefit  others.  To  Aefiefit  others,  is  fo  /contribute  somewhat, 
not  easily  had,  to  another  marCs  safety,  or  riches.  The  parts 
of  Jibno^r  SLve,  JSacrifices,  Mowwment^^  Rewards,  DecUc^Uion 
of  places,  Precedence,  JS^ulchres,  Statues,  jatdfliqk  Peai^sionSy 
Adorations,  Presents, 

6.  ffealth.  Which  is  the  ieing  free  from  I)i^efitse^y  wjiik 
strength  to  use  the  body. 

7.  Beauty,  Which  is  to  different  Ages  different.  To 
Youth,  strength  of  body,  and  sweetness  of  aspect.  To  Ftdl 
Men,  strength  of  body  fit  for  the  Wars,  and  Countenance  sweet, 
with  a  mixture  of  Terror.  To  Old  Me^,  strength  enough  fojr 
necessary  labours,  with  a  Countenance  not  displeoMng, 

8.  Strength,  Which  is  the  ability  to  move  any  thing  at 
pleasure  qftlie  Mover.  To  move,  is  to  puff,  to  put  off,  io  l^t, 
to  thrust  dmjoHy  to  press  together, 

9.  Stature,  Which  is  th^  just,  ^he^  .a  oPAt^n  m  height^ 
breadth,  and  thickness  qfhody  doth  so  exceed  &ie  mos^,  .as  ne- 
vertheless it  be  no  hindrance  to  the  quickness  qfhis  moiliQ», 

10.  Go^9kd  Jig^'  Whicb  is,  ifta^  v^Wh  fiomfis  loJtfi,  and 
with  the  least  trouble, 

1 1 .  Ma^y  and  ^ootf  friend^,,  l^^ch  ^9,  to  hqtm  many  fbat 
will  do  for  his  sake  tho^t  which  they  .thinh  will  be  for  his  good. 

12.  Prosperity.  Which  is,  to  hme  all,  or  th^  most,  or  (he 
greatest  of  diose  goods. wjmh  we  ajttributfi  to  Forimm. 

13.  Vertae,  Which  is  tJl^e^  to  ibe  ^Bfinod^  ^hssi  we  apeak 
of  PrOiise,, 

These  ^re  tbe  grounds  &om  whence  we  ea^kort, 
Ddwrtqkt^n  is  from  the  contran^es  .of  tbeae. 

cHA^p,  yi, 

jOfthe  Colours  or  common  Opinions  concerning  Good  and  Evil, 

In  Ddii^aUves,  t^  PiiacipUs,  qt  Elements  £rom  whence  we 
draw  our  Proofs,  are  common  Opinions  concerning  Good  and 
Evil,  And  these  Principles  are  either  Absolute,  or  Com- 
parative, And  those  that  are  Absolute,  are  either  Disputable, 
or  Indisputable. 

CHAP,  vx]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  281 

Th^Indi8put(dfle  Principles  sM^es^oh  9s  :()i(969,: 

Good,  is  that  whicti  we  lave  for  it  scdf. 

And  that,  for  which  we  love  somewhat  ^^e^. 

And  that  which  all  things  desire.. 

And  that  to  every  man  which  his  reason  dictates. 

And  that,  whic^h  when  we.haye,  wip :W^  well,, or  satisfied. 

And  that  which  satisfies. 

And  the  Cause  or  Effect  of  any  ^f  tbesf^. 

And  that  which  preserves  any  <3f  these. 

And  that  which  keeps  off,  or  d^sj^ys  ,tl\e  eoQti^^iiy  of  fmy 
of  these. 

Also  to  take  the  Good,  find  reject  the  Evil,  is  Good, 

And  to  take  the  greater  Goods  rather  than  the  less ;  and 
the  lesser  Evil,  rather  than  the  greater. 

Further,  all  Vertues  are  Good. 

And  Pleasure. 

And  all  things  Beautiful. 

And  Justice,  Valour,  Temp^ance,  Magnammity,  Magnifi- 
cence ;  and  other  like  Habits. 

And  Health,  3eanty,  Strength,  «tc. 

And  Riches.  * 

And  Friends. 

And  Honour,  and  Glory. 

And  Ability  to  say  or  do ;  also  Towardliness,  Will,  and  the 
like. 

And  whatsoever  Art,  or  Science. 

And  Life. 

And  whatsoever  is  Just. 

The  DisptUabU  Principles  are  sudh  as  fodlow : 

That  is  Good,  whose  contrary  is  EvU. 

And  whose  contrary  is  Good  for  our  JSnenues. 

And  whose  contrary  our  En^nies  ace  glad  >ot 
•  And  of  which  there  cannot  be  too  much. 

And  upon  which  much  labour  And  cost  hath  been  bestowed. 

And  that  which  many  desire. 

And  that  wiiieh  is  praised. 

And  that  which  even  our  Enemies  and  evil  men  praise. 

And  what  good  we  prefer. 

And  what  we  do  advise. 

And  that  which  is  possible,  is  Good  (to  undertake). 

And  that  which  is  easie. 

282  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

And  that  "which  depends  on  our  own  Will.  , 

And  that  which  is  proper  for  us  to  do. 

And  what  no  man  else  can  do. 

And  whatsoever  is  Extraordinary. 

And  what  is  suitable. 

And  that  which  wants  a  little  of  being  at  an  end. 

And  what  we  hope  to  master. 

And  what  we  are  fit  for.   . 

And  what  evil  men  do  not. 

And  what  we  love  to  do. 

CHAP.  VII. 

Of  the  Colours,  or  common  Opinions  concerning  Good  and  JSvU, 
comparatively. 

The  Colours  of  Good  comparatively  depend  partly  upon  the 
following  Definitions  of  Comparatives, 

1.  More,  is  so  much,  and  somewhat  besides, 

2.  Less,  is  that,  which  and  somewhat  else  is  so  much, 

.3.  Greater  and  more  in  number  are  laid  only  Comparatively 
to  Less,  Bnd  Fewer  in  number,  • 

4.  Great  and  Little,  Many  and  Few,  are  taken  Compara- 
tively to  the  Most  of  the  same  kind.  So  that  Great  and  Many, 
is  that  which  exceeds;  Little  and  Few,  is  that  which  is  ex 
needed  by  the  Most  of  the  same  kind. 

Partly  from  the  precedent  Definitions  of  Good  absolutely. 

Common  Opinions  concerning  Good 
Comparatively,  then,  are  these. 

Greater  Good  is  Many,  than  fewer,  or  one  of  those  many. 

And  Greater  is  the  kind,  in  which  the  greatest  is.  greater 
than  the  greatest  of  another  kind.  And  greater  is  that  Good 
than  another  good,  whose  kind  is  greater  than  another's  kind. 

And  Greater  is  that  from  which  another  Good  follows; 
than  the  Good  which  follows. 

And  of  two  which  exceed  a  third,  Grreater  is  that  which, 
exceeds  it  most. 

And  that  which  causes  the  greater  Good, 

And  that  which  proceeds  from  a  greater  Grood, 

And  Grreater  is  that  which  is  chosen  for  it  self,  than  that 
which  is  chosen  from  somewhat  else. 

CHAP.  VII.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.'  283 

And  tiK  end  Greater  than  that  which  is  not  the  end. 

And  that  which  less  needs  other  things,  than  that  which 
more. 

And  that  which  is  independent,  than  that  which  is  depend- 
ent of  another. 

And  the  Beginning,  than  not  the  Beginning. 

[Seeing  the  Beginning  is  a  greater  Goody  or  Evil^  than 
that  which  is  not  the  Beginning ;  and  the  End,  than  th^t 
which  is  not  the  End ;  One  may  argue  from  this  Colour 
both  ways :  as  Leodama^  against  ChahriaSy  would  have 
the  Actor  more  to  blame  than  the  Advisor ;  and  gainst 
CallistratuSy  the  Advisor  more  than  the  Actor.] 

And  the  Cause,  than  not  the  Cause. 

And  that  which  hath  a  greater  Beginning  or  Cause. 

And  the  Beginning,  or  Cause  of  a  greater  Good  or  Evil, 

And  that  which  is  Scarce,  greater  than  that  which  is  Plen- 
tiful ;  because  harder  to  get. 

And  that  which  is  Plentiful,  than  that  which  is  Scarce; 
because  oftener  in  Use. 

And  that  which  is  easie,  than  that  which  is  hard. 

And  that  whose  Contrary  is  greater. 

And  that  whose  Want  is  greater. 

And  Vertue  than  not  Vertue,  a  greater  Grood,  Vice,  than 
not  Vice,  a  greater  Evil. 

And  greater  Goody  or  Evil  is  that,  the  effects  whereof  are 
more  Honourable  or  more  Shameful. 

And  the  effects  of  greater  Vertues,  or  Vices. 

And  the  Excess  whereof  is  more  tolerabl  ,  a  greater  Good. 

And  those  things  which  may  with  more  honour  be  desired. 

And  the  desire  of  better  things. 

And  those  things  whereof  the  Knowledge  is  better. 

And  the  Knowledge  of  better  things. 

And  that  which  wise  men  prefer. 

And  that  which  is  in  better  men. 

And  that  which  better  men  chuse. 

And  that  which  is  more,  than  that  which  is  less  delightful. 

And  that  which  is  more,  than  that  which  is  less  honourable. 

And  that  which  we  would  have  for  our  selves  ana  Friends, 
&  greater  Good;  and  the  contrary  a  greater  Evil. 

And  that  which  is  Lasting,  than  that  which  is  not  Lasting. 

And  that  which  is  Firm,  than  that  which  is  not  Firm. 

284  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [boo^  i. 

And  what  manj  desire,  than  what  few.  * 

And  what  the  Adversary,  or  Judge  oonfeaaeth  .to  he  gr,eaier^ 
in  greater. 

And  Common  than  not  Common. 

And  not  Common  than  Common. 

And  what  is  more  Xtaudable. 

And  that  which  is  more  Honoured,  a  .greater  Good. 

And  that  wJiich  is  more  Punished,  a  greater  JEvil. 

And  both  Good  and  £lvU  divided  Ihan  undivided,  isppear 
greater. 

And  Compounded  than  Simple,  appear  gtteater. 

And  that  which  is  done  with  [Opportunity,  Age,  Place, 
Time,  Means  disadvantagious,  grecOer  <than  .otherwise. 

And  that  which  is  natural,  than  that  which  is  attained  unto. 

And  the  same  part  of  that  which  ie  great,  than  of  ^at 
which  is  less. 

And  that  which  is  nearest  to  the  end  designed. 

And  that  which  is  Chod  or  Enii  to  ones  aelf^  than  jihat 
which  is  simply  so. 

And  possible,  than  not  possible. 

And  that  which  comes  toward  the  end  of  our  Life. 

And  that  which  we  do  really,  than  that  which  iwe  do  for  show. 

And  that  which  we  wo^ld  be,  rather  than  wiiat  we  would 
seem  to  be. 

And  that  which  is  good  for  more  purposes,  is  the  greater 
Good, 

And  that  which  serves  us  in  great  necessity. 

And  that  which  is  joyiied  with  less  trcMible. 

And  that  whioh  is  joyned  with  moiTe  delight. 

And  of  the  two,  that  whieli  added  to  a  Idiird,  makes  the 
whole  the  greater. 

And  that  which  having,  we  are  more  sensible  of. 

And  in  every  thing,  that  which  we  most  esteem. 

CHAP-  vm. 

4        Of  the  several  Kinds  of  Governments, 

Because  ITortation  and  Dehortation  concern  the  Common- 
wealth, and  are  drawn  from  the  Elements  of  Good  a«d  Eml; 
as  we  have  spoken  of  tb^n  already  in  the  Abstr€Uit,  so  we 

CHAP.  VIII.]  ART  OF  RHETOMCK.  285 

must  speak  of  them'  also  in  the  Concrete;  that  is,  of  what  is 
Good  or  Evil  to  each  sort  of  Commonwealth  in  special. 

The  Crovemment  of  a  Commonwealth,  is  ^%h&v  Democracy, 
or  Aristocracy,  or  Oligarchy,  or  Monarchy, 

Democracy  is  that,  whei^ein  all  men  with  equal  rights  are 
preferred  to  the  highest  Magistracy  by  Lot 

Aristocracy  is  that,  wherein  the  highest  Magistrate  is 
chosen  out  of  those;  that  had  the  best  education,  according  to 
what  the  Laws  prescribe  fbr  best. 

Oligarchy  is  that,  where  the  highest  Magistrate  is  ctiosen 
for  w^adf^. 

Monarchy  is  that,  wherein  one  man  hath  the  Grovemment  of 
all ;  which  Government,  if  he  limit  by  Law,  is  called  King- 
dom; if  by  his  own' will;  Tyranny. 

The  end  of  Democracy,  or  the  Peoples  Government,  is 
lAibeny. 

The^end  of  Oligarchy,  is  the  riches  of  those  that  govern. 
The  end  of  Aristocracy  is  good  Laws,  and  goiod  ordering  of 
the  City. 

The  etod  oi  Mimarehy,  or  Kinjgs^  i^  the  safety  of  the  People, 
and  conservation  of  his  own  Authority. 

Gooc?"  therefore,  in  each  sort  of  Govemm&nt  is  that  which 
condttceth  to  these  their  ends;  ' 

And  because  belief  is  not  gotten  only  by  proofs,  but  also 
from  manners;  the  manners  of  each  sort  of  Commonwealth 
ought  to  be  well  imderstood  by  him  that  undertaketh  to  per- 
swade  or  diswade  in  matter  of  State.  Tiieb^  manners  may  be 
known  by  their  designs;  and  their  designs^'hy'^mr  ends;  and 
their  endshy  what  we  see  them  ti&e  jUeasuf^e  im  But  of  this 
more  accurately  in  the  Politicks. 

CHAP.  IX. 

Of  the  Colours  of  ^onourahle  and  IHshonouralile. 

In  a  Demonstrative  OratUm,  the  subject  whereof  is  Praise, 
or  Dispraise;  the  proofs  are  to  be  drawn  from  the  Elements 
oi' Honotirable  snd' Dishonourable. 

In  this  place  we  anticipate  the  secotid  way  of  gefHng  be- 
lief;  which  is  from  the  manners  of  the  Speaker.  For  P^ise, 
whether  it  come  in  as  the  principal  business,  or  upon  the  by, 
depends  still  upon  the  same  Principles.     Which  are  these : 

.286  •     HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book   i. 

Honourable,  is  that,  which  we  love  for  itself,  and  is  withal 
laudable. 

And  that  Good,  which  pleaseth  us  onlj  because  'tis  Grood. 

And  Virtue. 

Vertiie  is  the  faculty  of  getting  and  preserving  that  which 
is  Grood ;  and  the  faculty  of  doing  many,  and  great  things 
well. 

The  kinds  of  it  are  these ; 

1.  Justice;  which  is  a  Vertue  whereby  every  man  obtains 
\fhat  by  Law  is  his. 

2.  Fortitude;  which  is  a  Vertue  by  which  a  man  carries 
himself  Honourably^  and  according  to  the  Laws,  in  time  of 
danger. 

3.  Temperance;  which  is  a  Vertue  whereby  a  man  Grovems 
himself  in  matter  of  pleasure  according  to  the  Law. 

4.  Liberality;  which  is  a  Vertue,  by  which  we  benefit 
others  in  matter  of  money. 

5.  Magnanimity  ;  which  is  a  Fer^e,  by  which  a  man  is  apt 
to  do  great  benefits. 

6.  Magnificence  ;  which  is  a  Vertue,  by  which  a  man  is  apt 
to  be  at  great  cost. 

7.  Prudence;  which  is  an  Intellectual  Vertue,  by  which  a 
man  is  able  to  deliberate  weU  concerning  any  Good  leading  to 
Felicity. 

And  Honourable,  are  the  Causes,  and  effects  of  things 
Honourable, 

And  the  Works  of  Vertue. 

And  the  signs  of  Vertue. 

And  those  actions,  the  reward  whereof  is  Honour, 

And  the  reward  whereof  is  rather  Honour,  than  Money. 

And  that  which  we  do  not  for  our  own  sates. 

And  what  we  do  for  our  Countries  good,  neglecting  our  own. 

And  those  things  are  Honourable,  which  good  of  them- 
selves, are  not  so  to  the  Owner. 

And  those  things  which  happen  to  the  dead,  rather  than  to 
the  living. 

And  what  we  do  for  other  men,  especially  for  Benefactors. 

And  b^towing  of  Benefits. 

And  the  contrary  of  those  things  we  are  ashamed  of. 

And  those  things  which  men  strive  for  earnestly,  but  with- 
out fear  of  Adversary. 

CHAP.  IX.]  ART  OF  BHETOBICK.  287 

And  of  the  more  Honourable  and  better  men,  the  Vertues 
are  more  Honourable.  . 

And  more  Honourable  are  the  vertues  that  tend  to  other 
mens  benefit,  than  those  which  tend  to  ones  own. 

And  Honourable  are  those  things  which  are  Just.    \ 

And  Eevenge  is  Honourable, 

And  Victory. 

And  Honour. 

And  Monuments. 

And  those  things  which  happen  not  to  the  living. 
.   And  things  that  excel. 

And  what  none  can  do  but  we. 

And  possessions  we  reap  no  profit  bj. 

And  those  things  which  are  had  in  honour  particularly  in 
several  places. 

And  the  signs  of  praise. 

And  to  have  nothing  of  the  servile,  mercenary,  or  mechanick. 

And  that  which  seems  Honourable  ;  Namely  such  as  follow. 

Vices  confining  upon  Vertue. 

And  the  extreams  of  Vertues. 

And  what  the  Auditors  think  Honoutable. 

And  that  which  is  in  estimation. 

And  that  which  is  done  according  to  custom. 

Besides,  in  a  Demonstrative  Oration^  the  Orator  must  shew, 
that  he  whom  he  praiseth,  did  what  he  praiseth  unconstrain- 
edly,  and  willingly. 

And  he  does  so,  who  does  the  same  often. 

Prcdse,  is  speech,  declaring  the  magnitude  of  a  Vertue, 
Action,  or  Work, 

But  to  praise  the  Work  from  the  Vertue  of  the  Worker,  is 
a  circular  proof. 

To  Magnify  and  to  Praise,  differ  in  themselves,  as  Felicity 
and  Vertue,  For  Praise  declares  a  mans  Vertue  ;  and  Mag^ 
nifying  declares  his  Felicity, 

Praise  is  a  kind  of  inverted  Precept,  For  to  say.  Do  it  be- 
cause 'tis  good,  is  a  Precept,  But  to  say,  He  is  good  because 
he  did  it,  is  Praise. 

An  Orator  in  Praising  must  also  use  the  forms  of  Ampliji- 
cation  ;  such  as  these : 

He  was  the  first  that  did  it. 

The  only  man  that  did  it. 

288  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OP  THE  [book  i. 

The  special  man  that  did  it. 

He  did  it  with  disadvantage  of  time. 

He  did  it  with  little  help; 

He  was  the  oau8e>  that  the  Law  ordained  Rewards'  and 
Honours  for  such  Actions. 

Further,  he  that  will  praise  a*  Man,  must  compare  him 
with  others ;  and  his  actions  with  the  actions  of  dtheirs  ; 
especially  with  such  as  are  renowned. 

And  Amplification  is  more  proper  to  a  IhmonstrcMv^  Ota- 
tiouy  than  to  any  other.  For  here  the  Actions  are  confessed  ; 
and  the  Orators  part  is  only  this,  to  oontkifotite  unto  tHem 
Magnitude  and  Luster. 

chap:  X*. 

OfAccuaaHon  and  Defence,  with  tko  BeflnilSiofi  oflrijt^. 

In  a  Judicial  Oraiiofiy  whidh  c(»8ilits  in  Acinisaiion'  and  De- 
fence, the  thing  to  be  proved  is^  thiit  Injwry  has  beendoife  : 
and  the  heads  from  whence  the  proo&  are  to  bedraw^,  are 
these  three : 

1.  The  causes  that  move  to  Injury^ 

2.  The  Persons  apt  to  do  Injury. 

3.  The  Persons  obnoxious,  or  apt  to  suffer'/«/ti^. 

An  Injury  is  a  voluntary  offexiding;  of  another  man  contra- 
ry to  the  Law. 

Voluntary  is  that  which  a  man  does  witb  knoWledgjB,  and 
without  compulsion. 

The  causes  of  Voluntary  Actions  are  Intemperance,  and  a 
Vicious  disposition  concerning  things  Desirable.  As  the  Co- 
vetous man  does  against  the  Law,  out  of  an  intemperate  desire 
of  Money. 

All  Actions  proceed  ^ther  from  tiie  doers  disposition,  or 
not. 

Those  that  proceed  not  from  the  Doers  disposition  are  such 
as  he  does  by  Chanccyhj  Compulsion^  or  by  Natural  necessity. 

Those  that  proceed  from  the  Doers  disposition,  are  such  as 
he  does  by  CtMtom,  or  upon  Premediiationy  or  in  Angery  or 
out  of  Intemperance. 

By  Chance  are  said  to  be  done  those  things  whereof  neither 
the  Cause,  nor  the  Scope  is  evident;  and  which  are  donenei- 

CHAP.  XI.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  289 

ther  orderly,  nor  always,  nor  most  commonly  after  the  same 
manner. 

By  Nature  are  said  to  be  done  those  things,  the  Causes 
whereof  are  in  the  Doer ;  and  are  done  orderly,  and  always, 
or  for  the  most  part  after  the  same  manner. 

By  Compulsion  are  done  those  things,  which  are  against 
the  Appetite,  and  Ordination  of  the  Doer. 

By  Custom  those  Actions  are  said  to  be  done,  the  Cause 
whereof  is  this,  that  the  Doer  has  done  them  often. 

Upon  Premeditation  are  said  to  be  done  those  things  which 
are  done  for  profit,  as  the  End,  or  the  way  to  the  End. 

In  Anger  are  said  to  be  done  those  things  which  are  done 
with  a  purpose  to  Revenge. 

Out  of  Intemperance  are  said  to  be  done  those  things  which 
are  delightful. 

In  sum,  every  Voluntary  Action  tends  eith^  to  Profit  or 
Pleasure. 

The  Colours  oi  Profitable  are  already  set  down. 

The  Colours  of  that  which  is  Pleasing  follow  next. 

CHAP.  XI. 

Of  the  Colours y  or  Commit  Opinions  concerning  Pleasure. 

PLEASURE  is  a  sudden  and  sensible  motion  of  the  Soul, 
towards  that  which  is  NaturaL 

Grief  is  the  Contrary. 

Pleasant  therefore  is  that,  which  is  the  cause  of  such  motion. 

And  to  return  to  ones  own  Nature. 

And  Customes. 

And  those  things  that  are  not  violent. 

Unpleasant  are  those  things,  which  proceed  from  Necessity, 
as  Cares,  Study,  Contentions.  The  contrary  whereof.  Ease, 
Remission  from  Labour  and  Care :  also,  Play,  Rest,  Sleep,  are 
Pleasant. 

Pleasant  also  is  that,  to  which  we  have  an  appetite. 

Also  the  appetites  themselves,  if  they  be  sensual ;  as  Thirst, 
Hunger,  and  Lust. 

Also  those  things  to  which  we  have  an  appetite  upon  per- 
swasion  and  Reason. 

290  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

And  those  things  we  remember,  whether  they  pleased,  or 
displeased,  then  when  they  were  present. 

And  the  things  we  hope  for. 

And  Anger. 

And  to  be  in  Love. 

And  Revenge. 

And  Victory.     Therefore, 

Also  contentious  Games ;  as  Tables,  Ghess»  Dice,  Tennis,  etc. 

And  Hunting. 

And  Suits  in  Law. 

And  Honour  and  Reputation  amongst  men  in  Honour  and 
Reputation. 

And  to  Love. 

And  to  be  Beloved  and  Respected. 

And  to  be  Admired. 

And  to  be  Flattered. 

And  a  Flatterer :  (for  he  seems  both  to  love  and  admire). 

And  the  same  thing  often. 

And  Change,  or  Variety. 

And  what  we  return  to  afresh. 

And  to  learn. 

And  to  admire. 

And  to  do  Good. 

And  to  receive  Grood. 

And  to  help  up  again  one  that's  fallen. 

And  to  finish  that  which  is  unperfect. 

And  Imitation. 

And  therefore  the  Art  of  Painting. 

And  the  Art  of  Carving  Images. 

And  the  Art  of  Poetry. 

And  Pictures  and  Statues. 

And  other  Mens  Dangers,  so  they  be  near. 

And  to  have  escaped  hardly. 

And  things  of  a  kind  please  one  another. 

And  every  one  himseUl 

And  one's  own  pleases  him. 

And  to  bear  Sway. 

And  to  be  thought  Wise. 

And  to  dwell  upon  that  which  he  is  good  at. 

And  ridiculous  Actions,  Sayings,  and  Persons. 

CHAP.  XII.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  *291 

CHAP.  XII. 

Presumptions  of  Injury  drawn  from  the  Persons  ihat  doit:  or 

Common  Opinions  concerning  the  Aptitude  of  Persons 

'  to  do  Injury. 

Op  the  Causes  which  move  to  Injury,  namely,  Profit  and 
Pleasure,  has  been  already  spoken,  Chap,  6,  7,  11. 

It  follows  next  to  speak  of  the  Persons,  that  are  apt  to  do 
Injury. 

The  Doers  of  Injury  are, 

Such  as  think  they  can  do  it. 

And  such  as  think  to  be  undiscovered  when  they  have 
•  done  it. 

And  such  as  think,  though  they  be  discovered,  they  shall 
not  be  called  in  question  for  it. 

And  such  as  think,  though  they  be  called  in  question  for  it, 
that  their  Mulct  will  be  less  than  their  Gain,  which  either 
themselves  or  their  Friends  receive  by  the  Injury. 
Able  to  do  Injury  are, 

Such  as  are  Eloquent. 

And  such  as  are  practised  in  Business. 

And  such  as  have  skill  in  Process. 

And  such  as  have  many  Friends. 

And  Rich  Men. 

And  such  as  have  Rich  Friends;  or  Rich  Servants;  or 
Rich  Partners. 

Undiscovered  when  they  have  done  it,  are. 

Such  as  are  not  apt  to  commit  the  crimes  whereof  they  are 
accused :  as  Feeble  Men,  Slaughter :  Poor,  and  not  Beautiful 
Men,  Adultery. 

And  such  as  one  would  think  could  not  chuse  but  be  dis- 
covered. 

And  such  as  do  Injuries^  whereof  there  hath  been  no 
Example. 

And  such  as  have  none,  or  many  enemies. 

And  such  as  can  easily  conceal  what  they  do. 

And  such  as  have  some  body  to  transfer  the  fault  upon. 
They  that  do  Injury  openly,  are, 

Such  whose  friends  have  been  Injured. 
u  2 

292  HOBBES'  BIUEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

And  such  as  have  the  Judges  for  friends.  ' 

And  such  as  can  escape  their  Trjal  at  Law. 

And  such  as  can  put  off  their  Tryal.  ^ 

And  such  as  can  corrupt  the  Judges. 

And  such  as  can  avoid  the  payment  of  their  Fine. 
'     And  such  as  can  defer  the  payment. 

And  such  as  cannot  pay  at  all. 

And  such  as  by  the  Injury  get  manifestly,  much,  and  pre- 
sently ;  when  the  Fine  is  uncertain,  little,  and  to  come. 

And  such  as  get  by  the  Injury ^  money ;  by  the  penalty, 
shame  only. 

And  such  on  the  Contrary,  as  get  honour  by  the  Injury^  and 
suffer  the  mulct  of  money,  only,  or  banishment,  or  the  like. 

And  such  as  have  often  escaped,  or  been  undiscovered. 

And  such  as  have  often  attempted  in  vain. 

And  such  as  consider  present  pleasure,  more  than  pain  to 
come ;  and  so  intemperate  men  are  apt  to  do  Injury, 

And  such  as  consider  pleasure  to  come,  more  than  prest^nt 
pain ;  and  so  temperate  men  are  apt  to  do  Injury. 

And  such  as  may  seem  to  have  done  it  by  Fortune,  Nature, 
Necessity,  or  Custom ;  and  by  Error,  rather  than  by  Injustice. 

And  such  as  have  means  to  get  pardon. 

And  such  as  want  Necessaries,  as  poor  men :  or  Unneces- 
saries,  as  rich  men.  ' 

And  such  as  are  of  very  good,  or  very  bad  Reputation. 

CHAP.  xm. 

Presumptions  of  Injury  drawn  from  the  Persons  that  suffer^  and  from 
the  Matter  of  the  Lijury, 

Of  those  that  do  Injury,  and  why  they  do  it,  it  hath  been 
already  spoken. 

Now  of  the  persons  that  suffer,  and  of  the  Matter  wherein 
they  suffer,  the  common  Opinions  are  these  : 
Persons  obnoxious  to  Injury  are. 

Such  as  have  the  things  that  we  want,  either  as  necessary, 
or  as  delightful. 

And  such  as  are  far  from  us. 

And  such  as  are  at  hand. 

And  such  as  are  unwary,  and  credulous. 

CHAP,  xni.]  ART  OP  RHETORICK.  293 

And  such  as  are  lazj. 

And  such  as  are  modest 

And  such  as  have  swallowed  many  Injuries. 

And  such  as  have  Injured  often  before. 

And  such  as  never  before. 

And  such  as  are  in  our  danger. 

And  such  as  are  ill  beloved  generaUj. 

And  such  as  are  envjed» 

And  our  Friends. 

And  our  Enemies. 

And  such  as,  wanting  friends,  have  no  great  ability  either 
in  speech  or  action. 

And  such  as  ihaU  be  losers  by  going  to  Law :  as,  Strangers, 
and  Workmen. 

And  such  as  have  done  the  Injuries  they  suffer. 

And  such  as  have  committed  a  crime,  or  would  have  done, 
or  are  about  to  do. 

And  such  as,  by  doing  them  an  Injury,  we  shall  gratifie 
our  friends  or  superiours. 

And  such,  whose  friendship  we  have  newly  left,  and  accuse. 

And  such  as  another  would  do  the  Injury  to,  if  we  should 
not 

And  such  as  by  Injuring^  we  get  greater  means  of  doing 
good. 

The  Matters  wherein  men  are  obnoxious  to  Injury  are, 

Those  things  wherein  all,  or  most  men  use  to  deal  uiyustly. 

And  those  things  which  are  easily  hid,  and  put  off  into 
other  hands,  or  altered. 

And  those  things  which  a  man  is  ashamed  to  have  suffered. 

And  those  things  wherein  prosecution  of  Injury,  may  be 
thought  a  love  of  contention. 

CHAP.  XIV. 

Of  those  Things  which  are  necessary  to  he  known  for  (he  Definition 
of  Just  and  Unjust, 

When  the  fact  is  evident,  the  next  Inquiry  is,  whether  it 
be  Just,  or  Unjust 

For  the  Definition  of  Just  and  Unjust,  we  must  know  what 
Law  is :  that  is,  what  the  Law  of  Nature,  what  the  Law  of 

294  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

Nations;  what  the  Law  Civile  what  written  LaWy  and  what 
unwritten  Law  is :  and  what  Persons^  that  is,  what  a  pubUck 
Person,  or  the  City  is ;  and  what  a  private  Person,  or  Citi- 
zen is. 

Unjust  in  the  opinion  of  all  men,  is  that  which  is  contrary 
to  the  Law  of  Nature. 

Unjust  in  the  opinion  of  all  men  of  those  Nations  which 
traffick  and  come  together,  is  that  which  is  contrary  to  the 
Law  common  to  those  Nations, 

Unjust  only  in  one  Common-wealth,  is  that  which  is  con- 
trary to  the  Law  Civil,  or  Law  of  that  Common-wealth. 

He  that  is  accused  to  have  done  any  thing  against  the  Pub- 
lick,  or  a  private  Person,  is  accused  to  do  it  either  ignorantly, 
or  untDillingly,  or  in  anger,  or  upon  premeditation. 

And  because  the  Defendant  does  many  times  confess  the 
fact,  but  deny  the  unjustice;  as  that  he  took,  but  did  not  steal : 
and,  did,  but  not  adultery;  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  Defini- 
tions of  Theft,  Adultery,  and  all  other  crimes.  - 

What  facts  are  contrary  to  the  written  Laws,  may  be  known 
by  the  Laws  themselves. 

Besides  written  Laws,  whatsoever  is  Just,  proceeds  from 
Equity  or  Goodness, 

From  Goodness  proceeds  that  which  we  are  praised,  or 
honoured  for. 

From  Equity  proceed  those  actions,  which  though  the  writ- 
ten Law  command  not,  yet  being  interpreted  reasonably,  and 
supplyed,  seems  to  require  at  our  hands. 
Actions  of  Equity  are  such  as  these, 

Not  too  rigorously  to  punish  Errors,  Mischances,  or  Injuries. 

To  pardon  the  faults  that  adhere  to  Mankind. 

And  not  to  consider  the  Law  so  much,  as  the  Law-makers 
mind;  and  not  the  Words  so  much,  as  the  meaning  of  the 
Law  ^ 

And  not  to  regard  so  much  the  Fact,  as  the  intention  of 
the  Doer ;  nor  part  of  the  Fact,  but  the  Whole ;  nor  what  the 
Doer  is,  but  what  he  has  been  always,  or  for  the  most  part. 

'  For,  as  the  Quarterly  Reviewer  but  too  justly  remarks,  "  To  violate 
the  Spirit  by  obeying  the  letter,  is  often  the  painful  duty  of  the  judge ;  to 
make  the  letter  conform  to  the  spirit,  is  the  privilege  of  the  legislator  ;'* 
and  (he  might  have  added)  of  the  arbitrator^  whose  standard  is  equity. 
See  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  133. 

Cfl^p.  XV.]  ART  OP  RHBTORICK.  295 

And  to  remember  better  the  Good  received,  than  the  Dl. 
And  to  endure  injuries  patiently. 

And  to  submit  rather  to  the  sentence  of  a  Judge,  than  of 
t  the  Sword. 

And  to  the  sentence  of  an  Arbitrator,  rather  than  of  a  Judge. 

CHAP.  XV. 

Of  the  (Mown  or  Common  Opinions  concerning  juries 
con^rativeiy, 

COMMON  Opinions  concerning  Injuries  comparative^,  are 
such  as  these : 

Greater  is  the  Injury  which  proceed  from  greater  Iniquity. 

And  from  which  proceedeth  greater  damage. 

And  of  which  there  is  no  revenge. 

And  for  which  there  is  no  remedy. 

And  by  occasion  of  which,  he  that  hath  received  the  Injury, 
hath  done  some  mischief  to  himself.  ' 

He  does  the  greater  Injury,  that  does  it  first,  or  alone,  or 
with  few. 

And  he  that  does  it  often. 

Greater  Injury  is  that,  against  which  Laws  and  Penalties 
were  first  made. 

And  that  which  is  more  brutal,  or  more  approaching  to  the 
actions  of  beasts. 

And  that  which  is  done  upon  more  premeditation. 

And  by  which  more  Laws  are  broken. 

And  which  is  done  in  the  place  of  Execution. 

And  which  is  of  greatest  shame  to  him  that  receives  the 
Injury. 

And  which  is  committed  against  well  deservers. 

And  which  is  committed  against  the  univritten  Law ;  be- 
cause good  men  should  observe  the  Law  for  Justice,  and  not 
for  fear  of  punishment. 

And  which  is  committed  against  the  written  Law  ;  because 
he  that  will  do  Injury,  neglecting  the  penalty  set  down  in  the 
written  Law,  is  much  more  likely  to  transgress  the  unwritten 
Law,  where  there  is  no  penalty  at  alL 

296  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  i. 

CHAP,   XVL 

Of  Proofi  Inartificial 

Of  Artificial  Proofs  we  have  already  spoken. 

Inartificial  Proof Sy  which  we  invent  not,  hut  make  use  of, 
are  of  five  sorts. 

1.  Laws,  And  those  are  CivU^  ov  written  Law:  the  L^w 
or  Ctistonfiof  Nations :  and  the  universal  Law  of  Nature. 

2.  Witness,  And  those  are  suoh  as  concern  Matter;  and 
such  as  concern  Manners,    Also,  they  he  ancient^  or^  present, 

3.  EvidenceSy  or  Writings. 

4.  Question^  or  Torture. 

5.  Oaths.  And  those  he  either  given,  or  taken,  or  both,  or 
neither. 

For  Laws,  we  use  them  thus : 

When  the  written  Law  makes  against  us,  we  appeal  to  the 
Law  of  Nature,  alledging, 

That  to  be  greatest  Justice,  which  is  greatest  Equity. 

That  the  Law  of  Nature  is  immutable ;  the  written  Law 
mutable. 

That  the  written  Law  is  but  seeming  justice ;  the  Law  of 
Nature  very  Justice.  And  Justice  is  among  those  things 
which  are,  and  not  which  seem  to  be. 

That  the  Judge  ought  to  discern  between  true  and  adul- 
terate Justice. 

That  they  are  better  men  that  obey  unwritten,  than  written 
Laws. 

That  the  Law  against  us  does  contradict  some  other  Law, 
And  when  the  Law  has  a  double  interpretation,  that  is  the 
true  one,  which  makes  for  us. 

And  that  the  cause  of  the  Law  being  abolished,  the  Law 
is  no  more  of  Validity. 

But  when  the  written  Law  makes  for  us,  and  Equity  for 
the  Adversary,  we  must  alledge. 

That  a  man  may  use  Equity,  not  as  a  liberty  to  judge 
against  the  Law;  but  only  as  a  security  against  being  for- 
sworn, when  he  knows  not  the  Law, 

That  men  seek  not  Equity  because  'tis  good  simply,  but  be- 
cause good  for  them. 

CHAP.  xviJ]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  297 

That  it  is  the  same  thing  not  to  make,  and  not  to  use  the  Law, 

That  as  in  other  Arts,  and  namely  in  Physicky  fallacies  are 
pemitious ;  so  in  a  Common-wealth  'tis  pernitious  to  use  pre- 
texts against  the  Law. 

And  that  in  Common-wealths  well  instituted,  to  seem  wiser 
than  the  L^wSy  is  prohibited. 

For  Witnesses^  we  must  use  them  thus : 

When  we  have  tiiem  not,  we  must  stand  for  Presumptions^ 
and  saj, 

That  in  Equity  sentence  ought  to  be  given  according  to  the 
most  probability. 

That  Presumptians  are  the  testimony  of  the  things  them- 
selves, and  cannot  be  bribed. 

That  they  cannot  lye. 

When  we  have  Witnesses^  JAgainst  him  that  has  them 
not,  we  must  say, 

That  Jh^sumptionSf  if  they  be  false,  cannot  be  punished. 

That  if  Presumptians  were  enough,  Witnesses  were  super- 
fluous. 

For  Writings,  when  they  favour  us,  we  must  say. 

That  Writings  are  private  and  particular  Laws;  and  he 
that  takes  away  the  use  of  Evidences,  abolisheth  the  Law. 

That  since  Contracts  and  Negotiations  pass  by  Writings,  he 
that  bars  their  use,  dissolves  humane  Society, 

Against  them,  if  they  favour  the  Adversary,  we  may  say. 

That  since  Laws  do  not  bind,  that  are  fraudulently  made  to 
pass,  much  less  Writings. 

And  that  the  Judge  being  to  dispense  Justice,  ought  rather 
to  consider  what  is  just,  than  what  is  in  th6  Writing. 

That  Writings  may  bie  gotten  by  fraud  or  force ;  but  Justice 
by  neither. 

That  the  Writing  is  repugnant  to  some  Law,  Civil,  or 
Natural;  oj  to  Justice;  or  to  Honesty. 

That  'tis  repugnant  to  some  other  Writing  before,  or  after. 

That  it  crosses  some  commodity  of  the  Judge  (which  must 
not  be  said'directly,  but  implyed  cunningly). 

For  the  Torture,  if  the  giving  of  it  make  for  us,  we 
must  say, 

That  'tis  the  only  testimony  that  is  certain. 
But  if  it  make  for  the  Adversary,  we  may  say. 

That  men  inforced  by  Torture,  speak  as  well  that  which  is 
false,  as  that  which  is  true. 

298  THE  ART  OF  BHETORICK.  Ibook  i. 

That  thej  who  can  endure,  conceal  the  truth ;   and  they 
who  cannot,  say  that  which  is  false  to  be  delivered  from  pain. 
For  Oaths ;  he  that  will  not  put  his  Adversary  to  his 
Oathy  may  alledge, 

That  he  makes  no  scruple  to  he  forsworn. 

That  bj  swearing^  he  will  carry  the  cause;  which  not 
swearing,  he  must  lose. 

That  he  had  rather  trust  his  cause  in  the  hand  of  the 
Judge,  than  of  the  Adversary. 

He  that  refuseth  to  take  the  Oath,  may  say, 

That  the  matter  is  not  worth  so  much. 

That  if  he  had  been  an  evil  man,  he  had  sworn,  and 
carryed  his  cause. 

That  to  try  it  by  swearing  for  a  religious  man  against  an 
irreligious,  is  as  hard  a  match,  as  to  set  a  weak  man  against 
a  strong  in  combate. 

He  that  is  willing  to  take  the  Oath,  may  pretend, 

That  he  had  rather  trust  himself,  than  his  Adversary ;  and 
that  'tis  equal  dealing  for  an  irreligious  man  to  give,  and  for 
a  religious  man  to  take  the  Oath, 

That  'tis  his  duty  to  take  the  Oath,  since  he  has  required 
to  have  sworn  Judges, 

He  that  offers  the  Oath  may  pretend, 

That  he  does  piously  commit  his  cause  to  the  Grods. 

That  he  makes  his  Adversary  himself  Judge. 

That  'twere  absurd  for  him  not  to  swear,  that  has  required 
the  Judges  to  be  sworn. 

And  of  these  are  to  be  compounded  the  Forms  we  are  to 
use,  when  we  would  give,  and  not  take  the  Oath;  or  take,  and 
not  give;  or  both  give  and  take;  or  neither  give  nor  take. 

But  if  one  have  sworn  contrary  to  a  former  Oath,  he  may 
pretend, 

That  he  was  forced. 

That  he  was  deceived,  and  that  neither  of  these  is  Perjury, 
since  Perjury  is  voluntary. 

But  if  the  Adversary  do  so,  he  may  say, 

That  he  that  stands  not  to  what  he  hath  sworn,  subverteth 
humane  Society. 

And  (turning  to  the  Judge)  What  reason  have  we  to  re- 
quire, that  you  should  be  sworn,  that  judge  our  cause;  when 
we  will  not  stand  to  that  we  swear  ourselves. 

And  so  much  for  Proofs  inartificiaU 

BOOK  11. 

CHAP.  L 

The  Introduction/ 

Of  Belief  proceeding  from  our  Invention,  that  part  which 
consisteth  in  Proof,  is  already  spoken  of. 

The  other  two  parts  follow ;  whereof  one  ariseth  from  the 
manners  of  the  Speaker;  the  other  from  the  passions  of  the 
Hearer, 

The  Principles,  Colours,  or  Common  Opinions  upon  which 
a  mans  belief  is  grounded  concerning  the  manners  of  him 
that  speaks,  are  to  be  had  partly  out  of  that  which  hath  been 
said  before  concerning  Vertue,  book  i.  chap.  9,  partly  out  of 
those  things  which  shall  be  said  by  and  by,  concerning  the 
Passions.  For  a  man  is  believed  either  for  his  Prudence,  or 
for  his  Probity,  which  are  Vertues;  or  for  Good  Will:  of 
which  among  the  Passions. 

The  Principles  concerning  Belief,  arising  from  the  Passion 
of  the  Hearer,  are  to  be  gathered  from  that  which  shall  now 
be  said  of  the  several  Passions  in  order. 

In  every  one  of  which  three  things  are  to  be  considered : 

1.  First,  how  men  are  affected. 

2.  Secondly,  towards  whom. 

3.  Thirdly,  for  what. 

CHAP.  II. 

0/  Anger. 

ANGER  is  desire  of  Revenge,  joyned  with  grief  for  that  he, 

or  some  of  his,  is,  or  seems  to  be  neglected. 

^   The  object  of  Anger  is  always  some  particular,  or  individual 

thing. 

300  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

In  Anger  there  is  also  pleasure  proceeding  from  the  imagiDa-* 
tion  of  revenge  to  come. 

To  Neglecty  is  to  esteem  little  or  nothing :  and  of  three  kinds. 

1.  Contempt, 

2.  Crossing. 

3.  Contumely, 

Contempty  is  when  a  man  thinks  another  of  little  worth  in 
comparison  to  himself. 

Crossing^  is  the  hinderance  of  another  mans  will  without 
design  to  profit  himself. 

Contumely,  is  the  disgracing  of  another  for  his  own  pastime. 
The  common  Opinions  concerning  Anger  are  therefore 
such  as  follow : 

Thej  are  easily  Angry  that  think  thej  are  neglected. 

That  think  thej  exceU  others ;  as  the  Bich  with  the  Poor  ; 
the  Noble  with  the  Obscure,  etc. 

And  such  as  think  thej  deserve  well. 

And  such  as  grieve  to  be  hindered,  opposed,  or  not  assisted. 
And  therefore  sick  men,  poor  men,  lovers,  and  generally  all 
that  desire  and  attain  not,  are  angry  with  those  that  standing 
by,  are  not  n^oved  with  their  wants. 

And  such  as  having  expected  good,  find  evil. 
Those  that  men  are  angry  with,  are,    * 

Such  as  mock,  deride,  or  jest  at  them. 

And  such  as  shew  any  kind  of  Contumely,  towards  them. 

And  such  as  despise  those  things  which  we  spend  most  la- 
bour and  study  upon :  and  the  more,  by  how  much  we  seem 
the  less  advanced  therein. 

And  our  friends,  rather  than  those  that  are  not  our  friends. 

And  such  as  have  honoured  us,  if  they  continue.not. 

And  such  as  requite  not  our  courtesie. 

And  such  as  follow  contrary  courses,  if  they  be  our  inferiours. 

And  our  friends,  if  they  have  said,  or  done  us  evil,  or  not 
good. 

And  such  as  give  not  eare  to  our  intreaty. 

And  such  as  are  jo3rful,  or  calm  in  our  distress. 

And  such  as  troubling  us,  are  not  themselves  troubled. 

And  such  as  willingly  hear  or  see  our  disgraces. 

And  such  as  neglect  us  in  the  presence  of  our  Competitors ; 
of  those  we  admire  ;  of  those  we  would  have  admire  us ;  of 
those  we  reverence ;  and  of  those  that  reverence  us. 

CHAP.  III.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  301 

And  such  as  should  help  us,  and  neglect  it. 

And  such  as  are  in  jest,  when  we  are  in  earnest 

And  such  as  forget  us,  or  our  Names. 

An  Orator  therefore  must  so  frame  his  Judge  or  Auditor 
by  his  Oration  ;  as  to  make  him  apt  to  Anger  :  and  then  make 
his  Adversary  appear  such  as  men  use  to  be  angry  wiihal. 

CHAP.  TIL 
Of  BeoonciUng,  or  Pacifying  Anger, 

RECONCILIATION  is  the  appeasing  of  Anger. 
Those  to  whom  men  are  easily  reconciled,  are, 

Such  as  have  not  offended  out  of  neglect. 

And  such  as  have  done  it  against  their  will. 

And  such  as  wish  done  the  contrary  of  what  they  have  done. 

And  such  as  have  done  as  much  to  themselves. 

And  such  as  confess  and  repent. 

And  such  as  are  humbled. 

And  such  as  do  seriously  the  same  things,  that  they  do  se- 
riously. 

And  such  as  have  done  them  more  good  heretofore,  than 
now  hurt.  ' 

And  such  as  sue  to  them  for  any  thing. 

And  such  as  are  not  insolent,  nor  mockers,  nor  slighters  of 
others  in  their  own  disposition. 

«And  generally  such  as  are  of  a  contrary  disposition  to  those, 
whom  men  are  usually  angry  withal. 

And  such  as  they  fear  or  reverence. 

And  such  as  reyerence  them. 

And  such  as  have  offended  their  Angen 
Reconcileahle  are. 

Such  as  are  contrarily  affected  to  those  whom  we  have  said 
before  to  be  easily  angry. 

And  such  as  play,  laugh,  make  merry,  prosper,  live  in  plen- 
ty ;  and  in  sum,  all  that  have  no  cause  of  grief. 

And  such  as  have  given  their  anger  time. 
Men  lay  down  their  Anger  for  these  Causes. 

Because  they  have  gotten  the  Victory. 

Because  the  Offender  has  suffered  more  than  they  meant  to 
inflict. 

302  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  li. 

Because  they  have  been  revenged  of  another. 

Because  they  think  they  suffer  justly. 

And  because  they  think  the  revenge  will  not  be  felt,  or  not 
known  that  the  revenge  was  theirs,  and  for  such  an  injury. 

And  because  the  Offender  is  dead. 

Whosoever  therefore  would  ctsswage  the  anger  of  his  Audi- 
tor^ must  make  himself  appear  such,  as  men  use  to  be  recon- 
ciled unto :  and  beget  in  his  Auditor  such  opinions,  as  makie 
him  reconcUeable. 

CHAP.  IV. 

Of  Love  and  I^iends, 

To  Love,  is  to  will  well  to  another,  and  that  for  others,  not 
for  our  own  sake. 

A  Friend  is  he  that  loves,  and  he  that  is  beloved. 

Friends  one  to  another,  are  they  that  naturally  love  one 
another. 

A  Friend  therefore  is  he, 

That  rejoyceth  at  anothers  Good. 

And  that  grieves  at  his  hurt. 

And  that  wishes  the  same  with  us  to  a  third,  whether  good, 
or  hurt. 

And  that  is  Enemy  or  Friend  to  the  same  man. 
We  hve  them, 

That  have  done  good  to  us,  or  ours ;  especially  if  much, 
readily,  or  in  season. 

That  are  our  Friends  Friends. 

That  are  our  Enemies  Enemies. 

That  are  Liberal. 

That  are  Valiant. 

That  are  Just. 

And  that  we  would  have  hve  us. 

And  good  Companions. 

And  such  as  can  abide  Jests. 

And  such  as  break  Jests. 

And  such  as  praise  us,  especially  for  somewhat  that  we 
doubt  of  in  our  selves. 

And  such  as  are  neat. 

And  such  as  upbraid  us  not  with  our  vices,  or  with  their 
own  benefits. 

CHAP.  IV.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  303 

And  such  as  quickly  forget  injuries. 

And  such  as  least  observe  our  Errors. 

And  such  as  are  not  of  ill  Tongue. 

And  those. that  are  ignorant  of  our  Vices. 

And  such  as  cross  us  not  when  we  are  busie,  or  angrj. 

^d  such  as  are  officious  towards  us. 

And  those  that  are  like  us. 

And  such  as  follow  the  same  course  or  trade  of  life,  where 
they  impeach  not  one  another. 

And  such  as  labour  for  the  same  thing,  when  both  may  be 
satisfied. 

And  such  as  are  not  ashamed  to  tell  us  freely  their  faults, 
so  it  be  not  in  contempt  of  us,  and  the  faults  such,  as  the  World, 
rather  than  their  own  Consciences  condemns. 

And  such  as  are  ashamed  to  tell  us  of  their  very  faults. 

And  such  as  we  would  have  honour  us,  and  not  envie,  but 
imitate  us. 

And  such  as  we  would  do  good  to,  except  with  greater  hurt 
to  our  selves. 

And  such  as  continue  their  Friendship  to  the  dead. 

And  such  as  speak  their  mind. 

And  such  as  are  not  terrible. 

And  such  as  we  may  rely  on. 

The  several  kinds  of  Friendship,  are  Society,  FamiUarity, 
Consanguinity,  Affinity,  etc. 

The  things  that  beget  Love,  are, 

oiBeneJits,    \p^^^iy^ 

CHAP.  V. 

Of  Enmity  and  Hatred, 

The  Colours,  or  Common  Opinions  concerning  Hatred  are  to 
be  taken  frpm  the  contrary  of  those,  which  concern  Love  and 
Friendship. 

Hatred  differs  from  Anger  in  this, 

That  Anger  regards  only  what  is  done  to  ones  self ;  but 
Hatred  not. 

And  in  this,  that  Anger  regards  particulars  only ;  the  other 
universals  also. 

804  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  fnooK  n. 

And  in  this,  that  Anger  is  curable.  Haired  not 

And  in  this,  that  Anger  seeks  the  -vexation.  Haired  the 
damage  of  ones  Adversary.    '     ' 

That  with  Anger  there  is  always  joined  Grief ;  with  Hatred 
not  always. 

^hat  Anger  may  at  length  be  satiated,  but  Hatred  never. 

Hence  it  appears  how  the  Judge  or  Auditor  may  be  made 
Friend  or  Enemy  to  us;  and  how  our  Adversary  may  be 
made  appear  Friend  -or  Enemy  to  the  Judge ;  and  how  we 
may  answer  to  our  Adversary,  that  would  make  us  appear 
Enemies  to  him. 

CHAP.  VI. 

Cf  Fear. 

FEAR  is  a  trouble,  or  vexation  of  the  mind,  arising  from  the 
apprehension  of  an  evil  at  hand,  which  may  hurt  or  destroy. 

Danger  is  the  nearness  of  the  evil  feared. 
The  things  to  hefearedy  are, 

Such  as  have  power  to  hurt 

And  the  signs  of  will  to  do  us  hurt,  as  Anger  and  Hatred 
of  powerful  men. 

And  Injustice  joyned  with  Power. 

And  Valour  provoked,  joyned  with  Power. 

And  the  fear  of  powerful  men. 

The  men  that  are  to  be  feared^  are, 

Such  as  know  our  Faults. 

And  such  as  can  do  us  Injury. 

And  such  as  think  they  are  injured  by  us. 

And  such  as  have  done  us  Injury. 

And  our  Competitors  in  such  things  as  cannot  satisfie  both. 

And  such  as  are  feared  by  more  powerful  men  than  we  are. 

And  such  as  have  destroyed  greater  men  than  we  are. 

And  such  as  use  to  invade  their  inferiours. 

And  men  not  passionate,  but  dissemblers,  and  crafty,  are 
more  to  he  feared  than  those  that  are  hasty  and  free. 
The  things  especially  to  be  feared^  are. 

Such,  wherein  if  we  err,  the  error  cannot  be  repaired ;  at 
least,  not  according  to  ours,  but  our  Adversaries  pleasure. 

And  such  as  admit  either  none,  or  not  easie  help. 

CHAP,  vii.]  AiiT  OF  EHETORICK.  305 

And  such  as  being  done,  or  about  to  be  done  to  others, 
make  us  pitj  them. 

They  that  fear  not,  are, 

Such  as  expect  not  evil ;  or  not  now ;  or  not  this ;  or  not 
from  these. 

And  therefore  men  fear  little  in  prosperity. 

And  men  fear  little  that  think  they  have  suffered  already. 

An  Orator  therefore  that  would  put  Fear  into  the  Auditor, 
must  let  him  see  that  he  is  obnoxious ;  and  that  greater  than 
he  do  suffer,  and  have  suffered  from  those,  and  at  tiiose  times 
they  least  thought. 

CHAP.  VII. 

Of  Assurance. 

AssiTBANCE  is  hope,  arising  from  an  imagination  that  the  help 
10  near,  or  the  evil  afar  off. 

The  things  therefore  that  beget  Assurance  are. 

The  remoteness  of  those  things  that  are  to  be  feared,  and 
the  nearness  of  their  contraries. 

And  the  facility  of  great,  or  many  helps  or  remedies. 

And  neither  to  have  done,  nor  receiv^  Injury. 

And  to  have  no  Competitors,  or  not  great  ones,  or  if  great 
ones,  at  least  friends;  such  as  we  have  obUged,or  are  obliged  to. 

And  that  the  danger  is  extended  to  more,  or  greater  than  us. 
Assured,  or  Confident,  are, 

They  that  have  oft  escaped  danger. 

And  they  to  whom  most  things  have  succeeded  well. 

And  they  that  see  their  Equals,  or  inferiours  not  afraid. 

And  they  that  have  wherewith  to  make  themselves  feared, 
as  wealth,  strength,  etc. 

And  such  as  have  done  others  no  wrong. 

And  such  as  think  themselves  in  good  terms  with  Grod 
Almighty. 

And  such  as  think  they  will  speed  well  that  are  gone  before. 

306  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  Shame. 

SHAifE  is  a  perturbation  of  the  Mind  arising  from  the  appre- 
hension of  Evil,  past,  present,  or  to  come,  to  the  prejudice  of 
a  mans  own,  or  his  friends  reputation. 

The  things  therefore  which  men  are  ashamed  of  are  those 
Actions  which  proceed  from  Vice,  as. 

To  throw  awaj  ones  Arms ;  to  run  awaj ;  signs  of  Coward- 
liness. 

To  deny  that  which  is  committed  to  ones  trust,  a  sign  of 
Injustice. 

To  have  Ijen  with  whom,  where,  and  when  we  ought  not, 
signs  of  Intemperance. 

To  make  gain  of  small  and  base  things ;  not  to  help  with 
money  whom  and  how  much  we  ought ;  to  receive  help  from 
meaner  men ;  to  ask  monej  at  use  from  such  as  one  thinks  will 
borrow  of  him ;  to  borrow  of  him  that  expects  payment  of 
somewhat  before  lent ;  and  to  redemand  what  one  has  lent,  of 
him  that  one  thinks  will  borrow  more ;  and  so  to  praise,  as 
one  may  be  thought  to  ask ;  signs  of  Wretchedness. 

To  praise  one  to  his  face ;  to  praise  his  vertues  too  much, 
and  colour  his  vices ;  signs  of  Flattery. 

To  be  unable  to  indure  such  labours  as  men  indure  that  are 
elder,  tenderer,  greater  in  quality,  and  of  less  strength  than 
"he ;  signs  of  Effeminacy. 

To  be  beholden  often  to  another ;  and  to  upbraid  those  that 
are  beholding  to  him ;  signs  of  Pusillanimity. 

To  speak  and  promise  much  of  ones  self  more  than  is  due  ; 
signs  of  Arrogance. 

To  want  those  things  which  ones  Equals,  all,  or  most  of 
them  have  attained  to,  is  also  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  (^, 

And  to  suffer  things  ignominious,  as  to  serve  about  anothers 
person  ;  or  to  be  imployed  in  his  base  Actions. 

In  Actions  of  Intemperance,  whether  willingly,  or  unwill- 
ingly committed ;  there  is  shame  in  Actions  of  Force,  only 
when  they  are  done  unwillingly. 

The  men  before  whom  we  are  ashamjtdy  are  such  as  we 
respect;  namely, 

CHAP,  vm.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  ,     307 

Those  that  admire  us. 

And  those  whom  we  desire  should  admire  us. 

And  those  whom  we  admire. 

Those  that  contend  with  us  for  Honour. 

Those  whose  opinion  we  contemn  riot. 

And  therefore  men  are  most  ashamed  in  the  presence, 

Of  old  and  well  bred  men. 

Of  those  we  are  always  to  live  with. 

Of  those  that  are  not  guilty  of  the  same  fault. 

Of  those  that  do  not  easily  pardon. 

And  of  those  that  are  apt  to  reveal  our  faults ;  such  as  are 
men  injured,  Backbiters,  Scoffers,  Comick  Poets. 

And  of  those  before  whom  we  have  had  always  good  success. 

And  of  those  who  never  asked  any  thing  of  us  before. 

And  of  such  as  desir^  our  Friendship. 

And  of  our  familiars,  that  know  none  of  our  crimes. 

And  of  such  as  will  reveal  our  faults  to  any  of  those  that 
are  named  before. 

But  in  the  presence  of  such  whose  judgment  most  men 
despise,  men  are  not  ashamed. 

X^erefore  we  are  ashamed  also  in  the  presence, 

Of  those  whom  we  reverence. 

And  of  those  who  are  concerned  in  oiyr  own,  or  Ancestors, 
or  Kinsfolks  actions  or  misfortunes,  if  they  be  shamefuL 

And  of  their  Kivals. 

And  of  those  that  are  to  live  with  them  that  know  their 
disgrace. 

The  Common  Opinions  concerning  Impudence  are  taken* 
from  the  contrary  of  these. 

CHAP.   IX. 

Of  Chrace,  or  Favour. 

GRACE  is  that  Vertue,  by  which  a  man  is  said  to  do  a  good 
turn,  or  to  do  service  to  a  man  in  need ;  not  for  his  own  but 
for  his  cause  to. whom  he  does  it. : 

Great  Grace  is  when  the  need  is  great ;  or  when  they  are 
hard  or  difficult  things  that  are  conferred,  or  when  the  time 
is  seasonable,  or  when  he  that  confers  the  favour  is  the  only, 
or  the  first  man  that  did  it. 

X  2 

308  HO^BES'  BRIEF  OF  TI^E  [book  ii 

Needy  is  a  desire  jojned  with  grief  for  the  absence  of  the 
thing  desired. 

Grace  therefore  it  is  not,  if  it  be  not  done  to  one  that  needs. 

Whosoever  therefore  would  prove  that  he  has  done  a  Graces 
or  Favour^  must  shew  that  he  needeth  it  to  whom  it  was  do&e. 
Gretoe  it  is  not, 

Which  is  done  by  Chance* 

Nor  which  is  done  by  !{7ecessity. 

Nor  which  has  been  Requited. 

Nor  that  which  is  done  to  ones  Enemy. 

Nor  that  which  is  a  Trifle, 

Nor  that  which  is  Nought,  if  the  Giver  know  the  fault. 

And  in  this  manner  a  man  may  go  over  the  Praedicaments, 
and  examine  a  benefit,  whether  it  be  a  Grace  for  bdng  ThiSy 
or  for  being  so  Much,  or  for  heing  Such,  or  for  being  JVbw,  etc. 

CHAP.  X. 

Of  Pity  y  or  Compassion, 

PITY  is  a  perturbation  of  the  mind,  arising  from  the  appre- 
hension of  hurt  or  trouble  to  another  that  doth  not  deserve  it. 
and  which  he  thinks  may  happen  to  himself,  or  his. 

And  because  it  appertains  to  IHiif,  to  think  that  he,  or  his 
may  fall  into  the  misery  he  pities  in  others,  it  follows  that 
they  be  most  compassionate, 
,    Who  have  passed  through  Misery. 

And  old  Men. 

And  weak  Men. 

And  timorous  Men. 

And  learned  Men. 

And  such  as  have  Parents,  Wife,  and  Children. 

And  such  as  think  there  be  honest  Men. 
And  that  they  are  less  compassionate. 

Who  are  in  great  despair. 

Who  are  in  great  prosperity. 

And  they  that  are  angry ;  for  they  consider  not. 

And  they  that  are  very  confident ;  for  they  also  consider  not. 

And  they  that  are  in  the  Act  of  contumely ;  for  neither  do 
these  consider. 

And  they  that  are  astonished  with  fear. 

CHAP.  XI.]  ART  OP  BH^TORICK.  309 

And  they  that  think  no  Man  honest* 
The  things  to  be  pided  are, 

Such  as  grieve,  and  withal  hurt. 

Such  as  destroy. 

And  Calamities  of  fortune,  if  thej  be  great ;  as  noue  or  few 
friends,  deformity,  weajmess,  lameness,  etc. 

And  evil  that  arrives  where  good  is  expected. 

And  after  extream  evil,  a  little  goo4«v 

And  through  a  Mans  life  to  have  no  good  offer  it  self;  or 
being  offered,  not  to  have  been  able  to  enjoy  it 
Men  to  he  pitied  are, 

Such  as  are  known  to  us,  unless  they  be  so  oear  to  us^  a9 
th^r  hurt  be  our  own. 

And  such  as  be  of  our  own  yeiirs. 

Such  as  are  like  us  in  manners. 

Such  as  are  of  the  same,  or  like  stock« 

And  our  equals  in  dignity. 

Those  that  have  lately  suffered,  or  are  shortly  to  suffer  in- 
jury:  and  those  that  have  the  marks  of  injury  past. 

And  those  that  have  the  words  or  actions  of  them  in  the 
present  misery. 

CHAP  XL 

Cy  J5idignati9»9 

Opposite  in  a  manner  to  J^^  in  good  Men,  is  Indigncttion, 
which  is  grief  for  the  prosperity  of  a  Man  unworthy. 

With  Indignation  there  is  always  joyned  a  joy  for  the  pros- 
perity of  a  Man  worthy,  as  Pit^  is  always  with  coutentment 
in  the  adversity  of  them  that  deserve  it. 
In  wicked  Men  the  opposite  of  Pity  is, 

Envy;  as  also  the  companions  thereof  delight  in  the  harm  of 
others,  which  the  Greeks  in  one  word  have  called  €7rucaip€Kaicla, 
But  of  these  in  the  next  Chapter. 

■  Men  conceive  Indignation  agaiust  others^  not  for  their  ver- 
tues,  as  Justice,  etc. 

For  these  make  Men  worthy  ;  and  in  Indignation  we  think 
Men  unworthy. 

But  for  those  goods  which  men  indued  with  vertue,  and 
noble  Men,  and  handsoqEie  Men  are  worthy  of. 

310  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [w)ojl  n. 

And  for  newly  gotten  power  and  riches,  rather  than  for 
antient,  and  espeddlj  if  by  these  he  has  gotten  other  goods, 
as  hj  Riches,  Command.  The  reason  why  we  conceive  greater 
InSgnaHon  against  new  than  antient  Riches,  is,  that  the  for- 
mer seem  to  possess  that  which  is  none  of  theirs.  Bat  the 
antient  seem  to  have  bnt  their  own.  For  with  common  peo- 
ple, to  have  been  so  long,  is  to  be  so  bj  Right. 

And  for  the  bestowing  of  goods  incongmouslj :  as  ^vhen 
the  arms  of  the  most  valiant  Achilles  were  bestowed  on  the 
most  eloquent  Ulysses. 

And  for  the  comparison  of  the  inferionr  is  the  same  thing, 
as  when  one  valiant  is  compared  with  a  more  valiant ;  or  whe- 
ther absolutely  superiour,  as  when  a  good  Scholer  is  compared 
with  a  good  Man. 

Apt  to  Indignation  are, 

They  that  think  themselves  worthy  of  the  greatest  goods, 
andrdo  possess  them. 

And  they  that  are  good. 

And  they  that  are  ambitious.    . 

And  such  as  think  themselves  deserve  better  what  another 
possesseth,  than  he  that  hath  it. 
Least  apt  to  Indignation  are. 

Such  as  are  of  a  poor,  servile,  and  not  ambitious  Nature. 

Who  they  are  that  Rejoyce,  or  Grieve  not,  at  the  adversity 
of  him  that  suffers  worthily,  and  in  what  occasions  may  be 
gathered  from  the  contrary  of  what  has  been  already  said. 

Wlipsoever  therefore  would  turn  away  the  Compassion  of 
the  Judge,  he  must  make  him  apt  to  Indignation ;  and  shew- 
that  his  Adversary  is  unworthy  of  the  Good,  and  worthy  of 
the  Evil  which  happens  to  him. 

.     CHAP.  XII. 

CfEnvy. 

EN  Wis  grief,  for  the  prosperity  of  such  as  our  selves,  arising 
not  from  any  hurt  that  we,  but  from  the  good  that  they  receive^ 

Such  as'our  selves,  I  call  those  that  are  equal  to  us  in  blood, 
in  age,  in  abilities,  in  glory,  or  in  means. 
They  are  apt  to  £nvg, 

That  are  within  a  little  of  the  highest. 

CHAP.  XII.]  ART  OP  RHETORICK.  311 

And  those  that  are  e:9:traordinaril7  honoured  for  some  quality 
that  is  singular  in  them,  especially  Wisdom  or  good  Fortune. 

And  such  as  would  be  thought  wise. 

And  such  as  catch  at  glory  in  every  action. 

And  Men  of  poor  spirits :  for' every  thing  appears  great  to 
them. 

The  things  which  Men  Envy  in  others  are, 

Such  as  bring  Glory. 

And  goods  of  Fortune. 

And  such  things  £is  we  deisire  for  our  selves. 
-  And  things  in  the  possession  whereof  we  exceed  others,  or 
they  us  a  little. 

Obnoxious  to  Envi/  are. 

Men  of  our  own  time,  of  our  own  Countrey,  of  our  own  age, 
and  competitors  of  our  Glory. 
And  therefore. 

Those  whom  we  strive  with  for  honour. 

And  those  that  covet  the  same  things  that  we  do. 

Apd  those  that  get  quickly,  what  we  hardly  obtain,  or  not 
at  all. 

And  those  that  attain  unto,  or  do  the  things  that  turn  to  our 
reproach,  not  being  done  by  us. 

And  those  that  possess  what  we  have  possessed  heretofore. 
So  old  and  decayed  Men  envy  the  young  and  lusty. 

And  those  that  have  bestowed  little,  are  subject  to  be  en- 
vyedhj  such  as  have  bestowed  much  upon  the  same  thing. 

From  the  contraries  of  these  may  be  derived  the  Principles 
concerning  Joy  for.  other  Mens  hurt. 

He  therefore  that  would  not  have  his  Enemy  prevail,  when 
he  craves  Pity,  or  other  favour ;  must  dispose  the  Judge  to 
Envy;  and  make  his  Adversary  appear  such,  as  above  de- 
scribed, to  be  subject  to  the  Envy  of  others. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

CfEmukction, 

EMULATION!^  grief  arising  from  that  our  Equals  possess 
such  goods  as  are  had  in  honour,  and  whereof  we  are  capable, 
but  have  them  not ;  not  because  they  have  them,  but  because 
not  we  also. 

312     '  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

No  Man  therefore  Emtdaies  aoother  in  things  whereof  him- 
self is  not  capable. 

Apt  to  Emulate  are» 

Such  as  esteem  ^themselves  worthy  oimore  than  they  hove. 

And  Young  and  Magnanimous  Men. 

And  such  as  already  possess  the  goods  for  which  Men  are 
honoured :  for  they  measure  their  worth  by  their  having. 

And  those  that  are  esteemed  worthy  by  others. 

And  those  whose  Ancestors,  Kindred,  Familiars,  Nation, 
City,  have  been  emin^it  fw  some  good,  do  EmtdcUe  others 
ior  that  good. 

Objects  of  Emulation  are,  for  things ;  Yertaes. 

And  things  whereby  we  may  profit  others. 

And  things  whereby  we  may  please  others. 
For  Persons, 

They  that  possess  such  things. 

And  such  as  many  desire  to  be  friends  or  acquainted  with, 
or  like  unto. 

And  they  whose  praises  flie  abroad. 

The  contrary  of  Emulation  is  Contempt, 

And  they  that  Emulate  sueh  as  have  t^e  goods  aforemen- 
tioned, Contemn  such  as  have  tiiem  not :  and  thence  it  is,  that 
Men  who  live  happily  enough,  ui^ess  they  have  the  goods 
which  Men  honour,  are  nevertheless  Contemned, 

CHAP.  XIV. 
Of  the  Manners  of  Youth. 

Of  Passions  we  have  already  spoken. 

We  are  next  to  speak  of  Manners, 

Manners  are  distinguished  by  Passions^  Habits,  Ages,  and 
Fortunes, 

What  kind  of  Manners  proceed  from  Passions,  and  from 
Vertues  and  Vices  (which  are  Habits),  hath  been  already 
shewed. 

There  remains  to  be  spoken  of  the  Manners,  that  are  pe- 
culiar to  several  Ages  and  Fortunes, 

The  Ages  are  Youth,  Middle-Age,  Old-Age. 

And  first  of  Youth. 
Young  Men  are, 

CHAP.  XIV.]  ART  OF  BHETORICK  *  313 

Violent  in  their  desires. 

Prompt  to  execute  their  desires. 

Incontinent. 

Inconstant,  easily  forsaking  what  thej  desired  before. 

Longing  mightily,  and  soon  satisfied. 

Apt  to  anger,  and  in  their  anger  violent :  and  ready  to  ex- 
ecute their  anger  with  their  hands. 

Lovers  of  Honour  and  of  Victory  more  than  Money,  as 
having  not  been  yet  in  Want. 

Well  natured,  aa  having  not  been  acquainted  with  much 
malice.   - 

Full  of  hope,  both  because  they  have  not  yet  been  often 
frustrated,  and  because  they  have  by  natural  heat  that  disposi- 
tion that  other  Ages  have  by  Wine ;  Youth  being  a  kind  of 
natural  drunkenness.  Besides,  hope  is  of  the  time  to  come, 
whereof  Youth  hath  much,  but  of  the  time  past  little. 

Credulous,  because  not  yet  often  deceived. 

Easily  deceived,  because  full  of  hope. 

Valiant,  because  apt  to  Anger  and  full  of  hope ;  whereof 
this  begets  c(»ifidence,  the  other  keeps  off  Fear. 

Bashful,  because  they  estimate  the  Honour  of  Action  by  the 
precepts  of  the  Law. 

Magnanimous,  because  not  yet  dejected  by  the  misfortunes 
of  human  life. 

And  lovers  of  Honour  more  than  Profit,  because  they  live 
more  by  Custom  than  by  Reason ;  and  by  Reason  we  acquire 
Profit^  but  Vertue  by  Custom. 

Lovers  of  their  Friends  and  Companions. 

Apt  to  err  in  the  excess,  rather  than  the  defect,  contrary 
to  that  precept  of  ChUoriy  Ne  quid  nimis;  for  they  overdo 
every  thmg :  they  Love  too  much,  and  Hate  too  mucl^  because 
thinking  themselves  wise,  they  are  obstinate  in  the  opinion 
they  have  once  delivered. 

Doers  of  Injury  rather  for  contumely  than  for  Dammage. 

Mercifull,  because  measuring  others  by  their  own  innocence, 
they  think  them  better  than  they  be,  and  therefore  less  to 
merit  what  they  suffer ;  which  is  a  cause  of  Pity. 

And  lovers  of  Mirth,  and  by  cMisequence  such  as  love  to 
jest  at  others. 

Jesting  is  witty  Contumely. 

314  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii 

CHAP.  XV. 

Of  the  Manners  of  Old  Men. 

The  Manners  of  Old  Men  are  in  a  manner  the  contraries 
of  those  of  Youth. 

They  determine  nothing :  they  do  every  thing  less  vehe- 
mently than  is  fit :  they  never  say  they  know ;  but  to  every 
thing  they  say,  perhaps,  and  peradventure ;  which  comes  to 
pass  from  that  having  lived  longj  they  have  often  mistaken 
and  been  deceived. 

They  are  peevish  because  they  interpret  every  thing  to  the 
worst. 

And  suspicious  through  Incredulity,  and  incredulous  by 
reason  of  their  Experience. 

They  love  and  hate,  as  if  they  meant  to  continue  in  neither. 

Are  of  poor  spirits,  as  having  been  humbled  by  the  chances 
of  life. 

And  covetous,  as  knowing  how  easie  'tis  td^lose,  and  hard 
to  get. 

And  timorous,  as  having  been  cooled  by  years. 

And  greedy  of  life :  for  good  things  seem  greater  by  the 
want 'of  them. 

And  lovers  of  themselves  out  of  Pusillanimity.. 

And  seek  Profit  more  than  Honour,  because  they  love 
themselves ;  and  Profit  is  among  the  goods  that  are  not 
simply  good,  but  good  for  ones  self. 

And  without  bashfulness,  because  they  despise  seeming. 

And  hope  little ;  knowing  by  Experience  that  many  times 
good  Counsel  has  been  followed  with  ill  event,  and  because 
also  they  be  timorous. 

And  live  by  Memory  rather  than  Hope ;  for  Memory  is  of 
the  time  past,  whereof  Old  Men  have  good  store. 

And  are  full  of  Talk,  because  they  delight  in  their  Memory. 

And  Vehement  in  their  anger :  but  not  stout  enough  to 
execute  it. 

They  have  weak,  or  no  desires ;  and  thence  seem  Temperate. 

They  are  slaves  to  Gain. 

And  live  more  by  reason  than  Custom;  because  reason 
leads  to  Profit,  as  Custom  to  that  which  is  Honourable. 

CHAP.  XVI.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  315 

And  do  Injury  to  indammage,  and  not  in  Contumely. 

And  are  mercifull  by  Compassion,  or  imagination  of  the 
same  evils  in  themselves,  which  is  a  kind  of  Infirmity,  and  not 
Humanity,  as  in  Young  MeUy  proceeding  from  a  good  opinion 
of  those  that  suffer  Evil. 

And  ftdl  of  complaint,  as  thinking  themselves  not  far  from 
Evil,  because  of  their  Infirmity. 

Seeing  then  that  every  Man  loves  such  Men,  and  their 
discourses,  which  are  most  agreeable  to  their  own  Manners; 
'tis  not  hard  to  collect,  how  the  Orator,  and  his  Oration  may 
be  made  acceptable  to  the  Hearer,  whether  Young  or  Old, 

CHAP.  XVI. 

Of  the  Manners  of  Middle-aged  Men, 

The  Manners  of  Middle-aged  Men,  are  between  those  of 
Youthj  and  Old  Men,  and  therefore. 

They  neither  dare,  nor  fear  too  much :  but  both  as  is  £t. 

They  neither  believe  all ;  nor  reject  all ;  but  judge. 

They  seek  not  only  what  is  Honourable,  nor  only  what  is 
Profitable;  but  both. 

They  are  neither  Covetous,  nor  Prodigal ;  but  in  the  mean. 

They  are  neither  easily  Angry ;  nor  yet  Stupid :  but  be- 
tween both; 

They  are  Valiant,  and  withal  Temperate. 

And  in  general,  whatsoever  is  divided  in  Youth,  B,nd  Old 
Men,  is  compounded  in  Middle-age. 

Aod  whereof  the  Excess,  or  Defect  is  in  Yotah  or  Old 
Men;  the  Mediocrity  is  in  those  of  the  Middle-age. 

Middle-age  for  the  Body,  I  call  the  time  from  thirty  to  five 
and  thirty  years:  for  the  Mind,  the  nine  and  fortieth,  or 
thereabouts. 

CHAP.  xvn. 

Of  the  Manners  of  the  Nobility. 

Op  Manners  that  proceed  from  the  several  Ages  we  have 
already  spoken. 

We  are  next  to  speak  of  those  that  rise  from  several  Fortunes. 

316  HOBBES*  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

The  Matmers  of  the  Nohili^  are, 

To  be  Ambitious. 

To  underyalue  their  Ancestors  Equals.  For  the  goods  of 
Fortune  seem  the  mcnre  precious  £6r  their  Antiquity, 

Nobility  is  the  vertue  of  a  Stock. 

And  Generosityf  is  not  to  degenerate  from  the  virtue  of 
his  stock. 

For  as  in  Plants,  so  in  the  Baces  of  M^,  there  is  a  ccortain 
pn^ess ;  and  they  grow  better  and  better  to  a  certain  point : 
and  change,  viz.  Subtil  wits  into  madncQS ;  and  staid  wite  into 
stupidity  and  blockishness. 

CHAP.  XVIIL 

Of^  Manners  (fthe  JRich. 

BICH  Men  are  Contumelious  and  Proud.  This  they  have 
from  their  Riches.  For  seeing  every  thing  may  be  hiod  for 
Mon«y,  having  Money,  they  think  they  have  all  that  is  good. 

And  Effeminate ;  because  they  have  wherewithal  to  sub- 
minister  to  their  Lust 

And  Boasters  of  their  Wealth :  and  speak  in  high  terms 
foolishly.  For  Men  willingly  talk  of  what,  they  love  and  ad- 
mire ;  and  think  others  affect  tha  same  that  they  do :  and  the 
truth  is,  all  sorts  of  Men  submit  to  the  Rich. 

And  think  themselves  worthy  to  ccMnmand,  having  that  by 
which  Men  attain  command. 

And  in  general,  they  have  the  Manners, of  Fortunate  Fools. 

They  do  Injury,  with  intentions  not  to  hurt,  but  to  disgrace  ; 
and  partly  also  through  Incontinence. 

There  is  a  difference  between  New  and  Antieni  Riches: 
for  they  that  are  newly  come  to  Wealth  have  the  same  faults 
in  a  greater  degree :  for  New  Riches  are  a  kind  of  mdeness 
and  apprentiship  of  Riches. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

Cf  the  Manners  of  Men  in  Powers  and  of  such  as  prosper. 

The  Manners  of  Men  in  Power^  are  the  same,  or  better  than 
those  of  the  Rich. 

CHAP.  XIX.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  317 

They  have  a  greater  sense  of  Honour  t&an  the  Rich ;  and 
their  Manners  are  more  Manly. 

They  are  more  Industrious  than  the  Rich :  for  Power  is 
sustained  by  Industry. 

They  are  Grave,  but  without  Austereness :  for  being  in 
place  conspicuous,  they  carry  themselves  the  more  modestly ; 
and  have  a  kind  of  gentle  and  comely  Gravity,  which  the 
Greeks  call  trefivdrffg. 

When  they  do  Injuries,  they  do  great  ones. 

The  Manners  of  Men  that  prosper^  are  compounded  of  the 
Manners  of  the  NobUity,  the  Rich  and  those  that  are  in 
Ihwer,  for  to  some  of  these  all  Prosperity  appertains. 

Prosperity  in  Children,  and  goods  of  the  Body,  make  Men 
desire  to  exceed  others  in  the  goods  of  Fortune. 

Men  that  Prosper  have*  this  ill,  to  be  more  proud  and  in- 
considerate than  others. 

And  this  good ;  that  they  worship  Gk)d,  trusting  in  him, 
for  that  they  find  themselves  to  receive  more  good  than  pro- 
ceeds from  their  Industry. 

The  Manners  of  Poor  Men,  Obscure  Men,  Men  withotit 
Power,  and  Men  in  Adversity,  may  be  collected  from  the  Con- 
trary of  what  has  been  said. 

CHAP.  XX. 

Qmimon  Places  or  Principles  concerning  what  May  he  Done,  what 
Has  been  Done,  and  what  Shall  be  bone ;  or  of  Fact  Possible, 
Past,  and  Future,    Also  of  Great  and  Little, 

We  have  hitherto  set  down  such  Principles  as  are  pecuHar  to 
several  kinds  of  Orations. 

Now  we  are  to  speak  of fiuch  Places  as  are  Common  to  them 
all ;  as  these,  PossU^le,  Done,  or  Past,  Future,  Great,  SmedL 
Possible  is  that, 

The  Contrary  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  the  like  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  than  which  some  harder  thing  is  Possible. 

And  the  beginning  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  the  end  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  the  usual  consequent  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  whatsoever  we  desire. 

318  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

And  the  beginriing  whereof  is  in  the  power  of  those  whom 
we  can  either  compell  or  perswade.' 

And  part  whereof  is  Possible. 

And  part  of  the  whole  that  is  Possible. 

And  the  Greneral  if  a  Particular. 

And  a  Particular  if  the  General. 

And  of  Relatives,  if  one,  the  other. 

And  that  which  without  Art  and  Industry  iaihgsibley  is 
much  more  so  with  Art  and  Industry. 

And  that  which  is  Possible  to  worse,  weaker,  and  unskilfuller 
Men,  is  much  more  so  to  better,  stronger,  and  more  skilfuL 

The  Principles  concerning  Impossible  are  the  Contraries 
of  these. 

That  HcLS  been  done. 

Than  which  a  harder  thing  has  been  done. 

And  the  consequent  whereof  has  been  done. 

And  that  which  being  Possible,  he  had  a  will  to,  and  no- 
thing hindered. 

And  that  which  was  Possible  to  him  in  his  Anger. 

And  that  which  he  longed  to  do. 

And  that  which  was  before  upon  the  point  of  doing. 

And  whose  antecedent  has  been  done ;  or  that,  for  which  it 
uses  to  be  done. 

And  if  that,  for  whose  cause  we  do  this,  then  this. 

The  Principles  concerning  Not  done  are  the  Contraries 
of  these. 

That  ShaU  be  done. 

Which  some  Man  can,  and  means  to  do. 

And  which  some  Man  can,  and  desires  to  do. 

And  which  is  in  the  waj,  and  upon  the  point  to  be  done. 

And  the  antecedents  whereof  are  past. 

And  the  Motive  whereof  is  past. 

Of  Great  and  Small,  More  and  Less,  see  chap.*Ndi.  book  1. 

CHAP.  XXI. 

Cff  Example,  Similitude,  and  Fables. 

Of   the  Principles  both  general  and  special  from  whence 
Proofs  are  to  be  drawn,  has  been  already  spoken. 

Now  follow  the  Proofs  themselves  which  are  Examples  or 
EnUiymemes. 

CHAP.  XXI.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  319 

An  Example  is  either  an  Example  properly  so  called  (as 
some  Action  past) :  or  a  Similitude  (which  is  called  a  Para- 
"ble) :  or  a  Fable  (which  contains  some  Action  feigned). 

An  JExampk  properly  so  called,  is  this ;  Darius  cams  not 
into  Greece,  till  he  had  first  subdued  ^g3rpt.  Xerxes  also 
conquered  :^gypt  first ;  then  afterwards  crossed  the  Helles- 
pont. We  ought  therefore  to  hinder  the  King  of  Persia  from 
conquering  -^gypt. 

A  Similitude^  or  Parable^  is  such  as  foUoweth :  They  who 
choose  their  Magistrals  by  Lot,  are  like  them  that  choose  for 
their  (tampions  those  on  whom  the  Lot  shall  fall,  rather  than 
those  who  have  the  greatest  strength  ;  and  for  their  Pilot,  not 
him  that  Jiath  skill ;  but  him  whose  name  is  drawn  out  of  the 
Ume, 

A  Fable  is  in  this  manner.  The  Horse  desiring  to  drive 
out  the  Stag  from  his  common  pasture,  took  a  Man  to  assist 
hiniy  and  having  received  into  his  mouth  a  Bridle,  and  a  Rider 
upon  his  Back^  obtained  his  intent,  but  became  subject  to  the 
Man,  So  you  of  Himera,  having  {in  hope  to  be  revenged  of 
your  Enemies)  given  unto  Phalaris  Soveraign  Authority,  that 
is  to  say,  taken  a  Bridle  into  your  Mouths;  if  you  shall  also 
give  him  a  Guard  to  his  Person,  that  is,  let  him  get  up  upon 
your  Backs,  you  become  his  slaves  presently  past  recovery. 

To  find  out  Examples,  that  is,  Actions  done  that  may  serve 
our  purpose,  is  therefore  hard,  because  not  in  our  power. 

But  to  find  Fables  and  Similitudes,  is  easier ;  because  by 
conversing  in  Philosophy,  a  Man  may  feign  somewhat  in  na- 
ture like  to  the  case  in  hand. 

Examples,  Similitudes,  and  Fables,  where  Enthymemes  are 
wanting,  may  serve  us  in  the  beginning  of  an  Oration  for  In- 
ductions; otherwise  are  to  be  alledged  after  Enthymemes  for 
Testimonies. 

CHAP.  XXII, 

Of  a  Sentence, 

A  SENTENCE  is  an  universal  Proposition  concerning 
those  things  which  are  to  be  desired  or  avoided,  in  the  Actions 
or  Passions  of  the  common  life.     As, 

A  wise  Man  unll  not  suffer  his  Children  to  be  over-learned. 

320  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book   n. 

And  is  to  an  Enthymeme  in  Rheioriekf  as  any  ProposUion 
is  to  a  SyUogisme  in  Logick, 

And  therefore  a  Sentence^  if  the  reason  be  rendered,  be* 
comes  a  Canckesion,  and  both  together  make  an  En^ypneme. 
As  for  Example, 

To  he  over4eamedy  besides  that  it  begets  effhrnnaey^  pro- 
cures envy.  Therefore  he  that*s  vnse  wUl  not  st^ffper  Jos  Chil- 
dren to  be  over-learned. 

Of  Sentences  there  be  four  sorts. 
•  For  they  either  require  Proffsy  or  not :  that  is,  are  mani- 
fest, or  not. 

Such  as  are  manifest,  are  either  so,  as  soon  as  they  are  ut- 
tered; as. 

Health  is  a  great  good. 

Or  as  soon  as  they*  are  considered ;  as. 

Men  used  to  hate  whoin  they  have  hurt. 

Such  as  are  not  manifest,  are  either  ConclnsionB  cf  JSnfhy- 
memes;  as, 

He  that*s  wise  will  not  suffer  his  Children,  etc. 

Or  else  are  Enthymenuttical ;  that  is,  have  in  themselves 
the  force  of  an  Enthymeme;  as. 

Mortal  Men  ought  not  to  carry  Immortal  Anger. 

A  Sentence  not  Manifest,  ought  to  be  either  Inferred  or 
Con^rmed. 

Inferred  thus : 

'Tis  not  good  to  be  effeminately  mindly  nor  to  be  envyed 
by  ones  fellow  Citizens.  A  toise  Man  therefore  wiU  not  have 
his  Children  over-learned. 

Confirmed  thus : 

A  wise  Man  will  not  have  his  Children  over-learned,  seeing 
too  much  Learning  both  softens  a  Mans  mind,  4md  procures 
him  envy  among  his  fellow  Citizens. 

If  a  reason  be  added  to  a  manifest  Sentence  let  it  be  short. 

Sentences  become  not  every  Man ;  but  only  old  Men,  and 
such  as  be  well  versed  in  business.  For  to  hear  a  young  Man 
speak  Sentences,  is  ridiculous ;  and  to  hear  an  ignorant  Man 
speak  Sentences,  is  absurd. 

Sentences  generally  received,  when  they  are  for  our  pur- 
pose, ought  not  to  be  neglected,  because  they  pass  for  truths. 
And  yet  they  may  be  denyed,  when  any  laudable  custom,  or 
humour  may  thereby  be  made  appear  in  the  Denyer. 

CHAP.  XXIII.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  321 

The  commodities  of  Sentences^  are  two. 

One  proceeding  .from  the  Vanity  of  the  Hearer,  who  takes 
for  true  universally  affirmed,  that  which  he  has  found  for  true 
only  in  some  particular ;  and  therefore  a  Man  ought  to  con- 
sider in  every  thing  what  opinion  the  Hearer  holds. 

Another  is,  that  Sentences  do  discover  the  manners  and 
disposition  of  the  speaker ;  so  that  if  they  be  esteemed  good 
Sentences,  he  shall  be  esteemed  a  good  Man ;  and  if  evil,  an 
evil  Man. 

Thus  much  of  Sentences,  what  they  be ;  of  how  many  sorts ; 
bow  to  be  used ;  whom  they  become  ;  and  what  is  their  profit. 

CHAP.  XXIIL 
Cf  tlie  Invention  of  Enthymemes. 

Seeiko  an  Enthymeme  Offers  from  a  Logical  Sylhgisme,  in 
that  it  neither  concludes  out  of  every  thing,  nor  out  of  re- 
mote Principles;  the  Places  of  it,  from  whence  a  Man  may 
argue,  ought  to  be  certain,  and  determinate. 

And  because  whosoever  makes  a  SyUogisme  Bketarical,  or 
other,  should  know  all,  or  the  most  part  of  that  which  is  in 
question;  as,  whosoever  is  to  advise  the  Athenians  in  the 
question,  whether  they  are  to  make  "War  or  no,  must  know 
ivhat  their  Revenues  be ;  what,  and  what  kind  of  power  they 
have :  and  he  that  will  praise  them,  must  know  their  acts  at 
Salamis,  Marathon,  etc.  It  will  be  necessary  for  a  good 
speaker  to  have  in  readiness  the  choicest  particulars  of  what- 
soever he  foresees  he  may  speak  of. 

He  that  is  to  speak  ex  tempore,  must  comprehend  in  his 
speech  as  much  as  he  can  of  what  is  most  proper  in  the  mat- 
ter in  hand. 

Proper,  I  call  those  things  which  are  least  common  to  others ; 
as,  he- that  will  praise  Achilles,  is  not  to  declare  such  things 
as  are  common  both  to  him,  and  Diomedes;  as  that  he  was  a 
Prince,  and  warred  agaipst  the  Trojans;  but  such  things  as 
are  proper  only  to  Achilles;  as  that  he  killed  Hector  and 
Cygnus;  went  to  the  War  young,  and  voluntary. 

Let  this  therefore  be  one  general  Place,  from  that  which  is 
proper. 

322  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  u 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

Of  the  Places  of  Enthymemes  Ostensive. 

Forasmuch  as  Enthymemes  either  infer  truly,  or  seem  only 
80  to  do ;  and  they  which  do  infer  indeed,  be  either  Ostensive; 
or  such  as  bring  a  man  to  some  impossibility ;  we  will  first 
set  down  the  Places  of  Enthymemes  Ostensive, 

An  Ostensive  Enthymeme  is,  wherein  a  man  conclades  the 
question  from  somewhat  granted. 

That  Enthymeme  which  brings  a  Man  to  an  impossibility, 
is  an  Enthymeme  wherein  from  that  which  the  Adversary 
maintaineth,  we  conclude  that  which  is  manifestly  impossible. 

All  PlcLces  have  been  already  set  down  in  a  manner  in  the 
precedent  Propositions  of  Good,  Evil,  Just,  Unjust,  Honour- 
able,  and  Dishonourable:  namely,  they  have  been  set  down  as 
applyed  to  Particular  Subjects,  or  in  Concrete. 

Here  they  are  to  be  set  down  in  another  manner ;  namely 
in  the  Abstract  or  Universal. 

The  first  Place  then  let  be  from  Contraries,  which  in  the 
Concrete  or  Particulars  is  exemplified  thus.  If  Intemperance 
be  hurtful,  Temperance  is  profitable:  and  if  Intemperance  be 
not  hurtful,  neither  is  Temperance  profitable. 

Another  Place  may  be  from  Cognomination  or  affinity  of 
words :  as  in  this  Particular,  ijf  tvhat  is  Just  be  Good ; 
then  what  is  justly  is  well :  but  justly  to  die  is  not  well :  there- 
fore not  all  that  is  Just  is  Good. 

A  third  from  Relatives;  as.  This  Man  has  justly  done, 
therefore  the  other  has  justly  suffered.  But  this  Place  some- 
times deceives,  for  a  m^n  may  suffer  yi«%,  yet  not  from  him. 

A  fourth  from  Comparison,  three  ways. 

From  the  Chreat  to  the  Less :  as,  He  ha^  stricken  his  Father; 
and  therefore  this  Man. 

From  the  Less  to  the  Greater :  as,  The  Gods  know  not  all 
things;  much  less  Man. 

From  Equality:  as,  J£  Captains  be  not  always  the  worse 
esteemed  for  losing  a  Victory;  why  should  Sophisters  ? 

Another  from  tl^e  Time:  as  Philip  to  the  Thebans:  If  I 
had  required  to  pass  through  your  Country  with  my  Army, 
before^  I  had  ayded  you  against  the  Phocaeans,  there  is  no 

CHAP.  XXIV.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  323    , 

cLoubt  but  you  would  have  promised  it  me.     It  is  absurd  there' 
yore  to  deny  it  me  now^  after  I  have  trusted  you. 

A  sixth  from  what  the  Adversary  says  of  himself:  as, 
Iphicrates  ashed  Aristophon,  whether  he  would  tahe  a  Bribe 
to  betray  the  Army ;  and  he  arisweririg  no;  What  (say  he) 
is  it  Uhely  that  Iphicrates  would  betray  the  Army;  and  Aris- 
tophon  not? 

This  Place  would  be  ridiculous,  where  the  J)efendant  were 
not  in  much  more  estimation  than  the  Accuser, 

A  seventh  from  the  Definition;  as  that  of  Socrates;  a  Spi- 
fit  is  either  Gody  or  ^e  Creature  of  God:  and  therefore 
he  denies  not  that  there  is  a  God^  that  confesses  there  are 
Spirits, 

An  eighth  from  the  distinction  of  an  ambiguous  word. 

A  ninth  from  Division :  as,  If  all  Men  do  what  they  do  for 
one  of  three  causes^  whereof  two  are  impossible  ;  and  the  Ac- 
cuser  charge  not  the  Defendant  with  the  third;  it  follows  that 
he  has  not  done  it. 

A  tenth  from  Induction :  as,  At  Athens,  at  Thebes,  at 
Sparta,  etc.     And  therefore  every  where. 

An  eleventh  from  Authority,  or  precedent  sentence ;  as  that 
of  Sapphoy  that  Death  is  evil,  for  that  the  Gods  have  judged  it 
so,  in  exempting  themselves  from  mortality, 

A  twelfth  from  the  Conseqtience :  as,  '  Tis  not  good  to  be 
envied;  therefore  neither  to  be  learned,  *Tis  good  to  be  wise, 
therefore  also  to  be  instructed, 

A  thirteenth  from  two  contrary  Consequences  ;  as, '  Tis  not 
good  to  be  an  Orator,  because  if  he  speak  the  truth,  he  shall 
displease  Men :  If  he  speak  falsely,  he  shall  displease  God. 

Here  is  to  be  noted,  that  sometimes  this  argument  may  be 
retorted  :  as  thus.  If  you  speak  truth,  you  shall  please  God;  if 
you  speak  untruth,  you  shall  please  men:  therefore  by  all 
means  be  an  Orator, 

A  Fourteenth  from  the  quality  that  Men  have  to  praise  one 
thing,  and  approve  another :  as,  We  ought  not  to  war  against 
the  Athenians  upon  no  precedent  injury ;  for  all  Men  discom^ 
mend  injustice.  Again,  We  ought  to  war  against  the  Athenians ; 
for  otherwise  our  Liberty  is  at  their  mercy,  that  is,  is  no  Liberty  ; 
but  the  preservation  of  Liberty  is  a  thing  that  all  Men  tvill 
approve, 

A  Fifteenth  from  Proportion :   as,  seeing  we  naturalize 
Y  2 

'  334  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  n 

Uramgert  far  Anr  verimeM,  why  dUmId  we  noi  banish  Ms 
stranger  far  his  vices  f 

A  Sixteenth  from  dke  stmnitude  of  Ctmsequeids  :  aSySeikai 
demes  the  inumoriaiiiif  tf  die  Gods^is  no  worse  than  he  that  has 
written  ^generatUm  cfthe  Gods.  For  the  same  Consequence 
follows  t^  bothy  that  sometimes  there  are  none. 

A  Seyenteenth  from  that,  that  Men  change  their  mind:  as, 
If  when  we  were  in  Banishment,  we  fought  to  recover  our 
Countrg,  why  should  we  not  fight  now  to  retain  itf 

An  Eighteenth  frtxn  aflaned  end:  aS|  that  Diomedes  ckose 
UljBses  to  go  with  him,  not  as  more  valiant  than  ano^er^  but 
as  one  that  would  partahe  less  of  the  Glory, 

A  Nineteenth  from  the  Cause;  as  if  he  would  infer  he  did 
it  from  this,  that  he  had  Cause  to  do  it. 

A  Twentieth  from  diat  which  is  Incredible,  but  True:  as, 
^at  Laws  may  need  a  Law  to  mend  them;  as  well  as  Fish 
bred  in  the  salt  Water,  may  need  salting. 

CHAP.  XXV. 

Of  the  Places  ofErdhymemes  that  lead  to  J^possibiUty. 

Let  the  first  Fkuie  be  from  intpection  of  Times,  Actions,  or 
Words,  either  of  the  Adversary,  or  of  the  Speaher,  or  both. 
Of  the  Adversary;  as,  He  says,  he  hves  the  People,  and  yet 
he  was  in  the  Conspiracy  of  the  Thirty.  Of  the  Speaher;  as, 
He  says,  I  am  contentious,  and  yet  I  never  began  Suit.  Of 
both  ;  as,  Jle  never  conferred  any  thing  to  the  benefit  of  the 
Commonwealth,  whereas  I  have  ransomed  divers  CiHzens  with 
mine  oton  Money. 

A  Second,  from  shewing  the  cause  of  that  which  seemed 
amiss,  and  serves  for  Men  of  good  reputation  that  are  ac- 
cused ;  as.  The  Mother  that  was  accused  of  Incest  for  being 
seen  embracing  her  Son,  was  absolved  as  soon  as  she  made 
appear,  that  she  embraced  him  upon  his  arrival  from  far,  by 
Way  of  Salutation. 

A  Third,  from  rendring  of  the  cause ;  as,  Leodamas,  to 
whom  it  was  objected,  that  he  had,  under  the  Thirty  Tyrants, 
defaced  the  Inscription  (which  the  People  had  set  up  in  a 
Pillar)  of  his  Ignominy ;  answered.  He  had  not  done  it;  be- 
cause it  would  have  been  more  to  hiscommod^to  let  it  stand; 

CHAP.  XXVI.]  ART  OP  BHETOBICK.  325 

thereby  to  indear  hi$n»elfto  the  TyranUy  by  Ae  Testimony  of 
the  Peoples  hatred.  - 

A  Fourth,  from  better  Counsel ;  as,  He  might  have  done 
better  for  himself ;  therefore  he  did  not  this.  But  this  Flaee 
deceives,  when  the  better  Counsel  comes  to  mind  after  the 
Fact. 

A  Fifdi,  from  IncompatibiUty  qf  the  things  to  be  done  ;  as, 
They  that  did  deliherate  whether  they  should  hoth  mourn  and 
sacrifice  at  the  Funeral  of  Leucothea,  w^re  told,  that  if  they 
thought  her  a  Goddess,  they  ought  not  to  Mourn  ^  and  if  they 
thought  her  a  Mortal,  they  ought  not  to  Sacrifice. 

A  Sixth,  (which  is  proper  to  Judicial  Orations,)  from  an 
Inference  of  Errour;  sa,  ff  he  did  it  not,  he  was  not  wise, 
therefore  he  did  itK 

Enthymemes  that  lead  to  Impossibility,  please  more  than 
Ostensive:    for  they  compare,  and  put  contraries  together, 
whereby  they  are  the  better  set  off,  and  more  conspicuous  to  ~ 
the  Auditor.  \ 

Of  all  Enthymemes,  they  be  best,  which  we  assent  to  as 
soon  as  hear.  For  such  consent  pleaseth  us ;  and  makes  us 
favourable  to  the  Speaker. 

CHAP.  XXVI. 

Of  the  Places  of  seeming  Enthymemes. 

Of  seeming  Enthymemes,  one  Place  may  be  from  the  Form  of 
speaking;  as  when  a  Man  has  repeated  divers  Sentences,  he 
brings  in  his  Conclusion,  as  if  it  followed  necessarily,  though 
it  do  not. 

A  Second  from  an  ambiguous  word. 

A  Third  from  that  which  is  true  divided,  to  that  which  is 

false  joyned;  as  that  of  Orestes,  It  was  justice  that  I  should 

revenge  my  Fathers  death,  and  it  was  justice  my  Mother  should 

die  for  hilling  my  Father,  therefore  I  justly  hilled  my  Mother^ 

Or  from  that  which  is  true  joyned,  to  that  which  is  false 

1  Aristotle  mentions  a  teventh  element,  deriyahle  from  puns  upon 
n^ords.  This  however  our  analyst  entirely  overlooks;  from  the  con- 
sideration probably  that  it  could  contribute  but  little  to  the  argumentative 
strength  of  an  oration ;  or  because  it  may  be  applied  no  less  to  eonfirma' 
tion  than  to  refutation. 

326  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  ii. 

divided ;    as,  one  cup  of  Wine,  and  one  cup  of  WlnCy  are 
hurtful;  therefore 'one  cup  of  Wine  is  hurtftd, 

A  Fourth  from  Amplification  of  the  Crime,  For  neither  is 
the  Defendant  likely  to  have  committed  the  Crime  he  ampU- 
fies ;  nor  does  the  Accuser  seem,  when  he  is  passionate,  to 
want  ground  for  his  Accusation. 

A  Fifth  from  signs;  as«  when  a  Man  concludes  the  doing  of 
the  Fact  from  the  manner  of  his  life. 

A  Sixth  from  that  which  comes  by  chance,  as  if  from  this, 
that  the  Tjrrannj  of  Hipparchus  came  to  be  overthrown  from 
the  love  of  Aristogeiton  to  Harmodius,  a  Man  should  conclude, 
that  in  a  free  Common-wealth  loving  of  Boys  were  profitable, 

A  Seventh  from  the  Consequence,  as  Banishment  is  to  be 
desired,  because  a  banished  Man  has  choice  of  places  to  dwell  in. 

An  Eighth  from  making  that  the  cause  which  is  not;  as,  In 
,■  Demosthenes  his  Government,  the  War  began;  therefore  De- 
mosthenes governed  well.     With  the  Pelponnesian  War  be- 
gan the  Plague,  therefore  Pericles  that  perswaded  that  War, 
did  ill,     , 

A  Ninth  from  the  Omission  of  some  circumstance,  as, 
Helen  did  what  was  lawful,  when  she  ran  away  with  Paris, 
because  she  had  her  Father^ s  consent  to  choose  her  •own  Hus- 
band; which  was  true  only  dming  the  time  that  she  had  not 
chosen. 

A  Tenth,  from  that  which  is  probable  in  some  case,  to  that 
which  is  probable  simply;  as,  ^Tis  probable,  he  foresaw,  that  if 
he  did  it,  he  should  be  suspected;  therefore  'tis  probable  he  did 
it  not. 

From  this  Fiace  one  may  infer  both  ways  that  he  did  it  not. 
For  if  he  be  not  likely  to  do  it,  it  may  be  thought  he  did  it  not, 
again,  if  he  were  likely  to  do  it,  it  may  be  thought  he  did  it  not, 
for  this,  that  he  knew  he  should  be  suspected. 

Upon  this  Place  was  grounded  the  Art,  which  was  so  much 
detested  in  Protagoras,  of  making  the  better  cause  seem  the 
worse ;  and  the  worse  the  better. 

CHAP.  XXVII.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  327 

CHAP.  XXVII. 

Of  the  Wayes  to  answer  the  Arguments  of  the  Adversary. 

An  Argument  is  answered  by  an  opposite  SyUogisme^  or  by  an 
Objection, 

The  Placed  of  opposite  Syllogismes  are  the  same  with  the 
Places  of  SyllogismeSy  or  Enthymemes:  for  a  Rhetorical  Syl' 
logisme  is  an  Enthymeme, 

The  Places  of  Objections  are  four. 

First,  from  the  same,  as,  To  the  Adversary  that  proves 
love  to  be  good  by  an  Enthymeme^  may  be  objected,  that  ruf 
want  is  good,  and  yet  Love  is  want;  or  particularly  thus :  The 
Love  of  Myrrha  to  her  Father  was  not  good. 

The  Second  from  Contraries:  as,  if  the  Adversary  say,  A 
good  Man  does  good  to  his  friends,  an  O^ec^'o/z  might  be 
made,  that  then  an  evil  Man  wUl  do  also  evil  to  his  friends. 

The  Third  from  Similitude:  as  thus,  if  the  Adversary  say, 
all  Men  that  are  injured,  do  hate  those  that  have  injured  them, 
it  may  be  objected,  that  then,  all  Men  that  had  received  Bene- 
Jits  should  love  their  Benefactors,  that  is  to  say,  be  gratefuL 

The  Fourth  from  the  authority  of  famous  men;  as  when  a 
Man  shall  say,  that  drunken  Men  ought  to  be  pardoned  those 
Acts  they  do  in  their  drunkenness,  because  they  know  not 
what  they  do ;  the  Objection  may  be,  that  Pittacus  wa^  of  an- 
other mind,  that  appointed  for  such  Acts  a  double  punishment; 
one  for  the  Act,  another  for  the  Drunkenness. 

And  forasmuch  as  all  Enthymemes  are  drawn  from  Proba- 
bility, or  Example,  or  from  a  Sign  Fallibley  or  from  a  Sign 
Infallible:  an  Enthymeme  from  Probability  may  be  confuted 
really,  by  shewing  that  for  the  most  part  it  falls  out  other- 
wise ;  but  apparently  or  sophistically,  by  shewing  only  that  it 
does  not  fall  out  so  alwayes ;  whereupon  the  Judge  thinks  the 
Probability  not  sufficient  to  ground  his  Sentence  upon. 

[The  Reason  whereof  is  this.  That  the  Judge,  while  he 
hears  the  Fact  proved  probable,  conceives  it  as  true.  For 
the  Understanding  has  no  Object  but  Truth.  And 
therefore  by  and  by,  when^  he  shall  hear  bxt Instance  to 
the  contrary ;  and  thereby  find  that  he  had  no  necessity 
to  think  it  true,  presently  changes  his  opinion,  and  thinks 
it  false,  and  consequently  not  so  much  as  probable.    For 

328  THE  ART  OF  RHETOBICK.  [book  ii 

he  cannot  at  one  time  think  the  same  thing  hoth  probable 
and  false :  and  he  that  says  a  thing  is  probable^  the 
meaning  is,  he  thinks  it  true^  but  finds  not  arguments 
enough  to  prove  it.] 
An  EfUhymeme  from  tkfaUible  sian^  is  answered,  bj  sheinr- 
ing  the  sign  to  be  fallible. 

An  EfUhymeme  from  an  Example^  is  answered,  as  an  En- 
thymeme  from  Probability;  reallj,  by  shewing  more  Exaan- 
pies  to  the  contrary;  apparently ^  if  he  bring  Examples 
enough  to  make  it  seem  not  necessary. 

If  the  Adversary  have  more  Examples  than  we,  wo  must 
make  appear  that  they  are  not  applycable  to  the  Case. 

An  Enthymeme  from  an  infallible  sign^  if  the  Propositicm 
be  true^  is  unanswerable. 

CHAP.  xxvm. 

Amplification  and  Extenuation  are  not  Common  Places.  Enthymemes 
by  which  Arguments  are  answered,  are  the  same  with  those  by 
which  the  Matter  in  question  is  proved,  or  disproved.  Objections 
are  not  Enthymemes. 

Thb  first,  that  Amplification  and  Extentiation  are  not  Com- 
mon Pkujes,  appears  by  this,  that  Amplification  and  Extenu- 
ation do  prove  a  fact  to  be  greats  or  little;  and  are  therefore 
Enthymemes,  to  be  drawn  &om  Common  Places^  and  therefore 
are  not  the  Places  themselves. 

The  second,  that  Entl^ymemes,  by  which  Arguments  are 
answered,  are  of  the  same  kind  with  those  by  which  the  mat- 
ter in  question  is  proved,  is  manifest  by  this»  that  these  infer 
the  opposite  of  what  was  proved  by  the  other. 

The  third,  that  an  Objection  is  no  Enthymeme^  is  apparent 
by  this,  that  an  Objection  is  no  more  but  an  Opinion^  Exam-^ 
pie,  or  other  Instance^  produced  to  make  appear,  that  the  Ad- 
versaries Argument  does  not  conclude. 

Thus  much  of  Examples^  Sentences^  EnthymemeSy  and  ge- 
nerally of  all  things  that  belong  to  Argumentation;  from  what 
Places  they,  may  be  drawn,  or  answered. 

There  remains  Elocution  and  Disposition  to  be  spoken  of 
in  the  next  Book. 

BOOK  III. 

CHAP.  I. 

Of  the  Original  of  Elocution  and  Pronuntiation, 

Three  things  being  neoessarj  to  an  Ontiiony  namelj,  Proof, 
JElocuHon,  and  Disposition  ;  we  have  done  with  the  first,  and 
shall  speak  of  the  other  two  in  that  which  follows. 

As  for  Action,  or  Pronuntiationy  so  much  as  is  necessary 
for  an  Oratory  may  be  fetcht  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Art  of 
Poetry,  in  which  we  have  treated  of  the  Action  of  the  Stage, 

For  Tragedians  were  the  first  that  invented  such  Action, 
and  that  but  of  late ;  and  it  consisteth  in  governing  well  the 
magnitude,  tone,  and  measure  of  the  Voice;  a  thing  less  sub- 
ject to  Art,  than  is  either  Proof,  or  Elocution, 

And  yet  there  have  been  Rules  delivered  concerning  it,  as 
far  forth  as  serve  for  Poetry, 

3ut  Oratorical  Action  has  not  been  hitherto  reduced  to  Art, 

And  Orators  in  the  beginning,  when  they  saw  that  the 
Poets  in  barren  and  feigned  Arguments,  nevertheless  attained 
great  Reputation ;  supposing  it  had  proceeded  from  the  choice, 
or  connexion  of  words,  fell  into  a  Stile,  by  imitation  of  them, 
iqpproaching  to  Verse,  and  made  choice  of  words. 

But  when  the  Poets  changed  their  Stile,  and  laid  by  all 
words  that  were  nc^t  in  common  use,  the  Orators  did  the  same, 
and  lighted  at  last  upon  words,  and  a  Government  of  the 
Voice  and  Measures  proper  to  themselves. 

Seeing  therefore  Pronuntiation,  or  Action  are  in  some  de* 
gree  necessary  also  for  an  Orator,  the  Fk^cepts  thereof  are 
to  be  fetcht  from  the  Art  of  Poetry, 

[In  the  mean  time  this  may  be  one  general  rule.  If  the 
Words,  Tone,  Greatness  of  the  Voice,  Gesture  of  the 
Body  and  Countenance,  seem  to  proceed  all  from  one 
Passion,  then  'tis  wdl  pronounced.     Otherwise  not. 

330  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  Ibook   in. 

For  when  there  appear  more  passions  than  one  at  once, 
the  mind  of  the  Speaker  appears  unnatural  and  dis- 
tracted. Otherwise,  as  the  mind  of  the  Speaker,  so  the 
mind  of  the  Hearer  always.] 

CHAP.  II. 

Of  the  Choice  of  Wards  and  Epithets. 

The  Vertues  of  a  Word  are  two ;  the  first,  that  it  be  persptcu- 
ous ;  the  second,  that  it  be  decent ;  that  is,  neither  (zbove,  nor 
below  the  thing  signified ;  or,  neither  too  humble,  nor  too  fine. 

Perspicuous  are  all  Words  that  be  Proper, 

Fine  Words  are  those,  that  are  borrowed^  or  Translated 
'  from  other  significations ;  of  which  in  the  Art  of  Poetry, 

The  reason  why  borrowed  Words  please,  is  this.  Men  are 
affected  with  Wordsy  as  they  are  with  Men^  admiring  in  both 
that  which  is  Forraign  and  New, 

To  make  a  Poem  graceful,  many  things  help ;  but  few  an 
Oration. 

For  to  a  Poet  it  sufficeth  with  what  Words  he  can  set  out 
his  Poem:  but  an  Orator  must  not  only  do  that;  but  also 
seem  not  to  do  it :  for  else  he  will  be  thought  to  speak  un- 
naturally, and  not  as  he  thinks ;  and  thereby  be  the  less 
believed ;  vhereas  belief  is  the  scope  of  his  Oration, 

The  Words  that  an  Orator  ought  to  use  are  of  three  sorts. 
Proper;  such  as  are  Received;  and  Metaphors, 

Words  taken  from  Forraign  Languages,  Words  compounded, 
and  Words  new  coyned,  are  seldom  to  be  used. 

Synonimaes  belong  to  PoetSy  and  Equivocal  Words  to 
Sophisters, 

An  Orator  J  if  he  use  Proper  Words,  and  Received,  and 
good  Metaphors,  shall  both  make  his  Oration  beautiful,  and 
not  seem  to  intend  it ;  and  shall  speak  perspicuously.    For  in 
a  Metaphor  alone  there  is  Perspicuity,  Novity,  and  Sweetness. 
Concerning  Metaphors  the  Rules  are  these. 

1.  He  that  will  make  the  best  of  a  thing,  let  him  draw  his 
Metaphor  from  somewhat  that  is  better.  As  for  Example, 
let  him  call  a  Crime,  an  Error.  •  On  the  other  side,  when  he 
would  make  the  worst  of  it,  let  him  draw  his  Metaphor  from 
somewhat  worse,  as,  calling  Error,  Crime. 

CHAP.  III.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  331 

2.  A  Metaphor  ought  not  to  be  so  far  fetcht,  as  that  the 
Similitude  may  not  easily  appear. 

3.  A  Metaphor  ought  to  be  drawn  from  the  noblest  things, 
as  the  Poets  do  that  choose  rather  to  say,  Rosy-fingered^ 
than  Red-fingered  Aurora,  • 

In  like  manner  the  Rule  of  Epithets  is, 
That  he  that  will  adorn,  should  use  those  of  the  better  sort ; 
and  he  that  will  disgrace,  should  use  those  of  the  worse :  as 
Simonides  being  to  Write  an  Ode  in  honour  of  the  Victory 
gotten  in  a  Course  by  certain  Mules,  being  not  well  paid,  called 
them  by  their  name  [*H/iioyovc]  that  signifies  their  propinquity 
to  Asses :  but  having  received  a  greater  reward,  stiles  them 
the  Sans  of  swift-footed  Coursers* 

CHAP.   III. 
Of  the  Things  that  make  an  Oration  Flat 

The  things  that  make  an  Oration  fiat  or  insipide,  are  four. 

1.  Words  Compounded;  [and  yet  a  Man  may  Compound 
a  word,  when  the  Composition  is  necessary,  for  want  of  a 
simple  word ;  and  easie,  and  seldom  used.] 

2.  Forraign  Words,  As  for  Example,  such  as  are  newly 
"derived  from  the  Latine;  which  though  they  were  proper 
among  them  whose  tongue  it  is,  are  Forraign  in  another  Lan- 
guage :  and  yet  these  may  be  used,  so  it  be  moderately. 

3.  Long,  impertinent,  and  often  Epithets. 

4.  Metaphors,  indecent,  and  obscure.  Obscure  they  are, 
when  they  are  far  fetcht.  Indecent  when  they  are  ridiculous, 
as  in  Comedies  ;  or  too  grave,  as  in  Tragedies. 

CHAP.   IV. 

Of  a  Similitude. 

A  SIMILITUDE  differs  from  a  Metaphor  only  by  such  Par- 
ticles of  Comparison  as  these.  As  ;  Even  as  ;  So  ;  Even  so,  etc. 
A  Similitude  therefore  is  a  Metaphor  dilated;  and  a  Meta- 
phor ia  a  Similitude  Contracted  into  one  Word. 

'A  Similitude  does  well  in  an  Oration,  so  it  be  not  too  fre- 
quent ;  for  'tis  Poetical. 

333  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  in 

An  Example  of  a  Similiiude,  is  thiB  <^  Pericles;  that  said 
in  his  Oration,  ^ai  the  Bsotians  were  like  to  so  many  Oaks 
m  a  Wood,  thai  did  nothing  but  beat  one  another, 

CHAP.  V. 
€fthe  Purity  cf  Language, 

Four  things  are  necessary  to  make  Language  Pure. 

1.  The  right  rendring  of  those  Particles  which  some  ante- 
cedent Particle  does  require :  as  to  a  Not  onfyj  a  Not  aUo  ; 
and  then  thej  are  rendered  right,  when  thej  are  not  sus- 
pended too  long. 

2.  7^  use  of  proper  Words,  rather  than  Circumlocutions^ 
unless  there  be  motive  to  make  one  do  it  of  purpose. 

.  3.  That  there  be  nothing  tof  double  construction,  unless 
there  be  cause  to  do  it  of  purpose.  As  the  Prophets  (of  the 
Heathen)  who  speak  in  general  terms,  to  the  end  thej  may 
the  better  maintain  the  truth  of  thmr  Prophesies ;  which  is 
easier  maintained  in  generals,  than  in  particulars.  For  'tis 
easier  to  divine,  whe^er  a  number  be  even  or  odd,  than  how 
many;  and  that  a  thing  wiU  be,  than  wJwt  it  toill  be. 

4.  Concordance  of  Grender,  Number,  and  Person ;  as  not  to 
say  Him  for  Her ;  Man  for  Men ;  Hath  for  Have. 

In  Summ ;  a  Man's  Language  ought  to  be  easiefor  another 
to  read,  pronounce,  and  point. 

Besides,  to  divers  Antecedents,  let  divers  Relatives,  or  one 
common  to  them  all,  be  correspondent:  as,  He  saw  the 
Colour;  He  heard  the  Sound;  or  He  perceived  bo  A  CoUmr 
and  Sound  ;  but  by  no  means,  He  heard  or  saw  both. 

Lastly,  that  which  is  to  be  interposed  by  Parenthesis,  let  it 
be  done  quickly :  as,  I  purposed,  having  spoken  to  him  {to  this, 
and  this  purpose)  afterward  to  he  gone.  For  to  put  it  off 
thus :  /  resolved,  after  I  had  spoken  to  hifn,  to  be  gone  ;  but 
the  subject  of  my  speech  was  to  this  and  Ms  purpose,  is  vitious. 

CHAP.  VI, 
Of  the  Amplitude  and  Tenuity  of  Language. 

A  MAN  shall  add  Amplitude,  or  Dignity  to  his  Language,  but 
by  such  means  as  these. 

1.  By  changing  the  Name  with  the  Definition,  as  occasion 

CHAP,  vii.]  ABT  OF  RHETORICK.  333 

sball  serve.     As  when  the  Name  shall  be  indecent,  by  using 
tlie  Definition;  or  Contrary. 

2.  Bj  Metaphors, 

3.  By  using  the  plural  number  for  the  singular. 

4.  By  privative  Epithets. 

CHAP.  VII. 
Cfthe  Convenience  or  Decency  of  Elocution. 

ELOCUTIONS  are  made  Decent, 

1.  By  speaking  feeUngly;  that  is,  with  such  Passion  as  is 
fit  for  the  matter  he  is  in ;  as  Angerly  in  matter  of  Injury, 

2.  By  speaking  as  becomes  the  Person  of  the  Speaker;  as 
for  a  Gendeman  to  speak  eruditely. 

3.  By  speaking  proportionahly  to  the  matter ;  as  of  great 
chairs  to  speak  in  a  high  ;  and  of  mean,  in  a  low  Stile. 

4.  By  abstaining  from  Compounded,  and  from  Outlandish 
words ;  unless  a  Man  speak  passionately,  and  have  already 
moved,  and,  as  it  were,  inebriated  his  Hearers.    Or  Ironically. 

It  confers  also  to  perswasion  very  much,  to  use  these  ordin- 
BXj  Forms  of  speaking,  All  men  know;  *Tw  confessed  by  all; 
JNo  Man  tvitt  deny,  and  the  like.  For  the  Hearer  consents, 
surprized  with  thefbar  to  be  esteemed  the  only  Ignorant  Man. 

*Tis  good  also,  halving  used  a  word  that  signifies  more  than 
the  matter  requires,  to  abstain  from  the  Pronunciation  and 
Countenance  that  to  such  a  word  belongs :  that  the  Dispro-' 
portion  between  it  and  the  matter  may  the  less  appear.  And 
when  a  Man  has  said  too  much,  it  will  shew  well  to  correct 
'  himself :  for  he  will  get  belief  by  seeming  to  consider  what 
he  says. 

[But  in  this  a  Man  must  have  a  care  not  to  be  too  precise 
in  shewing  of  this  Consideration.  For  the  ostentation  of 
Carefulness  is  an  argument  oftentimes  of  lying ;  as  may  be 
observed  in  such  as  tell  particularities  not  easily  observed, 
when  they  would  be  thought  to  speak  more  precise  truth  than 
is  required.] 

334  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

CHAP.  VIII«. 
qftwoSortsofStOes. 

There  be  two  sorts  of  Stiles. 

The  one  continued  or  to  be  comprehended  at  once;  the 
other  divided^  or  distinguished  by  Periods. 

The  first  sort  was  in  use  with  antient  Writers :  but  is  now 
out  of  date. 

An  Example  of  this  Stile  is  in  the  History  of  Herodotus ; 
wherein  there  is  no  Period  till  the  end  of  the  whole  History. 

IvL  the  other  kind  of  Stiley  that  is  distinguished  by  Periods ; 
a  Period  is  such  a  part  as  is  perfect  in  it  self,  and  has  such 
length  as  may  easily  be  comprehended  by  the  understanding. 

This  later  kind  is  pleasant ;  the  forfper  unpleasant,  because 
this  appears  finite,  the  other  infinite :  in  this  the  Heifer  has 
always  somewhat  set  out,  and  terminated  to  him ;  in  the  other 
he  fore-sees  no  end,  and  has  nothing  finished  to  him  $  this 
may  easily  be  committed  to  memory,  because  of  the  measure 
and  cadence  (which  is  the  cause  that  Verses  be  easily  remem- 
bered) ;  the  other  not. 

Every  Sentence  ought  to  end  with  the  period,  and  nothing 
to  be  interposed. 

Period  is  either  simple,  or  divided  into  Parts. 

Simple  is  that  which  is  Indivisible;  as,  I  wonder  you  fear 
not  their  ends,  whose  actions  you  imitate. 

A  Period  divided,  is  that  which  not  only  has  perfection  and 
length  convenient,  for  respiration,  but  also  Parts,  As,  I  won- 
der  you  are  not  afraid  of  their  ends,  seeing  you  imitate  their 
actions:  where  in  these  words,  /  wonder  you  are  not  afraid 
of  their  ends,  is  one  Colon,  or  Part;  and  in  these,  Seeing  you 
imitate  their  actions,  another:  and  both  together  make  the 
Period. 

The  parts,  or  members,  and  periods  of  speech  ought  neither 
to  be  too  long,  nor  too  short. 

Too  long  are  they,  which  are  produced  beyond  the  expect- 
ation of  the  Hearer. 

Too  short  are  they,  that  end  before  he  expects  it. 

■  Hobbes  has  orerlooked  Aristotle's  8th  chapter  "  on  Rhythm." 

CHAP.  IX.]    '  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  335 

Those  that  he  too  long,  leave  the  Hearer  hehind,  like  him 
tliat  walking,  goes  hejond  the  usual  end  of  the  Walk,  and 
thereby  out-goes  him  that  walks  with  him. 

Thej  that  he  too  short,  make  the  Heai'er  stumhle;  for 
Tvlien  he  looks  far  before  him,  the  end  stops  him  before  he  be 
avrare. 

A  period  that  is  divided  into  parts,  is  either  divided  only; 
or  has  also  an  Opposition  of  the  Parts  one  to  another. 

Divided  only  is  such  as  this :  This  the  Senate  hnows;  the 
C€?nsul  sees;  and  yet  the  Man  lives. 

A  Period  with  Opposition  of  Parts,  called  also  Antithesis, 
and  the  parts  AnUthetd,  is  when  contrary  parts  are  put  toge- 
ther ;  or  also  joyned  by  a  third. 

Contrary  parts  are  put  together,  as  here,  The  one  has  oh- 
tained  Glory,  the  other  Riches;  both  by  my  benefit 

Antitheta  are  therefore  acceptable  '^  because  not  only  the 
parts  appear  the  better  for  the  opposition ;  but  also  for  that 
they  carry  with  them  a  certain  appearance  of  that  kind  of  En- 
thymeme,  which  leads  to  Impossibility. 

Parts,  or  Members  of  a  Period,  are  said  to  be  eqtuil,  when 
they  have  altogether,  or  almost  equal  Number  of  Syllables. 

Parts,  or  Members  of  a  Period,  arte  said  to  be  like,  when 
they  begin,  or  end  alike :  and  the '  more  Similitudes,  and  the 
greater  eqtiality  there  is  of  Syllables,  the  more  graceful  is  the 
Period. 

CHAP.  IX. 

Of  those  Things  that  grace  an  Oration,  and  make  it  delightful. 

Forasmuch  as  there  is  nothing  more  delightful  to  a  Man, 
than  to  find  that  he  apprehends  and  learns  easily  ;  it  neces- 
sarily follows,  that  those  Words  are  most  grateful  to  the  Ear, 
that  make  a  Man  seem  to  see  before  his  Eyes  the  things  sig- 
nified. 

And  therefore  Forraign  Words  are  unpleasant,  because 
Obscure;  and  Plain  Words,  because  too  Manifest,  making  us 
learn  nothing  new:  but  Metaphors  please;  for  they  beget  in 
us  by  the  Genus,  or  some  common  thing  to  that  with  another, 
a  kind  of  Science :  as  when  an  Old  Man  is  called  Stubble ; 
a  Man  suddenly  learns  that  he  grows  up,  fiourisheth,  and 

336  H06BES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  iil 

withers  like  Grass,  being  pat  in  mind  of  it  hy  the  qualities 
common  to  Stubble^  and  to  Old  Men. 

That  which  a  Metaphor  does,  a  SimUUude  does  the  same ; 
but  with  less  grctce,  because  with  more  proUxUy, 

Such  Enthymemei  are  the  most  graceful,  which  neither  are 
presently  very  Manifest,  nor  yet  very  hard  to  be  understood ', 
but  are  comprehended,  while  they  are  uttering,  or  presently 
after,  though  not  understood  before. 

The  things  that  make  a  speech  grace/til^  are  these ;  Anti' 
iketa.  Metaphors,  and  Anitnation. 

Of  AntUheta  and  AfUithetis  hath  been  spoken  in  the  prece- 
dent Chapter. 

Of  Metaphors  the  most  gra^xfid  is  that  which  is  drawn  from 
Proportion* 

[Aristotle  (in  the  12  Chapter  of  his  Poetry)  defines  a  Me- 
taphor to  be  the  translation  of  a  name  from  one  signif - 
cation  to  another ;  where<^  he  makes  four  kinds :  1.  From 
the  General  to  th^  Particular,  2.  From  the  Particular 
to  the  General.  3.  From  one  Particular  to  another. 
4.  From  Proportion.'] 
A  Metaphor  from  Proportion  is  such  as  this,  A  State  with- 
out Youth,  is  a  Fear  wiAout  a  Spring. 

Animation  is  that  expression  which  makes  us  seem  to  see 
the  thing  before  our  eyes ;  as  he  that  said.  The  Athenians 
poured  out  their  City  into  Sicily,  meaning,  they  sent  thither 
the  greatest  Army  they  could  make ;  and  this  is  the  greatest 
grace  of  an  Oration. 

If  therefore  in  the  same  Sentence  there  concur  both  Meta- 
phor, and  this  Anifnation,  and  also  Antithesis,  it  cannot  choose 
but  be  very  graceful. 

That  an  Oration  is  graced  by  Metaphor,  Animation,  and 
Antithesis,  hath  been  said :  but  how  'tis  graced,  is  to  be  said 
in  the  next  Chapter. 

CHAP.  X. 
In  what  Manner  an  Oration  is  graced  hy  the  Things  aforesaid. 

'Tis  graced  by  Animation,  when  the  actions  of  living  Crea- 
tures are  attributed  to  things  without  life ;  as  when  the  Sword 
is  said  to  devour.  ^ 

1  kievieoKaift  and  iiyuovfitva. 

CHAP.  X.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  337 

Snch  Metaphors  as  these  come  into  a  Mans  mind  by  the 
observation  of  things  that  have  similitude  and  proportion  one 
to  another.  And  the  more  unlike  and  unproportionable  the 
things  be  otherwise,  the  more  grcuie  hath  the  Metaphor. 

A  Metaphor  without  Animaiihony  adds  grace  then,  when  the 
Hearer  finds  h6  learns  somewhat  by  such  use  of  the  word. 

Also  Paradoxes  are  gracefvJL^  so  Men  inwardly  do  believe 
them :  for  they  have  in  them  somewhat  like  to  those  jests  that 
are  grounded  upon  the  similitude  of  words,  which  have  usually 
one  sense,  and  in  the  present  another ;  and  somewhat  like  to 
those  jests  which  are  grounded  upon  the  deceiving  of  a  Mans 
expectation. 

And  ParagraTM ;  that  is,  allusions  of  words  are  graceful, 
if  they  be  well  placed ;  and  in  Periods  not  too  long ;  and  with 
AnixUiexis;  for  by  these  means  the  ambiguity  is  taken  away. 
,  And  the  more  of  these;  namely.  Metaphor y  Anitnationj 
Antithesis^  Equality  cf  Members^  a  Period  hath,  the  more 
graceful  it  is. 

Similitudes  grace  an  Oration^  when  they  contain  also  a 

And  Proverbs  are  graceful,  because  they  are  Metaphors^  or 
Translations  of  words  from  one  species  to  another. 

And  Hyperboles^  because  they  also  are  Metaphors:  but 
they  are  youthful,  and  bewray  vehemence ;  and  are  used  with 
most  grace  by  them  that  are  angry ;  and  for  that  cause  are 
not  comely  in  Old  Men. 

CHAP.  XI.  I 

Of  the  Difference  between  the  Stile  to  be  used  in  Writing,  and  the 
Stile  to  be  used  m  Pleading, 

The  Stile  that  should  be  Read  ought  to  be  more  exact  and 
accurate. 

But  the  StUe  of  a  leader  ought  to  be  suited  to  Action  and 
Pronuntiation. 

Orations  of  them  that  Plead,  pass  away  with  the  hearing. 

But  those  that  are  Writteny  Men  carry  about  them,  and  are 
considered  at  leisure ;  and  consequently  must  endm*e  to  be 
sifted  and  examined. 

Written  Orations  appear  flat  in  Pleading, 
z 

338  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  hi 

And  Orations  made  for  the  Barr,  when  the  Action  is  away, 
appear  in  Reciding  insipide. 

In  Written  Orations  Repetition  is  justly  condemned. 

But  in  PleadingSy  by  the  help  of  Action,  and  by  some 
change  in  the  Pleader,  Repetition  becomes  Amplification. 
,    In  Written  Orations  Disjunctives  do  ill ;  as,  Icame^  I /bund 
him,  I  asked  him:  for  they  seem  superfluous,  and  but  one 
thing,  because  they  are  not  distinguished  by  Action. 

But  in  Pleadings  'tis  Amplification ;  because  that  which  is 
but  one  thing,  is  made  to  seem  many. 

Of  Pleadings,  that  which  is  Judicial  ought  to  be  more  ac- 
curate, than  that  which  is  before  the  people. 

And  an  Oration  to  the  people  ought  to  be  more  accommodate 
to  Action,  than  a  Judicial. 

And  of  Judicial  Orations,  that  ought  to  be  more  accurate, 
which  is  uttered  to  few  Judges  ;  and  that  ought  to  be  more 
accommodate  to  Action,  which  is  uttered  to  many.  As  in  a 
Picture,  the  farther  he  stands  off  that  beholds  it,  the  less  need 
there  is  that  the  Colours  be  fine :  so  in  Orations,  the  farther 
the  Hearer  stands  off,  the  less  need  there  is  for  his  Oration  to 
be  elegant. 

Therefore  Demonstrative  Orations  are  most  proper  for 
Writing,  the  end  whereof  is  to  Read. 

CHAP.  XII. 

Of  the  Parts  of  an  Oration,  and  their  Order. 

The  necessary  Parts  of  an  Oration  are  but  two ;  Proposi- 
tions, and  Proof;  which  are  as  it  were  the  Probleme,  and 
Demonstration. 

The  Proposition  is  the  explication,  or  opening  of  the  Mat- 
ter to  be  proved. 

And  Proof  is  the  Demonstration  of  the  Matter  propounded. 

To  these  necessary  parts,  are  sometimes  added  two  other, 
the  Proeme  and  the  Epilogue,  neither  of  which  are  any  Proof 

So  that  in  some  there  be  four  parts  of  an  Oration;  the 
Proeme,  the  Proposition,  or  (as  the  others  call  it)  the  Narra- 
tion, the  Proofs,  (which  contfdn  Confirmation,  Confutation, 
Amplication,  and  Diminution,)  and  the  Epilogue. 

CHAP.  XIII.]  ART  OF  EHBTORICK.  339 

CHAP.  xin. 

Cfthe  Proefne.  ' 

The  Proeme  is  the  beginning  of  an  Oration,  and,  as  it  were, 
the  preparing  of  the  way  before  one  enter  into  it. 

In  some  kinds  of  Orations  it  resembles  the  Prelude  of  Mu- 
sicians,  who  first  play  what  they  list,  and  afterwards  the  Tune 
they  intended. 

In  other  kinds  it  resembles  the  Prologue  of  a  Plat/,  that 
contains  the  Argument. 

Proemes  of  the  first  sort,  are  most  proper  for  Demonstrative 
Orations;  in  which  a  Man  is  free  to  foretell,  or  not,  what 
points  he  will  insist  upon ;  and  for  the  most  part  'tis  better 
not :  because  when  a  Man  has  not  obliged  himself  to  a  certain 
matter,  Digression  will  seem  Varieti/ :  but  if  he  have  ingaged 
himself,  vFaWety  will  be  accounted  Digression. 

In  Demonstratives  the  matter  of  the  Proeme  consisteth  in 
the  Praise  or  Dispraise  of  some  Law  or  Custom,  or  in  Ex'>- 
hortation,  or  Dehortation  ;  or  something  that  serves  to  incline 
the  Hearer  to  the  purpose. 

Proemes  of  the  second  kind  are  most  proper  for  Judicial 
Orations.  For  as  the  Prologue  in  a  Dramatick,  and  the  Exor* 
dium  in  an  Epique  Poem,  setteth  first  in  few  words  the  Argu- 
ment of  the  Poem :  so  in  a  Judicial  Oration  the  Orator  ought 
to  exhibit  a  Model  of  his  Oration,  that  the  mind  of  the  Hearer 
may  not  be  suspended,  and  for  want  of  fore-sight,  err  or  wander. 

Whatsoever  else  belongs  to  a  Proeme,  is  drawn  from  one 
of  these  four ;  From  the  Speaker,  From  the  Adversary,  From 
the  Hearer,  or  from  the  Matter. 

From  the  Speaker  and  Adversary  are  drawn  into  Proemes 
such  Criminations  and  Purgations  as  belong  not  to  the  cause. 

To  the  Defendant  'tis  necessary  in  the  Proeme  to  answer  to 
the  accusations  of  his  Adversary  ;  that  those  being  cleared,  he 
may  have  a  more  favourable  entrance  to  the  rest  of  his  Oration. 

But  to  the  Plaintife  'tis  better  to  cast  his  Criminations  all 
into  the  Epilogue,  that  the  Judge  may  the  more  easily  re- 
member them. 

From  the  Hearer  and  from  the  Matter  are  drawn  into  the 
Proeme  such  things  as  serve  to  make  the  Hearer  favourable, 
or  angry ;  attentive,  or  not  attentive,  as  need  shall  require. 

z  2 

340  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  in. 

And  Hearers  use  to  be  attentiye  toperioiM  that  are  reputed 
good;  to  things  that  are  of  great  Consequence^  or  that  concern 
themselves^  or  that  are  strange^  or  that  delight. 

But  to  make  the  Hearer  attentive,  is  not  the  part  of  the 
Jhroeme  only,  but  of  any  other  part  of  the  OraUon^  and  rather 
of  any  other  part,  than  of  the  Proeme*  For  the  Hearer  is 
every  where  more  remiss  than  in  the  beginning.  And  there- 
fore wheresoever  there  is  need,  the  Orator  must  make  appear 
both  the  probity  of  his  own  person,  and  that  the  matter  in 
hand  is  of  great  Consequence ;  or  that  it  concerns  the  Hearer; 
or  that  it  is  new;  or  that  it  is  deUghtftd. 

He  that  will  have  the  Hearer  attentive  to  him,  but  not  to 
the  Catise,  must  on  the  other  side  make  it  seem  that  the 
matter  is  a  trifief  without  relation  to  the  Hearer^  comman, 
and  tedkms. 

That  t^e  Hearer  may  be  favourable  to  the  Speaker,  <me  of 
two  things  is  required ;  that  he  hve  him,  or  thiU  he  pity  him. 

In  Demonstrative  Orations,  he  that  praises  shall  have  the 
Hearer  favourable  if  he  think  himself,  or  his  own  manners, 
or  course  of  life,  or  any  thing  he  loves,  comprehended  in  the 
teme  praise. 

On  the  contrary,  he  that  dispraises,  shall  be  heard  favour- 
ably, if  the  Hearer  find  his  Enemies,  or  their  courses,  or  any 
thing  he  hates,  involved  in  the  same  dispraise. 

The  Proeme  of  a  Deliberative  Oration  is  taken  from  the 
same  things,  from  which  are  taken  the  Proemes  of  Judicial 
Orations.  ¥ot  the  matter  of  a  Deliberative  Oration  needeth 
not  that  natural  Proeme,  by  which  is  shewn  what  we  are  to 
speak  of ;  for  that  is  ahready  known :  the  Proeme  in  these, 
being  made  only  for  the  Speakers,  or  Adversaries  sake ;  or  to 
make  the  Matter  appear  great^  or  Utiie,  as  one  would  have  it, 
and  is  therefore  to  be  taken  from  the  persons  of  the  PlainHf 
or  Defmdant ;  or  from  the  Hearer,  or  from  the  Maiter,  as  in 
Oration^  JudiciaL 

CHAP.  XIV. 
Places  of  Crimination,  and  Purgation. 

1.  Qnb  is  from  the  removal  of  iU  Opinion  in  the  Hearer, 
imprinted  in  him  by  the  Adversary,  or  otherwise. 

2.  Another  from  this,  That  the  thing  done  is  not  hurtful, 

CHAP.  XIV.]  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  341 

or  not  to  himy  or  not  so  much,  or  not  unjust,  or  not  greed,  or 
not  dishonourable* 

3.  A  third  from  the  Recompence,  as,  /  did  him  harm,  but 
tcithal  I  did  him  honour. 

4.  A  fourth  from  the  Excuse;  as,  It  was  Errour,  Mis- 
chance, or  Constraint 

5.  A  fifth  from  the  Intentwn;  as,  One  thing  wa»  done, 
another  meant 

6.  A  sixth  from  the  Comprehension  of  the  Accuser;  as, 
fVhat  I  have  done,  the  Accuser  has  dfme  the  same;  or  his 
father.  Kinsman,  or  Friend. 

7.  From  the  Comprehension  ef  those  that  are  in  Reputa-' 
Hon ;  as,  What  I  did,  such  and  such  hane  done  the  same, 
who  nevertheless  are  good  Men, 

8.  From  Comparison  with  such  as  have  heenjalsefy  accused, 
or  wrongfully  suspected,  and  nevertheless  found  upright 

9.  From  Recrimination ;  as.  The  Accuser  is  a  man  of  ill 
life,  and  therefore  not  to  be  believed. 

10.  From  that  the  Judgment  belongs  to  another  Place,  or 
Time  ;  as,  I  hatie  already  answered,  or  am  to  answer  else- 
where  to  this  Matter. 

11.  From  CrinUfMtion  of^  Crimination;  as,  It  serves  only 
to  pervert  Judgment 

12.  A  twelfth,  which  is  common  both  to  Crimination  and 
Purgation,  and  is  taken  from  some  sign;  as  Teucer  is  not  to 
be  believed,  because  his  Mother  was  Priam's  Sister.  On  the 
other  side,  Teucer  is  to  be  believed,  because  his  Father  was 
Priam's  Enemy. 

13.  A  thirteenth,  proper  to  Crimination  only,  from  praise 
and  dispraise  mixt:  as,  To  praise  small  things,  and  blame 
great  ones ;  or  to  praise  in  many  #ords,  and  blame  with  ef- 
fectual ones ;  or  to  praise  many  things  that  are  good,  and  then 
add  one  evil,  but  a  great  one. 

14.  A  fourteenth,  coming  both  to  Crimination  and  Purga*  - 
Hon,  is  taken  from  the  interpretation  of  the  fa^ct :  for  he  that 
purgeth  himself  interpreteth  the  fact  always  in  the  best  sense ; 
and  he  that  Criminates,  always  in  the  worst ;  as  when  Ulysses 
said,  Diomedes  chose  him  for  his  Companion,  as  the  most  able 
of  the  Grecians,  to  aid  him  in  his  exploit:  but  his  Adversary 
said,  He  chose  him  for  his  cowardice,  as  the  most  unUkely  to 
share  with  him  in  die  Honour. 

342  HOBBES'  BRIEF  OF  THE  [book  in. 

CHAP.   XV. 

Of  the  Narration. 

The  NarrcOion  is  not  always  continued  and  of  one  Piece ; 
but  sometimes,  as  in  Demonstratives,  interrupted,  and  dispers- 
ed through  the  whole  Oration. 

For  there  being  in  a  Narration  something  that  falls  not 
under  Art;  as  namely,  the  Actions  themselves,  which  the 
Orator  inventeth  not ;  he  must  therefore  bring  in  the  Nar- 
ration  of  them  where  he  best  may.  As  for  Example,  if  being 
to  praise  a  Man,  you  would  make  a  Narration  of  all  his  Acts 
inmiediately  from  the  beginning,  and  without  interruption, 
you  will  find  it  necessary  afterwards  to  repeat  the  same  Acts 
again,  while  from  some  of  them  you  praisei.  his  Valour,  and 
from  others  his  Wisdbm :  whereby  your  Oration  shall  have 
less  variety,  and  shall  less  please. 

'Tis  not  necessary  always  that  the  Narration  be  short. 
The  true  measure  of  it  must  be  taken  from  the  matter  that  is 
to  be  laid  open. 

In  the  Narration,  as  oft  as  maj  be,  'tis  good  to  insert  some- 
what commendable  in  ones  self,  and  blameable  in  ones  Adver- 
sary :  As,  /  advised  him  but  he  toould  take  no  Counsel. 

In  Narrations,  a  Man  is  to  leave  out  whatsoever  breeds 
compassion,  indignation  in  the  Hearer  besides  the  purpose; 
as  tflysses  in  Homer,  relating  his  Travels  to  Alcinovs,  to 
move  compassion  in  him,  is  so  long  in  it,  that  it  consists  of 
divers  Books :  but  when  he  comes  home,  tells  the  same  to  his 
Wife  in  thirty  Verses,  leaving  out  what  might  make  her  sad. 

The  Narration  ought  also  to  be  in  such  words  as  argue  the 

Manners;  that  is,  some  virtuous  or  vicious  habit  in  him  of 

whom  we  speak,  although  it  be  not  exprest ;  As,  setting  his 

'  Arms  a  kenbold,  he  answered,  etc.  by  which  is  insinuated  the 

pride  of  him  that  so  answered. 

In  an  Oration  a  Man  does  better  to  shew  his  affection  than 
his  Judgment :  that  is,  'Tis  better  to  say,  I  like  this;  than  to 
say.  This  is  better.  For  by  the  one  you  would  seem  wise,  by 
the  other  good.  But  Favour  follows  Goodness;  whereas  Wis- 
dom procures  Envy. 

But  if  this  Affection  seem  incredible,  then  either  a  reason 

CHAP.  XV.]  ART  OF  EHETOBICK.  343 

must  be  rendered,  aer  did  Antigone.  For  when  she  had  said, 
She  laved  her  brother  better  than  her  Husband  or  Children  ; 
she  added, /or  Husband  and  Children  I  may  have  more; 
but  another  Brother  I  cannot,  my  Parents  being  both  dead. 
Or  else  a  man  must  use  this  form  of  speaking ;  I  know  this 
affection  of  mine  seems  strange  to  you;  but  nevertheless  it  is 
such.  For  'tis  not  easily  believed,  that  any  Man  has  a  mind 
to  do  any  thing  that  is  not  for  his  own  good. 

Besides  in  a  Narration^  not  only  the  Actions  themselves ; 
but  the  Passions,  and  signs  that  accompany  them,  are  to  be 
discovered. 

And  in  his  Narration  a  Man  should  make  himself  and  his 
Adversary  be  considered  for  such,  and  such,  as  soon,  and  as 
covertly  as  he  can. 

A  Narration  m&y  have  need  sometimes  not  to  be  in  the 
beginning. 

In  Deliberative  Orations;  that  is,  where  soever  tiie  question 
is  of  things  to  come ;  a  Narration,  which  is  always  of  things 
past,  has  no  place :  and  yet  things  past  may  be  recounted,  that 
Men  may  deliberate  better  of  the  future :  But  that  is  not  as 
Narration,  but  Proof;  for  'tis  Example, 

There  lAay  also  be  Narration  in  Deliberatives  in  that  part 
where  Crimination  and  Praise  come  in :  But  that  part  is  not 
Deliberative,  but  Demonstrative, 

CHAP.  XVI. 
Cf  Proof,  or  Con/irmation,  and  BefutaHon, 

PROOFS  are  to  be  applyed  to  something  controverted. 

The  Controversie  in  Judicial  Oration  is,  Whether  it  ha^ 
been  done;  whether  it  hxts  been  hurtful;  whether  the  matter 
be  so  great,  and  whether  it  be  Just,  or  no. 

In  a  question  of  Fact,  one  of  the  Parties  of  necessity  is 
faulty,  (for  ignorance  of  the  Fact  is  no  excuse,)  and  therefore 
the  Fact  is  chiefly  to  be  insisted  on. 

In  DemonstriUives,  the  Fact  for  the  most  part  is  supposed : 
but  the  honour  and  profit  of  the  Fact  are  to  be  proved. 

In  Deliberatives,  the  question  is,  Whether  the  thing  be  like 
to  be,  or  likely  to  be  so  great;  or  whether  it  be  just;  or  whe- 
ther it  be  profitable. 

Besides  the  application  of  the  Proof  to  the  queiAion,  a  Man 

3U  HOBBES'  BBIEF  OF  THE  [book  iix. 

ought  to  observe,  whether  his  Adversary  have  Ijed  in  any 
point  without  the  Cause.  For  'tis  a  sign  he  does  the  same  in 
the  Cause. 

The  Proofs  themselves  are  either  Examples^  or  Enihymeme». 

A  Deliberative  Oration^  because  'tis  of  things  to  come,  re- 
quireth  rather  Examples,  than  Enthymetnes, 

But  a  Judicial  Oration^  being  of  things  past,  which  have  a 
necessity  in  them,  and  may  be  concluded  syllogisHcaUy,  re* 
quireth  rather  Enthymemes. 

Enthymemes  ought  not  to  come  too  thick  together,  for  they 
hinder  one  anothers  force  by  confounding  the  Hearer. 

Nor  ought  a  Man  to  endeavour  to  prove  every  thing  by 
Enthymeme,  least  like  some  PhilosopkerSy  he  collect  what  is 
known,  from  what  is  less  known. 

Nor  ought  a  Mim  to  use  EntAymemeSj  wh&k  he  would  move 
the  Hearer  to  some  affection :  For  seeing  divers  Motions  do 
mutually  destroy  or  weaken  one  another,  he  will  lose  either 
the  Entkymeme,  or  the  affection  that  he  would  move. 

For  the  same  reason,  a  Man  ought  not  to  use  Enthymemes 
when  he  would  express  Manners, 

But  whether  he  would  move  affectum,  or  insinuate  his 
Manners,  he  may  withal  use  Sentences. 

A  Deliberative  Oration  is  more  difficult  than  a  Judicial, 
because  'tis  of  the  future,  whereas  a  Judicial  is  of  that  which 
is  past,  and  that  consequently  may  be  known ;  and  because  it 
has  principles,  namely  the  Law;  and  it  is  easier  to  prove 
from  principles,  than  without. 

Besides,  a  Deliberative  Oration  wants  those  helps  of  turning 
to  the  Adversary  ;  oi  speaking  of  himself  ;  oi  raising  passion. 

He  therefore  that  wants  matter  in  a  Deliberative  Oration, 
let  him  bring  in  some  person  to  praise  or  dispraise. 

And  in  Demonstratives  he  that  has  nothing  to  say  in  com' 
mendation  or  discommendation. o^  the  principal  party,  let  him 
praise  or  dispraise^  some  body  else,  as  his  Father,  or  Kinsman, 
or  the  very  vertues  or  vices  themselves. 

He  that  wants  not  Proofs,  let  him  not  only  prove  strongly, 
but  also  insinuate  his  Manners:  but  he  that  has  no  Proof,  let 
him  nevertheless  insinuate  his  Manners.  For  a  good  Man 
is  as  acceptable,  as  an  exact  Oration. 

Of  Proofs^  those  that  lead  to  an  absurdity,  please  better 
than  those  thiett  are  direct  or  ostensive;  because  from  the  com- 

CHAP.  XVII.]  ART  OP  RHETORICK.  .  345 

parison  of  Contraries,  namely,  Truth  and  Fahityy  the  force 
of  the  SyUogisme  does  the  better  appear. 

Confutiztion  is  also  a  part  of  Ptoof, 

And  he  that  speaks  first,  puts  it  after  his  own  Proof Sy  unless 
the  Controversie  contain  many  and  different  matters.  And 
he  that  speaks  last,  puts  it  before. 

For  'tis  necessary  to  make  way  for  his  own  Oration,  by 
removing  the  Objections  of  him  that  spake  before.  For  the 
mind  abhors  both  the  Man,  and  his  Oration,  that  is  damned 
before  hand. 

If  a  Man  desire  his  Manners  should  appear  well,  (least 
speaking  of  himself  he  become  odious,  or  troublesome,  or 
obnoxious  to  obtrectation ;  or  speaking  of  another,  he  seem 
contumelious,  or  scurrilous,)  let  him  introduce  another  person. 

Last  of  all,  least  he  cloy  his  Hearer  with  Enthyfnemes,  let 
hin^  vary  them  sometimes  with  Sentences ;  but  such  as  have 
the  same  force.  As  here  is  an  Enthymeme,  If  it  he  then,  the 
best  time  to  makepeace  when  the  best  conditions  of  peace  may 
be  had,  then  the  time  is  now,  while  our  Fortune  is  entire.  And 
this  is  a  Sentence  of  equal  force  to  it.  Wise  Men  make  peace, 
tahite  their  Fortune  is  entire. 

CHAP.   XVII. 

0/  Interrogations,  Answers,  and  Jests, 

The  times  wherein  'tis  fit  to  ask  ones  Adversary  a  question 
are  chiefly  four. 

1.  The  first  is,  when  of  two  Propositions  that  conclude 
an  Absurdity,  he  has  already  uttered  one ;  and  we  would  by 
Interrogation  draw  him  to  confess  the  other. 

2.  The  second,  when  of  two  Propositions  that  conclude  an 
Absurdity,  one  is  manifest  of  it  self,  and  the  other  likely  to 
be  fetched  out  by  a  question;  then  the  Interrogation  wHl  be 
seasonable ;  and  the  absurd  Conclusion  is  presently  to  be  in* 
ferred,  without  adding  that  Proposition  which  is  manifest. 

3.  The  third,  when  a  Man  would  make  appear  that  his  , 
Adversary  does  contradict  himself. 

4.  The  fourth,  when  a  Man  would  take  from  his  Adversary 
such  shifts  as  these,  In  some  sort  'tis  so;  In  some  sort  'tis 
not  so. 

346  THE  ART  OF  RHETORICK.  Lbook  hi. 

Out  of  these  Cases  'tb  not  fit  to  interrogate.  For  lie  ^nrhose 
question  succeeds  not,  is  thought  vanquished. 

To  equivocal  questions  a  Man  ought  to  answer  fully,  and 
not  to  be  too  brief. 

To  Interrogations  which  we  fore-see  tend  to  draw  from  us 
an  Answer,  contrary  to  our  purpose,  we  must,  together  with 
our  Answer,  presently  give  an  Answer  to  the  objection  w^hich 
is  implyed  in  the  Question, 

And  where  the  Question  exacteth  an  Answer  that  con- 
cludeth  against  us,  we  must  together  with  our  Answer  pre- 
sently distinguish. 

Jests  are  dissolved  by  serious  and  grave  discourse:  and 
grave  discourse  is  deluded  by  Jests. 

The  several  kinds  of  Jests  are  set  down  in  the  Art  of 
Poetry. 

Whereof  one  kind  is  Ironia,  and  tends  to  please  ones  self. 

The  other  is  Scurrility,  and  tends  to  please  others. 

The  latter  of  these  has  in  it  a  kind  of  baseness ;  the  former 
may  become  a  Man  of  good  breeding. 

CHAP.  xvm. 

OftJie  Peroration. 

The  Peroration  must  consist  of  one  of  these  four  things. 

Inclining  the  Judge  to  favour  yourself,  or  to  disfavour 
your  Adversary.  For  then,  when  all  has  been  said  respecting 
the  cause,  is  the  best  season  to  praise,  or  dispraise  the  Parties. 

Of  Amplification  or  Diminution.  For  when  it  appears 
what  is  good  or  evil,  then  is  the  time  to  shew  how  great,  or 
how  little  that  good  or  evil  is. 

Or  in  moving  the  Judge  to  Anger,  Love,  or  other  Passion. 
For  when  it  istnanifest  of  what  kind,  and  how  great  the  good 
or  evil  is,  then  it  will  be  opportune  to  excite  the  Judge. 

Or  of  Repetition,  that  the  Judge  may  remember  what  has 
been  said. 

Repetition  consisteth  in  the  matter,  and  the  manner.  For 
the  Orator  must  shew,  that  he  has  performed  what  he  pro- 
mised in  the  beginning  of  his  Oration,  and  how  :  namely,  by 
comparing  his  Arguments  one  by  one  with  his  Adversaries, 
repeating  them  in  the  same  order  they  were  spoken. 

ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

ARISTOTLE'S   RHETORIC. 

BOOK  I. 

CHAP.  I.  &  II. 

How  many  parts  of  Rhetoric  are  there  ? 

On  which  of  these  parts,  JUaric^  Xc^cC)  or  ra  ixifni  rov  XtJyov, 
does  Aristotle  lay  the  greatest  stress  ? 

Of  which  of  these  parts  do  the  first  two  books  treat  ? 

Has  each  species  of  oration  vporaffeig  peculiar  to  itself  ? 

Give  the  Greek  specific  term  for  the  iSiat  irpoTaaeiQ. 

Are  there  Trporaaeig  common  to  all  the  species  of  oration  ? 

Give  the  specific  word  in  Greek  for  the  'Trporaaeig  Kotvai.^ 

Does  the  first  book  treat  of  the  eidri  or  roiroi  ? 

In  which  book  does  he  treat  of  the  roiroi  ? 
^    With  what  view  is  the  iri<mg  i^QiKri  and  ^la  rwv  aKpoaTStv 
previously  introduced  ? 

Do  you  consider  that  these  belong  peculiarly  to  the  species 
ZiKavixov  and  avfiPovXevTucbv  of  orations  ? 

With  what  view  has  Aristotle  previously  introduced  the 
rag  TjXiKiag  and  ri^ag  of  men  ? 

Has  he  treated  of  these  in  reference  to  all  the  species  of 
oration  ? 

How  many  subaltern  genera  of  the  ttiotic  lia  rov  \oyov  are 
there? 

Into  how  many  species  is  the  artificial  genus  subdivided  ? 

When  is  persuasion  effected  by  tS»  ^6«  rov  Xiyovrog  ? 

Should  the  persuasion  effected  by  this  species  arise  from 
any  previous  opinion  entertained  of  the  speaker  ? 

348  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

When  is  persuasion  effected  5ta  t&v  aKpoarHv  ? 

When  is  it  effected  ev  avrw  t&  \6yio  ? 

Of  the  viemig  ^la  rov  deiifyvvaif  (or  the  argument^)  how 
moxij  species  are  tha?e  ? 

Which  is  most  persuasive,  the  irapcLletyfjia  or  irBvfjirffjut  ? 

Does  Rhetoric  furnish  any  instrument  of  persuasion,  Bih  tqv 
ieiKvvvai,  hesides  these  ? 

From  what  matter  necessary,  contingent,  or  impossible,  are 
enthymems  drawn  ? 

Am  t  to  understand  that  the  enthymem  is  drawn  from  the 
elKdg  and  inifieiov? 

Can  an  orator  syllogize  from  premises  previously  inferred  ? 

Is  there  any  objection  to  this  process  ? 

What  is  the  objection  to  premises  not  previously  inferred  ? 

If  a  particular  proposition  is  inferred  from  an  universal,  is 
it  an  eiKog  or  arjfjieioy  ? 

Of  the  trrifieiov  how  many  kinds  are  there  ? 

You  say  that  one  is  anonymous,  because  it  has  no  logical  dif- 
ference to  fix  the  species ;  mention  the  logical  difference,  which, 
when  added  to  the  other  (nuidov  fixes  the  species  rzKfiii^wy  ? 

Are  both  these  species  equally  forcible  ? 

What  is  a  wapahnyfm  ?  / 

Which  is  of  most  service  in  induction,  the  reK^riptoy  or 
frapaheiy/Jta  ? 

Is  the  TtKfiiipwv  used  in  induction  ? 

CHAP.  IIL 

How  many  species  of  orations  are  there  ? 

From  what  premises  does  Aristotle  infer  the  three  species 
of  oration  ? 

Is  the  judge  of  things  past  a  judicial  orator  or  public 
speaker  ? 

Does  the  Ociupoc  judge  merely  of  the  power  of  an  oration, 
or  exercise  the  functions  of  a  judicial  orator  ? 

Which  species  of  oration  is  inferred  from  the  iKKKfitnatniiQ  ? 

Which  is  inferred  from  the  hiKaariiQ  and  Oeoipoc  ? 

Is  it  the  business  of  the  judicial  orator  to  dissuade  and 
praise  ? 

What  are  the  ra  riXr)  of  the  three  species  of  oration  ? 

Must  a  deliberative,  judicial,  and  demonstrative  orator  be 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  349 

in  possession  of  irpordo'ctc  on  the  subjects  of  each  of  these 
species  ? 

If  an  orator  wished  to  prove  the  injustice  of  Alcibiades's 
banishment  in  a  judicial  court,  would  the  premises  of  his  syl- 
logism be  ci3i}  of  the  judicial  species,  if  drawn. from  the  ra 
reXti  honour  and  turpitude  ? 

Must  a  syllogism  in  the  judicial  species  always  be  composed 
of  €  tSiy,  or  will  it  ever  admit  of  rwroi  ? 

When  the  orator  is  arguing  on  the  possibility  of  a  fact,  are 
his  irpoTCLffeic  the  ei^ti  or  roiroc  ? 

CHAP.  IV. 

How  many  chapters  are  devoted  to  the  cKJoc  trvfifiovKtwiKov  ? 
Does  Aristotle  make  any  distinction  between  the  subjects  of 
deliberation,  and  the  things  from  which  we  deliberate,  viz. 
oTotxeia  and  cK^ij  ? 

Throughout  the  following  treatise  does  not  Aristotle  pre- 
mise ^oixcla  (vide  chap.  vi.  1)  from  which  the  ciSiy  and  t6' 
TToc,  &c.  are  deduced  ? 

In  the  ciSoc  ffvjjifiovXevriKov  are  not  some  the  aroiy^tia  and 
ellri  of  happiness  and  its  divisions?  (chap,  v.) 

A^e  not  others  the  aroixtia  and  ei^i}  of  the  rov  ayaOov  and 
<rvfi<l>epoyros  simply  affirmed  concerning  a  subject  of  delibera- 
tion? (chap,  vi.) 

Are  the  m-otxcta  and  ((^17  ever  comparatively  affirmed  con- 
cerning a  measure,  whether  it  be  better  and  more  useful? 
(chap,  vii.) 

With  what  view  does  Aristotle  treat  of  different  forms  of 
government  and  their  ra  riXri  in  this  treatise  ? 

Could  the  orator  be  possessed  of  nporaaeig  on  a  deliberative 
subject  without  a  knowledge  of  different  forms  of  government 
and  the  institutions  of  the  same  ? 

Are  the  things  concerning  which  orators  deliberate  in 
necessary,  impossible,  or  contingent  matter  ? 

To  what  kind  of  things  is  deliberation  principally  confined  ? 
Am  I  then  to  understand,  that  men  deliberate  on  such 
things  as  it  is  possible  for  them  to  accomplish,  and  which  de- 
pend not  on  chance  for  existence  ? 
How  many  subjects  of  deliberation  does  Aristotle  enamerate? 
In  debates  on  finance,  war  and  peace,  internal  defence,  ex- 

350  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

ports  and  imports^  what  should  the  orator  be  accurateljr  ac- 
quainted with  ? 

Is  the  knowledge  of  legislation  of  importance  to  a  deliber- 
ative orator  ? 

In  what  does  Aristotle  place  the  safety  of  a  state  ? 

CHAP.  V. 

What  is  the  great  object  of  human  pursuit  ? 

How  many  definitions  of  happiness  does  Aristotle  give  ? 

"Which  definition  was  adopted  by  the  Stoics  ? 

Which  by  the  Epicurean  and  Peripatetic  schools  ? 

Can  you  enumerate  any  of  the  ra  juiprj  of  happiness  ? 

Distinguish  the  ra  fiipti  into  the  ra  r'  ev  avna^  or  internal 
goods,  and  into  ra  iicrds  ayada,  or  external  goods  ? 

Can  you  confirm  the  enumeration  of  the  internal  goods  by 
the  second  definition  of  happiness,  and  that  of  the  external 
goods  in  a  measure,  by  the  third  definition  ? 

Define  numerous  and  worthy  progeny,  nobility,  and  good 
old  age. 

Does  honour  arise  ever  from  the  reputation  of  conferring 
benefits  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  omit  to  treat  of  the  virtues  under  the 
deliberative  species  of  orations  ? 

CHAP.  VI. 

What  is  the  object  proposed  to  the  deliberative  orator  ? 

Does  he  deliberate  on  the  means  conducive  to  the  end,  or 
the  end  itself  ? 

How  many  definitions  of  good  does  Aristotle  enumerate  as 
aToi\ua  ? 

How  many  eidri  are  there  in  this  chapter  deduced  from  the 
aroix'^'ia  ? 

Are  tl\e  aroixeia  of  good  ever  definitions  of  good  ? 

Give  definitions  of  good  assumed  by  the  reasons  of  choice, 
appetite,  intellect,  and  disposition  to  contentment. 

Can  you  infer  from  the  above  premises  that  the  acquisition 
of  good,  and  the  exemption  from  evil,  are  goods  ?  ' 

Prove  them  to  be  goods  by  some  of  the  definitions  of  good,     i 

Goods  ra  o/uoXoyov/icva  can  be  proved  by  the  above  defini-     | 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  351 

tions,  but  in  disputed  cases,  (iv  iLfKfutrPriTrityifjLoic,)  what  is  the 
easiest  method  of  proving  a  thing  to  be  a  good  ?. 

Can  you  prove  legislation  to  be  a  good  because  anarchy  is 
an  evil  ? 

Can  you  prove  happiness  to  be  a  good  by  the  reason  of 
choice  ? 

Can  you  prove  pleasure  and  social  intercourse  to  be  goods 
by  the  reason  of  appetite  ? 

Can  you  prove  the  moral  virtues  to  be  goods  by  the  reason 
of  intellect  ? 

Are  the  consequences  to  the  exemption  from  evil  and  ac- 
quisition of  good,  immediate  or  remote  ? 

Does  Aristotle  imply  the  utility  of  the  virtues  when  he  says 
that  they  are  effective  of  good  ? 

How  does  he  prove  such  specific  virtues  as  temperance, 
fortitude,  &c.,  to  be  goods  ? 

Do  you  consider,  on  reviewing  this  chapter,  that  persuasion 
can  be  effected  by  other  Trporatreic  than  simple  npoTaaeic  as- 
sumed from  the  end  of  the  ei^oc  (Tv/ujSovXcvrtKov  ? 

CHAP.  VII. 

How  many  definitions  of  good  did  you  enumerate  in  the 
preceding  chapter  ^  ? 

Repeat  these  four  definitions. 

Mention  the  trToixeia  premised  by  Aristotle  in  this  chapter, 
from  which  he  deduces  the  eidri  wepl  tov  fjiei^ovoQ  ayadot/,  kqI 
<rvfJul>ipovTOi. 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say  that  the  definition  of  "  excess, 
and  the  thing  exceeded,"  is  premised  as  the  ffroixeiov  ? 

Define  the  ro  teXoq. 

Is  a  plurality  of  goods  greater  than  one,  or  a  fewer  goods, 
by  the  reason  of  numerical  excess  ? 

Would  this  eihoi  be  fallacious,  if  the  one,  or  the  fewer,  were 
not  co-enumerated  with  the  plurality?  Vide  Annotations, 
vii.  3. 

If  an  orator  were  to  say,  that  beauty,  strength,  and  riches, 
were  a  greater  good  than  virtue,  would  his  assumption,  ac- 
cording to  Aristotle,  be  correct  ? 

^  The  first  four  may  be  considered  as  definitions  of  the  tov  AyaOov, 
the  others  descriptions  of  the  tov  avfi<t>ipovTo^ 

352  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS- 

Why  would  it  not  ? 

Have  th^  excesses  of  genera  and  species  any  analogy  ? 

Could  an  orator  prove  cav  to  fiiyivroy  nw  fuyterrov  ifjrepixVf 
Kal  avra  ahrwy,  that  if  justice  is  a  greater  good  than  bravery, 
Aristides  excelled  Themistocles  ? 

How  many  eidri  does  Aristotle  enumerate  in  this  chapter  ? 

Can  an  orator  prove  one  thing  to  be  a  greater  good  than 
another  by  the  reason  of  its  being  the  ro  teXoq  ? 

Is  happiness,  therefore,  a  greater  good  than  virtue  ? 

Could  he  prove  from  the  definition  of  the  rov  ayadov  and 
€rvfi<l>ipoyTOSf  that  virtue  is  a  greater  good  than  happiness,  ^m 
TO  fuiZovoc  &yadov  voi^racifv  elvat  ? 

How  would  he  prove  one  principle  (apxh)  to  ^^  greater 
than  another*? 

CHAP.  VIIL 

"With  what  view  has  Aristotle  treated  in  the  fonner  chap- 
ters of  Ev^ai/xovta  and  the  ayaOoy  and  arvfi^ipov  ? 

"Why  was  it  essential  that  he  should  treat  of  the  evBaifwvia 
first  ?  (vide  chap.  v.  2.) 

Is  it  by  npoTatreic  on  the  6.yadoy  and  ffvfxifiipoy  that  the 
iKK\ri€fiafrrrl^  persuades  his  audiaice  ? 

Can  you  give  a  reason  why  the  ayadbv  and  trvpL^ipov  have 
a  peculiar  relation  to  eh^oufiovia  as  the  aKOToc  of  human  pur- 
suit ?  (chap.  viii.  2.) 

Why  does  Aristotle  assign  so  much  importance  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  ra  riXri  twv  woXtrciwv  ?  (chap.  viii.  5.) 

Why  does  he  consider  a  knowledge  of  the  ^0iy  of  each 
TToXtreia  essential  ?  (chap.  viii.  6.) 

Explain  how  the  speaker  will  become  invested  with  moral 
character,  by  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  ^#ij  without  any  pre- 
vious opinion  having  been  entertained  of  him.  (chap.  viiL  6.) 

Enumerate  the  ra  reXiy  iroKirtmv, 

Are  the  ra  riXri  the  subjects  of  deliberation,  or  measures 
.  which  have  a  reference  to  the  ra  reXi;  ? 

'  The  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief  of  the  Art  of  Rhetoric,  for  a 
distinct  enumeratiou  of  the  tovoi  throughout  tliis  treatise. 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  353 

CHAP.  IX. 

G-ive  the  definitions  of  the  rb  koXov  and  rb  aiff')(^pbyf  honour 
and  turpitude. 

Are  these  definitions  premised  as  the  aroix^la  from  which 
■tlie  ctSij  of  demonstrative  oratory  are  deduced  ? 

If  the  ro  KaXbv  be  that  which  you  have  defined,  does  it  fol- 
low that  virtue  and  its  species  are  honourable  ? 
Give  the  definitions  of  virtue. 

If  virtue  is  a  dvyafiic  evefyysTikyf  which  of  the  species  of 
virtue  do  you  consider  the  greatest  ? 

Would  you  consider  diKauxrvyri  a  greater  virtue  than  7r/)^orijc  ? 
Can  you  prove  this  assumption  by  the  tottoq,  to,  fxeii^ovog 
ayaOov  koi  avfi<l>€povT.oc  Trotiyrtica,  ftfi/^oi  ?  (vide  chap,  vii,  7.) 

Give  the  definitions  of  the  species  of  virtue,  as  these  are 
o-rocxcta  from  which  eidri  in  demonstrative  oratory  are  deduced. 
Have  demonstrative  and  deliberative  oratory  any  points  in 
common  ?  (vide  chap.  ix.  35.) 

Have  the  demonstrative  and  judicial  any  points  in  common  ? 
(chap.  ix.  38.) 

What  is  the  difference  between  eiratvoc  and  lyKojjjLioy  ? 
On  what  principle  must  we  shoyr  a  man  to  have  acted  to  be 
^worthy  of  praise  ?  (vide  chap.  viii.  32.) 

Is  coincidence  of  circuiQdtaQces  admissible  as  an  indication 
of  the  npoaipeffic  ? 

Which  are  the  best  indications  of  a  man's  habit^  ? 
To  which  of  the  species  of  oration  are  amplification  and 
extenuation  peculiarly  adapted  ? 

Is  the  Trapa^ety/ia  adapted  to  one  species  more  thaii  another  ? 
Why  do  you  consider  it  more  adapted  to  the  deliberative  ? 
To  which  species  is  the  euthymem  most  adapted  ? 

CHAP.  X. 

In  considering  the  nature  of  the  sources  from  which  the 
£a5ij  of  judicial  orations  are  deduced,  what  are  the  three  ques- 
tions which  Aristotle  proposes  to  consider? 

Define  the  to  d^imv. 

Do  you  conceive,  generally  spe;aki|ig,  that  whatever  men 
do  eldortQ  they  do  tKoyre^  ? 

2  A 

354  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

Does  the  irpoaLpetnq  characterize  all  actions  which  men  do 
tK6vrt^  ? 

Does  the  n-poo/peaic  characterize  all  actions  which  men  do 
ci^orec  ? 

Mention  the  causes  of  actions  which  men  do  irpocupovfAivoi 
and  Trapa  tov  vdjiov. 

Must  the  accuser  consider  the  r/vbfv,  koI  irSawy  evcica,  or  the 
inducement,  to  exist  in  his  adversary  ? 

What  are  the  efficient  causes  of  those  actions  which  men  do 
not  hi  atrrovc  ? 

Of  this  class  of  actions  which  men  do  not  ^c'  awrovc,  but  U 
iivayKrjc,  what  are  the  specific  causes  which  Aristotle  mentions  ? 

What  are  the  efficient  causes  of  those  actions  which  men  do 
^i  avTovc ? 

Into  how  many  species  does  Aristotle  divide  the  ope^ic  ? 

Mention  the  logical  differences,  which,  when  added  to  the 
genus  ope^icy  give  the  species  PovXritrig,  opyrj,  and  evidvfjua  ? 

Enumerate  the  seven  causes  of  actions. 

Can  the  fiXuciai  and  e£c(c  be  called  the  true  causes  of  human 
actions  ? 

Have  they  their  consequences  which  when  added  to  the  true 
causes  give  additional  weight  to  the  argument  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  omit  to  treat  of  the  ^Xcic/ac  and  £{«c 
under  the  judicial  species  ? 

Does  Aristotle  infer,  from  the  definitions  of  the  ^ven  causes 
of  human  actions,  the  ends  of  the  agents?  (chap.  x.  12,  13, 
14,  et  seq.) 

From  which  of  the  seven  causes  of  actions  does  he  infer  the 
ends  of  those  actions  which  men  do  di  avrovg  ? 

When  Aristotle  says,  that  all  such  things  as  men  do  ^i  av- 
Tovc  are  real  or  apparent  goods,  why  does  he  make  the  dis- 
tinction of  "  real"  and  "  apparent"? 

Am  I  then  to  understand  that  all  things  which  men  do 
willingly,  and  consequently  all  things  which  they  do  unjustly, 
are  really  or  apparently  good,  and  really  or  apparendyplea- 
sant,  and  that  ihme  are  the  Jv  cvcica  iidiKovai  ? 

CHAP.  XI. 

With  what  view  has  Aristotle  introduced  the  <TVfjul>ipov  in 
the  judicial  species  of  oration,  when  he  had  previously  con- 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  355 

sidered  it  as  the  to  rcXoc  of  the  deliberative?  (chap.  x. 
19.) 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say,  that  he  introduces  it  because  it 
is  the  end  of  human  action  ? 

You  have  before  stated  that  the  ehdaifwyla  was  the  (tk&itoq 
of  human  pursuit,  and  now  state  that  the  avuipipov  and  ayaQov 
are  the  to  tiKoq  of  actions ;  explain  the  meaning  of  the  words 
o-JCOTToc  and  teKoq, 

Give  the  definition  of  ^lovi^  and  Xviri;. 

How  would  you  infer  the  definition  of  the  iilv  and  \v7n\p6v  ? 

Are  these  definitions  the  oTotx'^'ia  from  which  Aristotle  de- 
duces the  eiZri  in  this  chapter  ^  ? 

CHAP.  xn. 

What  division  does  Aristotle  make  and  premise  of  the  ttwc 

%J(pVT€.Q  d^iKovai? 

What  are  the  three  subdivisions  of  the  orav  oiiavrai  kavTcHg 
dvvaTOv  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  refer  the  discussion  of  the  dwaTov 
TrpaxOfivaL  to  the  second  book  of  Rhetoric  ? 

Explain  why  the  second  part  of  the  division,  viz.  kavTolg 
BvvaTovy  should  belong  more  especially  to  the  judicial  species, 
'virhen  the  dwaTov  Trpaxdfjvai  is  considered  as  a  tottoc. 

Enumerate  the  threefold  subdivision  of  the  oTav  otwvrat 
eavrocc  ^vyaroy. 

To  what  things  do  those  persons  trust  who  rely  on  the 
punishment  being  less  than  the  gain,  if  detected  ?  (third 
member  of  the  subdivision.) 

Enumerate  the  things  to  which  those  persons  trust  who 
hope  to  escape  punishment  if  detected :  (second  member  of 
the  subdivision.) 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Why  should  right  and  wrong  be  defined  in  reference  to  two 
kinds  of  law  ? 

Why  is  the  twofold  distinction  of  persons  (npog  ovq)  in  refer- 
ence to  whom  right  and  wrong  is  defined,  necessary  ?  (3.) 

»  The  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief  of  the  Art  of  Rhetorick,  for 
an  enumeration  of  the  Toirot  throughout  this  treatise. 
2  A  2 

356  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

How  many  species  of  law  does  Aristotle  enumerate  ? 

What  is  the  subdivision  of  the  v6/aoq  t^ioc  ?  (2.) 

What  do  you  understand  by  the  vo/xoc  koivoc  ? 

Give  the  definition  of  to  dhKeiaBai, 

From  whence  does  Aristotle  infer  this  definition?  (chap. 
X.  3.) 

What  is  the  threefold  division  which  Aristotle  makes  of 
cyicX^/xara,  or  accusation  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  decline  treating  of  the  iyicX^/aerra  Sia 
irddoc  in  this  chapter  ? 

In  what  kind  of  cases  do  men,  generally  and  specifically 
speaking,  manifest  the  irpoaipetng  in  action  ?  (chap.  x.  4.) 

Is  it  necessary  for  an  accuser  to  lay  great  stress  on  the 
wpoaipeaii  ? 

Under  what  circumstances,  or  with  what  dispositions,  do 
men  act  by  deliberative  choice?  (chap.  xiL  1.) 

Do  you  consider  that  the  depravity  and  injustice  of  an  act 
is  manifested  by  the  Trpoaipetrtc  of  the  agent  ? 

Are  they  a  ffTifieior  or  TeKfiiipiov  of  deliberate  choice  ? 

Is  the  vpoaipeaiQ  a  arffiuov  or  retcfiripiov  of  depravity  and 
injustice? 

How  many  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong  {^ikoicl  i:ai 
dyada)  are  there  ? 

Why  is  this  twofold  distinction  made  ? 

Into  how  many  species  does  Aristotle  divide  the  subaltern 
genus  &ypa<lta  ? 

Can  you  give  a  reason  why  the  species  "  remarkably  virtu- 
ous and  vicious,"  (ra  fiev  Kaff  vwepfioXriv,  &c.,)  is  not  included 
in  the  written  law  ? 

When  Solon  was  asked  why  he  had  not  enacted  a  special 
law  against  parricide,  what  was  his  answer  ? 

Does  not  this  answer  give  the  reason  why  &^iica  of  this  spe- 
cies are  not  included  in  the  written  law  eKSvrwv  tuv  vofAoderwv  ? 

Mention  some  virtues,  which  as  falling  under  the  species 
ica6'  vTrcp/JoXj^v,  &c.,  are  not  noticed  in  written  laws  ? 

Is  it  because  they  are  so  universally  acknowledged  and  re- 
quired, that  they  are  not  noticed  in  written  laws  ? 

What  is  the  second  species  of  ra  dixala  and  d^uca  ? 

What  is  the  cause  of  this  defect  in  the  written  law  of  statca  ? 

Give  the  definition  of  equity. 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  357 

CHAP.  XIV. 

What  is  the  standard  by  which  the  degrees  in  criminality 
may  be  ascertained? 

With  what  view  does  Aristotle  infer  ct^iy,  otra  ay  ^  diro 
fjLEiZovoQ  dSmoc?  (vide  chap.  ix.  39,  with  respect  to  the 
cLTj^rimQy  and  Book  ii.  2Q^ 

What  kind  of  injuries  are  comparatively  the  more  severely 
felt  ? 

You  stated  in  reply  to  questions  in  the  first  book,  (chap,  x.) 
that  jcaic/a  generally,  and  oKpaala  specifically,,  were  the  causes 
of  acts  of  injustice  characterized  by  the  wpoaiptffic^  how  then 
would  you  ascertain  the  comparative  enormity  of  o^wc^ftara  ? 
(vide  Annotationes  Schrader.) 

Are  d^udifxara  of  this  description  estimated  by  the  hurt 
done,  or  the  wpoaipemc  of  the  agent  ?  (xii.  5.) 

If  the  hurt  done  be  irremediable,  is  the  act  of  injustice 
capable  of  being  amplified  ? 

Will  the  definition  of  ddiKfifiara  depend  on 'the  wpovoui  of 
the  agent  ?  (vide  Annotationes  xiv.  5.) 

Am  I  then  to  understand  that  dl^iicfifmTa  which  are  irreme- 
diable, incapable  of  being  adequately  punished,  of  being  re- 
venged, which  are  done  frequently,  and  cjc  wpovoicLCy  may  be 
considered  /ic/^ova  ? 

CHAP.  XV. 

How  many  distinctions  of  the  wi^reic  &Texvai  are  there  ? 

Into  how  many  species  is  the  distinction  vo^i  subdivided  ? 

Into  how  many  subaltern  genera  is  the  distinction  fiapTvpEc 
(chap.  XV.  13)  divided? 

Into  how  many  subaltern  species  is  the  subaltern  genus 
fraXaio}  fxApTvpes  subdivided  ? 

What  kind  of  persons  and  things  constitute  the  lowest  spe- 
cies to  the  subaltern  species,  (irepi  fiiv  ovv.  tUv  yeyofUvtav)  of 
the  jjLopTvptQ  naXaiol?  (vide  chap.  xv.  13,  14.) 

What  kind  of  things  and  persons  constitute  the  lowest  spe- 
cies to  the  subaltern  species  (nepl  ^c  rdv  ierofjiiytav)  of  the 
^apTvpec  iroKaioi  ?  (chap.  xv.  14.) 

Is  the  lowest  species  to  the  subaltern  species,  (wepl  ^iy  twv 

358  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS. 

yevofjiivtay,)  viz.  poets  and  illustrious  men;  most  adapted  to  the 
judicial  species  of  oration  ? 

Is  the  lowest  species  to  the  subaltern  species,  (irepl  fjLey  olv 
tQv  kaofiiviav,)  viz.  soothsayers,  oracles,  and  proverbs,  equally 
serviceable  in  the  deliberative  as  in  the  judicial  species  of 
oration  ? 

Into  how  many  subaltern  species  is  the  subaltern  genus 
fxaprvpeg  ^rpo^^aroi  divided  ?  (chap.  xv.  13'.) 

What  kind  of  things  and  persons  constitute  the  lo^west  spe- 
cies to  the  subaltern  species  (ol  /icv  fierixoyreg  rod  Ktydvyov)  of 
the  fjLopTvpeg  irp6<r<^aToi  ?  (chap.  XV.  15,  last  line.) 

What  kind  of  persons  constitute  the  lowest  species  to  the 
subaltern  species  {ol  Ik  eicrog  Kivhvyov)  of  the  fiaprvpec  irpoat^- 
Tot  ?  (chap.  XV.  15,  first  line.) 

Which  of  the  two  lowest  species  (viz.  the  oi  yv^pifiot,  and 
oi  ay  ^6iwai  if/cv^e^ai,  or  viva  voce  evidence,)  is  most  entitled 
to  credit  ? 

Aristotle  has  hitherto  treated  of  the  different  kinds  of 
fjLopTvptQy  and  he  then  proceeds  to  consider  the  manner  in 
which  their  credit  is  to  be  amplified  and  extenuated  by  the 
orator ;  if  the  orator  then  has  no  witnesses  to  support  his  case, 
by  what  arguments  must  he  diminish  the  credit  of  testimony  ? 
(chap.  XV.  17.) 

To  what  circumstances  does  testimony  speak  ?  (18.) 

Is  the  impeachment  of  the  veracity  of  a  witness  by  an  en- 
thymem  (ej  tUoTwy)  a  solid  objection  to  his  testimony  ? 

Am  I  then  to  understand,  that  if  the  orator  has  no  testi- 
mony to  adduce,  he  must, 

1st.  Insist  on  the  propriety  of  the  judge  deciding,  y  rot  fin 
rjf  apiarrj,  (vide  Book  I.  chap.  xv.  5,  12,  17.    Book  11. 
chap.  XXV.  10.) 
2nd.  That  tiKora  are  better  than  witnesses,  as  they  are 

never  open  to  corruption. 
3rd.  That  ciicora  are  never  convicted  of  falsehood  ? 

K  the  orator  has  witnesses  to  support  his  case,  by  what 
arguments  should  he  corroborate  their  testimony,  and  extenu- 
ate the  eiKora  ? 

What  two  precepts  does  Aristotle  give  with  respect  to  the  I 
extenuation  and  amplification  of  the  avydfjKai  and  fidaayoi  ? 

What  is  the  fourfold  division  with  respect  to  oaths  ? 

GENERAL  QUESTIONS 

JUDICIAL  SPECIES  OF  ORATION. 

Is  treating  of  the  judicial  species  of  oration,  what  does 
Aristotle  propose  that  the  orator  should  first  consider  in  his 
accusation  ? 

If  the  question  be  simply  whether  his  adversary  haa  com- 
mitted an  injury,  the  orator  must  prove, — ^what  ?  (chap.  x.  2.) 

If  an  act  of  injustice  has  been  cononitted,  but  that  act  of 
injustice  has  not  been  defined  by  the  written  law,  under  which 
species  of  law  must  he  prove  his  case  ?  (chap.  xiii.  14 ;  xv.  4.) 

Am  I  then  to  understand,  that  in  inquiring  whether  his 
adversary  has  committed  an  act  of  injustice,  the  orator's  first 
business  is  to  prove  that  he  has  acted  for  some  end ;  secondly, 
that  he  was  a  likely  person  to  commit  it ;  and  thirdly,  that 
the  object  injured  was  a  person  likely  to  be  injured  ? 

Are  these  the  three  general  points  which  he  must  prove 
against  his  adversary  ? 

What  is  the  specific  point  he  must  prove  against  his  ad- 
versary ? 

Why  is  the  general  question.  Whether  the  adversary  has 
committed  an  act  of  injustice,  (chap.  x.  xi.  xii.)  and  the  spe- 
cific question.  Whether  he  has  acted  unjustly,  (chap,  xiii.) 
distinguished  ?  (vide  chap.  x.  7.) 

To  prove  that  his  adversary  has  acted  unjustly  against  the 
state,  or  a  private  individual,  what  must  the  orator  urge 
against  his  adversary  ?  (chap.  xiii.  7.) 

If  the  act  is  clearly  done  by  a  voluntary  agent,  on  what 
principle  must  the  orator  prove  his  adversary  to  have  acted  ? 
(chap.  xiii.  7.) 

360  GENERAL  QUESTIONS. 

If  the  act  is  clearly  done  by  deliberative  choice,  what  is 
the  next  question  an  orator  must  prove  against  his  adversary  ? 
(chap.  xiii.  9.) 

To  prove  simply  that  his  adversary  has  acted  unjustly,  hovr 
many  specific  questions  arise  for  the  orator's  consideration  ? 
Axe  they  not  three  ? 

1st.  Whether  he  has  violated  the  written  law?  (chap. 

xiii.  9.) 
2nd.  If  he  has  not  violated  the  written  law,  whether  he 
has  acted  with  d^ravity  so  excessive  as  not  to  be  de- 
fined by  the  written  law  ?  (chap.  xiii.  12.) 
3rd.  Whether  he  has  acted  in  violation  of  equity  ?  (cliap. 
xiii.  12,  13.) 

ANALTTICAL  QTJESTIONS 
ARISTOTLE'S    RHETORIC. 

BOOK  IL— CHAP.  I. 

You  stated  in  reply  to  questions  in  the  first  book,  that  Aris- 
totle had  made  three  distinctions  of  triareiQ,  viz.  lia  tov  fjdovs, 
Sia  Twv  &KpoariSiv,  5ta  TMtv  \6y<in^ :  which  of  these  three  distinc- 
tions has  he  already  treated  of,  and  which  is  he  now  proceed- 
ing to  discuss  ? 

What  is  the  end  of  Rhetoric,  or  the  object  which  an  orator 
in  speaking  has  always  in  view  ?  (vide  Annotationes,  chap.  i.  2.) 

How  does  the  investment  of  one's  self  with  moral  character 
effect  perstiasion  in  the  auditor  ?  (vide  Schrader's  note,  1,  3.) 

Mast  the  qualifications  by  which  the  speakeir  invests  him- 
self with  moral  character,  be  perceived  from  the  speech  as 
existing  in  him,  (vide  Book  1.  chap.  ii.  4,)  or  known  to  have 
existed  in  him  before  ? 

From  the  three  distinctions  of  7r/<rrecc,  what  do  you  infer  to 
be  the  three  great  accomplishments  of  a  perfect  orator  ? 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say,  proof  by  enthymem,  invest- 
ment of  himself  with  moral  character,  and  the  excitement  of 
the  passions  in  his  auditors  ? 

What  are  the  three  causes  of  a  speaker's  effecting  persua- 
sion through  moral  character  ? 

1£  a  speaker  appears  to  be  a  man  capable  of  imparting  be- 
nefits to  the  state,  does  he  effect  persuasion  through  moral 
character,  by  his  virtue  ?  (vide  chap.  ix.  4,  definition  of  virtue.) 

When  Demosthenes  in  the  oration  for  the  crown  makes  use 
of  the  following  words, — 

362  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

'AXX'  WC  ioiKEV,  kKtivOQ  6  KOUpOQ    Kol   fj    fiflipa   kKtivri    OV     fJLOVOV 

tvvovv  KoX  vXovffiov  &ydpa  cicoXei,  dXXa  Kal  TTftpfjKokovdfjKora,  roZc 
n-payfxaffiy  if  apxVQy  i^a^  ayXKeXoyifffiiyoy  opOwc  tivoq  eyexa 
ravT  eTrparrey  b  ^iknrwog  Kai  tL  fiovXofjLeyos*  6  yap  firj  ravr*  eiButg 
fjirid*  eifjTaKitQ  vo^pwOev  tTrifuXwc,  ovt  d  evvovQ  ^y  ovr  el  ttXov- 
ffioc'y  ovdiy  fiaXXoy  iifieXXey  6  ti  xpi)  nouiy  eiffeaOcu  ovB'  vfilv 
t^uy  <rvfA(iovXivtiy,  et^ytiy  rolyvv  ovtoq  iy  eKtiyy  rjf  fffUp^  ^yw, 
Kal  irapeXdaty  tlvoy  eic  v/xac*  &  fwv  ^voiy  ey£K  aKOvtrare  irpoffi^ 
XoyTEQ  Toy  yovyy  kvoQ  fjiiy,  iv  eldfjre  on  fi6yoc  rwy  Xjeyoyrtov  xal 
rroXiTexfOfiiywy  eyu»  rffv  Tfjg  evyoiac  rd^iy  Iv  rote  deivoic  ovk 
eXivoyy  aXXa  koi  Xiywy  icai  ypa<l>wy  i^rira^oiJiriy  to.  lioyff  vvep 
ifjjLwy  iy  airrdiQ  Toig  <j>o(i£pdiQ,  kripov  3c,  ore  fxucpoy  aya\u}arciyT€Q 
Xpovoy  TToW^  trpoQ  to.  Xoiva  r^c  ttciotjc  iroXireiac  €ffe<rd'  ifiireipo- 
repot, — 

to  which  distinction  of  vifrreig  does  he  recur,  and  through 
which  of  the  causes  ^poviyo'tc,  djoer^,  or  evyoia,  does  he  endea- 
vour to  effect  persuasion  ? 

CHAP.  IL    , 

What  are  the  three  questions  which  Aristotle  proposes  for 
consideration  in  treating  of  the  passions  ?  (Book  11.  chap.  i.  9.) 

With  what  view  was  this  threefold  division  necessary  ? 

Is  it  possible  to  obtain  rdvot  calculated  for  the  excitement 
of  the  passions  without  a  knowledge  ot  these  three  questions 
proposed  by  Aristotle  ?  (Book  IL  chap.  L  9.) 

Give  the  definition  of  anger. 

Is  this  definition  proposed  as  a  aroixeloy  from  which  the 
TOTToi  are  afterwards  inferred  ? 

Does  not  Aristotle  explain  this  definition  by  two  proposi- 
tions, viz. 

1st.  Anger  is  against  some  individtial  on  account  of  con- 
tempt to  one's  self  or  friends. 
2nd.  Pain  is  not  so  much  the  consequent  of  anger  as  a 
certain  pleasure  ? 

Explain  the  reference  which  these  two  explanatory  propo- 
sitions have  to  the  definition  of  anger. 

To  what  cause  do  you  attribute  the  sensation  of  pain  in 
anger  ? 

To  what  causes  (which  are  two)  do  you  attribute  the  sensa- 
tion of  pleasure  in  anger  ? 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  363- 

Can  jou  give  any  other  reasons  why  pleasure  should  be  a 
consequent?  (Book  I.  chap.  x.  17,  18 ;  chap.  xi.  10,  12,  13.) 

Could  you  infer  a  reason  from  the  definition  of  ^^01^17  in  the 
first  book  ? 

Is  the  i  Spyrl  a  generic  or  specific  term  ? 

Under  what  generic  Herm  do  you  class  the  fi  opyrj  ? 

What  is  the  object  of  anger  ? 

What  is  the  cause  of  anger  ? 

How  many  species  of  the  oKiywpla  are  there  ? 

Does  not  Aristotle  prove  that  the  KUTatppoynaic  is  a  species 
of  oXiywpia  from  the  definition  of  oXiyutpia  ? 

Do  you  consider  the  evripeafff/Log  to  be  a  distinct  species  of 
oXiytopia  ?  , 

Explain  how  Aristotle  from  its  own  definition  proves  the 
iirriptafffioc  to  be  a  distinct  species  of  oXtycup/a. 

Is  slight  attended  with  a  certain  pleasure  ? 

You  have  before  stated  in  reply  to  questions  in  the  former 
book,  that  all  actions  done  by  men  licovrcc  are  ayada  ij  0atvd- 
fjiera  ayada,  rj  fiMa  rj  <l>aiy6jJi£va  fidia :  can  you  show  that  if  the 
oXiywpia  be  a  voluntary  act,  it  must  be  consequently  ?;Sv  f/ 
<l>aLv6fityoy  fj^v? 

Why  should  it  not  be  dyadoy  fi  (j^aiyofitvoy  dyadoy  ?  (Book 
I.  chap.  X.  18.) 

To  what  cause  do  you  attribute  the  pleasure  which  the  6 
vppil^wy  feels  ? 

How  then  are  men  affected  when  they  feel  anger  ? 

With  what  kind  of  persons  do  they  feel  angry  ? 

What  are  the  causes  of  this  passion  ? 

What  is  it  incumbent  on  the  orator  to  prove,  to  excite  an- 
ger against  his  adversary  ? 

What  kind  of  person  must  he  prove  his  adversary  to  be,  to 
merit  anger  ? 

When  JSschines  uses  the  following  arguments  in  his  ora- 
tion against  Ctesiphon,  does  he  endeavour  to  excite  anger 
against  Demosthenes  ?  and  by  which  of  the  causes  dXtywp/a, 
or  its  species,  does  he  endeavour  to  excite  it  against  his  ad- 
versary? 

£i€vr£poy  de  Koi  voXv  tovtov  fieH^oy  a^(«ci;/xa  ^^/jci^o'cv,  on  to 
fiovXevriipioy  to  Tfjc  irSXtiMtQ  Kai  Trjr  IriptoKpaTlay  apdriy  cXaOev 
vi^eXofievog  koi  fierfiveyKey  dg  Qrifiag  tig  Trjy  Kadfxtlav,  Tijy 
Koiyiaviay  Twy  irpaiewy  Tolg  'BouoTap^ig  trvydifjieyog'  koI  ri}Xi- 

364  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

Kavrriv  ahroQ  ahrf  hvvatrrelar  icareffKeitairev,  &(rr  ^^17  traptufw  IttI 
TO  fififJta  irpetrfievffsiv  fuv  e^vy  airot  av  avTf  Soic^,  kolp  /ii)   vfttig 
iiCTrifjLirrirSy  c2  hi  nc  ahr^  t&v  m-parriy&v  ovteIttoi,  KaraBovXov- 
fievoQ  TOVQ  6.p\pvTaQ  Kcu  ervvediZiav  firi^ev  avT^  avTiXiyeiv  SiaSi- 
KaaLav  e^»y  ypw^Eiv  rw  firifJMTt  vpoc  to  ffrpanyycTof  wXeii^  yap 
v/idc  ayada  hif  eccuroir  <^if  hiro  rov  jS^/Iaroc  ireTrovdiycu,  $  viro 
T&v  trTparqyCjy  eic  tov  trrpaTriyelov.    fjLnrBo<j>opwv  5*  sv  t^  ^evtx^ 
KEvaiq  xufpaiCy  Koi  ra   trrpariufTiKa  xp^fxara  KkiimaVy  koX   rove 
/jvplovg  ^ivovQ  €KfUiir$^aQ  ^XfU^aavJtn  teoKKa  ^tafjMprvpnofiiyov 
Koi  flT^erXiaf ovroc  kv  tcuc  eKKXrimaic  ifiov,  Tpotrifjuie  ^ipwv  avap- 
Traerdtvnav  twv  ^ivufv  r^r  Kivh^vov  a^apaincEv^  Ty  ttoXci.    ri  yitp' 
ap  otcorde  ^/XtTnroK  er  rol^  Tire  jnxtpotc  ev^atrOai ;  ou  X^P^C  f*ey 
TrpoQ  TTjv  TToXtnic^v  hvyafiiy  xioplg   8'   «/  'A^^c 0*017    'fpoc    tovs 
JeVovc  haywyi<ra<rdaiy  aBvfWve  he  tovc  "EXXiyvetc  Xa/Sclv  TrfXncav' 
TtiQ  fl-Xiyy^c  ycycviyjuefif c  5  *fa«  rif Xticovrwv  icaiffaiv  otrtoc  ycycyjy- 
/xivoc  ^rjfjiotTdivriQ  ohK  kytttrq,  tl  u^  diicfiy  hihtaKepy  oXX'  el  |i^  iccu 
Xpvfff  oTc^av^  (TTeipayw&fiireTai  ayttyaKTe7*  ov^  tirarov  lort-r  avr^ 
kvavTiov  vfi&y  KtipvTTeffSaiy  aXX'  cl  /ii)  rwv  'EXXi/vaiK  eytxyrioy 
dvafipriBittrerai,  tovt^  {i^tf  dyayajcre7.    evrwc,  w  eoticc,  xoi^pa  ^vircc 
/icydXijc  e^overiaQ  eTiXafiofiirrj  8ij/io<w'oc-  dvepya^erat  trvfu^opag. 

CHAP.  ni. 

As  the  1^  wpavvffic  is  the  ©ootFaay  to  the  ff  Spyri,  and  the 
TOTToi  are  therefore  inferred  ratione  contrariorum,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  propose  many  questions  on  this  chapter. 

What  is  the  definition  of  the  fi  irpavytnc  7 

You  stated  in  reply  to  a  former  question,  that  pain  and 
pleasure  were  consequent  to  the  ro  TaBri  and  tn^fieia  of  the 
)>  PovXriffiCy  (chap,  iv.)  but  are  they  both  consequent  to  Hie 
if  TTpavytrigy  and  which  is  the  errffjKtoy  of  the  (^ovkjjtnc  in  this 
passion  ? 

CHAP.  IV. 

What  is  the  definition  of  the  to  ^Xely  ? 
Can  you  infer  from  this  definition  that  a  friend  is  perceived 
from  the  indications  of  the  if  ^vktftnt  ? 

What  are  the  (nffuia  of  the  if  fiovXrferig  ?  (3.) 
How  many  species  of  the  if  (fUXia  are  there  ?  (28.) 
What  are  the  causes  which  gire  occasion  to  the-^  ^/Xca  ? 

ON  ABISTOTLB'S  RHETORIC.  365 

What  is  the  difference  hetween  the  ^  ofyyii  and  the  ^  ex^pa  ? 

How  many  differences  does  Aristotle  enumerate  ? 

How  many,  and  whiat  are  the  causes  of  the  fj  ^"xl^po.  which 
Aristotle  enumerates  ?  (30.) 

You  have  stated  that  the  ff  opyo  is  felt  on  account  of  the 
if  oKiyfapia  and  its  species  ;  hut  if  a  man  is  hahitually  addicted 
to  the  ^  6\iyu)pia  and  its  apecies,  are  our  sentiments  those  of 
the  if  opyil  or  fj  e^dpa  ? 

Do  anger  and  hatred  ever  differ  with  respect  to  the  ohjects 
against  whom  they  are  felt  ?  (xxxi.  line  3,  4.) 

Can  you  class  hoth  ^hese  passions  under  the  genus  opi^eic 
aXoyot  ? 

Does  the  sensation  of  the  ^/  Xlnrri  accompany  the  ex^pa  ? 
(xxxi.  line  10.) 

Which  of  the  two  passions,  the  ^  opyrj  and  the  fj  ex^pa,  does 
Aristotle  consider  as  incurable  ? 

You  stated  in  a  former  chapter  that  the  ^  rifjuopia  was  the 
object  of  the  ^  6py?iy  what  is  the  object  of  the  ^  exOpa  ?  (xxxi. 
line  6.) 

What  kind  of  person  will  an  orator  describe  his  adversary 
to  be,  when  he  endeavours  to  excite  feelings  of  hatred  against 
him  in  his  auditors  ? 

CHAP.  V. 

Give  the  definition  of  the  6  ^($Jt3oc. 

Does  it  follow  from  this  definition  that  all  the  ra  icajca  are 
the  objects  of  the  6  ^o/Joc  ? 

What  kind  of  evils  then  excite  .the  6  0<5/3off  ? 

Is  it  absolutely  necessary  for  the  sensation  of  the  6  0o/3oc 
that  the  evil  should  be  close  at  hand  ? 

Can  you  mention  any  circumstances,  or  characters  in  life, 
which  excite  the  6  ^o^a  in  others  ?  (vii.  et  seq.) 

What  is  the  reason  that  men  are  not  afraid  of  such  evils  as 
death? 

Am  I  to  understand  that  some  hope  of  safety  is  essential  in 
the  sensation  of  the  6  ^($j3oc  ?  (xiv.) 

Is  deliberation  also  essential  in  the  sensation  of  the  6  ^o/3oc  ? 

If  the  ra  KaKCL  be 'of  such  a  description  as  to  annihilate  all 
hope  of  safety,  and  prevent  all  deliberation  in  the  sufferer, 
what  is  the  to  nados  which  under  such  circumstances  is  felt  ? 

366  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

In  what  chief  respects  do  the  sensations  of  the  6  ^ofioc  and 
TO  ^eivov  differ? 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say,  *'  In  the  feeling  of  hope  and 
anxiety,  and  excitement  of  deliberation,  which  accompany  the 
one,  but  are  annihilated  in  the  other  ?" 

Do  they  differ  also  in  any  other  remarkable  respect  ?  (chap. 
▼.12,  line  4;  chap.  viiL  13,  line  4.) 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say,  "  In  the  sensation  of  the  6  eXcoc 
if  the  TCL  KQKa  were  to  happen  to  others  and  not  to  ourselves  ?  " 

Is  the  difference  discoverable  in  the  case  of  Amasis  ? 

Give  the  definition  of  the  ro  ^cLppeiv, 

What  is  the  twofold  division  which  Aristotle  makes  of  the 
men  who  feel  the  ro  ^dptros  ?  (xviii.) 

What  illustration  does  Aristotle  give  in  support  of  this  dis- 
tinction ? 

To  which  of  the  three  species  of  oration  do  you  consider 
appeals  to  the  6  ^o/3oc  most  peculiar  ? 

Give  me  a  reason  why  you  consider  them  most  peculiar  to 
the  clSoc  (TufifiovXevTtKoy.  (Confer  Book  L  chap.  iii.  4,  with  the 
definition  of  the  6  ^/3oc.) 

In  which  of  the  three  species  do  you  consider  appeals  to  the 
Ti  opyfjy  6  <l>06voc,  and  6  eX^oc,  most  likely  to  occur  ? 

Does  Aristotle  approve  of  such  appeals  to  the  6  diKaar^g  ? 
(Book  i.  chap.  i.  5.) 

CHAP.  VL 

Give  the  definition  of  the  al^xvvrj. 

Do  only  acts  of  depravity,  or  do  the  oi^/icta  of  such  specific 
vices  as  illiberality,  flattery,  &c.,  ever  excite  the  fi  altrxvyti  ? 
Give  me  a  arifuiov  of  the  ii  KoXaxela  ? 

CHAP.  VIL 

Give  the  definition  of  the  j>  x^P^^* 

Has  this  word  two  distincf  significations  ?  (vide  Schrader 
Annotationes.) 

Which  of  these  two  significations  is  expressive  of  the  to 
ttclOoq  ? 

With  what  view  does  Aristotle  explain  the  ff  x^^c  as  im- 
plying gratuitous  benevolence  ? 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  367 

Is  it  for  the  purpose  of  showing  how  it  may  be  amplified  ? 

What  division  of  the  ac  opi^eiQ  does  Aristotle  make  in  this 
cbsmter?  (iii.) 

To  which  division  do  you  consider  such  imdvfilai  as  hun- 
ger and  thirst  belong  ? 

Is  it  necessary  that  the  party  benefited  must  be  iy  ij  Toiavrri 
Betiaei  to  constitute  the  ^  x^P*^  ^ 

Is  it  necessary  that  the  party  benefiting  should  assist  the 
other  iv  rjf  rotavrij  XP^^^  ^ 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Give  the  definition  of  the  6  tXtoQ. 

What  kind  of  persons  are  most  sensible  of  the  6  eXcoc  ? 

What  reason  does  Aristotle  give  that  the  oi  TravreXwc  aTro- 
Xia\6r€Q  do  not  feel  the  6  i\eo£  ? 

Why  do  not  the  oi  vTrepevhaifwveiv  oUfievot  feel  the  6  eXeoc  ? 

What  reason  does  Aristotle  give  that  the  oi  ovrcc  iv  opy^  y 
Baj^fiei  do  not  feel  the  6  eXeoc  ?  (vi.)  *  . 

Can  you  give  another  reason  drawn  from  the  definition  of 
the  ii  opyil  and  6  tXeog  ? 

Can  you  class  the  fj  opyrf  and  6  cXcoc  under  the  genus  opeUiQ 
oKoyoi  ?  ^ 

What  kind  of  persons  do  men  pity  ? 

Give  me  a  reason  why  you  except  the  v0($^pa  lyyi/c  wcnv 
oiKetirriTi, 

In  what  respects  do  the  to  hivov  and  6  tkeog  differ  ?  (xii.) 

Can  you  give  a  reason  why  certain  characters,  when  repre- 
sented on  the  stage,  excite  pity  ? 

CHAP.  IX. 

What  passion  is  directly  opposed  to  the  6  eXcoc  ? 

Can  you  class  the  ii  vifuaig  and  6  cXcoc  under  the  same 
genus  of  the  ro  vdOri  ? 

What  is  the  logical  difference  which  when  added  to  the 
generic  term,  gives  the  specific  terms  4  vifieeiQ  and  6  eXcoc  ? 
(i.  line  4.) 

Does  not  Aristotle  define  the  4  yiiuaiq  and  6  tfiorog  by  a 
comparison  of  each  with  the  6  cXcoc  ? 

968  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

Do  yon  consider  the  ^  vifMeois  and  6  eXeoc  to  proceed  from 
the  same  virtuous  dispositions  ?  (diro  rev  avrov  ^Oovc*) 

If  thej  do  not  proceed  from  the  same  virtuous  dispositions, 
could  thej  be  cJasised  under  the  same  genus  of  the  to,  irM&n  ? 

Is  the  6  <^6voQ  opposed  in  a  measure  onlj^  or  does  it  differ 
entirelj  from  the  o  IXeoc  ? 

In  what  respects  do  they  agree,  and  in  what  dififor  ? 

Can  you  infer  that  the  opposite  feelings  are  consequent  to 
these  passions  ? 

What  is  the  opposite  feeling  and  consequent  to  the  6  ^oroc  - 

What  is  the  opposite  feeling  and  consequent  to  the  6  eXeoc? 

Do  you  consider  that  the  6  (jSoroc  and  i  rifutriQ  dispossess 
us  of  pity  ? 

What  kind  of  person  must  the  orator  show  his  adversaiy 
to  be,  when  he  wishes  to  excite  indignation  against  ium  in  his 
auditor  ? 

Can  yon  infer  from  its  definition  that  the  i  vifi^etg  is  felt  at 
the  virtues  ?  (viii.) 

You  have  stated  that  the  if  vifisai^  and  the  6  eXeog  are  di- 
rectly opposed  to  each  other,  and  are  undqr  the  same  g^nus; 
can  you  infer  therefore,  that  if  the  fi  viiutncU  not  felt  at  the 
virtues,  the  6  eXsoe  is  not  felt  at  the  vices  of  others  ? 

CHAP.  X. 

Give  the  definition  of  the  6  ^6ovoc- 

What  are  the  three  distinct  parts  in  this  definition,  'whicb 
should  be  distinguished,  to « obtain  a  dear  understfuiding  of 
the  rdnoi  ? 

When  Aristotle  says  that  such  persons  are  likely  to  fee/ 
envy  as  have  equals,  from  which  part  of  the  definition  does 
he  infer  this  roiroc  ? 

What  kind  of  a  person  must  an  orator  represent  his  adver- 
sary to  be  when  he  wishes  to  excite  the  6  <i>66vos  in  the  judge  ? 

CHAP.  XL 

Give  the  definition  of  the  6  ZrfKoc, 

Does  the  6  (fjXoc  difier  from  the  o  ij^Ooyoc  ? 

In  what  respects  do  they  difier  ? 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  369 

Can  the  6  (rjXoQ  be  felt  at  the  vices  of  others  ? 

To  what  genus  of  the  ra  vaOij  does  the  6  ^fiXoQ  belong  ? 
(i.  line  5.) 

Is  the  fi  Koraippovriatg  opposed  only,  or  is  it  the  contrary  to 
"tlie  6  (fjXos  ? 

CHAP.  XII. 

Why  is  it  necessary  that*  an  orator  should  consider  the  ro 
fidri  of  his  auditors  in  reference  to  their  passions,  habits,  ages, 
and  fortunes  ? 

Does  Aristotle  use  the  expression  ro  rfdrj  as  implying  only 
a.  certain  disposition  peculiar  to  men  at  a  certain  time  of  life, 
or  as  implying  the  al  cjctc,  or  the  virtues  and  vices  ? 

Are  the  ret  Hdrj  the  effects,  or  are  they  only  consequent  to 
tlie  at  iiXUiai  and  rvxac  of  men  ? 

You  have  stated  that  the  orator  should  consider  the  ra  fidri 
of  his  auditors  in  reference  to  their  passions,  habits,  &c. ;  un- 
der which  of  the  three  distinctions  of  vlaretg  would  you  place 
this  part  of  Rhetoric  ?  (vide  Riccobon  in  cap.  xii.  hujus  libri.) 

Do  you  consider  that,  when  Aristotle  treats  of  the  ro  7ra6iy, 
ot  £{ctc,  and  ra  ^0%  he  considers  them  to  have  a  relation  to 
the  three  species  of  oration  ? 

You  stated  in  reply  to  a  question  in  the  former  book,  that 
the  al  ^X/«cca(  and  rvx«t  of  men  were  not  the  true  causes  of  ac- 
tions, but  when  added  to  the  true  causes,  give  additional  weight 
to  an  argument  in  judicial  inquiry,  (vide  Book  I.  chap,  x.)  do 
you  consider  that  the  orator  should  adapt  his  oration  to  the 
TO  ijQrj  of  his  auditors  in  reference  to  their  passions,  habits, 
&c.,  in  the  demonstrative  and  judicial  species  ? 

What,'  generally  speaking,  are  the  ro  fl6ij  consequent  to 
youth  and  old  age  ? 

What  are  the  ro  fjOri  consequent  to  the  middle-aged  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  treat  of  the  ra  ffOij  of  thei  young  and 
old  before  those  of  the  middle-aged  ? 

What,  generally  speaking,  are  the  ro  ^6ij  of  the  noble,  the 
rich,  and  the  powerful  ^  ? 

'  For  a  distinct  enumeration  of  the  tA  lidti  as  far  as  the  serenieenth 
chapter,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief,  as  a  distinct  exposition 
would  swell  these  questions  to  an  unnecessary  length. 

2  B 

370  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

CHAP.  xvm. 

What  reason  does  Aristotle  adduce  in  this  chapter  for  his 
treating  of  the  to,  rjOri  ? 

Did  Aristotle  treat  of  any  f^dri  in  the  first  book  of  Rhetoric  ? 

Why  did  he  treat  of  the  tcl  Hdri  Kara  tclq  iroXireias  in  the 
first  book  ? 

Of  the  T6iroi  TTtpi  dvyariav  koI  otwaTUfy  do  you  consider  the 
TO  yeyovog  and  to  eadfjievov  both  equally  applicable  to  the 
judicial  and  deliberative  species  of  orations  ? 

CHAP.  XIX. 

The  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief  for  an  exposition 
of  the  Tdvoi  in  this  chapter. 

CHAP.  XX. 

Are  the  irapadety fia  and  ivOvfxrifjLa  common  to  all  the  species 
of  oration  ? 

As  Aristotle  says  that  the  rrapahiyfia  is  like  induction,  ex- 
plain in  what  points  they  resemble,  and  in  what  they  differ, 
(vide  Kiccobon  in  cap.  xx.  hujus  libri.) 

How  many  distinctions  of  wapahiyfjia  are  there  ? 

Into  how  many  species  is  the  to  aWov  voieiv,  or  matter  in- 
vented by  the  orator,  subdivided  ? 

Explain  what  is  meant  by  the  species  irapaPoXrj  ? 

When  Cicero,  in  his  oration  against  Catiline,  says, — "  Quod 
si  ex  tanta  latrocinio  iste  unus  toUetur;  videbimur  fortasse 
ad  breve  quoddam  tempus  cura  et  metu  esse  relevati  ;  pericu- 
lum  autem  residebit,  et  erit  inclusum  penitus  in  venis  atque 
visceribus  reipublicae.  Ut  saepe  homines  aegri  morbo  gravi 
cum  aestu  febrique  jactantur,  si  aquam  gelidam  biberint,  primo 
relevare  videntur ;  deinde  multo  gravius  vehementiusque  af- 
fiictantur ;  sic  hie  morbus,  qui  est  in  republica,  relevatus  istius 
poena  vehementius,  civibus  reliquisMingravescet;"  is  this  a 
9rapa/3oXi)  or  Xoybc  ? ' 

When  Agrippa  Menenius  says,  "  Tempore,  quo  in  homine, 
non,  ut  nunc,  omnia  in  unum  consentiebant,  sed  singulus 
membris  suum  cuique  consilium,  suus  sermo  fuerat,  indignatas 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  371 

reliquas  partes,  sua  cure,  suo  labore  ac  ministerio  ventri  om- 
nia quaeri :  ventrem,  in  medio  quietum,  nihil  aliud,  quam  datis 
voluptatibus  frui;  cohspirasse  inde,  ne  manus  ad  os  cibum 
ferrent,  nee  os  acciperet  datum,  nee  dentes  conficerent.  Hac 
ira,  dum  ventrem  fame  domare  vellent,  ipsa  una  membra  to- 
tumque  corpus  ad  extremam  tabem  venisse.  Inde  apparuisse, 
ventris  quoque  baud  segne  minister!  um  esse :  nee  magis  ali, 
quam  alere  eum,  reddentem  in  omnes  corporis  partes  bunc, 
quo  vivimus  vigemusque,  divisum  pariter  in  venas  maturum, 
confecto  cibo,  sanguinem.     Is  this  a  vapafioXri  or  \6yoQ  ? 

"Which  of  the  two  distinctions  of  the  Trapa^ety^a  do  you 
consider  most  persuasive  in  deliberative  oratory  ? 

If  the  orator  has  not  enthymems  at  cojnmand,  how  does 
Aristotle  recommend  him  to  use  the  vapaBeiyfia  ? 

But  if  the  orator  has  both  enthymems  and  examples  at 
command,  which  does  he  recommend  should  be  placed  before 
the  other  ? 

In  the  passage  quoted  from  Cicero  does  he  follow  Aristotle's 
precept  or  Hot  ? 

Why  is  the  irapdhiyfjia  and  its  species,  when  placed  before 
the  enthymems,  little  adapted  to  a  speech  ? 

What  advantage  is  gained  by  placing  the  vapahiyfia  after 
the  enthymem  ? 

In  placing  the  irapdhtyijia  after  the  enthymem  will  one  be 
a  sufficient  proof,  or  are  several  requisite  ? 

CHAP.  XXI.      •     ' 

Give  the  definition  of  the  ij  yywfiri. 

Are  the  conclusions  of  enthymems  ever  yvuffxai  ? 

How  many  subaltern  genera  of  the  ij  yv^jfiri  are  there  ? 

Into  how  many  species  is  the  subaltern  genus  &vev  kiriKSyov 
subdivided  ? 

Into  how  many  species  is  the  other  subaltern  genus  fier 
£7rtX<Jyov  subdivided  ? 

Explain  what  kind  of  yyutfiai  those  are  which  require  not 
the  annexation  of  the  ewCKoyo^, 

Explain  what  kind  of  yybjfiai  those  are  which  require  the 
annexation  of  the  kiriXoyoc* 

You  have  stated  that  each  subaltern  genus  is  subdivided 
into  two  species ;  would  you  be  correct  in  saying  that  the 
2  B  2 

372  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

Ist  species  of  the  subaltern  genus  (^i^ev  cTrcXoyov)  require 
not  the  annexation  of  the  cWXoyoC)  because  they  w^ere 
understood  before  uttered ;  and  that  th$ 
2nd  species  of  the  same  subaltern  genus  require  not  the 
annexation  of  the  cir/XoyoCf  because  they  are  under- 
stood as  soon  as  uttered ;  and  that  the 
3rd  species  of  the  subaltern  genus  {fUT^  iTnXoytnp)  are 

parts  of  enthymems :  and  that  the 
4th  species  of  the  same  subaltern  genus  are  essentiallj 
enthjmems,  and  have  the  ivlXoyos  as  it  were  inserted 
in  them  ? 
What  division  does  Aristotle  make  with  respect  to  the  use 
of  yvuffiai?  (i.) 

On  dubious  and  incredible  subjects,  which  of  the  above 
species  does  Aristotle  recommend  to  be  used  ? 

On  subjects  not  altogether  incredible,  but  obscure,  which  of 
the  above  species  does  he  recommend  to  be  used  ?  (vi.  ai  ^' 
eydvfiiifiart  col  fuv,) 

We  now  come  to  the  third  *  use  of  yvutftai  {rltriP  dp/iorrec) : 
is  the  use  of  yv&fiai  equally  suited  to  all  ages  and  conditions 
of  persons  ? 

Ought  yvwfiai  not  universallj  true  to  be  indiscriminately 
used  in  every  part  of  a  speech  ? 

In  what  occasions  then  should  yv^/ioc  of  this  description 
only  be  used,  and  ought  they  to  have  the  MXoyoQ  ? 

Are  yvwfjiai  which  are  generally  admitted  to  be  true,  ad- 
missible in  every  paH  of  *a  speech  ? 

Are  the  yvutfiai  which  contravene  current  sayings  (vapa  ra 
h^rifioauv/Aivaic)  equally  admissible  in  every  part  of  a  speech  ? 
On  what  occasions  then  is  it  fit  that  they  should  be  used  ? 
(xiii.) 

How  will  the  to  ^doQ  be  made  to  appear  fiiXrtov  ? 
Do  I  understand  you  to  say  "  by  being  manifested  in  the 
diction,  or  by  annexing  the  reason  for  the  received  opinion  ?" 
What  advantages  does  the  use  of  yvwfjiai  contribute  to  the 
orator  ? 

When  the  orator  wishes  to  give  his  speech  an  air  of  moral 
character  by  the  use  of  yv<tf/iac,  what  principle  must  he  mani- 
fest ? 

*  Aristotle  has  treated  of  the  tio-iv  Apfiorrti  first,  in  violation  of  his 
proposed  arrangement  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter. 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC,  ^7^ 

In  the  following  quotation  from  Demosthenes  irepl  tov 
SiTetpdvov  is  there  a  yvwfjiri  ? 

'AW'  oh  Sia  Tavra  trpoiivTO  tovq  KaTa6evyovTaq  €<b*  eavTovQy 
aW*  virep  tv^o^iag  Kal  rt/i^c  ijdeXoy  rdig  oeivoic  avrovQ  dilovai, 
opdwQ  Koi  KaXtjg  j3ovXEvo/ievot.  iripag  fiev  yap  ^.Tratriv  avdpwTroiQ 
i-trrl  TOV  (iiov  ^araTOQ,  Kay  ly  oiKiffK^  tiq  avroy  Kadeip^ag  riyppf* 
^£t  de  Tovg  ayadovg  av^pag  cyx^'P^*''  f^^^  &7raiTiy  atl  rolg  Ka\o7g, 
tt)v  ay adriv  irpofidWofiiyovg  iXir/Sct,  ^ipeiv  ^^  6  Tt  ay  6  ^eog  ^id^ 
ytvyaiiog. 

To  which  species  does  it  belong,  and  why  does  it  not  re- 
quire the  annexation  of  the  IwlXoyog  ? 

CHAP.  XXIL  XXIII.  XXIV. 

The  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief  on  the  subject  of 
these  chapters. 

CHAP.  XXV.  XXVI. 

You  stated  in  reply  to  a  question  in  the  first  book,  that  the 
irltrreig  ^la  tov  hUvvirBaiy  &c.,  were  divided  into  two  species, 
iyBvfjLTiiJia  and  wapahiy/jLa:  what  subdivision  does  Aristotle 
make  of  the  ivOvfirifia  in  the  second  book?  (Book  11.  chap, 
xxii.  14.) 

How  many  modes  of  the  i}  Xverig,  or  solution  of  arguments, 
are  there  ? 

Explain  the  different  methods  of  starting  an  objection. 

How  is  an  eiKog  solvable  ? 

How  is  a  irnpaZttyfia  solvable  ? 

How  is  a  TeKfjiiipioy  solvable  ? 

How  is  a  trnijieiov  solvable  ? 

What  reason  does  Aristotle  give  for  noi  considering  the  to 
avEeiv  icai  /letovv  as  Toiroi  kydvfiiifJiaTog  ? 

How  is  a  solution  of  them  effected  ? 

ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

ARISTOTLE'S    RHETORIC. 

BOOK  III.-CHAP.  L 

What  importance  does  Aristotle  ascribe  to  the  Xe^ic  in  rhe- 
toric ? 

Does  he  ascribe  any  importance  to  the  vvSKpitriQ  ? 

Li  what  does  he  consider  it  to  consist  ?  (iv.) 

But  why  does  he  treat  only  of  the  Xi^ic  when  he  ascribes 
importance  to  the  inroKpunc  ?  (vi.  and  vii.) 

Does  he  make  any  distinction  between  the  style  of  poetry 
and  orations  ? 

CHAP.  II. 

Define  the  XiUf^c  aper?!,  or  excellence  of  style. 

It  seems  that  Aristotle  in  this  definition  notes  two  things 
as  conducive  to  the  Xe£ea>c  &p£Tii,  viz.  to  (ra<j>rl  elvac  and  irpi- 
vovtray  ;  how  are  these  attained  in  style  ?  (ii.  iii.  and  iv.) 

Why  does  Aristotle  object  to  the  too  frequent  use  of 
yXwrraic  or  exotic  words,  irc^ot^/xfvotc  or  newly-coined  words, 
and  BlvXoic  or  compound  words  ? 

Is  the  orator  obliged  to  confine  himself  to  the  use  of  the 
Kvpia  or  words  in  common  use,  or  is  he  at  liberty  to  use  the 
other  species  occasionally  ? 

What  advantage  does  the  use  of  the  jc^jota  contribute  to 
style  ? 

What  advantage  does  the  use  of  the  yXwrratc,  &c.  con- 
tribute to  style  when  sparingly  used  ? 

ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS,  375 

When  Aristotle  says  that  in  the  use  of  ornament  we  should 
seek  to  escape  observation,  and  avoid  a  studied  manner,  what 
-would  be  the  consequence  of  the  neglect  of  this  twofold  pre- 
cept? (iv.) 

Does  Aristotle  lay  great  stress  on  the  proper  use  of  appro- 
priate metaphors  in  an  oration  ? 

For  the  selection  of  metaphors  what  precepts  does  Aristotle 
give  ?  (ix.  xii.  xiii.) 

From  what  sources  then  are  appropriate  metaphors  de- 
duced? (xiii.) 

CHAP.  IIL 

What  nouns  does  Aristotle  mention  as  contributing  to  a 
frigid  style  ? 

When  do  epithets  render  an  oration  frigid  ? 

Is  the  too  frequent  use  of  appropriate  epithets  approved 
by  Aristotle  ? 

When  do  you  conceive  a  metaphor  and  epithet  unbecom- 
ing ?  (chap.  ii.  9.) 

CHAP.  IV. 

In  what  respect  does  the  eiKtitv  differ  from  the  fiera<l>opa  ? 

Why  does  Aristotle  caution  the  orator  against  the  too  fre- 
quent use  of  the  clici^v  ? 

Can  the  /icra^ojoa  be  enunciated  as  the  elKibv,  and  the  ei«f<^v 
as  fUTa<l>opa  ? 

How  would  you  change  a  fierai^opa  to  an  shcukv  ? 

On  what  principle .  must  the  eIk^jv  be  constructed  to  be 
appropriate  ? 

CHAP.  V. 

In  what  does  excellence  of  style  (Xi^ewQ  dpeiii)  consist  ? 

On  what  does  purity  of  style  {to  eXKriviZeiv)  depend  ? 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say  the  first  consists  in  the  proper 
use  of  words,  and  the  latter  in  their  clear  and  proper  arrange- 
ment? 

Why  does  Aristotle  distinguish  the  to  kWnvlZetVy  (chap,  v.) 
the  oyKoc,  (chap,  vi.)  and  the  to  vpiirov^  (chap,  vii.)  from  the 
TO  tr)(rifAa  rfJQ  Xiieutg  ?  (chap,  viii.) 

376  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS 

Do  I  understand  jou  to  say,  because  the  first  are  essential 
to  style,  or  by  which  it  becomes  calculated  to  efiect  per- 
suasion, and  the  latter  only  accidental  to  style,  or  contributing 
to  give  it  elegance  and  beauty  ? 

CHAP  VL 
.  How  is  elevation  of  style  (6  oyicoc)  attained  ? 

CHAP.  VIL 

When  will  the  to  vpiirov,  or  becoming  in  style,  be  attained  ? 

You  say  that  the  to  vpiirov  in  style  will  be  attained,  if  it 
be  passionate,  expressive  of  moral  character,  and  suited  to  the 
subject ;  what  do  you  mean  by  the  to  Jdoc  Xtfewc  ?  (vide 
Annotationes  vii.  6.  Vater.) 

When  Aristotle  treats  of  the  to  ijOoc  in  style,  do  you  con- 
sider the  TO  ijOoc  Xi^eofQ  as  belonging  to  the  iv  ry  ijdei  tov 
XeyoKToc,  one  of  the  distinctions  of  vLoteiq  in  the  first  book  ? 

In  treatjng  of  the  •jrltrnQ  Ijdiicri  in  the  second  book,  and 
again  in  this  book,  on  the  subject  of  style,  explain  the  three- 
fold manner  in  which  Aristotle  has  treated  of  this  distinction 
of  viffTUQ,  (vide  Riccobon  in  Lib.  11.  cap.  i.  p.  153,  and  Lib. 
IIL  cap.  vii.  p.  246.) 

When  Aristotle  says  the  style  is  becoming  when  adapted 
to  the  ffetc,  what  meaning  do  you  attach  to  the  word  e^tig  ? 

CHAP.  VIII. 
What  precepts  does  Aj-istotle  give  on  the  to  trxflfjia  rijfc 

How  many  species  of  the  6  pvOfioc  does  Aristotle  mention  ? 

Of  these,  which  is  the  only  one,  out  of  which  it  is  impos- 
sible to  construct  any  metre,  and  therefore  appropriate  ? 

Which  of  the  two  species  of  Paeans  is  most  proper  for  the 
commencement  and  the  conclusion  of  a  speech? 

CHAP.   IX. 

Define  the  Xi^iQ  eipofiiyrj  and  KaTeerrpafjLiJih'ri. 
How  many  species  of  the  irepio^oQ  are  there  ? 
In  treating  of  the  to  trxVfJLa  r^c  Xi^etoQ  what  division  does 
Aristotle  make  ? 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  •         377 

How  many  distinctions  of  the  to  trxni^o.  rffQ  Xifciiic  are  there  ? 
Which  of  these  is  the  most  proper  for  orations  ? 
How  many  species  of  the  vepio^oQ  are  there  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  a  vepio^og  d^cXi^c  ? 
•    Of  the  ireplodo^  which  consists  of  clauses,  what  subdistinc- 
1;ion  does  Aristotle  make  ?  (7.  9.) 

What  is  meant  by  the  irapiffwiriQ  and  TrapoiioiwaiQ  ? 

CHAP.  X. 

Does  the  invention  of  the  derreia  and  ev^oKijJiovyra,o{  style 
l>elong  to  rhetoric  ? 

What  reason  can  you  give  from  the  first  book  of  rhetoric 
that  they  do  not  ?  (Book  I.  chap,  iii) 

Which  do  you  consider  are  the  most  approved  dtireta  and 
evBoKifjutvyra  of  style  ? 

Why  are  the  simile  and  metaphor  most  approved  ? 

Can  you  infer  from  Aristotle's  general  inference  that  "  those 
beauties  and  elegancies  of  style  are  most  approved  which  are 
the  quickest  in  communicating  information,"  any  particular 
rule  for  the  selection  of  evdvfjiijftaTa  or  arguments  ? 

In  treating  of  such  darela  as  metaphor,  simile,  enthymem, 
and  antithesis,  why  has  Aristotle  treated  of  antithesis  as  be- 
longing to  the  ro  ^XW"-  "^^  ^i^twQ,  and  the  others  Kara  'riiv 
htavoiav  Tov  Xtyofiivov  ?  (chap.  ii.  6 ;  ix.  7.) 

Enumerate  the  aartia  with  which  the  orator  should  seek  to 
grace  his  speech. 

CHAP.  XL 

How  dotes  metaphor  diflfer  from  personification  ? 

You  have  stated  that  such  metaphors  are  most  approved  as 
are  not  too  obvious ;  hoWv  will  an  orator  avoid  this  fault  in 
the  selection  of  his  metaphors,  and  at  the  same  time  render 
them  more  approved  ?  (vi.) 

When  will  a  sentence  be  more  elegant  ? 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say  in  proportion  as  it  contains  a 
greater  number  of  these  ornaments  ? 

Are  hyperboles  and  proverbs  ever  metaphors  ? 

Do  these  contribute  to  the  elegance  of  a  sentence  ? 

378  ANALYTICAL  QUESTIONS. 

Does  the  use  of  hyperbole  become  the  joang  as  w^ell  as  the 
oldi? 

CHAP.  XII. 

What  distinction  of  style  does  Aristotle  first  make  when  he 
Mrishes  to  ascertain  the  kind  of  style  most  adapted  to  each  spe- 
cies of  oration  ? 

How  many  species  of  the  Xef  tc  aywvt<rr«n)  are  there  ? 

To  which  species  of  oration  are  the  Xc£cc  riOucri  and  jradfirUti 
most  adapted  ? 

Which  of  the  two  species  of  oration,  the  judicial  or  deh- 
berative,  require  the  greatest  accuracy  of  style  ? 

Does  the  Xi^iQ  ay tovitrriKri  suit  the  demonstrative  species  ? 

Is  nicety  and  precision  essential  in  the  judicial  species,  and 
what  is  the  objection  to  too  great  nicety  and  precision  in  the 
deliberative  species  ? 

*  However  ready  we  may  be  to  acknowledge  the  wonderful  acuteness 
and  subtlety  of  Aristotle's  mind,  in  unfolding  the  whole  art  of  rhetoric, 
his  judgment  of  true  wit,  from  the  samples  afforded  in  this  chapter,  con- 
vinces us,  that  he  was  a  more  profoimd  philosopher  than  agreeable  com- 
panion. We  have  therefore,  perhaps  prudently,  refrained  from  noticing 
the  witty  applications  of  metaphor  and  hyperbole,  which  he  has  made,  as 
soml9  genenii  questions  on  the  Xc^is  will  be  stbsequently  introduced. 

GENERAL  QUESTIONS 

SECOND  PART  OF  RHETORIC. 

In  treating  of  the  Xcjic  does  Aristotle  propose  to  consider  first 
its  nature  and  the  matter  of  which  it  is  formed  ? 
In  doing  this  does  he  consider, 

1st.  The  matter  of  which  it  is  composed  as  words ; 
2nd.  Its  forms— of  which  one  is  the  essential  or  modifi- 
cation of  the  matter,  by^  which  it  becomes  adapted  to 
its  purpose  of  effecting  persuasion ;  and  another,  which 
is  the  accidental,  or  the  figure,  or  modification  of  the 
matter,  bj  which  it  becomes  adapted  to  its  purpose  of 
pleasing  the  ear : 
3rd.  Of  the  ^areiovy  or  introduction  of  metaphor,  apo- 
thegm, and  wit  ? 
Aristotle  has  hitherto  treated  of  the  nature  of  style  and  its 
modifications ;  what  does  he  secondly,  and  lastly,  propose  to 
consider  ? 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Enumerate  the  ra  }iipri  of  orations. 

Why  does  Aristotle  object  to  more  than  the  rrpoOeffic  and 

TTlffTlC  ? 

How  many  and  what  are  the  ra  filpri  which  Aristotle 
treats  of  ? 

Why  has  he  treated  of  them  when  he  set  out  with  object- 
ing to  them  ?  • 

380  GENERAL  QUESTIONS 

To  which  of  the  species  of  oration  is  the  ^iriyrftric  peculiar? 

Does  the  deliberative  species  always  require  as  manj  parts 
as  the  judicial  ?  and  which  are  the  parts  which  it  does  not 
require  ? 

When  does  it  require  the  wpooiiiioy  (xiy.  11)  dyriirKipa/SoXfi 
and  iwavo^oc  ? 

Is  the  iirikoyoQ  always  necessary  in  the  judicial  species  ? 

Of  how  many  parts  will  a  judicial  oration  delivered  bj  an 
accuser  be  composed  ? 

Under  which  of  these  parts  is  the  ra  xpoc  avrldiicov  or  re- 
futation, and  the  avrvirapafioXri  or  contrast  of  arguments,  in- 
cluded when  the  oration  is  ddivered  by  an  accused  ? 

"Why  should  they  not  be  included  in  the  vpooifiiov  or  Ivi- 
XoyoQ  ?  (4.) 

CHAP.  XIV. 

Give  the  definition  of  trpoolfiiov. 

From  what  sources  are  the  irpoolfjiia  in  the  ^^i^oiidtrative 
species  drawn  ?  (2.) 

What  ought  to  be  the  chief  object  of  a  judicial  npoelfuor  ?  (6.) 

From  what  sources  are  judicial  rrpooijuiia  drawn? 

Who  is  most  likely  to  draw  the  matter  of  his  trpooifuov  L 
Tov  XiyovToc — the  accuser  or  accused  ? 

Turn  to  the  oration  against  Verres  (Act.  Sec.  Lib.  iii.)  and 
tell  me  from  which  of  the  sources  Cicero's  exordium  is  drawn. 

In  which  of  the  parts  of  a  judicial  oration,  delivered  by  an 
accused,  would  the  orator  be  most  likely  to  have  recourse  to 
the  rrlaretQ  iv  rw  Udei  tov  XiyovroQ  ? 

Are  they  admissible  in  all  parts  ? 

In  which  part  of  the  oration  does  the  accuser  introdtice  the 
TO.  irpoQ  diafioX'fiv? 

What  is  the  objection  to  their  being  mentioned  in  the  Tpo- 

olfilOV  ? 

In  which  part  of  the  oration  does  the  accused  reply  to  the 
ra  xpoc  ^iaj3o\^v  ? 

What  is  the  orator's  object  when  his  vpoolfitoy  is  drawn  Ik 
TOV  dxpoaTov?  (7.) 

Does  the  deliberative  species  always  require  the  vpoolfitov  ? 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  381 

CHAP.  XV. 

The  reader  is  referred  to  Hobbes'  Brief  for  the  rovoi  on 
-this  chapter. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

"What  kind  of  htriyrftrtt  does  Aristotle  prefer  in  the  demon- 
strative species  of  oration  ? 

May  the  proof  and  amplification  be  blended  in  this  species  ? 
(vide  Biccobon  in  cap.  xvi.  hujns  libri.) 

What  is  the  objection  to  a  continuous  ^iriyrfaic  (i^cf^c)  in 
this  species  ? 

In  a  judicial  oration  should  the  hifiytieic  be  c^if^c  or  Kara 

fUpOQ? 

What  matter  does  the  accuser  naturally  relate  in  his  ^t^- 
yri<n£  ?  (iv.  line  6.) 

How  does  the  ^ifiyrieic  of  an  accused  differ  from  an  ac- 
cuser's ? 

What  relation  is  there  between  the  diriyriffiQ  and  the  iriartQ  \? 

On  what  points  should  an  accused  re&ain  from  dwelling, 
and  when  should  both  the  accuser  and  the  accused  dilate  on 
circumstances  in  the  hiiiyrfffiQ  ?  (8.) 

Is  it  of  qpnsequence  to  the  orator  to  vest  himself  with 
moral  character,  and  to  adapt  his  hiiiyriaiQ  to  the  viffric,  in 
order  that  the  one  may  support  the  other. 

Is  it  of  consequence  to  the  orator  to  vest  himself  with  mo- 
ral character,  (7,)  and  ought  he  to  do  this  at  the  comfiience- 
ment  of  his  ^i^yT/crtc  ?  (10.) 

^  Quoniam  narratio  est  remm  explicatio,  et  quiedam  quasi  sedes  ae 
fundamentom  constituendae  fidei,  ea  sunt  in  ea  servanda  maxime,  qusB 
etiam  in  reliquis  dicendi  paitibus,  quae  partim  sunt  necessaria,  partim  as- 
sumta  ad  ornandum. 

Nam  ut  dilucide  probabiliterque  narremus,  necessarium  est;  sed 
assumimus  etiam  suavitatem.  Probabilis  autem  narratio  erit,  si  personis, 
*  si  temporibus,  si  locis  ea,  quae  narrabuntur,  consentient ;  si  cujusque  facti 
et  erenti  causa  ponetur,  si  testata  dici  videbuntur,  si  cum  hominum  opi- 
nione,  auctoritate,  si  cum  lege,  cum  more,  cum  religione  conjuncta,  n 
probitas*  narrantis  significabltur,  si  antiquitas,  si  memoria,  si  orationis 
Veritas,  et  vitae  fides.  Suavis  autem  narratio  est,  quae  habet  admira- 
tiones,  exitus  tnopinatos,  interpositos  motus  animorum,  coUoquia  person- 
arum,  dolores,  iracundias,  metus,  Uetitias,  cupiditaies.  Cicero,  de  Orator. 
Partit. 

382  GENERAL  QUESTIONS 

Does  the  deliberative  species  of  orations  require  a  Sifjyfiais  ? 

When  is  a  hiriyritns  used  in  this  species  ? 

When  it  is  used  has  it  the  resemblance  to  the  wapaBeiyfjia  ? 

CHAP.  XVII. 

What  are  the  four  questions  for  proof  in  an  accuser's  ora- 
tion? 

Has  the  ^liiyritriQ  previously  prepared  the  judge  ? 
Can  you  repeat  the   division  which  Aristotle  made   of 
tyKKrifLara  in  the  first  book,  (chap.  xiii.  7,)  and  reconcile  it 
with  the  questions  to  be  proved  by  an  accused  as  stated  in 
this  chapter,  viz. 

either  5ri  ov  yiyoviv 
or  6Ti  oifK  ifi\a(ie 
or     ore  ovroffovhe,  fj  ori  hiKaiwQ  ? 

Suppose  the  accuser  charges  the  accused  with  a  deliberative 
injury,  what  cause  wiU  he  assign  for  the  action  done  ?  (Book 
I.  chap.  10.) 

Suppose  the  accused  is  compelled  by  weight  of  testimony 
to  acknowledge  the  commission  of  the  act  and  hurt  done,  but 
denies  the  irpoaiptaiQ :  if  he  proved  that  the  act  was  done  /z^ 
IC  avTov  or  ef  avay/oyc, — ^would  it  be  a  refutation  of  the  ac- 
cuser^? (vide  Book  I.  chap.  x.  6.) 

Suppose  the  accused  acknowledges  the  act  to  have  been 
done,  and  that  act  to  have  been  hurtful,  but  denies  the 
Trpoalpetric,  on  which  points  will  he  dwell  in  the  refutation  ? 

Wh^t  do  you  mean  by  refutation,*  and  is  the  refutation  in 
a  measure  different  from  proof  ? 

What  chiefly  constitutes  proof,  in  the  demonstrative  spe- 
cies? (3.) 

What  species  of  the  TrltrnQ  i5ta  tov  hlKvuyai  is  mostly  used 
in  the  deliberative  ? 

'  Aut  jure  factum,  depellendi  aut  ulsciscendi  doloris  gratia,  aut  pietatis, 
aut  pudicitiae,  aut  religioms,  aut  patriae  nomine,  aut  denique  necessitate, 
inscitia,  casu.  Nam  quae  motu  animi  et  perturbatione  facta  sine  ratione 
sunt,  ea  defensionem  contra  crimen,  in  legitimis  judiciis,  non  habent,  in 
liberis  disceptationibus  habere  possunt.     Cic.  Orat.  Partit. 

'  Ea  quae  ad  fidem  faciendam  pertinent  in  confirmationem  et  reprehen- 
sionem  dividimtur.  In  confirmando  nostra  probare  Tolumus ;  in  repre- 
hendendo  redarguere  contraria.  Quoniam  igitur  omne  quod  in  contro- 
Tersiam  venit,  id  aut  sit,  necne  sit,  aut  quid  sit,  aut  quale  sit,  quaeritur 
primo  conjectura,  in  altero  .definitio,  in  terti^  ratio.    Cic.  Orat.  Partit 

ON  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.       ^  383 

Do  you  recollect  any  precepts  which  Aristotle  gives  on  the 
use  of  enthymems  as  proofs  ? 

Why  should  they  not  be  used  when  the  orator  seeks  to  ex- 
cite the  passions  ? 

Why  should  they  not  be  used  i^e^^c,  or  in  a  continued 
series  ? 

To  which  of  the  three  distinctions  of  irlffreic  in  the  first 
book,  and  to  which  species  does  Aristotle  reduce  the  ra  vpoc 
ayri^iKOv  ? 

How  is  the  refutation  effected  by  enthymem  ?  (Book  11. 
chap.  XXV.  1.) 

Ought  not  an  accuser  to  notice  the  objections  which  the 
accused  is  likely  to  bring  forward  before  he  states  his  own  ? 

Why  should  he  not,  and  when  is  a  violation  of  this  order 
unobjectionable  ? 

Ought  the  accused  to  refute  his  adversary  before  intro- 
ducing his  own  proofs  ? 

What  reason  can  you  assign  for  this  order  in  the  proof  ? 

Are  yywfxai  admissible  as  proofs,  and  which  species  is  the 
best  ?  (Vide  Book  II.  chap,  xxi.) 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

Can  you  mention  any  cases  in  which  the  orator  may  inter- 
rogate with  success  ? 

Is  the  epwrrfffig  prudent  on  every  question,  and  when  is  it 
not? 

What  answer  is  the  best  to  an  equivocal  kp^rqaiQ  ? 

What  distinction  does  Aristotle  make  between  elptiivUa  and 

CHAP.  XIX. 

What  does  the  orator  propose  to  do  in  the  eirlXoyog  ? 

Why  should  an  accuser  prefer  the  eiriXoyoQ  to  the  other 
parts  of  the  oration,  for  exciting  the  passions  and  prejudices 
of  his  audience  against  his  adversary  ? 

Which  part  of  the  oration  of  an  accused  is  opposed  to  the 
iiriXoyoc  of  an  accuser  ? 

In  what  kind  of  judicial  cases  will  the  dvanvr^aiQ  be  used 
instead  of  to  eXq  to.  vadri  rov  dKpoaTfjy  KaTatTTfjaai  ? 

384  GENERAL  QUESTIONS. 

Will  every  case  admit  of  the  excitement  of  the  passions  in 
the  €7r/Xoyoc? 

What  kind  of  cases  require  the  excitement  of  anger,  hatred, 
and  pity  ? 

Is  it  necessary  to  the  excitement  of  anger  in  the  cn-iXoyoc, 
that  the  orator  should  show  in  the  vlartg  that  his  adversary 
has  acted  with  the  oXcyoipta  and  its  species  ? 

Why  is  it? 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say  because  these  are  the  errmxcla 
out  of  wliich  anger  is  excited?  (vide  Book  II.  chap,  ii.) 

Why  does  the  conciliation  of  the  hearer  in  the  iiriXtryoc 
naturally  follow  the  irltrTiQ  ? 

Why  does  amplification  and  extenuation  naturaJly  follow 
the  t6  KaraffKevdcrai  eZ  tov  dKpoarfjy? 

Should  the  dpafiyri<ric  be  long  or  brief? 

APPENDIX 

TO  TH« 

ANALYSIS  OF  ARISTOTLE'S  EHETOEIC, 

CONTAINING  THE  ORIGINAL  DEFINITIONS. 

BOOK   I. 

I. — ^1.  Rhetoric  corresponds  with  Logic,  since  A/z^orcpat 
irept  Totovrutv  nvStv  elffiv,  a  koipcl  rpoirov  riva  h.iravT(ov  karl 
yviopl^eiv,  Kal  oi^cfitdc  eTriarrifiric  d(l>(opi(rfievrig, 

2.  But  since  men  do  it  not  only  tlicfi,  but  also  ^la  ffwrideiay, 
CLTTO  t^eiact  eiri  hvavro  koI  odoiroteiy,  and  therefore  rijv  alriay  Oeo}- 
peiv  iv^ixerai.   Consequently,  there  must  be  an  art  of  Rhetoric. 

3.  But  previous  writers  have  done  but  little  towards  it,  for 
al  wlerreiQ  tVTe\v6p  kari  p.6vov  tcl  I*  iXXa  'TrpoffdrJKai,  and  they 
have  neglected  enthymems,  oirep  tori  (rwfjia  r^c  tt/otcwc. 

4.  But  appeals  to  the  passions,  oh  vepl  tov  Trpay/iaroc  corcr, 

5.  dXXd  vpoc  Toy  liKaariiy'  which  is  unjust,  and  avoided  by 
the  Areopagus. 

6.  The  business  of  the  pleader  is  only  with  the  fact,  5tl 
ecrrty  rj  ovk  ttrriy,  fj  yiyoyev  5  oh  yiyovty*  not  with  the  question 
of  its  importance. 

7.  Laws  would  therefore  be  best,  if  they  could  mark  out 
(ItopLl^iiy)  all  cases,  and  leave  but  little  to  the  judges,  both 
oii  account  of  the  difficulty  of  getting  many  good  men  to  legis- 
late, and  because  ac  ftky  vofwdeffiai  Ik  voXXov  ffKeypafiiywy  yi- 
yyovrac  at  Zt  KpltrtiQ  cj  viroyvov*  and  because  the  legislator 
does  not  judge  for  the  present  and  particular  case,  but  for  the 
future  and  universal,  and  is  therefore  free  from  prejudice  or 
paBsion. 

9.  Therefore  the  exordium,  narrative,  etc.  have  nothing  to 
do  with  the  art,  as  all  that  aims  at  making  the  judge  woioy  riva, 

2  c 

386  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

'  10.  Althoiigli  Irifitiyopvcii  is  superior  to  liKaviKri,  all  men 
prefer  the  latter,  because  it  best  admits  of  superfluity  and  false 
reasoning. 

11.  Now  i  }llv  tvTt\VOQ  lliBohoQ  tCtpi  TCLQ  VltrTtiQ    IffTtV'     ff  C€ 

iriffTiQ,  aTro^ei^ig  Tig'  tern  ^  dird^etiic  pryrogiKfi^  ivdv^rificL'  koI 
€OTi  TOVTO,  WQ  iiireiv  &7rXa>c,  KvpivraTOV  riav  TrioTetov'  ro  M  iyOv- 
firifia^  frvXKoyifffiOQ  rig'  ^ijXoy  2*,  ort  6  fjidXitrra  rovro  Svyafievog 
Oetapeiv,  €K  rlviDV  Km  irwc  yiyvtrai  trvXXoynrfioCj  ovrog  icai  ivdv 
firifiariKOQ  ay  eiri  fiaXitTTa.  But  he  must  also  know  not  Ix>gic 
only,  but  the  subjects  {vepl  vdia)  enthymems  are,  and  their 
differences  from  the  syllogisms  of  Logic.  For  ro  re  aXtidec, 
Kol  TO  Bfioioy  rf  &\rjdei,  rijc  ahrilc  e<m  hvyafjLstag  ihely  and  from 
a  natural  aptness  to  discover  truth,  man  has  an  aptness  in 
conjecturing  probabilities. 

12.  Rhetoric  is  useful,  I.  ^id  ro  i^ixTtt  cTvat  Kpeima  ra- 
Xrjdfj  Kai  ra  ZUcua  ruty  iyayritav'  2.  because,  on  account  of 
the  unscientific  character  of  some  hearers,  avayiciy  lia  r&v  koi- 
yCjy  iroieiaOai  rag  iritrreig  Koi  rovg  \6yovg'  3.  rayavTia  Set  ^v- 
vaffOai  irtideiy,  KaQairtp  koX  kv  rolg  cruXkoyiafiolg,  in  order  to 
confute  &Woy  j^puiytEvov  fxij  hucaiutg  rolg  Xoyoig  avroTc,  which 
Dialectic  and  Rhetoric  alonef  can  do.  4.  aroTrov,  ei  r^  ffutfian 
fjiey  al(r)(p6v  fjrj  ^vvacrdai  /3o?}0etv  kavr^,  Xoyy  3'  ovk  ala')(p6v'  o 
fjidWoy  *ihi6y  eortv  dvOpwrrov  rfjg  rov  ffutfiarog  ')(pelag, 

13.  The  improper  use  of  Rhetoric  is  an  objection  com- 
mon to  all  things  except  aperii. 

14.  The  business  of  Rhetoric  ov  to  veitraiy  aXka  ro  tSecv,  ro 
iriBavhy  and  both  ro  iriOavby^  koI  to  tjiaiydfuvoy  TriSayoy,  as  in 
Dialectic.  J  yap  ffO<l>i<micii*  ohK  ky  ri)  ^vvanti^  aXX*  ky  rp  npoai- 
pitrei.  But  in  Rhetoric  earrai  6  fiey  Kara  Trjy  kiriffrrifXTiy,  6  Bi 
fcara  r^y  Trpoaipeffiyy  piirwp'  but  in  Dialectic,  troffnorrilg  fiey  Kara 
rrly  irpoalpecnyy  ^laXeicriKog  de  oh  Kara  rr^y  Trpoaipttriyy  dXXa  Kara 
ri)v  ^vyafiiy, 

U. — 1.  Rhetoric  is  defined  to  be  dvyafxig  wepl  eKaaroy  rov 
dtfapfjffai  TO  krht^SfXEyoy  Tridayoy*  and  that  on  any  given  sub- 
ject (wepl  Tov  hoOivTog), 

2.  Twy  de  wiffTeaty  at  fjey  &T£')(yol  eicrty,  at  he  eyrex^oc  ^Tevya 
Si  Xiyoif  offa  firi  Sl  fifiwy  irevipiffrai,  aXXa  vpovirfipxtv'  oloy 
fjiaprvpeg,  fidffayoi,  cvyypa^ai,  koI  oaa  roiavra*  tyrexvo-  ^£>  oira. 
Zih.  T^g  fiEddSov  Kal  hi  fjfjLwy  KaTatTKevaffdfjyai  hvyardy'  <Sot£  Sel 
rovTuty  roXguey  xpTitratrBai,  ra  de  evpciv. 

3.  The  eiTe^yoi  iritntig  are  of  three  kinds.     1.  kv  r^  i^ii 

OF  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  387 

roZ  XiyovTOQ*    2.   iv  rf  rbr  aKpoarriv  ^ladeival  irwc*    S.  iv  ahr^ 

4.  The  first  takes  place  when  the  speaker  makes  himself 
appear  worthy  of  credit ;  the  second,  when  the  hearer  is  ex- 
cited with  any  feeling ;  "the  third,  when  a  real  or  apparent 
truth  is  shown. 

7.  Rhetoric  is  diov  frapa(pveQ  ri  Tfjg  AiaXcimif^C,  koi  ttjq  nepl 
TCL  I}6i7  xpay/xarc/ac  (i.  e.  iro\irtic^c)« 

8.  The  means  of  persuading  are  either  ev6viJLrifjLa=prfToptK6g 
trvWoyttrfJioe,  or  irapa^eiyjjia^^^  prjropiKrf  kiraywyii,  by  one  of 
-which  all  men  persuade. 

9.  Now,  to  show  or*  liri  iroWibv  Koi  ofioiwvt  ovrutg  cj^ft,  in 
liOgic  is  fcirayo/y^,  but  in  Rhetoric  irapaheiyfia'  but  that,  riyQv 
ovTwv,  €Tep6v  Ti  Sia  TavTa  ffvfipaiyeiv  trapa  Tavra  t^  ravra  el»'ai, 
rj  KadoXov,  rj  wg  eirl  to  ttoXv,  is  in  Logic  called  (rv\\.oyiafjiog,  but 
in  Rhetoric  evdvfxri^a, 

10.  Although  example  is  often  used,  yet  enthymematic 
reasonings  are  most  applauded  {dopv^ovvrai). 

11.  As  in  medicine,  universals  are  alone  considered  by  Rhe- 
toric, and  it  is  Ik  twv  ^^17  PovXeveff^ai  elwdoTwv, 

12.  As  the  reader  is  supposed  to  be  hirXovg,  the  atrvWoyiffra 
are  better  than  the  cvWcXoyier/icVa,  for  the  latter  are  not  cvxa- 
paKoXovdriTa  ^la  to  fjtfJKog, 

13.  We  can  only  reason  from  to.  evhx^fievo-  wc  ra  voWa 
i')(eiv  Kal  &XKiMtg. 

14.  But  as  there  are  but  few  dvayKola  which  form  rhetorical 
syllogisms,  they  are  generally  contingent  (wg  Inl  to  iroXv), 
Hence  tvdvfirjfiaTa  are  said  to  be  if  eixoTutv  koI  Ik  arifieitov' 
But  eIkoq  is  &Q  Itti  to  ttoXv  yiyvdfievoV  ©{>)(  A^rXoic  he*  aXXa  to 
frtpl  ra  ivle')(6fji£va  aXXwg  ^X^"'  ovTwg  t^ov  irpog  IkiIvo,  npog  o 
uKog,  utg  TO  KaOoXov  irpog  to  Kara  fiipog.  But  of  (rfifieia,  the 
one  ovTiag  txct,  wc  rwv  JcaO'  tKatrrdv  n  irpog  to  KaSoXov'  but  the 
other  utg  rdv  KadoXov  ti  vpog  to  icara  fiipog*  and  of  these  the 
hvayKalov  is  called  T€K^{iptov'  but  the  firj  avayKalov  has  no 
name  to  distinguish  it.* 

19.  But  irapahiyfia  is  an  tTraywyiy,  but  wc  f  «poc  frpog  fJiipog^ 
OfWiov  vpog  OfjioioVf  &rav  a/Lc^o)  ^tv  p  vtto  to  ovto  ytvog^  yvw/oi- 
fiUTtpov  hi  BcLTtpov  ^  BaTipov, 

•  The  best  explanation  of  the  difficulties  of  this  passage  will  be  found 
in  Manseirs  Logic,  Appendix,  note  E.    Some  useful  illustrations  will 
also  be  found  in  the  notes  to  the  translation,  pp.  17-^21. 
,  2  c  2 

APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

21.  Those  syllogisms  are  properly  logical  and  rhetorical, 
which  are  of  equal  extent  with  the  arts  themselves,  in  refer- 
ence to  which  the  tokci  are  used.  For  these  are  conunon 
irepl  woWCjv  ^laijupovrtay  eihiy  such  as  lesser  and  greater,  etc. 
But  the  ei^ri  are  confined  to  their  respective  subjects  ;  thus 
there  are  npoTatreic  concerning  physics,  that  are  of  no  use  in 
morals,  etc. 

The*ro7rot  convey  no  specific  knowledge,  as  they  are  vepl 
>  ovUy  vTToicelfjLevov,  but  the  ct^i},  if  well  selected,  will  gradually 
produce  a  science  distinct  from  the  Dialectic  and  Rhetoric. 

22.  "EiSiy  =  at  icaO*  €i:a<rroy  yivoQ  *iZiai  TrpordffeiQ. 
Toiroi  =  ai  Koivai  bfioitjc  vavToty. 

in. — 1.  There  are  three  £i5iy  of  Rhetoric,  tis  there  are  three 
kinds  of  hearers,  and  the  speech  con9ists  of  three  things  ;  1. 
6  Xiyijy,     2.  irepl  o^  Xiyeu     3.  trpog  6y. 

2.  The  hearer  is  either  dewpoc  trepl  rfjg  3vvu/i£(iic,  (the  skill  of 
the  orator,)  or  irpir^C)  i«  6.  KpiiijQ  rj  rdy  ycycvjjyiicvaii',  rj  rwy 
fiiWoyrwyj  the  latter  being  cfcicXi^o'taoT^Cy  the  former  Biicaor^c* 

3.  Hence  oratory  is  thus  divided  : — 

1.   crv/JifiovXevTtKrf 

2.  hiKayiKri 

Bunness. 
f  vpoTpoir^ 
<      and 
(  atroTponrl. 

Karriyopia 
and 

iLiroXoyicu 

efraiyog 
or 

\p6yoQ, 

Time, 
o  fiiXXiMty. 

o  yeyofieyog. 

End. 
<rvfi<j>ipoy 

and 
fiXafitpoy, 
^Uaioy 
and 
aiucov. 
kclXov 
and 

6  frapwy,  but  some- 
3.  eTTihiKTiKri         ^      or  times  the  others 

by  recoUection  or  ai<rxp6y. 

anticipation. 

8.  In  all  three  kinds  we  must  hq,ve  propositions  on  hwardy 
and  ddm'aroy,  ei  yeyovev,  rj  firif  on  fiiya  ^  fUKpoy^  hUaioy  rj 
AciKoy,  KoXoy  fj  ai<r)(p6yy  etc. 

IV. — 1.  Excluding  ddvyarag  dyayKoia,  and  diro  rvx^C  yf- 
vo/i£va  ayada,  Aristotle  enumerates  five  things  irept  iay  wfi- 
fiovXevoyrou  vayreg,  1.  iropou  2.  voXefiOQ  kcu  eipiiyij*  3.  ^v- 
Xajcj)  r^c  X^P^^'  ^'  c^o'ayo/xeva  kol  t^aySfitya,  5.  yofioBeaia. 
Then  follow  the  tihri  of  each,  and  the  knowledge  necessary 
and  useful.* 

*  As  these  are  fully  enumerated  by  Hobbes,  I  shall  here  omit  them, 
as  in  all  similar  ^^ases. 

OP  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  389 

V. — 1.  As  to  the  Epideictic  orator,  evMifiovla  is  his  aim, 
'rrepi  yap  Tavrqc,  koI  tCjv  eXq  ravrriv  (Tvvteiv6vt(ov^  koi  rdy  ivav 
Ttwy  ravT-j;,  at  te  irpoTpoiral  Kal  ai  dTrorpoiral  irdffal  eitrt, 

3.  But  ehdatfjiovla  is,  Istly,  evirpaiia  fxera  apsTrjg'  2Ddly, 
avrapKela  ^a>^c'  Srdlj,  6  /3/oc  6  //era  aor^aXf/ac  rjdiffTog'  4thly, 
eifffBivtia  icrrf^aTwv  Koi  autfidrwv,  fiera  ^vvdfiiwc  ^vXaKTucfJQ  re 
Koi  irpaKTucriQ  tovtwv, 

4.  Now  he  is  ahrapKiffrarog,  ^  vtrap^ei  rd  r'  cv  avrf,  koi  ra 
iiCTog  dyadd.  "EffTi  Sc  ev  avrf  /lccv,  ra  vtpl  "^xtxrlv,  koX  tcl  kv 
ai)fiaTC  e^ti)  ^e,  eiryeveia,  Kal  ^/Xot,  Kal  -^{ip-ara^  Kal  rifiri' 

7.  The  parts  of  wealth  are  vofilfffiarog  nXridoQ,  yfJQ,  y^wpitov 
KTrjeric'  crt  Sc,  CTrtVXwi'  KrrjfftQ  Kal  potTKrjixdtwv  koI  dydpano^ior 
TrXriBei  Kal  ^eyidn  Kal  mXXec  liaifupovrtov.  And  all  these  must 
be  daipakri  Kal  eXevdipia  Kal  ')(pri(nfia.  But  the  most  useful  are 
ra  KapTTifxa'  the  liberal,  ra  Trpoc  dirSXavaiy,  And  thej  are 
Kapvijia  df*  c3k  at  np6ffodoC  but  drroXaverTiKa,  difi"  u^v  fjiri^ev  irapa 
r^v  XP^^*''  yfyvcrat,  o  rt  Kal  aUov,  *A(r<j>aX£ia  consists  in  pos- 
sessing weialth  tiffT  i<l>*  avr^  elvai  Tijv  ')(pri<riv  avriov, 

8.  E^^o^/a,  TO  vito  irdyruv  <Tirovdalov  viroXan^dvtadai, 

9.  Ttjui),  (rrjfieiov  evepyeriKfig  5<5f)7c» 

"Evepyeffia,  if  tig  ffotTrfpiav,  Kal  Sera  atrta  tov  eJvai,  rj  tig 
rrXovToVy  rj  eig  rt  rwv  aXXaii^  dyaBioy, 

12.  *Iff')(ygy  ^vvafiig  tov  Kively  erepov,  wg  /JovXcrat. 

15.  Ewyijp/a,  Ppa^vTTjg  yfipojg  fier  dXvirlag,  ' 

16.  ^t'Xoc,  offTigy  &  oterat  aya^a  cTvat  exely^,  irpaKTiKog  ItTTiy 
airCiv  ^i  tKeiyoy.  A  man  who  possesses  many  such,  enjoys 
TToXv^tXta  and  xpf7<n'o^tX/a. 

17.  Eirrv)(la  Se  €(ttiv,  <3r  ^/  rv^iy  aya6wv  atr/a,  raiJra  yiyvc- 
adai  Kal  virapxeiy  rj  Travra,  ff  ra  TrXctora,  fj  to,  /zeytora. 

18.  As  dpsTTi  is  most  closely  connected  with  tiraiyog,  Aris- 
totle proceeds  to  ra  Trp^c  to  TtXog  of  deliberative  oratory. 

VI. — 1.  And  these  are  ra  trvufipovTa  vpog  Tag  Trpa^etc,  to 
^  ffv^<l>ipoy  dyadovj  which  must  therefore  be  considered. 
'Aya6ov  is  defined  to  be  o  aj'  avro  eavTOv  eyeKa  J  atpcrdi''  Kal 
oZ  eyeKa  dXXo  alpov^tda'  Kal  oif  t^/trai  travra,  fj  Trrcvra  ra  ali- 
(rdrjffiy  t^oyra^  rj  yovy,  fj  el  Xa/3ot  yovy*  Kal  6<ra  6  yovg  ay  licaory 
diro^olri'    Kal  oara  6  irepl  eKOffToy. 

3.  And  goods  follow  fj  dfia,  fj  vtrrepoy.  A  copious  enumer- 
ation of  the  TSvot  next  follows,  for  which  see  Hobbes. 

18.  Enumeration  of  ra  a/iJ^trrjSiyr^JTtjLta  aya6a. 

Vn. — 1.  In  order  to  enumerate  the  toitoi  of  comparative 

390  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

good  ftnd  expediency,  which  the  deliberative  orator  must  dis- 
cuss, Aristotle  defines  vv€^}ixoy,  rotrovrovf  koI  tvr  and  Virepe' 
j(6fuvov,  TO  iywap\oy.  Observing,  fui^oy  fi^y  aft  koI  vXeIov 
vpoQ  tXarroy'  fiiya  he  kcu  fiiKpoVy  koI  vo\v  koi  okiyov^  mpog  to 
T&v  woXXwy  fiiyidoQ'  Kal  vnepi'xpy  fitv^  to  fiiya'  to  he  iWelvoyj 
fjLiKpoy'  Kal  voXv  koI  oKlyov  uKravTtoQ.  Then  follow  the  rovoi. 
See  Hobbes. 

VIII. — 1.  To  be  able  veiOeiy  koI  KoXias  trvfifiovXeveiy,  one 
ought  to  be  able  rac  vo\irctac  hvcurag  \ape7y,  Kal  to,  eKCLtrrT/s 
edrif  Kal  yofnyLa,  koX  trvfK^epoyTa  litkely.  For,  1.  meidovrai  vay- 
Tes  T^  ffVfi^epoyTL*     2.  Kvpia  ff  tov  Kvpiov  dir6<^aytrig. 

3.  There  are  four  iroXtrcIai,  hrifxoKpaTia,  6\iyapx^o.9  dpitr- 
TOKpanoj  fioyap\ia'  SO  that  the  ruling  and  judicial  functions 
will  be  one  part  of  these  or  the  whole.  But  hrijioKparia  is  de- 
fined, voXiTeia,  ev  ^  icX^py  hiavifioyTai  rac  apxag'  oXiyapxia, 
ey  rj  01  afro  TifJLrffidTiay'  dpiffTOKpaTiay  ey  y  oi  jcara  vaiheiay. 
But  by  vathela  I  mean  n^v  vwo  tov  yofjiov  Ketfiiyriv.  But  ^or- 
ap^/a  is  that,  ey  ^  cic  &wayTioy  KvptoQ  koTC  and  ii  fiey  icara  raftv 
Tiya,  is  called  PaaiXeia'  'but  J  dopitrroQ^  Tvpayyig, 

5.  Their  respective  teXti  are, 

0£  drffWKpaTiCL,  iXevBepia, 

oXiyapxioy  vXovtoq, 

dpiOTOKpaTlOf  TO,  vepl  vaiZeiay  Kal  to.  yofiifia. 

TvpayylhoQf  ^vXaic^. 

IX — 1.  But  as  ethical  character  is  also  necessary  in  the 
speaker,  and  as  virtue  and  vice  are  the  objects  of  the  Epi- 
deictic  orator,  and  also  enable  us  to  appear  voioi  Tiveg  i:ara  to 
^doQ,  which  is  the  second  vI<ttlc  eyrexvost  we  must  therefore 
define  thus : 

3.  KaXov,  o  ay  hi  avTO  alpeTOv  oy  evaiyeToy  ^*  fj  o  h.y  oya- 
doy  oy  fihv  ffy  6ti  dyaOdy.  And,  if  so,  dpeTtl  must  needs  be 
KaXoy*  ayadoy  yap  oy  eiraiyeToy  iemv,  4.  But  apen)  is,  as  it 
seems,  hvyafHQ  vopitrriKrl  aya6w>'  Kal  ^vXaicrtic^*  Kal  hvvafjiiQ 
e{fepyeTiKrl  iroXXCjy  Kat  jjieydXiMty  Kal  vayTtoy  irepl  iravra.  5.  Its 
parts  are  hiKaioffvyrj,  ayhpeioy  erwijipoavyrf,  fieyaXonpiireta,  fieya- 
Xo)^vx/a,  eXevBepiOTrfgy  wpaorrig,  <pp6yriiTLCj  o^o^ta.  7.  Which  are 
thus  defined :  AiKaioavyrf,  apcri),  hi  fjy  to,  avTwy  eKatrroi  exovaiy 
Kal  a>c  o  y6fiO£*  but  dhucia,  hi  $v  to,  dXXSTpiOy  ovx  ^^  o  yofiOQ. 
8.  * Avhpeia,  hi  fjy  vpaKTiKoi  elm  Tufy  KaXHy  epyuty  ey  toIq  Kivhv- 
yoiQf  Kai  lie  6  vofiOQ  KeXevei,  Kal  vTrrjperiKol  Tf  yofi^'  but  htiKia 
the  reverse.     9.  ^it>i^poavyi)y  dpeT^^  hi  fjy  rrpog  rac  f/hoyciQ  tov 

OF  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  391 

(Totfiaroc  ovT(i}Q  exovffiv,  wq  b  vofwg  KeXevei'  but  aKoXaaia  the 
reverse.  10.  »EXcv6cpiori7c>  w-epi  '^•fifjiara  ev  iroirjnKri'  but 
<!ivc\cvO£p/a  the  reverse.  11.  McyaXovf/vxta?  ^P^''^  ^cyaXwv 
TTOtiynjc^  evEpyeTrjfiaTwV  but  fiiKpoypvxia  tho  reverse.  12.  Mc- 
yaXoTTpeTTcta,  dp£ri^  Ik  ^awavrifiam  fjieyiSovc  froirirucri'  but  fiiKpo- 
xinfxia  and  fiiKpoirpiireia  the  reverse.  13.  ^poj^Tycic,  dpen^  3ia- 
I'Oiac,  i:a6'  f/v  eZ  povXeveffdai  ^vvavrai  irepi  dyadiuv  koX  KUKwy 
Tufv  eiprifiivwv  elg  thhaipoviav. 

Then  follows  a  copious  list  of  ra  jcaXa. 

32.  But  as  praise  results  from  moral  action,  we  must  en- 
deavour to  show  that  the  person  commended  has  always  acted 
Kara  icpoaipeaiv.  He  defines  tvaivoQ^  \6yoQ  ejitpavi^wv  jiiyeOog 
aperfig. 

35.  "^xei  ^e  koivov  elhoc  6  Ewaiyoc  iccu  at  trvfifiovXai'  h  yap 
ev  T^  (TvfjpovKeveiv  vvoOoto  &y,  ravra,  fieTarediyra  ry  Xt^et, 
iyKbjfiia  yiyvETai, 

38.  In  praise,  we  may  also  use  ra  dv^riTiKo,  as  ei  fiovos,  fj 
TrpGfTOQ,  fj  fjiET  6Xiyu)v,  rj  Kol  6  fiaXierra  TreiroirjKev,  Also  ra  £K 
rGtv  y(p6vti)v  Koi  t&v  Kaipwv  koX  €i  iroWaKig, 

X.  Judicial  Oratory  requires  us  to  consider  three  things, 
ev  fiivf  Tiy wvy  koi  votrtuv  cVejca  d^iKovtn'  ^evrepov  Sc,  viae  avroi 
ZiaKeifievoC    rpiTOV  hij  rove  woioucj  koX  tt&q  eypyrag* 

3.  Aristotle  then  defines  to  ddixelv^  to  j3\a7rrciv  £ic<5vra  irapd 
rov  vofwv.  But  vofiog  is  either  tSioc  or  Koivog.  "Idiog  is  that, 
Kaff  by  ytypafifiivov  voXiTevovTai'  but  Koivog,  oaa  &ypa<l>a  wapd 
iratrtv  ofioXoyeiaQai  doKel,  Men  eKOVTeg,  6aa  eiZoTegj  kqX  fxrl 
dvayKai^OfiEvoi.  "Offa  fiev  oZv  eKOVTeg,  ol  irdvTa  irpoaipovfievoi* 
otra  he  irpoaipovfieyoi,  tihoTeg  &iravTa'  ovheig  yap,  b  wpoaiptiTai, 
dyvoel.  But  the  motives  through  which  TrpoaipovvTai  pXair- 
T€iVf  Kol  <l>avXa  voieiy  vapd  tov  vofWVy  are  Koxia  and  aKpaala. 

6.  The  motives  of  injustice. 

7.  Motives  of  all  actions  are  either 

Ol  avTOvg 

hi  i 

Ci  eOog,  hi  ope^iv  2to  Tv^qy  ej  dydyKrig, 

XoyiffTitc^v  rj 
aXoyov,  i.  e. 
either  through 
fiovXr\(ng,  opyil, 
or  tTTiOvfjiia, 

392  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

12.  Now  TO.  arro  TifxnQ  *re  ro  rotavra  yiyvofitva^  otru^v  ^  re 
alHa  aopKTTOQ,  Koi  /xi^  €V£icd  tov  yiyviraC  KoX  fiiiTt  aeiy  fkifrt  4tfc 
£iri  TO  TToXv,  ^ii\Tt  TiTayfjLtykt^, 

13.  But  rd  (j^vfrHf  oirwv  ij  re  airia  kv  avroic  koI  TETayfiivii'  T/ 
yap  deii  ^  oic  cttc  to  voKv  uvavr^c  dvofiaiyet, 

14.  Ta  Plif.  are  oaa  ncLp*  hriBvidav  i}  tovq  Xoyurfiovc  yiyvvrai 
dt  ovrwv  rCtv  TrpaTrdynav, 

15.  "EOci  ^£,  oo-a  hia  to  iroXXacic  veTroi^reVac  irocov<rc. 

16.  Aoyifffif  ^£y  rd  dorovKra  <rvfuj>ip€iv  bk  tuv  lipiifAivfav  dya- 
dHyf  fj  <i»c  rcXoc,  i)  ii»(  ^poc  ro  r^0£,  orav  ^ud   to   trufi^ipov 

TTpOTTTITai, 

17.  Aid  Bvfiov  Se  KoX  dpT^v  ra  ri/iA^piyruca. 

But  we  must  observe  that  ^  icoXao-tc  rov  7rd<r)(pvT0Q 
eviKa  IffTiV  ff  hi  Tifiwpla  rov  voiovvtoq,  iva  avoTrXriptfd^. 

18.  Aft*  kiridvfilav  dk  trpdmrai^  6<ra  ^alvtrai  ^lia, 

XI. — 1.  *HSo>'i)  is  defined  to  be  Ktyriaig  nc  r^  ^^vytfCt  koI 
KardoTaffiQ  aQp6a  Kok  OivdiTni  <(£  t^k  inrapr^ovtray  i^vtny  XvTtf 
hi  TOvyayTioy, 

Enumeration  of  ra  fiUa. 

XII.  IIwc  txoyrec  ahiKovai,  mil  irdiaf  koi  ttocovc* 

For  this  chapter,  see  Hobbes. 

Xni. — 3.  Division  of  laws  into  "ihtoi  and  Koiyol,  and  conse- 
quently of  ra  ahiKfifJMTa  Koi  diKaiutfAara, 

5.  Aristotle  defines  a^dcct^^ai,  ro  wro  it^oyroQ  ra  a^tca  wa<r- 
XCif*  adding,  to  yap  adixeiy  Cipurrai  vpOTipov  kKOvtrioy  tJvau 

11.  As  there  are  tUv  huccUwy  Kal  rdy  ahixiay  hvo  iihti"  to. 
jiey  yeypaufxiya'  to,  he  fiypa^a*  SO,  of  these  latter  eoTi  ra  fiey 
Kad^  hireplioX^y  dpeTfjc  koi  xaiciacy  if*  olc  Qytihrj  ical  enaivoiy  koI 
aTifulai  Kal  TifAdi,,Kal  hiapsal*  ,oIov,  to  xapiy  exuy  r^  irotiivavn 
€v,  KoX  avTevKouiiy  Toy  ev  iroiriffayTa'  but  others  are  rov  Ihtov 
vofiov  Kot  yeypanfiivov  eWeififAO,  i.  e,  ImeiKeQ  or  -equity,  which 
is  defined  to  vapa  rov  yeypapfjiiyoy  v6fioy  hiKaiov.  And  this 
happens,  ra  /x£v  eK6yTiM}yj  ra  he  aKOvrhty  r^y  yofjtoQfriiiv*  aKOvruv 
fiey,  Bray  Xa^*  fjcovroiv  Sf,  oray  fxri  hvywyrai  htoplaai,  aXX' 
dyayKoioy  fiey  ^  KadoXov  eiirelyy  fiil  J  ^€,  aXX'  «c  eirl  to 
rroXv. 

15,  And  hence  ra  eTrteiKii  are  those  deeds,  £^'  olc  he7  wy 
yyutfjiriy  ej(ety, 

18.  And  Equity  consists  in  looking  rather  to  the  irpoaiptviQ 
than  the  Trpa^^g. 

XIV.  Enumeration  of  the  degrees  of  guilt     See  Hobbes. 

OF  ARISTOl^.E'S  EHETORIC.  393 

XV. — 1.  The  (iTexvci  wi&retg  are  vofjiot,  fiaprvpeCf  tfvvdfjicaiy 
ficLcrayoi,  6pK0t, 

3.  Arguments  for  the  use  or  opposition  of  the  laws. 

13.  "MapTvpig  elvi  Sirroi,  oi  fXEv  vaXaioij  oi  Se  'jrp6ff<paT0i, 
Kal  roVTiov  ol  /icv  yLtrlxovret  rov  Ktvhvvov*  ol  ^e  eicrog.  na\aio<, 
oi  iroifp-al  ifat  oi  '^rifrp.oK6yoiy  the  former  vepl  twv  yeyofiivtov, 
the  latter  wepl  t&v  kaonivutv. 

Also  proverbs  are  naprvpia, 

15.  Xlpoa^TOit  otroL  yvwpifioi  ri  iceKplKain*  "xpritrtfxoi  yap  at 
TOVTfov  Kpltreig  Tciig  vepl  rdv  avriav  afjK^itrliriTovcnv. 

Manner  of  using  or  invalidating  witnesses. 

20.  Use  of  avvOfjKai.     See  Hobbes. 

26.  Useof/3a(ravot. 

27.  In  regard  to  oaths,  there  is  a  fourfold  division,  rj  yap 
dihtotn,  Kol  Xa/Lc/3avc(^  rj  oh^ertpov'  rj  to  fiev,  ro  ^  ov'  xai  tovtwv 
rj  Bi^bfat  /x£v,  ov  Xafifiavei  Bi*  rj  \afi0avei  fxev,  Bi^uttri  3c  ov. 

Manner  of  using  the  oath  under  the  different » circumstances. 

BOOK  IL 

I.  Having  discussed  deliberative  and  epideicti,c  oratory, 
Aristotle  now  turns,  to  judicial,  observing :  evsKa  xpiffewg  krmv 
fl  ^Vrpropucfi'  Koi  yap  rag  trvfifiovXag  Kpivovffi,  Kal  ij  Biicri  Kpiffig 
ioTiv*  therefore  we  must  not  cmly  consider  ontag  airohiKtiKog 
ttrrai  xal  wtcrrog  6  \6yog,  aXXa  xal  airrov  ttoI&v  rtva  Kal  rov 
Kpvrily  KaratrKEvai^eiy,  * 

4.  And  this  is  chiefly  important  for  the  speaker  elg  Tag 
ffv^^vKag,  but  for  the  hearer  elg  Tag  BiKag.  For  men  form 
different  opinions  according  as  they  are  ^iXovvrtc,  fnffovvTeg, 
opyil^ofievoi,  or  lep^tag  t-^^ovTegy  iiriOvfiovyTeg,  or  ehiXTri^eg, 

5.  Tov  fjtev  olv  avTovg  ilrai  iri^rrovg  Tovg  XiyovTag  rpia  etrri 
TO.  airta*  roaavra  yap  ktrri^  Bi  a  iriffTCvofxev  e^w  tCjv  aTohdi^twv, 
"'EoTt  Zt  ravra  i^p6vri<ngy  jcai  kpeHl^  koi  fvvoia. 

7.  But  how  men  may  appear  virtuous  and  prudent,  may  be 
learnt  from  the  chapter  on  virtues. 

But  tvvola  must  be  derived  from  a  knowledge  of  rh  iradtf, 
which  are  hi  oera  fiera^aXXovng  diafftipovai  wpog  Tag  Kpiffetg,  oig 

394  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

circrai  Xvrri  cat  i^y^'  oioVf  oftyi^,  tXioc,  f^fioCi  Jcac  ova  SXka 
rotowra,  koI  to  tovtois  iyayrla*  Aec  Sc  diatpEiv  [to]  irepl  etccurror 
€ic  rpia*  Xeyw  5*,  olov  xcpl  opy^c*  ir«C  Te  Ziaxtifitvoi  opyiXoi  €t«ri, 
icai  Tiffiy  ewdatriv  opyi^cffOai,  ral  ciri  iro/oic. 

IL  Anger  is  defined  to  be  ope^ic  fura  Xvxi^c  Tifiwpiac  ^airo- 
fAevriQ  lia  (^aivo^iyriv  oXiytaplay  tUv  iIq  avrov,  fl  etc  airrov  riva 
fir^  icpoanKovTVQ,  2.  ThuB  anger  will  always  be  against  a  par- 
ticular object,  and  all  anger  will  be  accompanied  bx  a  certam 
pleasure,  ivo  rrfc  tkifiho^  rev  TifiiapriaaerSai,  3.  if  oXiywpia 
IfTTiv  kvipytia  ctiriQ  vtpX  to  firi^evoi  a^tov  (^aivofierov"  but 
there  are  three  kinds  of  oXiyiapia,  KaTa<l>p6yriatQy  iwTfpeatrfwgf 
and  v(ipiQ* 

For  the  enumeration  of  the  feelings  and  objects  of  anger, 
see  Hqbbes. 

IIL — 1.  As  rf  opyii^effSai  kvavrioy  to  vpavveaBai^  Aristotle 
defines  vpavytnc,  KaTatrratnc  koX  ^pifiritrig  opyfJQ, 

TV. — 1.  He  now  defines  to  ^iXciv,  to  fiovXEtrSai  nviy  h  ota-ai 
ayadoj  (.Kiiyov  eyeKCL,  aXXa  fxil  avTOv,  koI  to  cara  Zvvafiiy  irpcuc- 
TLKoy  elyat  TOVTuty.  <^IXoq  2*  etrrly  6  <piXwy  ral  dyTKfuXovfxeyog. 
So  it  follows,  ^eXoF  elvai  roF  avyrihofuyoy  role  aya6oIc,  koI 
trvyaXyovyra  toTq  Xwripo'iQf  /ii^  3ta  rl  mpoy,  aXXa  5i*  iKelyoy, 

After  enumerating  rove  ii^XovyTag  koI  /Liiorovvrac,  Aristotle 
observes,  TroiriTiKa  exdpaQj  dpy^,  IvriptatrfiOQ,  lia(ioX(i* 

31.  *Opyil  fxey  oZy  kariy  Ik  r«v  xpoc  awroF*  ex^P^  ^*  *^*'*  &yev 
Tov  trpos  avToy'  and  ff  fity  opyri  del  vpoQ  rd  Kad*  eKatrra'  ro  de 
fiiaoc  Koi  vpoQ  ra  yiyri.  And  all  Xwrripd  are  aloBrp-dy  but  Ta 
HaXitrra  Kcucd^  ijiciOTa  alvBi^ro,  as  a^iicta  and  a^povvKi^. 

V. — 1.  ^o/3oc  is  Xvmf  Tig  ij  Tapaxn  kic  (f^ayratriac  piXXoyTog 
KaKOv  fj  <l>dapTucoVj  fj  Xvfrtjpov'  and  ^/Bepa,  oaa  if^aiyeTai  Zvvaptv 
tX^iy  piyaXriy  tov  fdelpeiyy  rj  PXcLTrreiy  /3Xa/3ac  etc  Xv?nyy  peyd- 
XijF  trvyTetyovffag. 

16.  After  enumerating  the  feelings  and  objects  of  fear, 
Aristotle  remarks  of  confidence,  t6  re  ddpaoc  iyayrioy  t^ 
<l>6fit^f  ical  TO  dappaXioy  t^  ipofiepf'  SoTe  peTO,  <^ayTaaiaQ  fi  cXxic 
Toty  ffon-riplwyf  ifc  iyyvc  ovnay'  Ttay  Zl  i^ofitpiay  $  pif  orrwyy  t/ 
TTOppta  ovTiay, 

VL — 2.  Aitrxyyti  is  Xvvri  ric  *«*  f^^XJ^  V€pi  ra  cJc  dhiiav 
^aiydpeya  ^ipEiv  rSty  KaKtiy,  rj  irapoyTwy,  fj  yeyoydruy,  ij  pe\- 
XovTwy.  But  aKaccrxvvrea,  oXiytopia  tic  'fa*  dirddeia  irtpi  ra 
avra  ravra. 

VII.  Aristotle  defines  x**P'C>  Kad*  ffy  o  l^wv  Xiyerai  x«p*'' 

OF  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  395 

virovpyeiv  rf  ^eojiiv^^  /ii)  avTi  rivocy  /liijB'  tya  ti  avr^  ry  virovp' 
yovvTi,  aXX'  tva  ti  Ixeiv^* 

5,  We  may  do  away  with  obligation  on  the  grounds  rj  6ti 
cLVT&y  €veKa  vvrfperovffiv,  fj  virripETriaay'  fj  6ti  avo  rvp^iyc  avyi- 
TreereVf  k.  t.  X. 

VIII.  "EXcoc  is  XvTTiy  ric  «ir*  ^aivo/xcVy  icaic^  ^daprcic^  koi 
\wripf  Tov  dva^iov  Tvy\aveiVf  6  kclv  ahroc  vpoahoKritreuv  av  Tra- 
Oeiy^  fj  Twy  airrov  riya-Kol  tovto,  ^ray  vXriffloy  (^aiyrirai, 

8.  *£Xeeiva  are  otra  rSty  XuTrripHy  icai  ohoyrfptiy  <l>OapTiKd. 

IX.  But  to  pity  is  particularly  opposed  to  vc/icrr^v  r^  yap 
\v7rtiadai  eiri  toIq  dva^iaiQ  icajcoTrpay/atc  avTiKelfjievov  koTi  Tp6' 
TToy  TivcLj  KoX  dvo  TOV  ovTOv  ^doug,  TO  Xv7r€i<r0ai  CTrt  rate  dvaf- 
iaic  thirpaylaiQ'  koI  &jai^  to,  tt&Bi]  f^dovQ  xpi}0Tov.  2.  Whence 
vifitaiQ  is  even  an  attribute  of  the  gods. 

3.  But  ^Oovoc  is  differently  opposed  to  pity,  for  it  is  Xvtt?; 
rapa^^ZriQ  kiti  eifTrpayitj^  aXX'  ov  tov  aya^iov^  aXXa  tov  *iffov  koI 
ofAolov*  But  it  is  solely  with  reference  to  one's  neighbour, 
otherwise  it  will  be  ^ojSoc 

4.  But,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  6  Xwovfieyog  M  toIq  dya^iws 
KaKOTTpayovaiy  ^o-d^ercrai,  tj  &\vvroc  corai,  crrl  rote  eyavTiioc 
KaKOTrpayovtriv. 

5.  'O  avTog  ioTiy  circxacpcfcaicoc  ical  tjfdoyepoQ'  k<f  ^  yap  Tig 
XvTTcirai  yiyyojiiy^y  koX  vTrapxovrt,  avayicacov,  TovToy  irri  Ty 
(TTepriffei,  Koi  t^  i^Bopq,  rjf  tovtov  \alpeiv  avayicri. 

For  the  enumeration  of  the  objects  of  vc/zco-ic,  see  Hobbes. 

X. — 1.  ^dovog  is  defined  to  be  Xinrri  tiq  evl  tifvpayiq.  ^atro- 
/itvfj  TSty  elprifiivufy  dyadwy  wept  rove  Ofiolovg^  fi^  iya  ti  uvt^, 
aXXa  hi  Ikuvovq'  t^Qoviiaovtrt  fxey  yap  oi  TOtovTOiy  olg  eiai  Tiveg 
OfJLOioi,  rj  <l>aiyovTai.  And  6fA0U)i  are  rara  ytVoc,  jcara  avyyi- 
yeiay,  icaff  ^Xtictac,  Kad*  HeiCf  icaTO,  ho^av,  KaTO,  to.  vrrapxovra. 

XI.  ZfjXoc  is  Xvvri  Tig  ivi  <l>atyofiiyri  wapovtriijf,  dyadwy  ivTi' 
fAtav^  KoX  kvZt\0}iiyiiiy  avT^  \a fitly ^  vtp\  Tovg  Ofioiovg  tij  (fivtrei, 
ovx  ^ri  &XX^,  aXX'  ort  o^x^  '"'  ovr^  ktrru  Hence  l^fjkog  kiri' 
eiKtg  koTi,  cat  €irt£ticc5v,  but  ^0ovoc  is  ^avXoK,  Kal  ^avXci;y. 

XII.  Aristotle  now  considers  the  passions  and  habits  of 
men  according  to  their  ages,  which  are  three,  yeoTtjg^  dxfiily  koi 
yfjpag.     See  Hobbes. 

16.  Mirth  or  eirrpairekla  veiradevfUyri  vfipig  ktrn. 
Xm.  Old  men  are  in  most  respects  the  contrary. 
XIV.  But  01  dKfia'ioyTtg  are  fura^v  Tovrwy  to  7idog,  in  all 
respects. 

396  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

XV.  The  gooda  of  fortune  are  next  considered,  in  as  far  as 
they  influence  the  dispositions  of  men.  And,  first>  the  fdoc  of 
2.  eifyevtla  is  defined  to  be  to  i^oTift6r€pov  ^vai  rby  Keicrrifjuvov 
ahrfiV  but  fifyiveia  is  kimfiort^Q  npoy6yit>y'  teal  Karaippomp-iKov 
KaX  Twv  ofwlwy  toIq  xpoyovotg  toiq  avTwv,  3.  It  differs  from 
TO  yeyydioy,  inasmuch  as  cvycvcc  is  said  Kara  Trfv  rov  yirovQ 
nperriv'  but  ytvvaioy  Kara  to  firl  elltrraoBai  rffg  <pv(rewc» 

XVL  Of  wealth  it  is  observed,  vfiptfrral  Kal  vwepwiipavm. 
iraa^ovTiQ  ti  viro  r^c  KT^treofg  tov  vXovtov.  He  then  enumerates 
the  characteristics  of  the  wealthy,  observing  ey  Ke<pa\ai^,  dvorirov 
tvdaifiovoQ  ^0Qc  frXovrov  etrri.  But  the  difference  between  those 
of  recent  and  long-standing  wealtb,  consists  r^  Arravra  fidWov 
icai  ^avXorcpa  to,  KaKO.  e^eiy  tovc  vcoTrXbvrovc*  <3<r7rcp  yap.  d-jnii- 
litvaia  vXovtov  e(ttI  to  veontXovToy  elvai. 

XVII.  The  disposition  of  the  powerful  and  the  fortunate. 

XVIII. — 1.  Having  shown  that  there  are  Kotya  tlBri  belong- 
ing to  aU  the  three  kinds  of  oratory,  Train  yap  dvayKoioy,  ra 
vepi  TOV  dvyaTOv  Kal  oZvvaTov  irpo(r)(pfj(T&aL  ky  toIq  Xoyotc'  icai  rove 
fjtty,  <ic  corai*  roue  Sc,  <&c  yiyoye,7retpa(rdai  leiKvvvai.  "Ert  ^c,  Trepi 
fiiyidovQ  KOivoy  hmavTiay  ktrrl  rwv  Xoywy*  '^Hvrat  yap  flrdvrtc 
T^  fjieiovy  Kal  avfccv,  Kal  av^fiovXtvovriQ  ri  dvorpiwoyreg,  Kal 
kiratvovyTeg  rj  xj/iyoyTeg,  ical  KaTrfyopovyreg  vj  dmoXoyovfiEvoi. 
Aristotle  proceeds  to  lay  down  a  list  of  the  different  Koiyh  tilri 
applicable  to  each.     See  Hobbes. 

XX.  Having  treated  of  ai  t^tat  wtien-fic,  Aristotle  proceeds 
to  at  KOivaly  which  are  Ivo  t^  yiyetj  vapadeiyfia  Kal  iyQhfxr^fia' 
2.  ^  yap  yvw/iiy  /zepoc  kydvyLriyLaT6g  ktm.  3.  TlapaZtiyfiartav  3* 
tihfi  hvo'  \v  ftey  yap  ktrri  itapa^eiy/xarog  eJ^og  to  Xeyety  ntpay- 
fiaTa  nrpoyeyeyrffjtiya*  Iv  M  to  atTiy  moieiy,  Toirrov  5*  ey  fjey 
mapa^oXri'  ey  he  XoyoC  oioy  ol  Alaiiveioi,      Specimens  of  both. 

7.  The  X6yoi  are  drjiirfyoptKoly  and  have  the  •  advant^e,  on 
wpay/iara  evpe^y  Ofioia  yeyei^fjiiya,  \a\eif6y*  Xoyovg  ^c,  p^or. 
But  ra  TTpay fiaTa  are  best  frpog  to  fiovXeifffaerdaC  ofjtoia  yap  ug 
kiri  TO  'jroXv  ra  /ucXXovra  rolg  yeyoydau 

9.  Act  he  "Xpfi&Qat  Tojg  mapaheiyjiatnv^  o^k  tx^yra  pey  kvdyfiii' 
.fiaTa,  wc  dirohel^emy  if  f^ap  vt&rtg  hid  Tovrtov  exoyra  hk^  i5c 
fiapTvpioigy  kiriXoy^  ^w^cvoy  {_krri]  Tolg  kyBvfiiffiaffu 

XXI. — 2.  Vy^fxrf  is  defined  dnSf^aymg^  oh  fxiyroi  vegX  twv 
Ka&  eKaoToy*  dXXd  'KaBoXov*  Kal  oit  "rrepl  ttoktwv,  aXXa  Trepl  otruv 
«te  TTpa^eig  elffl,  Kal  aiperd  tj  ff^evKTa  hrn  vpbg  To  'rrpatrtreiv. 

But  since  enthymems  are  syllogisms  vepl  ToiovTwy^  ra  crv/i- 

OP  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  397 

irtpatr^ara  tUv  evdvfjirifidTtavy' ical  at  ap^ai,  a^ai^Qivrog  tov 
trvWoyiafioVf  yvwfiai  titny'  irpofrredeiarig  Ji  TiJQ  alHas,  kui  tov 
^icL  riy  kvQiffiriyia  tarai  ro  6,7rav. 

3.  Hence  there  are  four  kinds  of  yvu>fi%  as  being  either 
fiET  eiriKoyovy  avev  CTriXoyou/ 

1.  ivdvjJTjfjtaroc  fiipog,  1.  Sid.ro  irpoeyvitKrdat. 

2.  IvQvfirjfiaTiKai,  iy ,  otraiQ      \    2.  &yLa  \ty6iAtvai  Iri^cuL. 
€fi(l>aiv£Tat  TOV  Xeyofiivov 

TO  oLtiov, 

15.  These  sort  of  sayings  are  of  great  use,  1»  S*d  t^v  i^ti- 
KortiTa  Twy  dKpoaT&y'  \aipov(n  yap,  kav  tiq  KaBokov  Xtytov.  ctti- 
Tvxn  Twy  ^o^iav,  &c  eKilvoi  Kara  fiipoQ  ex^^^'-^'  ^'  ^^*  ifdiKovQ 
iroiei  Tovc  XoyovCy  which  takes  place  ky  6Voi€  ^V^V  ^  vpoaipetrig. 

XXIL  Requisites  of  enthymems..  1,  ovrs  wo^ptadevt  ovre 
iravTa  del  Xafifidvoyra  truv&yety*  2,  ovk  k^  dirdyTioy  Tdy  So- 
KovmoVy  uXX'  £«:  twv  utpiafjitywy  Xeicrioy'  3.  fjii),  fioyov  vvvdytiy 
tK  Twv  CLvayKaiwy^  aXXd  koI  kic  rwv  wq  knl  to  ttoXv. 

4—12.  Enumeration  of  th^  manner  of  forming  e^thymems 
on  different  subjects. 

13.  '!^oix£'ioy  koI  toitoq  kvOvfirifiaTOS  to  avTO.. 

14.  Two  kinds  of  enthymems,  rd  fikv  yap  hucriKd  coriv,  on 
taTiv,  rj  OVK  tare  to,  M  iXcyicriica*  jcai  liw^iptiy  &a'K€p  ky .  toIc 
^laXeKTiKoig  tXeyxoQ  cat  fn/XXoyia^oQ.  "iStOTi  5c  to  fuv  heiKTixoy 
kydvfjirfjjia  to  if  ofioXoyovfiiytay  avydyav'  to  he  kXeyKTUcoy  rd 
ayoftoXoyovfxeva  trvvdyety. 

XXIII.  The  rowoi  kydvfxrifmTiov  are> 

1.  Twy  kvavTiwy. 

2.  kK  T&v  bfioiwy  vTbttribty* 

3.  kK  T&y  vpoQ  6.XXriXa, 

4.  kK  TOV  ^dXXoy  koi  JJttovj  a  fortiori^  or  a  minori. 

5.  d  fiiire  /itaWov,  /xjjrc  ^ttov,  by  parity  of  reasoning^ 

6.  kK  TOV  Toy  xp^^oy  uKOveiy* 

7.  kK  rwv  elpriiJiiywy  Kad*  avTOvg  Trpoc  Toy  ciTrovro. 

8.  ki  opifffwv. 

9.  kx  TOV  "TTotraxiiK* 

10.  kK  haipitrewc, 

11.  t£  CTraywy^C' 

12.  kK  KpiffewQ  vepi  tov  avTov,  ^  bfiolovy  ^  ivavr/ov. 

13.  tK  T&v  fiepHjy. 

14.  kveihvl   krrl   Twy    vXiCffTW    irvfi(iaiy€iy    daff    ETret&ttl   n 

398  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

avToic   ayadoy  ra2   carov,   Ik  tov  aKoKovdovvTOQ  vporpifreiv  y 
avoTpiveiy* 

15.  orav  wept  ^voiv  rot  iLVriKEtfuvoiy  [f/]  ntporpiifEiv  ri  CLiro- 
rpitttiv  ^irif  xal  r^  vpirtpov  elprffiivf  rqv^  iv  ajjit^ly  'x^p^aBai, 
the  dilemma. 

16.  iireihfj  ov  ra  avTO.  tftavepwe  evaiyovffi  kcu  a^av&>c* 

17.  tK  TOV  iiyaXoyov  rat/ro  avfifiaiyeiy. 

18.  If  Tov^  TO  avixPaivoy  khy  y  ravroy,  oti  koX  l^  wv^  ov/i- 
fiaiyti  roira. 

19.  kx  TOV  fi^  TavTO  a  let  alpeitrdai  vtrrepoy  rj  irporepovy  dXX* 
cti'airaXiv,  olov  Toht  to  kydvfirifia. 

20.  TOy  o\f  lyeKa  ay  ctiy,  rj  yivoirOy  tovtov  tyeKa  ^avai  elvaif  y 
ytyevfjtrdai. 

21.  tTKoveiv  TCL  mpOTpivovTa  koX  amoTpiirovTa^  koi  «3v  eveKa 
Koi  irpcLTTOvai  cat  ^cvyovcrc. 

22.  £jc  rwv  ^OKOvyTioy  fiey  ylyveffdai^  attioTtay  IL 

23.  kXtyKTiKOQj  TO  tcl  dvofjtoXoyovfJieva  aKoveiy^  ei  w  dyofwXo- 
yovfityoy  bk  vayTwy  [ical]  ')(p6yiav,  xal  irpaietoyj  koi  \6ywy, 

24.  rote  vpo5ia/3f/3Xiy/x£Votc  icat  dyOpufiroiQ  ical  vpdyfiaai,  yj 
^OKOvtriy  TO  Xiyeiy  Trfy  alrlay  tov  vapa^oiov. 

25.  airo  TOV  ahiov,  &y  re  VTrapxiy,  on  ktrrl'  Kay  fitf  virapxri, 
6Vt  ovK  (.(FTiy    Ajjia, 

26.  el  kve^ixero  fiiXrioy  aWtoc,  rj  ir^cxerat,  Jv  rj  ffv/xfiov' 
Xcvet,  fj  TrpaTTCi,  y  vivpaxeVf  trKonely, 

27.  OTay  Ti  kyavTloy  fiiXXri  irpaTTefrSai  toIq  veirpay/jLeyoiCi  &fjLa 
aicoireiy, 

28.  TO  IK  Twy  &fiapTridiyrwy  ican/yopetv,  fj  dnoXoyeiffdau 

29.  OTTO  TOV  oyofxaTO^' 

The  kXeyKTiKCL  are  preferred. 
XXIV.  Apparent  enthymems  are, 

1.  vapa  Hfy  Xi^iy,  1.  to  fjirl  (rvXXoyi(rajs,Evoy  (rvfjLvepafffjiaTt' 
icwc  TO  TeXevTaloy  eltreiv,     2.  to  irapa  rrly  ofiwyvfilay, 

2.  TO  ^lyprifiivoy  <rvyTidiyTa  Xiyeiy,  rj  to  avyKeifieyoy  Ziai- 
povvTa. 

3.  TO  Zeiv^trei  raraerfceva^etv,  y  iiyaffKeviiZeiy,  5rav  ^ij  hi^ac, 
OTi  kwolriaey,  aif^ytry  to  Trpdy/ta. 

4.  TO  kK  ffTifjLeiov, 

5.  Zia  TO  avfifiePriKoe, 

6.  vapa  TO'  kv6fjieyoy. 

7.  irooa  TO  dyaiTwy  «c  atrtov. 

8.  irdpa  ttiv  eXX£tt//tv  row  Trorc  raJ  ttwc. 

OF  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  399 

9.  &(nrtp  kv  role  ipiariKoie  vapa  to  &9rXJ)c  koX  jjirl  airXwCt  aXXo 
Ti,  ylyverai  ^jtaivofievoQ  avWoyitrfjioc'  from  what  is  not  ^.nXCJe 
€ik6qi  but  ri  eUos. 

XXV.  Solution  of  arguments  is  managed  either  by  an 
civTiffvXkoyifffjtog  or  evaratrig. 

3.  "IStvarracriQ  is  fourfold.  1.  €k  TobTOv.  2.  Ik  tov  ojMiov. 
3.  Ik  tov  ivayTiov.     4.  Ik  Twy  KeKpififuvtoy. 

8.  Since  enthymems  are  derived  from  eUog,  irapahiyfjia, 
TEKfifiptov,  and  trrifjLEiov,  and  since  the  inferences  from  what  is 
usual  are  U  rHv  cliccJrwv,  but  those  from  evraywyrj  are  derived 
2ia  vapadelyfiarocy  but  avUyKoia,  did  TtKfiripiov,  and  those 
drawn  from  what  holds  good  or  not,  either  universally  or  par- 
ticularly, are  ^ta  arifieltay,  and  as  ehog  is  only  M  to  noXv,  it  is 
plain  that  all  reasonings  may  be  got  rid  of  by  objection. 

9.  'H  Sc  Xvtrig  <f>aivofiivrj,  aXX!  oIk  dXridrj'c  aiei'  ov  yap,  oti 
ovK  ehcoQ,  Xv£i  6  kviffTOLiJLevoQ,  dXX*'  6ti  oifK  dvayKoiov,  Aio  cat 
dti  itrri  TrXeoyeKreiv  diroXoyov^tvov  fiaXXov  rj  Kariyyo/oovvra,  Sia 
rovTOv  TOV  vapaXoyifffiOV* 

12.  AvETai  Be  koI  to,  o^/ieca,  jcai  tcl  ^la  (nifjieiov  ivOvfJiii jjara 
elprifiiva,  icav  ^  v7rdp\ovTaj  since  dffvXXoynrrdv  kari  irav  ffrnxeiov. 

13.  The  same  Xvatg  applies  to  ra  ircLpadetyfAaTutdri  jcot  tol 
elicdra*  lav  yap  txuffiiv  ti  o{f\  ovrwc,  XcXvrat,  but,  if  the  major 
part  be  against  us,  we  must  strive  to  show  oti  ohx  ofioioy  to 
vapoy. 

14.  But  TEKftripia  fcai  T€Kfjiripiwhti  lydvfxii/jiaTa  icara  /icv  to 
dtrvXXoyiffToy  oific  etrrai  Xvcrat. 

XXVI.  To  avleiy  Koi  fxetovy  oifK  toTiv  lyOvfirffiaTog  (Ttoi- 
XC'ov,  but  they  are  IvOvfJirifiaTa  irpog  to  Iti^ai^  on  fiiya  y 
fjiiKpoy* 

3.  O^Bc  ra  Xwixa  IvdvfiiifJiaTOc  elliog  ti  Iotiv  &XXo  rCjy  Kara- 
(TKevatrTtKufy, 

4.  Nor  is  iyaratne  an  enthymem,  but  to  tlirtty  I6^ay  rivd, 
£$  5c  ttrrai  3^Xoi/,  6ti  ov  cvXKEXoyiaraiy  ri  &n  >//cv3oc  ri  ciXi/^cv. 

400  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

BOOK  ni. 

I. — 1.  Three  points  to  be  considered  in-  a  speech,  irianc, 

2.  We  may  treat  of  XHiq^  for  it  is  not  sufficient  Ix^t*",  a  Zel 
\iyuvt  aW*  dvdyiai  Koi  ^av^e^  wc  See,  tlvuv. 

3.  Now  vTr6KpimQ  has  been  omitted,  which  indeed  came  late 
into  Tragedy  and  Rhapsody,  for  the  poets  at  first  recited  their 
own  verses. 

4.  It  consists  in  three  things  fceycdoc*  h^iiovia^  pvdfjtoQ. , 

6.  After  showing  its  disadvantages,  Aristotle  observes,  ro 
fjL€y  oZv  T^g  Xi^eioQ  Ofiufi  €%«  rt  fUKphv  dvayKoiov  iv  vdci^  S*- 
SaircoX/^*  dicu^ip^i  yap  ri  vpog  rb  ^rikufaai^  u3l  rj  <tf2t  eiweivy  oh 
fuvTOL  ToaovToy'  dSX  ivayra  tj^avratfla  ravra  earij  Koi  vpo^  rby 
aKpoariiy. 

7.  The  effect  of  it  is  the  same  as  that  produced  by  acting. 
8..  The  poets  first  made  it  their  study,  then  the  rhetoricians, 

after  which  it  fell  of^  as  the  tragic  poets  have  changed  from 
tetrametre  to  Iambics. 

11.  Two  dperai  Xi^etag,  1.  aeu^^  eJyat,  2.  fi^  raxccKj^v, 
/i^rc  vtrep  to  d^ibi/za,  dWa  irpiirowray* 

2.  The  former  virtue  is  obtained  by  the  use  of  Kvpia  ovofiaroy 
the  latter  by  rd  dXXa,  Sid  hti  irouiy  ^iyrjy  r^i^  htdXncroyy  be- 
cause the  hearers  are  davfiaaral  TtHy  dirovTiay. 

3.  This  is  more  easy  and  suitable  in  poetry,  hence  in  prose 
Sec  Xavdayeiy  woiovyrag,  koi  fii)  doKeiy  Xiyeiv  wcirXatrfiiyiagf 
dXXa  Tre<j>vK6TU)g*  tovto  yap  reOayov,  EKciyo  8c  Tovyayrloy, 

5.  Of  the  many  species  of  nouns  yXoirracc  fiey,  koa  SctXoic 
ovofiatTi,  Kal  rrewoirifjiiyoig,  oXiyaKig  koI  6Xiya')(pv  'xpriffrioy  ivi 
TO  fuii^oy  yap  eioXXdrrei  rov  vpivoyrog, 

6.  To  Se  Kvpioy  jcal  to  oliceiov,  Kal  fUTCL^opa,  fwvai  XP^irc^t 
irpbg  T^v  tQv  \piXwy  Xoytoy  Xi^iy'  8ti  TOVTOig  ^ovoig  irayrtg 
Xpwvrai'  iravrcc  yap  ficra^^opatc  SiaXiyovrat,  icai  Tolg  oUeioigf 
Kal  Tolg  Kvpioig.  Hence  if  any 'one  form  his  discourse  well, 
etrrai  re  {eviicov,  Kal  Xaydaytiy  cvSixcrac,  Kal  <ra<l>riyi€'u 

7.  ofjitityvfilat  are  useful  to  the  sophist,  trvyufyvfia  and  Kvpia 
to  the  poet. 

8.  To  aa(l>€g,  kcu  to  fjdv,  Kal  to  ^eyiKdy  cj(€t  fxaXttrra  fi 
fiera<l>opcL. 

OP  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  401 

9.  A£i  oe  fcat  ra  eirldirOj  Kal  rac  ficra^opac  hp^iorrovaag  Xfyeiv, 
1.  e.  ijc  rov  avaXoyoi^. 

10.  Kal  idv  Kotryitiv  /3ovXf},  otto  rov  fieXriovoe  tS>v  kv  ravrf 
yevti  ifiipeiy  rrjv  ^ra^opav,  ear  de  ypiyetv^  avo  tUv  \£tp6vtav. 

11.  *'EoTc  M  Kal  iv  rale  ervWajSalc  ^/uapWo,  iai'  /k^  ^Se/ac  ^ 
<rf§/JL£ia  <l>t}yric. 

12.  Ow  iroppiaQtv  ScZ,  aXX'  eic  rwi'  avyyivCiV  koI  tUv  OfioeiBioy 
fX€Ta<^peiy  to.  dvutyvfAa  utyofAatTfiivutQf  o  Xe^dev  ^ffkoy  iariy  on 
irvyyeyic, 

13.  Ka2  ino  icaXuy  fj  ry  <^k>yyy  rj  r^  ^vvafiei,  tj  rp  ot/zci^  $  &XXjf 
rt^A,  ahrdritreu 

14.  And  epithets  may  be  derived  dno  ^avXov  fj  aitrxpovy  or 
diro  rov  /3e\r/oyoc»  and  we  may  also  make  use  of  vvoKopiafiog. 

m.  ^vxP^'  ^^^  produced  in  four  ways : 

1.  ey  roiQ  ^iirXoiQ  oySfiairiy. 

2.  €v  rij>  'xpfjffdai  yXwrraif. 

3.  ey  rote  e^idcroiCt  to  ri  fuucpoiCf  3  aKaipoiCf  tj  vvKyoig 
^fjffSai. 

4.  fi€Ta<j>opaX  drrpiireicy  al  ^uy  Zih  to  yeXoloyy  at  hi  dia  ro 
trefiyoy  &yay  koI  rpayucoy* 

lY.  Simile  akin  to  metaphor.     Examples. 
V.  *Apx^  "?c  Xtfcwc  TO  'EXXiji'/f ciK.     And  this  is  produced 
in  four  ways : 

1.  cv  toIq  tnfyMfffioiQ, 

2.  cy  rf  Tolg  IhloiQ  oyofiaai  Xcyciv,  ical  fiii  toIq  vepuxovin. 

3.  fifi  afju^ili6XoiQ, 

4.  CI'  r^  ra  yiyti  rHy  ovoimTtay  Appeva^  ical  ^Xeo,  Kal  uKevri 
diroZidoyai  opOwc* 

5.  cv  r^  ra  iroXXa,  koI  dXcya,  icai  Iv,  op6aic  oyofiaZeiy. 

6.  *OXa>c  Sc  2ct  gifayayviooToy  elyai  to  yty pafifiiyoy,  ical 
ewl^paaToy'  and  this  must  not  depend  upon  the  punctuation. 

7.  It  causes  a  solecism,  fi^  iLvohih6yai,  lay  /i^  Ifriitvyyvyg 
dfii^ty,  o  upfiOTTu. 

And  it  is  indistinct,  hp  firl  vpodeiQ  eiirys,  /zeXXoiv  ttoXXgl  fjie- 
ralv  e/i/3aXXeiv. 

VL  To  produce  oyx^c*  t^®  following  rules  contribute : 

1.  ro  Xoy^  )^^<r6ai  kyr  oydfiaroQ. 

2.  Lay  alayjpoy  J  iy  r^  Xoy^,  Tovyofia  Xiyctv,  and  vice  versa* 

3.  fiera^opaic  Bi^Xovv,  jcal  cirtBcVoic,  tlXafiovntyoy  to  voiriTucoy, 

4.  ro  cv  TToXXa  irotciv. 

5.  /i^  CTi^evyvvvai. 

2  D 

402  APPENDIX  TO  THE  ANALYSIS 

6.  fi€Ta  trvvhifffiov  Xeyctv. 

7.  By  negative  epithets. 

VII. — 1.  To  ^€  wpevov  Uei  fi  Xcjic,  ^av  J  vaQrrnxfi  re  koI 
46un),  cai  rote  vwoKeifUyoig  wpayfjunrty  dvoKoyov.  But  d^^aXoyar 
is,  lav  fjifiT£  ffcpi  ihoyKwv  aifTOKaP>laKiiiQ  Xcyi^ai,  /liirc  ir€f>i 
cvrcX(i>y  aefivCjQ'  fxrj^  iirl  rf  shriKei  6y6fiari  ivy  Koajwc*  In- 
stances.    See  Hobbes. 

VIII.  On  the  rhythms.     See  the  notes,  p.  227,  sq. 

XI.  "Etpofiivii  Xe^cc,  ij  ov^ey  exti  rcXoc  xaff  avr^yy  ay  fjol  to 
irpayfia  Xeyofieyov  rcXeioiO^. 

Karetrrpafifjiiyrf^  fj  ky  irtpiShoiQ.  And  veplodog  is  defined  to 
be  Xc^ic  txovtra  dpxriy  koI  TeKEvrrjv  aM^y  JcaO'  aMjy,  ral  ^iyt" 
SoQ  €h<Tvyorrroy*  and  it  must  finish  with  the  sense,  and  not  be 
cut  off. 

5.  ILepio^oc  ^e,  ^  /icv  Iv  KuXotC  fi  he  d^cX^c*  "Eorc  ^c  cy^ 
icwXocc  fjiey  Xc^ic  //  TiTektiiafiiyri  re  koI  hiyprffiivri,  iced  e irava9rv£i/- 
oroc,  fjtif  ey  T^  diaipitreij  &(nrtp  fi  dpriiiiyri  vepiohoc,  dXK*  oXrf» 
KdXoy  ^'  iari  to  trepoy  fjiopiov  ravnyc.  'A^cX^  he  Xiyat  T^r 
fJioyoKiaXoy. 

7.  And  fj  ky  KwKoig  is  either  hitiprifiijnj  or  dyTiKetfiimj. 

9.  Uapofwiuffig  is  when  o^ta  ra  €ff)(ara  fcj^r;  CKaTepoy  T&r 

KUlXbty, 

X. — 2.  Since  to  fxavOdyeiy  pqSlwQ  fjhv  ^vtrei  vatriy^  Kvpm, 
/icra^pac,  and  eiicoyec  chiefly  contribute  to  the  fundamental 
principle  of  elegance,  fxaOritrig. 

4.  *AydyKTi  h),  kqI  Xtfty,  icai  kyOvfiiiftara  ravra  slyai  doTtiay 
6tra  trout  fffiiy  fjiadtjtriy  Ta\eiav, 

o.  Koi  kay  dvTiKetfiiytjjQ  Xeyijrac. 

7.  Of  the  four  kinds  of  metaphors,  al  Kar  dyaXoyiav  evho- 
KifiovtTi  fiaXitrra. 

XI. — 1.  A  man  is  said  wouly  vp6  ofifxaruty,  6aa  kytpyovvra 
orifAulyei,     See  Hobbes,  p.  337. 

XII.  Each  kind  of  oratory  has  its  proper  Xi^ic 

Now  the  Xefcc  ypa^nci)  is  ^  dirpt^eoTany  but  the  aywviffra-j) 
is  ff  vwoKpiTiKUTaTrj,  Tavrtjc  he  hvo  ct^ij*  ii  fuy  yap  ijducfi'  iJ  ht 
vaOriTiicil, 

4.  And  hrifiriyopiK})  Xijic  TravTiXCJQ  eotxe  rp  irKiaypa^iq, 

5.  ii  he  hlKfj  dxpifiiffTepoy, 

6.  fi  he  kmheiKTiKrl  Xi^ic  ypa^tjcwrdrjy*  hevTepa  he  fj  hiKavvc^. 
Xni. — 1.  The  parts  of  a  speech  are  two,  dyayKalot^  yap, 

TO  irpayfia  eiTrely,  Trcpi  ol,  icai  tovt  d'Trohel^au 

OF  ARISTOTLE'S  RHETORIC.  403 

2.  Hence  the  Trpodeaii  and  Tlam^  are  ra  ivayKcTia  fiopta. 

4.  But  there  are  in  all  four,  vpoolfiioyy  vpddetne,  vritmc, 
inriXoyoQ. 

XJV.  Upooifiiov  ioTiy  dpx^fj  Xoyov*  ovep  iy  iroc^orei  wpoXoyog, 
teal  iy  a{ikii€rei  wpoavKiov.  For  this  and  the  next  chapter,  see 
Hobbes,  p.  339,  sqq. 

XVL  ^liiyriaiQ  ^*  h  fuy  role  iirideixriKdic  ioriv  oIk  iif^e^fic, 
dXXa  Kara  fxipOQ. 

4.  In  ^ucayiKvlf  the  di^yi^eric  must  be  clear,  and  the  orator 
sliould,  by  a  TrapahiiyriinCf  tell  6ffa  tig  rify  kavrov  dperrfy  ijtipei, 
yj  Baripov  Koxiavj  $  oaa  ifZia  toiq  ^iKatrraic, 

7.  TLeirpay^iya  5e*  Xcyciv,  otra  /ii)  vparrofxeya  7J  oTktov,  § 
ZElviatriy  ^cpci. 

8.  And  the  ZtiiyrjinQ  must  be  fidiicfi.  1.  By  showing  the 
TTpoaipttriQ.  2.  ra  kirofuya  eKdtrr^  ^Oei.  3.  ^^  Ctc  diro  ^layolaQ 
Xiyeiy,  dXX'  tag  dvo  vpoaipitretog* 

10.  "En,  £K  Twy  vadririKwy  Xiyt,  ^if/yov/icvoc  Kai  ra  eirdfievcL, 
a:ai  2r  cerairi,  jcai  ra  Uiijf.  rj  avrfy  Yj  iKeiyto  vpoaoyra.  Kal  tvdvg 
Eladtrayt  treavroy  voioy  riva,  lya  tag  TOiovTvy  dcoipoiai,  Koi  rov 
dpTidiKoy*  \ayddy(ay  dk  voUi. 

11.  But  in  drjfiTiyoplq,  ^liiyriaiQ  is  least  used,  and  only  wepi 
fieXXovnayy  tya  dya^ytiffdiyrec  iKtiytav  (HXrioy  PovXEvawyrai 
trepl  rStv  varepoy* 

XVn.  UioTug  must  be  aVoSeucruca/,  upon  four  points. 
See  Hobbes,  p.  343,  sq.     As  also  for  the  two  next  chapters.   * 

THE  END. 

THE    POETIC 

ARISTOTLE, 

LITERALLY  TRANSLATED,  WITH  A  SELECTION   OP   NOTES, 
AN  ANALYSIS,  AND  QUESTIONS. 

BY 

THEODORE  BUCKLEY,  B.A. 

OV  CHKIST  CHURCH. 

THE   POETIC. 

€HAP.  I. 

On  Poetry  in  generei^  as  un  imitative  Art,  and  Ua  different 
Speeiee. 

liET  us  speak  concerning  poetry  itself,  and  its  [dif-  1.  On  Po- 
ferent]  species^ ;  what  power  each  possesses,  and  how  ^^^^^ 
fables  must  be  composed,  in  order  that  poetry  may  and  spe- 
be  such  as  is  fitting :  further  still,  [let  us  show]  of  cies. 
bow  many  and  what  kind  of  parts  it  consists ;  and 
in  like  manner  [let  us  treat]  concerning  such  other 
things  as  pertain  to  this  method,  beginning,  con- 
formably to  nature,  first  from  such  things  as  are 
first. 

Tlie  epopee,   therefore,  and  tragic  poetry,   and  2.  The 
moreover  comedy,  and  dithyrambic  poetry,  and  the  ^**^^® 
greatest  part  of  the  art  pertaining  to  the  flute  and 
5ie  lyre*,  are  ail  entirely  imitations  ^     They  difier,  3.  Their 
however,  in  three  things ;  for  [they  differ]  either  by  differ- 
imitating  through  means  different  in  kind,  or  by  imi-  **"** 
tating  different  objects,  or  in  a  different,  and  not  after 
the  same  manner.     For  as  certain  persons  assimi-  4. 
lating,  imitate  many  things  by  colours  and  figures, 
some  indeed  through  art,  but  others  through  custom, 
[and  others  through  voice]  ^;  thus  also  in  the  afore- 

<  "  Poesis  in  tpeciet  stye  fvmMi  («2di7),  formae  mnos  in 
partes  {noptUf  fiipn)  dividnntur."    Ritter. 

'  Cfr  Plato  Theag.  p.  10.  C.  Citheni-playing  waa  one  of  the 
&TOurite  accomplishments  of  the  Athenian  youth,  ibid.  p.  8.  E. 
Alcib.  Pr.  p.  26.  D.-  Laem.  and  Olympiodor.  in  eund.  t.  ii.  p. 
65.  ed.  Creuz. 

*  See  Ritter,  and  Twining's  Dissertatioiia  and  firrt  note. 

*  Hennann  reads  4»vatm  for  ^«i^  with  Madius,  bnt  Ritter 
oondemns  the  -words  as  spurious. 

*i  B 

408  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  i. 

mentioned  arts,  all  of  them  indeed  produce  imitation 
in  rhythm,  words,  and  harmony ;  and  in  these,  either 
distinctly,  or  mingled  together,  as,  for  instance,  the 
arts  of  the  flute  and  the  lyre  alone  employ  harmony 
and  rhythm^ ;  and  this  will  also  be  the  case  with  any 
other  arts  which  possess  a  power  of  this  kind,  such 

6.  as  the  art  of  playing  on  reed-pipes.  But  the  arts 
Dancing  pertaining  to  dancing  imitate  by  rhythm,  without  har- 
^  *  mony ;  for  dancers,  through  figured  rhythms,  imitate 
rhvthm  manners,  and  passions,  and  actions.  But  the  epopee 
6  Th  alone  imitates  by  mere  words ^  or  metres,  and  bj  these 
epopee  by  either  mingling  them  with  each  other,  or  employing 
words.       one  certain  kind  of  metres,  which  method  has  been 

7.  Ety-  adopted  up  to  the  present  time^.  For  otherwise  we 
mology  of  should  have  no  common  name,  by  which  we  could 
Po^e?*"^*  denominate  the  Mimes  of  Sophron  and  Xenarchus, 

and  the  dialogues  of  Socrates ;  or  those  who  imitate 
by  trimetres,  or  elegies,  or  certain  other  things  of 
this  kind ;  except  that  men  joining  with  metre  the 
verb  to  make\  call  some  of  these  makers  of  elegies, 
but  others  epic  makers,  not  as  poets  according  to  imi- 

»  Cf.  Rhet.  iii.  8. 

•  There  is  much  difficulty  about  this  definition  of  tiroiroda^ 
as  Xdyotc  i^tXoIv  is  supposed  by  some  to  mean  jmw«,  (see  Ro- 
bortell.  p.  14,)  by  others,  verse  without  music.  The  former 
opinion  is  advocated  by  Hermann,  the  latter  by  Buhle.  Ritter 
seems  to  have  clearly  shown  that  JJ-roit/ifexpoty  is  added,  not 
as  an  explanation  of  Xoyotv  y\n\oUy  but  disjunctively,  and  that 
iiroiroua  is  used  in  a  new  sense  for  certain  parts  of  prose- writ- 
ing as  well  as  verse.  The  sense  is,  therefore,  "  by  prose  or  by 
metre,  but  unaccompanied  by  song." 

7  Ritter  observes  that  the  following  passage  is  an  excuse  for 
the  new  signification  of  iiro-roita. 

®  It  may  be  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  Greek  word 
(voiiiTrii—poietes)  -whey.ce  poeta,  and  poet^  is,  literally,  moA^; 
and  maker,  it  is  well  known,  was  once  the  current  term  for 
poet  in  our  language ;  and  to  write  verses,  was,  to  make.  Sir 
Philip  Sidney,  speaking  of  the  Greek  word,  says,  "  wherein,  I 
know  not  whether  by  luck  or  wisdom,  we  Englishmen  have 
met  with  the  Greeks,  in  calling  him  maker"  Defense  of 
Poesy. 

So  Spenser : 

The  god  of  shepherds,  7%rt<«,  is  dead, 
Who  taught  me,  homely,  as  I  can,  to  make. 

Shep.  Gal.  June.    Twining. 

CHAP.  II.]  POETIC.  409 

tation,  but  denominating  them  in  common  according 
to  measure.     For  they  are  accustomed  thus  to  de- 
nominate them,  if  they  write  any  thing  medical  or  8.  Which 
musical  in  verse.     There  is,  however,  nothing  com-  ^^^^  " 
mon  to  Homer  and  Empedocles  except  the  measure ;  to  writers 
on  which  account,  it  is  right  indeed  to  call  the  former  on  other 
a  poet ;  but  the  latter,  a  physiologist  rather  than  a  subjects. 
poet.    In  like  manner,  though  some  one,  mingling  all  9.  But  the 
the  measures,  should  produce  imitation,  as  Chaere-.  adherence 
mon  has  done  in  his  Centaur,  a  mixed  rhapsody  of  ^^^? 
all  the  metres,  yet  he  must  not  be  called  a  poet^.  Let  make  the 
it  then  be  thus  laid  down  concerning  these  particulars.  P**®*- 
But  there  are  some  kinds  of  poetry  which  employ  all  10.  Means 
the  before-mentioned  means,  I  mean,  rhythm,  melody,  J^©]^  em- 
and  measure,  such  as  dithyrambic  poetry  and  the  ployed  by 
Nomes  ^^,  and  also  tragedy  and  comedy.     But  these  *^®  ^^?' 
differ,  because  some  of  them  use  all  these  at  once,  but  of  poetry. 
others  partially.     I  speak,  therefore,  of  these  differ- 
ences of  the.  arts  in  respect  to  the  means  by  which 
they  produce  imitation. 

CHAP.  II. 

On  Imitation,  and  its  usual  Objects, 

But  since  imitators  imitate  those  who  do  some-  i.  Objects 
thing,  and  it  is  necessary  that  these  should  either  be  S^™*?- 

fr  J  J  /!•  1     tion  either 

worthy  or  depraved  persons ;    (for  manners  nearly  ^^^  ^r 

always  depend  on  these  alone,  since  all  men  differ  in  bad,  as  in 

their  manners  by  vice  and  virtue ;)  it  is  necessary  parting. 

either  [to  imitate]  those  who  are  better  than  we  are, 

•  "For  imitation  makes  the  poet,  not  the  metre."    Ritter. 

^^  In  dithyrambic  or  Bacchic  hymns,  and  in  the  Nomes, 
which  were  also  a  species  of  hymns  to  Apollo  and  other 
deities,  all  the  means  of  imitation  were  employed  together^  and 
ihroughout :  in  tragedy  and  comedy,  separately  ;  some  of  them 
in  one  part  of  the  drama,  and  some  in  another.  In  the  choral 
part,  however,  at  least,  if  no  where  else,  all,  melody,  rhythm, 
and  words,  must  probably  have  been  used  at  once,  as  in  the 
hymns.    Twining. 

2  E  2 

410  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  m. 

or  those  who  are  worse,  or  sach  as  are  like  onrseWes ', 
in  the  same  manner  as  painters  do.  For  Foljgtiotns, 
indeed,  painted  men  more  beantiful  than  they  are, 
bat  Paason  less  so,' and  Didnysias  painted  th^n  as 
2.  And  they  are*.  But  it  is  evident  that  each  of  the  before^ 
^€^1^  mentioned  imitations  will  have  these  differences ;  «iid 
imitation  is  difl^rent,  bj  imitating  different  things 
Sw  after  this  manner.  For  there  maj  be  differences  of 
diis  kind  in  dancing,  in  plajring  on  the  flute^  on  tiie 
lyre,  and  also  in  orations  and  m^ne  measare.  Thas 
Homer  imitates  better  men'  [than  exist],  but  Cleo- 
phcn  men  as  the j  are ;  and  Hegemon  the  Thasian, 
who  first  made  parodies,  and  Nicochares,  who  wrote 
i,  the  Deliad,  imitate  worse  characters.  In  like  man- 
ner in  dithyrambics  and  the  Nomi,  [as  Timothens 
and  Philoxenns  have  imitated  the  Persians  and  the 
Cyctops,]  one  may  imitate^.  By  this  very  same  dif- 
ference, also,  tragedy  differs  from  comedy.  For  the 
one  seeks  to  imitate  worse,  bnt  the  other  better  men 
than  are. 

CHAP.  III. 

T?ie  third  difference  of  Poetry  aecordinff  to  the  manner 
of  ttrntettrng^ 

ioMdtf    Th^sske  is  also  a  third  diference  of  these,  consist- 
feient  in    ^^E  ^  ^^^  manner  in  which  one  may  maitate  ea<^  of 

^e  man-        i  ^  „  ^j^^g^  ^^^^  ^  commonly  foimd." 

'  PolygnotuB  and  Dionyshis  lived  about  01.  ^;  Paxuoa 
abont  Ol.  90.    On  the  following  peeto  see  Bitter. 

'  Superior,  that  is,  in  courage  strength,  wisdom,  prudence, 
etc — in  any  laudable,  useful,  or  admirable  quality,  whether 
such  as  we  denominate  tnordlt  or  not.  If  superiority  of  nural 
character  only  were  meant,  the  assertion  would  be  false. — ^It  is 
necessary  to  remember  here,  the  toide  sense  in  which  the 
ancients  used  the  terms  virtue^  vice—good^  bcui,  etc  See  note 
19. — The  difference  between  moral  and  poetical  perfection  of 
character,  b  well  explained  by  Dr.  Beattie,  Eaaay  on  Poetry, 
etc,  Part  I.  ch.  4.  The  heroes  of  Homer,  as  he  well  observes, 
are  ^^ finer  animdU**  than  we  are,  (p.  69,)  not  hel^ermtn. 
Twinmg. 

*  Ritter  would  throw  but  the  words  enclosed  in  brackets. 
See  his  note. 

CHAP.  III.]  POETIC.  411 

tbem^      For  by  the    same  instruments  the    same 

things  may  be  imitated,  the  poet  sometimes  himself 

narrating,  and  sometimes  assuming  another  person  [as 

Homer  does]  * ;  or  speaking  as  the  same  person  with-  . 

out  any  change ;   or  as  all  imitate  [who  do  so]  by 

deed  and  action.     But  imitation  consists  in  these  2.  And 

three  differences,  as  we  said  in  the  beginning ;    viz.  *^®  diffetv 

^i_  ^x.       1^'     M  ^1.  TT  ences  of 

m  the  means,  the  objects,  or  the  manner.     Hence,  imitation 

Sophocles  will  in  one  respect  be  the  same  imitator  are  three. 
as  Homer,  for  both  of  them  imitate  elevated  cha- 
racters ;    and  in  another  the  same  as  AristophaneSi 
for  both  of  them  imitate  persons  engaged  in  acting ; 
p 'whence  also  it  is  said  that  certain  persons  call  their  S-  Ety- 
works  dramas^  because  they  imitate  those  who  are  S!e^^^ 
engaged  in  doing  something.     On  this  account  the  anddaims 
Dorians  lay  claim  to  the  invention  of  tragedy  and  *<>  i*?  ^- 
comedy ;   of  comedy  indeed  the  Megarians,  as  well  ^®^****^ 
those  who  are  natives  of  Greece,  as  being  invented 
by  them  at  the  time  when  their  government  was  a 
democracy,  as  those  of  Sicily.      For  thence  was  the 
poet  Epicharmus,  who  was  much  prior  to  Chonides 
and  Magnes.    But  some  of  those  Dorians  who  inhabit 
Peloponnesus  lay  claim  to  tragedy,  making  naines  an 
evidence.      For  they   allege   that    they  call   their 
villages   komai,  but  the  Athenians  demoi ;    as'  if 
comedians  were  not  so  denominated  from  komazeinj 
[i.  e.  to  revel,"]  but  from  their  wandering  through 
villages,  being  ignominiously  expelled  from  the  cities. 
The  verb  poiein  also,  or  to  make,  is  by  the  Dorians 
denominated  dran,  but  by  the  Athenians  prattein.'] 
And  thus  much  concerning  the  differences  of  imita-  4. 
tion,  as  to  their  number  and  quality. 

'  But  this  assertion  is  not  correct,  and  Bitter  shows  that  tlie 
words  are  spurious. 

'  The  learned  note  of  Bitter  seems  to  condemn  the  whole  of 
this  passage  as  spurious. 

413  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  iv. 

CHAP.  IV. 
The  Causes  and  Progress  of  Poetry, 

1.  Two      Two  causes,  however,  and  these  physical,    appear 

2.  of  poe-  ^  ^8,ve  produced  poetry  in  general.  For  to  imitate 
try,  and  is  congenial  to  men  from  childhood.  And  in  this 
iSitml-  ^^^  differ  from  other  animals,  that  they  are  most 
the  first,  imitative,  and  acquire  the  first  disciplines  through 
the  na-  imitation ;  and  that  all  men  delight  in  imitations. 
^U^jjJ^  But  an  evidence  of  this  is  that  which  happens  in  the 
tion,  works  [of  artists].     For  we  are  delighted  on  survey- 

3.  seen  m  i^g  ygyy  accurate  images,  the  realities  of  which  are 
t^^orks  paiJiftd  to  the  view ;    such  as  the  forms  of  the  most 
of  art;       contemptihle  animals,  and  dead  hodies.      The  cause, 
to  1^^  however,  of  this  is,  that  learning  is  not  only  most  de- 
ever  plea-  Hghtful  to  philosophers,  but  in  like  manner  to  other 
«"it-         persons,  though  they  partake  of  it  but  in  a  small 
deHffS'ln  ^^g^^*     ^^r  on  this  account^  men  are  delighted  on 
images,      surveying  images,  because  it  happens  that  by  survey- 
ing they  learn  and  infer  what  each  particular  is ;  as, 
that  this  is  an  image  of  that  man;  since,  unless  one 
happen  to  have  seen  [the  reality],  it  is  not  the  imi- 
tation that  pleases  S  but  [it  is  through]  either  the 
workmanship,  or  the  colour,  or  some  other  cause  of 

from^mit-  *^®  ^^^®  kind.  But  imitation,  harmony,  and  rhythm 
ation,  being  natural  to  us,  (for  it  is  evident  that  measures 
harmony,  ^^  metres  are  parts  of  rhythms,^  )  the  earliest  among 
rhythm,     mankind,  making  a  gradual  progress  in  these  things 

^  Bitter  -well  reads  oirxl  fitfirif'^a  f  /Mtftrifta, 

s  "Rhythm  differs  from  metre,  inasmuch  as  rhythm  is 
proportion,  applied  to  any  motion  whatever;  metre  is  propor- 
tion,  applied  to  the  motion  of  words  spoken.  Thus,  in  the 
drumming  of  a  march,  or  the  dancing  of  a  hornpipe,  there  is 
rhythm,  though  no  metre.;  in  Dry  define  celebrated  Ode  there  is 
metre  as  well  as  rhythm,  because  the  poet  with  the  rhythm 
has  associated  certain  toorde.    And  hence  it  follows,  that,  though 

ALL  METRE  is  RHYTHM,  yet  ALL  RHYTHM  is  NOT  METRE."  Har- 
ris's Philol.  Inquiries,  p.  67, — where  it  is  also  observed,  very 
truly,  that  **uo  English  word  expresses  rhythmus  better  than 
the  word  time.**  P.  69,  note.    Twining. 

CHAP.  IV.]  POETIC.  413 

from  the  beginning,  produced  poetry  from  extempo-  men  ori- 
rancous  efforts.     But  poetry  was  divided  according  |JJ^ced 
to  appropriate  manners.     For  men  of  a  more  vener-  poetry, 
able  character  imitated  beautiful  actions,  and  the  7-  which 
actions  of  such  men ;  but  the  more  ignoble  imitated  JJ^  ^". 
the  actions  of  depraved  characters,  first  composing  cording  to 
vituperative  verses,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  others  ®^^t*^l« 
composed  hymns  and  encomiums.     Of  the  authors, 
therefore,  before  Homer,  we  cannot  mention  any  poem  8.  No  sati- 
of  this  kind ;  though  it  is  probable  that  there  were  2^^^ 
many  such  writers.     But  if  we  begin  from  Homer,  Somer^s 
there  are  such  for  instance  as  his  Margites^,  and  some  Margites. 
others,  in  which,  as  being  suited,  the  measure  is 
Iambic.     Hence,  also,  the  Iambic  verse  is  now  called, 
because  in  this  metre  they  used  to  lambize  (i.  e.  de- 
fame) each  other.     Of  ancient  poets,  likewise,  some  9.  The  old 
composed  heroic  poems,  and  others  Iambic.     But  as  ^^^ 
Homer  was  the  greatest  of  poets  on  serious  subjects,  were  d- 
(and  this  not  only  because  he  alone  imitated  well,  but  ^^^  hero- 
also  because  he  made  dramatic  imitations,)  thus  too  ^^       ' 
be  first  demonstrated  the  figures  of  comedy,  not  dra- 
matically exhibiting  invective,  but  ridicule.     For  the 
Margites  bears  the  same  analogy  to  comedy,  as  the 
Iliad  and  Odyssey  to  tragedy.     But  when  tragedy  lO.  Pro- 
and  comedy  had  appeared,  those  poets  who  were  na-  gj^  ^^ 
turally  impelled  to  each  kind  of  poetry,  some,  instead  gtyiesy^ 
of  writing  Iambics,  became  comic  poets,  but  others,  npon  the 
instead  of  [writing]  epic  poems,  became  the  authors  ^^^f*®" 
of  tragedies,  because  these  forms  [of  poetry]  are  tragedy 
greater  and  more  esteemed  than  those.      To  con-  and 
sider,   therefore,   whether  tragedy  is   now  perfect  ®^^«^y- 
in  its  species  or  not,  regarded  as  well  with  refer- 
ence to  itself  as  to  the  theatres,  is  the  business  of  12.  Both 
another  treatise.     Both  tragedy  and  comedy,  there-  Jj^,^!' 
fore,  at  first  originated  from  extemporaneous  efforts,  neoiu. 

*  The  character  of  the  hero  is  handed  down  to  us  thus : 
T6v  d'  OUT*  ap  vKaiTTtipti  Ocol  9iaa»  o8x*  dporiifia 
oSt  aXXttis  Te  trotpoVf  <ira<rT|«  d*  ^fiuprav*  Ttxvtiv, 

And  again, 

•jToXX*  finritrraTo  Ipya,  kukw^  ^  iivltrraTO  nr&VTa, 

A  character  not  unlike  Sir  Abel  Handy  in  Morton's  *'  School 

of  Reform." 

414  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  it. 

And  tragedy,  indeed,  or^inated  from  those  who  led 
the  dithyramb,  but  comedy  from  those  -who  sung  the 
Phallic  verses,  which  even  now  in  many  cities  re- 
main in  use ;  and  it  gradually  increased  as  obvious 
improvements  became  known.  And  tragedy,  having 
experienced  many  changes,  rested  when  it  had  ar- 

13.  JBb-  rived  at  its  proper  nature.  .Sschylus,  alsoi,  first  in- 
^7^^  creased  the  number  of  players  firom  one  to  two^ 
^^^  abridged  the  functions  of  the  chorus^  and  made  <me 
and  then  of  the  players  act  the  chief  part^  But  Sophocles  in- 
^^^      troduced  three  players  into  the  scene,  and  added 

14.  It  be-  scenic  painting.  Further  stiU,  the  magnitude  [of 
comes  tragedy  increased]  from  small  fables  and  ridiculous 
^  ^l^^     dic^on,  in  consequence  of  having  been  changed  from 

satyric^  composition,  it  was  late  before  it  acquired 

dignity.     The  metre  also  of  tragedy,  from  tetrameter, 

b^ame  Iambic  (for  at  first  they  used  tetrameter  ia 

tragedy,  because  poetry  was  then  satyrical,  and  more 

adapted  to  the  dance,, but  dialogue  being  adopted. 

Suitable-  nature  herself  discovered  a  suitable  metre ;  for  the 

I^bfc^^  Iambic  measure  is  most  of  all  adapted  to  conversation. 

metre.       And  as  an  evidence  of  this,  we  most  frequently  speak 

in  Iambics  in  familiar  discourse  with  each  other ;  but 

we  seldom  speak  in  hexameters^  and  then  only  when 

we  depart  from  that  harmony  which  is  adapted  to 

conversation).     Again,  tragedy  is  said  to  have  been 

further  adorned^  with  a  multitude  of  episodes,  and 

15.  other  particulars.     Let,  therefore,  thus  much  said 

suffice  concerning  these  things ;  for  it  would  perhaps 

be  a  great  toil  to  discuss  every  particular. 

^  See  ra^  introduction  to  Maehylaa,  p*  vu.  ed.  Bobn. 

*  See  ibid.  note. 

'  Satyric,  from  the  share  which  those  fantastic  beings  called 
Satyrs,  the  companions  and  play-feUowM  of  Bacchus,  had  in  fh6 
^  earliest  Tragedy,  of  which  they  formed  the  choras.  Joking  and 
dancing  were  essential  attributes  of  these  rustic  semi-deities. 
Hence  the  **ludicrou»  language"  and  the  ** dancing  geniut" 
of  the  old  Tragedy,  to  "Which  the  trochaic  or  running  metre 
here  spoken  of  was  peculiarly  adapted ;  being  no  other  than 
this: 

"  Jolly  mortals,  fill  your  glasses,  noble  deeds  are  done  by 
wine." 

The  reader  wUl  not  confound  satgric  with  satiric;  nor  the 

CBAP.  ▼.]  POETIC.  415 

CHAP.  V. 
On  Comedy,  and  its  Onsvn. — Difference  of  Epopee  and 

But  comedy  is,  as  we  have  said,  an  imitation  in-  i.  Come- 
deed  of  bad  characters,  yet  it  does  not  imitate  the^  ^y  an  im- 
aecording  to  every  vice,  [but  the  ridiculous  only ;]  Jheridi-^ 
since  the  ridiculous  is  a  portion  of  turpitude.     For  culous. 
the  ridiculous  is  a  certain  error^  and  turpitude  un- 
extended  with  pain,  and  not  destructive.     Thus,  for 
instance^  a  ridiculous  face  is  something  deformed  and 
distorted  without  pain.     The  transitions,  therefore,  2.  Its 
of  tragedy,  and  the  causes  thrdngh  which  they  are  cl^J^^firea 
produced,  are  not  unknown ;  but  [those  of]  comedy  known. 
have  escaped  our  knowledge,  because  it  was  not  at 
first  an  object  of  attention.     For  it  was  late  before 
the  magistrate  gave  a  chorus  to  comedians  ^  but 
prior  to  that  period,  the  choruses  were  voluntary. 
Comedy,  however,  at  length  having  obtained  a  certain 
form,  those  -^ho  are  said  to  have  been  poets  therein  , 
are  commemorated.     But  it  is  unknown  who  it  was  3.  Nor 
that  introduced  masks  or  prologues,*  or  a  multitude  *^®  "^"    - 
of  players,  and  such  like  particulars.     But  Epichar-  ^wks^f  ^ 
mus  and  Phormis  [were  the  first]  to  compose  fa-  etc. 
bles ;  which,  therefore,  originated  from  Sicily.     But 
among  the  Athenians,  Crates,  rejecting  the  Iambic' 

Greek  tatyrio  drftms  with  the  tatire  ot  Roman  origin.  See 
Harris's  Phil.  Arrang.  p.  460,  note.  Dacier's  Pre£gu;e  to  Ho- 
race's Satires.  The  two  words  are  of  different  derivations. 
Twining. 

*  This  was  almost  eqniTalent  to  the  modem  "licensing"  of 
plays,  but  was  probably  conducted  with  more  taste  and  less 
absurdity.  The  poet  was  said  alTsiv  x*>P^^»  ^6  choragus 
didomt,  and,  if  the  piece  was  approved  by  the  archon,  the  poet 
Xopdv  2Xa/3c.    See  Bitter. 

*  But  this  is  evidently  corrupt.  Bitter  ready  Xoyoi/v  with  Her* 
mann,  understanding  thoise  passages  which  the  single  actor 
either  recited,  or  spoke  in  conversation  with  the  choms,  op- 
posing \6yoi  vwoKpir&y  to  the  dofiara  Kmfitfiwy. 

*  Iambic,  i.  e.  satirical,  and  ptrsonaUy  so,  like  the  old  Iambi, 

41« 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[chap.  ▼!. 

4.  Simi- 
larity of 
tragedy 
to  epic 
poetry. 

5.  Their 
common 
and  dis- 
tinctive 
parts. 

form,  first  began  generally  to  compose  speeches  and 
fables.  The  epopee,  therefore,  is  an  attendant  on 
tragedy,  [with  the  exception  of  the  long  metre*,] 
since  through  this  it  is  an  imitation  of  worthy  cha- 
racters and  actions.  But  it  differs  from  tragedy  in 
that  it  has  a  simple  metre,  and  is  a  narration.  It 
also  [differs  from  it]  in  length.  For  tragedy  is 
especially  limited  by  one  period  of  the  sun,  or  ad- 
mits but  a  small  Tariation  from  this  period ;  but  the 
epopee  is  not  defined  within  a  certain  time,  and  in 
this  it  difiers;  though  at  first  they  observed  the 
same  conduct  with  tragedy^,  no  less  than  epic  po- 
etry. With  respect  to  the  parts,  however,  [of  the 
epopee  and  tragedy,]  some  are  the  same  in  both,  but 
others  are  peculiar  to  tragedy.  Hence  he  who  knows 
what  is  a  good  or  bad  tragedy,  knows  the  same  in 
respect  to  epic  poetry.  For  those  things  which  the 
epopee  possesses  are  to  be  found  in  tragedy;  but 
every- thing  which  tragedy  contains  is  not  in  the 
epopee. 

CHAP.  VI. 

On  the  Form  and  End  of  Tragedy,  and  on  its  six  parts, 
especially  the  Plot, 

1.  Concerning,  therefore,  imitative  poetry  in  hexame- 
ters, and  comedy,  we  shall  speak  hereafter.     Let  us 
now,  however,  speak  concerning  tragedy,  assuming 
the  definition  of  its  essence  as  arising  from  what  has 
2.  Defini-  been  already  said.     Tragedy^  therefore,  is  an  tmito- 
^^      tion  of  a  worthy  or  illustrious  and  perfect  action, 

invectives^  or  lampoons,  of  which  Aristotle  speaks  above,  and 
from  Mrhich  the  Iambic  metre,  -which  is  not  here  alluded  to, 
took  its  name.    Twining. 

*  The  words  m*XP*  hovov  fiirpov  fiey&Xov  or  /ucT-d  X^ov  are 
thrown  out  by  Ritter,  and  can  have  no  meaning.         , 

'  On  the  question  of  the  unities,  see  Twining,  note  43,  and 
my  own  note  on  ^sch.  Eum.  235. 

CHAP.  VI. ]  POETIC.  417 

possessing  magnitude^  in  pleasing  language^  usir^g 
separately  the  several  species  of  imitation  in  its  parts, 
by  men  acting,  and  not  through  narration,  through 
pity  and  fear  effecting  a  purijicaiion  from  such  like 
passions^.     But  by  pleasing  language,  I  mean  Ian-  3.  its  lan- 
guage  possessing   rhythm,   harmony,   and   melody,  guage, 
And  it  uses  separately  the  several  species  [of  imita-  ^^^f' 
tion"],  because  some  parts  of  the  tragedy  are  alone  manners 
perfected  through  metres,  and  others  again  through  o.^imita- 
melody.     But  since  they  produce  imitation  by  act-  4°^^ 
ing,  in  the  first  place  the  ornament  of  the  spectacle  ^  scenery, 
-will  be  a  certain  part  of  the  tragedy,  and  in  the  next  ™®?^ 
place  the  melopoeia^  and  the  diction.    For  by  these  S^^tion.^ 
they  produce  imitation.     But  I  call  diction,  indeed, 
the  composition  of  the  metres ;  and  melopoeia  that, 
the  whole  power  of  which  is  apparent.     Since,  how-  6.  Two 
ever,  [tragedy]  is  an  imitation  of  action,  and  action  ^^on   ^^ 
is  effected  by  certain  agents,  who  must  needs  be  per-  senti-  * 
sons  of  a  certain  description  both  as  to  their  manners  ments, 
and  their  sentiments*,  (for  from  these  we  say  that  ^bit**^^ 

^  On  the  different  interpretations  of  this  difficult  passage, 
see  Twining,  note  45.  Ritter  has  followed  the  views  of  Les- 
sing,  in  a  note  too  full  of  argument  to  admit  of  condensation. 
Taylor's  note  is,  as  usual,  a  blundering  Neo-Platouic  attempt 
to  reconcile  the  discrepancies  of  Aristotle  and  Plato. 

^  Decora^um^literidly,  the  decoration  of  the  tpectacle,  or 
sight  In  other  places  it  is  called  the  apecteuile,  or  sight  only 
— <ii^is.  It  comprehends  scenery y  dreaaee — ^the  whole  visible 
apparatus  of  the  theatre.  I  do  not  know  any  single  English 
word  that  answers  fully  to  the  Greek  word.     Twining. 

*  3fe2opa»a— literally,  the  nuiking,  or  the  composition,  of  the 
Music;  as  we  use  Epopceia,  or  according  to  the  French  termina- 
tion, which  we  have  naturalized.  Epopee,  to  signify  epic  poetry, 
or  epic-making,  in  general. — I  might  have  rendered  it,  at  once, 
the  MUSIC ;  but  that  it  would  have  appeared  ridiculous  to  ob- 
serve, of  a  word  so  fiuniliar  to  us,  even  that  "  its  meaning  is 
ohvious."    Twining. 

*  Dianoia — Siavoia,  in  a  general  way,  may  be  defined  to  be 
duj^oiucri  Tov  \6yov  ivtoytia,  i.  e.  the  discursive  energy  of  rea- 
son. But  accurately  speaking,  it  is  that  poioer  of  soul  which 
reasons  scientifically,  driving  die  principles  of  its  reasoning  from 
intellect*  This  latter  definition,  however,  pertains  to  it,  so  far 
as  it  is  not  influenced  in  its  reasonings  by  imagination  and  false 
opinions.  Taylor,  who  objects  to  translating  it "  sentiments." 
I  prefer  following  Twining,  understanding  sentiments  not  ex- 

418  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  m. 

actions  derive  tiieir  qnalitj,)  hence  there  are  naturallj 
two  causes  of  actions,  sentiments  and  moral  hahit, 
and  through  these  actions  all  men  obtain  or  fail  of 

6.  Defini-  the  object  of  their  wishes.  But  a  fable,  indeed,  is 
tiOTi  of  far  an  imitation  of  action ;  for  I  mean  by  a  fable  here, 
newj^Md  *^®  composition  of  incidents.  By  manners^  I  mean 
tenti-  those  things  according  to  which  we  say  that  agents 
ment        ^^e  persons  of  a  certain  character ;  and  by  seniimeni, 

that  through  which  those  who  speak  demonstrate  anj 

7.  Six  thing,  or  explain  their  meaning.  It  is  necessary, 
P^  ^^  therefore,  that  the  parts  of  every  tragedy  should  be 
ged)^      '  si^  ^roi^  which  the  tragedy  derives  its  quality.    But 

these  are,  fable  and  manners,  diction  and  sentiment^ 
spectacle  and  malopoeia.  Of  these ,  parts,  howevor, 
two  pertain  to  the  means  by  which  they  imitate ;  one, 
to  the  manner ;  and  three,  to  the  objects*.     And  be- 

8.  Some  sides  these,  there  are  no  other.  [Not  a  few  [tragic 
tragic  po-  poetsl,  therefore,  as  I  may  say,  use  all  these  parts®.] 
JhesT  For  every  tragedy  has  scenic  apparatus,  manners, 
parts.        and  a  fable,  and  melody,  and,  in  a  similar  manner, 

sentiment.     But  the  greatest  of  these  is  the  combina- 

9.  Trage-  tion  of  the  incidents.     For  tragedy  is  an  imitation  not 

dy  an  imi-  ^f  mgn,  but  of  actions,  [of  life,  and  of  felicity.  For 
tation  of     .    -  ,.  .1  '  J.    •         h  j  xi_         j   •  .,   » 

actions,     infelicity  consists  m  action,  and  the  end  is  a  certain 

10.  What  action,  and  not  a  quality^.]  Men,  however,  are  per- 
tutM^cha-  ^^^  ^^  *  certain  character,  according  to  their  man- 
racter.  Tiers ;  but  according  to  their  actions,  they  are  happy. 
Manner  or  the  Contrary.  The  end  of  tragedy,  therefore, 
end^trar  ^^^  °^^  consist  in  imitating  manners,  but  it  embraces 
ffedy;        manners  on  account  of  actions;  so  that  the  action 

11.  but     and  the  fable  are  the  end  of  tragedy.     But  the  end 
*^^^'      is  the  greatest  of  all  things.     Moreover,  without  ac- 
tion, tragedy  cannot  exist ;  but  it  may  exist  without 

pressed,  (yvw/tiai,  cf.  Rhet.  ii.  21,)  but  in  the  mind,  and  form* 
ing  the  mainspring  of  action. 

*  L  e.  Xc^fv  and  fitXtnroUa  are  the  means  or  instnunexits, 
5^»  the  manner,  ftDdos,  ^n,  and  diavoia,  the  objects. 

'  An  evident  interpolation.    See  Ritter. 

^  Thus  stands  the  text,  as  freed  from  the  additions  made  by 
Aldus,  or  other  Italian  critics.  But  the  whole  passage  is  pro- 
bably an  interpolation,  as  Ritter  seems  to  have  clearly  idiown. 
See  his  judicious  note. 

CHAP.  VI.]  POETIC.  419 

manners.     For  most  modem  tragedies  are  without 
manners;   and  in  short,  many  poets  are  such  as 
among  painters  Zeuzis  is  when  compared  with  Poly- 
gnotus.     For  Poljgnotus,  indeed,  painted  the  man- 
ners of  the  good ;  but  the  pictures  of  Zeuxis  are 
without  manners.     Further  still,  if  any  one  place  in  12.  Proof, 
a  continued  series  moral  speeches,  sayings,  and  senti- 
ments well  framed,  he  will  not  produce  that  which  is 
the  work  of  tragedy ;  but  that  will  be  much  more  a 
tragedy,  which  uses  these  things  as  subordinate,  and 
which  contains  a  fable  and  combination  of  incidents. 
Add  to  this,  that  the  greatest  parts  by  which  fable  13-  The 
allures  the  soul,  are  the  revolutions  and  discoveries.  ^Jn  and 
Again,  it  is  likewise  an  eyidence  of  this,  that  those  discovery 
who  attempt  to  write  tragedies,  acquire  the  power  of  «a^® 
expressing  a  thing  in  tragic  diction  and  manners  ac-  ^^^^  ^^ 
curately,  before  they  can  compose  a  fable,  as  was  the  14.  Proof 
case  with  nearly  all  the  first  poets.     The  fable,  there-  ^^  .^® 
fore,  is  the  principal  part,  and  as  it  were  the  soul  of  offormSg 
tragedy ;  but  the  manners  are  next  in  rank*.  [Just  as,  a  plot. 
in  painting,  if  any  one  were  to  spread  the  most  beauti-  ^^'  P^^' 
ful  pigments  on  promiscuonsly,  he  would  not  please  paintmg. 
the  view  so  much  as  by  outlining  an  Jmage  with  white 
colour  only.     Tragedy  also  is  an  imitation  of  action, 
and  on  this  account,  e£^)ecially,  [an  imitation]  of 
agents.  But  the  sentiments  rank  third.   And  by  them  1?-.  ^«*: 
[I  mean]  the  power  of  eaydaining  what  is  inherent  ^^ti^  ° 
m  the  subject,  and  adapted  to  k,  which  is  the  pecu-  ment. 
liar  province  of  politics^  and  rhetoric.     For  the  an- 
cient poets  represent  those  whom  they  introduce  as 
speaking  politically ;  but  those  of  the  present  day, 
rhetorically.     But  the  manners  are,  whatever  shows  17.  Of 
what  the  deliberate  chotpe  is.     Hence  those  speeches  ^^^" 
are  without  manners,  in  which  there  is  akogeth^  senti- 

ment. 

*  The  rest  of  this  chapter  is  condemned  by  Rltter  as  an  in- 
terpolation. 

*  The  reader,  here,  most  not  think  of  our  modem  polities. 
— ^The  poUHcal,  or  cinU  art,  or  aeience,  vas,  in  Aristotle's  view^ 
of  wide  extent  and  high  importance.  It  comprehended  tfM»c« 
and  eloquence,  or  the  art  of  public  speaking ;  every  thing,  in 
short,  that  concerned  the  well-being  of  a  state. — See  note  67. 
Twining. 

420  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  vii. 

nothing  that  the  speaker  may  choose  or  avoid  ^**.  Bat 
sentiment  is  that  through  which  they  show  that  a  cer- 
tain thing  is,  or  is  not,  or  by  which  they  universaUy 

18.  Of       enunciate  something.    And  the  fourth  part  of  tragedy 
diction,      jg  diction.     But  I  say,  as  was  before  observed,  that 

diction  is  interpretation  by  the  means  of  wordSy  and 
which  also  has  the  same  power  in  verse  and  prose. 

19.  Melo-  But  of  the  remaining  five,  the  melopoeia  is  the  great- 
sp^dS^  est  of  the  embellishments.     But  the  scenic  decora- 
the latter  tion  is  alluring  indeed;  yet  it  is  most  inartificial, 
least  per-  and  is  in  the  smallest  degree  akin  to  poetrj.     For 
^^^      the  power  of  tragedy  remains,  even  when  unaccom- 
panied with  scenic  apparatus   and  players.      And 
further/still,  the  art  of  the  mechanic  possesses  more 
power  in  constructing  the  scenic  apparatus  than  that 
of  the  poet.] 

CHAP.  VII. 
On  the  Bequisites  arid  Length  of  IVagic  Action, 

1.  Defini-  These  things  being  defined,  let  us  in  the.  next  place 
tion  of  a  show  what  the  combination  of  the  incidents  ought  to 
^  °  *  be,  since  this  is  the  first  and  greatest  part  of  tragedy. 

2.  But  it  is  granted  to  us,  that  tragedy  is  the  imitation 
of  a  perfect  and  whole  action,  and  of  one  which  pos- 
sesses a  certain  magnitude ;  for  there  may  be  a  whole 
8.  Of  a     which  has  no  magnitude.     But  a  whole  is  that  which 
dramatic    has  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end.     And  the  begin- 
and  ite       ^^^S  ^^  *^^*  which  necessarily  is  not  itself  posterior 
parts.        to  another  thing ;  but  another  thing  is  naturally  ex- 
pected to  follow  it.     On  the  contrary,  the  end  is  that 
which  is  itself  naturally  adapted  to  be  posterior  to  an- 
other thing,  either  from  necessity,  or  for  the  most  part; 
but  after  this  there  is  nothing  else.     But  the  middle 
is  that  which  is  itself  after  another  thing,  and  after 
which  there  is  something  else.    Hence,  it  is  necessary 
that  those  who  compose  fables  properly,  should  neither 
^®  These  words  are  differently  placed  in  some  editions. 

CHAP.  VII.]  POETIC.        .  421 

begin  them  casually,  nor  end  them  casually,  but  should 
employ  the  above-mentioned  forms  [of  beginning, 
middle,  and  end].     Further  still,  since  that  which  is  4.  Magni- 
beautiful,  whether  it  be  an  animal,  or  ai^y  thing  else  *^®  ^^ 
-which  is  composed  from  certain  parts,  ought  not  only  ^natitu^ 
to   have  these  parts  arranged,  but  a  magnitude  also  ents  of 
-which  is  not  casual.     For  the  beautiful  consists  in  ^e*^*y* 
magnitude  and  order.     Hence,  neither  can  any  very 
small  animal  be  beautiful;    for  the  survey  of  it  is 
confused,  since  it  is  effected  in  a  time  nearly  in- 
sensible.    Nor  yet  a  very  large  animal ;  for  it  is  not 
surveyed  at  once,  but  its  subsistence  as  one  and  a 
whole  escapes  the  view  of  the  spectators ;  such  as  if^ 
for  instance,  it  should  be  an  animal  of  ten  thousand 
stadia  in  length.     Hence,  as  in  bodies  and  in  animals  5.  Magni- 
it  is  necessary  there  should  be  magnitude;  but  such  *^^®  ^ 
as   can  easily  be  seen ;   thus  also  in  fables,  there  to  plots ; 
should  be  length,  but  this  such  a^  can  easily  be  re- 
membered ^     The  definition,  however,  of  the  length  6.  Istly. , 
with  reference  to  contests*  and  the  senses,  does  not  **  ^  ^^" 
fall  under  the  consideration  of  art.     For  if  it  were  hibitions. 
requisite  to  perform  a  hundred  tragedies,  [as  is  said 
to  have  been  the  case  more  than  once^]  the  perform- 
ance ought  to  be  regulated  by  a  clepsydra.     But  the  7.  2ndly, 
definition  [of  the  length  of  the  fable]  according  to  the  js  to  in- 
nature  of  the  thing,  is  this,  that  the  fable  is  always  value? 
more  beautiful  the  greater  it  is,  if  at  the  same  time 
it  is  perspicuous.  Simply  defining  the  thing,  however, 
we  may  say,  [that  a  fable  has  an  appropriate  magni- 
tude,] when  the  time  of  its  duration  is  such  as  to 
render  it  probable  that  there  can  be  a  transition  from 
prosperous  to  adverse,  or  from  adverse  to  prosperous 
fortune,  according  to  the  necessary  or  probable  order 

'  The  unity  here  spoken  of,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  not 
absolute  and  simple,  but  relative  and  compoundy  unity ;  a  unity 
consisting  of  different  partSf  the  relation  of  which  to  each 
other,  and  to  the  whole,  is  easily  perceived  at  one  view.  On 
this  depends  the  perception- of  beauty  in  form. — In  objects  too 
extended,  you  may  be  said  to  have  parts,  but  no  whole :  in 
yery  minute  objects  the  wholes  but  no  parts.    Twining. 

*  i.  e.  to  its  representation  at  the  dramatic  contests. 

*  These  words  are  condemned  by  Bitter. 

422  .    ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  ▼ui. 

of  things  as  they  take  place.     This  is  a  anffifii^t 
definition  of  magnitude. 

CHAP.  VIIL 
On  the  Unity  of  the  FoMe. 

1.  On  The  fable,  however,  is  one,  not  as  some  suppose,  if 
dramatio  qq^  person  is  the  subject  of  it;  for  manj  things 
viutj*       which  are  infinite   in  kind  happen  \Xo  one  man], 

from  a  eertain  numb^  of  which  no  one  ev^t  arises. 
Thus,  also,  there  are  many  actions  of  one  man,  from 

2.  Previ-  which  no  one  action  is  produced.  Hence  all  thoee 
Tioiumit-  poets  appear  to  have  erred  who  have  written  the 
tiouTon  Herackdd,  and  Theseid,  and  such  like  poems.  For 
the  8ub-  they  suppose  that  because  Hercules  was  one  person, 
ir^Con.  ^  ^^^  ^*  *^^  *^  isAAe  should  be  one.  Homer,  how- 
duct  of  evevy  as  he  excelled  in  other  things,  appears  likewise 
Homer,     to  have  seen  this  clearly,  whether  from  art,  or  from 

nature.     For  in  composing  the  Odyssey,  he  has  not 

related  every  thing  w^ich  happened  to  Ulysses ;  such 

as  the  being  wounded  in  Parnassus  ^  and  pretending 

to  be  insane'  at  the  muster  of  the  Greeks ;  one  of 

which  taking  place,  it  was  not  necessary  or  probable 

that  the  other  should  happen ;  but  he  composed  the 

4.  Appli-   Odyssey,  as  also  his  Biad,  upon  one'  action.     It  is 

^^tvta    '^'*^**®»  therefore,  that  as  in  other  imitative  arts 

tb!e  plot    <^^  imitation^  is  the  imitation  of  one  thing,  thus, 

^  This  incident  is,  howeyer^  related,  and  at  considerable 
length,  in  the  xixth  book  of  the  Odyssey,  (v.  563  of  Pope's 
translation,)  but  digressiTely,  and  incidentally;  it  made  no 
essential  part  of  his  general  plan.    Twining. 

'  A  ridiculous  story. — **  To  avoid  going  to  the  Trojan  war, 
Ulysses  pretended  to  be  mad ;  and,  to  prore  his  insanity,  went 
to  plough  with  an  ex  and  a  horse;  but  Palamedes,  in  order  to 
detect  him,  laid  his  infant  son,  Telemachus,  in  the  way  of  the 
plough ;  upon  which  Ulysses  immediately  stojyped,  and  there- 
by proved  himself  to  be  in  his  right  senses.^'—- (Hyginus,  etc.) 
Twining. 

>  I  follow  Ritter's  text. 

^  i.  e.  one  imitative  work.    Thus  one  pieture  represents,  or 

CHAP.  IX.]  POETIC.  423 

also,  [in  tragedy,]  the  fable,  since  it  is  an  imitation 
of  acj;ion,  should  be  the  imitation  of  one  action,  and 
of  the  whole  of  this,  and  that  the  parts  of  the  trans- 
actions should  be  so  arranged,  that  any  one  of  them 
being  transposed,  or  taken  away,  the  whole  would 
become  different  and  changed.  For  that  which 
Tv^hen  present  or  not  present  produces  no  sensible 
Indifference],  is  not  a  part  of  the  fable*. 

CHAP.  IX. 

Ott  the  difference  between  History  and  Poetry,  and  how  his" 
torical  matter  should  be  used  in  Poetry, 

!BnT  it  is  evident  from  wh^t  has  been  said^  that  it  is  i.  The 
not  the  province  of  a  poet  to  relate  things  which  poet  does 
have  happened,  but  such  as  might  have  happened,  Jl^^"*^^ 
and  such  things  as  are  possible  according  to  proba-  events, 
bility,  or  which  would  necessarily  have  happened*. 
For  an  historian  and  a  poet  do  not  differ  from  each  2.  for  then 
other,  because  the  one  writes  in  verse  and  the  other  ^e  ^«>^d 
in  prose ;  for  the  history  of  Herodotus  might  be  th^hist^ 
written  in  verse,  and  yet  it  would  be  no  less  a  history  nan. 

shottld  represent,  but  pne  thing ; — a  single  olffectt  or  a  single 
action,  etc.  So,  every  poem  (the  Orlando  Furioso  as  much  as 
the  lUad)  is  one  imitation — one  imitative  work^  and  should 
imitate  one  action,  in  Aristotle's  sense  of  unity ,  like  the  poems 
of  Homer ;  not  a  number  of  actions  unconnected  with  each 
other,  or  connected  merely  by  their  common  relation  to  one 
person,  as  in  the  Theaeids,  etc.,  or  to  one  time,  as  in  the  poem 
of  Ariosto;  or,  by  their  resemblance  merely,  as  in  the  Me- 
tamorphoses of  Ovid,     Twining. 

•  **  The  painter  will  not  inquire  what  things  may  be  ad- 
mitted without  much  censure.  He  will  not  think  it  enough  to 
show  that  they  may  be  there,  he  will  show  that  they  must  be 
there ;  that  their  absence  would  render  his  picture  maimed  and 
defective. — They  should  make  a  part  of  that  tohole  which  would 
be  imperfect  without  them,** — ^Sir  J.  £Leynolds>  Disc,  on  Paint- 
ing, p.  106.    Twining. 

»  Of.  Sheridan's  Critic,  vii.  1.  "What the  plague!  a  play 
is  not  to  show  occurrences  that  happen  eveqr  day,  but  things 
just  so  strange,  that  though  they  never  did,  they  might  happen." 
2  F 

424  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  ix. 

with  metre,  than  without  metre.     But  they  differ  in 
this,  that  the  one  speaks  of  things  which  have  hap- 
pened, and  the  other  of  such  as  might  have  happened. 
3.  Hence  Hence,  poetry  is  more  philosophic,  and  more  deserv- 
P^^^'y  is    iug  Qf  attention,  than  history.     For  poetry   speaks 
and  phi-    niore  of  universals,  but  history  of  particulars.     But 
loeophic.    universal  consists  indeed  in  relating  or  performing 
tion  o?"'  ^'^^  things  which  happen  to  a  man  of  a  certain 
nnivenal  description,  either  probably  or  necessarily,  [to  which 
and  par-    the  aim  of  poetry  is  directed  in  giving  names*;]  but 
ticuiar.     particular  consists  in  narrating  what,  [for  example,  J 
6.  Aau     AlciJ)iades  did,  or  what  he   suffered.     In  comedy, 
©Tidejt  ™  therefore,  this  is  now  become  evident.     For  [comic 
comedy,     p^^^s]  having  composed  a  fable  through  things  of  a 
probable  nature,  they  thus  give  whatever  names  they 
please'  to  their  characters,  and  do  not,  like  Iambic 

6.  Real  poets,  write  poems  about  particular  persons.  But  in 
names  re-  tragedy  they  cling  to  real  names.  The  cause,  how- 
tained  m   ^y^^  q{  this  is  that  the  possible  is  credible.     Things, 

therefore,  which  have  not  yet  been  done,  we  do  not 

yet  believe  to  be  possible;  but  it  is  evident  that 

"  things  which  have  been  done  are  possible ;  for  they 

would  not  have  been  done,  if  they  were  impossible. 

7.  but  not  ^^^  indeed,  but  that  in  some  tragedies  there  are  one 
real  or  two  of  known  names,  and  the  rest  are  feigned ; 
nwaes       y^^^  j^  others  there  is  no  known  name ;  as,  forinstance, 

in  the  Flower  of  Agatho.     For  in  this  tragedy,  the 
things  and  the  names  are  alike  feigned,  and  yet  it 

8.  Nor  delights  no  less.  Hence,  one  must  not  seek  to  ad- 
must  we  here  entirely  to  traditional  fables,  which  are  the  sub- 
confin/  J^^®  ^^  tragedy.  For  it  is  ridiculous  to  make  this 
ourselves   the  object  of  search,  because  even  known  subjects  are 

to  tradi-    known  but  to  a  few,  though  at  the  same  time  they 

tionalfa-  '  °  ^ 

'  Bitter  well  observes  that  the  perspicuity  of  this  otherwise 
clear  passage  is  destroyed  by  diis  absurd  interpolation. 

'  Thus  nearly  all  the  names  in  the  tragedies  of  Terence  and 
Plautus,  thus  Dromo  and  Sosia  are  applied  to  slaves,  Pamphi- 
lus  to  a  lover,  Glycerium  or  Philumena  to  a  lady,  Pyrgopoli- 
nices  or  Thraso  to  soldiers.  Also  the  names  in  Petronius  and 
Apuleius,  as  Pannychis,  Meroe,  Fotis,  etc.  So  Ben  Jonson 
has  personified  the  virtues  and  vices  in  *'  Cynthia's  Revels," 
and  elsewhere. 

bles. 

CHAP.  IX.]         .  PCETid  425 

delight  all  men.     From  these  things,  therefore,  it  is  9.  Hence 
evident  that  a  poet  ought  rather  to  be  the  author  t^^®  plot» 
or  fables  than  of  metres,  inasmuch  as  he  is  a  poet  than  the 
from  imitation,  and  he  imitates   actions.      Hence,  metre,  is 
tliough  it  should  happen  that  he  relates  things  which. *^|^^®^* 
liave  happened,  he  is  no  less  a  poet.     For  nothing 
liinders  but  that  some  actions  which  have  happened, 
are  such  as  might  both  probably*  and  possibly  have 
Iiappened,  and  bj  [the  narration  of]  such  he  is  a 
poet. 

But  of  simple  plots  and  actions,  the  episodic  are  lo.  Ob- 
the  worst.   But  I  call  the  plot  episodic,  in  which  it  is  jectionto, 
neither  probable  nor  necessary  that  the  episodes  fiction 
follow*  each  other.     Such  plots,  however,  are  com-  of,  episo- 
dic &ble8. 
-*  It  may  appear  to  the  reader  to  be  a  strange  observation, 
that  "some  true  events  may  he  probable  "    But  he  will  recol- 
lect what  sort  of  events,  and  what  sort  of  probabUityt  Aristotle  « 
here  speaks  of:  i.  e.  of  extraordinary  events,  such  as  Poetry 
requires,  and  of  that  more  strict  and  penfect  probability,  that 
closer  connexion  and  visible  dependence  of  circumstances, 
-which  are. always  required  from  the  poet,  though  in  such 
events,  not  often  to  be  found  in  fact,  and  real  life,  and  there- 
fore not  expected  from  the  historian, 

Aristotle  alludes  to  these  two  lines  of  Agatho : 

Tox'  **'  **"**  «i«^«  abr^  t5t*  tlvai  \iyoi, 
hpoToi<n  iroWd  Tvyxouftty  ^k  cIkoto. 

Even  this,  it  may  be  said,  is  probable. 
That  many  things  improbable  should  happen, 
In  human  life. — 

See  Rhet.  ii.  24.  10,  and  Bayle's  Diet.  Art  Aoathon, 
note  [f],  who  mentions  a  similar  maxim  of  St.  Bernard's : 
"  Ordinatissimum  est,  minus  interdum  ordinate  fidri."  **  II 
est  tout  k  fait  de  Tordre,  que  de  terns  en  tems  il  se  fasse 
quelque  chose  centre  Tordre." 

This  general,  and,  if  I  may  call  it  so,  possible  sort  of  proba- 
biUty,  may  be  termed,  the  probdbiUiy  of  romance ;  and  these 
lines  of  Agatho  furnish  a  good  apologetical  motto  for  the  novel 
writer.  It  might  be  prefixed,  perhaps,  without  impropriety, 
even  to  the  best  productions  of  the  kind — ^to  a  Clarissa,  or  a 
Cecilia.  Nothing  is  so  commonly  complained  of  in  such 
works,  as  their  improbability ;  and  often,  no  doubt,  the  com- 
plaint is  well-founded :  often,  however,  the  criticism  means 
nothing  more,  than  that  the  events  are  uncommon,  and  proves 
nothing  more,  than  the  want  of  fancy,  and  an  extended  view 
of  human  life,  in  the  reader.  If  the  events  were  no^  uncommon^ 
where  would  the  book  find  readers  ?  Twining. 
2  r  2 

426 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[CHAF.  X. 

posed  by  bad  poets  indeed,  through  their  own  want 
of  ability* ;  but  by  good  poets,  on  account  of  the 
players®.  For,  introducing  [dramatic]  contests,  and 
extending  the  plot  beyond  its  capabilities,  thej  are 
frequently  compelled  to  distort  the  connexion  of  the 
11.  De-  parts.  But,  since  tragedy  is  not  only  an  imitatioa 
&iition  of  of  a  perfect  action,  but  also  of  actions  which  are  ter- 
nble  and  piteous,  and  actions  principally  become 
such,  [and  in  a  greater  degree,  when  they  happen 
contrary  to  opinion,^]  on  account  of  each  other. 
*  *  *  *  For  thus  they  will  possess  more  of  the 
marveUous,  than  if  they  happened  from  chance  and 
fortune;  since,  also,  of  things  which  are  from  for- 
tune, those  appear  to  be  most  admirable,  which  seem 
to  happen  as  it  were  by  design.  Thus  the  statae  of 
Mityus  at  Argos,  killed  him  who  was  the  cause  of 
the  death  of  Mityus  by  falling  as  he  was  surveying 
it.®  For  such  events  as  these  seem  not  to  take  place 
casually.  Hence  it  is  necessary  that  fables  of  this 
kind  should  be  more  beautiful. 

the  terri- 
ble. 

12.  Of 
chance 
circum^ 
stances* 

CHAP.  X. 

Fables  either  simple  or  comjpwtnd, 

1.  Of  fii-  Op  fables,  however,  some  are  simple,  and  others 
plriSd '  complex ;  for  so  also  are  the  actions  of  which  fables 
complex,   are  the  imitations.     But  I  call  the  action  simple, 

•  Such  is  the  sense  oiii*  ahroit^^^" propter  ingenii  tarditaUm," 
Ritter. 

•  i.  e.  that  the  play  may  not  show  off  only  one  actor.  Thus 
a  modem  dramatist  writes  a  play  for  Charles  Kean,  and  puts 
in  a  few  episodes  for  Buckstone  or  Keeley.  It  is  clear  from 
this  that  plays  were  often  written  to  suit  particular  performers. 

^  These  words  are  condemned  as  interpolated.  But  the 
apodosis  to  the  whole  sentence  is  wanting,  and  I  have  therefore 
marked  the  lacuna  with  Ritter. 

•  A  similar  story  of  the  death  of  a  cruel  beloved  being  killed 
by  the  falling  of  a  statue  of  Cupid,  is  told  by  Theocritus,  Id 
xxiii.  sub  fin. 

CHAP.  xi.J  POETIC.      /  427 

from  which  taking  place,  as  it  has  been  denned, 
with,  continuity  and  unity,  there  is  a  transition  with- 
out either  revolution  or  discovery;  but  complex,  from 
•which  there  is  a  transition,  together  with  discovery, 
or  revolution,  or  both.  It  is  necessary,  however,  3. 
that  these  should  be  effected  from  the  composition 
itself  of  the  fable,  so  that  from  what  has, formerly 
happened  it  may  come  to  pass  that  the  same  things 
take  place  either  necessarily  or  probably.  For  it 
makes  a  great  difference  whether  these  things  are 
effected  on  account  of  these,  or  afta:  these. 

CHAP.  XL 

Now,  revolution  is  a  mutation,  as  has  been  stated,  of  l.  Defini- 
actions  into  a  contrary  condition ;  and  this,  as  we  say,  tion  of  re- 
according  to  the  probable,  or  the  necessary.     Thus      ^      * 
in  the  "  OEdipus,^"  the  messenger  whp  comes  with  an 
intention  of  delighting  CEdipus  and  liberating  him 
from  his  fear  respecting  his  mother,  when  he  makes 
himself  known,  produces  a  contrary  effect.     Thus, 
too,  in  the  "  Lynceus,"  he  indeed  is  introduced  as  one 
who  is  to  die,  and  Danaus  follows  with  an  intention 
of  killing  him ;  but  it  happens  from  the  course  of  in- 
cidents, that  Lynceus  is  saved,  and  Danaus  is  slain. 
And  discovery  is,  as  the  name  signifies,  a  change  2.  of  dis- 
from  ignorance  to  knowledge,  or  into  the  friendship  covery. 
or  hatred  of  those  who  are  destined  to  prosperous  or 
adverse  fortune.     The  discovery,  however,  is  most 
beautiful,  when  at  the  same  time  there  are,  as  in  the 
*'  CEkiipus,^"  revolutions.     There  are,  therefore,  other  3.  Other 
discoveries  also.     For  sometimes  it  happens,  as  has  J^cog^- 
been  before  observed,  that  there  are  discoveries  of 
things  inanimate^,  and  casual;  or  if  some  one  has 

*  Cf.  Soph.  CEd.  Tyr.  1014,  sqq.  Dind. 

•  Such  ia  the  discovery  of  Joseph  by  his  brethren,  Gen.  xlv. 
—the  most  beautiful  and  affecting  example  that  can  be  given. 
Twining. 

'  r  do  not  understand  Aristotle  to  be  here  speaking  of  ttich 

428 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[chap.    XII. 

4.  Feel- 
ings ex- 
cited by 
revolu- 
tion and 
discovery. 

«d.  Differ- 
ent disco- 
veries. 

6.  The 
third  re- 
quisite is 
pathos  or 
disaster. 

performed,  or  has  not  performed,  a  thing,  there  is  a 
recognition  of  it ;  but  the  discovery  which  especiallj 
pertains  to  the  fable  and  the  action  is  that  before 
mentioned.  For  a  discovery  and  revolution  of  this 
kind  will  excite  either  pity  or  fear ;  and  tragedy  is 
supposed  to  be  an  imitation  of  such  actions  [as  excite 
fear  and  pity].  Again,  it  will  happen  that  in- 
felicity and  felicity  will  be  in  such  like  discover- 
ies. But  since  discovery  is  a  discovery  of  certain 
persons,  some  [discoveries]  are  of  one  person  only 
with  reference  to  another,  when  it  is  evident  who  the 
other  person  is,  but  sometimes  it  is  necessafy  to  dis- 
cover both  persons.  Thus  Iphigenia  was  recognised 
by  Orestes  through  the  sending  an  epistle*;  but 
another  discovery  was  requisite  to  his  being  known 
by  Iphigenia ^  [Two  parts  of  the  fable,  therefore,  viz. 
revolution  and  discpvery,  are  conversant  with  these 
things ;  but  the  third  part  is  pathos.  And  of  these, 
revolution  and  discovery  have  been  already  discussed. 
Pathos,  however,  is  an  action  destructive,  or  lament- 
able ;  such  as  death  when  it  is  obvious,  grievous  pains, 
wounds,  and  such  like  particulars^.] 

CHAP.  XII. 

On  the  Parts  of  Tragedy, 

1  The      [But  we  have  before  spoken  of  the  parts  of  tragedy 
tM^d^     which  are  requisite  to  constitute  its  quality.     The 
according  parts  of  tragedy,  however,  according  to  quantity,  and 
to  quan- 
tity, discoveries  of  "  inanimate  things  "  (rings,  bracelets,  etc.)  as  are 
the  means  of  bringing  about  the  true  discovery — that  of  the 
persons.     For,  in  what  follows,  it  is  implied  that  these  "  other 
sorts  of  discovery  "  produce  neither  terror  nor  pi^y,  neither  Aop- 
piness  nor  unhappiness  ;  which  can  by  no  means  be  said  of  such 
discoveries  as  are  instrumental  to  the  personal  discovery,  and, 
through  that,  to  the  catastrophe  of  the  piece.    Of  these,  he 
treats  afterwards. — ^Dacier,  I  think,  has  mistaken  this.    Twi- 
ning. 

*  Cf.  Eur.  Iph.  Taur.  759.  92.  »  Ibid.  811.  26. 

*  The  whole  of  this  paragraph  is  condemned  by  Ritter« 

CHAP.  XII.]  POETIC.  429 

into  which  it  is  sepfirately  divided,  are  as  follow : 
|>rologue,^  episode,^  exodfe,^  and  chorus,  of  the  parts 
o£  which  one  is  the  parodos,^  but  the  other  is  the  sta- 
simon,^     These  [five]  parts,  therefore,  are  common 
to  all  [tragedies];  but  the  peculiar  parts  are  [the 
songs]  from  the  scene  and  the  kommoi.     And  the  2.  Pro- 
prologue,  indeed,  is  the  whole  part  of  the  tragedy,  ^^^S^^- 
prior  to  the  entrance  of  the  chorus.     The  episode  is  Episode. 
the  whole  part  of  the  tragedy  between  two  complete 
odes  of  the  chorus.     The  exode  is  the  whole  part  of  Exode. 
th^  tragedy,  after  which  there  is  no  further  melody 
of  the  chorus.     And  of  the  chorus,  the  parodos,  in-  Parodos. 
deed,  is  the  first  speech  of  the  whole  chorus ;  but  the 
stasimon  is  the  melody  of  the  chorus,  without  ana-  Stasimoa 
paest  and  trochee:  and  the  commos^  is  the  common  Commos. 
lamentation  of  the  chorus  and  from  the  scene.     But  3. 
we  have  before  shown  what  the  parts  of  tragedy  are 
w^hich  must  necessarily  be  used ;  but  the  parts  of  it 
according  to  quantity,  and  into  which  it  is  separately 
divided,  are  these''.] 

*  Probgue — This  may  be  compared  to  our  first  act.  See' 
note  40.     Twining. 

'  Episode — i.  e.  a  part  introduced,  inserted,  etc.,  as  all  the 
dialog  was,  originally,  between  the  choral  odes.     Twining. 

*  Exode — i.  e.  the  going  out,  or  exit;  the  concluding  act,  as 
we  should  term  it.  The  Greek  tragedies  ntyer  finisfied  widi  a 
choral  ode.    Twining. 

^  Parade — ^i.  e.  entry  of  the  chorus  upon  the  stage :  and 
hence  the  term  was  applied  to  what  they  first  sung,  upon  their 
entry.    IVining. 

^  Stasimon — i.  e.  stable;  because,  as  it  is  explained,  these 
odes  were  sung  by  the  choral  troop  when  fixed  on  the  stage, 
and  at  rest:  whereas  the  parodeja  said  to  haye  been  sung  as 
they  came  on.  Hence,  the  trochaic  and  anapastic  measures, 
being  lively  and  full  of  motion,  were  adapted  to  the  parade,  but 
not  to  the  stasimon.    Twining. 

*  Fr6m  a  verb  signifying  to  beat  or  strike;  alluding  to  the 
gestures  of  violent  grief. 

^  Bitter,  who  has  illustrated  this  whole  chapter  with  great 
learning  (ind  taste,  allows  its  utility,  but  doubts  that  it  is  the 
work  of  Aristotle.  The  reader  will  find  his  remarks  on  the 
different  parts  of  tragedy  very  valuable. 

430  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xiii. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

The  EssentidUfor  a  Tragic  Plot. 

1.  Ik  the  next  place  we  must  show,  as  consequent 
to  what  has  been  said,  what  those  who  compose 
fables  ought  to  aim  at,  and  beware  of,  and  whence 

2.  Tra-  *^c  purpose  of  tragedy  is  effected.  Since,  therefore, 
gedy  it  is  necessary  that  the  composition  of  the  most  beau- 
be^rim^e!  ^^^  tragedy  should  not  be  simple,  but  complex,  and 
Proper  that  it  should  be  imitative  of  fearful  and  piteous  ac- 
tidad-       tiouft— (for  this  is  the  peculiarity  of  such  imitation) 

^*  — ^in  the  first  place  it  is  evident,  that  it  is  not  proper 
that  worthy  men  should  be  represented  as  changed 
from  prosperity  to  adversity,  (for  this  is  neither  a 
subject  of  terror  nor  commiseration,  but  is  impious,) 
nor  should  depraved  characters  [be  rejM-eaented  as 
changed]  from  adversity  to  prosperity ;  for  this  is  the 
most  foreign  from  tragedy  of  all  things,  since  it  pos- 
sesses nothing  which  is  proper ;  for  it  neither  appeals 
to  moral  sensed  nor  is  piteous,  nor  fearful.  Nor, 
again,  must  a  very  depraved  man  be  represented  as 
having  fallen  from  prosperity  into  adversity.  For 
such  a  composition  will  indeed  possess  moral  tend- 
ency, but  not  pity  or  fear.  For  the  one  is  conversant 
with  a  character  which  does  not  deserve  to  be  un- 
fortunate; but  the  other,  with  a  character  similar 
[to  one's  own].  [And  pity,  indeed,  is  excited  for  one 
who  does  not  deserve  to  be  unfortunate ;  but  fear,  for 
one  who  resembles  ones^f  ^]  ;  so  that  the  event  will 
neither  appear  to   be   commiserable,  nor  terrible. 

3.  The  There  remains  therefore  the  character  between  these. 
*^fti^*"  But  a  character  of  this  kind  is  one,  who  neither  ex- 
hero  must  eels  in  virtue  and  justice,  nor  is  changed  throagh 

be  of  a  vice  and  depravity,  into  misfortune,  from  a  state  of 
moderate 

'  Ritier  considers  rd  <l>ik&u9p<ttirov  as  a  feeling  bordering  on 
IXcoC)  "id  quidem  quod  prope  ad  miserationem  accedit."  It 
probably  is  best  expressed  by  our  "  humanity,"  considered  in 
both  its  senses. 

'  Hitter  condemns  these  words  as  a  marginal  annotation. 

CHA.P.  XIII.]  POETIC.  431 

great  renown  and  prosperity,  but  has  experienced  excel- 
this  change  through  some  [human],  error ;  such  as  ^^^^  ^r 
CE^ipus  and  Thyestes,  and  other  illustrious  men  of  ty. 
this  kind.     Hence  it  is  necessary  that  a  plot  which  4.  Simple 
is  well  constructed,  should  be  rather  single*  than  ^^^?J*7" 
twofold,  (though  some  say  it  should  be  the  latter,)  twofold.** 
and  that  the  change  should  not  be  into  prosperity 
from  adversity,  but  on  the  contrary  into  adversity 
from  prosperity,  not  through  depravity,  but  through 
some  great  error,  either  of  such  a  character  [as  we 
have  mentioned],  or  better  rather  than  worse.     But  5.  Proof 
the  proof  of  this  is  what  has  taken  place.     For  of  old  from  the 
the  poets  adopted  any  casual  fables;  but  now  the  subjects  of 
most  beautiful  tragedies  are  composed  about  a  few  tragedy, 
families;  as  for  instance,  about  Alcmaeon,  CEMipus, 
Orestes,  Meleager,  Thyestes,  and  Telephus*,  and  such 
other  persons  as  happen  either  to  have  suffered  or 
done  things  of  a  dreadful  nature.    The  tragedy,  there- 
fore, which  is  most  beautiful  according  to  art,  is  of 
this   construction.     Hence  they  erroneously  blame  e.  Anun- 
Euripides,  who  accuse  him  of  having  done  this  in  his  happy 
tragedies,  and  for  making  many  of  them  terminate  in  g^kawTto 
misfortune.     For  this  metho(^  as  we  have  said,  is  tragedy, 
right ;  of  which  this  is  the  greatest  evidence,  that  in 
the  scenes,  and  contests  of  the  players,  simple  fables 
which  terminate  unhappily  appear  to  be  most  tra- 
gical, if  they  are  properly  acted.     And  Euripides, 
though  he  does  not  manage  other  things  well,  yet 
appears  to  be  the  most  tragic  of  poets  ^.     The  fable,  7.  but 
however,  ranks  in  the  second  place,  though  by  some  ^®*^ 
it  is  said  to  be  the  first  composition,  which  has  a  ^^     ^* 
twofold  construction,  such  as  the  Odyssey,  and  which 
terminates  in  a  contrary  fortune,  both  to  the  better 

*  What  is  here  meant  by  a  *mgle  fable,  will  appear  presently 
from  the  account  of  its  opposite— the  double  fable.  It  must 
not  be  confounded  with  the  nmple  fable,  though  in  the  original 
both  are  expressed  by  the  same  word.  The  Hmple  fable  is 
only  a  fable  wU^out  revohdum,  or  diseovery.    Twining. 

*  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  French  tragic  stage. 

s  But  below,  XY.  5.  and  Bth.  iii.  1,  Euripides  is  justly  charged 
with  the  improper  introduction  of  comic  characters  and  lan- 
guage.   The  praise  applies  only  to  the  catastrophe. 

432  ARISTOTLE'S  [chj.p.  xit. 

and  worse  characters.     It  appears,  however,  to  rank 

in  the  first  place,  through  the  imbecility  of  the  spec- 

8.  imdthe  tators^     For  the  poets,  in  composing  their  plots,  ac- 

liappy       commodate  themselves  to  the  wish  of  the  spectators. 

skmroi-    "^^^  pleasure,  however,  is  not  [properly]  derived 

ferred/     from  tragedy,  but  is  rather  suited  to  come4y-     For 

there,  though  the  greatest  enemies  be  introduced,  as 

Orestes  and  J£gisthns,-yet  in  the  end  they  depart 

friends,  and  no  one  falls  by  the  hand  of  the  other  ^. 

CHAP.  XIV, 
Of  Terror  and  Pity. 

I.  Terror  Terrob  and  pity,  therefore,  may  be  produced  from 
how^ro^'   the  sights     But  they  may  also  arise  from*the  com- 

duced.  6  That  weakness  wliich  cannot  bear  strong  emotions,  even 

from  fictitious  distress.  I  have  known  those  who  could  not 
look  at  that  admirable  picture,  the.  UgoUno  of  Sir  Jos.  Rey- 
nolds.— To  some  minda,  every  thing  that  is  not  cheerful  is 
shocking, -^^Mi^  might  not  the  preference  here  attributed  to 
weaknessyhe  attributed  to  better  causes— the  gratification  of 
philanthropy,  the  love  of  justice,  order,  etc.  ? — the  same  causes 
which,  just  before,  induced  Aristotle  himself  to  condemn,  as 
ahoching  and  disgusting,  those  fables  which  involve  the  virtuous 
in  calamity.    Twining. 

Modem  audiences  partake  of  this  weakness.  Thus,  the 
catastrophe  of  "Measure  for  Measure,**  " Cymbeline,**  or 
"  Winter's  Tale,"  are  more  satisfactory  than  those  of  **  Ham- 
let** or  "Pizarro.**  Knowles*s  "Hunchback**  is  a  happy 
specimen  of  ai/ayvcopto-ts,  leading  to  a  happy  termination, 
while  his  "  Wife  **  displeases.  Marston*s  "  Heart  and  the 
World,**  weak  as  the  play  is,  is  more  agreeable  than  his  "  Pa- 
trician's Daughter.**  But,  such  plays  are  merely  serious 
comedies. 

7  This  is  excellently  applicable  to  the  plays  of  Vanbrugh 
and  Gibber.  Compare  the  conclusions  of  the  "  Relapse,*'  (Sir 
Tunbelly  excepted,)  the  "  Provoked  Wife,**  etc.  As  to  the 
-  diroOinio-Kct  ov^eIs  i/'t'  oudcvov,  it  is  very  descriptive  of  the  dueis 
in  a  modem  or  ancient  comedy,  as  in  "  London  Assurance," 
or  in  the  "Beaux  Stratagem,**  according  to  Scrub*s  de- 
scription. 

^  See  a  very  pleasant  paper  of  Addison*s  on  this  subject, 
"Spectator,**  No.  42.     We  know  the  eflfect  of  the  skull  and 

CHAP.  XIV.]  POETIC.  433 

bination  of  the  incidents*  which  is  preferable,  and  the 

province  of  a  better  poet.     For  it  is  necessary  that 

the  fable  should  be  so  composed,  that  he  who  hears 

the  things  which  are  transacted,  may  be  seized  with 

horror,  and  feel  pity,  from  the  events,  without  the 

assistance  of  the  sight ;  and  in  this  manner  any  one 

who  hears  the  fable  of  (Edipus  is  affected.     But  to 

effect  this  through  spectacle  is  more  inartificial,  and 

requires   great  expense'*.     But  they  who  produce  2.  The 

not  the  terrible,  but  the  monstrous  alone,  through  ^^^' 

^  ,.         ,  ^1  •        •  '^i    strousnot 

scenic  representation,  have  nothing  in  common  with  tragic. 

tragedy.     For  it  is  not  proper  to  expect  every  kind 
of  pleasure  from  tragedy,  but  that  which  is  ap- 
propriate.    Since,  however,  it  is  necessary  that  the  3.  The 
poet  should  procure  pleasure  from  pity  and  fear  Pj^oper 
through  imitation,  it  is  evident  that  this  must  be  ef-  to^be^e- 
fected  by  the  circumstances.    Let  us,  then,  ascertain  rived 
what  kind  of  events  appear  to  be  dreadful  or  lament-  ^'^^  *^" 
able.     But  it  is  necessary  that  actions  of  this  kind  f,  ^hat 
should  either  be  those  of  friendsf  towards  each  other,  actions 
or  of  enemies,  or  of  -neither.     If,  therefore,  an  ene-  dreadful 
my  kills  an  enemy,  he  does  not  show  any  thing  orla- 
which  is  an  object  of  pity,  neither  while  he.  does  the  "JJ^*" 
deed,  nor  when  he  is  about  to  do  it,  except  what  *  ^' 
arises  from  the  deed  itself.     And  this  will  be  the 
case,  when  one  of  those  who  are  neither  friends  nor 
enemies  do  the  same.     But  when  these  things  hap- 
pen in  friendships ^  as  when  a  brother  kills  a  brother, 
or  a  son  his  father,  or  a  mother  her  son,  or  a  son  his 
mother,  or  intends  to  do  it,  or  does  any  thing  else  of 
the  like  kind — such  subjects  are  to  be  sought  for. 
One  must  not,  therefore,  [completely]  alter  the  re- 
ceived fables.     I  mean,  for  instance,  such  as  the  5.  Fur- 
fable  of  Clytemnestra  being  slain  by  Ol^stes,  and  of  *^®^  P'®* 

black  hangings  in  the  "  Fair  Penitent,"  the  scaffold  in  "  Venice 
Preserved,"  Uie  tomb  in  "  Romeo  and  Juliet,"  etc.  Twining. 
But  Bitter  understands  5^i9  to  mean  the  countenance  of  tlie 
actor. 

3  "  Xofmyiav  generatim  pro  preiioao  et  operoto  apparatu  et 
apte  dici  posse  et  eo  intellectu  h.  1.  accipiendam  esse  manifes- 
tum  est"     Bitter. 

'  As  in  the  "  Fatal  Curiosity  "  of  Lillo.    Twining. 

434  ABISTOTLE*S  [chap,  xit 

oepts  re-  Eripbjle  bj  Alcmseon.  But  it  is  necessary  that  the 
jpecting  po^t  should  invent  the  plot,  and  use  in  a  becoming 
manner  those  fables  which  are  handed  down.  What, 
however,  we  mean  by  [using  fables]  in  a  becoming 
6.  Exam-  manner,  let  us  explain  more  clearly.  Now,  the  action 
pies.  nmy  take  f^lace  in  such  a  way  as  the  ancients  fa&ve 
represented  it,  viz.  knowingly  with  intent  ;  as  Euri- 
pides represents  Medea  kiUing  her  children.  Men 
may  also  do  an  action,  who  are  ignorant  of,  and 
afterwards  discover  their  connexion  [with,  the  in- 
jured party,]  as  in  the  "CEdipus"  of  Sophocles. 
This,  therefore,  is  extraneous  to  the  drama  ^,  but  is 
in  the  tragedy  itself ;  as  in  the  "  Alcmaeon  "  of  As- 
tydamas,  or  Telegonus  in  the  "  Ulysses  Wounded  *." 
7.  Further  still,  besides  these  there  is  a  third  mode, 
when  some  one  is  about  to  perpetrate,  through  ig- 
norance, an  atrocious  deed,  but  makes  the  discovery 
before  he  does  it^  And  besides  these  there  is  no 
other  mode.  For  it  is  necessary  to  act,  or  not ;  and 
that  knowing,  or  not  knowing.  But  of  these,  to  in- 
tend to  perpetrate  the  deed  knowingly,  and  not  to 
perpetrate  it,  is  the  worst ;  for  it  is  wicked  and  not 
tragical ;  because  it  is  void  of  pathos.  [Hence,  no 
poet  introduces  a  character  of  this  kind  except 
rarely;  as  in  the  "Antigone,**  in  which  Hsemon 
[endeavours  to  kill  his  father]  Crton,  [but  does  not 

*■  The  murder  of  Laitts  by  CEdipns,  his  son,  is  supposed  to 
have  happened  a  considerable  tune^before  the  beginning  of  the 
action.    Twining. 

^  Of  these  two  dramas  nothing  more  is  known  than  the  Uttle 
that  Aristotle  here  tells  us.  In  the  first,  the  poet  adhered  so 
far  to  history,  as  to  make  Alcmson  kiU  his  mother  Eriphyle, 
but  with  the  improvement,  (according  to  Aristotle's  idea,)  of 
making  him  do  it  iffnorantly.  The  story  of  Telegonus  is,  that 
he  was  a  son  of  Ulysses  by  Circe;  was  sent  by  her  in  quest  of 
his  father,  whom  he  wounded,  without  knowing  him,  in  a 
skirmish  relative  to  some  sheep,  that  he  attempted  to  carry  off 
from  the  island  of  Ithaca.  It  is  somewhat  singular,  that  the 
wound  is  said  to  have  been  given  with  a  kind  of  Otaheite  spear, 
headed  with  a  sharp  fish-bone.  See  Pope's  Odyssey,  xi.  167, 
and  the  note.     Twining. 

•  Thus  in  Talfourd's  "  Ion,"  Ion  discovers  Adrastus  to  be 
his  father,  just  as  he  is  on  the  point  of  murdering  him. 

CHAF.  xvj  POETIC.  435 

efiibct  his  purpose.]''  ]    For  the  action  here  ranks  in 
the  second  place.     But  it  is  better  to  perpetrate  the  8. 
deed  ignorantly,  and  having  perpetrated  to  discover ; 
for  then  it  is  not  attended  with  wickedness,  and  the 
discovery  excites  horror.     The  last  mode,  however,  9, 
is  the  best;   I  mean,  as  in  the  " Cresphontes,"  in 
which  Merope  is  about  to  kill  her  son,  but  does  not,, 
in  consequence  of  discovering  that  he  was  her  son. 
Thus,  too,  in  the  "  Iphigenia  in  Tauris,"  in  which 
the  sister  is  going  to  kill  the  brother,  [but  recog- 
nises him ;]  and  in  the  "  Helle,"  the  son  is  about  to 
hetray  his  mother,  but  is  prevented  by  recognising 
her.     Hence,  as  has  been  formerly  observed,  trage-  lo. 
dies  fare  not  conversant  with  many  families ;   for 
poets  were  enabled  to  discover  incident  of  this  kind 
in   fables,  not  from  art,  but  from  fortune*.     They  11. 
were  compelled,  therefore,  to  direct  their  attention 
to  those  families  in  which  calamities  of  this  kind 
happened. 

And  thus  we  have  spoken  sufficiently  concerning 
the  combination  of  the  incidents,  and  have  shown 
what  kind  of  fables  ought  to  be  employed. 

CHAP.  XV. 

With  respect  to  manners,  however,  there  are  four  .  ^ 
things  to  which  one  ought  to  direct  attention :  one,  sites  ^ 
indeed,  and  the  first,  that  they  be  good.     But  the  manners, 
tragedy  will  indeed  possess  manners,  if,  as  was  said,  g™^®^ 
the  words  or  the  action  render  any  deliberate  inten-  nrpoalpt- 
tion   apparent;   containing  good  manners \  if  the  <^*«> 
deliberate  intention  is  good.     But  manners  are  to  be 
found  in  each  genus ;  for  both  a  woman  and  a  slave 
may  be  good;  though  perhaps  of  these,  the  one  is 

f  Ritter  condemns  this  passage.  See  also  Donaldson,  Intro- 
duction to  the  Antigone,  p.  xl. 

•  i.  e.  to  history  or  tradition. 

'  The  interpolation  <pav\ov  fiiv  i&v  <paii\tt  j  is  rightly  thrown 
out  by  Ritter. 

436 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[chap.  XT. 

2.  that 
they  be 
adapted 
to  the 
persons, 

3.  similar, 

4.  and 
consist- 
ent. 

6.  De- 
praved 
manners 
unneces- 
sary. 

less  good^  and  the  other  is  wholly  bad'.  In  the 
second  place,  the  manners  must  be  adapted  to  the  per* 
sons.  For  there  are  manners  which  are  character- 
ized by  fbrtitude,  but  it  is  not  suited  to  a  woman  to 
be  either  brave  or  terrible.  In  the  third  place,  the 
manners  must  be  similar.  For  this,  as  was  before 
observed,  differs  from  making  the  manners  to  be  good 
and  adapted^.  In  the  fourth  place,  they  must  be  uni- 
form ;  for  if  he  is  anomalous,  who  exhibits  the  imita- 
tion, and  expresses  such  like  manners,  at  the  same 
time  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  be  uniformly  un- 
equal. The  example,  however,  of  depraved  manners 
is  indeed  not  necessary;  such,  for  instance,  as  that  of 
Menelaus  in  the  "  Orestes,"  but  an  example  of  un- 
becoming and  unappropriate  manners  is,  the  lamenta- 
tion of  Ulysses  in  the  tragedy  of  "  Scylla^*"  and  the 
speech  of  Menalippe ;  and  the  example  of  anomalous 
manners  in  the  Iphigenia  in  AuUs,     For  Iphigenia 

*  This  is  very  Euripidean  gallantry.  Compare  Aristoph. 
546,  sqq. 

3  This  is  observed,  to  show  the  consistence  of  this^«^  pre- 
cept with  the  next.  The  manners  must  be  drawn  as  good  as 
may  be,  consistently  with  the  observance  of  propriety,  with 
respect  to  the  genercd  character  of  different  sexes,  ages,  condi- 
tions, etc.  It  might  have  been  objected-—**  You  say  the  charac- 
ter must  be  good.  But  suppose  the  poet  has  to  represent,  for 
instance,  a  slave  ? — the  character  of  slaves  in  general  is  noto- 
riously had.** — The  answer  is, — any  0Ung  may  be  good  in  its 
kind.    Twining. 

*  This  is  very  trivial,  compared  with  Horace's  description 
of  the  manners  suited  to  different  characters.  Cf.  Aia  Poet. 
114,  sqq. 

*  Of  the  Scylla  nothing  is  known. — Some  fragments  remam 
of  "  Menalippe  the  Wise,"  (for  this  was  the  title,)  a  tragedy  of 
Euripides,  the  subject  of  which  is  a  curiosity.  Menahppe  was 
delivered  of  two  children,  the  fruits  of  a  stolen  amour  with 
Neptune.  To  conceal  her  shame,  she  hid  them  in  her  father's 
cotD'house ;  where  he  found  them,  and  being  less  of  a  philoso- 
pher than  his  daughter,  took  them  for  a  monstrous  production 
of  some  of  his  cows,  and  ordered  them  to  be  burned.  His 
daughter,  in  order  to  save  them,  without  exposing  herself^  en- 
ters into  a  long  physical  argument,  upon  the  principles  of  Anaz- 
agoras,  to  cure  her  father  of  his  unphilosophical  prejudices 
about  monsters  and  portentous  births,  and  to  convince  hiin 
that  these  infants  might  be  the  natural  children  of  his  cows. 
Twining. 

CHAP.  XV.]  '    POETIC.  437 

supplicating  does  not  at  all  resemble  the  Iphigenia  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  tragedy.     It  is  requisite,  how-  6;  Neces- 
ever,  in  the  manners  as  well  as  in  the  combination  probabili- 
of  the  incidents,  always  to  investigate,  either  the  ne-  ty  of  ac- 
cessary or  the  probable ;  so  that  such  a  person  should  *^**^* 
say  or  do  such  things,  either  necessarily  or  probably  ; 
and  that  it  be  necessary  or  probable,  that  this  thing 
should  be  done  after  that.     It  is  evident,  therefore,  7.  Solu- 
that  the  solutions  of  fables  ought  to  happen  from  the  ^^\^  ^ . 
fable  itself,  and  not  as  in  the  "Medea,^"  from  the  be  from 
machinery,  and  in  the  tragedy  called  the  "Iliad,"  the  fable, 
froDOL  the  particulars  respecting  the  sailing  away  [from  ^^_    ® 
Troy^].     But  we  must  employ  machinery  in  things  chinery. 
Tvhich  are  external  to  the  drama,  which  either  hap- 
pened before,  and  which  it  is  not  possible  for  men  to 
know,  or  which  happened  afterwards,  and  require 
to  be  previously  foretold  and  announced.      For  we 
ascribe  to  the  gods  the  power  of  seeing  all  things,  but 
"we  do  not  admit  the  introduction  of  any  thing  absurd 
in  the  incidents  \  but  if  it  is  introduced  it  must  be 
external  to  the  tragedy;   as  in  the  "CEdipus"  of 
Sophocles.     Since,  however,  tragedy  is  an  imitation  8.  Com- 
of  better  things,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  imr  ^^^^^ 
itate  good  painters.     For  these,  in  giving   an  ap?  painting, 
propriate  form  to  the  image,  depict  the  similitude, 
but  increase  the  beauty^.     Thus,  also,  it  is  requisite 
that  the  poet,  in  imitating  the  wrathful  and  the  indo- 
lent, and  those. who  are  similarly  affected  in  their 
manners,  should  form  an  example  of  equity,  or  as- 
perity;   such  as  Agatho  and  Homer  have  repre- 
sented Achilles.      These  things,  indeed,  it  is  neces-  9. 
sary  to^  observe ;  and  besides  these,  such  perceptions 
of  the  senses  as  are  attendant  upon  poetry,  besides 

'  Of  Euripides.  Medea  is  carried  off,  at  the  end  of  the  tra- 
gedy, in  a  chariot  drawn  by  flying  dragons.     Twining. 

f  Pope's  Iliad,  ii.  189.  etc.     Twining. 

^  By  incidents  of  thefeible,  Aristotle  here  plainly  means  all 
those  actions  or  erents  which  are  essential  parts  of  the  svhject  or 
«tory,  whether  previous  to  the  action,  and  necessary  to  be  known, 
or  included  in  it^  and  actually  represented  in  the  drama. 

*  This  seems  mtended  to  explain  his  third  precept,  of  re- 
semblance  in  the  manners ;  to  reconcile  it  with  }aa  firsts  and  to 
show  what  sort  of  likeness  the  nature  of  tragic  imitation  re- 
quires.    Twining. 

438  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xvi. 

the  necessary  ones.^®  For  in  these,  errors  are  fre- 
quently committed.  But  concerning  these  things, 
enough  has  been  said  in  the  treatises  alreadj  pub- 
lished. 

use. 

CHAP.  XVI. 

v.  On  the  [*  What  discovery,  however,  is,  has   been  before 
^^^*    stated.  But  with  respect  to  the  species  of  reoognitioiiy 
tions.        the  first  indeed  is  the  most  inartificial,  and  that  which 
most  poets  use  through  being  at  a  loss,  and  is  efiTected 
2.  through  signs.     But  of  these,  some  are  natural,  such 
as  the  "lance  with  which  the  earth-bom*  race  are 
marked,"  or  the  stars  [on  the  bodies  of  the  sons]  in 
the  "Thyestes"  of  Carcinus.     Others  are  adventi- 
tious, and  of  these  some  are  in  the  hody,  as  scars  ; 
but  others  are  external,  such  as  necklaces ;  and  such 
as   [the  discovery]   through  a  small  boat,  in   the 
3.  Their    *<  Tyro'.**     These  signs  also  may  be  used  in-  a  better 
or  worse  manner.     Thus  Ulysses,*  through  his  scar, 
is  in  one  way  known  by  his  nurse,  and  in  another  by 
the  swineherds.      For  the  discoveries  which  are  for 
the  sake  of  credibility,  are  more  inartificial,  and  all 

^*  L  e.  to  the  sights  and  the  hearing ;  in  other  words,  to 
actual  repreaentaiion. 

^  The  reader,  who  recollects  the  conclusion  of  Sect.  14, 
where  the  author  took  a' formal  leave  of  the  "fable  and  it» 
requitiUa,"  and  proceeded  to  the  second  essential  part  of 
tragedy,  the  manners,  will  hardly  be  of  Dacier's  opinion,  who 
contends  that  this  section  is  rightly  placed.  His  reasons  are 
perfectly  ^unsatisfactory.  Twining.  I  have  enclosed  it  in 
iMTfickets,  with  Bitter. 

>  The  descendants  of  the  original  Thebans,  who,  according 
to  the  fabulous  history,  sprung  from  the  earth  when  Cadmus 
sowed  the  dragon's  teeth,  etc. — This  noble  race  are  said  to  have 
been  distinguished  by  the  natural  mark  of  a  lance  upon  their 
bodies. 

'  Sophocles  wrote  two  tragedies  of  this  name,  neither  of 
them  preserved. — The  story  of  Tyro  leads  us  to  suppose,  that 
Aristotle  means  the  little  boat,  trough,  or,  as  some  render  it, 
cradle,  in  which  Tyro  had  exposed  her  children,  on,  or  near,  the 
river :  the  particular  manner  of  the  discovery  it  would  be  in 
vain  to  guess.  . 

*  See  Pope's  Odyssey,  xix.  v.  451,  etc.,  and  the  note  there, 
on  V.  461,  and  xxi.  226. 

CHAP.  XVI.]  POETIC.  43» 

of  them  are  of  this  kind ;   hut  those  which  are  from 
revolution,  as  in  the  "Washing  of  Ulysses ^"  are 
better.     And  those  recognitions  rank  in  the .  second  4.  Invent- 
place,  which  are  invented  by  the  poet,  on  which  ac-  ed  recog- 
count   they  are    inartificial.     Thus  Orestes  in  the 
"  Iphigenia"  discovers  that  he  is  Orestes^.    For  she 
indeed  recognises  her  brother  through  a  letter,  but 
Orestes  himself  speaks  what  the  poet  designs,  but  not 
what  the  fable  requires ;  on  which  account  it  is  near 
to  the  above-mentioned  error ;   since  he  might  have 
introduced  some  [of  the  real  things  as  signs].    Thus, 
too,  in  the  "  Tereus"  of  Sophocles,  the  "  voice  of  the 
shuttle"  [produced  a  recognition''].      But  the  third  5.  By  me- 
mode  of  discovery  is   through   memory,  from   the  "^^'y* 
sensible  perception  of  something  by  sight,  as  in  the 
**  Cyprii "  of  DicaK)genes ;  for  on  seeing  the  picture  a 
certain  person  weeps.  And  in  the  "  Tale  of  Alcinous ;" 
for  Ulysses,  on  hearing  the  lyrist,  and  recollecting 
the  story,  weeps  ;  whence  also  [all  these]  were  recog- 
nised.   The  fourth  mode  of  discovery  is  derived  from  6.  By 
syllogism*,  as  in  the  "Choephorae" — a  person  like  ''®*s^'^- 

ing. 

^  The  ancients  distingnished  the  different  parts^  of  Homer's 
poems  by  different  titles  accommodated  to  the  different  subjects, 
or  episoaes ;  and,  in  referring  to  him,  they  made  use  of  these, 
not  of  the  division  into  books.  Thus,  the  part  of  the  xixth 
book  of  the  Odyssey  above  referred  to,  was  called  The  Wash' 
ing.  The  Tale  of  Aldnoua  was  another  title,  which  will 
presently  be  mentioned.     Twining. 

•  1  follow  Hitter,  who  supplies  "  to  Iphigenia."  The  older 
editors  interpolated  the  passage.  See  Ritter's  note  on  the  fol- 
lowing passage.  The  whole  disputation  is  **  arguta  et  obscura,'* 
as  the  learned  critic  observes. 

'  ^Taylor's  note  is  pre-eminently  absurd.  Tyrwhitt  elegantly 
explains  the  passage  thus :  «cspKido«  <pM»ii  is  a  quotation  from 
the  play,  and  denotes  the  web  itself  by  means  of  which  Philo- 
mela explained  to  her  sister  Procne  the  injuries  she  had  suffered 
from  Tereus,  since,  her  tongue  being  cut  out,  she  could  not 
speak.  Cf  Ovid,  Met.  VI.  424  ;  Hygin.  Fab.  45,  quoted  by 
Ritter,  whose  note  deserves  the  student's  attention.  As  the 
web  is  said  to  speak,  which  describes,  so  thr  shield  of  Capaneus 
•jfpvirolv  <l>o»vel  ypaiiifia<nv,  i9Ssch«  Sept.  C.  Th.  434. 

•  Occasioned  Ijy  reasoning ; — i.  e.  by  reasoning,  (or  rather, 
inferefice,  or  conclusion,)  in  the  person  discovered.  See  the 
note. — It  should  be  remembered,  that  Aristotle  is  npt,  in  this 
chapter,  inventing  discoveries,  nor  enumerating  all  the  kinds 

2  o 

410  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xvi. 

me  is  arrived — ^there,  is  no  person  like  me  but 
Orestes, — Orestes,  therefore,  is  arrived.  Thas  too 
in  the  "  Iphigenia  •"  of  Polyides  the  sophist.  For  it 
was  probable  that  Orestes  would  syllogistically  con- 
clude, that  because  his  sister  had  been  immolated, 
it  would  likewise  happen  to  him  to  be  sacrificed. 
Thus  also  in  the  "  Tjdeus^^"  of  Theodectes,  a  cer- 
tain person  comes  to  discover  his  son,  and  himself 
perishes".  Another  example  also  is  in  the  "  Phinidae." 
For  the  women,  on  seeing  the  place,  inferred  what 
their  fate  would  be,  viz.  that  thej  must  needs  perish 
in  this  place ;  for  they  were  exposed  in  it  from  their 

7.  By  the  infancy.  There  is  also  a  certain  compound  [dis- 
miscon-  covery],  which  is  produced  from  the  false  inference 
thfaudi^^  of  the  spectator,  as  in  the  "  Ulysses  the  False  Messen- 
ence.         gcr."     For  he  says,  he  should  know  the  bow,  which 

he  had  not  seen ;  but  the  [audience],  as  if  he  must 
be  known  through  this,  on  this  account  infer  falsely. 

8.  The  The  best  recognition,  however,  of  .9.II,  is  that  which 
f  ^**  ^ih  *^^®  ^^^™  *^®  things  themselves,  astonishment  being 
circum-  excited  through  probable  circumstances;  as  in  the 
stances  "CEdipus^of  Sophocles  and  the  "  Iphigenia ;  **  (for 
sel^s        ^*  ^^  probable  that  she  would  be  willing  to  send  letters ;) 

since  such  things  alone  are  without  fictitious  signs  and 
.    necklaces".    But  the  recognitions  which  rank  in  the 
second  place,  are  those  which  are  derived  from  syl- 
logism.] 

possihle  or  practicable ;  but  only  classing  and  examining  such 
as  he  found  in  use,  or  could  recollect,  in  the  tragedies  and  epic 
poems  of  his  time.    Twining. 

'  The  subject  appears  to  have  been  the  same  as  that  of  the 
Iphigenia  in  Tauria  of  Euripides.  We  are  to  suppose,  that 
Orestes  was  discovered  to  his  sister  by  this  natural  exclama- 
tion, at  the  moment  when  he  was  led  to  the  altar  of  Diana  to 
be  sacrificed.    Twining. 

*®  Of  this  and  the  preceding  tragedy,  we  know  nothing  but 
what  we  learn  here :  i.  e.  that  in  the  one,  afather^  and  in  the 
other,  the  daughters  of  Phinetu^  were  discovered,  and,  proba- 
bly, saved,  by  those  exclamations.    Twining. 

**  See  Ritter.    Nothing  of  this  play  is  known. 

^'  All  this  passage  is  hopelessly  corrupt. 

CHAP.  xvii.J  POETIC.  441 

CHAP.  XVII. 

It  is  necessary,  however,  that  the  poet  should  form  l.  Rules 
the  plots,  and  elaborate  his  diction,  in  such  a  manner  ^"^F  T®" 
that  he  may  as  much  as  possible  place  the  thing  before  id^5 
his  own  eyes  ^     For  thus  the  poet  perceiving  most 
acutely,  as  if  present  with  the  transactions  themselves, 
will  discover  what  is  becoming,  and  whatever  is  re- 
pugnant will  be  least  concealed  from  his  view.     An 
evidence  of  this  is  the  fault  with  which  Carcinus  is 
reproached.     For  Amphiaraus  had  left  the  temple, 
which  was  concealed  from  the  spectator,  who  did  not 
perceive  it,  and  the  piece  was  driven*  from  the  stage 
in  consequence  of  the  indignation  of  the  spectators. 
For  the  poet  as  much  as  possible  should  co-operate 
with  the  gestures  [of  the  actor]  ;  since  those  are 
naturally  most  adapted  to  persuade  who  are  them- 
selves under  the  influence  of  passion.     Hence,  also,  2.  The 
he  agitates  others  who  is  himself  agitated^,  and  he  PJJ*®*,, 
excites  others  to  anger  who  is  himself  most  truly  fe^\hat 
enraged.     Hence,  poetry  is  the  province  either  of  he  writes, 
one  who  is  naturally  clever,  or  of  one  who  is  insane*. 

>  i.  e.  place  himself  in  the  position  of  a  spectator.  Ritter 
observes  that  <r6v  <rvvi<rravTa  must  be  supplied. 

«  «iciriirT«ti/  is  properly  used  of  the  condemnation  of  a  piece. 
See  Hemst.  on  Lucian,  Nigrin.  §  8.  In  Demosth.  de  Coron. 
p.  315,  ed.  Reisk.  it  is  applied  to  the  actor.  Cf.  Bud.  Com. 
L.  Gr.  p.  536.  There  is  a  pun  upon  the  double  meaning  of 
the  yerb.  Amphiaraus  went  (e^eireo'e)  away,  and  the  piece 
-was  condemned  (igtireo-f )  in  consequence. 

'  But  Twining,  in  a  long  and  learned  note,  expresses  his 
opinion  that  x«tM«*»'e«  may  be  used  in  its  proper  neuter  sense, 
and  that  the  meaning  may  be  as  follows :  "  The  poet  should 
work  himself,  as  far  as  may  be,  into  the  passion  he  is  to  repre- 
sent, by  even  assuming  the  countenance  and  the  gestures 
which  are  its  natural  expressions.  For  they,  of  course,  have 
most  probability  and  truth  in  their  imitation,  who  actually  feel, 
in  some  degree,  the  passion :  and  no  one  expresses  offitation  of 
mind  (xc(M<<^''<*)  so  naturally,  (aXtjOii/wTara,)  as  he  who  is 
really  agitated,  (xet/A«$<>M«»'o«.)  or  expresses  anger  (xn^tvatutt) 
80  naturally,  as  he  who  is  really  angry  (6pyi<^6fitvo9)" 

♦  "  In  an  enthusiasm  allied  to  madness,*'  is  Twlning's 
translation,  which  is  all  that  Aristotle  means  to  say,  under- 
2  G  2 

442  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xvn. 

For  of  these  characters,  the  one  is  easily  fashioned, 

3.  and  hut  the  other  is  prone  to  ecstasy.  It  is  likewise 
should  necessary  that  the  poet  should  in  a  general  way  lay 
aea^TnUL  down  the  fables  composed  by  others,  and  those  which 
sketch  of  he  composes  himself^  and  afterwards  introduce  epi- 
h«  plot,     godes  and  lengthen  out  [the  play].     But  I  say  that 

he  V  should  give  a  general  sketch  after  this  manner. 
Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  "  Iphigenia^"  a  certain 
virgin  on  the  point  of  being  sacrificed,  and  vanishing 
from  the  view  of  those  who  were  to  sacrifice  her,  and 
being  brought  to  another  country  in  which  it  was  a 
law  to  sacrifice  strangers  to  a  certain  goddess,  she 
is  appointed  the  priestess  of  these  rites.  Some  time 
after,  it  happened  that  the  brother  of  the  priestess 
came  to  this  place ;  [but  on  what  account  ?  Because 
some  god  hd.d  ordered  him,  for  a  certain  reason  which 
does  not  pertain  to  the  general  view  of  the  tragedy,] 
to  come  thither,  [but  why  he  did  so  is  foreign  to  the 
fable®].  The  brother,  therefore,  coming,  and  being 
made  captive,  discovered  [his  sister],  when  he  is 
going  to  be  sacrificed ;  whether,  as  Euripides  says,  [by 
an  epistl^]  or,  as  Poljddes  feigns,  speaking  according 
to  probability,  because  he  said,  it  was  not  only  requi- 
site that  the  sister,  but  that  he  also  should  be  sacri- 

4.  The  ficed : — and  hence  safety  arises.  After  these  things, 
®P^sodM  the  poet  having  given  names  to  the  persons,  should 
suitable     insert  the  episodes ;  and  he  must  be  careful  that  the 

episodes  be  appropriate ;  as  that  of  the  insanity 
through  which  Orestes  was  taken  captive,  and  his 

5.  and  being  saved  through  expiation.  In  dramas,  therefore, 
short.        the  episodes  are  short,  but  by  these  the  epopee  is 

lengthened.  For  the  fable  of  the  Odyssey  is  short,  viz. 
a  certain  man  wandering  for  many  years,  and  perse- 
cuted by  Neptune,  and  left  alone.  And  besides  this, 
his  domestic  affairs  being  so  circumstanced,  that  his 

standing  "  eos,  qui  animo  commotiores  sunt/'  as  Bitter  ren- 
ders it.  On  the  connexion  between  poetic  enthusiasm  and 
madness,  cf.  Plato,  Ion.  p.  145.  G.  etc.  Phsedr.  p.  344.  B.  Laem. 
with  Clemens  Alex.  Strom.  vL  p.  827.  Theodoret.  dEpair,  II.  p. 
25.  Cicer.  de  Div.  I.  37. 

»  Eur.  Iph.  Taur. 

'  The  passage  is  interpolated.    See  Ritter. 

CHAP,  xviii.]  POETIC.  443 

wealth  is  consumed  by  suitors,  and  stratagems  are 
plotted  against  his  son.  But  driven  by  a  tempest,  he 
returns,  and  making  himself  known  to  certain  per- 
sons, he  attacks  the  suitors,  and  is  himself  saved,  but 
destroys  his  enemies.  This,  therefore,  is  the  peculi- 
arity of  the  fable,  but  the  rest  is  episode. 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

[Is  every  tragedy,  however,  there  is  a  complication  1.  Com- 
and  development  K     And  ^external  circumstances  in-  ^^5*^*°." 
deed,  and  some  of  those  that  ^re  internal,  frequently  yelop- 
form  the  complication;  but  the  rest  the  development,  ment. 
I  call,  however,  the  complication,  the  whole  of  that 
"which  extends  from  the  beginning  to  the  last  part, 
from  which  there  is  a  transition  to  good  fortune; 
but  I  call  the  development  that  part  which  extends 
from  the  beginning  of  the  transition  to  the  end. 
Thus  in  the  Lynceus  of  Theodectes,  the  past  trans- 
actions, and  the  capture  of  the  son,  are  the  compli- 
cation ;  but  the  part  which  extends  from  the  charge 
of  murder  to  the  end,  is  the  development.     But  of  2.  Four 
tragedy  there  are  four  species ;  for  so  many  parts  of  21^^  °5 
it  have  also  been  enumerated.      And  one  species  is  ' 

the  complicated,  of  which  the  whole  is  revolution 
and  discovery;  another,  the  pathetic,  such  as  the 
tragedies  of  Ajax  and  Ixion ;  another,  the  moral  ^ 
8uch  as  the  Phthiotides  and  the  Peleus;   but  the 

*  Literally,  the  tying  and  untying.  With  the  French,  Nceud 
and  Denouement  are  convenient  and  established  terms.  I 
hope  I  shall  be  pardoned  for  avoiding  our  awkward  expres- 
sionSk  of  the  intrigue  and  unravelling  of  a  plot,  etc.  I  could 
find  no  terms  less  exceptionable  than  those  I  have  used. 
Twining. 

*  i.  e.  in  which  the  delineation  of  manners  or  character  is 
predominant.  Our  language,  I  think,  wants  a  word  to  express 
this  sense  of  the  Greek  iiOiKduy  and  the  Latin,  moratum.  Man- 
nered has,  I  believe,  sometimes  been  used  in  this  sense ;  but  so 
seldom,  as  to  sound'  awkwardly.  We  know  nothing  of  the  8ub> 
jects  here  given  as  examples.    Twining. 

444  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap,  xviii. 

fourth  is  another  such  as  the  "Phorcides^"  and  the 
"Prometheus,"  and  the  tragedies  which  represent 
3.  all        what  passes  in  Hades.     It  is  especially  necessary, 
pc^t^^  *^®  therefore,  that  the  poet  should  endeavour  to  have  all 
should       these  species ;   or  at  least  that  he  should  have  the 
under-      greatest  and  most  of  them,  especially  since  men  of 
stand.       ^^  present  age  calumniate  €he  poets.     For  as  there 
have  been  good  poets  in  each  part  of  ^tragedy,  they 
now  expect  one  poet  to  excel  in  all  the  parts.     But 
it  is  right  to  call  tragedy  diffei:ent  and  the  same, 
though  not  perhaps  with  any  reference  to  the  fable ; 
but  this  [may  be  the  case  with  those]  of  which  there 
is  the  same  plot  and  solution.     But  many  poets  com- 
plicate well,  and  develope  badly*.     But  both  these 
should  always  be  applauded^.     But  it  is  necessary  to 
recollect,  as  has  been  often  observed,  that  we  must 
t '  ^^^^^  ^^^  make  tragedy  an  epic  system.     Now,  I  call  that 
tragedy  an   epic   system,  which   consists   of  many 
fables;    as  if  some  one  should  compose  a  tragedy 
from  the  whole  fable  of  the  Iliad.     For  in  the  Iliad, 
on  account  of  its  length,  the  parts  receive  an  appro- 
priate magnitude.     But  in  dramas)  the  effect  pro- 
5.  Illus-     duced  would  be  very  contrary  to  expectation.     The 
trations.     truth  of  this  is  indicated  by  such  as  have  repre- 
sented [in  one  tragedy]  the  whole  destruction   of 
Troy,  and  not  some  part  of  it,  as  the  "Niobe"  or 
"Medea"  of  Euripides,  and  who  have   not   acted 
like  ^schylus ;  for  these  have  either  been  condenmed, 

'  ^tchylus  wrote  a  tragedy  so  named.  It  is  difficult  to 
imagine  what  he  could  make  of  these  three  curious  personages, 
who  were  bom  old  tootnan,  lived  imder  ground,  and  had  but 
one  eye  among  them,  which  they  used  by  turns ;  carrying  it,  I 
suppose,  in  a  case,  like  a  pair  of  spectacles.  Such  is  the  tale ' 
Twining. 

*  No  fault  so  common :  see  note  59.  It  was  with  the  Greek 
tragedians,  probably,  as  with  Shakapeare. — *'  In  many  of  his 
plays  the  latter  part  is  evidently  neglected.  When  he  found 
himself  near  the  end  of  his  work,  and  in  view  of  his  reward,  he 
shortened  the  labour,  to  snatch  the  profit.  He  therefore  re- 
mits his  efforts  where  he  should  most  vigorously  exert  them, 
and  his  catastrophe  is  improbably  produced,  or  imperfectly 
represented."    Johnson's  Pref.  to  Shakspeare.      Twining. 

*  This  passage  is  contradictory  and  unintelligible.  See 
Ritter,  who  condemns  the  whole  as  spurious. 

CHAP.  XVIII.]  POETIC.  *    445 

or  contend  without  success ;  since  Agatho  also  failed 
in  this  alone.      But  in  revolutions,  and  in  simple  ac- 
tions, those  poets  admirably  effect  their  aim.     For 
this  is  tragical,  and  has  a  moral  tendency.     This,  6. 
however,  takes  place  when  a  wise  but  a  depraved 
man,  such  as  Sisyphus,  is  deceived ;  and  a  brave  but 
unjust  man  is  vanquished.      But  this  is  probable,  as 
Agatho  says.      For  it  is  probable  that  many  things 
may  take  place  contrary  to  probability.     It  is  neces-  7.  The 
sary  likewise  to  conceive  the  chorus  to  be  one  of  the  ^?!?^®®* 
players®  and  a  part  of  the  whole,  and  that  it  eo-oper-  chorus. 
ates  with  the  players,  not  as  in  Euripides^,  but  as  in 
Sophocles.     But  with  other  tragedians,  the  choral 
songs  do  not  more  belong  to  that  fable,  than  to  any 
other  tragedy;    on  which  account  the  chorus  sing 
detached  pieces,  inserted  at  pleasure®,  of  which  Aga- 
tho was  the  inventor.     What  difference,  however, 

•  Aetoria  partes  chorus,  offidumque  virile 
Defendat :  neu  quid  medioa  intercinat  actus, 
Quod  non  propoaito  donducat  et  hareat  apte. 

Hor.  A.  P.  193. 
7  This  expression  does  not,  I  think,  necessarily  imply  any 
stronger  censure  of  Euripides,  than  that  the  choral  odes  of  his 
tragedies  were,  in  general,  more  loosely  connected  with  the 
subject,  than  those  of  Sophocles;  which,  on  examination, 
would,  I  believe,  be  found  true.  For  that  this  is  the  fault  here 
meant,  not  the  improper  **  choice  of  the  persons  toho  compose 
the  chorus"  as  the  ingenious  translator  of  Euripides  under- 
stands, is,  I  think,  plain  from  what  immediately  follows ;  the 
connexion  being  this : — "  Sophocles  is,  in  this  respect,  most 
perfect ;  Euripides  less  so ;  as  to  the  others,  their  choral  songs 
are  totally  foreign  to  the  subject  of  their  tragedies.**  See  Pot- 
ter's Euripides — Postscript  to  the  Trojan  Dames.  Warton's 
Essay  on  ihe  Genius,  etc.,  of  Pope,  vol.  i.  p.  71. 

*  It  is  curious  to  trace  the  gradual  extinction  of  the  chorus. 
At  first,  it  was  all;  then,  relieved  by  the  intermixture  of  dia- 
logue, but  still  principal;  then,  stiordinate  to  the  dialogue; 
then,  digressive,  and  ill  connected  with  the  piece ;  then,  borrow- 
ed from  other  pieces  at  pleasure — and  so  on,  to  the  fiddles  and 
the  act-tunes,  at  which  Dacier  is  so  angry.  (See  his  note,  p. 
335.)  The  performers  in  the  orchestra  of  a  modem  theatre 
are  little,  I  believe,  aware,  that  they  occupy  the  place,  and  may 
consider  themselves  as  the  lineal  descendants,  of  the  ancient 
chorus.  Orchestra  {6pxn<rrpa)  was  the  name  of  that  part  of  the 
ancient  theatre  which  was  appropriated  to  the  chorus.  [Jul. 
PoUux,  IV.  p.  423.] 

446  ABISTOTLE'S  [chjlt,  x«. 

does  it  make,  to  sing  inserted  pieces,  or  to  adapt 
the  diction  of  one  drama  to  another,  or  the  whole 
episode? 

CHAP.  XIX. 

1.  Bictioa  Of  the  other  parts  of  tragedy  enough  has  now  been 
andjenti-  gaid.  But  it  remains  that  we  should  speak  concern- 
ing the  diction  and  the  sentiments.  The  particulars, 
therefore,  respecting  the  sentiments,  are  unfolded  in 
the  treatise*  on  Rhetoric,  to  which  it  more  properlj 
belongs.  But  those  things  pertain  to  the  sentiments, 
which  it  is  requisite  to  procure  by  a  reasoning  pro- 

2.  Their    cess.     And  the  parts  of  these  are,  to  demonstrate,  to 
parts.        refute,  and  to  excite  the  passions ;    such  as  pity,  or 

fear,  or  anger,  and  such  like ;    and  besides  these,  to 

8.  amplify  and  extenuate.     It  is  evident,  however,  that 

in  things,  also,  it  is  requisite  to  derive  what  is  usefhl 

from  the  same  forms,  when  it  is  necessary  to  procure 

objects  of  pity,  or  things  that  are  dreadful,  or  great, 

or  probable.     Except  that  there  is  this  difference, 

that  things  in  tragedy  ought  to  be  rendered  apparent 

without  teaching,  but  in  an  oration  they  are  -to  be 

dhown  by  the  speaker,   and  in  consequence  of  the 

speech.     For  what  employment  would  there  be  for 

the  orator,  if  the  things  should  appear  [of  themselves] 

4.  How     pleasing,  and  not  through  the  speech  ?  But  of  things 

far  the      pertaining  to  diction,  there  is  one  species  of  theoty 

8hould.be  respecting  the  forms  of  speech  \  which  it  is  the  pro- 

*  What  are  we  to  understand  by  these  erxn/iaTa  \l^iw9  ?— 
The  learned  reader  will  immediately  see,  that,  as  Victorius  has 
observed,  they  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  those  ox^/uera 
Xi^£C0«,  of  which  we  hear  so  much  from  Cicero,  Quintilian, 
Dion.  Hal.  etc., — those  '*  figurse  verborum,**  which  are  opposed 
to  the  ax^fia-ra  diavoias:',  the  "  figurse  meniitf  sententiarum" 
etc.  Indeed,  no  such  division  of  <rx^M«'*'«  is,  I  believe,  to  be 
found  in  Aristotle.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  invention  of  the 
later  rhetoricians ;  and  how  little  they  were  agreed,  as  to  the 
number  and  the  species  of  these  o-xn/aoTo,  the  propriety  of  the 
division  itself,  and  even  the  precise  sense  of  the  tpord  o'xn^a, 
may  be  seen  in  Quintilian  ix.  1. — The  vx^f-ara  X^coic  of  Aris- 

CHAP.  XX.]  POETIC.  447 

vince  of  the  actor  to  know,  and  of  him  who  is  a  acquaint- 
master  artist  in  this  profession.     Thus,  for  instance,  ®^  ^^ 
[^it  is  requisite  he  should  know,]  what  a  mandate  is,  ent  appli- 
iBirhat  a  prayer,  narration,  threats,  interrogation  and  an-  cations  of 
swer  are,  and  whatever  else  there  may  he  of  this  kind.  ^®**<>"- 
For  from  the,  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  these,  the  6. 
poetic  art  incurs  no  hlame  of  any  moment.    For  who 
Tvoald  think  that  Homer  errs  in  what  he  is  reproved 
for  by  Protagoras?   viz.  that  while  he  fancies  he 
prays,  he  commands,  when  he  says,  "  The  wrath,  O 
goddess,  sing."     For,  says  he,  to  order  a  thing  to  be 
done,  or  not  to  be  done,  is  a  mandate.     Hence,  this 
must  be  omitted  as  a  theorem  pertaining  to  another 
art,  and  not  to  poetry. 

CHAP.  XX. 
ITie  parts  of  Diction. 

[*  Op  all  diction,  however,  the  following  are  the  parts;  i.  The 
viz.  the  letter,  the  syllable,  the  conjunction,  the  noun,  ppts  of 
the  verb,  the  article,  the  case,  and  the  sentence.    The  ^*'*^°^- 

totle  in  this  place,  are  plainly  such  as  would  have  been  de- 
nominated by  later  writers,  vxnftara  itavoia^ — figures  of  the 
thought  or  sense.  Indeed  we  find  them  actually  enumerated 
among  the  figures  of  that  class.  See  Dionys.  Halicam.  de 
Struct,  etc.  Sect.  8. — So  Quintilian ;  '*  Figurae  quoque  mentie, 
quae  ax^fiarra  biavoia^  dicuntur,  res  eadem  recipit  omnes,  in 
quas  nonnuUi  diviserunt  species  dictorum,  (i.  e.  of  jokes,  bons 
mots).  Nam  et  interrogamus,  et  dubitamus,  et  affirmamus,  et 
minamwr,  et  optamus,** 

I  see,  therefore,  not  the  least  reason  why  the  expression 
^XW**-  ^^«S«*»»  should  not  be  rendered  here  exactly  as  in  the 
other  passages  aboTe  referred  to,  **Jigura  orationis  "—form,  or 
confffuration,  of  speech.  For  Xt^t«,  it  must  be  observed,  is  here 
used,  not  in  the  particular  sense  of  diction,  or  style  and  man^ 
ner  of  expression,  (as  it  is  used  Rhet.  iii.  8,)  but  in  the 
general  sense  of  \6y09,  speech,  as  we  find  it  used  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  next  chapter. 

^  This  chapter  is  an  eyident  interpolation,  and  the  student 
will  gain  but  little  benefit  from  its  perusal,  as  the  matter  of  it 
is  incorrect  and  ill  arranged.     See  Ritter. 

448  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xx. 

2.  Letters,  letter,  therefore,  indeed,  is  an  indivisible  sound*;  yet 

not  every  such  sound,  but  that  from  which  an  intelli- 
gible sound  is  adapted  to  be  produced.  For  there 
are  indivisible  vocal  sounds  of  brutes,  no  one  of  which 

3.  Their    I  call  a  letter'.     But  the  parts  of  this  indivisible 
visions,   g^yjj^   ^j^^  vowel,  semivowel,  and  mute.      And  a 

vowel,  indeed,  is  that  which  has  an  audible  sound, 
without  percussion^;  such  as  a  and  o.  But  a  semi- 
vowel 'is  that  which  has  an  audible  sound,  with  per- 
cussion ;  as  s  and  r.  And  a  mute  is  that  which, 
even  with  the  concurrence  of  the  tongue,  has  of  itself, 
indeed,  no  sound,  but  becomes  audible  in  conjunction 
with  things  which  have  a  certain  sound;  as  ^. and 

4.  and  dif-  d.     But  these  differ  by  the  configurations  of  the 
ferences.    mouth,  in  the  parts  [of  the  mouth  ^]  by  density  and 

tenuity  of  aspiration,  by  length  and  shortness ;  and 
further  still,  they  differ  by  acuteness  and  gravity, 
and  by  the  medium  between  both  these ;  the  theory 
respecting  each  of  which  pertains  to  the  metrical 

5.  Sylla-    art     But  a  syllable  is  a  sound  without  signification, 
bles.  composed  from  a  mute,  and  an  element  which  has 

sound  [i.  e.  from  a  vowel,  or  semivowel].  For  g  r 
without  a  is  a  syllable®,  and  also  with  a,  2lb  g  r  a, 

*  **  Vocal  sound,"  is  Taylor's  translation  of  ^«vii. 
«  "  Element  of  diction."     Taylor. 

*  As  Hermann  has  ventured  to  call  irpoar^oXfi  aUiauty  I 
trust  I  shall  be  excused  for  adopting  Twining's  quaint,  but 
clear  translation.  He  observes :  *'  Literally,  percussion^  L  e. 
of  the  tongue  against  the  palate,  or  teeth,  the  lips  against  the 
teeth,  or  against  each  other,  and  all  the  other  modes  of  conso- 
nant articulation.  See  Hermes,  iii.  2.  p.  322,  where  they  are 
called  *  contacts.*  Dacier  makes  sad  confusion  here,  both  in 
his  version  and  his  notes,  by  confounding  the  names  of  the 
consonants,  when  vowels  are  prefixed,  or  put  after  them,  to 
make  them  separately  pronouncible^  (Te,  eF,  eL,  etc.,)  with 
their  powers  in  composition — as  elements  of  words.  Thus,  it 
is  strictly  true,  that  S  and  R  have  a  sound,  without  the  assist- 
ance of  a  vowel,  merely  by  their  mode  of  articulation.  But  D, 
or  G,  have  no  sound  at  all  by  themselves*  The  semivowels 
are  1,  m,  n,  r,  s.     (Dion.  Halicam.  De  Struct.  Orat.  sect.  14.)  ** 

^  i.  e.  the  different  organs  of  speech,  from  which  letters  are 
denominated  nasal,  dental,  labial,  etc.    Taylor. 

**  6  r  is  an  instance  of  a  syllable  composed  of  a  mbte  and  a 
semivowel ;  and  g  r  a  of  a  syllable  composed  of  a  mute,  a 
vowel,  and  a  semivowel.    Taylor.    But  see  Bitter. 

OiAP.  XX.]  POETIC.  449 

The  study,  however,  of  the  differences  of  these,  per- 
tains also  to  the  metrical  art.  But  a  conjunction  is  6.  Con- 
a  sound  void  of  signification,  which  neither  impedes  J^^^ction. 
nor  produces  one  significant  sound  adapted  to  he 
composed  from  many  sounds,  and  which  may  he 
placed  cither  at  the  heginning  or  the  end  of  the  pe- 
riod, unless  something  requires  that  it  should  he 
placed  hy  itself  at  the  heginning ;  such  as  juv,  fjroi, 
irg.  Or  it  is  a  sound  without  signification,  composed 
from  more  sounds  than  one,  hut  naturally  adapted  to 
produce  one  significant  sound.  An  article  is  a  sound  7.  Article 
without  signification,  which  shows  the  beginning,  or 
end,  or  distinction  of  a  word'';  as  to  <l>rifjLi,  and  to 
ircp/,  and  others  of  the  like  kind.  Or  it  is  a  sound 
without  signification,  which  neither  impedes  nor  pro- 
duces one  significant  sound  naturally  adapted  to  be 
composed  from  many  sounds,  both  in  the  extremes  and 
in  the  middle.  But  a  noun  is  a  composite  sound,  s.  Noun, 
significant  without  time,  of  which  no  part  is  of  itself 
significant.  For  in  double  nouns,  we  do  not  use  the 
parts  as  of  themselves  significant.  Thus,  in  the  word 
Theodorus,  [though  Theos  signifies  God  and  doron  a 
gift,]  yet  doron  signifies  nothing.  A  verb  is  a  com-  9.  Verb, 
posite  sound,  significant  with  time,  of  which  no  part 
i^  of  itself  significant,  in  the  same  manner  also  as  in 
nouns.  For  man  or  white  does  not  signify  time ;  but 
he  walks,  or  he  did  walk,  signify,  the  former  indeed 
the  present,  and  the  latter  the  past  time.  But  case  10.  Case, 
pertains  to  noun  or  verb.  And  one  case,  indeed, 
[in  nouns]  signifies  that  something  is  said  of  this 
thing,  or  is  attributed  to^  this  thing,  and  the  like; 

'  This  description  is  most  obscure ;  but  the  sense  seems  to 
be,  that  an  article  is  a  sound  which  of  itself  does  not  signify 
any  thing  definite,  but  merely  serves  to  indicate  a  significant 
sound,  before  or  afler  which  it  is  placed,  or  which  it  distin- 
guishes from  other  words.  Taylor.  Ritter  denies  that  there 
is  any  sense  at  all,  an  opinion  in  which  the  reader  will  pro- 
bably acquiesce. 

*  These  onlj/t  in  modem  grammar,  are  called  eates :  in  Aris- 
totle, numbeTt  whether  in  noun  or  verb,  and  the  tenaeSf  and 
modes,  (or  moode^)  of  verbs,  are  comprehended  under  that 
term;  because  cases  (irxworctv — eases)  are  endings,  termina' 
tions,  inflections,  etc.,  and,  in  the  learned  languages,  all  the 

tence. 

450  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxi. 

but  another  is  that  which  pertains  to  one  thing  or 
many  things ;  as  meriy  or  man.  And  another  case 
pertains  to  acting**,  such  as  what  relates  to  interro- 
gation or  demand.     For  did  he  wcUkf    Or  walk  is  a 

11.  Sen-    case  of  a  verb  according  to  these  species.     And  a 
"  sentence  is  a  composite  significant  sound,  of  which 

certain  parts  of  themiselves  signify  something ;  for 
not  every  sentence  is  composed  from  nouns  and 
verbs,  (since  the  definition  of  man^°  is  a  sentence 
without  a  verb,)  but  there  may  be  a  sentence  without 
verbs.  A  sentence,  however,  will  always  have  some 
part  significant ;  as  in  the  sentence  Cleon  ttalks,  the 

12.  Its  word  Cleon  is  significant.  But  a  sentence  is  one  in 
^ttity  ^  twofold  respect ;  for  it  is  either  that  which  signi- 
fies one  thing,  or  that  which  becomes  one  from  many 
by  conjunction  ^^  Thus  the  Iliad,  indeed,  is  one  by 
conjunction ;  but  the  definition  of  man  is  one,  be- 
cause it  signifies  one  thing.] 

CHAP.  XXI. 
On  Novum  and  Metaphors, 

1.  The      With  respect  to  the  species  of  a  noun,  one  is  simple ; 

nouns!  ^  ^^<^  I  c^  ^^^  simple  noun  that  which  is  not  corn- 
above-mentioned  differences  of  meaning  are  expressed  by  dif- 
ferent terminations.  The  French  use  chute,  the  literal  trans- 
lation of  casus,  in  the  sense  of  termination — "  La  chute  d'une 
periode/*  etc.  And  fall  is  used,  in  our  poetical  language,  for 
a  close,  or  cadence,  in  music. 

Thai  strain  again — it  had  a  dying  fall. 

Merch.  of  Venice. 
And  so  Milton  in  Gomus,  v.  251 .    Twining. 

*  These  modes  are  the  same  which  he  calls  figures  of  speech, 
Sect.  23.    Twining. 

^®  The  definition  alluded  to  appears  to  be  this,  literally  ren- 
dered: "A  terrestrial  animal  with  two  feeV*  iXf^ov  irejjw, 
dtirouv).     Twining. 

"  Compare  ir«/»A  *Epfiriu.  cap.  v.  p.  38. — ^Analyt.  Post.  lib.  ii. 
cap.  10.  p.  469,  E.— Metaphys.  vii.  4.  p.  910,  D.  (where  he 
uses  Tti  avvtx^h  as  equivalent-^to  vvvdia-imp,)  and  viii.  6.  p. 

CHAP.  XXI.'  POETIC.  451 

posed  from  significant  parts;  but  another  is  two- 
fold.    And  this  either  consists  of  that  which  is  sig- 
nilicant,  and  that  which  is  without  signification,  or 
of  Loth  parts  significant.    A  noun  also  may  be  triple 
ana  quadruple,  as  is  the  case  with  many  of  the  nouns 
of  the   MegaliotsB*;   such  tts  HermoeazcoxcmtknsK 
But  every  noun  is  either  proper  or  foreign^,  or  me-  2.  Their 
taphorical,   [or  ornamental  *,]  or   invented,  or  ex-  divisions 
tended,  or  contracted,  or  altered.     But  I  call  that  a  3.  Pro- 
proper  name,  which  is  used  by  every  one ;  and  that  P®'^  ?"d 
a  foreign*  name  which  is  used  by  other  nations.      ^^^' 
Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  same  noun  may  be  both 
foreign  and  proper,  though  not  to  the  same  people. 
For  the  word  ^lyvvov^  is  proper  to  the  Cyprians, 

931,  C.  Twining.  Bitter  remarks,  that  the  compiler  of  this 
chapter  did  not  understand  the  passages  he  copied. 

^  I  have  read,  in  some  ludicrous  book,  of  a  country  that  was 
**  lost  by  the  ignorance  of  geographers**  This  seems  to  have 
been  the  case  of  these  MegaiioUB^  if  such  a  people  ever  ex- 
isted. They  are  no  where  recorded. — Dacier  reads,  ntyapi- 
^oin-tfv — "  ceux  qui  disent  de  grandee  choaee:**  and  cites  Hc«y- 
ckitis — Meyopijoin-es — fiiyaXa  Xiyoirm.  But  this  is  too  distant 
from  the  present  reading,  MiyaXtwTtov,  Winstanley's  conjec- 
ture— fityaXtltaVf  ti«,  is  somewhat  nearer,  and,  in  other  re- 
spects, preferable :  but  it  is,  I  think,  a  strong  presumption 
against  its  truth,  that  Aristotle  constantly  uses  olov,  when  l^e 
■gives  an  instance ;  never,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  w«. 

I  have  sometimes  thought  it  not  very  improbable,  that  the 
passage  might  originally  have  stood  thus:  t&v  ftiyaKAAnw 
KONtmv  :  i.  e.  of  those  who  aJFect,  aim  a^,  are  fend  of, 
grandeur  and  pomp  of  expression ;  who  love  hard  words,  as 
we  say.  Nothing  more  common  Uian  this  sense  of  ,iiwKnv. 
Twining. 

Donaldson,  Theatre  of  the  Greeks,  p.  27,  pt.  2,  adopts  Tyr- 
whitt*s  conjecture,  fityaXtioov  »«,  as  being  confirmed  hy 
Xenoph.  Mem.  II.  1,  {  34,  and  renders  it,  "  the  bombasUc 
expressions."  Ritter  prefers  -n-oWatrXofityaXtairo^,  as  an  ex- 
ample  of  this  kind  of  word,  but  Donaldson  seems  right. 

'  This  is  a  noun  composed  from  the  names  of  the  three 
rivers  Hermus,  Caicus,  and  Xanthus. 

*  Cf.  Rhet.  iii.  1  and  2. 

*  Ritter  condemns  the  addition  of  Kocfio^,  as  it  has  no  de- 
finition. 

*  Ritter  remarks  that  yXwTroi  are  both  provincialisms  and 
obsolete  words. 

'  i.  e.  a  spear. 

452  ABISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxi. 

.4.  Meta-    but  foreign  to  us.   But  a  metaphor'  is  the  transposi- 

^^^^'        tion  of  a  noun  from  its  proper  signification,  either 

from  the  genus  to  the  species,  or  from  the  species  to 

the  genus ;  or  from  species  to  species,  or  according 

5.  Differ-  to  the  analagous.     I  call,  however,  a  transposifton 
*hor8^ex"  ^^^™  genus  to  species,  such  as, 

emplified.  Secure  in  yonder  port  my  vessel  stands'. 

For  to  be  moored  is  a  species  of  standing.  But  a 
transposition  from  species  to  genus  is  such  as, 

Ten  thousand  valiant  deeds 

Ulysses  has  achieved*. 

For  ten  thousand  is  a  great  number,  and  is  now  used 
instead  of  many.  And  a  transposition  from  species 
to  species  is  such  as, 

The  brazen  falchion  drew  away  his  life. 
And, 

Cut  by  the  ruthless  sword  ". 

For  here  to  draw  away,  is  used  instead  of  to  cat ; 
and  to  cut  is  used  instead  pf  to  draw  away ;  since 

6.  Ana-     ^^^^  imply  the  taking  something  away.     But  I  call 
logons.      it  analogous,  when  the  relation  of  the  second  term  to 

the  first  is  similar  to  that  of  the  fourth  to  the  third ; 
for  then  the  fourth  is  used  instead  of  the  second,  or  the 
second  instead  of  the  fourth.  [And  sometimes  the 
proper  term  is  added  to  the  relative  terms  *^]  I  say, 
for  instance,  a  cup  has  a  similar  relation  to  Bacchus 
that  a  shield  has  to  Mars.  Hence,  a  shield  may  be 
called  the  cup  of  Mars,  and  a  cup  the  shield  of  Bac- 
chus. Again,  evening  has  the  same, relation  to  day 
that  old  age  has  to  life.     One  may  therefore  say  that 

'  Aristotle  understands  metaphor  in  a  more  extended  « 
than  we  do,  for  we  only  consider  the  third  and  fourth  of  the 
kinds  enumerated  by  him,  as  metaphors.  Our  usurpation  of 
the  word  was  in  vogue  in  Cicero's  time.  See  de  Orat.  III. 
38,  sqq.     Ritter. 

•  Odyss.  A.  185.  »  II.  B.  272. 

*•  This,  and  the  next  species  only,  answer  to  what  we  call 
metaphor — the  metaphor  founded  on  reaemblafice.  The  two 
first  species  belong  to  the  trope  denominated,  since  Aristotle's 
time.  Synecdoche,     Twining. 

11  This  is  perfectly  out  of  place  and  useless.    See  Ritter. 

CHAP.  XXI.]  POETIC.  453 

evening  is  the  old  age  of  day,  and  that  old  age  is  the 
evening  of  life  ;  or  as  Empedocles  calls  it,  "  The  set-     - 
ting  of  life  ^^"    In  some  instances,  also,  where  there  7.  Means 
is  no  analogous  name,  this  method  may  be  no  less  pjo^g 
similarly  employed.  Thus,  to  scatter  grain  is  to  sow ;  them, 
but  there  is  no  name  for  the  scattering  of  light  from 
the  sun,  and  yet  this  has  a  similar  relation  to  the  sun 
that  sowing  has  to  grain.     Hence,  it  is  said, 

Sowing  his  god-created  flame. 

This  mode  of  metaphor  may  likewise  be  used  differ-  8. 
ently,  when,  calling  a  thing  by  a  foreign  name,  some- 
thing belonging  to  it  is  denied  of  it ;  as  if  one  should 
call  a  shield  not  the  cup  of  Mars,  but  the  wineless 
cup.     But  an  invented  noun  is  that,  in  short,  which,  9.  Inyen- 
not  being  adopted  by  others,  is  introduced  by  the  poet  ted  words, 
himself.     For  it  appears  that  there  are  certain  nouns 
of  this  kind ;  as  substituting  epwyeg  instead  of  Kipara 
for  homs^^y  and  calling  a  priest  dprjTrjp^\  instead  of 
lepevQ,     And  a  word  is  extended  qr  contracted,  partly  lo.  Ex- 
by  using  a  vowel  longer  than  the  proper  one,  or  by  tended 
inserting  a  syllable ;  and  partly  by  taking  something  ^^d? 
away  from  it.     An  extended  noun,  indeed,  is  such  as 
•n-dXiyoc  for  ^roXeotc,  and  irrjXrfidheut  for  TrriXeldov  ;  but 
the  contracted,  such  as  KpX,  and  3a>^^;  and, 

fxia  ylvtnrai  dfitftoTipuv  5i^". 

-The  sight  of  both  is  one, 

And  a  word  is  changed  when  the  poet  leaves  part  of  ll.    . 
it,  and  invents  part ;  as.  Changed. 

it,  and  invents  part ;  as, 

It  «« Thy  ^^  ig  ggf^  ijiy  gpfing  ds  gone.** 

Gray,  Ode  on  Spring. 
"  Yet  hath  my  night  of  life  some  memory.** 

Shakspeare,  Com.  of  Errors — last  scene.    Twining. 
"  i.  e.  branches  ;  which  we  also  use  for  the  horns  of  a  stag. 
But  Aristotle  means  a  new  word^  not  a  new  application  merely 
of  a  word  already  in  use.    Twining. 

"  A  mpplicator;  literally,  &prayer^  taken  in  the  sense  of  one 
who  prays;  as  seer  is  used  for  prophet.    Twining. 
"  Kpl  is  used  II.  E.  196.  A&,  11.  A.  425.     Twining. 
»•  Part  of  a  verse  of  Empedocles,  quoted  by  Strabo,  p.  364. 
ed.  Cantab. 

454  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxii. 

In  the  right  breast  *7. 

^en£r8  ^^*^^^  ®^  hii6v.  ["Further  still,  of  nouns  some 
are  masculine,  others  feminine,  and  others  between, 
[or  neuter].  And  the  niasculine,  indeed,  are  such  as 
end  in  r,  and  p,  an<l  ^,  and  such  as  are  composed  from 
(T ;  but  these  are  two,  i//  and  £.  The  feminine  nouns 
are  such  as  are  composed  from  vowels,  and  always 
end  in  long  vowels ;  as,  for  instance,  in  17  and  w,  or 
in  a  of  the  doubtful.  Hence  it  happens  that  the 
number  of  terminations  for  masculine  and  feminine 
are  equal ;  for  the  terminations  of  xp  and  {  are  the 
same.  No  noun,  however,  ends  in  a  mute,  or  in  a 
short  vowel;  atid  only  three  nouns  end  in  «,  viz. 
/AcXc,  K6fifiif  and  iriirepi.  But  five  end  in  v ;  viz.  w-ww, 
vdwv,  yovv,  ^opvy  and  atrrv.  And  the  neuter  nouns 
end  in  these,  and  in  y  and  c*] 

CHAP.  xxn. 

The  subject  of  Diction  continued. 

1.  Two  The  virtue  of  diction,  however,  consists  in  being  per- 
ofSictiOTi  spicuous,  and  not  mean^  The  diction,  therefore,  is 
clearness,'  most  perspicuous,  which  is  cpmposed  from  proper 
S"^  ft!f"  '^^^^^j  ^"*  ^^^^  ^*  ^^^  ^  mean.  But  an  example  of 
mSnness,  ^^^^  ^^  *^^  poetry  of  Cleophon  and  Sthenelus.  It 
How  pro-  will,  however,  be  elevated,  and  remote  from  the  vul- 
duced.       gap  idiom,  by  employing  unusual  words.     But  I  call 

unusual  words,  such  Words  as  are  foreign,  the  meta- 
phorical, the  extended,  and  every  word  except  the 

2.  Re-  proper  [name  of  a  thing].  If,  however,  [a  poet] 
*ff  ^te^f  "^^^^^7  employ  such  words  as  these,  it  will  be  either 
the  differ-  ^^  enigma,  or  a  barbarism.  If,  therefore,  it  were 
ent  kinds 

of  words.        "II.  E.  393. 

^*  This  following  passage  is  false  in  its  statements,  and  totally 
foreign  to  Aristotle's  design.  Ritter,  therefore,  has  rightly 
condemned  it. 

1  Cf.  Rhet.  iii.   1,  extr.  and  2.  init. 

CHAP.  XXII.]  POETIC.  455 

Composed  from  metaphors,  it  would  be  an  enigma ; 
but  if  from  foreign  words,  a  barbarism.  For  the 
essence  of  an  enigma  is  this,  to  unite  things  impos- 
sible, yet  really  true^  Now,  from  the  arrangement  of 
the  words,  it  is  not  possible  to  effect  this,  but  it  may 
be  effected  by  a  metaphor ;  as  '*  I  saw  a  man  who  had 
glued  brass  to  a  man  with  fire^;"  and  others  of  the 
like  kind.  [But  from  the  composition  of  foreign 
-words  a  barbarism  is  produced*.]  Hence  language 
should  be  moderately  varied  with  these.  Foreign,  3. 
therefore,  metaphorical,  [and  ornamental]  words,  and 
the  other  species  that  have  been  mentioned,  will 
cause  the  diction  to  be  neither  vulgar  nor  mean ;  but 
proper  words  produce  perspicuity.  But  the  extend-  4. 
ing,  contracting,  and  changing  of  names,  contribute 
in  no  small  degree  to  the  perspicuity  of  the  diction, 
without  vulgarity.  For  the  use  of  words  in  a  way 
different  from  their  proper  and  usual  signification, 
causes  the  diction  to  be  not  vulgar ;  but  the  adoption 
of  words  in  their  accustomed  meaning,  renders  it 
perspicuous.  Hence  those  do  not  blame  rightly,  who  5.  Objec- 
find  fault  with  this  mode  of  speech,  and  like  the  an-  f^^jj^^^ 
cient  Euclid  ridicule  the  poet,  [objecting]  that  yerse 
might  easily  be  composed,  if  one  permit  the  quantity 
of  syllables  to  be  lengthened  at  pleasure,  making  Iam- 
bics even  in  common  discourse ;  as 

And, 

Owjc  &v  y*  ipdfituov  t6v  iKtivov  iWi^opovK 

'  TO  Xiyoyra  vir&pxoyra  diOvara  <rvvd}ffatt  "  to  put  together 
things  apparently  inconsistent  and  impossible,  and  at  the  same 
time  saying  nothing  but  what  is  true."     Twining. 

•  Rhet.  iii.  2.  KoWtjffiv  tltrt  t^v  t^«  ctikuos  irpoo-jSoMi/. 
The  operation  of  cupping  is  meant.  Compare  Celsus  ii.  11, 
and  Almelov.  on  Coelius  Aurel.  Chronic,  ii.  1.  §394.  Rhod. 
on  Scribon.  Larg.  Compos,  xlvi.  The  Jire  alhides  to  the 
burnt  tow  (linamentumj  used  to  exhaust  the  air  in  the  cup- 
ping glass. 

^  Apparently  a  gloss.  See  Ritter. 

*  It  is  of  little  use  to  attempt  to  settle  the  reading  of  these 
"nonsense  verses."  Ritter  obsenres  that  the  fault  probably 
lay  in  pronouncing  fiadit^ovra,  Ippafitvov,    See  his  notes. 

2  H 

456  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxii. 

6.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  to  be  detected  using  this 
mode  of  diction  is  ridiculous.  [But  measure  is  com- 
mon to  all  the  parts  of  diction  ®.  J  For  it  would  pro- 
duce the  same  effect,  to  make  an  improper  and 
ridiculous  use  of  metaphors,  foreign  words,  and  other 

7.  forms  of  diction.  But  how  great  a  difference  is 
made  by  the  appropriate  use  of  them,  may  be  seen  in 
epic  poetry,  by  putting  the  words  in  metre.  And  he 
who  transfers  proper  names  into  foreign  words,  into 
metaphors,  and  the  other  forms,  will  see  that  what  we 
have  said  is  true.  Thus,  for  instance,  ^schylus 
and  Euripides  made  the  same  Iambic  verse ;  but  by 
only  changing  one  word  from  its  proper  and  usual 
to  a  foreign  signification,  the  one  verse  appears 
beautiful,  and  the  other  mean.  For  ^schylus  in- 
deed, in  his  Fhiloctetes,  writes, 

A  cancerous  ulcer  feeds  upon  my  foot. 

But  Euripides,  instead  of  eadiei,  feedsy  uses  the  word 
doivaraiy  banquets  on.     And, 

by  inserting  proper  [and  common]  words,  it  will  be, 

"Svv  di  fk  idtv  fiiKpoi  Tc  fcal  iiadiviKd^  Kal  &6t6^9^. 

And, 

,  Al<f>pov  AtiKiXtov  KaTadtUf  dXiynv  t«  Tp&irttav. 

Ai<l>pov  fiox^tip^v  KaTadtlv,  fiiKpav  rs  Tj>aire^av  *. 

•  Twining  renders,  "  in  the  employment  of  all  the  species 
of  unusual  words,  moderation  is  necessary."  But  this  meaning 
can  scarcely  be  elicited  from  the  words.  See  Ritter,  who  con- 
demns the  passage  as  an  interpolation. 

'  In  this  verse  Polyphemus  complains  that  he  was  deprired 
of  sight  by  Ulysses,  a  tittle^  toeak,  vile  man.  But  Homer,  in- 
stead of  using  the  word  iiiKp69y  littie,  uses  6\iyo9t  which  signi- 
fies y«tr.  Instead  of  AvdtviKov,  puny,  he  uses  oirriSavdvy  which 
tigni/iet  a  man  of  no  tufcount ;  and  Slkikv^,  powerlesa,  instead 
of  o«ti^«,  obscure.    Taylor.    Cf.  Od.  ix.  515. 

*  In  this  verse,  which  is  from  the  21st  book  of  the  Odyssey, 
Homer,  for  the  purpose  of  signifying  an  ignoble  teat,  calls  it  by 
a  foreign  word,  duKiXioif,  and  not  by  the  usual  word,  fio-xPtipov ; 
and  he  calls  the  table,  not  fiucpiv,  ttnall,  but  iXlytiPt  few* 
Taylor.    Cf.  Od.  xxi.  259. 

CHAP.  XXII.]  POETIC.  457 

Or  change,  ijiovtQ  fioowtriv  (the  shores  rebellow^)  to 
ilovec  Kpdi^ovtnv  (the   shores  cry  out).      [*^  Again,  8.  Fur- 
Ariphraides  ugfed  to  ridicule  the  tragic  pdets  for  em-  *^®^  ®^ 
ploying  modes  of  diction,  which  no  xme  would  use  in  i^wM-ed. 
common  conversation ;  such  as  dtaficLTwv  Stto,  and  not 
inro  ^w/xarwy,  i.  e.  home  from,  and  not  from  home ; 
aidev  [for  trov];  eyw  hi  ytv**,  and'Aj^iXXewc  iripiy  and 
not  irepl  *AxiKKiwg,  i.  e.  Achilles  about,  and  not  about 
Achilles;  and  other  expressions  of  the  like  kind. 
For  all  such  forms  of  language,  because  they  are  not 
in  common  use,  remove  vulgarity  from  the  diction. 
But  this  he  did  not  know.]     It  is,  however,  a  great  9.  Proper 
thing  to  use  each  of  the  above-mentioned  modes  in  a  different ^ 
becoming  manner ;  and  also  compound  and  foreign  words, 
words.     But  the  greatest  thing  is  to  employ  meta- 
phors well.     For  this  alone  cannot  be  acquired  from 
another,  but  it  is  an  indication  of  an  excellent  genius; 
since  to  employ  metaphors  well,  is  to  discern  simili- 
tude*^.    But  of  words,  the  compound  are  chiefly  ^^:  *« 
suited  to  dithyrambic  verse,  the  foreign  to  heroic,  ^hkind 
and  metaphors  to  Iambic  verse.    And  in  heroic  verse,  of  poetry, 
indeed,  all  the  above-mentioned  words  are  useful; 
but  in  Iambics,  because  they  especially  imitate  com- 
mon discourse,  those  words  are  adapted  which  may 
be  also  used  in  conversation.     And  words  of  this 
description  are,  the  proper,  the  metaphorical,  [and 
the  ornamental.]     And  thus  much  may  suffice  con- 
cerning tragedy,  and  the  imitation  in  acting**. 

•  n.  P.  265.— Pope's  line  is, 

"  And  distant  rocks  rebellow  to-the  roar."    Twining. 

*•  Ritter  objects  to  this  clause.    Twining,  however,  admires 
and  commends  its  conclusion. 

"  Cf.  Soph.  CEd.  col.  987. 

"  More  clearly  expressed  in  Rhet.  iii.  11.  5,  ToofioiouKal 
iv  ToXif  duxovari  Qttapslv,  bvotoxov, 

^*  These  last  words  appear  to  me  out  of  place. 

2b2 

488  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap,  xxiii 

CHAP.  xxm. 

•On  the  Epic  Poem, 

1.  Onnar-  CONCERNING  the  poetry,  however,  which  is  narratiye 
SoStaT       ^^^  imitative  in  metre,  it  is  evident  that  it  ought  to 
ite  simi-    have  dramatic  fables,  in  the  same  manner  as  tragedy, 
!*"*L***    ^^^  should  be  conversant  with  one  whole  and  per- 
^^   ^'    feet  action,  which  has  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end, 
in  order  that,  like  one  whole  animal,  it  may  produce 
its  appropriate  pleasure);  and  that  it  may  not  be  like 
the  custom  of  histories,  in  which  it  is  not  necessary 
to  treat  of  one  action,  but  of  one  time,  viz.  of  such 
things  as  have  happened  in  that  time,  respecting  one 
.    or  more  persons,  the  relation  of  each  of  which  things 
2.  to  the  other  is  just  as  it  may  happen.     For  as  the 
sea-fight  at  Salamis,  and  the  battle  with  the  Cartha- 
ginians in  Sicily,  though  they  happened  at  the  same 
time,  tend  nothing  to  the  same  end ;  thus  also  in  suc- 
cessive times,  one  thing  may  sometimes  be  connected 
with  another,  from  which  no  one  end  is  produced. 
3- Praise  But  nearly  eJl  poets  do  this.     Hence,  as  we  have 
and  com-'  l>efore  observed,  in  this  respect  also  Homer  will  ap- 
parison      pear  to  be  divine,  when  compared  with  other  poets, 
^^         because  he  did  not  attempt  to  sing  of  the  whole  of 
poete.        ^^^  Trojan  war,  though  it  had  a  beginning  and  an 
end.     For  if  he  had,  it  would  have  been  very  great, 
and  not  sufficiently  conspicuous ;  or  if  it  had  been 
of  a  moderate  size,  it  would  have  been  intricate 
through  the  variety  of  incidents  \     But  now,  having 
selected  one  part  of  the  war,  he  has  made  use  of 
many  episodes ;  such  as  the  catalogue  of  the  ships^ 
and  other  episodes,  with  which  he  has  adorned  his 

^  i.  e.  opposed  (as  appears  from  what  follows)  to  that  which 
history  gives.  Unity  of  interett  is  essential  to  the  pleasure  we 
expect  from  the  epic  poem ;  and  this  cannot  exist,  at  least  in 
the  degree  required,  without  unity  ofjustion.    Twining. 

'  Because  "  the  length  of  the  whole  would  "  then  **  not  ad- 
mit of  a  proper  magnitude  in  the  parte;**  and  thus  an  epic 
poem  constructed  upon  an  historical  plan,  would  be  exactly  in 
the  same  case  with  a  tragedy  *' constructed  on  an  epio  plan" 
Twining. 

CHAP.  XXIV.]  POETIC.  459 

poem.  Other  poets,  however,  have  composed  a  fable 
about  one  man,  and  one  time,  and  one  action,  consist- 
ing of  many  parts ;  as  the  authors  of  the  Cjpriacs, 
and  the  Lesser  Iliad  ^  [With  respect  to  the  Iliad  ^> 
and  Odyssey,  therefore,  one  or  two  tragedies  only 
could  be  made  from  each.  But  many  might  be  made 
from  the  Cypriacs ;  and  from  the  Lesser  Iliad  more 
than  eight;  such  as  the  Judgment  of  the  Arms^ 
Philoctete8^  Neoptolemus,  Eurypylus^,  the  B^ging 
[of  Ulysses],  the  Lacaense,  the  Destruction  of  Troy, 
the  Eetura  of  the  Greeks,  Sinon,  and  the  Troades. 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

On  the  SpecieSy  Parts^  etc.  of  Epic  Poetry. 

Again,  it  is  requisite  that  the  epopee  should  have  the  1-  TJie 
same  species  as  tragedy.     [For  it  is  necessary  that  a?^^ts 
it  should  be  either  simple,  or  complex,  or  ethical,  or^of  epic 
pathetic  *.]  •  The  parts  also  are  the  same,  except  the  Poetry, 
music  and  the  scenery.     For  it  requires  revolutions, 
discoveri^s,  and  disasters ;  and  besides  these,  the  sen- 

'  Of  this  kind  seems  the  poem  of  Arioato^  the  exordium  of 
which  not  only  expresses  the  miscellaneous  variety  of  his  mat- 
ter, but,  also,  "his  prinaple  oi  unity. 

Le  Donne,  i  cavalier,  1*  arme,  ^1  amori, 
Le  cortesie,  1'  audaci  imprese,  io  canto, 
Chefmro  al  tempo  che  passaro  i  Mori,  etc. 
Arioato't  expedient  was,  to  "intertwist  the  several  actions  to- 
gether, in  order  to  give  something  like  the  appearance  of  one 
action  **  to  the  whole,  as  has  been  observed  of  Spenser  [Let- 
tert  on  Chivalry,  etc.] :  he  has  given  his  poem  the  continuity  of 
basket-work.    Or,  if  I  may  be  indulged  in  another  comparison, 
his  unity  is  the  unity  produced  between  oil  and  vinegar  by 
shaking  them  together,  which  only  makes  them  separate  by 
smaller  portions,    Twinmg. 

*  So  called  to  distinguish  it  from  the  lUad  of  Homer,  of  which 
it  seems  to  have  been  a  continuation.    Twining. 

'  i.  e.  between  Ajax  and  Ulysses.  uSsehyhts  wrote  a  tra- 
gedy on  this  subject,  of  which  the  AJax  of  Sophocles  is  the 
sequel.     Dacier. 

'  Of  these  two  plays  nothing  is  known. 
Condemned  by  Ritter. 

460 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[chap.  XXIV 

2.  Differ- 
ence be- 
tween the 
Iliad  and 
Odyssey. 

3.  Length 
of  the 
epic 
poem. 

4.  Its 
power  of 
extension. 

5.  Its 
proper 
metre. 

timent«  and  the  diction  should  be  well  formed ;  all 
which  were  first  used  by  Homer,  and  are  used  by  him 
fitly.  For  of  his  two  poems,  the  Hiad  indeed  con- 
tains the  simple  and  pathetic ;  but  the  Odyssey,  the 
complex ;  for  through  the  whole  of  it  there  is  dis- 
covery* and  moral.  And  besides  these  things,  he 
excelled  all  poets  in  diction  and  sentiment.  The 
epopee,  however,  differs  from  tragedy  in  the  length 
of  the  composition,  and  in  the  metre.  But  the  pro- 
per boundary  of  its  length  has  been  before  described ; 
for  it  should  be  such  that  the  beginning  and  the  end 
may  be  seen  at  one  view»  [And  this  will  be  efiected 
if  the  compositions  are  shorter  than  those  of  the  an- 
cient poets,  and  brought  to  the  same  length  with  the 
multitude,  of  tragedies  that  are  recited  at  one  hear- 
ing 3.]  But  it  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  epopee  to 
possess  abundantly  the  power  of  extending  its  mag- 
nitude ;  for  tragedy  is  not  capable  of  imitating  many 
actions  that  are  performed  at  the  same  time,  but  that 
part  only  which  is  represented  in  the  scene,  and 
acted  by  the  players.  But  in  the  epopee,  in  conse- 
quence of  its  being  a  narration,  many  events  may  be 
introduced  which  have  happened  at  the  same  time, 
which  are  properly  connected  with  the  subject,  and 
from  which  the  bulk  of  the  poem  is  increased.  Hence, 
this  contributes  to  its  magnificence,  transports  the 
hearer  to  difierent  places,  and  adorns  the  poem  with 
dissimilar  episodes.  For  similitude  of  events  rapidly 
produces  satiety,  and  causes  tragedies  to  fail  But 
heroic  metre  is  established  by  experience  as  adapted 
to  the  epopee.  For  if  any  one  should  attempt  narra- 
tive   imitation  in   any  other  metre,   or    in   many 

•  See  Pope's  translation,  xvi.  206,  etc.,  -where  Ulysses  dis- 
covers himself  to  Telemachus — xxi.  212,  to  the  shepherds — 
xxiii.  211,  to  Penelope — ^xxir.  375,  to  his  father — ^ix.  17, 
to  Alcinous — iv.  150,  etc.,  Telemachus  is  discovered  to  Me- 
nelaus  by  his  tears — r.  189,  to  Helen,  by  his  resemblance  to 
his  father — xix.  545,  Ulysses  is  discovered  to  the  old  nurse, 
by  the  scar.     Twining. 

•  This  is  quite  contrary  to  Aristotle's  own  opinion.  See  Rit- 
ter.  Twiniug's  great  and  tasteful  learning  cannot  bring  him 
to  any  satisfactory  explanation  of  these  words. 

CHAP.  XXIV.]  POETIC.  461 

metres  mingled  together,  the  unfitness  of  it  would  be 
apparent.     For  heroic  metre  is  of  all  others  the  most 
stable  and  ample.      [H^nce   it  especially  receives 
foreign  words  and  metaphors.     For  narrative  imita- 
tion excels  all  others  *.]   But  Iambics  and  tetrametres 
have  more  motion ;  the  one  being  adapted  to  dancing, 
but  the  other  to  acting.     It  would,  however,  be  still  6.  Ob- 
more  absurd,  to  mingle  them  together,  as  Chaeremon*  ^^^^  ^^ 
did.     Hence,  no  one  has  composed  a  long  poem  in  metres. 
anj  other  measure  than  the  heroic ;  but,  as  we  have 
said.  Nature  herself  teaches  us  to  distinguish  the 
measure  best  suited.     Homer,  indeed,  deserves  to  be  7.  Praise 
praised  for  many  other  things,  and  also  because  he  is  of  Homer. 
the  only  poet  who  was  not  ignorant  what  he  ought 
to  do  himself.      For  it  is   requisite  that  the  poet 
should  speak  in  his  own  person  as  little  as  possible  ; 
for  so  far  as  he  does  so  he  is  not  an  imitator®.    Other 
poets,  therefore,  take  an   active  part  through  the 
whole  poem,  and  they  only  imitate  a  few  things,  and 
seldom^.     But  Homer,  after  a  short  preface,  imme- 
diately introduces  a  man  or  a  woman,  or  something 
else^  that  has  manners;  for  there  is  nothing  in  his 
poem  unattended  with  manners.      It  is   necessary,  s.  The 
therefore,  in  tragedies  to  produce  the  wonderful ;  but  wonder- 
that  which  is  contrary  to  reason  (whence  the  wonder-  ^de^d  in 
ful  is  best  produced)  is  best  suited  to  the  epopee,  reference 
from  the  agent  not  being  seen^.     In  the  next  place,  to  tragedy 
the   particulars  respecting   the  pursuit   of  Hector  epopee. 

*  Condemned  by  Rltter.  *  Cf.  i.  9. 

*  Strictly  speaking.     See  Dissertation  i.  p.  37.     Twining. 

^  This  is  remarkably  the  case  with  Lucan;  of  whom  Hobbes 
says,  that  "  no  heroic  poem  raises  such  admiration  of  the  poet 
as  his  hath  done,  though  not  so  great  admiration  of  the  persons 
he  introduceth." — [Discourse  concerning  the  Virtues  of  an 
Heroic  Poem.]     Twining. 

*  As  gods,  goddesses,  allegorical  beings,  etc.    Twining. 

'  The  best  comment  to  which  I  can  refer  the  reader  upon 
all  this  part  of  Aristotle,  is  to  be  found  in  the  10th  of  the  Let- 
tert  on  Chivalry  and  Romance,  in  which  the  Italian  poets,  and 
the  privileges  of  genuine  poetry,  are  vindicated,  with  as  much 
solidity  as  elegance,  against  those  whom  Dryden  used  to  call 
his  "Prose  Critics" — against  that  sort  of  criticism  "which 
looks  like  philosophy  f  ofid  is  not" — Dr.  Hurd*8  Dialogues,  etc. 
vol.  iii.     Twining. 

462  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxiv. 

would  appear  ridiculous  in  the  scene;  the  Greeks 
indeed  standing  still,  and  not  pursuing,  and  Achilles 
making  signs  to  them,  hy  the  motion  of  his  head,  not 
to  engage^'.  But  in  the  epopee  this  is  concealed. 
Now,  the  wondfsrful  pleases ;  of  which  this  is  an  in- 
dictation,  that  all  men,  when  they  wish  to  gratify  their 

9.  False  hearers,  add  something  to  what  they  relate.  Homer 
reasoningB  also  in  the  highest  degree  taught  others  how  to  feign 
pwtey!^^'  ^^  *  proper  manner.    But  this  is  a  paralogism.     For 

men  fancy  that  when  the  consequent  follows  or  re- 
sults from  the  antecedent,  the  consequent  may  be 
converted,  and  that  the  antecedent  will  follow  from 
the  consequent  This,  however,  is  false.  [But  why, 
if  the  antecedent  be  false,  so  long  as  this  other  be 
otherwise,  should  the  consequent  necessarily  follow  ? 
For  through  knowing  the  consequent  to  be  true,  our 
soul  paralogizes,  and  concludes  that  the  antecedent 
also  is  true.    And  there  is  an  example  of  this  in  **  the 

10.  Fur-  Washing  "."]  Again,  one  should  prefer  things  which 
ther  pre-  are  impossible  but  probable,  to  such  as  are  possible 
vMctlnff  ^^^  improbable.  Fables  also  should  not  be  composed 
poetic  from  irrational  parts,  [but  as  much  as  possible,^  in* 
SmtT       ^^*^'  *^®^  should  have  nothing  irrational  in  them : 

^'  if,  however,  this  is  impossible,  care  should  be  taken 
that  the  irrational  circumstance  does  not  pertain  to 
the  fable,  as  in  the  case  of  CEdipus  not  knowing  how 
Laius  died  *^.  For  it  must  not  be  brought  into  the 
drama,  like  the  narration  of  the  P^i;hian  games  in 
the  Electra^',  or  him  who,  in  the  tragedy  of  the 

10  Pope's  Iliad,  xxii.  267. — Perhaps  the  idea  of  stopping 
a  whole  anny  by  a  nod,  or  shake  of  the  head,  (a  circumstance 
distinctly  mentioned  by  Homer,  but  sunk  in  Mr.  Pope's  ver- 
sion,) was  the  absurdity  here  prindpaUy  meant.  If  this  whole 
Homeric  scene  were  represented  cm  our  stage,  in  the  best 
manner  possible,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  effect  wonld 
justify  Aristotle's  observation.  It  would  certainly  set  the 
audience  in  a  roar.  Twining* 
•  ^^  I  follow  Hitter's  text  and  yersion,  but  both  he  and  Donald^ 
son  regard  these  words  as  an  interpolation. 

"  Cf.  Soph.  CBd.  Tyr.  112,  sqq.    This  clause  Is  condemned 
by  Ritter. 

''  Id.  Electr.  680,  s^q.    See  my  Introduction  to  Sophocles, 
p.  ziii. 

CHAP.  XXV.]  POETIC  463 

Mjsians,  comes  from  Tegeato  Mysiawitfaoat  speak- 
ing.]    It  is  ridiculous,  therefore,  to  saj,  that  other- 
"sdse  the  fable  would  be  destroyed;  for  such  fables 
should  not  at  first  be  composed.     But  if  they  are 
composed,  and  it  appears  more  reasonable  that  they 
should  be,  the  absurdity  also  must  be  admitted; 
since  the  irrational  circumstances  in  the  Odyssey, 
such  as  Ulysses  being  left  [on  the  shore  of  Ithaca  by 
the  Fhoeacians],  wovdd  evidently  have  been  intoler- 
able, if  they  had  been  fabricated  by  a  bad  pbet.   But 
now  the  poet  conceals  the  absurdity,  and  renders  it 
pleasing  by  the  addition  of  other  beauties.    The  die-  11.  The 
tion,  likewise,  should  be  laboured  in  the  sluggish  ^ctionin 
parts  of  the  poem,  and  which  exhibit  neither  manners  gpectWe 
nor  sentiment  ^^«     For  a  very  splendid  ^  diction  con-  parts. 
oeals  the  manners  and  the  reasoning. 

CHAP.  XXV. 
On  removing  critical  Objections. 
rWiTH  respect  to  critical  objections*,  and  the  solu-  1.  Objec- 

K  -  -    '^      -  -  -  -.         -  .    .  .       tionsof 

critics, 

tions  of  them,  the  number  and  quality  of  their  species  ^^^  ^^ 

"  The  reader  may  wonder  that  Aristotle  did  not  add — "  nor 
p<unon"  But  that  part  of  the  epic  and  tragic  poem,  which 
he  calls  the  tenUmenU,  includes  the  exprettion  of  pauum. 
Twining. 

^  "  His  diction  [  ThomaonW]  is  in  the  highest  degree  florid 
and  luxuriant;  such  as  may  be  eaid  to  be  to  his  images  and 
thoughts  both  their  luttre  and  their  ahcide  ;  such  as  invests  them 
with  splendour,  through  which  peritiups  they  are  not  always 
easily  discerned." — Dr,  Johmon'e  lAfe  of  Thomson,    Twining. 

'  The  original  is,  Proidenu,  This  appears  to  have  been  a 
common  title  of  critical  works  in  Aristotle's  time.  Objectionsy 
censures,  and  the  most  unreasonable  cavils,  were  conveyed  in 
ihe  civil  form  of  probleme  and  queetione.  Thus,  many  criti- 
cisms on  Homer  were  published  under  the  title  of  Homeric 
Probieme, 

The  scope  of  this  part  of  Aristotle's  work  is  of  more  import- 
ance to  his  subject  than,  at  first  view,  it  mav  appear  to  be. 
In  teaching  how  to  answer  criticisms,  it,  in  net,  teaches,  (as 
far,  I  mean,  as  it  goes,)  what  the  poet  should  do  to  avoid 

464  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  zxv. 

and  Aeir  will  become  apparent  from  surveying  them  as  follows, 
solutions,   gince  the  poet  is  an  imitator,  in  the  same  manner  as 
a  painter,  or  any  other  person  who  makes  likenesses, 
it  is  necessary  that  he  should  always  imitate  one  of 
the  three  [objects  of  imitation].     For  he  must  either 
imitate  things  such  as  they  were  or  are,  or  such  as 
they  are  said  and  appear  to  be^  or  such  as  they 
2.  ought  to  be.     But  these  are  enunciated  either  by 
[common]  diption,  or  by  foreign  words  and  meta- 
phors.   For  there  are  many  modifications^  of  diction ; 
3.  Error    and  we  concede  these  to  the  poets.     Besides  this, 
essentbi    *^®^  ^^  ^®*  *^®  ^*"^®  rectitude  of  politics  and  poetry, 
and  acci-    ^OT  of  any  Other  art  and  poetry.     But  of  poetry  itself, 
dental       the  error  is  twofold;  the  one  essential,  the  other 
4.  accidental.     For  the  error  is  essential,  when  it  at- 
tempts to  imitate  that  which  is  beyond  its  power; 
but  [when  it  attempts  to  imitate  improperly,  as*]  if, 
for  instance,  a -horse  should  be  described  as  moving 
both  its  right  legs  together,  or  an  error  in  any  of  the 

giring  occasion  to  them.  It  seems,  indeed,  intended  as  an 
apology  for  Poetry ^  and  a  vindication  of  its  privileges  upon  true 
poetical  principles,  at  a  time  when  the  art  and  its  professors 
were  unfairly  attacked  on  all  sides,  by  the  cavils  of  prosaic 
philosophers  and  sophists,  such  as  Ariphrades,  Protagoras, 
Euclid,  etc.,  and  by  the  puritanical  objections  of  Plato  aiid  his 
followers.     Twining. 

If  Bitter's  strictures  be  true,  our  acquaintance  with  Aristotle's 
Poetics  is  now  at  an  end:  In  a  learned  annotation  (pp.  263 — 6) 
he  seems  to  have  completely  proved  the  spurious  character  of 
both  this  and  the  following  chapter. 

'  This  includes  all  that  is  called  ya«ry,  machinery,  ghosts, 
witches,  enchantments,  etc. —  things,  according  to  Hobbes, 
**  beyond  the  actual  bounds,  and  only  within  the  *'  conceived 
possibility  of  nature."  [See  the  Letters  on  Chivalry,  as  above.] 
Such  a  being  as  Cauban,  for  example,  is  impossible.  Yet 
Shakspeare  has  mad^  the  character  appear  probable  ;  not,  cer- 
tainly, to  reason,  but  to  imagination;  that  is,  we  make  no  diffi- 
cidty  about  the  possibility  of  it,  in  reading.  Is  Hot  the  Lovelace 
of  Richardson,  in  this  view,  more  out  of  nature,  more  impro- 
bable, than  the  Caliban  of  Shakspeare  ?  The  latter  is,  at  least, 
consistent.  I  can  imagine  such  a  monster  as  Caliban:  I  never 
could  imagine  such  a  man  as  Lovelace.    Twining. 

*  ir&dii,  inflections,  dialectic  variations,  etc. 

*  These  words,  t6  'irpotXiarBai  firi  dpOStSf  are  totally  incon- 
sistent with  the  meaning.    See  Ritter. 

CHAP.  XXV.]  POETIC  465 

arts  be  committed  in  poetry,  as  in  medicine,  or  any 
other  art,  when  it  fabricates  things  that  are  impos- 
sible, these,  therefore,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  not 
the  essential  errors  of  poetry.  Hence,  one  must  re-  5. 
fate  the  objections  of  critics  from  surveying  these  T?^^^** 
particulars.  For  in  the  first  place,  indeed,  the  poet  may  be 
errs,  if  what  he  fabricates  is  impossible  according  to  removed. 
the  art  itself ;  but  it  will  be  right  if  the  end  of  po- 
etry is  obtained  by  it.  For  we  have  before  shown 
what  the  end  is,  viz.  if  the  poet  thus  renders  what 
he  fabricates,  or  any  other  part  of  the  poem,  more 
capable  of  producing  a  more  striking  effect®.  An 
example  of  this  is  the  pursuit  of  Hector.  If,  how- 
ever, this  end  can  be  more  or  less  attained,  and  that 
according  to  the  art  pertaining  to  these  things,  then 
the  fault  will  not  be  excusable.  For  it  is  requisite 
if  possible  to  be  entirely  without  error.  Further 
still,  it  should  be  considered  whether  the  error  ranks 
among  things  essential  to  the  poetic  art,  or  foreign 
and  incidental.  For  it  is  a  less  fault  not  to  know 
that  a  hind  has  no  horns,  than  to  depict  a  bad  copy 
of  one.  Besides  this,  also,  if  the  poet  is  blamed  for  6. 
not  imitating  things  as  they  truly  are,  the  reply  is, 
but  he  imitates  them  as  they  should  be.  Thus  So- 
phocles said,  that  he  described  men  such  as  they 
should  be,  but  Euripides  such  as  they  are.  If,  how- 
ever, it  should  be  objected,  that  the  poet  represents 
things  in  neither  of  these  ways,  he  may  say  that  he 
represents  them  as  men  say  tney  are;  as,  for  in- 
stance, in  things  pertaining  to  the  gods.  For  per-  7. 
haps  it  is  neither  better  thus  to  speak,  nor  true,  but 
it  is  just  as  it  may  happen ;  as  Xenophanes  observes, 
"At  any  rate  they  tell  us  such  things^."  Perhaps, 
however,  it  may  be  said,  that  it  is  not  better,  indeed, 
thus  to  speak,  but  that  the  thing  was  so ;  as  in  the 
passage  concerning  the  arms  [of  the  sleeping  sol" 
diers  of  Diomed] : 

*  A  false  definition.    See  Bitter. 

^  "  Tyrwhitt*8  emendation,  <fcXX*  o3i/  ^ao-ii;  r&dt,  seems  to  be 
ihfi  best  of  those  which  have  been  proposed."    Donaldson. 

466  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxt. 

f 7X"  ^*  vif>i9  ifff  iirl  vaitpwrripm, 

fixed  upright  in  the  earth 
Their  spears  stood  by ^ 

For  such  was  the  custom  at  that  time,  as  it  ia  now 

8.  with  the  niTrians.     With  respect^  however,  to  the 

inquiry  whether  a  thing  is  said  or  done  bj  any  one 

well  or  ill,  we  must  not  only  regard  the  thing  itadf 

which  is  done  or  said,  whether  it  is  good  or  bad,  bat 

we  must  also  [consider]  the  person  by  whom  it  is  done 

or  said,  viz.  concerning  whom,  or  when,  or  to  whom,  br 

on  what  account,  he  speaks  or  acts ;  as  whether  it  is 

for  the  sake  of  bringing  to  pass  a  greater  good,  or  in 

9.  Die-      order  to  avoid  a  greater  eviL     But  it  is  requisite  to 

^^'         remove  some  objections  by  lodcing  to  the  diction ; 

as,  for  instance,  to  foreign  words : 

On  mules  th'  infection  first  began. 

For  perhaps  he  does  not  use  oi^p^ac  to  signify  mules^ 
but  guardsK     And  in  what  he  says  of  Dolon, 

— —  cl^  fjAv  iny  JcaicM* 

of  form  unhappy     • 

It  may  be  said  that  elBoc  kokoq  does  not  signify  a 
body  without  symmetry,  but  a  deformed  face.  For 
the  Cretans  call  a  man  with  a  good  face  ehetd^g. 
And, 

Za»f)are/9ov  dk  xlpau  — — w 

For  (up6Tepov  may  not  mean  undiluted  wine,  as  for 

f  II.  X.  152.    See  Bitter. 

'  II.  A.  5Q.  Zoilus  thought  the  pestilence  should  hare  be- 
gun with  the  men  first. 

'  II.  K.  316.  The  objection  of  the  critics  is  wppoMd  to 
have  been,  that  an  ill-made  man  could  not  be  a  good  racer. 
See  Pope's  note.    Twining. 

"  Iliad  ix.  267, 8. — ^Pope  follows  the  common,  and  probably 
the  right,  acceptation  of  the  word.  "Mix  purer  wine."— Aris- 
totle's interpretation  has  not  made  its  fortune  with  the  critics. 
He  seems  to  have  produced  it  rather  as  an  exemplification  of 
the  8ort  of  answer  which  he  is  here  considering,  than  as  an 
opinion  in  which  he  acquiesced  himself.  It  was,  probably,  an 
answer  which  had  been  given.  The  cavil,  according  to  Plu- 
tarch, came  from  Zoilus.  [See  the  Syraposiac  Prob.  of  Plut 
T.  4,  where  this  subject  is  discussed,  and  several  other  con- 
jectural senses  of  the  word  Zmportpw  are  proposed.]  Twimng. 

CHAP.  XXV.]  POETIC.  467 

intemperate  drinkers,  but  wine,  poured  out  rapidly. 

But  a  thing  is  s^d  metaphorically,  as,  ,  10  Meta- 

The  other  gods  and  men  "  — 
Slept  all  the  night. 

And  at  the  same  ti'me  he  says  : 

*Htoi  ot'  £«  'jriitov  t6  Tptoixdv 
'AvKSou  vvpiyytAV  0*  OfiaSov, 

phor. 

For  aH  is  said  metaphorically,  instead  of  many,  aU^* 
being  a  species  of  many.     And  thus  oirf  5*  afifjiopog  is 
said  of  Orion  metaphorically.      For  that  which  is 
most  known,  is  called  alone  or  sole^K  Objections  also  H*  Ac- 
may  be  solved  from  accent,  as  Hippias  the  Thasian  ^®^*- 
solved  the  following  passages  : 

didofJLtv  ii  ol  [e9xo«  dpiarBai].  • 

And, 

Objections  likewise  may  be  solved  by  punctuation ;  12.  Punc- 
as  in  the  following  instance  from  Empedocles,  tuation. 

Ali^a  a  dirfi'^  c^voirro,  tcl  irpiv  /idOov  &ddvaT*  elvaiy 
Ztapa  T«  t4  trpltf  KiKptro,^^ ^ 

1*  Begmning  of  II.  ii. — What  it  was  that  wanted  defence  in 
this  passage,  and  that  was  to  be  taken  metaphorically,  we  are 
not  told.  That  it  was  the  representation  of  the  ffods  as  sleqj' 
ing,  is  the  most  probable  conjecture.  This  is  somewhat  soft- 
ened by  Mr.  Pope's  "  tlumbered,**  Homer  says — "  slept  aW 
the  nightt* — tv6o»  trawuxtoi.     Twining. 

12  'rdtrrit  is  a  far-fetched  notion  from  xawi/xwi.  The  author 
has  blundered  between  II.  B.  1.,  and  II.  I.  1,  and  11 — 13. 
See  Ritter. 

^*  II.  xxi.  297,  has  Hidofitv  Hi  roi  <5xov  ipitrdai,  but  the  line, 
as  here  quoted,  is  not  found  in  Homer.  See  Ritter.  Taylor  ob- 
serves :  '*  It  alludes  to  the  order  given  by  Jupiter  to  the  dream  in 
II.  ii.  to  deceive  Agamemnon.  Here,  if  iiSoftev  is  read  with 
an  accent  in  the  antepenult,  it  will  signify  damuSf  and  will  im- 
ply that  Jupiter  promises  Agamemnon  glory  from  the  battle ; 
but  if  it  is  read  with  an  accent  in  the  penult,  itdofitif,  so  as  to 
be  the  infinitive  Ionic,  it  will  signify  dare.     It  will  therefore  • 

imply  that  Jupiter  orders  the  dream  to  give  the  hope  of  victory 
to  Agamemnon." 

^*  If  this  is  read  with  the  circumflex  on  the  oS,  it  will  signify 
that  the  oak  became  putrid  by  the  rain,  which  is  absurd;  but 
if  it  is  read  with  an  acute  accent  and  spiritus  lenis  o0,  it  will 
signify  not^  and  will  imply,  that  the  oak  was  not  rotted  by  the 
rain.    Taylor. 

>'  The  sense  here  depends  on  the  punctuation*    For  if  the 

468 

ARISTOTLE'S 

[CHAF.   XXV 

14.   Cllfl- 

tomof 
diction. 

13.  Ambi-  Or  by  ambiguous  expressions,  as  [in  Biad,  x.] 
guity. 

Night  of  two  parts  the  greater  diare  had  waned* 
But  of  her  empire  still  a  third  remain'd. 

For  the  word  trXiiav  is  ambiguous.  Or  objections 
may  be  answered  from  the  custom  of  diction;  as 
when  wine  is  called  iccjcpct/xci/o)/,  mixed^'^ ;  whence  has 
been  said, 

Greaves  of  new-wrought  tin. 

And  those  that  work  on  iron  are  called  braziers  ^\ 
Whence  Ganymede  is  said 

To  pour  out  wine  for  Jove  *•;  II.  20. 

though  the  gods  do  not  drink  wine.     But  this  may 

16.  Con-    also  be  metaphorically  said.     It  is  necessary,  how- 

triines.      ever,  when  a  word  appears  to  signify  something  of  a 

contrary  nature,  to  consider  how  many  significations 

it  may  have  in  the  passage  before  us ;  as, 

TJf  p*  IcrxfiTO  xaXKtov  eyx<>* — 

**  There  ttutk  the  lance  «» :*' 

For  here  the  word  stuck  implies  that  the  lance  was 
impeded.  Of  how  many  different  senses  a  word  may 
admit,  one  may  learn  thus,  by  a  contrary  manner 

comma  is  put  after  ^cupd  in  the  second  line,  instead  of  'rplvy  the 
sense  will  be,  "  Immediately  those  things  were  made  mortal 
which  before  had  learnt  to  be  immortal,  and  pure  which  be- 
fore were  mixed."  But  if  tlie  comma  is  put  ader  'n-plv  instead 
of  ^<k>f><^,  the  sense  will  be,  "  that  those  things  which  before  were 
pure,  were  mixed."    Taylor.    But  see  Ritter's  learned  note. 

"  But  the  ambiguity  is  occasioned  by  the  word  -wXewir,  which 
may  either  signify  more  than,  or  ike  greater  part  of.  Taylor. 
II.  K.  252. 

'Airrpa  ik  br\  trpopifiiiKt,  iraptf^^Ktv  bt  irXiup  vv^, 
T&u  Svo  fioip&wu, 

i7  "  £a  potio  quee  ex  aqua  et  vino  commixta  est  tamen  innum 
nominatur.     Nove  dictum  <l>a<ri»  tlvai  pro  Xiyoutriv.**    Hitter. 

'*  "  Schol.  in  Hom.  II.  T.  283.  iraXaiA  ^  XP^®""  '*■<>»'  x**^*^* 
6vofJLdX'*^  "^^^  fTiStipov.  d/ueXst  Kai  xoXictas  Toht  t6»  a-iiripov  ip- 
yaiofiiuou^.     Ritter. 

"  II.  Y.  234. 

^  II.  r.  272.  This  is  consummate  twaddle.  See  Twining 
and  Ritter. 

CHAP.  XXV.]  POETIC.  469 

from  what  Glauco  says**,  [when  he  asserts  thai] 
"  some  men  presuppose  irrationally,  and  then  reason 
from  their  own  decision:  and,  having  once  pronounced 
their  opinion,  reprobate  whatever  is  contrary  to  their 
[preconceived]  opinion."  This  was  the  case  with  re- 
spect to  Icarius.  For  the  multitude  fancy  that  he  was 
a  Laconian.  On  this  supposition,  therefore,  it  is  ab- 
surd that  Telemachus  should  not  meet  him,  on  his  ar- 
rival at  Lacedaemon'**.  Perhaps,  however,  the  truth 
is  as  the  Cephalenians  say,  viz.  that  Ulysses  married 
among  them,  and  that  Icadius,  and  not  Icarius,  [was 
his  father-in-law].  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  this  17. 
objection  is  erroneous.  In  short,  it  is  necessary  to 
refer  the  impossible  either  to  the  poetry,  or  to  that 
which  is  better,  or  to  opinion.  For,  with  respect  to 
poetry,  probable  impossibility  is  more  eligible,  than 
the  improbable  and  possible,  and  things  should  be 
such  as  Zeuxis  ^  painted.  And  also  [we  may  refer 
the  impossible]  to  that  which  is  better^ :  for  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  the  pattern  should  transcend  those  things 
which  are  said  to  be  irrational.  The  objection,  also, 
that  something  is  irrational  may  be  solved  by  saying, 
that  sometimes  it  is  not  irrational ;  for  it  is  probable 
that  what  is  improbable  may  have  happened.  But  l^* 
with  respect  to  the  solution  of  apparent  contraries, 
these  are  to  be  considered  in  the  same  manner  as 

''  This  is  most  clumsily  and  indistinctly  expressed. 

**  See  Bitter. 

"  "  In  ancient  days,  while  Greece  was  flourishing  in  liberty 
and  arts,  a  celebrated  painter,  [Zeuxiet]  having  drawn  many 
excellent  pictures  for  a  certain  free  state,  and  been  generously 
rewarded  for  his  labours,  at  last  made  an  offer  to  paint  them  a 
Heleny  as  a  model  and  exemplar  of  the  most  exquisite  beauty. 
The  proposal  was  readily  accepted,  when  the  artist  informed 
them,  that  in  order  to  draw  one  Fair,  it  was  necessary  he 
should  contemplate  many.  He  demanded,  therefore,  a  sight  of 
all  their  finest  women.  The  state,  to  assist  the  work,  assented 
to  his  request.  They  were  exhibited  before  him ;  he  selected 
the  most  beautiful ;  and  from  these  formed  his  Helen^  more 
beautiful  than  them  all." — Harris's  Three  Treatises,  p.  216. 
Twining. 

'^  Improved  nature,  ideal  beauty,  etc.,  which,  elsewhere,  is 
expressed  by  what  ehouid  he.  Twining.  Rltter  rightly  sup- 
plies T^  divvarov  iti  dv6yu». 

470  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap,  xxvi 

elenchi^  in  arguments,  if  the  same  thing  [is  affirmed 
or  denied] ,  and  with  respect  to  the  same  thing,  and 
after  the  same  manner,  and  wh^tber  it  is  the  same 
person  [who  affirms  and  denies],  and  also  with  what 
reference  he  speaks,  and  what  a  wise  man  would  un- 

19.  derstand  fr<Mn  his  words^.     The  reprehension  [of 
^^®^      poets]  on  the  score  of  improbability^  and  vicious 
sTon^is^*^"  manners  will  be  right,  through  which  it  is  shown, 
correct,     that  they  have  without  any  necessity  devised  some- 
thing irrational     Thus  irrationality  is  used  [with- 
out any  necessity]  by  Euripides  in  his  .^Sgeus^  and 
viciousness,  in  the  character  c^  Menelaus,  in  his 

20.  Sum-  Orestes.     The  reprehensions,  therefore,  may  be  de- 
wiajy-       rived  from  Ave  species.     For  they  are  either  made 

because  impossibilities  are  introduced,  or  absurdities, 
or  things  of  evil  tendency,  or  contraries,  or  as  errors 
committed  against  the  rectitude  of  art.  But  the  so- 
lutions may  be  surveyed  from  the  above-mentioned 
number ;  for  they  are  twelve.^] 

CHAP.  XXVI. 

1.  Re-      One  may,  however,  question  whether  epic  or  tragic 
mOTiteof  ^Daitation  is  the  more  excellent.     For  if  that  imita- 
tragicand  tion  is  the  better  which  is  less  troublesome  to  the 
epicimi-  spectator,  and  such  an  imitation  pertains  to  better 
spectators,  that  which  imitates  every  thing  is  evi- 
dently attended  with  molestation.     For,  as  if  the 
spectators  will  not  perceive  what  is  acted  without 
the  addition  of  much  movement  \  they  make  great 

^^  i.  e.  confutations. 

^  I  have  followed  Hitter,  who  has  done  much  for  this  awk- 
ward heap  of  tautologies. 

^  Surely  the^words  Kal  dKoyia  Kai  fioxBtip^a  are  corrupt  or 
interpolated. 

'*  The  reader  who  regards  his  own  ease,  will,  I  believe,  do 
well  to  take  this  for  granted.  If,  however,  he  has  any  desire 
to  try  the  experiment,  he  may  read  my  mote  on  this  passage ; 
and  I  wish  it  may  answer  to  him.    Twining. 

*  Though  Aristotle  instances  in  feature  only,  the  objectioi^ 

OHAP.  XXVI.]  POETIC.  471 

gesticulations ;  just  as  bad  pkyers  cm  the  flute  turn 
themselves  round,  when  it  is  requisite-  to  imitate  the 
action  of  the  discus ;  or  when  they  sing  o£  Scylla,  draw 
to  themselves*  the  corj^phseuSjOT  leader  of  the  band. 
Such,  then,  is  tragedy,  as  the  modem  actors  are  in  2.  Com- 
the  estimation  of  their  predecessors  ^  Hencet,  Mynis-  plaints  re- 
cus  called  Callipides  an  ape,  in  consequence  of  carry-  2^^^^^ 
ing  his  imitation  to  a  great  excess.  And  there  was 
also  a  similar  opini<m  respecting  Pindar  [the  player]. 
But  as  these  latter  actors  are  to  the  former,  so  is  the 
whole  art  of  tragedy  to  the  epopee.  They  say,  there- 
fore, that  the  epopee  is  calculated  for  hearers  of  the 
better  sort,  on  which  account  «it  does  not  require 
scenery ;  but  that  tragedy  is  calculated  for  the  vul- 
gar. Hence,  tragic  imitati<m^  which  is  troublesome 
to  the  spectator,  will  evidently  be  inferior  to  epic 
imitation. 

In  the  first  place,  however,  this  accusation  does  3.  But 
not  pertain  to  the  poet,  but  the  actor ;  since  it  is  *^®  whole 
possible  in  reciting  epic  poetry  to  overdo  action,  as  ?ather*^ 
Sosistratus  did,  and  singing  likewise^  as  Mnastheus  pertains 
of  Opus  did.  In  the  next  place,  neitber  is  all  motion  J^J^^t^an 
to  be  despised,  since  neither  is  every  kind  of  dancing,  the  poet. 

no  doubt,  extended  to  the  whole  imitatLre  representation  of  the 
theatre,  including  the  staffe  and  scenery,  by  which  place  is 
imitated,  and  the  dresses,  -which  are  necessarj  to  complete  the 
imitation  of  the  persons.    Twining. 

*  *'E\icoirr««  nrdp  Kopv<t>aiov-~To  imitate  Scylla, — "  naves  in 
aaxa  trahentem"  as  Virgil  has  expressed  it.  But  it  is  not  easy 
to  see  how  the  performer,  at  least  while  he  was  playing,  could 
well  spare  a  hand  for  this  operation. — This  was  even  worse 
than  what  we  call  hunumnng  a  catch ;  when,  for  instance,  a 
singer  who  is  performing  Purceira  "  Fie,  nay  prithee,  John** 
— thinks  it  necessary  to  collar  his  neighbour.    Twining. 

Sheridan  has  burlesqued  this  habit  of  "  suiting  the  action  " 
with  admirable  humour  in  **  the  CJritic."  Sir  Christopher  Hat- 
ton  turning  out  his  toes,  Lord  Burleigh  shaking  his  head,  and 
Tilbumia  going  mad  in  white  satin,  are  among  the  best  of  his 
innumera'ble  fiuxtue  on  the  subject.  Compare  also  "  the  Re- 
hearsal," Act  1,  where  Bayes  instructs  the  Thunder  and  Light- 
ning how  to  express  their  noisy  and  rapid  powers  by  suitable 
action. 

•  The  "  decline  of  the  drama,**  then,  was  a  subject  of  com- 
plaint at  Athens,  as  well  aa  in  London. 

2  X 

472  ARISTOTLE'S  [chap.  xxyi. 

but  only  that  \Yhich^is  bad;  and  hence  Callipedes 
was  blamed,  as  others  now  are  for  imitating  light 
women  K  Further  still,  tragedy,  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  epopee,  may  fulfil  its  purpose  without  gesture ; 
for  by  reading,  it  is  manifest  what  kind  of  thing  it  is. 
If,  therefore,  it  i?  in  other  respects  better,  it  is  not  ne- 
cessary that  it  should  be  accompanied  [by  motion  and 
*•  ^'  gesture].  In  the  next  place,  tragedy  has  every  thing 
the  supe-  which  the  epopee  possesses.  For  it  may  use  metre, 
riority  of  and  it  has  also  music  and  scenery,  as  no  smaU  parts, 
tragedy,  through  which  the  pleasure  it  produces  is  most  ap- 
parent. To  which  may  be  added,  that  it  possesses 
perspicuity,  both  when  it  is  read,  and  when  it  is 
6'  acted.  The  end,  too,  of  its  imitation  is  confined  in 
less  extended  limits.  For  being  crowded  into  a  nar- 
rower compass,  it  becomes  more  pleasing  than  if  it 
were  diffused  through  a  long  period  of  time.  Thus, 
for  instance,  if  one  were  to  put  the  CEdipus  of 
Sophocles  into  as  many  verses  as  the  Iliad,  [it  would 
®-  be  less  pleasing].  Again,  the  imitation  of  the  epopee 
has  less  unity  [than  tragic  imitation];  of  which  this 
is  an  indication,  that  from  any  kind  of  [epic]  imita- 
tion many  tragedies  may  be  produced.  Hence,  if  he 
who  writes  an  epic  poem  should  choose  a  fable  per- 
fectly one,  the  poem  would  necessarily  either  appear 
short,  as  if  curtailed,  or  if  it  should  be  accompanied 
with  length  of  metre,  it  would  seem  to  be  languid*. 
But  if  he  should  compose  one  fable  from  many  fables, 
I  mean,  if  the  poem  should  consist  of  many  actions, 
it  would  not  possess  unity.  Thus,  the  Iliad  and 
Odyssey  contain  many  such  parts,  which  of  them- 
selves possess  magnitude,  though  these  poems  are 
composed,  as  much  as  possible,  in  the  most  excellent 

*  Taylor  has  gone  fearfully  astray  in  his  version,  "  for  not 
imitating  free  women  *' !  The  negative  particle  belongs  to  the 
adjective.  Twining  observes :  '*  as  no  eictresses  were  admitted 
on  the  Greek  stage,  their  capital  actors  must  frequently  have 
appeared  in  female  parts,  such  as  Electra,  Iphigeniay  Medea, 
etc.  This  is  sufficiently  proved  by  many  passages  of  ancient 
authors;  and  among  others,  by  a  remarkable  story  of  Polus, 
an  eminent  Greek  Tragic  actor,  told  by  Auhia  Gellita" 

*  idaprj,  mUk-and-waterUh, 

CHAP.  XXVI.]  POETIC.  473 

manner,  and  are  most  eminently  the  imitation  of  one 
action.  If,  therefore,  tragedy  excels  in  all  these  7. 
particulars,  and  besides  this,  in  the  work  of  art,  (for 
neither  tragic  nor  epic  imitation  ought  to  produce  a 
casual  pleasure,  but  that  which  has  been  stated,)  it 
is  evident  that  it  will  be  more  excellent  than  the 
epopee,  in  consequence  of  attaining  its  end  in  a 
greater  degree.  And  thus  much  concerning  tragedy,  8. 
and  the  epopee,  as  to  themselves,  their  species,  and 
their  parts,  their  number,  and  their  difference,  what 
the  causes  are  of  their  being  good  or  bad,  and  also 
concerning  the  objections  which  may  be  made  to 
them,  and  the  solutions  of  the  objections. 

QUESTIONS 

ON 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC. 

CHAP.  I. 

Explain  Aristotle's  notion  of  imitation. 
To  what  different  arts  does  it  apply  ? 
In  what  manner  do  these  themselves  differ  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Poetry  is  an  art  ? 
In  what  does  the  poet  agree  with,  in  what  differ  from,  the 
historian  ? 

What  does  Aristotle  say  on  the  subject  of  metre  ? 

CHAP.  II. 
What  are  the  objects  of  (dramatic)  imitation,  and  what  in* 
ference  respecting  moral  character  is  thence  derived? 

What  parallel  does  Aristotle  draw  between  the  conduct  of 
painters  and  poets  in  this  respect  ? 

How  also  do  tragedy  and  comedy  differ? 
2  I  2 

474  QUESTIONS  ON 

CHAP.  III. 
Explain  the  three  modes  of  ioiitation. 
State  the  traditional  derivations  of  tragedy  apd  oomedj. 
Are  thej  to  be  regarded  aa  genuine  ? 

CHAP.  IV,      , 

Give  Aristotle's  views  on  the  phjffiical  und  sensitive  causes 
of  poetry. 

How  did  men's  dispositians  actuate  their  ot^oice  of  subject 
and  metre  ? 
.  Were  all  Homer's  poems  of  a  grave  c|kst  ? 

What  analogy  do  his  works  respectively  bear  Ijo  tragedy 
and  comedy  ? 

What  changes  took  place  in  the  different  styles  ? 

Trace  the  progress  of  tragedy  from  its  earliest  elements, 
and  explain  th&  respective  improvements  made  by  ^schylus 
and  Sophocles. 

What  does  Aristotle  say  on  the  natural  affinity  of  metres 
to  ordinary  life  ? 

CHAP.  V. 

With  what  restrictions  are  we  to  regard  comedy  as  fufjujaic 
<^v\oTipwv  ? 

Define  to  yekoiov.  ' 

Are  the  changes  through  which  comedy  has  passed  as  well 
known  as  those  of  tragedy,  and  what  appears  to  have  been  the 
reason? 

What  do  you  read  of  Epicharmus,  Phormis^  and  Crates  ? 

Trace  the  analogy  between  the  epopee  and  tragedy. 

CHAP.  VI. 

Define  tragedy,  luXovotia^  Xc£cc»  rhythm,  harmony,  and  6\pts. 
Enumerate  the  parts  of  tragedy  that  constitute  its  quality. 
What  remark  does  Aristotle  make  respecting  the  manners 
of  modem  tragedies  ? 

What  parts  of  tragedy  convey  mos*  delight? 
What  fault  is  usually  committed  ? 
Define  ^avolcu 

CHAP.  VII. 

Define  a  poetic  whole,  and  its  parts. 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  473 

How  is  beauty  concerned  therein  ? 

What  limits  does  Aristbtle  set  to  the  length  of  tragedy  ? 

CHAP.  VIII. 
Define  fable. 

What  errors  in  construction  do  poets  nov«^  cohiinit  t 
What  events  are  the  best  to  select  ? 

CHAP.  IX. 

Should  a  poet  narrate  real  events  ?  if  not,  what  kind  are 
best  suited  ? 

But  may  not  real  and  probable  events  sometimes  coincide  ? 

Define  poetical  probability. 

What  is  the  superiority  of  Poetry  over  history  ? 

Define  universal. 

What  are  the  subjects  most  popular  in  tragedy  ? 

Of  what  must  the  poet  be  a  contriver  ? 

Which  fables  and  simple  actions  are  worst  ? 

Define  them. 

What  kind  of  perfect  actions  must  be  imitated  in  tragedy  ? 

Give  an  example  of  accidents  seeming  to  proceed  from 

CHAP.  X* 

Define  a  simple  action. 

CHAP.  XL 
Define  revolution  and  discovery,  and  give  some  examples. 

CfiAP.  XIL 
Give  an  account  of  pathos. 
Describe  the  parts  of  a  tragedy  according  to  its  quantity. 

CHAP.  xni. 

Give  some  examples  of  the  best  modes  .of  exciting  pity 
and  terror,  and  compare  their  respective  merits. 
What  character  does  Aristotle  give  of  Euripides  ? 
Is  this  remark  meant  to  apply  to  his  Poetry  as  a  whole? 
What  kind  of  tragedy  is  most  popular  ? 
Through  what  reason  ? 

476  QUESTIONS  ON 

CHAP.  XIV. 
Can  terror  and  pity  be  excited  by  stage  appointments  ? 
Is  it  well  to  depend  upon  this  means  ? 
Why  not? 

What  actions  are  truly  pitiable,  and  why  ? 
Give  different  instances. 

•    CHAP.  XV. 
What  are  the  four  requisites  of  manners  ? 
Give  some  examples* 
How  ought  the  \vtreic  of  fables  to  arise  ? 
Where  should  art  aim  at  matters  extraneous  to  the  drama  ? 
Whom  should  we  imitate,  and  how  ? 
Does  Aristotle  make  reference  here  to  any  other  treatise  ? 

CHAP.  XVI. 
Give  some  examples  of  different  recognitions. 
Which  does  Aristotle  consider  the  best  ? 

CHAP.  XVII. 

How  will  the  poet  be  best  enabled  to  realize  the  objects  or 
actions  he  imitates  ? 

Who  are  best  capable  of  persuading,  and  what  inference  do 
you  thence  derive  respecting  the  character  of  a  poet  ? 

What  plan  should  be  adopted  in  setting  about  a  subject  ? 

What  follows? 

Give  Aristotle's  example  from  Euripides. 

What  do  you  mean  by  poetic  madness  ? 

What  is  the  character  of  episodes  in  epic  and  tragic  Poetry 
respectively  ? 

CHAP.  XVIII. 

Explain  the  Utric  and  XvaiQ. 
Give  some  illustrations. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

What  do  you  read  concerning  Xt  Jtc  and  ^lavoia  ? 
What  knowledge  properly  belongs  to  the  poet  ? 
How  did  Protagoras  accuse  Homer  ? 
Was  it  justly? 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  477 

CHAP.  XX. 
Give  an  account  of  the  parts  of  speech. 

CHAP.  XXI. 

Explain  and  illustrate  the  different  kinds  of  words,  and 
collect  what  has  been  said  in  the  Rhetoric  on  the  same  subject. 

CHAP.  XXII. 

What  are  the  virtues  of  diction  ? 
How  are  they  respectively  obtained  ? 
Quote  some  of  the  illustrations. 
Does  this  chapter  appear  to  be  genuine  ? 

CHAP.  XXIII. 

What  are  the  requisites  of  narrative  Poetry  ? 

In  what  does  its  form  differ  from  that  of  history  ? 

Illustrate  this  by  an  example. 

What  was  Homer's  conduct  in  respect  to  episodes  ? 

What  do  you  know  of  the  Cyprica,  the  Little  Iliad  ? 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

Describe  the  forms  of  epopee,  and  their  similarity  to  those 
of  tragedy. 

Collect  all  that  Aristotle  says  of  Homer's  excellence  in  the 
different  departments  of  poetry. 

What  do  you  read  of  the  heroic  metre  ? 

Explain  Aristotle's  views  respecting  possibility  and  pro- 
bability. 

CHAP.  XXV. 

Give  a  few  specimens  of  the  answering  cijtical  objections. 

CHAP.  XXVI. 
Compare  the  respective  merits  of  epic  and  tragic  Poetry. 

ANALYSIS 

OP 

ARISTOTLE'S   POETIC, 

WITH  THE  ORIGINAL  DEFINITIONS  * 

I. — I.  On  Poetry  in  general,  its  species  and  parts. 

2.  Now,  all  Poetry  is  an  imitation,  as  also  flute  and  cithern- 
playing,  but  they  differ  either  in  the  means,  the  objects,  or  the 
manner  of  their  imitation. 

6.  Epopee  imitates  fwvov  role  Xoyoie  Tf^iXoie  5  toIq  nirpoiQ, 
either  simple  or  mixed. 

7.  But  custom  has  falsely  connected  the  name  of  poet  with 
the  metre  only,  and  not  with  their  mannei"  of  imitation,  as  is 
shown  in  the  case  of  Empedocles  and  Chasremon. 

10.  Dithyrambs,  nomes,  tragedy,  and  comedy  employ  all 
the  means  of  imitation,  but  some  do  so  all  together,  others 
separately. 

U. — 1.  But  since  actions  are  the  objects  of  imitation,  the 
characters  must  be  bad  or  good,  tcadq,  yap  ical  aper^  ra  4^ 
hta(l>ipov<n  Travreg ;  and  hence  men  must  be  imitated  either  as 
they  are,  or  under  a  more  exalted  or  more  contemptible  view, 
as  in  the  respective  paintings  of  Dionj«ius,  Polygnotus,  and 
Pauson.  The  same  thing  holds  good  in  other  arts,  and  in 
Poetry,  as  is  shown  by  Cleophon,  Homer,  and  Hegemon  re* 
spectively. 

4.  And  hence*  is  the  difference  of  tragedy  and  comedy,  i^ 
fuy  yap  xetpovQ,  4  Be  fieXriovc  fiifitivOcu  fiovkerai  j-Gtv  vvv, 

III. — 1.  The  third  difference  is  as  to  the  manner  of  imi- 
tation. For  the  poet  may  imitate  the  same  object,  and  by  the 
same  means,  but  he  may  do  so  either,  i.  in  narrative,  i.  e.  ^ 

*  As  I  follow  the  text  of  Ritter,  no  analysis  will  of  course  be  made  of 
such  passages  as  are  satisfactorily  proved,  by  this  scholar,  to  be  spurious, 
especially  when  such  passages  are  but  an  analysis  of  what  has  been 
already  said  in  the  Rhetoric. 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  479 

perscffuxHng  other  characters,  or  in  his  o%ifn  person,  tl  Or  he 
may  represent  iravra^  wc  TparroyTac  xal  iyepyovvrac, 

2.  Since,  then,  there  are  three  <Ufferenc6s  of  imitation  {ir 
olc  re  Koi  &  koi  <Sic),  Sophocles  agrees  with  Homer,  because 
both  imitate  rowc  irwov^diotfg,  but  with  Aristophanes^  on  tOvQ 
wpdrrovraQ,  [Hence  the  Dorians  laj  an  etymological  claim  to 
the  invention  of  the  Drama  and  Comedj,  ^a/rara,  on  fnfiovt^ 
rai  2p6rracy  KWfu^oit  rp  icara  icitfioQ  trXdvp  an^iofievOL  Ik  tov 

IV,  Two  natural  causes  of  Poetry,  i.  To  imitate  is  the 
peculiar  faculty  and  pleasure  of  man,  as  is  evident  firom  his 
taste  for  images,  pictures,  etc.,  the  resemblance  even  of  the 
worst  objects  causing  satisfaction.  And  this  results  from  the 
pleasure  felt  in  learning  and  forming  conclusions, 

6.  n.  Moreover,  rhythm  and  harlnony  are  equally  natural 
to  us,  and  ra  fiirpa  fwpia  tvv  pvOfiHy  itrri. 

Poetry,  therefore,  gradually  arose  from  the  combined  ex- 
ertions of  ol  fjiifirinKol  KOI  oi  fierpiKoL 

7.  And  of  these  men  oi  <rcftvore^t  rac  JcaXac  ifiifJiJOvvTO  wpa^- 
€vc  KOi  rac  r&v  TOtovnav,  ol  3e  evreKifrrtpoi  rac  r&v  (^vXwv,  the 
one  writing  hymns  and  encomia,  the  others  satires,  of  which 
Homer's  Margites  was  the  earliest  known. 

8.  Iambic  was  the  fit  metre  for  vituperation.  But  Homer, 
by  substituting  to  ytSmop  for  i^oyoc,  suggested  comedy,  for 
his  Margites  has  the  same  relation  to  comedy  as  the  IHad  to 
tragedy.  10.  And  the  heroic  and  vituperative  poets  respec^ 
tively  became  rpayia^iBa^aXot  and  Ki^^hoteoioL 

11.  Tragedy  and  comedy  were  at  first  hvTovx^hmvnxaly  the 
one  resulting  airo  t&v  i^apx^yrwv  rhr  hMpapfiov,  but  the  other 
airo  T&v  ra  ^aXkiKa ;  they  then  gradually  increased,  as  ivd* 
provements  presented  themselves. 

13.  .^Bschylus  added  a  second  actQr,'and  gave  the  pre-emi- 
nence to  the  dialogue  (see,  however,  the  note).  Sophocles 
added  a  third,  and  introduced  scen\c  decoration.  While 
tragedy  remained  in  its  simple,  satyric  state,  the  Trochaic 
metre  was  employed;  but,  on  its  improvement,  the  Iambic, 
as  being  the  most  naturally  adapted  to  every-<lay  discourse* 
The  Trochaic  Poetry  was  <rarvpuf^  itai  6pxri9nicumpily  but  ro 
lajifitlov  fi6\nrra  Xsicrusoy  rStv  p^irpufy^ 

15.  Episodes  were  also  multiplied,  and  thQ  other  parts  im- 
proved. 

480  ANALYSIS  OF 

V. — 1.  Ktofx^^la  itrrl  filfAfitriQ  (jKivXoTipwVy  but  not  rara  ira- 
tra>  kOKlavy  but  to  ycXoiov,  which  is  a  part  tov  al(r)(pov.  For 
yeXdioy  is  defined  hfiagrrina  ri  ical  alo^oc  av<ii^^vvoi'  icat  ov 
i^dapriKoy. 

2.  The  progress  of  comedy,  from  its  being  for  a  long  time 
unpopular,  is  unknown,  but  its  poets  are  known  from  the  time 
when  it  began  to  possess  any  form. 

3.  The  inventor  of  masks,  dialogues,  and  an  increased  num- 
ber of  actors  is  likewise  unknown.  But  Epicharmus  and 
Phormis  of  Sicily  first  invented  comic  fables,  but  Crates  was 
the  first  Athenian  who  began  &0c/xevoc  ttjq  ia^|3«fci/c  <^eac 
KadoXov  Toieiv  Xoyovc  koI  fxvQovQy  to  introduce  dialogues  and 

•plots  of  a  regular  character. 

4.  Tragic  Poetry  and  epic  agree  in  imitating  rove  ^irov- 
dalovc^  but  epic  differs  from  it  r^  to  fxtTgov  kirXovv  tytiv  rat 
ctTrayyEXtav  el  vac,  and  also  r^  fiiiKti,  For  epopee  is  aopurrog 
ry  XP^^^y  ^^*  tragedy^ vTTo  fiiav  veplohov  ifXiov.  But  at  first 
there  was  no  such  restriction. 

6.  As  all  the  parts  of  epic  Poetry  are  found  in  tragic, 
(but  not  vice  versd,)  a  judge  of  the  former  will  be  a  judge  of 
the  latter  also. 

VI. — 2.  Tragedyis  defined  to  be  nlfirftrig  vpa^ewc  airovdalac 
Koi  TeXtlaQ,  fxiyzdoQ  k')(pvffriQ,  ^Bvfffiiy^  Xoy^,  X***?'^  kKcurrov  twv 
ei^Qv  tv  Tolg  fjiopioic  BputVTbtVy  Kal  ov  di  fTrayycX/ac,  dXXa  ^i 
eXiov  Kol  <p6pov  irtpalvovtra  Ti^v  t&v  toiovtuv  vadijfjiaTiay  KoBtup- 
aiv.  And  fi^wfJiivoQ  Xoyoc  is  o  cx*^''  pvOfiov  koI  apfwvlay  koI 
/icXoc*  3nt  by  x^^^P^c  twv  eidwr,  Aristotle  means  to  ^la  fUTp^v 
tvia  fxovov  vepalveadai,  koI  vaXiv  ertpa  Ita  ftiXovQ. 

4.  And  since  tragedy  imitates  action,  the  necessary  parts 
of  it  must  be  6  riyc  oi//£a)c  K6(TfjioQy  fUXovoda,  and  Xe£ic>=4  ^"'' 
^iTpwv  crvydeiTig, 

5.  And  since  action  cannot  exist  but  by  Jjdoc  and  havoloy 
which  are  its  two  causes,  koI  icara  ravrac  koi  rvyxavovai  cat 
airoTvyxciyovfft  'rravT.£g\etm  M  r^c  jjiev  trpa^ewQ  6  fivQoQ  .fdfiiitng, 
6.  For  he  defines  /iv0oc  to  be  ^  trvvBttriQ  rwv  vpayfjiartay'  and 

.^0jy,  icad*  &  TTotovc  Tiyas  civat  «^^tyTOVQ  vparroyTaQ'  and  3«avoca, 
iy  otroiQ  Xiyoyrec  avolttKyvoval  r«,  r\  Kal  aTro^ivoyrat  yyuffjify, 

7.  Hence  there  are  six  parts  of  tragedy,  as  far  as  its  quality 
is  concerned)  fivdog,  Hdri,  Xef ic,  ^lavo/a,  oipiQ,  fieXovoita*  oTq  fuv 
yitp  fiifiovyrai,  huo  fiipri  itrrly'  ug  M  fiipovyrai,  ty'  &  Be  fiifiovy^ 
rac,  Tpia,     koi  wapa  raOra  ovhey. 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  481 

9.  The  most  important  is.^  rwv  Trpay/iarwy  trvtrratric,  for 
tragedy  imitates  actions,  not  men,  and  manners  only  as  far  as 
they  are  involved  by  actions.  Hence  action  is  the  rcXoc  of 
tragedy. 

11.  For  it  may  exist  without  manners,  but  cannot  without 
action:  the  later  authors  are  imperfect  in  manners, 

12.  Nor  would  a  whole  string  of  well  mannered  incidents 
please  so  well  as  a  regular  plot. 

13.  And,  moreover,  ra  niyiara  oIq  yj^vxayiayei  ff  rpay ^^la, 
Tov  fjivdov  fJieprf  Itrrtv,  aire  irepiirtreiai  teal  avayvufpicreic*  And 
men  arrive  at  perfection  in  diction  and  manners,  sooner  than 
in  constructing  plots.  [The  rest  of  this  chapter  is  a  repeti- 
tion, and  is  inconsistent  with  Aristotle's  own  ideas  in  other 
places.     See  Ritter.] 

Vn. — 2.  From  the  prievious  definition,  Kelrai  fifily  rrjy 
rpayifhlav  reXelag  koI  oXtfc  vpa^ewg  sTvai  fiijjrienv  k\ovai)Q  ri 
fiiyeOoQ'  for  there  may  be  6\ov  fxrfikv  txov  fiiytQoQ.  And  Skov 
is  TO  txov  cLpxTjy  ical  fjiiffov  Koi  TeXevHiv,  3.  but  ap^^,  o  ahro 
fuv  ki  dvaytcriQ  /i^  iier  SlKKo  karl'  fjier  eiceivo  ^  irepov  ttc^viccv 
elvai  ^  ylveffdai,  and  rcXevr^,  roivavrlov,  o  avro  fxer  aXXo  ttc- 
^vKtv  el  vat,  rj  !{  dpayicric,  rj  wq  tTriroiroXv*  fiera  de  tovto  &Wo 
ohdev,  and  fiitrov,  koi  avro  fier  &Wo,  Koi  fxer  eiccIvo  erepov.  To 
these  definitions  the  poet  must  conform. 

4.  Again,  whatever  is  beautiful,  must  not  only  have  a  pro- 
per arrangeme9t  of  its  parts,  but  must  be  of  a  proper  magni- 
tude, neither  too  large  for  its  parts  to  be  comprehended,  nor 
too  smalL 

7.  The  proper  fiiyedog  of  tragedy  is  ev  otrfKara  to  tlxog,  rj 
TO  dvayKcuov  i(l>£irJQ  yiyvofJiivwy,  trvfjifialvei  elg  ehrvxlav  sic 
BvaTv\iaQ,  rj  l^  ti/rvxlaQ  eIq  dv<mr)(/av  /iera/3aXXetv. 

Vni. — 1.  Mvdoc  is  one,  not  lay  vepl  eva  ^,  as  the  authors 
'of  Heracleids,  etc.  have  wrongly  supposed,  but  because  it  is 
the  imitation  of  one  entire  action,  complete  in  all  its  parts. 

IX. — 1.  Moreover  it  is  not  the  poet's  province  to  relate  ra 
yiySftercL,  but  olo  hy  yivoiTO,  icaX  tcl  ^vvara  kutcl  to  eIkoq,  ^  to 
kyayKoioy.  For  this  is  the  proper  difference  between  the 
historian  and  poet,  not  the  use  of  metre. 

3.  And  poetry  is  more  philosophical  than  history,  because 
it  regards  ra  icadoKov,  but  history  ro  Kaff  eKatrrov. 

4.  "EffTi  5c  KaOoXov  fjL€v,  Ttf  TTol^  TO  voV  &TTa  ffvfjipmyei  Xi- 
yity,  rj  vpamiy  Kara  to  dKoc,  rj  to  ayayKoioy,  o5  aroxdZerai  ^ 

482  ANALYSIS  OF 

wolritric  oKo^ra  ii-irtOc^cvif'    ra  ^  tfa6''  ccaffroKy  ri  AXrijScadifc 

5.  Hence  comic  writers  use  names  of  their  own  inyentaoo, 
but  tragedians  t&v  yeyo^yiav  ovofidrktv  dvTi\ovTCLi,  at  lem^t  one 
or  two  in  each  {^y. 

8.  But  it  is  not  neoessatj  that  a  i^ot^  should  donfine  him* 
self  to  rove  irapa^f^/ucFovc  fivBov^y  but  he  should  be  irotiyri^c 
/laXXoi'  Tfuv  fivdwVf  i  Twv  fUTo^y,  inatmuoh  as  he  is  woofr^ 
Kara  Tify  fiififivty'  9»  fUfietrai  oc  rac  frpd^tiQ ;  even  if  he  Wzite 
ra  yiyofuya^  be  is  no  less  a  poet^ 

10.  Of  simple  plots  or  actions  the  epiiodie  are  the  worst 
And  eirectfv^fwdiyc  /iv^c  i*  that^  iy  if  ra  iir€t96ita  far  6Xktf\m. 
ovT  lUoct  0vr  dydyKti  eWi,  and  Such  are  made  by  bad  poets^ 
^L  ai&rovc,  but  by  good  ones,  2ia  rove  vvoicpiTdi* 

12»  And  since  oi  fjuSyoy  reXc^ac  e^i  9rpa£e«>c  4  t*^fJ^^*^f  £SXa 
Kai  ^ofiepQy  Kai  iKtuyHy,  that  which  is  wonderful  must  also 
have  some  appearance  of  ^auee^  rather  than  of  being  aird  rw 
ain-ofAaTov  Koi  r^c  rv)^i9f  >  for  even  easutd  etents  are  most  won* 
derful  when  they  seem  to  be  firool  design. 

X. — 1.  Plots,  like  actions,  are  either  dirXol  or  ircirXey^ym. 

2.  dirX^  9rpa(«c»  i$C  ycvo^cyiyci  d^nrep  ^piffrai^  avvcxovy  iral 
ficaC)  ^''cv  wepiittTtlas  Q  dyayyktpivfiov  ^  furafiatriQ  yiyerai'  but 
ire7rXey/Lce}'>7,  e£  i|[c  ftcra  aFayv«i»p(«r/iov,  i}  irep»rerWac>  4  dfufoiy^ 
4  fieripatric  imu 

3.  And  these  should  be  the  ntoessary  consequences  of  what 
has  gone  before,  dca^cpct  yap  ^reXv  ylysuBeu  ra^s  ^tk  rdte,  $ 
fiera  ro^c. 

XL — 1.  *E<m  ^6  ^cpnrcreia  ^i>  ^  tit  to  lyavrior  r&r  itpoTro^ 
fiiywy  furafloXilf  tcark  to  bUcoq^  ^  dyayxatoy, 

2.  AyayywpiJ^ii  ^*  iwrly,  &inrep  iroi  rovvo/ua  tfii^otvcc^  c{  Ay 
vo/ac  e2c  yrii^o'iy  lutafioKil^  %  cip  ^tXiai',  $  tyfipay  rStv  TtpoQ 
evTvxiay  Q  Zvatvy^ifiy  tfptvfiiywy^  KoKKiimiJ^e  dyayyitpim^y  6ray 
Afjia  ircpiirfrccat  yivutyrau 

3.  There  are  also  others^  but  the  above  is  best>  as  |>ro- 
ducing  eXeov  fi  fofioy* 

5,  And  since  discoveries  are  relative^  they  are  sometime^ 
of  one,  sometimes  of  both  the  persons. 

XIL  \^0f  douhtftd  authorUy.  The  following,  however,  Are 
the  definitions  of  the  parts  of  qwMxty.  1.  irpciXoyoc,  f^^c 
oXoi^  rpay^^cae  ro  irp6  X^P^^  irapo3ov.  2.  miao^ioy^  ftip^g  oKoy 
Tpaytf^iaSf  ro  fiEra^v  6Xbty  j(ppu:wy  fiekijy.     3.   e£odo£,  fdpof 

ARISTOTLE'S  POBTIC.  483 

o\oy  rpay^^cac,  ^eff  o  oix  tart  yppov  fiiXoQ,  4.  But  of  the 
chorus,  TrapoSoc,  fi  ^rpwrij  Xtjic  oXetf  x^P®''*  And  oraatfLoy^ 
fiiXoQ  X'^P^^f  "^^  ^^^^  dvaicoioTOv  koX  Tpoxaiov.  5,  KOHfiog,  6p^- 
voc  Koivog  "xppov  Kol  OTTO  iTiciyvi;?.] 

XIII. — 2.  The  poet  should  aim  at  a  plot  that  is  ireirXey^cvii, 
and  ^^tpSiv  KoX  ikttivdv  fHfirinK^.  He  should  not  represent 
Tov£  IwtetKeic  changing  from  happiness  to  misery,  a&  yap  f>o/36* 
pov,  ov^e  eXeeiyov  tovto,  dWa  fitapov  itrriv,  nor  yet  the  con?- 
trary,  for  the  fall  of  the  wicked  does  not  excite  pity  ©r  fear, 
but  only  to  <l>i\dvdp(»nroy. 

3.  The  best  subject  for  tragedy  is  6  ftfr-e  apsrp  dia(^pi»w,  Kal 
BuecuQcrvyy,  fiffre  dtd  jcajc/ov  Kal  /io^^P^®*'  /Li«raj3a\Xfc»i#  sic  Trjv 
dwrrv\jiavf  dXXa  ^t*  hfiapriay  Tiya  rAy  ky  /leyaXiy  Se{jj  tyriay  icaX 

4.  Hence  avayio;  &pa  Toy  KoKStQ  t^pyTa  ftvBoy  AirXowv  clvai 
/jtaWoy  rj.  ^iirXovy,  &<nrtp  Tiyig  (jiaffi,  Kal  furaf^aWetv  ovk  tiQ 
ehrv^fay  Ik  ^vtrrvyfaQ,  oXXa  rovyayrioy  If  ehTvj(ias  tig  ^vffTv 
Xiay^  fiil  ^a  no\(Shipiayy  aXXa  3i*  ■&^apriay  /ueyetXifis  ?  otov  £*pi?- 
rat,  rj  fieXrloyos  fiaWey  fj  x«<powc.  5.  Thus  the  plots  are 
confined  to  the  adventures  of  a  few  families. 

6.  Euripides,  from  his  plots  ending  unhappily,  is  unduly 
blamed. 

7.  But  a  happy  end  ^pleases  the  weak  feelings  of  the  spec- 
tators, as  also  does  the  hiirXfi  crvtrraffis,  where  the  play  ends  in 
a  contrary  result  to  the  good  and  bad. 

8.  But  this  is  better  suited  to  comedy. 

XIV. — 1.  Scenic  dectoration  may  excite  terror  and  pity, 
but  they  should  rather  arise  e£  ahrfic  rjfc  avardfftt^  Tdy 
vpayfjiaTkfy,  which  is  far  better,  and  more  suitable  to  the 
poet's  art. 

2.  And  ml/iQ  rather  produces  to  rtpaT^hg. 

4.  Now,  terrible  actions  must  be  either  between  friends, 
enemies,  or  persons  indi£Perent.  But  if  an  enemy  kill  an 
enemy,  oidey  iXeeLyoyy  ad  also  with  indifferent  persons.  But 
it  is  between  friends  and  relations  that  such  events  become 
piteous. 

5.  Now,  we  must  not  essential^  alter  the  received  subjects 
of  tragedy,  but  we  must  inv^it  new  ones,  and  use  the  old 
judiciously. 

6.  Now,  this  may  be  done  in  the  following  ways :  1.  sidorac 
Kal  ytyvbifficovraC)  ftS  Medea.      2,   dyyoovyrag  to  dctvoK,  tiff 

484  ANALYSIS  OF 

voTipoy  d^ayviifpiffai  Ttiy  ^iX/av,  as  CEdipus.  3.  rov  filX- 
\ovTa  TTOuiy  n  ruv  dytiKitnuty  ^i  ayyoiay^  dyayywpiffai  vpir 
voifjffai* 

7.  The  worst  way  is  yiyinrKoyra  fieWfjaai,  koI  fi^  irpaiai^ 
for  it  is  d?ra0€c*  BcXrcoi^  2c  to  dyyoovyra  fiey  Trpd^at,  vpa^ayra 
he  dyayyufplaai,  to,  re  yap  fuapoy  oi  vpoaeoTiy  Kai  ^  ,ayayyv' 
piffig  eKwXriKftKoy.  Kpanaroy  Zk  to  TtKtvraioyy  as  in  the  Iphi- 
geaia  in  Tauris. 

11.  Hence  tragedy  is  confined  to  a  few  families,  ^<ra££  ra 
TOiavra  avfifiififfKe  tradti. 

XV.  Four  requisites  of  ra  ^diy.  1.  orwc  XP*?*""**  5*  c5"  ^c 
^doc  fuy^  iayy  &<nrtp  iKiydiiy  iroiy  iftayepay  6  Xdyoc,  rj  fi  trpd^iQ 
vpoaipetriy  rcva*  ^avXov  fieyy  eay  0avXi}y*  j^priaroy  M,  lay 
Xpriarriy.     tarn  Zk  tv  licaaT^  yiyei, 

2.  ra  hpixoTTovra* 

3.  TO  o/ioioy. 
^  4.  TO  OfiaXoy. 

6.  Furthermore,  xf>^  f*"  ly  role  fjdetny,  &ixirep  koX  iy  rjf  rwv 
vpayfioTwy  fnxrraan,  atl  (riTeiy,  ^  to  dyayKoioyy  3  to  eikoq.  7. 
And  hence  the  development  of  a  plot  should  arise  out  of  the 
plot  itself y  not  out  of  the  machinery,  which  should  be*  confined 
to  ra  e£<ii  tov  ZpdfiaTOQf  things  happening  before  or  after  the 
time  of  action.  And  6Xoyoy  firihey  eJyai  iy  toIq  "Trpdyfiaaiyy 
but  if  so,  cjw  TTfc  TpaywZias* 

8.  Like  good  painters,  we  must  improve  upon  the  original 
we  imitate. 

XVI.  [Doubtful.  '  The  four  kinds  of  discovery  are,  1.  ^ 
Zid  TQy  (rrifieibfyy  and  these  are  either  avfupwoy  or  iwiKTriTa, 
which  are  the  worst.  2.  ai  vetrotrifxiyai  vtto  tov  iroiiiTovy  also 
ovic  &Texyoi.     3.  Zia  fxyiifirig,     4.  Ik  avWoyiafJiov. 

8.  But  the  best  is  ^  e^  ahrwy  rcDv  irpayfidTWVy  r^c  einrX^fea^C 
yiyyofxivriC  Zi  thorwy.     Next  to  it,  if  Ik  mfWoyifTfwv,^ 

XVII. — 1.  The  poet  should  put  himself  as  much  as  possi- 
ble in  the  place  of  a  spectator. 

2.  And  of  an  actor  likewise,  for  he  will  best  express  agita- 
tion who  feels  it,  Zi  o  iwj>vovc  fi  noiffTucfi  ktmy  n  fiayiKOv, 

3.  He  should  first  draw  out  a  general  sketch  of  the  subject, 
then  add  the  episodes,  taking  care  that  they  belong  properly 
to  the  subject.  They  are  short  in  tragedy,  but  serve  to 
lengthen  out  an  epic  poem.  . 

XVIII.  \_Doubtful,     Every  tragedy  consists  of  two  parts : 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  485 

1.  ^iaiQy  fj  air  dp')(fjc  y-i'xpi  tovtov  tov  fxipovQ  o  ta')(aT6v  itntv^ 
If  oh  fierafiaiyei  elg  fhrvyiav, 

2.  XixTiQy  ii  dtro  tyiq  dpxrJQ  r^c  fiiTafiaffeug  fc^XP'  Ti^ovg. 
Four  kinds  of  tragedy :  1.  ffCTrXcy^tViy,  ^c  to  6\oy  iari  wcpt- 

wireia  Koi  dvayvutpiffig.  2.  vadririKri'  oloy,  oi  re  Aiavrec*  Koi 
oi  l^lovec,  3.  ijOiKTi'  oTov,  ai  ^diufTL^eg  Kai  6  UrjXevc.  4.  olov, 
at  re  ^opKi^eg  Koi  Upofiridevg,  koi  oca  iv  ^^jy,  with  all  which  the 
poet  should  be  more  or  less  acquainted,  for  the  public  now 
expect  excellence  in  all  the  different  kinds. 

3.  Tragedies  are  the  same  or  different,  not  according  to  the 
•  subject,  but  the  5cVtc  and  XOtng,     Many  poets  complicate  well, 

but  develops  badly.] 

4.  We  must  be  careful  /ij)  voteiy  i-KoitouKov  (L  e.  xoXv- 
p,vQov)  ffVffTTffjLa  Tpay^^iay. 

7.  Moreover,  the  chorus  must  be  considered  as  one  of  the 
persons  of  the  drama,  and  be  a  part  of  the  whole,  not  arbi- 
trarily introduced. 

XIX.  The  diayola  has  been  treated  of  in  the  Rhetoric,  and 
includes  to,  ts.  diroZtiKVvyai^  ical  to  Xveir,  koX  to  •Kadtf  irapaaKtv- 
dZsiV  (noy,  tXeoyy  rj  (fiofioyf  fj  opyrjv,  koI  ova  roiavro,  icat  en 
fieyedog,  koi  (r^iKp6Trira.  The  poet  must  therefore  draw  from 
the  same  sources  as  the  orator,  except  that  in  the  drama 
things  must  appear  to  be  such  &vev  ^iSao-icaX/ac,  to.  ^e  iy  r^ 
Xoy^  inro  tov  XiyoyTOg  Trapao-iceva^ecrdac,  icat  irapa  Toy  \6yov 
yiyyeadai. 

4.  The  figures  of  speech  concern  the  actor,  rather  than  the 
poet,  oloy  Ti  cvroXi),  koX  tI  e^xij,  iceri  difiyrfffigf  koi  dweiXii,' koi 
ipufTtiffigf  Koi  diroKpiaig,  koI  ft  ti  &XXo  TOiovToy, 

XX.  [This  chapter  is  an  useless  scholium.  The  proper 
divisions  and  definitions  will  be  found  in  the  Rhetoric.] 

XXI. — 1.  A  word  is  either  AttXcvv,  o  firj  Ik  arffiaivoyTUfy 
ffvyKeiTaiy  or  hnrXovy,  either  Ik  arifjiaiyoyTog  koI  darifwVf  or  Ik 
arifjiaivoyTwy.     The  following  are  the  different  kinds. 

rt  f         T      -         ^  1  Sometimes  the  same  word, 

2.  I.  «;p»v,  y  xf:i.^<u  ^cacTOi.  I      .^  reference  to  different 

4.  in.  /xera<^opa,  oyofxarog  dXXoTpiov  tTrnpopOf  ij  cl'tto  yiyovg 
£Ti  dhog^  5  diro  tilovg  kwl  yiyog'  5  dffo  eihovg  CTri  tl^ogy  rj  Kara 
TO  dyaXoyoy. 

9.  rv.  weiroirifiiyoyf  o  oXwc  firj  KoXovfJieyoy  viro  Tiyiay,  clutoq 
TiOerai  6  voiijrfig. 

486  ANALYSIS  OF 

10.  V.  iTreKTerafjilrov,  iav  t^vrieyTt  fioKporipf  Kt\firiftivov,  y 

YI.  diprjprifiivov^  ay  dfyprffxivev  p  n,  i?  avrov,  fj  ifi/^epKrifiirov. 
vn.  iiriWayfAivor,  Sray  rov  SrofAa^ofievov,  to  fXEv  KoraKtiicrfy 
TO  ^e  iroiy. 

[The  remainder  19  both  spurioas  and  incorrect.] 
XXTT. — 1.  The  virtaes  of  Xcftc  are, 

(ra<bri  eiyai  kcli  jlc^  rairuyiiv. 

I  .    ,  •        1. 

•tf  r«K  Kvpiiay  oyoftdriiw.         and  such  will  be  if  toiq  fcKtroic 

\pw^iyri^  i.  e.  yXw7TO«c,  fieraifkO' 
paitf.KCtt  vatri  tvIq  vapa  to  Kvpwy, 
But  too  great  a  use  of  such  words 
will  'proauce  an  enigma  or  bar- 
barism, for  the  verj  notion  of  an 
enigma  is  to  Xiyoyra  vvdpj^oyra 
SidvyaTa  mfyd\j/ai. 
4.  Both  effects  are  produced  by  a  judicious  use  of  ai  EireK- 

rdtreig  Koi  airoKovaly  Kal  cfaXXayal  rwy  oyofMiTuv. 

9.  But  a  judicious  use  of  metaphors  is  the  greatest  excel- 
lence of  all,  for  it  cannot  be  derived  from  another,  and  is  a  sign 
r^C  ev<j>viac,  to  yap  ei  lUTa^eptiy^  to  Sfioioy  deu^peiy  cor*. 

10.  ra  ^ifrXa  are  best  suited  to  dithyrambs. 
yXwrrat,  to  heroic  verse. 
fjL£Ta(l>opal,  to  Iambic. 

But  heroic  verse  admits  of  all  these  kinds.  I-^mbic  should 
approach  as  much  as  possible  to  the  diction  of  common  life. 

XXIII.  In  narrative  and  hexameter  verse,  the  story  ought 
to  be  dramatically  constructed,  as  in  tragedy,  i.  e.  it  should  be 
Trepl  filay  irpa^iy  SXriy  Kal  rcXe/av,  £\ov<ray  dp^tjy  koi  fxitroy  jcoi 
reXoc,  tv',  AtTittp  (Hoy  ly  oXoy,  voi^  tt)v  oiKtiay  ri^oyrjy,  differing 
from  history,  which  treats  of  events  cf  one  time^  not  of  one 
action. 

3.  Hence  the  excellent  management  of  Homer  in  not  at- 
tempting to  bring  the  whole  war  into  his  poem,  but  only 
taking  one  part,  filling  it  out  with  episodes. 

XXIV.  The  epic  poem  should  also  agree  with  the  tragic 
as  to  its  kinds  [simple  or  complicated,  rrral  or  disastrously 
Its  parts  are  also  the  same,  except  fuXo^oua  and  oi^tc,  for  it 
must  have  irepiveTeiaiy  ayayywpicreiQy  1  :0i/iara,  ^cayocac,  and 

ARISTOTLE'S  POETIC.  487 

Xc£cc»  suitably  arranged,  as  in  Homer,  j^  fiev  IXiag,  Il^Xovv  ical 
vaOriTiKoV  fi  hi  Odvtrtreiay  vevXeyfiivov*  avayvktpiffig  yap  dioXov 
Koi  ijOiicii,  mpoQ  Ik  tovtoiq  Xi^ei  Kai  diayoi^g,  vdyrac  vvep/3e/3Xi}Jce. 

3.  It  also  differs  in*  length. 

4.  For  it  has  the  advantage  of  being  extended  by  narrative 
of  many  simultaneous  actions,  which  increase  the  oyicoc  rov 
woiriiJiaTog,  and  also  by  diiferent  episodes. 

5.  Heroic  is  the  established  metre  of  narrative  poetry,  for  it 
is  trramfjiutTaToy  Koi  oyKwZiaraTov^  but  the  Iambic  and  Trochaic 

KlVflTlKQ^  TO  lUVi  OpyflOTlKOV ^  TO  ^C,  VpaXTlKOV, 

6.  A  mixture  of  these  metres  is  absurd. 

7.  Like  Homer,  the  poet  should  know  when  il  is  fitting  for 
him  to  speak  in  person. 

8.  The  BavfxaffToy  is  necessary  in  tragedy,  but  in  epopee 
even  to  aXoyoy  is  admitted,  which  is  most  wonderful,  iia  t'. 
A*d  op^y  £tc  Toy  irpdrroyTa. 

9.  And  Homer  has  chiefly  taught  other  poets  tp£v3^  Xiyny 
a»c  l^h  which  is  by  a  vapaXoyia/jog  on  the  part  of  the  hearer. 

10.  And  the  poet  should  prefer  d^vvara  icat  ukoto,  fidXXop 
Ti  hvyara  koi  dirLQaya'  tovq  re  XoyovQ  fjirl  trvyiarratrOai  Ik  fiepiow 
uXoytoyy  dXXa  fidXitrra  fiiy  fiti^ey  €)(ccv  &Xoyoy'  cI  he  jui),  c£a 
tov  fivOevfjLarosy  as  CEdipus'  ignorance  as  to  the  manner  of 
Lai  us'  death. 

11.  And  the  diction  should  be  most  studied  in  the  idle 
parts  of  the  poem,  where  there  are  neither  manners  nor  senti- 
ment.    For  these  latter  are  obscured  by  over-fine  diction. 

XXV.  and  XXVL  [  Very  doubtful.     As  these  two  chap 
ters  are  quite  unintelligible,  except  in  reference  to  the  ex- 
amples quoted,  it  is  of  little  use  to  analyse  them.] 

rtlE  END. 
2  K 

.  INDEX 

ARISTOTLE'S  TBEATISKS 

RHETORIC  AND  THE  POETIC. 

Ability,  a  specific  good,  41. 
Abundant,  the,  better  than  the  rare, 

48. 
Accent,  objections  to,  removed,  467. 
Accident,  an  element  of  the  ap- 
parent enthymem,  195. 
Accomplices  in  guilt,  to  be  feared, 

122. 
Accusation   and    defence,    yarious 

reasonings  in,  67. 
Achilles,  anger  of,  107. 
Action,    habitual,    attended    Tfith 

pleasure,  76. 
Actions,  tragedy  an  imitation  o^ 

418. 
Actors,  complaints  respecting,  471. 
Admiration,<attended  with  pleasure, 

76,  77. 
Adulation,  meaning  of,  explained, 

128. 
Adultery,  legal  definition  of,  88, 89. 
>£nesidemus,  specious  liberality  of, 

85. 
^sop,  fables  of,  166,  167. 
Agatho,  remark  of,  163;  lines  firom, 

425. 
Aged,  see  Old  Age. 
Ages,  definition  of,  150. 
AItiov,  definition  of,  47,  n. 
'AXijOlv,  the  subject  matter  of  logic, 

10,  n. 
AXa^c&v,  application  of  the  word, 

10,  n. 

2  XL  2 

Alcseus,  saying  of,  60. 

"Alcmeeon"  of  Astydamas,  the 
tragedy  of,  434  et  n. 

Alliteration,  instances  of,  233. 

Ambiguity,  an  element  of  apparent 
enthymems,  192. 

Ambitious,  the,  likely  to  feel  indig- 

'  nation,  144;  disposed  to  envy, 
145. 

Amplification,  necessity  for,  65,  66. 

and  extenualion,  observations 

on,  201. 

Amusements,  attended  -with  plea- 
sure, 75. 

Analogy,  an  element  of  the  enthy- 
mem, 186. 

Androcles,  the  orator,  188. 

Anger,  feelings  of,  3,  71 ;  definition 
of,  105;  persons  against  whom 
and  by  whom  it  is  felt,  ib.  et 
aeq.;  three  species  of,  106;  how 
allayed,  114.      ' 

and  hatred,  six  points  of  com- 
parison between,  120. 

Anomalies,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem, 190. 

Antimachus,  precept  of,  223. 

Antithesis,  of  style,  232;  the  false 
one,  234. 

Appetite,  impulse  of  the,  71;  tlie 
desire  of  what  is  pleasant,  73; 
irrational  and  rational,  ib, 

*Apxh,  definition  of,  47. 

490 

INDEX. 

Areopagus,  practice  of  the,  3. 
Argos,  peculiar  law  at,  93. 
Arguing  from  cause  to  effect,  an 

element  of  the  enthymem,  190. 
Arguments,  on  the  solution  of,  )97 

et  seq, 
Aristippus,  passage  from,  184. 
Aristocracy,  form  of  government, 

55. 
Articles,  one  of  the  parts  of  diction, 

449. 
Arts,  illustration  from  the,  4,  n. 
Auditors,  feelings  of  the,  12;  held 

to  be  AtrXolf  15 ;  three  kinds  of, 

24;  how  to  appease  the,  115. 

B. 

Bacchic  hymns,  all  the  means  of 
imitation  employed  together  by, 
409,  n. 

Badges,  honourable,  61. 

Beauty,  different  according  to  dif- 
ference of  age,  36 ;  of  objects  and 
words,  213;  of  style,  234;  mag- 
nitude the  constituent  of,  421.   . 

Benefactors,  friendliness  felt  for, 
117. 

Benevolence,  object  of,  134. 

Birth,  high,  qualities  of,  34;  cha- 
racteristic disposition  of,  156. 

Body,  excellencies  of  the,  36. 

Brave,  the,  friendliness  felt  for,  117. 

Calippus  the  orator,  188. 

CalHstratus,  his  charge  against 
Melenopus,  92. 

Cases,  one  of  the  parts  of  diction, 
449. 

Censure,  attended  with  pleasure,  78. 

Chance,  definition  of,  38;  mankind 
impelled  by,  70 ;  on  the  circum- 
stances of,  426. 

Character,  goodness  of,  35 ;  a  spe- 
cific good,  41 ;  attended  with 
pleasure,  75 ;  men  of,  are  some- 
times impelled  to  commit  injus- 
tice, 82;  comparison  of,  to  be 
made,  66;  what  constitutes,  418. 

Charemon,  saying  of,  191. 

Xttfxv,  definition  of,  133. 

Xetfiaivstt  meaning  of,  441,  n. 

Chorus,  a  part  of  tragedy,  429 ;  its 
various  divisions,  ib. ;  business  of 
the,  445;  gradual  extinction  of 
the,  ib,y  n. 

Cicero,  caution  of,  16,  n. 

Cithern-playing,  a  favourite  accom- 
plishment of  the  Athenian  youth, 
407.  n. 

Comedy,  an  imitative  art,  407 ;  ori- 
gin of,  413,  415  etseq. 

Comeliness,  different  according  to 
difference,  of  age,  36. 

Commendation,  language  of,  64, 65. 

Commos,  a  part  of  the  chorus,  429. 

Community,  injustice  to  the,  de- 
fined, 87. 

Compacts,  definition  of,  98. 

Compulsion,  the  motive  of  human 
action,  70. 

Confidence,  definition  of,  125;  how 
created,  ib.;  persons  who  feel, 
126. 

Conjunctions,  one  of  the  parts  of 
diction,  449. 

Conon,  expression  of,  191. 

Consequents,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem,  185,  186. 

Constraint,  freedom  from,  pleasant, 
73. 

Contempt,  a  feeling  contrary  to 
emulation,  149. 

Contraries,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem,  178;  consideration  of, 
468. 

Contumely,  definition  of,  107. 

Courage,  quality  of,  50;  a  consti- 
tuent of  virtue,  58. 

Cowardice,  illustration  of,  128. 

Crimes,  on  the  various  degrees  of, 
92  et  seq. 

Critics,  objections  of,  answered, 
463  ef  teg. 

Custom,  mankind  impelled  by,  7]. 

Dancing,  an  imitative  art,  408 
Danger,  an  object  of  fear,  122 

INDEX. 

491 

Decisions,  legal,  an  element  of  the 
enthymem,  184. 

Declamation,  often  ridiculous  when 
read,  247. 

Decoration,  a  certain  part  of  tra- 
gedy, ^17  et  n. 

Deeds,  one  of  the  proofs  necessary 
in  judicial  oratory,  98;  argu- 
ments to  be  used  for  and  against, 
98,99. 

Definition,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem, 182. 

Definitions  of  Aristotle's  Rhetpric, 
385—403;  of  hU  Poetic,  478— 
487. 

Delicacy  of  feeling,  disquisition  on, 
127  etaeq. 

Democracy,  form  of  government,  55. 

Depravity,  the  cause  of  injustice,  68. 

AtaPoXfit  use  of  the  word,  3,  ». 

AiaXiKTiKiiy  explanation  of,  23,  n. 

AiaXtKTiKdty  explained,  10,  n. 

Dialectics,  rhetoric  an  offshoot  of, 
13. 

Aiavoia,  a  certain  part  of  tragedy, 
417  e*n. 

Diction,  an  element  of  apparent  en- 
thymems,  192;  definition  of,  420; 
on  the  use  of,  in  tragedy,  446 ;  on 
the  various  parts  of,  447  et  aeq,; 
requisites  of,  454  et  aeq.;  should 
sometimes  be  laboured,  463 ; 
many  modifications  of,  464 ;  criti- 
cal objections  to,  removed,  466  ; 
custom  of,  468. 

Dilemma,  an  element  of  the  enthy- 
mem, 185. 

AioifvooKoXaKat,  origin  of  the  term, 
211,  n. 

Discovery,  explanation  of,  in  fable, 
427 ;  feelings  excited  by  the,  428 ; 
on  the  different  kinds  of,  438  et 
aeq. 

Discussions,  mmute,  to  be  avoided, 
28. 

Disgraced,  the,  motives  of,  for  com- 
mitting injustice,  83. 

Dissembling,  the,  to  be  feared,  123. 

Dithyrambic  poetry,  an  imitative 
art,  407 ;  all  the  means  of  imita- 
tion employed  together  by,  409,  n. 

Dorieus,  conqueror  at  the  Olympic 
games,  17. 

Draco,  the  laws  of,  191. 

Drama,  etymology  of  the,  411;  on 
its  various  parts,  420 ;  on  exhibi- 
tions in  the,  421. 

E. 

EWii,  use  of  the  term,  22,  23. 

EIkov,  definition  of,  17  e^  aeq.;  en- 
thymems  deduced  from,  17;  so- 
lution of,  sometimes  fallacious, 
199 

*Eiinr£irTscv,  meaning  of,  441,  n. 

Empedocles,  saying  of,  87. 

Emulation,  definition  of,  147;  na- 
ture, objects,  and  feelings  of,  147 

■  et  aeq. 

Encomium,  language  of,  64. 

Enemies,  motives  of,  for  committing 
injustice,  83,  84;  objects  of  fear, 
122. 

Enthymems,  the  very  body  of  proof, 
3,  7 ;  consequence  of  disregard- 
ing, 5,  n. ;  a  sort  of  syllogism,  7, 
14 ;  deduced  from  dKora  and 
o-tj/uela,  17  e^  aeq.;  two  different 
sorts  of,  22,  177;  suited  to  judi- 
cial oratory,  66;  on  the  nature 
and  use  of,  168,  174  et  aeq.;  va- 
rious elements  of,  178  et  aeq.; 
how  to  be  used  in  legal  proof, 
263,  265,  267. 

,  fallacious,  the  various  ele- 
ments of,  192  et  aeq. 

Enumeration  of  parts,  an  element 
of  the  enthymem,  185. 

Envy,  opposed  to  pity,  141  ;  defini- 
tion of,  141,  145 ;  on  the  nature, 
objects*  and  feelings  of,  145  et 
aeq. 

'Eiraiuot,  definition  of,  64. 

Epic  Poetry,  similarity  of  tragedy 
to,  416;  observations  on,  458; 
different  species  and  parts  of,  459 
et  ae^. ;  merit  of  imitation  in,  as 
compared  with  tragedy,  470  et 
aeq. 

*E<rtxaipeicaicta,  explanation  of, 
142,  n. 

492 

INDEX. 

Epideictic  oratory,  'the  subjects  of, 
57 ;  the  common  point  of,  64 ; 
amplification  suitable  to,  66 ; 
general  nature  of,  1Z5.    , 

- —  stj'le  suited  to  writing,  248. 

'E-M-t-iroita,  difficulty  of  defining, 
408,  n. 

Episode,  a  part  of  tragedy,  429 ; 
must  be  suitable  to  the  plot,  442 ; 
Homer's  use  of,  458. 

Epithets,  on  the  use  of,  213,  215. 

Epopee,  an  imitative  art,  407,  408  ; 
various  parts  of  the,  459  ;  its 
power  of  extension,  and  its  pro- 
per metre,  460 ;  necessity  for  the 
wonderful  in,  461. 

Equals,  likely  to  be  envied,  146. 

Equipoise  of  style,  233. 

Equity,  in  law,  explanation  of,  89 
tt  seq. 

Equivocation,  an  element  of  the 
enthymem,  191. 

Errors,  previously  committed,  an 
element  of  the  enthymem,  190. 

•Hen  explained,  149,  n. 

Eubulus,  adopts  a  sayingof  Plato,97. 

Euphony,  necessity  of,  212. 

Euripides,  his  reply  to  the  Syra- 
cusans,  131. 

EurpaireXot,  remarks  on,  152,  «. 

Exaggeration,  an  element  of  the  ap- 
parent enthymems,  194. 

Examples,'  suited  to  deliberative 
oratory,  66 ;  different  kinds  of, 
and  their  use,  165  et  aeq.;  reason- 
ings derived  from,  199 ;  solution 
of,  200 ;  best  suited  to  proofs,  263. 

Excellencies,  personal,  attended  with 
pleasure,  78. 

Excess  of  good  or  evil,  46  et  aeq. 

Exhorting,  objects  of,  in  oratory,  33. 

Exode,  a  part  of  tragedy,  429. 

Exordium,  occurrence  of  the,  250 ; 
on  the  nature  and  use  of  the,  251 
et  aeq. 

Expedient,  the  object  of,  proposed, 
39;  what  is  the  higher  degree  of, 
44. 

Exports,  necessary  to  be  under- 
stood by  the  orator,  31. 

Extenuation,  observations  on,  201. 

Fable,  or  Apologue,  use  of,  by  way 
of  example,  166;  suited  to  the 
deliberative  orator,  167. 

-~~  definition  of,  418  ;  revolutions 
and  discoveries  of,  the  cause  of 
pleasure,  419;  the  soul  of  tra- 
gedy, ib.;  on  the  unity  of,  422 
et  aeq. ;  on  the  simple  and  com- 
plex, 426, 427 ;  the  various  requi- 
sites of,  427,  428 ;  the  simple 
preferable  to  the  two-fold,  431 ; 
precepts  respecting,  434;  exam- 
ple of,  ib.;  on  the  incidents  of,  437. 

Fact,  questions  of,  to  be  left  to  the 
judge,  5. 

Fallacies  of  apparent  enthymems, 
192  et  aeq. 

Fear,  definition  of,  121 ;  on  the  na- 
ture and  objects  of,  121  et  aeq.; 
closely  allied  to  pity,  124. 

Feeling  essential  to  the  poet,  441. 

Feelings  of  delicacy  and  shame,  dis- 
quisition on,  Vn  et  aeq. 

Flattery  attended  with  pleasure,  76. 

Forgiving,  the,  friendliness  felt  for, 
118. 

Fortunate,  the,  dispositions  and  cha- 
racteristics of,  159. 

Fortune,  definitions  of,  3^,  150. 

Friendless,  the,  disposition  of^  for 
committing  injustice,  84. 

Friendliness,  definition  of,  116 ; 
those  to  whom  we  entertain  the 
feelings  of,  116  et  aeq. 

Friends,  number  and  excellence  of, 
the  difference  defined,  38;  mo- 
tives of,  for  committing  injustice, 
83. 

Friendship,  attended  with  pleasure, 
78;  causes  of,  116  et  aeq.,  119: 
three  kinds  of,  119. 

Genders,  on  the  proper  distinction 
of,  221 ;  remarks  on,  454. 

Generous,  distinguished  from  noble, 
156. 

INDEX. 

493 

Genius,  high,  a  special  good,  41. 

r\tt»TTa,  use  of,  209. 

Good,  to  do  and  to  receive^  condu- 
ciTe  to  pleasure,  77. 

fortune,  definition  of,  38. 

old  age,  definition  of,  38. 

qualities,  apparent,  to  be  re- 
garded as  real,  62. 

-.^-  and  expedient,  the,  proposi" 
tions  on  tiie  subjects  of,  39  et 
teg. ;  what  is  the  greater  degree 
of,  44  et  aeg. 

Goods,  internal  and  external,  34 ; 
indisputable,  40  ;  disputable,  41. 

Gorgias,  saying  of,  265. 

Goyemment,  reasons  for  under- 
standing the  different  forms  of, 
54  et  uq, ;  the  four  forms  de- 
fined, 55 ;  ends  of  each,  ib. ;  the 
orator  should  know  them,  56. 

Gratitude,  on  the  feelings  of,  133 
et  aeg. ;  the  orator  to  invest  the 
audience  with  feelings  of,  135. 

Great  and  small,  on  the  subject  of, 
165. 

Greater,  as  compared  with  less,  46 
et  aeg. 

Grief  for  another's  calamity  is  pity, 
136,  n. 

Guilt,  on  the  various  degrees  of,  92 
et  aeg. 

Gymnastic  excellence  described,  37. 

H. 

Habits,  definition  of,  150. 
Happiness,  the  object  of  mankind, 

33;    four     definitions    of,    ib.; 

opinion  of  the  schools  on,  ib.,  n, ; 

a  specific  good,  40. 
Harmony    and    rhythm,  originate 

from  imitation,  412. 
Hatred,  causes  of,  120;  six  points 

of  comparison  between  anger  and, 

120. 
Health,  the  excellency  of  the  body, 

36  ;>  a  specific  good,  41. 
Hearers,  see  Auditors. 
Hegesippus,  consults  the  oracle,  184. 
Hero,  cluuracter  of  the,  to  be  mode- 
rately drawn,  431,  432. 

Herodicus,  expression  of,  191. 
Hippolochus,  encomium  passed  on, 

65. 
History,  how  it  differs  firom  poetry, 

and  how  it  should  be  applied  in, 

423  et  aeg, 
*'  Hobbes'  Brief  of  the  Art  of  Rhe- 

toric,"  275—376. 
Homer,  passage   from,   143;   epic 

skill   of,  422;    genius   of,   458, 

463. 
Honour,  evidence  of  character,  35 ; 

a   specific  good,   41;    attended 

with  pleasure,  75. 
—  men  of,  their  motives  for  com- 
mitting ii\ju8tice,  83. 
Hope,  conducive  to  pleasure,  73. 
Horror,  distinct  from  pity,  139. 
Hurt,  explanation  of,  88. 
Husbandmen,  firiendliness  felt  for, 

117. 
Hyperbole,  a  sort  of  metaphor^  245. 

I. 

Iambic  metre,  suitableness  of,  to 
tragedy,  414 ;  origin  of,  415.  , 

Ideas,  rules  for  recognising,  441. 

Iliad  and  Odyssey,  difference  be- 
tween the,  460. 

Ill-will,  feeling  of,  3. 

Images,  natural  delight  in,  412. 

Imitation,  attended  with  'pleasure, 
77;  the  various  objects  of,  in 
poetry,  409, 410 ;  difference  in  the 
manner,  410,  411 ;  the  first  natu- 
ral taste  for,  in  poetry,  412 ;  har- 
mony and  rhythm  originate  from, 
412,  413;  respective  merits  of 
tragic  and  epic,  470  et  aeg. 

Imitative  arts,  diJSerent  species  of, 
407. 

Imports,  questions  of,  to  be  familiar 
to  the  orator,  31. 

Impossible,  disquisition  on  the,  161 
et  aeg* 

Impudence,  definition  of,  127. 

Imputations,  topics  for  removing, 
255  et  aeg. 

Inconsistency,  an  element  of  the 
enthymem,  187. 

494 

INDEX. 

Incontinence,  the  cause  of  injustice, 
68 ;  deanition  of,  82. 

Incontinent,  the,  disposition  of,  to 
commit  injustice,  82. 

Incredibility,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem,  188. 

Indignation,  on  the  nature,  objects, 
and  feelings  of,  140  et  aeq. 

Individual,  injustice  to  the,  defined, 
87. 

Indolent,  the*  motives  of,  for  com- 
mitting injustice,  83. 

Induction,  rhetorical,  21 ;  an  ele- 
ment of  the  enthymem,  183. 

Inflections,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem derirable  from,  1 79. 

Injured,  the,  disposition  of,  for  com- 
mitting injustice,  83,  85;  are  ob- 
jects of  fear,  123. 

Injury,  definition  of,  88. 

Injustice,  two  causes  of,  68;  the 
motives  of,  ib. ;  with  what  dispo- 
sitions men  commit  it,  79  et  aeq. ; 
various  acts  of,  enumerated  and 
defined,  86  et  aeq. ;  on  the  greater 
degrees  of,  92  et  aeq, ;  an  object 
of  fear,  122. 

Innocent,  the,  objects  of  fear,  127; 
sensible  of  shame,  130. 

Insult,  legal  definition  of,  88,  89. 

Insulted  virtue,  an  object  of  fear, 
122. 

Intemperance,  illustration  of,  128. 

Interrogation,  on  the  nature  and  use 
of,  267  ei  aeq, 

Iphicrates,  encomium  on  himself, 
52,  63;  passages  from,  181,  182, 
186. 

Ismenias,  the  orator,  183. 

Isocrates,  passages  from,  184,  185. 

Jason,  a  saying  of,  85. 

Jests,  nature  of,  241. 

Judge,  the,not  to  be  biassed  by  appeaL 
ing  to  the  passions,  3 ;  laws  not  to 
be  left  to  his  discretion,  4 ;  ques- 
tions of  fact  to  be  left  to  him,  5 ; 
does  not  always  fulfil  the  charac- 
ter, 6^  necessity  of  investing  him 

with  a  favourable  feeling,  103  e 
aeq. 
Justice,  a  constituent  of  virtue,  58. 

K. 

EaX6v,  tJ,  defined,  57;  the  yBrious 
points  of  the,  59. 

KoTrafiott  amusement  of  the,  85,  n. 

Kptrqc  TO?  vofiov  KavtoVf  applica- 
tion of  the  metaphor,  3,  n. 

Kvpta,  use  of,  209  et  n. 

Lacedemonians,  custom  of  wearing 
the  hair  among  the,  62. 

Language,  purity  of,  necessary, 
219  et  aeq, 

Lt^ughter,  attended  with  pleasure, 
79. 

Law,  forbids  irrelevant  matter,  7; 
the  various  objects  of,  29,  n.  ; 
questions  of,  31 ;  peculiar  or  uni- 
versal, ^7, 86 ;  Demosthenes'  ex- 
planation of,  t&.,  n.;  written  and 
unwritten,  89;  on  the  violation 
of,  93;  how  the  orator  is  to  adapt 
it  to  his  purpose,  94 ;  one  of  the 
proofs  necessary  in  judicial  ora- 
tory, 94,  95;  distinguished  firom 
deeds  or  compacts,  98. 

Learning,  attended  with  pleasure,77. 

Legislation,  questions  of,  31 ;  ac- 
counts of  travellers  useful  to,  32. 

Leodamus,  sayings  of,  48,  96. 

Letters,  one  of  the  parts  of  diction, 
448. 

Liberality,  a  constituent  of  virtue, 
58. 

Locrians,  law  of  retaliation  among 
the,  53,  n. 

Logic,  Thetoric  the  counterpart  of, 
1,  28 ;  Zeno's  illustration  of,  2, 
n.;  how  it  difi'ers  from  rhetoric, 
10;  aXtjOlv  the  subject  matter 
of,  10,  n. 

Logician,  reasons  why  he  may  be 
&e  best  rhetorician,  7. 

A6yo9t  explanation  of,  14,  n. 

Love,  criterion  of,  74. 

INDEX. 

495 

M. 

Magnanimity,  a  constituent  of  vir- 
tue, 58. 

Magnificence,  a  constituent  of  irir- 
tue,  59. 

Magnitude,  the  constituent  of  beau- 
ty, 421. 

Manhood,  dispositions  and  charac- 
teristics of,  155  et  8eq, 

Mavticc0T-spa,  remarks  on,  157,  n. 

Mankind,  characters  of,  149. 

Manners,  definition  of,  418,  419; 
not  the  end  of  tragedy,  418 ;  the 
various  requisites  of,  435  et  aeq, 

Manlius,  the  orator,  183. 

Masks,  the  inventors  of,  not  known, 
415. 

Maxims,  different  kinds  of,  and 
their  use,  169  et  aeq, ;  to  be  used 
in  the  proof  and  narration*  264.> 

Meanness,  illustration  of,  128. 

Melopoeia,  a  certain  part  of  tragedy, 
417  e<n.,  420. 

Memory,  conducive  to  pleasure, 
73,  74;  on  recognition  by,  439. 

"  Menalippe  the  Wise,"  tragedy  of, 
438  et  n. 

M^pov  irpdt  fiipo9f  explanation  of, 
21. 

McTtt^opai,  use  of,  209. 

Metaphors,  on  the  nature  and  use 
of,  210,  219;  misuse  of,  216; 
productive  of  pleasure,  234 ;  four- 
fold, 236;  various  instances  of, 
239  ;  produce  personification, 
240;  on  Uie  different  species  of, 
450;  exemplifications  of,  452; 
means  of  employing  them,  453, 
456;  critical  objections  to,  an- 
swered, 467. 

Metre,  difference  of  from  rhythm, 
412,  n. 

Metres,  mixed,  obscurity  of,  461. 

Monarchy,  a  form  of  government, 
55. 

Monstrous,  the,  not  tragic,  433. 

Moral  excellence,  necessary  for  the 
orator,  104. 

sentiments,  different  kinds  of, 

their  use  and  advantage,  169  et 

aeq. 
Motives,  an  element  of  the  enthy- 

mem,  186,  188. 
of  injustice,  causes  of  the,  68 

etseq. 

N-. 

Narration,  on  the  nature  and  use 
of,  258  et  seq.;  to  be  made  pa- 
thetic and  moral,  261 ;  least  used 
in  tieliberative  oratory,  262. 

Narrow-minded,  the,  disposed  to 
envy,  145. 

Natural  logic,  illustration  of,  2,  n. 

Nature,  mankind  impelled  by,  70 ; 
conformity  to,  attended  with  plea- 
sure, 77. 

Necessity,  acts  of,  painful,  73. 

Noble,  distinguished  from  generous, 
156. 

Nomes,  a  species  of  hymns  to  Apol- 
lo, 409,  n. 

Nouns,  one  of  the  parts  of  diction, 
449;  the  different  species  of,  450, 
451,  453,  454. 

O. 

Oaths,  one  of  the  proofs  necessary 
in  judicial  evidence,  100;  their 
fourfold  division,  100  et  seq. 

Objections,  fourfold,  198;  of  the 
critics  answered,  463  et  aeq. 

Offspring,  the  excellence  of  a  good, 
34. 

OlKtla,  use  of,  209. 

Old  Age,  a  specific  good,  37 ;  pas- 
sions, habits,  and  characteristics 
of,  152  et  aeq. 

.Oligarchy,  form  of  government,  55. 

Olympic  victor,  inscription  of  the, 
52,  63. 

Oration,  three  things  proposed  by 
an,  24 ;  three  kinds  of,  ib. ;  end 
peculiar  to  each,  25 ;  illustration 
of,  26. 

Orator,  the  object  of  the  deliberative, 
25;  propositions  necessary  to, 
26,  27,  et  aeq. ;  objects  at  which 

496 

INDEX. 

he  should  aim  in  exhorting  or 
dissuading,  33  et^  acq. ;  should 
advise  on  "  the  means,"  39; 
should  understand  the  different 
forms  of  government,  54  et  aeq,; 
virtue  and  vice  the  objects  of,  57 
et  seq. ;  the  number  and  nature 
of  the  sources  out  of  which  he 
must  construct  his  reasonings, 
67  et  eeq, ;  how  he  is  to  adapt 
the  laws  to  his  purpose,  94 ;  three 
requisites  necessary  for  his  gain- 
ing belief,  <pp6vtiai9,  apei-^,  and 
iSvoia,  104 ;  by  exciting  envy  he 
will  remove  pity,  147;  fables 
suited  to,  167. 
Oratory,  strictures  on  previous  sys- 
tems of,  2 ;  judicial  preferred  to 
deliberative,  5  ;  five  occasions 
for  the  employment  of,  29 ;  war 
and  peace,  30 ;  demonstrative 
and  deliberative,  64;  judicial,  67 ; 
five  proofs  peculiar  to,  94 ;  some 
topics  common  to  all  the  species 
of,  160;  deliberative  more  diffi- 
cult than  judiciali  264. 

Paean,  use  of  the,  227,  228. 

Painter,  objects  of  the,  423,  n. 

Painting,  attended  with  pleasure, 
77  ;  objects  of  imitation  in,  409 ; 
comparisons  with,  necessary, 
437. 

Pamphilus,  the  orator,  188. 

Panegyric,  before  whom  pronounc- 
ed to  be  considered,  63;  to 
show  that  the  object  of,  has  acted 
on  principle,  64. 

Paradoxes,  nature  of,  241. 

Parodos,  a  part  of  the  chorus,  429. 

Particles,  on  the  proper  use  of, 
220. 

Passions,  on  undue  appeals  to  the,  3. 

of  the  young,  disquisition  on 

the,  149  et  eeq. 

Pathos,  necessity  of,  in  fable,  428. 

Peculiar,  use  of  the  term,  22. 

Pericles*  saying  of,  52 ;  simile  of, 
218. 

Periods,  on  the  management  of, 
231 ;  style  of,  232. 

Peijury,  definition  of,  102. 

Peroration,  not  always  necessary, 
250;  on  the  nature  and  use  of 
the,  270,271. 

Personification,  on  the  chai^acter- 
istics  and  advantages  o^  239  et 
eeq. 

Perspicuity,  advantages  of,  207,  n. 

Persuasion,  how  efiiected,  12 ;  ob- 
ject of,  in  oratory,  33 ;  means  of, 
56. 

Philip  of  Macedon,  argument  of 
Iphicrates  against,  181. 

Philocrates,  anecdote  of,  114. 

^opTiKdVf  explained,  204,  n. 

Photagoras,  sophistiy  of,  197. 

<^p6vifioLt  ol,  explanation  of,  130,  n. 

Ilto^ets,  defined,  11,  12,  n.,*  subdi* 
vision  of,  14;  remarks  on  the 
term,  94,  n. 

n/o-Ttv,  uncertain  signification  a£, 
2,  n.  ;  neglect  of  the,  3. 

i»T(p  ^du  Tov  XeyovToe,  dis- 
cussion of  the,  103. 

Pity,  feeling  of,  3 ;  closely  allied  to 
fear,  124 ;  definition  of,  136 ;  dis- 
quisition on,  136  et  teg. ;  horror 
distinct  from,  139;  indignation 
and  envy  opposed  to,  140,  141 ; 
leading  principles  of,  154;  how 
produced,  432  et  eeq. 

Placability,  persons  susceptible  of, 
and  the  occasions  on  which  it  is 
felt,  112  et  eeq,;  tdefinition  of, 
112. 

Places,  use  of  the  expression,  22. 

Plato,  saying  of,  97. 

Pleader,  business  of  a,  3,  6. 

Pleasure,  a  specific  good,  40;  mo- 
tives comprehended  in^  71  ;  what 
conduces  to,  72;  definition  of, 
ib.;  the  various  sources  which 
contribute  to,  ib.  et  eeq. 
Plot,  definition  of  a,  420;  applica- 
tion  of  unity  to,  422;  the  poet's 
object  rather  than  the  metre,  425; 
episodic  the  worst,  t&.;  essentials 
for,  in  tragedy,  430  et  eeq.;  on 
recognition  in  and  discovery,  438 

INDEX. 

497 

et  seq. ;  rales  for  realizing  ideas, 
441 ;  general  sketch  of  tone 
formed,  442. 

Poet,  etymology  of  the  name,  408. 

Poetic,  AristoUe's»  Questions  on, 
473—477;  Analysis  of,  with  the 
original  Defihitions,  478—487. 

l*oetry,  attended  with  pleasure,  77 ; 
an  imitative  art,  407  et  seq. ;  its 
influence  and  different  species 
of,  ib.;  therarious  objects  of  imi- 
tation, 409;  difference  of,  accord- 
ing to  the  manner  of  imitating, 
410,  4 1 1 ;  the  causes  and  progress 
of,  412  et  eeq.;  how  it  differs 
from  history,  and  how  historical 
matter  should  bo  used  in,  423  et 
seq,;  different  words  suited  to 
each  kind  of,  456,  457;  on  the 
Epic,  458 ;  false  reasonings  re- 
specting, 462. 

Poets,  means  employed  by  different 
kinds  of,  409 ;  should  feel  what 
they  write,  441. 

noiijrii-,  definition  of,  408,  fi. 

Politics,  rhetoric  an  offshoot  of,  13. 

Polus,  expression  of,  191. 

Polycrates,  the  sophist,  195. 

Possible  and  impossible,  disquisition 
on  the,  161  et  aeq. 

Poverty,  a  motive  for  committing 
wrong,  82. 

Power,  attended  with  pleasure,  78; 
dispositions  and  characteristics 
of  men  in,  159. 

Powerful,  the,  disposition  of,  for 
committing  injustice,  80. 

Praise  and  blame,  from  what  con- 
siderations derived,  57. 

Prelude,  explained,  251. 

Probability,  reasonings  derived 
from,  199;  on  the  contingencies 
of,  425,  n.,  437. 

Prologue,  explained,  251 ;  a  part  of 
tragedy,  429. 

Proofs,  on  the  nature  of,  and  their 
various  sources,  262  et  teq, ;  pe- 
culiar to  judicial  oratory,  five  in 
number,  94. 

Property,  essentials  of,  35. 

Propositions  necessary  to  the  ora- 
tor, 26,  27,  et  aeq, 

IlpoctpaTot,  judicial  witnesses,  96 

Proverbs,  one  of  the  proofs  neces- 
sary in  judicial  oratory,  96;  a 
^ort  of  metaphor,  245. 

Provisions,  a  knowledge  of  imports 
and  exports  of,  necessary  to  the 
judicial  orator,  31. 

Prudence,  a  constituent  of  virtue, 
59 ;  necessary  for  the  orator,  104. 

Punctuation,  critical  objections  to, 
answered,  467. 

Puns,  nature  of,  242,  243. 

Purity  of  language,  necessity  of, 
219  et  seq. 

Q. 

Questions,  on  the  nature  and  use  of, 
in  legal  proof,  267  et  seq. 

Reasoning,  forms  of,  22;  derived 
from  four  sources,  199 ;  on  recog- 
nition by,  439. 

Recognition,  on  the  different  kinds 
of,  in  ihe  development  of  plot, 
438. 

Refutation,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem,  189 ;  more  in  repute 
than  the  confirmative,  191. 

enthymems  to   be  preferred, 

265. 

Relatives,  an  element  of  the  enthy- 
mem,  179. 

Reprehension,  when  correct,  470. 

*PT}Tof>f£a,  explanation  of,  14,  n. 

Revenge,  is  honourable,  61 ;  so- 
phistry of,  f6.,  n. ;  attended  with 
pleasure,  75. 

Revolution,  definition  of,  in  fable, 
427 ;  feelings  excited  by  the,  428. 

Rhetoric,  the  counterpart  of  logic, 
1,  28;  Plato's  opinion  of,  ib. ; 
can  be  reduced  to  a  system,  2 ; 
strictures  of  previous  systems,  ib.; 
Zeno's  illustration  of,  ib,,  n. ;  en- 
thymem  the  proof  of,  7 ;  utility 
of,  ib,,  8 ;  objections  against  the 

496 

INDEX. 

abiise  of,  answered,  9;  end  and 
duty  of,  t&. ;  how  it  differs  from 
logic,  10 ;  definition  of,  11  et 
»eq.;  an  offshoot  of  dialectics  and 
politics,  13,  29 ;  three  kinds  of, 
24,  25 ;  to  be  treated  as  a  science, 
29 ;  on  the  various  parts  of,  203 
et  seq. ;  its  influence,  205;  a  dis- 
tinct style  appropriate  to  each 
species  of,  246  et  eeq. 

Rhetoric,  Aristotle's,  "Analytical 
Questions  on,"  347—384 ;  "  Ap- 
pendix to  the  Analysis,  containing 
the  original  Definitions,"  385 — 
403. 

"  Hobbes'  Brief  of  the  Art  of," 

275—376.  ^ 

Rhetorician,  reasons  why  the  logi- 
cian may  excel  him,  7. 

Rhythm,  on  the  nature  and  rarieties 
of,  226  et  seq,;  its  difference 
from  metre,  412,  n. 

Rich,  the,  objects  of  fear,  126. 

Ridicule,  on  the  nature  and  use  of, 
267  et  seq. 

Rivals,  objects  of  fear,  123;  likely 
to  be  envied,  146. 

S. 

Safeguard  of  the  country,  questions 
respecting  the,  31. 

Sappho,  quotation  from,  60. 

Satyric  drama,  origin  of,  414,  m 

'Sx^/iaTa  Xc^cMv,  on  the  meaning 
of,  446,  447,  n. 

Science,  takes  cognisance  of  its  pe- 
culiar truths,  49. 

Sculptu^,  attended  with  pleasure, 
77. 

"  Scylla,"  tragedy  of,  434. 

Selfishness,  freedom  from,  honour- 
able, 60. 

2i)/Lietov,  definition  of,  17  ^^  seq.; 
enthymems  deduced  from,  17; 
reasonings  derived  from,  199. 

Senses,  the,  an  element  of  the  en- 
thymem,  183. 

Sentences,  one  of  the  parts  of  dic- 
tion, 450. 

Sentiment,  definition  of,  418,  419 , 
on  the  use  of,  in  tragedy,  446. 

Shame,  definition  of,  127 ;  illustra- 
tions of,  130  et  seq. 

Similes,  on  the  nature  and  .use  of, 
217  et  seq.;  instances  of,  218; 
effect  of,  235;  a  sort  of  metaphor, 
244. 

Simonides,  verses  of,  43;  epitaph 
by,  63 ;  poem  of,  noticed,  214. 

Sincere,  the,  friendliness  felt  for, 
119. 

Socrates,  sajring  of,  63 ;  conclusive 
reasoning  of,  268. 

SoXotKoi,  use  of  the  word,  157,  n. 

Solon,  saying  of,  96. 

Solution,  should  arise  from  the  fa- 
ble, 437. 

Soothsayers,  judicial  witnesses  of 
the  future,  96. 

^otpivriii  explained,  10,  n. 

Sophists,  character  of,  10,  11 ;  dis- 
putations of  the,  196. 

Sophocles,  sentiment  of,  87 :  saying  - 
of,  92;  passages  from,  95,  191. 

Sorrow,  attended  with  pleasure,  75. 

Speaking,  different  means  of  per- 
suading by,  12;  importance  of 
the  manner  of,  12,  n.;  various 
styles  of,  14.  ' 

Speaker,  duties  of  the  first  and  last, 
266 ;  character  of  the,  how  con- 
veyed, 267. 

Speech,  three  points  in  a,  nrim^, 
Xt^i«,  and  Tdft«,  203;  three 
things  requisite,  fiiytOov,  dp/AO»ia, 
and  ^uOftot^  204 ;  delivery  of  a, 
205 ;  on  the  various  parts  of  a, 
249,  250. 

Stasimon,  a  part  of  the  chorus,  429. 

Stature,  excellencies  of,  37 ;  qualir 
ties  of,  ib. 

Stilbon,  the  orator,  183. 

Strength,  definition  of,  37. 

Style,  excellence  of,  defined,  207 ; 
disquisition  on,  ib.  et  seq.;  on 
the  frigidity  of,  214  et  seq.;  on 
the  purity  of,  219  et  seq.;  general 
rules  for,  221,  225;  on  elevation 
of,  222  et  seq. ;  what  is  the  most 

IKDEX. 

499 

becoming,  224  et  aeq. ;  necessity 
of  rhythm,  226;  the  continuous, 
229;  the  reflex,  230;  manage- 
ment of  periods  in,  232;  on  the 
elegancies  and  beauties  of,  234 
et  teq. ;  the  three  requisites,  236; 
a  distinct  one  appropriate  to  each 
kind  of  rhetoric,  246  et  eeq. ;  de- 
liberative and  judicial,  248. 

Successful,  the,  likely  to  be  en- 
Yied,  146. 

Syllables,  one  of  the  parts  of  dic- 
tion, 448. 

Syllogism,  definition  of,  14. 

Systems  of  oratory,  strictures  on,  2. 

Talented,  the,  motives  of,  for  com- 
mitting injustice,  83. 

Tattlers,  sensible  of  shame,  131. 

TcfCMiiptov,  definition  of,  20,  21 ; 
reasonings  derived  from,  199, 
200. 

Temperance,  a  constituent  of  vir- 
tue, 58. 

Terrible,  definition  of  Uie,  426. 

Terror,  how  produced,  432  et  teq. 

Theft,  legal  definition  of,  88,  89. 

Themistocles,  expression  of,  96. 

Theodectes  the  tragedian  and  ora- 
tor, 180,  183, 185,  186,  187, 189. 

BopvPovvraif  mistake  in  the  sense 
of,  15,  n. 

Time,  an  element  ofthe  enthymem, 
183. 

Topics,  necessary  for  removing  as- 
persions, 255  et  teq, 

Toirot,  use  of  the  word,  22. 

Torture,  one  of  the  proofs  necessary 
in  judicial  oratory,  100. 

Tragedy,  an  imitative  art,  407  ; 
origin  of,  413 ;  ^schylus  and 
Sophocles  improve  it,  414 ;  suit- 
ableness of  Iambic  metre  to,  ib,; 
similarity  of,  to  epic  poetry,  416 ; 
on  the  form  and  end  of»  ib. 
et  teq.;  definition  of,  ib.;  of 
the  six  parts  in,  418;  fable  the 
soul  of,  419;  on  the  requisites 
and  length  of  action  in,  420  et 

teq. ;  real  names  retained  in,  424 ; 
on  the  various  parts  of,  the  pro- 
logue, episode,  exode,  and  chorus, 
428,  429;  essentials  for  a  plot, 
430  et  teq, ;  a  happy  conclusion 
preferred,  432 ;  the  proper  plea- 
sure to  be  derived  from,  433 ;  re- 
quisites of  manners  in,  435  et 
teq.;  on  complication  and  de- 
velopment, 443 ;  four  species  of, 

.  443, 444 ;  not  to  be  made  an  epic 
system,  444 ;  on  the  diction  and 
sentiments  of,  446  ;  necessity 
for  the  wonderful,  461 ;  merit  of 
imitation  in,  as  compared  with 
the  epic,  470  et  teq, ;  reasons  for 
the  superiority  of,  472.  ^ 

Travellers,  accounts  of,  useful  to 
legislation,  32. 

"  Tyro  *'  of  Sophocles,  tragedy  of^ 
438  et  n. 

U. 

Ulysses,  on  the  pretended  insanity 
of,  422,  n. 

Unity,  explanation  of,  421,  n. ;  of 
the  fable,  422;  one  of  the  parts 
of  diction,  450. 

Unjust,  disposition  of  the,  for  com- 
mitting wrong,  84. 

*YiroiufTot,  note  on,  13,  n. 

^Y-roKpLTTis,  Tarious  meanings  of. 
204,  n. 

Vanity,  illustration^of,  129. 

Variety  attended  with  pleasure,  77. 

Vengeance,  when  to  be  taken,  114. 

Verbs,  one  of  the  parts  of  diction, 
449. 

Vexatiousness,  definition  of,  106, 
107. 

Vice  and  virtue,  the  subject  dis- 
cussed, 57  et  teq. 

Victory  attended  with  pleasure,  75. 

Virtue,  is  honourable,  38,  57 ;  con- 
stituents of,  58. 

and  vice,  the  objects  of  the 

orator,  57  et  teq. 

500 

INDEX. 

Virtues,  the,  a  specific  good,  40 ; 

an  object  of  emulation,  148. 
Vulgar,  natural  logic  pf  the,  2,  n. 

W. 

Want,  a  motive  for  committing 
wrong,  82. 

War  and  peace,  questions  of,  90. 

Water  the  best  of  things,  48. 

Wealth,  constituents  of,  35 ;  a  spe- 
cific good,  41 ;  dispositions  con- 
sequent on,  157,  158. 

Will,  motive  of  the,  71. 

Wisdom,  attended  with  pleasure, 
78. 

Wise,  the,  disposed  to  envy,  145. 

Witnesses,  one  of  the  proofs  neces- 
sary in  judicial  oratory,  96,  97. 

Wonderful,  the,  necessary  in  trage- 
dy and  epic,  461. 

Words,  on  the  proper  and  different 
usee  of,  209,  210,  215,  216,  456, 
457;  on  ihe  beauty  of,  213;  on 
the  invention,  extension,  contrac- 
tion, and  changes  of,  453 ;  on  the 
various  kinds  of,  454. 

Wronged,  the,  objects  of  fear,  123. 

X. 

Xenophanes,  the  orator,  sayings  of, 
101,  186, 190,  4^. 

Y. 

Youth,  on  the  passions  and  habits 
of,  149  et  teq. 

Zeuxis,  his  painting  of  Helen,  469, 
It. 

JOHN   CHILDS  AND  fiOV^    t>RINTER8. 

^ 

y 

i
