> hh W 90 
Wl 9 915 et "A 
= IK 3. 7 

E A W S. 

SOBER FROM THE FRENCH or 
e“ 4 

M. DE s E C O N D AT; 
BARON DE MYONTESQUIEV.. 

IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOLUME I. 

— i... + __ „ FY 

«+++ + « Prolem fine matre creatam. 

— 

THE SEVENTH EDIT TON. 

* 

E DIN BU ROE: 
Printed for Arzu bin Don 41D 0 

And fold at his Shop, No. 48. St. Paul's Church - yard, 
ä London; and at Edinburgh. 

M, Dec, LXXYLL -- 

— 
F 1 : 

* 
——— — 

o 

SEP 30 1915 

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 

LORD CAM D E N, 
EATE. 
" LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR: 
| 0 | 
GREAT-BRITALN,;, 
THIS EDITION 

OF THE CELEBRATED' 

BARON. MON TESQUIEU's: 
SPIRLT OF LAWS; 

4 8 
A TESTIMONY OFiHIS LORD$SHIP's . 
FIRM AND UPRIGHT CONDUCT: 
IN THAT HIGH OFFICE, 
IS MOST HUMBLY. DEDICATED; 
BY HIS LORDSHIP*s 
MOST OBEDIENT- 
AN DU 

VERY HUMBLE SERVANT; 

THE EDITOR. 

"_ . wes - s5 TT & wy &W FF cw 4G wy Ry % VW”Ww TU 0 co ws 0 OJ 

——— . — — 

— 

AN 
AC C.0U; MT 
OF THE. 
LIFE and WRITINGS 
OF THE 

A U T H © R: 

Extracted from Elage de . 4 .MonT$qQurev, 
M. de MauyeERTVU1s, late | Ray of the 
hs; Academy at Berlin. 

8. was born in the year 1689, in 
the Chateau de la Brede, within three leagues 
of Bourde aux of an ancient and noble family. He ap- 
plied himſelf almoſt from his infancy to the ſtudy of 
civil law. The firſt product of his early genius was a 
work, in which he undertook to prove, that the ido- 
latry of moſt part of the Pagans did not deſerve eter- 
nal puniſhment. But this book his prudence thought 
fit to ſuppreſs. In 1914 he was made counſellor cf the 
parliament of Bourdeaux, and in 1716 preſident à 
mortier. In this year he was allo created a meiner 
of the new founded academy of the ſame city In 
1725 he opened the parliament with a ſpeech, the 
depth and eloquence of which were coavincing proofs 
of his great abilities as an orator. The year following 
he quitted his charge, which in ſo excellent a magi- 
ſtrate -would have been inexcuſable, if, in ceaſing to 
execute the law, he had not put it in his power to rene 
der the law itſelf more perfect. 

In 1728 he offered himſelf a candidate for's ſeat in 

Vor. I. a the 

i THE AUTHOR's LIFE. 

the Academic Frangoiyg, to which his Lettres Perſannes 
-(publiſhed in 1721) ſeemed to give him a ſufficient ti- 
tle: yet ſome rather too bold ſtrokes in that work, to- 
gether with the great circumſpeRion of that fociety, 
rendered the matter dubious. Cardinal Fleury, alarm- 
ed with what he had heard concerning theſe letters, 
wrote to let the academy know, that the king would 
not have them admit the author, unleſs he thought 
proper to diſavow the book. M. MonTesqurey de- 
elared that he had never owned himſelf to be the au- 
thor of it, but that he ſhould never diſavow it The 
cardinal read the Lettres Perſannet, found them more 
agreeable than I ang. Mourrzqyseu was 
admitted. - | 

When he leſt . he accompanied his intimate 
friend, Lord Walgrave, in his embaſſy to Vienna; 
and, after ſeeing alſo Hungary, Italy, Switzerland, 
and Holland, he ended his tour in Great Britain; 
where, meditating upon the ſpring of that govern» 
ment, in which, fays M. Maupertuis, ſo many ſeem- 
ingly incongruous advantages are united, he found all 
the materials that were wanting to complete the great 
works which lay wrapt in his imagination. 

No ſooner was he returned to France, than he re- 
tired to La Brede, where, for the ſpace of two whole 
years ſeeing nothing but books and trees, he wrote his 
Conſiderations on the canſes of the grandeur and de- 
eline of the Roman empire, which was publiſhed in 
1733. To this work he deſigned to have added a book 
on the Engliſh government; but this moſt excellent 
treatiſe has fince found a more proper place in his 
Aſprit des Loix, with which he obliged the world in the 
year 1748. The preceding works of M. MonTesqQuiev 
may be regarded as ſo many Reps leading up to this 
great temple which he erected to the felicity of man- 

Kad. From the firſt page to the laſt 1 this * the 
nature 

I a. Os. 

hs > 4 _ Aa 

1 7 w „ 0 

r 08. Fc GW of 9 of 0 a 9 

\ 

; THE AUTHOR's LIFE. wt 

nature of M. MonTesquiev's ſoul is diſtinctly viſible z; 

his great love of mankind, his defire for their happi- 
neſs, and his ſentiments: of liberty. His picture of 
Aſiatic deſpotiſm, of that horrid government where one 
ſees but one lord, and all the reſt in ſlavery, is one 
of the beſt preſervatives from ſuch an evil. The ſame 
wiſdom appears in his advice how to guard againſt 

the evils that may ariſe from too extenſive an equa- 

lity. 

and the Temple de Gnyde, were alſo written by M. 

Monrtsgpizu, and, though of a different kind, do 
not leſs indicate- their author, than his more profound 
compoſitions. They prove to us that wiſdom is no 

enemy to mirth, 
The ſame candour, which di kinguiſhed M. Mon- 
TESQUIEV in his writings, was alſo his characteriſtie in 

his converſation with the world. He was the ſame: 

man viewed in all lights. He appears even, if poſſible, 
more extraordinary, when we conſider him as a mem-- 

ber of ſociety, than as an author. Profound, ſublime, . 
in his ſimplicity, he charmed, inſtructed, and never 

offended. 1 myſelf, ſays M. Maupertuis, having had 
the happineſs to frequent thoſe ſocieties of which he 
was a member, have been frequent witnels of the im- 

patience with which he was always expected, and the f 

univerſal joy that appeared on his arrival. The mo- 

deſty and openneſs of his mien bore great reſemblance 

to his converſation. He was well proportioned; and, 
though he had almoſt entirely loſt the fight of one eye, 
yet that defect was ſcarce obſervable. 

He was extremely negligent of his dreſs, deſpiſing 
every thing that went beyond being decent. His 

clothes were always of the plaineſt kind, without any 

ornament of gold or ſilver. The ſame ſimplicity reign- 
ed at his table, and in every other part of his econo- 

a 2 | my. 

The 1 between Hlla and Eucrates, Lyſimague- 

- * . 
———ů ets ca 

iv THE AUTHOR's LIFE.- 

my. His paternal eſtate he left, as he found it, nei - 
ther increaſed nor diminiſhed. On the 10th of Febru- 
ary 1755, he died, as he had lived, without either 
oſtentation or puſilianimity, acquitting himlelf of every 
duty with the greateſt decency. During his indiſpo - 
ſition his houſe was inceſſantly crowded with people of 
the frſt diſtinction in France, and ſuch as were moſt | 
deſerving of his friendſhip. The Ducheſs d' Aiguillon, | 
who will permit me to mention her name upon this oc- 
caſion, (M. Moxrzsqpizv's memory would loſe too | 
much were I not to name her), ſcarce ever left him a 
moment; ſhe received his laſt ſighs. It was in her 
houſe that I firſt ſaw him, and there began the friend. ? 
ſhip that hath afforded me ſo much delight. To this 
lady I am alſo indebted for theſe circumſtances of his 
death. The ſweetneſs of his diſpoſition, the tells me, 
continued to his very laſt moment. Not a ſingle com- 1 
plaint eſcaped his lips, nor even the leaſt ſign of impa- 
tience. Theſe were his words to thoſe that flood 
around him: 7 always paid great reſpect to religion: the | 
morality of the goſpel is a moſt excellent thing, and the * 
moſt valuable preſent that could poſſibly have been received 
by man from his Creator. The Jeſuits, who were near 
him, preſſing him to deliver up his corrections of the 
Lettres Perſannes, * he gave to me,” adds the Ducheſs, 
% and to Madam du Pre, his manuſcript, with theſe 
« words.—/ will ſacrifice every thing to reaſon and re- 
« ligion : conſult with my friends, and decide whether 
- *© this ought to appear. He had a pleaſure in the pre- 
& ſence of his friends, and, as often as an interval of 
„ eaſe would permit, he would join the converſation, *' 
« His fituation, he told me, was cruel, but not wwith- 
* out many cauſes of conſolation ; ſo ſenſible was he of | 
the public concern, and the affection of his friends. | 
„ Myſelf and Madam du Pré were his attendants al- 
* moſt day and night. The Duke de Nivernois, M. 
| « de 

THE AUTHOR's LIFE, 1 
« de Bucley, the family of Fitzjames, the Chevalier 
« de Jeaucourt, &c. In ſhort, the houſe was always 

full, and even the ſtreet was ſcarce paſſable. But 
«* alt our care and anxiety was as ineffectual as the ſkill 

« of his phyſicians. He died the thirteenth day of 

« his illneſs, of an inflammatory fever, which had 
« ſeized every part of him.“ 

M. MonTesquiev was married in 1715 to Jeanne 
de Lartigue, daughter to Pierre de Lartigue, Lieu- 
tenant-colone] of the regiment de Maulevrier. By this- 
lady he had a ſon and two daughters, His ſon M. de 
Secondat, diſtinguiſhed for his phyſical and mathema- 
tical knowledge, was named to fill his father's place in 
the academy of Berlin, ef which the father had been 
admiued a member in 1746. 

23 PRE. 

= w © r = Mc AMS co X..a. DUYXY Yr MM Ry og WW 7--WYP — WY 

FRN NU 

F, amidſt the infinite number of ſubjects contained 
I in this book, there is any thing which, contrary 
to my eapectation, may poſſibly offend, I can at leaſt 
aſſure the public, that it was not inſerted with an ill 
intention; for I am not naturally of a captious tem- 
per. Plato thanked heaven that he was born in the 
ſame age with Socrates: and, for my part, I give 
thanks to God that I was a ſubje& of that govern- 
ment under which 1 live, and that it is his pleafure 1 
ſhould obey thoſe whom he has made me love. 

1 beg one favour of my readers, which 1 fear will 
not be granted me; this is, that they will not Judge 
by a few hours reading of the labour of twenty years; 
that they will "approve or condemn the book entire, 
and not a few particular pbrafes. If they would 
ſearch into the defign of the author, they can do it no 
other way ſo completely, as by ſearching into the de- 
ſign of the work. 

I have firſt of all conſidered mankind ; and the re- 
ſult of my thoughts has been, that, amid{dſuch an in- 
finite diverſity of laws and manners, they were not 
ſolely conducted by the caprice of fancy. 

1 have laid down the firſt principles, and have 
found that the particular eaſes apply naturally to them; 
that the hiſtories of all nations are only conſequences 
of them; and that every particular law is connected 
with another lay, or depends on ſome other of a more 
general extent. | 

vin P R E F A C E. 

When I have been obliged to look back into antiqui- 
ty, I hive eiideavoiired to aſſume the ſpirit of the an- 
cients, leſt I ſhould conſider thoſe things as alike, which 

are really different; and leſt I ſhould mils the differ- 
ence of thoſe: which appear to be alike. - 

I have not drawn my principles from my prejudices, . 

but from the nature of things. 

Here a great many truths will not appear, till we 

have ſeen the chain which connects them with other: 
The more we enter into particulars, the more we (att 

| perceive the certainty of the principles on which = 

are founded. | have not even given all theſe | particu: 

lars, for who could mention them all without a molt 

inſupportable Fatigue ?; i 

Ihe reader will not here meet with any of thoſe 
bold flights which ſeem to characteriſe the works of + che. 
preſent age- When things are examined with ever ſo 
ſmall a degree of extent, the ſallies of i imagination muſt. 

vaniſh; theſe generally arife from the minds collectin "g 

all its powers to view only one fide of the ſubject, while 

it leaves the other unobſerved. 
l write not to cenſure any thing eſtabliſhed i in any 
country whatſoever. Every nation will here find the 

reaſons on which its maxims are founded ; and this. 

will be the natural inference, that to propoſe” alterd-- 

tions, belongs only to thoſe who are ſo happy as to be 
born with a genius capable. of penetrating into the en - 

tire conſtitution of a ſtate. | 

It is not a matter of indifference, that the minds of, ; 

the people be enlightened. The prejudices of the ma- 

giſtrare have ariſen from national prejudice. In a time 

of ignorance they have committed even the greateſt. 
evils without the laſt ſeruple; but in an enlightened: 
age they even tremble, while conſerring the greateſt: 

bleſſings. They perceive the ancient abuſes ; they ſee 
how they muſt be reformed ; but they are ſenſible alſo 

of 

a— + ac > a 

Re ix 
of the abuſes of the reformation. They let the evil 
continue, if they ſear a worſe; they are content with 
a leſſer good, if they doubt of a greater. They exa- 
mine into the parts, to judge of them in connection; 
and they examine all the cauſes, to diſcover their dif- 
ferent effects. 

Could I but ſucceed ſo as to afford new reaſons to 
every man to love his duty, his prince, his country, his 
laws ; new reaſons to render him more ſenſible in every 
nation and government, of the bleſſings he enjoys, L 
ſhould think myſelf the moſt happy of mortals. 

Could I but ſucceed ſo as to perſuade thoſe who 
command, to increaſe their knowledge in what they 
ought to preſcribe ; and thoſe who obey, to find a new 
pleaſure reſulting trom their obedience; 1 ſhould think 
myſelf the moſt happy of mortals. | 

The moſt happy of mortals I ſhould think myſelf, 
could ] contribute to make mankind recover from their 
prejudices. By prejudices, I here mean, not that 
which renders men ignorant of ſome particular things, 
but whatever renders them ignorant of themſelves. 

It is in endeavouring to iaſtrut mankind, that we 
are belt able to practiſe that general virtue, which com- 
prehends the love of all. Man, that flexible being, 
conforming in ſociety to the thoughts and impreſſions 
of others, is equally capable of knowing his own na- 
ture, whenever it is laid open to his view; and of lo- 
ſing the very ſenſe of it, when this idea is baniſhed 
from his mind. - 

Often have I begun, and as office have I laid aſide 
this undertaking. I have a thouſand times given the 
leaves | have written to the“ winds: 1 every day felt 
my paternal hands fall f. I have followed my object 
without any fixed plan: I have known neither rules 

. Ludibria ,veatis. 
+ Bis patria cecidere manus . 

=” PREF ACE. 
nor exceptions ; I have found the truth, only to loſe 

it again. But when I had once diſcovered my firſt 

principles, every thing | ſought for appeared; and, 
in the courſe of twenty years, I have teen my work 
begun, wore up, advancing to — and fi- 
niſhed. 
If this work meets with ſucceſs, I ſhall owe it chiefly 
to the grandeur and majeſty of the ſubject. However, 
1 do not think that | have been totally deficient in 
point of genius. When I have ſeen what ſo many 
reat men both in France and Germany have wrote 
before me, I have been loſt in admiration; but I have 
not loſt my courage: I have faid with Corregio, And 

1 alſo am a painter *, 

s £4 bo enchs ab ene 

17 

7 

* — WW 

e O N Nn 

Book I. Of laws in general, 
HAP. I. Of Laws as they relate to different 

1 beings, page 1 
855 I. oY the laws of nature, + 
hap, LIT. Of poſitive laws, | 6 

Bock II. Of laws directly derived from the nature of 

government. 
Chap. I. Of the nature of the three different govern: 

9 

Chap. Il. Of the e government, aud the laut 

relative ts democracy, 10 

9015 111. Of the laws relative do the nature of ari- 3 

flocra 

Chap. IV. Of the relation of laws to the nature of mo- 

narchial government, 19 

Chap, V. Of the la relative ts the nature of a df 

potic erm 

Book III. Of the principles of the three kinds of ge- 
VELNUERLs 

Chap, I. Difference between the nature and principle 
2 government, 23 
ap. II. Of the principle of different. geyernments, 24 
coun III. Of the principle of democracy, ib. 
hap. LV, CF the Principle of ariſtocracy, 3 
Chap. V. That virtue is not the principle 5 4 — 

* 

chial government, 28 
Chip. VI. In what manner virtue is ſupplied in 4 no- 
narchial government, | 8 

Chap. VII. Of the principle of a monarchy, 
Chap. VIII. That honour is nat the principle of ap 
tie government, | | 
Chap. 

3 CONnTRN TS 

Chap. IX. Of the principle of deſpotic government, 
Chap. X. Difference of obedience in moderate and 4 

potic governments, -:.-.08 
Chap. XI. Refledtions on the foregoing, 35 

Book IV. That the laws of education ought to be re- 
lative to the principles of government. 

| Chap. T Of the laws of education, 

Chap. II. CF education in monarchies, 

C * HI. 9f education in a deſpotic government, 46 

Chap. IV. Difference between the effetls of ancient and 
modern education, 47 

Chap. V. Of education in a republican government, 

C $4.4 VI. Of ſome inſlitutions among the Greeks, 42 

Chap. VII. In what caſe theſe ſingular inflitutions 
may be of fervice, 45 

Chap. VIII. Explication of a paradox of the ancients 
in reſpect to manners, 

Book V. That the laws given by the legiſlator ought 
to be relative to the principle of government. 

Chap. I. Tdea of this book 49 
Chap. II. What is meant by virtue in a political * 
ate ” 0 
Chap. III. What i ir meant by a love 4 the republic * 
a democracy, ib. 
cha p. IV. 1n what manner the 45 of equality and 
frugality is inſpired, 52 
Chap. V. In what manner the laws eftabliſh equality , 
in a democracy, ib. 
Chap. VI. In what manner the laws ought to maintain 
frugality in a democracy, 56 
Chap. VII. Other methods of favouring the principle 
of democracy, 5 
Chap. VIII. Ii what manner the laws ought to be 
relative to the principle of n in an ariſto- 
_ © eracy, 61 
Chap. IX. In what manner the lax are relative to 
their principle is monarchiet, 67 
| = þ Chap. 

CONTENTS. xiii 
Chap, X. Of the expedition peculiar to the executive 

in monarchies, 68 

Chap. XI. Of the excellence of a monarchical govern- 

ment, 69 
Chap. XII. The ſame ſubject continned, 71 
Chap. XIII. An idea of deſpotic power, ib. 
Chap. XIV. Ina what manner the laws are relative 

to the principles of deſpotic goverument, 72 
Chap. XV. The ſame ſubjed? continued, 78 
— XVI. Of the communication of power, 80 
Chap. XVII. Of preſents, 82 

Chap. XVII. reuards conferred zy the e 

\ + #1 eig „ 

Coup: XIX. New cenſequences of the principles of * 

three governments, . 84 

Book VI. Conſequences · of the ꝓrineiples of different 
governments with reſpect to the ſimplicity of civil 
and criminal laws, the form of judgments, and the 
infliding of puniſhments. 

Chap. I. 07 the femplicity of civil lau in diſſerent 
governments, 8 
Chap. II. C/ the fimplicity of criminal lau in dif- 
ferent governments, 92 
Chap. III. I» what governments, and in what caſes, 
the judges ought to determine according to the ex- 
preſs letter of the lau,, R. 94 
Chap. IV. Of the manner of forming Judgments, 95 
Chap. V. In what governments the ſovereign may be 

Judpe, 
Chap: VI. That in monarchies the miniſters ought not a 
to be judges, 100 
Chap. vil. Of a jingle magiſtrate, a ib. 
Chap. WII. Of — in different govern" - 
ments, 101 
Chap. IX. O the ſeverity of puniſhments in different 
governments, IOZ 
Chap. X. OF tbe ancient French laws, 104 
Chap. Xl. That when a people are virtuous, few pu- 
niſhments are neceſſary, ib, 
Chap. XII. TIO 2 10F 
Vol. I. Chap. 

ie, CONTENTS. 

Chap. XIII. Impotency of the laws of Japan, 107 

Chap. XIV. Of the ſpirit of the Roman ſenate, 110 

Chap. XV. / the Roman laws in reſpect to purii/h- 
ments, 

Chap. XVI. Of the faſt Proportion n. puniſp- 
ments and crimes, 

Chap. XVII. CF the queſtion or det l 

Chap. XVIII. Of pecuniary -and corperad puniſh- 
ments, 115 

Chap. XIX. Of the law of retaliation, 116 

Chap. XX. Of the puniſhment of CT: fir tha | 
crimes of their children, FT ib. 

Chap. XXI. of the a of the prince 117 

tb, 

Book VII. Ces of the different 8 of 

the three governments, with reſpect to the ſumptu- 
dun ee luxury, gr e een en 

: 

Chap. I .. Of lueury 1 711 {4 118 4 
Chap. II. Of N 121 

Chap. III. Of fumptuary laws in an ariflocracy, 122 
ii 

Chap. IV. G fumptuary. laut in a monarchy, 
Chap. V. In what cafes ſumptuary . are uſeful 

in a monarchy, - | 11 884 
Chap. VI. Of the Jy of China, 126 
Chap. VII. Fatal con/equencer of luxury in Cina, 127 
Chap. VIII. OF public continency, W nls 
Chap. IX. Of the condition or ſlate * women in al 

ferent governments, 129 

Chap. X. Of the domeſtic tribunal among the Ro- 
mant, 

Chap. XI. In what manner the inſlitutions changed 
at Rome, together with the government, 131 

Chap. XII. Of the guardianſhip of women —_— ihe 
Romans, 

Chap. XIII. Of the puniſhments decreed by the empe-- 
rors aguinſt the incontinency of women, 133 

Chap. MV. Sumptuary laws among the Romans, 135 

Chap. XV. Of doweries and nuptial advantages in 

2 

132 

different conflitutions, ft ib. 
Chap. XVI. An excellent cuſtom of the Sammites, 136 
| Chap XVII. CF female ad; * 137 

113 

CONTENTS. xv 

Book VIII. Of the corruptions of the principles of 
the three governments. 

; Chap. I. General idea of this book, 138 
113 Chap. II. CF the corruption of the principle of demo- 
114 cracys ib. 
Chap. III. Of the ſpirit of extreme equality, 141 
** Chap. IV. Particular cauſe of the corruption of * 
G ie, i » 
5 ola nd V. Of the corruption of the principle ari- 
flecracy, 142 
i i Chap. VI. / the corpuption of the principle of mo» 
narchy, - 143 
of Chap. VII. The fame ſubjed continued, 144 
tu- Chap. VIII. Danger of the corruption of the princi- 
F monarchical government, 145 
13 Chap. IX. How ready the nobility are to defend the 
1 throne, 7 14 
2 Chap. X. M the corruption of the principle of deſpotic 
ib. 1 government, 147 
Chap XI. Natural efedr of the goodneſs and cor- 
| ruption »f the principles of government, ib, 
Chap XII. The ſame ſubject continued, | 149 
Chap. XIII. The efed of an oath among a virtuous 

, 8 people, | « 2 5 0 
Chap. XIV. How the ſmalleſt change in the conſtitu - 

tion is attended with the ruin of its principles, 151 

9 Chap. XV. Sure methods of preſerving the three prin- 

ciples, I52 

% Chap. XVI. Diflindive properties of a republic, ib. 

. Chap. XVII. Diftindive properties of a monarchy, 154 
Chap. XVIII. Particular caſe of the Spaniſh mo- 

narchy, | ib. 
2 i} Chap. XIX Diſtindive properties of a deſpotic go 

vernment, | 155 

Chap. XX. Conſequence of the preceding chapters, ib. 

Chap. XXI. Of the empire of China, 156 

b 2 Book 

xvi CONTENTS. 

Book IX. Of laws in the relation they bear to a de- 

fenfive force. 

Ch ap. I. In what manner republics provide for their 
' ſafety, 159 
Chap. IF. That a confederate government ought to be 

' compoſed of flates of the ſame nature, eſpecially of 
the republican kind, 161 

Chap. III. Other requiſites in a conſederate repub- 

lic, 162 | 

Chap. IV. In what manner deſpotic governments pro- 
vide for their ſecurity, 163 
Chap. V. In what manner a monarchical 88 

ment provides for its ſecurity, ib, 
- Chap. VI. of the defenſive force of nn in gene- | 
ral, 164 
Chap. VII. A refledtion, | 165 

Chap. VIII. A particular caſe, in which the deſen- 

free force of a ſlate is inferior to the offen/ive, 166 2 
Chap. IX. C/ the relative force of fates, 167 
Chap. X. / the weakneſs of neighbouring ſlates, ib. 

Book X. Of laws in the relation they bear to —_— | 

ſive force. 

Chap. I. Of offenſice force. | Sr: | 

Chap. II. H war, ib. 
Chap. III. C/ the right of conqueſt, 169 
Chap. IV. Some advantages of a conquered people, 172 
Chap. V. Gelon Ling of Syracuſe, 173 
Chap. VI. Of conqueſts made by a republic, ib. 
Chap. VII. The fame ſubjed continued, 175 
Chap, VIII. The ſame ſulject continued. ib. 
Chap. IX. Of conqueſts made by a monarchy, 176 
Chap. X. OF one menarchy that ſubdues another, 177 
Chap. XI. OF the manners of a conquered people, ib. 
Chap. XII. Ha law of rut, 178 
Chap. XIII. Alexander, r ib. 

Chap. XIV. Charles XII. 181 
Chap. XV. New methods of preſerving a conqueſt, 182 
Chap. XVI. Of conqueſts made by a deſpotic * 183 
dl XVIL The ſame ſubjedt continued, 184 

C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
0 
( 

1 — es an A IB 

CONTENTS: xvi 
Book XI. Of the laws that form political liberty, with 

regard to the conſtitution. 
Chap. I. A general idea, 184 
59 — li . 25 erent fignifications given to the word 
e I 05 
III. In what liberty conſiſts, 
Gr 88 IV. The ſame ſubje(t continued, 
Chap. v. Of the end or view of diferent gevern- 
62 ment! 187 
Chap. VI. Of the conſtitutian of England, Wes 
63 Chap: VII. of the monarchies we are acquainted 
with, 202 
b, Chap. VIII. Why the ancients had nob'a vhs idea of 
| - monarchy, ib. 
54 Chap. IX. Ariſtotle's manner of thinking, | 204 
55 Chap. X. What other politiciant thought, ib. 
Chap. XI. Of the kings of the heroic times of 
56 Greece, ib. 
7 8 Chap. XII. Of the grvernment of the kings of Rome, 
b. and in what manner the three Powers were there 
diftributed, 206 
|» Chap. XIII. General reſeciont on the Rate of Rome ; 
Aer the expulſion of its kings, 208 
% Chap. XIV. In what manner the diſtribution of the 
three powers began to 8 after the expulſion of 
8 the ling, 210 
Chap. XV. In what manner Rome, while in the © 
Jouriſhing ate of the republic, fuddenty loft its li- 
berty, 212 
a Chap. XVI. Of the legiſlative proers in the Roman 
republic, 214 
: Chap. XVIL. Of the executive power in the Roman 
| republic, 215 
Chap. XVIII. Of the Judiciary power in the Roman 
p government, ' 217. 
Chap XIX. Of the government of the Reap pro · 
Fen” 218: 
Chap. XX. End of this bead, wo 

3 Borns 

ry CONTENTS. 

relative to the ſubject. | 
Chap. I. Idea of this book, 228 
Chap. II. Oythe liberty of the ſubj ct, 229 
Chap. III. The ſame ſulject continued, 230 
Chap. IV. That liberty is favoured by the nature and 
proportion of puniſhments, 234 
Chap. V. &/ certain accuſations that require parti- 
ticular moderation and prudence, be Pe © 
Chap. VI. Y the crime againſt nature, 236 
Chap, VII. Of the crime of high treaſon, 237 
Chap. VIII. br the bad application of the name of 
Sacrilege and High-treaſon, 238 
Chap. IX. The ſame ſubject continued, EY 
Chap. X. The r ſame ſubjett continued, 241 
Chap. XI. Of thoughts, ib. 
Chap. XII. M indiſercet ſpeecher, | ib. 
Chap. XIII. Of writings, 243 

Chap. XIV. Breach of modeſly in puniſhing crimes, 245 y 

Chap. XV. Of the inſrauchiſement of ſlaves. in order 

to accuſe their maſter, ib. 
Chap. XV. C/ calumny in reſpect to the crime of bigh-. 

treaſon, 246 
Chap. XVII. Of the revealing of conſpiracies, | ib. 

Chap. XVIII. . How dangerous it is. in republics to be 
too ſevere in puniſhing the crime of high treaſon, 2 
Chap. XIX. In what manner the uſe of liberty is ſu 2 

fended in a republic, 

Chap. XX. Of laws favourable to the liberty of the 

ſubject in a republic, ib, 
Chap. XXI. Of the cruelty of laws in reſped to debtors 
in a republic, 250 
Chap. XXII. 07 things that frrike at liberty in mo- 
narchies, 2 52 
Chap. XXIII. Of ſpies in monarehie, 2253 
Chap. XXIV. Of anonymous letters, „ 
Ohap. XXV. Of the manner of governing in mo- 
 aarchies, ib, 
Chap. XXVI. That in a — the prince ought | 
to be of eaſy acceſs, 255 

Chap. XX VII. Of the manners of a monarch, ib. 
Chap. 

Book XII. Of the laws that ſorm political liberty as | 

CONTENT 8. xix 
Chap. XXVIII. CF the regard aubich monarchs owe 

to their ſubjecte, 256 
Chap. XXIX. Gf the civil laws proper for mixing a 
little liberty in a deſpotic government, 257 
Chap. XXX. The ſame ſubje@ continued, 4368 
Book XIII. Of the relation which the . 
taxes, and the greatneſs of the * revenues have 
to liberty. | 
Chap. I. Of the revenues of the flate, 259 

Chap. II. That it is bad reafoning to ſay that the 
a peaks 7 of the taxes is good in its own nature, 260 

Chap. III. Of taxes in countries where part of the 

people are villains or bondmen, 261 
Chap. IV. OF a republic in the like caſe, ST 
Chap. V. Of a monarchy in the like caſe, 262 

Chap. VI. Of a deſpotic government in the like caſe, ib. 
Chap. VII. CF taxes in countries where villainage is 

no eftabliſhed, © 263 
Chap. VIII. In what manner the illuſion is pre- 
Bo . 265 
Chap. IX. Of a bad hind »f impoſt, 260 
Chap. X. That the greatneſs of taxes depends on the 

nature of the government, 267 
Chap. XI. / fiſcal puni ſbments, ib. 
Chap. XII. Relation between the from 1 taxes 

and liberty, 268 
Chap. XI It. In what governments taxes are capable 

of increaſe, 270 
Chap. XIV. That the nature of the taxes. is relative 

to the government, ib. 
Chap. XV. Abuſ+ of liberty, 8 
Chap. XVI. Cf the conqueſts of the Mahometans, 272 
Chap. XVII. the augmentation of trocpt, 273 
Chap. XVIII. Of an exemption from taxes, 2274 

Chap. XIX Which is moſt ſuitable to the prince and 
to the people, the letting out to farm, or the admi- 

niſtration of the revenues, 275 
Chap. XX. Of the farmers of the revenuer, 276 
Book XIV. Of laws as relative to the N Fer 

climate. 

Chap. J. General idea, 27 7 
Chap. II. Of the _— of men in di * 4 ib. 
Chap. 

xx CONTENTS. 
Chap. III. Centradictian in the charactert of” fem 

ſoutbern nations, 287 
Chap. IV. Cauſe off the ere of religion, 
manners, cuſtoms, and laws, in the my coun- 

tries 7 282 
Chap. V. That theſe are bad legiſlators andy favour 
| the vices of the climate, and: good; eine., who 

oppofe thoſe vices, 28 | 
Cz. VI. Of the cultivation eee in warm eli. = 
mates, 8 284 
Chap. VII. CF e . * 
Chap, VIII. An excellent cuſtom of China, 285 
Chap. IX. Means of encouraging induſiry, ib. 
Chap. X. Of the laws relative to the ſobriety of the 06 
le, 
car. x1. Of the laws relative to the diftempers of 

the climate, [280 
Chap. XII. 2f the laws againſt ſuicides, © a 
Chap. XIII. Effect. erifing from the climate of Eng- 2 

land, 1 
Chap. XIV. Other effedts of the climate, 292 

Chap. XV. Of the different confidence which the Jaws 
bave in the people, 1 zo the difference o cli- 
_ mates, | 293 

Book xv. Ta what manner the Jaws of civil favery 
are relative to the nature of che climate. 

Chap. I. Of civil ſlavery, 

Chap. II. Origin of the right of Navery among the Ro- 
man civilians, 295 
Chap. III. 4nather origin of the right of Aavery, 297 
Chap. IV. Anather origin of the right of flavery, 298 
Chap. V. Of the Aaver of the negroer, 4 
Chap. VL The true origin of the right of flavery, 299 
Chap VII. Another origin of the right of favery,- zoo 
Chap VIII. [nutility of flavery among a2. E 
4 5 e kinds of flavery, | 
X. Regulations neceſſary in . to flavery, 

1. 7 u buſei of flavery, | op 
Chap. XII. TO ram the ade of aver, ci 

1 
1 
. 
ö 

CONTENTS. 

Chap. XIII. Of armed flaves, ' 
Chap. XIV. The ſame ſulject a 
Chap. XV. Precautions ts be uſed i in moderale govern- 

ments, ib. 
Chap. XVI. Regulations between maſters and ſla vet, 308 
Chap. XVII. Of infranchiſements, — 88 

Chap. XVIII. Of freedmen and eunuchs, * 312 

Book XVI. How the laws of domeſtic ſlavery have a 
relation to the nature of the climate. 

Chap. I. Of domeffic ſervitude, | 314 
Chap. II. That in the countries of the fouth there is 

a natural inequality between the taus ſexes, ib, 
Chap. III. That a plurality of wives depends greatly 

on the means of ſupporting them, 316 
Chap. IV. That the law of polygamy is an affair 
that depends on calculatien, WM 
Chap. V. The e of a law of Malabar, 317 
Chap. VI. OF polygamy conſidered in itſelf, 318 

Chap. VII. CF an equality of treatment in caſe of 

many wives, 319 
Chap. VIII. CF the ſeparation of women from men, ib. 
Cha p. IX. Of the connection between domeſtic and po- 

ljlical government, 320 
Ch ap. X. The principal on which the morals of i 

' Eaſt are founded, 

Chap. XI. UF domeſtic /lavery n of . 

2 
cp. XII. Of natural modeſty, 1 
Chap. XIII, OF jealouſy, | 324 
Chap. XIV. Of the eaftern manner of woe pat nate” 
ment, : 325 
Chap Xv. Of divorce and repudiation, 5 ib. 

c * XVI. / An and divorce amongſt ibe 

' Romans, © . 327 

Book. XVII. How the laws of altes ſervitude have 

a relation to the nature of the climate, 

| Chap. 1. Of political Fru sn {> eg 

Chap. II. The difference between nations in. e of 
courage, \ b 

T | Chap: 

u c ONTE NTS. 

Chap III. the climate e Aa, 32. 

Chap. IV. The ee reſulting from 1 334 

Chap. V. That awhen the people in the north of | Afia, 
and thoſe of the narth of Europe have conquered, ye 
effedts of the conqueſt were not the ſame, © 335 

Chap. VI. A new phyſical cauſe, of the flavery of 
Ajia, and of the liberty of Europe, . 

Chap. VII. Of Africa and Americ ay 338 

| | . 

Book. xVIIi. Os lass in es relation they bear to 
the nature of the foil. | 

Chap. 1. How the nature of the ſoil has an influence 

en the laws, 338 
Chap. II. The ſame ſubjed? continerd, 339 
Chap. III. What countries are beſt caltiveted, 349 
Chap. IV. New ect. of the fertility and barrennefs 

_ of countries, 41 
Chap. V. Of the en of iſlands, ib, 
Chap. VI. Of countries raiſed by the induſtry of 
men, 342 
Chap. VII. Of the works of men, 343 
Chap. VIII. The general relation of laws, ib. 
Chap. IX. Of the ſoil of America, | 344 
Chap, X. Of the number of men with regard to the 
_ manner in which they procure ſubſiſtence, ib, 
Chap. XI. Of ſavage nations and nations of bar- 
barians, © 345 
Chap. XII. Of the law of mations amongſi people who 
do not cultivate the earth, ib, 
Chap. XIII. Of the civil laws of thoſe nations who 
_ do not caltivate the earth, 346 
Chap. XIV, OF the political fate of the foo! who 
do nat cultivate the lands, | 347 

Chap. XV. Of people who 1505 the aſe of money, 347 
Chap. XVI. F civil laws among people who know 

not the uſe of money, - 348. 
Chap. XVII. Of political E. among watiens wk 
"have net the uſe of money, ib. 
Chap. XVIII. Of the power of ſuptrflition,. 349 
Cs XIX. Of. the liberty of the Mraks, and the for 

oats of the Tartars, 51.5144 is. 
: | Chap.. 

- 

CONTENTS. 
Chap. AM: Of the Law OF NATIONS ar Prad ied 

y the Tartars, 2 385 | 

Chap. XXI. The cri Law of the Farther, ** 
Chap. XXII. Of a CIVIL LAW of the r 

tions, | 352 
Chap. XXII 90 the ornaments of royalty, . 358 
Chap. XXIV. Of the marriages f the kings 97 the 

Franks, 255 359 
Chap. XXV. Carrpeerc, ib. 

Chap. XXVI. Of the time. when the king of the 
Franks became f ape, 360 
Chap. XXVII. The ſame fabjelt continued; 362 
Chap. XXVIII. Of the rr of the kings 
of the Frankr, * 3 
Chap. XXIX. Of the national afemtlies of the 
Franks,” ' © is. 

Chap. XXX. Of the enter Li the. F under 
the firſt race, * 0 2 364 

Book XIX. Of laws in, "had to the principles which 

form the W Piel the morals, and Sonam of 

a nation. 

Chap. I. 0f the fulje of thts ky 1 
Chap. II. That it i. people mind. ſhould: 

be prepared for the reception of the beſt l, ib. 

Chap. III. Of tyranny, 366 
Chap. IV. Of the general ſpirit of mankind, 367 
Chap. V. How far we ſhould be attentive, left the 
general ſpirit of @ nation ſhould be changed, 368 
Chap. VI. That every thing ought not to be correded, ib. 
Chap. VII. Of the Athenians and Lacedemonians, 369 
Chap. VIII. Heat, of & ſociable tember, ib. 
Chap. IX. Of the vanity and the pride of nations, 370 
Chap. X. if the characters of the ard and 

Chineſe, © 371 

Chap. XI. A refleQion, 372 

Chap. XII. Of caftoms and manners in a a deſpetic 
ate, ib. 

Chap. XIII. „ ins of the Chineſe, 373 
Ch!bdap. 

ao — — 

xxiv CONTENTS. 
Chap. XIV. What are the natural means of chan- 

ing the manners and cuſtoms of a nation, 
Chap. XV. The influence of domeſtic government on 

ib. 

the political, 375 
Chap. XVI. How ſome legiſlators have confounded 

the principles which govern mankind, ib. 
Chap. XVII. Of the peculiar guulity of the Chineſe go- | 

. vernment, 377 
Chap. XVIII. A conſequence drawn from the preced- 

ing chapter, 378 

Chap. XIX. How this union of religion, laws, man- 
ners, and cuftome, among fi the Chineſe, was pro- 
uced, 

379 

Chap. XX. An explication of a paradox relating to 
the Chineſe, 380 

Chap. XXI. How the laws ought to have a relation 
to manners and cuſtoms, 381 
Chap. XXII. The ſame ſubjef continued, 382 

Chap. XXIII. How the laws are founded on the man- 
ners of a people, - ub, 
Chap. XXIV. The ſame ſubjed? continued, 383 
Chap. XXV. The ſame ſubject continued, 384 
Chap. XXVI. The ſame ſubjed continued, ib. 

Chap. XXVII. How the laws contribute to form the 
manners, enſtoms, and abaracter of a nation, 385 

£ 

"TUE | 

Slg: ys - 

THE 

SPIRIT os LAWS. 

2 * 1 yh | — | | —_ ” _ 
Or Laws I GENERAL. 

e 
/ Lows as thy relate o afrs beings 

AWS, in their moſt general Ggnification, are 
the neceſſary relations reſulting from the nature 
of things. In this ſenſe all beings have their 

laws; the Deity has ® his laws, the material world its 
Jaws, the intelligences ſuperior to man have their laws, 
the beaſts their laws, man his laws. 
Thoſe who aſſert, that a bind. fatality produced the 
various effetts wwe behold in thir world, are guilty of 
a very great abſurdity; for can any thing be more ab- 
eee eee 

productive of intelligent beings ? 

* The law, ſays Plutarch, is queen of the gods and men. See 
F 
Vor. 1 A 2 2 There 

8 7 „ | 

2 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book l. 

There is then a primitive reaſon ; and laws are the 
relations which ſubſiſt between it and different beings, 
and the relations of theſe beings among themſelves, 

God is related to the univerſe as creator and pre- 
ſerver : the laws by which he created all things, are 
thoſe by which he preſerves them. He acts according 
to theſe rules, becauſe he knows them ; he knows them, 
becauſe he made them; and he made them, becauſe 
they are relative to his wiſdom and power. 

As we ſee that the world, though formed by the 
motion of matter, and void of underſtanding, ſubſiſts 
through ſo long a ſucceſſion of ages, its motions. mull 

certainly be directed by invariable laws: and could we 

imagine another world, it malt alſo haye conſtant rules, 

or muſt inevitably periſh, 

Thus the creation, which ſeems an arbitrary act, 
ſuppoſeth laws as invariable as the fatality of the athe- 
iſts. It would be abſurd to ſay, that the Creator might 
govern the world without thoſe rules, ſince without 
them it could not ſubſiſt. 

Theſe rules are a fixed and invariable relation. Be- 
tween two bodies moved, it is according to the rela- 

tions of the quantity of matter and velocity, that all 

the motions. are received, augmented, diminithed, Toft ; 
each nr is enen each Fhange is con- 
STAN err. 

Particular * beings may have laws of their 
on making, but they have fome-likewiſe which they 

never made. Before there were intelligent beings, they 

vere poſſible; they had therefore poſſible relations, and 
conſequently paſſible laws. Before laws were made, 
there were relations af poſſible juſtice. To ſay that 
there is nothing juſt or unjuſt but what is commanded 
or forbidden by poſitive laws, is the ſame as ſaying, 
that, before the * of a 2985 all the radii 
* equal. 

f 

We 

. _ - 4 A 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 3 

We muſt therefore acknowledge relations of juſtice, 
antecedent to the poſitive law by which they are eſta - 
bliſhed : as for inſtance; that if human ſocieties ex- 
ited, it would be right to conform to their laws: if 
there were intelligent beings that had received a be- 
nefit of another being, they ought to be grateful: if 
one intelligent being had created another intelligent 
being, the latter ought to continue in its original 
ſtate of dependence : if one intelligent being injures 
another, it deſerves a retaliation: of the i injury, and ſo 
on. 

But the intelligent world is far from being ſo well 
governed as the phyſical. For though the former has. 
alſo its laws, which of their own nature are invariable, 
yet it does not conform to them ſo exactly as the phy- 
ſical world. This is becanſe, on the one hand, par- 
ticular intelligent beings-are of a finite nature, and 
conſequently liable to error; and, on the other, their 
nature requires them to be free agents. Hence they 
do not ſteadily conform to their primitive laws; and 
even thoſe of their o/ iaſtituting they: frequently. i in- 
fringe. | 
Whether brutes be governed by the general laws of 
motion, or by a particular movement, is what we can · 
not determine. Be that as it may, they have not a 
more intimate relation to God than the reſt of the ma- 
terial world; and ſenfation is of no other uſe to them, 
than in the relation they have either to other particu- 
lar beings, or to themſelves. I; 

By the allurement of pleaſure, they We the 
being of the individual, and by the ſame allurement 
they preſerve their ſpecies. They have natural laws, 
becauſe they are united by ſenſations: poſitive laws 
they have none, becauſe: they are not connected by 
knowledge. And yet they do not conform invari- 
ably to their natural laws: theſe are better obſerved 

A 2 3 by 

4 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book I. 
hy vegetables, that have neither intellectual nor ſenſa- 

tive faculties. 

Brutes are deprived of the high advantages we en- 
joy; but they have ſome which we have not. They 
have not our hopes, but they are without our fears ; 
they are ſubject like us to death, but without know- 
ing it: even moſt of them are more attentive than we 
to ſe]f-preſervation, and do not make fo bad a uſe of 
their paſſions. | 

Man, as a phyſical being, is, like other bodies, go- 
verned by invariable laws. As an intelligent being, he 
inceſſantly tranfgrefles the laws eſtabliſhed by God, 
and changes thoſe which he himſelf has eſtabliſhed. 
He is left to his own direction, though he is a limited 
being, ſubject, like all finite intelligences, to ignorance 
and error; even the imperfect knowledge he has, he 
loſes as a ſenſible creature, and is hurried away by a 
thouſand impetuous paſſions. Such a being might eve - 
ry inſtant forget his Creator; God has therefore re- 

minded him of his duty by the laws of religion. Such 

a being is liable every moment to forget himſelf; phi- 
loſophy has provided againſt this by the laws of mora- 
lity. Formed to live in ſociety, he might forget his 
fellow. ereatures; legiſſators have therefore, by politi- 
cal and civil laws, confined him to his duty. | 
CHAP. II. 
/ the laws of nature. 

2 to all theſe laws are thoſe of nature, ſo cal - 
| 

led, becauſe they derive their force entirely from 
our frame and being. In order to have a perfect 

knowledge of theſe laws, we muſt conſider man before 

the eſtabliſhment of ſociety ; the laws received in ſuch 
a ſtate would be thoſe of nature. 

The law, which, by imprinting on our minds the 
idea of a Creator, inclines us to him, is the firſt in im- 
| portance, 

1 at. + — cu. ws + «ts FLY 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. «oh 

portance, though not in order, of natural laws. Man 
in a ſtate of nature would have the faculty of know- 
ing, before he had any acquired knowledge. It is 
evident that his firſt ideas would not be of a ſpecula - 
tive nature; he would think of the preſervation of his 
being, before he would inveſtigate its original. Such | 
a man would feel nothing in himſelf at firſt but impo - 
tency and weakneſs; his fears and apprehenſions would 
be exceſſive 3 as appears from inſtances (were there any 
neceſſity of proving it) of ſavages found in foreſts *, 

* trembling at the motion of a leaf, and flying from every 

ſhadow. 
In this ſtate every man would fancy himſelf inferi- 

or; ſcarcely would he think of his being equal. There 
would therefore be no danger of their attacking one 
another ; peace would be the firſt law of nature. 

The natural impulſe or defire which Hobbes attri- 
butes to mankind of ſubduing one another, is far from 
being well founded. The idea of empire and domi- 
nion is ſo complex, and depends on ſo many other no- 
tions, that it could never be the firſt that would occur 
to human underſtandings. 

Hobbes inquires, For what reaſon do men go 
«© armed, and have locks and keys to faſten their 
% doors, if they be not naturally in a ſtate of war? 
But is it not obvious, that he attributes to men before 
the eſtabliſhment of ſociety, what can happen but in 
conſequence of this eſtabliſhment, which ſurniſhes them 
with motives for hoſtile attacks and ſelf-defence ? 

Next to a ſenſe of his weakneſs, man would ſoon. 

find that of his wants. Hence another law of nature 

would prompt him to ſeek for nouriſhment. 
Fear, I have obſerved, would incline men to den | 
one another; but the marks of this fear being reci- 

Wit eis the ſavage found in the foreſts of Hanover, who was 
carried over to England in the reign of George I 

A3 procal, 

——— — En o — 

6 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book I. 

procal, would ſoon induce them to aſſociate. Beſides, 
this aſſociation would quickly follow from the very 

pleaſure one animal feels at the approach of another of | 
the ſame ſpecies. Again, the attraction ariſing from 

the different ſexes would enhance this pleaſure, and 

the natural inclination they have for each other, would 
form a third law. | 

Beſide the ſenſe or inſtinct which man has in com- 

mon with brutes, he has the advantage of attaining to 

acquired knowledge; and thereby has a ſecond tye 
which brutes have not. Mankind have therefore a new 

motive of uniting, and a fourth law of nature ariſes, 

from the deſire of living in ſociety. 

CHAP. IL 
Of poſitive laws. 

As ſoon as mankind enter into a ſtate of ſociety, 

they loſe the ſenſe of their weakneſs ; the equali- 
ty ceaſes, and then commences the ſtate of war. 
Each particular ſociety begins. to feel its. ſtrength, 

whence ariſes a ſtate of war betwixt different nations, 

The individuals likewiſe of each ſociety become ſenſible 
of their ſtrength; hence the principal advantages of 
this ſociety they endeavour to convert to their own 
emolument, which conſtitutes between them a ſtate of 
war. | 

Theſe two different kinds of hoſtile ſtates give riſe 
to human laws. Conſidered as inhabitants of ſo great 

a planet, which neceſſarily implies a variety of nations, 

they have laws relative to their mutual intercourſe, 
which is what we call the Law or NATIONS. Conſi- 
dered as members of a ſociety that muſt be properly 

ſupported, they have laws relative to the governors 

and the governed; and this we call yoLiTicaL Law. 

They have alſo another ſort of laws relating to the 

. * 0 > | [ no . 
mutual communication of citizens ; by which is under- 

Rood che VII LAW. | ; 

- 
. CO aan on ER — 

a 1 

rr 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. ; 

The law of nations is naturally fonnded on. this 
principle, that different nations ought in time of peace 
to do one another all the good-they can, and in tune 
of war as little harm as poſſible, without prejudicing 
their real intereſts. 

The object of war is victory; victory aims at con- 
queſt; conqueſt at preſervation. From this and the 
preceding principle, all. thoſe rules are derived which 
conſtitute the LAW OF- NATIONS. 

All countries. have a law of nations, not excepting 
the Iroquois theraſelves, though they devour their 
priſoners ; for they ſend and receive ambaſſadors, and 
underſtand the rights of war and peace. The miſ- 
chief is, that their law of nations is not founded on 
true principles. 

Beſides the law of nations relating to all ſocieties, 
there is a POLITICAL Law for each particularly con- 
ſidered. No ſociety can ſubſiſt without a form of 
government. The conjunction of the particular 
© forces. of individuals,” as Gravina well obſerves, 
« conſtitutes what we call a eoLITICAL STATE.” 

The general force may be in the hands of a fingle 
perſon, or of many. Some think that nature having 
eſtabliſhed paternal authority, the government of a 
ſingle. perſon was moſt conformable to nature. But 
the example of paternal authority proves nothing. 
For if the power of a father is relative to a ſingle go- 
vernment, that of brothers after the death of a father, 
or that of couſin-germans after the deceaſe of bro- 
thers, are relative to a government of many. The 
political power neceſſarily comprehends the union of 
ſeveral families, 

Better is it to ſay, that the government moſt con- 
formable to nature, is that whoſe particular diſpoſi - 
tion beſt agrees with the humour and diſpoſition of 
the people in whoſe favour it is eſtabliſhed, 

The 

9 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. - Book 1. 

The particular force of individuals cannot be uni- 
ted without a conjunction of all their wills. The 
% conjunction of thoſe wills,” as Gravina again very 
juſtly obſerves, © is what we call the crvit srarz.“ 

Law in general is human reaſon, inaſmach as it go- 
verns all the inhabitants of the earth, the political and 
civil laws of each nation ought to be only the parti- 
cular caſes in which this human reaſon is applied, 

They ſhould be adapted in ſuch a manner to the 

ple for whom they are made, as to render it very 
unlikely for thoſe of one nation to be Pe for an- 
other. 

They ſhould be relative to the nature wind principle 
of the actual, or intended government; whether they 
form it, as in the caſe of political laws, or whether 
they ſapport it, as may be ſaid of civil inſtitutions. 

They ſhould be relative to the climate of each conn» 
try, to the quality of the ſoil, to its ſituation and ex- 

tent, to the manner of living of the natives, whether 

huſbandmen, huntſmen, or ſhepherds: they ſhould 
have a relation to the degree of liberty which the con- 
ſtitution will bear; to the religion of the inhabitants, 
to their inclinations, riches, number, commerce, man- 
ners, and cuſtoms. In fine, they have relations to 
each other, as alſo to their origin, to the intent of 
the legiſlator, and to the order cf things on which 

they are eſtabliſhed; in all which different lights they 

ought to be conſidered. 

This is what I have undertaken to perform in the 
following work. Theſe relations I ſhall examine, 
fince all theſe together form what I call the Srigir 
or Laws. 

I have not ſeparated the political from the civil 
laws; for as I do not pretend to treat of laws, but of 
their ſpirit, and this ſpirit conſiſts in the various rela- 
tions which the laws may have to different things, it 
is 

LY 

Chap. x THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 9 

is not ſo much my buſineſs to follow the natural order 
of laws, as that of theſe relations and things. 

I ſhall firſt examine the relation which laws have to 
the nature and principle of each government: and as 
this principle has a ſtrong influence on laws, I ſhall 

make it my buſineſs to underſtand it thoroughly: and 
if I can but once eſtabliſh it, the laws will ſoon ap- 

8 r to flow from thence as from their ſource. I ſhall 
1 proceed afterwards to other more particular relations. 

wy j oppor ů ů ̃ —— 
| B O OE UI. 

e 

4 Of laws directiy derived from the nature of 
N 
C H A P. ; A 

Of the nature of the three different governments. 

PRES are three ſpecies of government; the re- 
publican, monarchical, and deſpetic In order to 
diſcover their nature, it is ſufficient to recollect the 
common notion, which ſupppoſes three definitions, or 
rather three facts: That a republican government 
I is that in which the body, or only a part of the 
d « people, is poſſeſſed of the ſupreme power: A mo- 
4 * narchical, that in which a ſingle perſon governs by 
0 fixed and eſtabliſhed laws : A deſpotic government, 
3 « that in which a fingle perſon, without law and 
| « without rule, directs every thing by his own * 
| « and caprice.” 
: This is what I call the nature of each government; 
we muſt examine now which are thoſe laws that fol- 
low this nature directly, and conſequently are the firſt 
fundamental laws. 

CHAP 

10 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book 1. 
CHAP. II. 

Of the republican government, and the laws relative to 
democracy. | 
WHEN the body of the people in a republic are + 
poſſeſſed of the ſupreme power, this is called a 
democracy. When the ſupreme power is lodged in the 
hands of a part of the people, it is then an ariſtocracy. 

In a democracy the people are in ſome reſpects the 
ſovereign, and in others the ſubject. 

They can no way exerciſe ſovereignty but by their 
ſuffrages, which are their own will; now, the ſove- 
reign's will is the ſovereign himſelf. The laws there- 
fore which eſtabliſh the right of ſuffrage, are funda- 
mental to this government. In ſa, it is as import- 
ant to regulate in a republic, in what manner, by 
whom, to whom, and concerning what fuffrages are 

to be given, as it is in a monarchy to know who is the 
prince, and after what manner he ought to govern. 

Libanius * ſays, that at Athens a ſtranger who 
« intermeddled in the aſſemblies of the people, was 
1. pnniſhed with death.” This is becauſe ſuch a man 
uſurped the rights of ſovereignty. 

It is an eſſential point to fix the number of citizens 
who are to form the public aſſemblies; otherwiſe it 
might be uncertain whether they had the votes of the 
whole, or of only a part of the people, At Sparta 

the number was fixed to ten thouſand. But at Rome, 
a city deſigned by providence to rife from the weakeſt 
beginnings to the higheſt pitch of grandeur; at Rome, 
a city doomed to experience all the vicifiitudes of for- 
tune ; at Rome, who had ſometimes all her inhabi- 
tants without her walls, and ſometimes all Italy and 
a conſiderable part of the world within them; at 

% 

* Declam. 17. & 28. 
Rome, 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 11 

Rome, 1 ſay, this number was never fixed *, and 

this was one of the principal cauſes of her ruin. 
The people in whom the ſupreme power reſides 

ought to do of themſelves whatever convenient]y they 

can, and what they themſelves cannot rightly per- 

ſorm they muſt do by their miniſters. 

The miniſters are not properly theirs, unleſs they 
have the nomination of them: it is therefore a funda- 
mental- maxim in this government, That the people 

ſhould chuſe their miniſters ; that is, their magiſtrates. 

They have occaſion as well as monarchs, and even 
more than they, to be directed by a council or ſenate. 

But, to have a proper confidence in theſe, they ſhould 

have the chuſing of the members; and this whether 
the election be made by themſelves, as at Athens, or 
by ſome magiſtrate deputed for that ,purpoſe, as on 
certain occaſions was cuſtomary at Rome. | 

The people are extremely well qualified for chuſng 
thoſe whom they are to intruit with a part of their 
authority. They have only to be determined by things 
which they cannot be ſtrangers to, and by facts that 
are obvious to ſenſe. They can tell when a perſon 
has been in ſeveral engagements, and has had parti- 
cular ſucceſs; they are therefore very capable of ele&- 
ing a general, They can tell when a judge is aſſiduous 
in his office, when he gives general ſatisfaction, and 

has never been charged with bribery : this is ſuffici · 

ent for chuſing a prætor. They are ſtruck with the 
magnificence or riches of a fellow · citizen; this is as 
much as is requiſite for electing an ædile. Theſe are 
all facts of which they can have better information 
in a public forum, than a monarch in his palace. But 
are they able to manage an intricate affair, to find out 
and make a proper uſe of: places, occaſions, moments ? 
No, this is beyond their capacity. 

* See the confideratioas on the cauſes of the grandeur and decline 
.of the Remus. . 
Should 

= 

4 
2 
"= 

1 
o 
7 

„ 
* 

rr 

n 
. 

2 

— — 
* & 

9 — — — 
— — — ͤ wq ' ———— — — — 

12 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book II. 

Should we doubt of the people's natural ability in 
reſpect to the diſcernment of merit, we need only caſt | 
an eye on the continual ſeries of furpriſing elections 
made by the Athenians and Romans, which no one 
ſurely will attribute to hazard. 4 

We know, that though the people of Rome aſſumed Þ 
to themſelves the right of raiſing plebeians to public ? 

offices, yet they could not reſolve to chuſe them; and, 
though at Athens the magiſtrates were allowed by 
the law of Ariſtides to be elected from all the diffe- 
rent claſſes of inhabitants, yet there never was a cale, 
ſays Xenophon “, that the common people petitioned ? 
for employments that could endanger their ſecurity 
or glory. 7 

As moſt citizens have a capacity of chuſing, though | 
they are not ſufficiently qualified to be choſen; ſo the | 
people, though capable of calling others to an ac- | 
count for their adminiſtration, are incapable of the | 
adminiſtration themſelves. - 

The public buſineſs muſt be carried on with a cer- | 
tain motion, neither too quick nor too ſlow. But the 
motion of the people is always either too remiſs or too 
violent. Sometimes with 100,000 arms they overturn ' 
all before them, and ſometimes with 100,000 feet they 
creep like inſects. 

In a popular ſtate, the inhabitants are divided into 
certain claſſes. It is in the manner of making this di- 
viſion, that great legiſlators have ſignalized themſelves; 
and it is on this the duration and proſperity of demo- 
cracy have always depended. 

Servius Tullius followed the ſpirit of ariſtocracy in 
the diſtribution of his clafſes. We find in Livy, and 
in Dionyfius Halicarnafſust, in what manner he lodged 

® P. 691. & 692. edit. Wechel. ann. 1896. + Lib. i. f 
þ Lib. iv. art. 13. a edit. Wechel, Pollux lib. vi. cap. 10. oF 
art. 1 30. ' 

g * the | 

Chap. 2. THE sPRTr or LAWS, 13 

the right of ſuffrage in the hands of the principal ci- 

tizens, He had divided the people of Rome into 193 

centuries, which formed fix claſſes; and, ranking the 
rich who were in ſmaller numbers in the firſt centu- 

ries, and thoſe in middling circumſtances who were 

more numerous in the following centuries, he flung 

the indigent multitude into the laſt; and, as each cen- 

tury had but one vote“, it was property rather than 
numbers that decided the elections. 

Solon divided the people of Athens into four claſ+ 
ſes. In this he was directed by the ſpirit of dero:ra- 
cy, his intention not being to fix thoſe who were to 
chuſe, but thoſe who were capable of being choſen 
wherefore, leaving to each citizen the right of elec- 
tion, he made ꝗ the judges eligible from each of thoſe 
four claſſes ; but the magiſtrates he ordered to be 
choſen only out of the three firſt, which conſiſted of 
citizens of eaſy fortunes. 

As the diviſion of thoſe who have a right of ſuf- 
frage is a fundamental law in a republic, ſo the man- 
ner alſo of giving this ſuffrage is another fundamen- 
tal law. 

The ſuffrage by lot is natural to democracy, as that 
by choice is to ariſtocracy. 

The ſuffrage by lot is a method of electing that of. 
fends no one; it lets each citizens entertain reaſonable 
hopes of ſerving his country. 

But, as this method is in itſelf deſective, it has been 
the glorious endeavour of the moſt eminent Rp 
to regulate and amend it, 
Solon made a law at Athens, that military employ- 
ments ſhould be conferred by choice, but that ſena- 
tors and judges ſhould be elected by lot. 

* Sec in the conſiderations on the cauſes of the grandeur and de- 

cline of the Romans, chap. ix. how this ſpirit of Servius Tullius 
was preſerved in the republic, 

+ Dionyſius Halicar. clog. of Ifocrates, p. gy. tome 3. 
Vor. I. B ; The 

14 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book II. 

The ſame legiſlator ordained, that civil magiſtracies 
attended with great expence ſhould be given by choice, 
and the others by lot. | 

But, in order to amend the ſuffrage by lot, he made 
a rule, that none but thoſe who preſented them. © 
ſelves ſhould be elected; that the perſon elected ſhould 3 
be examined by judges “, and that every one ſhould 2? 
have a right to accuſe him if he were unworthy of 
the office : this participated at the ſame time of the 
ſuffrage by lot, and of that by choice. When the 
time of their magiſtracy was expired, they were obli- 
ged to ſubmit to another judgment upon the man- 
ner they had behaved. Perſons utterly unqualified x 
muſt have been extremely backward in giving in their 
names to be drawn by lot. i 

The law which determines the manner of giving 
the ſuffrage is likewiſe fundamental in a democracy. 
It is a queſtion of ſome importance, whether the ſaf. 
frages ought to be public or ſecret? Cicero f obſerves, 

that the laws | which rendered them ſecret towards 

the cloſe of the republic were the cauſe of its decline. 
But, as this is differently practiſed in different repub- 

tics, I ſhall offer here my thoughts concerning this 

ſubject. 
The people's ſuffrages onght doubtleſs to be pub- 

lie ; and this ſhould be conſidered as a fundamental 

law of democracy. The lower fort of people ought 
to be directed by thoſe of higher rank, and reſtrained 

® Sec the oration of Demoſthenes de falſa legat. and the oration 
againſt Timarchus. 

+ They uſed even to draw two tickets for each place, one which 
gave the place, and the other which named the 2 who was to 

ſucceed in caſe the firſt was rezeQed. 

4 Lib. 1. & 3. de leg. 
| They were called leges tabulares; two tables were preſented to 

each citizen; the firſt marked with an A for Antiquo, or I forbid it; 
and the other with an U and R for Uti Rogas, or Be it as you deſire. 

8 At Athens the people uſed to lift up their heads. 
within 

4 1 
x 
. 

ap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, 15 

within bounds by the gravity of certain perſonages. 
Hence, by rendering the ſuffrages ſecret in the Ro- 
man republic, all was loſt; it was no longer poſſible 
to direct a populace that ſought its own deſtruction. 
But, when the body of the nobles are to vote in an 
ariſtocracy *®, or in a democracy the ſenate f, as the 
buſineſs is then only to prevent intrigues, the ſuffrages 
cannot be too ſecret. 

the Intriguing in a ſenate is dangerous: dangerous it 
the is alſo in a body of nobles, but not ſo in the people, 
bli- v hoſe nature it is to act through paſſion. In countries 
an- where they have no ſhare in the government, we of- 
ied ten ſee them as much inflamed on the account of an 

eir actor, as ever they could be for any concern of the 

ſtate. The misfortunes of a republic is, when there 
are no more intrigues; and this happens when the 
people are corrupted by dint of money; in which caſe 
they grow indifferent to public concerns, and paſſion · 
ately deſirous of lucre, Careleſs of the government, 
and of every thing belonging to it, they quietly wait 
for their ſalary. 

It is likewiſe a fundamental N in democracies, that 
the people ſhould have the fole power to enact laws. 
And yet there are a thouſand occaſions on which it 
is neceſſary the ſenate ſhould have a power of decree- 
ing; nay, it is frequently proper to make ſome trial. 
of a law before it is eſtabliſhed. The conſtitutions of 
Rome and Athens were excellent. The decrees of 
the ſenate t had the force of laws for the ſpace of a 
year, and did not become perpetual till they were ra- 
tified by the conſent of the people. 

As at Venice. | 
+ The thirty tyrants at Athens ordered the ſuffrages of the Areo- 
pagites to be public, in order to manage them as they pleaſed, Lys 
Fus orat. contra Agorat. cap. 8. 
þ See Diony ſius Halicar, lib. 4. & 9, 

B 2 C HAP. 

16 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book II. 

CHAP III. 
Of the laws relative to the nature f ariſtocracy. 

I an ariſtocracy, the ſupreme power is lodged in 
the hands of a certain number of perſons. 'Theſe | 

are inveſted both with the legiſlative and executive au- | 
thority z and the reſt of the people are in reſpect to 
them the ſame as the ſubjects of a monarchy in regard | 
to the monarch. 

They do not vote here by lot; for this would be at- , 

tended only with inconveniencies. In fat, in a go- 
vernment where the moſt diſtinctions are already eſta- 
bliſhed, though they were to vote by lot, ſtill theß 
would not ceaſe to be odious; it is the noblemen they | 
envy, and not the magiltrate. 
- When the nobility are numerous, there muſt be a 
ſenate to regulate the affairs which the body of no- 
bles are incapable of deciding, and to prepare thoſe 
they decide. In this caſe it may be ſaid, that the ari- 
ſlocracy i is in ſome meaſure in the ſenate, the demo- 
cracy in the body of the nobles, and the people are 
nothing at all. | 

It would be a ory happy thing in an ariſtocracy, 
if by ſome. indirect method the people could be eman. 
cipated from their (tate of annihilation. Thus at Ge- 
noa the bank of St. George, being adminiſtered by the 
people, gives them a certain influence in the govern- 
ment, from whence their whole proſperity ariſes. 
The ſenators ought by no means to have a right of 
- Naming their own members; for this would be the on- 
ly way to perpetuate. abuſes. At Rome, which in its 
early years was a kind of ariſtocracy, the ſenate did 
not fill up the vacant places in their. own body, the 
new ſenators were nominatcd by the cenſors “. 

An exorbitant authority ſuddenly! conferred upon 
a citizen in a republic produces a monarchy, or foine- 

They were named at firſt by the conſuls, * 
ng 

II. 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 17 

thing more than a monarchy. In the latter the laws. 

have provided for, or in ſome meaſure adapted them - 
felves to the conſtitution ; and the principle of govern» 
ment checks the monarch ; but in a republic where. 
a private citizen has obtained an exorbitant power “, 
the abuſe of this power is much greater, becauſe the 
laws foreſaw it not, and conſequently 8 no provi-- 
ſion againſt i it. 

There is an exception to this rule when the conſti- 
tution is ſuch as to have immediate need of a magi - 
ſtrate inveſted with an exorbitant power. Such was 
Rome with her dictators; ſuch is Venice with her 
ſtate-inquiſitors z theſe are formidable magiltratess- 
who reſtore, as it were by violence, the ſtate to its 
liberty. But how comes it that theſe magilirates are- 
ſo very different in theſe two republics? It is becauſe 
Rome ſupported the remains of her ariſtocracy a- 
gainſt the people, whereas Venice employs her ſtate- 
inquiſitors to maintain her ariſtoeracy againſt the no- 
bles? The conſequence was, that at Rome the dic- 
tatorſhip could be only of a ſhort duration, becauſe- 
the people act through paſſion and violence, and not 
with deſign. It was neceffary that a magiſtracy of 
this kind ſhould be exerciſed. with luſtre and pomp, 
becauſe the buſineſs was to intimidate, and not to pu- 
niſh. the people. It was alfo neceffary that the dic. 
tator ſhould be created only for ſome particular af - 
fair, and for this only ſhould have an unlimited au- 
thority,. becauſe he was always created. upon ſome 
ſadden emergency. On the contrary,. at Venice they 
have occaſion for a permanent magiltracy ; for here 
it is that deſigns may be commenced, continued, ſuſ- 
pended, reſumed ;. that the ambition of a ſingle per- 
tn becomes that of a family, and the ambition of one- 
family that of many. They have occalion for a ſecret: 

* This is what ruined the republic vi Rome. See conſideration 
on the cauſes of the grandeur and decline of the Romans. 

B 3 2 magiſtracy, 

18 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book 11. 

magiſtracy, becauſe the crimes they puniſh are hatch- 
ed in ſecrecy and ſilence. This magiſtracy muſt have 

a general inquiſition, by reaſon their buſineſs is not to 
put a ſtop to known evils, but to prevent the unknown. i 

In fine, the latter magiſtracy is appointed in arder to | 

puniſh ſuſpected crimes, and the former uſed rather 
menaces than puniſhment even for crimes that were 

openly avowed by their authors. 

In all magiſtracies, the greatneſs of the power muſt | 
be compenſated by. the brevity of the duration. This 
moſt legiſlators have fixed to a year; a longer ſpace i 
would be dangerous, and a ſhorter would be contra- 
ry to the nature of the thing; for who is it that in 
the management even of his own domeſtic affairs 
would be thus confined ? At Raguſa“ the chief ma- 
giſtrate is changed every month, the other officers | 

every week, and the governor of the caſtle every day. 
But this can take place only in a ſmall republic envi- 
roned + by formidable powers, who might eaſily cor- 
rupt ſuch petty and inſignificant magiſtrates. 

The beſt ariſtocracy is that in which thoſe who | 

have no ſhare in the legiſlature are ſo few and incon- 
ſiderable, that the governing party have no intereſt 
in oppreſſing them. Thus, when Antipater 4 made 
a law at Athens, that whoſoever was not worth 200 

drachms ſhould have no power to vote ; he formed by ; 
this means the beſt ariſtocracy poſſible, becauſe this 
was ſo ſmall a ſum as excluded very few, and not one 

of any rank or conſideration in the city. Ariſtocrati - 

cal families ought therefore, as much as poflible, to 
level themſelves in appearance with the people. The 
more an ariſtocracy borders on democracy, the nearer 
it approaches to perfection; and the more it is im- 
perfect, in proportion as it draws towards monarchy. 

„ Tournefort's voyages, 
At Lucca the magiſtrates are choſen only for two months, 
$ Diodorus, lib, xviii, p. 601. - Rhodoman's edition, 5 
was ut 

- 

. 

Chap. 44 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 19 

But the moſt imperſect of all, is that in which the 
part of the people that obeys is in a ſtate of civil ſer- 
vitude to thoſe who command, as the ariilocracy of 
Poland, where the peaſants are ſlaves to the nobility. 

C:H A. P. V. 

Of the relation of laws to the nature of monarchical go- 
vernment. 

H E intermediate, ſubordinate, and dependent 
powers, conllitute the nature of monarchical go- 
vernment, I mean of that in which a ſingle perſon 
governs by fundamental laws. I ſaid the intermedi- 
ate, ſubordinate, and dependent powers. In fact, in 
monarchies the prince is the ſource of all power po- 
litical and civil. Theſe fundamental laws neceſſarily 
ſuppoſe the intermediate channels through which the 
power flows; for, if there be only the momentary 
and capricious will of a ſingle perſon to govern the 
ſtate, nothing can be fixed, and of courſe there can 
be no fundamental law. 

The moſt natural, intermediate, and ſubordinate 
power is that of the nobility. This in ſome meaſure 
ſeems to be eſſential to a monarchy, whoſe fundamen- 
tal maxim is, No monarch, no nobility ; no nobility, 

% no monarch ; but there may be a deſpotic prince.“ 
There are men who have endeavoured in ſome 
countries in Europe to aboliſh all the juriſdiction of 
the nobility, not perceiving that they were driving at 
the very thing that was done by the parliament of 
England. Aboliſh the privileges of the lords, of the 
clergy, and of the cities in a monarchy, and you will 
ſoon have a popular ſtate, or elſe a deſpotic govern» 
ment. | | 

The courts of a conſiderable kingdom in Europe 
have for many ages been ſtriking at the patrimonial 
juriſdiction of the lords and clergy, We do not pre- 

tend 

20 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: Book II. 

tend to cenſure theſe ſage magiſtrates; but we leave 
it to the public to judge ow far this may alter the 
conſtitution. 

Far am I from being cali in favour of the 
Privileges of the clergy 5 however, I ſhould be glad 
their juriſdiction were once fixed. The queſtion is 
not, Whether their juriſdiction was juſtly eſtabliſhed, 
but Whether it be really eſtabliſhed ; whether it con- 
ſtitutes a part of the laws of the country, and is in 
every reſpect relative to thoſe laws; whether between. 
two powers acknowledged independent, the condi- 
tions ought not to be reciprocal; and whether it is 
not equally the duty of a good ſubject to defend the 
prerogative of the prince, as to maintain the limits. 
which from time immemorial he has preſcribed to his 
authority ? 

Though the eccleſiaſtic power is ſo dangerous in a 
republic, yet it is extremely proper in a monarchy, 

. eſpecially of the abſolute kind. What would. become 
of Spain and Portugal ſince the ſubverſion of their 
„laws, were it not for this only barrier againſt the in- 
curſions of arbitrary power? A barrier that is always 
uſeful when there is no other; for, as à deſpotic go- 
vernment is productive of the moſt frightful calami»- 
ties to human nature, the very evil that reſtrains it is 
beneficial to the ſubject. | 

As the ocean which ſeems to threaten to overflow. 
the whole earth is ſtopped by weeds and by little peb- 
bles that lie ſeattered along the ſhore ; ſo monarchs 
whoſe power ſeems unbounded are reſtrained by the 
ſmalleſt obſtacles, and ſuffer their natural. pride to be 
ſubdued by ſuppiication and prayer. 

The Englith, to favour their liberty, have aboliſh- 
ed all the intermediate powers of which their monar- 
chy was compoſed. They have a. great deal of reaſon 
— AOINEs were they ever to be ſo 

unhappy 

Chap. 4 THE SPIRIT! OF LAWS. 21 

unhappy as to loſe it, they would be one of the molt 
ſervile nations upon earth. 

Mr. Law, through ignorance both of a republican 
and monarchical conſtitution, was one of the greateſt 
promoters of abſolute power that ever was known in 
Europe. Beſides the violent and extraordinary changes 
owing to his direction, he wanted to ſuppreſs all the 
intermediate ranks, and to aboliſh the political com- 
munities. He was diffolving “ the monarchy by his 
chimerical reimburſements, and ſeemed as if he want- 
ed to buy again even the very conſtitution. 

It is not enough to have intermediate powers in a 
monarchy; there mult be alſo a depoſitary of the 
laws. This depoſitary can be only the political bodies. 
who promulge the new laws, and revive the obſo- 
lete The natural ignorance of the nobility, their 
indolence, and contempt” of civil government, require 
there ſhould be a body inveſted with a power of re- 
yiving the laws which would be otherwiſe buried in 
_ oblivion. The prince's council are not a proper depo- 
ſitary. They are naturally the depoſitary oft the mo - 
mentary will of the prince, and not of the fundamen-. 
tal laws. Beſides, the prince's council is continually: 
changing; it is neither permanent nor numerous; 
neither has it a ſufficient ſhare of the confidence of 
the people; conſequently it is incapable to ſet them 
right in difficult conjunctures, or to reduce them to 
proper obedience. 

Deſpotic governments, where there are no funda- 
mental laws, have no ſuch kind of depoſitary. Hence 
it is that religion has generally ſo much influence in 
thoſe coun:ries, becauſe it forms a kind of permanent 
depoſitary ; and, if this cannot be ſaid of religion, it 
may of the cuſtoms that are reſpected inſtead of laws, 

Ferdinasd king of Arragon made himſelf grand-maſter of the 
| _ and that aloue changed the conſtitution, 
CHAP. 

22 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book II. 

| CHAP. V. 
Of the laws relative to the nature of a deſpotic govern« 
ment. 

FROM the nature of deſpotic power it follows, that 
the ſingle. perſon inveſted with this power com - 
mits the execution of it alſo to a fingle perſon. A man, 
whom his ſenſes continually inform that he himſelf is 
every thing and his ſubjects nothing, is naturally la- 
25, voluptuous, and ignorant. In conſequence of this, 
he neglects the management of public affairs. But, 
were he to commit the adminiſtration to many, there 
would be eontinual diſputes among them; each would 
form intrigues to be his firſt ſlave, and he would be 
obliged to take the reins into his own hands. It is 
therefore more natural for him to refign it to a vi- 
zir*, and to inveſt him with the ſame power as him- 
ſelf. This creation of a vizir is a fundamental 1. of 
this government. 
It is related of a pope, that he had raiſed an infi- 
nite number of difficulties againſt his election from a 
thorongh conviction of his incapacity. At length he 
was prevailed on to accept of the pontificate, and re- 
ſigned the adminiſtration entirely to his. nephew. He 
was ſoon ſtruck with ſurpriſe, and faid, I ſhould 
never have thought that theſe things were ſo eaſy.“ 

The ſame may be ſaid of the prinees of the Eaſt, who, : 

being bred in that priſon where their eunuchs ener- 
vate both their hearts and underſtandings, and where 
they are frequently kept ignorant even of their high 
rank, when drawn forth in order to be placed upon 
the throne, they are at firſt amazed ; but, as ſoon as 
they have choſen a vizir, they abandon themſelves in 
their ſeraglio to the moſt brutal pafſions, purſuing, 
in the midſt of a proſtituted court, the | moſt capri- 

* The caſtern kings are never without vizirs, ſays Sir J. Chardin, 
cious 

of laws, 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 23 

cious extravagancies; they could then never have 
dreamed to find matters fo eaſy. 

The greater the extent of an empire, the greater 
is the ſeraglio, and conſequently ſo much the more is 
the prince intoxicated with pleaſure. Hence the more 
nations ſuch a prinee has to govern, the leſs he at- 
tends to the government ; the greater his affairs, the 
leſs he makes them the ſubje& of his deliberations. 

— —— - — 

B O O K m | 

Of the principles of the three kinds of go- 
vernment. 

"og r n X 

— 

CHAP. I. 

| Difference between the nature and principle of gevern- 

ment. 

1 laws relative to the 
nature of each government, we mult inveſtigate 
thoſe that relate to its principle. 

There is this difference between the nature and 
principle of government; its nature is that by which 
it is conſtituted, and its principle that by which it is 
made to act. One is its particular ſtructure, and the 
other the human paſſions which ſet it in motion. 

Now, laws ought to be no leſs relative to the prin - 
ciple than to the nature of each government. We 
mult therefore enquire into this principle, which ſhall 
be the ſubject of this third book. 

© This is d very important ditiaiiion, ens whenee Tulle 
a great many conſequences; for it is the key of an infinite number 

CHAP. 

24 THE spIRTT OF LAWS. Book III. 

CHAP. II. 
Of the principle of different governments. 
I Have already obſerved that it is the nature of a 
republican government, that either the colleQive 
body of the people, or particular families, ſhould be 

poſſeſſed of the ſovereign power; of a monarchy, that 

the prince ſhould have this ſovereign power, but in 

the execution of it ſhould be directed by eſtabliſhed | 

| 

laws; of a deſpotic government, that a ſingle perſon |} 

ſhould rule according to his own will and caprice. 
No more do I want to enable me to diſcover their 
three principles: theſe are from thence moſt naturally 
derived. I ſhall begin with a republican government 
and in particular with that of democracy. 

CHAP, III. 
_Of the principle of democracy. 

TAE is no great ſhare of probity neceſſary to 

ſupport a monarchical or deſpotic government. 
The force of Jaws in one, and the prince's arm in the 
other, are ſufficient to direct and maintain the whole. 
But in a popular ſtate one ſpring more is neceſlary, 
namely Virtue. | 

What I have here advanced is confirmed by the 
unanimous teſtimony of hiſtorians, and is extremely 
agreeable to the nature of things; for it is clear, that 
in a monarchy, where he who commands the execu- 
tion of the laws generally thinks himſelf above them, 
there is leſs need of virtue than in a popular govern- 
ment, where the perſon intruſted with the execution 
of the laws is ſenſible of being ſubject himſelf to their 
| direction. 

Clear it is alſo, that a monarch, who through * 
advice or indolence ceaſes to enforce the execution of 
the laws, may eaſily repair the evil; he has only to 
follow other advice, or to ſhake off this indolence. 

; 2 But, 

e 7 

2 PR vos 

, 

Chap. 3. 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 

25 

But, when in a popular government there is a ſuſpen- 
ſion of the laws, as this can proceed only from the cor- 
ruption of the republic, the ſtate is certainly undone. 
A very curious ſpectacle it was in the laſt century to 
behold the impotent efforts the Engliſh made for the 
eſtabliſhment of democracy. As thoſe who had a ſhare 
in the direction of public affairs were void of all vir- 
tue, as their ambition was inflamed by the ſucceſs of 
the moſt daring of their members *, as the ſpirit of a 
faction was ſuppreſſed only by that of a ſucceeding 
faction, the government was continually changing; 
the people, amazed at ſo many revolutions, ſought 
every where for a democracy without being able to 
find it. At length, after a ſeries of tumultuary mo- 
tions and violent ſhocks, they were obliged to have' 
recourſe to the very government which they had ſo 

odiouſly proſcribed. 

When Sylla wanted to reſtore Rome to her liderty, 

this unhappy city was incapable of receiving it. 

She: 

had only ſome. feeble remains of virtue; and, as this 
was every day diminiſhing, inſtead of being rouſed 
out of her lethargy by Ceſar, Tiberius, Caius, Clau- 
dius, Nero, Domitian, ſhe rivetted every day her 
chains; the blows ſhe ſtruck were levelled againſt the 

tyrants, but not at the tyranny. ; | 
The politic Greeks, who lived under a popular go- 
vernment, knew no other ſupport but virtue. 

modern inhabitants of that country are entirely taken 
up with manufactures, commerce, finances, riches, and 

laxury. 

When virtue is baniſhed, ambition invades the 
hearts of thoſe who are diſpoſed to receive it, and 
avarice - poſſeſſes the whole community. The deſires 
now change their objects; what they were fond of 
before becomes indifferent; they were free, while un- 

* Cromwell, 

Vor. I, 

C 

der 

26 THE SPIRIT or LAWS. Book 111 

der the reſtraint of laws they will now. be free to act 
againſt law; and, as every citizen is like a ſlave eſca- 
ped from his maſter's houſe, what was a maxim of 
equity they call rigour; what was a rule of action 
they call conſtraint; and to precaution they give the 
name of fear, Frugality, and not the thirſt of gain, 
now paſſes for avarice. Formerly the wealth of indi- 
viduals conſtituted the public treaſure ; but now the 
public treaſure is become the patrimony of private 
perſons. The members of the commonwealth riot on 

the public ſpoils, and its ſtrength is only the power of 

ſome citizens, and the licentiouſneſs of the whole com- 
munity. | 

Athens was poſſeſſed of the ſame number of forces, 
when the triumphed with ſo much glory, and when 
with fo much infamy ſhe was enſlaved. She had 20,006 
citizens *®, when ſhe defended the Greeks againſt the 
Perſians, when ſhe contended. for empire: with Sparta, 
and invaded Sicily. She had 20,6co when Deme- 
trius Phalerius numbered them , as ſlaves are told by 
the head in a market. When Philip attempred to 
reign in Greece, and appeared at the gates of Athensf, 
ihe had even then loſt nothing but time. We may ſee 
in Demoſthenes how difficult it was to awake her: 
ſhe dreaded Philip not as the enemy of her liberty, 
but of her pleaſures J. This famous city, which had 
withſtood ſo many defeats, and, after having been fo 
often deſtroyed, had as often riſen out of her aſhes, 
was overthrown at Chæronea, and at one blow * 

Plutarch ia Pericles. Plato in ritia. 

+ She had at that time 20,000 citizens, 10,900 ſtrangers, and 

4-0,000 ſlaves, See Athenzus, book 6. 
4 She had then 20,000 citizens, Sec NDewoſthenes in Ariſtog. 
+ They had paſſed a law, which had rendered it a capital crime 
| for any one to propofe applying the xs © de ſigned for the thea- 
tres to the military ſervice. 

prived 

= 

* 1, 80 O0 

d 4s 3 We OS © - 

„ 

* 

Chap. 4. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 27 

prived of all hopes of reſource, What does it avail 
her that Philip ſeads back her priſoners, if he does 
not return her men? It was ever after as eaſy to tri- 
umph over the Athenian forces, as it would have been 
difficult to triumph over her virtue. 

How was it poſſible for Carthage to maintain her 
ground ? When Hannibal, upon his being made prz- 
tor, endeavoured to hinder the magiſtrates from plun- 
dering the republic, did not they complain of him to 
the Romans ? Wretches, who wauted to be citizens 
without a city, and to be beholden for their riches to 
their very deſtroyers! Rome ſoon inſiſted upon having 
300 of their principal citizens as hoſtages ; the obliged 
them next to ſurrender their arms and {hips ; and then 
ſhe declared war againſt them“. By the efforts made 
by this defenceleis city, when reduced to deſpair, one 

may judge of what the might have done in her full 

ſtrength, and aſſiſted by virtue. 

CHAP. . 
Of the principle of ariſtecracy. 

A® virtue is neceſſary in a popular government, fo 
it is neceſſary alſo under an ariſtocracy. True it 

is, that in the latter it is not ſo abſolutely requiſite. 
The people, who, in reſpect to the nobility, are the 
ſame as the ſubjects with regard to the monarch, are 
reſtrained by their laws. They have, theretore, leſs 
occaſion for virtue than the people in a democracy. 
But how are the nobility to be reſtrained ? Thoſe who 
are to execute the laws againſt their colleagues will 
immediately perceive they are acting againſt theraſelves. 
Virtue is therefore neceſſary in this body by the very 

nature of the conſtitution. 
As ariſtocratical government has within itſelf a 
certain ſtrength which a democracy has not. The 
* This war laſted three years, ; 

EE, C 2 nobles 

28 

through particular intereſt, reſtrain the people; it is 

ſufficient here that there are laws in being to ſee them 
executed. 

But, however eaſy it is for the body of the nobles 

to contain the people within bounds, in the ſame degree 

is it difficult to contain themſelves *. Such is the na- 

ture of this conſtitution, that it feems to ſubject the 

very ſame perſons to the Foes of the laws, and to ex- 
empt them. 

Now, ſuch a body as this can reſtrain itſelf only 
two ways; either by a very eminent virtue, which 
puts the nobility in ſome meaſure on a level with the 
people, and may be the means of forming a great re- 
public; or by an inferior virtue, which conſiſts in a 
certain moderation, that puts them at leaſt upon a le- 
vel with one another, and on this their preſervation de- 
pends. 

Moderation is, therefore, the very ſoul of this go- 
vernment; a moderation I mean founded on virtue, 
not that which proceeds from e and puſillani- 

mity. 

C HAP. v. 
That virtue is not the principle of a monarchical govern- 
ment. 

TY mics, policy makes people do great things 
with as little virtue as ſhe can. Thus in the fineſt 
machines art has contrived as few movements, {prings, 
and. wheels, as poſſible. 

The ſtate ſubſiſts independently of the love of our 
country, of the thirſt of true glory, of ſelf-denial; of 
the ſacrifice of our deareſt intereſts, and of all. thoſe 

* public crimes may be puniſhed, becauſe it is a common con- 
cern; but private crimes will go unpuniſhed, becauſe it is a com- 
mon intereſt nct to puniſh them. 
heroic 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book III. 
nobles form a body, who, by their . prerogative, and 

S 4 8. 4 2 

II. 

Chap. 5- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 20 

heroic virtues which we admire in the ancients, and. 
which to us are known only by ſtory. | 

The laws ſupply here the place of thoſe meg 
they ate by uo means wanted, and the Rate diſpenſes. 
with them: an action performed: here in ſecret is in 
ſome meaſure of no coniequence. 

Though all crimes be in their own nature public, yet. 
there is a diſtinction between crimes that are really pub- 
lic, and thoſe that are private, which are ſo called, 
becauſe they are more injurious to individuals than to 
the whole ſociety. 

Now, in republics, private crimes are more public; 
that is, they attack the conſtitution more than they do 
individuals; and in monarchies public crimes are more 
private; that is, they are more prejudicial to private 
people than to the conſtitution. 

I beg that no one will take this amiſs ; my obſerva- 
tions are founded on the unanimous teſtimony of hiſto- 
rians. I am not ignorant that virtuous princes are no 

ſuch very rare ſight; but I venture to afficm, that in a 

monarchy it is extremely difhcult for the people to be 

virtuous “. 

Let us compare what the hiſtorians of all ages have 
ſaid concerning the. courts of monarchs ; let us recol- 
let the converſations and ſentiments of people of all: 
countries, in reſpect to the wretched character of cour- 
tiers; and we ſhall find, that theſe are not mere airy 
fpeculations, but things confirmed by a ſad and melan- 
choly experience. 

Ambition joined to idleneſs, and baſeneſs to pride; 
a deſire of obtaining riches without labour, and an- 
averſion to truth, flattery, treaſon, perfidy, violation 

of engagements, contempt of civil duties, fear of the- 

©* I ſpeak here of political virtue, which-is a mor l virtue as it is 
directed to the public good; very little of private moral virtue; 
and not at all of that virtue which relates to revealed ttuths. This 
will appear better, book v. ch. 2 
C 3 | Prince's 

30 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: Book III 

prince's virtue, hope from his weakneſs, but, above all, 
a perpetual ridicule caſt upon virtue, are, I think, the 
characteriſtics by which moſt courtiers in all ages and 
countries have been conſtantly diſtinguiſhed. Now, it is 
exceeding difficult for the leading men of the nation to 
be knaves, and for the inferior ſort of people to be ho- 
neſt ; for the former to be cheats, and for the meter 
to reſt ſatisfied to be only dupes. 

But, if there ſhould chance to be ſome unlucky ho- 
neſt man “ among the people, Cardinal Richlieu in his 
political teſtament + ſeems to hint, that a prince ſhould | 
take care not to employ him . So true it is that vir- | 
tue is not the ſpring of this government! 

H. A E. VI. 

| Is what manner virtue is. ſupplied in a monarchical go - 
vernment. 

UT it is bigh time for me to have done with this 
ſubject, leſt I ſhould be ſuſpected of writing a ſa- 
tire againſt monarchical government. Far be it from 
me; if monarchy wants one ſpring, it is provided with 
another. Honour, that is, the prejudice of every per- 
ſon and every rank, ſupplieth the place of virtue, and 
is every where her repreſentative; here it is capable of | 
inſpiring the moſt glorious actions, and, joined with 
the force of laws, may lead us to the end of govern- 
ment, as well as virtue itſelf, 

Hence, in well-regulated monarchies,-they are al- 
moſt all good ſubjects, and very few good men; for 
to be a good man, a good intention is neceſſary . 

* This is to be underſtood in the ſcnfe of the preceding note. 

+ This book was written under the inſpection, and from the 
memoirs of Cardinal Richlien, by Meſſ. de $157 9H and de —, 
who were ſtrongly his adherents. 

t We mult not, ſays he, employ ds of mean extraQtion ; 

they are too auſtere and difficult, 
See the note, p. 29. 

CHAP. 

75 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 31 

CHAP VI. 
Of the principle of a monarchy. 

A Monarchical government ſuppoleth, as we have 
already obſerved, pre-eminences, and ranks, and 
likewiſe a noble deſcent, Now, as it is the nature of 
honour to aſpire to preferments and diſtinguiſhing 

titles, it is therefore properly placed in this goyern- 
ment. 

Ambition is pernicious in a republic; but in a mo- 
narchy it has ſome good effects: it gives liſe to the 
government, and is attended with this advantage, 
that it is no way dangerous, becauſe it may be conti- 
nually checked. 

It is with this kind of government as with the ſy- 
ſtem of the univerſe, in which there is a power that 
conſtantly repels all bodies from the centre, and a 
power of gravitation that attracts them to it. Honour 
ſets all the part of the body politic in motion; by its 
very action it connects them, and thus each individual 

advances the public good, while he only thinks of 

promoting his own particular intereſt. 

True it is, that, philoſophically ſpeaking, it is a falſe 
honour which moves all the parts of the government; 
but even this falſe honour is as uſeful to the public, as 

true honour could poſſibly prove to private people. 

Is it not a very great point to oblige men to perform 
the moſt difficult actions, ſuch as require a great de- 
gree of fortitude and ſpirit, without any other recom- 
pence- than the fame and reputation ariſing from * 
actions chemſelves: 4 

e VII A 
That honour is not the principle of deſpotic government. 

Onour is far from being the principle of deſpotic 
government: men being here all upon a level, 

B 4 no 

% 

32 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book III. 

no one can prefer himſelf to another ; men, being here 
all ſlaves, can give themſelves no preference at all. 

Beſides, as honour has its laws and rules, as it. 
knows not how to ſubmit, as it depends in a great 
meaſure on a man's own caprice, and not. on that of 
another perſon; it can be ſound only in countries in 
which the conſtitution is fixed, and where they are go- 
verned by ſettled laws. | 

How can a deſpotic prince bear with any ſuch thing 
as honour? Honour glories in contempt of life, and 
here the prince's whole ſtrength conſiſts in the power of 
taking it away. How can honour ever bear with a 
deſpotic prince? It has its fixed rules and conſtant ca- 
prices; but a deſpotic prince is directed by no rule, and 
his own caprices deſtroy all others. 

Honour therefore, a thing unknown in deſpotic go- 
vernments, where very often they have not ſo much 
as a fit word to expreſs it“, is the prevailing principle 
in monarchies ; here it gives life to the whole body po- 
lic, to the laws, and even to the virtues themſelves. 

CT HE AF It 

| ile principle of deſpotic government. 
— is neceſſary in a republic, and in a mo- 
narchy honour, ſo fear is neceſſary in deſpotic: 
government; with regard to virtue, there is no occa- 
fron for it, and honour would be extremely dangerous. 
Here the -immenſe power of the prince is devolved 
entirely upon thoſe to whom he is pleaſed to intruſt it. 
Perſons capable of ſetting a value upon. themſelves 
would be likely to create revolutions. Fear muſt there - 
fore depreſs their ſpirits, and extinguiſh even. the leaſt 

ſenſe of ainbition. 

& moderate goverament may, whenever it pleaſes, 

See Perry, page 4% 

and 

FF 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, $3 

and without any danger, relax it ſprings; it ſupports 
itſelf by its laws and by its own force. But, when a 
deſpotic prince ceaſes one ſingle moment to lift up his 
arm, when he cannot inſtantly demolith thoſe whom 

he has entruſted with the firſt poſts and employments“, 

all is over; for, as fear, the ſpring of this government, 

no longer ſubſiſts, the poop are left without a provee> 
tor. 

It is probably in this ſens the Cadis i 
that the Grand Signor was not obliged to keep his 
word or oath, when he limited thereby his authority Þ. 

It is neceſſary that the people ſhould be judged by 
laws, and the great men by the caprice of the prince; 
that the lives of the loweſt ſubjects ſhould be ſafe, and 
the Baſhaw's head always in danger. We cannot men- 
tion theſe monſtrous governments without horror. 
The Sophi of Perſia, dethroned in our days by Maho- 
met the ſon of Miriveis, ſaw the conſtitution ſubverted 
before this revolution, becauſe he had been too ſparing 

of blood . 

Hiſtory informs us, that the horrid e of Do- 
mitian ſtruck ſuch a terror into the governors, that the 
people recovered themſelves a little under his reign |. 
Thus a torrent lays one fide of a whole country waſte, 
and on the other leaves fields untouched, where the 
eye is refreſhed with the ſight of ſome diſtant mea · 

dows. | 4 

CHAP. Xx. | ö 
Difference of obedience in moderate and deſpotic Pow 
ments. | 

I* deſpotic ſtates the nature of the goverment re- 
quires the molt paſſive obedience 3 and, when once 

As it often happens in a military ariſtocracy, 

+ Ricault on the Ottoman empire. 

| Sce the hiſtory of this revolution by Father du Cercean. 

His was a military government, which is one of the ſpecies of 
de ſpotie governments, 

the 

34 TE SPIRIT, OF LAWS. Book III 

the prince's will is made known, it ought infallibly to 
produce its effect. 

Here they have no limitations or reſtrictions, no me- 
diums, terms, equivalents, parleys, or remonſtrances; 
nothing equal or better to propoſe : man is a creature 
that ſubmits to the abſolute will of a creature like him- 
ſelf. 

In a country like this they are no more allowed to | 

repreſent their fears in reſpect to a future event, than 
to excule their bad ſucceſs by the capriciouſneſs of for- 
tune. Man's portion here, like that of beaſts, is in- 
ſtinct, compliance, and puniſhment. . 

Little does it then avail to plead the ſentiments of 
nature, reſpect for a father, tenderneſs for a wife and 
children, the laws of honour, or an ill tate of health; 
the orders are given, and that is ſuſficient. 

In Perſia, when the king has condemned a perſon, 
it is no longer lawful to mention his name, or to inter- 
cede in his favour. Though he were drunk and beſide 
himſelf, yet the decree muſt be executed“; otherwile 
dhe would contradi& himſelf, and the law admits of no 
contradiction. This has been the way of thinking in 
this country in all ages; as the order which Ahaſuerus 
gave to exterminate the Jews could not be revoked, 
they contrived to allow them the liberty of defending 
themſelves. 

There is one thing, however, that may be oppoſed 
to the prince's will T, namely, religion. They will 
abandon à pardon, nay they may kill him, if the prince 
ſo commands; but he cannot oblige them to drink 
wine. The laws of religion are of a ſuperior nature, 
becauſe they bind the prince as well as the ſubject. 
But, with reſpe& to the law of nature, it is otherwiſe 
the prince is no longer ſuppoſed to be a man. 

In monarchical and moderate ſtates, the power is 
J mited by its very ſpring ; I mean, by honour, which 

* Sce Sir John Chardin. + Ibid, 18 
like 

ti 

21 
d 

A © = «a — Ro &\, 

I 
* 

Chap 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 35 

like a monarch reigns over prince and people. They 
will not here allege to their prince the laws of reli- 
gion ; a courtier would think this would render him ri- 
diculous. But the laws of honour will be alleged on 
all occaſions. Hence ariſe the reſtrictions neceſſary to 
obedience ; honour is naturally ſubject to whims, by 
which the ſubject's obedience will be always directed. 

Though the manner of obeying be different in theſe 
two kinds of government, yet the power is the ſame. 
On which ſide ſoever the monarch turns, he inclines 
the ſcale, and is obeyed. The whole difference is, that 
in a monarchy the prince has the aſſiſtauce of inſtruc- 
f tion, and his miniſters have a far greater capacity, and 
d WF axe far better verſed in affairs than the miniſters of a 
3 

deſpotic government. 
, | n -* 
Refleftions on the foregoing. 

UCH are the principles of the three ſorts of go- 
vernment ; which does not imply that in a particu- 
lar republic they actually are, but that they ought to 
be virtuous; nor does it prove, that in a particular 
monarchy they are actuated by honour, or in a parti- 
cular deſpotic government by fear, but that they ought 
to be directed by theſe principles, otherwiſe the go- 
vernment is imperfect. 

— — — — —__—__) 
8 OK 

That the laws of education ought to be rela- 
| tive to the prineiples of government. 

_ 1 

9 H A P. | 1 
| Of the laws of education. 
| 1 laws of education are the firſt impreſſions we 

receive; aud, as s they prepare us for civil life, 
each 

38 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book Iv. 

each particular family ought to be governed purſuant 
to the plan of the great family which comprehends 
them all. 

If the people in general have a renate their con- 
ſtituent parts, that is, the ſeveral families will have one 
alſo. The laws of education will be therefore different 
in each ſpecies of government: in monarchies they will 
have honour for their object; in * virtue; in 

deſpotic governments, fear. 
„ © db. It 

Of education in monarchies. 

N monarchies the principal branch of education is 
not taught in colleges or academies. It in ſome 

meaſure commences when we enter the world; for 
this is the ſchool of what we call honour, that uni- 
verſal preceptor which * every where to be our 
guide. 
Here it is that we ante Ay ſee and hear three 
things; that we ſhould have a certain nobleneſs in 
© our virtues, a kind of frankneſs in our morals, and 
« a particular politeneſs in our behaviour.” 

- The virtues we are here taught, are leſs what we 
owe to others than to ourſelves; they are not ſo much 
what aſſimilates us to, as what diſtinguiſhes us from, 
our fellow-citizens. 

Here the actions of men are not judged as good, but 
as ſhining ; not as juſt, but as great; not as reaſonable, 
but as extraordinary. 

When honour here meets with any thing noble in 
our actions, it is either a judge that approves them, 
or a ſophiſt by whom they are excuſed. 

It allows of gallantry when united with the idea of 
| ſenſible affection, or with that of conqueſt ; this is the 
reaſon why we never meet with ſo ftrict a purity of 

worals 1 in monarchies as in republican governments. 
2: It 

* 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 37 

It allows of cunning and craſt, when joined with 
the idea of greatneſs of ſoul or importance of affairs ; 
as for inſtance, in politics, with whoſe tineſſes it is far 
from being offended. 

It. does not forbid adulation but when ſeparate from 
the idea of a large fortune, and connected only with 
the ſenſe of our mean condition. 

With regard to morals, I have obſerved that the 
education of -monarchies ought to admit of a certain 
frankneſs and open carriage. Truth therefore in con- 
verſation is a neceſſary point. But is it for the ſake of 
truth? By no means. Truth is requiſite only becauſe 
a perſon habituated to veracity has an air of boldneſs 
and freedom. In fact, a man of this ſtamp ſeems to 
lay ſtreſs only on the things themſelves, and not on the 

manner in which others receive them. 
Hence it is, that as much of this kind of fade 

is commended, ſo much that of the common people is 
deſpiſed, which has * but truth and ſimplicity 
for its object. 

In fine, the education of monarchies require a cer - 
tain politeneſs of behaviour. Men born for ſociety, are 
born to pleaſe one another; and a perſon that would 
break through the rules of decorum, by ſhocking thoſe 
he converſed with, would ſo far loſe the public eſteem 
as to become incapable of doing any good. 

But politeneſs, generally ſpeaking, does not derive 
its original from ſo pure a ſource. It riſes from a de- 
ſire of diſtinguiſhing ourſelves. -It is pride that renders 

. us polite? we feel a pleaſing vanity in being remarked 

for a behaviour that ſhows in ſome meaſure we are not 
meanly born, and that we have not been bred up 
with thoſe who in all ages have been confidered as * 

ſcum of the people. 

Politeneſs, in monarchies, is naturalized at court. 

One wan exceſſively great renders every body elſe lit- 
Vor. I, D tle, 

| 
— 
— x | a 

— 
—— •1v⁰— 

— - * — — 2 * 
— _ D - * 
1 — rr” wn nd 2 * So i > _ 
— =. — PEE: — — — — 
2 by ———_— — — — — — ( K— 8 
a — F 
— 1 > * — = - 
- — 
— — ———— . NCT — 
— 
— — — — 
5 d 
. * 
* * : - , 
— 

ky _ s — 
—___ CO ? * LIFT 
- 

Sd w — 2 
Ju 12 — — 
———— — af — 2 
= * — — 
— — — 
* 8 
— 

. — 
b . 
- —— 

« 

38 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IV. 

tle. Hence that regard which is paid to our fellow. 
ſubjects; hence that politeneſs, which is as pleaſing to 

| thoſe by whom, as to thoſe towards whom, it is practi. 

ſed; becauſe it gives people to underſtand, that a per. 
ſon actually belongs, or at leaſt deſerves to o belong, to 
the court. 

A court air conſiſts in quitting a real for a borrow- 

ed greatneſs. The latter pleaſes the courtier more than | 

His own. It inſpires him with a certain diſdainful mo- 
deſty, which ſhows itſelf externally, but whoſe pride 

' diminiſhes inſenſibly in proportion to its diſtance from 

the ſource of this greataels, 
At court we find a delicacy of taſte in every thing, 

a delicacy arifing from the conſtant uſe of the ſuper- 

Auities of an affluent fortune, from the variety, and 

eſpecially the ſatiety of pleaſures, from the multiplicity, 

and even confuſion, of fancies ; which, if they are but 
agreeable, are always well recetved. 

Theſe are the things which properly fall within the 
province of education, in order to form what we call 
a man of honour, a man poſſeſſed of all the qualities 
and virtues requiſite in this kind of government. 

Here it is that honour interferes with every thing, 
mixing even with peoples manner of thinking and 
feeling, and directing their very principles. 

To this whimſical honour it is owing, that the vir- 
tues are only juſt what it pleaſes, and as it pleaſes ;. it 
adds rules of its own invention to every thing preſcri- 
bed to us; itextends our limits, our duties, according to 
its own fancy, whether they proceed from religion, po: 
litics, or morality. 

There is nothing ſo ſtrongly inculeared i in monar- 
chiew by the laws, by religion, and honour, as ſub- 
miſtion to the prince's will; but this very honour tells 
us, that the prince ought never to command a diſho- 
nourable action, becauſe this would render us incapa- 

ple to ſerve him. 

— — a 

Chap. 2 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 3% 

Grillon refuſed to aſſaſſinate the Duke of Guiſe, 
but he offered Henry III. to fight him. Aſter the 
maſſacre of St. Bartholomew, Charles IX. having 
ſent orders to all the governors in the ſeveral pro- 
vinces for the Huguenots to be murdered, Viſcount 
Dorte who commanded at Bayonne, wrote thus to 
the king: “ Sire, among the inhabitants of this 
« town, and your Majeſty's troops, I could only find 
„ honeſt citizens and brave ſoldiers, but not one exe- 
« cutioner : we jointly therefore beſeech your Majeſty 
« to command our arms and lives in things that are 
« practicable.” This great and generous ſoul looked 
upon a bale action as a thing impoſſible. 

There is nothing that honour more ſtrongly recom- 
mends to the nobility, than to ſerve their. prince m a 
military capacity. In fact, this is their favourite pro- 
feſſion, becauſe its dangers, its ſucceſs, and even its 
misfortunes, are the road to grandeur. And yet this 
very law of its own making, honour chules to explain; 
and if it happens to be affronted, requires or permits 
us to retire. 

It inſiſts alſo, that we ſhould be at liberty either to 
ſeek or reje& employments; a liberty which it pre- 
fers even to an ample fortune, _ 

Honour therefore has its ſupreme laws, to which 
education is obliged to conform. The chief of theſe 
are, that we are allowed to ſet a value upon our for- 
tune; but it is abſolutely forbidden to ſet any value 
upon our lives. | 

The ſecond is, that when we are raiſed to a poſt or 
rank, we ſhould never do or permit any thing which 
may ſeem to imply that we look upon ourſelves as in- 
ferior to the rank we hold. 

The third is, that thoſe things which honour for- 
bids are more rigorouſly forbidden, when the laws do 

* Sce D*'Aubigne's hiſtory. 

D 2 not 

4 
. 
U 
1 ' 
3 
9 
= 
| 
1 
' 
1 | 
| 
+ Fi 
1 
1 
= 
2 
: 
Q 
F 
'| 
1 

4% THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IV. 

not concur in the prohibition; and thoſe it commands 
are more ſtrongly inſiſted upon, when they happen 
not to be commanded by law, 

CHAP. HL 
Of education in a deſpotic government. 

A? education in monarchies tends only to raiſe and 
ennoble the mind, ſo in deſpotic government its 
only aim is to debaſe it, Here it muſt neceſſarily be 
ſervile; even in power ſuch an education will be an 
advantage, becauſe every tyrant is at the ſame time a 
flave. 
Exceſſive obedience ſuppoſes ignorance in the per- 
ſon that obeys: the ſame it ſuppoſes in him that com- 
mands ; for he has no occaſion to deliberate, to doubt, 

to reaſon; he has only to will. 

In deſpotic ſtates each houſe is a ſeparate govern- 
ment. As education therefore conſiſts chiefly in ſocial 
converſe, it muſt be here very much limited; all it 
does is to ſtrike the heart with fear, and to imprint 

in the underſtanding a very ſimple notion of a few 

principles of religion, Learning here proves danger- 
ous, emulation fatal; and as to virtue, Ariſtotle can - 
not think there is any one virtue belonging to ſlaves*; 
if ſo, education in deſpotic countries is confined with- 
in a very narrow compals. * 
| Here therefore education is in ſome meaſure need- 
leſs: to give ſomething one muſt take away every 
thing; and begin with making a bad ſubje& in order 
to make a good ſlave. 

For why ſhould education take pains in F517 
a good citizen, only to make him ſhare in the public 
miſery ? If he loves his country he will ſtrive to relax 
the ſprings of government: if he miſcarries, he will 
be undone: if he ſucceeds, he mult expoſ himſelf, the 
prince, and his country to ruin. 

Polit. lib, 1. - 

CHAP 

9 b „ Re 

Chap. 4. THE spIRTT OF Laws. 4s 
"CRAP. 1V. 

Difference between the eas of ancient and modern 

education. 

OST of the ancients lived under governments- 
that had virtue for their principle; and when. 

this was in full vigour, they performed things unſeen. 

in our times, and ſuch as are capable ot aſtoniſhing. 
our little ſouls. 4 

Another advantage their education had over ours; 
it never was effaced by contrary impreſſions. Epa- 
minondas, the laſt year of his life, ſaid, heard, faw, 
and performed the very ſame things as at the age in 
which he received the firſt: principles of his education. 

In our days we receive three different or contrary 
educations, namely of our parents, of our maſters, 
and of the world. What we learn in the latter effa- 
ces all the ideas of the former. This in fome meas 
ſure ariſes from the contraſt we experience between: 
our religious and worldly engagements; 1 _ un · 
known to the ancients.. 

CIA PV; 
Of education in a republican government. 

FP is in a republican government that the whols- 

power of education is required. The fear of deſ- 
potic governments riſes naturally of itſelf amidſt: 
threats and puniſhments; the honour of monarchies is 
favoured by the paſſions, and favours them in its 
turn: but virtue is a ſelf-renunciation. which is al- 
ways arduous and painful. 

This virtue may be defined, the love of the laws 
and of our country. As this love requires a conſtant 
preference of public to private intere{t, it is the ſource 
of all particular virtues; for they are ne more 
than this very preference itſelf, 

D3 T his- 

42 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IV. 

This love is peculiarly proper to democracies. In 
theſe alone the government is intruſted to private citi- 
zens. Now, government is like every thing elſe; to 
preſerve it, we muſt love it. 

Has it ever been heard, that kings were not fond 
of monarchy, or that deſpotic princes hated arbitrary 
power ? 

Every thing therefore depends on eſtabliſhing = 
love in a republic, and to inſpire it, ought to be 
principal buſineſs of education: but the ſureſt way of 
inſtilling it into children, is for parents to ſet them an 
cxanaple. 

People have it generally in their power to communi- 
cate their ideas to their children; but they are ſtillbet. 
ter able to transfuſe their paſſions. 

If it happens otherwiſe, it is becauſe the impreſ- 

ſions made at home are effaced by thoſe they have re- 
ceived abroad. 

It is not the young people that degenerate: they 
are not ſpoiled till thoſe of maturer age are already 
ſunk into corruption. 

CHAP. VI. 
Of ſome inſlitutions among the Greeks. 

8 dom ancient Greeks, convinced of the neceſſity that 
people who live under a popular government 
ſhould be trained up to virtue, made very fingular in- 
ſtitutions in order to inſpire it. Upon ſeeing in the 
life of Lycurgus the laws that legiſlator gave to the 
Lacedzmoneans, I imagine I am reading the hiſtory 
of the Sevarambes. The laws of Crete were the mo- 
del of thoſe of Sparta, and thoſe of Plato a reforma- 
tion of them. 
Let us reflect here a little on the extenſive genius 
with which thoſe legiſlators muſt have been endowed, 
to perceive that by ſtriking at received cuſtoms, and 

oO REESE BY 8 8 AM at Mi. — n — „ 

0 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. _ 

by confounding all manner of virtues, they ſhould 
diſplay their wiſdom to the univerſe. Lycurgus, by 
blending theft with the ſpirit of juſtice, the hardeſt 
ſervitude with excels of liberty, the molt rigid ſenti- 
ments with the greateſt moderation, gave ſtability to 
his city. He ſeemed to deprive her of all her re- 
ſources, ſuch as arts, commerce, money, walls: am- 
bition prevailed among the citizens without hopes of 
improving their fortune; they had natural ſentiments 
without the tie of a ſon, huſband, or father ; and 

_ chaſtity was ſtript even of modeſty and ſhame. This 
was the road that led Sparta to grandeur and. glory ; 

and ſo infallible were her inſtitutipns, that it ſignified 
nothing gain a victory over her, without — 
her polity *. 
Buy theſe laws Crete and Laconia were governed. 
Sparta was the laſt that fell a prey to the Macedoni- 
ans, and Crete to the Romans . The Samnites had 
the ſams inſtitutions hich furniſhed thoſe very Ro- 
mans with the ſubje& of four and twenty triumphs}. 
A character ſo extraordinary in the inſtitutions of 
Greece, has ſhown itſelf lately in the dregs and cor- 
ruption of our modern times . A very honeſt legiſ- 
lator has formed a people, to whom probity ſeems as 

natural as bravery to the Spartans. Mr. Penn is. a 

real Lycurgus; and though the former made peace 
his principal aim, as the latter did war, yet they re- 
ſembled one another in the ſingula way of living to 
which they reduced their people, in the aſcendant 

* Philopemon obliged the Lacedzmonians to change their man- 
ner of educating their children, being convinced that if he did not 
take this meaſure, they would always have a great foul and a noble 
heart. Plutarch, life of Philopemon, See Livy. book 38. 

+ She defended her laws and liberties for the ſpace of three years. 
See the 98th, 9gth, and tooth book of Livy, in Florus's epitiome. 
She made a braver reſiſtance than the greateſt kings. 

+ Florus, lib, 2. $ In fece Romuli, Cicero. ah 

they 

30 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IV. 

they had over free men, in the prejudices they over - 

came, and in the paſſions they ſubdued. 

Another example we have from Paraguay. This 
bs been the ſubject of an invidious charge againſt a 
ſociety that conſiders the pleaſure of commanding as 
the only happineſs in life: but it will be always a glo- 
rious undertaking, to render government ſubſervient 
to human happineſs *. 

It is glorious indeed for this ſociety,. to have been 
the firſt in pointing out to thoſe countries the idea of 
religion joined with that of humanity. By repairing 

the devaſtations of the Spaniards, ſhe has begun to 
heal one of- the nnn wounds that the hu - 

man ſpecies ever received. * 

An exquiſite ſenſibility to whatever ſhe diſtinguiſhes * 
by the name of honour, her zeal for a religion which 

much more humbles thoſe who hear than thoſe that 
preach it, have ſet her upon vaſt undertakings, — 
ſhe has accompliſhed with ſucgeſs. She his. 
wild people from. their woods, ſecured them a mainte- 
nance, and clothed their nakedneſs; and had the only 
by this means improved the induſtry of mankind, it 
would have been ſufficient to eternize her fame. 

Thoſe who ſhall attempt hereafter to introduce ſuch | 

inſtitations as theſe, muſt eſtabliſh the community of 
goods, as preſcribed in Plato's republic; that high re- 
| = he required forathe gods; that ſeparation from 
angers for the — of people's morals; and 

an extenſive commerce carried on by the community, 
and not by private citizens ; they mult give our arts 
without our luxury, and our wants without our de- 
ſires. | | 
They mult proſcribe money, the effect of which is 
to ſwell people's fortunes beyond the pounds pre- 

The Indians of Paraguay do not depend on any particular 
lord; they pay only a fifth of the taxes, and are allowed the uſe of 
tre · arms to defend themſelves. 

ſcribed - 

1 
De + A 

«i 

* 

* —— WW 

* | 
Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OP®LAWS. 45 

ſcribed by nature, to learn to preſerve for no purpoſe 
what has been idly hoarded up; to multiply without 
end our deſires, and to ſupply the ſterility of nature, 
of whom we have received very ſcanty means of in- 
flaming our paſſions, and of corrupting each other. 

„% The Epidamnians *, perceiving their morals de- 
« praved by converſing with barbarians, choſe a ma- 
« giſtrate for making all contracts and fales in the 

„ name and behalf of the city.” Commerce then 

does not corrupt the conſtitution, and the conſtitution 
does not deprive the —_— 4 the advantages of com- 

merce. 
HAP. VII. 

In what caſe theſe ſingular inſtitutions may be of ſervice. 

| rioxs of this kind may be proper in republics, 
becauſe they have virtue for their principle; but to 
excite men to honour in monarchies, or to imprint fear 

in def potic governments, leſs pains is neceſſary, - 

Beſides, they cannot take place but in a ſmall ſtate f, 
in which there is a poſſibility of a general education, 
and of training up the body of the people like a ſingle 

family. 
The laws of Minos, of Lycurgus, * of Plato, 

ſuppoſe a particular attention and care which the citi - 

zens ought to have over one another's conduct. But 
an attention of this kind cannot be expected in the con- 
fuſion and multitude of affairs in which a large nation 

is intangled. 

In inſtitutions of this had, money, as we have a 
obſerved, muſt be baniſhed. But in great ſocieties, 
the multiplicity, variety, embarraſſinent, and impor- 
tance of affairs, as well as the facility of purchaſing, 
and the flowneſs of exchange, require a coinmon mea- 

Plutarch, in his queſtions concerning the Greek affairs. 

f Such as were formerly the eities of Greece. | 

ſure, 

4 

46 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book Iv. 

ſure. In order to extend or ſapport our power, we 
mult be poſſeſſed of the means to which, by the una- 
nimous conſent of mankind, this power is annexed. 

'CHAP. VIII. | 
Explication of a paradox of the ancients, in reſpect to 
maggers. | 

TH AT judicious writer Polybius informs us, that 
— muſic was neceſſary to ſoften the manners of the 
Arcadians, who lived in a cold gloomy country; that 
the inhabitants of Cynete, who lighted muſic, were 
the cruelleſt of all the Greeks, and that no other town 
was ſo immerſed in luxury and debauch. Plato is not 
afraid to affirm, that there is no poſſibility of making 
a change in muſic, without changing hkewiſe the 
frame of government. Ariſtotle, who ſeems to have 
wrote his politics only in order to contradict Plato, 

agrees with him notwithſtanding, in regard to the 

power and influence of muſic over the manners of the 
people. This was alſo the opinion of Theophraſtus, of 
Plutarch *, and of all the ancients; an opinion. 
grounded on mature reflection; being one of the prin- 

ciples of their politics. Thus it was they enacted laws, 
and thus they required that cities ſhould be governed, 

This I fancy may be explained in the following man- 
ner. It is obſervable, that in the cities of Greece, eſpe- 
cially thoſe whoſe principle object was war, all lu- 
crative arts and profeſſions were conſidered as un- 
worthy of a freeman. Moſt arts,” ſays I I 

* Life of Pelopidas, 

+ Plato, in his fourth book of laws, ſays, that the præfectures 
of muſic and gymnaſtic exerciſes are the moſt important employ- 

ments in the city ; and in his Republic, book 3. Damon will 
e tell you, (ſays he), what ſounds are capable of inſpiring a mean- 
te neſs of ſoul, inſolence, and the contrary virtues, : 

Book 5, of memorable . 368 . 
% corrupt 

1 
0 ans © | 
Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 47 
« corrupt and enervate the bodies of thoſe that exer- 
« ciſe them; they oblige them to fit under a ſhade or 
« near the fire. They can find no leiſure, either for 
« their friends, or for the public.” It was only by - 
the corruption of ſome democracies that artiſans be- 
came freemef This we learn from Ariſtotle *, who 
maintains, that a well- ated republic will -never 
give them the right and freedom of the city 7. 

Agriculture was likewiſe a ſervile profeſſion, and 
generally praiſed by the inhabitants of conquered 
countries. Such as the Helottr among the Lacedæmo- 
nians, the Perieciant among the Cretans, the Pengftes 
among the Theſſalians, other conquered 4 people 
in other republics. * 

In fine, every kind of low commerce || was infamous 
among the Greeks ; as it obliged a citizen to ſerve and 
wait on a flave, on a lodger, on a ſtranger. This 
was a notion that claſhed with the fpirit of Greek li- 
berty : hence Plato 9 in his laws orders a citizen to be 
puniſhed, if he attempted to concern himſelf with 
trade. R | * 

Thus in Greek republics the magiſtrates were ex- 
tremely embarraſſed. They would not have the citi- 
zens apply thetnſelves to trade, to agriculture, or to 
the arts; and yet they would not have them idle **. 
They found therefore employment for them in gym- 
naſtic and military . and none elſe were al- 

® Polit, book 3. chap. 4. 

+ Diophantes, ſays Ariſtotle, Polit. chap. y. made a law for- 
merly at Athens, that artiſans ſhould be ſlaves to the republic. 

+ Plato likewiſe and Ariſtotle require ſlaves to, till the land. 
Laws, book 5, Polit. book y. c. 10. It is true that agriculture was 
not every where exerciſed by ſlaves; on the contrary, Ariſtotle ob- 
| ſerves, the beſt republics were thoſe in which the citizens themſelves - 
tilled the land; but this was brought about by the corruption of 
the ancient governments, which were become demoecratical; for in 
earlier times the cities of Greece were ſubject to an ariſtocratic go- 
vernment. ; 

{| Cauponatio. S Book 2. 9 Ariſtot. Polit. lib. 20. 

lowed 

s % 
* 

48 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IV. 
lowed by their inſtitution *. Hence the Greeks muſt 
be conſidered as a fociety of wreſtlers and boxers, 
Now, theſe exerciſes — natural tendency to ren- 

der people hardy and fier&, there was a neceflity for 
. tempering them with others that might ſoften their 
manners +. For this purpoſe, muſic, with influences 
the mind by means of the corporeal organs, was ex. 
tremely proper. It is a 100 of a medium between 
the bodily exerciſes that gender men fierce and hardy, 
and ſpeculative ſciences that render them unſociable 
and ſour ; it cannet be faid that muſic inſpired virtue, 
for this would be inconceivable :. but it prevented the 
effects of a ſavage inſtirorid, and enabled the ſoul to 
have ſuch a ſhake in the education, as it eould never 
have had without the aſſiſtance of harmony. 

Let us ſuppoſe among ourſelyes a ſociety of men ſo 
paſſionately fond of hunting a to make it their ſole 
employment; theſe people would doubtleſs contract 
thereby a kind of ruſticity and fierceneſs. But if they 
happened to receigt a taſte for muſic, we ſhould 
quickly perceive a ſenſible difference in their cuſtom, 
and manners. In ſhort, the exerciſes uſed by the 
Greeks excited only one kind of pafligns, viz. fierce- 
neſs, anger, and cruelty. But muſic excites them all; 
and is able to inſpire the ſoul with a ſenſe of pity, le- 
nity, tenderneſs, and love. Our moral writers, who 
declaim ſo vehemently againſt᷑ the ſtage, ſufficiently de- 
monſtrate the power of muſic over the ſoul. 

If the ſociety above-mentioned were to have no 
other muſic than that of drums and the ſound of the 
trumpet ; would it not be more difficult to accompliſh 

Ars corporum excercendsrum gymnaſtica, variis certaminibus ſe- 
rendorum pedetribica, Ariſt, Polit, lib, 8, c. 3. 
+ Ariſtotle obſerves, that the children of the Lacedzmonians, 

who began theſe exerciſes at a very tender, age, contracted from 
thence too great a ſerocity and rudeneſs of behaviour. 
this 

eee e 

=y 

0 

e 

HR IX ͤ com © oc. AW 4. Fi. AL_ 295. i 

A A 

Chap. 11 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 49 

this end, than by the more melting tones of ſofter 
harmony? The ancients were therefore in the right, 
when under particular circumſtances they preferred 
one mode to another in regard to manners. 

But ſome will aſk, why ſhould muſic be pitched upon 
preferable to any other entertainment? It is, becauſe, 
of all ſenſible pleaſures, there is none that Jeſs corrupts 
the ſoul. We bluſh to read in Plutarch“, that the 
Thebans, in order to ſoften the manners of their 
youth, authoriſed by law a paſſion that ought to be 
proſcribed by all nations. 

— — — 

50 V3 
That the laws given by the legiſlator ought to 
be relative to the principle of government. 

——— 

CHEAT. 1 
Idea of this book. 

HAT the laws of education onght to be relative 
to the principle of each government, has been 
ſhewn in the preceding book. Now, the ſame may be 
{aid of thoſe which the legiſlator gives to the whole 
fociety. This relation of laws tothis principle, ſtrength- 
ens the ſeveral ſprings of government, and this prin- 
ciple receives from thence, -in its turn, a new degree 
of ſtrength. And thus it is in phyſics action i is al- 
ways followed by re- action. 
Our deſign is to examine this relation in each go- 
vernment, beginning with the republican ſtate, whoſe 
principle is virtue. 

»Liſe of Pelopidas. e 
| Vor. I. E CHAP, 

50 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 

CHAP. II. 
What is meant by virtue in a political ſlate. 

IRTUE in a republic is a moſt ſimple thing ; it is 

a love for the republic; it is a ſenſation, and not 
a conſequence of acquired knowledge; a ſenſation, that 
may be felt by the meaneſt as well as by the higheſt 
perſon in the ſtate. When the common people adopt 
good maxims, they adhere to them ſteadier than thoſe 
we call gentlemen. It is very rare that corruption 
rommences with the former; nay they frequently de- 
rive from their imperfe& light a ſtronger attachment 
to the eſtabliſhed laws aud cuſtoms. 

The love of our country is conducive to a purity of 
morals, and the latter is again conducive to the love of 
our country, The leſs we are able to ſatisfy our par- 
ticular paſſions, the more we abandon ourſelves to thoſe 
of a general nature. How comes it that monks are ſo 
fond of their order? It is owing to the very cauſe that 
renders the order inſupportable to themſelves. Their 
rule debars them of all thoſe things by which the ordi- 
nary paſſions are fed; there remains therefore only this 
paſſion for the very rule that torments them. The 
more auſtere it is, that is, the more it curbs their in- 
elinations, the more force it 22 to the only paſſion it 
n. them. 

CHAP, III. 
What is meant by a love of the republic in a demecracy. 
Loves of the republic in a democracy, is a love of 
the democracy; a love of the democracy is that 

of equality. 
A love of the democracy is likewiſe that of fruga- 

lity. As every individual ought to have here the fame © 

happineſs and the ſame advantages, they ought con- 
ſequently to taſte the ſame pleaſures, and to form the 

fame 

Bock V. 

, c GS au. a. oa 

E r ” COLT RE ENT ERS. *? 

e 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 51 
ſame hopes, which cannot be expected but from. a ge- 

neral frugality. The love of equality in a democracy, 

limits ambition to the ſole deſire, the ſole happineſs of 

doing greater ſervices to our country than the reſt of 
our fellow-citizens. They cannot all render ker equal 

ſervices, but they ought all to ſerve her with equal ala- 
crity- At our coming into the world, we contract an 

immenſe debt to our country, which we can never diſ- 

charge. 

Hence diſtinQions ariſe here from the principle of 
equality, even when it ſeems to be removed by ſignal 
ſervices, or ſuperior abilities. 

The love of frugality limits the defire of wealth to 
the attention requiſite for procuring neceſſaries to our 
family, and ſuperfluities to our country. Riches give 
a power which a citizen cannot uſe for himſelf, for 
then he would be no longer equal. They likewiſe pro- 
cure pleaſures which he ought not to enjoy, becauſe 
theſe would allo ſubvert the equality. 

Thus well-regulated democracies by eſtabliſhing do- 

meſtic frugality, made way at the ſame time for public 

expences, as was the caſe at Rome and Athens, when 
munificence and profuſion aroſe from the very fund of 
frugality. And as religion requires us to have pure 
and unſpotted hands when we make our offerings to 
the gods, the laws require a frugality of * to enable 
us to be liberal to our country 

The good ſenſe and happineſs of :ndividuals depend 
greatly on the mediocrity of their talents and fortunes. 
Therefore a republic, where the laws have placed ma- 
ny in a middling ation, as it is compoſed of wiſe men, 
it will be wiſely governed; as it is compoſed ot happy 
men, it will be extremely happy: 

— 

E 2 CHA P- 

52 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

CHA-P. IV, 
I „ what manner the love of equality and frugality is in- 
ſpired. 

PHE love of equality and of a frugal economy is 

greatly excited by equality and trugality them. 
ſelves, in ſocieties where both thele virtues are eſtabliſh- 
ed by law. 

In monarchies and deſpotie governments, no body 
aims at equality; this does not ſo much as enter their 
thoughts; they all aſpire to ſuperiority. People of the 
very loweſt condition deſire to emerge from their ob- 
ſurity, only to lord it over their fellow · ſubjects. 

It is the ſame with reſpect to frugality. To love it 
we mult practiſe and enjoy it. It is not thoſe who are 
- enervated with pleaſure, that are fond of a frugal life: 
were this natural and common, Alcibiades would never 
have been the admiration of the univerſe Neither is 
it thoſe who envy and admire the luxury of the great; 
people that have preſent to their view none but rich 
men, or rich men miſerable like themſelves, deteſt their 
miſerable condition, without loving or knowing the 
real term or point of miſery. 4 

A true maxim it is, therefore, that in order to love 
equality and frugality in a republic, theſe virtues — 
bave been previouſly eſtabliſhed by law. 

C HA P. V. 
In what manner the laws eftabliſh equality in a demo- 
cracy. 

| 8 * ancient ere as Lycurgus and Romu- 
lus, made an equal diviſion of lands A ſettle» 
ment of this kind can: never take place but upon the 

oundation of a new republic; or when che old one is 

o corrnpt, and the minds of the people ſo diſpoſed, 
that the poor think themſelves obliged to demand, and 

the rich obliged to conſent to a remedy of this nature. 

3 

ws od wa R8©% 

Chap. 5. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 53. 

If the legiſlator, in making a diviſion of this kind, 
does not enact laws at the ſame time to ſupport it, he 

forms only a temporary conſtitution; inequality will 

break in where the laws have not precluded it, and the 
republic will be utterly undone. | 

Hence, for the preſervation of this equality, it is 
abſolutely neceſſary there ſhould be ſome regulation in 
reſpect to womens doweries, donations, ſucceſſions, teſ« 
tamentary ſettlements, and all other forms of contract- 
ing. For were it once allowed to diſpoſe of our pro- 
perty to whom and how we pleaſed. the will of each 
individual would did the order ok the ſundamental 
law. 

Solon, by permitting the 8 upon failure of 
iſſne , to leave their eſtates to whom they pleaſed, act - 
ed contrary to the ancient laws, by which the eſtates 
were ordered to continue in the family of the teſtatorſ; 
and even contrary to his own laws, for by aboliſhing 
debts he had aimed at equality. 

'The law which prohibited people's having two inhe- 

ritances | was extremely well adapted for a democracy. 

It derived its origin from the equal diſtribution of 
lands and portions made to each citizen. The law 

| would not permit a ſingle man to poſſeſs more than a 
ſingle portion. 

From the ſame ſource aroſe thoſe laws by which he 
next relation was ordered to marry the heireſs. This 
Law was given to the Jews after the like diſtribution. 
Plato, who grounds his laws on his divifion, made 

the ſame regulation which bad been received as a law 

by the Athenians. - 

Plutarch, life of Solon. + Ibid. 
+ Philolaus of Corinth made a law at Athens, that the number of 
the portions of land and that of inheritances ſhouſd be always the 

ſame. Arift. Polit. lib. 2. cap. Ma: 
4 book 8. | 
E 3 233 

- -- - 

30 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v: 

At Athens there was a law, whote ſpirit, in my opi- 

nion, has not been hitherto rightly underſtood. It was 

lawful to marry a ſiſter only by the father's ſide, but 
it was not permitted to marry a ſiſter by the ſame mo- 
ther *. This cuſtom was originally owing to republics, 

whoſe ſpirit it was not to let two portions of land, and 

conſequently two inheritances, devolve on the ſame 
perſon A man that married his ſiſter only by his fa - 
ther's ſide, could inherit but one eſtate, namely, that 
of his father; but by marrying his ſiſter by the ſame 
venter, it might happen that his ſiſter's father, having 
no male ifſue, might leave her his eſtate, and conſe - 
quently the brother that married her might be poſſeſſed 
of two. | 
Little will it avail to object what Philo ſays +, that 
though the Athenians were allowed to marry a ſiſter 
by the father's fide, and not by the mother's, yet the 
contrary practice prevailed among the Lacedzmonians,. 
who were permitted to marry a lifter by the mother's. 
fide,. and not by the father's. For I find in-Strabo}, 
that at Sparta, whenever a woman married her bro- 
ther, {he had half his portion ſor her dowery. It is 
Plain that this ſecond law was made in order to prevent 
the bad conſequences of the firſt. That the eſtate be- 
longing to the ſiſter's family might not devolve on the 
brother's, they gave half the brother's eſtate to the 
filter for ber dowery. 
Seneca], ſpeaking of Silanus, who- had married 
his faſter, ſays, that the permiſſion was limited at 

Cornelius Nepos in prefat. This cuſtom began in the earlieſt 

times. Thus Abraham ſays of Sarah, She is my fitter, my father's 
daughter, but not my mother's. The ſame reaſons occaſioned the. 
eſtabliſhing the ſame law among different nations. ; 

+ De ſpecialibus legibus que pertinent ad precepta decalogi: 

+} Lib. 10. | 

| Athenis mnidiom licet, Alexandriz totum. Seneca de morte 
 Claudii, 

Athens, 

| 

Chap: 5. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 97 
Athens, but general at Alexandria. In a monarchical 
goverument, there was very little concern about any 

uch thing as a diviſion of eſtates. 

Excellent was that law, which, in order to main» 
tain this diviſion of lands in a democracy, ordained, 
that a father who had ſeveral children, thould pitch 
upon one of them to inherit his portion“, and give 
the others to be adopted by thoſe that had no chil 
dren,' to the end that the number of citizens might 
always be kept upon an equality with that of the divi- 
ſions. ; 

Phaleas of Chalcedon+ contrived a very extraordi- 
nary method of rendering all tortunes equal, in a re- 
public where there was the greateſt inequality. This 
was, that the rich ſhould give fortunes with their 
daughters to the poor, but ſhould receive noue.theme 
ſelves ;- and that the poor ſhould receive money for 
their danghters, inſtead of giving them fortunes. But 
I do not remember that a regulation of this kind ever 
took place in any republic. It lays the citizens under 
ſuch hard and odious conditions, as would make them 
deteſt the very equality which they deſigned to eſta- 
bliſh. It is proper ſometimes that the laws ſhould not 
ſeem to tend ſo directly to the end they propoſe. 

Though real equality be the very ſoul of a demo- 
eracy, yet it is ſo difficult to eſtabliſh, that an extreme 
exactneſs in this reſpect would not be always conveni- 
ent. It is ſufficient to eſtabliſ- a cenſus t, which 
would reduce or fix the differences to a certain point: 
it is afterwards the buſineſs of particular laws to level 

* Plato has a law of this kind, lib. 3. leg. 2 
T Ariſt. Polit. lib. 2. cap. 27. a 

Solon made four claſſes; the firſt, of thoſe who had an income 
of 500 minas, either in corn or liquid fruits; the ſecond, of thoſe 
who had 300, and were able to keep a horſe; the third, of thoſe 

who had only 200; the fourth, of all thoſe who lived by their ma- 
nual labour, Put. hfe of Solon. 

; as 
* 

56 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

as it were the inequalities, by the duties laid upon the 
rich, and by the eaſe they afford to the poor. It is 
moderate riches alone that can give or ſuffer this ſort 
of compenfations; for as to men of overgrown eltates, 
every thing which does not contribute to advance their 
power and honour, is confidered by them as an injury. 

All inequality in a democracy ought to be derived 
from the nature of the democracy, and even from the 
principle of equality. For example, it may be appre- 
hended, that people who are obliged to hve by their 
labour, would be too much impoveriſhed by a public 
office, or neglect the duties attending it; that artiſans 
would grow inſolent; and that too great a number of 
freed men would overpower the ancient citizens. In 
this caſe the equality of the citizens “ in a democracy 
may be ſupprefied, whenever it will conduce to the 
utility of the ſtate. But then it is only an apparent 
equality they remove: for a man ruined by a public of- 
fice, would be in a worſe condition than the reſt of his 
fellow-citizens ; and this ſame man being obliged to ne- 
glect his duty, would reduce the other citizens to a 
worſe condition than himſelf, and fo on. 

CHAP. YL 

In what manner the laws ought to maintain frugality in 
A2 democracy. 

| | bas 1s not ſufficient in a well regulated democracy that 
the diviſions of land be equal; they ought alſo to 
be ſmall, as was cuſtomary among the Romans. God 
«< forbid,” ſaid Curius to his ſoldiers „ that a citi - 
« -zen ſhould look upon that as a ſinall piece of land, 

% which is ſufficient to ſupport a man.” 

* Solon excludes from public employ me ts all thoſe of the fourth 
ela fs. 

+ They inſiſted upon a larger diviſion of the conquered lands, 
Pitarch's moral works, Ii ves of the ancient kings and commenders. 

@hap.'6, _ THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 57 

As the equality of fortune ſupports frugality, fruga. 
lity ſupports the equality of fortunes. Theſe things, 
though in themſelves different, are of ſuch a nature as 
to be unable to ſubſiſt ſeparately ; each is the caute and 
the effect; if one withdraws itſelf from a democracy, 
it is ſurely followed by the other. 

It is true, that when a democracy is founded on 
commerce, private people may acquire vaſt riches with- 
out a corruption of morals. This is becaute the ſpirit 
of commerce is naturally attended with that of fruga- 
lity, economy, moderation, labour, prudence, tran- 
quillity, order, and rule. As long as this ſpirit ſub- 
ſiſts, the riches it produces have no bad effect. I] he 
miſchief is, when exceſſive wealth deſtroys the ſpirit of 
commerce; then it is that the inconveniencies of ine - 
quality begin to be felt. 

In order to ſupport the ſpirit of commerce, it ſhould- 
be carried on by the principal citizens; this ſpirit alone 
ought to prevail without being croſſed by another; all 
the laws ſhould encourage it; and theſe very laws, by 
dividing the eſtates of individuals in proportion to the 
increaſe of commerce, ſhould ſet every poor citizen ſo 
far at his eaſe as to be able to work like the reſt, and 
every rich citizen in ſuch a mediocrity as to be obliged 
to labour either to preſerve or acquire his wealth. 

It is an excellent law in a trading republic, to make 
an equal diviſion of the father's eſtate among the chil- 
dren. The conſequence of this is, that how great ſo- 
ever a fortune the father has made, his children being 
not ſo rich as he, are induced to avoid luxury, and to 
follow the parent's induſtrious example. I ſpeak here 
only of trading republics; for as to thoſe thar have no 
commerce, the legiſlature muſt purſue quite different 
meaſures *, 

Isa theſe the portions or fortunes of women 8 to be very 
much limited. 
In 

— — — — e — — — jð7ä «˙ rZ24ĩ̃² U. ————ͤ—„—-— — 
- 

58 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock v. 
In Greece there were two ſorts of republics : the one 

military, like Sparta; the other commercial, as Athens. 

In one the citizens were obliged to be idle; in the 
other endeavours were uſed to-inſpire them with the 

love of induſtry and labour. Solon made idleneſs a 

crime, and inſiſted that each citizen ſhould give an ac- 
count of his manner of getting a livelihood. In fact, 
in a well-regulated democracy, where people's expen- 
ces ought to extend only to what is neceſſary, every 
one, ought to have as much as his neceſſities require: 
for irom whom could his wants be ſupplied ? 

CHAP. VII. 
Other methods of favouring the principle of democracy. 

AN equal diviſion of lands cannot be eſtabliſhed in 
all democracies. There are ſome circumſtances 
in which a regulation of this nature would be imprac- 
ticable, dangerous, and even ſubverſive of the conſti- 
tution. We are not always obliged to proceed to ex- 
tremes. If it appears that this diviſion of lands, which 

was deſigned to preſerve the people's morals, does not 

ſuit with a democracy, recourſe muſt be had to other 

methods. 
If a fixed body be eſtabliſhed to fra; as a rule and 

pattern of manners, a ſenate, to which age, virtue, 
gravity, and public ſervices gain admittance ; the ſe- 

nators, by being expoſed to public view like the ſtatues 

of the gods, muſt naturally inſpire ſentiments that will 
trausfuſe themſelves into the boſom of every family. 

Above all. this ſenate muſt ſteadily adhere to the an- 
cient inſtitutions, and mind that the people and the 
magiſtrates never ſwerve from them. 

The preſervation of the ancient cuſtoms is a very 
conſiderable point in reſpe& to manners. Since a cor - 
rupt people ſeldom perform any memorable actions, 
ſeldom eſtabliſh ſocieties, build cities, or enact laws; 

on 

chap. ). THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 55 

on the contrary, fince moſt inſtitutions are derived 
from people of ſimple or ſevere morals; to recal men 
to the aucient maxuns is * recalling them to 
virtue. 

Beſides, if there happens to be any revolution, by 
which the ſtate has aſſumed a new form, this ſeldom 
can be effected without infinite pains and labour, and 
hardly ever with idleneſs and a depravation of man- 
ners. Even thoſe who have been the inſtruments of 
the revolution, are defirous it ſhould be rehtiſhed, 
which is difficult to compaſs without good laws. 
Therefore, ancient inſtitutions are generally reforma- 
tions, and modern ones abuſes. In the courſe of a 
long adminiſtration the deſcent to viee is infenfible ; 
but there is no re-aſcending to virtue without making 
the moſt generous efforts. 

It has been queſtioned, whether the members of the 
ſenate we are here ſpeaking ot ought to be for life, or 
choſen only for a time. Doubeleſs they onght to be 
for liſe, as was the cuſtom at Rome “, at Sparta +, and 
even at Athens. For we mult not confound what was 
called the Senate at Athens, which was a body that 
changed every three months, with the Areopagus, 
whoſe members, - as Kaen models, were eſtabliſhed 
for life. 

Let this be therefore a general maxim: That in a 
ſenate deſigned to be a rule, and the depoſitary, as it 
were, of manners, the members ought to' be choſen 
for life: in a ſenate deſigned for the adminiſtration of 
affairs, the members may be changed. 

* The magiſtrates there were annual, and the ſenators for liſe. 

+ Lycurgus, ſays Xenephon, de repwb. Laced, ordained that the 
ſenators ſhould be taken from amengſt the old men, to the end that 
they ſhould not be neglected in the decline of life. Thus, by ma- 
king them judges of the courage of young people, he rendered the 
old age of the former more honourable than the ſtrength mw vigour 
of the latter, 

The 

60 THE $SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

The ſpirit, ſays Ariſtotle, waxes old as well as the 
body. This reflection holds good only in regard to a 
ſingle magiſtrate, but cannot be applied to a ſenatorian 
aſſembly. 

At Athens, beſides the Areopagus, there were guar- 
dians of the people's morals, and guardians of the 
laws *. At Sparta all the old men were cenſors. At 
Rome the cenſorſhip was committed to two particular 
magiſtrates. As the ſenate watched over the people, 
the cenſors were to have an eye over the people and 
the ſenate. Their office was to reform the corruptions 
of the republic, to ſtigmatize indolence, to cenſure ir- 
regularities, and to correc faults ; and as for notori- 
ous crimes, theſe were left to the puniſhment of the 
laws. 

That Roman law, which required the accuſations 
of adultery to be public, was admirably well calculat- 
ed for preſerving the purity.of morals ; it intimidated 
married women, as well as thoſe who were to watch 
over their conduct. | 

Nothing contributes more to the preſervation of mo- 
rals, than an extreme ſubordination of the young to 
the old. Thus they are both reltrained, the former 
by the reſpe& they have for thoſe of advanced age, and 
the latter by the reſpect they have for themſelves. 

Nothing gives a greater force to the laws than a 
perfe& ſubordination between the citizens and the ma- 
giſtrate. The great difference which Lycurgus eſta- 
4 bliſhed between Sparta and the other cities,” ſays 
Xenophon +, ** conſiſts chiefly in the obedience the ci- 
« tizens ſhow to the laws; they run, when the magi- 
«46 ſtrate calls them. But at Athens, a rich man would 
« be highly diſpleaſed to be thought dependent on the 
« magiſtrate.” 

* Even the Areopagus itſelf was ſubject to theid cenſure, 
+ Republic of the Lacedzmonians, 

I Paternal 

Chap. 8S. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 61 

Paternal authority is likewiſe of great uſe towards 
the preſervation of morals. We have already obſer- 
ved, that in a republic there is not ſo coercive a force 
as in other governments. The laws mult therefore en- 
deavour to ſupply this deficiency by forme means or 
other; and this is done by paternal authority. 

Fathers at Rome had the power of life and death 
over their children“. At Sparta every father had a 
right to correct another man's child. 

Paternal authority ended at Rome together with the 
republic. In monarchies,. where ſuch a purity of mo- 
rals is not required, they are controlled by no other 
authority that that of the magiſtrates. 

The Roman laws, which accuſtomed young people 
to dependence, eſtabliſhed a long minority. Perhaps 
we are miſtaken in conforming to this cuſtom: there 
is no neceſſity for ſo much conſtraint in monarchies. | 

This very ſubordination in a republic might make it 
neceſſary for the father to continue in the poſſeſſion of 
his children's fortune during life, as was the cuſtom at 
Rome. But this is not agreeable to the ſpirit of mo- 
narchy. 

CHAP. VII. 

In what manner the laws ought to be relative to the prin- 
ciple of government in an ariſtacracy. 

T* the people-are virtuous in an ariſtocracy, they en- 

Joy very near the ſame happineſs as in a popular 
government, and the ſtate grows powerful. But, as 
a great ſhare of virtue is a very rare thing where mens 
/ fortunes are ſo unequal, the laws muſt tend as muck 

* We may ſee in the Roman hiſtory how uſeful this power was 
to the republic. 1 ſhall give an inſtance even in the time of its 
greateſt corruption. Aulus Flavius was ſet out on his journey in 
order to join Catiline ; his father called him back, and put him to 
death, Salluſt de bello Catil, 5 

Vor. I, F bee as 

62 THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. Book V. 

as poſſible to mfuſe a ſpirit of moderation, and endea- 
vour to re-eſtabliſh that equality which was nenen 
removed by the conſtitution. 

The ſpirit of moderation is what we call virtue in an 
ariſtocracy; it ſupplies the place of a ſpirit of equality 
in a popular ſtate. 

As the pomp and ſplendor, with which kings are 
ſurrounded, form a part of their power, ſo modeſty 
and ſimplicity of manners conſtitute the ſtrength of an 
ariſtocratic nobility *®. When they effect no diſtinction, 
when they mix with the people, dreſs like them, and 
wich them ſhare all their pleaſures, the people are apt 
to forget their ſubjection and weakneſs. 

Every government has its nature and principle. An 
ariſtocracy muſt not therefare aſſume the nature and 
principle of monarchy, which would be the caſe, were 
the nobles to be invefted with perſonal and particular 
privileges diſtin& from thoſe of their body; privileges | 

ought to be for the ſenate, and ſunple un for the 
ſenators. 

In ariftocratical governments, es two princi- 
pal ſources of diſorder ; exceſſive inequality between 
the governors and the governed, and the ſame inequa- 
lity between the different members of the body that 

s. From theſe two inequalities hatreds and jea- 
louſies ariſe, which the laws ought always to prevent 
or reprels. . 

The firſt inequality is chiefly when the privileges of 
the nobility are honourable only as they are ignomi- 
nious to the people. Such was the law at Rome by 
which the Patricians were forbidden to marry + Ple- 
2 In our days the Venetians, who in many reſpects may be ſaid 
to have a very wiſe government. decided a diſpute between a-nobly 
Venetian anda gentleman in Terra Firma, with, reſpect to prece 

dency in a church, by declaring, that out of Venice a noble Vene 
tian had no pre-eminence over any other citizen, 

+ It was inſerted by the decemvirs in the two laſt bles. Ser 
Dionyſ. Halicar. lib, 10. * P ö 

beians; 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 63 

beians; à law that had no other effect than to render 
the patricians on the one ſide more haughty, and on 
the other more odious. 

This inequality occurs likewiſe when the condition 
of the citizens differs with regard to taxes, which 
may happen four different ways; when the nobles 
aſſume the privilege of paying none; when they com- 
mit frauds to exempt themſelves , when they in- 
groſs the taxes to themſelves, under pretence of re- 
wards or appointments for their reſpective employ- 
ments; in fine, when they render the common peo- 
ple tributary, and divide among. their own -body the 
profits ariſing from the ſeveral ſubſidies. This laſt 
caſe is very rare: an ariſtocracy ſo inſtituted would be 
the malt intolerable of all governments. 

While Rome inclined towards ariitocracy, ſhe avoid- 
ed all; theſe inconveniencies. The magiitrates never 
received any emoluments from their office. The chief 
men of the republic were taxed like the reit, nay 
beavier, and ſometimes the taxes fell upon them alone, 
In fine, far from ſharing among themſelves the reve- 
nues of the ſtate, all they could draw from the public 
treaſure, and all the wealth that fortune flung in their 
way, they beſtowed frecly on the people, that they 
might not envy them their honours . 

It is a fundamental maxim, That however perni- 
cious the effects of largeſſes be to the people in a de- 
R mocracy, in the ſame degree are they ſalutary in an 
ariſtocratical government. The former make them 
forget they are citizens; the latter. bring them to a 

„ 

l ſenſe of it. bs 
It is caſy to ſee the advantages the tribunes drew from thence 
in their ſpeeches. 
+ As in ſome ariſtocracies in Italy ; ; nothing is more prejudicia 

to the government. 
+ See in Strabo, lib. 14. in what manner the Rhodians behaved 
in this reſpect. 

12 If 

which the prince applies himſelf to trade. 

/ ; - 
64 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

If the revenues of the ſtate are not diſtributed 
among the people, they muſt be convinced at leaſt of 

their being well adminiſtered. To feaſt their eyes with 

public treaſure is with them the ſame thing almoſt as 
enjoying-it, The golden chain diſplayed at Venice, 
the riches exhibited at Rome in public triumphs, the 
treaſres*preſerved in the temple of Saturn, were in 
reality the riches of the people. | 

It is a very eſſential point in an ariſtocracy, that the 
nobles themſelves ſhould not levy the taxes. The firſt 
order of the ſtate in Rome never concerned themſelves 
with it ; the levying of taxes was committed to the 
fecond; and even this in proceſs of time was attended 

with-great inconveniencies. In an ariſtocracy of this 

kind, where the nobles levied the taxes, the private 
people would be all at the diſcretion of thoſe who 
were in public employments ; and there would be no 

ſuch thing as a ſuperior tribunal to check their power, 

The members appointed to remove the abuſes would 
rather enjoy them. I he nobles would be like the princes 
of deſpotie governments, who- confilcate whatever 
eſtates they pleaſe. 

© Soon would the profits hence ariſing be conſidered 
as a patrimony, which avarice would enlarge at plea- 
ſure. The farms would be lowered, and the public 
revenues reduced to nothing. This is the reaſon that 
ſome governments, without having ever received any 
remarkable ſhock, have dwindled away to ſuch a de- 

; gree, as not only their neighbours, but even their 

own ſubjects have been ſurpriſed at it. 

The laws ſhould likewiſe forbid the nobles all kind 
of commerce: merchants of ſuch unbounded credit 
would monopolize all to themſelves. Commerce is a 
profeſſion of people who are upon an equality; hence 
among deſpotic ſtates the moſt miſerable are thoſe in 

The 

— 

7 FM, = wh =” LAH Ht 

e 

— 

— 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 65; 
The laws of Venice“ debar the nobles from com- 
merce, by which they might even innocently acquire 
exorbitant wealth. 
The laws aught to employ the moſt effectual means. - 
for making the nobles do juſtice to the people. If 
they bave not eſtablithed a tribune, they ought to be a 

tribune themſelves. 

Every ſort of aſylum in oppoſition to the execution. 
of the laws deſtroys ariftocracy, and is ſoon {ncceeded 

by tyranny. 

They, ought always 1 to mortify the pride of domi 
neering, There ſhould be either a temporary or per- 
petual magillrate to keep the nobles in awe, as the 
Ephori at Sparta, and the ſtate · inquiſitors at Venice, 
magiſtrates that are ſubject to no formalities. This 
fort of government ſtands in need of the ſtrongeſt 
ſprings: thus a mouth of ſtone + is open to every in- 
former at Venice, a mouth to which one would be apt 
to give the appellation of that of tyranny. 

Theſe tyrannical magiſtrates in an ariſtocracy bear 
ſome analogy to the cenſorſhip of democracies, Which 
of its own nature is equally independent. In fact, the 
cenſors ought to be ſubject to no inquiry in relation 
to their conduct during their office; they ſhould meet 

; with a thorough confidence, and never be diſcouraged; 

In this reſpect the practice of the Romans deſerved admi- 
ration; magiſtrates of all denominations were account- 

able for their adininiſtration +, except the cen ſors 6, 

* Amclot de la Honſhye of the government of Venice, part 3, 
The Claudian law forbade the ſenators to have any (hip at ſca, that. 
held above forty buſhels. Liv. lib. ar. : 

+ The informers threw their ſcrolls into it. 

.* Sec Livy, lib. 49, A cenſor could not be tronbled even hy a- 
cenſor; each made his remark without taking the opinion of bis 
colleague; and, when it otherwiſe happened, the cenſorſhip was in 
a manner aboliſhed. 

$ At Athens the Logiſtz, who made all the magiſtrates: accounts 

able for their conduct, gave no account themſelves, 

F 3 There 

66 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book V. 

There are two very pernicious things in an ariſto- 
cracy, either exceſs of poverty, or exceſs of wealth, 
in the nobility. o prevent their poverty, it is ne- 
ceſſary above all things to oblige them to pay their 

debts in time. To moderate the excels of wealth, pru- 
dent and ſenſible regulations ſhould be made, but no 
confiſcations, no agrarian laws, no expunging of 
debts ; theſe are things that are en of infinite 
miſchicf. 

The laws ought to aboliſh the right of primogeni 
ture among the nobles “, to the end that, by a conti- 
nual diviſion of the inheritances, their fortunes may 
be always upon a level. 

There thould be no ſubſtitutions, no powers of re- 
demption, no rights of majority or adoption. The 
contrivances for perpetuating the grandeur of families 
in monarchical governments ought never to be em- 
ployed in ariſtocracies f 

Aſter the laws have made families equal, the next 
thing they have to do is to preſerve a proper harmo- 
ny and union amongſt them. The quarrels of the 
nobility ought to be quickly decided; otherwiſe the 
conteſt of individuals becomes thoſe of families. Ar- 
- biters may terminate or even prevent the riſe of diſ- 
. 

In fine, the laws muſt not favour the diſtinctions 
raiſed by vanity among families, under pretence that 
they are more noble or ancient: pretences of this na- 
ture ought to be ranked among the weakneſſes of pri- 
vate perſons. 

We have only to caſt our eyes on Sparta; there we 
may ſee how the Ephori contrived to check the foibles 
of the kings, as well as thoſe of the W and of 
the common people. 

It is ſo practiſed at Venice. Amelot de Ia Hos ye, p. 30 & N. 
7 The main deſign of ſome ariſtocracies ſeems to be leſs the ſup- 

port of the ſtate than of what they call their nobility. 

chap. 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 67 
CHAP. IX. 

In what manner the laws are relative to their principle 
in monarchies. 

A® honour is the principle of a monarchical go- 
vernment, the laws ought to be relative to this 
principle. 

They ſhould endeavour to ſupport the nobility, in 
reſpe& to whom honour may be in ſome meaſure deem- 
ed both child and parent. 

They ſhould render the nobility hereditary, not as 
a boundary between the power of the prince and the 
weakneſs of the people, . þut as the bond and conjunc- 

tion of both. 

In this government, ſubſtitutions which preſerve 
the eſtates ot families undivided are extremely uſeful, 
though in others not ſo proper. 

Here the power of redemption is of ſervice, as it 
reſtores to noble families the lands that had been alic- 
nated by the prodigality of a parent. 

The lands of the nobility ought to have privileges 
as well as their perſons. The monarch's dignity is in- 
ſeparable from that of his kingdom, and the dignity 
of the nobleman from that of his fief. 

All theſe privileges mult be peculiar to the nobility, 
and incommunicable to the people, unleſs we intend 
to act contrary to the principle of goverment, and to 
diminith the power of the nobles together with that of 
the people. 

Subſtitutions are a reſtraint to commerce; ; the power 
of redemption produces an infinite number of pro- 
celſzs; every eſtate in land that is ſold throughout 
the kingdom is in ſome meaſure without an owner for 
the ſpace of a year. Privileges annexed to fiefs give 
a power that is very burthenſome to thoſe govern- 
ments which tolerate them. 'Theſe are the particular 

inconveniencies of nobility z inconveniencies however 

that 

-- 

68 

that. vaniſh when compared with the general utility 
which reſults from it: but, when theſe privileges are 
communicated to the people, every principle of go- 
vernment is broke through to no manner of purpoſe. 

In monarchies a perion may leave the bulk of his 
eſtate to one of his children; a permiſſion improper in 
auy other government, 

The laws ought to favour all kinds of commerce * 
conſiſtent with the conſtitution of this government, 
to the end that the ſubjects may, without ruining 
| themlelves, be able to ſatisfy the continual cravings. 
of the prince and his court. 

They ſhould ellablith ſome fixed regulation in the 
manner of collecting the taxes, that this may not be 
more burthenſome than the taxes themſelves. 

The weight of duties produces labour, labour wea- 
rineſs, and wearinets the 1pirit of indolence. 

| CHAP. 
Of the expedition peculiar to the executive power in mo- 
aarchtes. 
828 is the advantage which a monarchial go- 
vernment has over a republic: as the tare ig 
conducted by a fingle perion, the executive power is 
thereby enabled to act wich greater expedition. But, 
as this expedition may degenerate into rapidity, the 
laws ſhould uſe ſome contrivance to ſlacken it. They 
ought not 'only to favour the nature of each conſtitu- 
tion, but likewiſe to remedy the abules that might re- 
falt from this very nature. 
Cardinal Richlieu + adviſes monarchs to permit no 
ſocieties or communities that raiſe difhculties upon. 
every thing, If this man's heart had not been be- 

lt is tolerated only in the common people. See the third law, 
code dt comm. el mercalgridus, ** is full of 0 enſe. 
t Teftam. Polit. 

gr * 
* * 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

meas ws HtfhS ww A on 

Chap, 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 69 

witched with the love of deſpotic power, till theſe ar- 
bitrary notions would have filled his head. 
The bodies intruſted with the depofitum of the laws 
are never more obedient than when they proceed ſlow- 
ly, and uſe that reflection in the prince's affairs, which 
can ſcarcely be expected from the ignorance of the laws 
which prevails in a court, or from the precipitation of 
its councils * | 

What vale have become of the fineſt monarchy i in 
the world, if the magiſtrates, by their delays, by their 
complaints, by their prayers, had not ſtopped the ra- 
pidity even of their princes virtues, when theſe mo- 
narchs, conſulting only the generous impulſe of great 
minds, wanted to give a boundleſs reward to ſervices 
performed with a boundleſs courage and fidelity ? 

CHAP. XI. 

Of the excellence of a menarchical government. 

M has a great advantage over a deſpotic 
government. As it naturally requires there 
ſhould be ſeveral orders belonging to the conſlitution 
under the prince, the [tate is more fixed, the conſtitu- 
tion more ſteady, and the perſon of him who governs 
more ſecure. 
| CiceroÞ is of opinion, that the eſtabliſhing of the 
tribunes was the preſervation of the republic. In 
« fat,” ſays he, the violence of, a headleſs people 
te is more terrible: A chief or head is ſenſible that 
« the affair depends upon himſelf, and therefore he 
* thinks; but the people in their impetuoſity are ig - 
* norant of the danger into which they hurry them- 
“ ſelves.” This reflection may be applied to a deipo- 
tic government, which is a people withour 'tribunes» 
* Barbaris cantatio ſervilis, ſtatim exequi regium videtur. Tacit. 

Annal. lib. s. {© 
1 Lib. 3. de leg. 

and 

—  — x, — 

— — 

— A 
Ip CW 
F — ̃ —— fp 

| 
| 
1 
l 
1 
1 

— K — 
- — — — — — * 

— EE SS - 2 

— 

— 

70 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

and to a monarchy, where people have fome ſort of 
triunes. 252 

In fact, it is obſervable, that, in the commotions 
of a deſpotie government, the people, hurried away 
by their paſſions, puſh things always as far as they | 
can go. The diſorders they commit are all extreme ; 
whereas in monarchies things are ſeldom carried to 
exceſs. The chiefs are afraid on their own account; 
they are afraid of being abandoned, and the interme- 
diate dependent powers“ do not chule that the peo- 
ple {ſhould have too much the upper hand. It rarely 
happens that the ſtates of the kingdom are entirely 
corrupted. The prince adheres to theſe, and the ſe - 
ditious who have neither will nor hopes to ſubvert the 

government, have neither power nor will to dethrone 

the prince. 

In theſe circumftances,men of prudence and autho- 
rity interfere; moderate meaſures are firſt propoſed» 
then comphed with, and things at length are redref- 
fed; the laws reſume their vigour, and command ſub · 
miſſion. | 
Thus all our hiſtories are full of civil wars without 

revolutions, while the hiſtories of deſpotic govern- 

ments abound. with revolutions without civil wars. 

The writers of the hiſtory of the civil wars of ſome 
countries, even they who fomented them, ſufficiently 
demonſtrate how little reaſon princes have to ſuſpect 
the authority with which they inveſt particular bodies 
of men for their ſervice, ſince even in their very going 
aſtray they ſighed only after the laws and their duty, 
and reſtrained, more than they were capable of inflam- 
ing, the impetuoſity of the revolted f. 

Cardinal Richlieu, reflecting perhaps that he had 
too much reduced the ſtates of the kingdom, has re- 

. See the firſt note of book 11. chap. 4. | 

+ Memoirs of Cardinal de Retz and other hiſtor ies. 
E courſe 

— 

1 @OQ * 4 . 

Chap. 12. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 71 

courſe to the virtues of the prince aud of his miniſters 
for the ſupport “ of the government: but he requires 
ſo many things, that indeed there is none but an an- 
gel capable of ſuch. attention, of ſuch reſolution and 
knowledge; and ſcarce can we flatter ourſelves ever 
to ſee ſuch a prince and miniſters, no not while mo- 
narchy ſubſiſts. 

As people who live under a good government are, 
happier than thoſe who, without role or leaders, wans 
der about the foreſts; ſo 'monarchs who live under the 
fundamental laws of their country are tar happier than 
deſpotic princes, who have nothing to regulate either 
their own or their ſubjects hearts. 

CHAP. XII. 
The ſame ſubject continued. 
ET us not look for magnanimity in deſpotic go- 
vernments ; the prince cannot impart a grandeur 
which he has not hiuiſelf: with him there is no ſuch 

thing as glory. 
It is in monarchies we ſee the ſubjects around the 

prince, receiving the influence of his beams; there it 

is that each perſon, filling as it were a larger ſpace, is 
capable of exerciſing thoſe virtues which adorn the 
foul, not with independence, but with grandeur. 
CHAP. XIIL 
An idea of deſpotic power. 
WEN the ſavages of Louiſiana are defirous of 

fruit, they cut the tree to the root, and gather 
the fruit f. This is an emblem of deſpotic government. 

® Teſtam. Polit, + Edifyiog letters, 11. col. p. 31s. 

CHAP. 

72 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 
CHAP. XIV. 

In what manner the laws. are relative to the principles of 
deſpotic government. 

＋ principle of deſpotic government is fear; but 
a timid, ignorant, and faint hearted. people have 
no occaſion for a great number of laws: 

Every thing ought to depend here on two or three 
ideas; therefore there is no neceſſity that any new no- 
tions ſhould be added. When we want to break a 
horſe, we take care not to let him change his maſter, 
his leſſon. or his pace. Thus an impreſſion is made on 
his brain by two or three motions and no more. 

If a prince is ſhut up in a ſeraglio, he cannot leave 
this voluptuous abode without alarming thoſe who keep 
him confined. They cannot bear that his perſon and 
power ſhould paſs into other hands. He ieldom there- 
. fore wages war in perſon, and hardly ventures to in- 
truſt the command to his generals. 

A prince of this ſtamp, unaccuſtomed to reſiſtance 
in his palace, is enraged to ſee his will oppoſed by arm- 
ed force ; hence he is generally governed by wrath or 
vengeance. 

Beſides, he can have no notion of hows n War, 
therefore, is carried on under ſuch a government in 

its full natural fury, and a leſs extent is given to the 

law of nations than in other ſtates. 

Such a prince has ſo many imperſections, that they 
are afraid to expoſe his natural ſtupidity to public view. 
He is concealed in his palace, and the people are igno- 
rant of his ſituation. It is lucky for him, that the in- 
habitants of thoſe countries need only the name of a 
prince to govern them. 

When Charles XII. was at Bender, he met with 
ſome oppoſition from the ſenate of Sweden; upon 
which he wrote word home, that he would ſend one 

ET; of 

- 

Chap. 14- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 73 

of his boots to command them. This boot would have 
governed like a deſpotic prince. 

If the prince is a priſoner, he is ſuppoſed to be dad, 
and another mounts the throne. The treaties made 
by the priſoner are void; his ſucceſſor will not ratify 
them: in effect, as he is the law, the ſtate, and the 
prince, when he is no longer a prince, he is nothing : 
were he not therefore deemed to be dead, ths ſtate 
would be ſubverted. 

One thing which chiefly determined the Turks to 
conclude a ſeparate. peace with Peter I. was the Muſ- 
covites telling the vizir, that in Sweden another ne 
had been ſet upon the throne““. 

The preſervation of the ſtate is only the ira 
tion of the prince, or rather of the palace where he ig 
confined. Whatever does not directly menace this pa- 
lace or the capital, makes no impreſſion on ignorant, 
proud, and prejudiced minds; and, as for the conca - 

tenation of events, they are unable to trace, to fore - 

ſee, or even to conceive it. Politics, with its ſeveral 
ſprings and laws, muſt here be very much limited; the 
political government is as ſimple as the civil +, | 

The whole is reduced to reconciling the political 
and civil adminiſtration with the domeſtic government, 
the officers of ſtate with thoſe of the ſeraglio. 

Such a ſtate is happieſt, when it can look upon it - 
ſelf as the only one in the world, when it is environed 
with deſerts, and ſeparated from thoſe people whom 
they call Barbarians, Since it cannot depend on the 
militia, it is proper it ſhould deſtroy a part of itſelf. 

As fear is the principle of deſpotic government, its 
end is tranquillity; but this tranquillity cannot be 

» Continuation of Puſſendorff's introduction to the hiſtory of 

Europe, in the article of Sweden, chap. 10. 
+ According to Sir J. Chardin there is no council of ſtate in Per- 

vor, I. i (3. called 

74 THE $8PIRIT OF LAWS. Bock v. 

called a peace; no, it is only the ſilence of thoſe towns 
which the enemy is ready to invade. 

Since the ſlrength does not ly in the tate, but in the 
army that founded it, in order to defend the ſtate the 
army mult be preſerved; but the army is formidable 
to the prince. How then can we reconcile the ſecurity 
of the ſtate with that of the prince's perſon ? 
Obſerve how induſtriouſly the Ruſſian government 

endeavours to temper its arbitrary power, which is 
more burdenſome to it than to the people themſelves. 
"They have broke their great bodies of troops, mitiga- 
ted criminal puniſhments, erected tribunals, entered in- 
to a knowledge of the laws, and inſtructed the people. 
But there are particular cauſes, that will probably 
-oblige them to return to the very miſery which they 
now endeavour to avoid. 

In thoſe ſtates religion has more influence than any 
-where elſe; it is a fear added to fear. In Mahometan 
-countries it is partly from their religion that the peo- 
le derive the ſurpriſing veneration they have for their 
Prince. 3 
It is religion that in ſome meaſure the Tur- 
kifh conſtitution. The ſubjects, who have no attach- 

ment of honour to the glory and grandeur of the ſtate, 

are attached to it -by the force and principle of reli- 

n. 

f "08 all deſpotic governments, there is none that la- 
bours more under its own weight, than that wherein 
:the prince declares himſelf proprietor of all the lands, 
and heir to all his ſubjects. Hence the neglect of agri- 
culture ariſes; and, if the prince-intermeddles likewiſe 
in trade, all manner of induſtry is rained. 
Under this ſort of goverament nothing is repaired 
or improved“. Houſes are built only for the neceſſity 
of habitation; there is no ſuch thing as digging of 
4 Sce Ricault's State of the Ottoman empire, p. 196. 

\ 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, 55 

ditches, or planting of trees; every thing is drawn 
from, but nothing reſtored to the earth ; the land lies- 
untilled, and the whole country becomes a deſert. 

s it to be imagined that the laws, which aboliſh the 
property of land and the ſucceſſion of eſtates, will di- 
miniſh the avarice and cupidity of the great? By no 
means. They will rather ſtimulate this cupidity and 
avarice. The great men. will be prompred to uſe a. 
thouſand oppreſſive methods, becauſe they think they 
have no other property, but the gold and ſilver which 
they are able to ſeize upon by violence, or conceal. 

To prevent therefore the utter ruin of the ſtate, the 
avidity of the prince ought to be moderated by ſome 
eſtabliſhed cuſtom. Thus in Turky the prince is ſatis - 
fied with the right of three per cent. on the value of 

inheritances. But, as the Grand Seignior gives the 

greateſt part of the lands to his. ſoldiery, and diſpoſes 
of them as he pleaſes; as he ſeizes on all the eſtates of 
the officers of the empire at their deceaſe ; as he has 
the property of the eſtates of thoſe who. die without iſ- 
ſue, and the daughters have only the uſufruct; it thenoe 
follows, that the greateſt parts of the eſtates of the 
country are poſſeſſed in a precarious manner. 

By the laws of Bantam+, the king ſeizes on the 
whole inheritance, even wife, children, and habitation, 
In order to elude the crueleſt part of this law, they 

are obliged to marry their children at eight, nine, or 

ten years of age, and ſometimes younger, to the end 
that they may not be a wretched part of the father's. 
ſucceſſion. | 

In countries where there are no fandamental laws,. 

* See, concerning the inheritances of the Turks, Ancient and mo- 
dern Sparta. See alſo Ricault ou the Ottoman empire 

+ Collection of voyages that contributed to the eſtabliſhment of 

the Eaſt-India Company, tome 1. . The law of Pegu is leſs cruel; 
if there happens to be children, the king ſucceeds only to two thirds, 

T1hid. tome iii. p. 1. 
G 2. ; the. 

— — — — — 

| 
[ 
; 
'# | 

— 

75 TE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

the ſucceſſion of the empire cannot be fixed. The 
crown is then. elective, and the right of eleQing is in 
the prince, who names a ſucceſſor either of his own or 
of ſome other family. In vain would it be to eſtabliſh 
here the ſucceſlion of the eldeſt ſon; the prince might 
always chuſe another. The ſucceſſor is declared by the 
prince himſelf, or by his miniſters, or by a civil war, 
Hence a deſfpotic ſtate is, upon another account, more 
liable than a monarchical government to diſſolution. 
As every prince of the royal family is held equally 
capable of being choſen, hence it follows, that the 

prince who aſcends the throne ſtrangles immediately 

bis brothers, as in Turky, or puts out their eyes, as in 
- Perſia, or bereaves them of their underſtanding, as in 
the Mogul's country, or if theſe precautions are not 

uſed, as in Morocco, the vacancy of the throne is al · 

ways attended with a horrid civil war, 

By the conſtitutions of Ruſſia & the Czar may chuſe 
whom he das a mind for his ſucceſſor, whether of his 
own or a ſtrange family. Such a ſettlement produces 
a thouſand revolations, and renders the throne as tot- 

tering as the ſuecceſſion is arbitrary. 

The right of ſucceſſion being -one of thoſe things 
which are of moſt importance to the people to know, 
the beſt is that which moſt ſenſibly ſtrikes them, ſuch 
as a certain order of birth. A ſettlement of this kind 
puts a ſtop to intrigues, and ſtifles ambition; the mind 
of a weak prince is no longer inſlaved, nor is he made 
to ſpeak his will as he is juſt expiring. 

When the ſucceſſion is eſtabliſhed by a fundamental 
ur, only one prince is the ſucceſſor, and his brothers 

have neither a real nor apparent right to diſpute the 

crown with him. They can neither pretend to, nor 

take any advantage of the will of a father. There 

* See the different conſtitutions, eſpecially that bf 1722. 
1s 

AQ 

— r 2. T © 

„%% << — nw e-_9_ 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 57 

is then no more occaſion to confine or kill the king's. 
brother than any other ſubject. 

Bat in deſpotic governments, where the prince's bro-- 
thers are equally his ſlaves and his rivals, prudence re-- 
quires that their perſons be ſecured, eſpecially in Ma- 
hometan countries where reli gion conſiders victory or 
ſucceſs as a divine deciſion in their favour ; ſo that 
they have no ſuch thing as a monarch de jure, but on · 
ly de ſacto. IEA . 

There is a far greater incentive to ambition in couns- 
tries where the princes of the blood are ſenſible that, 
if they do not aſcend the throne, they mult be either 
impriſoned- or put to death, than amongſt us, where 
they are placed in ſuch. a ſtation, as may ſatisfy, if not 
their ambition, at leaſt their. moderate deſires. | 

The princes of deſpotic governments have always 
perverted the uſe of marriage. They generally take a. 
great many wives, eſpecially in that part of the world 
where abſolute power is in ſome meaſure. naturalized,, 
namely Afia.. Hence they come to have ſuch a mul- 
titude. of children, that they can hardly have any great 
affection for them, nor the children for one another. 

The reigning family refembles the ftate; it is too - 
weak itſelf, and its head too powerful; it ſeems very 
numerous and extenftve, and yet is. ſuddenly extinct. 
Artaxerxes“ put all his children to death for conſpiring 
againſt him. It is not at all probable that fifty N hgh. 
ſhould conſpire againſt their father, and much leſs that 
this conſpiracy ſhould-be owing to his having refuſed. 
to reſign his concubine to his eldeſt ſon. It is more na · 
tural to believe. that the whole was an intrigue of thoſe - 
oriental ſeraglios, where artifiee, treachery, and deceit -. 
reign in ſilence, involved in thiek odſeurity ; where an 
old prince, grown every day more weak, is the firſt pri- 
ſoner of the palace. 

* See Juſtin. 

G 3 Aſter 

78 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

After what has been ſaid, one would imagine that 
human nature ſhould perpetually riſe in oppoſition to 
n deſpotic government. But, notwithſtanding the love 
of liberty ſo natural to mankind, notwithſtanding 
their innate deteſtation of force and violence, moſt 
nations are ſubject to this very government. This is 
eaſily accounted for. In order to form a moderate 
government, it is neceſſary to combine the ſeveral 
powers, to regulate, temper, and ſet them in motion, 
to give as it were ballaſt to one, in order to enable it 
to reſiſt another. This is a maſterpiece of legiſlation, 
rarely produced by hazard, and ſeldom attained by 
prudence. On the contrary, a deſpotic government 
offers itſelf as it were at firſt ſight; it is uniform through: 
out; and, as paſſions only are requiſite to eſtabliſh it, 
this is what every capacity may reach. 

'CHA'P. Xv. 
Dye ſame ſubject continued. 

P warm climates, where deſpotic power generally 

prevails, there is an earlier ſenſibility, as well as 
an earlier extinction of the paſſions * the under 
ſtanding is ſooner ripened; they are in leſs danger of 
ſquandering away their fortunes ; there is leſs facility 
in diſtinguiſhing themſelves in the world; leſs com- 
munication between young people, who are confined 
at home; they marry much earlier, and conſequently 
they may be ſooner of age than in our European cli- 
mates. In Turky they are of age at fifteen T. 
Here there is no ſuch thing as a ceſſion of goods ; in 
a government where there is no fixed property, peo- 
ple depend rather on the perſon than on his eſtate. 

The ceſſion of goods is naturally admitted in mo- 

® See the book of laws as relative to the nature of the climate. 
+ Languilltiere, ancient and modern Sparta, p. 463. | 
I, derate 

I 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 79 

derate governments“, but eſpecially in republics, 
becauſe of the greater confidence which ariſes from 
the probity of the citizens, and becaule of the lenity 
and moderation that a form of government, which 
every one ſeems to have framed for himſelf, ought to 
inſpire. | 

Had the legiſlators of the Roman republic eſtabliſn · 
ed the ceſſion of goods , they never would have been 
expoſed to ſo many ſeditions and civil diſcords, nor 
would they have experienced the dangers of the evils, 
or the inconveniency of the remedies. 

Poverty and the precariouſneſs of property in a deſ- 
potic ſtate render uſury natural, each perſon raiſing 
the value of his money in proportion to the danger he 
ſees in lending it. Miſery therefore pours in from all 
parts into thoſe unhappy countries; they are bereft of 
every thing, even of the reſource of borrowing. 

Hence it is, that a merchant under this government 
is unable to carry on a great trade ; he lives from hand 
to mouth; were he to encumber himſelf with a large 
quantity of merchandiſes, he would loſe more by the 
exorbitant intereſt he muſt give for money, than he 
could poſſibly get by the goods. Wheretore there are 
no laws here relating to commerce; they are all re- 
duced to what is called the civil polity. \ 

A government cannot be unjuſt without having 
hands to exerciſe its injuſtice, Now, it is impoſſible 
but theſe hands will be graſping for themſelves. The 
embezzling of the public money is therefore natural in 
deſpotic ſtates. 

As this is a common crime under this government, 
confiſcations are very uſeful. By theſe the people are 

The ſame may be ſaid of compoſitions in regard to fair bank. 
rupts. 

+ There was no ſach eſtabliſhment made till the Julian law d- 

ceſſione bonorum, which preſcryed them from Reiss and from an 
ignominious diviſion of their goods. 
eaſed 

% THE spiRTr OF LAWS. Book v. 

eaſed, the money drawn by this means being a con- 
ſiderable tribute which could hardly be raiſed on the 
exhauſted ſubjects; neither is there in thoſe countries 
any one family which the prince would be glad to. 
preſerve. _ . 

In moderate governments it is quite a different 
thing. Confiſcations would render property uncer- 
tain, would ſtrip innocent children, would deſtroy a 
whole family, inſtead of puniſhing a ſingle criminal. 
In republics they would be attended with the miſchiet: 
of ſubverting equality, which is the very ſoul of this 
government, by depriving a citizen. of his neceſſary. 
ſubſiſten cee. 

There is no Roman law + againſt inte, ex- 
cept in the caſe of high treaſon of the moſt heinous 
nature. It would be a prudent thing to follow the 
ſprit of this law, and to limit confiſcations to parti- 
cular crimes. In countries where a local cuſtom has 
rendered real eſtates alienable, Bodin. very juſtly ob- 
ſerves, that confiſcations ſhould extend only to ſuch 
as are purchafed or acquired 4. 

1:.C'H:-&A Þ. i. 
Of the communication of power. 
I* a deſpotic government the power is communica- 
ted entire to the perſon intruſted with it. The vi- 
zir himſelf is the deſpotic prince, and each particular 
officer is the vizir. In monarchies the power is lefs 
immediately applied, being tempered by the mo- 
narch as he gives it ſ. He makes ſuch a diſtribution 
They ſeemed to have been too fond of confiſcations in the re- 
public of Athens. 
+ Autheotica bona damnatorum, code de bon, damn. 
1 Book v. chap. 3. 
ut eſſe Phœbi dulcius lumen ſolet 
Jamjam cadentis 
| | of 

9 we 2 * 

WO. — 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 81 

of his authority, as never to communicate a part of it, 
without reſerving a greater ſhare to himſelf, 

Hence, in monarchies the particular governors of 
towns are not ſo dependent on the governor of the 
province, as not to be ſtil] more ſo on the prince, and 
the private officers of military bodies are not ſo far 
ſubje& to their general, as not to owe ſtill a greater 
ſubjection to their ſovereign. 

In moſt monarchies, it has been wiſely regulated, 
that thoſe who have an extenſive command ſhould not 
belong to any military body, ſo that, as they have 
no authority but through the prince's particulac plea- 
ſore, and as they may be employed or not, they are 
in ſome meaſure in the ſervice, 14 in ſome ene 
out of it. 

This is incompatible with a deſpotie government: 
for, if thoſe who are not actually employed were ne- 
vertheleſs inveſted with privileges and titles, the con- 
ſequence muſt be, that there would be a kind of men 

in the ſtate, who might be ſaid to be great of them- 

ſelves, a thing directly oppoſite to the nature of this 
government. 
Were the governor of a town independent of the 

- baſhaw, expedients would be daily neceſſary to make 

them agree, which is highly abſurd in a deſpotic 
ſtate ; beſides, if a particular governor might refuſe 
to obey, how could the other anſwer for his province 
with his head? 

In this kind of government authority muſt ever be 
wavering, nor is that of the loweſt magiſtrate leſs 
ſteady than that of the deſpotic prince. Under mo- 
derate governments, the law is prudent in all its parts, 
is perfectly well known, and even the pettieſt magi- 
ſtrates are capable of following it. But in a deſpotic 
ſtate where the prince's will is the law, though the 
prince were wize, yet how could the magillrate fol- 

' low 

82 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book V. 

Jow a will he does not Enow? He muſt certainly fol. 

low his own. 
Moreover, as the law is only the prince's will, and 

as the prince can only will what he knows, it follbws 

that there are an infinite number of people who muſt 
will for him, and as he wills. 

In fine, as the law is the momentary will of the 
prince, it is neceſſary that thoſe who will for him 
ſhould follow his ſudden manner of willing. 

CHAP. XVII. 

Of preſents. 

T is a received cuſtom in deſpotic countries, never 

to addreſs any ſuperior whatſoever, not excepting 
their kings, without making them a preſent. The 
Mogul * never receives the petitions of his ſubjects, if 
they come with empty hands. Theſe princes ſpoil 
even their own favours. 

But thus it mult ever be in a . where no 
man is a citizen; in a government where they have 
all a notion that a ſuperior is under no obligation to an 
inferior ; in a government where men imagine them. 
ſelves bound by no other tie than the chaſtiſements in- 
flicted by one part over another; in a government, in 
| fine, where there is very little to do, and where the 
people have ſeldom an occafion of preſenting them- 
ſelves before the great, of offering their Py and 
much leſs their complaints. 

In a republic preſents are odious, he virtue 
ſtands in no need of them. In monarchies honour is 
a much ſtronger incentive than preſents. But in a 
deſpotic government, where there is neither honour 
nor virtue, people cannot be determined to act but 
through hope of the conveniencies of liſe. 

Collection of voyages that contributed to the eſtabliſhment of 
the Eaſt- India Company, tome i. p. 80. 

It 

4 
cc as 1 „** 

XX <= wad 4a 0644 = «aA .o A 

8 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 38g 

It is in conformity to republican ideas, that Plato 
ordered thoſe who received preſents for doing their 
duty to be punithed with death. They muſt not take 
preſents, ſays he, neither for good ner for evil attions f. 

A very bad law that was among the Romans, 
which gave the magiſtrates leave to accept of ſmall 
preſents t, provided they did not exceed 100 crowns 
the whole year. They who receive nothing expect no. 
thing; they who receive a little ſoon defire a little 
more, till at length their deſires ſwell to an exorbitant 
height. Beſides, it is much eaſier to convict a man 
who knows himſelf obliged to accept. of no preſent at 
all, and yet will accept of ſomething, than a perſon 

who takes more when he ought to take leſs, and who 

always finds pretexts, excuſes, and plauſible reaſons in 
juſtification of his conduct. 

CH A P. XVIII. 
. Of rewards conferred by the ſovereign. 
P deſpotic governments, where, as we have already 
obſerved, the principal motive of action is the hope 
of the convenience of life, the prince who confers re- 
wards has nothing to beſtow but money. In monar- 
chies, where honour alone predominates, the prince's 
rewards would conſiſt only of marks of diſtinction, if 
the diſtinctions eſtabliſhed by honour were not attended 
with luxury, which neceſſarily brings on its wants; the 
prince therefore is obliged to confer ſuch honour as 
leads to wealth. But in a republic where virtue reigns, 
a motive ſelf-ſufficient, and which excludes all others, 
the recompenſes of the ſtate conſiſt only of public at- 
teſtations of this virtue. 

It is-a general rule, that great rewards in monar- 
chies and republics, are a ſign of their decline; be. 

® Book xii. of laws. + Leg. S 5. ad leg. Jul. repet. 

+ Muauſcula, ; 
2 cauſe 

. —ů — — —— 
uk. — — . ow 1 
„ —— 
— —— — 
_ — _ — —— 
— — 
- <= RR - —— 

2 

, 
i U 
| | 
j : : 
17 : 
: 
'' : 
| 1 
. 
1 
Þ } 
1 
1 
"262 
| 4 
f 
” 4: 
| 
. 

$4 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

cauſe they are a proof of their principles being corrup- 
ted, and that the idea of honour has no longer the 
ſame force in monarchy, nor the title of citizen the 
ſame force in a republic. 

The very worſt Roman emperors were thoſe who 
were moſt profuſe in their largeſſes, for example, Cali- 
gula, Claudius, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Commodus, He- 
liogabulus, and Caracalla. The beſt, as Anguſtus, Vel- 
paſian, Antonius Pius, Marcus Aurelius, and Perti- 
nax, were economiſts. Under good emperors the ſtate 
reſumed its principles; all other treaſures were — 
by that of honour. 

CHA p. XIX. 
New conſequences of the principles of the three * 

ments. 

— 1 Cannot conclude this book without making ſome ap- 
plications of my three principles. 

Queſt. 1. It is a queſtion, Whether the laws ought 
to oblige a ſubject to accept of a public employment ? 
My opinion is, that they ought in a republic, but not 
in a monarchical government. In the former, public 
employments are atteſtations of virtue, depoſitums with 
which a citizen is intruſted by his country, for whom 
alone he ought to live, act, and think; conſequently 
he cannot refuſe them *. In the latter, public offices 
are teſtimonies of honour; now ſuch is the capriciouſ- 
neſs of honour, that it chuſes to accept of none of 

_ theſe teſtimonies, but when and in what manner it 

pleaſes: 
The late king of Sardinia + inflicted onnihments on 
his ſubjects that refuſed the dignities and public offices 

* Plato, in his Republic, book 8. ranks the refaſals among the 
marks of the corruption of a republic. In his Laws, book 6. he 
orders them to be puniſhed 8 a fine; at Venice they are puniſhed 
with baniſhmentf, 

+ Victor Amadeus. 

5 | — 

_ 8 einm — — — Dad 

Web „ aw DV 

e t e of 

— kw wy 

Chap. ty. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 8 

of the ſtate. In this he unknowingly followed repub- 
lican ideas: but his manner of governing in other re- 
ſpects ſufficiently proves that this was not his intention. 

Oueſt. 2. Secondly, it is queſtioned, Whether a ſub- 

ject ſhould be obliged to accept of a poſt in the army 

inferior to that which he held before? Among the Ro- 
mans it was uſual to ſee a captain ſerve the next year 
under his lieutenant *. This is becauſe virtue in repub- 
lics requires a continual ſacrifice of our perſons and of 
our repugnances for the good of the ſtate. But in mo- 
narchies, . honour, true or falſe, will never bear with 
what it calls degrading itſelf. 

In deſpotic governments, where honour, poſts, and 
ranks, are equally abuſed, they indiſcriminately make 
of a prince a ſcullion, and of a ſcullion a prince. 

Quel. 3. Thirdly, it may be inquired, Whether ci- 
vil and military employments ſhould be conferred on- 
the ſame perſon? In republics I think they ſhould be 
joined, but in monarchies ſeparated. In republics it 
would be extremely dangerous to make the profeſſion 
of arms a particular ſtate, diſtint from that of civil 
functions: and in monarchies no leſs dangerous would 
it be to confer theſe two nnen on the 8 per- 
ſon. 

In republics, a perſon takes np arms only with a 
vie w to defend his country and its laws; it is becauſe 
he is a citizen he makes himſelf for a while a ſoldier, 
Were theſe two diſtin& ſtates, the perſon who under 
arms thinks himſelf a citizen, would ſoon be made ſen- 
ſible he is only a ſoldier. 

In monarchies they whoſe condition engages them 

® Some centurions having appealed to the people for the employ- 
ments which they had before enjoyed, It is juſt, my comrades,” 
ſaid a centurion, ** that you ſhould look upon every poſt as houeur- 
able, in which you have an opportunith of defending the repub- 
« lic.” Liv, lib. 42. * | 

Vor. J. in 

8% Tg SPIRIT or LAWS. Book v. 

in the profeſſion of arms, have nothing but glory, or 
at leaſt honour or fortune, in view. To men therefore 
like theſe, the prince ſhould never give any civil em. 
ployments; on the contrary, they ought to be checked 
by the civil magiſtrate, that the ſame perſons may not 
have at the ſame time the confidence of the people and 
the power to abuſe it *. 

We have only to caſt an eye on a nation chat may 
de juſtly called a republie diſguiſed under the form of 
monarchy, and we ſhall ſee how jealous they are of 
making a ſeparate order of the profeſſion of arms, and 
how the military ſtate is eonſtantly allied with that of 
the citizen, and even ſometimes of the magiſtrate, to 
the end that theſe qualities may be a pledge for their 
country, which ſhould never be forgotten. : 
The diviſion of civil and military employments, 

made by the Romans after the extinction of the repub- 
lic, was not an arbitrary thing. It was a conſequence 
of the change which happened in the conſtitution of 
Rome; it was natural to a monarchical government, 
and what was only commenced under Auguſtus f ſuc- 
ceeding emperors | were obliged to finiſh, in order to 
temper the military government. 

Procopius, therefore, the competitor of Valens the 
' emperor, was ignorant of this principle, when confer- 
ring the proconſular | dignity upon Hormiſdas, a 
prince of the blood-royal of Perſia, he reſtored to this 
magiſtracy the military command of which it had been 
formerly poſſeſſed ; unleſs. indeed he had very parti- 
cular” reaſons for ſo doing. A perſon that aſpires to 

Ne imperium ad optimos nobilium .ransferretur, ſenatum mi- 
litia vetuit Gallienus, etiam adire exercitum, Aurelius Victor de vi- 

Tis illuftribus. 
. + Auguſtus deprived the ſenators, proconſuls, and governors of 
the privilege of wearing arms. Dion, lib. 33. 
t Conſtantine, See Zozimis, lib. 2. 
I Ammianus Marcellinus, lib, 26. More veterem et bell 1 rectus. 

the 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. * 
the ſovereignty, concerns himſelf leſs about what is 
ſerviceable to the ſtate, than about what is likely to 
promote his own intereſt. 

ueft. 4. Fourthly, it is a queſtion, Whether public 

employments ſhould be venal? They ought not, E 

think, in deſpotic governments, where the ſubjects mult 
be inſtantaneouſly placed or diſplaced by the prince. 
But in monarchies this venality is not at all impro- 
per, by reaſon it is an inducement to undertake that 
as a family employment, which would never be under- 
taken through a motive of virtue; it fixes likewiſe every 
one to his duty, and renders the ſeveral orders of the 
kingdom more permanent. Suidas * very juſtly ob- 
ſerves, that Anaſtaſius had changed the empire into a 
kind of ariſtocracy, by ſelling all public employments. 
Plato + cannot bear with this venality. This is 
« exactly,“ ſays he, as if a perſon was to be made 
« a mariner or pilot of a ſhip for his money. Is it 
« poſſible that this rule ſhould be bad in every other 
employment of life, and hold good only in the ad- 
« miniſtration of a republic? But Plato ſpeaks of 
a republic founded on virtue, and we of a monarchy. 
Now, in monarchies, (where though there were no 
ſuch thing as a regular fale of public offices, ſtill the 
indigence and avidity of the courtier would equally 
prompt him to expoſe them to fale), chance will fur- 

| Niſk better ſubjects than the prince's choice. In fine, 

the method of attaining to honours through riches, 
inſpires and cheriſhes indaftry 1, a thing extremely 
wanting in this kind of government. 

Pueſt. 5. The fifth queſtion is, In what kind of go- 
vernment cenſors are neceflary? My anſwer is, they 

Fragments taken from the embaſſies of Conſt. Torphyrogeni- 

tus. , + Repub. lib. 8. 

We ſee the lazineſs of Spain, where all public employments 
are given away. 

12 are 

88 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book v. 

are neceſſary in a republic, where the principle of go- 
vernment is virtue. We muſt not imagine that crimi. 
nal actions only are deſtructive of virtue; it is deſtroy. 

. ed alſo by careleſſneſs, by faults, by a certain coolneſs 

in the love of our country, by dangerous examples, by 
ſeeds of corruption, by whatever does not openly vio- 
late but elude the laws, by what does not ſubvert but 
weaken them; all this ought to fall under the i W. 
and correction of the cenſors. 

We are ſurpriſed at the puniſhment of the Areopa- 
gite for killing a ſparrow, which, to eſcape the purſuit 
of a hawk, kad taken ſhelter in his boſom. Surpriſed 
are we alſo that an Areopagite ſhould put his ſon to 
death for pulling out the eyes of a little bird. But let 
us reflect, that the queſtion here does not relate to a 

eriminal condemnation, but to a judgment of — 

in a republic founded on manners. 
In monarchies there ſhould be no e monar - 
chies are founded on honour, and the nature of ho- 

nour is to have the whole univerſe for its cenſor. Eve- 
ry man that fails in this reſpect is ſubject to the re- 

proaches even of thoſe who are void of honour. 

Here the cenſors would be ſpoiled by the very peo- 
ple whom they ought to correct: they could not pre- 
vail againſt the corruption of a monarchy : the cor- 
ruption rather would be too ſtrong againſt them. 

Hence it is obvious, that there ought to be no cenſors 
in deſpotic governments. The example of China ſeems 
to derogate from this rule; but we ſhall ſee, in the 
courſe of this work, the 2 reaſons of that in- 
ſtitution. ” 

BOOK 

Chap. i, THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 843 

0.03. 
Conſequences of the principles of different go- 
vernments with reſpe& to the ſimplicity of 
civil and criminal laws, the form of judg- 
ments, and the inflicting of puniſhments. 

_ = — 

CHAP. I. 
Of the ſimplicity of civil laws in different governments. 
OnarcHiss do not admit of ſo great a ſimplici- 
ty of laws as defpotic governments. For in. 
monarchies there maſt be courts of judicature ; theſe: 
mutt give their deciſions; the deciſions mult be preſer - 
ved and learned, that we may judge in the fame man-- 
ner to-day as yeſterday, and that the lives and proper - 
ty of the citizens may be as certain. and fixed. as the- 
very conſtitution of the ſtate. 

In monarchies, the adminiſtration of juſtice, which: 
decides not only in whatever belongs to life and pro- 
perty, but likewiſe to: honour, demands very ſcrupulous. 
inquiries. The delicacy of the judge increaſes in pro- 
portion to the increaſe of his truſt, and. of the impor- 
cance of the intereſts on which he determines. 

We muſt not therefore be ſurpriſed to find ſo many 
rules, reſtrictions, and extenſions in the laws of thoſe 
countries ; rules that multiply the particular caſes, and 
ſeem. to make an art of reaſon itſelf. | 

The difference of rank, birth, and. condition, eſta-- 
bliſhed in monarchical governments, is frequently at- 
tended with. diſtinctions in the nature of property; 

„„ Ham. 
— 

- 

and the laws relative to the conſtitution of this go- 

vernment, may augment the number of theſe diſtinc- 

tions. Hence, among us, goods are divided into real: 
eſtates, purchaſes, doweri®, paraphernalia, paternali 

H 3 : and: 

22 
* 2 
— — — Wy 

_ CESS q E 
* - 
— 

* 24 
— ” aw. —- 
py 

2 $p-* 
- w k 44 R 4 > - * 
4 % FEES nd. Z No IS ory — — "< F Rags Cup 

1 * 5 * . —— — * — — AGE. K E — 

r r Ya OA - 2 — N — = 5 * 

* — — — — = _ = N N — — n w 

2 => - bs 
ym . = * 
— 2 . F 9 _ W ſhy 1s 
Pr 2 £ - — — - — - 

90 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. | Book VI. 

and maternal eſtates ; moveables of different kinds; 
eſtates held in fee ſimple, or in tail; acquired by de- 

ſcent or conveyance; allodial, or held by loccage ; 

ground-rents, or annuities. Each ſort of goods is ſub- 
ject to particular rules, which muſt be complied with in 
the diſpoſal of them. Theſe things muſt needs dimi- 
niſh the ſimplicity of the laws. 

In our governments, the fiefs are become heredita- 

ry. It was neceſſary that the nobility ſhould have a 
fixed property, that is, the fief ſhould have a certain 
conſiſtency, to the end that the proprietor of the fief 

might always be in a capacity of ſerving the prince. 
This muſt have been productive of great varieties; for 

iuſtance, there are countries where fiefs could not be 

divided among the brothers; in others the younger 

brothers may be allowed a more generous ſubſiſtence, 
The monarch who knows each of his provinces, may 

_ eſtabliſh different laws, or tolerate different cuſtoms. 
But the deſpotic prince knows nothing, and can attend 

to nothing; he muſt take general meaſures; he go- 

verns by a rigid and inflexible will, which throughout 
his whole dominions produces the ſame effects; my 

thing yields under his feet. 

Ia proportion as the deciſions of the courts of Judi- 
cature are multiphed in monarchies, the law is loaded 
with decrees that ſometimes contradict one another, 
either becauſe ſucceeding judges are of a different way 

of thinking; or becauſe the ſame cauſes are ſometimes 

well, and at other times ill defended; or, in fine, by 
reaſon of an infinite number of abuſes that ſlip into 

| whatever paſſes through the hands of man. This is 

a neceſſary evil, which the ligiſlator redreſſes from 
time to time, as contrary even to the ſpirit of mode- 
rate governments. For when people are obliged to 
have recourſe to courts of 3 this ſhould come 

from 

as nn S eien 

= 
an WD 2D S a SiS: ne act accu om a Xa a ac P And oo. amt 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: 91 

from the nature of the conſtitution, and not from * 
contradictions or uncertainty of the laws. 

In governments where there are neceſſary diſtinc- 
tions of perſons, there muſt likewiſe be privileges. 
This alſo diminiſhes the ſimplicity, and creates a thou- 
ſand exceptions. 

One of the privileges leaſt burthenſome to ſociety, 
and eſpecially to him that confers it, is that of plead- 
ing in one court preferably to. another. Here new 
difficulties ariſe, when it becomes a queſtion, before 
which court we ſhall plead. 

Far different is the caſe of people under deſpotic 
governments. In thoſe conntries I can ſee nothing 
that the legiſlator is able to decree, or the magiſtrate 
to judge. As the lands belong to the prince, it fol- 
lows, that there are ſcarce any civil laws. concerning 
the property of lands. From the right the ſovereign 
has to ſucceed to eftates, it follows likewiſe that there 
are none relating to inheritances. The monopolies 
eſtabliſhed by the prince for himſelf in ſome countries, 
render all forts of commercial laws quite uſeleſs. The 
marriages which they uſually contract with the ſla ves, 
are the cauſe-that there are ſcarce any civil laws re- 
- lating to doweries, or to the particular advantage of 
married women. From the prodigious multitude 'of 
ſlaves, it follows likewiſe that there are very few who 
have any ſuch thing as a will of their own, and of. 
courſe are anſwerable for their conduct before a judge. 
Moſt moral actions that are only in conſequence of a 
father's, a huſband's, or a maſter's will, are regulated 
by them, and not by the magiſtrates. 

I forgot to obſerve, that as what we call honour, 
is a thing hardly known in thoſe countries, the ſeve- 
ral points relating to this honour, which are of ſuch 
importance with us, are with them quite out of the 
_ 

Deſpotic 

— — — 

2 — 3 — 
2 . TIED — — — 
— I x > oe ey LT op 
E - + — . — 

- 

— 
. 
D 

= — — — * a = 
r 2 — 2 = — — 
os - þ a = 

—— 

— 

2. 
. — — pa; 

92 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VT, 

Deſpotic power is of itſelf ſufficient ; round it there 
is an abſolute vacunm. Hence it is, that when tra- 

vellers favour us with the deſcription of countries 
- where arbitrary ſway prevails, they ſeldom make men- 

tion of civil laws *. 

All occaſions therefore of wrangling and of law- 
fuits are here removed. And to this in part it is owing 
that litigious people in thoſe countries are ſo roughly 

handled: as the injuſtice of their demand is neither 
ſcreened, palliated, nor protected by an infinite number 

of laws, of courſe it is immediately diſcovered. 
: C H A P. II. 

Of the femplicity of criminal laws in different govern- 

ments. 

WE hear it cenaralty ſaid, that juſtice ovght to be 
adminiſtered with us as in Turky. ls it poſlible 

then that the moſt ignorant of all nations ſhould be 
the moſt clear-ſighted in a point that it moſt behoves 
mankind to know? 

If we examine the ſet forms of juſtice in reſpect to 
the trouble the ſubject undergoes in recovering his 
property, or in obtaining ſatisfaction for an injury or 
affront, we ſhall find them doubtleſs too many; but 
if we confider them in the relation. they. have to the 
liberty and ſecurity of the ſubject, we ſhall often find 
them too few: and we ſhall be convinced that the 
trouble, expence, delays, and even the very dangers 
of our juSelary proceedings, are the price that every 
ſubject pays for his liberty. 

* In Mazulipatan it could never be found out that there was ſuch 
a thing as written laws. See the collection of voyages that contri- 
buted to the eſtabliſhment of the Eaſt-India company, tome 4. part i. 

p. 391. The Indians are regulated in their judgments by certain 
3-490 The Vedan and ſuch like books do not contain civil 

; laws, m religious precepts. See * letters, 14. collect. 

In 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 93 

In Turky, where little regard is ſhown to the ho- 
nour, lives, or eſtates of the ſubjec, all cauſes are one 

way or other quickly decided. The method of de- 
termining them is a matter of indifference, provided 
they be determined. The baſhaw, after a quick hear - 
ing, orders which party he pleaſes to be baſlinodoed, 
and then ſends them abont their buſineſs. 

Here it would be dangerous to have the paſſion of 
litigiouſneſs ; this ſuppoſes a violent deſire of obtain- 
nd ing juſtice, a ſtrong averſion, a hurry of mind, and 
an obſtinacy in purſuing revenge. All this ſhould be 
avoided in a government where fear ought to be the 
only prevailing ſentiment, and in which the leaſt po- 
pular diſtubances are frequently attended with ſudden 
and unforeſeen revolutions. Here every man ought 
to know that the magiſtrate muſt not hear his name 
mentioned, and that his ſecurity depends entirely on 
his being reduced to a kind of annihilation, 

But in moderate governments, where the life of the 
meaneſt ſubject is deemed precious, no man is ſtript of 
0 his honour or property but after a long inquiry; and 
E no man is bereft of liſe, till his very country has at- 
r tacked him, an attack that is never made without 
t leaving him all poſſible means of making his defence. 
e Hence it is that when a perſon renders himſelf ab · 
| ſolute *, he immediately thinks of ſimplifying the 
- 

5 
F 

7 

© @ @a.o 

laws. In a government thus conſtituted, they are 
more affected with particular inconveniencies, than 
with the liberty of the ſubject, which is very little 
minded. ö 
In republics, it is plain that as many forwalities at 
leaſt are neceſſary as in monarchies. In both govern- 
ments they increaſe in proportion to the value which 
is ſet on the honour, . arty] nd lite. of the 
ſubje&. | 

i * Czfar, Cromwell, and many others. 1 

94 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Book vl. 

In republican governments men are all equal; equal 
they are alſo in deſpotic governments: In the former 
becaule they are every thing, in the latter becauſe they 
are nothing. 

CHAP III. 

In what governments, and in what caſes, the judges 
* ought to determine according to the expreſs letter of 
the law. 
4 = nearer a government approaches to a repub- 
lic, the more the manner of judging becomes 
ſettled and fixed; wherefore it was a fault in the re- 
public of Sparta, for the Ephori to paſs ſuch arbi- 
trary judgments, without having any laws to direct 
them. The firſt conſuls at Rome pronounced ſen- 
tence in the ſame manner as the Ephori; but the in · 
eonveniency of this proceeding was ſoon felt, and 
they were Riged'to have rroners 20 cogeeb and fix. 
ed laws. 1 

In deſpotic governments there are no laws; the 
judge himſelf is his own rule. There are laws in 
monarchies; and where theſe are explicit, the judge 
conforms to them; where they are otherwiſe, he en - 
deavours to follow their ſpirit. In republics, the very 
nature of the conſtitution requires the judges to keep 
to the letter of the law. Here there is no citizen 
againſt whom a law can be interpreted, in caſes "hace 
either his honour, property, or life is concerned. 

At Rome the judges had no more-to do op to 
declare, that the perſon accuſed was guilty of a par- 
ticular crime, and then the puniſhment was found in 
the laws, as may be ſeen in divers laws ſtill extant. In 
England the jury determine whether the fact brought 
under their cognizance be proved or not; if it be 
proved, the judge pronounces the puniſhment inflicted 
by the law for ſuch a particular fact, and for this he 
needs only open his eyes. 

CHAP. 

—_ a 

nx ww WWwvueew=w$_ =_T oO EP TY. SY EE Co ORE CN nn 

"© ws po St , Y 9 

0 
t 

!. - 9. 7 9 

\ 

Chap. . THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 95 

CHAP. IV. 
Of the manner of forming judgments. 

1 — ariſe the different manners of forming 
judgments In monarchies the judges take the 
method of arbiters; they deliberate together, they 
communicate their thovghts, in order to come to an 
agreement, they moderate their opinion to render it 
conformable to that of others; and the ſentiments of 
the feweſt muſt yield to thoſe of two thirds of the 
whole number, But this is not agreeable to the na- 
ture of a republic. At Rome, and in the cities of 
Greece, the judges never entered into a conſultation z 
each gave his opinion one of theſe three ways, I ab- 
folve ; I condemn; It does not appear clear to ne 
This was becauſe the people judged, or were ſuppo- 
ſed to judge. But the people are far from being ci - 
vilians; all thoſe modifications of arbitration are above 
their reach; they muſt have only one object and one 
ſingle fact ſet before them; and then they have only to 
ſee whether they ought to condemn, to acquit, or to 
ſuſpend their judgment. 

The Romans introduced fet forms for actions +, af- 
ter the example of the Greeks, and eſtabliſhed a rule, 
that each cauſe ſhould be directed by its proper action. 
This was neceſſary in their manner of judging ; it was 
neceſſary to fix the ſtate of the queſtion, that the peo- 
ple might have it always before their eyes. Otherwiſe, 
in a long proceſs, this ſtate of the queſtion would con- 
tinually change, and be no longer diſtinguiſhed. 

Hence it followed, that the Roman judges granted 
only the ſimple demand, without making any addi. 
tion, deduction, or limitation. But the pretors devi- 

Non liquet. 
7 Quas adttones ne populus prout vellet inſtitueret, certas ſolem- 
neſque eſſe voluerunt, Lib. 2. $6. Digeſt. de orig. jur. 

* 

DIR GOOG ES 

— —— 

— —— 3dfT 2 = - 
— — — — - — 
— 

— * ur 
+ IS — © — 

— 
n 
— — 2 — — 1 - 
4 _ — 

„ . —— — — — — 

1 

} 

) 

[1 

* 
_ 

nd © 

4 
1 
f 
"1 
. 
oy 

N x 

4 v1 

+875 

f 
p l 

\ 

j : 
7 
o . 
; T 

i . 
. 
5 | 

_ 

1 

1 

» 
of; 

135 
ig 

\ 

8 
#: l 
: 

, 64 

118 

$3! 

U 
: 

: 

0 

. 

{ : 
: 

+ » : 
5 
_ 

2 

#4335 

TT 

= * 

* , 

} 

* 14 

1 

4 

d * 

* 

o Li 
h * 
A : 

: 

* . 

i F! 

U 14 
1 ; 
145 
19 
3 . 
4 
J 
. * 

CT 5 
| ; 
1 

uy. 

1 

+ 

5 

| - 
7 

ii 

+ mh 
ö 

; 
- 
by 
„ 
7 
. 
1 
8 
. 

* — 

g6 THE SPIRIT OF Laws. Book VI, 
ſed other forms for actions, which were called ex bona 

fide, where the method of pronouncing ſentence was 
left more to the diſpoſition of the judge. This was 
more agreeable to the ſpirit of monarchy. Hence it 
is a ſaying among the French lawyers, That in * 
all * adtions are Ex BONA FIDE. 

CHAP. V. 
In what governments the ſovereign may be judge. 

Mv attributes the loſs of the liberty of 

| Florence, to the people's not judging in a body 
in caſes of high treaſon againſt themſelves, as was 
cuſtomary at Rome. For this purpoſe they had eight 

judges: But the few, ſays Machiavel, (are cor- 

66 rupted by a few.” I. ſhould willingly adopt the 
maxim of this great man: but as in thoſe cales the 
political intereſt prevails in ſome meaſure over the 

civil, (for it is always an inconvenieney that the peo- 

ple ſhould be judge in their own cauſe), in order to reme- 
dy this evil, the laws muſt provide as much as poſſible 
for the ſecurity of individuals. 

With this view the Roman legiſlators did t two things; 
they gave the perſons accuſed permiſſion to baniſh 
themſelves + before ſentence was pronounced 6; and 
they ordained that the goods of thoſe who were con- 
demned ſhould be ſacred, to prevent their being con- 

fiſcated to the people. We ſhall ſee in the 11th book 

the other limitations that were ſet to the power the 
people had of judging. - | 
* In France a perſon, though ſued for more than he owes, loſes, 
noÞ«ithſtanding bis coſts, if he has not offered to pay as much as 
he owes. 
+ Diſcourſe on the firſt decade of Livy, book 1. chap. : 7. 
t This is well explained i in Cicero's oration pro 3 toward, 
the end. 

$ This us 6 low at Athens; as appears by Demoſthenes. So- 
Crates refuſed to make uſe of it. 

3 | Solon 

7 a 5 -A fo: 4 A &## #4 ws 

am_ a> „ a my od was 

Mia Pay ws 

Chap. . THE. SPIRIT OF LAWS. 97 

Solon knew how to prevent the abuſe which the peo- 
ple might make of their power in criminal judgments. 
He ordained that the court of Areopagus ſhould re - 
examine the affair; that if they believed the party ac- 
cuſed was unjuſtly acquitted “, they ſhould accuſe him 
again before the people; that if they believed him un- 
jultly condemned-f, they ſhould put a ſtop to the exe- 
cution, and make-them re-judge the proceeding. An 
admirable law, that ſubjected the people to the cenſure 
of the magiſtracy which they molt revered, and even 
to their own !. . 

In affairs of this kind, it is always proper to _ 
in ſome delays, eſpecially when the party accuſed is 
under confinement; to the end that the people may 
grow calm, and give their judgment coolly, 

In deſpotic governments the prince himſelf may be 
judge. But in monarchies this cannot be; the conſti- 

tution by ſuch means would be ſubverted, and the de+ 
pendent intermediate powers annihilated ; all ſet forms 

of judgment would ceaſe; fear would take poſſeſſion of 
the people's minds, and paleneſs ſpread itſelf over eve- 
ry countenance: the more confidence, honour, affec- 
tion, and ſecurity is in the ſubject, the more 8 
extended is the power of the monarch. 

We ſhall here give a few more refle&ions on this 
point. In monarchies, the prince is the party that pro- 
ſecutes the perſons accuſed, and cauſes them to be pu- 
niſhed or acquitted ; now, were he himſelf to fit as 
judge, he would be both judge and party, _ | 

In this government, the prince has frequently hs 
benefit of confiſcations ; ſo that here again, by being 
judge himlelf of crimes he would be both jodgs and 

party. 

* Demoſthenes pro corona, p. 494. edit. Frankf. ann. 1604, 
+ See Philoſtratus's lives of the Sophiſts, book 1. life of E- 
Vor. I. | He Further, 

Ms 

* =_ bs b < "> - - 
& N ** * 2 r 
- - = _— —_—_— — - — — = — 3 
— — 6 — 1 N 3 — 3 
r >, — = — * 4 x ——— — — — 8 _ — 
PR ; — — S * 
— — 8 Lo 5 —— — x = . * 
_ - =: _ — > K r Wt —=oop - 2 —— £ . 
3 — — — = —— 2 — — . 2— 
— os — * ST ä * — — - 2 We — p 4 - _ * 
n - - * re — a. "F< - 
— * , . 
— — A 
— 

* — 
— 
- - N 
— — 

98 THE SPIRIT or LAWS. Bock V1. 
Further, by this means he would deprive himſelf of 
the moſt glorions attribute of ſovereignty, namely, 
that of granting pardon “; for it would be quite ridi. 
dulous in him to make and unmake his deciſions: ſure. 
iy he would not chuſe to contradict himſelf. Beſides, 
this would be confounding all ideas; it would be im. 
poſſible to tell whether a man was acquitted, or recei- 
ved his pardon. 
Lewis XIII. being deſirous to fit as judge at the trial 
of the Duke de la Valetie f, aſſembled in his cabinet 
ſoine members of the parliament, together with ſome 
vounſellors of ſtate, to conſult about it: upon their be · 
ing compelled by the king to give their opinion or 
judgment concerning the decree for his arreſt, the Pre- 
ſident de Believre faid, That he ſaw in this affair a 
s very ſtrange thing, a prince paſſing ſentence upon 
<* one of his ſubjets; that kings had reſerved to 
< themſetves the power of pardoning, and left that of 
* condemning to their officers; that his Majeſty want- 
* ed to ſee before him at the bar, a perſon who by his 
„ decifion was to be hurried away in an hoar's time in · 
<: to the other world! That this is what a prince's 
% countenance, from whence favours flow, ſhould ne- 
4% yer bear; that his preſence alone removed eccleſi- 
se aſtic cenfares ; and that fubje&s ought not to go 
away diſſatisfied from their prince,” When ſentence 
was paſſed, the fame preſident ſaid, „This is an un- 
% precedented judgment, to ſee, contrary to the exam- 
% ple of paſt ages, à king of France in the quality of 
s n judge, condemmng a gentleman to death .“ 
bo Plato does not think it right that kings, who, as he fays, art 
prieits, ſhould preſide at jdugments whore people are condemned 

to death, exile, or impriſonment, 
+ See the relation of the trial of the Duke de Valette. It is 

printed i in the memoirs of Monteſor, tome 2, p. 62. 
3 It as afterwards revoked. See the fame relation. 
Again 

* 

1 
: 

Chap. 5- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 99 

Again, ſentences, paſſed by the prince would be an in- 
exhauſtible ſource of injuſtice and abuſe ; the courtiers, 
by their importunity, would always. be able to extort 
his deciſions, Some Roman emperors were ſo mad as 
to ſit as judges themſelves ; the conſequence was, that, 
no reigns ever ſo ſurpriſed the univerſe with e 
and injuſtice. 

« Claudius,” ſays Tacitus *, “having appropria- 
« ted to himſelf the judgment of law-ſuits, and the 
functions of magiſtrates, gave oceaſion to all man- 
« ner of rapine:”* But Nero, upon his coming to the 
empire after Claudius, endeavoured to conciliate the 
minds of the people, by declaring. That be would 
* take care not to be judge himſelf in private cauſes, 
„ that the parties might not be expoſed within the 
walls of a palace to the iniquitous power of a few 
16 freed- -men +. IL 

« Under the reign. of Arcadius,“ fays Zozimus t, 
« a ſwarm of calumniators ſpread themtelves all round, 
and infected the court. Upen @ perſon's deceaſe, it 
« was immediately ſuppaſed he had no children | ; 
« and, in conſequence of this, his property was given 
« away by a reteript. For, as the prince was ſurpri - 
« fingly ſtupid, and the empreſs exceflively enterpri- 
« ſing, ſhe was a flave to the inſatiable avarice of ber 
« domeſtics and confidents; inſomuch that to an ba- 
'* neſt man nothing: could be more deſirahle than 
death.“ 
„ Formerly,” ſays Procopius g © there uſed to be 

very few people at court; but in Juſtinian's reign, 

* as the judges had no longer the liberty of admini- 
« ſtering juſtice, their tribunals were deſerted, while 
« the prince's palace reſounded with the clamours of 

Annal. lib. rr. . + Ibid. lib. 13. + Hiſt. lib. 3. 
The ſame diforder happ« ned under re the younger. 
8 Secret biſtory 

I 2 ce the 

ro THE SPIRIT OP LAWS. Book VI. 

the ſeveral litigating parties.” Every body knows 
what a proſtitution there was, at that court, of public 
judgments, and even of the very laws themſelves. 
The laws are the eye of the prince; by them he ſees 
what he could not other wiſe diſcern. Should he at- 
tempt the function of a judge, he would not then la- 

bour for hiniſelf, but for impoſtors that want to deceive 
him. 

CH:&A- P. VI. 
That i in monarchies the miniſters ought not to be judges. 

1 is likewiſe a very great inconveniency in monar- 

chies for the miniſters of the prince- to be judges. 
We have ſtill inſtances of ſtates where there are a great 
number of judges to determine fiſcal controyerſies, and 
where the miniſters notwithſtanding (a thing almoſt 
incredible!) want to determine them. - Many are the 
reflections that here ariſe; but this * one vill ſuf- 
fice for my purpoſe. 

There is in the very nature of things a kind of con- 
traſt between a prince's council and his courts of judi - 
cature. The king's council ought to be compoſed of 
a few perſons, and the courts of judicature of a great 
many. The reaſon is, in the former, things ſhould be 
undertaken and purſued with a kind of warmth and 

paſſion, which can hardly be expected but from four or 
five men who make it their ſole buſineſs. On the con- 
trary, in courts of judicature a certain coolneſs is re- 
quiſite, and an indifference in ſome meaſure to all man- 
ner of affairs. 

CHAP. VII. 
Of a fingle magiſtrate. | 
A Mac1sTracy of this kind cannot take place but 
in a deſpotic government. We have an inſtance 
in the Roman hiſtory, how far a ſingle magiſtrate 
| may 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 10 

may abuſe his power. Might it not be very well er- 
pected, that Appius on his tribunal ſhould contemn-. 
the laws, after having violated the very law of his. 
own * enacting? Livy has given us the iniquitous di- 
ſtinction of the decemvir. He had ſuborned a man to 
reclaim Virginia in his preſence as his ſlaye: Virginia's- 
relations inſiſted, that, by virtue of bis own law, ſhe 
ſhould be configned to them till the definitive judgment 
was paſſed. Upon. which he declared, that his law had: 
been made only in favour of the father; and that, as 
Virginius was abſent, no application could be made of 
it to the preſent caſe}. : 

CHAP: VIII. 

Of accuſations in different governments, 
Þ Rome þ it was lauful for oue citizen to accuſe an- 
'* other; this was according to the ſpirit of a repub-- 
lic, where each citizen ought to have an unlimited zeal: 
for the public good, and where each citizen is ſuppoſed: 
to hold the whole rights of his country in his hands. 
Under the emperors the republican maxims-were till 
purſued; and inſtantly a pernicious ſet of men ſtarted 
up, a whole ſwarm of informers. Whoſoever had nu-- 
merous vices and abilities, a mean foul, and an ambi-- 
tious ſpirit, buſied himſelf in the ſearch of ſome cri- 
minal whoſe condemnation might be agreeable to the 
prince : this was the road to honour and fortune || 1. 
but luckily we are ſtrangers to it in our country. 

We have at preſent an admirable law, namely, that: 
which requires that the prince who is eftabliſhed for: 

® Sec the 2d law, & 24. fl. de orig. jur. 

+ Quod peter puellæ abeſſet, locum injuriz eſſe ratus. Zivias,, 
dec. 1. lib. 3. 

And io a great mavy other cities, 

j Sce in Tacitus the reward given to theſe informers, | 
| 1 the. 

102 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock VI. 

the execution of the laws, ſhould appoint an officer in 
each court of judicature to proſecute all ſorts of crimes 
in his name ; by this means the profeſſion of informers 
is a thing unknown to us; for if this public avenger 
were ſuſpected to abuſe his office, he would ſoon be 
obliged to name his author. 

By Plato's laws “, thoſe who negle& to inform or 
aſſiſt the magiſtrates, are liable to be puniſhed. This 
would not be ſo proper in our days. The public pro- 
ſecutor watches for the ſafety of the citizens; he pro- 
ceeds in his office, while they enjoy 1 ſweets of tran- 

Auillity. 

C H A P. IX. 
Of the ſeverity of puniſhments in different governments. 
T* ſeverity of puniſhments is fitter for deſpotie 
governments, whoſe principle is terror, than for 
a monarchy or a republic, whoſe ſpring is honour and 
virtue. 

In moderate governments the love of one's country, 
ſhame, and fear of blame, are reſtraining motives, ca- 
pable of preventing a great multitude of crimes. Here 
the greateſt puniſhment of a bad action is conviction · 
The civil laws have therefore a ſofter way of correct - 
ing, and do not require ſo much force and ſeverity. 

In thoſe ſtates a good legiſlator i ts leſs bent upon 
_ puniſhing than preventing crimes; he is more atten- 
tive to inſpire good morals, than to inflit puniſh- 
ments. 

It is a perpetual remark of the Chineſe authors +, 
that the more the ſeverity of puniſhments was increa- 
ſed in their empire, the nearer they were to a revolu- 

© Lib. 9. 5 

+ I ſhall ſhew hereafter, that China is in this reſpeRt in the ſame 
eaſe as a republic or r monarchy, 

tion. 

Chap. 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 103 

tion. Becauſe puniſhments were augmented in propor- 
tion as the public morals were corrupted. 

It would be an eaſy matter to prove, that in all, or 
almoſt all, the governments of Europe, puniſhments _' 
have increaſed or diminiſhed in proportion as thoſe go- 
vernments favoured or diſcouraged liberty. 

In deſpotic governments people are ſo unhappy as 
to have a greater dread of death, than regret for the 
toſs of life; conſequently their puniſhments ought to 
be more ſevere. In moderate ſtates they are more 
afraid of loſing their lives, than apprehenſive of the 
pain of dying ; thoſe puniſhments therefore that de- 
prive them ſimply of life are ſufficient, 

Men, in exceſs of happineſs or miſery, are equally 
iaclinable to ſeverity z witneſs conquerors and monks, 
It is mediocrity alone, and a mixture of proſperous 
and adverſe fortune that inſpire us with lenity and pity, 

What we obſerve among particular men is equally 
obſervable in different nations. In countries inhabited 
by ſavages who lead a very hard life, and in deſpotic 
governments, where there is only one perſon on whom 
fortune laviſhes her favours, while the miſerable ſub- 
jects ly expoſed to her inſults, people are equally cruel. 
Lenity reigns in moderate governments, 

When we read in hiſtory the horrid ſeverity of the 
ſultans in the adminiſtration of juſtjce, we feel a kind 
of pain upon nn. che miſeries of human na- 
ture. 

In moderate governments, a good legiſlator may 
make uſe of every thing by way of puniſhment. - ls it 
not a very extraordinary thing, that one of the princi- 
pal puniſhments at Sparta was to deprive a perſon of 
the power of lending out his wife, or of receiving the 
wife of another man, and to oblige him to have no 
company at home but virgins? In ſhort, whatever the 
law calls a puniſhment is ſuch effectually. 

CHAP. 

ö 
N 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VI. 
CHAP. X. 
Of the ancient French laws. 

I* the ancient French laws we find the true LEN of 

monarchy. In cafes relating to pecuniary puniſh- 
ments the common people are leſs ſeverely puniſhed 
than the nobility “ . But in criminal + caſes it is quite 
the reverſe ; the nobleman loſes his honour and his. 
voice in court, while the peaſant, who has no honour 
to loſe, undergoes a corporal A 

CHAP XI. 

That when a people are virtuous, few mc are. 

neceſſary. 

THE 3 of Rome had ſome ſhare of probity. 
Such was the force of this probity, that the legi- 
ſlator had frequently no farther occafion than to point 
out the right road, to induce them to follow it; one 
wonld imagine, that, inſtead of precepts, it was ſuffi- 

cient to give them counſels. 
The puniſhments of the regal laws, and thoſe of the 

2 tables, were almoſt all aboliſhed in the time f 

the republic, in conſequence either of the Valerian t, 
or of the Porcian law |. It was never obſerved that 

this ſtep did any manner of prejudice to the civil ad- 

miniſtration. 
* Suppoſe, for inſtance, to preyent the execution of a deeree, 

the common people paid a fiae of forty ſous, and the nobility of 
futy livres. Somme Rurale, book 2. p. 198. edit. Got. 1512. 

+ See the council of Peter Dgfontaines, c. 13. eſpecially art. 22. 
t It was made by Valerius Publicola, ſoon after the expulſion of 
the kings, and was twice renewed, both times by magiſtrates of 
the ſame family, as Livy obſerves, |. 10. The queſtion was not 
to give it a greater force, but to render its nn more er 
diligentius ſanflum, ſays Livy, ibid. * 
Lex Porcia pro tergo civium lata. 18 made in the 454th 
year of the foundation of Rome, 
This 

Chap. 12. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 10 

This Valerian law, which prohibited the magiſtrates 
from uſing any violent methods againſt a citizen that 
had appealed to the people, inflicted no other puniſh- 
ment on the perſon who infringed it, than that of 
being reputed a diſhoneſt man“. 

CH AP. XII. 
Of the power of puniſhments. * 
XyeerienCE ſhows, that, in countries remarkable 
for the lenity of penal laws, the ſpirit of the in- 

habitants is as much affected by them, as in other 
countries by ſeverer puniſhments. | 

If an inconveniency or abuſe. ariſes in the ſtate, a 
violent government endeavours ſuddenly to. redreſs it, 
and, inſtead of putting the old laws in execution, it 
eſtabliſhes ſome cruel puniſhment which inſtantly puts 
a ſtop to the evil. But the ſpring of government is 
hereby weakened ; the imagination grows accuſtomed 
to the ſevere as well as to the milder puniſhment ; 
and, as the fear of the latter diminiſhes, they are ſoon 
obliged in every caſe t& have recourſe to the other. 
Robberies on the highway were grown common in 
ſome countries; in order to remedy this evil, they in- 
vented the puniſhment of breaking upon the wheel, 
the terror of which put a ſtop for a while to this miſ- 
chievous practice. But ſoon after robberies on the 
highways were become as common as ever. R 
Deſertion in our days was grown to a very great 
height; in conſequence of this it was judged proper 
to puniſh deſerters with death; and yet their number 
did not diminiſh. The reaſon is very natural; a ſol- 
dier, accuſtomed daily to venture his life, deſpiſes, or 
affects to deſpiſe, the danger of loſing it, He is daily 
habituated to the fear of thame; it would have there- 
fore been much better to have continued a punith- 

Nihil ultra quam improbe factum adjecit. Liv. 

ment 

106 THE.SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock VI. 

ment which branded him with infamy for life: the 
puniſhment was pretended to be increaſed, while it 
was really diminiſhed. 

Men mult not be led by alk of violence; we 
ought to make a prudent uſe of the means which na- 
ture has given us to conduct them. If we enquire in- 
to the cauſe of all human corruptions, we ſhall find 
that they proceed from the impunity of crimes, and 
not from the moderation of puniſhments. 

Let us follow nature, who has given ſhame to man 
for his ſcourge, and let the heavieſt part of the pu- 
niſhment be the infamy attending it. 

But, if there be ſome countries where ſhame is not 
a, conſequence of puniſhment, this muſt be owing to 
_ tyranny, which has inflied the ſame puniſhments on 
villains and honeſt men. | 

And, if there are others where men are deterred. 
only by cruel puniſhments, we may be ſure that this 
mutt in a great meaſure ariſe from the violence of the 
government, which has infligd ſuch puniſhments for 
* tranſgreflions. . 

It often happens that a legiſfator, de ſirous of re · 
forming an evil, thinks of nothing but of this reſor · 
mation; his eyes are open only to this object, and ſhut 
to its inconveniencies. When the evil is redrefled, 
there is nothing more ſeen but the ſeverity of the le- 
giſlitor : yet there ſtill remains an evil in the ſtate 
that has ſprung from this ſeverity ; the minds of the 
people aye corrupted, and become ae to deſ- 
potic power. 

Lyſander * having dd a victory over the 
Athenians, the priſoners were ordered to be tried, in 
conſequence of an accuſation brought againſt the 
Athenians, of having thrown all the captives of two 
galleys down a precipice, and of having reſolved in 

* Xenoph. bill. lib. 2. ; TY. 

full 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. wy 

full aſſembly to cut off the hands of thoſe whom they 
ſhould chance to make priſoners. The Athenians were 
therefore all maſſacred, except Adymantes who had 
oppoſed this decree. Lyſander reproached Philocles, 
before he was put to death, with having depraved 
the people's minds, and given leſſons of cruelty to all 
Greece. 
„The Argives,“ ſays Plutarch“, « having put 
« 1500 of their citizens to death, the Athenians or- 
« dered ſacrifices of expiation, that it might pleafe 
« the gods to turn the hearts of the Athenians from 
« ſo eruel a thought.“ | 

There are too forts of corruption; one, when the 
people do not obſerve the laws, the other when they 
are corrupted by the laws; an incarable evil, becauſe 

it is in the very remedy itſelf. 

CHAP. XIII. 
Impotency of the laws of Fapan. 
E.. vr puniſhments may even corrupt a deſpotie 
government; of tifis we have an inſtance in Japan. 

Here almoſt all crimes are puniſhed with death +, 
becauſe diſobedience to ſo great an emperor, as that 
of Japan, is reckoned an enormous crime. The que- 
ſtion is not ſo much to correct the delmquent, as to 
vindicate the authority of the prince. Theſe notions 
are derived from ſervitude, and are owing eſpecially 
to this, that, as the emperor is univerſal proprietor, 
almoſt all crimes are directly againſt his intereſts. 

They puniſh with death lies ſpoken before the ma- 
giſtrates + ; a proceeding contrary to natural defence. 

Even things which have not the appearance 'of a 

n Morals of thoſe who are intruſted with the direftion of ſtate 

affairs. , + See Kempfer. 
t Collection of voyages that contributed to the eſtabliſhment 

che Eaſt-India company, tome iii, p. 428. | * % 
in 5 | $i crime 

108 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VT. 

crime-are ſeverely puniſhed ; for inſtance, a man that 
ventures his money at play is put to death. 

It is true, that the ſurpriſing character of this ob- 
ſtinate, capricious, reſolute, whimſical people, who 
defy all dangers and calamities, ſeems to abſolve their 
legiſlators from the imputation of cruelty, notwith- 
ſtanding the ſeverity of their laws. But are men who 
have a natural contempt of death, and who rip open 
their bellies for the leaſt fancy; are ſuch men, 1 ſay, 
- mended or deterred, or rather are they not hardened, 
by the continual ſight of puniſhments ? 

The relations of travellers inform us, with reſpec 

to the education of the Japaneſe, that children muſt 

be treated there with mildneſs, becauſe they become 
hardened to puniſhment ; that their ſlaves muſt not be 
too roughly uſed, becauſe they immediately put, them- 
ſelves in a poſture of defence. Would not one ima- 
gine that they might eaſily have judged of the ſpirit 
which ought to reign in their political and civil govern- 
ment, from that which ſhould * in their domeſtic 
concerns ? 
A wiſe legiſlator 8 5 endeavoured to re- 
claim people's minds by a juſt temperature of puniſh- 
ments and rewards ; by mazims of philoſophy, mora- 
lity, and religion, adapted to theſe characters; by a 
juſt application of the rules of honour, and by the 
enjoyment of a conſtant happineſs and ſoft tranquillity 
of life. But theſe are ſprings to which deſpotic power 
is a ſtranger: it may abuſe itſelf, and that is all it can 
do. In Japan it has made its utmoſt effort, and has 
ſurpaſſed even itſelf in cruelty. _ 

As the minds of the people by this means ee wild 
and intractable, they were obliged to have recourſe 
to the molt horrid ſeverity. This 1 is the origin, this 
is the ſpirit of the laws of Japan. They had more 
fury however than force. They ſucceeded in the ex- 
tirpation of Chriſtianity; but ſach unaccountable 

2 efforts 

«a... iS Aa _ oa od .oS> wm oc am os i aw ac. aw oe 

. 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 109 

efforts are a proof of their impotence. They wanted 
to eſtabliſh a good polity, and they have ſhown great- 
er marks of their weaknets. 

We have only to read the relation of the interview 
between the emperor and the deyro at Meaco *. The 
number of ghipſe who were ſuffocated or murdered in 
that city by rufftans is incredible; young maids and 
boys were carried off by force, and found afterwards 
expoſed in public places, at unſeaſonable hours, quite 
naked and ſewed in linen bags, to prevent their know- 
ing which way they had paſſed ; robberies were com- 
mitted in all parts, the bellies of horſes were ripped 
open to bring their riders to the ground, and coaches 
were overturned in order to ſtrip the ladies. The 
Dutch, who were told they could not paſs the night 
on the ſcaffold without expoſing themſelves to the dan- 
ger of being aſſaſſinated, came down, Cc. 

I ſhall here give one inſtance more from the ſame 
nation. The emperor, having abandoned himſelf to 
infamous pleaſures, lived unmarried, and was conſe- 
quently in danger of dying without iſſue. The deyro 
ſent him two beautiful young virgins; one he married 
out of reſpect, but would not meddle with her. His 
nurſe cauſed the fineſt women of the empire to be ſent 
for, but all to no purpoſe. At length, an armourer's 
daughter having pleaſed his fancy +, he determined to 
marry her, and had a fon. The ladies belongivg to 

the court, enraged to ſee a perſon of ſuch mean ex- 

traction preferred to themſelves, Rifled the child. The 

crime was concealed from the emperor: for he would 

have ſpilled a torrent of blood. The exceſſive ſeverity 
of the laws hinders therefore their execution : when the 
puniſhment ſurpaſſes all meaſure, they are frequently 
obliged to prefer impunity to it. 

Collection of voyages that contributed to the eſtabliſhment of 

| the Eaſt-India Company, tome v. p. 2. + Ibid, 

Vor. I, K CHAP. 

tio THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VI. 

CHAP. XIV. 
Of the ſpirit of the Roman ſenate. 

[JNDER the conſulate of Acilius Glabrio and Piſo, 
the Acilian law“ was made to prevent the in- 
triguing for places. Dio ſays , that thgſſenate enga- 
ged the conſuls to propoſe it, by reaſon that C. Corne- 
lius the tribune had reſolved to cauſe moſt ſevere pu- 
niſhments to be eſtabliſhed againſt this crime; to which 
the people ſeemed greatly inclined. The ſenate right- 
ly judged, that immoderate puniſhments would ftrike 
indeed a terror into people's minds, but muſt have alſo 
this effect, that there would be nobody afterwards to 
| accuſe or condemn ; whereas, by propoſing moderate 
puniſhments, there would be always judges and accu- 
ſers. 

.- OC -M AP. XY; 
Of the Roman laws in reſped to puniſhments. 
I Am ſtrongly confirmed in my ſentiments, upon find- 
ing the Romans on my fide, and I think that pu- 
niſhments are connected with the nature of the govern- 
ment, when I behold this great people changing in 
this reſpe& their civil laws, in proportion as they al- 
tered their form of government. 
The regal laws, made for a multitude compoſed of 
fugitives, {laves, and vagabonds, were very ſevere, 
The ſpirit of a republic would have required that the 
decemvirs ſhould not have inſerted thoſe laws in their 
twelve tables; but men who aimed at tyranny were far 
from conforming to a republican ſpirit. . 
Livy t ſays, in relagion to the puniſhment of Me- 
tius Suffetius, dictator of Alba, who was condemned 
* Thoſe that were guilty were condemned to a fine; they could 
rot be admitted into the tank of Jenators, = nominated to any 
public office. Dio, book 36. : 
+ Book 36. + Lib. r. EN 
8 22.2 an 7 | | by 

Chap. 15. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 111 

by Tullus Hoſtilius to be pulled to pieces by two cha- 
riots, that this was the firſt and laſt puniſhment in 
which the remembrance of humanity ſeemed to have 
been loſt. He is miſtaken : the law of the twelve ta- 
bles is full of very cruel puniſhments “. 

The deſigi of the decemvirs appears moſt conſpicu- 
ous in the capital puniſhment pronounced againſt libel. 
lers and poets. This is not agreeable to the genius of 
a republic, where the people like to ſee the great men 
humbled. But perſons, that aimed at the ſubverſion of 
liberty, were afraid of writings that might revive. its 
ſpirit +. 

After the expulſion of the decemvirs, almoſt all the 
penal laws were aboliſhed. It is true they were not 
expreſsly repealed ; but, as the Porcian law had ordain- 
ed that no citizen of Rome ſhould be put to * 
they were of no ſurther uſe. 

This is exactly the time to which we may refer what 
Livy ſays ⁊ of the Romans, that no people were ever 
fonder of moderation in puniſhments. 

But, if to the mildneſs of puniſhments we add the 
right which the party accuſed had of withdrawing be- 
fore judgment was pronounced, we ſhall find that the 
Romans followed the ſpirit which I have obſerved to 
be natural to a republic. 

Sylla, who confounded tyranny, anarchy, and liber- 
ty, made the Cornelian laws. He ſeemed to have 
contrived regulations merely with a view to create 
new crimes, Thus, diſtinguiſhing an infinite number 
of actions by the name of murder, he found murder- 
ers in all parts; and, by a practice but too much fol- 

We find there the puniſhment afgtre, and almoſt always e- 
tal puniſhments, theft puniſhed with gleath, Cc. 

+ Sylla, animated with the ſame t as the decemvirs, follow- 
ed their example in augmenting the laws againſt ſatirical wri- 
ters, + Book 1. * 

f | K-2- 

4 * 
% 
"% 
4 R 
4 ” 
* 
— 4 x of Fg 

112 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Book VI. 

lowed, he laid ſnares, ſowed thorns, and opened pre- 
cipices whereſoever the citizens ſet their feet. 

Almoſt all Sylla's laws contained only the interdic. 
tion of fire and water. To this Cæſar added the con- 
fiſcation of goods, becauſe the rich by preſerving 
their eſtates in exile, became bolder in the perpetration 
of crimes. 

The emperors, having eſtabliſhed a military govern- 
ment, ſoon found that it was as terrible to the prince 
as to the ſubje&t ; they endeavoured therefore to tem - 
per it, and wich this view had recourſe to dignities, and 
to the reſpect with which thoſe dignities were attended. 

The government thus drew nearer a little to mo- 
narchy, and puniſhments were divided into three claſ- 
ſes +: thoſe which related to the principal perſon in 
the ſtate T, which were very mild; thoſe which were 
inflicted on perſons of an inferior rank |, and were 
more ſevere; and, in fine, ſuch as concerned only per. 
ſons of the loweſt condition ““, which were the moſt 
rigorous. 

Mariminus, that fierce, that ſtupid prince, increaſed 
the rigour of the military government which he ought 
to have ſoftened. The ſenate were informed, ſays Ca- 
pitolinus 4. that ſome had been crucified, others ex- 
poſed to wild beaſts, or ſewed up in the ſkins of beaſts 
lately killed, without any manner of regard to their 
dignity. It ſeemed as if he wanted to exerciſe the mi- 
litary diſcipline on the model of which he STS: to 
regulate the civil adminiſtration, 

In the Conſiderations on the riſe and declenſion of the 

5 Penas facinorum auxit, cum locupletes eo facilius ſcelere ſe ob- 
ligarent, quod integris pztrimoniis exularent. , Suet. in Jul. Ceſare, 

+ See the third law, § legis ad leg. C rnel. d: ſicariis, and a valt 
number of others in the Digeſt and in the Codex. 

1 Sublimiores, | + Medios. 

** Infimos, leg. 3. & legis. ad leg. ce 14 icariis. 
it Jul, Cap. Mutimini duo. 

Roman 

* 

— Ls A. „ GG” - Gas 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 113 

Roman grandeur, we find in what manner Conſtantine 
changed the military goverament into a military and. 
civil one, and drew nearer to monarchy. There we 
may trace the different revolutions of this ſtate, and 
ſee how they fell from rigour to indolence, and from 
indolence to impunity. 

CHAP. XVI. 
Of the juſt proportion betwixt puniſhments and crimes. 

FE: is an eſſential point that there ſhould be a certain. 
proportion in puniſhments, becauſe it is eſſential 
that a great crime ſhould be avoided rather than a leſ- 
er, and that which is more pernicious to ſociety rather 
than that which is leſs. 

« An impoſtor *, who called himſelf Conſtantine: 
« Ducas, raiſed a great inſurrection at Conſtantinople. 
« He was taken and condemned to be whipt; but, up- 
„ on informing againſt ſeveral perſons of diſtinction, 
«© he was condemned to be burnt as a calumniator.”” 
It is very extraordinary, that they ſhould thus propor- 
tion the puniſhments betwixt the crimes of high trea- 
ſon and that of calumny. 

This puts me in mind of a ſaying of Charles II. 
king of Great Britain. He ſaw a man one day ſtand- 
ing in the pillory ; upon which he aſked what crime 
the man had committed. He was anſwered, ** Pleaſe 
% your Majeſty, he has wrote a libel againſt your mi- 
„ niſters.” The fool! (ſaid the king), why did he 
« not write againſt me ? they would have done no- 
„thing to him.“ 

« Seventy perſons having conſpired againſt the em- 
% peror Baſil T, he ordered them to be whipt, and: 
« the hair of their heads and beards to be burnt. A 
*« ſtag one day having taken hold of him by the gir- 

* Hiſt. of Nicephorus, patriarch of Conſtantinople. 

+ In Nicephorus's hiſtory. 6 | 

— de 

4 4 
. 

_ = 

% 

114 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VI. 

« dle with his horn, one of his retinue drew his ſword, 
cut the girdle, and ſaved him; upon which he or- 
«« dered that perſon's head to be cut off for having, 
« ſaid he, drawn his ſword againſt his ſovereign.” 
Who could imagine that the ſame prince could ever 
have paſſed two ſuch different judgments. 

It is a great abuſe amongſt us to condemn to the 
ſame puniſhment a perſon that, only robs on the high- 
way, and another that robs and murders. Surely, for 
the public ſecurity, ſome difference ſhould be _—_ " By 
the puniſhment. 

In China, thoſe who add murder to robbery are cut 
in pieces , but not ſo the others : to this difference it 
is owing, that though they ow in that country, yet 
they never murder. 

In Ruſſia, where the puniſhment of robbery and 
murder is the ſame, they always murder 1. The dead, 
ſay they, tell no tales. 

When there is no difference in the puniſhment, there 
ſhould be ſome in the expectation of pardon. In Eng- 
land they never murder on the highway, , becauſe rob- 
bers have ſome hopes of tranſportation, which is never 
the caſe in reſpect to thoſe that commit murder. | 
Letters of grace are of excellent uſe in moderate go- 
vernments. This power which the prince has of par- 
doning, exerciſed with prudence, is capable of produ- 
cing admirable effects. The principle of deſpotic. go- 
vernment, which neither grants nor receives any par- 
don, deprives it of theſe advantages. 

CHAP, XVII. 
Of the queſtion or torture. 

* wickedneſs of mankind makes it neceffary for 

the laws to ſuppoſe them better than they are. 
Hence the depoſition of two witneſſes is ſufficient in 
* Du Halde, tome 1. p. 6. + Preſent State of Ruſſia by Perry. 
the 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 115 

the puniſhment of all crimes. The law believes them 
as if they ſpoke by the mouth of truth. Thus we 
judge that every child conceived in wedlock is legiti- 
mate, the law having a confidence in the mother as if 
ſhe were chaſtity itfelf, But the uſe of the rack againſt 
criminals cannot be defended on a like plea of neceſſi - 
ty. | 
We have before us the example of a nation bleſſed 
with an excellent civil government“, where, without 
any inconveniency, the practice of racking criminals is 
rejected. It is not therefore in its own nature neceſſary. 

So. many men cf learning and genius have wrote 
againſt the cuſtom of torturing criminals, that after 
them I durſt not preſume to meddle with the ſubject. I 
was going to ſay that it might ſuit deſpotic ſtates, 
where whatever inſpires fear is the propereſt ſpring of 
government; | was going to ſay that the ſlaves among 
the Greeks and Romans But I hear the voice of 
nature cry out loudly againſt me. 

CHAP. XVIIL 
Of pecuniary and corporal puniſhments. 

UR anceſtors the Germans admitted of none but 
pecuniary punithments. Thoſe free and warlike 
people were of opinion that their blood ought not to 
be ſpilt but with ſword in hand. On the contrary, 
theſe puniſhments are rejected by the Japaneſe , un- 
der pretence that the rich We elude them. But are 

* The Engliſh. t 

+ The citizens of Athens 580 not be put to the rack ( Lyſias, 
orat, in Agorat.) unleſs it was for high treaſon. The torture was 
uſed within thirty days after condemnation, ( Curius fortunatus 
rhetor. ſchol. lib. 2.) There was no preparatory torture. In regard 
to the Romans, the zd and qth law ad leg. Julian majeſt. ſhews 
that birth, dignity, and the military profeſſion, exempted people 
from the rack, except in caſes of high treaſon. See the prudent 
reſtriftions of this practice made by the laws of the Viſigoths. 

See Kemper, 

not 

% 

116 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VI. 

not the rich afraid of being ſtripped of their property ? 
And might not the pecuniary puniſhments be propor- 
tioned to people's fortunes ; and, in fine, might not 
infamy be added to theſe puniſhments ? 

A good legiſlator takes a juſt medium; he ordains 
neither always pecuniary, nor always corporal puniſh- 
ments. 

CHAP. XIX. 
Of the law of retaliation. 

HE uſe of the law of retaliation * is very frequent 

in deſpotic countries, where they are fond of ſim- 
ple laws. Moderate goyernments admit of it ſometimes, 
but with this difference, that the former exerciſe it in 
full rigour, and among the latter it always receives 
ſome kind of limitation. 

The law of the twelve tables admitted two; 1/, It 
never condemned to retaliation but when the plaintiff 
could not be ſatisfied in any other manner +; 24ly, Af- 
ter condemnation they might pay damages and inte- 
reſt t, and then the corporal puniſhment was changed, 

into a poromary one ||. 

| CHAP XX. 
Of the 1 of fathers for the crimes of their chil- 
dren. * : 
TP China fathers are puniſhed for the crimes of their 
children. This was likewiſe the cuſtom at Peru 4; 
a cuſtom derived from the notion of deſpotic power. 
Little does it ſignify to ſay, that in China the fa- 
ther is puniſhed for not having exerted that paternal 
* It is eſtabliſhed in the Koran. See the chapter of the Cow. 
+ $i membrum rupit, ni cum co pacit, talio eſto. Aulus Gel- 

lius, lib. xx. cap. 1. Ice Kemp 
U See alſo the law of the Viſigoths, book vi. t. 4.$3.&s. 

| + See Garcilaſſo, hiſtory of the civil wars of the Spaniards. 
authority 

Chap. 21. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 117 

authority which nature has eſtabliſhed, and the laws 
themſelves have improved. This ſtill ſuppoſes that 
there is no honour among the Chineſe. Amongſt us, 
parents whoſe children are condemned to puniſhment, 
and children * whoſe parents have undergone the like 
fate, are as ſeverely puniſhed by ſhame as they would 
be in China by the loſs of their lives. 

CH AP. XXI. 

Of the clemency of the prince. ; 

er is the peculiar characterĩſtie of monarchs. 

In republics, whoſe principle is virtue, it is not 
ſo neceſſary. In deſpotic governments, where fear pre- 
dominates, it is leſs cuſtomary, becauſe the great men 
are to be reſtrained by examples of ſeverity, It is 
more neceſſary in monarchies, where they are govern» 
ed by honour, which frequently requires what the ve- 
ry law forbids. Diſgrace is here equivalent to cbaſtiſe- 
ment, and even the formalities of juſtice are puniſh. 
ments. This is becauſe particular kinds of puniſhment 
are formed by ſhame, which on every ſide invades the 
delinquent. 

The great men in monarchies are ſo heavily Puniſh. 
ed by diſgrace, by the loſs (though often imaginary ) 
of their fortune, credit, acquaintance, and pleaſures, 
that rigour in reſpe& to them is needleſs. It can 
tend only to diveſt the ſubject of the affe ction he has 
for the perſon of his prince, and of the reſpect he 
ought to have for public poſts and employments. 

As the inſtability of the great is natural to a deſpo- 
tic government, ſo their ſecurity is inter woven with the 
nature of monarchy. 

So many are the advantages which monarchs gain 

* Inſtead of puniſhing them, ſays Plato, they ought to have 
been commended for not * f.llowed their father's example. 
Burk 9. of laws, 

| by 

118 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

by clemency; ſuch love, ſuch glory attends it, that it 
is generally a point of happineſs to have an opportu- 
nity of exerciſing it, which in theſe parts is ſeldom 
wanting. 

Some branch perhaps of their authority, but never 
hardly the whole, will be diſputed ; aud, if they ſome- 
times fight for their crown, they do not fight for their 
life. 

But ſome may aſk, when is it proper to puniſh, and 
when to pardon ? This is a point that is eaſier felt than 
preſcribed. When there is danger in the exerciſe of cle- 
mency, the danger is viſible; it is an eaſy matter to 
diſtinguiſh it from that imbecility which expoſes princes 

to contempt, and to the very incapacity of puniſhing. 

The emperor Maurice “ made a reſolution never to 
ſpill the blood of his ſubjects. Anaſtaſius + puniſhed no 
crimes at all. Iſaac Angelus took an oath that no one 
ſhould be put to death during his reign. Thoſe Greek 

emperors had forgot that it was not for nothing they 

were entruſted with the ſword. 

| 

B O O K VII. 

Conſequences of the different principles of 

the , three governments with reſpect to 
ſumptuary —_ luxury, and the condition 
of women. 

— 

_ ä 

CHAP. I. 
Of luxury. 
] ,Xvny; is always in proportion to the incquality 
of fortunes. If the riches of a ſtate are equally di- 

* Evagr. hiſt. + Frag. of Suidas ia Coaſtant. Porphyrog. 
vided, 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 119 

vided, there will be no luxury; for it is founded mere - 
ly on the conveniencies acquired by the labour of 
others. 

In order to have this equal diſtribution of riches, 
the law ought to give each man only juſt what is ne · 
ceſſary for nature. If they exceed thoie bounds, ſome 
will ſpend, and others will acquire, and by this means 
an inequality will be eſtabliſhed. 

Suppoling what is neceſſary for the ſupport of na- 
ture to be equal to a given ſum, the luxury of thoſe 
who have only what is barely neceſſary will be equal 
to a cipher ; if a perſon happens to have double that 
ſum, his luxury will be equal to one; he that has dou- 
ble the latter's ſubſtance will have a luxury equal to 
three; if this be ſtill doubled, there will be a luxury 
equal to ſeven ; ſo that the property of the ſubſequent 
individual being always ſuppoſed double to that of the 
preceding, the luxury will increaſe double, and an unit 
be always added in this progreſſion, o, 1, 3, 7, 15, 31, 
63, 127. 

In Plato's republic * luxury might * been exact- 
ly calculated. There were four ſorts of cenſuſes, or 
rates of eſtates. The firit was exactly the term beyond 
poverty, the ſecond was double, the third triple, the 
fourth quadruple to the firſt. In the firſt cenſus, lux- 
ury was equal to a cipher ; in the ſecond to one, in 
the third to two, in the fourth to three; and thus it 
followed in an arithmetical proportion, 

Conſidering the luxury of different nations with 
reſpet to one another, it is in each ſtate in a com» 
pound proportion to the inequality of the ſubje&'s 
fortunes, and to the inequality of the wealth of the 
different ſtates. In Poland, for example, there is an 
extreme inequality of fortunes; but the poverty of the 

The firſt cenſus was the hereditary ſhare in land, and Plato 
would not allow them to have in other effects above a warn of the 

hereditary ſhare. See his laws, book 5. 

whole 

120 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

whole hinders them from having ſo much luxury as in 
a more opulent (tate. 

Luxury is alſo in proportion to the populouſneſs of 
the towns, and eſpecially of the capital; ſo that it is 
in à compound proportion to the riches of the ſtate, 
to the inequality of private fortunes, and to the num- 
ber of people ſettled in particular places. 

In proportion to the populouſneſs of towns, the in- 
habitants are filled with yain notions, and actuated by 

an ambition of diſtinguiſhing themſelves by trifles *, 
If they are ſo very numerous, that moſt of them are 
ſtrangers to one another, the paſſion of diſtinguiſhing 
themſelves redoubles, becauſe there are greater hopes 
of ſucceſs. As luxury inſpires theſe hopes, each man 
aſſumes the marks of a ſuperior condition. But, by 
endeavouring thus at diſtinction, every one becomes 
equal, and diſtinction ceaſes; as all of them are deli- 
rous of reſpect, nobody is taken notice of. 

Hence ariſes a general inconveniency. Thoſe who 
excel in a profeſſion ſet what value they pleaſe upon 
their labour; this example is followed by people of in- 
ferior abilities; and then there is an end of all propor- 
tion between our wants and the means of ſatisfying 
them, When I am forced to go to law, I muſt be able 
to fee counſel; when I am ſick, I muſk be able to fee 
a phyſician. 

It is the opinion of ſeveral, that the aſſembling fo 
great a multitude of people in capital cities is an ob- 
ſtruction to commerce, becauſe by this means the in- 
habitants are no longer within a proper diſtance from 
each other. But I cannot think ſo; for men have 
more deſires, more wants, more fancies, when they 
live together. 

® In a great city, ſays the author of the Fable of the Bees, tome 

i. p. 133. they dreſs above their condition, in order to be cſteemed 
more than what they really are by the multitude. This to a weak 

perſon — as great a pleaſure as the necompliſument of hisdeſires. 

2 CHAP, 

1 1 

r A . ad 

= © _ kw — yH „ R89axX<- 

" 

%” \ as. | Lg 

& WV” cw wW 

ö 
* 

- 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 124 

CHAP. II. 
Of ſumptuary laws in a democracy. 

E have obſerved, that in a republic where riches 

are equally divided, there can be no ſuch thing 
as luxury; and, as this equal diſtribution conſtitutes 
the excellency of a republican government, hence it fol- 
lows, that the leſs luxury there is in a republic, the 
more it is perfect. There was none amongſt the old 
Romans, none amongſt the Lacedæmonians; and, in 

republies where this equality is not quite loſt, the ſpirit 

of commerce, induſtry, and virtue, renders every. man 
able and willing to live on his own property, and con · 
ſequently prevents the growth of lutury. 

The laws concerning the new diviſion of lands, i in- 
ſited upon ſo eagerly. in ſome republics, were of the 
moſt ſalutary nature. They were dangerous only as 
they were ſudden. By reducing inſtantaneouſly the 
wealth and riches of ſome, and increaſing that of 
others, they form a revolution in each family, and 
muſt produce a general one in the ſtate. - 

In proportion as luxury gains ground in a republic, 
the minds of the people are turned towards their par- 
ticular intereſt, Thoſe who are allowed only what is 
necefſary have nothing to wiſh for but their own and 
their country's glory. But a ſoul depraved by luxury 
has many other deſires, and ſoon becomes an enemy 
to the laws that confine it. The luxury in which the 
garriſon of Rhegio began to live was the cauſe of their 
maſſacring the inhabitants. 

No ſooner were the Romans corrupted, than their 
deſires became boundleſs and immenſe. Of this we 
may judge by the price they ſet on things. A pitcher 
of Falernain wine * was ſold for 109 Roman denarii; 

* Frigment of the 36th book of Diodorus, quoted by Conf. 

Porphyrogen, in his extra& of virtues and vices. | 
Vor. I. L "OY 

= 
F ff 
> — — — — — —— — —— 

122 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

| a barrel of ſalt meat from the kingdom of Pontus colt 

400; a good cook four talents; and for boys no price 

| was reckoned too great, 

When the whole world, impelled by the force of a 

general corruption, is immerſed in voluptuouſnels “, 

what mutt then become of virtne ? 
CHAP. III. 
Of ſumptuary laws in am ariftocracy: 

Teng is this inconveniency in an ill · conſtituted 

ariſtocracy, that the wealth centers in the nobili- 
ty, and yet they are not allowed to ſpend; for as Ju- 
xury is contrary to the ſpitit of moderation, it muſt be 
baniſhed from thence. This government comprehends 
therefore only people that ate extremely poor and can- 
not . and people that are vaſtly rich and cunnot 

ſpend. 
In Venice they are compelled by the laws to mode- 

ration. They are ſo habituated to parſimony, chat 
none but courteſans can make them part with their 

money. Such is the method made uſe of for the ſup- 
port of induſtry; the moſt contemptible of women 

ſpend freely their money without danger, whilſt thoſe 

who fapport them conſume their days in the greateſt 

obſcurity. 

Admirable in this reſped were the inſtitutions of the 

principal republics of Greece. The rich employed their 

money in feſtivals, muſical choruſes, chariots, horſe · 
races, and chargeable offices. Wealth was therefore 

AS n en there as poverty. 

CHAP. IV. 
CF ſumptuary laws in a monarchy. 

TP aAcrros lays 7, „That the Suiones, a German na- 
« tion, have a particular reſpe& for riches; for 

Cum maximus omnium impetus ad luxuriam eſſet. 0 | 

+ De morib German, 
6 « which 

aa AIM, aw a«©« > awd ——cc TY 

a yy a 

Or 

ch 

Chap. 44 THE SPIRIT OF: LAWS, 123 

n which reaſon they live under the government af one 

« perſon.” This ſhews that luxury is extremely proper 
ſor monarchies, and that under this goverumeat there 
muſt be no ſumptuary laws. 

As riches, by the very conſtitution of monarchies, 
are unequally divided, there is an abſolute neceſſity far 
juxury. Were the rich not to ſpend their money free- 
ly, the poor would arve. It is even neceſſary here, 
that the expences of the rich ſhould be in proportion ta 
the inequality of fortynes, and that luxury, as we 
have already obſerved, ſhould increafe in this propor · 
tion. The augmentation of private wealth is qQwing 
to its having deprived one part of the citizens of their 
neceſſary ſupport ; this mult therefore be reſtored to 
them. 

For the preſervation therefore of a monarchical 
Rate, luxury Qught continually to increaſe and ta grow 
more extenfiye, as it riſes from the labourer to the ar- 
tifieers, ta the merchants, to the magiſtrates, to the 
nobility, to the great officers of ate, up to the very 
prince : ther wiſe the pation will be undone. 

bn the reign of Auguſtus, a propaſal was made in 
the Roman ſenate, which was compaſed of grave ma- 
giſtrates, learned civilians, and of men whoſe heads 
were filled with the ngtian of the primitive times, to 
reform the manners and luxury of women, It is cu- 
rious to ſee in Dio®, with what art this prince eluded 
the importunate ſolicitations of thoſe ſenators. This 
was becauſe he was founding a monarchy, and difiel- 
ving a republic. 

Under Tiberius, the ediles propoſed in the ſenate 
the re · oſtabliſhment of the ancient ſumptuary laws f. 
This prince, who did not want ſenſe, oppoſed it. 
The itate,” ſaid he, (could not poſſibly ſubſiſt in 
* the preſent ſituation of things. How could Rome, 

Pio Caſſius, lib. 54, + Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. 
| | L 2 % how 

124 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

„how could the provinces live? We were frugal 
« while we were inhabitants of a fingle city ; now we 
« conſume the riches of the univerſe, and employ 

« both maſters and ſlaves in our ſervice” He plainly 

faw that ſumptuary laws would not ſuit the preſent 
form of government. 

When a propoſal was made under the fame emperor 
to the ſenate, to prohibit the governors from carrying 
their nives with them into the provinces, becauſe of 
the diſſoluteneſs and irregularities which followed thoſe 
In lies, the propoſal was rejected. It was ſaid, © That 
the examples of ancient auſterity had been changed 
** into a more agreeable method of living *.” They 
found there was a neceſſity for different manners. 

Luxury is therefore abſolutely neceſſary in monar- 
chies, and neceſſary alſo in deſpotic ſtates. In the for- 
mer it is the uſe people make of what ſhare of liberty 
they poſſeſs; in the other, it is the abuſe. they make of 
the advantages of their ſlavery. & ſlave ſingled out 
by his maſter to tyrannize over the other ſlaves, un- 
certain of enjoying to-morrow the bleſſings of to-day, 
has no other felicity than that of glutting the pride, 
rhe paſſions, and arne of the preſent mo- 

ment. | 

Hence ariſes a very natural reflection. Republic | 

ead with luxury; monarchies with poverty f. 

N CHA . V. 

In what caſes ſumptuary laws are uſeful in a monarchy. 
Wir ER it was from a republican ſpirit, - or from 
ſome other particular circumſtances, in the mid- 

dle of the thirteenth century, ſumptuary laws were 
made in Arragon. James I. ordained, that neither 
the king, nor any of his ſubjets ſhould have above 

Multa duritici veterum melius & lztins mutata. Tac. Ann. I. 3. 

+ Opulentia paritura mox egeſtatem. Florus, lib. 3. 
N two 

r . d c.im© 

— «a = — . — A 

Chap. 3. THE $PIRIT OF Laws. ug; 

_ two ſorts of diſhes at a meal, and that each diſh ſhould 
» be dreſſed only one way, except it were game of their 
* own killing “. 
y In our day, ſumptuary laws have been alſo _ 
5 in Sweden, but with a different view from thoſe of 
Arragon. 
of A government may make ſumptuary laws with 4 
> view to abſolutue frugalicy; this is the ſpirit of ſump · 
f tuary laws in republics; and the very nature of the 
e thing ſhews that ſuch was the deſign of thoſe of Arra- ' 
; gon. | py 
Sumptuary laws may likewiſe be made with a deſign 
* to promote à relative frugality: when a government, 
perceiving that foreign merchandiſes being at two high 
? a price, will require ſach an exportation of the home- 

? manufactures, as to deprive them of more advantages 
| by the Joſs of the latter, than they can receiye from 
f the poſſeſſion of the former, they will forbid their be- 
C ing introduced. And this is the ſpirit of the laws that 
, in our days have been. paſſed in Sweden . Such are 

, the ſumptuary laws proper for monarchies. 

, In general, the poorer a ſtate is, the more it is ruin- 

: ed by its relative luxury, and conſequently the more 
occaſion it has for relative ſumptuary laws. The rich- 

2 er a ſtate is, the more it thrives by its relative luxury; 
| for which reaſon it maſt take particular care not to 
make any relative ſumptuary law. This we ſhall bet- 
ter explain in the book on commerce g here we teak 
only of abſolute luxury. 
* Conſtitution of Janes 1. in the your 1134, art. 9. in Marea 
Hiſpanica, p. 1429: 
+ They have prohibited rich 3 other nl merchandiſes. 
t Ser book ax, chap. 20. | 

L 3 CHAP. 

—  — 

— 

120 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock VII, 

CHAP. VI. 
Of the luxury of China. 

8 laws may, in ſome governments, be ne. 

ceſſary for particular reaſons. The people, by the 
influence of the clime, may grow ſo numerous, and 
the means of ſubſiſting may be ſo uncertain, as to ren · 
der an univerſal application to agriculture extremely 
neceſſary. As luxury in thoſe countries is dangerous, 
their ſumptuary laws ſhould be very ſevere. In order, 
therefore, to be able to judge whether luxury ought to 

be encouraged or proſcribed, we ſhould examine firſt 
what relation there is between the number of people, 

and the facility they have of procuring ſubſiſtence. In 
England, the ſoil produces more grain than is neceſſa- 
Ty for the maintenance of thoſe who cultivate the land, 

and of thoſe who are employed in the woollen manu- 

factures. This country may be therefore allowed to 
have ſome trifling arts, and conſequently luxury. In 
France likewiſe there is corn enough for the ſupport 
of the huſbandman, and of the manufacturer. Beſides, 
a foreign trade may bring in ſo many neceſſaries in re- 
turn for toys, that there is no . to be ane 
ed from luxury. 

On the contrary, in China the women are ſo proli- 
fic, and the human ſpecies multiplies ſo faſt, that the 
lands, though « ever ſo much cultivated, are ſcarce ſuf- 
ficient to ſupport the inhabitants. Here therefore lu- 

xury is pernicious, and the ſpirit of induſtry and econo- 
my is as requiſite, as in any republic“. They are 

obliged to purſue the neceſſary arts, and to ſhun * 
of luxury and pleaſure. 

This is the ſpirit of the excellent deerees of the Chi. 
neſe emperors. 4 Our anceſtors,” ſays an emperor 
of the family of the Tangs T, held it as a maxim, 

* Luxury has been here always prohibited. 

la an ordinance, quoted by Father du Halde, tome ii, p. 497. 
i 8 That, 

4 
* 
, 
q 
K 
1 
1 

. i. alu co on Father dn Bulle, tome fl 5. 46. 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 127 

« That, if there was a man who did not work, or a 
« woman that was idle, ſomebody mult ſuffer cold or 
« hunger in the empire.” And, on this principle, he 
ordered an infinite number of monaſteries of bonzes to 
be deſtroyed. a 
The third emperor of the one and twentieth And 
ſty ®, to whom ſome precious ſtones were brought that 
had been found in a mine, ordered it to be ſhut up, 
not chuſing to fatigue his people with working for a 
thing that could neither feed nor clothe them. 
So great is our luxury,” ſays Kiaventi +, © that 
« people adorn with embroidery the ſhoes of boys and 
girls, whom they are obliged to ſell.” Is employing fo 
many people in making clothes for one perſon, the way 
to prevent a great many from wanting clothes? There 
are ten men who eat the fruits of the earth to one em- 
ployed in agriculture ; and is this the means to preſerve 
numbers from wanting nouriſhment? 

CHAP. VIL 
Fatal conſequences of luxury in China. 

N the hiſtory of China, we find it has had twenty- 

two ſucceſſive dynalties ; that is, it has experienced 
twenty-two general, without mentioning an infinite 
number of particular revolutions. The three tirſt 
dynaſties laſted a long time, becauſe they were ſagely 
adminiſtered, and -the empire had not ſo great an ex- 
tent as it afterwards obtained, But we may obſerye 
in general, that all thoſe. dynaſties began very well- 
Virtue, attention, and vigilance, are neceſſary in 
China; theſe prevailed in the commencement of the 
dynaſties, and failed in the end. Indeed it was na- 
tural, that emperors trained up in military toils, who 

* Hiſtory of China, 21ſt dynaſty, in Father du Halde's work, 
tome 1. 

bad 

1 THE 8PIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

had compaſſed the dethroning of a family immerſed in 
pleaſures, ſhould be Ready to virtue, which they had 
found ſo advantageous, and afraid of voluptuouſneſs, 
which they knew had proved ſo fatal to the family de- 
throned. But after the three or four firſt princes, cor. 

ruption, luxury, indolence, and pleaſure, poſſeſs their 

ſucceſſors; they ſhat themſelves up in a palace; their 
underſtanding is impaired ; their life is ſhortened ; the 
family declines; the grandees riſe up; the ennuchs 
gain credit ; none but children are ſet on the throne ; 
the palace is at variance with the empire; a lazy ſet of 
fellows that dwell there, ruin the induſtrious part of 
the nation; the emperor is killed or deſtroyed by an 
uſurper, who founds a family, the third or fourth ſuc- 
ceſſor of which goes and ſhats himſelf up in the very 
ſame palace. | 
C HAP. VIII. 
Of public continency. 
80 many are the imperfections that attend the loſs of 
virtue in women, and ſo greatly are their minds 
depraved when this principal guard is removed, that, 
in a popular ſtate, public incontinency may be conſider- 
ed as the laſt of miſeries, and as a certain forerunner 
of a change in the conſtitution. 
Hence it is, that the ſage legiſlators of republican 

Nates have always required of women a particular gra- 

vity of manners. They have proſcribed not only vice, 
but the very appearance of it. They have baniſhed 
even all commerce of gallantry; a commerce that pro- 
duces idleneſs, that renders the women corrupters, even 
before they are corrupted, that gives a value to trifles, 
and debaſes things of importance; a commerce, in 
fine, that makes people act entirely by the maxims of 
ridicule, ig which the women are ſo perfectly ſkilled. 
Sm 

3 F'TY — — 9 

* 
e tw« ww =w. am 

r 

Chap. 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 129 
A ee eee 
Of the condition or ſlate of women in di ferent governs. 

ments. ; 

P e e women are ſubject to very little re- 
ſtraint; becauſe, as the diſtinction of ranks calls 
them to court, thit her they repair in order to aſſume 
that ſpirit of liberty, which is the only one there tole- 
rated, The aſpiring courtier avails himſelf of their 
charms and paſſions, in order to advance his fortune: 
and as their weakneſs admits not of pride, but of va- 
nity, luxury conſtantly attends them. 85 
In deſpotic governments women do not introduce, 
dut are themſelves an object of luxury. They muſt be 
in a ſtate of the moſt rigorous. ſervitude. Every one 
follows the ſpirit of the government, and adopts in 
his own family the cuſtoms he ſees elſewhere eſtabliſhed. 
As the laws are very ſevere, and executed on the ſpot, 
they are afraid Jeſt the liberty of women ſhould expoſe 

- them to dangers. Their quarrels, indiſcretions, re- 

pugnances, jealouſies, piques, and that art, in fine, 
which little ſouls haye of intereſting great ones, would: 
be attended there with fatal conſequences, ' © © © 

Beſides, as princes in thoſe countries make a ſport 
of human nature, they allow themſelves a multitude 
of women; and a thouſand conſiderations oblige chem 
to keep them in cloſe confinement. 

In republics, women are free by the laws, and con- 
ſtrained by manners; luxury is baniſhed from thence, 
and with it corruption and vice. . 

In the cities of Greece, where they were not under 
the reſiraint of a religion which declares, that even 
amongſt men a purity of manners is a part of virtue 
where a blind paſſion triumphed with a boundleſs in- 
ſolence, and love appeared only in a ſhape. which we 
dare not mention; while marriage was conſidered as 

nothing 

130 THE SPIRIT OF Laws. Book VII. 

nothing more than ſimple friend{hip * ; ſuch was the 
virtue, ſimplicity, and chaſtity of women in thoſe ci- 
ties, that in this reſpe& hardly any people were ever 
known to have had a better and wiſer polity f. 

* C H A P. X. 
Of the domeſtic tribunal amang the Romans. 

T HE Romans bad no particular magiſtrates, like the 
Greeks, to inſpect the conduct of women. The 
cenſors had not an eye over them, but as over the reſt 
of the republie. The ĩnſtitution of the domeſtie tribu- 
nal + ſupplied the RAY eſtabliſhed among the 
Greeks |}. 

The huſband FREED the wife's relations and tried 
her in their prefence g. This tribunal preſerved the 
morals of the republic, and at the fame time theſe ve; 
ry morals maintained this tribunal. For it decided not 
only in reſpec to the violation of the laws, but alſo of 
morals; now, in order to judge of the violation of 
morals, marals are requiſite. | : 

ln reſpect to true love, ſays Plutarch, the women have nothing 
& ſay to it; in his treatiſe of love, p. 600, He ſpoke in the ſtyle 
of his time. See Nonophon in the dialogue intitled Hiero. 
.+ At Athens there was à particular magiltrate who inſpefted the 
conduct of women. 
1 Romulus inſtituted this tribunal, as appears from Dionyſius 
Halicarnaff. book ii, p. 39. 
| See in Livy, book 39. the uſe that was mads of this tribunal, 
at the time of the conſpiracy of the Racehanghans, They gave the 
news of conſpiracy agaiuſt the republic, to aſſerablics in which the 
anorals of women and young people were debauched. 
$ It appears from Dionyſ. Halicarn. lib. z, that by the iaſtitu · 
tion of Romulus, in ordi-ary caſes the huſband ſhould fit as ſole 
judge in preſence of the wife's relations, but that in grievons erimes 
he ſhould determine in conjunction with five of them. Hence Ul- 
ian, tit. 6.4 9, 12, & 13. diſtinguiſhes ia reſpeR to the different 
judgment; of mauners, between tboſe which he calls importan', 
aud thoſe N 2 re leſs ſo, grav. the leviores. 
The 

bd 

Chap. 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 13. 

The penalties infſicted by this tribunal ought to be, 
and actually were, arbitrary: for all that relates to 
manners, and to the rules of modeſty, can hardly be 
compriſed under a code of laws. It is eaſy, indeed, 
to regulate by laws what we owe to others; but it is 
very difficult to compriſe all we owe to ourſelves. 

The domeſtic tribunal inſpected the general conduct 
of women: but there was one crime which, beſide the 
animadverſion of this tribunal, was likewiſe ſubject to 
a public accuſation. I'his was adultery; whether that 
in a republic ſo great a violation of morals intereſted 

the government; or whether the wife's immorality 

might render the huſdand's ſuſpected ; or whether, in 

| fine, they were afraid leſt even honeſt people might 

chuſe that this crime ſhould rather be concealed than 
puniſhed. 

CHAP. XL. -. 

In what manner the inſtitutions changed at Rome, thee- | 
ther wih the government. 

8 morals were ſuppoſed by the domeſtic tribunal, 

they were alſo ſuppoſed by the public accuſation ; 

and hence it is that theſe two things fell together with 

the public morals, and ended with the republic *. 

The eftablithing of perpetual queſtions, that is, the 
diviſion of juriſdiction among the prætors, and the 
cuſtom gradually introduced of the pretors judging all 
affairs themſelves +, weakened the uſe of the domeſtic 
tribunal. This appears by the ſurpriſe of hiſtorians, 
who look upon the deciſions which Tiberias cauſed to 
be given by this tribunal 4s ſmgular facts, and as a re- 
newal of the ancient courſe of pleading. 

* Judiciv de moribus (quod antea quidem in antiquis legibus po- 
atum erat, non autem frequeutabatur) penitus abolito, leg. 11. Cid. 
de eh. | 

+ Judicia extraordi . 05 

| 
: 
. 

- as THE SPIRIT: or LAWS. Book VII, 

The eſtabliſhment of monarchy, and the change of 

manners, put likewiſe an end to public accuſations. It 

might be apprehended leſt a diſhoneſt man, affronted at 

the contempt ſhewn him by a woman, vexed at her re- 
_ fufals, and irritated even by her virtues, ſhould form a 

deſign to deſtroy her. The Julian law ordained, that 

a woman ſhauld not be accuſed of- adultery till after 
her huſband had been charged with favouring her ir- 
regularities ; ; which limited greatly, and annihilated, 

as it were, this ſort of accuſation *. 

Sixtus Quintus ſeemed to have ben ae of revi. 
ving the public accuſation F But there needs very lit - 
tle reflection to ſee, that this law would be more im - 
proper in ſuch a monarchy as his, than in any other. 

n | 
Of the guardianſhip of women among the Romans. 
* Roman laws ſubjected women to a perpetual 
* guardianſhip, except they were under cover and 
the authority of a huſband f. This guardianihip was 
given to the neareſt of the male relations; and by a 
vulgar e ion | it appears they were very much 
confined. This was proper for a republic, but not at 
all neceſſary in a monarchy 5. | 
That the women among the ancient Germans were 

likewiſe under a perpetual tutelage, appears from the 
different codes of the laws of the barbarians 4. This 

* It was entirely aboliſhed by Conſtantine; * It is a ſhame,” 

ſaid he, that ſettled marriages. ſhould be diſlarbed by the pre- 
ſumption of ſtrangers.” 

+ Sixtus Quintus ordained, that if a huſband did not come and 
make his complaints to him of his wife's infidelity, he ſbould be 
pou to death. See Leti. 

t Niki conveniſſent in manum viri. 

Ne ſis mihi patruus oro. | 3 

& The Papian law ordained under Avuguſtns, that women who 
had bore three children ſhould be exempt from his tutelage. 

4 This tutelage was by the Germans called Maundeburdium. 

2 cuſtom 

4 289 — — Aa 

Po ts NR — — $25 a = 

— 

Pee mM 2 

. at% oo AG... TRA. 

PB X RA. = 

Chap. 13- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 133 

cuſtom was communicated to the monarchies founded 
by thoſe people; but was not of a long duration. 

CHAP. XIII. 
Of the puniſhments decreed by the emperors againſt the 

incontinency of women. 

HE Julian law ordained a pnniſhment againſt adul- 

tery. But ſo far was this law, any more than 
thoſe afterwards made on the fame account, ſrom be- 
ing a mark of purity of morals, that on the coutrary 
they were a proof of their depravation. 

The whole political ſyſtem, in reſpe&t to women, re- 
ceived a change in the monarchical tate. The queſtion 
was no longer to oblige them to a purity of morals, 
but to punith their crimes. That new laws were made 
to puniſh their crimes, was owing to their leaving thoſe 
tranſgreſſions unpuniſhed, which were not cf ſo crimi- 
nal a nature. | 

Ihe frightful diſſolution of manners obliged indeed 
the emperors to enact laws in order to put ſome ſtop 
to lewdneſs ; but it was not their intention to eſtablith 
a general reformation. Of this the poſitive facts rela- 
ted by hiſtorians are a much ſtronger proof than all 
thoſe laws can be of the contrary. We may ſee in Dio 

the conduct of Auguſtus on this oceaſion, and in what 

manner he eluded, both in his prætor's and in his cen- 
ſor's office, the repeated inſtances that were made“ him 
for that purpoſe, | 

Upon their bringing before him a young man who had. mar- 
ried a woman with whom he had before carricd on an illicit com- 
merce, he heſitated a long while, not daring to approve nor to pu- 
niſh theſe things. At length recollecting himſelf, editions,“ ſays 
he, have been the cauſe of very great evils, let us forget them.“ 
Dio, book 54. The ſenate having defired him to give them ſome 
regulations in reſpect to women's morals, he evaded their petition , 
by telling them, that they ſhould chaſtiſe their wives in the ſame 
manner as he did his; upon which-they-defired him to tell them 
how he behaved to his wife, (I think a very indiſereet queſtion), 

Vol. I, M We 

ö 

134 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII, 

We find indeed in hiſtorians very rigid ſentences, 
paſſed in the reigns of Auguſtus and Tiberius, againſt 
the lewdneſs of ſome Roman ladies: but by ſhewing us 
the ſpirit of theſe reigns, they at the ſame time ſhew 
us the ſpirit of thoſe deciſions. 

The principal deſign of Auguſtus and Tiberius was 

to puniſh the diſſoluteneſs of their relations. It was 
Not their immorality they puniſhed, hut a particular 
crime of impiety or high treaſon * of their own inven- 
tion, which ſerved to promote a* reſpect for majeſty, 
and anſwered their private revenge. 
The penalty of the Julian law was ſmall+. The 
emperors inſiſted, that, in. paſſing ſeytence, the judges 
ſhould increaſe the penalty of the law. This was the 
ſubject of the invectives of hiſtorians. They did not 
examine whether the women were deſerving of puniſh. 
ment, but whether they had violated the law, in order 
to puniſh them. 

One of the moſt tyrannical proceedings of Tiberius t, 
was the abuſe he made of the ancient, laws. When he 
wanted to, extend the puniſhment of a Roman lady 
beyond that inflicted by the Julian lun, he revived the 
domeſtic tribunal . 

Theſe regulations, in reſpect to women, concerned 
only ſenatorian families, but not the common people. 
Pretences were wanted to accuſe the great, which 

Culpam inter viros et feminas vulgatam gravi nomine læſarum 
religionum appellando, clementium majorum ſuaſque ipſe leges 
egrediebatur. Tacit, annal, lib. iii. 

* This law is given in the digeſt; but withont mentioning the 
penalty. It is ſuppoſed it was only relegatio, becauſe that of incelt 
was anly deportatio. Leg. Si quis viduam, F. de queſt. 

+ Proprium id Tiberio fujt, ſcelera nuper reperta priſcis verbis 
obtegere. Tacit. 

1 Adulterii graviorem pœnam SRC ut exemplo majorum 
propinquis ſuis ultra dncenteſimum lapidem removeretur, ſuaſit - 
Adultero Manlio Italia atque Africa interdictum eſt,  Taci/. annual. 
lib. i ll, 

Were 

. 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 135 
were conſtantly furniſhed by the diſſolute behaviour 
of the ladies. | | 

In fine, what I have above obſerved, namely, that 
purity. of morals is not the principle of monarchy, was 
never better verified than under thoſe firſt emperors; 
and whoever donbts of it, need only read Tacitus, 
Suctonius, Juvenal, or Martial, 

C HA f. XIV. 

Sumptuary laws among the Romans. 

WE bave ſpoken of public incontinency, becauſe 

it always accompanies, always follows, and is 
followed always by luxury. If we leave the motions 
of the heart at liberty, how ſhall we be able to re- 
lirain the weakneſſes of the mind? 

At Rome, beſides the general inftitutions, the cen- 
ſors prevailed on the magiſtrates to ena ſeveral par- 
ticular laws to preſerve the frugality of women. This 
was the deſign of the Fannian, Licinian, and Oppian 
laws. We may ſee in Livy ® the great ferment the 
ſenate was in, when the women infilted npon the re. 
vocation of the Oppian law. The abrogation of this 
law is fixed upon by Valerius Maximus, as the period 
from whence we may date the luxury of the Romans. 

CHAP. XV. 
Of doweries and nuptial advantages in diferent conſli. 
tulions. | 

Dovre: ought to be conſiderable in monarchies, 
in order to enable huſbands to ſupport their rank 
and the eſtabliſhed luxury. In republics, where luxu- 
ry ſhould never reign , they ought to be moderate; 
* Decad. iv. lib. iv. | 
+ Marſeilles was the wiſcſt of all the republics in its time; here 
it was ordained that doweries ſhould not exceed one hundred crowns. 
in money, and five in elothes, as Strabo obſer ves, bb. iv. 
M 2 but 

— 

135 THE SPIRIT Oo LAWS. Book VII. 

but there ſhould hardly be any at all in deſpotie go- 
vernments, where women are in ſome meaſure ſlaves, 

The community of goods introduced by the French 
laws between man and wite, is extremely well adapted 
ro a monarchical government; becauſe the women 
ure thereby intereſted in domeſtic affairs, and compel- 
led, as it were, to take care of their family. It is leſs 
jo in a republic, where women have more virtue. But 
it would be quite abſurd in deſpotic governments, where 
the women-themſelves generally conſtitute” a part of 
the maſter's property. 

As women are in a ſtate that furniſhes ſuffcient in- 
ducements to marriage, the advantages which the law 
gives then over the huſband's property, are of no ſer- 
vice to ſociety. But in a republic, they would be ex- 
tremely prejudicial, becaufe riches are productive of 
luxury. In,deſpotic governments the profit accruing 
from marriage-ought to be mere ſubliſtence, and no 
more. 

51 CHAP. XVI, 
An excellent cuflom of the Samnitet. 

** Samnites had a cuſtom, which in ſo ſmall a 

republic, and eſpecially in their ſituation, muſt 
have produced admirable effects. The young people 
were all convened in one place, and their conduct was 
examined. He that was declared the beſt of the whole 
aſſembly, had leave given him to take which girl he 
pleaſed for his wife; the perſon that had. been decla- 
red ſecond beſt, choſe after him; and fo on Admi- 
rable inſtitution ! The. only recommendation that 
young men could have oa this occaſion, was owing, 
to virtue, and to the ſervices done their country. Hz 
who had the. greateſt ſhare of theſe endowments, 
choſe which girl he liked out of the whole nation. 

Fragment. of Nicolaus Damaſcenus, taken from 3tobxzus in tha 
Collection of Conſtan tine Porphyrogenitus.. 

Love 

"i 7 Wy 4«. . _ = 

ME: © HE 

Chap. 17. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 137 

Love, beauty, chaſtity, birth, and even wealth itſelf, 
were all, in ſome meaſure, the dowery of virtue. A 
nobler, and grander recompenſe, leſs chargeable to a 
petty ſtate, and more capable of influencing both ſexes, 
could ſcarce be imagined. 

The Samnites were deſcended from the Lacedzmo- 
nians: and Plato, whoſe inſtitutes are only an improve- 
ment of thoſe of Lycurgus, enacted very near the 

. 

C HAP. XVII. 
Of female ona 

Ir. is contrary to reaſon and nature, that women 

ſhould reign i in families, as was cuſtomary among 
the Egyptians; but not that they ſhonld govern an 
empire. In the firſt caſe, the ſtate of their natural 
weakneſs does not permit them to have the pre-emi- 
nence; in the ſecond, their very weakneſs generally 
gives them more lenity and moderation; qualifications 
fitter for a good adminiſtration than roughneſs aud 
ſeverity. 

In the Indies they are very eaſy under a female go- 
vernment; and it is ſettled, that if the male iſſue be 
not of a mother of the ſame blood, the females born 
of a mother of the blood-royal muſt ſucceed 1. And 
then they have a certain number of perſons that aſſiſt 
them to bear the weight of the government, If to 
this we add the example of England and Ruſſia, we 
fall find that they ſucceed alike both in moderate and 
defpotic governments. - 

He even permits them to have a more frequent interview with 

one another, ch. r7. 
+ Edifying letters, 14th collection 

M 3 BOOK 

138 THE SPIRIT- or LAWS. Book VIII. 

B O O K. VIII. 

Of the corruption of the principles of the three 
governments: 

_ 

CHAP: 
General idea of this book. 

HE corruption of each government generally 
begins with that of the principles. 

CHAP. II. 
Of the corruption of. the principle of democracy: 
HE principle. of democracy. is corrupted, not only 

when the ſpirit of equality is extin&. but likewiſe 
when they fall into a ſpirit of extreme equality, and 
when every citizen wants to be upon a level with thoſe 
he has choſen. to command him. Then the people, 
incapable of bearing the very power they have intruit. 
ed, want to do every thing of themſelves, to debate 
For the ſenate, to execute for the . and to 
Arip the judges 

When this is the caſe, virtue can no longer fabGi 

in the republic. The people want to exerciſe the 
functions of the magiſtrates, who ceaſe to be revered. 
The deliberations: of the ſenate are flighted; all re- 
ſpect is then laid aſide for the ſenators, and conſe- 
quently for old age. If there is no more reſpect for 
old age, there will be none ſoon for parents; deſe- 
rence to huſbands will be likewiſe thrown off, and 
ſubmiſſion to maſters. This licentiouſneſs will ſoon 
taint the mind; and the reſtraint of command be as 
 fatiguing as that of obedience. N children, 
ſlaves, will ſhake off all ſubjection. No longer will 

there be any ſuch thing as 1 order, or virtue. 
We 

Chap. 22 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 139 

We find in Xenophon's Banquet a very lively de- 
ſcription of a republic in which the people abuſed their 

equality. Each gueſt gives in his turn the reaſon why 
he is ſatisfied. I am content with myſelf,” ſays 

Chamides, © becauſe of my poverty. When I was 
« rich, I was obliged to pay my court to informers, 
« knowing I was more liable to be hurt by them, than 
« capable of doing them harm. The republic con- 
« ſtantly demanded ſpme new ſum of me; and I could 
« not decline paying. Since I am grown poor I have 
« acquired authority ; no body threatens me, I rather 
« threaten others. I can go or ſtay where [ Pleaſe. 
„The rich already riſe from their ſeats, and give me 
« the way. I am a king; I was before a flave: I 
* paid taxes to the republic, now it maintains me: I 
« am no longer afraid of loſing; I hope to acquire.” 

The people fall into this misfortune when thoſe in 
whom they confide, deſirous of concealing their own 
corruption, endeavour to corrupt. - To prevent them 
from ſeeing. their own. ambition, they ſpeak to them 
only of their grandeur ; to conceal. their own avarice, 

they inceſſantly flatter theirs. 

The corruption will increaſe among the corrupters, 
and likewiſe among thoſe who are already corrupted. 
The people will diſtribute the public money among 
themſelves, and having added the adminiſtratian of af- 
fairs to their indolence, they will be for -adding to their 
poverty the amuſements of luxury. But with their in- 
dolence and luxury, nothing but the public treaſure 
will be able to ſatisfy their demands. 

We muſt not be ſurpriſed to ſee their ſuffrages gi- 
ven for money. It is impoſlible to give a great deal 

to the people, without ſqueezing much more out of 

them: but to compaſs this, the ſtate muſt be ſubvert- 
ed. The greater the advantages they ſeem. to derive 
N 191 a TRE 198-701 from 

149 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VIII. 

from their liberty, the nearer they draw to the critica} 
moment of loſing it. Petty tyrants ariſe, who have 
all the vices of a fingle tyrant. The ſinall remains of 

liberty ſoon become unſupportable; a ſingle tyrant 

ſtarts up, and the people loſe all, even the advantages 
of their corruption. 

Democracy hath therefore two exceſſes to avoid, the 
ſpirit of inequality which leads to ariſtocracy or mo- 
narchy ; and the ſpirit of extreme equality, which leads 
to deſpotic power, as the latter is os An by con- 

neſt. 

: Trae it is, that thoſe who corrupted the Greek re- 
publics did not become tyrants. This was becauſe 
they had a greater paſſion for eloquence than for the 
military art. Beſides, there reigned an implacable ha- 
tred in the hearts of the Greeks againſt thoſe who ſub- 

verted a republican government; and for this reaſon a- . 

narchy degenerated into annihilation, inſtead of being 
changed into tyranny. 

But Syracuſe, which was ſituated in the midſt of a 
great number of petty ſtates, whoſe government had 
been changed from oligarchy to tyranny “; Syracuſe, 
which had a ſenate f ſcarce ever mentioned in hiſtory, 
was expoſed to ſuch miſeries as are the conſequences. 
of a more than ordinary corruption. This city, con- 
tinnally in a ſtate of Jicentiouſneſs 4 or oppreſſion, 
equally labouring under its liberty and fervitude, re- 

* See Plutarch in the lives of Timoleon and Dio. 

+ R was that of the ſx hundred, of whom * made by 
Diodorus. 

$ Upon the expulſion of the tyrants, they "EVE citizens of ſtran- 
gers and mercenary troops, which produced civil wars, Arift. Polit, 
Lib. v. cap. 3. The people having been the cauſe of the victory 
over the Athenians, the republic was ehanged, ibid. cap. 4. The 

poſſion of rwo young thagiſtzates, one of whom carried off the other's 
boy, and in revenge the other debauched his wiſe, was attended 

with a change in the ſorm of this republic. Did. ib. vii. cap. a: 

. ceiving 

% 

a__ - ww vOAl amo a  Oamx 

aw+*@ Xo uax a Q a « a 

Chap. 3- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 141 

ceiving always the one and other like a tempeſt, and, 
notwithſtanding its external ſtrength, conſtantly deter- 
mined to a revolution by the leaſt ſoreign power: this 
city, I ſay, had in its boſom an immenſe multitude of 
people, whoſe fate it was to have always the cruel al- 
ternative, of either giving themſelves a tyrant, or of 
being the tyrant themſelves, 

CHAP III. 
Of the ſpirit of extreme equality. 

8 diſtant as heaven is from earth, ſo is the true 
ſpirit of equality from that of extreme equality. 
The former does not conſiſt in managing ſo that every 
one ſhould command, or that no one ſhould be com: 
manded; but in obeying and commanding our equals. 
It endeavours not to be without a maſter, but that its 

maſters ſhould be none but its equals. 

In the Rate of nature, indeed, all men are born 
equal; but they cannot continue long in this equality. 
Society makes them loſe it, and they recover it only 
by means of the laws. | 

Such is the difference between a well- nd de- 
mocracy and one that is not ſo, that in the former 
men are equal only as citizen, but in the latter they 
are equal allo as magiſtrates, as ſenators, as judges, as 

fathers, as huſbands; or as maſters. 

The natural place of virtue is near to liberty; but 
it is not nearer to extreme liberty than to ſervitude. 

| CHAP. Iv. 
Particular cauſe of the corruption of the people. 

6 AT ſucceſs, eſpecially when chiefly owing to 
the people, ſwells them ſo high with pride, that 

* 

it is impoſſible to manage them. Jealous of their ma: 

giltrates, they ſoon become jealous likewiſe of the 

W z Enemies to thoſe that govern, they ſoon 
prove 

142 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VIII. N 

prove enemies alſo to the conſtitution. Thus it was the d 
victory. over the Perſians obtained in the ſtreights of p 
Salamis, that corrupted the republic of Athens “, and | 
thus the defcat of the Athenians ruined the republic t. 
of Syracuſe +. b 
Marſeilles never experienced thoſe great tranſitions p 
from lowneſs ta grandeur: this was owing to the pru- a] 
dent conduct of this republic, which always preſerved 
her principles, Cc 
CHAP. V, : 
Of the corruption of the principle of een 16 
F. ee is corrupted, if the power of the no- * 
bles becomes arbitrary; when this is the caſe, te 

there can no longer be any virtue either in the gover- 
nors, or the governed. 5 
If the reigning families/obſerve the laws, it is a mo- 
narchy with feveral monarchs, and in irs own nature 
one of the moſt excellent: for almoſt all theſe monarchs 
are tied down by the laws. But when they do not ob- 
ſerve them, it is a deſpotic ſtate r by a great 
many deſpotic princes. Ct 

In this laſt caſe the republic conſiſts — in the no- 
bles. The body governing is the republic; and the 
body governed is the deſpotic ſtate ; which forms two 
of the moſt W and divided bodies in the ; 
world. 

The extremity of corrnption is when the power of tl 
the nobles becomes hereditary}; for then they can p 
hardly have any moderation. If they are few in num - Vi 

ber, their power is greater, but their ſecurity leſs ; if 
they are a larger number, their power is leſs, and l 
their fecurity greater: inſomuch that power goes on 
increaſing, and ſecurity diminiſhing,' up to the very 
» Ariſt, Pokit. lib. v. cap. 4. dia. 
t The ariſtocracy is changed into an oligarchy. 

U 

i 
=__ 
l | 

: 

9 
I 
Ml 
' 
| 

—— arc end —— — 

deſpotic 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 144 
deſpotic prince, whoſe head is encircled with exceſs of ; 

power and danger. 

The great number therefore of nobles in an heredi- 
tary ariltocracy renders the government leſs violent: 
but as there is leſs virtue, they fall into a ſpirit of ſu- 
pinenels and negligence, by which means the ſtate loſes 
all its ſtrength and activity *. | 

An ariſtocracy may maintain the full vigoar of its 
conſtitution, if the laws be ſuch as are apt to render 
the nobles more ſenſible of the perils and fatigues, than 
of the pleaſure of command; and if the government 
is in ſuch a ſituation as to have ſomething to dread, 
while ſecurity ſhelters under its protection, and uncer- 
tainty threatens from abroad. 

As a certain kind of confidence forms the glory and 
ſtability of monarchies, repablics, on the contrary, 
muſt have ſomething to apprehend +, A fear of the 
Perſians ſupported the Jaws of Greece. Carthage and 
Rome were alarmed, and ſtrengthened by each other. 
Strange, that the greater ſecurity thoſe ſtates enjoyed, 
the more, like ſtagnated waters, they were ſubje& to 
corruption ! | 

C H AP. VL 
| 07 the corruption. of the principle of monarchy. | 
A® democracies are; deſtroyed: when the people de- 
ſpoil the ſenate, the magiſtrates, and judges, of 
their functions; ſo monarchies are corrupted when the 
prince iuſenſibly depri ves ſocieties or cities of their pri- 
vileges. In the firſt caſe, the multitude uſurp a deſpo- 
Venice is one of thoſe republics that has beſt corrected by its 
laws the inconverjencies of hereditary ariſtocracy. 

+ Juſtin attributes the extinction of Athenian virtue to the death 
ol Epaminondas, Haying no further emulation, they ſpent their 
revenues in feaſts, frequentius cenam quam caſira viſentes, Then it 
was that the Macedonians emerged out of obſcurity. J. 6. f 

| | 8 

144 THE 8PIRIT OF LAWS. Book VIII. 

tic power; in the ſecond, it is uſurped by a ſingle per. 
ſon. 

The deſtruQtion of the dynaſties of Tſin and Soiii,” 
ſays a Chineſe author, “was owing to this: The prin- 
« ces, inſtead of confining themſelves like their anceſ- 
* tors, to a general inſpection, the only one worthy of 
« a ſovereign, wanted to govern every thing imme- 
« diately by themſelves *.” The Chineſe author gives 
us here the cauſe of the corruption of almoſt all mo- 
narchies. 

- Monarchy is deftroyed; when a prince thinks he 

| ſhews a greater exertion of power in changing, than 

in conforming to, the order of things; when he de- 

prives ſome of his ſubjects of their hereditary employ- 

ments to beſtow them arbitrarily upon others; and 
when he is fonder of being guided by fancy than Judg- 
ment. 

Monarchy, is deſtroyed, when the * direding 
every thing to himſelf, calls che Rate to his capital, the 
capital to his court, and the court to his own perſon. 

- Monarchy is deſtroyed, in fine, when the prince 
miſtakes his authority, his ſituation, and the love of 
his people; and when he is not fully perſuaded that a 
monarch ought to think himſelf ſecure, as a deſpotic 
prince ought to think himſelf in danger. 

CH AF. VI. 
The ſame ſubje@ continued. - 

T principle of monarchy is corrupted, when the 
firſt dignities are marks of the firſt ſervitude, 
when the great men are ſtripped of popular reſpect, 
and rendered the low tools of arbitrary power. 
It is ſtill more corrupted, when honour is ſet-up in 

contradiction to honours, and when men are capable 

* Compilement of works made under the Ming, related by Fa- 
ther du Halde, 
I TIE | 

tn << I r nw 

25 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 145 

ol being loaded at the very ſame time with infamy* and 

with dignities. 

It is corrupted, when the prince changes his juſtice 
into ſeverity; when he puts, like the Roman emperors, 
a Meduſa's head on his breaſt T; and when he aſſumes 
that menacing and terrible air which Commodus or- 
dered to be given to his ſtatues 4. 

Again, it is corrupted, when mean and abject ſouls 
grow vain of the pomp attending their ſervitude ; and 
imagine that the motive which induces them to be en- 
tirely devoted to their prince, exempts them from all 
duty to their country. 

But if it be true, (and indeed the experience of all 
ages has ſhewn it), that in proportion as the power of 
the monarch becomes boundleſs. and immenſe, his ſe - 
curity diminiſhes ; is the corrupting this power, and 
the altering its very nature, a leſs crime than that of 

high treaſon againſt the prince ? 

C HAP. VIII. 
Danger of the corruption of the principle of monarchical 

government. 

'F danger is not when the ſtate paſſes from one 
moderate to another moderate government, as 

Under the reign of Tiberius, ſtatues were erected to, and tri- 
umphal ornaments conferred on informers; which debaſed theſe 
honours to ſuch a degree, that thoſe who really merited them dif- 
dained to accept of them. Fragm. of Dio, book 58. taken from the 
Extraft of virtues and vices by Conſtantine Porphyrog, See io Taci- 
tus, in what manner Nero, on the diſcovery and puniſhment of 2 
pretended conſpiracy, beſtowed triump hal ornaments on Petronius 
Turpilianus, Nerva, and Tigellinus. Annal. book x4. See like- 
wiſe how the generals refuſed to ſerve, becauſe they contemned the 
OY honours, perviſizatis iriumphi inſigni bus. Tacit. Anal. 

k 13. 

+ In this ſtate, the prince knew extremely well the principle a 
his goverament. 

+ Herodiagn. 

Vor. I. N from 

145 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VIII. 

from a republic to a monarchy, or from a monarchy 
to a republic ; but when it precipitates from A mode- 
rate to a deſpotic government. 

Moſt of the European nations are ſtill governed by 
principles of morality. But if, by a long, abuſe of 
power, or the ſury of conqueſt, deſpotic ſway ſhould 
prevail to a certain degree; neither morals nor climate 
would be able to withſtand its baneſul influence: and 
then human nature would be expoſed, for ſome time 
at leaſt, even in this beautiful part of the world, to 
the inſults with which ſhe has been abuſed in the other 

res, 

QC: a P; IK; 
How ready the nobility are to defend the throne. 

7 Engliſh nobility buried themſelves with Charles 
the Firſt under the ruins of the throne; and be · 
fore that time, when Philip the Second endeavoured 
to tempt the French with the allurement of liberty, 
the crown was conſtantly ſupported by a nobility, who 
think it an honour to obey a king, but conſider it as 
the loweſt infamy to ſhare the power with the people. 
The houſe of Auſtria has uſed her conſtant endea- 
vours to oppreſs the Hungarian nobility; little thiuk- 
ing how ſerviceable that very nobility would be one 
day to her. She wanted money from their country, 
which it had not; but took no notice of the men with 
which it bounded. When a multitude of princes fell 
to a diſmembering of her dominions, the ſeveral pieces 
of her monarchy fell motionleſs, as it were, upon one 
another. No life was then to be ſeen but in that very 
nobility, who reſenting the injuries done to their ſove - 
reigu, and forgetting thoſe done to themſelves, took 
up arms to avenge her cauſe, and conſidered it as the 

higheſt glory bravely to dic and to forgive. 

CHAP. 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 147 

C. HAP. X. 

Of the corruption of the principle of deſpotic gevernmen.t. 
ys Fra principle of deſpotic government is ſubject to 

a continual corruption, becauſe it is even in its 
nature corrupt. Other governments are deſtroyed by 
particular accidents, which do violence to the principles 
of each conſtitmion ; this is ruined by its own intrinſic 
imperfectiou, when no accidental cauſes impede or cor- 
rupt the principles on which it is founded, It main- 
tains itſelf therefore only when circumitances drawn 
from the climate, religion, ſituation, or genius of the 
people, oblige it to follow ſome orders and to admit of 
ſome rule. By theſe things, its nature is forced with- 
out being changed; its ferocity remains; ane it is 
made tame and tractable only for a time. 

CHAT aL | 
Natural ect. of the goodneſs and corruption of the prin. 

ciples of government. 

WW HEN once the principles of government are cor- 

rupted, the very beſt laws become bad, and 
turn, againſt the ſtate: but when the principles are 
ſound, even bad laws have the ſame effect as good; the 
force of the principle draws every thing to it. 

The inhabitants of Crete uſed a very ſingular me- 
thod to keep the principal magiltrates dependent on 
the laws; which was that of inſurrection. Part of 
the citizens roſe up in arms *, put the magiſtrates to 
flight, and obliged them to return to a private con- 
dition. This was ſuppoſed to be done in conſequence 

of the Jaw. One would have imagined that an inſti - 

tution of this nature, which eſtabliſhed ſedition in order 
to hinder the abuſe of power, would Dans ſubverted 

Ariſtot. Polit. book ii. chap. 10. 
; N 2. any; 

143 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Book VII, 

any republic whatſoever z and yet it did not ſubvert 
that of Crete. The reaſon is this “: | 

When the ancients wanted to expreſs a people that 
had the ſtrongeſt love for their country, they always 
mentioned the inhabitants of. Crete: Our country,” 
faid Plato p a name ſo dear to the Cretans.” They 
called it by a name which ſignifies the love of-a mother 
for her children 1. Now, the love of our country ſets 
every thing right. | 
The laws of Poland have likewiſe their inſurrection: 
but the inconveniencies thence ariſing plainly thew that 
the people of Crete alone were capable of employing 
ſuch a remedy with ſncceſs.. 

The gymnaſtie exerciſes eſtabliſhed among the 
Greeks, had the ſame dependence on the goodneſs of 
the principle of government. It was the Lacedz- 
„% monians and Cretans,” ſaid Plato ||, that opened 
„ thoſe celebrated academies which gave them to 
« eminent a rank in the world. Modeſty at firſt was 
« alarmed; but it yielded to the public utility.” In 
Plato's time theſe inſtitutions were admirable F; us 
they had a relation to a very important object, which 
was the military art. But when virtue fled from 
Greece, the military art was deſtroyed by theſe inllitu- 

They always united immediately ageinſt foreign enemies, which 
was called Syncretiſm, Plut. Mer. p. 88. 

+..Repub. lib. 9. 

+ Plugerch's morals, treatiſe, Whether men advanced in years ought 
to medale wth public affairs. 

Repub. my 5. 

The gymraſtic art was divided into two parts, dancing and 
wreſtling. In Crete they had the armed dances of the Curetes; at 
Sparta they had thoſe of Caſtor-and Pollux; et Athens the armed 
dances of Pallas, which were extremely, proper for thoſe that were 
not yet of age or militery ſervice, Wreſtiſog is the image cf Mar, 
ſaid Plato, of 7aws, bort . He commends antiquity for having 
eſtabliihed only two dances, the Pacific and the Pyrrhic. See how 
the, latter dance was applied to the military art, Plato, ibid. 

tions; 

„ @ 

„ö Ä p f _vwW Nas - 

Chap. 12: THE SPIRIT OF LAWS... thy! 
tions; people appeared then on the arena, not for i im- 
provement but for debauch. 

Plutarch informs us ®, that the Romans in his time 
were of opinion, that thoſe games had been the prin- 
cipal cauſe of the ſlavery into which the Greeks were 
fallen. On the contrary, it was the ſlavery of the 
Greeks that had corrupted theſe exerciſes. In Plutarch's 
time +, their fighting naked in the parks, and their 
wreſtling, infected the young people with the ſpirit of 
cowardice, inclined them to infamous paſſions, and 
made them mere dancers. But, in Epaminondas's 
time, the exerciſe of wreſtling made. the Thebaus win 
the famous battle of Leuctra g. | 

There are very few laws which are not odds; white 
the ſtate retains its principles: here I way apply what 
Epicurus ſaid of riches ;. © Ir is not the liquor, but 
«-the veſſel that is corrupted.” 

E HAN MH. 
The ſame ſulje continued. 

Fo Rome the judges were choſen at firſt from the or- 

der of ſenators. This privilege the Gracchi trans- 
ſerred to the knights: Druſus gave it to the ſenators 
and knights; Sylla to the fenators only; Cotta to the 
ſenators, kaights, and public treaſurers; Ceſar exclud- 
ed the latter; Antony. made decuries of. ſenators, 
knights, and centurions. 

When once a republic is corrupted; chere is no poſ- 
ſibility of remedying any of the riſing evils, but by 
removing the corruption, and reſtoring its loſt prin- 
caples; every other correction is either uſeleſs or a new 
evil. While Rome preſerved its principles entire, the 
power of judging might without any abuſe be lodged 

* Platarch's morale, in the treatiſe eutitled Queftions concerning. 

the affairs of the Romans. + Ibid. 
4. Plutarch's morals, table-propoſitions, book 2. . 

N. 3. in 

150. THE SPIRIT OF. LAwWS. Book VIII. 

in the hands of the ſenators: but as ſoon as this city 
was corrupted, let the judicial authority be transfer- 
red to whatſoever body, whether to the ſenate, to the 
knights, to the treaſurers, to two of theſe bodies, to. 
all three together, or to any other, matters ſtill went 
always wrong. The knights had no more virtue than. 
the ſenate, the treaſurers no. more than the knights, 
and theſe as little as the centurions. 

When the people of Rome had obtained the privi- 
lege of ſharing the magiſtracy with the patricians, it 
was natural to think . that their flatterers would .im- 
mediately became arbiters of the government. But. 
no ſuch thing ever happened. It was obſervable, that. 
the very, people who had rendered the plebeians ca- 
pable of public offices, conſtantly fixed. their choice 
upon the. patricians. Becauſe they were. virtuous, 
they were magnanimous, and becauſe they were ſree, 
they had a contempt of power. But when their mo- 
rals were corrupted; the more power they were poſ- 
ſefled of, the leſs prudent was. their conduct; till at 
length, upon becoming their own tyrants and flaves, . 
they loſt the ſtrength of liberty, to fall into the weak · 
neſs and impotency of licentiouſneſs, . 

C HA P. XIII. 
The effedt'of an oath: among a virtuous people. 

*"HERE1 is no nation, ſays Livy“, that has been 

longer uncorrupted than the Romans; no nation 
where moderation and poverty have been longer re-: 
ſpected. 

Such was the W ben an gate among thoſe peo» 
af that nothing bound them ſtronger to the laws. 
They often did more for the obſervance. of an oath 
then they would ever have done for the thirſt of glory, 
or for the love of their country. : 

pl | Wh 
en 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF. LAWS. 151 
When Quintus Cincinnatus the conſul wanted to 

raiſe an army in the city againſt the Ægui and the 

Volſci, the tribunes oppoſed him. Well, (ſaid he), 
« [et all. thoſe Who have taken an oath to the conſul 

„ of the preceding year, march under my banners?.”” 
In vain did the tribunes cry out, that this oath. was 

no longer binding; and. that, when they made. it, 
Quintus was but a private perſon. The. people were 
more religions than . thoſe who pretended. to direct 
them; they would not liſten to the diſtinctions or equi- 
vocations. of the tribunes. | 

When the ſame people thought of. retiring to the 
Sacred Mount, tliey felt an inward check from the 
oath they had taken to the conſuls, that they would 
follow them into the field 1. They entered then into 
a deſign of killing the conſuls ; but dropped it when 
they were given to underſtand that their oath would 
ſtill be binding. It. is eaſy to judge of the notion 

they entertained of the violation of. an. oath, by the 

Sime they intended to commit. 

Aſter the battle of Cannæ, the people were ſeized 
with ſuch a panic, that they wanted to retire to Sicily. 
Bat Scipio having prevailed upon them to ſwear they 
would not ſtir from Rome, the fear of violating this 
oath ſurpaſſed all other apprehenſions. Rome was a 
ſhip held by two anchors, . religion and morality, in 
the midſt of a furious tempeſt. 

G HAP. XIV. 
Hau the ſmalleſt change in the conſtitution is attended 
with the ruin Mit principles, 

AW STOTLE mentions the city of Carthage as a well- 
regulated republic. Polybius tells us , that 
there was this inconveniency at Carthage in the ſecond 

= Livy, book 3+ + Ibid. book 3. 

About a huadred years after, a 
| Punic 

poſed their election. Ses Cicero to Atticus, book iv. let, 10. & 15. 

152 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock vir 

Punic war, that the ſenate - had loſt almoſt all their 
authority. We are informed by Livy, that when 
Hannibal returned to Carthage, he found that the 
magiſtrates and the principal citizens had abuſed their 
power, and converted the pubhe revenues to their own 
emolument. The virtue therefore of the magiſtrates, 

and the authority of the ſenate both fel} at the ſame 

time; and all was owing to the ſane cauſe. 
Every one knows the wonderful effects of the cenſor- 
ſhip among the Romans. There was a- time when it 

grew burdenſome; but ſtill it was ſupported, becauſe 

there was more luxury than corruption. Claudius“ 
weakened its authority, and by this means the corrup- 

tion became greater than the luxury, and the cenſor- 
wp dwindled away of itſelf f. 

C HAP. XV. 
Sure methods of preſerving the three principler 
1 SHALL not be able to make myſelf rightly under- 
ſtood, till the reader has peruſed the four following 
chapters. 
. 
Diſtiuctiue preperties of a republic. 
T is natural to a republic to have only a ſmall terri- 
' tory; otherwiſe it cannot Jong ſubſiſt. In a large 
republic there are men of large fortunes, and conſe- 
quently of leſs moderation; there are truſts too great 
to be placed in any ſingle ſubjet ; he has intereſts of 
his own ;. he ſoon begins to think that he may be hap- 
Py, great, and glorious by oppreſſing his fellow-citi- 

zens; and that he may raiſe himſelf to grandeur on 

the ruins of his country. 

» See book xi. chap. 12. 
+ The uibunes hindered them from making the cenſus; and op- 

In- 

a a es , ©fz 

Pw e — — e 5 „ „ -& 

 «©@©-#-A «<< a 

1 * 
* 

* 

Chap, 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 153 

In a large republic, the public good is ſacrificed to 
a thouſand views; it is ſubordinate to exceptions, and 
depends on accidents. In a ſmall one, the intereſt of 
the public is eaſier perceived, better underſtood, and 
more within the reach of every citizen; abuſes have 

" a leſs extent, aud of courſe are leſs protected. 

The long duration of the republic of Sparta was 
owing to its having always continued in the ſame ex- 
tent of territory after all its wars. The ſole aim of 
Sparta was liberty, and the ſole advantage of its li- 
berty glory. | I 

[t was the ſpirit of the Greek republics to be as 
contented with their territories, as with their laws. 
Athens was firſt fired with ambition, and gave it to 
Lacedzmon ; but it was an ambition rather of com- 
manding a free people, than of governing ſlaves; ra. 
ther of directing than of breaking the union. All was 
loſt upon the ſtarting up of monarchy, a government 
whoſe ſpirit is more æurned to increaſe and advance- 
ment, 

Excepting particular circumſtances “, it is difficult 
tor any other than a republican government to ſubſiſt 
long in a ſingle town. A prince of ſo petty a ſtate 
would naturally endeavour to oppreſs his ſubjects, be- 
eauſe his power would be great, while the means of 
enjoying it, or of cauſing it to be reſpected, would 
be very inconfiderable. The conſequence is, he would 
trample upon his people. On the other hand, ſuch a 
prince might be eaſily cruſhed by a foreign, or even 
by a domeſtic force; the people might every inſtant 

unite and riſe up againſt him. Now, as ſoon as a 

prince of a ſingle town is expelled, the quarrel is over, 
but, if he has many towns, it only begins. 

* As whicn a petty ſovereign ſupports himſelf betwixt two greot 
powers Ly mrans of their mutual je. louſy; but then be has only a 
prec2rious exiſtence. | 

CHAP, 

154 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VIII. 
| C HAP. XVII. 
 Diftindtive properties of a monarchy. 
A Moxarcnicar ſtate ought to be of a moderate 
extent. Were it ſmall, it would form itſelf into 
A republic: were it very large, the nobility, poſſoſſed 
of great eſtates, far from the inſpection of the prince, 
with a private court of their own, and ſecure more- 
over from ſudden executions by the laws and manners 
of the country, ſuch a nobility, I ſay, might throw 
off their allegiance, having nothing to tear from too 
ilow and too diſtant a puniſhment. 

Thus Charlemagne had ſcarce founded his empire, 
when he was obliged to divide it; whether the go- 
vernors of the provinces refuſed to obey, or whether, 
in order to keep them under more ſuhjection, there 
vas a neceſſity of parcelling the empire into ſeveral 
kingdoms. 

After the deceaſe of Alexander, his empire was di- 
vided. How was it poſſible for thoſe Greeks and Ma- 
cedonian chiefs, who were each of them free and inde- 
pendent, or commanders at leaſt of the victorious bands 
diſperſed throughout that vaſt extent of conquered 
land; how was it poſſible, I ſay, for them to obey? 
Attila's empire was diſſolved ſoon after his death; 

ſuch a number of kings, who were no longer under 

reſtraint, could not reſume their fetters. 
The ſudden eftabliſhment of unlimited power is a 
- remedy, which in thoſe caſes may prevent a difiolution : 
but how dreadful the remedy, that, after the enlarge- 
ment of dominion, opens a new ſcene of miſery ? 
The rivers haſten to mingle their waters with the 

ſea, and monarchies loſe theinſelves in deſpotic power. 

| N. 
Particular caſe of the Spaniſh monarchy. 
LEE not the example of Spain be produced againſt 
me; it rather proves what I affirm. To preſerve 

America, 

„% „ tw pJ_« 

Ve 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. 155 

America, ſhe did what even deſpotic power itſelf does 
not attempt; ſhe deſtroyed the inhabitants. To pre- 
ſerve her colony, ſhe was obliged to keep it dependent 
even for its ſubſiſtence. 

In the Netherlands ſhe eſſayed to render herſelf, ar- 
bitrary; and, as ſoon as ſhe abandoned the attempt, 
her perplexity increaſed. On the one hand, the Wal- 
loons would not be governed by Spaniards, and on the 
other, the Spanith ſoldiers retuſed to ſubmit to Wal- 
loon officers *. 

In Italy ſhe maintained her ground merely by ex- 
hauſling herſelf, and by enriching that country; for 
thoſe who would have been glad to have got rid of 
the king of Spain were not in a humour to refuſe his 
gold. | 

CT AF ATC: 

Diſtinctive properties of a deſpotic government. 
A Lasco empire ſuppoles a. deipotie authority in 

the perſon that governs. It is neceſſary that the 
quickneſs of the prince's reſolutions ſhould ſupply the 
diſtance of the places they are ſent to; that fear ſhould 
prevent the careleſſneſs of the remote governor or ma- 
giltrate ; that the law ſhould be derived from a fingle 
perſon, and thould change continually according to the 

_ accidents which inceſſautly multiply in a ſtate in pro- 

portion to its extent. 

| CHAP. XX. 
Conſequence of the preceding chapters. 
IF it be therefore the natural property of ſmall Rates 
to be gaverned as a republic, of middling ones to 
be ſubjet to a monarch, and of large empires to be 
ſwayed by a deſpotic prince, the conſequence is, that, 
in order to preſerve the principles of the eſtabliſhed 

Ste the hiſtory of the Vnited Provinces by Monſ. le Clere. 
government, 

156 THE sPIRTT.Or LAWS. Book VIII. 

government, the ſtate muſt be ſupported in the extent 
it has acquired, and that the ſpirit of this ſtate will 
change in proportion as it contracts or extends its 
limits. 

CHAP. XXI. 
Of the empire of China. 

BE FORE I finiſh this book, I ſhall anſwer an objection 
that may be made to what has been here advanced. 
Our miſſionaries tell us, that the vaſt empire of Chi- 
na has an admirable government, in which there is a 

per mixture of fear, honour, and virtue. Conſe- 
quently I muſt have given an idle diſtinction, in eſta- 

bliſhing the principles of the three governments. 

But I cannot conceive what this honour can be 
among people that will not do the leaſt net without 
blows . 

Again, our mercantile people are far from giving us 
any idea of that virtue ſo much talked of by the miſ- 
ſionaries; we need only conſult them in relation to the 
robberies and extortions of the mandarines . 

Beſides, father Parennin's letters concerning the em- 
peror's proceedings againſt ſome new converted princes 

of the blood . who had incurred his diſpleaſure, plain · 

ly ſhews us a continued plan of tyranny, and inhuman 
injuries committed by rule, that is, in cool blood. 

We have likewiſe Monſieur de Mairan's and the 
ſame father Parennin's letters on the government of 
China. I find therefore, that, after ſome pertinent 

ueſtions and anſwers, the whole wonder vaniſhes. 

Might not our miſſionaries have been deceived by 
an appearance of order? Might not they have been 

ſtruck wich that continual exerciſe of a ſingle perſon's 

It is the cudyel that governs China, ſays Father du Halde. 

+ Among others, de Lange's relation. 

1 Of the family of 9 Edifying Letters, 8th collection. 
A | will, 

( 

” Re © 2X Ttxr= Ws " * 

mm. co as ak 

Aa Aa ne HT) —_ 

| Chap. 1. THE 8PIRIT OF LAWS. 157 

t will, an exerciſe-by-which they themſelves are govern- 

11 ed, and which they are ſo pleaſed to find in the courts 

'$ of the Indian princes, becauſe, as they go thither on- 
ly in order to introduce great changes, it is much ea- 
ſier to convince thoſe. princes that there are no bounds 
to their power, than to perſuade the people that. there 
are none to their ſubmiſſion“? 

5 In fine, there is frequently ſome kind of truth even 
1. in errors themſelves. It may-be owing to particular, 
i. and perhaps very ſingular cireumſtances, that the Chi- 
a neſe government is not ſo corrupt as one might natu- 
J rally expect. The climate, and ſome other phyſical 

A cauſes may, in that country, have had ſo ſtrong an in- 
fluence on the morals, as in ſome meaſure to produce 
be wonders. 
at The climate of China is ſurpriſingly favourable to the 
propagation of the human ſpecies. The women are the 
* moſt prolific in the whole world. The moſt barbarous 
PA tyranny can put no ſtop to the progreſs of propagation. 
he The prince cannot ſay there like Pharaoh, Let us deal 
wiſely with them, leſt they multiply. He would be rather 
n- reduced to Nero's wiſh. that mankind had all but one 

es head. In ſpite of tyranny, China, by the force of its 
n- climate, will be always populous, and will tri 
over the tyrannical oppreſſor. | | 

China, like all other countries that live chiefly up- 
on rice , is ſubject to frequent famines. When the 
people are ready to ſtarve with hunger, they diſperſe + 
in order to ſeek for nouriſhment ; in conſequence' of 
which, ſmall gangs of robbers are formed on all ſides. 
by Moſt of them are extirpated in their very infaney; 
on others increaſe, and are-likewiſe ſuppreſſed. - And yet, 
n's - A gee in Father du Halde, how the miſſionaries availed themſelves 

of the authority of Can-Hi to ſilence the mandarines, who con- 

ſtantly declared, that, by the laws of the country, no forrigu wor- 
ſhip could be eſtabliſned in the empire. * e 
jon. 1 See book xxlii. chap. 14. ; 

vill, Vor. I. | 0 1 In 

158 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book VII. 

in ſo great a number of ſuch. diſtant provinces, ſome 
gang or other may happen to meet with ſucceſs. In 
that caſe they maintain their ground, ſtrengthen their 
party, ſorm themſelves into a military body, march 
ſtraight up to the capital, and their leader aſcends the 
throne. 

From the very nature of ings, a bad adminiſtra. 
tion is here immediately puniſhed. The want- of ſub- 
ſiſtence in ſo populous a country produces ſudden dif. 
orders. The reaſon why the redreſs of abuſes is in 
other countries attended with ſuch difficulty is, becauſe 
| their effects are not immediately felt; the prince is not 

informed in ſo ſudden and ſenſible a manner as in Chi- 

The emperor of China is not taught like our princes, 
that, if he governs ill, he will be Jeſs happy in the 
other life, leſs potent and leſs rich in this. He knows, 
that, if his government is not good, he will be ſtrip 
ped both of empire andilife. 

As China grows every day more popu; notwith- 
ſtanding the expoſing of children, the inhabitants are 
inceſſantly: employediin tilling the land for their ſubſiſt- 

Fo ence. This requires a very extraordinary attention in 

the government. It. is their perpetnal' concern, that 
every body ſhould be able to work without any appre - 
henſion of being deprived of the fruits of his labour. 
Conſequently _ is- not ſo much a civil as a Rr 
government. 
ZSuoh has been the + ceigin of- thoſe deres which 
have been ſo. greatly extolled: They wanted to make 
the laws reign in conjunction vrth defpotic power; but 
whatever is joined with the latter loſes all its: force. 
In vain did this arbitrary ſway, labouring under its 
owr misfortunes, deſire to be fettered; it armed itſelf 
with its chains, and is become ſtill, more terrible. 
China is therefore à deſpotie ſtate, whoſe principle 
| 7 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 159 

is fear. Perhaps, in the earlieſt dynaſties, when the 
empire had not ſo large an extent, the government 

might have deviated a little from this ſpirit ; but the 
caſe at preſent is other wiſe. 

1 5 

— ͤ— 

B O OK . 

* 

— 

— — 

Of laws in the relation they bear to a defen- 

five force. 

HA. I. | 
In what manner republics provide for their ſaſely. 

imperfection. 

To this twofold inconvenience both democracies and 

ariſtocracies are equally liable, and that whether they 
be good or bad. The evil is in the very thing itſelf; 
and no form can redreſs it. 

It is therefore very probable, that mankind would 

have been at length obliged to live conſtantly under the- 
government of a ſingle perſon, had they not coutrived 

a kind of conftitution that has all the internal advan- 

tages of a republican, together with the external force. 

of a monarchical government: I mean a confederate 

| republic. 
This form of government is a convention, by which 

ſeveral ſmall ſtares agree to become members of a lar- 
ger one which they intend to form. It is a kind of at- 

ſemblage of ſocieties, that conſtitute a new one, capa- 

ble of increaſing by means of new aſſociations, till 
they arrive to ſuch a degree of power, as to be able to 
provide for the ſecurity of the united body. 

It was theſe aſſociations that contributed fo long 
ta. the proſperity of Greece. By theſe. the Romans 

Q 2: atttacked. 

Fa republic is ſnull, it is deſtroyed by a foreign 
force; if it be large, it is ruined by an internal: 

— - „ 4 

160 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IX. 

attacked the univerſe, and by theſe alone the univerſe 
* withſtood them ; for, when Rome was arrived to her 
higheſt pitch of grandeur, it was the aſſociations be. 
hind the Danube and the Rhine, aſſociations formed 
by the terror of her arms, that enabled the barbarians 
to reſiſt her. 

From hence it proceeds, that Holland“, Germany, 
and the Swiſs cantons, are conſidered in Europe as 
perpetual republics. 

The aſſociations of cities were formerly inore ne- 
ceſſary than in our times. A weak defenceleſs town 
was expoſed to greater dangers. By conqueſt it was 
deprived not only of the executive and legiſlative pow. 
er, as at preſent, but moreover, of all human proper- 
ty. 
— republic of this kind, able to withſtand an ex- 
ternal force, may ſupport itſelf without any internal 
corruption; the form of this ſociety prevents all man- 
ner of inconveniencies. ; 

If a ſingle member ſhould attempt to uſurp the ſu- 
preme authority, he could not be ſuppoſed to have an 
equal authority and credit in all the confederate ſtates. 
Were he to have too great an influence over one, this 
would alarm the reſt ; were he to ſubdue a part, that 
which would till remain free might oppoſe him with 
forces independent of thoſe which he had uſurped, and 
overpower him before he could be ſettled in his uſur- 
pation. 

Should a popular inſurrection happen in one of the 
confederate ſtates, the others are able Ito quell it. 
Should. abuſes creep into one part, they are reformed 
by thoſe that remain. ſound. The ſtate may be de- 
ſtroyed on one ſide, and not on the other; the con- 

* It is compoſed of about fifty differeat republics. State of the 
United Provinces by M. Janiſon. 

+. -2ivil liberty, goods, wives, children, remples, and even bu- 

ryiog-places. 
federacy 

Chap. 2: THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 161. 
fed:racy may be diſſolved, and the confederates pre · 
ſerve their ſovereignty. 

As this government is compoſed of petty republics, 
it enjoys the internal happineſs of each; and, with re- 
ſpect to its external ſituation, it is poſſeſſed, by means 
of the aſſociation, of all the advantages of large mo- 
narchies. 

| CHAP. II. 
That a confederate government ought to be compoſed of © 
fates of the ſame nature, eſpecially of the republican 
kind. | | 
1 'HE Canaanites were deſtroyed, by reaſon they were 
petty monarchies that had no union or confedera- - 
cy for their common defence; and indeed a confedera» 
cy is not agreeable to the nature of petty. monurchies. 

As the confederate republic of Germany conſilts 'of 
free cities and of petty Rates ſubject to different princes, . 
experience ſhews us that it is much more. imperfet than 
that of Holland and Switzerland. 

The ſpirit of monarchy is war and enlargement of J 
dominton ; peace and moderation is the ſpirit of a re- 
public. Theſe two kinds of government cannot natu- 
rally ſubſiſt in a conſederate republic. 

Thus we obſerve in the Roman hiſtory, that, when 
the Veientes had choſen a king, they were immediate + 
ly abandoned by all the other petty republics of Tuſ- 
cany. Greece was undone as ſoon as the kings of Ma- 
cedon obtained a feat among the Amphictyons. 

The confederate republic of Germany, compoſed of 
princes and free towns, ſubſiſts by means of a chief, 
who is in fome reſpecti the magiſtrate of the union, in + 
others the monarch. 

| 0 3 HAP. 

THE SPIRIT" OP LAWS: Beck 1%. 

CHAP: III 
Other requiſites in a conſederate republic. 

2 the republic of Holland one province cannot 

conclude an alliance without the conſent of the 
others. This law, which is an excellent one, and even 
neceſſary in a confederate republic, is wanting in the 
Germanic conſtitution, , where it would prevent the 
misfortunes that may happen to the whole confedera- 
cy through the imprudence, ambition; or avarice of a 
ſingle member A republic, united by a political con 
federacy, has given itſelf entirely up, and has nothing | 

more to reſi 
It is difficult far the united ſtates to be. all of an 

equal extent and power. The Lycian * republic was 
an aſſociation of twenty-three towns; the large ones 
had three votes in the common council, the middling - 
ones two, and the ſmal} towns.one. . The Dutch re- 
public conſiſts of ſeven provinces, of different extent of 
territory, which have each one voice. 

The cities of Lycia . contributed to the.expences of 
the ſtate, according to the proportion of ſuffrages. 
The provinces of the United Netherlands cannot fol- 
low this proportion; they muſt be directed by that of 
their power. 

In Lycia t, the judges and town magiſtrates were 
elected by the common council, and according to the 
proportion already mentioned. Iu the republic of Hol. 

land they are not choſen by the common council, but 

each town names its magiſtrates. 
Were I to give a model of an excellent confederate 

republic, I ſhould pitch upon that of Lycia. 

'® Strabs, lib. 14. + Ibid, lib. 4. t Wia. 
CHAP, 

Chap. 44 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 163 

CHAP. IV. 

In. what manner deſpotic governments provide for their 
ſecurity. 

As republics provide for their ſecurity by uniting, 
deſpotic governments do it by ſeparating, and by 
keeping themſelves as it were ſingle. They ſacrifice a 
part of the country, and, by ravaging and deſolating 
the frontiers, they render the heart of the empire in- 
acceſſible. | | 

It is a received axiom in geometry, that the greater 
the extent of bodies, the more their circumference is 
relatively ſinall. This practice therefore of laying the 
frontiers waſte is more tolerable in large than i in mid- 
dling ſtates... p x 

A deſpotic government does all the miſchief to itſelf 
that could be..done by. a cruel enemy, whole progreſs 
it could not reſiſt. 

It preſerves itſelf likewiſe by another kind of ſepara 
tion, which is by putting the moſt diſtant provinces in- 
to the hands of a feudatory prince. The Mogul, the 
king of Perſia, and the emperors of China have their 
feudarories, and the Turks have found their account 
in putting the Tartars, the Moldavians, the Walachi- 

ans, and formerly the Tranfilvanians, between them- 

felves and their enemies. 
CH AP; v. 

Int what manner a monarchical government provides for 

: its. ſecurity. 

A Monazxciay never deſtroys itſelf like a deſpotic 
government; But a kingdom of a moderate ex- 

tent is 7 liable to ſudden invaſions ; it mult therefore 
have fortified places to defend its frontiers, and troops 
to garriſon thoſe places. The leaſt ſpot of ground is 
diſputed with art, with courage, and obſtinacy. Deſ- 
potic 

10864 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book IX. 
potic ſtates make incurſions againſt one another; it is. 

monarchies only that wage war. 
Fortreſſes are proper for monarchies ; deſpotic go- 
vernments are afraid of them. They dare not intruſt 

them to any body, for there is no one that has a love. 

for the prince or his government. 
| CR VFL. 
Of the defenſive force of flates in general. 

5 5 preſerve a ſtate in its due force, it muſt have 

ſuch an extent as to admit of a proportion be. 
tween the quickneſs with which it may be invaded, and 
that with which it may render the invaſion abortive, 
As an invader may inftantly appear on all ſides, it 

is requiſite that the ſtate ſhould be able to make on all. 

ſides its defence; conſequently. it ſhould-be. of a mode- 
rate extent, proportioned to that degree of celerity 
with which nature has enabled men to move from one 
place to another. 

France and Spain are exactly of a proper extent. 
They have ſo eaſy. a communication for their forces, 
as to be able to convey them immediately to what part 
they have a mind: the armies unite and paſs with ra- 
pidity from one frontier to another, without any ap- 
prehenſion of ſuch difficalties as require time to re- 
move. | 

It is extremely happy for France, that the capital. 

ſtands nearer to the different frontiers in proportion to 

their weaknels, and the prince has a better view of 

each part of his country in proportion as it is more e- 

pPoſed. 

But when a vaſt empire, like Perfia, is attacked, it 
is ſeveral months before the troops are able to aflem- 
ble, . znd then they cannot make ſuch forced marches 
for that length of time, as they can for fifteen days. 
If the army on the frontiers is beaten it is certainly 

diſperſed, 

tu 4 cc —_—— — 1 

„ 0 

Chap. 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 165 

diſperſed, becauſe there is no neighbouring place of 
retreat. The victor, meeting with no reſiſtance, ad- 
vances with all expedition, ſits down before the capr. 
tal, and lays ſiege to it, when there is ſcarce time 
enough to give notice to the governors of the pro- 
vinces to come to its relief. "Thoſe who foreſee an im- 
minent revolution, haſten it by their diſobedience; for 
men, whoſe fidelity is entirely owing to the proximity 
of puniſhment, are eaſily corrupted as ſoon as it be- 
comes diſtant ; their aim is their own private intereſt, 
The empire is ſubverted, the capital taken, and the 
conqueror diſputes the ſeveral provinces with the go- 
vernors. 

The real power of a prince does not conſiſt ſo much 
in the facility he meets with in making conqueſts, as in 
the difficulty an enemy finds in attacking him, and, if 
I may ſo ſpeak, in the immutability of his condition, 
But the increaſe of territory obliges a government to 
expoſe new ſides by which it may be attacked. 

As monarchs therefore ought to be endued with 
wiſdom in order to increaſe, they ought likewiſe to 
have an equal ſhare of prudence to limit their power. 
Upon removing the inconveniencies of too ſmall a ter- 
ritory, they ought to have their eye conſtantly on the 
inconveniencies that attend its immoderate enlargement. 

% 
CHAP. VI. 
A reflection. 

14 1 * enemies of a great prince, whoſe reign was 
'® protracted to an unuſual length, have very often 
accuſed him, rather I believe from their own fears 
than upon any ſolid foundation, of having formed 
and carried on a projet of univerſal monarchy, Had 
he ſucceeded, nothing would have been more fatal to 
Europe, to his ancient ſubjects, to himſelf, and to 
kis family. Heaven, that knows our true intereſts, 

ſerved 

166 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book 1X. 

ſerved him more by defeats than it could have done by 
victories. Inſtead of making him the only ſovereign 
in Europe, it favoured him more by renderipg him the 
moſt powerfvl. 

The ſubjects of this prince, who in foreign countries 
are never affected but with what they have forſaken ; 
who, on leaving their own homes, look upon glory as 
a ſovereign good, and in diſtant countries as an obſta- 
cle to their return; who difpleaſe you even by their 
good qualities, becauſe they ſeem to be joined with an 
air of contempt; who are capable of ſupporting 
wounds, perils, and fatigues, but not the loſs of their 
pleaſures; who love nothing ſo much as gatety, and 
conſole themſelves for the loſs of a battle by finging 
the praiſe of the general; thoſe ſubjects, | ſay, would 
never have been able to compaſs an enterpriſe, that 
could not poſſibly be defeated in one country, without 
milcarrying in all the others, nor miſcarry for a mo- 
ment, without miſcarrying for ever. 

e H AFP. VIII. 

A particular caſe „in which the defenſive force of a ſlate 
is inferior to the offenſree, 

II was a ſaying of the Lord of Coucy to K. Charles V. 

that the Engliſh are never weaker, nor eaſier over- 
come than in their own country, The ſame was obſerved 
of the Romans; the ſame of the Carthaginians; and 
the ſame will always happen to every power that ſends 
armies to diſtant countries, in order tq reunite, by dint 
of diſcipline and military power, thoſe who are divided 
among themſelves by political or civil intereſts. The 
ſtate finds itſelf weakened by the diſorder that ſtill con. 
tinues, and more ſo by the remedy. | 

The Lord of Coucy's maxim is an exception to the 

general rule, which diſapproves of wars againſt diſtant 
countries. 

e A oo an 

1 

* c Fo „ . . 

Chap: 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 67 
countries. And this exception confirms likewiſe the 

rule, becauſe its takes place only in reſpect to thoſe by 
whom ſuch wars are.undertaken. 

CHAP. IX. 
Of the relative force of ſlates. 

A2 grandeur, force, and power are relative. care 
therefore muſt be taken, that, in endeavouring 
to inereaſe the real grandeur, the relative be not di- 
miniſhed. 

About the middle of the reign of Louis XIV. 
France was at its higheſt pitch of relative grandeur, 
Germany had- not yet ſuch great monarchs as it has 
fince produced. Italy was in the ſame caſe. England 
and Scotland were not yet formed into one united 
kingdom. Arragon was not joined to Caſtile; the dꝭ. 
ſtant parts of the Spaniſh monarchy were weakened by 
i; and weakened. it in their turn; and'Muſcovy was as 
little known in Europe as Crim-Tartary. 

| CHAP. X. 

Of the; weakneſs of neighbouring, ſlates. 
'Henſoever a ſtate lies contiguous to another that 
happens to be in its decline, the former ought to 
take particular care not to precipitate the latter's ruin, 
becauſe this is the happieſt ſituation imaginable, no- 

thing being ſo convenient for one prince as to be near 

another who receives for him all the rebuffs and inſults: 
of fortune. And it ſeldom happens, that, by ſubduing 
{ach a ſtate, the real power of the conqueror is as 2 

increaſed as the relative is diminithed. 

BOOK, 

168 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X. 

3 O EK. 
Of laws 1 in the relation they bear to offenſive 

force. 
CHAT x 
Of offenſive force. 

\ Frexsrve force is regulated by the law of na- 
tions, which is the political law of each country 

. conſidered in its relation to every other. 

I 
Of war. 

22 life of government is like that of man. The 
latter has a right to kill in caſe of natural de- 
fence ; the former have a right to wage war for their 
own preſervation. | 

In the caſe of natural defence I have a right to kill, 
becauſe my life is in reſpect to me what the life of my 
antagoniſt is to him: In the ſame manner a ſtate 
wages war, becauſe its preſervation is equally juſt with 
that of any other ſtate. 

Among citizens the right of natural defence does 
not imply a neceſſity of attacking. Inſtead of attack- 
ing they need only have recourſe to proper tribunals, 
They cannot therefore exerciſe this right of defence 
but in ſudden caſes, when immediate death would be 
the conſequence of waiting for the aſſiſtance of the 
laws. But, among ſocieties, the right of natural de- 
fence carries along with it ſometimes the neceſſity of at- 
tacking; as, for inſtance, when one nation ſees that a 
longer peace will enable another to deſtroy her, and 
that to attack that nation inſtantly is the only way to 
prevent her own deſtruction. 

From thence it follows, that ſmall ſocieties have of- 
1 - tener 

= © 

W 8 n + #* & 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 165 

tener a right to declare war than great ones, becauſe 
they are oftener in the caſe of being afraid of de- 
ſtruction. 

The right therefore of war is derived from neceſſity 
and ſtrict juſtice, If thoſe who direct the conſcience or 
councils of princes do not hold by this, all is undone : 
when they proceed on arbitrary principles of glory, 
conveniency, and utility, torrents of blood will over- 
ſpread the earth. 

But, above all, let them not avail themſelves of any 
ſuch idle plea as the glory of the prince. His glory is 
nothing but pride; it is a paſſion, and not a legitimate 
right. 

Air! is true, che fame of his power might increaſe the 
ſtrength of his government; but it might be equally 
increaſed by the reputation of his juſtice, 

CHAP. III. 
Of the right of conqueſt. 
FROM the right of war comes that of conqueſt, 
which is the conſequence of that right, and ought 
therefore to follow its ſpirit, 

The right the conqueror has over a conquered. peo 
ple is directed by four ſorts of laws; the law of nature, 
which makes every thing tend-to the preſervation of 
the ſpecies ; the law of natural reaſon, which teaches 
us to do to others what we would have done to our. 
ſelves; the law that forms political ſocieties, whoſe du- 
ration nature has not limited; and in fine, the law de- 
rived from the nature of the thing itſelf. Conqueſt is 
an acquiſition ; acquiſition carries with it the ſpirit of 
preſervation and uſe, and not of deſtruction. 

A conquered nation is treated. by the conqueror one 
of the four following ways. Either he continues to 

rule them according to their own laws, and aſſumes 
Vor. I, WIS - | to 

170 THE spIRTT OF LAWS. Book x 

to himſelf only the exercife of the political and civil 
government; or he gives them a new political and ci- 
vil government; or he deſtroys and diſperſes the ſocie · 
ty; or in fine, he exterminates the inhabitants. 
The firſt way is conformable to the law of nations 
now followed; the fourth is more agreeable to the law 
of nations followed by the Romans; in reſpect to 
which I leave the reader to judge how far we have im. 
proved upon the ancients. We muſt here give due 
praiſe to our modern times, to our preſent reaſon, to 
our religion, philoſophy, and manners. 

The authors of our public law, guided by ancient 
hiſtories, without confining themſelves to caſes of ftri& 
neceſſity, have fallen into very great errors. They 
have adopted tyrannical and arbitrary principles, by 
fuppoſing the conquerors to be inveſted with I know 
not what right to kill: from thence they have drawn 
conſequences as terrible as the very principle, and eſta. 
bliſhed maxims which the conquerors themſelves, when 
poſſeſſed of the leaſt grain of ſenſe, never preſumed to 
follow. It is a plain caſe, that, when the conqueſt is 
completed, the conqueror has no longer a right to kill, 
becauſe he has no longer the Pn ef natural defence 
and ſelf - preſer vation. 

What has led them into this miſtake is, that they 
imagined a conqueror had a right to deſtroy the ſociety ; 
from whence they inferred that he had a right to de- 

ſtroy the men that compoſe it, a wrong conſequence 

from a falſe principle; for from the deſtruction of the 

fociety it does not at all follow, that the people who 
compoſe it ought to be alſo deſtroyed. - Society is the 
union of men, and not the men themſelves; the citizen 
may periſh, and the man remain. 

From the right of killing in caſe of conqueſt, poli. 
ticians have drawn that of reducing to ſlavery, a con- 
equence as ill grounded as the principle. 

There is no ſuch thing as a right of reducing peo- 

— a” a am as. e2c:o. . 

ea. „ .. 

ch. THE SPIRIT or LAWS — um 

ple to ſlavery, but when it hecomes meceſſary for the 
preſervation of the conqueſt. Preſervation, but never 
ſervitude, is the end of conqueſt, though fervitude may 
happen ſometimes to be a neceſſary means of preſerva- 
tion. 

Even in that caſe it is contrary to the nature of 

things, that the flavery ſhould be perpetual. The peo- 
ple enflaved ought to be rendered capable of becoming 
ſubjects. Slavery in conqueſts is an accidental thing, 
When, after the expiration of a certain ſpace of time, 
all the parts of the conquering ſtate are connected with 
the conquered nation by cuſtoms, marriages, laws, 
aſſociations, and by a certain conformity of ſpirit, there 
ought to be an end of the ſlavery; for the rights of th. 
eonqueror are founded entirely on the want of thoſe 
very things, and on the eſtrangement between the two 
nations which prevents their confiding in each other, 
A eonqueror therefore, who reduces the conquered 
people to ſlavery, ought always to reſerve to himſelf 
the means (for means there are without — of re- 
ſtoring them to their liberty. 

Theſe are far from being vague and uncertain no- 
tions. Thus our anceſtors acted, thoſe anceſtors who 
conquered the Roman empire. The laws they made in 
the heat of fire, action, impetuofity, and the pride of 
victory, were afterwards ſoftened; thoſe laws were ſe- 
vere, but they rendered them impartial. The Burgua- 

dians, Goths, and Lombards, would always have the 

Romans continue a conquered people; but the laws of 
Euric, Gundebald, and Rotharis, made the Romans 
and Barbarians fellow-citizens *. | 

* Sec the cade of barbarian laws, and book 28, 

* . HA. 

172 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock X. 

r 
Some advantages of a conquered people. 

Irn 40 of inferring ſuch fatal conſequences from 

right of conqueſt, politicians would have done 
much better to mention the advantages, which this 
very right may ſometimes give to a conquered people; 
advantages which would be more ſenſibly, more uni- 
verſally felt, were our law of nations exactly followed, 
and eſtabliſhed over all the earth. 

Conquered countries are, generally ſpeaking, dege- 
nerated from their original inſtitution. Corruption has 
crept in, the execution of the laws has been neglected, 
and the government is grown oppreſſive. Who can 
queſtion but ſuch a ſtate would be a gainer, and de- 
rive ſome advantages from the very conqueſt itſelf, if 
it did not prove deſtructive? When a government is 
arrived to that degree of corruption, as to be incapa · 

ble of reforming itſelf, it would not loſe much by being 
new moulded. A conqueror that enters triumphant 

into a country, where the monied men. have by a 
thouſand wiles and artifices inſenſibly practiſed innu- 
merable ways of uſurping; where the miſerable peo- 
ple, who grieve to ſee abulk⸗ grow into laws, live un- 
der oppreſſion, and think they have no right to com- 
plain; a conqueror, I ſay, may make a total change, 
and then the maſked tyranny will be the firſt thing ex- 
poſed to his fury. 

We have ſeen, "in inſtance, countries oppreſſed by 
the farmers of the revenues, and eaſed. afterwards by 
the conqueror, who had neither the engagements nor 
wants of the legitimate prince. Even the abuſes have 
been often redreſſed without any interpoſition of the 
conqueror. 

Sometimes the frugal of a conquering nation has 
enabled them to allow the conquered thoſe neceſſa- 
; ties, 

© — 

„ . K . — -< „ 

Chap. 5- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 173 

ries, of which they have been,deprived under a'lawful 
e hes may deſtroy pernicious prejudices, * 
lay, if 1 may preſume to make uſe of the expreſſion, 
the nation under a better genius. - 

What good might not the Spaniards have done to 
the Mexicans? They had a mild religion to impart to 
them ; but they gave them a mad ſuperſtition. They 
might have ſet ſlaves at liberty; they made free men 
faves. They might have undeceived them with regard 
to the abuſe of human ſacrifices ; inſtead of that they 
deſtroyed them. Never ſhould I have done, were I to 
recount all the good they did not, and all the milchict 
they did. 

It is a conqueror's buſineſs to repair a part of the 
miſchief he has committed. The right therefore of 
conqueſt 1 define thus: A neceſſary, lawful, and un- 
happy right, which leaves always an immenſe debt to 
diſcharge, in order to clear the obligations of human 
Nature. 2 - 7 ö 

5 "CHAP, v. 

Gelon king of Syracuſe. 

THE nobleſt treaty 
ory is, in my opinion, that which Gelon made 

with the Carthagenians. He inſiſted upon their abo- 

liſhing the cuſtom of ſacrificing their children v. Glo- 
rious indeed! After having defeated 300,000 Cartha- 
ginians, he required a condition that was advantage- 

ous only to themſelves, or cather he ſipulaediin f- 
vour of human nature. 

C H A P. VI. 
Of conqueſts made by a republic. 
T is contrary to the nature of things, that, in in a 

confederate government, one ſtate ſbould make | 

See M. Barbeyrac's Collection, art. 112, IP 
P 3 any 

race ever mentioned in hi- 

194 THE SPIRIT. OF LAWS. Book x. 

any conquelt over another, as in our days we have ſeen 
in Swiſſerland “. la mixed confederate republics, 
where the affociation is between ſmall republics and 
mall monarchies, this is not ſo abſurd. 

It is alſo contrary to the nature of things, that a f 
democratical republic ſhould conquer towns, which 
cannot enter into the ſphere of its democracy. It is 
neceſſary that the conquered people ſhould be capable 
of enjoying the privileges of ſovereignty, as was ſet - 
tled in the very beginning among the Romans. The 
conquelt ought to be limited to the number of citizens 
fixed for the democracy. 

If a democratical republic ſubdues a nation in order 

to govern them as ſubjects, it expoſes its own liberty, 
becauſe it intruſts too great a power to the officers ſent 
into the conquered provinces. - 
- How great would have been the danger of the re- 
Public of Carthage, had Hannibal made himſelf ma- 
ſter of Rome? What would not he have done in his 
own country, had he been victorious, he who cauſed 
ſo many revolutions. after, his defeat +. 

Hanno could never have diſſuaded the ſenate from 
ſending ſuccours to Hann I, had he uſed no other 
argument than his own -jEMlouſy. The Carthaginian 
ſenate, whoſe wiſdom is ſo highly extolled by Ariſto- 
tle, (and* which has been evidently proved by the pro. 
ſperity of that republic), could never have been deter- 
mined by other than ſenfible reafons. They muſt have 
been ſtupid not to ſee, that an army at the. diſtance of 
zoo leagues would neceſſarily be — loſſes that 
ought to be repaired. 

Hanno's party inſiſted that Hannibal ſhould be de- 
livered up to the Romans . They could not at that 

With regard to Tockenburgh. 

+ He was at the head of a faction. 

. 2 Hanno wanted to deliver Hahnibal up to the v as Ca- 
r | 

time 

ty 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 175 

time be afraid of the Romans; they were therefore 

afraid of Hannibal. 

lt vas impoſſible, ſome will ſay, for them to . 
gine that Hannibal had been ſo ſucceſsful. But how 

was it poſſible for them to doubt of it? Could the Car- 
thaginians, a people ſpread all over the earth, be igno- 
rant of what was tranſacting in Italy? No; they were 
| ſufficiently acquainted with it, and for that reaſon they 

did not care to ſend ſupplies to Hannibal. 

Hanno became more reſolute after the battle of 
Trebia, after the battle of Thraſimenes, after that of 
Cannæ; it was not his ann that increaſed, but 
his fear. 

CHA P VII. 
| The ſame ſubje@ continued. 

HERE is ſtill another inconveniency in conqueſts . 

made by democracies: their government is al- 
ways odious to the conquered ſtates, It is apparently 
monarchical; but in reality it is much more oppreſſive 

than monarchy, as the nn he all ages and 
countries evinces. 

The coriquered people ate in a e ituation): 

They neither enjoy the advantages of a republic, nor 

thoſe of a monarchy. 
What has been here ſaid of a popular ſtate is appli- 
cable to ariſtocracy. 
| iE RAE. M. 
The ſame ſubjed continued. 

ye a republic therefore keeps another nation 

ſubjection. it ſhould endeavour to repair the 

inconveniencies ariſing from the nature of its ſituation, 

dy giving it good laws both for the political and civil 
government of the people. 

We have an inſtance of an iſland in the Mediterra- 

[ 
| 
4 

176 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book x. 

nean ſubject to an Italian republic, whoſe political and 

civil laws, in reſpect to the inhabitants of that iſland, 
were extremely deſective. The act of amneſty *, by 
which it ordained that no one ſhould be condemned to 
bodily puniſhment in conſequence of the private know. 
ledge of the governor, ex informata conſcientia, is ſtill 
recent in every body's memory. There have been 
frequent inſtances of the people's petitioning , for pri- 
vileges: here the ſovereign grants only the common 
| 1 of all nations. 

CHAP. IX. 
Of conqueſts made by a monarchy. -_ 

F a monarchy can for a long time ſubſiſt before it 

is weakened by its increaſe, it will become formida- 
ble, and its ſtrength will remain entire, white pent up 
dy the neighbouring monarchies. 

It ought not therefore to aim at conqueſts beyond 
the natural limits of its government. As ſoon as it 
has paſſed theſe limits, it is prudence to ſtop. 

In this kind of conqueſt things muſt be left as they 
were found; the ſame courts of judicature, the ſame 

Laws, the ſame cuſtoms, the ſame privileges: there 
- ought to be no other alteration than that of the ar- 

my; and of the name of the ſovereign. 

When a monarchy has extended its limits by the 
conqueſt of ſome neighbouring provinces, it ſhould 
treat thoſe provinces with great lenity. 

If a monarchy has been a long while endeavouring 
at conqueſts, the provinces of its ancient demeſne are 
. . ® Of the 18th of October, 1738, printed at Genoa by Franchetty 
Victiamo al noſtro general gouvernatore in detta ifgla, di condannare 
zn avenire ſolamente ex informata conſcieutia perſona alcuna nazio- 
nale, in' pena afflittiva, pot ra ben ſi far arreſtare ed incarcerare le 

perſonne che gli faranno ſoſpette, ſalyo di renderne poi a noi conto 
ſollecitamente. Art. 6. See alſq the * Gaxette of the 

r ed bt] 

| generally 

wi. aO©A ww amo fu 2 nu  OvoMmar 

S am. 

Y 
e 
e 

2 gee Puſſendorf 's Univerſal Hiſtory, 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 177 
generally ill uſed. They are obliged to ſubmit both 
to the new and to the ancient abuſes, and to be depo- 
pulated by a vaſt metropolis that ſwallows up the whole. 
Now, it after having made conqueſts round this de- 
meſne, the conquered people were treated like the an- 
cient ſubjects, the ſtate would be undone; the taxes 
ſent by the conquered provinces to the capital would 
never return; the inhabitants of the frontiers would 

be ruined, and conſequently the frontiers 'would be 

weaker ; the people would be diſaffected; and the ſub- 
ſiſtence of the armies, deſigned to act and remain 
there, would become more precarious. 

Such is the neceſſary date of a conquering monar- 
chy; a ſhocking luxury in the capital; miſery in the 
provinces ſomewhat diſtant ; and plenty in the molt 
remote. It is the ſame with ſuch a monarchy as with 
our planet; fire at the centre, verdure on the ſurface, 
and between both a dry, cold, and barren land. | 

C H A P . X. 
Of one monarchy that ſubdues another. 

COnzTines one monarchy ſubdues another. The 
ſmaller the latter, the better it is checked by for- 

treſſes, and the larger it is, the detter it is preſerved 

by colonies, 

CH AP. XI. | 
Of the manners of a conquered people. 

JF is not ſufficient in thoſe conqueſts to let the-con- 
quered nation enjoy their own laws; it is perhaps 
more neceſſary to leave them alſo their manners, be- 
cauſe people generally know, love, and defend their 
manners better than their laws. | 
The French have been driven nine times out of Ita - 
ly, becauſe, as hiſtorians ſay “, of their inſolent fa · 

miliariti 

5% THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book x. 

miliaries with the fair ſex. It is too much for a na- 
tion to be obliged to bear not only with the pride of 
conquerers, but with their incontinence and indiſere - 
tion; theſe are without doubt moſt grievous and in- 
tolerable, as they are the ſource of infinite outrages. 
HAF. XI. 
Of a law of Cyrus. | 

FAR am I from thinking that a good law which 

Cyrus made, to oblige the Lydians to practiſe 
none but mean or infamous profeſſions. It is true, he 
directed his attention to what was of the greateſt im- 
portance; he thought of revolts, and not of invaſions: 
but invaſions will ſoon come; for the Perſians and 
Lydians unite and corrupt each other. I would there · 
tore much rather ſupport by laws the ſimplicity and 

rudeneſs of the conquering nation, than the effemina» 

cy of the conquered. 

Ariſtodemus tyrant of Cumez * uſed all his endea- 
vours to baniſh courage, and to enervate the minds of 
youth. He ordered that boys ſhould let their hair 
grow in the ſame manner as girls, that they ſhould 
deck it with flowers, and wear long robes of different 
colours down to their heels; that, when they went 
to their maſters of muſic and dancing, they ſhould 
have women with them to carry their umbrellas, per- 
fumes, and fans, and to preſent them with combs 
and looking glaſſes whenever they bathed. This edu- 
cation laſted till the age of twenty; an education that 

could be agreeable to none but to a petty tyrant, who 
_— his ſovereignty to defend his life. | 

CHAP. XIII. 
Alexander. 
A Lozanons made a g- conqueſt. Let us ſee 

how it was conducte and ſince enough has 

» Dionyſ. Halicar, I. 7. "1 
en 

— 

. 2 

A ww 0 „ ro © 

** r A c«<« aa hd a —— — — 

aud virtue of Alexander. 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 179 - 

been ſaid by other writers of his valour, let us men- 
tion ſometbing concerning his prudence. 

The meaſures he took were juſt. He did not ſet 
out till he had compleated the reduction of Greece; 
he availed himſelf of this reduction, for no other end 
than for the execution of his enterpriſe ; . and he left 
nothing by which he could be annoyed behind him. 
He began his attack againſt the maritime provinces ; 
he made his land · forces keep cloſe to the ſea-coaſt, that 
they might not be ſeparated from his fleet ; he made an 
admirable uſe of diſcipline againſt numbers ; he never 
wanted proviſions; and if it be true that victory gave 
him every thing, he, in his turn did every thing to 
obtain it. 

In this manner he carried on fs conqueſts z let us 
now ſee how he preſerved them. 

He oppoſed thoſe who would have had him treat 
the Greeks as maſters®, and Perſians as flaves. He 
thought only of uniting the two nations, and of abo- 
Jiſhing the diſtinctions of a conquering and a conquer- 
ed people. After he had compleared his victories, he 
relinquiſhed all thoſe prejudices that had helped him to 
obtain them. He aſſumed the manners of the Per- 
ſians that he might not afflict them too much, 
obliging them to conform to thoſe of the Greeks. 
It was this humanity which made him ſhow fo great 
a reſpe& for the wife and mother of Darius ; this thax 
made him ſo continent; this that cauſed his death to 
be ſo much lamented by the Perſians. What a con- 
queror ! He is lamented by all the nations he has 
ſubdued. What an uſurper ! At his death the very 
family he has caſt from the throne is all in tears. 
Theſe were the moſt glorious paſſages in his life, and 
ſuch as hiſtory cannot produce an inſtance of in any 
other conqueror. 

* This was Ariſtotle's advice, Plutarch' s morals, of the fortune 
Nothing 

180 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X. 

Nothing conſolidates more a conqueſt than the uni. 
on formed between the two nations by marriages, 
Alexander choſe his wives from the nation he had ſub- 
 dued; he mſiſted on his courtiers doing the ſame; 
and the reſt of the Macedonians followed the exam- 
ple. The Franks and Burgundians permitted thoſe 
marriages*; the Viſigoths forbade them in Spain, 
and afterwards allowed them f. By the Lombards 
they were not only allowed but encouraged t. When 
the Romans wanted to weaken Macedonia, they or- 
dained that there ſhould be no intermarriages between 
the people of different provinces. . 

Alexander, whoſe aim was to unite the two nations, 
thought fit to eſtabliſh in Perſia a great number of 
Greek colonies. He built therefore a vaſt multitude 
of towns; and ſo ſtrongly were all the parts of this 
new empire cemented, that after his deceaſe, amidſt 
the trouble and confuſion of the moſt frightful civil 
wars, when the Greeks had reduced themſelves, as it 

were to a ſtate of annihilation, not a ſingle province 
of Perſia revolted. 

To prevent Greece and Macedon, from being too 

much exhauſted, he ſent a colony of Jews to Alexan- 

dria ; the manners of thoſe people ſignified nothing 

to him provided he could be ſure of their fidelity. 
The kings of Syria, abandoning the plan laid down 

by the founder of the empire, reſolved to oblige the 

Jews to conform to the manners of the Greeks; a re- 

ſolution that gave the moſt terrible ſhocks to their go- 

vernment. 

gee the law of the I alle tit. 12. art, 5. 

+ See the laws of the Viſigoths, book iii. tit. 1. $ 1. which abro- 
gates the ancient law, that had more regard, it ſays, to the diffe- 
rence of nations, than to that of people's conditions. 

| See the law of the / book i Ii, tit, 7. & 1. & 

CHAT: 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 181 

-C HAP. XIV. ey 
Charles XII. 

12 prince, Who depended entirely on his own 
ſtrength, haſtened his ruin, by forming deſigns 
that could never be executed "but. by a long war; a 
thing which his kingdom was unable to ſupport. 

It was not a declining ſtate he undertook to ſubvert, 
but a riſing empire. The Ruſſians made uſe of the 
war he waged againſt them, as of a military ſchool. 
Every defeat brought them nearer to victory; and 
loſing _—_— they learned to defend anne at 
home. 

Charles, in the deſerts of Poland, imagined him- 
ſelf maſter of the univerſe; here he wandered, and 
with him in ſome meaſure wandered Sweden; while 
his capital enemy acquired new ſtrength againſt him, 
locked him up, made ſettlements along the Baltic, 
deftroyed' or ſubdued Livonia. 

Sweden was like a river, whoſe waters are cut off 
at the fountain-head, in order to change its. courſe. 

It was not the affair of Pultowa that ruined Charles. 
Had he not been deſtroyed at that place, he would ia 
another. The caſualties of-fortane are eaſily repair- 

ed; but who can be guarded. againſt events oy in · 

2 ariſe from the nature of things, - 

But neither nature nor fortune were ever & muck 

againſt him as he himſelf. | - 

He was not directed by the actual ſituation of things, 
but by a kind of model he had formed to himſelf; 
and even this he followed very ill. He was not an 

Alexander ; but he v have been Alexander's beſt 
ſoldier. le 

Alexander's project Weceeded, becauſe it was pru · 
dently concerted The bad ſucceſs of the Slog 
in their ſeveral invaſions of Greece, the conqueſts of 

| Vor. I. | 2 - Ageſilaus, 

182 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X. 

Ageſilaus, and the retreat of the ten thouſand, had 

| ſhown to demonſtration the ſuperiority of the Greeks 

in their manner of fighting, and in the arms they 

made uſe of; and it was well known that the Perſans 

| were too proud to be corrected. . 
It was no longer poſſible for them to weaken Greece 
by diviſions; Greece was then united under one head, 

who could not pitch upon a better method of render - 

ing her inſenſible of her ſervitude, than by flattering 
her vanity with the deſtruction of her hereditary ene- 
my, and with the hopes of the conqueſt of Aſia. 

An empire. cultivated, by the moſt induſtrious nation 
in the world, that tilled the Jands through a principle 
of religion; an empire abounding with every conve- 
niency of life, furniſhed the enemy with all neceſſary 
means of ſubſiſting. 

It was eaſy to judge by the pride of thoſe. kings, 
who in vain were mortified by their numerous defeats, 
that they would precipitate their ruin by being ſo for · 
ward to venture battles; and, that flattery would ne- 
ver permit them to doubt of their grandeur. 

The project was not only wiſe, but wiſely executed. 
Alexander, in the rapidity of his conqueſts, even in 
the fire of his paſſions, had, if I may preſume, to uſe 
the expreſſion, a flaſh. of reaſon by. which he was di- 
rected, and which, thoſe who, wanted to make a ro- 
mance of his hiſtory, and whoſe. minds were more de- 
bauched than his, could not conceal from OS 

r 
New mgtheds. of preſerving a. conqueſt. | 

UF HEN + monarch bas conquered a.large countey, 
he may make 'uſe of an admirable method, 
equally proper for moderating deſpotic power, and for 
the conqueſt; it is a n nen by 

the conquerors of China- i 

2 oh Fa ww” . 9 . ˙ a. 

S2 

ao ww 2a > 

e g. 0 

— 
oo” 

ww 6G © 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 183 

In order to prevent the conquered nation from fal- 
ling into deſpair, the conquerors from growing inſo · 
lent and proud, the government from becoming mili- 
tary, and to contain the two nations within duty, the 
Tartar family now on the throne of China has ordain- 

ed, that every military corps in the provinces ſhould 
be compoſed half of Chineſe and half of Tartars, to 

the end that the jealouſy between the two nations may 

keep them within bounds. The courts of judicature 
are likewiſe half Chineſe, and half-Tartars. This is 
productive of ſeveral good effects. 1. The two na- 

tions keep one another in awe. 2. They both pre- 

ſerve the civil and military power, and one is not de» 
ſtroyed by the other. 3. The conquering nation may 
ſpread itſelf without being weakened and loſt. It is 

; likewiſe enabled to reſiſt civil and foreign wars. The 

want of ſo wiſe an inſtitution as this, has been the ruin 
of almoſt all the conquerors that ever exiſted. 

CHAP. XVI. 
Of conqueſts made by a deſpotic prince. 
WW HEN a conquelt happens to be vaſtly large, it 
ſuppoſes a deſpotic power: and then the army 
diſperſed in the provinces is not ſufficient, There 
ſhould be always a truſty body of troops around the 

prince, ready to fall inſtantly upon any part of the 

empire that might chance to waver. This military 

corps ought to awe the reſt, and to ſtrike terror into 

thoſe who, through neceſſity, have been intruſted with 
any authority in the empire. The emperor of China 
has always a large body of Tartars near his perſon, 
ready upon all occaſions. In India, in Turky, in Ja- 
pan, the prince has always a body - guard independent 
of the other regular forces. This particular corps 
keeps the diſperſed troops in awe. | 

22 CH AP. 

184 THE SPIRIT: OF: LAWS. Book Xl. 

CHAP XVII. 
The ſame ſubject continued. 

WE have obſerved, that the countries ſubdued by 

a deſpotic monarch . ougln to be feodary. Hi. 
ſtorians exbauſt themſelves in extolling the generoſity 
of thoſe conquerors. who reſtored to the throne the 
princes they had vanquiſhed. Extremely generous then 
were the Romans, who made kings in all parts, in or- 
der to have inſtruments of ſlavery *., A proceeding of 
that kind is abſolutely neceſſary, If the conqueror in- 
tends to preſerve the conquered country, neither the 
governors he ſends will be able to contain the ſubjects 
within duty, nor he himſelf the governors. He will be 
obliged to ſtrip his ancient patrimony of troops, iu or- 
der to ſecure the new. All. the miſeries of the two na- 
tions will be common; the civil war of one will com- 
municate itſelf to the other. On the contrary, if the 
conqueror reſtores the legitimate prince to the throne 
he will have a neceſſary ally, by the junction of whoſe 
forces his own will be augmented. We have a recent 

inſtance of what has been here ſaid in Shah Nadir, 

who conquered the Mogul, ſeized his treaſures, and 
left-him the poſſeſſion of Indoſtan. 

B '2 by » ws ig 

Of the laws that form political liberty, with 
regard to the conſtitution. 

þ 

— —-— 2 

C HA RES © 
A general Idea. 

1 Mane a diſtinction between the laws that form po- 
litical liberty with regard to the conſtitution, and 

* Ut habercut inſtrumenta {et vituiis, & reges. 

thoſe 

Chap. 2: THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. 185 
thoſe by which it is formed in. reſpe& to the citizen-- 
The former ſhall be the ſubje& of this book; che lat · 
ter 1 ſhall examine in the next. 

CHAP. IL 
Different fignifications given to the word Liberty. 
HERE is no word that has admitted of more va” 

rious fignifications, and has made' more different 
impreſſions on human minds, that that of bert. 

Some have taken it for a facility of depoſing a perſon 

on whom they had conferred a tyrannical authority; 
others for the power of chuſing a perſon whom they 
are obliged to obey; others for the right of bearing 
arms, and of being thereby enabled to uſe violence; 
others for the privilege of being governed by a native 
of their own country, or by their own laws. A cer» 
tain nation for a long time thought, that liberty con · 
filed in the privilege of wearing a long beard +; 
Some have annexed this name ro one form of govern-- 
ment, in excluſion of others: thoſe who. had a re- 
publican taſte, applied it to this government; thoſe 
who liked a monarchical ſtate, gave it to monarehies . 
Thus they all have applied the name of liberty to the 
government moſt conformable to their own cuſtoms 
and inclinations: and as in @ republic people have 
not ſo conſtant and ſo preſent a view of the inſtru · 
ments. of the evils they complain of, and likewiſe as 
the laws ſeem there to ſpeak more, and the executors 
of the laws leſs, it is generally attributed to republics, 
and denied to monarchies. In fine, as in democracies 

® have copied, ſays Cicero, Scevola's edict, which permits the 
Greeks to terminate their differcnces among themſ-lves according to 
their own laws, this-makes them conſider themſclves as afree people. 

+ The Ruſſians could not bear that the Czar Peter ſhould make 
them cut it off, 

: The Cappadvcians refuſed the condition of a . 

* was offered them by tbe Romans, 

Vs -the 

186 THE SPIRIT. OF LAWS: Book XI. 

the people ſeem to do very near whatever they pleaſe, 

liberty has been placed in this ſort of goverament, 
and the power of the people has. been confounded 

with their liberty. 
CHAP. III. 
In what liberty conſiſtt. 

I is true, that in democracies the people ſeem to 

do what they pleaſe ; but political liberty does not 
conſiſt in an unreſtrained freedom. In governments, 
that is, in ſocieties directed by laws, liberty can con- 

fiſt only in the power of doing what we ought to will, 

and not in being conſtrained to do what we * not 
to will 

We muſt have continually preſent to our minds the 

difference between independence and liberty. Liberty 
is a right of doing whatever the laws permit; and if 

a citizen could do what they forbid, he would no 
longer be poſſeſſed of liberty, becauſe all his fellow- 

citizens would have the ſame power. 
f CHAP: IV. 
The ſame ſubje@ continued. 

EnocraTic and ariflocratic ſtates are not neceſſa. 
rily free. Political liberty is to be met with only 
in moderate governments: yet even in theſe it is not 

always met with. It is there, only when there is no 

abuſe of power: but conſtant experience ſhows us, 

chat every man inveſted with power is apt to abuſe it; 
/ | he puſhes on till he comes to ſomething that limits 

him. Is it not arange, thongh true, to ſay, that vir- 
tue itſelf has need of limits? 4 

To prevent the abuſe of power, it is neceſſary that 
by the very diſpoſition of things power ſhould he a 
check to power. A government may be ſo conſtitu- 

ted, as 14 ä be * to do things to > which 
| | the 

th 

1 

Chap. 5. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 187 
the law does not oblige him, nor forced to abſtain 
from things which the law permits. 
CHAF. V. 
Of the end or view / different governments. 
"Hovcn all governments have the ſame general end, 
which is that of preſervation, yet each has ano- 

ther particular view. Increaſe of dominion was the 
view of Rome; war, of Sparta; religion, of the Jew- 
iſh laws; commerce, that of Marſeilles; public tran- 
quillity, that of the laws of China * navigation, that 
of the laws of Rhodes; natural liberty, that of the 
policy of the ſavages; in general, the pleaſures of the 
prince, that of deſpotic ſtates; that of monarchies, 
the prince's and the kingdom's glory; the indepen- 
dence of individuals, is the end aimed at. by the laws 
of Poland, and from thence reſults the oppreſſion of 
the whole +. , 
One nation there is alſo in the world, that has for 
the direct end of its conſtitution political liberty. We 
ſhall examine preſently the principles on which this li- 
berty is founded: if they are ſound, liberty will ap- 
pear as in & mirror. 

To diſcover political liberty in a ien no 
great labour is requiſite. If we are capable of ſeeing 
it where it exiſts, why ſhould. we go any farther in 
ſearch of it ? 

CHAP, VI.. | 

Of the conſtitution of England. | 

N every government there are three ſorts of power: 
the legiſlative ; the executive, in reſpect to things 

dependent on the law of nations; and the executive, 
in regard to things that depend on the civil lw. 

The natural end of a ſlate that has no forcign enemies, or thed 

| thinks itſelf ſecured againſt them by barriers. 

© + Inconvenicncy of the hberam veto, 

By 

— —— — — — — Sc” S- 
© 

———— — 
— 

„ 

183 _ THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book Xt. 

By virtue of the firſt, the prince or magiſtrate enaqs 
temporary or perpetual laws, and amends or abropates 

thoſe that have been already enacted. By the ſecond, 

he makes peace or war, ſends or receives embaſſies, 
eſtabliſhes the public ſecurity, and provides again in- 
valions. By the third, he puniſhes criminals, or de- 
termines the diſputes that ariſe between individuals, 

The latter we ſhall call the judiciary power, and the 

other ſimply the executive power of the tate. 

The political liberty of the ſubject is a tranquillity of 
mind, ariſing from the opinion each perſon has of his 
fiſety. In order to have this liberty, it is requiſite 
the government be ſo conſlituted as one man need not 
be afraid of another. 

Whea the legiſlative and executive powers are unit- 
ed in the ſame perſon, or in the ſame body of magi- 
ſtrates, there can be no liberty; becauſe apprehenſions 

may ariſe, leſt the ſame nonarch or ſenate ſhould' enact 

tyrannical laws, to exccnte them in a tyraanical man- 

Ner. IE + 
Again, there is no bberty, if the power of judging 

be not ſeparated from the legiſlative and executive 

powers. Were it joined with the legiſlative, the life 
and liberty of the ſubject would be expoſed to arbi- 
trary controul ; for the judge then would be the le- 
giſlator. Were it joined to the executive power, the 
judge might behave with all the violence of an op- 
preſſor. 

There would be an end of every thing, were the 
fame man, or the fame body, whether of. the nobles 
or of the people, to exc: ciſe thoſe three powers, that 

of enacting laws, that of executing the public reſolu · 

tions, and that of judging the crimes or differences of 

individuals. > 
Moſt kingdoms of Europe enjoy a moderate govern- 

went, becauſe he prince, who is inveſted with the two 

fir ll 

eee 

0 

Chap. 6. THE sPIRT OF LAWS. 189 

firſt powers, leaves the third to his ſubjects. In Tur- 
ky, where theſe three powers are united in the ſultan's 
perſon, the ſubjects groan under the weight of a moſt 
frightful oppreſſion. 

In the republics of Italy, where theſe three powers 
are united, there is leſs liberty than in our monarchies, 
Hence their government is obliged to have recourſe to 
as violent methods for its ſupport, as even that of the 
Turks; witneſs the ſtate inquiſitors“, and the lion's 
mouth into which every informer may at all hours 
throw bis written accuſations. 

What a ſituation mult the poor ſubject be in mite 
thoſe republics! The ſame body of magiſtrates are 
poſſeſſed, as executors of the laws, of the whole power 
they have given themſelves in quality of legiſlators, 
They may plunder the ſtate by their general determi- 
vations; and as they have likewiſe the judiciary power 
in their hands, every private citizen may be ruined by 
their particular deciſions. 

The whole power is here united in one w body and 
though there is no external pomp that indicates a de- 
ſpotic ſway, yet the 3 feel the effects mk it every 
moment. 

Hence it is that many of the princes of eps 
whoſe aim has been levelled at arbitrary power, have 
conſtantly ſet out with uniting in their own perſons, 
all the branches of magiltracy, and all the 3 offi· 

ces of ſtate. 

I allow indeed that the mere hereditary e 

of the Italian republics, does not an{wer exactly to 

the deſpotic power of the eaſtern princes. The num- 
ber of magiſtrates ſometimes ſoftens the power of the 
magiſtracy; the whole body of the nobles do not al: 
ways concur in the- ſame deſigns; and different tri- 

bunals are erected, that temper each other. Thus at 

At Venice. Ven; 4 
Enice 

190 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

Venice the legiſlative power-is in the council, the exe. 
cutive inthe pregadi, and the judiciary in the quaran. 
tia. But the miſchief is, that theſe different tribunals 
are compoſed of magiſtrates all belonging to the ſame 
body; which conſtitutes almoſt one and the ſame 
power. 

The juſticiary power ought not to be given to a 
ſtanding ſenate; it ſhould be exercifed by perſons ta- 
ken from the body of the people “, at certain times of 
the year, and purſuant to a form and manner preſcri- 
bed by law, in order to direct a tribunal that ſhould laſt 
only as long as neceflity requires. 

By this means the power of judging, a power ſo 
terrible to mankind, not being annexed to any particular 
ſtate or proſeſſion, becomes, as it were, inviſible. Peo- 
ple have not then the judges continually preſent to their 
view; they fear the office but not the magiſtrate. 

In accuſations of a deep or criminal nature, it is 

proper the perſon accuſed ſhould have the privilege of 
chuſing in ſome meaſure his judges, in concurrence 
with the law; or, at leaſt, he ſhould have a right to 
except againft ſo great a number, that the remaining 
part may be deemed his own choice. 

The other two powers may be given rather to ma- 
giſtrates or permanent bodies, becauſe they are not ex- 
erciſed on any private ſubject; one being no more than 
the general will of the ſtate, and the other the execu- 
tion of that general will. 

- But though the tribunals onght not to be fixed, yet 
the judgments ought, and to ſuch a degree as to be 

always conformable to the exact letter of the law. 
Were they to be the private opinion of the judge, peo- 
ple would then live in ſociety without knowing exactly 
the obligations it lays them under. 

* As at Athens. ; | 

j 

The 

Chap. 6 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 191 

The judges ought likewiſe to be in the ſame ſtation 
as the accuſed, or, in other hands, his peers, to the 
end that he may not imagine he is fallen into the hands 
of perſons inclined to treat him with rigour. 

If the legiſlature leaves the executive power in poſ., 
ſeſſion of a right to impriſon thoſe ſubjects who can 
give ſecurity for their good behaviour, there is an end 
of liberty; unleſs they are taken up, in order to an- 
ſwer without delav to a capital crime; in this caſe they 
are really free, being ſubject only to the power of the 
law. 

But ſhould the legiſlature think irſelf in danger by 
ſome ſecret conſpiracy againſt the ſtate, or by a cor- 
reſpondence with a foreign enemy, it might authoriſe. 
the executive power, for a ſhort and limited time, to 
impriſon ſuſpected perſons, who, in that caſe, would 
loſe their liberty only, for a while, to preſerve it, for 
ever. 

And this is the only, reaſonable method that can be. 
ſubſtituted to the tyrannical magiſtracy of the ZEpbori, 
and to the ſtate-inquiſitors of Venice, whe. are allo 
deſpotical. 

As in a free ſtate, every man who. is ſuppoſed a free 
agent ought, to be his own. governor ; ſo. the legiſla - 
tive power ſhould; reſide in the whole body of the peo-—- 
ple. But ſince this is impoſſible in large ſtates, and in 
ſmall, ones. is ſubject to many inconveniencies ; it is fit 
the people ſhould act by their repreſentatives, what 
they cannot act by themſelves, 

The inhabitants of a particular town are much bet · 
ter acquainted, with its wars and intereſts, than 
with thoſe of other places; and are better judges of 
the capacity of their neighbours, than of that of the 
reſt of their countrymen. The members therefore of 
the legiſlature ſhould, not be choſen from the general 
body of the nation; but it is proper, that, in every 

conſiderable 

192 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

conſiderable place, a repreſentative ſhould be elected 
by the inhabitants. | | 

The great advantage of repreſentatives, is their be- 
ing capable of diſcuſſing affairs. For this the people 
collectively are extremely unfit, which is one of the 
greateſt inconveniencies of a democracy. 
It is not at all neceſſary that the repreſentatives, 

who have received a general inſtruction from their 
electors, ſhould wait to be particularly inſtructed on 
every affair, as is practiſed in the diets of Germany, 
True it is, that, by this way of proceeding, the ſpeech- 
es of the deputies might with greater propriety be cal. 
led the voice of the nation: but, on the other hand, 
this would throw them into infinite delays would give 
each deputy a power of controlling the afſembly ; and, 
on the moſt urgent and preſſing occaſions, the ſprings 
of the nation might be ſtopped by a ſingle caprice. 
When the deputies, as Mr. Sidney well obſerves, 

repreſent a body of people, as in Holland, they ought. 

to be accountable to their conſtituents : but it is a dif- 
| ferent thing in England, where they are deputed by 
boroughs. 

All the inhabitants of the ſeveral diſtricts ought to 
have a right of voting at the election of a repreſenta- 
tive, except ſuch as are in ſo mean a ſituation as to be 
deemed to have no will of their own. 

One great fault there was in moſt of the ancient re- 
publics: ; that the people had a right to active reſolu- 
tions, ſuch as require ſome execution, a thing of which 
they are abſolutely incapable. They ought to have no 
hand in the government, but for the chuſing of repre- 
ſentatives. which is within their reach” For though 
few can tell the exact degree of mens capacities, yet 
there are none but are capable of knowing in general, 
whether the perſon they chuſe i is better . than 
moſt of his neighbours. | 

1 "Neither 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 193 

Neither ought the repreſentative body to be choſen 
for active reſolutions, for which it is not ſo fit; but for 
the enacting of laws, or to ſee whether the laws al- 
ready enacted be duly executed, a thing they are very 
capable of, and which none indeed but themſelves can 
properly perform. 

In a ſtate there are always perſons diſtinguiſhed by 
their birth, riches, or honours: but were they to be 
confounded with the common people, and to have 
only the weight of a ſingle vote like the reſt, the com- 
mon liberty would be their ſlavery, and they would 
have no intereſt in ſupporting it, as moſt of the popu- 
lar reſolutions would be againſt them. The {hare they 
have therefore in the legiſlature ought to be propor. 
tioned to the other advantages they have in the ſtate ; 
which happens only when they form a body that has a 
right to put a top to the enterpriſes of the people, as 
the people have a right to put a ſtop to theirs. 

The legiſlative power is therefore committed to the 
body of the nobles, and to the body choſen to repre- 
ſent the people, which have each their aſſemblies and 
deliberations apart, each their ſeparate views and in- 
tereſts. 

Of the three powers above mentioned, the judiciary 
is in ſome meaſure next to nothing. There remains 
therefore only two; and as theſe have need of a regu- 
lating power to temper them, the part of the legiſlative 
body compoſed of the nobility is extremely proper for 
this very purpoſe. 

The body of the nobility ought to be hereditary. 
In the firſt place, it is fo in its own nature; and in the 
next, there muſt be a conſiderable intereſt to preſerve 
its privileges; privileges that in themſelves are obno- 
xious to popular envy, and of courſe, in a free ſtate, 
are always in danger. | 1 

Vox. I. e "py But 

— — — — — — — — — 

A. 

194 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

But as an hereditary power might be tempted to 
purſue its own particular intereſts; and forget thoſe of 
the people; it is proper that where they may reap a 
ſingufar advantage from being corrupted, as in the 
Jaws relating to the ſupplies, they thould have no other 
{hare in the legiſlation than the power of rejecting, and 
not that of reſolving. 

By the power of reſolving, I mean the right of or. 
daining by their own authority, or of amending what 
has been ordained by others. By the power of rejec- 
ing, I would be anderſtood to mean the right of an- 
nulling a reſolution taken by another ; which was the 

power of the tribunes at Rome. And though the per- 

fon poſſeſſed of the privilege of rejecting may likewiſe 
have the right of approving, yet this approbation paſ- 
ſes for no more than a declaration, that he intends to 
make no uſe of his privilege of rejecting, and is deri- 
ved from that very privilege. 

The executive power ought to be in the hands of a 

monarch ; becauſe this branch of government, which 

has always need of expedition, is better adminiſtered 
by one than by many : whereas, whatever depends 
on the legiſlative power, is oftentimes better regulated 
by many than by a ſingle perſon. 

n Bot if there was no monarch, and the executive 
power was committed to a certain number of perſons, 
ſelected from the legiſlative body, there would be an 
end. then of liberty, by reaſon the two powers would 
be united; as the ſame perſons would actually ſome- 
fimes have, and wonld moreover be always able to 
have, a ſhare in both. 

Were the legiſlative body to be a conſiderable time 
without meeting, this would likewiſe pat an end to li- 
berty. For one of theſe two things would naturally 
follow; either that there would be no longer any le- 
giſlative reſolutions, and then the ſtate would fall into 

| anarchy; 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 195 

anarchy ; or that theſe reſolutions would be taken by 
the executive power, which would render it abſolute. 
It would be needleſs for the legiſlative body to con- 
tinue always aſſembled. This would be troubleſome to 
the repreſentatives, and moreover would cut out too 
much work for the executive power, 1o as to take off 
its attention from executing, and oblige it to think on- 

ly of defending its own prerugalive, and the right it 

has to execute. 

Again, were the legiſlative body to be always afſem- 
bled, it might happen to be kept up only by filling 
the places of the deceaſed members with new repre- 

ſentatives; and in that caſe, if the legiſlative body< 

was once corrupted, the evil would be pait all remedy, 
When different Ileg:{]ative bodies ſucceed one another, 
the people who have a bad opinion of that which is 
actually fitting, may reaſonably entertain ſome hopes 
of the next: but were it to be always the ſame body, 
the people upon ſeeing it once corrupted, would no 
longer expect any good from its laws; and of courſe 
they would either become deſperate, or fall into a itate 
of indolence. 

The legillative body ſhould not afſemble of itſelf. 
For a body is ſuppoled to have no will but when it is 
aſſembled ; and belides, were it not to aſſemble unani- 
mouſly, it would be impollibie to determine which was 
really the legiſlative body, the part aſſembled, or the 
other. And if it had a right to prorogue-itlelt, it 
might happen never to be prorogued ; which would 
be extremely dangerous, in caſe it ſhould ever attemp: 
to iacroach on the executive power. Belides, there 
are ſeaſons ſome of which are more proper than others 

for aſſembling the legiſlative body: it is fit therefore 

that the executive power ſhould regulate the time of 
convening, as well as the duration of thoſe afſemblies, 
according to the circumſtances and exigencies of ſtate 

known to itſelf. 
R 2 Were 

— 232 —— — — 

196 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 
Were the executive power not to have a right of 

putting a ſtop to the incroachments of the legiſlative 

body, the latter would become deſpotie; for as it might 
arrogate to itſelf what authority it pleaſed, i would 
100n deſtroy all the other powers. 

Bat it is not proper, on the other hand, that the 

legiſlative power-ſhould have a right to ſtop the exe- 
cutive. For as the execution has its natural limits, it 

is uſcleſs to confine it; beſides, the executive power 

is generally employed in momentary operations, The 
power therefore of the Roman tribunes was faulty, as 
it put a ſtop not only to the legiſlation, but likewiſe 
to the execution itſelf; which was attended with in. 
finite milchiefs. 

But if the legiſlative power in a free government 
ought to have no right to ſtop the executive, it has 
a right, and ought to have the means of examining 
in what manner its laws have been executed; an ad- 
vantage which this government has over that of Crete 
and Sparta, where the Colmi and the Ephori gave no 
account of their adminiſtration. 

But whatever may be the iſſue of that examination, 
the legiſlative body ought not to have a power of 

judging the perſon, nor of courſe the conduct of him 

who is intruſted with the executive power. His per- 
ſon ſhould be ſacred, becauſe as it is neceſſary for the 
good of the ſtate to prevent the legiſlative body from 
rendering themſelves arbitrary, the moment he is ac- 
cuſed or tried, there is an end of liberty. 

In this caſe the ſtate would be no longer a monarchy, 
but a kind of republican, though not a free govern- 
ment. But as the perſon intruſted with the executive 
power cannot abuſe it without bad counſellors, and 
ſuch as hate the laws as miniſters, though the laws 

"favour them as ſubjects; theſe men may be examined 

and puniſhed. An advantage which this ene, 
has 

A OT mw tee 

has over that of Gnidus, where the law allowed of no 
ſuch thing as calling the Amymones “ to an account, 

even after their adminiſtration ; and. therefore the 

people could never obtain any ſatisfaction for the inju- 
ries done them. 

Though in general the judiciary power ought not 
to be united with any part of the legiſlative, yet this 
is liable to three exceptions, founded on the particular 
intereſt of the party accuſed. | 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 797 

The great are always obnoxious to popular envy; 

and were they to be judged by the people, they might 
be in danger from their judges, and wonld moreover 
be deprived of the privilege which the meaneſt ſub- 
jeQ is pofſeiſed of in a free ſtate, of being tried by 
their peers. The nobility for this reaſon ought not to 

be cited before the ordinary courts of judicature, 

but before that part of the legiſlature which is com- 

poſed of their o body. 

It is poſſible that the law, which is clear-ſi :ghted in 
one ſenſe, and blind in another, might in ſome caſes 
de too ſevere. But, as we have already obſerved, the 
national judges are no more than the mouth that pro · 
nounces the words of the law, mere paſſive beings, 
incapable of moderating either its force or rigour. 
That part therefore of the legiſlative body, which we 
have juſt now obſerved to be a neceſſary tribunal on 
another occaſion, is alſo a neceſſary tribunal in this; 
it belongs to its ſupreme authority to moderate the 
law in favour of the ow itſelf, by mitigating the ſen- 
tence 

It might alſo 3 that a ſubject intruſted with 
the adminiſtration of public affairs, might infringe 
'  ® Theſe were magiſtrates choſen annually by ms 2 See 
Stephen of Byzantium. 

lt was lawful to accuſe the Sin e afeer the expira- 

FRY of their - ſeveral offices, Sce in Dionyſ. Haſicara, I. 9., the 
Hair of Genacius the tribune, 

R3 the 

98 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book xl. 

the rights of the people, and be guilty of crimes which 

the ordinary magiſtrates either could not, or would 
not puniſh. But in general the legitlative power can. 
not judge; and much leſs can it be a judge in this 
particular caſe, where it repreſents. the party concern. 
ed, which is the people. It can only therefore im- 
peach, But before what court ſhall it bring its im- 
peachment? Muſt it go and abaſe itſelf before the or- 
dinary tribunals, which are its inferiors, and being 
compoſed moreover of men who are choſen from the 
people as well as itſelf will naturally be ſwayed by 
the autbority of ſo powerful an accuſer? No: In or- 
der to preſerve the dignity of the people, and the ſe - 
curity of the ſubject, the legiſlative part, which repre- 
ſents the people, mult bring in its charge before the le- 
giſlative part which repreſents the nobility, who have 
neither the ſame intereſts nor the ſame paſſions. 

Here is an advantage which this government has 
over moſt of the ancient republics, where there was 
this abuſe, that the people were at the ſame time both 
jadge and accuſer. 

The executive power, purſuant. to what. has been 
already ſaid, ought to have a ſhare in the. legiſlature 
by the power of rejecting, otherwiſe it would ſoon be 
ſtripped of its prerogative. But ſhould the legiſlative 
power uſurp a ſhare of the executive, the latter would 
be equally undone. 

If the prince were to have a ſhare in the legiſlature 
by che power of reſolving, liberty would be loſt. But 
as it is neceſſary he ſhould have a ſhare in the legiſla- 
rure for the ſupport of his own prerogative, this ſhare 
muſt conſiſt in the power of rejecting. 

The change of government at Rome was owing to 
this, that neither the ſenate, who had one part of the 
executive power, nor the magiſtrates, who were in- 
truſted with the other, had the right of rejecting, which 
was entirely lodged ia the people. 

Here 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 199 

Here then is the fundamental conſtitution of the go- 
rernment we are treating of. The legiſlative body be- 
ing compoſed of two parts, one checks the other, by 
the mutual privilege of rejecting. They are both 
checked by the executive power, as the executive is by 
the legiſlative. 

Theſe three powers ſhould naturally form a ſtate of 
repoſe or ination. But as there is a neceſſity for 
movement in the courſe of human affairs, they are 
forced to move, but ſtill to move in concert. 

As the executive power has no other part in the le- 
giſlative than the privilege of rejecting, it can have no 
ſhare in the public debates. It is not even neceſſary 
that it ſhould propoſe, becauſe as it may always diſap- 
prove of the reſolutions that ſhall be taken, it may 
Ikewiſe reje& the deciſions on thoſe propoſals which 
were made againſt its will, 

[n.ſome ancient commonwealths, where public de- 

bates were carried on by the people in a body, it was 

natural for the executive power to-propoſe and debate. 
with the people,  otherwile their retolutions muſt have 
been attended with a ſtrange confuſion. 

Were the executive power to. ordain the- raiſing of 
public. money, otherwiſe than by giving its conſent, 
liberty would be at an end; becanie it would become 
legiſlative in the moſt-important point of legiſlation. 

If the legiſlative power was to ſettle the ſubſidies, 
not from year to year, but for ever, it would run the 
riſk of loſing its liberty, becauſe. the executive power 
would no longer be dependent; and when once it was 
poſſeſſed of ſuch a perpetual right, it would be 4 matter 
of indifference, whether it held it of itſelf, or of ano- 
ther. The ſame may be ſaid if it ſhould fix,- not from 
year to year, but for ever, the ſea and land forces with 
which it is to intruſt the executive-power. 

To prevent the executive power from being able to 

oppreſs, 

200 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

oppreſs, it is requiſite that the armies, with which it 
is intruſted, ſhould conſiſt of the people, and have the 

ſame ſpirit as the people, as was the caſe at Rome, 

till the time of Marius. To obtain this end, there are 
only two ways, either that the perſons employed in 
the army ſhould have ſufticient property to anſwer for 
their conduct to their fellow - ſubjects, and be inliſted 
only for a year, as was cuſtomary at Rome: or if 
there ſhould be a ſtanding army, compoſed” chiefly of 
the moſt deſpicable part of the nation, the legiſlative 
power ſhould have a right to diſband them as ſoon as 
it pleated ; the ſoldiers ſhould live in common with the 
reſt of the people; and no ſeparate camp, barracks, 
or fortreſs, thould be ſuffered. 

When once an army is eltablifhed, it onght not to 
depend immediately on the legiſlative, but on the exe- 
cutive power; and this from the very nature of the 
thing; its buſineſs en more in action than in 
deliberation. 

From a manner of hiading that TER among lt 
mankind, they ſet a higher value upon courage than 
timorouſnets, on activity than prudence, on ſtrength 
than counſel. Hence, the army will ever deſpiſe a 
ſenate, and reſpect their own officers. They will na- 
turally flight the orders ſent them by a body of men 
whom they look upon as cowards, and therefore un- 
worthy to command them. So that as ſoon as the 

army depends on the legiſlative body, the government 

becomes a military one; and if the contrary has ever 
happened. it has been owing to ſome extraordinary 
circumſtances. | It is becauſe the army was always 
kept divided; it is becauſe it was compoſed of ſeveral 
bodies, that depended each on their particular pro- 
vince; it is becauſe the capital towns were ſtrong 
places, defended by their natural ſituation, and not 

garriſoned with regular troops. Holland, for inſtance, 

18 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 201 

is ſtill ſafer than Venice; ſhe might drown, or ſtarve 
the revolted troops: for as they are not quartered in 
towns capable of furniſhing them with neceſſary ſub- 
liltence, this ſubſiſtence is of courle precarious. 
Whoever ſhall read the admirable treatiſe of Ta- 
citus on the manners of the Germans“, will find that 
it is from them the Engliſh have borrowed the idea 
of their political government. This beautiful ſyſtem 
was invented firſt in the woods. | 
As all human things have an end, the ſtate we are 

ſpeaking of will loſe its liberty, it will perith. Have 

not Rome, Sparta, and Carthage perithed? It will 
periſh when the legiſlative power ſhall be more cor- 
rupted than the executive. 

It is not my buſineſs to examine whether the Engliſh | 
atually enjoy this liberty, or not. It is ſufficient for 
my purpoſe to obſerve, that it is eſtabliſhed by their 
laws; and I inquire no further. 

Neither do I pretend by this to undervalue other 
governments, nor to ſay that this extreme political 
liberty ought to give uneaſineſs to thoſe Who have 
only a moderate ſhare of it. How ſhould I have any 
ſuch deſign, I who think that even the exceſs of rea- 

ſon is not always delirable, and that mankind geue- 

rally find their account better ia mediums than in ex- 
tremes ? | 

Harrington, i in his Oceana, has alſo inquired into 
the higheſt point of liberty to which the conſtitution 
of a (tate may be carried. But of him indeed it may 
be ſaid, that, for want of knowing the nature. of real 
liberty, he buſied himſelf in purſuit of an imaginary 
one, and that he built a Chalcedon, though he had a 
Byzantium before his eyes. 

Pe minoribus rebus principes conſultant, de rajoribus omnes; 

ita tamen ut ea quoque, quorum penes plebem arbitrium eſt, apud 
principes pertractentur. 

CHAP. 

% 

202 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XI. 

_y 

CHAP Vil 

Of the monarchies we are acg uainted with, 

HE monarchies we are acquainted with have not, 

like that we have been ſpeaking of, liberty for 

their direct view: their only aim is the ſubject's, the 

ſtate's, and the prince's glory. But from this glory - 

there reſults a ſpirit of liberty, which in thoſe ſtates 
may perform as great things, and may contribute as 
much perhaps to happineſs, as liberty itſelf. 

Here the three powers are not diſtributed and found. 
ed on the model of the conſtitution above mentioned ; 
they have each a particular diſtribution, according to 
which they border more or leſs upon political liber- 
ty; and if they did not border upon it, monarchy 
would degenerat? into deſpotic government. 

CHAP. VIII. 
Why the ancients had not a clear idea of monarchy. 

T HE ancients had no notion of a government found- 
ed on a body of nobles, and much leſs on a legiſ- 
lative body compoſed of the repreſentatives of the 
pevple. The republics of Greece and Italy were ci- 
ties that had each their own form of government, and 
convened their ſubjects within their own walls. Be- 
fore Rome had ſwallowed up all the other republics, 
there was ſcarce any where a king to be found, no, not 
in Italy, Gaul, Spain, or Germany; theſe were all 
| petty ſtates, or little republics. Even Africa itſelf was 
ſubje& to a great republic; and Afia Minor was occu- 
pied by Greek colonies. There was therefore no ex- 
ample of deputies of towns, or aſſemblies of the ſlates; 
one muſt have gone as far as Perſia to find a country 

under the government of a ſingle perſon. 
I am not ignorant that there were confederate re- 
publics, in which ſeveral towns ſent deputies to an 
aſſembly: 

wh a wi & 0 „ K — 8 4 

„ ee — an — — 8 R ﬀmv-* 

. Ss WW we 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 203 

aſſembly: but I affirm there was no monarchy on the 
reſent model. 

The firſt plan therefore of the monarchies we are 
acquainted with was thus formed. The German na- 
tions that conquered the Roman empire, were, as it 
is known to every one, a free people. - Of this we may 

be convinced, only by reading Tacitus on the manners 

of the Germans. 'The conquerors ſpread themſelves 
all over the country ; living moſtly in the fields, and 
very little in towns. When they were in Germany, 
the whole nation was able to aſſemble. This they could 

no longer do, when they were diſperſed through the 

conquered provinces. And yet as it was neceffary that 
the nation ſhould deliberate on public affairs, purſuant 
to their uſual method before the conqueſt; they had 
therefore recourſe to repreſentatives. Such is the ori- 
gin of the Gothic government amongſt us. At firſt it 
was mixed with ariſtocracy and monarchy ; a mixture 
attended with this inconveniency, that the common 
people were bond-men. The cuſtom afterwards ſuc- 
ceeded of granting letters of infranchiſement, and was 
ſoon followed by ſo perfect a harmony between the ei- 

vil liberty of the people, the privileges of the nobility 

and clergy, and the prince's prerogative, that I really 
think there never was in the world a government ſo 
well tempered as that of each part of Europe, ſo long 
as it laſted. Surpriſing ! that the corruption of the 
government of a conquering nation, ſhould have given 
birth to the beſt ſpecies of conſtitution that could poſ- 
ibi be imagined by man“. 

® Tt was good government has had in itfelf a capacity of 
growing better, l 

CHAP: 

—— 9. — 

— — —— — 
- 
- * 
1 

* 

204 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI - 

CHAP. IX. _ 
Ariſtotle's manner of thinking. 

Auer is greatly puzzled in treating of monar- 
diſtinguiſh them by the form of conſtitution, but by 
things merely accidental, as the virtues or vices of the 
prince, or by things extrinſical, ſuch as the uſurpation 
of, or ſucceſſion to tyranny. 

He ranks among the number of monarchies the Per- 
ſian empire and the kingdom of Sparta. But is it not 
evident, that the one was a deſpotic ſtate, and the 
other a republic ? 

The ancients, who were ſtrangers to the diſtribution 
of the three powers in the government of a ſingle per- 
ſon, could neyer form a juſt idea of monarchy. 

CHA FP. 4 
What other politicians thought. 

TO temper the government of a ſingle perſon, Ary- 
bas king + of Epirus found no other remedy than 

a republic. The Moloſſi, not knowing how to limit 
the ſame power, made two kings ; by this means the 
ſtate was weakened more than the prerogative of the 
prince; they wanted rivals, and they created enemies. 
Two kings were tolerable no where but at Sparta 
here they did not form, but were only a part of the 

conſtitution, 

ds CHAP. XI. 
| Of the kings of the heroic times of Greece. 
I* the heroic times of Greece, a kind of monarch 

1 aroſe that was not of long duration h. Thoſe who 
had been inventors of arts, who had fought in their 

„Polit. book iii. chap. 14. + See Juſtin, book x7. 
7 Ariſt, Polit, book v. chap. 8. $ Ibid. book iii. chap. 14. 
| | . 

1 | country's 

chy “. He makes fve ſpecies, and he does not 

- 
nm n 1 PIR. _ ya 2” 

- 1 1 TT — * 

TY wy 

— 

, 
8 

Chap. 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 205 

country's cauſe, had eſtabliſhed ſocieties, or diſtributed 
lands among the people, obtained the regal power, 
and tranſmitted it to their children. They were kings, 
prieſts, and judges. This is one of the five ſpecies of 

monarchy mentioned by Ariſtotle * ;. and the only one 

that can give us any idea of the monarchical conſtitu- 
tion. But the plan of this conſtitution is oppoſite to 
that of our modern monarchies. | 

The three powers were there diſtributed in ſuch a 
manner as the people had the legiſlative , and the 
king the executive, together with the power of judg- 
ing; Whereas in modern monarchies, the prince is in- 
veſted with the executive and legiſlative powers, or, at 
leaſt, with part of the 3 but does not — 
the power of judging. 

In the government of the kings of the heraie times, 
the three powers were ill diſtributed. Hence thoſe 
monarchies could not long ſubſiſt; for, as ſoon as the 
people got the legiſlative power into their hands, they 
might, as they every where did, upon the very leaſt 
caprice, ſubvert the regal authority. 

Among a free people poſſeſſed of the legillative 
power, a people incloſed within walls, where every 
thing of an odious nature becomes ſtill more odious, 
it is the higheſt maſterpiece of legiſlation, to know how 
to place properly the judiciary power. But it could not 
be in worſe hands, than in thoſe of the perſon to whom 
the executive power had been already committed. 
From that very inſtant, the monarch became terrible. 
But at the ſame time, as he had no ſhare in the legiſla- 
ture, he could make no defence againſt it; thus his 
power was in one ſenſe too great, in another too little, 

They had not as yet diſcovered, that the true func- 
tion of a prince was to appoint judges, and not to 

* Ariſtot. Polit. book iii. chap. 14. f See what Plutarch ſays 
in the life of Theſeus. See likewiſe * book 2. 

Vor. I. 8 ſit 

206 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X! 

ſit as judge himſelf. The oppoſite policy rendered 
the government of a fingle perſon inſupportable. 
Hence all thoſe kings were baniſhed. The Greeks had 
no notion of the proper diſtribution of the three 
powers in the government of one perſon ; they could 
ſee it only in that of many; and this kind of conſtitu- 
tion they diſtinguithed by the name of polity *. 

C HA P. XII. 

Of the government of the kings of Rome, and in what 
manner the three powers were there diſtributed. 

"= government of the kings of Rome had ſome 

relation to that of the kings of the heroic times 
of Greece. Its ſubverſion, like the latter's, was owing 
to its general defect, though in itſelf, and in its own 
particular nature, it was exceeding good. 

In order to give an adequate idea of this govern- 
ment, I ſhall diſtinguiſh that of the five firſt kings, 
that of Servius Tullius, and that of Tarquin. 

The crown was elective, and under the five firſt 
kings the ſenate had the greateſt ſhare in the election. 

Upon the king's deceaſe, the ſenate examined whe- 
ther they ſhould continue the eftabliſhed form of go- 
vernment. If they thought proper to continue it, they 
named a magiſtrate + taken from their own body, who 
choſe a king ; the ſenate were to approve of the elec- 
tion, the people to confirm it, and the augurs to de- 
clare the approbation of the gods. If one of theſe 
three conditions was wanting, they were obliged to 
proceed to another election. 

The conſtitution was a mixture of monarchy, ari- 
ſtocracy, and democracy ; and ſuch was the harmo- 
ny of power, that there was no inſtance of jealouſy or 
diſpute in the firſt reigns. The king commanded the 

* Ariſtot, Polit. book iv. chap. 8. 5 

f Dioayk — book ii. p. 120. and book iv. p. 242. & 243- 

armies, 

y 
] 
| 
| 
| 
F 
i 

in 

ye Wy UT FTP 5 ws TS ws @S 

* 0 * 

Chap. 12. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 207 

armies, and had the direction of the ſacrifices ; he had 

the power of determining“ civil and criminal + cauſes : 

he called the ſenate together, converied the people, 
laid ſome affairs betore the latter, and regulated the 
reſt with the ſenate . 

The authority of the ſenate was very great. The 
kings ofteatimes pitched upon ſenators with whom 
they judged in conjunction, and they never laid any 
affair before the people, till it had been previoully de- 
bated Y 4 in the ſenate, 

The people bad the right of chuſing | magiſtrates, 

of conſenting to the new laws, and, with the king's 

permiſſion, of making war and peace ; but they had 
not the power of judging. When Tullus Hoſtilius re- 
ferred the trial of Horatius to the people, he had his 
particular reaſons, which may be ſeen in n 
Halicarnaſſus““. 

The conſtitution altered under ++ Servius Tullius. 
The ſenate had no ſhare in his election; he cauſed 
himſelf to be proclaimed by the people; he reſigned 
the power of judging civil cauſes ft, reſerving none 
to himſelf but the criminal; he laid all affairs directly 
before the people; he eaſed them of taxes, and im- 
poſed the whole burden on the patricians. Hence, 
in proportion as he weakened the regal together 

* Sce 'Tanaquil's d ſconcſe in I. vy, book i. dee. t. and the re · 
galations of Seryius Tullius ia Digaſ. Halicarn. bock iv. p. 229. 
f Ste Dionyſ. Halicarn, bock ii. p. 118. and book iii. p. 177. 

4 It was by virtue of 3 ſeratyſcoaſoltum, that Tallus Hoſtilivs 
orlered Alba to be deitroyed, Diory/. Halicara. bock iii. p. 165. 
& 172. 

& Ibid. book iv. p. 276, 

| Ibid. book ii. And yet they nds not have the nomination of 
all offices, ſince Valerius Publicola made that famous law by which 
every citizen was forbid to exerciſe any employment, unlets lie had 
obtained it by the ſuffrage of the people. 

** Book iii p® 159, ++ Dionyſ. Halicarn, bock 10 

½ He diveſted himſelf of half the regel power, ſeys Diony. 
ine Halicacnaſſus, book iv. p. 229. 

8 2 | with 

208 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

with the ſenatorian power, he augmented that of the 
people“. 

Tarquin would neither be choſen by the ſenate nor 
by the people; he conſidered Servius Tullius as an 
uſurper, and took the crown as an hereditary right. 
He deſtroyed moſt of the ſenators; thoſe who remain- 
ed he never conſulted, nor did he even ſo much as 
ſummon them to aſſiſt at his deciſions T. Thus his 
power increaſed ; but the odium of that power recei- 
ved a new addition by uſurping alſo the authority of 
the people, without whom and even againſt whom 
he enacted ſeveral laws. The three powers were by 
this means reunited in his perſon ; but the people at a 
critical minute recollected that they were legitlators, 
and there was an end of Tarquin. 

C HAF. XIII. 
General refietions on the fiate of Rome after the expul, on 
of its kings. © 

F-5. is impoſſible ever to be tired with ſo agreeable 2 
ſubje& as ancient Rome; even at preſent ſtrangers 
leave the modern palaces of that celebrated capital to 

go in ſearch of ruins ; thus the eye, after reſting itſelf | 

on the enamelled meadows, is e with the ſight of 
rocks and mountains. 

The patrician families were at all times poſſeſſed of 
great privileges. Theſe diſtinctions, which were con- 
ſiderable under the kings, became much more impor- 
tant after their expulſion. Hence aroſe the jealouſy 
of the plebeians who wanted to reduce them. The 
conteſt ſtruck at the conſtitution without weakening 
the government; for it was very indifferent of what 

- 
* It was thought, that, if he had not been prevented by Tar- 
din, he would have eſtabl.ſhed a popular goveroment, Diomſ. 
Hal carn, book iv. p. 243. 
t mm Halicatn. et iv. 

family 

G = I 

= © G — DJ 

2 1,09 wy = _ wy N& wm: . ot 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 209 

family the magiſtrates were, provided the my, 097964 
rved its authority. 
An elective monarchy, like that of Rome, eee 

rily ſuppoſeth a powerful ariſtocratic body to ſupport 

it, without which it changes immediately into tyran- 
ny or into a popular ſtate. But a popular ftate has no 
need of this diſtinction of families to maintain itſelf. 
To this it was owing, that the patricians, who were a 
neceſſary part of the conſtitution under the regal go- 
vernment, became a ſuperfluous branch under the con- 
ſuls : the people could ſuppreſs them without hurting 

| themſelves, and change the conſtitution without cor- 

rupting it. 

After Servius Tullius had redoced the patricians, it 
was natural that Rome ſhould fall from the regal hands 
into thoſe of the people. But the people had no oc- 
caſion to be afraid of relapſing under a _ power 
by reducing the patricians. 

A ftate may alter two different ways, either by the 
amendment or by the corruption of the con{titution. 
If it has preſerved its principles, and the conſtitution 
changes, it is owing to its amendment; if, upon 
changing the conſtitution, its principles are loſt, it is 
becauſe it has been corrupted. 

Rome, after the expulſion of the kings, ſhould na- 
turally have been a democracy. The people had al- 
ready the legiſlative power in their hands; it was their 
unanimous conſent that had expelled the kings; and, 
if they had not continued ſteady in thoſe principles, 
the Tarquins might eafily have been reſtored. To 
pretend that their defign in expelling them was to ren. 
der themſelves ſlaves to a few families is quite unrea- 
ſonable. The ſituation therefore of things req red 
that Rome ſhould be a democracy, and yet it was Bot. 
There was a neceſſity of tempering the power ot he 
principal families, and of giving the laws à bias to de- 
Mocracy. 

83 The 

\ 

216 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: Book XI. 

The proſperity of Rates is frequently greater in the 
inſenſible tranſition from one conſtitution to another 
than in either of thoſe conſtitutions. Then it is that 
all the ſprings of government are ſtretched, that eve. 
ry citizen forms pretenſions, that the inhabitants at. 
tack or careſs one another, and that there is a noble 
emulation between thoſe who defend the declining, and 

thoſe who are ſtrenuous in promoting the new conſti- 

CH Ap. XIV. 

| In what manner the diſtribution of the three powers be- 
gan to change after the expulſion of the kings. 

11 RE were four things that greatly oppreſſed the 

liberty of Rome. The patricians had ingroſſed 
to themſelves all ſacred, political, civil and military 
employments; an exorbitant power was annexed to the 
_ conſulate ; the people were often inſulted ; and, in fine, 
they had ſcarce any influence at all left in the public. 
- ſuffrages. Theſe four abuſes were redreſſed by the peo- 
_ It was regulated that have ſhould be ſome magi- 
ſtracies to which the plebeians might aſpire; and by 
degrees they obtairied their being made capable of them 
all, except that of interrex. 

2: The conſulate was diſſolved into ſeveral other 
magpiſtracies * ; prætors were created, on whom the 
power was conferred of judging private affairs ; quz- 
tors F were nominated for determining criminal cau- 
ſes; ædiles were eſtabliſhed for the civil adminiſtra- 
tion; treaſurers | were made who had the inanage- 
ment of the public money; and, in fine, by the cre- 
ation of cenſors the conſuls were diveſted of that part 
of the legiſlative power which ä the morals of 

Livy, decad, i. book 6. 
— Pomponins, leg 3. 7 de ov. or 

Plutarch's life of Publicola, * 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 217 

the citizens, and the momentary policy of the diffe- 
rent bodies of the ſtate. The chief privileges left them 
were to preſide in the great meetings“ of the people, 
to aſſemble the ſenate, and to command the armies. 

3. By the ſacred laws tribunes were eſtabliſhed, 
who had a power on all occaſions of checking the in- 
croachments of the patricians, and prevented not only 
particular, but likewiſe general injuries. 

In fine, the plebians increaſed their influence i in pub · 
lic deciſions. The people of Rome were divided in 
three different manners, by centuries, by curiæ, and by 
tribes; and, whenever they gave their votes, they were 
allembled and formed one of thoſe three ways. 

In the firſt, the patricians, the leading men, the 
rich, the ſenate, which was very near the fame thing, 
had almoſt the whole authority; in the ſecond they 
had leſs, and leſs (till in the third. 

The diviſion into centuries was a diviſion rather of 
eſtates and fortunes, than of perſons. The whole peo- 
ple were divided into 493 centuries , which had each 
a ſingle vote. The patricians and leading men com- 
poſed the firſt ninety-eight centuries, and the other 
ninety-five conſiſted of the remainder of the citizens. 
In this diviſion therefore the patricians were maſters of 
the ſuſfrages. 

In the diviſion into Curiæ , the patricians had not 
the ſame advantages : ſome however they had; for it 
was neceſſary that the augurs ſhould be conſulted, 
who were under the direction of the patricians; and 
no propoſal could be made there to the people, unleſs 
it had been previouſly laid before the ſenate, and 
approved of by a ſenatuſconſultum. But, in the divi- 
ſion into tribes, they had nothing to do either with 

* Comitiis centuriatis. 
+ See Livy, book i. and Dionyſ. Halicarn. book iv. & vii. 
1 Dionyſ. Halicarn, book ix. p. 398. . 

| the 

218 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

the augurs or with the decrees of the ſenate; and the 
patricians were excluded. 

| Now the people endeavoured conſtantly to have 
thoſe meetings by curias which had been cuſtomary by 
centuries, and by tribes thoſe they uſed to have before 
by curias; by which means, the direction of public 
affairs ſoon devolved from the patricians to the ple- 
beians. 

Thus, when the plebeians obtained the power of 
judging the patricians, a power which commenced in 
the affair of Coriolanus “, the plebeians infiſted upon 
judging them by aſſemblies in tribes , and not in ceu- 
turies; and, when the new magiſtracies of tribunes 
and ædiles were eſtabliſhed in favour of the people, 
the latter obtained that they ſhould meet by curias 
in order to nominate them, and, after their power 
was quite ſettled, they gained || ſo far their point as to 
aſſemble by tribes to proceed to this nomination. 

CHAP. XV, 

In what manner Rome, while in the firuriſhing ſtate of the 
republic, ſuddenly laſt its liberty. 
1* the heat of the conteſts between the patricians 
and the plebeians, the latter inſiſted upon having 
fixed laws, to the end that the public judgments 
ſhould no longer be the effect of a capricious will, or 
of an arbitrary power. The ſenate, after a great deal 
of reſiſtance, acquieſced, and decemvirs were nomi- 
nated to compoſe thoſe laws. It was thought proper 

to grant them an extraordinary power, becauſe they 
were to give laws to parties whoſe views and intereſts 

, * Dionyſ. Halicarn, book vii. — 
+ Contrary to the ancient cuſtom, as may be ſeen in Dart Ha- 
licarn. book v. p. 320. | 
t Dionyſ. Halicarn. book vi. p. 41s, and 411. 
See Dionyſ. Halicarn. book. ix. p. 695. 

it 

rer r 

Chap. 15. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 213 

it was almoſt impoſlible to unite. The nomination of 
all magiſtrates was ſuſpended, anti they were choſen 
in the comitia ſole adminiſtrators of the republic. Thus 
they found themſelves inveſted with the coniular and 
tribunician power. By one they had the privilege. of 
aſſembling the ſenate; by the other that of aſſembling 
the people. But they aſſembled neither ſenate nor 
people. Ten men only in the republic had the whole 
legillative, the whole executive, and the whole judi - 
ciary power. Rome ſaw herſelf enſlaved by as cruel 
a tyranny as that of Tarquin. When Tarquin exer- 
ciſed his oppreſſions, Rome was ſeized with indigna- 
tion at the power he had uſurped; when the decem- 
virs exerciſed theirs, ſhe was aſtoniſhed at the power 
the had given. { 

But what a ſtrange ſyſtem of tyranny! a tyranny 
carried on by men who had obtained the political and 
military power merely becauſe of their knowledge in 
civil affairs, and who, in the circumſtances of that 
very time, ſtood in need of the cowardice of the citi- 
zens to let themſelves be inſulted at home, and of their 
courage to protect them abroad? _ 

The ſpeRtacle of Virginia's death, whom her father 
immolated to chaſtity and liberty, put an end to the 
power of the decemvirs. Every man became free, be- 
cauſe every man had been injured ; each ſhewed him- 
ſelf a citizen, becauſe each had the tye of a parent. 
The ſenate and people reſumed a liberty which had 
been commirted to ridiculous tyrants. 

No people were ſo eaſily moved with ſpeQacles as 
the Romans. The bloody body of Lucretia put an 
end to the regal government. The debtor, who ap- 
peared in the, public market-place covered with 
wounds, cauſed an alteration in the form of the re- 
public. The decemvirs owed their expulſion to the 

ſight of Virginia. To condemn Maulius, it was ne- 
ceſſar y 

214 THE SPIRIT or LAWS. Bock XI. 

ceſſary to keep the people from ſeeing the capitol, 
Czſar's bloody garment Aung Rome again into ſlavery. 

CHAP. XVI. 

Of the legiſlative powers in the Roman republic. 

HERE were no rights to conteſt under the de“ 

cemvirs; but npon the reſtoration of liberty jea- 
louſies revived, and, as long as the patficians had any 
privileges left, they were ſure to be ſtripped of them 
dy the plebeians. | 
The miſchief would not have been ſo great, had 
the plebeians been ſatisfied with depriving the patri- 
cians of their prerogatives ; but they alſo injured them 
as citizens, When the people afſembled by curias or 
centuries, they were compoſed of ſenators, patricians, 
and plebeians. In their diſputes the plebeians gained 
this point “, that they alone, without patricians or 
ſenate, ſhould enact laws called plebiſciia; and the 

comitia, in which they were made, had the name 

given them of Comitia by tribes. Thus there were 
caſes, in which the patricians F had no ſhare in the 
jegiſlative power, and ꝗ in which they were ſubject 
to the legiſlation of another body of the ſtate. This 
was the higheſt extravagance of liberty. The people, 
to eſtabliſh a democracy, acted againſt the very prin- 
ciples of this government. One would have imagined, 
that fo exorbitant a power muſt have deſtroyed the 
authority of the ſenate. But Rome had admirable in- 

* Dionyf. Halicarſi. book xi. p. 725. 

+ By the ſacred Jaws the plcheians had a power of making the 
plebiſciia by themſelves, without admitting the patricians into their 
aſſembly. Dionyſ. Halicara. bock vi. p. 410. C book vii. p. 430. 

By the law made after the expulſion-of the decem virs, tlie pa- 
tricians were made ſubject to the plebiſcita, though they had not a 
right of voting there. Livy. book iii. and Dionyſ. Halicarn, book xi, 
F. 125. This Jaw was confirmed by that of Publius Philo, the 
dictator, in the year of Rome 416, Liwy, book viii. 

ſtitutions. 

Chap. 17- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 215 

ſtitutions. Two of theſe were eſpecially remarkable; 
one by which the legiſlative power of the people was 
regulated, and the other by which it was limited. 

The cenſors, and before them the confuls *, form- 
ed and created as it were, every five years, the body 
of the people; they exerciſed the legiſlation on the 
very body that was poſſeſſed of the legiſlative power. 
« Tiberius Gracchus, ſays Cicero, © cauſed the 
« freedmen to be admitted into the tribes of the city, 
« not by the force of his eloquefice, but by a words 
« by a geſture ; which, had he not effected, the re- 
« public, whoſe drooping head we are at preſent 
« ſcarce able to uphold, would not even exiſt.“ 

On the other hand, the fenate had the power of re- 
* ſcuing, as it were, the republic out of the hands of the 
people, by creating a dictator, before whom the ſove- 
reign bowed his head, and the moſt popular laws were 
Hent +. 

„ A: F.: Iv 
Of the executive power in the ſame republic. 

Ne as the people were of their legiſlative 
power, yet they had no great jealouſy of the exe · 
cutive. This they left almoſt entirely to the ſenate and 
to the conſuls, reſerving ſcarce any thing more to them - 
ſelves, than the right of chuſing the magiſtrates, aud 
of confirming the acts of the ſenate and of the gene- 

rals. | 
Rome, whoſe paſſion was to command, whoſe am- 

bition was to conquer, whoſe commencement and pro- 
greſs were one continued uſurpation, had conſtantly 

* Ia the year 312 of Rome, the conſuls performed ſtill the bu- 
ſineſs of ſurveying the people and their eſtates, as appears by Di- 
onyſ. Halicarn, book xi. 

+ Such as thoſe, by which it was allowed to appeal from the de- 
ciſions of all the magiſtrates to the people. 

affairs 

\ 

216 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 
affairs of the greateſt weight upon her hands ; her ene- 

mies were always conſpiring againſt her, or he againſt 

her enemies. 

As ſhe was obliged to behave on the one hand with 
heroic courage, andon the other with conſummate pru- 
dence, the ſituation of things required of courſe, that 
the management of affairs ſhould be committed to the 
ſenate. Thus the people diſputed every branch of the 
legiſlative power with the ſenate, becauſe they were 

jealous of their liberty; but they had no diſputes about 

the executive, becauſe they were jealous of their glory. 

80 great was the ſhare the ſenate took in the exe- 
cutive power, that, as Polybius “ informs ns, foreign 
nations imagined that Rome was an ariftocracy. 'The 
ſenate diſpoſed of the public money, and farmed out 
the revenue; they were arbiters of the affairs of their 
allies; they determined war or peace, and directed in 
this reſpect the conſuls ; they fixed the number of the 
Roman and of the allied troops, diſpoſed of the pro- 
vinces and armies to the conſuls or prætors, and, upon 
the expiration of the year of command, had the 
power of appointing ſucceſſors ; they decreed triumphs, 
received and ſent embaſſies ; they nominated, reward- 
ed, puniſhed, and were judges of kings; gave them, 
or declared they had forfeited, the title of allies of the 
Roman people. 

The conſuls. levied the troops which they. were to 
carry into the field; they had the command of the 
forces by ſea and land, diſpoſed of the allies, were in- 
veſted with the whole power of the republic in the 
provinces, gave peace to the vanquiſhed nations, im- 

poſed conditions on them, or referred them to the ſe- 

nate. 
ln the earlieſt times, when the people had ſome 

0 Book vi. 
We. 2 ſhare 

OI Ul © EP EY. RETRY 

— woes 

Chap. 18, THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 219 

- 

ſhare in the affairs relating to war and peace, they 
exerciſed rather .their legiſlative than their executive 
power. They ſcafce did any thing elſe but confirm the 
acts of the kings, and, after their expulſion, of the 
conſuls or ſenate. So far were they. from being the ar- 
biters of war, that we have inſtances of its having 
been often declared notwithſtanding the oppoſition of 
their tribunes. But, growing wanton in their proſpe- 
rity, they increaſed their executive power. Thus® they 
created the military tribunes, the nomination of whom 
till then had belonged to the generals, and ſome time 
before the firſt Panic war they decreed, that them. 
ſelves anly ſhould have the right + of declaring war. 

HAP. XVIII. " 
07 the. Ane power in the Roman 8 

T* (judiciary power was given to the people, to 

the ſenate, to the magiſtrates, and to particular 
judges. We muſt ſee in what manner it was ce 
buted ; beginning with-their civil affairs. 

The conſuls had 4 the power of judging after the 
expulſion of the kings, as the prætors were judges 
after the . conſuls. Servius Tullius had diveſted him- 
ſelf of the judgment of civil affairs, which was not 
reſumed 'by/ the - conſuls, except in q ſome very rare 

* In the year of Rome 444. Livy, decad. i. Bet 9. As the 
war againſt Perſeus appered ſomewhat dangerous, -it was ordained 
by a ſenatuſconſultum, that this law ſhould be ſuſpended, * the 
people agreed to it. Livy, dec. v. Bt 
+ They entorted it from the ſenate, ſays Frienſhemius, dec. il. 

4 There is yo manner of qoubt, but the conſuls had ewe 
of judging civil affairs beſoe the creation of the prætors. See Li- 
vy, dec. i. book 2. p. 19. Dionyſ. Halicarn. book x. p. G27. and 
the ſame book, p. 645. 

the tibunes frequently judged by themſelves only, but no- 
thing rendered them more © odious. Nl Halicarn. book rs. 109. 

Vor, 1. | . K | | - caſes; 

* 

— — 

278 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI 

caſes, for thut reaſon called extnaordinary*. Phey 
were ſatisfied with naming the judges, and with form- 
ing the ſeveral tribunals, By a diſeourſe of Appius 
Claudius in Dionyſius Halicarnaſſus + it appears, that, 
as early as the 259th year of Rome, this was looked 
upon as an eſtabliſhed cuſtom among the Romans, and 
it is not tracing it _—_ ms to es it to Servius ths 
lus. 

choſe to diſcharge the office, of judges during his ma, 
giltracy. A ſufficient number was pitched. upon for 
each cauſe; a cuſtom very near the ſame as that which 
is now practiſed in England, And what was extremely 
favourable to liberty $, was the prætor's fixing the 
judges with the conſent of the parties. The, great 
number of exceptions, that can be made now in Eng- 
land, amounts pretty near to-this very cuſtom. 
The judges decided only the queſtions #* relating to 
facts ; for example, whether a ſum of money, had been 
paid or not, whether an act had been committed or 
not. But as to queſtians of ++ right, as they required 
ſome ſort of capacity, they were always carried before 
the tribunal of the centumvirs 14. 
The kings reſerved to themſelves the Jada of 
criminal affairs, and in this they were ſucceeded by 

* Fudicia:extraordinaria. See the Inſtitutes, book 4. 

+ Book vi. 360. Album judicium. 

$ Our anceſtors,” ſays Cicero pro Cluentio, ** would not ſuf- 
«« fer any man, whom the, parties had not agreed to, to be Judge 
*« of the leaſt pecuniary affair, much leſs of a citizen's reputation. 
I see in the fragments of the Servilian, Cornelian, and other 
laws, ia vw hat manner theſe laws appointed judges for the crimes 
they propoſed to puniſh, They u ere pfien by choice, ſometimes 
hy lot, or, in ſine, by lot mixed together with Choice. 

-** Seneca de benefic. Ib. iii, cap. 7. in fine. 

11 See Quiatilian, lib. iv. p. $4: in fol. edit, of Paris, 1541, 
44 Legs 2+ . de orig. jur. Magiſtrates who were called decem · 
vir Preſided in court, the whole under a prztor's direction. 

the 

Every year the prætor de a na of ſuch ul. 

& '. WW, WF WY WS, oy, WW.” 

1 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 219 
te conſuls: It was in conſequence of this authority 
that Brutus the conſul put his children and all thoſe 

who were concerned in the 'Parquinian conſpiracy to 
death. This was an exorbitant power. The conſuls, 

already inveſted with the military command, extended 

the exerciſe of it even to civil affairs; and their proce - 
dares, being tripped of all forms of juſtice, were ra- 
ther exertions of violence than legal judgments.. 

This gave riſe to the Valerian law, by which it' was 
made lawtul to appeal to the people from every ordi · 
nance of the conſuls that endangered the lite of a ci- 
tizen. The conſuls aſter this had no longer a power of 
pronouncing ſentence in capital caſes againſt a un 
citizen without the conſent of the people “. 

We ſee in the firſt confpiracy for the reſtoration of. 
the Farquins, that the criminals were tried by Brutus 
the conful; in the ſecond the fenate and comitia were 
afſembled to try them 

The laws diſtinguilhed by the name of Sacred al- 
lowed the plebeians the priviiege of chuſing tribunes; 
by this means a body was formed, whoſe pretenſions 
at firſt were/iromenſe; It is hard to determine which 

was greater, the inſolence of the plebeians in demand - 
ing, or the condeſcenſion of the ſenate in granting. 
The Valerian law allowed of appeals to the people, 
that is, to the people compoſed of ſenators, patri- 
cians, and plebeians. "The plebeians made a law that 
appeals ſhould be brought before themſelves. A que- 
ſtion was ſoon after ſtarted, whether the plebeians had 
a right to judge a patrician: this was the ſubje& of 
a diſpute, which the affair of Coriolanus gave riſe to, 
and which ended with that affair. When Coriolanus 
was accuſed by the tribunes before the people, he in- 
liſted, contrary to the ſpirit of che Valerian law, that, 

. * Puonium de capile ci vii Romani, in juſa populi Romani, now 
'erat perm ſum e Jus dicere. See Femponias, lag. 2. F. de 

* 

Ll 4 
bee Halicarn, book v. p. „„ 
| 2 

\ S 

220 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book Xt. 

as he was a patrician, none but the conſuls had a 
power to judge him;. on the other hand, the plebei · 
ans alſo, contrary to the fpirit of that very ſame law, 
pretended + that none but themſelves had a power to 
judge him, and they judged him accordingly. 

This was moderated by the law of the twelve tables, 
whereby it was ordained, that none but the great aſ- 
ſemblies of the people“ ſhould pronounce ſentence 

againſt a citizen in capital caſes. Hence the body of 

the plebeians, or which amounts to the very ſame, the 
comitia by tribes, had no longer any power of judging 
crimes, except ſuch as were puniſhed with a pecuniary 

mulct. To inflict a capital puniſhment a law was re- 

quiſitez but, to condemn to a pecuniary fine, there 
was occafion only for a plebiſeitum. 

This regulation of the law of the twelve tables was 
very prudent... It produced an admirable reconcilia- 
tion between the body of the plebeians and the ſenate; 
for, as the full judiciary power of both depended on 

the greatneſs of the puniſhment and the nature of the 

crime, it was neceſſary they ſhould: both agree. 

The Valerian law aboliſhed all the remains of the 

Roman government, which were any way relative to 
that of the kings of the heroic times of Greece. The 

conſuls were diveſted of the power to puniſh crimes. 
Though all crimes are public, yet we mult diſtinguiſh 

between thoſe which more nearly concera- the mutual 
communieation of citizens, and thoſe which more 
nearly intereſt the Rate in the relation it has to its ſub- 
jects. The firſt are called private, the ſecond public. 
The latter were judged by the people, and, in regard 
to the former, they named by particular commiſſion 
a quzſtor for the proſecution of each crime. The per- 
ſon choſen by the people was ſrequently one of the 

- ® The comitia by centuries, Thus Manlius Capitolinus was 
judged in theſe comitia, Livy, dec. i. Bt 6. P. 60. 

magiſtrates, | 

a ce oo A045; ES. io... a6 ot 

ws A ev wh „ WH mo 

„eee 0 on, O 

vE  F&# Yo * a 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 221 
| magiſtrates, and ſometimes a private man. He was 
called the gue/tor of parricide, and is s mentioned i in the 

law of the twelve tables * 

The quæſtor nomicured the 2 of the queſtion, 
ho drew lots for the judges, and formed the tribu · 
nal, under which he preſided 7. 

Here it is proper to obſerve what ſhare the ſenate 
had in the nomination of the quæſtor, that we may 
fee how far the two powers were balanced in this re- 
ſpect. Sometimes the ſenate cauſed a dictator to be 
choſen in order to exereiſe the office of quæſtor ; 
ſometimes they ordained that the people ſhould be con - 
vened by a tribune, in order to proceed to the nomi- 

nation of a quæſtor ||; and, in fine, the people ſome- 

times appointed a-mayiltrate to make his report to the 
ſenate concerning a particular crime, and to deſire 
them to name a queſtor, as may be ſeen in the * 
of Lucius Scipio g in Livy ““. 

In the year of Rome 604, ſome of thoſe commiſ- 
fions were rendered permanent . All criminal cau- 
ſes were gradually divided into different parts, to- 
which they gave the name of perpetual queſtions.. Dif- 
ferent prætors were ereated, to each of whom ſome of 

thoſe queſtions were aſſigned. They had a power 
conferred upon them, for the term of a year, of judg- 

ing ſuch crimes as. were any way relative to thoſe: 

* Pomponius, in the ſecond law, digeft. de orig. 

+ See a fragmeat of Ulpian, who gives another of the Cornelians 
hw; it is to be met with in the collection of the Moſaic and he 
man laws, tit. 1. de ſicuriis & homicidiis.. 

+ This took place efpecially in regard ty: erimes committed in 
Italy, which were ſub ject chiefly to the inſpection of the ſenate. 

See Livy, dec. i. book 9, concerning the conſpiracies of Capna. 

This was the caſe in the proſeention for the murder of Poſt-- 

| Evmius, in the year 340 of Rome. See Livy. 

$ This judgment was giver in the year of Rome 557: 
»* Book 8. þ$f Cicero in Bruto. 

T 3 | qpeſtions ” 

— — 
— — 
—— — >. 
— 

— 

% 

222 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: Book XI. 

queſtions, and then they were ſent to govern their 
province. 

At Carthage, the ſenate of an hundred was com - 
poſed of judges that enjoyed that. dignity- for life v. 
But at Rome, the prætors were annual, and the 
judges were not even for ſo long a term, but were no- 
iicated for each cauſe. We have already ſhewn in the 
{ixth chapter of this book, how favourable this, regu- 
lation was to liberty in particular governments. 

The judges were choſen from the order of ſenators, 
till the time of the Gracchi.. Tiberius Gracchus can- 
ſed a law to paſs, that they ſhould be taken from the 
equeſtrian order; a change ſo very conſiderable, that 
the tribune boaſted of having cut, by one rogation 
only, the ſine ws of the ſenatorian dignity... 

It is neceſſary to obſerde, that the three powers 
may be very well diſtributed in regard to the liberty 
of the conſtitution, though not ſo well in reſpect to 
the liberty of the ſubject. At Rome, the people bad 
the greateit ſhare of the legiſlative, a part of the execu- 
tive, and part of the judiciary power, by which means 
| they had ſo great a weight in the government, as re- 
quired ſome other power to balance it. The ſenate 
indeed had part of the executive power, and ſome 
ſhare of the legiſlative ; hut this was not ſufficient to 
counterbalance the weight of the people. It was ne- 
ceſſary that they ſhould have a ſhare in the judiciary 
power; and aceordingly they had a ſhare, when the 
judges were choſen from among the ſenators. But, 
when the Gracchi deprived the ſenators of the power 
of judging |, che ſenate were no longer able to with- 

This is proved from Livy, book 43, who ſays that Hannibal 
rendered their magiſtracy annual. K 

＋ The ſenatuſconſulta were of force for the ſpace of a year, though 

not confirmed by the people, Diany/. Halj icarp, * ix. . $95. and 

Ab. 1 N þ 

e 630. | 

1 > one 30. | | FEY 

* go_ bon, we 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. 223 

ſtand the people. To favour therefore the liberty of 

the ſubject, they ſtruck at the liberty of the cooſtitu- 

tion; but the former periſhed with the latte. 
Infinite were the miſchiefs that from thence aroſe, 

The conſtitution was changed at a time when the fire 

of civil diſcords had ſcarce left any ſuch thing as a 
conſtitution. . The knights were no longer that mid- 
dle order which united the people to the ſenate; the 
chain of the conſtitution was broke. 

There were even particular reaſons againſt wand. 
ſerring the judiciary power to the equeſtrian order. 

The conſtitution of Rome was founded on this prin- 

ciple, that none ſhould be enliſted. as ſoldiers, but 

ſuch as were men of ſufficient property to anſwer for 
their conduct to the republic. The knights, as perſons 

of the greateſt property, formed the cavalry of the 
legions. But,@when their dignity increaſed, .. they re- 
fuſed to ſerve any longer in that capacity; and ano- 

ther kind of cavalry was obliged to be. raiſed: thus 

Marius inliſted all fosts of people. into his. army, and 

ſoon aſter the republic was loſt“ . : 
Beſides, the knights were the farmers of the public 
revenues; à ſet of rapacious men, who. ſowed new 

miſeries amongſt a miſerable people, and made a ſport 

of the publie calamity. Inſtead of giving to ſuch men 

as thoſe the power of judging, they ought to have 
been conſtantly under the eye of the judges, This we 

muſt ſay in commendation. of the ancient. French laws; 

they have ſtipulated with the officers of the revenues 

vith as great a difidence as would be obſerved between 
enemies. When the judiciary power at Rome was 

transferred to the farmers of the revenues, there was 

then an end of virtue, Naber, uh magiſtracy, and 

I 14109"20p 0 
Of this we find a very ies Jefeription in ome 

f * 
See. fragments 

\ 

224 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XI. 
fragments of Diodorus Sieulus and Dio; „ Mucius 
© Scævola,“ ſays Diodorus a; wanted to revive the 
« ancient morals, and the landable cuſtom of ſober 

and frugal living: for his predeceſſors having enter- 

« ed into a contract with the farmers of the revenue, 
« who at that time were poſſeſſed of the judiciary 
„ power at Rome, they had filled the province with 

all manner of crimes. But Scævola made an ex- 
. « ample of the publicans, and Nee hemp U 

« had ſent others to priſon.” 
Dio informs us +, that Publius Rutilius, kis EY 

nant, was equally obnoxions to the equeſtrian order, 

and that upon his return, they accuſed-him of having 

received ſome preſents, and condemned him to a fine, 
upon which he inſtantly made a ceſſion of his goods. 
His ivriocenee appeared in this, that he was found to 
be worth a great deal leſs than what he was charged 
with having extorted, and that he ſhewed a juſt title 

to what he poſſeſſed; but he would not live any long- 

er in the ſame city with ſuch profligate wretches. 

The Italians, ſays Diodorus again , bought up 

whole droves of flaves in Sicily to till their lands, and 
to take care of their cattle, but refuſed them a neceſ- 
fury ſubſiſtence. Theſe wretches were then forced to 
go and rob on the highways, armed with lances and 

clubs, covered with beaſts ſkins, and followed by large 

maſtiff-· dogs. Thus the whole province was laid 

waſte, and the inhabitants could not call any thing 
their own but what was ſecured within the walls of 

towns. There was neither proconſul nor prætor, that 

eould or would oppoſe this diſorder, or that preſum- 
ed to puniſh theſe faves, becauſe they belonged to 
Fragment of this author, book * in collection of the Con- 

FE Aantine Porphyrogenitns of virtues and vices. 

"+ - pe" n dale from de extract nes 

and vices. 1 
1 Fregwent of ue 20 book, io th cel ite ad vie 

the 

y — 
* 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 225 

the knights, who at Rome were poſſeſſed of the judi- 
ciary power . And yet this was one of the cauſes of 
the war of the ſlaves. - But I ſhall add only one word 
more. A proſeſſion that neither has, nor can have 
any other view than lucre; a proſeſſion that was al- 
ways forming freſh demands, without ever granting 
any; a deaf and inexorable profeſſion, that impove- 
riſhed the rich, and increaſed even the - miſery of the 
poor; ſuch a profeſſion, I fay, ſhould never have been 
intruſted with the judiciary power at Rome, 

CHAP. XIX. 
Of the gavernment of the Roman provinces. 

UCH was the diſtribution of the three powers in 
Rome, But they were far from being thus diſtri- 
bated in the provinces: liberty was at the centre, 
and tyranny in the extreme parts. . ; 
While Rome extended her dominions no farther than 
Italy, the people were governed as. confederates, and 
the laws of each republic were preſerved. / But, as 
ſoon as ſhe enlarged her conquelts- and the ſenate had 
no longer an immediate inſpection over the provin- 
ces, nor the magiſtrates reſiding at Rome were any 
longer capable of governing the empire, they were 
obliged to ſend prætors and proconſuls. Then it was 
that the harmony of the three power + was Joſt. Thoſe 
who were ſent on that errand were intruſted with a 
power which comprehended that of all the Roman 
magiſtracies, nay, even that of the ſenate a.:1 of the 
people f. They were deſpotic 'magiſtrates, extremely 
proper for the diſtance of the places to which they 
were ſent. They exerciſed the three powers, being, 
 '© Peres Guos Romæ tum judic'a erant, atque ex eque ſtri ordine 

ſolerent (ortito judiees eſigi in cauſa prætotum & procon 9 qui- 
bus poſt al miniſtrat-m provinciam- dies dicta erat. | 

t They made their edicts upon owing L.to-the provinces. 
4 if 

— — 

226 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

if I'may preſume to uſe the expreſſion, the baſhaws of 

the republic. 
We have elſewhere obſerved, that in a common- 
wealth the ſame magiſtrate ought to be poſſeſſed of the 

executive power, as well civil as military, To this it 

is owing that a conquering republic can hardly com- 
municate her government, and rule the conquered 

ſtate according to the ſorm of her own conſtitution. 

In fact, as the magiſtrate ſhe ſends to govern is in- 
veſted with the executive power, both civil and milita- 
ry, he muſt alſo have the legiſlative; for who' is it 
that could make laws without him? He muſt Uke 
wiſe have the judiciary power; for who could pre- 
tend to judge independently of him? It is neceffary 
therefore that tlie goveruor ſhe-ſends be intruſted with 
the three powers, as was practiſed in the Roman pro- 
vinces. | 

It is more eaſy for a monarchy to communicate its 
government, . becauſe the officers it ſends have ſome 
the civil executive, and others the military executive 

power, which does not neceſſarily imply a deſpotic 

authority. 

It was a privilege of the utmoſt conſequence to à 
Roman citizen, to have none but the people for his 
judges. . Were it not for this, he would have been 
ſubject in the p. vinces to the arbitrary power of a 

Procouſul or of a proprætor. The city never felt the 

tyranny, which was exerciſed only on conquered ra- 
tions. + "FT: 1 
- Thus in the Roman world, as at Sparta, thoſe who 
were free were extremely ſo, while thoſe who. were 
faves laboured under the extremity of ſlavery.  - 
While the citizens paid taxes, they were raiſed with 
great juſtice and equality. The regulation of Servins 
Tullius was obſeryed, who had diitributed the people 
into fix elaſſes according to their difference of proper- 

8 

e 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRT OF LAWS. 227 

ty, and fixed the ſeveral ſhares of the public taxes in 
proportion to that which each perſon had in the go- 
vernment. Hence they bore with the greatneſs of the 
tax becauſe of their proportionable greatneſs of cre- 
dit, and conſoled themſelves for the ſmalneſs of their 
credit, becauſe of the ſmalneſs of the tax. 

There was alſo another thing worthy of admira- 
tion, which is, chat, as Servius Tulljus's diviſion into 
claſſes was in ſome meaſure the fundamental prin- 
ciple of the conſtitution, it thence followed that an 
equal levying of the taxes was ſo connected with this 
fundamental principle, that the one could not be abo- 
liſhed without the other. 

But, while the city paid the taxes without. trouble, 
or paid none at all “, the provinces were plundered by 
the knights, who were the farmers of the public re- 
vennes. We have already made mention of their op- 
preſſive extorſions, with which all hiſtory abounds. 

« All Aſia,” ſays Mithridates , expects me as its 
« deliverer; ſo great is the hatred which the rapa- 
e ciouſneſs of the proconſuls , the confiſcations made 
« by the officers of the revenue, and the quirks and 
« cayils of judicial proceedings % have excited againſt 
« the Romans.“ 

Hence it was that the ſtrength of the provinces 
Gade addition to, but rather weakened the ſtrength. 
of the republic. Hence it was that the provinces 
looked upon the loſs of the liberty of Rome as the 
epocha of their own n 

* 

* After the conqueſts of Macedonia the Romans paid no taxes. 
+ Speech taken from Trogus Pompcius, and related by . 
book 38. | 

See the orations againſt Verres. 
| It is well known what ſort of a tribunal was that of Varus 

which provoked the Germans to revolt. | 
| | *CHAP. 

— 
of ” 

\ 

223 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

CHAP. XX. 
End of this book, 

Should be lad to inquire into the diſtribution of 
the three powers, in all the moderate governments 
we are acquainted with, and to calculate thereby the 
degrees of liberty which each may enjoy. But we 

mult not always exhault a ſubject ſo far, as to leave no 
Work at all for the reader. My buſineſs is not to 
/ maks people read, but to make them think. 

1 

of the laws that form political ney as re- 
95 lative to Fig ſubject. 

„ 3 & - & &# 1 * * — 
a * 

'c "= A P. 1. 
Idea of this book. 

+ 

1 . is not ſufficient to have treated of political Ii liderty | 

as relative to the conſtitution ; we muſt examine it 
likewiſe i in the relation it bears to the ſubjeR. 

We have obſerved, that in the firlt caſe-it is formed 
by a certain diſtribution of the three powers: but in 
the ſecond we muſt conſider it under another idea. lt 
conſiſts in ſecurity, or in the —_— People have of 
cheir ſecurity. 

The conſtitution may happen to be free, and the 
ſubject not. The ſubject may be free, and not the 
conſtitution. In thoſe caſes, the conſtitution will be 
free by right and not in fact, the ſubject will be free in 
fact, and not by right. - 

It is the diſpoſition only of the laws, and even of 
the fundamental laws, that conſtitutes Uberty in its 
relation to the conſtitution. But as it relates to the 

a 2 ſubject; 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 229 

ſubject; morals, cuſtoms, or received examples may 
give riſe to it, and particular civil laws may favour it, 
as we ſhall preſently ſee in this book. 

Farther, as in molt ſtates liberty is more checked or 
depreſſed than their conſtitution demands, it is proper 
to treat of the particular laws that in each conſtitution 
are apt to afliſt or check the principle-of liberty which 
each ſtate is capable of receiving. 

CHAP. IL 
Of the liberty of the ſuljecb. | 
Hitos0rnIcat liberty conſiſts in the free exerciſe of 

the will; or, at leaſt, if we muſt ſpeak agreeably 
to all ſyſtems, in an opinion that we have the free ex- 

5 ereiſe of our will. Political liberty conſiſts in ſecurity, 
sor at leaſt in the opinion that we enjoy ſecurity. 
FE This ſecurity is never more dangerouſly attacked 

than in public or private accuſations. Tt is therefore 
on the goodneſs of criminal laws that the liberty of the 
ſubje& principally depends. 

of Criminal laws did not receive their full perfection 

* all at once. E ven in places where liberty has been 
moſt ſought after, it has not been always found. 

ed Ariſtotle “ informs us, that at Cumz the parents of 

* the accuſer might be witneſſes. So imperfect was the , 

x law under the kings of Rome, that Servius Tullius 

0 

pronounced. ſentence againſt the children of Ancus 
Marcius, who were charged with having aſſaſſinated 
he IF the king his father-in-law f. Under the firſt kings 
of France, Clotarius made a law , that nobody ſhould 

be be condemned without being heard ; which ſhews that 

" a contrary -caftom had prevailed in ſome particular 
« caſe, or among ſome barbarous people. It was Cha- 
0 

its * Politics, book 2. 

the + Tarquinius Priſcus. Sce Dionyſ. Halicarn, book 4. 

f 7 As earty as the year 560, 
8 Vor. I. U rondas 

220 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

rondas that firſt eſtabliſhed penalties againſt falſe wit. 
neſſes J. When the ſubje& has no fence to ſecurs his 
innocence, he has none for his liberty. 

The knowledge already acquired in ſome countries, 
or that may be hereafter attained in others, in regard 
to the ſureſt rules that can be obſerved in criminal 
judgments, is gore intereſting to mankind than any 
other thing in the univerſe. 

Liberty can only be founded on the edles of this 
knowledge: and ſuppoſing a ſtate to have the beſt 
laws imaginable in this reſpect, a Perſon tried under 
that ſtate, and condemned to be hanged the next day, 
would have much more liberty than a baſhaw enjoys 
in Turky, 
i CHAP III. 

The ſame ſubjedt continued. | 
HOSE laws which condemn a man 'to death on 
the depoſition of a fingle witneſs, are fatal to 
liberty. In right reaſon there ſhould be two, becauſe 
a witneſs who affirms, and the accuſed who denies, 
make an equal balance, and a third n incline the 
ſcale. 

The Greeks * and Romans + kl one voice 
more to condemn ; but our French Jaw inſiſts upon 
two. The Greeks pretend that their cuſtom was eſta- 
bliſhed by the gods ; but this more juſtly may be ſaid 
of ours. 

Axiſtot. Polit. book ii. chap, xii. He gave his laws at Thurium, 

in the 84th Olympiad. 
® See Ariſtid. orat. in 8 | 
f Dionyf. Halicarn, on the judgment of Coriolanus, book vii. 

1 Minervz calculus, 

XP. 

Chap. . THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 237 

CHA P. IV. 
That liberty is favoured by the nature and proportion of 
| puniſhments. 

| Boch is in its higheſt perfection, whea criminal 

laws derive each puniſhment from the particular 
nature of the crime. There are then no arbitrary de- 
ciſions; the puniſhment does not flow from the capri- 
ciouſneſs of the legiſlator, but from the very nature of 
the thing; and man uſes no violence to man. 

There are four ſorts of crimes, Thoſe of the firſt 
ſpecies are prejudicial to religion, the ſecond to morals, 
the third to the public tranquillity, and the fourth to 
the ſecurity of the ſubject. The puniſhments inflicted 
for theſe crimes ought ta proceed from the nature of 
each of theſe ſpecies. 

In the claſs of crimes that concern religion, 1 rank 
only thoſe which attack it directly, ſuch as all ſimple 
ſacrileges. For as to crimes that diſturb the exerciſe 
of it, they are of the nature of thoſe which prejudiſe 
the tranquillity or ſecurity of the ſubject, and ought 
to be referred to thoſe claſſes. 

Ig order to derive the puniſhment of ſimple ſacri - 
leges from the nature of the thing *, it ſhould conſiſt 
in depriving people of the advantages conferred by re- 
ligion, in expelling them out of the temples, in a tem- 
porary or perpetual excluſion from the ſociety of the 
faithful, in ſhanning their preſence, in execrations, de- 
teſtations, and conjurations. 

In things that prejudiſe the tranquillity or ſecurity 
of the ſtate, ſecret actions are ſubject to human juriſ- 
dition, But in thoſe which offend the Deity, where 

gt. Lewis made ſuch ſevero laws againſt thoſe who ſwore, that 
the Pope thought himſelf obliged to admonit him for it. This 
prince mederated his zeal, and foftencd tis laws, Sce his ordi- 

Dances. 
U 2 there . 

\ 

232 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

there is no public action, there can be no criminal mat. 
ter; the whole paſſes betwixt man and God, who 
knows the meaſure and time of his vengeance. Now, 
if magiſtrates, confounding things, ſhould inquire al- 
ſo into hidden ſacrileges, this inquiſition would be di- 

rected to a kind of action that does not at all require 
it; the liberty of the ſubject would be ſubverted, by 

arming the zeal of timorous, as well as of NG; $553 
ous conſciences againſt him. 
The miſchief ariſes from a notion which ſome peo- 
ple have entertained of revenging the cauſe of the 
eity. But we muſt honour the Diety, and leave him 
ro avenge his own cauſe. In effect, were we to be di- 
refed by ſuch a notion, where would be the end of 

puniſhments? If human laws are to avenge the cauſe 
of an infinite Being, they will be directed by his inſini- 

ty, and not by the ignorance and caprice of man. 

An hiſtorian “ of Provence relates a fact, which fur - 
niſhes us with an excellent deſcription of the conſe - 
quences that may ariſe in weak capacities from this no- 
tion of avenging the Diety's cauſe. A Jew was ac- 
cuſed of having blaſphemed againſt the bleſſed Virgin; 

and, upon conviction, was condemned to be flayed 

alive. A ſtrange ſpeQacle was then ſeen : gentlemen 
maſked, with knives in their hands, aſcended the ſcaf- 
fold, and drove away the executioner, in order to be 

the avengers themſelves of the honour of the bleſſed 

Virgin. II do not here chuſe to anticipate the re- 
flections of the reader. 

The ſecond claſs conſiſts of thoſe crimes which are 
prejudicial” to morals. Such is the violation of pub- 
lic or private continency, that is, of the policy direct- 
ing the manner in which the pleaſures annexed to the 

union of bodies is to be enjoyed. The puniſhment 

* Father Bougerel. | 
* of 

a 9 
* * * * 
o 

] 
1 
6 
I 
t 
1 

wing re; meer nen S#roms was od re 

+ ay Kt 

Cinp. 44 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS.. 2330 

of thoſe erimes ought to be alſo derived from the na- 
ture of the thing; the privation of ſuch advantages 
as ſociety has attached to the purity of morals, fines, 
ſhame, neceſſity of concealment, public infamy, ex- 
pullion ſrom home and ſociety, and, in fine, all ſuch 
puniſhments as belong to a correQiye juriſdiction, are 
ſufficient to repreſs the temerity of the two ſexes. In 
effect, theſe things are leſs founded on wickedneſs, than 
on the forgetting and deſpiſing ourſelves. 

We ſpeak here of none but crimes-that relate mere - 
ly to: morals ; for as to thoſe that are alſo prejudiciat 
to the public ſecurity, ſuch as rapes and raviſhments, 
they belong to the fourth ſpecies. ; 

The crimes of the third claſs are thoſe that diſturb. 
the public tranquillity. The puniſhments ought there- 
fore to be derived from the nature of the thing, and 
to be relative to this tranquillity ; ſuch as impriſon- 
ment, exile, corrections, and other like chaſtiſements, 
proper for reclaiming turbulent ſpirits, and reducing, 
them to the eſtabliſhed order. 

I confine thoſe crimes that injure the public tran- 
quillity to things that imply a ſingle tranſgreſſion 
againſt the civil adminiſtration : for as to thoſe which, 
by diſturbing the public tranquillity, attack at the fame. 
tine the ſecurity of the ſubjeQ, they ought to be 
ranked in the fourth claſs. 

The puniſhments inflicted upon the latter crimes are: 
ſuch as are properly diſtinguiſhed by that name. They 
are a kind of retaliation, by which the ſociety retuſes 
ſecurity to a member, who has actually or intentional- 
ly deprived another of his ſecurity. Theſe puniſh» 
ments are derived from the nature of the thing, found-- 
ed on reaſon, and drawn from the very ſource of good 

and evil. A man deſerves death when he has violated 

the ſecurity ſo far as to deprive, or to attempt to de- 

prive another man of his life. This puniſhment of 

* 3 death 

% 

234 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

death is the remedy, as it were, of a ſic! ſociety. 
When there is a breach of ſecurity in reſpe& to pro- 
perty, there may be ſome reaſons for inflicting a capi- 
tal puniſhment : but it would be perhaps much better, 
and more natural, that erimes committed againit the 
ſecurity of property ſhould be puniſhed with the loſs 
of property; and this ought indeed to be the caſe, if 
mens fortunes were common or equal, But as thoſe 
who have no property are generally the readieſt to at- 

tack the property of others, it has been found neceſ- 
fary, inſtead of a pecuniary, to ſubſtitute a corporal 
puniſhment. 

All that I have here advanced is founded in nature, 

| and extremely favourable to the liberty of the 11 

c HA p. V. 

07 certain accuſations that require particular moderation 
| and prudence. - 

II. is an 1 maxim, that we ought to be very 

circumſpet in tie proſecution of magic and hereſy, 
| The accuſation of theſe two crimes may be valtly in- 
| jurious to liberty, and productive of an infinite num. 
ber of oppreſſons, if the legiſlator knows not how to 
ſet bounds to it. For as it does not aim directly at a 
perſon s actions, but at his character, it grows danger - 
ous in proportion to che ignorance of the people; and 
then a man is always in danger, becauſe the moſt un- 
exceptionable conduct, the pureſt morals, and the con- 
ſtant practice of every duty in life, are not a ſufficient 
ſecurity againſt the ſuſpicion of his being guilty of 
crimes like theſe. 

Under Manuel Comnenus, the proteſtator * was 
accuſed of having conſpired againſt the emperor, and 
of having employed for that purpoſe ſome ſecrets that 
render men inviſible. It is mentioned in the life of 
this emperor Þ that Aaron was detected as he was 

292 Nicetas' life of Manuel Gomgenus, book i ivv + hid. 
poring 

Chap. 5. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 235 

poring over a book of Solomon's, the reading of 
which was ſufficient to conjure up whole legions of de · 
vils. Now, by ſuppoſing a power in magic to arm all, 
hell, people look upon a man whom they call a magi - 
cian as the fitteſt perſon in the world to trouble and 
ſubvert ſociety, and of courſe they are diſpoſed to pu- 
niſh him with the utmoſt ſeverity. 

But their indignation increaſes when magic is ſaps 
poſed to have a power of ſubverting religion. The hi- 
ſtory of Conſtantinople “ informs us, that in conſe - 
quence of a revelation made to a biſhop of a miracle 
having ceaſed becauſe of the magic practices of a cer - 
tain perſon, both that perſon. and his ſon. were put to. 
death. On how many ſurpriſing things did not ahis 
fingle crime depend? That revelations ſhould not be: 

uncommon; that the biſhop ſhould. be favoured with 

one; that it was real; that there had been a miracle in 
the caſe ;. that this miracle had ceaſed ; that there was. 
an art magic; that magic could ſubvert religion; that 
this particular perſon was a magician; and, in fine, 
that he had committed-that action of magic. 

The emperor Theodorus Laſcaris attributed. his ill. 
neſs to magic. Thoſe who were accuſed of this crime, 
had no other reſource. left than to handle a hot iron 
without being hurt. Thus among the Greeks a per- 
ſon ought to have been a magician to be able to clear 
himſelf of the imputation of magic. Such was the ex- 
ceſs of their ſtupidity, that, to the molt dubious crime 
in the world, they joined the moſt uncertain proofs. 
Under the reign of Philip the Long, the Jews were. 
expelled from France, being acculed of having poiſon. 
ed the ſprings with their lepers. So abſurd an accuſa< 
tion ought very well to make us doubt of all thoſe wy 
are founded on pablic hatred, 

2 Hiltory of the 4 5 Maurice, by Theopbyladtus, chap. 17. 
| 1 have 

Na l 

) 

236 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 
J have not here aſſerted that hereſy ought not to be 

puniſhed ; I ſaid only that we ought to be extremely 

eircumſpect in puniſhing it. 
„e . 
Of the crime againſt nature. 

OD forbid that I ſhould have the leaſt inclination 
to diminiſh the horror people have for a crime 

which religion, morahty, and civil government equal- 

ly condemn. It onght to be proſeribed, were it only 
for its communicating to one ſer the weakneſſes of the 
- Other, and for leading people, by a ſcandalous proſti- 
tution of their youth, to an ignominious old age. 
What I ſhall fay concerning it will nowiſe diminith its 
infamy, being levelled only againſt the tyranny that 
may abuſe the very horror we ought to have for the 
vice. | | 

As the nature of this crime is ſecrecy, there are fre- 
quent inſtances of its having been puniſhed by legiſla- 
tors upon the depoſition of a child. This was opening 

. a very wide door to calumny. © Juſtinian,” ſays Pro- 

copins “, „“ pnbliſhed a law againſt this crime; he or- 
« dered an inquiry to be made, not only againſt thoſe 
* who were guilty of it after the enacting of that law, 
„ but even before. The depoſition of a ſingle witneſs, 
* ſometimes of a child, ſometimes of a ſlave, was ſut- 
« ficient, eſpecially againit ſuch as were rich, and 
© againſt thoſe that were of the green faction.“ 

It is very odd that theſe three crimes, magic, he» 
reſy, and that againſt nature, of which the firſt might 
eaſily be proved not to. exiſt at all; the ſecond to be 
ſuſceptible of an infinite number of diſtinctions, inter- 
pretations, and limitations; the third to be often ob- 

ſcure and uncertain ; it is very odd, I ſay, that theſe 

three crimes ſhquld amongſt us be puniſhed with fire. 

® Secret hiſtory. y 
may 

a a A r * i 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 237 

may venture to afhrm, that the crime againſt na- 
ture will never make any great progrels in ſociety, un- 
leſs people find themſelves induced to it in other re- 
ſpects by ſome particular cuſtom, as among the Greeks, 
where the young people performed all their exerciſes 
naked, as amongſt us where domeſtic education is diſ- 
uſed, as among the Aſiatics, where particular perſons 
have a great number of women whom they deſpiſe, 
while others can have none at all. Let there be no 
cuſtoms preparatory to this crime; let it, like every 
other violation of morals, be ſeverely proſcribed by the 
civil magiſtrate, and nature will ſoon be ſeen to defend 
or reſume her rights. Nature, that tender, amiable, 
and loving parent, has ſtrewed her pleaſures with a 
hounteous hand, and while ſhe fills us with delights, 
ſhe prepares us for future ſatisfaction of a more exqui - 

ſite kind than thoſe delights themſelves. 

i bus 1 HA VU. 
Of the crime of high treaſon. 

T is determined by the laws of China, that wholo- 

ever ſhews any diſreſpect to the emperor, is to be 
puniſhed with death. As they do not mention in, what 
this diſreſpect conſiſts, every thing may furniſh a pre · 
text to take away a man's life, and to exterminate any 
family whatſoever. 

Two perſons of that country; who were employed 
to write the court-gazette, having inſerted ſome cir- 
cumſtances relating to a certain fact, that were not 
true; it was pretended, that to tell a lie in the court- 
gazette was a diſreſpect ſhewn to the court, in conſe- 
quence of which they were put ro death“. A prince 
of the blood having inadvertently made ſome mark on 
a memorial ſigned with the red pencil by the empe - 
ror, it was determined that he had behaved diſreſpedt- 

Father du Halde, tom. 1, p. 43. p 
r. ally 

— =y 

—— — 

— — — 

| 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

* 

238 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

fully to that prince; which was the cauſe of one of the 
moſt terrible perſecutions againſt that m * ever 
was recorded in hiſtory *. 

If the crime of high treaſon be hn, this 
alone is ſufficient to make the government degenerate 

into arbitrary power, I ſhall deſcant more largely on 

this ſubject, when I come to treat of the compoſition 
of laws. 

CHAP. VIII. 

of the bad afplication of the name of Sacrilege and 

High- treaſon. 

T is likewiſe a mockilg abuſe to give the appella- 
tion of High-treaſon to an action that does not de- 
ſerve it. It was decreed by an imperial law g, that 
thoſe who called in queſtion the prince's judgment, or 
doubted of the merit of ſuch as be bad choſen for a 
public office, ſhould be proſecuted as guilty of ſacri · 
lege g. Surely it was the cabinet · council and the fa - 
vourites of the court who invented that crime. By 
another law it was determined, that whoſoever made 
any attempt againſt the miniſters and officers of the 
prince ſhould be deemed guilty of high - treaſon, as if 
he had attempted againſt the prince himſelf ||. This 
law is owing to two princes , celebrated in hiſtory 
for their weakneſs ; princes who were led by their mi- 
niſters as flocks by ſhepherds; princes who were flaves 
in the palace, children in the council, ſtrangers to the 
army; princes, in fine, who preſerved their authority 
only by giving it away every day. Some of thoſe fa- 

Father Parennin in the edifyirg letters. + Book xxix. 

$ Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodoſius. This is the ſecond in 
the code de crim. jacril. 

5 Sacrilegii inſtar eſt dub tare, an is dignus ſit quem 3 impre 
rater. Ibid. This law ſerved as a model to that of Roger in the 
conſtitutions of Naples, tit. 4. 

| The $th law od leg. Jul. maj. ** Arcadius and Honorius. 

ſh FPourites 

Chap. 9. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 239 

vourites conſpired againſt their emperors. Nay, they 
did more, they conſpired againſt the empire; they cal- 
led in barbarous nations; and when the emperors 
wanted to ſtop their progreſs, the ſtate was fo enfee+ 
bled, as tobe under a neceſſity of infringing their law, 
and of expoling itſelf to the crime of high · treaſon in 
order to puniſh thoſe favourites. 

And yet this is the very law which the judge of 
Monſieur de Chinq-Mars built upon “, when endea- 
vouring to prove that the latter was guilty of the crime 
of high-treaſon, for attempting to remove Cardinal 
Richlieu from the miniſtry, he ſays, Crimes that 
« aim at the perſon of miniſters, are deemed, by the 
©. imperial conſtitutions, of equal conſequence with 
&« thoſe which are levelled againſt the emperor's own 
« perſon. A miniſter diſcharges his duty to his prince 
« and to his country; to attempt therefore to remove 
« him, is endeavouring to deprive the former of one 
*« of his arms +, and the latter of part of its power.” 
If even Slavery herſelf was to deſcend upon the earth, 
ſhe could not ſpeak in any.other language. 

By another law of Valentinian, Theodoſius, and 
Arcadius 4, falſe coiners are declared guilty of high- 
treaſon. But is not this confounding the ideas of 
things? Is not the very horror of high · treaſon dimi- 
_ by giving that name to another crime? 

CHAP. . 
The Same ſuljeQ continued. 

1 having wrote to the emperor Alexander, 
that “ he was preparing to n for high- 

Memoirs of Monteſor, tom. 1. 

+ Nam ipſi pars corporis noſtr; ſunt. The ſame law of the 
code ad leg, Ful. maj. 

+ It is the gth of the code Theodoſ. de falſa monets. 

* , 

240 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 
< treaſon, a judge who had decided contrary to his 
«edi&;” the emperor an{wered, | © That under his 
4 reign there was no ſuch thing as dine? high- 
« treaſon *.“ 

- Fauſtinian wrote to the ſame emperor, his as he 
had fworn by the prince's life never to pardon his ſlave, 
he found himſelf thereby obliged to perpetuate. his 
wrath, left he ſhould incur the guilt of high - treaſon. 
Upon which the emperor made anſwer, . Your fears 
« are groundleſs , __ you are a ous: to ap prin · 
46 ciples. L 8 

It was determined bo a ſenatuſconſultum t. that who- 
ſoever melted down any of the emperor's ſtatues which 
ſhould happen to be rejected, ſhould not be deemed 
guilty of high-treaſon. The emperors Severus and 
Antonius wrote to Pontius $, that thoſe who ſold un - 
conſecrated ſtatues of the emperor, ſhould not be char - 
ged with high · treaſon. The ſame princes wrote to Ju- 
lius Caſſianus, that if any perſon, when flinging a 
ſtone, ſhould by chance ſtrike one of the emperor's 
ſtatues, he ſhould not be liable to a proſecution of 
high · treaſon l. The Julian law requires theſe ſorts of 
limitations; for in virtue of this law, the crime of 
high treaſon was charged not only upon thoſe who 
melted down the emperor's ſtatues, but likewiſe on thoſe 
who committed any. ſuch like action“ *, which made 
it an arbitrary crime. When a. number of crimes 
of high-treaſon had been eſtabliſhed, they were 
obliged to diſtinguiſh the ſeveral ſorts Hence 
Ulpian the civilian, after ſaying, that the accuſation 
of high- treaſon did not die with the criminal, adds, 

® Etiam ex aliis cauſis majeſtatis crimina ceſſant meo ſeculo. 
Leg. 1. cod. ad leg. Jul. maj. 
+ Alienam ſectæ meæ ſollicitudinem concepiſti. Leg. 2. itid, 
T See the 4th law in F. ad leg. Jul. maj. 
See the 5th law, ibid. I Ibid. 
*+ Alliudve quid ſimile admiſerint. Leg. 6. ibid. 
| 1 | that 

LY 

lat 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 241 

that this does not relate to“ all the treaſonable acts 
eſtabliſhed by the Julian law, but only to that which 
implies an attempt * the empire, or againſt the 
emperor's life. 

CHAP. X. | 
The ſame ſulje@ continued. 

HERE was a law paſſed in England under 
Henry VIII. by which whoſoever predicted the 

| king's death, was declared guilty of high - treaſon. 

This law was very indeterminate ; the terror of de- 
ſpotic power is ſo great, that it even turns againſt 
thoſe who exerciſe it. In this king's laſt illneſs, the 
phyſicians would not venture to ſay he was in danger 
and ſurely they aQed very right f. 

0 H A P. XI. 
Of 4 houghts, 

nora dreamed that he had cut Dionyſius's 

throat f. Dionyſius put him to death, pretend- 
ing that he would never have dreamed of ſuch a thing 
by night, if he had not thought of it by day. This 
was a moſt tyrannical action; for though it had been 
the ſubject of his thoughts, yet he had made no at- 
tempt towards it. The laws do not take upon them 

to puniſh any other than overt acts. 

CHAP, II. 
Of indiſcreet ſpeeches. 

Ornixs renders the crime of high-treaſon more - 
arbitrary, than declaring people guilty of it for 
indiſcreet ſpeeches. Speech is ſo ſubje& to interpre- 

* In the laſt law in F. ad leg. Jul. de adulteriis. 

+ See Burnet's hiſtory of the Reformation, 

Plutarch, life of Dionyſus. 

The thoughts muſt be joined with ſome ſort of action. 

Vor. I. * "of tation; 

442 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

tation; there is ſo great a difference between indiſcre- 
tion and malice, and frequently ſo little is there of the 
latter in the expreſſions uſed, that the law can hardly 
ſubject people to a capital puniſhment for words, un- 
leſs it expreſsly declares what words they are which 
render a man guilty “. | 

Words do not conſtitute an overt at; they remain 
only in idea. They generally, when confidered by 
themſelves,, have no determinate ſignification; for 
this depends on'the tone in which they are uttered. 
It often happens, that, in repeating the fame words 
they have not the ſame meaning; this meaning de- 
-pends on their connection with other things; and 
Jometimes more is expreſſed by ſilence than by any diſ- 
courſe whatſoever. As there can be nothing ſo equi- 
vocal and ambiguous as all this; how is it poſſible to 
convert it into a crime of high-treaſon ? Wherever 
this law is eſtabliſhed, there is an end not only of li- 
-berty, but even of its very ſhadow. 

In the manifeſto of the late Czarina againſt the fa- 
mily of the Dolgorukys , one of theſe princes is con - 
demned to death for having uttered ſome indecent 
words concerning her perſon; another for having 
maliciouſſy interpreted her ſage regulations for the 
welfare of the empire, and for having offended her ſa- 
cred perſon by diſreſpectful words. | 

Not that I pretend to diminiſh the indignation peo- 
ple ought to have againſt thoſe who preſume to ſtain 
the glory of their prince; what I mean is, that if de- 
ſpotic princes are willing to moderate their power, a 
ſimple correction would be more proper on theſe occa- 

1 gi non tale ſitdeliftum in quod vel ſcriptura legis deſcendit 
„vel ad exemplum legis vindicandum eſt,” fays Modeſtinus in the 
feventh law, i” ad leg. Jul. Maj. 

+ In 174%; | 

7 | : = fhons, 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 247 

fions, than an accuſation of high - treaſon, a thing al · 
ways terrible even to innocence itſelf *. 

Overt acts are not things that happen every day's 5 
they are liable to the obſervation of a great many 
people ; and a falſe charge in reſpect to fats may be 
eaſily detected. Words joined to an action aſſume the 
nature of this action. Thus a man who goes into a 
public market - place to incite the ſubje&ts to revolt, 
incurs the guilt of high - treaſon, becauſe the words 
are joined to the action, and partake of its nature. 

It is not the words that are puniſhed, but an action 

in which words are employed. They do not become 
criminal but when they prepare for, accompany, or 
tollow, a criminal action. Every thing is confounded 
if words are conſtrued as a capital crime, inſtead cf 
conſidering them only as a mark of a capital crime. 
The emperors Theodoſius, Arcadius, and Honorius, 
wrote thus to Rufinus, who was prefedtus pretorio :- 
If a man ſpeaks amiſs of our perſon or government, 
« we do not for all that intend to puniſh him; if + he 
has ſpoke through levity, we mult deſpiſe him; if 
« through folly, we muſt pity him; and if he wrongs 
« us, we mult forgive him. Wherefore leaving things 
&« as they are, you muſt inform us accordingly, that 
% we may be able to jndge of words by perſons, and 
that we may well conſider whether we Lge to puniſo 
„ or overlook them.“ 

CHAP. XIII 

Of writings. 
IF writings there is ſomething more permanent than 
in words; but when they are no way preparative to 
bigh · treaſon, they are not a ſubject of that crime, 

* Nec lubricum linguæ ad pœnam facile trahendum ell. Mo- 
deſtin. in the 7th law, in F. ad leg. Jul. maj. in 

+ Si id ex levitate proceſſerit, contemnendum eſt; ſi ex infaniz,: 
wiſeratione digniſſimum 4 ſi ab in juria, remittendum. ** unica / 

cod. fi. qus imp erat. maled. f 
X 2 And 

214 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 
And yet Auguſtus and Tiberius ſubjected ſatirical 

writers to the ſame puniſhment as for having violated 
the law of majelty.; Auguſtus“, becauſe of ſome libels 
that had been wrote againſt men and women of the firſt 
quality z Tiberius, becauſe of thofe which he ſuſpected 
to have been written againſt himſelf. Nothing was 
more fatal to Roman liberty. Cremutins Cordus was 
accuſed for having called Caſſius, in his annals, the 
laſt of the Romans . 

Satirical writings are hardly known in deſpotie go- 
vernments, where dejection of mind on the one hand, 
and ignorance on the other, afford neither abilities 
nor will to write, In democracies they are not hin- 
dered for the very ſame reaſon, which cauſes them to 
be prohibited under the government of a ſingle per- 
ſon; being generally levelled againſt men of power 
and authority, they flatter the malignity of the peo- 
ple who are the governing party. In monarchies they 
are forbidden, but rather as a ſubje of civil animad- 
verſion, than as a capital crime. They may amuſe the 
general malignity, pleaſe the malecontents, diminiſh 
the envy againſt public employments, give the peo» 
ple patience to ſuffer, and make them laugh at theit 
ſufferings. 

But no government is ſo averſe to ſatirical writings 
as the ariſtocratical. There the magiſtrates are petty 
fovereigns, but not great enough to deſpiſe affronts, 
If in a monarchy a ſatirical ſtroke is deſigned againſt 
the prince, he is placed in ſuch an eminence that it 
does not reach him; but an ariſtocratical lord is pier- 
ced to the very heart. Hence the decimvirs, who 
ſormed an ariſtocracy, puniſhed ſatirical writings with 

death }. 

* Facitus's Annals, book 1. This continued under the follow- 

ing reigns. See the firſt law in the code de famaſis libellit. 
F Tacit. Annal. book 4. 1 The law of the twelve tables. 
CHAP. 

„ 

thi 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 245 

CHAP. XIV. _ 
Breach of modeſly in puniſhing crimes. 

HERE are rules of modeſty. obſerved by almoſt 
every nation in the world; now, it would be ve- 
ry abſurd to infringe theſe rules in the puniſhment of 
crimes, the principal view of which ought always to 
be the eſtabliſhment of order. 63414467 

Was it the intent of thoſe oriental nations who ex- 
go- poſed women to elephants trained up for an abomina - 
nd, ble kind of puniſhment; was it, I ſay, their intent to 
eſtabliſh one law by the breach of another? 

in. By an ancient cuſtom of the Romans, it was not 
10 permitted to put girls to death, till they were ripe: for- 
* marriage. Tiberius found out an expedient of having 
wer them debauched by the executioner, before they were 
"TIE brought to the place of puniſhment“. Thus this 

hey bloody and ſubtile tyrant deſtroyed the morals of the · 
ad- people to preſerve their cuſtoms. 

the When the magiſtrates of Japan cauſed-women to * 
nilh expoſed naked in the market places, and obliged them 
to go upon all- four like. beaſts, modeſty was ſhocked ;.. 

0» 
\eir but when they wanted to compel a mother—when 
| they wanted to force a ſon l cannot proceed; even 
ngs nature herſelf: was ſtruck with horror. 
W er 
= N the infranchiſement of Haves in order te accuſe their. 

7 maſter. - | 
ier AVovarus made a hs, that the ave of thoſe o- 
cho conſpired againſt his perſon, ſhould be ſold to the 
rith I publics that they might depoſe againſt their maſter f. 
Nothing ought to be neglected ar may-comribute to 

u » Suetonius in Tiberio. 
+ Collection of voyages that contributed to the elbe of 
1 the Eaſt- India company, tom. 5. part 2. 
Dio in Xiphilinus. | * 
P. | X 3 the 

% 

246 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

the diſcovery of an heinous crime; it is natural there- 
fore that in a government where there are ſlaves, they 
thould be allowed to inform; but they ought not to be 
admitted as witneſſes. 

Vindex diſcovered the conſpiracy that had been 
formed in favour of Tarquin; but he was not admit- 
ted a witneſs againit the children of Brutus. It was 
right to give liberty to a perſon who had rendered fo 
great a ſervice to his couutry; but it was not given 
bim in order to enable him to render this ſervice. 

Thus the emperor Tacitus ordained that ſlaves ſhould 
not be admitted as witneſſes againſt their maſters, even 
in the caſe of high-treaſon*: a law which was not 
mſerted in Juſtinian's compilement. 

CHAP, XVI. 
Of calumny in reſpect to the crime of high-treafon. 

T= do juſtice to the Cæſars, they were not the firſt 

deviſers of the diſmal laws which they enacted. 
It was Sylla F that taught them that calumniators 
ought not to be puniſhed; but the thing was foon 
- n ſo far as to reward them . 

CHAP, XVII. 
Of the revealing of conſþiracies. 

00 I thy brother the ſon of thy mother, or thy ſon, 
„% or thy daughter, or the wife of thy boſom, or 
„ thy friend, who is as thine own ſoul, entice thee 
« ſecretly, ſaying, Let us go and ſerve other gods, 
« thou ſhalt ſurely kill him, thou ſhalt None him g.“ 
| '* Flavips Vopiſeus in his life, « 

+ Sylla made a law of majeſty, which is mentioned in Cicero 
orations pro Cluent's, art. 3. in Piſonem art. 21. ad ageinſt Verres, 
art. 5. familiar epiſiles, b ok 3. letter 11. Cæſar and Auguſtus in- 
ſerted them in the Julian laws; others made additions to them. 

Et quo quis diſtinQior accuſator, eo magis honores ali queba- 
tor, ac veluti ſacroſanctus erat. Tucii. 

Deuter. chap. xiii. ver. 6, 

This 

133 

ere- 
hey 
> be 

een 
Nit« 
Was 
ſo 
ven 

uld 
ven 
not 

firſt 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF Laws. 247 

This law of Denteronomy cannot be a civil law among 
moſt of the nations known to us, becauſe it would 
pave the way for all manner of wickedneſs. 

No leſs ſevere is the law of ſeveral countries, which 
commands the ſubjects, on pain of death, to diſcloſe 
conſpiracies in which they are not even ſo much as 
concerned. When ſuch a law is eſtabliſhed in a mo- 
narchical government, it is very proper it ſhould be un- 
der ſome reſtrictions. 

It ought not to be applied in its full ſeverity, but 
to the ſtrongeſt caſes of high - treaſon. In thoſe coun- 
tries it is of the utmoſt importance not to confound 
the different degrees of this crime. In Japan, where 
the laws ſubvert every idea of human reaſon, the crime 
of concealment is applied even to the moit ordinary 
caſes. 

A certain relation ® makes mention of two young 
ladies, who were ſhut up for life in a box thick ſet with 
pointed nails, one for having had a love-intrigue, and 
the other for nor diſcloſing it. | 

CHAP. XVIII. 

How dangerous it is in republics to be tas ſevere in pu- 
niſhing the crime of bigh-treaſfon. 

8 ſoon as a republic has compaſſed the deſtruction 
of thoſe who wanted to ſubvert it, there thould 
be an end of nn MARE and even of re- 
wards. © 
Great puniſhments, ard conſequently great chan- 
ges, cannot take place, without inveſting ſome citizens' 
with great a power. It is therefore more adviſe. 
able in this caſe to exceed in lenity, than in ſeverity; 
to baniſh+ but few, rather than many; and to leave 
them their eſtates, rather than to make a great num- 

Collection of voyages that contributed to the eſlabliſument of 
bee 

the Eaſt India Company, p. 423. book v. * 2. 

* 

298 THE 8PIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI. 

ber of confiſcations. Under pretence of avenging the 
republic's cauſe, the avengers would eſtabliſh tyranny. 
Teh buſineſs is not to deſtroy the. rebel, but the re- 
bellion. They ought to return as quick as poſſible in- 
to the . uſual: tract of government, in which every one 
is protected by the laws, and no one oppreſſed.” 
We find in Appian “, the edi& and formula of the 

proſeriptions. One would imagine that they had no 
other aim than the good of the republic, ſo coolly they 
ſpeak, ſo many advantages they point out, ſo preferable 

are the means they take to others, ſuch ſecurity they 
promiſe to the rich, ſuch tranquillity to the poor, ſo. 
afraid they ſeem to be of endangering the lives of the | 
ſubjects, ſo deſirous of appeaſing the ſoldiers: a dread · | 
ful example, Which ſhows how near. ſevere puniſhments. 
border upon tyranny. - 

The Greeks ſet no bounds to the vengeance they took 
of tyrants, or of thoſe they ſuſpected of tyranny; they 
put their children to death , nay, ſometimes five of 
their neareſt relations + ; and they proſcribed an infinite. 
number of families. By this means their republics 
ſuffered the moiſt violent thocks; exiles, or the return 
of the exiled, were always epochas. that indicated a. 
change of the conſtitution. 

r T Es EE 20m. "2 

The Romans had more ſenſe. When Caſſius was 

put to death for having aimed at tyranny, the queſtion 

| was propoſed, whether his children ſhould undergo the 
ſame fate? But they were preſerved. They,” ſays. ] 

Dionyſius Halicarnaſſus $,, who wanted to change 
« this law at the end of the Marſian and civil wars, t 
«.and to exclude from public offices the children of t 
«. thoſe. who had been proſcribed by Sylla, at very F 
% much to blame.“ - f 
Of che civil wars, book iv. 50 

+ Dionyſ. Halicarn. Roman antiguities, book viii. 
f Tyranno oceiſo, quinque ejus proximus cognatione _— 

tus necato. Cic. de invent. Ib. 2 
9 Bock viii. P · 547. 

C HAP. 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 249 

CHAP. XIX. 
In what manner the uſe of liberty is ſuſpended in a re- 
| public. = | 

* countries where liberty is moſt eſteemed, there are 

laws by which a ſragle perſon is deprived of it, in 
order to preſerve it for the whole community. Such 
are in England what they call bills of attainder *. Theſe 
are relative to thoſe Athenian laws by which a private 
perſon was condemned +, provided they were made by 
the unanimous ſuffrage of ſix thouſand citizens, They 
are relative alſo to thoſe laws which were made at Rome 
againſt private citizens, and were called privileges g. 
Theſe were never paſſed but in the great meetings of 
the people. But in what manner ſoever they are enact - 
ed, Cicero is for having them aboliſhed, becauſe the 
force of law conſiſts in its being made for the whole 
community 5. I muſt own, notwithitanding, that the 
practice of the ſreeſt nation that ever exiſted, induces 
me to think, that there are caſes in which a veil ſhould 
be drawn for a while over liberty, as it was cuſtomary 
to veil the ſtatues of the gods. 

C HAP. XX. | 
Of laws favourable to the liberty of a ſubject in a re- 
public, | 
1* popular governments it often happens that accu - 
ſations are carried on in public, and every man is 

* The author of the continnation of Rapin Thoyras defines a 
bill of attainder, a fentence which, upon being approved by the 
two houſes, and ſigned by the king, paſſes inta an ect, whereby the 
party a@uſed is declared' guilty of high-treaſon without any other 
formality, and without appeal. Tom. 2. p. 266, 

+ Legem de fingulari aliquo ne rogato, niſi ſex millibus ita vi- 
ſum. Ex andicide de myſteriis. This is what they called Oſtraciſm. 

t De privis hominibus latæ. Cicero de leg. lil. 3. 

& Scitum eſt juſſum in omnes. Cicero, ibid. 
, allowed 

\ 

250 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: Book XII. 

allowed to accuſe whomſoever he pleaſes. This ren. 
dered it neceſſary to eſtabliſh proper laws, in order to 
protect the innocence of the ſubject. At Athens, if 
an accuſer had not the fifth part of the votes on his 
fide, he was obliged to pay a fine of a thouſand” 
drachms. AÆAſchines, who accuſed Cteſiphon, was con- 
demned to pay this fine -. At Rome a falſe accuſer 
was branded with infamy r, by marking the letter & 
on his forehead. Guards were-alſo appointed to watch. 

the accuſer, in order to prevent his corrupting either 

the judges or the witneſſes . 
I have already taken notice'of that Athenian and- 

Roman law, by which the party accuſed was allowed: 

to withdraw before judgment was pronounced. 

; CHAP. XXL 
Of the cruelty of laws in reſpect to debtors in a republic. 
68 is the ſuperiority which one fellow · ſubject 
— has already over another by lending him money, 
which the latter borrows in order to ſpend, and of 
courſe has no longer in his poſſeſſion. What mult be. 
the conſequence, if the laws of a republic make a ſar · 
ther addition to this ſervitude and ſubjection? 

At Athens and Rome F, it was at firſt permitted to 
ſell ſach debtors as were inſolvent. Solon redreſſed this 
abuſe at Athens , by ordaining that no man's body 
ſhould anſwer. for his civil debts. But the decem - 
virs * did not reform the ſame cuſtom at Rome; 

* See Philoſtratus, book 1. Lives of the Sophilts, life of 
FE ſchines. See likewiſe Plutarch and Photius, 

+ Ry the Remmian law, 

Plutarch, in a treatiſe, intitled, How a perſon may reap ad- 
vantages from his enemies. 

$ A great many ſold their children to pay their debts, Plutarch, 

life if Solon. 
Plutarch, life of Solon. 

** It appears from hiſtory that this cuſtom was eſtabliſhed 

amon the Romaus beſore the law of the twelve tables. Livy, 
Kc. 1. boak 2. : _ 

* 

. 

Chap. 21. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 251 

and though they had Solon's regulation before their 
eyes, yet they did not chuſe to follow it. This is not 
the only paſſage of the law of the twelve tables, in 
which the decemvirs ſhew their deſign of checking the 
ſpirit of democracy. 

Often did thoſe cruel laws againſt debtors throw the 
Roman republic iato danger. A man all covered with 
wounds made his eſcape from his creditor's houſe, and 
appeared in the foram “. The people were moved 
with this ſpectacle, and other citizens whom their cre- 
ditors durſt no longer confine, emerged from their dun- 
geons. They had promiſes made them, which were 
all broke. The people upon this having withdrawn to 
the ſacred mount, obtained, not an abrogation of thoſe 
laws, but a magiſtrate to defend them. Thus they 
quitted a ſtate of anarchy, but were ſoon in danger of 
falling into tyranny. Manlius, to render himſelf po- 
.pular, was going to ſet thoſe citizens at liberty, who 
had been reduced to ſlavery by their inhuman eredi. 
tors T. Manlius's deſigns were prevented, but with. 

out remedying the evil. Particular laws facilitated to 

debtors the means of paying 4, and in the year of 
Rome 428 the conſuls propoſed a law $, which depri- 

ved creditors of the power of confining their debtors 

in their own houſes}, An uſurer, by name Papirius, 
attempted to corrupt the chaſtity of a young man na. 
med Publius, whom he kept in irons. Sextus's crime 
gave to Rome its political r that of ins 
gave it alſo the civil. 

* Dionyſ. Halicarn. Roman antiq. book vi. 

+ Plutarch, life of Furius Camillus. 

t Sce what follows in the 24th chapter of the book of laws, as 
relative to the uſe of money. 

one hnadred and twenty years after the law of the twelve 
tables, eo anno plebi Romanæ, velul aliud initium libertatis foftum 
eft, quod nei deſierant. Liv. lib. 8. a N 

F Bona debitoris, non corpus owoxinm effet. III. A 4 

u 

PP 0 G ³˙·¹mm —— — 

252 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 
Such was the fate of this city, that new crimes con- 

firmed the liberty, which thoſe of a more ancient date 

had procured it. Appius's attempt upon Virginia, 
Aung the people again into that horror againſt tyrants 
with which the misfortune of Lucretia had firſt inſpi- 
red them. Thirty-ſeven years after“ the crime of the 
infamous Papirius, an action of the like criminal na. 
ture . was the cauſe of the people's retiring to the 
Janiculum t, and of giving new vigour to the law 
made for the ſafety of debtors. 

Aſter that time creditors were oftener endend by 

debtors for having violated the laws againſt uſury, than 
the latter were ſued for refuſing to pay them. 

8 e Xx. - 
Of things that frrike at liberty in monarchies. . 

Lier has been often weakened in monarchies by 

a thing of the leaſt uſe in the world to the prince. 

This is, the naming of commiſſioners to try a private 
perſon. 

The prince himſelf FUR ſo very little advantage 
from thoſe commiſſioners, that it is not worth while 

to change for their ſake the common courſe of things. 

He is morally ſure, that he has more of the ſpirit of 

probity and juſtice than his commiſſioners, who always 
think themſelves ſufficiently juſtified by his orders, by 

à dubious intereſt of ſtate, by the choice that has been 

made of them, and even by their very apprehenſions. 

Upon the arraigning of a peer under Henry VIII. 

The year of Rome 465. 

+ That of Plantius who made an attempt on the hody of Vetu- 
rius. Valerius Maximus, hook vi. art. 9. Theſe two events ought 
not to be confounded ; they are neither the ſame perſons, nor the 
ſame times. 

t See a fragment of Dionyſ. Halicarn. in the extract of 1 
and vices; .Liyy's epitom. book 11. and Frienſhemius, book xi. 

| A it 

Chap. 23. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 253 

it was cuſtomary to try him by a committee of the 
houſe of lords: by this means he put to death as many 

* as he pleaſed. A 
CHAP. XXIII. 
Of ſpies in monarchies. 

GHopty I be aſked whether there is any neceſlity - 
for ſpies in monarchies, my anſwer would be, that 
the uſual practice of good princes is not to employ 
them. When a man obeys the laws, he has diſchar- 
his duty to his prince. He ought at leaſt to have 
his own houſe for an aſylum, and the reſt of his con- 
duct ſhould be exempt from inquiry. The ſpying trade 
might perhaps be tolerable, were it practiſed by honeſt 
men; but the neceſſary infamy of the perſon is ſufficient 
to make us judge of the infamy of the thing. A prince 
ought to act towards his ſubjects with candour, frank - 
neſs, and confidence. He that has ſo much diſquiet, 
ſuſpicion, and fear, is an actor embarraſſed in playing 
his part. When he finds that the laws are generally 
obſerved and reſpected, he may judge himſelf ſafe. The 
general behayiour of the public anſwers for that of 
every individual. Let him not be afraid: he cannot 
imagine how natural it is for his people to love him. 
And how ſhould they do otherwiſe than love him, ſince 
he is the ſource of almoſt all the favours that are 
ſhewn? puniſhments being generally charged to the ac- 
count of the laws. He never ſhews himſelf to his peo- 
ple but with a ſerene countenance : they have even a 
ſhare of his glory, and they are protected by his 
power. A proof of his being beloved is, that his ſub- 
jets have a confidence in him ; what the miniſter re- 
fules they imagine the prince would have granted: 
even under public calamities they. do not accuſe his 
perſon; they are apt to complain of his being miſin- 
formed, or beſet by corrupt men : did the prince but 
Vor. I. * inc us 

— 

N 
1 

254 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI.. 
Ano, ſay the people; theſe words are a kind of invo. 

cation, and a proof of the confidence they have in his 
perſon. ' 

CHAP, XXIV. 
Of anmymons letters. 

Tu Tartars are obliged to put their names to their 
arrows, that the arm may be known that ſhoots 

them. When Philip of Macedon was wounded at the 

ſiege of a certain town, theſe words were found on 
the javelin, After has given this mortal wound to Philips. 
If they who accuſe a perſon did it merely to ferve the 
public, they would not carry their complaint to the 

prince, who may be eaſily prejudiced, but to the magi- 

ſtrates who have rules that are formidable only to ca- 
lumniators. But, if they are unwilling to leave the 
laws - open between them and the accuſed, it is a pre- 
ſumption they have reaſon to be afraid of them ; and 
the leaſt puniſhment they onght to ſuffer is not to be cre- 
dited. No notice therefore ſhould ever be taken of 
thoſe letters but in cafes that cannot admit of the de. 
lays of the ordinary courſe of juſtice, and where the 
prince's welfare is concerned. Then it may be ima- 

gined that the accuſer has made an effort, which has 
untied his tongue and made him ſpeak, But in other 
caſes, one ought to ſay with the emperor Conſtantius, 
« We cannot ſuſpect a perſon who has wanted an ac- 

4 cuſer, whilſt he did not want an enemy +.” 

CH AP. XXV. 
, Of the manner of governing in monarchies. 
HE royal anthority is a great ſpring that onght 
to move eaſily and without noiſe. The Chineſe 

* Plutarch's morals, compariſon of ſome 8 and Greek hi- 
ſtories, tome A. p. 487. 1 

+ Leg. 6. cod; Theod, de ſamoſ. libellit. : , 
a ; l 1 OG. boa 

II. 

us 

Chap. 26. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 255 

boaſt of one of their emperors, whg governed, they 
ſay, like heaven, that is, by his example. 

There are ſome caſes in which a ſovereign ought to- 
exert the full extent of his power, and others in which 
he ought to reduce it within its proper limits. The 
ſublimity of adminiſtration conſiſts in knowing per- 
ſectly the proper degree of power that ſhould be ex- 
erted on different occaſions. 

The whole felicity of our monarchies conſiſts in the 
opinion people have of the lenity of the government. 
A wrong-headed miniſter always wants to remind us 
of our ſlavery. But, granting even that we are ſlaves, 
he ought to endeavour to conceal our miſerable condi- 
tion from us. All he can ſay or write is, that the 
prince is uneaſy, that he is ſurpriſed, and that he will (et 
things to rights. There is a certain eaſe in command- 
ing; the prince ought only to encourage, and * the 
menacing part to the laws“. 

C HAP. xXXVI. 
That in a monarchy the prince ought to be of eaſy acceſs» 

TI utility of this maxim will appear better from 

the inconveniency attending the contrary practice. 
« Czar Peter I, (ſays the Sieur Perry +), has publiſhed 
« a new edi, by which he forbids any of his ſubjects 
« to offer him a petition, till after having preſemed 
4 two to his officers. In caſe of refuſal of juſtice, they 
% may preſent him a third, but upon pain of death, 
© if they are in the wrong. After this, no one ever 
« preſumed to offer a petition to the Ozar,” 

CHAP. XXVII. 
Of the manners of a manarch, 

HE manners of a prince contribute as much az 
the laws themſelves to liberty; like theſe he may 
* Nerva, ſays Tacitus, increaſed the eaje of the empire. 
+ State of Rullia, p. 173. Paris edition, 2715. 

dS 2 transform 

* 

256 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XI.. 
transform men into beaſts, and beaſts into men. If 
he likes free and noble ſouls, he will have ſubjects; if 

he likes baſe daſtardly ſpirits, he will have flaves. Does 
he want to know the great art of ruling ? let him call 

| Honour and virtue around his perſon ; let him invite 

perſonal merit. He may even ſometimes caſt an eye 
on talents and abilities. Let him not be afraid of thoſe 

rivals who are called men of merit ; he is their equal as 

foon as he loves them. Let him gain the hearts of his 
people without bringing their ſpirits into ſubjection. 
Let him render himſelf popular; he ought to be plea- 
{ed with the affection of the loweſt of his ſubjects, for 
they too are men. The common people require ſo very 
little deference, that it is fit they ſhould be humoured 
the infinite diſtance between the ſovereign and them 
will ſurely prevent them from giving him any uneaſi- 
neſs. Let him be exorable to ſupplication, and reſolute 
againſt demands ; let him be ſenſible, in fine, that his 
people have his refuſals, while his courtiers enjoy his 
favours. 
C H. A P. XXVIII. 
Of the regard which monarchs owe to their ſubjectu. 

1 ought to be extremely circumſpect in point 

of raillery. It pleaſes when moderate, becauſe it 
opens the way to familiarity; but a biting raillery is 
leſs excuiable in them than in the meaneſt of their ſub · 

jects, for it is they alone that give a mortal wound. 

Much leſs ought they to offer a notorious inſult to any 
of their ſubjects: kings were inſtituted to pardon, and 
to puniſh, but never to inſult. 

When they -»inſult their ſubjeQs, their treatment is 
more cruel than that of the Turk or the Muſcovite. 
The inſults of the latter are a humiliation, not a dif- 
grace 3 but both muſt follow from the inſults of the 

. l 
former. | 

Such 
55 

Chap. 29. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 257 

Such is the prejudice of the eaſtern nations, that 
they look upon an affront coming from the prince, as 
the effect of paternal goodneſs; and ſueh, on the eon- 
trary, is our way of thinking, that, to the cruel vex- 
ation of being afronted, we join the deſpair of ever 
being able to wipe off the diſgrace. 

Princes ought to be overjoyed to have ubjeds to 
whom henour is dearer than life, an incitement to fide- 
lity as well as to courage. 

They ſhould remember the * apes that have 
happened to princes for inſulting their ſubjects, the re- 
venge of Cherea, of the eunuch Narſes, of Count 
Jalian, and in fine of the Ducheſs of Montpenſier, 
who, being enraged againſt Henry III. for having pub» 
liſhed ſome of her private failings, plagued him all his. 
life. 

CHAP. XX1X. 
Of the civil laws proper for mixing a little liberty in @ 
| d:ſpotic government. 

Hoven deſpotic governments are of their ow 

nature every where the ſame, yet from circum” 
ſtances, from an opinion of religion, from prejudice, 
from received examples, from a particular turn of 
mind, from manners or morals, it is poſſible * may 
admit of a conſiderable difference. 

It is uſeful that ſome particular notions ſhould be 
eſtabliſhed in thoſe governments. Thus in China the 
prince is confidered as the father of his people, and at 
the eommencement of the empire of the Arabs, the 
prince was their preacher *. 

It is proper there ſhould be ſome ſacred book to- 
ſerve for a rule, as the Koran among the Arabs, the 
books of Zoroaſter among the Perſians, the Vedam 

among the Indians, and the claſſic books among the 
The Califs. | 

* 3 i 2 | Chi eſe. | 

% 

258 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XII. 

Chineſe. The religious code ſupplies the civil one, and 
direQs the arbitrary power. 

It is not atall amiſs, that in dubious caſes the judges 
ſkould conſult the miniſters of religion *®, Thus in 
Turky the Cadis conſult the Mollachs. Bat, if it is a 
capital crime, it may be proper for the particular judge, 
if ſuch there be, to take the governor's advice, to the 
end that the civil and ecclefiaftic power may be tem- 

pered alſo by the political authority. 

CHAP. XXX. 
The ſame ſubjed continued. 

JOrnixc but the very exceſs and fury of deſpotie 
power ordained, that the father's diſgrace ſhould 
drag after it that of his wife and children. They are 
wretched enough already without being criminals : be- 
ſides, the prince ought to have ſuppliants or mediators, 
between, himſelf and the accuſed, to afſwage his wrath, 
or to-inform his juſtice. 

It is an excellent cuſtom of the Maldivians , that 
when a lord is diſgraced, he goes every day to pay his 
court to the king till he is taken again into favour : his 
preſence diſarms the prince's wrath. 

In fome deſpotic governments þ they have a notiou 
that it is treſpaſſing againſt the reſpet due to their 
prince, to ſpeak to him in favour of a. perſon. in diſ- 
grace. Theſe princes. ſeem. to uſe all their endeavours 
to deprive themſelves. of the virtue of clemency. 
Areadius and Honorious, in a law d which we have 
already deſcanted-upon ||, poſitively declare, that they 

* Hiſtory of the Tartars, part. 3. p. 277. in the remarks. | 

+ See Francis Pirard, 

1 As at qrefont in Perſia, according to Sir John Chardin. This 
caſtom. is very ancient. They put Cavades, ſays Procopius, in the 
caſtle of obfivion. There is a law which forbids any one to ſpeak 

of thoſe who are hut up, or even to mention their name. 

5 The sth law i in the code ad leg. Jul. maj, 

Ia viii. of this book, 

will 

\ 

Chap. 1. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 259 
will ſhow no favour to thoſe who ſhall preſume to 

petition them in behalf of the guilty ®. This was a 
very bad law indeed, ſince it is bad even n a de · 
ſpotic government. 

The cuſtom of Perſia, which permits every man 
that pleaſes to leave the kingdom, is excellent; and 
though the contrary practice derives its origin from 
deſpotic power, which has always looked upon ſub- 
jects as ſlaves , and thoſe who quit the country as fu- 
gitives, yet the Perſian practice is uſeful even to a 
deſpotic government, becauſe the apprehenſion of the 
flight, or of the withdrawing of debtors, puts a ſtop 
to, or moderates the oppreſſions of baſhaws and ex- 
tortioners. 

— 
B O O K XII. 

Of the relation which the levying of taxes 
and the greatneſs of the public revenues 
have to liberty. 

_ 2 

CHAP. I. 0 
Of the revenues. of the ſtate. 

HE revenues of the ſtate are a portion that each 
ſubje& gives of his property, in order to ſecure 

er to have the agreeable enjoyment of the remainder. 
To fix theſe revenues in a proper manner, regard 
thould be had both to the neceflities of the ſtate and 

Frederick copied this law in the conſtitution of Naples, book i. 

+ In monarchies there is generally a law which forbids thoſe 
who are inveſted with public employments, to go ont of the kin 
dom without the prince a leave. This law ought to be eſtabliſhed 
alſo in republics. But, in thoſe that have particular inſtitutions, 
the prohibition ought io be general, in order to prevent the intxo- 
duction of foreign manuers. 

= 
* 
6 
—— to 

—_——— e ] — a 4 
- — — > 

260 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIII. 

to thoſe of the ſubje&. The real wants of the people 
ought never to give way to the imaginary wants of the 

Race. 

Imaginary wants are thoſe which flow. from the 
paſſions, and from the weakneſs of the governors, 
from the charms of an extraordinary 'projet, from 
the diſtempered deſire of vain-glory, and from a cer · 
tain impotency of mind incapable of withſtanding the 

attacks of fancy. Often has it happened, that mini- 

ſters of a reſtleſs diſpoſition have imagined, that the 
wants of the tate were thoſe of their own little and 
ignoble ſouls. 

There is nothing requires more wiſdom and prudence 
than the regulation of that portion which is taken 
from, and of that which is left to the ſubject. 

"The public revenues are not to be meaſured by 
what the people are able, but by what they ought to 
give; and if they are meaſured by what they are able 
to give, it ought to be at leaſt by what they are able 
to give conſtantly. 

CHAP. II. 
That it is bad reaſoning to ſay, that the greatmeſe of taxes 
* is good in its own nature. 

HERE have been inſtances in pagticular monar- 

chies of ſmall ſtates exempt from taxes, that have 
been as miſerable as the circumjacent places which 
groaned under the weight of exaQtions. The chief 
reaſon of this is, that the ſmall ſurropnded ſtate. can 
hardly have any ſuch thing as induſtry, arts, or ma- 
nufactures, becauſe in this reſpect it lies under a thou- 
ſand reſtraints from the great ſtate in which it is in- 
cloſed. The great ſtate that.ſurrounds it is bleſſed 

with induſtry, manufactures, and arts, and eſtabliſhes 

laws by which thoſe ſeveral advantages are procured. 

The petty ſtate becomes therefore neceſſarily poor, let 

it ever ſo few' taxes, 
pay | An N 

Chap. 3. TRE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 261 

And yet ſome have concluded from the poverty of 
thoſe petty ſtates, that, in order to render the people 
induſtrious, they ſhould be loaded with taxes. But 
it would be a much better concluſion to ſay, that they 
ought to have no taxes at all. None live here but 
wretches who retire from the neighbouring parts to 
avoid working ; wretches who, diſheartened by pain 
and toil, make their whole ſelicity conſiſt in idleneſs. 

The effect of wealth in a country is to inſpire every 
heart with ambition; the effect of poverty is to give 
birth to deſpair. The former is excited by labour, the 
latter is ſoothed by indolence. 

Nature is juſt, to all mankind ; ſhe rewards them for 
their induſtry, whilſt ſhe renders them induſtrious by 
annexing rewards in proportion to the greatneſs of 
their labour, But, if an arbitrary power deprives 
people of the recompenſes of nature, they fall into a 
diſreliſh of induſtry, and then indolence and inaction 
ſeem to be their only happineſs. 

CHAP. III. 

Of taxes in countries where part of the n are villains 
or bandmen *, 

1 ſtate of villainage is ſometimes eſtabliſhed af- 

ter a conqueſt. In that caſe the bondman, or 
villain that tills the land, ought to have a kind of 
partnerſhip with his maſter. Nothing but a commu» 
nication of loſs or profit can reconcile thoſe who are 

doomed to labour, with thoſe who are blefſed with a 
ſtate of affluence. 

CHAP. lv. 
Of @ republic in the like caſe. | 
WW HEN a republic has reduced a nation to the 
drudgery of cultivating her lands, ſh: onght 
* Glebe aſcriptitias, _ 

never 

262 THE SPIRIT OF LAws. Book xIn, © 

never to ſuffer the free ſubject to have a power of in- 

. creaſing the tribute of the bondman. This was not 
permitted at Sparta, Thoſe brave people thought the 
Helotes * would be more induſtrious in cultivating 
their lands, upon knowing that their ſervitude was 
not to increaſe; they imagiſted likewiſe that the ma- 
ſters would be better citizens when they deſired no 
more than what they were accuſtomed to enjoy. 

CHAP. V. 
Of a monarchy in the like caſe. 

V HEN the nobles of a monarchical ſtate cauſe the 
— lands to be cultivated for their own uſe by a 
. conquered people, they ought never to have a power 
of increabng the ſervice or tribute 7. Beſides, it is 
right the prince ſhould be ſatisfied with his own de- 
racine and the military ſervice, But, if he wants to 
raiſe taxes on the bondmeg of his nobility, the lords 
of the ſeveral diſtricts opght to be anſwerable for the 
tax {, and be obliged to pay it for the bondmen, by 
whom they may be afterwards reimburſed. But, if 
this rule is not followed, the lord and the collectors 
of the prince's taxes will haraſs the poor bondman 
by turns, till he _oonny with wiſer or flies into the 

woods. 

* 
Fr G ena ad. 

wes XX TS OW, MY , * 

CHA r. VI. 
| Of a deſpotic government in the like caſe. 
WIr has been above ſaid js ſtill more igdiſpen- 
ſably neceſſary in a deſpotic government. The 

lord, who is every moment liable to be ſtripped of his 
lands and ONCE, is not fo | eager to 1 them. 

„ K % XX www 

—— — —— —wé—ä—— — _ — — — ᷓ — — —.U-h , — — — — a — 
* ——— — — — — — — — — _ — * A 
— — 

9 Plutarch. 
+ This is what indueed Charlemagne to make his excellent inſtitu 
tions upon this See the gth book of the espitularies, art 303. 

This is the practice in Germany. 

— 

. When 

I 

p Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 263 

When Peter I. thought proper to follow the cuf- 
tom of Germany, and to demand his taxes in money, 
de made a very prudent regulation which is ſtill fol- 
lowed in Ruſſia. The gentleman levies the tax on the 
5 peaſants, and pays it to the Czar. If the number of 
peaſants diminiſhes, he pays all the fame; if it in- 

5 creaſes, he pays no more; ſo that it is his intereſt not 
a to worry or oppreſs his vaſſals. 
CHAP. VII. 
Of taxes in czuntries where villainage is not eſtabliſhed, 
1 W HEN the inhabitants of a ſtate are all free ſub- 
8 jects, and each man enjoys his property with as 

5 much right as the prince his ſovereignty, taxes may 
: then be laid either on perſons, on lands, or merchan- 
diſes, on two of theſe, or on all three together. 

In the tazing of perſons, it would be an unjuſt pro- 
portion to conform exactly to that of property. At 
Athens the“ people were divided into four claſſes. 
, Thoſe who drew 500 meaſures of liquid or dry fruit 
ie from their eſtates paid a talent to the public; thoſe 

who drew 300 meaſures paid half a talent; thoſe who 

had 200 meaſures paid ten minæ; thoſe of the fourth 
claſs paid nothing at all. The tax was fair, though 
it was not proportionable : if it did not follow the 
proportion of people's property, it followed that of 
their wants. It was judged that every man had an 
equal ſhare of what was neceſſary for nature ; that 
whatſoever was neceſſary for nature ought not to be 
taxed ; that to this ſucceeded the uſeful, which ought 
to be taxed, but leſs than the ſuperfluous; and that 
the largeneſs of the taxes on what was ſuperfluous pre- 
vented ſuperfluity. # 
In the taxing of lands it is caſtomary to make liſts 
or regiſters in which the different claſſes of eſtates are 

Pollux, Wok viii. chap. ro. art. 1 30. + Or 60 minz. 

ranged 

N 

* 

264 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Book XII. 

ranged. But it is very difficult to know theſe diffe- 
reuces, and ſtill more ſo to find people that are not in- 
tereſted in miſtaking them. Here therefore are two 
ſorts of injuſtice, that of the man and that of the 
thing. But, if in general the tax be not exorbitant, 
and the people continue to have plenty of neceſſaries, 
theſe particular acts of injuſtice will do no harm. On 
the contrary, if the people are permitted to enjoy only 
juſt what is neceſſary for ſubſiſtence, the leaſt diſpro- 
portion will be of the greateſt conlequence, 

If ſome ſubjects do not pay enough, the miſchief is 
not ſo great; their convenience and eaſe turn always 
to the public advantage : if ſome private people pay 
too much, their ruin redounds to the public detri- 
ment. If the government proportions its fortune to 
that of individuals, the eaſe and conveniency of the 
latter will-ſoon make its fortune riſe. The whole de- 
pends upon à critical moment. Shall the ſtate begin 

with imporeriſhing the ſubjects to enrich itſelf ? or 
had it better wait to be enriched by its wealthy ſub- 
jects? Is it more adviſeable for it to have the firſt or 

ſecond advantage ? Which ſhall it chuſe, to begin, or 
to end with being rich ? 

The duties felt leaſt by the people are thoſe on 
merchandiſe, becauſe they are not demanded of them 
in form. They may be ſo prudently managed, that 
the people themſelves ſhall hardly know they pay 
them. For this purpoſe it is of the utmoſt conſequence, 
that the perſon who ſells the merchandiſe ſhould pay 
the duty. He is very ſenſible that he does not pay it 
for himſelf; and the conſumer who pays it in the 
main confounds it with the price. Some authors have 
obſerved, that Nero had aboliſhed the duty of the five 

and twentieth part ariſing from the ſale of ſlaves *; 
_ ® Vedtigal quintz & viceſimæ venalium manciplorum remiſſum 

ſpecie magis quam vi, quia cum venditor pendere juberetur, in par · 
tem pretii emptoribus acereſcebat. Tacit, Annal. lib. 13. 
2 and 

| 
{ 
t 
t 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 265 

and yet he had only ordained, that it ſhould be paid 
by the ſeller inſtead of the purchaſer ; this regulation» 
which left the icapoſt entire, ſeemed nevertheleſs to 
ſuppreſs it. 

There are two ſtates in Cy where there are 
very heavy impoſts upon liquors: in one the brewer 
alone pays the duty, in the other it is levied indiſcri- 
minately upon all the conſumers ; in the firſt nobody 
ſeels the rigour of the impoſt, in the ſecond it is look- 
ed upon as a grievance. In the former the ſubje& is 
ſenſible only of the liberty he has of not paying, in 
the latter he feels only the necellity that compels him 
to pay. 

Farther, the obliging the conſumers to pay requires 
a perpetual rumaging and ſearching into their 
houſes. Now, nothing is more contrary than this to 
liberty; and thoſe who eſtabliſh theſe ſort of duties 
have not ſurely Been ſo happy in this reſpect, as to 
hit npon the beft method of adminiſtration. 

c HAP. VII. 
In what manner the illuſion is preſerved. 

TY order to make the purchaſer confound the price 

of the commodity with the impoſt, there muſt be 
ſome proportion between the impoſt and the value of 
the commodity ; wherefore there onght not to be an 

 excallive duty Upon merchandiſes of little value. There 

are countries in which the duty exceeds ſeventeen or 
eighteen times the valne of the commodity. In this 
caſe the prince removes the illuſion; his ſubjects plain- 
ly fee they are dealt with in an unreaſonable manner, 
which renders them moſt exquiſitely ſenſible of their 
faviſh fituation. 

Beſides, the prince, to be able to levy a duty fo dif. 
proportioned to the value of the, commodity, muſt be 
himſelf the vender, and the people muſt not have it 

Vor. I. 2 in 

266 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XIII. 
in their power to purchaſe it elſewhere; a praQtice ſub. 

ject to a thouſand inconveniencies. 

Smuggling being in this caſe extremely lucrative, 
the natural and moſt reaſonable penalty, namely the 
confiſcation of the merchandiſe, becomes incapable of 

putting a ſtop to it, eſpecially as this very merchan. 
diſe is intrinſically of an inconſiderable value. Re. 

courſe muſt therefore be had to extravagant puniſh. 
ments, ſuch as thoſe inflicted for capital crimes. All 
proportion then of puniſhment is at an end. People 
that cannot really be conſidered as bad men are pu- 
niſhed like villains, which, of all things in the world, 
is the moſt contrary to the ſpirit of a moderate go. 
vernment. 

I add, that the more the people are tempted to 
cheat the farmer of the revenues, the more the latter 
js enriched and the former impoveriſhed. To put a 
ſtop to ſmuggling, the publican muſt be inveſted with 
extraordinary means of oppreting, and then the coun · 

try is ruined. 

8 0 HA P. IX. 

| Of a bad kind of impeſt. 
WE ſhall here take ſome curſory notice of an im- 

poſt laid in particular countries on the different 
articles of civil contracts. As theſe are things ſubject 
to very nice diſquiſitions, a vaſt deal of knowledge is 
neceſſary to make any tolerable defence again the 
farmer of the revenues, who interprets in that caſe 
the regulations of the prince, and exerciſes an arbi- 
trary power over people's fortunes. Experience has 
demonſtrated, that a duty an the paper on which the 
deeds are drawn would be of far greater fervice. 

55 CHAP 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, 267 

CHAP. X. 

That the greatneſs of taxes depends on the nature of the 
government. 

1 ought to be very light in deſpotic govern- 
ments; otherwiſe who would be at the trouble of 
tiling the land? Beſides, how is it pollible to pay 
heavy tazes in a government that makes no manner of 
return to the different contributions of the ſubject ? 

The exorbitant power of the prince, and the extreme 
depreſſion of the people, require that there ſhould not 
be even a poſſibility of the leaſt miſtake between them. 
The taxes ought to be ſo eaſy to collect, and ſo clear - 
y ſettled as to leave no opportunity for the collectors to 
inereaſe or diminiſh them. A portion of the fruits of 
the earth, a capitation, a duty of ſo much per cent. on 
merchandiſes, are the only taxes ſuitable to that go- 
vernment. 

Merchants in deſpotic countries ought to have a per · 
ſonal ſafeguard, to which all due reſpect ſhould be paid. 
Without this, they would ſtand no chance in the diſ- 
putes that might ariſe between them and the prince's 
officers. 

Of fiſeal puniſhments. 

ITH reſpe& to fiſcal puniſhments, there is one 
thing. very particular, that, contrary to the ge- 

neral cuſtom, they are more ſevere in Europe than in 
Aſia. In Europe, not only the merchandizes, but 
even ſometimes the ſhips and carriages, are confiſca- 
ted; which is never practiſed in Aſia. This is becauſe 
in Europe the merchant has judges, who are able to 
ſhelter him from oppreſſion; in Aſia the deſpotie 
judges themſelves would be the greateſt oppreſſors. 
What remedy could a merchant have againſt a ba- 
Z 2 ſhaw 

— 

\ 

© „ 

268 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIII 

thaw, that was determined to confiſcate his merchan- 
dizes? 

- The prince therefore reſtrains his own power, find- 
ing himſelf under a neceſſity of acting with ſome kind 
of lenity. In Turky they raiſe only a fingle duty for 
the importation of goods, and afterwards the whole 
country is open to the merchant. Falſe entries are 
not attended with confiſcation, or increaſe of duty. In 
China“, they never open the baggage of thoſe who are 
not merchants. Detrauding the cuſtoms in the territory 
of the Mogul is not punithed with confiſcation, but 
with doubling the duty. The princes of Tartary +, 
who reſide in towns, impoſe ſcarce any duty at all on 
the goods that paſs. through their country. In Japan, 
it is true, the defrauding of the caſtoms is a capital 
crime; but this is, becauſe they have particular reaſons 
for prohibiting all communication with foreigners ; 
hence the fraud ꝗ is rather a contravention of the laws 
made for the 2881 of the een, than of thoſe 

| CH AF. 1A. .. 
11 between the greatneſs of taxes and liberty. 
I is a general rule, That taxgs may be heavier in 
proportion to the liberty of the ſubject, and that 

there is a neceſſity for reducing . them in proportion to 
the increaſe of flavery. This has always been, and 

always will be, the caſe. It is a rule derived from 

natnre, that never varies. We find it in-all parts, in 
England, in Holland, and in every ſtate where liberty 

Father du Halle, tom. ii. p 37. 
1 Hiſtory of the Tartars, part iii. p. 290. 

} Being willing to trade with fore'gners without having any com. 
- muni «tion «ich them, they have pitched upon two nations for that 
purpoſe, the Dutch For the commeree of Earope, and the Chineſe 

for that of Aſia; ;/ they confine the factors and ſailors in a kind of 

priſon, and lay ſach a reſtraiat upon them as tires their patience. 
gradually 

Chap. 12. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 269 

gradually declines, till we come, to Turky. Switzer- 
land ſeems to be an exception to this rule, becauſe they 
pay no taxes; but the particular reaſon for that exemp- 
tion is well known, and even confirms what I have ad- 
vanced. In thoſe barren mountains proviſions are ſo 
dear, and the country is ſo populous, that a Swiſs 

pays four times more to nature, than a Turk does to 

the Sultan. 

A conquering people, ſuch as were formerly the 
Athenians and the Romans, may rid themſelves of all 
taxes, as they reign over vanquiſhed nations. Then 

indeed they do not pay in proportion to their liberty, 

becauſe in this reſpect they are no longer a people, but 
a monarch. 

But the general rule ſtill holds good. In moderate 
governments there is an indemnity for the. weight of 
the taxes, which is liberty. In deſpotic countries“ 
there is an equivalent for liberty, which is the light- 
neſs of the taxes. 

In ſome monarchies in Europe, there are + particu- 
lar provinces, which, from the very nature of theie 
civil government, are in a more flouriſhing condition 
than the reſt. It is pretended, that theſe provinces are 

not ſufficiently taxed, becauſe through the poodneſs of 

their government they are able to be taxed higher. 
Hence the miniſters ſeem conſtantly to aim at depriving 
them of this very government, from whence a diffuſive 
bleſſing is derived; a bleſſing which ſpreads its influ- 
ence to diſtant parts, and redounds even to the 8 's 
advantage. 

+ 

In Ruſſia the taxes are but ſmall; they have been increaſed . 
ſnce the deſpotic power of. the prince is exerciſed with more me- 
deration, See the hiſtory of the Tartars, part 2. 

+ The Pais d'*tats, where the ſtates of the province aſſemble to 

ee pee, 
2 3 CHAP. 

* 

20 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIII. 
CHAP. XII. 

In what governments taxes are capable of increaſe. 

vb AXES may be increaſed in moſt republics, be- 
; cauſe the citizen, who thinks he is paying him. 
ſelf, willingly ſubmits to them, and moreover is gene- 
rally able to bear their weight through an effect of the 
nature of the government. 

In a monarchy taxes may be increaſed, becauſe the 
moderation of the government is capable of procur- 
ing riches; it is a recompenſe, as it were, of the prince 
for the reſpect he ſhews to the laws. In deſpotic go- 
vernments they cannot be increaſed, becaule there can 
be no mcreaſe of the extremity of ſlavery. 

CHAP. XIV. 
That the nature of the taxes is relative to the government. 

A CariTATION is more natural to ſlavery ; a duty on 
merchandiſes is more natural to liberty, becauſe 
it has not ſo direct a relation to the perſon, 

It is natural in a deſpotie government for the prince 
not to give money to his ſoldiers, or to thoſe belong- 
ing to his court, but to diſtribute lands amongſt them, 
and of courſe that there ſhould be very few taxes. But, 
if the prince gives money, the moſt natural tax he can 
raiſe is a capitation which can never be conſiderable: 
for, as it is impoſſible to make different claſſes of the 
contributors, becauſe of the abuſes that might ariſe 

_  ſrom thence, conſidering the injuſtice and violence of 

the government, they are under an abſolute neceſlity 
of regulating themſelves by the rate of what even the 

pooreſt and molt wretched are able to pay. 
The natural tax of moderate governments is the 
duty laid on merchandiſes. As this is really paid by 
the conſumer, though advanced by the merchant, it 
2 | 47 is 

1 a 5— *** 2 _ 

Chap. 15. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 271 

is a loan which the merchant has already made to the 
conſumer. Hence the merchant muſt be conſidered, on 
the one ſide, as the general vender for the ſtate, and, 
on the other, as the creditor of every individual. He 
advances to the ſtate the duty which the conſumer will 
ſome time or other refand, and he has paid for the 
merchandiſe, It is therefore obvious, that, in propor- 
tion to the moderation of the government, to the pre- 
valence of the fpirit of liberty, and to the ſecurity of 
private fortunes, the more a merchant has it in his 
power to advance money to the ſtate, and to pay con- 
ſiderable duties for individuals. In England a mer- 
chant lends really to the government fifty or ſixty 
pounds ſterling for every tun of wine he imports. 
Where is the merchant that would dare do any ſuch 
thing in a country like Turky? And, were he ſo cou- 
rageous, how could he do i it with: a dubious or ſhatter- 
ed fortune ? 

CHAP, XV. 
Abuſe of liberty. 
O theſe great advantages of liberty it is owingy 
that liberty itſelf has been abuſed. Becauſe a 
moderate governinent has been productive of admi- 
rable effects, this moderation has been laid aſide: be- 
cauſe great taxes have been raifed, they wanted to 
raiſe them to exceſs, and, ungrateful to the hand of 
liberty of whom they received this preſent, they ad. 
dreſſed themſelves to e who never err * 
leaſt favour. 
Liberty produces 4 tates; but the effect of 
exceſſive taxes is to produce flavery in their turn, and 
ſlavery produces a diminution of tribute. 

Mat of this eidiviel tht enfiors e 

exempt every year ſome province of their empire from 
paying 

* 

272 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIII. 

paying tribute . The manifeſtations of their will are 
favours. But in Europe the edicts of princes are dif. 
agreeable even before they are ſeen, becauſe they al. 
ways make mention of their own wants, but not a 
word of ours. 

From an unpardonable indolence in the miniſters of 
thoſe countries, owing to the nature of the govern- 
ment, and frequently to the climate, the people derive 
this advantage, that they are not inceſſantly plagued 
with new demands. The public expence does not in - 
creaſe, becauſe the miniſters do not form new projets; 
and, if ſome by chance are formed, they are ſuch as 
are ſoon executed. The governors of the ſtate do not 
perpetually torment the people, becauſe they do not 
perpetually torment themſelves. But it is impoſſible 
there ſhould be any fixed rule in our finances, becauſe 
we always know that we ſhall have ſomething or other 
to do, without ever knowing what it is. 

It is no longer cuſtomary with us te give the appel- 
lation of a great miniſter to a wiſe diſpenſer of the 
public revenues, but to a perſon of dexterity and cun- 
ning, who is clever at finding out what we call way: 
and means. 

CHAP. XVL-. 
Of the conqueſts of the Mahometans. 

FF was this exceſs of taxes + that occaſioned the pro- 
digious facility with which the Mahometans car- 
ried on their conqueſts. Inſtead of a continual ſeries 
of extortions deviſed by the ſubtile avarice of the em- 
perors, the people were ſubjected to a ſimple tribute, 
which was paid and collected with eaſe. Thus they 

This is the practice of the emperors of China. 
+ See in hiſtory the greatneſs, the oddity, and even the folly of 
| thoſe taxes. Anaſtaſius invented a tax for breathing; uf gui ſyue pro 
| bauftu aeris * 
were 

sg egg S _— Al. n. th. ** * 

_ wwe wo mA_s md £A Rn at - 

Chap. 17. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 273 

were far happier in obeying a barbarous nation than 
a corrupt government, in which they ſuffered every 
inconveniency of a lolt liberty, with all the horrors of 
a preſent flavery. | 

C HAP. XVII. 
Of the augmentation of troops. 

A New diſtemper has ſpread itſelf over Europe; it 
has infected our princes, and induces them to 
keep up an exorbitant number of troops. It has its 
redoublings, and of neceſſity becomes contagious: for, 
as ſoon as one prince augments what he calls his eroops, 
the reſt of courſe do the ſame; ſo that nothing is 
gained thereby but the public ruin. Each monarch 
keeps as many armies on foot as if his people were in 
danger of being exterminated, and they give the name 
of peace® to this general effort of all againſt all. Thus 
Europe is ruined to that degree, that were private 

people to be in the ſame. fituation as the three moſt 

opulent powers of this part of the world, they would 
not have neceſſary ſubſiſtence. We are poor with the 
riches and commerce of the whole univerſe ; and ſoon, 
by thus augmenting our troops, we ſhall have nothing 
but ſoldiers, and be reduced to the very ſame ſituation 
as the Tartars . 

Great princes, not ſatisfied with hiring or buying 
troops of petty ſtates, make it their buſineſs on all 
ſides to pay ſubſidies for alliauces, that is, almoſt ge- 
nerally, to throw away their money. 

The conſequence of ſuch a ſituation is the perpetual 
augmentation of taxes, and the miſchief which pre- 
yents all future remedy is, that they reckon no more 

* All that is wanting for this is, to improve the new invention 
of the militia eſtabliſhed almoſt all, over Europe, and carry it to the 
ſ. me excels as they do the regular, troops. . 

+ True it is that this ſtate of effort is the chief ſupport of the 
balance, becauſe it checks the great powers, 

upon 

K 

274 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIII. 

upon their revenues, but go to war with their whole 
capital. It is no unuſual thing to ſee governments 
mortage their funds even in time of peace, and to em- 
ploy what they call extraordinary means to ruin them- 
ſclves; means ſo extraordinary indeed, that ſuch are 
hardly thought on by the moſt extravagant young 
Ipendthrift. 

CH AP. XVIII. 
Of an exemption from taxes. 

HE maxim of the great eaſtern empires, of er- 

empting ſuch provinces as have very much ſuf- 
fered from taxes, ought to be extended to monarchi- 
cal ſtates. There are ſome indeed where this maxim 
is eſtabliſhed; yet the country is more oppreſſed than 
if no ſuch rule took place; becauſe, as the prince le- 
vies ſtill neither more nor leſs, the ſtate becomes bound 
for the whole. In order to eaſe a village that pays 
badly, they load another that pays better ; the former 
is not relieved, and the latter is rained. The people 
grow defperate between the neceflity of paying, for 
fear of exactions, and the Sages of paying, for fear 
of new charges. 

A well-regulated government ought to ſet aſide, for 
the firſt article of its expence, a determinate ſum for 
contingent caſes. It is with the public as with indi. 
viduals, who are ruined when they live up exactly to 
their income. 

With regard to an obligation for the whole amongſt 
the inhabitants of the ſame village, ſome pretend “, 
that it is but reaſonable; becauſe there is a poſſibility 
of a fraudulent combination on their fide: but who 

ever heard, that upon mere ſuppoſitions we are to eſta - 

bliſh a thing in itſelf unjuſt and ruinous to the ſtate ? 
® Sec a treatiſe op the Roman finances, chap. 2. 

CHAP. 

„ -a K* = K ww tus tr ic. a5 as — 

— 

we 

SS. <0. tv & > _- 

Chap. rg. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 255 

CHAP. XIX. 

Which is meſt ſuitable to the prince and to the people; the 
letting out to farm, or the adminiftration of the re-- 
venues 2? 

HE adminiſtration of the revenues is like the 
conduct of a good father of a family, who col- 
lets his own rents himſelf with economy and order. 

By the adminiſtration of the revenues the prince is 
at liberty to preſs or to retard the levy of the taxes, 
according to his own wants, or thoſe of his people- 
By this he ſaves to the ſtate the immenſe profits of the 
farmers, who impoveriſh it a thouſand ways. By this 
he ſpares the people the mortifying ſight. of ſudden for- 
tunes. By this the money collected paſſes through few 
hands, and goes directly to the treaſury, and conſe* 
quently makes a quicker return to the people. By this 
the prince avoids an infinite number of bad laws, ex- 
torted from him continually-by the importunate avarice 
of the farmers, who pretend to. offer a preſent advan- 
tage for regulations pernicious to poſterity. 

As the monied man is always the moſt powerful, 
the farmer renders himſelf arbitrary even over the 
prince himſelf; he is not the legiflator, but he obliges 
the legiſlator to give laws. 

la republics, the revenues of the ſtate are generally 
under adminiſtration. The contrary practice was a 
great defect in the Roman government“. In deſpo- 
tic governments,, the people are infinitely happier 
where this adminiſtration is eſtabliſhed; witneſs Perſia 
„ Czar was obliged to remove the publicans from the province 
of Aſia, and to eſtabliſh there another kind of adminiſtration, ag 
we learn from Dio; and Tacitus informs us, that Macedonia and 
Achaia, provinces left by Auguſtus to the people of Rome, and 

conſequently governed purſuant to the ancient plan, obtained to be 
of the number of thoſe which the emperor governed by his officers. 

and 

26 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X11! 

and China *. The unhappieſt of all are thoſe where 
the prince farms out his ſea-ports and trading cities. 
The hiſtory of monarchies abounds with miſchiefs done 
by the farmers of the revenue. 

Nero, incenſed at the oppreſſive extortions of the 
publicans, formed a magnanimous, but impoſſible pro- 
ject, of aboliſhing all kinds of impoſts. He did not 
think of an adminiſtration of the revenues, but made 
four edicts : that the laws enacted againſt publicans, 
which had hitherto been kept ſecret, ſhould be made 
public; that they ſhonld not pretend to any thing 
which they had omitted to demand in the term of a 
year; that there ſhould be a prætor eſtabliſhed to judge 
their pretenſions without any formality; and that the 
merchants ſhould pay no duty for their veſſels. Theſe 
were the bright days of that emperor. 

CHAP XX. 
Of the farmers of the revenues. 

LL is loſt when the lucrative profeſſion of tax- 
gatherers becomes likewiſe, by means of the riche, 

with which it is attended, a poſt of honour. This 
may do well enough in deſpotic ſtates, where their em- 
ployment is oftentimes a part of the functions of the 
governors themſelves. But it is by no means proper in 
a republic; ſince a cuſtom of the like nature deſtroyed 
the people of Rome. Nor is it better in monarchies ; 
nothing being more oppoſite to the fpirit of this go- 
vernment. All the other orders of the ſtate are diſ- 
ſatisfied; -honour loſes its whole value; the flow and 
natural means of diſtinction are no longer regarded; 
and the very principle of the government is ſirbverted. 
It is true, indeed, that ſcandalous fortunes were 
raiſed in former times, but this was one of the* cala- 

® Sce Sir John Chardin's travels through Perſia, tom, 6. 
* 
5 4 2 g Mities 

Chap. . THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 277 

mities of the fifty years war. Theſe riches were then 
conſidered as ridiculous; now we admire them. 

Every profeſſion has its particular lot. The lot of 
thoſe who levy the taxes is wealth, and the recompenſe 
of wealth is wealth itſelf, Glory and honour fall to 

the ſhare of that nobility, who neither know, ſee, nor 

feel any-other happineſs than honour and glory. Re- 
ſpet and eſteem are for thoſe miniſters and magiſtrates, 
whoſe whole life is a continued ſucceſſion of labour, and 
who watch day and night over the happineſs of the 

empire, . | | 
B O O K XIV. 
Of laws as relative to the nature of the climate. 

* 

EKA. 
General idea. 

F it be true that the character of the mind and the 
paſſions of the heart are extremely different in dif- 
ferent climates, the laws -ought to be relative both to 
the difference of thoſe REN and to the difference 
of thoſe characters. 

EAA. II. 
Of the difference of men in different climates. 

A Corp air“ conſtringes the extremities of the ex- 
ternal fibres of the body; this increaſes their 
elaſticity, and favours the return of the blood from the 
extremities to the heart. It contracts F thoſe very 
fibres; conſequently it "increaſes alſo their force. On 

. * This appears even in the countenance: in cold weather people 
look thinner. _ 
+ We know it ſhortens iron, 

"Vu. IJ. Aa | the 

— 

\ 

2738 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book xv. 

the contrary, a warm air relaxes and lengthens the ex. 
tremes of the fibres; of courſe it diminithes their force 
and elaſticity. ; 
People are therefore more vigorous in cold climates 
Here the action of the heart and the re-aQion of the 
extremities of the fibres are better performed, the 
temperature of the humours is greater, the blood 

moves freer towards the heart, and reciprocally the 

Heart has more power. This ſuperiority of ſtrength 

muſt produce a great many effects; for inſtance, a 

greater ſelf-confidence, that is, more courage; a great- 
er ſenſe of ſuperiority, that is, leſs deſire of revenge; 
a greater opinion of ſecurity, that is, more frankneſs, 
leſs ſuſpicion, policy, and cunning. In ſhort, this muſt 
be productive of very different characters. Put a man 
in a cloſe warm place, and he will, for the reaſons above 
given, feel a great faintneſs. If under this circumſtance 
you propoſe a bold enterpriſe to him, I believe you will 
find him very little diſpoſed towards it: his preſent 
weakneſs, will throw him into a deſpondency of ſoul 3 
he will be afraid of every thing, becauſe he will feel 
himſelf capable of nothing. The inhabitants of warm 
countries are, like old men, timorous; the people in 
cold countries, are like young men, brave. If we re- 
flect on the late wars *, which are more preſent to our 
memory, and in which we can better diſtinguith ſome 
flight effects that eſcape us at a great diſtance of time; 
we ſhall find that the northern people tranſplanted into 
ſouthern countries +, did not perform ſuch great feats 
as their countrymen, who fighting in their own climate 

ſſeſſed their full vigour and courage. 

This ſtrength of the fibres in northern nations is 

the cauſe tha! the coarſeſt juices are extracted from 
» 

* Thoſe for the ſucceſſion to the Spaniſh TOES J 

A For lnflance, to * i Tk 
their 

a ws Jv om  X- mw. .-c 

. 2 — 
0 - 
1 

ſt 

ches $. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 259 

: their Aments. From hence two things reſult: one, 

that the parts of the chyle or lymph are more proper, 

by reaſ6h of their large ſurface, to be applied to, and 

to nouriſh the fibres: the other, that they are leſs pro- 
per, becauſe of their coarſeneſs, to give a certain ſub - 

tilty to the nervous juice, Thoſe people have there- 

fore large bodies and little vivacity. 

The nerves that terminate from all parts in the cutis, 
form each a bundle of nerves; generally ſpeaking, the 
whole nerve is not moved, but a very minute part, In 
warm climates, where the cutis is relaxed, the ends of 
the nerves are opened, and expoſed to the ſmalleſt ac - 
tion of the weakeſt objects. In cold countries the cutis 
is conſtringed, and the papillæ compreſſed; the mili- 
ary glands are in ſome meaſure paralytic; and the 
ſenſation does not reach the brain but when it is very 
ſtrong, and proceeds from the whole nerve at once. 
Now, imagination, taſte, ſenſibility, and vivacity, de- 
pend on an infinite number of ſmall ſenſations. 

I have obſerved the outermoſt part of a ſheep's 
tongue, where to the naked eye it ſeems covered with 
papillæ. On theſe papillz, I have diſcerned, through 
a microſcope, ſmall hairs or a kind of down: between 
the papillæ were pyramids, ſhaped towards the endg 
like piacers. Very likely theſe pyramids are the prin- 
cipal organ of taſte. 

I cauſed the half of this tongue to be frozen, and. 
obſerving it with the naked eye, I found the papille- 

conſiderably diminithed : even ſome rows of the papil- 
læ were ſunk into their ſheath, I examined the outer. 
molt part with the microſcope, and I perceived no py. 
ramids. In proportion as the froſt went off, the pa- 
pillæ ſeemed to the naked eye to riſe, and with thę mi- 
croſcope the miliary glands began to appear. 
This obſervaticn confirms what I have been ſaying, 
that in cold countries the nervous glands are leſs 
Aa 232 ſpread; 

: —— - boo. wn 

» Po 4 

- _ —— — _— 
— 

2860 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS.” Book XIV. 

__ * 

ſpread; they ſink deeper into their ſneaths, or they are 
ſheitered from the action of external objects; conſe- 
quently they have not ſuch lively ſenſations. 

In cold countries they have very little ſenſibility for 
pleaſure; in temperate countries they have more; in 
warm countries their ſenſibility is exquiſite. As cli- 
mates are diſtinguiſhed by degrees of latitude, we might 
diſtinguiſh them alſo, in ſome meaſure, by degrees of 
ſenſibility. 1 have ſeen the operas of England and of 
Italy; they are the ſame pieces and the ſame perfor- 
mers; and yet the ſame muſic produces ſuch different 
effects on the two nations, one is ſo cold and indifferent, 
and the other ſo tranſported, that it ſeems almoſt 1 in · 
conceivable. 

It is the ſame with regard to pain; which is excited 

by the laceration of ſome fibre of the body. The Au- 

thor of nature has made it an eſtabliſhed rule, that this 

. pain ſhould be more acute in proportion as the lacera- 

tion is greater; now it is evident, that the large bodies 

and coarſe fibres of the people of the north are leſs 

capable of laceration than the delicate fibres of the in- 
habitants of warm countries; conſequently the ſoul is 
there leſs ſenſible of pain. You mult flay a Muſcovite 
alive to make him feel. #2 

From this delicacy of organs peculiar to warm cli- 
mates, it follows, that the foul is moſt ſenſibly moved 

by whatever has a relation to the union of the two 

ſexes : here every thing leads to this object. 

In northern climates ſcarce has the animal part of 
love a power of making itſelf felt. In temperate cli- 
mates love, attended by a thouſand appendages, ren. 
ders itſelf agreeable by things that have at firſt the ap. 
pearance of love, though not the reality. In warmer 
climates love is liked for its own ſake, it is the only 
cauſe of happineſs, it is life itſelf. | 

In ſouthern countries a delicate, weak, but ſenſible 

machine, reſigns itſelf either to a love which riſes and 
: is 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 281 
| , inceſſantly laid in a ſeraglio; or to a love which leaves 

women in a greater independence, and is conſequent · 
ly expoſed to a thouſand inquietudes. In northern cli - 
mates a ſtrong but heavy machine, finds a pleaſure in 

| whatever is apt to throw the ſpirits into motion, ſuch: 
as hunting, travelling, war, and wine. In northern: 

countries we meet with a people who have few vices, 
many virtues, a great ſhare of frankneſs and ſincerity. 
If we draw near the ſouth, we fancy ourſelves remo- 
ved from all morality ; the ſtrongeſt paſſions multiply 
all manner of crimes, every one endeavouring to take. 
what advantage he can over his neighbour, in order to 
encourage" thoſe paſſions. In temperate climates we find 
the inhabitants inconſtant in their manners, in their 
yery vices, and in their virtues :. the climate has not a: 
quality determinate enough io fix them. 

The heat of the climate may be ſo exceſſive as to de- 
prive the body of all vigour and ſtrength. Then the 
faintneſs is communicated to the mind: there is no cu-- 
rioſity, no noble enterpriſe, no generous ſentiment ;. 

the inclinations are all paſſive; indolence conſtitutes. 

the utmoſt happineſs ;-ſcarcely any puniſhment is ſo ſe- 

vere as the action of the foul, and flavery is more ſup- 

portable than the force and vigour of mind neceſſary: 
tor human action. 

CHAP. III. 
cantradiſtios in the characlers of ſome ſouthern nations.” 

IR: E Indians “ are naturally a cowardly people; 
even the children + of the Europeans born in the 
Indies laſe the courage peculiar to their own climate. 

One hundred European ſoldiers, ſays Tavernier, would with-- 
out any great difficulty beat a thouſand Iadian ſoldiers, | 

+ Even the Perſians, who ſettle in the Indies, contract in the 
third generation the indolence and cowardice of the Indians. See - 
Bernier, on the Mogn!, tom. 1. p. 282, 

A a 3 85 But: 

— —— — 

— 
3  —— 

= — — ——— 

—— — oy 
= 

| 

% 

282 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIV. 

But how ſhall we reconcile this with their cruel aQions, 
with their cuſtoms and penances, ſo full of barbarity ? 
The men voluntarily undergo the greateſt hardſhips; ; 
the women burn themſelves: here we find a very odd 
compound of fortitude and weakneſs. . 

Nature having framed thoſe people of a texture ſo 

weak as renders them timid, has formed them at the 
ſame time of an imagination fo lively, that every ob. 
ject makes the ſtrongeſt impreſſion upon them. That 
delicacy of organs which renders them apprehenſive 

of death, contributes likewiſe to make them dread a 
thouſand things more than death; the very ſame ſen- 
ſibility makes them fly, and dare all dangers. 

As a good education is more neceſſary to children 
than to thoſe who are arrived at a maturity of under. 
ſtanding, ſo the inhabitants of thoſe climates have 
much greater need than our people of a wiſe legiſlator, 
The greater their ſenſibility, the more it behoves them 
to receive proper impreſſions, to imbibe no prejudices, 
and to let themſelves be directed by reaſon. | 

At the time of the Romans, the inhabitants of the 
north of Europe lived without art, education, and al- 
moſt without laws and yet, by the help of the good 
ſenſe annexed to the groſs fibres of thoſe climates, they 
made an admirable ſtand againſt the power of the Ro- 
man empire, till that memorable period in which they 

quitted their woods to ſubvert it. 

CHAP. Iv. 

Cauſe of the immutability of religion, manners, cuſtoms, 
and laws, in the eaſtern countries. 

I that delicacy of organs which renders. the eaſtern 
people ſo ſuſceptible of every impreſſion, is accom- 
panied likewiſe with a ſort of lazineſs of mind natu- 

rally coaneded with that of the body, by means of 
which 

Chap. 5. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 283 
which they grow incapable of any action or effort; it 
is eaſy to comprehend, that when once the ſoul has re - 
ceived an impreſſion, ſhe cannot change it. This is tbe 

reaſon that the laws, manners, and cuſtoms *, even 
thoſe which ſeem quite indifferent, ſuch as their manner 
of dreſs, are the ſame to this very day in eaſtern 
countries, as they were à thouſand years ago. 

F 

That thoſe are bad legillators who favour the vices of the 
climate, and gogd legiſlators who oppoſe thoſe vices. 

$ Loo Indians believe, that repoſe and non-exiſtence 

are the foundation of all things, and the end in 
which they terminate. They conſider therefore the 
ſlate of entire inaction as the moſt perfect of all ſtates, 
and the object of their deſires. They give to the Su- 
preme Being + the title of Immoveable. The inhabi- 

tants of Siam believe, that their utmoſt | happineſs 

conſiſts in not being obliged to animate a machine, or 
to give motion to a body. 

In thoſe countries where the exceſs of heat enervates 
and oppreſſes the body, reſt is ſo delicious, and mo- 
tion ſo painful, that this ſyſtem of metaphyſics ſeems 
natural; and Foe f, the legiſlator of the Indies, fol. 

lowed what he himſelf felt, when he placed mankind 

in a ſtate extremely paſſive: but his doctrine ariſing 

We find by a fragment of Nicholaus Damaſcenus, collected by 
Conſtantine Porphyrog. that it was an ancient cuſtom in the 
eaſt, to ſend to ſtrangle a governor who had given any diſpleaſure ; 
it was in the time of the Medes, 

+ Panamanad. See Kircher. | 
1 La Lopbere, relation of Siam, p. 446. | 

| Foc endeavoured to reduce the heart to a mere vacuum: We 
% have eyes and ears, but perfection conſiſts in neither ſeeing nor 
* hearing; « mouth, hands, &c. but perfection requires that theſe 
„ members ſh-uld be inactive This is taken from the diologue 
of a Chineſe philoſopher, quoted by Father du Halde, tom. 3. 

from 

* 

284 
from the lazineſs of the climate, favoured it alſo in its 

urn; which has been the ſource of an infinite deal of 

miſchief. | 
The legiſlators. of China had more ſenſe, when con- 

fidering men not in the peaceful ſtate which they are to 

enjoy hereafter, but in the ſituation proper for diſchar- 
ging the ſeveral duties of life, they made their religi- 
on, philoſophy, and laws, all practical. The more the 
phyſical cauſes incline mankind. to inaction, the more 
the moral cauſes ſhould eſtrange them from it, 

CHAP. VI. 
Of the cultivation of lands: in warm climates. 

2 cultivation of lands is the principal labour of 

man. The more the climate inclines them to ſhun 
this labour, the more their religion and laws ought to 
excite them to it. Thus the Indian laws, which give 
the lands to the prince, and deſtroy the ſpirit of pro- 
perty among the ſubjects, increaſe the bad. eſfects of. 
the climate,. that 1 is, their natural lazineſs. 

CH A P.-VIL. 
Of monachiſin. 

b een very ſame miſchiefs reſult from monachiſm; it 
had its riſe in the warm countries of the eaſt, 

where they are leſs inclined to action than to ſpecula- 

tion. = 
In Aſia the number of derviſes or monks ſeems to 

increaſe together with the heat of the climate. The 
Indies, where the heat is exceſſive, are full of them; 
and the ſame difference is found in Europe. 

- In order to ſurmount the lazineſs of the climate, 
the laws ought to endeavour to remove all means of 
ſubſiſting without labour: but in the ſouthern parts 
of Europe they a& quite the reverſe; to thoſe who 

want to live in a ſtate of indolence they afford retreats 
| the 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIV. 

Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 285 

the moſt proper for a ſpeculative life, and endow 
them with immenſe revenues, Theſe men, who live in 
the midſt of a plenty they know not how to enjoy, are 
ig the right to give their ſuperfluities away to the com- 
mon people. The poor are bereft of property; and 
theſe men indemnify them by ſupporting them in idle - 
neſs, ſo as to make them even grow fond of their mi- 
ſery. 

CHAP. VIII. 
An excellent cuſtom of China, 

HE hiſtorical relations * of China mention a cere- 

mony f of opening the grounds, which the em- 
peror performs every year. The deſign of this public 
and ſolemn act is to excite f the people to tillage. 

Farther, the emperor is informed every year of the 
huſbandman who has diſtinguiſhed. himſelf moſt in his 
profeſſion; and he makes him a mandarin of the 
eighth order. 

Among the ancient Perſians 5 the kings quitted their 
grandeur and - pomp on the eighth day of the month 
called Charrem- rux, to eat with the huſbandmen Theſe 
inſtitutions were admirably well calculated for the en · 
couragement of agriculture. 

CHAP. TIX. 
Means of enceuraging induſtry. 

WE ſhall ſhow, in the ninteenth book, that lazy 
nations are generally proud. Now, the effect 
might well be turned againſt the cauſe, and lazineſs 

Father du Halde's hiſtory of China, tom. 2 p. 72. 

+ Several of the kings of India do the ſame, Relation of the 
lingdom of Siam by La Leber. þ 69. 

t Venty, the third emperor of the third dynaſty, tilled the lands 
himſelf, and made the empreſs and his wives employ their time in 
the filk-works in his palace. Hiftory of China, 

$ Hyde, religion of the Perſians. | 

be 

286 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIV. 

be deſtroyed by pride. In the ſouth of Europe, where 
people have juch a high notion of the point of honour, 
it would be right to give prizes to huſbandmen who 
had cultivated beſt the lands, or to artiſts who had 
made the greateſt improvements in their ſeveral pro- 
feſſions. This practice has ſucceeded in our days in 
Ireland, where it has eſtabliſhed one of the moſt con- 
ſiderable linen - manufactures in Europe. as} 

CHAP. X. 
of the laws relative to the ſobriety of the people. 

* warm countries the aqueous part of the blood 

loſes itſelf greatly by perſpiration “; it muſt there- 
fore be ſupplied by a like liquid. Water is there of 
admirable uſe ; ſtrong liquors would coagulate the glo- 
bules + of blood that remaia after the tranſuding of the 
aqueous humour. 

In cold countries the aqueous part of the blood is 
is very little evacuated by perſpiration. They may 
therefore make uſe of ſpirituous liquors, without dan- 
ger of coagulating the blood. They are full of hu- 
mours ; conſequently ſtrong liquors, which give a mo- 
tion to the blood, are proper for thoſe countries. 

The law of Mahomet, which prohibits the drink 
ing of Fine, is therefore a law fitted to the climate 
of Arabia : and indeed, before Mahomet's time, wa- 
ter was the common drink of the Arabs. The 4 law 
which forbade the Carthaginians to drink wine, was 
- ® Monſieur Berzier, travelling from Lahor to Cachemir, wrot, 
thus: My body is a ſieve; ſcarce have I ſwallowed a pint of wa- 
ster but I ſee it tranſude like dew out of all my limbs, even to 
„my fingers ends. I drink ten pints a day, and it does me no 
« manner of harm.” Beraier's Travels, tom. 2. Pp. 261. 

+ In the blood there are red globules, fibrous parts, white glo- 
bules, and water in which the whole ſwims. | 

+ Plato, book ii. of Jaws; Ariſtole, of the care of domeſtic af. 
fairs ; Euſebius's evangelical preparation, book xii, c. 17. | 

| allo 

=” 
4 

Chap 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 287 

alſo a law of the climate; in fact, the climate of thoſe 
two countries is pretty near the ſame. 

Such a law 'would be improper for cold countries, 
where the climate ſeems to force them to a kind of na- 
tional drunkenneſs, very different from perſonal intem- 
perance. Drunkenneſs predominates over all the 
world, in proportion to the coldnefs and humidity of 
the climate. Go from the equator to our pole, and 
you will find drunkenneſs increaſing together with the 
degree of latitude. Go from the ſame equator to the 
oppoſite pole, and you will find drunkenneſs travelling 
fouth *, as on this fide it travels towards the north. 

It is very natural that where wine is contrary to the 
climate, and conſequently to health, the exceſs of it 
ſhould be more ſeverely puniſhed, than in countries 
where drunkenneſs produces very few bad effects to the 
perſon, fewer. to the ſociety, and where it does not 
make people mad, but only ſtupid and heavy. Hence 
laws F which puniſhed a drunken man both for the 
fault he committed, and for his drunkenneſs, were ap 
plicable only to a perſonal, and not to a national ebrie- 
ty. A German drinks through cuſtom, and a Spani- 
ard by choice. 

In warm countries the relazing of the fibres produ- 
ces a great evacuation of the liquids, but the folid parts 
are leſs tranſpired. The fibres which act but weakly, 
and have very little elaſticity, are not much worn; a 
ſmall quantity of nutritious juice is ſufficient to repair 
them; for which reaſon they eat very little. 

It is the difference of wants in different climates» 
chat firſt formed a difference in the manner of living, 

* This is ſeen in the Hottentots, and the inhabitants of the moſt 
ſonthern part of Chili. . 

+ As Pittacus did, according to Ariſtotle, polit. Iib. 1. c. 3. He 
lived in a climate where drunket neſs is not a national vice, 

* 

and 

* 

288 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIV, 

and this difference of living gave riſe to that of laws, 
Where people are very communicative, there muſt be 
particular laws; and others among people where there 
is but little communication. 
| CHAP AL 

Of the laws relative to the diſiempers of the climate. | 

ErxoDoTvus * informs us, that the Jewiſh laws con- 
cerning the leproſy were borrowed from the practice 
of the Egyptians. In fact, the ſame diſtemper requi- 
red the ſame remedies. The Greeks and the primitive 
Romans were ſtrangers to theſe laws, as well as to the 
diſeaſe. The climate of Egypt and Paleſtine rendered 
them neceſſary ; ; and the facility with which this diſeaſe 
is ſpread, is ſufficient to make us ſenſible of the wiſdom 
and ſagacity of thoſe laws. 

Even we ourſelves have felt the effects of them. The 
cruſades had brought the leproſy amongſt us; but the 
wiſe regulations made at that time hindered it from in- , 
ſecting the maſs of the people. in 
Me find by the laws of the Lombards + that this * 
diſeaſe was ſpread in Italy before the cruſades, and me- 
rited the attention of the legiſlators. Rotharis ordain- m 
ed, that a leper ſhould be expelled from his houſe, and v. 
baniſhed to a particular place, that he ſhould be inca- 80 
pable of diſpoſing of his property; becauſe, from the MW 1: 
very moment .he had been driven from home, he was ad 
reckoned dead in the eye of the law. Tn order to pre- i; 
vent all communication with lepers, they were render- W |; 

ed incapable of civil acts. 
I am apt to think that this diſeafe was brought i into ſpe 

| Italy by the conqueſts of the Greek emperors, in whoſe far 
armies there might be ſome ſoldiers from Paleſtine or MW the 
Egypt. Be that as it may, the progreſs of it was ſtop- 

- ped till the time of the eruſades. 

ö 

Beck i, | + Book ii, tit. 1. C f. and tit. 18. f 7. 
2 

It 

Chap. 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 289 

It is related, that Pompey's ſoldiers, returning from 
Syria, brought a diſtemper home with them not unlike 
the leproſy. We have no account of any regulation 
made at that time; but it is highly probable that ſome 
regulation was made, ſince the * was ſtopped 
till the time of the Lombards. 

It is now two centuries ſince a diſeaſe, unknown to 
our anceſtors, was firſt tranſplanted from the new 
world to ours, and came to attack human nature even 
in the very ſource of life and pleaſure. Moſt of the 
principal families in the ſouth of Europe were ſeen to 
periſh by a diſtemper that was grown too common to 
be ignominious, and was confidered in no other light 
than in that of its being fatal. It was the thirſt of gold 
that propagated this diſeaſe ; the Europeans went con- 
tinually to America, and always brought back a new 
leaven of it. 

As it is the buſineſs of legiſlators to watch over the 
health of the citizens, it would have been a wiſe part 
in them to have ſtopped this communication by laws 
made on the plan of thoſe of Moſes. 

The plague is a diſeaſe whoſe infectious progreſs is 
much more rapid. Egypt is its principal ſeat, from 
whence it ſpreads over the whole univerſe. Moſt 
countries in Europe have made exceeding good regu- 
lations to prevent this infection, and in our times an 
admirable method has been contrived to ſtop it; this 
is by forming a line of troops round the infected coun- 
try, which cuts off all manner of communication. 

The Turks “, who have no regulations in this re- 
ſpe, ſee the Chriſtians eſcape this infection in the 
fame town, and none but themſelves perith ; they buy 
the clothes of the infected, wear them, and go on 
their old way as if nothing had- . The doc- 

* Ricaut on the Ottoman empire, p. 254. 

Vor. I. B b trine 

3 
. —_— 
* . <—- he * — : 
* - Fx .- —= -_ — 
* — - — g — — —— 4 
9— — ED GIS — ; 
* 

that God has already done every ins, and that he 

290 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIV. 

trine of a rigid fate, which directs their whole conduct, 
renders the magiſtrate a quiet ſpectator: he thinks 

himſelf bas nothing to do. 

CHAT. XL, | | 
Of the laws againſt ſuicides. | 

WE do not find in hiſtory that the Romans ever 
killed themſelves without a cauſe ; but the Eng- 
liſh deſtroy themſelves moſt unaccountably: they de- 
troy themſelves often in the very boſom of happineſs, 
This action among the Romans was the effect of educa. 
tion; it was connected with their principles «nd cu- ( 
ſtoms: among the Engliſh it is the effect of a diſtem- 
per “; it is connected with the phyſical tate of the 9 
machine, and independent of every other cauſe. b 
In all probability it is a defect of the filtration of Pp 
the nervous juice; the machine whoſe motive faculties q 
are every moment without action, is weary of itſelf; 
the ſoul feels no pain, but a certain uneaſineſs in ex- tc 
iſting. Pain is a local thing, which leads us to the de- 
fire of ſeeing an end of it; the burden of life is an evil 

confined to no particular place, which prompts us to FR 

the deſire of ceaſing to live. of 

It is evident, that the civil laws of ſome countries 
may have reaſon for branding ſuicide with infamy: 
but ia England it cannot be puniſhed without puniſh- pl 
ing the effects of madneſs. 

C HAP. XIII. 
Effects ariſing from the climate of England. 

F a nation ſo diſtempered by the climate as to have 
a diſreliſh of every thing, nay even of life, it is plain 
It may be complicated with the ſcurvy, which, in fonie coun- 
tries eſpecially, renders a man whimſical and inſupportable to him- 
lf. See Pirard's voyages, part 2. chap. zr. 
17 . that 

ave 
[210 

dun- 
aim- 

that 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 29t 

that the government moſt ſuitable to the inhabitants 
is that in which they cannot lay their uneaſineſs to any 
ſingle perſon's charge, and in which, being under the 
direction rather of the laws than of the prince, they 
cannot change the government without ſubverting the 
laws themſelves. 

And if this nation has likewiſe derived from the cli- 
mate a certain character of impatience, which renders 
them incapable of bearing the ſame train of things for 
any long continuance; it is obvious that the govern- 
ment above-mentioned is the fitteſt for them. This 
character of impatience is not very conſiderable of it- 
ſelf; but t may become ſo when joined with courage. 

It is quite a different thing from levity, which makes 
people undertake or drop a project without cauſe ; it 
borders more upon obſtinacy, becauſe it proceeds from 
ſo lively a ſenſe of miſery, that it is not weakened even 
by the habit of ſuffering. 

This character in a free nation is extremely proper 
for diſconcerting the projects of tyranny , which is 
always flow and feeble in its commencements, as in the 
end it is active and lively; which ar firſt only ſtretehes 
out a hand to aſſiſt, and exerts afterwards a multnude 
of arms to oppreſs. 

Slavery is ever preceded by fleep. But a people 
who find no relt in any ſituation, who continually ex- 
plore every part, and feel nothing but pain, can hard. 
ly be lulled to ſleep. 

Politics are like a ſmooth file, which cuts ſlowly, 
and attains its end by a gradual and tedious progreſ- 
fon. Now, the people of whom we have been ſpeak- 
ing, are incapable of bearing the delays, the details, 

* Here I take this word for the deſign of ſubverting the eſtabliſh-- 
ed power, and eſpecially that of democracy, This is the ſignifica« 
tion in which it was underſtood by the Greeks and Romaus. 

Bb 2  _adui . 

— 

I 2 * >, \ 
3 —— — —— 

— 2 

| 

—ůä — 
— * 

292 THE SPIRIT OP LAWS, Book XIV, 

and the coolneſs of negociations : in theſe they. are 
more unlikely to ſucceed than any other nation; hence 
they are apt to loſe by treaties what they obtain by 
their arms, 

CHAP. X. 
Other effedts of the climate. 

UR anceſtors the ancient Germans lived under a 
climate where the paſſions were extremely calm, 
Their laws decided only in ſuch caſes where the inju- 
ry was viſible to the eye, and went no farther. And 
as they judged of the outrages done to men from the 
greatneſs of the wounds, they acted with no other de. 
licacy in reſpect to the injuries done to women. The 
law of “ the Germans on this ſubject is very extraordi- 
nary. If a perſon uncovers a woman's head, he pays 
a fine of fiſty ſous; if he uncovers her leg up to the 
knee, he pays the ſame; and double from the knee up- 
wards, One wovld think that the law meaſured the 
inſults offered to women as we meaſure a figure in geo- 
metry; it did not puniſh the crime of the imagination, 
but that of the eye. But, upon the migration of a 
German nation into. Spain, the climate ſoon found a 
neceſſity for different laws. The law of the Viſigoths 
inhibited the ſurgeons to bleed a free woman, except 
either her father, mother, brother, ſon, or uncle was 
preſent. As the imagination of the people grew warm, 
ſo did that of the legiſlators ; the law ſuſpected every 
thing, when the people grew ſuſpicious. 

Theſe laws had therefore a particular regard for 
the two ſexes. But in their puniſhments they ſeem 
rather to humour the revengeful temper of private 
perſons, than to exerciſe public juſtice. Thus in moſt 
caſes they reduced both the criminals to be ſlaves to 

Chap. viii. C 1. & 2. 

the 

ce 

Chap. 15- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 27733 
the offended relations, or to the injured huſband; a 
free born woman * who had yielded to the embraces. 
of a married man, was delivered up to his wife to dif- 
poſe of her as the pleaſed. They obliged the flaves +, 
if they found their maſter's wife in adultery, to bind- 
her, and carry her to her hatband ; they even permit- | 
ted her children ꝓ to be her acculers, and her ſlaves | 
to be tortured in order to convict her. Thus their 
Jaws were far better adapted to refine even to exceſs a | 
certain point of honour, than to form a good civil ad- 
miniſtration, We muſt not. therefore. be ſurpriſed if 
count Julian was of opinion, that an affront of that 
kind ought to be expiated by the ruin of his king and 
country : we muſt not be ſurpriſed if the Moors, with 
ſuch a conformity of manners, found it ſo eaſy a mat- 
ter to ſettle and to maintain themſelves in Sin, and. 
to retard the fall. of. their empire. 

| CHAP; XV. 
Gf the different confidence which the laws have in tbe 
people, according to the difference of climates. 
1. people of Japan are of ſo ſtubborn and per- 
verſe a temper, that neither. their legiſlators nor 
magiitrates can put any confidence in them: they ſet. 
nothing. before their eyes but judges, menaces, and 
ohaſtiſements; every ſep they take is ſubject to the in. 
quiſition of the civil magiſtrate. Thoſe laws which 
out of five beads of families eſtabliſn one as à magi- 
ſtrate over the other ſour; thoſe Jaws which puniſh a fa. 
mily, or a whole ward, for a ſingle crime; thole Jaws; 
in fine, which find no one innocent where there. may 
happen to be one guilty; are made with a dafign to 
implant in all the people a diſtruſt of each other, and: 
to make every one the inſpector, . witneſs, and judge of 
his neighbour's conduct. 
* Law of the Viſigoths, book iii. tit. 4. § 9. 
+. lhid. & 6. 1 lhid. § 73. 

294 THE, SPIRIT OF LAWS, . Book XV. 

On the contrary, the people of India are mild *, 
tender, and compaſſionate. Hence their legiſlators re. 
poſe a great confidence in them. They have eſtablith. 
ed + very few puniſhments; theſe are not ſevere, nor 
are they rigorouſly executed. They have ſubjected ne- 
phews to their uncles, and orphans to their guardians, 
as in other countries they are ſubje& to their fathers, 
they have regulated the ſucceſſion by the acknowledged 
merit of the ſucceſſor. They ſeem to think that every 
individual ought to -place an entire confidence in the 
good nature of his fellow ſubject. 

They infranchiſe their ſlaves without difficulty, they 
marry them, they treat them as their children . Hap. 
py climate, which gives birth to purity of manners, 
and produces a lenity in the laws! 

_— I” — OC I" OT OH” AI — 

B: O. Q. K XV. 

— 

—— „ 

n what manner the laws of civil ſlavery are 
relative to the nature of the climate: 

th 
4 

HA F. I.. 
Of civil flavery. 

LAVERY, properly ſo called, is the eſtabliſhment 
8 of a right, which gives to one man ſuch a power 
over another, as renders him abſolute maſter of his 
life and fortune. The ſtate. of ſlavery is in its own 
nature bad. It is neither ufeful to the maſter nor to 
the ſlave; not to the flave, beeauſe * can do nothing 

* Sce Bernicr, tom. 2. p. 149. 

+ See in the 14th collection of the edifying letters, p. 403. the 
principal laws or cuſtoms of the inhabitants of the peninfula on 
this de the Ganges. 

1 This is perhaps what made Diodorus ſay, that | in the Indies 
there was neither mefler nor flave. 

through 

arc 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 295 

through a motive of virtue ; not to the maſter, becaule, 
by having an unlimited authority over his ſlaves, he 
inſenſibly accuſtoms himſelf to the want of all moral 
virtues, and from thence grows fierce, haſty, ſevere, 

choleric, voluptuous, and cruel. 

In deſpotic countries, where they are already ln a 
ſtate of political ſlavery, civil ſlavery is more tolerable 
than in other governments. Every one ought to be 
ſatisfied in thoſe countries with neceſſaries and life, 
Hence the condition of a ſlave is hardly more burden- 
ſome than that of a ſubject. 

But in a monarchical government, where it is of the 
utmoſt importance that human nature ſhould not be 
debaſed or diſpirited, there ought to be no ſlavery. In 
democracies, where they are all upon an equality, and - 
in ariſtocracies, where the laws ought to ule their ut- 
moſt endeavour to procure as great an equality as the. 
nature of the government will permit, flavery is con- 
trary to the. ſpirit of the conſtitution; . it only contri- 
butes to give a power and luxury to the citizens which. 
they ought not to have. 

CH AP. I. 

Origin of the right of ftavery among the Roman civilia tans... 
QNE would never have imagined that ſlavery thould. 

owe its birth to pity, and that this ſhould have. 
been excited three different ways *. 

The law of nations, to prevent priſoners from bei 

put to death, has. allowed them to be made flaves.— 
The civil law of the Romans impowered debtors, Who 
were ſubject to be ill.uſed by their. creditors, to ſell 
themſelves. And the law. of nature requires, that 

children whom a ſather reduced to ſlavery is no longer 
able to maintain, ſhould be reduced to the ſame itate - 
a5 the father. 

juſtinian's inſtitutes, book i. 

Theſe 

= 

a 

- — 

2 — wp X22 

— 

| | 
. 
N 
CL 
4 

1 
459 
dit 
| 
[| 
1 
1 

— 

* 

298 THE SPTRTT OF LAWS. Book xv. 
Theſe reaſons of the civilians are all falſe. It is falſe 

that killing in war is lawful, unleſs in a caſe of abſo- 

lute neceſſity: but when a man has made another his 

flave, he cannot be ſaid to have been under a neceſſity 
of taking away his life, ſince he actually did not take 
it away. War gives no other right over priſoners than, 
to diſable them from doing any further harm, by ſe- 
curing their perſons. All nations “ concur in deteſt-- 
ing the murdering. of priſoners in cold blood. 

2. Nor is it true, that a freeman can fell himſelf. 

Sale implies a price; now when a perſon ſells himſelf 

his whole ſubſtance immediately devolves to his ma- 
ſter ; the maſter therefore in that caſe gives nothing, 
and the ſlave receives nothing. You. will ſay, he has 
a peenlium. But this peculium goes along with his 

perſon, If it is not Jawful for a man to kill himfelf, 

becauſe he robs his conntry of his perſon, for the ſame: 
reaſon he is not allowed to ſell himſelf. The liberty of 

every citizen conſtitutes a part cf the public liberty, 

and, in a democratical ſtate, is even a part of the ſo- 
vereignty. To ſell one's citizenfhip f is ſo repugnant: 
to all reaſon, as to be ſcarce ſuppoſeable. in any man.. 
If liberty may be rated with reſpect to the buyer, it is 
beyond all price to the ſeller. The civil law which 
authoriſes a diviſion of goods among men, cannot be 

thought to rank among ſuch goods a part of the men 

who were to make this diviſton:. The ſame law annuls- 

all iniquitous contracts; ſurely then it aTords redreſs. 

in a contract where the grievance is moſt. enormous. 
The third way is birth; which: falls with the two: 
former. For if a man could not fel} himſelf, much 

Rfs could he fell an unborn offspring. If a priſoner 

* Fxcepting a few cannibals. 
+ I mean ſlavery in a ſtrict ſenſe, as formerly among the Ro- 

* 

mans, and at preſent in our colonies; 

PRE PO a—_— ** 0 . 55 

&Q a, — 

Chap. 3- TRE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 297 

of war is not to be reduced to ſlavery, much leſs are 
his children. | 
The Jawfulneſs of putting a malefator to death 
ariſes from this ; the law, by which he is puniſhed, was 
made for his ſecurity. A murderer, for inſtance, has 
enjoyed the benefit of the very law which condemns 
him; it has been a continual protection to him; he 
cannot therefore object againſt it. But it is not ſo with 
the ſlave. The law of flavery can never be beneficial 
to him; it is in all cafes againſt him, without ever be- 
ing for his advantage; and therefore this law is con- 
trary to the fundamental principle of all ſocieties. _ 
If it be pretended that it has been beneficial to him, 
as his maſter has provided for his ſubſiſtence ; ſlavery 
at this rate ſhould be limited to thoſe who are incapa- 
ble of earning their livelihood. But who will take up 

Vith ſuch ſlaves? As for infants, nature, who has ſup- 

plied their mothers with milk, had provided for their 
ſuſtenance, and the remainder of their childhood ap- 
proaches ſo near the age in which they are moſt capa- 
ble of being of ſervice, that he who ſupports them 
cannot be ſaid to give them an equivalent, which can 
entitle him to be their maſter. 

Nor is ſlavery leſs oppoſite to the civil law than to 
that of nature. What civil law can reſtrain a ſlave 
from running away, ſince he is not a member of ſo- 
ciety, and conſequently has no intereſt in any civil 
laws? He can be retained only by a family law, that 
Is by the maſter's authority. 

CHAP. III. 
Another origin of the right of Aavery. 

] WovrD as ſoon ſay, that the right of flavery pro- 
ceeds from the contempt of one nation for another, 

founded on a difference in. cuſtomis. 

. 

Lopez 

298 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XV 

Lopez de Gamar relates, © that the Spaniards found 
near St. Martha ſeveral baſkets full of crabs, ſnails, 
«--raſchoppers, and locuſts, which proved to be the 
% ordinary proviſion of the natives. This the con- 
% querors turned to a heavy charge againſt the con- 
% quered.” The author owns that this, with their 

ſmoking tobacco, and trimming their beards in a dif. . 

ferent manner, gave riſe to the law by which the 
Americans became ſlaves to the Spaniards. + Know- 
ledge humanizes mankind, and reaſon inclines to mild- 

neſs ; but prejudices eradicate every tender diſpoſition. * 

CHAP. IV. 
Another origin of the right of flavery. 
1 Wovrp as ſoon ſay that religion gives its profeſſors 

a right to enſlave thoſe who diſſent from it, in or- 
der to render its propagation more eaſy. 

This was the notion that enconraged the ravagers of 
America in their iniquity“. Under the influence of 
this idea, they founded their right of enflaving ſo many 
nations ; for theſe robbers, who would abfolutely be 
both robbers and Chriſtians, were ſuperlatively devour, 

Lewis XIII. + was extremely uneaſy at a law, by 
which all the negroes of his colonies were to be made 
ſlaves; but, it being ſtrongly urged to him as the 
readieſt means for their converſion, he acquieſced with · 
out further ſcruple. 

CHAP. V. 
| Of the Nlavery of the negroes. 
WERE I to vindicate our right to make ſlaves of 
the negroes, thele ſhould be my arguments. 

* See hiſt. of the conqueſt of Mexico, by Solis, and that of 
Peru, by Garcilaſſo de le Vega. 
f Labat's new voyage to W vol. iv, p. 114 
A732, in lama. f 

* f f The 

te 

2 2 

Chap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 299 

The Europeans, having extirpated the Americans, 
were obliged to make ſlaves of the Africans for clear- 
ing fach valts tracts of land. 

Sugar would be too dear, if the plants which pro- 
duce it were cultivated by any other than ſlaves. | 
Theſe creatures are all over black, and with ſuch a 

flat noſe, that they can ſcarcely be pitied. 

It is hardly to be believed that God, who is a wiſe 
Being, ſhould place a foul, eſpecially a good ſoul, in 
ſuch a black ngly body. 7 

It is ſo natural to look upon colour as the criterion 
of human nature, that the Aſiatics, among whom eu- 
nuchs are employed, always deprive the Blacks of their 
reſemblance to us by a more opprobrious diſtinction. 

The colour of the ſkin may be determined by that 
of the hair, which, among the Egyptians, the beſt 
philoſophers in the world, was of ſuch importance, 
that they put to death all the red-haired men who fell 
into their hands. 

The negroes prefer a glaſs-necklace to that of gold, 
which polite nations ſo highly value: can there be a 
greater proof of their wanting common ſenſe ? - 

It is impoſſible for us to ſuppoſe theſe creatures to 
be men, becauſe, allowing them to be men, a ſuſpicion 
would follow, that we ourſelves are not Chriſtians. 

Weak minds exaggerate too much the wrong done 
to the Africans : for, were the caſe as they ſtate it, 
would the European powers, who make ſo many need- 
leſs conventions among themſelves, have failed to make 
a general one in behalf of humanity and compaſſion ? 

CHAP. VI 
The true origin of the right of ſlavery, 

II is time to enquire into the true origin of the right 
of avery. It ought to be founded on the nature 

cf 

300 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XV. 

of things: let us ſee if there be any caſes where it can 
be derived from thence. 

In all deſpotic governments, people make no difficul. 
ty in ſelling themſelves: the political ſlavery, in ſome 
meaſure, annibilates the civil liberty. 

According to Mr. Perry *, the Muſcovites ſell them- 
ſelves very readily ; their reaſon for it is evident; their 
liberty is not worth keeping. 

At Achim every one is for ſelling himſelf. Some of 
the chief lords + have not leſs than a thouſand flaves, 
all principal merchants, who have a great number of 
flaves themſelves, and theſe alſo are not without their 
flaves. Their maſters are their heirs, and put them 
into trade, In thoſe ſtates, the freemen, being over- 
powered by the government, have no better reſource 
than making themſelves ſlaves to the tyrants in office. 
This is the juſt and rational origin of that mild law 
of ſlavery, which obtains in ſome countries ; and mild 
it ought to be, as founded on the free choice a man 
makes of a maſter for his own benefit, which forms a 
mutual convention betwixt the two parties, 

CHAP. VIL 
: Another origin of the right of ſlavery. 

b is another origin of the right of ſlavery, 

and even of the moſt cruel ſlavery which is to be 
ſeen among men. 

"There are countries where the exceſs of heat ener- 
vates the body, and renders men ſo ſlothful and diſ- 
pirited, that nothing but the fear of chaſtiſement can 
© oblige them to perform any laborious duty: ſlavery is 
there more reconcileable to reaſon; and, the maſter 
being as lazy with reſpect to his ſovereign as his ſlave 
is to him, this adds a political to a civil ſtavery. 

| Ariſtotle 4 endeavours to prove, that there are na- 

Preſent ſtate of Ruſſia, + Dampier's voyages, vol. 3. 

1 Polit. lib. i. chap. 1. | 
„ tural 

| Chap. 8. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, ze 

tural ſlaves; but what he ſays is far from proving it. 
If there be any ſuch, I believe they are thoſe of whom 
I have been ſpeaking. 

But as all men are born equal, ſlavery muſt be ac- 
counted unnatural, though in ſome countries it be 
founded on natural reaſon; and a wide difference ought 
to be made betwixt ſuch countries, and thoſe where 
even natural reaſon rejects it, as in n where it 
has been ſo bappily aboliſhed. 

Plutarch, in his life of Numa, ſays, than in Saturn's 
time there was neither ſlave nor maſter, Chriſtianity 
has reſtored that age in our climates, 

CH AP. . VIIL 
Inutility of AJavery among ul. 

Arona flavery, then, is to be limited to ſome par- 

ticular parts of the world. In all other countries 

even the-moſt laborious works of ſociety may be per. 
formed by freemen. 

Experience verifies my aſſertion. Before Chriſtiani- 
ty had aboliſhed civil ſlavery in Europe, working in 
the mines was judged too. toilſome for any but ſlaves or 
malefactors: but, at preſent, there are men employed 
in them, who are known to live * happily. They have, 
by ſome ſmall privileges, encouraged this profeſſion ; 
to an increaſe of labour they have joined an increaſe of 

gain, and have gone ſo far as to make them better 

pleaſed with their condition than with any other which 
they could have embraced. 

No labour is ſo heavy, but it may be brought to ale- 

vel with the workman's ſtrength, when regulated by 

equity, and not by avarice. The violent fatigues, 
which ſlaves are made to undergo in other parts, may 
be ſupplied by commodious machines, invented by 
A may be ſeen in the mines of Hartz in Lower Germany, 
and in thoſe of Hungary. 
I. ä 6 art, 

302 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book xv. 

art, and ſkilfully applied. The Turkiſh mines in the 
Bannat of Temeſwar, though richer than thoſe of 
Hungary, did not yield ſo much, becauſe their inven. 
tion reached no farther than the ſtrength of their ſlaves. 
1 know not whether this article be dictated by my 
underſtanding, or by my heart. Poſſibly there is not 
that climate upon earth, where the moſt laborious ſer. 
vices might not, with proper encouragement, be per- 
formed by freemen. Bad laws having made lazy men, 
they have been reduced to ſlavery becauſe of their . 

zineſs. 
CHA P. IX. 
Several kinds of flavery, 

Lavery is of two kinds, real and perſonal. The 
real annexes the ſlave to the land, which Tacitus“ 
makes the condition of ſlaves among the Germans, 
They were not employed in the family; a ſtated tribute 
of corn, cattle, or other moveables paid to their ma- 
ſter, was the whole of their ſervitude. And ſuch a 
ſervitude ſtill continues in Hungary, pe and ſe 
veral parts of Lower Germany. 

Perſonal ſlavery conſiſts in domeſtic ſervices, and re- 
lates more to the maſter's perſon. 

The worft degree of flavery is, when it is at once 
both real and perſonal, as that of the Helotes among 
the Lacedæmonians. They underwent the fatigues of 
the field, and ſuffered all manner of inſults within the 
houſe. This Helotiſm is contrary to the nature of 
things. The real flavery is to be fonnd only among 
nations + of a plain manner of living, all family bu- 
ſineſs being done by the wives and children. The per- 
ſonal ſlavery is peculiar to nen nations, luxu- 

* De moribus Germanorum. - 
>Þ Tacitus de moribus German, ſays, the maſter is not to be di- 
2 nguited from. the ſlave by any delicacy of living. {2 

j 5 1 ry 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 303 

ry requiring the ſervice of ſlaves in the houſe. But 
Helotiſm joins in the ſame perſons the ſlavery eſta- 
bliſhed by voluptuous nations, and that of the moſt 
ſimple. 

CHAP. X. 
Regulations neceſſary in reſpect to flavery. 
BY? of whatſoever kind the ſlavery be, the civit 
laws ſhould endeavour, on the one hand, to abo - 

liſh the abuſes of it, and on the other to guard againſt 
its dangers. 

CH AP. XI, 

Abuſes of ſlavery. 
I* Mahometan ſtates +, not only the life and goods 

of female flaves, but alſo what is called their vir- 

tue or honour, are at their maſter's diſpoſal. One of 
the misfortunes of thoſe countries is, that the greateſt 
part of the nation are born only to be ſubſervient to 
the pleaſures of the other. This ſervitude is alleviated 
by the lazineſs in which ſuch ſlaves live, which is an. 
additional diſadvantage to the ſtate. 

It is this indolence which renders the eaſtern ſera · 
glios fo delightful to thoſe very perſons whom they were 
made to confine. People who dread nothing but la- 
bour may imagine themſelves happy in theſe places of 

indolence and eaſe. But this ſhows how contrary they 

are to the very inſtitutions of ſlavery, 

. Reaſon requires that the malter's power ſhall not ex- 
tend to what does not appertain to kis ſervice. Sla- 

very ſhould be calculated for utility, aud not for plea- 

ſure. The laws of. chaſtity ariſe from thoſe of nature,. 

and ought in all nations to be reſpected. 

+ Sir Joho Chardin's travels to Perſia, 

T Sir John Chardin, vol. 2. in his deſcription of the * of 
Izagour, | 

Cc 2 | If 

304 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XV. 

If a law which preſerves the chaſtity of ſlaves be 

good in thoſe ſtates where an arbitrary power bears 

down all before it, how much more will it be ſo in mo- 
narchies, and how much more till in republics ? 

The law of the Lombards * has a regulation which 
ought/to be adopted by all governments. „ If a ma- 
+ fter debanches his ſlave's wife, the ſlave and his 
wife ſhall be reſtored to their freedom.” An admi- 
rable expedient, which, without ſeverity, lays a pow* 
erful reſtraint on the incontinency of maſters, 

The Romans ſeem to me to have erred on this head, 
They allowed an unlimited ſcope to the maſter's luſt, 
and in ſome meaſure denied their ſlaves the privilege of 
- marrying. It is true, they were the loweſt part of the 
nation; yet there ſhould have been ſome care taken of 
their morals, eſpecially as, in prohibiting their mar- 
riage, they corrupted the, morals of the citizens. 

E HAF. XIE: 
Danger from the multitude of flaves, 

T HE multitude of ſlaves has different effects in dif- 
ferent governments. It is no grievance in a def- 
potic ſtate, where the political ſlavery of the whole 
body takes away the ſenſe of civil ſlavery. Thoſe who 
are called freemen in reality are Ilutle more ſo than they 
who do not come within that claſs; and as the. latter, 
in quality of eunuchs, freedmen, or ſlaves, have gene- 
rally the management of all afairs, the condition of a 
freeman and that of a flave are very nearly allied. This 

makes it therefore almoſt àa matter oſ indifference, whe | 

ther in ſuch ſtates the ſlaves be few or numerous. 

But in moderate ſtates, it is.a point of the higheſt 
importance, that there ſhould not be a great number 
of ſlaves. The political liberty of thoſe Rates adds to 

* Lib. i. tit, 32 F 8. . 
the 

7 SAFS 

. Chap, 12. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 305 
the value of civil liberty, and he who is deprived of the 

latter is alſo deprived of the former. He ſees the hap- 
pineſs of a ſociety, of which he is not ſo much as a 

member; he ſees the ſecurity of others fenced by laws, 

himſelf without any protection. He ſees his maſter has 
a ſoul that can enlarge itſelf, while his own is conſtrain- 

ed to ſubmit to a continual depreſſion. Nothing more 

aſſimilates à man to a beaſt, than living among free* 
men, himſelf a ſlave. Such people as theſe are the na- 
tural enemies of the ſociety, and their number —_ be 
dangerous.. 

It is not therefore to be woadeted at, that 3 
governments have been ſo frequently diſlurbed by re · 
volts of la ves; and that this ſo ſeldom happens in“ 
W | 

CHA P. XIII. 
of armed ſlaves. 

Tue danger of arming ſlaves is not ſo great in mo · 
narchies as ift republics. In the former a warlike 

people, and a body of nobility, are à ſufficient eheck 
vpon theſe armed ſlaves; whereas the pacific members 
of a republic would have a hard tale to quell à ſort of 
men, who, having offenſive weapons in their hands, 

would find themſelves a match for the citizens. 

The Goths, who conquered Spain, ſpread themſelves 
over the country, and ſoon became very weak. They 
made three important regulations; they aboliſhed an 
ancient, cuſtom which prohibited intermarriages with 

the T Romans; they enacted that all the freedmen 

belonging to the fle ſhould ſerve in war, under penal - 
ty of being reduced to ſlavery; and they ordained, 
that each Goth ſhould arm and bring into the field the - 

The revolt of the Mammalucs was a different caic; this was a 
body of the militia who uſurped the empire. | 
+ Law of the Viſigoths, lib. iii. tit. 1. H. 

1 Idid. lib. v. tit. 7. 4 20. 

Ce 3. tenth? 

| 
] 
| 
| 

366 THE SPIRIT or LAWS. Book xv. 

tenth part “ of his ſlaves. This was but a ſmall pro. 
portion : befides, theſe flaves thus carried to the field, 
did not form a ſeparate body; they were in the army, 

and might be ſaid to continue in the family. 

CHAP. XIV. 
The ſame ſubject continued. 

| W a whole nation is of a martial temper, the 
flaves in arms are leſs to be feared. 

By a law of the Allemans, a ſlave who had com- 
_- mitted a clandeſtine theft + was liable to the ſame pu- 
 niſhment as a freeman in the like caſe ; but, if he was 
found guilty of a forcible robbery 4, he was only bound 
to reſtore the thing ſo taken. Among the Allemans, 
courage and intrepidity extenuated the guilt of. an ac- 
tion. They employed their flaves in their wars. Moſt 
republics have been attentive to diſpirit their ſlaves: 
but the Allemans, relying on themſelves, and being 
always armed, were fo far from fearing their's, that 
they were rather, for augmenting their courage; they 
were the inſtruments either of thay: depredations or of 
their glory. | 
8 HAP. XV. 

Pretautians to be uſed in moderate governments. 

E and humane treatment may prevent the dan- 
gers to be apprehended from the multitude of 
{lives in a moderate government. Men grow recon- 
ciled to every thing, and even to ſervitude, if not ag · 
gravated by the ſeverity of the maſter. 'The Atheni- 
ans treated their ſlaves with great lenity; and this ſe - 
cured that ſtate from the commotions raiſed. by the 
ſlaves amongſt the auſtere Lacedzmonians, 

* Law of the Viſigoths, lib. xi. tit. 3. 4 g. 
+ Law of the Allemans, chap. 5. 5 3. 

J wid. chap. 5. F 5. per virtulem. , 1 

— — : — 

- 

75 

Chap. 15. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 30 

. Ir does not appear that the primitive Romans met 

with any trouble from their ſlaves. Thoſe civil wars, 
which “ have been compared to the Punic wars, were 
the conſequences of their having diveſted themſelves of 

all humanity towards their ſlaves. 

A frugal and laborious people generally uſe their 
ſlaves more kindly, than thoſe who are above labour. 
The primitive Romans lived, worked, and ate with 
their flaves; they behaved towards them with great 
juſtice and humanity. The greateſt puniſhment they 
made them ſuffer, was to make them paſs before their 

neighbours with a forked piece of wood upon their 

backs, Their manners were ſufficient to ſecure the fi- 
delity of their ſlaves; there was no neceſſity for laws. 

But when the Romans aggrandiſed themſelves ; when 

their ſlaves were no longec the companions of their 
labour, but the inſtruments of their luxury and pride; 
as they then wanted morals, they had need of laws. 
It was even neceſſary for theſe laws to be of the moſt 
terrible kind, in order to eſtabliſh the ſafety of thoſe 
cruel maſters, who lived in the midſt of their ſlaves, as 
in the midſt of enemies. They made the Syllanian 
ſenatuſconſultum, and other laws , which decreed, that 
when a maſter was'murdered, all the ſlaves under eht 
ſame roof, or in any place ſo near the houſe as to be 
within the hearing of a man's voice, ſhould, without 
diſtinction, be condemned to die. Thoſe who in this 
caſe ſheltered a flave, in order to fave him, were pu- 

' - Niſhed as murderers ; he whom his maſter ordered 

to kill him, and who obeyed, was reputed guilty ; 

Sicily, nr the ſervile than in the 
Punic war, lib. 3. 

+ Ste the whole title of the ſenat. conſult, Syllan. in ff. 

t Leg Gi quis, & 12. ff. de ſenat, conſult. Syllan. 

When Antony commanded Eros to kill him, it was the ſame 
as commanding him to kill bimſelf, becauſe, if be had obeyed, he 
would have been puniſhed as the murderer of bis maſter, 
© even 

d 

us A VO — — 

— ü ˙ -w —6ů e cd as OA oe AAA ocean 4 — 

306 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XV. 

even he, who did not hinder him from killing himſelf, 

was liable to be puniſhed ®z if a maſter was murdered 

on a journey, they put to death + thoſe who were with 

him, and thoſe who. fl:d? © All theſe laws took place 

even againſt thoſe whoſe innocence. was proved: the 

intent of them was to give their ſlaves a prodigious 

reſpe& for their maſter. They were not dependent on 

| the civil government, but on a fault or imperfeRion of 

the eivil government. They were not derived from the 

lll. equity of civil laws, fince they were contrary. to the 

| principle of civil laws. They were properly founded on 

[ *the principles of war, with this difference, that the- 

| enemies were in the boſom of the ſtate. The Syllani- 

an ſenatuſconſultum was derived from the law of na- 

| tions, — 287 a n * 1 6527 7 

It is a mand in government, whim the magi · 

ſtraey thus find themſelves under a neceſſity of making 
ce.ruel laws; becauſe they have rendered obedience dit. 

ficult, they are obliged to increaſe the penalty of dif- 

obedience, or the ſuſpicion of fidelity. A-prudent le · 

giſlator foreſees the ill confequences of rendering the 

legiflature terrible. The flaves amongſt the Romans 

could have no confidence in the laws, aud therefore 
the laws could have no confidence in them. | | 

CHAP. xvi. 

Regulations. between maſters and aver. 

. Tur magiſtrate ought to take care that hd 5 4 

e eee e f 

to be regulated by lac. {: 
The laws onght to provide that care be bow of 

them in fickneſs and old age. Claudius + decreed, a 

L- 3- 5 24. de ſcuat, conſole. Syllan, K 7 
ne amm, | 

r ß X Js _ 

_ FTaw YyUY” FAR” = =—Y 

”” 

AS”. AA _- a anks 

ww AA &* «a = 

that 

1 

e , ek.» 

E 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. zes 

that the ſlaves, who in ſickneſs had been abandoned 
by their maſters, ſhould, in caſe they recovered, be free. 
This law inſured their liberty; but ſhould not there 
have been ſome care alſo taken to preſerve their lives? 

When the law permitted a maſter to take away the 
life of his flave, he was inveſted with a power which he 
ought to exerciſe as judge, and not as maſter ; it was 
neceſſary that the law ſhould ordain thoſe formalities, 
which take away the ſuſpicion of an act of violence. 

When fathers at Rome were no longer permitted to 

put their children to death, the magittrates ordained 

the *® puniſhment which the father would have inflict- 
ed; A like cuſtom between the maſter and his ſlaves 
would be highly reaſonable in a country where maſters 
who have the power of life and death. 

The law of Moſes was extremely ſevere. 4 If any 
«© one {truck his ſlave ſo that he died under his hand, 
« he was to be puniſhed; but, if he ſurvived a day or 

« two, he was not, becauſe he was as his money.“ 
Strange, that a civil law ſhould thus amongſt theſe By; 

ple relax the law of nature! 
By a law of the Grecks +, a dave too roughly treats 
ed by his maſter might inſiſt upon being ſold to ano- 
ther. In the latter times there was a law of the ſame 
nature } at Rome, A malter diſpleaſed with his flave, 
and a flave with his maſter, ovght to be ſeparated. 
When a citizen uſes a ſlave of another ill, the latter 
ought to have liberty to complain before the judge. 
The laws f of Plato, and of moſt nations, took away 

from ſlaves the right of natural defence, it was neceſ- 
ſary then that they ſhould give them a civil defence. 

* See law 3- in the Code de patria pateflate, by the emperor Alex - 
and r. ö | 
I Plutzrch on ſuperſtition. 
t See the copſtitutiva of Antonians Pius, inſtitut. lib, 2. tit. 7. 
Lid. ** | | | 
Noe At 

— —— 

gio THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book xv. 

At Sparta, ſlaves could have no juſtice againſt either 
infults or injuries. So exceſſive was their miſery, that 
they were not only the ſlaves of a citizen, but alſo of 
the public; they belonged to all, as well as to one - 
At Rome, when they conſidered the injury done to a 
flave; they had regard only to the intereſt * of the ma- 
ſter. In the breach of the Aquilian law, they con · 
founded a wound given to a beaſt, and that given to a 
ſlave; they regarded only the diminution of their va- 
lue. At Athens , he who had abuſed the ſlave of 
another was puniſhed ſeverely, and ſometimes even 
with death. The law of Athens was very reaſonable, 
in not adding the loſs of ſafety to that of liberty. 

C HAP. XVII. 
F infranchiſements. 

Fi is eaſy to perceive, that many ſlaves i in a republi- 

can government create a neceſſity of making many 
free. The evil is, if they have too many ſlaves, they 
cannot keep them in due bounds; if they have too 
many freedmen, they cannot live, and mult become a 
burthen to the republic: beſides, it may be as much in 
danger from the too great number of freedmen, as 
from the too great number of ſlaves. It is (39s "56 
therefore that the laws ſhould have an eye to theſe two 
inconveniencies. 

The ſeveral laws and decrees of the ſenate made at 
Rome, both for and againſt flaves, ſometimes to limit, 
and at other times to facilitate their. inff3nchifament, 

plainly ſhew the embarraſſment in which they found 

themſelves in this reſpect There were even times in 
which they durſt not make laws. When under Nero 
they F demanded of the ſenate a permiſſion for the 

* This was frequently the ſpirit of the laws of thoſe nations who 
ame out of Germany, as may be ſeen by their codes. 

Demoſthenes orat. contra Midiam, p- 610, Franck ſort 1604. 

Annals of Tacitus, lib. xii. 

1 maſters 

ww ws mw, as " 

=: om ooo =o we an... 

Chap. 17. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 31 

maſters to reduce again to ſlavery the ungrateful freed- 
men, the emperor declared that they ought to decide 
the affairs of individuals, and to make no general de- 
cree. 

Much leſs can 1 amin what ought to be the re- 
gulations of a good republic in an affair of this kind ; 
this depends on too many circumſtances. Let us how- 
ever make ſome reflections. 

A conſiderable number of freedmen . not ſud- 
denly to be made by a general law. We know that 
amongſt the Volſinienſes ® the freedmen becoming ma- 
ſters of the ſuffrages, made an abominable law, which 
gave them the right of lying firſt with the girls mar- 
ried to the free · born. 

There are ſeveral ways of aeedahg inſenſibly new 
citizens into a republic. The laws may favour the ac 

quiring a peculium, and put ſlaves into a condition of 
buying their liberty: they may give a term to ſervitude 
like thoſe of Moſes, which limited that of the F He- 
brew ſlaves to fix years. It is eaſy to give every year 

' freedom to a certain number of thoſe ſlaves, who, by 
their age, health, or induſtry, are capable of getting 

a ſubſiſtence. The evil may be even cured in its root, 
as a great number of ſlaves are connected with the ſe · 
veral employments which are given them; to divide 
amongſt the free · born a part of theſe -employments, 
for example, commerce, or navigation, is diminiſhing 
the number of ſlaves. 

When there are many freedmen, it 1s ede 

the civil laws ſhould determine what they owe to their 

patron, or elſe that theſe duties ſhould bd fixed by the 

contract of infranchiſement. 
It is certain that their condition ſhould. be more fa- 

voured in the civil, than in the political ſtate, becauſe, 
even in a popular government, the power ought not to 
fall into the hands of the vulgar. 

* F reinſhemius's ſupplement, * 2. lib,y. + Exod. 21. 

At 

ä— ——— th - 

312 * THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XV, 

0 
At Rome, where they had ſo many freedmen, the 
political laws with regard to them were admirable. f 
They gave them little, and excluded them almoſt from 4 
nothing ; ; they had even a ſhare in the legiſlature; but 6 
the reſolutions they were capable of taking were almoſt 
of no weight. They might bear a part in the public 
offices, and even in the dignity of the prieſthood * ; 0 
but this privilege was in ſome ſort rendered uſeleſs by P 
the diſadvantages they had to encounter with in the - 
elections. They had a right to enter into the army; 7 
but they were to be regiſtered in a certain claſs of the 
cenſus, before they could be ſoldiers. Nothing hindered 5 
the +-freedmen from being united by marriage with 1 
the families of the free - born; but they were not per- 
mitted to mix with thoſe of the ſenators. In ſhort, 4 
their children were free- RUG SEO e were not {© x: 
themſelves. I: TIN tt 
CHAP. AvRL-:. 13 th 
Of freedmen and ewnuchs, | | 
A 

TuS. in a republican government, it is nen- ſp 
ly of advantage, for the ſituation of the freedmen 

to be but little below that of the free born, and that $4 
the laws be adapted to remove a diſlike of their con- 

dition. But in a deſpotic government, where luxury * 
and arbitrary power prevail, they have nothing to do pl 
in this reſpect; the freedmen almoſt always find them- It 
ſelves above the free-born, They rule in the court of =Y 
the prince, and in the palaces of the great ; and, as 

they ſtudy the foibles, and not the virtues of their ma- a 
ſer, they lead him not by his virtues, but by his weak · ke 

neſs. Such were the freedmen of Rome in the times 0 
of the emperors. 
When the principal ſlaves are e let ever ſo 
many privileges be nn them; they can hardly be 

* Annals of Tacitus, 1. 3, 7 Augoſtus' $ ſpeech in Dio, 1. 56. 
| regarded 

5 . J 

— ̃ ¶ p ]⁵ NQ 7˙Q) ————— 

r 2 v1. AC - a. - FS. a 2 

5 a” wow GCN WU. 

ZZZ 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 313 

regarded as freedmen; for, as they cannot have a fa- 
mily of their own, they are naturally attached to that 
of another, and it is only by a kind of fiction that they 
are conſidered citizens. 

And yet there are countries where the magiſtracy is 
entirely in their hands: In“ Tonquin,” ſays Dam- 
pier f, © all the mandarins civil and military are eu- 
« nuchs.” They have no families, and though they 
are naturally avaricious, the maſter or the prince in the 
end takes advantage of this very avarice. 

Dampier þ tells us too, that, in this country, the eu · 
nuchs cannot live without women, and therefore marry. 
The law which permits their marriage may be founded, 
on the one band, on their reſpe& for theſe eunuchs, 
and, on the other, on their contempt for women. 

Thus they are truſted with the magiſtracy, becaufe 
they have no family, and permitted to Warey, becauſe 
they are magiſtrates. 

Then it is that the ſenſe which remains would fain 
ſupply that they have loſt; and the enterpriſes of de- 
ſpair become a kind of enjoyment. So in Milton, that 

ſpirit who has nothing left but deſires, enraged at his 

degradation, would make uſe of his impotency itſelf. 

We ſee in the hiſtory of China a great number of 
laws to deprive eunuchs of all civil and military em- 
ployments, but they always returned to them again, 
It ſeems as if the eunuchs of the eaſt were a neceſſary 
evil, 

* It was formerly the ſame in China. The two Mahometan 
Arabs, who travelled thither in the ninth century, uſe the word 

runuch whenever they ſpeak of the governor of a city. 
+ Vol. iii, p. 91. I Ibid. iii. p. 94. 

Vor. I. D d BO OR 

- 
* 
—ä— —ͤ— — — © — 
F ˙ ü;]m].. ͤ¶ %eA—m—]ö ¼⅛oéꝛ V Ü — u ̃ ANuẽͤ!f (N I ̃ Ä — ⁰.uÄÄ — OOO —— —__ 

314 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI. 

3 O. o K XVI. 

How the laws of domeſtic flavery have a re. 
| lation to the nature of the climate. 

* 

— 

GA. L 
Of domeſtic ſervitude. 
LAVES are eſtabliſhed for the family; but they are 
not a part of it. Thus I diſtinguiſh their ſervitude 
from that which the women in ſome countries ſuffer, 
and which I ſhall properly call domeſtic ſervitude, , 

CH A ©. 35. 

| That in the countries of the fouth there is a natural in- 
equality between the two ſexes. 

MEN, in hot clunates, are * marriageable at 

3 nine, or ten years of age; thus, in thoſe 
countries, infancy and marriage almoſt always go to- 
gether. They are old at twenty: their reaſon there. 
fore never accompanies their beauty. When beauty 
demands the empire, the want of reafon forbids the 
claim; when reaſon is obtained, beauty is no more. 
Theſe women ought then to be in a ſtate of depen- 

deney ; for reaſon cannot procure in old age that em- 

pire, which even youth and beauty could not give. It 
is therefore extremely natural, that, in theſe places, a 
man, when no law oppoſes it, ſhould leave one wife to 

take another, and that polygamy ſhould be introduced. 

* Mahomet married Cadhisja at ſive, and took her to his bed at 
cight years old. In the hot countries of Arabia and the Indies, girls 
are marriageable at eight years of age, and are brought to bed the 
year after, Prideau, life of M ahbomet. We ſee women in the kingdom 
of Alglers pregnant at nine, ten, and eleven years of age. Hi. of 

the kingdom of _— by Logier de Taſſis, p. 61. 

In 

"I 

i- 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 379 

In temperate climates, where the charms of women 
are beſt preſerved, where they arrive latter at maturi- 
ty, and have children at a more advanced ſeaſon of 
lite, the old age of their huſbands in ſome degree fol- 
lows theirs ; and, as they have more reaſon and know- 
ledge at the time of marriage, if it be only on account 
of their having continued longer in life, it mult natu- 
rally introduce a kind of equality between the two 
ſexes, and, in conſequence of this, the law of having 
only one wife. 

In cold countries, the almoſt neceſſary cuſtom of 
drinking ſtrong liquors eftabliſhes intemperance amongſt 
men. Women, who in this reſpe& have a natural re- 
ſtraint becauſe they are always on the defenſive, have 
therefore the advantage of reaſon over them. 

Nature, which has diftinguithed men by their reaſon 
and bodily ſtrength, has ſet no other bounds to their 
power than thoſe of this ſtrength and reaſon. It has 

given charms to women, and ordained that their a- 

fcendant over man ſhall end with theſe charms ; but, in 
hot countries, theſe are found only at the beginning, 
and never in the progreſs of life. 

Thus the law, which permits only one wife, is phy- 
fically conformable to the climate of Europe, and not 
to that of Aſia. This is the reaſon. why Mahometa- 
niſm was eſtabliſhed with ſuch facility in Aſia, and ſo 
dificultly extended in Europe, why Chriſtianity is 
maintained in Europe, and has been deſtroyed in Alta ;. 
and, in fine, why the Mahometans have made ſuch 
progreſs in China, and the Chriſtians ſo little. 

Some particular reaſons induced Valentinian * to 
permit polygamy in the empire. That law, ſo impro- 

per for our climates, was abrogated F by Theodolws,. 

Arcadius, and Honorius. 
-* See Jornaudes de regno et tempor. ſucceſ. and the eccleſtaſtic hi- 

ſtorians. 

+ See. la 7. of the Code de Fdeis et Celicolis, and nov. 18. c. 
Dd 2. CHAP. 

——_—_—  -  - " — 

316 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI. 

CHAP. III. 

That a ou of wives depends greatly on the means of 

ſupporting them. 

Tassen in eountries where polygamy i is once eſla · 
bliſhed, the number of wives is principally deter- 
mined by the riches of the huſband; yet it cannot be 
faid that riches eſtabliſhed polygamy in theſe ſtates, 
fince poverty may produce the ſame effeR, as I ſhall 
prove when I come to ſpeak of the ſavages. 
Polygamy in powerful nations is lefs a luxury in it- 
ſelf, than the occaſion of great luxury. In hot“ cli. 
mates they have few wants, and it coſts little to main- 
tain a wife and children; they may therefore have a 
greater number of wives. 

CHAP. IV. 

That the law of palygamy is an affair that depend; on 

calculation. 

A Cconpme to the calculations made in ſeveral parts 
of Europe, there are here born more boys than 

girls ;- on the contrary, by the accounts we have of 

Aſia, there are there born more þ girls than boys. 

The law which in Europe allows only one wife, and 

that in Aſia which permits many, have therefore a a cer» 

tain relation to the climate. 

In the cold climates of Aſia, there are born, as in 
Europe, more males than females; and from hence» 
ſay the || Lamas, is derived the reaſon of that law, 

® In Ceylow a man may live on ten ſols a- month; they eat no- 
thing there but rice and fiſh, Colleflion f voyages mode to eſtabliſo 

an India company. 
- + Dr. Arbothnot finds that in England t the number of boys ex- 

ceeds that of girls; but people have been to blame to conclude that 
the caſe is the ſame in all climates. 

f See Kempfer, who relates, that, upon numbering the people 
of Meaco, there were found 182,012 males, and 223,573 females. 

| Dy Haide's hift. of China, vol. iv. p. 46t, 
; which 

1 

on 

Chap. 5: THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: 

huſbands. 

But it is difficult for me to believe, that there are ma- 
ny countries, where the diſproportion can be great 

enough to require the introducing either the law in fa - 
your of many wives, or that of many huſbands. This 
would only imply, that a plurality of women, or even 
a plurality of men, is more. conformable to nature in 
certain countries than in others. 

I confeſs, that if what hiſtory tells us be true, that 
at Bantam + there are ten women to oe man, this 
muſt be a cafe particularly favourable to polygamy. 

In all this I only give their reaſons, but do not ju - 

ſtify their cuſtoms.. 
CHAP V. 
The reaſon of a law of Malabar. 

IN the tribe of the 4 Naires, on the coaſt of Mala - 
bar, the men can have only one wife, while a wo. 
man on the contrary may have many huſbands. The 

origin of this cuſtom is not, I believe, difficult to diſ- 

cover. The Naires are the tribe of nobles, who are 
the ſoldiers of all thoſe nations. In: Europe, ſoldiers 
are forbid to marry : in Malabar,. where the climate 
requires greater indulgence, they are ſatisfied with 
rendering marriages as little burdenſome to them as 

poſſible; they give a wife amongſt. many men, which. 

conſequently diminithes the attachment to a. family, 

*' Albazeit:el-haſſen, one of the two Mihometan Arabs, who, 
in the ninth century, went into India and Chins, thought this cu- 
ſtom a proſtitution. And indeed nothing could be more-contrary 
to the ideas of a Mahometan. 

+ Collection of voyages for the. eſtabliſbment:of an India com 

pauy, vol, 1. 

See Francis Pirard, c. 27: ; ediſying letters zd and roth col 
lection on the Malleani on the coaſt of Malabar. This is conſider- 
ed as an*abuſe of the military proſeſſion, as a woman, ſays Prirad, 
of. the tribe of the Bramias never would marry many huſbands. 

* 

327 

which amongſt them permits a woman to have“ many 

ͤ—ũ— — —— — —w — 

318 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI 
and the cares of houſekeeping, and leave them in the 

free poſſeſſion of a military ſpirit. 
CHAP. VI. 

| Of polygamy conjidered in itſelf. 
W ITH- regard to polygamy in general, indepen- 

dently of the circumſtances which may render it 
tolerable, it is. not of the leaſt ſervice to mankind, nor 

to either of the two ſexes, whether it be that which 

abuſes, or that which is abuſed. Neither is it of ſer - 
vice to the children; for one of its greateſt inconveni- - 

encies is, that the father and mother cannot have the 

ſame affection for their offspring; a father cannot love 

twenty children with the ſame tenderneſs as a mother 
can love two. It is much worſe when a wife has many 
huſbands; for then paternal love is only held by this 
opinion, that a father may believe, if he will, or that 
others may believe, that certain children belong to him, 

A plurality of wives, who would think it! leads to 
that paſſion which nature diſallows; for one deprava- 
tion always draws on another. I remember, that in 
the revolution which happened at Conſtantinople, when 
Sultan Achmet was depoſed, hiſtory ſays, that the peo- 
ple having plundered the Kiaya's houſe, they found 

not a ſingle woman; they tell us, that at “ Algiers, in 

the preateſt part of their ſeraglios, they have none 
at all. 

Beſides, the poſſeſſion of many wives FER not al 
ways prevent their entertaining deſires + for thoſe of 
others: it is with luſt as with avarice, whoſe thirſt in- 
creaſes by the acquiſition of treaſures. 

In the reign of Juſtinian, many philoſophers dif 

* Hiſt. of Algiers by Logier de Taſſis. 
+ This is the reaſon wby women in the Eaſt are fo carefully 
conccalcd. - 

pleaſed 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 319 
pleaſed with the conſtraint of Chriſtianity, retired in · 

to Perſia, What ſtruck them the molt, ſays Agathi- 
as“, was, that polygamy was permitted amongſt men 
who did not even abſtain from adultery. 

CHA FP. VI. 
Of an equality of treatment in caſe of many wives. 
F the law which permitted a plurality of wives? 

followed that of an equal behaviour to each, Ma- 

homet, who allowed of four, would have every thing, 
as proviſions, dreſs, and conjugal duty, equally divid- 
ed between them. This law 1s alſo in force in the 
Maldivian iſles , where they are at liberty to marry 
three wives. | 

The law of Moſes t even declares, that if any one 
has married his ſon to a ſlave, and this ſon ſhould mar- 

ry afterwards a free woman, he {hall diminiſh nothing. 

of her food, her raiment, or duty of marriage. They 
might give more to the new wife; but the firſt was 
not to have leſs than ſhe. had before. 

| H A. E. MI. 
Of the ſeparation of women from men. 
1 prodigious number of wives poſſeſſed by thoſe 
who live in rich and voluptuous nations is a con - 
ſequence of the law of polygamy. Their ſeparation 
from men, and their cloſe confinement, naturally fol- 
low from the greatneſs of this number. Domeſtic or- 

der renders this n-cflary ; thus an inſolvent debtor 

ſeeks to conceal -himſelf from the purſuit of his credi- 
tors. There are climates. where the . irapulſes of na- 
ture have ſuch ſtrength that morality has almolt none. 
If a man be left with a woman, the temptation and 
the fall will be the ſame thing; the attack certain, the 

_ reſiſtance none, In theſe countries, inflead of pre- 

cepts, they have recourſe to bolts and bars. 
* Life and actions of Juſtinian, p. 403. ; 
+ See Pirard, chap. xiti, } Exod, xxi. 10, 117 
| One 

— EEE. 

320 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI, 

One of the Chineſe claflic authors conſiders the man 
as a prodigy of virtue, who, finding a woman alone- 
in a diſtant apartment, can forbear violating her “. 

S HAT HK. | 
Of the conneftion between domeſtic and political go- 
ver nment. 

182 a 3 the condition of citizens is limited, 

equal, mild, and agreeable : every thing partakes. 
of the benefit of public liberty. An empire over the 
women cannot amongſt them be ſo well exerted; and, 
where the climate demands this empire, it is nol 
agreeable to the government of a fingle perſon. This 
is one of the reaſons why it has always been difficult 
to eſtabliſh a popular government in the eaſt, 

On the contrary, the flavery of women is perfectly 
conformable to the genius of a deſpotic government, 
which delights in treating all with ſeverity. Thus at 
all times have we ſeen in Afia domeſtic ſlavery and 

deſpotic government wen hand in hand with an equal 

ce. 
* a government which requires, above all things, 
that a particular regard be paid to its tranquillity, and 
where the extreme ſubordination forms that tranquilli- 
ty, it is abſolutely neceſſary to ſhut up the women; for 
their intrigues would prove fatal to their huſbands. A 
government, which has not time to examine into the 
conduct of its ſubjects, views them with a ſuſpicious 
eye. only becauſe they appears and ſuffer themſelves to 
be known.. - 

Let us only ſuppoſe that the levity of mind; the in · 
diſcretions, the taſtes and diſguſts of our women, at- 
tended by their paſſions of a higher and a lower kind, 

1 It is an admirable touchſtone, to find by one's ſelf x treaſure 
„ which we can make ourſelves maſter of, or a beautiful woman in 

« a diſtant apartment, or to hear the voice of an enemy who muſt 
« periſh without our aſſiſtance.” Tranſlation of a Chineſe piece of 

moral:ty, which may be {cen in Du Halde, vol. iii. p. 151. h 
. with 

$8 

ne. 

— wks > ww eG 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 321 

with all their active fire, and in that full liberty with 
which they appear amongſt us, were conveyed into an 
eaſtern government; where would be the father of a 
family who could enjoy a moment's repoſe ? The men 
would be every where ſuſpected, every where enemies; 
the ſtate would be overturned, and the kingdom over. 
flowed with rivers of blood. 

HAP. X. 

The principle on which the morals of the L. are found - 

ed. 

N the caſe of a multiplicity of wives, the more a 

family ceaſes to be united, the more ought the laws 

to re · unite its detached parts in a common centre; and 

the greater the diverſity of intereſts, the more neceſ- 

fary it is for the laws to bring them back to a common 
intereſt. 

This is more particularly done by confinement. The 
women ſhould not only be ſeparated from the men by 
the walls of the houſe, but they ought alſo to be ſepa- 
rated in the ſame incloſure, ia ſuch a manner that each 
may have a diſtin houſhold in the ſame family. From 
hence each derives all that relates to the practice of 
morality, modeſty, chaſtity, reſerve, ſilence, peace, 
dependence, reſpe&, love, and, in ſhort, a general di- 
rection of her thoughts to that which in its own na- 

ture is a thing of the greateſt importance, a hogle and 

entire attachment to her family. 
Women have naturally ſo many duties to fulfil, du - 

ties which are peculiarly theirs, that they cannot be 
enough excluded from every thing capable of inſpiring 

other ideas, from every thing that goes by the name 
of amuſements, and wo every thing which we call 

buſineſs. 
We find the manners more pure in the ſeveral parts 
of the Eaſt, in proportion as the confinement of wo- 
Dd 3 men 

— ns 

322 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XVI. 

men is more ſtrictly obſerved. In great kingdoms there 
gre neceſſarily great lords. The greater their wealth, 
the more enlarged is their ability of keeping their wives 
in an exact confinement, and of preventing them from 
entering again into ſociety. From hence it proceeds, 
that in the empires of Turky, Perſia, of the Mogul, 
China, and Japan, the manners of their wives are ad- 
mirable. | | | 

But the caſe is not the ſame with India, where a 
multitude of iſlands, and the ſituation of the land, have 
divided the country into an infinite number of little 
ſtates, which, from cauſes that we have not here room 
to mention, are rendered deſpotic. 

There are none there but the wretches who pillage, 
and the wretches who are pillaged. Their grandees 
have very moderate fortunes, and thoſe whom they 
call rich have only a bare ſubſiſtence. The coufine- 
ment of their women cannot therefore be very ſtrict; 
nor can they make uſe of any great precautions to 
keep them within due bounds: from hence it proceeds 
that the corruption of their manners is ſcarcely to be 
conceived. — 

We may there ſee to what an extreme the vices of 
a climate, indulged in full liberty, will carry licen- 
tiouſneſs. It is there that nature has a ſtrength, and 
modeſty a weakneſs, that exceeds all comprehenſion. 
At Patan “ the wanton defires + of the women are ſo 
outrageous, that the men are obliged to make uſe of 
a certain apparel to ſhelter them from their deſigns, 

Collection of voyages for the eſtabliſhment of an India com- 
pany, vol. ii. p. 2. 
1 In the Maldivian iſles the fathers marry their tid at ten 
and eleven years of age, becauſe it is a great ſan, ſay they, to ſuffer 
them to endure the want of a huſband. See Pirard, chap. 12. At 
Bantam, as ſoo" as a girl is twelve or thirteen years old, ſhe mult 
be married, if they would not have her lead a debauched life. C- 
lection of voyages for the eſtabliſt ment of an India company, p. 348. 

wv er @> 2 

7 

Chap. 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 321 

In theſe countries, the two ſexes loſe even thoſe laws 
which properly belong to each. 
„eK AE 
Cf demeſtic ſlavery independently of polygamy. 

JT" is not only a plurality of wives, which in certain 

places of the Eaſt requires their confinement, but 
alſo the climate itſelf. Thoſe who conſider the horri- 
ble crimes, the black villanies, the poiſonings, the aſ- 
ſaſinations, which the liberty of women has occaſioned 
at Goa, and in the Portugueſe ſettlements in the In- 
dies, where religion permits only one wiſe; and who 
compare them with the innocence and purity of man- 
ners of the women of Turky, Perſia, Mogulſtan, Chi- 
na, and Japan, will clearly ſee that it is frequently as 
neceſſary to ſeparate them from the men, when they 
have but one, as when they have many. 

Theſe are things which ought to be decided by the 
climate. What purpoſe would it anſwer to ſhut up 
women in our northern countries, where their manners 
are naturally good; where all their paſſions are calm 
and where love rules over the heart with ſo regular 
and gentle an empire, that the leaſt degree of prudence 
is ſufficient to conduct it ? wy 

It is a happineſs to live in thoſe climates which per- 
mit a communication between each other, where that 
ſex which has molt charms ſeems to embelliſh ſociety, 
and where wives reſerving themſelves for the pleaſures 
of one contribute to the amuſement of all. 

CHAP XII. 

Of natural modeſty. 
LL nations are equally agreed in fiting contempt 
and ignominy on. the incontinence of women. 
Nature has dictated this to all. She has eſtabliſhed 
the attack, and ſhe has eſtabliſhed too the defence ; 
| and 

324 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XV, 

and having implanted deſires in both, ſhe has given to 

the one boldneſs, and to the other ſhame.” She has 
given to individuals a long extent of years, in which 
they are to ſeek their own preſervation ; but to perpe- 
tuate themſeves, ſhe has given only a moment. 

It is then far from being true, that to be inconti- 
nent is to follow the laws of nature; ſince this is, on 
the contrary, a violation of them : it is only by mode- 
ſty and diſcretion that we can follow theſe laws, 

Beſides, it is natural for intelligent beings to feel 
their imperfections. Nature has therefore fixed mode- 
fy in our minds, that is, a ſhame of our imperfections. 

When therefore the phyſical power of certain cli- 
mates violates the natural law of the two ſexes, and 
that of intelligent beings, it belongs to the legiſlature 
to make civil laws to oppoſe the nature of the climate, 
and to re-eſtabliſh the primitive laws, 

CHAP. XIII. 
Of jealouſy. 

| Wrrn reſpe& to nations, we ought to diſtinguiſh 

between the paſſion of jealouſy, and a jealouſy 
ariſing from cuſtoms, manners, and laws. The one 
is a hot raging fever; the other cold, but ſometimes 
terrible, may be joined with indifference and contempt. 
The one, which is an abuſe of love, derives its birth 
from love itſelf The other depends only on manners, 
on the cuſtoms of a nation, on the laws of ey coun- 
try, and ſometimes even on religion *. | 
It is almoſt always the effe of the phyſical power of 
the climate ; and, at the ſame time, the remedy of ths 

phyſical power. 

* Mahomet deſired his followers to watch their wives ; a certain 

Iman, when he was dying, ſaid the fame thing; and Confucius 

e Gran 

CHAP. 

Dm wg © @,i.n 4&4 - 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 325 

CHAP. XIV. 

Of the eaſtern manner of domeſtic government. 
WwW IVES are changed ſo often in the Eaſt, that they 
| cannot have the power of domeſtic goyernment. 
This care is therefore committed to the-eunuchs, whom 

they intruſt with all their keys, and the management _ 

of all their houſehold affairs. ** In Perſia,” fays Sir 
John Chardin, “they give wives their clothes, as we 
« do to children.” Thus that care which ſeems ſo 
well to become them, that care which every where elſe 
is the firſt of their cares, does not at all concern them · 

C HAP. XV. 
of divorce and repudiation. 

PHERE is this difference between a divorce and a 
repudiation, that a divorce is made by a mutual 
conſent, occaſioned by a mutual antipathy ; while a 
repudiation i is made by the will, and for the advan- 
tage of one of the two parties, independently of the 

will and advantage of the other. 
The neceſſity there is ſometimes for women to repu- 
diate, and the difficulty there always is in doing it, ren. 

der that law very tyrannical which gives this right to 

men, without giving it to women. A huſband is the 
maſter of the houſe ; he has a thouſand ways of keep- 
ing his wife to her duty, or of bringing ber back to 
it ; ſo that in his hands it ſeems as if repudiation could 
be only a new abuſe of power. But a wife who repu- 

diates, only makes uſe of a dreadful kind of remedy, 
It is always a great misfortune for her to go in ſearch 

of a ſecond huſband, when ſhe has loſt the moſt part 

of her attractions with another. One of the advanta- 
ges attending the charms of youth in the female ſex / is, 
Vor. I. E e that 

— V ˙•⁰mA . ⏑—— Wo coi os ——o———_ 
— P ˙¹ 1 - 

| 

326 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI. 
that in an advanced age the huſband is led to compla- 
cency and love by the remembrance of paſt pleaſures. 

It is then a general rule, that in all countries where 
the laws have given to men the power of repudiating, 
they ought alſo to give it to women. 
| Nay, in climates where women live in domeſtic fla. 

very, one would think that the law ought to permit 
women the right of repudiation, and to huſbands only 
that of divorce. 
| When wives are confined in a ſeraglio, the huſband 
ought not to repudiate, on account of an oppoſition of 
manners; it is the huſband's fault if their manners are 
incompatible. 

Repudiation, becauſe of the barrenneſs of the wo- 
man, ought never to take place but where there is on- 
ly one wife; when there are many, this is of no im- 
portance to the huſband. 

A law of the Maldivians * permitted them to take 
again a wife whom they had repudiated. A law of 
Mexico forbade their being re-united under pain of 
death. The law of Mexico was more rational than 
that of the Maldivians : at the time even of the diſſo- 
lution it attended to the perpetuity of marriage; inſtead 
of this, the law of the Maldivians ſeemed equally to 
ſport with marriage and repudiation. 

The law of Mexico admitted only of divorce. This 
was a particular reaſon for their not permitting thoſe 
who were voluntarily ſeparated, to be ever re - united. 
Repudiation ſeems chiefly to proceed from a haſtineſs 
of temper, and from the dictates of ſome of the paſ- 
ſions; while divorce appears to be an affair of delibe- 
ration. 

Divorces are frequently of great political uſe; but 
as to the civil utility, they are eſtabliſned only for the 

® They took them again preferably to any other, becauſe, in this 
caſe, there was leſs expence. Pirard's travels. 
+ Hiſt. of the conquelt of Mexico by Solis, p. 499. 

| 

adyan- 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 327 

advantage of the huſband and wife, and are. not al- 
ways favourable to their children. 

CHAP Il. 
Of repudiation and divorce among ft the Romans. 

R Ouorus permitted a huſband to repudiate his wife, 

if ſhe had committed adultery, prepared poiſon, 
or procured falſe keys, He did not give to women the 
right of repudiating their huſbands. Plutarch“ calls 
this a law extremely ſevere. 

As the Athenian law gave + the power of repudia- 
tion to. the wife as well as the huſband, and as this 
right was obtained by the women amongſt the primi- 
tive Romans, notwithſtanding the law of Romulus, it 
is evident that this inſtitution was one of thoſe which 
the deputies of Rome brought from Athens, and which 
were inſerted into the laws of the twelve tables. 

Cicero f ſays, that the reaſons of repudiation ſprung 
rom the law of the twelve tables. We cannot then 
doubt, but that this law increaſed the number of the 
reaſons for repudiation eſtabliſhed by Romulus, 

The power of divorce was alfo an appointment, or 
at leaſt a conſequence of the law of the twelve tables. 
For from the moment that the wife or the huſband had 
ſeparately the right of repudiation, there was a much 
ſtronger reaſon for their having the power of quitting. 
each other by mutual conſent. 

The law. did not require that they ſhould lay open. 
the & cavſes of divorce. In the nature of the thing, 
the reaſons for repudiation ſhould be given, while 
thoſe for a divorce are unneceſſary ; becauſe whatever- 
cauſes the law may admit as ſufficient to break a 

* Life of. Romulus. + This was a law of Solon. 

I Minam res ſuas ſibi habere 4 705 ; ex duodecim tabulis oauſam 

Addidit. Philip. 2. 
1 altered this, nov. 117. c. 10. 

Ee 2. marriagez, 

328 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVI. 

marriage, a mutual antipathy muſt be ww than 
them all. 

The following fa, mentioned by Dionyſius Hali- 
carnaſſenſis“, Valerius Maximus +, and Aulus Gelliust , 
does not appear to me to have the leaſt degree of pro- 
bability : though they had at Rome, ſay they, the 
power of repudiating a wife, yet they had ſo much re. 
ſpe& for the auſpices, that no body, ſor the ſpace of 
five hundred and twenty years F, ever made uſe of this 
right till Carvilius Ruga repudiated his, becauſe of her 
ſterility. We need only be ſenſible of the nature of the 
human mind, to perceive how very extraordinary it 
muſt be, for a law to give ſuch right to a whole nation, 
and yet for nobody to make uſe of ir. Coriolanus ſet- 
ting out on his exile, adviſed his | wife to marry a man 
more happy than himſelt. We have juſt been ſeeing 
that the law of the twelve tables, and the manners of 
the Romans, greatly extended the law of Romulus. 
But to what purpoſe were theſe extenſions, if they ne- 
ver made uſe of a power to repudiate : beſides, if the 
citizens had ſuch a refpe& for the auſpices, that they 
would never repudiate, how came the legiſlators of 
Rome to have leſs than they ; and how came the laws 
inceſſantly to corrupt their manners? 

All that is ſurpriſing in the fact in queſtion will 
ſoon diſappear, only by comparing two paſſages in 
Plutarch. The regal law ** permitted a huſband to 
repudiate in the three caſes already mentioned, and 
« jt enjoined,” ſays Plutarch ++, „that he who re- 
10 Fadi in any other cale, ſhould be a to 

; C Lib. ii. + Lib. ii. cap. 8 Lin. iv. cap. 3. 8. 
& According to Diouyf. Haticaca, and Valerius Maximus, and 

- five hundred and twenty three according to Aulus Gellius, So alſo 

they did not agree in placing this under the ſame conſuls. 
| See the ſpeech of Veturia in Dionyf. Hzlicarn, lib, viii. 
Plutarch, life of Romulus. tt Ibid. 

46 give 

ou 

0 „% ow @wGWh wo we 

— 

9 — »H + 2 ww aHHeyw 2 KKK . wa , £-a 

7 

Chap. 16. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: 329 
« give the half of his ſubſtance to his wife, and that 

the other half ſliould be conſecrated to Ceres.” They 
might then repudiate in all caſes, if they were but wil - 

ling to ſubmit to the penalty. Nobody had done this be- 

fore Carvilius Ruga “; who, as Plutarch ſays in ano- 
ther place F, “put away his wife for her ſterility, two 

« hundred and thirty years after Romulus: “ that is, 
ſhe was repudiated ſeventy - one years before the law of 
the twelve tables, which extended both the powee and | 

the cauſes of repudiation. 

The authors I have cited ſay, that Carvitine Ruga 
loved his wife; but that the cenſors made him take an 
oath to put her away, becauſe of her barrenneſs, to the 
end that he might give children to the republic; and 

that this rendered him odious to the people. We muſt 

know the genius and temper of the Romans, before 

ve can diſcover the true cauſe of the harred they had 

conceived for Carvilius. He did not fall into diſgrace: 
with the people for repudiating his wife ;. this was an. 
affair that did not at all concern them. But Carvilius 
had taken an oath to the cenſors, that, becauſe of the 
ſterility of. his wife, he would repudiate her to give- 

children to the republic. This was a yoke which the: 
people faw the cenfors were going to put upon them. 
I ſhall diſcover, in the proſecution of this work , the 

repugnance which they always felt for regulations of. 

the like kind. We ſhould explain the laws by the . 
and hiſtory by hiſtory. 

Indeed ſterility is not and mentioned by the law of Romn:. 

las; but, to all appearance, he was not ſubject to a confiſcatian of: 
his eſſects, ſince he followed the orders of the cenſors. - 

+ la his compariſon between Theſeus and Romulus. 

T. Book xxiii. c. 227. * 

- 
* 

Ee 5 BOOR 

- 
— P ͤ K ue te oo — — —ßãkn — 2 — —ß— tn EE  Rm_—AR 

330 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVII. 

BO O K XVIL 

How the laws of political ſervitude have a re- 
lation to the nature of the climate. 

* 
* 

AQ. * 

CHAP. LI 
Of political ſervitude. 

22 ſervitude does not leſs depend on the 

nature of the climate, than that which is civil and 
eſtic; and this we are going to make appear. 

CHAP. II. 
Te di ference between nations in point of courage. 

WE ua have already obſerved, that great heat ener- 

the ſtrength and courage of men, and that 
1 cold climares they have acertain vigour of body and 
mind which renders them capable of long, painful 
great, and intrepid actions. This remark holds true 
not only between one nation and another, but even in 
the different parts of the ſame country. In the north 
of China *, people are more courageous than thoſe in 
the ſouth, and thoſe in the ſouth of Corea + have leſs 
' bravery than thoſe in the north. 

We ought not then to be aſtoniſhed, that the effemi- 
nacy of the people in hot climates has almoſt always 
rendered them flaves; and that the bravery of thoſe in 
cold chmates has enabled them to maintain their liber- 
ties. This is an effect which ſprings from a natural 
cauſe. 

This has alſo been ſound true in America; the def- 
potic empires of Mexico and Peru were near the line, 
and almoſt all the little free nations were, aud are ſtill, 
near the poles. 

®* Du Halle, vol. 1. p. 172. 5 

4 The Chineſe * make mention of this; 191% * 4 p. 448. 

CHAP. 

; 

I. 1 Chap. 3. THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. 331 

CHAP. III. 
Of the climate of Aſia. | 

e- HE relations of travellers * inform us, „that che 
« yaſt continent of the north of Aſia, which ex- 

« tends from forty degrees or thereabouts to the pole, 
« and from the frontiers of Muſcovy even to the ea- 
ce ſtern ocean, is in an extremely cold climate; that 
« this immenſe tract of land is divided by a chain of 
hs % mountains, which run from welt to eaſt, leaving Si- 
4 « beria on the north, and Great Tartary on the ſouth ; 
e that the climate of Siberia is ſo cold, that excepting 

« ſome places it cannot be cultivated ; and that though 

« the Ruſſians have ſettlements all along the Irtis, they 

« cultivate nothing; that in this country there grows 

= « only ſome little firs and ſhrubs; that the natives of 

at « the country are divided into wretched colonies like 

d « thoſe of Canada; that the reaſon ot this cold pro- 

E « ceeds on the one hand from the height of the land, 

e « and on the other from the mountains, which, in pro- 

n « portion as they run from ſouth to north, are level. 

hb FF fed in ſuch a manner that the north wind every . | 

n where blows without oppoſition; that this wind, | 

ſs „ which renders Nova Zembla uninhabitable, blowing | 
« jn Siberia makes it a barren waſte ; that in Europe, | 

[> « on the contrary, the mountains of Norway and Lap- | 

8 „ land are admirable bulwarks, which cover the nor» | 

U « thern countries from this wind; ſo that at Stock. x- | 

25 « helm, which is about fifty nine degrees latitude, the 

il « earth produces plants, fruits, and corn; and that 

about Abo, which is ſixty- one degrees, and even to 

. « ſixty-three and ſitty· four, there are mines of ſilver, 
y « and the land is fruitful enough.“ g 
* | 

© ® See ravels e the North, vol. 8. the big. of he Tarans, ang — | | 
Du Halde, vol. 4. FTE 4 | 

312 THE 8PIRIT OF LAWS: Book XVII. 

We ſee alſo in theſe relations, ** that Great Tartary, 
«© which is to the ſouth of Siberia, is alſo exceeding; 

„ cold; that the country cannot be cultivated ; that 
% nothing can be found but paſturage for their flocks 
and herds; that trees cannot grow there, but only 
68 brambles, as m Iceland ;. that there are near China 
and India ſome countries where there grows a kind. 
« of millet, but that neither corn nor rice will ripen ; 
«© that there is ſcarcely a place in Chineſe Tartary at 

« ſorty-three, forty-four, and forty-five degrees, where 

« jt does not freeze ſeven or eight months in the year, 
& ſo that it is as cold as Iceland, though it might be 
* imagined from its ſituation to be as hot as the ſouth 
« of France; that there are no cities, except four or 

_ «« five towards the eaſtern ocean, and ſome which the 

«© Chineſe, for political reaſons, have built near China ;. 
« that in the reſt of Great Tartary there are only a 
« few fituated-in Buchar, Turqueſtan, and Cathay; 

that the reaſon of this extreme cold proceeds from 

« the nature of the nitrous earth, full of ſaltpetre and 
© ſand; and more particularly from the height of the 

* jand. Father Verbieſt found, that a certain place, 

« 'eighty leagues: north of the great wall towards the 
* ſource of Kavamhuram, exceeded the height of the 
« ſea near Pekin three thouſand geometrical paces, 
that this height ® is the cauſe that though almoſt all 
«. the great rivers of: Aſia have their ſource in this 

e country, there is however ſo great a want of wa. 

««- ter. that it can be inhabited ny near the rivers and 
lakes.“ | 

The facts being laid down, I reaſon thus. Aſia has 
properly no temperate zone, as the places ſituated i in a 
very cold climate immediately touch upon thoſe which 
are exceeding hot, that is, . Perſia, Chi- 

na, Corea, and Japan. 

Tartary is then a kind of a flat mountain. = 

"= 
w 

F 

1 1 6300 

% 0 eo RSS AG. . 4 
. EI "'E.. . * 
- 

Chap. 3- THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 333 

In Europe, on the contrary, the temperate zone is 
very extenſive, though ſituated in climates widely dit- 
ferent from each other; there being no affinity between 
the climates of Spain and Italy, and thoſe of Norway 
and Sweden. But as the climate grows inſenſibly cold 
upon our advancing from ſouth to north, nearly in pro- 
portion to the latitude of each country; it thence fol- 

lows, that each reſembles the country joining to it, that 

there is no very extraordinary difference between them 
and that, as I have jult ſaid, the temperate: zone is 
very extenſive. 5 1 

From hence it comes, that in Aſia the doe na - 

tions are oppoſed to the weak; the warlike, brave, and 

active people touch immediately on thoſe who are iado - 
lent, eſfeminate, and timorous: the one mult therefore 
conquer, and the other be conquered. In Europe, on 
the contrary, ſtrong nations are oppoſed to the ſtrong; 
and thoſe who join to each other have nearly the ſame 
courage. This is the grand reaſon of the weakneſs of 

fla, and of the ſtrength of Europe; of the liberty of 
Europe, and of the ſtavery of Aſia: a cauſe that I do 
not recollect ever to have ſeen remarked. ' From hence 
it proceeds, that liberty in Aſia never increaſes ;| whilſt 
in Europe it is inlarged AEST ARES (ia to per- 
ticular eircumſtances. 

The Ruſſian nobility have indeed Ko reduced to 
ſlavery by the ambition of one of their princes; but 
they have always diſcovered thoſe marks of impatience 
and diſcontent which are never to be ſeen in the ſou. 
thern climates. © Have they not been able for a thort 
time to eſtabliſh an ariſtocratical government? Another 
of the northern kingdoms has loſt its laws; but we 
may truſt to the climate, that they are not loſt in ſuch 
a manner as never to be recovered. 

CHAP, 

334 THE SPIRIT or LAWS. Book XVII. 

CHAP. ww. 
The conſequences reſulting from this. 

WHAT we have juſt ſaid is perfectly conformable 

to hiſtory. Aſia has been ſubdued thirteen 
times; eleven by the northern nations, and twice by 
thoſe of the ſouth. In the early ages it was conquer» 
ed three times by the Scythians; afterwards it was 
conquered once by the Medes, and once by the Perſi- 
aus; again by the Greeks, the Arabs, the Moguls, 
the Turks, the Tartars, the Perſians, and the Afghans. 
I mention only the Upper Aſia, and ſay nothing of the 
invaſions made in the reſt of the ſouth of that part of 
the wo Id, which has ccntinually ſuffered prodigious 
revolutions. 

In Enrope, on the contrary, fince the eſtabliſhment 
of the Greek and Phoenician colonies, we know but of 
four great changes; the firſt cauſed by the conquelt of 
the Romans ; the ſecond by the inundations of the bar- 
barians, who deſtroyed theſe very Romans ; the third 
by the victories of Charlemagne; and the laſt by the 
invaſions of the Normans. And if this be rightly ex- 
amined, -we fhall find, even in theſe changes, a general 
ſtrength diffuſed through all the parts of Europe. We 
know the difficulty which the Romans met within con. 
quering Europe, and the eaſe and facility with which 
they invaded Aſia. We are ſenſible of the difficulties 
the northern nations had to encounter in overturning 
the Roman empire; of the wars and Jabours of Char- 

lemagne; and of the ſeveral enterpriſes of the Nor- 

mans. The deſtroyers were inceſſantly deſtroyed. 

CHAP. 

CHAP. V. 

That when the people in the north of Afia, and thoſe of 
the north of Eurape have conquered, the effetts of the 
conqueſt were not the ſame. 

x Hmm nations in the north of Europe conquered as 
freemen ; the people in the north of Aſia con- 
quered as ſlaves, and ſubdued others only to gratify the 
ambirion of a maſter. 

The reaſon is, that the people of Tartary, the na 
tural conquerors of Aſia, are themſelves enſlaved - 
They are inceſſantly making conquelts in the ſouth of 
Afia, where they form empires; but that part of the 
nation which continues in the country, find that they 
are ſubje& to a great maſter, who, being deſpotic in 
the ſouth, will alſo be ſo in the north, and exerciſing 
an arbitrary power over the conquered ſubjects, pre- 
tends to the ſame over thoſe who are the conquer- 
ors. This is at this day plainly ſeen in that vaſt coun- 
try called Chineſe Tartary, which is governed by the 
emperor with a power almoſt as deſpotic as that of 

China itſelf, and which he every day extends by his 

conqueſts. | 
We may likewiſe ſee in the hiſtory of China, that the 

emperors * fent Chineſe colonies into Tartary, Theſe 

Chineſe are become Tartars, and the mortal enemies of 
China; but this does not prevent their cagrying into 
Tartary the ſpirit of the Chineſe government. 

A. part of the Tartars who have conquered, have 

very often been themſelves driven out; when they have 
carried into their deſerts that ſervile ſpirit which they 

had acquired in the climate of ſlavery. The hiſtory of 

China furniſhes us with great examples I this, as does 

alſo our ancient F hiſtory. 

* As Vouty V. emperor of the fifth dynaſty. 
+ The Scythians three times conquered Afia, and were three 
times driven from thence, Juin, J. 2. 
From 

Chap. 3. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 335 

| 
| 
| 
| 

336 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XVII, 

From hence it proceeds, that the genius of the Ge. 
tic or Tartarian nation has always reſembled that of 
the empires of Aſia. The people in theſe are govern- 
ed by the cudgel; the people in Tartary by long whips. 
The ſpirit of Europe has always been contrary to theſe 
manners; and in all ages what the people of Aſia have 
called puniſhment, the people of Europe have called 
the molt outrageous abuſe #. 
The Tartars, who deſtroyed the Grecian empire, 
eſtabliſhed in the conquered countries ſlavery and deſ- 

potic power; the Goths, conquering the Roman em- 

pire, every where founded monarchy and liberty. 

I do not know whether the famous Rudbeck, who 
in his Atlantica has beſtowed ſuch praiſes on Scandi- 
navia, has made mention of that great prerogative 
which ought to ſet this people above all the nations 
upon earth; namely, this country's having been the 
ſource from whence ſprung the liberties of Europe, that 
is, of almoſt all the freedom wane. FOES ſubſiſts 
amongſt mankind. 

Jornadez the Goth has called the north of Europe 
the forge f of the human race. 1 ſhould rather call it 
the forge of the inſtruments which broke the chains 
framed in the ſouth.” In the north were formed thoſe 
valiant nations, which ſallied forth and left their coun- 
tries to deſtroy tyrants and ſlaves, and to teach men, 
that nature having made them equal, reaſon could not 
render them dependent, except where it was 7 
oy happineſs. | | 

% ; This is no way contrary to what I ſhall ay in in book xxviii. e. 

20. concerning the manner of thinking among the German nations, 

in reipect to the eudgel; let the inſtrument be what it will, the power 
or action of beating was always conſidered by them as an affront. 
+ Humani generis officinam. 

5 CHAP. 

Ee 

1 77 Wer Y 

„ we wo 

I. Cbap. 6. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 337 

* Hr FL | 
1 A new phyſical cauſe of the flavery of Afia, and of the 
8. liberty of Europe. 

le * Afia they have always had great empires : : in Eu- 
I rope theſe could never ſubſiſt. Aſia has larger plains; 

d it is cut out into much more extenſive diviſions, by 
mountains and ſeas; and as it lies more to the ſouth, 
e, its ſprings are more eaſily dried up; the mountains are 
. leſs covered with ſnow; and the rivers being not ſo 
large, form ſmaller barriers. 
Power in Aſia ought then to be always deſpotic : 
0 for if their ſlavery was not ſevere, they would ſoon 
* make a diviſion inconſiſtent with the nature of the 
e country. 
* In Europe the natural diviſion 3 many nations 
© of a moderate extent, in which the government of the 
5 laws is not incompatible with the maintenance of the 

ſtate; on the contrary, it is ſo favourable to it, that 
without this the ſtate would fall into decay, and be- 
1 come inferior to all others. 
* It is this which has formed a genius for hberty, that 
* renders every part extremely difficult to be ſubdued 
e and ſubjected to a foreign power, otherwiſe than by 
the laws and the advantage of commerce. 

1, On the contrary, there reigns in Aſia a ſervile ſpi- 
* rit, which they have never been able to ſhake off; and 
1 it is impoſſible to find, in all the hiſtories of this coun- 

try, a ſingle paſſage which diſcovers a free ſoul: we 
ſhall never fee any thing there but the heroiſm of ſla - 
very. 

The waters loſe themſelves, or evaporate before or after their 
ſtreams axe united. 

>, Vor. I. F F CHAP, 

— — — — — — — — — — 
= 

333 THE SPIRIT OF\ LAWS. Book XVIII, 

Africa and America. 
HIS is what I had to ſay of Aſia and Europe. 

Africa is in a climate like that of the ſouth of Aſia, 
- and is in the ſame ſervitude. America * being deſtroy- 

ed, and lately re-peopled by the nations of Europe and 
Africa, can now ſcarcely ſhew its true genius ; but 

what we know of its ancient hiſtory is very conform- 

able to our principles. 

B O O K XVIII. 

C of laws i in the relation they bear to the nature 

ol the ſoil. 

1 hit — 
__— 

— 
—— —ññ U ů MUHi . —fã — — —f—ñ—9— 
. 

. 3. * — 
1 13 

e 
How the nature of the ſeil has an influence on the 20 

HE goodneſs of the land in any country, natu- 
rally eſtabliſhes ſubjection and dependence. The 

Hhuſbandmen, who compoſe the principal part of the 
people, are not very jealous of their liberty: they are 
too buſy and too intent on their own private affairs. 
A country which overflows with wealth, is afraid of 

pillage, afraid of an army. Who is there that forms 

40 this goodly party?” ſaid Cicero to Atticus 4 2: *©. are 

40 they the men of commerce and of huſbandry? Let 
«« us not imagine that theſe are averſe to monarchy, 
te theſe to whom all governments are equal, as ſoon as 

<< they beſtow tranquillity.” 

* The petty barbarous nations of America are called by the Spa- 
niards Indios Bravos, and are much more difficult to ſubdue than 
the great empires of Mexico and Peru, 

+ Lib. «7. 

Thus 

ee 

III. 

Ure 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 339 

Thus monarchy is more frequently found in fruitful 
countries, and a republican goverament in thoſe which 
are not ſo; and this is ſometimes a ſufficient compen- 
ſation for the inconveniencies they ſuifer by the ſterility 
of the land, 

The barrenneſs of the Attic ſoil eſtabliſhed there a 
popular government ; and the fertility. of that of La- 
cedæmon an ariſtocratical form of government. For- 
in thoſe times, Greece was averſe to the government of 
a ſing le perſon; and ariſtocracy had the neareſt reſem - 
blance to that government. 

Plutarch ſays *, that the Cilonian ſedition having 

been appeaſed at Athens, the city fell into its ancient 

diſſenſions, and was divided into as many parties as 
there were kinds of territory in Attica. The men who 
inhabited the eminences, would by all means have 
popular government ; thoſe of the plain demanded a 
government compoſed of the chiefs; and they who 
were near the ſea, were for a Is ca: made up of 
both. 

CHAP. Il 
The ſame ſuliect continued. 

1 fertile countries are always plains, where 

the inhabitants are unable to diſpute againſt a 
ſtronger body: they are then obliged to ſubmit, and 
when they have once ſubmitted, the ſpirit of liberty 
cannot return ; the wealth of the country is a pledge 
of their fidelity. But in mountainous countries, as they 
have but little, they may preſerve what they have. The 
liberty they enjoy, or, in other words, the government. 
they are under is the only bleſſing worthy of their de- 
fence, It reigns therefore more in mountainous and. 
difficult countries, than in thoſe which nature ſeems to- 
have moſt favoured. 

* Life of Solon. 

Ff 2 The 

a” 

340 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

The mountaineers preſerve a more moderate govern- 
ment; becauſe they are not ſo liable to be conquered, 
They defend themſelves eaſily, and are attacked with 
difficulty; ammunition and proviſions are collected and 
carried againſt them with great expence, for the coun. 
try furniſhes none. It is then more difficult to make 
war againſt them, a more hazardous enterpriſe; and 
ail the laws that can be made for the ſafety of the peo. 
ple are there of leaſt uſe. 

CHA b. III. 
What countries are beſt cultivated, 

Crate are not cultivated in proportion to their 

fertility, bat to their liberty; and if we make an 
. Imaginary diviſion of the earth, we ſhall be aſtoniſhed 
to fee in molt ages, deſerts in the molt fruitful parts, 
and great nations in thoſe where nature ſeems to re- 
fuſe every thing. 

It is natural for a people to leave a bad country to 

ſeek a better; and not to leave a good country to ſeek 
a worſe. Moſt of the invaſions have therefore been 
made in countries which nature ſeems to have formed 
for happineſs; and as nothing is more nearly allied 
than deſolation and invaſion, the beſt countries are 
moſt frequently de populated; whilſt the frightful coun- 
tries of the north continue always inhabited, from their 
being almoſt uninhabitable, 

We find, by what hiſtorians tell us of the paſſage of 
the people of Scandinavia, along the banks of the Da- 
nube, that this was not a conqueſt, but only a migrg- 
tion into deſert countries. 

Theſe happy climates muſt therefore have been de. 
populated by other migrations, thongh we know not 
the tragical ſcenes that happened. 

« Tt appears by many monnments of antiquity,” 
ſays Ariſtotle “, that the Sardinians were a Grecian 

„ Or he who wrote the book De mirab. li“ us. 
| | % colony. 

Chap. 44 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS.. 511 

« colony. They were formerly very rich; and Ari-- 
« ſteus, ſo famed for his love of agriculture, was their 
« lawgiver. But they are ſince fallen into decay: for 
« the Carthaginians becoming their maſters, deſtroy- 
« ed every thing proper for the nouriſhment of man, 
% and forbade the cultivation of the lands on pain of 
« death.” Sardinia was not recovered in nods time of 
Ariſtotle, nor is it to this day. - 

The moſt temperate parts of Perſia, Turky, Muſco- 
vy, and Poland, have not been able to recover f 
_ from the devaſtations of the Tartars.. 

CHAP. IV. 
New effe(ts of the fertility and barrenneſs of countries... 

Y Brom barrenneſs of the earth renders men indaitri- 
ons, ſober, inured to hardſhip, courageous, and 
fir for war; they are obliged. to procure by labour what 
the earth refuſes to beſtow ſpontaneoully,, The ſertili- 
ty of a country gives eaſe, effeminacy, and a certain 
fondneſs for the preſervation. of life. It has been re- 
marked, that the German troops raiſed in thoſe places 
where the peafants are rich, as, for inſtance, in Sax- 
ony, are not ſo good as the others. Military laws may 
provide againſt this i inconvenience by a more ſevere dif-- 
cipline. 
CHAP. V. | 
Of the inhabitants of iflandis. | 
32 — people of the iſles have a higher reliſh: for 
liberty than thoſe of the continent. Iflands are 
commonly of a ſmall ® extent; one part of the peo- 
ple cannot be ſo eaſily employed to oppreſs the other; 

the fea ſeparates them from great empires; ſo that: - 
they cannot be countenanced' by tyranny z: conquer- 

* Japan is an exception to this, by its great extent as well as by. 

Bf z . 

its — 

34a THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII.. 

ors are ſtopped by the ſea; the iſlanders themſelves are 

not involved in conqueſts, and more eaſily preſerve 
their laws. 

| CHAP. VI. 
NOT © 14 countries raiſed by the induſtry of men. 

HOSE. coonries which the induſtry of men has. 
rendered habitable, and which ſtand in need of 
the ſame _ induſtry: to provide for their ſubſiſtence, re- 
guire amild and moderate goverament. There are prin- 
__ _ cipally three of this ſpecies, the two fine provinces of. 
Kianguan and Tchekian in China, Egypt, and Holland. 

The ancient emperors of China were not conquer- 
ors. The firſt thing they did to aggrandize themſelves 
was what gave the higheſt proof of their wiſdom. They 
raiſed from beneath the waters two of the fine pro- 
vinces of the empire; theſe owe their exiſtence to the la · 
bour of man. And it is the ine xpreſſible fertility of theſe 
two provinces which has given Europe ſuch ideas of the 
felicity of this vaſt country. But a continual and neceſ- 
. fary care to preſerve from deſtruction ſo conſiderable a. 
part of the empire, demanded rather the manners of a wiſe. 
than of a voluptuous nation; rather the lawtul authori- 
ty of a monarch, than the tyrannic power ot a deſpo- 
tic prince. Power was therefore neceſſarily moderated 
in that country, as it was formerly in Egypt, and as 
it is ſtill in that part of the Turkiſh empire. Power 
was neceſſarily moderated, as it is in Holland, which 
nature has made to attend to herſelf, and not to be 
abandoned to negligence or capriee. 

Thus, in ſpite of the climate of China, where they | 
are naturally led to a ſervile obedience; in ſpite of 
the apprehenſions which follow a too great extent of 
empire, the firſt legiſlators of this country were obli- 

; ged 

Ik. 

re 

chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS: 143 

" 

ged to make moſt excellent laws, and the government 
was frequently obliged to follow them. 

C. HAP. VII. 
Of the. works ef men. 

ME by their care, and by the influence of good 

laws, have rendered the earth more proper for 
their abode. We ſee rivers flow where there have been 
lakes and marſhes: this is a benefit which nature has 
not beſtowed ; but it is a benefit maintained and ſup- 
plied by nature. When the Perſians “ were maſters of 
Aſia, they permitted thoſe who conveyed a ſpring to 
any place which had not been watered before, to en- 
joy the benefit for five generations; and as a number: 
of rivulets flowed from mount Taurus, they ſpared no 
expence in directing the courſe of their ſtreams. At 
this day, without knowing how they came thither, 
they are found in their fields and gardens. 

Thus as deſtructive nations produce evils more du. 
rable than themſelves, the actions of induſtrious nationg 
are the ſource of bleſſings which laſt when they are 
no more. 

C. HA P. VIII. | 
The general relation of laws. 

HE laws have a very great relation to the manner 
in which the ſeveral nations procure their ſubſiſt - 
ence. There ſhould be a code of laws of a much lar- 
ger extent, for a nation attached to trade and naviga- 
tion, than for a people who are contented with culti- 
vating the earth. There ſhould be a much greater for 
theſe, than for a people who live by their flocks and 
herds, There muſt be a greater for this laſt, than for 
thoſe who live by hunting. 

* Tolybius, 4. 10. 

CHAP, 

34% THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVII 

CHA EF DX 
Of the foil of America. 
F cauſe of there being ſo many ſavage nations 
in America, is the fertility of the earth, which 
ſpontaneouſly produces many fruits capable of afford - 
ing them nouriſhment. If the women cultivate a ſpot 
of land round their cabins, the maiz grows up preſent- 
Iy ; and hunting and fiſhing put the men in a ſtate of 
complete abundance. Beſides, animals that feed on 
graſs, as cows, buffaloes, &c. ſucceed there better than. 
-  earnivorous beaſts. | 
We ſhould not, I believe, have all theſe advantages. 
in Evrope, if the land was left uncultivated : it would. 
produce ſcarce any thing beſides foreſts of oaks, and: 
other barren trees. 

CHAT Xx: 
Of the number of men with regard to the manner in which 
they procure ſub/iflence. | 

12 us ſee in what proportion the number of men 
is ſound, in nations who do not cultivate the earth,. 
As the produce of uncultivated land is to the produce: 
of land improved by culture; ſo the number of ſava- 
ges in one country is to the number of huſbandmen in 
another: and when the people who cultivate the land, 
cultivate alſo the arts, the number of ſavages is, to the 
number of this people, in the compound proportion of 
the number of ſavages to that of the huſbandmen, and. 
of the number of huſbandmen to that of men who cul- 

tivate the arts. 

They can ſcarcely form a great nation. If they 
are herdmen and ſhepherds, they have need of an ex- 
tenſive country to turniſh ſubſiſtence for a ſmall num- 
ber; if they live by hunting, their number mult be 

till 

TIE 

Chap. 11. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 345 

Rill leſs, and, in order to find the means of life, they 
mult form a very ſmall nation. 

Their country is commonly full of foreſts ; which, 
as the men have not the art cf draining off the wa- 
ters, are filled with bogs; here each troop canton 
themſelves, and forin a little nation. 

C H A-P. XI. 

Of ſavage nations and nations of barbarians. 

7 1 is this difference between ſavage and bar- 

+ barous nations; the firſt are little diſperſed na- 
tions, which, ſor ſome particular reaſon, cannot be 
united; and the barbarians are commonly ſmall nations, 
capable of being united. The firſt are generally na- 
tions of hunters; the ſecond of herdmen and ſhepherds. 
This appears plain in the north of Aſia. The people 
of Siberia cannot live in bodies, becauſe they cannot 
find ſubſiſtence; the Tartars may live in bodies for 

ſome time, becauſe their herds and flocks may for a 

time be re-aſſembled. All the clans may then be re- 
united, and this is done when one chief has ſubdued 
many others; aſter which they may do two things, 
either ſeparate, or ſet out with a deſign to make a great 
conqueſt in ſome empire in the ſouth. | 

CHA P. XII. 

| Of the law of nations among ſt people who do not cultivate 

the earth. 

hs As theſe people do not live in limited and circum-- 

ſcribed boundaries, many cauſes of ſtrife ariſe: 
between them ; they diſpute the uncultivated land, as 
we diſpute about inheritances. Thus they find frequent 
occalions for war, in defence of their hunting, their. 
fiſhing, the paſture for their cattle, and the taking of 
their flaves; and having no territory, they have many 
things 

346 - THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

things to regulate by the law of nations, and but few 
to decide by the civil law. 

CHAP. XIII. 

Of the civil law of theſe nations aubo do not culli vate the 
earth. 

HE diviſion of lands is what principally increaſes 
the civil code. Amongſt nations where they have 
not made this diviſion, there are very few civil laws. 

The inſtitutions of theſe people may be called man- 
ners rather than /aws. 

Amongſt ſuch nations as theſe, the old men. who 
remember things paſt,-have great authority; they can- 
not there be Rang by wealth, but by wiſdom 
and valour. 

Theſe people wander 2 diſperſe themſelves in pa- 
ſture-grounds or in foreſts. Marriage cannot there 
have the ſecurity which it has amongſt us, where it is 
fixed by the habitation, and where the wife continues 
in one houſe ; they may then more eaſily change their 
wives; poſſeſs many, and ſometimes mix day 
like brutes. . 

Nations of herdmen and ſhepherds cannot leave their 
cattle, which are their ſubſiſtence, neither can they ſe · 

parate themſelves from their wives, who look aſter 

them. All this ought then to go together, eſpecially 

as living generally in great plains, where there are few 

places of conſiderable ſtrength, their wives,  their;chil. 

dren, their fiocks, may n the prey of their ene- 

mies. 
Their laws regulate "4 Jivifion of plunder, and 
have, like our Salic laws, a e attention to 

chefts. 
CHAP. 

Chap. 14. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 347 

CHAP. XIV. 

Of the political fate of the people who do not cultivate the 
; lands. 

122 people enjoy great liberty: for, as they do 
not cultivate the earth, they are not fixed ; they 
are wanderers and ragabonds; and, if a chief would 
deprive them of their liberty, they would immediately 
go and ſeek it under another, or retire into the woods, 
and live there with their families, The liberty of the 
man is ſo great among theſe people, that it neceſſa- 
rily draws aſter it the liberty of the citizens. 
CHAP. XV. 

Of people who know the uſe of money. 

1 being ſhipwrecked, ſwam and got ſate 
to the next ſhore, where, ſeeing | 
traced in the ſand, he was ſeized with a trauſport of 
joy, judging that he was amongſt Greeks, and not in 
a nation of barbarians. 

Being alone, and caſt by ſome accident amongſt an 
unknown people; if you ſee a piece of money, be af- 
ſured that you are arrived in a civilized nation. 

The culture of lands requires the uſe of money, 
This culture ſuppoſes many arts and degrees of know- 
ledge; and we always ice ingenuity, the arts, and a 
ſenſe of want, making their progreſs with an equal 
pace. All this conduces to the eſtabliſhment of a ſign 
of value. 

Torrents and eruptions * have made the diſcovery 
that metals were concealed in the earth. When they 

have once been ſeparated, they have eaſily been applied 

to their proper uſes. 

® Tt is thus that Diodorus tells us the ſhepherds found gold in 
the Pyrcacan mountains, 

CHAP. 

348 THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

CHAP. XVI. 
Of civil laws among ft people who know not the uſe of 
Oey. 

W HEN a people have not the uſe of money, they 
are ſeldom acquainted with any other injuſtice 
than that which ſprings from violence; and the weak, 
by uniting, defend themſelves from its effects. They I 

have nothing there but political regulations. But, 
where money is eſtabliſhed, they are ſubje& to that in- I ce 
" Juſtice which proceeds from craft; an injuſtice that may IJ all 
be exerciſed a thouſand ways. From hence they are I} hi 
forced to have good civil laws, which ſpring up with Si 
the new means, and the ſeveral methods of becoming FF W 
wicked. gi 
In countries where they have no money, the robber || hi: 
takes only bare moveables, which have no reſem- I fol 
blance to each other. In countries where they make I} mc 
uſe of money, the robber takes the ſigns, and theſe al- 
ways reſemble each other. In the firſt nothing can be 
concealed, becauſe the robber always takes along with 
Him the-proofs of his ee but in the others it i is 

quite the contrary. 

2 CHAP. XVII. 
Of political laws among ft nations who have not the uſe of 

money. 

* greateſt ſecurity of the liberties of a people 

who do not cultivate the earth, is their not know- 
ing the uſe of money. What is gained by hunting, fiſh- 
ing, or keeping herds of cattle, cannot be aſſembled in T 
ſuch great quantities, nor be ſufficiently preſerved, for 
one-man to find himſelf in a condition to corrupt many | tha 
others: but when, inſtead of this, a man has the ſign | ing 
of riches, he may obtain a large quantity of theſe a 
figns, and diſtribute them amongſt whom he pleaſes. 

[ The 

= 2 

Chap. 18. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. © 349 

The people who have no money have but few wants 
and theſe are ſupplied both with eaſe, and in an equal 
manner. Equality is then unavoidable; and from 
hence it proceeds, that their chiefs are not deſpotic. 

C HAP. XVIII. 
Of the power of ſuperſtition. 

Ir what travellers tell us be true, the conſtitution of a 

nation of Louiſiana, called the Natches, is an ex- 
ception to this. Their “ chief diſpoſes of the goods of 
all his ſubjects, and makes them labour according to 
his pleaſure. He has a power like that of the Grand 
Signior, and they cannot even refuſe him their heads. 
When the preſumptive heir enters into the world, they 
give him all the ſuckling children to ſerve him during 
his life. One would imagine that this is the great Se- 
ſoſtris. He is treated in his cabin with as much Ceres 
mony as an emperor of Japan or China. 

The prejudices of ſuperſtition are ſuperior to- all 
other prejudices, and its reaſons to all other reaſons. 
Thus, though the ſavage nations have naturally no 
knowledge of deſpotic tyranny, yet this people feel it. 
They adore the ſun; and, if their chief had not ima- 
gined that he was the brother of this glorious lumi- 
nary, they would have —_— him a W wretch 
like themſelves. 

CHAP. XIX. 
Of the liberty of the Arabs, and the ſervitude of th 

Tartars. 

PHE Arabs and Tartars are nations of 8 
and ſhepherds. The Arabs find themſelves in 

that general ſituation, of which we have been ſpeak- 

ing, and are thereſore free; whilſt the Tartars, (the 

„ Editying letters, 20th collect. ? * 
| Vor. I, | 68 moſt 

350 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XVIII. 0 
moſt ſingular people on earth), are involved in a“ po. 
| Iitical flavery. I have already given ſome reaſons + t 
for this, and ſhall now give others. 1 
They have no towns, they have no foreſts, and but. 
ſew marſhes ; their rivers are almoſt always frozen, and. 
they dwell in an immenſe plain. They have paſture: 
for their herds and flocks, and conſequently property ; 
but they have no kind of retreat, or place of ſafety. | - 
A khan is no ſooner overcome than they cut off hisf I , 
head; his children are treated in the ſame manner, and * 
all his ſubjects belong to the conqueror. Theſe are not tl 
condemned to à civil ſlavery; they would in that caſe 4 
be a burden to a fimple nation who have no lands to 10 
cukivate, and no need of any domeſtic ſervice. They to 
therefore augment the nation; but inſtead of civil ſla. " 
very, 2 political one muſt em be introduced 
amongſt them. 10 
It is apparent, that in a 3 * 1 the u 
Hans make continual war, and are perpetually conquer- | 
ing each other ; in a country, where, by the death of th 
_ the chief, the body politic of the vanquiſhed clan is al- yy 
ways deſtroyed, the nation in general can enjoy but lit- | +. 
tile freedom; for there is not a ſingle party that muſt pr 
not have been a very great number of times ſubdued. * 
A conquered people may preſer ve ſome degree of 
iberty, when, by the ſtrength of their ſituation, they f ©; 
are in a ſtate that will admit of their capitulating af- 
ter their defeat. 'But the Tartars, always defenceleſs, ſpi 
being onee overcome, can n able to ſtand upon 
conditions. 

' * When a khan is prochimed, all the people , Mar ls worg 
all be a8 z fword. © 
1 Book xvii. chap. 5. 
We ought not therefore to be aoniſhed at Mahomet the ſon of 
Aliriveis, who, upon taking Iſpahan, put all the princes of the 
E l to the ſword. 
| 1 hare 

cap. 20. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. $51 

I have ſaid in Chap. II. that the inhabitants of cul- 
tivated plains are ſeldom free. Circumſtances have 
concurred to put the Tartars who dwell in uncultivated. 

plains in the ſame ſituation. 

| CHAP. XX. | 
Of the Law OF NATIONS as practiſed by the Tartars. © 

THE Tartars appear to be mild and humane amongſt 

themſelves, and yet they are moſt cruel conguer- 
ors: when they take cities, they put the inhabitants to 
the ſword, and imagine that they do them a favour 
when they ſell them or diſtribute them amongſt their 
foldiers. They have deſtroyed: Afia from India even 
to the Mediterranean, and all the country which forms 
the eaſt of Perſia they have made a defert. 

This law of nations is owing, I think, to the fol. 
lowing cauſe. This people have no towns; all theip 
wars are carried on with eagerneſs and impetuofity. 
They fight whenever they hope to conquer; and, when 
they have no ſuch hopes, they join the ſtronger army. 

With ſuch cuſtoms, it is contrary to their law of na» 

tions, that a city which cannot reſiſt ſhould ſtop their 
progreſs: They regard not cities as/ an- aſſembly af 
inhabitants, but as places made to ſet: limits to thei 
power. They beſiege them without art, and expoſe 
themſelves greatly in their ſieges; and therefore re- 
vehge themſelves by the blood of all thoſe who have- 
2 theirs. > 

The civil Law of the Tartars. 

Firn du Halde ſays, that amongſt the Tartars, 
the youngeſt of the males is always the heir, by- 
reaſon, that as ſoon as the elder are capable of lead - 

wg a paltoral life, they leave the houſe with a cer- 

Gg. 2— 

tam 

352 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

tain number of cattle given them by the father, and 
go to build a new habitation. The laſt of the males 
who continues in the houſe with the father is then his 
natural heir. 

I have heard that a like cuſtom was alſo chives i in 
ſome ſmall diſtricts of England. This was doubtleſs a 
paſtoral law conveyed thither by ſome of the people of 
Brittany, or eſtabliſhed by ſome German nation. We 
are informed by Cæſar and Tacitus, chat theſe laſt cul · 
tivated but little lanjcd. 

C H A P. . 
Of a civil Law of the German nations. 

I SHALL here explain how that particular paſſage of 
the Salic law, which is commonly diſtinguiſhed by 

the term of the Salic law, relates to the inſtitutions of 

a people who do not cultivate the earth, or at leaſt 

who cultivate it but very little. 

The * Salic law ordains, that, when a man has left 

children behind him, the males ſhall ſucceed to the Sa- 

lic land, to the prejudice of the females. 

To underſtand the nature of thoſe Salic lands, there 
needs no more than to ſearch into the uſages or cuſ- 
toms, with reſpect to land amongſt the Franks before 
they came out of Germany. 

Mr. Echard has very plainly proved, that the word 
Salic is derived from Sala, which ſignifies a houle, and 
that therefore the Salic land was the land of the houſe- 
I ſhall go farther, and examine what was the houſe, 
and what the land belonging to the — among the 
Germans. 

« They dwell not in towns,” ſays 7 Tacitus, « nor 

= Tit. 62. 
+ Nullas Germanorum populis urbes babitari ſatis notum eſt, ne 

pati quidem inter ſe junctas ſedes; colunt diſereti, ut nemus placuit · 

Vicos locant, non in noſtrum morem connexis et cohærentibus ædi- 

. ſuam quiſque domum ſpatio circumdat, De mor ib. German, 
can 

1 

_ SS 8 Ban. * 

fo 

. Chap: 22: THE SPIRIT or /LAWS. 333 
2 « can they bear to have their houſes joined to thoſe of 
others; every one leaves a ſpace or ſmall piece of 

122 « ground about his houſe, which is incloſed and thut 
in % up.” Tacitus is very exact in this account ; for 
12 many laws of the * barbarian codes have different de- 
of crees againſt thoſe who threw down this incloſure, as 
We well as againſt thoſe who broke into the houſe. 
oY We learn from Tacitus and Cæſar, that the lands 
cultivated by the Germans were given them only for 
the ſpace of a year, after which they again became - 
public. They had no other patrimony but the houſe, 
and à piece of land within the f.iacloſure that ſur- 
of roanded it. It was this particular patrimony which 
by belonged to the males. And indeed how could it be- 
of long to the daughters? They were to paſs into ano - 

aſt ther houſe. - | 

The Salic land was then within that incloſure which - 
eſt belonged to a German houſe; this was the only pro- 
perty they had. The Franks, after their conqueſts, 

acquired new poſſeſſions, and eee to call them 
__ Salic lands. d 
af; When the Franks lived in Germany, their wealth 
re conſiſted of ſlaves, flocks, horſes, arms, Cc. the houſe 

and the ſmall portion of land adjaiuing to it, were na- 
rd turally given to the male-children, Who were to dwell - 
Y there, But afterwards, when the Franks had by con- 
ſe. queſt acquired large diviſions of land, they thought it 
hard, that the daughters and their children thould be 
he incapable of enjoying any part of them. They intro - 
duced a cuſtom of permitting the father to recal his 
daughter and her children. They ſilenced the law ; - 
and it appears that theſe recals were trequeut, e - 
they were entered in the formularies 1. 

t. be law of the Allemans, chap, 10- and law of the Bavarians, 

dis tit. 10. F 1. & 4. 
+ This iacloſure is called certis in the charters. 

in t See Marculfus, lib. ii, form. 10. & 12. bk to Marculfus, - 
form, 42: and the ancient formularics of Sirmondus, form. 22. 

Gg 3. | Amongſt © 

334 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

Amongſt all theſe formularies I find one “ of a fin- 
gular nature. A grandfather recalled his g. and-chil- 
. dren to ſucceed with his ſons and daughters. What 
then became of the Salic law? In thoſe times either it 
could not be obſerved, or the continual uſe of recaliing 
the daughters had made them regard their ability to 
inherit, as a caſe authoriſed by cuſtom, - : 

The Salic law had not in view a preference of one 
ſex to the other, much leſs had it a regard to the per. 
petuity of a family, a name, or the tranſmiſſion of land. 
Theſe things did not enter into the heads of the Ger- 
mans; it was purely a law of economy which gave 
the houſe, and the land dependent on the houſe, to the 
males who ſhould dwell in it, and to whom it conſe- 
quently was of moſt ſervice. 

We need here only tranſcribe the title of the 40h. 
ial lands of the Salic law, that famous text of which 
fo many have ſpoken, and which ſo few have read. 

„ Tf a man dies without iſſue, his father or mother 
« ſhall ſucceed him. 2. If he has neither father nor 
mother, his brother or ſiſter ſhall ſucceed bim. 3. if 
* he has neither brother nor ſiſter, the filter of his 
„ mother ſhall ſucceed him. 4. If his mother has no 
s ſiſter, the ſiſter of his father ſhall ſucceed him. 5. If 
„hie father has no ſiſter, the neareſt relation by the 
4 male fhall ſucceed. 6. Not + any part of the Sa- 
lic land ſhall paſs to the females ; but it ſhall belong 
'« to the males; that is, the male-children ſhall ſucceed 
« their father.“ 

It is plain that the firſt five articles relate to the in- 

Hheritance of a man who dies without iſſue, and the 

fixth to the ſucceſſton of him who has children. 
When a man dies without children, the law or- 

Form. 55. in Lindeaibrook's collection. 
+ De terro vero Salica in mulicrem nulla portio hereditaris tran. 

fit, ſed hoe virilis ſextus acquirit 5 hoc eft, fill in ipſa hereditate 
ſyvccedurt. Tit. 62, 17 

dains 

Chap. 22. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 355 

dains that neither of the two ſexes ſhall have the pre- 
ference to the other, except, in certain caſes. In the 
two firſt degrees of ſucceſſion, the advantages of the 
males and females were the ſame; in the third and 
fourth, the females had the preference, and the males 
in the fifth. 

Tacitus gives us the ſeeds of theſe extravagancies : 
« The ſiſters children, ſays he, are as dear to 
« their uncle as to their own father. There are men 
«© who regard this degrees of kindred as more ſtrict, 
« and even more holy. They prefer it when they 
« receive hoſtages.” From hence it proceeds that our 
earlieſt + hiſtorians ſpeak in ſuch ſtrong terms of the 
love of the kings of the Franks for their filters, and 
their ſiſters children. And indeed, if the children of 
the ſiſter were conſidered in her brother's houle as his 
own children, it was natural for theſe to regard — 
aunt as their mother. 

The ſiſter of the mother was preferred to the fa 
ther's ſiſter; this is explained by other texts of the 
Salic law When a | woman was a widow, the tell 
under the guardianſhip of her huſband's relations; 
the law preferred to this guardianſhip, the relations 
by the females before thoile by the. males Indeed a 
woman who entered into a family, joining herſelf 
with thoſe of her own ſex, became more united to 
her relations by the female than by the male. More- 
over, when * a man had killed another, and had not 
wherewithal to pay the pecuniary penalty he had in- 

* Sororum filiis idem apud avunculum quam apud patrem honor. 
Quidam ſandiorem arctioremque hunc nexum ſanguinis arbitrantur, | 
& in accipiendis obſidibus magis exigunt, tanquam i & animum 
firmius & domum latius teneant, De moribus Germanorum. 

J Scein Gregory of Tours, lib viii, c. 18. & 20. & lib. ix. c, 

18 & 20. the rage of Gontram at Leovigild's ill treatment of In. 
gunda his niece, which Childebert her brother took up arms to re- 

venge. . 
1 Salic laws, tit. 47, ** Ibid. tit, 63. 5 2, 1 4 
curred, 

* 

356 THE SPIRIT o LAWS. Book XVIII. 

curred, the law permitted him to deliver up his ſub- 

ſtance,. and his relations were to- ſupply what was 
wanting: After the father, mother, and brother, the 

ſiſter of the mother was to pay, as if this tie had ſome- 

thing in it moſt tender. Now, the degree of kindred, 
which gives the. burdens, ought to give alſo the ad- 

vantages. 

The Salic law injoins, that, after the father's ſiſter, 
the ſucceſſion ſhould be held by the neareſt relation 
male; but, if this relation was beyond the fifth degree 
he ſhould not inherit. Thus a woman of the fifth degree 

might inherit to the prejudice of a male of the ſixth: 

And this may be ſeen in the“ law of the Ripuarian 
Franks, (a faithful interpretation of the Salic law), un- 
der the title of ailadial lands, where it follows ſtep by 
ſtep the Salic law on the ſame ſubject. 

If the father left iſſue, the Salic law would have the 
daughters excluded from the inheritance of the Salic 

land, and that it ſhould - belong to the male children. 
It would be eaſy for me to prove, that the Salic law 

did not abfolutely exclude the daughters from the poſ- 
ſeſſion of the Salic land, but only in the cafe where 
they were excluded by their brothers. This appears 
from the Salle law itſelf, which after having ſaid that 
the women ſhall poſſeſs none of the Salie land, but only 
the males, interprets and reſtrains itſelf, by adding, 
that is, the ſon ſhall ſucceed to the ne of 
81 the father.“ 

2. The text of the Salie law is cleared up by the 
Jaw of the Ripuarian Franks, which has alſo a title f 

on allodial lands, _ conformable to that of the Sa- 
lic law. 

3. The Jaws of theſe barbarous nations, who all 

Et deinceps uſque at quintum genuculum qui proximus foerle 8 

4n heriditatem ſuccedat. Ti. $6. & 3, 
7 Tit. 56, 

ſprang | 

e iz „ 64 © Kt o 

Chap. 22. THE SPIRIT or LAWS. 357 

ſprung from Germany, interpret each other, more 
particularly as they all have nearly the ſame ſpirit. 

The Saxon law * injoined the father and mother to 
leave their inheritance to their ſon, and not to their 
daughter; but, if there were none but daughters, they 
were to have the whole inheritance. 

4. We have two ancient formularies + that ſtate the 
Caſe, in which, according to the Salic law, the daugh- 
ters were excluded by the males, that is, when they 
were in competition with their brother, 

5. Another formulary + proves, that the daughter 
ſucceeded to the prejudice of the grandſon; ſhe was 
therefore excluded only by the ſon. 

6. If daughters had been generally excluded by 
the Salic law from the inheritance of land, it would 
be impoſſible to explain the hiſtories, formularies, and 
charters, which are continually mentioning the Jands 
and poſſeſſions of the women under the firlt race. 

People || have been to blame to aſſert, that the Sa- 
lic lands were fiefs. 1. This head is diſtinguiſhed by 
the title of allodial lands. 2. Fiefs at firſt were not 
hereditary. 3. If the Salic lands had been fiefs, how 
could Marculfus treat that cuſtom as impious which 
excluded the women from inheriting, when the males 
themſelves did not ſucceed to fiefs? 4. The charters, 
which have been cited to prove that the Salic lands 
were fiefs, only prove that they were freeholds. 
5. Fiefs were not eſtabliſhed till after the conqueſt, and 
the Salic cuſtom ſubſiſted long before the Franks 
jeft Germany. 6. It was not the Salic law, which, 
by ſetting bounds to the ſucceſſion of women, formed 

Tit. 7.4 1. Pater aut mater defunQi, filio non filiz heredita - 
tem relinquant; & 4. qui defunctus, non filios, ſed filias reliquerit, 
ad eas omnis hereditas pertineat. 

+ Ia Marculfus, lib. ii, form. 12. and in the appendix to Mar- 
culfus, form. 49. | 

} Lindembrock's collect form. 55. * || Ducange, Pithou, G 

the 

358 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

the eſtabliſhment of fiefs; but it was the eſtabliſhmend 
of fiefs that ſet limits to the ſucceſlion of women, and 
to the regulations of the Salic law. 

After what has been ſaid, one would not imagine 
that the perpetual ſucceſſion of the males to the crown 
of France ſhould have taken its riſe from the Salic 
law. And yet this is a point undubitably certain. I 
prove it from the ſeveral codes of the barbarons na. 
tions. The Salic law“ and the law of the Burgun- 
dians + refuſed the daughters the right of ſucceeding 
to the land in conjunction with their brothers; nei- 
ther did they ſucceed to the crown. The law of the 
Viſigoths, + on the contrary, || permitted the daugh- 
ters to inherit the land with the brothers; and the 
women were capable of inheritiog the crown. A- 
mongſt theſe people the regulations of the civil law 
had an effect on the political. 

This was not the only caſe in which the politica} 
law of the Franks gave way to the civil law. By the 
Salic law all the brothers ſucceeded equally to the 
land, and this was alſo decreed by a law of the Bur- 
gundians. Thus, in the kingdom of the Franks, and 
in that of the Burgundians, all the brothers ſucceed · 
ed to the crown, if we except a few murders and 
uſurpations which took place amongſt the Burgun- 
dians. 

CHAP. XXIII. 
Of the ornaments of royalty. 
A People who do not cultivate the land have not ſo 
much as an idea of luxury. We may ſee in Ca- 
ceitus the admirable ſimplicity of the German nations; 

* Tit. 62. + Tit. 1.4 3. tit. 14. f. 1. and tit. gi. 

t Lid. iv. tit. 2. 5 1. - 

| The German nations, ſays Tacitus, had common cuſtoms, and 
alſo bote which were peculiar to cach, 

the 

char. 24. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 359 

the arts were not employed in their ornaments; theſe 
were founded in nature. If the family of their chief 
was to be diſtinguiſhed by any ſign, it was no other 
than that which nature beſtowed. The kings of the 
Franks, of the Burgundians, and the Viſigoths, had 
their long hair for a diadem. 

CH A P. XXIV. 

le marriages of the kings of the Franks. 

Have already ſaid, that, with people who do 

not cultivate the earth, marriages are leſs fixed;than 
with others, and that they generally take many wives- 
The Germans were almoſt the only people of * all 
« the barbarous nations, who were ſatisfied with one 
« wife, if we except f,“ ſays Tacitus, ** ſome perſons, 
« who, not from a di ſſoluteneſs of manners, but be- 
« cauſe of their nobility, had many,” This explains 
the reaſon why the kings of the firſt race had fo great 
u number of wives. Theſe marriages were leſs a proof 
of incontinence, than an attribute of dignity; and it 
would have wounded them in a tender point to have 
deprived them of ſuch a prerogative +. This explains 
the reaſon why the example of the kings was not fol- 
lowed by the ſubjects. | 

CHAP XXV. 

Cutrp Ric. 

6 err amongſt the Germans,” ſays Taci. 
tus, © are ſtrictly obſerved 9. Vice is not 
* there a ſubje& of ridicule. To corrupt, or be cor. 

* Prope ſoli barbarorum ſingulis uxoribus conteati ſunt, De 
onorib.  Germanorum. 

+ Exceptis admodum paucis, qui non libidine, ſed ab nobilita- 
te m, plurimi nuptiis ambigntur. Jbid. 
. + See Fredegarius's chronicle of the year 628. 

$ Severa matrimonia — nemo illic vitia ridet, nec corrum* 
pere & corruwpi ſæculum vocatur. De motib. German. 

« rupted, 

360 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XVIII. Ic 

*© rupted, is not called a point of faſhion, or a manner hi 
& of living; there are few examples * in this populous 4 
© nation of the violation of conjugal faith.” tr 

This was the reaſon of the expulſion of Childeric; 10 
he ſhocked their rigid virtue, which conqueſt had not 8 
had time to corrupt. 

C HAP. XXVI. 
Of the time when the kings of the Franks became of age. 10 

1 who do not cultivate the earth have, 6« 
" ſtrictly ſpeaking, no territory, and are, as we have ba 
already ſaid, rather governed by the law of nations, 40 
than by civil laws. They are therefore always armed. 2 
Thus Tacitus tells us, “that the Germans + under- ſu 
« took no affairs either of a public or private nature, h 
Wo unarmed.” They gave their + opinion by a ſign ſt 
with their arms |]. As ſoon as they could carry them, A 
they were preſented to the aſſembly; they put a jave- CC 
lin F into their hands: from that moment“ they af 
were out of their infancy ; they had been a part of the 
ſamily, now they became a part of the republic. lis 
Childebert II. was ++ fifteen years old, when Gon. ſu 
tram his uncle declared that he was of age, and ca- al 
pable of governing by himſelf. © I have put,” ſays le 
ce 

fpauciſſima in tam numeroſa gente adulteria, 2bid, 

+ Nihil neque publicz neque private rei, niſi armati, agunt. B. 

4 si diſplicuit ſententia, ſremitu aſpernantur ; ſin placuit, frameas th 
eoncutiunt. TJbid. | 

| Sed arma ſumere ante cuiquam moris quam civitas ſuſſecturum 

- probaverit, ine 

& Tum in ipſo conſilio vel principum aliquis, vel pater, vel pro. 
pinquus, ſento frameaque juvenem ornant. re: 
** Hzc apud illos toga, hie primus Juvents honos ; ante hoc do» he 

mus pars videnter, mox reipublicz. 
++ He was ſcarcely five years old, ſays Gregory of Tours, I. v. 
e. 7+. when he ſucceeded to his father in the year 575. Gontram de- pe 
clares him of age in the year 565 ; he was therefore at that time no | 
more than fifteen. | by 
; I he, 

Chap. 26. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 361 

he *, © this javelin into thy hands, as a token that I 
« have given thee all my kingdom ;“ and, then 
turning towards the aſſembly, he added, . You ſee 
„that my ſon, Childebert is become a man; obey 
« him.” 

We find in the Ripuarian hes, that the age of 
fifteen, the ability of bearing arms, and majority, went 
together ; it is there ſaid g, © that, if a Ripuarian 
« dies, or is killed, and leaves a ſon behind him, that 
« ſon can neither proſecute, nor be proſecuted, till he 
« has completely attained the age of fifteen ; and then 
« he may either anſwer for himſelf, or chuſe a cham- 
« pion.” It was neceſſary that his mind ſhould be 
ſufficiently formed, that he might be able to defend 
himſelf in court, and that his body ſhould have all the 
ſtrength that was proper for his defence in. combat, 
Amongſt the Burgundians ||, who alſo made uſe of 
combat in their judiciary proceedings, they were of 
age at fifteen, 

Agathias tells us, that the arms of the Franks were 
light. They might therefore be of age at fifteen. In 
ſucceeding times the arms they made uſe of were heavy. 
and they were already greatly ſo in the time of Char- 
lemagne, as appears by our capitularies and roman- 
ces. Thoſe who 5 had fiefs, and were conſequently 
obliged to do military ſervice, were not then of age till 
they were twenty-one years old “. | 

* Gontramnus, data in Childeberti manu haſta, dixit. Hoo eſt 
indicium, quod tibi omne regnum meum tradidi. 153d. J. 3. c. 33. 

+ Gontram declared that his nephew Childebert, who was al. 
ready king, was out of his minority, and beſides he made him his 
heir. 

t Tit. 87. Tit. 87. 

§ There was no change in the time in regard to the common 
people. 

St. Lewis was not of age till twenty-one; this was changed 
by an edict of Charles V. in the year 2374. 

Vor. I. Hh CHAP. 

352 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

CHAP. XXVII. 
The ſame ſubjed? continued, 

WE have ſeen that the Germans did not appear in 

their aſſemblies, before they were of age; they 
were a part of the family, but not of the republic. 
This was the reaſon that the children of Clodomir 
king of Orleans, and conqueror of Burgandy, were 
not declared kings, becauſe they were of too tender an 
age to be preſent at the aſſembly. They were not yet 
kings, but they had a right to be kings as ſoon as they 
were able to bear arms; and in the mean time 
Clotilda, their grandmother, governed the ſtate *. 
But their uncles Clotarius and Childebert aſſaſſinated 
them, and divided their kingdom. This action was 
the cauſe that, in the following ages, princes in their 
minority were declared kings immediately after the 
death of their fathers. Thus Duke Gondovald ſaved 
Childebert II. from the cruelty of Chilperic, and cau- 
ſed him to be declared king + when he was only five 
years old. 

But even in this change they followed the original 
ſpirit of the nation; for the acts did not paſs in the 
name of the young king: ſo that the Franks had a 
double adminiſtration; the one which concerned the 

-perſon of the infant king, and the other which 
regarded the kingdom; and in the fiefs there was a 
difference between the guardianſhip and the civil ad- 
miniſtration. | 

* It appears from Gregory of Tours, I. iii. that ſhe choſe two 
natives of Burgundy, which had been conquered by Clodomir, to 
raiſe them to the ſee of Tours, which alſo belonged to Clodomir, 

+ Gregory of Tours, I. v. e. z. Vix luſtro ælatis uno jam peratto, 

qui die Domi nice natalis regnare cepit. | 
- CHAP. 

II. 

Chap. 28. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 363 

: CHAP. XXVIIL 
Of the ſanguinary temper of the kings of the Franks. 

8 was not the only prince who bad invaded 
Gaul. Many of his relations had entered this 
country with particular tribes ; but, as he had much 
greater ſucceſs, and could give conſiderable eſtabliſh. 
ments to thoſe that followed him, the Franks ran to 
him from all the tribes, ſo that the other chiefs found 
themſelves too weak to reſiſt him. He formed a de- 
ſign of exterminating his whole race, and he ſucceed» 
ed *. He feared, ſays Gregory of Tours +, leſt the 
Franks ſhould chuſe another chief. His children and 
ſucceſſors followed this practice to the utmoſt of their 
power. Thus the brother, the uncle, the nephew, 
and, what is ſtill worſe, the father or the ſon, were 
perpetually conſpiring againſt their whole family. The 
law continually divided the monarchy ; white fear, am- 
bition, and cruelty, wanted to reunite it. | 

| C HAP. XXIX. 
Of the national aſſemblies of the Franks. 

T has been remarked above, that nations who. do 

not cultivate the land enjoy great liberty. Thig 
was the caſe of the Germans. Tacitus ſays, that they 
gave their kings or chiefs a very moderate degree of 
power ; and Cæſar adds farther , that in times of 
peace they had no common magiltrates; but their 
princes diſtributed juſtice in each village. "i'hus, as- 
Gregory of Tours { ſufficiently proves, the Franks in. 
Germany had no king. 

Gregory of Tours, I. ii. + Ibid. 

Nec zegibus libera aut infinita poteſtas. Ceterum neque ani- 
mad yertere, neque vincire, neque verberare, &c. De morib. Germ. 

In pace nullus eſt communis mzgiltratus, ſed principes regio- 
pum atque pagorum inter ſuos jus dicunt. De bells Gal. bb. 6. 

$ Lib. 2. | | 
H h 2 „ The 

$64 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XVIII. 

© The princes,” ſays Tacitus *, © deliberate on 
« ſmall matters, while affairs of great importance are 
& laid before the whole nation; but in ſuch a manner, 
„that theſe very affairs, which are under the cog- 
«« niſance of the people, are at the ſame time laid be- 
* fore the princes.” This cuſtom was obſerved by 
them after their conqueſts, as may be ſeen + in all 
their records. 

Tacitus ſays f, that capital crimes might be carried 
before the aſſembly. It was the ſame after the con- 
queſt, when the great vaſſals were tried before that 
body. 5 

HAT. XXX. 
Of the authority of the clergy under the firſt race. 

IS prieſts of barbarous nations are commonly in- 

veſted with power, becauſe they have both that 
authority which is due to them from their religious 
character, and that influence which amongſt ſuch a 
people ariſes from ſuperſtition, Thus we ſee in Taci- 
tus, that prieſts were held in great veneration by 
the Germans, and that they preſided | in the aſſembly 
of the people. They alone were permitted F to chaſtiſe, 
to bind, to ſmite; which they did, not by order of 
the prince, or as his miniſters of juſtice, but as by an 

* De minoribus principes conſultant, de m4yjorib 1s omnes; ita 
tamen ut ca quorum penes plebem arbitrium eſt, apud prineipes 
pertractentur. De morib. Germ. | 

+ Lex conſenſu populi ſit & conſtitutione regis, Capitularies of 
Charles the Bald, anno 864, art. 6. | 

t Licet apud conciiium accuſare & diſerimen capitis intendere. 
De mcriv, Germ. 

{| Silentium per ſacerdotes, quibus et eoereendi jus eſt, imperatur, 
De morib. Germ. | 290 

& Nec regibus liber i aut infinita pateſtas. Ceterum neque ani- 
mad vertere, neque vi cite, neque verherare, uiſi ſacerdotibus, eſt 
permiſſum, non quiſi in param, nec dueis juſln, fed velut des im- 

perante, quem adeſle bellato: ibus eredunt De meriv. German, | 
inſpiration 

Chap. i. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 365: 

inſpiration of the Deity, who was always ſuppoſed to 
be preſent with thoſe who made war. 

We ought not to be aſtoniſhed, if, from the very be- 
ginning of the firſt race, we ſee biſhops the diſpen - 
ſers of “ juſtice, if we ſee them appear in the aſſemblies. 
of the nation, if they have ſuch a prodigious influence 
on the minds of kings, and if they acquire ſo large a 
ſhare of property. 

— 5 
| 1 0 G K 
Of laws in relation to the principles which 

form the general ſpirit, the morals, and. 
cuſtoms of a nation. 

— _ * 

C HAP. I. 
Of the ſubject of this hoo. 
HIS ſubject is of a great extent. In that crowd: 
of ideas which preſent themſelves to my mind, I 
ſhall be more attentive. to the order of things, than to 
the things themſelves, I ſhall. be obliged to wander to 
the right and to the left, that I may ſearch into and 
diſcover the truth. 

CHAP. IL 

That it is neceſſary people's. minds ſhould le prepared FM 
. the reception of the beſt laws. 

Norume could appear more inſupportable to the 

Germans + than the tribunal of Varus. That 

which Juſtinian erected amongſt: the Lazi, to pro- 

® See the conſtitutions of Clotarius in the year 360, art, 6. 
+ They cut out the tongues of the adyocates, and cried, Viper 
don't hiſs. Tacitus, 

} Agathias, .lid. 4. 

Hh; | ed: 

366 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 

ceed againſt the murderers of their king, appeared to 
them as an affair the moſt horrid and barbarous. Mi- 
thridates , haranguing againſt the Romans, re- 
proached Am more particularly for their + formali- 
ties of juſtice. The Parthians could not bear with one 
of their kings, who, having been educated at Rome, 
rendered himſelf affable and f eaſy of acceſs to all, 
Liberty itſelf has appeared inſupportable to thoſe na- 
tions who have not been accuſtomed to enjoy it. Thus 
a pure air is ſometimes diſagreeable to thoſe who have 
lived in a fenny country. 

Balbi a Venetian, being at pegu, v was introduced 
to the king. When the monarch was informed that 
they had no king at Venice, he burſt into fuch a fit of 
laughter, that he was ſeized with a cough, and had 
much ado to ſpeak to his courtiers. What legiſlator 
could propoſe a popular government to a people like 
this. 

CHAP. III. 
Of tyranny. 

HERE. are two ſorts of tyranny; the one real, 

which ariſes from the oppreſſions of government; 
- the other is ſeated in opinion, and is fure to be felt, 
whenever thoſe who govern eſtabliſh things ſhocking 
to the turn of thought, and inconſiſtent with the ideas 
of a nation. 

Dio tells us, that Ae was deſirous of being 
called Romulus, but having been informed, that the 

people feared that he would cauſe himſelf to be 
crowned king, he changed his deſign. The old Ro- 

* Tuſtin lib. 38. + Czlnmnius litium. Bid. 
4 Prompti aditus, nova comitas, ignotæ Parthis virtutes, nova 
vitia. Tacitus. 
ne has deſcribed this interview which happened in the year 
1596, in the collection of voyages for the eſtabliſhment of an Indi- 
company, vol. iii. part 2. Page 33- 
mans 

— 

a. „% ana oo: . ets tos Wh of 

Ry Www H7F - Ru ew WP VT» *) 

— / mm TE EMEF 7 

- 

Chap. 44 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 367 

mans were averſe to à king, becauſe they could not 

ſuffer any man to enjoy ſuch power; theſe would not 
have a king, becauſe they could not bear his man- 
ners: for though Cæſar, the triumvirs, and Aguſtus, 
were really kings, they had preſerved all the outward 

appearance of equality, while their private lives were a. 

kind of contraſt to the pomp and luxury of foreign 
monarchs; ſo that, when they were reſolved to have 
no king, this only ſignified that they would .preſerve 

their cuſtoms, and not take up thoſe of the African 

and eaſtern nations. 
The ſame writer informs us, that the Renans were 
exaſperated againſt Auguſtus for making certain laws 

which were too ſevere ; but, as ſoon as he had recalled 
Plyades the comedian, whom the jarring of different 

factions had driven out of the city, the diſcontent cea- 
ſed. A people of this ſtamp have a more lively ſenſe 
of tyranny when a player is baniſhed, than when Ip 

are deprived of all their laws. 
CHAP. IV. 
Of the general ſpirit of mankind, | 

MEN are influenced by various cauſes, by the cli- 
| mate, 

the religion, the laws, the maxims of go- 

vernment, by precedents, morals, and cuſtoms ; from 

whence is formed a general ſpirit, which takes its riſe 
from theſe. 

In proportion as in every nation any one of theſe 

| Cauſes acts with more force, the others in the ſame de. 

gree become weak. Nature in the climate rules almoſt 
alone over the ſavages; cuſtoms govern the Chineſe z 
the laws tyrannize in Japan; morals had formerly all 
their influence at Sparta; maxims of government, and 
the ancient ſimplicity of manners once g at 

Rome. 

57 

— 

j—ęyUU77——mw w t ˖/‘f⸗ — p —ůp— ṹꝗꝙ—Atũ—l. — em —ä— . —ä— 
- 
: 
. 
. 
- 
- 
„ 
- 

363 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 
CHAP. v. 
How far we ſhould be attentive, left the general "EF of 
a. nation ſhould be changed. 
FF in | any-part of the world there had been a nation: 
whoſe inhabitants were of a ſociable temper,. open. 
hearted, pleaſed with life, poſſeſſed of judgment, and 
a facility in communicating: their thoughts; who were 
ſprightly, agreeable, gay, ſometimes imprudent, often 
indiſcreet ; and beſides had courage, generoſity, frank. 
neſs, and a certain. point of honour ; no one ought. to 
endeavour to reſtrain their manners by laws, unleſs he 
would lay a conſtraint on their virtues. If in general 
the character is good, the little faults that may be 
found in it will be of. ſmall importance. | 
They might-lay a reſtraint upon women, make laws 

to correct their manners, and to limit: their luxury; 

but who knows but that, by this means, they might 
loſe that peculiar taſte which would be the ſource of 
the riches of the nation, and that politeneſs which 
would render the country frequented by ſtrangers? 

It is the buſinefs of the legiflature to follow the 
ſpirit of the nation, when it is not. contrary to the 

Principles of government; for we do nothing. ſo well 

as when we act with freedom, and —_— the bent of 

our natural genius. 

If an air of pedantry be given to a nation that i is 

naturally gay, the ſtate will gain no advantage from it 
either at home or abroad. Leave it to do frivolous © 

things in the moſt ſerious manner, and with gaiety 

things the moſt ſerious. 

| CHAP. vr. 
7 hat every thing eugbt net to bi correcfad. 
LET them bur leave us as we are, faid a gentleman 

of a nation which had a very great reſemblance 
to that we have been deſcribing, and nature will re- 

| Pair 

4 a W . Sg". 

af wn _ a = as 

r 

Chap. 7. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 369 

pair whatever is amiſs. She has given us a vivacity 
capable of offending, and hurrying us beyond the 
bounds of reſpect; this ſame vivacity is corrected 
by the politeneſs it procures us, inſpiring a taſte for 
the world ; and, above all, for the converſation of 
women. 

Let them leave us as we are: our indiſcretions 
joined to our good nature, would make the laws 
which ſhould conſtrain our ſociable temper not at all 
proper for us. 

CHAP. MI. 
; Of the Athenians and Lacedemonians. 

HE Athenians, this gentleman adds, were a na- 
tion that had ſome relation to ours. They min- 

gled gaiety with buſineſs; a ſtroke of raillery was as 

agreeable in the ſenate as in the theatre, This viva- 
city, which diſcovered itſelf in their councils, went 
along with them in the execution of their reſolves. 
The charaQeriſtic of the Spartans was gravity, ſeri- 
ouſnels, ſeverity, and ſilence, It would have been as 
difficult to bring over an Athenian by teaſing, as is 
ve a Spartan by diverting him, 

C HAP. VIII. 
Effect. if a ſociable temper. 

** more communicative a people are, the more 
eaſily they change their habits, becauſe each is 
in a greater degree a ſpectacle to the other, and the 
ſingularities of individuals are better ſeen. The cli- 
mate which makes one nation delight in being com- 
municative, makes it alſo delight in change; and that 
which makes it delight in change, forms its taſte, 
"The ſociety of women ſpoils the manners, and 
forms the taſte; the deſire of giving greater pleaſure 
than others, eſtabliſhes the ornaments. of dreſs; and. 

370 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Book XIX. 

the deſire of pleaſing others more than ourſelves, 
eſtabliſhes faſhion. The mode is a ſubject of import- 
ance: by giving a trifling turn of mind, it continual- 
ly increaſes the branches of its commerce f. 

CHAP. IX 
Of the vanity and pride of nations. 

> e is as advantageous to a government as 
pride is dangerous. To be convinced of this we 
need only repreſent, on the one hand, the numberleſs 
benefits which reſult from vanity ; from thence ariſes 
luxury, induſtry, arts, faſhions, politeneſs, taſte : and, 
on the other, the infinite evils which ſpring from the 
pride of certain nations, lazineſs, poverty, and uni- 
verſal neglect, the deſtruction of the nations which 
have accidentally fallen into their hands, as well as 
of their own. Lazineſs | is the effect of pride; la- 
bour a conſequence of vanity : the pride of a Spa- 
niard leads him to refuſe labour; the vanity of a 
Frenchman to know how to work better than others. 
All lazy nations are grave; for thoſe who do not 
labour, regard themſelves as the-ſorereigns of thoſe 
who do. 
If we ſearch amongſt all nations, we ſhall find that, 
for the moſt part, gravity, pride, and indolence, 80 
hand in hand. 

The people of Achim $ are proud and lazy; thoſe. 

who bave no flaves hire one, if it be only to carry a 
quart of rice a hundred paces; they would be diſlio- 
noured if they carried it themſelves. 

- + Fable of the bees. 

1 The people who follow the Khan of Malzeamber, thoſe. of 
Carnataca and Coromandel, are proud and indolent; they con” 
fume little, becauſe they are miſerably poor; while the ſubjects of 
the Mogul, and the people of Indoſtan empl6y themſelves, and enjoy 
the conveniences of life like the Europeans. Colfeftion of voyages 
for the eſtabliſhment of an India company, * . . Ste 
See Dampier, vol. * | 

In 

Land 

+ © = © & © = 

Chap. 10. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. g7t 

my ore propld for thioke eee e all 
may ſee they do not work. 

Women in the Indies * believe it ſhameful for them 
to learn to read; this is, they ſay, the buſineſs of the 
ſlaves, who ſing their ſpiritual ſongs in the temples 
of their pagods. In one tribe they do not ſpin; in 
another they make nothing but baſkets and mats 
they are not even to pound rice; and in others they 
muſt not go to ſetch water. Theſe rules are eſta- 
I paſſion makes them 
followed. | | 

CHAP. X. | 

Of the character of the Spaniards and Chineſe. 

HE charaReriſtics of the ſeveral nations are form- 

ed of virtues and vices, of good and bad quali. 
ties. From the happy mixture of theſe, great ad- 
vantages reſult, and frequently where it would be 
leaſt expected; there are others from whence great 
evils ariſe, evils which one would not ſuſpect. 228 
The Spaniards have been in all ages famous for 
their honeſty. Juſtin ? mentions their fidelity in keep- 
ing whatever was intruſted to their care; they have 
frequently ſuffered death rather than reveal a ſecret. 
They have till the ſame fidelity for which they were 
formerly diſtinguiſhed. All the nations who trade to 
Cadiz, truſt their fortunes to the Spaniards, and have 
never yet repented it. But this admirable quality, 
joined to their indolence, forms a mixture from 
whence ſuch effects reſult as to them are the moſt per- 
nicious. The people of Europe carry on in their ve- 
ry Tight all the commerce of their monarchy. - 

The character of the Chineſe is formed of another 
mixture, directly oppoſite to that of the Spaniards. 
The precariouſneſs of their ſubſiſtence t᷑ inſpires them 

© Edifyiog letters, 22th collect. p. 80. + Lib. 43. 
+ By the nature of the foil and climate. 
2 with 

— 

372 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XIX. 

with a prodigious activſty, and ſuch an exceſſive deſire 

of gain, that no trading nation can confide in them “. 
This acknowledged infidelity has ſecured -them. the 
poſſeſſion of the trade to Japan. No European mer- 
chant has ever dared to undertake it in their name, 
how eaſy ſoever it might be for them to do it from 
their maritime provinces in the north. 

Cc H A P. «0h 
| A reftedtion. 12 TY 
1 3 ſaid nothing here with a view to leſſen dos 
infinite diſtance which there muſt ever be between 
virtue and vice. God forbid that I ſhould be guilty 
of ſuch an attempt ! I would only make my readers 
comprehend, that all political vices are not moral 
vices, and that all moral are not political vices: and 
that thoſe who make laws which ſhock the general 
ſpirit of a nation, ought not to be ignorant of this. 
wo 5 © Ap © ab 
Of cuſtoms and manners in a deſpotic late. 
: is a capital maxim, That the manners and cuſtoms 

of a deſpotic empire ought never to be changed; 
for nothing would more ſpeedily produce a revolution. 

The reaſon is, that in theſe ſtates there are no laws, 

that is, none that can properly be called ſo; there are 
only manners and cuſtoms, and if you overturn theſe, 
you overturn all. 

Laws are eſtabliſhed, manners are inſpired ; theſe 

Nees from a general ſpirit, thoſe from a particular 

inſtitution: now it is as dangerous, nay more ſo, to 
overturn the general ſpirit, as to 1 a pertienlar 
- inſtitution. 

-. "There is leſs communication in a country ** 
each, either as ſuperior or inferior, exerciſes or ſuffers 

* Du Halde, vol, 4. | 
an 

Chap. 13. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 373 

an arbitrary power, than there is in thoſe where li- 
berty reigns in every ſtation. They do not therefore 
ſo often change their manners and behaviour, Fixed 
and eſtabliſhed cuſtoms haye a near reſemblance to 
laws. Thus it is here neceſſary that a prince or a 
legiſlator ſhould leſs oppoſe the manners and cuſtoms 

of the people, than in any other country upon earth. 

'Their women are commonly confined, and have no 
influence in ſociety. In other countries, where they 
hve with men, their deſire of pleaſing, and the defire 
men alſo have of giving them pleaſure, produce a 
continual change of cuſtoms. The two ſexes ſpail 
each other. They both loſe their diſtinctive and eſſen- 
tial quality ; what was naturally fixed becomes quite 
unſettled, and their cuſtoms and 2 change 

every day. 

C HAP. XII 
Of the cuſtom of the Chineſe. 

Br China is the place where the cuſtoms of the 

country can never be changed. Beſides their 
women being abſolutely ſeparated from the men, their 
cnſtoms, like their morals, are taught in the ſchools. 
A. man of » letters may be known by his eaſy addreſs. 
Theſe things being once taught by precept, and in- 
culcated by grave doctors, become fixed, like the prin. 
ciples of morality, and are never changed, | 

CHAP. XIV. 

1 are the natural means of changing the manners and 
cuſtoms of a nation. 
NG have ſaid, that the laws were the particular 

and preciſe inſtitutions of a legiflator, and man- 
ners and cuſtoms the inſtitutions of a nation in gene. 

ral. From hence it follows,that when theſe manner | 

2: Dy Rad 

* Vor. I. Ii | | and 

374 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX, 

and cuſtoms are to be changed, it ought not to be 

done by laws; this wonld have too much the air of 
tyranny; it would be better to change them by in- 
. troducing other manners and other cuſtoms. 

Thus when a prince would make great alterations 
in his kingdom, he ſhould reform by laws what is 
eſtabliſhed-by laws, and change by cuſtoms what is eſta- 
bliſhed by cuſtoms ; for it is very bad policy to change 
by laws, what ought to be changed by cuſtoms. 

The law which obliged the Muſcovites to cut off 
their beards, and to ſhorten their clothes, and the 
rigour with which Peter I. made them crop, even to 
the knees, the long cloaks of thoſe who entered into 
the cities, were inſtances of tyranny. There are means 
that may be made uſe of to prevent crimes, theſe arc 
puniſhments ; there are thoſe for changing our euſ⸗ 
toms, theſe are examples. 

The facility and eaſe with which this nation has 
been poliſhed, plainly ſhows that this prince had a 
worſe opinion of his people than they deſerved, and 
that they were not brutes, though he was pleaſed to 
call them ſo. The violent meaſures which he employ- 
ed were needleſs, he would have attained his end as 
well by milder methods. 

He bimſelf experienced the eaſiueſs of . a- 
bout theſe alterations. The women were ſhut up, 
and in ſome ſort ſlaves; he called them to court, he 
ſent them ſilks and ſtuffs, and made them dreſs like 
the German ladies. This ſex immediately reliſhed a 
manner of life which ſo greatly flattered their taſte, 
their vanity, and their paſſions, and by _ means 

it was reliſhed by the men. 
What rendered the change more eaſy was, their 
manners being at that time foreign to the climate ; 
and their having been, introduced among them by 
ae * by à mixture of nations. Peter I. in 
| _ giving 

ws waa ws WY — 

$90 „ wes 

W © © > 

tl 

TIX, 
be 

of 
in- 

ons 
0 
ſta · 
nge 

323572 

11 

G@ * © S. » 8 

Wo EO DS 

Chap. 15. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 375 

giving the manners and cuſtoms of Europe to an Eu- 
ropean nation, found a facility which he did not him- 

. ſelf expect. The empire of the climate is the *. the 

moſt powerful of all empires. 

He had then no occaſion for Jaws to þ LS the 
manners and cuſtoms of his country; it would have 
been ſufficient to have introduced other manners and 
other cuſtoms. 5 

Nations are in general very tenacious of their cul. 
toms; to take them away by violence is to render 
them unhappy : we ſhould not therefore change them, 
but engage the people to make the change themſelves. 

All puniſhment which is not derived from neceſſity 
is tyrannical. The law is but a mere act of power; 
things i in their own nature W n are not within 
its province. 5 

5 ; ; G HA P, XV. 

The influence of domeſtic government on the political. 
b 5. changing the manners of women had, with- 
out doubt, a great influence on the government 
of Muſcovy. One thing is very cloſely united to an- 
other: the deſpotic power of the prince is naturally 
connected with the ſervitude of women, the liberty of 
the women with the ſpirit of monarchy. 

CHAP. XVI. 

How ow legiſlators have confounded the principles which 
govern mankind. 

| Me and cuſtoms are thoſe habits which are 

not eſtabliſhed by the laws, either becauſe they 
were not able, or were not willing to eſtabliſh them. 
There is this difference between laws and manners, 
that the laws are moſt adapted to regulate the action; 
of the ſubject, and manners to regulate the actions of 
the man. There is this difference between manners 

4 

nes Iiz and 

376 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 

and cuſtoms, that the firſt principally relate to the in- 
terior conduct, the others to the exterior. 8 

Theſe things“ have been ſometimes confounded. 
Lycurgus made the ſame code for the laws, manners, 
and cuſtoms : and the legiſlators of China have done 
the ſame. 

We ought not to be ſurprized char the legiſlators 
of China and Sparta ſhould confound the laws, man- 
ners, and cuſtoms : the reaſon is, their manners re- 
preſent their laws, and their cuſtoms their manners. 

The principal object which the legiſlators of China, 
had in view, was to make the people live in peace and 
tranquillity, They would have people filled with a 
veneration for one another, that each fhould be every 
moment ſenſible how greatly he was indebted to others, 
and that there was not a ſubject who did not in ſome 
degree depend on another ſubject. They therefore 
gave rules of the moſt extenſive civility. 

Thus the inhabitants of the villages of China ob- 
ſerve amongſt themſelves the ſame ceremonies as thoſe 
obſerved by perſons of an exalted ſtation; a very pro- 
per method of inſpiring mild and gentle diſpoſitions, 
of maintaining peace and good order amongſt the 

people, and of baniſhing all the vices which ſpring 
from an aſperity of temper. In effect, would not the 

freeing them from the rules of civility, be to ſearch 
out a method for them to indulge their faults more 
at eaſe. | 

Civility is in this reſpet of more value than polite- 

neſs. Politeneſs flatters the vices of others, and civi- 

lity prevents ours from being brought to light. It is 
a barrier which men have placed in themſelves to 
| prevent the corruption of each other. 

* Moſes wade the ſame code for laws and religion. The ald 

Romans confounded the ancient cuſtoms with the laws. 
+ See Du Halde. , 

_ Lycurgus, 

TT Og POT T8 EA _, 

—S als. 4 
- 

w 

Chap. 17. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 377 

Lycurgus, whoſe inſtitutions were ſevere, had no re- 
gard to civility in forming the external behaviour; he 
had a view to that warlike ſpirit which he would fain 
give to his people. A people who were ever correfting 
or ever corrected, always inſtructing or always inſtruct- 
ed, endued with equal ſimplicity and rigour, atoned by 
their virtues for their want of complaiſance. 

AP. XVEL 
Of the peeute quality of the Chinefs government. 

: JE legiſlators of China went farther v. They 

confounded together their religion, laws, man- 
ners, and cuſtoms; all thoſe were morals, all theſe 

were virtue. The precepts relating to theſe four points 

were what they called rites; and it was in the exact 
obſervance of theſe that the Chineſe government 

. triumphed. They ſpent their whole youth ia learning 

them, their whole life in their practice. They were 
taught by their men of learning, they were inculcated 
by the magiſtrates; and as they included all the or- 
dinary actions of life, when they found the means of 
making them ſtrictiy obſerved, China was well 2 2 

ed. 
Two things have contributed to the kale with which 

| theſe rites are engraved on the hearts and minds of 

the Chineſe; the one, the difficulty of writing, which 
during the greateſt part of their lives wholly employs 
their mind , becauſe it is neceſſary to prepare them 
to read and underſtand the books in which they are 
compriſed; the other, that the ritual precepts having 
nothing in them that is ſpiritual, bur being merely 
rules of common practice, they are more adapted to 

See the claſſic books from which father Du Halde gives us ſome 
excellent extracts. 
+ It is this which has eſtabliſhed aktion, which has baniſhed: 
lazi.eſs, and cultivated a love of learning. 
Iiz . convince: 

338 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 

convince and ſtrike the mind than things merely intel- 
lectual. 

Thoſe princes who, inſtead of governing by theſs 
| Tide governed by the force of puniſhments, wanted to 
accompliſh that by puniſhments which is not in their 
power to produce, that is, to give habits of morality. 
By puniſhments a ſubject is very juſtly cut off from ſo- 
ciety, who having loſt the purity of his manners, vio- 
lates the laws ; but if all the world were to loſe their 

moral habits, would theſe re-eſtabliſh them? Puniſn - 

ments may be juſtly inflicted to put a ſtop to many of 
the conſequences of the general evil, but it will not re- 
move the evil itſelf. Thus when the principles of the 
Chineſe government were diſcarded, and morality loſt, 
the ſtate fell into anarchy, and revolutions were ſeen 
to take place. 

CHAP. XVII. 
A conſequence drawn from the preceding chapter, 

PM hence it follows, that the laws of China are 
not deſtroyed by conqueſt. Their cuſtoms, man- 
ners, laws, and religion, being the ſame thing, they 
cannot change all theſe at once; and as it will hap- 
pen, that either the conqueror or conquered muſt 
change, in China it has always been the conqueror, 
For the manners of the conquering nation not being 
its cuſtoms, nor its cuſtoms its laws, nor its laws its 
religion, it has been more eaſy for them to conform by 
degrees to the vanquiſhed people, than the vanquiſhed 
people to them. 

There ſill follows from hence a very unbappy con. 
ſequence, which is, that it is almoſt impoſſible for 
Chriſtianity * ever to be eſtabliſhed in China. The 
| # $ce the reaſons given by the Chineſe magiſtrates i in their de- 

erees for N the Chriſtian religion, Edifying letters, 11th 
collet. 

vows 

1 0 

7 W 17 XY 

Chap. 19. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 379 
vows of virginity, the aſſembling of women in church- 

es, their neceſſary communication with the miniſters 

of religion, their participation in the ſacraments, auri- 
cular confeſſion, extreme union, the marriage of only 
one wife, all theſe overturn the manners and cuſtoms 
of the, country, and with the ſame blow ſtrike at their 
religion and laws. 

The Chriſtian religion, by the eſtabliſhment of cha. 
rity, by a public worſhip, by a participation of the 
ſame ſacraments, ſeems to demand, that all ſhould be 
united ; while the rites of China ſeem to ordain, that 
all ſhould be ſeparated. | 

C HAP. XIX. 
How this union of religion, laws, manners and cuſtoms 
among ft the Chineſe was produced. 

| PHE principal object of government which the 

Chineſe legiſlators had in view, was the peace and 
tranquillity of the empire: and ſubordination appeared 
to them as the moſt proper means to maintain it. Fil- 
led with this idea, they believed it their duty to inſpire 

a reſpect for fathers, and therefore aſſembled all their 

power to eſſect it. They eſtabliſhed an infinite number 
of rites and ceremonies to do them honour when liv- 
ing, and after their death. It was impoſſible for them 

to pay ſuch honours to deceaſed parents, without being 
led to honour the living. The ceremonies at the death 

of a father were more nearly related to religion; thoſe 
for a living father had a greater relation to the laws, 

manners, and cuſtoms: however, theſe: were only 

parts of the ſame code, but this coll; mas Ver y-qaten- 

| five. 

A veneration for fathers was neceſſarily connect. 

'<d with a ſuitable reſpect for all who. repreſented 

fathers, ſuch as old men, maſters, magiſtrates, and 
the — This reſpect for fathers, ſuppoſed 2a re- 
turn 

38⁰ THE SPIRIT OF EAWS. Bock XIX. 

turn of love toward children, and conſequently the 
ſame return from old men to the young, from magi- 
ſtrates to thoſe who are under their juriſdiction, and 
from the emperor to his ſubjects. This formed the 
rites, and theſe rites the general ſpirit of the nation. 
We ſhall now ſhow the relation which things, in 
appearance the moſt indifferent, may have to the fun- 
damental conſtitution of China. This empire is formed 
on the plan of the government of a family, If you dF. 
miniſh the paternal authority, or even if you retrench 
the ceremonies which expreſs your reſpect for it, you 

weaken the reverence due to magiſtrates, who are con- 

ſidered as fathers ; nor would the magiſtrates have the 

ſame care of the people whom they ought to conſider 
as their children; and that tender relation which fub- 
ſiſts between the prince and his ſubjects would inſen- 
fibly be loft. Retrench but one of theſe habirs, and 
you overturn the ſtate. It is a thing in itſelf very in- 
different, whether the daughter-in-law riſes every 
morning to pay ſuch and ſuch duties to her mother · in- 
law; but if we conſider that theſe exterior habits in- 
ceſſantly revive an idea neceſſary to be imprinted on all 
minds, an idea that forms the governing ſpirit of the 
empire, we ſhall fee that it is neceſſary that fuch or 
ſuch a nn action be performed. * 

CHAP. XX. 

An: .explication of a paradox relating to the Chineſe. 
4. is very remarkable that the Chineſe, whoſe lives 

are guided by rites, are nevertheleſs the greateſt 
cheats upon earth. This appears chiefly in their 
trade, which, in ſpite of its natural tendeney, has 
never been able to make them honeſt. He who buys 
of them ought to carry with him bis own * weights, 
. Lange's journal in 172: and n, in voyages to the North, 

vol. y vill. P- 363. 
p every 

WW 0 

— oy wy 

a aA AA «a oa ct ww 3) Fg 

Chap. 21. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 387 

every merchant having three ſorts, the one heavy for 
buying, another light for ſelling, and another of the 
true ſtandard, for thoſe who are upon their guard. It 
is poſſible, I believe, to explain this contradiction. 

The legiſlators of China had two objects in view; 
they were deſirous that the people ſhould be ſubmiſſive 
and peaceful, and that they. ſhould alſo be laborious 
and induſtrious. By the nature of the foil and climate, 
their ſubſiſtence is very precarious; nor can it be any 
other way ſecured, than by the aſſiſtance of — 
and labour. 

When every one obeys, and every one is employed, 
the ſtate is in a happy ſituation. It is neceſſity, and 
perhaps the nature of the climate, that has given to 
the Chineſe an inconceivable greedineſs for gaip, and 
laws have never been made to put a ſtop to it. Every 
thing has been forbidden, when acquired by acts of 
violence; every thing permitted, when obtained by 
artifice or labour. Let us not then compare the mo- 
rals of China with thoſe of Europe. Every one in 
China is obliged to be attentive to what will be for his 
advantage; if the cheat has been watchful over his 
own. intereſt, he who is the dupe ought to have thought 
of his. At Sparta they were permitted to ſeal; in 
China they are ſuffered to deceive. 

CHAP. XXI. | 
How the laws ought to have a relation to manners and 
cuſtoms, 

17 is only ſingular inſtitutions which thus confound 
laws, manners and cuſtoms, things naturally diſtin 
and ſeparate: but though they are things in themſelves 
different, there is nevertheleſs a great relation between 

them, 
Solon being aſked, if the laws he had given to the 
Athenians were the beſt, he replied, “ I have given 
" them 

TY THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX, 

« them the beſt: they were able to bear.“ A fine 
expreſſion, that onght to be perfectly underſtood by all 
legiſlators! When Divine Wiſdom ſaid to the Jews, 
„ have given you precepts which are not good,” this 
ſignified that they had only a relative goodneſs; which 
is the ſponge that wipes out all the difficulties that are 
to be e in the law of Modes. | 

.c H AP. XXII. 
Te ſame ſubject — 3 "Io 

WIr a 5 have pure and 4 manners, 
ſays, that Rhadamanthus. who governed a people ex- 
tremely religious, finiſhed every proceſs with extraor- 
dinary deſpatch, adminiſtering only the oath on every 
accuſation. - But, ſays the ſame Plato , when a peo- 
ple are not religious, we ſhould never have recourſe to 
an oath, except he who ſwears is entirely without in» 
tereſt, as in the caſe of a judge and a witneſs. 159 

CHAP. XXIII 

How the laws are founded an the Manuers of a people. . 
TT the time when the manners of the Romans 

were pure, they had no particular law againſt 

the embezzlement of the public money. When this 

crime began to appear, it was thought ſo infamous, 
that to be condemned to reſtore |} what they had ta - 
ken was conſidered as a ſufficient diſgrace : for a proof 
of this ſee the ſentence of L. Scipio {| 

Ot laws, lib. 12, 1 wid. 
1 la pmplum. | '1 Livy, lib. 38. 

e 

their laws become ſimple and natural. Plato“ 

a hs i. a a. «4 md —_ 1 — 

, 

4 

Ae, >. 6 

Chap. 244 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 383 

CHAP. XXIV. 
The ſame ſubject continued. 

PHE laws which gave the right of tutelage to the 

mother, were moſt attentive to the preſervation of 
the infant's perſon; thoſe which gave it to the next 
heir, were molt attentive to the preſervation of the 
eſtate. When the manners of a people are corrupted, 
it is much better to give the tutelage to the mother. 
Amongſt thoſe whoſe laws confide in the manners of 
the ſubjects, the guardianſhip is given either to the next 
heir, or to the mother, and ſometimes to both. 

If we reflect on the Roman laws, we ſhall find tha, 
the ſpirit of theſe was conformable to what I have ad. 
vanced, At the time when the laws of the twelve 
tables were made, the manners of the Romans were 
molt admirable. The guardianſhip was given to the 
neareſt relation of the infant, from a conſideration 
that he ought to have the trouble of the tutelage, who 
might enjoy the advantage of poſſeſſing the inhe- 
ritance. They did not imagine the life of the heir 
in danger, though is was put into, a perſon's hands 
who would reap advantage by his death. But when 
the manners of Rome were changed, its legiſlators 
changed their conduct. If in the pupillary ſubſtitu- 
tion, ſays Caius “ and Juſtinian 1, the teſtator is a- 
fraid that the ſubſtitute will lay any ſnares for the 

pupil, he may leave the vulgar f ſubſtitution open 

and put the pupillary into a part of the teſtament, 

® Inſtitut, lib. ii. tit. 6. 8 2. OzeP e LAG LI BRaa Ht: in 
1658. 

T Inftizur, lib. 2. de beni. ſubſtit. $ 3. 

t The form of the vulgar ſuhſfitution ran thus: If ſuch a one is 

unwilling to take the inheritance, I ſubſtitate in his ſtead, Cc. the 

pupillary ſubſtitution, If ſuch a one dies defore ** at the age 
of paderty, I ſubſtitute, Ce- 
which 

b 
| 
4 
{i 
1 
| 

3% THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book X1X, 

which cannot be opened till after a certain time. Theſe 
fears and precautions were unknown to the primitive 
- Romans. 

CHAP. XY... - 
The ſame ſubje@ continued. 

* Roman law gave the liberty of making pre. 

ſents before marriage; after the marriage they 
were not allowed. This was founded on the manners 
of the Romans, who were led to marriage, only by 
frugality, ſimplicity, and modeſty; but who might ſuf- 
fer themſelves to be ſeduced by domeſtic cares, by com- 
plaiſance, and the happineſs of a whole life. 

A law of the Viſigoths forbade the man giving 
more to the woman he was to marry than the tenth 
part of his ſubſtance, and his giving her any thing 
during the firſt year of their marriage. 'This alſo rook 
its riſe from the manners of the country. The legifla- 
tors were willing to put a ſtop to that Spaniſh oftenta- 
tion, which only led them to diſplay an exceſſive 'libe- 
rality in acts of magnificence, 

The Romans, by their laws, put a ſtop to ſome of 
the inconveniencies which aroſe from the moſt dura- 

dle empire in the world, that of virtue; the Spaniards, 

by theirs, would prevent the bad effects of a tyranny. 
the moſt frail and fleeting, that of beauty. 

C HAP. XXVL 
The ſame ſubjetl continued. 
* law + of Theodoſius and Valentinian drew 
the cauſes of repudiation from the ancient man- 
ners + and cuſioms of the Romans. It placed in the 
number of theſe cauſes the behaviour of a || huſband 

* Lib. iii. tit. 1. $ 5. + Leg. $. cod. de repudiis. 
1 And the law of the twelve tables. See Cicero's 2d Phillippic, 
Si verberibus quæ ingeauis alien ſunt, afficientem probaverit. 

\ 
( 

TX, 

Chap. 279. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 385 

who beat his wife, in a manner that diſgraced the 
character of a freeborn woman. This cauſe was omit- 
ted in the following laws; for their manners were in 
this reſpe&t changed: the eaſtern cuſtoms had baniſh- 
ed thoſe of Europe. The firſt eunuch of the empreſs 

wife to Juſtinian TL. threatened her, ſays the hiſtorian, 

to chaſtiſe her in the ſame manner as children are pu- 
nifhed at ſchool. Nothing but eſtabliſhed manners, or 
thoſe which they were ſeeking to eſtabliſh, could raiſe 
even an idea of this kind. 

We have ſeen how the laws follow the manners of 
a people: let us now ſee how the manners follow the 

laws. | 

: CHAP. XXVII. 

How. the laws contribute to form the manners, eilen 
and character of a nation. 

PHE cuſtoms of an enſlaved people are a part of 
their ſervitude; 1 of a free people are a part 
of their liberty. 

I have ſpoken i in the en book + of a free peo- 
ple, and have given the principles of their ,conſtitution. 
Let us now ſee the effects which follow from this liber- 
ty, the character it is capable of forming, and the cu - 
ſtoms which naturally reſult from it. | 

I do not deny that the climate may have 05 
great part of the laws, manners and cuſtoms of this 
nation; but I maintain, that its manners and cuſtoms 

have a cloſe connection with its laws. 

. As there are in this ſtate two viſible powers, the 

will of his own, and may at pleaſure aſſert his inde- 
pendence ; moſt men have a greater fondneſs for 
one of theſe powers than for the other, and the mul- 

= In Nov. 117. Cc. 14. + Chap, 6. | | 

and executive, and as every citizen has a 

3868 THE spIRTr OF LAWS. Bock XIX. 

titude have commonly neither equity nor ſenſe enough 

to ſhow an equal affection to both. 

As the executive power, by diſpoſing of all employ- 
ments, may give great hopes, and no fears, every man 
who obtains any favour from it, is ready to eſpouſe its 
cauſe; while it is liable to be attacked by thoſe who 
have nothing to hope from it. 

All the paſſions being unreſtrained, hatred, envy, 
jealouſy, and an ambitious deſire of riches and honours, 
appear in their full extent. Were it otherwiſe, the Rate 
would be in the condition of a man weakened by fick- 
neſs, who is without paſſions, becauſe he is without 
ſtrength. 4 

The hatred which ariſes between the two parties 
will always ſubſiſt, becauſe it will always be impotent. 
- Theſe parties being compoſed of freemen, if the one 

becomes too powerful, as a conſequence of liberty, it 

will be ſoon brought down; while the citizens endea- 
vour to raiſe up the other, with the ſame readineſs as 
the hands lend their aſſiſtance to the body. 

Every individual is independent, and being com- 

monly led by caprice and humour, frequently changes 
parties; he abandons one where he left all his friends, 
to unite himſelf to another in which he finds all his 
- enemies: ſo that in this vation it frequently happens 
that the people forget the laws. of friendſhip, as well as 
thoſe of hatred. 
The ſovereign is here in the ſame caſe ohh a pri- 
vate perſon, and, againſt the ordinary maxims of pru- 
dence, is frequently obliged to give his confidence to 
thoſe who have. moſt offended him; and to diſgrace 
the men who have beſt ſerved him: he does that by 
neceſlity which other princes do by choice, 

As we are afraid of being deprived of the b 
ve already enjoy, and which may be diſguiſed and 
miſrepreſented to us; and as fear always enlarges ob- 
5 12 jects 

* 

© _ 

FR. 1. 

dix 

Chap. 2. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 387 

jects, the people are uneaſy under ſuch a ſituation, and 
believe themſelves in danger, even in thoſe moments 
when they are molt ſecure. 

As thoſe who with the greateſt warmth oppoſe the 
executive power, dare not avow the ſelf-intereſted mo- 
tives of their oppoſition, ſo much the more do they en- 
creaſe the terrors of the people, who can never be cer- 
tain whether they are in danger or not. But even this 
contributes to make them avoid the real dangers to 
which they may in the end be expoſed. 

But the legiſlative body having the confidence of 

+ the people, and being more enlightened than they, may 
calm their uneaſineſs, and make them recover from the 

bad impreſſions they have entertained. 

This is the great advantage which this government 
has over the ancient democracies, in which the peo. 
ple had an immediate power; for when they wer- 
moved and agitated by the orators, theſe agitations al- 
ways produced their effects. 

But when an impreſſion of terror has no certain 
object, it produces only clamours and abuſe; it has, 
however, this good effect, that it puts all the ſprings of 
government in motion, and fixes the attention of every 
citizen. But if it riſes from a violation of the funda» 
mental laws, it is ſullen, eruel, and produces the mot 
dreadful cataſtrophes. | 

Soon we ſhould ſee a frightfal calm, during which 
every one would unite. againſt that n which had 

violated the laws. 

If when the uneaſineſs proceeds from no certain " 
je, ſome foreign power ſhould threaten the ſtate, or- 
put its proſperity or its glory in danger, their little in · 
tereſts of party would then yield to the more trong: 
and binding, and there would be a perfect coalition in 
favour of the executive.power. 

But if the diſputes were occaſioned by a viclation- 

338 THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 

of the fundamental laws, and a foreign power ſhould 
appear; there would be a revolution that would nei- 
ther alter the conſtitution nor the form of government. 
For a revolution formed by liberty, becomes a confir- 
mation of liberty. 

A free nation may have a deliverer; a nation enſla- 
ved can have only another oppreſſor. 

For whoever has a power ſufficient to dethrone an 
abſolute prince, has a power ſufficient to enable him to 
become abſolute himſelf. 

As the enjoyment of liberty, and even its ſupport 

and preſervation, conſiſts in every man's being allowed 

to ſpeak his thoughts, and to lay open his ſentiments 

a citizen in this ſtate will ſay or write whatever the 
laws do not expreſsly forbid to be ſaid or wrote. 
A people like this being always in a ferment, are 
more eaſily conducted by their paſſions than by reaſon, 
which never produces any great effects in the mind of 

man; it is therefore eaſy for thoſe who govern, to 

make mem undertake enterpriſes "OY to their true 
intereſt. 

This nation is n fond of liberty, deen 
this liberty is true and real; and it is poſſible for it, in 
its defence, to ſacrifice its wealth, its eaſe, its intereſt, 

and to ſupport the burden of the moſt heavy taxes, 

eren ſuch as a deſpotic prince durſt not lay upon his 
ſubjects. 

But as the people have a certain knowledge of the 
_ neceſſity of ſubmitting to them, they pay from the well- 

founded hope of their ſoon paying them no longer; 

their burdens are heavy, but they do not feel their 
weight: while in other Rates the uneaſineſs is infinite- 
ly greater than the evil. 

This nation muſt therefore have a fixed and certain 

credit, becauſe it borrows * itſelf, and pays itſelf. 
| | «It 

as wa, oo 8 wc Ca 

* alt FP WY at. Fm — pw FLY nn nn n 

PY 1 1 — nn - 

Chap. 29. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 389 

It is poſſible for it to undertake things above its na- 
tural ſtrength, and employ againſt its enemies immenſe 
ſums of fictitious riches, which the credit and nature of ; 
its government may render real. 

To preſerve its liberty, it borrows of its fabjeas; ; 
and its ſubjects, ſeeing that its credit would be loſt, if 
ever it was conquered, have a new motive to make 
freſh efforts in defence of its liberty. 

This nation, inhabiting an ifland, is not fond of eon - 
quering, becauſe it would be weakened by diſtant con- 
queſts; eſpecially as the ſoil of the iſland is good: be- 
cauſe it has then no{need of enriching itſelf by war, 
and as no citizen is ſubje& to another, each ſets a 
greater value on his own liberty, than on the glory of 
one,, or any nutnber of citizens. 

Military men are there regarded as belonging to a2 
profeſſion which may be uſeful, but is often dangerous; 
ard as men-whoſe very ſervices are burdenſome to the 
nation : civil qualifications are therefore more eſteemed . 
than the military. 

This nation, which liberty and the laws render eaſy, , 
on being freed from pernicious prejudices, is become a 
trading people; and, as it has ſome of thoſe primitive 
materials of trade, out of which are made ſach things as 
from the artiſt's hand receive a conſiderable value, it 
has made ſettlements proper to procure the enjoyment : 
of this gift of heaven in its fulleſt extent, 

As this nation is ſituated towards the north, and 
has many ſuperfluous commodities; it muſt want alſo 
a great number of merchandiſes which its climate will 
not produce: it has therefore entered into a great and 
neceſſary commerce with the ſouthern nations; and 
making choice of thoſe ſtates whom it is willing to fa - 
vour with an advantageous commerce, it enters into 
ſuch treaties with the nation it has 2 as are reci- 

procally uſeful to both. 
K E 3; f Im: 

1 

350 THE SPIRTT OF LAWS. Book XIx. 

In a ſtate where, on the one hand, the opulence is 
extreme, and, on the other, the taxes are exceſſive, they 
'are hardly able to live on a ſmall fortune without in- 
duſtry: many, therefore, under a pretence of travel- 
ling, or of health, retire from amongſt them, and go 
in ſearch of plenty, even to the countries of ſlavery. 

A trading nation has a prodigious number of little 
particular intereſts: it may then injure or be injured 
an infinite number of different ways. Thus it becomes 
immoderately jealous, and is more afflicted at the pro- 
ſperity of others, than it rejoices at its own. 

And its laws, otherwiſe mild and eaſy, may be fo ri- 
gid with reſpect to the trade and navigation carried on 
with it, that it may ſeem to trade only with enemies. 

If this nation ſends colonies abroad, it muſt rather be 
to extend its commerce than its dominion.” - 

As men are fond of introducing into other places 
what they have eſtabliſhed amongſt themſelves, they 
- have given the people of their colonies the form of 

their.own government ; and this government carrying 
| proſperity along with it, they have formed great na- 
tions in the foreſts they were ſent to inhabit. 

Having formerly ſubdued a neighbouring nation, 
which, by its ſituation, the goodneſs of its ports, and 
che nature of its products, inſpires it with jealouſy; 
though it has given this nation its own laws, yet it 
holds it in great dependence: the ſubjects there are 
free and the ſtate itſelf in flavery. 

The conquered ſtate has an excellent civil govern- 
ment, but it is oppreſſed by the laws of nations; laws 

are impoſed by one nation on the other, and theſe are 

fuch as render its proſperity precarious, and dependent 
on the will of a maſter. 

The ruling nation, n 2 large iſlaud, and 
* 

* 

Chap. 279. THE SPIRIT. or Laws. 391 

being in poſſeſſion of a great trade, hath with extra- 
ordinary eaſe grown powerful at ſea ; and as the pre · 
ſervation of its liberties requires that it ſhould have 
neither ſtrong holds, nor fortreſſes, nor land-forces, 
it has occaſion for a formidable navy to preſerve it 
from invaſions z a navy which muſt be ſuperior to that 
of all other powers, who, employing their treaſures 
in wars at land, have not ſufficient for thoſe at fea. 

The empire of the ſea has always given thoſe who- 
have enjoyed it a natural pride, becauſe, thinking 
themſelves capable of extending their inſults where- 
ever they pleaſe, they imagine that their power is as 
boundleſs as the ocean. 

This nation has a great influence in the affairs of 
its neighbours ; for, as its power is not employed in 
conquelts, its friendſhip is more courted, and its re- 

| ſentment more dreaded, than could naturally be ex- 

peed from the inconſtancy of its government, and 
its domeſtic commotions. 
Thus it is the fate of the executive power to be al- 
moſt always diſturbed at home, and reſpected abroad. 
Should this nation on ſome occaſions become the 
centre of the negotiations of Europe, probity and 

good faith would be carried to a greater height than 

in other places, becauſe the miniſters being trequent- 
ly obliged to juſtify their conduct before a popular 
council, their negotiations could not be ſecret, and 
they would be forced to be in this reſpect a little more 
honeſt. 

| Beſides, as they would in ſome ſort be anſwerable 
for the events which an irregular conduct might pro- 
duce, the ſureſt, the ſafeſt way for them, would be 
to take the ſtraighteſt path. 

If the nobles were formerly poſfeſſed of an immo- 
derate power, and the monarch bad fourid the means 
of abaſing them by raiſing the people, the point of 

extreme 

w2 THE 9PIRIT OF LAWS. Bock XIX. 

extreme ſervitude. mult have been that between hum- 
bling the nobility, and that in which the people be- 
gan to feel their power. ; 

Thus this nation, having been formerly ſubject to- 
an arbitrary power, on many occaſions preſerves the 
ſtiyle of it in ſuch a manner, as to let us frequently 

fee, upon the foundation of a free government, the 

form of an abſolute monarch Fe 

With regard to religion, as in this Rate every ſub- 
ject has a free will, and muſt conſequently be either 
conducted by the light of his own mind or by the ca- 

prices of fancy, it neceſſarily follows, that every one 

mult either look upon all religion with indifference, 
by which means they muſt be led to embrace the eſta- 
bliſned religion, or that they muſt be zealous for re- 
ligion in general, by which means the number of ſects 
muſt be increaſed. 

It is not. impoſſible, hut that in this nation there 
may be men of no religion, who would not however 
bear to be obliged to change that which they would 
chuſe, if- they cared. to chuſe any; for they would 
i mmediately perceive that their lives and fortunes are 

not more peculiarly theirs than their manner of think 

ing, and that whoever would deprive them of the 
one might, even * better reaſon, take away the 

other. 
If, a the different religions, there i is one that 

has been attempted to be. eſtabliſhed by the methods 

of ſlavery, it muſt there be odious; becauſe, as we 
judge of things bythe appendages we join with them, 
it could never preſepr itſelf to the mind in conjunction 
with the idea of liberty. 

The laws againſt thoſe who profeſs this religion 
could not however be of the ſanguinary kind; for 

liberty can never: inflict theſe ſorts of puniſhments : but 

they 

ME. & 

© 

— A a a a. 

— — — ids. a 

. - * us his * 8 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 393 

they may be ſo rigorous as to do all the miſchief that 
cbuld be done in cold blood. 

It is pofliible that a thouſand circuradianeac might 
concur to give the clergy ſo little credit, that other 

Chap. 27. 

citizens may have more. Therefore, inſtead of ſepa- 
rating themſelves, they have choſe rather to ſupport 
the ſame burdens as the laity, and in this reſpect to 
make only one body with them : but, as they always 
ſeek to conciliate the reſpect of the people, they diſ- 

. tinguiſh themſelves by a more retired life, a conduct 

more reſerved, and a greater purity of manners. 

The clergy, not being able to protect religion, nor 
to be protected by it, not having power to conſtrain, 
ſeek only to perſuade : their pens, therefore, furniſh 
us with excellent works in proof of a revelation, and 
of the providence of a Supreme Being. 

Vet the ſtate prevents the fitting of their aſſemblies, 
and does not ſuffer them to correct their own abuſes x 

it chuſes thus, through a caprice of liberty, rather to 

leave their reformation imperfe&, than ſuffer the cler. 
gy to be the reformers. 

, Thoſe dignities, which make a fundamental part 
of the. conſtitution, are more fixed than elſewhere ; 
but, on the other hand, the great in this country of 
liberty are nearer upon a level with the people; their 
ranks are more ſeparated, and their perſons more 
confounded. 

As thoſe who govern have a power "which in ſome 
meaſure has need of freſh vigour every day, they have 

a greater regard for thoſe who are uſeful to them, 
than for thoſe who only contribute to their amuſe- 
ment: we ſee therefore fewer courtiers, flatterers, 
and paraſites, in ſhort, fewer of all thote who make 
their own advantage of the folly of the great. 

Men are lefs eſteemed for frivolous talents and at- 
atinments, than for eſſential qualities; and of this 

kind there are but two, riches, and perional merit. 
h They 

394 THE SPIRIT OF. LAWS. XIX. 

They enjoy a ſolid luxury, founded not on the re- 
finements of vanity, but on that of real wants ; they 
alk nothing of nature but what nature can beſtow. 
The rich enjoy a great ſuperfluity of fortune, and 
yet have no reliſh for frivolous amuſements : thus ma- 
ny, having more wealth than opportunities of ex- 
pence, employ it in a fantaſtical manner: in this na- 
tion they have more judgment than taſte. 
As they are always employed about their own in- 

tereſt, they have not that politeneſs which is founded - | 

on indolence ; and they r have not ö to ate 
tain it. 

The æra of Roman politeneſs is the ſame as that 

of the eſtabliſhment of arbitrary power. An abſolute 
government produces indolence, and indolence gives 
birth to politeneſs. 

The more people there are in a nation who require 
a cireumſpect behaviour, and a care not to diſpleaſe, 
the more there is of politeneſs. But it is rather the 
politeneſs of morals than that of manners, „ Aich 
ought to diſtinguiſh us from barbarous nations. 

In a country where every man has in ſome ſort a 
ſhare in the adminiſtration of the government, the 
women ought ſcarcely to live with the men. They are 

therefore modeſt, that is, timid; and this timidity 
_ conſtitutes their virtue, whilſt the men, without ataſte 

for gallantry, plunge themſelves into a debauchery 
which leaves them at leiſure. and in the enjoyment of 
their full liberty. 

Their laws not being made for one individual more. 
than another, each conſiders himſelf as a monarch ;. 
and ir.deed the men. of, this nation are rather confe- 
derates than fellow · ſubjects. 

As the climate has given many perſons a reſtleſs. 

. — and extended views, in a country where the 

conſtitution 

ah: at” ( ( > 

” vo EL a "Oy 

. e py — 

find the men of thought and deep meditation. 

Chap. 29. THE SPIRIT OF LAWS. 395 

conſtitution gives every man a ſhare" in its government 
and political intereſts, converſation generally turns 
upon politics: and we ſee men ipend their lives in 
the calculation of events, which, conſidering the na- 
ture of things, and the caprices of fortune, or rather 
of men, can ſcarcely be thought fubjet to the rules 
of calculation. 

In a tree nation it is very often a matter of indif- 
ference, whether individuals reaſon well or ill; it is 
ſufficient that they do reaſon: from hence ſprings 
that liberty which is a ſecurity from he effects of 

theſe reaſonings. 

But in a deſpotic government it is equally pernici- 
ous whether they reaſon well or ill; their reaſoning 
is alone ſufficient to thock the principle of their so- 
vernment. 

Many people who have no deve of pleaſing aban- 

don themſelves to their own particular humour; moſt 
of thoſe who have wit and ingenuity are ingenious in 
tortnc....ng themſelves ; filled with a contempt or diſ- 
guſt for all things, they are unhappy amidſt all the 
bleſſings that can poſſibly contribute to their happineſs. 

As no ſubje& fears another, the whole nation is 
proud; for the pride of kings is founded "oP in 
their independence. 

Free nations are haughty ; others may more pro- 
perly be called vain. 

But as theſe men, who are naturally ſo proud, live 
much by themſelves, they are commonly baſhful when 
they come among ſtrangers; and we frequently ſee 
them behave for a conſiderable time with an odd mix- 
ture of pride and ill-placed ſhatne. 

The character of the nation is more particularly 
diſcovered in their literary performances, in which we 

As 

— ———E—— — 

— — 
* 

36% THE SPIRT OF LAWS. Book XIX. 
As ſociety gives"us a ſenſe of the ridicules of man- 

kind, retirement renders us more fit to reflect on the 

folly of vice. Their ſatirical writings are ſharp and 
ſevere, and we find amongſt them many Juvenals, 
without diſcovering one Horace. 

In monarchies extremely abſolute, hiſtorians betray 
the truth, becauſe they are not at liberty to ſpeak it; 

in ſtates remarkably free, they betray the truth be- 

cauſe of their liberty itſelf, which always produces 
diviſions, every one becoming as great a ſlave to the 
prejudices of his faction as he could be in a deſpotic 
ſtate. 

Their poets have more frequently an original rude- 
neſs of invention, than that particular kind of delicacy 
which ſprings from taſte; we there find ſomething 
which approaches nearer to the bold ſtrength of a Mi- 
chael Angelo, than to the ſotter graces of a Raphael. 

Exp or Th FIRST VOLUME, 

06
