Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

atthtto: //books.gqoogle.com/ 

Pausanias 

τ 

' 

+ 
E 
4 
Ὕ 3 
2 

. 

κ 
o 
5 
k 4 
> 
—_— 
Y 

τν 

ση Ὢ 

.- 

tba 

y 

ww 

ya 

ΤΗΕ LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

EDITED BY 
E. CAPPS, Pu. D., LL.D. T. E. PAGE, Liit.D. W. H. D. ROUSE, Πιττ.Ρ. 

PAUSANIAS 
| 1 

PAUSANIAS 

DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
W. H. 5. JONES, M.A. 

ST. CATHARINK’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 

IN SIX VOLUMES 

I 

BOOKS I AND II 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 

MCMXVIII 
A 
το 

PREFACE 

Tue present work was originally intended to be a 
plain translation of the text of Spiro. After a time 
I was requested by the Editors of the Loeb series to 
add a few notes, dates, maps, etc., so that the Tour 

might be more intelligible to English readers. Fully ` 

aware of the difficulties and dangers of the plan, I 
have nevertheless tried my best to choose from a 
vast quantity of material just those scraps of informa- 
tion which an English reader would need most. A 
few of the notes are printed at the side and foot of 
the page; most of them, together with the maps 
and plans, are reserved for the Index, which it is 
hoped to make a “ companion ” to Pausanias. 

The transliteration of Greek names has been a 
matter of difficulty. The only way to avoid incon- 
sistencies is to transliterate letter for letter without 
attempting either to Latinize or to Anglicize. To 
follow the rules adopted in the Loeb series without 
occasional inconsistencies is impossible, especially as 
the number of names given by Pausanias is so vast; 

ν 

αν ας 

PREFACE 

here again I can only say that I have tried my 
best. 

The text of Spiro has rarely been altered. A few 
of the most plausible conjectures, generally though 
not always adopted by Spiro, have been assigned to 
their authors in footnotes. 

In my translation I have not distinguished be- 
tween “ Medes” and “ Persians,” or “Ilium” and 
“ Troy.” It is rather deceptive to an English reader 
to do so, and the Greek scholar can easily tell from 
the original which word in each case was used by 
Pausanias. | | 

I have to acknowledge much kind help. Especially 
am I indebted to my friend Mr. A. W. Spratt, Fellow 
of St. Catharine’s College, for his careful reading of 
the proofs. Professor Ridgeway and my colleague, 
Mr. R. B. Appleton, have given invaluable criticism 
and advice. 

W. H. 5. J. 

vi 

CONTENTS 

e PAGE 
PREFACE > Vee oh ae Bet ἂν. ea et oe we ad a ας πον. ν 
INTRODUCTION .................. ix 

A FEW SYNONYMS ............ 6. . 6 XXV 

THE MANUSCRIPTS OF PAUSANIAS .. . ο ρου ee.) χχνὶ] 
EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS ,.......... XXVili 
BOOK 1.—ATTICA. ................ 1 
BOOK 1Ι.--ΟΟΒΕΙΝΤΗ................ 245 

Vii 

INTRODUCTION 

Lire oF PAUSANIAS 

Αβουτ Pausanias we know nothing except what 
we can gather from a few scattered hints in his own 
Tour of Greece. In book v. xiii. § 7 he mentions “ the 
dwelling among us of Pelops and Tantalus,” and 
“the throne of Pelops on Mount Sipylus.” It isa 
fair inference that Pausanias was a native of Lydia. 
His date we can fix with tolerable certainty. In 
v. i. § 2 he says that two hundred and seventeen 
years had passed since Corinth was repeopled. Now 
Corinth was restored in 44 B.c., so that Pausa- 
nias was writing his fifth book in 174 a.D. Again, in 
vir, xx. § 6, he tells us that in his account of Attica 
he did not mention the Odeum of Herodes because 
it was not yet built at the time of writing; but we 
happen to know that it was built during the time of 
the Antonines. These emperors Pausanias knows as 
“the first Antonine” and “the second Antonine,” 
and he mentions a war of the latter against the 
Germans and Sauromatae. This war began in 
166 a.p., and the emperor triumphed in 176 a.D. 

1X 

INTRODUCTION 

He does not mention the death of “the second 
Antonine,” which took place in 180 a.p. 

Of the character of Pausanias we know very little. 
His work is that of a commonplace mind, which 
accepts the conditions of the period in which it finds 
itself as the best possible outcome of an unhappy 
past. Without being a scientific critic, Pausanias 
can reject the improbable or relate it with a caveat 
lector. He is transparently honest, with no axe to 
grind and no object to be gained by intentional 
inaccuracy. His book exhibits no enthusiasms, 
either of love or of hate, but throughout it there is 
manifest a quiet admiration for the beauties and 
glories of Greece. 

Tue STYLE or PAUSANIAS 

The style of Pausanias is simple and unpretentious. 
The matter of the work does not lend itself to 
literary embellishment, and, with two exceptions, 
the narrative unfolds itself plain and unadorned. 
The first exception is that Pausanias, like other 
Hellenistic writers, often indulges in curiously ver- 
bose and tortuous expressions to represent very 
simple ideas; the second is his fondness for trans- 
positions of words, which are sometimes so violent as 
to throw doubt upon the sense. 

The translator is sometimes. troubled by what 
appears to be carelessness in the use of prepositions. 
x 

INTRODUCTION 

It is impossible, for example, to decide positively 
in many cases whether ὑπέρ means “above” or 
“beyond.” Another source of ambiguity is the use 
of ἐπί with the dative case, of which Pausanias is 
very fond. But ἐπί with the dative may have, among 
others, the following meanings :— ` 

(1) In addition to; 
(2) Next to, close to, at, near ; 
(3) On the top οἵ; 
(4) In the case of. 

Now in topographical descriptions the use of pre- 
positions with local meanings should be very strict 
and precise, and it is rather unfortunate that Pau- 
sanias employs this construction of ἐπί so frequently, 
as the translator is often uncertain which meaning 
to choose, and an error may make a serious change 
in the sense of a passage. 

Another ambiguity, occurring several times in 
Pausanias, is of less account, as it does not seriously 
affect the sense, but it may be of some interest to 
grammarians. Pausanias is fond of using a past 
tense when in many cases the natural tense in 
English is the present. The reason is sometimes 
because the writer is thinking of the time when he 
visited a locality, or investigated a problem, some- 
times because he places himself in the position of 
his readers. Occasionally the past tense appears to 
be of the “momentary” type. In each case the 

xi 

INTRODUCTION 

translator has to decide which course is the best—to 
use a past tense in English,! to use the present, or 
to paraphrase. 

Tue Tour 

The work of Pausanias is far from being a com- 
plete description of ancient Greece. Many points 
which a modern reader would be interested in are 
either passed over altogether or else dismissed in 
the fewest possible words. Geological features, 
scenery, the general appearance of cities and villages, 
the state of agriculture and of trade, the power and 
efficiency of the country—all these things, which 
nowadays are objects of concern to an author, occupy 
a very small part of the narrative of Pausanias. To 
some extent these omissions are due to the differ- 
ences between ancient taste and modern taste. The 
Greeks, for example, and indeed ancient peoples 
generally, appreciated scenery less than we do. But 
the chief reason for the peculiar character of the 
Tour is that Pausanias wrote for a limited public, 
which took little interest in such matters as in- 
dustrial and economic questions. The reader he 

1 I have retained the past tense in 1. vi. 8], 1. xii. §2, 1. 
xxix. ὃ 10 (ἐπῆλθεν), and in 1. xxxiii. 8 3 (εἶχον, ἀπεδεχόμην), 
as referring to the time when Pausanias was making his 
inquiries, but it would perhaps be more natural to use the 
English present in all cases. The tense of ἐπῆλθεν reminds 
one of the colloquial English, '“1 am sending the photograph, 
because I thought you would like to see it.” 

xii 

INTRODUCTION 

has in mind is the tourist, who visited Greece for 
pleasure. It is interesting to observe that even in 
the second century Α.Ὀ. there were not a few who 
travelled for the sake of sight-seeing. We have as 
evidence not only the work of Pausanias, but also 
the many references in it (some nineteen! in all) to 
the ciceroni (ἐξηγηταί) who conducted visitors over 
the various districts and showed them the sights, 
adding a running commentary of legend and gossip. 
Pausanias himself was one of these tourists, and he 
appears to have explored the country with some 
thoroughness. 

A modern reader of Pausanias is disappointed 
because the information given is often so scanty, and 
of such a nature, that he cannot successfully visualize 
the place or object that is being described. This 
dryness of the narrative, this enumeration of sights 
without adequate description, indicates that Pausanias 
meant his work to be a guide-book to accompany 
the tourist on his travels and to show him what to 
look for; he had no intention of giving information 
which could be obtained by a glance on the spot. 

I have spoken of the omissions of Pausanias ; what 
kind of information is he careful to include? Towns, 
villages, roads, rivers, mountains and bays are given 
with some completeness. Fountains, and water 

1 See I. xiii. § 8, xxxiv. § 4, XXXV. § 8, xli. § 2, xlii. §4; 
Π. ix. 87, xxiii. § 6, xxxi. §4; Iv. xxxiii. 86; v. vi. §6, x. 87, 
xv. 810, xviii. 86, xx. 84, xxi. 588 and ϑ, xxiii. 86; VIIL vi. 
§5; Ix. ili. §3. 

xiii 

INTRODUCTION 

supply! generally, theatres and race-courses are 
often mentioned. But his main interest lies in 
sanctuaries, statues, tombs, and the legends con- 
nected therewith. We notice moreover that, like 
the tourist of modern days, he devotes his attention 
to superficial details rather than to truly artistic 
qualities. When describing a statue Pausanias will 
tell us that it is “ worth seeing” for its size or grace, 
but he rarely gives a critical appreciation of it. 
Interspersed among the descriptions of places and 
buildings are myths and legends, scraps of folklore 
and history, oracles and prophecies—in fact, odds 
and ends of all sorts. Sometimes, particularly when 
Pausanias turns aside to history, these digressions 
are of great length,’ and seriously interrupt the main 
thread of the narrative. Peculiarities of ritual are 
regularly given when they might strike the visitor as 
odd. Pausanias has a voracious appetite for names. 
It may safely be said that he never omits to mention 
one if he can give it. Artists, builders, those who 
have dedicated votive offerings, figures in history and 
legend, catalogues and genealogies, appear in great 

1 It was natural for a Greek writer to lay stress upon 
water, that precious necessity in southern lands. But other 
creature comforts for the traveller Pausanias ignores; he 
does not even inform his readers where a night’s lodging 
could be obtained. 

2 In a modern work they would either not appear at all, 
the reader being referred to other books, or they would be 
inserted as notes or appendices. The form of an ancient 
book and the difficulties of reference in ancient times account 
for many artistic defects in the old writers. 

χὶν 

i 
i 
d 

INTRODUCTION 

profusion. To us these names are dull enough, but 
to Greek ears they came fraught with pleasing and 
romantic associations derived from the stories of 
childhood, from the national poetry and sagas, and 
from the hymns sung at religious festivals. 

Pausanias appears to have gathered most of his 
topographical knowledge from his own travels, but 
he doubtless used in places the works of his prede- 
cessors, while his historical information is fairly re- 
liable, being generally derived from good sources. 

SumMaryY oF Books I anp II 

The regions described in the first two books of 
Pausanias are, roughly, Attica, Megaris, Corinth and 
Argolis, The chief places to which the reader is 
conducted are Sunium, Laurium, the Peiraeus, 
Athens and its neighbourhood, Marathon, Oropus, 
the islands Patroclus, Helena and Salamis, Eleusis, 
Megara, Nisaga and Megaris, Corinth, the Isthmus, 
Lechaeum, Cenchreae, Acrocorinthus, Sicyon, Tijtane, 
Phiius, Cleonae, Argos, Mycenae, Orneae, Tiryns, 
Epidaurus, Aegina, Troezen, Hermione and its neigh- 
bourhood. The way in which Pausanias describes a 
place can be seen from an analysis of the first five 
chapters of the second book. The origin of the 
name Corinth ; the Isthmus and what is on it; the 
harbours of Corinth ; the tombs on the way to Corinth 
from Cenchreae; the sights in Corinth itself—the 

XV 

INTRODUCTION 

sanctuary of Artemis Ephesia and the images ot 
Dionysys, the temple of Fortune, the sanctuary of 
all the gods, the fountain and the statues by it, the 
market-place with its bronze Athena and the temple 
of Octavia above it—the road from the market-place 
to Lechaeum and the sights on it, the chariots of 
Phaéthon and the Sun, the bronze Heracles, Peirene, 
the enclosure of Apollo, the statues of Hermes, 
Poseidon, Leucothea and Palaemon ; the baths and 
wells of Corinth; the road from Corinth to Sicyon 
with the temple of Apollo, the well of Glauce, the 
Odeum, and the tomb of Medea’s children; the 
legend of Medea; the temple of Athena the Bridler 
and the legend of Bellerophontes; the other early 
kings of Corinth ; the theatre and the Heracles of 
Daedalus; the sanctuary of Zeus Capitolinus; the 
old gymnasium and the temples of Zeus and of 
Asclepius; the Acrocorinthus, with enclosures of 
Isis and Serapis, altars to the Sun, Necessity and 
Force, temples of the Mother of the gads, the Fates, 
Demeter, Hera Bunaea and Aphrodite, the spring 
behind the last and the legend about it ; the Teneatic 
gate and the sanctuary of Eileithyia; the burnt 
temple on the way to Sicyon. Pausanias then passes 
on to the Sicyonians and their city. 

“<> The general method of description seems to be to 
describe the road to some central spot, such as the 
market-place, and to make this a starting point. 
Pausanias first gives the chief objects of interest at 
his centre, and then, taking in turn the chief roads 
xvi 

INTRODUCTION 

leading from it, describes the sights to be seen 
along each, returning after a while to the starting 
point to begin again with a fresh road. 

He does not profess to give an exhaustive account. 
“From the beginning my narrative has picked out 
of much material the things that deserve to be 
recorded.” ! Such is the rule governing his work; 
he commends himself for adopting it, and promises 
never to break it.? 

Greek RELIGION 

It will be seen that most of the sights noted by 
Pausanias had religious associations. Indeed, in the 
eyes of a Greek, everything that he could not ex- 
plain, everything that puzzled or awed him, was of 
divine origin, and in those early and pre-scientific 
days the realm of the unexplained was a large one. 
A Greek instinctively personified the forces, powers 
and processes of nature, both of the animate and of 
the inanimate world, and this personification nearly 
always resulted in assigning to these aspects of 
nature human forms endowed with divine and 
miraculous characteristics, that is, in the creation of 
anthropomorphic gods and goddesses. | 

Greek religion is of disputed origin, or origins, 
but it is certainly a complex. It consists of several 
different kinds of belief, with some of which the 

1 1. ΧΧΧΙΧ. § 3. 3 III. xi. §1. 
xvii 
b 

INTRODUCTION 

reader of Pausanias ought to be familiar. Three of 
them, at least, must be briefly noticed. 

First there is ancestor worship, the payment of 
divine honours to “ heroes.” These divinities were 
on a lower level than the “gods,’! and some 
modern scholars plausibly conjecture that the wor- 
ship of them was the native religion 3 of the primitive 
inhabitants of the country, who were conquered just 
before the dawn of Greek history by a race from the 
North, who introduced the “gods.” Be this as it 
may, the hero depended on his descendants for 
sustenance to enable him to enjoy such existence as 
tell to his lot, and it was therefore their bounden 
duty to pay him the traditional honours if they 
wished to keep his friendship. The ritual of this 
service is expressed in Greek by a special verb, 
ἐναγίζει.ὸ The offerings to a hero were not burnt; 
the sweet savour ascending to heaven was for the 
“upper gods.” The dead hero in the ground was 
nourished by drink and food, especially by the blood 

1 Sometimes a ‘‘hero ” became a ‘‘ god” in course of time. 
Instances of such a change are (probably) Asclepius and 
Heracles. See, e.g. Pausanias ΙΙ. x. 

ἃ One of the strongest pieces of evidence in support of this 
theory is derived from the methods of disposing of the dead. 
Archaeology tells us that the primitive inhabitants buried 
their dead, and were therefore likely to conceive of them as 
living a ghostly existence underground near their family ; the 
Achaeans of Homer, supposed to be the later conquerors, 
burned their dead, and therefore were likely to believe that 
the spirits of the departed left the scene of their earthly 

activities to take up their abode in a distant Hades. 
3 To sacrifice to a ‘‘ god ” was θύειν. 

xviii 

` 

INTRODUCTION 

of victims, sent down to him through his grave. 
Usually the sacrifice was not shared in by the wor- 
shippers, but was all sacred to the hero. The shrine 
of the hero was called an ἡρῷον. 

Early in Greek history, probably during the eighth 
and seventh centuries Β.ς., there spread through 
Greece a religious movement to which the name 
Orphism, a name derived from the Orpheus of legend, 
has been given. Orphism taught that man was a 
creature of sin and defilement, that the body was 
the prison of the soul, and that by ceremonial purifi- 
cation the soul could win a more blessed existence 
in the world to come. This movement found con- 
crete expression in the “mysteries,” initiation in 
which was sought by those who were depressed by 
a consciousness of sin or by the awful facts of life 
and death. Mysteries were associated with the wor- 
ship of the dead and with various deities, but 
especially with Demeter and her worship at Eleusis. 
The ritual, if we may judge from the little we know 
about it,? was trivial and absurd, but there can be 
no doubt that it did much to satisfy the emotional 
side of the religious instincts of the Greeks. Its 
modern analogue is perhaps the Salvation Army.? 

1 Pausanias mentions, e.g., mysteries of Demeter, of the 
Great Gods, and of a hero Dryops. 

3 The Greeks were careful not to divulge the holy secrets. 
We know however that they were acts, ritual and perhaps 
pantomime, rather than a liturgy of words. 

3 Any parallel is bound to be unfair and misleading, as the 
evangelicalism of religious bodies like the Salvation Army is 

xix 
b 2 

ΙΝΤΗΟΡΟΟΤΙΟΝ 

Thirdly, we have as a component of Greek τε- 
ligion nature-worship, the deification of physical 
forces and physical impulses. The instinct which 
created the fairies, brownies, elves and mermaids 
of our own legends gave to the Greeks that won- 
derful hierarchy,! with the nymphs and muses 
at one end and Zeus, the king of the gods, at the 
other. Round their names there gradually grew a 
matchless mythology, which was at once the inspira- 
tion and the theme of the best Greek art. Main- 
tained by the state, although often helped by private 
gifts and benefactions, the more honourable of these 
cults, in spite of their obvious drawbacks, not only 
afforded an outlet for religious devotion, but also 
presented to the Greek mind idealised conceptions 
of man’s activities and aspirations. Anthropomor- 
phism, with all its defects,? provides the worshipper 
with a deity that he can understand, to whom he 

pure and spiritual, and, unlike any form of Greek religion, is 
closely connected with a strict moral code. But there are 
certain close resemblances, only to be explained by the fact 
that religious emotion does not differ much from age to age 
and seeks to express itself by the same or similar channels. 

1 It is not implied that all θεοί originated in nature-worship, 
but only that such worship is an important factor in this 
part of Greek religion. Although Greek religion has many 
aspects, it must not be thought that these are altogether 
separate and unconnected. The exact relations, however, 
that they bear to one another are largely a matter of 
conjecture. 

2 These defects are largely due to the conservatism of 
religious traditions, which preserve and pass on to the future 
the ideals of a less developed, less moral, past. 

ΧΧ 

1 
l 
` 

INTRODUCTION 

can attribute, sometimes indeed his vices, but more 
often his noblest virtues, raised to a height they 
never attain in the actual, workaday world. A 
conception like that of Athena, once thoroughly 
established, grew ; poets and sculptors purified and 
enriched it, and the religious consciousness of the 
worshipper, deepening ever from age to age, gave 
to it a fuller and nobler significance. It was to art 
that religion owed most; indeed, art exerted that 
purifying influence which is exerted on modern 
religions by the development of the moral sense. 
The grandeur of the Parthenon and the majesty of 
the Athena of Pheidias could not fail to awake in 
Athenian hearts loftier notions both of divinity and 
of womanhood. 

The ritual that formed part of the worship of a 
“god” differed from, the ritual of “ hero” worship. 
The offering, or rather a part! of it, was burnt, 
so as to send a sweet smell to the deity above; 
after the sacrifice, the rest of the victim .formed 
part of a feast shared in by both worshippers and 
priest. 

Even this brief summary of Greek religion must 
not entirely omit the ceremonies of riddance, ritual 
by which the Greeks tried to ward off evil influences 

' which they did not attempt to personify. These 
' rituals often had affinities to magic, and are perhaps 

the most primitive and degraded element in Greek 

1 The thigh-bones wrapped in fat. 
xxi 

INTRODUCTION 

belief. Probably the Thesmophoria and the Litho- 
bolia (Stoning) were ceremonies of this type. 

Finally, we have the cults that were imported 
late, those for example of Isis and Serapis, signs of 
the close connexion between Greece and Egypt, and 
also those of the Roman emperors, to whom every 
subject of the Roman empire was expected to pay 
his respects. 

There were no sermons and few prayers in Greek 
worship. Its object was, not to edify the worshipper, 
but to persuade the god or goddess to grant a favour. 
The chief means employed of persuading the deity 
were burnt sacrifice, processions, dances and hymns. 

It should be noticed that there was no priestly 
caste. Many of the priesthoods were held by girls 
or women, and, with very few exceptions, no minis- 
ters of the gods laid any claim to peculiar sanctity. 
There were indeed diviners, who were more skilled 
than ordinary men in interpreting omens or in dis- 
covering the intentions of heaven, but, on the whole, 
Greek religion was singularly free from priestcraft} 
of any kind. 

SURNAMES oF Gops 

Any reader of Pausanias will be struck by the 
number of epithets or surnames attached to the 
names of certain gods. The following is a list of 

1 Possibly there was most priestcraft in the oracles, 
especially that at Delphi, and in the mysteries. 

xxii 

INTRODUCTION 

the chief divinities he mentions with the number of 
surnames given to each :— 

Aphrodite . . 27 Fortune . . 3 
Apollo . . . 58 Hera . . . 18 
Ares. . . . 4 Heracles . . 11 
Artemis. .. . 64. Hermes . . 15 
Asclepius . . 10 Muses... 2 
Athena. . . 59 Nymphs . . 10 
Core. . . . 6 Pan. ... 4 
Demeter > . 26 Poseidon . . 18 
Dionysus . . 27 Sleep . . . 1 
Dioscuri . . 2 Zeus... 0] — 

Pausanias gives no surnames of Cronus, Hephaestus, ο. 
Leto, Pluto, or of the Graces. are, 
The mere number of epithets attached to a deity 
is a fair test of the power of his cult to appeal to the 
religious instinct. But a closer examination of them 
will enable a reader to appreciate passages in Pausa- 

nias which otherwise may be almost meaningless. 

Many of the epithets merely refer to the city or 
place in which the cult was established. Thus 
Artemis was called Brauronian, Ephesian, Munychian 
and Tauric; Poseidon was Heliconian, Isthmian, 
Onchestian, Taenarian. | 

Other surnames are derived from the names of 
animals, In many cases, without a doubt, the deity 
was originally an animal, or at any rate manifested 

himself in the form of an animal; while in other 
xxiii 

INTRODUCTION 

cases the epithet merely refers to some legend 
about the deity. Examples are :— 

Apollo. . . . Wolf-god. 
Apollo. . . . Locust-god. 
Athena . . . MHorse-goddess. 
Zeus . . . . Cuckoo-god. 
Artemis . . . Goat-goddess. 

Not a few surnames are taken from the names of 
plants sacred to the deity, for instance, Demeter 
Grass and Dionysus Ivy. 
A great number of epithets refer to some mode in 
which the divine power manifests itself, or to an 
aspect or characteristic of the deity, either (a) general 
or (b) peculiar to a particular time or place. Thus 
Zeus was :— 
Lord of Thunderbolts. 
Lord of Dust. 
Cleanser. 
Gracious. 
Saviour. 

Apollo was :— 
Lord of Embarking. 
Lord of Streets. 
Healer. 

Again, the surname may mark the supplanting of 
one deity by another, as Artemis supplanted Dic- 
tynna, the Goddess of Nets, Apollo Carneiis, and 
Hermes (apparently) a hero Aepytus. In other 

xxiv 

INTRODUCTION 

cases the epithet perpetuates some detail of a legend 
(Athena Trumpet), of a temple (Athena of the 
Bronze House), or even of a type of image (Athena 
Sharp-sighted). In a great number of cases the 
meaning can only be guessed at, or has been entirely 
lost. 

XXV 

A FEW SYNONYMS 

There are a few synonyms, mostly with religious associa- 
tions, a short discussion of which will not be out of place 
here. 

(1) ἦρφον : hero-shrine or ‘‘ chapel,” the temple of a hero or 
demi-god. 
ἱερόν : sanctuary, the holy ground belonging to a god or 
(sometimes) a hero,! and generally containing a 
temple. | 

ναός: temple, the actual building. It is sometimes used 
of a hero-shrine.? 

περίβολος, τέµενος: precinct, sacred enclosure. It is hard 
to distinguish between these two words. Perhaps 
the former looks more to the boundaries of the, 
precinct, the latter to the space enclosed. Usually 
the words are used of ἱερά without a vads.? 

(9) ἐόανον: wooden image of a god. Statues of wood are 

older than those of metal or stone. 

ἄγαλμα: image, statue, generally of a god. It might be 
translated ‘‘idol” were it not for the superstitious 
associations of this word. 

ἀνδριάς : statue of a man. This word has no religious 
associations, and in this way can be distinguished 
from ἄγαλμα. 

εἰκών: portrait, likeness, often identical in meaning with 
ἀνδριάς. 

ἔδος : used only once in Pausanias, of a statue of Aphro- 
dite.’ 

(3) τάφος: grave, burying-place. 

μνῆμα: tomb, memorial, monument. The word therefore 

suggests more than τάφος, though the two are some- 
times identical.® 

1 im. xv. 83. Σ I. xv. 87. 

3 But sometimes a τέμενος has a ναός, ΙΙ. xxiii. ὃ 7. 
4 See, e.g., II. xvii. 8 7 and ΙΙ. xviii. § 1. 

5 1, xx. 88, 6 τι. xv. §§ 2 and 3. 

xxvi 

THE MANUSCRIPTS OF PAUSANIAS 

There are many MSS. of Pausanias, but all are late. They 
have been divided into three classes, of which the beci 
representatives are :— 

(1) P, a manuscript written in the year 1491 A.D. It isnow 
in Paris, and is known as Parisinus 1410. 
Pd, known as Parisinus 1411. 
Fa, now at Florence, and known as Laurentianus 56. 10. 
Fb, also at Florence, and known as Laurentianus 56. 11. 

(2) L, now at Leyden, known as Lugdunensis 16. K. 

(3) V, now at Vienna, known as Vindobonensis 23. 
M, now at Moscow, known as Mosquensis 194. 
Vn, now at Venice, known as Venetus 413, 

Lb, now at Leyden, known as Lugdunensis 16. L. 

The first two groups are closely connected, while the third 
has given us the ‘‘vulgate” or common text. It does not 
seem likely that a further study of the MSS. will, of itself, 
do much to clear away the blemishes that still disfigure the 
text of Pausanias. The chief blemishes are gaps in the text, 
where the manuscript tradition fails us entirely. Conjectures 
may sometimes fill these gaps plausibly, but obviously no 
great trust can be reposed in them. 

xxvii 

EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS 

The following are the chief editions of Pausanias :— 

1516 (Venice), M. Musurus. 
1550 (Basle), A. Loescher. 

1613 (Hanover), G. Xylander. 
This is one of the best early editions. 

1794-6 (Leipzig), Jo. F. Facius. 

1822-8 (Leipzig), C. G. Siebelis. 

1826-7 (Berlin), I. Bekker. 

1838 (Leipzig), J. H. C. Schubart et Chr. Walz. 
1845 (Paris), L. Dindorf. 

1853 (Leipzig), J. H. C. Schubart. 

1896-1910 (Leipzig), H. Hitzig, H. Bluemner,. 
1903 (Leipzig), F. Spiro. 

The English Translations are :— 

1794 (London), T. Taylor. 
1886 (London), A. R. Shilleto. 
1898 (London), J. G. Frazer. 

The last has a monumental commentary, and is the standard 
work of reference in English. 

xxviii 

PAUSANIAS 
DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

BOOK I—ATTICA 

VOL. 1. | Β 

ΠΑΥΣΑΝΙΟΥ 
ΕΛΛΑΔΟΣ ΠΕΡΙΗΓΗΣΕΩΣ 

A’ 
ATTIKA 

I. Τῆς ἠπείρου τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς κατὰ νήσους 
τὰς Κυκλάδας καὶ πέλαγος τὸ Αἰγαῖον ἄκρα 
Σούνιον πρόκειται γῆς τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς: καὶ λιμήν 
τε παραπλεύσαντι τὴν ἄκραν ἐστὶ καὶ ναὸς 
᾿Αθηνᾶς Σουνιάδος ἐπὶ κορυφῇ τῆς ἄκρας. 
πλέοντι δὲ ἐς τὸ πρόσω Λαύριόν τέ ἐστιν, ἔνθα 
ποτὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις ἦν ἀργύρου μέταλλα, καὶ νῆσος 
ἔρημος οὐ μεγάλη Πατρόκλου καλουμένη" τεῖχος 
γὰρ ᾠκοδομήσατο ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ χάρακα ἐβάλετο 
Πάτροκλος, ὃς τριήρεσιν ὑπέπλει ναύαρχος 
Αἰγυπτίαις, ἃς Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Πτολεμαίου τοῦ 
Λάγου τιμωρεῖν ἔστειλεν ᾿Αθηναίοις, ὅτε σφίσιν 
᾿Αντίγονος ὁ Δημητρίου στρατιᾷ τε αὐτὸς ἐσβε- 
Εληκὼς ἔφθειρε τὴν χώραν καὶ ναυσὶν ἅμα ἐκ 
θαλάσσης κατεῖργεν. 

O δὲ Πειραιεὺς δῆμος μὲν ἦν ἐκ παλαιοῦ, 
πρότερον δὲ πρὶν ἢ (Θεμιστοκλῆς ᾿Αθηναίοις 
ἦρξεν ἐπίνειον οὐκ ἦν' Φαληρὸν δέ--ταύτῃ γὰρ 
ἐλάχιστον ἀπέχει τῆς πόλεως ἡ θάλασσα---, 
2 

—_ 
r 

\ 

PAUSANIAS 
DESCRIPTION OF GREECE ` 

BOOK I 

ATTICA 

I. On the Greek mainland facing the Cyclades 
Islands and the Aegean Sea the Sunium promohtory 
stands out from the Attic land. When you have 
‘rounded the promontory you see a harbour and a 

- temple to Athena of Sunium on the peak of the 

promontory., Farther on is Laurium, where once 
the Athenians had silver mines, and a small un- 
inhabited island called the Island of Patroclus. y For 
a fortification was built on it and a palisade con- 

structed by Patroclus, who was admiral in command 
of the Egyptian men-of-war sent by Ptolemy, son of 
Ptolemy, son of Lagus, to help the Athenians, when 
Antigonus, son of Demetrius, was ravaging their 
country, which he had invaded with an army, and 
at the same time was blockading them by sea with 
a fleet. 

The Peiraeus was a parish from early times, 
though it was not a port before Themistocles became 
an archon of the Athenians. . Their port was Phale- 
rum, for at this place the sea comes nearest to 

3 

ο. 267- 
268 B.C. 

493 B.C. 

- 
- 
- 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοῦτό σφισιν ἐπίνειον ἣν, καὶ Μενεσθέα φασὶν 
αὐτόθεν ταῖς :Υχυσὶν ἐς Τροίαν ἀναχθῆναι καὶ 
τούτου πρότέρῥν. θησέα δώσοντα Μίνῳ δίκας τῆς 
᾿Ανδρόγεω τελευτῆς. Θεμιστοκλῆς δὲ ὡς ἦρξε-- 
τοῖς τε γὰρ πλέουσιν ἐπιτηδειότερος ὁ Πειραιεὺς 
ἐφαίνοτά οἱ προκεῖσθαι καὶ λιμένας τρεῖς ἆνθ' 
ἑνὸς ἔχειν τοῦ Φαληροῖ--τοῦτό να ἐπίνειον 
εἶναι κατεσκευάσατο: καὶ νεὼς καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦσαν 
x Ῥΐκοι καὶ πρὸς τῷ μεγίστῳ λιμένι τάφος Θεμι- 
“στοκλέους. φασὶ γὰρ μεταμελῆσαι τῶν ἐς 
το, ` Θεμιστοκλέα ᾿Αθηναίοις καὶ ὡς οἱ προσήκοντες 
τὰ ὀστᾶ κομίσαιεν ἐκ Μαγνησίας ἀνελόντες" 
φαίνονται δὲ οἱ παῖδες οἱ Θεμιστοκλέους καὶ 
κατελθόντες καὶ γραφὴν ἐς τὸν Παρθενῶνα 
ἀναθέντες, ἐν Ñ Θεμιστοκλῆς ἐστι γεγραμμένος. 
3 θέας δὲ ἄξιον τῶν ἐν Πειραιεῖ μάλιστα ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
ἐστι καὶ Διὸς τέμενος" Χαλκοῦ μὲν ἀμφότερα τὰ 
ἀγάλματα, ἔχει δὲ ὁ μὲν σκῆπτρον καὶ Νίκην, ή 
δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶ δόρυ. ἐνταῦθα Λεωσθένην, ὃς ᾿Αθη- 
ναίοις καὶ τοῖς πᾶσιν "Ελλησιν ἡ ἡγούμενος Maxe- 
δόνας ἔν τε Borwroîs ἐκράτησε μάχῃ καὶ αὖθις 
ἔξω Θερμοπυλῶν. καὶ βιασάμενος ἐς Λάμιαν 
κατέκλεισε τὴν ἀπαντικρὺ τῆς Οἴτης, τοῦτον 
τὸν Λε θένην καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ἔγραψεν ᾿Αρκε- 
σίλαος«ὰ ἔστι δὲ τῆς στοᾶς τῆς μακρᾶς, ἔνθα 
καθέστηκεν ἀγορὰ τοῖς ἐπὶ θαλάσσης--καὶ γὰρ 
τοῖς ἀπωτέρω τοῦ λιμένος ἐστὶν ἑτέρα---, τῆς δὲ 
ἐπὶ θαλάσσης στοᾶς ὄπισθεν ἑστᾶσι Ζεὺς καὶ 
Δῆμος, Λεωχάρους ἔργον. πρὸς δὲ τῇ θαλάσσῃ 
Κόνων ᾠκοδόμησεν ᾿Αφροδίτης ἱερόν, ͵ τριήρεις 
Λακεδαιμονίων κατεργασάμενος περὶ Κνίδον τὴν 
ἐν τῇ Καρικῇ χερρονήσῳ. Κνίδιοι γὰρ τιμῶσιν 
4 

ATTICA, 1. 2-3 
f 
Athens, and from here men say that Menestheus set 
sail with his fleet for Troy, and before him Theseus, 
when he went to give satisfaction to Minos for the 
| death of Androgeos. But when Themistocles became 
' archon, since he thought that the Peiraeus was more 
/ conveniently situated for mariners, and had three 
_ harbours as against one at Phalerum, he made it the 
' Athenian port.. Even up to my .time there were 
docks there, and near the largest harbour is the grave 
of Themistocles.» For it is said that the Athenians 
repented of their treatment of Themistocles, and that 
his relations took up his bones and brought them 
from Magnesia.) And the children of Themistocles 
certainly returned and set up in the Parthenon a 
painting, on which is a portrait of Themistocles. The 
most noteworthy sight in the Peiraeus is a precinct of 
Athena and Zeus. Both their images are of bronze ; 
Zeus holds a staff and a Victory, Athena a spear. Here 
is a portrait of Leosthenes and of his sons, painted 
by Arcesilaus. This Leosthenes at the head of the 
Athenians and the united Greeks defeated the Mace- 323 s.c. 
“donians in Boeotia and again outside Thermopylae, 
forced them into Lamia over against Oeta, and shut 
them up there. The portrait is in the long portico, 
where stands a market-place for those living near 
| the sea—those farther away from the harbour have 
another—but behind the portico near the sea stand 
a Zeus and a Demos, the work of Leochares. And 
by the sea Conon built a sanctuary of Aphrodite, 
after he had crushed the Lacedaemonian warships 94 ».c. 
off Cnidus in the Carian peninsula. For the Cnidians 

5 

Π. ο. 
$50 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αφροδίτην μάλιστα, καί σφισιν ἔστιν ἱερὰ τῆς 
θεοῦ- τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἀρχαιότατον Δωρίτιδος, μετὰ 
δὲ τὸ ᾿Ακραίας, νεώτατον δὲ ἣν Κνιδίαν οἱ πολλοί, 
Κνίδιοι δὲ αὐτοὶ καλοῦσιν Εὔπλοιαν. 

Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ᾿Αθηναίοις ὁ μὲν ἐπὶ 
Μουνυχίᾳ λιμὴν καὶ Μουνυχίας ναὸς ᾿Αρτέμιδος, 
ε A > A . / Ν ld 
ὁ δὲ ἐπὶ Φαληρῷ, καθὰ καὶ πρότερον εἴρηταί 
μοι, καὶ πρὸς αὐτῷ Δήμητρος ἱερόν. ἐνταῦθα 

\ 4 » A / 3 . ? 
καὶ Σκιράδος ᾿Αθηνᾶς ναός ἐστι καὶ Διὸς amw- 

/ . - 3 / ? 4 
τέρω, βωμοὶ δὲ θεῶν τε ὀνομαζομένων ᾿Αγνώστων 
καὶ ἡρώων καὶ παίδων τῶν Θησέως καὶ Φαληροῦ: 

- ` ` A ? A A 
τοῦτον yap τὸν Φαληρὸν Αθηναῖοι πλεῦσαι 
μετὰ Ἰάσονός φασιν ἐς Κόλχους. ἔστι δὲ καὶ 
᾿Ανδρόγεω βωμὸς τοῦ Μίνω, καλεῖται δὲ "Ἠρωος: 
᾿Ανδρόγεω δὲ ὄντα ἴσασιν οἷς ἐστιν ἐπιμελὲς τὰ 
9 ΄ / Μ / > / 
ἐγχώρια σαφέστερον ἄλλων ἐπίστασθαι. ἀπέχει 
δὲ σταδίους εἴκοσιν ἄκρα Κωλιάς ἐς ταύτην 
φθαρέντος τοῦ ναυτικοῦ τοῦ Μήδων κατήνεγκεν 
ὁ κλύδων τὰ νανάγια. Κωλιάδος δέ ἐστιν ἐν- 
ταῦθα ᾿Αφροδίτης ἄγαλμα καὶ Γενετυλλίδες 
ὀνομαζόμεναι eai: δοκῶ δὲ καὶ Φωκαεῦσι τοῖς 
3 > / 7 4 A a 
ἐν Ἰωνία θεάς, ἃς καλοῦσι Γενναΐδας, εἶναι ταῖς 
ἐπὶ Κωλιάδι τὰς αὐτάς. ---ἔστι δὲ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν 
τὴν ἐς ᾿Αθήνας ἐκ Φαληροῦ ναὸς "ρας οὔτε 
θύρας ἔχων οὔτε ὄροφον: Μαρδόνιόν φασιν αὐτὸν 
3 A A ΄ A LA A A 
ἐμπρῆσαι τὸν Γωβρύου. τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα τὸ νῦν 
δή, καθὰ λέγουσιν, ᾿Αλκαμένους ἐστὶν ἔργον" 
οὐκ ἂν τοῦτό ye ὁ Μῆδος εἴη λελωβημένος. 

II. ᾿Εσελθόντων δὲ ἐς τὴν πόλιν ἐστὶν ᾿Αν- 
6 

et αι. νόῳ... πιω ο” ne επ. παπα... --α-αε 

ATTICA, τ. 3-1. 1 

hold Aphrodite in very great honour, and they have 
sanctuaries of the goddess; the oldest is to her as 
Doritis (Bountiful), the next in age as Acraea (Of the 
Height), while the newest is to the Aphrodite called 
Cnidian by men generally, but Euploia (Fair Voyage) 
by the Cnidians themselves. 

== The Athenians have also another harbour, at 

/ 

Munychia, with a temple of Artemis of Munychia, 
and yet another at Phalerum, as I have already 
stated, and near it is a sanctuary of Demeter. Here 
there is also a temple of Athena Sciras, and one of 
Zeus some distance away, and altars of the gods 
named Unknown, and of heroes, and of the children 
of Theseus and Phalerus ; for this Phalerus is said by 
the Athenians to have sailed with Jason to Colchis. 
There is also an altar of Androgeos, son of Minos, 
though it is called that of Heros; those, however, 
who pay special attention to the study of their 
country’s antiquities know that it belongs to Andro- 
geos. Twenty stades away is the Coliad promontory ; 
on to it, when the Persian fleet was destroyed, the 
wrecks were carried down by the waves. There is 
here an image of the Coliad Aphrodite, with the 
goddesses Genetyllides (Goddesses of Birth), as they 
are called. And I am of opinion that the goddesses 
of the Phocaeans in Ionia, whom they call Gennaides, 
are the same as those at Colias. On the way from 
Phalerum to Athens there is a temple of Hera with 
neither doors nor roof. Men say that Mardonius, son 
of Gobryas, burnt it. But the image there to-day 
is, as report goes, the work of Alcamenes. So that 
this, at any rate, cannot have been damaged by the 
Persians. 

II. On entering the city there is a monument to 

κ 

fl. 440- 
400 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τιόπης μνῆμα ᾿Αμαξόνος. ταύτην τὴν ᾿Αντιόπην 
Πίνδαρος μέν φησιν ὑπὸ Πειρίθου καὶ Θησέως 
ἁρπασθῆναι, Τροιζηνίῳ δὲ '᾿Ηγίᾳ τοιάδε ἐς αὐτὴν 
πεποίηται "Ἡρακλέα Θεμίσκυραν πολιορκοῦντα 
τὴν ἐπὶ Θερμώδοντι ἑλεῖν μὴ δύνασθαι, Θησέως 
δὲ ἐρασθεῖσαν ᾿Αντιόπην--στρατεῦσαι γὰρ ἅμα 
Ἡρακλεῖ καὶ Θησέα- παραδοῦναι τὸ χωρίον. 
τάδε μὲν Ἡγίας πεποίηκεν: ᾿Αθηναῖοι δέ φασιν, 
ἐπεί τε ἦλθον ᾿Αμαξόνες, ᾿Αντιόπην μὲν ὑπὸ 
Μολπαδίας τοξευθῆναι, Μολπαδίαν δὲ ἀποθανεῖν 
ὑπὸ Θησέως. καὶ μνῆμά ἐστι καὶ Μολπαδίας 

--ζΑθηναίοις. 

(2, ᾿Ανιόντων δὲ ἐκ Πειραιῶς ἐρείπια τῶν τειχῶν 
ἐστιν, ἃ Κόνων ὕστερον τῆς πρὸς Κνίδῳ ναυ- 
μαχίας ἀνέστησε' τὰ γὰρ Θεμιστοκλέους μετὰ 
τὴν ἀναχώρησιν οἰκοδομηθέντα τὴν Μήδων ἐπὶ 
τῆς ἀρχῆς καθῃρέθη τῶν τριάκοντα ὀνομαζομένων. 
εἰσὶ δὲ τάφοι κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν γνωριμώτατοι Με- 
νάνδρου τοῦ Διοπείθους καὶ μνῆμα Εὐριπίδου 
κενόν' τέθαπται δὲ Εὐριπίδης ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ παρὰ 
τὸν βασιλέα ἐλθὼν ᾿Αρχέλαον, ὁ δέ οἱ τοῦ θανά- 
του τρόπος---πολλοῖς γάρ ἐστιν εἰρημένος---ἐχέτω 

3 καθὰ λέγουσιν. συνῆσαν δὲ ἄρα καὶ τότε τοῖς 
βασιλεῦσι ποιηταὶ καὶ πρότερον ἔτι καὶ Πολυ- 
κράτει Σάμου τυραννοῦντι ᾿Ανακρέων παρῆν καὶ 
ἐς Συρακούσας πρὸς Ἱέρωνα Αἰσχύλος καὶ Σι- 
μωνίδης ἐστάλησαν: Διονυσίῳ δὲ, ὃς ὕστερον 
ἐτυράννησεν ἐν Σικελίᾳ, Φιλόξενος παρῆν καὶ 
᾿Αντιγόνῳ Μακεδόνων ἄρχοντι᾽ Ανταγόρας “Ῥόδιος 
καὶ Σολεὺς "Ἄρατος. Ἡσίοδος δὲ καὶ "Όμηρος 

ἢ συγγενέσθαι βασιλεῦσιν ἠτύχησαν ἢ καὶ 

ἑκόντες ὠλιγώρησαν, ὁ μὲν «ἀγροικίᾳ καὶ ὄκνῳ 

8 

ATTICA, 1u. 1-3 

Antiope the Amazon. This Antiope, Pindar says, was 
carried off by Peirithous and Theseus, but Hegias of 
Troezen gives the following account of her, Heracles 
was ‘besieging Themiscyra on the Thermodon, but 
could not take it, but Antiope, falling in love with 
Theseus, who was aiding Heracles in his campaign, 
surrendered the stronghold. Such is the account of 
_Hegias. But the Athenians assert that when the 
Amazons came, Antiope was shot by Molpadia, while 
. Molpadia was killed by Theseus. To Molpadia also 
' there is a monument among the Athenians. 
-- As you go up from the Peiraeus you see the ruins of 
the walls which Conon restored after the naval battle 
off Cnidus. For those built by Themistocles after 
the retreat of the Persians were destroyed during 
the rule of those named the Thirty. Along the road 
are very famous graves, that of Menander, son of 
Diopeithes, and a cenotaph of Euripides. He him- 
self went to King Archelaus and lies buried in 

Macedonia; as to the manner of his death (many 

have described it), let it be as they say. So even in 
his time poets lived at the courts of kings,.as earlier 
still Anacreon consorted with Polycrates, despot of 
Samos, and Aeschylus and Simonides journeyed to 
Hiero at Syracuse. Dionysius, afterwards despot in 
Sicily, had Philoxenus at his court, and Antigonus,! 
ruler of Macedonia, had Antagoras of Rhodes and 
Aratus of Soli. But Hesiod and Homer either failed 
to win the society of kings or else purposely despised 
it, Hesiod through boorishness and reluctance to 

1 Antigonus surnamed Gonatas became king of Macedonia 
in 283 B.C. 9 

404-403 
B.C. 

9 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πλάνης,᾽ Ὄμηρος δὲ ἀποδημήσας ἐπὶ μακρότατον 
καὶ τὴν ὠφέλειαν τὴν ἐς χρήματα παρὰ τῶν 
δυνατῶν ὑστέραν θέμενος τῆς παρὰ τοῦς πολλοῖς 
ἝΝ ἐπεὶ ως ‘Onn pe πεποιημένα ἐστὶν ᾿Αλκίνῳ 
παρεῖναι Δημόδοκον καὶ ὡς ᾿Αγαμέμνων κατα- 
arth τινὰ παρὰ τῇ γυναικὶ ποιητήν.---ἔστι δὲ 
ος οὐ πόρρω τῶν πυλῶν, ἐπίθημα ἔχων στρα- 
σα ἵππῳ παρεστηκότα" ὅντινα μέν, οὐκ οἶδα, 
Πραξιτέλης ᾿δὲ καὶ τὸν ἵππον καὶ τὸν στρατιώτην 
ἐποίησεν. 

Ἔσελθόντων δὲ ἐς τὴν πόλιν οἰκοδόμημα ἐς 
παρασκευήν ἐστι τῶν πομπῶν, ἃς πέμπουσι 
τὰς μὲν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος, τὰς δὲ καὶ χρόνον δια- 
λείποντες. καὶ πλησίον ναύς ἐστι Δήμητρος, 
ἀγάλματα δὲ αὐτή τε καὶ ἡ παῖς καὶ δᾷδα ἔ ἔχων 
Ἴακχος' γέγραπται δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ τοίχῳ γράμμασιν 
᾿Αττικοῖς ἔργα εἶναι Πραξιτέλους. τοῦ ναοῦ δὲ 
οὐ πόρρω Ποσειδῶν ἐστιν ἐφ᾽ ἵππου, δόρυ ἀφιεὶς 
ἐπὶ γίγαντα .Πολυβώτην, ἐς ὃν Κῴοις ὁ μῦθος 
ὁ περὶ τῆς ἄκρας ἔχει τῆς Χελώνης' τὸ δὲ ἐπί- 
γραμμα τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν τὴν εἰκόνα ἄλλῳ δίδωσι καὶ 
οὐ Ποσειδῶνι. στοαὶ δέ εὖσιν ἀπὸ τῶν πυλῶν 
ἐς τὸν Κεραμεικὸν καὶ εἰκόνες πρὸ αὐτῶν χαλκαῖ 
καὶ γυναικῶν καὶ ἀνδρῶν, ὅσοις τι ὑπῆρχεν 
ἐς δόξαν. ἡ δὲ ἑτέρα τῶν στοῶν ἔχει μὲν ἱερὰ 
θεῶν, ἔχει δὲ γυμνάσιον Ἑρμοῦ ιά 
ἔστι δὲ ἐν αὐτῇ Πουλυτίωνος οἰκία, καθ᾽ ἣν 
παρὰ τὴν ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι δρᾶσαι τελετὴν ᾿Αθη- 
ναίων φασὶν οὐ τοὺς ἀφανεστάτους" ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δὲ 
ἀνεῖτο Διονύσῳ. Διόνυσον δὲ τοῦτον καλοῦσι 
Μελπόμενον ἐπὶ oye τοιῷδε ἐφ᾽ ὁποίῳ περ 
᾿Απόλλωνα Μουσηγέτην. ἐνταῦθά ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς 

1ο 

ATTICA, τι. 3-5 

travel, while Homer, having gone very far abroad, 
depreciated the help afforded by despots in the 
acquisition of wealth in comparison with his reputa- 
tion among ordinary men. And yet Homer, too, in 
his poem makes Demodocus live at the court of 
Alcinous, and Agamemnon leave a poet with his wife. 
Not far from the gates is a grave, on which is 
mounted a soldier standing by a horse. Who it 
is I do not know, but both horse and soldier were 
carved by Praxiteles. 

On entering the city there is a building for the 
preparation of the processions, which are held in 
some cases every year, in others at longer intervals. 
Hard by is a temple of Demeter, with images of the 
goddess herself and of her daughter, and of Iacchus 
holding a torch. On the wall, in Attic characters, 
is written that they are works of Praxiteles. Not 
far from the temple is Poseidon on horseback, 
hurling a spear against the giant Polybotes, concern- 
ing whom is prevalent among the Coans the story 
about the promontory of Chelone. But the inscrip- 
tion of our time assigns the statue to another, and 
not to Poseidon. From the gate to the Cerameicus 
there are porticoes, and in front of them brazen 
statues of such as had some title to fame, both men 
and women. One of the porticoes contains shrines 
of gods, and a gymnasium called that of Hermes. 
In it is the house of Pulytion, at which it is said that 
a mystic rite was performed by the most notable 
Athenians, parodying the Eleusinian mysteries. But 
in my time it was devoted to the worship of Dionysus. 
This Dionysus they call Melpomenus (Minstrel), on 
the same principle as they call Apollo Musegetes 
(Leader of the Muses). Here there are images of 

II 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἄγαλμα Παιωνίας καὶ Διὸς καὶ Μνημοσύνης καὶ 
Μουσῶν, ᾿Απόλλων τε ἀνάθημα καὶ ἔργον Εὐ- 
βουλίδου, καὶ ,δαίµων τῶν ἀμφὶ Διόνυσον Arpa- 
τος" πρόσωπόν ἐστίν οἱ μόνον ἐνῳκοδομημένον 
τοίχῳ. μετὰ δὲ τὸ τοῦ Διονύσου τέμενος ἐστιν 
οἴκημα ἀγάλματα ἔχον͵ ἐκ πηλοῦ, βασιλεὺς 
᾿Αθηναίων ᾿Αμϕικτύων ἄλλους τε θεοὺς ἑστιῶν 
καὶ Διόνυσον. ἐνταῦθα καὶ Πήγασός ἐστιν 
᾿Ελευθερεύς, ὃς ᾿Αθηναίοις τὸν θεὸν ἐσήγαγε" 
συνεπελάβετο δέ οἱ τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς μαντεῖον ἆνα- 
μνῆσαν τὴν ἐπὶ Ἰκαρίου ποτὲ ἐπιδημίαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν ᾽Αμϕικτύων ἔσχεν οὕτως. 
᾿Ακταῖον λέγουσιν ἐν τῇ νῦν ᾿Αττικῇ βασιλεῦσαι 
πρῶτον" ἀποθανόντος δὲ ᾿Ακταίου Κέκροψ ἐκ- 
δέ εται τὴν ἀρχὴν θυγατρὶ συνοικῶν ᾿Ακταίου, 
καί, οἱ γίνονται θυγατέρες μὲν “Epon καὶ "Άγλαυ- 
ρος καὶ Πώνδροσος, υἱὸς δὲ ᾿Ερυσίχθων' οὗτος 
οὐκ ἐβασίλευσεν ᾿Αθηναίων, ἀλλά οἱ τοῦ πατρὸς 
ζῶντος τελευτῆσαι συνέβη, καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν τὴν 
Κέκροπος Κραναὸς ἐξεδέξατο, ᾿Αθηναίων υνάμει 
πρού ων. Κραναῷ δὲ θυγατέρας καὶ ἄλλας καὶ 
᾿Ατθίδα γενέσθαι. λέγουσιν" ἀπὸ ταύτης ὀνομά- 
ζουσιν ᾿Αττικὴν τὴν χώρα», πρότερον καλουμένην 
᾿Ακταίαν. _ Κραναῷ δὲ ᾽Αμϕικτύων ἐπαναστάς, 
θυγατέρα ὅ ὅμως ἔχων αὐτοῦ, παύει τῆς ἀρχῆς" Kab 
αὐτὸς ὕστερον ὑπὸ Ἐριχθονίου καὶ τῶν συνεπ- 
αναστάντων ἐκπίπτει" πατέρα δὲ ᾿Εριχθονίῳ 
λέγουσιν ἀνθρώπων μὲν οὐδένα εἶναι, γονέας δὲ 
"Ηφαιστον καὶ Γῆν. 

ΠΗ. Τὸ δὲ χωρίον ὁ Κεραμεικὸς τὸ μὲν ὅ ὄνομα 
ἔχει ἀπὸ ἥρωος Κεράμου, Διονύσου τε εἶναι καὶ 
᾿Αριάδνης καὶ τούτου λεγομένου: πρώτη δέ ἐστιν 

12 

ATTICA, u. 5-m. 1 

Athena Paeonia (Healer), of Zeus, of Mnemosyne 
(Memory) and of the Muses, an Apollo, the votive 
offering and work of Eubulides, and Acratus, a 
daemon attendant upon Apollò; it is only a face - 
of him worked into the wall. After the precinct 
of Apollo is a building that contains earthen- 
ware images, Amphictyon, king of Athens, feasting 
Dionysus and other gods. Here also is Pegasus of 
Eleutherae, who introduced the god to the Athenians. 
Herein he was helped by the oracle at Delphi, 
hich called to mind that the god once dwelt in 
thens in the days of Icarius. Amphictyon won 
the kingdom thus. It is said that Actaeus was the 
first king of what is now Attica. When he died, 
Cecrops, the son-in-law of Actaeus, received the 
. kingdom, and there were born to him daughters, 
Herse, Aglaurus and Pandrosus, and a son Erysich- 
thon. This son did not become king of the 
Athenians, but happened to die while his father 
lived, and the kingdom of Cecrops fell to Cranaus, 
the most powerful of the Athenians. They say that 
Cranaus had daughters, and among them Atthis; 
and from her they call the country Attica, which 
before was named Actaea. And Amphictyon, rising 
up against Cranaus, although he had his daughter 
to wife, deposed him from power. Afterwards he 
himself was banished by Erichthonius and his fellow 
rebels. Men say that Erichthonius had no human 
father, but that his parents were Hephaestus and 
Earth. 
III. The district of the Cerameicus has its name 
from the hero Ceramus, he too being the reputed 
son of Dionysus and Ariadne. First on the right is 

16 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐν δεξιᾷ καλουμένη στοὰ βασίλειος, ἔνθα καθίζει 
βασιλεὺς ἐνιαυσίαν ἄρχων ἀρχὴν καλουμένην 
βασιλείαν. ταύτης ἔπεστι τῷ κεράμῳ τῆς στοᾶς 
ἀγάλματα ὀπτῆς γῆς, ἀφιεὶς Θησεὺς ἐς θάλασσαν 
Σκίρωνα καὶ φέρουσα "Ἡμέρα Κέφαλον, ὃν rar- 
λιστον γενόμενόν φασιν ὑπὸ Ἡμέρας ἐρασθείσης 
ἁρπασθῆναι" καί οἱ παῖδα γενέσθαι Φαέθοντα, 
«ὃν ὕστερον ἡ ᾿Αφροδίτη ἥρπασε» .. . καὶ 
φύλακα ἐποίησε τοῦ ναοῦ. ταῦτα ἄλλοι τε καὶ 
Ἡσίοδος εἴρηκεν ἐν ἔπεσι τοῖς ἐς τὰς γυναῖκας. 
πλησίον δὲ τῆς στοᾶς Κόνων ἕστηκε καὶ Τιμόθεος 

υἱὸς Κόνωνος καὶ βασιλεὺς Κυπρίων Εὐαγόρας, 

ὃς καὶ τὰς τριήρεις τὰς Φοινίσσας ἔπραξε παρὰ 
βασιλέως ᾿Αρταξέρξου δοθῆναι Κόνωνι: ἔπραξε 
δὲ ὡς ᾿Αθηναῖος καὶ τὸ ἀνέκαθεν ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος, 
ἐπεὶ καὶ γενεαλογῶν ἐς προγόνους ἀνέβαινε 
Τεῦκρον καὶ Κινύρου θυγατέρα. ἐνταῦθα ἕστηκε 
Ζεὺς ὀνομαζόμενος Ελευθέριο καὶ βασιλεὺς 
᾿Αδριανός, ἐς ἄλλους τε ὧν ἦρχεν εὐεργεσίας 
καὶ ἐς τὴν πόλιν μάλιστα ἀποδειξάμενος τὴν 
᾿Αθηναίων. στοὰ δὲ ὄπισθεν ᾠκοδόμηται γραφὰς 
ἔχουσα θεοὺς τοὺς δώδεκα καλουμένους" ἐπὶ 

τῷ τοίχῳ τῷ πέραν Θησεύς ἐστι γεγραμμένος 
καὶ Δημοκρατία τε καὶ Δῆμος. δηλοῖ δὲ ἡ γραφὴ 
Θησέα εἶναι τὸν καταστήσαντα ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐξ 
ἴσου πολιτεύεσθαι" κεχώρηκε δὲ φήμη καὶ ἄλλως 
ἐς τοὺς πολλούς, ὡς Θησεὺς παραδοίη τὰ πράγ- 
pata τῷ δήμῳ καὶ ὡς ἐξ ἐκείνου δημοκρατού- 
μενοι διαμείναιεν, πρὶν ἢ Πεισίστρατος ἐτυράν- 
νησεν ἐπαναστάς. λέγεται μὲν δὴ καὶ ἄλλα οὐκ 
ἀληθῆ παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς οἷα ἱστορίας ἀνηκόοις 
οὖσι καὶ ὁπόσα ἤκουον εὐθὺς ἐκ παίδων ἔν τε 

14 

- -- τας ο πο, l 

ATTICA, πι. 1-3 

what is called the Royal Portico, where sits the king 

when holding the yearly office called the kingship. 
On the tiling of this portico are images of baked 
earthenware, Theseus throwing Sciron into the sea 
and Day carrying away Cephalus, who they say was 
very beautiful and was ravished ky Day, who was in 
love with him. , His son was Phaéthon, <afterwards 
ravished by Aphrodite> . . . and made a guardian 
of her temple. Such is the tale told by Hesiod, 
among others, in his poem on women. Near the 
Portico stand Conon, Timotheus his son and Evagoras 1 
King of Cyprus, who caused the Phoenician men-of- 
war to be given to Conon by King Artaxerxes. This 
he did as an Athenian whose ancestry connected him 
with Salamis, for he traced his pedigree back to Teucer 
and the daughter of Cinyras. Here stands Zeus, 
called Zeus of Freedom, and the Emperor Hadrian, a 
benefactor to all his subjects and especially to the 
city of the Athenians. A portico is built behind 
with pictures of the gods called the Twelve. On the 
wall opposite are painted Theseus, Democracy and 
Demos. The picture represents Theseus as the one 
who gave the Athenians political equality. By other 
means also has the report spread among men that 
Theseus bestowed sovereignty upon the people, and 
that from his time they continued under a democrati- 
cal government, until Peisistratus rose up and became 
despot. But there are many false beliefs current 
among the mass of mankind, since they are ignorant 
of historical science and consider trustworthy whatever 

1 Evagoras was a king of Salamis in Cyprus, who reigned 
from about 410 to 374 B.c. He favoured the Athenians, and 
helped Conon to defeat the Spartan fleet off Cnidus in 394 
B.C. 

15 

560-527 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

χοροῖς καὶ τραγῳδίαις πιστὰ ἡγουμένοις, λέγεται 
καὶ ἐς τὸν Θησέα, ὃς αὐτός τε ἐβασίλευσε 
ο / / > 
καὶ ὕστερον Μενεσθέως τελευτήσαντος καὶ ἐς 
τετάρτην οἱ Θησεῖδαι γενεὰν διέμειναν ἄρχοντες. 
εἰ δέ μοι γενεαλογεῖν ἤρεσκε, καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ Με- 
λάνθου βασιλεύσαντας ἐς Κλείδικον τὸν Αἰσιμέ- 
δου καὶ τούτους ἂν ἀπηριθμησάμην. 
912 - /.3 / . . di 
Ενταῦθά ἐστι γεγραμμένον καὶ τὸ περὶ Μαντί- 
νειαν ᾿Αθηναίων ἔργον, οἳ βοηθήσοντες Λακε- 
δαιμονίοις ἐπέμφθησαν. συνέγραψαν δὲ ἄλλοι 
Ν - . / / / ΄ 
τε καὶ Ξενοφῶν τὸν πάντα πόλεμον, κατάληψίν 
τε τῆς Καδμείας καὶ τὸ πταῖσμα Λακεδαιμονίων 
τὸ ἐν Λεύκτροις καὶ ὡς ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἐσέ- 
βαλον Βοιωτοὶ καὶ τὴν συμμαχίαν Λακεδαι- 
μονίοις τὴν παρ ᾿Αθηναίων ἐλθοῦσαν: ἐν δὲ τῇ 
γραφῇ τῶν ἱππέων ἐστὶ μάχη, ἐν ἡ γνωριµώ- 
τατοι Γρύλος τε ὁ Ξενοφῶντος ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αθηναίοις 
3 
καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἵππον τὴν Βοιωτίαν ᾿Επαμινώνδας 
ε - 4 \ 3 4 ” 
ὁ Θηβαῖος. ταύτας τὰς γραφὰς Εὐφράνωρ ἔγρα- 
ψεν ᾿Αθηναίοις καὶ πλησίον ἐποίησεν ἐν τῷ ναῷ 
τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα Πατρῷον ἐπίκλησιν' πρὸ δὲ τοῦ 
. A N r a \ A ? / 
νεὼ τὸν μὲν Λεωχάρης, ὃν δὲ καλοῦσιν ᾽Αλεξί- 
kakov Κάλαμις ἐποίησε. τὸ δὲ ὄνομα τῷ θεῷ 
γενέσθαι λέγουσιν, ὅτι τὴν λοιμώδη σφίσι νόσον 
ὁμοῦ τῷ Πελοποννησίων πολέμῳ πιέζουσαν κατὰ 
μάντευμα ἔπαυσεν ἐκ Δελφῶν. 
, , \ ` ν - εν 
Ὡκοδόμηται δὲ καὶ Μητρὸς θεῶν ἱερόν, ἣν 
Φειδίας εἰργάσατο, καὶ πλησίον τῶν πεντακοσίων 
καλουμένων βουλευτήριον, of βουλεύουσιν ἐνι- 
~ 9 / 3 A a 
αυτὸν ᾿Αθηναίοις' Βουλαίου δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ κεῖται 
’ \ > / / / 
ξόανον Διὸς καὶ Απόλλων τέχνη Πεισίου καὶ 
Δῆμος ἔργον Λύσωνος. τοὺς δὲ θεσμοθέτας 

16 

ATTICA, πι. 3-5 

they have heard from childhood in choruses and 

tragedies ; one of these is about Theseus, who in fact - 

himself became king, and afterwards, when Menes- 
theus was dead, the descendants of Theseus remained 
rulers even to the fourth generation. But if I 
eared about tracing the pedigree I should have in- 
cluded in the list, besides these, the kings from 

Melanthus to Cleidicus the son of Aesimides, A 

— Here is a picture of the exploit, near Mantinea, of 

the Athenians who were sent to help the Lacedae- 362 p.c. 

monians. Xenophon among others has written a 
history of the whole war—the taking of the Cadmea, 
the defeat of the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra, how 
the Boeotians invaded the Peloponnesus, and the con- 
tingent sent to the Lacedaemonians from the Athen- 
ians. In the picture is a cavalry battle, in which the 
most famous men are, among the Athenians, Grylus 
the son of Xenophon, and in the Boeotian cavalry, 
Epaminondas the Theban. These pictures were 
painted for the Athenians by Euphranor, and he also 
wrought the Apollo surnamed Patroiis (Paternal) in 
the temple hard by. And in front of the temple is 
one Apollo made by Leochares; the other Apollo, called 
Averter of evil, was made by Calamis. They say that 
the god received this name because by an oracle 
from Delphi he stayed the pestilence which afflicted 
the Athenians at the time of the Peloponnesian War. 

Here is built also a sanctuary of the Mother of the 
gods; the image is by Pheidias. Hard by is the 
council chamber of those called the Five Hundred, 
who are the Athenian councillors for a year. In it 
are a wooden figure of Zeus Counsellor and an Apollo, 
the work of Peisias,! and a Demos by Lyson.! The 

1 The dates of these artists are unknown. 
17 
VOL. I. ο 

480 B.C. 

490-482 
B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔγραψε Πρωτογένης Καύνιο, ᾿Ὀλβιάδης δὲ 
Κάλλιππον, ὃς ᾿Αθηναίους ἐς Θερμοπύλας 
ἤγαγε φυλάξοντας τὴν ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα Γαλα- 
τῶν ἐσβολήν. 

IV. Οἱ δὲ Γαλάται οὗτοι νέμονται τῆς Εὐρώ- 
πης τὰ ἔσχατα ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ πολλῇ καὶ ἐς τὰ 
πέρατα οὐ πλωίμῳ, παρέχεται δὲ ἄμπωτιν καὶ 
ῥαχίαν καὶ θηρία οὐδὲν ἐοικότα τοῖς ἐν θαλάσσῃ 
τῇ λοιπῇ' καί σφισι διὰ τῆς χώρας ῥεῖ ποταμὸς 
Ἠριδανός, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τὰς θυγατέρας τὰς Ἡλίου 
ὀδύρεσθαι νομίξουσι τὸ περὶ τὸν Φαέθοντα τὸν 
ἀδελφὸν πάθος. ὀψὲ δέ ποτε αὐτοὺς καλεῖσθαι 
Γαλάτας ἐξενίκησεν: Κελτοὶ γὰρ κατά τε σφᾶς 
τὸ ἀρχαῖον καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις ὠνομά- 
ζοντο. συλλεγεῖσα δέ σφισι στρατιὰ τρέπεται 
τὴν ἐπὶ ᾿Ιονίου, καὶ τό τε Ἰλλυριῶν ἔθνος καὶ 
πᾶν ὅσον ἄχρι Μακεδόνων ᾧκει καὶ Μακεδόνας 
αὐτοὺς ἀναστάτους ἐποίησε Θεσσαλίαν τε ἐπέ- 
δραμε. καὶ ὡς ἐγγὺς Θερμοπυλῶν ἐγίνοντο, 
ἐνταῦθα οἱ πολλοὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐς τὴν ἔφο- 
δον ἡσύχαζον τῶν βαρβάρων, ἅτε ὑπὸ ᾿Αλεξ- 
άνδρου μεγάλως καὶ Φιλίππου κακωθέντες mpå- 
τερον: καθεῖλε δὲ καὶ ᾿Αντίπατρος καὶ Κάσ- 
σανδρος ὕστερον τὸ Ἑλληνικόν, ὥστε ἕκαστοι 
δι ἀσθένειαν οὐδὲν αἰσχρὸν ἐνόμιζον ἀπεῖναι 
τὸ κατὰ σφᾶς τῆς βοηθείας. ᾿Αθηναῖοι δὲ μάλιστα 
μὲν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀπειρήκεσαν μήκει τοῦ Μακε- 
δονικοῦ πολέμου καὶ προσπταίοντες τὰ πολλὰ 
ἐν ταῖς μάχαις, ἐξιέναι δὲ ὅμως ὥρμηντο ἐς τὰς 
Θερμοπύλας σὺν τοῖς ἐλθοῦσι τῶν Ἑλλήνων, 
ἑλόμενοι σφίσι τὸν Κάλλιππον τοῦτον ἡγεῖσθαι. 
καταλαβόντες δὲ ἡ στενώτατον ἦν, τῆς ἐσόδου 
18 

ATTICA, πι. 5-iv. 2 

] 

| thesmothetae (ἰαπυρίυετε) were painted by Protogénes! 
| the Caunian, and Olbiades? portrayed Callippus, who 
| led the Athenians to Thermopylae to stop the in- 
eion of the Gauls into Greece. 

IV. These Gauls inhabit the most remote portion 
of Europe, near a great sea that is not navigable to 
its extremities, and possesses ebb and flow and 
creatures quite unlike those of other seas. Through 
their country flows the river Eridanus, on the bank 
of which the daughters of Helius (Sun) are supposed 
to lament the fate that befell their brother Phaë- 
thon. It was late before the name “ Gauls” came 
into vogue; for anciently they were called Celts 
both amongst themselves ahd by others. An army 
of them mustered and turned towards the Ionian Sea, 
dispossessed the Illyrian people, all who dwelt as far 
as Macedonia with the Macedonians themselves, and 
overran Thessaly. And when they drew near to 
Thermopylae, the Greeks in general made no move 
to prevent the inroad of the barbarians, since pre- 
viously they had been severely defeated by Alexander 
and Philip. Further, Antipater and Cassander? after- 
wards crushed the Greeks, so that through weakness 
each state thought no shame of itself taking no part 
in the defence of the country. But the. Athenians, 
although they were more exhausted than any of the 
Greeks by the long Macedonian war, and had been 
generally unsuccessful in their battles, nevertheless 
set forth to Thermopylae with such Greeks as joined 
them, having made the Callippus I mentioned their 
general. Occupying the pass where it was narrowest, 

s A contemporary of Alexander the Great. 

2 An unknown painter. 

3 Antipater and Cassander were successors of Alexander 
the Great. 

19 
c2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τῆς ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα εἶργον τοὺς βαρβάρους" 
ἀνευρόντες δὲ οἱ Κελτοὶ τὴν ἀτραπόν, ἣν καὶ 
ε 
Μήδοις ποτὲ ᾿Εφιάλτης ἡγήσατο o Τραχίνιος, 
καὶ βιασάμενοι Φωκέων τοὺς τεταγμένους ἐπ᾽ 
αὐτῇ λανθάνουσι τοὺς "Ελληνας ὑπερβαλόντες 
τὴν Οἴτην. ἔνθα δὴ πλείστου παρέσχοντο αὑτοὺς 
᾿Αθηναῖοι τοῖς "Ελλησιν ἀξίους, ἀμφοτέρωθεν 
ὡς ἐκυκλώθησαν ἀμυνόμενοι τοὺς βαρβάρους" οἱ 
δέ σφισιν ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν μάλιστα ἐταλαιπώρουν 
ἅτε τοῦ κόλπου τοῦ Λαμιακοῦ τέλματος πρὸς ταῖς 
a y \ 3 A \ @ 
Θερμοπύλαις ὄντος' αἴτιον δὲ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν τὸ ὕδωρ 
ταύτῃ τὸ θερμὸν ἐκρέον ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν. μείζονα 
οὖν εἶχον οὗτοι πόνον: ἀναλαβόντες γὰρ ἐπὶ τὰ 
καταστρώματα τοὺς "Ελληνας ναυσὶν ὑπό τε 
ὅπλων βαρείαις καὶ ἀνδρῶν ἐβιάζοντο κατὰ τοῦ 
πηλοῦ πλεῖν. οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τοὺς Ἓλληνας τρόπον 
\ > / e 4 A 
τὸν εἰρημένον ἔσωζον, οἱ δὲ Γαλάται Πυλῶν τε 
» . . / ε a 3 2 `~ 
ἐντὸς ἦσαν καὶ τὰ πολίσματα ἑλεῖν ἐν οὐδενὶ τὰ 
/ \ 2 / ο; 
λοιπὰ ποιησάμενοι Δελφοὺς καὶ τὰ χρήματα τοῦ 
θεοῦ διαρπάσαι μάλιστα εἶχον σπουδήν. καί 
σφισιν αὐτοί τε Δελφοὶ καὶ Φωκέων ἀντετάχθησαν 
οἱ τὰς πόλεις περὶ τὸν Παρνασσὸν οἰκοῦντες, 
> / \ Ν 3 A A 5 
ἀφίκετο δὲ καὶ δύναμις Αἰτωλῶν: τὸ γὰρ Αίτω- 
λικὸν προεῖχεν ἀκμῇ νεότητος τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον. 
ὡς δὲ ἐς χεῖρας συνῄεσαν, ἐνταῦθα κεραυνοί τε 
ἐφέροντο ἐς τοὺς Γαλάτας καὶ ἀπορραγεῖσαι 
πέτραι τοῦ Παρνασσοῦ, δείματά τε ἄνδρες ἐφί- 
σταντο ὁπλῖται τοῖς βαρβάροις" τούτων τοὺς μὲν 
ἐξ Ὑπερβορέων λέγουσιν ἐλθεῖν, “Ἑπέροχον καὶ 
» 
Αμάδοκον, τὸν δὲ τρίτον Πύρρον εἶναι τὸν Αχιλ.- 
λέως: ἐναγίζουσι δὲ ἀπὸ ταύτης Δελφοὶ τῆς 
συμμαχίας Πύρρῳ, πρότερον ἔχοντες ἅτε ἀνδρὸς 
20 

ATTICA, ιν. 2-4 

they tried to keep the foreigners from entering Greece ; 
but the Celts, having discovered the path by which 
Ephialtes of Trachis once led the Persians, over- 
whelmed the Phocians stationed there and crossed 
Oeta unperceived by the Greeks. Then it was that the 
Athenians put the Greeks under the greatest ob- 
ligation, and although outflanked offered resistance 
to the foreigners on two sides. But the Athenians 
on the fleet suffered most, for the Lamian gulf is a 
swamp near Thermopylae—the reason being, I think, 
the hot water that here runs into the sea. These 
then were more distressed; for taking the Greeks 
on board they were forced to sail through the mud 
weighted as they were by arms and men. So they 
tried to save Greece in the way described, but the 
Gauls, now south of the Gates, cared not at all to 
capture the other towns, but were very eager to sack 
Delphi and the treasures of the god. They were 
opposed by the Delphians themselves and the Pho- 
cians of the cities around Parnassus; a force of 
Aetolians also joined the defenders, for the Aetolians 
at this time were pre-eminent for their vigorous 
activity. When the forces engaged, not only were 
thunderbolts and rocks broken off from Parnassus 
hurled against the Gauls, but terrible shapes as 
armed warriors haunted the foreigners. They say that 
two of them, Hyperochus and Amadocus, came from 
the Hyperboreans, and that the third was Pyrrhus 
son of Achilles. Because of this help in battle the 
Delphians sacrifice to Pyrrhus as to a hero, although 
formerly they held even his tomb in dishonour, as 

21 

480 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

5 πολεμίου καὶ τὸ μνῆμα ἐν ἀτιμίᾳ. Γαλατῶν δὲ 
οἱ πολλοὶ ναυσὶν ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν διαβάντες τὰ 
παραθαλάσσια αὐτῆς ἐλεηλάτουν: χρόνῳ δὲ 
ὕστερον οἱ Πέργαμον ἔχοντες, πάλαι δὲ Τευθρα- 
νίαν καλουμένην, ἐς ταύτην Γαλάτας ἐλαύνουσιν 
ἀπὸ θαλάσσης. οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τὴν ἐκτὸς Σαγγα- 
ρίου χώραν ἔσχον "Άγκυραν πόλιν ἑλόντες Φρυ- 
γῶν, ἣν Μίδας ὁ Γορδίου πρότερον .ὤκισεν--- 
ἄγκυρα δέ, ἣν ὁ Μίδας ἀνεῦρεν, ἦν ἔτι καὶ ἐς 
ἐμὲ ἐν ἱερῷ Διὸς καὶ κρήνη Μίδου καλουμένη" 
ταύτην οἴνῳ κεράσαι Μίδαν φασὶν ἐ ἐπὶ τὴν θήραν 
τοῦ Σιληνοῦ ---, ταύτην τε δὴ τὴν "Αγκυραν εἷλον 
καὶ Ἡεσσινοῦντα τὴν ὑπὸ τὸ ὄρος τὴν “Ay- 
διστιν, ἔνθα καὶ τὸν "ATT τεθάφθαι λέγουσι. 

6 Περγαμηνοῖς δὲ ἔστι μὲν σκῦλα ἀπὸ Γαλατῶν, 
ἔστι δὲ γραφὴ τὸ ἔργον τὸ πρὸς Γαλάτας 
ἔχουσα. ἣν δὲ νέμονται οἱ Περγαμηνοί, Καβεί- 

ων ἱεράν φασιν εἶναι τὸ ἀρχαῖον: αὐτοὶ δὲ 
Αρκάδες ἐθέλουσιν εἶναι τῶν ὁμοῦ Τηλέφῳ δια- 
βάντων ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν. πολέμων δὲ τῶν μὲν 
ἄλλων, εἰ δή τινας ἐπολέμησαν, οὐκ ἐς ἅπαντας 
κεχώρηκεν Ù phun τρία δὲ γνωριμώτατα ἐξείρ- 
γασταί σφισι, τῆς τε ᾿Ασίας ἀρχὴ τῆς κάτω καὶ 
ἡ Γαλατῶν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἀναχώρησις καὶ τὸ ἐς τοὺς 
σὺν ᾿Αγαμέμνονι Τηλέφου τόλμημα, ὅτε Ἕλληνες 
ἁμαρτόντες Ἰλίου τὸ πεδίον ἐλεηλάτουν τὸ Μήιον 
ὡς γῆν Ἑρφάδα. ἐπάνειμι δὲ ἐς τὴν ἀρχὴν ὅθεν 
ἐξέβην τοῦ λόγου. 
V. Τοῦ βουλευτηρίου τῶν πεντακοσίων πλησίον 
Θόλος ἐστὶ καλουμένη, καὶ θύουσί τε ἐνταῦθα οἱ 
πρυτάνεις καί τινα καὶ ἀργύρου πεποιημένα ἐστὶν 

22 

ATTICA, ιν. 4-ν. 1 

being that of anenemy. The greater number of the 
Gauls crossed over to Asia by ship and plundered its 
coasts. Some time after, the inhabitants of Berganys, 
that was called of old Teuthrania, drove the @auls 
into it from the sea. Now this people occupied the 

- country on the farther side of the river Sangarius, 
capturing Ancyra, a city of the Phrygians, which Midas 
son of Gordius had founded in former time. And 
the anchor, which Midas found,! was even as late as 
my time in the sanctuary of Zeus, as well as a spring 
called the Spring of Midas, water from which they 
say Midas mixed with wine to capture Silenus. Well 
then, the Pergameni took Ancyra and Pessinus which 
lies under Mount Agdistis, where they say that Attis 
lies buried. They have spoils from the Gauls, and a 
painting which portrays their deed against them. 
The land they dwell in was, they say, in ancient times 
sacred to the Cabeiri, and they claim that they are 
themselves Arcadians, being of those who crossed 
into Asia with Telephus. Of the wars that they 
have waged no account has been published to the 
world, except that they have accomplished three 
most notable achievements; the subjection of the 
coast region of Asia, the expulsion of the Gauls 
therefrom, and the exploit of Telephus against the 
followers of Agamemnon, at a time when the Greeks, 
after missing Troy, were plundering the Meian plain 
thinking it Trojan territory. Now I will return from 
my digression. eee 6 

— V, Near to the Council Chamber of the Εἴνέ 
Hundred is what is called Tholos (Round House) ; 
here the Presidents sacrifice, and there are a few 

1 A legend invented to explain the name Ancyra, which 
means anchor. 

23 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿ ἀγάλματα οὐ μεγάλα. ἀνωτέρω δὲ ἀνδριάντες 
ἑστήκασιν ἡρώων, ἀφ ὧν ᾿Αθηναίοις ὕστερον τὰ 
ὀνόματα ἔσχον αἱ φυλαί" ὅστις δὲ κατεστήσατο 
δέκα ἀντὶ τεσσάρων φυλὰς εἶναι καὶ µετέθετὀ 
σφισι τὰ ὀνόματα ἀντὶ τῶν ἀρχαίων, "Ἡροδότῳ 
καὶ ταῦτά ἐστιν εἰρημένα. τῶν δὲ ἐπωνύμων ---- 
καλοῦσι γὰρ οὕτω σφᾶς---ἔστι μὲν Ἱπθθθόων 
Ποσειδῶνοςτικαὶ ᾿Αλόπης θυγατρὸς Κερκυόνος, 
ἔστι δὲ ᾿Αντίοχος τῶν παίδων τῶν Ἡρακλέους, 
γενόμενος ἐκ Μήδας Ἡρακλεῖ τῆς Φύλαντος, καὶ 
τρίτος Αἴας ὁ Τελαμῶνος, ἐκ δὲ ᾿Αθηναίων Λεώς" 
δοῦναι δὲ ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ λέγεται κοινῇ τὰς θυγα- 
τέρας τοῦ θεοῦ χρήσαντος. Βρεχθεύς τέ ἐστιν 
ἐν τοῖς ἐπωνύμοις, ὃς ἐνίκησεν ᾿Ελευσινίους μάχη 
καὶ τὸν ἡγούμενον ἀπέκτεινεν Ἰμμάραδον τὸν 
Εὐμόλπου' Αἰγεύς τέ ἐστι καὶ Οἰνεὺς Πανδίονος 
υἱὸς νόθος καὶ τῶν Θησέως παίδων ᾿Ακάμας. 
Κέκροπα δὲ καὶ Πανδίονα--εἶδον γὰρ καὶ τού- 
των ἐν τοῖς ἐπωνύμοις εἰκόνας---οὐκ οἶδα οὓς 
ἄγουσιν ἐν τιμῇ" πρότερός τε γὰρ ἦρξε Κέκροψ, 
ὃς τὴν ᾿Ακταίου θυγατέρα ἔσχε, καὶ ὕστερος, ὃς 
δὴ καὶ μετῴκησεν ἐς Εὔβοιαν, ᾿Ερεχθέως υἱὸς 
τοῦ Πανδίονος τοῦ Ἐριχθονίου.] καὶ δὴ καὶ 
Πανδίων ἐβασίλευσεν ὅ τε ᾿Εριχθονίου καὶ ὁ 
Κέκροπος τοῦ δευτέρου: τοῦτον Μητιονίδαι τῆς 
ἀρχῆς ἐξελαύνουσι, καί οἱ φυγόντι ἐς Méyapa— 
θυγατέρα γὰρ εἶχε Πύλα τοῦ βασιλεύσαντος ἐν 
Μεγάροις---συνεκπίπτουσιν οἱ παῖδες. καὶ Παν- 
δίονα μὲν αὐτοῦ λέγεται νοσήσαντα ἀποθανεῖν, 
καί οἱ πρὸς θαλάσσῃ μνῆμά ἐστιν ἐν τῇ Με- 
γαρίδι ἐν ᾿Αθηνᾶς Αἰθυίας καλουμένῳ σκοπέλῳ" 
οἱ δὲ παῖδες κατίασί τε ἐκ τῶν Μεγάρων ἐκβαλ- 

24 

ATTICA, v. 1-4 

small statues made of silver. Farther up stand statues 
of heroes, from whom afterwards the Athenian tribes 
received their names. Who the man was who estab- 
lished ten tribes instead of four, and changed their 
old names to new ones—all this is told by Herodotus.} 
The eponymot?—this is the name given to them— 
are Hippothodn son of Poseidon and Alope daugh- 
ter of Cercyon, Antiochus, one of the children of 
Heracles borne to him by Meda daughter of Phylas, 
thirdly, Ajax son of Telamon, and to the Athenians be- 
longs Leos, who is said to have given up his daughters, 
at the command of the oracle, for the safety of the 
commonwealth. Among the eponymoz is Erechtheus, 
who conquered the Eleusinians in battle, and killed 
their general, Immaradus the son of Eumolpus. There 
is Aegeus also and Oeneus the bastard son of Pandion, 
and Acamas, one of the children of Theseus. I saw 
also among the eponymo: statues of Cecrops and 
Pandion, but I do not know who of those names are 
thus honoured. For there was an earlier ruler Cecrops 
who took to wife the daughter of Actaeus, and a 

' later—he it was who migrated to Euboea—son of 

Erechtheus, son of Pandion, son of Erichthonius. And 

there was a king Pandion who was son of Erichthonius, 
: and another who was son of Cecrops the second. 

This man was deposed from his kingdom by the 
Metionidae, and when he fled to Megara—for he had 

` to wife the daughter of Pylas king of Megara—his 

children were banished with him. And Pandion is 
said to have fallen ill there and died, and on the coast 
of the Megarid is his tomb, on the rock called the rock 
of Athena the Gannet. But his children expelled the 

1 See v. 66 and 69. The reform took place in 508 B.c. 
2 That is, those after whom others are named. 

25 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREEC 

‘ , 4 . 3 \ A > 
ὄντες Μητιονίδας, καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν. τῶν “A 
ναίων Αἰγεὺς πρεσβύτατος ὢν ἔσχεν. θυγατέ 
δὲ οὐ σὺν ἀγαθῷ δαίμονι ἔθρεψεν ὁ Παν 
οὐδέ οἱ τιμωροὶ παῖδες ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐλείφθησ. 
’ g A 
καίτοι δυνάμεώς γε ἕνεκα πρὸς τὸν Θρᾷκα 
κῆδος ἐποιήσατο. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδεὶς πόρος ἐστὶν 
4 - - A 
θρώπῳ παραβῆναι τὸ καθῆκον ἐκ τοῦ Θεὰ 
λέγουσιν ὡς Τηρεὺς συνοικῶν Πρόκνῃ Φιλομή 
ῇσχυνεν, οὐ κατὰ νόμον δράσας τὸν Ἑλλήν 
καὶ τὸ σῶμα ἔτι λωβησάμενος τῇ παιδὶ ἤγ 
3 ? / / A / λ 
ἐς ἀνάγκην δίκης τὰς γυναῖκας. ᾿]ανδίονι δὲ 
Ww » / 3 3 ? / , 2 
ἄλλος ἀνδριάς ἐστιν ἐν ἀκροπόλει θέας ἄξιος. 
Oise μέν εἰσιν ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐπώνυμοι τῶν ap- 
/ ν . » μ A ” 
αἰων' ὕστερον δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶνδε φυλὰς ἔχουσιν, 
Αττάλου τοῦ Μυσοῦ καὶ Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Αἰγυ- 
πτίου καὶ κατ ἐμὲ ἤδη βασιλέως ᾿Αδριανοῦ τῆς 
τε ἐς τὸ θεῖον τιμῆς ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἐλθόντος καὶ τῶν 
ἀρχομένων ἐς εὐδαιμονίαν τὰ μέγιστα ἑκάστοις 
παρασχομένου. καὶ ἐς μὲν πόλεμον οὐδένα ἑκού- 
σιος κατέστη, “Εβραίους δὲ τοὺς ὑπὲρ Σύρων 
ἐχειρώσατο ἀποστάντας" ὁπόσα δὲ θεῶν ἱερὰ τὰ 
μὲν ᾠκοδόμησεν ἐξ ἀρχῆς, τὰ δὲ καὶ ἐπεκόσμησεν 
ἀναθήμασι καὶ κατασκευαῖς ἢ δωρεὰς πόλεσιν 
y e / ν \ a / a 
ἔδωκεν Ἑλληνίσι, τὰς δὲ καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων τοῖς 
δεηθεῖσιν, ἔστιν οἱ πάντα γεγραμμένα ᾿Αθήνῃσιν 
ἐν τῷ κοινῷ τῶν θεῶν ἱερῷ. VI. τὰ δὲ ἐς "Ατ- 
ταλον καὶ Πτολεμαῖον ἡλικίᾳ τε ἦν ἀρχαιότερα, 
ὡς μὴ μένειν ἔτι τὴν φήμην αὐτῶν, καὶ οἱ συγ- 
γενόμενοι τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἐπὶ συγγραφῇ τῶν 
1 This king of Pergamus visited Athens in 200 B.c. in the 

company of the Roman ambassadors, and was treated with 
every mark of respect by the Athenians. | 

26 

ATTICA, v. 4-νι. 1 

Metionidae, and returned from banishment at Megara, 
and Aegeus, as the eldest, became king of the Athen- 
ians. But in rearing daughters Pandion was unlucky, 
nor did they leave any sons to avenge him. And yet it 
was for the sake of power that he made the marriage 
alliance with the king of Thrace. But there is no 
way for a mortal to overstep what the deity thinks 
fit tosend. They say that Tereus, though wedded 
to Procne, dishonoured Philomela, thereby trans- 
gressing Greek custom, and further, having mangled 
the body of the damsel, constrained the women to 
avenge her. There is another statue, well worth 
seeing, of Pandion on the Acropolis. 

These are the Athenian eponymo: who belong to 
the ancients. And of later date than these they 
have tribes named after the following, Attalus! the 
Mysian and Ptolemy the Egyptian,? and within my 
own time the emperor Hadrian, who was extremely 
religious in the respect he paid to the deity, and 
contributed very much to the happiness of his various 
subjects. He never voluntarily entered upon a war, 
but he reduced the Hebrews beyond Syria, who had 
rebelled. As for the sanctuaries of the gods that 
in some cases he built from the beginning, in others 
adorned with offerings and furniture, and the bounties 
he gave to Greek cities, and sometimes even to 
foreigners who asked him, all these acts are inscribed 
_ in his honour in the sanctuary at Athens common to 

all the gods. λ VI. Butas to the history of Attalus and 
Ptolemy, it is more ancient in point of time, so that 
tradition no longer remains, and those who lived with 
these kings for the purpose of chronicling their deeds 

7 It is uncertain to which of the many kings of Egypt 
called by this name Pausanias refers. 

27 

117-188 
A.D. 

132 A.D. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔργων καὶ πρότερον ἔτι ἠμελήθησαν' τούτων 
ἕνεκά μοι καὶ τὰ τῶνδε ἐπῆλθε δηλῶσαι ἔργα τε 
ὁποῖα ἔπραξαν καὶ ὡς ἐς τοὺς πατέρας αὐτῶν 
περιεχώρησεν Αἰγύπτου καὶ ἡ Μυσῶν καὶ τῶν 
προσοίκων ἀρχή. 

Πτολεμαῖον Μακεδόνες Φιλίππου παῖδα εἶναι 
τοῦ ᾿Αμύντου, λόγῳ δὲ Λάγου νομίξουσι' τὴν γάρ 
οἱ μητέρα ἔχουσαν ἐν γαστρὶ δοθῆναι γυναῖκα 
ὑπὸ Φιλίππου Λάγῳ. Πτολεμαῖον δὲ λέγουσιν 
ἄλλα τε ἐν τῇ ᾿Ασίᾳ λαμπρὰ ἀποδείξασθαι καὶ 
᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ κινδύνου ξυμβάντος ἐν ᾿Οξυδράκαις 
μάλιστά οἱ τῶν ἑταίρων ἀμῦναι. τελευτήσαντος 
δὲ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῖς ἐς ᾿Αριδαῖον τὸν Φιλίππου 
τὴν πᾶσαν ἄγουσιν ἀρχὴν ἀντιστὰς αὐτὸς μά- 
λιστα ἐγένετο ἐς τὰς βασιλείας αἴτιος τὰ ἔθνη 
νεµηθῆναι. αὐτὸς δὲ ἐς Αἴγυπτον διαβὰς Κλεο- 
μένην τε ἀπέκτεινεν, ὃν σατραπεύειν Αἰγύπτου 
κατέστησεν ᾿Αλέξανδρος, Περδίκκα νομίζων εὔ- 
νουν καὶ δι αὐτὸ οὐ πιστὸν αὑτῷ, καὶ Μακεδόνων 
τοὺς ταχθέντας τὸν ᾿Αλεξάνδρου νεκρὸν ἐς Αἰγὰς 
κομίζειν ἀνέπεισεν αὑτῷ παραδοῦναι" καὶ τὸν μὲν 
τῷ νόμῳ τῷ Μακεδόνων ἔθαπτεν ἐν Μέμφει, οἷα 
δὲ ἐπιστάμενος πολεμήσοντα Περδίκκαν Αἴγυ- 
πτον εἶχεν ἐν φυλακῇ. Περδίκκας δὲ ἐς μὲν τὸ 
εὐπρεπὲς τῆς στρατείας ἐπήγετο ᾿Αριδαῖον τὸν 
Φιλίππου καὶ παῖδα ᾿Αλέξανδρον ἐκ “Ῥωξάνης 
τῆς Ὀξυάρτου γεγονότα καὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου, τῷ δὲ 
ἔργῳ Πτολεμαῖον ἐπεβούλευεν ἀφελέσθαι τὴν ἐν 
28 

— 

ATTICA, vi. 1-3 

fell into neglect even before tradition failed. Where- 
fore it occurred to me to narrate their deeds also, 
and how the sovereignty of Egypt, of the Mysians 
and of the neighbouring peoples fell into the hands 
of their fathers. 

1The Macedonians consider Ptolemy to be the son of 

. Philip, the son of Amyntas, though putatively the son 

of Lagus, asserting that his mother was with child 
when she was married to Lagus by Philip. And 
among the distinguished acts of Ptolemy in Asia 

, they mention that it was he who, of Alexander's 

companions, was foremost in succouring him when in 
danger among the Oxydracae. After the death of 
Alexander, by withstanding those who would have 
conferred all his empire upon Aridaeus, the son of 
Philip, he became chiefly responsible for the division 
of the various nations into the kingdoms. He crossed 
over to Egypt in person, and killed Cleomenes, whom 
Alexander had appointed satrap of that country, con- 
sidering him a friend of Perdiccas, and therefore not 
faithful to himself; and the Macedonians who had 
been entrusted with the task of carrying the corpse 
of Alexander to Aegae, he persuaded to hand it over 
to him. And he proceeded to bury it with Mace- 
donian rites in Memphis, but, knowing that Perdiccas 
would make war, he kept Egypt garrisoned. And 
Perdiceas took Aridaeus, son of Philip, and the 
boy Alexander, whom Roxana, daughter of Oxyartes, 
had borne to Alexander, to lend colour to the cam- 
paign, but really he was plotting to take from 

1 The account which follows deals with the troubled 
period which came after the death of Alexander the Great 
in 323 B.c. The generals Antigonus, Ptolemy, Seleucus, 

Lysimachus and Cassander quarrelled over the division of 
the empire. 

29 

823 Β.ς, 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Αὐγύπτῳ βασιλείαν' ἐξωσθεὶς δὲ Αἰγύπτου wat 
τὰ ἐς πόλεμον ἔτι οὐχ ὁμοίως θαυμαζόμενος, Ἢ 
διαβεβλημένος δὲ καὶ ἄλλως ἐς τοὺς Μακεδόνας, 
ἀπέθανεν ὑπὸ τῶν σωματοφυλάκων. Πτολε- 
μαῖον δὲ αὐτίκα ἐς τὰ πράγματα ὁ Περδίκκου 
θάνατος ἐπέστησε: καὶ τοῦτο μὲν Σύρους καὶ 
Φοινίκην εἷλε, τοῦτο δὲ ἐκπεσόντα ὑπὸ ᾿Αντε- 
γόνου καὶ φεύγοντα ὑπεδέξατο Σέλευκον τὸν 
᾿Αντιόχου, καὶ αὐτὸς παρεσκευάξετο ὡς ἀμυνού- 
μενος ᾿Αντίγονον. καὶ Κάσσανδρον τὸν ᾿Αντε- 
πάτρου καὶ Λυσίμαχον βασιλεύοντα ἐν Θράκῃ 
μετασχεῖν ἔπεισε τοῦ πολέμου, τὴν φυγὴν λέγων 
τὴν Σελεύκου καὶ τὸν ᾿Αντίγονον φοβερόν σφισιν 
εἶναι πᾶσιν αὐξηθέντα. ᾿Αντίγονος δὲ τέως μὲν 
ἦν ἐν παρασκευῇ πολέμου καὶ τὸν κίνδυνον οὐ 
παντάπασιν ἐθάρρει" ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐς Λιβύην ἐπύθετο 
στρατεύειν Πτολεμαῖον ἀφεστηκότων Κυρηναίων, 
αὐτίκα Σύρους καὶ Φοίνικας εἷλεν ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς, 
παραδοὺς δὲ Δημητρίῳ τῷ παιδί, ἡλικίαν μὲν 
νέῳ φρονεῖν δὲ ἤδη δοκοῦντι, καταβαίνει ἐπὶ τὸν 
Ἑλλήσποντον. πρὶν δὲ ἡ διαβῆναι ᾿ πάλιν ἦγεν 
ὀπίσω τὴν στρατιάν, Δημήτριον ἀκούων ὑπὸ 
Πτολεμαίου μάχῃ κεκρατῆσθαι: Δημήτριος δὲ 
οὔτε παντάπασιν ἐξειστήκει Πτολεμαίῳ τῆς Xw- 
pas καί τινας τῶν Αἰγυπτίων λοχήσας διέφθειρεν 
οὐ πολλούς. τότε δὲ ἥκοντα Αντίγονον οὐχ 
ὑπομείνας Πτολεμαῖος ἀνεχώρησεν ἐς Αἴγυπτον. 
διελθόντος δὲ τοῦ χειμῶνος Δημήτριος πλεύσας 
ἐς Κύπρον Μενέλαον σατράπην Πτολεμαίου 
ναυμαχίᾳ καὶ αὖθις αὐτὸν Πτολεμαῖον ἐπιδια- 
Bavra ἐνίκησε' φυγόντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἐς Αἴγυπτον 
1 } καταβῆναι, emended by Hitzig. 

30 

| 

ΑΤΤΙΟΑ, νι. 1-6 

Ptolemy his kingdom in Egypt. But being expelled 
from Egypt, and having lost his reputation as a 
soldier, and being in other respects unpopular with 
the Macedonians, he was put to death by his body- 

' guard. The death of Perdiccas immediately raised 
Ptolemy to power, who both reduced the Syrians 

and Phoenicia, and also welcomed Seleucus, son of 
Antiochus, who was in exile, having been expelled by 
Antigonus; he further himself prepared to attack 
Antigonus. He prevailed on Cassander, son of Anti- 
pater, and Lysimachus, who was king in Thrace, to 
join in the war, urging that Seleucus was in exile 
and that the growth of the power of Antigonus was 
dangerous to them all. For a time Antigonus pre- 
pared for war, and was by no means confident of 
the issue ; but on learning that the revolt of Cyrene 
had called Ptolemy to Libya, he immediately reduced 
the Syrians and Phoenicians by a sudden inroad, 

. handed them over to Demetrius, his son, a man who for 

all his youth had already a reputation for good sense, 
and went down to the Hellespont. But he led his army 
back without crossing, on hearing that Demetrius had 
been overcome by Ptolemy in battle. But Demetrius 
had not altogether evacuated the country before 
Ptolemy, and having surprised a body of Egyptians, 
killed a few of them. Then on the arrival of Anti- 
gonus Ptolemy did not wait for him but returned to 
Egypt. When the winter was over, Demetrius sailed 
to Cyprus and overcame in a naval action Menelaus, 
the satrap of Ptolemy, and afterwards Ptolemy him- 
self, who had crossed to bring help. Ptolemy fled to 

31 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

"A / / ὰ A . . e 3 / 
ντίγονός τε κατὰ γῆν καὶ ναυσὶν ἅμα ἐπολιόρ- 
κει Δημήτριος. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ ἐς πᾶν ἀφι- 
κόμενος κινδύνου διέσωσεν ὅμως τὴν ἀρχὴν 
στρατιᾷ τε ἀντικαθήμενος ἐπὶ Πηλουσίῳ καὶ 
τριήρεσιν ἀμυνόμενος ἅμα ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ. 
᾽Αντίγονος δὲ Αἴγυπτον μὲν αἱρήσειν ἐκ τῶν 
παρόντων οὐδεμίαν ἔτι εἶχεν ἐλπίδα, Δημήτριον 
δὲ ἐπὶ “Ῥοδίους στρατιᾷ πολλῇ καὶ ναυσὶν ἔστει- 
- ε 
λεν, ὡς εἴ οἱ προσγένοιτο ἡ νῆσος ὁρμητηρίφ 
/ ~ \ 3 , ’ » 
χρήσεσθαι πρὸς TOUS Αἰγυπτίους ἐλπίξων: ἀλλὰ 
αὐτοί τε οἱ Ῥόδιοι τολμήματα καὶ ἐπιτεχνήσεις 
παρέσχοντο ἐς τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας καὶ litore- 
μαῖός σφισιν ἐς ὅσον δυνάμεως ἧκε συνήρατο 
ἐς τὸν πόλεμον. ᾿Αντίγονος δὲ Ῥόδου τε ἆμαρ- 
τὼν καὶ Αἰγύπτου πρότερον, οὐ πολλῷ τούτων 
ὕστερον ἀντιτάξασθαι Λυσιμάχῳ τολμήσας καὶ 
Κασσάνδρῳ τε καὶ τῇ Σελεύκου στρατιᾷ, τῆς 
/ > Z 7 αν, ` \ 3 \ 9 fy 
δυνάμεως ἀπώλεσε τὸ πολὺ καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπέθανε 
ταλαιπωρήσας μάλιστα τῷ μήκει τοῦ πρὸς 
Εὐμένη πολέμου. τῶν δὲ βασιλέων τῶν καθε- 
λόντων ᾿Αντίγονον ἀνοσιώτατον κρίνω γενέσθαι 
Κάσσανδρον, ὃς δι ᾿Αντιγόνου τὴν Μακεδόνων 
ἀρχὴν ἀνασωσάμενος πολεμήσων ἦλθεν ἐπ᾽ ἄνδρα 
εὐεργέτην. ἀποθανόντος δὲ ᾿Αντιγόνου Πτολε- 
μαῖος Σύρους τε αὖθις καὶ Κύπρον εἷλε, κατήγαγε 
δὲ καὶ Πύρρον ἐς τὴν Θεσπρωτίδα ἤπειρον" 
Κυρήνης δὲ ἀποστάσης Μάγας Βερενίκης υἱὸς 
Πτολεμαίῳ τότε συνοικούσης ἔτει πέμπτῳ μετὰ 
\ 9 / / 9 e 
τὴν ἀπόστασιν εἷλε Κυρήνην.-- εἰ δὲ ὁ Πτολε- 
A Φ » m / / A 3 UA 
μαῖος οὗτος ἀληθεῖ λόγῳ Φιλίππου τοῦ Αμύντου 
παῖς ἦν, ἴστω τὸ ἐπιμανὲς ἐς τὰς γυναῖκας κατὰ 
~ / 9 / a 9 
τὸν πατέρα κεκτημένος, ὃς Εὐρυδίκη τῇ ᾿Αντι- 

32 

| 

ΑΤΤΙΟΑ, νι. 6-8 

Egypt, where he was besieged by Antigonus on land 
and by Demetrius with a fleet. In spite of his 
extreme peril Ptolemy saved his empire by making 
a stand with an army at Pelusium while offering 
resistance with warships from the river. Antigonus 
now abandoned all hope of reducing Egypt in the 
circumstances, and dispatched Demetrius against the 
Rhodians with a fleet and a large army, hoping, if 
the island were won, to use it as a base against the 
Egyptians. But the Rhodians displayed daring and 
ingenuity in the face of the besiegers, while Ptolemy 
helped them with all the forces he could muster. 
Antigonus thus failed to reduce Egypt or, later, 
Rhodes, and shortly afterwards he offered battle 
to Lysimachus, and to Cassander and the army of 
Seleucus, lost most of his forces, and was himself 
killed, having suffered most by reason of the length 
of the war with Eumenes. Of the kings who put 
down Antigonus I hold that the most wicked was 
Cassander, who although he had recovered the throne 
of Macedonia with the aid of Antigonus, nevertheless 
came to fight against a benefactor. After the death 
of Antigonus, Ptolemy again reduced the Syrians 
and Cyprus, and also restored Pyrrhus to Thesprotia 
on the mainland. Cyrene rebelled; but Magas, the 
son of Berenice (who was at this time married to 
Ptolemy) captured Cyrene in the fifth year of the. 
rebellion. If this Ptolemy really was the son of 
Philip, son of Amyntas, he must have inherited from 
his father his passion for women, for, while wedded 
to Eurydice, the daughter of Antipater, although he 

33 

VOL, I. D 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

TAT pov συνοικῶν ὄντων οἱ παίδων Βερενίκης ἐς 
ἔρωτα ἦλθεν, ἣν ᾿Αντίπατρος Εὐρυδίκῃ συνέ- 
πεμψεν ἐς Αἴγυπτον. ταύτης τῆς γυναικὸς 
ἐρασθεὶς παῖδας ἐξ αὐτῆς ἐποιήσατο, καὶ ὡς ἦν 
οἱ πλησίον ἡ τελευτή, Ἡτολεμαῖον ἀπέλιπεν 
Αἰγύπτου βασιλεύειν, ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ ᾿Αθηναίοις 
ἐστὶν ἡ φυλή, γεγονότα ἐκ Βερενίκης ἀλλ. οὐκ ἐκ 
τῆς ᾿Αντιπάτρου θυγατρός. 

VII. Οὗτος ὁ Πτολεμαῖος ᾿Αρσινόης ἀδελφῆς 
ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἐρασθεὶς ἔγημεν αὐτήν, Μακεδόσιν 
οὐδαμῶς ποιῶν νομιζόμενα, Αἰγυπτίοις μέντοι ὧν 
ἦρχε. δεύτερα δὲ ἀδελφὸν ἀπέκτεινεν ᾿Αργαῖον 
ἐπιβουλεύοντα, ὡς λέγεται, καὶ τὸν ᾿Αλεξάνδρου 
νεκρὸν οὗτος ὁ καταγαγὼν ἦν ἐκ Μέμφιδος" ἀπέ- 
ΚΤεινε δὲ καὶ ἄλλον ἀδελφὸν γεγονότα ἐξ Εὐρυ- 
δίκης, Κυπρίους ἀφιστάντα αἰσθόμενος. Μάγας 
δὲ ἀδελφὸς ὁμομήτριος Πτολεμαίου παρὰ Βερε- 
νίκης τῆς μητρὸς ἀξιωθεὶς é ἐπιτροπεύειν Κυρήνην 
—éyeyover δὲ ἐκ Φιλίππου τῇ «Βερενίκῃ Μακεδόνος 
μέν, ἄλλως δὲ ἀγνώστου καὶ ἑνὸς τοῦ δήµου---, 
τότε δὴ οὗτος ὁ Μάγας ἀποστήσας Πτολεμαίου 
Κυρηναίαυς ἤλαυνεν ἐπ᾽ Αἴγυπτον. καὶ Ἠτολε- 
μαῖος μὲν τὴν ἐσβολὴν φραξάμενος ὑπέμενεν ἐπι- 
όντας Κυρηναίους, Μάγᾳ δὲ ἀπαγγέλλεται raf’ 
ὁδὸν ἀφεστηκέναι Μαρμαρίδας: εἰσὶ δὲ Λιβύων 
οἱ Μαρμαρίδαι τῶν νομάδων. καὶ τότε μὲν ἐς 
Κυρήνην ἀπηλλάσσετο' Πτολεμαῖον δὲ ὥρμη- 
μένον διώκειν αἰτία τοιάδε ἐπέσχεν. ἡνίκα παρ- 
εσκευάξετο ἐπιόντα ἀμύνεσθαι Μάγαν, ξένους 
ἐπηγάγετο καὶ ἄλλους καὶ Γαλάτας ἐς τετρακισ- 
χιλίους" τούτους λαβὼν ἐπιβουλεύοντας Kata- 
σχεῖν Αἴγυπτον, ἀνήγαγε σφᾶς ἐς νῆσον ἔρημον 

44 

ATTICA, νι. 8-vu. 2 

had children he took a fancy to Berenice, whom 
Antipater had sent to Egypt with Eurydice. He 
fell in love with this woman and had children by her, 
and when his end drew near he left the kingdom of 
Egypt to Ptolemy (from whom the Athenians name 
' their tribe) being the sop of Berenice and not of the 
daughter of Antipater. ja 
VII. This Ptolemy fell in love with Arsinoë, his 
full sister, and married her, violating herein Mace- 
donian custom, but following that of his Egyptian 
subjects. Secondly he put to death his brother 
Argaeus, who was, it is said, plotting against him ; 
and he it was who brought down from Memphis the 
corpse of Alexander. He put to death another 
brother also, son of Eurydice, on discovering that he 
was creating disaffection among the Cyprians. Then 
Magas, the half-brother of Ptolemy, who had been 
entrusted with the governorship of Cyrene by his 
mother Berenice—she had borne him to Philip, a 
Macedonian, but of no note and of lowly origin—in- 
‘ duced the people of Cyrene to revolt from Ptolemy 
and marched against Egypt. Ptolemy fortified the 
entrance into Egypt and awaited the attack of the 
Cyrenians. But while on the march Magas was in- 
formed that the Marmaridae,a tribe of Libyan nomads, 
had revolted, and thereupon fell back upon Cyrene. 
Ptolemy resolved to pursue, but was checked owing to 
the following circumstance. When he was preparing 
to meet the attack of Magas, he engaged mercenaries, 
including some four thousand Gauls. Discover- 
ing that they were plotting to seize Egypt, he led 

35 
D 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ. καὶ οἱ μὲν ἐνταῦθα ἀπώλοντο 
3 ὑπό τε ἀλλήλων καὶ τοῦ λιμοῦ: Μάγας δὲ ἤδη 
γυναῖκα ἔχων ᾽Απάμην ᾿Αντιόχου τοῦ Σελεύκου 
θυγατέρα, ἔπεισεν ᾿Αντίοχον παραβάντα ἃς ὁ 
πατήρ οἱ Σέλευκος ἐποιήσατο συνθήκας πρὸς 
Πτολεμαῖον, ἐλαύνειν ἐπ᾽ Αἴγυπτον. ὡρμημένου 
δὲ ᾿Αντιόχου στρατεύειν, Πτολεμαῖος διέπεμψεν 
ἐς ἅπαντας ὧν ἦρχεν ᾿Αντίοχος, τοῖς μὲν ἆσθενε- 
στέροις λῃστὰς κατατρέχειν τὴν γῆν, οἳ δὲ ἦσαν 
δυνατώτεροι στρατιᾷ κατεῖργεν, ὥστε ᾿Αντιόχῳ 
μήποτε ἐγγενέσθαι στρατεύειν ἐπ᾽ Αἴγυπτον. oÙ- 
τος ὁ Πτολεμαῖος καὶ πρότερον εἴρηταί pot ὡς 
ναυτικὸν ἔστειλεν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αθηναίων συμμαχίαν 
ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αντίγονον καὶ Μακεδόνας: ἀλλὰ γὰρ aw 
αὐτοῦ οὐδὲν μέγα ἐγένετο ἐς σωτηρίαν ᾿Αθηναίοις. 
οἱ δέ οἱ παῖδες ἐγένοντο ἐξ ᾿Αρσινόης, οὐ τῆς 
ἀδελφῆς, Λυσιμάχου δὲ θυγατρός: τὴν δέ οἱ 
συνοικήσασαν ἀδελφὴν κατέλαβεν ἔτι πρότερον 
ἀποθανεῖν ἄπαιδα, καὶ νομός ἐστιν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς 
᾿Αρσινοΐτης Αἰγυπτίοις. 

VIII. ᾿Απαιτεῖ δὲ ὁ λόγος δηλῶσαι καὶ τὰ ἐς 
"Ατταλον ἔχοντα, ὅτι καὶ οὗτος τῶν ἐπωνύμων 
ἐστὶν ᾿Αθηναίοις. ἀνὴρ Μακεδὼν Δόκιμος ὄνομα, 
στρατηγὸς ᾿Αντιγόνου, Λυσιμάχῳ παραδοὺς ὕσ- 
τερον αὑτὸν καὶ τὰ χρήματα, Φιλέταιρον Παφλα- 
γόνα εἶχεν εὐνοῦχον. ὅσα μὲν δὴ Φιλεταίρῳ 
πεπραγμένα ἐς τὴν ἀπόστασίν ἐστι τὴν ἀπὸ 
Λυσιμάχου καὶ ὡς Σέλευκον ἐπηγάγετο, ἔσται 
μοι τῶν ἐς Αυσίμαχον παρενθήκη' ὁ δὲ "Ατταλος 
᾿;Αττάλου μὲν παῖς wv, ἀδελφιδοῦς δὲ! Φιλεταίρου, 
τὴν ἀρχὴν Εὐμένους παραδόντος ἔσχεν ἀνεψιοῦ. 

1 παῖς ἦν ἀδελφοῦ φιλεταίρῳ δὲ, emended by Clavier. 
36 

f eae 
_ = „ermin --- m- a a ο - 

= 

+ = -- 

ATTICA, vu. 2--ΝΗΙ. 1 

/ them through the river to a deserted island. There 
they perished at one another’s hands or by famine. 
Magas, who was married to Apame, daughter of 
Antiochus, son of Seleucus, persuaded Antiochus to 
break the treaty which his father Seleucus had 
made with Ptolemy and to attack Egypt. When 
Antiochus resolved to attack, Ptolemy dispatched 
forces against all the subjects of Antiochus, free- 
booters to overrun the lands of the weaker, and an 
army to hold back the stronger, so that Antiochus 
never had an opportunity of attacking Egypt. I 

' have already stated how this Ptolemy sent a fleet 

to help the Athenians against Antigonus and the 

Macedonians, but it did very little to save Athens. 

His children were by Arsinoé, not his sister, but 
| the daughter of Lysimachus. His sister who had 
wedded him happened to die before this, leaving 
no issue, and there is in Egypt a district called 

' Arsinoites after her. 

η VIII. It is pertinent to add here an account of 
Attalus, because he too is one of the Athenian 

ymot. A Macedonian of the name of Docimus, 
| a general of Antigonus, who afterwards surrendered 

; both himself and his property to Lysimachus, had a 
Paphlagonian eunuch called Philetaerus. All that 

l Philetaerus did to further the revolt from Lysimachus, 

| and how he won over Seleucus, will form an episode 
in my account of Lysimachus. Attalus, however, son 

| of Attalus and nephew of Philetaerus, received the 
kingdom from his cousin Eumenes, who handed it 

te oe 

a 

m 

37 

| 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

, 3 / ε - 54 4 ` 9 
μέγιστον δέ ἐστίν οἱ τῶν ἔργων: Γαλάτας γὰρ ἐς 
τὴν γῆν, ἣν ἔτι καὶ νῦν ἔχουσιν, ἀναφυγεῖν ἠνάγ- 
κασεν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης. 

Μετὰ δὲ τὰς εἰκόνας τῶν ἐπωνύμων ἐστὶν ἀγάλ- 

A 3 lA » 4 
pata θεῶν, ᾿Αμϕιάραος καὶ Εἰρήνη φέρουσα 
Πλοῦτον παῖδα. ἐνταῦθα Λυκοῦργός τε κεῖται 
αλκοῦς ὁ Λυκόφρονος καὶ Καλλίας, ὃς πρὸς 
Αρταξέρξην τὸν Ἐέρξου τοῖς "Ελλησιν, ὡς ᾿Αθη- 
ναίων οἱ πολλοὶ λέγουσιν, ἔπραξε τὴν εἰρήνην' 
” N / A > / 9 
ἔστι δὲ καὶ Δημοσθένης, ὃν ἐς Καλαυρείαν ᾿Αθη- 
ναῖοι τὴν πρὸ Τροιζῆνος νῆσον ἠνάγκασαν ano- 
χωρῆσαι, δεξάμενοι δὲ ὕστερον διώκουσιν αὖθις 
μετὰ τὴν ἐν Λαμίᾳ πληγήν. Δημοσθένης δὲ ὡς 
τὸ δεύτερον ἔφυγε, περαιοῦται καὶ τότε ἐς τὴν 
Καλαυρείαν, ἔνθα δὴ πιὼν φάρμακον ἐτελεύτησεν' 
φυγάδα τε "Ἕλληνα μόνον τοῦτον ᾿Αντιπάτρῳ καὶ 
3 
Μακεδόσιν οὐκ ἀνήγαγεν Αρχίας. ὁ δὲ ᾿Αρχίας 
οὗτος Θούριος av ἔργον ἤρατο ἀνόσιον: ὅσοι 
Μακεδόσιν ἔπραξαν ἐναντία πρὶν ἢ τοῖς "Ελλησι 
τὸ πταῖσμα τὸ ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ γενέσθαι, τούτους 
r 9 / 3 , , 
ἦγεν Αρχίας ᾽Αντιπάτρῳ δώσοντας δίκην. An- 
μοσθένει μὲν ἡ πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους ἄγαν εὔνοια ἐς 
τοῦτο ἐχώρησεν' εὖ δέ μοι λελέχθαι δοκεῖ ἄνδρα 
ἀφειδῶς ἐκπεσόντα ἐς πολιτείαν καὶ πιστὰ ἡγη- 
σάμενον τὰ τοῦ δήμου μήποτε καλῶς τελευτῆσαι. 
Τῆς δὲ τοῦ Δημοσθένους εἰκόνος πλησίον 
WwW ’ » ε ΄ y ? 4 ΄ 
Apews ἐστιν ἱερόν, ἔνθα ἀγάλματα δύο μὲν 
᾿Αφροδίτης κεῖται, τὸ δὲ τοῦ "Άρεως ἐποίησεν 
᾿Αλκαμέ nv δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἀνὴρ Ila ὄ 
μένης, τὴν δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἀνὴρ Πάριος, ὄνομα 
- 4 “A A 
δὲ αὐτῷ Λόκρος. ἐνταῦθα καὶ Ενυοῦς ἄγαλμά 
ἐστιν, ἐποίησαν δὲ οἱ παῖδες οἱ Πραξιτέλους" 

38 

) 

ATTICA, vni. 1-4 

over. The greatest of his achievements was his 

. forcing the Gauls to retire from the sea into the 

ae Όσα «µς 

country which they still hold. 

After the statues of the eponymoit come statues 
of gods, Amphiaraus, and Eirene (Peace) carrying 
the boy Plutus (Wealth). Here stands a bronze 
figure of Lycurgus,! son of Lycophron, and of Callias, 
who, as most of the Athenians say, brought about 
the peace between the Greeks and Artaxerxes, son of 
Xerxes. Here also is Demosthenes, whom the Athen- 
ians forced to retire to Calauria, the island off Troe- 
zen, and then, after receiving him back, banished again 
after the disaster at Lamia. Exiled for the second 
time Demosthenes crossed once more to Calauria, and 
committed suicide there by taking poison, being the 
only Greek exile whom Archias failed to bring back to 
Antipater and the Macedonians. This Archias was a 
Thurian who undertook the abominable task of 
bringing to Antipater for punishment those who had 
opposed the Macedonians before the Greeks met with 
their defeat in Thessaly. Such was Demosthenes’ 
reward for his great devotion to Athens. I heartily 
agree with the remark that no man who has un- 
sparingly thrown himself into politics trusting in the 

' loyalty of the democracy has ever met with a happy 

death. 

Near the statue of Demosthenes is a sanctuary of 
Ares, where are placed two images of Aphrodite, one 
of Ares made by Alcamenes, and one of Athena 
made by a Parian of the name of Locrus. There is 
also an image of Enyo, made by the sons of Praxiteles. 

1 An Athenian orator who did great service to Athens 
when Demosthenes was trying to stir up his countrymen 
against Philip of Macedon. 

39 

c. 448 
B.C. 

82% B.C. 

ο ο a E 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

περὶ δὲ τὸν ναὸν ἑστᾶσιν Ἡρακλῆς καὶ Θησεὺς 
καὶ ᾿Απόλλων ἀναδούμενος ταινίᾳ τὴν κόμην, 
ἀνδριάντες δὲ Καλάδης ᾿Αθηναίοις ὡς λέγεται 
νόμους γράψας καὶ Ἠίνδαρος ἄλλα τε εὑρόμενος 
παρὰ ᾿Αθηναίων καὶ τὴν εἰκόνα, ὅτι σφᾶς ἐπήνε- 
σεν dopa ποιήσας. οὐ πόρρω δὲ ἑστᾶσιν Αρμό- 
διος καὶ ᾿Αριστογείτων οἱ κτείναντες Ἵππαρχον' 
αἰτία δὲ ἥτις ἐγένετο καὶ τὸ ἔργον ὄντινα τρόπον 
ἔπραξαν, ἑτέροις ἐστὶν εἰρημένα. τῶν δὲ ἀνδρι- 
άντων οἱ μέν εἰσι Κριτίου τέχνη, τοὺς δὲ ἀρχαίους 
> / 3 / / / ε 3 / 
ἐποίησεν ᾽Αντήνωρ' Ἐέρξου δέ, ὡς εἷλεν ᾿Αθήνας 
ἐκλιπόντων τὸ ἄστυ ᾿Αθηναίων, ἀπαγαγομένου 
καὶ τούτους ἅτε λάφυρα, κατέπεμψεν ὕστερον 
᾿Αθηναίοις ᾿Αντίοχος. . 

Τοῦ θεάτρου δὲ ὃ καλοῦσιν Ὠιδεῖον ἀνδριάντες 
πρὸ τῆς ἐσόδου βασιλέων εἰσὶν Αἰγυπτίων. ὀνό- 
pata μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ Πτολεμαῖοί σφισιν, 
ἄλλη δὲ ἐπίκλησις ἄλλῳ" καὶ γὰρ Φιλομήτορα 
καλοῦσι καὶ Φιλάδελφον ἕτερον, τὸν δὲ τοῦ Λάγου 
Σωτῆρα παραδόντων “Ροδίων τὸ ὄνομα. τῶν δὲ 
ἄλλων ὁ μὲν Φιλάδελφός ἐστιν οὗ καὶ πρότερον 
μνήμην ἐν τοῖς ἐπωνύμοις ἐποιησάμην, πλησίον 

' δέ οἱ καὶ ᾿Αρσινόης τῆς ἀδελφῆς ἐστιν εἰκών. 

EX. ὁ δὲ Φιλομήτωρ καλούμενος ὄγδοος μέν ἐστιν 

ἀπόγονος Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Λάγου, τὴν δὲ ἐπί- 
κλησιν ἔσχεν ἐπὶ χλευασμῷ. οὐ γάρ τινα τῶν 
βασιλέων μισηθέντα ἴσμεν ἐς τοσόνδε ὑπὸ µη- 
τρός, ὃν πρεσβύτατον ὄντα τῶν παίδων ἡ μήτηρ 
οὐκ εἴα καλεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχήν, πρότερον δὲ ἐς 
Κύπρον ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς πεμφθῆναι πράξασα" 
τῆς δὲ ἐς τὸν παῖδα τῇ Κλεοπάτρᾳ δυσνοίας 
λέγουσιν ἄλλας τε αἰτίας καὶ ὅτι ᾿Αλέξανδρον τὸν 

49 

αν 

ATTICA, vi. 4-1x. 1 

About the temple stand images of Heracles, 
Theseus, Apollo binding his hair with a fillet, and 
statues of Calades,! who it is said framed laws? for the 
Athenians, and of Pindar, the statue being one of 
the rewards the Athenians gave him for praising 
them in anode. Hard by stand statues of Harmodius 
and Aristogiton, who killed Hipparchus. The reason 
of this act and the method of its execution have 
been related by others; of the figures some were 
made by Critius, the old ones being the work of 

Athenians had abandoned the city he took away 
these statues also among the spoils, but they were 
afterwards restored to the Athenians by Antiochus. 
Before the entrance of the theatre which they call 
the Odeum (Music Hall) are statues of Egyptian kings. 
They are all alike called Ptolemy, but each has his own 
surname. For they call one Philometor, and another 
Philadelphus, while the son of Lagus is called Soter, 
a name given him by the Rhodians. Of these, 
Philadelphus is he whom I have mentioned before 
among the eponymot, and near him is a statue of his 
sister Arsinoë. KIX. The one called Philometor is 
om Ptolemy son of Lagus, and his 
surname was given him in sarcastic mockery, for we 
know of none of the kings who was so hated by his 
mother. Although he was the eldest of her children 
she would not allow him to be called to the throne, but 
prevailed on his father before the call came to send 
him to Cyprus. Among the reasons assigned for 
Cleopatra’s enmity towards her son is her expectation 

1 Nothing more is known of this person. 
2 Or “ tunes.” 

41 

Antenor. When Xerxes took Athens after the * 

514 B.C. 

κ” 

t 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

νεώτερον τῶν παίδων κατήκοον ἔσεσθαι μᾶλλον 
ἤλπιζε. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἑλέσθαι βασιλέα ᾿Αλέξ- 
ανδρον ἔπειθεν Αἰγυπτίους: ἐναντιουμένου δέ οἱ 
τοῦ πλήθους, δεύτερα ἐς τὴν Κύπρον ἔστειλεν 

᾿Αλέξανδρον, στρατηγὸν μὲν τῷ λόγῳ, τῷ δὲ ἔργῳ 

δι αὐτοῦ Πτολεμαίῳ θέλουσα εἶναι φοβερωτέρα, 
τέλος δὲ κατατρώσασα οὓς μάλιστα τῶν εὐνούχων 
ἐνόμιξεν εὔνους, ἐπήγετο σφᾶς ἐς τὸ πλῆθος ὡς 
αὐτή τε ἐπιβουλευθεῖσα ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου καὶ 
τοὺς εὐνούχους τοιαῦτα ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου παθόντας. οἱ 
δὲ ᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς ὥρμησαν μὲν ὡς ἀποκτενοῦντες 
τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, ὡς δὲ σφᾶς ἔφθασεν ἐπιβὰς 
νεώς, ᾿Αλέξανδρον ἥκοντα ἐκ Κύπρου ποιοῦνται 
βασιλέα. Κλεοπάτραν δὲ περιῆλθεν ἡ δίκη τῆς 
Πτολεμαίου φυγῆς ἀποθανοῦσαν ὑπὸ ᾿Αλεξάν- 
δρου, ὃν αὐτὴ βασιλεύειν ἔπραξεν Αἰγυπτίων. 
τοῦ δὲ ἔργου φωραθέντος καὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου φόβῳ 
τῶν πολιτῶν φεύγοντος, οὕτω Πτολεμαῖος κατ- 
ῆλθε καὶ τὸ δεύτερον ἔσχεν Αἴγυπτον' καὶ Θη- 
Βαίοις ἐπολέμησεν ἀποστᾶσι, παραστησάμενος 
δὲ ἔτει τρίτῳ μετὰ τὴν ἀπόστασιν ἐκάκωσεν, ὡς 
μηδὲ ὑπόμνημα λειφθῆναι (Θηβαίοις τῆς ποτε 
εὐδαιμονίας προελθούσης ἐς τοσοῦτον ὡς ὑπερ- 
βαλέσθαι πλούτῳ τοὺς Ἑλλήνων πολυχρημά- 
τους, TO τε ἱερὸν τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς καὶ Ὀρχομενίους. 
Πτολεμαῖον μὲν οὖν ὀλίγῳ τούτων ὕστερον ἐπέ- 
λαβε μοῖρα ἡ καθήκουσα: ᾿Αθηναῖοι δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
παθόντες εὖ πολλά τε καὶ οὐκ ἄξια ἐξηγήσεως 
χαλκοῦν καὶ αὐτὸν καὶ Βερενίκην ἀνέθηκαν, ἣ 
μόνη γνησία οἱ τῶν παίδων ἦν. 

Μετὰ δὲ τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους Φίλιππός τε καὶ 
᾿Αλέξανδρος ὁ Φιλίππου κεῖνται: τούτοις μείζονα 

42 

Ἢ 

ATTICA, 1x. 1-4 

that Alexander the younger of her sons would prove 
more subservient, and this consideration induced her 
to urge the Egyptians to choose Alexander as king. 
When the people offered opposition, she dispatched 
Alexander for the second time to Cyprus, ostensibly 
as general, but really because she wished by his means 
to make Ptolemy more afraid of her. Finally she 
covered with wounds those eunuchs she thought best 
disposed, and presented them to the people, making 
out that she was the victim of Ptolemy’s machinations, 
and that he had treated the eunuchs in such a 
fashion. The people of Alexandria rushed to kill 
Ptolemy, and when he escaped on board a ship, made 
Alexander, who returned from Cyprus, their king. 
Retribution for the exile of Ptolemy came upon 
Cleopatra, for she was put to death by Alexander, 
whom she herself had made to be king of the 
Egyptians. When the deed was discovered, and 
Alexander fled in fear of the citizens, Ptolemy 
returned and for the second time assumed control of 
Egypt. He made war against the Thebans, who had 
revolted, reduced them two years after the revolt, and 
treated them so cruelly that they were left not even 
a memorial of their former prosperity, which had 
so grown that they surpassed in wealth the richest 
of the Greeks, the sanctuary of Delphi and the 
Orchomenians. Shortly after this Ptolemy met 
with his appointed fate, and the Athenians, who 
had been benefited by him in many ways which I 
need not stop to relate, set up a bronze likeness 
of him and of Berenice, his only legitimate 
child. 

After the Egyptians come statues of Philip and of 
his son Alexander. The events of their lives were too 

43 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὑπῆρχέ πως ἢ ἄλλου πάρεργα εἶναι λόγου. τοῖς | 
μὲν οὖν ἀπ᾽ Αἰγύπτου τιμῇ τε ἀληθεῖ καὶ εὐεργέ- : 
ταις οὖσι γεγόνασιν αἱ δωρεαί, Φιλίππῳ δὲ καὶ 
᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ κολακείᾳ μᾶλλον ἐς αὐτοὺς τοῦ πλή- 
θους, ἐπεὶ καὶ Λυσίμαχον οὐκ εὐνοίᾳ τοσοῦτον ὥς | 
ἐς τὰ παρόντα χρήσιμον νομέξοντες ἀνέθηκαν. |, 

Ὁ δὲ Λυσίμαχος οὗτος γένος τε ἦν Μακεδὼν i 
καὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου δορυφόρος, ὃν ᾽Αλέξανδρός ποτε | 
ὑπ᾽ ὀργῆς λέοντι ὁμοῦ καθείρξας ἐς οἴκημα κεκρα- 
τηκότα εὗρε τοῦ θηρίου: τά τε οὖν ἄλλα ἤδη 
διετέλει θαυμάζων καὶ Μακεδόνων ὁμοίως τοῖς 
ἀρίστοις ἦγεν ἐν τιμῇ. τελευτήσαντος δὲ ᾿Αλεξ- 
άνδρου Θρᾳκῶν ἐβασίλευεν ὁ Λυσίμαχος τῶν 
προσοίκων Μακεδόσιν, ὅσων ἦρχεν ᾿Αλέξανδρος 
καὶ ἔτι πρότερον Φίλιππος" εἶεν δ᾽ ἂν οὗτοι τοῦ 
Θρακίου μοῖρα οὐ μεγάλη. Θρᾳκῶν δὲ τῶν πάν- 
των οὐδένες πλείους εἰσὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ὅτι μὴ 
Κελτοὶ πρὸς ἄλλο ἔθνος ἓν ἀντεξετάζοντι, καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο οὐδείς πω πρότερος Θρᾷκας “Ῥωμαίων 
κατεστρέψατο ἀθρόους: “Ῥωμαίοις δὲ Θράκη τε 
πᾶσά ἐστιν ὑποχείριος, καὶ Κελτῶν ὅσον μὲν 
ἀχρεῖον νομίζουσι διά τε ὑπερβάλλον ψῦχος καὶ 
γῆς φαυλότητα, ἑκουσίως παρῶπταί σφισι, τὰ δὲ 
ἀξιόκτητα ἔχουσι καὶ τούτων. τότε δὲ ὁ Λυσί- 
μαχος πρώτοις τῶν περιοίκων ἐπολέμησεν Ὀδρύ- 
σαις, δεύτερα δὲ ἐπὶ Δρομιχαίτην καὶ Γέτας 
ἐστράτευσεν' οἷα δὲ ἀνδράσι συμβαλὼν οὐκ ἀπεί- 

} - ` \ 4 

pots πολέμων, ἀριθμῷ δὲ καὶ πολὺ ὑπερβεβλη- 
κόσιν, αὐτὸς μὲν ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον ἐλθὼν κινδύνου 
. διέφυγεν, ὁ δέ οἱ παῖς ᾿Αγαθοκλῆς συστρατευύ- 
μενος τότε πρῶτον ὑπὸ τῶν Γετῶν ἑάλω. Λυσί- 

σι 

52 

44 

ATTICA, 1x. 4-6 

important to form a mere digression in another story. 
Now the Egyptians had their honours bestowed upon 
them out of genuine respect and because they were 
benefactors, but it was rather the sycophancy of the 
people that gave them to Philip and Alexander, since 
they set up a statue to Lysimachus also not so much 
out of goodwill as because they thought to serve 
their immediate ends. 

This Lysimachus was a Macedonian by birth and 
one of Alexander’s body-guards, whom Alexander 
once in anger shut up in a chamber with a lion, and 
afterwards found that he had overpowered the 
brute. Henceforth he always treated him with 
respect, and honoured him as much as the noblest 
Macedonians. After the death of Alexander, Lysi- 
machus ruled such of the Thracians, who are neigh- 
bours of the Macedonians, as had been under the 
sway of Alexander and before him of Philip. These 
would comprise but a small part of Thrace. If race 
be compared with race no nation of men except the 
Celts are more numerous than the Thracians taken 
all together, and for this reason no one before the 
Romans reduced the whole Thracian population. 
But the Romans have subdued all Thrace, and they 
also hold such Celtic territory as is worth possessing, 
but they have intentionally overlooked the parts that 
they consider useless through excessive cold or bar- 
tenness. Then Lysimachus made war against his 
neighbours, first the Odrysae, secondly the Getae 
and Dromichaetes. Engaging with men not unversed 
inwarfare and far his superiors in number, he himself 
escaped from a position of extreme danger, but his 
sn Agathocles, who was serving with him then for 
the first time, was taken prisoner by the Getae. 

45 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

µαχος δὲ καὶ ὕστερον προσπταίσας μάχαις καὶ 
τὴν ἅλωσιν τοῦ παιδὸς οὐκ ἐν παρέργῳ ποιού- 
μενος συνέθετο πρὸς Δρομιχαίτην εἰρήνην, τῆς τε 
ἀρχῆς τῆς αὑτοῦ τὰ πέραν Ἴστρου παρεὶς τῷ 
Γέτη καὶ θυγατέρα συνοικίσας ἀνάγκη: τὸ πλέον' 
ε 3 9 2 4 . > 4 e A 
οἱ δὲ οὐκ ᾿Αγαθοκλέα, Λυσίμαχον δὲ αὐτὸν ἁλῶ- 
- 9 / 
ναι λέγουσιν, ἀνασωθῆναι δὲ ᾿Αγαθοκλέους τὰ 
πρὸς τὸν Γέτην ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πράξαντος. ὡς δὲ 
ἐπανῆλθεν, Αγαθοκλεῖ Λυσάνδραν γυναῖκα ἠγά- 
γετο, Πτολεμαίου τε τοῦ Λάγου καὶ Εὐρυδίκης 
οὖσαν. διέβη δὲ καὶ ναυσὶν ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν καὶ 
τὴν ἀρχὴν τὴν ᾿Αντιγόνου συγκαθεῖλε. συνῷ- 
κισε δὲ καὶ ᾿Εφεσίων ἄχρι θαλάσσης τὴν νῦν 
πόλιν, ἐπαγαγόμενος ἐς αὐτὴν Λεβεδίους τε οἰκή- 
τορας καὶ Κολοφωνίους, τὰς δὲ ἐκείνων ἀνελὼν 
πόλεις, ὡς Φοίνικα ἰάμβων ποιητὴν Κολοφωνίων 
- ε 
θρηνῆσαι τὴν ἅλωσιν. Ἑρμησιάναξ δὲ ὁ τὰ ἐλε- 
γεῖα γράψας οὐκέτι ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν περιῆν' πάντως 
γάρ που καὶ αὐτὸς ἂν ἐπὶ ἁλούσῃ Κολοφῶνι 
ὠδύρατο. Λυσίμαχος δὲ καὶ ἐς πόλεμον πρὸς 
Πύρρον κατέστη τὸν Αἰακίδου: φυλάξας δὲ ἐξ 
9 / 3 / 4 \ 9 A 9 
Ηπείρου ἀπιόντα, οἷα δὴ τὰ πολλὰ ἐκεῖνος ἐπλα- 
A / 2 / Y (T ) Αλ 
νᾶτο, τήν τε ἄλλην ἐλεηλάτησεν Ἤπειρον καὶ ἐπὶ 
τὰς θήκας ἦλθε τῶν βασιλέων. τὰ δὲ ἐντεῦθεν 
2 / 3 » / œ lA Ν 
ἐμοί ἐστιν οὐ πιστά, Ἱερώνυμος δὲ ἔγραψε Kap- 
διανὸς Λυσίμαχον τὰς θήκας τῶν νεκρῶν ἀνελόντα 
τὰ ὀστᾶ ἐκρῖψαι. ὁ δὲ Ἱερώνυμος οὗτος ἔχει μὲν 
καὶ ἄλλως δόξαν πρὸς ἀπέχθειαν γράψαι τῶν 
> 
βασιλέων πλὴν ᾿Αντιγόνου, τούτῳ δὲ οὐ δικαίως 
/ \ 3 a ΄ A ? 
χαρίζεσθαι' τὰ δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς τάφοις τῶν ᾿Ἠπειρω- 
τῶν παντάπασίν ἐστι φανερὸς ἐπηρείᾳ συνθείς, 
ἄνδρα Μακεδόνα θήκας νεκρῶν ἀνελεῖν. χωρὶς δὲ 
46 

ATTICA, tx. 6-8 

Lysimachus met with other reverses afterwards, and 
attaching great importance to the capture of his son 
made peace with Dromichaetes, yielding to the Getic 
' king the parts of his empire beyond the Ister, and, 
chiefly under compulsion, giving him his daughter 
in marriage. Others say that not Agathocles but 
Lysimachus himself was taken prisoner, regaining 
his liberty when Agathocles treated with the Getic 
king on his behalf. On his return he married to 
Agathocles Lysandra, the daughter of Ptolemy, son 
of Lagus, and of Eurydice. He also crossed with a 
fleet to Asia and helped to overthrow the empire of 
Antigonus. He founded also the modern city of 
Ephesus as far as the coast, bringing to it as settlers 
people of Lebedos and Colophon, after destroying 
their cities, so that the iambic poet Phoenix com- 
posed a lament for the capture of Colophon. Her- 
mesianax, the elegiac writer, was, I think, no longer 
living, otherwise he too would certainly have been 
moved by the taking of Colophon to write a dirge. 
Lysimachus also went to war with Pyrrhus, son of 
Aeacides. Waiting for his departure from Epeirus 
(Pyrrhus was of a very roving disposition) he ravaged 
Epeirus until he reached the royal tombs. The next 
part of the story is incredible to me, but Hieronymus 
the Cardian relates that he destroyed the tombs and 
cast out the bones of the dead. But this Hierony- 
mus has a reputation generally of being biassed against 
all the kings except Antigonus, and of being unfairly 
partial towards him. As to the treatment of the 
Epeirot graves, it is perfectly plain that it was malice 
that made him record that a Macedonian desecrated 
the tombs of the dead. Besides, Lysimachus was 

47 

802 B.C. 

Jl. 820- 
800 B.c. 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἠπίστατο δή που καὶ Λυσίμαχος οὐ Πύρρου σφᾶς | 
προγόνους μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοὺς aù- . 
τοὺς τούτους ὄντας" καὶ γὰρ ᾿Αλέξανδρος Ἠπει- ! 
ρώτης τε ἦν καὶ τῶν Αἰακιδῶν τὰ πρὸς μητρός, ÙÜ. 
τε ὕστερον Πύρρου πρὸς Λυσίμαχον συμμαχία 
δηλοῖ καὶ πολεμήσασιν ἀδιάλλακτόν γε οὐδὲν 
πρὸς ἀλλήλους γενέσθαι σφίσι. τῷ δὲ Ἱερωνύμῳ 

τάχα μέν που καὶ ἄλλα ἦν ἐς Λυσίμαχον ἐγκλή-. 
"pata, μέγιστον δὲ ὅτι τὴν Καρδιανῶν πόλιν 
ἀνελὼν Λυσιμάχειαν ἀντ᾽ αὐτῆς ὧκισεν ἐπὶ τῷ 
ἰσθμῷ τῆς Θρακίας χερρονήσου. 

X. Λυσιμάχῳ δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν ᾿Αριδαίου βασιλεύον- 
τος καὶ ὕστερον Κασσάνδρου καὶ τῶν παίδων. 
φιλία διέμεινε πρὸς Μακεδόνας" περιελθούσης δὲ. 
ἐς Δημήτριον τὸν ᾿Αντιγόνου τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἐνταῦθα 
ἤδη Λυσίμαχος πολεμήσεσθαι ἤλπιζεν ὑπὸ Δη- 
μητρίου καὶ αὐτὸς ἄρχειν ἠξίου πολέμου, πα- 
τρῷον ἐπιστάμενος by Δημητρίῳ προσπεριβάλ- 
λεσθαί τι ἐθέλειν καὶ ἅμα ὁρῶν αὐτὸν παρελθόντα 
ἐς Μακεδονίαν μετάπεμπτον ὑπὸ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῦ 
Κασσάνδρου, ὡς δὲ ἀφίκετο, αὐτόν τε ᾿Αλέξαν- 
ὃρον φονεύσαντα καὶ ἔχοντα ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνου τὴν 
Μακεδόνων ἀρχήν. τούτων ἕνεκα Δημητρίῳ ovpu- 
βαλὼν πρὸς ᾽Αμϕιπόλει παρ᾽ ὀλίγον μὲν ἦλθεν. 
ἐκπεσεῖν Θράκης, ἀμύναντος δέ οἱ Πύρρου τήν τε 
Θράκην κατέσχε καὶ ὕστερον ἐπῆρξε Νεστίων καὶ | 
Μακεδόνων' τὸ δὲ πολὺ Μακεδονίας αὐτὸς Πύρ- 
ρος κατεῖχε, δυνάμει τε ἥκων ἐξ Ἠπείρου καὶ 
πρὸς Λυσίμαχον ἐν τῷ παρόντι ἔχων ἐπιτηδείως. 
Δημητρίου δὲ διαβάντος ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν καὶ Σε- 
λεύκῳ πολεμοῦντος, ὅσον μὲν χρόνον ἀντεῖχε τὰ 
Δημητρίου, διέμεινεν ἡ Πύρρου καὶ Λυσιμάχου 
48 

ATTICA, 1x. δ--Χ. 2 

surely aware that they were the ancestors not of 
Pyrrhus only but also of Alexander. In fact Alex- 
ander was an Epeirot and an Aeacid on his mother’s 
side, and the subsequent alliance between Pyrrhus 
and Lysimachus proves that even as enemies they were 
not irreconcilable. Possibly Hieronymus had griev- 
ances against Lysimachus, especially his destroying 
the city of the Cardians and founding Lysimachea in 
its stead on the isthmus of the Thracian Chersonesus. 

X. As long as Aridaeus reigned, and after him 
Cassander and his sons, friendly relations continued 
between Lysimachus and Macedon. But when the 
kingdom devolved upon Demetrius, son of Antigonus, 
Lysimachus, henceforth expecting that war would be 
declared upon him by Demetrius, resolved to take 
aggressive action. He was aware that Demetrius 
inherited a tendency to aggrandise, and he also 
knew that he visited Macedonia at the summons of 
Alexander and Cassander, and on his arrival murdered 
Alexander himself and ruled the Macedonians in his 
stead. Therefore encountering Demetrius at Amphi- 
polis he came near to being expelled from Thrace, but 
on Pyrrhus’ coming to his aid he mastered Thrace 
and afterwards extended his empire at the expense 
of the Nestians and Macedonians. The greater part 

294 B.C. 

288 B.C. 

of Macedonia was under the control of Pyrrhus 

himself, who came from Epeirus with an army and 
was at that time on friendly terms with Lysimachus. 
When however Demetrius crossed over into Asia 
and made war on Seleucus, the alliance between 
Pyrrhus and Lysimachus lasted only as long as 

49 
VOL, I. E 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

συμμαχία" γενομένου δὲ ἐπὶ Σελεύκῳ Δημητρίου 
Λυσιμάχῳ καὶ Πύρρῳ διελύθη ἡ φιλία, καὶ kaTa- 
στάντων ἐς πόλεμον Λυσίμαχος ᾿Αντιγόνῳ τε 
τῷ Δημητρίου καὶ αὐτῷ Πύρρῳ πολεμήσας ἐκρά- 
τησε παρὰ πολὺ καὶ Μακεδονίαν ἔσχεν, ἆνα- 
χωρῆσαι Ι]ύρρον βιασάμενος ἐς τὴν ᾿Ηπειρον. 
εἰώθασι δὲ ἀνθρώποις φύεσθαι δι ἔρωτα πολλαὶ 
-συμϕοραί. Λυσίμαχος γὰρ ἡλικίᾳ τε ἤδη προ- 
ήκων καὶ ἐς τοὺς παῖδας αὐτός τε νομιζόμενος 
εὐδαίμων καὶ ᾿Αγαθοκλεῖ παίδων ὄντων ἐκ Λυσάν- 
Spas ᾿Αρσινόην ἔγημεν ἀδελφὴν Λυσάνδρας. ταύ- 
την τὴν ᾿Αρσινόην φοβουμένην ἐπὶ τοῖς παισί, μὴ 
Λυσιμάχου τελευτήσαντος ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αγαθοκλεῖ γένων- 
ται, τούτων ἕνεκα ᾿Αγαθοκλεῖ ἐπιβουλεῦσαι 
λέγεται. ἤδη δὲ ἔγραψαν καὶ ὡς ᾿Αγαθοκλέους 
ἀφίκοιτο ἐς ἔρωτα ἡ ᾿Αρσινόη, ἀποτυγχάνουσα δὲ 
ἐπὶ τῷ] βουλεῦσαι λέγουσιν ᾿Αγαθοκλεῖ θάνατον. 
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ ὡς Λυσίμαχος αἴσθοιτο ὕστερον 
τὰ τολμηθέντα ὑπὸ τῆς γυναικός, εἶναι δὲ οὐδὲν 
ἔτι οἱ πλέον ἠρημωμένῳ φίλων ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον. 
ὡς γὰρ δὴ τότε ὁ Λυσίμαχος ἀνελεῖν τὸν ᾿Αγαθο- 
κλέα ᾿Αρσινόῃ παρῆκε, Λυσάνδρα παρὰ Σέλευκον 
ἐκδιδράσκει τούς τε παῖδας ἅμα ἀγομένη καὶ τοὺς 
ἀδελφοὺς τοὺς αὑτῆς, οἱ  περιελθὸν τοῦτο ἐς 
Πτολεμαῖον καταφεύγουσι. τούτοις ἐκδιδρά- 
σκουσι παρὰ Σέλευκον καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἠκολούθη- 
σεν, υἱὸς μὲν Λυσιμάχου, γεγονὼς δὲ ἐξ Όδρυσι- 
άδος γυναικός. οὗτοί τε οὖν ἐς Βαβυλῶνα ava- 
θεβηκότες ἱκέτευον Σέλευκον ἐς πόλεμον πρὸς 
Λυσίμαχον καταστῆναι: καὶ Φιλέταιρος ἅμα, ᾧ 
τὰ χρήματα ἐπετέτραπτο Λυσιμάχου, τῇ τε 
1 ἔπειτα 7 3 Text corrupt. 

5Ο 

στ 

ATTICA, κ. 2-4 

Demetrius continued hostilities; when Demetrius 
submitted to Seleucus, the friendship between 
Lysimachus and Pyrrhus was broken, and when war 
broke out Lysimachus fought against Antigonus 
son of Demetrius and against Pyrrhus himself, had 
much the better of the struggle, conquered Mace- 
donia and forced Pyrrhus to retreat to Epeirus. 
Love is wont to bring many calamities upon men. 
Lysimachus, although by this time of mature age 
and considered happy in respect of his children, 
and although Agathocles had children by Lysandra, 
nevertheless married Lysandra’s sister Arsinoé. This 
Arsinoé, fearing for her children, lest on the death of 
Lysimachus they should fall into the hands of 
Agathocles, is said for this reason to have plotted 
against Agathocles. Historians have already related 
how Arsinoé fell in love with Agathocles, and being 
unsuccessful they say that she plotted against his life. 
They say also that Lysimachus discovered later his 
wife’s machinations, but was by this time powerless, 
having lost all his friends. Since Lysimachus, then, 
overlooked Arsinoé’s murder of Agathocles, Lysandra 
fled to Seleucus, taking with her her children and 
her brothers, who were taking refuge with Ptolemy 
and finally adopted this course. They were ac- 
companied on their flight to Seleucus by Alexander, 
who was the son of Lysimachus by an Odrysian woman. 
So they going up to Babylon entreated Seleucus 
to make war on Lysimachus. And at the same time 
Philetaerus, to whom the property of Lysimachus had 

51 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αγαθοκλέους τελευτῇ χαλεπῶς φέρων καὶ τὰ 

παρὰ τῆς ᾿Αρσινόης ὕποπτα ἡγούμενος καταλαμ- 

βάνει Πέργαμον τὴν ὑπὲρ Καΐκου, πέμψας δὲ 
κήρυκα τά τε χρήματα καὶ αὑτὸν ἐδίδου Σελεύκῳ. 

Λυσίμαχος δὲ ταῦτα πάντα πυνθανόμενος ἔφθη 

διαβὰς ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν καὶ ἄρξας αὐτὸς πολέμου 

συμβαλών τε Σελεύκῳ παρὰ πολύ τε ἐκρατήθη 
καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπέθανεν. ᾿Αλέξανδρος δέ, ὃς ἐκ τῆς 
γυναικὸς Ὀδρυσίδος ἐγεγόνει οἱ, πολλὰ Λυσάν- 

Spav παραιτησάμενος ἀναιρεῖταί τε καὶ ὕστερον 

τούτων ἐς Χερρόνησον κομίσας ἔθαψεν, ἔνθα ἔτι 

καὶ νῦν ἐστίν οἱ φανερὸς ὁ τάφος Καρδίας τε 
μεταξὺ κώμης καὶ Πακτύης. 

r— ΧΙ. Τὰ μὲν οὖν Λυσιμάχου τοιαῦτα ἐγένετο’ 
᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ εἰκών ἐστι καὶ Πύρρου. οὗτος ὁ 
Πύρρος ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ προσῆκεν οὐδέν, εἰ μὴ ὅσα 
κατὰ γένος Αἰακίδου γὰρ τοῦ ᾿Αρύββου Πύρρος 
ἦν, Ὀλυμπιάδος δὲ ᾿Αλέξανδρος τῆς Νεοπτολέ- 
μου, Νεοπτολέμῳ δὲ καὶ ᾿Αρύββᾳ πατὴρ ἣν ᾿Αλ- 
κέτας ὁ Θαρύπου. ἀπὸ δὲ Θαρύπου ἐς Πύρρον 
τὸν ᾿Αχιλλέως πέντε ἀνδρῶν καὶ δέκα εἰσὶ γενεαί: 
πρῶτος γὰρ δὴ οὗτος ἁλούσης Ἰλίου τὴν μὲν ἐς 
Θεσσαλίαν ὑπερεῖδεν ἀναχώρησιν, ἐς δὲ τὴν 
Ἤπειρον κατάρας ἐνταῦθα ἐκ τῶν Ἑλένου χρη- 
σμῶν ᾧκησε. καί οἱ παῖς ἐκ μὲν "Ερμιόνης νεο 
οὐδείς, ἐξ ᾿ Ανδρομάχης δὲ Μολοσσὸς καὶ Πίελος 
καὶ νεώτατος o Πέργαμος. ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ Ἑλένῳ 
Κεστρῖνος: τούτῳ γὰρ ᾿Ανδρομάχη συνῴκησεν 

2 ἀποθανόντος ἐν Δελφοῖς Πύρρου. Ἑλένου δὲ ὡς 
ἐτελεύτα Μολοσσῷ τῷ Πύρρου παραδόντος τὴν 
ἀρχὴν Κεστρῖνος μὲν σὺν τοῖς ἐθέλουσιν Ἠπειρω- 
τῶν τὴν ὑπὲρ Θύαμιν ποταμὸν χώραν ἔσχε, Πέρ- 

52 

σι 

ATTICA, x. 4-χι. 2 

been entrusted, aggrieved at the death of Agathocles 
and suspicious of the treatment he would receive at 
the hands of Arsinoé, seized Pergamus on the Caicus, 
and sending a herald offered both the property 
and himself to Seleucus. Lysimachus hearing of all 

` these things lost no time in crossing into Asia, and 

assuming the initiative met Seleucus, suffered a 
severe defeat and was killed. Alexander, his son by 
the Odrysian woman, after interceding long with 
Lysandra, won his body and afterwards carried it to 

| the Chersonesus and buried it, where his grave is still 

to be seen between the village of Cardia and Pactye. 

XI. Such was the history of Lysimachus. The 
Athenians have also a statue of Pyrrhus. This Pyr- 
rhus was not related to Alexander, except by ancestry. 
Pyrrhus was son of Aeacides, son of Arybbas, but 
Alexander was son of Olympias, daughter of Neopto- 
lemus, and the father of Neoptolemus and Arybbas 

; was Alcetas, son of Tharypus. And from Tharypus to 

Pyrrhus, son of Achilles, are fifteen generations. Now 
Pyrrhus was the first who after the capture of Troy 

disdained to return to Thessaly, but sailing to Epeirus 

dwelt there because of the oracles of Helenus. By 
Hermione Pyrrhus had no child, but by Andromache 
he had Molossus, Pielus, and Pergamus, who was the 
youngest. Helenus also had a son, Cestrinus, being 

_Inarried to Andromache after the murder of Pyrrhus 
at Delphi. Helenus on his death passed on the king- 

dom to Molossus, son of Pyrrhus, so that Cestrinus 
with volunteers from the Epeirots took possession of 
the region beyond the river Thyamis, while Pergamus 

53 

281 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

γαμος δὲ διαβὰς ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν "Άρειον δυναστεύ- 
οντα ἐν τῇ Τευθρανία κτείνει μονομαχήσαντά οἱ 
περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ τῇ πόλει τὸ ὄνομα ἔδωκε τὸ 
νῦν ἀφ᾽ αὑτοῦ" καὶ ᾿Ανδρομάχης--ἠκολούθει γάρ 
οἱ --καὶ νῦν ἐστιν ἡρῷον ἐν τῇ πόλει. Πίελος δὲ 
αὐτοῦ κατέμεινεν ἐν Ἠπείρῳ, καὶ ἐς πρόγονον 
A e . 
τοῦτον ἀνέβαινε Ἠύρρος τε ὁ Αἰακίδου καὶ οἱ 
3 
πατέρες, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐς Μολοσσόν. ἦν δὲ ἄχρι μὲν 
᾽Αλκέτου τοῦ Θαρύπου ἐφ᾽ ἑνὶ βασιλεῖ καὶ τὰ 
5 A e \ 3 A P 
Ηπειρωτῶν: οἱ δὲ ᾿Αλκέτου παῖδες, ὥς σφισι 
στασιάσασι μετέδοξεν ἐπ᾽ ἴσης ἄρχειν, αὐτοί τε 
πιστῶς ἔχοντες διέμειναν ἐς ἀλλήλους καὶ ὕστε- 
ρον ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῦ Νεοπτολέμου τελευτήσαντος 
ἐν Λευκανοῖς, Ὀλυμπιάδος δὲ διὰ τὸν ᾿Αντιπάτρου 
/ 3 4 9 y 9 / e 
φόβον ἐπανελθούσης ἐς Ἤπειρον, Αἰακίδης ὁ 
Α 4 4 EA ὃ όλ, , Δ 
ρύββου τά τε ἄλλα διετέλει κατήκοος ὧν 
5 lA . 4, 2 » 
Ολυμπιάδι καὶ συνεστράτευσε πολεμήσων ᾿Αρι- 
δαίῳ καὶ Μακεδόσιν, οὐκ ἐθελόντων ἕπεσθαι τῶν 
. . a , / ὃ Èd ? Ζ 
Ηπειρωτῶν. Ὀλυμπιάδος ὡς ἐπεκράτησεν 
ἀνόσια μὲν ἐργασαμένης καὶ ἐς τὸν ᾿Αριδαίου 
θάνατον, πολλῷ δὲ ἔτι ἀνοσιώτερα ἐς ἄνδρας 
Μακεδόνας, καὶ διὰ ταῦτα οὐκ ἀνάξια ὕστερον 
ε \ ΄ ὃ Ῥ ϐ A 0 [4 » ‘5 
ὑπὸ Κασσάνδρου” παθεῖν νομισθείσης, Αἰακίδην 
3 9 \ . 9 δ᾽ 3 p 5 a N ’O ΄ 
κατ ἀρχᾶς μὲν οὐὸ αὐτοί διὰ τὸ Ὀλυμτγιά- 
5 A 
δος ἔχθος ἐδέχοντο ᾿Ηπειρῶται, εὑρομένου δὲ ἀνὰ 
΄ 
χρόνον παρὰ τούτων συγγνώμην δεύτερα ἠναντι- 
οὔτο Κάσσανδρος μὴ κατελθεῖν ἐς δη δις 
γενομένης δὲ Φιλίππου τε ἀδελφοῦ Κασσάνδρου 
\ > / 4 Ν 2 4 > ld 
καὶ Αἰακίδου μάχης πρὸς Οἰνιάδαις, Αἰακίδην 
μὲν τρωθέντα κατέλαβε μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ τὸ χρεών" 
> A 3 2 \ / / 
Ηπειρῶται δὲ ᾿Αλκέταν ἐπὶ βασιλείᾳ κατεδέ- 
ξαντο, Αρύββου μὲν παῖδα καὶ ἀδελφὸν Αἰακί- 

54 

ATTICA, x1. 2-5 

crossed into Asia and killed Areius, despot in Teu- 
thrania, who fought with him in single combat for his 
kingdom, and gave his name to the city which is still 
called after him. To Andromache, who accompanied 
him, there is still a shrine in the city. Pielus re- 
mained behind in Epeirus, and to him as ancestor 
Pyrrhus, the son of Aeacides, and his fathers traced 
their descent, and not to Molossus. Down to Alcetas, 
son of Tharypus, Epeirus too was under one king. 
But the sons of Alcetas after a quarrel agreed 
to rule with equal authority, remaining faithful to 
their compact; and afterwards, when Alexander, son 
of Neoptolemus, died among the Leucani, and Olym- 
pias returned to Epeirus through fear of Antipater, 
Aeacides, son of Arybbas, continued in allegiance to 
Olympias and joined in her campaign against Aridaeus 
and the Macedonians, although the Epeirots refused 
to accompany him. Olympias on her victory behaved 
wickedly in the matter of the death of Aridaeus, and 
much more wickedly to certain Macedonians, and 
for this reason’ was considered to have deserved her 
subsequent treatment at the hands of Cassander ; so 
Aeacides at first was not received even by the Epeirots 
because of their hatred of Olympias, and when after- 
wards they forgave him, his return to Epeirus was 
next opposed by Cassander. Whena battle occurred at 
Oeneadae between Philip, brother of Cassander, and 313 s.c. 
Aeacides, Aeacides was wounded and shortly after 
met his fate. The Epeirots accepted Alcetas as their 
king, being the son of Arybbas and the elder brother 

55 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

` δου πρεσβύτερον, ἀκρατῆ δὲ ἄλλως θυμοῦ καὶ δι᾽ 

αὐτὸ ἐξελασθέντα ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρός. καὶ τότε 
ἥκων ἐξεμαίνετο εὐθὺς ἐς τοὺς ᾿Ηπειρώτας, ἐς ὃ 
νύκτωρ αὐτόν τε καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ἐπαναστάντες 
ἔκτειναν. ἀποκτείναντες δὲ τοῦτον Πύρρον τὸν 
Αἰακίδου κατάγουσιν' ἥκοντι δὲ εὐθὺς ἐπεστρά- 
τευε Κάσσανδρος, νέῳ τε ἡλικία ὄντι καὶ τὴν 
ἀρχὴν οὐ κατεσκευασμένῳ βεβαίως. Πύρρος δὲ 
ἐπιόντων Μακεδόνων ἐς Αἴγυπτον παρὰ Πτολε- 
μαῖον ἀναβαίνει τὸν Λάγου" καί οἱ Πτολεμαῖος 
γυναῖκά τ᾽ ἔδωκεν ἀδελφὴν ὁμομητρίαν τῶν αὑτοῦ 
παίδων καὶ στόλῳ κατήγαγεν Αἰγυπτίων. 

6 Πύρρος δὲ βασιλεύσας πρώτοις ἐπέθετο 'Ελλ.ή- 
νων Κορκυραίοις, κειμένην τε ὁρῶν τὴν νῆσον πρὸ 
τῆς αὑτοῦ χώρας καὶ ἄλλοις ὁρμητήριον ἐφ᾽ αὑτὸν 
οὐκ ἐθέλων εἶναι. μετὰ δὲ ἁλοῦσαν Κόρκυραν 
ὅσα μὲν Λυσιμάχῳ πολεμήσας ἔπαθε καὶ ὡς 
Δημήτριον ἐκβαλὼν Μακεδονίας ἦρξεν ἐς ὃ αὖθις 
ἐξέπεσεν ὑπὸ Λυσιμάχου, τάδε os τοῦ Πύρρου 
μέγιστα ἐς ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρὸν δεδήλωκεν ἤδη pot 

7 τὰ ἐς Λυσίμαχον ἔχοντα' “Ῥωμαίοις δὲ οὐδένα 
Πύρρου πρότερον πολεμήσαντα ἴσμεν "Ἕλληνα. 
Διομήδει μὲν γὰρ καὶ ᾿Αργείων τοῖς σὺν αὐτῷ 
οὐδεμίαν ἔτι γενέσθαι πρὸς Αἰνείαν λέγεται 
μάχην' ᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ ἄλλα τε πολλὰ ἐλπίσασι 
καὶ Ἰταλίαν πᾶσαν καταστρέψασθαι τὸ ἐν Συρα- 
κούσαις πταῖσμα ἐμποδὼν ἐγένετο μὴ καὶ Ῥω- 
μαίων λαβεῖν πεῖραν' ᾿Αλέξανδρος δὲ ὁ Neo- 
πτολέμου, γένους τε Ov Πύρρῳ τοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ 
ἡλικίᾳ πρεσβύτερος, ἀποθανὼν ἐν Λευκανοῖς 
ἔφθη πρὶν ἐς χεῖρας ἐλθεῖν Ῥωμαίοις. XII. οὕτω 
Πύρρος ἐστὶν ὁ πρῶτος ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος τῆς 
56 

w 

ATTICA, χι. ς-ΧΙΙ. τ 

οἵ Aeacides, but of an uncontrollable temper and on 
this account banished by his father. Immediately 
on his arrival he began to vent his fury on the 
Epeirots, until they rose up and put him and his 
children to death at night. After killing him they 
brought back Pyrrhus, son of Aeacides. No sooner 
had he arrived than Cassander made war upon him, 
while he was young in years and before he had 
consolidated his empire. When the Macedonians 
attacked him, Pyrrhus went to Ptolemy, son of Lagus, 
in Egypt. Ptolemy gave him to wife the half-sister of 
his children, and restored him by an Egyptian force. 

The first Greeks that Pyrrhus attacked on becoming 
king were the Corcyraeans. He saw that the island 
lay off his own territory, and he did not wish 
others to have a base from which to attack him. 
My account of Lysimachus has already related how 
he fared, after taking Corcyra, in his war with 
Lysimachus, how he expelled Demetrius and ruled 
Macedonia until he was in turn expelled by Lysima- 
chus, the most important of his achievements until 
he waged war against the Romans, being the first 
Greek we know of todo so. For no further battle, it is 
said, took place between Aeneas and Diomedes with 
his Argives. One of the many ambitions of the Athen- 
ians was to reduce all Italy, but the disaster at 
Syracuse prevented their trying conclusions with the 
Romans. Alexander, son of Neoptolemus, of the 
same family as Pyrrhus but older, died among the 
Leucani before he could meet the Romans in battle. 
XII. So Pyrrhus was the first to cross the Ionian 

57 

418 B.C. 

280 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 
Τον, ᾿Ιονίου διαβὰς ἐπὶ Ρωμαίους" διέβη 

κα οὗτος ἐπαγαγομένων. Ταραντίνων. τούτοβε 
γὰρ πρότερον ἔτι π ὃς “Ρωμαίους συνειστήκθε 
πόλεμος: ἀδύνατοι ὲ κατὰ σφᾶς ὄντες ἀντε-. 
σχεῖν, προὐπαρχούσης μὲν ἐς αὐτὸν εὐεργεσίαςι 
ὅτι οἱ πολεμοῦντι τὸν πρὸς Κόρκυραν πόλεμον. 
ναυσὶ συνήραντο, μάλιστα δὲ οἱ πρέσβεις 
Ταραντίνων ἀνέπεισαν τὸν Πύρρον, τήν τε Ira- 
λίαν διδάσκοντες ὡς εὐδαιμονίας ἕνεκα ἀντὲ 
πάσης εἴη τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ ὡς οὐ ὅσιον αὐτῷ | 
παραπέμψαι σφᾶς φίλους τε καὶ ἱκέτας ἐν τῷ ὁ 
παρόντι ἥκοντας. ταῦτα λεγόντων τῶν πρέσβεων 
μνήμη τὸν Πύρρον τῆς ἁλώσεως ἐσῆλθε τῆς . 
Ἰλίου, καί οἱ κατὰ ταὐτὰ ἤλπιξε χωρήσειν Toe- ` 
μοῦντι: στρατεύειν γὰρ ἐπὶ Τρώων. ἀποίκους 
᾿Αχιλλέως ὧν a -ἀπόγονος. ὡς δέ οἱ ταῦτα ἤρεσκε 
--"διέμελλε γὰρ én’ οὐδενὶ ὧν ἕλοιτο---, αὐτίκα 
ναῦς τε ἐπλήρου μακρὰς καὶ πλοῖα στρογγύλα 
εὐτρέπιξεν ἵππους καὶ ἄνδρας ὁπλίτας ἄγειν. 
ἔστι δὲ ἀνδράσι βιβλία οὐκ ἐπιφανέσιν ἐ ἐς συγ- 
γραφήν, ἔχοντα ἐπίγραμμα ἔργων ὑπομνήματα 
εἶναι. ταῦτα ἐπιλεγομένῳ μοι μάλιστα ἐπῆλθε 
θανμάσαι Πύρρου τόλμαν τε, ἣν μαχόμενος aù- 
TÒS παρείχετο, καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἀεὶ μέλλουσιν 
ἀγῶσι πρόνοιαν" ὃς καὶ τότε περαιούμενος ναυσὶν 
ἐς Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαίους ἐλελήθει καὶ ἥκων οὐκ 
εὐθὺς ἡ ἦν σφισι φανερός, γινομένης δὲ Ῥωμαίων 
πρὸς Ταραντίνους συμβολῆς τότε δὴ πρῶτον 
ἐπιφαίνεται σὺν τῷ στρατῷ καὶ παρ᾽ ἐλπίδα 
σφίσι προσπεσών, ὡς τὸ εἰκός, ἐτάραξεν. ἅτε δὲ 
ἄριστα ἐπιστάμενος ὡς οὐκ ἀξιόμαχος εἴη πρὸς 
Ῥωμαίους, παρεσκευάζετο ὡς τοὺς ἐλέφαντας 

58 

ATTICA, xu. 1-3 

Sea from Greece to attack the Romans. And even he 
crossed on the invitation of the Tarentines. For they 
were already involved in a war with the Romans, but 
were no match for them unaided. Pyrrhus was 
already in their debt, because they had sent a fleet 
to help him in his war with Corcyra, but the most 
cogent arguments of the Tarentine envoys were their 
accounts of Italy, how its prosperity was equal to 
that of the whole of Greece, and their plea that it 
was wicked to dismiss them when they had come as 
friends and suppliants in their hour of need. When 
the envoys urged these considerations, Pyrrhus re- 
membered the capture of Troy, which he took to be 
an omen of his success in the war, as he was a 
descendant of Achilles making war upon a colony of 
Trojans. Pleased with this proposal, and being a 
man who never lost time when once he had made up 
his mind, he immediately proceeded to man war- 
ships and to prepare transports to carry horses and 
men-at-arms. There are books written by men 
of no renown as historians, entitled “ Memoirs.” 
When I read these I marvelled greatly both at 
the personal bravery of Pyrrhus in battle, and 
also at the forethought he displayed whenever a 
contest was imminent. So on this occasion also 
when crossing to Italy with a fleet he eluded the 
observation of the Romans, and for some time 
after his arrival they were unaware of his presence ; 
it was only when the Romans made an attack 
upon the Tarentines that he appeared on the scene 
with his army, and his unexpected assault naturally 
threw his enemies into confusion. And being per- 
fectly aware that he was no match for the Romans, 
he prepared to let loose against them his elephants. 

59 

δι 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE | 

ἐπαφήσων σφίσιν. ἐλέφαντας δὲ πρῶτος μὲν 

τῶν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἐκτήσατο | 

Πῶρον καὶ τὴν δύναμιν καθελὼν τὴν ᾿Ινδῶν, 
ἀποθανόντος δὲ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν Ba- 
σιλέων καὶ πλείστους ἔσχεν ᾿Αντίγονος, Πύρρ 

δὲ ἐκ τῆς μάχης ἐγεγόνει τῆς πρὸς Δημήτρεον τ 

θηρία αἰχμάλωτα: τότε δὲ ἐπιφανέντων αὐτῶν 
δεῖμα ἔλαβε “Ρωμαίους ἄλλο τι καὶ οὐ ζῷα εἶναι 
νομίσαντας. ἐλέφαντα γάρ, ὅσος μὲν ἐς ἔργα καὶ 
ἀνδρῶν χεῖρας, εἰσὶν ἐκ παλαιοῦ δῆλοι πάντες 
εἰδότες" αὐτὰ δὲ τὰ θηρία, πρὶν ἢ διαβῆναι Ma- 
κεδόνας ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν, οὐδὲ ἑωράκεσαν ἀρχὴν 
πλὴν ᾿Ινδῶν τε αὐτῶν καὶ Λιβύων καὶ ὅσοι 
πλησιόχωροι τούτοις. δηλοῖ δὲ Όμηρος, ὃς βα- 
σιλεῦσι κλίνας μὲν καὶ οἰκίας τοῖς εὐδαιμονε- 
στέροις αὐτῶν ἐλέφαντι ἐποίησε κεκοσμημένας, 
θηρίου δὲ ερ ών μνήμην οὐδεμίαν ἐποιήσατο" 
θεασάμενος ἢ πεπυσμένος ἐμνημόνευσεν ἂν 
πολύ γε πρότερον ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ἡ Πυγμαίων τε 
ἀνδρῶν καὶ γεράνων μάχης. Ηύρρον δὲ ἐς Σικε- 
λίαν ἀπήγαγε πρεσβεία Συρακουσίων: Kapyn- 
δόνιοι γὰρ διαβάντες τὰς "Ελληνίδας τῶν πόλεων 
ἐποίουν ἀναστάτους, À δὲ ἦν λοιπή, Συρακούσαις 
πολιορκοῦντες προσεκάθηντο. ἃ τῶν πρέσβεων 
Πύρρος ἀκούων Ἱάραντα μὲν εἴα καὶ τοὺς τὴν 
ἀκτὴν ἔχοντας ᾿Ιταλιωτῶν, ἐς δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν 
διαβὰς Καρχηδονίους ἠνάγκασεν ἀπαναστῆναι 
Συρακουσῶν. φρονήσας δὲ ἐφ᾽ αὑτῷ Καρχηδο- 
νίων, οἳ θαλάσσης τῶν τότε βαρβάρων μάλιστα 
εἶχον ἐμπείρως Τύριοι Φοίνικες τὸ ἀρχαῖον ὄντες, 

6ο 

έω Γ᾽ 

` 
q 
a 

ATTICA, χι. 3-5 

The first European to acquire elephants was Alex- 
ander, after subduing Porus and the power of the 
Indians ; after his death others of the kings got them, 
but Antigonus more than any; Pyrrhus captured his 
beasts in the battle with Demetrius. When on this 
occasion they came in sight the Romans were seized 
with panic, and did not believe they were animals. 
For although the use of ivory in arts and crafts 
all men obviously have known from of old, the 
actual beasts, before the Macedonians crossed into 
Asia, nobody had seen at all except the Indians 
themselves, the Libyans, and their neighbours. This 
is proved by Homer, who describes the couches and 
houses of the more prosperous kings as ornamented 
with ivory, but never mentions the beast; but if he 
had seen or heard about it he would, in my opinion, 
have been much more likely to speak of it than 
of the battle between the Dwarf-men and cranes.! 
Pyrrhus was brought over to Sicily by an embassy 
of the Syracusans. The Carthaginians had crossed 
' over and were destroying the Greek cities, and 
had sat down to invest Syracuse, the only one now 
remaining. When Pyrrhus heard this from the en- 
voys he abandoned Tarentum and the Italiots on the 
coast, and crossing into Sicily forced the Carthaginians 
to raise the siege of Syracuse. In his self-conceit, 
although the Carthaginians, being Phoenicians of 
Tyre by ancient descent, were more experienced sea- 
men than any other non-Greek people of that day, 
Pyrrhus was nevertheless encouraged to meet them 
1 Niad, iii. 3 f. 
61 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τούτων ἐναντία ἐπήρθη ναυμαχῆσαι τοῖς Hre- 
ρώταις χρώμενος, οἳ μηδὲ ἁλούσης ᾿Ἰλίου θάλασ- 
σαν οἱ πολλοὶ μηδὲ ἆλσὶν ἠπίσταντό πω χρῆσθαι. 
μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι καὶ “Ὁμήρου ἔπος ἐν Ὀδυσσεία: 

οἳ οὐκ ἴσασι θάλασσαν 
ἀνέρες, οὐδέ θ᾽ ἄλεσσι μεμιγμένον εἶδαρ ἔδουσιν. 

XIII. τότε δὲ ὁ Πύρρος, ὡς ἡττήθη, ταῖς ναυσὶν 
ἐς Τάραντα ἀνήγετο ταῖς λοιπαῖς' ἐνταῦθα προσ- 
έπταισε μεγάλως καὶ τὴν ava ώρησιν---οὐ γὰ 
ἀμαχεὶ Ῥωμαίους ἠπίστατο ἀφήσοντας---πορί- 
ζεται τρόπον τοῦτον. ὡς ἐπανήκων ἐκ Σικελίας 
ἡττήθη, πρῶτον διέπεμπε γράμματα ἔς τε τὴν 
᾿Ασίαν καὶ πρὸς ᾿Αντίγονον, τοὺς μὲν στρατιὰν 
τῶν βασιλέων, τοὺς δὲ χρήματα, ᾿Αντίγονον δὲ 
καὶ ἀμφότερα αἰτῶν: ἀφικομένων δὲ τῶν ἀγγέ- 
λων, ὥς οἱ γράμματα ἀπεδόθη, συναγαγὼν τοὺς 
ἐν τέλει τῶν τε ἐξ ᾿Ηπείρου καὶ τῶν Ταραντίνων, 
ὧν μὲν εἶχε τὰ βιβλία ἀνεγίνωσκεν οὐδέν, ὁ δὲ 
ἥξειν συμμαχίαν ἔλεγε. ταχὺ δὲ καὶ ἐς τοὺς 
Ῥωμαίους ἦλθε φήμη Μακεδόνας καὶ ἄλλα ἔθνη 
περαιοῦσθαι τῶν ᾿Ασιανῶν ἐς τὴν Πύρρου Boñ- 
θειαν' “Ρωμαῖοι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἀκούοντες ἡσύ- 
χαξον, Ηύρρος δὲ ὑπὸ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν περαιοῦται 
νύκτα πρὸς τὰ ἄκρα τῶν ὀρῶν, ἃ Κεραύνια 
ὀνομάξουσι. 

Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ πληγὴν ἀναπαύσας 

` / - , / / ν 
τὴν δύναμιν προεῖπεν ᾿Αντιγόνῳ πόλεμον, ἄλλα 
τε ποιούμενος ἐγκλήματα καὶ μάλιστα τῆς ἐς 
Ἰταλίαν βοηθείας διαμαρτίαν. κρατήσας δὲ τήν 
τε ἰδίαν παρασκευὴν ᾿Αντιγόνου καὶ τὸ παρ᾽ αὐτῷ 
Γαλατῶν ξενικὸν ἐδίωξεν ἐς τὰς ἐπὶ θαλάσση 
62 

eee 

ATTICA, χι. σ- χμ. 2 

in a naval battle, employing the Epeirots, the majority 
of whom, even after the capture of Troy, knew no- 
thing of the sea nor even as yet how to use salt. 
Witness the words of Homer in the Odyssey} :— 

“Nothing they know of ocean, and mix not salt 
with their victuals.” 

XIII. Worsted on this occasion Pyrrhus put back 
with the remainder of his vessels to Tarentum. 
Here he met with a serious reverse, and his retire- 
ment, for he knew that the Romans would not let 
him depart without striking a blow, he contrived in 
the following manner. On his return from Sicily 
and his defeat, he first sent various dispatches to 
Asia and to Antigonus, asking some of the kings for 
troops, some for money, and Antigonus for both. 
When the envoys returned and their dispatches 
were delivered, he summoned those in authority, 
whether Epeirot or Tarentine, and without reading 
any of the dispatches declared that reinforcements 
would come. A report spread quickly even to the 
Romans that Macedonians and Asiatic tribes also 
were crossing to the aid of Pyrrhus. The Romans, 
on hearing this, made no move, but Pyrrhus on the 
approach of that very night crossed to the headlands 
of the mountains called Ceraunian. 

After the defeat in Italy Pyrrhus gave his forces a 
rest and then declared war on Antigonus, his chief 
ground of complaint being the failure to send rein- 
foreements to Italy. Overpowering the native troops 
of Antigonus and his Gallic mercenaries he pursued 

1 Odyssey, xi. 122. 
63 

Q 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πόλεις, αὐτὸς δὲ Μακεδονίας τε τῆς ἄνω καὶ 
Θεσσαλῶν ἐπεκράτησε. δηλοῖ δὲ μάλιστα τὸ 
μέγεθος τῆς μάχης καὶ τὴν Πύρρου νίκην, ὡς 
παρὰ πολὺ γένοιτο, τὰ ἀνατεθέντα ὅπλα τῶν 
Κελτῶν ἐς τὸ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱερὸν τῆς Ἰτωνίας 
Pe ov μεταξὺ καὶ Λαρίσης καὶ τὸ ἐπίγραμμα τὸ 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς' 

Τοὺς θυρεοὺς ὁ Μολοσσὸς ᾿Ιτωνίδι δῶρον 
᾿Αθάνᾳ 
Ἠύρρος a ἀπὸ θρασέων ἐ ἐκρέμασεν Γαλατᾶν, 
πάντα τὸν ᾿Αντιγόνου καθελὼν στρατόν. οὐ 

μέγα θαῦμα' 
> . . - . / » / 
αἰχματαὶ καὶ νῦν καὶ πάρος Αἰακίδαι. 

τούτους μὲν δὴ ἐνταῦθα, τῷ δὲ ἐν Δωδώνη Au 
Μακεδόνων ἀνέθηκεν. αὐτῶν τὰς ἀσπίδας. ἐπι- 
γέγραπται δὲ καὶ ταύταις" 

Αἴδε mor ᾿Ασίδα γαῖαν ἐπόρθησαν πολύ- 

υσον, 
athe καὶ Ἕλλασιν δουλοσύναν ë ἔπορον. 

νῦν δὲ Διὸς ναῶ ποτὶ κίονας ὀρφανὰ κεῖται 
τᾶς μεγαλαυχήτω σκῦλα Μακεδονίας. 

Πύρρῳ δὲ Μακεδόνας ἐ ἐς ἅπαν μὴ καταστρέψα- 
σθαι παρ᾽ ὀλίγον ὅμως ἥκοντι ἐ ἐγένετο Κλεώνυμος 
αἴτιος, ἑτοιμοτέρῳ καὶ ἄλλως ὄντι ἑλέσθαι τὰ ἐ ἐν 
χερσίν. Κλεώνυμος δὲ οὗτος, ὁ τὸν Ἠύρρον ἀπο- 
λιπόντα τὰ Μακεδόνων πείσας ἐς Πελοπόννησον 
ἐλθεῖν, Λακεδαιμόνιος ἆ ὢν Λακεδαιμονίοις στρατὸν 
ἐς τὴν xirar, πολέμιον ἐπῆγε δι αἰτίαν, ἣν ἐγὼ 
τοῦ γένους ὕστερον τοῦ Κλεωνύμου δηλώσω. 
Παυσανίου τοῦ περὶ Πλάταιαν τοῖς "Ἕλλησιν 

64 

? 

ATTICA,” χιπ. 2-4 

them to the coast cities, and himself reduced upper 
Macedonia and the Thessalians. The extent of the 
fighting and the decisive character of the victory of 
Pyrrhus are shown best by the Celtic armour dedi- 
| cated in the sanctuary of Itonian Athena between 
Pherae and Larisa, with this inscription on them :— 

“Pyrrhus the Molossian hung these shields taken 
from the bold Gauls as a gift to Itonian 
Athena, when he had destroyed all the host 

| of Antigonus. ‘Tis no great marvel. The 
Aeacidae are warriors now, even as they were 

! of old.” 

These shields then are here, but the bucklers of the 
Macedonians themselves he dedicated to Dodonian 
Zeus. They too have an inscription :— 

“These once ravaged golden Asia, and brought 
slavery upon the Greeks. Now ownerless 
they lie by the pillars of the temple of Zeus, 
spoils of boastful Macedonia.” 

Pyrrhus came very near to reducing Macedonia 
entirely, but, being usually readier to do what 
came first to hand, he was prevented by Cleonymus. 
This Cleonymus, who persuaded Pyrrhus to abandon 
his Macedonian adventure and to go to the Pelo- 
ponnesus, was a Lacedaemonian who led an hostile 
army into the Lacedaemonian territory for a reason 
which I will relate after giving the descent of 
Cleonymus. Pausanias, who was in command of the 

65 

VOL, 1. F 

479 B.C. 

} 

ο 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἡγησαμένου Πλειστοάναξ υἱὸς ἐγένετο, τοῦ δὲ 
Παυσανίας, τοῦ δὲ Κλεόμβροτος, ὃς ἐναντία 
᾿Επαμινώνδᾳ καὶ Θηβαίοις μαχόμενος ἀπέθανεν 
ἐν Λεύκτροις: Κλεομβρότου δὲ ᾿Αγησίπολ.ις ἦν 
καὶ Κλεομένης, ᾿Αγησιπόλιδος δὲ ἄπαιδος τελευ- 
τήσαντος Κλεομένης τὴν βασιλείαν ἔσχε. Kreo- 
μένει δὲ παῖδες γίνονται πρεσβύτερος μὲν ᾿ Ακρό- 
τατος, νεώτερος δὲ Κλεώνυμος. ᾿Ακρότατον μὲν 
οὖν πρότερον κατέλαβεν ἡ τελευτή" Κλεομένους 
δὲ ἀποθανόντος ὕστερον ἐς ἀμφισβήτησιν κατέστη 
περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς ᾿Αρεὺς ὁ ᾿Ακροτάτου, καὶ Κλεώ- 
νυμος ὅτῳ δὴ τρόπῳ μετελθὼν ἐπάγει Πύρρον ἐς 
τὴν χώραν. Λακεδαιμονίοις δὲ πρὸ μὲν τοῦ ἐν 
Λεύκτροις οὐδὲν ἐγεγόνει πταῖσμα, ὥστε οὐδὲ 
συνεχώρουν ἀγῶνί πω κεκρατῆσθαι πεζφ' Aew- 
νίδᾳ μὲν γὰρ νικῶντι οὐκ ἔφασαν τοὺς ἑπομένους 
ἐς τελέαν ἐξαρκέσαι φθορὰν τῶν Μήδων, τὸ δὲ 
᾿Αθηναίων καὶ Δημοσθένους ἔργον πρὸς τῇ νήσῳ 
Σφακτηρίᾳ κλοπὴν εἶναι πολέμου καὶ οὐ νίκην. 
πρώτης δὲ γενομένης σφίσι συμφορᾶς ἐν Βοιωτοῖς, 
ὕστερον ᾿Αντιπάτρῳ καὶ Μακεδόσι μεγάλως 
προσέπταισαν' τρίτος δὲ ὁ Δημητρίου πόλεμος 
κακὸν ἀνέλπιστον ἦλθεν ἐς τὴν γῆν. Πύρρου δὲ 
ἐσβαλόντος τέταρτον δὴ τότε στρατὸν ὁρῶντες 
πολέμιον αὑτοί τε παρετάσσοντο καὶ ᾿Αργείων 
ἥκοντες καὶ Μεσσηνίων σύμμαχοι Ἰύρρος δὲ 
ὡς ἐπεκράτησεν, ὀλίγου μὲν ἦλθεν ἑλεῖν αὐτοβοεὶ 
τὴν πόλιν, δῃώσας δὲ τὴν γῆν καὶ λείαν ἐλάσας 
μικρὸν ἡσύχαξεν. οἱ δὲ ἐς πολιορκίαν εὐτρεπί- 
ζοντο, πρότερον ἔτι τῆς Σπάρτης ἐπὶ τοῦ πολέμου 
τοῦ πρὸς Δημήτριον τάφροις τε βαθείαις καὶ 
σταυροῖς τετειχισμένης ἰσχυροῖς, τὰ δὲ ἐπεμαχώ- 
66 

ATTICA, xui. 4-6 

Greeks at Plataea, was the father of Pleistoanax, he 
of Pausanias, and he of Cleombrotus, who was killed 
at Leuctra fighting against Epaminondas and the 
Thebans. Cleombrotus was the father of Agesipolis 
and Cleomenes, and, Agesipolis dying without issue, 
Cleomenes ascended the throne. Cleomenes had two 
sons, the elder being Acrotatus and the younger 
Cleonymus. Now Acrotatus died first; and when 
afterwards Cleomenes died, a claim to the throne was 
put forward by Areus son of Acrotatus, and Cleonymus 
took steps to induce Pyrrhus to enter the country. 
Before the battle of Leuctra the Lacedaemonians 
had suffered no disaster, so that they even refused 
to admit that they had yet been worsted in a land 
battle. For Leonidas, they said, had won the vic- 
tory, but his followers were insufficient for the 
entire destruction of the Persians; the achievement 
of Demosthenes and the Athenians on the island 
of Sphacteria was no victory, but only a trick in 
war. Their first reverse took place in Boeotia, 
and they afterwards suffered a severe defeat at the 
hands of Antipater and the Macedonians. Thirdly 
the war with Demetrius came as an unexpected 
misfortune to their land. Invaded by Pyrrhus 
and seeing a hostile army for the fourth time, 
they arrayed themselves to meet it along with the 
Argives and Messenians who had come as their allies. 
Pyrrhus won the day, and came near to capturing 
Sparta without further fighting, but desisted for a 
while after ravaging the land and carrying off plunder. 
The citizens prepared for a siege, and Sparta even 
before this in the war with Demetrius had been 
fortified with deep trenches and strong stakes, and at 

67 
F 2 

871 B.C. 

480 B.C. 

425 B.C. 

880 B.C. 

295 B.C. 

272 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

7 tata καὶ οἰκοδομήμασιν. ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν 
χρὀνον καὶ τὴν τοῦ πολέμου τοῦ Λακωνικοῦ 
τριβὴν ᾿Αντίγονος τὰς πόλεις τῶν Μακεδόνων 
ἀνασωσάμενος ἠπείγετο ἐς Πελοπόννησον οἷα 
ἐπιστάμενος Πύρρον, ἣν Λακεδαίμονα xrara- 
στρέψηται καὶ Πελοποννήσου τὰ πολλά, οὐκ 
ἐς Ἤπειρον ἀλλ᾽ ἐπί τε Μακεδονίαν αὖθις καὶ 
τὸν ἐκεῖ πόλεμον ἥξοντα' μέλλοντος δὲ Αντιγόνου 
τὸν στρατὸν ἐξ "Ἄργους ἐς τὴν Λακωνικὴν ἄγειν, 
αὐτὸς ἐς τὸ Αργος ἐληλύθει Πύρρος. κρατῶν δὲ 
καὶ τότε συνεσπίπτει τοῖς φεύγουσιν ἐς τὴν 
πόλιν καί οἱ διαλύεται κατὰ τὸ εἰκὸς ἡ τάξις' 
μαχομένων δὲ πρὸς ἱεροῖς ἤδη καὶ οἰκίαις καὶ 
κατὰ τοὺς στενωποὺς καὶ κατ ἄλλο ἄλλων τῆς 
πόλεως, ἐνταῦθα ὁ Πύρρος ἐμονώθη καὶ τυτρώ- 
σκεται τὴν κεφαλήν. κεράμῳ δὲ βληθέντα ὑπὸ 
γυναικὸς τεθνάναι φασὶ Πύρρον: ᾿Αργεῖοι δὲ οὐ 
γυναῖκα τὴν ἀποκτείνασαν, Δήμητρα δέ φασι 
εἶναι γυναικὶ εἰκασμένην. ταῦτα ἐς τὴν Πύρρον 
τελευτὴν αὐτοὶ λέγουσιν ᾿Αργεῖοι καὶ ὁ τῶν ἐπι- 
χωρίων ἐξηγητὴς Λυκέας ἐν ἔπεσιν εἴρηκε: καί 
σφισιν ἔστι τοῦ θεοῦ χρήσαντος, ἔνθα ὁ Πύρρος 
ἐτελεύτησεν, ἱερὸν Δήμητρος" ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ὁ 
Πύρρος τέθαπται. θαῦμα δὴ ποιοῦμαι τῶν 
καλουμένων Αἰακιδῶν τρισὶ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ ἐκ τοῦ 
θεοῦ συμβῆναι τὴν τελευτήν, εἴ γε ᾿Αχιλλέα 
μὲν "Όμηρος ὑπὸ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου φησὶ τοῦ Πριάμου 
καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἀπολέσθαι, Ilvppov δὲ τὸν 
᾿Αχιλλέως ἡ Πυθία προσέταξεν ἀποκτεῖναι Δελ- 

φοῖς, τῷ δὲ Αἰακίδου συνέβη τὰ ἐς τὴν τελευτὴν. 

οἷα ᾿Αργεῖοί τε λέγουσι καὶ Λυκέας ἐποίησε. 

68 

με μα... ee 

ATTICA, xin. 6-9 

the most vulnerable points with buildings as well. 
Just about this time, while the Laconian war was 
dragging on, Antigonus, having recovered the Mace- 
donian cities, hastened to the Peloponnesus, being 
well aware that if Pyrrhus were to reduce Lacedaemon 
and the greater part of the Peloponnesus, he would 
not return to Epeirus but to Macedonia to make war 
there again. When Antigonus was about to lead 
his army from Argos into Laconia, Pyrrhus himself 
reached Argos. Victorious once more he dashed into 
the city along with the fugitives, and his formation 
not unnaturally was broken up. When the fighting 
was now taking place by sanctuaries and houses, and 
in the narrow lanes, between detached bodies in 
different parts of the town, Pyrrhus left by himself was 
wounded in the head. It is said that his death was 272 5.ο. 
caused by a blow from a tile thrown by a woman. 
The Argives however declare that it was not a woman 
who killed him but Demeter in the likeness of a 
woman. This is what the Argives themselves relate 
about his end, and Lyceas, the guide for the neigh- 
bourhood, has written a poem which confirms the 
story. They have a sanctuary of Demeter, built at the 
command of the oracle, on the spot where Pyrrhus 
died, and in it Pyrrhus is buried. I consider it re- 
markable that of those styled Aeacidae three met 
their end by similar heaven-sent means ; if,as Homer 
says, Achilles was killed by Alexander, son of Priam, 
and by Apollo, if the Delphians were bidden by the 
Pythia to slay Pyrrhus, son of Achilles, and if the end 
of the son of Aeacides was such as the Argives say and 

69 

2 am =- 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

διάφορα δὲ ὅμως ἐστὶ καὶ ταῦτα ὧν Ἱερώνυμος o 
Καρδιανὸς ἔγραψεν' ἀνδρὶ γὰρ βασιλεῖ συνόντα 
ἀνάγκη πᾶσα ἐς χάριν συγγράφειν. εἰ δὲ καὶ 
Φίλιστος αἰτίαν δικαίαν εἴληφεν, ἐπελπίζων τὴν 
ἐν Συρακούσαις κάθοδον, ἀποκρύψασθαι τῶν Διο- 
νυσίου τὰ ἀνοσιώτατα, ἡ που πολλή γε Ἱερωνύμῳ 
συγγνώμη τὰ ἐς ἡδονὴν ᾿Αντιγόνου γράφειν. 

XIV. Ἡ μὲν Ἠπειρωτῶν ἀκμὴ κατέστρεψεν ἐς 
τοῦτο' ἐς δὲ τὸ ᾿Αθήνησιν ἐσελθοῦσιν Ὠιδεῖον 
ἄλλα τε καὶ Διόνυσος κεῖται θέας ἄξιος. mAN- 
σίον δέ ἐστι κρήνη, καλοῦσι δὲ αὐτὴν ᾿Εννεάκρου- 
νον, οὕτω κοσμηθεῖσαν ὑπὸ Πεισιστράτου' φρέατα 
μὲν γὰρ καὶ διὰ πάσης τῆς πόλεώς ἐστι, πηγὴ δὲ 
αὕτη μόνη. ναοὶ δὲ ὑπὲρ τὴν κρήνην ὁ μὲν 
Δήμητρος πεποίηται Kal Κόρης, ἐν δὲ τῷ Tp- 
πτολέμου κείμενόν ἐστιν ἄγαλμα: τὰ δὲ ἐς αὐτὸν 
ὁποῖα λέγεται γράψω, παρεὶς ὁπόσον ἐς Δηιόπην 
ἔχει τοῦ λόγου. Ελλήνων οἱ μάλιστα ἀμφισβη- 
τοῦντες ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐς ἀρχαιότητα καὶ δῶρα, ἃ 
παρὰ θεῶν φασὶν ἔχειν, εἰσὶν ᾿Αργεῖοι, καθάπερ 
βαρβάρων Ὀρυξὶν Αἰγύπτιοι. λέγεται οὖν ὡς 

` Δήμητρα ἐς Αργος ἐλθοῦσαν Πελασγὸς δέξαιτο 

-< a >a 

οἴκῳ καὶ ὡς Χρυσανθὶς τὴν ἁρπαγὴν ἐπισταμένη 
τῆς Κόρης διηγήσαιτο' ὕστερον δὲ Τροχίλον 
ἱεροφάντην φυγόντα ἐξ "Άργους κατὰ ἔχθος 
᾿Αγήνορος ἐλθεῖν φασιν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν καὶ 
γυναῖκά τε ἐξ ᾿Ελευσῖνος γῆμαι καὶ γενέσθαι οἱ 
παῖδας Εὐβουλέα καὶ Τριπτόλεμον. ὅδε μὲν 
᾿Αργείων ἐστὶ λόγος: ᾿Αθηναῖοι δὲ καὶ ὅσοι παρὰ 
τούτοις . . . ἴσασι Ἑριπτόλεμον τὸν Κελεοῦ 
πρῶτον σπεῖραι καρπὸν ἥμερον. ἔπη δὲ ἄδεται 

7ο 

ATTICA, xni. 9-x1v. 3 

Lyceas has described in his poem. The account, how- 
ever, given by Hieronymus the Cardian is different, for 
a man who associates with royalty cannot help being 
a partial historian. If Philistus was justified in sup- 
pressing the most wicked deeds of Dionysius, because 
he expected his return to Syracuse, surely Hieronymus 
may be fully forgiven for writing to please Antigonus. 
XIV. So ended the period of Epeirot ascendancy. 
When you have entered the Odeum at Athens you 
meet, among other objects, a figure of Dionysus worth 
seeing. Hard by is a spring called Enneacrunos 
‘(Nine Jets), embellished as you see it by Peisistratus. 
| There are cisterns all over the city, but this is the 
‘only fountain. Above the spring are two temples, 
one to Demeter and the Maid, while in that of 
Triptolemus is a statue of him. The accounts given 
of Triptolemus I shall write, omitting from the story 
as much as relates to Deiope. The Greeks who 
dispute most the Athenian claim to antiquity and 
the gifts they say they have received from the gods 
,are the Argives, just as among those who are not 
i Greeks the Egyptians compete with the Phrygians. 
| It is said, then, that when Demeter came to Argos 
| She was received by Pelasgus into his home, and that 
Chrysanthis, knowing about the rape of the Maid, re- 
lated the story toher. Afterwards Trochilus, the priest 

| of the mysteries, fled, they say, from Argos because 
_ ofthe enmity of Agenor, came to Attica and married 
' a woman of Eleusis, by whom he had two children, 
Eubuleus and Triptolemus. That is the account 
given by the Argives. But the Athenians and those 
who with them . . . know that Triptolemus, son of 

, Celeus, was the first to sow seed for cultivation. 

| Some extant verses of Musaeus, if indeed they are 

71 
E 

2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

Μουσαίου μέν, εἰ δὴ Μουσαίου καὶ ταῦτα, Τρι- 
/ A ? A . A 4 3 
πτόλεμον παῖδα ᾿Ὠκεανοῦ καὶ Γῆς εἶναι, Ὀρφέως 
δέ, οὐδὲ ταῦτα ᾿Ορφέως ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ὄντα, EvBov- 
Net καὶ Τριπτολέμῳ Δυσαύλην πατέρα εἶναι, 
μηνύσασι δέ σφισι περὶ τῆς παιδὸς δοθῆναι παρὰ 
Δήμητρος σπεῖραι τοὺς καρπούς: Χοιρίλῳ δὲ 
᾿ΑΑθηναίῳ δρᾶμα ποιήσαντι ᾿Αλόπην ἔστιν 
εἰρημένα Κερκυόνα εἶναι καὶ Τριπτόλεμον ἀδελ- 
φούς, τεκεῖν δὲ σφᾶς θυγατέρα ᾿Αμϕικτύονος, 
εἶναι δὲ πατέρα Τριπτολέμῳ μὲν ᾿Ῥᾶρον, Kep- 
κυόνι δὲ Ποσειδῶνα. πρόσω δὲ ἰέναι µε ὠρμη- 
μένον τοῦδε τοῦ λόγου καὶ ὁπόσα ἐξήγησιν 
ἔχει τὸ ᾿Αθήνῃσιν ἱερόν, καλούμενον δὲ Ἔλευ- 
σίνιον, ἐπέσχεν ὄψεις ὀνείρατος: ἃ δὲ ἐς πάντας 
ὅσιον γράφειν, ἐς ταῦτα ἀποτρέψομαι. πρὸ τοῦ 
ναοῦ τοῦδε, ἔνθα καὶ τοῦ Ἐριπτολέμου τὸ ἄγαλμα, 
ἔστι βοῦς χαλκοῦς οἷα ἐς θυσίαν ἀγόμενος, 
πεποίηται δὲ καθήμενος ᾿Επιμενίδης Κνώσσιος, 
ὃν ἐλθόντα ἐς ἀγρὸν κοιμᾶσθαι λέγουσιν ἐσελ- 
θόντα ἐς σπήλαιον: ὁ δὲ ὕπνος οὐ πρότερον 
ἀνῆκεν αὐτὸν πρὶν ἢ οἱ τεσσαρακοστὸν ἔτος 
γενέσθαι καθεύδοντι, καὶ ὕστερον ἔπη τε ἐποίει 
καὶ πόλεις ἐκάθηρεν ἄλλας τε καὶ τὴν ᾿Αθηναίων. 
Θάλης δὲ ὁ Λακεδαιμονίοις τὴν νόσον παύσας 
οὔτε ἄλλως προσήκων οὔτε πόλεως ἦν Ἐπιμενίδῃ 
τῆς αὐτῆς: ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν. Κνώσσιος, Θάλητα δὲ 
εἶναί φησι Γορτύνιον Πολύμναστος Κολοφώνιος 
ἔπη Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐς αὐτὸν ποιήσας. ---- ἔτι δὲ 
ἀπωτέρω ναὸς Εὐκλείας, ἀνάθημα καὶ τοῦτο ἀπὸ 
Μήδων, οἳ τῆς χώρας Μαραθῶνι ἔσχον. φρο- 
νῆσαι δὲ ᾿Αθηναίους ἐπὶ τῇ νίκῃ ταύτῃ μάλιστα 
1 Text corrupt. és ἐξήγησιν ὁπόσων Hitzig. 

72 

\ 

1 

ATTICA, χιν. 3-5 

to be included among his works, say that Triptolemus 
was the son of Oceanus and Earth; while those 
ascribed to Orpheus (though in my opinion the re- 
ceived authorship is again incorrect) say that Eubuleus 
and Triptolemus were sons of Dysaules, and that 
because they gave Demeter information about her 
daughter the sowing of seed was her reward to them. 
But Choerilus, an Athenian, who wrote a play called 
Alope, says that Cercyon and Triptolemus were 
brothers, that their mother was the daughter of 
Amphictyon, while the father of Triptolemus was 
Rarus, of Cercyon, Poseidon. After I had intended 
to go further into this story, and to describe the 
contents of the sanctuary at Athens, called the 
Eleusinium, I was stayed by a vision in a dream. I 
shall therefore turn to those things it is lawful to 
write of to all men. In front of this temple, where 
is also the statue of Triptolemus, is a bronze bull 
being led as it were to sacrifice, and there is a 
sitting figure of Epimenides of Cnossus, who they say 
entered a cave in the country and slept. And the 
sleep did not leave him before the fortieth year, and 
afterwards he wrote verses and purified Athens and 
other cities. But Thales who stayed the plague for 
the Lacedaemonians was not related to Epimenides 
in any way, and belonged to a different city. The 
latter was from Cnossus, but Thales was from Gortyn, 
according to Polymnastus of Colophon, who com- 
posed a poem about him for the Lacedaemonians. 

. Still farther off is a temple to Glory, this too 

_ being a thank-offering for the victory over the Per- 
' sians, who had landed at Marathon. This is the 
| victory of which I am of opinion the Athenians were 

73 

. 

hh > Ap. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

εἰκάζω: καὶ δὴ καὶ Αἰσχύλος, ὥς οἱ τοῦ βίου 
προσεδοκᾶτο ἡ τελευτή, τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἐμνη- 
μόνευσεν οὐδενός, δόξης ἐς τοσοῦτο ἥκων ἐπὶ 
ποιήσει καὶ πρὸ ᾿Αρτεμισίου καὶ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι 
ναυμαχήσας' ὁ δὲ τό τε ὄνομα πατρόθεν καὶ τὴν 
πόλιν ἔγραψε καὶ ὡς τῆς ἀνδρίας μάρτυρας ἔχοι 
τὸ Μαραθῶνι ἄλσος καὶ Μήδων τοὺς ἐς αὐτὸ 
ἀποβάντας. 

Ὑπὲρ δὲ τὸν Κεραμεικὸν καὶ στοὰν τὴν κα- 
λουμένην Βασίλειον ναός ἐστιν Ἡφαίστου. καὶ 
ὅτι μὲν ἄγαλμά οἱ παρέστηκεν ᾿Αθηνᾶς, οὐδὲν 
θαῦμα ἐποιούμην τὸν ἐπὶ ᾿Εριχθονίῳ ἐπιστάμενος 
λόγον: τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα ὁρῶν τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς γλαυκοὺς 
ἔχον τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς Λιθύων τὸν μῦθον ὄντα 
εὕρισκον: τούτοις γάρ ἐστιν εἰρημένον Τοσειδῶ- 
νος καὶ λίμνης Τριτωνίδος θυγατέρα εἶναι καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο γλαυκοὺς εἶναι ὥσπερ καὶ τῷ Ποσειδῶνι 
τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς. πλησίον δὲ ἱερόν ἐστιν ᾿Αφρο- 
δίτης Οὐρανίας. πρώτοις δὲ ἀνθρώπων ᾿Ασ- 
συρίοις κατέστη σέβεσθαι τὴν Οὐρανίαν, μετὰ 
δὲ ᾿Ασσυρίους Κυπρίων Παφίοις καὶ Φοινίκων 
τοῖς Ασκάλωνα ἔχουσιν ἐν τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ, παρὰ 
δὲ Φοινίκων Κυθήριοι μαθόντες σέβουσιν" ᾿Αθη- 
ναίοις δὲ κατεστήσατο Αἰγεύς, αὑτῷ τε οὐκ εἶναι 
παῖδας νομίζων---οὐ γάρ πω τότε ἦσαν---καὶ ταῖς 
ἀδελφαῖς γενέσθαι τὴν συμφορὰν ἐκ μηνίματος 
τῆς Οὐρανίας. τὸ δὲ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔτι ἄγαλμα λίθου 
Παρίου καὶ ἔργον Φειδίου: δῆμος δέ ἐστιν ᾿Αθη- 
ναΐοις ᾿Αθμονέων, οἳ Πορφυρίωνα ἔτι πρότερον 
᾿Ακταίου βασιλεύσαντα τῆς Οὐρανίας φασὶ τὸ 

παρὰ σφίσιν ἱερὸν ἱδρύσασθαι. λέγουσι δὲ ἀνὰ 

74 

ATTICA, χιν, 5-7 

proudest; while Aeschylus, who had won such renown 
for his poetry and for his share in the naval battles 
before Artemisium and at Salamis, recorded at the 
prospect of death nothing else, and merely wrote 
his name, his father’s name, and the name of his 
city, and added that he had witnesses to his valour 
in the grove at Marathon and in the Persians who 
landed there. | 

Above the Cerameicus and the portico called the 
King’s Portico is a temple of Hephaestus. I was not 
surprised that by it stands a statue of Athena, be- 
cause I knew the story about Erichthonius. But 
when I saw that the statue of Athena had blue eyes I 
found out that the legend about them is Libyan. For 
the Libyans have a saying that the Goddess is the 
daughter of Poseidon and Lake Tritonis, and for this 
reason has blue eyes like Poseidon. Hard by is a 
sanctuary of the Heavenly Aphrodite; the first men 
to establish her cult were the Assyrians, after the 
Assyrians the Paphians of Cyprus and the Phoenicians 
who live at Ascalon in Palestine; the Phoenicians 
taught her worship to the people of Cythera. Among 
the Athenians the cult was established by Aegeus, 
who thought that he was childless (he- had, in fact, 
no children at the time) and that his sisters had 
suffered their misfortune because of the wrath of 
Heavenly Aphrodite. The statue still extant is of 
Parian marble and is the work of Pheidias. One of 
the Athenian parishes is that of the Athmoneis, who 
say that Porphyrion, an earlier king than Actaeus, 

, founded their sanctuary of the Heavenly One. But 

75 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοὺς δήµους καὶ ἄλλα οὐδὲν ὁμοίως καὶ οἱ τὴν 
πόλιν ἔχοντες. 

XV. Ἰοῦσι δὲ πρὸς τὴν στοάν, ἣν Ποικίλην 
ὀνομάζουσιν ἀπὸ τῶν γραφῶν, ἔστιν Ειρμῆς yar- 
κοῦς καλούμενος ᾿Αγοραῖος καὶ πύλη πλησίον 
ἔπεστι δέ οἱ τρόπαιον ᾿Αθηναίων ἱππομαχίᾳ 
κρατησάντων Πλείσταρχον, ὃς τῆς ἵππου Kas- 
σάνδρου καὶ τοῦ ξενικοῦ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀδελφὸς ὢν 
ἐπετέτραπτο. αὕτη δὲ ἡ στοὰ πρῶτα μὲν ᾿Αθη- 
ναίους ἔχει τεταγμένους ἐν Οἰνόῃ τῆς ᾿Αργείας 
ἐναντία Λακεδαιμονίων γέγραπται δὲ οὐκ ἐς 
ἀκμὴν ἀγῶνος οὐδὲ τολμημάτων ἐς ἐπίδειξιν τὸ 
ἔργον ἤδη προῆκον, ἀλλὰ ἀρχομένη τε ἡ μάχη 
καὶ ἐς χεῖρας ἔτι συνιόντες. ἐν δὲ τῷ μέσῳ τῶν 
τοίχων ᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ Θησεὺς ᾿Αμαζόσι μάχον- 
ται. μόναις δὲ ἄρα ταῖς γυναιξὶν οὐκ ἀφήρει τὰ 
πταίσματα τὸ ἐς τοὺς κινδύνους ἀφειδές, εἴ γε 
Θεμισκύρας τε ἁλούσης ὑπὸ “Ηρακλέους καὶ 
ὕστερον φθαρείσης σφίσι τῆς στρατιᾶς, ἣν ἐπ᾽ 
᾿Αθήνας ἔστειλαν, ὅμως ἐς Τροίαν ἦλθον ᾿Αθη- 
ναίοις τε αὐτοῖς μαχούμεναι καὶ τοῖς πᾶσιν 
Ἕλλησιν. ἐπὶ δὲ ταῖς ᾽Αμαξόσιν "Ελληνές εἰσιν 
ε / ν \ e A » , 
ἠρηκότες Ἴλιον καὶ οἱ βασιλεῖς ἠθροισμένοι διὰ 
τὸ Αἴαντος ἐς Κασσάνδραν τόλμημα" καὶ αὐτὸν 
ἡ γραφὴ τὸν Αἴαντα ἔχει καὶ γυναῖκας τῶν aiy- 
μαλώτων ἄλλας τε καὶ Κασσάνδραν. τελευ- 
ταῖον δὲ τῆς γραφῆς εἶσιν οἱ μαχεσάμενοι Μα- 
ραθῶνι' Βοιωτῶν δὲ οἱ Πλάταιαν ἔχοντες καὶ 
ὅσον ἦν ᾿Αττικὸν ἴασιν ἐς χεῖρας τοῖς βαρβάροις. 
καὶ ταύτῃ μέν ἐστιν ἴσα τὰ παρ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων 
ἐς τὸ ἔργον: τὸ δὲ ἔσω τῆς μάχης φεύγοντές εἰσιν 
οἱ βάρβαροι καὶ ἐς τὸ ἕλος ὠθοῦντες ἀλλήλους, 
76. 

ATTICA, xiv. 7-χν. 3 

the traditions current among the parishes often difter 
altogether from those of the city. 

XV. As you go to the portico which they call 
Painted, because of its pictures, there is a bronze 
statue of Hermes of the Market-place, and near it a 
gate. On it is a trophy erected by the Athenians, who 
in a cavalry action overcame Pleistarchus, to whose 
command his brother Cassander had entrusted his 
cavalry and mercenaries. This Portico contains, first, 
the Athenians arrayed against the Lacedaemonians 
at Oenoé in the Argive territory.! What is depicted 
is not the crisis of the battle nor when the action 
had advanced as far as the display of deeds of valour, 
but the beginning of the fight when the combatants 
were about to close. On the middle wall are the 
Athenians and Theseus fighting with the Amazons. 
So, it seems, only the women did not lose through 
their defeats their reckless courage in the face of 
danger; Themiscyra was taken by Heracles, and 
afterwards the army which they dispatched to Athens 
was destroyed, but nevertheless they came to Troy 
to fight all the Greeks as well as the Athenians them- 
selves. After the Amazons come the Greeks when 
they have taken Troy, and the kings assembled on 
account of the outrage committed by Ajax against 
Cassandra. The picture includes Ajax himself, Cas- 
sandra and other captive women. At the end of the 
painting are those who fought at Marathon; the 
Boeotians of Plataea and the Attic contingent are 
coming to blows with the foreigners. In this place 
neither side has the better, but the centre of the 
fighting shows the foreigners in flight and pushing 
one another into the morass, while at the end of the 

1 Date unknown. 

77 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔσχαται δὲ τῆς γραφῆς νῆές τε αἱ Φοίνισσαι καὶ f 

τῶν βαρβάρων τοὺς ἐσπίπτοντας ἐς ταύτας 
φονεύοντες οἱ "Ελληνες. ἐνταῦθα καὶ Μαραθὼν 
γεγραμμένος ἐστὶν ἥρως, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὸ πεδίον ὠνδ: 

pactat, καὶ Θησεὺς ἀνιόντι ἐκ γῆς εἰκασμένος ᾷ. 

᾿Αθηνᾶ τε καὶ Ἡρακλῆς: Μαραθωνίοις γάρ, ἃς 
αὐτοὶ λέγουσιν, ᾿Ἡρακλῆς ἐνομίσθη θεὸς πρώ- 
τοις. τῶν μαχομένων δὲ δῆλοι μάλιστά εἶσιν ἐν 
τῇ γραφῇ Καλλίμαχός τε, ὃς ᾿Αθηναίοις πο- 
λεμαρχεῖν ἤρητο, καὶ Μιλτιάδης τῶν στρατη- 

γούντων, ἥρως τε Ἔχετλος καλούμενος, οὗ καὶ ἶ 

ὕστερον ποιήσομαι μνήμην. ἐνταῦθα ἀσπίδες 
κεῖνται χαλκαῖ, καὶ ταῖς μέν ἐστιν ἐπίγραμμα 
ἀπὸ Σκιωναίων καὶ τῶν ἐπικούρων εἶναι, τὰς δὲ 
ἐπαληλιμμένας πίσσῃ, μὴ σφᾶς ὅ τε χρόνος λυ- 
µήνηται καὶ ὁ ἰός, Λακεδαιμονίων εἶναι λέγεται 
τῶν ἁλόντων ἐν τῇ Σφακτηρίᾳ νήσῳ. 

XVI. ᾿Ανδριάντες δὲ χαλκοῖ κεῖνται πρὸ μὲν 

τῆς στοᾶς Σόλων ὁ τοὺς νόμους ᾿Αθηναίοις γρά- 
ψας, ὀλίγον δὲ ἀπωτέρω Σέλευκος, ᾧ καὶ πρότε- 
ρον ἐγένετο ἐς τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν τὴν μέλλουσαν 
σημεῖα οὐκ ἀφανῆ. Σελεύκῳ γάρ, ὡς ὡρμᾶτο ἐκ 
Μακεδονίας σὺν ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ, θύοντι ἐν Πέλλῃ 
τῷ Aù τὰ ξύλα τὰ ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ κείμενα 
προύβη τε αὐτόματα πρὸς τὸ ἄγαλμα καὶ ἄνευ 
πυρὸς ἥφθη. τελευτήσαντος δὲ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου 
Σέλευκος ᾿Αντίγονον ἐς Βαβυλῶνα ἀφικόμενον 
δείσας καὶ παρὰ Πτολεμαῖον φυγὼν τὸν Λάγου 
κατῆλθεν αὖθις ἐς Βαβυλῶνα, κατελθὼν δὲ ἐκρά- 
τήσε μὲν τῆς ᾿Αντιγόνου στρατιᾶς καὶ αὐτὸν 
ἀπέκτεινεν ᾿Αντίγονον, εἷλε δὲ ἐπιστρατεύσαντα 
ὕστερον Δημήτριον τὸν ᾿Αντιγόνου. ὡς δέ οἱ 
78 

| 

αυτος ον 2 = ος 

ATTICA, xv. 1-ΧΥΙ. 2 

painting are the Phoenician ships, and the Greeks 
killing the foreigners who are scrambling into them. 
Here is also a portrait of the hero Marathon, after 
whom the plain is named, of Theseus represented as 
coming up from the under-world, of Athena and of 
Heracles. The Marathonians, according to their own 
account, were the first to regard Heracles as a god. 
Of the fighters the most conspicuous figures in the 
painting are Callimachus, who had been elected 
commander-in-chief by the Athenians, Miltiades, one 
of the generals, and a hero called Echetlus, of whom I 
shall make mention later. Here are dedicated brazen 
shields, and some have an inscription that they are 
taken from the Scioneans and their allies, while 
others, smeared with pitch lest they should be worn 
by age and rust, are said to be those of the Lace- 
daemonians who were taken prisoners in the island 
of Sphacteria. 

XVI. Here are placed bronze statues, one, in 
front of the Portico, of Solon, who composed the laws 
for the Athenians, and, a little farther away, one of 
Seleucus, whose future prosperity was foreshadowed 
by unmistakable signs. When he was about to set 
forth from Macedonia with Alexander, and was 
sacrificing at Pella to Zeus, the wood that lay on the 

_ altar advanced of its own accord to the image and 

caught fire without the application of a light. On 
the death of Alexander, Seleucus, in fear of Antigonus, 
who had arrived at Babylon, fled to Ptolemy, son of 
Lagus, and then returned again to Babylon. On his 

return he overcame the army of Antigonus and 

killed Antigonus himself, afterwards capturing De- 
metrius, son of Antigonus, who had advanced with an 
army. After these successes, which were shortly fol- 

79 

/ 

421 B.C. 
425 B.C. 

594 B.C. 

να 

ad 

Pe gp ae wees 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ταῦτα προκεχωρήκει καὶ per’ ὀλίγον τὰ Avot 
μάχου κατείργαστο, THY μὲν ἐν τῇ Acta Traces 
ἀρχὴν παρέδωκεν ᾿Αντιόχῳ τῷ παιδί, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐξ 
Μακεδονίαν ἠπείγετο. στρατιὰ μὲν καὶ Ελλήνωςβ 
καὶ βαρβάρων ἦν παρὰ Σελεύκῳ' Πτολεμαῖος δὲ 
ἀδελφὸς μὲν Λυσάνδρας καὶ παρὰ Λυσιμάχου 
Tap αὐτὸν πεφευγώς, ἄλλως δὲ τολμῆσαι πρό- 

ειρος καὶ δι αὐτὸ Κεραυνὸς καλούμενος, οὗτος 
ὁ Πτολεμαῖος, ὡς προσιὼν ὁ Σελεύκου στρατὸς 
ἐγένετο κατὰ Λυσιμάχειαν, λαθὼν Σέλευκον 
κτείνει, διαρπάσαι δὲ ἐπιτρέψας τὰ χρήματα 
τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἐβασίλευσε Μακεδονίας, ἐς ὃ 
Γαλάταις πρῶτος ὧν ἴσμεν βασιλέων ἀντιτάξα- 
σθαι τολμήσας ἀναιρεῖται ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων' 
τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν ᾿Αντίγονος ἀνεσώσατο ὁ Δημητρίου. 
Σέλευκον δὲ βασιλέων ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα πείθομαι 
καὶ ἄλλως γενέσθαι δίκαιον καὶ πρὸς τὸ Θεῖον 
εὐσεβῆ. τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ Σέλευκός ἐστιν ὁ Min- 
σίοις τὸν χαλκοῦν καταπέμψας ᾿Απόλλωνα ἐς 
Βραγχίδας, ἀνακομισθέντα ἐς ᾿Εκβάτανα τὰ Mn- 
δικὰ ὑπὸ Ξέρξου: τοῦτο δὲ Σελεύκειαν οἰκίσας 
ἐπὶ Τίγρητι ποταμῷ καὶ Βαβυλωνίους οὗτος 
ἐπαγόμενος ἐς αὐτὴν συνοίκους ὑπελίπετο μὲν τὸ 
τεῖχος Βαβυλῶνος, ὑπελίπετο δὲ τοῦ Βὴλ τὸ 
ἱερὸν καὶ περὶ αὐτὸ τοὺς Χαλδαίους οἰκεῖν. 

XVII. ᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ καὶ ἄλλα 
ἐστὶν οὐκ ἐς ἅπαντας ἐπίσημα καὶ Endéov βωμός, 
ᾧ μάλιστα θεῶν ἐς ἀνθρώπινον βίον καὶ μετα- 
βολὰς πραγμάτων ὄντι ὠφελίμῳ μόνοι τιμὰς 
Ἑλλήνων νέμουσιν ᾿Αθηναῖοι. τούτοις δὲ οὐ τὰ 
ἐς φιλανθρωπίαν μόνον καθέστηκεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
θεοὺς εὐσεβοῦσιν ἄλλων πλέον, καὶ γὰρ Αἰδοῦς 
δο 

κ. ων ee i 

Paes 

ATTICA, xvi. 2-ΧΥΙΙ. 1 

lowed by the fall of Lysimachus, he entrusted to his 
son Antiochus all his empire in Asia, and himself pro- 
ceeded rapidly towards Macedonia, having with him 
an army both of Greeks and of foreigners. But 
Ptolemy, brother of Lysandra, had taken refuge with 
him from Lysimachus; this man, an adventurous char- 
acter named for this reason the Thunderbolt, when the 
army of Seleucus had advanced as far as Lysimachea, 
assassinated Seleucus, allowed the kings to seize 
his wealth, and ruled over Macedonia until, being 
the first of the kings to my knowledge to dare 
to meet the Gauls in battle, he was killed by the 
foreigners. The empire was recovered by Antigonus, 
son of Demetrius. I am persuaded that Seleucus 
was the most righteous, and in particular the most 
religious of the kings. Firstly, it was Seleucus who 
sent back to Branchidae for the Milesians the bronze 
Apollo that had been carried by Xerxes to Ecbatana 
in Persia. Secondly, when he founded Seleucea on 
the river Tigris and brought to it Babylonian colonists, 
he spared the wall of Babylon as well as the sanc- 

, tuary of Bel, near which he permitted the Chaldeans 

to live. 

XVII. In the Athenian market-place among the 
objects not generally known is an altar to Mercy, of 
all divinities the most useful in the life of mortals 
and in the vicissitudes of fortune, but honoured by 
the Athenians alone among the Greeks. And they 
are conspicuous not only for their humanity but also 
for their devotion to religion. They have an altar to 

gI 
VOL. I. G 

281 B.C. 

950 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

σφισι βωμός ἐστι καὶ Φήμης καὶ Ορμῆς: 
τε ἐναργῶς, ὅσοις πλέον τι ἑτέρων εὖσεβ 
μέτεστιν, ἴσον σφίσι παρὸν τύχης χρηστῆς. 
δὲ τῷ γυμνασίῳ. τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἀπέχοντε οὐ πο 
Πτολεμαίου δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ κατασκευασαµένου 
λουμένῳ, λίθοι τέ εἰσιν Ἑρμαϊ θέας ἄξιοι 
εἰκὼν Πτολεμαίου χαλκή' καὶ ὅ τε Λίβυς Ἴοβ 
ἐνταῦθα κεῖται καὶ Χρύσιππος ὁ ὁ Σολεύς. 

Πρὸς δὲ τῷ γυμνασίφ Θησέως ἐστὶν ἑερόν' 
γραφαὶ δέ εἰσι πρὸς ᾿Αμαξόνας ᾿Αθηναῖοι μαχό- 
μενοι. πεποίηται δέ σφισιν ὁ ò πόλεμος οὗτος καὶ 
τῇ ᾿Αθηνᾷ ἐ ἐπὶ τῇ ἀσπίδι καὶ τοῦ Ὀλυμπίου Διὸς 
ἐπὶ τῷ βάθρῳ. γέγραπται δὲ ἐν τῷ τοῦ Θησέως 
ἱερῷ καὶ ἡ Κενταύρων καὶ Λαπιθῶν μάχη" Θη- 
σεὺς μὲν οὖν ἀπεκτονώς ἐστιν ἤδη Κένταυρον, 
τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις ἐξ ἴ ἴσου καθέστηκεν ἔ ἔτι ἡ μάχη. 

τοῦ δὲ τρίτου τῶν τοίχων ἡ γραφὴ μὴ πυθομένοις 

ἃ λέγουσιν οὐ σαφής ἐστι, τὰ μέν. που διὰ τὸν 
χρόνον, τὰ δὲ Μίκων οὐ τὸν πάντα ἔγρα ψε λόγον. 
Μίνως ἡνίκα Θησέα καὶ τὸν ἄλλον στόλον τῶν 
παίδων ἦγεν ἐς Κρήτην, ἐρασθεὶς ΠἩεριβοίας, ὥς 
οἱ Θησεὺς μάλιστα ἠναντιοῦτο, καὶ ἄλλα ὑπὸ 
ὀργῆς ἀπέρριψεν ἐς αὐτὸν καὶ παῖδα οὐκ ἔφη 
Ποσειδῶνος εἶναι, ἐπεὶ οὐ δύνασθαι τὴν σφρα- 
vida, ἣν αὐτὸς φέρων ἔ ἔτυχεν, « ἀφέντι ἐς θάλασσαν 
ἀνασῶσαί οἱ. Μίνως μὲν λέγεται ταῦτα εἰπὼν 
ἀφεῖναι τὴν σφραγῖδα' Θησέα δὲ σφραγῖδά τε 
ἐκείνην ἔχοντα καὶ στέφανον χρυσοῦν, Appi- 
τρίτης δῶρον, ἀνελθεῖν λέγουσιν ἐ ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης. 
ἐς δὲ τὴν τελευτὴν τὴν Θησέως πολλὰ ἤδη καὶ 
οὐχ ὁμολογοῦντα εἴρηται" δεδέσθαι τε γὰρ αὐτὸν 
λέγουσιν ἐς τόδε ἕως ὑφ᾽ Ἡρακλέους ἀναχθείη, 

82 

ATTICA, xvu. 1-4 

Shamefastness, one to Rumour and one to Effort. 
It is quite obvious that those who excel in piety are 
correspondingly rewarded by good fortune. In the 
gymnasium not far from the market-place, called 
Ptolemy’s from the founder, are stone Hermae well 
worth seeing and a likeness in bronze of Ptolemy. 
Here also is Juba the Libyan and Chrysippus! of 
Soli. 

Hard by the gymnasium is a sanctuary of Theseus, 
where are pictures of Athenians fighting Amazons. 
This war they have also represented on the shield 
of their Athena and upon the pedestal of the 
Olympian Zeus. In the sanctuary of Theseus is 
also a painting of the battle between the Centaurs 

| and the Lapithae. Theseus has already killed a 

Centaur, but elsewhere the fighting is still undecided. 
The painting on the third wall is not intelligible to 
those unfamiliar with the traditions, partly through 
age and partly because Micon has not represented in 
the picture the whole of the legend. When Minos 

_ was taking Theseus and the rest of the company of 

young folk to Crete he fell in love with Periboea, and 
on meeting with determined opposition from Theseus, 
hurled insults at him and denied that he was a son 
of Poseidon, since he could not recover for him the 
signet-ring, which he happened to be wearing, if he 
threw it into the sea. With these words Minos is 
said to have thrown the ring, but they say that 
Theseus came up from the sea with that ring and 
also with a gold crown that Amphitrite gave him. 
The accounts of the end of Theseus are many and 
inconsistent. They say he was kept a prisoner until 
Heracles restored him to the light of day, but the 

1 The Stoic philosopher, 280-207 B.C. 
83 
α 2 

\ 
: πιθανώτατα δὲ ὧν ἤκουσα: Θησεὺς ἐς Beor 

1 
i 
i 
t 
1 

D> 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοὺς ἐμβαλών, τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν ϐΘεσπρωτ 
γυναῖκα ἁρπάσων, τὸ πολὺ τῆς στρατιᾶς OUTS. 
ἀπόλλυσι’ καὶ αὐτός τε καὶ Πειρίθους — Πειρί- 
θους γὰρ καὶ τὸν γάμον σπεύδων ἐστράτευεν --- 
ἥλωσαν, καὶ ae 0 Θεσπρωτὸς δήσας εἶχεν ἐν 
Κιχύρφ. γῆς δὲ τῆς Θεσπρωτίδος ἔστι μέν που 
καὶ ἄλλα θέας ἄξια, ἱερόν τε Διὸς ἐν Δωδώνῃ καὶ 
ἱερὰ τοῦ θεοῦ φηγός' πρὸς δὲ τῇ Κιχύρῳ λίμνη 
τέ ἐστιν ᾿Αχερονσία καλουμένη pe ποταμὸς 
᾿Αχέρων, ῥεῖ δὲ καὶ Κωκυτὸς ὕδωρ ἀτερπέστατον. 
"Ομηρός τέ μοι δοκεῖ ταῦτα ἑωρακὼς ἔς τε τὴν 
ἄλλην ποίησιν ἀποτολμῆσαι τῶν ἐν "Αιδου καὶ 
δὴ καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα τοῖς ποταμοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν 
Θεσπρωτίδι θέσθαι. τότε δὲ ἐχομένου Θησέως 
στρατεύουσιν ἐς ᾿Αφιδναν οἱ Τυνδάρεω παῖδες 
καὶ τήν τε ᾿Αφιδναν αἱροῦσι καὶ Μενεσθέα ἐπὶ 
βασιλείᾳ κατήγαγον: Μενεσθεὺς δὲ τῶν μὲν 
παίδων τῶν Θησέως παρ᾽ Ἐλεφήνορα ὑπεξελθόν- 
των ἐς Εὔβοιαν εἶχεν οὐδένα λόγον, Θησέα δέ, εἶ 
ποτε παρὰ Θεσπρωτῶν ἀνακομισθήσεται, δυσαντ- 
αγώνιστον ἡγούμενος διὰ θεραπείας τὰ τοῦ δήμου 
καθίστατο, ὡς Θησέα ἀνασωθέντα ὕστερον àmo- 
σθῆναι. στέλλεται δὴ Θησεὺς παρὰ Δευκαλίωνα 
ἐς Κρήτην, ἐξενεχθέντα δὲ αὐτὸν ὑπὸ πνευμάτων 
ἐς Σκῦρον τὴν νῆσον λαμπρῶς περιεῖπον οἱ Σκύ- 
ριοι κατὰ γένους δόξαν καὶ ἀξίωμα ὧν ἦν αὐτὸς 
εἰργασμένος: καί οἱ θάνατον Λυκομήδης διὰ 
ταῦτα ἐβούλευσεν. 

Ὁ μὲν δὴ Θησέως σηκὸς ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐγένετο 
ὕστερον ἢ Μῆδοι Μαραθῶνι ἔσχον, Κίμωνος τοῦ 
Μιλτιάδου Σκυρίους ποιήσαντος ἀναστάτους -- 

84 

ATTICA, xvi. 4-6 

most plausible account 1 have heard is this. Theseus 
invaded Thesprotia to carry off the wife of the 
Thesprotian king, and in this way lost the greater 
part of his army, and both he and Peirithous (he too 
was taking part in the expedition, being eager for 
the marriage) were taken captive. The Thesprotian 
king kept them prisoners at Cichyrus. Among the 
sights of Thesprotia are a sanctuary of Zeus at 
Dodona and an oak sacred to the god. Near 
Cichyrus is a lake called Acherusia, and a river called 
Acheron. There is also Cocytus, a most unlovely 
stream. I believe it was because Homer had seen 
these places that he made bold to describe in his 
poems the regions of Hades, and gave to the rivers 
there the names of those in Thesprotia. While 
Theseus was thus kept in bonds, the sons of Tyn- 
dareus marched against Aphidna, captured it and 
restored Menestheus to the kingdom. Now Menes- 
theus took no account of the children of Theseus, who 
had secretly withdrawn to Elephenor in Euboea, but 
he was aware that Theseus, if ever he returned from 
Thesprotia, would be a doughty antagonist, and so 
curried favour with his subjects that Theseus on re- 
covering afterwards his liberty was expelled. So 
Theseus set out to Deucalion in Crete. Being 
carried out of his course by winds to the island of 
Scyros he was treated with marked honour by the 
inhabitants, both for the fame of his family and for 
the reputation of his own achievements. Accordingly 
Lycomedes contrived his death. 

His close was built at Athens after the Per- 
sians landed at Marathon, when Cimon, son of 
Miltiades, ravaged Scyros, thus avenging Theseus’ 

85 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δίκην δὴ τοῦ Θησέως θανάτου — καὶ τὰ ὀστᾶ 
κομίσαντος ἐς ᾿Αθήνας: XVIII. τὸ δὲ ἱερὸν τῶν 
Διοσκούρων ἐστὶν ἀρχαῖον, αὐτοί τε ἑστῶτες καὶ 
οἱ παῖδες καθήμενοί σφισιν ἐφ᾽ ἵππων. ἐνταῦθα 
Πολύγνωτος μὲν ἔχοντα ἐς αὐτοὺς ἔγραψε γάμον 
τῶν θυγατέρων τῶν Λευκίππου, Μίκων δὲ τοὺς 
μετὰ Ἰάσονος ἐς Κόλχους πλεύσαντας: καί οἱ 
τῆς γραφῆς ἡ σπουδὴ μάλιστα ἐς "Ακαστον καὶ 

9 τοὺς ἵππους ἔχει τοὺς ᾿Ακάστου. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν 
Διοσκούρων τὸ ἱερὸν ᾿Αγλαύρου τέμενός ἐστιν. 
᾿Αγλαύρῳ δὲ καὶ ταῖς ἀδελφαῖς “Epon καὶ Παν- 
δρόσῳ δοῦναί φασιν ᾿Αθηνᾶν ᾿Εριχθόνιον rara- 
θεῖσαν ἐς κιβωτὸν, ἀπειποῦσαν ἐς τὴν παρακατα- 
θήκην μὴ πολυπραγμονεῖν: Πάνδροσον μὲν δὴ 
λέγουσι πείθεσθαι, τὰς δὲ δύο --- ἀνοῖξαι γὰρ 
σφᾶς τὴν κιβωτόν --- μαίνεσθαί τε, ὡς εἶδον τὸν 
᾿Εριχθόνιον, καὶ κατὰ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως, ἔνθα jv 
μάλιστα ἀπότομον, αὑτὰς ῥῖψαι. κατὰ τοῦτο 
ἐπαναβάντες Μήδοι κατεφόνευσαν ᾿Αθηναίων 
τοὺς πλέον τι ἐς τὸν χρησμὸν ἢ Θεμιστοκλῆς 
εἰδέναι νομίξοντας καὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ξύλοις καὶ 

3 σταυροῖς ἀποτειχίσαντας. πλησίον δὲ πρυτα- 
νεῖον ἐστιν, ἐν ᾧ νόμοι τε οἱ Σόλωνός εἰσι γεγραμ- 
μένοι καὶ θεῶν Εἰρήνης ἀγάλματα κεῖται καὶ 
Ἑστίας, ἀνδριάντες δὲ ἄλλοι τε καὶ Αὐτόλυκος ὁ 
παγκρατιαστής' τὰς γὰρ Μιλτιάδου καὶ Θεμιστο- 
κλέους εἰκόνας ἐς Ῥωμαῖόν τε ἄνδρα καὶ Θρᾷκα 

4 μετέγραψαν». ἐντεῦθεν ἰοῦσιν ἐς τὰ κάτω τῆς 
πόλεως Σαράπιδός ἐστιν ἱερόν, ὃν ᾿Αθηναῖοι παρὰ 
Πτολεμαίου θεὸν ἐσηγάγοντο. Αἰγυπτίοις δὲ 
ἱερὰ Σαράπιδος ἐπιφανέστατον μέν ἐστιν ᾿Αλε- 
ξανδρεῦσιν, ἀρχαιότατον δὲ ἐν Μέμφει" ἐς τοῦτο 
86 

ATTICA, xvn. 6-ΧΥΙ11. 4 

death, and carried his bones to Athens. XVIII. The 
sanctuary of the Dioscuri is ancient. They them- 
selves are represented as standing, while their 
sons are seated on horses. Here Polygnotus has 
painted the marriage of the daughters of Leu- 
cippus, which is a part of the gods’ history, but 
Micon those who sailed with Jason to the Col- 
chians, and he has concentrated his attention upon 
Acastus and his horses. Above the sanctuary of the 
Dioscuri is a sacred enclosure of Aglaurus. It was 
to Aglaurus and her sisters, Herse and Pandrosus, 
that they say Athena gave Erichthonius, whom she- 
had hidden in a chest, forbidding them to pry 
curiously into what was entrusted to their charge. 
Pandrosus, they say, obeyed, but the other two (for 
they opened the chest) went mad when they saw 
Erichthonius, and thréw themselves down the steepest 
part of the Acropolis. Here it was that the Persians 
climbed and killed the Athenians who thought that 
they understood the oracle! better than did Themis- 
tocles, and fortified the Acropolis with logs and stakes. 
Hard by is the Prytaneum (Tomwn-hall), in which the 
laws of Solon are inscribed, and figures are placed 
of the goddesses Peace and Hestia (Hearth), while 
among the statues is Autolycus the pancratiast.?_ For 
the likenesses of Miltiades and Themistocles have 
had their titles changed to a Roman and a Thracian. 
As you descend from here to the lower part of the 
city, is a sanctuary of Serapis, whose worship the 
Athenians introduced from Ptolemy. Of the Egyp- 
tian sanctuaries of Serapis the most famous is at 
Alexandria, the oldest at Memphis. Into this neither 

1 That the Athenians were to trust their ‘‘ wooden walls,” 
t.e. their ships. 2 See p. 191. 

87 

P 

fl. 465 
B.C. 

480 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

2 - ww ww kA - ε ο 
ἐσελθεῖν οὔτε ξένοις ἔστιν οὔτε τοῖς ἱερεῦσι, π 
ἂν τὸν "Απιν θάπτωσι. τοῦ δὲ ἱεροῦ τοῦ Σα 
πιδος οὐ πόρρω χωρίον. ἐστίν, ἔνθα Πειρίθουν κ 
Θησέα συνθεμένους ἐς Λακεδαίμονα καὶ ὕστε 
ἐς Θεσπρωτοὺς σταλῆναι λέγουσι. πλησίον 
9 , . / ο 
κοδόμητο ναὸς Εἰλειθυίας, ἣν ἐλθοῦσαν ἐξ 
Ὑπερβορέων ἐς Δῆλον γενέσθαι βοηθὸν ταῖς 
Λητοῦς ὠδῖσι, τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους παρ᾽ αὐτῶν dacs 
A / - ~ ” 7 / 
τῆς Εἰλειθυίας μαθεῖν τὸ ὄνομα' καὶ θύουσί τε 
Εἰλειθυία Δήλιοι καὶ ὕμνον ἆδουσιν ᾿Ὠλῆνος. 
Κρῆτες δὲ χώρας τῆς Κνωσσίας ἐν ᾿Αμνισῷ 
γενέσθαι νομίξουσιν Εἰλείθυιαν καὶ παῖδα "Ηρας 
A 4 
εἶναι μόνοις δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις τῆς Εἰλειθυίας κεκά- 
4 
λυπται τὰ ξόανα ἐς ἄκρους τοὺς πόδας. τὰ μεν 
δὴ δύο εἶναι Κρητικὰ καὶ Φαίδρας ἀναθήματα 
- / 
ἔλεγον αἱ γυναῖκες, τὸ δὲ ἀρχαιότατον ᾿Ἐρυσί- 
χθονα ἐκ Δήλου κομίσαι. 
Πρὶν δὲ ἐς τὸ ἱερὸν ἰέναι τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Ὄλυμ- 
/ 2 bY e e / 4 [ὦ 
πίου ---᾿Αδριανὸς ὁ "Ῥωμαίων βασιλεὺς τόν τε 
\ > 7 \ \ ΜΝ 9 e 
ναὸν ἀνέθηκε καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα θέας ἄξιον, οὗ 
` 
μεγέθει 1 μέν, ὅτι μὴ “Ῥοδίοις καὶ Ῥωμαίοις εἰσὶν 
ε / 
οἱ κολοσσοί, τὰ λοιπὰ ἀγάλματα ὁμοίως ἀπολεί- 
πεται, πεποίηται δὲ ἔκ τε ἐλέφαντος καὶ χρυσοῦ 
καὶ ἔχει τέχνης εὖ πρὸς τὸ μέγεθος ὁρῶσιν ---, 
ἐνταῦθα εἰκόνες ᾿Αδριανοῦ δύο μέν εἰσι Θασίου 
A A 4 
λίθου, δύο δὲ Αὐγυπτίου' χαλκαῖ δὲ ἑστᾶσι πρὸ 
A ’ A A 
τῶν κιόνων ἃς ᾿Αθηναῖοι καλοῦσιν ἀποίκους πό- 
ε - 
Acis. ὁ μὲν δὴ πᾶς περίβολος σταδίων μάλιστα 

1 οὗ μεγέθει, emended by Coraes. 

3 ἀποδείκνυται, emended by Coraes. 

3 as... ἀποίκους πόλεις placed after ἑκάστης by Wachs- 
muth. 

88 

ATTICA, xvi. 4-6 

stranger nor priest may enter, until they bury Apis. 
Not far from the sanctuary of Serapis is the place 
where they say that Peirithous and Theseus made 
their pact before setting forth to Lacedaemon and 
afterwards to Thesprotia. Hard by is built a temple 
of Eileithyia, who they say came from the Hyper- 
boreans to Delos and helped Leto in her labour ; and 
from Delos the name spread to other peoples. The 
Delians sacrifice to Eileithyia and sing a hymn of 
Olen. But the Cretans suppose that Eileithyia was 
born at Amnisus in the Cnossian territory, and that 
Hera was her mother. Only among the Athenians 
are the wooden figures of Eileithyia draped to the 
feet. The women told me that two are Cretan, 
being offerings of Phaedra, and that the third, 
which is the oldest, Erysichthon brought from 
Delos. 

Before the entrance to the sanctuary of Olympian 
_ Zeus—Hadrian the Roman emperor dedicated the 
temple and the statue, one worth seeing, which in 
size exceeds all other statues save the colossi at 
᾽ Rhodes and Rome, and is made of ivory and gold 
_ with an artistic skill which is remarkable when the 
size is taken into account—before the entrance, I 
say, stand statues of Hadrian, two of Thasian stone, 
two of Egyptian. Before the pillars stand bronze 
statues which the Athenians call “colonies.” The 
whole circumference of the precincts is about four 

89 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE | 

τεσσάρων ἐστίν, ἀνδριάντων δὲ πλήρης' ἀπὸ γὰρ | 
πόλεως ἑκάστης εἰκὼν ᾿Αδριανοῦ βασιλέως ἆ ἀνά- 
κειται, καὶ σφᾶς ὑπερεβάλοντο ᾿Αθηναῖοι τὸν 
κολοσσὸν ἀναθέντες ὄπισθε τοῦ ναοῦ θέας ἄξιον. 
ἔστι δὲ ἀρχαῖα ἐν τῷ περιβόλῳ Ζεὺς χαλκοῦς 
καὶ ναὸς Κρόνου καὶ Ρέας καὶ τέμενος Γῆς ἐπί- 
κλησιν Ὀλυμπίας. ἐνταῦθα ὅσον ἐς πῆχυν τὸ 
ἔδαφος. διέστηκε, καὶ λέγουσι μετὰ τὴν ἐπομβρίαν 
τὴν ἐ ἐπὶ Δευκαλίωνος συμβᾶσαν ὑπορρυῆναι ταύ 
τῃ τὸ ὕδωρ, ἐσβάλλουσί τε ἐς αὐτὸ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος 
ἄλφιτα. πυρῶν μέλιτι μίξαντες. κεῖται δὲ ἐπὶ 
κίονος ᾿Ισοκράτους. ἀνδριάς, ὃς ἐς μνήμην τρία 
ὑπελέπετο, ἐπιπονώτατον μὲν ὅτι οἱ βιώσαντι ἔτη 
δυοῖν δέοντα ἑκατὸν οὔποτε κατελύθη μαθητὰς 
ἔχειν, σωφρονέστατον δὲ ὅτι πολιτείας ATEXO- 
pevos διέµεινε καὶ τὰ κοινὰ οὐ πολυπραγμονῶν, 
ἐλευθερώτατον δὲ ὅτι πρὸς τὴν ἀγγελίαν τῆς ἐν 
Χαιρωνείᾳ μάχης ἀλγήσας ἐτελεύτησεν ἐθελον- 
τής. κεῖνται x καὶ λίθου Φρυγίου Πέρσαι χαλ- 
κοῦν «τρίποδα ἀνέχοντες, θέας ἄξιοι καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ 
ὁ τρίπους. τοῦ x Ὀλυμπίου. Διὸς Δευκαλίωνα 
οἰκοδομῆσαι λέγουσι τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἱερόν, σημεῖον 
ἀποφαίνοντες ὡς Δευκαλίων ᾿Αθήνῃσιν PKNCE 
τάφον τοῦ ναοῦ τοῦ νῦν οὐ πολὺ ἀφεστηκότα. 
"A δριανὸς δὲ κατεσκευάσατο μὲν καὶ ἄλλα ᾿Δόη- 
ναΐοις, ναὸν "Ἠρας καὶ Διὸς Πανελληνίου καὶ 
θεοῖς τοῖς πᾶσιν ἱερὸν κοινόν, τὰ δὲ ἐπιφανέστατα 
ἑκατόν εἰσι κίονες Φρυγίου λίθου" πεποίηνται δὲ 
καὶ ταῖς στοαῖς κατὰ τὰ ἀὐτὰ οἱ .τοῦχοι. καὶ 
οἰκήματα ἐνταῦθά ἐστιν ὀρόφῳ τε ἐπιχρύσῳ καὶ 
ἀλαβάστρῳ λίθῳ, πρὸς δὲ ἀγάλμασι κεκοσµη- 

go 

ATTICA, xviu. 6-9 

stades, and they are full of statues; for every city 
has dedicated a likeness of the emperor Hadrian, 
and the Athenians have surpassed them in dedi- 
eating, behind the temple, the remarkable colossus. 
Within the precincts are antiquities: a bronze Zeus, 
a temple of Cronus and Rhea and an enclosure of 
Earth surnamed Olympian. Here the floor opens to 
the width of a cubit, and they say that along this bed 
flowed off the water after the deluge that occurred 
in the time of Deucalion, and into it they cast every 
year wheat meal mixed with honey. On a pillar is a 
statue of Isocrates, whose memory is remarkable for 
three things: his diligence in continuing to teach to 
the end of his ninety-eight years, his self-restraint in 
keeping aloof from politics and from interfering 
with public affairs, and his love of liberty in dying a 
voluntary death, distressed at the news of the battle 
at Chaeronea. There are also statues in Phrygian 
marble of Persians supporting a bronze tripod ; both 
the figures and the tripod are worth seeing. The 
ancient sanctuary of Olympian Zeus the Athenians 
say was built by Deucalion, and they cite as evidence 
that Deucalion lived at Athens a grave which is not 
far from the present temple. Hadrian constructed 
other buildings also for the Athenians: a temple of 
Hera and Zeus Panellenios (Common to all Greeks), a 
sanctuary common to all the gods, and, most famous 
of all, a hundred pillars of Phrygian marble. The 
walls too are constructed of the same material as the 
cloisters. And there are rooms there adorned with 
a gilded roof and with alabaster stone, as well as 

ΟΙ 

838 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μένα καὶ γραφαῖς" κατάκειταί δὲ ἐς αὐτὰ βιβλία. 
καὶ γυμνάσιόν ἐστιν ἐπώνυμον ᾿Αδριανοῦ" κίονες 
δὲ καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἑκατὸν λιθοτομίας τῆς Λιβύων. 
XIX. Μετὰ δὲ τὸν ναὸν τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Ὄλυμ- 
πίου πλησίον ἄγαλμά ἐστιν ᾿Απόλλωνος Πυθίου: 
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλο ἱερὸν ᾿Απόλλωνος ἐπίκλησιν 
Δελφινίου. λέγουσι δὲ ὡς ἐξειργασμένου τοῦ 
ναοῦ πλὴν τῆς ὀροφῆς ἀγνὼς ἔτι τοῖς πᾶσιν ᾽ἀφί- 
KOLTO Θησεὺς ἐς τὴν πόλιν' οἷα δὲ χιτῶνα ἔχον- 
τος αὐτοῦ ποδήρη καὶ πεπλεγμένης ἐς εὐπρεπὲς οἱ 
τῆς κόμης, ὡς ἐγίνετο κατὰ τὸν τοῦ , Δελφινίου 
ναόν, οἱ τὴν στέγην οἰκοδομοῦντες ἤροντο σὺν 
χλευασίᾳ, ὅ τι δὴ παρθένος ἐ ἐν apg γάμου πλανᾶ- 
ται μόνη" Θησεὺς δὲ ἄλλο μὲν αὐτοῖς ἐδήλωσεν 
οὐδέν, ἀπολύσας δὲ ὡς λέγεται τῆς ἁμάξης 
τοὺς βοῦς, ñ σφισι παρῆν, ἀνέρριψεν ἐς ὑψη- 
2 λότερον ὴ τῷ ναῷ τὴν στέγην ἐποιοῦντο. —€s 
δὲ τὸ ωρίον, ὃ Κήπους ὀνομάξουσι, καὶ τῆς 
᾿Αφροδίτης τὸν ναὸν οὐδεὶς λεγόμενός σφισίν ἐστι 
λόγος" οὐ μὴν, οὐδὲ ἐς τὴν ᾿Αφροδίτην, ἣ τοῦ 
ναοῦ πλησίον ἕστηκε. ταύτης γὰρ σχῆμα μὲν 
τετράγωνον κατὰ ταὐτὰ καὶ τοῖς "Ἑρμαῖς, τὸ δὲ 
ἐπίγραμμα σημαίνει τὴν Οὐρανίαν ᾿Αφροδίτην 
τῶν καλουμένων Μοιρῶν εἶναι πρεσβυτάτην. τὸ 
δὲ ἄγαλμα τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης τῆς ἐν Κήποις ἔργον 
ἐστὶν ᾿Αλκαμένους καὶ τ ᾿Αθήνῃσιν ἐν ὀλίγοις 
3 θέας ἄξιον. ἔστι δὲ ' κλιέους ἱερὸν, καλού- 
μενον Κυνόσαργες καὶ Ey μὲν. ἐς τὴν κύνα εἰδέ- 
ναι τὴν λευκὴν ἐπιλεξαμένοις ἔ ἔστι τὸν χρησμόν, 
βωμοὶ δέ εἰσιν Ἡρακλέους τε καὶ Ἠβης, ἣν 
Διὸς παῖδα οὖσαν συνοικεῖν Ἡρακλεῖ νομέξουσιν' 
᾿Αλκμήνης τε βωμὸς καὶ lordov πεποίηται, ὃς 

92 

ATTICA, xvi, 9-x1x. 3 

with statues and paintings. In them are kept books. 
There is also a gymnasium named after Hadrian ; of 
this too the pillars are a hundred in number from the 
Libyan quarries. 

XIX. Close to the temple of Olympian Zeus is a 
statue of the Pythian Apollo. There is further a sanc- 
tuary of Apollo surnamed Delphinius. The story has 
it that when the temple was finished with the excep- 
tion of the roof Theseus arrived in the city, a stranger 
as yet to everybody. When he came to the temple 
of the Delphinian, wearing a tunic that reached 
to his feet and with his hair neatly plaited, those 
who were building the roof mockingly inquired 
what a marriageable virgin was doing wandering 
about by herself. The only answer that Theseus 
made was to loose, it is said, the oxen from the cart 
hard by, and to throw them higher than the roof 
of the temple they were building. Concerning 
the district called The Gardens, and the temple 
of Aphrodite, there is no story that is told by them, 
nor yet about the Aphrodite which stands near the 
temple. Now the shape of it is square, like that of 
the Hermae, and the inscription declares that the 
Heavenly Aphrodite is the oldest of those called 
Fates. But the statue of Aphrodite in the Gardens 
is the work of Alcamenes, and one of the most note- 
worthy things in Athens. There is also the place 
called Cynosarges, sacred to Heracles; the story of 
the white dog! may be known by reading the oracle. 
There are altars of Heracles and Hebe, who they 
think is the daughter of Zeus and wife to Heracles. 
An altar has been built to Alcmena and to [olaus, 

1 66 Cynosarges ” may mean white dog. 

93 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τὰ πολλὰ Ἡρακλεῖ συνεπόνησε τῶν ἔργων. Ame 
κειον δὲ ἀπὸ μὲν Λύκου τοῦ Πανδίονος ἔ ἔχει 
ὄνομα, ᾿Απόλλωνος δὲ ἱερὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς τε εὖθ 
καὶ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐνομίξετο, Λύκειός τε ὁ | 
ἐνταῦθα ὠνομάσθη πρῶτον' λέγεται δὲ ὅτι καὶ] 
Τερμίλαις, ἐς οὓς ἦλθεν ὁ Λύκος φεύγων Αἰγέα, 
καὶ τούτοις αἴτιός ἐστι Λυκίους ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ κα-ὶ 
λεῖσθαι. ἔστι δὲ ὄπισθεν τοῦ Λυκείου Νίσου 
μνῆμα, ὃν ἀποθανόντα ὑπὸ Μίνω βασιλεύοντα 
Μεγάρων κομίσαντες ᾿Αθηναῖοι ταύτη θάπτουσι». 
ἐς τοῦτον τὸν Νῖσον. ἔχει λόγος τρίχας ἐν τῇ 
κεφαλῇ οἱ πορφυρᾶς εἶναι, χρῆναι. δὲ αὐτὸν TENEU- 
τᾶν ἐπὶ ταύταις ἀποκαρείσαις' ὡς δὲ οἱ Κρῆτα | 
ἦλθον ἐς τὴν γῆν, τὰς μὲν ἄλλας ἐξ ἐπιὸ ομῆς 
ἥρουν τὰς ἐν τῇ Μεγαρίδι πόλεις, ἐς δὲ τὴν 
Νίσαιαν καταφεύγοντα τὸν Νῖσον ἐπολιόρκουν' 
ἐνταῦθα τοῦ Νίσου λέγεται θυγατέρα ἐρασθῆναι 
Μίνω καὶ ὡς ἀπέκειρε τὰς τρίχας τοῦ πατρός. 
Ταῦτα μὲν οὕτω γενέσθαι λέγουσι’ ποταμοὶ δὲ 
᾿Αθηναίοις ῥέουσιν Ἰλισός τε καὶ Ἠριδανῷ τῷ 
Κελτικῷ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ ὄνομα ἔχων, ἐκδιδοὺς ἐ ἐς 
τὸν Ἰλισόν. ὁ δὲ Ἰλισός ἐστιν οὗτος, ἔνθα παί- 
ζουσαν Ὠρείθυιαν ú ὑπὸ ἀνέμου Βορέου φασὶν åp- 
πασθῆναι' καὶ συνοικεῖν Ὠρειθυίᾳ Βορέαν καὶ 
σφισι διὰ τὸ κῆδος ἀμύναντα τῶν τριήρων τῶν 
βαρβαρικῶν ἀπολέσαι τὰς πολλάς. ἐθέλουσι δὲ 
᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ ἄλλων θεῶν i ἱερὸν εἶναι τὸν ᾿Ιλισόν, 
καὶ Μουσῶν βωμὸς ἐπ’ αὐτῷ ἐστιν Ἰλισιάδων' 
δείκνυται δὲ καὶ ἔνθα Πελοποννήσιοι Κόδρον τὸν 
Μελάνθου βασιλεύοντα ᾿Αθηναίων κτείνουσι. 
διαβᾶσι δὲ τὸν Ἰλ.σὸν χωρίον "Αγραι καλούμενον 
καὶ ναὸς ᾿Αγροτέρας ἐστὶν ᾿Αρτέμιδος" ἐνταῦθα 

94 

j 
a 4 
! 
| 

j 

ATTICA, x1x. 1-6 

who shared with Heracles most of his labours. The 
Lyceum has its name from Lycus, the son of Pandion, 
but it was considered sacred to Apollo from the be- 
ginning down to my time, and here was the god first 
named Lyceus. There is a legend that the Termilae 
also, to whom Lycus came when he fled from Aegeus, 
were called Lycii after him. Behind the Lyceum is 
a monument οἵ Nisus, who was killed while king of 
Megara by Minos, and the Athenians carried him here 
and buried him. About this Nisus there is a legend. 
His hair, they say, was red, and it was fated that he 
should die on its being cut off. When the Cretans 
attacked the country, they captured the other cities 
of the Megarid by assault, but Nisaea, in which Nisus 
had taken refuge, they beleaguered. The story says 
how the daughter of Nisus, falling in love here with 
Minos, cut off her father’s hair. Such is the legend. 

The rivers that flow through Athenian territory are 
the [lisus and its tributary the Eridanus, whose name 
is the same as that of the Celtic river. This Ilisus 
is the river by which Oreithyia was playing when, ac- 
cording to the story, she was carried off by the North 
Wind. With Oreithyia he lived in wedlock, and be- 
cause of the tie between him and the Athenians he 
helped them by destroying most of the foreigners’ 
warships. The Athenians hold that the Ilisus is sacred 
to other deities as well, and on its bank is an altar of 
the Ilisian Muses. The place too is pointed out where 
the Peloponnesians killed Codrus, son of Melanthus 
and king of Athens. Across the Ilisus is a district 
called Agrae and a temple of Artemis Agrotera (the 

95 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

"Αρτεμιν πρῶτον θηρεῦσαι λέγουσιν ἐλθοῦσαν 
Δήλου, καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα, διὰ τοῦτο ἔχει τόξον. 
δὲ ἀκούσασι μὲν οὐχ ὁμοίως ἐπαγωγόν, θαῦμα 
ἰδοῦσι, στάδιόν ἐστι λευκοῦ λίθου. μέγεθος 
αὐτοῦ τῇδε ἆ ἄν τις μάλιστα τεκμαίροιτο" ἄνω 
ὄρος ὑπὲρ τὸν Ἰλισὸν ἀρχόμενον ἐκ μηνοειὸ 
καθήκει τοῦ ποταμοῦ πρὸς τὴν ὄχθην εὐθύ τε κ 
διπλοῦν. τοῦτο ἀνὴρ ᾿Αθηναῖος Ἡρώδης OK 
δόµησε, καί οἱ τὸ πολὺ τῆς λιθοτομίας τῆς Ile 
τελῆσιν ἐς τὴν οἰκοδομὴν ἀνηλώθη. 

XX. Ἔστι δὲ ὁδὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ πρυτανείου κα 
λουμένη Τρίποδες: ἀφ οὗ καλοῦσι τὸ χωρίον; 
ναοὶ ὅσον ἐς τοῦτο μεγάλοι, Kal σφισιν ἐφεστή- 
κασι τρύποδες, χαλκοῖ μέν, μνήμης δὲ ἄξεα μά- 
λιστα περιέχοντες εἰργασμένα. Σάτυρος γάρ 
ἐστιν, ἐφ ᾧ Πραξιτέλην λέγεται φρονῆσαι μέγα" 
καί ποτε Φρύνης αἰτούσης, ὅ τι οἱ κάλλεστον ely 
τῶν ἔργων, ὁμολογεῖν μέν φασιν οἷα ἐραστὴν 
διδόναι, κατειπεῖν δ᾽ οὐκ ἐθέλειν ὅ τε κάλ- 
λιστον αὐτῷ οἱ φαίνοιτο. ἐσδραμὼν οὖν οἰκέτης 
Φρύνης ἔφασκεν οἴχεσθαι Ἡραξιτέλει τὸ πολὺ 
τῶν ἔργων πυρὸς ἐσπεσόντος ἐς τὸ οἴκημα, οὐ μὲν 
οὖν πάντα YE ἀφανισθῆναι" Ἡραξιτέλης δὲ aù- 
τίκα ἔθει διὰ θυρῶν ἔξω καί οἱ καμόντι οὐδὲν 
ἔφασκεν εἶναι πλέον, εἰ δὴ καὶ τὸν Σάτυρον ἡ 
φλὸξ καὶ τὸν "Έρωτα ἐπέλαβε: Φρύνη δὲ μένειν 
θαρροῦντα ἐκέλευε: παθεῖν γὰρ ἀνιαρὸν οὐδέν, 
τέχνῃ δὲ ἁλόντα ὁμολογεῖν τὰ κάλλιστα ὧν 
ἐποίησε. Φρύνη μὲν οὕτω τὸν Ἔρωτα αἱρεῖται" 
Διονύσῳ δὲ ἐν τῷ ναῷ τῷ πλησίον Σάτυρος ἐστι. | 
παῖς καὶ δίδωσιν ἔκπωμα" "Ἔρωτα δ᾽ ἑστηκότα 
ὁμοῦ καὶ Διόνυσον Θυμίλος ἐποίησεν. 

96 

we 

ATTICA, χιΧ. 6-ΧΧ. 2 

Huntress). They say that Artemis first hunted here 
when she came from Delos, and for this reason the 
statue carries a bow. A marvel to the eyes, though 
not so impressive to hear of, is a race-course of white 
marble, the size of which can best be estimated from 
the fact that beginning in a crescent on the heights 
above the Ilisus it descends in two straight lines to 
the river bank. This was built by Herodes, an 
Athenian, and the greater part of the Pentelic quarry 
was exhausted in its construction. 

XX. Leading from the Prytaneum is a road called 
Tripods. The place takes its name from the shrines, 
large enough to hold the tripods which stand upon 
them, of bronze, but containing very remarkable 
works of art, including a Satyr, of which Praxiteles 
is said to have been very proud. Phryne once asked 
of him the most beautiful of his works, and the story 
goes that lover-like he agreed to give it, but refused 
to say which he thought the most beautiful. So a 
slave of Phryne rushed in saying that a fire had 
broken out in the studio of Praxiteles, and the 
greater number of his works were lost, though not all 
were destroyed. Praxiteles at once started to rush 
through the door crying that his labour was all wasted 
if indeed the flames had caught his Satyr and his 
Love. But Phryne bade him stay and be of good 
courage, for he had suffered no grievous loss, but had 
been trapped into confessing which were the most 
beautiful of his works. So Phryne chose the statue 
of Love ; while a Satyr is in the temple of Dionysus 
hard by, a boy holding out a cup. The Love 
standing with him and the Dionysus were made by 
Thymilus. 

97 

VOL. I. H 

3 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

A 

Τοῦ Διονύσου δέ ἐστι πρὸς τῷ θεάτρῳ τὸ ἀρ- 
χαιότατον ἱερόν" δύο δέ εἰσιν eae τοῦ περιβόλου 
ναοὶ καὶ Διόνυσοι, 6 τε Ἐλευθερεὺς καὶ ὃν ᾿Αλκα- 
μένης ἐποίησεν ἐλέφαντος καὶ χρυσοῦ. γραφαὶ 
δὲ αὐτόθι Διόνυσός ἐστιν ἀνάγων "Ηφαιστον ἐς 
οὐρανόν' λέγεται δὲ καὶ τάδε ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων, ὡς 
"ρα ῥίψαι γενόμενον "ΗἨφαιστον, ὁ δέ οἱ µνησι- 
κακῶν πέμψαι δῶρον χρυσοῦν θρόνον ἀφανεῖς 
δεσμοὺς ἔχοντα, καὶ τὴν μὲν ἐπεί τε ἐκαθέξετο 
δεδέσθαι, θεῶν δὲ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων οὐδενὶ τὸν 
"Ἡφαιστον ἐθέλειν πείθεσθαι, Διόνυσος δὲ----μά- 
λιστα γὰρ ἐς τοῦτον πιστὰ ἦν Ηφαίστῳ---μεθυ- 
σας αὐτὸν ἐς οὐρανὸν ἤγαγε: ταῦτά τε δὴ ye- 

γραμμένα εἰσὶ καὶ Πενθεὺς καὶ Λυκοῦργος ὧν ἐς 

Διόνυσον ὕβρισαν διδόντες δίκας, Αριάδνη δὲ 
καθεύδουσα καὶ Θησεὺς ἀναγόμενος καὶ Διόνυσος 
ἥκων ἐς τῆς ᾿Αριάδνης τὴν ἁρπαγήν. 

Ἔστι δὲ πλησίον τοῦ τε ἱεροῦ τοῦ Διονύσου 
καὶ τοῦ θεάτρου κατασκεύασμα, ποιηθῆναι δὲ τῆς 
σκηνῆς αὐτὸ ἐς μίμησιν τῆς Ἐέρξου λέγεται' 
ἐποιήθη δὲ καὶ δεύτερον, τὸ γὰρ ἀρχαῖον στρατη- 

A e / > 2 UA / ο ΄ 
γὸς Ῥωμαίων ἐνέπρησε Σύλλας ᾿Αθήνας ἑλών. 
αἰτία δὲ ἥδε τοῦ πολέμου. Μιθριδάτης ἐβασίλευε 
Βαρβάρων τῶν περὶ τὸν Πόντον τὸν Εὔξεινον. 
πρόφασις μὲν δὴ δι ἥντινα “Ῥωμαίοις ἐπολέμησε 
καὶ ὃν τρόπον ἐς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν διέβη καὶ ὅσας ἢ 

4 ή r y A 4 ? ’ 
πολέμῳ βιασάμενος πόλεις ee ἢ φίλας émoi- 
σατο, τάδε μὲν τοῖς ἐπίστασθαι τὰ Μιθριδάτου 
θέλουσι μελέτω' ἐγὼ δὲ ὅσον ἐς τὴν ἅλωσιν τὴν 
᾿Αθηναίων ἔχει δηλώσω. hv ᾿Αριστίων Abn- 
ναῖος, ᾧ Μιθριδάτης πρεσβεύειν ἐς τὰς πόλεις 

ν ε / 9 - Φ » 2 9 
τὰς Ἑλληνίδας ἐχρῆτο' οὗτος ἀνέπεισεν ᾿Αθη- 
08 

ATTICA, xx. 3-5 

’ The oldest sanctuary of Dionysus is near the 
theatre. Within the precincts are two temples and 
two statues of Dionysus, the Eleuthereus (Deliverer) 
and the one Alcamenes made of ivory and gold. 
There are paintings here—Dionysus bringing Hephae- 
stus up to heaven. One of the Greek legends is that 
Hephaestus, when he was born, was thrown down by 
Hera. In revenge he sent as a gift a golden chair 
with invisible fetters. When Hera sat down she was 
held fast, and Hephaestus refused to listen to any 
other of the gods save Dionysus—in him he reposed 
the fullest trust—and after making him drunk 
Dionysus brought him to heaven. Besides this 
picture there are also represented Pentheus and 
Lycurgus paying the penalty of their insolence to 
Dionysus, Ariadne asleep, Theseus putting out to sea, 
and Dionysus on his arrival to carry off Ariadne. 
Near the sanctuary of Dionysus and the theatre is 
a structure, which is said to be a copy of Xerxes’ tent. 
It has been rebuilt, for the old building was burnt 
by the Roman general Sulla when he took Athens. 
The cause of the war was this. Mithridates was king 
over the foreigners around the Euxine. Now the 
grounds on which he made war against the Romans, 
how he crossed into Asia, and the cities he took by 
force of arms or made his friends, I must leave for 
those to find out who wish to know the history of 
Mithridates, and I shall confine my narrative to the 
capture of Athens. There was an Athenian, Aristion, 
whom Mithridates employed as his envoy to the 
Greek cities. He induced the Athenians to join 

99 
H 2 

86 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ναίους Μιθριδάτην θέσθαι Ῥωμαίων ἐπίπροσθεν. 
ἀνέπεισε δὲ οὐ πάντας, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσον δῆμος ἦν καὶ 
δήμου τὸ ταραχῶδες: ᾿Αθηναῖοι δὲ ὧν τις λόγος, 
παρὰ τοὺς Ῥωμαίους ἐκπίπτουσιν ἐθελονταί. ye- 
νομένης δὲ μάχης πολλῷ περιῆσαν οἱ “Ρωμαῖοι, 
καὶ φεύγοντας ᾿Αριστίωνα μὲν καὶ ᾿Αθηναίους ἐς 
τὸ ἄστυ καταδιώκουσιν, ᾿Αρχέλαον δὲ καὶ τοὺς 
βαρβάρους ἐς τὸν Πειραιᾶ: Μιθριδάτου δὲ στρα- 
τηγὸς καὶ οὗτος ἦν, ὃν πρότερον τούτων Μάγνητες 
οἱ τὸν Σίπυλον οἰκοῦντες σφᾶς ἐπεκδραμόντα αὐ- 
τόν τε τιτρώσκουσι καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων φονεύουσι 
τοὺς πολλούς. ᾿Αθηναίοις μὲν δὴ πολιορκία 
καθειστήκει, Ταξίλος δὲ Μιθριδάτου στρατηγὸς 
ἐτύγχανε μὲν περικαθήμενος ᾿Ελάτειαν τὴν ἐν τῇ 
Φωκίδι, ἀφικομένων δὲ ἀγγέλων ἀναστήσας τὸν 
στρατὸν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν ἦγεν. ἃ πυνθανόμενος 
ὁ στρατηγὸς τῶν Ῥωμαίων Αθήνας μεν τοῦ στρα- 
τοῦ μέρει πολιορκεῖν ἀφῆκεν, αὐτὸς δὲ Ταξίλῳ τὸ 
πολὺ τῆς δυνάμεως ἔχων ἐς Βοιωτοὺς ἀπαντᾷ. 
τρίτῃ δὲ ὕστερον ἡμέρᾳ τοῖς “Ῥωμαίοις ἦλθον ἐπ᾽ 
ἀμφότερα τὰ στρατόπεδα ἄγγελοι, Σύλλᾳ μὲν 
ὡς ᾿Αθηναίοις εἴη τὸ τεῖχος ἑαλωκός, τοῖς δὲ 
᾿Αθήνας πολιορκήσασι Ταξίλον κεκρατῆσθαι 
μάχῃ περὶ Χαιρώνειαν. Σύλλας δὲ ὡς ἐς τὴν 
᾿Αττικὴν ἐπανῆλθε, τοὺς ἐναντιωθέντας ᾿ Αθη- 
ναίων καθείρξας ἐς τὸν Κεραμεικὸν τὸν λαχόντα 
σφῶν ἐκ δεκάδος ἑκάστης ἐκέλευσεν ἄγεσθαι τὴν 
ἐπὶ θανάτῳ. Σύλλου δὲ οὐκ ἀνιέντος ἐς ᾿Αθη- 
ναίους τοῦ θυμοῦ λαθόντες ἐκδιδράσκουσιν ἄνδρες 
ἐς Δελφούς" ἐρομένοις δέ σφισιν, εἰ καταλαμβάνοι 
τὸ χρεὼν ἤδη καὶ τὰς ᾿Αθήνας ἐρημωθῆναι, τού- 
τοις ἔχρησεν ἡ Πυθία τὰ ἐς τὸν ἀσκὸν ἔχοντα. 
100 

ATTICA, xx. 5-7 

Mithridates rather than the’ Romans, although he 
did not induce all, but only thé lower orders, and 
only the turbulent among them.’ ’The respectable 
Athenians fled to the Romans of their own accord. 
In the engagement that ensued the Romans won a 
decisive victory; Aristion and the Athenians they 
drove in flight into the city, Archelaus and the foreign- 
ers into the Peiraeus. This Archelaus was añother 
general of Mithridates, whom earlier than this the 
Magnetes, who inhabit Sipylus, wounded when h< 
raided their territory, killing most of the foreignérs 
as well. So Athens was invested. Taxilus, a general 
of Mithridates, was at the time besieging Elatea in 
Phocis, but on receiving the news he withdrew his 
troops towards Attica. Learning this, the Roman 
general entrusted the siege of Athens to a portion 
of his army, and with the greater part of his forces 
advanced in person to meet Taxilus in Boeotia. On 
the third day from this, news came to both the 
Roman armies; Sulla heard that the Athenian forti- 
fications had been stormed, and the besieging force 
learnt that Taxilus had been defeated in battle near 
Chaeronea. When Sulla returned to Attica he im- 
prisoned in the Cerameicus the Athenians who had 
opposed him, and one chosen by lot out of every ten 
he ordered to be led to execution. Sulla abated 
nothing of his wrath against the Athenians, and so a 
few effected an escape to Delphi, and asked if the 
time were now come when it was fated for Athens 
also to be made desolate, receiving from the Pythia 
the response about the wine skin. Afterwards Sulla 

IOI 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Σύλλα δὲ ὕστερον τὀύτὼν ἐνέπεσεν ἡ νόσος, ἢ καὶ 
τὸν Σύριον Φερεκύδὴν ἁλῶναι πυνθάνομαι. Σύλλα 
δὲ ἔστι μὲν καὶ τὰ ἐς τοὺς πολλοὺς ᾿Αθηναίων 
ἀγριώτερα ἢ ὡς «ἄνδρα .εἰκὸς ἦν ἐργάσασθαι ‘Po- 
μαῖον: ἀλλὰ γὰρ οὐ ταῦτα δὴ αἰτίαν γενέσθαι οἱ 
δοκῶ τῆς συμφορᾶς, Ἱκεσίου δὲ μήνιμα, ὅτι κατα- 
φυγόντα ἐς τὸ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱερὸν ἀπέκτεινεν anmo- 
ondogs ᾿Αριστίωνα. 
3 Α A ” ε Ν - / a 
- Αθήναι μὲν οὕτως ὑπὸ τοῦ πολέμου κακωθεῖ- 
gat τοῦ Ῥωμαίων αὖθις ᾿Αδριανοῦ βασιλεύοντος 
- "ἤνθησαν: XXI. Εἰσὶ δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις εἰκόνες ἐν τῷ 
Ὃν θεάτρῳ καὶ τραγῳδίας καὶ κωμῳδίας ποιητῶν, αἱ 
πολλαὶ τῶν ἀφανεστέρων' ὅτι μὴ γὰρ Μέναν- 
ὅρος, οὐδεὶς ἦν ποιητὴς κωμῳδίας τῶν ἐς δόξαν 
ἡκόντων. τραγῳδίας δὲ κεῖνται τῶν φανερῶν 
Εὐριπίδης καὶ Σοφοκλῆς. λέγεται δὲ Σοφοκλέους 
τελευτήσαντος ἐσβαλεῖν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν Λακε- 
δαιμονίους, καὶ σφῶν τὸν ἡγούμενον ἰδεῖν ἐπι- 
στάντα οἱ Διόνυσον κελεύειν τιμαῖς, ὅσαι καθε- 
στήκασιν ἐπὶ τοῖς τεθνεῶσι, τὴν Σειρῆνα τὴν 
νέαν τιμᾶν' καί οἱ τὸ ὄναρ ἐς Σοφοκλέα καὶ 
τὴν Σοφοκλέους ποίησιν ἐφαίνετο ἔχειν, εἰώθασι 
δὲ καὶ νῦν ἔτι ποιημάτων καὶ λόγων τὸ ἐπαγωγὸν 
2 Σειρῆνι εἰκάξειν. τὴν δὲ εἰκόνα τὴν Αἰσχύλου 
πολλῷ τε ὕστερον τῆς τελευτῆς δοκῶ ποιηθῆναι 
καὶ τῆς γραφῆς ἣ τὸ ἔργον ἔχει τὸ Μαραθῶνι. 
ἔφη δὲ Αἰσχύλος μειράκιον dv καθεύδειν ἐν ἀγρῷ 
φυλάσσων σταφυλάς, καί οἱ Διόνυσον ἐπιστάντα 
κελεῦσαι τραγῳδίαν ποιεῖν: ὡς δὲ ἦν ἡμέρα-- 
πείθεσθαι γὰρ ἐθέλειν---ῥᾷστα ἤδη πειρώμενος 
3 ποιεῖν. οὗτος μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγεν: ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ 
Νοτίου καλουμένου τείχους, ὃ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως 

102 

ATTICA, xx. Ί-αχι. 3 

was smitten with the disease which I learn attacked 
Pherecydes the Syrian. Although Sulla’s treatment 
of the Athenian people was so savage as to be un- 
worthy of a Roman, I do not think that this was the 
cause of his calamity, but rather the vengeance of 
the suppliants’ Protector, for he had dragged Aristion 
from the sanctuary of Athena, where he had taken 
refuge, and killed him. 
In such wise was Athens sorely afflicted by the 
war with Rome, but she flourished again when 
Hadrian was emperor. XXI. In the theatre the 
Athenians have portrait statues of poets, both tragic 
and comic, but they are mostly of undistinguished 
persons. With the exception of Menander no poet 
of comedy represented here won a reputation, but 
tragedy has two illustrious representatives, Euripides 
and Sophocles. There is a legend that after the 
death of Sophocles the Lacedaemonians invaded 
Attica, and their commander saw in a vision 
Dionysus, who bade him honour, with all the cus- 
tomary honours of the dead, the new Siren. He 
interpreted the dream as referring to Sophocles and 
his poetry, and down to the present day men are 
wont to liken to a Siren whatever is charming in 
both poetry and prose. The likeness of Aeschylus 
is, I think, much later than his death and than the 
painting which depicts the action at Marathon. 
Aeschylus himself said that when a youth he 
slept while watching grapes in a field, and that 
Dionysus appeared and bade him write tragedy. 
When day came, in obedience to the vision, he 
made an attempt and hereafter found composing 
quite easy. Such were his words. On the South 
wall, as it is called, of the Acropolis, which faces 

103 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREEC 

΄ 

ἐς τὸ θέατρόν ἐστι τετραμμένον, ἐπὶ το 
a / 
Μεδούσης τῆς Γοργόνος ἐπίχρυσος ἀνάκει 
κεφαλή, καὶ περὶ αὐτὴν αἰγὶς πεποίηται. ἐν 
τῇ κορυφῇ τοῦ θεάτρου σπήλαιόν ἐστιν ἐν 
. 
πέτραις ὑπὸ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν: τρίπους δὲ ἔπε 
΄ 5 / \ 3 > Αα . 
καὶ τούτῳ' ᾿Απόλλων δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ "Αρτει 
τοὺς παῖδάς εἰσιν ἀναιροῦντες τοὺς Νιόβ 
4 . / . > AN 9 » A 
ταύτην τὴν Νιόβην καὶ αὐτὸς εἶδον ἀνελθὼν 
. / . ν e / A / 
τὸν Σύπυλον τὸ ὄρος' ἡ δὲ πλησίον μὲν TET 
καὶ κρημνός ἐστιν οὐδὲν παρόντι σχῆμα παρε 
μενος γυναικὸς οὔτε ἄλλως οὔτε πενθούσης' εἰ 
γε πορρωτέρω γένοιο, δεδακρυμένην δόξεις ὁ 
καὶ κατηφῆ γυναῖκα. | 
sy / .. 3 / > . ? [ή ᾽ 
]όντων δὲ ᾿Αθήνησιν ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν a 
- 4 / f - \ 4 
τοῦ θεάτρου τέθαπται Κάλως' τοῦτον τὸν Κάλ 
ἀδελφῆς παῖδα ὄντα καὶ τῆς τέχνης μαθητὴ 
/ 
φονεύσας Δαίδαλος ἐς ΟΠ ἔφυγε, χρόνῳ 
/ 
ὕστερον ἐς Σικελίαν ἐκδιδράσκει παρὰ Κώκαλον. 
- A Ν 
τοῦ δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ τὸ ἱερὸν ἔς τε τὰ ἀγάλματά. 
e A A A 
ἐστιν, ὁπόσα τοῦ θεοῦ πεποίηται καὶ τῶν παίδων, 
b . / LA ν Ν > 9 A 
καὶ ἐς τὰς γραφὰς θέας ἄξιον: ἔστι δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ 
» A A 
κρήνη, Tap ᾗ λέγουσι Ποσειδῶνος παῖδα “Αλιρ- 
ρόθιον θυγατέρα "Άρεως ᾿Αλκίππην αἰσχύναντα 
- d a 
ἀποθανεῖν ὑπὸ “Apews, καὶ δίκην ἐπὶ τούτῳ τῷ 
A A , 
φόνῳ γενέσθαι πρῶτον. ἐνταῦθα ἄλλα τε καὶ 
αυροματικὸς ἀνάκειται θώραξ: ἐς τοῦτόν τις. 
ἰδὼν οὐδὲν ἧσσον Ἑλλήνων τοὺς βαρβάρους | 
φήσει σοφοὺς ἐς τὰς τέχνας εἶναι. Σαυρομάταις 
γὰρ οὔτε αὐτοῖς σίδηρος ἐστιν ὀρυσσόμενος οὔτε 
σφίσιν ἐσάγουσιν' ἄμικτοι γὰρ μάλιστα τῶν 
ταύτῃ βαρβάρων εἰσί. πρὸς οὖν τὴν ἀπορίαν 
LA v4 - 
ταύτην ἐξεύρηταί σφισιν: ἐπὶ μὲν τοῖς δόρασιν 

104 

ATTICA, χχι. 3-5 

the theatre, there is dedicated a gilded head of 
Medusa the Gorgon, and round it is wrought an aegis. 
At the top of the theatre is a cave in the rocks 
under the Acropolis. This also has a tripod over it, 
wherein are Apollo and Artemis slaying the children 
of Niobe. This Niobe I myself saw when I had gone 
up to Mount Sipylus. When you are near it is a 
beetling crag, with not the slightest resemblance to 
a woman, mourning or otherwise ; but if you go fur- 
ther away you will think you see a woman in tears, 
with head bowed down. 

On the way to the Athenian Acropolis from the 
theatre is the tomb of Calos. Daedalus murdered 
this Calos, who was his sister’s son and a student of 
his craft, and therefore he fled to Crete ; afterwards 
he escaped to Cocalus in Sicily. The sanctuary of 
Asclepius is worth seeing both for its paintings and 
for the statues of the god and his children. In it 
there is a spring, by which they say that Poseidon’s 
son Halirrhothius deflowered Alcippe the daughter 
of Ares, who killed the ravisher and was the first to 
be put on his trial for the shedding of blood. Among 
the votive offerings there is a Sauromatic breast- 
plate. On seeing this a man will say that no less 
than Greeks are foreigners skilled in the arts. For 
the Sauromatae have no iron, neither mined by them- 
selves nor yet imported. They have, in fact, no 
dealings at all with the foreigners around them. To 
meet this deficiency they have contrived inventions. 
In place of iron they use bone for their spear-blades, 

τος 

a 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

αἰχμὰς ὀστεΐνας ἀντὶ σιδήρου φοροῦσι, τόξα τε 
κράνινα καὶ ὀιστοὺς καὶ ὀστεΐνας ἀκίδας ἐπὶ τοῖς 
ὀιστοῖς: καὶ σειραῖς περιβαλόντες τῶν πολεμίαν 
ὁπόσους καὶ τύχοιεν, τοὺς ἵππους ἀποστρέψαντες 
ἀνατρέπουσι τοὺς ἐνσχεθέντας ταῖς σειραῖς. τοὺς 
δὲ θώρακας ποιοῦνται τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον. ἵππους 
πολλὰς ἕκαστος τρέφει, ὡς ἂν οὔτε ἐς ἐδιωτῶν 
κλήρους τῆς γῆς μεμερισμένης οὔτε τι φερούση: 
πλὴν ὕλης ἀγρίας ἅτε ὄντων νομάδων: ταύταις 
οὐκ ἐς πόλεμον χρῶνται μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ θεοῖς 
θύουσιν ἐπιχωρίοις καὶ ἄλλως σιτοῦνται. συλ- 
λεξάμενοι δὲ τὰς ὁπλὰς ἐκκαθήραντές τε καὶ 
διελόντες ποιοῦσιν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν isi ἢ δρακόντων 
φολίσιν' ὅστις δὲ οὐκ εἶδέ πω δράκοντα, πίτυος 
γε εἶδε καρπὸν χλωρὸν ἔτι. ταῖς οὖν ἐπὶ τῷ 
καρπῷ τῆς πίτυος φαινομέναις ἐντομαῖς εἰκάζων 
τὸ ἔργον τὸ ἐκ τῆς ὁπλῆς οὐκ ἂν ἁμαρτώνοι. 
ταῦτα διατρήσαντες καὶ νεύροις ἵππων καὶ βοῶν 
συρράψαντες χρῶνται θώραξιν οὔτε εὐπρεπείᾳ 
τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν ἀποδέουσιν οὔτε ἀσθενεστέροις 
καὶ γὰρ συστάδην τυπτόμενοι καὶ ϱβληθέντε 
ἀνέχονται. οἱ δὲ θώρακες οἱ Mvo? μαχομένοις 
μὲν οὐχ ὁμοίως εἰσὶ χρήσιμοι, διιᾶσι γὰρ καὶ 
βιαζόμενοι τὸν σίδηρον: θηρεύοντας δὲ ὠφελοῦ- 
σιν, ἐναποκλῶνται γάρ σφισι καὶ λεόντων ὀδόν- 
τες καὶ παρδάλεων. θώρακας δὲ λινοῦς ἰδεῖν ἔν τε 
ἄλλοις ἱεροῖς ἔστιν ἀνακειμένους καὶ ἐν Γρυνείῳ, 
ἔνθα ᾿Απόλλωνος κάλλιστον ἄλσος δένδρων καὶ 
ἡμέρων καὶ ὅσα τῶν ἀκάρπων ὀσμῆς παρέχεται 
τινα ἢ θέας ἡδονήν. 

XXII. Μετὰ δὲ τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ ταύτῃ 
πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἰοῦσι Θέμιδος ναός ἐστι. 
τού 

ATTICA, xxi. σ-χχι. 1 

and cornel-wood for their bows and arrows, with bone 
points for the arrows. They throw a lasso round 
any enemy they meet, and then turning round their 
horses upset the enemy caught in the lasso. Their 
breastplates they make in the following fashion. 
Each man keeps many mares, since the land is not 
divided into private allotments, nor does it bear any- 
thing except wild trees, as the people are nomads. 
These mares they not only use for war, but also 
sacrifice them to the local gods and eat them for 
food. Their hoofs they collect, clean, split, and 
make from them as it were python scales. Whoever 
has never seen a python must at least have seen a 
pine-cone still green. He will not be mistaken if he 
liken the product from the hoof to the segments that 
are seen on the pine-cone. These pieces they bore 
and stitch together with the sinews of horses and 
oxen, and then use them as breastplates that are as 
handsome and strong as those of the Greeks. For 
they can withstand blows of missiles and those 
struck in close combat. Linen breastplates are not 
so useful to fighters, for they let the iron pass through, 
if the blow be a violent one. They aid hunters, how- 
ever, for the teeth of lions or leopards break off in 
them. You may see linen breastplates dedicated 
in other sanctuaries, notably in that at Gryneum, 
where there is a most beautiful grove of Apollo, with 
cultivated trees, and all those which, although they 
bear no fruit, are pleasing to smell or look upon. 
XXII. After the sanctuary of Asclepius, as you go 
by this way towards the Acropolis, there is a temple 

107 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

κέχωσται δὲ πρὸ αὐτοῦ μνῆμα Ἱππολύτῳ' ἡ 
δέ οἱ βίου τὴν τελευτὴν συμβῆναι λέγουσι 
καταρῶν. δῆλα δέ, καὶ ὅστις βαρβάρων γλῶσᾶ 
ἔμαθεν Ελλήνων, ὅ τε ἔρως τῆς Φαίδρας καὶ 
τροφοῦ τὸ ἐς τὴν διακονίαν τόλμημα. ἔστι δὲ A 
Τροιξηνίοις Ἱππολύτου τάφος ἔχει δέ ohu 
9 ὧδε ὁ λόγος. (Θησεὺς ὡς ἔμελλεν ἄξεσθαε 
δραν, οὐκ ἐθέλων εἴ οἱ γένοιντο παῖδες οὔ 
ἄρχεσθαι τὸν Ἱππόλυτον οὔτε βασιλεύειν ἀν 
αὐτῶν, πέμπει παρὰ Πιτθέα τραφησόμενον αὐτὰ 
καὶ βασιλεύσοντα Τροιζῆνος. χρόνῳ δὲ ὕστερ 
Πάλλας καὶ οἱ παῖδες ἐπανέστησαν (Θησεῖ: τοῦ 
τους κτείνας ἐς Τροιζῆνα ἔρχεται καθαρσίαὶ 
ἕνεκα, καὶ Φαίδρα πρώτη ἐνταῦθα εἶδεν Ἱππᾶ 
λυτον καὶ τὰ ἐς τὸν θάνατον ἐρασθεῖσα ἐβοῦ 
Acuse. μυρσίνη δέ ἐστι Ἐροιξηνίοις τὰ φύλλα 
διὰ πάσης ἔχουσα τετρυπημένα' φῦναι δὲ οὐκ ἐξ 
ἀρχῆς τοιαύτην λέγουσιν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἔργον γεγενῆ- 
σθαι τῆς ἐς τὸν ἔρωτα ons καὶ τῆς περόνης ἣν 
ἐπὶ ταῖς θριξὶν εἶχεν ἡ Φαίδρα. ᾿Αφροδίτην δὲ 
τὴν Πάνδημον, ἐπεί τε ᾿Αθηναίους Θησεὺς ἐς μίαν 
ἤγαγεν ἀπὸ τῶν δήμων πόλιν, αὐτήν τε σέβεσθαι 
καὶ Πειθὼ κατέστησε τὰ μὲν δὴ παλαιὰ ἀγάλ- 
pata οὐκ ἦν ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, τὰ δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ τεχνιτῶν ἦν 
οὐ τῶν ἀφανεστάτων. ἔστι δὲ καὶ Γῆς Κουρο- 
τρόφου καὶ Δήμητρος ἱερὸν Χλόης: τὰ δὲ ἐς τὰς 
ἐπωνυμίας ἔστιν αὐτῶν διδαχθῆναι τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν 
ἐλθόντα ἐς λόγους. 
‘+ "Es δὲ τὴν ἀκρόπολίν ἐστιν ἔσοδος µία" ἑτέραν 
δὲ οὐ παρέχεται, πᾶσα ἀπότομος οὖσα καὶ τεῖχος 
ἔχουσα ἐχυρόν. τὰ δὲ προπύλαια λίθου λευκοῦ 

oo 

108 

ATTICA, xxu. 1-4 

of Themis. Before it is raised a sepulchral mound 
to Hippolytus. The end of his life, they say, came 
from curses. Everybody, even a foreigner who has 
learnt Greek, knows about the love of Phaedra and 
the wickedness the nurse dared commit to serve her. 
The Troezenians too have a grave of Hippolytus, and 
their legend about it is this. When Theseus was 
about to marry Phaedra, not wishing, should he have 
children, Hippolytus either to be their subject or to 
be king in their stead, sent him to Pittheus to be 
brought up and to be the future king of Troezen. 
Afterwards Pallas and his sons rebelled against 
Theseus. After putting them to death he went to 
Troezen for purification, and Phaedra first saw Hip- 
polytus there. Falling in love with him she contrived 
the plot for his death. The Troezenians have a 
myrtle with every one of its leaves pierced ; they say 
that it did not grow originally in this fashion, the 
holes being due to Phaedra’s disgust with love and to 
the pin which she wore in her hair. When Theseus had 
united into one state the many Athenian parishes, he 
established the cults of Aphrodite Pandemos (Com- 
mon) and of Persuasion. The old statues no longer 
existed in my time, but those I saw were the work 
of no inferior artists. There is also a sanctuary of 
Earth, Nurse of Youth, and of Demeter Chloé 
(Green). You can learn all about their names by 
conversing with the priests. 
sæ There is but one entry to the Acropolis. It affords 
no other, being precipitous throughout and having 
a strong wall. The gateway has a roof of white - 

109 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREE 

τὴν ὀροφὴν ἔχει καὶ κόσμῳ καὶ μεγέθει 

θων μέχρι γε καὶ ἐμοῦ προεῖχε. τὰς μὲν 
εἰκόνας τῶν ἱππέων οὐκ ἔχω σαφῶς εὐπεῖν, 
οἱ παῖδές εἰσιν οἱ Ἐενοφῶντος εἴτε ἄλλως 
εὐπρέπειαν πεποιημέναι" τῶν δὲ προπυλαίω 
δεξίᾳ Νίκης ἐστὶν ᾿Απτέρου ναός. ἐντεῦθ 
θάλασσά ἐστι σύνοπτος, καὶ ταύτῃ ῥέψας Αἱ 
ἑαυτὸν ὡς λέγουσιν ἐτελεύτησεν. ἀννήγετο 
γὰρ ἡ ναῦς μέλασιν ἱστίοις ἡ τοὺς παῖδας 
povoa ἐς Κρήτην, Θησεὺς δὲ---ἔπλει γὰρ τόλ 
τι ἔχων ἐς τὸν Μίνω καλούμενον ταῦρον---π. 
τὸν πατέρα προεῖπε χρήσεσθαι τοῖς ἱστίοις 
κοῖς, ἣν ὀπίσω πλέῃ τοῦ ταύρου κρατήσας" τ 
των λήθην ἔσχεν ᾿Αριάδνην ἀφῃρημένος: ἐνταῦθα 
Αἰγεὺς ὡς εἶδεν ἱστίοις μέλασι τὴν ναῦν κοµε». 
ζομένην, οἷα τὸν παῖδα τεθνάναι δοκῶν, ἀφεὶς 
αὑτὸν διαφθείρεται" καί οἱ παρὰ ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐστὶ { 
καλούμενον ἡρῷον Αἰγέως.--ἔστι δὲ ἐν ἀριστερᾶ 
τῶν προπυλαίων οἴκημα ἔχον γραφάς: ὁπόσαις 
δὲ μὴ καθέστηκεν ὁ χρόνος αἴτιος ἀφανέσιν εἶναι, 
Διομήδης ἦν καὶ Ὀδυσσεύς, ὁ μὲν ἐν Λήμνῳ τὸ 
Φιλοκτήτου τόξον, ὁ δὲ τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἀφαερού- ` 
μενος ἐξ Ἰλίου. ἐνταῦθα ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς Ὄρέ- 
στης ἐστὶν Αἴγισθον φονεύων καὶ Ἱ]υλάδης τοὺς 
παῖδας τοὺς Ναυπλίου βοηθοὺς ἐλθόντας Αἰγί- 
σθῳ' τοῦ δὲ ᾿Αχιλλέως τάφου πλησίον μέλλουσά 
ἐστι σφάξεσθαι Πολυξένη. Ὁμήρῳ δὲ εὖ μὲν 
παρείθη τόδε τὸ ὠμὸν οὕτως ἔργον: εὖ δέ μοι 
φαίνεται ποιῆσαι Σκῦρον ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλλέως ἁλοῦ- 
σαν, οὐδὲν ὁμοίως καὶ ὅσοι λέγουσιν ὁμοῦ ταῖς 
παρθένοις ᾿Αχιλλέα ἔχειν ἐν Σκύρῳ δίαιταν, ἃ δὴ 
καὶ Πολύγνωτος ἔγραψεν. ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ πρὸς 
ITO 

ATTICA, χχπ. 4-6 

marble, and down to the present day it is unrivalled 
for the beauty and size of its stones. Now as to the 
statues of the horsemen, I cannot tell for certain 
whether they are the sons of Xenophon or whether 
they were made merely to beautify the place. On 
the right of the gateway is a temple of Wingless 
Victory. From this point the sea is visible, and far 
it was that, according to legend, Aegeus threw him- 
self down to his death. For the ship that carried 
the young people to Crete began her voyage with 
black sails; but Theseus, who was sailing on an 
adventure against the bull of Minos, as it is called, 
had told his father beforehand that he would 
use white sails if he should sail back victorious 
over the bull. But the loss of Ariadne made him 
forget the signal. Then Aegeus, when from this 
eminence he saw the vessel borne by black sails, 
thinking that his son was dead, threw himself down 
to destruction. There is at Athens a sanctuary 
dedicated to him, and called the hero-shrine of 

egeus. On the left of the gateway is a building 
with pictures. Among those not effaced by time I 
found, Diomedes taking the Athena from Troy, and 
OdySseus in Lemnos taking away the bey of Philo- 
ctetes. There in the pictures is Orestes killing 
Aegisthus, and Pyladbð killing the sons of Nauplius 
who had come bring Aegisthus succour. And 
there is Polyx about to be sacrificed near the 
grave of Achilles. Homer did well in passing by this 
barbarous act. I think.too that he showed poetic 
insight in making Achilles capture Scyros, differing 
entirely from those who say that Achilles lived 
in Scyros with the maidens, as Polygnotus has re- 
presented in his picture. He also painted Odysseus 

ITI 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREE 

τῷ ποταμῷ ταῖς ὁμοῦ Ναυσικᾷ πλυνούσαις ὃ 
στάµενον Ὀδυσσέα κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ καθὰ δὴ 
"Όμηρος ἐποίησε. γραφαὶ δέ εἰσι καὶ ἄλλαι 

7 ᾿Αλκιβιάδης, ἵππων δέ οἱ νίκης τῆς ἐν Nef 
ἐστὶ σημεῖα ἐν τῇ γραφῆ' καὶ Περσεύς ἐστι 
Σέριφον κομιζόμενος, Πολυδέκτῃ φέρων τὴν 
φαλὴν τὴν Μεδούσης. καὶ τὰ μὲν ἐς Μέδουσᾷ 
οὐκ εἰμὶ πρόθυμος ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αττικοῖς σημῆ» 
ἔτι δὲ τῶν γραφῶν, παρέντι τὸν παῖδα τὸν 
ὑδρίας φέροντα καὶ τὸν παλαιστὴν ὃν Γιμαίνετά 
ἔγραψεν, ἐστὶ Μουσαῖος. ἐγὼ δὲ ἔπη μὲν ἐπελῇ 
ξάμην, ἐν οἷς ἐστι πέτεσθαι Μουσαῖον ὑπὸ Βορέᾶ 
δῶρον, δοκεῖν δέ μοι πεποίηκεν αὐτὰ ᾿Ονομάκριτέ 
καὶ ἔστιν οὐδὲν Μουσαίου βεβαίως ὅτι μὴ μόνε 
ἐς Δήμητρα ὕμνος Λυκομίδαις. 

8 Κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἔσοδον αὐτὴν ἤδη τὴν ἐς ἀκρὸ- 
πολιν Ἑρμῆν, ὃν Προπύλαιον ὀνομάξουσι, καὶ 
Χάριτας Σωκράτην ποιῆσαι τὸν Σωφρονίσκοσ 
λέγουσιν, © σοφῷ γενέσθαι μάλιστα avb pomor 
ἐστὶν ἡ Πυθία μάρτυς, ὃ μηδὲ ᾿Ανάχαρσιν 
ἐθέλοντα ὅμως καὶ δι αὐτὸ ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀφικό- 
μενον προσεῖπεν. XXIII. "Ελληνες δὲ ἄλλα τε 
λέγουσι καὶ ἄνδρας ἑπτὰ γενέσθαι σοφούς. τού- 
των καὶ τὸν Λέσβιον τύραννον καὶ Περίανδρον 
εἶναί φασι τὸν Κυψέλου: καίτοι Περιάνδρου 
Πεισίστρατος καὶ ὁ παῖς Ἱππίας φιλάνθρωποι 
μᾶλλον καὶ σοφώτεροι τά τε πολεμικὰ ἦσαν καὶ 
ὅσα ἧκεν ἐς κόσμον τῶν πολιτῶν, ἐς ὃ διὰ τὸν 
Ἱππάρχου θάνατον Ἱππίας ἄλλα τε ἐχρήσατο 

9 θυμῷ καὶ ἐς γυναῖκα ὄνομα Λέαιναν. ταύτην 
γάρ, ἐπεί τε ἀπέθανεν Ἴππαρχος,--- λέγω δὲ οὐκ 
ἐς συγγραφὴν πρότερον ἥκοντα, πιστὰ δὲ ἄλλως 

112 

ATTICA, xxn. 6-χχιῃ. 2 

coming upon the women washing clothes with 
Nausicaa at the river, just like the description in 
Homer. There are other pictures, including a por- 
trait of Alcibiades, and in the picture are emblems 
of the victory his horses won at Nemea. There is 
also Perseus journeying to Seriphos, and carrying to . 
Polydectes the head of Medusa, the legend about 
whom I am unwilling to relate in my description of 
Attica. Included among the paintings—I omit the 
boy carrying the water-jars and the wrestler of 
Timaenetus!—is Musaeus. I have read verse in 
which Musaeus receives from the North Wind the 
gift of flight, but, in my opinion, Onomacritus wrote 
them, and there are no certainly genuine works of 
Musaeus except a hymn to Demeter written for the 
Lycomidae. 

Right at the very entrance to the Acropolis are a 

Hermes (called Hermes of the Gateway) and figures 
of Graces, which tradition says were sculptured by 
Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus, who the Pythia 
testified was the wisest of men, a title she refused to 
Anacharsis, although he desired it and came to Delphi 
to win it. XXIII. Among the sayings of the Greeks is 
one that there were seven wise men. Two of them 
were the despot of Lesbos and Periander the son of 
Cypselus. And yet Peisistratus and his son Hippias 
were more humane than Periander, wiser too in war- 
fare and in statecraft, until, on account of the murder 
of Hipparchus, Hippias vented his passion against 
all and sundry, including a woman named Leaena 
(Lioness). What I am about to say has never before 
been committed to writing, but is generally credited 

1 An unknown painter. 

II3 
VOL. 1. I 

em 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αθηναίων τοῖς πολλοῖς -- Ἱππίας εἶχεν ἐν αἰκίᾳ 
> / ε / 3 / 
ἐς ὃ διέφθειρεν, ola ἑταίραν ᾿Αριστογείτονσᾷ 
ἐπιστάμενος οὖσαν καὶ τὸ βούλευμα οὐδαμῶξ 
> a / 3 N \ / 9 \ 
ἀγνοῆσαι δοξάζων: ἀντὶ δὲ τούτων, ἐπεὶ τυραν- 
/ » ΄ e / 
νίδος ἐπαύθησαν οἱ Πεισιστρατίδαι, χαλκῆ 
λέαινα ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐστὶν ἐς μνήμην τῆς γυναικὸς, 
παρὰ δὲ αὐτὴν ἄγαλμα ᾿Αφροδίτης, ὃ Καλλίου 
τέ φασιν ἀνάθημα εἶναι καὶ ἔργον Καλάμιδος. 
Πλησίον δέ ἐστι Διιτρέφους χαλκοῦς ἀνδριὰς 
3 a / Φ ς ΄ 9 
ὀιστοῖς βεβλημένος. οὗτος ὁ Διιτρέφης ἄλλα 
τε ἔπραξεν ὁπόσα λέγουσιν ᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ Θρᾷκας 
μισθωτοὺς ἀφικομένους ὕστερον ἢ Δημοσθένης ἐς 
Συρακούσας ἐξέπλευσε, τούτους ὡς ὑστέρησαν 
ὁ gad αλα ἀπῆγεν ὀπίσω. καὶ δὴ κατὰ τὸν 
Χαλκιδικὸν ἔσχεν Εὔριπον, ἔνθα Βοιωτῶν ἐν 
μεσογαίᾳ πόλις Μυκαλησσὸς ἦν' ταύτην ἐπ- 
αναβὰς ἐκ θαλάσσης ὁ Διιτρέφης εἷλε. Mv- 
καλησσίων δὲ οὐ μόνον τὸ μάχιμον οἱ Θρᾷκες 
ἀλλὰ καὶ γυναῖκας ἐφόνευσαν καὶ παῖδας. μαρ- 
τυρεῖ δέ pot Βοιωτῶν γὰρ ὅσους ἀνέστησαν 
Θηβαῖοι, wxodvto αἱ πόλεις ἐπ᾿ ἐμοῦ, διαφυ- 
γόντων ὑπὸ τὴν ἅλωσιν τῶν ἀνθρώπων: εἰ δὲ 
\ / e 4 \ A 3 
καὶ Μυκαλησσίοις οἱ βάρβαροι μὴ πᾶσιν ἀπο- 
κτείναντες ἐπεξῆλθον, ὕστερον ἂν τὴν πόλιν 
ἀπέλαβον οἱ λειφθέντες. τοσοῦτον μὲν παρέστη 
μοι θαῦμα ἐς τὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ Διιτρέφους, ὅτι 
ὀιστοῖς ἐβέβλητο, "Ελλησιν ὅτι μὴ Κρησὶν οὐκ 
ἐπιχώριον ὂν τοξεύειν" Λοκροὺς γὰρ τοὺς Όπουν- 
τίους ὁπλιτεύοντας ἤδη κατὰ τὰ Μηδικὰ ἴσμεν, 
A. ο 5 / ο / / 
οὓς "Όμηρος ἐποίησεν ὡς φερόμενοι τόξα καὶ 
σφενδόνας ἐς Ἴλιον ἔλθοιεν' οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ Μαλιεῦσι 
παρέμεινε μελέτη τῶν τόξων, δοκῶ δὲ οὔτε πρό- 

114 

ATTICA, xxii. 2-4 

among the Athenians. When Hipparchus died, Hip- 
pias tortured Leaena to death, because he knew she 
was the mistress of Aristogeiton, and therefore could 
not possibly, he held, be in ignorance of the plot. 
As a recompense, when the tyranny of the Peisistra- 
tidae was at an end, the Athenians put up a bronze 
lioness in memory of the woman, which they say 
Callias dedicated and Calamis made. 

Hard by is a bronze statue of Diitrephes shot 
through by arrows. Among the acts reported of 
this Diitrephes by the Athenians is his leading back 
home the Thracian mercenaries who arrived too late 
to take part in the expedition of Demosthenes against 
Syracuse. He also put into the Chalcidice Euripus, 
where the Boeotians had an inland town Mycalessus, 
marched up to this town from the coast and took it. 
Of the inhabitants the Thracians put to the sword 
not only the combatants but also the women and 
children. I have evidence to bring. All the Boeo- 
tian towns which the Thebans sacked were inhabited 
in my time, as the people escaped just before the 
capture ; so if the foreigners had not exterminated 
the Mycalessians the survivors would have afterwards 
reoccupied the town. I was greatly surprised to see 
the statue of Diitrephes pierced with arrows, because 
the only Greeks whose custom it is to use that 
weapon are the Cretans. For the Opuntian Locrians, 
whom Homer represents as coming to Troy with bows 
and slings, we know were armed as heavy infantry by 
the time of the Persian wars. Neither indeed did the 
Malians continue the practice of the bow; in fact, I 

τις 
1 2 

418 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τερον ἐπίστασθαι σφᾶς πρὶν ἢ Φιλοκτήτην, 
παύσασθαί τε οὐ διὰ μακροῦ" τοῦ δὲ Δωτρέφους 
πλησίον---τὰς γὰρ εἰκόνας τὰς ἀφανεστέρας γρά- 
φειν οὐκ ἐθέλω---θεῶν ἀγάλματά ἐστιν Υγείας 
τε, ἣν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ παῖδα εἶναι λέγουσι, καὶ 
᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐπίκλησιν καὶ ταύτης Ὑγείας. ἔστι 
δὲ λίθος οὐ μέγας, ἀλλ. ὅσον καθίξεσθαι μικρὸν 
ἄνδρα: ἐπὶ τούτῳ λέγουσιν, ἡνίκα Διόνυσος ἦλθεν 
ἐς τὴν γῆν, ἀναπαύσασθαι τὸν Σιληνόν. τοὺς 
γὰρ ἡλικίᾳ τῶν Σατύρων προήκοντας ὀνομάξουσι 
Σιληνούς περὶ δὲ Σατύρων, οἵτινές εἰσιν, ἑτέρου 
πλέον ἐθέλων ἐπίστασθαι πολλοῖς αὐτῶν τούτων 
ἕνεκα ἐς λόγους ἦλθον. ἔφη δὲ Εὔφημος Κὰρ 
ἀνὴρ πλέων ἐς Ἰταλίαν ἁμαρτεῖν ὑπὸ ἀνέμων 
τοῦ πλοῦ καὶ ἐς τὴν ἔξω θάλασσαν, ἐ ἐς ἣν οὐκέτι 
πλέουσιν, ἐξενεχθῆναι. νήσους δὲ εἶναι .μὲν 
ἔλεγεν ἐρήμους πολλάς, ἐν δὲ ἄλλαις οἰκεῖν 
ἄν ρας ἀγρίους" ταύταις δὲ οὐκ ἐθέλειν νήσοις 
προσίσχειν τοὺς ναύτας οἷα πρότερόν τε προσ- 
σχόντας καὶ τῶν ἐνοικούντων οὐκ ἀπείρως 
ἔχοντας, βιασθῆναι δ᾽ οὖν καὶ τότε. ταύτας 
καλεῖσθαι μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ναυτῶν Σατυρίδας, εἶναι 
δὲ τοὺς ἐνοικοῦντας ᾿καπυροὺς καὶ ἵππων͵ οὐ πολὺ 
μείους ἔχειν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἰσχίοις οὐράς. τούτους, ὡς 
ἤσθοντο, καταδραμόντας ἐπὶ τὴν ναῦν φωνὴν μὲν 
οὐδεμίαν ἑέναι, ταῖς δὲ γυναιξὶν ἐπιχειρεῖν ταῖς 
ἐν τῇ νηΐ" τέλος δὲ δείσαντας τοὺς ναύτας Bap- 
βαρον γυναῖκα ἐκβαλεῖν ἐ ἐς τὴν νῆσον' ἐς ταύτην 
οὖν ὑβρίξειν τοὺς Σατύρους od μόνον ᾗ καθέ- 
στηκεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ πᾶν ὁμοίως σῶμα. 

Καὶ ἄλλα ἐν τῇ ᾿Αθηναίων ἀκροπόλει θεασά- 
μενος οἶδα, Λυκίου τοῦ Μύρωνος χαλκοῦν παῖδα, 
116 

| O N 

ATTICA, xxm. 4-7 

believe that they did not know it before the time of 
Philoctetes, and gave it up soon after. Near the 
statue of Diitrephes—I do not wish to write of the 
less distinguished portraits—are figures of gods; of 
Health, whom legend calls daughter of Asclepius, and 
of Athena, also surnamed Health. There is also a 
smallish stone, just large enough to serve as a seat to 
a little man. On it legend says Silenus rested when 
Dionysus came to the land. The oldest of the Satyrs 
they call Sileni. Wishing to know better than most 
people who the Satyrs are I have inquired from many 
about this very point. Euphemus the Carian said that 
on a voyage to Italy he was driven out of his course by 
winds and was carried into the outer sea, beyond the 
course of seamen. He affirmed that there were many 
uninhabited islands, while in others lived wild men. 
The sailors did not wish to put in at the latter, 
because, having put in before, they had some experi- 
ence of the inhabitants, but on this occasion they had 
no choice in the matter. The islands were called 
Satyrides by the sailors, and the inhabitants were 
red haired, and had upon their flanks tails not much 
smaller than those of horses. As soon as they caught 
sight of their visitors, they ran down to the ship with- 
out uttering a cry and assaulted the women in the 
ship. At last the sailors in fear cast a foreign woman 
on to the island. Her the Satyrs outraged not only 
in the usual way, but also in a most shocking manner. 
I remember looking at other things also on the 
Athenian Acropolis, a bronze boy holding the 

117: 

10 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὃς τὸ περιρραντήριον ἔχει, καὶ Μύρωνος Περσέα 
τὸ ἐς Μέδουσαν ἔργον εἰργασμένον. καὶ Aprét 
μιδος ἱερόν ἐστι Βραυρωνίας, Πραξιτέλους μὲν 
τέχνη τὸ ἄγαλμα, τῇ θεῷ δέ ἐστιν ἀπὸ Βραυρῶνος 
δήμου τὸ ὄνομα: καὶ τὸ ἀρχαῖον ξόανόν ἐστιν ὃν 
Βραυρῶνι, "Αρτεμις ὡς λέγουσιν ἡ Ταυρική 
ἵππος δὲ ὁ καλούμενος Δούριος ἀνάκειται χαλ- 
κοῦς. καὶ ὅτι μὲν τὸ ποίημα τὸ ᾿Επειοῦ pr- 
χάνηµα ἣν ἐς διάλυσιν τοῦ τείχους, οἶδεν ὅστις 
μὴ πᾶσαν ἐπιφέρει τοῖς Φρυξὶν εὐήθειαν: λέγεται 
δὲ ἔς τε ἐκεῖνον τὸν ἵππον ὡς τῶν Ελλήνων ἔνδον 
ἔχοι τοὺς ἀρίστους, καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦ χαλκοῦ τὸ 
σχῆμά ἐστι κατὰ ταῦτα καὶ Μενεσθεὺς καὶ 
Τεῦκρος ὑπερκύπτουσιν ἐξ αὐτοῦ, προσέτι δὲ καὶ 
οἱ παῖδες οἱ Θησέως. ἀνδριάντων δὲ ὅσοι μετὰ 
τὸν ἵππον ἑστήκασιν ᾿Επιχαρίνου μὲν ὁπλιτο- 
δρομεῖν ἀσκήσαντος τὴν εἰκόνα ἐποίησε Κριτίας, 
Οἰνοβίῳ δὲ ἔργον ἐστὶν ἐς Θουκυδύδην τὸν Ὀλόρου 
χρηστόν: ψήφισμα γὰρ ἐνίκησεν Οἰνόβιος κατελ- 
θεῖν ἐς ᾿Αθήνας (Θουκυδίδην, καί οἱ δολοφονηθέντι 
ὡς κατῄει μνῆμά ἐστιν οὐ πόρρω πυλῶν Memri- 
δων. τὰ δὲ ἐς Ἑρμόλυκον τὸν παγκρατιαστὴν 
καὶ Φορμίωνα τὸν Ασωπίχου Lard Saag hod ἑτέρων 
παρίημι" ἐς δὲ, Φορμίωνα τοσόν ε ἔχω πλέον 
γράψαι. Φορμίωνι γὰρ. τοῖς ἐπιεικέσιν Αθη- 
ναίων ὄντι ὁμοίῳ καὶ ἐς προγόνων δόξαν οὐκ 
ἀφανεῖ συνέβαινεν ὀφείλειν χρέα" ἀναχωρήσας 
οὖν ἐς τὸν Παιανιέα δῆμον ἐνταῦθα εἶχε δίαιταν, 
ἐς ὃ ναύαρχον αὐτὸν ᾿Αθηναίων αἱρουμένων ἐκ- 
πλεύσεσθαι! οὐκ ἔφασκεν: ὀφείλειν τε γὰρ καί οἱ, 

1 ἐκπλεῦσαι, emended by Herwerden. 

118 

ATTICA, αχ, 7-10 

sprinkler, by Lycius son οἵ Myron, and Myron’s 
Perseus after beheading Medusa. There is also a 
sanctuary of Brauronian Artemis; the image is the 
work of Praxiteles, but the goddess derives her name 
from the parish of Brauron. The old wooden image 
is in Brauron, the Tauric Artemis as she is called. 
There is the horse called Wooden set up in bronze. 
That the work of Epeius was a contrivance to make 
a breach in the Trojan wall is known to everybody 
who does not attribute utter silliness to the Phrygians. 
But legend says of that horse that it contained the 
most valiant of the Greeks, and the design of the 
bronze figure fits in well with this story. Menestheus 
and Teucer are peeping out of it, and so are the sons 
of Theseus. Of the statues that stand after the 
horse, the likeness of Epicharinus who practised the 
race in armour was made by Critius, while Oenobius 
performed a kind service for Thucydides the son of 
Olorus.? He succeeded in getting a decree passed 
for the return of Thucydides to Athens, who was 
treacherously murdered as he was returning, and 
there is a monument to him not far from the Melitid 
gate. The stories of Hermolycus the pancratiast 
and Phormio? the son of Asopichus I omit, as others 
have told them. About Phormio, however, I have a 
detail to add. Quite one of the best men at Athens 
and distinguished for the fame of his ancestors he 
chanced to be heavily in debt. So he withdrew 
to the parish Paeania and lived there until the 
Athenians elected him to command a naval ex- 
pedition. But he refused the office on the ground 

1 The great historian of the Peloponnesian war. 
ΣΑ famous Athenian admiral who served during the first 
period of the Peloponnesian war. 

119 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πρὶν ἂν ἐκτίση, πρὸς τοὺς στρατιώτας οὐκ εἶναι 
παρέχεσθαι φρόνημα. οὕτως ᾿Αθηναῖοι-- πάντως 

ε / 
γὰρ ἐβούλοντο ἄρχειν Φορμίωνα-- τὰ χρέα ὁπό- 
σοις ὤφειλε διαλύουσιν. 

XXIV. ᾿Ενταῦθα ᾿Αθηνᾶ πεποίηται τὸν Σίλη- 
νὸν Μαρσύαν παίουσα, ὅτι δὴ τοὺς αὐλοὺς 
> 7 5 A A A A / 
ἀνέλοιτο, ἐρρῖφθαι σφᾶς τῆς θεοῦ βουλομένης. 
-- τούτων πέραν, ὧν εἴρηκα, ἐστὶν ἡ λεγομένη 

A / 

Θησέως μάχη πρὸς τὸν ταῦρον τὸν Μίνω καλού- 
ε A 

μενον, εἴτε ἀνὴρ εἴτε θηρίον ἦν ὁποῖον κεκράτηκεν 

ὁ λόγος: τέρατα γὰρ πολλῷ καὶ τοῦδε θαυ- 

μασιώτερα καὶ καθ ἡμᾶς ἔτικτον γυναῖκες. 

a / e 9 / z 
κεῖται δὲ καὶ Φρίξος o ᾿Αθάμαντος ἐξενηνεγμένος 
ἐς Κόλχους ὑπὸ τοῦ κριοῦ" θύσας δὲ αὐτὸν ὅτῳ 
δὴ θεῷ, ὡς δὲ εἰκάσαι τῷ Λαφυστίῳ καλουμένῳ 
παρὰ Ὀρχομενίοις, τοὺς μηροὺς κατὰ νόμον ἐκ- 
τεμὼν τὸν Ἑλλήνων ἐς αὐτοὺς καιομένους ὁρᾶ. 

A Chen y > / ε / 
κεῖνται δὲ ἑξῆς ἄλλαι τε εἰκόνες καὶ Ἡρακλέους' 
ἄγχει δέ, ὡς λόγος ἔχει, τοὺς δράκοντας. ᾿Αθηνᾶ 
τέ ἐστιν ἀνιοῦσα ἐκ τῆς κεφαλῆς τοῦ Διός. ἔστι 
δὲ καὶ ταῦρος ἀνάθημα τῆς βουλῆς τῆς ἐν ees 

4 27) of \ > / ` e 2 
πάγῳ, ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ δὴ ἀνέθηκεν ἡ βουλή. πολλὰ 
y 37 » / I 4 / 
ἂν τις ἐθέλων εἰκάζοι. λέλεκται δέ μοι καὶ πρό- 
τερον ὡς ᾿Αθηναίοις περισσότερόν τι ἢ τοῖς 
ἄλλοις ἐς τὰ θεῖά ἐστι σπουδῆς: πρῶτοι μὲν γὰρ 
᾿Αθηνᾶν ἐπωνόμασαν ᾿Εργάνην, πρῶτοι δ᾽ ἀκώ- 

ε A A A 
λους ᾿Ερμᾶς ἀνέθεσαν, ὁμοῦ δέ σφισιν ἐν τ 
ναῷ σπουδαίων! δαίμων ἐστίν. ὅστις δὲ τὰ 
σὺν τέχνῃ πεποιημένα ἐπίπροσθε τίθεται τῶν ἐς 
ἀρχαιότητα ἡκόντων, καὶ τάδε ἔστιν οἱ θεάσα- 
σθαι. κράνος ἐστὶν ἐπικείμενος ἀνὴρ Κλεοίτου, 

1 The text here is almost certainly corrupt. 
120 

ATTICA, xxin. 1ο-χχιν. 3 

that before his debts were discharged he lacked the 
spirit to face his troops. So the Athenians, who 
were absolutely determined to have Phormio as their 
commander, paid all his creditors. 

XXIV. In this place is a statue of Athena striking 
Marsyas the Silenus for taking up the flutes that 
fhe goddess wished to be cast away for good. Op- 
posite these I have mentioned is represented the 
fight which legend says Theseus fought with the 
so-called Bull of Minos, whether this was a man or a 
beast of the nature he is said to have been in the 

accepted story. For even in our time women have 
given birth to far more extraordinary monsters than.___ 

this. There is also a statue of Phrixus the son of 
Athamas carried ashore to the Colchians by the ram. 
Having sacrificed the animal to some god or other, 
presumably to the one called by the Orchomenians 
Laphystius, he has cut out the thighs in accordance 
with Greek custom and is watching them as they burn. 
Next come other statues, including one of Heracles 
strangling the serpents as the legend describes. 
There is Athena too coming up out of the head of 
Zeus, and also a bull dedicated by the Council of the 
Areopagus on some occasion or other, about which, 
if one cared, one could make many conjectures. 1 
have already stated that the Athenians are far more 
devoted to religion than other men. They were 
the first to surname Athena Ergane (Worker); they 
were the first to set up limbless Hermae, and the 
temple of their goddess is shared by the Spirit of 
Good men. Those who prefer artistic workmanship 
to mere antiquity may look at the following: a man 

wearing a helmet, by Cleoetas, whose nails the artist 

121 

--- 

7 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

͵ e ` ” 2 A 3 / e / 
καί οἱ τοὺς ὄνυχας ἀργυροῦς ἐνεποίησεν ὁ Κλεοί- | 
A e 
τας" ἔστι δὲ καὶ Γῆς ἄγαλμα ἱκετευούσης ὑσαί οἱ 
\ / Y > A y A > / 
τὸν Δία, εἴτε αὐτοῖς ὄμβρου δεῆσαν ᾿ Αθηναίοις 
εἴτε καὶ τοῖς πᾶσιν Ἓλλησι συμβὰς αὐχμός. 
A e a 
ἐνταῦθα καὶ Τιμόθεος ὁ Κόνωνος καὶ αὐτὸς κεῖται 
Κόνων" Πρόκνην δὲ τὰ ἐς τὸν παῖδα βεβουλευ- 
/ » / . «. ν > 2 3 - 2 
μένην αὐτήν τε καὶ τὸν Ἴτυν ἀνέθηκεν Αλκαμένης. 
/ \ \ bY \ A / 2 A \ 
πεποίηται δὲ καὶ τὸ φυτὸν τῆς ἐλαίας Αθηνᾶ καὶ 
4 κῦμα ἀναφαίνων Ποσειδῶν: καὶ Διός ἐστιν 
ε 3 
ἄγαλμα τὸ τε Λεωχάρους καὶ ὁ ὀνομαζόμενος 
Πολιεύς, ᾧ τὰ καθεστηκότα ἐς τὴν θυσίαν γρά- 
. > 9 2 A > 2 9 / 
φων τὴν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς λεγομένην αἰτίαν οὐ γράφω. 
a \ A / / 2 μὶ 
τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Πολιέως κριθὰς καταθέντες ἐπὶ τὸν 
A ΄ 
βωμὸν μεμιγμένας πυροῖς οὐδεμίαν ἔχουσι φυλα- 
ε A 
κήν' ὁ βοῦς δέ, ὃν ἐς τὴν θυσίαν ἑτοιμάσαν”ες 
φυλάσσουσιν, ἅπτεται τῶν σπερμάτων φοιτῶν 
ἐπὶ τὸν βωμόν. καλοῦσι δέ τινα τῶν ἱερέων 
βουφόνον, ὃς κτείνας τὸν βοῦν καὶ ταύτῃ τὸν 
ε ΄ 
πέλεκυν ῥίψας-- οὕτω γάρ ἐστίν οἱ νόµος---οἴχεται 
φεύγων" οἱ δὲ ἅτε τὸν ἄνδρα ὃς ἔδρασε τὸ ἔργον 
οὐκ εἰδότες, ἐς δίκην ὑπάγουσι τὸν πέλεκυν. 
Ταῦτα μὲν τρόπον τὸν εἰρημένον δρῶσιν" ἐς δὲ 
5 τὸν ναὸν ὃν Ἡαρθενῶνα ὀνομάζουσιν, ἐς τοῦτον 
A e / a A A 
ἐσιοῦσιν ὁπόσα ἐν τοῖς καλουμένοις ἀετοῖς κεῖται, 
/ > AS ? A y , N y 
πάντα ἐς τὴν Αθηνᾶς ἔχει γένεσιν, τὰ δὲ ὄπισθεν | 
ἡ Ποσειδῶνος πρὸς ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἐστιν ἔρις ὑπὲρ τῆς 
A . 
γῆς: αὐτὸ δὲ ἔκ τε ἐλέφαντος τὸ ἄγαλμα καὶ | 
A ΄ 
χρυσοῦ πεποίηται. μέσῳ μὲν οὖν ἐπίκειταί οἱ 
A 4 ~ > , - » \ 4 
τῷ κράνει Σφιγγὸς εἰκών-- ἃ δὲ ἐς τὴν Σφίγγα 
/ 
λέγεται, γράψω προελθόντος ἐς τὰ Βοιώτιά pot 
A / ° A A 
τοῦ λόγου---, καθ᾽ ἑκάτερον δὲ τοῦ κράνους γρῦ- κ 

122 

Ευ. . 

ATTICA, xxiv. 3-5 

has made of silver, and an image of Earth beseeching 
Zeus to rain upon her; perhaps the Athenians them- 
selves needed showers, or may be all the Greeks had 
been plagued with a drought. There also are set up 
Timotheus the son of Conon and Conon himself ; 
Procne too, who has already made up her mind about 
the boy, and Itys as well—a group dedicated by Alca- 
_menes. Athena is represented displaying the olive 
plant, and Poseidon the wave, and there are statues of 
Zeus, one made by Leochares ! and one called Polieus 
(Urban), the customary mode of sacrificing to whom I 
will give without adding the traditional reason thereof. 
Upon the altar of Zeus Polieus they place barley mixed 
with wheat and leave it unguarded. The ox, which 
they keep already prepared for sacrifice, goes to the 
altar and partakes of the grain. One of the priests 
they call the ox-slayer, who kills the ox and then, 
casting aside the axe here according to the ritual, 
runs away. The others bring the axe to trial, as 
though they know not the man who did the deed. 
Their ritual, then, is such as I have described. As 
you enter the temple that they name the Parthenon, 
all the sculptures you see on what is called the 
pediment refer to the birth of Athena, those on the 
rear pediment represent the contest for the land 
between Athena and Poseidon. The statue itself is 
made of ivory and gold. On the middle of her 
helmet is placed a likeness of the Sphinx—the tale 
of the Sphinx I will give when I come to my descrip- 
tion of Boeotia—and on either side of the helmet 
1 See p. 5. 
123 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

6 πές εἶσιν ἐπειργασμένοι. τούτους τοὺς γρῦπας 
ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσιν ᾿Αριστέας ὁ Προκοννήσιος μάχε- 
σθαι περὶ τοῦ χρυσοῦ φησιν ᾿Αριμασποῖς τοῖς 
ὑπὲρ ᾿Ισσηδόνων' τὸν δὲ χρυσόν, ὃν φυλάσ- 
σουσιν οἱ γρῦπες, ἀνιέναι τὴν γῆν: εἶναι δὲ 
᾿Αριμασποὺς μὲν ἄνδρας µονοφθάλµους πάντας 
ἐκ γενετῆς, γρῦπας δὲ θηρία λέουσιν εἰκασμένα, 
πτερὰ δὲ ἔχειν καὶ στόμα ἀετοῦ. καὶ γρυπῶν 

7 μὲν πέρι τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω" τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα τῆς 
᾿Αθηνᾶς ὀρθόν ἐστιν ἐν χιτῶνι ποδήρει καί οἱ 
κατὰ τὸ στέρνον ἡ κεφαλὴ Μεδούσης ἐλέφαντος 
ἐστιν ἐμπεποιημένη: καὶ Νίκην τε ὅσον τεσσάρων 
πηχῶν, ἐν δὲ τῇ ἑτέρᾳ χειρὶ 1 δόρυ ἔχει, καὶ οἱ 
πρὸς τοῖς ποσὶν ἀσπίς τε κεῖται καὶ πλησίον τοῦ 
δόρατος δράκων ἐστίν' εἴη δ᾽ ἂν ᾿Εριχθόνιος οὗτος 
ὁ δράκων. ἔστι δὲ τῷ βάθρῳ τοῦ ἀγάλματος 
ἐπειργασμένη Πανδώρας γένεσις. πεποίηται δὲ 
Ἡσιόδῳ τε καὶ ἄλλοις ὡς ἡ Πανδώρα γένοιτο 
αὕτη γυνὴ πρώτη: πρὶν δὲ ἢ γενέσθαι Πανδώραν 
οὐκ ἦν πω γυναικῶν γένος. ἐνταῦθα εἰκόνα ἰδὼν 
οἶδα ᾿Αδριανοῦ βασιλέως μόνου, καὶ κατὰ τὴν 
ἔσοδον Ἰφικράτους ἀποδειξαμένου πολλά τε καὶ 
θαυμαστὰ ἔργα. 

= 8 —~—Tod ναοῦ δέ ἐστι πέραν ᾿Απόλλων χαλκοῦς, 
καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα λέγουσι Φειδίαν ποιῆσαι: Παρ: 
νόπιον δὲ καλοῦσιν, ὅτι σφίσι παρνόπων βλα- 
πτόντων τὴν γῆν ἀποτρέψειν ὁ θεὸς εἶπεν ἐκ τῆς 
χώρας. καὶ ὅτι μὲν ἀπέτρεψεν ἴσασι, τρόπῳ δὲ 
οὐ λέγουσι ποίῳ. τρὶς δὲ αὐτὸς ἤδη πάρνοπας ἐκ 
Σιπύλου τοῦ ὄρους οὐ κατὰ ταὐτὰ οἶδα φθαρέντας, 
ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ἐξέωσε βίαιος ἐμπεσὼν ἄνεμος, 

1 τῇ ἑτέρᾳ χειρὶ Walz. 

124 

ATTICA, xxiv. 5-8 

are griffins in relief. These griffins, Aristeas! of Pro- 
connesus says in his poem, fight for the gold with the 
Arimaspi beyond the Issedones. The gold which 
the griffins guard, he says, comes out of the earth; 
the Arimaspi are men all born with one eye; griffins 
are beasts like lions, but with the beak and wings 
of an eagle. I will say no more about the griffins. 
The statue of Athena is upright, with a tunic reach- 
ing to the feet, and on her breast the head of 
Medusa is worked in ivory. She holds a statue of 
Victory about four cubits high, and in the other hand a 
spear; at her feet lies a shield and near the spear is 
a serpent.. This serpent would be Erichthonius. 
On the pedestal is the birth of Pandora in relief. 
Hesiod and others have sung how this Pandora was 
the first woman; before Pandora was born there 
was as yet no womankind. The only portrait statue 
I remember seeing here is one of the emperor 
Hadrian, and at the entrance one of Iphicrates,? who 
accomplished many remarkable achievements. 
Opposite the temple is a bronze Apollo, said to be 
the work of Pheidias. They call it the Locust God, 
because once when locusts were devastating the 
land the god said that he would drive them from 
Attica. That he did drive them away they know, 
but they do not say how. I myself know that 
locusts have been destroyed three times in the past 
on Mount Sipylus, and not in the same way. Once 
a gale arose and swept them away ; on another occa- 

1 An early Greek traveller and writer. 
2 A famous Athenian soldier. fl. 390 B.c. 

125 

ο» 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοὺς δὲ ὕσαντος τοῦ θεοῦ καῦμα ἰσχυρὸν καθεῖλεν 
> / e / es ον / 
ἐπιλαβόν, οἱ δὲ αἰφνιδίῳ ῥίγει καταληφθέντες 
ἀπώλοντο. 

XXV. Τοιαῦτα μὲν αὐτοῖς συμβαίνοντα εἶδον: 
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῇ ᾿Αθηναίων ἀκροπόλει καὶ Περικλῆς 
ὁ Ἐανθίππου καὶ αὐτὸς Ἐλάνθιππος, ὃς ἐναυ- 
μάχησεν ἐπὶ Μυκάλῃ Μήδοις. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν Περι- 
κλέους ἀνδριὰς ἑτέρωθι ἀνάκειται, τοῦ δὲ Ἐανθίπ- 
που πλησίον ἕστηκεν ᾿Ανακρέων ὁ Τήιος, πρῶτος 
μετὰ Σαπφὼ τὴν Λεσβίαν τὰ πολλὰ ὧν ἔγραψεν 
ἐρωτικὰ ποιήσας: καί οἱ τὸ σχῆμά ἐστιν οἷον 
ἆδοντος ἂν ἐν μέθῃ γένοιτο ἀνθρώπου. γυναῖκας 

è πλησίον Δεινομένης Ἰὼ τὴν ᾿Ινάχου καὶ 
Καλλιστὼ τὴν Λυκάονος πεποίηκεν, αἷς ἀμφο- 
τέραις ἐστὶν ἐς ἅπαν ὅμοια διηγήματα ἔρως Διὸς 
καὶ Ἤρας ὀργὴ καὶ ἀλλαγὴ τῇ μὲν ἐς βοῦν, 

᾿Καλλιστοῖ δὲ ἐς ἄρκτον. 

Πρὸς δὲ τῷ τείχει τῷ Νοτίῳ γιγάντων, οἳ περὶ 
A 

Θράκην ποτὲ καὶ τὸν ἰσθμὸν τῆς Παλλήνης 
ὤκησαν, τούτων τὸν λεγόμενον πόλεμον καὶ 
μάχην πρὸς ᾽Αμαξόνας ᾿Αθηναίων καὶ τὸ Μαρα- 
θῶνι πρὸς Μήδους ἔργον καὶ Γαλατῶν τὴν ἐν 
Μυσίᾳ φθορὰν ἀνέθηκεν "Ατταλος, ὅσον τε δύο 
πηχῶν ἕκαστον. ἕστηκε δὲ καὶ Ὀλυμπιόδωρος, 
μεγέθει τε ὧν ἔπραξε λαβὼν δόξαν καὶ οὐχ 
ἥκιστα τῷ καιρῷ, φρόνημα ἐν ἀνθρώποις παρα- 
σχόμενος συνεχῶς ἑπταικόσι καὶ δι αὐτὸ οὐδὲ ὃν 
χρηστὸν οὐδὲ ἐς τὰ μέλλοντα ἐλπίξουσι. τὸ γὰρ 
ἀτύχημα τὸ ἐν Χαιρωνείᾳ ἅπασι τοῖς "Ελλησιν 
ἦρξε κακοῦ καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα δούλους ἐποίησε τοὺς 
ὑπεριδόντας καὶ ὅσοι μετὰ Μακεδόνων ἐτάχθη- 

126 

ATTICA, xxiv. 8-xxv. 3 

sion violent heat came on after rain and destroyed 
them; the third time sudden cold caught them and 
they died. 

XXV. Such were the fates I saw befall the locusts. 
On the Athenian Acropolis is a statue of Pericles, 
the son of Xanthippus, and one of Xanthippus him- 
self, who fought against the Persians at the naval 
battle of Mycale. But that of Pericles stands apart, 
while near Xanthippus stands Anacreon of Teos, the 
first poet after Sappho of Lesbos to devote himself 
to love songs, and his posture is as it were that 
of a man singing when he is drunk. Deinomenes 
made the two female figures which stand near, Io, 
the daughter of Inachus, and Callisto, the daughter 
of Lycaon, of both of whom exactly the same story 
is told, to wit, love of Zeus, wrath of Hera, and 
ορια Io becoming a cow and Callisto a 

r. 

By the south wall are represented the legendary 
war with the giants, who once dwelt about Thrace 
and on the isthmus of Pallene, the battle between 
the Athenians and the Amazons, the engagement 
with the Persians at Marathon and the destruction 
of the Gauls in Mysia.! Each is about two cubits, 
and all were dedicated by Attalus. There stands too 
Plympiodorus;)|who won fame for the greatness of 
is aciiievements, especially in the crisis when he 
displayed a brave confidence among men who had 
met with continuous reverses, and were therefore in 
despair of winning a single success in the days to 
come. For the disaster at Chaeronea was the begin- 
ning of misfortune for all the Greeks, and especially 
did it enslave those who had been blind to the 

1 See p. 98. — 
127 

479 B.C. 

888 B.C. 

σι 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

σαν. τὰς μὲν δὴ πολλὰς Φίλιππος τῶν πόλει 
εἷλεν, ᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ λόγῳ συνθέµενος ἔργῳ opi 
μάλιστα ἐκάκωσε, νήσους τε ἀφελόμενος καὶ τῇ 
ἐς τὰ ναυτικὰ παύσας ἀρχῆς. καὶ χρόνον 
τινα ἡσύχασαν ᾿Αθηναῖοι Φιλίππου βασιλεύο 
καὶ ὕστερον ᾿Αλεξάνδρου: τελευτήσαντος δὲ 
᾿Αλεξάνδρου Μακεδόνες μὲν βασιλεύειν εἴλοντ 
᾿Αριδαῖον, ᾽Αντιπάτρῳ δὲ ἐπετέτραπτο ἡ πᾶσα 
ἀρχή, καὶ ᾿Αθηναίοις οὐκέτι ἀνεκτὰ ἐφαίνετο en 
τὸν πάντα χρόνον ἔσται ἐπὶ Μακεδόσι τὸ Er- $ 
ληνικόν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοί τε πολεμεῖν ὥρμηντο καὶ 
ἄλλους ἐς τὸ ἔργον ἤγειρον. ἐγένοντο δὲ αἱ 
μετασχοῦσαι πόλεις Πελοποννησίων μὲν "Αργος 
᾿Επίδαυρος Σικυὼν Τροιξὴν Ἠλεῖοι Φλιάσιοι 
Μεσσήνη, οἱ δὲ ἔξω τοῦ Κορινθίων ἰσθμοῦ Λοκροὶ 
Φωκεῖς Θεσσαλοὶ Κάρυστος ᾿Ακαρνᾶνες ἐς τὸ 
Αἰτωλικὸν συντελοῦντεςα: Βοιωτοὶ δὲ Θηβαίων 
ἠρημωμένην τὴν γῆν τὴν Θηβαΐδα νεμόμενοι δέει 
μὴ Θήβας αὖθις ᾿Αθηναῖοί σφισιν ἐποικίξωσιν 
οὔτε ἐς τὴν συμμαχίαν ἐτάσσοντο καὶ ἐς ὅσον 
ἧκον δυνάμεως τὰ Μακεδόνων ηὖξον. τοὺς δὲ ἐς 
τὸ συμμαχικὸν ταχθέντας κατὰ πόλεις τε ἑκά- 
στους ἦγον στρατηγοὶ καὶ τοῦ παντὸς ἄρχειν 
ἤρητο ᾿Αθηναῖος Λεωσθένης πόλεώς τε ἀξιώματι 
καὶ αὐτὸς εἶναι δοκῶν πολέμων ἔμπειρος. ὑπῆρχε 
δέ οἱ καὶ πρὸς πάντας εὐεργεσία τοὺς " Ελληνας' 
ὁπόσοι γὰρ μισθοῦ παρὰ Δαρείῳ καὶ σατράπαις 
ἐστρατεύοντο "Ελληνες, ἀνοικίσαι σφᾶς ἐς τὴν 
Περσίδα θελήσαντος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου Λεωσθένης 
128 

ATTICA, xxv. 3-5 

danger and such as had sided with Macedon. Most of 
their cities Philip captured ; with Athens he nomin- 
ally came to terms, but really imposed the severest 
penalties upon her, taking away the islands and put- 
ting an end to her maritime empire. For a time the 
Athenians remained passive, during the reign of 
Philip and subsequently of Alexander. But when 
on the death of Alexander the Macedonians chose 
Aridaeus to be their king, though the whole empire 
had been entrusted to Antipater, the Athenians now 
thought it intolerable if Greece should be for ever 
under the Macedonians, and themselves embarked 
on war besides inciting others to join them. The 
cities that took part were, of the Peloponnesians, 
Argos, Epidaurus, Sicyon, Troezen, the Eleans, the 
Phliasians, Messene; on the other side of the Co- 
rinthian isthmus the Locrians, the Phocians, the 
Thessalians, Carystus, the Acarnanians belonging to 
the Aetolian League. The Boeotians, who occupied 
the Thebaid territory now that there were no 
Thebans left to dwell there, in fear lest the Athen- 
ians should injure them by founding a settlement on 
the site of Thebes, refused to join the alliance and 
lent all their forces to furthering the Macedonian 
cause. Each city ranged under the alliance had its 
own general, but as commander-in-chief was chosen 
the Athenian Leosthenes, both because of the fame of 
his city and also because he had the reputation of 
being an experienced soldier. He had already proved 
himself a general benefactor of Greece. All the 
Greeks that were serving as mercenaries in the armies 
of Darius and his satraps Alexander had wished to 
deport to Persia, but Leosthenes was too quick for 

129 
VOL, 1. K 

æ -- 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔφθη κομίσας ναυσὶν ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην. καὶ ἡ 
καὶ τότε ὧν ἐς αὐτὸν ἤλπισαν ἔργα λαμπῇ 
tepa ἐπιδειξάμενος παρέσχεν ἀποθανὼν ἀθυμῆθ 
πᾶσι καὶ δι αὐτὸ οὐχ ἥκιστα σφαλῆναι: ppo 
τε Μακεδόνων ἐσῆλθεν ᾿Αθηναίοις, où Μουνυχίᾶ 
ὕστερον δὲ καὶ Πειραιᾶ καὶ τείχη μακρὰ ἔσχῇ 
᾿;Αντιπάτρου δὲ ἀποθανόντος Ὀλυμπιὰς διαβᾶᾶ 
ἐξ Ἠπείρου χρόνον μέν τινα ἦρξεν ἁποκτείνασ 
᾿Αριδαῖον, οὐ πολλῷ δὲ ὕστερον ἐκπολιορκηθεῖα 
ὑπὸ Κασσάνδρου παρεδόθη τῷ πλήθει. Κάσσαϊ 
δρος δὲ βασιλεύσας---τὰ δὲ ἐς ᾿Αθηναίους ἐπέξ 
εισί μοι μόνα ὁ λόγος--Πάνακτον τεῖχος ἐν TH 
᾿Αττικῇ καὶ Σαλαμῖνα εἷλε τύραννόν τε ᾿Αθηναί- 
ows ἔπραξε γενέσθαι Δημήτριον τὸν Φανοστρὰ- 
του, δόξαν εἰληφότα ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ. τοῦτον μὲν 

τυραννίδος ἔπαυσε Δημήτριος ὁ ᾿Αντιγόνου, νέος 
τε ὢν καὶ φιλοτίμως πρὸς τὸ ᾿Ελληνικὸν δια- 
κείμενος: Κάσσανδρος δὲ---δεινὸν γάρ τι ὑπῆν 
οἱ μῖσος ἐς τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους---, ὁ δὲ αὖθις Aa- 
χάρην προεστηκότα ἐς ἐκεῖνο τοῦ δήμου, τοῦτον 
τὸν ἄνδρα οἰκειωσάμενος τυραννίδα ἔπεισε Bov- 
λεῦσαι, τυράννων ὧν ἴσμεν τά τε ἐς ἀνθρώπους 
μάλιστα ἀνήμερον καὶ ἐς τὸ θεῖον ἀφειδέστατον. 
Δημητρίῳ δὲ τῷ ᾿Αντιγόνου διαφορὰ μὲν ἦν ἐς 
τὸν δῆμον ἤδη τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων, καθεῖλε δὲ ὅμως 
καὶ τὴν Λαχάρους τυραννίδα" ἁλισκομένου δὲ τοῦ 
τείχους ἐκϑιδράσκει Λαχάρης ἐς Βοιωτούς, ἅτε 
δὲ ἀσπίδας ἐξ ἀκροπόλεως καθελὼν χρυσᾶς καὶ 
αὐτὸ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς τὸ ἄγαλμα τὸν περιαιρετὸν 
ἀποδύσας κόσμον ὑπωπτεύετο εὐπορεῖν μεγάλως 
χρημάτων. Λαχάρην μὲν οὖν τούτων ἕνεκα 

130 

ATTICA, xxv. 5-8 

him, and brought them by sea to Europe. On this 
occasion too his brilliant actions surpassed expectation, 
and his death produced a general despair which was 
chiefly responsible for the defeat. A Macedonian 
garrison was set over the Athenians, and occupied first 
Manychia and afterwards Peiraeus also and the Long 
Walls. On the death of Antipater,Olympias came over 
from Epeirus, killed Aridaeus, and for a time occupied 
the throne; but shortly afterwards she was besieged 
by Cassander, taken and delivered up to the people. 
Of the acts of Cassander when he came to the throne 
my narrative will deal only with such as concern the 
Athenians. He seized the fort of Panactum in Attica 
and also Salamis, and established as tyrant in Athens 
Demetrius the son of Phanostratus, a man who had 
won a reputation for wisdom. This tyrant was put 
down by Demetrius the son of Antigonus, a young 
man of strong Greek sympathies. But Cassander, 
inspired by a deep hatred of the Athenians, made a 
friend of Lachares, who up to now had been the 
popular champion, and induced him also to arrange a 
tyranny. We know no tyrant who proved so cruel 
to man and so impious to the gods. Although 
Demetrius the son of Antigonus was now at variance 
with the Athenian people, he notwithstanding de- 
posed Lachares too from his tyranny, who, on the 
capture of the fortifications, escaped to Boeotia. La- 
chares took golden shields from the Acropolis, and 
stripped even the statue of Athena of its removable 
ornament ; he was accordingly suspected of being a 
very wealthy man, and was murdered by some men of 

131 

K 2 

822 B.c. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREEQ 

κτείνουσιν ἄνδρες Κορωναῖοι' Δημήτριος 
᾿Αντυγόνου τυράννων ἐλευθερώσας ᾿Αθηναίο 
τε παραυτίκα μετὰ τὴν Λαχάρους φυγὴν 
ἀπέδωκέ σφισι τὸν Πειραιᾶ καὶ ὗ ὕστερον πο 
κρατήσας ἐσήγαγεν ἐς αὐτὸ φρουρὰν τὸ ἄστ 
Μουσεῖον καλούμενον τειχίσας. ἔστι δὲ ἐ ἐντὸ 
περιβόλου τοῦ ἀρχαίου τὸ Μουσεῖον ἆπαν 
τῆς ἀκροπόλεως λόφος, ἔνθα Μουσαῖον 
καὶ ἀποθανόντα γήρᾳ ταφῆναι λέγουσιν" Ü 
δὲ καὶ μνῆμα αὐτόθι ἀνδρὶ ᾠκοδομήθη Σ 
τότε δὲ Δημήτριος τειχίσας εἶχε" XXVI. 
δὲ ὕστερον ἄνδρας ἐσῆλθεν ov πολλοὺς y 
τε προγόνων καὶ ἐς οἵαν μεταβολὴν τὸ 
wpa ἥκοι τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων, αὐτίκα τε ὡς ε 
αἱροῦνται στρατηγὸν Ὀλυμπιόδωρον. ὁ δὲ 
ἐπὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἦγε καὶ γέροντας καὶ 
ράκια ὁμοίως, προθυμίᾳ πλέον ἢ ῥώμη κα 
θοῦσθαι τὰ ἐς πόλεμον ἐλπίζων" ἐπεξελθόντα 
τοὺς Μακεδόνας μάχη τε ἐκράτησε καὶ φυγόν 
ἐς τὸ Μουσεῖον τὸ χωρίον εἷλεν. ᾿Αθῆναι | 
οὕτως ἀπὸ Μακεδόνων ἠλευθερώθησαν, ᾿Αθην 
δὲ πάντων ἀγωνισαμένων ἀξίως λόγου Λεώκρι 
μάλιστα ὁ ) Πρωτάρχου λέγεται τόλμῃ χρήσασ 
πρὸς τὸ ἔργον" πρῶτος μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχὶ 
ἀνέβη, πρῶτος δὲ ἐς τὸ Μουσεῖον ἐσήλατο, κ 
οἱ πεσόντι ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τιμαὶ παρ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίων καὶ 
ἄλλαι γεγόνασι καὶ τὴν ἀσπίδα ἀνέθεσαν τῷ Ad 
τῷ Ἐλευθερίῳ, τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Λεωκρίτου καὶ τὸ 
κατόρθωμα ἐπιγράψαντες. Ὀλυμπιοδώρῳ δὲ 
τόδε μέν ἐστιν ἔργον μέγιστον χωρὶς τούτων ὧν 
ἔπραξε Πειραιᾶ καὶ Μουνυχίαν ἀνασωσάμενος' 
ποιουμένων δὲ Μακεδόνων καταδρομὴν ἐς Ἔλεν- 

142 

--ᾱ- 

ATTICA, xxv, 8-xxvi. 3 

Coronea for the sake of this wealth. After freeing the 
Athenians from tyrants Demetrius the son of Anti- 
gonus did not restore the Peiraeus to them imme- 
diately after the flight of Lachares, but subse- 
quently overcame them and brought a garrison even 
into the upper city, fortifying the place called the 
Museum. This is a hill right opposite the Acropolis 
within the old city boundaries, where legend says 
Musaeus used to sing, and, dying of old age, was 
buried. Afterwards a monument also was erected 
here to a Syrian. At the time to which I refer De- 
metrius fortified and held it. XXVI. But afterwards 
a few men called to mind their forefathers, and 
the contrast between their present position and the 
ancient glory of Athens, and without more ado forth- 
with elected Olympiodorus to be their general. He 
led them against the Macedonians, both the old 
men and the youths, and trusted for military 
success more to enthusiasm than to strength. The 
Macedonians came out to meet him, but he over- 
came them, pursued them to the Museum, and 
captured the position. So Athens was delivered from 
the Macedonians, and though all the Athenians 
fought memorably, Leocritus the son of Protarchus 
is said to have displayed most daring in the engage- 
ment. For he was the first to scale the fortification, 
and the first to rush into the Museum; and when he 
fell fighting, the Athenians did him great honour, 
dedicating his shield to Zeus of Freedom and in- 
scribing on it the name of Leocritus and his exploit. 
This is the greatest’ achievement of Olympiodorus, 
not to mention his success in recovering Peiraeus and 
Munychia; and again, when the Macedonians were 

133 

288 B.C. 

, 4 

σι 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

σῖνα Ἐλευσινίους συντάξας ἐνίκα τοὺς Μ 
δόνας. πρότερον δὲ ἔτι τούτων ἐσβαλόντος ἐς 
᾿Αττικὴν Κασσάνδρου πλεύσας ᾿Ὀλυμπιόδωρ 
ἐς Αἰτωλίαν βοηθεῖν Αἰτωλοὺς ἔπεισε, καὶ 
συμμαχικὸν τοῦτο ἐγένετο ᾿Αθηναίοις atti 
μάλιστα διαφυγεῖν τὸν Κασσάνδρου πόλε 
Ὀλυμπιοδώρῳ δὲ τοῦτο μὲν ἐν ᾿Αθήναις εἰσὶν ἃ 
τε ἀκροπόλει καὶ ἐν πρυτανείῳ τιμαί, τοῦτο δὲ & 
Ἐλευσῖνι γραφή' καὶ Φωκέων οἱ Ελάτε 
ἔχοντες χαλκοῦν Ὀλυμπιόδωρον ἐν Δελφοῦ 
ἀνέθεσαν, ὅτι καὶ τούτοις ἤμυνεν ἀποστᾶ 
Κασσάνδρου. 

Τῆς δὲ εἰκόνος πλησίον τῆς ᾿ΟλυμπιοδώρουἩΆ 
χαλκοῦν ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἄγαλμα ἔστηκεν ἐπίκλησιν 
Λευκοφρύνης, ἀνέθεσαν δὲ οἱ παῖδες οἱ Θεμιστο- 
κλέους: Μάγνητες γάρ, ὧν ἦρχε Θεμιστοκλῆς 
λαβὼν παρὰ βασιλέως, Λευκοφρύνην "Αρτεμιν 
ἄγουσιν ἐν τιμῇ. 

Δεῖ δέ µε ἀφικέσθαι τοῦ λόγου πρόσω, πάντα 
ὁμοίως ἐπεξιόντα τὰ Ἑλληνικά. :"Ενδοιος Fv 
γένος μὲν ᾿Αθηναῖος, Δαιδάλου δὲ μαθητής, ὃς 
καὶ φεύγοντι Δαιδάλῳ διὰ τὸν Κάλω θάνατον 
ἐπηκολούθησεν ἐς Κρήτην" τούτου καθήμενόν 
ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἄγαλμα, ἐπίγραμμα ἔχον ὡς Καλ- 
Mas μὲν ἀναθείη, ποιήσειε δὲ Ἔνδοιος.---ἔστι δὲ 
καὶ οἴκημα ᾿Ερέχθειον καλούμενον: πρὸ δὲ τῆς 
ἐσόδου Διός ἐστι βωμὸς Ὑπάτου, ἔνθα ἔμψυχον 
θύουσιν οὐδέν, πέμματα δὲ θέντες οὐδὲν ἔτι οἵν 
χρήσασθαι νομίξουσιν. ἐσελθοῦσι δέ εἰσι βωμοί, 
Ποσειδῶνος, ἐφ᾽ οὗ καὶ ᾿Ερεχθεῖ θύουσιν ἔκ τον 
μαντεύματος, καὶ ἥρωος Βούτου, τρίτος δὲ Ἡφαί- 
στου" γραφαὶ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν τοίχων τοῦ γένους εἰσὶ 

134 

ATTICA, χχνι. 3-5 

iding Eleusis he collected a force of Eleusinians and 
@efeated the invaders. Still earlier than this, when 
€assander had invaded Attica, Olympiodorus sailed 
to Aetolia and induced the Aetolians to help. This 
allied force was the main reason why the Athenians 
escaped war with Cassander. Olympiodorus has not 
only honours at Athens, both on the Acropolis and 
in the town hall, but also a portrait at Eleusis. The 
Phocians too of Elatea dedicated at Delphi a bronze 
- statue of Olympiodorus for help in their revolt from 
< Cassander. 
= Near the statue of Olympiodorus stands a bronze 
image of Artemis surnamed Leucophryne, dedicated 
by the sons of Themistocles ; for the Magnesians, 
whose city the King had given him to rule, hold 
- Artemis Leucophryne in honour. 
But my narrative must not loiter, as my task is 
a general description of all Greece. Endoeus was f. 540 
an Athenian by birth and a pupil of Daedalus, who *” 
also, when Daedalus was in exile because of the 
death of Calos, followed him to Crete. Made by him 
is a statue of Athena seated, with an inscription that 
Callias dedicated the image, but Endoeus made it. 
There is also a building called the Erechtheum. 
Before the entrance is an altar of Zeus the Most 
High, on which they never sacrifice a living creature, 
but offer cakes, not being wont to use any wine 
either. Inside the entrance are altars, one to Poseidon, 
on which in obedience to an oracle they sacrifice also 
to Erechtheus, the second to the hero Butes, and the 
third to Hephaestus. On the walls are paintings 

135 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοῦ Βουταδῶν καὶ-- διπλοῦν γάρ ἐστι τὸ οἴκημα 
-τὕδωρ ἐστὶν ἔνδον θαλάσσιον ἐ ἐν φρέατι. τοῦτο 
μὲν θαῦμα οὐ μέγα: καὶ γὰρ ὅσοι μεσόγαιαν οἱ- 
κοῦσιν, ἄλλοις τε ἔστι καὶ Καρσὶν ᾿Αφροδισιεῦ. 
σιν: ἀλλὰ τόδε τὸ φρέαρ ἐς συγγραφὴν παρέ- 
χεται κυμάτων ἦχον ἐπὶ νότῳ πνεύσαντι. καὶ 
τριαίνης ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ πέτρᾳ σχῆμα: ταῦτα δὲ λέ- 
yerat Ποσειδῶνι μαρτύρια ἐς τὴν ἀμφισβήτησιν 
τῆς χώρας φανῆναι. 

Ἱερὰ μὲν τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐστιν ἤ τε ἄλλη πόλις 
καὶ ἡ πᾶσα ὁμοίως γῆ--καὶ γὰρ ὅσοις θεοὺς 
καθέστηκεν ἄλλους ἐν τοῖς δήμοις σέβειν, οὐδέν 
τι ἧσσον τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἄγουσιν ἐν τιμῇ---, τὸ δὲ 
ἁγιώτατον ἐν κοινῷ πολλοῖς πρότερον νομισθὲν 
ἔτεσιν ἢ συνῆλθον ἀπὸ τῶν δήμων ἐστὶν 
᾿Αθηνᾶς ἄγαλμα ἐν τῇ νῦν ἀκροπόλει, τότε δὲ 
ὀνομαζομένῃ πόλει" φήμη δὲ ἐς αὐτὸ ἔχει πεσεῖν 
ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. καὶ τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἐπέξειμι εἴτε 
οὕτως εἴτε ἄλλως ἔχει, λύχνον δὲ τῇ θεῷ χρυσοῦν 
Καλλίμαχος ἐποίησεν: ἐμπλήσαντες δὲ ἐλαίου 
τὸν λύχνον τὴν αὐτὴν τοῦ μέλλοντος ἔτους ava- 
μένουσιν ἡμέραν, ἔλαιον δὲ ἐκεῖνο τὸν μεταξὺ 
ἐπαρκεῖ ας τῷ λύχνῳ. κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ 
καὶ νυκτ .φαίνοντι. καί οἱ λίνου Καρπασίου 
θρυαλλὴς ἔνεστιν, ὃ δὴ πυρὶ λίνων μόνον οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἁλώσιμον" φοῖνιξ δὲ Ù ὑπὲρ τοῦ λύχνου χαλ- 
Koos ἀνήκων ἐς τὸν ὄροφον ἀνασπᾷ τὴν ἀτμίδα. 
ὁ δὲ Καλλίμαχος ὁ τὸν λύχνον ποιήσας, ἀπο- 
δέων τῶν πρώτων ἐς αὐτὴν τὴν τέχνην, οὕτω 
σοφίᾳ πάντων ἐστὶν. ἄριστος ὥστε καὶ λύθους 
πρῶτος ἐτρύπησε καὶ ὄνομα ἔθετο κατατηξίτεχνον, 
ἡ θεμένων ἄλλων κατέστησεν ἐφ᾽ αὑτῷ. 

136 

ATTICA, χχτι. 5-7 

representing members of the clan Butadae ; there is 
also inside—the building is double—sea-water in a 
cistern. This is no great marvel, for other inland 
regions have similar wells, in particular Aphrodisias 
in Caria. But this cistern is remarkable for the 
noise of waves it sends forth when a south wind 
blows. On the rock is the outline of a trident. 
Legend says that these appeared as evidence in 
support of Poseidon’s claim to the land. 

Both the city and the whole of the land are alike 
sacred to Athena ; for even those who in their parishes 
have an established worship of other gods never- 
theless hold Athena in honour. But the most holy 
symbol, that was so considered by all many years 
before the unification of the parishes, is the image of 
Athena which is on what is now called the Acropolis, 
but in early days the Polis (City). A legend concern- 
ing it says that it fell from heaven; whether this is 
true or not I shall not discuss. A golden lamp for the 
goddess was made by Callimachus. Having filled the 
lamp with oil, they wait until the same day next 
year, and the oil is sufficient for the lamp during the 
interval, although it is alight both day and night. 

The wick in it is of Carpasian flax,! the only kind of ` 

flax which is fire-proof, and a bronze palm above the 
lamp reaches to the roof and draws off the smoke. 
The Callimachus who made the lamp, although not 
of the first rank of artists, was yet of unparalleled 
cleverness, so that he was the first to drill holes 
through stones, and gave himself the title of Refiner 
of Art, or perhaps others gave the title and he 
adopted it as his. 

1 Probably asbestos. 
137 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

XXVII. Κεῖται δὲ ἐν τῷ ναῷ τῆς Πολι 
Ἑρμῆς ξύλου, Κέκροπος. εἶναι λεγόμενον ἀνάθη 
ὑπὸ κλάδων μυρσίνης οὐ σύνοπτον. ἀναθήμα 
δὲ ὁπόσα ἄξια λόγου, τῶν μὲν ἀρχαίων sipi 
ὀκλαδίας ἐστὶ Δαιδάλου ποίημα, λάφυρα δὲ ἀπ 
Μήδων Μασιστίου ; θώραξ, ὃς εἶχεν ἐν Πλαταιαῖ 
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς ἵππου, καὶ ἀκινάκης Μαρδονίου 
λεγόμενος εἶναι. Μασίστιον μὲν δὴ τελευτήσαντα 
ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων οἶδα ἱππέων" Μαρδονίου δὲ 
μα εσαμένου Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐναντία καὶ ὑπὸ 
ἀν ρὸς Σπαρτιάτου πεσόντος οὐδ᾽ ἂν ὑπεδέξαντο 
ἀρχὴν οὐδὲ ἴσως ᾿Αθηναίοις παρῆκαν φέρεσθαι 
Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὸν ἀκινάκην. | περὶ δὲ τῆς ἐλαίας 
οὐδὲν ἔχουσιν ἄλλο εἰπεῖν ὴ τῇ θεῷ. μαρτύριον 
γενέσθαι τοῦτο ἐς τὸν ἀγῶνα τὸν ἐπὶ τῇ χώρᾳ 
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ τάδε, κατακαυθῆναι μὲν τὴν 
ἐλαίαν, ἠνίκα ὁ Μῆδος τὴν πόλιν ἐνέπρησεν 
᾿Αθηναίοις, κατακαυθεῖσαν δὲ αὐθημερὸν ὅσον τε 
ἐπὶ δύο βλαστῆσαι πήχεις. 

Τῷ ναῷ δὲ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς Πανδρόσου ναὸς συν- 
εχής ἐστι. καὶ ἔστι Π]άνδροσος ἐς τὴν παρακατα- 
θήκην ἀναίτιος τῶν ἀδελφῶν μόνη. ἃ δέ μοι 
θαυμάσαι μάλιστα παρέσχεν, ἔστι μὲν οὐκ ἐς 
ἅπαντας γνώριμα, γράψω δὲ οἷα συμβαίνει. 
παρθένοι δύο τοῦ ναοῦ τῆς Πολιάδος οἰκοῦσιν οὐ 
πόρρω, καλοῦσι δὲ ᾿Αθηναῖοι σφᾶς ἀρρηφόρους' 
αὗται χρόνον μέν τινα δίαιταν ἔχουσι παρὰ τῇ 
θεᾷ, παραγενομένης δὲ τῆς ἑορτῆς δρῶσιν ἐν νυκτὶ 
τοιάδε. ἀναθεῖσαί σφισιν ἐπὶ τὰς κεφαλὰς ἃ ἡ 
τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱ ἱέρεια δίδωσι φέρειν, οὔτε ἡ διδοῦσα 
ὁποῖόν τι δίδωσιν εἰδυῖα οὔτε ταῖς Φε ούσαις 
ἐπισταμέναις---ἔστι δὲ περίβολος ἐν τῇ πόλει τῆς 

145 

ATTICA, xxvi. 1-3 

XXVII. Inthe temple of Athena Polias (Of the City) 
is a wooden Hermes, said to have been dedicated by 
Cecrops, but not visible because of myrtle boughs. 
The votive offerings worth noting are, of the old ones, 
a folding chair made by Daedalus, Persian spoils, 
namely the breastplate of Masistius, who com- 
manded the cavalry at Plataea, and a scimitar said to 
have belonged to Mardonius. Now Masistius I know 
was killed by the Athenian cavalry. But Mardonius 
was opposed by the Lacedaemonians and was killed 
by a Spartan; so the Athenians could not have 
taken the scimitar to begin with, and furthermore 
the Lacedaemonians would scarcely have suffered 
them to carry it off. About the olive they have 
nothing to say except that it was testimony the 
goddess produced when she contended for their land. 
Legend also says that when the Persians fired 
Athens the olive was burnt down, but on the very 
day it was burnt it grew again to the height of two 
cubits. 

Adjoining the temple of Athena is the temple of 
Pandrosus, the only one of the sisters to be faithful to 
the trust. I was much amazed at something which 
is not generally known, and so I will describe the 
circumstances. Two maidens dwell not far from the 
temple of Athena Polias, called by the Athenians 
Bearers of the Sacred Offerings. For a time they live 
with the goddess, but when the festival comes round 
they perform at night the following rites. Having 
placed on their heads what the priestess of Athena 
gives them to carry—neither she who gives nor they 
who carry have any knowledge what it is—the maidens 
descend by the natural underground passage that goes 

139 

479 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

καλουμένης ἐν Κήποις ᾿Αφροδίτης οὐ πόρρω 
δι αὐτοῦ κάθοδος ὑπόγαιος αὐτομάτη---, ταυτῇ 
κατίασιν αἱ παρθένοι. κάτω μὲν δὴ τὰ φερόμενα 
λείπουσιν, λαβοῦσαι δὲ ἄλλο τι κομίζουσιν èy- 
κεκαλυμμένον' |xal τὰς μὲν ἀφιᾶσιν ἤδη τὸ ἐν» 
τεῦθεν, ἑτέρας δὲ ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν παρθένους. 
ἄγουσιν ἀντ᾽ αὐτῶν. πρὸς δὲ τῷ ναῷ τῆς ᾿Αθη- 
vas ἔστι μὲν εὐήρις! πρεσβῦτις ὅσον τε πήχεος 
μάλιστα, φαμένη διάκονος εἶναι Λυσιμάχης, ἔστι 
δὲ ἀγάλματα μεγάλα χαλκοῦ διεστῶτες ἄνδρες 
ἐς μάχην' καὶ τὸν μὲν Ερεχθέα καλοῦσι, τὸν δὲ 
Εὔμολπον: καίτοι λέληθέ γε οὐδὲ ᾿Αθηναίων ὅσοι 
τὰ ἀρχαῖα ἴσασιν, Ἰμμάραδον εἶναι παῖδα Ev- 
μόλπου τοῦτον τὸν ἀποθανόντα ὑπὸ ᾿Ερεχθέως. 
ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ βάθρου καὶ ἀνδριάντες ciol Θεαίνετος 
ὃς ἐμαντεύετο Τολμίδη καὶ αὐτὸς Τολμίδης, ὃς 
᾿Αθηναίων ναυσὶν ἡγούμενος ἄλλους τε ἐκάκωσε 
καὶ Πελοποννησίων τὴν χώραν ὅσοι νέμονται τὴν 
παραλίαν, καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπὶ Γυθίῳ τὰ 
νεώρια ἐνέπρησε καὶ τῶν περιοίκων Βοιὰς εἷλε 
καὶ τὴν Κυθηρίων νῆσον: ἐς δὲ τὴν Σικυωνίαν 
ποιησάμενος ἀπόβασιν, ὥς οἱ δῃοῦντε τὴν γῆν ἐς 
μάχην κατέστησαν, τρεψάμενος σφᾶς κατεδίωξε 
πρὸς τὴν πόλιν. ὕστερον δὲ ὡς ἐπανῆλθεν ἐς 
᾿Αθήνας, ἐσήγαγε μὲν ἐς Εὔβοιαν καὶ Νάξον 
᾿Αθηναίων κληρούχους, ἐσέβαλε δὲ ἐς Βοιωτοὺς 
στρατῷ" πορθήσας δὲ τῆς γῆς τὴν πολλὴν καὶ 
παραστησάμενος πολιορκίᾳ Χαιρώνειαν, ὡς ἐς 
τὴν ᾿Αλιαρτίαν προῆλθεν, αὐτός τε όμενος 
ἀπέθανε καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἤδη στράτευμα ἡττᾶτο. τὰ 
μὲν ἐς Τολμίδην τοιαῦτα ἐπυνθανόμην ὄντα. ἔστι 
1 The reading here is corrupt. 
140 { | 

ATTICA, χχντι. 1-6 

across the adjacent precincts, within the city, of 
Aphrodite in the Gardens. They leave down below 
what they carry, and receive something else which 
they bring back covered up. These maidens they 
henceforth let go free, and take up to the Acropolis 

others in their place. By the temple of Athena is 6 

....an old woman about a cubit high, the inscrip- 
tion calling her a handmaid of Lysimache, and large 
bronze figures of men facing each other for a fight, 
one of whom they call Erechtheus, the other Eumol- 
pus ; and yet those Athenians who are acquainted with 
antiquity must surely know that this victim of Erech- 
theus was Immaradus, the son of Eumolpus. On the 
pedestal are also statues of Theaenetus, who was seer 
to Tolmides, and of Tolmides himself, who when in 
command of the Athenian fleet inflicted severe damage 
upon the enemy, especially upon the Peloponnesians 
who dwell along the coast, burnt the dock-yards at 
Gythium and captured Boeae, belonging to the “ pro- 
vincials,” and the island of Cythera. He made a 
descent on Sicyonia, and, attacked by the citizens as 
he was laying waste the country, he put them to flight 
and chased them to the city. Returning afterwards to 
Athens, he conducted Athenian colonists to Euboea 
and Naxos and invaded Boeotia with an army. Hav- 
ing ravaged the greater part of the land and reduced 
Chaeronea by a siege, he advanced into the territory 
of Haliartus,where he was killed in battle and all his 
army worsted. Such was the history of Tolmides that 
I learnt. There are also old figures of Athena, no 

141 

447 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἀγάλματα ἀρχαῖα: καί σφισιν ἀπ 
τάκη μὲν οὐδέν, μελάντερα δὲ καὶ πληγὴν ἐνεγκεῖ 
ἐστιν ἀσθενέστερα" ἐπέλαβε γὰρ καὶ ταῦτα Ẹ 
φλόξ, ὅτε ἐσβεβηκότων ἐς τὰς ναῦς ᾿Αθηναίων 
βασιλεὺς εἷλεν ἔ ἔρημον τῶν ἐν ἡλικίᾳ τὴν πόλιν. 
ἔστι δὲ συός τε θήρα, περὶ οὗ σαφὲς οὐδὲν οἶδα εἶ 
τοῦ Καλυδωνίου, καὶ Κύκνος Ἡρακλεῖ µα payo- 
pevos" τοῦτον τὸν Κύκνον φασὶν ἄλλους τε φο- 
νεῦσαι καὶ Λύκον Θρᾷκα προτεθέντων σφίσι 
μονομαχίας ἄθλων, περὶ δὲ τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν 
Πηνειὸν ἀπέθανεν ὑφ᾽ Ἡρακλέους. 

Τῶν δὲ ἐν Τροιξῆνι λόγω», οὓς ἐς Θησέα λέ- 
γουσιν, ἐστὶν ὡς Ἡρακλῆς ἐς Τροιζῆνα ἐλθὼν 
παρὰ Πιτθέα καταθεῖτο" ἐπὶ τῷ δείπνῳ τοῦ 
λέοντος τὸ δέρμα, ἐσέλθοιεν δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτὸν ᾿ἄλλοι 
τε Τροιξηνίων παῖδες καὶ Θησεὺς ἕβδομον μά- 
λιστα γεγονὼς ἔτος" τοὺς μὲν δὴ λοιποὺς παῖδας, 
ὡς τὸ δέρμα εἶδον, φεύγοντάς φασιν οἴχεσθαι, 
Θησέα δὲ ὑπεξελθόντα οὐκ ἄγαν σὺν φόβῳ παρὰ 
τῶν διακόνων ἁρπάσαι ' πέλεκυν καὶ αὐτίκα ἐπιέ- 
ναι σπουδῇ, λέοντα εἶναι τὸ δέρμα ἡγούμενον. 
ὅδε μὲν τῶν λόγων πρῶτος ἐς αὐτόν ἐστι Ίροι- 
envio. ὁ δὲ ἐπὶ τούτῳ, κρηπῖδας Αἰγέα ὑπὸ 
πέτρᾳ καὶ ξίφος θεῖναι γνωρίσματα εἶναι τῷ 
παιδὶ καὶ τὸν μὲν ἐς ᾿Αθήνας ἀποπλεῖν, Θησέα 
δέ, ὡς ἕκτον καὶ δέκατον ἔτος ἐγεγόνει, τὴν 
πέτραν ἀνώσαντα οἴχεσθαι τὴν παρακαταθήκην 
τὴν Αἰγέως φέροντα. τούτου δὲ εἰκὼν ἐν ἀκρο- 
πόλει πεποίηται τοῦ λόγου, χαλκοῦ πάντα ὁμοίως 
πλὴν τῆς πέτρας" ἀνέθεσαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλο Θησέως 
ἔργον, καὶ ὁ λόγος οὕτως ἐς αὐτὸ ἔχει. Κρησὶ : 

1 κατάθοιτο, emended by Porson. 

142 

πα 

ATTICA, xxvii. 6-9 

limbs of which indeed are missing, but they are rather 
black and too fragile to bear a blow. For they too were 
caught by the flames when the Athenians had gone 
on‘board their ships and the King captured the city 
emptied of its able-bodied inhabitants. There is also 
a boar-hunt (I do not know for certain whether it 
is the Calydonian boar) and Cycnus fighting with 
Heracles. This Cycnus is said to have killed, among 
others, Lycus a Thracian, a prize having been pro- 
posed for the winner of the duel, but near the river 
Peneius he was himself killed by Heracles. 

One of the Troezenian legends about Theseus is 
the following. When Heracles visited Pittheus at 
Troezen, he laid aside his lion’s skin to eat his dinner, 
and there came in to see him some Troezenian 
children with Theseus, then about seven years of age, 
The story goes that when they saw the skin the other 
children ran away, but Theseus slipped out not much 
afraid, seized an axe from the servants and straightway 
attacked the skin in earnest, thinking it to be a lion. 
This is the first Troezenian legend about Theseus. 
The next is that Aegeus placed boots and a sword 
under a rock as tokens for the child, and then 
sailed away to Athens ; Theseus, when sixteen years 
old, pushed the rock away and departed, taking what 
Aegeus had deposited. There is a representation of 
this legend on the Acropolis, everything in bronze 
except the rock. Another deed of Theseus they have 
represented in an offering, and the story about it is as 
follows :—The land of the Cretans and especially that 

143 

10 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

τήν τε ἄλλην γῆν καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ ποταμῷ Τεθρίνι 
ταῦρος ἐλυμαίνετο. πάλαι δὲ ἄρα τὰ θηρία 
φοβερώτερα ἦν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ὡς ὅ τ᾽ ἐν Νεμέα 
λέων καὶ ὁ Παρνάσσιος καὶ δράκοντες τῆς ἝἙλλά- 
δος πολλαχοῦ καὶ ὗς περί τε Καλυδῶνα καὶ 
Ἐρύμανθον καὶ τῆς Κορινθίας ἐν Κρομυῶνι, 
ὥστε καὶ ἐλέγετο τὰ μὲν ἀνιέναι τὴν γῆν, τὰ δὲ 
ὡς ἱερὰ εἴη θεῶν, τὰ δὲ καὶ ἐς τιμωρίαν ἀνθρώπων 
ἀφεῖσθαι. καὶ τοῦτον οἱ Κρῆτες τὸν ταῦρον ἐς 
τὴν γῆν πέμψαι σφίσι Ποσειδῶνά φασιν, ὅτι 
θαλάσσης ἄρχων Μίνως τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς οὐδενὸς 
Ποσειδῶνα ἦγεν ἄλλου θεοῦ μᾶλλον ἐν τιμῇ. 
κομισθῆναι μὲν δὴ τὸν ταῦρον τοῦτόν φασιν ἐς 
Πελοπόννησον ἐκ Κρήτης καὶ Ἡρακλεῖ τῶν δώ- 
δεκα καλουμένων ἕνα καὶ τοῦτον γενέσθαι τὸν 
ἆθλον'/ ὡς δὲ ἐς τὸ πεδίον ἀφείθη τὸ ᾿Αργείων, 
φεύγει διὰ τοῦ Κορινθίου ἰσθμοῦ, φεύγει δὲ ἐς 
γῆν τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν καὶ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἐς δῆμον τὸν 
Μαραθωνίων, καὶ ἄλλους τε ὁπόσοις ἐπέτυχε καὶ 
Μίνω παῖδα ᾿Ανδρόγεων ἀπέκτεινε. Μίνως δὲ 
ναυσὶν én’ ᾿Αθήνας πλεύσας--οὐ γὰρ ἐπείθετο 
ἀναιτίους εἶναι σφᾶς τῆς ᾿Ανδρόγεω τελευτῆς---ἐς 
τοσοῦτον ἐκάκωσεν, ἐς ὃ συνεχωρήθη οἱ παρθέγ- 
ους ἐς Κρήτην ἑπτὰ καὶ παῖδας ἴσους ἄγειν τῷ 
λεγομένῳ Μίνω ταύρῳ τὸν ἐν Κνωσσῷ Λαβυ- 
ρινθον οἰκῆσαι" τὸν δὲ ἐν τῷ Μαραθῶνι ταῦρον 
ὕστερον Θησεὺς ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἐλάσαι καὶ 
θῦσαι λέγεται τῇ θεῷ, καὶ τὸ ἀνάθημά ἐστι τοῦ 
δήμου τοῦ Μαραθωνίων. 

XXVIII. Κύλωνα δὲ οὐδὲν ἔχω σαφὲς εἰπεῖν 
ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ χαλκοῦν ἀνέθεσαν τυραννίδα ὅμως βον- 
λεύσαντα' τεκμαίρομαι δὲ τῶνδε ἕνεκα, ὅτι εἶδος 

144 

ATTICA, xxvii. g-xxvul. 1 

by the river Tethris was ravaged by a bull. It would 
seem that in the days of old the beasts were much 
more formidable to men, for example the Nemean 
lion, the lion of Parnassus, the serpents in many parts 
of Greece, and the boars of Calydon, Erymanthus and 
Crommyon in the land of Corinth, so that it was said 
that some were sent up by the earth, that others were 
sacred to the gods, while others had been let loose to 
punish mankind. And so the Cretans say that this bull 
was sent by Poseidon to their land because, although 
Minos was lord of the Greek Sea, he did not worship 
Poseidon more than any other god. They say that 
this bull crossed from Crete to the Peloponnesus, and 
came to be one of what are called the Twelve Labours 
of Heracles. When he was let loose on the Argive 
plain he fled through the isthmus of Corinth, into the 
land of Attica as far as the Attic parish of Marathon, 
killing all he met, including Androgeos, son of Minos, 
Minos sailed against Athens with a fleet, not believing 
that the Athenians were innocent of the death of 
Androgeos, and sorely harassed them until it was 
agreed that he should take seven maidens and seven: 
boys for the Minotaur that was said to dwell in the 
Labyrinth at Cnossus. But the bull at Marathon 
Theseus is said to have driven afterwards to the 
Acropolis and to have sacrificed to the goddess; the 
offering commemorating this deed was dedicated by 
the parish of Marathon. 
XXVIII. Why they set up a bronze statue of 632 50. 
Cylon, in spite of his plotting a tyranny, I cannot 
say for certain; but I infer that it was because he 

145 
VOL. I. L 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

κάλλιστος καὶ τὰ ἐς δόξαν ἐγένετο οὐκ ἀφανὴ 
2 / ὃ ’ / Ὀ A / OF. 
ἀνελόμενος διαύλου νίκην λυμπικην καὶ 
θυγατέρα ὑπῆρξε γῆμαι Θεαγένους, ὃς Μεγάρων 
ἐτυράννησε. χωρὶς δὲ ἡ ὅσα κατέλεξα δύο μὲν 
᾿Αθηναίοις εἰσὶ δεκάται πολεμήσασιν, ἄγαλμα 
᾿Αθηνᾶς χαλκοῦν ἀπὸ Μήδων τῶν ἐς Μαραθῶνα 
ἀποβάντων τέχνη Φειδίου---καί οἱ τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς 
ἀσπίδος μάχην Λαπιθῶν πρὸς Κενταύρους καὶ 
σ L4 » > / / A 
ὅσα ἄλλα ἐστὶν ἐπειργασμένα λέγουσι τορεῦσαι 
Μῦν, τῷ δὲ Mut ταῦτά τε καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν 
ἔργων Ἡαρράσιον καταγράψαι τὸν Ἐὐήνορος: 
ταύτης τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἡ τοῦ δόρατος αἰχμὴ καὶ o 
λόφος τοῦ κράνους ἀπὸ Σουνίου mpoonrhéovow 
ἐστιν ἤδη σύνοπτα ---, καὶ ἅρμα κεῖται χαλκοῦν 
9 . A ΄ \ l4 ca 3 
ἀπὸ Βοιωτῶν δεκάτη καὶ Χαλκιδέων τῶν ἐν 
Εὐβοίᾳ. δύο δὲ ἄλλα ἐστὶν ἀναθήματα, Ilep- 
A A A / 
κλῆς ὁ Ἐανθίππου καὶ τῶν ἔργων τῶν Φειδίου 
θέας μάλιστα ἄξιον ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἄγαλμα ἀπὸ τῶν 
3 / A 2 / 
ἀναθέντων καλουμένης Λημνίας. τῇ δὲ ἀκροπόλει, 
~ ν ’ ? / > A ε / 
πλὴν ὅσον Κύμων ᾠκοδόμησεν αὐτῆς ὁ Μιλτιάδου, 
A \ ~ / - ld 
περιβαλεῖν τὸ λοιπὸν λέγεται τοῦ τείχους Ile- 
λασγοὺς οἰκήσαντάς ποτε ὑπὸ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν' 
φασὶ γὰρ ᾿Αγρόλαν καὶ Ὑπέρβιον τοὺς οἰκοδο- 
μήσαντας εἶναι. πυνθανόμενος δὲ οἵτινες ἦσαν 
- 3 
οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐδυνάμην μαθεῖν ἢ Σικελοὺς τὸ ἐξ 
ἀρχῆς ὄντας ἐς ᾿Ακαρνανίαν μετοικῆσαι. 
καταβᾶσι δὲ οὐκ ἐς τὴν κάτω πόλιν ἀλλ᾽ ὅσον 
ὑπὸ τὰ προπύλαια πηγή τε ὕδατός ἐστι καὶ 
πλησίον ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερὸν ἐν σπηλαίῳ' Κρεούση 
δὲ θυγατρὶ Ἐρεχθέως ᾿Απόλλωνα ἐνταῦθα ovy- 
γενέσθαι νομίζουσι.ὶ . . . ὡς πεμφθείη Φιλιππι- 
1 Here there is a gap in the text. | 

146 

ο 
| ATTICA, xxvi. 1-4 

was very beautiful to look upon, and of no undis- 
tinguished fame, having won an Olympian victory 
in the double foot-race, while he had married the 
daughter of Theagenes, tyrant of Megara. In addi- 
tion to the works I have mentioned, there are two 
tithes dedicated by the Athenians after wars. There 
is first a bronze Athena, tithe from the Persians who 
landed at Marathon. It is the work of Pheidias, 
but the reliefs upon the shield, including the fight 
between Centaurs and Lapithae, are said to be from 
the chisel of Mys, for whom they say Parrhasius, a 
the son of Evenor, designed this and the rest of his 
works. The point of the spear of this Athena and 
the crest of her helmet are visible to those sailing to 
Athens, as soon as Sunium is passed. Then there is «δ 
a bronze chariot, tithe from the Boeotians and the 
Chalcidians in Euboea. There are two other offer- 
ings, a statue of Pericles, the son of Xanthippus, 
and the best worth seeing of the works of Pheidias, 
the statue of Athena called Lemnian after those who 
dedicated it. All the Acropolis is surrounded by 
a wall; a part was constructed by Cimon, son of 
Miltiades, but all the rest is said to have been built 
round it by the Pelasgians, who once lived under the 
Acropolis. The builders, they say, were Agrolas and 
Wyperbius. On inquiring who they were I could 
discover nothing except that they were Sicilians 
originally who emigrated to Acarnania. Χ ΕΟ 
On descending, not to the lower city, but to ju 
beneath the Gateway, you see a fountain and near it 
a sanctuary of Apollo in a cave. It is here that 
Apollo is believed to have met Creiisa, daughter of 
Erechtheus. . . . when the Persians had landed in 

147 
L 2 

$ 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δης ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ἄγγελος ἀποβεβηκότων Mj- 
δων ἐς τὴν γῆν, ἐπανήκων δὲ Λακεδαιμονίους 
ὑπερβαλέσθαι φαίη τὴν ἔξοδον, εἶναι γὰρ δὴ 
νόμον αὐτοῖς μὴ πρότερον μαχουμένους ἐξιέναι 
πρὶν ἢ πλήρη τὸν κύκλον τῆς σελήνης γενέσθαι: 
τὸν δὲ Πᾶνα ὁ Φιλιππίδης ἔλεγε περὶ τὸ ὄρος 
ἐντυχόντα οἱ τὸ Παρθένιον φάναι τε ὡς εὔνους 
᾿Αθηναίοις εἴη καὶ ὅτι ἐς Μαραθῶνα ἥξει ovp- 
μαχήσων. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ὁ θεὸς ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ 
ἀγγελίᾳ τετίμηται. ἔστι δὲ “Aperos πάγος καλού- 
μενος, ὅτι πρῶτος "Άρης ἐνταῦθα ἐκρίθη, καί pot 
καὶ ταῦτα δεδήλωκεν ὁ λόγος ὡς Αλιρρόθιον 
ἀνέλοι καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ κτείνειε. κριθῆναι δὲ καὶ 
ὕστερον Ὀρέστην λέγουσιν ἐπὶ τῷ φόνῳ τῆς 
μητρός" Kat βωμός ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς ᾿Αρείας, ὃν 
ἀνέθηκεν ἀποφυγὼν τὴν δίκην. τοὺς δὲ ἀργοὺς 
λίθους, ἐφ᾽ ὧν ἑστᾶσιν ὅσοι δίκας ὑπέχουσι καὶ 
οἱ διώκοντες, τὸν μὲν "Ύβρεως τὸν δὲ ᾿Αναεδείας 
αὐτῶν ὀνομάξουσι. 

Πλησίον δὲ ἱερὸν θεῶν ἐστιν ἃς καλοῦσιν ᾿Αθη- 
ναῖοι Σεμνάς, Ἡσίοδος δὲ ᾿Ερινῦς ἐν Θεογονία. 
πρῶτος δέ σφισιν Αἰσχύλος νι ἐποίησεν 
ὁμοῦ ταῖς ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ θριξὶν εἶναι τοῖς δὲ 
ἀγάλμασιν οὔτε τούτοις ἔπεστιν οὐδὲν φοβερὸν 
οὔτε ὅσα ἄλλα κεῖται θεῶν τῶν ὑπογαίων. κεῖται 
δὲ καὶ Πλούτων καὶ Ἑρμῆς καὶ Γῆς ἄγαλμα' 
ἐνταῦθα θύουσι μὲν ὅσοις ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ τὴν 
αἰτίαν ἐξεγένετο ἀπολύσασθαι, θύουσι δὲ καὶ 
ἄλλως ξένοι τε ὁμοίως καὶ ἀστοί. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ` 
ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου μνῆμα Οἰδίποδος, πολυ- 
πραγμονῶν δὲ εὕρισκον τὰ ὀστᾶ ἐκ Θηβῶν 
κομισθέντα' τὰ Jan ἐς τὸν θάνατον Σοφοκλεῖ 

148 

ATTICA, xxviii. 4-7 

Attica Philippides was sent to carry the tidings to 
Lacedaemon. On his return he said that the Lace- 
daemonians had postponed their departure, because 
it was their custom not to go out to fight before the 
moon was full. Philippides went on to say that 
near Mount Parthenius he had been met by Pan, 
who told him that he was friendly to the Athenians 
and would come to Marathon to fight for them. This 
deity, then, has been honoured for this announcement. 
There is also the Hill of Ares, so named because 
Ares was the first to be tried here; my narrative has 
already told that he killed Halirrhothius, and what 
were his grounds for this act. Afterwards, they say, 
Orestes was tried for killing his mother, and there 
is an altar to Athena Areia (Warlke), which he 
dedicated on being acquitted. The unhewn stones 
on which stand the defendants and the prosecutors, 
they call the stone of Outrage and the stone of 
Ruthlessness. 

Hard by is a sanctuary of the goddesses which 
the Athenians call the August, but Hesiod in 
the Theogony! calls them Erinyes (Furies). It was 
Aeschylus who first represented them with snakes 
in their hair. But on the images neither of these 
nor of any of the under-world deities is there 
anything terrible. There are images of Pluto, 
Hermes, and Earth, by which sacrifice those who 
have received an acquittal on the Hill of Ares; 
sacrifices are also offered on other occasions by 
both citizens and aliens. Within the precincts is 
a monument to Oedipus, whose bones, after diligent 
inquiry, I found were brought from Thebes. The 

1 1. 186, 
149 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πεποιημένα τὸν Οἰδίποδος "Όμηρος οὐκ εἴα μοι 
δόξαι πιστά, ὃς ἔφη Μηκιστέα τελευτήσαντος 
Οἰδίποδος ἐπιτάφιον ἐλθόντα ἐς Θήβας ἀγωνί- 
σασθαι. 

"Eor: δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις καὶ ἄλλα δικαστήρια οὐκ 
ἐς τοσοῦτο δόξης ἥκοντα. τὸ μὲν οὖν καλούμενον 
παράβυστον καὶ τρίγωνον, τὸ μὲν ἐν ἀφανεῖ τῆς 
πόλεως ôv καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐλαχίστοις συνιόντων ἐς 
αὐτό, τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ σχήματος ἔχει τὸ ὄνομα' 
βατραχιοῦν δὲ καὶ φοινικιοῦν ἀπὸ χρωμάτων 
καὶ ἐς τόδε διαμεμένηκεν ὀνομάξεσθαι. τὸ δὲ 
μέγιστον καὶ ἐς ὃ πλεῖστοι συνίασιν, ἡλιαίαν 
καλοῦσιν. ὁπόσα δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς φονεῦσιν, ἔστιν 
ἄλλα' καὶ ἐπὶ Παλλαδίῳ καλοῦσι καὶ τοῖς ano- 
κτείνασιν ἀκουσίως κρίσις καθέστηκε. καὶ ὅτι 
μὲν Δημοφῶν πρῶτος ἐνταῦθα ὑπέσχε δίκας, 
ἀμφισβητοῦσιν οὐδένες: ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ δέ, διάφορα ἐς 
τοῦτο εἴρηται. Διομήδην φασὶν ἁλούσης ᾿Τλίου 
ταῖς ναυσὶν ὀπίσω κομύζεσθαι, καὶ ἤδη τε νύκτα 
ἐπέχειν ὡς κατὰ «Φάληρον πλέοντες «γίνονται 
καὶ τοὺς ᾿Αργείους ὡς ἐς πολεμίαν ἀποβῆναι 
τὴν γῆν, ἄλλην που δόξαντας ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ καὶ οὐ 
τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν εἶναι. ἐνταῦθα Δημοφῶντα λέγου- 
σιν ἐκβοηθήσαντα, οὐκ ἐπιστάμενον οὐδὲ τοῦτον 
τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν ὡς εἰσὶν ᾿Αργεῖοι, καὶ ἄνδρας 
αὐτῶν ἀποκτεῖναι καὶ τὸ Παλλάδιον ἁρπάσαντα 
οἴχεσθαι, ᾿Αθηναῖόν τε ἄνδρα οὐ προϊδόμενον 
ὑπὸ τοῦ ἵππου τοῦ Δημοφῶντος ἀνατραπῆναι καὶ 
συμπατηθέντα ἀποθανεῖν' ἐπὶ τούτῳ Δημοφῶντα 
ὑποσχεῖν δίκας οἱ μὲν τοῦ συμπατηθέντος τοῖς 
προσήκουσιν, οἱ δὲ ᾿Αργείων φασὶ τῷ κοινῷ. 

10 ἐπὶ Δελφινίῳ δὲ κρίσις καθέστηκεν ἐργάσασθαι 

ασ 

150 

™ 

ATTICA, xxvul. Ί--το 

account of the death of Oedipus in the drama of 
Sophocles I am prevented from believing by Homer, 
who says that after the death of Oedipus Mecisteus 
came to Thebes and took part in the funeral games. 
The Athenians have other law courts as well, 
which are not so famous. We have the Parabystum 
(Thrust aside) and the Triangle; the former is {η añ- 
obscure part of the city, and in it the most trivial 
cases are tried; the latter is named from its shape. 
The names of Green Court and Red Court, due to their 
colours, have lasted down to the present day. The 
largest court, to which the greatest numbers come, 
is called Heliaea. One of the other courts that deal 
with bloodshed is called ' At Palladium,” into which 
are brought cases of involuntary homicide. All are 
agreed that Demophon was the first to be tried 
there, but as to the nature of the charge accounts 
differ. It is reported that after the capture of Troy 
Diomedes was returning home with his fleet when 
night overtook them as in their voyage they were 
off Phalerum. The Argives landed, under the im- 
pression that it was hostile territory, the darkness 
preventing them from seeing that it was Attica. 
Thereupon they say that Demophon, he too being 
unaware of the facts and ignorant that those who 
had landed were Argives, attacked them and, having 
killed a number of them, went off with the Palladium. 
An Athenian, however, not seeing before him in the 
dark, was knocked over by the horse of Demophon, 
trampled upon and killed. Whereupon Demophon 
was brought to trial, some say by the relatives of 
the man who was trampled upon, others say by the 
Argive commonwealth. At Delphinium are tried 

151 

11 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

φόνον σὺν τῷ δικαίῳ φαμένοις, ὁποῖόν τι καὶ 
Θησεὺς παρεχόμενος ἀπέφυγεν, ὅτε Πάλλαντα 
ἐπαναστάντα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ἔκτεινε" πρότερον 
δὲ πρὶν ἢ Θησεὺς ἀφείθη, καθειστήκει πᾶσι φεύ- 
yew κτείναντα ἢ κατὰ ταὐτὰ θνήσκειν μένοντα. 
τὸ δὲ ἐν πρυτανείῳ καλούμενον, ἔνθα τῷ σιδήρῳ 
καὶ πᾶσιν ὁμοίως τοῖς ἀψύχοις δικάξουσιν, ἐπὶ 
τῷδε ἄρξασθαι νομίζω. ᾿Αθηναίων βασιλεύοντος 
Ἐρεχθέως, τότε πρῶτον βοῦν ἔκτεινεν ὁ βουφόνος 
ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ τοῦ Πολιέως Διός: καὶ ὁ μὲν 
ἀπολιπὼν ταύτῃ τὸν πέλεκυν ἀπῆλθεν ἐκ τῆς 
χώρας φεύγων, ὁ δὲ πέλεκυς παραυτίκα ἀφείθη! 
κριθεὶς καὶ ἐς τόδε ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος κρίνεται. λέγε- 
ται μὲν δὴ καὶ ἄλλα τῶν ἀψύχων αὐτόματα 
ἐπιθεῖναι σὺν τῷ δικαίῳ τιμωρίαν ἀνθρώποις" 
ἔργον δὲ κάλλιστον καὶ δόξῃ φανερώτατον ὁ 
Καμβύσου παρέσχετο ἀκινάκης. ἔστι δὲ τοῦ 
Πειραιῶς πρὸς θαλάσσῃ ὩΦρεαττύς: ἐνταῦθα 
οἱ ο ae aad ἣν ἀπελθόντας ἕτερον ἐπιλάβ 
σφᾶς ἔγκλημα, πρὸς ἀκροωμένους ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἀπὸ 
νεὼς ἀπολογοῦνται' Τεῦκρον πρῶτον λόγος ἔχει 
Τελαμῶνι οὕτως ἀπολογήσασθαι μηδὲν ἐς τὸν 
Αἴαντος θάνατον εἰργάσθαι. τάδε μὲν οὖν εἰρή- 
σθω μοι τῶνδε ἕνεκα, ὁπόσοις μέτεστι σπουδῆς 
γνῶναι τὰ ἐς τὰ δικαστήρια ΧΧΙΧ. τοῦ δὲ 
᾿Αρείου πάγου πλησίον δείκνυται ναῦς ποιηθεῖσα 
ἐς τὴν τῶν Παναθηναίων πομπήν. καὶ ταύτην 
μὲν ἤδη πού τις ὑπερεβάλετο: τὸ δὲ ἐν Δήλῳ 
πλοῖον οὐδένα πω νικήσαντα οἶδα, καθῆκον ἐς 
ἐννέα ἐρέτας ἀπὸ τῶν καταστρωμάτων. 

1 ἀφείθη ἐς θάλασσον Hitzig. 

ATTICA, xxvii. ΙΟ-ΧΧΙΧ. 1 

those who claim that they have committed justifiable 
homicide, the plea put forward by Theseus when he 
was acquitted, after having killed Pallas, who had 
risen in revolt against him, and his sons. Before 
Theseus was acquitted it was the established custom 
among all men for the shedder of blood to go into 
exile, or, if he remained, to be put to a similar death. 
The Court in the Prytaneum, as it is called, where 
they try iron and all similar inanimate things, had 
its origin, I believe, in the following incident. It 
was when Erechtheus was king of Athens that the 
ox-slayer first killed an ox at the altar of Zeus 
Polieus. Leaving the axe where it lay he went out 
of the land into exile, and the axe was forthwith 
tried and acquitted, and the trial has been repeated 
year by year down to the present. Furthermore, it 
is also said that inanimate objects have on occasion of 
their own accord inflicted righteous retribution upon 
men, of this the scimitar of Cambyses affords the best 
and most famous instance.! Near the sea at the 
Peiraeus is Phreattys. Here it is that men in exile, 
when a further charge has been brought against 
them in their absence, make their defence on a ship 
while the judges listen on land. The legend is that 
Teucer first defended himself in this way before 
Telamon, urging that he was guiltless in the matter of 
the death of Ajax. Let this account suffice for those 
who are interested to learn about the law courts. 
- XXIX. Near the Hill of Ares is shown a ship built 
for the procession of the Panathenaea. This ship, 
I suppose, has been surpassed in size by others, but 
I know of no builder who has beaten the vessel 
at Delos, with its nine banks of oars below the deck. 

1 See Herodotus iii. 64. 

153 

2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ καὶ ἔξω πόλεως ἐν τοῖς δή 
καὶ κατὰ τὰς ὁδοὺς θεῶν ἐστιν ἱερὰ καὶ ἡρ 
καὶ ἀνδρῶν τάφοι. ἐγγυτάτω δὲ ᾿Ακαδημία, 
/ 9 ~ 3 ΄ 4 > » 32 A 
ῥίον ποτὲ ἀνδρὸς ἰδιώτου, γυμνάσιον δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ» 
κατιοῦσι δ᾽ ἐς αὐτὴν περίβολός ἐστιν ᾿Αρτέμιδος 
΄ 4 
καὶ ξόανα ᾿Αρίστης καὶ Καλλέστης' ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ 
δοκῶ καὶ ὁμολογεῖ τὰ ἔπη τὰ Πάμφω, τῆς ᾿Αρ- 
τέμιδός εἰσιν ἐπικλήσεις αὗται, λεγόμενον δὲ καὶ 
ἄλλον ἐς αὐτὰς λόγον εἰδὼς ὑπερβήσομαι. καὶ 
ναὸς οὐ μέγας ἐστίν, ἐς ὃν τοῦ Διονύσου τοῦ 
᾿Ελευθερέως τὸ ἄγαλμα ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος κομίζουσιν 
7 
ἐν τεταγμέναις ἡμέραις. ἱερὰ μέν σφισι ταύτῃ 
- 4 32 4 4 . a 
τοσαῦτά ἐστι, τάφοι δὲ Θρασυβούλου μὲν πρῶ- 
τον τοῦ Λύκου, ἀνδρὸς τῶν τε ὕστερον καὶ ὅσοι 
A 3 - / > / / \ 
πρὸ αὐτοῦ γεγόνασιν ᾿Αθηναίοις λόγιμοι TA 
πάντα ἀρίστου---παρέντι δέ µοι τὰ πλείω τοσάδε 
ἐς πίστιν ἀρκέσει τοῦ λόγου: τυραννίδα γὰρ 
y A / 2 . 3 f 
ἔπαυσε τῶν τριάκοντα καλουμένων σὺν ἀνδράσιν 
ἑξήκοντα τὸ κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς ὁρμηθεὶς ἐκ Θηβῶν, καὶ 
᾿Αθηναίους στασιάξοντας διαλλαγῆναι καὶ συν- 
θεμένους ἔπεισε μεῖναι---, πῥῶτος μέν ἐστιν οὗτος 
τάφος, ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτῷ Περικλέους τε καὶ Χαβρίου 
/ y \ - a 3 
καὶ Φορμίωνος. ἔστι δὲ καὶ πᾶσι μνῆμα ` Abr- 
ναίοις ὁπόσοις ἀποθανεῖν συνέπεσεν ἔν τε ναυμα- 
χίαις καὶ ἐν μάχαις πεζαῖς πλὴν ὅσοι Μαραθῶνι 
αὐτῶν ἠγωνίσαντο" τούτοις γὰρ κατὰ χώραν εἰσὶν 
οἱ τάφοι δι. ἀνδραγαθίαν, οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι κατὰ τὴν 
δω A \ >? / A e A 
ὁδὸν κεῖνται τὴν ἐς ᾿Ακαδημίαν, καὶ σφῶν ἑστᾶσιν 
ἐπὶ τοῖς τάφοις στῆλαι τὰ ὀνόματα καὶ τὸν δῆμον 

154 

i> ὁυ 

ATTICA, χχιχ. 2-4 

Outside the city, too, in the parishes and on the 
roads, the Athenians have sanctuaries of the gods, 
and graves of heroes and of men. The nearest is the 
Academy, once the property of a private individual, 
but in my time a gymnasium. As you go down to it 
you come to a precinct of Artemis, and wooden images 
of Ariste (Best) and Calliste (Fairest). In my opinion, 
which is supported by the poems of Pamphos, these 
are surnames of Artemis. There is another account 
of them, which I know but shall omit. Then there 
is a small temple, into which every year on fixed 
days they carry the image of Dionysus Eleuthereus. 
Such are their sanctuaries here, and of the graves 
the first is that of Thrasybulus son of Lycus, in all 
respects the greatest of all famous Athenians, 
whether they lived before him or after him. The 
greater number of his achievements I shall pass by, 
but the following facts will suffice to bear out my 
assertion. He put down what is known as the 
tyranny of the Thirty, setting out from Thebes with 
a force amounting at first to sixty men; he also 
persuaded the Athenians, who were torn by fac- 
tions, to be reconciled, and to abide by their com- 
pact. His is the first grave, and after it come those 
of Pericles, Chabrias! and Phormio.? There is also 
a monument for all the Athenians whose fate it has 
been to fall in battle, whether at sea or on land, 
except such of them as fought at Marathon. These, 
for their valour, have their graves on the field of 
battle, but the others lie along the road to the 
Academy, and on their graves stand slabs bearing 

1 Died 357 B.c. 
? A famous Athenian admiral who fought well in the early 
part of the Peloponnesian War. 

155 

408 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

e / / A \ 3 4 8 » 
ἑκάστου λέγουσαι. πρῶτοι δὲ ἐτάφησαν οὓς ἐν 
Θρῴκῃ ποτὲ ἐπικρατοῦντας μέχρι Δραβθησκοῦ 
τῆς χώρας ᾿Ηδωνοὶ φονεύουσιν ἀνέλπιστοι Ème- 
θέµενοι λέγεται δὲ καὶ ὡς κεραυνοὶ πέσοεεν ἐς 
» / . y. 9 b 4 
5 αὐτούς. στρατηγοὶ δὲ ἄλλοι τε ἦσαν καὶ Λέα- 
γρος, ᾧ μάλιστα ἐπετέτραπτο ἡ δύναμις, καὶ 
Δεκελεὺς Σωφάνης, ὃς τὸν ᾿Αργεῖόν ποτε πέντ- | 
αθλον Νεμείων ἀνηρημένον νίκην ἀπέκτεινεν Ev- | 
, A . / ν ν ν { 
ρυβάτην βοηθοῦντα Αἰγινήταις. στρατὸν δὲ ἔξω 
- ε / 2 A / A ” 
τῆς Ελλάδος ᾿Αθηναῖοι τρίτον τοῦτον ἔστειλαν" 
Πριάμῳ μὲν γὰρ καὶ Τρωσὶ πάντες Ἕλληνες ἀπὸ 
κοινοῦ λόγου κατέστησαν ἐς πόλεμον, ᾿Αθηναῖοι 
δὲ ἰδίᾳ μετ᾽ ᾿Ιολάου τε ἐς Σαρδὼ καὶ δευτέραν ἐς 
τὴν νῦν ᾿Ιωνίαν ἐστράτευσαν καὶ τρίτον δὴ τότε 
6 ἐς τὴν Θράκην. ἔστι δὲ ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ μνήματος 
στήλη μαχομένους ἔχουσα ἱππεῖς: Μελάνωπός 
σφισίν ἐστι καὶ Μακάρτατος ὀνόματα, οὓς κατέ- 
λαβεν ἀποθανεῖν ἐναντία Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ 
Βοιωτῶν τεταγμένους, ἔνθα τῆς ᾿Ελεωνίας εἰσὶ 
χώρας πρὸς Ταναγραίους ὅροι. καὶ Θεσσαλῶν 
/ > . ε ld . ld l 
τάφος ἐστὶν ἱππέων κατὰ παλαιὰν φιλίαν ἐλθον- 
των, ὅτε σὺν ᾿Αρχιδάμῳ Πελοποννήσιοι πρῶτον 
ἐσέβαλον ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν στρατιᾷ, καὶ πλησίον 
, / q 2 ».4 / , 
τοξόταις Κρησίν' αὖθις δέ ἐστιν Αθηναίων uvi- 
pata Κλεισθένους, ᾧ τὰ ἐς τὰς φυλὰς al νῦν 
καθεστᾶσιν εὑρέθη, καὶ ἱππεῦσιν ἀποθανοῦσιν 
ἡνίκα συνεπελάβοντο οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ τοῦ κινδύνου. 
} - N A A > / ? 
7 ἐνταῦθα καὶ Ιζλεωναῖοι κεῖνται, μετὰ ᾿Αργείων ἐς 
\ ? 4 / 979 9 / / a 
τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν ἐλθόντες' ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ δέ, γράψω τοῦ 
λόγου μοι κατελθόντος ἐς τοὺς ᾿Αργείους. καὶ 

156 

ο ν Ἡ 

ATTICA, xxix. 4-7 

the name and parish of each. First were buried 
those who in Thrace, after a victorious advance as 
far as Drabescus, were unexpectedly attacked by the 
Edonians and slaughtered. There is also a legend 
that they were struck by lightning. Among the 
generals were Leagrus, to whom was entrusted chief 
command of the army, and Sophanes of Decelea, who 
killed when he came to the help of the Aeginetans 
Eurybates the Argive, who won the prize in the pent- 
athlon} at the Nemean games. This was the third 
expedition which the Athenians dispatched out of 
Greece. For against Priam and the Trojans war was 
made with one accord by all the Greeks ; but by them- 
selves the Athenians sent armies, first with Iolaus to 
Sardinia, secondly to what is now Ionia, and thirdly 
on the present occasion to Thrace. Before the 
monument is a slab on which are horsemen fighting. 
Their names are Melanopus and Macartatus, who 
met their death fighting against the Lacedaemonians 
and Boeotians on the borders of Eleon and Tanagra. 
There is also a grave of Thessalian horsemen who, by 
reason of an old alliance, came when the Pelopon- 
nesians with Archidamus invaded Attica with an 
army for the first time, and hard by that of Cretan 
bowmen. Again there are monuments to Athenians : 
to Cleisthenes, who invented the system of the tribes 
at present existing, and to horsemen who died when 
the Thessalians shared the fortune of war with the 
Athenians. Here too lie the men of Cleone, who 
came with the Argives into Attica; the occasion 
whereof I shall set forth when in the course of my 
narrative I come to the Argives. There is also the 

1 A group of five contests : leaping, foot-racing, throwing 
the quoit, throwing the spear, wrestling. 

157 

c. 465 
B.O. 

481 B.C. 

508 B.C. 

457 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αθηναίων δ᾽ ἔστι τάφος, of πρὶν ἢ στρατεῦσαι 
τὸν Μῆδον ἐπολέμησαν πρὸς Αἰγινήτας. ἣν δὲ 
ἄρα καὶ δήμου δίκαιον βούλευμα, εἰ δὴ καὶ 
᾿Αθηναῖοι μετέδοσαν δούλοις δημοσίᾳ ταφῆναι 
καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα ἐγγραφῆναι στήλῃ: δηλοῖ δὲ 
ἀγαθοὺς σφᾶς ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ γενέσθαι περὶ τοὺς 
δεσπότας. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν μνήματα ἄλλων, 
διάφορα δέ σφισι τὰ χωρία τῶν ἀγώνων" καὶ γὰρ 
τῶν ἐπ᾽ Ὄλυνθον ἐλθόντων οἱ δοκιμώτατοι καὶ 
Μελήσανδρος ἐς τὴν ἄνω Καρίαν ναυσὶν ava- 
8 πλεύσας διὰ τοῦ Μαιάνδρου, ἐτάφησαν δὲ καὶ οἱ 
τελευτήσαντες πολεμοῦντος Κασσάνδρου καὶ οἱ 
συμμαχήσαντές ποτε ᾿Αργείων. πραχθῆναι δὲ 
οὕτω σφίσι τὴν πρὸς ᾿Αργείους λέγουσι ovup- 
µαχίαν' Λακεδαιμονίοις τὴν πόλιν τοῦ θεοῦ 
σείσαντος οἱ εἵλωτες ἐς Ἰθώμην ἀπέστησαν, 
ἀφεστηκότων δὲ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι βοηθοὺς καὶ 
ἄλλους καὶ παρὰ ᾿Αθηναίων μετεπέμποντο' οἱ 
δέ σφισιν ἐπιλέκτους ἄνδρας ἀποστέλλουσι καὶ 
στρατηγὸν Κίμωνα τὸν Μιλτιάδου. τούτους 
ἀποπέμπουσιν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πρὸς ὑποψίαν 
9 ᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ οὐκ ἀνεκτὰ ἐφαίνετο περιυβρίσθαι, 
καὶ ὡς ἐκομίζοντο ὀπίσω συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσαντο 
᾿Αργείοις Λακεδαιμονίων ἐχθροῖς τὸν ἅπαντα 
οὖσι χρόνον. ὕστερον δὲ μελλούσης ᾿Αθηναίων 
ἐν Τανάγρα γίνεσθαι πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς καὶ Λακε- 
δαιμονίους μάχης, ἀφίκοντο ᾿Αθηναίοις ᾿Αργεῖοι 
βοηθοῦντες: καὶ παραυτίκα μὲν ἔχοντας πλέον 
τοὺς ᾿Αργείους νὺξ ἐπελθοῦσα ἀφείλετο τὸ σαφὲς 
τῆς νίκης, ἐς δὲ τὴν ὑστεραίαν ὑπῆρξε κρατῆσαι 
Λακεδαιμονίοις Θεσσαλῶν προδόντων ᾿Αθηναίους. 
10 καταλέξαι δέ μοι καὶ τούσδε ἐπῆλθεν, ᾿Απολ- 

Ῥω 

E. 

ATTICA, χχιχ. 7-10 

grave of the Athenians who fought against the 
Aeginetans before the Persian invasion. It was 
surely a just decree even for a democracy when the 
Athenians actually allowed slaves a public funeral, 
and to have their names inscribed on a slab, which 
declares that in the war they proved good men 
and true to their masters. There are also monu- 
ments of other men, their fields of battle lying in 
various regions. Here lie the most renowned of 
those who went against Olynthus, and Melesander 
who sailed with a fleet along the Maeander into 
upper Caria; also those who died in the war with 
Cassander, and the Argives who once fought as the 
allies of Athens. It is said that the alliance between 
the two peoples was brought about thus. Sparta 
was once shaken by an earthquake, and the Helots 
seceded to Ithome. After the secession the La- 
cedaemonians sent for help to various places, in- 
cluding Athens, which dispatched picked troops 
under the command of Cimon, the son of Miltiades. 
These the Lacedaemonians dismissed, because they 
suspected them. The Athenians regarded the in- 
sult as intolerable, and on their way back made an 
alliance with the Argives, the immemorial enemies 
of the Lacedaemonians. Afterwards, when a battle 
was imminent at Tanagra, the Athenians opposing 
the Boeotians and Lacedaemonians, the Argives 
reinforced the Athenians. For a time the Argives 
had the better, but night came on and took from 
them the assurance of their victory, and on the next 
day the Lacedaemonians had the better, as the 
Thessalians betrayed the Athenians. It occurred to 
me to tell of the following men also, firstly Apollo- 

159 

849 B.C. 
480 B.C. 

461 B.C. 

457 Β.ς. 

840 B.C. 

1] 

PAUSANIAS: DESERIPTION OF GREECE 

λόδωρον ξένων ἡγεμόνα, ὃς ᾿Αθηναῖος μὲν ἦν, 
ἐκπεμφθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ ᾿Αρσίτου σατράπου τῆς ἐφ᾽ 
Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίας διεφύλαξε Περινθίοις τὴν 
πόλιν ἐσβεβληκότος ἐς τὴν Περινθίαν Φιλίππου 
στρατῷ: οὗτός τε οὖν ἐνταῦθα τέθαπται καὶ 
Εὔβουλος ὁ Σπινθάρου καὶ ἄνδρες οἷς ἀγαθοῖς 
οὖσιν οὐκ ἐπηκολούθησε τύχη χρηστή, τοῖς μὲν 
ἐπιθεμένοις τυραννοῦντι Λαχάρει, οἱ δὲ τοῦ Ie- 
ραιῶς κατάληψιν ἐβούλευσαν Μακεδόνων φρου- 
ρούντων, πρὶν δὲ εἰργάσθαι τὸ ἔργον ὑπὸ τῶν 
συνειδότων μηνυθέντες ἀπώλοντο. κεῖνται δὲ καὶ 
οἱ περὶ Κόρινθον πεσόντες: ἐδήλωσε δὲ οὐχ 
ἥκιστα ὁ θεὸς ἐνταῦθα καὶ αὖθις ἐν Λεύκτροις 
τοὺς ὑπὸ “Ελλήνων καλουμένους ἀνδρείους τὸ 
μηδὲν ἄνευ Τύχης εἶναι, εἰ δὴ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, 
Κορινθίων τότε καὶ ᾿Αθηναίων, ἔτι δὲ καὶ ᾿Αρ- 
γείων καὶ Βοιωτῶν κρατήσαντες, ὕστερον ὑπὸ 
Βοιωτῶν μόνων ἐν Λεύκτροις ἐς τοσοῦτον ἐκακώ- 
θησαν. μετὰ δὲ τοὺς ἀποθανόντας ἐν Κορίνθῳ 
στήλην ἐπὶ τοῖσδε ἑστάναι τὴν αὐτὴν σημαίνει 
τὰ ἐλεγεῖα, τοῖς μὲν ἐν Εὐβοίᾳ καὶ Χίῳ τελευ- 
τήσασι, τοὺς δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἐσχάτοις τῆς ᾿Ασιανῆς 
ἠπείρου διαφθαρῆναι δηλοῖ, τοὺς δὲ ἐν Σικελίᾳ. 
γεγραμμένοι δέ εἰσιν of τε στρατηγοὶ πλὴν 
Νικίου, καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὁμοῦ τοῖς ἀστοῖς 
Πλαταιεῖς: Νικίας δὲ ἐπὶ τῷδε παρείθη, γράφω 
δὲ οὐδὲν διάφορα ἢ Φίλιστος, ὃς ἔφη Δημοσθένην 
μὲν σπονδὰς ποιήσασθαι τοῖς ἄλλοις πλὴν αὑτοῦ 
καὶ ὡς ἡλίσκετο αὑτὸν ἐπιχειρεῖν ἀποκτεῖναι, 

160 

ATTICA, xxrx. 10-12 

dorus, commander of the mercenaries, who was an 
Athenian dispatched by Arsites, satrap of Phrygia 
by the Hellespont, and saved their city for the 
Perinthians when Philip had invaded their territory 
with an army. He, then, is buried here, and also 
Eubulus 1 the son of Spintharus, along with men who 
though brave were not attended by good fortune; 
some attacked Lachares when he was tyrant, others 
planned the capture of the Peiraeus when in the hands 
of a Macedonian garrison, but before the deed could 
be accomplished were betrayed by their accomplices 
and put to death. Here also lie those who fell 
near Corinth. Heaven showed most distinctly here 
and again at Leuctra that those whom the Greeks 
call brave are as nothing if Good Fortune be not 
with them, seeing that the Lacedaemonians, who 
had on this occasion overcome Corinthians and 
Athenians, and furthermore Argives and Boeotians, 
were afterwards at Leuctra so utterly overthrown 
by the Boeotians alone. After those who -were 
killed at Corinth, we come across elegiac verses 
declaring that one and the same slab has been 
erected to those who died in Euboea and Chios, and 
to those who perished in the remote parts of the 
continent of Asia, or in Sicily. The names of the 
generals are inscribed with the exception of Nicias, 
and among the private soldiers are included the 
Plataeans along with the Athenians. This is the 
reason why Nicias was passed over, and my account is 
identical with that of Philistus, who says that while 
Demosthenes made a truce for the others and ex- 
cluded himself, attempting to commit suicide when 

1 A contemporary of Demosthenes. 

161 
VOL. 1. M 

304 B.C. 

371 B.C. 

445 B.C. 

413 B.C, 

19 

14 

15 

ao 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Νικίᾳ δὲ τὴν παράδοσιν ἐθελοντῇ γενέσθαι" τού- 
των ἕνεκα οὐκ ἐνεγράφη Νικίας τῇ στήλῃ, Kata- 
γνωσθεὶς αἰχμάλωτος ἐθελοντὴς εἶναι. καὶ οὐκ 
ἀνὴρ πολέμῳ πρέπων. εἰσὶ δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῃ στήλῃ 
καὶ οἱ μαχεσάμενοι περὶ Θράκην καὶ ἐν Μεγά- 
ροις καὶ ἡνίκα ᾿Αρκάδας τοὺς ἐν Μαντινείᾳ καὶ 
᾿Ηλείους ἔπεισεν ᾿Αλκιβιάδης Λακεδαιμονίων 
ἀποστῆναι καὶ οἱ πρὶν ἐς Σικελίαν ἀφικέσθαι 
Δημοσθένην Συρακουσίων κρατήσαντες. ἐτάφη- 
σαν δὲ καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ναυμαχή- 
σαντες καὶ ὅσοι Μακεδόνων ἐναντία ἠγωνίσαντο 
ἐν Χαιρωνείᾳ καὶ οἱ μετὰ Κλέωνος ἐς ᾽Αμϕίπολιν 
στρατεύσαντες, οὗ τε ἐν Δηλίφ τῷ Ταναγραίων 
τελευτήσαντες καὶ ὅσους ἐς Θεσσαλίαν Λεω- 
σθένης ἤ ἤγαγε καὶ οἱ πλεύσαντες ἐς Κύπρον ue 
Κίμωνι, τῶν τε σὺν Ὀλυμπιοδώρῳ τὴν φρουρὰ ν 
ἐκβαλόντων τριῶν καὶ δέκα ἄνδρες οὐ πλείους. 
φασὶ δὲ ᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ “Ῥωμαίοις ὅμορόν τινα 
πολεμοῦσι πόλεμον στρατιὰν οὐ πολλὴν πέμψαι, 
καὶ ὕστερον ναυμαχίας “Ῥωμαίων πρὸς Καρχη- 
δονίους γινομένης τριήρεις πέντε ᾿Αττικαὶ παρε- 
γένοντο" ἔστιν οὖν καὶ τούτοις ἐνταῦθα τοῖς 
ἀνδράσιν ὁ τάφος. Τολμίδου δὲ καὶ τῶν σὺν 
αὐτῷ δεδήλωται μὲν ἤδη μοι τὰ ἔργα καὶ ὃν 
τρόπον ἐτελεύτησαν" ἴστω δὲ ὅτῳ φίλον κει- 
μένους σφᾶς κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ταύτην. κεῖνται 
δὲ καὶ οἱ σὺν Κίμωνι τὸ μέγα ἔργον πεζῇ καὶ 
ναυσὶν αὐθημερὸν κρατήσαντες: τέθαπται δὲ καὶ 
Κόνων καὶ Τιμόθεος, δεύτεροι μετὰ Μιλτιάδην 
καὶ Κίμωνα οὗτοι πατὴρ καὶ παῖς ἔργα ἀποδει- 
ξάμενοι λαμπρά. κεῖται δὲ καὶ Ζήνων ἐνταῦθα 
ὁ Μνασέου καὶ Χρύσιππος ὁ Σολεύς, Νικίας τε ὁ 

162 

κω. 

ATTICA, xxix, 12-15 

taken prisoner, Nicias voluntarily submitted to the 
surrender. For this reason Nicias had not his 
name inscribed on the slab, being condemned as a 
voluntary prisoner and an unworthy soldier. On 
another slab are the names of those who fought in 
the region of Thrace and at Megara, and when 
Alcibiades persuaded the Arcadians in Mantinea and 
the Eleans to revolt from the Lacedaemonians, and 
of those who were victorious over the Syracusans before 
Demosthenes arrived in Sicily. Here were buried also 
those who fought in the sea-fights near the Helles- 
pont, those who opposed the Macedonians at Chae- 
ronea, those who marched with Cleon to Amphipolis, 
those who were killed at Delium in the territory of 
Tanagra, the men Leosthenes led into Thessaly, 
those who sailed with Cimon to Cyprus, and of those 
who with Olympiodorus! expelled the garrison not 
more than thirteen men. The Athenians declare 
that when the Romans were waging a border war 
they sent a small force to help them, and later on five 
Attic warships assisted the Romans in a naval action 
against the Carthaginians. Accordingly these men 
also have their grave here. The achievements of 
Tolmides and his men, and the manner of their death, 
I have already set forth, and any who are interested 
may take note that they are buried along this road. 
Here lie too those who with Cimon achieved the 
great feat of winning a land and naval victory on one 
and the same day. Here also are buried Conon and 
Timotheus, father and son, the second pair thus re- 
lated to accomplish illustrious deeds, Miltiades and 
Cimon being the first ; Zeno? too, the son of Mnaseas 
and Chrysippus ? of Soli, Nicias the son of Nicomedes, 

1 See p. 133. 3 Stoic philosophers. 
163 
M 2 

445 B.c. 
420 B.c. 

409 B.C. 
838 B.C. 
422 B.C. 
424 B.C. 

449 B.C. 

466 B.C. 

16 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Νικομήδους ζῷα ἄριστος γράψαι τῶν ἐφ᾽ aù- 
τοῦ, καὶ Αρμόδιος καὶ ᾿Αριστογείτων οἱ τὸν 
Πεισιστράτου παῖδα “Ἵππαρχον ἀποκτείναντες, 
ῥήτορές τε ᾿Εφιάλτης, ὃς τὰ νόµιµα τὰ ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ 
πάγῳ μάλιστα ἐλυμήνατο, καὶ Λυκοῦργος ὁ Λυ- 
κόφρονος. Λυκούργῳ δὲ ἐπορίσθη μὲν τάλαντα 
ἐς τὸ δημόσιον πεντακοσίοις πλείονα καὶ ἑξα- 
κισχιλίοις ἢ ὅσα Περικλῆς ὁ Ἐανθίππου συνή- 
γαγε, κατεσκεύασε δὲ πομπεῖα τῇ θεῷ καὶ Νίκας 
χρυσᾶς καὶ παρθένοις κόσμον ἑκατόν, ἐς δὲ πόλε- 
μον ὅπλα καὶ βέλη καὶ τετρακοσίας ναυμαχοῦσιν 
εἶναι τριήρεις: οἰκοδομήματα δὲ ἐπετέλεσε 
τὸ θέατρον ἑτέρων ὑπαρξαμένων, τὰ δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς 
αὑτοῦ πολιτείας ἃ ᾠκοδόμησεν ἐν Πειραιεῖ νεώς 
εἰσιν οἶκοι καὶ τὸ πρὸς τῷ Λυκείῳ καλουμένῳ 
γυμνάσιον. ὅσα μὲν οὖν ἀργύρου πεποιημένα ἦν 
καὶ χρυσοῦ, Λαχάρης καὶ ταῦτα ἐσύλησε τυραν- 
νήσας" τὰ δὲ οἰκοδομήματα καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔτι ἦν. 
ΧΧΧ. Πρὸ δὲ τῆς ἐσόδου τῆς ἐς ᾿Ακαδημίαν 
ἐστὶ βωμὸς Ἔρωτος ἔχων ἐπίγραμμα ὡς Xdppos 
᾿Αθηναίων πρῶτος Ἔρωτι ἀναθείη. τὸν δὲ ἐν 
πόλει βωμὸν καλούμενον ᾿Αντέρωτος ἀνάθημα 
εἶναι λέγουσι μετοίκων, ὅτι Μέλης ᾿Αθηναῖος 
μέτοικον ἄνδρα Τιμαγόραν ἐρασθέντα ἀτιμάζων 
ἀφεῖναι κατὰ τῆς πέτρας αὑτὸν ἐκέλευσεν ἐς τὸ 
ὑψηλότατον αὐτῆς ἀνελθόντα" Γιμαγόρας δὲ ἄρα 
καὶ ψυχῆς εἶχεν ἀφειδῶς καὶ πᾷντα ὁμοίως 
κελεύοντι ἤθελε χαρίζεσθαι τῷ μειρακίῳ καὶ δὴ 
καὶ φέρων ἑαυτὸν ἀφῆκε: Μέλητα δέ, ὡς aro- 
θανόντα εἶδε Τιμαγόραν, ἐς τοσοῦτο μετανοίας 
ἐλθεῖν ὡς πεσεῖν τε ἀπὸ τῆς πέτρας τῆς αὐτῆς 
καὶ οὕτως ἀφεὶς αὑτὸν ἐτελεύτησε. καὶ τὸ 

164 

ATTICA, xxix. τς-χχχ. 1 

the best painter from life of all his contemporaries, 
Harmodius and Aristogeiton, who killed Hipparchus, 
the son of Peisistratus; there are also two orators, 
Ephialtes, who was chiefly responsible for the 
abolition of the privileges of the Areopagus, and +3-! 
Lycurgus,! the son of Lycophron; Lycurgus pro- *® 
vided for the state-treasury six thousand five hundred 
talents more than Pericles, the son of Xanthippus, 
collected, and furnished for the procession of the 
Goddess golden figures of Victory and ornaments for 

a hundred maidens; for war he provided arms and 
missiles, besides increasing the fleet to four hundred 
warships. As for buildings, he completed the theatre 
that others had begun, while during his political life 

he built dockyards in the Peiraeus and the gymnasium 
near what is called the Lyceum. Everything made 

of silver or gold became part of the plunder Lachares 
made away with when he became tyrant, but the 
buildings remained to my time. 

-- XXX. Before the entrance to the Academy is an 
altar to Love, with an inscription that Charmus was 
the first Athenian to dedicate an altar to that god. 
The altar within the city called the altar of Anteros 
(Love Avenged) they say was dedicated by resident 
aliens, because the Athenian Meles, spurning the love 
of Timagoras, a resident alien, bade him ascend to 
the highest point of the rock and cast himself down. 
Now Timagoras took no account of his life, and was 
ready to gratify the youth in any of his requests, so 
he went and cast himself down. When Meles saw 
that Timagoras was dead, he suffered such pangs 
of remorse that he threw himself from the same 
rock and so died. From this time the resident 

1 A contemporary of Demosthenes, 

165 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐντεῦθεν δαίµονα ᾽Αντέρωτα τὸν ἁλάστορα τὸν 
Τιμαγόρου κατέστη τοῖς μετοίκοις νομίζειν. ἐν 
᾿᾽Ακαδημία δέ ἐστι Προμηθέως βωμός, καὶ θέουσιν 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἔχοντες καιομένας 
λαμπάδας: τὸ δὲ ἀγώνισμα ὁμοῦ τῷ δρόμῳ 
φυλάξαι τὴν δᾷδα ἔτι καιομένην ἐστίν, ano- 
σβεσθείσης δὲ οὐδὲν ἔτι τῆς νίκης τῷ πρώτῳ, 
δευτέρῳ δὲ ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ μέτεστιν' εἰ δὲ μηδὲ τούτῳ 
καίοιτο, ὁ τρίτος ἐστὶν ὁ κρατῶν" εἰ δὲ καὶ πᾶσιν 
ἀποσβεσθείη, οὐδείς ἐστιν ὅτῳ καταλείπεται ἡ 
νίκη. ἔστι δὲ Μουσῶν τε βωμὸς καὶ ἕτερος 
Ἑρμοῦ καὶ ἔνδον ᾿Αθηνᾶς, τὸν δὲ "Ἡρακλέους 
ἐποίησαν: καὶ φυτόν ἐστιν ἐλαίας, δεύτερον τοῦτο 
λεγόμενον φανῆναι. 

? Ια . 9 / / A / 

Ακαδηµίας δὲ οὐ πόρρω Πλάτωνος μνῆμά 
ἐστιν, ᾧ προεσήμαινεν ὁ θεὸς ἄριστον τὰ ἐς 
φιλοσοφίαν ἔσεσθαι" προεσήμαινε δὲ οὕτω. Zw- 
κράτης τῇ προτέρᾳ νυκτὶ ἢ Πλάτων ἔμελλεν 
ἔσεσθαί οἱ μαθητὴς ἐσπτῆναί οἱ κύκνον ἐς τὸν 
κόλπον εἶδεν ὄνειρον" ἔστι δὲ κύκνῳ τῷ ὄρνιθι 
μουσικῆς δόξα, ὅτι Λιγύων τῶν ᾿Ηριδανοῦ πέραν 
ὑπὲρ γῆς τῆς Κελτικῆς Κύκνον ἄνδρα μουσικὸν 
γενέσθαι βασιλέα φασί, τελευτήσαντα δὲ ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος γνώμῃ μεταβαλεῖν λέγουσιν αὐτὸν ἐς τὸν 
ὄρνιθα. ἐγὼ δὲ βασιλεῦσαι μὲν πείθομαι Λί- 
γυσιν ἄνδρα μουσικόν, γενέσθαι δέ μοι ἄπιστον 
ὄρνιθα ἀπ᾽ ἀνδρός. κατὰ τοῦτο τῆς χώρας 
φαίνεται πύργος Τίμωνος, ὃς μόνος εἶδε μηδένα 
τρόπον εὐδαίμονα εἶναι γενέσθαι πλὴν τοὺς 
ἄλλους φεύγοντα ἀνθρώπους. δείκνυται δὲ καὶ 
χῶρος καλούμενος κολωνὸς ἵππιος, ἔνθα τῆς 

166 

A O ` 

ATTICA, xxx. 1-4 

aliens worshipped as Anteros the avenging spirit of 
Timagoras. In the Academy is an altar to Prome- 
theus, and from it they run to the city carrying 
burning torches. The contest is while running to 
keep the torch still alight; if the torch of the first 
runner goes out, he has no longer any claim to 
victory, but the second runner has. If his torch 
also goes out, then the third man is the victor. If 
all the torches go out, no one is left to be winner. 
There is an altar to the Muses, and another to 
Hermes, and one within to Athena, and they have 
built one to Heracles. There is also an olive tree, 
accounted to be the second that appeared. 

Not far from the Academy is the monument of 
Plato, to whom heaven foretold that he would be 
the prince of philosophers. The manner of the 
foretelling was this. On the night before Plato 
was to become his pupil Socrates in a dream saw 
a swan fly into his bosom. Now the swan is a 
bird with a reputation for music, because, they say, 
a musician of the name of Swan became king of the 
Ligyes on the other side of the Eridanus beyond the 
Celtic territory, and after his death by the will of 
Apollo he was changed into the bird. I am ready 
to believe that a musician became king of the 
Ligyes, but I cannot believe that a bird grew out 
of a man. In this part of the country is seen the 
tower of Timon, the only man to see that there is 
no way to be happy except to shun other men. 
There is also pointed out a place called the Hill of 
Horses, the first point in Attica, they say, that 

167 

Ww 

a 

s 

vB 

- 

UA 

A 

eN 

A 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αττικῆς πρῶτον ἐλθεῖν λέγουσιν Οἰδίποδα-- 
διάφορα μὲν καὶ ταῦτα τῇ Ὁμήρου ποιήσει, 
λέγουσι δ᾽ οὗν---, καὶ βωμὸς Ποσειδῶνος Ἱππίου 
ν - e / ς aAa \ / \ 
καὶ Αθηνᾶς Ἱππίας, ἡρῷον δὲ Πειρίθου καὶ 
Θησέως Οἰδίποδός τε καὶ ᾿Αδράστου. τὸ δὲ 
ἄλσος τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος καὶ τὸν ναὸν ἐνέπρησεν 
» ld 9 ΄ \ y a , 
Αντίγονος ἐσβαλών, καὶ ἄλλοτε στρατιᾷ kako- 
σας ᾿Αθηναίοις τὴν γῆν. 
- XXXI. Δῆμοι δὲ οἱ μικροὶ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, ὡς 

5 Ρ ο , θ / (ὃ ? / 
1 Se ετυχεν ἑεκαστοςς-οικισύσείς, TAOE ES μνήμην TA- 

ρείχοντο' ᾽Αλιμουσίοις μὲν Θεσμοφόρου Δήμη- 

τρος καὶ Κόρης ἐστὶν ἱερόν, ἐν Ζωστῆρι δὲ ἐπὶ 
θαλάσσης καὶ βωμὸς ᾿Αθηνᾶς καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος 
καὶ Αρτέμιδος καὶ Λητοῦς. τεκεῖν μὲν οὖν Λητὼ 

-ο, τοὺς παῖδας ἐνταῦθα οὔ φασι, λύσασθαι δὲ τὸν 

μα) t j a ὃν η 5 έ 
ae ζωστῆρα ὡς τεξομένην, κα 

\ 

S Τε ῷ χωρίῳ διὰ τοῦτο 
γενέσθαι τὸ ὄνομα. ἩΠροσπαλτίοις δέ ἐστι καὶ 
τούτοις Κόρης καὶ Δήμητρος ἱερὸν, ᾿Αναγὐρασίοις 
δὲ Μητρὸς θεῶν ἱερόν: oe Ae δὲ οἱ Διόσ- 
κουροι νομίζονται μάλιστα, Μεγάλους veges 

εὖσιν 

ε 
2 οἱ ταύτῃ θεοὺς ὀνομάξουσιν. ἐν δὲ Πρ 

᾿Απόλλωνός ἐστι ναός: ἐνταῦθα τὰς Ὑπερβορέων 
ἀπαρχὰς ἰέναι λέγεται, παραδιδόναι δὲ αὐτὰς 
Ὑπερβορέους μὲν ᾿Αριμασποῖς, ᾿Αριμασποὺς ὃ 
Ισσηδόσι, παρὰ δὲ τούτων Σκύθας ἐς Σινώπην 
κομίξειν, ἐντεῦθεν δὲ φέρεσθαι διὰ Ἑλλήνων ἐς 
Πρασιάς, ᾿Αθηναίους δὲ εἶναι τοὺς ἐς Δῆλον ἄγον- 
τας: τὰς δὲ ἀπαρχὰς κεκρύφθαι μὲν ἐν καλάμη 
T” ~ γυώσκεσθαι δὲ ὑπ᾽ οὐδένων. ἔστι δὲ 
t Πρασιαῖς Ἐρυσίχθονος, ὡς ἐκομίξετο 

την θεωρίαν ἐκ Δήλου, γενομένης οι 

λοῦν τῆς τελευτῆς. Κραναὸν δὲ τὸν 

ATTICA, xxx. 4-ΧΧΧΙ. 3 

Oedipus reached—this account too differs from that 
given by Homer, but it is nevertheless current 
tradition—and an altar to Poseidon, Horse God, and 
to Athena, Horse Goddess, and a chapel to the 
heroes Peirithous and Theseus, Oedipus and Adrastus. 
The grove and temple of Poseidon were burnt by 
Antigonus! when he invaded Attica, who at other 
times also ravaged the land of the Athenians. 
XXXI. The small parishes of Attica, which “were 
founded severally as chance would have it, presented 
the following noteworthy features. At Alimus is a 
sanctuary of Demeter Lawgiver and of the Maid, 
and at Zoster (Girdle) on the coast is an altar to 
Athena, as well as to Apollo, to Artemis and to 
Leto. The story is that Leto did not give birth to 
her children here, but loosened her girdle with a 
view to her delivery, and the place received its 
name from this incident. Prospalta has also a 
sanctuary of the Maid and Demeter, and Anagyrus 
a sanctuary of the Mother of the gods. At Cephale 
the chief cult is that of the Dioscuri, for the in- 
habitants call them the Great gods. At Prasiae is 
a temple of Apollo. Hither they say are sent the 
first-fruits of the Hyperboreans, and the Hyper- 
boreans are said to hand them over to the Arimaspi, the 
Arimaspi to the Issedones, from these the Scythians 
bring them to Sinope, thence theyare carried by Greeks 
to Prasiae, and the Athenians take them to Delos. 
The first-fruits are hidden in wheat straw, and they 
are known of none. There is at Prasiae a monu- 
ment to Erysichthon, who died on the voyage home 
from Delos, after the sacred mission thither. How 

1 See p. 3. 
169 

ue 

PAUSANIAS: ΜΜΕ. ΟΝ OF GREECE 

βασιλεύσαντα ᾿Αθηναίων gri μὲ μὲν ἐξέβαλεν Αμ 
φικτύων κηδεστὴν ὅ ὄντα, ἔτι πρότερον εἴρηταί μοι’ 

. 
υ ως, δὲ αὐτὸν σὺν τοῖς στασιώταις ἐς τὸν 

ῆμον τὸν Λαμπτρέα ἀποθανεῖν τε αὐτοῦ καὶ 
ταφῆναί φασι, καὶ ἔστι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἐν τοῖς 
Λαμπτρεῦσι Κραναοῦ μνῆμα. Ἴωνος δὲ τοῦ 
Ἐούθου-- καὶ γὰρ οὗτος ῴκησε παρὰ ᾿Αθηναίοις 
καὶ Αθηναίων è ἐπὶ τοῦ πολέμου τοῦ προς Ἐλευ- 
σινίους ἐπολεμάρχησε--τάφος ἐν Trofeo ἐστι 

τῆς χώρας. ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω λέγεται, Φλὂδεῦσι: 

€ εἰσι καὶ Μυρρι ουσίοις τοῖς μὲν ᾿Απόλλωνος 
Διονυσοδότου καὶ Αρτέμιδος Σελ φόρου βωμοὶ 
Διονύσου τε ᾿Ανθίου καὶ νυμφῶν "Io guider Kal 
Γῆς, ἣν Μεγάλην θεὸν ὀνομάξουσι" ναὸδ δὲ ἕτερος 
ἔχει βωμοὺς Δήμητρος ᾿Ανησιδώρας ὶ Διὸς 
Κτησίου καὶ Τιθρωνῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς καὶ Kopn Se 
τογόνης καὶ Σεμνῶν ὀνομαξομένων θεῶν' τὸ 

Μυρρινοῦντι ξόανόν ἐστι Κολαινίδος. ᾿Αθμονεῖς 
δὲ τιμῶσιν ᾿Αμαρυσίαν "Αρτεμιν: πυνθανόμενος 
δὲ σαφὲς οὐδὲν. ἐς αὐτὰς ἐπισταμένους τοὺς έξη 
γητὰς εὗρον, αὐτὸς δὲ συμβάλλομαι τῆδε. ἔστιν 
᾿Αμάρυνθος ἐ ἐν Εὐβοίᾳ" καὶ γὰρ οἱ ταύτῃ τιμῶσιν 
᾿Αμαρυσίαν, ἑ ἑορτὴν δὲ καὶ ᾿Αθηναῖοι τῆς -Άμαρυ- 

σίας ἄγουσιν οὐδέν Τι Εὐβοέων ἀφανέστερον' | 

ταύτῃ μὲν γενέσθαι τὸ ὄνομα ἐπὶ τούτῳ παρὰ 

᾿Αθμονεῦσιν ἡγοῦμαι, τὴν δὲ ἐν Μυρρινοῦντι | 

Κολαινίδα ἀπὸ Κολαίνου καλεῖσθαι. γέγραπται 

δ᾽ ἤδη pou TOV ἐν τοῖς δήμοις φάναι πολλοὺς ὡς ! 
καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἐβασιλεύοντο τῆς Κέκροπος | 

ἔστι δὲ ὁ Κόλαινος ἀνδρὸς ὄνομα πρότερον ἢ 

Κέκροψ ἐβασίλευσεν---ὡς οἱ Μυρρινούσιοι λέ-, 

17ο 

t 
1 

t 

1 

+ 

1 

ATTICA, χχχι. 3-5 

Amphictyon banished Cranaus, his kinsman by mar- 
riage and king of Athens, I have already related. 
They say that fleeing with his supporters to the 
parish of Lamptrae he died and was buried there, 
and at the present day there is a monument to 
Cranaus at Lamptrae. At Potami in Attica is also 
the grave of Ion the son of Xuthus—for he too dwelt 
among the Athenians and was their commander- 
in-chief in the war with Eleusis. Such is the 
legend. Phlya and Myrrhinus have altars of Apollo 
Dionysodotus, Artemis Light-bearer, Dionysus 
Flower-god, the Ismenian nymphs and Earth, whom 
they name the Great goddess; a second temple 
contains altars of Demeter Anesidora (Sender-up 
of Gifts), Zeus Ctesius (God of Gain), Tithrone 
Athena, the Maid First-born and the goddesses 
styled August. The wooden image at Myrrhinus is of 
Colaenis. Athmonia worships Artemis Amarysia. On 
inquiry I discovered that the guides knew nothing 
about these deities, so I give my own conjecture. 
Amarynthus is a town in Euboea, the inhabitants 
of which worship Amarysia, while the festival of 
Amarysia which the Athenians celebrate is no less 
splendid than the Euboean. The name of the 
goddess, I think, came to Athmonia in this fashion, 
and the Colaenis in Myrrhinus is called after 
Colaenus. I have already written that many of the 
inhabitants of the parishes say that they were ruled 
by kings even before the reign of Cecrops. Now 
Colaenus, say the Myrrhinusians, is the name of a 
man who ruled before Cecrops became king. There 

171 

6 γουσιν--ἄρξαντος. ἔστι δὲ ᾿Αχαρναὶ δῆμος" 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

Ἡρακλέα. καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς βωμός ἐστιν "Υγείας" 
τὴν δ᾽ Ἱππίαν ᾿Αθηνᾶν ὀνομάζουσι καὶ Διόνυσον 
Μελπόμενον καὶ Κισσὸν τὸν αὐτὸν θεόν, τὸν 
κισσὸν τὸ φυτὸν ἐνταῦθα πρῶτον φανῆναι λέ- 
Ύοντες. 

XXXII. “Opn δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐστὶ Πεντελικὸν 
ἔνθα λιθοτομίαι, καὶ Πάρνης παρεχομένη θήραν 
συῶν ἀγρίων καὶ ἄρκτων, καὶ Ὑμηττὸς ὃς φύει 
νομὰς μελίσσαις ἐπιτηδειοτάτας πλὴν τῆς ᾿Αλα- 

ζώνων. ᾿Αλαξῶσι γὰρ Να eee oe ἄλ- 
λοις 1 ἐς νομὰς ἰοῦσιν εἰσὶν ἄφθτοι καὶ μέλὰσσαι, 
δὲ - 3 / θ / Μ á : 
οὐδὲ σφᾶς ἐς σίμβλους καθείρξαντες ἔχουσιν' αἱ 
δὲ ἐργάξονταί τε ὡς ἔτυχον τῆς χώρας καὶ ovp- 
a . 
φυὲς τὸ ΡΥ ο ἐστιν, ἰδίᾳ δὲ οὔτε κηρὸν 
οὔτε μέλι ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ποιήσεις. τοῦτο μὲν τοιοῦ- 
/ > 3 / \ A ” . A » / 

τόν ἐστιν, ᾿Αθηναίοις δὲ τὰ ὄρη καὶ θεῶν ἀγάλ- 
ματα ἔχει Πεντελῆσι μὲν ᾿Αθηνᾶς, ἐν ὝὙμηττῷ 
δὲ ἄγαλμά ἐστιν Ὑμηττίου Διός, βωμοὶ δὲ καὶ 
᾿Ὀμβρίου Διὸς καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνός εἶσι Προοψίου. 
A λ 
καὶ ἐν Πάρνηθι Παρνήθιος Ζεὺς χαλκοῦς ἐστι καὶ 
βωμὸς Σημαλέου Διός" ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῇ Πάρνηθι 
y / / > 9 > A \ 
καὶ ἄλλος βωμός, θύουσι δὲ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοτὲ μὲν 
- \ 
Ὄμβριον τοτὲ δὲ ᾿Απήμιον καλοῦντες Δία. καὶ 
᾿Αγχεσμὸς ὄρος ἐστὶν οὐ μέγα καὶ Διὸς ἄγαλμα 

᾿Αγχεσμίου. 
Πρὶν δὲ ἢ τῶν νήσων ἐς ἀφήγησιν τραπέσθαι, 
nr / 
τὰ ἐς τοὺς δήµους ἔχοντα αὖθις ἐπέξειμι. δῆμος 
ἐστι Μαραθὼν ἴσον τῆς πόλεως τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων 
ἀπέχων καὶ Καρύστου τῆς ἐν Εὐβοία' ταύτῃ τῆς 

1 τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, emended by Korais. 
172 

A 

ATTICA, χχχι. σ-χαχιι. 3 

is a parish called Acharnae, where they worship 
Apollo Agyieus (God of Streets) and Heracles, and 
there is an altar of Athena Health. And they call 
upon the name of Athena Horse-goddess and Dio- 
my sus Singer and Dionysus Ivy, saying that the plant 
ivy first appeared there. 
| ΧΧΧΗ. The Attic mountains are Pentelicus, 
-where there are quarries, Parnes, where there is 
hunting of wild boars and of bears, and Hymettus, 
which grows the most suitable pasture for bees, 
except that of the Alazones.! For these people have 
- actually bees ranging free, tamely following the 
other creatures when they go to pasture. These 
- bees are not kept shut up in hives, and they work in 
any part of the land they happen to visit. They 
produce a solid mass from which you cannot separate 
' either wax or honey. Such then is its nature. The 
Athenians have also statues of gods on their moun- 
tains. On Pentelicus is a statue of Athena, on 
Hymettus one of Zeus Hymettius. There are altars 
both of Zeus Rain-god and of Apollo Foreseer. On 
Parnes is a bronze Zeus Parnethius, and an altar to 
Zeus Semaleus (Sign-giving). There is on Parnes 
another altar, and on it they make sacrifice, calling 
Zeus sometimes Rain-god, sometimes Averter of Ills. 
Anchesmus is a mountain of no great size, with an 
image of Zeus Anchesmius. 

Before turning to a description of the islands, I 
must again proceed with my account of the parishes. 
There is a parish called Marathon, equallydistant from 
Athens and Carystus in Euboea. It was at this point 

1 A people of S. Russia. 173 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αττικῆς ἔ ἔσχον οἱ βάρβαροι καὶ μάχῃ τε ἐκρατή- 
θησαν καί τινας ὡς ἀνήγοντο ἀπώλεσαν τῶν νεῶν. 
τάφος δὲ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ᾿Αθηναίων ἐστίν, ἐπὶ δὲ 
αὐτῷ στῆλαι τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν ἀποθανόντων κατὰ 
φυλὰς ἑκάστων ἔχουσαι, καὶ ἕτερος Ἡλαταιεῦσι 
Βοιωτῶν καὶ δούλους" ἐμαχέσαντο γὰρ καὶ δοῦλοι 
τότε πρῶτον. καὶ ἀνδρός ἐστιν ἰδίᾳ μνῆμα Μιλ- 
τιάδου τοῦ Κίμωνος, συμβάσης ὕστερόν οἱ τῆς 
τελευτῆς Πάρου τε ἁμαρτόντι καὶ δι αὐτὸ ἐς 
Kpiow ᾿Αθηναίοις καταστάντι. ἐνταῦθα ava πᾶ- 
σαν νύκτα καὶ í ἵππων χρεμετιξόντων καὶ ἀνδρῶν 
μαχομένων᾽ ἔστιν αἰσθέσθαι: καταστῆναι δὲ ἐς 
ἐναργῆ θέαν v ἐπίτηδες 'πὲν p οὐκ ο ὅτῳ ovvi 
νεγκεν, ἀγηκόῳ δὲ ὄντι καὶ ἄλλως βὰν οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἐκ τῶν δαιμόνων ενα ὅλες ναῷ δὲ οἱ 
Μαραθώνιοι τούτους τε οἳ παρὰ τὴν μάχην ἀπέ- 
θανον 7 ἥρωας ὀνομάξοντες καὶ Μαραθῶνα ἀφ᾽ οὗ 
τῷ δήμῳ τὸ ὄνομά ἐστι καὶ Ἡρακλέα, φάμενοι 
πρώτοις Ελλήνων σφίσιν Ἡρακλέα θεὸν vout- 
σθῆναι. συνέβη δὲ ὡς λέγουσιν ἄνδρα ἐν τῇ 
μάχῃ παρεῖναι τὸ εἶδος καὶ τὴν σκευὴν ἄγροικον" 
οὗτος τῶν βαρβάρων πολλοὺς καταφονεύσας ἀρό- 
τρῳ μετὰ τὸ ἔργον ἦν ἀφανής". ἐρομένους δὲ An- 
ναΐοις ἄλλο μὲν ὁ θεὸς ἐς αὐτὸν ἔχρησεν οὐδέν, 
τιμᾶν δὲ ᾿Εχετλαῖον ἐκέλευσεν ἥρωα. πεπούηται 
δὲ καὶ τρόπαιον λίθου λευκοῦ. τοὺς δὲ Μήδους 
᾿Αθηναῖοι μὲν θάψαι λέγουσιν ὡς πάντως ὅσιον 
ἀνθρώπου νεκρὸν γῇ κρύψαι, τάφον δὲ οὐδένα 
εὗρεῖν ἐδυνάμην" οὔτε γὰρ χῶμα οὔτε ἄλλο ση- 
μεῖον ἦν ἰδεῖν, ἐς ὄρυγμα δὲ φέροντες σφᾶς ὡς 

174 κ... 

ATTICA, χχχιι, 3-5 

in Attica that the foreigners landed, were defeated 

in battle, and lost some of their vessels as they were 490 μ.ο. 
putting off from the land. On the plain is the grave 

of the Athenians, and upon it are slabs giving the 
names of the killed according to their tribes; and 

there is another grave for the Boeotian Plataeans | 
and for the slaves, for slaves fought then for the 

first time by the side of their masters. There es 
also a separate monument to one man, Miltiades; 

the son of Cimon, although his end came later, after 
he had failed to take Paros and for this reason had 
been brought to trial by the Athenians. At Marathon 
every night you can hear horses neighing and men 
fighting. No one who has expressly set himself to 
behold this vision has ever got any good from it, but 
the spirits are not wroth with such as in ignorance 
chance to be spectators. The Marathonians worship 
both those who died in the fighting, calling them 
heroes, and secondly Marathon, from whom the parish 
derives its name, and then Heracles, saying that they 
were the first among the Greeks to acknowledge him 
asa god. They say too that there chanced to be present 
in the battle a man of rustic appearance and dress. 
Having slaughtered many of the foreigners with a 
plough he was seen no more after the engagement. 
When the Athenians made enquiries at the oracle the 
god merely ordered them to honour Echetlaeus (He 
of the Plough-tdil) as a hero. A trophy too of white 
marble has been erected. Although the Athenians 
assert that they buried the Persians, because in every 
case the divine law applies that a corpse should be 
laid under the earth, yet I could find no grave. 
There was neither mound nor other trace to be seen, 
as the dead were carried to a trench and thrown in 

175 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

6 τύχοιεν ἐσέβαλον. ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῷ Μαραθῶνι 
πηγὴ καλουμένη Μακαρία, καὶ τοιάδε ἐς αὐτὴν 
λέγουσι». Ἡρακλῆς ὡς ἐκ Τίρυνθος ἔφευγεν 
Εὐρυσθέα, παρὰ Κήυκα φίλον ὄντα μετοικίξεται 
βασιλεύοντα Τραχῖνος. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπελθόντος ἐξ 
ἀνθρώπων Ἡρακλέους ἐξήτει τοὺς παῖδας Eùpv- 
σθεύς, ἐς ᾿Αθήνας πέμπει σφᾶς ὁ Τραχίνιος ἆσθέ- 
νειάν τε λέγων τὴν αὑτοῦ καὶ Θησέα οὐκ ἀδύνατον 
εἶναι τιμωρεῖν: ἀφικόμενοι δὲ οἱ παῖδες ἱκέται 
πρῶτον τότε Πελοποννησίοις ποιοῦσι πόλεμον 
πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους, Θησέως "τ; οὐκ ἐκδόντος 
αἰτοῦντι Εὐρυσθεῖ. λέγουσι ᾿Αθηναίοις γενέ- 
σθαι χρησμὸν τῶν παίδων ἀποθανεῖν χρῆναι τῶν 
"Ηρακλέους τινὰ ἐθελοντήν, ἐπεὶ ἄλλως γε οὐκ 
εἶναι νίκην σφίσιν: ἐνταῦθα Μακαρία Δηιανείρας 
καὶ "Ἡρακλέους θυγάτηρ. ἀποσφάξασα ἑαυτὴν 
ἔδωκεν ᾿Αθηναίοις τε κρατῆσαι τῷ πολέμῳ καὶ τῇ 
πηγῆ τὸ ὄνομα ad’ αὑτῆς. ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῷ Μαρα- 
θῶνι λίμνη τὰ πολλὰ ἑλώδης' ἐς ταύτην ἀπειρία 
τῶν ὁδῶν φεύγοντες ἐσπίπτουσιν οἱ βάρβαροι, 
καί σφισι τὸν φόνον τὸν πολὺν ἐπὶ τούτῳ συμ: 
βῆναι λέγουσιν" ὑπὲρ δὲ τὴν λίμνην φάτναι εἰσὶ 
λίθου τῶν ἵππων τῶν ᾿Αρταφέρνους καὶ σημεῖα 
ἐν πέτραις σκηνῆς. ῥεῖ δὲ καὶ ποταμὸς ἐκ τῆς 
λύμνης, τὰ μὲν πρὸς αὐτῇ τῇ λίμνῃ βοσκήμασιν 
ὕδωρ ἐπιτήδειον παρεχόμενος, κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκβο- 
λὴν τὴν ἐς τὸ πέλαγος ἁλμυρὸς ἤδη, γίνεται καὶ 
ἰχθύων τῶν θαλασσίων πλήρης. ὀλίγον δὲ atow- 
τέρω τοῦ πεδίου Ἡανός ἐστιν Spas καὶ σπήλαιον 
θέας ἄξιον" ἔσοδος μὲν ἐς αὐτὸ στενή, παρελθοῦσι 
δέ εἰσιν οἶκοι καὶ λουτρὰ καὶ καλούμενον Πανὸς 
αἰπόλιον, πέτραι τὰ πολλὰ αἰξὶν εἰκασμέναι. 

176 

a, Si agar i o E ee 

ATTICA, χχχιι. 5-7 

anyhow. In Marathon is a spring called Macaria, 
with the following legend. When Heracles left 
Tiryns, fleeing from Eurystheus, he went to live with 
his friend Ceyx, who was king of Trachis. But when 
Heracles departed this life Eurystheus demanded his 
children; whereupon the king of Trachis sent them 
to Athens, saying that he was weak but Theseus 
had power enough to succour them. The arrival 
of the children as suppliants caused for the first 
time war between Peloponnesians and Athenians, 
Theseus refusing to give up the refugees at the 
demand of Eurystheus. The story says that an 
oracle was given the Athenians that one of the chil- 
dren of Heracles must die a voluntary death, or else 
victory could not be theirs. Thereupon Macaria, 
daughter of Deianeira and Heracles, slew herself and 
gave to the Athenians victory in the war and to the 
spring her own name. There is at Marathon a lake 
which for the most part is marshy. Into this igno- 
rance of the roads made the foreigners fall in their 
flight, and it is said that this accident was the cause 
of their great losses. Above the lake are the stone 

stables of Artaphernes’ horses, and marks of his 

tent on the rocks. Out of the lake flows a river, 

affording near the lake itself water suitable for cattle, 

but near its mouth it becomes salt and full of sea 

fish. A little beyond the plain is the Hill of Pan 

and a remarkable Cave of Pan. The entrance to 

it is narrow, but farther in are chambers and baths 

and the so-called “ Pan’s herd of goats,’ which are 

rocks shaped in most respects like to goats. 

177 
VOL. I. N 

XXXIII. Μαραθῶνος δὲ ἀπέχει τῇ μὲν Βραυ 
ρών, ἔνθα Ἰφιγένειαν τὴν ᾿Αγαμέμνονος ἐκ Taŭ- 
ρων φεύγουσαν τὸ ἄγαλμα ἀγομένην τὸ Αρτέμιδος 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE | 

9 - / A A Ν 1) 
ἀποβῆναι λέγουσι, καταλιποῦσαν δὲ τὸ ἄγαλμα 
4 .. 9 9 4 \ 0 >. WV 3 
ταύτῃ καὶ ἐς ᾿Αθήνας καὶ ὕστερον ἐς "Αργος ἀφι- 

3 
κέσθαι' ξόανον μὲν δὴ καὶ αὐτόθι ἐστὶν Αρτέμιδος 
ἀρχαῖον, τὸ δὲ ἐκ τῶν βαρβάρων οἵτινες κατὰ 
΄ / 

γνώμην ἔχουσι τὴν ἐμήν, ἐν ἑτέρῳ λόγῳ δηλώσω" 
Μαραθῶνος δὲ σταδίους μάλιστα ἑξήκοντα ἀπέχει 
ε - N 4 7 A > 9 

Ῥαμνοῦς τὴν παρὰ θάλασσαν ἰοῦσιν ἐς Ὥρωπον. 
καὶ αἱ μὲν οἰκήσεις ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
> / N \ 2 \ y / ΄ » 
εἰσί, μικρὸν δὲ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἄνω Νεμέσεως ἐστιν 
ἱερόν, ἣ θεῶν μάλιστα ἀνθρώποις ὑβρισταῖς ἐστιν 
ἀπαραίτητος. δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἀποβᾶσιν ἐς 
Μαραθῶνα τῶν βαρβάρων ἀπαντῆσαι μήνιμα ἐκ 
τῆς θεοῦ ταύτης' καταφρονήσαντες γὰρ μηδέν 

9 N η 5 / e a ΄ 
σφισιν ἐμποδὼν εἶναι τὰς ᾿Αθήνας ἑλεῖν, λίθον 
Πάριον ὡς ἐπ᾽ ἐξειργασμένοις ἦγον ἐς τροπαίου 
ποίησιν. τοῦτον Φειδίας τὸν λύθον εἰργάσατο 
ἄγαλμα μὲν εἶναι Νεμέσεως, τῇ κεφαλῇ δὲ ἔπεστι 
τῆς θεοῦ στέφανος ἐλάφους ἔχων καὶ Νίκης ἀγάλ- 
ματα οὐ μεγάλα" ταῖς δὲ χερσὶν ἔχει τῇ μὲν κλά- 
δον μηλέας, τῇ δεξιᾷ δὲ φιάλην, Αἰθίοπες δὲ ἐπὶ 
τῇ φιάλῃ πεποίηνται. συμβαλέσθαι δὲ τὸ ἐς τοὺς 
Αἰθίοπας οὔτε αὐτὸς εἶχον οὔτε ἀπεδεχόμην τῶν 
συνιέναι πειθομένων, οἳ πεποιῆσθαι σφᾶς ἐπὶ τῇ 
φιάλῃ φασὶ διὰ ποταμὸν ᾿Ὠκεανόν: οἰκεῖν γὰρ 
/ A 
Αἰθίοπας ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ, Νεμέσει δὲ εἶναι πατέρα 
> 4 A A \ 
Ὠκεανόν. Ὠκεανῷ γὰρ οὐ ποταμῷ, θαλάσσῃ δὲ 
> 2 A 4 a 
ἐσχάτῃ τῆς ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπων πλεομένης προσοικοῦ- 
y / A . Ν y 

σιν Ἴβηρες καὶ Κελτοί, καὶ νῆσον Ὠκεανὸς ἔχει 

178 

ATTICA, xxxii. 1-4 

XXXIII. At some distance from Marathon is 
Brauron, where, according to the legend, Iphigenia, 
the daughter of Agamemnon, landed with the image 
of Artemis when she fled from the Tauri ; leaving the 
image there she came to Athens also and afterwards 
to Argos. There is indeed an old wooden image of 
Artemis here, but who in my opinion have the one 
taken from the foreigners I will set forth in another 
place. About sixty stades from Marathon as you go 
along the road by the sea to Oropus stands Rhamnus. 
The dwelling houses are on the coast, but a little way 
inland is a sanctuary of Nemesis, the most implacable 
deity to men of violence. It is thought that the 
wrath of this goddess fell also upon the foreigners 
who landed at Marathon. For thinking in their pride 
that nothing stood in the way of their taking Athens, 
they were bringing a piece of Parian marble to make a 
trophy, convinced that their task was already finished. 
Of this marble Pheidias made a statue of Nemesis, 
and on the head of the goddess is a crown with deer 
and small images of Victory. In her left hand she 
holds an apple branch, in her right hand a cup on 
which are wrought Aethiopians. As to the Aethio- 
pians, I could hazard no guess myself, nor could I 
accept the statement of those who are convinced that 
the Aethiopians have been carved upon the cup be- 
cause of the river Ocean. For the Aethiopians, they 
say, dwell near it, and Ocean is the father of Nemesis. 
It is not the river Ocean, but the farthest part of the 
sea navigated by man, near which dwell the Iberians 
and the Celts, and Ocean surrounds the island of 

179 
N 2 

7 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τὴν Βρεττανῶν: Αἰθιόπων δὲ τῶν ὑπὲρ Συήνης 
ἐπὶ θάλασσαν ἔ ἔσχατοι τὴν ᾿Ερυθρὰν κατοικοῦσιν 
Ἰχθυοφάγοι, καὶ ὁ κόλπος ὃ ὃν περιοικοῦσιν Ἴχθυο- 
φάγων ὀνομάξεται. οἱ δὲ δικαιότατοι Μερόην 
πόλιν καὶ πεδίον Αἰθιοπικὸν καλούμενον οἰκοῦσιν' 
οὗτοι καὶ τὴν ἡλίου τράπεζάν εἰσιν οἱ δεικνύντες, 
οὐδέ σφισιν ἔστιν οὔτε θάλασσα οὔτε ποταμὸς 
ἄλλος γε ἢ Νεῖλος. εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι πρόσοικοι 
Μαύροις Αἰθίοπες ἆ ἄχρι Νασαμώνων παρήκοντες. 
Νασαμῶνες γάρ, οὓς "Ατλαντας Ἡρόδοτος, οἱ δὲ 
μέτρα φάμενοι γῆς εἰδέναι Λιξίτας καλοῦσι, Ai- 
Bvov οἱ ἔσχατοι πρὸς "Ατλαντι οἰκοῦσι σπείρον- 
τες μὲν οὐδέν, ἀπὸ δὲ ἀμπέλων ζῶντες ἀγρίων. 
ποταμὸς δὲ οὐδὲ τούτοις τοῖς Αἰθίοψιν οὐδὲ τοῖς 
Νασαμῶσίν ἐστιν οὐδείς: τὸ γὰρ πρὸς τῷ ᾿Ατ- 
λαντι ὕδωρ, τρισὶ παρεχόμενον ἀρχὰς 6 ῥεύμασυ, 
οὐδὲν τῶν ευμάτων ποιεῖ ποταμόν, ἀλλὰ πᾶν 
ὁμοίως αὐτίκα ἔχει συλλαβοῦσα ἡ ἡ ψάμμος. oŭ- 
τως Αἰθίοπες ποταμῷ γε οὐδενὶ προσοικοῦσιν 
Ὠκεανῷ. τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ τὸ ἐκ τοῦ "Ατλαντος θολε- 
pov τέ ἐστι καὶ πρὸς τῇ πηγῇ κροκόδειλοι 
διπήχεων ἦσαν οὐκ ἐλάσσους, προσιόντων δὲ 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων κατεδύοντο ἐς τὴν πηγήν. παρί- 
στατο δὲ οὐκ ὀλίγοις τὸ ὕδωρ τοῦτο ἀναφαινό- 
μενον αὖθις ἐκ τῆς ψάμμου ποιεῖν τὸν Νεῖλον 
Αἰγυπτίοις. ὁ δὲ "Άτλας ὄρος ὑψηλὸν μέν 
ἐστιν οὕτως ὥστε καὶ λέγεται ταῖς κορυφαῖς 
ψαύειν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, ἄβατον δὲ ὑπὸ ὕδατος καὶ 
δένδρων ἃ ἃ διὰ παντὸς πέφυκε' τὰ μὲν δὴ πρὸς 
τοὺς Νασαμῶνας αὐτοῦ γινώσκεται, τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸ 
πέλαγος οὐδένα πω παραπλεύσαντα ἴσμεν. τάδε 
μὲν ἐς τοσοῦτον εἰρήσθω": πτερὰ δ᾽ ἔχον οὔτε 
180 

B. 

ATTICA, xxxm. 4-7 

Britain. But of the Aethiopians beyond Syene, those 
who live farthest in thedirection of the Red Sea are the 
Ichthyophagi (Fish-eaters), and the gulf round which 
they live is called afterthem. The most righteous of 
them inhabit the city Meroe and what is called the 
Aethiopian plain. These are they who show the 
Table of the Sun,! and they have neither sea nor river 
except the Nile. There are other Aethiopians who are 
neighbours of the Mauri and extend as far as the 
Nasamones. For the Nasamones, whom Herodotus 
calls the Atlantes, and those who profess to know 
the measurements of the earth name the Lixitae, are 
the Libyans who live the farthest close to Mount 
Atlas, and they do not till the ground at all, but live 
on wild vines. But neither these Aethiopians nor 
yet the Nasamones have any river. For the water 
near Atlas, which provides a beginning to three 
streams, does not make any of the streams a river, 
as the sand swallows it all up at once. So the 
Aethiopians dwell near no river Ocean. The water 
from Atlas is muddy, and near the source were croco- 
diles of not less than two cubits, which when the men 
approached dashed down into the spring. The thought 
has occurred to many that it is the reappearance of 
this water out of the sand which gives the Nile to 
Egypt. Mount Atlas is so high that its peaks are said to 
touch heaven, but is inaccessible because of the water 
and the presence everywhere of trees. Its region 
indeed near the Nasamones is known, but we know 
of nobody yet who has sailed along the parts facing the 
sea. I must now resume. Neither this nor any other — 

1 A meadow near the city of the Aethiopians, in which 
they dined. 

181 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τοῦτο τὸ ἄγαλμα Νεμέσεως οὔτε ἄλλο πεποίηται 
τῶν ἀρχαίων, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ Σμυρναίοις τὰ ἁγιώτατα 
ξόανα ἔχει πτερά' οἱ δὲ ὕστερον--ἐπιφαίνεσθαι 
\ 8 N / ἑ ὶ A )_ A θέ 
γὰρ τὴν θεὸν μάλιστα ἐπὶ τῷ ἐρᾶν ἐθέλουσιν-- 
ἐπὶ τούτῳ Νεμέσει πτερὰ ὥσπερ Ἔρωτι ποιοῦσι. 
- y / ε / > \ A 4 m 9 

νῦν δὲ ἤδη δίειµι ὁπόσα ἐπὶ τῷ βάθρῳ τοῦ ἀγάλ- 
patos ἐστιν εἰργασμένα, τοσόνδε ἐς τὸ σαφὲς 

, / / 4 Ῥ ϕ 
προδηλώσας. Ἑλένῃ Νέμεσιν μητέρα εἶναι λέ- 
γουσιν Ἕλληνες, Λήδαν δὲ μαστὸν ἐπισχεῖν 
αὐτῇ καὶ θρέψαι" πατέρα δὲ καὶ οὗτοι καὶ πάντες 

\ 

4 

κατὰ ταὐτὰ “Ελένης Δία καὶ οὐ Τυνδάρεων εἶναι 

8 νοµίζουσι. ταῦτα ἀκηκοὼς Φειδίας πεποίηκεν 
ε / ε \ / » / \ \ / 
Ελένην ὑπὸ Λήδας ἀγομένην παρὰ τὴν Νέμεσιν, 
πεποίηκε δὲ Γυνδάρεών τε καὶ τοὺς παῖδας καὶ 
ἄνδρα σὺν ἵππῳ παρεστηκότα Ἱππέα ὄνομα" 
y \ 2 / / N ΄ r 
ἔστι δὲ ᾿Αγαμέμνων καὶ Μενέλαος καὶ Πύρρος ὁ 
᾿Αχιλλέως, πρῶτος οὗτος "Ἑρμιόνην τὴν “Ελένης 
γυναῖκα λαβών' Ὀρέστης δὲ διὰ τὸ ἐς τὴν μητέρα 
τόλμημα παρείθη, παραμεινάσης τε ἐς ἅπαν Ἑρ- 
μιόνης αὐτῷ καὶ τεκούσης παῖδα. ἑξῆς δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ 
βάθρῳ καὶ Ἔποχος καλούμενος καὶ νεανίας ἐστὶν 
ἕτερος: ἐς τούτους ἄλλο μὲν ἤκουσα οὐδέν, ἀδελ- 

ν 9 aA 9» 7, 3 9 3 \ ν 
gous δὲ εἶναι σφᾶς Oivons, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐστι τὸ ὄνομα 
a 4 

r T? δήμῳ. \ \ A \ > / A a 

~ XXXIV. Τὴν δὲ γῆν τὴν ᾿Ὠρωπίαν μεταξὺ τῆς 
᾿Αττικῆς καὶ Ταναγρικῆς, Βοιωτίαν τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς 
οὖσαν, ἔχουσιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ᾿Αθηναῖοι, πολεμήσαντες | 
μὲν τὸν πάντα ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς χρόνον, κτησάμενοι δὲ 

9 / / \ A / / 
οὐ πρότερον βεβαίως πρὶν ἢ Φίλιππος Θήβας | 
ἑλὼν ἔδωκέ σφισιν. ἡ μὲν οὖν πόλις ἐστὶν ἐπὶ 
θαλάσσης μέγα οὐδὲν ἐς συγγραφὴν παρεχομένη Ἢ 
- / 

ἀπέχει δὲ δώδεκα τῆς πόλεως σταδίους µάλιστα 
182 

-A 

ATTICA, xxxii. 7-XXXIV. 1 

ancient statue of Nemesis has wings, for not even the 
holiest wooden images of the Smyrnaeans have them, 
but later artists, convinced that the goddess mani- 
fests herself most as a consequence of love, give wings 
to Nemesis as they do to Love. I will now go onto 
describe what is figured on the pedestal of the statue, 
having made this preface for the sake of clearness. 
The Greeks say that Nemesis was the mother of Helen, 
while Leda suckled and nursed her. The father of 
Helen the Greeks like everybody else hold to be 
not Tyndareus but Zeus. Having heard this legend 
Pheidias has represented Helen as being led to Neme- 
sis by Leda, and he has represented Tyndareus and 
his children with a man Hippeus by name standing 
by with a horse. There are Agamemnon and Mene- 
laus and Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles and first husband 
of Hermione, the daughter of Helen. Orestes was 
passed over because of his crime against his mother, 
yet Hermione stayed by his side in everything and 
bore him a child. Next upon the pedestal is one 
called Epochus and another youth; the only thing I 
heard about them was that they were brothers of 
Οεποδ, from whom the parish has its name. 

XXXIV. The land of Oropus, between Attica and 
the land of Tanagra, which originally belonged to 
Boeotia, in our time belongs to the Athenians, 
who always fought for it but never won secure pos- 
session until Philip gave it to them after taking 
Thebes. The city is on the coast and affords nothing 
remarkable to record. About twelve stades from 

183 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

2 ἱερὸν τοῦ ᾿Αμϕιαράου. λέγεται δὲ ᾽Αμϕιαράφ 
φεύγοντι ἐκ Θηβῶν διαστῆναι τὴν γῆν καὶ ὡς 
αὐτὸν ὁμοῦ καὶ τὸ ἅρμα. ὑπεδέξατο: πλὴν οὗ 
ταύτῃ συμβῆναί φασιν, ἀλλά ἐστιν ἐκ Θηβῶν 
ἰοῦσιν ἐς Χαλκίδα id Appa καλούμενον. θεὸν δὲ 
᾽Αμϕιάραον πρώτοις Ὠρωπίοις κατέστη νομίζεω, 
ὕστερον δὲ καὶ οἱ πάντες “Ελληνες ἥγηνται. 
καταλέξαι δὲ καὶ ἄλλους ἔχω γενομένους τότε 
ἀνθρώπους, οἳ θεῶν παρ Ἕλλησι τιμὰς ἔ ἔχουσι, 
τοῖς δὲ καὶ ἀνάκεινται πόλεις, Ἠλεοῦς ἐν Xeppo- 
νήσφ II ρωτεσιλάῳ, Λεβάδεια Βοιωτῶν Τροφωνίφ' 
καὶ ᾿Ὠρωπίοις ναός τέ ἐστιν ᾿Αμϕιαράου καὶ 

3 ἄγαλμα. λευκοῦ λίθου. παρέχεται δὲ ὁ βωμὸς 

μέρη" τὸ μὲν “Ἡρακλέους καὶ Διὸς καὶ ᾿Απόλλω- 
vos ἐστι Παιῶνος, τὸ δὲ ἥ ἥρωσι καὶ ἡρώων ἀνεῖται 
γυναιξί, τρίτον δὲ Ἡστίας καὶ "Ἑρμοῦ καὶ 
᾽Αμϕιαράου καὶ τῶν παίδων ᾿Αμϕιλόχου" ANK- 
µαίων δὲ διὰ τὸ ἐς Ἐριφύλην ἔργον οὔτε ἐν 
᾽Αμϕιαράου τινά, ov μὴν οὐδὲ παρὰ τῷ ᾽Αμϕι- 
λόχῳ τιμὴν ἔχει. τετάρτη δέ ἐστι τοῦ βωμοῦ 
μοῖρα Α ροδίτης καὶ Πανακείας, ἔτι δὲ ᾿Ιασοῦς 
καὶ Ὑγείας καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς Παιωνίας" πέμπτη δὲ 
πεποίηται νύμφαις καὶ Πανὶ καὶ ποταμοῖς ᾿Αχε- 
λῴῳ καὶ Κηφισῷ. τῷ δὲ ᾽Αμϕιλόχῳ καὶ παρ᾽ 
᾿Αθηναίοις ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ πόλει βωμὸς καὶ Κιλικίας 
ἐν Μαλλῷ μαντεῖον ἀψευδέστατον τῶν ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ. 

4 ἔστι δὲ Ὠρωπίοις πηγὴ πλησίον τοῦ ναοῦ, ἣν 
A ιαράου καλοῦσιν, οὔτε θύοντες οὐδὲν ἐς . 
αὐτὴν οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ καθαρσίοις ἢ χέρνιβι χρῆσθαι | 
νομύξοντες: νόσου δὲ ἀκεσθείσης ἀνδρὶ μαντεύ- 
ματος γενομένου καθέστηκεν ἄργυρον ἀφεῖναι 
καὶ χρυσὸν ἐπίσημον ἐς τὴν πηγήν, ταύτῃ γὰρ 
1δ4 it $ χρυσὸν Hitzig. 

ATTICA, χχχιν. 1-4 

the city is a sanctuary of Amphiaraus. Legend says 
that when Amphiaraus was exiled from Thebes the 
earth opened and swallowed both him and his chariot. 
Only they say that the incident did not happen here, 
the place called the Chariot being on the road from 
Thebes to Chalcis. The divinity of Amphiaraus was 
first established among the Oropians, from whom 
afterwards all the Greeks received the cult. I can 
enumerate other men also born at this time who are 
worshipped among the Greeks as gods; some even 
have cities dedicated to them, such as Eleiis in 
Chersonnesus dedicated to Protesilans, and Lebadea 
of the Boeotians dedicated to Trophonius. The Oro- 
pians have both a temple and a white marble statue 
of Amphiaraus. The altar shows parts. One part is to 
Heracles, Zeus, and Apollo Healer, another is given 
up to heroes and to wives of heroes, the third is 
to Hestia and Hermes and Amphiaraus and the 

his treatment of Eriphyle, is honoured neither in 

the temple of Amphiaraus nor yet with Amphilochus. ~ is 
The fourth portion of the altar is to Aphrodite and (΄ 

Panacea, and further to Iaso, Health and Athena.: 

΄- 

children of Amphilochus. But Alcmaeon, because of À.. 
e. 

Healer. The fifth is dedicated to the nymphs and ΄ 

to Pan, and to the rivers Acheloiis and Cephisus. 
The Athenians too have an altar to Amphilochus in 
the city, and there is at Mallus in Cilicia an oracle 
of his which is the most trustworthy of my day. 
The Oropians have near the temple a spring, which 
they call the Spring of Amphiaraus; they neither 
sacrifice into it nor are wont to use it for purifications 
or for lustral water. But when a man has been 
cured of a disease through a response the custom is 
to throw silver and coined gold into the spring, for 

185 

a / 
ΓΗ 

σι 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἀνελθεῖν τὸν ᾿Αμϕιάραον λέγουσιν ἤδη θεῖν. 

᾿Ιοφῶν δὲ Κνώσσιος τῶν ἐξηγητῶν Χρησμοὺς ἐν 
ἑξαμέτρῳ παρείχετο, ᾿Αμϕιάραον χρῆσαι φάμενος 
τοῖς ἐς Θήβας σταλεῖσιν ᾿Αργείων. ταῦτα τ 

ἔπη τὸ ἐς τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐπαγωγὸν ἀκρατῶς 
εἶχε' χωρὶς δὲ πλὴν ὅ ὅσους ἐξ ᾿Απόλλωνος μανῆ- 
ναι λέγουσι τὸ ἆρ atov, μάντεών η οὐδεὶς 
χρησμολόγος ἦν, arya. οἱ δὲ ὁ ὀνείρατα ἐξηγήσασθαι 
καὶ -διαγνῶναι πτήσεις ὀρνίθων καὶ σπλάγχνα 
ἱερείων. δοκῶ δὲ ᾿᾽Αμϕιάραον ὀνειράτων δια- 
κρίσει μάλιστα προσκεῖσθαι: δῆλος δέ, ἡνίκα 
ἐνομίσθη θεός, δι ὀνειράτων μαντικὴν κατα- 
στησάμενος. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν καθήρασθαι νομί- 
ζουσιν ὅστις ἦλθεν ᾽Αμϕιαράφ χρησόμενος" ἔστι 
δὲ καθάρσιον τῷ θεῷ θύειν, θύουσι δὲ καὶ αὐτῷ 

καὶ πᾶσιν ὅσοις ἐστὶν ἐπὶ τῷ βωμῷ τὰ ὀνο- 
para: προεξειργασµένων δὲ τούτων κριὸν θύ- 
σαντες καὶ τὸ δέρμα ὗ ὑποστρωσάμενοι καθεύδουσιν 
ἀναμένοντες δήλωσιν ὁ ὀνείρατος. 

ΧΧΧΥ. Νῆσοι δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις οὐ πόρρω τῆς χώ- 
pas εἰσίν, ἡ ἡ μὲν Πατρόκλου καλουμένη--- τὰ δὲ ἐς 
αὐτὴν ἤδη μοι δεδήλωται---, ἄλλη δὲ ὑπὲρ Σουνίου 
τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν ἐν ἀριστερᾷ παραπλέουσιν' ἐς ταύ- 
την ἀποβῆναι λέγουσιν Ἑλένην μετὰ τὴν ἅλωσιν 
τὴν Ἰλίου, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὄνομά ἐστιν Ἑλένη TH 
νήσῳ. Σαλαμὶς δὲ κατὰ ᾿Ελευσῖνα κειμένη. παρη- 
κει καὶ ἐ ἐς τὴν Μεγαρικήν. πρῶτον δὲ τῇ νήσῳ 
τὸ ὄνομα θέσθαι τοῦτο Kuxpea? ἀπὸ τῆς μητρὸς 
Σαλαμῖνος τῆς ᾿Ασωποῦ, καὶ ὗ ὕστερον Αἰγινήτας 
τοὺς σὺν Τελαμῶνι ἐποικῆσαι: Φίλαιον δὲ τὸν 

1 Κυχρέα added by Sylburg. 
186 

-“ 

ATTICA, xxxiv. 4-ΧΧΧΥ. 2 

by this way they say that Amphiaraus rose up after 
he had become a god. Iophon the Cnossian, a 
guide, produced responses in hexameter verse, saying 
that Amphiaraus gave them to the Argives who were 
sent against Thebes. These verses unrestrainedly 
appealed to popular taste. Except those whom they 
say Apollo inspired of old none of the seers uttered 
oracles, but they were good at explaining dreams and 
interpreting the flights of birds and the entrails of 
victims. My opinion is that Amphiaraus devoted him- 
self most to the exposition of dreams. It is manifest 
that, when his divinity was established, it was a dream 
oracle that he set up. One who has come to consult 
Amphiaraus is wont first to purify himself. The mode 
of purification is to sacrifice to the god, and they 
sacrifice not only to him but also to all those whose 
names are on the altar. And when all these things 
have been first done, they sacrifice a ram, and, 
spreading the skin under them, go to sleep and 
await enlightenment in a dream. 

XXXV. There are islands not far from Attica. Of 
the one called the Island of Patroclus I have already 
given an account.! There is another when you have 
sailed past Sunium with Attica on the left. On this 
they say that Helen landed after the capture of 
Troy, and for this reason the name of the island 
is Helene. Salamis lies over against Eleusis, and 
stretches as far as the territory of Megara. It is 
said that the first to give this name to the island 
was Cychreus, who called it after his mother Salamis, 
the daughter of Asopus, and afterwards it was 
colonised by the Aeginetans with Telamon. Philaeus, 

1 See p. 3. 
187 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Εὐρυσάκους τοῦ Αἴαντος παραδοῦναι λέηουσιν 
᾿Αθηναίοις τὴν νῆσον, γενόμενον ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
᾿Αθηναῖον. Σαλαμινίους δὲ ᾿Αθηναῖοι τούτων 
ὕστερον πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν ἀναστάτους ἐποίησαν, 
καταγνόντες ἐθελοκακῆσαι σφᾶς ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ 
τῷ πρὸς Κάσσανδρον καὶ τὴν πόλιν γνώμη 
τὸ πλέον Μακεδόσιν ἐνδοῦναι: καὶ Αὐσχητάδου | 
τε κατέγνωσαν θάνατον, ὃς τότε pro ἐς τὴν . 
Σαλαμῖνα στρατηγός, καὶ ἐς τὸν πάντα ἐπώ- ,' 
µοσαν χρόνον Σαλαμινίοις ἀπομνημονεύσειν r 
προδοσίαν. ἔστι δὲ ἀγορᾶς τε ἔτι ἐρεύπια καὶ 
ναὸς Αἴαντος, ἄγαλμα δὲ ἐξ ἐβένου ξύλου. δια- 
μένουσι δὲ καὶ ἐς τόδε τῷ Αἴαντι παρὰ ᾿Αθη- 
ναίοις τιμαὶ αὐτῷ τε καὶ Εὐρυσάκει, καὶ γὰρ 
Εὐρυσάκους βωμός ἐστιν ἐν ᾿Αθήναις. δείκνυται | 
δὲ λίθος ἐν Σαλαμῖνι οὐ πόρρω τοῦ λιμένος" ἐπὶ 
τούτου καθήμενον Τελαμῶνα ὁρᾶν λέγουσιν ἐς | 
τὴν ναῦν ἀποπλεόντων οἱ τῶν παίδων ἐς A ὑλίδα 
ἐπὶ τὸν κοινὸν τῶν Ελλήνων στόλον. λέγουσι 
δὲ οἱ περὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα οἰκοῦντες ἀποθανόντος | 
Αἴαντος τὸ ἄνθος σφίσιν ἐν τῇ γῇ τότε φανῆναι 
πρῶτον: λευκόν ἐστιν, ὑπέρυθρον, κρίνου καὶ 
αὐτὸ ἔλασσον καὶ τὰ φύλλα' γράμματα δὲ 
ἔπεστιν οἷα τοῖς ὑακίνθοις καὶ τούτῳ. λόγον δὲ 
τῶν μὲν Αἰολέων τῶν ὕστερον οἰκησάντων Ἴλιον 
ἐς τὴν κρίσιν τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅπλοις ἤκουσα, οἳ τῆς 
ναυαγίας Ὀδυσσεῖ συμβάσης ἐξενεχθῆναι κατὰ 
τὸν τάφον τὸν Αἴαντος τὰ ὅπλα λέγουσι τὸ δὲ 
ἐς τὸ μέγεθος αὐτοῦ Μυσὸς ἔλεγεν ἀνήρ. τοῦ 
γὰρ τάφου τὰ πρὸς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν ἔφασκεν ἐπι-. 
κλύσαι τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ τὴν ἔσοδον ἐς τὸ μνῆμα 

188 

ATTICA, xxxv. 2-5 

the son of Eurysaces, the son of Ajax, is said to 
have handed the island over to the Athenians, 
having been made an Athenian by them. Many 
years afterwards the Athenians drove out all the 
Salaminians, having discovered that they had been 
guilty of treachery in the war with Cassander, and 
mainly of set purpose had surrendered to the Mace- 
donians. They sentenced to death Aeschetades, 
who on this occasion had been elected general for 
Salamis, and they swore never to forget the treachery 
of the Salaminians. There are still the remains of a 
market-place, a temple of Ajax and his statue in 
ebony. Even at the present day the Athenians pay 
honours to Ajax himself and to Eurysaces, for there is 
an altar of Eurysaces also at Athens. In Salamis is 
shown ἃ stone not far from the harbour, on which they 
say that Telamon sat when he gazed at the ship in 
which his children were sailing away to Aulis to take 
part in the joint expedition of the Greeks. Those who 
dwell about Salamis say that it was when Ajax died 
that the flower first appeared in their country. It is 
_ white and tinged with red, both flower and leaves 
being smaller than those of the lily; there are 
letters on it like to those on the iris. About the 
judgment concerning the armour I heard a story 
of the Aeolians who afterwards settled at Ilium, to 
the effect that when Odysseus suffered shipwreck 
the armour was cast ashore near the grave of Ajax. 
As to the hero’s size, a Mysian was my informant. 
He said that the sea flooded the side of the grave 
facing the beach and made it easy to enter the tomb, 

189 

818 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

οὐ χαλεπὴν ποιῆσαι, καί µε τοῦ νεκροῦ τὸ 
μέγεθος τεκμαίρεσθαι τῇδε ἐκέλευε: πεντάθλου 
γὰρ παιδὸς εἶναί οἱ κατὰ δίσκον μάλιστα τὰ ἐπὶ 
τοῖς γόνασιν ὀστᾶ, καλουμένας δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ἰατρῶν 
μύλας. ἐγὼ δέ, ὁπόσοι μὲν οἰκοῦσιν ἔσχατος 
Κελτῶν ἔχοντες ὅμορον τῇ διὰ κρυμὸν ἐρήμῳ, 
οὓς Καβαρεῖς ὀνομάζουσι, τούτων μὲν οὐκ ἐθαύ- 
µασα τὸ μῆκος, οἳ νεκρῶν οὐδέν τι διαφόρως 
ἔχουσιν Αἰγυπτίων: . ὁπόσα δὲ -ἄξια ἐφαίνετο 
εἶναί μοι θέας, διηγήσομαι. Μάγνησι τοῖς ἐπὶ 
Ληθαίῳ Πρωτοφάνης τῶν ἀστῶν ἀνείλετο ἐν 
Ὀλυμπίᾳ νίκας ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ παγκρατίου καὶ πάλης' 
τούτου λῃσταὶ κερδανεῖν πού τι δοκοῦντες ἐσῆλ- 
θον ἐς τὸν τάφον, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς λησταῖς ἐσήεσαν 
ἤδη θεασόμενοι τὸν νεκρὸν τὰς πλευρὰς οὐκ 
ἔχοντα διεστώσας, ἀλλά οἱ συμφυὲς ἦν ὅσον 
ἀπ᾽ ὤμων ἐς τὰς ἐλαχίστας πλευράς, καλουμένας 
δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ἰατρῶν νόθας. ἔστι δὲ Μιλησίοις 
πρὸ τῆς πόλεως Λάδη νῆσος, ἀπερρώγασι δὲ ἀπ' 
αὐτῆς νησῖδες: ᾿Αστερίου τὴν ἑτέραν ὀνομάξουσι 
καὶ τὸν ᾿Αστέριον ἐν αὐτῇ ταφῆναι λέγουσιν, 
εἶναι δὲ ᾿Αστέριον μὲν "Ανακτος, “Avarta δὲ Γῆς 
παῖδα: ἔχει δ οὖν ὁ νεκρὸς οὐδέν τι μεῖον πηχῶν - 
δέκα. τὸ 8 ἐμοὶ θαῦμα παρασχόν, Λυδίας τῆς 
ἄνω πόλις ἐστὶν οὐ μεγάλη “Τημένου θύραι 
ἐνταῦθα παραραγέντος λόφου διὰ χειμῶνα ὀστᾶ 
ἐφάνη τὸ σχῆμα παρέχοντα ἐς πίστιν ὡς ἔστιν 
ἀνθρώπου, ἐπεὶ διὰ μέγεθος οὐκ ἔστιν ὅπως ἂν 
ἔδοξεν. αὐτίκα δὲ λόγος ἦλθεν ἐς τοὺς πολλοὺς 
Γηρυόνου τοῦ Χρυσάορος εἶναι μὲν τὸν νεκρὀν, 
εἶναι δὲ καὶ τὸν θρόνον: καὶ γὰρ θρόνος ἀνδρός 
ἐστιν ἐνειργασμένος ὄρους λιθώδει προβολῇ" καὶ 
190 

ATTICA, xxxv. 5-7 

and he bade me form an estimate of the size of the 
corpse in the following way. The bones on his 
knees, called by doctors the knee-pan, were in the 
case of Ajax as big as the quoit of a boy in the 
pentathlon. 1 saw nothing to wonder at in the 
stature of those Celts who live farthest off on the 
borders of the land which is uninhabited because of 
the cold ; these people, the Cabares, are no bigger 
than Egyptian corpses. But I will relate all that 
appeared to me worth seeing. For the Magnesians on 
the Lethaeus, Protophanes, one of the citizens, won 
at Olympia in one day victories in the pancration 1 
and in wrestling. Into the grave of this man robbers 
entered, thinking to gain some advantage, and after 
the robbers people came in to see the corpse, which 
had ribs not separated but joined together from the 
shoulders to the smallest ribs, those called by doctors 
bastard. Before the city of the Milesians is an island 
called Lade, and from it certain islets are detached. 
One of these they call the islet of Asterius, and say 
that Asterius was buried in it, and that Asterius was 
the son of Anax, and Anax the son of Earth. Now 
the corpse is not less than ten cubits. But what 
really caused me surprise is this. There is a small 
city of upper Lydia called The Doors of Teme- 
nus. There a crest broke away in a storm, and there 
appeared bones the shape of which led one to sup- 
pose that they were human, but from their size one 
would never have thought it. At once the story 
spread among the multitude that it was the corpse of 
Geryon, the son of Chrysaor, and that the seat also 
was his. For there is a man’s seat carved on a 
rocky spur of the mountain. And a torrent they 

1 Boxing and wrestling combined. 

IQI 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

΄ / XN 3 by » / . a 
χείμαρρὀν τε ποταμὸν ᾿Ὠκεανὸν ἐκάλουν καὶ βοῶν 
ἤδη κέρασιν ἔφασάν τινας ἐντυχεῖν ἀροῦντας, 

- r 

διότι ἔχει λόγος Bods ἀρίστας θρέψαι τὸν Γηρυό- 

8 vyv. ἐπεὶ δέ σφισιν ἐναντιούμενος ἀπέφαινον ἐν 
Γαδείροις εἶναι Γηρυόνην, οὗ μνῆμα μὲν οὔ, δέν- 
ὅρον δὲ παρεχόμενον διαφόρους μορφάς, ἐνταῦθα 
οἱ τῶν Λυδῶν ἐξηγηταὶ τὸν ὄντα ἐδείκνυον λόγον, 
ὡς εἴη μὲν ὁ νεκρὸς Ὕλλου, παῖς δὲ "Ύλλος εἴη 

A e 
Γῆς, ἀπὸ τούτου δὲ ὁ ποταμὸς ὠνομάσθη: ‘Hpa- 
κλέα δὲ διὰ τὴν παρ Ὀμφάλῃ ποτὲ ἔφασαν 
δίαιταν "Ύλλον ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ καλέσαι τὸν 
παῖδα. 

XXXVI. Ἐν Σαλαμῖνι δὲ--ἐπάνειμι γὰρ ὁ 

A ΄ 
τὸν προκείμενον λόγον---τοῦτο μὲν ᾿Αρτέμιδός 
ἐστιν ἱερόν, τοῦτο δὲ τρόπαιον ἕστηκεν ἆπο τῆς 

/ A 
νίκης ἣν Θεμιστοκλῆς ὁ Νεοκλέους αἴτιος ἐγένετο 
/ θ A “E ë \ K 4 2 N e d 
γενέσθαι τοῖς Ἓλλησι καὶ Κυχρέως ἐστὶν ἱερόν. 
/ 
ναυμαχούντων δὲ ᾿Αθηναιων πρὸς Μήδους δρά- 
a A A t 
κοντα ἐν ταῖς ναυσὶ λέγεται φανῆναι" τοῦτον o 
|) 
θεὸς ἔχρησεν ᾿Αθηναίοις Κυχρέα εἶναι τὸν ἥρωα. 
9 νῆσος δὲ πρὸ Σαλαμῖνός ἐστι καλουμένη Pur- 
τάλεια' ἐς ταύτην τῶν βαρβάρων ὅσον τετρα- 
/ A A 
κοσίους ἀποβῆναι λέγουσιν, ἡττωμένου δὲ τοῦ 
y y A . 4 > / \ 
Ἐέρξου ναυτικοῦ καὶ τούτους ἀπολέσθαι φασὶν 
» [ή 3 N / a e / 
ἐπιδιαβάντων ἐς τὴν Ψυττάλειαν τῶν Ἑλλήνων. 
- [4 
ἄγαλμα δὲ ἐν τῇ νήσῳ σὺν τέχνῃ μέν ἐστιν οὐδέν, 
A 
Πανὸς δὲ ὡς ἕκαστον ἔτυχε ξόανα πεποιημένα. 
2 A \ 39 9 - 2g? - ? ο 
3 ᾿Ιοὔσι δὲ ἐπ᾿ ᾿Ελευσῖνα e£’ Αθηνῶν ἣν ᾿Αθηναῖοι 
- ε / 
καλοῦσιν ὁδὸν ἱεράν, ᾿ΑἈνθεμοκρίτου πεποίηται 

A A - / 
μνῆμα. ἐς τοῦτον Μεγαρεῦσίν ἐστιν ἀνοσιώ- 
τατον ἔργον, οἳ κήρυκα ἐλθόντα, ὡς μὴ τοῦ λοι- 

192 

ATTICA, xxxv. Ί-χχανι. 3 

called the river Ocean, and they said that men 
ploughing met with the horns of cattle, for the story 
is that Geryon reared excellent cows. And when I 
criticised the account and pointed out to them that 
Geryon is at Gadeira, where there is, not his tomb, 
but a tree showing different shapes, the guides of 
the Lydians related the true story, that the corpse 
is that of Hyllus, a son of Earth, from whom the 
river is named. They also said that Heracles from 
his sojourning with Omphale called his son Hyllus 
after the river. 

XXXVI. But I will return to my subject. In 
Salamis is a sanctuary of Artemis, and also a trophy 
erected in honour of the victory which Themistocles 
the son of Neocles won for the Greeks. There is also 
a sanctuary of Cychreus. When the Athenians were 
fighting the Persians at sea, a serpent is said to have 
appeared in the fleet, and the god in an oracle told 
the Athenians that it was Cychreus the hero. Before 
Salamis there is an island called Psyttalea. Here 
they say that about four hundred of the Persians 
landed, and when the fleet of Xerxes was defeated, 
these also were killed after the Greeks had crossed 
over to Psyttalea. The island has no artistic statue, 
only some roughly carved wooden images of Pan. 

As you go to Eleusis from Athens along what the 
Athenians call the Sacred Way you see the tomb of 
Anthemocritus.! The Megarians committed against 
him a most wicked deed, for when he had come as 
a herald to forbid them to encroach upon the land in 

1 Just before the Peloponnesian War. 
193 

VUL. 1. 

480 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ποῦ τὴν χώραν ἐπεργάξοιντο, κτείνουσιν ᾿Ανθε- 
μόκριτον" καί σφισι ταῦτα δράσασι παραμένει 
καὶ ἐς τόδε μήνιμα ἐκ τοῖν θεοῖν, οἷς οὐδὲ ᾿Αδριανὸς 
ὁ βασιλεὺς ὥστε καὶ ἐπαυξηθῆναι μόνοις ἐπήρ- 
κεσεν Ἑλλήνων. μετὰ δὲ τοῦ ᾿Ανθεμοκρίτου την 
στήλην Μολοττοῦ τε τάφος ἐστὶν ἀξιωθέντος 
᾿Αθηναίων καὶ τούτου στρατηγεῖν, ὅτε Iov- 
τάρχῳ βοηθοῦντες διέβησαν ἐς Εὔβοιαν, καὶ 
χωρίον Σκῖρον ἐπὶ τοιῷδε καλούμενον. Ἔλευ- 
σινίοις πολεμοῦσι πρὸς ᾿Ερεχθέα ἀνὴρ μάντις 
ἦλθεν ἐκ Δωδώνης ὄνομα Σκῖρος, ὃς καὶ τῆς 
Σκιράδος ἱδρύσατο ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐπὶ Φαληρῷ. τὸ ἀρ- 
χαῖον ἱερόν" πεσόντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ θά- 
πτουσιν ᾿Ελευσίνιοι “πλησίον ποταμοῦ χειμάρρου, 
καὶ τῷ τε χωρίφ τὸ ὄνομα ἀπὸ τοῦ ἥρωός ἐστι 
καὶ τῷ ποτα πλησίον δὲ πεποίηται Κηφισο- 
δώρου μνῆμα ig μον προστάντος καὶ Φιλίππῳ τῷ 
Δημητρίου Μακεδόνων βασιλεύοντι € ἐς τὰ μάλιστα 
ἐναντιωθέντος συμμάχους δὲ ἐπήγετο Κηφισό- 
δωρος ᾿Αθηναίοις γενέσθαι βασιλεῖς μὲν "Ατταλον 
τὸν Μυσὸν καὶ 1ἰτολεμαῖον τὸν Αἰγύπτιον, ἔθνη 
δὲ αὐτόνομα Αἰτωλοὺς καὶ νησιωτῶν “Ροδίους καὶ 
Κρῆτας. ὡς δὲ καὶ ἐξ Αἰγύπτου καὶ Μυσίας 
καὶ παρὰ τῶν Κρητῶν τὰ πολλὰ ὑστέριξον αἱ 
βοήθειαι, “Ῥόδιοι δὲ μόναις ναυσὶν ἰσχύοντες 
πρὸς ὁπλίτας τοὺς Μακεδόνας οὐ μεγάλα ὠφέ- 
λουν, ἐνταῦθα Κηφισόδωρος ἐς Ἰταλίαν σὺν 
ἄλλοις ᾿Αθηναίων πλεύσας ἱκέτευεν ἀμῦναι Po- 
μαίους" οἱ δέ σφισι. δύναμιν καὶ στρατηγὸν πέμ- 
πουσιν, οἳ τὰ Φιλίππου καὶ Μακεδόνων ἐς το- 
σοῦτο καθεῖλον ὡς ὕστερον Περσέα τὸν Φιλίππου 
τήν τε ἀρχὴν ἀποβαλεῖν καὶ αὐτὸν αἰχμάλωτον 
ἐς Ἰταλίαν ἀχθῆναι. Φίλιππος δὲ ἦν οὗτος ὁ 

194 

ATTICA, xxxvi. 1-6 

future they put him {ο death. For this act the wrath 
of the Two Goddesses lies upon them even to this 
day, for they are the only Greeks that not even the 
emperor Hadrian could make more prosperous. After 
the tombstone of Anthemocritus comes the grave of 
Molottus, who was deemed worthy of commanding 
the Athenians when they crossed into Euboea to 
reinforce Plutarch,! and also a place called Scirum, 
which received its name for the following reason. 
The Eleusinians were making war against Erechtheus 
when there came from Dodona a seer called Scirus, 
who also set up at Phalerum the ancient sanctuary of 
Athena Sciras. When he fell in the fighting the 
Eleusinians buried him near a torrent, and the hero 
has given his name to both place and torrent. Hard 
by is the tomb of Cephisodorus, who was champion 
of the people and opposed to the utmost Philip, the 
son of Demetrius, king of Macedon. Cephisodorus 
induced to become allies of Athens two kings, Attalus 
the Mysian and Ptolemy the Egyptian, and, of the 
self-governing peoples, the Aetolians with the Rho- 
dians and the Cretans among the islanders. As the 
reinforcements from Egypt, Mysia, and Crete were 
for the most part too late, and the Rhodians, whose 
strength lay only in their fleet, were of little help 
against the Macedonian men-at-arms, Cephisodorus 
sailed with other Athenians to Italy and begged aid 
of the Romans. They sent a force and a general, 
who so reduced Philip and the Macedonians that 
afterwards Perseus, the son of Philip, lost his throne 
and was himself taken prisoner to Italy. This Philip 
1 Tyrant of Eretria in Euboea. 

IQF 
o 2 

350 B.C. 

198 Β.ς. 

wi 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Δημητρίου" πρῶτος γὰρ ταύτης τῆς οἰκίας ἔσχε 
Δημήτριος τὴν Μακεδόνων ἀρχὴν ἀποκτείνας 
᾿Αλέξανδρον τὸν Κασσάνδρου παῖδα, ὡς τὰ πρό- 
τερον ἔχει μοι τοῦ λόγου. 

XXXVII. Mera δὲ τοῦ Κηφισοδώρου τὸ μνῆμα 
τέθαπται μὲν Ἡλιόδωρος * ᾿Αλις 1] τούτου γραφὴν 
ἰδεῖν ἔστι καὶ ἐν τῷ ναῷ τῷ μεγάλῳ τῆς ᾿ Αθηνᾶς' 
τέθαπται δὲ Θεμιστοκλῆς Ἡολιάρχου, τρίτος 
ἀπόγονος Θεμιστοκλέους τοῦ Ξέρξη καὶ Μή. 
δοις ἐ ἐναντία ναυμαχήσαντος. τοὺς δὲ κατωτέρω 
τοῦ γένους πλὴν ᾿Ακεστίου παρήσω τοὺς ἄλλους" 
᾿Ακεστίῳ δὲ τῇ Ἐενοκλέους τοῦ Σοφοκλέους τοῦ 
Λέοντος τούτους τε ἐς τὸν τέταρτον πρόγονον 
Λέοντα .δᾳδούχους πάντας ὑπῆρξε γενέσθαι καὶ 
παρὰ τὸν βίον τὸν αὑτῆς πρῶτον μὲν τὸν ἀδελφὸν 
Σοφοκλέα εἶδε δᾳδουχοῦντα, ἐπὶ δὲ τούτῳ τὸν 
ἄνδρα Θεμιστοκλέα, τελευτήσαντος δὲ καὶ τούτου 
Θεόφραστον τὸν παῖδα. ταύτῃ μὲν τύ ην τοιαύ- 
την συμβῆναι λέγουσι" προελθοῦσι ὲ ὀλίγον 
Λακίου τέμενός ἐστιν ἥρωος καὶ δῆμος ὃ ὃν Λακιά- 
δας ὀνομάξουσιν ἀπὸ τούτου, καὶ Νικοκλέους 
Ταραντίνου ἐστὶ μνῆμα, ὃς ἐπὶ μέγιστον δόξης 
κιθαρῳδῶν ἆ ἁπάντων ἦλθεν. ἔστι δὲ καὶ Ζεφύρου 
τε βωμὸς καὶ Δήμητρος ἱερὸν καὶ τῆς παιδός 
σὺν δέ σφισιν ᾿Αθηνᾶ καὶ Ποσειδῶν ἔ ἔχουσι τιμάς. 
ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χωρίῳ Φύταλόν φασιν οἴκῳ Δήμητρα 
δέξασθαι, καὶ τὴν θεὸν ἀντὶ τούτων δοῦναί οἱ τὸ 
φυτὸν τῆς συκῆς" μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι τῷ λόγῳ τὸ 
ἐπίγραμμα τὸ ἐπὶ τῷ Φυτάλου τάφῳ: 

ἐνθάδ᾽ ἄναξ ñ ἥρως Φύταλός ποτε δέξατο σεμνὴν 
Δήμητραν, ὅτε πρῶτον ὀπώρας καρπὸν ἔφηνεν, 

1 «Αλαιεὺς Leake. 

196 

ATTICA, xxxvi. 6-ΧΧΧΥΙΙ. 2 

was the son of Demetrius. Demetrius was the first 
of this house to hold the throne of Macedon, having 
put to death Alexander, son of Cassander, as I have 
related in a former part of my account. ~, - 
XXXVII. After the tomb of Cephisodorus is the 
grave of Heliodorus Halis.! A portrait of this man is 
also to be seen in the great temple of Athena. Here 
too is the grave of Themistocles, son of Poliarchus, 
and grandson of the Themistocles who fought 
the sea fight against Xerxes and the Persians. Of 
the later descendants I shall mention none except 
Acestium. She, her father Xenocles, his father 
Sophocles, and his father Leon, all of them up to her 
great-grandfather Leon won the honour of being 
torch-bearer, and in her own lifetime she saw as 
torch-bearers, first her brother Sophocles, after him 
her husband Themistocles, and after his death her son 
Theophrastus. Such was the fortune, they say, that 
happened to her. A little way past the grave 
of Themistocles is a precinct sacred to Lacius, a 
hero, a parish called after him Laciadae, and the 
tomb of Nicocles of Tarentum, who won a unique 
reputation as a harpist. There is also an altar of 
Zephyrus and a sanctuary of Demeter and her daugh- 
ter. With them Athena and Poseidon are wor- 
shipped. There is a legend that in this place Phy- 
talus welcomed Demeter in his home, for which act 
the goddess gave him the fig tree. This story 
is borne out by the inscription on the grave of 
Phytalus :— 
“Hero and king, Phytalus here welcome gave to 
Demeter, 
August goddess, when first she created fruit of 
the harvest ; 
1 Nothing more is known of this man. 

19: 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE q 

ἣν ἱερὰν συκῆν θνητῶν γένος ἐξονομάζει: 
ἐξ οὗ δὴ τιμὰς Φυτάλου γένος ἔσχεν ἀγήρως. 

Πρὶν δὲ ἡ διαβῆναι τὸν Κηφισὸν Θεοδώρου 
μνῆμά ἐστι τραγῳδίαν ὑποκριναμένου τῶν καθ᾿ 
αὑτὸν ἄριστα. ἀγάλματα δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ 
Μνησιμάχης, τὸ δὲ ἕτερον ἀνάθημα κειροµένου οἱ 
τὴν κόμην τοῦ παιδὸς ἐστι τῷ Κηφισῷ" καθε- 
στάναι δὲ ἐκ παλαιοῦ καὶ τοῖς πᾶσι τοῦτο" Ἕλλησι 
τῇ Ὁμήρου τις ἂν τεκμαίροιτο ποιήσει, ὃς τὸν 
Πηλέα εὔξασθαί φησι τῷ Σπερχειῷ κερεῖν ἄνασω- 
θέντος ἐκ Τροίας ᾿Αχιλλέως τὴν κόμην. 

Διαβᾶσι δὲ τὸν Κηφισὸν βωμός ἐστιν ἀρχαῖος 
Μειλιχίου Διός: ἐπὶ τούτῳ Θησεὺς ὑπὸ τῶν ἀπο- 
γόνων τῶν Φυτάλου καθαρσίων ἔτυχε, λῃστὰς 
καὶ ἄλλους ἀποκτείνας καὶ Σίνιν τὰ πρὸς Πιτ- 
θέως συγγενῆ. tapos δὲ ἔστι μὲν αὐτόθι Oeo- 
δέκτου τοῦ Φασηλίτου, ἔστι δὲ Μνησιθέου: τοῦτον 
λέγουσιν ἰατρόν τε ἀγαθὸν γενέσθαι καὶ ἀναθεῖναι 
ἀγάλματα, ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ Ἴακχος πεποίηται. wko- 
δόµηται δὲ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ναὸς οὐ μέγας καλού- 
μενος Κυαμίτου' σαφὲς δὲ οὐδὲν ἔχω λέγειν εἶτε 
πρῶτος κυάμους ἔσπειρεν οὗτος εἴτε τινὰ ἐπεφή- 
μισαν ἥρωα, ὅτι τῶν κυάμων ἀνενεγκεῖν οὐκ ἔστι 
σφίσιν ἐς Δήμητρα τὴν εὕρεσιν. ὅστις δὲ ἤδη 
τελετὴν ᾿Ελευσῖνι εἶδεν ἢ τὰ καλούμενα ᾿Ὀρφικὰ 
ἐπελέξατο, οἶδεν ὃ λέγω. μνημάτων δὲ ἃ μάλιστα 
ἐς μέγεθος καὶ κόσμον ἥκει, τὸ μὲν ἀνδρός ἐστι 
“ῬῬοδίου μετοικήσαντος ἐς ᾿Αθήνας, τὸ δὲ "Αρ- 

198 

ATTICA, xxxvi. 2-5 

Sacred fig is the name which mortal men have 
assigned it. 

Whence Phytalus and his race have gotten 
honours immortal.” 

Before you cross the Cephisus you come to the 
tomb of Theodorus, the best tragic actor of his day. 
By the river is a statue of Mnesimache, and a 
votive statue of her son cutting his hair as a gift for 
Cephisus. That this habit has existed from ancient 
times among all the Greeks may be inferred from 
the poetry of Homer,! who makes Peleus vow that on 
the safe return of Achilles from Troy he will cut off 
the young man’s hair as a gift for the Spercheiis. 

Across the Cephisus is an ancient altar of Zeus 
Meilichius (Gracious). At this altar Theseus ob- 
tained purification at the hands of the descendants 
of Phytalus after killing brigands, including Sinis 
who was related to him through Pittheus. Here 
is the grave of Theodectes? of Phaselis, and also 
that of Mnesitheiis. They say that he was a skilful 
physician and dedicated statues, among which is a 
representation of JTacchus. On the road stands a 
small temple called that of Cyamites.2 I cannot 
state for certain whether he was the first to sow beans, 
or whether they gave this name to a hero because 
they may not attribute to Demeter the discovery of 
beans. Whoever has been initiated at Eleusis or has 
read what are called the Orphica* knows what I mean. 
Of the tombs, the largest and most beautiful are that 
of a Rhodian who settled at Athens, and the one 

1 Iliad, xxiii. 141 f. 2 A pupil of Isocrates. 
3 Cyamos means “' bean.” 
+ A poem describing certain aspects of Orphic religion. 

199 

fluc. 
370 Β.ς, 

rl 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

παλος Μακεδὼν ἐποίησεν, ὃς ᾿Αλέξανδρον ἆπο- 
δρὰς ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ασίας διέβη ναυσὶν ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην, 
ἀφικόμενος δὲ παρ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίους ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν συνε- 
λήφθη, διαφθείρας δὲ χρήμασιν ἄλλους τε καὶ 
τοὺς ᾿Αλεξάνδρου φίλους ἀπέδρα, πρότερον δὲ ἔτι 
Πυθονίκην ἔγημε, γένος μὲν οὐκ οἶδα ὁπόθεν, 
ἑταιροῦσαν δὲ ἔν τε ᾿Αθήναις καὶ ἐν Κορίνθφ' 
ταύτης ἐς τοσοῦτον ἔρωτος προῆλθεν ὡς καὶ 
μνῆμα ἀποθανούσης ποιῆσαι πάντων ὁπόσα "Ελ- 
λησίν ἐστιν ἀρχαῖα θέας μάλιστα ἄξιον. 

Ἔστι δὲ ἱερὸν ἐν ᾧ κεῖται Δήμητρος καὶ τῆς 
παιδὸς ἀγάλματα καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς τε καὶ ᾿Απόλ- 
Awos" ᾿Απόλλωνι δὲ ἐποιήθη μόνῳ τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς. 
Κέφαλον γὰρ τὸν Δηίονος συνεξελόντα 1 λέγουσο 
᾿Αμϕιτρύωνι Τηλεβόας τὴν νῆσον οἰκῆσαι πρώ- 
τον, ἣ νῦν ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου Κεφαλληνία καλεῖται" 
μετοικεῖν δὲ αὐτὸν τέως ἐν Θήβαις φεύγοντα ἐξ 
᾿Αθηνῶν διὰ τὸν Πρόκριδος " τῆς γυναικὸς φόνον. 
δεκάτῃ δὲ ὕστερον γενεᾷ Χαλκῖνος καὶ Δαῖτος 
ἀπόγονοι Κεφάλου πλεύσαντες ἐς Δελφοὺς qTouv 
τὸν θεὸν κάθοδον ἐς ᾿Αθήνας" ὁ δέ σφισι κελεύει 
θῦσαι πρῶτον ᾿Απόλλωνι ἐνταῦθα τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, 
ἔνθα ἂν ἴδωσιν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς τριήρη θέουσαν. 
γενομένοις δὲ αὐτοῖς κατὰ τὸ ποικίλον καλού 
μενον ὄρος δράκων ἐφάνη σπουδῇ κατὰ τὸν φω- 
λεὸν ἰών" καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνί τε θύουσιν ἐν τῷ χωρίῳ 
τούτῳ καὶ ὕστερον σφᾶς ἐλθόντας ἐς τὴν πόλιν 
ἀστοὺς ἐποιήσαντο ᾿Αθηναῖοι.- -μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο 
᾿Αφροδίτης ναός ἐστι καὶ πρὸ αὐτοῦ τεῖχος ἀργῶν 
λίθων θέας ἄξιον. 

1 συνεξελθόντα, emended by Xylander. 
2 πρόκνιδο:, emended by Xylander. 

200 

“ ATTICA, xxxvu. 5-7 

made by the Macedonian Harpalus, who ran away 
from Alexander and crossed with a fleet from Asia to 
Europe. On his arrival at Athens he was arrested by 
the citizens, but ran away after bribing among others 
the friends of Alexander. But before this he mar- 
ried Pythonice, whose family I do not know, but she 
was a courtesan at Athens and at Corinth. His love 
for her was so great that when she died he made her 
a tomb which is the most noteworthy of all the old 
Greek tombs. 

There is a sanctuary in which are set statues of 
Demeter, her daughter, Athena, and Apollo. At the 
first it was built in honour of Apollo only. For legend 
says that Cephalus, the son of Deion, having helped 
Amphitryon to destroy the Teleboans, was the first to 
dwell in that island which now is called after him 
Cephallenia, and that he resided till that time at 
Thebes, exiled from Athens because he had killed his 
wife Procris. In the tenth generation afterwards 
Chalcinus and Daetus, descendants of Cephalus, sailed 
to Delphi and asked the god for permission to return 
to Athens. He ordered them first to sacrifice to Apollo 
in that spot in Attica where they should see a man-of- 
war running on the land. When they reached the 
mountain called the Many-coloured Mountain a snake 
was seen hurrying into its hole. In this place they 
sacrificed to Apollo; afterwards they came to Athens 
and the Athenians made them citizens. After this 
is a temple of Aphrodite, before which is a note- 
worthy wall of unwrought stones. 

201 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

XXXVIII. Οἱ δὲ ‘Perrot καλούμενοι ῥεῦμα" 
μόνον παρέχονται ποταμῶν, ἐπεὶ τὸ γε 
θάλασσά ἐστί σφισι: πείθοιτο δὲ ἄν τις καὶ ὧς 
ἀπὸ τοῦ Χαλκιδέων Εὐρίπου ῥέουσιν ὑπὸ τῆς 
γῆς ἐς θάλασσαν κοιλοτέραν ἐμπίπτοντες, λέ- 
Ύονται - δὲ οἱ “Petrol Κόρης ἱεροὶ καὶ Δήμητρος 
εἶναι, καὶ τοὺς ἰχθῦς ἐξ αὐτῶν τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ἔστιν 
αἱρεῖν μόνοις. οὗτοι τὸ ἀρχαῖον, ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθά- 
νομαι, πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους τοὺς ἄλλους ὅροι τῆς γῆς 
᾿Ελευσινίοις ἦσαν, καὶ διαβᾶσι τοὺς “Ῥειτοὺς 
πρῶτος ᾠκει Κρόκων, ἔνθα καὶ νῦν ἔτι βασίλεια 
καλεῖται Κρόκωνος. τοῦτον ᾿Αθηναῖοι τὸν Kpo- 
κωνα Κελεοῦ θυγατρὶ συνοικῆσαι. Σαισάρα λέ- 
Ύουσι λέγουσι δὲ où TÁVTES, ἀλλ ὅσοι τοῦ ήμου 
τοῦ Σκαμβωνιδῶν εἰσιν' ἐγὼ δὲ Κρόκωνος μὲν 
ἀνευρεῖν τάφον οὐχ οἷός τε ἐγενόμην, τὸ δὲ Eù- 
μόλπου μνῆμα κατὰ ταὐτὰ ᾿Ελευσινίοις ἀπέφαι- 
νον καὶ ᾿Αθηναῖοι. τοῦτον τὸν Εὔμολπον ἀφι- 
κέσθαι λέγουσιν ἐκ Θράκης Ποσειδῶνος παῖδα 
ὄντα καὶ Χιόνης: τὴν δὲ Χιόνην Βορέου θυγατέρα 
τοῦ ᾿ἀνέμου καὶ Ὠρειθυίας φασὶν εἶναι. Ὁμήρφ 
δὲ ἐς μὲν τὸ γένος ἐστὶν οὐδὲν αὐτοῦ πεποιηµένον, 
ἐπονομάζει δὲ ἀγήνορα ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσι τὸν Εὔμολ- 
πον. γενομένης δὲ ᾿Ελευσινίοις μάχης πρὸς 
᾿Αθηναίους ἀπέθανε μὲν ᾿Ερεχθεὺς ᾿ Αθηναίων 
Βασιλεύς, ἀπέθανε δὲ Ἰ μμάραδος Εὐμόλπου' 
καταλύονται δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖσδε τὸν πόλεμον, ὡς 
᾿Ελευσινίους ἐς τὰ ἄλλα ᾿Αθηναίων κατηκόους 
ὄντας ἰδίᾳ τελεῖν τὴν τελετήν. τὰ δὲ ἱερὰ τοῦ 
θεοῖν Εὔμολπος καὶ αἱ θυγατέρες δρῶσιν αἱ 
Κελεοῦ, καλοῦσι δὲ σφᾶς Πάμφως τε κατὰ ταὐτὰ 

292 

ATTICA, ΧΧΧΥΊΠ. 1-3 

XXXVIII. The streams called Rheiti are rivers 
only in so far as they are currents, for their water is 
sea water. It is a reasonable belief that they flow 
beneath the ground from the Euripus of the Chalci- 
dians, and fall into a sea of a lower level. They are 
said to be sacred to the Maid and to Demeter, and 
only the priests of these goddesses are permitted to 
catch the fish in them. Anciently, I learn, these 
streams were the boundaries between the land of the 
Eleusinians and that of the other Athenians, and 
the first to dwell on the other side of the Rheiti 
was Crocon, where at the present day is what is called 
the palace of Crocon. This Crocon the Athenians 
say married Saesara, daughter of Celeiis. Not all 
of them say this, but only those who belong to the 
parish of Scambonidae. 1 could not find the grave of 
Crocon, but Eleusinians and Athenians agreed in 
identifying the tomb of Eumolpus. This Eumolpus 
they say came from Thrace, being the son of Posei- 
don and Chione. Chione they say was the daughter 
of the wind Boreas and of Oreithyia. Homer says 
nothing about the family of Eumolpus, but in his 
poems styles him “manly.” When the Eleusinians 
fought with the Athenians, Erechtheus, king of the 
Athenians, was killed, as was also Immaradus, son of 
Eumolpus. These were the terms on which they 
concluded the war: the Eleusinians were to have in- 
dependent control of the mysteries, but in all things 
else were to be subject to the Athenians. The min- 
` isters of the Two Goddesses were Eumolpus and the 
daughters of Celeiis, whom Pamphos and Homer 

203 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

καὶ "Όμηρος Διογένειαν καὶ Παμμερόπην καὶ 
τρίτην Σαισάραν' τελευτήσαντος δὲ Βὐμόλπου 
Κήρυξ νεώτερος λείπεται τῶν παίδων, ὃν αὐτοὶ 
Κήρυκες θυγατρὸς Κέκροπος ᾿Αγλαύρου καὶ “Ep- 
μοῦ παῖδα εἶναι λέγουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ Εὐμόλπου. | 
l Ἔστι δὲ Ἱπποθόωντος ἡρῷον, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὴν puar 
ὀνομάζουσι, καὶ πλησίον Ζάρηκος. τοῦτον pa- 
θεῖν παρὰ ᾿Απόλλωνι μουσικήν φασιν, ἐγὼ Be 
ξένον μὲν ἀφικόμενον ἐς τὴν γῆν Λακεδαιμόνιόν — 
τε εἶναι δοκῶ καὶ Ζάρακα ἐν τῇ Λακωνικῇ πόλιν 
ἀπὸ τούτου πρὸς θαλάσσῃ καλεῖσθαι: εἰ δέ τες - 
Ζάρηξ ἐπιχώριος ᾿Αθηναίοις ἥρως, οὐδὲν ἐς αὐτὸν 
ἔχω λέγειν.---ῥεῖ δὲ Ιζηφισὸς πρὸς "Ἐλευσῶνε 
βιαιότερον παβεχόµενος τοῦ προτέρου ῥεῦμα: καὶ 
παρ᾽ αὐτῷ καλοῦσιν ᾿Ἐρινεόν, λέγοντες τὸν Πλού- 
Tova ὅτε ἥρπασε τὴν Κόρην καταβῆναι ταύτη. 
πρὸς τούτῳ τῷ Κηφισῷ λῃστὴν Πολυπήμονα 
ὄνομα, Προκρούστην δὲ ἐπίκλησιν, Θησεὺς ἀπέ- 
κτεινεν. ᾿Ελευσινίοις δὲ ἔστι μὲν Τριπτολέμου 
ναός, ἔστι δὲ Προπυλαίας ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ Τ[οσει- 
δῶνος Πατρός, φρέαρ τε καλούμενον Καλλίχορον, 
ἔνθα πρῶτον ᾿Ελευσινίων αἱ γυναῖκες χορὸν ἔστη- 
σαν καὶ ἦσαν ἐς τὴν θεόν. τὸ δὲ πεδίον τὸ 
Ῥάριον σπαρῆναι πρῶτον λέγουσι καὶ πρῶτον 
αὐξῆσαι καρπούς, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐλαῖς ἐξ αὐτοῦ 

olai σφισι καὶ ποιεῖσθαι πέμματα ἐς τὰς 
υσίας καθέστηκεν. ἐνταῦθα ἅλως καλουμένη 
Ἑριπτολέμου καὶ βωμὸς δείκνυται" τὰ δὲ ἐντὸς 
τοῦ τείχους τοῦ ἱεροῦ τό τε ὄνειρον ἀπεῖπε γρά- 
φειν, καὶ τοῖς οὐ τελεσθεῖσιν, ὁπόσων θέας εἴρ- 
γονται, δῆλα δήπου μηδὲ πυθέσθαι μετεῖναί 
σφισιν. ᾿Ελευσῖνα δὲ ἥρωα, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὴν πόλιν 
204 

ATTICA, xxxvint. 3-7 

agree in naming Diogenia, Pammerope, and the third 
Saesara. Eumolpus was survived by Ceryx, the 
younger of his sons, whom the Ceryces themselves 
say was a son of Aglaurus, daughter of Cecrops, 
and of Hermes, not of Eumolpus. 

There is also a shrine of the hero Hippothoén, 
after whom the tribe is named, and hard by one of 
Zarex. The latter they say learned music from 
Apollo, but my opinion is that he was a Lacedaemo- 
nian who came as a Stranger to the land, and that 
after him is named Zarax, a town in the Laconian 
territory near the sea. If there is a native Athenian 
hero called Zarex, 1 have nothing to say concerning 
him. At Eleusis flows a Cephisus which is more violent 
than the Cephisus I mentioned above, and by the side 
of it is the place they call Ετἰπείϊ5, saying that Pluto 
descended there to the lower world after carrying off 
the Maid. Near this Cephisus Theseus killed a brigand 
named Polypémon and surnamed Procrustes. The 
Eleusinians have a temple of Triptolemus, of Artemis 
of the Portal, and of Poseidon Father, and a well called 
Callichorum (Lovely dance), where first the women of 
the Eleusinians danced and sang in praise of the 
goddess. They say that the plain called Rharium was 
the first to be sown and the first to grow crops, and for 
this reason it is the custom to use sacrificial barley 
and to make cakes for the sacrifices from its produce. 
Here there is shown a threshing-floor called that of 
Triptolemus and an altar. My dream forbade the 
description of the things within the wall of the sanc- 
tuary, and the uninitiated are of course not permitted 
to learn that which they are prevented from seeing. 
The hero Eleusis, after whom the city is named, some 

205 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὀνομάξουσιν, οἱ μὲν Ἑρμοῦ παῖδα εἶναι καὶ Δαεί- 
ρας Ὠκεανοῦ θυγατρὸς λέγουσι, τοῖς δέ ἐστε 
πεποιημένα "Ὥγυγον εἶναι πατέρα Ἐλευσῖνι: οἱ 
yap? ἀρχαῖοι τῶν λόγων ἅτε οὗ προσόντων 
σφίσιν ἐπῶν ἄλλα τε πλάσασθαι δεδώκασι 
καὶ μάλιστα ἐς τὰ γένη τῶν poor. 

Ἐκ δὲ ᾿Ελευσῖνος τραπομένοις ἐπὶ Βοιωτῶν, 
ἐστὶν ὅμορος ᾿Αθηναίοις ἡ Πλαταιές. πρότερον 
μὲν γὰρ ᾿Ελευθερεῦσιν ὅροι πρὸς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν 
ἦσαν" «προσχωρησάντων δὲ ᾿Αθηναίοις τούτων, 
οὕτως ἤδη Βοιωτίας ὁ Κιθαιρών ἐ ἐστιν ὄρος. mpos- 
εχώρησαν δὲ ᾿Ελευθερεῖς οὐ πολέμῳ βιασθέντες, 
ἀλλὰ πολιτείας τε ἐπιθυμήσαντες παρὰ ᾿Αόη: 
ναίων καὶ κατ᾽ ἔχθος τὸ Θηθαίων. ἐν τούτῳ τῷ 
πεδίῳ ναός ἐστι Διονύσου, καὶ τὸ ξόανον ἐντεῦθεν 
᾿Αθηναίοις ἐκομίσθη τὸ ἀρχαῖον" τὸ δὲ ἐν Ἔλευ- 
θεραῖς τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐς μίμησιν ἐκείνου πεποίη- 
ται. ἀπωτέρω δὲ ὀλίγον σπήλαιόν ἐστιν οὐ μέγα, 
καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτὸ ὕδατος πηγὴ ψυχροῦ: λέγεται δὲ 
ἐς μὲν τὸ σπήλαιον ὡς ᾿Αντιόπη τεκοῦσα κατά- 
θοιτο ἐς αὐτὸ τοὺς παῖδας, περὶ δὲ τῆς πηγῆς 
τὸν ποιμένα. εὑρόντα τοὺς παῖδας ἐνταῦθα σφᾶς 
λοῦσαι πρῶτον. ἀπολύσαντα τῶν σπαργάνων. 
᾿Ελευθερῶν δὲ ἦν μὲν ἔτι τοῦ τείχους, ἦν δὲ καὶ 
οἰκιῶν ἐρείπια" δήλη δὲ τούτοις ἐστὶ πόλις ὀλίγον 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ πεδίου πρὸς τῷ Κιθαιρῶνι οἰκισθεῖσα. 

XXXIX. Ἑτέρα δὲ ὁδὸς ἐξ ᾿Ελευσῖνος πρὸς 
Μέγαρα ἄγει" ταύτην ἐρχομένοις τὴν ὁδὸν φρέαρ 
ἐστὶν "Άνθιον καλούμενον. ἐποίησε δὲ Πάμφως 
ἐπὶ τούτῳ τῷ φρέατι καθῆσθαι Δήμητρα μετὰ 
τὴν ἁρπαγὴν τῆς παιδὸς ypat εἰκασμένην: ἐντεῦ- 

1 ἐκευσίνιοι γὰρ, emended by Schubart. 
206 

ATTICA, xxxvin. 7-xxx1x. 1 

assert to be a son of Hermes and of Daeira, daugh- 
ter of Ocean; there are poets, however, who have 
made Ogygus father of Eleusis. Ancient legends, 
deprived of the help of poetry, have given rise to 
many fictions, especially concerning the pedigrees of 
heroes. 

When you have turned from Eleusis to Boeotia 
you come to the Plataean land, which borders on 
Attica. Formerly Eleutherae formed the boun- 
dary on the side towards Attica, but when it came 
over to the Athenians henceforth the boundary of 
Boeotia was Cithaeron. The reason why the people 
of Eleutherae came over was not because they 
were reduced by war, but because they desired to 
share Athenian citizenship and hated the Thebans. 
In this plain is a temple of Dionysus, from which 
the old wooden image was carried off to Athens. 
The image at Eleutherae at the present day is a 
copy of the old one. A little farther on 15 a small 
cave, and beside it is a spring of cold water. The 
legend about the cave is that Antiope after her 
labour placed her babies into it; as to the spring, it 
is said that the shepherd who found the babies 
washed them there for the first time, taking off their 
swaddling clothes. Of Eleutherae there were still 
left the ruins of the wall and of the houses. From 
these it is clear that the city was built a little above 
the plain close to Cithaeron. 

XXXIX. There is another road from Eleusis, which 
leads to Megara. As you go along this road you come 
to a well called Anthium (Flowery Well). Pamphos 
in his poems describes how Demeter in the likeness 
of an old woman sat at this well after the rape of her 

207 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

θεν δὲ αὐτὴν ἅτε γυναῖκα ᾿ Αργείαν ὑπὸ τῶν 
θυγατέρων τῶν Κελεοῦ κομισθῆναι παρὰ τὴν 
μητέρα καί οἱ τὴν Μετάνειραν οὕτω πιστεῦσαι 
τοῦ παιδὸς τὴν ἀνατροφήν. ὀλίγῳ δὲ ἀπωτέρω 
τοῦ φρέατος ἱερὸν Μετανείρας è ἐστὶ καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ 
τάφοι τῶν ἐπὶ Θήβας. Κρέων γάρ, ὃς ἐδυνάστενε 
τότε ἐν Θήβαις Λαοδάμαντα ἐπιτροπεύων τὸν 
Ἐτεοκλέους, οὐ παρῆκε τοῖς προσήκουσιν ἀνελο- 
μένοις θάψαι: ἱκετεύσαντος δὲ ᾿Αδράστου Θησέα 
καὶ μάχης ᾿Αθηναίων γενομένης πρὸς Βοιωτούς, 
Θησεὺς ὡς ἐκράτησε τῇ μάχη κομίσας ἐς τὴν 
᾿Ελενσινίαν τοὺς νεκροὺς ἐνταῦθα ἔθαψε. 6Θη- 
βαἴοι δὲ τὴν ἀναίρεσιν τῶν νεκρῶν λέγουσιν ἐθε- 
λονταὶ δοῦναι καὶ συνάψαι μάχην οὔ φασι-- 
μετὰ δὲ τῶν ᾿Ἀργείων τοὺς τάφους ἐστὶν ᾽Αλόπης 
μνῆμα, ἣν τεκοῦσαν Ἱπποθόωντα ἐκ Ποσειδῶνος 
ἀποθανεῖν ἐνταῦθά φασιν ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς Kep- 
KUOVOS. εἶναι δὲ ὁ Κερκυὼν λέγεται καὶ τὰ ἄλλα 
ἄδικος ἐς τοὺς , ξένους καὶ παλαίειν οὐ βουλο. 
μένοις" καὶ ὁ τόπος οὗτος παλαίστρα καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ 
ἐκαλεῖτο Κερκυόνος, ὀλίγον τοῦ τάφου τῆς ANo- 
TNS ἀπέχων. λέγεται δὲ ὁ Κερκυὼν τοὺς κατα: 
στάντας ἐς πάλην διαφθεῖραι πλὴν Θησέως, 
Θησεὺς δὲ κατεπάλαισεν αὐτὸν copia τὸ πλέον' 
παλαιστικὴν γὰρ τέχνην εὗρε Θησεὺς ο 
καὶ πάλης κατέστη ὕστερον ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου διδα 
σκαλία" πρότερον δὲ ἐχρῶντο μεγέθει μόνον καὶ 
ῥώμῃ πρὸς τὰς πάλας, 

Τοσαῦτα κατὰ γνώμην τὴν ἐμὴν ᾿Αθηναίοις 
γνωριμώτατα ἦν ἔν τε λόγοις καὶ θεωρήμασι», 
ἀπέκρινε δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν πολλῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὁ λόγος 
μοι τὰ ἐς συγγραφὴν ἀνήκοντα. 

208 

Pd 

ATTICA, ΧΧΧΙΧ. 1-3 

daughter, how the daughters of Celeiis thence took 
her as an Argive woman to their mother, and how 
Metaneira thereupon entrusted to her the rearing of 
herson. A little farther on from the well is a sanctuary 
of Metaneira, and after it are graves of those who went 
against Thebes. For Creon, who at that time ruled 
in Thebes as guardian of Laodamas the son ot 
Eteocles, refused to allow the relatives to take up 
and bury their dead. But Adrastus having sup- 
plicated Theseus, the Athenians fought with the 
Boeotians, and Theseus being victorious in the fight 
carried the dead to the Eleusinian territory and buried 
them here. The Thebans, however, say that they 
voluntarily gave up the dead for burial and deny 
that they engaged in battle. After the graves of 
the Argives is the tomb of Alope, who, legend says, 
being mother of Hippothoén by Poseidon was on 
this spot put to death by her father Cercyon. He is 
said to have treated strangers wickedly, especially 
in wrestling with them against their will. So even 
to my day this place is called the Wrestling Ground 
of Cercyon, being a little way from the grave of 
Alope. Cercyon is said to have killed all those who 
tried a bout with him except Theseus, who out- 
matched him mainly by his skill. For Theseus 
was the first to discover the art of wrestling, and 
through him afterwards was established the teaching 
of the art. Before him men used in wrestling only 
size and strength of body. 

Such in my opinion are the most famous legends 
and sights among the Athenians, and from the 
beginning my narrative has picked out of much 
material the things that deserve to be recorded. 

209 
VOL. I. P 

4 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

"EXevoive δὲ ἤδη πλησιόχωρος ἡ καλουμένη 
Μεγαρίς- τῆς ᾿Αθηναίων ἣν καὶ αὕτη τὸ ἀρχαῖον, 
Hóra τοῦ βασιλέως καταλιπόντος. Πανδίονι. 
μαρτύρια δέ μοι τάφος τε Πανδίονος ἐν τῇ YD καὶ 
Nioos Αἰγεῖ μὲν πρεσβυτάτῳ τοῦ παντὸς γένους 
παραχωρήσας ᾿Αθηναίων ἄρχειν, αὐτὸς δὲ Μεγά- 
ρων καὶ τῆς ἄχρι Κορίνθου βασιλεύειν ἀξιωθείς 
Νίσαιά τε ἔτι καὶ νῦν Μεγαρεῦσιν ἐπίνειον ἀπ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ καλεῖται. Κόδρου δὲ ὕστερον βασιλεύοντος 
A cab ia ere ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αθήνας Πἐλοποννήσιοι" καὶ ὡς 
οὐδὲν ἀποδειξάμενοι λαμπρὸν ἐκομίζοντο ὀπίσω, 
Μέγαρα ᾿Αθηναίων ἑλόντες Κορινθίων καὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων συμμάχων τοῖς ἐθέλουσιν ἔδωκαν οἰκῆσαι. 
Μεγαρεῖς μὲν οὕτως ἔθη καὶ φωνὴν μεταβαλόντες 
Δωριεῖς γεγόνασι, κληθῆναι δὲ οὕτω τὴν πόλιν 
φασὶν ἐπὶ Καρὸς τοῦ Φορωνέως ἐν τῇ γῇ ταύτῃ 
βασιλεύοντος" τότε πρῶτον λέγουσιν ἱερὰ γενέ- 
σθαι Δήμητρος αὐτοῖς, τότε ἀνθρώπους ὀνομάσαι 
Μέγαρα. οὕτω μὲν αὐτοὶ περὶ σφῶν Μεγαρεῖς 
λέγουσι" Βοιωτοὶ δὲ ἐν ᾿Ογχηστῷ Μεγαρέα τὸν 
Ποσειδῶνος οἰκοῦντα ἀφικένδα αι στρατιᾷ Βοιωτῶν 
φασι Νίσῳ τὸν πρὸς Μίνω πόλεμον συνδιοίσοντα, 
πεσόντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ μάχη ταφῆναί τε αὐτοῦ 
καὶ τῇ πόλει Μέγαρα 6 ὄνομα ἀπὸ τούτου γενέσθαι, 
πρότερον Νίσᾳ καλουμένῃ. δωδεκάτῃ δὲ ὕστερον 
μετὰ Κᾶρα τὸν Φορωνέως γενεᾷ λέγουσιν οἱ 
Μεγαρεῖς Λέλεγα ἀφικόμενον ἐξ Αἰγύπτου βασι- 
λεῦσαι καὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους κληθῆναι Λέλεγας 
ἐπὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς αὐτοῦ" Κλήσωνος δὲ τοῦ Λέλεγος 
γενέσθαι }ύλαν, τοῦ Πύλα δὲ Σκίρωνα- τοῦ- 
τον συνοικῆσαι Πανδίονος θυγατρί, καὶ ὕστερον 

210 

ATTICA, xxx1x. 4-6 

Next to Eleusis is the district called Megaris. 
This too belonged to Athens in ancient times, 
Pylas the king having left it to Pandion. My 
evidence is this; in the land is the grave of Pandion, 
and Nisus, while giving up the rule over the Athen- 
ians to Aegeus, the eldest of all the family, was 
himself made king of Megara and of the territory 
as far as Corinth. Even at the present day the port 
of the Megarians is called Nisaea after him. Subse- 
quently in the reign of Codrus the Peloponnesians 
made an expedition against Athens. Having ac- 
complished nothing brilliant, on their way home 
they took Megara from the Athenians, and gave 
it as a dwelling-place to such of the Corinthians and 
of their other allies as wished to go there. In this 
way the Megarians changed their customs and dialect 
and became Dorians, and they say that the city re- 
ceived its name when Car the son of Phoroneus was 
king in this land. It was then they say that sanc- 
tuaries of Demeter were first made by them, and | 
then that men used the name Megara (Chambers). 
This is their history according to the Megarians 
themselves. But the Boeotians declare that Megareus, 
son of Poseidon, who dwelt in Onchestus, came 
with an army of Boeotians to help Nisus wage the 
war against Minos ; that falling in the battle he was 
buried on the spot, and the city was named Megara 
from him, having previously been called Nisa. In 
the twelfth generation after Car the son of Phoroneus 
the Megarians say that Lelex arrived from Egypt and 
became king, and that in his reign the tribe Leleges 
received its name. Lelex they say begat Cleson, 
Cleson Pylas and Pylas Sciron, who married the 
daughter of Pandion and afterwards disputed with 

211 
p 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Νίσῳ τῷ Πανδίονος ἐς ἀμφισβήτησιν ἐλθεῖν περὶ 
τῆς ἀρχῆς Σκίρωνα καί σφισιν. Αἰακὸν δικάσαι, 
βασιλείαν μὲν διδόντα Νίσῳ καὶ τοῖς ἀπογόνοις, 
Σκίρωνι δὲ ἡγεμονίαν εἶναι πολέμου. Μεγαρέα 
δὲ τὸν Ποσειδῶνος θυγατρὶ Νίσου συνοικήσαντα 
Ἰφινόῃ διαδέξασθαι τὴν τοῦ Νίσου hasiv ἀρχήν' 
τὸν δὲ Κρητικὸν πόλεμον καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ Νίσου 
βασιλεύοντος ἅλωσιν τῆς πόλεως οὐκ ἐθέλουσιν 
εἰδέναι. 

XL. Ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῇ πόλει κρήνη, ἣν σφισιν 
ὠκοδόμησε Θεαγένης, οὗ καὶ πρότερον τούτων 
ἐπεμνήσθην θυγατέρα αὐτὸν συνοικίσαι Κύλωνι 
᾿Αθηναίῳ. οὗτος ὁ Θεαγένης τυραννήσας godo- 
μησε τὴν κρήνην μεγέθους ἕνεκα καὶ κόσμου καὶ 
ἐς τὸ πλῆθος τῶν κιόνων θέας ἀξίαν' καὶ ὕδωρ ἐς 
αὐτὴν ῥεῖ καλούμενον Σιθνίδων νυμφῶν. τὰς δὲ 
Σιθνίδας νύμφας λέγουσι Μεγαρεῖς εἶναι μέν 
σφισιν ἐπι ωρίας, μιᾷ δὲ αὐτῶν συγγενέσθαι 
Δία, Μέγαρον τε παῖδα ὅ ὄντα Διὸς καὶ ταύτης δὴ 
τῆς νύμφης ἐκφυγεῖν τὴν ἐπὶ Δευκαλίωνός ποτε 
ἐπομβρίαν, ἐκφυγεῖν δὲ πρὸς τὰ ἄκρα τῆς Tepa- 
νίας, οὐκ ἔχοντός πω τοῦ ὄρους τὸ ὄνομα τοῦτο, 
ἀλλὰ-- νήχεσθαι γὰρ πετομένων γεράνων πρὸς 
τὴν βοὴν τῶν ὀρνίθων αὐτόν---διὰ τοῦτο Γερανίαν 
τὸ ὄρος ὀνομασθῆναι. τῆς δὲ κρήνης οὐ πόρρω 
ταύτης ἀρχαῖόν ἐστιν ἱερόν, εἰκόνες δὲ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
ἑστᾶσιν ἐν αὐτῷ βασιλέων “Ῥωμαίων καὶ ἄγαλμα 
κεῖται χαλκοῦν ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἐπίκλησιν Σωτείρας. 
φασὶ δὲ ἄνδρας τοῦ Μαρδονίου στρατοῦ κατα- 
δραμόντας τὴν Μεγαρίδα ἀποχωρεῖν ἐς Θήβας 
ὀπίσω παρὰ Μαρδόνιον ἐθέλειν, γνώμῃ δὲ Ap- 

212 

ATTICA, χχχιχ. ό-χι.. 2 

Nisus, the son of Pandion, about the throne, the 
dispute being settled by Aeacus, who gave the 
kingship to Nisus and his descendants, and to Sciron 
the leadership in war. They say further that Nisus 
was succeeded by Megareus, the son of Poseidon, 
who married Iphinoé, the daughter of Nisus, but 
they ignore altogether the Cretan war and the 
capture of the city in the reign of Nisus. 
-- XL. There is in the city a fountain, which was 
built for the citizens by Theagenes,! whom I have 
-< mentioned previously as having given his daughter 
in marriage to Cylon the Athenian. This Theagenes 
upon becoming tyrant built the fountain, which is 
noteworthy for its size, beauty and the number 
of its pillars. Water flows into it called the water 
of the Sithnid nymphs. The Megarians say that 
the Sithnid nymphs are native, and that one of them 
mated with Zeus; that Megarus, a son of Zeus and 
of this nymph, escaped the flood in the time of Deuca- 
lion, and made his escape to the heights of Gerania. 
The mountain had not yet received this name, 
but was then named Gerania (Crane Hill) because 
cranes were flying and Megarus swam towards the 
cry of the birds. Not far from this fountain is an 
ancient sanctuary, and in our day likenesses stand in 
it of Roman emperors, and a bronze image is there of 
Artemis surnamed Saviour. There is a story that a 
detachment of the army of Mardonius, having over- 479 ».c 
run Megaris, wished to return to Mardonius at 
Thebes, but that by the will of Artemis night came 

1 See p. 147. 
213 / 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τέμιδος νύκτα τε ὁδοιποροῦσιν. ἐπιγενέσθαι καὶ 
τῆς ὁδοῦ σφᾶς ἁμαρτόντας ἐς τὴν ὀρεινὴν τραπέ- 
σθαι τῆς χώρας" πειρωμένους δὲ εἰ στράτευμα 
ἐγγὺς εἴη πολέμιον ἀφιέναι τῶν βελῶν, καὶ τὴν 
πλησίον πέτραν στένειν βαλλομένην, τοὺς δὲ 
αὖθις τοξεύειν προθυμίᾳ ' πλέονι. τέλος δὲ αὐτοῖς 
ἀναλωθῆναι τοὺς ὀιστοὺς ἐς ἄνδρας πολεμίους 
τοξεύειν νομίξουσιν" ἡ ἡμέρα τε ὑπεφαίνετο καὶ οἱ 
Μεγαρεῖς ἐπῄεσαν, pa μαχόμενοι δὲ ὁπλῖται πρὸς 
ἀνόπλους καὶ οὐδὲ βελῶν εὐποροῦντας ἔτι φονεύ- 
ουσιν αὐτῶν τοὺς πολλούς: καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδε Σωτείρας 
ἄγαλμα ἐποιήσαντο ᾿Αρτέμιδος. ἐνταῦθα καὶ 
τῶν δώδεκα ὀνομαδομένων θεῶν ἐστιν ἀγάλματα 
ἔργα εἶναι λεγόμενα Πραξιτέλους τὴν δὲ “Apte- 
μιν αὐτὴν Στρογγυλίων è ἐποίησε. 

ετὰ ταῦτα ἐς τὸ τοῦ Διὸς τέμενος ἐσελθοῦσι 
καλούμενον Ὀλυμπιεῖον vaos ἐστι θέας ἄξιος: τὸ 
δὲ ἄγαλμα οὐκ ἐξειργάσθη τοῦ Διός, ἐπιλαβόντος 
τοῦ Πελοποννησίων πολέμου πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους, ἐ ἐν 
ᾧ καὶ ναυσὶν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος καὶ στρατῷ. φθείροντες 
Μεγαρεῦσιν ᾿Αθηναῖοι τὴν χώραν τά τε κοινὰ 
ἐκάκωσαν καὶ ἰδίᾳ τοὺς οἴκους ἤγαγον ἐς τὸ 
ἔσχατον ἀσθενείας. τῷ δὲ ἀγάλματι τοῦ Διὸς 
πρόσωπον ἐλέφαντος καὶ χρυσοῦ, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ 
πηλοῦ τέ ἐστι καὶ γύψου ποιῆσαι δὲ αὐτὸ Θεό- 
Koo pov λέγουσιν ἐπιχώριον, συνεργάσασθαι δέ οἱ 
Φειδίαν. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς κεφαλῆς τοῦ Διός εἰσιν 
Ὧραι καὶ Μοῖραι: δῆλα δὲ πᾶσι τὴν πεπρωμένην 
μόνῳ οἱ πείσεσθαι καὶ τὰς ὥρας τὸν θεὸν τοῦτον 
νέμειν ἐς τὸ δέον. ὄπισθε δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ κεῖται 
ξύλα ἡμίεργα' ταῦτα ἔμελλεν ὁ Θεόκοσμος ἐλέ- 

214 

P a 

A 

| 

ΑΤΤΙΟΑ, χι. 2-4 

on them as they marched, and missing their way 
they turned into the hilly region. Trying to find 
out whether there was a hostile force near they 
shot some missiles. The rock near groaned when 
struck, and they shot again with greater eagerness, 
until at last they used up all their arrows thinking 
that they were shooting at the enemy. When the 
day broke, the Megarians attacked, and being men in 
armour fighting against men without armour who no 
longer had even a supply of missiles, they killed the 
greater number of their opponents. For this reason 
they had an image made of Artemis Saviour. Here 
are also images of the gods named the Twelve, 
said to be the work of Praxiteles. But the image of 
Artemis herself was made by Strongylion. 

After this when you have entered the precinct 
of Zeus called the Olympieum you see a note- 
worthy temple. But the image of Zeus was not 
finished, for the work was interrupted by the war of 
the Peloponnesians against the Athenians, in which 
the Athenians every year ravaged the land of the 
Megarians with a fleet and an army, damaging public 
revenues and bringing private families to dire distress. 
The face of the image of Zeus is of ivory and gold, the 
other parts are of clay and gypsum. The artist is said 
to have been Theocosmus, a native, helped by Pheidias. 
Above the head of Zeus are the Seasons and Fates, 
and all may see that he is the only god obeyed by 
Destiny, and that he apportions the seasons as is due. 
Behind the temple lie half-worked pieces of wood, 
which Theocosmus intended to overlay with ivory 

3] 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

φαντι καὶ χρυσῷ κοσμήσας τὸ ἄγαλμα ἐκτελέσειν 
5 τοῦ Διός. ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ τῷ ναῷ τριήρους ἀνάκειται 
a ” / A - 
χαλκοῦν ἐμβολον' ταύτην τὴν ναῦν λαβεῖν φασι 
περὶ Σαλαμῖνα ναυμαχήσαντες πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους 
- » - 
ὁμολογοῦσι δὲ καὶ ᾿Αθηναῖοι χρόνον τινὰ Μεγα- 

ο A A ’ 
ρεῦσιν ἀποστῆναι τῆς νήσου, Σόλωνα δὲ ὕστερόν 
φασιν ἐλεγεῖα ποιήσαντα προτρέψαι σφᾶς, κατα- 
στῆναι δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐς ἀμφισβήτησινν Αθηναῖοι, 
κρατήσαντες δὲ πολέμῳ Σαλαμῖνα αὖθις ἔχειν, 
Μεγαρεῖς δὲ παρὰ σφῶν λέγουσιν ἄνδρας φυγάδας, 
οὓς Δορυκλείους ὀνομάζουσιν, ἀφικομένους παρὰ 
τοὺς ἐν Σαλαμῖνι κληρούχους προδοῦναι Σαλαμῖνα 
᾿Αθηναίοις. 

6 Μετὰ δὲ τοῦ Διὸς τὸ τέμενος ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν 
ἀνελθοῦσι καλουμένην ἀπὸ Καρὸς τοῦ Φορωνέως 
καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔτι Καρίαν, ἔστι μὲν Διονύσου ναὸς 
Νυκτελίου, πεποίηται δὲ ᾿Αφροδίτης Ἔπιστρο- 
φίας ἱερὸν καὶ Νυκτὸς καλούμενον ἐστι μαντεῖον 

. « / . 9 y y A δὲ 
καὶ Διὸς Κονίου ναὸς οὐκ ἔχων ὄροφον. τοῦ δὲ 
᾿Ασκληπιοῦ τὸ ἄγαλμα Βρύαξις καὶ αὐτὸ καὶ τὴν 
Ὑγείαν ἐποίησεν. ἐνταῦθα καὶ τῆς Δήμητρος τὸ 
καλούμενον μέγαρον: ποιῆσαι δὲ αὐτὸ βασιλεύ- 
οντα Κᾶρα ἔλεγον. 

ΧΙΙ. Ἔκ δὲ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως κατιοῦσιν, ᾗ πρὸς 
ἄρκτον τέτραπται τὸ χωρίον, μνῆμά ἐστιν ᾿Αλκ- 
μήνης πλησίον τοῦ ᾿Ὀλυμπιείου. βαδίζουσαν 

A 3 / 3 y A 2 CA4 
γὰρ ἐς Θήβας ἐξ Άργους τελευτῆσαι καθ᾽ ὁδὸν 
λέγουσιν αὐτὴν ἐν τοῖς Μεγάροις, καὶ τοὺς ‘Hpa- 

ὃ » » ’ A . . 3 
κλείδας ἐς ἀμφισβήτησιν ἐλθεῖν, τοὺς μὲν ἐς 
"Αργος ἐθέλοντας ὀπίσω κομίσαι τὸν νεκρὸν τῆς 
3 / . 9 » A 9 / \ a 
᾽Αλκμήνης, τοὺς Ò αὐτῶν ἐς Θήβας: καὶ γὰρ τοῖς 

216 

ATTICA, χι. 4—xu1. 1 

and gold in order to complete the image of Zeus. 
In the temple itself is dedicated a bronze ram of a 
galley. This ship they say that they captured off 
Salamis in a naval action with the Athenians. The 
Athenians too admit that for a time they evacuated 
the island before the Megarians, saying that after- 
wards Solon! wrote elegiac poems and encouraged 
them, and that thereupon the Athenians challenged 
their enemies, won the war and recovered Salamis. 
But the Megarians say that exiles from themselves, 
whom they call Dorycleans, reached the colonists 
in Salamis and betrayed the island to the Athenians. 

After the precinct of Zeus, when you have ascended 
the citadel, which even at the present day is called 
Caria from Car, son of Phoroneus, you see a temple 
of Dionysus Nyctelius (Nocturnal), a sanctuary built 
to Aphrodite Epistrophia (She who turns men to love), 
an oracle called that of Night and a temple of Zeus 
Conius (Dusty) without a roof. The image of Asclepius 
and also that of Health were made by Bryaxis. Here 
too is what is called the Chamber of Demeter, built, 
they say, by Car when he was king. 

XLI. On coming down from the citadel, where the 
ground turns northwards, is the tomb of Alcmena, 
near the Olympieum. They say that as she was 
walking from Argos to Thebes she died on the way 
at Megara, and that the Heracleidae fell to disputing, 
some wishing to carry the corpse of Alemena back to 
Argos, others wishing to take it to Thebes, as in Thebes 

1 The great legislator, who flourished early in the sixth 
century B.C. 

217 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Ἡρακλέους παισὶ τοῖς ἐκ Μεγάρας τάφον εἶναι 
καὶ ᾽Αμϕιτρύωνος ἐν Θήβαις. ὁ δὲ ἐν Δελφοῖς 
θεὸς ἔχρησε θάψαι ᾿Αλκμήνην ἐν τοῖς Μεγάροις 
ἄμεινον εἶναί σφισιν. ἐντεῦθεν ὁ ὁ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων 
ἡμῖν ἐξηγητὴς ἡ ἡγεῖτο ἐς χωρίον Ῥοῦν ὡς ἔφασκεν 
ὀνομαξόμενον, ταύτῃ γὰρ ὕδωρ ποτὲ ἐκ τῶν ὀρῶν 
τῶν ὑπὲρ τὴν πόλιν ῥυῆναι Θεαγένης δέ, ὃς τότε 
ἐτυράννει, τὸ ὕδωρ ἑτέρωσε τρέψας βωμὸν ἐν- 
ταῦθα ᾿Αχελῴῳ ἐποίησε. καὶ Ύλλου πλησίον 
τοῦ Ἡρακλέους μνῆμά ἐστιν ἀνδρὶ ᾿Αρκάδι Ἔχε- 
μῳ τῷ ᾿Αερόπου μονομαχήσαντος" καὶ ὅστις μὲν 
Ἔχεμος ὢν ἀπέκτεινεν Ὕλλον, ἑτέρωθι τοῦ 
λόγου δηλώσω, τέθαπται δὲ καὶ “Ύλλος ἐν τοῖς 
Μεγάροις. αὕτη καλοῖτο ἂν ὀρθῶς στρατεία τῶν 
Ἡρακλειδῶν ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἐπὶ ᾿Ὀρέστου 
βασιλεύοντος. ov πόρρω δὲ τοῦ ὝὝλλου pvi- 
ματος Ἴσιδος ναὸς καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτὸν ᾽᾿Απόλλωνός 
ἐστι καὶ Αρτέμιδος" ᾿Αλκάθουν δέ φασι ποιῆσαι 
ἀποκτείναντα λέοντα τὸν καλούμενον Κιθαιρώ- 
νιον. ὑπὸ τούτου τοῦ λέοντος διαφθαρῆναι καὶ 
ἄλλους καὶ Μεγαρέως φασὶ τοῦ σφετέρου βασι- 
λέως παῖδα Εὔιππον, τὸν δὲ πρεσβύτερον τῶν 
παίδων αὐτῷ Τίμαλκον ἔτι πρότερον ἀποθανεῖν 
ὑπὸ (Θησέως, στρατεύοντα ἐς Αφιδναν σὺν τοῖς 
Διοσκούροις" Μεγαρέα δὲ γάμον τε ὑποσχέι 
θυγατρὸς καὶ ὡς διάδοχον ἕξει τῆς ἀρχῆς, ὅστις 
τὸν Κιθαιρώνιον λέοντα ἀποκτείναι: διὰ ταῦτα 
᾿Αλκάθουν τὸν Πέλοπος € ἐπιχειρήσαντα τῷ θηρίῳ 
κρατῆσαί τε καὶ ὡς ἐβασίλευσε τὸ ἱερὸν ποιῆσαι 
τοῦτο, ᾿Αγροτέραν "Αρτεμιν καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνα 
᾿Αγραῖον ἐπονομάσαντα. ταῦτα μὲν οὕτω «γενέ- 
σθαι λέγουσιν' ἐγὼ δὲ γράφειν μὲν ἐθέλω Meya- 

218 

ATTICA, χι]. 1-4 

were buried Amphitryon and the children of Heracles 
by Megara. But the god in Delphi gave them an 
oracle that it was better for them to bury Alcmena 
in Megara. From this place the local guide took us 
to a place which he said was named Rhus (Stream), 
for that water once flowed here from the mountains 
above the city. But Theagenes, who was tyrant at 
that time, turned the water into another direction 
and made here an altar to Acheloiis. Hard by is 
the tomb of Hyllus, son of Heracles, who fought a 
duel with an Arcadian, Echemus the son of Aéropus. 
Who the Echemus was who killed Hyllus I will tell 
in another part of my narrative, but Hyllus also is 
buried at Megara. These events might correctly be 
called an expedition of the Heracleidae into the 
Peloponnesus in the reign of Orestes. Not far from 
the tomb of Hyllus is a temple of Isis, and beside it 
one of Apollo and of Artemis. They say that Alca- 
thous made it after killing the lion called Cithae- 
ronian. By this lion they say many were slain, 
including Euippus, the son of Megareus their king, 
whose elder son Timalcus had before this been killed 
by Theseus while on a campaign with the Dioscuri 
against Aphidna. Megareus they say promised that 
he who killed the Cithaeronian lion should marry his 
daughter and succeed him in the kingdom. Alcathous 
therefore, son of Pelops, attacked the beast and 
overcame it, and when he came to the throne he built 
this sanctuary, surnaming Artemis Agrotera (Huntress) 
and Apollo Agraeiis (Hunter). Such is the account of 
the Megarians ; but although I wish my account to 

219 

ο A 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

ρεῦσιν ὁμολογοῦντα, οὐκ ἔχω δὲ ὅπως εὕρωμαι 
πάντα σφίσιν, ἀλλὰ ἀποθανεῖν μὲν λέοντα ἐν τῷ 
Κιθαιρῶνι ὑπὸ ᾿Αλκάθου πείθομαι, Μεγαρέως δὲ 
Τίμαλκον παῖδα τίς μὲν ἐς ᾿Αφιδναν ἐλθεῖν μετὰ 
τῶν Διοσκούρων ἔγραψε; πῶς ὃ ἂν ἀφικόμενος 
ἀναιρεθῆναι νομίξοιτο ὑπὸ Θησέως, ὅπου καὶ 
᾿Αλκμὰν ποιήσας άσμα ἐς τοὺς Διοσκούρους, ὡς 
᾿Αθήνας ἕλοιεν καὶ τὴν Θησέως ἀγάγοιεν μητέρα 
αἰχμάλωτον, ὅμως Θησέα φησὶν αὐτὸν ἀπεῖναι; 
Πίνδαρος δὲ τούτοις τε κατὰ ταὐτὰ ἐποίησε καὶ 
γαμβρὸν τοῖς Διοσκούροις Θησέα εἶναι Bovo- 
μενον ἁρπασθεῖσαν τὴν Ἑλένην διαφυλάξαι, ἐς 3 
ὃ ἀπελθεῖν αὐτὸν Πειρίθῳ τὸν λεγόμενον γάμον 
συμπράξοντα. ὅστις δὲ ἐγενεαλόγησε, δῆλον ὡς 
πολλήν τοῖς Μεγαρεῦσι σύνοιδεν εὐήθειαν, εἴ γε 
Θησεὺς ἦν ἀπόγονος Πέλοπος" ἀλλὰ γὰρ τὸν 
ὄντα λόγον οἱ Μεγαρεῖς εἰδότες ἐπικρύπτουσιν, 
οὐ βουλόμενοι δοκεῖν ἁλῶναί σφισιν ἐπὶ τῇ 
ἀρχῆς τῆς Νίσου τὴν, πόλιν, διαδέξασθαι. δὲ τῆν 
Εασιλείαν γαμβρὸν Νίσου τε Μεγαρέα καὶ αὖθις 
᾿Αλκάθουν Μεγαρέως. φαίνεται δὲ μον ώωὢ 
τος Νίσου καὶ τῶν πραγμάτων Μεγαρεῦσιν ἐ ἐ 
θαρμένων ὑπὸ τοῦτον ᾿Αλκάθους ἀφικόμενος τὸν 
καιρὸν ἐξ Ἤλιδος μαρτύριον δέ por τὸ γὰρ 
τεῖχος Φκοδόμησεν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἅτε τοῦ περιβόλου 
τοῦ ἀρχαίου καθαιρεθέντος Ú ὑπὸ τῶν Κρητῶν. 
᾿Αλκάθου μὲν καὶ τοῦ λέοντος, εἴτε ἐν τῷ 
Κιθαιρῶνι αὐτὸν εἴτε καὶ ἑτέρωθι ἀποκτείνας 
ναὸν ᾿Αγροτέρας ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος 
ἐποίησεν ᾿Αγραίου, ἐς τοσόνδε ἔστω μνήμη" ἐκ 
τούτου δὲ τοῦ ἱεροῦ κατιοῦσι Πανδίονός ἐστιν 
ἡρῷον. καὶ ὅτι μὲν ἐτάφη Πανδίων ἐν Αἰθυίας 

220 

Ῥω. 

ο». 

ATTICA, χι. 4-6 

agree with theirs, yet I cannot accept everything they 
say. Iam ready to believe that a lion was killed by 
Alcathous on Cithaeron, but what historian has re- 
corded that Timalcus the son of Megareus came with 
the Dioscuri to Aphidna? And supposing he had gone 
there, how could one hold that he had been killed by 

Theseus, when Aleman wrote a poem on the Dioscuri, ο. 640- 

in which he says that they captured Athens and car- 
ried into captivity the mother of Theseus, but The- 
seus himself was absent? Pindar in his poems agrees 
with this account, saying that Theseus, wishing to be 
related to the Dioscuri, carried off Helen and kept 
her until he departed to carry out with Peirithous the 
marriage that they tell of. Whoever has studied 
genealogy finds the Megarians guilty of great 
silliness, since Theseus was a descendant of Pelops. 
The fact is that the Megarians know the true story 
but conceal it, not wishing it to be thought that their 
city was captured in the reign of Nisus, but that both 
Megareus, the son-in-law of Nisus, and Alcathous, the 
son-in-law of Megareus, succeeded their respective 
fathers-in-law as king. It is evident that Alcathous 
arrived from Elis just at the time when Nisus had died 
and the Megarians had lost everything. Witness to 
the truth of my statement is the fact that he built the 
wall afresh from the beginning, the old one round the 
city having been destroyed by the Cretans. 

Let so much suffice for Alcathous and for the lion, 
whether it was on Cithaeron or elsewhere that the 
killing took place that caused him to make a temple 
to Artemis Agrotera and Apollo Agraeiis. On going 
down from this sanctuary you see the shrine of the hero 
Pandion. My narrative has already told how Pandion 

221 

B.C. 

7 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

᾿Αθηνᾶς καλουμένῳ σκοπέλῳ, δεδήλωκεν. ὁ λόγος 
ἤδη por τιμὰς δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει παρὰ Meya- 
ρέων ἔχει. 

Πλησίον δέ ἐστι τοῦ Πανδίονος ἡρῴου μνῆμα 
Ἱππολύτης: γράψω δὲ καὶ τὰ ἐς αὐτὴν ὁποῖα 
Μεγαρεῖς λέγουσιν. ὅτε ᾿Αμαξόνες € ἐπ᾿ ᾿Αθηναίους 
στρατεύσασαι δι ᾿Αντιόπην ἐκρατήθησαν ὑπὸ 
Θησέως, τὰς μὲν πολλὰς συνέβη μαχομένας av- 
TOV ἀποθανεῖν, Ἱππολύτην δὲ ἀδελφὴν οὖσαν 
᾿Αντιόπης καὶ τότε ἡγουμένην τῶν γυναικῶν 
ἀποφυγεῖν σὺν ὀλίγαις ἐς Μέγαρα, ἅτε δὲ κακῶς 
οὕτω πράξασαν τῷ στρατῷ τοῖς τε παροῦσιν 
ἀθύμως ἔχουσαν καὶ περὶ τῆς οἴκαδε ἐς τὴν 
Θεμίσκυραν σωτηρίας μᾶλλον ἔτι ἀποροῦσαν 
ὑπὸ λύπης τελευτῆσαι" καὶ θάψαι αὐτὴν ἀπτο- 
θανοῦσαν, καί οἱ τοῦ μνήματος σχῆμά ἐστιν 
᾿Αμαξονικῇ ἀσπίδι ἐμφερές. τούτου δέ ἐστιν 
οὐ πόρρω τάφος Τηρέως τοῦ Πρόκνην γήμαντος 
τὴν Πανδίονος. ἐβασίλευσε δὲ ὁ Τηρεύς, ὡς μὲν 
λέγουσιν. οἱ Μεγαρεῖς, περὶ τὰς Παγὰς τὰς καλου- 
μένας τῆς , Μεγαρίδος, ὡς δὲ ἐγώ τε δοκῶ καὶ 
τεκμήρια ἐς τόδε λείπεται, Δαυλίδος ἤρχε τῆς 
ὑπὲρ Χαιρωνείας" πάλαι γὰρ τῆς νῦν καλουμένης 
Ἑλλάδος βάρβαροι τὰ πολλὰ ὤκησαν. ἐπεὶ δὲ 
ἦν καὶ Τηρεῖ τὰ ἐς Φιλομήλαν ἐξειργασμένα 
καὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν Ἴτυν ὑπὸ τῶν γυναικῶν, ἑλεῖν 
σφᾶς ὁ Τηρεὺς οὐκ ἐδύνατο" καὶ ὁ μὲν ἐτελεύ- 
τησεν ἐν τοῖς Μεγάροις αὐτοχειρίᾳ, καί οἱ τάφον 
αὐτίκα ἔχωσαν καὶ θύουσιν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος vr 
φῖσιν ἐν τῇ θυσία ἀντὶ οὐλῶν χρώμενοι καὶ τὸν 
ἔποπα τὸν ὄρνιθα ἐνταῦθα φανῆναι πρῶτον λέ- 
γουσιν' αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες ἐς μὲν ᾿Αθήνας ἀφίκοντο, 

222 

ATTICA, χει. 6-0 

was buried on what is called the Rock of Athena 
Aethyia (Gannet). He receives honours from the 
Megarians in the city as well. 

Near the shrine of the hero Pandion is the tomb of 
Hippalyte. I will record the account the Megarians 
give of her. When the Amazons, having marched 
against the Athenians because of Antiope, were over- 
come by Theseus, most of them met their death in 
the fight, but Hippolyte, the sister of Antiope and on 
this occasion the leader of the women, escaped with 
a few others to Megara. Having suffered such a 
military disaster, being in despair at her present situa- 
tion and even more hopeless of reaching her home in 
Themiscyra, she died of a broken heart, and the 
Megarians gave her burial. The shape of her tomb 
is like an Amazonian shield. Not far from this is the 
grave of Tereus, who married Procne the daughter 
of Pandion. The Megarians say that Tereus was king 
of the region around what is called Pagae (Springs) 
of Megaris, but my opinion, which is confirmed by 
extant evidence, is that he ruled over Daulis beyond 
Chaeronea, for in ancient times the greater part of 
what is now called Greece was inhabited by foreigners. 
When Tereus did what he did to Philomela and Itys 
suffered at the hands of the women, Tereus found 
himself unable to seize them. He committed suicide 
in Megara, and the Megarians forthwith raised him a 
barrow, and every year sacrifice to him, using in the 
sacrifice gravel instead of barley meal; they say that 
the bird called the hoopoe appeared here for the first 
time. The women came to Athens, and while 

223 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

θρηνοῦσαι δὲ ola ἔπαθον καὶ οἷα ἀντέδρασαν t ὑπὸ 
δακρύων διαφθείρονται, καί σφισι τὴν ἐς ἀηδόνα 
καὶ χελιδόνα μεταβολὴν ἐπεφήμισαν ὅτε οἶμαι 
καὶ αὗται αἱ ὄρνιθες ἐλεεινὸν καὶ θρήνῳ ὅμοιον 
ἆδουσιν. 

XLII. Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλη Μεγαρεῦσιν aK po- 
πολις ἀπὸ ᾿Αλκάθου τὸ ὄνομα ἔχουσα: ἐς ταύτην 
τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἀνιοῦσίν ἐστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ Μεγαρέως 
μνῆμα, ὃς κατὰ τὴν ἐπιστρατείαν τῶν Κρητῶν 
ξύμμαχός « σφισιν ἦλθεν ἐξ Ὀγχηστοῦ, δείκνυται 
δὲ καὶ ἑστία θεῶν Προδομέων καλουμένων. θῦσαι 
δέ σφισιν ᾿Αλκάθουν λέγουσι πρῶτον, ὅτε τῆς 
οἰκοδομίας τοῦ τείχους ἔμελλεν ἄρχεσθαι. τῆς 
δὲ ἑστίας ἐγγὺς ταύτης ἐστὶ λίθος, ἐφ᾽ οὗ κατα- 
θεῖναι λέγουσιν ᾿Απόλλωνα τὴν κιθάραν ᾿Αλκάθῳ 
τὸ τεῖχος. συνεργαξόμενον. δηλοῖ τέ μοι καὶ τόδε 
ὡς συνετέλουν ἐς ᾿Αθηναίους Μεγαρεῖς" φαίνεται 
γὰρ τὴν θυγατέρα ᾿Αλκάθους .Περίβοιαν ἅμα 
Θησεῖ πέμψαι κατὰ τὸν δασμὸν ἐ ἐς Κρήτην. τότε 
δὲ αὐτῷ τειχίξοντι, ὥς φασιν οἱ Μεγαρεῖς, συνερ- 
γάξεταί τε ᾿Απόλλων καὶ τὴν κιθάραν κατέθηκεν 
ἐπὶ τὸν λίθον: ἣν δὲ τύχῃ βαλών τις ψηφῖδε, 
κατὰ ταὐτὰ οὗτός τε ἤχησε καὶ κιθάρα κρου- 
σθεῖσα. ἐμοὶ δὲ παρέσχε μὲν καὶ τοῦτο θαυμώ- 
σαι, παρέσχε δὲ πολλῷ μάλιστα Αἰγυπτίων ὁ 
κολοσσός. ἐν Θήβαις τ ταῖς Αἰγυπτίαις, διαβᾶσι 
τὸν Νεῖλον πρὸς τὰς Σύριγγας καλουμένας, 
εἶδον ἔτι καθήμενον ἄγαλμα ἠχοῦν---Μέμνονα 
ὀνομάξουσιν οἱ πολλοί, τοῦτον γάρ. φασιν ἐξ 
Αἰθιοπίας ὀρμηθῆναι ἐς Αἴγυπτον καὶ τὴν ἄχρι 
Σούσων' ἀλλὰ γὰρ οὗ Μέμνονα οἱ Θηβαῖοι λέ- 
γουσι, Φαμένωφα δὲ εἶναι τῶν ἐγχωρίων οὗ τοῦτο 

224 

— Ἂ 

ATTICA, χε. χι]. 3 

lamenting their sufferings and their revenge, perished 
through their tears; their reported metamorphosis 
into a nightingale and a swallow is due, I think, to 
the fact that the note of these birds is plaintive and 
like a lamentation. 

XLII. The Megarians have another citadel, which is 
named after Alcathous. As you ascend this citadel you 
see on the right the tomb of Megareus, who at the time 
of the Cretan invasion came as an ally from Onchestus. 
There is also shown a hearth of the gods called 
Prodomeis (Builders before). They say that Alcathous 
was the first to sacrifice to them, at the time when he 
was about to begin the building of the wall. Near 
this hearth is a stone, on which they say Apollo laid 
his lyre when he was helping Alcathous in the 
building. I am confirmed in my view that the 
Megarians used to be tributary to the Athenians by 
the fact that Alcathous appears to have sent his 
daughter Periboea with Theseus to Crete in payment 

of the tribute. On the occasion of his building 
the wall, the Megarians say, Apollo helped him and 
placed his lyre on the stone; and if you happen to hit 
it with a pebble it sounds just as a lyre does when 
struck. This made me marvel, but the colossus in 
Egypt made me marvel far more than anything else. 
In Egyptian Thebes, on crossing the Nile to the so- 
called Pipes, I saw a statue, still sitting, which gave 
out a sound. The many call it Memnon, who they 
say from Aethiopia overran Egypt and as far as Susa. 
The Thebans, however, say that it is a statue, not of 
Memnon, but of a native named Phamenoph, and I 

225 
VOL. I Q 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἄγαλμα Hv, ἤκουσα δὲ ἤδη καὶ Σέσωστριν φα- 
μένων εἶναι, ὃ Καμβύσης διέκοψε’ καὶ νῦν ὁπόσον 
ἐκ κεφαλῆς ἐς µέσον σῶμά ἐστιν ἀπερριμμένον, 
τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν κάθηταί τε καὶ ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέραν 
ἀνίσχοντος ἡλίου βοᾷ, καὶ τὸν ἦχον μάλιστα 
εἰκάσει τις κιθάρας ἢ λύρας ῥαγείσης χορδῆς. 

Μεγαρεῦσι δὲ ἔστι μὲν βουλευτήριον, Τιµάλκου 
δὲ ἦν ποτε ὡς λέγουσι τάφος, ὃν πρότερον ὀλίγον 
τούτων οὐκ ἔφην ὑπὸ Θησέως ἀποθανεῖν. wro- 
δόµηται δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ κορυφῇ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως ναῦς 
᾿Αθηνᾶς, ἄγαλμα δέ ἐστιν ἐπίχρυσον πλὴν χειρῶν 
καὶ ἄκρων ποδῶν' ταῦτα δὲ καὶ τὸ πρὀσωπόν 
ἐστιν ἐλέφαντος. καὶ ἕτερον ἐνταῦθα ἱερὸν ᾿Αθη- 
vas πεποίηται Καλουμένης Νίκης καὶ ἄλλο Atarti- 
δος: τὰ δὲ ἐς αὐτὸ Μεγαρέων μὲν παρεῖται τοῖς 
ἐξηγηταῖς, ἐγὼ δὲ ὁποῖα νομίζω γενέσθαι γράψω. 
Τελαμὼν ὁ Αἰακοῦ θυγατρὶ ᾿Αλκάθου Περιβοία 
συνῴκησεν Αἴαντα οὖν τὴν ἀρχὴν τὴν ᾿Αλ. κάθου 
διαδεξάμενον ποιῆσαι τὸ ἄγαλμα ἡγοῦμαι τῆς 
᾿Αθηνᾶς. 

Τοῦ δὲ Απόλλωνος πλίνθου μὲν ἦν ὁ ἀρχαῖος 
ναός" ὕστερον δὲ βασιλεὺς ᾠκοδόμησεν ᾿Αδριανὸς 
λίθου λευκοῦ. ὁ μὲν δὴ Πύθιος καλούμενος καὶ 
ὁ Δεκατηφόρος τοῖς Αἰγυπτίοις μάλιστα ἐοίκασι 
ξοάνοις, ὃν δὲ ᾿Αρχηγέτην ἐπονομάξουσιν, Ai- 
γινητικοῖς ἔργοις ἐστὶν ὅμοιος": ἐβένου δὲ πάντα 
ὁμοίως πεποίηται. ἤκουσα δὲ ἀνδρὸς Κυπρίου 
διακρῖναι πόας ἐς ἀνθρώπων ἴασιν εἰδότος, ὃς τὴν 
ἔβενον φύλλα οὐκ ἔφη φύειν οὐδὲ εἶναι καρπὸν 
οὐδένα ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς οὐδὲ ὁρᾶσθαι τὸ παράπαν 
αὐτὴν ὑπὸ ἡλίου, ῥίζας δὲ ὑπογαίους εἶναι, ταύ- 
τας δὲ ὀρύσσειν τοὺς Αἰθίοπας καὶ ἄνδρας εἶναί 
226 

to αν A .- ΕΙ ν᾿ κα ραςο 

νο 

ATTICA, xı. 3-5 

have heard some say that it is Sesostris. This statue 
was broken in two by Cambyses, and at the present 
day from head to middle it is thrown down; but 
the rest is seated, and every day at the rising of the 
sun it makes a noise, and the sound one could best 
liken to that of a harp or lyre when a string has been 
broken. 

The Megarians have a council chamber which once, 
they say, was the grave of Timalcus, who just now I 
said was not killed by Theseus. On the top of the 
citadel is built a temple of Athena, with an image 
gilt except the hands and feet; these and the 
face are of ivory. There is another sanctuary built 
here, of Athena Victory, and yet a third of Athena 
Aeantis (Ajacian). About the last the Megarian 
guides have omitted to record anything, but I will 
write what I take to be the facts. Telamon the 
son of Aeacus married Periboea the daughter of 
Aleathous; so my opinion is that Ajax, who suc- 
ceeded to the throne of Alcathous, made the statue 
of Athena. 

The ancient temple of Apollo was of brick, but the 
emperor Hadrian afterwards built it of white marble. 
The Apollo called Pythian and the one called Decate- 
phorus (Bringer of Tithes) are very like the Egyptian 
wooden images, but the one surnamed Archegetes 
(Founder) resembles Aeginetan works. They are all 
alike made of ebony. I have heard a man of Cyprus, 
who was skilled at sorting herbs for medicinal pur- 
poses, say that the ebony does not grow leaves or 
bear fruit, or even appear in the sunlight at all, but 
consists of underground roots which are dug up by 
the Aethiopians, who have men skilled at finding 

227 
Q 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

6 σφισιν οἳ τὴν ἔβενον i ἴσασιν εὑρίσκειν. ἔστι δὲ 
καὶ Δήμητρος ἱερὸν Θεσμοφόρου. κατιοῦσι δὲ 
ἐντεῦθεν Καλλιπόλιδος μνῆμά ἐστιν ᾿Αλκάθου 
παιδός. ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ᾿Αλκάθῳ πρεσβύ- 
τερος υἱὸς Ἰσχέπολις, ὃ ὃν ἀπέστειλεν ὁ πατὴρ 
Μελεάγρῳ τὸ ἐν Αἰτωλίᾳ θηρίον συνεξαιρήσοντα. 
ἀποθανόντος δὲ ἐνταῦθα πρῶτος τεθνεῶτα ἐπύ- 
θετο ὁ Καλλίπολις, ἀναδραμὼν δὲ ἐς τὴν ἀκρό- 
πολιν---τηνικαῦτα δὲ ὁ πατήρ οἱ τῷ ᾿Απόλλωνι 
ἐνέκαεν---ἀπορρίπτει τὰ ξύλα ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ" 
᾿Αλκάθους δὲ ἀνήκοος ὢν ἔτι τῆς Ἰσχεπόλιδος 
τελευτῆς κατεδίκαξεν οὐ ποιεῖν ὅσια τὸν Καλ- 
λίπολιν καὶ εὐθέως ὡς εἶχεν. ὀργῆς ἀπέκτεινε 
παίσας ἐς τὴν κεφαλὴν τῶν ἀπορριφέντων ἀπὸ 
τοῦ βωμοῦ ξύλῳ. 

Κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐς τὸ πρυτανεῖον ὁδὸν ᾿Ινοῦς ἐστιν 
ἦρφον, περὶ δὲ αὐτὸ θριγκὸς λίθων" πεφύκασι δὲ 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ ἐλαῖαι. μόνοι δέ εἶσιν Ἑλλήνων 
Μεγαρεῖς οἱ λέγοντες τὸν .νεκρὸν τῆς ᾿Ινοῦς ἐς 
τὰ παραθαλάσσιά σφισιν ἐκπεσεῖν THS χώρας, 
Κλησὼ δὲ καὶ Ἑαυρόπολιν εὑρεῖν τε καὶ θάψαι 
-- θυγατέρας δὲ αὐτὰς εἶναι Κλήσωνος τοῦ Λέ- 
λεγος---, καὶ Λευκοθέαν τε ὀνομασθῆναι παρὰ 
σφίσι πρώτοις φασὶν αὐτὴν καὶ θυσίαν ἄγειν 
ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος. 

XLIII. Λέγουσι δὲ εἶναι καὶ Ἰφιγενείας ο. 
ἀποθανεῖν yap καὶ ταύτην ἐν Μεγάροις. ἐγώ 
ἤκουσα μὲν καὶ ἄλλον ἐς ᾿Ιφιγένειαν λόγον ὑπὸ 
"A ρκάδων λεγόμενον, οἶδα δὲ Ἡσίοδον ποιήσαντα 
ἐν καταλόγῳ γυναικῶν Ἰφιγένειαν οὐκ ἀποθανεῖν, 
γνώμῃ δὲ ᾿Αρτέμιδος Ἑκάτην εἶναι" τούτοις δὲ 
Ἡρόδοτος ὁμολογοῦντα ἔγραψε Tavpous τοὺς 

228 

SE N 

ATTICA, χιπ. σ--χιῃ. τ 

ebony. There is also a sanctuary of Demeter Thes- 
mophorus (Lamgiver). On going down from it you 
see the tomb of Callipolis, son of Alcathous. Alca- 
thous had also an elder son, Ischepolis, whom his 
father sent to help Meleager to destroy the wild beast 
in Aetolia. There he died, and Callipolis was the 
first to hear of his death. Running up to the citadel, 
at the moment when his father was preparing a fire 
to sacrifice to Apollo, he flung the logs from the 
altar. Alcathous, who had not yet heard of the 
fate of Ischepolis, judged that Callipolis was guilty 
of impiety, and forthwith, angry as he was, killed 
him by striking his head with one of the logs that 
had been flung from the altar. 

On the road to the Town-hall is the shrine of the 
heroine Ino, about which is a fencing of stones, and 
beside it grow olives. The Megarians are the only 
` Greeks who say that the corpse of Ino was cast 
up on their coast, that Cleso and Tauropolis, the 
daughters of Cleson, son of Lelex, found and buried 
it, and they say that among them first was she 
named Leucothea, and that every year they offer her 
sacrifice. 

XLIII. They say that there is also a shrine of the 
heroine Iphigenia; for she too according to them 
died in Megara. Now I have heard another ac- 
count of Iphigenia that is given by Arcadians, 
and I know that Hesiod, in his poem 4 Catalogue 
of Women, says that Iphigenia did not die, but by 
the will of Artemis is Hecate. With this agrees 
the account of Herodotus, that the Tauri near 

229 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

. A A ΄ / ` [4 
πρὸς τῇ Σκυθικῇ θύειν παρθένῳ τοὺς ναυαγούς, 
φάναι δὲ αὐτοὺς τὴν παρθένον ᾿Ιφιγένειαν εἶναι 
τὴν ᾿Αγαμέμνονος. ἔχει δὲ παρὰ Μεγαρεῦσι καὶ 
"AS Ἴ δὲ ἀποθανεῖ L σφί 
Άδραστος τιµας' φασὶ δὲ ἀποθανεῖν παρὰ σφισι 

A ΄- ` 
καὶ τοῦτον, ὅτε ἑλὼν Θήβας ἀπῆγεν ὀπίσω τὸν 
στρατόν, αἴτια δέ οἱ τοῦ θανάτου γῆρας καὶ τὴν 
Αἰγιαλέως γενέσθαι τελευτήν. καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδος 
e N e 9 / 3 / e 7 4 ΄ 
ἱερὸν ὁ ᾿Αγαμέμνων ἐποίησεν, ἡνίκα ἦλθε Κάλ- 
χαντα οἰκοῦντα ἐν Μεγάροις ἐς Ἴλιον ἕπεσθαι 
πείσων. ἐν δὲ τῷ πρυτανείῳ τεθάφθαι μὲν 

- . 
Εὔιππον Μεγαρέως παῖδα, τεθάφθαι δὲ τὸν 
9 1@ 4 3 / y . a 
Αλκάθου λέγουσιν ἸΙσχέπολιν. ἔστι δὲ τοῦ 
πρυτανείου πέτρα πλησίον: ᾿Ανακληθρίδα τὴν 
πέτραν ὀνομάζουσιν, ὡς Δημήτηρ, εἴ τῳ πιστά, 
ὅτε τὴν παῖδα ἐπλανᾶτο ζητοῦσα, καὶ ἐνταῦθα 

, - - 
ἀνεκάλεσεν αὐτήν. ἐοικότα δὲ τῷ λόγῳ δρῶσιν 
ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔτι αἱ Μεγαρέων γυναῖκες. 

Εἰσὶ δὲ τάφοι Μεγαρεῦσιν ἐν τῇ πόλει" καὶ 
τον μὲν τοῖς ἀποθανοῦσιν ἐποίησαν κατὰ τὴν 
3 / A / \ \ » 4 e 
ἐπιστρατείαν τοῦ Μήδου, τὸ δὲ Αἰσύμνιον καλού- 

- A 4 
μενον μνῆμα ἦν καὶ τοῦτο ἡρώων. “Ὑπερίονος δὲ 

- ’ 
τοῦ ᾿Αγαμέμνονος---οὗτος γὰρ Μεγαρέων ἐβασί- 
λευσεν ὕστατος-- τούτου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀποθανόντος 
e N 4 . , \ @ 
ὑπὸ Σανδίονος διὰ πλεονεξίαν καὶ ὕβριν, βασι- 
λεύεσθαι μὲν οὐκέτι ὑπὸ ἑνὸς ἐδόκει σφίσιν, εἶναι 
δὲ ἄρχοντας αἱρετοὺς καὶ ἀνὰ μέρος ἀκούειν 
ἀλλήλων. ἐνταῦθα Αἴσυμνος οὐδενὸς τὰ ἐς δόξαν 
Μεγαρέων δεύτερος παρὰ τὸν θεὸν ἦλθεν ἐς 

4 
Δελφούς, ἐλθὼν δὲ ἠρώτα τρὀπον τίνα εὖδαι- 

4 
μονήσουσι: καί οἱ καὶ ἄλλα ὁ θεὸς ἔχρησε καὶ 
Μεγαρέας εὖ πράξειν, ἣν μετὰ τῶν πλειόνων 
βουλεύσωνται. τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος ἐς τοὺς τεθνεῶτας 
230 

ΓΝ 

ATTICA, xum. 1-3 

Scythia sacrifice castaways to a maiden who they 
say is Iphigenia, the daughter of Agamemnon. Ad- 
wastus also is honoured among the Megarians, who say 
that he too died among them when he was leading 
Wack his army after taking Thebes, and that his 
death was caused by old age and the fate of Aegi- 
aleus. A sanctuary of Artemis was made by Aga- 
memnon when he came to persuade Calchas, who 
dwelt in Megara, to accompany him to Troy. In 
the Town-hall are buried, they say, Euippus the son 
of Megareus and Ischepolis the son of Alcathous. 
Near the Town-hall is a rock. They name it Ana- 
clethris (Recall), because Demeter (if the story be 
credible) here too called her daughter back when she 
was wandering in search of her. Even in our day 
the Megarian women hold a performance that is a 
mimic representation of the legend. 

In the city are graves of Megarians. They made one 
for those who died in the Persian invasion, and what 
is called the Aesymnium (Shrine of Aesymnus) was also 
atomb of heroes. When Agamemnon’s son Hyperion, 
the last king of Megara, was killed by Sandion for his 
greed and violence, they resolved no longer to be 
ruled by one king, but to have elected magistrates 
and to obey one another in turn. Then Aesymnus, 
who had a reputation second to none among the 
Megarians, came to the god in Delphi and asked in 
what way they could be prosperous. The oracle in 
its reply said that they would fare well if they took 
counsel with the majority. This utterance they took 

231 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔχειν νομίξοντες βουλευτήριον ἐνταῦθα ᾠκοδά- 
µησαν, ἵνα σφίσιν ὁ ὁ τάφος τῶν ἡρώων ἐντὸς τοῦ 
βουλευτηρίου γένηται. 

Ἐντεῦθεν πρὸς τὸ ᾿Αλκάθου βαδίξουσιν ἡ ἡρῷον, 
ᾧ Μεγαρεῖς ἐς γραμμάτων φυλακὴν ἐχρῶντο 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμοῦ, μνῆμα ἔλεγον τὸ μὲν Πυργοῦς εἶναι 
γυναικὸς ᾿Αλκάθου πρὶν ἡ ἢ τὴν Μεγαρέως αὐτὸν 
λαβεῖν Εὐαίχμην, τὸ δὲ Ἰφινόης ᾿Αλκάθου θυγα- 
τρός: ἀποθανεῖν δὲ αὐτήν φασιν ἔτι παρθένον. 
καθέστηκε δὲ ταῖς κόραις οὰς πρὸς τὸ τῆς 
Ἰφινόης μνῆμα προσφέρειν πρὸ γάμου καὶ ἀπάρ- 
χεσθαι τῶν τριχῶν, καθὰ καὶ τῇ Ἑκαέρηῃ καὶ 
Ὠπιδι αἱ θυγατέρες ποτὲ ἀπεκείροντο αἱ Δηλίων. 
παρὰ δὲ τὴν ἔσοδον τὴν ἐς τὸ Διονύσιον τάφος 
ἐστὶν ᾿Αστυκρατείας καὶ Μαντοῦς θυγατέρες δὲ 
ἦσαν Πολυίδου τοῦ Κοιράνου τοῦ ᾿Αβαντος τοῦ 
Μελάμποδος ἐς Μέγαρα ἐλθόντος ᾿Αλκάθουν 
ἐπὶ τῷ φόνῳ τῷ ᾿Καλλιπόλιδος καθῆραι τοῦ 
παιδός. ᾠκοδόμησε δὴ καὶ τῷ Διονύσῳ τὸ ἱερὸν 
Πολύιδος καὶ ξόανον ἀνέθηκεν ἀποκεκρυμμένον 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν πλὴν τοῦ προσώπου" τοῦτο δέ ἐστι 
τὸ φανερόν. Σάτυρος δὲ παρέστηκεν αὐτῷ 
Πραξιτέλους ἔργον Παρίου λίθου. τοῦτον μὲν δὴ 
Πατρῷον καλοῦσιν: ἕτερον δὲ Διόνυσον Δασύλ- 
Atov ἐπονομάξοντες Εὐχήνορα τὸν Κοιράνου τοῦ 
Πολυίδου τὸ ἄγαλμα ἀναθεῖναι λέγουσι. μετὰ 
δὲ τοῦ Διονύσου τὸ ἱερόν ἐστιν ᾿Αφροδίτης ναός, 
ἄγαλμα δὲ ἐλέφαντος ᾿Αφροδίτη πεποιημένον 
Πρᾶξις ἐπίκλησιν. τοῦτό ἐστιν ἀρχαιότατον ἐν 
τῷ ναφ' Πειθὼ δὲ καὶ ἑτέρα θεός, ἣν Παρή- 
γορον ὀνομάζουσιν, ἔργα Πραξιτέλους: Σκόπα 
δὲ Ἔρως καὶ Ἴμερος καὶ Πόθος, εἰ δὴ διάφορά 

232 

a. 

ATTICA, xuni. 3-6 

to refer to the dead, and built a council chamber in 
this place in order that the grave of their heroes 
might be within it. 

Between this and the hero-shrine of Alcathous, 
which in my day the Megarians used as a record 
office, was the tomb, they said, of Pyrgo, the wife of 
Alcathous before he married Euaechme, the daughter 
of Megareus, and the tomb οἵ Iphinoé, the daughter of 
Alcathous; she died, they say, a maid. It is customary 
for the girls to bring libations to the tomb of Iphinoé 
and to offer a lock of their hair before their wedding, 
just as the daughters of the Delians once cut their 
hair for Hecaérge and Opis. Beside the entrance to 
the sanctuary of Dionysus is the grave of Astycratea 
and Manto. They were daughters of Polyidus, son of 
Coeranus, son of Abas, son of Melampus, who came 
to Megara to purify Alcathous when he had killed 
his son Callipolis. Polyidus also built the sanctuary 
of Dionysus, and dedicated a wooden image that in 
our day is covered up except the face, which alone 
is exposed. By the side of it is a Satyr of Parian 
marble made by Praxiteles. This Dionysus they call 
Patroiis (Paternal); but the image of another, that 
they surname Dasyllius, they say was dedicated 
by Euchenor, son of Coeranus, son of Polyidus. 
After the sanctuary of Dionysus is a temple of 
Aphrodite, with an ivory image of Aphrodite sur- 
named Praxis (Action). This is the oldest object in 
the temple. There is also Persuasion and another 
goddess, whom they name Consoler, works of Praxi- 
teles. By Scopas are Love and Desire and Yearning, 

233 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐστι KATA ταὐτὸ τοῖς ὀνόμασι καὶ τὰ ἔργα σφίσι. 
πλησίον δὲ τοῦ τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης ναοῦ Τύχης ἐ ἐστὶν 
ἱερόν, Πραξιτέλους καὶ αὕτη τέχνη" καὶ ἐν τῷ 
ναῷ τῷ πλησίον Μούσας καὶ χαλκοῦν Δία 
ἐποίησε Λύσιππος. 

Ἔστι δὲ Μεγαρεῦσι καὶ Κοροίβου. τάφος τὰ 
δὲ és αὐτὸν ἔπη κοινὰ ὅ ὅμως ὄντα τοῖς ᾿Αργείων 
ἐνταῦθα δηλώσω. ἐπὶ Κροτώπου λέγουσιν ἐν 
Αργει βασιλεύοντος Ψαμάθην τὴν Κροτώπου 
τεκεῖν παῖδα ἐξ ᾿Απόλλωνος, ἐ ἐχομένην δὲ ἰ ἰσχυρῶς 
τοῦ πατρὸς δείματι τὸν παῖδα ἐκθεῖναι: καὶ τὸν 
μὲν διαφθείρουσιν ἐπιτυχόντες ἐκ τῆς ποίμνης 
κύνες τῆς Κροτώπου, ᾿Απόλλων δὲ ᾿Αργείοις ἐς 
τὴν πόλιν πέμπει Ποινήν. ταύτην τοὺς παῖδας 
ἀπὸ τῶν .μητέρων φασὶν ἁρπάζειν, ἐ ἐς ὃ Κόροιβος 
ἐς χάριν. ᾿Αργείοις φονεύει τὴν Ποινήν. φονεύσας 
δὲ — οὐ γὰρ ἀνίει σφᾶς δεύτερα ἐπιπεσοῦσα 
νόσος λοιμώδης --- Κόροιβος ἑκὼν ἦλθεν ἐς 
Δελφοὺς ὑφέξων δίκας τῷ θεῷ τοῦ φόνου τῆς 
Tous. ἐς μὲν δὴ τὸ "Αργος ἀναστρέφειν οὐκ 
εἴα Κόροιβον ù Πυθία, τρίποδα δὲ .«ἀράμενον 
φέρειν ἐκέλευεν ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ, καὶ ἔνθα ἂν ἐκπέση 
οἱ φέροντι ὁ τρίπους, ἐνταῦθα ᾿Απόλλωνος 
οἰκοδομῆσαι ναὸν καὶ αὐτὸν οἰκῆσαι. καὶ ὁ 
τρύπους κατὰ τὸ ὄρος τὴν Γερανίαν ἀπολισθὼν 
ἔλαθεν αὐτοῦ] ἐκπεσών' καὶ Τριποδίσκους κώμην 
ἐνταῦθα οἰκῆσαι. Κοροίβφ δέ ἐστι τάφος ἐν τῇ 
Μεγαρέων ἀγορᾷ" γέγραπται δὲ ἐλεγεῖα τὰ ἐξ 
Ψαμάθην καὶ τὰ ἐς αὐτὸν ἔχοντα Κόροιβον, καὶ 
δῆ kal ἐπίθημά ἐστι τῷ τάφῳ Κόροιβος φονεύων 
τὴν Ποινήν. ταῦτα ἀγάλματα παλαιότατα, 

1 αὐτὸν 9 

234 

ATTICA, χιπ. 6-8 

if indeed their functions are as different as their 
names. Near the temple of Aphrodite is a sanctuary 
of Fortune, the image being one of the works of 
Praxiteles. In the temple hard by are Muses and a 
bronze Zeus by Lysippus. 

The Megarians have also the grave of Coroebus. 
The poetical story of him, although it equally 
concerns Argos, I will relate here. They say that in 
the reign of Crotopus at Argos, Psamathe, the daugh- 
ter of Crotopus, bore a son to Apollo, and being in 
dire terror of her father, exposed the child. He was 
found and destroyed by sheepdogs of Crotopus, and 
Apollo sent Vengeance to the city to punish the 
Argives. They say that she used to snatch the 
children from their mothers, until Coroebus to please 
the Argives slew Vengeance. Whereat as a second 
punishment plague fell upon them and stayed not. 
So Coroebus of his own accord went to Delphi to 
submit to the punishment of the god for having slain 
Vengeance. The Pythia would not allow Coroebus to 
return to Argos, but ordered him to take up a tripod 
and carry it out of the sanctuary, and where the 
tripod should fall from his hands, there he was to 
build a temple of Apollo and to dwell himself. At 
Mount Gerania the tripod slipped and fell unawares. 
Here he dwelt in the village called the Little Tri- 
pods. The grave of Coroebus is in the market-place 
of the Megarians. The story of Psamathe and of 
Coroebus himself is carved on it in elegiac verses, 
and further, upon the top of the grave is represented 
Coroebus slaying Vengeance. These are the oldest 

235 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὁπόσα λίθου πεποιημένα ἐστὶν "Ελλησιν, ἰδὼν 
οἶδα. 

XLIV. Κοροίβου δὲ τέθαπται πλησίον Ὄρ- 
σιππος, ὃς «περιεξωσµένων ἐν τοῖς ἀγῶσι κατὰ 
δῆ παλαιὸν ἔθος τῶν ἀθλητῶν , Ολύμπια ἐνίκα 
στάδιον δραμὼν γυμνός. φασὶ δὲ καὶ στρατη- 
γοῦντα ὕστερον τὸν Ὄρσιππον. ἀποτεμέσθαι 
χώραν. τῶν προσοίκων" δοκῶ δέ οἱ καὶ ἐν Ὄλυμ- 
πίᾳ τὸ περίξωμα ἑκόντι περιρρυῆναι, γνόντι ὡς 
ἀν ρὸς περιεζωσµένου δραμεῖν ῥᾷων ἐστὶν ἀνὴρ 
γυμνὸς. ἐκ δὲ τῆς ἀγορᾶς κατιοῦσι τῆς ὁδοῦ 
τῆς Εὐθείας καλουμένης ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερόν ἐστιν 
ἐν δεξιᾷ Προστατηρίου’ τοῦτο ὀλίγον ἐκτραπέντα 
ἔστιν ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀνευρεῖν. ᾿Απόλλων δὲ ἐν 
αὐτῷ κεῖται θέας ἄξιος καὶ "Αρτεμις καὶ Λητὼ 
καὶ ἄλλα ἀγάλματά ἐστι Πραξιτέλους Trot? 
σαντος. ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῷ γυμνασίῳ τῷ ap ρχαίῳ 
πλησίον πυλῶν καλουμένων Νυμφάδων λίθος 
παρεχόµενος πυραμίδος σχῆμα οὐ μεγάλης" τοῦ- 
τον ᾿Απόλλωνα ὀνομάζουσι Καρινόν, καὶ Εἶλει- 
θυιῶν ἐστιν ἐνταῦθα ἱερόν. 

Τοσαῦτά σφισιν ἐς ἐπίδειξιν παρείχετο ἡ 
πόλις" ἐς δὲ τὸ ἐπίνειον, καλούμενον καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς 
ἔτι Νίσαιαν, ἐς τοῦτο κατελθοῦσιν ἱερὸν Δήμη- 
τρός ἐστι Μαλοφόρου: λέγεται δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ἐς 
τὴν ἐπίκλησιν καὶ τοὺς πρώτους πρόβατα ἐν τῇ 

γῇ θρέψαντας Δήμητρα ὀνομάσαι Μαλοφόρον, 
καταρρυῆναι ὲ τῷ ἱερῷ τὸν ὄροφον τεκμαίροιτο 
ἄν τις ὑπὸ τοῦ χρόνου. καὶ -ἀκρόπολίς ἐστιν 
ἐνταῦθα ὀνομαξομένη καὶ αὐτὴ Nisaa: κατα- 
Αᾶσι δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως μνῆμά ἐστι πρὸς 
θαλάσσῃ Λέλεγος, ὃν ἀφικόμενον βασιλεῦσαι 

236 

ΡΤ 

ATTICA, χι. ὃ--χιιν. 3 

stone images I am aware of having seen among the 
Greeks. 

XLIV. Near Coroebus is buried Orsippus, who 
won the foot-race at Olympia by running naked 
when all his competitors wore girdles according to 
ancient custom. They say also that Orsippus when 
general afterwards annexed some of the neighbour- 
ing territory. My own opinion is that at Olympia 
he intentionally let the girdle slip off him, realizing 
that a naked man can run more easily than one girt. 
As you go down from the market-place you see on the 
right of the street called Straight a sanctuary of 
Apollo Prostaterius(Protecting). You must turn a little 
aside from the road to discover it. In itis a noteworthy 
Apollo, Artemis also, and Leto, and other statues, 
made by Praxiteles. In the old gymnasium near the 
gate called the Gate of the Nymphs is a stone of the 
shape of a small pyramid. This they name Apollo Car- 
inus, and here there is a sanctuary of the Eileithyiae. 

Such are the sights that the city had to show. 
When you have gone down to the port, which to the 

720 B.c. 

present day is called Nisaea, you see a sanctuary of Ἢ 

Demeter Malophorus (Sheep-bearer or Apple-bearer). 
One of the accounts given of the surname is that those 
who first reared sheep in the land named Demeter 
Malophorus. The roof of the temple one might con- 
clude has fallen in through age. There is a citadel 
here, which also is called Nisaea. Below the citadel 
near the sea is the tomb of Lelex, who they say 
arrived from Egypt and became king, being the son 

237 

4 

5 

6 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

λέγουσιν ἐξ Αἰγύπτον, παῖδα δὲ εἶναι Ποσειδῶνος 
καὶ Λιβύης τῆς Ἐπάφου. παρήκει δὲ παρὰ 
τὴν Νίσαιαν νῆσος οὐ µεγάλη Μινώα" ἐνταῦθα 
ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ τῷ πρὸς Νῖσον παρώρμει τὸ vav- 
τικὸν τῶν Κρητῶν. ἡ δὲ ὀρεινὴ τῆς Μεγαρίδος 
τῆς Βοιωτῶν € ἐστιν ὅμορος, ἐν ᾗ Μεγαρεῦσι Haya 
πόλις, ἑτέρα δὲ Αἰγόσθενα ὠκισται. ἰοῦσι δὲ 
ἐς τὰς Παγὰς ἐ ἐκτραπομένοις. ὀλίγον τῆς λεωφόρου 
πέτρα, δείκνυται διὰ πάσης ἔχουσα ἐμπεπηγότας 
ὀιστούς, ἐς ἣν οἱ Μῆδοί ποτε ἐτόξευον ἐν τῇ 
νυκτί. ἐν δὲ ταῖς Παγαῖς θέας ὑπελείπετο ἄξιον 
"A ρτέμιδος Σωτείρας ἐπίκλησιν χαλκοῦν ἄγαλμα, 
μεγέθει τῷ παρὰ, Μεγαρεῦσιν ἴσον καὶ σχῆμα 
οὐδὲν διαφόρως ἔχον. καὶ Αἰγιαλέως ἐνταῦθά 
ἐστιν ἦρῷον τοῦ ᾿Αδράστου" τοῦτον γάρ, ὅτε 
᾿Αργεῖοι τὸ δεύτερον ἐς Θήβας ἐ ἐστράτευσαν, ὑπὸ 
τὴν πρώτην μάχην πρὸς Γλισᾶντι ἀποθανόντα 
οἱ προσήκοντες ἐς Παγὰς τῆς Μεγαρίδος Kopi- 
σαντες θάπτουσι, καὶ Αἰγιάλειον ἔτι καλεῖται 
τὸ ἡρῷον. ἐν Αὐγοσθένοις δὲ Μελάμποδος τοῦ 
᾽Αμυθάονός ἐστιν ἱερὸν καὶ ἀνὴρ οὐ μέγας 
ἐπειργασμένος ἐν στήλῃ' καὶ θύουσι τῷ Μελάμ- 
ποδι καὶ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος ἑορτὴν ἄγουσι. μαντεύ- 
εσθαι δὲ οὔτε δι᾽ ὀνειράτων αὐτὸν οὔτε ἄλλως 
λέγουσι. καὶ τόδε ἄλλο ἤκουσα ἐν ᾿Ερενείᾳ TH 
Μεγαρέων κώμῃ, Αὐτονόην τὴν Κάδμου τῷ τε 
᾿Ακταίωνος .θανάτῳ, συμβάντι ὡς λέγεται, καὶ 
τῇ πάση τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ πατρῴου τύχη περισσότε- 
ρον ἀλγοῦσαν ἐνταῦθα ἐκ Θηβῶν μετοικῆσαι: 
καὶ Αὐτονόης μνῆμά ἐστιν ἐν τῇ κώμῃ ταύτῃ. 

Ἰοῦσι δὲ ἐκ Μεγάρων ἐς Κόρινθον ἄλλοι τέ 
εἰσι τάφοι καὶ αὐλητοῦ Σαμίου Τηλεφάνους' 
238 

ATTICA, xtiv. 1-6 

of Poseidon and of Libya, daughter of Epaphus. 
Parallel to Nisaea lies the small island of Minoa, 
where in the war against Nisus anchored the fleet of 
the Cretans. The hilly part of Megaris borders 
upon Boeotia, and in it the Megarians have built the 
city Pagae and another one called Aegosthena. As 
you go to Pagae, on turning a little aside from the 
highway, you are shown a rock with arrows stuck all 
over it, into which the Persians once shot in the 
night. In Pagae a noteworthy relic is a bronze 
image of Artemis surnamed Saviour, in size equal to 
that at Megara and exactly like it in shape. There 
is also a hero-shrine of Aegialeus, son of Adrastus. 
When the Argives made their second attack on 
Thebes he died at Glisas early in the first battle, and 
his relatives carried him to Pagae in Megaris and 
buried him, the shrine being still called the Aegia- 
leum. In Aegosthena is a sanctuary of Melampus, 
son of Amythaon, and a small figure of a man 
carved upon a slab. To Melampus they sacrifice 
and hold a festival every year. They say that he 
divines neither by dreams nor in any other way. 
Here is something else that I heard in Erenéa, a 
village of the Megarians. Autonoé, daughter of 
Cadmus, left Thebes to live here owing to her great 
grief at the death of Actaeon, the manner of which 
is told in legend, and at the general misfortune ot 
her father’s house. The tomb of Autonoé is in this 
village. 

On the road from Megara to Corinth are graves, 
including that of the Samian flute-player Telephanes,} 

1 A contemporary of Demosthenes. 2 ορ. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ποιῆσαι δὲ τὸν τάφον Κλεοπάτραν τὴν Φιλίππου 
τοῦ ᾽Αμύντου λέγουσι. καὶ Καρὸς τοῦ Φορωνέως 
μνῆμά ἐστι, τὸ μὲν ἐξ ἀρχῆς χῶμα γῆς, ὕστερον 
δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ χρήσαντος ἐκοσμήθη λίθῳ κογχίτῃ. 
μόνοις δὲ Ἑλλήνων Μεγαρεῦσιν ὁ o κογχίτης οὗτός 
ἐστι, καί σφισι καὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει πεποίηται πολλὰ 
ἐξ αὐτοῦ. ἔστι δὲ ἆ ἄγαν λευκὸς καὶ ἄλλου λίθου 
μαλακώτερος" κόγχοι δὲ αἱ θαλάσσιαι διὰ παντὺς 
ἔνεισίν οἱ. αὐτὸς μὲν τοιοῦτός ἐστιν ὁ λίθος" 
τὴν δὲ ὀνομαζομένην ἀπὸ Σκίρωνος καὶ ἐς τόδε 
Σκιρωνίδα Σκίρων, ἡνίκα Μεγαρεῦσιν ἐπολε- 
μάρχει, πρῶτος ὡς λέγουσιν ἐποίησεν ἀνδράσιν 
ὁδεύειν εὐξώνοις" ᾿Αδριανὸς δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ 
οὕτως ὡς καὶ ἅρματα ἐναντία ἐλαύνεσθαι κατέ- 
-στησεν εὐρυχωρῆ τε καὶ ἐπιτηδείαν εἶναι. 

| Λόγοι δέ εἰσιν ἐς τὰς πέτρας, αἳ κατὰ τὸ 
στενὸν τῆς ὁδοῦ μάλιστα ἀνέχουσιν, ἐς μὲν τὴν 
Μολουρίδα, ὡς ἀπὸ ταύτης αὑτὴν ἐς θάλασσαν 
᾿Ινὰ ῥίψαι Μελικέρτην ἔχουσα τῶν παίδων 
τὸν νεώτερον" τὸν γὰρ δὴ πρεσβύτερον αὐτῶν 
Λέαρχον ἀπέκτεινεν ὁ πατήρ. λέγεται μὲν δὴ 
καὶ μανέντα δρᾶσαι ταῦτα ᾿Αθάμαντα, λέγεται 
δὲ καὶ ὡς ἐς τὴν ᾿Ινὼ καὶ τοὺς ἐξ αὐτῆς παῖδας 
χρήσαιτο ἀκρατεῖ τῷ θυμῷ τὸν συμβάντα Ὄρχο- 
μενίοις λιμὸν καὶ τὸν δοκοῦντα Φρίξου θάνατον 
αἰσθόμενος, οὗ τὸ θεῖον αἴτιον οὐ γενέσθαι, Pov- 
λεῦσαι δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοις πᾶσιν ᾿Ινὼ μητρυιὰν οὖσαν" 
τότε δὲ φεύγουσα ἐς θάλασσαν αὑτὴν καὶ τὸν 
παῖδα ἀπὸ τῆς πέτρας τῆς Μολουρίδος ἀφίησιν, 
ἐξενεχθέντος δὲ ἐς τὸν Κορινθίων ἰσθμὸν ὑπὸ 
δελφῖνος ὡς λέγεται τοῦ παιδός, τιμαὶ καὶ ἄλλαι 
τῷ Μελικέρτῃ δίδονται μετονομασθέντι Παλαί- 

240 

oe 

ATTICA, xiv. 6-8 

said to have been made by Cleopatra, daughter of 
Philip, son of Amyntas. There is also the tomb 
of Car, son of Phoroneus, which was originally a 
mound of earth, but afterwards, at the command of 
the oracle, it was adorned with mussel stone. The 
Megarians are the only Greeks to possess this stone, 
and in the city also they have made many things 
out of it. It is very white, and softer than other 
stone; in it throughout are sea mussels. Such is 
the nature of the stone. The road called Scironian 
to this day and named after Sciron, was made by him 
when he was war minister of the Megarians, and 
originally they say was constructed for the use of 
active men. But the emperor Hadrian broadened 
it, and made it suitable even for chariots to pass each 
other in opposite directions. 

There are legends about the rocks, which rise 
especially at the narrow part of the road. As to 
the Molurian, it is said that from it Ino flung her- 
self into the sea with Melicertes, the younger of her 
children. Learchus, the elder of them, had been 
killed by his father. One account is that Athamas 
did this in a fit of madness; another is that he 
vented on Ino and her children unbridled rage 
when he learned that the famine which befell the 
Orchomenians and the supposed death of Phrixus 
were not accidents from heaven, but that Ino, 
the step-mother, had intrigued for all these things. 
Then it was that she fled to the sea and cast 
herself and her son from the Molurian Rock. 
The son, they say, was landed on the Corinthian 
Isthmus by a dolphin, and honours were offered to 
Melicertes, then renamed Palaemon, including the 

241 
VOL. I. R 

πα οτε κος. 
“Ζων ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ τὸν dé ve 
2 7 Μολουρίδα πέτρα» «Ίεννες 
we 5 ἱερὰν ἤγηντο" τὰς δὲ με 
fa vars ὅτι παροικῶν σφισι 
“yous τῶν ξένων ἐπετύγχανεν, ng ία 
if ίλασσαν. χελώνη. δὲ ὑπενήχετο 
ή μας τοὺς ἐσβληθέντας ἁρπάξειν- εἰσ. 
siat πλὴν μεγέθους καὶ ποὺ 
‘(is χερσαίαις, πόδας δὲ ἐοικότας ἔχον 
pats. τούτων περιῆλθεν ἡ ἡ δίκη Σκίρ 
a ἐς θάλασσαν. τὴν αὐτὴν ὑπὸ Θησέως «. 7 
rou ὄρους τῇ ἄκρῳ Διός ἐστιν ᾿Αφεσίο ου 
νου ναός" φασὶ è ἐπὶ τοῦ συμβάντι 
is “ “Ελλησιν αὐχμοῦ θύσαντος Alak 
δὴ λόγιον τῷ Ἠανελληνίῳ Aù ἐν Ain 
Te! ἀφεῖναι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ᾿Αφέσιον 
w τὸν Δία. ἐνταῦθα καὶ Αφροδίτη 
καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνός ἐστι καὶ Ilavés. προ- 
δὲ ἐς τὸ πρόσω. μνῆμά ἐστιν Ἐὐρυσθέω 
ι δὲ ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς μετὰ τὴν πρὸς 
δας μάχην ἐνταῦθα. ἀποθανεῖν av Ὃν. 
άου λέγουσιν. ἐκ ταύτης τῆς ὁδοῦ κατα 
ἰπύλλωνος ἱερόν ἐστι Λατῴου καὶ 
γαρεῦσιν ὅροι πρὸς τὴν Κορινθίαν, oa 
τὸν Ἡρακλέους μονομαχῆσαι πρὸς τὸν. 
"Ἔχεμον λέγουσιν. 

jv 

1 

ὕσαντά τε Facius. 

ATTICA, χιιν. 8-10 

celebration of the Isthmian games. The Molurian 
Rock they thought sacred to Leucothea and Palae- 
mon; but those after it they consider accursed, in 
that Sciron, who dwelt by them, used to cast into 
the sea all the strangers he met. A tortoise used to 
swim under the rocks to seize those that fell in. 
Sea tortoises are like land tortoises except in size and 
for their feet, which are like those of seals. Retribu- 
tion for these deeds overtook Sciron, for he was cast 
into the same sea by Theseus. On the top of the 
mountain is a temple of Zeus surnamed Aphesius 
(Releaser). It is said that on the occasion of the 
drought that once afflicted the Greeks Aeacus in 
obedience to an oracular utterance sacrificed in 
Aegina to Zeus God of all the Greeks, and Zeus 
rained and ended the drought, gaining thus the name 
Aphesius. Here there are also images of Aphrodite, 
Apollo, and Pan. Farther on is the tomb of Eurys- 
theus. The story is that he fled from Attica after 
the battle with the Heracleidae and was killed here 
by Iolaus. When you have gone down from this 
road you see a sanctuary of Apollo Latoiis, after 
which is the boundary between Megara and Corinth, 
where legend says that Hyllus, son of Heracles, 
fought a duel with the Arcadian Echemus. 

243 

BOOK IT—CORINTH 

B’ 
. ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΑΚΑ 

I. Ἡ δὲ Κορινθία χώρα μοῖρα οὖσα τῆς ᾿Αρ- 
γείας ἀπὸ Κορίνθου τὸ ὄνομα ἔσχηκε. Διὸς δὲ 
εἶναι Κόρινθον οὐδένα οἶδα εἰπόντα πω σπουδῇ 
πλὴν Κορινθίων τῶν πολλῶν: Εὔμηλος. δὲ 0 
᾽Αμϕιλύτου τῶν Βακχιδῶν καλουμένων, ὃς καὶ 
τὰ ἔπη λέγεται ποιῆσαι, φησὶν ἐν τῇ Κορινθίᾳ 
συγγραφῇ--εἰ δὴ Εὐμήλου γε ἡ συγγραφή-- 
᾿Εφύραν ᾿Ὠκεανοῦ θυγατέρα οἰκῆσαι πρῶτον ἐν τῇ 
vi ταύτῃ, Μαραθῶνα δὲ ὕ ὕστερον τὸν Ἐπωπέως 
τοῦ ᾿Αλωέως τοῦ Ἡλίου φεύγοντα ἀνομίαν καὶ 
ὕβριν τοῦ πατρὸς ἐς τὰ παραθαλάσσια perot- 
κῆσαι τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, ἀποθανόντος δὲ ᾿Επωπέως 
ἀφικόμενον ἐς Πελοπόννησον καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν δια- 
νείμαντα τοῖς παισὶν αὐτὸν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν 
αὖθις ἀναχωρῆσαι, καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν Σικυῶνος τὴν 
᾿Ασωπίαν, ἀπὸ δὲ Κορίνθου τὴν ᾿Εφυραίαν per- 
ονομασθῆναι. 

Κόρινθον δὲ οἰκοῦσι Κορινθίων μὲν οὐδεὶς ë ἔτι 
τῶν ἀρχαίων, ἔποικοι δὲ ἀποσταλέντες ὑπὸ Po- 
μαίων. αἴτιον δὲ τὸ συνέδριον τὸ ᾿Αχαιῶν. συν- 
τελοῦντες γὰρ ἐς αὐτὸ καὶ οἱ Κορίνθιοι μετέσχον 
τοῦ πολέμου τοῦ πρὸς Ῥωμαίους, ὃν Κριτόλαος 
στρατηγεῖν ᾿Αχαιῶν ἀποδειχθεὶς παρεσκεύασε 

246 

BOOK' II 

CORINTH 

a ο 

I. Της Corinthian land is a portion of the Argive, 
and is named after Corinthus. That Corinthus was 
a son of Zeus I have never known anybody say 
seriously except the majority of the Corinthians. 
Eumelus, the son of Amphilytus, of the family called "cent. 
Bacchidae, who is said to have composed the epic l 
poem, says in his Corinthian History (if indeed the 
history be his) that Ephyra, the daughter of Oceanus, 
dwelt first in this land; that afterwards Marathon, 
the son of Epopeus, the son of Aloeus, the son of 
Helius (Sun), fleeing from the lawless violence of his 
father migrated to the sea coast of Attica; that on the 
death of Epopeus he came to Peloponnesus, divided 
his kingdom among his sons, and returned to Attica ; 
and that Asopia was renamed after Sicyon, and 
Ephyraea after Corinthus. 

~ Corinth is no longer inhabited by any of the old 
Corinthians, but by colonists sent out by the Romans. 
This change is due to the Achaean League.! The 
Corinthians, being members of it, joined in the war 
against the Romans, which Critolaus, when appointed 
general of the Achaeans, brought about by persuad- 
1 A league of states in the northern Peloponnesus. It was 

most influential in the’second half of the third century B.c. 
Founded 280 B.C. 

247 

PAU SANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

γενέσθαι τούς τε ᾿Αχαιοὺς ἀναπείσας ἀποστῆναι 
καὶ τῶν ἔξω Πελοποννήσου τοὺς πολλούς. Ῥω- 
μαῖοι δὲ ὡς ἐκράτησαν τῷ πολέμῳ, παρείλοντο 
μὲν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων τὰ ὅπλα καὶ τείχη 
περιεῖλον ὅσαι τετειχισμέναι πόλεις ἦσαν' Ko- 
ρινθον δὲ ἀνάστατον Moppiov ποιήσαντος τοῦ 
τότε ἡγουμένου τῶν ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου “Ῥωμαίων, 
ὕστερον λέγουσιν. ἀνοικίσαι Καίσαρα, ὃς πολι- 
τείαν ἐν Ῥώμη πρῶτος τὴν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν κατεστήσατο' 
ἀνοικίσαι δὲ καὶ Καρχηδόνα ἐπὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς 
αὐτοῦ. 

3 Τῆς δὲ Κορινθίας ἐστὶ γῆς καὶ ὁ καλούμενος 
Κρομυὼν ἀπὸ Κρόμου τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος. ἐνταῦθα 
τραφῆναί φασι Φαιάν,! καὶ τῶν λεγομένων 
Θησέως καὶ τὸ ἐς τὴν ov ταύτην ἐστὶν ἔργον. 
προϊοῦσι δὲ ἡ πίτυς ἄχρι γε ἐμοῦ πεφύκει παρὰ 
τὸν αἰγιαλὸν καὶ Μελικέρτου βωμὸς ἡ Ἵν. ἐς τοῦ- 
τον τὸν τόπον ἐκκομισθῆναι τὸν παῖδα ὑπὸ δελ- 
φῖνος λέγουσι" κειμένῳ δὲ ἐπιτυχόντα Σίσυφον 
θάψαι τε ἐν τῷ ἰσθμῷ καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ 

4 ποιῆσαι τῶν Ἰσθμίων. ἔστι δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἰσθμοῦ 
τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἔνθα ὁ λῃστὴς Σίνις λαμβανόμενος 
πιτύων ἦγεν ἐς τὸ κάτω σφᾶς' ὁπόσων δὲ μάχη 
κρατήσειεν, ἀπ αὐτῶν δήσας ἀφῆκεν ἃ ἂν τὰ δέν- 
ὅρα a ἄνω φέρεσθαι" ἐνταῦθα ἑκατέρα τῶν πιτύων 
τὸν δεθέντα ἐφ᾽ αὑτὴν εἷλκε, καὶ τοῦ δεσμοῦ. μη- 
δετέρωσε εἴκοντος ἀλλ᾽ ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἐπ᾽ ἴσης 
Βιαξομένου διεσπᾶτο ὁ .δεδεµένος. τοιούτῳ διε- 
φθάρη τρόπῳ καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπὸ Θησέως ὁ Sins 
ἐκάθηρε γὰρ. Θησεὺς τῶν κακούργων τὴν ὁδὸν τὴν 
ἐς ᾿Αθήνας ἐκ Τροιζῆνος, οὕς τε πρότερον κατη- 

1 Φαιὰν added by Clavier. 
248 

te 

CORINTH, 1. 2-4 

ing to revolt both the Achaeans and the majority 
of the Greeks outside the Peloponnesus. When the 
Romans won the war, they carried out a general 
disarmament of the Greeks and dismantled the walls 
of such cities as were fortified. Corinth was laid 
waste by Mummius, who at that time commanded 
the Romans in the field, and it is said that it was 
afterwards refounded by Caesar, who was the author 
of the present constitution of Rome. Carthage, too, 
they say, was refounded in his reign. 

In the Corinthian territory is also the place called 
Cromyon from Cromus the son of Poseidon. Here 
they say that Phaea was bred; overcoming this sow 
was one of the traditional achievements of Theseus. 
Farther on the pine still grew by the shore at the 
time of my visit, and there was an altar of Melicertes. 
At this place, they say, the boy was brought 
ashore by a dolphin; Sisyphus found him lying and 
gave him burial on the Isthmus, establishing the 
Isthmian games in his honour. At the beginning of 
the Isthmus is the place where the brigand Sinis 
used to take hold of pine trees and draw them down. 
All those whom he overcame in fight he used to tie 
to the trees, and then allow them to swing up again. 
Thereupon each of the pines used to drag to itself 
the bound man, and as the bond gave way in neither 
direction but was stretched equally in both, he was 
torn in two. This was the way in which Sinis himself 
was slain by Theseus. For Theseus rid of evil- 
doers the road from Troezen to Athens, killing those 

249 

146 9.ο 

44 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ρίθµησα ἀνελὼν καὶ ἐν ᾿Επιδαύρῳ τῇ ἱερᾷ Περα- 
φήτην "Ἡφαίστου νομιξόμενον, κορύνῃ χα 
ον tous ἐς τὰς μάχας. καθήκει δὲ ὁ τῶν Κορις- 

ων ἰσθμὸς τῇ μὲν ἐς τὴν ἐπὶ Κ.εγχρέαις, τῇ δὲ 
ἐς τὴν ἐπὶ Λεχαίῳ θάλασσαν’ τοῦτο γὰρ ἤπειρον 
ποιεῖ τὴν ἐντὸς χώραν. ὃς δὲ ἐ ἐπεχείρησε Πελο- 
πόννησον ἐργάσασθαι νῆσον, προαπέλιπε διορύσ- 
σων ἰσθμόν" καὶ ὅθεν μὲν διορύσσειν ἤρξαντο 
δῆλόν ἐστιν, ἐς δὲ τὸ πετρῶδες οὐ ' προεχώρησαν 
ἀρχήν" μένει δὲ ὡς πεφύκει καὶ νῦν ἤπειρος ὤν. 
᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ τε τῷ Φιλίππου διασκάψαι Μέ- 
μαντα ἐθελήσαντι μόνον τοῦτο οὐ προεχώρησε τὸ 
ἔργον: Κνιδίους δὲ ἡ ἡ Πυθία τὸν ἰσθμὸν ὀρύσσον- 
τας ἔπαυσεν. οὕτω χαλεπὸν ἀνθρώπῳ τὰ θεῖα 
βιάσασθαι. τὸ δὲ οὐ Κορινθίοις μόνον περὶ τῆς 
χώρας ἐστὶν εἰρημένον, ἀλλὰ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ᾿Αθη- 
ναῖοι πρῶτοι περὶ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἐσεμνολόγησαν' 
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ οἱ Κορίνθιοι Ποσειδῶνα ἐλθεῖν 
Ἡλίῳ περὶ τῆς γῆς ἐς ἀμφισβήτησιν, Βριάρεων 
δὲ διαλλακτὴν γενέσθαι σφίσιν, ἐσθμὸν μὲν καὶ 
ὅσα ταύτῃ δικάσαντα εἶναι Ποσειδῶνος, τὴν δὲ 
ἄκραν Ἡλίῳ δόντα τὴν ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως. 

᾿Απὸ μὲν τούτου λέγουσιν εἶναι τὸν ἰσθμὸν 
Ποσειδῶνος" θέας δὲ αὐτόθι ἄξια ἔστι μὲν θέα- 
Tpov, ἔστι δὲ στάδιον λίθου. λευκοῦ. ἐλθόντι δὲ 
ἐς τοῦ θεοῦ τὸ ἱερὸν. τοῦτο μὲν ἀθλητῶν νικησάν- 
των τὰ Ἴσθμια ἑστήκασιν εἰκόνες, τοῦτο δὲ πιτύων 
δένδρα ἐστὶ πεφυτευμένα ἐπὶ στοίχου, τὰ πολλὰ 
ἐς εὐθὺ αὐτῶν ἀνήκοντα. τῷ ναῷ δὲ ὅ ὄντι μέγεθος 
οὐ μείξονι ἐφεστήκασι Τρίτωνες χαλκοῖ. καὶ 
ἀγάλματά ἐστιν ἐν τῷ προνάῳ δύο μὲν Ποσειδῶ- 
νος, τρίτον δὲ ᾽Αμϕιτρίτης, καὶ Θάλασσα καὶ 

250 

1 

CORINTH, 1. 4-7 

whom I have enumerated and, in sacred Epidaurus, 
Periphetes, thought to be the son of Hephaestus, 
who used to fight with a bronze club. The Corin- 
thian Isthmus stretches on the one hand to the sea at 

Cenchreae, and on the other to the sea at Lechaeum. |‘) 

For this is what makes the region to the south 
mainland. He who tried to make the Peloponnesus 
an island gave up before digging through the Isth- 
mus. Where they began to dig is still to be seen, 
but into the rock they did not advance at all. So it 
still is mainland as its nature is to be. Alexander the 
son of Philip wished to dig through Mimas, and his 
attempt to do this was his only unsuccessful project. 
The Cnidians began to dig through their isthmus, but 
the Pythian priestess stopped them. So difficult it is 
for man to alter by violence what Heaven has made. 
A legend of the Corinthians about their land is not 
peculiar to them, for I believe that the Athenians 
were the first to relate a similar story to glorify 
Attica. The Corinthians say that Poseidon had a 
dispute with Helius (Sun) about the land, and that 
Briareos arbitrated between them, assigning to 
Poseidon the Isthmus and the parts adjoining, and 
giving to Helius the height above the city. 

Ever since, they say, the Isthmus has belonged to 
Poseidon. Worth seeing here are a theatre and a 
white-marble race-course. Within the sanctuary of the 
god stand on the one side portrait statues of athletes 
who have won victories at the Isthmian games, on the 
other side pine trees growing in a row, the greater 
number of them rising up straight. On the temple, 
which is not very large, stand bronze Tritons. In 
the fore-temple are images, two of Poseidon, a 

| third of Amphitrite, and a Sea, which also is of 

251 

9 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

αὕτη χαλκῆ. τὰ δὲ ἔνδον ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀνέθηκεαε 
Ἡρώδης ᾿Αθηναῖος, ἵ ἵππους τέσσαρας ἐπιχρύσους 
πλὴν τῶν ὁπλῶν' ὁπλαὶ δέ σφισίν εἰσιν ἐλέφαν- 
τος. καὶ Τρίτωνες δύο παρὰ τοὺς ἵππους εἰ 
ρυσοῖ, τὰ μετ᾽ ἐξὺν ἐλέφαντος καὶ οὗτοι' τῷ δὲ 
ἅρματι ᾽Αμϕιτρίτη καὶ Ποσειδῶν ἐφεστήκασε, 
καὶ παῖς ὀρθός ἐστιν ἐπὶ δελφῖνος ὁ o Παλαίμων- 
ἐλέφαντος δὲ καὶ «Χρυσοῦ καὶ οὗτοι πεποίηνται. 
τῷ βάθρῳ δὲ ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὸ ἅρμα µέση μὲν ἐπείργασται 
Θάλασσα ἀνέχουσα ᾿Αφροδίτην παῖδα, ἑ ἑκατέρω- 
θεν δέ εἰσιν αἱ Νηρηίδες καλούμεναι. ταύταις 
καὶ ἑτέρωθι τῆς Ἑλλάδος βωμοὺς οἶδα ὄντας, 
τοὺς δὲ καὶ τεμένη σφίσιν ἀναθέντας πρὸς ἠιόσιν,' 
ἔνθα καὶ ᾿Αχιλλεῖ τιμαί: Δωτοῦς δὲ ἐν Γαβά- 
λοις ἱερόν ἐστιν ἅγιον, ἔνθα πέπλος ἔτι ἐλείπετο, 
ὃν "Ελληνες ᾿Εριφύλην λέγουσιν ἐπὶ τῷ παιδὶ 
λαβεῖν ᾽Αλκμαίωνι. τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος δέ εἶσιν 
ἐπει γασμένοι τῷ βάθρῳ καὶ οἱ Τυνδάρεω παῖδες, 
ὅτι δὴ σωτῆρες καὶ οὗτοι νεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων εἰσὶ 
ναυτιλλομένων. τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἀνάκειται Γαλήνης 
ἄγαλμα καὶ Θαλάσσης καὶ ἵππος εἰκασμένος 
κήτει τὰ μετὰ τὸ στέρνον, ᾿Ινώ τε καὶ Βελλερο- 
φόντης καὶ ὁ ἵππος ὁ Πήγασος. 

Π. Τοῦ περιβόλου, δέ ἐστιν ἐντὸς Παλαίμονος 
ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ναῦς, ἀγάλματα δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ Ποσειδῶν 
καὶ Λευκοθέα καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Παλαίμων. ἔστι δὲ 
καὶ ἄλλο Αδυτον καλούμενον, κάθοδος δὲ ἐς αὐτὸ 
ὑπόγεως, ἔνθα δὴ τὸν Παλαίμονα κεκρύφθαι 
φασίν" ὃς δ' ἂν ἐνταῦθα ἦ Κορινθίων ἢ ξένος 
ἐπίορκα ὀμόσῃ, οὐδεμία ἐστίν οἱ μηχανὴ διαφυ- 

1 πρὸς ἠιόσιν Preller. The reading is very doubtful. 
252 

G 

CORINTH, τ 7-11. 1 

bronze. The offerings inside were dedicated in our 
time by Herodes the Athenian, four horses, gilded 
except for the hoofs, which are of ivory, and two gold 
Tritons beside the horses, with the parts below the 
waist of ivory. On the car stand Amphitrite and 
Poseidon, and there is the boy Palaemon upright 
upon a dolphin. These too are made of ivory and 
gold. On the middle of the base on which the car 
is has been wrought a Sea holding up the young 
Aphrodite, and on either side are the nymphs called 
Nereids. I know that there are altars to these 

~ in other parts of Greece, and that some Greeks have 

even dedicated to them precincts by shores, where 

_ honours are also paid to Achilles. In Gabala isa holy 
. sanctuary of Doto, where there was still remaining 

the robe by which the Greeks say that Eriphyle was 
bribed to wrong her son Alcmaeon. Among the 
reliefs on the base of the statue of Poseidon are the 
sons of Tyndareus, because these too are saviours of 
ships and of sea-faring men. The other offerings are 
images of Calm and of Sea, a horse like a whale from 
the breast onward, Ino and Bellerophontes, and the 
horse Pegasus. 

II. Within the enclosure is on the left a temple of 
Palaemon, with images in it of Poseidon, Leucothea 
and Palaemon himself. There is also what is called 
his Holy of Holies, and an underground descent to 
it, where they say that Palaemon is concealed. 
Whosoever, whether Corinthian or stranger, swears 

, falsely here, can by no means escape from his oath. 

253 

a7 
= 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

γεῖν τοῦ ὅρκου. καὶ δὴ ἱερόν ἐστιν ἀρχαῖον 
Κυκλώπων καλούμενος βωμός, καὶ θύουσιν èr 
αὐτῷ Κύκλωψι. τάφους δὲ Σισύφου καὶ Ny- 
λέως---καὶ γὰρ Νηλέα ἀφικόμενον ἐς Κόρινθον 
νόσῳ τελευτῆσαί φασι καὶ περὶ τὸν ἰσθμὸν τα- 
φῆναι-- οὐκ ἂν οἶδ᾽ εἰ ἑητοίη τις ἐπιλεξάμενος τὰ 
Εὐμήλου' Νηλέως μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ Νέστορι ἐπι- 
δειχθῆναι TÒ μνῆμα ὑπὸ τοῦ Σισύφου φησί, 
χρῆναι γὰρ ἄγνωστον τοῖς πᾶσιν ὁμοίως εἶναι, 
Σίσυφον δὲ ταφῆναι μὲν ἐν τῷ ἰσθμῷ, τὸν δέ οἱ 
τάφον καὶ τῶν ἐφ᾽ αὑτοῦ Κορινθίων ὀλίγους εἶναι 
τοὺς εἰδότας. ὁ δὲ Ισθμικὸς ἆ ἀγὼν οὐδὲ ἆ ἀναστάν- 
των ὑπὸ Μομμίου Κορινθίων ἐξέλιπεν, GAN ὅσον 
μὲν χρόνον ἠρήμωτο. ἡ πόλις, Σικυωνίοις ἄγειν 
ἐπετέτραπτο. τὰ Ἴσθμια, οἰκισθείσης δὲ αὖθις ἐς 
τοὺς νῦν οἰκήτορας περιῆλθεν ἡ ἡ τιμή. 

Κορινθίοις δὲ τοῖς ἐπινείοις τὰ ὀνόματα Λέχης 
καὶ Κεγχρίας ἔδοσαν, Ποσειδῶνος εἶναι καὶ Πειρη- 
νης τῆς ᾿Αχελφου λεγόμενοι: πεποίηται δὲ ἐν 
᾿Ηοίαις μεγάλαις Οι βάλου θυγατέρα εἶναι Hepi 
νην. ἔστι δὲ ἐν Λεχαίῳ μὲν Ποσειδῶνος ἱερὸν 
καὶ ἄγαλμα χαλκοῦν, τὴν δὲ ἐ ἐς Κεγχρέας ἰόντων 
ἐξ ἰσθμοῦ ναὸς ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ ξόανον ἀρχαῖον. 
ἐν δὲ Κεγ Ὑχρέαις ας. τέ ἐστι vaos καὶ 
ἄγαλμα V ου, μετὰ δὲ αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῷ ἐρύματι τῷ 
διὰ τῆς θαλάσσης Ἡοσειδῶνος χαλκοῦν, κατὰ δὲ 
τὸ ἕτερον πέρας τοῦ λιμένος ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ καὶ 

Ἴσιδος i ἱερά. Κεγχρεῶν δὲ ἀπαντικρὺ τὸ Ἑλένς 
ἐστὶ Aout pov" ὕδωρ ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκ πέτρας ῥεῖ 
πολὺ καὶ ἁλμυρὸν ὕδατι ὅμοιον ἀρχομένῳ lep- 

μαίνεσθαι. 
᾿Ανιοῦσι δὲ ἐς Κόρινθον καὶ ἄλλα ἐστὶ κατὰ 

254 

at 

CORINTH, τι. 1-4 

There is also an ancient sanctuary called the altar 
of the Cyclopes, and they sacrifice to the Cyclopes 
upon it. The graves of Sisyphus and of Neleus—for 
they say that Neleus came to Corinth, died of disease, 
and was buried near the Isthmus—I do not think 
that anyone would look for after reading Eumelus. 
For he says that not even to Nestor did Sisyphus 
show the tomb of Neleus, because it must be kept 
unknown to everybody alike, and that Sisyphus is in- 
deed buried on the Isthmus, but that few Corinthians, 
even those of his own day, knew where the grave 
was, The Isthmian games were not interrupted even 
when Corinth had been laid waste by Mummius, but 
so long as it lay deserted the celebration of the 
games was entrusted to the Sicyonians, and when 
it was rebuilt the honour was restored to the present 
inhabitants. 

The names of the Corinthian harbours were given 
them by Leches and Cenchrias, said to be the 
children of Poseidon and Peirene the daughter of 
Acheloiis, though in the poem called The Great 
Eoeae | Peirene is said to be a daughter of Oebalus. 
In Lechaeum are a sanctuary and a bronze image of 
Poseidon, and’ on the road leading from the Isthmus 
to Cenchreae a temple and ancient wooden image of 

_ Artemis. In Cenchreae are a temple and a stone statue 

of Aphrodite, after it on the mole running into the 
sea a bronze image of Poseidon, and at the other end 

_ οἱ the harbour sanctuaries of Asclepius and of Isis. 

Right opposite Cenchreae is Helen’s Bath. It isa 
large stream of salt, tepid water, flowing from a rock 

` into the sea. 

As one goes up to Corinth are tombs, and by the 
1 Said to be a work of Hesiod. | 

255 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τὴν ὁδὸν μνήματα καὶ πρὸς τῇ πύλη Διογένης 
τέθαπται ὁ Σινωπεύς, ὃν κύνα ἐπίκλησιν καλοῦ- 
σιν "Ελληνες. πρὸ δὲ τῆς πόλεως κυπαρίσσων 
ἐστὶν ἄλσος ὀνομαζόμενον Κράνειον. ἐνταῦθα 
Βελλεροφόντου τέ ἐστι τέμενος καὶ ᾿Αφροδίτης 
ναὸς Μελαινίδος καὶ τάφος Λαΐδος, ὦ δὴ λέαινα 
ἐπίθημά ἐστι κριὸν ἔχουσα ἐν τοῖς προτέροις 
ποσίν. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλο ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ Λαῖδος 
φάμενον μνῆμα εἶναι παρεγένετο γὰρ καὶ ἐς 
Θεσσαλίαν ἐρασθεῖσα Ἱπποστράτου. τὸ δὲ ἐξ 
ἀρχῆς ἐξ Ὑκάρων αὐτὴν τῶν ἐν Σικελία λέγεται 
παῖδα οὖσαν ὑπὸ Νικίου καὶ ᾿Αθηναίων ἁλῶναι, 
πραθεῖσαν δὲ ἐς Κόρινθον ὑπερβαλέσθαι κάλλει 
τὰς τότε ἑταίρας, θαυμασθῆναί τε οὕτω παρὰ 
Κορινθίοις ὡς ἀμφισβητεῖν σφᾶς καὶ νῦν ἔτι 
Λαΐδος. 

Λόγου δὲ ἄξια ἐν τῇ πόλει τὰ μὲν λειπόμενα 
ἔτι τῶν ἀρχαίων ἐστίν, τὰ δὲ πολλὰ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ 
τῆς ἀκμῆς ἐποιήθη τῆς ὕστερον. ἔστιν οὖν ἐπὶ 
τῆς ἀγορᾶς- ἐνταῦθα γὰρ πλεῖστά ἐστι τῶν 
ἱερῶν---"Αρτεμίς τε ἐπίκλησιν ᾿Εφεσία καὶ Ao- 
νύσου ξόανα ἐπίχρυσα πλὴν τῶν προσώπων: τὰ 
δὲ πρόσωπα ἀλοιφῇ σφισιν ἐρυθρᾷ κεκόσμηται 
Λύσιον δέ, τὸν δὲ Βάκχειον ὀνομάζουσι. τὰ δὲ 
λεγόμενα ἐς τὰ ξόανα καὶ ἐγὼ γράφω. Πενθέα 
ὑβρίζοντα ἐς Διόνυσον καὶ ἄλλα τολμᾶν λέγουσι 
καὶ τέλος ἐς τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ κατα- 
okor) τῶν γυναικῶν, ἀναβάντα δὲ ἐς δένδρον 
θεάσασθαι τὰ ποιούμενα: τὰς δέ, ὡς ἐφώρασα», 
καθελκύσαι τε αὐτίκα Πενθέα καὶ ζῶντος aro- 
σπᾶν ἄλλο ἄλλην τοῦ σώματος. ὕστερον δέ, ὡς 
Κορίνθιοι λέγουσιν, ἡ Πυθία χρᾷ σφισιν ἀνευ- 
256 

oa A 

+ 

CORINTH, η. 4-7 

gate is buried Diogenes! of Sinope, whom the Greeks 

surname the Dog. Before the city is a grove of 
cypresses called Craneum. Here are a precinct of 
Bellerophontes, a temple of Aphrodite Melaenis and 
the grave of Lais, upon which is set a lioness 
holding a ram in her fore-paws. There is in Thes- 
saly another tomb which claims to be that of Lais, 
for she went to that country also when she fell in 
love with Hippostratus. The story is that originally 
she was of Hycara in Sicily. ‘Taken captive while 
yet a girl by Nicias and the Athenians, she was sold 
and brought to Corinth, where she surpassed in beauty 
the courtezans of her time, and so won the admiration 
of the Corinthians that even now they claim Lais as 
their own. 

The things worthy of mention in the city include 
the extant remains of antiquity, but the greater 
number of them belong to the period of its second 
ascendancy. On the market-place, where most of the 
sanctuaries are, stand Artemis surnamed Ephesian 
and wooden images of Dionysus, which are covered 
with gold with the exception of their faces; these 
are ornamented with red paint. They are called 
Lysius and Baccheiis, and I too give the story told 
about them. They say that Pentheus treated Diony- 
sus despitefully, his crowning outrage being that he 
went to Cithaeron, to spy upon the women, and 
climbing up a tree beheld what was done. When the 
women detected Pentheus, they immediately dragged 
him down, and joined in tearing him, living as he 
was, limb from limb. Afterwards, as the Corinthians 
say, the Pythian priestess commanded them by an 

1 The ‘‘ Cynic” philosopher. 
257 

VOL. I. 8 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ρόντας τὸ δένδρον ἐκεῖνο ἴσα τῷ θεῷ σέβειν" καὶ 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διὰ τόδε τὰς εἰκόνας πεποίηνται 
ταύτας. ἔστι δὲ καὶ Τύ χης. ναῦς" ἄγαλμα ὀρθὸν 
Παρίου λίθου: παρὰ δὲ αὐτὸν θεοῖς πᾶσίν ἐστιν 
ἱερόν. πλησίον δὲ ᾠκοδόμηται κρήνη, καὶ Io- 
σειδῶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ χαλκοῦς καὶ δελφὶς ὑπὸ τοῖς 
ποσίν ἐστι τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος ἀφιεὶς ὕδωρ. καὶ 
᾿Απόλλων ἐπίκλησιν. Κλάριος χαλκοῦς ἐστι καὶ 
ἄγαλμα ᾿Αφροδίτης “Ἑρμογένους Κυθηρίου ποιή- 
σαντος. Ἑρμοῦ τέ ἐστιν ἀγάλματα χαλκοῦ μὲν 
καὶ ὀρθὰ ἀμφότερα, τῷ δὲ ἑτέρῳ καὶ ναὸς πε- 
ποίηται. τὰ δὲ τοῦ Διός, καὶ ταῦτα ὄντα ἐν 
ὑπαίθρῳ, τὸ μὲν ἐπίκλησιν οὐκ εἶχε, τὸν δὲ αὐτῶν 
Χθόνιον καὶ τὸν τρίτον καλοῦσιν" Ὕψιστον. 

III. ᾿Εν μέσῳ δὲ τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶ 
χαλκῆ τῷ βάθρῳ δὲ αὐτῆς ἐστι Μουσῶν ἀγάλ- 
ματα ἐπειργασμένα. ὑπὲρ δὲ τὴν ἀγοράν ἐστιν Ὃκ- 
ταβίας ναὸς ἀδελφῆς Αὐγούστου βασιλεύσαντος 
Ῥωμαίων μετὰ Καίσαρα τὸν οἰκιστὴν Κορίνθου 
τῆς νῦν. 

Ἔκ δὲ τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἐξιόντων τὴν ἐπὶ Λεχαίου 
προπύλαιά ἐστι καὶ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἅρματα ἐπίχρυσα, 
τὸ μὲν Φαέθοντα "Ηλίου παῖδα, τὸ δὲ "Ηλιον 
αὐτὸν φέρον. ὀλίγον δὲ ἀπωτέρω τῶν προπυ- 
λαίων ἐσιοῦσιν ἐν δεξιᾷ ἐ ἐστιν Ἡρακλῆς χαλκοῦς, 
μετὰ δὲ αὐτὸν ἔσοδός ἐστι τῆς Ἠειρήνης ἐς τὸ 
ὕδωρ. ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτῇ λέγουσιν ὡς ἡ Πειρήνη γέ- 
vorto ὑπὸ δακρύων ἐξ ἀνθρώπου πηγή, τὸν παῖδα 
ὀδυρομένη Κεγχρίαν ὑπὸ ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἀκούσης 
ἀποθανόντα. κεκόσμηται δὲ ἡ ἡ πηγὴ λίθῳ λευκῷ, 
καὶ πεποιημένα ἐστὶν οἰκήματα σπηλαίοις κατὰ 
ταὐτά, ἐξ ὧν τὸ ὕδωρ ἐς κρήνην ὕπαιθρον ῥεῖ 

258 © 

o- A 

CORINTH, 11. 7-11. 3 ee 

= oracle to discover that tree and to worship it equally 
with the god. For this reason they have made these 
images from the tree. There is also a temple of 
Fortune, with a standing image of Parian marble. 
Beside it is a sanctuary for all the gods. Hard by 
is built a fountain, on which is a bronze Poseidon ; 
under the féet of Poseidon is a dolphin spouting 
water. There is also a bronze Apollo surnamed 
Clarius and a statue of Aphrodite made by Hermo- 
genes of Cythera. There are two bronze, standing 
images of Hermes, for one of which a temple has 
been made. The images of Zeus also are in the 
open; one had not a surname, another they call. 
Chthonius (of the Lower World) and the third 
Most High. 

III. In the middle of the market-place is a bronze 
Athena, on the pedestal of which are wrought in 
relief figures of the Muses. Above the market-place 
‘is a temple of Octavia the sister of Augustus, who 
was emperor of the Romans after Caesar, the founder 
of the modern Corinth. 

On leaving the market-place along the road to 
Lechaeum you come to a gateway, on which are two 
gilded chariots, one carrying Phaéthon the son of 
Helius (Sun), the other Helius himself. A little farther 
away from the gateway, on the right as you go in, is 
a bronze Heracles. After this is the entrance to the 
water of Peirene. The legend about Peirene is that 
she was a woman who became a spring because of her 
tears shed in lamentation for her son Cenchrias, who 
was unintentionally killed by Artemis. The spring 
is ornamented with white marble, and there have 
been made chambers like caves, out of which the 

259 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πιεῖν τε ἡδὺ καὶ τὸν Κορίνθιον χαλκὸν διάπυρον 
καὶ θερμὸν ὄντα ὑπὸ ὕδατος τούτου βάπτεσθαι 
λέγουσιν, ἐπεὶ χαλκός . . . γε οὐκ ἔστι Κοριν- 
θίοις. ἔτι γε δὴ καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἄγαλμα πρὸς 
τῇ Πειρήνῃ καὶ περίβολός ἐστιν, ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ 
γραφὴ τὸ ᾿Ὀδυσσέως ἐς τοὺς μνηστῆρας ἔχουσα 
τόλμημα. 

Αὖθις Ò ἰοῦσιν ἐπὶ Λεχαίου τὴν εὐθεῖαν χαλ.- 
κοῦς καθήμενός ἐστιν ᾿Ερμῆς. παρέστηκε δέ οἱ 
κριός, ὅτι Ἑρμῆς μάλιστα δοκεῖ θεῶν ἐφορᾶν καὶ 
αὔξειν ποίμνας, καθὰ δὴ καὶ "Όμηρος ἐν Ἰλιάδε 
ἐποίησεν 

Tidv Φόρβαντος πολυμήλου, Tov pa μάλιστα 
Ἑρμείας Τρώων ἐφίλει καὶ κτῆσιν ὄπασσε' 

τὸν δὲ ἐν τελετῇ Μητρὸς ἐπὶ Ἑρμῆ λεγόμενον 
καὶ τῷ κριῷ λόγον ἐπιστάμενος οὐ λέγω. μετὰ 
δὲ τὸ ἄγαλμα τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ Ποσειδῶν καὶ Λευκοθέα 
καὶ ἐπὶ δελφῖνος ἐστιν ὁ Παλαίμων. λουτρὰ δὲ 
ἔστι μὲν πολλαχοῦ Κορινθίοις καὶ ἄλλα, τὰ μὲν 
ἀπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ, τὸ δὲ βασιλέως ᾿Αδριανοῦ κατα- 
σκευάσαντος' τὸ δὲ ὀνομαστότατον αὐτῶν πλη- 
σίον τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος. τοῦτο δὲ Εὐρυκλῆς ἐποί- 
noev ἀνὴρ Σπαρτιάτης λίθοις κοσμήσας καὶ 
ἄλλοις καὶ ὃν ἐν Κροκεαῖς χώρας τῆς Λακωνικῆς 
ὀρύσσουσιν. ἐν ἀριστερᾷ Ὦ τῆς ἐσόδου Ilosc- 
δῶν καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν "Αρτεμις θηρεύουσα ἕστηκε. 
κρῆναι δὲ πολλαὶ μὲν ἀνὰ τὴν πόλιν πεποίηνταε 
πᾶσαν ἅτε ἀφθόνου ῥέοντός σφισιν ὕδατος καὶ ὃ 
δὴ βασιλεὺς ᾿Αδριανὸς ἐσήγαγεν ἐκ Στυμφήλου, 
θέας δὲ μάλιστα ἀξία ἡ παρὰ τὸ ἄγαλμα τὸ τῆς 
1 Here there is a gap in the text, 
260 

> 

CORINTH, τι. 3-5 

water flows into an open-air well. It is pleasant to 
drink, and they say that the Corinthian bronze, when 
red-hot, is tempered by this water, since bronze... 
the Corinthians have not. Moreover near Peirene 
are an image and a sacred enclosure of Apollo; in 
the latter is a painting of the exploit of Odysseus 
against the suitors. 

Proceeding on the direct road to Lechaeum we see 
a bronze image of a seated Hermes. By him stands 
a ram, for Hermes is the god who is thought most 
to care for and to increase flocks, as Homer puts it 
in the [liad }:— 

“ Son was he of Phorbas, the dearest of Trojans to 
Hermes, 
Rich in flocks, for the god vouchsafed him wealth 
in abundance.” 

The story told at the mysteries of the Mother 
about Hermes and the ram I know but do not 
relate. After the image of Hermes come Poseidon, 
Leucothea, and Palaemon on a dolphin. The Corin- 
thians have baths in many parts of the city, some 
put up at the public charge and one by the emperor 
Hadrian. The most famous of them is near the 
Poseidon. It was made by the Spartan Eurycles,? 
who beautified it with various kinds of stone, especial- 
ly the one quarried at Croceae in Laconia. On the 
left of the entrance stands a Poseidon, and after him 
Artemis hunting. Throughout the city are many 
wells, for the Corinthians have a copious supply of 
flowing water, besides the water which the emperor 
Hadrian brought from Lake Stymphalus, but the 
most noteworthy is the one by the side of the image 

1 xiv. 490. 2 Probably a contemporary of Augustus. 
261 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

᾿Αρτέμιδος' καί οἱ Βελλεροφόντης ἔπεστι καὶ τὸ 
ὕδωρ δι ὁπλῆς ἵππου ῥεῖ τοῦ Πηγάσου. 

Ἑτέραν δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἀγορᾶς τὴν ἐπὶ Σικυῶνα 
ἐρχομένοις ἔστιν ἰδεῖν ἐν δεξιᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ ναὸς καὶ 
ἄγαλμα αλκοῦν ᾿Απόλλωνος καὶ ὀλίγον ἀπω- 
τέρω κρήνη καλουμένη Γλαύκης: ἐς γὰρ ταύτην 
ἔρριψεν αὑτήν, ὡς λέγουσι, τῶν Μηδείας ἔσεσθαι 
φαρμάκων τὸ ὕδωρ νομίζουσα ἴαμα. ὑπὲρ ταύ- 
την πεποίηται τὴν κρήνην καὶ τὸ καλούμενον 
᾿Ὠιδεῖον, παρὰ δὲ αὐτὸ μνῆμά ἐστι τοῖς Mn- 
δείας παισίν' ὀνόματα μέν σφισι Μέρμερος καὶ 
Φέρης, καταλιθωθῆναι δὲ ὑπὸ Κορινθίων λέ- 
γονται τῶν δώρων ἕ ἕνεκα ὧν τῇ Γλαύκη κομίσαι 
φασὶν. αὐτούς": ἅτε δὲ τοῦ θανάτου βιαίου καὶ οὗ 
σὺν τῷ δικαίῳ γενομένου, τὰ τέκνα Κορινθίων τὰ 
νήπια ὑπ αὐτῶν ἐφθείρετο, πρὶν ἢ χρήσαντος 
τοῦ θεοῦ θυσίαι τε αὐτοῖς ἐπέτειοι κατέστησαν 
καὶ Δεῖμα ἐπεστάθη. τοῦτο μὲν δὴ καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς 
ἔτι λείπεται, γυναικὸς ἐς τὸ φοβερώτερον εἰκὼν 

πεποιημένη: Κορίνθου δὲ ἀναστάτου γενομένης 
ὑπὸ “Ῥωμαίων καὶ Κορινθίων τῶν ἀρχαίων aro- 
λομένων, οὐκέτι ἐκεῖναι ,καθεστήκασιν αὐτοῖς αἱ 
θυσίαι παρὰ τῶν ἐποίκων οὐδὲ ἀποκείρονταί 
σφισιν οἱ παῖδες οὐδὲ μέλαιναν Φοροῦσιν ἐσθῆτα. 
Μήδεια δὲ τότε μὲν ἐλθοῦσα ἐς ᾿Αθήνας συνῳ- 
κησεν Αἰγεῖ, χρόνῳ. δὲ ὕστερον φωραθεῖσα ἐπι- 
βουλεύειν Θησεῖ καὶ ἐξ ᾿Αθηνῶν ἔφυγε, Tapa- 
γενομένη δὲ ἐς τὴν λεγομένην τότε ᾿Αρίαν τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις ἔδωκε τὸ ὄνομα καλεῖσθαι Μήδους á ἀπ 
αὐτῆς. τὸν δὲ παῖδα, ὃν ἐπήγετο φεύγουσα ές 
τοὺς ᾿Αρίους, γενέσθαι λέγουσιν ἐξ Αὐγέως, 
ὄνομα δέ οἱ Μῆδον εἶναι Ἑλλάνικος δὲ αὐτὸν 
262 

CORINTH, πι. 5-8 

of Artemis. Over it is a Bellerophontes, and the 
water flows through the hoof of the horse Pegasus. 
As you go along another road from the market- 
place, which leads to Sicyon, you can see on the 
right of the road a temple and bronze image of 
Apollo, and a little farther on a well called the Well 
of Glauce. Into this they say she threw herself in 
the belief that the water would be a cure for the 
drugs of Medea. Above this well has been built 
what is called the Odeum (Music Hall), beside which 
is the tomb of Medea’s children. Their names were 
Mermerus and Pheres, and they are said to have 
been stoned to death by the Corinthians owing to 
the gifts which legend says they brought to Glauce. 
But as their death was violent and illegal, the young 
babies of the Corinthians were destroyed by them 
until, at the command of the oracle, yearly sacrifices 
were established in their honour and a figure of 
Terror was set up. This figure still exists, being the 
likeness of a woman frightful to look upon; but 
after Corinth was laid waste by the Romans and 
the old Corinthians were wiped out, the new 
settlers broke the custom of offering those sacrifices 
to the sons of Medea, nor do their children cut 
their hair for them or wear black clothes. On the 
occasion referred to Medea went to Athens and 
married Aegeus, but subsequently she was detected 
plotting against Theseus and fled from Athens also; 
coming to the land then called Aria she caused its 
inhabitants to be named after her Medes. The son, 
whom she brought with her in her flight to the Arii, 
they say she had by Aegeus, and that his-name was 
Medus. Hellanicus,! however, calls him Polyxenus 

1 A writer of the fifth century B.c. 
263 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Πολύξενον καλεῖ καὶ πατρὸς Ἱάσονός φησιν 

9 εἶναι. ἔπη δὲ ἔστιν ἐν "Ἕλλησι. Ναυπάκτια 

10 

11 

ὀνομαζόμενα: πεποίηται δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖς ᾿Ιάσονα ἐξ 
Ἰωλκοῦ μετὰ τὸν Πελίου θάνατον ἐς Κόρκυραν 
μετοικῆσαι καί οἱ Μέρμερον μὲν τὸν πρεσβύ- 
τερον τῶν παίδων ὑπὸ λεαίνης διαφθαρῆναι 
θηρεύοντα ἐ ἐν τῇ πέραν ἠπείρῳ" Φέρητι δὲ οὐδέν 
ἐστιν ἐς μνήμην προσκείμενον. Κιναίθων δὲ ο 
Λακεδαιμόνιος — ἐγενεαλόγησε γὰρ καὶ οὗτος 
ἔπεσι ---Μήδειον καὶ θυγατέρα ᾿Εριῶπιν ᾿Ιάσονι 
εἶπεν ἐκ Μηδείας γενέσθαι". πέρα δὲ ἐς τοὺς 
παῖδας οὐδὲ τούτῳ πεποιημένα ἐστίν. Εὔμηλος 
δὲ "Hov ἔφη δοῦναι τὴν χώραν ᾿Αλωεῖ μὲν τὴν 
᾿Ασωπίαν, Αἰήτῃ δὲ τὴν ᾿Εφυραίαν' καὶ Αἰήτην 
ἀπιόντα ἐς Κόλχους παρακαταθέσθαι Βούνφ τὴν 
γῆν, Βοῦνον δὲ “Ερμοῦ καὶ ᾽Αλκιδαμείας εἶναι, 
καὶ ἐπεὶ Βοῦνος ἐτελεύτησεν, οὕτως Ἐπωπέα 
τὸν ᾿Αλωέως καὶ τὴν ᾿Εφυραίων σχεῖν ἀρχην' 
Κορίνθου δὲ ὕστερον τοῦ Μαραθῶνος οὐδένα 
ὑπολιπομένου παῖδα, τοὺς Κορινθίους Μήδειαν 
μεταπεμψαμένους ἐξ Ἰωλκοῦ παραδοῦναί οἱ τὴν 
ἀρχή». βασιλεύειν μὲν δὴ δι᾿ αὐτὴν ᾿Ιάσονα ἐ ἐν 
Κορίνθῳ, Μηδείᾳ δὲ παῖδας μὲν γίνεσθαι, τὸ δὲ 
ἀεὶ τικτόμενον. κατακρύπτειν͵ αὐτὸ ἐς τὸ ἱερὸν 
φέρουσαν τῆς Ηρας, κατακρύπτειν δὲ ἀθανάτους 
ἔσεσθαι νομίξουσαν τέλος δὲ αὐτήν τε μαθεῖν 
ὡς ἡμαρτήκοι τῆς ἐλπίδος καὶ ἅμα ὑπὸ τοῦ 
ἼἸάσονος φωραθεῖσαν---οὐ γὰρ αὐτὸν ἔχειν δεο- 
μένῃ συγγνώμην, ἀποπλέοντα δὲ ἐς Ἰωλκὸν 
οἴχεσθαι---, τούτων δὲ ἕνεκα ἀπελθεῖν καὶ Μή- 
δειαν παραδοῦσαν Σισύφῳ τὴν ἀρχήν. 

IV. Τάδε μὲν οὕτως ἔχοντα ἐπελεξάμην, τοῦ 

264 

CORINTH, πι, ὃ--ιν. 1 

and says that his father was Jason. The Greeks have 
an epic poem called Naupactsa. In this Jason is repre- 
sented as having removed his home after the death of 
Pelias from Iolcus to Corcyra, and Mermerus, the elder 
of his children, to have been killed by a lioness while 
hunting on the mainland opposite. Of Pheres is 
recorded nothing. But Cinaethon! of Lacedaemon, 
another writer of pedigrees in verse, said that 
Jason’s children by Medea were a son Medeiis 
and a daughter Eriopis; he too, however, gives no 
further information about these children. Eumelus 
said that Helius (Sun) gave the Asopian land to Aloeus 
and Ephyraea to Aeetes. When Aeetes was depart- 
ing for Colchis he entrusted his land to Bunus, the 
son of Hermes and Alcidamea, and when Bunus 
died Epopeus the son of Aloeus extended his 
kingdom to include the Ephyraeans. Afterwards, 
when Corinthus, the son of Marathon, died childless, 
the Corinthians sent for Medea from Iolcus and 
bestowed upon her the kingdom. Through her 
Jason was king in Corinth, and Medea, as her 
children were born, carried each to the sanctuary 
of Hera and concealed them, doing so in the belief 
that so they would be immortal. At last she learned 
that her hopes were vain, and at the same time she 
was detected by Jason. When she begged for 
pardon he refused it, and sailed away to lolchus. 
_ For these reasons Medea too departed, and handed 
_ over the kingdom to Sisyphus. 

IV. This is the account that I read, and not far from 

1 An early epic writer. 

r ) 
` 
. 

, 

265 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μνήματος δέ ἐστιν οὐ πόρρω Χαλινίτιδος ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
ἱερόν: ᾿Αθηνᾶν γὰρ θεῶν μάλιστα συγκατεργά- 
σασθαι Ta τε ἄλλα Βελλεροφόντῃ φασὶ καὶ ὡς 
/ ‘ 
τὸν Πήγασόν οἱ παραδοίη χειρωσαμένη τε καὶ 
- - a 
ἐνθεῖσα αὐτὴ τῷ ἵππῳ χαλινόν. τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα 
τοῦτο ξόανόν ἐστι, πρόσωπον δὲ καὶ χεῖρες καὶ 
2 ἀκρόποδες εἰσὶ λευκοῦ λίθου. Βελλεροφόντην δὲ 
οὐκ αὐτοκράτορα ὄντα βασιλεύειν, εἶναι δὲ ἐπὶ 
Προίτῳ καὶ ᾿Αργείοις ἐγώ τε πείθομαι καὶ ὅστις 
τὰ Ὁμήρου μὴ πάρεργον ἐπελέξατο. φαίνονται 
δὲ καὶ Βελλεροφόντου μετοικήσαντος ἐς Λυκίαν 
οὐδὲν ἧσσον οἱ Κορίνθιοι τῶν ἐν "A pyet δυναστῶν 
A / e ΄ 207 δν πο παμε 
ἢ Μυκήναις ὑπακούοντες" ἰδίᾳ τε οὐδένα παρέ- 
σχοντο ἄρχοντα τῆς ἐπὶ Τροίαν στρατιᾶς, συντε- 
/ . er Y. ᾽ 
ταγμένοι δὲ Μυκηναίοις καὶ ὅσων ἄλλων ᾿Αγα- 
- A \ 
3 μέμνων ἡγεῖτο μετέσχον τοῦ στόλου. Σισύφῳ δὲ 
οὔτι Γλαῦκος μόνον ὁ Βελλεροφόντου πατήρ 
. ` 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἕτερος υἱὸς ἐγένετο Ὀρνυτίων, ἐπὶ δὲ 
» - 2 / . ν » / 
αὐτῷ Θέρσανδρός τε καὶ “Ardpos. ᾿Ὀρνυτίωνος 
δὲ ἦν Φῶκος, Ποσειδῶνος δὲ ἐπίκλησιν. καὶ o 
, a A z , 
μὲν ἀπῴκησεν ἐς Τιθορέαν τῆς νῦν καλουμένης 
r 
Φωκίδος, Θόας δὲ ᾿Ορνυτίωνος vids νεώτερος 
κατέμεινεν ἐν τῇ Κορίνθῳ. (Θόαντος δὲ Δαμοφῶν, 
- / 
Δαμοφῶντος δὲ ἦν Προπόδας, Προπόδα δὲ Awp- 
δας καὶ Ὑανθίδας. τούτων βασιλευόντων Av- 
- ΄ μ.ο / e - . / 
ριεῖς στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ Κόρινθον' ἡγεῖτο δὲ ᾿Αλη- 
ε - A e 
της Ἱππότου τοῦ Φύλαντος τοῦ ᾿Ἀντιόχου τοῦ 
Ἡρακλέους. Δωρίδας μὲν οὖν καὶ Ὑανθίδας πα: 
ραδόντες τὴν βασιλείαν ᾿Αλήτῃ καταμένουσιν 
» - - \ ΄ e a 9457 cs 
αὐτοῦ, τῶν δὲ Κορινθίων ὁ δῆμος ἐξέπεσεν ὑπὸ 
/ S ΄ .3 / \ >» 
4 Δωριέων κρατηθεὶς μάχη. ᾿᾿Αλήτης δὲ αὐτος Τε 
A 
καὶ οἱ ἀπόγονοι βασιλεύουσιν ἐς μὲν Βάκχιν τον 
266 

CORINTH, ιν. 1-4 

the tomb is the temple of Athena Chalinitis (Bredler). 
For Athena, they say, was the divinity who gave most 
help to Bellerophontes, and she delivered to him 
Pegasus, having herself broken in and bridled him. 
The image of her is of wood, but face, hands and 
feet are of white marble. That Bellerophontes was 
not an absolute king, but was subject to Proetus 
and the Argives is the belief of myself and of all 
who have read carefully the Homeric poems.! When 

' Bellerophontes migrated to Lycia it is clear that 

the Corinthians none the less were subject to the 
despots at Argos or Mycenae. By themselves they 
provided no leader for the campaign against Troy, 

i but shared in the expedition as part of the forces, 
. Mycenaean and other, led by Agamemnon. Sisy- 

phus had other sons besides Glaucus, the father of 
Bellerophontes ; a second was Ornytion, and besides 
him there were Thersander and Almus. Ornytion 

_ had a son Phocus, reputed to have been begotten 

by Poseidon. He migrated to Tithorea in what is 
now called Phocis, but Thoas, the younger son of 
Ornytion, remained behind at Corinth. Thoas begat 
Damophon, Damophon begat Propodas, and Propodas 
begat Doridas and Hyanthidas. While these were 
kings the Dorians took the field against Corinth, 
their leader being Aletes, the son of Hippotas, the © 
son of Phylas, the son of Antiochus, the son of 
Heracles. , So ο... and Hyanthidas gave up the 
kingship to Aletes and remained at Corinth, but 
the Corinthian people were conquered in battle and 
expelled by the Dorians. Aletes himself and his 
descendants reigned for five generations to Bacchis, 

1 Iliad, vi. 159. 
= 267 

5 

6 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Προύμνιδος ἐπὶ γενεὰς πέντε, ἀπὸ τούτου δὲ οἱ 
Βακχίδαι καλούμενοι πέντε ἄλλας γενεὰς ἐς Τε. 
λέστην τὸν ᾿Αριστοδήμου. καὶ Τελέστην μὲν 
κατὰ ἔχθος ᾿Αριεὺς καὶ Περάντας κτείνουσι, 
βασιλεὺς δὲ οὐδεὶς ἔτι ἐγένετο, πρυτάνεις δὲ ἐκ 
Βακχιδῶν ἐνιαυτὸν ἄρχοντες, ἐς ὃ Κύψελος τυ- 
ραννήσας o ᾿Ηετίωνος ἐξέβαλε τοὺς Βακχίδας' 
ἀπόγονος δὲ ἦν ὁ Κύψελος Μέλανος τοῦ ᾿Αντάσου. 
Μέλανα δὲ ἐκ Γονούσσης τῆς ὑπὲρ Σικυῶνος 
στρατεύοντα σὺν Δωριεῦσιν ἐπὶ Κόρινθον ᾽Αλή- 
της τὸ μὲν παραυτίκα ἀπειπόντος τοῦ θεοῦ 
παρ᾽ ἄλλους τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐκέλευσεν ἀποχωρεῖν, 
ὕστερον δὲ ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ χρησμοῦ δέχεται 
σύνοικον. 

Τοιαῦτα μὲν ἐς τοὺς Κορινθίων βασιλέας ovy- 
Βάντα εὕρισκον: τὸ δὲ ἱερὸν τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς τῆς 
Χαλινίτιδος πρὸς τῷ θεάτρῳ σφίσιν ἐστὶν καὶ 
πλησίον ξόανον γυμνὸν "Ηρακλέους, Δαιδάλου δὲ 
αὐτό φασιν εἶναι τέχνην. Δαίδαλος δὲ ὁπόσα 
εἰργάσατο, ἀτοπώτερα μέν ἐστιν ἐς τὴν ὄψιν, 
ἐπιπρέπει δὲ ὅμως τι καὶ ἔνθεον τούτοις. ὑπὲρ 
δὲ τὸ θέατρόν ἐστιν ἱερὸν Διὸς Καπετωλίου φωνῇ 
τῇ Ῥωμαίων' κατὰ Ἑλλάδα δὲ γλῶσσαν Κορυ- 
φαῖος ὀνομάξοιτο ἄν. τοῦ θεάτρου δέ ἐστι τοῦδε 
οὐ πόρρω γυμνάσιον τὸ ἀρχαῖον καὶ πηγὴ 
καλουμένη Λέρνα: κίονες δὲ ἑστήκασι περὶ αὐτὴν 
καὶ καθέδραι πεποίηνται τοὺς ἐσελθόντας ἀναψύ- 

ειν ὥρᾳ θέρους. πρὸς τούτῳ τῷ γυμνασίῳ ναοὶ 
δεῶν εἰσιν ὁ μὲν Διός, ὁ δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ' τὰ δὲ 
ἀγάλματα ᾿Ασκληπιὸς μὲν καὶ Ὕγεία λευκοῦ 
λίθου, τὸ δὲ τοῦ Διὸς χαλκοῦν ἐστιν. 

᾿Ανιοῦσι δὲ ἐς τὸν ᾿Ακροκόρινθον---ἡ δέ ἐστιν 
268 

i 

CORINTH, ιν. 4-6 

the son of Prumnis, and, named after him, the 
Bacchidae reigned for five more generations to Te- 
lestes, the son of Aristodemus. Telestes was killed 
in hate by Arieus and Perantas, and there were no 
more kings, but Prytanes (Presidents) taken from the 
Bacchidae and ruling for one year, until Cypselus, 
the son of Eetion, became tyrant and expelled the 
Bacchidae. Cypselus was a descendant of Melas, 
the son of Antasus. Melas from Gonussa above 
Sicyon joined the Dorians in the expedition against 
Corinth. When the god expressed disapproval 
Aletes at first ordered Melas to withdraw to other 
Greeks, but afterwards, mistaking the oracle, he 
received him as a settler. 

Such I found to be the history of the Corinthian 
kings. Now the sanctuary of Athena Chalinitis is by 
their theatre, and near is a naked wooden image of 

Heracles, said to be a work of Daedalus. All the > | 
= works of this artist, although rather uncouth to 

look at, are nevertheless distinguished by a kind 
of inspiration. Above the theatre is a sanctuary of 
Zeus surnamed in the Latin tongue Capitolinus, 
which might be rendered into Greek Coryphaeos. 
Not far from this theatre is the ancient gymnasium, 

_ and a spring called Lerna.: Pillars stand around it, 

and seats have been made to refresh in summer time 
those who have entered it. By this gymnasium are 
temples of Zeus and Asclepius. The images of 
Asclepius and of Health are of white marble, that of 
Zeus is of bronze, 

The Acrocorinthus is a mountain peak above the 

269 

655 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

ὄρους ὑπὲρ τὴν πόλιν κορυφή, Βριάρεω μὲν Ἡλέφ 
δόντος αὐτὴν ὅτε ἐδίκαζεν, Ἡλίου δὲ ὡς οἱ Κορίν- 
θιοί φασιν ᾿Αφροδίτῃ παρέντος---ἐς δὴ τὸν Axpo- 
κόρινθον τοῦτον ἀνιοῦσίν ἐστιν Ἴσιδος τεμένη, 
ὧν τὴν μὲν Πελαγίαν, τὴν δὲ Αἰγυπτίαν αὐτῶν 
ἐπονομάξουσιν, | καὶ δύο Σαράπιδος, ἐν Κανώβῳ 
καλουμένου τὸ ἕτερον. μετὰ δὲ αὐτὰ Ἡλίῳ πε- 
ποίηνται βωμοί, καὶ ᾿Ανάγκης καὶ Bias ἐστὶν 
ἱερόν" ἐσιέναι δὲ ἐς αὐτὸ οὐ νομίξουσιν. ὑπὲρ 
τοῦτο Μητρὸς θεῶν ναός ἐστι καὶ θρόνος' λίθων 
καὶ αὐτὴ καὶ ὁ θρόνος. ὁ δὲ τῶν Μοιρῶν καὶ ὁ 
Δήμητρος καὶ Κόρης οὐ φανερὰ ἔχουσι τ τὰ ἀγάλ- 
ματα. ταύτῃ καὶ τὸ τῆς Βουναίας ἐστὶν "Has 
ἱερὸν ἱδρυσαμένου Βούνου τοῦ “Ερμοῦ: καὶ δι 
αὐτὸ ἡ θεὸς καλεῖται Βουναία. 

V. ᾿Ανελθοῦσι δὲ ἐς τὸν ᾿Ακροκόρινθον vaos 
ἐστιν ᾿Αϕροδύτης" ἀγάλματα, δὲ αὐτή τε ὡπλι- 
σμένη καὶ "Ἠλιος καὶ "Έρως č ἔχων τόξον. τὴν δὲ 
πηγήν, ἤ ἐστιν ὄπισθεν τοῦ ναοῦ, δῶρον μὲν 
᾿Ασωποῦ λέγουσιν εἶναι, δοθῆναι δὲ Σισύφῳ' 
τοῦτον γὰρ εἰδότα, ὡς εἴη Ζεὺς ἡ ἡρπακὼς Αἴγιναν 
θυγατέρα ᾿Ασωποῦ, μ μὴ “πρότερον φάναι ζητοῦντι 
μηνύσειν πρὶν ἢ οἱ καὶ ἐν ᾿Ακροκορίνθῳ γένοιτο 
ὕδωρ' δόντος δὲ ᾿Ασωποῦ μηνύει τε οὕτως καὶ 
ἀντὶ τοῦ μηνύματος δίκην-- ὅτῳ πιστὰ---ἐν "Αιδου 
δίδωσιν. ἤκουσα δὲ ἤδη τὴν Ἠειρήνην φαμένων 
εἶναι ταύτην͵ καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ αὐτόθεν ú ὑπορρεῖν τὸ ἐν 
τῇ πόλει. ὁ δὲ ᾿Ασωπὸς οὗτος ἄρχεται μὲν ἐκ 
τῆς Φλιασίας, ῥεῖ δὲ διὰ τῆς Σικυωνίας καὶ 
ἐκδίδωσιν ἐς τὴν ταύτῃ θάλασσαν. θυγατέρας δὲ 
αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι Φλιάσιοί φασι Κόρκυραν καὶ 
Αἴγιναν καὶ Θήβην' ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ Κορκύρας καὶ 
270 

= 

CORINTH, ιν. 6--ν. 2 

city, assigned to Helius by Briareos when he acted 
as adjudicator, and handed over, the Corinthians 
say, by Helius to Aphrodite. As vou go up this 
Acrocorinthus you see two precincts of Isis, one 
of Isis surnamed Pelagian (Marine) and the other of 
Egyptian Isis, and two of Serapis, one of them being 
of Serapis called “in Canopus,” After these are altars 
to Helius, and a sanctuary of Necessity and Force, 
into which it is not customary to enter. Above it 
are a temple of the Mother of the gods and a 
throne ; the image and the throne are made of stone. 
The temple of the Fates and that of Demeter and 
the Maid have images that are not exposed to view. 
' Here, too, is the temple of Hera Bunaea set up by 
| Bunus the son of Hermes. It is, for this reason 
' that the goddess is called Bunaea. 

V. On the summit of the Acrocorinthus is a temple 
of Aphrodite. The images are Aphrodite armed, 
Helius, and Eros with a bow. The spring, which is 
behind the temple, they say was the gift of Asopus to 

_ Sisyphus. The latter knew, so runs the legend, that 
_ Zeus had ravished Aegina, the daughter of Asopus, 
but refused to give information to the seeker before 
he had a spring given him on the Acrocorinthus. 
. When Asopus granted this request Sisyphus turned 
informer, and on this account he receives—if anyone 
believes the story—punishment in Hades. I have 
' heard people say that this spring and Peirene are 
| the same, the water in the city flowing hence under- 
' ground, This Asopus rises in the Phliasian territory, 
| flows through the Sicyonian, and empties itself into 
the sea here. His daughters, say the Phliasians, 
were Corcyra, Aegina, and Thebe. Corcyra and 

271 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE | 

Αἰγίνης τὰς νήσους Σχερίαν καὶ Οἰνώνην καλου- 
μένας μετονομασθῆναι, ἀπὸ δὲ Θήβης τὴν ὑπὸ τῆ 
Καδμείᾳ κληθῆναι. Θηβαῖοι δὲ οὐχ ὁμολογοῦσι, 
φάμενοι τοῦ Βοιωτίου τὴν Θήβην ᾿Ασωποῦ καὶ 
οὐ τοῦ Φλιασίου εἶναι. τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἐς τὸν 
ποταμὸν Φλιάσιοι καὶ Σικυώνιοι λέγουσι, τὸ 
ὕδωρ ἔπηλυ καὶ οὐκ ἐγχώριον εἶναί οὐ" Μαίαν- 
δρον γὰρ κατιόντα ἐκ Κελαινῶν διὰ Φρυγίας καὶ 
Καρίας καὶ ἐκδιδόντα ἐς τὴν πρὸς Μιλήτῳ θά- 
λασσαν ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἔρχεσθαι καὶ ποιεῖν 
τὸν ᾿Ασωπόν. οἶδα δὲ καὶ Δηλίων τοιοῦτο ἀκού- 
σας ἕτερον, ὕδωρ ὃ καλοῦσιν Ἰνωπὸν εἶναί σφισιν 
ἐκ τοῦ Νείλου" καὶ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸν ἔχει τὸν Νεῖλον 
λόγος Εὐφράτην « ὄντα ἐς ἕλος ἀφανίζεσθαι καὶ 
αὖθις ἀνιόντα ὑπὲρ Αἰθιοπίας Νεῖλον γίνεσθαι. 
᾿Ασωποῦ μὲν πέρι τοιαῦτα ἤκουσα, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ 
᾿Ακροκορίνθου τραπεῖσι τὴν ὀρεινὴν πύλη τέ ἐσ- 
τιν a Τενεατικὴ καὶ Εἰληθυίας i ἱερόν' ἑξήκοντα δὲ 
ἀπέχει μάλιστα στάδια À καλουμένη Τενέα. οἱ 
δὲ ἄνθρωποί ασιν οἱ ταύτῃ Τρῶες εἶναι, αἰχμά- 
λωτοι δὲ ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων ἐκ Τενέδου γενόμενοι 
ἐνταῦθα ᾿Αγαμέμνονος δόντος οἰκῆσαι: καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο θεῶν μάλιστα ᾿Απόλλωνα τιμῶσιν. 

Ἔκ Κορίνθου. δὲ οὐκ ἐς μεσόγαιαν ἀλλὰ τὴν 
ἐπὶ Σικυῶνα ἰοῦσι ναὸς ἐμπεπρησμένος ἐστὶν οὐ 
πόρρω τῆς πόλεως, ἐν ἀριστερᾷ δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ. γε- 
γόνασι μὲν δὴ καὶ ἄλλοι πόλεμοι. περὶ τὴν Κορι- 
θίαν καὶ πῦρ ἐπέλαβεν ὡς τὸ εἰκὸς. καὶ οἰκίας καὶ 
ἱερὰ τὰ ἔξω τείχους" ἀλλὰ τοῦτόν γε τὸν ναὸν 
᾿Απόλλωνος εἶναι λέγουσι͵ καὶ ὅτι Πύρρος KaTa- 
καύσειεν ὁ ᾿Αχιλλέως αὐτόν. χρόνῳ δὲ ὕστερον 

272 

CORINTH, v. 2-5 

Aegina gave new names to the islands called Scheria 
and Oenone, while from Thebe is named the city 
below the Cadmea. The Thebans do not agree, but 
say that Thebe was the daughter of the Boeotian, 
and not of the Phliasian, Asopus. The other stories 
about the river are current among both the Phlia- 
sians and the Sicyonians, for instance that its water 
is foreign and not native, in that the Maeander, 
descending from Celaenae through Phrygia and 
Caria, and emptying itself into the sea at Miletus, 
goes to the Peloponnesus and forms the Asopus. I 
remember hearing a similar story from the Delians, 
that the stream which they call Inopus comes to 
them from the Nile. Further, there is a story that 
the Nile itself is the Euphrates, which disappears 
into a marsh, rises again beyond Aethiopia and 
becomes the Nile. Such is the account I heard 
of the Asopus. When you have turned from the 
Acrocorinthus into the mountain road you see the 
Teneatic gate and a sanctuary of Eilethyia. The town 
called Tenea is just about sixty stades distant. The 
inhabitants say that they are Trojans who were 
taken prisoners in Tenedos by the Greeks, and were 
permitted by Agamemnon to dwell in their present 
home. For this reason they honour Apollo more 
than any other god. 

“As you go from Corinth, not into the interior but 
along the road to Sicyon, there is on the left not far 
from the city a burnttemple. There have, of course, 
been many wars carried on in Corinthian territory, 
and naturally houses and sanctuaries outside the 
wall have been fired. But this temple, they say, was 
Apollo's, and Pyrrhus the son of Achilles burned it 
down. Subsequently I heard another account, that 

273 
VOL. I. T 

6 

7 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. 

ἤκουσα καὶ ἄλλο τοιόνδε, ὡς οἱ Κορίνθιοι 
ποιήσαιντο Ὀλυμπίῳ τὸν ναὸν καὶ ὡς ἐξαίφ 
πῦρ ποθὲν ἐμπεσὸν διαφθείρειεν αὐτόν. 
Σικυώνιοι δὲ---οὗτοι γὰρ ταύτῃ Κορινθίοις εἰ 
ὅμοροι---περὶ τῆς χώρας τῆς σφετέρας λέγου 
ὡς Αἰγιαλεὺς αὐτόχθων πρῶτος ἐν αὐτῷ γένο 
καὶ Πελοποννήσου δὲ ὅσον ἔτι καλεῖται καὶ 
Αἰγιαλὸς ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου βασιλεύοντος ὀνομασθῆ 
καὶ Αἰγιάλειαν αὐτὸν οἰκίσαι πρῶτον ἐν τῷ πε 
πόλιν: οὗ δέ ἐστι νῦν σφίσι τὸ ἱερὸν τῆς ᾿Άθη 
ἀκρόπολιν τοῦτο εἶναι. Αἰγιαλέως δὲ Εὔρωπα 
γενέσθαι φασίν, Εὔρωπος δὲ Τελχῖνα, ΈΓελ.χίνος 
δὲ "Anuv. οὗτος ὁ "Ares ἐς τοσόνδε ηὐξήθη δυ- 
νάµεως, πρὶν ù Πέλοπα è ες Ὀλυμπίαν ἀφικέσθαι, 
ὡς τὴν ἐντὸς ᾿]Ισθμοῦ χώραν ᾿Απίαν ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου 
καλεῖσθαι. "Απιδος δὲ ἦν Θελξίων, Θελξίονος 
δὲ Alyupos, τοῦ δὲ Θουρίμαχος, Θουριμάχον δὲ 
Λεύκιππος' Λευκίππῳ δὲ a ἄρρενες. παῖδες οὐκ ἐγέ- 
νοντο, θυγάτηρ δὲ Καλχινία. ταύτῃ τῇ Καλχινίᾳ | 
Ποσειδῶνα συγγενέσθαι φασὶ καὶ τὸν τεχθέντα 
ὑπ αὐτῆς ἔθρεψεν ὁ Λεύκιππος καὶ τελευτών 
παρέδωκέν οἱ τὴν ἀρχήν" ὄνομα δὲ ἦν Πέρατος 
8 τῷ παιδί. τὰ δὲ ἐς Πλημναῖον τὸν Περάτου μά- 
λιστα ἐφαίνετό μοι θαύματος ἄξια" τὰ γάρ οἱ 
τικτόµενα ὑπὸ τῆς γυναικὸς αὐτίκα ὁπότε πρῶτον 
κλαύσειεν ἠφίει τὴν ψυχήν, ἐς ὃ Δημήτηρ ἔλεον 
ἴσχει Ἡλημναίου, παραγενομένη δὲ ἐς τὴν Αἰγιά- 
λείαν ὡς δὴ γυνὴ ξένη Πλημναίῳ παῖδα ἀνέθρεψεν 
Ὀρθόπολιν. Ὀρθοπόλιδι δὲ θυγάτη γίνεται 
Χρυσόρθη- ταύτην τεκεῖν νομίζουσιν ἐξ ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος καὶ ὁ παῖς ὠνομάσθη Κόρωνος, Κορώνου | 
δὲ γίνονται Κόραξ καὶ νεώτερος Λαμέδων. | 

274 

CORINTH, v. 5-8 

the Corinthians built the temple for Olympian Zeus, 
and that suddenly fire from some quarter fell on it 
and destroyed it. 

The Sicyonians, the neighbours of the Corinthians 
at this part of the border, say about their own land 
that Aegialeus was its first and aboriginal inhabitant, 
that the district of the Peloponnesus still called 
Aegialus was named after him because he reigned 
over it, and that he founded the city Aegialéa on the 
plain. Their citadel, they say, was where is now their 
sanctuary of Athena; further, that Aegialeus begat 
Europs, Europs Telchis, and Telchis Apis. This 
Apis reached such a height of power before Pelops 
came to Olympia that all the territory south of 
the Isthmus was called after him Apia. Apis begat 
Thelxion, Thelxion Aegyrus, he Thurimachus, and 
Thurimachus Leucippus. Leucippus had no male 
issue, only a daughter Calchinia. There is a story 
that this Calchinia mated with Poseidon; her child 
was reared by Leucippus, who at his death handed 
over to him the kingdom. His name was Peratus. 
What is reported of Plemnaeiis, the son of Peratus, 
seemed to me very wonderful. All the children 
borne to him by his wife died the very first time 
they wailed. At last Demeter took pity on Plem- 
naeiis, came to Aegialea in the guise of a strange 
woman, and reared for Plemnaeiis his son Ortho- 
polis, Orthopolis had a daughter Chrysorthe, who 
is thought to have borne a son named Coronus to 
Apollo. Coronus had two sons, Corax and a younger 
one Lamedon. 

we 275 

ο PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

VI. Kopakos δὲ ἀποθανόντος ἄπαιδος ὑπὸ τού- 
τον τὸν καιρὸν ᾿Επωπεὺς ἀφικόμενος ἐκ Θεσσα- 
λίας ἔσχε τὴν ἀρχήν. ἐπὶ τούτου βασιλεύοντος 
στρατόν σφισι πολέμιον λέγουσιν ἐς τὴν χώραν 
τότε ἐλθεῖν πρῶτον, τὰ πρὸ τοῦ πάντα τὸν χρόνον 
διατελέσασιν ἐ ἐν εἰρήνη. αἰτία δὲ ἥδε". ᾿Αντιόπης 
ἐν Ἕλλησι τῆς Νυκτέως ὄνομα ἦν ἐπὶ κάλλει 
καί οἱ καὶ φήμη προσῆν ᾿Ασωποῦ θυγατέρα, 
ὃς τὴν Θηβαΐδα καὶ Ἡλαταιίδα ὀρίδει, καὶ οὐ 

2 Νυκτέως εἶναι. ταύτην οὐκ οἶδα εἴτε γυναῖκα 
αἰτήσας εἴτε θρασύτερα ἐξ ἀρχῆς βουλευσάμενος 
᾿Επωπεὺς ἁρπάξει" ὡς δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι σὺν ὅπλοις 
ἦλθον, ἐνταῦθα τιτρώσκεται μὲν Νυκτεύς, ἐτρώθη 
δὲ κρατῶν τῇ μάχῃ καὶ Ἐπωπεύς. Νυκτέα μὲν 
δὴ κάμνοντα ὀπίσω κομίζουσιν ἐς Θήβας, καὶ 
ὡς ἔμελλε τελευτᾶν, Λύκον ἀδελφὸν ὄντα παρα- 
δίδωσι Θηβαίων ἐν τῷ παρόντι ἄρχειν' Λάβ. 
δακον γὰρ τὸν Πολυδώρου τοῦ Κάδμου παῖδα 
ἔτι αὐτός τε ἐπετρόπευεν ὁ Νυκτεὺς καὶ τότε 
ἀπέλιπεν .ἐπιτροπεύειν ἐκείνῳ. τοῦτον οὖν τὸν 
Λύκον ἱκέτευσε στρατῷ μείζονι ἐπὶ τὴν Αἰγιά- 
λειαν ἐλάσαντα τιμωρήσασθαι μὲν ᾿Ἐπωπέα, 

9 κακοῦν δὲ el λάβοι καὶ αὐτὴν ᾿Αντιόπην. Erv- 
πεὺς δὲ TÒ μὲν παραυτίκα. ἐπινίκια ἔθυε καὶ 
᾿Αθηνᾶς ᾠκοδόμει ναόν, ἐπ᾿ ἐξειργασμένῳ δὲ 
εὔξατο, ἐνδείξασθαι τὴν θεὸν εἴ οἱ τετελεσμένος 
ἐστὶν ὁ ναὸς κατὰ γνώμην" μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν 
ἔλαιον λέγουσι ῥυῆναι πρὸ τοῦ ναοῦ. ὕστερον 
δὲ καὶ Ἐπωπέα κατέλαβεν ἀποθανεῖν ὑπὸ τοῦ 
τραύματος ἀμεληθέντος κατ ἀρχάς, ὡς . μηδὲν ἔτι 
Λύκῳ δεῆσαι πολέμου' Λαμέδων γὰρ ὁ Κορώνου 

eee ee I 

276 

CORINTH, νι. 1-3 

VI. Corax died without issue, and at about this 
time came Epopeus from Thessaly and took the 
kingdom. In his reign the first hostile army is said 
to have invaded the land, which before this had 
enjoyed unbroken peace. The reason was this. 
Antiope, the daughter of Nycteus, had a name among 
the Greeks for beauty, and there was also a report 
that her father was not Nycteus but Asopus, the 
river that separates the territories of Thebes and 
Plataea. This woman Epopeus carried off, but I do 
not know whether he asked for her hand or adopted 
a bolder policy from the beginning. The Thebans 
came against him in arms, and in the battle 
Nycteus was wounded. Epopeus also was wounded, 
but won the day. Nycteus they carried back ill to 
Thebes, and when he was about to die he appointed 
to be regent of Thebes his brother Lycus; for 
Labdacus, the son of Polydorus, the son of Cadmus, 
being still a child, was the ward of Nycteus, who on 
this occasion entrusted the office of guardian to Lycus. 
He also besought him to attack Aegialea with a 
larger army and bring vengeance upon Epopeus; 
` Antiope herself, if taken, was to be punished. As to 
Epopeus, he forthwith offered sacrifice for his victory 
and began a temple of Athena, and when this was 
complete he prayed the goddess to make known 
whether the temple was finished to her liking, and 
after the prayer they say that olive oil flowed before 
the temple. Afterwards Epopeus also died of his 
wound, which he had neglected at first, so that Lycus 
had now no need to wage war. For Lamedon, the 

277 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

βασιλεύσας μετὰ ᾿Επωπέα ἐξέδωκεν ᾿Αντιόπην. 
ἡ δὲ ὡς ἐς Θήβας ἤγετο τὴν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ελευθερῶν, 
9 a » CAN / . 5 ν / 

4 ἐνταῦθα καθ ὁδὸν τίκτει. καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ πε- 
ποίηκεν “Actos ὁ ᾿Αμϕιπτολέμου' 

᾿Αντιόπη Ò ἔτεκε Ζῆθον καὶ ᾿Αμϕφίονα δῖον 
᾿Ασωποῦ κούρη ποταμοῦ βαθυδινήεντος, 
Ζηνί τε κυσαμένη καὶ Επωπέι ποιμένι λαῶν. 

er . A 9 ’ 9 8 A / A 
Όμηρος δὲ σφᾶς ἀνήγαγεν ἐπὶ τὸ σεμνότερον τοῦ 
γένους καὶ Θήβας φησὶν οἰκίσαι πρώτους, ἀπο- 
κρίνων τὴν κάτω πόλιν ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ἀπὸ τῆς 
5 Καδμείας. Λαμέδων δὲ βασιλεύσας ἔγημεν ἐξ 
᾿Αθηνῶν γυναῖκα Φηνὼ Κλυτίου' καὶ ὕστερον 
γενομένου οἱ πολέμου πρὸς "Αρχανδρον καὶ 
᾿Αρχιτέλην τοὺς ᾿Αχαιοῦ συμμαχήσοντα ἐπη- 
γάγετο Σικυῶνα ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, καὶ θυγατέρα 
τε συνῴκισεν αὐτῷ Ζευξίππην καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου 
βασιλεύσαντος ἡ γῆ Σικυωνία καὶ Σικυὼν ἀντὶ 
Αἰγιάλης ἡ πόλις ὠνομάσθη. Σικυῶνα δὲ οὐ 
Μαραθῶνος τοῦ ᾿Επωπέως, Μητίονος δὲ εἶναι 
τοῦ ᾿Ερεχθέως φασίν. ὁμολογεῖ δέ σφισι καὶ 
ν 9 \ e / Lá . wv e ` 
Ασιος, ἐπεὶ Hoioðos γε καὶ Ἴβυκος, ὁ μὲν 
ἐποίησεν ὡς ᾿Ερεχθέως εἴη Σικυών, Ἴβυκος δὲ 
6 εἶναι Πέλοπός φησιν αὐτόν. Σικυῶνος δὲ γίνεται 
Χθονοφύλη, Χθονοφύλης δὲ καὶ Ἑρμοῦ Πόλυβον 
’ / [14 A 3 A / t 
γενέσθαι λέγουσιν' ὕστερον δὲ αὐτὴν Φλίας ο 
Διονύσου γαμεῖ, καί οἱ παῖς ᾿Ανδροδάµας γίνεται. 
Πόλυβος δὲ Ταλαῷ τῷ Βίαντος βασιλεύοντι 
9 / 4 . , y . 
Αργείων Λυσιάνασσαν τὴν θυγατέρα ἔδωκε: καὶ 

278 

CORINTH, νι. 3-6 

son of Coronus, who became king after Epopeus, gave 
up Antiope. As she was being taken to Thebes by 
way of Eleutherae, she was delivered there on the 
road. On this matter Asius the son of Amphiptolemus 
says in his poem :— | 

“Zethus and Amphion had Antiope for their 
mother, 
Daughter of Asopus, the swift, deep-eddying 
river, 
Having conceived of Zeus and Epopeus, shepherd 
of peoples.” 

Homer traces their descent to the more august side 
of their family, and says that they were the first 
founders of Thebes, in my opinion distinguishing 
the lower city from the Cadmea. When Lamedon 
became king he took to wife an Athenian woman, 
Pheno, the daughter of Clytius. Afterwards also, 
when war had arisen between him and Archander 
and Architeles, the sons of Achaeiis, he brought 
in as his ally Sicyon from Attica, and gave him 
Zeuxippe his daughter to wife. This man became 
king, and the land was named after him Sicyonia, 
and the city Sicyon instead of Aegiale. But they 
say that Sicyon was not the son of Marathon, the 
son of Epopeus, but of Metion the son of Erech- 
theus. Asius confirms their statement, while Hesiod 
makes Sicyon the son of Erechtheus, and Ibycus 
says that his father was Pelops. Sicyon had a 
daughter Chthonophyle, and they say that she and 
Hermes were the parents of Polybus. Afterwards 
she married Phlias, the son of Dionysus, and gave 
birth to Androdamas. Polybus gave his daughter 
Lysianassa to Talaus the son of Bias, king of the 

279 

fl. 640- 
617 B.c. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὅτε "Αδραστος ἔφευγεν ἐξ Άργους, παρὰ Iov- 
βον ἦλθεν ἐς Σικυῶνα καὶ ὕστερον ἀποθανόντος 
Πολύβου τὴν ἐν Σικυῶνι ἀρχὴν ἔσχεν. Ἀδράστου 
δὲ ἐς "Αργος κατελθόντος Ἰανίσκος ἀπόγονος 
Κλυτίου τοῦ Λαμέδοντι κηδεύσαντος ἐλθὼν ἐκ 
τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἐβασίλευσεν, ἀποθανόντος δὲ Ἰανί- 
σκου Φαῖστος τῶν Ἡρακλέους λεγόμενος παΐδων 
καὶ οὗτος εἶναι. Φαίστου δὲ κατὰ μαντείαν 
μετοικήσαντος ἐς Κρήτην βασιλεῦσαι λέγεται 
Ζεύξιππος ᾿Απόλλωνος υἱὸς καὶ νύμφης Συλλί- 
δος. μετὰ δὲ Ζεύξιππον τελευτήσαντα ᾿Αγα- 
μέμνων στρατὸν ἤγαγεν ἐπὶ Σικυῶνα καὶ τὸν 
βασιλέα Ἱππόλυτον Ῥοπάλου παῖδα τοῦ Φαί- 
στου’ δείσας δὲ τὸν στρατὸν ἐπιόντα Ἱππόλυτος 
συνεχώρησεν ᾿Αγαμέμνονος κατήκοος καὶ Mven- 
ναίων εἶναι. Ἱππολύτου δὲ ἦν τούτου Λακε- 
orans. Φάλκης δὲ ὁ Τημένου καταλαβὼν 
νύκτωρ Σικυῶνα σὺν Δωριεῦσι κακὸν μὲν ἅτε 
Ἡρακλείδην καὶ αὐτὸν ἐποίησεν οὐδέν, κοινωνὸν 
δὲ ἔσχε τῆς ἀρχῆς. 

VII. Καὶ Δωριεῖς μὲν Σικυώνιοι γεγόνασιν ἀπὸ 
τούτου καὶ μοῖρα τῆς ᾿Αργείας' τὴν δὲ τοῦ Αἰγια- 
λέως ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ πόλιν Δημήτριος καθελὼν ὁ 
᾿Αντιγόνου τῇ πάλαι ποτὲ ἀκροπόλει προσῴκισε 
τὴν νῦν πόλιν. ` ἐχόντων δὲ ἀσθενῶς ἤδη τῶν 
Σικυωνίων---αἰτίαν δὲ οὐκ ὀρθῶς ποιοῖ τις ἂν 
ζητῶν, ἀποχρῷτο δὲ τῷ Ὁμήρῳ λεγομένῳ περὶ 
Atos, 

A 
ὃς δὴ πολλάων πολίων κατέλυσε κάρηνα ---, 

διακειμένοις οὖν ἀδυνάτως ἐπιγενόμενος σεισμὸς 
1 Ὑλλίδος O. Müller. 
280 

CORINTH, νι. 6-νιι. τ 

Argives; and when Adrastus fled from Argos he 
came to Polybus at Sicyon, and afterwards on the 
death of Polybus he became king at Sicyon. When 
Adrastus returned to Argos, Ianiscus, a descendant 
of Clytius the father-in-law of Lamedon, came from 
Attica and was made king, and when Ianiscus died 
he was succeeded by Phaestus, said to have been 
one of the children of Heracles. After Phaestus in 

obedience to an oracle migrated to Crete, the next. 

king is.said to have been Zeuxippus, the son of 
Apollo and the nymph Syllis. On the death of 
Zeuxippus, Agamemnon led an army against Sicyon 
and king Hippolytus, the son of Rhopalus, the son 
of Phaestus. In terror of the army that was attack- 
ing him, Hippolytus agreed to become subject to 
Agamemnon and the Mycenaeans. This Hippolytus 
was the father of Lacestades. Phalces the son of 
Temenus, with the Dorians, surprised Sicyon by 
night, but did Lacestades no harm, because he too 
was one of the Heracleidae, and made him partner 
in the kingdom. 

ΥΠ. From that time the Sicyonians became 
Dorians and their land a part of the Argive terri- 
tory. The city built by Aegialeus on the plain was 
destroyed by Demetrius the son of Antigonus, who 
founded the modern city near what was once the 
ancient citadel. The reason why the Sicyonians 
grew weak it would be wrong to seek; we must be 
content with Homer's saying about Zeus :— 

“s Many, indeed, are the cities of which he has 
levelled the strongholds.” 

When they had Jost their power there came upon 

281 

fo eS 
$ 
z 

λ 

μι 

303 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

ὀλίγου τὴν πόλιν ἐποίησεν ἀνδρῶν ἔρημον, πολλὰ 
δὲ σφᾶς καὶ τῶν ἐς ἐπίδειξιν ἀφείλετο. ἐκάκωσε 
δὲ καὶ περὶ Καρίαν καὶ Λυκίαν τὰς πόλεις καὶ 
Ῥοδίοις ἐσείσθη μάλιστα ἡ νῆσος, ὥστε καὶ τὸ 
λόγιον τετελέσθαι Σιβύλλη τὸ ἐς τὴν “Ῥόδον 
ἔδοξεν. 

Ἐκ δὲ τῆς Κορινθίας ἐλθοῦσιν ἐς τὴν Σικυω- 

νίαν Λύκου Μεσσηνίου μνῆμά ἐστιν, ὅστις δη 

οὗτος ὁ Λύκος" οὐ γάρ τινα Λύκον εὑρίσκω 
Μεσσήνιον ἀσκήσαντα πένταθλον οὐδὲ Ὄλυμ- 

πικὴν ἀνῃρημένον νίκην. τοῦτο μὲν δὴ χῶμά 
ἐστι γῆς, αὐτοὶ δὲ Σικυώνιοι τὰ πολλὰ ἐοικότι 
τρόπῳ θάπτουσι. τὸ μὲν σῶμα γῇ κρύπτουσι, 
λίθου δὲ ἐποικοδομήσαντες κρηπῖδα κίονας ἐφι- 
στᾶσι καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐπίθημα ποιοῦσι κατὰ τοὺς 
ἀετοὺς μάλιστα τοὺς ἐν τοῖς ναοῖς" ἐπίγραμμα 
δὲ ἄλλο μὲν ἐπιγράφουσιν οὐδέν, τὸ δὲ ὅ ὄνομα ἐφ᾽ 
αὑτοῦ καὶ οὗ πατρόθεν ὑπειπόντες κελεύουσι τὸν 
νεκρὸν αίρειν. 

Μετὰ δὲ τὸ μνῆμα τοῦ Λύκου διαβεβηκόσιν 
ἤδη τὸν ᾿Ασωπόν, ἔστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ τὸ Ὀλύμπιον, 
ὀλίγον δὲ ἔμπροσθεν ἐν ἀριστερᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ τάφος 
Εὐπόλιδι ᾿Αθηναίῳ ποιήσαντι κωμφ iav. T po- 
ελθοῦσι δὲ καὶ ἐπιστρέψασιν ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν πόλεν 
Ξἰενοδίκης μνῆμά ἐστιν ἀποθανούσης ἐν ὠδῖσι" 
πεποίηται δὲ οὐ κατὰ τὸν ἐπι ώριον τρόπον, ἀλλ᾽ 
ὡς ἂν τῇ γραφῇ. μάλιστα ἁρμόξοι: γραφὴ δὲ 
εἴπερ ἄλλη τις καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶ θέας ἀξία. προ: 
ελθοῦσι δὲ ἐντεῦθεν τάφος Σικυωνίοις ἐστίν, 
ὅσοι περὶ Πελλήνην καὶ Δύμην τὴν ᾿Αχαιῶν καὶ 
ἐν Μεγάλῃ πόλει καὶ περὶ Σελλασίαν ἐτελεύτη- 
σαν' τὰ δὲ ἐς αὐτοὺς σαφέστερον ἐν τοῖς ἐφεξῆς 

282 

ἰ 

CORINTH, vu. 1-4 

them an earthquake, which almost depopulated their 
city and took from them many of their famous 
sights. It damaged also the cities of Caria and 
Lycia, and the island of Rhodes was very violently 
shaken, so that it was thought that the Sibyl had 
had her utterance about Rhodes?! fulfilled. 

When you have come from the Corinthian to the 
Sicyonian territory you see the tomb of Lycus the 
Messenian, whoever this Lycus may be; for I can 
discover no Messenian Lycus who practised the 
pentathlon ? or won a victory at Olympia. This tomb 
is a mound of earth, but the Sicyonians themselves 
usually bury their dead in a uniform manner. They 
cover the body in the ground, and over it they 
build a basement of stone upon which they set 
pillars. Above these they put something very like 
the pediment of a temple. They add no inscrip- 
tion, except that they give the dead man’s name 
without that of his father and bid him farewell. 

After the tomb of Lycus, but on the other side of 
the Asopus, there is on the right the Olympium, and 
a little farther on, to the left of the road, the grave 
of Eupolis,? the Athenian comic poet. Farther on, 
if you turn in the direction of the city, you see the 
tomb of Xenodice, who died in childbirth. It has 
not been made after the native fashion, but so as to 
harmonize best with the painting, which is very 
well worth seeing. Farther on from here is the 
grave of the Sicyonians who were killed at Pellene, 
at Dyme of the Achaeans, in Megalopolis and at Sel- 
lasia. Their story I will relate more fully presently. 

1 That it should perish and be left destitute. 
2 See p. 157. 
3 Flourished at the time of the Peloponnesian war. 

283 

222 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δηλώσω. πρὸς δὲ τῇ πύλῃ πηγή ἐστί σφισι 
ἐν σπηλαίῳ, ἧς τὸ ὕδωρ οὐκ ἄνεισιν ἐκ γῆς, 
ἐπιρρεῖ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ὀρόφου τοῦ σπηλαίου" καὶ 
καλεῖται δι αὐτὸ Στάξουσα ἡ ἡ πηγή. 

Ἐν δὲ τῇ νῦν ἀκροπόλει Τύχης ἱερόν ἐστιν 
᾿Ακραίας, μετὰ δὲ αὐτὸ Διοσκούρων" ξόανα δὲ 
οὗτοί τε καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα τῆς Τύχης ἐστί. τοῦ 
θεάτρου δὲ ὑπὸ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ᾠκοδομημένου τὸν 
ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ πεποιημένον ἄνδρα ἀσπίδα ἔ ἔχοντα 
Αρατόν φασιν εἶναι τὸν Κλεινίου. μετὰ ὲ τὸ 
θέατρον Διονύσου ναός ἐστι" χρυσοῦ μὲν καὶ 
ἐλέφαντος ὁ θεός, παρὰ δὲ αὐτὸν Βάκχαι λίθου 
λευκοῦ. ταύτας τὰς γυναῖκας ἱερὰς εἶναι καὶ 
Διονύσῳ μαίνεσθαι λέγουσιν. ἄλλα δὲ ἀγάλματα 
ἐν ἀπορρήτῳ Σικυωνίοις ἐστί" ταῦτα μιᾷ καθ᾿ 
ἕκαστον ἔτος νυκτὶ ἐ ἐς τὸ Διονύσιον ἐκ τοῦ καλου- 
μένου κοσμητηρίου κομίξουσι, κομίζουσι δὲ μετὰ 
δάδων τε ἡμμένων καὶ ὕμνων ἐπιχωρίων. ἡγεῖται 
μὲν οὖν ὃν Βάκχειον ὀνομάξουσιν — ᾿Ανδροδάμας 
σφίσιν ὁ Φλίαντος τοῦτον ἱδρύσατο —, ἕπεται 
δὲ ὁ καλούμενος Λύσιος, ὃν Θηβαῖος Φάνης 
εἰπούσης τῆς Πυθίας ἐκόμισεν ἐκ Θηβῶν. ἐς 
δὲ Σικυῶνα ἦλθεν ὁ Φάνης, 6 ὅτε ᾿Αριστόμαχος ὁ 
Κλεοδαίου τῆς γενομένης μαντείας ἁμαρτὼν δι 
αὐτὸ καὶ καθόδου τῆς ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἤ ἥμαρτεν. 
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ Διονυσίου βαδίζουσιν ἐς τὴν ἀγορών, 
ἔστι ναὸς ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἐ ἐν δεξιᾷ Λιμναίας. καὶ ὅτι 
μὲν κατερρύηκεν ὁ ὄροφος, δῆλά ἐστιν ἐδόντι' 
περ ὃ τοῦ ἀγάλματος οὔτε ὡς κομισθέντος 
ἑτέρωσε οὔτε ὅντινα αὐτοῦ διεφθάρη τρόπον 
εἰπεῖν ἔχουσιν. 

284 

CORINTH, νι. 4-6 

By the gate they have a spring in a cave, the 
water of which does not rise out of the earth, but 
flows down from the roof of the cave. For this reason 
it is called the Dripping Spring. 

On the modern citadel is a sanctuary of Fortune 
of the Height, and after it one of the Dioscuri. Their 
images and that of Fortune are of wood. On the 
stage of the theatre built under the citadel is a 
statue of a man with a shield, who they say is Ara- 
tus, the son of Cleinias. After the theatre is a 
temple of Dionysus. The god is of gold and ivory, 
and by his side are Bacchanals of white marble. 
These women they say are sacred to Dionysus 
and maddened by his inspiration. The Sicyonians 
have also some images which are kept secret. 
These one night in each year they carry to the 
temple of Dionysus from what they call the Cos- 
meterium (Tiring-room), and they do so with lighted 
torches and native hymns.’ The first is the one 
named Baccheiis, set up by Androdamas, the son of 
Phlias, and this is followed by the one called 
Lysius (Deliverer), brought from Thebes by the 
Theban Phanes at the command of the Pythian 
priestess. Phanes came to Sicyon when Aristoma- 
chus, the son of Cleodaeiis, failed to understand the 
oracle! given him, and therefore failed to return to 
the Peloponnesus. As you walk from the temple of 
Dionysus to the market-place you see on the right a 
temple of Artemis of the Lake. A look shows that 
the roof has fallen in, but the inhabitants cannot tell 
whether the image has been removed or how it was 
destroyed on the spot. 

1 To wait for ‘‘the third fruit,” i.e. the third generation. 
lt was interpreted to mean the third year. 

285 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

7 Ἐς δὲ τὴν ἀγορὰν ἐσελθοῦσι Πειθοῦς ἐστιν 
ἱερὸν οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἄγαλμα ἔχον. Πειθὼ δὲ ἐπὶ 
λόγῳ τοιῷδε αὐτοῖς κατέστη σέβεσθαι. ᾽Απόλ- 
λων καὶ "Αρτεμις ἀποκτείναντες Πύθωνα mape- 
γένοντο ἐς τὴν Αἰγιάλειαν καθαρσίων ἕνεκα. 
γενομένου δέ σφισι δείματος, ἔνθα καὶ νῦν «Φόβον 
ὀνομάξουσι τὸ χωρίον, οἱ μὲν ἐς Κρήτην παρὰ 
Καρμάνορα ἀπετράποντο, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους 
ἐν τῇ Αἰγιαλείᾳ νόσος ἐπέλαβε' καὶ σφᾶς ἐκέ- 
λευον οἱ μάντεις ᾿Απόλλωνα ἱλάσασθαι καὶ 

8 "Αρτεμιν. οἱ δὲ παῖδας ἑπτὰ καὶ ἴσας παρθένους 
ἐπὶ τὸν Σύθαν ποταμὸν ἀποστέλλουσιν ἱκετεύ- 
οντας' ὑπὸ τούτων δὲ πεισθέντας τοὺς θεούς 
φασιν ἐς τὴν τότε ἀκρόπολιν ἐλθεῖν, καὶ ὁ τόπος 
ἔνθα πρῶτον ἀφίκοντο Πειθοῦς ἐστιν ἱερόν. 
τούτοις δὲ ἐοικότα καὶ νῦν ἔτι ποιεῖται: καὶ γὰρ 
ἐπὶ τὸν Σύθαν ἴασιν οἱ παῖδες τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ 
᾿Απόλλωνος, καὶ ἀγαγόντες δὴ τοὺς θεοὺς ἐς τὸ 
τῆς Πειθοῦς ἱερὸν αὖθις ἀπάγειν ἐς τὸν ναόν 
φασι τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος. ὁ δὲ ναὸς ἔστι μὲν ἐν 
τῇ νῦν ἀγορᾷ, τὸ δὲ ἐξ ἀρχῆς λέγουσιν αὐτὸν ὑπὸ 
Προίτου ποιηθῆναι: τὰς γάρ οἱ θυγατέρας èv- 
9 ταῦθα τῆς μανίας παύσασθαι. λέγουσι δὲ καὶ 

τάδε, ὡς Μελέαγρος ἐς τοῦτον τὸν ναὸν ἀνέθηκε 
τὴν λόγχην ἡ τὸν Ùv κατειργάσατο. καὶ αὐλοὺς 
ἀνατεθῆναί φασιν ἐνταῦθα τοὺς Μαρσύου: γενο- 
μένης γὰρ τῷ Σιληνῷ τῆς συμφορᾶς τὸν ποταμὸν 
τὸν Μαρσύαν κατενεγκεῖν αὐτοὺς ἐς τὸν Μαίαν- 
ὅρον, ἀναφανέντας δὲ ἐν τῷ ᾿Ασωπῷ καὶ κατὰ 
τὴν Σικυωνίαν ἐκπεσόντας ὑπὸ ποιμένος τοῦ 
εὑρόντος δοθῆναι τῷ ᾿Απόλλωνι. τούτων τῶν 
ἀναθημάτων οὐδὲν ἔτι ἐλείπετο, συγκατεκαύθη 

286 

CORINTH, vu. 7-9 

Within the market-place is a sanctuary of Persua- 
sion ; this too has no image. ‘The worship of Persua- 
sion was established among them for the following 
reason. When Apollo and Artemis had killed Pytho 
they came to Aegialea to obtain purification. Dread 
coming upon them at the place now named Fear, 
they turned aside to Carmanor in Crete, and the 
people of Aegialea were smitten by a plague. When 
the seers bade them propitiate Apollo and Artemis, 
they sent seven boys and seven maidens as suppliants 
to the river Sythas. They say that the deities, per- 
suaded by these, came to what was then the citadel, 
and the place that they reached first is the sanctuary 
of Persuasion. Conformable with this story is the cere- 
mony they perform at the present day; the children 
go to the Sythas at the feast of Apollo, and having 
brought, as they pretend, the deities to the sanc- 
tuary of Persuasion, they say that they take them 
back again to the temple of Apollo. The temple 
stands in the modern market-place, and was origin- 
ally, it is said, made by Proetus, because in this 
place his daughters recovered from their madness. 
It is also said that in this temple Meleager dedicated 
the spear with which he slew the boar. There is 
also a story that the flutes of Marsyas are dedicated 
here. When the Silenus met with his disaster, the 
river Marsyas carried the flutes to the Maeander ; 
reappearing in the Asopus they were cast ashore in 
the Sicyonian territory and given to Apollo by the 
shepherd who found them. I found none of these 
offerings still in existence, for they were destroyed 

287 

( af a 

“hh 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

A A A . 
γὰρ ἐμπιπραμένῳ τῷ ναῷ’ τὸν δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ ναὸν 
καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα Πυθοκλῆς ἀνέθηκεν. 

VIII. T δὲ τῆς Πειθοῦς ἱερῷ τὸ ἐγγὺς τέμενος 
A e 
ἀνειμένον βασιλεῦσι Ῥωμαίων οἰκία ποτὲ ἦν 
e ? 
Κλέωνος τυράννου Κλεισθένης μὲν γὰρ ὁ ᾿Αρι- 
στωνύμου τοῦ Μύρωνος ἐχόντων ἔτι τὴν κάτω 
πόλιν Σικυωνίων ἐτυράννησε, Κλέων δὲ ἐν τῇ 
νῦν πόλει. πρὸ ταύτης τῆς οἰκίας ἡρῷόν ἐστιν 
Α / / E / ? / - 3.7 
ράτου μέγιστα Ελλήνων ἐργασαμένου τῶν ἐφ 
ε ο. 4 \ eF \ 2 » 7? / 
αὑτοῦ. ἔχει δὲ ὧδε τὰ ἐς αὐτόν. μετὰ Κλέωνα 
μοναρχήσαντα ἐνέπεσε τῶν ἐν τέλει πολλοῖς 
ἐπιθυμία τυραννίδος οὕτω δή τι ἀκάθεκτος ὡς 
καὶ ἄνδρας δύο Εὐθύδημον καὶ Γιμοκλείδαν ὁμοῦ 
τυραννῆσαι. τούτους μὲν οὖν ἐξέβαλεν ὁ δῆμος, 
΄ . 
Κλεινίαν τὸν πατέρα Αράτου προστησάµενος' 
ἔτεσι δὲ ὕστερον οὐ πολλοῖς ἐτυράννησεν ᾿Αβαν- 
τίδας. Κλεινίᾳ μὲν οὖν συνεβεβήκει πρότερον 
x e row Sa ‘5 Pä 
ἔτι ἡ τελευτή' “Aparov δὲ ᾿Αβαντίδας φυγά 
’ 
ἐποίησεν, ἢ καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπεχώρησεν "Αρατος 
» 
ἐθελοντής. ᾿Αβαντίδαν μὲν οὖν κτείνουσιν ἄνδρες 
A 3 e 
τῶν ἐπιχωρίων, τύραννος δὲ αὐτίκα ἐγεγόνει ὁ 
5 A ο 
Αβαντίδου πατὴρ ΠἩασέας. Νικοκλῆς δὲ ἐκεῖνον 
A ‘ 
ἀνελὼν ἐτυράννησεν αὐτός. ἐπὶ τοῦτον τὸν 
Νικοκλέα "Αρατος ἀφικόμενος Σικυωνίων φυγάσι 
καὶ ᾿Αργείοις μισθωτοῖς τοὺς μὲν ἔλαθεν ἅτε ἐν 
σκότῳ--νύκτωρ γὰρ δὴ τὴν ἐπιχείρησιν ἐποι- 
εἶτο---, τοὺς δὲ καὶ βιασάμενος τῶν φυλασσόντων 
ἐγένετο ἐντὸς τείχους" καὶ---ὑπέφαινε γὰρ ἕως ἤδη 
---προσλαβὼν τὸν δῆμον ἐπὶ τὴν οἰκίαν σπουδῇ 
τὴν τυραννικὴν τρέπεται. καὶ ταύτην μὲν εἷλεν οὗ 
A e \ A » AN > ΄ 
αλεπῶς, ὁ δὲ Νικοκλῆς αὐτὸς ἔλαθεν ἀποδράς. 
7 «. 3 ΄ ν > y A 
ικυωνίοις δὲ ἀπέδωκεν "Άρατος ἐξ ἴσου πολιτεύ- 

288 

; 

CORINTH, vir. g-vut. 3 

by fire when the temple was burnt. The temple 
that I saw, and its image, were dedicated by 
Pythocles. 

VIII. The precinct near the sanctuary of Persua- 
sion that is devoted to Roman emperors was once 
the house of the tyrant Cleon. He became tyrant 
in the modern city ; there was another tyranny while 
the Sicyonians still lived in the lower city, that e. 59 
of Cleisthenes, the son of Aristonymus, the son of `` 
Myron. Before this house is a hero-shrine of Aratus, 271-218 
whose achievements eclipsed those of all contempo- ”“ 
rary Greeks. His history is as follows. After the 
despotism of Cleon, many of those in authority were 
seized with such an ungovernable passion for tyranny 
that two actually became tyrants together, Euthyde- 
mus and Timocleidas. These were expelled by the 
people, who made Cleinias, the father of Aratus, their 
champion. A few years afterwards Abantidas became 
tyrant. Before this time Cleinias had met his death, 
and Aratus went into exile, either of his own accord 
or because he was compelled to do so by Abantidas. 
Now Abantidas was killed by some natives, and his 
father Paseas immediately became tyrant. He was 
killed by Nicocles, who succeeded him. This Nicocles 251 s.c. 
was attacked by Aratus with a force of Sicyonian 
exiles and Argive mercenaries. Making his attempt 

by night, he eluded some of the defenders in the 
darkness; the others he overcame, and forced his 
way within the wall. Day was now breaking, and 
taking the populace with him he hastened to the 
tyrant’s house. This he easily captured, but Nicocles 
himself succeeded in making his escape. Aratus 
restored equality of political rights to the Sicyonians, 

| 259 
VOL. 1, υ 

a ώ. 

y 
PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

εσθαι διαλλάξας τοῖς φεύγουσιν, οἰκίας μὲν 
φυγάσι καὶ ὅσα τῶν κτημάτων ἄλλα ἐπέπρατο 
ἀποδούς, τιμὴν δὲ τοῖς πριαμένοις διέλυσεν 
4 αὐτός. καὶ- ἦν γὰρ δέος τοῖς πᾶσιν "Ελλησι 
Μακεδόνων καὶ ᾿Αντιγόνου Φίλιππον ἐπιτρο- 
πεύοντος τὸν Δημητρίου---, τοῦδε ἕνεκα τοὺς Σι- 
κυωνίους ἐς τὸ ᾿Αχαιῶν συνέδριον ἐσήγαγε 
Δωριεῖς ὄντας. αὐτίκα δὲ στρατηγὸς ὑπὸ τῶν 
᾿Αχαιῶν ἥρητο, καὶ σφᾶς ἐπὶ Λοκροὺς τοὺς ᾿Αμ- 
φισσέας ἀγαγὼν καὶ ἐς τὴν Αἰτωλῶν πολεμίων 
ὄντων τὴν γῆν ἐπόρθησε' Κόρινθον δὲ ἔχοντος 
᾽Αντιγόνου καὶ φρουρᾶς Μακεδόνων ἐνούσης τοὺς 
Μακεδόνας τῷ αἰφνιδίῳ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως κατέπληξε 
καὶ ἄλλους τε κρατήσας μάχῃ διέφθειρε καὶ 
Περσαῖον ἐπὶ τῇ φρουρᾷ τεταγμένον, ὃς παρὰ 
Ζήνωνα τὸν Μνασέου κατὰ μάθησιν σοφίας 
5 ἐφοίτησεν. ἐλευθερώσαντος δὲ ᾿Αράτου Κόρινθον 
προσεχώρησαν μὲν ἐς τὸ συνέδριον ᾿Επιδαύριοι 
καὶ Τροιζήνιοι οἱ τὴν ᾿Αργολίδα ᾿Ακτὴν οἰκοῦντες 
καὶ τῶν ἐκτὸς ἰσθμοῦ Μεγαρεῖς, συμμαχίαν δὲ 
πρὸς ᾿Αχαιοὺς Πτολεμαῖος ἐποιήσατο. Λακε- 
δαιμόνιοι δὲ καὶ "Ayis ὁ Εὐδαμίδου βασιλεὺς 
ἔφθησαν μὲν Πελλήνην ἑλόντες ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς, 
ἥκοντι δὲ ᾿Αράτῳ καὶ τῇ στρατιᾷ συμβαλόντες 
ἐκρατήθησαν καὶ τὴν [Πελλήνην ἐκλιπόντες ava- 
6 χωροῦσιν οἴκαδε ὑπόσπονδοι. Άρατος δέ, ὥς οἱ 
τὰ ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ προεκεχωρήκει, δεινὸν ἡγεῖτο 
Πειραιᾶ καὶ Μουνυχίαν, ἔτι δὲ Σαλαμῖνα καὶ 
Σούνιον ἐχόμενα ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων περιοφθῆναι, 
καὶ-- οὐ γὰρ ἤλπιζε δύνασθαι πρὸς βίαν αὐτὰ 
ἐξελεῖν---Διογένην πείθει τὸν ἐν τοῖς φρουροῖς 
ἄρχοντα ἀφεῖναι τὰ χωρία ἐπὶ ταλάντοις πεντή- 

290 

Pain, N 

CORINTH, vit. 3-6 

striking a bargain for those in exile; he restored to 
them their houses and all their other possessions 
which had been sold, compensating the buyers out: 
of his own purse. Moreover, as all the Greeks were 
afraid of the Macedonians and of Antigonus, the 
guardian of Philip, the son of Demetrius, he induced 
the Sicyonians, who were Dorians, to join the Achaean 
League. He was immediately elected general by the 
Achaeans, and leading them against the Locrians 
of Amphissa and into the land of the Aetolians, 
their enemies, he ravaged their territory. Corinth 
was held by Antigonus, and there was a Macedonian 
garrison in the city, but he threw them into a panic 
by the suddenness of his assault, winning a battle 
and killing among others Persaeiis, the commander 
of the garrison, who had studied philosophy under 
Zeno,' the son of Mnaseas. When Aratus had 
liberated Corinth, the League was joined by the 
Epidaurians and Troezenians inhabiting Argolian 
Acte, and by the Megarians among those beyond 
the Isthmus, while Ptolemy made an alliance with 
the Achaeans. The Lacedaemonians and king Agis, 
the son of Eudamidas, surprised and took Pellene by 
a sudden onslaught, but when Aratus and his army 
arrived they were defeated in an engagement, evacu- 
ated Pellene, and returned home under a truce. 
After his success in the Peloponnestis, Aratus 
thought it a shame to allow the Macedonians to 
hold unchallenged Peiraeus, Munychia, Salamis, and 
Sunium ; but not expecting to be able to take them 
by force he bribed Diogenes, the commander of the 
garrisons, to give up the positions for a hundred and 

1 The Stoic philosopher (ο. 360-970 B.c.). 

201 
υ 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

κοντα καὶ ἑκατόν, καὶ τῶν χρημάτων συνετέλεσεν 
αὐτὸς ᾿Αθηναίοις ἕκτον μέρος. ἔπεισε δὲ καὶ 
᾿Αριστόμαχον τυραννοῦντα ἐν ΄Άργει δημοκρατίαν 
ἀποδόντα ᾿Αργείοις ἐς τὸ ᾿Αχαϊκὸν συντελεῖν, 
Μαντίνειάν τε Λακεδαιμονίων ἐχόντων εἷλεν. 
ἀλλὰ γὰρ οὐ πάντα ἀνθρώπῳ τελεῖται κατὰ 
γνώμην, εἰ δὴ καὶ "Άρατον κατέλαβεν. ἀνάγκη 
γενέσθαι Μακεδόνων καὶ ᾿Αντιγόνου σύμμαχον: 
ἐγένετο δὲ οὕτως. 

ΙΧ. Κλεομένης ὁ Λεωνίδου τοῦ Κλεωνύμου 
παραλαβὼν τὴν βασιλείαν ἐν Σπάρτῃ Παυσανίαν 
ἐμιμεῖτο τυραννίδος τε ἐπιθυμῶν καὶ νόμους τοῖς 
καθεστηκόσιν οὐκ ἀρεσκόμενος. ἅτε δὲ ὄντε αὐτῷ 
Παυσανίου θερμοτέρῳ καὶ οὐ φιλοψύχῳ ταχὺ τὰ 
πάντα ὑπὸ φρονήματος καὶ τόλμης κατείργαστο, 
καὶ βασιλέα τε οἰκίας τῆς ἑτέρας Εύρυδα μίδαν 
παῖδα ἔτι ἀνελὼν φαρμάκῳ διὰ τῶν ἐφορευόντων 
ἐς ᾿Επικλείδαν τὸν ἀδελφὸν μετέστησε τὴν 
ἀρχὴν καὶ τὸ κράτος τῆς γερουσίας καταλύσας 
πατρονόμους τῷ λόγῳ κατέστησεν ἀντ᾽ αὐτῶν. 
ἐπιθυμῶν δὲ πραγμάτων µειζόνων καὶ ἀρχῆς 
τῶν Ἑλλήνων, ἐπέθετο. ᾿Αχαιοῖς πρώτοις, συμ- 
μάχους ἐλπίζων ἕξειν ἦν κρατήσῃ καὶ μάλιστα 
ἐμποδὼν οὐκ ἐθέλων εἶναί οἱ τοῖς δρωμένοις. 

9 συμβαλὼν δὲ περὶ Δύμην τὴν ὑπὲρ Πατρῶν. 
᾿Αράτου καὶ τότε ἡγουμένου τῶν ᾿Αχαιῶν, νικᾷ 
τῇ μάχῃ. τοῦτο "Αρατον ἠνάγκασεν ὑπέρ τε 
᾿Αχαιῶν καὶ αὐτῆς Σικυῶνος δείσαντα ᾿Αντίγονον 
ἐπάγεσθαι. Κλεομένους δὲ παραβάντος ἣν πρὸς 
᾿Αντίγονον συνέθετο εἰρήνην καὶ παράσπονδα ἐκ 
τοῦ φανεροῦ καὶ ἄλλα δράσαντος καὶ Μεγαλο- 

202 

CORINTH, νι. 6-1x. 2 

fifty talents, himself helping the Athenians by con- 

tributing a sixth part of the sum. He induced 
Aristomachus also, the tyrant of Argos, to restore to 
the Argives their democracy and to join the Achaean 
League; he captured Mantinea from the Lacedae- 
monians who held it. But no man finds all his plans 
turn out according to his liking, and even Aratus 
was compelled to become an ally of the Macedonians 
and Antigonus in the following way. 

IX. Cleomenes, the son of Leonidas, the son of 
Cleonymus, having succeeded to the kingship at 
Sparta, resembled Pausanias? in being dissatisfied 
with the established constitution and in aiming at a 
tyranny. A more fiery man than Pausanias, and no 
coward, he quickly succeeded by spirit and daring 
in accomplishing all his ambition. He poisoned Eury- 
damidas, the king of the other ? royal house, while yet 
a boy, raised to the throne by means of the ephors 
his brother Epicleidas, destroyed the power of the 
senate, and appointed in its stead a nominal Coun- 
cil of Fathers. Ambitious for greater things and for 
supremacy over the Greeks, he first attacked the 
Achaeans, hoping if successful to have them as allies, 
and especially wishing that they should not hinder his 
activities. Engaging them at Dyme beyond Patrae, 
Aratus being still leader of the Achaeans, he won 
the victory. In fear for the Achaeans and for Sicyon 
itself, Aratus was forced by this defeat to bring in 
Antigonus as an ally. Cleomenes had violated the 
peace which he had made with Antigonus and had 
openly acted in many ways contrary to treaty, 

1 The victor of Plataea (479 B.c.). Afterwards put to 
death for treachery. 

2 There were two kings at Sparta, one from each of the 
two royal houses. 

293 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πολίτας ποιήσαντος ἀναστάτους, οὕτω διαβάντος 
ἐς Πελοπόννησον ᾿Αντιγόνου συμβάλλουσιν 
"A ὶ Κλεομένει περὶ Σελλασίαν. νικ σάντων 
χαιοὶ μέ ρ η 
δὲ τῶν ᾿Αχαιῶν Σελλασία τε ἠνδραποδίσ θη καὶ 
αὐτὴ λακολαίμων κ ἑάλω. Λακεδαιμονίοις μὲν οὖν 
ἀπέδωκεν ᾿Αντίγονος καὶ ᾿Αχαιοὶ πολιτείαν τὴν 
3 πάτριον: τῶν δὲ Λεωνίδου παίδων ᾿Επικλείδας 
μὲν ἀπέθανεν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ, Κλεομένην δὲ φεύγοντα 
ἐς Αἴγυπτον καὶ τιμῆς παρὰ Πτολεμαίῳ πρῶτα 
ἔχοντα συνέβη δεθῆναι, καταγνωσθέντα Αίγυ- 
πτίων ἄνδρας ἐπὶ τὸν βασιλέα συνιστάναι. καὶ 
ἀπέδρα μὲν ἐκ τοῦ δεσμωτηρίου καὶ τοῖς ᾿Αλεξαν- 
δρεῦσιν ἀρχὴν θορύβου παρέσχε τέλος δέ, ὡς 
ἡλίσκετο, ἀπέσφαξεν αὑτόν. Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ 
ἄσμενοι Κλεομένους ἀπαλλαγέντες βασιλεύεσθαι 
μὲν οὐκέτι ἠξίωσαν, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ καὶ ἐς τόδε 
διαμένει σφίσιν ἐκείνης τῆς πολιτείας. ᾿Αράτῳ 
δὲ ᾿Αντίγονος ἅ ἅτε ἀνδρὶ εὐεργέτῃ καὶ συγκατειρ- 
4 γασμένῳ λαμπρὰ οὕτω διέμεινεν εὔνους. Φίλιπ- 
πος δὲ ὡς παρέλαβε τὴν ἀρχήν- οὐ γὰρ αὐτὸν 
"Άρατος θυμῷ πολλὰ ἐς τοὺς ἀρχομένους χρώ- 
μενον ἐπῇνει, τὰ δὲ καὶ ὡρμημένον ἐπεῖχε μὴ 
ποιεῖν---, τούτων ἕνεκεν ἀπέκτεινεν "Αρατον, οὐδὲν 
προϊδομένω δούς οἱ φάρμακον. καὶ τὸν μὲν ἐξ 
Αἰγίου---ταύτῃ γὰρ τὸ χρεὼν ἐπέλαβεν αὐτὸν--- 
ἐς Σικυῶνα κομίσαντες θάπτουσι, καὶ τὸ ἦρῷον 
᾿Αράτειον ἔτι ὀνομάζεται: Φιλίππῳ δὲ καὶ ἐς 
Ἑὐρυκλείδην καὶ Μίκωνα ᾿Αθηναίους 6 ὅμοια eip- 
γάσθη: καὶ γὰρ τούσδε ὄντας ῥήτορας καὶ οὐκ 
5 ἀπιθάνους τῷ δήμῳ φαρμάκοις ἔ ἔκτεινεν. ἔμελλε 
δὲ ἄρα καὶ αὐτῷ Φιλίππῳ τὸ ἀνδροφόνον φάρ- 
µακον ἔσεσθαι συμφορά τὸν γάρ οἱ παῖδα 

204 

~ 

CORINTH, 1x. 2-5 

especially in laying waste Megalopolis. So Antigo- 
nus crossed into the Peloponnesus and the Achaeans 
met Cleomenes at Sellasia. The Achaeans were vic- 
torious, the people of Sellasia were sold into slavery, 
and Lacedaemon itself was captured. Antigonus and 
the Achaeans restored to the Lacedaemonians the 
constitution of their fathers; but of the children of 
Leonidas, Epicleidas was killed in the battle, and 
Cleomenes fled to Egypt. Held in the highest 
honour by Ptolemy, he came to be cast into prison, 
being convicted of inciting Egyptians to rebel 
against their king. He made his escape from prison 
and began a riot among the Alexandrians, but at last, 
on being captured, he fell by his own hand. The 
Lacedaemonians, glad to be rid of Cleomenes, refused 
to be ruled by kings any longer, but the rest of their 
ancient constitution they have kept to the present 
day. Antigonus remained a constant friend of 
Aratus, looking upon him as a benefactor who had 
helped him to accomplish brilliant deeds. But when. 
Philip succeeded to the throne, since Aratus did not 
approve of his violent treatment of his subjects, and 
in some cases even opposed the accomplishment of 
his purposes, he killed Aratus by giving him secretly 
a dose of poison. This fate came upon Aratus at 
Aegium, from which place he was carried to Sicyon 
and buried, and there is still in that city the hero- 
shrine of Aratus. Philip treated two Athenians, 
Eurycleides and Micon, in a similar way. These men 
also, who were orators enjoying the confidence of the 
people, he killed by poison. After all, Philip him- 
self in his turn was fated to suffer disaster through 

the fatal cup. Philip’s son, Demetrius, was poisoned 

295 

222 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

X. Ἐν δὲ τῷ γυμνασίῳ τῆς ἀγορᾶς ὄντι οὐ 
μακρὰν Ἡρακλῆς ἀνάκειται λίθου, Σκόπα ποί- 
ημα. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἑτέρωθι ἱ ἱερὸν "Ἡρακλέους" τὸν 
μὲν πάντα ἐνταῦθα περίβολον Παιδιξὴν -ὀνομά- 
ζουσιν, ἐν μέσῳ δέ ἐστι τῷ περιβόλῳ τὸ ἑερόν, 
ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ -ξόανον ἀρχαῖον, τέχνη Φλιασίου 
Λαφάους. ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ θυσίᾳ τοιάδε δρᾶν νομίζουσι. 
Φαῖστον ἐν Σικυωνίᾳ λέγουσιν ἐλθόντα καταλα- 
βεῖν Ἡρακλεῖ σφᾶς ὡς ἥρωι ἐναγίξοντας οὔκουν 

ἠξίου δρᾶν οὐδὲν ὁ ὁ Φαῖστος τῶν αὐτῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς 
θεῷ θύειν. καὶ νῦν ἔτι ἄρνα οἱ Σικυώνιοι σφά- 
ξαντες καὶ τοὺς μηροὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ καύσαντες 
τὰ μὲν ἐσθίουσιν ὡς ἀπὸ ἱερείου, τὰ δὲ ὡς ἥρωι 
τῶν κρεῶν ἐναγίξουσι. τῆς ἑορτῆς δέ, ἣν ἄγουσι 
τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ, τὴν προτέραν τῶν ἡμερῶν Τὀνόματα 1 
ὀνομάξοντες Ἡράκλεια δὴ καλοῦσι τὴν ὑστέραν. 

Ἐντεῦθέν ἐστιν ὁδὸς ἐς ἱερὸν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ. 
παρελθοῦσι δὲ ἐς τὸν περίβολον ἐν ἀριστερᾷ 
δυπλοῦν ἐστιν οἴκημα" κεῖται δὲ "Ύπνος ἐν τῷ 
προτέρῳ καί οἱ πλὴν τῆς κεφαλῆς ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἔτι 
λείπεται. τὸ ἐνδοτέρω δὲ ᾿Απόλλωνι ἀνεῖται 
Καρνείῳ, καὶ ἐς αὐτὸ οὐκ ἔστι πλὴν τοῖς ἑερεῦσιν 
ἔσοδος. κεῖται δὲ ἐν τῇ στοᾷ κήτους ὀστοῦν 
θαλασσίου μεγέθει μέγα καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ ἄγαλμα 
Ὀνείρου καὶ "Ύπνος κατακοιµίζων λέοντα, Er- 
δώτης δὲ ἐπίκλησιν. és δὲ τὸ ᾿Ασκληπιεῖον 
ἐσιοῦσι καθ᾽ ἑκάτερον τῆς ἐσόδου τῇ μὲν Πανὸς 
καθήμενον ἄγαλμά ἐστι, τῇ δὲ "Άρτεμις ἕστηκεν. 
ἐσελθοῦσι δὲ ὁ θεός ἐστιν οὐκ ἔχων γένεια, 
χρυσοῦ καὶ ἐλέφαντος, Καλάμιδος δὲ ἔργον' ἔχει 

} The text is corrupt here. 
298 

CORINTH, x. 1-3 

X. In the gymnasium not far from the market- 
place is dedicated a stone Heracles made by Scopas.! 
There is also in another place a sanctuary of Heracles. 
The whole of the enclosure here they name Paedize ; 
in the middle of the enclosure is the sanctuary, and 
in it is an old wooden figure carved by Laphaés the 
Phliasian. I will now describe the ritual at the 
festival. The story is that on coming to the Sicyonian 
land Phaestus found the people giving offerings to 
Heracles as toa hero. Phaestus then refused to do 
anything of the kind, but insisted on sacrificing 
to him as to a god. Even at the present day the 
Sicyonians, after slaying a lamb and burning the 
thighs upon the altar, eat some of the meat as part 
of a victim given to a god, while the rest they offer 
as toahero. The first day of the festival in honour 
of Heracles they name .. . ; the second they call 
Heraclea. 

From here is a way to a sanctuary of Asclepius. 
On passing into the enclosure you see on the left a 
building with two rooms. In the outer room lies a 
figure of Sleep, of which nothing remains now except 
the head. The inner room is given over to the 
Carnean Apollo; into it none may enter except the 
priests. In the portico lies a huge bone of a sea- 
monster, and after it an image of the Dream-god and 
Sleep, surnamed Epidotes (Bountiful), lulling to sleep 
alion. Within the sanctuary on either side of the 
entrance is an image, on the one hand Pan seated, on 
the other Artemis standing. When you have entered 
you see the god, a beardless figure of gold and ivory 
made by Calamis.? He holds a staff in one hand, 

1 Flourished first half of fourth century B.c. 
2 A famous early fifth-century sculptor. 

299 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

δὲ καὶ σκῆπτρον, καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ἑτέρας χειρὸς πίτυος 
καρπὸν τῆς ἡμέρου. φασὶ δέ σφισιν ἐξ Er- 
δαύρου κομισθῆναι τὸν θεὸν ἐπὶ ζεύγους ἡμιόνων 
δράκοντι «εἰκασμένον, τὴν δὲ ἀγαγοῦσαν Nexa- 
γόραν εἶναι Σικυωνίαν ᾿Αγασικλέους μητέρα, 
γυναῖκα. δὲ Ἐχετίμου. ἐνταῦθα ἀγάλματά ἐστιν 
οὐ μεγάλα ἀπηρτημένα τοῦ ὀρόφου" τὴν δὲ ἐπὶ 
τῷ δράκοντι ᾿Αριστοδάμαν ᾿Αράτου µητέρα εἶναι 
λέγουσι καὶ ΄Αρατον ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ παῖδα εἶναι 
νομίξουσιν. 

4 Οὗτος μὲν δὴ παρείχετο. ὁ περίβολος TOO AOE 
ἐς μνήμην, πέραν δὲ αὐτοῦ ἄλλος ἐστὶν Αφ- 
ροδίτης ἱερός: ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ π τον ἄγαλ.μά 
ἐστιν ᾿Αντιόπης: εἶναι γάρ οἱ τοὺς παῖδας 
Σικυωνίους καὶ δι᾽ ἐκείνους ἐθέλουσι καὶ αὐτὴν 
᾿Αντιόπην προσήκειν σφίσι. μετὰ τοῦτο HON | 
τὸ τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης ἐστὶν ἱερόν. ἐσίασι μὲν δὴ 
ἐς αὐτὸ γυνή τε νεωκόρος, ᾗ μηκέτι θέμις. παρ᾽ 
ἄνδρα φοιτῆσαι, καὶ παρθένος i ἱερωσύνην ἐπέτειον 
ἔχουσα: λουτροφόρον τὴν παρθένον ὀνομάζουσι" 
τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις καθέστηκεν | ὁρᾶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐσόδου | 

5 τὴν θεὸν καὶ αὐτόθεν ΑΕ eras τὸ μὲν δὴ | 

ἄγαλμα καθήμενον Κάναχος εκυώνιος ἐποίησεν, 
ὃς καὶ τὸν ἐν Διδύμοις τοῖς Μιλησίων καὶ Θη- 
βαίοις τὸν Ἰσμήνιον εἰργάσατο ᾿Απόλλωνα" Tre- 
ποίηται δὲ ἔκ τε χρυσοῦ καὶ ἐλέφαντος, φέρουσα 
ἐπὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ. πόλον, τῶν χειρῶν δὲ ἔχει τῇ μὲν 
μήκωνα τῇ δὲ ἑτέρᾳ μῆλον. τῶν δὲ ἱερείων τοὺς 
μηροὺς θύουσι πλὴν ὑῶν, τἄλλα δὲ ἀρκεύθου 
ξύλοις καθαγίξουσι, καιομένοις δὲ ὁμοῦ τοῖς un- 
pois φύλλον τοῦ παιδέρωτος συγκαθαγίξουσιν. 
1 καθέστηκεν (for κατὰ ταὐτὰ καὶ) Sehubart. 
300 

CORINTH, x. 3-5 

and a cone of the cultivated pine in the other. The 
Sicyonians say that the god was carried to them from 
Epidaurus on a carriage drawn by two mules, that 
he was in the likeness of a serpent, and that he 
was brought by Nicagora of Sicyon, the mother of 
Agasicles and the wife of Echetimus. Here are 
small figures hanging from the roof. She who is on 
the serpent they say is Aristodama, the mother of 
Aratus, whom they hold to be a son of Asclepius. 
Such are the noteworthy things that this enclosure 
presented to me, and opposite is another enclosure, 
sacred to Aphrodite. The first thing inside is a statue 
of Antiope. They say that her sons were Sicyonians, 
and because of them the Sicyonians will have it 
that Antiope herself is related to themselves. After 
this is the sanctuary of Aphrodite, into which enter 
only a female verger, who after her appointment may 
not have intercourse with a man, and a virgin, called 
the Bath-bearer, holding her sacred office for a year. 
All others are wont to behold the goddess from the 
entrance, and to pray from that place. The image, 
which is seated, was made by the Sicyonian Canachus, 
who also fashioned the Apollo at Didyma of the Mi- 
lesians, and the Ismenian Apollo for the Thebans. 
It is made of gold and ivory, having on its head a 
polos, and carrying in one hand a poppy and in the 
other an apple. They offer the thighs of the victims, 
excepting pigs; the other parts they burn for the 
goddess with juniper wood, but as the thighs are 
burning they add to the offering a leaf of the paideros. 

1 A curiously shaped head-gear. 
301 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

6 ἔνεστι δὲ ὁ παιδέρως ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ τοῦ περιβόλου 
πόα, φύεται δὲ ἀλλαχόθι οὐδαμοῦ γῆς, οὔτε ἄλλης 
οὔτε τῆς Σικυωνίας. τὰ δέ οἱ φύλλα ἑλάσσονα 

ἢ φηγοῦ, μείζονα. δέ ἐστιν ἢ πρίνου, σχῆμα δέ 
σφίσιν οἷον τοῖς τῆς δρυός" καὶ τὸ μὲν ὑπομελαί- 
νει, τὸ δὲ ἕτερον λευκόν ἐστι" φύλλοις δ ἂν 
λεύκης μάλιστα εἰκάξοις τὴν χροιάν. 

7 ᾿Απὸ τούτων δὲ ἀνιοῦσιν ἐς τὸ γυμνάσιον, 
ἔστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ Pepaias ἱερὸν ᾿Αρτέμιδος- Kopt- 
σθῆναι δὲ τὸ ξόανον λέγουσιν ἐκ Φερῶν. τὸ δέ 
σφισι γυμνάσιον τοῦτο. Κλεινίας ᾠκοδόμησε, καὶ 
παιδεύουσιν ἐνταῦθα ἔτι τοὺς ἐφήβους. κεῖται 
δὲ λίθου λευκοῦ καὶ "Αρτεμις τὰ ἐς ἰξὺν μόνον 
εἰργασμένη καὶ Ἡρακλῆς τὰ κάτω τοῖς Ερμαῖς 
τοῖς τετραγώνοις εἰκασμένος. 

ΧΙ. ᾿Εντεῦθεν δὲ ἀποτραπεῖσιν ἐπὶ πύλην 
καλουμένην Ἱεράν, οὐ πόρρω τῆς πύλης ναός 
ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς, ὃ ὃν Ἐπωπεύς ποτε ἀνέθηκε μεγέθει 
καὶ κόσμῳ τοὺς τότε ὑπερβεβλημένον. ἔδεε δὲ 
ἄρα χρόνῳ καὶ τοῦδε ἀφανισθῆναι τὴν μνήμην: 
κεραυνοῖς θεὸς αὐτὸν κατέκαυσε, βωμὸς δὲ 
ἐκεῖνος -- οὐ γάρ τι ἐς αὐτὸν κατέσκηψε — 
μένει καὶ ἐς τόδε οἷον ᾿Επωπεὺς ἐποίησε. πρὸ 
τοῦ βωμοῦ δὲ αὐτῷ μνῆμα Ἐπωπεῖ κέχωσται, 
καὶ τοῦ τάφου πλησίον εἰσὶν ᾿Αποτρόπαιοι θεοί; 
παρὰ τούτοις δρῶσιν ὅσα Ἕλληνες ἐς ᾿ἀποτροπὴν 
κακῶν νομίζουσιν. Ἐπωπέα δὲ καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδι 
καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνι τὸ πλησίον ἱερὸν ποιῆσαι λέγουσι, 
τὸ δὲ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ "Ηρας "Αδραστον' ἀγάλματα δὲ 
ὑπελείπετο οὐδετέρῳ. βωμοὺς δὲ ὄπισθεν τοῦ 
Ἥραίου τὸν μὲν Πανὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν, Ἡλίῳ δὲ 

9 λίθου λευκοῦ. καταβαίνουσι δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον, 

302 

CORINTH, x. 6-Χι. 2 

This is a plant in the open parts of the enclosure, 
and it grows nowhere else either in Sicyonia or in 
any other land. Its leaves are smaller than those of 
the esculent oak, but larger than those of the holm ; 
the shape is similar to that of the oak-leaf. One 
side is of a dark colour, the other is white. You ee 
might best compare the colour to that of white- 
poplar leaves. 

Ascending from here to the gymnasium you see 
on the right a sanctuary of Artemis Pheraea. It is 
said that the wooden image was brought from Pherae. 
This gymnasium was built for the Sicyonians by Clei- 
nias, and they still train the youths here. White 
marble images are here, an Artemis wrought only to 
the waist, and a Heracles whose lower parts are 
similar to the square Hermae. 

XI. Turning away from here towards the gate 
called Holy you see, not far from the gate, a temple 
of Athena. Dedicated long ago by Epopeus, it sur- 
passed all its contemporaries in size and splendour. 
Yet the memory of even this was doomed to perish 
through lapse of time—it was burnt down by light- 
ning—but the altar there, which escaped injury, re- 
mains down to the present day as Epopeus made it. 
Before the altar a barrow has been raised for Epopeus 
himself, and near the grave are the gods Averters 
of evil. Near them the Greeks perform such rites 
as they are wont to do in order to avert misfortunes. 
They say that the neighbouring sanctuary of Artemis 
and Apollo was also made by Epopeus, and that of 
Hera after it by Adrastus. I found no images re- 
maining in either. Behind the sanctuary of Hera he P - 
built an altar to Pan, and one to Helius (Sun) made 
of white marble. On the way down to the plain is 

36 

r 

- 

9 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἱερόν ἐστιν ἐνταῦθα Δήμητρος" ἱδρῦσαι. δέ φασιν 
αὐτὸ Πλημναῖον ἀποδιδόντα χάριν τῇ θεῷ τοῦ 
παιδὸς τῆς τροφῆς. τοῦ δὲ ἱεροῦ τῆς ” Hpas, 
ἣν ἱδρύσατο "Αδραστος, ὀλίγον ἀπωτέρω Καρ- 
νείου ναός ἐστιν ᾿Απόλλωνος: κίονες δὲ ἑστήκασιν 
ἐν αὐτῷ μόνοι, τοίχους δὲ οὐκέτι οὐδὲ ὄροφον 
οὔτε ἐνταῦθα εὑρήσεις οὔτε ἐν τῷ τῆς Προδρομίας 
"ρας. τοῦτον γὰρ δὴ Φάλκης ἱδρύσατο o 
Τημένου, τῆς ὁδοῦ οἱ τῆς ἐς Σικυῶνα "Ἡραν 
φάμενος ὁδηγὸν γενέσθαι. 

"Ex Σικυῶνος δὲ τὴν κατ᾽ εὐθὺ ἐς Φλιοῦντα 
ἐρχομένοις καὶ ἐν ἀριστερᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ δέκα μάλιστα 
ἐκτραπεῖσι στάδια, Πυραία καλούμενόν ἐστιν 
ἄλσος, ἱερὸν δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ Προστασίας Δήμητρος 
καὶ Κόρης. ἐνταῦθα ἐφ᾽ αὑτῶν οἱ ἄνδρες ἑορτὴν 
ἄγουσι, τὸν δὲ Νυμφῶνα καλούμενον ταῖς γυναι- 
Ely ἑορτάξειν παρείκασι' καὶ ἀγάλματα Διονύσου 
καὶ Δήμητρος καὶ Κόρης τὰ πρόσωπα φαίνοντα 
ἐν τῷ Νυμφῶνί ἐστιν. ἡ δὲ ἐς Τιτάνην ὁδὸς 
σταδίων μέν ἐστιν ἑξήκοντα καὶ ζεύγεσιν ἄβατος 
διὰ στενότητα" σταδίους δὲ προελθοῦσιν ἐμοὶ 
δοκεῖν εἴκοσι καὶ ἐν ἀριστερᾷ διαβᾶσι τὸν ᾿Ασω- 
πόν, ἔστιν ἄλσος πρίνων καὶ ναὸς θεῶν ἃς ᾿Αθη- 
ναΐοι Σεμνάς, Σικυώνιοι δὲ Εὐμενίδας ὀνομάζουσι: 
κατὰ δὲ ἔτος ἕκαστον ἑορτὴν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ σφισιν 
ἄγουσι θύοντες πρόβατα ἐγκύμονα, μελικράτῳ 
δὲ σπονδῇ καὶ ἄνθεσιν ἀντὶ στεφάνων χρῆσθαι 
νομίζουσιν. ἐοικότα δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ βωμῷ τῶν 
Μοιρῶν δρῶσιν: ὁ δέ σφισιν ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ τοῦ 
ἄλσους ἐστίν. ἀναστρέψασι δὲ ἐ ἐς τὴν ὁδὸν δια- 
βᾶσί τε αὖθις τὸν ᾿Ασωπὸν καὶ ἐς κορυφὴν ὅ ὄρους 

ἥξασιν, ἐνταῦθα λέγουσιν οἱ ἐπιχώριοι Τιτᾶνα 

304 

CORINTH, χι, 2-5 

sanctuary of Demeter, said to have been founded by 
Plemnaeüs as a thank-offering to the goddess for the 
rearing of his son. A little farther away from the 
sanctuary of Hera founded by Adrastus is a temple 
of the Carnean Apollo. Only the pillars are standing 
in it; you will no longer find there walls or roof, 
nor yet in that of Hera Pioneer. This temple was 
founded by Phalces, son of Temenus, who asserted 
that Hera guided him on the road to Sicyon. 

On the direct road from Sicyon to Phlius, on the 
left of the road and just about ten stades from it, is a 
grove called Pyraea, and in it a sanctuary of Hera 
Protectress and the Maid. Here the men celebrate 
a festival by themselves, giving up to the women 
the temple called Nymphon for the purposes of their 
festival. In the Nymphon are images of Dionysus, 
Demeter, and the Maid, with only their faces ex- 
posed. The road to Titane is sixty stades long, and 
too narrow to be used by carriages drawn by a yoke. 
At a distance along it, in my opinion, of twenty 
stades, to the left on the other side of the Asopus, 
is a grove of holm oaks and a temple of the god- 
desses named by the Athenians the August, and by 
the Sicyonians the Kindly Ones. On one day in 
each year they celebrate a festival to them and offer 
sheep big with young as a burnt offering, and they 
are accustomed to use a libation of honey and water, 
and flowers instead of garlands. They practise 
similar rites at the altar of the Fates; it is in 
an open space in the grove. On turning back to 
the road, and having crossed the Asopus again 
and reached the summit of the hill, you come to 
the place where the natives say that Titan first 

395 

VOL, 1. i X 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

οἰκῆσαι πρῶτον: εἶναι δὲ αὐτὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἡλίου 
καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου κληθῆναι Τιτάνην τὸ χωρίον. 
δοκεῖν δὲ ἐμοὶ δεινὸς ἐγένετο ὁ Τιτὰν τὰς ὥρας 
τοῦ ἔτους φυλάξας καὶ ὁπότε ἥλιος σπέρματα 
καὶ δένδρων αὔξει καὶ πεπαίνει καρπούς, καὶ ἐπὶ 
τῷδε ἀδελφὸς ἐνομίσθη τοῦ Ἡλίου. ὕστερον δὲ 
᾽Αλεξάνωρ ὁ Μαχάονος τοῦ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ παρα- 
γενόμενος ἐς Σικυωνίαν ἐν Τιτάνῃ τὸ ᾿Ασκληπιεῖον 
ἐποίησε. περιοικοῦσι μὲν δὴ καὶ ἄλλοι καὶ τὸ 
πολὺ οἰκέται τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ κυπαρίσσων ἐστὶν 
ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου δένδρα ἆ ἀρχαῖα" τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα 
οὔτε ὁποίου ξύλον γέγονεν. ἦ μετάλλου μαθεῖν 
ἔστιν οὔτε τὸν 'ποιήσαντα ἴσασι, πλὴν εἰ μή τις 
ἄρα ἐς αὐτὸν τὸν ᾿Αλεξάνορα ἀναφέροι. φαίνεται 
δὲ τοῦ ἀγάλματος πρόσωπον μόνον καὶ ἄκραι 
χεῖρες καὶ πόδες' χιτὼν γάρ οἱ λευκὸς ἐρεοῦς 
καὶ ἑμάτιον ἐπιβέβληται. καὶ Ὑγείας. δ᾽ ἔστι 
κατὰ ταὐτὸν ἄγαλμα" οὐκ ἂν οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἴδοις 
ῥᾳδίως, οὕτω περιέχουσιν. αὐτὸ κόμαι τε γυναικῶν 
αἳ κείρονται τῇ θεῷ καὶ ἐσθῆτος Βαβυλωνίας 
τελαμῶνες. ᾧ ὃ ἂν ἐνταῦθα τούτων ἱλάσασθαι 
θελήση τις, ἀποδέδεικταί οἱ τὸ αὐτό, σέβεσθαι 
τοῦτο ὃ δὴ καὶ Ὑγείαν καλοῦσι. τῷ δὲ “Ade 
ξάνορι καὶ Εὐαμερίωνι — καὶ γὰρ τούτοις ἀγάλ- 
ματά ἐστι — τῷ μὲν ὡς ἥρωι μετὰ ἥλιον δύναντα 
ἐναγίξουσιν, Εὐαμερίωνι δὲ ὡς θεῷ θύουσιν. 
εἰ δὲ ὀρθῶς εἰκάξω, τὸν Εὐαμερίωνα τοῦτον 
Π]εργαμηνοὶ Τελεσφόρον ' ἐκ μαντεύματος, Ἔπι- 
δαύριοι δὲ "Άκεσιν ὀνομάξουσι. τῆς δὲ Kopo- 
νίδος ἔστι μὲν καὶ ταύτης ξόανον, καθίδρυται 

1 The reading and translation are both uncertain. I have 
tried to make sense by putting a comma at αὐτό. 

306 

CORINTH, χι. 5-7 

dwelt. They add that he was the brother of 
Helius (Sun), and that after him the place got the 
name Titane. My own view is that he proved clever 
at observing the seasons of the year and the times 
when the sun increases and ripens seeds and fruits, 
and for this reason was held to be the brother of 
Helius. Afterwards Alexanor, the son of Machaon, 
the son of Asclepius, came to Sicyonia and built 
the sanctuary of Asclepius at Titane. The neigh- 
bours are chiefly servants of the god, and within the 
enclosure are old cypress trees. One cannot learn 
of what wood or metal the image is, nor do they know 
the name of the maker, though one or two attribute it 
to Alexanor himself. Of the image can be seen only 
the face, hands, and feet, for it has about it a tunic 
of white wool and a cloak. There is a similar image 
of Health; this, too, one cannot see easily because 
it is so surrounded with the locks of women, who 
cut them off and offer them to the goddess, and with 
strips of Babylonian raiment. With whichever of 
these a votary here is willing to propitiate heaven, 
the same instructions have been given to him, to 
worship this image which they are pleased to call 
Health. There are images also of Alexanor and of 
Euamerion ; to the former they give offerings as to a 
hero after the setting of the sun; to Euamerion, as 
being a god, they give burnt sacrifices. If I conjecture 
aright, the Pergamenes, in accordance with an oracle, 
call this Euamerion Telesphorus (Accomplisher), while 
the Epidaurians call him Acesis (Cure). There is 
also a wooden image of Coronis, but it has no fixed 

307 
x 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δὲ οὐδαμοῦ τοῦ ναοῦ: θυομένων δὲ τῷ θεῷ ταύρου 
καὶ ἀρνὸς καὶ ὑὸς ἐς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱερὸν τὴν Κορωνίδα 
μετενεγκόντες ἐνταῦθα τιμῶσιν. ὁπόσα δὲ τῶν 
θυομένων καθαγίξουσιν, οὐδὲ ἀποχρᾷ σφισιν 
ἐκτέμνειν τοὺς μηρούς" χαμαὶ δὲ καίουσι πλὴν 
τοὺς ὄρνιθας, τούτους δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ. τὰ δὲ 
ἐν τοῖς ἀετοῖς Ἡρακλῆς καὶ Νῖκαι πρὸς τοῖς 
πέρασίν εἰσιν. ἀνάκειται δὲ ἀγάλματα ἐν τῇ 
στοᾷ Διονύσου καὶ Ἑκάτης, ᾿Αφροδίτη τε καὶ 
Μήτηρ θεῶν καὶ Τύχη: ταῦτα μὲν ξόανα, λέθου 
δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιὸς ἐπίκλησιν. Γορτύνιος. παρὰ δὲ 
τοὺς δράκοντας ἐ ἐσιέναι τοὺς ἱεροὺς οὐκ ἐθέλουσιν 
ὑπὸ δείματος" καταθέντες δέ σφισι πρὸ τῆς 
ἐσόδου τροφὴν οὐκέτι πολυπραγμονοῦσι. κεῖται 
δὲ χαλκοῦς ἀνὴρ ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου Γρανιανὸς 
Σικυώνιος, ὃς νίκας ἀνείλετο Ὀλυμπίασι δύο μὲν 
πεντάθλου καὶ σταδίου τὴν τρίτην, διαύλου δὲ 
ἀμφότερα καὶ γυμνὸς καὶ μετὰ τῆς ἀσπίδος. 

XII. "Ev δὲ Τιτάνῃ καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱερόν ἐστιν, 
ἐς ὃ τὴν Κορωνίδα ἆ ἀνάγουσιν: ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ ξόανον 
᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐστιν ἀρχαῖον, κεραυνωθῆναι δὲ καὶ 
τοῦτο ἐλέγετο' ἐκ τούτου τοῦ λόφου καταβᾶσιν 
--Φκοδόμηται γὰρ ἐπὶ λόφῳ. τὸ ἱερὸν--βωμός 
ἐστιν ἀνέμων, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τοῖς ἀνέμοις ὁ ἱερεὺς μιά 
νυκτὶ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος θύει. δρᾷ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα 
ἀπόρρητα ἐς βόθρους τέσσαρας, ἡμερούμενος τῶν 
πνευμάτων τὸ ἄγριον, καὶ δὴ καὶ Μηδείας ὡς 
λέγουσιν ἐπῳδὰς ἐπῴδει. 

Ἐκ δὲ Τιτάνης ἐς Σικυῶνα ἀφικομένοις καὶ 
καταβαίνουσιν ἐ ἐς θάλασσαν ἐ ἐν ἀριστερᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ 
ναός ἐστιν "ρας οὐκ ἔχων ἔτι οὔτε ἄγαλμα 
οὔτε ὄροφον: τὸν δὲ ἀναθέντα Ὡροῖτον εἶναι τὸν 

308 

CORINTH, χι. 7-ΧΙΙ. 2 

position anywhere in the temple. While to the god 
are being sacrificed a bull, a lamb, and a pig, they 
remove Coronis to the sanctuary of Athena and 
honour her there. The parts of the victims which 
they offer as a burnt sacrifice, and they are not con- 
tent with cutting out the thighs, they burn on the 
ground, except the birds, which they burn on the 
altar. In the gable at the ends are figures of 
Heracles and of Victories. In the portico are dedi- 
cated images of Dionysus and Hecate, with Aphro- 
dite, the Mother of the gods, and Fortune. These 
are wooden, but Asclepius, surnamed Gortynian, is 
of stone. They are unwilling to enter among the 
sacred serpents through fear, but they place their 
food before the entrance and take no further 
trouble. Within the enclosure is a bronze statue 
of a Sicyonian named Granianus, who won the fol- 
lowing victories at Olympia: the pentathlon 1 twice, 
the foot-race, the double-course foot-race twice, once 
without and once with the shield. 

XII. In Titane there is also a sanctuary of Athena, 
into which they bring up the image of Coronis. In it 
is an old wooden figure of Athena, and I was told that 
it, too, was struck by lightning. The sanctuary is 
built upon a hill, at the bottom of which is an Altar 
of the Winds, and on it the priest sacrifices to the 
winds one night in every year. He also performs 
other secret rites at four pits, taming the fierce- 
ness of the blasts, and he is said to chant as well 
charms of Medea. 

On reaching Sicyon from Titane, as you go down 
to the shore you see on the left of the road a temple 
of Hera having now neither image nor roof. They say 

1 See p. 157. 
300 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

"Αβαντός φασι. καταβᾶσι δὲ ἐς τὸν Σικυωνίων 
καλούμενον λιμένα καὶ τραπεῖσιν ἐπ᾿ ᾿Αριστο- 
ναύτας τὸ ἐπίνειον τὸ Πελληνέων, ἔ ἔστιν ὀλύγον 
ὑπὲρ τὴν ὁδὸν ἐν -ἀριστερᾷ Ποσειδῶνος ἱερόν' 
προελθοῦσι δὲ κατὰ τὴν λεωφόρον Ἑλισσών τε 
καλούμενος ποταμὸς καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν Σύθας ἐστίν, 
ἐκδιδόντες ἐς θάλασσαν. 

Ἡ δὲ Φλιασία τῆς Σικυωνίων ἐστὶν ὅμορος" 
καὶ Τιτάνης μὲν τεσσαράκοντα σταδίους ἀπέχει 
μάλιστα ἡ πόλις, ἐκ Σικυῶνος δὲ ἐς αὐτὴν ὀδός 
ἐστιν εὐθεῖα. καὶ ὅτι μὲν ᾿Αρκάσι Φλιάσιοι 
προσήκουσιν οὐδέν, δηλοῖ τὰ ἐς τὸν ᾿Αρκάδων 
κατάλογον της Ὁμήρου ποιήσεως, ὅτι οὐκ εἰσὶν 
᾿Αρκάσι καὶ οὗτοι συγκατειλεγμένοι' ὡς δὲ ᾿Αρ- 
γεῖοί τε ἦσαν ἐξ ἀρχῆς καὶ ὕστερον Δωριεῖς 
γεγόνασιν Ἡρακλειδῶν κατελθόντων ἐς Πελο- 
πόννησον, φανεῖται προϊόντι ὁμοῦ τῷ λόγῳ. διά- 
φορα δὲ ἐς τοὺς Φλιασίους τὰ πολλὰ εἰδὼς 
εἰρημένα, τοῖς μάλιστα αὐτῶν ὡμολογημένοις 
χρήσομαι. ἐν τῇ γῆ ταύτῃ γενέσθαι πρῶτον 
"Αραντά φασιν ἄνδρα αὐτόχθονα". καὶ πόλιν τε 
@KLTE περὶ τὸν ᾿Βουνὸν τοῦτον, ὃς ᾿Αραντῖνος ἔτι 
καλεῖται καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς, οὐ πολὺ ἑτέρου λόφου 
διεστηκώς, ἐφ᾽ οὗ Φλιασίοις ἥ τε ἀκρόπολις καὶ 
τῆς "Ἥβης ἐστὶ τὸ ἱερόν. ἐνταῦθά τε δὴ πόλιν 
Φκισε καὶ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἡ γῆ καὶ ἡ πόλις 
᾿Αραντία ἐκλήθησαν. τούτῳ βασιλεύοντι ᾿Ασω- 
πὸς Κηλούσης εἶναι λεγόμενος καὶ Ποσειδῶνος 
ἐξεῦρε τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸ ὕδωρ, ὅ ὅντινα οἱ νῦν ἀπὸ 
τοῦ εὑρόντος καλοῦσιν ᾿Ασωπόν. τὸ δὲ μνῆμα 
τοῦ ᾿Αραντός ἐστιν ἐν χωρίῳ Κελεαῖς, ἔνθα δὴ 
καὶ Δυσαύλην ἄνδρα Ἐλευσίνιον τεθάφθαι M- 

310 

CORINTH, xu. 2-4 

that its founder was Proetus, the son of Abas. When 
you have gone down to the harbour called the 
Sicyonians’ and turned towards Aristonautae, the 
port of Pellene, you see a little above the road 
on the left hand a sanctuary of Poseidon. Farther 
alomg the highway is a river called the Helisson, 
and after it the Sythas, both emptying themselves 
into the sea. 

Phliasia borders on Sicyonia. The city is just 
about forty stades distant from Titane, and there is a 
straight road to it from Sicyon. That the Phliasians 
are in no way related to the Arcadians is shown by 
the passage in Homer that deals with the list of the 
Arcadians, in which the Sicyonians are not included 
among the Arcadian confederates. As my narrative 
progresses it will become clear that they were Argive 
originally, and became Dorian later after the return 
of the Heracleidae to the Peloponnesus. I know 
that most of the traditions concerning the Phliasians 

are contradictory, but I shall make use of those 
which have been most generally accepted. They 
say that the first man in this land was Aras, who 
sprang from the soil. He founded a city around that 
hillock which even down to our day is called the 
Arantine Hill, not far distant from a second hill on 
which the Phliasians have their citadel and their 
sanctuary of Hebe. Here, then, he founded a city, 
and after him in ancient times both the land and 
the city were called Arantia. While he was king, 
Asopus, said to be the son of Celusa and Poseidon, 
discovered for him the water of the river which the 
present inhabitants call after him Asopus. The tomb 
of Aras is in the place called Celeae, where they say 

411 

Lip 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

5 γουσι». ΄Άραντος δὲ υἱὸς "Λορις καὶ θυγάτηρ 
ἐγένετο ᾿Αραιθυρέα. τούτους paci «Φλιάσιοι 
θηρᾶσαί τε ἐμπείρους γενέσθαι καὶ τὰ ἐς πόλε- 
μον ἀνδρείους. προαποθανούσης δὲ ᾿Αραιθυρέας 
"Λορις ἐς μνήμην τῆς ἀδελφῆς μετωνόμασεν 
᾿Αραιθυρέαν τὴν χώραν" καὶ ἐπὶ τώδε " Όμηρος 
τοὺς ᾿Αγαμέμνονος ὑπηκόους καταλέγων τὸ ἔπος 
ἐποίησεν 

9 r > 9 ’ 9 / ? 9 r 
Ορνειάς T ἐνέμοντο ᾿Αραιθυρέην τ ἐρατεινην. 

τάφους δὲ τῶν "Αραντος παίδων οὐχ ἑτέρωθι 
ἡγοῦμαι τῆς χώρας, ἐπὶ τῷ λόφῳ δὲ εἶναι τῷ 
᾿Αραντίνῳ' καί σφισιν ἐπίθημα στῆλαι περι- 
φανεῖς εἰσι, καὶ πρὸ τῆς τελετῆς ἣν τῇ Δήμητρι 
ἄγουσιν ᾿Άραντα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας καλοῦσιν ἐπὶ 
τὰς σπονδὰς ἐς ταῦτα βλέποντες τὰ νήματα. 

6 Φλίαντα δέ, ὃ ὃς τρίτον τοῦτο ἐποίησεν ὄνομα ad’ 
αὑτοῦ τῇ γῇ, Κείσου μὲν παῖδα εἶναι τοῦ Τημένου 
κατὰ .δὴ τὸν ᾿Αργείων λόγον οὐδὲ ἀρχὴν ἔγωγε 
προσίεμαι, Διονύσου δὲ οἶδα καλούμενον καὶ τῶν 
πλευσάντων ἐπὶ τῆς ᾿Αργοῦς καὶ τοῦτον ᾿ γενέσθαι 
λεγόμενον. ὁμολογεῖ δέ μοι καὶ τοῦ ‘Podiov 
ποιητοῦ τὰ ἔπη' 

/ @ 93 >» \ - ? , er 
Pias αὖτ ἐπὶ τοῖσιν Αραιθυρέηθεν ἵκανεν, 
ἔνθ᾽ ἀφνειὸς ἔναιε Διωνύσοιο ἕκητι 
πατρὸς ἑοῦ, πηγῆσιν ἐφέστιος ᾿Ασωποῖο. 

τοῦ δὲ Φλίαντος ᾿Αραιθυρέαν εἶναι μητέρα, ἀλλ. 
οὐ Χθονοφύλην' Χθονοφύλην δέ οἱ συνοικῆσαι 
καὶ ᾿Ανδροδάμαν γενέσθαι Φλίαντι ἐξ αὐτῆς. 

312 

CORINTH, xu. 4-6 

is also buried Dysaules of Eleusis. Aras had a son 
Aoris and a daughter Araethyrea, who, the Phliasians 
say, were experienced hunters and brave warriors. 
Araethyrea died first, and Aoris, in memory of his 
sister, changed the name of the land to Arae- 
thyrea. This is why Homer,! in making a list of 
Agamemnon’s subjects, has the verse :— 

“ Orneae was their home and Araethyrea the de- 

lightful.”’ 

The graves of the children of Aras are, in my opinion, 
on the Arantine Hill and not in any other part of the 
land. On the top of them are far-seen gravestones, 
and before the celebration of the mysteries of De- 
meter the people look at these tombs and call Aras 
and his children to the libations. The Argives say 
that Phlias, who has given the land its third name, 
was the son of Ceisus, the son of Temenus. This 
account I can by no means accept, but I know that 
he is called a son of Dionysus, and that he is said to 
have been one of those who sailed on the Argo. 
The verses of the Rhodian poet? confirm me in my 
opinion :--- 
“< Came after these Phlias from Araethyrea to the 
muster ; 
Here did he dwell and prosper, because Disayais 
his father 
Cared for him well, and his home was near to 
the springs of Asopus.” 

The account goes on to say that the mother of Phlias 
was Araethyrea and not Chthonophyle. The latter 
was his wife and bore him Androdamas. 

1 Iliad, ii. 571. 

3 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica, i. 115-117. 

313 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

XIII. Ἡρακλειδῶν δὲ κατελθόντων Πελοπον- 
νησος ἐταράχθη πᾶσα πλὴν ᾿Αρκάδων, ὡς πολ- 
λὰς μὲν τῶν πόλεων συνοίκους ἐκ τοῦ Δωρικοῦ 

- ΄ y / . 
προσλαβεῖν, πλείονας δὲ ἔτι γενέσθαι τὰς µετα- 
Boras τοῖς οἰκήτορσι. τὰ δὲ κατὰ «Φλιοῦντα 
οὕτως ἔχει. “Ῥηγνίδας ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν ὁ Φάλκου τοῦ 
Τημένου Δωριεὺς ἔκ τε” Άργους στρατεύει καὶ ἐκ 
τῆς Σικυωνίας. τῶν δὲ Φλιασίων τοῖς μὲν ἃ 
προεκαλεῖτο Ῥηγνίδας ἐφαίνετο ἀρεστά, μένοντας 
» . e A ’ ε ’ . 8 A 
ἐπὶ τοῖς αὑτῶν βασιλέα Ρηηγνίδαν καὶ τοὺς σὺν 
9 / A 9 , 9 - - , er 
ἐκείνῳ Δωριεῖς ἐπὶ ἀναδασμῷ γῆς δέχεσθαι- Ir- 
πασος δὲ καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ διεκελεύοντο ἀμύνεσθαι 
μηδὲ πολλῶν καὶ ἀγαθῶν ἀμαχεὶ τοῖς Δωριεῦσιν 
ἀφίστασθαι. προσεμένου δὲ τοῦ δήμου τὴν 
ἐναντίαν γνώμην, οὕτως "Ἴππασος σὺν τοῖς ἐθέ- 
λουσιν ἐς Σάμον φεύγει. Ἱππάσου δὲ τούτου 

/ ᾽ ’ a e Ld 
τέταρτος ἦν ἀπόγονος Πυθαγόρας ὁ λεγόμενος 

la ld , . / Φ 
γενέσθαι σοφός: Μνησάρχου γὰρ Πυθαγόρας ἦν 
τοῦ Εὔφρονος τοῦ Ἱππάσου. ταῦτα μὲν zad- 

/ - A 
σιοι λέγουσι περὶ αὑτῶν, ὁμολογοῦσι δέ σφισι τὰ 
πολλὰ καὶ Σικυώνιοι. 

Προσέσται δὲ ἤδη καὶ τῶν ἐς ἐπίδειξιν ἡκόντων 

. > , ” ΜΝ » - ld 
τὰ ἀξιολογώτατα. ἔστι yap ἐν τῇ Φλιασίων 
ἀκροπόλει κυπαρίσσων ἄλσος καὶ ἱερὸν ἁγιώ- 

2 - . . . 3 Νο . ε 
τατον ἐκ παλαιοῦ" τὴν δὲ θεὸν ἧς ἐστι τὸ ἱερὸν οἱ 

A S 
μὲν ἀρχαιότατοι Φλιασίων Γανυμήδαν, οἱ δὲ 
er (4 
ὕστερον "Ηβην ὀνομάξουσιν' ἧς καὶ Όμηρος 

/ A «ν 9° 
μνήμην ἐποιήσατο ἐν τῇ Μενελάου πρὸς Αλέξαν- 

’ lá A m 
dpov μονομαχία φάμενος οἰνοχόον τῶν θεῶν 

314 

CORINTH, χιπ, 1-3 

XIII. On the return of the Heracleidae disturb- 
ances took place throughout the whole of the Pelo- 
ponnesus except Arcadia, so that many of the cities 
received additional settlers from the Dorian race, 
and their inhabitants suffered yet more revolutions. 
The history of Phlius is as follows. The Dorian 
Rhegnidas, the son of Phalces, the son of Temenus, 
attacked it from Argos and Sicyonia. Some of the 
Phliasians were inclined to accept the offer of Rheg- 
nidas, which was that they should reniain on their 
own estates and receive Rhegnidas as their king, 
giving the Dorians with him a share in the land. 
Hippasus and his party, on the other hand, urged 
the citizens to defend themselves, and not to give up 
many advantages to the Dorians without striking a 
blow. The people, however, accepted the opposite 
policy, and so Hippasus and any others who wished 
fled to Samos. Great-grandson of this Hippasus was 
Pythagoras,! the celebrated sage. For Pythagoras 
was the son of Mnesarchus, the son of Euphranor, 
the son of Hippasus. This is the account the 
Phliasians give about themselves, and the Sicyonians 
in general agree with them. 

I will now add an account of the most remarkable 
of their famous sights. On the Phliasian citadel is 
a grove of cypress trees and a sanctuary which from 
ancient times has been held to be peculiarly holy. 
The earliest Phliasians named the goddess to whom 
the sanctuary belongs Ganymeda; but later authori- 
ties call her Hebe, whom Homer? mentions in the 
duel between Menelaus and Alexander, saying that 
she was the cup-bearer of the gods; and again he 

1 The philosopher and mathematician. Fl. c. 527 B.C. 
? Iliad, iv: 2 foll. 

315 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

εἶναι, καὶ αὖθις ἐν Ὀδυσσέως ἐς "Αιδου καθόδῳ 
A e / » 9 3 - ` 3 
γυναῖκα Ἡρακλέους εἶπεν εἰναι. Ωλῆνι δὲ ἐν 
f Ἠρας ἐστὶν ὕμνῳ . πεποιημένα τραφῆναι τὴν 
"ραν ὑπὸ Ὡρῶν, εἶναι δέ οἱ παῖδας ὌΑρην. τε 
καὶ j Ἠβην. παρὰ δὲ Φλιασίοις τῇ θεῷ ταύτῃ 
καὶ ἄλλαι τιμαὶ καὶ μέγιστον τὸ ἐς τοὺς ἱκέτας 
ἐστί" δεδώκασι γὰρ δὴ ἄδειαν ἐνταῦθα ἱκετεύουσι, 
λυθέντες δὲ οἱ δεσμῶται τὰς πέδας πρὸς τὰ ἐν 
τῷ ἄλσει δένδρα ἀνατιθέασιν. ἄγεται δὲ καὶ 
ἑορτή σφισιν ἐπέτειος, ἣν καλοῦσι Κισσοτόμους. 
ἄγαλμα δὲ οὔτε ἐν ἀπορρήτῳ φυλάσσουσιν οὐδὲν 
οὔτε ἐστὶν ἐν φανερῷ δεικνύμενον--ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ δὲ 
οὕτω νομίξουσιν, ἱ ἱερός ἐστιν αὐτοῖς λόγος--, ἐπεὶ 
τῆς γε "ρας ἐστὶν ἐξιόντων ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ναὸς 
ἄγαλμα ἔχων Παρίου λίθου. ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀκροπόλει 
καὶ ἄλλος περίθολός ἐστιν ἱερὸς Δήμητρος, ἐν 
δὲ αὐτῷ ναός τε καὶ ἄγαλμα Δήμητρος καὶ τῆς 
παιδός: τὸ δὲ τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος--ἔστι γὰρ καὶ 
᾿Αρτέμιδος ἐνταῦθα χαλκοῦν ἄγαλμα---ἐφαίνετο 
ἀρχαῖον εἶναί μοι. κατιόντων δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἀκρο- 
πόλεώς ἐστιν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ ναὸς ἐν δεξιᾷ καὶ 
ἄγαλμα οὐκ ἔχον πω γένεια. ὑπὸ τοῦτον τὸν 
ναὸν θέατρον πεποίηται" τούτου δὲ οὐ πόρρω 
Δήμητρός ἐστιν ἱερὸν καὶ καθήμενα ἀγάλματα 
ἀρχαῖα. 
᾿Ανάκειται δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς ἀγορᾶς αἲξ χαλκῆ, τὰ 
πολλὰ ἐπίχρυσος" παρὰ δὲ Φλιασίοις τιμὰς ἐπὶ 
τῷδε εἴληφε. τὸ ἄστρον ἣν ὀνομάξουσιν αἶγα 
ἀνατέλλουσα τὰς ἀμπέλους λυμαίνεται συνεχῶς 
ἵνα δὲ ἄ ᾿ἄχαρι μηδὲν ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς γένηται, οἱ δὲ τὴν 
ἐπὶ τῆς ἀγορᾶς χαλκῆν αἶγα ἄλλοις τε τιμῶσι 
καὶ χρυσῷ τὸ ἄγαλμα ἐπικοσμοῦντες. ἐνταῦθα 

316 

CORINTH, xu. 1-6 

says, in the descent of Odysseus to Hell,’ that she 
was the wife of Heracles. Olen,? in his hymn to 
Hera, says that Hera was reared by the Seasons, 
and that her children were Ares and Hebe. Of the 
honours that the Phliasians pay to this goddess the 
greatest is the pardoning of suppliants. All those 
who seek sanctuary here receive full forgiveness, and 
prisoners, when set free, dedicate their fetters on the 
trees in the grove. The Phliasians also celebrate a 
yearly festival which they call Ivy-cutters. There is 
no image, either kept in secret or openly displayed, 
and the reason for this is set forth in a sacred legend 
of theirs; though on the left as you go out is a 
temple of Hera with an image of Parian marble. 
On the citadel is another enclosure, which is sacred 
to Demeter, and in it are a temple and statue of 
Demeter and her daughter. Here there is also a 
bronze statue of Artemis, which appeared to me to 
be ancient. As you go down from the citadel you 
see on the right a temple of Asclepius with an 
image of the god as a beardless youth. Below this 
temple is built a theatre. Not far from it is a 
sanctuary of Demeter and old, seated images. 

On the market-place is a votive offering, a bronze 
she-goat for the most part covered with gold. The 
following is the reason why it has received honours 
among the Phliasians. The constellation which they 
call the Goat on its rising causes continual damage to 
the vines. In order that they may suffer nothing un- 
pleasant from it, the Phliasians pay honours to the 
bronze goat on the market-place and adorn the image 

l Odyssey, χι. 603. 
3 A mythical poet of Greece, associated with Apollo. 

317 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐστι καὶ ᾿Αριστίου μνῆμα τοῦ Πρατίνου" τούτῳ 
τῷ ᾿Αριστίᾳ σάτυροι καὶ Πρατίνα τῷ πατρί εἰσι 
πεποιημένοι πλὴν τῶν Αἰσχύλου δοκεμώτατοι. 
ὄπισθεν δὲ τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἐστιν οἶκος ὀνομαζόμενος 
ὑπὸ Φλιασίων μαντικός. ἐς τοῦτον ᾽Αμϕιάραος 
ἐλθὼν καὶ THY νύκτα ἐγκατακοιμηθεὶς μαντεύ- 
εσθαι τότε πρῶτον, ὡς οἱ Φλιάσιοί φασιν, ἤρξατο 
τέως δὲ ἦν ᾿ Ἀμφιάραος τῷ ἐκείνων λόγῳ ἐδιώτης 
τε καὶ οὐ μάντις. καὶ τὸ οἴκημα ἀπὸ τούτου 
συγκέκλεισται τὸν πάντα ἤδη χρόνον. οὐ πόρρω 
δέ ἐστιν ὁ καλούμενος Ὀμφαλός, Πελοποννήσου 
δὲ πάσης μέσον, εἰ δὴ τὰ ὄντα εἰρήκασιν. ἀπὺ 
δὲ τοῦ Ὀμφαλοῦ προελθοῦσι Διονύσου σφίσιν 
ἱερόν ἐστιν ἀρχαῖον, ἔστι δὲ καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος καὶ 
ἄλλο Ἴσιδος. τὸ μὲν δὴ ἄγαλμα τοῦ Διονύσου 
δῆλον πᾶσιν, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τὸ τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος 
τὸ δὲ τῆς Ἴσιδος τοῖς ἱερεῦσι θεάσασθαι μόνον 
ἔστι. λέγεται δὲ καὶ ὧδε ὑπὸ Φλιασίων λόγος 
Ἡρακλέα, ὅτ᾽. ἐκ Λιβύης ἀνεσώθη κομίζων τὰ 
μῆλα τὰ Ἑσπερίδων καλούμενα, ἐς Φλιοῦντα 
ἐλθεῖν κατὰ δή τι ἴδιον, διαιτωμένου δὲ ἐνταῦθα 
Οἰνέα ἐξ Αὐτωλίας ἀφικέσθαι παρ᾽ αὐτόν' ἐγεγο- 

νει δὲ τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ. πρότερον ἔτι κηδεστής, τότε. 

δὲ ἀφιγμένος εἱστία τὸν Ἡρακλέα ἢ αὐτὸς εἰ- 
στιᾶτο ὑπὸ ἐκείνου. Κύαθον δ᾽ οὖν παῖδα οἰνο- 
χόον Οἰνέως οὐκ ἀρεσθεὶς τῴ δοθέντι πώματι 
παίει τῶν δακτύλων ἑνὶ ἐς τὴν κεφαλήν: ato- 

θανόντος δὲ αὐτίκα ὑπὸ τῆς πληγῆς Φλιασίοις | 

ἐστὶν οἴκημα ἐς μνήμην. τοῦτο ο ihe μὲν 
παρὰ τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος, ἆγάλ 
λίθου πεποιημένα ἔχει, κύλικα ὀρέγοντα Hark 
τὸν Κύαθον. 

318 

CORINTH, χιπ. 6-8 

with gold. Here also is the tomb of Aristias, the 

son of Pratinas. This Aristias and his father Pratinas | 

composed satyric plays more popular than any save 
those of Aeschylus. Behind the market-place is a 
building which the Phliasians name the House of 
Divination. Into it Amphiaraus entered, slept the 
night there, and then first, say the Phliasians, began 
to divine. According to their account Amphiaraus 
was for a time an ordinary person and no diviner. 
Ever since that time the building has been shut up. 
Not far away is what is called the Omphalos (Nare/), 
the centre of all the Peloponnesus, if they speak the 
truth about it. Farther on from the Omphalos they 
have an old sanctuary of Dionysus, a sanctuary of 
Apollo, and one of Isis. The image of Dionysus is 
visible to all, and so also is that of Apollo, but the 
image of Isis only the priests may behold. The Phli- 
asians tell also the following legend. When Heracles 
came back safe from Libya, bringing the apples of 
the Hesperides, as they were called, he visited Phlius 
on some private matter. While he was staying there 

Oeneus came to him from Aetolia. He had already 

allied himself to the family of Heracles, and after 

his arrival on this occasion either he entertained 

Heracles or Heracles entertained him. Be this as 

it may, displeased with the drink given him Heracles 

struck on the head with one of his fingers the boy 

Cyathus, the cup-bearer of Oeneus, who died on the 

spot from the blow. A chapel keeps the memory of 

the deed fresh among the Phliasians; it is built by 

the side of the sanctuary of Apollo, and it contains 

statues made of stone representing Cyathus holding 

out a cup to Heracles. 

319 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, 

A / | 
XIV. Τῆς δὲ πόλεως αἱ Κελεαὶ πέντε movu 
4 A A ΄ 
σταδίους μάλιστα ἀπέχουσι, καὶ τῇ Δήμητρε 
ἐνταῦθα δι ἐνιαυτοῦ τετάρτου τὴν τελετὴν καὶ οὐ 
κατὰ ἔτος ἄγουσιν. ἱεροφάντης δὲ οὐκ ἐς τὸν 
΄ ΄ » r A ` e ’ 
βίον πάντα ἀποδέδεικται, κατὰ δὲ ἑκάστην τελ.ε- | 
τὴν ἄλλοτέ ἐστιν ἄλλος σφίσιν αἱρετός, Map- 
βάνων ἣν ἐθέλη καὶ γυναῖκα. καὶ ταῦτα μὲν 
- - / 
διάφορα τῶν ᾿Ελευσῖνι νομίζουσι, τὰ δὲ ἐς αὐτὴν 
ο 
τὴν τελετὴν ἐκείνων ἐστὶν ἐς μίμησιν: ὁμολο- 
γοῦσι δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ μιμεῖσθαι Φλιάσιοι τὰ ἐν. 
Ἐλευσῖνι δρώμενα. Δυσαύλην δέ φασιν ἆδελ- 
a A 
φὸν Κελεοῦ παραγενόμενόν σφισιν ἐς τὴν χώραν 
καταστήσασθαι τὴν τελετήν, ἐκβληθῆναι δὲ αὐτὸν 
» ’ A e \ y σ ν 3 , e` 
ἐξ ᾿Ελευσῖνος ὑπὸ Ἴωνος, ὅτε Ἴων Αθηναίοις ὁ 
Ξούθου πολέμαρχος τοῦ πρὸς ᾿Ελευσινίους ἠρέθη 
πολέμου. τοῦτο μὲν δὴ Φλιασίοις οὐκ ἔστιν 
ν ε , ΄ 4 N29 
ὅπως ὁμολογήσω, κρατηθέντα μάχη τινὰ Ἓλευσι- 
νίων φυγάδα ἀπελαθέντα οἴχεσθαι, τοῦ πολέμου 
a 
τε ἐπὶ συνθήκαις καταλυθέντος πρὶν ἢ διαπολε- 
μηθῆναι καὶ ἐν ᾿Ελευσῖνι αὐτοῦ καταμείναντος 
Εὐμόλπου. δύναιτο ὃ ἂν κατὰ ἄλλην τινὰ ἐν- 
m e 4 2 / / . » 
ταῦθα ὁ Δυσαύλης ἀφικέσθαι πρόφασιν καὶ οὐχ 
ὡς οἱ Φλιάσιοί φασιν. οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ Κελεῷ προση]- 
Κων ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν οὐδὲ ἄλλως ἦν ἐν τοῖς ἐπιφανέσιν 
᾿Ελευσινίων' οὐ γὰρ ἄν ποτε Ὄμηρος παρῆκεν 
A 8 « 
αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσιν. ἔστι γὰρ καὶ Ὁμήρῳ πεποι- 
ημένα ἐς Δήμητραν: ἐν δὲ αὐτοῖς καταλέγων τοὺς 
/ e . A A \ A ή 
διδαχθέντας ὑπὸ τῆς θεοῦ τὴν τελετὴν Δυσαύλην 
Σο 3 . / x \ Y \ 
οὐδένα οἶδεν Ἐλευσίνιον. ἔχει δὲ οὕτω τὰ ἔπη- 

δεῖξεν 'Γριπτολέμῳ τε Διοκλεῖ τε πληξίππῳ 
Εὐμόλπου τε βίη Κελεῷ θ᾽ ἡγήτορι λαῶν 
δρησμοσύνην ἱερῶν καὶ ἐπέφραδεν ὄργια πᾶσιν. 

320 

CORINTH, xiv. 1-3 

XIV. Celeae is some five stades distant from the 
ity, and here they celebrate the mysteries in honour 
f Demeter, not every year but every fourth year. 
‘he initiating priest is not appointed for life, but at 
ach celebration they elect a fresh one, who takes, 
Γ he cares to do so,a wife. In this respect their 
ustom differs from that at Eleusis, but the actual 
elebration is modelled on the Eleusinian rites. The 
hliasians themselves admit that they copy the “ per- 
xmance ”’ at Eleusis. They say that it was Dysaules, 
he brother of Celeiis, who came to their land and 
stablished the mysteries, and that he had been ex- 
elled from Eleusis by Ion, when Ion, the son of 
‘uthus, was chosen by the Athenians to be com- 
nander-in-chief in the Eleusinian war. Now I cannot 
ossibly agree with the Phliasians in supposing that 
n Eleusinian was ‘conquered in battle and driven 
way into exile, for the war terminated in a treaty 
εἴοτε it was fought out, and Eumolpus himself re- 
nained at Eleusis. But it is possible that Dysaules 
‘ame to Phlius for some other reason than that given 
Υ the Phliasians. I do not believe either that he 
vas related to Celeiis, or that he was in any way 
listinguished at Eleusis, otherwise Homer would 
1ever have passed him by in his poems. For Homer 
5 one of those who have written in honour of De- 
neter, and when he is making a list of those to 
whom the goddess taught the mysteries he knows 
nothing of an Eleusinian named Dysaules. These 
ire the verses ! :— 

“ She to Triptolemus taught, and to Diocles, driver of 
horses, 

Also to mighty Eumolpus, to Celeiis, leader of peoples, 

Cult of the holy rites, to them all her mystery telling.” 

1 Hymn to Demeter, 474-476. 

321 
VOL. I. Υ a 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

4 οὗτος δ᾽ οὖν, ὡς οἱ Φλιάσιοί φασιν, ὁ Δυσαύ 
κατεστήσατο ἐνταῦθα τὴν τελετὴν καὶ οὗ 
“ἣν ὁ τῷ χωρίῳ τὸ ὄνομα παραθέμενος Kere 
Δυσαύλου τέ ἐστιν ἐνταῦθα, ὡς εἴρηταί 
μνῆμα. πρότερον δὲ ἄρα ἐπεποίητο ὁ ᾿Αράντε 
τάφος" ὕστερον γὰρ κατὰ τὸν Φλιασίων Að 
καὶ οὐκ ἐπὶ τῆς "Αραντος βασιλείας ἀφίκετ 
Δυσαύλης. Φλιάσιοι γὰρ Προμηθεῖ γενέσθαι 
Ἰαπετοῦ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον φασὶν Ἄρα 
καὶ τρισὶν ἀνθρώπων γενεαῖς Πελασγοῦ τε εἶναι 
πρεσβύτερον τοῦ ᾿Αρκάδος καὶ τῶν λεγομένων 
᾿Αθήνῃσιν αὐτοχθόνων.-- τοῦ δὲ ᾿Ανακτόρου κα- ͵ 
λουμένου πρὸς τῷ ὀρόφῳ Πέλοπος ἅρμα λέγουσιν ' 
ἀνακεῖσθαι. | 

XV. Φλιασίοις μὲν δὴ τοσαῦτα Aoyou μάλεστα 
ἦν ἄξια' ἐκ Κορίνθου δ ἐς "Αργος ἐρχομένῳ 
Κλεωναὶ πόλις ἐστὶν οὐ μεγάλη. παῖδα δὲ εἶναι 
Πέλοπος Κλεώνην λέγουσιν, οἱ δὲ τῷ παρὰ 
Σικυῶνα ῥέοντι ᾿Ασωπῷ θυγατέρα ἐπὶ ταῖς ĞA- | 
λαις Κλεώνην γενέσθαι" τὸ δ οὖν ὄνομα ἀπὸ τοῦ | 
ἑτέρου τούτων ἐτέθη τῇ πόλει. ἐνταῦθά ἐστιν | 
ἱερὸν ᾿Αθηνᾶς, τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα Σκύλλιδος τέχνη 
καὶ Διποίνου' μαθητὰς δὲ εἶναι Δαιδάλου σφᾶς, | 
οἱ δὲ καὶ γυναῖκα ἐκ Γόρτυνος ἐθέλουσι λαθεῖν | 
Δαίδαλον καὶ τὸν Δίποινον καὶ Σκύλλιν ἐκ τῆς 
γυναικός οἱ ταύτης γενέσθαι. ἐν Κλεωναῖς δὲ 
τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ ἱερὸν καὶ μνῆμα Εὐρύτου καὶ 
Κτεάτου' θεωροὺς γὰρ ἐξ Ἤλιδος ἐς τὸν ἀγῶνα 
ἰόντας τῶν Ἰσθμίων αὐτοὺς ἐνταῦθα Ἡρακλῆς 
κατετόξευσεν, ἔγκλημα ποιούμενος ὅτι οἱ πρὸς 
Αὐγείαν πολεμοῦντι ἀντετάχθησαν. 

2 Ἐκ Κλεωνῶν δέ εἶσιν ἐς "Αργος ὁδοὶ δύο, ἡ : 

322 

CORINTH, xiv. 4-Χν. 2 

At all events, this Dysaules, according to the Phli- 
asians, established the mysteries here, and he it was 
who gave to the place the name Celeae. I have 
already said that the tomb of Dysaules is here. So the 
grave of Aras was made earlier, for according to the 
account of the Phliasians Dysaules did not arrive in 
the reign of Aras, but later. For Aras, they say, was a 
contemporary of Prometheus, the son of lapetus, and 
three generations of men older than Pelasgus the 
son of Arcas and those called at Athens aboriginals. 
On the roof of what is called the Anactorum they 
say is dedicated the chariot of Pelops. 
=—-XV. These are the things that I found most 
worthy of mention among the Phliasians. On the 
road from Corinth to Argos is a small city Cleonae. 
They say that Cleones was a son of Pelops, though 
there are some who say that Cleone was one of the 
daughters of Asopus, that flows by the side of Sicyon. 
Be this as it may, one or other of these two accounts 
for the name of the city. Here there is a sanctuary 
of Athena, and the image is a work of Scyllis and 
Dipoenus. Some hold them to have been the pupils 
of Daedalus, but others will have it that Daedalus took 
a wife from Gortyn, and that Dipoenus and Scyllis 
were his sons by this woman. Cleonae possesses 
this sanctuary and the tomb of Eurytus and Cte- 
atus. The story is that as they were going as 
ambassadors from Elis to the Isthmian contest they 
were here shot by Heracles, who charged them with 
being his adversaries in the war against Augeas. 
: From Cleonae to Argos are two roads ; one is direct 

323 

fA. sixth 
cent, 
B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μὲν ἀνδράσιν εὐξώνοις καὶ ἔστιν -ἐπίτομος, ý δὲ 
ἐπὶ τοῦ καλουμένου Ἔρητοῦ, στενὴ μὲν καὶ αὐτὴ 
περιεχόντων ὀρῶν, ὀχήμασι δέ ἐ ἐστιν ὅμως ἐπιτη- 
δειοτέρα. ἐν τούτοις τοῖς ὄρεσι τὸ σπήλαιον ἔτι 
δείκνυται τοῦ λέοντος, καὶ ἡ Νεμέα τὸ χωρίον 
ἀπέχει σταδίους πέντε που καὶ δέκα. ἐν δὲ 
αὐτῇ Νεμείου. Διὸς ναός ἐστι θέας ἄξιος, πλην 
ὅσον κατερρυήκει τε ὁ ὄροφος καὶ ἄγαλμα οὐδὲν 
ἔτι ἐλείπετο' κυπαρίσσων τε ἄλσος ἐστὶ περὶ 
τὸν ναόν, καὶ τὸν Ὀφέλτην ἐνταῦθα ὑπὸ τῆς 
τροφοῦ τεθέντα ἐς τὴν πόαν διαφθα τ λέ- 
3 γουσιν ὑπὸ τοῦ δράκοντος. θύουσι δε ’ Αργεῖοι 
τῷ Διὶ καὶ ἐν τῇ Νεμέᾳ καὶ Νεμείου Διὸς ἱερέα 
αἱροῦνται, καὶ δὴ καὶ δρόμου προτιθέασιν ἀγῶνα 
ἀνδράσιν. ὡπλισμένοις Νεμείων πανηγύρει τῶν 
χειμερινῶν. ἐνταῦθα ἔστι μὲν Ὀφέλτου τάφος, 
περὶ δὲ αὐτὸν θριγκὸς λίθων καὶ ἐντὸς τοῦ περι- 
Βόλου βωμοί: ἔστι δὲ χῶμα γῆς Λυκούργου 
μνῆμα τοῦ ᾿Οφέλτου πατρός. τὴν δὲ πηγὴν 
᾿Αδράστειαν ὀνομάζουσιν εἴτε ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῃ τινὶ αἰτία 
εἴτε καὶ ἀνευρόντος αὐτὴν ᾿Αδράστου' τὸ δὲ 
ὄνομα λέγουσι τῇ Χώρᾳ Νεμέαν δοῦναι θυγατέρα 
᾿Ασωποῦ καὶ ταύτην. καὶ ὄρος ᾿Απέσας ἐστὶν 
ὑπέρ τὴν Νεμέαν, ἔνθα Περσέα πρῶτον Διὶ θῦσαι 
4 λέγουσιν ᾿Απεσαντίῳ.--ἀνελθοῦσι δὲ ἐ ἐς τὸν Έρη- 
τὸν, καὶ αὖθις τὴν ἐς "Αργος i ἰοῦσίν ἐστι Μυκηνῶν 
ἐρείπια ἐν ἀριστερᾷ. καὶ ὅτι μὲν Περσεὺς ἐγέ- 
νετο Μυκηνῶν οἰκιστής, ἴσασιν Ἕλληνες: ἐγὼ δὲ 
αἰτίαν τε γράψω τοῦ οἰκισμοῦ καὶ δι ἥντινα 
πρόφασιν ᾿Αργεῖοι Μυκηναίους ὕστερον ἀνέστη- 
σαν. ἐν γὰρ τῇ νῦν ᾿Αργολίδι ὀνομαξομένῃ τὰ 
μὲν ἔτι παλαιότερα οὐ μνημονεύουσιν, Ἴναχον 

324 

CORINTH, xv. 2-4 

and only for active men, the other goes along the 
pass called Tretus (Pierced), is narrow like the other, 
being surrounded by mountains, but is nevertheless 
more suitable for carriages. In these mountains is 
still shown the cave of the famous lion, and the place 
Nemea is distant some fifteen stades. In Nemea is a 
noteworthy temple of Nemean Zeus, but I found 
that the roof had fallen in and that there was no 
longer remaining any image. Around the temple is 
a grove of cypress trees, and here it is, they 
say, that Opheltes was placed by his nurse in the 
grass and killed by the serpent. The Argives 
offer burnt sacrifices to Zeus in Nemea also, and 
elect a priest of Nemean Zeus; moreover they offer 
a prize for a race in armour at the winter cele- 
bration of the Nemean games. In this place is the 
grave of Opheltes; around it is a fence of stones, 
and within the enclosure are altars. There is also a 
mound of earth which is the tomb of Lycurgus, the 
father of Opheltes. The spring they call Adrastea 
for some reason or other, perhaps because Adrastus 
found it. The land was named, they say, after Nemea, 
who was another daughter of Asopus. Above Nemea 
is Mount Apesas, where they say that Perseus first 
sacrificed to Zeus of Apesas. Ascending to Tretus, 
and again going along the road to Argos, you see on 
the left the ruins of Mycenae. The Greeks are aware 
that the founder of Mycenae was Perseus, so I will 
narrate the cause of its foundation and the reason 
why the Argives afterwards laid Mycenae waste. 
The oldest tradition in the region now called Argolis 

325 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δὲ βασιλεύοντα τόν τε ποταμὸν ἀφ᾽ αὑτοῦ λέγου- 
5 σιν ὀνομάσαι καὶ θῦσαι τῇ "Ἥρᾳ. λέγεται δὲ 
καὶ ὧδε λόγος" ωνέα ἐν τῇ γῆ ταύτῃ γενέσθαι 
πρῶτον, Ἴναχον ' δὲ οὐ οὐκ ἄνδρα ἀλλὰ τὸν ποταμὸν 
πατέρα εἶναι Φορωνεῖ- τοῦτον δὲ Ποσειδῶνι καὶ 
"Ηρᾳ δικάσαι περὶ τῆς χώρας, σὺν δὲ αὐτῷ 
Κηφισόν τε καὶ ᾿Αστερίωνα ποταμόν" κρινάντων 
δὲ "ρας εἶναι τὴν γῆν, οὕτω σφίσιν ἀφανίσαι 
τὸ ὕδωρ Ποσειδῶνα. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὔτε “Ivayos 
ὕδωρ. οὔτε ἄλλος παρέχεται τῶν εἰρημένων πστα- 
μῶν ὅτι μὴ ὕσαντος τοῦ θεοῦ" θέρους δὲ ava 
σφισίν ἐστι τὰ ῥεύματα, πλὴν τῶν ἐν Λέρνῃ. 
Φορωνεὺς δὲ ὁ Ἰνάχου τοὺς ἀνθρώπους συνήγαγε 
πρῶτον ἐς κοινόν, σποράδας τέως, καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν 
ἑκάστοτε οἰκοῦντας καὶ τὸ χωρίον ἐς ὃ πρῶτον 
ἠθροίσθησαν a ἄστυ ὠνομάσθη Φορωνικόν. 

XVI. Άργος δὲ Φορωνέως θυγατριδοῦς βασι- 
λεύσας μετὰ Φορωνέα ὠνόμασεν ἆφ αὐτοῦ τὴν 
χώραν. Άργου δὲ Πείρασος γίνεται καὶ Φόρβας, 
Φόρβαντος δὲ Τριόπας, Τριόπα δὲ Ἴασος καὶ 
᾽Αγήνωρ. Ἰὼ μὲν οὖν Ἰάσου θυγάτηρ, εἴτε ὡς 
"Ἡρόδοτος ἔγραψεν εἴτε καθ ὃ λέγουσιν νὰ 
ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἀφικνεῖται" Κρότωπο ropit ὁ ᾽Αγή- 
νορος ἔσχε μετὰ Ἴασον τὴν åp% ήν, Kporæwmov 
Σθενέλας γίνεται, Δάναὸς δ᾽ ἀπ  Ἀὐγύπτου πλεύ- 
σας ἐπὶ Γελάνορα τὸν ᾿Σθένέλα τοὺς ἀπογόνους 
τοὺς ᾿Αγήνορος βασιλείας ἔπαυσεν. τὰ δὲ ἀπὸ 
τούτου καὶ οὗ πάντες ὁμοίως ἴσασι, θυγατέρων 
τῶν Δαναοῦ τὸ ἐς τοὺς ἀνεψιοὺς τόλμημα καὶ ὡς 
ἀποθανόντος Δαναοῦ τὴν ἀρχὴν Λυγκεὺς ἔσχεν. 

9 οἱ δὲ Ἄβαντος τοῦ Λυγκέως παῖδες τὴν βασι- 
λείαν ἐνείμαντο, καὶ ών μὲν αὐτοῦ κατέ- 

326 

CORINTH, xv. 4--χνι. 2 

is that when Inachus was king he named the river 
after himself and sacrificed to Hera. There is also 
another legend which says that Phoroneus was the 
frst inhabitant of this land, and that Inachus, the 
father of Phoroneus, was not a man but the river. 
This river, with the rivers Cephisus and Asterion, 
judged concerning the land between Poseidon and 
Hera. They decided that the land belonged to Hera, 
and so Poseidon made their waters disappear. For 
this reason neither Inachus nor either of the other 
rivers I have mentioned provides any water except 
after rain. In summer their streams are dry except 

= those at Lerna. Phoroneus, the son of Inachus, was 

the first to gather together the inhabitants, who up 
to that time had been scattered and living as isolated 
families. The place into which they were first gathered 
was named the City of Phoroneus. 

XVI. Argus, the grandson of Phoroneus, succeed- 
ing to the throne after Phoroneus, gave his name to 
the land. Argus begat Peirasus and Phorbas, Phorbas 
begat Triopas, and Triopas begat Iasus and Agenor. 
Io, the daughter of Iasus, went to Egypt, whether 
the circumstances be as Herodotus records or as the 
Greeks say. After lasus, Crotopus, the son of Agenor, 
came to the throne and begat Sthenelas, but Danaus 
sailed from Egypt against Gelanor, the son of Sthen- 
elas, and stayed the succession to the kingdom of 
the descendants of Agenor. What followed is known 
to all alike: the crime the daughters of Danaus 
committed against their cousins, and how, on the 
death of Danaus, Lynceus succeeded him. But the 
sons of Abas, the son of Lynceus, divided the king- 
dom between themselves; Acrisius remained where 

327 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE | 

µεινεν ἐν τῷ “A pyet, Ἡροῖτος δὲ τὸ Ἡραῖον καὶ 
Μιδείαν καὶ Τίρυνθα ἔ ἔσχε καὶ ὅσα πρὸς θαλάσσῃ 
τῆς ᾿Αργείας'. σημεῖά τε τῆς ἐν Τίρυνθι οἰκήσεως 
Προίτου καὶ ἐς τόδε λείπεται. χρόνῳ δὲ ὕστερον 
᾿Ακρίσιος Περσέα αὐτὸν τε περιεῖναι πυνθανό- 
μενος καὶ ἔργα ἀποδείκνυσθαι, ἐς Λάρισαν ἀπεχώ- 
ρησε τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ Πηνειῷ. Περσεὺς δὲ---ἐδεῖν γὰρ 
πάντως ἤθελε τὸν γονέα τῆς μητρὸς καὶ λόγοις τε 
χρηστοῖς καὶ ἔργοις δεξιώσασθαι--ἔρχετα: παρ 
αὐτὸν ἐς τὴν Λάρισαν: καὶ ὁ Mey ola ἡλικίᾳ τε 
ἀκμάζων καὶ τοῦ δίσκου χαίρων τῷ εὑρήματι 
ἐπεδείκνυτο ἐς ἅπαντας, ᾿Ακρίσιος δὲ λανθάνει 
κατὰ δαίμονα ὑποπεσὼν τοῦ δίσκου τῇ ὁρμῇ. 

ὁ ᾿Ακρισίῳ μὲν ἡ πρόρρησις τοῦ θεοῦ τέλος 
an οὐδὲ ἀπέτρεψέν οἱ τὸ χρεὼν τὰ ἐς τὴν 
παῖδα καὶ τὸν θυγατριδοῦν παρευρήματα' Ilep- 
σεὺς δὲ ὡς ἀνέστρεψεν ἐ ἐς ᾿Άργος--ἠσχύνετο γὰρ 
τοῦ φόνου τῇ φήμῃ-- » Μεγαπένθην τὸν Προίτου 
πείθει οἱ τὴν ἀρχὴν ᾿ ἀντιδοῦναι, παραλαβὼν δὲ 
αὐτὸς τὴν ἐκείνου Μυκήνας κτίξει. τοῦ ξίφους 
γὰρ ἐνταῦθα ἐξέπεσεν ὁ μύκης αὐτῷ, καὶ τὸ 
σημεῖον ἐς οἰκισμὸν ἐνόμιξε συμβῆναι πόλεως. 
ἤκουσα δὲ καὶ ὡς διψῶντι ἐπῆλθεν ἀνελέσθαι 
οἱ μύκητα ἐκ τῆς γῆς, ῥυέντος δὲ ὕδατος πιὼν 
καὶ ἡσθεὶς Μυκήνας ἔθετο τὸ ὄνομα τῷ χωρίῳ. 
"Όμηρος δὲ ἐν Ὀδυσσείᾳ γυναικὸς Μυκήνης ἐν 
ἔπει τῷδε ἐμνήσθη 

Tupo τ᾽ ᾽Αλκμήνη τε ἐυστέφανός τε Μυκήνη. 

ταύτην εἶναι θυγατέρα Ἰνάχου γυναῖκα δὲ ᾿Αρέ- 
στορος τὰ ἔ ἔπη λέγει, ἃ ἃ δὴ ss Έλληνες καλοῦσιν 
Ἠοίας µεγάλας' ἀπὸ ταύτης οὖν γεγονέναι καὶ 

328 

CORINTH, xvi. 2-4 

he was at Argos, and Proetus took over the Heraeum, 
Mideia, Tiryns, and the Argive coast region. Traces 
of the residence of Proetus in Tiryns remain to the 
present day. Afterwards Acrisius, learning that Per- 
seus himself was not only alive but accomplishing great 
achievements, retired to Larisa on the Peneiis. And 
Perseus, wishing at all costs to see the father of his 
mother and to greet him with fair words and deeds, 
visited him at Larisa. Being in the prime of life 
and proud of his inventing the quoit, he gave displays 
before all, and Acrisius, as luck would have it, stepped 
unnoticed into the path of the quoit. So the pre- 
diction of the god to Acrisius found its fulfilment, 
nor was his fate prevented by his precautions against 
his daughter and grandson. Perseus, ashamed be- 
cause of the gossip about the homicide, on his return 
to Argos induced Megapenthes, the son of Proetus, to 
make an exchange of kingdoms; taking over him- 
self that of Megapenthes, he founded Mycenae. 
For on its site the cap (myces) fell from his scabbard, 
and he regarded this as a sign to found a city. I 
have also heard the following account. He was 
thirsty, and the thought occurred to him to pick 
up a mushroom (myces) from the ground. Drinking 
with joy water that flowed from it, he gave to 
the place the name of Mycenae. Homer in the 
Odyssey mentions a woman Mycene in the following 
verse :— 

“Tyro and Alemene and the fair-crowned lady 
Mycene.” | 

She is said to have been the daughter of Inachus 
and the wife of Arestor in the poem which the 
Greeks call the Great Eoeae. So they say that this 

329 

a 

4 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τὸ ὄνομα τῇ πόλει φασίν. ὃν δὲ προσποιοῦσιν 
᾿Ακουσιλάῳ λόγον, Μυκηνέα υἱὸν εἶναι Σπάρ- 
τωνος, Σπάρτωνα δὲ Φορωνέως, οὐκ ἂν ἔγωγε 
ἀποδεξαίμην, διότι μηδὲ ᾿αὐτοὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι. 
Λακεδαιμονίους γὰρ Σπάρτης μὲν γυναικὸς εἰκὼν 
ἐστιν ἐν ᾽Αμύκλαις, Σπάρτωνα δὲ Φορωνέως 
παῖδα θαυμάζοιεν ἃ ἂν καὶ ἀρχὴν ἀκούσαντες. 

Ὕππ--- Μυκήνας δὲ ᾿Αργεῖοι καθεῖλον ὑπὸ ζηλοτυπίας. 

ἡσυχαξόντων γὰρ τῶν ᾿Αργείων κατὰ τὴν ἐπι- 
στρατείαν τοῦ Μήδου, Μυκηναῖοι. πέμπουσιν ἐς 
Θερμοπύλας ὀγδοήκοντα ἄνδρας, οἳ Λακεδαιμονί- 
οις μετέσχον τοῦ ἔργου: τοῦτο ἤνεγκεν ὄλεθρόν 
σφισι τὸ φιλοτίμημα. παροξῦναν ᾿Αργείους. λεί- 
πεται δὲ ὅ ὅμως ἔτι καὶ ἄλλα τοῦ περιβόλου καὶ ἡ 
πύλη, λέοντες δὲ ἐφεστήκασιν αὐτῆ" Κυκλώπων 
δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἔργα εἶναι λέγουσιν, οἳ Προίτῳ τὸ 
τεῖχος ἐποίησαν ἐν Τίρυνθι. Μυκηνῶν δὲ ἐν τοῖς 
ἐρειπίοις κρήνη τέ ἐστι καλουμένη Περσεία καὶ 
᾿Ατρέως καὶ τῶν παίδων ὑπόγαια οἰκοδομήματα, 
ἔνθα οἱ θησαυροί. σφισι τῶν χρημάτων ἦσαν. 
τάφος δὲ ἔστι μὲν ᾿Ατρέως, εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ ὅσους σὺν 
᾿Αγαμέμνονι ἐπανήκοντας ἐξ Ἰλίου δειπνίσας 
κατεφόνευσεν Αἴγισθος. τοῦ μὲν δὴ Κασσάνδρα: 
μνήματος ἀμφισβητοῦσι Λακεδαιμονίων οἱ περὶ 
᾿Αμύκλας οἰκοῦντες: ἕτερον δέ ἐστιν ᾿Αγαμέ 
μνονος, τὸ ) δὲ Εὐρυμέδοντος τοῦ ἡνιόχου, καὶ Τελε- 
δάµου τὸ αὐτὸ καὶ Ἠέλοπος-- τούτους yap τεκεῖν 
διδύμους Κασσάνδραν φασί, νηπίους δὲ ἔτι ὄντας 
ἐπικατέσφαξε τοῖς γονεῦσιν Αἴγισθος — καὶ 
᾿Ηλέκτρας: Πυλάδῃ γὰρ συνῴκησεν ᾿Ὀρέστου 
δόντος. Ἑλλάνικος δὲ καὶ τάδε ἔγραψε, Mé- 
δοντα καὶ Στρόφιον γενέσθαι Πυλάδῃ παῖδας ἐξ 

330 

CORINTH, xvi. 4-7 

lady has given her name to the city. But the 
account which is attributed to Acusilaus, that My- 
ceneus was the son of Sparton, and Sparton of 
Phoroneus, I cannot accept, because the Lacedae- 
monians themselves do not accept it either. For 
the Lacedaemonians have at Amyclae a portrait 
statue of a woman named Sparte, but they would be 
amazed at the mere mention of a Sparton, son of 
Phoroneus. 

It was jealousy which caused the Argives to destroy 
Mycenae. For at the time of the Persian invasion 
the Argives made no move, but the Mycenaeans 
sent eighty men to Thermopylae who shared in the 
achievement of the Lacedaemonians. ‘This eager- 
ness for distinction brought ruin upon them by ex- 
asperating the Argives. There still remain, however, 
parts of the city wall, including the gate, upon which 
stand lions. These, too, are said to be the work of 
the Cyclopes, who made for Proetus the wall at 
Tiryns. / In the ruins of Mycenae is a fountain called 
Persea; there are also underground chambers of 
Atreus and his children, in which were stored 
their treasures. ~There is the grave of Atreus, along 
with the graves of such as returned with Agamemnon 
from Troy, and were murdered by Aegisthus after he 
had given them a banquet. As for the tomb of Cas- 
sandra, it is claimed by the Lacedaemonians who 
dwell around Amyclae. Agamemnon has his tomb, 
and so has Eurymedon the charioteer, while another 
is shared by Teledamus and Pelops, twin sons, they 
say, of Cassandra, whom while yet babies Aegisthus 
slew after their parents. Electra has her tomb, for 
Orestes married her to Pylades. Hellanicus adds 
that the children of Pylades by Electra were Medon 

33 her 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

Ἠλέκτρας. Κλυταιμνήστρα δὲ eran καὶ Ale 
γισθος ὀλίγον ἀπωτέρω τοῦ τείχους", ἐντὸς δὲ 
ἀπηξιώθησαν., ἔνθα ᾿Αγαμέμνων τε αὐτὸς ἔκειτο 
καὶ οἱ σὺν ἐκείνῳ φονευθέντες. 
— XVII. Μυκηνῶν δὲ ἐ ἐν ἀριστερᾷ πέντε ἀπέ 

καὶ δέκα στάδια τὸ Ἡραῖον. ῥεῖ δὲ κατὰ τὴν 
ὁδὸν ὕδωρ ᾿Ελευθέριον καλούμενον" χρῶνται é 
αὐτώ πρὸς καθάρσια αἱ περὶ τὸ ἑερὸν καὶ τῶν 
θυσιῶν ἐς τὰς ἀπορρήτους. αὐτὸ δὲ τὸ ἱερόν 
ἐστιν ἐν χθαμαλωτέρῳ τῆς Εὐβοίας" τὸ γὰρ δὴ | 
ὄρος τοῦτο ὀνομάξουσιν Εὔβοιαν, λέγοντες Ao- | 
τερίωνι γενέσθαι τῷ ποταμῷ θυγατέρας Εὔβοιαν | 
καὶ Ἡρόσυμναν κα ᾿Ακραίαν, εἶναι δὲ σφᾶς ' 

2 τροφοὺς τῆς Ἡρας" καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν ᾿Ακραίας τὸ | 
ὄρος καλοῦσι τὸ ἀπαντικρὺ τοῦ Ἡραίου, ἀπὸ δὲ 
Εὐβοίας ὅσον περὶ. τὸ ἱερόν, Ἡρόσυμναν δὲ τὴν 
ὑπὸ τὸ Ἡραῖον χώραν. ὁ δὲ ᾿Αστερίων οὗτος 
ῥέων ὑπὲρ τὸ “Ἡραῖον ἐς «φάραγγα ἐσπίπτων 
ἀφανίξεται. φύεται δὲ αὐτοῦ πόα πρὸς Tals . 
ὄχθαις" ἀστερίωνα ὀνομάξουσι καὶ τὴν πόαν' | 
ταύτην τῇ "Ἠρᾳ καὶ αὐτὴν φέρουσι καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν 

3 φύλλων αὐτῆς στεφάνους πλέκουσιν. ἀρχιτέ- | 
κτονα μὲν δὴ γενέσθαι τοῦ ναοῦ λέγουσιν Εὐπό- | 
λεμον ᾿Αργεῖον" ὁπόσα δὲ ἑ ὑπὲρ τοὺς κίονάς ἐστιν | 
εἰργασμένα, τὰ μὲν ἐς τὴν Διὸς γένεσιν καὶ θεῶν 
καὶ γιγάντων μάχην ἔχει, τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸν πρὸς 
Τροίαν πόλεμον καὶ Ἰλίου τὴν ἅλωσι». ἀνδρι- 
άντες τε ἑστήκασι πρὸ τῆς ἐσόδου καὶ .Ὑυναικῶν, 
αἳ γεγόνασιν ἱέρειαι τῆς "ρας, καὶ ἡρώων ἄλλων 
τε καὶ ᾿Ορέστου' τὸν γὰρ ἐπίγραμμα ἔχοντα, 
ὡς εἴη βασιλεὺς Αὔγουστος, Ὀρέστην εἶναι 
λέγουσιν. ἐν δὲ τῷ προνάῳ τῇ μὲν Χάριτες 

332 

CORINTH, xvi. 7--χνῃ. 3 

and Strophius. Clytemnestra and Aegisthus were 
buried at some little distance from the wall. They 
were thought unworthy of a place within it, where lay 
Agamemnon himself and those who were murdered 
with him. 

XVII. Fifteen stades distant from Mycenae is on 
the left the Heraeum. Beside the road flows the brook 
called Water of Freedom. The priestesses use it in 
purifications and for such sacrifices as are secret. 
The sanctuary itself is on a lower part of Euboea. 
Euboea is the name they give to the hill here, 
saying that Asterion the river had three daughters, 
Euboea, Prosymna, and Acraea, and that they were 
nurses of Hera. The hill opposite the Heraeum 
they name after Acraea, the environs of the sanc- 
tuary they name after Euboea, and the land beneath 
the Heraeum after Prosymna. This Asterion flows 
_ above the Heraeum, and falling into a cleft disap- 
pears. On its banks grows a plant, which also is called 
asterion. They offer the plant itself to Hera, and 
from its leaves weave her garlands. It is said that 
the architect of the temple was Eupolemus, an Argive. 
The sculptures carved above the pillars refer either 
to the birth of Zeus and the battle between the gods 
and the giants, or to the Trojan war and the cap- 
ture of Ilium. Before the entrance stand statues of 
women who have been priestesses to Hera and of 
various heroes, including Orestes. They say that 
Orestes is the one with the inscription, that it re- 
presents the Emperor Augustus. In the fore-temple 
are on the one side ancient statues of the Graces, 

333 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἀγάλματά ἐστιν ἀρχαῖα, ἐν δεξιᾷ δὲ κλίνη τῆς 
"ρας καὶ ἀνάθημα ἀσπὶς ἣν Μενέλαός ποτε 
4 ἀφείλετο Εὔφορβον ἐ ἐν Ἰλίῳ. τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα τῆς 
“Hpas ἐπὶ θρόνου κάθηται μεγέθει μέγα, χρυσοῦ 
μὲν καὶ ἐλέφαντος, Πολυκλείτου δὲ ἔ ἔργον" ἔπεστι 
δέ οἱ στέφανος Χάριτας ἔ ἔχων καὶ Ὥρας ἐπειργα- 
σμένας, καὶ τῶν χειρῶν τῇ μὲν καρπὸν φέρει ῥοιᾶς, 
τῇ δὲ σκῆπτρον. τὰ μὲν οὖν ἐς τὴν ῥοιὰν-- 
ἀπορρητότερος γάρ. ἐστιν ὁ λόγος--ἀφείσθω μοι" 
κόκκυγα δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ σκήπτρῳ καθῆσθαί φασι 
λέγοντες τὸν Δία, ὅ ὅτε ἤρα παρθένου τῆς "Ἠρας, 
ἐς τοῦτον τὸν ὄρνιθα ἀλλαγῆναι, τὴν δὲ ἅτε 
παίγνιον θηρᾶσαι. τοῦτον τὸν λόγον καὶ ὅσα 
ἐοικότα εἴρηται περὶ θεῶν οὐκ ἀποδεχόμενος 
ὅ γράφω, γράφω δὲ οὐδὲν ἧσσον. λέγεται δὲ 
παρεστηκέναι τῇ "Hpg τέχνη Ναυκύδους ἄγαλμα 
Ἥβης, ἐλέφαντος καὶ τοῦτο καὶ 'Χρυσοῦ' παρὰ 
δὲ αὐτήν ἐστιν ἐπὶ κίονος ἄγαλμα" 'Ἠρας å ἀρχαῖον. 
τὸ δὲ ἀρχαιότατον πεποίηται μὲν ἐξ -ἀχράδος, 
ἀνετέθη δὲ ἐς Τίρυνθα i ὑπὸ Ἡειράσου τοῦ ᾿Άργου, 
Τίρυνθα δὲ ἀνελόντες ᾿Αργεῖοι κομίξουσιν ἐς τὸ 
‘Hpaiov: ὃ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς εἶδον, καθήμενον ἄγαλμα 

0 οὗ μέγα. ἀναθήματα δὲ τὰ ἄξια λόγου βωμὸς 
ἔχων ἐπειργασμένον τὸν λεγόμενον Ἥβης καὶ 
“Ἡρακλέους γάμον: οὗτος μὲν ἀργύρου, χρυσοῦ 
δὲ καὶ λίθων λαμπόντων ᾿Αδριανὸς βασιλεὺς 
ταὼν ἀνέθηκεν' ἀνέθηκε δέ, ὅτι τὴν ὄρνιθα 
ἱερὰν τῆς "ρας νομίξουσι. κεῖται δὲ καὶ στέ- 
φανος χρυσοῦς καὶ πέπλος πορφύρας, Νέρωνος 
7 ταῦτα ἀναθήματα. ἔστι δὲ ὑπὲρ τὸν ναὸν τοῦτον 
τοῦ προτέρου ναοῦ θεμέλιά τε καὶ εἰ δή τι ἄλλο 
ὑπελίπετο ἡ φλόξ. κατεκαύθη δὲ τὴν ἱέρειαν 

334 

A 

CORINTH, xvu. 3-7 

and on the right a couch of Hera and a votive offer- 
ing, the shield which Menelaus once took from Eu- 
phorbus at Troy. The statue of Hera is seated on a 
throne ; it is huge, made of gold and ivory, and is 
a work of Polycleitus. She is wearing a crown 
with Graces and Seasons worked upon it, and in one 
hand she carries a pomegranate and in the other a 
sceptre. About the pomegranate I must say nothing, 
for its story is somewhat of a holy mystery. The 
presence of a cuckoo seated on the sceptre they 
explain by the story that when Zeus was in Jove 
with Hera in her maidenhood he changed himself 
into this bird, and she caught it to be her pet. 
This tale and similar legends about the gods I relate 
without believing them, but I relate them neverthe- 
less. By the side of Hera stands what is said to be 
an image of Hebe fashioned by Naucydes; it, too, 
is of ivory and gold. By its side is an old image 
of Hera ona pillar. The oldest image is made οἱ 
wild-pear wood, and was dedicated in Tiryns by 
Peirasus, son of Argus, and when the Argives 
destroyed Tiryns they carried it away to the 
Heraeum. I myself saw it, a small, seated image. 
Of the votive offerings the following are note- 
worthy. There is an altar upon which is wrought in 
relief the fabled marriage of Hebe and Heracles. 
This is of silver, but the peacock dedicated by the 
Emperor Hadrian is of gold and gleaming stones. 
He dedicated it because they hold the bird to be 
sacred to Hera. There lie here a golden crown and 
a purple robe, offerings of Nero. Above this temple 
are the foundations of the earlier temple and such 
parts of it as were spared by the flames. It was 

335 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τῆς "ρας Χρυσηίδα ὕπνου καταλαβόντος, ὅτε 
ὁ λύχνος πρὸ τῶν στεφανωμάτων ἥπτετο. καὶ 
Χρυσηὶς μὲν ἀπελθοῦσα ἐς Τεγέαν τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν 
τὴν ᾿ΑἉλέαν ἱκέτευεν: ᾿Αργεῖοι δὲ καίπερ κακοῦ 
τηλικούτου παρόντος σφίσι τὴν εἰκόνα οὐ καθεῖ- 
λον τῆς Χρυσηίδος, ἀνάκειται δὲ καὶ ἐς τόδε τοῦ 
ναοῦ τοῦ κατακαυθέντος ἔμπροσθεν. 

XVIII. Ἐκ Μυκηνῶν δὲ ἐ ἐς "Αργος ἐρχομένοις 
ἐν ἀριστερᾷ Περσέως παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν ἐ ἐστιν ἡρῷον. 
ἔχει, μὲν δὴ καὶ ἐνταῦθα τιμὰς παρὰ τῶν προσ: 
χωρίων, μεγίστας δὲ ἔν τε Σερίφῳ καὶ παρ 
Αθηναίοις, οἷς Περσέως τέμενος καὶ Δίκτυος 
καὶ Κλυμένης βωμὸς σωτήρων καλουμένων Περ: 
σέως. ἐν δὲ τῇ ᾿Αργείᾳ προελθοῦσιν ὀλίγον ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ἡρῴου τούτου Θυέστου τάφος. ἐστὶν ἐν δεξιᾷ’ 
λίθου δὲ ἔπεστιν αὐτῷ κριός, ὅτι τὴν ἄρνα ô 
Θυέστης ἔσχε τὴν χρυσῆν, μοιχεύσας τοῦ ἀδελ- 
φοῦ τὴν γυναῖκα. ᾿Ατρέα δὲ οὐκ ἐπέσχεν ὁ 
λογισμὸς μετρῆσαι τὴν ἴσην, ἀλλὰ τῶν Θυέστου 
παίδων σφαγὰς καὶ τὰ .ἀδόμενα δεῖπνα ἐξειργά- 
σατο. ὕστερον δὲ οὐκ ἔχω σαφὲς εἰπεῖν πότερον 
ἀδικίας ἦρξεν Αἴγισθος ἢ προὐπῆρξεν ᾿Αγαμέ- 
μνονι φόνος Ταντάλου τοῦ Θυέστου" συνοικεῖν δέ 

ασιν αὐτὸν Κλυταιμνήστρᾳ παρθένῳ παρὰ 
Τυνδάρεω, λαβόντα. ἐγὼ δὲ καταγνῶναι μὲν οὐκ 
ἐθέλω φύσει σφᾶς γενέσθαι κακούς" εἰ δὲ ἐπὶ 
τοσοῦτον αὐτοῖς τὸ μίασμα τὸ Πέλοπος καὶ ὁ 
Μυρτίλου προστρόπαιος ἠκολούθησε, τούτοις ἦν 
ἄρα ὁμολογοῦντα, ἡνίκα ἡ Πυθία Γλαύκῳ τῷ 
᾿Επικύδους Σπαρτιάτῃ, βουλεύσαντι ἐπίορκα 
ὀμόσαι, καὶ τοῦδε εἶπεν ἐς τοὺς ἀπογόνους 
κατιέναι τὴν δίκην. 

336 

í 

| 

| 

CORINTH, xvi. 7--χνπῃ, 2 

burnt down because sleep overpowered Chryseis, the 
priestess of Hera, when the lamp before the wreaths 
set fire to them. Chryseis went to Tegea and 
supplicated Athena Alea. Although so great a dis- 
aster had befallen them the Argives did not take 
down the statue of Chryseis; it is still in position 
in front of the burnt temple. 

XVIII. By the side of the road from Mycenae to 
Argos there is on the left hand a hero-shrine of 
Perseus. The neighbouring folk, then, pay him 
honours here, but the greatest honours are paid to 
him in Seriphus and among the Athenians, who have 
a precinct sacred to Perseus and an altar of Dictys 
and Clymene, who are called the saviours of Perseus. 
Advancing a little way in the Argive territory from 
this hero-shrine one sees on the right the grave of 
Thyestes. On it is a stone ram, because Thyestes 
obtained the golden lamb after debauching his 
brother’s wife. But Atreus was not restrained by 
prudence from retaliating, but contrived the slaughter 
of the children of Thyestes and the banquet of 
which the poets tell us. But as to what followed, 
I cannot say for certain whether Aegisthus began 
the sin or whether Agamemnon sinned first in 
murdering Tantalus, the son of Fhyestes. It is said 
that Tantalus had received Clytaemnestra in marriage 
from Tyndareus when she was still a virgin. I 
myself do not wish to condemn them of having 
been wicked by nature; but if the pollution of 
Pelops and the avenging spirit of Myrtilus dogged 
their steps so long, it was after all only consistent 
that the Pythian priestess said to the Spartan 
Glaucus, the son of Epicydes, who consulted her 
about breaking his oath, that the punishment for 
this also comes upon the descendants of the sinner. 

337 
VOL, 1. Ζ 

3 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

"Amo δὲ τῶν Κριῶν-- οὕτω γὰρ τοῦ Θυέστου 
τὸ μνῆμα ὀνομάξουσι-- προελθοῦσιν ὀλίγον ἐστὶν 
ἐν ἀριστερᾷ χωρίον Μυσία καὶ Δήμητρος Μυσίας 
ἱερὸν ἀπὸ ἀνδρὸς Μυσίου τὸ ὄνομα, γενομένου 
καὶ τούτου, καθάπερ λέγουσιν ᾿Αργεῖοι, ξένου τῇ 
Δήμητρι. τούτῳ μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἔπεστιν ὄροφος 
ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ ναός ἐστιν ἄλλος ὀπτῆς πλίνθου, 
ξόανα δὲ Κόρης καὶ Πλούτωνος καὶ Δήμητρός 
ἐστι. προελθοῦσι δὲ ποταμός ἐστιν Ἴ νάχος, καὶ 
διαβᾶσιν Ἡλίου βωμός. ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἐπὶ πύλην 
ἥξεις καλουμένην ἀπὸ τοῦ πλησίον ἱεροῦ' τὸ δὲ 
ἱερόν ἐστιν Εἰλειθυίας. 

Μόνους δὲ Ἑλλήνων οἶδα ᾿Αργείους ἐς τρεῖς 
βασιλείας νεμηθέντας. ἐπὶ γὰρ τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς 
᾿Αναξαγόρου τοῦ ᾿Αργείου τοῦ Μεγαπένθους 
μανία ταῖς γυναιξὶν ἐνέπεσεν, ἐκφοιτῶσαι δὲ ἐκ 
τῶν οἰκιῶν ἐπλανῶντο ἀνὰ .τὴν χώραν, ἐς ὃ 
Μελάμπους ὁ ᾿Αμυθάονος ἔπαυσε σφᾶς τῆς 
νόσου, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τε αὐτὸς καὶ ὁ ἀδελφὸς Βίας 
᾿Αναξαγόρα τὸ ἴσον ἕξουσιν. ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ Βίαντος 
βασιλεύουσι πέντε ἄνδρες ἐπὶ γενεὰς τέσσαρας 
ἐς Κυάνιππον τὸν .Αὐγιαλέως, 6 ὄντες Νηλεῖδαι τὰ 
πρὸς μητρός, ἀπὸ δὲ Μελάμποδος γενεαί τε ἓξ 
καὶ ἄνδρες ἴσοι μέχρις ᾽Αμϕιλόχου τοῦ ᾿Αμ- 
φιαράου' τὸ δὲ ἐγχώριον γένος οἱ ᾿Αναξαγορίδαι 
βασιλεύουσι πλέον. Ἶφις μὲν γὰρ ὁ ᾿Αλέκτορος 
τοῦ ᾿Αναξαγόρου Σθενέλῳ τῷ Καπανέως ἀδελφοῦ 
παιδὶ ἀπέλιπε τὴν ἀρχήν" ᾽Αμϕιλόχου δὲ μετὰ 
ἅλωσιν Ἰλίου µετοικήσαντος ἐς τοὺς νῦν ᾽Αμϕι- 
λόχους, Κυανίππου Ò ἄπαιδος τελευτήσαντος, 
οὕτω Κυλαράβης ὁ Σθενέλου μόνος τὴν βασιλείαν 
ἔσχεν. οὐ μέντοι παῖδας κατέλιπεν οὐδ᾽ οὗτος, 

338 

CORINTH, xviii. 3-5 

A little beyond the Rams—this is the name they 
give to the tomb of Thyestes—there is on the left 
a place called Mysia and a sanctuary of Mysian 
Demeter, so named from a man Mysius who, say the 
Argives, was one of those who entertained Demeter. 
Now this sanctuary has no roof, but in it is another 
temple, built of burnt brick, and wooden images of 
the Maid, Pluto and Demeter. Farther on is a river 
called Inachus, and on the other side of it an altar 
of Helius (the Sun). After this you will come to a 
gate named after the sanctuary near it. This 
sanctuary belongs to Eileithyia. 

The Argives are the only Greeks that I know of 
who have been divided into three kingdoms. For 
in the reign of Anaxagoras, son of Argeiis, son 
of Megapenthes, the women were smitten with 
madness, and straying from their homes they roamed 
about the country, until Melampus the son of 
Amythaon cured them of the plague on condition 
that he himself and his brother Bias had a share of 
the kingdom equal to that of Anaxagoras. Now 
descended from Bias five men, Neleids on their 
mother's side, occupied the throne for four genera- 
tions down to Cyanippus, son of Aegialeus, and 
descended from Melampus six men in six genera- 
tions down to Amphilochus, son of Amphiaraus. 
But the native house of the family of Anaxagoras 
ruled longer than the other two. For Iphis, son of 

Alector, son of Anaxagoras, left the throne to Sthene- 
lus, son of Capaneus his brother. After the capture 
of Troy, Amphilochus migrated to the people now 
called the Amphilochians, and, Cyanippus having died 
without issue, Cylarabes, son of Sthenelus, became 
sole king. However, he too left no offspring, and 

339 
z ? 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἀλλὰ Ὀρέστης ὁ ᾿Αγαμέμνονος τὸ "Αργος KaT- 
έσχε παροικῶν τε ἐγγὺς αὐτῷ καὶ ἄνευ τῆς 
πατρῴας ἀρχῆς προσπεποιημένος μὲν ᾿Αρκάδων 
τοὺς πολλούς, παρειληφὼς δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐν Σπάρτῃ 
βασιλείαν, συμμαχικοῦ δὲ ἐκ Φωκέων ἀεί ποτὲ 
ἐπ᾽ ὠφελείᾳ ἑτοίμου παρόντος. Λακεδαιμονίων 
δὲ ἐβασίλευσεν Ὄρεστης Λακεδαιμονίων. ἐφέντων 
αὐτῷ' τοὺς γὰρ Τυνδάρεω θυγατριδοῦς τὴν ἀρχὴν 
ἔχειν ἠξίουν πρὸ Νικοστράτου καὶ Μεγαπένθους 
Μενελάῳ γεγενημένων ἐκ δούλης. Ὀρέστου δὲ 
ἀποθανόντος ἔ ἔσχε Τισαμενὸς τὴν ἀρχήν, Ἑρμιό- 
νης τῆς Μενελάου καὶ Ὀρέστου παῖς. τὸν δὲ 
Ὀρέστου νόθον Πενθίλον Κιναίθων ἔγραψεν ἐν 
τοῖς ἔπεσιν Ἡριγόνην, τὴν Αἰγίσθου τεκεῖν. ἐπὶ 
δὲ τοῦ Τισαμενοῦ τούτου κατίασιν ἐς Πελοπόν- 
νησον Ἡρακλεῖδαι, Τήμενος μὲν καὶ Κρεσφόντης 
᾿Αριστομάχου, τοῦ τρίτου δὲ ᾿Αριστοδήμου po- 
τεθνεῶτος εἵποντο οἱ παῖδες. "Άργους μὲν δὴ 
καὶ τῆς ἐν “A pret βασιλείας ὀρθότατα ἐ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν 
ἠμφισβήτουν, ὅτι ἦν Πελοπίδης ὁ Τισαμενὸς, 
οἱ δὲ “Ἡρακλεῖδαι τὸ ἀνέκαθέν εἰσι Ἡερσεῖδαι" 
Tuvddpew δὲ καὶ αὐτὸν ἐκπεσόντα ἀπέφαινον ἱ ὑπὸ 
Ἱπποκόωντος, Ἡρακλέα δὲ ἔφασαν ἀποκτείναντα 
“Ἱπποκόωντα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας παρακαταθέσθαι 
Tuvddpe τὴν χώραν" τοιαῦτα δὲ καὶ περὶ τῆς 
Μεσσηνίας ἕτερα ἔλεγον, παρακαταθήκην Νέ- 
στορι δοθῆναι καὶ ταύτην. ὑπὸ “Ἡρακλέους ἑλόντος 
Πύλον. ἐκβάλλουσιν οὖν ἐκ μὲν Aaxedaipovos 
καὶ Άργους Τισαμενόν, ἐκ δὲ τῆς Μεσσηνίας 
τοὺς Νέστορος ἀπογόνους, ᾿Αλκμαίωνα Σίλλου 
τοῦ Θρασυμήδους καὶ Πεισίστρατον τὸν ΊΠεισι- 

340 

CORINTH, xvni. 5-8 

Argos was seized by Orestes, son of Agamemnon, 
who was aneighbour. Besides his ancestral dominion, 
he had extended his rule over the greater part of 
Arcadia and had succeeded to the throne of Sparta ; 
he also had a contingent of Phocian allies always 
ready to help him. When Orestes became king of 
the Lacedaemonians, they themselves consented to 
accept him; for they considered that the sons of 
the daughter of Tyndareus had a claim to the throne 
prior to that of Nicostratus and Megapenthes, who 
were sons of Menelaus by a slave woman. On the 
death of Orestes, there succeeded to the throne 
Tisamenus, the son of Orestes and of Hermione, the 
daughter of Menelaus. The mother of Penthilus, 
the bastard son of Orestes, was, according to the 
poet Cinaethon, Erigone, the daughter of Aegisthus. 
It was in the reign of this Tisamenus that the 
Heracleidae returned to the Peloponnesus; they were 
Temenus and Cresphontes, the sons of Aristomachus, 
together with the sons of the third brother, Aristo- 
demus, who had died. Their claim to Argos and to 
the throne of Argos was, in my opinion, most just, 
because Tisamenus was descended from Pelops, 
but the Heracleidae were descendants of Perseus. 
Tyndareus himself, they made out, had been expelled 
by Hippocoon, and they said that Heracles, having 
killed Hippocoon and his sons, had given the land 
in trust to Tyndareus. They gave the same kind of 
account about Messenia also, that it had been given 
in trust to Nestor by Heracles after he had taken 
Pylus. So they expelled Tisamenus from Lacedae- 
mon and Argos, and the descendants of Nestor from 
Messenia, namely Alemaeon, son of Sillus, son 
of Thrasymedes, Peisistratus, son of Peisistratus, 

α΄” 

- te TAUCK 

ον σεχ l = Am 
=. re ~ re pa i Ἶ 
πα Pome raropos τοῦ 

των tue i 
j SNEU σ-πατηγῷ πρὸς τὰ: 

- «u “Sah - - æ % r 
z ~ ἃ TW craw καὶ σύμβουλον 
~oa 
a πο. ETS Ow -ε εκεῖνον πεποιημένος 
eS OE $ 
--- eal ται --ν παίδων ἀρεσκο- 

eS oe ene dak TR. ἁπωπτεύετο δὲ ἤδη 
oo SR ur ὃς ἐκεσην καὶ Amgorry 
Oo gets επτεσοε: ση Τε τπυτων ἕνεκα ὑπὸ τῶν 
aww ie acme Reiras πρεσβύτατος ὧν 
τ ο νο Aree Ce, ἆτε ἐσηγορίαν καὶ 
po Le teers ἐς παλαιοτάτου. τὰ TIS 
τα zw ες ἑλαχεστον προήγαγον, 

Ντεπ καὶ τοις απογονοις TO 

ης Ξασιλεῖας μονον. Μέλταν 
ETW are 7ονον Ἀ[ήδωνος 70 
TUT IYS καταγνοὺς ὁ δῆμος. 

CFS s ] . k: 
4 <7 Te Toke: το επιφανἐστᾶτο 

CORINTH, xvi. δ-χιΧ. 3 

”. ‘s of Paeon, son of Antilochus, and 
- Z lanthus, son of Andropompus, son 
E ' © Penthilus, son of Periclymenus. 
τω his sons went with his army 

Ze ow Achaia. To what people 
we do not know, but the rest 

: Athens, and the clans 

‘he Alemaeonidae were 

ο is even came to the 
6 the son of Oxyn- 

' Athenian king 

uhat I should set 

.csphontes and of the 

.«emenus openly employed, 

, Deiphontes, son of Antima- 

urasyanor, son of Ctesippus, son 

, aS general in war and as adviser 

asions. Even before this he had made him 

n-in-law, while Hyrnetho was his favourite 

ighter ; he was accordingly suspected of intending 

to divert the throne to her and Deiphontes. For 

this reason his sons plotted against him, and Ceisus, 

the eldest of them, seized the kingdom. But from 

the earliest times the Argives have loved freedom 

and self-government, and they limited to the utmost 

the authority of their kings, so that to Medon, the 

son of Ceisus, and to his descendants was left a 

kingdom that was such only in name. Meltas, the 

son of Lacedas, the tenth descendant of Medon, was 

condemned by the people and deposed altogether 
from the kingship. 

The most famous building in the city of Argos is 

3 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

στράτου καὶ τοὺς Παίονος τοῦ ᾿Αντιλόχου παῖδας, 
σὺν δὲ αὐτοῖς Μέλανθον τὸν ᾿Ανδροπόμπου τοῦ 
Βώρου τοῦ Πενθίλου τοῦ Περικλυμένου. Τισα- 
μενὸς μὲν οὖν ἦλθε σὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ καὶ οἱ παῖδες 
ἐς τὴν νῦν ᾿Αχαϊαν' οἱ δὲ Νηλεῖδαι πλὴν Πεισι- 
στράτου---τοῦτον γὰρ οὐκ οἶδα παρ οὕστινας 
ἀπεχώρησεν - -ἐς ᾿Αθήνας a (κοντο οἱ λοιποί, 
καὶ τὸ Παιονιδῶν γένος καὶ Αλκμαιωνιδῶν ἀπὸ 
τούτων ὠνομάσθησαν. Μέλανθος δὲ καὶ τὴν 
βασιλείαν é ἔσχεν ἀφελόμενος Θυμοίτην τὸν ᾿Οξύν- 
του' Θυμοίτης γὰρ Θησειδῶν ἔσχατος ἐβασί- 
λευσεν ᾿Αθηναίων. 

ΧΙΧ. Τὰ μὲν οὖν Κρεσφόντου καὶ τῶν ᾿Αρι- 
στοδήµου παίδων οὐκ ἤπειγεν ὁ λόγος µε ἐνταῦθα 
δηλῶσαι' Τήμενος δὲ ἐκ μὲν τοῦ φανεροῦ Δηι- 
φόντῃ, τῷ ᾿Αντιμάχου τοῦ Θρασυάνορος τοῦ 
Κτησίππου, τοῦ “Ἡρακλέους στρατηγῷ πρὸς τὰς 
μάχας ἐχρήσατο ἀντὶ τῶν υἱῶν καὶ σύμβουλον 
ἐς πάντα εἶχεν, ἅτε αὐτόν τε ἐκεῖνον πεποιημένος 
πρότερον ἔτι γαμβρὸν καὶ τῶν παίδων ἀρεσκό- 
μενος τῇ Ὕρνηθοϊ μάλιστα; ὑπωπτεύετο δὲ ἤδη 
καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἐς ἐκείνην καὶ Δηιφόντην 
τρέπειν, ἐπεβουλεύθη δὲ τούτων ἕνεκα ὑπὸ τῶν 
υἱῶν" ἐκείνων δὲ αὐτῷ Κεῖσος πρεσβύτατος ἃ ὧν 
ἔσχε τὴν ἀρχήν. ᾿Αργεῖοι δέ, ἅτε ἰσηγορίαν καὶ 
τὸ αὐτόνομον ἀγαπῶντες ἐκ παλαιοτάτου, τὰ τῆς 
ἐξουσίας τῶν βασιλέων ἐς ἐλάχιστον προήγαγον, 
ὡς Μήδωνι τῷ Κείσου καὶ τοῖς ἀπογόνοις τὸ 
ὄνομα λειφθῆναι τῆς βασιλείας μόνον. Μέλταν 
δὲ τὸν Λακήδου δέκατον ἀπέγονον Μήδωνος τὸ 
παράπαν ἔπαυσεν ἀρχῆς καταγνοὺς ὁ δῆμος. 

᾿Αργείοις δὲ τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει τὸ ἐπιφανέστατον 

342 

A 

CORINTH, xvin. δ--χιχ. 3 

and the sons of Paeon, son of Antilochus, and 
with them Melanthus, son of Andropompus, son 
of Borus, son of Penthilus, son of Periclymenus. 
So Tisamenus and his sons went with his army 
to the land that is now Achaia. To what people 
Peisistratus retreated I do not know, but the rest 
of the Neleidae went to Athens, and the clans 
of the Paeonidae and of the Alcmaeonidae were 
named after them. Melanthus even came to the 
throne, having deposed Thymoetes the son of Oxyn- 
tes; for Thymoetes was the last Athenian king 
descended from Theseus. 

XIX. It is not to my purpose that I should set 
forth here the history of Cresphontes and of the 
sons of Aristodemus. But Temenus openly employed, 
instead of his sons, Deiphontes, son of Antima- 
chus, son of Thrasyanor, son of Ctesippus, son 
of Heracles, as general in war and as adviser 
on all occasions. Even before this he had made him 
his son-in-law, while Hyrnetho was his favourite 
daughter; he was accordingly suspected of intending 
to divert the throne to her and Deiphontes. For 
this reason his sons plotted against him, and Ceisus, 
the eldest of them, seized the kingdom. But from 
the earliest times the Argives have loved freedom 
and self-government, and they limited to the utmost 
the authority of their kings, so that to Medon, the 
son of Ceisus, and to his descendants was left a 
kingdom that was such only in name. Meltas, the 
son of Lacedas, the tenth descendant of Medon, was 
condemned by the people and deposed altogether 

from the kingship. 

The most famous building in the city of Argos is 

343 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

ἐστιν ᾿Απόλλωνος “ἱερὸν Λυκίου. τὸ μὲν οὖν 
ἄγαλμα τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ᾿Αττάλου ποίημα ἦν 
᾿Αθηναίου, τὸ δὲ ἐξ ἀρχῆς Δαναοῦ καὶ ὁ ναὸς 
καὶ τὸ ξόανον ἀνάθημα ἦν", ξόανα γὰρ δὴ τότε 
εἶναι πείθομαι πάντα καὶ μάλιστα τὰ Αἰγύπτια. 
Δαναὸς δὲ ἱδρύσατο. Λύκιον ᾿Απόλλωνα ἐπ aitia 
τοιαύτῃ. παραγενόμενος ἐς τὸ "Αργος ἦμφι- 
σβήτει πρὸς Γελάνορα τὸν Σθενέλα περὶ τῆς 
ἀρχῆς. ῥηθέντων δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ δήµου παρ' ἀμ- 
Γι πολλῶν τε καὶ ἐπαγωγῶν καὶ οὐχ ἧσσον 
ίκαια λέγειν τοῦ Γελάνορος δόξαντος, ὁ 0 μὲν δῆ- 
μος ὑπερέθετο-- φασὶν- -ἐς τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν κρίνειν 
ἀρχομένης δὲ ἡμέρας ἐς βοῶν ἀγέλην νεμομένην 
πρὸ τοῦ τείχους ἐσπίπτει λύκος, προσπεσὼν δὲ 
ἐμάχετο πρὸς ταῦρον ἡγεμόνα τῶν βοῶν. παρί- 
σταται δὴ τοῖς ᾿Αργείους τῷ μὲν Γελάνορα, 
Δαναὸν δὲ εἰκάσαι τῷ λύκῳ, ὅτι οὔτε τὸ θηρίον 
τοῦτό ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις σύντροφον οὔτε Δαναος 
σφισιν ἐς ἐκεῖνο τοῦ χρόνου. ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸν ταῦρον 
κατειργάσατο ὁ "λύκος, διὰ τοῦτο ὁ Δαναὸς ἔσχε 
τὴν ἀρχήν. οὕτω δὴ νομίζων ᾿Απόλλωνα ἐπὶ 
τὴν ἀγέλην ἐπαγαγεῖν τῶν βοῶν τὸν λύκον, 
ἱδρύσατο ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερὸν Λυκίου. ἐνταῦθα 
ἀνάκειται μὲν θρόνος Δαναοῦ, κεῖται δὲ εἰκὼν 
Βίτωνος, ἀνὴρ ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων φέρων ταῦρον" ὡς 
δὲ Λυκέας ἐ ἐποίησεν, ἐς Νεμέαν ᾿Αργείων ἀγόντων 
θυσίαν τῷ Διὶ ὁ ο Βίτων ù ὑπὸ pee, τε καὶ ἰσχύος 
ταῦρον ἀράμενος ἤνεγκεν. ἑξῆς δὲ τῆς εἰκόνος 
ταύτης πῦρ καίουσιν ὀνομάζοντες Φορωνέως εἶναι" 
οὐ γάρ τι ὁμολογοῦσι δοῦναι πῦρ Προμηθέα 
ἀνθρώποις, ἀλλὰ ἐς Φορωνέα τοῦ πυρὸς μετάγειν 

344 

CORINTH, xix. 3-5 

the sanctuary of Apollo Lycius (Wolf-god). The 
modern image was made by the Athenian Attalus,! 
but the original temple and wooden image were the 
offering of Danaus. I'am of opinion that in those 
days all images, especially Egyptian images, were 
made of wood. The reason why Danaus founded a 
sanctuary of Apollo Lycius was this. On coming to 
Argos he claimed the kingdom against Gelanor, the 
son of Sthenelas. Many plausible arguments were 
brought forward by both parties, and those of Sthe- 
nelas were considered as fair as those of his opponent; 
so the people, who were sitting in judgment, put off, 
they say, the decision to the following day. At dawn 
a wolf fell upon a herd of oxen that was pasturing 
before the wall, and attacked and fought with the 
bull that was the leader of the herd. It occurred 
to the Argives that Gelanor was like the bull and 
Danaus like the wolf; for as the wolf will not live 
with men, so Danaus up to that time had not lived 
with them. It was because the wolf overcame the 
bull that Danaus won the kingdom. Accordingly, 
believing that Apollo had brought the wolf on the 
herd, he founded a sanctuary of Apollo Lycius. 
Here is dedicated the throne of Danaus, and here 
is placed a statue of Biton, in the form of a man 
carrying a bull on his shoulders. According to the 
poet Lyceas, when the Argives were holding a sacri- 
fice to Zeus at Nemea, Biton by sheer physical 
strength took up a bull and carried it there. Next 
to this statue is a fire which they keep burning, 
calling it the fire of Phoroneus. For they do not 
admit that fire was given to mankind by Prome- 
theus, but insist in assigning the discovery of fire to 

1 A sculptor of unknown date. 

345 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

6 ἐθέλουσι τὴν εὕρεσιν. τὰ δὲ ξόανα ` Αφροδίτης 
καὶ Ἑρμοῦ, τὸ μὲν ᾿Επειοῦ λέγουσιν ἔργον εἶναι, 
τὸ δὲ Ὑπερμήστρας ἀνάθημα. ταύτην γὰρ τῶν 
θυγατέρων μόνην τὸ πρόσταγμα ὑπεριδοῦσαν 

ὑπήγαγεν ὁ Aavaos ἐς δικαστήριον, τοῦ τε 

Λυγκέως οὐκ ἀκίνδυνον αὑτῷ τὴν σωτηρίαν ἡγού- 
μενος καὶ ὅτι τοῦ τολμήματος οὐ µετασχοῦσα 
ταῖς ἀδελφαῖς καὶ τῷ βουλεύσαντι τὸ ὄνειδος 
ηὔξησε. κριθεῖσα δὲ ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αργείοις ἀπγοφεύγει 
τε καὶ ᾿Αφροδίτην ἐπὶ τῷδε ἀνέθηκε Νικηφόρον. 
τοῦ ναοῦ δέ ἐστιν ἐντὸς Λάδας ποδῶν ὠκύτητι 

= cole 

eee a 

ὑπερβαλλόμενος τοὺς ἐφ᾽ αὑτοῦ καὶ Ἑρμῆς ἐς λύ-. 

pas ποίησιν χελώνην ἠρηκώς. ἔστι δὲ ἔμπροσθεν 
τοῦ ναοῦ βόθρος ! πεποιημένα ἐν τύπῳ ταύρου 
μάχην ἔχων καὶ λύκου, σὺν δὲ αὐτοῖς παρθένον 
ἀφιεῖσαν πέτραν ἐπὶ τὸν ταῦρον' "Αρτεμιν εἶναι 
νομίζουσι τὴν παρθένον. Δαναὸς δὲ ταῦτά τε 
ἀνέθηκε καὶ πλησίον κίονας καὶ Διὸς καὶ ᾿ Ἀρτέ- 
μιδος ξόανον. 

Τάφοι δέ εἰσιν o μὲν Λίνου τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνγος 
καὶ Ψαμάθης τῆς Κροτώπου, τὸν δὲ λέγουσιν 
εἶναι Λίνου τοῦ ποιήσαντος τὰ ἔπη. τὰ μὲν οὖν 
ἐς τοῦτον οἰκειότερα ὄντα ἑτέρῳ λόγῳ παρίημι 
τῷδε, τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸν Ψαμάθης ἡ Μεγαρική μοι 
συγγραφὴ προεδήλωσεν. / ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐστὶν 
᾿Απόλλων ᾿Αγυιεὺς καὶ βωμὸς “Ὑετίου Διός, 
ἔνθα οἱ συσπεύδοντες Πολυνείκει τὴν ἐς Θήβας 
κάθοδον ἀποθανεῖσθαι συνώμοσαν, ἦν μὴ τὰς 

1 See the footnote on the opposite page. 

346 

—— - 

CORINTH, xix. 5-8 

?>horoneus. As to the wooden images of Aphrodite 
ind Hermes, the one they say was made by Epeis, 
while the other is a votive offering of Hyper- 
mnestra. She was the only one of the daughters 
>f Danaus who neglected his command,! and was 
accordingly brought to justice by him, because he 
considered that his life was in danger so long as 
Lynceus was at large, and that the refusal to share 
in the crime of her sisters increased the disgrace 
of the contriver of the deed. On her trial she was 
acquitted by the Argives, and to commemorate her 
escape she dedicated an image of Aphrodite, the 
Bringer of Victory. Within the temple is a statue 
of Ladas, the swiftest runner of his time, and one 
of Hermes with a tortoise which he has caught to 
make a lyre. Before the temple is a pit? with a 
relief representing a fight between a bull and a wolf, 
and with them a maiden throwing a rock at the 
bull. The maiden is thought to be Artemis. 
Danaus dedicated these, and some pillars hard by 
and wooden images of Zeus and Artemis. 

Here are graves; one is that of Linus, the son of 
Apollo by Psamathe, the daughter of Crotopus; the 
other, they say, is that of Linus the poet. The story 
of the latter Linus is more appropriate to another 
part of my narrative, and so I omit it here, while I 
have already given the history of the son of Psamathe 
in my account of Megara. After these is an image 
of Apollo, God of Streets, and an altar of Zeus, God 
of Rain, where those who were helping Polyneices 
in his efforts to be restored to Thebes swore an 
oath together that they would either capture Thebes 

1 To kill their husbands. 
3 Or (reading βάθρον πεποιημένην and ἔχον) ‘‘ pedestal.” 

347 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

Θήβας γένηταί σφισιν ἑλεῖν. ἐς δὲ τοῦ Ἡρομη» 
θέως τὸ μνῆμα ἧσσόν μοι δοκοῦσιν Ὀπουντίωψ i 
εἰκότα λέγειν, λέγουσι δὲ ὅμως. 

ΧΧ. Παρέντι δὲ Κρεύγα τε εἰκόνα ἀνδρὸς | 

πύκτου καὶ τρόπαιον ἐπὶ Κορινθίοις ἀνασταθέν, 
ἄγαλμά ἐστι καθήμενον Διὸς Μειλιχίου, λίθου 
λευκοῦ, Πολυκλείτου δὲ ἔργον. ποιηθῆναι δὲ 
ἐπυνθανόμην αὐτὸ ἐπ᾽ αἰτίᾳ τοιαύτῃ. Nare- 
δαιμονίοις. πολεμεῖν πρὸς ᾿Αργείους. ἀρξαμένοις 
οὐδεμία ἦν ἔτι ἀπαλλαγή, πρὶν ἡ Φίλιππος 
σφᾶς ἠνάγκασεν ὁ ᾿Αμύντου μένειν ἐπὶ τοῖς 
καθεστηκόσιν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὅροις τῆς χώρας. τὸν δὲ 

----------- 

οσο ------ 

ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μηδὲν ἔξω | 

Πελοποννήσου περιεργαζόµενοι τῆς ᾿Αργείας ἀεί 
τι ἀπετέμνοντο, ἡ οἱ "A ἱργεῖοι. τετραμμένων πρὸς 
πόλεμον ἐκείνων .ὑπερόριον ἐν τῷ τοιούτῳ καὶ 

αὐτοί σφισιν ἐνέκειντο. , προηγμένου δὲ appo- 

τέροις ἐς ἄκρον τοῦ μίσους ἔδοξεν ᾿Αργείοις 
λογάδας τρέφειν χιλίους" ἡγεμὼν δὲ ἐτέτακτο 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς Βρύας ᾿Αργεῖος, ἃ ὃς ἄλλα τε ἐς ἄνδρας 
ὕβρισε τοῦ δήμου καὶ παρθένον κομιξομένην mapa 
τὸν νυμφίον ἤσχυνεν ἀφελόμενος τοὺς ἄγοντας. 
ἐπιλαβούσης δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς τυφλοῦ τὸν Βρύαντα 
ἡ παῖς φυλάξασα ὑπνωμένον" φωραθεῖσα δὲ ὧν 
ἐπέσχεν ἡμέρα, κατέφυγεν ἱ ἱκέτις ἐς τὸν δῆμον. οὗ 
προεµένων ὲ αὐτὴν τιμωρήσασθαι τοῖς χιλίοις 
καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου προαχθέντων ἐς μάχην ἀμφοτέ- 
ρων, κρατοῦσιν οἱ τοῦ δήμου, κρατήσαντες δὲ 
οὐδένα ὑπὸ τοῦ θυμοῦ τῶν ἐναντίων ἔλιπον. 
ὕστερον δὲ ἄλλα τε ἐπηγάγοντο καθάρσια ὡς 
ἐπὶ αἵματι ἐμφυλίῳ καὶ ἄγαλμα ἀνέθηκαν Μειλι- 
χίου Διός. 

348 

~ CORINTH, χιχ. 8-xx. 2 

or die. As to the tomb of Prometheus, their account 
seems to me to be less probable than that of the 

Opuntians,! but they hold to it nevertheless. .. -΄ 

-ΚΧ. Passing over a statue of Creugas, a boxer, 
and a trophy that was set up to celebrate a victory 
over the Corinthians, you come to a seated image 
of Zeus Meilichius (Gracious), made of white marble 
by Polycleitus. I discovered that it was made for the 
following reason. Ever since the Lacedaemonians 
began to make war upon the Argives there was 
no cessation of hostilities until Philip, the son of 
Amyntas, forced them to stay within the original 
boundaries of their territories. Before this, if the 
Lacedaemonians were not engaged on some business 
outside the Peloponnesus, they were always trying 
to annex a piece of Argive territory; or if they were 
busied with a war beyond their borders it was the 
turn of the Argives to retaliate. When the hatred 
of both sides was at its height, the Argives resolved 
to maintain a thousand picked men. The commander 
appointed over them was the Argive Bryas. His 
general behaviour to the men of the people was 
violent, and a maiden who was being taken to the 
bridegroom he seized from those who were escorting 
her and ravished. When night came on, the girl 
waited until he was asleep and put out his eyes. 
Detected in the morning, she took refuge as a sup- 
pliant with the people. When they did not give 
her up to the Thousand for punishment both sides 
took up arms; the people won the day, and in their 
anger left none of their opponents alive. Subse- 
quently they had recourse to purifications for shed- 
ding kindred blood; among: other things they 
dedicated an image of Zeus Meilichius. 

1 z.e. both peoples claimed to have the grave. 

349 

418 B.C. 

3 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Πλησίον δέ εἶσιν ἐπειργασμένοι λίθῳ Κλέοβις 
καὶ Βίτων αὐτοί τε ἕλκοντες τὴν ἅμαξαν καὶ er 
αὐτῇ ἄγοντες τὴν μητέρα ἐς τὸ Ἡ ραῖον. τούτων 
δὲ ἀπαντικρὺ Νεμείου Διός ἐστιν ἱερόν, ἄγαλμα 
ὀρθὸν αλκοῦν, τέχνη Λυσίππου. μετὰ δὲ αὐτὸ 
προελ ovow ἐν δεξιᾷ Φορωνέως τάφος ἐστίν' 
ἐναγίζουσι δὲ καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔτι τῷ Φορωνεῖ. πέραν 
δὲ τοῦ Νεμείου Διὸς Τύχης ἐ ἐστὶν ἐκ παλαιοτάτου 
ναός, εἰ δὴ Παλαμήδης κύβους εὑρὼν ἀνέθηκεν ἐ ἐς 
τοῦτον τὸν ναόν. τὸ δὲ μνῆμα τὸ πλησίον 
Χορείας μαινάδος ὀνομάξουσι, Διονύσῳ λέγοντες 
καὶ ἄλλας γυναῖκας καὶ ταύτην ἐς Αργος 
συστρατεύσασθαι, Hepoéa δέ, ὡς ἐκράτει τῆς 
μάχης, φονεῦσαι τῶν γυναικῶν τὰς πολλάς" τὰς 
μὲν οὖν λοιπὰς θάπτουσιν ἐν κοινῷ, ταύτῃ δὲ-- 
ἀξιώματι γὰρ, δὴ προεῖχεν---ἐδίᾳ τὸ μνῆμα ἐποί- 
Ἴσαν. ἀπωτέρω δὲ ὀλίγον Ὡρῶν ἱερόν ἐστιν. 
ἐπανιόντι δὲ ἐκεῖθεν ἀνδριάντες ἑστήκασι Hov- 
νείκους τοῦ Οἰδίποδος καὶ ὅσοι σὺν ἐκείνῳ τῶν 
ἐν τέλει πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος μαχόμενοι τὸ Θηβαίων 
ἐτελεύτησαν. τούτους τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐς μόνων 
ἑπτὰ ἀριθ μὸν κατήγαγεν Αἰσχύλος, πλειόνων ἐκ 
τε Άργους ἡγεμόνων καὶ Μεσσήνης καί τινων καὶ 
᾿Αρκάδων στρατευσαμένων. τούτων δὲ τῶν ἑπτὰ 
--ἐπηκολουθήκασι γὰρ καὶ ᾿Αργεῖοι τῇ Αἰσχύλου 
ποιήσει-- πλησίον κεῖνται καὶ οἱ τὰς Θήβας 
ἑλόντες Αἰγιαλεὺς ᾿Αδράστου καὶ Πρόμα μαχος o 
Παρθενοπαίου τοῦ Ταλαοῦ καὶ Πολ ύδωρος Ἶπ- 
πομέδοντος καὶ Θέρσανδρος καὶ οἱ ᾿Αμϕιαράου 
παῖδες, ᾿Αλκμαίων τε καὶ ᾿Αμϕίλοχος, Διομήδης 
τε καὶ Σθένελος’ παρῆν δὲ ἔτι καὶ ἐπὶ τούτων 

359 

CORINTH, xx. 3-5 

Hard by are Cleobis and Biton carved in relief 
on stone, themselves drawing the carriage and 
taking in it their mother to the sanctuary of Hera. 
Opposite them is a sanctuary of Nemean Zeus, and 
an upright bronze statue of the god made by 
Lysippus.! Going forward from this you see on the 
right the grave of Phoroneus, to whom even in our 
time they bring offerings as to a hero. Over against 
the Nemean Zeus is a temple of Fortune, which must 
be very old if it be the one in which Palamedes 
dedicated the dice that he had invented. The 
tomb near this they call that of the maenad Chorea, 
saying that she was one of the women who joined 
Dionysus in his expedition against Argos, and that 
Perseus, being victorious in the battle, put most of 
the women to the sword. To the rest they gave a 
common grave, but to Chorea they gave burial apart 
because of her high rank. A little farther on is a 
sanctuary of the Seasons. On coming back from here 
you see statues of Polyneices, the son of Oedipus, 
and of all the chieftains who with him were killed 
in battle at the wall of Thebes. These men Aeschylus 
has reduced to the number of seven only, although 
there were more chiefs than this in the expedition, 
from Argos, from Messene, with some even from 
Arcadia. But the Argives have adopted the number 
seven from the drama of Aeschylus, and near to 
their statues are the statues of those who took 
Thebes: Aegialeus, son of Adrastus; Promachus, 
son of Parthenopaeus, son of Talaus; Polydorus, 
son of Hippomedon; Thersander; Alemaeon and 
Amphilochus, the sons of Amphiaraus; Diomedes, 
and Sthenelus. Among their company were also 

1 See p. 297. 
35! 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Εὐρύαλος Μηκιστέως καὶ Πολυνείκους "Αδραστος 
6 καὶ Τιμέας. τῶν δὲ ἀνδριάντων. οὐ πόρρω δεί- 
κνυται Δαναοῦ μνῆμα καὶ ᾿Αργείων τάφος κενὸς 
ὁπόσους ἔν τε Mo καὶ ὀπίσω κομιξομένους ἐ ἐπέ- 
λαβεν ἡ τελευτή. καὶ Διός ἐστιν ἐνταῦθα ἱερὸν 
Σωτῆρος καὶ .παριοῦσίν. ἐστιν οἴκημα: ἐνταῦθα 
τὸν "Αδωνιν αἱ γυναῖκες ᾿Αργείων ὀδύρονται. | 
δεξιᾷ δὲ τῆς ἐσόδου τῷ Κηφισῷ πεποίηται τὸ 
ἱερόν: τῷ δὲ ποταμῷ τούτῳ τὸ ὕδωρ φασὶν ov 
καθάπαξ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος ἀφανισθῆναι, ἀλλὰ 
ἐνταῦθα δὴ μάλιστα, ἔνθα καὶ τὸ ἱερόν ἐστι, 

7 συνιᾶσιν ὑπὸ γῆν ῥέοντος. παρὰ δὲ τὸ ἑερὸν 
τοῦ Κηφισοῦ Μεδούσης λίθου πεποιημένη κε- 
parry Κυκλώπων φασὶν εἶναι καὶ τοῦτο ἔργον. 
τὸ δὲ χωρίον τὸ ὄπισθεν καὶ ἐς τόδε Κριτήριον 
ὀνομάξουσιν, Ὑπερμήστραν ἐνταῦθα ὑπὸ Δαναοῦ 
κριθῆναι λέγοντες. τούτου δέ ἐστιν οὐ πόρρω 
θέατρον" ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ἄλλα θέας ἄξια καὶ avnp 
φονεύων ἐστὶν ἄνδρα, Ὀθρυάδαν τὸν Σπαρτιάτην 
Περίλαος ᾿Αργεῖος ὁ ᾿Αλκήνορος" Περιλαφ δὲ 
τούτῳ καὶ πρότερον ἔτι ὑπῆρχε Νεμείων ἀνηρῆ- 
σθαι νίκην παλαίοντι. 

8 Ὑπὲρ δὲ τὸ θέατρον ᾿Αφροδίτης ἐστὶν ἱερόν, 
ἔμπροσθεν δὲ τοῦ ἔδους Τελέσιλλα ἡ ποιήσασα 
τὰ ἄσματα ἐπείργασται στήλῃ" καὶ Βιβλία μὲν 
ἐκεῖνα ἔρριπταί οἱ πρὸς τοῖς ποσίν, αὐτὴ δὲ ἐς 

κράνος ὁρᾷ κατέχουσα τῇ χειρὶ καὶ ἐπιτίθεσθαι 
τῇ κεφαλῇ μέλλουσα. ἦν δὲ αὶ Τελέσιλλα καὶ 
ἄλλως ἐν ταῖς γυναιξὶν εὐδόκιμος καὶ μᾶλλον 
ἐτιμᾶτο ἔτι ἐπὶ τῇ ποιήσει. συμβάντος δὲ ᾿Αρ- 
γείοις ἀτυχῆσαι λόγου μειξόνως πρὸς Κλεομένην 
τὸν ᾿Αναξανδρίδου καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους, καὶ τῶν 

352 

CORINTH, xx. 5-8 

Euryalus, son of Mecisteus, and Adrastus and Timeas, 
sons of Polyneices. Not far from the statues are 
shown the tomb of Danaus and a cenotaph of the 
Argives who met their death at Troy or on the 
journey home. Here there is also a sanctuary of 
Zeus the Saviour. Beyond it is a building where the 
Argive women bewail Adonis. On the right of the 
entrance is the sanctuary of Cephisus. It is said that 
the water of this river was not utterly destroyed by 
Poseidon, but that just in this place, where the 
sanctuary is, it can be heard flowing under the earth. 
Beside the sanctuary of Cephisus is a head of Medusa 
made of stone, which is said to be another of the 
works of the Cyclopes. The ground behind it is called 
even at the present time the Place of Judgment, 
because it was here that they say Hypermnestra was 
brought to judgment by Danaus. Not far from this 
is a theatre. In it are some noteworthy sights, in- 
cluding a representation of a man killing another, 
namely the Argive Perilaus, the son of Alcenor, 
killing the Spartan Othryadas. Before this, Perilaus 
had succeeded in winning the prize for wrestling at 
the Nemean games. | 

Above the theatre is a sanctuary of Aphrodite, 
and before the image is a slab with a representa- 
tion wrought on it in relief of Telesilla, the lyric 
poetess. Her books lie scattered at her feet, and 
she herself holds in her hand an helmet, which 
she is looking at and is about to place on her 
head. Telesilla was a distinguished woman who was 
especially renowned for her poetry. It happened 
that the Argives had suffered an awful defeat at the 
hands of Cleomenes, the son of Anaxandrides, and 

353 

VOL. I. A A 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μὲν ἐν αὐτῇ πεπτωκότων τῇ μάχῃ, ὅσοι δὲ ἐς τὸ 
ἄλσος τοῦ "Άργου κατέφευγον διαφθαρέντων καὶ 
τούτων, τὰ μὲν πρῶτα ἐξιόντων κατὰ ὁμολογίαν, 
ὡς δὲ ἔγνωσαν ἀπατώμενοι συγκατακαυθέντων 
τῷ ἄλσει τῶν λοιπῶν, οὕτω τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους 
Κλεομένης ἦγεν ἐπὶ ἔρημον ἀνδρῶν τὸ "Άργος. 

9 Τελέσιλλα δὲ οἰκέτας μὲν καὶ ὅσοι διὰ νεότητα 
ἡ γῆρας ὅπλα ἀδύνατοι φέρειν ἦσαν, τούτους μὲν 
πάντας ἀνεβίβασεν ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος, αὐτὴ δὲ ὁ ὁπόσα 
ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις ὑπελείπετο καὶ τὰ ἐκ τῶν ἱερῶν 
ὅπλα ἀθροίσασα τὰς ἀκμαξούσας | ἡλικίᾳ τῶν 
γυναικῶν ἅπλιξεν, ὁπλίσασα δὲ ἔτασσε κατᾶ 
τοῦτο ᾗ τοὺς πολεμίους. προσιόντας ἠπίστατο. 
ὡς δὲ ἐγγὺς ἐγίνοντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ αἱ 
γυναῖκες οὔτε τῷ ἀλαλαγμῷ κατεπλάγησαν δεξά- 
μεναί τε ἐμάχοντο ἐρρωμένως, ἐνταῦθα οἱ Λακε- 
δαιμόνιοι, φρονήσαντες ὡς καὶ διαφθείρασί σφισι 
τὰς γυναῖκας ἐπιφθόνως τὸ κατόρθωμα ἕξει καὶ 
σφαλεῖσι μετὰ ὀνειδῶν γενήσοιτο ἡ συμφορά, 

10 ὑπείκουσι ταῖς γυναιξί. πρότερον δὲ ἔτι. τὸν 
ἀγῶνα τοῦτον προεσήμηνεν Μι Πυθία, καὶ τὸ 
λόγιον εἴτε ἄλλως εἴτε καὶ ὣς συνεὶς ἐδήλωσεν 
Ἡρόδοτος: 

ἀλλ. ὅταν ἡ θήλεια τὸν ἄρρενα νικήσασα 
ἐξελάσῃ καὶ κῦδος ἐν ᾿Αργείοισιν͵ ἄρηται, 
πολλὰς ᾿Αργείων ἀμφιδρυφέας τότε θήσει. 

Τὰ μὲν ἐς τὸ ἔργον τῶν γυναικῶν ἔχοντα τοῦ 

χρησμοῦ ταῦτα ἦν: XXI. κατελθοῦσι δὲ ἐν- 
τεῦθεν καὶ τραπεῖσιν αὖθις ἐπὶ τὴν ἀγοράν, ἔστι 

354 

CORINTH, xx. 8-ΧΧι. 1 

the Lacedaemonians. Some fell in the actual fight- 
ing; others, who had fled to the grove of Argus, 
also perished. At first they left sanctuary under 
an agreement, which was treacherously broken, and 
the survivors, when they realized this, were burnt to 
death in the grove. So when Cleomenes led his 
troops to Argos there were no men to defend it. 
But Telesilla mounted on the wall all the slaves and 
such as were incapable of bearing arms through 
youth or old age, and she herself, collecting the 
arms in the sanctuaries and those that were left in 
the houses, armed the women of vigorous age, and 
then posted them where she knew the enemy would 
attack. When the Lacedaemonians came on, the 
women were not dismayed at their battle-cry, but 
stood their ground and fought valiantly. Then the 
Lacedaemonians, realizing that to destroy the women 
would be an invidious success while defeat would 
mean a shameful disaster, gave way before the 
women. This fight had been foretold by the Py- 
thian priestess in the oracle quoted by Herodotus,! 
who perhaps understood to what it referred and 
perhaps did not :--- 

“ But when the time shall come that the female 
conquers in battle, 
Driving away the male, and wins great glory in 
Argos, 
Many an Argive woman will tear both cheeks in 
her sorrow.” 

Such are the words of the oracle referring to 
the exploit of the women. XXI. Having de- 
scended thence, and having turned again to the 

1 vi. 77. 

355 

AA 2 

510 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μὲν Κερδοῦς Φορωνέως γυναικὸς μνῆμα, ἔστι δέ 
ναὸς ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ. τὸ δὲ τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἱερὸν 
ἐπίκλησιν Ἠειθοῦς, Ὑπερμήστρα καὶ τοῦτο ἀνέ- 
θηκε νικήσασα τῇ δίκῃ τὸν πατέρα ἣν τοῦ Λυγ- 
κέως ἕνεκα ἔφυγε. καὶ Αἰνείου ἐνταῦθα .Χαλκοῦς 
ἀνδριάς ἐστι καὶ χωρίον καλούμενον Δέλτα' ἐφ᾽ | 
ὅτῳ δέ---οὐ γάρ μοι τὰ λεγόμενα ἤρεσκεν----, ἑκὼν. 
2 παρίημι. πρὸ δὲ αὐτοῦ πεποίηται Διὸς Φυξίου 
βωμὸς καὶ πλησίον Ὑπερμήστρας μνῆμα ᾽αμϕια- 
ράου μητρός, τὸ δὲ ἕτερον Ὑπερμήστρας τῆς 
Δαναοῦ" σὺν δὲ αὐτῇ καὶ Λυγκεὺς τέθαπται. 
τούτων δὲ ἀπαντικρὺ Ταλαοῦ τοῦ Βίαντός ἐστι 
τάφος" τὰ δὲ ἐς Βίαντα καὶ ἀπογόνους τοῦ Βίαν- 
3 τος ἤδη λέλεκταί μοι. ᾿Αθηνᾶς δὲ ἱδρύσασθαι 
Σάλπιγγος ἱερόν φασιν Ἡγέλεων. Τυρσηνοῦ δὲ 
τοῦτον τὸν Ἠγέλεων, τὸν δὲ “Ἡρακλέους εἶναι 
καὶ γυναικὸς λέγουσι τῆς Λυδῆς, Τυρσηνὸν δὲ 
σάλπιγγα εὑρεῖν πρῶτον, 'Ἠγέλεων δὲ τὸν Tvp- 
σηνοῦ διδάξαι τοὺς σὺν Τημένῳ Δωριέας τοῦ 
ὀργάνου τὸν ψόφον καὶ δι αὐτὸ ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἐπονο- 
μάσαι Σάλπιγγα. πρὸ δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
᾿Επιμενίδου λέγουσιν εἶναι τώφον' Λακεδαιμονί- 
ους γὰρ πολεμήσαντας πρὸς Κνωσσίους ἑλεῖν 
ζῶντα ᾿Επιμενίδην, λαβόντας δὲ ἀποκτεῖναι, 
διότι σφίσιν οὐκ αἴσια ἐμαντεύετο, αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀνε- 
λόμενοι θάψαι ταύτῃ φασί. τὸ δὲ οἰκοδόμημα 
λευκοῦ λίθου κατὰ μέσον μάλιστα τῆς ἀγορᾶς οὐ 
τρόπαιον ἐπὶ Πύρρῳ τῷ ᾿Ηπειρώτῃ, καθὰ λέ- 
γουσιν οἱ ᾿Αργεῖοι, καυθέντος δὲ ἐνταῦθα τοῦ 
νεκροῦ μνῆμα καὶ τοῦτο ἂν εὗροι TUS, ἐν ᾧ τά τε 
ἄλλα ὅσοις ὁ Πύρρος ἐχρῆτο ἐς τὰς μάχας καὶ οἱ 

em 

356 

fn 

CORINTH, xxi. 1-4 

iarket-place, we come to the tomb of Cerdo, the 
rife of Phoroneus, and to a temple of Asclepius. 
“he sanctuary of Artemis, surnamed Persuasion, is 
mother offering of Hypermnestra after winning 
he trial to which she was brought by her father 
ysecause of Lynceus. Here there is also a bronze 
statue of Aeneas, and a place called Delta. I inten- 
tionally do not discuss the origin of the name, be- 
cause I could not accept the traditional accounts. In 
front of it stands an altar of Zeus Phyxius (God of 
Flight), and near is the tomb of Hypermnestra, the 
mother of Amphiaraus, the other tomb being that of 
Hypermnestra, the daughter of Danaus, with whom 
is also buried Lynceus. Opposite these is the grave 
of Talaus, the son of Bias; the history of Bias and his 
descendants I have already given. A sanctuary of 
Athena Trumpet they say was founded by Hegeleos. 
This Hegeleos, according to the story, was the son 
of Έγτβεπις, and Tyrsenus was the son of Heracles 
and the Lydian woman; Tyrsenus invented the 
trumpet, and Hegeleos, the son of Tyrsenus, taught 
the Dorians with Temenus how to play the instru- 
ment, and for this reason gave Athena the surname 
Trumpet. Before the temple of Athena is, they 
say, the grave of Epimenides. The Argive story is 
that the Lacedaemonians made war upon the Cnos- 
sians and took Epimenides alive ; they then put him to 
death for not prophesying good luck to them, and the 
Argives taking his body buried it here. The building 
of white marble in just about the middle of the 
market-place is not, as the Argives declare, a trophy 
in honour of a victory over Pyrrhus of Epeirus, but it 
ean be shown that his body was burnt here, and that 
this is his monument, on which are carved in reliet 

357 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐλέφαντές εἰσιν ἐπειργασμένοι. τοῦτο μὲν δὴ 
κατὰ τὴν πυρὰν τὸ οἰκοδόμημα ἐγένετο" αὐτὰ δὲ 
κεῖται τοῦ Πύρρου τὰ ὀστᾶ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τῆς Δή- 
µητρος, παρ ᾧ συμβῆναί οἱ καὶ τὴν τελευτὴν 
ἐδήλωσα ἐν τῇ ᾿Ατθίδι συγγραφῇ. τοῦ δὲ τῆς 
Δήμητρος ἱεροῦ τούτου κατὰ τὴν ἔσοδον ἀσπίδα 
ἰδεῖν Πύρρου χαλκῆν ἔστιν ὑπὲρ τῶν θυρῶν 
᾽ 

ἀνακειμένην. 

5 Τοῦ δὲ ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ τῶν ᾿Αργείων οἰκοδομή- 
ματος οὐ μακρὰν χῶμα γῆς ἐστιν: ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ 
κεῖσθαι τὴν Μεδούσης λέγουσι τῆς Γοργόνος 
κεφαλήν. ἀπόντος δὲ τοῦ μύθου τάδε ἄλλα ἐς 
αὐτήν ἐστιν εἰρημένα: Φόρκου μὲν θυγατέρα 
εἶναι, τελευτήσαντος δέ οἱ τοῦ πατρὸς βασιλεύειν 
τῶν περὶ τὴν λίμνην τὴν Τριτωνίδα οἰκούντων 
καὶ ἐπὶ θήραν τε ἐξιέναι καὶ ἐς τὰς μάχας ἡγεῖ 
σθαι τοῖς Λίβυσι' καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε ἀντικαθημένην 
στρατῷ πρὸς τὴν Περσέως δύναμιν---ἔπεσθαι γὰρ 
καὶ τῷ Περσεῖ λογάδας ἐκ Πελοποννήσου--- 
δολοφονηθῆναι νύκτωρ, καὶ τὸν Περσέα τὸ κάλ- 
λος ἔτι καὶ ἐπὶ νεκρῷ θαυμάζοντα οὕτω τὴν 
κεφαλὴν ἀποτεμόντα αὐτῆς ἄγειν τοῖς “Ελλησιν 

6 ἐς ἐπίδειξιν. Καρχηδονίῳ δὲ ἀνδρὶ Προκλεῖ τῷ 
Εὐκράτους ἕτερος λόγος ὅδε ἐφαίνετο εἶναι τοῦ 
προτέρου πιθανώτερος.. Λιβύης ἡ ἔρημος καὶ 
ἄλλα παρέχεται θηρία ἀκούσασιν οὐ πιστὰ καὶ 
ἄνδρες ἐνταῦθα ἄγριοι καὶ ἄγριαι γίνονται γυναῖ- 
Kest ἔλεγέ τε ὁ Προκλῆς aw αὐτῶν ἄνδρα ἰδεῖν 
κομισθέντα ἐς Ῥώμην. εἴκαξεν οὖν πλανηθεῖσαν 
γυναῖκα ἐκ τούτων καὶ ἀφικομένην ἐπὶ τὴν λίμνην 
τὴν Τριτωνίδα λυμαίνεσθαι τοὺς προσοίκους, ἐς ὃ 
Περσεὺς ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτήν: ᾿Αθηνᾶν δέ οἱ ovv- 

358 

CORINTH, xx. 4-6 

the elephants and his other instruments of warfare. 
This building then was set up where the pyre stood, 
but the bones of Pyrrhus lie in the sanctuary of 
Demeter, beside which, as I have shown in my account 
of Attica, his death occurred. At the entrance to 
this sanctuary of Demeter you can see a bronze 
shield of Pyrrhus hanging dedicated over the door. 
Not far from the building in the market-place of 
Argos is a mound of earth, in which they say lies 
the head of the Gorgon Medusa. I omit the mi- 
raculous, but give the rational parts of the story 
about her. After the death of her father, Phorcus, 
she reigned over those living around Lake Tritonis, 
going out hunting and leading the Libyans to battle. 
On one such occasion, when she was encamped with 
an army over against the forces of Perseus, who was 
followed by picked troops from the Peloponnesus, 
she was assassinated by night. Perseus, admiring 
her beauty even in death, cut off her head and 
carried it to show the Greeks. But Procles, the son 
of Eucrates, a Carthaginian, thought a different ac- 
count more plausible than the preceding. It is as 
follows. Among the incredible monsters to be found 
in the Libyan desert are wild men and wild women. 
Procles affirmed that he had seen a man from them 
who had been brought to Rome. So he guessed that a 
woman wandered from them, reached Lake Tritonis, 
and harried the neighbours until Perseus killed her ; 
Athena was supposed to have helped him in this ΝΗ 
μα. - 
355 

10 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

επιλαβέσθαι δοκεῖν τοῦ ἔργου, ὅτι οἱ περὶ τὴν 
λίμνην τὴν Τριτωνίδα ἄνθρωποι ταύτης εἰσὶν 
ἱεροί. ἐν δὲ ᾿Άργει παρὰ τοῦτο δὴ τὸ μνῆμα τῆς 
Γοργόνος Γοργοφόνης τάφος ἐστὶ τῆς Περσέως. 
καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ μὲν αὐτῇ τὸ ὄνομα ἐτέθη, δῆλον εὐθὺς 
ἀκούσαντι. γυναικῶν δὲ πρώτην αὐτήν φασι τε- 
λευτήσαντος τοῦ ἀνδρὸς Περιήρους τοῦ Αἰόλου--- 
τούτῳ γὰρ παρθένος συνῴκησε---, τὴν δὲ αὖθις 
Οἰβάλῳ γήμασθαι" πρότερον δὲ καθεστήκει ταῖς 
γυναιξὶν ἐπὶ ἀνδρὶ ἀποθανόντι χηρεύειν. τοῦ 
τάφου δὲ ἔμπροσθεν τρόπαιον λίθου πεποίηται 
κατὰ ἀνδρὸς Ἀργείου Λαφάους' τοῦτον yap— 
γράφω δὲ ὁπόσα λέγουσιν αὐτοὶ περὶ σφῶν 
᾿Αργεῖοι--τυραννοῦντα ἐξέβαλεν ἐπαναστὰς ὁ 
δῆμος, φυγόντα δὲ ἐς Σπάρτην Λακεδαιμόνιοι 
κατάγειν ἐπειρῶντο ἐπὶ τυραννίδι, νικήσαντες δὲ 
οἱ ᾿Αργεῖοι τῇ μάχη Λαφάην τε καὶ τῶν Λακε- 
δαιμονίων τοὺς πολλοὺς ἀπέκτειναν. 

Τὸ δὲ í ἱερὸν τῆς Λητοῦς ἔ ἔστι μὲν οὐ μακρὰν τοῦ 
τροπαίου, τέχνη δὲ τὸ ἄγαλμα Πραξιτέλους. τὴν 
δὲ εἰκόνα παρὰ τῇ θεῷ τῆς παρθένου Χλῶριν 
ὀνομάξουσι, Νιόβης μὲν θυγατέρα εἶναι λέγοντες, 
Μελίβοιαν δὲ καλεῖσθαι τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς" ἀπολλν- 
μένων δὲ ὑπὸ ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος τῶν 
᾽Αμϕίονος παίδων περιγενέσθαι μόνην τῶν ἀδελ- 
φῶν ταύτην καὶ Αμύκλαν, περιγενέσθαι δὲ εὐξα- 
μένους τῇ Λητοῖ. Μελίβοιαν δὲ οὕτω δή τι 
παραυτίκα τε χλωρὰν τὸ δεῖμα ἐποίησε καὶ ἐς 
τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ βίου παρέμεινεν ὡς καὶ τὸ ὄνομα 
ἐπὶ τῷ συμβάντι ἀντὶ Μελιβοίας αὐτῇ γενέσθαι 
Χλῶριν. τούτους δή φασιν ᾿Αργεῖοι τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς 
οἰκοδομῆσαι τῇ Λητοῖ τὸν ναόν: ἐγὼ δὲ---πρόσκει- 
360 

| 

CORINTH, xx1. 6-10 

exploit, because the people who live around Lake 
Tritonis are sacred to her. In Argos, by the side 
of this monument of the Gorgon, is the grave of 
Gorgophone (Gorgon-killer), the daughter of Perseus. 
As soon as you hear the name you can understand 
the reason why it was given her. On the death of 
her husband, Perieres, the son of Aeolus, whom she 
married when a virgin, she married Oebalus, being 
the first woman, they say, to marry a second time; 
for before this wives were wont, on the death ot 
their husbands, to live as widows. In front of the 
grave.is a trophy of stone made to commemorate 
a victory over an Argive Laphaés. When this man 
was tyrant—I write what the Argives themselves 
say concerning themselves — the people rose up 
against him and cast him out. He fled to Sparta, 
and the Lacedaemonians tried to restore him to 
power, but were defeated by the Argives, who killed 
the greater part of them and Laphaés as well. 

Not far from the trophy is the sanctuary of Leto; 
the image is a work of Praxiteles. The statue of 
the maiden beside the goddess they call Chloris 
(Pale), saying that she was a daughter of Niobe, 
and that she was called Meliboea at the first. When 
the children of Amphion were destroyed by Apollo 
and Artemis, she alone of her sisters, along with 
Amyclas, escaped; their escape was due to their 
prayers to Leto. Meliboea was struck so pale by 
her fright, not only at the time but also for the rest 
of her life, that even her name was accordingly 
changed from Meliboea to Chloris. Now the Argives 
say that these two built originally the temple to 
Leto, but I think that none of Niobe’s children 

361 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μαι γὰρ πλέον τι ἢ οἱ λοιποὶ TH Ὁμήρου σγονήσει 
--δοκῶ τῇ Νιόβη τῶν παίδων μηδένα ὑπόλοιπον 

γενέσθαι. μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι τὸ ἔπος 
΄ 
τὼ Ò ἄρα καὶ δοιώ περ ἐόντ᾽ ἀπὸ πάντας 
ὄλεσσαν. 

Οὗτος μὲν δὴ τὸν οἶκον τὸν ᾽Αμϕίονος ἐκ 
βάθρων ἀνατραπέντα οἶδε: XXII. τῆς δὲ “Ἠρας 
ὁ ναὸς τῆς ᾿Ανθείας ἐ ἐστὶ τοῦ ' ἱεροῦ τῆς Λητοῦς ἐν 
δεξιᾷ καὶ πρὸ αὐτοῦ γυναικῶν τάφος. ἀπέθανον 
δὲ αἱ γυναῖκες ἐν μάχῃ. πρὸς ᾿Αργείους τε καὶ 
Περσέα, ἀπὸ νήσων τῶν ἐν Αἰγαίῳ Διονύσῳ 
συνεστρατευμέναι'. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο Ἁλίας αὐτὰς 
ἐπονομάξουσιν. ἀντικρὺ δὲ τοῦ μνήματος τῶν 
γυναικῶν Δήμητρός ἐ ἐστιν ἱερὸν ἐπίκλησιν Πελασ- 
γίδος ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱδρυσαμένου Πελασγοῦ τοῦ 
Τριόπα, καὶ οὐ πόρρω τοῦ ἱεροῦ τάφος Ἡελασγοῦ. 
πέραν δὲ τοῦ τάφου χαλκεῖόν ἐστιν ov μέγα, 
ἀνέχει δὲ αὐτὸ ἀγάλματα ἀρχαῖα ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ 
Διὸς καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς. Λυκέας μὲν οὖν ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσιν 
ἐποίησε Μηχανέως τὸ ἄγαλμα εἶναι Διός, καὶ 
᾿Αργείων ἔφη τοὺς ἐπὶ Ἴλιον στρατεύσαντας 
ἐνταῦθα ὀμόσαι παραμενεῖν πολεμοῦντας, ἔστ᾽ 
ἂν ἢ τὸ "Ίλιον ἕλωσιν ἢ μαχομένους τελευτὴ 
σφᾶς ἐπιλάβῃ" ἑτέροις δέ ἐστιν εἰρημένον ὀστᾶ 
ἐν τῷ χαλκείῳ κεῖσθαι Ταντάλου. τὸν μὲν δὴ 
Θυέστου παῖδα ἢ Βροτέου---λέγεται γὰρ ἀμφύ- 
τερα---, ὃς Κλυταιμνήστρᾳ πρότερον ἡ ᾿Αγαμέμ- 
νων συνῴκησε, τοῦτον μὲν τὸν Τάνταλον ov διοί- 
σοµαι ταφῆναι ταύτη" τοῦ δὲ λεγομένου Διός τε 
εἶναι καὶ Πλουτοῦς ἰδὼν οἶδα ἐν Σιπύλῳ τάφον 

362 

A. 

---- ----  - 

CORINTH, xxi. τ6-ΧΧΙΙ. 3 

survived, for I place more reliance than others on 
the poetry of Homer, one! of whose verses bears 
out my view :— 

“Though they were only two, yet they gave all to 
destruction.” 

So Homer knows that the house of Amphion was 
utterly overthrown. XXII. The temple of Hera 
Anthea (Flowery) is on the right of the sanctuary of 
Leto, and before it is a grave of women. They were 
killed in a battle against the Argives under Perseus, 
having come from the Aegean Islands to help 
Dionysus in war ; for which reason they are surnamed 
Haliae (Women of the Sea). Facing the tomb of the 
women is a sanctuary of Demeter, surnamed Pelasgian 
from Pelasgus, son of Triopas, its founder, and 
not far from the sanctuary is the grave of Pelasgus. 
Opposite the grave is a small bronze vessel support- 
ing ancient images of Artemis, Zeus, and Athena. 
Now Lyceas in his poem says that the image is of 
Zeus Mechaneus (Coniriver), and that here the Ar- 
gives who set out against Troy swore to hold out in 
the war until they either took Troy or met their end 
fighting. Others have said that in the bronze vessel 
lie the bones of Tantalus. Now that the Tantalus is 
buried here who was the son of Thyestes or Broteas 
(both accounts are given) and married Clytae- 
mnestra before Agamemnon did, I will not gainsay ; 
but the grave of him who legend says was son of Zeus 
and Pluto—it is worth seeing—is on Mount Sipylus. 

1 Iliad xxiv. 609. 
363 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

θέας ἄξιον. πρὸς δὲ οὐδὲ ἀνάγκη συνέπεσεν ἐκ 
τῆς Σιπύλου φυγεῖν αὐτόν, ὡς Πέλοπα ἐπέλαβεν 
ὕστερον ἐλαύνοντος Ἴλου τοῦ Φρυγὸς ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν 
στρατείᾳ. 

Τάδε μὲν ἐς τοσοῦτον ἐξητάσθω' τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸν 
βόθρον τὸν πλησίον δρώμενα Νικόστρατον ἄνδρα 
ἐπιχώριον καταστήσασθαι λέγουσιν. ἀφιᾶσι δὲ 
καὶ νῦν ἔτι ἐς τὸν βόθρον καιομένας λαμπάδας 
Κόρῃ τῇ Δήμητρος. ἐνταῦθα Ποσειδῶνός ἐστιν 
ἱερὸν ἐπίκλησιν Προσκλυστίου' τῆς γὰρ χώρας 
τὸν Ποσειδῶνά φασιν ἐπικλύσαι τὴν πολλήν, 
ὅτι "Ηρας εἶναι καὶ οὐκ αὐτοῦ τὴν γῆν Ἴναχος 
καὶ οἱ συνδικάσαντες ἔγνωσαν. "Ηρα μὲν δὴ παρὰ 
Ποσειδῶνος εὕρετο ἀπελθεῖν ὀπίσω τὴν θάλασ- 
σαν' ᾿Αργεῖοι δέ, ὅθεν τὸ κῦμα ἀνεχώρησεν, ἱερὸν 
Ποσειδῶνι ἐποίησαν Ἡροσκλυστίῳ. προελθόντι 
δὲ οὐ πολὺ τάφος ἐστὶν "Άργου Διὸς εἶναι δο- 
κοῦντος καὶ τῆς Φορωνέως Νιόβης: μετὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα Διοσκούρων ναός. ἀγάλματα δὲ αὐτοί τε 
καὶ οἱ παῖδές εἰσιν "Αναξις καὶ Μνασίνους, σὺν 
δέ σφισιν αἱ μητέρες Ἱλάειρα καὶ Φοίβη, τέχνη 
μὲν Διποίνου καὶ Σκύλλιδος, ξύλου δὲ ἐβένου' 
τοῖς Ò ἵπποις τὰ μὲν πολλὰ ἐβένου καὶ τούτοις, 
ὀλίγα δὲ καὶ ἐλέφαντος πεποίηται. πλησίον δὲ 
τῶν ᾿Ανάκτων Εἰληθυίας ἐστὶν ἱερὸν ἀνάθημα 
Ἑλένης, ὅτε σὺν Πειρίθῳ Θησέως ἀπελθόντος ἐς 
Θεσπρωτοὺς "Αφιὸνά τε ὑπὸ Διοσκούρων ἑάλω 
καὶ ἤγετο ἐς Λακεδαίμονα Ελένη. ἔχειν μὲν γὰρ 
αὐτὴν λέγουσιν ἐν γαστρί, τεκοῦσαν δὲ ἐν "Άργει 
καὶ τῆς Εἐληθυίας ἱδρυσαμένην τὸ ἱερὸν τὴν μὲν 
παῖδα ἣν ἔτεκε Κλυταιμνήστρα δοῦναι---συνοικεῖν 
γὰρ ἤδη Κλυταιμνήστραν ᾿Αγαμέμνονι---, αὐτὴν 

4 

CORINTH, xxu. 1-6 

I know because I saw it. Moreover, no constraint 
came upon him to flee from Sipylus, such as after- 
wards forced Pelops to run away when Ilus the 
Phrygian launched an army against him. 

But I must pursue the inquiry no further. The 
ritual performed at the pit hard by they say was 
instituted by Nicostratus, a native. Even at the 
present day they throw into the pit burning torches 
in honour of the Maid who is daughter of Demeter. 
Here is a sanctuary of Poseidon, surnamed Pros- 
clystius (Flooder), for they say that Poseidon inun- 
dated the greater part of the country because Inachus 
and his assessors decided that the land belonged to 
Hera and not to him. Now it was Hera who in- 
duced Poseidon to send the sea back, but the Argives 
made a sanctuary to Poseidon Prosclystius at the spot 
where the tide ebbed. Going on a little further you 
see the grave of Argus, reputed to be the son of 
Zeus and Niobe, daughter of Phoroneus. After these 
comes a temple of the Dioscuri. The images repre- 
sent the Dioscuri themselves and their sons, Anaxis 
and Mnasinous, and with them are their mothers, 
Hilaeira and Phoebe. They are of ebony wood, and 
were made by Dipoenus and Scyllis. The horses, 
too, are mostly of ebony, but there is a little ivory 
also in their construction. Near the Lords is a 
sanctuary of Eilethyia, dedicated by Helen when, 
Theseus having gone away with Peirithous to Thes- 
protia, Aphidna had been captured by the Dioscuri 
and Helen was being brought to Lacedaemon. For 
it is said that she was with child, was delivered in 
Argos, and founded there the sanctuary of Eilethyia, 
giving the daughter she bore to Clytaemnestra, who 
was already wedded to Agamemnon, while she herself 

365 

Sixth 
cent. 
B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

7 δὲ ὕστερον τούτων Μενελάῳ γήμασθαι. καὶ ἐπὶ 
τῷδε Εὐφορίων Χαλκιδεὺς καὶ Πλευρώνιος ᾿Αλέ- 
ξανδρος ἔπη ποιήσαντες, πρότερον δὲ ἔτι Στησί- 
χορος ὁ Ἱμεραῖος, κατὰ ταὐτά φασιν ᾿Αργείοις 
Θησέως εἶναι θυγατέρα Ἰφιγένειαν. τοῦ δὲ ἱεροῦ 
τῆς Εἰληθυίας πέραν ἐστὶν Εκάτης ναός, Σκόπα 
δὲ τὸ ἄγαλμα ἔργον. τοῦτο μὲν λίθου τὰ δ' 
ἀπαντικρὺ χαλκᾶ, Ἑκάτης καὶ ταῦτα ἀγάλματα, 
τὸ μὲν Πολύκλειτος ἐποίησε, τὸ δὲ ἀδελφὸς 

8 Πολυκλείτου Ναυκύδης Μόθωνος.! ἐρχομένῳ δὲ 
ὁδὸν εὐθεῖαν ἐς γυμνάσιον Κυλάραβιν, ἀπὸ τοῦ 
παιδὸς ὀνομαζόμενον τοῦ Σθενέλου, τέθαπται δὴ 
Λικύμνιος ὁ ᾿Ηλεκτρύωνος: ἀποθανεῖν È αὐτὸν ` 
Ὅμηρος ὑπὸ Τληπτολέμου φησὶ τοῦ “Ηρακλέους, 
καὶ διὰ τὸν φόνον τοῦτον ἔφυγεν ἐξ "Αργους 
Τληπτόλεμος. ὀλύγον δὲ τῆς ἐπὶ Κυλάραβιν καὶ 
τὴν ταύτῃ πύλην ἀποτραπεῖσι Σακάδα μνῆμά 
ἐστιν, ὃς τὸ αὔλημα τὸ Πυθικὸν πρῶτος ηὔλησεν 

9 ἐν Δελφοῖς" καὶ τὸ ἔχθος τὸ ᾿Απόλλωνι διαμένον 
ἐς τοὺς αὐλητὰς ἔτι ἀπὸ Μαρσύου καὶ τῆς apid- 
λης τοῦ Σιληνοῦ παυθῆναι διὰ τοῦτον δοκεῖ τὸν 
Σακάδαν. ἐν δὲ τῷ γυμνασίῳ τῷ Κυλαράβου 
καὶ Πανία ἐστὶν ᾿Αθηνᾶ καλουμένη καὶ τάφον 
Σθενέλου δεικνύουσι, τὸν δὲ αὐτοῦ Κυλαράβου. 
πεποίηται δὲ οὐ πόρρω τοῦ γυμνασίου πολυ- 
άνδριον τοῖς μετὰ ᾿Αθηναίων πλεύσασιν ᾿Αργείοις 
ἐπὶ καταδουλώσει Συρακουσῶν τε καὶ Σικελίας. 

XXIII. Ἐντεῦθεν ἐρχομένοις ὁδὸν καλουμένην 
Κοίλην} ναός ἐστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ Διονύσου. τὸ δὲ 
ἄγαλμα εἶναι λέγουσιν ἐξ Εὐβοίας. συμβάσης 

1 Μεθωναῖος Furtwaengler, νεώτερος Robert. 
2 Κοίλην supplied by Kuhn. 

366 

ΝΟ 
ο ay » / 
4 

CORINTH, xxn. 6-ΧΧΙΠ. 1 

subsequently married Menelaus. And on this matter 
the poets Euphorion of Chalcis and Alexander of 
Pleuron, and even before them, Stesichorus of c. 610- 
Himera, agree with the Argives in asserting that ὃν πο 
Iphigenia was the daughter of Theseus. Over 
against the sanctuary of Eilethyia is a temple of 
Hecate, and the image is a work of Scopas. This 
one is of stone, while the bronze images opposite, also 
of Hecate, were made respectively by Polycleitus 1 
and his brother Naucydes, son of Mothon. As you 
go along a straight road to a gymnasium, called 
Cylarabis after the son of Sthenelus, you come to 
the grave of Licymnius, the son of Electryon, who, 
Homer says, was killed by Tleptolemus, the son of 
Heracles; for which homicide Tleptolemus was 
banished from Argos. On turning a little aside 
from the road to Cylarabis and to the gate there, 
you come to the tomb of Sacadas, who was the 
first to play at Delphi the Pythian flute-tune; the 
hostility of Apollo to flute-players, which had lasted 
ever since the rivalry of Marsyas the Silenus, is 
supposed to have stayed because of this Sacadas. 
In the gymnasium of Cylarabes is an Athena called 
Pania ; they show also the graves of Sthenelus and 
of Cylarabes himself. Not far from the gymnasium 
has been built a common grave of those Argives 
who sailed with the Athenians to enslave Syracuse 
and Sicily. 

— XXIII. As you go from here along a road called 
Hollow there is on the right a temple of Dionysus ; 
the image, they say, is from Euboea. For when the 

1 It is uncertain who this Polycleitus was or when he 
lived. He was not the great Polycleitus, and flourished 
probably after 400 ν.ο, 

367 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

γὰρ τοῖς "Ελλησιν, ὡς ἑκομίζοντο ἐξ Ἰλίου, τῆς 
πρὸς τῷ Καφηρεῖ ναυαγίας, τοὺς δυνηθέντας ἐς 
τὴν γῆν διαφυγεῖν τῶν ᾿Αργείων ῥῖγός τε πιέξει 
καὶ λιμός. εὐξαμένοις δὲ θεῶν τινα ἐν τοῖς 
παροῦσιν ἀπόροις γενέσθαι σωτῆρα, αὐτίκα ὡς 
/ 3 / / 7 4 . 
προήεσαν ἐφάνη σφίσι Διονύσου σπήλαιον, καὶ 
Ἧ 2 - / A A 4 . 
ἄγαλμα ἦν ἐν τῷ σπηλαίῳ τοῦ θεοῦ: τότε δὲ 
αἶγες ἄγριαι φεύγουσαι τὸν χειμῶνα ἐς αὐτὸ ἧσαν 
ἠθροισμέναι. ταύτας οἱ ᾿Αργεῖοι σφάξαντες τά 
τε κρέα ἐδείπνησαν καὶ δέρμασιν ἐχρήσαντο ἀντὶ 
ἐσθῆτος. ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ χειμὼν ἐπαύσατο καὶ ἐπι- 
σκευάσαντες τὰς ναῦς οἴκαδε ἐκομίζοντο, ἐπάγον- 
ται τὸ ἐκ τοῦ σπηλαίου ξόανον: καὶ διατελοῦσιν 
ἐς τόδε τιμῶντες ἔτι. τοῦ Διονύσου δὲ ἐγγυτάτω 
> / ψ \ . / \ 9 / ΄ 
οἰκίαν ὄψει τὴν ᾿Αδράστου καὶ ἀπωτέρω ταύτης 
ἱερὸν ᾿Αμϕιαράου καὶ τοῦ ἱεροῦ πέραν ᾿Βριφύλης 
μνῆμα. ἑξῆς δὲ τούτων ἐστὶν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ τέμενος 
. \ - ε . / ο ΄ 
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἱερὸν Βάτωνος. ἦν δὲ ὁ Βάτων 
/ > 4 A 5 A A A 
γένους ᾿Αμϕιαράῳ τοῦ αὐτοῦ τῶν Μελαμποδιδῶν 
καὶ ἐς μάχην ἐξιόντι ἡνιόχει τοὺς ἵππους" γενο- 
, A A A 
μένης δὲ τῆς τροπῆς ἀπὸ τοῦ Θηβαίων τείχους 
/ A 3 / . «0 e r 
χάσμα γῆς ᾽Αμϕιάραον καὶ τὸ ἅρμα ὑποδεξάμενον 
ἠφάνισεν ὁμοῦ καὶ τοῦτον τὸν Βάτωνα. 
/ - A 
᾿Επανιόντι δὲ ἐκ τῆς Κούλης Ὑρνηθοῦς τάφον 
λέγουσιν εἶναι. εἰ μὲν δὴ κενὸν καὶ ἄλλως ἐς 
/ a a 
μνήμην τῆς γυναικός, εἰκότα λέγουσιν' εἰ δὲ τῆς 
ε A A . ~ / 3 A 
Ὑρνηθοῦς κεῖσθαι τὸν νεκρὸν νομίζουσιν ἐνταῦθα, 
> A / 3 / / \ 9 
ἐγὼ μέν σφισιν οὐ πείθομαι, πειθέσθω δὲ ὅστις 
ὰ b ὃ / ? / A 3 9 ΄ 
τὰ ᾿Επιδαυρίων οὐ πέπυσται. τὸ Ò ἐπιφανέ- 

368 

Ἂμ 

CORINTH, xxn. 1-4 

Greeks, as they were returning from Troy, met 
with the shipwreck at Caphereus, those of the 
Argives who were able to escape to land suffered 
from cold and hunger. Having prayed that someone 
of the gods should prove himself a saviour in their 
present distress, straightway as they advanced they 
came upon a cave of Dionysus; in the cave was an 
image of the god, and on this occasion wild she- 
goats had gathered there to escape from the storm. 
These the Argives killed, using the flesh as food 
and the skins as raiment. When the storm was 
over and the Argives, having refitted their ships, 
were returning home, they took with them the 
wooden image from the cave, and continue to 
honour it to the present day. Very near to the 
temple of Dionysus you will see the house of 
Adrastus, farther on a sanctuary of Amphiaraus, and 
opposite the sanctuary the tomb of Eriphyle. Next 
to these is a precinct of Asclepius, and after them 
a sanctuary of Baton. Now Baton belonged to the 
same family as Amphiaraus, to the Melampodidae, 
and served as his charioteer when he went forth | 
to battle. When the rout took place at the wall of | 
Thebes, the earth opened and received Amphiaraus 
and his chariot, swallowing up this Baton at the 
same time. 

Returning from Hollow Street, you see what they 
say is the grave of Hyrnetho. If they allow that it 
is merely a cenotaph erected to the memory of the 
lady, their account is likely enough; but if they 
believe that the corpse lies here I cannot credit it, 
and leave anyone to do so who has not learnt the 
history of Epidaurus. The most famous sanctuary 

369 
VOL. I. B B 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

στατον ᾿Αργείοις τῶν ᾿Ασκληπιείων ἄγαλμα ep 
ἡμῶν ἔχει καθήμενον ᾿Ασκληπιὸν λίθου λευκοῦ, 
καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτὸν «ἕστηκεν “Ὑγεία' κάθηνται δὲ καὶ 
οἱ ποιήσαντες τὰ ἀγάλματα Ξενόφιλος καὶ rpa- 
των. ἐξ ἀρχῆς. δὲ ἱδρύσατο Σφῦρος τὸ ἱερόν, 
Μαχάονος μὲν υἱός, ἀδελφὸς δὲ ᾿Αλεξάνορος τοῦ 
παρὰ Σικυωνίοις ἐν Τιτάνῃ τιμὰς ἔχοντος. τῆς 
δὲ ᾿Αρτέμιδος τῆς Φεραίας---σέβουσι γὰρ καὶ 
᾿Αργεῖοι Φεραίαν "Αρτεμιν κατὰ ταὐτὰ ᾿Αθηναίοις 
καὶ Σικυωνίοις---τὸ ἄγαλμα καὶ οὗτοί φασιν ἐκ 
Φερῶν τῶν ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ κομισθῆναι. τάδε δὲ 
αὐτοῖς οὐχ. ὁμολογῶ" ᾿λέγουσι γὰρ ᾿Αργεῖοι 
Δηιανείρας ἐν “A pyet μνῆμα εἶναι τῆς Οἰνέως τὸ 
τε “Ἑλένου τοῦ Πριάμου, καὶ ἄγαλμα κεῖσθαι 
παρὰ σφίσιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς τὸ ἐκκομισθὲν ἐξ ᾿Ιλίου 
καὶ ἁλῶναι ποιῆσαν Ἴλιον. τὸ μὲν δὴ Παλλά. 
διον---καλεῖται γὰρ οὕτω---δῆλόν ἐστιν ἐς Ἴτα- 
λίαν κομισθὲν ὑπὸ Αἰνείου: Δηιανείρᾳ δὲ τὴν 
τελευτὴν περὶ Τραχῖνα ï ἴσμεν καὶ οὐκ ἐν "Αργά 
γενομένην, καὶ ἔστιν ὁ τάφος αὐτῇ πλησίον 
Ἡρακλείας τῆς ὑπὸ τῇ Οἴτῃ. τὰ δὲ ἐς Ἔλλενον 
τὸν Ἡριάμου δεδήλωκεν ὁ ὁ λόγος ἤδη μοι, μετὰ 
Πύρρου τοῦ ᾽Αχιλλέως αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν ἐς Ἤπειρον 
καὶ ἐπιτροπεῦσαί τε TOUS Πύρρου παῖδας συνοι- 
κοῦντα ᾿Ανδρομάχῃ καὶ τὴν Κεστρίνην καλου- 
μένην ἀπὸ Κεστρίνου τοῦ Ἑλένου λαβεῖν τὸ 
ὄνομα. οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ αὐτῶν λέληθεν ᾿Αργείων 
τοὺς ἐξηγητὰς ὅ ὅτι μὴ πάντα ἐπ᾽ ἀληθείᾳ λέγεταί 
σφισι, λέγουσι δὲ ὅ ὅμως: οὐ γάρ τι ἕτοιμον pera: 
πεῖσαι τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐναντία ὧν δοξάξουσιν. 
ἄλλα δέ ἐστιν ᾿Αργείοις θέας ἄξια: κατάγαιον 

37° 

CORINTH, xxi. 4-7 

Asclepius at Argos contains at the present day 
white-marble image of the god seated, and by his 
le stands Health. There are also seated figures 
' Menophilus and Straton, who made the images. 
1e original founder of the sanctuary was Sphyrus, 
m of Machaon and brother of the Alexanor who 

honoured among the Sicyonians in Titane. The 
rgives, like the Athenians and Sicyonians, worship 
rtemis Pheraea, and they, too, assert that the 
nage of the goddess was brought from Pherae in 
hessaly. But I cannot agree with them when they 
tv that in Argos are the tombs of Deianeira, the 
aughter of Oeneus, and of Helenus, son of Priam, 
nd that there is among them the image of Athena 
hat was brought from Troy, thus causing the 
apture of that city. For the Palladium, as it is 
‘alled, was manifestly brought to Italy by Aeneas. 
às to Deianeira, we know that her death took place 
1ear Trachis and not in Argos, and her grave is near 
Heraclea, at the foot of Mount Oeta. The story 
of Helenus, son of Priam, I have already given: 
that he went to Epeirus with Pyrrhus, the son ΟΕ. 
Achilles; that, wedded to Andromache, he was 
guardian to the children of Pyrrhus ; and that the 
district called Cestrine received its name from 

Cestrinus, son of Helenus. Now even the guides 
of the Argives themselves are aware that their 
account is not entirely correct. Nevertheless they 
hold to their opinion, for it is not easy to make 
the multitude change their views. The Argives 
have other things worth seeing; for instance, an 

371 

B BQ 

-α 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

οἰκοδόμημα, ἐ êT αὐτῷ δὲ ἦν ὁ χαλκοῦς θάλαμος, 
ὃν ᾿Ακρίσιός ποτε ἐπὶ φρουρᾷ τῆς θυγατρὸς 
ἐποίησε Περίλαος δὲ καθεῖλεν αὐτὸν τυραννήσας. 
τοῦτό τε οὖν τὸ οἰκοδόμημά ἐστι καὶ Κροτώπου 
μνῆμα καὶ Διονύσου ναὸς Κρησίου. Περσεῖ 
γὰρ πολεμήσαντα αὐτὸν καὶ αὖθις ἐλθόντα ἐς 
λύσιν τοῦ ἔχθους τά τε ἄλλα τιμηθῆναι μεγάλως 
λέγουσιν ὑπὸ ᾿Αργείων καὶ τέμενός οἱ δοθῆναι 

8 τοῦτο ἐξαίρετον" Κρησίου δὲ ὕ ὕστερον ὠνομάσθη, 
διότι ᾿Αριάδνην ἀποθανοῦσαν ἔθαψεν ἐνταῦθα. 
Λυκέας δὲ λέγει κατασκευαξομένου δεύτερον τοῦ 
ναοῦ κεραμέαν εὑρεθῆναι σορόν, εἶναι δὲ ᾿Αριάδνης 
αὐτήν" καὶ αὐτός τε καὶ ἄλλους ᾿Αργείων δεῖν 
ἔφη τὴν σορὀν. πλησίον δὲ τοῦ Διονύσου καὶ 
᾿Αφροδύτης ναός ἐστιν Οὐρανίας. 

XXIV. Τὴν δὲ ἀκρόπολιν Λάρισαν μὲν καλοῦ" 
σιν ἀπὸ τῆς Πελασγοῦ θυγατρός" ἀπὸ ταύτης 
δὲ καὶ δύο τῶν ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ πόλεων, ἤ τε ἐπὶ 
θαλάσσῃ καὶ ἡ παρὰ τὸν Πηνειόν, ὠνομάσθησαν. 
ἀνιόντων δὲ ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἔστι .μὲν τῆς 
᾿Ακραίας | Ἠρας τὸ ἱερόν, ἔστι δὲ καὶ ναὸς ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος, ὃν Ἰυθαεὺς πρῶτος παραγενύµενος ἐκ 
Δελφῶν λέγεται ποιῆσαι. τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα τὸ 
νῦν χαλκοῦν ἐστιν ὀρθόν, Δειραδιώτης ᾿Απόλλων 
καλούμενος, ὅτι καὶ ὁ τόπος οὗτος καλεῖται 
Δειράς. ἡ δέ οἱ μαντικὴ — μαντεύεται γὰρ ἔτι 
καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς — καθέστηκε τρόπον. τοῦτον. γυνὴ 
μὲν προφητεύουσά ἐστιν, ἀνδρὸς εὐνῆς εἰργομέν 
θυομένης δὲ ἐν νυκτὶ ἀρνὸς κατὰ μῆνα ἕκαστο 
γευσαµένη δὴ τοῦ αἵματος ἡ γυνὴ κάτοχος 

2 τοῦ θεοῦ γίνεται. τοῦ Δειραδιώτου δὲ Απόλλω 
ἔχεται μὲν ἱερὸν ᾿Αθηνᾶς ᾿Ὀξυδερκοῦς καλο 

372 

CORINTH, xxi. 7—xx1v. 2 

underground building over which was the bronze 
chamber which Acrisius once made to guard his — 
daughter. Perilaus, however, when he became ` 
tyrant, pulled it down. Besides this building there 
is the tomb of Crotopus and a temple of Cretan 
Dionysus. For they say that the god, having made 
war on Perseus, afterwards laid aside his enmity, 
and received great honours at the hands of the 
Argives, including this precinct set specially apart 
for himself. It was afterwards called the precinct 
of the Cretan god, because, when Ariadne died, 
Dionysus buried her here. But Lyceas says that 
when the temple was being rebuilt an earthenware 
cofin was found, and that it was Ariadne’s. He 
also said that both he himself and other Argives 
had seen it. Near the temple of Dionysus is a 
temple of Heavenly Aphrodite. 

XXIV. The citadel they call Larisa, after the 
daughter of Pelasgus. After her were also named two 
of the cities in Thessaly, the one by the sea and the 
one on the Peneiis. As you go up the citadel you 
come to the sanctuary of Hera of the Height, and 
also a temple_of Apollo, which is said to have been 
first built by Pythaeus when he came from Delphi. 
The present image is a bronze standing figure called 
Apollo Deiradiotes, because this place, too, is called 
Deiras (Ridge). Oracular responses are still given 
here, and the oracle acts in the following way. 
There is a woman who prophesies, being debarred 
from intercourse with a man. Every month a lamb 
is sacrificed at night, and the woman, after tasting 
the blood, becomes inspired by the god. Adjoining 
the temple of Apollo Deiradiotes is a sanctuary of 
Athena Oxyderces (Sharp-sighted), dedicated by 

373 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μένης, Διομήδους ἀνάθημα, ὅτι οἱ μαχομένῳ ποτὶ 
ἐν Ἰλίφ τὴν ἀχλὺν. ἀφεῖλεν ἡ θεὸς ἆ ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλ. 
μῶν" ἔχεται δὲ τὸ στάδιον, ἐν ᾧ τὸν ἀγῶνα τῷ 
Νεμείῳ Διὶ καὶ τὰ Ἡραῖα ἄγουσιν. ἐς δὲ τὴν 
ἀκρόπολιν ἰοῦσίν ἐστιν ἐν ἀριστερᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ 
τῶν Αἰγύπτου παίδων καὶ ταύτῃ μνῆμα. χωρὶς 
μὲν γὰρ ἀπὸ τῶν σωμάτων ἐνταῦθα αἱ κεφα- 
dat, χωρὶς δὲ ἐν Λέρνῃ σώματα τὰ λοιπά: ἐν 
Λέρνῃ yap καὶ o φόνος ἐξειργάσθη τῶν νεανί- 
σκων, ἀποθανόντων δὲ ἀποτέμνουσιν αἱ γυναῖκες 
τὰς κεφαλὰς ἀπόδειξιν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ὧν 

3 ἐτόλμησαν. ἐπ᾽ ἄκρᾳ δέ ἐστι τῇ Λαρίσῃ Διὸς 
ἐπίκλησιν Λαρισαίου ναός, οὐκ ἔχων ὄροφον" τὸ 
δὲ ἄγαλμα ξύλου πεποιημένον οὐκέτι ἑστηκὸς ἦν. 
ἐπὶ τῷ βάθρῳ. καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς δὲ ναός ἐστι Θέα: 
ἄξιος: ἐνταῦθα ἀναθήματα κεῖται καὶ ἄλλα καὶ 
Ζεὺς ξόανον, δύο μὲν ἡ πεφύκαμεν ἔχον. ὀφθαλ. 
μούς, τρίτον δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου. τοῦτον τὸν 
Δία Πριάμῳ φασὶν εἶναι τῷ ô Λαομέδοντος πατρῷον 
ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ τῆς αὐλῆς ἱδρυμένον, καὶ ὅτε ἠλύσκετο 
ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων Ἴλιον, ἐπὶ τούτου κατέφυγεν ο 
Πρίαμος τὸν βωμόν. ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ λάφυρα ἐνέ- 
μοντο, λαμβάνει Σθένελος ὁ Καπανέως αὐτόν, 

4 καὶ ἀνάκειται μὲν διὰ τοῦτο ἐνταῦθα: τρεῖς be 
ὀφθαλμοὺς, ἔχειν ἐπὶ τῷδε ἄν τις τεκμαίροιτο. 
αὐτόν. Δία γὰρ ἐν οὐρανῷ βασιλεύει», οὗτος 
μὲν λόγος κοινὸς πάντων ἐστὶν ἀνθρώπων. ὃν 
δὲ a ἄρχειν φασὶν ὑπὸ γῆς, ἔστιν ἔπος τῶν Ὁμήρου. 
Δία ὀνομάξον καὶ τοῦτον' 

Ζεύς τε καταχθόνιος καὶ ἐπαινὴ Περσεφόνεια. 
Αἰσχύλος δὲ ὁ Εὐφορίωνος καλεῖ Δία καὶ τὸν ἐν 
374 

πο A 

CORINTH, xxiv. 2-4 

Diomedes, because once when he was fighting at 
Troy the goddess removed the mist from his eyes. 
Adjoining it is the race-course, in which they hold 
the games in honour of Nemean Zeus and the festi- 
val of Hera. As you go to the citadel there is on 
the left of the road another tomb of the children 
of Aegyptus. For here are the heads apart from 
the bodies, which are at Lerna. For it was at 
Lerna that the youths were murdered, and when 
they were dead their wives cut off their heads, 
to prove to their father that they had done the 
dreadful deed. On the top of Larisa is a temple 
of Zeus, surnamed Larisaean, which has no roof; the 
wooden image I found no longer standing upon its 
pedestal. There is also a temple of Athena worth 
seeing. Here are placed votive offerings, including 
a wooden image of Zeus, which has two eyes in the 
natural place and a third on its forehead. This 
Zeus, they say, was a paternal god of Priam, the son 
of Laomedon, set up in the uncovered part of his 
court, and when Troy was taken by the Greeks 
Priam took sanctuary at the altar of this god. 
When the spoils were divided, Sthenelus, the son 

of Capaneus, received the image, and for this ; < 

reason it has been dedicated here. The reason for 

its three eyes one might infer to be this. That Zeus 

is king in heaven is a saying common to all men. 

As for him who is said to rule under the earth, 

there is a verse of Homer! which calls him, too, 
Zeus :— 

“ Zeus of the Underworld, and the august Perse- 

phonea.” 
The god in the sea, also, is called Zeus by Aeschylus, 
1 Ihad ix. 457. 
375 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

θαλάσση. τρισὶν οὖν ὁρῶντα ἐποίησεν ὀφθαλ- 
μοῖς ὅστις δὴ ἦν ὁ ποιήσας, ἅτε ἐν ταῖς τρισὶ 

- `~ A 
ταῖς λεγομέναις λήξεσιν ἄρχοντα τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦ- 
τον θεόν. 

Ὁδυὺ δὲ ἐξ Ἄργους καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλα εἰσὶ τῆς 
Πελοποννήσου καὶ πρὸς ᾿Αρκαδίας ἐπὶ Τεγέαν. 
3 A ὃ wv > . ε / δέ 
ἐν δεξιᾷ δὲ ὄρος ἐστὶν ἡ Λυκώνη, δένδρα κυπα- 

. 
ρίσσου μάλιστα ἔχουσα. «ὠκοδόμηται δὲ ἐπὶ 
- A mM / ? ĝi e / \ 
κορυφῇ τοῦ ὄρους ᾿Αρτέμιδος Ὀρθίας ἱερόν, καὶ 
9 4 E 9 / \ A ΑΝ / ὃ 
ἀγάλματα ᾿Απόλλωνος καὶ Λητοῦς καὶ Αρτέμιδος 
πεποίηται λευκοῦ λίθου. Πολυκλείτου δέ φασιν 
Aa ’ 
εἶναι ἔργα. καταβάντων δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ὄρους αὖθίς 
ἐστιν ἐν ἀριστερᾷ τῆς λεωφόρου ναὸς Αρτέμιδος. 
ὀλίγον δὲ ἀπωτέρω ἐν δεξιᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ Χάον ἐστὶν 
4 A 
ὄρος ὀνομαζόμενον, ὑπὸ δὲ αὐτῷ δένδρα πέφυκεν 
ἥμερα καὶ ἄνεισι τοῦ ᾿Ἡρασίνου φανερὸν ἐνταῦθα 
δὴ τὸ ὕδωρ' τέως δὲ ἐκ Στυμφάλου ῥεῖ τῆς 
. 4 ” » > 7 b > A 
Αρκάδων ὥσπερ ἐξ Εὐρίπου κατὰ ᾿Ελευσῖνα 
καὶ τὴν ταύτῃ θάλασσαν οἱ ‘Perroi. πρὸς δὲ τοῦ 
Ῥ / - XN . y > - [ή 
ρασίνου ταῖς κατὰ τὸ ὄρος ἐκβολαῖς Διονύσῳ 
΄ - 
καὶ Πανὶ θύουσι, τῷ Διονύσῳ δὲ καὶ ἑορτὴν 
y / vs 5 A .. 
ἄγουσι καλουμένην Τύρβην. ἐπανελθοῦσι δὲ ἐς 

\ - A 

τὴν ἐπὶ Τεγέας ὁδόν ἐστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ ὀνομα- 
/ ’ 
ζομένου Tpoyou Keyypeat. τὸ δὲ ὄνομα ἐφ ὅτῳ 

- A 
τῷ χωρίῳ γέγονεν, οὐ λέγουσι, πλὴν εἰ μὴ καὶ 
τοῦτο ἄρα ὠνομάσθη διὰ τὸν Πειρήνης παῖδα 
Κεγχρίαν. καὶ πολυάνδρια ἐνταῦθά ἐστιν ᾿Αρ- 

. 
γείων νικησάντων μάχῃ Λακεδαιμονίους περί 
ε - A 

Tods. τὸν δὲ ἀγῶνα τοῦτον συμβάντα εὕρισκον 

> / . 

Αθηναίοις ἄρχοντος Πεισιστράτου, τετάρτῳ δὲ 

ἔτει τῆς ἑβδόμης καὶ εἰκοστῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος 
» ΄ » - 

ἣν Εὐρύβοτος ᾿Αθηναῖος ἐνίκα στάδιον. wara- 

376 

CORINTH, xxiv. 4-7 

the son of Euphorion. So whoever made the image 
made it with three eyes, as signifying that this 
same god rules in all the three “allotments ” of the 
Universe, as they are called. 

From Argos are roads to various parts of the 
Peloponnesus, including one to Tegea on the side 
towards Arcadia. On the right is Mount Lycone, 
which has trees on it, chiefly cypresses. On the top 
of the mountain is built a sanctuary of Artemis Orthia 
(of the Steep), and there have been made white-marble 
images of Apollo, Leto, and Artemis, which they say 
are works of Polycleitus. On descending again from 
the mountain you see on the left of the highway a 
temple of Artemis. A little farther on there is on 
the right of the road a mountain called Chaon. At 
its foot grow cultivated trees, and here the water 
of the Erasinus rises to the surface. Up to this 
point it flows from Stymphalus in Arcadia, just as 
the Rheiti, near the sea at Eleusis, flow from the 
Euripus. At the places where the Erasinus gushes 
forth from the mountain they sacrifice to Dionysus 
and to Pan, and to Dionysus they also hold a festival 
called Tyrbe (Throng). On returning to the road that 
leads to Tegea you see Cenchreae on the right of what 
is called the Wheel. Why the place received this 
name they do not say. Perhaps in this case also 
it was Cenchrias, son of Peirene, that caused it to 
be so called. Here are common graves of the 
Argives who conquered the Lacedaemonians in 
battle at Hysiae. This fight took place, I dis- οὐ» 
covered, when Peisistratus was archon at Athens, in ᾿᾿ 
the fourth year of the twenty-seventh Olympiad, in 

| which the Athenian, Eurybotus, won the foot-race. 

377 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

βάντος δὲ ἐς τὸ χθαμαλώτερον ἐρείπια Ὑσιῶν 
ἐστι πόλεώς ποτε ἐν τῇ ᾿Αργολίδι, καὶ τὸ 
πταῖσμα Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐνταῦθα γενέσθαι λέ- 
γουσιν. 

XXV. H Ò ἐς Μαντίνειαν ἄγουσα ἐξ "Άργους 
ἐστὶν οὐχ. ἥπερ καὶ ἐπὶ Τεγέαν, ἀλλὰ ἀπὸ τῶν 
πυλῶν τῶν πρὸς τῇ Δειράδι. ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ 
ταύτης ἱερὸν διπλοῦν πεποίηται, καὶ πρὸς ἡλίου 
δύνοντος ἔσοδον καὶ κατὰ ἀνατολὰς ἑτέραν ἔχον. 
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τοῦτο ᾿Αφροδίτης κεῖται ξόανον, 
πρὸς δὲ ἡλίου δυσμὰς "Άρεως: εἶναι δὲ τὰ ἀγάλ- 
ματα Πολυνείκους .λέγουσιν ἀναθήματα καὶ ` Ap- 
γείων, ὅσοι τιµωρήσοντες αὐτῷ συνεστρατεύοντο. 
προελθοῦσι δὲ αὐτόθεν διαβάντων ποταμὸν yei- 
pappov Xápaðpov καλούμενον ἔστιν Οἰνόη, τὸ 
ὄνομα ἔχουσα, ὡς ᾿Αργεῖοί φασιν, ἀπὸ Οἰνέως. 
Οἰνέα γὰρ τὸν βασιλεύσαντα ἐν Αἰτωλία λέγου- 
σιν ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Αγρίου παίδων ἐκβληθέντα τῆς 
ἀρχῆς παρὰ Διομήδην ἐς "Αργος ἀφικέσθαι. 0 

ὲ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ἐτιμώρησεν αὐτῷ στρατεύσας 
ἐς τὴν Καλυδωνίαν, παραμένειν δὲ οὐκ ἔφη οἱ 
δύνασθαι: συνακολουθεῖν δέ, εἰ βούλοιτο, ἐς 
"Αργος ἐκεῖνον ἐκέλευεν. ἀφικόμενον δὲ τά τε 
ἄλλα ἐθεράπευεν, ὡς πατρὸς θεραπεύειν πατέρα 
εἰκὸς ἦν, καὶ ἀποθανόντα ἔθαψεν ἐνταῦθα. ἀπὸ 
τούτου μὲν Οἰνόη Χωρίον ἐστὶν Αργείους ὑπὲρ 
δὲ Οἰνόης ὄρος ἐστὶν ᾿Αρτεμίσιον καὶ ἱερὸν 
᾿Αρτέμιδος ἐπὶ κορυφῇ τοῦ ὄρους. ἐν τούτῳ δέ 
εἰσι τῷ ὄρει καὶ αἱ πηγαὶ τοῦ ᾿Ινάχου" πηγαὶ 
γὰρ δὴ τῷ ὄντι εἰσὶν αὐτῷ, τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ οὐκ ἐπὶ 
πολὺ ἐξικνεῖται τῆς γῆς. 

Ταύτῃ μὲν δὴ θέας οὐδὲν ἔτι ἦν ἄξιον: ἑτέρα δὲ 

378 

ee” ο ο ο ο Ee, EERE, EE eee: a ee eee eee 

CORINTH, xxiv. 7—xxv. 4 

On coming down to a lower level you reach the 
ruins of Hysiae, which once was a city in Argolis, 
and here it is that they say the Lacedaemonians 
suffered their reverse. 
/ XXV. The road from Argos to Mantinea is not the 
ae as that to Tegea, but begins from the gate at 
the Ridge. On this road is a sanctuary built with 
two rooms, having an entrance on the west side and 
another on the east. At the latter is a wooden 
image of Aphrodite, and at the west entrance one 
of Ares. They say that the images are votive 
offerings of Polyneices and of the Argives who 
joined him in the campaign to redress his wrongs. 
Farther on from here, across the torrent called 
Charadrus (Gully), is Oenoé, named, the Argives 
say, after Oeneus. The story is that Oeneus, who 
was king in Aetolia, on being driven from his throne 
by the sons of Agrius, took refuge with Diomedes at 
Argos, who aided him by an expedition into Caly- 
donia, but said that he could not remain with him, 
and urged Oeneus to accompany him, if he wished, 
to Argos. When he came, he gave him all the — 
attention that it was right to give a father’s father, 
and on his death buried him here. After him the 
Argives name the place Oenoé. Above Oenoë is 
Mount Artemisius, with a sanctuary of Artemis on 
the top. On this mountain are also the springs of 
the river Inachus. For it really has springs, though 
the water does not run far. l 
Here I found nothing else that is worth seeing. 

am 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὁδὸς ἀπὸ τῶν πυλῶν τῶν πρὸς TH Δειράδι ἐστὶν 
ἐπὶ Λύρκειαν. ἐς τοῦτο λέγεται τὸ χωρίον 
Λυγκέα ἀποσωθῆναι τῶν πεντήκοντα ἀδελφῶν 
μόνον' καὶ ἡνίκα ἐσώθη, πυρσὸν ἀνέσχεν ἐντεῦ- 
θεν. συνέκειτο δὲ ἄρα αὐτῷ πρὸς τὴν Ὕπερμη- 
στραν ἀνασχεῖν τὸν πυρσόν, ἣν διαφυγὼν Aavaor 
ἐς ἀσφαλὲς ἀφίκηταί trou τὴν δὲ καὶ αὐτὴν ava- 
ψαι λέγουσιν ἕτερον ἀπὸ τῆς Λαρίσης, δῆλα καὶ 
ταύτην ποιοῦσαν ὅτι ἐν οὐδενὶ οὐδὲ αὐτὴ καθέ- 
στηκεν ἔτι κινδύνῳ. ἐπὶ τούτῳ δὲ ᾿Αργεῖοι κατὰ 
ἔτος ἕκαστον πυρσῶν ἑορτὴν ἄγουσι. τὸ δὲ χω- 
ρίον τότε μὲν Λυγκεία ἐκαλεῖτο, οἰκήσαντος δὲ 
ὕστερον ἐν αὐτῷ Λύρκου---παῖς δὲ ἦν ᾿Αβαντος 
[4 ν y ᾽ 2 A ” \ y v4 
νόθος---τὸ ὄνομα δι αὐτὸν ἔσχηκε καὶ ἄλλα τέ 
ἐστιν οὐκ ἀξιόλογα ἐν τοῖς ἐρειπίοις καὶ εἰκὼν 
ἐπὶ στήλῃ τοῦ Λύρκου. ἐς μὲν δὴ ταύτην ἐστὶν 
b] ” e 4 / 4 / » 
ἐξ Άργους ἑξήκοντα μάλιστά που στάδια, ἐκ δὲ 
Λυρκείας ἕτερα τοσαῦτα ês Ὀρνεάς. Λυρκείας 
μὲν δὴ πόλεως, ἅτε ἠρημωμένης ἤδη κατὰ τὴν 
ΕΛ ή ld > Ἀν > » 4 
Ελλήνων στρατείαν ἐπὶ "ἴλιον, οὐκ ἐποιήσατο 
"Όμηρος ἐν καταλόγῳ μνήμην" Ὀρνεὰς δέ---ἔτι 
γὰρ ὠκοῦντο--, ὥσπερ τῷ τόπῳ τῆς ᾿Αργείας 
ἔκειντο, οὕτω καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσι προτέρας ἢ 
Φλιοῦντά τε καὶ Σικυῶνα κατέλεξεν. ἐκαλοῦντο 
δὲ ἀπὸ ᾿Ὀρνέως τοῦ ᾿Βρεχθέως' τοῦ δὲ ᾿Ὀρνέως 
ἦν τούτου Πετεώς, τοῦ δὲ Μενεσθεύς, ὃς ᾿Αγαµέ- 
μνονι μετὰ ᾿Αθηναίων τὴν Πριάμου συγκαθεῖλεν 
ἀρχήν. ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ τούτου τὸ ὄνομα ἐγένετο τῇ 
πόλει, ᾿Αργεῖοι δὲ ὕστερον τούτων ᾿Ὀρνεάτας 
ἀνέστησαν: ἀναστάντες δὲ σύνοικοι γεγόνασιν 
᾿;Αργείοις. ἔστι δὲ ἐν ταῖς Ὀρνεαῖς ᾿Αρτέμιδός 
τε ἱερὸν καὶ ξόανον ὀρθὸν καὶ ἕτερος ναὸς θεοῖς 
380 

CORINTH, xxv. 4-6 

There is another road, that leads to Lyrcea from 
the gate at the Ridge. The story is that to this 
place came Lynceus, being the only one of the fifty 
brothers to escape death, and that on his escape he 
raised a beacon here. Now to raise the beacon was 
the signal he had agreed with Hypermnestra to give 
if he should escape Danaus and reach a place of 
safety. She also, they say, lighted a beacon on 
Larisa as a sign that she too was now out of danger. 
For this reason the Argives hold every year a 
beacon festival. At the first the place was called 
Lyncea; its present name is derived from Lyrcus, 
a bastard son of Abas, who afterwards dwelt there. 
Among the ruins are several things not worth 
mentioning, besides a figure of Lyrcus upon a 
slab. The distance from Argos to Lyrcea is about 
sixty stades, and the distance from Lyrcea to 
Orneae is the same. Homer in the Catalogue 
makes no mention of the city Lyrcea, because at 
the time of the Greek expedition against Troy it 
already lay deserted; Orneae, however, was in- 
habited, and in his poem he places it} on the list 
before Phlius and Sicyon, which order corresponds 
to the position of the towns in the Argive territory. 
The name is derived from Orneus, the son of 
Erechtheus. This Orneus begat Peteos, and Peteos 
begat Menestheus, who, with a body of Athenians, 
helped Agamemnon to destroy the kingdom of 
Priam. From him then did Orneae get its name, 
and afterwards the Argives removed all its citizens, 
who thereupon came to live at Argos. At Orneae 
are a sanctuary and an upright wooden image of 
Artemis; there is besides a temple devoted to all 

1 Iliad ii. 571. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

πᾶσιν ἐς κοινὸν ἀνειμένος. τὰ δὲ ἐπέκεινα Ὄρ- 
νεῶν ἥ τε Σικυωνία καὶ ἡ Φλιασία ἐστίν. 

᾿Ερχομένοις δὲ ἐξ "Άργους ἐς τὴν Ἐπιδαυρίαν 
ἐστὶν οἰκοδόμημα ἐν δεξιᾷ πυραμίδι μάλιστα 
εἰκασμένον, ἔχει δὲ ἀσπίδας σχῆμα ᾿Αργολικὰς 
ἐπειργασμένας. ἐνταῦθα Προίτῳ περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς 
πρὸς ᾿Ακρίσιον μάχη γίνεται, καὶ τέλος μὲν ἴσον 
τῷ ἀγῶνι συμβῆναί φασι καὶ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διαλ.- 
λαγὰς ὕστερον, ὡς οὐδέτεροι βεβαίως κρατεῖν 
ἐδύναντο" συμβάλλειν δὲ σφᾶς λέγουσιν ἀσπίσι 
πρῶτον τότε καὶ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὸ στράτευμα ὡπλι- 
σμένους. τοῖς δὲ πεσοῦσιν ἀφ᾽ ἑκατέρων---πολῆται 
γὰρ καὶ συγγενεῖς ἡσαν--ἐποιήθη ταύτῃ μνῆμα 
ἐν κοινῷ. 

Προϊοῦσι δὲ ἐντεῦθεν καὶ ἐκτραπεῖσιν ἐς δεξιὰν 
Τίρυνθὀς ἐ ἐστιν ἐρείπια. ἀνέστησαν δὲ καὶ Τιρυν- 
θίους ᾿Αργεῖοι, συνοίκους προσλαβεῖν καὶ τὸ 

"Αργος ἐπαυξῆσαι θελήσαντες. Τίρυνθα δὲ 
ἥρωα, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τῇ πόλει τὸ ὄνομα ἐγένετο, παῖδα 
Αργου τοῦ Διὸς εἶναι λέγουσι. τὸ δὲ τεῖχος, ὃ 

δὴ μόνον τῶν ἐρειπίων λείπεται, Κυκλώπων μέν 
ἐστιν ἔργον, πεποίηται δὲ . ἀργῶν λίθων, μέγεθος 
ἔχων ἕκαστος λίθος ὡς ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν μηδ᾽ ἂν ἀρχὴν 
κινηθῆναι τὸν μικρότατον ὑπὸ ζεύγους ἡμιόνων" 
λιθία δὲ ἐνήρμοσται πάλαι, ὡς μάλιστα αὐτῶν 
ἕκαστον ἁρμονίαν τοῖς μεγάλοις λίθοις εἶναι. 
καταβάντων δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν, ἐνταῦθα οἱ 
θάλαμοι τῶν .Προίτου θυγατέρων εἰσίν' ἐπανελ.- 
θόντων δὲ ἐς τὴν λεωφόρον, ἐπὶ Μήδειαν ἐς 
ἀριστερὰν ἥξεις. βασιλεῦσαι δέ φασιν Ἠλε- 
κτρύωνα ἐν τῇ Μηδείᾳ τὸν πατέρα Αλκμήνης: 
ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δὲ Μηδείας πλὴν τὸ ἔδαφος ἄλλο οὐδὲν 

382 

τω. 

CORINTH, xxv. 6-ο 

tlhe gods in common. On the further side of 
O rneae are Sicyonia and Phliasia. 

On the way from Argos to Epidauria there is on 
the right a building made very like a pyramid, and 
on it in relief are wrought shields of the Argive 
shape. Here took place a fight for the throne be- 
ttween Proetus and Acrisius; the contest, they say, 
ended in a draw, and a reconciliation resulted after- 
wards, as neither could gain a decisive victory. The 
story is that they and their hosts were armed with 
shields, which were first used in this battle. For 
those that fell on either side was built here a common 
tomb, as they were fellow citizens and kiusmen. 

Going on from here and turning to the right, 
you come to the ruins of Tiryns. The Tiryn- 
thians also were removed by the Argives, who 
wished to make Argos more powerful by adding to 
the population. The hero Tiryns, from whom the 
city derived its name, is said to have been a son 
of Argus, a son of Zeus. The wall, which is the 
only part of the ruins still remaining, is a work of 
the Cyclopes made of unwrought stones, each stone 
being so big that a pair of mules could not move 
the smallest from its place to the slightest degree. 
Long ago small stones were so inserted that each of 
them binds the large blocks firmly together. Going 
down seawards, you come to the chambers of the 
daughters of Proetus. On returning to the highway 
you will reach Medea on the left hand. They say 
that Electryon, the father of Alcmena, was king of 
Medea, but in my time nothing was left of it except 

383 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

10 ἐλείπετο. κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐς ᾿Επίδαυρον εὐθεῖάν 
ἐστι κώμη Λῆσσα, ναὸς δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐν αὐτῆ καὶ 
a > / / A \ 2 2 / Led 
ξόανον οὐδέν τι διάφορον ἢ τὸ ἐν ἀκροπόλει τῇ 
Λαρίσῃ. ἔστι δὲ ὄρος ὑπὲρ τῆς Λήσσης τὸ ᾿Αρα- 
Aa Ν 
χναῖῦον, πάλαι δὲ σάπυς ἐλάτων 1 ἐπὶ Ἰνάχου το 
ὄνομα εἰλήφει. βωμοὶ δέ εἰσιν ἐν αὐτῷ Διός τε 
καὶ Hpas: δεῆσαν ὄμβρου σφίσιν ἐνταῦθα θύουσι. 
XXVI. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Λῆσσαν ἔχεται τῆς 
> / e’ / \ κ A > > \ 
Ἀργείας ἡ ᾿Επιδαυρίων' πρὶν δὲ ἢ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν 
ε - 
γενέσθαι τὴν πόλιν, ἐπὶ τὸ ἱερὸν ἀφίξῃ τοῦ 
᾿Ασκληπιοῦ. ταύτην τὴν χώραν οὐκ οἶδα οἵτινες 
πρότερον ᾠκησαν πρὶν Επίδαυρον ἐλθεῖν ἐς 
αὐτήν" οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ τοὺς ἀπογόνους Ἐπιδαύρου 
πυθέσθαι παρὰ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ἐδυνάμην. τε- 
λευταῖον δὲ πρὶν ἢ παραγενέσθαι Δωριέας ἐς 
Πελοπόννησον βασιλεῦσαί φασι Ἠιτυρέα "Ἴωνος 
ἀπόγονον τοῦ Ξούθου. τοῦτον παραδοῦναι λέ- 
γουσιν ἀμαχεὶ τὴν γῆν Δηιφόντῃ καὶ ’ Αργείοις' 
ε A A 
2 καὶ ὁ μὲν ἐς ᾿Αθήνας ὁμοῦ τοῖς πολίταις ἀφικό- 
μενος ἐνταῦθα ᾠκησε, Δηιφόντης δὲ καὶ ᾿Αργεῖοι 
» 
τὴν ᾿Επιδαυρίαν ἔσχον. ἀπεσχίσθησαν δὲ οὗτοι 
τῶν ἄλλων ᾿Αργείων Τημένου τελευτήσαντος, 
Δηιφόντης μὲν καὶ Ὑρνηθὼ κατ᾽ ἔχθος τῶν 
Τημένου παίδων, ὁ δὲ σὺν αὐτοῖς στρατὸς Δηι- 
/ \ ce a 4 A / \ a 
φόντῃ καὶ Ὕρνηθοῖ πλέον ἢ Κείσῳ καὶ τοῖς 
9 a / » / / > 9 Φ ` 
ἀδελφοῖς νέμοντες. Επίδαυρος δέ, ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὸ 
ὄνομα τῇ γῆ ἐτέθη, ὡς μέν φασιν ᾿Ηλεῖοι, Ilé- 
λοπος Hy: κατὰ δὲ Αργείων δόξαν καὶ τὰ ἔπη τὰς 
4 9 / Φ » ὃ 4 \ 5 e 
μεγάλας Ἠοίας ἦν ᾿Επιδαύρῳ πατήρ Αργος o 
’ > ΄ 
Atos: Επιδαύριοι δὲ ᾿Απόλλωνι ᾿Επίδαυρον 
3 παῖδα προσποιοῦσιν. ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ δὲ ἱερὰν ud- 
1 Text corrupt. 

384 

στ πα 

CORINTH, xxv. 9-χΧνε 3 

the foundations. On the straight road to Epidaurus 
is a village Lessa, in which is a temple of Athena 
with a wooden image exactly like the one on the 
citadel Larisa. Above Lessa is Mount Arachnaeus, 
which long ago, in the time of Inachus, was named 
Sapyselaton.' On it are altars to Zeus and Hera. 
When rain is needed they sacrifice to them here. 
XXVI. At Lessa the Argive territory joins that of 
Epidaurus. But before you reach Epidaurus itself 
you will come to the sanctuary of Asclepius. Who 
dwelt in this land before Epidaurus came to it 
I do not know, nor could I discover from the 
natives the descendants of Epidaurus either. But 
the last king before the Dorians arrived in the Pelo- 
ponnesus was, they say, Pityreus, a descendant of 
Ion, son of Xuthus, and they relate that he handed 
over the land to Deiphontes and the Argives 
without a struggle. He went to Athens with his 
people and dwelt there, while Deiphontes and the 
Argives took possession of Epidauria. These on 
the death of Temenus seceded from the other 
Argives; Deiphontes and Hyrnetho through hatred 
of the sons of Temenus, and the army with them, 
because it respected Deiphontes and Hyrnetho 
more than Ceisus and his brothers. Epidaurus, who 
gave the land its name, was, the Eleans say, a son 
of Pelops; but, according to Argive opinion and the 
poem the Great Eoeae,? the father of Epidaurus was 
Argus, son of Zeus, while the Epidaurians main- ` 
tain that Epidaurus was the child of Apollo. That 
the land is especially sacred to Asclepius is due to 

1 See opposite page. . 
2 A poem attributed to Hesiod. 

38% 

VOL. I. CC 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Mota εἶναι THY γῆν ἐπὶ λόγω συμβέβηκε τοἰῷδε. 
Φλεγύαν ᾿Ἐπιδαύριοί φασιν ἐλθεῖν ἐς Πελοπόν- 
νησον πρόφασιν μὲν ἐπὶ θέα τῆς χώρας, ἔργῳ δὲ 
κατάσκοπον πλήθους τῶν ἐνοικούντων καὶ εἰ τὸ 
πολὺ μάχιμον εἴη τῶν ἀνθρώπων: ἦν γὰρ δὴ 
Φλεγύας πολεμικώτατος τῶν τότε καὶ ἐπιὼν 
ἑκάστοτε ἐφ οὓς οι τοὺς καρποὺς ἔφερε καὶ 

4 ἤλαυνε τὴν Ὁ λείαν. ὅτε δὲ παρεγένετο ἐς Πελο- 
πόννησον, εἴπετο ἡ θυγάτηρ αὐτῷ, λεληθυῖα ἔ ἔτι 
τὸν πατέρα ὅτι ἐξ ᾿Απόλλωνος εἶχεν ἐν γαστρί. 
ὡς δὲ ἐν τῇ γῇ τῇ Ἐπιδαυρίων ἔ ἔτεκεν, ἐκτίθησι 
τὸν παῖδα ἐ ἐς τὸ ὄρος τοῦτο ὃ δὴ Τίτθιον ὀνομά- Ἱ 
ξουσιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν, τηνικαῦτα δὲ ἐκαλεῖτο Μύρτιον' 
ἐκκειμένῳ δὲ ἐδίδου μέν οἱ γάλα μία τῶν περὶ τὸ 
ὄρος ποιμαινομένων αἰγῶν, ἐφύλασσε δὲ ὁ κύων 
ὁ τοῦ αἰπολίου φρουρός. ᾿Αρεσθάνας δὲ--« ὄνομα 

5 γὰρ τῷ ποιμένι τοῦτο ἦν- ὡς τὸν ἀριθμὸν οὐχ 
εὕρισκεν ὁμολογοῦντα τῶν αἰγῶν καὶ ὁ κύων ἅμα 
ἀπεστάτει τῆς ποίμνης, οὕτω τὸν ᾿Αρεσθάναν ἐς 
πᾶν φασιν ἀφικνεῖσθαι ζητήσεως, εὑρόντα δὲ 
ἐπιθυμῆσαι τὸν παῖδα ἀνελέσθαι" καὶ ὡς ἐγγὺς 
ἐγίνετο, ἀστραπὴν ἰδεῖν ἐκλάμψασαν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
παιδός, νομίσαντα δὲ εἶναι θεῖόν τι, ὥσπερ ἦν, 
ἀποτραπέσθαι. ὁ δὲ αὐτίκα ἐπὶ γῆν καὶ ὶ θάλασσαν 
πᾶσαν ἠγγέλλετο τά τε ἄλλα ὁπόσα βούλοιτο 
εὑρίσκειν ἐπὶ τοῖς κάμνουσι καὶ ὅτι ἀνίστησι 

6 τεθνεῶτας. λέγεται δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ 
λόγος, Κορωνίδα κύουσαν ᾿Ασκληπιὸν Ἴσχυι τῷ 
Ἐλάτου συγγενέσθαι, καὶ τὴν μὲν ἀποθανεῖν ú ὑπὸ 
᾿Αρτέμιδος ἀμυνομένης τῆς ἐς τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα 
ὕβρεως, ἐξημμένης δὲ ἤδη τῆς πυρᾶς ἁρπάσαι 

7 λέγεται τὸν παῖδα Ἑρμῆς ἀπὸ τῆς φλογός. ὁ 

386 

CORINTH, xxvi. 3-7 

' the following reason. The Epidaurians say that 
Phlegyas came to the Peloponnesus, ostensibly to 
see the land, but really to spy out the number of 
the inhabitants, and whether the greater part of- 
them was warlike. For Phlegyas was the greatest 
soldier of his time, and making forays in all direc- 
tions he carried off the crops and lifted the cattle. 
When he went to the Peloponnesus, he was accom- 
panied by his daughter, who all along had kept hidden 
from her father that she was with child by Apollo. 
In the country of the Epidaurians she bore a son, 
and exposed him on the mountain called Nipple at 
the present day, but then named Myrtium. As the 
child lay exposed he was given milk by one of the 
oats that pastured about the mountain, and was 
guarded by the watch-dog of the herd. And when 
Aresthanas (for this was the herdsman’s name) dis- 
covered that the tale of the goats was not full, and 
that the watch-dog also was absent from the herd, 
he left, they say, no stone unturned, and on find- 
ing the child desired to take him up. As he drew 
near, he saw lightning that flashed from the child, 
and, thinking that it was something divine, as in 
fact it was, he turned away. Presently it was 
reported over every land and sea that Asclepius was 
discovering everything he wished to heal the sick, 
and that he was raising dead men to life. There is 
also another tradition concerning him. Coronis, 
they say, when with child with Asclepius, had inter- 
course with Ischys, son of Elatus. She was killed 
by Artemis to punish her for the insult done to 
Apollo, but when the pyre was already lighted 
Hermes is said to have snatched the child from the 

QO 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

δὲ τρίτος τῶν λόγων ἥκιστα ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ἀληθής 
ἐστιν, ᾿Αρσινόης ποιήσας εἶναι τῆς Λευκίππου 
παῖδα ᾿Ασκληπιόν. ᾿Απολλοφάνει γὰρ τῷ Ap- 
κάδι ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐλθάντι καὶ ἐρομένῳ τὸν θεὸν εἰ 

{ 3 3 / ? ~ . 4 
γένοιτο ἐξ Αρσινόης Ασκληπιὸς καὶ Μεσσηνίοις 
πολίτης εἴη, ἔχρησεν ἡ Πυθία" 

Ὦ μέγα χάρμα βροτοῖς βλαστὼν ᾿Ασκληπιὲ 
πᾶσιν, 

ὃν Φλεγυηὶς ἔτικτεν ἐμοὶ φιλότητι μιγεῖσα 

ἱμερόεσσα Κορωνὶς ἐνὶ κραναῇ ᾿Επιδαύρῳ. 

οὗτος ὁ χρησμὸς δηλοῖ μάλιστα οὐκ ὄντα Ac- 
κληπιὸν ᾿Αρσινόης, ἀλλὰ Ἡσίοδον ἢ τῶν τινα 
b 4 3 ε / \ wm ld 
ἐμπεποιηκότων ἐς τὰ Ἡσιόδου τὰ ἔπη συνθέντα 
ἐς τὴν Μεσσηνίων χάριν. μαρτυρεῖ δέ poe καὶ 
τόδε ἐν Ἐπιδαύρῳ τὸν θεὸν γενέσθαι τὰ γὰρ 
᾿Ασκληπιεῖα εὑρίσκω τὰ ἐπιφανέστατα γεγονότα 
2 2 4 - s . 3 A - 
ἐξ ᾿Επιδαύρου. τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ᾿Αθηναῖοι, τῆς 
τελετῆς λέγοντες ᾿Ασκληπιῷ μεταδοῦναι, τὴν 
ε / ’ » lA bd / \ ` 
ἡμέραν ταύτην Επιδαύρια ὀνομάζουσι καὶ θεὸν 
> > 9 / 3 / - 
ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου φασὶν ᾿Ασκληπιόν σφισι νομισθῆναι" 

A . 3 / e > / . `~ 
τοῦτο δὲ ᾿Αρχίας ὁ ᾿Αρισταίχμου, τὸ συμβὰν 

, , / ε \ ν , > ` 
σπάσμα θηρεύοντί οἱ περὶ τὸν Πίνδασον ἰαθεὶς 
» - > / A . 9 LA » ld 
ἐν τῇ ᾿Επιδαυρίᾳ, τὸν θεὸν ἐπηγάγετο ἐς Πέρ- 
γάμον. ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Περγαμηνῶν Σμυρναίοις 

394» ο A ? m λ > ὋΝ r 
γέγονεν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ᾿Ασκληπιεῖον τὸ ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ. 
τὸ Ò ἐν Βαλάγραις ταῖς Κυρηναίων ἐστὶν ’Ac- 
~A 4 ᾽ by 2 » ΄ 

κληπιὸς καλούμενος Ἰατρὸς ἐξ ᾿Επιδαύρου καὶ 
ka ? \ A \ / \ 3 , 
οὗτος. ἐκ δὲ τοῦ παρὰ Κυρηναίοις τὸ ἐν Λεβθήνη 
388 

CORINTH, χχνι. 7-9 

flames. The third account is, in my opinion, the 
farthest from the truth; it makes Asclepius to be 
the son of Arsinoé, the daughter of Leucippus. For 
when Apollophanes, the Arcadian, came to Delphi 
and asked the god if Asclepius was the son of Arsinoé 
and therefore a Messenian, the Pythian priestess 
gave this response :— 

«Ὁ Asclepius, born to bestow great joy upon 
mortals, 
Pledge of the mutual love I enjoyed with Phlegyas’ 
daughter, 
Lovely Coronis, who bare thee in ταραξᾶ land, 
Epidaurus.” — 

This oracle makes it quite certain that Asclepius 
was not a son of Arsinoé, and that the story was 
a fiction invented by Hesiod, or by one of Hesiod’s 
interpolators, just to please the Messenians. There 
is other evidence that the god was born in Epi- 
daurus; for I find that the most famous sanctuaries 
of Asclepius had their origin from Epidaurus. In 
the first place, the Athenians, who say that they 
gave a share of their mystic rites to Asclepius, call 
this day of the festival Epidauria, and they allege 
that their worship of Asclepius dates from then. 
Again, when Archias, son of Aristaechmus, was 
healed in Epidauria after spraining himself while 
hunting about Pindasus, he brought the cult to Per- 
gamus. From the one at Pergamus has been built 
in our own day the sanctuary of Asclepius by the sea 
at-Smyrna. Further, at Balagrae of the Cyreneans 
there is an Asclepius called Healer, who like the 
others came from Epidaurus. From the one at 
Cyrene was founded the sanctuary of Asclepius 

389 

10 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

τῇ Κρητῶν ἐστιν ᾿Ασκληπιεῖον. δι εάφορον δὲ 
Κυρηναίοις τοσόνδε ἐς ᾿Επιδαυρίους ἐστίν, ὅτι 
αἶγας οἱ Κυρηναῖοι θύουσιν, Ἐπιδαυρίοις οὗ 
καθεστηκότος. θεὸν δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιὸν νομισθέντα 
ἐξ ἆ ἀρχῆς καὶ οὐκ ἀνὰ χρόνον λαβόντα τὴν φήμην 
τεκμηρίοις καὶ ἄλλοις εὑρίσκω. καὶ Ὁμήρου 
μαρτυρεῖ μοι τὰ περὶ Μαχάονος ὑπὸ ᾿Αγαμέμνονος 
εἰρημένα 

Ταλθύβι, ὅττι τάχιστα Μαχάονα δεῦρο κά: 

-λεσσον 

gat ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ υἱόν, 
ὡς ἂν εἰ λέγοι θεοῦ παῖδα ἄνθρωπον. 

XXVII. Tò δὲ ἱερὸν ἄλσος τοῦ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ 
περιέχουσιν ὅροι πανταχόθεν" οὐδὲ ἀποθνήσκου- 
σιν ἄνθρωποι οὐδὲ τύκτουσιν αἱ γυναῖκές σφισιν 
ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου, καθὰ καὶ ἐπὶ Δήλῳ 
τῇ νήσῳ τὸν αὐτὸν νόμον. τὰ δὲ θυόμενα, ἤν 
τέ τις Επιδαυρίων αὐτῶν ἣν τε ξένος ὁ θύων 
Ns καταναλίσκουσιν ἐντὸς τῶν ὅρων" τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ 
γινόμενον οἶδα καὶ ἐν Τιτάνη. τοῦ δὲ ᾿Ασκλη- 
πιοῦ τὸ ἄγαλμα μεγέθει μὲν τοῦ ᾿Αθήνῃσιν 
Ὀλυμπίου Διὸς ἥμισυ ἀποδεῖ, πεποίηται δὲ 
ἐλέφαντος καὶ «χρυσοῦ" μηνύει δὲ ἐπίγραμμα τὸν 
εἰργασμένον εἶναι Θρασυμήδην ᾿Αριγνώτου Ila- 
ριον. κάθηται δὲ ἐπὶ θρόνου βακτηρίαν κρατῶν, 
τὴν δὲ ἑτέραν τῶν χειρῶν «ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ἔχει 
τοῦ δράκοντος, καὶ οἱ καὶ κύων παρακατα- 
κείμενος πεποίηται. τῷ θρόνῳ δὲ ἡρώων ἐπειρ- 
γασμένα ᾿Αργείων ἐστὶν ἔργα, Βελλεροφόντου 
τὸ ἐς τὴν Χίμαιραν καὶ Ἡερσεὺς ἀφελὼν τὴν 

39° 

CORINTH, xxvi. 9-χΧΥΙΙ, 2 

at Lebene, in Crete. There is this difference be- 
tween the Cyreneans and the Epidaurians, that 
whereas the former sacrifice goats, it is against the 
custom of the Epidaurians to do so. That Asclepius 
was considered a god from the first, and did not 
receive the title only in course of time, I infer from 
several signs, including the evidence of Homer,! 
who makes Agamemnon say about Machaon :— 

« Talthybius, with all speed go summon me hither 
Machaon, 
Mortal son of Asclepius.” 

As who should say, “ human son of a god.” 

XXVII. The sacred grove of Asclepius is sur- 
rounded on all sides by boundary marks. No death or 
birth takes place within the enclosure ; the same cus- 
tom prevails also in the island of Delos. All the offer- 
ings, whether the offerer be one of the Epidaurians 
themselves or a stranger, are entirely consumed 
within the bounds. At Titane too, 1 know, there is 
the same rule. The image of Asclepius is, in size, 
half as big as the Olympian Zeus at Athens, and is 
made of ivory and gold. An inscription tells us that 
the artist was Thrasymedes, a Parian, son of Ari- 
gnotus. The god is sitting on a seat grasping a staff ; 
the other hand he is holding above the head of the 
serpent; there is also a figure of a dog lying by his 
side. On the seat are wrought in relief the exploits 
of Argive heroes, that of Bellerophontes against the 
Chimaera, and Perseus, who has cut off the head of 

1 Iliad iv. 193. 
391 

κ΄ 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Μεδούσης κεφαλήν. τοῦ ναοῦ δέ ἐστι πέραν 
ἔνθα οἱ ἱκέται τοῦ θεοῦ καθεύδουσιν. οἴκημα 
δὲ περιφερὲς λίθου λευκοῦ καλούμενον Θόλος 
ᾠκοδόμηται πλησίον, θέας ἄξιον" ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ 
Παυσίου γράψαντος βέλη μὲν καὶ τόξον ἐστὲν 
ἀφεικὼς Ἔρως, λύραν δὲ ἀντ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀράμενος 
φέρει. γέγραπται δὲ ἐνταῦθα καὶ Μέθη, Παυ- 
σίου καὶ τοῦτο ἔργον, ἐξ ὑαλίνης φιάλης πίνουσα: 
ἴδοις δὲ κἂν ἐν τῇ γραφῇ φιάλην τε ὑάλου καὶ 
δι αὐτῆς γυναικὸς πρόσωπον. στῆλαι δὲ . εἱστή- 
κεσαν ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου τὸ μὲν ἀρχαῖον καὶ 
πλέονες, ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δὲ ἐξ λοιπαί" ταύταις ἐγγεγραμ- 
μένα καὶ ἀνδρῶν καὶ γυναικῶν ἐστιν ὀνόματα 
ἀκεσθέντων ὑπὸ τοῦ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ, προσέτι δὲ 
καὶ νόσημα ὅ τι ἕκαστος ἐνόσησε καὶ ὅπως ἰάθη: 
γέγραπται δὲ φωνῇ τῇ Δωρίδι. χωρὶς δὲ ἀπὸ 
τῶν ἄλλων ἐστὶν ἀρχαία στήλη" ἵππους δὲ 
Ἱππόλυτον ἀναθεῖναι τῷ θεῷ φησιν εἴκοσι. 
ταύτης τῆς στήλης τῷ ἐπιγράμματι ὁμολογοῦντα 
λέγουσιν ᾿Αρικιεῖς, ὡς τεθνεῶτα Ἱππόλυτον ἐκ 
τῶν Θησέως ἀρῶν ἀνέστησεν Ασκληπιός ὁ δὲ 
ὡς αὖθις ἐβίω, οὐκ ἠξίου νέμειν τῷ. πατρὶ 
συγγνώμην, ἀλλὰ ὑπεριδὼν τὰς δεήσεις ἐς Ἴτα- 
λίαν ἔ ἔρχεται παρὰ τοὺς ᾿Αρικιεῖς, καὶ ἐβασίλευσέ 
τε αὐτόθι καὶ ἀνῆκε τῇ ᾿Αρτέμιδι τέμενος, ἔνθα 
ἄχρι ἐμοῦ μονομαχίας ἆθλα ἦν καὶ ἱερᾶσθαι τῇ 
θεῷ τὸν νικῶντα" ὁ δὲ ἀγὼν ἐλευθέρων μὲν προ- 

έκειτο οὐδενί, οἰκέταις δὲ ἀποδρᾶσι τοὺς δεσπότας. 
Ἐπιδαυρίοις δέ ἐστι θέατρον ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, μάλιστα 
ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν θέας ἄξιον". τὰ μὲν γὰρ “Ῥωμαίων 
πολὺ δή τι ὑπερῆρκε τῶν πανταχοῦ τῷ κόσμῳ, 
μεγέθει δὲ ᾿Αρκάδων τὸ ἐν Μεγάλῃ πόλει" ἀρ- 

292 

ΘΝ 

- CORINTH, χχνιι. 2-5 

Af edusa. Over against the temple is the place where 
the suppliants of the god sleep. Near has been 
buailt a circular building of white marble, called 
®Rolos (Round House), which is worth seeing. In 
it is a picture by Pausias! representing Love, who 
has cast aside his bow and arrows, and is carrying 
imastead of them a lyre that he has taken up. Here 
there is also another work of Pausias, Drunkenness 
Grinking out of a crystal cup. You can see even in 
the painting a crystal cup and a woman’s face through 
it. Within the enclosure stood slabs; in my time 
six remained, but of old there were more. On them 
are inscribed the names of both the men and the 
women who have been healed by Asclepius, the 
disease also from which each suffered, and the 
means of cure. The dialect is Doric. Apart from 
the others is an old slab, which declares that Hippo- 
lytus dedicated twenty horses to the god. The 
, Aricians tell a tale that agrees with the inscrip- 
~ tion on this slab, that when Hippolytus was killed, 
owing to the curses of Theseus, Asclepius raised 
him from the dead. On coming to life again he 
refused to forgive his father ; rejecting his prayers, 
he went to the Aricians in Italy. There he became 
king and devoted a precinct to Artemis, where down 
to my time the prize for the victor in single combat 
was the priesthood of the goddess. The contest 
was open to no freeman, but only to slaves who had 
run away from their masters. The Epidaurians have 
a theatre within the sanctuary, in my opinion very 
well worth seeing. For while the Roman theatres 
are far superior to those anywhere else in their 
splendour, ‘and the Arcadian theatre at Megalo- 

1 A famous painter of Sicyon. 

393 

PAUSANIAS : DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μονίας δὲ ἢ κάλλους ἕνεκα ἀρχιτέκτων ποῖος 
ἐς ἅμιλλαν Πολυκλείτφ γένοιτ᾽ ἂν ἀξιόχρεως; 
Πολύκλειτος γὰρ καὶ θέατρον τοῦτο καὶ οἴκημα 
τὸ περιφερὲς ὁ ποιήσας ἦν. ἐντὸς δὲ τοῦ ἄλσους 
ναῦς τέ ἐστιν A τέμιδος καὶ ἄγαλμα ᾿Ηπιόνης καὶ 
᾿Αϕροδίτης ἱερον καὶ Θέμιδος καὶ στάδιον, οἷα 
Ἕλλησι τὰ πολλὰ γῆς χῶμα, καὶ κρήνη τῷ τε 

6 ὀρόφῳ καὶ κόσμῳ τῷ λοιπῷ θέας ἀξία. ὁπόσα δὲ 
᾿Αντωνῖνος ἀνὴρ τῆς συγκλήτου βουλῆς ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
ἐποίησεν, ἔστι μὲν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ λουτρόν, ἔστι δὲ 
ἱερὸν θεῶν οὓς ᾿Επιδώτας ὀνομάξουσιν' ἐποίησε 
δὲ καὶ Ὑγείᾳ ναὸν καὶ ᾿Ασκληπιῷ καὶ Απόλλωνι 
ἐπίκλησιν Αἰγυπτίοις. καὶ ἦν γὰρ στοὰ καλου- 
μένη Κότυος, καταρρυέντος δέ οἱ τοῦ ὀρόφου 
διέφθαρτο ἤδη πᾶσα ἅτε ὠμῆς τῆς πλίνθου moin- 
θεῖσα' ἀνῳκοδόμησε καὶ ταύτην. Ἐπιδαυρίων | δὲ 
οἱ περὶ τὸ ἱερὸν μάλιστα ἐταλαιπώρουν, ὅτι 
μήτε αἱ γυναῖκες ἐν σκέπῃ σφίσιν ἔτικτον καὶ ἡ 
τελευτὴ τοῖς κάμνουσιν ὑπαίθριος ἐγίνετο" ὁ δὲ 
καὶ ταῦτα ἐπανορθούμενος κατεσκευάσατο οἴκη- 
σιν' ἐνταῦθα ἤδη καὶ ἀποθανεῖν ἀνθρώπῳ καὶ 
τεκεῖν γυναικὶ ὅσιον. 

7 “Opn δέ ἐστιν ὑπὲρ τὸ ἄλσος τό τε Τίτθιον καὶ 
ἕτερον ὀνομαζόμενον Κυνόρτιον, Μαλεάτου δὲ 
᾿Απόλλωνος ie ov ἐν αὐτῷ. τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τῶν 
ἀρχαίων' τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ὅσα περὶ τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ 
Μαλεάτου καὶ ἔλυτρον κρήνης, ἐς ὃ τὸ ὕδωρ 
συλλέγεταί σφισι τὸ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, ᾿Αντωνῖνος 
καὶ ταῦτα Ἐπιδαυρίοις ἐποίησεν. XXVIII. 
δράκοντες δὲ: οἱ λοιποὶ καὶ ἕτερον γένος ἐς τὸ 
ξανθότερον ῥέπον τῆς χρόας ἱεροὶ μὲν τοῦ ᾿Ασκλη- 

1 The text here is probably corrupt. 

394 

CORINTH, xxvii. 5-xxviil. 1 

polis is unequalled for size, what architect could 
sgeaiously rival Polycleitus in symmetry and beauty ? 
For it was Polycleitus! who built both this theatre 
asd the circular building. Within the grove are a 
temple of Artemis, an image of Epione, a sanctuary 
of Aphrodite and Themis, a race-course consisting, 
like most Greek race-courses, of a bank of earth, 
and a fountain worth seeing for its roof and general 
splendour. A Roman senator, Antoninus, made in 
our own day a bath of Asclepius and a sanctuary of the 
gods they call Bountiful. He made also a temple to 
Health, Asclepius, and Apollo, the last two surnamed 
Egyptian. He moreover restored the portico that 
was named the Portico of Cotys, which, as the brick 
of which it was made had been unburnt, had fallen 
into utter ruin after it had lost its roof. As the 
Epidaurians about the sanctuary were in great dis- 
tress, because their women had no shelter in which 
to be delivered and the sick breathed their last in 
the open, he provided a dwelling, so that these 
grievances also were redressed. Here at last was 
a place in which without sin a human being could 
die and a woman be delivered. 

Above the grove are the Nipple and another 
mountain called Cynortium; on the latter is a sanc- 
tuary of Maleatian Apollo. The sanctuary itself is 
an ancient one, but among the things Antoninus 
made for the Epidaurians are various appurtenances 
for the sanctuary of the Maleatian, including a re- 
servoir into which the rain-water collects for their 
use. XXVIII. The serpents, including a peculiar 
kind of a yellowish colour, are considered sacred 

1 Probably the younger artist of that name. 

395 

138 or 

16] A.D. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

πιοῦ νοµίζονται καὶ εἰσὶν ἀνθρώποις ἥμεροι, 
τρέφει δὲ μόνη σφᾶς ἡ τῶν ᾿Επιδαυρίων γῆ. 
τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ εὑρίσκω καὶ ἄλλαις χώραις συμβε- 
Θηκός' Λιβύη μέν γε μόνη κροκοδείλους τρέφει 
. 
χερσαίους διπήχεων οὐκ ἐλάσσονας, παρὰ δὲ 
9 A e 
Ivéav μόνων ἄλλα τε κομίξεται καὶ ὄρνιθες οἱ 
. 
ψιττακοί. τοὺς δὲ ὄφεις οἱ ᾿Επιδαύριοι τοὺς 
μεγάλους ἐς πλέον πηχῶν καὶ τριάκοντα προή- 
κοντας, οἷοι παρά τε ᾿Ινδοῖς τρέφονται καὶ ἐν 
᾽ 
Λιβύῃ, ἄλλο δή τι γένος φασὶν εἶναι καὶ οὐ 
δράκοντας. ἐς δὲ τὸ ὄρος ἀνιοῦσι τὸ Κόρυφον, 
” 9 CAN A , ld 
ἔστι καθ ὁδὸν Στρεπτῆς καλουμένης ἐλαίας φυ- 
, A A € 
τόν, aitiov τοῦ περιαγαγόντος τῇ χειρὶ Ηρα- 
κλέους ἐς τοῦτο τὸ σχῆμα. εἰ δὲ καὶ ᾿Ασιναίοις 
τοῖς ἐν τῇ ᾿Αργολίδι ἔθηκεν ὅρον τοῦτον, οὐκ ἂν 
ἔγωγε εἰδείην, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ἑτέρωθι ἀναστάτου 
γενομένης χώρας τὸ σαφὲς ἔτι οἷόν τε τῶν ὅρων 
a - A / 
ἐξευρεῖν. ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ ἄκρᾳ τοῦ ὄρους Κορυφαίας 
9 
ἐστὶν ἱερὸν Αρτέμιδος, οὗ καὶ Τελέσιλλα ἐποιή- 
2 Yy , 
σατο ἐν do ; 
on antl νά > / 8 [á 
Κατιοῦσι δὲ ἐς τῶν ᾿Επιδαυρίων τὴν πόλιν 
χωρίον ἐστὶ πεφυκυίας ἀγριελαίους ἔχον: Ὕρνή- 
θιον δὲ καλοῦσι τὸ χωρίον. τὰ δὲ ἐς αὐτό, ὡς 
Ἐπιδαύριοί τε λέγουσι καὶ εἰκὸς ἔχει, γράψω. 
Κεῖσος καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ Τημένου παῖδες μάλιστα 
ἤδεσαν Δηιφόντην λυπήσοντες, εἰ διαλῦσαί πως 
» » 3 M e Ay - ? ld 9 
am αὐτοῦ τὴν Ὑρνηθὼ δυνηθεῖεν. ἀφίκοντο οὖν 
3 ᾽ / 4 / b / 
ἐς Ἠπίδαυρον Κερύνης καὶ Φάλκης' ᾿Αγραίῳ γὰρ 
τῷ νεωτάτῳ τὰ ποιούμενα οὐκ ἤρεσκεν. οὗτοι δὲ 
στήσαντες τὸ ἅρμα ὑπὸ τὸ τεῖχος κήρυκα ano- 
/. . 2 4 - - 9 
στέλλουσι παρὰ τὴν ἀδελφήν, ἐλθεῖν δῆθεν ἐς 

396 

CORINTH, xxvii. 1-3 

to Asclepius, and are tame with men. These are 
peculiar to Epidauria, and I have noticed that other 
lands have their peculiar animals. For in Libya 
only are to be found land crocodiles at least two 
cubits long; from India alone are brought, among 
other creatures, parrots. But the big snakes that 
grow to more than thirty cubits, such as are found 
in India and in Libya, are said by the Epidaurians 
not to be serpents, but some other kind of creature. 
As you go up to Mount Coryphum you see by the 
road an olive tree called Twisted. It was Heracles 
who gave it this shape by bending it round with his 
hand, but I cannot say whether he set it to be a 
boundary mark against the Asinaeans in Argolis, 
since in no land, which has been depopulated, is 
it easy to discover the truth about the boundaries. 
On the top of the mountain there is a sanctuary οἱ 
Artemis Coryphaea (of the Peak), of which Telesilla? 
made mention in an ode. 

On going down to the city of the Epidaurians, 
you come to a place where wild olives grow; 
they call it Hyrnethium. I will relate the story 
of it, which is probable enough, as given by the . 
Epidaurians. Ceisus and the other sons of Temenus 
knew that they would grieve Deiphontes most if 
they could find a way to part him and Hyrnetho. 
So Cerynes and Phalces (for Agraeiis, the youngest, 
disapproved of their plan) came to Epidaurus. 
Staying their chariot under the wall, they sent a 
herald to their sister, pretending that they wished 

1 A famous lyric poetess. See p. 355. 
397 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

4 λόγους αὐτῇ βουλόμενοι. ὡς δὲ ὑπήκουσε καλοῦ- 
σιν, ἐνταῦθα οἱ νεανίσκοι πολλὰ μὲν Δηιφόντου 
/ ` \ 2 A εν 3 ΄ 
κατηγόρουν, πολλὰ δὲ αὐτὴν ἱκέτευον ἐκείνην 
» ΄ 3. WwW wv. » / 
ἐπανήκειν ἐς Άργος, ἄλλα τε ἐπαγγελλόμενοι καὶ 
ἀνδρὶ δώσειν αὐτὴν Δηιφόντου τὰ πάντα ἀμείνονε 
καὶ ἀνθρώπων πλειόνων καὶ γῆς ἄρχοντι εὐδαεμο- 
νεστέρας. ὝὙρνηθὼ δὲ τοῖς λεχθεῖσιν ἀλγήσασα | 
ἀπεδίδου σφίσι τὴν ἴσην, Δηιφόντην μὲν αὑτῇ 
τε ἄνδρα ἀρεστὸν εἶναι φήσασα καὶ Τημένῳ 
γενέσθαι γαμβρὸν οὐ μεμπτόν, ἐκείνοις δὲ Τη μέ- 
νου προσήκειν σφαγεῦσιν ὀνομάζεσθαι μᾶλλον ñ 
ὅ παισίν. καὶ τὴν μὲν οὐδὲν ἔτι ἀποκρινάμενοι | 
/ 9 ΄ A 9 ` σ » s 
συλλαμβάνουσιν, ἀναθέντες δὲ ἐς τὸ ἅρμα an- 
λαυνον' Δηιφόντῃ δὲ ἀγγέλλει τις τῶν Ἐπι- | 
δαυρίων ὡς Κερύνης καὶ Φάλκης ἄγοντες οἴχοιντο 
ἄκουσαν Ὕρνηθώ. ὁ δὲ αὐτός τε ὡς τάχους 
εἶχεν ἤμυνε καὶ οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι πυνθανόμενοι 
2 / ΄ . € 
προσεβοήθουν. Δηιφόντης δὲ Κερύνην μὲν wos . 
r ? a ΄ / . > / 
κατελάμβανεν ἀναιρεῖ βαλών, Φάλκην δὲ ἐχό- | 
μενον Ὑρνηθοῦς βαλεῖν μὲν ἔδεισε, μὴ ἁμαρτὼν 
γένοιτο αὐτῆς ἐκείνης φονεύς, συμπλακεὶς δὲ 
ἐπειρᾶτο ἀφαιρεῖσθαι. Φάλκης δὲ ἀντεχόμενος 
καὶ ἕλκων βιαιότερον ἀπέκτεινεν ἔχουσαν ἐν 
6 γαστρί. καὶ ὁ μὲν συνείς, οἷα ἐς τὴν ἀδελφὴν 
ἐξειργασμένος ἔργα ἦν, ἤλαυνε τὸ ἅρμα ἀφειδέ- 
- - ε A 
στερον, προλαβεῖν τῆς ὁδοῦ σπεύδων πρὶν ἢ 
A > 
πάντας ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν συλλεχθῆναι τοὺς ᾿Επιδαυρίους' 
Δηιφόντης δὲ σὺν τοῖς παισίν---ἐγεγόνεσαν γὰρ 
- ” ? 
καὶ παῖδες αὐτῷ πρότερον ἔτι υἱοὶ μὲν ᾿Αντεμένης 
καὶ Ἐάνθιππός τε καὶ ᾿Αργεῖος, θυγάτηρ δὲ 
᾿Ὀρσοβία: ταύτην Πάμφυλον τὸν Αἰγιμίου λέ- | 
γουσιν ὕστερον γῆμαι---τότε δὲ ἀναλαβόντες τὸν 

398 

επ, μα, 

CORINTH, xxvi. 3-6 

to parley with her. When she obeyed their 
summons, the young men began to make many 
accusations against Deiphontes, and besought her 
much that she would return to Argos, promising, 
among other things, to give her to a husband in 
every respect better than Deiphontes, one who 
ruled over more subjects and a more prosperous 
country. But Hyrnetho, pained at their words, 
gave as good as she had received, retorting that 
Deiphontes was a dear husband to her, and had 
shown himself a blameless son-in-law to Temenus; 
as for them, they ought to be called the murderers 
of Temenus rather than his sons. Without further 
reply the youths seized her, placed her in the 
chariot, and drove away. An Epidaurian told Dei- 
phontes that Cerynes and Phalces had gone, taking 
with them Hyrnetho against her will; he him- 
self rushed to the rescue with all speed, and as 
the Epidaurians learned the news they reinforced 
him. On overtaking the runaways, Deiphontes 
shot Cerynes and killed him, but he was afraid 
to shoot at Phalces, who was holding Hyrnetho, 
lest he should miss him and become the slayer οἱ 
his wife; so he closed with them and tried to get 
her away. But Phalces, holding on and dragging 
her with greater violence, killed her, as she was 
with child. Realising what he had done to his 
sister, he began to drive the chariot more reck- 
lessly, as he was anxious to gain a start before all the 
Epidaurians could gather against him. Deiphontes 
and his children—for before this children had been 
born to him, Antimenes, Xanthippus, and Argeiis, 
and a daughter, Orsobia, who, they say, afterwards 
married Pamphylus, son of Aegimius—took up the 

399 αν 

1 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

νεκρὸν τῆς “Ὑρνηθοῦς κομίξουσιν ἐς τοῦτο τὸ 
7 χωρίον τὸ ἀνὰ χρόνον Ὑρνήθιον κληθέν. καί οἱ 
ποιήσαντες ἡρῷον τιμὰς καὶ ἄλλας δεδώκασι καὶ 
5... A Ld / Ν 3 L 
ἐπὶ τοῖς πεφυκόσιν ἐλαίοις, καὶ εἰ δή τι ἄλλο 
δένδρον ἔσω, καθέστηκε νόμος τὰ Opavopeva 
μηδένα ἐς οἶκον φέρεσθαι μηδὲ χρᾶσθαί σφισιν 
ἐς μηδέν, κατὰ χώραν δ᾽ αὐτοῦ λείπουσιν ἱερὰ 
A e A 
εἶναι τῆς Ὑρνηθοῦς. 
9 / . A [ή , A , 

Οὐ πόρρω δὲ τῆς πόλεως Μελίσσης μνῆμά 
ἐστιν, ἣ Περιάνδρῳ συνῴκησε τῷ Κυψέλου, καὶ 
ἕτερον Προκλέους πατρὸς τῆς Μελίσσης. ἐτυ- 

/ ΔΝ 4 Φ 3 , . A νο 
ράννει δὲ καὶ οὗτος ᾿Επιδαυρίων, καθὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ 
γαμβρὸς οἱ Περίανδρος Κορίνθου. ΧΧΙΧ. αὐτὴ 
δὲ τῶν ᾿Επιδαυρίων ἡ πόλις παρείχετο ἐς μνήμην 
τάδε ἀξιολογώτατα: τέμενος δή ἐστιν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ 
καὶ ἀγάλματα ὁ θεὸς αὐτὸς καὶ ᾿Ηπιόνη, γυναῖκα 
δὲ εἶναι τὴν ᾿Ηπιόνην ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ φασι' ταῦτά 
> ? e / s / . ΔΝ Aa 
ἐστιν ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ λίθου Παρίου. ναὸς δὲ ἐν τῇ 

[ή 4 \ 3 4 la 9 bd 
πόλει καὶ Διονύσου καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδός ἐστιν ἄλλος' 
εἰκάσαις ἂν θηρευούσῃ τὴν "Αρτεμιν. ᾿ Αφροδίτης 
τε ἱερὸν πεποίηται' τὸ δὲ πρὸς τῷ λιμένι ἐπὶ 
y » 4 > / Ld er 
ἄκρας ἀνεχούσης ἐς θάλασσαν λέγουσιν "Ηρας 

9 A A 

εἶναι. τὴν δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶν ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει, ξόανον 
θέας ἄξιον, Κισσαίαν ἐπονομάζουσιν. 

Αἰγινῆται δὲ οἰκοῦσιν ἔχοντες τὴν νῆσον ἀπαν- 

4 A 3 ’ 4 » » > ` 

τικρὺ τῆς ᾿Επιδαυρίας. ἀνθρώπους Ò οὐκ εὐθὺς 
ἐξ ἀρχῆς λέγουσιν ἐν αὐτῇ γενέσθαι" Διὸς δὲ ἐς 
ἔρημον κομίσαντος Αἴγιναν τὴν ᾿Ασωποῦ τῇ μὲν 

` A A Ν 
τὸ ὄνομα ἐτέθη τοῦτο ἀντὶ Οἰνώνης, Αἰακοῦ δὲ 
αἰτήσαντος ὡς ηὐξήθη παρὰ Διὸς οἰκήτορας, 
οὕτω οἱ τὸν Δία ἀνεῖναι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους φασὶν 
ἐκ τῆς γῆς. βασιλεύσαντα δὲ ἐν τῇ γῆ πλὴν 

400 

-. _ q 

CORINTH, xxvn. 6-ΧΧΙΧ. 2 

dead body of Hyrnetho and carried it to this place, 
which in course of time was named Hyrnethium. 
They built for her a hero-shrine, and bestowed upon 
her various honours; in particular, the custom was 
established that nobody should carry home, or use for 
any purpose, the pieces that break off the olive trees, 
or any other trees, that grow there; these are left 
there on the spot to be sacred to Hyrnetho. 

Not far from the city is the tomb of Melissa, who 
married Periander, the son of Cypselus, and another 
of Procles, the father of Melissa. He, too, was 
tyrant of Epidaurus, as Periander, his son-in-law, was c. 600 
tyrant of Corinth. ) XXIX. The most noteworthy *“ 

“things which Í found the city of Epidaurus itself had 
to show are these. There is, of course, a precinct of 
Asclepius, with images of the god himself and of 
Epione. Epione, they say, was the wife of Asclepius. 
These are of Parian marble, and are set up in the 

_open. There is also in the city a temple of Dionysus 
and one of Artemis. The figure of Artemis one might 
take to be the goddess hunting. There is also a 
sanctuary of Aphrodite, while the one at the harbour, 
on a height that juts out into the sea, they say is 
Hera’s. The Athena on the citadel, a wooden 
image worth seeing, they surname Cissaea (lvy 
Goddess). 

~~ The Aeginetans dwell in the island over against 
Epidauria. It is said that in the beginning there 
were no men in it; but after Zeus brought to it, 
when uninhabited, Aegina, daughter of Asopus, its 
name was changed from Qenone to Aegina; and ~ 
when Aeacus, on growing up, asked Zeus for settlers, 
the, god, they say, raised up the inhabitants out of 
the earth. They can mention no king of the island 

401 
VOL. I. D D 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Αἰακὸν οὐδένα εἰπεῖν ἔχουσιν, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ τῶν 
Αἰακοῦ παίδων τινὰ ἴσμεν καταμείναντα, Πηλεῖ 
μὲν συμβὰν καὶ Τελαμῶνι ἐπὶ φόνῳ φεύγειν τῷ 
Φώκου, τῶν δὲ αὖ Φώκου παίδων περὶ τὸν Παρ 

νασσὸν οἰκησάντων ἐν τῇ νῦν καλουμένῃ Φωκίδι. 
τὸ δὲ ὄνομα προῦπῆρχεν ἤδη τῇ χώρᾳ, Φώκου 
τοῦ ᾿Ὀρνυτίωνος γενεᾷ πρότερον. ἐς αὐτὴν ἐλ- 

θόντος. ἐπὶ μὲν δὴ Φώκου τούτου ἡ περὶ Τιθορέαν 
τε καὶ Ἡαρνασσὸν ἐκαλεῖτο Poris ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ 
Αἰακοῦ καὶ πᾶσιν -ἐξενίκησεν, ὅσοι Μινύαις τέ 
εἰσιν Ὀρχομενίοις ὅ ὅμοροι. καὶ ἐπὶ Σκάρφειαν τὴν 
Λοκρῶν καθήκουσι. γεγόνασι δὲ ἀπὸ μὲν Πη- 
λέως οἱ ἐν ᾿Ηπείρῳ βασιλεῖς, Τελαμῶνος δὲ τῶν 
παίδων Αἴαντος μέν ἐστιν ἀφανέστερον γένος οἷα 
ἰδιωτεύσαντος ἀνθρώπου, πλὴν ὅσον Μιλτιάδης, 
ὃς ᾿Αθηναίοις ἐς Μαραθῶνα. ἡγήσατο, καὶ Κίμων 
ὁ Μιλτιάδου προῆλθον ἐς δόξαν" οἱ δὲ Τευκρίδαι 
Βασιλεῖς διέμειναν Κυπρίων. ἄρχοντες ἐς Eva- 
γόραν. Φώκῳ δὲ "Acos ὁ τὰ ἔπη ποιήσας Ὑενέ- 
σθαι φησὶ Tlavorréa καὶ Κρῖσον' καὶ Πανοπέως 
μὲν ἐγένετο Ἐπειὸς ὁ ὁ τὸν ἵππον τὸν δούρειον, ὡς 
Όμηρος ἐποίησεν, ἐργασάμενος, Κρίσου δὲ ἦν 
ἀπόγονος τρίτος Πυλάδης, Στροφίου τε ὢν τοῦ 
Κρίσου καὶ ᾿Αναξιβίας ἀδελφῆς. ᾿Αγαμέμνονος. 
γένη μὲν τοσαῦτα τῶν καλουμένων Αἰακιδῶν, 
ἐξεχώρησε δὲ ἑτέρωσε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. χρόνῳ δὲ 
ὕστερον μοῖρα ᾿Αργείων τῶν ᾿Επίδαυρον ὁμοῦ 
Δηιφόντῃ κατασχόντων, διαβᾶσα ἐ ἐς Αἴγιναν καὶ 
Αἰγινήταις τοῖς ἀρχαίοις γενόμενοι σύνοικοι, τὰ 
Δωριέων ἔθη καὶ φωνὴν κατεστήσαντο ἐν τῇ 
νήσῳ. προελθοῦσι δὲ Αἰγινήταις ἐς μέγα δυνά- 
μεως, ὡς ᾿Αθηναίων γενέσθαι ναυσὶν ἐπικρατε- 

402 

CORINTH, χχιχ. 2-5 

xcept Aeacus, since we know of none even of the 
ms of Aeacus who stayed there; for to Peleus and 
‘elamon befell exile for the murder of Phocus, while 
he sons of Phocus made their home about Parnassus, 
a the land that is now called Phocis. This name 
aad already been given to the land, at the time 
vhen Phocus, son of Ornytion, came to it a genera- 
ion previously. In the time, then, of this Phocus 
ənly the district about Tithorea and Parnassus was 
called Phocis, but in the time of Aeacus the name 
spread to all from the borders of the Minyae at 
Orchomenos to Searphea among the Locri. From 
Peleus sprang the kings in Epeirus; but as for 
the sons of Telamon, the family of Ajax is undistin- 
guished, because he was a man who lived a private 
life; though Miltiades, who led the Athenians 
to Marathon, and Cimon, the son of Miltiades, 490 5. 
achieved renown; but the family of Teucer con- 
tinued to be the royal hoyse in Cyprus down to 
the time of Evagoras. Asius the epic poet says 
that to Phocus were born Panopeus and Crisus. To 
Panopeus was born Epeiis, who made, according to 
Homer, the wooden horse; and the grandson of 
Crisus was Pylades, whose father was Strophius, son 
of Crisus, while his mother was Anaxibia, sister 
of Agamemnon. Such was the pedigree of the 
Aeacidae (family of Aeacus), as they are called, but 
they departed from the beginning to other lands. 
Subsequently a division of the Argives who, under 
Deiphontes, had seized Epidaurus, crossed to Aegina, 
and, settling among the old Aeginetans, established 
in the island Dorian manners and the Dorian dialect, 
Although the Aeginetans rose to great power, so 
that their navy was superior to that of Athens, and 

403 
DD 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

στέρους καὶ ἐν τῷ Μηδικῷ πολέμῳ παρασχέσθαι 
πλοῖα μετά ye Αθηναίους πλεῖστα, οὐ ᾿ παρέμεινεν 
ἐς ἅπαν ἡ εὐδαιμονία, γενόμενοι δὲ ὑπὸ ᾿Αθηναίων 
ἀνάστατοι Θυρέαν τὴν ἐν τῇ ᾿Αργολίδι Λακεδαι- 
μονίων δόντων ὤκησαν. καὶ ἀπέλαβον μὲν τὴν 
νῆσον, ὅτε περὶ Ἑλλήσποντον αἱ ᾿Αθηναίων 
τριήρεις ἐλήφθησαν, πλούτου δὲ ἢ δυνάμεως 
οὐκέτι ἐξεγένετο ἐς ἴσον προελθεῖν σφισιν. 

6 Ἡροσπλεῦσαι δὲ Αἴγινά ἐστι νήσων τῶν Ελ. 
ληνίδων ἆ ἀπορωτάτη' πέτραι τε γὰρ ὕφαλοι περὶ 
πᾶσαν καὶ χοιράδες ἆ ἀνεστήκασι. μηχανήσασθαι 
δὲ ἐξεπύτηδες ταῦτα Αἰακόν φασι λῃστειῶν τῶν 
ἐκ θαλάσσης φόβῳ, καὶ πολεμίοις ἀνδράσι μὴ 
ἄνευ κινδύνου εἶναι. πλησίον δὲ τοῦ λεμένος ἐν 
ᾧ μάλιστα ὁρμίζονται ναός ἐστιν ᾿Αφροδίτης, 
ἐν ἐπιφανεστάτῳ δὲ τῆς πόλεως τὸ Αἰάκειον 
καλούμενον, περίβολος τετράγωνος λευκοῦ λί- 

7 θου. ἐπειργασμένοι δέ εἰσι κατὰ τὴν ἔσοδον οἱ 
παρὰ Αἰακόν ποτε ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων σταλέντες 
αἰτίαν δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν «Αἰγινήταις καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ 
λέγουσιν. αὐχμὸς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐπὶ χρόνον ἐπίεζε 
καὶ οὔτε τὴν ἐκτὸς ἰσθμοῦ χώραν οὔτε Πελοπον- 
νησίοις ͵ dev ὁ θεός, ἐς ὃ ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀπέστειλαν 
ἐρησομένους τὸ αἴτιον ὅ τι εἴη καὶ αἰτήσοντας 
ἅμα λύσιν τοῦ κακοῦ. τούτοις ἡ Πυθία εἶπε Δία 
ἱλάσκεσθαι, ῆναι δέ, εἴπερ ὑπακούσει σφίσιν, 

8 Αἰακὸν τὸν ἐκετεύσοντα εἶναι. οὕτως Αἰακοῦ 
δεησομένους ἀποστέλλουσιν ἀφ᾽ ἑκάστης πόλεως' 
καὶ ὁ μὲν τῷ Πανελληνίῳ Διὶ θύσας καὶ εὐξά- 
μενος τὴν Ἑλλάδα γῆν ἐποίησεν ὕεσθαι, τῶν δὲ 
ἐλθόντων ὡς αὐτὸν εἰκόνας ταύτας ἐποιήσαντο 

404 

Pa, 

CORINTH, χχιχ. 5-8 

in the Persian war supplied more ships than any 
state except Athens, yet their prosperity was not 
permanent; but when the island was depopulated 
by the Athenians, they took up their abode at 
Thyrea, in Argolis, which the Lacedaemonians gave 
them to dwell in. They recovered their island when 
the Athenian warships were captured in the Helles- 
pont, yet it was never given them to rise again to 
their old wealth or power. 

Of the Greek islands, Aegina is the most difficult 
of access, for it is surrounded by sunken rocks 
and reefs which rise up. The story is that Aeacus 
devised this feature of set purpose, because he 
feared piratical raids by sea, and wished the ap- 
proach to be perilous to enemies. Near the har- 
bour in which vessels mostly anchor is a temple 
of Aphrodite, and in the most conspicuous part of 
the city what is called the shrine of Aeacus, a 
quadrangular enclosure of white marble. Wrought 
in relief at the entrance are the envoys whom the 
Greeks once dispatched to Aeacus. The reason for 
the embassy given by the Aeginetans is the same as 
that which the other Greeks assign. A drought 
had for some time afflicted Greece, and no rain fell 
either beyond the Jsthmus or in the Peloponnesus, 
until at last they sent envoys to Delphi to ask what 
was the cause and to beg for deliverance from the 
evil. The Pythian priestess bade them propitiate 
Zeus, saying that he would not listen to them unless 
the one to supplicate him were Aeacus. And so 
envoys came with a request to Aeacus from each 
city. By sacrifice and prayer to Zeus, God of all the 
Greeks (Panellenios), he caused rain to fall upon the 
earth, and the Aeginetans made these likenesses of 

405 

431 B.C. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION ΟΕ GREECE 

οἱ Αἰγινῆται. τοῦ περιβόλου δὲ ἐντὸς ἐλαῖαι 
ο ἐκ παλαιοῦ καὶ βωμός ἐστιν οὐ πολὺ 
ἀνέχων ἐκ τῆς γῆς: ὡς δὲ καὶ μνῆμα οὗτος ὁ 
βωμὸς εἴη Αἰακοῦ, λεγόμενόν ἐστιν ἐν ἀπορρήτῳ. 
9 παρὰ δὲ τὸ Αἰάκειον Φώκου τάφος χῶμά ἐστι 
περιεχόμενον κύκλῳ κρηπῖδι, ἐπίκειται δέ οἱ 
λίθος τραχύς" καὶ ἡνίκα Φῶκον Τελαμὼν καὶ 
Πηλεὺς προηγάγοντο ἐς ἀγῶνα πεντάθλου καὶ 
περιῆλθεν ἐς Πηλέα ἀφεῖναι τὸν λίθον--- οὗτος 
γὰρ ἀντὶ δίσκου σφίσιν ἦν--, ἑκὼν τυγχάνει τοῦ 
Φώκου. ταῦτα δὲ ἐχαρίζοντο τῇ μητρί: αὐτοὶ 
μὲν γὰρ ἐγεγόνεσαν ἐκ τῆς Σκίρωνος θυγατρός, 
Φῶκος δὲ οὐκ ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς, ἀλλ. ἐξ ἀδελφῆς 
Θέτιδος ἦν, εἰ δὴ τὰ ὄντα λέγουσιν "Ελληνες. 
Πυλάδης τέ μοι καὶ διὰ ταῦτα φαίνεται καὶ οὐκ 
Ὀρέστου φιλίᾳ μόνον βουλεῦσαι Νεοπτολέμῳ 
10 τὸν φόνον. τότε δὲ ὡς τῷ δίσκῳ πληγεὶς ἀπέ- 
θανεν ὁ Φῶκος, φεύγουσιν ἐπιβάντες νεὼς οἱ 
᾿Ἐνδηίδος παῖδες: Τελαμὼν δὲ ὕστερα κήρυκα 
ἀποστέλλων ἠρνεῖτο μὴ βουλεῦσαι Φώκῳ θάνα- 
τον. Alaxos δὲ ἐς μὲν τὴν νῆσον ἀποβαίνειν 
αὐτὸν οὐκ εἴα, ἑστηκότα δὲ ἐπὶ νεώς, εἰ δὲ ἐθέλοι, 
χῶμα ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ χώσαντα ἐκέλευεν ἐντεῦθεν 
ἀπολογήσασθαι. οὕτως ἐς τὸν Κρυπτὸν rahoi- 
μενον λιμένα ἐσπλεύσας νύκτωρ ἐποίει χῶμα. 
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἐξεργασθὲν καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔτι μένει 
καταγνωσθεὶς δὲ οὐκ ἀναίτιος εἶναι Φώκῳ τῆς 
τελευτῆς, τὸ δεύτερον ἐς Σαλαμῖνα ἀπέπλευσε. 
11 τοῦ λιμένος δὲ οὐ πόρρω τοῦ Κρυπτοῦ θέατρόν 
ἐστι θέας ἄξιον, ae τὸ ᾿Επιδαυρίων μάλιστα 
μέγεθος καὶ ἐργασίαν τὴν λοιπήν. τούτου δὲ 
ὄπισθεν ᾠκοδόμηται σταδίου πλευρὰ μία, ἀνέ- 

406 

CORINTH, xx1x, 8-11 

those who came to him. Within the enclosure are 
olive trees that have grown there from of old, and 
there is an altar which is raised but a little from the 
ground. That this altar is also the tomb of Aeacus 
is told as a holy secret. Beside the shrine of Aeacus 
is the grave of Phocus, a barrow surrounded by a 
basement, and on it lies a rough stone. When 
Telamon and Peleus had induced Phocus to compete 
at the pentathlon, and it was now the turn of Peleus 
to hurl the stone, which they were using for a quoit, 
he intentionally hit Phocus. The act was done to 
please their mother ; for, while they were both born 
of the daughter of Sciron, Phocus was not, being, if 
indeed the report of the Greeks be true, the son of 
a sister of Thetis. I believe it was for this reason, 
and not only out of friendship for Orestes, that 
Pylades plotted the murder of Neoptolemus. When 
this blow of the quoit killed Phocus, the sons of 
Endeis boarded a ship and fled. Afterwards Telamon 
sent a herald denying that he had plotted the death 
of Phocus. Aeacus, however, refused to allow him 
to land on the island, and bade him make his 
defence standing on board ship, or, if he wished, 
from a mole raised in the sea. So he sailed into the 
harbour called Secret, and proceeded to make a 
mole by night. This was finished, and still remains 
at the present day. But Telamon, being condemned 
as implicated in the murder of Phocus, sailed away 
a second time and came to Salamis. Not far from 
the Secret Harbour is a theatre worth seeing ; it is 
very similar to the one at Epidaurus, both in size 
and in style. Behind it is built one side of a race- 

407 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

χουσά τε αὐτὴ τὸ θέατρον καὶ ἀντὶ ἐρείσματος 
ἀνάλογον ἐκείνῳ χρωμένη. 
ΧΧΧ. Ναοὶ δὲ οὐ πολὺ ἀλλήλων ἀφεστηκότες 
ὁ μὲν ᾿Απόλλωνός ἐστιν, ὁ δὲ ᾿Αρτέμιδος, Διο- 
νύσῳ δὲ αὐτῶν ὁ τρίτος. ᾿Απόλλωνι μὲν δὴ 
ξόανον γυμνόν ἐστι τέχνης τῆς ἐπιχωρίου, τῇ 
δὲ ᾿Αρτέμιδί ἐστιν ἐσθής, κατὰ ταὐτὰ δὲ καὶ τῷ 
Διονύσῳ' καὶ γένεια Διόνυσος ἔχων πεποίηται. 
τοῦ δὲ Ασκληπιοῦ τὸ ἱερὸν ἔστι μὲν ἑτέρωθι καὶ 
9 οὐ ταύτῃ, λίθου δὲ ἄγαλμα καθήμενον. θεῶν δὲ 
Αἰγινῆται τιμῶσιν Εκάτην μάλιστα καὶ τελετὴν 
LA 3 N A ” ε 4 > / la \ 
ἄγουσιν ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος Εκάτης, Opdéa σφίσι τὸν 
Θρᾷκα καταστήσασθαι τὴν τελετὴν λέγοντες. 
τοῦ περιβόλου δὲ ἐντὸς ναός ἐστι, ξόανον δὲ 
ἔργον Μύρωνος, ὁμοίως ἓν πρόσωπόν τε καὶ τὸ 
λοιπὸν σῶμα. ᾿Αλκαμένης δὲ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν πρῶτος 
ἀγάλματα “Εκάτης τρία ἐποίησε προσεχόμενα 
ἀλλήλοις, ἣν ᾿Αθηναῖοι καλοῦσιν Ἐπιπυργιδίαν: 
ἕστηκε δὲ παρὰ τῆς ᾿Απτέρου Νίκης τὸν ναόν. 
3 ἐν Αἰγίνῃ δὲ πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τοῦ Πανελληνίου Διὸς 
ἰοῦσιν, ἔστιν ᾿Αφαίας ἱερόν, ἐς ἣν καὶ Πίνδαρος 
ᾧσμα Αἰγινήταις ἐποίησε. φασὶ δὲ οἱ Κρῆτες-- 
τούτοις γάρ ἐστι τὰ ἐς αὐτὴν ἐπιχώρια---Καρμά- 
νορος τοῦ καθήραντος ᾿Απόλλωνα ἐπὶ φόνῳ τῷ 
Πύθωνος παῖδα Εὔβουλον εἶναι, Διὸς δὲ καὶ 
Κάρμης τῆς Εὐβούλου Βριτόμαρτιν γενέσθαι" 
χαίρειν δὲ αὐτὴν δρόμοις τε καὶ θήραις καὶ ᾿Αρτέ- 
µιδι μάλιστα φίλην εἶναι Μίνω δὲ ἐρασθέντα 
εύγουσα ἔρριψεν ἑαυτὴν ἐς δίκτυα ἀφειμένα ἐπ᾽ 
ἰχθύων θήρᾳ. ταύτην μὲν θεὸν ἐποίησεν "Αρ- 
τεμις, σέβουσι δὲ οὐ Κρῆτες μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ 

408 

~ 

CORINTH, xxix. 11-xxx. 3 

course, which not only itself holds up the theatre, 
but also in turn uses it as a support. 

ΧΧΧ. There are three temples close together, one 
of Apollo, one of Artemis, and a third of Dionysus. 
Apollo has a naked wooden image of native work- 
manship, but Artemis is dressed, and so, too, is 
Dionysus, who is, moreover, represented with a 
beard. The sanctuary of Asclepius is not here, 
but in another place, and his image is of stone, 
and seated. Of the gods, the Aeginetans worship 
most Hecate, in whose honour every year they 
celebrate mystic rites which, they say, Orpheus 
the Thracian established among them. Within 
the enclosure is a temple; its wooden image is 
the work of Myron, and it has one face and 
one body. It was Alcamenes,!} in my opinion, 
who first made three images of Hecate attached 
to one another, a figure called by the Athenians 
Epipurgidia (on the Tower); it stands beside the 
temple of the Wingless Victory. In Aegina, as you 
go towards the mountain of Zeus, God of all the 
Greeks, you reach a sanctuary of Aphaea, in whose 
honour Pindar composed an ode for the Aeginetans. 
The Cretans say (the story of Aphaea is Cretan) that 
Carmanor, who purified Apollo after he had killed 

Pytho, was the father of Eubulus, and that the 
daughter of Zeus and of Carme, the daughter of 
Eubulus, was Britomartis. She took delight, they 
say, in running and in the chase, and was very dear 
to Artemis. Fleeing from Minos, who had fallen 
in love with her, she threw herself into nets which 
had been cast (αρλείπιεπα) for a draught of fishes. 
She was made a goddess by Artemis, and she is 
worshipped, not only by the Cretans, but also by 
1 A contemporary of Pheidias. 

409 

cot 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Αὐγινῆται, λέγοντες φαίνεσθαί σφισιν ἐν τῇ 
νήσῳ τὴν Βριτόμαρτιν. ἐπίκλησις δέ οἱ παρά τε 
Αἰγινήταις ἐστὶν ᾿Αφαία καὶ Δίκτυννα ἐν Κρήτῃ. 
τὸ δὲ Πανελλήνιον, ὅτι μὴ τοῦ Διὸς τὸ ἱερόν, 
ἄλλο τὸ ὄρος ἀξιόλογον εἶχεν οὐδέν. τοῦτο δὲ τὸ 
ἱερὸν λέγουσιν Αἰακὸν ποιῆσαι τῷ Διί τὰ δὲ ἐς 
τὴν Αὐξησίαν καὶ .Δαμίαν, ὡς οὐχ. vev ὁ θεὺς 
᾿Επιδαυρίοις, ὡς τὰ ξόανα ταῦτα ἐκ μαντείας 
ἐποιήσαντο ἐλαίας παρ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίων λαβόντες, ὡς 
᾿Επιδαύριοι μὲν οὐκ ἀπέφερον ἔτι ᾿Αθηναίοις ἃ a 
ἐτάξαντο οἷα Αἰγινητῶν ἐχόντων τὰ ἀγάλματα, 
᾿Αθηναίων δὲ ἀπώλοντο οἱ διαβάντες διὰ ταῦτα 
ἐς Αἴγιναν, ταῦτα εἰπόντος Ἡροδότου καθ' ἕκα- 
στον αὐτῶν ἐπ᾽ ἀκριβὲς οὔ μοι γράφειν κατὰ 
γνώμην ἦν εὖ προειρημένα, πλὴν τοσοῦτό γε ὅτι 
εἶδόν τε τὰ ἀγάλματα καὶ ἔθυσά σφισι κατὰ τὰ 
αὐτὰ καθὰ δὴ καὶ ᾿Ελευσῖνι θύειν νομέξουσιν. 
Αἰγίνης μὲν δὴ Αἰακοῦ ἕνεκα. καὶ ἔργων ὁπόσα 
ἀπεδείξατο ἐ ἐς τοσόνδε ἔστω μνήμη’ τῆς δὲ Ἔπι- 
δαυρίας ἔχονται Τροιξήνιοι, σεμνύνοντες εἴπερ 
καὶ ἄλλοι τινὲς τὰ ἐγχώρια" φασὶ δὲ Ὥρον γενέ- 
σθαι σφίσιν ἐν τῇ γῇ πρῶτον. ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν 
Αἰγύπτιον φαίνεται καὶ οὐδαμῶς Ἑλληνικὸν 
ὄνομα Ὢ ee εἶναι" βασιλεῦσαι ὃ οὖν φασιν aù- 
τὸν καὶ αίαν ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ καλεῖσθαι τὴν γῆν, 
στο è Ποσειδῶνος παῖδα καὶ Ληίδος τῆς 
Ὥρου, παραλαβόντα μετὰ Ὥρον τὴν ἀρχήν, 
᾿Αλθηπίαν ὁ ὀνομάσαι τὴν γῆν. ἐπὶ τούτου βασι- 
λεύοντος ᾿Αθηνᾶν καὶ Ποσειδῶνα sea Antia 
λέγουσι περὶ τῆς χώρας, ἀμφισβητήσαντας δὲ 
ἔχειν ἐν κοινῷ' προστάξαι γὰρ οὕτω Δία σφίσι. 

41ο 

CORINTH, xxx. 1-6 

the Aeginetans, who say that Britomartis shows 
herself in their island. Her surname among the 
Aeginetans is Aphaea; in Crete it is Dictynna 
(Goddess of Nets). The Mount of all the Greeks, 
except for the sanctuary of Zeus, has, I found, 
nothing else worthy of mention. This sanctuary, 
they say, was made for Zeus by Aeacus. The story 
of Auxesia and Damia, how the Epidaurians suffered 
from drought, how in obedience to an oracle they had 
these wooden images made of olive wood that they 
received from the Athenians, how the Epidaurians 
left off paying to the Athenians what they had 
agreed to pay, on the ground that the Aeginetans 
had the images, how the Athenians perished who 
crossed over to Aegina to fetch them—all this, as 
Herodotus! has described it accurately and in 
detail, I have no intention of relating, because the 
story has been well told already; but 1 will add 
that I saw the images, and sacrificed to them in the 
same way as it is customary to sacrifice at Eleusis. 
So much I must relate about Aegina, for the sake 
of Aeacus and his exploits. Bordering on Epidauria 
are the Troezenians, unrivalled glorifiers of their 
own country. They say that Orus was the first to be 
born in their land. Now, in my opinion, Orus is 
an Egyptian name and utterly un-Greek; but they 
assert that he became their king, and that the land 
was called Oraea after him ; and that Althepus, the 
son of Poseidon and of Leis, the daughter of Orus, 
inheriting the kingdom after Orus, named the land 
Althepia. During his reign, they say, Athena and 
Poseidon disputed about the land, and after dis- 
puting held it in common, as Zeus commanded 

1 Herodotus v. 82-87. 
411 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ᾿Αθηνᾶν τε σέβουσι Πολιάδα καὶ 
Σθενιάδα ὀνομάζοντες τὴν αὐτὴν καὶ Ποσειδῶνα 
Βασιλέα ἐπίκλησιν" καὶ δὴ καὶ νόμισμα αὐτοῖς 
τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἐπίσημα ἔχει τρίαιναν καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
πρόσωπον. μετὰ δὲ ΄Αλθηπον Σά ων ἐβασί- 
λευσεν. ἔλεγον δὲ ὅτι οὗτος τῇ α ρωνίδι τὸ 
ἱερὸν ᾿Αρτέμιδι Φκοδόμησεν ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ τελ- 
ματώδει καὶ ἐπιπολῆς μᾶλλον, ὥστε καὶ Φοιβαία 
λίμνη διὰ τοῦτο ἐκαλεῖτο. Σάρωνα δὲ---θηρεύειν 
γὰρ δὴ μάλιστα ἤρητο---κατέλαβεν ἔλαφον διώ- 
κοντα ἐς θάλασσαν συνεσπεσεῖν φευγούσῃ' καὶ 
ἥ τε ἔλαφος ἐνήχετο ἀπωτέρω τῆς γῆς καὶ ὁ 
Σάρων εἴχετο τῆς ἄγρας, ἐς ὃ ὑπὸ προθυμίας 
ἀφίκετο ἐς τὸ πέλαγος ἤδη δὲ κάμνοντα αὐτὸν 
καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν κυμάτων κατακλυζόμενον ἐπέλαβε 
τὸ χρεών. ἐκπεσόντα δὲ τὸν νεκρὸν. κατὰ τὴν 
Φοιβαίαν λίμνην ἐς τὸ ἄλσος τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος 
ἐντὸς τοῦ ἱεροῦ περιβόλου θάπτουσι, καὶ λίμνην 
ἀπὸ τούτου .Σαρωνίδα τὴν ταύτῃ θάλασσαν 
καλοῦσιν. ἀντὶ Φοιβαίας. τοὺς δὲ ὕ ὕστερον͵ βασι- 
λεύσαντας οὐκ ἴσασιν ἄχρι Ὑπέρητος καὶ "Ανθα' 
τούτους δὲ εἶναι Ποσειδῶνος καὶ ᾿Αλκυόνης ᾿Ατ- 
λαντος θυγατρός, καὶ πόλεις αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ χώρα 
φασὶν Ὑπέρειάν τε καὶ ΄Ανθειαν οἰκίσαι" ᾿Αέτιον 
δὲ τὸν ᾿Ανθα τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ θείου παραλα- 
βόντα τὴν ἀρχὴν τὴν ἑτέραν τῶν πόλεων Hoce- 
δωνιάδα ὀνομάσαι. Τροίζηνος δὲ καὶ Πιτθέως 
παρὰ ᾿Αέτιον ἐλθόντων βασιλεῖς μὲν τρεῖς ἀντὶ 
ἑνὸς ἐγένοντο, ἴσχυον δὲ οἱ παῖδες μᾶλλον οἱ 
Πέλοπος. σημεῖον δέ. ἀποθανόντος γὰρ Τροί- 
ζηνος Ἡιτθεὺς ἐς τὴν νῦν πόλιν συναγαγὼν τοὺς 
ἀνθρώπους ὠνόμασεν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ Τροίζηνα, 

412 

- A 

CORINTH, xxx. 6-9 

them to do. For this reason they worship both 
Athena, whom they name both Polias (Urban) and 
Sthenias (Strong), and also Poseidon, under the sur- 
name of King. And moreover their old coins have 
as device a trident and a face of Athena. After 
Althepus, Saron became king. They said that this 
man built the sanctuary for Saronian Artemis by a- 
sea which is marshy and shallow, so that for this 
reason it was called the Phoebaean lagoon. Now 
Saron was very fond of hunting. As he was chasing 
a doe, it so chanced that it dashed into the sea 
and he dashed in after it. The doe swam further 
and further from the shore, and Saron kept close 
to his prey, until his ardour brought him to the 
open ocean. Here his strength failed, and he was 
drowned in the waves. The body was cast ashore 
at the grove of Artemis by the Phoebaean lagoon, 
and they buried it within the sacred enclosure, 
and after him they named the sea in these parts 
the Saronic instead of the Phoebaean lagoon. They 
know nothing of the later kings down to Hyperes 
and Anthas. These they assert to be sons of 
Poseidon and of Alcyone, daughter of Atlas, adding 
that they founded in the country the cities of 
Hyperea and Anthea; Aétius, however, the son 
of Anthas, on inheriting the kingdoms of his father 
and of his uncle, named one of the cities Posei- 
donias. When Troezen and Pittheus came to Aétius 
there were three kings instead of one, but the sons 
of Pelops enjoyed the balance of power. Here is 
evidence of it. When Troezen died, Pittheus 
gathered the inhabitants together, incorporating 
both Hyperea and Anthea into the modern city, 

413 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

συλλαβὼν Ὑπέρειάν τε καὶ "Ἀνθειαν. πολλοῖς 
δὲ ἔτεσιν ὕστερον ἐς ἀποικίαν ἐκ Τροιξῆνος στα- 
λέντες “Αλικαρνασσὸν ἐν τῇ Καρίᾳ καὶ Μύνδον 
ἀπῴκισαν οἱ γεγονότες ἀπ᾽ ᾿Δετίου τοῦ "Ανθα. 
Τροίζηνος δὲ οἱ παῖδες ᾿Ανάφλυστος καὶ Σφῆττος 
μετοικοῦσιν ἐς τὴν ᾿Αττικήν, καὶ οἱ δῆμοι τὰ 
ὀνόματα ἔχουσιν ἀπὸ τούτων. τὰ δὲ ἐς Θησέα 
θυγατριδοῦν Πιτθέως εἰδόσι τὰ ἐς αὐτὸν οὐ γρά- 
10 φω, δεῖ δέ µε τοσόνδε ἔτι δηλῶσαι. Ἡ ρακλειδῶν 
γὰρ κατελθόντων ἐδέξαντο καὶ οἱ Τροιξήνιοι 
συνοίκους. Δωριέων τῶν ef “Apyous καὶ πρότερον 
ἔτι ᾿Αργείων ὄντες κατήκοοι" καὶ σφᾶς καὶ 
Όμηρος ἐν καταλόγῳ φησὶν ὑπὸ Διομήδους 
ἄρχεσθαι. Διομήδης γὰρ καὶ Εὐρύαλος ὁ Μη- 
κιστέως Κυάνιππον τὸν Αἰγιαλέως παῖδα ὄντα 
ἐπιτροπεύοντες ᾿Αργείων ἡγήσαντο ἐς Τροίαν. 
Σθένελος δέ, ὡς ἐδήλωσα ἐ ἐν τοῖς πρότερον, οἰκίας 
τε ἦν ἐπιφανεστέρας, τῶν ᾿Αναξαγοριδῶν καλου- 
μένων, καὶ ἡ Βασιλεία τούτῳ μάλιστα ἦν ἡ 
᾿Αργείων προσήκουσα. τοσαῦτα Τροιζηνίοις ἐχό- 
μενα ἱστορίας ἦν, παρὲξ ἢ ὅσαι πόλεις παρ᾽ 
αὐτῶν φασιν ἀποικισθῆναι' κατασκευὴν δὲ ἱερῶν 
καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐς ἐπίδειξιν, τὸ ἐντεῦθεν ἐπέξειμι. 
ΧΧΧΙ. ᾿Εν τῇ ἀγορᾷ Τροιζηνίων ναὸς καὶ 
ἀγάλματα ᾿Αρτέμιδός ἐστι Σωτείρας: Θησέα δὲ 
ἐλέγετο ἱδρύσασθαι καὶ ὀνομάσαι Σώτειραν, 
ἡνίκα ᾿Αστερίωνα τὸν Μίνω καταγωνισάμενος 
ἀνέστρεψεν ἐκ τῆς Κρήτης. ἀξιολογώτατον δὲ 
εἶναι τοῦτο ἔδοξέν οἱ τῶν κατειργασμένων, οὐ 
τοσοῦτον ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ὅτι ἀνδρείᾳ τοὺς ἀποθανόν- 
τας ὑπὸ Θησέως ὑπερέβαλεν ὁ ᾿Αστερίων, ἀλλὰ 
τό τε τοῦ λαβυρίνθου :δυσέξοδον καὶ τὸ λαθόντα 

414 

Hiii 

CORINTH, xxx. 9-xxxı. 1 

which he named Troezen after his brother. Many 
years afterwards the descendants of Aétius, son of 
Anthas, were dispatched as colonists from Troezen, 
and founded Halicarnassus and Myndus in Caria. 
Anaphlystus and Sphettus, sons of Troezen, migrated 
to Attica, and the parishes are named after them. 
As my readers know it already, I shall not relate 
the story of Theseus, the grandson of Pittheus. 
There is, however, one incident that I must add. 
On the return of the Heracleidae, the Troezenians 
too received Dorian settlers from Argos. They had 
been subject at even an earlier date to the Argives ; 
Homer, too, in the Catalogue, says that their com- 
mander was Diomedes. For Diomedes and Euryalus, 
son of Mecisteus, who were guardians of the boy 
Cyanippus, son of Aegialeus, led the Argives to 
Troy. Sthenelus, as I have related above, came of 
a more illustrious family, called the Anaxagoridae, 
and he had the best claim to the Kingdom of 
Argos. Such is the story of the Troezenians, with 
the exception of the cities that claim to be their 
colonies. I will now proceed to describe the appoint- 
ments of their sanctuaries and the remarkable sights 
of their country. 

XXXI. In the market-place of Troezen is a temple 
of Artemis Saviour, with images of the goddess. It 
was said that the temple was founded and the name 
Saviour given by Theseus when he returned from 
Crete after overcoming Asterion the son of Minos. 
This victory he considered the most noteworthy 
of his achievements, not so much, in my opinion, 
because Asterion was the bravest of those killed by 
Theseus, but because his success in unravelling the 
difficult Maze and in escaping unnoticed after the 

415 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἀποδρᾶναι μετὰ τὸ ἔργον ἐποίησεν εἰκότα τὸν 
λόγον ὡς προνοία θεία καὶ αὐτὸς ἀνασωθείη 
2 Θησεὺς καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ. ἐν τούτῳ δέ εἰσι τῷ 
ναῷ βωμοὶ θεῶν τῶν λεγομένων ὑπὸ γῆν ἄρχειν, 
καὶ φασιν ἐξ "Αιδου Σεμέλην τε ὑπὸ Διονύσου 
κομισθῆναι ταύτῃ καὶ ὡς ᾿Ηρακλῆς ἀναγάγοι τὸν 
κύνα τοῦ "Αιδου' ἐγὼ δὲ Σεμέλην μὲν οὐδὲ aro- 
θανεῖν ἀρχὴν πείθομαι Διός γε οὖσαν γυναῖκα, 
Ν y 9 4 . / er r e 
τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸν ὀνομαζόμενον "Αιδου κύνα ἑτέρωθι 
ἔσται pot δῆλα ὁποῖα εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ. 
35. Ὄπισθεν δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ Πιτθέως μνῆμά ἐστι, 
- A > 9 9 A ’ - 2 a 
τρεῖς δὲ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ θρόνοι κεῖνται λίθου λευκοῦ' 
δικάξειν δὲ Πιτθέα καὶ ἄνδρας δύο σὺν αὐτῷ 
λέγουσιν ἐπὶ τῶν θρόνων. οὐ πόρρω δὲ ἱερὸν 
Μουσῶν ἐστι, ποιῆσαι δὲ ἔλεγον αὐτὸ "Αρδαλον 
A e A 
παῖδα Ἡφαίστου' καὶ αὐλόν τε εὑρεῖν νομίξουσι 
by ” A A UA 3 ? 9 a 
τὸν "Αρδαλον τοῦτον καὶ τὰς Μούσας an’ αὐτοῦ 
A 2 a 
καλοῦσιν ᾿Αρδαλίδας. ἐνταῦθα Πιτθέα διδάξαι 
λόγων τέχνην φασί, καί τι βιβλίον Πιτθέως δὴ 
2 e » . > bY > 8 . 
σύγγραμμα ὑπὸ ἀνδρὸς ἐκδοθὲν ᾿Επιδαυρίου καὶ 
αὐτὸς ἐπελεξάμην. τοῦ Μουσείου δὲ οὐ πόρρω 
βωμός ἐστιν ἀρχαῖος, ᾿Αρδάλου καὶ τοῦτον ὥς 
3 > Y \ - , \ e 
φασιν ἀναθέντος" ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτῷ Μούσαις καὶ Ύπνῳ 
θύουσι, λέγοντες τὸν "Ὕπνον θεὸν μάλιστα εἶναι 
4 φίλον ταῖς Μούσαις. πλησίον δὲ τοῦ θεάτρου 
» 
Λυκείας ναὸν Αρτέμιδος ἐποίησεν Ἱππόλυτος ἐς 
δὲ τὴν ἐπίκλησιν οὐδὲν εἶχον πυθέσθαι παρὰ τῶν 
3 - 3 a ΄ » / / AS 
ἐξηγητῶν, ἀλλὰ ἢ λύκους ἐφαίνετό µοι τὴν Tpos- 
- e , 
ζηνίαν λυμαινομένους ἐξελεῖν ὁ “ππόλυτος ἢ 
> / 5... \ b > 7 
Αμαζόσι, παρ ὧν τὰ πρὸς μητρὸς ἦν, ἐπίκλησις 
an? / 3 ο y » y \ y 
τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδός ἐστιν αὕτη" εἴη Ò ἂν ἔτι καὶ ἄλλο 

416 

CORINTH, xxx. 1-4 

exploit made credible the saying that it was divine 
providence that brought Theseus and his company 
back in safety. In this temple are altars to the 
gods said to rule under the earth. It is here that 
they say Semele was brought out of Hell by Dionysus, 
and that Heracles dragged up the Hound of Hell.: 
But I cannot bring myself to believe even that 
Semele died at all, seeing that she was the wife 
of Zeus; while, as for the so-called Hound of Hell, 
I will give my views in another place.? 

Behind the temple is the tomb of Pittheus, on 
which are placed three seats of white marble. On 
them they say that Pittheus and two men with him 
used to sit in judgment. Not far off is a sanc- 
tuary of the Muses, made, they told me, by Ardalus, 
son of Hephaestus. This Ardalus they hold to 
have invented the flute, and after him they name 
the Muses Ardalides. Here, they say, Pittheus 
taught the art of rhetoric, and I have myself read 
a book purporting to be a treatise by Pittheus, 
published by a citizen of Epidaurus. Not far from the 
Muses’ Hall is an old altar, which also, according to 
report, was dedicated by Ardalus. Upon it they 
sacrifice to the Muses and to Sleep, saying that 
Sleep is the god that is dearest to the Muses. Near 
the theatre a temple of Artemis Lycea (Woljish) was 
made by Hippolytus. About this surname I could 
learn nothing from the local guides, but I gathered 
that either Hippolytus destroyed wolves that were 
ravaging the land of Troezen, or else that Lycea is 
a surname of Artemis among the Amazons, from 
whom he was descended through his mother. Per- 
haps there may be another explanation that I am 

1 Cerberus, the fabulous watch-dog. 
2 Pausanias III. xxv. § 6. 

417 
VOL. I. E E 

κ ων 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

οὐ γινωσκόμενον ὑπὸ ἐμοῦ. τὸν δὲ ἔμπροσθεν 
τοῦ ναοῦ λίθον, καλούμενον δὲ ἱερόν, εἶναι λέγου- 
σιν ἐφ᾽ οὗ ποτε ἄνδρες Τροιζηνίων ἐννέα ᾿Ὀρέστην 
ἐκάθηραν ἐπὶ τῷ φόνῳ τῆς μητρός. εἰσὶ δὲ οὐ 
μακρὰν. τῆς Λυκείας Αρτέμιδος βωμοὶ διεστη- 
κότες οὐ πολυ AT ἀλλήλων' O μὲν πρῶτος ἐστιν 
αὐτῶν Διονύσου κατὰ δή τι μάντευμα ἐπίκλησιν 
Σαώτου, δεύτερος δὲ Θεμίδων ὀνομαζόμενος: Πιτ- 
θεὺς τοῦτον ἀνέθηκεν, ὡς λέγουσιν. "Ηλίου δὲ 
Ἐλευθερίου καὶ σφόδρα εἰκότι λόγῳ δοκοῦσί µοι 
ποιῆσαι βωμόν, ἐκφυγόντες δουλείαν ἀπὸ Ξέρξου 
τε καὶ Περσῶν. τὸ δὲ ἱερὸν τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος 
τοῦ Θεαρίου κατασκευάσαι μὲν Πιτθέα ἔφασαν, 
ἔστι δὲ ὧν οἶδα παλαιότατον. ἀρχαῖος μὲν οὖν 
καὶ Φωκαεῦσι τοῖς ἐν ᾿Ιωνίᾳ ναός ἐστιν ᾿Αθηνᾶς, 
ὃν "Αρπαγός ποτε ὁ Μῆδος ἐνέπρησεν, ἀρχαῖος δὲ 
καὶ Σαμίοις ᾿Απόλλωνος Πυθίου. πλὴν πολύ ye 
ὕστερον τοῦ παρὰ Τροιζηνίοις ἐποιήθησαν. ἄγαλ- 

δέ ἐστι τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀνάθημα Αὐλίσκου, τέχνη 
δὲ Ἕρμωνος Τροιζηνίου. τοῦ δὲ "Ερµμωνος τούτου 
καὶ τὰ τῶν Διοσκούρων ξόανά ἐστι. κεῖνται δὲ 
ἐν στοᾷ τῆς ἀγορᾶς γυναῖκες λίθου καὶ αὐταὶ καὶ 
οἱ παῖδες. εἰσὶ δὲ ἃς ᾿Αθηναῖοι Τροιζηνίοις γυναῖ- 
κας καὶ τέκνα ἔδωκαν σώζειν, ἐκλιπεῖν σφισιν 
ἀρέσαν τὴν πόλιν μηδὲ στρατῷ πεζῷ τὸν Μῆδον 
ἐπιόντα ὑπομεῖναι. λέγονται δὲ οὐ πασῶν τῶν 
γυναικῶν--οὐ γὰρ δὴ πολλαί τινες ἐκεῖναι--, 
ὁπόσαι δὲ ἀξιώματι προεῖχον, τούτων εἰκόνας | 
ἀναθεῖναι μόνων. τοῦ δὲ ἱεροῦ τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος 
ἐστιν οἰκοδόμημα ἔμπροσθεν, Ὀρέστου καλού- 
μενον σκηνή. πρὶν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῷ αἵματι καθαρ- . 
θῆναι τῆς μητρός, Ἐροιζηνίων οὐδεὶς πρότερον 

418 

CORINTH, χκχι, 4-8 

unaware of. The stone in front of the temple, called 
the Sacred Stone, they say is that on which nine men 
of Troezen once purified Orestes from the stain of 
matricide. Not far from Artemis Lycea are altars close 
to one another. The first of them is to Dionysus, sur- 
named, in accordance with an oracle, Saotes (Saviour); 
the second is named the altar of the Themides 
(Laws), and was dedicated, they say, by Pittheus. 
They had every reason, it seems to me, for making 
an altar to Helius Eleutherius (Sun, God of Freedom), 
seeing that they escaped being enslaved by Xerxes 
and the Persians. The sanctuary of Thearian Apollo, 
they told me, was set up by Pittheus ; it is the oldest 
I know of. Now the Phocaeans, too, in Ionia have 
an old temple of Athena, which was once burnt by 
Harpagus the Persian, and the Samians also have an 
old one of Pythian Apollo; these, however, were 
built much later than the sanctuary at Troezen. 
The modern image was dedicated by Auliscus, and 
made by Hermon of Troezen. This Hermon made 
also the wooden images of the Dioscuri. Under a 

rtico in the market-place are set up women; 
both they and their children are of stone. They 
are the women and children whom the Athenians 
gave to the Troezenians to be kept safe, when 
they had resolved to evacuate Athens and not to 
await the attack of the Persians by land. They 
are said to have dedicated likenesses, not of all 
the women—for, as a matter of fact, the statues are 
not many—but only of those who were of high 
rank. In front of the sanctuary of Apollo is a 
building called the Booth of Orestes. For before 
he was cleansed for shedding his mother’s blood, no 

EE 2 

> ο. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἤθελεν αὐτὸν οἴκῳ δέξασθαι" καθίσαντες δὲ ἐν- 
ταῦθα ἐκάθαιρον καὶ εἱστίων, ἐς ὃ ἀφήγνισαν. 
καὶ νῦν ἔτι οἱ ἀπόγονοι τῶν καθηράντων ἐνταῦθα 
δειπνοῦσιν ἐ ἐν ἡμέραις ῥηταῖς. κατορυχθέντων δὲ 
ὀλίγον ἀπὸ τῆς σκηνῆς τῶν καθαρσίων. φασὶν an 
αὐτῶν ἀναφῦναι δάφνην, ñ ἣ δὴ καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς ἔστιν, 

ἡ πρὸ τῆς σκηνῆς ταύτης. καθῆραι δέ φασιν 

Ὀρέστην. καθαρσίοις καὶ ἄλλοις καὶ ὕδατι τῷ 

ἀπὸ τῆς ππου κρήνης. ἔστι γὰρ καὶ Τροιζη- 

νίοις ππου καλουμένη κρήνη, καὶ ὁ λόγος ἐς 
αὐτὴν οὗ διαφόρως τῷ Βοιωτῶν ἔχει" Ἡηγάσφ 
γὰρ τῷ ἵππῳ καὶ οὗτοι λέγουσι. τὸ ὕδωρ ἀνεῖναι 
τὴν γῆν θιγόντι τοῦ ἐδάφους τῇ ὁπλῇ, Βελλερο- 
φόντην δὲ ἐλθεῖν ἐς Τροιξῆνα γυναῖκα αἰτήσοντα 

Αἴθραν παρὰ Πιτθέως, πρὶν δὲ γῆμαι συμβῆναί 

οἱ φυγεῖν ἐκ Κορίνθου. 

10 Καὶ Ἑρμῆς ἐνταῦθά ἐστι Πολύγιος καλού- 
μενος. πρὸς τούτῳ τῷ ἀγάλματι τὸ ῥόπαλον 
θεῖναί φασιν Ἡρακλέα: καὶ- ἦν γὰρ κοτίνου--- 
τοῦτο μὲν ὅτῳ πιστὰ ἐνέφυ τῇ γῆ καὶ ἀνεβλά- 
στησεν αὖθις καὶ ἔστιν ὁ κότινος πεφυκὼς ἔτι, 
τὸν δὲ H ρακλέα λέγουσιν ἀνευρόντα τὸν πρὸς τῇ 
Σαρωνίδι κότινον ἀπὸ τούτου τεμεῖν ῥόπαλον. 
ἔστι δὲ καὶ Διὸς ἱερὸν ἐπίκλησιν Σωτῆρος" ποιῆ- 
σαι δὲ αὐτὸ βασιλεύοντα ᾿Αέτιον τὸν "Ανθα 
λέγουσιν. ὕδωρ δὲ ὀνομάζουσι Χρυσορόαν" αὐχ- 
μοῦ δὲ ἐπὶ ἔτη συμβάντος σφίσιν ἐννέα, ἐν οἷς 
οὐχ ὑεν ὁ θεός, τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ἀναξηρανθῆναί φασιν 
ὕδατα, τὸν δὲ Χρυσορόαν τοῦτον καὶ τότε ὁμοίως 
διαμεῖναι ῥέοντα. 

“ο 

~ 420 

CORINTH, xxx1. 8-10 

citizen of Troezen would receive him into his home ; 
so they lodged him here and gave him entertain- 
ment while they cleansed him, until they had 
finished the purification. Down to the present day 
the descendants of those who cleansed Orestes dine 
here on appointed days. A little way from the 
booth were buried, they say, the means of cleansing, 
and from them grew up a bay tree, which, indeed, 
still remains, being the one before this booth. 
Among the means of cleansing which they say they 
used to cleanse Orestes was water from Hippocrene 
(Horse’s Fount); for the Troezenians too have a 
fountain called the Horse’s, and the legend about 
it does not differ from the one which prevails in 
Boeotia. For they, too, say that the earth sent up 
the water when the horse Pegasus struck the 
ground with his hoof, and that Bellerophontes came 
to Troezen to ask Pittheus to give him Aethra to 
wife, but before the marriage took place he was 
banished from Corinth. 

Here there is also a Hermes called Polygius. 
Against this image, they say, Heracles leaned his club. 
Now this club, which was of wild olive, taking root 
in the earth (if anyone cares to believe the story), 
grew up again and is still alive; Heracles, they say, 
discovering the wild olive by the Saronic Sea, cut a 
club from it. There is also a sanctuary of Zeus sur- 
named Saviour, which, they say, was made by Aétius, 
the son of Anthas, when he was king. To a water 
they give the name River of Gold. They say that 
when the land was afflicted with a drought for nine 
years, during which no rain fell, all the other 
waters dried up, but this River of Gold even then 
continued to flow as before. 

421 
P 

p 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

XXXII. Ἱππολύτῳ δὲ τῷ Θησέως τέμενός τε 
ἐπιφανέστατον ἀνεῖται καὶ ναὸς ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ 
ἀγαλμά ἐστιν ἀρχαῖον. ταῦτα μὲν Διομήδην 
λέγουσι ποιῆσαι καὶ προσέτι θῦσαι τῷ Irro- 
λύτῳ πρῶτον' Τροιξηνίοις δὲ ἱερεὺς μέν ἐστιν 
Ἱππολύτου τὸν χρόνον τοῦ βίου πάντα ἱερώμενος 
καὶ θυσίαι καθεστήκασιν ἐπέτειοι, ὁρῶσι δὲ καὶ 
ἄλλο τοιόνδε" ἑκάστη παρθένος πλόκαμον ATO- 
κείρεταί οἱ πρὸ γάμου, κειραµένη δὲ ἀνέθηκεν ἐ ἐς 
τὸν ναὸν φέρουσα. ἀποθανεῖν δὲ αὐτὸν οὐκ ἐθέ. 
λουσι συρέντα ὑπὸ τῶν ἵππων οὐδὲ τὸν τάφον 
ἀποφαίνουσιν εἰδότες- τὸν δὲ ἐν οὐρανῷ καλού- 
μενον. ἡνίοχον, τοῦτον εἶναι νομίζουσιν ἐκεῖνον 
Ἱππόλυτον τιμὴν παρὰ θεῶν ταύτην ἔχοντα. 
τούτου δὲ ἐντὸς τοῦ περιβόλου ναός ἐστιν ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος Ἐπιβατηρίου, Διομήδους ἀνάθημα ἐκφυ- 
γόντος τὸν χειμῶνα ὃς τοῖς “Ἕλλησιν ἐπεγένετο 
ἀπὸ Ἰλίου κομιζομένοις" καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα τῶν Πυ- 
θίων Διομήδην πρῶτον θεῖναί φασι τῷ ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνι. ἐς δὲ τὴν Δαμίαν καὶ Αὐξησίαν---καὶ γὰρ 
Τροιζηνίοις μέτεστιν αὐτῶν- -οὐ τὸν αὐτὸν λέγου- 
σιν ὃν ᾿Επιδαύριοι καὶ Αἰγινῆται λόγον, ἀλλὰ 
ἀφικέσθαι παρθένους ἐκ Κρήτης στασιασάντων 
δὲ ὁμοίως τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει ἁπάντων καὶ ταύτας 
φασὶν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀντιστασιωτῶν καταλευσθῆναι, 
καὶ ἑορτὴν ἄγουσί σφισι Λιθοβόλια ὀνομάξοντες. 
κατὰ δὲ τὸ ἕτερον τοῦ περιβόλου μέρος στάδιόν 
ἐστιν Ἱππολύτου καλούμενον καὶ ναὸς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ 
᾿Αφροδίτης Κατασκοπίας' αὐτόθεν γάρ, ὁπότε 
γυμνάξοιτο ὁ Ἱππόλυτος, ἀπέβλεπεν ἐς αὐτὸν 
ἐρῶσα ἡ Φαίδρα. ἐνταῦθα ἔτι πεφύκει 7 μυρ- 
-' a, τὰ φύλλα ὡς καὶ πρότερον ἔγραψα ἔχουσα 

CORINTH, xxxi. 1-3 

a XXXII. To Hippolytus, the son of Theseus, is 

devoted a very famous precinct, in which is a 
temple with an old image. Diomedes, they say, 
made these, and, moreover, was the first to sacrifice 
to Hippolytus. The Troezenians have a priest of 
Hippolytus, who holds his sacred office for life, and 
annual sacrifices have been established. They also 
observe the following custom. Every maiden before 
marriage cuts off a lock for Hippolytus, and, having 
cut it, she brings it to the temple and dedicates it. 
They will not have it that he was dragged to death 
by his horses, and, though they know his grave, they 
do not show it. But they believe that what is called 
the Charioteer in the sky is the Hippolytus of the 
legend, such being the honour he enjoys from the 
gods. Within this enclosure is a temple of Apollo 
Seafaring, an offering of Diomedes for having 
weathered the storm that came upon the Greeks 
as they were returning from Troy. They say that 
Diomedes was also the first to hold the Pythian 
games in honour of Apollo. Of Damia and Auxesia 
(for the Troezenians, too, share in their worship) they 
do not give the same account as the Epidaurians and 
Aeginetans, but say that they were maidens who 
came from Crete.: A general insurrection having 
arisen in the city, these too, they say, were stoned 
to death by the opposite party; and they hold 
a festival in their honour that they call Stoning. 
In the other part of the enclosure is a race-course 
called that of Hippolytus, and above it a temple 
of Aphrodite Spy. For from here, whenever Hippo- 
lytus practised his exercises, Phaedra, who was in 
love with him, used to gaze upon him. Here ther 
still grew the myrtle, with its leaves, as I ha 

ν΄ 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

τετρυπημένα: καὶ ἡνίκα ἠπορεῖτο ἡ Φαίδρα καὶ 
ῥᾳστώνην τῷ ἔρωτι οὐδεμίαν εὕρισκεν, ἐς ταύτης 
τὰ φύλλα ἐσιναμώρει τῆς μυρσίνης. ἔστι δὲ καὶ 
τάφος Φαίδρας, πος t δὲ ov πολὺ τοῦ Ἱππολύ- 
του μνήματος" τὸ δὲ οὐ πόρρω κέχωσται τῆς 
μυρσίνης. τοῦ δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ τὸ ἄγαλμα ἐποίησε 
μὲν Τιμόθεος, Τροιξήνιοι δὲ οὐκ ᾿Ασκληπιὸν ἀλλὰ 
εἰκόνα Ἱππολύτου φασὶν εἶναι. καὶ οἰκίαν ἰδὼν 
οἶδα Ἱππολύτου" πρὸ δὲ αὐτῆς ἐστιν Ἡράκλειος 
καλουμένη κρήνη, τὸ ὕδωρ ὡς οἱ Ἱροιξήνιοι λέ- 
youow ἀνευρόντος. Ἡράκλέους. ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀκρο- 
πόλει τῆς Σθενιάδος καλουμένης ναός ἐστιν 
᾿Αθηνᾶς, αὐτὸ δὲ εἰργάσατο τῆς θεοῦ τὸ ξόανον 
Κάλλων Αἰγινήτης: μαθητὴς δὲ ὁ Κάλλων ἦν 
Τεκταίου καὶ ᾿Αγγελίωνος, of Δηλίοις ἐποίησαν 
τὸ ἄγαλμα τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος' ὁ δὲ ᾿Αγγελίων καὶ 
Τεκταῖος παρὰ Διποίνῳ καὶ Σκύλλιδι ἐδιδά- 
χθησαν. κατιόντων δὲ αὐτόθεν Λυτηρίου Πανός 
ἐστιν ἱερόν' Τροιξηνίων γὰρ τοῖς τὰς ἀρχὰς 
ἔχουσιν ἔδειξεν ὀνείρατα ἃ εἶχεν ἄκεσιν λοιμοῦ 
πιέσαντος τὴν Τροιξηνίαν, ᾿Αθηναίους δὲ μάλιστα. 
διαβὰς δὲ καὶ ναὸν ἂν ἴδοις Ἴσιδος καὶ ὑπὲρ αὐτὸν 
᾿Αφροδίτης ᾿Ακραίας- τὸν μὲν ἅτε ἐν μητροπόλει 
τῇ Τροιζῆνι “Αλικαρνασσεῖς ἐποίησαν, τὸ δὲ 
ἄγαλμα τῆς Ἴσιδος ἀνέθηκε. Τροιζηνίων δῆμος. 
᾿]οῦσι δὲ τὴν διὰ τῶν ὀρέων ἐς Ἑρμιόνην πηγή 
τέ ἐστι τοῦ Ὑλλικοῦ ποταμοῦ, Ταυρίου δὲ τὸ 
ἐξ ἀρχῆς καλουμένου, καὶ πέτρα Θησέως ὀνο- 
μαζομένη, μεταβαλοῦσα καὶ αὐτὴ τὸ ὄνομα ἀνελο- 
μένου Θησέως. ὑπ᾽ αὐτῇ κρηπῖδας τὰς Αἰγέως 
καὶ ξίφος: πρότερον δὲ βωμὸς ἐκαλεῖτο Σθενίου 

424 

~ 

CORINTH, xxxii. 3-7 

described above, pierced with holes. When Phaedra 
was in despair and could find no relief for her 
passion, she used to vent her spleen upon the leaves 
of this myrtle. There is also the grave of Phaedra, 
not far from the tomb of Hippolytus, which is a 
barrow near the myrtle. The image of Asclepius 
was made by Timotheus, but the Troezenians say 
that it is not Asclepius, but a likeness of Hippolytus. 

I remember, too, seeing the house of Hippolytus; 
before it is what is called the Fountain of Heracles, 
for Heracles, say the Troezenians, discovered the 
water. On the citadel is a temple of Athena, called 
Sthenias. The wooden image itself of the goddess Barly 
was made by Callon, of Aegina. Callon was a pupil νι 
of Tectaeus and Angelion, who made the image of 8. 
Apollo for the Delians. Angelion and Tectaeus were 
trained in the school of Dipoenus and Scyllis. On 
going down from here you come to a sanctuary of 
Pan Lyterius (Releasing), so named because he 
showed to the Troezenian magistrates dreams which 
supplied a cure for the epidemic that had afflicted 
Troezenia, and the Athenians more than any other 
people. Having crossed the sanctuary, you can see 

a temple of Isis, and above it one of Aphrodite of the 
Height. The temple of Isis was made by the Hali- 
carnassians in Troezen, because this is their mother- 
city, but the image of Isis was dedicated by the 
people of Troezen. 

On the road that leads through the mountains 
to Hermione is a spring of the river Hyllicus, 
originally called Taurius (Bull-like), and a rock 
called the Rock of Theseus ; when Theseus took up 
the boots and sword of Aegeus under it, it, too, 
changed its name, for before it was called the altar « 

425 

8 

10 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF ee 

Διός. τῆς δὲ πέτρας πλησίον ᾿Αφροδίτης ἐστὶν 
ἱερὸν Νυμφίας, ποιήσαντος Θησέως ἡνίκα ἔσχε 
γυναῖκα '“Ελένην. ἔστι δὲ ἔξω τείχους καὶ Ilo- 
σειδῶνος ἱερὸν Φυταλμίου' μηνίσαντα γάρ σφισι 
τὸν Ποσειδῶνα ποιεῖν φασιν ἄκαρπον τὴν χώραν 
ἄλμης ἐς τὰ σπέρματα καὶ τῶν φυτῶν τὰς ῥίξας 
καθικνουμένης, ἐς ὃ θυσίαις τε εἴξας καὶ εὐχαῖς 
οὐκέτι ἄλμην ἀνῆκεν ἐς τὴν γῆν. ὑπὲρ δὲ τοῦ 
Ποσειδῶνος τὸν ναόν ἐστι Δημήτηρ Θεσμοφόρος, 
᾿Αλθήπου καθὰ λέγουσιν ἱδρυσαμένου. κατα- 
βαίνουσι δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν πρὸς τῇ Κελενδέρει καλου- 
μένῃ λιμένα χωρίον ἐστὶν ὃ Γενέθλιον ὀνομάζουσι, 
τεχθῆναι Θησέα ἐνταῦθα λέγοντες. πρὸ δὲ τοῦ 
ωρίου τούτου ναός ἐστιν "Άρεως, (Θησέως καὶ 
ἐνταῦθα ᾿Αμαξόνας μάχῃ κρατήσαντος: αὗται δ᾽ 
ἂν εἴησαν τῶν ἐν τῇ ᾿Αττικῇ πρὸς Θησέα καὶ 
᾿Αθηναίους ἀγωνισαμένων. ἐπὶ θάλασσαν δὲ τὴν 
Ψιφαίαν πορευομένοις κότινος πέφυκεν ὀνομα- 
ζόμενος ῥᾶχος στρεπτός. ῥάχους μὲν δὴ καλοῦσι 
Τροιζήνιοι πᾶν ὅσον ἄκαρπον ἐλαίας, κότινον 
καὶ φυλίαν καὶ ἔλαιον: στρεπτὸν δὲ ἐπονομά- 
ζουσι τοῦτον, ὅτι ἐνσχεθεισῶν αὐτῷ τῶν ἡνιῶν 
ἀνετράπη τοῦ Ἱππολύτου τὸ ἅρμα. τούτου δὲ 
οὐ πολὺ τῆς Σαρωνίας ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἀφέστηκε τὸ 
ἱερόν, καὶ τὰ ἐς αὐτὸ ἐμήνυσεν ὁ λόγος ἤδη μοι. 
τοσόνδε δὲ ἔτι δηλώσω' Σαρώνια γὰρ δὴ κατὰ 
ἔτος τῇ ᾿Αρτέμιδι ἑορτὴν ἄγουσι. 
XXXIII. Νῆσοι δέ εἶσι Τροιζηνίοις μία μὲν 
πλησίον τῆς ἠπείρου, καὶ διαβῆναι ποσὶν ἐς 
αὐτὴν ἔστιν: αὕτη  Ἀφαιρία ὀνομαζομένη πρότερον 

426 

CORINTH, χχχι. 7-xxxm. 1 

of Zeus Sthenius (Strong). Near the rock is a sanc- 
tuary of Aphrodite Nymphia (Bridal), made by 
Theseus when he took Helen to wife. Outside the 
wall there is also a sanctuary of Poseidon Nurturer 
(Phytalmios), For they say that, being wroth with 
them, Poseidon smote the land with barrenness, 
brine (halme) reaching the seeds and the roots of 
the plants (phyta),! until, appeased by sacrifices and 
prayers, he ceased to send up the brine upon the 
earth. Above the temple of Poseidon is Demeter 
Law-bringer (Thesmophoros), set up, they say, by 
Althepus. On going down to the harbour at what 
is called Celenderis, you come to a place called 
Birthplace (Genethiion), where Theseus is said to 
have been born. Before this place is a temple of 
Ares, for here also did Theseus conquer the Amazons 
in battle. These must have belonged to the army 
that strove in Attica against Theseus and the 
Athenians. As you make your way to the Psiphaean 
Sea you see a wild olive growing, which they call 
the Bent Rhacos. The Troezenians call rhacos every 
kind of barren olive—cotinos, phylia, or elaios—and 
this tree they call Bent because it was when the 
reins caught in it that the chariot of Hippolytus 
was upset. Not far from this stands the sanctuary 
of Saronian Artemis, and I have already given an 
account of it. I must add that every year they 
hold in honour of Artemis a festival called Saronia. 
XXXIII. The Troezenians possess islands, one of 
which is near the mainland, and it is possible to 
wade across the channel. This was formerly called 

1 The epithet phytalmios means nourishing, but to judge 
from the story he gives, Pausanias must have connected it 
with the Greek words for brine and plant. 

427 

P” 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

e \ 3 5. » ΄ 4 1 3 p 
Ἱερὰ δι αἰτίαν ἐκλήθη τοιαύτην. ἔστιν ἐν α 
Σφαίρου μνῆμα' Πέλοπος δὲ ἡνίοχον εἶναι 
by 5 - 4 \ ὃ / 2 > 0 
γουσι τον Σφαῖρον. τούτῳ κατὰ δή τι ἐξ Αύην 
bd / y \ ‘` / 9 
ὄνειρον κοµίζουσα Αἴθρα χοὰς διέβαινεν ἐς 
νῆσον, διαβάσῃ δὲ ἐνταῦθα λέγεται Ποσειδῶνα 
- A b i 
μιχθῆναι. ἱδρύσατο μὲν διὰ τοῦτο Αἴθρα vaor. 
ἐνταῦθα ᾿Αθηνᾶς ᾽Απατουρίας καὶ “Ἱερὰν ἀντὶ ' 
Σφαιρίας ὠνόμασε τὴν νῆσον: κατεστήσατο δὲ 
A A 
καὶ ταῖς Τροιζηνίων παρθένοις ἀνατιθέναι προ 
/ \ , a 3 a a? , j 
γάμου τὴν ζώνην τῇ ᾿Δθηνᾶ τῇ ᾽᾿Απατουρια. 
9 Καλαύρειαν δὲ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερὰν τὸ ἀρχαῖον 
εἶναι λέγουσιν, ὅτε περ ἦσαν καὶ οἱ Δελφοὶ 
Ποσειδῶνος: λέγεται δὲ καὶ τοῦτο, ἀντιδοῦναι 
τὰ χωρία σφᾶς ἀλλήλοις. φασὶ δὲ ἔτι καὶ λόγιον 
μνημονεύουσιν' 

σόν τοι Δῆλόν τε Καλαύρειάν τε νέμεσθαι 
Πυθώ τ᾽ ἠγαθέην καὶ Ταίναρον ἠνεμόεσσαν. 

- N A 
ἔστι δ᾽ οὖν Ποσειδῶνος ἱερὸν ἐνταῦθα ἅγιον, 
ἱερᾶται δὲ αὐτῷ παρθένος, ἔστ᾽ ἂν ἐς ὥραν προ- 
- . 
3 έλθῃ γάμου. τοῦ περιβόλου δὲ ἐντὸς καὶ τὸ 
Δημοσθένους μνῆμά ἐστι. καί μοι τὸ δαιμόνιον 
a / > \ / A e / 
δεῖξαι μάλιστα ἐπὶ τούτου δοκεῖ καὶ “Ὁμήρου 
/ e y / 2 δὴ e \ 
πρότερον ὡς εἴη βάσκανον, εἰ δὴ "Όμηρον μὲν 
/ . 9 . 3 . r 
προδιεφθαρμένον τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ἐπὶ τοσούτῳ 
A / - 
κακῷ κακὸν δεύτερον πενία πιέξουσα ἐπὶ πᾶσαν 
γῆν πτωχεύοντα ἦγε, Δημοσθένει δὲ φυγῆς τε 
συνέπεσεν ἐν γήρᾳ λαβεῖν πεῖραν καὶ ὁ θάνατος 
e / a 
ἐγένετο οὕτω βίαιος. εἴρηται μὲν οὖν περὶ αὐτοῦ 

428 

CORINTH, xxxi. 1-3 

Sphaeria, but its name was changed to Sacred 
Island for the following reason. In it is the tomb 
of Sphaerus, who, they say, was charioteer to Pelops. 
In obedience forsooth to a dream from Athena, 
Aethra crossed over into the island with libations 
for Sphaerus. After she had crossed, Poseidon is 
said to have had intercourse with her here. So 
for this reason Aethra set up here a temple of 
Athena Apaturia,! and changed the name from 
Sphaeria to Sacred Island. She also established a 
custom for the Troezenian maidens of dedicating 
their girdles before wedlock to Athena Apaturia. 
Calaurea, they say, was sacred to Apollo of old, at 
the time when Delphi was sacred to Poseidon. 
Legend adds that the two gods exchanged the two 
places. They still say this, and quote an oracle :— 

«« Delos and Calaurea alike thou lovest to dwell in, 
Pytho, too, the holy, and Taenarum swept by the 
high winds.” 

At any rate, there is a holy sanctuary of Poseidon 
here, and it is served by a maiden priestess until 
she reaches an age fit for marriage. Within the 
enclosure is also the tomb of Demosthenes. His 
fate, and that of Homer before him, have, in my 
opinion, showed most plainly how spiteful the 
deity is; for Homer, after losing his sight, was, in 
addition to this great affliction, cursed with a 
second—a poverty which drove him in beggary to 
every land; while to Demosthenes it befell to 
experience exile in his old age and to meet with 
such a violent end. Now, although concerning him, 

1 Apparently here derived from the Greek word for deceit. 
429 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

καὶ ἄλλοις καὶ αὐτῷ Δημοσθένει πλεῖστα, ἢ μὴν 
τῶν χρημάτων ἃ ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ασίας ἤγαγεν ' Άρπαλος 
μὴ μεταλαβεῖν αὐτόν: τὸ δὲ ὕστερον λεχθὲν 
e A 
ἐπέξειμι ὁποῖον ἐγένετο. "Αρπαλος μὲν ὡς ἐξ 
3 - 3 / . \ 3 4 > 
Αθηνῶν ἀπέδρα διαβὰς ναυσὶν ἐς Κρήτην, οὐ 
- ’ 
πολὺ ὕστερον ὑπὸ τῶν θεραπευόντων ἀπέθανεν 
οἰκετῶν: οἱ δὲ ὑπὸ ἀνδρὸς Μακεδόνος Παυσανίου 
δολοφονηθῆναί φασιν αὐτόν. τὸν δέ οἱ τῶν 
χρημάτων διοικητὴν φυγόντα ἐς “Ῥόδον Φιλόξενος 
Μακεδὼν συνέλαβεν, ὃς καὶ αὐτὸν παρὰ ᾿Αθη- 
ναίων ἐξήτησεν "Αρπαλον. τὸν δὲ παῖδα τοῦτον 
ἔχων ἤλεγχεν ἐς ὃ πάντα ἐπύθετο, ὅσοι τῶν 
Αρπάλου τι ἔτυχον εἰληφότες: μαθὼν δὲ ἐς 
? A 
Αθήνας γράμματα ἐπέστελλεν. ἐν τούτοις τοῖς 

/ A / Νε ΄ 

γράμμασι τοὺς λαβόντας παρὰ Αρπάλου rata- 
A e A 

ριθμῶν καὶ αὐτοὺς καὶ ὁπόσον αὐτῶν ἔλαβεν 

ἕκαστος οὐδὲ ἐμνημόνευσεν ἀρχὴν Δημοσθένους, 

᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ τε ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ἀπεχθανομένου 

καὶ αὐτὸς ἰδίᾳ προσκρούσας. 

Δημοσθένει μὲν οὖν τιμαὶ καὶ ἑτέρωθι τῆς 
€ / 4 4 A / > A ? 
Ελλάδος καὶ παρὰ τῶν Καλαυρείας εἰσὶν οἰκη- 
τόρων' XXXIV. τῆς δὲ Τροιζηνίας γῆς ἐστιν 
2 ~ > \ \ ’ bd / 3 bi > a 
ἰσθμὸς ἐπὶ πολὺ διέχων ἐς θάλασσαν, ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ 

/ > / 3 / / ν 
πόλισμα οὐ μέγα ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ Μέθανα rorat. 

- A 
Ἴσιδος δὲ ἐνταῦθα ἱερόν ἐστι καὶ ἄγαλμα ἐπὶ 

A A A e 
τῆς ἀγορᾶς Ἑρμοῦ, τὸ δὲ ἕτερον Ἡρακλέους. 
τοῦ δὲ πολίσματος τριάκοντά που στάδια ἀπέχει 
θερμὰ λουτρά: φασὶ δὲ ᾿Αντιγόνου τοῦ Anpa- 

A . 

τρίου Μακεδόνων βασιλεύοντος τότε πρῶτον τὸ 
A A . 

ὕδωρ φανῆναι, φανῆναι δὲ οὐχ ὕδωρ εὐθὺς ἀλλὰ 

A A A . 4 
πῦρ ἀναξέσαι πολὺ ἐκ τῆς γῆς, ἐπὶ δὲ τούτῳ 

430 

CORINTH, xxxii. 2-Χχχιν. 1 

not only others, but Demosthenes himself, have 
again and again declared that assuredly he took no 
part of the money that Harpalus brought from Asia, 
yet I must relate the circumstances of the state- 
ment made subsequently. Shortly after Harpalus 
ran away from Athens and crossed with a squadron 
to Crete, he was put to death by the servants who 
were attending him, though some assert that he 
was assassinated by Pausanias, a Macedonian. The 
steward of his money fled to Rhodes, and was 
arrested by a Macedonian, Philoxenus, who also had 
demanded Harpalus from the Athenians. Having 
this slave in his power, he proceeded to examine 
him, until he learned everything about such as had 
allowed themselves to accept a bribe from Harpalus. 
On obtaining this information he sent a dispatch to 
Athens, in which he gave a list of such as had taken 
a bribe from Harpalus, both their names and the 
sums each had received. Demosthenes, however, 
he never mentioned at all, although Alexander held 
him in bitter hatred, and he himself had a private 
quarrel with him. 

So Demosthenes is honoured in many parts of 
Greece, and especially by the dwellers in Calaurea. 
XXXIV. Stretching out far into the sea from Troe- 
zenia is a peninsula, on the coast of which has 
been founded a little town called Methana. Here 
there is a sanctuary of Isis, and on the market-place 
is an image of Hermes, and also one of Heracles. 
Some thirty stades distant from the town are hot 
baths. They say that it was when Antigonus, 
son of Demetrius, was king of Macedon that the 
water first appeared, and that what appeared at 
once was not water, but fire that gushed in great 

431 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

μαρανθέντι ῥυῆναι τὸ ὕδωρ, ὃ δὴ καὶ ἐς ἡμᾶς 
ἄνεισι θερμόν τε καὶ δεινῶς ἁλμυρόν. λουσαμένῳ 
δὲ ἐνταῦθα οὔτε ὕδωρ ἐστὶν ἐγγὺς ψυχρὸν οὔτε 
ἐσπεσόντα ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν ἀκινδύνως νήχεσθαι: 
θηρία γὰρ καὶ ἄλλα καὶ κύνας παρέχεται πλει- 

2 στους. ὃ δὲ ἐθαύμασα ἐ ἐν τοῖς Μεθάνοις μάλιστα, 
γράψω καὶ τοῦτο. ἄνεμος ὁ Aly βλαστανούσαις 
ταῖς ἀμπέλοις ἐμπίπτων ἐκ τοῦ Σαρωνικοῦ Ko- 
που τὴν βλάστην σφῶν ἀφαναίνει" κατιόντος οὖν 
ἔτι τοῦ πνεύματος ἀλεκτρυόνα τὰ πτερὰ ἔχοντα 
διὰ παντὸς λευκὰ διελόντες -ἄνδρες. δύο ἐναντίοι 
περιθέουσι τὰς ἀμπέλους, ἥμισυ ἑκάτερος τοῦ 
ἀλεκτρυόνος φέρων: ἀφικόμενοι δ᾽ ἐς τὸ αὐτὸ 

3 ὅθεν ὡρμήθησαν, κατορύσσουσιν ἐνταῦθα. τοῦτο 
μὲν προς τὸν Λίβα σφίσιν ἐστὶν εὑρημένον" τὰς 
δὲ νησῖδας αἳ πρὀκεινται τῆς χώρας. ἀριθμὸν 
ἐννέα οὔσας Πέλοπος μὲν καλοῦσι, τοῦ θεοῦ δὲ 
ὕοντος μίαν ἐξ αὐτῶν ov φασιν ὕεσθαι. τοῦτο δὲ 
εἰ τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν οὐκ οἶδα, ἔλεγον δὲ οἱ περὶ τὰ 
Μέθανα, ἐπεὶ χάλαξάν γε ἤδη θυσίαις εἶδον καὶ 
ἐπῳδαῖς ἀνθρώπους ἀποτρέποντας. 

4 Τὰ μὲν δὴ Μέθανα ἐσθμός ἐστι τῆς Πελοπον- 
νήσου" ἐντὸς δὲ τοῦ ἰσθμοῦ τῆς Τροιζηνίων 
ὅμορός ἐστιν “Ερμιόνη. οἰκιστὴν ὲ τῆς ἀρχαίας 
πόλεως Ἑρμιονεῖς γενέσθαι φασὶν [πό Εὔρω- 
πος. τὸν δὲ Εὔρωπα ---ἣν γὰρ δὴ Φ ορωνέως — 
Ἡροφάνης ὁ Τροιξήνιος ἔφασκεν εἶναι νόθον' οὐ 
γὰρ δή ποτε ἐς Άργον τὸν Νιόβης θυγατριδοῦν 
ὄντα Φορωνέως τὴν ἐν "Ἄργει περιελθεῖν ἂν 

6 ἀρχὴν παρόντος Φορωνεῖ γνησίου παιδός. ἐγὼ 
δέ, εἰ καὶ γνήσιον ὄντα Εὔρωπα πρότερον τὸ 
χρεὼν ἢ Φορωνέα ἐπέλαβεν, εὖ οἶδα ὡς οὐκ 

432 

““Ὄ. 
PC 

CORINTH, xxxiv. 1-5 

‘olume from the ground, and when this died down 
he water flowed; indeed, even at the present day 
t wells up hot and exceedingly salt. A bather here 
inds no cold water at hand, and if he dives into the 
sea his swim is full of danger. For wild creatures 
live in it, and it swarms with sharks. I will also 
relate what astonished me most in Methana. The 
wind called Lips,! striking the budding vines from 
the Saronic Gulf, blights their buds. So while the 
wind is still rushing on, two men cut in two a cock 
whose feathers are all white, and run round the 
vines in opposite directions, each carrying half of 
the cock. - When they meet at their starting place, 
they bury the pieces there. Such are the means 
they have devised against the Lips. The islets, 
nine in number, lying off the land are called the 
Isles of Pelops, and they say that when it rains 
one of them is not touched. If this be the case I 
do not know, though the people around Methana 
said that it was true, and I have seen before now 
men trying to keep off hail by sacrifices and spells. 
Methana, then, is a peninsula of the Pelopon- 
nesus. Within it, bordering on the land of Troezen, 
is Hermione. The founder of the old city, the 
Hermionians say, was Hermion, the son of Europs. 
Now Europs, whose father was certainly Phoroneus, 
Herophanes of Troezen said was an illegitimate 
child. For surely the kingdom of Argos would 
never have devolved upon Argus, Niobe’s son, the 
= grandchild of Phoroneus, in the presence of a legiti- 
mate son. But even supposing that Europs was 
a legitimate child who died before Phoroneus, I 
am quite sure that his son was not likely to stand 

1AS.W. wind. 

| 433 
VOL, I. ΕΕ 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἔμελλεν ὁ παῖς αὐτῷ Νιόβης παιδὶ ἴσα οἴσεσθαι 
Διός γε εἶναι δοκοῦντι. ἐπῴκησαν δὲ καὶ Ἑρ- 

/ [ὁ - e > Y , 
μιόνα ὕστερον Δωριεῖς οἱ ἐξ "Άργους: πόλεμον 
δὲ οὐ δοκῶ γενέσθαι σφίσιν, ἐλέγετο γὰρ ἂν ὑπὸ 
᾿Αργείων. 

Ἔστι δὲ ὁδὸς ἐς Ἑρμιόνα ἐκ Τροιζῆνος κατὰ 
. / , . » - ΄ \ 
τὴν πέτραν ἣ πρότερον μὲν ἐκαλεῖτο Σθενίου Διὸς 
βωμός, μετὰ δὲ Θησέα ἀνελόμενον τὰ γνωρίσματα 
ὀνομάξουσιν οἱ νῦν Θησέως αὐτήν. κατὰ ταύτην 
οὖν τὴν πέτραν ἰοῦσιν ὀρεινὴν ὁδόν, ἔστι μὲν 
᾿Απόλλωνος ἐπίκλησιν Πλατανιστίου ναός, ἔστι 
δὲ Εἰλεοὶ χωρίον, ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ Δήμητρος καὶ 
Κόρης τῆς Δήμητρος ἱερά' τὰ δὲ πρὸς θάλασσαν 
ἐν ὅροις τῆς Ἑρμιονίδος ἱερὸν Δήμητρός ἐστιν 
3 / / / 4 
ἐπίκλησιν θερμασίας. σταδίους δὲ ὀγδοήκοντα 

ἀπέχει μάλιστα ἄκρα Σκυλλαῖον ἀπὸ τῆς Νίσου | 

καλουμένη θυγατρός. ὡς γὰρ δὴ τὴν Νίσαιαν o 

Μίνως καὶ τὰ Μέγαρα εἷλεν ἐκείνης προδούσης, 

y A ν > N κ y . / 

οὔτε γυναῖκα ἕξειν αὐτὴν ἔτι ἔφασκε καὶ προσέ- 

- . » / A a 2 - 

ταξε τοῖς Κρησὶν ἐκβάλλειν τῆς νεώς: ἀποθανοῦ- 

σαν δὲ ἀπέρριψεν ἐς τὴν ἄκραν ταύτην ὁ κλύδων. 
, . > 2 / > A > . 

τάφον δὲ οὐκ ἀποφαίνουσιν αὐτῆς, ἀλλὰ περιο- 

φθῆναι τὸν νεκρὸν φασι διαφορηθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκ 

θαλάσσης ὀρνίθων. ἀπὸ δὲ Σκυλλαίου πλέοντι 
ο ΣΝ . / " X 43 e / , 

ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν ἄκρα τέ ἐστιν ἑτέρα Βουκέφαλα 
καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἄκραν νῆσοι, πρώτη μὲν ᾿Αλιοῦσσα 

---παρέχεται δὲ αὕτη λιμένα ἐνορμίσασθαι ναυσὶν | 

ἐπιτήδειον---, μετὰ δὲ Πιτυοῦσσα, τρίτη δὲ ἣν 
᾿Αριστερὰς ὀνομάζουσι. ταύτας δὲ παραπλεύ- 

434 

CORINTH, χχχιν. 5-8 

a fair chance against Niobe’s child, whose father 
was supposed to be Zeus. Subsequently the Dorians 
from Argos settled, among other places, at Hermion, 
but I do not think there was war between the two 
peoples, or it would have been spoken of by the 
Argives, 

There is a road from Troezen to Hermion by way 
of the rock which aforetime was called the altar of 
Zeus Sthenius (Strong) ; but afterwards Theseus 1 took 
up the tokens, and people now call it the Rock of 
Theseus. As you go, then, along a mountain road by 
way of this rock, you reach a temple of Apollo sur- 
named Platanistius (God of the Plane-tree Grove), and 
a place called Eilei, where are sanctuaries of Demeter 
and of her daughter Core (Maid). Seawards, on the 
borders of Hermionis, is a sanctuary of Demeter 
surnamed Thermasia (Warmth). Just about eighty 
stades away is a headland Scyllaeum, which is 
named after the daughter of Nisus. For when, 
owing to her treachery, Minos had taken Nisaea 
and Megara, he said that now he would not have 
her to wife, and ordered his Cretans to throw her 
from the ship. She was drowned, and the waves 
cast up her body on this headland. They do not 
show a grave of her, but say that the sea birds were 
allowed to tear the corpse to pieces. As you sail 
from Scyllaeum in the direction of the city, you 
reach another headland, called Bucephala (Ox-head), 
and, after the headland, islands, the first of which is 
Haliussa (Salt Island). This provides a harbour where 
there is good anchorage. After it comes Pityussa 
(Pine Island), and the third they call Aristerae. On 

1 See Pausanias I. xxvii. § 8, and II. xxxii. § 7. 
3 See Pausanias I. xix. 

10 

11 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

σαντί ἐστιν αὖθις ἄκρα Κωλυεργία ἀνέχουσα ἐκ 
τῆς ἠπείρου, μετὰ δὲ αὐτὴν νῆσος Tpixpava 
καλουμένη καὶ ὄρος ἐς θάλασσαν ἀπὸ τῆς Ilero- 
ποννήσου προβεβλημένον Ῥούπορθμος. ἐν Bov- 
πόρθμῳ δὲ πεποίηται μὲν ἱερὸν Δήμητρος καὶ τῆς 
παιδός, πεποίηται δὲ ᾿Αθηνᾶς" ἐπίκλησις δέ ἐστι 
τῇ θεῷ Προμαχόρμα. πρόκειται δὲ Ἡουπόρθμου 
νῆσος ᾿Απεροπία καλουμένη, τῆς δὲ ᾿Απεροπίας 
ἀφέστηκεν οὐ πολὺ ἑτέρα νῆσος Ὕδρέα. μετὰ 
ταύτην αἰγιαλός τε παρήκει τῆς ἠπείρου μηνοει- 
δὴς καὶ ἀκτὴ μετὰ. τὸν αἰγιαλὸν ἐπὶ Ποσείδιον, 
ἐκ θαλάσσης μὲν ἀρχομενη τῆς πρὸς ἀνατολάς, 
προήκουσα δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν ἑσπέραν' ἔχει δὲ καὶ 
λιμένας ἐν αὑτῇ. μῆκος μὲν δὴ τῆς ἀκτῆς ἐστιν 
ἑπτά που στάδια, πλάτος δὲ ἡ πλατυτάτη στα- 
δίων τριῶν οὐ πλέον. ἐνταῦθα ἡ ἡ προτέρα πόλις 
τοῖς Ἑρμιονεῦσιν ἦν. ἔστι. δέ σφισι καὶ νῦν ἔτι 
ἱερὰ αὐτόθι, Ποσειδῶνος μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς ἀκτῆς τῇ 
ἀρχῆ, προελθοῦσι ο, ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἐς τὰ μετέ- 
ώρα ναὸς ᾿Αθηνᾶς, π ὰ δὲ αὐτῷ σταδίου θεμέλια" 
ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ τοὺς Τυν άρεὼ παΐδας ἀγωνίσασθαι 
λέγουσιν. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἕτερον οὐ μέγα τῆς ᾿Αθη- 
νᾶς ἱερόν, ὁ δὲ ὄροφος κατερρύηκεν αὐτῷ. καὶ 
Ἡλίῳ ναὸς καὶ ἄλλος Χάρισιν, ὁ δὲ Σαράπιδι 
ᾠκοδόμηται καὶ Ἴσιδι" καὶ περίβολοι μεγάλων 
λίθων λογάδων εἰσίν, ἐντὸς δὲ αὐτῶν ἱερὰ δρῶσιν 
ἀπόρρητα Δήμητρι. 

οσαῦτα μὲν Ἑρμιονεῦσίν è ἐστιν ἐνταῦθα" ἡ δὲ 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν πόλις ἀπέχει μὲν τῆς ἄκρας, ἐφ᾽ ἡ τοῦ 
Ποσειδῶνος τὸ ἱερόν, τέσσαρας μάλιστα σταδίους, 
κειμένη͵ δὲ ἐν ὁμαλῷ τὰ πρῶτα ἠρέμα ἐς πρόσ- 
αντες ἄνεισι, τὸ δέ ἐστιν ἤδη τοῦ Ι]ρωνοός' 

436 

CORINTH, xxxiv. 8-11 

sailing past these you come to another headland, 
Colyergia, jutting out from the mainland, and after 
it to an island, called Tricrana (Three Heads), and 
a mountain, projecting into the sea from the 
Peloponnesus, called Buporthmus (Oz-ford). On 
Buporthmus has been built a sanctuary of Demeter 
and her daughter, as well as one of Athena, sur- 
named Promachorma (Champion of the Anchorage). 
Before Buporthmus lies an island called Aperopia, not 
far from which is another island, Hydrea. After it 
the mainland is skirted by a crescent-shaped beach ; 
and after the beach there is a spit of land up to a 
sanctuary of Poseidon, beginning at the sea on the 
east and extending westwards.! It possesses har- 
bours, and is some seven stades in length, and not 
more than three stades in breadth where it is 
broadest. Here the Hermionians had their former 
city. They still have sanctuaries here; one of 
Poseidon at the east end of the spit, and a temple 
of Athena farther inland ; by the side of the latter 
are the foundations of a race-course, in which legend 
says the sons of Tyndareus contended. There is 
also another sanctuary of Athena, of no great size, 
the roof of which has fallen in. There is a temple 
to Helius (Sun), another to the Graces, and a third 
to Serapis and Isis. There are also circuits of large 
unhewn stones, within which they perform mystic 
ritual to Demeter. 

Such are the possessions of the Hermionians in 
these parts. The modern city is just about four 
stades distant from the headland, upon which is the 
sanctuary of Poseidon, and it lies on a site which 
is level at first, gently rising up a slope, which 

1 i.e. the spit runs eastward into the sea from the west. 

437 

12 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Πρῶνα γὰρ τὸ ὄρος τοῦτο ὀνομάζουσι. τεῖχος 
μὲν δὴ περὶ πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑρμιόνα ἕστηκε: τὰ δὲ ἐς 
συγγραφὴν καὶ ἄλλα παρείχετο καὶ ὧν αὐτὸς 
ποιήσασθαι μάλιστα ἠξίωσα μνήμην. ᾿Αϕρο- 
δίτης ναός ἐστιν ἐπίκλησιν Τοντίας καὶ Λεμενίας 
τῆς αὐτῆς, ἄγαλμα δὲ λευκοῦ λίθου μεγέθει τε 
μέγα καὶ ἐπὶ τῇ τέχνη θέας ἄξιον. καὶ ναὸς 
ἕτερός ἐστιν ᾿Αφροδίτης: αὕτη καὶ ἄλλας ἔχει 
παρὰ "Ἑρμιονέων τιμάς, καὶ ταῖς παρθένοις καὶ ἦν 
γυνὴ χηρεύουσα παρὰ ἄνδρα μέλλῃ φοιτᾶν, ånd- 
σαις πρὸ γάμου θύειν καθέστηκεν ἐνταῦθα. Ar- 
µητρος δὲ ἱερὰ πεποίηται Θερμασίας, τὸ μὲν ἐπὶ 
τοῖς πρὸς τὴν Τροιζηνίαν ὅροις, ὡς ἐστὶν εἰρη- 
μένον ἤδη μοι, τὸ δὲ καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει. 
ΧΧΧΥ. πλησίον δὲ αὐτοῦ Διονύσου ναὸς Μελαν- 
αἴγιδος τούτῳ μουσικῆς ἀγῶνα κατὰ ἔτος ἕκα- 
στον ἄγουσι, καὶ ἁμίλλης κολύμβου καὶ πλοίων 
τιθέασιν ἆθλα' καὶ Αρτέμιδος ἐπίκλησιν ᾿ἼΊφιγε- 
νείας ἐστὶν ἱερὸν καὶ ἸΠοσειδῶν χαλκοῦς τὸν 
ἕτερον πόδα ἔχων ἐπὶ δελφῖνος. παρελθοῦσι δὲ 
ἐς τὸ τῆς Εστίας, ἄγαλμα μέν ἐστιν οὐδέν, βωμὸς 
δέ: καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ θύουσιν Ἑστία. ᾿Απόλλωνος 
δέ εἰσι ναοὶ τρεῖς καὶ ἀγάλματα τρία: καὶ τῷ 
μὲν οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπίκλησις, τὸν δὲ Πυθαέα ὀνο- 

΄ ϱ/ . / A A A 
μάζουσι, καὶ "Όριον τὸν τρίτον. τὸ μὲν δὴ τοῦ 
Πυθαέως ὄνομα μεμαθήκασι παρὰ ᾿Αργείων: τού- 
τοις γὰρ Ἑλλήνων πρώτοις ἀφικέσθαι Τελέσιλλά 
φησι τὸν Πυθαέα ἐς τὴν χώραν ᾿Απόλλωνος 
παῖδα ὄντα' τὸν δὲ "Όριον ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ καλοῦσιν, 
σαφῶς μὲν οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιμι εἰπεῖν, τεκμαίρομαι δὲ 
περὶ γῆς ὅρων πολέμῳ σφᾶς ἢ δίκῃ νικήσαντας 

438 

CORINTH, xxxiv. 11—xxxv. 2 

presently merges into Pron, for so they name this 
mountain. A wall stands all round Hermion, a 
city which I found afforded much to. write about, 
and among the things which I thought I myself 
must certainly mention are a temple of Aphrodite, 
surnamed both Pontia (of the Deep Sea) and Limenia 
(of the Harbour), and a white-marble image of huge 
size, and worth seeing for its artistic excellence. 
There is also another temple of Aphrodite. Among 
the honours paid her by the Hermionians is this 
custom: maidens, and widows about to remarry, all 
sacrifice to her before wedding. Sanctuaries have 
also been built of Demeter Thermasia (Warmth), one 
at the border towards Troezenia, as I have stated 
above, while there is another in Hermion itself. 
XXXV. Near the latter is a temple of Dionysus of 
the Black Goatskin. In his honour every year they 
hold a competition in music, and they offer prizes 
for swimming-races and boat-races. There is also 
a sanctuary of Artemis surnamed Iphigenia, and 
a bronze Poseidon with one foot upon a dolphin. | 
Passing by this into the sanctuary of Hestia, we see 
no image, but only an altar, and they sacrifice to 
Hestia upon it. Of Apollo there are three temples 
and three images. One has no surname ; the second 
they call Pythaeus, and the third Horius (of the 
Borders). The name Pythaeus they have learned 
from the Argives, for Telesilla! tells us that they 
were the first Greeks to whose country came Py- 
thaeus, who was a son of Apollo. I cannot say for 
certain why they call the third Horius, but I con- 
jecture that they won a victory, either in war or by 
arbitration, in a dispute concerning the borders 

1 See p. 353. 
439- 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

3 ἐπὶ τῷδε τιμὰς ᾿Απόλλωνι Ὁρίῳ νεῖμαι. τὸ δὲ 
ἱερὸν τῆς Τύχης νεώτατὸν μὲν λέγουσιν Ἑρμιονεῖς 
τῶν παρά σφισιν εἶναι, λύθου δὲ Παρίου κολοσσὸς 
ἕστηκεν. κρήνας δὲ τὴν μὲν σφόδρα ἔχουσιν 
ἀρχαίαν, ἐς δὲ αὐτὴν οὐ φανερῶς τὸ ὕδωρ κάτει- 
σιν, ἐπιλείποι δὲ οὐκ ἄν ποτε, οὐδ᾽ εἰ πάντες 
καταβάντες ὑδρεύοιντο ἐξ αὐτῆς" τὴν δὲ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
πεποιήκασιν, ὄνομα δέ ἐστιν τῷ χωρίῳ Λειμών, 
ὅθεν ῥεῖ τὸ ὕδωρ ἐς αὐτήν. 

4 Τὸ δὲ λόγου μάλιστα ἄξιον ἱερὸν Δήμητρος 
ἐστιν ἐπὶ τοῦ Πρωνός. τοῦτο τὸ ἱερὸν Ἑρρμιονεῖς 
μὲν Κλύμενον Φορωνέως παῖδα καὶ ἀδελφὴν Κλυ- 
μένου Χθονίαν τοὺς ἱδρυσαμένους φασὶν εἶναι. 
᾿Αργεῖοι δέ, ὅτε ἐς τὴν ᾿Αργολίδα ἦλθε Δημήτηρ, 
τότε ᾿Αθέραν μὲν λέγουσι καὶ Μύσιον ὡς ξενίαν 
παρασχοῖεν τῇ θεῷ, Κολόνταν δὲ οὔτε οἴκῳ δέ- 
ξασθαι τὴν θεὸν οὔτε ἀπονεῖμαί τι ἄλλο ἐς τιμήν 
ταῦτα δὲ οὐ κατὰ γνώμην Χθονίᾳ τῇ θυγατρὶ 
ποιεῖν αὐτόν. Κολόνταν μὲν οὖν φασιν ἀντὶ τού- 
των συγκαταπρησθῆναι τῇ οἰκίᾳ, Χθονίαν δὲ 
κομισθεῖσαν ἐς Ἑρμιόνα ὑπὸ Δήμητρος Ἕρμιο- 

5 νεῦσι ποιῆσαι τὸ ἱερόν. Χθονία δ᾽ οὖν ἡ θεός τε 
αὐτὴ καλεῖται καὶ Χθόνια ἑορτὴν κατὰ ἔτος ἄγου- 
σιν wpa θέρους, ἄγουσι δὲ οὕτως. ἡγοῦνται μὲν 
αὐτοῖς τῆς πομπῆς οἵ τε ἱερεῖς τῶν θεῶν καὶ ὅσοι 
τὰς ἐπετείους ἀρχὰς ἔχουσιν, ἕπονται δὲ καὶ 
γυναῖκες καὶ ἄνδρες. τοῖς δὲ καὶ παισὶν ἔτι οὖσι 
καθέστηκεν ἤδη τὴν θεὸν τιμᾶν τῇ πομπῇ' οὗτοι 
λευκὴν ἐσθῆτα καὶ ἐπὶ ταῖς κεφαλαῖς ἔχουσι 

στεφάνους. πλέκονται δὲ οἱ στέφανοί σφισιν ἐκ 
τοῦ ἄνθους ὃ καλοῦσιν οἱ ταύτῃ κοσμοσάνδαλον, 

440 ; 

CORINTH, xxxv. 2-5 

(oroi) of their land, and for this reason paid honours 
to Apollo Horius. The sanctuary of Fortune is said 
by the Hermionians to be the newest in their city ; 
a colossus of Parian marble stands there. Of their 
wells, one is very old; nobody can see the water 
flowing into it, but it would never run dry, even 
if everybody descended and drew water from it. 
Another well they made in our own day, and the 
name of the place from which the water flows into 
it is Leimon (Meadow). 

The object most worthy of mention is a sanctuary 
of Demeter on Pron. This sanctuary is said by the 
Hermionians to have been founded by Clymenus, 
son of Phoroneus, and Chthonia, sister of Clymenus. 
But the Argive account is that when Demeter 
came to Argolis, while Atheras and Mysius afforded 
hospitality to the goddess, Colontas neither received 
her into his home nor paid her any other mark 
of respect. His daughter Chthonia disapproved 
of this conduct. They say that Colontas was 
punished by being burnt up along with his house, 
while Chthonia was brought to Hermion by Demeter, 
and made the sanctuary for the Hermionians. At 
any rate, the goddess herself is called Chthonia, 
and Chthonia is the name of the festival they hold 
in the summer of every year. The manner of it 
is this. The procession is headed by the priests 
of the gods and by all those who hold the annual 
magistracies ; these are followed by both men and 
women. It is now a custom that some who are 
still children should honour the goddess in the pro- 
cession. These are dressed in white, and wear 
wreaths upon their heads. Their wreaths are woven 
of the flower called by the natives cosmosandalon, 

441 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὑάκινθον ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ὅ ὄντα καὶ μεγέθει καὶ χρόᾳ" 
ἔπεστι δέ οἱ καὶ τὰ ἐπὶ τῷ θρήνῳ γράμματα. 
τοῖς δὲ τὴν πομπὴν πέμπουσιν ἕπονται τελείαν 
ἐξ ἀγέλης βοῦν ἄγοντες διειλημμένην δεσμοῖς τε 
καὶ ὑβρίξουσαν ἔτι ὑπὸ ἀγριότητος. ἐλάσαντες 
δὲ πρὸς τὸν ναὸν οἱ μὲν ἔσω φέρεσθαι τὴν βοῦν ἐ ἐς 
τὸ ἱερὸν ἀνῆκαν ἐκ τῶν δεσμῶν, ἕ ἕτεροι δὲ ἀναπε- 
πταμένας ἔχοντες τέως τὰς θύρας, ἐπειδὰν τὴν 
βοῦν ἴδωσιν ἐντὸς τοῦ ναοῦ, προσέθεσαν τὰς 
θύρας. τέσσαρες δὲ ἔνδον ὑπολειπόμεναι γρᾶες, 
αὗται τὴν. βοῦν εἰσιν αἱ κατεργαξόμεναι: δρεπάνῳ 
γὰρ ἥτις ἂν ν τύχῃ τὴν φάρυγγα ú ὑπέτεμε τῆς βοός. 
μετὰ δὲ αἱ θύραι τε ἠνοίχθησαν καὶ προσελαύ- 
νουσιν οἷς ἐ ἐπιτέτακται βοῦν δευτέραν καὶ τρίτην 
ἐπὶ ταύτῃ καὶ ἄλλην τετάρτην. κατεργάξονταί 
τε δὴ πάσας κατὰ ταὐτὰ αἱ ypaes καὶ τόδε ἄλλο 
πρόσκειται τῇ θυσίᾳ θαῦμα" ἐφ᾽ ἥντινα γὰρ ἂν 
πέσῃ τῶν πλευρῶν ἡ πρώτη βοῦς, ἀνάγκη πεσεῖν 
καὶ πάσας. θυσία μὲν δρᾶται τοῖς Ἑρμιονεῦσι 
τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον: πρὸ δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ γυναικῶν 
ἱερασαμένων τῇ Δήμητρι εἰκόνες ἑστήκασιν οὐ 
πολλαί, καὶ παρελθόντι ἔ ἔσω θρόνοι τέ εἰσιν, ἐφ᾽ 
ὧν αἱ γρᾶες ἀναμένουσιν ἐσελαθῆναι, καθ᾽ ἑκάστην 
τῶν βοῶν, καὶ ἀγάλματα οὐκ ἄγαν ἀρχαῖα 
᾿Αθηνᾶ καὶ Δημήτηρ. αὐτὸ δὲ ὃ σέβουσιν ἐπὶ 
πλέον ἡ τἄλλα, ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ εἶδον, οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ 
ἀνὴρ ἄλλος οὔτε ξένος οὔτε “Ἑρμιονέων αὐτῶν: 
μόναι δὲ ὁ ὁποῖόν τί ἐστιν αἱ γρᾶες ἴστωσαν. 

Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ναός" εὐκόνες δὲ περὶ πάντα 
ἑστήκασιν αὐτόν. οὗτος ὁ ναός ἐστιν ἀπαντικρὺ 
τοῦ τῆς Χθονίας, καλεῖται δὲ Κλυμένου, καὶ τῷ 

442 

CORINTH, xxxv. ς-ο 

which, from its size and colour, seems to me to be 
an iris; it even has inscribed upon it the same 
letters of mourning.! Those who form the procession 
are followed by men leading from the herd a full- 
grown cow, fastened with ropes, and still untamed 
and frisky. Having driven the cow to the temple, 
some loose her from the ropes that she may rush 
into the sanctuary, others, who hitherto have been 
holding the doors open, when they see the cow 
within the temple, close to the doors. Four old 
women, left behind inside, are they who dispatch 
the cow. Whichever gets the chance cuts the 
throat of the cow with a sickle. Afterwards the 
doors are opened, and those who are appointed 
drive up a second cow, and a third after that, and 
yet a fourth. All are dispatched in the same way 
by the old women, and the sacrifice has yet another 
strange feature. On whichever of her sides the 
first cow falls, all the others must fall on the same. 
Such is the manner in which the sacrifice is per- 
formed by the Hermionians. Before the temple 
stand a few statues of the women who have served 
Demeter as her priestess, and on passing inside you 
see seats on which the old women wait for the cows 
to be driven in one by one, and images, of no great 
age, of Athena and Demeter. But the thing itself 
that they worship more than all else, I never saw, 
nor yet has any other man, whether stranger or 
Hermionian. The old women may keep their know- 
ledge of its nature to themselves. 

There is also another temple, all round which 
stand statues. This temple is right opposite that of 
Chthonia, and is called that of Clymenus, and they 

1 The letters Al, an exclamation of woe supposed to be 
inscribed on the flower. 443 

10 

11 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

Κλυμένῳ θύουσιν ἐνταῦθα. Κλύμενον. δὲ οὐκ 
ἄνδρα ᾿Αργεῖον ἐλθεῖν ἔ ἔγωγε ἐς Ἑρμιόνα ἡ ἡγοῦμαι, 
τοῦ θεοῦ δέ ἐστιν ἐπίκλησις, ὄντινα ἔχει λόγος 
βασιλέα ὑπὸ γῆν εἶναι. παρὰ μὲν δὴ τοῦτόν 
ἐστιν ἄλλος ναὸς καὶ ἄγαλμα Άρεως, τοῦ δὲ τῆς 
Χθονίας ἐστὶν ἱεροῦ στοὰ κατὰ τὴν δεξιάν, ᾿Ηχοῦς 
ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων καλουμένη" φθεγξαμένῳ δὲ 
ἀνδρὶ τὰ ὀλίγιστα. ἐς τρὶς ἀντιβοῆσαι πέφυκεν. 
ὄπισθεν δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ τῆς Χθονίας χωρία ἐστὶν ἃ 
καλοῦσιν Ἑρμιονεῖς τὸ μὲν Κλυμένου, τὸ δὲ 
Πλούτωνος, τὸ τρίτον δὲ αὐτῶν λίμνην ᾿Αχερου- 
σίαν. περιείργεται μὲν δὴ πάντα θριγκοῖς λίθων, 
ἐν δὲ τῷ τοῦ Κλυμένου καὶ γῆς χᾶσμα: διὰ 
τούτου δὲ Ἡρακλῆς ἀνῆγε τοῦ "Αιδου τὸν κύνα 
κατὰ τὰ λεγόμενα ὑπὸ "Ἑρμιονέων. πρὸς δὲ τῇ 
πύλη, καθ ἣν ὁδὸς εὐθεῖά ἐστιν ἄγουσα ἐπὶ 
Μάσητα, Εἰλειθυίας ἐστὶν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους 
ἱερόν. ἄλλως μὲν δὴ κατὰ ἡμέραν ἑκάστην καὶ 
θυσίαις καὶ θυμιάμασι μεγάλως τὴν θεὸν iùd- 
σκονται καὶ ἀναθήματα δίδοται πλεῖστα τῇ 
Εἰλειθυίᾳ: τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα οὐδενὶ πλὴν εἰ μὴ ἄρα 
ταῖς ἱερείαις ἔ ἔστιν ἰδεῖν. 

XXXVI. Kara δὲ τὴν ἐπὶ Μάσητα εὐθεῖαν 
προελθοῦσιν ἑ ἑπτά που σταδίους καὶ ἐς ἀριστερὰν 
ἐκτραπεῖσιν, ἐς ᾿Αλίκην ἐστὶν ὀδός. ý δὲ “Αλίκη 
τὰ μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐστιν ἔρημος, ᾠκεῖτο δὲ καὶ 
αὕτη ποτέ, καὶ ᾿Αλικῶν λόγος ἐν στήλαις ἐστὶ 
ταῖς Ἐπιδαυρίων ai τοῦ ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ τὰ ἰ ἰάματα 
ἐγγεγραμμένα ἔχουσιν: ἄλλο δὲ σύγγραμμα οὐ- 
δὲν οἶδα .ἀξιόχρεων, ἔνθα ἢ πόλεως Αλίκης ὴ 
ἀνδρῶν ἐστιν Αλικῶν μνήμη. ἔστι δ᾽ οὖν ὁδὸς 
καὶ ἐς ταύτην, τοῦ τε Πρωνὸς μέση καὶ ὄρους 

444 

CORINTH, xxxv. Ο-ΧΧΧΥΙ. 1 

sacrifice to Clymenus here. I do not believe that 
Clymenus was an Argive who came to Hermion ; 
<c Clymenus” is the surname of the god, whoever 
legend says is king in the underworld. Beside this 
temple is another; it is of Ares, and has an image 
of the god; while to the right of the sanctuary of 
Chthonia is a portico, called by the natives the 
Portico of Echo. It is such that if a man speaks it 
reverberates at least three times. Behind the 
temple of Chthonia are three places which the 
Hermionians call that of Clymenus, that of Pluto, 
and the Acherusian Lake. All are surrounded by 
fences of stones, while in the place of Clymenus 
there is also a chasm in the earth. Through this, 
according to the legend of the MHermionians, 
Heracles brought up the Hound of Hell. At the 
gate through which there is a straight road leading 
to Mases, there is a sanctuary of Eileithyia within 
the wall. Every day, both with sacrifices and with 
incense, they magnificently propitiate the goddess, 
and, moreover, there is a vast number of votive gifts 
offered to Eileithyia. But the image no one may 
see, except, perhaps, the priestesses. 

XXXVI. Proceeding about seven stades along the 
straight road to Mases, you reach, on turning to the 
left, a road to Halice. At the present day Halice 
is deserted, but once it, too, had inhabitants, and 
there is mention made of citizens of Halice on the 
Epidaurian slabs on which are inscribed the cures of 
Asclepius. I know, however, no other authentic 
document in which mention is made either of the 
city Halice or of its citizens. Well, to this city also 
there is a road, which lies midway between Pron 

445 

i>. Ar. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἑτέρου Θόρνακος καλουμένου τὸ ἀρχαῖον" ἀπὸ δὲ 
τῆς Διὸς ἐς κόκκυγα τὸν ὄρνιθα ἀλλαγῆς λεγο- 
μένης ἐνταῦθα γενέσθαι μετονομασθῆναι τὸ ὄρος 

9 φασίν. ἱερὰ δὲ καὶ ἐς τόδε ἐπὶ ἄκρων τῶν ὀρῶν, 
ἐπὶ μὲν τῷ Κοκκυγίῳ Διός, ἐν δὲ τῷ Πρωνί ἐστιν 
Ἥρας: καὶ τοῦ γε Κοκκυγίου πρὸς τοῖς πέρασι 
ναός ἐστι, θύραι δὲ οὐκ ἐφεστήκασιν οὐδὲ ὄροφον 
εἶχεν. οὐδέ οἵ τι ἐνῆν ἄγαλμα" εἶναι δὲ ἐλέγετο 

ὁ ναὸς ᾿Απόλλωνος. παρὰ. δὲ αὐτὸν ὁδός ἐστιν 
ἐπὶ Μάσητα τοῖς ἐκτραπεῖσιν ἐκ τῆς εὐθείας. 
Μάσητι δὲ οὔσῃ πόλει τὸ ἀρχαῖον, καθὰ καὶ 
΄ Όμηρος ἐ ἐν ᾿Αργείων καταλόγῳ πεποίηκεν, ἐπινείῳ 

3 xaf’ ἡμᾶς ἐχρῶντο Ἑρμιονεῖς. ἀπὸ Μάσητος δὲ 
ὁδὸς ἐν δεξιά ἐστιν ἐπὶ ἄκραν καλουμένην Στρου- 
θοῦντα. στάδιοι δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ἄκρας ταύτης κατὰ 
τῶν ὀρῶν τὰς κορυφὰς πεντήκοντά εἰσι καὶ 
διακόσιοι ἐς Φιλανόριόν τε καλούμενον καὶ ἐπὶ 
Βολεούς: οἱ δὲ Βολεοὶ οὗτοι λίθων εἰσὶ σωροὶ 
λογάδων. χωρίον δὲ ἕτερον, ὃ Διδύμους ὀνομά- 
ζουσι, στάδια εἴκοσιν αὐτόθεν ἀφέστηκεν' ἐν- 
ταῦθα ἔ ἔστι μὲν ἱερὸν ᾿Απόλλωνος, ἔστι δὲ Ποσει- 
δῶνος, ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτοῖς Δήμητρος, ἀγάλματα δὲ ὀρθὰ 
λίθου λευκοῦ. 

4. Τὸ δὲ ἐντεῦθέν ἐστιν ᾿Αργείων ἥ ποτε ᾿Ασιναία 
καλουμένη, καὶ ᾿Ασίνης ἐστὶν ἐρείπια ἐπὶ Oa- 
λάσσῃ. Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως 
Νικάνδρου τοῦ Χαρίλλου τοῦ Πολυδέκτου τοῦ 
Εὐνόμου τοῦ Πρντάνιδος τοῦ Βὐρυπῶντος ἐ ἐς τὴν 
᾿Αργολίδα ἐσβαλόντων στρατιᾷ συνεσέβαλὀν 
σφισιν οἱ ᾿Ασιναῖοι, καὶ ἐδήωσαν σὺν ἐκείνοις 
τῶν ᾿Αργείων τὴν γῆν. ὡς δὲ ὁ στόλος τῶν 
Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπῆλθεν οἴκαδε, στρατεύουσιν 

446 

CORINTH, xxxvi. τ--4 

and another mountain, called in old days Thornax ; 
but they say that the name was changed because, 
according to legend, it was here that the trans- 
formation of Zeus into a cuckoo took place. Even 
to the present day there are sanctuaries on the 
tops of the mountains: on Mount Cuckoo one of 
Zeus, on Pron one of Hera. At the foot of Mount 
Cuckoo is a temple, but there are no doors standing, 
and I found it without a roof or an image inside. 
The temple was said to be Apollo's. By the side of 
it runs a road to Mases for those who have turned 
aside from the straight road. Mases was in old 
days a city, even as Homer! represents it in the 
catalogue of the Argives, but in my time the Her- 
mionians were using it as a seaport. From Mases 
there is a road on the right to a headland called 
Struthus (Sparrow Peak). From this headland by 
way of the summits of the mountains the distance 
to the place called Philanorium and to the Boleoz is 
two hundred and fifty stades. These Boleo: are 
heaps of unhewn stones. Another place, called 
Twins, is twenty stades distant from here. There 
is here a sanctuary of Apollo, a sanctuary of Poseidon, 
and in addition one of Demeter. The images are of 
white marble, and are upright. 
Next comes a district, belonging to the Argives, 
that once was called Asinaea, and by the sea are 
ruins of Asine. When the Lacedaemonians and 
their king Nicander, son of Charillus, son of Poly- 
dectes, son of Eunomus, son of Prytanis, son of Eury- 
pon, invaded Argolis with an army, the Asinaeans 
joined in the invasion, and with them ravaged 
the land of the Argives. When the Lacedae- 
monian expedition departed home, the Argives 
eee 
Iliad ii. 562. 447 

- - 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίνην οἱ ᾿Αργεῖοι καὶ ὁ Βασιλεὺς αὐτῶν 
Ἔρατος. καὶ χρόνον μέν τίνα ἀπὸ τοῦ τεύχους 
ἠμύναντο οἱ ᾿Ασιναῖοι καὶ ἀποκτείνουσιν ἄλλους 
τε καὶ Λυσίστρατον ἐν τοῖς δοκιμωτάτοις ὄντα 
᾿Αργείων" ἁλισκομένου δὲ τοῦ τείχους οὗτοι μὲν 
γυναῖκας ἐς τὰ πλοῖα ἐνθέμενοι καὶ παῖδας ἐκλεί- 
πουσι τὴν. αὑτῶν, ᾿Αργεῖοι δὲ ἐς ἔδαφος κατα- 
βαλόντες τὴν ᾿Ασίνην καὶ τὴν γῆν προσορισάµενοι 
τῇ σφετέρᾳ Πυθαέως τε ᾿Απόλλωνος ὑπελίποντο 
τὸ ἱερὸν --- καὶ νῦν ἔτι δῆλόν ἐστι --- καὶ τὸν 
Λυσίστρατον πρὸς αὐτῷ θάπτουσιν. 

᾿Απέχει δὲ ᾿Αργείων τῆς πόλεως τεσσαράκοντα 
καὶ οὐ πλείω στάδια ἡ κατὰ Λέρναν θάλασσα. 
κατιόντων δὲ ἐς Λέρναν πρῶτον μὲν καθ ὁδόν 
ἐστιν ὁ ᾿Ερασῖνος, ἐκδίδωσι δὲ ἐς τὸν Φρίξον, ὁ 
Φρίξος δὲ ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν τὴν μεταξὺ Τημενίον 
καὶ Λέρνης. ἀπὸ δὲ ᾿Ἐρασίνου τραπεῖσιν ἐς 
ἀριστερὰ σταδίους ὅ ὅσον ὀκτώ, Διοσκούρων ἱερόν 
ἐστιν ᾿Ανάκτων' πεποίηται δέ σφισι κατὰ ταὐτὰ 
καὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει τὰ ξόανα. ἀναστρέψας δὲ ἐς 
τὴν εὐθεῖαν τόν τε ᾿Ερασῖνον διαβήσῃ καὶ ἐπὶ 
τὸν Χείμαρρον ποταμὸν ἀφίξῃ. πλησίον δὲ 
αὐτοῦ περίβολός ἐστι λίθων, καὶ τὸν Πλούτωνα 
ἁρπάσαντα ὡς λέγεται Κόρην τὴν Δήμητρος 
καταβῆναι ταύτῃ φασὶν ἐς τὴν ὑπόγεων νομιξο- 
μένην ἀρχήν. ἡ δὲ .Λέρνα ἐστίν, ὡς καὶ τὰ 
πρότερα ἔχει μοι τοῦ. λόγου, πρὸς θαλάσση, 
καὶ τελετὴν Λερναίᾳ ἄγουσιν ἐνταῦθα Δήμητρι. 

Ἔστι δὲ ἄλσος ἱερὸν ἀρχόμενον. μὲν ἀπὸ ὄρους 
ὃ καλοῦσι Ποντῖνον, τὸ δὲ .ὄρος ὁ Ποντῖνος οὐκ 
ἐᾷ τὸ ὕδωρ ἀπορρεῖν τὸ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ ἐς 
αὑτὸ καταδέχεται" pet δὲ καὶ ποταμὸς ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 

448 

CORINTH, xxxvi. 4-8 

under their king Eratus attacked Asine. For a time 
the Asinaeans defended themselves from their wall, 
and killed among others Lysistratus, one of the 
most notable men of Argos. But when the wall 
was lost, the citizens put their wives and children 
on board their vessels and abandoned their own 
country ; the Argives, while levelling Asine to the 
ground and annexing its territory to their own, left 
the sanctuary of Apollo Pythaeus, which is still 
visible, and by it they buried Lysistratus. 

Distant from Argos forty stades and no more is 
the sea at Lerna. On the way down to Lerna the 
first thing on the road is the Erasinus, which 
empties itself into the Phrixus, and the Phrixus 
into the sea between Temenium and Lerna. About 
eight stades to the left from the Erasinus is a 
sanctuary of the Lords Dioscuri (Sons of Zeus). 
Their wooden images have been made similar to 
those in the city. On returning to the straight 
road, you will cross the Erasinus and reach the river 
Cheimarrus (Winter-torrent). Near it is a circuit of 
stones, and they say that Pluto, after carrying off, 
according to the story, Core, the daughter of 
Demeter, descended here to his fabled kingdom 
underground. Lerna is, I have already stated, by 
the sea, and here they celebrate mysteries in honour 
of Lernaean Demeter. 

There is a sacred grove beginning on the moun- 
tain they call Pontinus. Now Mount Pontinus does 
not let the rain-water flow away, but absorbs 
it into itself. From it flows a river, also called 

449 
VOI. 1. GG 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE | 

Ποντῖνος. καὶ ἐπὶ κορυφῇ. τοῦ ὄρους ἱερόν τε 
᾿Αθηνᾶς. Σαΐτιδος, ἐρείπια ἔτι μόνα, καὶ θεμέ- 
λια οἰκίας ἐστὶν Ἱππομέδοντος, ὃς Πολυνείκει 
τῷ Οἱδίποδος τιµωρήσων ἦλθεν ἐς «Θήβας. 
XXXVII. ἀπὸ δὴ τοῦ ὄρους τούτου τὸ ἄλσος 
ἀρχόμενον πλατάνων τὸ πολὺ ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν 
καθήκει. ὅροι δὲ αὐτοῦ τῇ μὲν ποταμὸς ὁ Ποντῖνος, 
τῇ δὲ ἕτερος ποταμός: ᾿Αμυμώνη δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς 
Δαναοῦ θυγατρὸς ὄνομα τῷ ποταμῷ. ἐντὸς δὲ 
τοῦ ἄλσους ἀγάλματα ἔστι μὲν Δήμητρος Προσύ- 
μνης, ἔστι δὲ Διονύσου, καὶ Δήμητρος καθήμενον 
ἄγαλμα οὐ μέγα: ταῦτα μὲν λίθου πεποιημένα, 
ἑτέρωθι δ᾽ ἐν ναῷ Διόνυσος Σαώτης καθήμενον 
ξόανον καὶ ᾿Αφροδίτης ἄγαλμα ἐπὶ θαλάσση 
λίθου: ἀναθεῖναι δὲ αὐτὸ τὰς θυγατέρας λέγουσι 
τὰς Δαναοῦ, Δαναὸν δὲ αὐτὸν τὸ ἱερὸν ἐπὶ Iov- 
τίνῳ ποιῆσαι τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς. καταστήσασθαι δὲ 
τῶν Λερναίων τὴν τελετὴν Φιλάμμωνά φασι. τὰ 
μὲν οὖν λεγόμενα ἐπὶ τοῖς δρωμένοις δῆλά ἐ ἐστιν 
οὐκ ὄντα ἀρχαῖα" ἃ δὲ ἤκουσα ἐπὶ τῇ καρδίᾳ 
γεγράφθαι τῇ πεποιηµένῃ τοῦ ὀρειχάλκου, οὐδὲ 
ταῦτα ὄντα Φιλάμμωνος ᾿Αρριφῶν εὗρε, τὸ μὲν 
ἀνέκαθεν Τρικωνιεὺς πῶν ἐν Αἰτωλίᾳ, τὰ δὲ ἐφ 
ἡμῶν Λυκίων τοῖς μάλιστα ὁμοίως δόκεμος, 
δεινὸς δὲ ἐξευρεῖν ἃ μή τις πρότερον εἶδε, καὶ δὴ 
καὶ ταῦτα φωράσας ἐπὶ τῷδε. τὰ ἔπη καὶ ὅσα 
οὐ μετὰ μέτρου μεμιγμένα ἦν τοῖς ἔπεσι, τὰ 
πάντα Δωριστὶ ἐπεποίητο' πρὶν δὲ Ἡρακλείδας 
κατελθεῖν ἐς Πελοπόννησον, τὴν αὐτὴν ἠφίεσαν 
᾿Αθηναίοις οἱ ᾿Αργεῖοι φωνήν" ἐπὶ δὲ Φιλάμμωνος 
οὐδὲ τὸ ὄνομα τῶν Δωριέων ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν ἐς ἅπαντας 
ἠκούετο Ελληνας. 

45ο 

CORINTH, χχχγι. 8-xxxvi. 3 

Pontinus. Upon the top of the mountain is a sanc- 
tuary of Athena Saitis, now merely a ruin; there 
are also the foundations of a house of Hippome-~ 
don, who went to Thebes to redress the wrongs 
of Polyneices, son of Oedipus. XXXVII. At this 
mountain begins the grove, which consists chiefly 
of plane trees, and reaches down to the sea. Its 
boundaries are, on the one side the river Pontinus, 
on the other side another river, called Amymone, 
after the daughter of Danaus. Within the grove 
are images of Demeter Prosymne and of Dionysus. 
Of Demeter there is a seated image of no great 
size. Both are of stone, but in another temple is a 
seated wooden image of Dionysus Saotes (Saviour), 
while by the sea is a stone image of Aphrodite. 
They say that the daughters of Danaus dedicated 
it, while Danaus himself made the sanctuary of 
Athena by the Pontinus. The mysteries of the 
Lernaeans were established, they say, by Philam- 
mon. Now the words which accompany the ritual 
are evidently of no antiquity; and the inscription 
also, which I have heard is written on the heart 
made of orichalcum, was shown not to be Philam- 
mon’s by Arriphon, an Aetolian of Triconium by 
descent, who now enjoys a reputation second to none 
among the Lycians; excellent at original research, 
he found the clue to this problem in the following 
way. The verses, and the prose interspersed among 
the verses, are all written in Doric. But before the 
return of the Heracleidae to the Peloponnesus the 
Argives spoke the same dialect as the Athenians, .. 
and in Philammon’s day I do not suppose that 
even the name Dorians was familiar to all Greek 
ears. 

GG 2 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

4 Ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ἀπέφαινεν οὕτως ἔχοντα, τῆς δὲ 
9 A A ν 
Αμυμώνης πέφυκεν ἐπὶ τῇ πηγῇ πλάτανος" ὑπὸ 
ταύτῃ τὴν ὕδραν τραφῆναι τῇ πλατάνῳ φασά». 
ἐγὼ δὲ τὸ θηρίον πείθομαι τοῦτο καὶ μεγέθει 
διενεγκεῖν ὑδρῶν ἄλλων καὶ τὸν ἰὸν οὕτω δή τι 
ε ~ - 
ειν ἀνίατον ὡς τὸν Ἡρακλέα ἀπὸ τῆς χολῆς | 
αὐτοῦ τὰς ἀκίδας φαρμακεῦσαι τῶν ὀιστῶν- 
κεφαλὴν δὲ εἶχεν ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν μίαν καὶ οὐ πλεί- 
ε 
ονας, Πείσανδρος δὲ ὁ Καμιρεύς, ἵνα τὸ θηρίον τε 
δοκοίη φοβερώτερον καὶ αὐτῷ γίνηται ἡ ποίησις 
9 ’ - 3 . , 4 
ἀξιόχρεως μᾶλλον, ἀντὶ τούτων τὰς κεφαλὰς 
5 ἐποίησε τῇ ὕδρα τὰς πολλάς. εἶδον δὲ καὶ πηγὴν 
9 J ΄ Ν AY > ld 
Αμφιαράου καλουμένην καὶ τὴν ᾽Αλκυονίαν 
> > A 
λίμνην, δι ἧς φασιν ᾿Αργεῖοι Διόνυσον ἐς τὸν 
"Αιδην ἐλθεῖν Σεμέλην ἀνάξοντα, τὴν δὲ ταύτη 
κάθοδον δεῖξαί οἱ Πόλυμνον. τῇ δὲ ᾿Αλκυονίᾳ 
/ a / > y ’ δέ 5 ν § 
πέρας τοῦ βάθους οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδέ τινα οἶδα ἄν- 
θρωπον ἐς τὸ τέρμα αὐτῆς οὐδεμιᾷ μηχανῇ καθι- 
κέσθαι δυνηθέντα, ὅπου καὶ Νέρων σταδίων  , 
πολλῶν κάλους ποιησάμενος καὶ συνάψας ἀλλή- 
λοις, ἀπαρτήσας δὲ καὶ μόλυβδον ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ 
» / 4 y 9 . - IQA e 
εἰ δή τι χρήσιμον ἄλλο ἐς τὴν πεῖραν, οὐδὲ οὗτος 
6 οὐδένα ἐξευρεῖν ἐδυνήθη ὅρον τοῦ βάθους. καὶ 
, ” ” « Φ - / e 907 
τόδε ἤκουσα ἄλλο' τὸ ὕδωρ τῆς λίμνης ὡς ἰδόντα 
/ A 
εἰκάσαι γαληνόν ἐστι καὶ ἠρεμαῖον, παρεχόμενον 
δὲ ὄψιν τοιαύτην διανήχεσθαι τολμήσαντα πάντα 
/ / o’ ν ε ` 
τινὰ καθέλκειν πέφυκε καὶ ἐς βυθὸν ὑπολαβὸν 
ἀπήνεγκε. περίοδος δὲ τῆς λίμνης ἐστὶν οὐ | 
/ 9 \ ο / / > \ \ a 
πολλή, ἀλλὰ ὅσον τε σταδίου τρίτον ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς 
εἶλεσιν αὐτῆς πόα καὶ σχοῖνοι πεφύκασι. τὰ 
δὲ ἐς αὐτὴν Διονύσῳ δρώμενα ἐν νυκτὶ κατὰ ἔτος 
ἕκαστον οὐχ ὅσιον ἐς ἅπαντας ἣν μοι γράψαι. 

452 

a. ee 

CORINTH, xxxvii. 4-6 

All this was proved in the demonstration. At 
the source of the Amymone grows a plane tree, 
beneath which, they say, the hydra (water-snake) 
grew. I am ready to believe that this beast was 
superior in size to other water-snakes, and that its 
poison had something in it so deadly that Heracles 
treated the points of his arrows with its gall. It 
had, however, in my opinion, one head, and not 
' several. It was Peisander? of Camirus who, in 
order that the beast might appear more frightful 
and his poetry might be more remarkable, repre- 
sented the hydra with its many heads. I saw also 
what is called the Spring of Amphiaraus and the 
Alcyonian Lake, through which the Argives say 
Dionysus went down to Hell to bring up Semele, 
adding that the descent here was shown him by 
Polymnus. There is no limit to the depth of the 
Alcyonian Lake, and I know of nobody who by any 
contrivance has been able to reach the bottom of it; 
since not even Nero, who had ropes made several 
stades long and fastened them together, tying lead to 
them, and omitting nothing that might help his ex- 
periment, was able to discover any limit to its depth. 
This, too, I heard. The water of the lake is, to all 
appearance, calm and quiet ; but, although it is such 
to look at, every swimmer who ventures to cross it 
is dragged down, sucked into the depths, and swept 
away. The circumference of the lake is not great, 
being about one-third of a stade. Upon its banks 
grow grass and rushes. The nocturnal rites per- 
formed every year in honour of Dionysus I must not 
divulge to the world at large. 

1 Peisander wrote a poem on the labours of Heracles. His 
date is uncertain, but perhaps he flourished about 645 Ε.Ο. 

453 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

XXXVIII Ἐκ Λέρνης δὲ ἰοῦσιν és Τημένιος--- 
τὸ δὲ Ῥημένιόν ἐστιν ᾿Αργείων, ὠνομάσθη. δὲ ἀπὸ 
Τημένου τοῦ ᾿Αριστομάχαυ" καταλαβὼν γὰρ καὶ 
ἐχυρωσάμενος τὸ χωρίον ἐπολέμει σὺν τοῖς Aw- 
ριεῦσιν αὐτόθεν τὸν πρὸς Τισαμενὸν καὶ ᾿Αχαιοὺς 
πόλεμογ-- ἐς τοῦτο οὖν τὸ Τημένιον ἰοῦσιν ὅ τε 
Φρίξος ποταμὸς ἐκδίδωσιν ἐς θάλασσαν καὶ 
Ποσειδῶνος ἱερὸν ἐν Τημενίῳ πεποίηται καὶ 
᾿Αφροδίτης ἕ ἕτερον καὶ , μνῆμά ἐστι Τημένου τιμὰς 
ἔχον παρὰ Δωριέων τῶν ἐν "A pyet. Τημενίου δὲ 
ἀπέ Εν Ναυπλία πεντήκοντα ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν σταδίους, 
τὰ μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔρημος, οἰκιστὴς δὲ ἐ ἐγένετο. αὐτῆς 
Ναύπλιος Ποσειδῶνος. λεγόμενος, καὶ ᾿Αμυμώνης 
εἶναι.. λείπεται δὲ καὶ τειχῶν. ἔτι ἐρείπια, καὺ 
Ποσειδῶνος i ἱερὸν καὶ λιμένες εἰσὶν ἐν Ναυπλίᾳ 
καὶ πηγὴ Κάναθος καλουμένη" ἐνταῦθα. τὴν 
"Ἡραν φασὶν ᾿Αργεῖοι κατὰ ἔτος λουμένην map- 
θένον γίνεσθαι. οὗτος μὲν δή σφισιν ἐκ τελετῆς, 
ἣν ἄγουσι τῇ “Hpa, λόγος τῶν ἀπορρήτων ἐστίν" 
τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν Ναυπλίᾳ λεγόμενα ἐς τὸν 
ὄνον, ὡς ἐπιφαγὼν ἀμπέλου κλῆμα ἀφθονώτερον 
ἐς τὸ μέλλον ἀπέφηνε τὸν καρπὀν- -καὶ ὄνος 
σφίσιν ἐν πέτρᾳ πεποιημένας διὰ, τοῦτό ἐστιν 
ἅτε ἀμπέλων διδάξας τομήν ---, παρίημι οὐκ 
ἀξιόλογα ἡ ἡγούμενος. 

Ἔστι δὲ ἐκ Λέρνης καὶ ἑτέρα. παρ αὐτὴν ὁδὸς 
τὴν θάλασσαν ἐπὶ χωρίον ὃ. Εενέσιον ὀνομάξουσι- 
πρὸς θαλάσσῃ δὲ τοῦ Γενεσίου Ἡοσειδῶνος i ἱερόν 
ἐστιν οὐ μέγα. τούτου δ᾽ ἔχεται χωρίον ἄλλο 
᾿Απόβαθμοι: γῆς δὲ ἐνταῦθα, πρῶτον τῆς ᾿Αρ- 
γολίδος Δαναὸν σὺν ταῖς παισὶν ἀποβῆναι λέγου- 
σιν. ἐντεῦθεν διελθοῦσιν ᾿Ανιγραῖα καλούμενα 

454 

CORINTH, xxxvur. 1-4 

XXXVIII. Temenium is in Argive territory, and. 

was named after Temenus, the son of Aristomachus. 
For, having seized and strengthened the position, he 
waged therefrom with the Dorians the war against 
Tisamenus and the Achaeans. On the way to 
Temenium from Lerna the river Phrixus empties 
itself into the sea, and in Femenium is built a 
sanctuary of Poseidon, as well as one of Aphrodite ; 
there is also the tomb of Temenus, which is wor- 
shipped by the Dorians in Argos. Fifty stades, I 
conjecture, from Temenium is Nauplia, which at 
the present day is uninhabited; its founder was 
Nauplius, reputed to be a son of Poseidon and 
Amymone. Of the walls, ἴσο, ruins. still remain; 
and in Nauplia are a sanctuary of Poseidon, har- 
bours, and a spring called Canathus. Here, say the 
Argives, Hera bathes every year and. recovers her 
maidenhood. This is one of the sayings told as a 
holy secret at the mysteries which they celebrate in 
honour of Hera. The story told by the people in 
Nauplia about the ass, how by nibbling down the 
shoots of a vine he caused a more plenteous crop 
of grapes in the future, and how for this reason 
they have carved an ass on a rock, because he 
taught the pruning of vines—al] this I pass over as 
trivial. 

From Lerna there is also another road, which 
skirts the sea and leads to a place called Genesium. 
By the sea is a small sanctuary of Poseidon Genesius. 
Next to this is another place, ealled Apobathmi 
(Steps). The story is that this is. the first place in 
Argolis where Danaus landed with his daughters. 
From here we pass through what is called Anigraea, 

455 

ο... 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE 

ὁδὸν καὶ στενὴν καὶ ἄλλως δύσβατον, ἔστιν ἐν 
ἀριστερᾷ μὲν καθήκουσα ἐπὶ θάλασσαν καὶ 
δένδρα --- ἐλαίας μάλιστα — ἀγαθὴ τρέφειν γῆ, 
ἰόντι δὲ ἄνω πρὸς τὴν ἤπειρον ἀπ’ αὐτῆς χωρίον 
ἐστίν, το δὴ, ἐμαχέσαντο ὑπὲρ τῆς γῆς ταύτης 
λογάδες ᾿Αργείων τριακόσιοι πρὸς ἄνδρας. Λακε- 
δαιμονίων ἀριθμόν τε ἴσους καὶ ἐπιλέκτους ὁ ὁμοίως. 
ἀποθανόντων δὲ ἁπάντων πλὴν ἑνὸς Σπαρτιάτου 
καὶ δυοῖν ᾿Αργείων, τοῖς μὲν ἀποθανοῦσιν ἐχώ- 
σθησαν ἐνταῦθα οἱ τάφοι, τὴν χώραν δὲ οἱ Λακε- 
δαιμόνιοι γενομένου πανδημεί σφισιν ἀγῶνος 
πρὸς ᾿Αργείους κρατήσαντες | βεβαίως αὐτοί τε 
παραυτίκα ἐκαρποῦντο καὶ ὕστερον Αἰγινήταις 
ἔδοσαν ἐκπεσοῦσιν ὑπὸ ᾿Αθηναίων ἐ ἐκ τῆς νήσου. 
τὰ δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ τὴν Θυρεᾶτιν ἐνέμοντο ᾿Αργεῖοι" 
φασὶ δὲ ἀνασώσασθαι δίκῃ νικήσαντες. amò δὲ 
τῶν πολυανδρίων i ἰόντι ᾿Αθήνη τέ ἐστιν, ἣν Αὐγι- 
νῆταί ποτε ῴκησαν, καὶ ἑτέρα κώμη Nopis, τρίτη 
δὲ Eva μεγίστη τῶν κωμῶν" καὶ i ἱερὸν τοῦ Πολε- 
μοκράτους ἐστὶν ἐν ταύτῃ. ὁ δὲ Πολεμοκράτης 
ἐστὶ καὶ οὗτος Μαχάονος υἱός, ἀδελφὸς δὲ ᾿Αλε- 
ξάνορος, καὶ ἰᾶται τοὺς ταύτῃ καὶ TIAS παρὰ τῶν 
προσοίκων ἔχει. ἀνατείνει δὲ ὑπὲρ τὰς κώμας 
ὄρος Πάρνων, καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων è ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῦ πρὸς 
᾿Αργείους ὅροι καὶ Τεγεάτας εἰσίν" ἑστήκασι δὲ 
ἐπὶ τοῦς ὅροις Ἑρμαῖ λίθου, καὶ τοῦ χωρίου τὸ 
ὄνομά ἐστιν aT αὐτῶν. ποταμὸς δὲ καλούμενος 
Τάναος---εἷς γὰρ δὴ. οὗτος ἐκ τοῦ Ἡάρνωνος 
κάτεισι---ῥέων διὰ τῆς ᾿Αργείας ἐκδίδωσιν ἐς τὸν 
Θυρεάτην κόλπον. 

456 

σα 

CORINTH, xxxvii. 4-7 

along a narrow and difficult road, until we reach a 
tract on the left which stretches down to the sea; 
it is fertile in trees, especially the olive. As you 
go up inland from this is a place where three 
hundred picked Argives fought for this land with 648 x.c. 
an equal number of specially chosen Lacedaemonian 
warriors. All were killed except one Spartan and 
two Argives, and here were raised the graves for 
the dead. But the Lacedaemonians, having fought 
against the Argives with all their forces, won a 
decisive victory; at first they themselves enjoyed 
the fruits of the land, but afterwards they assigned 
it to the Aeginetans, when they were expelled from 431 2.0, 
their island by the Athenians. In my time Thyreatis 
was inhabited by the Argives, who say that they 
recovered it by the award of an arbitration. As you 388 Ρ.ο, 
go from these common graves you come to Athene, 
where Aeginetans once made their home, another 
village Neris, and a third Eua, the largest of the 
villages, in which there is a sanctuary of Polemo- 
crates. This Polemocrates is one of the sons of 
Machaon, and the brother of Alexanor; he cures 
the people of the district, and receives honours 
from the neighbours. Above the villages extends 
Mount Parnon, on which the Lacedaemonian border 
meets the borders of the Argives and Tegeatae. 
On the borders stand stone figures of Hermes, from 
which the name of the place is derived. A river 
called Tanaus, which is the only one descending 
from Mount Parnon, flows through the Argive terri- 
tory and empties itself into the Gulf of Thyrea. 

457 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
RICHARD CLAY AND Sons, LIMITED, 
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMPORD STREET, 8.8. I, 
AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY. 

VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED. 

Latin Authors. 

APULEIUS. The Golden Ass. (Metamorphoses.) Trans. by 
W. Adlington (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. 

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. 

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans. by H. J. Edwards. 

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; and PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. 
Trans. by J. W. Mackail. (3rd Impression.) 

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. 

CICERO: DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. 

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. 
Winstedt. Vols. I, II and III. (Vol. I. 2πα Impression.) 

CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. Watts 
(1631). 2 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 

HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Trans. by C. E. Bennett. 
(2nd Impression.) 

OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans. by Grant 
Showerman. 

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. 

PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCO- 
LOCYNTOSIS. Trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. (210 /m- 
pression.) 

PLAUTUS. Trans. by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I anc IT. 

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by 
W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 

PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. (22d Impression.) 

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans. by R. M. 
Gummere. 3 Vols. Vol. I. 

SENECA: TRAGEDIES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. 

SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; 
and AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA. Trans, by Maurice 
Hutton. 

TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (24 Zm- 
presston.) . 

VIRGIL. Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. 

Greek Authors. 

ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans. by S. Gaselee. 
APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. (20d Impression.) 

THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols. (2nd 
Impression.) 

APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace White. 4 Vols. 

DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley’s Translation revised by J. M. 
Edmonds; and PARTHENIUS. Trans. by S. Gaselee. 

DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. Cary. ο Vols. 
Vols. I to VI. 

EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. S. Way. 4 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 
GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans. by A. J. Brock. 
THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 5 Vols. 

THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, MOS- 
CHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. (2ad Impression.) 

HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn 
ite. 

JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. Vols. I and II. 
LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. 7 Vols. Vols. I and II. 

MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans. by C. R. Haines. 

PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA. 
Trans. by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 

PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. 

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, PHAE- 
DRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. (ολα Impression.) 

PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by B. Perrin. 11 Vols. 
Vols. I to VII. 

PROCOPIUS: HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing. 
7 Vols. Vols. I to ITI. 

QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. Trans. by A. 5. Way. 
SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (2nd Impression.) 

ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. Trans. by 
the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Trans. by Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. Vol. I. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans. by Sir Arthur 
Hort, Bart. 2 Vols. 

XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 2 Vols. 

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, anp SYM- 
POSIUM. Trans, by C. L. Brownson. 3 Vols, Vol. I. 

DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION. 

London a =» WILLIAM HEINEMANN. 
New Yorka «a G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS. 

Digitized by Google 

Digitized by Google 

ET 

μα... 
.Ξ 
-- 
r x 
eS 
o SS 
no Ss 
=Se 
Sc 
w >? 
ας 
Έτ 
ως 
SF 
Στ 
= 
=> 
ΞξῬ 
=> 
>= Ὁ 
l - κ 
ο” λα», 

| © MAY 3 0 η - -ega 

πο“: ἘΝ. nags 
MAY LG τν, 

με ΙΝ 
JUL 3 = pe WAR 

n 19 1968 

10 “ou 
ΠΕΝ 
Stanford University Library 

Stanford, California 

JUL -3 1976 
In order that others may use this book, 
please return it as soon as possible, but 
not later than the date due. 

JUN 39 1379 
AUG 8 - 1986
