Original from 

1 by NOX gle UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

. = I 

> a 

—— hee 
| jee 

. we 

‘<_ 

i 

iP 

0 

2 u mad 
~ = 

- <n 
Poa 

hin 
ar 
tt 

TH 

SOP) ee eT LATTE LTTE OEE AL PERE et eed el Ee eee 

ee 

Sree 
we ee 

cone 
= 

“pee VA 

TTT Le 

H . e 
| / 
, 
. 
\ 
. 
i} tl 
| 
\ 
L a 
ai! 2 al 

F / 
zt av? a 

1 i § 
= a 
a 

. 
ii ob J 
ae 

i TH Mn uit 

TTTNIMITYIT DEOL UOT 0a ; 
LEAAANA MONARY ALETbGhOAaabGEDANH henna eR boeesdspakPUDOALO Es Kad 4 bs baKKAMEsnbun obs bbtmatatunaad 

Se af Pu 
r a 

= < le or Tee 

Te nit 
a erg 
ai i. - 

| Feainal Ti ill 
Tr a eee Sa ese —— oe aie 
UIA BRST OF MICHIGAN i, 
7 Fr. | 

wi ae Le ee = 

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

ee re Original Fron 
Digitizea by Google UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

T HE volumes of the University of Michigan 
Studies are published by authority of the 
Executive Board of the Graduate School 

of the University of Michigan. A list 
of the volumes thus far published or ar- 
ranged foris given at the end of this volume. 

Tniversity of Michigan Studies 
HUMANISTIC SERIES 
VOLUME XVI 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

MEW YORK : BOSTON - CHICAGO + DALLAS 
ATLANTA * SAN FRANCISCO 

MACMILLAN & CO., Limrrep 
LONDON + BOMBAY + CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltn. 
TORONTO 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA~.... 

INTRODUCTION 

TO 

ARITHMETIC 

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 

BY 

MARTIN LUTHER D’OOGE 

WITH STUDIES IN GREEK ARITHMETIC 
BY 

FRANK EGLESTON ROBBINS 

AND 

LOUIS CHARLES KARPINSKI 

Neto Bork 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND COMPANY, Lro. 

1926 

Ail rights reserved 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

COPYRIGHT, 1926, 
By FRANCIS W. KELSEY. 

Set up and electrotyped. Published March, 1926. 

Norwooh Press 
J. 8. Cushing Co. — Berwick & Smith Co. 
Norwood, Mass., U.5.A. 

IN 
COMMEMORATION 
OF THE 
LONG AND INTIMATE FRIENDSHIP 
BETWEEN TWO KINDRED SPIRITS 
EDWARD WALDO PENDLETON 
MARTIN LUTHER D'OOGE 

: ™ _ Ongival from 
Digitiena by Google UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

PREFACE 

ProFessorR Martin Luther D’Ooge died suddenly on September 
12, 1915, leaving unfinished a work on the Introduction to Arithmetic 
by Nicomachus. His translation of the Greek text was complete, 
but the supporting studies had not been commenced. 

As soon as possible after his death, colleagues of Mr. D’Ooge in the 
University of Michigan took up the unfinished task, and their work 
combined with his appears in this volume. Mr. Karpinski contrib- 
uted Chapters I, III, IV and the greater part of Chapter X of Part 
I, together with the first section of Part III, Extensions of a Theorem 
of Nicomachus ; Mr. Robbins made the final revision of Mr. D’Ooge’s 
translation and prepared the rest of the volume. At first it was pro- 
posed to present a revised Greek text, but this proved to be imprac- 
ticable without too great delay. 

Sincere thanks are due to Mrs. Edward Waldo Pendleton, whose 
generous help made the publication of the volume possible. We are 
under much obligation also to our colleagues, who have rendered assis- 
tance on many points. A special mention of indebtedness should be 
made to the University Editor, Dr. Eugene S. McCartney, for his 
scholarly assistance in the preparation of the manuscript for the press. 

FRANK EGLESTON ROBBINS 
Louis CHARLES KARPINSKI 
ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN, 
September 1, 1925. 

7 - Original from 
Digitizer by Google UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

Stee k 
4-13-26 

CONTENTS 

PART I 
STUDIES IN GREEK MATHEMATICS 

THE SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NI- 
COMACHUS 

THE MATHEMATICAL CONTENT OF THE GREEK MATHEMATICA 
GREEK ARITHMETICAL NOTATION 

THE LIFE oF NICOMACHUS 

THE Works OF NICOMACHUS . 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS . 

NICOMACHUS’S PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS OF NICOMACHUS 

THE Successors OF NICOMACHUS . 

THe MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT OF THE INTRODUCTION TO 
ARITHMETIC . : ; 
THE LANGUAGE AND STYLE OF NICOMACHUS 

PART II 

OF NICOMACHUS OF GERASA, THE PYTHAGOREAN 

Boox I 
Boox II 

III. 

PART III 

SUPPLEMENTARY AIDS TO THE INTERPRETATION 
OF THE INTRODUCTION TO ARITHMETIC 

EXTENSIONS OF A THEOREM OF NICOMACHUS 

GLOSSARY OF GREEK TERMS . 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INDEX 

138 

146 

TRANSLATION OF THE INTRODUCTION TO ARITHMETIC ~ 

181 

230 

289 
291 
311 

313 

ee 2 Original fram 

PART I 

STUDIES IN GREEK MATHEMATICS 

tt i a “ Original from 
Digitizer bty GOogle UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

CHAPTER I 
THE SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 

ARITHMETIC is fundamentally associated by modern readers, par- 
ticularly by scientists and mathematicians, with the art of computa- 
tion. For the ancient Greeks after Pythagoras, however, arithmetic 
was primarily a philosophical study, having no necessary connection 
with practical affairs. Indeed the Greeks gave a separate name to the 
arithmetic of business, Aoytorixy ; of this division of the science no 
Greek treatise has been transmitted tous. In general the philosophers 
and mathematicians of Greece undoubtedly considered it beneath 
their dignity to treat of this branch, which probably formed a part of 
the elementary instruction of children. The evidence for the existence 
of treatises on the fundamental operations is very insecure and vague, 
resting upon a passage of Diogenes Laertius’! and a citation by 
Eutocius.” 

So far as the content of the logistic is concerned, our main source 
of information is the scholium’ on Plato’s Charmides, 163 £. This 
scholium is undoubtedly based on the lost work of Geminus, although 
it may be through the medium of Anatolius.* A passage in Proclus® 
which explicitly mentions Geminus touches analogous points. 

The scholium is as follows: ‘Logistic is the theory which deals with 
numerable objects and not with numbers; ® it does not, indeed, con- 
sider number in the proper sense of the term, but assumes 1 to be 
unity, and anything which can be numbered to be number (thus in 
place of the triad, it employs 3; in place of the decad, 10), and dis- 
cusses with these the theorems of arithmetic. 

1 Vitae Philosophorum, VIII. 12, where a certain Apollodorus is designated as d Aoyiorexds, 
which may mean, as Cantor thinks, that he was a Rechenmetster. 

2 In the Commentary on the Measurement of the Circle by Archimedes (in Heiberg, Archimedis 
Opera Omnia cum Commentariis Euctocti, Leipzig, 1881, vol. III, p. 302, line 4), he mentions the 
hovyiorexd of a certain Magnus or Magnes. 

7 Here quoted on the basis of the text given in C. F. Hermann’s edition of Plato (Leipzig, 
1907), vol. VI, p. 290. See also Hultsch, Heronis Alexandrint Geometricorum et Stereometricorum 
Reliquiae, Berlin, 1864, pp. 247-248. 

4 Tannery, La Géométrie Grecque, Paris, 1887, pp. 48-49. 

6 Proclus, In Primum Euclidis Elementorum Librum Commentari, pp. 38, 1I—42, 8 (ed. 
Friedlein). 

* Compare the similar distinction made by Aristotle. 

3 

4 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

“Tt treats, then, on the one hand, that which Archimedes called 
‘The Cattle Problem,’ and on the other hand, ‘melite’ and ‘phialite’ 
numbers, the one discussing vials (measures, containers) and the other 
flocks; and when dealing with other kinds of problems it has regard 
for the number of sensible bodies and makes its pronouncements as 
though it were for absolute objects. 

“Tt has for material all numerable objects, and as subdivisions the 
so-called Greek and Egyptian methods for multiplication and division, 
as well as the summation and decomposition of fractions, whereby it 
investigates the secrets lurking in the subject-matter of the problems 
by means of the procedure that employs triangles and polygons. 

“Tt has for its aim that which is useful in the relations of life and in 
business, although it seems to pronounce upon sensible objects as if 
they were absolute.”’ 

The philosophical arithmetic of the Greeks, aptOunrixy, of which 
the arithmetic of Nicomachus is a specimen, corresponds in a measure 
to our number theory; the subject was designed for mature students 
as a preparation for the study of philosophy, and was not at all in- 
tended for children. Arithmetica is, as the name indicates, the study 
of that which is implied in number. This branch of arithmetical 
science developed along two quite distinct lines. On the one hand 
we have the rigid, mathematical discussion of the properties of num- 
bers, involving the forms of proof and the rigor of the demonstrational 
geometry, which is the great contribution of Greece to science; on the 
other hand we have a mystical development, ascribing even magical 
powers and life-properties to numbers. This pseudo-science which 
employs the results, but not the demonstrations of the rigid science, is 
commonly termed arithmology.' Greek arithmetic must be con- 
sidered, then, from the point of view of the philosopher and theoretical 
mathematician, rather than from that of our elementary schools. 

Arithmetic was intimately connected by the early Greeks with both 
geometry and music. The treatise on arithmetic by Euclid, as found 
in the seventh, eighth, and ninth books of the Elements,’ is wholly 
from the geometrical standpoint. This point of view is reflected in 
many ways in later treatises, that of Nicomachus, for instance, which 
considered arithmetic as an independent science. The intimate con- 

1 See Chapter VII, pp. 90 ff., for a discussion of arithmology and of the share of Nicomachus 
. * Gir references to the Elements of Euclid will be to the English edition by Sir T, L. Heath, 
The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements, three volumes, Cambridge, 1908. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 5 

nection between arithmetic and music accounts, in some measure, 
for the complete and even tedious discussion of ratios in the Greek 
treatises on arithmetic. In consequence, our consideration of the 
origins of Greek arithmetic will necessarily touch incidentally not only 
the processes of computation of the Greeks, but also geometry, music, 
and even other sciences, as related to the sciences of the older civiliza- 
tions.’ 

For the sources of the early Greek arithmetical sciences we must 
look to Egypt and to Babylon, possibly even beyond to India and 
China. Evidence of the exchange of ideas between Greece and Egypt, 
and between Greece and Babylon, has accumulated so much in recent 
years as to show a degree of intimacy long unsuspected.’ In the early 
centuries of the Christian era, knowledge of Greek astronomy was 
carried to India; traces of reciprocal influence in ancient times are 
not wanting, although any detailed statement must await more ac- 
curate information of the historical development of Hindu learning. 
The sciences, biological, physical, and mathematical, as well as the 
fine arts and technical arts, are involved in the interchange of ideas 
between Orient and Occident, but our interest is centered upon the 
mathematical sciences. In this field the Oriental science served pri- 
marily as a directive force, determining the topics which for centuries 
occupied the attention of Greek mathematicians. 

In mathematics and astronomy the early traces of Oriental influence 
cover a wide range of ideas, touching at the lower point the simplest 
operations of computation and at the upper point the development of 
complicated astronomical theories. At the outset we may say that one 
extraordinary achievement in mathematics remains undisputedly 
Greek in its origin, namely, the development of logical, demonstrative 
geometry. Writers* who confound with the whole of science the 
systematization of the sciences achieved by the Greeks, together with 
this process of logical demonstration, entirely mistake the nature of 
science and the processes of its progress. Science is concerned with 
the problems involved in comprehending the universe in which we live. 
Science involves inevitably the knowledge of numbers and form, or 

1 For more complete discussion of arithmetic and logistic, see Heath, A History of Greek 
Mathematics (Oxford, 1921), vol. I, pp. 13-16. 

2F,. Cumont, The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism (Chicago, 1911); and Astrology 
and Religion among the Greeks and Romans (New York, 1912); Milhaud, Nouvelles Etudes sur 
V Histoire de la Pensée Scientifique (Paris, 1911), pp. 41-133. 

? Like John Burnet, Greck Philosophy, Part I, Thales to Plato (London, 1920), pp. 4 ff. 

6 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

mathematics, as well as the sciences of material things and life-pro- 
cesses. This science begins with primitive man, and develops as man 
develops. 

The processes of computation in Greece were closely allied to those 
of Egypt. The abacus with its counters for reckoning, which was 
in wide use among the ancient Greeks,’ had its counterpart, according 
to Herodotus,? in Egypt. While no trace of any Egyptian abacus has 
been found, Plato’s statement that in Egypt “systems of calculation 
have been actually invented for the use of children” suggests that the 
Egyptians may have invented the abacus for the purpose for which it 
is now used in our primary schools. 

The ‘Egyptian methods’ of multiplication and division, mentioned 
in the scholium on Plato’s Charmides quoted above, are now known 
to us through the preservation and publication of the Ahmes manual,’ 
an Egyptian arithmetic which dates from about 1700 B.c. Miultipli- 
cation is effected by repeated doubling. Division is the inverse of 
multiplication, effected by doubling and re-doubling the divisor until 
the dividend can be obtained by summation of the appropriate doubles. 
Thus the product of 27 times 57 is obtained as follows: 

57 I 
114 2" 
228 4” 
456 8" 

912 16" 
1539 

The multiplication of 27 times 57 is treated as 16 + 8 4+ 2 + 1 times 
57. The accent marks to indicate which numbers are to be summed 
appear in the papyrus. Were 1539 to be divided by 27, the same 
series of doubles would be written, and the required summands would 
be obtained by subtraction from the dividend or by inspection. A 
multiplier or quotient involving fractions would be treated in the same 
way ; thus, to multiply 57 by 27, 4,4, the numbers 284 and 141, 4 and 
4 respectively of 57, would appear among the summands to be added. 
Multiplication by 10 was sometimes included, without any doubling. 

The most distinctive feature of the Egyptian arithmetic is the 

1 Herodotus, II. 36; Anstotle, Constitution of Athens, 68, 3 ff.; Plutarch, Vita Catonis 
Minoris, 70; Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos, IX. 194. 

2 Herodotus, iid. 

3 Eisenlohr, Ein mathematisches Handbuch der alien Aegypter (Papyrus Rhind des British 
Museum), Leipzig, 1891; T. Eric Peet, The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, London, 1923. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 7 

restriction of the operations with fractions to unit fractions, i.e. those 
having one as the numerator; 4 is the single exception. Thus ? was 
written as 44, and # as 1,4,; the juxtaposition indicates that the 
fractions are to be summed. Now the Greek symbolism for fractions 
includes special devices for writing such unit fractions, together with 
a separate symbol for the fraction %.' The little that we know of 
ancient computation, supported by definite indications of later docu- 
ments, shows the intimate connection between the Greek and Egyptian 
methods of treating fractions. Thus, Euclid has a special term for 
a unit fraction,’ while in the works of Hero of Alexandria and Dio- 
phantus series of unit fractions in true Egyptian form are common.? 
Furthermore, in the arithmetica the superparticular is definitely con- 
nected with the notion of a unit fraction. 

Mention has been made of the “summation and decomposition of 
fractions.’ In the absence of any treatise on logistic from the classical 
period, the meaning of the scholiast’s phrase is revealed to us only 
by later documents. A Greek papyrus of the eighth century A.D., 
found at Akhmim in Egypt,‘ includes unit fractions entirely after the 
manner of the Ahmes manual. The products of #, 4, 4, 4,4,4,4, and 
zs by the integers from 1 to ro, and by the tens to go are written in 
terms of unit fractions. A fragment of the same nature appears in the 
ancient Egyptian manual, giving the product of 2 by 2, 4, 3, 4, 3, 4, 
zr, and 4, as well as the products separately, of 4 by %, and 4 by 3, by 
4, ps, +, and 7, and#by+4. The distribution problems by Ahmes of 
I, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, and g loaves of bread among ten people are arithmeti- 
cally analogous. 

Undoubtedly we have here the ‘decomposition’ process into unit 
fractions; this also appears in the introductory material of the Egyp- 
tian manual wherein the fractions having 2 as a numerator and odd 
numbers to 99 as denominators are resolved into unit fractions.° 
Some of the same numerical operations are found also in two letters 

1 Heath, Diophantus of Alexandria, A Study in the History of Greek Algebra (second edition, 
Cambridge, 1910), pp. 44-47. 

2 Elements, Book VI, definition 3: ‘‘A number is a peri of a number, the less of the greater, 
when it measures the greater; but parfs when it does not measure it.” Heath adds (vol. IT, 
p. 280) that ‘‘by the expression paris (uéon, the plural of ywépos) Euclid denotes what we should 
call a proper fractton.” * Heath, Diophantus, p. 46. 

4 J. Baillet, Le Papyrus Mathématique d'Akhmim, Mémoires Publiées par les Membres de la 
Mission Archéologique Francaise au Caire (Paris, 1892), T. LX, pp. 1-89. 

§ Similar fractions in Michigan Papyrus, No. 621; described by L. C. Karpinski, Jsts, vol. V 

(1922), pp. 20-25, with facsimile. The text was published by F. E. Robbins, Classical Philology. 
vol. XVIII (1923), pp. 328-333. 

8 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

of the fourteenth century written by the Greek monk Nicolas Rhabdas 
Atarvasda of Smyrna, who gives further the reverse process of ‘sum- 
mation’ of unit fractions into ordinary ones.’ Doubtless it was early 
recognized that for multiplication and division by a series of unit 
fractions the combination of the set into a single common fraction was 
desirable. Nicolas explains the process of combination. 

Europe continued to employ the unit fractions for many centuries. 
Leonard of Pisa in the thirteenth century includes in his famous 
Liber Abbaci a table for decomposition into unit fractions,? and employs 
them frequently. The Arabs * and the Hindus, too, used Egyptian 
methods, although not exclusively, in their discussions of fractions, 
and traces of the Egyptian process of multiplication are preserved to 
this day among the Russian peasants. 

Plato makes a statement about Egyptian mathematics which shows 
not only his own respect for Egyptian methods of instruction, but 
also brings to light certain Egyptian problems which may have had to 
do with the problems on containers, ‘phialite numbers,’ mentioned in 
the scholium on the Charmides already cited. Plato says (Laws, 819): 

“All freemen, I conceive, should learn as much of these various 
disciplines as every child in Egypt is taught when he learns his alphabet. 
In that country, systems of calculation have actually been invented 
for the use of children, which they learn as a pleasure and amusement. 
They have to distribute apples and garlands, apportioning the same 
number either to a larger or smaller number of persons. . . . Another 
mode of amusing them is by taking vessels of gold, and brass, and 
silver, and the like, and mingling them or distributing them without 
mingling; as I was saying, they adapt their amusement to the numbers 
in common use, and in this way make more intelligible to their pupils 
the arrangements and movements of armies and expeditions, and in 
the management of a household they make people more useful to 
themselves, and more wide awake; and again in measurements of 
things which have length, and breadth, and depth, they free us from 
that ludicrous and disgraceful ignorance of all things which is natural 
to man.” 

1 Paul Tannery, Notices sur les Deux Lettres Arithmétiques de Nicolas Rhabdas, Notices et 
Extraits de Manuscrits de la Bibliotheque Nationale (Paris, 1886), vol. XXXII, pp. 121-252. 

2 Scriiti de Leonardo Pisano, published by B. Boncompagni, JI liber abbact (Rome, 1857), vol. I, 

P- 79. ° 
#See Karpinski, The Algebra of Abu Kamil Shoja ben Aslam, in Bibliotheca Mathematica 

{third series), vol. XII, pp. 52-54. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 9 

The problems of the Ahmes papyrus on the distribution of loaves 
of bread among ten people,’ and the problem to which we shall recur 
on the distribution of 100 loaves of bread according to the terms of an 
arithmetical series, are certainly suggestive of the type of problems of 
distribution to which Plato had reference. The following problem? 
in the Egyptian papyrus is doubtless one of the type dealing with 
containers (‘phialite’): “I pour (from my container) three times; 
IT add 4 and 4; I fillit up. What part of the measure have I?” In 
the Greek anthology are found a series of problems on the distribution 
of apples and nuts, and problems on the weights of bowls, which 
involve linear equations in one and two unknown quantities.* 

The intimate connection between Greek logistic and Egyptian arith- 
metic can hardly be seriously questioned. So far as Greek arithmetica 
is concerned here again we find that the Greeks were inspired by their 
Oriental predecessors. The available Babylonian and Egyptian 
documents in the exact sciences are as yet extremely limited; our 
present information is more or less accidental, and by no means com- 
prehensive. So far as early Egyptian mathematical science is con- 
cerned, we are largely dependent upon the Ahmes papyrus. But these 
few surviving documents give indications of development along many 
different lines of mathematical thought. Their content is, as we have 
already partially indicated, quite in harmony with the Greek traditions 
concerning Egyptian and Babylonian science. In view of this cor- 
respondence and of further definite indications of real progress in 
mathematical thinking among the Egyptians, we are warranted in 
giving some credence to the Greek traditions concerning Oriental 
science which are not yet confirmed by indigenous evidence. 

Arithmology is closely related to the occult sciences, astrology, 
alchemy, and magic. While alchemy is undoubtedly a comparatively 
late development, the Oriental source of its theories is unquestioned.* 
Between the industrial arts of Egypt and Babylon and the develop- 
ment of theories of alchemy, there is an intimate connection, as 
Berthelot has shown. Furthermore this authority even asserts that 
Thales may have taken from Babylonian myths his theory that water 
is the material cause of all things.® 

1 Eisenlohr, op. ctt., pp. 71-74; Peet, op. cit., pp. 78-79. 

? Eisenlohr, op. cit., pp. 63-65; Peet, op. ci#., pp. 70-72. 

*See Heath, A History of Greek Mathematics, vol. I, pp. 15-16; vol. II, pp. 441-443; 

Tannery, Diophanti Alexandrini, Opera omnia, vol. II (Leipzig, 1895), pp. 43-72- 
‘ Berthelot, Les Origines de P’ Alchimte (Paris, 1885), Chapter ITI. ® Of. cil., Pp. 251. 

10 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

So far as the origin of the signs of the zodiac and the star-symbols is 
concerned, Oriental and Occidental contributions are not separable, 
and the same is true of other scientific ideas.’ Astrology was born 
and bred in the temples of the Babylonians. The desire to forecast 
the future and equally the desire to establish a connection between the 
marvels of the beautiful heavens of the East and the events on the 
mundane sphere resulted in the cultivation of astrology. The devotion 
to the art constituted the first scientific study of the stars.2 “The 
observations which the priests of the ancient Orient gathered with 
indefatigable patience inspired the first physical and astronomical 
discoveries, and just as in the period of scholasticism, the occult 
sciences [astrology and magic] led to the exact sciences. But these, 
by making evident later the vanity of the marvellous illusions by 
which they were nourished, destroyed the foundations of astrology 
and magic to which they owed their birth.” * 

The observations of the Egyptian and, more particularly, of the 
Babylonian astronomers, furnished a mass of material which was 
used by the Greeks.* Ptolemy and Hipparchus utilized the observa- 
tions and the computations of the Chaldeans, mentioning specifically 
certain eclipses observed ;° Theon of Smyrna discusses the different 
types of treatment of astronomical problems by Egyptians as com- 
pared with the Babylonians; * Diodorus Siculus notes that both the 
Egyptian priests and the Chaldeans were skilled in the prediction of 
eclipses.’ As scientific observers of celestial phenomena the Baby- 
lonians compare favorably with the greatest of the Greek astronomers. 
Further than this, the evidence of their ability to use the data intel- 
ligently is indisputable. The determination of the period and mean 
motion of the moon, the determination of the lengths of the seasons 
and of the year, the determination of the period of eclipses and the 
periods (ephemerides) of the planets, and a host of minor deductions 
were derived by the scientists of the Orient from their data. The most 

1 Franz Boll, Sphaera, Neue griechische Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Stern- 
bilder (Leipzig, 1903), p. 461. 

?Cumont, Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain (Paris, 1909). See also his 
Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans (New York, 1912). 

*Cumont, Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain, p. 235. 

‘ Heath, Aristarchus of Samos, The Ancient Copernicus, A History of Greek Astronomy to 
Artstarchus (Oxford, 1913), Chapter ITT. 

‘Ptolemy, Composition Mathématique de Claude Ptolémée (Almagest), ed. Halma (Paris, 
1813), vol. I, Book IV, pp. 216, 244-247, 267. 

® Theon of Smyrna, p. 177, 9 ff., Hiller. 

7 Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica, I. 50; II. 30. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 11 

notable advance in astronomy in Babylon was undoubtedly made 
during the period in which the science was making real progress in 
Greece; indebtedness was mutual, but independent scientific progress 
on both sides is incontestably established. 

To deny to Babylon, to Egypt, and to India their part in the develop- 
ment of science and scientific thinking is to defy the testimony of the 
ancients,! supported by the discoveries of modern authorities.2 The 
efforts which have been made to ascribe to Greek influence the science 
of Egypt, of later Babylon, of India, and later of the Arabs, do not add 
to the glory that was Greece. How could the Babylonians of the 
golden age of Greece have taken over the developments of Greek 
astronomy? This would have been possible only if they had arrived 
at a stage of development in astronomy which would have enabled 
them properly to estimate and appreciate the work which was to be 
absorbed. ‘There has never been any question concerning the nature 
and origin of such feeble beginnings of science as are found among the 
American Indians. As regards the Babylonians, the Hindus, and the 
civilization of Europe in the time of Alexander the Great and up to 
600 A.D., the problem is entirely different. These are peoples who had 
reached approximately the same stage of development. The admis- 
sion that Greek astronomy immediately affected the astronomical 
theories of Babylon and India carries with it the implication that this 
science had attained somewhat the same level in these countries as in 
Greece. Without serious questioning we may assume that a signif- 
cant part of the science of Babylon and Egypt that was developed 
during the times which we think of as Greek was indigenous. Nor do 
we thereby detract from the real greatness of Greece. The Hellenic 
civilization remains as an integral and vital part of all civilization, 
and not as something apart. 

Turning to the arithmetica proper, we may first inquire as to the 
Egyptian attempts at systematization of the science. The Ahmes 
manual in itself is evidence of a noteworthy step in this direction, 
since it establishes the fact that the body of ideas which we now group 
under the name ‘ mathematics’ was recognized as a separate field by 

1 Hipparchus and Ptolemy, Theon of Smyrna, and Diodorus, as cited above; Herodotus, IT. 
109; Berosus, fragg. 17 ff. in C. Miiller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graccorum, vol. II, pp. 509 f.; 
Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromata, II. 4; Pliny, Naturalis Historia, VI. 121; VII. 193. 

? Heath, Berthelot, Boll, Cumont, as cited above; Kugler, Die babylonische Mondrechnung 
(Freiburg, 1900), pp. 50-51; 203-211; Epping, Astronomisches aus Babylon (Freiburg, 1889), 
pp. 183-190. 

12 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

the Egyptians. While no definitions of number, as such, have as yet 
been found, Iamblichus informs us that Thales gave the classical 
definition of it as a collection of units, and the definition of the unit, 
arithmetically, as one of a group, “following the custom of the Egyp- 
tians with whom he studied.””! Furthermore, the distinction between 
even and odd, fundamental in the arithmetica, is implicit in the Egyp- 
tian manual. For example, the first part of the work is devoted to a 
table for the conversion into unit fractions of fractions with odd de- 
nominators from 5 to 99 and with 2 as numerator. This table in and 
of itself marks real progress in systematization. 

The decad, which is prominent in the Pythagorean arithmetic, also 
receives, In a way, particular attention in the Ahmes papyrus, for 10 
appears over and over again in the problems of the Egyptian manual.” 

Attention to arithmetical and geometrical series was given both 
in early Babylon and in early Egypt. The single reference which we 
have, as yet, to the arithmetical and geometrical series in Babylon 
is found in a moon tablet * deciphered by Hincks. This gives the 
geometric series 5, 10, 20, 40, 80 followed by the arithmetical series, 
80, 96, 112, 128,. . . 240. 

In the Egyptian manual we have much more than the simple ap- 
pearance of arithmetical and geometrical series. The discussion of 
arithmetical and geometrical progressions reveals an unexpected 
familiarity with rules which we now express by algebraical formulas, a 
familiarity which has not received adequate appreciation. The es- 
sential points of the two formulas which we have for the mth term and 
the sum of the arithmetical series, a,a +d,a+2d,a+3d,..., 
appear from the problems to have been familiar to the Egyptians. 
Comparatively intricate problems are handled with the ease and in- 
timacy born of long acquaintance. 

The problem numbered 40 by Eisenlohr reads: ‘‘To distribute 100 
loaves of bread among 5 people so that 4 of the (total of the) first three 
equals that of the last two. What is the difference?’’ The solution 
shows that it is understood that the loaves are to be distributed in 
arithmetical progression. 

“Following instructions, the difference 54,” is the next somewhat 
cryptical suggestion of the manual. I hold that this reference implies 

1 In Nicomachi Arithmeticam Introductionem Liber, p. 10, 8 (Pistelli). 
? Eisenlohr, op. cit., 208, 211, 216, 217, 218, 219, ef passim. 
3 The Literary Gazette, Aug. 5, 1854, with reference to Tablet K 90 of the British Museum. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS 13 

definite rules of procedure in such problems, leading to the difference 
54, if unity be taken as the first term, under the conditions proposed. 
Our common procedure, in analytical solution of this problem, leads 
to the result, d = 54a or d = 54 if a is 1. Even if the method of 
arriving at this value for d be that of ‘false position,’ the procedure 
which, being adaptable to similar problems, arrives definitely and 
surely at the complete solution of the proposed problem must be 
regarded as scientific. 

From this point the solution follows the lines of previous problems. 
With 1 as the first term and 54 as the difference, the terms are 1, 64, 
12, 174, and 23, having 60 asasum. To complete this to the required 
100 loaves there must be added 40, or 4 of 60. After it has been noted 
that this is the case, there 1s added to each of the numbers in the dis- 
covered series # of itself, a process that gives 1%, 10% 4, 20, 294, and 
384 as the series fulfilling the required conditions. 

A second problem involving an arithmetical series is entitled “In- 
structions for the difference in distribution.” The solution opens 
with the phrase, ‘‘If you are told,”’ which was later adopted by Arabic 
mathematicians, and is not uncommon even today. “If you are told, 
[distribute] 10 measures of grain to 10 people so that the difference in 
[the amount received by] each person as compared with the next one is 
% of a measure of grain. I take the mean, one measure. I subtract 
1 from 10, leaving 9g. I take 4 of the difference, ;4,, and take it nine 
times. This gives 4 ;4,, which I add to the mean. From this take 
away 4 measure for each person in order to arrive at the goal. Follow- 
ing instructions : 1 yy, 1t 4 vey 14 vey 1h Po ttle $4 4 tes $ tae, 
AAs, $ te, ¢ 4 pg, together 10.” The solution of this problem as 
given by the Egyptian manual should be compared step by step with 
the solution by the ordinary procedure with the formulas of our ele- 
mentary algebra; the close correspondence is too striking to be 
regarded as wholly accidental. 

No one could ask that the ancient Egyptians should have modern 
formulas with a literal symbolism, for this advance was not made in 
Europe until the end of the sixteenth century of the Christian era. 
The similarity in method is, however, highly significant, revealing a 
development in analytical thinking that is not equalled for many 
centuries. In effect, we have in these problems the first term of an 
arithmetical series regarded as a function of the common difference, 
under given conditions, and the last term as a function of the mean 

14 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

and the difference. This is true functional thinking whose like is 
hardly met again until Archimedes. 

The single illustration of a geometrical series confirms the implica- 
tions of the solutions found in the problems involving arithmetical 
series. The text is extremely concise, and possibly mutilated : 

“A ladder 

I 2,801 scribe 7 

2 5,002 cat 49 

4 11,204 mouse 343 

together 19,607 sheaf 2,401 
grain 16,307 

together 19,607.”’ 

At the right we have the summation of the series 7, 49, 343, 2,401, and 
16,807 by actual addition; at the left we have the summation of the 
same series 7 X 2,801, with the multiplication effected in the usual 
manner. Now our formula for the summation of this series gives 

7 — 
7 —= e or 7 times 2,801. 

Some three thousand years after Ahmes an Italian mathematician 
of prominence, Leonard of Pisa, includes in his arithmetic the same 
series with one further term. He effects the solution in precisely 
the two ways selected by his Egyptian predecessor. In India, too, 
powers of 7 received special attention. The words, or illustrations, 
which accompany the numbers suggest the nursery rhyme concerning 
the old woman going to St. Ives. 

So far as geometrical formulas are concerned the Egyptians had 
definite methods for finding the area of triangles, rectangles, trapezoids, 
and circles, as well as for finding the volume of cylinders." Recently 
an Egyptian document has been published which gives the expression 
for the volume of a truncated pyramid.” Further there have been 
found in Egyptian papyri problems concerned with determining the 
sides of a rectangle when the area and the ratio of the sides are given.* 
All of this material connects directly with the geometry of Greece. 

Iamblichus asserts that Pythagoras brought the harmonical progres- 

1 Eisenlohr, of. cil., pp. 75-115. 

2B. Touraeff, The Volume of the Truncated Pyramid tn Egyptian Maihematics, Ancient 
Egypt, 1917, pp. 100-102; Karpinski, An Egyptian Mathematical Papyrus in Moscow, Science, 
vol. §7, 1923, Pp. 528-529. 

?H. Schack-Schackenburg, Der Berliner Papyrus 6619, Zeitschrift fiir dgypltische Sprache, 
vol. XXXVIII, pp. 135-140, and vol. XL, pp. 65-66. 

SOURCES OF GREEK MATHEMATICS Is 

sion to Greece from Babylon, but no Babylonian record confirming the 
statement has yet been found. 

The squares and cubes of numbers also received particular attention 
in Babylon, and tables of squares and cubes have been found. In 
Egypt the relation 3’ + 4° = 5° appears to have been used in the laying 
out of right angles by means of a stretched rope. Democritus, an able 
Greek mathematician of the fifth century B.c., boasts: “So far as the 
laying out of lines is concerned, no one has surpassed me, not even 
the rope-stretchers of ancient Egypt.’’! Michael Psellus of the 
eleventh century mentions the Greek equivalents of the Egyptian 
names of the higher powers, first power to twelfth power; it is sup- 
posed that the statement is based upon the lost commentary upon the 
Arithmetic of Diophantus by Hypatia. Again the reference, although 
not confirmed by available Egyptian material, adds to the probability 
of mathematical developments in addition to those with which we 
happen, almost accidentally, to be familiar. 

The mystical element in Greek arithmetic is undoubtedly also of 
Oriental origin. ‘‘It must be remembered that at Babylon a number 
was a very different thing from a figure. Just as in ancient times and, 
above all, in Egypt, the name had a magic power, and ceremonial 
words formed an irresistible incantation, so here the number possesses 
an active force, the number is a symbol, and its properties are sacred 
attributes.”’* This attitude we see occasionally in Nicomachus, and 
to a more pronounced degree in later mediaeval times. 

The purpose of this introduction is to show the Oriental inspiration 
and origin of many of the Greek developments in mathematics. The 
assertion, which has been seriously made by Burnet,’ that all science 
is Greek in its origin, is shown to be not at all in accordance with the 
facts. The well-established tradition‘ of Babylonian and Egyptian 
influence upon the science of early Greece is confirmed by a mass of 
self-supporting evidence, naturally not confined to one branch of 
science, which has been illustrated above with particular reference to 
arithmetic. Greece retains the right to enjoy the profound admiration 
of the world of science, but the Orient, also, must be credited with 
contributions worthy of note. " 

1 Clement of Alexandria (ed. Potter), p. 357. 

?Cumont, Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans (New York, 1912), p. 30. 

? John Burnet, Greck Philosophy, Pari I, Thales to Plato (London, 1914), pp. 4 ff. 
‘ Bretschneider, Die Geometrie und die Geometer vor Euklides (Leipzig, 1870), pp. 3-35. 

CHAPTER II 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE 
NICOMACHUS 

OnLy a slight acquaintance with Greek mathematics is necessary 
to convince one that the Introduction to Arithmetic of Nicomachus is 
but a restatement of facts which were common property not only in 
Nicomachus’s own generation but even long before him, and that, 
except for the few unimportant propositions the discovery of which 
our author with pardonable pride claims for himself, the book is largely 
unoriginal.’ This naturally leads to the inference that the Introduc- 
tion must be closely connected with other mathematical treatises, 
which served as the fountains whence Nicomachus drew his supply. 
Because so little remains of this literature, it 1s difficult to demonstrate 
the hypothesis in detail; few, however, will question its general truth. 

A few words concerning the purpose of the Introduction, and the 
type of books of which it is a representative, will make clearer its 
necessarily dependent position among mathematical books, and ex- 
plain why it becanie famous in spite of little originality. Iamblichus, 
when he refers to the Introduction as the apiOuntixn réyvn, or Art of 
Arithmetic,’ exactly describes it, and properly locates it in literature. 
The Introduction belongs, then, among the artes or réyvat, concise, 

. = F al * . . * ' 
practical descriptions and systematic expositions of the principles of 
various arts and sciences, a type of treatise exceedingly common in 
ancient times,* and one which, save in a few well-known exceptions, 
made scant claim to originality. 

1 Cf, the estimate of Gow, History of Greek Mathematics (Cambridge, 1884), p. 94. 

2 P. 4, 12 ff. (Pistelli). See p. 80. 

+ The name was most often applied to texts of rhetoric, to mark the superiority of this over all 
other arts. E. M. Cope, Introduction to Aristotle’s Rhetoric (London, 1867), pp. 1, 17, and notes, 
discusses this and gives examples of the use of réx»y, xpa‘vudraa, péfodos, and érierhyun, all of 
which were used in about the same sense, as ‘‘a system or body of rules and principles” of any 
art. The réxvy of Korax was “the earliest theoretical Greek book, not merely on Rhetoric, but 
in any branch of art” (R. C. Jebb, Affic Orators, vol. I, p. cxxi), and Aristotle’s lost cuvaywy} 
rexpav was a collection of such material. Isocrates refers to rhetorical treatises under this name: 
hovwol 8° quip elow ol xpd qudw yerduevot xal rds xadoupévas réxvas ypdyat rohufoarres (Oratio XIII. 
19). His own (fragmentary) réxvy is collected in the Benseler-Blass edition (Leipzig, 1904), vol. 

16 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 17 

Designed for the use of students, they aimed to present in small 
compass and with accuracy, clearness and completeness, the elements 
of a subject, so that it might easily be comprehended and put into 
practice, in which regard they may best be compared to the modern 
school and college text-book. The scholars of ancient times, like their 
modern brethren, did not publish the results of special research in books 
of this character; and just as our school-books differ from such monu- 
mental works as The Origin of Species, so we must consider that the 
Introduction to Arithmetic differs from the great original treatises of 
Diophantus and Heron. 

Even without presenting new material, Nicomachus found it possi- 
ble, therefore, to win fame by writing an ‘art of arithmetic.’ Because 
in clearness, conciseness, compendiousness, orderly arrangement and 
adaptability for scholastic use, it satished the demands of seekers 
after education or general information, it remained the standard work 
of its class for many centuries. Independence was not, and did not 
need to be, one of its virtues. To understand it we must survey the 
historical processes out of which developed the science of which it is 
an epitome. 

Greek interest in the topics dealt with by arithmetic can be traced 
back to the very dawn of all their science among the Ionians of the sixth 
century before Christ. Tradition credits Thales with the introduction 
of geometry into Greece from Egypt, and even designates the theorems 
which were his discoveries.‘ For the present purpose, however, it is 
more important to note that the astronomical problems with which 
Thales is said to have dealt — the length of the year,” the prediction 
of an eclipse,® the determination of the apparent size of the sun as 745 
of the complete circle of the heavens,‘ and the determination of the 
equinoxes,” — are all fundamentally arithmetical, a fact which far 

II, p. 275. The title of one of Protagoras’s works was réxvn épiorixaw (Diogenes Laertius, VIII. 
55). The pseudo-Hippocratean On the Art was, however, a defense of medicine. ‘ Introduc- 
tions,’ eloaywyal, also, were of much the same nature as the réyrn; examples are, besides those 
written by Nicomachus, that of Alcinous to the Platonic philosophy, and that of Porphyry to 
the Aristotelian. 

1 Cf. Burnet, op. cif., p. 20; Eudemus in Proclus, In Euclid. J, pp. 157, 10; 250, 20; 299, 1; 352; 
14 (Friedlein). Cf. Heath, A History of Greek Mathematics, vol. I, pp. 128-137. 

? Diogenes Laertius, I. 24, 27; T. L. Heath, Artstarchus of Samos, p. 21; A History of Greck 
Mathematics, vol. I, pp. 137-—139- 

3 Diogenes Laertius, I. 23; Theon of Smyrna, p. 198, 16 (Hiller); Heath, Aristarchus of Samos, 
pp. 13-18; Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokraitker, vol. I', p. 7, no. §. 

‘ Diogenes Laertius, I. 24; Heath, op. cif., p. 22, where the point is disputed. 

§ Diogenes Laertius, I. 23; Heath, op. cz#., p. 20. 

18 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

outweighs the statement of the late writer Iamblichus that Thales 
gave a definition of number based upon Egyptian tradition." 

Not Ionia, however, but Magna Graecia, was destined to be the 
real birthplace of Greek arithmetic; for although the Ionians un- 
doubtedly set in motion the wonderful series of scientific researches 
that culminated in Plato and Aristotle, the immediate successors of 
Thales do not seem to have been much concerned with mathematics, 
and Pythagoras and his school must receive the credit for laying 
its real foundations. Just what was the measure of their service in the 
development of arithmetic it is hard to say, because, as is generally 
admitted, no Pythagorean treatises were published until the time of 
Philolaus, that is, for nearly a century after the lifetime of Pythagoras 
himself.” Still there 1s enough to show that many of the subjects 
treated by Nicomachus were known in the earliest days of the sect. 

Pythagoras himself is said to have determined the numerical ratios 
of the fundamental musical concords,’ a statement which implies a 
knowledge of the ratios in general; the discovery of the teiraktys, 
too, was said to be his, and was commemorated by the customary 
oath of the Pythagorean brethren,* in view of which it is clear that 
figurate numbers, certainly triangles, squares and heteromecic num- 
bers, were known in the earliest days.® The classification of numbers 
into odd and even, and perhaps some of the others which we observe 
in Nicomachus, may also safely be ascribed to Pythagoras and his 
group. Although the traditions that credit Pythagoras with a knowl- 
edge of the three common proportions,® if not their introduction into 
Greece, are late, it is not improbable, since he was acquainted with 
ratios, that he knew them. 

No inconsiderable portion of Nicomachus’s material, then, was al- 

1 See p. 127. 

2 Cf. Diogenes Laertius, VITI.85. Iamblichus, Vita Pythagorica, 199, distinctly says that no 
one had met with any Pythagorean writings until Philolaus (fforuit ca. 440 B.C.) published his 
books. A written text-book might have circulated within the community itself, of course, but 
there is no evidence that they used books of any sort. 

4 Cf, Nicomachus’s account of his discovery, Manuale Harmonicum, c.6,and Theon of Smyrna, 
p. 56, 9 (Hiller); Burnet, op. cif., pp. 45 ff. In general see Heath’s chapter on “ Pythagorean 
Arithmetic,” History, vol. I, pp. 65 ff.; Leon Brunschvig, Les Etapes de la Philosophie M athé- 
matique (Paris, 1922), pp. 33 ff.; Aldo Mieli, Le Scuole Ionica Pythagorica ed Eleata (Florence, 
1916), pp. 236 ff. 

4Quoted by Theon of Smyrna, p. 94, 6-7 (see Hiller, ad loc., for other citations). 

’ Cf. Burnet, op. cii., pp. 52-54. 

6 Nicomachus, Introduction, II. 22.1; Iamblichus, Jn Nicomach: Arithmeticam Introductionem, 
p. 118, 23 (Pistelli). 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 19 

ready the property of the first Pythagoreans. It is another question, 
however, whether they formulated their doctrines and put them in 
writing, and for the answer we must rely wholly upon our ideas of 
likelihood, for there is no tradition of the existence, in any form, of 
an ars arithmetica among the fraternity. Undoubtedly it was neces- 
sary to instruct their novices in the elements of arithmetic, and so it 
is highly probable that in time their arithmetic came to assume a 
fixed and definite form; but in view of the aversion to written records 
which seems to have characterized the early Pythagorean school, 
it is also likely that this formulation took at first the aspect of an oral 
tradition and can hardly have been written down, in any case, before 
the time of Philolaus. In any event, even though we cannot assume 
that Nicomachus possessed documents that directly emanated from 
this group, their pioneer service to the science of arithmetic can hardly 
be overrated. 

The later generations of the early Pythagorean school abandoned, at 
least partially, the policy of secrecy and began the publication of written 
records; thus it is easier to determine the extent of their arithmetical 
knowledge. In general, if we cannot quote the actual words of the 
members of the sect, we can be confident that the traditions handed 
down by trustworthy authorities have an authentic documentary 
basis. The two authors most worthy of attention are Philolaus and 
Archytas of Tarentum. 

From the fragments of Philolaus’s book On Nature (wept dicews) 
some idea may be gained of the extent to which his ars arithmetica 
had been developed. In one’ he states that there are two ‘proper’ 
classes of number, odd and even, and the even-odd (apriomépitros) 
combining the characteristics of these ; another is a passage of consider- 
able length dealing with the numerical ratios of harmony,’ which shows 
that his nomenclature of the ratios and probably his doctrine of them 
were substantially those of later times. Traditions about him allow 
the scope of his arithmetic, as we are to conceive it, to be greatly in- 
creased. Speusippus, we are told,*® used Philolaus’s works as the chief 
source of his book On Pythagorean Numbers (mepi Uv0ayopixav 
dpcOuav) and treated therein both plane and solid figurate numbers 
and the five forms assigned to the elements of the universe. A pas- 
sage quoted from the latter half of the treatise mentions odd andeven 

! Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, vol. 13, p. 310, frag. 5. 
2 Diels, op. cil., p. 310, frag. 6. 3 Theologumena Arithmeticac, p. 61 (Ast). 

20 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

numbers, primes and composites, multiples and submultiples, ratios, 
and pyramidal numbers, besides many other matters more akin to 
arithmology or to geometry. 

The tradition of Nicomachus' that Philolaus used the expression 
‘harmonic proportion,’ and referred to the~ cube as ‘geometric har- 
mony,’ and that of Iamblichus,” ascribing to him the use of the so- 
called ‘ musical proportion’ 6, 8, 9, 12, show that the proportions also 
were included in his arithmetical knowledge, although only three 
kinds are reputed to have been known to him.’ By the time of 
Philolaus, therefore, we may assume that the ars arithmetica was 
practically complete in all its essentials. 

On the other hand, perhaps no written codification of it had as yet 
been made. We know that Philolaus wrote much, but we hearof no 
arithmetic among his books; there are also references to the ‘Py- 
thagorean tradition’ concerning various matters of arithmetic and the 
allied sciences,* but none coupled with the name of an ‘art of arith- 
metic.’ Such books may have been compiled, but probably for the 
most part the Pythagorean doctrines of arithmetic occurred in philo- 
sophical or musical contexts, if we may judge by the fragments of 
Philolaus, for much as the school valued mathematics, it was never- 
theless to them a means to the end of philosophizing about the nature 
of the universe. The mathematics of the Pythagoreans, also, was even 
at this early day deeply tinged with arithmological speculations, which 
detract from its value as pure science; and the tendency persisted 
among their descendants for many centuries, as we may observe in the 
writings of Nicomachus, Theon, and Jamblichus. 

Archytas, who is far more important than Philolaus in the history 
of arithmetic, lived fully a generation later and was a somewhat older 
contemporary of Plato. Of course we may assume that he was familiar 
with all the science of arithmetic as it was known to Philolaus, and it 

1 Introduction, Il. 26. 2. 

2 In Nicomachi Arithmeticam Introductionem, p. 118, 20-22 (Pistelli). 

*Iamblichus, Jn Nicomacht Arithmeticam Introductionem, p. 100, 19 (Pistelli), says the others 
were discovered later. 

‘E.g., Theon of Smyrna, p. 47, 8 ff. (Hiller), admits that the arithmetic he has thus far pre- 
sented is taken from ‘Pythagorean tradition’; see also what he says about the proportions, 
p.116,3 ff. Some of the makers of this tradition may have belonged, of course, to the Alexandrian 
period, like Myonides and Euphranor (see on Introduction, II. 22.1; 28.6). Note also that 
Nicomachus vaguely mentions ‘ other writers’ on arithmetic (see p. 29), some of whom may have 
been early Pythagoreans. 

‘ His floruit is given as ca. 400-365 B.c. For his life, see Diogenes Laertius, VIII. 79 ff. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 21 

is probable that it underwent refinement at his hands. What is more 
important, he quite certainly wrote an ars arithmetica, but we cannot 
be certain whether it was an independent book, or, as is more likely, a 
part of a more voluminous work on musical theory. At any rate 
it is the first example of this type of literature for the existence of which 
there is more than mere conjectural testimony. 

The chief evidence that Archytas compiled an ars arithmetica is 
found in a detailed proof in Euclidean form of the proposition that no 
number, that is, no rational number, can be a mean between ” and 
n-+ 1; this is quoted by Boethius and ascribed to Archytas; it occurs 
also in the Euclidean Sectio Canonis.' The theorem finds a direct 
application in musical theory in the proof that the ‘tone,’ the numerical 
ratio of which is 9: 8, cannot be halved,’ and so it is very probable 
that it originally occurred, just as it is now found in Euclid, in a treatise 
on harmony. But in point of mathematical refinement it is far above 
the level of Nicomachus, and whatever its subject, the book of which 
it was a part is of high importance in the history of arithmetic. 

Another fragment of Archytas, dealing with the proportions, 1s 
likewise notable for its scientific accuracy of expression. This is 
quoted by Porphyry * as follows: “ Archytas, in explaining the means, 
wrote the following: ‘There are in music three means; the first is the 
arithmetical mean, the second is the geometrical, and the third is the 
subcontrary mean which is called harmonical. The mean is arith- 
metical when the three terms are in proportion according to the follow- 
ing excess: the quantity by which the first exceeds the second is the 
same precisely as that by which the second exceeds the third. In this 
proportion it is found that the ratio of the greater terms is smaller, 
and the ratio of the smaller terms is greater. There is a geometrical 
mean when the first term is to the second as the second is to the third; 
here the ratio of the greater terms is identical with that of the lesser. 
The subcontrary mean, which we call harmonical, exists when the 
first term exceeds by a fraction of itself the second, while the second 
exceeds the third by the same fraction of the third. In this proportion 
the ratio of the greater terms is greater, and of the lesser is less.’ ”’ 

We may note that in addition to defining the proportions Archytas 

1 Boethius, De Institudione Musica, III. 11; cf. P. Tannery, Un Tratié Grec d’Arithmétique 
Antérieur d Euclide, Bibliotheca Mathematica, 3 Folge, vol. VI, pp. 225 ff. See also Euclid, Sectto 
Canonis, in Von Jan, Musici Scriptores Graeci (Leipzig, 1895), p. 152; Heath, History, vol. I, p. go. 

t Euclid, Sectio Canonis, c. 16, p. 161 (Von Jan). 
* In Ptolemaci Harmonica, p. 267; Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, vol. I’, pp. 334-335: 

22 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

states what is the peculiar characteristic of each; this is precisely the 
procedure of Nicomachusin theIntroduction. Archytas perhaps herein 
furnished a model for future writers of aries. 

Either in the same work or in another, Archytas seems to have 
written upon certain of the fundamental conceptions of arithmetic; 
for it is reported that he and Philolaus used the terms ‘monad’ and 
‘one’ indiscriminately, and that he believed the monad to partake of 
the nature of both odd and even,’ and we may note also the passage 
which Nicomachus quotes in the Introduction, I. 3. 4. Archytas was 
besides a pioneer in mechanics and an able geometrician. 

The first two fragments cited above, together with several others 
which need not be mentioned here, seem, to judge from their similarity 
of subject, to have come from the same work of Archytas, and Diels, 
who groups them under the title Discourse on Harmony (appovikds, sc. 
Aoyos), has probably made the best conjecture as to both name and 
nature of the work, for an underlying interest in music pervades them 
all. This book, however, was also cited by the ancients as On Mathe- 
matics or On Music.2 Blass’s conjecture as to the character of the 
book,‘ that it was a comprehensive one on mathematics, with a general 
introduction and sections dealing with harmony and the other mathe- 
matical sciences, and that the ancients cited it by the subjects of the 
various parts, is on the whole less likely than the theory which con- 
ceives it to have been a treatise dealing primarily with music, but 
containing a subsidiary discussion of arithmetic as a necessary intro- 
duction to the theory of harmony. 

The section on arithmetic must have been a systematic ars arith- 
metica; whether or not it was a complete one must remain in doubt. 
It is at least true, as Tannery declares, that the proposition preserved 
by Boethius would naturally be one of a series like that in the seventh 
book of Euclid’s Elements, and we may be assured that ratio and pro- 
portion also were systematically dealt with. Tannery adds that most 
probably this could not have been original with Archytas, but is evi- 
dence for an ars arithmetica already existent in his time. However 

1 Cf. Nicomachus, Introduction, II. c. 23 ff. Note that similar definitions of the means are 
given by Plato in Timaeus, 31 C — 32 A, and 36 A-B. 

? Theon of Smyrna, pp. 20, 19; 22, 5 ff. (Hiller). 

3 xepl pabquaruhs, Porphyry, In Ptolemact Harmonica, p. 236, introducing the fragment 
quoted by Nicomachus, Introduction, I. 3. 4, as from the dpyomxdés. Diels’s fragment 3 is cited as 
from wept pafnudrwr by Iamblichus. The fragment on the proportions, cited by Porphyry and 
quoted above, purports to come from the repi rijs poverxis. 

4 Mélanges Graux, pp. 583-584. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 23 

that may be, the name of Archytas is the first with which is associated 
something definite in the history of the development of a formal! arith- 
metic, and it is in consonance with his undoubted eminence as a mathe- 
matician to assume that it was by his own original efforts that he 
accomplished a great share of the contributions already mentioned.’ 

Plato and the Academic philosophers who succeeded him were 
hardly less concerned with mathematics than Archytas and the 
Pythagoreans. Although but one proposition, that which specifies 
that between two plane numbers as extremes one mean can be found, 
but that there must be two between two solid numbers,’ is definitely 
linked with the name of Plato in the later tradition of the ars arith- 
metica, he nevertheless exercised in another way his influence upon its 
form, for we see that Nicomachus planned his Introduction so as to 
explain the mathematical principles involved in the difficult Platonic 
passages concerning the world-soul in the Timaeus and the marriage- 
number in the Republic.’ 

The esteem in which Plato held mathematical studies is sufficiently 
seen from the importance he attaches to them in his account of educa- 
tion in both the Republic and the Laws,‘ and by his constant references 
to things mathematical. Undoubtedly they were the subject of in- 
struction and discussion in the Academy, and we might well conjecture 
that for such purposes some formal outline of the subject was prepared, 
if nothing more than a set of lecture notes, but there is no positive in- 
formation that a book of the sort existed. Some of the matters which 
it would contain can be inferred, however, from the mathematical 
references of the dialogues. 

Like Nicomachus, Plato gives a list of allied mathematical sciences, 
the most famous of which is that in the Republic, which contains 
arithmetic, plane geometry, solid geometry, and astronomy.® Music 

! The opinion of T. L. Heath of the importance of Archytas’s contribution is to be seen from 
the following quotation from The Thiricen Books of Euclid's Elements, vol. 11, p. 295: “We have 
then here a clear indication of the existence at least as early as the date of Archytas (about 
430-365 B.c.) of an Elements of Arithmetic in the form which we call Euclidean.” Cf. Heath, 
History, vol. 1, pp. 212-216. 

Cf. Introduction, Il. 24. 6 and Plato, Timaeus, 32 A. 

7 Cf. Introduction, Il. 24. 6. 

‘Republic, 522 c ff.; Laws, 817 E. See Burnet, of. cil., pp. 224 ff. 

‘ Plato’s arithmetic includes also logistic. Other sciences mentioned are those of weighing and 
measuring, craruy and perpixy, besides those spoken of by Nicomachus. The passages refer- 
ring to these sciences are Republic, 522 c ff.; Laws, 817 £; Philebus, 55 © ff.; Alcibiades, 126; 

Euthydemus, 290 B; Protagoras, 356 D ff.; Gorgias, 453 E; Hippias Minor, 367 ff.; Poltticus, 
284£; Theaefelus, 198 A fi. 

24 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

is omitted, but astronomy is distinguished, as by Nicomachus, as a 
science that treats of bodies in motion. Arithmetic is twice defined 
as the science that deals with the odd and even,' and Plato distinguishes 
the mathematics of the philosopher, which deals with abstract numbers 
and quantities, from the arithmetic of ordinary life which manipu- 
lates concrete units that are not always thesame.? Among the funda- 
mental ideas of mathematics which Plato discusses is the nature of 
arithmetical number,’ of ‘one,’* and of the odd and even,® together 
with mention of addition,® greatness and smallness,’ multitude,*® and 
the counting process.’ In the Parmenides,!® moreover, it is demon- 
strated that number must exist, and in the Theaetetus " there occurs 
a set of three axioms which underlie all arithmetical computation. 
The Platonic dialogues contain also a surprising number of references 
to the classifications of number and the topics which fall under the 
head of relative number in the typical ars artthmetica; the terminology, 
too, is the same as that of Nicomachus. Plato usually divides 
number into odd and even,” but a more exhaustive classification, 
including even-times even, odd-times odd, even-times odd, and odd- 
times even, occurs in one place. The even series is a ortyos, just 
as in Nicomachus;* there are mentioned ‘parts’ (yépy),™ 
aliquot parts (ydproy),!® ‘measures’ (wérpor),'® rationals and surds 
(pyrd, appyra),’” powers (duvdpecs) 1? and roots (Suvdpevac),'® solid 
and plane numbers (orepeoi, émimedor) with their varieties, squares, 
cubes, and oblongs (icov iodxtis, kuBos, mpounKys),?° and their sides 
(w\evpa) and dimensions (amrdcracts),” addition and division (oxiots, 

1 Theaetetus, 198 A; Gorgias, 453 E- 5 Phaedo, 103 E ff. 

* Philebus, 55 © ff. ® Phaedo, 96 © ff. 

+ Philebus, 56 D ff. 7 Phaedo, 100 E. 

‘ Parmenides, 137 D. ® Parmenides, 144 A. 

9 Theacteius, 198 Cc; to count (dpyelr) is “to see how great a number it chances to be”’ 
(oxoweicGas wéc0s mis dpWuds ruyxXdvet Gy). 10 r43 fff. Wiss A. 

13 Gorgias, 453 B; Hippias Maior, 303 B; Politicus, 262 £; Theaetetus,198 a; Republic, s10c. 
The fourfold classification occurs in Parmenides, 143 §£; it should be compared to the Euclidean 
subdivision (Elements, Book VII, definitions) into the same classes, and contrasted with the three- 
fold classification (of the even) of Nicomachus, Introduction, I. 8. 3. 

@ Phaedo, 104 B; ctl. Introduction, II. 17. 3-4, etc. 

4 Theacictus, 204 £ ff.; Parmenides, 151 B. 16 Parmenides, 151 B; Philebus, 25 A. 

18 Timaeus, 36 B. " Hippras Mator, 303 B; Republic, 546 c. 

18 Theaetetus, 147 D ff. dvvacrevdueru: also occurs, Republic, 546 B. 

W Republic, loc. cit. 

Republic, 5460; Theaelelus, 147 ¥ ff.; Timaeus,a32. Note also the terminology whéur thar- 
rovaais, tXdrrwv wheovdats, Theaetefus, loc. cif., which is much like that of Nicomachus in Jniroduc- 
tion, II. 17.6. Plato also uses dvé as the name for a square; Meno,83D; Nicomachus, Introduc- 
tion, I. 9. 6, etc. | Republic, 546 B. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 25 

apoabecus),| and the ‘pythmen’ or smallest representative of any 
form of ratio (rvOpu7v).? 

With regard to relative number, the fundamental idea of equality is 
often mentioned and is defined as “that which neither exceeds nor 
is exceeded” (76 pyre uTepeyov pyre vrepexouevov),*® and the major 
classes of relations between numbers, the greater and the less, occur 
no less frequently.* From the multitude of examples that may be 
cited, it is clear that Plato’s nomenclature of the individual ratios was 
the ordinary one.° He uses the notions ‘greater’ and ‘less’ to illus- 
trate relativity,° but at the same time assigns ratios a place in the di- 
vision of the finite.’ Finally, if we consider that all mention of them 
is purely incidental, the treatment of proportion (avadoyia) is es- 
pecially complete. Definitions of the arithmetic and harmonic types 
occur in the form found also in Archytas and Nicomachus,?® and the 
geometric is seen in the simile of the divided line * and elsewhere. 

We have already noted that the theorem concerning the number of 
means necessary between plane and solid numbers as extremes may 
well be a contribution of Plato himself; and furthermore the use of 
the so-called ‘musical’ proportion by Plato in Tzmaeus 36 a, though 
it had doubtless been employed by the Pythagoreans before him, led 
the authors of artes, like Nicomachus in [ntroduction, II. 29, and of com- 
mentaries on the Timaeus to devote much space to its discussion. 

From this wealth of arithmetical material in the works of Plato later 
authors might surely have borrowed. Whether or not they did so, 
its presence in Plato is another link in the chain of evidence proving 
the gradual development of a standard form of statement for arith- 
metical matters, and shows perhaps as well that, although the arith- 
metic of Plato is substantially that of Archytas, further refinement of 
definition and classification was constantly going on, in which the 
Platonic school bore a share. 

To prove this more definitely, we could wish to have more extensive 
documents from the Academy than the scanty remains we actually 
possess; for although little but the titles of books is left, yet these 

1 Phaedo, 97 A. 

2 Republic, 546; cf. on Introduction, I. 19. 6. 

* Phaedo, 97 A. 

4 Republic, 438 B; Charmides, 168 B; Parmentdes, 140 C, 150 D, 151 B. 

® Charmides, 168 B; Phaedo, 105 A; Meno, 83 B, 84 E; Timaeus, 36 a; Theaetetus, 154 C; 
Republic, 546 c. 

® Republic, 438 B. ? Philebus, 25 A. ® Timaeus, 36 A. 

® Republic, 509 D ff.; Timaeus, 31 C— 32 A (a proportion of equality). 

26 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

indicate that the interest in mathematics continued high after the 
master’s death. Speusippus’s book On Pythagorean Numbers has 
already been mentioned; and we may note that Xenocrates’s works 
included On Mathematics, On Geometry, On Numbers, and Theory of 
Numbers! Philip of Opus, the reputed author of the Platonic Epino- 
mis, treated the subject of polygonal numbers in a book which is now 
lost, but which may well have influenced subsequent discussions of the 
polygonals; he is said to have written upon arithmetic as well, but 
this work also is not now extant.’ 

The celebrated astronomer and mathematician Eudoxus was also 
intimately connected with the Platonic group and is known to have 
made important contributions to the theory of proportion. The 
treatment of this subject found in Euclid, in fact, is now regarded 
as due to him, and as Heath remarks, it is “equally applicable to 
geometry, arithmetic, music, and all mathematical science.” * Since 
the works of Eudoxus have unfortunately all perished, we cannot be 
certain that his theory of proportion occurred in a book on arithmetic, 
but the reference made by Theon, as noted above, to the school of 
Eudoxus, and Iamblichus’s statement that he defined number as 
‘limited multitude’ * make it somewhat probable. His success as an 
astronomer has tended to obscure whatever he may have accomplished 
in other fields of mathematics. We may also recall that the philosopher 
Democritus, an older contemporary of Plato, was much interested in 
mathematics, and that a book entitled Numbers (apiOpoi) is among 
those which he is said to have written.° 

Aristotle’s share in the making of the réyvy was, to judge from his 
influence traceable in Nicomachus, no small one; it was concerned 
chiefly with the definition of the fundamental concepts of mathematics. 
His antiquarian interests also led him to write an essay upon the 
Pythagoreans, now lost,® and to bring into his extant works frequent 
discussions of them and their theories.’ He is still our best informant 

See p. 89, n. r. 

2 Cf. Bibypada, Vitarum Scriptores Graeci Minores (ed. Westermann, 1845), p. 446. 

3 Op. cit., vol. II, p. 112. The date of Eudoxus was about 408-355 B.c. See Diogenes 
Laertius, VIII. 86, on his life. See also Heath, History, vol. I, pp. 321-334. 

‘See p. 127. 

’ See Burnet, op. cil., pp. 193 ff., and Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, vol. I’, p. 390, 
for a collection of the titles of the mathematical works of Democritus. 

© Tuayopixés or wept trav [wWayopeluw; see Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen (ed. 5), vol. 
I, part 1, p. 280, note 1. 

7 The first book of the Metaphysics gives an extended account of them. References abound, 
however, throughout the Mefaphysics, Physics and other works. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 27 

about Pythagoreanism, and probably he, like the doxographers and 
biographers of the philosophers,’ preserved much that was of interest 
to Nicomachus. Aristotle’s pupil, Theophrastus, wrote books deal- 
ing with geometry, music, and astronomy, besides one book each of 
Arithmetical Inquiries and On Numbers,’ but we are wholly ignorant 
of the character of his work. 

So great was the respect of the Greeks for the genius of Plato that 
his dialogues very soon became a subject of study in their higher edu- 
cation, and scholars began to write commentaries upon them. The 
Platonic commentaries undoubtedly must be taken into account in 
any study of the evolution of such books as the Introduction, for in 
order to elucidate the mathematical passages of Plato it was often 
necessary to set forth in detail the principles upon which the explana- 
tion rested, and so, although they may not have embraced a com- 
plete ars arithmetica, parts of them dealing with special subjects — 
for example, with ratios — were really incomplete artes and were of 
great use to compilators like Nicomachus. This is particularly true 
of commentaries on the Timaeus, the most mathematical of all the 
Platonic dialogues. 

We shall see that one of these commentaries, the Platonicus of 
Eratosthenes,*® was very probably a source, direct or indirect, of Theon 
of Smyrna, if not of Nicomachus himself, and that another, by Adras- 
tus,’ was a primary source of Theon. To what extent still others may 
have exercised influence it would be rash to try to say, for few of them 
survive. We can form an idea of the lost commentaries only through 
the extant ones, those of Plutarch,’ Chalcidius, and Proclus, and by 
means of the citations found in these and other authors. It is known, 
however, that Crantor, Xenocrates, Eudorus, Clearchus, Theodorus, 
Panaetius and Posidonius commented on the TJimaeus, besides 
Plutarch, Eratosthenes, Adrastus, Chalcidius and Proclus;® and we 
must grant the possibility that any one of them may have contributed 
something to the ars arithmetica. 

! For the doxographers, cf. Diels’s collection of texts, Doxographi Graect. Arius Didymus was 
a writer of this type, and Sotion compiled Lives of the Philosophers. 

7 Cf. Diogenes Laertius, V. 2. 50. 

* Eratosthenes, c. 275-194 B.C., was librarian at Alexandria. On the book, cf. E. Hiller, 
Philologus, vol. XXX, pp. 60 ff., who shows that it was a commentary on the Timacus. 

“On this commentary, cf. E. Hiller, Rheinisches Museum, vol. XXVI, pp. 582 ff.; Zeller, 
op. cit. (ed. 4), vol. III, part I, p. 806, note; Cantor, Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der Mathematik, 
vol. I (ed. 3), p. 433. § De Animae Procreatione in Timaeo, 

6 Th. Martin, in his edition of the Timaeus, has collected the names of the commentaries and 
the information about them that we have. 

28 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Before we leave the commentaries, it must be remarked that two of 
the surviving artes, those of Theon and of Nicomachus, have a very 
close connection with this class in that both authors relate their dis- 
cussion of mathematics to the study of Plato, Theon openly, through 
the title and the introduction of his book, Nicomachus by frequently 
reminding the student that certain of his chapters will be of use toward 
understanding the mathematics of Plato.! That is, the two treatises 
both belong to the class of the artes and are at the same time related 
to the Platonic commentaries and handbooks. It is essential that this 
relationship be constantly borne in mind in order to form a correct idea 
of the literary ancestry of the Introduction. Not only is it a handbook 
of arithmetic, but it presupposes, like Theon’s work, that its user is to 
hear lectures on the Timaeus and the Republic, and is designed to assist 
him. Theon’s introductions to arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and 
music all have this as their avowed purpose. Remembering that 
Nicomachus wrote other ‘introductions’ also,” we may perhaps say 
that he did in four treatises what Theon did in one. 

Euclid * marks an undoubted epoch in the history of the ars arith- 
metica. The Elements is the first extant written work which completely 
covers the ground of elementary arithmetic, definitions and proposi- 
tions alike; and needless to say the Elements was likewise in many 
respects a model for later compilers to follow. We cannot here pause 
to show how fully the seventh, eighth and ninth books of the Ele- 
menis fulfill the requirements of the ars artthmetica, and indeed it may 
be assumed that the work is too well known to require such a demon- 
stration. The methods of Euclid and Nicomachus, it may be re- 
marked, are very different, in that Euclid always, Nicomachus never, 
offers proofs for his propositions; and in this respect the Elements 
probably differed from most of the artes, for as a class they seem to 
have been descriptive rather than based on demonstration. 

Another mathematician who probably contributed to this tradition 

1Cf. Introduction, II. 2. 3; 21. 1; 24. 6; 28. 1. Im these passages it is stated that the 
material given will be useful in the study of Platonic theorems, or the passages read and dealt 
with (4vayrdcuare) in the schools; a similar purpose will be suspected also when Nicomachus 
halts to point out the bearing of arithmetical propositions upon metaphysical theory; e.g., 
Introduction, I. 23.4; I]. 17.2; 18. 4. 

* See p. 81. 

* The dates of Euclid’s life are not exactly known. He was later than Plato's disciples, earlier 
than Eratosthenes and Archimedes, according to Proclus, Jn Primum Euclidis Elementorum 
Librum Commentarii, p. 68 (Friedlein), and is usually placed in the reigns of the first Ptolemies. 
See Heath, History, vol. I, pp. 354-357. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 29 

was Hypsicles.’ He, like Philip of Opus, is known to have worked upon 
the subject of polygonal numbers, and one of his propositions bears 
close resemblance to a Nicomachean passage.” The name of the book 
in which this occurred, however, is unknown, and likewise we have 
no information upon a treatise on arithmetic which he is reported to 
have written. 

Euclid, Eudoxus, Hypsicles and Eratosthenes, who has been men- 
tioned in another connection, are practically the only mathematicians 
whom we can specify as having very probably been concerned in the 
development of the ars arithmetica from the fourth century before 
Christ to the time of Nicomachus. Yet in this age the Greek science 
of mathematics was in its most flourishing state, centering especially 
about Alexandria, and it is hardly to be imagined that the Elements 
of Euclid was the only book of the type of the artes which was 
written in this period. Nesselmann has already noted this serious 
lacuna in our knowledge of arithmetical history.* 

That the production of books upon elementary arithmetic, however, 
really went on during this time is attested by many proofs, to be 
drawn partly from Nicomachus and Theon of Smyrna, partly from 
others, especially Philo, which by their cumulative evidence lead one 
to believe that most of what Nicomachus has written was commonly 
found in the books of his time, and furthermore that this elementary 
mathematical knowledge existed in a form fairly well fixed and gen- 
erally accepted. It was not, apparently, accompanied by Euclidean 
proofs; at least the references in Nicomachus and Philo make no men- 
tion of them, and, if anything, suggest the opposite. To sum up the 
whole matter, it is extremely probable that the period between Euclid 
and Nicomachus witnessed the final development of the ars arithmetica, 
by the work of many hands, into a form greatly resembling the 
Introduction to Arithmetic itself. 

Much of the evidence for this conjecture, comes, as has been re- 
marked, from Nicomachus, who, without giving names, several times 
refers to arithmeticians engaged, as it would seem,in work much like 
his own. He says, for example, in Introduction II. 14. 5, that he must 
introduce the subject of truncated and bitruncated pyramids and the 

1 Hypsicles lived about 180 B.c. His work included arithmetical progressions as well as 
polygonal numbers. See Gow, op. cit., p. 87, and Cantor, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 358 ff., especially 
p. 361; Heath, History, vol. II, pp. 213-218. 

1 Introduction, II. 11. 4 (cf. the notes). 
3 Geschichte der Algebra, vol. I, p. 219. 

30 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

like, which may be met with ‘in the theoretical treatises’ (év ovyypap- 
pact padhuora Tots Gewpnuarixots) ; and again, touching upon scalene 
numbers, he records that ‘certain ones’ or ‘others’ used various names 
for them, ‘wedges,’ ‘wasps,’ ‘altars.’ ! 

Somewhat more definite information may be derived from what is 
stated in II. 22. 1 and 28. 6 about the history of the varieties of propor- 
tion. In the former passage he says that, whereas the three chief 
forms and their subcontraries were known to Pythagoras, Plato and 
Aristotle, the ‘moderns’ (ot vedrepou) devised four more to make up 
the sacred number, 10; and, furthermore, that in the latter the three 
subcontraries came into use among the ‘writers of commentaries and 
members of schools’ (vzoprvnuatroypadot, aipertorai) after Plato and 
Aristotle, while ‘certain ones’ discovered the remaining four. It 
could easily be inferred even on this basis alone that the immediate 
successors of Plato and Aristotle, the Academics and Peripatetics, 
and the Platonic and Aristotelian commentators, were the ones who 
dealt especially with the three subcontraries, and because the sacred 
number 10 was taken into account that the ‘moderns’ mentioned were 
Pythagoreans. 

Iamblichus ? fortunately confirms this suspicion by informing us 
that Eudoxus and his followers invented the three subcontraries, 
which with the three original forms were in use up to the time of 
Eratosthenes, and that thereafter the Pythagoreans Myonides and 
Euphranor introduced the rest. Nothing further is known of these 
two men other than that they flourished between the times of Eratos- 
thenes and Nicomachus. It cannot be assumed that they were purely 
scientific writers — the presumption is rather that they were not — 
nor that they dealt with the whole subject of mathematics. The 
circumstance, however, proves for Nicomachus a disposition to take 
account of existing work and casts light, though feebly, on the prob- 
lem of his sources. 

Certain utterances of Theon of Smyrna are similar in purport to 
those of Nicomachus just mentioned. We have already noted that 
Theon speaks vaguely of a ‘Pythagorean tradition’ to which he was 
deeply indebted.* In other passages he says that “some’ regarded the 

111. 16. 2. Similarly with reference to the arithmetical proportion he writes that one of its 

peculiar properties has escaped ‘the majority,’ whereas another is recorded by ‘all previous 

authors’ (II. 23. 6). Cf. also II. 13. 1. . _ 
2See on II. 22.1; 28.6. Note also that Moderatus probably dealt with all the varieties of 

proportion. 3 See p. 20, n. 4. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 31 

monad as first of the series of odd numbers, and with regard to the 
elements of number he mentions the opinions of ‘later’ writers as 
opposed to ‘the followers of Pythagoras,’ and those of Archytas and 
Philolaus in contrast to ‘the majority.’ * 

The testimony of Philo Judaeus is even more important, for it shows 
that, although he cannot have seen the works of Nicomachus or of 
Theon, he nevertheless knew a surprising number of the topics which 
they employ, and we can hardly account for this fact save on the 
ground that he was acquainted with an ars arithmetica which pre- 
sented these matters in practically the same formas they did. Nothing 
will more clearly demonstrate this than a brief recapitulation of the 
arithmetical material in his works. The examination of the Philonic 
corpus shows that he distinguished between the monad and one;? 
that he had an idea comparable to that of Nicomachus concerning 
‘sameness’ and ‘otherness’ in number, embodied in the monad and 
dyad or in ‘odd’ and ‘even’; * and that he distinguished even, odd, 
and even-times odd numbers,’ primes ° and perfect numbers.°® 

Of the subjects treated by Nicomachus under the general head 
‘relative number’ Philo mentions equality, inequality, excess and 
deficiency,’ and ratios, including multiples, superparticulars and 
superpartients, with their specific forms.* Concerning figurate num- 
bers, he touches upon the distinction between the dimensional and 
the indimensional, upon the four ‘bounds’ of things— point, line, sur- 
face-and solid, each of which he defines ?— and the numbers corre- 

1 Pp. 20, 5 ff.; 20, 19 fi.; 21, 24 (Hiller). 

? Quaestiones et Solutiones in Genesim, IV. 110; cf. Lydus, II. 5. This is not in Nicomachus, 
but is treated at length by Theon. 

1 Suggestions of this occur in Quaestiones ef Solutiones in Genesim, II. 12; IV. 110. 

4 Jbid., IV. 199; De Mundi Opificio, 3; De Septenario, 6; De Decalogo, 6; Quaestiones 
et Solutiones in Genesim, III. 38. The threefold classification is found in older Pythagorean 
works and in Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 3 (Ast). 

* De Decalogo, 7. 

® De Mundi Opificio, 34: redeov xal rots abrov pépeow loobuevow (cf. Nicomachus’s defini- 
tion) ; ibid., 3; Legis Allegoriac, 1. 2; De Decalogo,7; Quaestiones et Solutiones in Genesim, III. 
38; Quaestiones et Solutiones in Exodum, Il. 87; De Vita Mosis, III. 5. Philo mentions only 6 
and 28 as perfect numbers. 

7 De Justitia, 14; Quis Rerum Divinarum Heres Su, 28. 

8 Various specific ratios are named, as De Mundi Opificio, 15, 30, 37; Quaestiones et Solutiones 
in Genesim, II. 5; ITI. 49, 56; IV. 71; Quod Deterius Potiort Insidiari Soleat, 19. Musical 
concords, De Mundi Opificio, 15, 31; De Vita Mosis, LI. 11; Quaestiones et Solutiones in 
Genesim, IV, 27. 

° De Decalogo, 7; De Mundi Opificio, 10, 16, 34; De Congressu Quaerendce Erudttionis 
Gratia, 26; De Somniis, 1. 5; Quaestiones et Solutiones in Exodum, II. 93. 

32 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

sponding to them, triangular, square, pentagonal, hexagonal, hep- 
tagonal numbers,” and heteromecic. 

He knew that the addition of successive odd numbers produces 
the squares, and that of even numbers the heteromecic numbers,’ and 
he states more fully than Nicomachus himself the theorem concern- 
ing the occurrence of squares, cubes and cube-squares in analogous 
series. Among solid numbers he mentions pyramids® and cubes ° 
and in the matter of proportions he is informed as to the three chief 
forms ’ and their union in the series 6, 8, 9, 12.8 This brief synopsis 
shows that far more of the arithmetic of Nicomachus was in the hands 
of Philo than either Plato, Archytas or Philolaus possessed. This 
could hardly have been so unless we imagine these doctrines to have 
been written over and over again in books which were in ordinary 
circulation. By Philo’s time not only the topics, but even the Nicoma- 
chean form of statement, must have been commonly known. 

We may rest assured that activity in the production of artes arith- 
meticae did not cease during the two or three centuries immediately 
preceding the lifetime of Nicomachus, although we are not directly 
informed about it. The part played by the Neo-Pythagorean sect, 
of which Nicomachus himself was a member, remains to be discussed. 
So far as the later Pythagoreans occupied themselves with mystical 
and theological speculations in the realm of arithmology, they can be 
conceded very little credit for the development of the arithmetical 
Téxvyn upon its scientific side; yet it will be seen that even the arith- 
mological doctrines made their way, to some extent, into the artes. 
On the other hand, we have already found reason to believe that many 
of the unknown writers of arfes were Pythagorean. 

From the titles of their books and such fragments as remain, it is 
clear that the interests of the Neo-Pythagoreans were directed more 
toward philosophy and mysticism than to mathematics proper. 
Evidently their books were more closely related to the Theologumena 

1 De Mundi Opificio, 16, 32; De Decalogo, 7; Quaestiones et Soluliones in Exodum, IT. 93, 94. 

2 All mentioned in Quaestiones ef Solutiones in Genesim, I. 83; cf. ibid., I. 91; II. 5; III. 56. 

* Ouaestiones et Solutiones tn Genestm, IL. 5, 12, 14. 

“ De Mundi Optficro, 30, 36. 

5 Thid., 16. 

® De Decalogo, 7; Quaestiones ef Solutiones in Genesim, II. 5; III. 49, 56. 

7 Philo defines them: De Decalogo6; De Mundi Opificio, 37. 

8 Cf. Introduction, II. 29. Philo calls this the wAlouor (laterculus): De Mundi Opificio, 37; 
Quaestiones ef Solutiones in Genesim, 1. 91; III. 38; IV. 27. He also makes use of the similar 
series 6, 9, 12, 18 (mentioned in Theologumena Arithmeticac, but not in the Introduction). 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 33 

Artihmeticae than to the Introduction, although even the latter con- 
tains references to some of them which prove that in the midst of 
extraneous matter they may have contained topics relating to arith- 
metic, or to the traditions of the early Pythagoreans which would be 
of value to writers of artes. The following are of some interest, either 
from their titles or because they are cited by Nicomachus :' 

Androcydes, On the Pythagorean Symbols (llepi Wv@ayopixor 
ovupBorwv), 

Aristaeon, On Harmony (Tlept appovias), 

Butherus, On Numbers (Ilept appar), 

Eubulides, author of a work (title unknown) dealing with Pythag- 
oras, 

Hippasus,” 

Kleinias, 

Megillus, On Numbers (Tlept apOpov), 

Prorus, On the Hebdomad (Tlepi rns EBSopddos). 

Aside from the fact that Nicomachus himself was a Neo-Pythag- 
orean and that the works of Philo seem to presuppose an ars arith- 
metica of decidedly Neo-Pythagorean cast, the little that is known of 
the career of Moderatus of Gades,* one of the most eminent of the 
school, confirms the conjecture that this group was actively interested 
in the ars arithmetica. The only known work of Moderatus was 
called Pythagorean Lectures,‘ and its fragments show it to have been 
less extravagant than most of the writings of the school, and to have 
approached the study of certain fundamental questions of the theory 
of numbers in a decidedly scientific spirit. Moderatus’s treatment 

1 Androcydes: Introduction, I. 3.3; Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 40 (Ast); Aristaeon is 
usually identified with the ‘Aristaeus’ of Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 41; Butherus: see Sto- 
baeus, Eclogae I, Prooemium, 5; Eubulides: Theologumena Arithmelicae, p. 40; Hippasus is 
frequently cited, but the writings attributed to him are generally thought spurious; Kleinias, 
Megillus, and Prorus: Theologumena Arithmeticae, pp. 17, 27, and 43, respectively. Zeller, 
op. cit. (ed. 4), vol. III, part 2, pp. 115 ff., and Chaignet, Pythagore et la Philosophie Pythagoricienne 
(Paris, 1873), vol. I, pp. 165 ff., may be consulted for longer lists of such works and for theories 
of their dates and compositions. 

? The real Hippasus belonged, of course, to the early school. The writings attributed to him, 
however, should be dealt with as products of the Neo-Pythagoreans. 

* Usually assigned to the time of Nero on the ground that he was a teacher of Lucius, a 
contemporary of Plutarch. Cf. also Porphyry, Vite Plotini, 20; Stephanus Byzantinus, s.v. 
Tédecpa. 

‘TlwWayopuai cxodal; cf. Porphyry, Vila Pythagorica, 48; Simplicius, Physica, p. 50, B; 
Stobaeus, Eclogae I, Proocmium, 8-9 (vol. I, p. 21, ed. Wachsmuth-Hense). 

34 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

of the monad and one influenced a chapter of Theon of Smyrna,’ and, 
like Nicomachus, he probably discussed ten forms of proportions.’ 
Although little more is known of the scope and nature of the Pythag- 
orean Lectures, it is at any rate clear that Moderatus occupied himself 
with the themes of the ars arithmetica and may well have produced 
an ars of his own. 

The survey of the history of the ers arithmetica which we have just 
made is in itself enough to show how hopeless is the attempt to assign 
to each topic of the Introduction to Arithmetic its precise source. The 
Introduction brings together the results of a gradual growth; there is 
hardly one of its subjects but had been discussed and written about 
dozens, if not hundreds, of times. One may naturally assume, of 
course, that the more eminent mathematicians, who had made es- 
pecially famous contributions to the art, were the real sources of 
Nicomachus when he deals with the subjects of their special study, 
and such probabilities can be specified with reasonable accuracy ; 
his general sources, however, can only be regarded as the indeterminate 
mass of previous arithmetical writing. 

It cannot even be positively stated that Nicomachus used Euclid’s 
Elements. There can be no question of course that he knew it. But 
the two works are of entirely different character, Euclid defining and 
demonstrating, Nicomachus defining and laying down general prin- 
ciples with abundant illustration and explanation. If in any respect 
Euclid could have served as a basis for Nicomachus, we should at once 
think of his definitions, but even here it will be observed that there 
are many divergences between the two. In Euclid’s Elements, how- 
ever, there were at least a pattern of arrangement and an example show- 
ing what subjects needed exposition. It is perhaps in this general 
way, if at all, that we are to look for a relation between the two. It 
may be confidently stated, nevertheless, that Euclid did not serve as 
the only model, nor even as the principal model, for Nicomachus. 

With regard to his actual sources Nicomachus himself offers small 
help; the only authors he mentions by name are Androcydes, Archytas, 

1 Cf. Moderatus in Stobaeus, Joc. cii., and Theon of Smyrna, pp. 18, 3-9 and 19, 7-8 and 
12-13 (Hiller). 

2 Cf. Proclus, In Timaeum (Dieh)), vol. II, p. 18, 29 ff., who says, tnfer alta, va ydp rapaper 
pew ras GAAas peocdryras 4s ol vewrepor wpogriact, Tous Nixoudxous Aké-yw, robs Modepdrous «ai ef 
gues GAAot rovovTa, wepi && ray Tpuaw Td viv pecorhrwy elrwyer ad’ Oy cal 6 Tlkdrur tplorye: ryp 
yuxhy, «rh. This leads to the inferences, first, that Moderatus was actively interested in arith- 
metical subjects in much the same way as Nicomachus, and second, since their names are so 
coupled, that he discussed, like Nicomachus, ten forms of proportion. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 35 

Aristotle, Eratosthenes, Plato and Philolaus, besides Pythagoras, to 
whom he refers in a general way. 

Three of these, Androcydes, Archytas, and Philolaus, are Pythag- 
oreans, and Plato is treated as practically a member of theschool. The 
two former are quoted in I. 3. 4-4 to substantiate the well-known 
Pythagorean principle of the necessity of mathematics, and immedi- 
ately thereafter Plato 1s cited to the same effect. But the Pythagorean 
mathematicians have left their imprint upon the Introduction in far 
more essential matters; to say nothing of the cosmological topics 
found in the introductory chapters, to them must be ascribed the 
fundamental conception of number as a balanced and harmonized 
fabric of ‘odd’ and ‘even,’ ‘same’ and ‘other,’ which makes itself 
especially felt in certain chapters of Book II, and in the treatment of 
the dyad, as well as the monad, as an element of number.! 

Less important matters are the remarks about the nomenclature of 
the harmonic proportion (II. 26. 2) attributed to Philolaus, the ‘ Pythag- 
orean’ definition of ‘odd’ and ‘even’ (I. 7. 3), and the references to 
the ‘sacred’ decad (II. 22.1). The fact is that the whole Introduction 
has a distinctly Pythagorean coloring through the underlying assump- 
tion that the numbers influence their derivatives. Just what were the 
books most powerful in influencing Nicomachus cannot be said; 
certainly Philolaus’s work, [lept dvcews, was one, but the long list 
of Neo-Pythagorean documents must not be forgotten. 

That Aristotle was a source for Nicomachus cannot be doubted, 
but it was not so much mathematical material as logical method that 
was derived from the Stagirite. To be sure, Aristotle seems to have 
been consulted upon the definition and classification of the ultimate 
subjects of mathematics, number and quantity,” but he is also present 
on nearly every page in the distinctions of genus and species and in 
the formation of arguments.’ 

Eratosthenes, of course, makes his appearance in connection with 
his famous ‘sieve’ (I. 13), but there are two other places where with 
the aid of Theon we can detect a suggestive similarity. This is seen 
most clearly in the theorem of the ‘three rules’ for deriving the various 
ratios from equality ;* and there was perhaps another kindred matter 
in which Eratosthenes led the way for Nicomachus. Theon reports 

1 See pp. 115 ff. 2 See pp. 112 ff. 
+See on Introduction, I. 2. 3-4; 3.1; 4. 2,3; 14.2; 23.5; II. 20. 2. 
‘See on Introduction, I. 23. 4 

36 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

much of what Eratosthenes had to say in demonstrating that equality 
is the element of ratio. Now one of Nicomachus’s own favorite 
themes is that equality is the element of relative number.? There 
is doubtless no way of demonstrating a direct relation in these matters, 
and in fact it is not certain that even for the ‘sieve’ proposition Nicoma- 
chus went to Eratosthenes himself. 

Plato is quoted many times by Nicomachus, and was most influen- 
tial in the establishment of his philosophic doctrines, as we have had 
occasion to observe.* On the mathematical side, the most important 
proposition probably taken from this source is the one which states 
that there must be two geometrical means between cubes and one 
between squares; Plato had also been one of the first to make use of 
the proportion dealt with in IT. 29. 

There is little further that can be definitely said about the source of 
Nicomachus, but no one can doubt that our author drew from many 
others who must for us remain nameless, the authors of the artes 
arithmeticae for the existence of which in his day we have seen that 
there is sufficient evidence. Nicomachus can hardly fail to leave the 
impression with the reader that he is working over familiar ground, and 
the assumption that there was an extensive literature, now lost, of the 
type described in the preceding pages, is the only satisfactory explana- 
tion of this fact. His task was the collection and organization of ma- 
terial, not its creation; and his fame in antiquity must have been 
based on the skill with which he performed this work and on the use- 
fulness of the book which he produced. 

Before passing, however, from this topic to the influence of Nicoma- 
chus upon later writers, we must examine his relation to Theon of 
Smyrna. Concerning the personality and history of this author far 
less is known than even the meager facts of the life of Nicomachus, 
but his date may be confidently placed in the first quarter of the 
second century of our era.* Theon was the author of a book dealing 
with the mathematical matters needful for the reading of Plato,® in 
the course of which he draws freely upon Thrasyllus, Eratosthenes, 
and especially the Peripatetic Adrastus, and in addition seems to have 

1 Theon, p. 82, 22 ff. (Hiller). 

2 See Introduction, II. 1, and on I. 23. 4. 

3 See pp. 92, etc. 

4See p. 72. Cf. Heath, History, vol. II, pp. 238-244. 

5 Exposttio Rerum Mathematicarum ad Legendum Platonem Utilium, ed. E. Hiller, Leipzig, 
1878 (whose paging is cited). See also J. Dupuis, Théon de Smyrne, Paris, 1892. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 37 

made some reference to Moderatus of Gades.’ The book is interest- 
ing as an illustration of the methods then in vogue of helping Platonic 
students in their tasks, and inasmuch as there is evidence that Nicoma- 
chus took account of such writings, a comparison of the two authors, 
even though not wholly conclusive, cannot but be enlightening. 

In scope and in the selection of the topics treated, Theon and 
Nicomachus are in close agreement, as the following parallel arrange- 

ment shows: 

THEON (ed. Hiller) 

On the necessity of mathematics, p. 1, 
1 ff. Note the occurrence of the 
same Platonic passages, €.g., 

p. 2, 16-19: cf. Epinomts, 992 B; 

p. 3, 8-15: cl. Republic, 527 D; 

p. 5, 11-13: cf. Republic, 526 D 

and p. 12, 10 ff.: Philolaus. 

On the natural order of mathematical 
studies, p. 16, 24 ff.” 

Cf. especially p. 18, 1. 

On one and the monad, p. 18, 3 ff. 
Definitions of number,’ p. 18, 3 f. - 
The monad, p. 18, 5 ff. 

Cf., however, this passage: xaAetrat 
S¢ povas Wot dro TOU pevety Arpertos Kal 
py eLioracGae THs EauTys picews’ ooaKts 
yap dv ép daurny roAAarAacidcwpev TH 
povdda, péver povds (p. 19, 7 ff.). 

Further discussion of one and the 
monad‘ and of the Pythagorean 
doctrine of the elements of number, 
pp. 19, 21 ff. 

Cf. dwids 8 dpyas dpWpov of pay 
voTepov Pack THY TE povdda Kat THY 
évada, p. 20, 5 fi. 

‘Odd’ and ‘even,’ p. 21, 20-24. 

Nicomacuus (ed. Hoche) 

I. 5. 1-2. 
I. 4. 1 (p. 9, 7). 

1%. 
Not in Nicomachus. 
Cf. . Kal povas €x jayTos porn 
Tov dpiOuov ¢avriy wodd\awAacidcaca 
ovdéy wAéov daurns yevva, II. 6. 3 (p. 84, 
22 ff.), and cf. II. 17. 4 (p. 110, 8 ff.). 

Not in Nicomachus. 

Cf. Tod yap drA@s nai xa’ atro mrocov 
povas Nv Kai Ovas Ta Apyixwrata oToLyeia, 
xrA., II. 1. 1 (p. 74, § f.). 

I. 7. 1-2. 

1 Cf. p. 33; also G. Borghorst, De Anatolii Fontibus (Berlin, 1905), pp. 12 ff.; G. Altmann, 
De Posidonio Timaei Platonis Commentatore (Berlin, 1906), pp. 19 ff.; and Schmekel, Die Philo- 
sophie der mittleren Sioa (Berlin, 1892), p. 409, n. 3, especially upon the source of the passage in 

Theon, pp. 93, 16-106, 11 (Hiller). 

2 For a detailed comparison with Nicomachus, see p. 113, . 4. 

1 Here (p. 18, 3-9; p- 19, 7-8; 12-13) occur parallels (almost word for word) with Modera- 
tus in Stobaeus (see p. 34); the other lines can be regarded as comment and explanation. 

‘In this passage (p. 19, 21 — 20, 9) also there is agreement with Moderatus (in Stobaeus). 

38 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

THEON 

Is the monad odd or even?! p. 
24 — 22, 10. 

The natural series increases with the 
constant difference 1 but decreasing 
ratios, p. 22, 17 — 23, 5. 

Cf. the notion that the ‘odd’ is 
‘sameness’; the ‘even,’ ‘difference,’ 
p. 22, 10 ff. 

Prime and Composite, p. 23, 6 ff. 
Classification :3 

Prime 

Absolutely 
Relatively 
Composite 
Absolutely 
Relatively 

2i, 

Absolute primes defined, p. 23, 9. 
They are also called ypappexoi, evfv- 
perpixoi, wepiccanis wepircoi, tbid., 
12; 

Odd numbers only are prime, zb7d., 23. 

Status of 2, p. 24, 5. 

Relatively prime numbers, 261¢., 8. 

Absolutely and relatively composite 
numbers, zbid., 16. 

(Here are discussed the status of 
1 and 2; plane and solid numbers 
classed here.) 

Varieties of the ‘even’; the even- 
times even, p. 25, 5. 

The even-times odd, zbid., 19. 

The odd-times even, p. 26, 5. 
igaxts toor and dvicaxts iooe as kinds 
of composite numbers, 7bid., 14. 

NICOMACHUS 

Not in Nicomachus. 

Not in Nicomachus.? 

General agreement in II. 17. 2; 18. 4. 

Nicomachus disagrees. 

(1) His classification is as follows: 
Prime 
Relatively prime 
Composite 

(2) It refers to odd numbers only; 
Theon includes all numbers in 
these classes. 

I. 11. 2 (different phraseology). 
These terms do not occur in the Jn- 
troduction.* 

Agrees. 

Not in Nicomachus. 

I. 13. 1. 

I. 12. 1 (absolutely composite numbers : 
but the class does not include even 
numbers as in Theon). 

No discussion of the other topics. 

I. 8. 3-4. 

I. g. 1. 

I. 10. 2. 

Not included in the formal classifica- 
tion; the former term is used in 
I. 19. 19 and for the latter, cf. note 
on that section. 

1 Citing Aristotle’s Tu@a-yopixés (now lost), and Archytas. 
? Nicomachus notes, however, that in any arithmetical series the ratios are greater in the 

smaller terms (Introduction, II. 23. 6). 

This involves of course the general idea stated by Theon. 

? This classification agrees with Euclid (Elements, VII, Def.) against Nicomachus. 
‘ But in Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 44 (Ast): povwrdry yap obre wAdros éxidéxera: ebtuper- 

pixy odbc xal udvou rot duwriuou bwidexrum) pépovs, kth. (sc. the number 7). 

There is some doubt 

about the authorship of this portion of the Theologumena Arithmelicae. Euclid (Elements VII, 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 39 

'THEON 

Heteromecic numbers defined, p. 26, 
21. 

They are always even, p. 27, I. 
Formation by adding evens, 75id., 8. 
Formation by multiplication, 157d., 15. 
Reason for the name, zbid., 20. 

Parallelograms (i.e., rpopyxes), p. 27, 
23. 

Squares, p. 28, 3. 

Formation by adding odd numbers, 
tb1d. 

Formation by multiplication, 1did., 
13. 

Make a geometrical proportion with 
the heteromecic numbers as mean 
terms. The converse is not true. 
Ibid., 16. 

Oblong (promecic) numbers defined, 
p- 39, 8. 

For their classification, see on /n- 

troductton, II, 18, 2. 

Plane numbers are the product of 
two factors, p. 31, 9. 

Triangular numbers, p. 31, 13. (Here 
follows a digression on the squares 
and ‘heteromeces,’ merely repeating 
previous material.) 

Repetition of methods of forming 
squares,’ with several new theorems, 
Pp. 34, I. 

Squares are alternately even and odd, 
ibid., 3. 

The gnomons of the other polyg- 
onals are numbers of the natural 
series occurring at intervals of 
n — 2 terms, zdid., 6. 

Occurrence of the squares and cubes 
in the series of multiples, tdzd., 
16. 

NICOMACHUS 

LL, 7x5 3B..%, 

Cf. II. 19. 1; 17.23; 20.3. 

Cf... 18.2: 

Cf. II. 18. 3 (p. 114, 1); 17. 3 (p. 100, 
24); 18. 1 (p. 112, 22). 
Cf. II. 18. 2. 

IT. 9. 
IT. 9. 3, etc. 

II. 18. 3 (not a direct statement). 

II. 19. 4. 

The converse is not stated. 

II. 18. 2. 

Nicomachus does not classify in Theon’s 
manner. 

Plane numbers are mentioned, but not 

this definition. Cf. note on II. 7. 3. 
IL. 8. 

Not in Nicomachus. 

IT. rr. 4. 

II. 20. 5. 

Def. 11) uses weptoodxs wepioods to denote the product of an odd number by an odd number, 

not in the sense in which Theon employs it. 

1 Several topics, of which this is an instance, are duplicated in Theon. 
parallels are given only with the first occurrence. 

The Nicomachean 

40 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

THEON 

Special properties of the squares, 
P. 35, 17 ff. 

They are either divisible by 3 or 
can be if 1 is subtracted; like- 
wise by 4; even squares that are 
divisible by 3 when 1 has been sub- 
tracted are divisible by 4; those 
that are divisible by 4 when 1 has 
been subtracted are divisible by 3 
(Theon neglects to add “or be- 
come divisible by 3 when 1 is 
subtracted”); some squares are 
divisible by both 3 and 4; finally, 
the square which is not divisible 
by 3 or 4 admits both divisors 
when 1 is subtracted.! 

Miscellaneous matter not found in 
Nicomachus: Squares and het- 
eromecic and promecic numbers 
are plane. Solids have three fac- 
tors (a repetition). They are 
called from their resemblance to 
the space they measure, p. 36, 3. 

Similar numbers, zbid., 12. 

Polygonal numbers, p. 37, 7. 

Definition of gnomons, z1d., 11. 

The side of the triangle equals the 
last gnomon added, 1tbid., 13. 

The monad potentially triangular, 
ibid., 15. 

Cyclic, spherical, recurrent numbers, 
p. 38, 16, 

Derivation of squares repeated, p. 39, 
10. 

Pentagons defined, p. 39, 14. 

Hexagons defined, p. 40, I. 

Derivation of other polygonals and 
rule for their gnomons, zb7d., 14 
(as in p. 34, 6). 

Two triangles make a square, p. 41, 3. 

Solid numbers classified as to the 
equality of 3, 2 or no dimensions, 
tbid., 8. 

1 Tamblichus (see p. 

NICOMACHUS 

None of them given by Nicomachus. 

Not in Nicomachus. 

Not in Nicomachus. 

II. 8.3: The side of the triangle equals 
the number of gnomons taken. 

IT. 8. 2. 

IT. 17. 7. 

II. ro. 
II. 11. 

II. 12. 1-2. 
Not in Nicomachus. | 

129) includes this. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 41 

THEON 

Cubes = aX aX a; 
‘Altars’=axXbXc; 
‘Plinths’ = a X a X b, (6 < a); 
‘Beams’ = a X a X 4, (8 > a). 
Pyramidal numbers; truncated pyra- 
mids, p. 42, 3. 
(Theon reports that some called 
the pyramid trapezium.) 
Pleuric and diametric numbers, i02d., 10. 
Perfect, superabundant, deficient num- 
bers, p. 45, 9. 
The perfection of 3, p. 46, 14. 
(Other material intervenes.) 
Ratio defined, p. 73, 16. 
Ratio exist between homogeneous 
things only.! 

‘Terms’ defined, p. 74, 8. 
Proportion defined, ibid., 12. 
Equal, greater, and less ratios,? zb:d., 
18 
The ratios of music. 
The ratios of arithmetic, p. 76, 1. 
Multiples, zd7d., 8. 
Superparticulars, zbrd., 21. 
Superpartients, p. 78, 6. 
Multiple superparticular and _ super- 
partient, ibid., 23. 
“Ratio of number to number,’ p. 80, 7. 
Root ratios (wuvOueéves AGyou), ibid., 15. 

Intervals and ratios contrasted,‘ p. 81, 
6. 

Definitions of proportions, and of con- 
tinuous and disjunct proportions, 
p. 82, 6. 

Eratosthenes on equality as the element 
of ratio, tbid., 23. 

Epinomis, ggt E cited, p. 84, 7. 

1 Based on Adrastus. See on I. 17. 4. 
? With reference to Plato, Timaeus, 36 B. 

NICOMACHUS 

II. 15. 2; 16. 1. 
L..16.2 5 17, 6. 

IT. 13 and 14, much fuller. 
Not in Nicomachus. 

Not in Nicomachus. 
I. 14-16. 

Not in Introduction, but cf. Theologu- 
mena Artihmeticae, p. 15 (Ast). 

Il, 2%... 

I. 17. 4-5 states that equality exists 
only between homogeneous things, 
but no such statement occurs re- 
garding ratio. 

dpos is used, but not defined. 

II. 21. 2 (differs; vide ad loc.). 

Not formulated; but cf. I. 17. 2, 6, etc. 

Ch TL§. FY DLa6% 20: 4. 

I. 17. 4. (See the note on I. 17. 7.) 
I. 18. 1-3 (much fuller). 

. Ig. 1-5 (much fuller). 

. 20 (much fuller). 

. 22-23 (much fuller). 

SS = = 

Not in Nicomachus. 

No separate treatment, but cf. I. 19. 6; 
20. X} 21. 13 IL to. 3, ete. 

No separate treatment. Cf. on II. 6. 3. 

) 3 Pe ees aS 

Cf. II. 1. (Equality is the element of 
relative number. ) 

Cited I. 3. 5. 

2 See on I. 17. 7. 

4A passage based on the IlAarwoxds of Eratosthenes; cf. p. 237, n. 3, and Hiller, Philologus, 

vol. XXX, pp. 60 ff. 

42 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

THEON 

dvadoyia and pecorns differentiated, p. 
84, 15. 

Proportions: the three chief kinds,! 
with definitions, p. 85, 8. 

Here intervenes a section on the 
ratios of harmony (p. 85, 22; cf. p. 
75, 7). Thrasyllus’s division of the 
canon, and the Pythagorean aspects 
of the tetraktys and of the numbers 
of the first decade.’ 

Proportions: geometric, arithmetic, 
harmonic, subcontrary, fifth, sixth, 
and 6 others subcontrary to them, 
p. 106, 12. 

dvadoyia, properly the geometric 
alone.’ 

Repetition of the short definitions. 

Equality is the first and elementary 
ratio (from Adrastus ; [cf. p. 82, 23]), 
p. 107, 10. 

Citation of Eratosthenes for the 
proocemium of the proposition, of 
the ‘three rules’ and of Adrastus for 
the actual rules, p. 107, 15. 
Converse of the ‘three rules,’ p. 110, 

19. 

Figures: point, line, plane, solid, and 
varieties, p. 111, 14. 

Varieties of solids (geometrical treat- 
ment); parallelopipeda, rectangu- 

lar parallelopipeda, p. 112, 26: 

Cubes (dimensions a, a, a); 

Plinths (dimensions a, a, b where 
b< a); 

Beams (dimensions a, a, b where 
b> a); 

Scalene (dimensions a, 5, c). 

Proportions; general definition of 

perorys, P. 113, 9. 

NICOMACHUS 

Not treated. 

IT. 2x (much fuller). 

II. 22. x (but the fourth is called simply 
‘fourth’ and the remaining kinds num- 
ber 4, not 6. In II. 28. 3, the name 
‘subcontrary’ is given for ‘fourth ’) 

II. 24. 1. 

I. 23 (cf. the note on I. 23. 4). 

II. 2. 

Not formally included. 

No geometrical treatment of these. 

Does not occur. 

1 Citing Adrastus, who is never mentioned by Nicomachus. 
? This material can be paralleled largely in the Theologumena Ariihmeticae, but not in the 

Introduction. 
3 Adrastus is again cited. 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 43 

THEON NICOMACHUS 

Arithmetic proportion, #5:d., 18. II. 23. (See the note on II. 28.1 for 
a general comparison of the propor- 
tions used by Nicomachus and by 

Theon.) 
Geometric proportion, p. 114, 1 ff. II. 24. 
Harmonic proportion, p. 114, 14. If... 2%. 

‘Subcontrary’ proportion, p. 115, 5. — II. 28. 3. 
Fifth variety of proportion, p. 115, 12. _—‘II. 28. 4. 
Sixth variety of proportion, ibid., 20. IT. 28. 5s. 
How to find the various means between II. 27. 7. 
two given terms, p. 116, 8. 
Arithmetic; has both methods 
given by Nicomachus, and this: 
“‘ Add the halves of the extremes.”’ 
Geometric; Parallels Nicomachus, 
p. 140, 4-5, but not p. 140, 6, 
and adds a geometrical method. 
Harmonic; gives methods for 
finding the mean, first, when the 
extremes are in double ratio; 
second, in triple; third, in any 
ratio (but this is identical with 
the first method). 
His first method agrees strik- 
ingly with Nicomachus (who 
gives this alone, p. 118, 5): p. 140. 8 ff.: dppovsny 5€, rav dxpuy thy 
dav péy oty év SurAaciw Acyw wpos Siadopay woinrfoy dri rév Udrrova nal rav 
dAAnAovs boPaatv of axpot, olor 6 1B" yevépavoy wapaPAnrdoy trl rév civberoy lx 
Kat 6 s' rhv twepoxhy rod palfovos trav ixpev, elra rd wAdros THs wapafoAns 
wapa tov ihdrrova oloy Ta s' wout- wporGerioy ro éAdrrov, Kai loro 3b yrvd- 
cavreg ial Tov s' Kal Tdv yevdpavow Ag! paves dppowmKy peordtns. 
wapaBaldvreg wapd rév ocivOcrov dx 
tev Expev oloy mapa Ta iy’ Kal rd 
widrog Tw As’ oloy Ta B' xpocBivres 
te drrom, Tovrecre TO Tay s', 

Hopev 7d [yrotpavov. 

The differences between Theon and Nicomachus are easily discerned 
in this summary. Theon omits the elaborate Pythagorean introduc- 
tion and the incidental dissertations of a similar nature; unlike 
Nicomachus (cf. Introduction, I. 19. 21; II. 19. 20), he does not use 
tables and point out numerical properties from them; he does not 
give such elaborate illustrations and explanations, but there are really 

44 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

few important propositions that he leaves out. We may note among 
(a — 1)+(a+ 1) 
2 
except when a = 1 (I. 8. 1-2); the ‘sieve’ of Eratosthenes (I. 13); 
the discussion of the derivation of superparticulars from multiples and 
of the combinations of ratios in II. 3-5; the proposition concerning the 
addition of a triangular number to any sort of polygonal (II. 12. 3 ff.) ; 
and certain observations upon squares and heteromecic numbers 
(II. 19. 2-3; 20.1). On the other hand one may easily note the large 
number of topics in Theon which Nicomachus omits. (See Theon, pp. 
18, 5 ff.; 19, 21 ff.; 21,24- 22,16; 34,3; 35,17 ff.; 37,11; 42, 10ff. ; 
73, 16 ff.; 80,7 and 15; 81, 6 ff.; 82, 23 ff.) It is particularly sur- 
prising to see that Nicomachus does not attempt to discuss the monad 
as Theon does. 

But even if one takes all these differences into consideration, there 
is great similarity between the two works; the most notable point 
is that, notwithstanding their agreement in subjects treated, and the 
fact that they say substantially the same thing about most subjects, 
there is after all slight verbal likeness between them. The only pas- 
sage in which verbal likeness is especially marked is that to which at- 
tention is called at the very end of the table above (Theon, p. 118, 5; 
Nicomachus, p. 140, 8). It is justifiable to infer, therefore, that neither 
writer served as the direct source of the other, and this must remain 
for the present the only certain fact regarding their relationship 
to each other. We may also conjecture that behind them, to some 
extent, lay the same sources, a supposition supported by the verbal 
parallels noted. But it does not immediately follow that Nicomachus, 
like Theon, employed Adrastus ; had he done so, we might have looked 
for greater similarity in the texts. From the fact that the two quote 
the same passages of Plato not much can be inferred; they must be 
simply the usual quotations made by schoolmen to support their 
statements by Platonic authority, and it chances that Theon and 
Nicomachus have the same position to sustain.! 

them the definitions of I. 7. 3 ff., the theorem that a = 

1 The Platonic passages which Theon and Nicomachus quote in common are enumerated on 
pp. 37 and 41. In none of the cases does either writer agree completely with our Platonic text, 
but although they sometimes agree with each other in their variations, their differences are far 
more striking, and the only conclusion warranted 1s that each independently quotes loosely from 
memory the gist of Plato’s words. They certainly cannot have used a common source, such as, 
for instance, a collection of Platonic passages or a commentary which employed similar inaccurate 
quotations. The most noteworthy verbal agreement is in the citation of Republic, 527 p, where 

GREEK ARITHMETIC BEFORE NICOMACHUS 45 

Whether Theon is to be treated as a successor or a predecessor of 

Nicomachus is, as has been pointed out before, a difficult question. 
It is most probable that their lives were contemporary in part, and 
farther than that, it is useless to conjecture. In view of the fame of 
Nicomachus, it seems hardly possible that Theon could have written 
after the publication of the Introduction without quoting it, but we 
have seen that there is no suggestion of a direct connection between the 
two men. They must have been nearly contemporary. 
Nicomachus (I. 3. 7) has as obs el, Srt tomas Sediédvar uw} Apa Axpnora Tatra rd pabhuara 
mposrdrrowu, Theon (p. 3, 8) reads dis ef, dre orcas Sediévae pu) Sxpnora rd pabhuara 
axpocrarrowa, and Plato Wits el... Gre douxas dedidre robs woddols, yh doxps Expyora pabjuara 
wpooTrdarrew. 

Nicomachus and Theon agree in using peculiar syntax which does not occur in the original; 

but in the remainder of the passage their texts are widely divergent. The initial phrase, perhaps, 
was Commonly quoted in their day in the form which they both used. 

CHAPTER III 
THE MATHEMATICAL CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 

IF we restrict the meaning of the term arithmetica so as to include 
only the ars arithmetica, which, as is explained more fully elsewhere, 
refers, when technically used, to the fundamentals of the science of 
arithmetic systematically stated, we may obtain an idea of its mathe- 
matical content by a comparison of three texts, Nicomachus’s Intro- 
duction, Euclid’s Elements (Books VI, VIII, and IX), and Theon’s 
treatise On Mathematical Matters Useful for Reading Plato. With- 
out such restriction the term, applying to the Greek science of arith- 
metic in general, would include all the developments of higher mathe- 
matics such as those made by Diophantus. Since, however, Nico- 
machus’s book is an ‘arithmetic’ in the narrower sense, we shall not 
be forced to go so far afield in this summary. 

In the first place, the differences existing between Euclid on the one 
hand and Nicomachus and Theon on the other are to be observed. 
The latter two are generally in agreement in their selection of topics 
and in their manner of presentation; Euclid differs in both these 
respects. His material is stated in the form of propositions, each sub- 
jected to logical proof, a thing wholly lacking in Nicomachus and 
Theon, who confine themselves to setting forth principles and 
illustrating them. Euclid’s material itself, moreover, is not confined 
to the propositions treated by the other two, although there is much 
overlapping between the two groups, but Euclid makes a far more 
systematic study of the matters he introduces. In the third place, 
Euclid employs the geometrical form of illustration in the proof of 
his arithmetical propositions, and makes use of lines in much the 
same way that modern mathematics uses its literal algebraic symbolism. 
This process complicates his solutions and often involves him in long 
demonstrations of matters which are more or less self-evident when 
stated in algebraic terms. Nicomachus and Theon, since both avoid 
any attempt at proof, do not share this habit of Euclid, but deal with 
the numbers directly; only when they come to the discussion of plane 

46 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 47 

and solid numbers do they make their approach through geometry. 
Furthermore, Euclid does not share the philosophical proclivities, or, 
more accurately, the Pythagorizing tendencies, of Nicomachus and 
Theon, and consequently holds himself continually to a more strictly 
scientific level. It is for this reason that he 1s more successful in gen- 
eral than Nicomachus in making a scientific classification of numbers. 
All three mathematicians, however, agree in confining themselves, 
in their arithmetic, to the use of rational numbers, although many of 
the propositions of Euclid’s books (notably V and X) are stated with 
reference to irrational quantities. Some of these, in Book VII, are 
applied to the discussion of rational numbers. 

The following outlines roughly sketch the plans according to which 
the work of Nicomachus, Euclid, and Theon, respectively, are arranged. 
In the preceding chapter will be found an analysis of Theon’s treatise, 
with the parallel passages of Nicomachus indicated.! 

NICOMACHUS THEON EvcLip 
Book VII 
Philosophical introduc- Philosophical introduc- Definitions 
tion tion Greatest common divisor 
1. Number per se Definitions Propositions dealing with 
2. Relative number Number per se, including submultiples and frac- 
3. Plane and solid num- planeand solid numbers __ tions, with reference to 
bers Ratios the propositions on pro- 
4. Proportions Proportions portion in Book V 

Prime and _ relatively 
prime numbers 
Least common multiple 

Book VIII 

Properties of numbers in 
progression and propor- 
tion 

Cubes, squares, and their 
relations 

Book IX 

Cubes and squares, con- 
tinued 
Geometrical series 
Prime numbers 
Odd and even numbers 
The perfect number 
* See pp. 37 ff. 

48 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Nicomachus and Theon, it will be seen, follow plans closely similar, 
and their topics fall into a scheme ordered from the philosophic point 
of view; Euclid does not proceed in the same way. The primary 
subdivision of material in the first two is based on the distinction be- 
tween absolute and relative number, which they carefully separate; 
Euclid mingles the two inextricably, but keeps uppermost the relations 
between numbers. In setting forth the subject in detail we shall 
follow the order adopted by Nicomachus, with the exception of the 
philosophical introduction, which is lacking in mathematical interest. 

I. NUMBER PER SE 

The definitions of ‘number’ given by the Greek mathematicians 
are discussed elsewhere. Nicomachus, in I. 7, limits himself to defining 
number and its two subdivisions, odd and even; in Euclid (VII, 
def. 1) we have also a definition of the monad (unity), and in Theon a 
lengthy discussion of this subject (p. 18, 5 — 21, 19, Hiller). His 
reference (p. 20, 7 ff.) to the Pythagorean doctrine of the ‘principles’ 
or ‘origins’ (apyat) of number shows a surprising similarity to the 
most modern conception of number; the Pythagoreans, he says, con- 
sidered all the terms of the natural series ‘principles,’ so that “for 
example ‘three’ (the triad) is the principle of three’s among sensible 
objects, and ‘four’ (the tetrad) of all four’s,” and so on. 

Nicomachus, in I. 8, states that any integer is one half the sum of 
the two integers on each side of it: 

gg CD 
2 

Since zero is not included in the numerical system,’ unity, in Nicoma- 
chus’s eyes, occupies a unique position, and is therefore regarded by 
him as the ‘natural starting point of all numbers.’ Theon introduces 
here the problem of determining whether unity is odd or even; his 
treatment of the problem takes the form of a logical demonstration, 
which is all the more remarkable because both he and Nicomachus 
usually avoid this method: “Some have said that unity is odd. For 
the odd is opposite to the even; unity is therefore either odd or even. 
It would not be even; for it cannot be divided into equal halves, nor 
even divided at all. Therefore unity is odd. And if you add an even 

1 When he speaks philosophically, Nicomachus denies that even 1 and 2 are real numbers, and 
begins the series with 3; see pp. 116 ff. 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 49 

number to an even number, the sum is even;’ but if unity be added 
to an even number, the sum is odd; unity is therefore not even, but 
odd.” * Euclid does not thus give special treatment of unity, but in 
IX. 21-31, he studies the relations of the two classes of numbers, 
odd and even, proving that the sum of any number of even numbers 
is even (IX. 21), and that the sum of odd numbers is even if the number 
of terms is even, and odd if the number of terms is odd, and then deal- 
ing in similar fashion with differences and products of odd and even 
numbers. This material, curiously, is not introduced by Nicomachus 
until, in IT. 24. 10, he is led to speak of the products of squares, cubes, 
and heteromecic numbers, and introduces incidentally, by way of il- 
lustration, certain propositions regarding the products of even and 
odd numbers : 

(1) 2” X 2mis even; 
(2) (2m + 1)(2m +1) is odd; 
(3) 2n(2m +1) or (2” + 1)2 m is even. 

The classes of even numbers, according to Nicomachus (I. 8. 3 ff.), 
are three: 

(1) Even times even, that is, numbers of the form 2"; 
(2) Odd times even, of the form 2*(2k + 1), >1; 
(3) Even times odd, of the form 2(2 k + 1). 

Theon has the same classification, but Euclid omits the odd times 
even and adds another class, the odd times odd, namely, those 
“measured by an odd number an odd number of times,” as (2 m + 1) 
(2” +1). The name ‘odd times odd’ occurs in Theon as an alter- 
native designation of the primes (p. 23, 14 ff.). Furthermore, Euclid 
is not precise in this classification, a fault for which Iamblichus, in 
his Commentary on Nicomachus, criticizes him. Since he defines the 
even times even as “a number measured by an even number an even 
number of times”’ (VII, def. 8), and the even times odd as one “‘ meas- 
ured by an even number an odd number of times”’ (def. 9), it is ob- 
vious that the former class can include numbers of two forms 2°, or, 
2*(2k + 1), > 1, and the latter might likewise include the two types, 
2(2k + 1), or, 2"(2 Rk + 1), where k is a positive integer. It is evident 
from the algebraic forms that the two classes overlap, and the proposi- 
tion stated in TX. 34, which deals with certain numbers that are both 

‘Cf. Euclid, IX. 21. 2P. 21, 24 ff. 

50 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

even-times even and even-times odd, makes it clear that Euclid rec- 
ognized the possibility of a number falling in both classes.! 

The arithmetic of Nicomachus includes a lengthy discussion of all 
these types of the even numbers. In I. 8. 12 he notes that 

T+t2+4+8+ 164+ 32 +--+ 2% = 2-1, 
and that this theorem will be useful in the discussion of perfect num- 
bers,” but many of his observations are more or less self-evident. 
For example, in the series 
I, 2; 4; 8, 16, 32; 64 ee 
it is evident that in any sequence of three of these terms the square of 
the mean will equal the product of the extremes, or, 
(2*)? = gn-l. gntl. 
and similarly, if each member of the series be multiplied by the same 
integer, the property persists. Further, in the series, 
I, 3, 5, 7) 9, II, --- 2” — I, 
evidently the middle term of any sequence of three terms equals half 
the sum of the extremes, and in any sequence of four the two means 
equal the two extremes. 

The subdivision of the odd (I. 11 ff.) is a matter of more difficulty 
to Nicomachus. As in the former case, he sets up three classes, and 
designates them as prime, composite and relatively prime; the latter 
are pairs of composite numbers that are prime to each other. To 
disregard 2, the primes are indeed odd, but there is no reason why 
composite numbers should be treated as a class of the odd. The 
classification belongs, of course, to all numbers rather than to the odd 
alone, and it is so regarded by Theon and Euclid, who add to the list 
another class, ‘relatively composite’ numbers (i.e., composite numbers 
that have acommon measure). Strictly speaking, none of the authors 
need have specified more than the first two subdivisions, for all the 
‘relatively prime’ and ‘relatively composite’ numbers are composite. 
As to 2, Nicomachus is silent:* but Theon somewhat doubtfully 
recognizes it as prime,‘ and it satisfies Euclid’s definition of the prime. 

1 For a fuller discussion of the difficulties centering about this matter, see Heath’s The Thirteen 
Books of Euclid’s Elements, vol. II, pp. 281 ff. 

? Theon omits this theorem, while Euclid proves it. 

7 But he names 3 as the first prime number (I. 11. 2). 

‘He does not name 2 in his list of primes, which begins with 3 (p. 23, 11); he states that 
only the odd are prime (ibid., 23); yet he admits that 2 shares the characteristics of the primes 
(p. 24, 5) and finally says that it is ‘‘called odd-like because it shares the qualities of the odd” 
(ibid.), His stand in the matter is indecisive. See Heath, op. cit., vol. II, p. 285. 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 51 

To find the prime numbers the celebrated method of Eratosthenes, 
known as his ‘sieve,’ is employed (I. 13. 2 ff.). This involves no 
mathematical principle of any difficulty, but is, notwithstanding, the 
only systematic method of locating them. The odd numbers are con- 
ceived as written down; then every third number beyond 3 is stricken 
out, every fifth beyond 5, every seventh beyond 7, and so on, leaving 
only numbers which are prime; after the multiples of m have been re- 
jected, only prime numbers remain up to n®. Nicomachus makes it 
clear that the process consists in discarding multiples. 

In the same chapter (sections to ff.) he takes up the Euclidean prob- 
lem of the greatest common divisor, but with the announced purpose 
of determining whether any two given numbers (in practice limiting 
himself to odd numbers) are prime to each other or not. The process 
consists in dividing the greater by the smaller,’ and then the smaller 
by the remainder after the division, until, if the two numbers are prime, 
the final remainder is unity, or until the remainder is found to be an 
exact divisor of the preceding divisor. In this case, the remainder 
is the greatest common factor of the two original numbers. Euclid 
devotes VII. 1-3 to this subject, and Theon omits it. 

In Euclid, the subject of prime and relatively prime numbers re- 
ceives a more detailed treatment in VII. 20-32 and again in Book IX. 
The matters proved in VII. 20-32, stated algebraically, are as follows, 
if we always assume a and b relatively prime to each other : 

VII. 20: If =5=o=--, then c = ka, and d = kb. 
VII. 21: If, = 5, then a <c,andb <d. 
a 

= > and given that, for any values of c and d, 
a <c and b <d, then a and 6 are relatively prime to 
each other. 

VIT. 23: If a and kb are prime to each other, then a and b are prime 
to each other. 

VIT. 24: Given a and c prime to b, then ac is prime to b. 

VII. 25, 27: Given a prime to b, then a® is prime to b, also a* is prime to 
b?, and a® prime to B°. 

VII. 26: Given a and c both prime to b and d, then ac ts prime to bd. 

VIT. 22: Given ; 

1 Nicomachus’s ‘ division’ is really subtraction continued until the remainder is smaller than the 
subtrahend., 

52 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

VIT. 28: Given a prime to b, then a + bis prime to a and to b, and 
also if a + b 1s prime to a and b, a is prime to b. 

VII. 29, 30: If ais a prime number, itis prime to any number which 
does not contain 1t as a factor, and conversely. 

In two propositions (31 and 32) Euclid shows that every number is 
prime, or has a prime factor. In Book IX, propositions 11-17 deal 
with primes and relative primes in continued proportion, and LX. 20 
proves that the number of primes is infinite. 

The ancient artthmetica commonly divided numbers in yet a third 
way, into perfect, superabundant and deficient numbers. Again 
we find that Nicomachus restricts to one subdivision, the even, 
a classification which properly belongs to number in general; and 
although Theon speaks of ‘numbers,’ not specifically even numbers, 
as being subject to this classification, it may be noted that all the 
examples he cites are even numbers. Nicomachus and Theon define 
all three classes, but Euclid touches upon only the perfect number, 
defining it (VII, def. 22) and subjecting to proof the method of its 
discovery (IX. 36). As usual, Nicomachus and Theon state only the 
method. Nicomachus mentions four perfect numbers, 6, 28, 496, and 
8,128. If, in I. 17. 3 and 7, he means to implythat a perfect number 
is to be found in each order of the powers of 10, he is mistaken; and 
he certainly is incorrect in asserting that all perfect numbers end 
alternately in 6 and 8 (ibid.). It is proved by Euclid, IX, 36, that 
every number of the form 2"-'(2" — 1), if 2" — 1 is prime, is perfect ; 
the first ten, viz.: for m = 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, 61, and 89, have 
actually been calculated. 

II. RELATIVE NUMBER 

The fundamental relations of number, as the Greek arithmetica 
states, are equality and inequality, and the latter is further divided into 
two classes, the greater and the less. Furthermore, each of these 
latter has five subdivisions, those of the greater being 

multiples, as, mn:n 

superparticulars, as” + 1:0 

superpartients, asm + kin, k> 1 

multiple superparticulars, as mm + 1:",m> 1 

multiple superpartients, as mn + k:n, both m and k being greater 
than 1. 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 53 

The subdivisions of the less are the reciprocal ratios of these, and 
are designated by the same names with sub- (Greek, vo-) prefixed ; 
for example, submultiple. Each of these is described by Nicomachus 
at considerable length (I. 17-23) and more briefly by Theon; Euclid 
has no parallel discussion, but it may be recalled that he gives defini- 
tions (VII, defs. 3, 4) of the terms ‘part’ and ‘parts’ (wépos, pp), 

the former having the same meaning as submultiple («. g. S 3) and the 
37 

latter being equivalent to our term ‘ proper fraction’ | with numerator 

greater than unity, as . a) For the former term Nicomachus 
3 

prefers to substitute poptov, and the use of this word in composition, 
in the term émipcdpios, ‘superparticular,’ a number which contains 
another smaller number once, plus one péproy of it (I. 19. 1), shows 
clearly the proper meaning of the word. 

In I. 19.9, Nicomachus presents our ordinary multiplication table, 
but not for use as such; it is rather to serve as a table of multiples. 
Such tables are of common occurrence in the Introduction, but neither 
Euclid nor Theon makes use of them. In his discussion of this table, 
Nicomachus notes two propositions which may thus be expressed 

(I. 19.9): 
(1) M+ (n+ 1)? +2n(n +1) = (24+ 1); 
(2) (n—1)n+ (n+ 1)n4+ 277 = (2n)’. 

As a fitting termination to Book I, Nicomachus states a general 
principle whereby all forms of inequality of ratio may be generated 
from a series of three given equal terms; it was designed to show that 
equality is the ‘root and mother’ of all forms of inequality. The 
first number of the given series is taken as the first term of the new 
series; the sum of the given first and second terms gives the new 
second term; and the new third term is derived by adding the given 
first and third terms plus twice the given second term. Thus, given 
a, a, a, we first obtain a, 2a, 4a. Given a, na, n’a, we obtain a, 
(n + 1)a, (n + 1)?a, a geometric progression with the ratio (# + 1). 
Given n’a, na, a, we obtain n’*a, n(n + 1)a, (n + 1)%a, in which each 
term has the ratio n + 1: to the preceding. The reverse process is 
elaborated in II. 2, showing that equality may finally be obtained from 

1 Qn the history of this proposition see on I. 23. 4. 

54 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

any given series illustrating any form of inequality. Theon also gives 
these rules and their converse (p. 107, 10 ff.) 

' In II. 3-4, Nicomachus sets forth a method for deriving from the 
successive series of multiples the series of superparticulars; from the 
doubles come the series with ratio 3:2; from the triples, those with 
ratio 4:3; and in general, if the multiple series is 1, , n’, n’, ---, the 
ratio is #+ 1:2. Algebraically expressed, the series and derivative 
ratios are: 

In n’ n° n' .. 
2 a 2 q 2 
M+in+n nm +n n*-+n 
VWtenti nt+an*tn ni + an? + wr? 

OW+3n+3n+1 m+3n54+3n7 +n 
m+ani+6n?+4an+1 
In his discussion Nicomachus remarks upon two facts as especially 
strange and significant, first, that the number of integral superparticu- 
lars arising from a given term in the series is limited, and second, that 
the number of superparticulars that may be derived from a given term 
can be determined, as it will agree with the exponent of the power of n 
in the multiple series. With the algebraic notation it is easy to see 
that the derivation of integral superparticulars must come to a halt 
when an expression whose numerator is not divisible by x is reached, 
for example, is + 1 Win + 1), and that, given 2’, from it there will arise 
n 
a series of k numbers increasing in the ratio m + 1:n, thus: 

n* (n + .1)n*, (n + 1)?n*-?, (n + 1)8n'-3,.--(n + 1)* 
The matter dealt with in II. 5, the combination of ratios, calls forth 
a lengthy discussion, but in our notation the facts that 

XS=BhEXPH-EPTXH= Ft 

are self-evident. 
III. PLANE AND SOLID NUMBERS 

The remainder of Nicomachus’s second book is devoted to the plane 
and solid numbers, including a rather detailed treatment of the squares, 
cubes and heteromecic numbers, followed by the general subject of 
proportions. 

The doctrine of plane, or polygonal, numbers set forth by both Nico- 
machus and Theon is based upon the possibility of arranging the 
component units of any number in various regular forms in a plane or 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 55 

planes. Thus, first, the monad, unity, may be regarded as a geometri- 
cal point; any greater integer, beginning with 2, if its units are arranged 
along a line, may be regarded as linear; beginning with 3, the numbers 
can be arranged in a plane so as to form the various plane figures; 
and from 4 on, the numbers can be arranged in three dimensions, after 
the fashion of solids. There is reason to believe that this was a typi- 
cally Pythagorean view of the matter, and older than Aristotle’s time. 

Euclid’s conception of the plane and solid numbers is very dif- 
ferent, and is based upon the possibility of representing numbers by 
lines of lengths corresponding to the units in the number, the lines 
in turn being used as the sides of rectangular plane and solid figures. 
The plane number, according to his definition (VII, def. 16), is the 
product of the two (linear) numbers which are used as sides; similarly, 
solid numbers are the product of three numbers (def. 17). Euclid’s 
view, therefore, excludes triangles, pentagonals, and the like among 
plane numbers, and pyramids among solids, and coincides with the 
theory held by Nicomachus and Theon only when rectangular figures 
and solids are in question. Euclid’s plane and solid numbers, that is, 
really represent areas and volumes; those of Nicomachus and Theon 
are simply arrangements of points in space.? 

Nicomachus shows in II. 8 that the triangular numbers, thus con- 
ceived, result from the summation of the terms of the natural series 
1, 2, 3) 4) 5, 6, ont Thy giving n(n + 1) T) 

2 
as the mth triangular number; squares may be derived in two ways, 
by squaring the successive terms of the natural series, or by the sum- 
mation of the terms of the natural series with differencé 2, i.e., 1, 3, 5, 7, 
9, --- (2m — 1), giving n’ as the mth square number; the pentagons 
arise from the summation of the arithmetical series with difference 

3, 1.€:, I, 4, 7, 10, 13, --: (3 n— 2), so that the mth pentagon 15 n(3 ae 1) 

To generalize, the polygonal number of the order & (k-gonal aioaiaid 
is derived from the series 

1,1 + (k —2),1 + 2(k — 2),1 + 3(k — 2),--- 1+ (n —1)(k — 2), 
and the mth k-gonal number will be 
“(kn — 2n—k-+ 4). 

1 See Aristotle, Metaphysica, 1092 b ro. 
2 Heath, op. cit., vol. Ig, pp. 287 ff., gives a detailed comparison of the two theories. 

56 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Nicomachus carries the discussion up to the octagonal and indicates 
that the process of derivation may be indefinitely extended. It is 
noteworthy that he himself develops a generalization in this con- 
nection. The terms of the arithmetical series from the summation 
of which the polygonals are derived were technically called gnomons 
and Nicomachus (probably following Hypsicles) states that the con- 
stant difference between the gnomons will be k — 2, & being the number 
of sides (or angles) of the polygon in question (II. 11. 4). 

In II. 12 there follow some theorems dealing with the polygonal 
numbers. Both Nicomachus (II. 12.2) and Theon (p. 41, 3) state 
that the sum of two consecutive triangular numbers is a square, and 
conversely every square is the sum of two triangular numbers. That 
is, taking the (m — 1)st and the mth triangular numbers, 

(n — 1)n i. n(n +1) _ nt 
2 2 
Nicomachus next states that any triangular number added to the 
square number next after it in order in the parallel series of squares 
gives a pentagonal; that is, for the (# — 1)st triangle and the mth 

square, n(n — 1) a n—n 

which is the mth pentagonal. He proceeds to put this principle in 
general form, to the effect that any triangle added to the following 
k-gonal number produces the (& + 1)-gonal number, or in algebraic 
terms, for the (” — 1)st triangle and the mth k-gonal number, 

His =) 4 SI + (n — 3)(k — 2) = "2 + &-1)(n- dD). 

Nicomachus sets down the polygonal numbers in tabular form, and 
notes what is obvious in the table, viz., that the polygonal numbers 
occupying the same position in their respective series, the mth triangle, 
the nth square, the th pentagon, and so on, form an arithmetical 
series with the (7 — 1)st triangular number as their difference, but as 
usual he does not offer any proof. In algebraic form we have 

* [2+ (nm — 1)(k — 2)], the mth &-gonal number, 

2 

* [2+ (nm — 1)(k — 1)], the nth (k + 1)-gonal number, 
2 

with the difference mn, the (7 — 1)st triangular number. 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 57 

So far as the solid numbers are concerned, the pyramids and the 
truncated pyramids, the cubes, wedges, the parallelopipeds, the 
heteromecic and the promecic numbers, we have here no real mathe- 
matical principles involved, but simply definitions. The recurrent 
or spherical numbers are worthy of note; numbers which end in 1, § 
and 6 when multiplied by themselves produce other numbers ending 
in the same digit, and such are called spherical. 

From an arrangement of the squares and the heteromecic numbers 
(which have the form k(k + 1)) in parallel array, Nicomachus dis- 
covers, in II. 19, certain general relationships whose proof offers no 
difficulty with modern algebraic symbolism. 

I 4 9 16 25 36---” (n + 1)? 
2 6 12 20 30 42---n(n +1) (1+ 1)(n 4+ 2) 

The ratio of the mth heteromecic number to the mth square is obviously 
n-+1:m (II. 19. 3), and the difference is n(n +1) —”? =m. Simi- 
larly the (m + 1)st square less the mth heteromecic number is (m + 1)’ 
—n(n+1) =2+1. Furthermore, the mth heteromecic number is a 
mean proportional between the mth and the (m + 1)st squares; and 
if two successive squares be added with twice the intermediate het- 
eromecic number, a square number results : 

n+(n+1)? + 2n(n+1) = (2”4+1)2. 

Nicomachus is quite amazed by the fact (II. 19. 4) that the sums 
1+2,2+4,4+6,6+9,9+ 12, 12 + 16, -:- give the triangular 

numbers in regular sequence : 
n?+n(n +1) = (2” + 1)n, or 

a triangular number; and similarly 

2n(2n + 1) 
2 } 

(2m —1)2n_(2n—1)(2m—1+41) 
2 2 ‘ 

n+ (1 —1)n =(2n—1)n= 

the triangular number which precedes the one just given. 

After noting (II. 20. 1) that n? + and n? — n give in each case a 
heteromecic number, Nicomachus introduces a proposition the dis- 
covery of which is commonly credited to him. He states (II. 20. 5) 
that if the odd numbers be written down in order, 

I, 3) 5) 7) 9, TI, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, -:: 

the first number is the ‘potential cube’ (cube of unity); the second 

58 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

two, 3 + 5, make the cube of 2; the following three, 7+oQo+ 11, 
make the cube of 3, and so on. 

I, 3) 5; 7) Q, Il, T3; 15, 17, IQ, 21, 23) 25; 27) 2Q; re 

a a3 33 43 53 

A theorem of the first importance from the standpoint of the modern 
theory of numbers, relating to the divisibility of the square numbers, 
is found in Theon, but not in Nicomachus or Euclid. According to 
this proposition, every square is either divisible by 3, or becomes so 
when diminished by unity, and is similarly divisible by 4. Theon 
gives no proof of this, of course, in accordance with his usual practice. 
Any number when divided by 3 gives either 1, — 1 (or 2), oro, as re- 
mainder; and hence it may be written either as 3” or 3” +1, or 
3” + 2; the square is of the form 

onworgon +6n+10r9gn? +12n+4 4. 

In the first case the square is divisible by 3, and in the second and third 
cases it becomes divisible by 3 when 1 is subtracted. Similarly any 
even number, when squared, contains the factor 4, and any odd number, 
being of the form 2 » + 1, when squared, may be written 
4n?’+4n+1, 

which is divisible by 4 when unity is subtracted. Apparently Theon 
desired to divide all square numbers into four classes, viz., those divisi- 
ble by 3 and not by 4; by 4 and not by 3; by 3 and by 4; and by 
neither 3 nor 4. In modern mathematical phraseology all square 
numbers are termed congruent to o or 1, modulus 3, and congruent 
too or 1, modulus 4. This is written: 

n* = 1 (mod. 3), 

n* =O (mod. 3), 

n? =o or 1 (mod. 4). 

This is the first appearance of any work on congruence which is funda- 
mental in the modern theory of numbers. 

Another important subject, omitted by Nicomachus, but studied 
by Theon, is that of ‘side and diagonal’ numbers, which may be in- 
troduced at this point, inasmuch as it bears some relation to the theories 
about plane numbers. Theon says (p. 42, 10 ff.): 

“Even as the numbers are potentially invested with the essential 
principles of triangles or quadrilaterals, of pentagons or other figures, 
so also we find that the essential principles of sides and diagonals ap- 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 59 

pear in numbers in accordance with the ultimate principles of their 
being ;? for it is these which harmonize the configurations. Then 
just as unity is the starting point of all (geometrical) figures, according 
to the supreme generative principle, so also the ratio of the diagonal 
to the side is found in unity.”’ 

A pair of side and diagonal numbers consists of two numbers, y and 
x, so related-that ee Se 

or, e-—eays=-— i. 

In other words, a series of increasing side and diagonal numbers are 
rational approximations to the sides and hypotenuses of increasing 
isosceles right triangles, and in each case the sum of the squares of 
the sides differs numerically from the square of the hypotenuse by 
unity. Theon gives the general rule which establishes such a series, 
starting from any given solution. Taking y, x, 5 as any solution, he 
then states that another solution is given by x + y, x + 2 y, in which 
the first of the pair represents the side and the second always the diag- 
onal. Thus 1, 1, a potential algebraic solution, gives 2, 3 as a second 
solution; 2, 3 generates by the rules 5, 7, and from this, in turn, 12, 17 
is derived ; to this point Theon carries the numerical illustration.. The 

a x . : ° ° 
successive values of — are increasingly refined approximations to the 
y 

square root of 2; thus, 

$$ 4 
differ in square from 2 by 
—1I,+ 5, — gs, + rh 

and continuing the series, we would have 

435) #3, $28. iis 

as further and closer approximations of the square root of 2; the 
value #38 is correct to the fourth decimal place. 

Zeuthen ? was the first to note that a generalized geometrical state- 
ment of this theory is implicit in Euclid II. 9 and 10. In effect Euclid 
states that 

ee x Yy x x y 
a a $$$ 4 
A C D B A C B D 

1 xard robs oweppariuots Mé-yous. This is the technical terminology of the Stoics. 
2 Zeuthen, Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitien im Allertum, 1886, pp. 27-28. 

60 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

if C is the mid-point of AB, and D any other point in the line (internal 
in II. 9, and external in II. 10), then 

AD* + DB? = 2 AC? + 2CD*, 
or, AD? — 2 AC? = 2CD* — DB; 

taking the values x and y, respectively, as indicated in the diagrams, 

we have 
(2x + y)? — a(x + y)? = 227 — ¥’. 

The theorem is ascribed by Zeuthen to the Pythagoreans, and confirma- 
tion of its Pythagorean origin, as well as of the correspondence be- 
tween the geometrical propositions and the arithmetical theory, is 
found in Proclus’s Commentary on Plato’s Republic,’ in which Proclus 
refers to this method of forming ‘side and diagonal numbers’ as Py- 
thagorean, and says that the same is proved graphically in the second 
book of the Elements. Further, Proclus alludes to the Pythagorean 
distinction between ‘rational’ and ‘irrational’ diameters, to which 
Plato makes reference in the Republic? when he contrasts the ‘rational 
diameter of 5’ with the ‘irrational,’ having in mind 7 as opposed to the 
irrational number \/50.° The discussion above touches only one of 
many possible references to essentially arithmetical or algebraic 
theorems which are concealed in geometrical form in the first six or 
last four books of Euclid’s Elements. It likewise gives evidence of the 
fact that, although Theon’s treatise was not pedagogically so success- 
ful as the Introduction, yet it is much superior to that work from the 
mathematician’s point of view. 

IV. PRoOpoRTIONS 

Nicomachus distinguishes the proportions involving four distinct 
terms, called disjunct, and those involving only three terms, or con- 
tinuous; there are two means in the first type and only one in the 
second. Given a, b, c, d as the terms of an arithmetical proportion, 
the propositions he sets forth correspond to the following algebraic 
formulations : 

1 Procli Diadochi, Jn Platonis Rem Publicam Commentarti (Leipzig, 1901), vol. IE, cc. 23, 27; 
see Heath, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 395-401. 

2546 c. This became known during the Middle Ages as the ‘‘Rule of Nicomachus”; thus 
98? = (98 — 2)(98 + 2) + 2%. However, Nicomachus does not give such illustrations. 

3 The discussion here closely follows Heath, loc. cv. 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 61 

_ 
bad 
— 
‘ca 
ie 
mat 
| 
WwW 
a 

(4) ac =P —(c— by, or(a—x(a+n2) +2 =, 

(s) “><>, when d > ec > BD @. 
The fourth of these propositions, which states that the product of 
the extremes differs from the square of the mean by the square of the 
common difference, came to be known in the Middle Ages as the 
Regula Nicomachi.! It is more readily grasped if the terms are written 
asa — k, a,a + k, when evidently 

(a—k)(a+k) =a — k* 

The theorems stated by Nicomachus concerning four numbers, 
a, b, c, d, which form a geometric proportion, are as follows: 

d:b6=€:a; 
d_b_d~< 
¢c a ¢c—b’ 
When Gm fm 2 eed = ome, endic = b md: 
c 6b a I 
Wig fa Fae M8 eg J ome GE em 
c b ai Yy 
Wie t al a! <4 eaptme = v2, : 
c b a st 
Wie = EE me 5 tends ad, 
c b ai t 
a 0b 
= -, b= ac; 
b h6¢ we 
a_¢ pK 
i dae ad. 

Between n? and (n + 1)*, only one geometric mean, viz., n(n + 1), is 

possible; between 7’ and (n + 1)°, there are two, viz., n?(m + 1) and 

n(n + 1)?. These propositions, which Nicomachus ascribes to Plato, 

are also proved by Euclid (VIII. 11-12). Nicomachus goes on to 
1’Creat, Twelfth Century. See p. 60, n. 2. 

* This formula can be used in squaring numbers near to 100, and other numbers also; thus, 
94" = (94 — 6)(94 + 6) + 6%, or 88 X 100 + 36. 

62 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

state that the product of two squares is a square, and that of two cubes 
a cube, but the product of a square by a heteromecic number, or that 
of a cube by a heteromecic number, can never be, respectively, either 
a square or a cube. 

Nicomachus says that three numbers, as a, 5, c, are in harmonic 
c—b. 
b—a 
c — b = kc, then b — a = ka, and this is the definition given by Plato 
for the harmonic progression. Nicomachus uses this result, numeri- 
cally, stating also the general theorem. Further, given a, b, ¢ in 

harmonic proportion, with ¢ > bd, it follows that ; > 2 and that 
a 

from this definition it follows that if 

proportion when £ = 
a 

b(c + a) = 2ac. The particular proportion given by 6, 8, 12, the 
numbers of the faces, vertices, and edges of a cube, is taken as the 
type of harmonic proportion par excellence, since the three funda- 
mental concords of music, the diapason (with the numerical ratio 
2:1 or 12:6), the diatessaron (4:3 or 8:6), and the diapente 
(3:2 or 12:8), are contained in these numbers. 

The definition of these three types of proportion as given by Theon 
presents an interesting variation of the Nicomachean definition. They 
are : 
p=F. © arithmetical, 

b-—a ¢ 

— : = 1 geometrical, 
C=» © Harmonic 
b—a 

There may also be noticed at this point the series of propositions 
introduced by Euclid in Book VII, in which he applies to arithmetic 
the principles of proportion already stated in Book V. They are as 
follows : 

a= *., VII. 4 
b 
Ifa = +b, andc=~d,thnatc=+(b+4); VII. 5,7 
Tt Ti it 
Ifa=b,andc= “d,thenatc=—(b +d); VIT. 6, 8 
=. coe te 8 
Ifa = — 0, and ¢ = oe 7 VIT. 9 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 63 

He =" t,.cadco=e HZ Em 2, VII. 10 
nN nN C d 
Ifa>c,andb>d, and § = * then 3 = 53 VII. 11 
6b _c_d atb+c+d+--. o . x 
US=— = § = Sy-ythet Se 
io h’ c’ d’ ten a’ +) +e¢+4+ da’ +. seas a’ T2 
a ¢ a ob 
Ae — ae E> .? LT. 
Ys ? hen - 7 VIT. 13 
a a a VII. 14 
b OD ¢ (UC dd’ d ad’ 
fis, thn © = +; VII. 15 
ad ma mt ma | 
a-b=b6.-a. VIT. 16 
Given a, b, ¢, 
Gs gag es OS VII. 17, 18 
c ac C ¢-da@ 
If; = 7 then ad = bc, and conversely. VIT. 19 

Another very important theorem of Euclid dealing with proportions 
is IX. 35, in which he stops just short of determining the formula for 
the summation of a geometric series. If the series be stated as 

a, ar, ar’, ar’, ar’, --- ar*—, ar’, 
giving (7 + 1) terms, and if we take S, as the sum of n terms, this 
proposition proves that 
ar—a_ar*—a 
or aie Bis 
or, in effect, that 

a ar" — a 
r—I 

Archimedes gives the ‘sum to infinity’ of a geometric series with ratio 
1:4, but Euclid nowhere takes up this type of arithmetical discussion. 
Euclid utilizes IX. 35 for proving his proposition in IX. 36 concerning 
the perfect number, showing that if 2" — 1 is prime, then 2*-'(2* — 1) 
is perfect. 

Both Nicomachus and Theon give rules for inserting the different 
kinds of means between two numbers ; their methods differ but slightly. 
Those of Nicomachus are as follows : 

64 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 
For the arithmetical mean, x must be chosen so that 
x—a=b—x. 
For the harmonical mean, x must be chosen so that 

b—x=k.b, 
and x—a=k.-a. 

For the geometrical mean, x must be chosen so that 

To choose x scientifically, Nicomachus adds further that for the 
arithmetical mean 

x= a+} 
2 
or, x= °— 4 wherein b > a; 
for the geometric mean, x= Vab, 
or (incorrectly), x= a> i. 
2a 
for the harmonic mean, (b — aja + a, where b > a. 
b+a 
Three other proportions are defined as follows (givenc > b > a): 
a Bes “| the fourth type; 
a — 6 
56 b-a , 
—_= the fifth type; 
a __ b’ e ype 3 
and ; = — - the sixth type. 

In connection with the fifth type, Nicomachus gives as numerical 
illustrations 2, 4, 5, and then makes the incorrect assertion that “to 
this form of proportion it is likewise peculiar that the product of the 
greater by the middle term is double that of the greater by the lesser 
term,” an accident due to this particular selection of numbers. 

For the remaining four proportions, Nicomachus gives only the 
definitions and therefore avoids further blunder; they involve no 
mathematical points. In the closing chapter, however, the ‘most 

CONTENT OF THE GREEK ARITHMETICA 65 

perfect of all proportions’ is presented, that is, such a series of four 
numbers a, b, c, d that 
a:b=c:d, 

while at the same time a, c, and d form an arithmetical progression and 
a, b, andd form a harmonical progression. Nicomachus refers to the 
possibility of the end terms being cubes, but if this be the case, it would 
lead to irrational means; and again, he does not note, and apparently 
is not aware of the fact, that two of the given conditions are sufficient 
to determine the third. For if we are given 

© 

b d 
and d—-c¢c=c-—4, 
it follows that d — = = _ — a (substituting for c its value), 
or that d = = o 

a b-a 

whence, by definition, d, b, and a form a harmonical progression. 
This concludes our review of the content of the Greek arithmetica, 
from the mathematical point of view. There can be no doubt that if 
Nicomachus is to be judged, as a mathematician, simply with reference 
to his Introduction to Arithmetic, he must yield place to both Euclid 
and Theon. Euclid himself is far less successful in the portions of the 
Elements which deal with arithmetic than in the strictly geometrical 
parts, and in fact we should look rather to books like the second, 
fifth, and twelfth for propositions — geometrically stated, it is true, but 
related to the field known as ‘geometrical algebra’ — which are of 
fundamental importance in the development of analysis. Theon’s 
work is disjointed in its arrangement and far briefer than the Jntro- 
duction, yet in general it shows a deeper appreciation of the mathe- 
matical points involved in the subject-matter. For Nicomachus we 
can only say that, in spite of his mistakes and his philosophical 
prejudices, he gives the most complete discussion of the matters cus- 
tomarily included in the elements of the Greek arithmetical science. 

ME 
OF Ct 
Fir 

CHAPTER IV 
GREEK ARITHMETICAL NOTATION 

THE language of any nation undoubtedly reflects, both in its vocabu- 
lary and in its structural peculiarities, the mental development of the 
people. The relationship is, of course, reciprocal; the mental develop- 
ment influences the language, and the language influences the unfold- 
ing of thought. Particularly in philosophy and in literature this type 
of influence is apparent. The French philosophy and literature are 
in accord with the genius of the French language, reflecting the clarity 
and gracefulness of the speech; the German philosophy and literature 
are in striking contrast, reflecting obscurity, and ponderosity of the 
German language possibly inevitable in profound philosophical spec- 
ulation. 

In mathematical development the choice of a numerical notation 
might, at first thought, be supposed to be a matter of indifference so 
far as progress in scientific thinking is concerned. However, even as 
language influences the development of philosophy and literature, 
even more does notation directly affect mathematical progress. The 
Greeks were unfortunate in their choice of mathematical notation ; 
apparently they realized the deficiency of their early system, for about 
500 B.C., a new one was adopted, radically different in principle from 
the old, but even more awkward from the mathematical point of view.’ 
The comparative lack of progress in analysis in Greece may be at- 
tributed in a large measure to the clumsy systems of notation which 
were in use. 

The numerals employed in Greece are of three separate and dis- 
tinct types, viz., the geometrical numerals, initial letter numerals, 
and alphabetic numerals. The oldest of these are found in the recently 
discovered Minoan writings, which far antedate the classical Greek 

1Sir T. L. Heath, History of Greek Mathematics, vol. I, pp. 37-39, has recently attempted to 
show that the Greek notation did not adversely affect their arithmetic. Heath’s assertion that 
we reckon “with words” is not correct; computation in arithmetic and algebra is by symbols, 
In looking at 3 we do not say “three times two’; we think 6” immediately. 
66 

GREEK ARITHMETICAL NOTATION 67 

period, and may be assigned to the second millennium B.c. The system 
employed is more closely related to the pictorial system of the Egyp- 
tians than to the systems of later Greece. The forms’ are as follows: 

ali y)))) or HT = g, 
ha || 
\ or / = 100, oe = 40, 
() = 1,000, VV = 3 (probably). 

The symbols for one and for ten are strikingly like the curvilinear 
numerals employed in ancient Babylon; the semicircular mark was 
used there also for 1, and the complete circle for ro. 

The second system of numerals adopted in Greece was based upon 
the initial letters of the corresponding numeral words; but exception 
was made for the unit, which was represented, as commonly every- 
where, by a simple vertical stroke.? 

II (orf) from mévre for 5; compare pentagon. 
A from dé€ka_ for IO; compare decagon. 

H from €xarov for 100; compare hekialiter. 
X from xiAtor for 1,000; compare kilogram. 

M (or M”) from puptoe for 10,000; compare myriad. 

™ soon replaced II for five; combinations of f with the symbols for 
10, 100, 1,000, and 10,000, were used to represent 50, 500, 5,000 and 
50,000, thus: [4, [#, [, and [™. 

These numerals occur frequently in Attic inscriptions and have 
therefore received the name Attic numerals. A description of them 
was given by a Byzantine grammarian of the second century after 
Christ, Herodian, and in consequence the designation ‘Herodianic 
numerals’ has frequently been employed. 

The Attic system was replaced about 500 B.c.—300 B.c. (date uncer- 
tain) by another type of alphabetic numerals in which nine letters 
are used to represent the nine units, nine other letters to represent the 
nine tens, and nine more letters to represent the nine hundreds, as 
follows : 

1 Evans, Scripia Minoa (Oxford, 1909), p. 258. 
? Heath, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 29-64; the best and most recent discussion of Greek anthmetic. 

68 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

a By 8 e€ -F & y 8 
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
u K r ys y € o 7 ? 
fe) 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 go 
poo +r uy f$ KX w wo » 
100 200 300 400 #500 600 =7oo 800 goo 

«o By 

1,000 2,000 3,000 

The ordinary Greek alphabet included only 24 letters, so three 
characters borrowed from older Greek alphabets were employed to 
designate the remaining numbers. ‘These characters, called émrionpa, 
are the ones which are used for 6 (oriypua or digamma), for go (kdé77a), 
and for goo (vapmt). To distinguish from a word a group of letters 
used with numerical significance, a horizontal line was commonly 
placed over the numerals; an accent after the final numeral letter of 
any number was also a distinguishing mark. 

To extend the system to numbers from 1,000 to 999,999 a multi- 
plication by 1,000 of any of the numbers above was represented by the 
corresponding character with an accent mark placed before it and a 
little below the line; the myriad symbol was retained-and with any 
of the foregoing numerals written above it represented the given num- 
ber of myriads. 

A multiplication example in these numerals is recorded by Eutocius, 
a writer of the sixth century A.D., in a commentary on the works 
of Archimedes ;* this is one of the few even comparatively ancient 
illustrations of the fundamental operations as performed with Greek 
numerals : 

err” 780 

pr’ 780 

pl e 

MMs’ 490,000 + 50,000 + 6,000 - 
Mssv’ 50,000 + 6,000 + 6,000 + 400 
: ee ee ee ee 
Mnv’ 600,000 + 8,000 + 400 

1 Eutocius, Commentarius in Dimensionem Circuli, in Archimedis Opera Omnia cum Commen- 
lariis Eutocii (ed. Heiberg, 1881), vol. III, p. 290. 

GREEK ARITHMETICAL NOTATION 69 

The use of letters with numerical significance was common among 
the Semitic peoples, with whom, indeed, the system may have origi- 
nated. The Arabs continued to use their letters in this way long after 
our present Hindu-Arabic system became known to them. Ac- 
cording to this scheme of representation of numbers, a numerical 
value is attached to any word. Sometimes for purposes of secrecy 
or mysticism a play upon the numerical value of a word or name was 
indulged in; the Hebrews particularly had a fancy for this kind of 
juggling, giving it the name gematria. The passage in Revelation, 
xiii, 18, ‘Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the 
number of the beast: for it is the number of a man: and his number 
is six hundred three score and six,” refers to the fact that some name 
in Hebrew, or Greek letters or even Roman numerals, has the numeri- 
cal value 666 (or 616).? 

Apparently the alphabetic type is simpler than the Attic type of 
numerals, for such a number as 725 is written more compactly wre, 
than in Attic symbols, P'HHAAP. However the gain in writing these 
numbets is entirely overbalanced by the loss of simplicity in the 
addition and multiplication tables. The connection between 7, 70, 
and 700 is preserved in the form of writing these numbers in the Attic 
style: PII, PAA, HH; whereas { = 7, o = 70, and w = 700 have no 
connecting link so far as the representation is concerned. The Greek 
multiplication table with the alphabetic numerals consisted of 378 
combinations ; in this system 2 X 3, 2 X 30, 2 X 300, 20 X 3, 20 X 30, 
20 X 300, 200 X 3, 200 X 30, 200 X 300 are entirely distinct combi- 
nations, as is evident when these products are written as they had to 
be learned, BX y, BX A, BX, KX y,KXA KX 1,06Xy,a0XA, 
andg Xr. Thecomplexity in addition is not quite as great, including 
only 135 combinations as opposed to 45 with g digits. In these facts 
we probably have one reason for the lack of progress along arithmeti- 
cal lines as compared with the attainments of the Greeks along other 
mathematical lines. 

The representation of fractions in the alphabetic system was ef- 
fected in several different ways. Probably the most common was to 
write the numerator first with one accent and then the denominator 
repeated, each time with two accent marks; thus tf’ xe’’ we’’, for 44. 

1 This passage in Revelafion is now known to be early commentary (second century or even 
first), not original text. See Sanders, The Number of the Beast in Revelation, Journal of Biblical 
Literature, vol. XXXVII (1918), pp. 95-99. 

70 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Another device was to write the denominator as a kind of exponent 
attached to the numerator, «{“*. Unit fractions were represented by 
the simple denominator written but once and distinguished by an 
accent, usually doubled. This distinction attaching to the unit frac- 
tions accords with the Egyptian practice, and the same may be said of 
the representation of both % and 4 by special symbols, outside the 
regular system. For % the symbol is w’’, and for 3,C”’ or ©. 

Archimedes (250 B.C.) and Diophantus (250 A.D.) may be mentioned 
among the Greek mathematicians who did not pay particular atten- 
tion to unit fractions while Heron of Alexandria, the great mechanician, 
was among those who did. A Greek papyrus of the eighth century 
A.D., found at Akhmim, employs the unit fractions quite in the ancient 
Egyptian manner and includes the separate symbols for 4 and %. 

A further peculiar notation with alphabetic numerals was noted 
by Maximus Planudes? in the thirteenth century, but without any 
indication of the date and place of origin. This system consists in 
writing the 27 letters each with two dots superimposed to represent 

the corresponding number of myriads, thus B for 20,000, y for 30,000. 
The system can be indefinitely extended, and with three tiers of dots, 

for example, represents myriads of myriads of myriads; thus ¢ for 
100,000,000,000,000. Nicolas Rhabdas of Smyrna (end of thirteenth 
century) explains the system and states that it can be extended even 
toinfinity.2 The suggestion of place value is evident, and a somewhat 
similar device with superposed and also with subscript dots was used 

+ 

with the Hindu-Arabic numerals by the Arabs; ‘ thus, 5 for 500, 5 for 
50. 
A great mathematician like Archimedes or Diophantus could largely 
overcome the difficulties created and inherent in the various Greek 
mathematical notations. However for the rank and file of those who 
occupied themselves with mathematical studies, the notations proved 
an insurmountable barrier to progress in the development of arith- 
metical and algebraical ideas. 

1 Hultsch, Metrologicorum Scriptorum Religuiae (Leipzig, 1864), vol. I, pp. 173-174. 

* Gerhardt, Etudes Historiques sur l’Arithmélique de Position (Programm, Berlin, 1856) | 
p. 10. 

+P. Tannery, Notices sur les deux Lettres Arithmétiques de Nicolas Rhabdas, in Notices et Ex- 
traits des Mss. de la Bibliothtque Nationale, vol. XXXII, p. 147. 

‘ Smith-Karpinski, The Hindu-Arabic Numerals (Boston, 1911), pp. 66-67. 

CHAPTER V 
THE LIFE OF NICOMACHUS 

History has been most unkind to Nicomachus of Gerasa, author 
of the Introduction to Arithmetic. During his lifetime he enjoyed, 
apparently, the highest reputation as a mathematician, and after his 
death he continued to be studied, directly or indirectly, by genera- 
tion after generation of schoolboys, yet scarcely a word has come 
down to us to tell what sort of man he was, or where he lived, and 
under what circumstances, or even what were the years of his birth 
and death. 

The period of Nicomachus can be fixed, within certain limits, by in- 
direct evidence.! Nicomachus does not say much about his con- 
temporaries. He does mention Thrasyllus,? a celebrated writer on 
music who lived under Tiberius, but fails to make reference either to 
Theon of Smyrna or to Claudius Ptolemy ; and we are told that Apuleius 
of Madaura honored him by translating into Latin his book on arith- 
metic. Thrasyllus furnishes us with one limit, the reign of Tiberius, 
and Apuleius, who lived in the time of the Antonines, the other. It 
seems improbable that Nicomachus would have failed to mention 
Ptolemy in his book on harmony, if the latter had already attained to 
fame by the time that he wrote. As to the period of Ptolemy we have 
more satisfactory data in the form of astronomical observations made 
and reported by himself. The earliest and latest of these fall in 125 
and 151 A.D., respectively. About Theon of Smyrna not enough is 

1 For discussions of Nicomachus’s date, cf. Hoche’s edition, p. iv, n., where the pertinent 
citations are collected; Von Jan, Mustct Scriptores Graect (Leipzig, 1895), pp. 211 ff.; Nessel- 
mann, Geschichte der Algebra (Berlin, 1842), pp. 188 ff.; Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen 
(4th ed.), vol. III, part 2, p. 124, n. 3; Heath, History, vol. 1, pp. 97-112. 

? Manuale Harmonicum, I, p. 24. 

* Cassiodorus, De Artibus ac Disctplinis Liberalium Litterarum, c. IV, De Arithmetica (Migne, 
Patrologia Latina, vol. LXX, pp. 1204 ff.), p. 1208 B: .. . arithmetica disciplina quam apud 
Graecos Nicomachus diligenter exposutt. Hunc primum Madaurensis Apuleius, deinde magnificus 
vir Boetius Latino sermone translatum Romanis contulit lectitandum. 

“Cantor, Vorlesungen tiber Geschichte der Mathematik, vol. I (3d edition, Leipzig, 1907), 
p. 41S. 

71 

72 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

known to warrant any conclusions in relation to the date of Nicoma- 
chus. Theon probably flourished in the first part of the second cen- 
tury,’ and his book contains much matter that is parallel to Nicoma- 
chus’s own work, yet it is unsafe to argue for the dependence of either 
of these authors upon the other.? The inconclusiveness of the ar- 
gumenium ex silentio is proverbial. We are warranted, therefore, 
merely in saying that the period of Nicomachus’s life fell somewhere 
between the middle of the first century and the middle of the second 
century after Christ. 

In the manuscripts of his works and in the scholia of Johannes 
Philoponus upon the Initroducizon, Nicomachus is referred to as a 
Gerasene.* The most prominent city having the name Gerasa was 
located in Palestine, in the Decapolis, some thirty miles southeast of 
the Lake of Tiberias; it was, therefore, close to the region where 
Christianity had its birth. This was probably the Gerasa from which 
Nicomachus came, and upon that supposition a few surmises can be 
ventured about the environment of his youth. There is a tradition 
to the effect that Alexander the Great, in the course of his campaign- 
ing, left behind at this place a group of his veterans (yépovres), and 
that from this circumstance the place got its name. Whatever may 
be the truth of this story, it suggests the inference that Greeks predom- 
inated in this neighborhood. | 

Not far from Gerasa is placed the episode of the cure of the demoniac’ 
who was possessed by the ‘Legion,’ and the name Gerasa is found in 
this connection in some of the Biblical manuscripts.‘ At any rate, 
the swine which are reported to have rushed into the lake were being 
t2nded not more than a score of miles from Gerasene territory; the 
swine were not likely to be a product of a region where Jewish tradi- 
tions held sway. 

1 Cf. the dates of the astronomical observations probably made by Theon; Cantor, op. cii., 
v.l. I, p. 433- 

? Von Jan, op. cit., p. 211, holds that Nicomachus refers to Theon in the Manuale Harmonicum 
wi-hout calling him by name; he sets the Manuale before 170 A.D. and Nicomachus in the middle 
cf the second century. 

1 Scholia (ed. Hoche): Tepagnwds b¢ Adyerac dwd ris wédews Fs Broua Tépaca~ tor: dé wepl 
Bésrpary cal ApaBlar. Tépaca d¢ Aéyerac dwd rod rods cvcrparetcarras rw Adetdvdpw yéporras 
ka’ ah duvapévous wodepety dxet ry olknow woijoad Gan. 

‘In Mark, v. 1-20, the episode is referred to Gerasene territory, but medern critics identify 
1..¢ Gerasa in question with a place called Gersa, or Khersa, on the shore of the lake. Cf. Mat- 
thew, villi. 28-34; Luke, vill. 26-39. Westcott and Hort read Teparyvay in Mark and Luke, 
Tadapnydv in Matthew; but the manuscripts of Matthew and Luke vary, giving both these 
rea_ings and Tepyernvdr besides. 

LIFE OF NICOMACHUS 73 

The remains of the city, moreover, monumental and written, at- 
test a Greek civilization strongly colored by the Roman influence that 
came with the tightening of Rome’s grasp upon the Near East. Most 
of the inscriptions from the place are in Greek; and there are, besides 
remains of extensive walls, an imposing Roman arch, a circus, a thea- 
ter and a maumachia of a provincial city of considerable importance, 
which without doubt enjoyed a varied and lively existence, including 
all that the Greco-Roman civilization had to offer. Furthermore, 
the name Nicomachus (Ni«dpayos) is pure Greek. 

We may imagine that Nicomachus spent his early years in Gerasa 
and attended the school of the grammar-master, where he would learn 
to write, read and sing; to figure a little, and to enjoy to some extent 
the works of the classical authors. What was the social position of 
his family it is impossible to say, but there is no suggestion in his writ- 
ings to warrant the conclusion that his surroundings in life were other 
than comfortable. It is interesting to note that among the Gerasene 
inscriptions the name Nicomachus (spelled Necduayxos) occurs thrice, 
and in each case it would appear that the bearer was a person of 
affluence. 

The Nicomachus who comes nearest in time to the author of the 
Introduction is the father of a certain Demetrius, who, either in the 
year 149 A.D., OF 255 A.D., according to the era upon which the date is 
to be based, set up an altar bearing an inscription in honor of two 
Augusti— Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, or Valerian and 
Gallienus, as the case may be.”, The other Nicomachus, with the sur- 
name Claudius, was a commissioner (€mipeAnrys) of the city in 231 A.D.® 
In view of the Greek custom of naming a child from its grandfather, 
there 1s of course a possibility that these men may have been related to 
Nicomachus the mathematician, but the name was common and the 
chances are slight. Whether his family was engaged in trade, and 
sent goods to Rome or to Alexandria or into the East, or was connected 
with officialdom, local or imperial, or belonged to the class of landed 
proprietors, they seem to have been able to give to the young Nicoma- 
chus the best sort of training obtainable for the career he chose. As 

1 For a description of the present remains and citation of passages dealing with Gerasa, see 
Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Encyclopddte, s.v. Gerasa. 

2 Inscripliones Graecae ad Res Romanas Pertinentes, vol. III, No. 1343: frovs Bes’ Aatelov fa’. 
brép Tis TO / LeBacrady cwrnplas / Oey ApaBiap éxrynxdy / Anutrpws ‘Adxlov / rod xal Ne«woud- 
xou / roy Bwpydy dvdby / Key. 

+ Ibid., Nos. 1360-61, referring to the same person. 

74 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Iamblichus says, “‘The man is great in mathematics and as instruc- 
tors therein had those that were most skilled in the subject.” ? 

It is hardly to be assumed that Nicomachus could find in Gerasa 
itself all the advantages which he seems to have enjoyed. His home 
city was of course responsive to those influences which in those times 
went out from the centers of culture, — Athens, Rhodes, Tarsus, and 
Alexandria, among the nearest. Rome had made all parts of the em- 
pire easily accessible; knowledge of what was being done in these 
university cities must have been current in the Hellenistic towns of 
the East, and it is easy to see how a desire may have been aroused in 
Nicomachus to devote himself to the study of philosophy. 

In regard to the course of his studies, we know nothing of a certainty, 
but the balance of probability points to Alexandria as the place to 
which Nicomachus would naturally go to acquire the training which 
he sought. The choice of that center of learning would also explain 
the type of his thinking, for in the first century after Christ Alexandria 
was the most famous seat of Pythagoreanism in the world. There 
the old doctrines were being revived, and new treatises were being put 
in circulation under old names; in Alexandria, in short, the Neo- 
Pythagorean movement received, if not its initial impulse, at least 
its chief encouragement. 

The claim of Alexandria to be the real birthplace and center of this 
philosophical movement can be disputed only by Rome; but a bref 
survey of the early history of Neo-Pythagoreanism is enough to prove 
that the Egyptian capital has by far the better right to the distinction. 
There are, to be sure, scattered literary references to Pythagoreans 
in other parts of the world during the centuries following the disaster 
in Magna Graecia which brought the independent existence of the 
school to an end; the New Comedy took as a butt those who followed 
‘the Pythagorean way of life.’? There were too traces of a Pythag- 
orean tradition in southern Italy,* but the former certainly counted 
for nothing in a philosophical way, and the latter neither deserve to 
rank with the greater sects contemporary with them nor form a neces- 
sary link in the chain connecting the renascent Pythagoreanism with 

17 Nicomachi Arithmeticam Introductionem, p. 4,14 (ed. Pistelli, Leipzig, 1894): 8 re yap 
dvhp péyas dorly dv rots wabhpact cal xadyyeusvas toye wepl abrwy rods duweipordrous év rois 
pabhpace. *See Zeller, op. cit., vol. III, part 2, pp. 93 ff. 

3 Ibid., pp. 97 ff. The interest of the Platonic schools and of Aristotle himself was of far more 
weight in preserving Pythagorean doctrine than the influence of the obscure men who professed 
to be Pythagoreans; see p. 88. 

LIFE OF NICOMACHUS 75 

the old. The first prominent person in the later time to be called 
definitely a Pythagorean is the Roman, Nigidius Figulus.' There is 
also a dim tradition about the Sextii at Rome, who were Pythagoreans,” 
but the meager reports about them indicate that they made little 
of the essential features of the doctrine, much more of its external 
observances. 

Apparently even before the interest at Rome had been awakened, 
the renaissance at Alexandria * had started. Inasmuch as the begin- 
nings of the movement cannot be connected with the names of noble 
Romans like Figulus, we do not know much about it, but many facts 
indicate how important this city was as a seat of Neo-Pythagoreanism. 
With Alexandria is probably to be connected the unknown Pythagorean 
of the first century before Christ quoted by Alexander Polyhistor, who 
is oné of our best sources of information. Alexandria was the home of 
Arius and Eudorus, who are connected with the early history of the 
movement, and of Sotion; in its neighborhood were established the 
Therapeutae, who built up a system highly colored by Pythagoreanism ; 
and perhaps the best evidence of all is that the Alexandrian philosophy 
of Philo Judaeus, who flourished early in the first century of the 
Christian era, is deeply influenced by it. 

Very probably many of the pseudonymous writings, of which Zeller 
has collected a long list,* and the period of whose composition he would 
make begin with the last half of the first century before Christ, origi- 
nated in Alexandria. At no place in the ancient world could a com- 
piler of such books have found a better place in which to work; for 
here was the famous library, part of which was burned in 47 B.c., 
but which had been restored before Nicomachus’s time through the 
liberality of Antony and the transfer hither of the royal Pergamene 
collection. All the written material on the early history of Pythag- 
oreanism must have been available to the scholars working here, and 
Nicomachus in his time would find a complete apparatus at his disposal. 

Furthermore, it is absolutely certain that Alexandria had been for 
a long time, and still was, the center of Greek mathematical interests.® 
Nearly all of the famous mathematicians who lived after the date of 
the founding of the city are associated in one way or another with 

1 Zeller, ibid., p. 109. 

* Chaignet, Pythagore et la Philosophie Pythagorictenne (Paris, 1873), vol. II, p. 301, n. 1. 

7 On the importance of Alexandria in the history of Neo-Pythagoreanism, see Zeller, of. cit., 

vol. ITI, part 2, p. 114; Chaignet, op. cit., p. 301. 
4 Thid., p. 115, 0. 3. ’ See Cantor, op. cit., vol. I, p. 427. 

76 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Alexandria— Euclid, Eratosthenes, Apollonius of Pergae, and Heron; 
and their successors were continually offering instruction in the science. 

Thus, the center at once of later Pythagoreanism and of mathe- 
matical study, Alexandria clearly furnished the most fitting environ- 
ment for the training and subsequent career of Nicomachus, but if 
we picture him to ourselves as having lived and written there, it 
must not be forgotten that we have no positive testimony to that 
effect. Perhaps it is significant, however, that he is once referred to 
as an authority upon Egyptian festivals,’ but, as we shall see, we can- 
not be sure that our Nicomachus is meant. 

One bit of evidence regarding the life of Nicomachus he himself 
gives. His Manual of Harmony is dedicated to an unknown lady, 
apparently of high degree, having been written at her request. Seeing 
that it is the only autobiographical touch in all his extant works, it 
will be worth while to quote the passage. In speaking of the treatise 
that he is presenting, he says, “But I must spur on all my zeal, most 
noble and august lady, since it is you that bid me.”? Again, modestly 
depreciating the Manual in favor of the more scholarly work which he 
plans later to substitute for it, he writes, “And, if the gods are willing, 
just as soon as I shall have leisure and a rest from my journeyings, I 
will compile for you a better and more detailed Introduction dealing 
with this very subject; .. . and, so that you may the more easily 
follow the argument, I will take my beginning, say, from the same 
point as that at which I began your instruction when I was expounding 
the subject to you.” ? 

How much light would be thrown on the life of Nicomachus if we 
but knew the name of this lady! We cannot tell whether she was 
Greek or Roman. Was Nicomachus but a ‘Greekling,’ a household 
philosopher to noble dames, a holder of pet poodles, like the butts of 
Lucian’s satire?* Such a supposition makes but a sorry figure of 
him ; it condemns him to a career of humiliation of which there is no 
suggestion in the tone of his writings. The constant mention therein 
of matters that arise in the student’s reading of the philosophers — 
that is, in the ordinary course of higher studies — seems to indicate 
that Nicomachus was engaged in educational work, and ought to 

1 See p. So. 

? P. 237, 15 (Von Jan’s edition). 

3 Tbid., p. 238, 6 ff. Other references to the lady and the promise to her, ibid., pp. 242, 11 ff.; 

260, 4 ff.; 261,17; 264, I. 
‘De Mercede Conducits. 

LIFE OF NICOMACHUS 77 

outweigh any disparaging inferences that might be made from these 
references to the unknown lady. 

At the same time the references show that he associated with mem- 
bers of the upper classes of society and could adopt the attitude of a 
man of the world. Nicomachus was called upon to give instruction 
to the noble lady to whom he writes, and valued her good will so 
highly as to compose a manual at her request. It would not be im- 
possible for him to do this and at the same time to maintain his more 
dignified position as an independent teacher of the higher subjects. 
A Pythagorean would be more interesting, perhaps, to the nobility 
than other philosophers ; but we must not assume that the only motive 
of Nicomachus’s noble friend was mere curiosity. She seems to 
have been serious in her inquiries ; in order to use the proffered Manual 
she would have to possess no mean knowledge of the theories of math- 
ematics and music. 

Nicomachus speaks also of journeys which necessitate a postpone- 
ment of work on another and larger Harmonic Introduction. His 
language implies a journey which he was obliged to make, the object 
of which was known to his correspondent. He was, we infer, a busy 
man; others besides those in his own neighborhood, perhaps, wished 
to hear him lecture, although we know nothing of the errand that put 
him to the inconvenience of travel. At any rate we conclude that he 
was aman of affairs, and of some eminence, befriended by the mighty ; 
he was aman, too, who knew how to play his part successfully in such a 
character, and was not content merely to cultivate learning in a cor- 
ner. Lucian’s remark, “You reckon like Nicomachus!”’ shows that 
he did in fact achieve such fame that his name was synonymous with 
mathematical skill.’ 

We have a bit of interesting testimony to the reputation of Nico- 
machus after his death which may reflect also upon the fame that he 
won in his lifetime. Proclus, who died 485 A.D., is said to have been 
convinced that he himself was one of the ‘golden chain,’ or succession 
of true philosophers, who, as it were, connected men with heaven after 
the fashion of the golden chain which Homer mentions. It was re- 
vealed to him in a dream, we are told, that the soul of Nicomachus was 
incarnate in him.” This is a clear implication that Nicomachus too 

1 Philopatris, 12: nal yap dpidudecs ws Nixduaxos 6 Teparnrds. 

2? Marinus, Vila Procli, 28: Ore ris ‘Epuaieis efn cecpas cadas éedoaro (sc. Proclus) «ai ére 
Thy Nexoudyou rot Ilu@ayopelou uxt Exar Svap wore éwioreveer. 

78 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

was regarded as a link in the ‘golden chain.’ That he was reckoned 
among the ‘illustrious men’ of the Pythagorean sect we know on the 
authority of Porphyry ;‘ if any further evidence be needed, we have 
but to point to the reputation borne by his works and to the number 
of commentaries that scholars wrote upon them. 

1 Quoted by Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiae, VI. 9. 8: evry re (sc. Origen) yap del rg Thdron 
roit re Novunriov xal Kpoviov, "Awoddkoddwrous re xal Aoyylrov xal Modepdrov Nixoudyou re xal 
rar éy trois [lu@ayopelous dAXoyluwry drdpor aulhe ovyypdupacir. 

The praise of Isidore of Seville (Etymotogiae, III. 2. 1), by whom Nicomachus is coupled with 
Pythagoras himself as a mathematician, shows the view of a later time. See also Cassiodorus 
as cited, p. 71. 

CHAPTER VI 
THE WORKS OF NICOMACHUS 

THE fame of Nicomachus rests chiefly upon his writings. Only two 
works by him are preserved to us in their entirety, the Manuale 
Harmonicum' and the Introduction to Arithmetic. Of a third, the 
Theologumena Arithmeticae,’ we have a large part, which gives us a 
far more accurate judgment of Nicomachus’s philosophy than we should 
otherwise have had; this work, as it stands, is one of the best sources 
of information about Neo-Pythagoreanism. 

Besides these three works, Nicomachus was certainly the author of 
several other books; modern scholars have credited him with the 
authorship of additional works which he probably did not write. A 
full list of them, including both those properly ascribed to him and 
those that are either doubtfully or wrongly assigned to him, is as 
follows : 

1. An Introduction to Geometry (Tewperpuxn etoayaryy). — Nico- 
machus certainly wrote a book with this title, for he refers to it in his 
Introduction to Arithmetic.* 

2. A Life of Pythagoras. — Nicomachus is quoted by both Porphyry 
and Iamblichus, in their biographies of Pythagoras,® and, as a promi- 
nent member of the sect, he is likely to have compiled a life of the 
master. 

3. Another and larger work on music. This would be the book 
which, as we have seen, Nicomachus promised to write; because of 
certain citations of Nicomachus by musical writers upon matters that 
are not to be found in the present Manuale Harmonicum, Von Jan, 
its latest editor, thinks it probable that this work was actually written. ® 

1 Here cited in Von Jan’s edition, Musici Scripiores Graect, Leipzig, 1895. 

2 Here cited in Hoche’s edition, Leipzig, 1866. 

1A fuller discussion of this work follows; see pp. 82 fi. 

‘See II. 6. 1. 

® Porphyry, Vita Pythagorae, 20 (p. 27, 3); 59 (p. 50,12). In the second instance (the story 
of Damon and Phintias), he says that Nicomachus followed Aristoxenus. Iamblichus, Vite 

Pythagorica, KXXV, 251. 
6 Von Jan, op. ci., pp. 223 ff., collects the evidence on the matter. 

79 

80 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

4. Awork on the interpretation of Plato (IAarwvixn cvvavayvwors). 
This and the following are more doubtful than those that have already 
been mentioned. The evidence in the present case consists simply 
of Nicomachus’s words in the Introduction, II. 24. 11: ravra dé rys 
oixeias cadnveias érAnpera év TH TAaravxy cvvavayvace Kata Tov 
Tov heyouévou ydpou Térov év TH Tlodtreig. dd Tpowadmov THY Movoav 
Tmapecayonevov. This might be taken to refer to the title of a book ; 
but it more likely means simply the school lectures on Plato, and in 
the lack of further evidence is best so taken. 

5. On Egyptian Festivals (Ilept é€oprov Atyvrriwyv).— The only 
evidence for this is a citation in Athenaeus, beginning: “And Nicoma- 
chus says in the first book On Egyptian Festivals.”” The objection 
is, of course, that another Nicomachus may have written the book. 
There is no other reference to it, save a doubtful one in Johannes 
Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus.* 

6. A larger work on arithmetic,’ besides the Introduction and the 
Theologumena Arithmeticae. Only by the misconception of the mean- 
ing of Iamblichus has such a book been attributed to Nicomachus. At 
the beginning of his commentary Iamblichus states that he will not 
write a new book on arithmetic because he finds that this has already 
been done so well by Nicomachus in his Art of Arithmetic (dpiOpnrurn 
téxvn).° As he continues, he draws freely upon the Introduction and 
the Theologumena, but not, as far as can be judged, from any other 
Nicomachean source. It is perfectly clear that in these words he has 
referred to the Introduction by a somewhat unusual title, but one which 
could fairly be given to it. Those who have used this passage as testi- 
mony for the existence of a separate work with this title have been 
misled. 

1 Deipnosophistae, XT. 55, 478 A: Nixéduayos F év wpdry wepl dopray Alyurrlwy dyol: Td 
82 xévdu dori per Tlepoixdy, ry 82 doxiv Av Epuirwos dorpodoyixds ws 6 xdopos éf of riy Gedy ra 
Gavuara xal rd xapreoiwa ylyecGa: dx yijs' 36d dx rovrov owévderPa:. The passage as it stands 
seems very confused; the editor, Kaibel, says of it, “‘non intellego.” 

2 Von Jan, op. cti., p. 233, finds it uncertain. 

7TV, 46. Roether (in his edition, Leipzig, 1827), ad loc., suggests that the citation in Lydus 
is to this work; it may equally well be, however, that Lydus was quoting the Theologumena Arith- 
meticae, of which he certainly made use in De Mensibus, III. 51. 

4 Ast (Theologumena Arilhmeticae, pp. 160, 205), Fabricius, Bibliotheca Graeca, vol. III, p. 632, 
and others named by Nesselmann, op. cit., p. 217, n. §3, believe in the existence of such a work, 
but Nesselmann clearly exposes the error. Cf. also Von Jan, op. ctl., p. 232. 

6P. 4, 12 ff. (ed. Pistelli): edploxouer 84 wdvra xard yrwunr ry IMvdayépa ror Nixdpayor wepl 
airijs dwodeduxéra év rq dpwWynrecy tTéxxq. Note also the scholium of Philoponus on the title of 
the Introduction, elaayoryh éxrvyéypawra: ws wpdt Tra ‘yeypaupéra airy Geodhoyicd fro: peydda 
dpiunrixd. This refers, of course, to the Theologumena Arithmeticae. 

WORKS OF NICOMACHUS 81 

7. A Life of Apollonius of Tyana.'— This also may be dismissed 
for lack of evidence; the only testimony regarding it has been misin- 
terpreted. Sidonius Apollinaris says, “Since you urged, I have sent 
you the life of the Pythagorean Apollonius, not in the form in which 
the elder Nicomachus wrote it down from the account of Philostratus, 
but as Tascius Victorianus set it forth from the outline of Nicomachus.’’? 
Now, as Philostratus certainly lived long after Nicomachus, the ‘elder 
Nicomachus’ who is mentioned cannot be the one in whom we are at 
present interested; and it is hardly possible that the name Nico- 
machus, twice used in the passage quoted, does not refer to the same 
person each time. Even if the Nicomachus of the second reference 
is not the same as the first, there is no reason to identify him with the 
Gerasene. 

8. A work dealing with astronomy.® The evidence for such a 
book is inconclusive, consisting merely of the following remark of 
Simplicius: “. .. unless the hypothesis of eccentric circles was de- 
vised by the Pythagoreans, as not only certain others recount, but also 
Nicomachus, and Jamblichus following Nicomachus.” 4 A statement 
such as this could easily have found a place in the life of Pythagoras 
which Nicomachus seems to have written; but in case he did write 
an astronomical work, it fills up for him a series of four introductions 
to the four mathematical sciences, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, 
and music, corresponding to the four divisions of the book of Theon 
of Smyrna, and doubtless designed, as was the latter, for the use of 
students about to begin their higher studies. Nicomachus certainly 
called his books on arithmetic, geometry, and music ‘introductions,’® 
and so the title of this work, if it existed, was probably Introduction to 
Astronomy. Perhaps, as Zeller® supposes, the books written by 
Nicomachus were all parts of what was called “ Collection [or Collec- 
tions] of Pythagorean Opinions.” 

In the further consideration of Nicomachus we shall not find 
it necessary to make frequent reference to the Manuale Harmonicum, 

1 Von Jan, op. cil., p. 234, strangely accepts this as Nicomachean. 

*VIII. 3: Apollonitt Pythagorict vilam non ul Nicomachus senior ¢ Philosirali, sed ut Tasctus 
Victorianus e Nicomachi schedio exscripstt, guia iusseras, mist. 

Von Jan, op. cil., p. 223, accepts this as Nicomachean on the evidence stated. 

4JIn Aristotelis de Caelo, p. 227, Karsten (= Scholia Bekkeri, p. 503 b): el wh dpa q rap éxxér- 
Tpwy Ktxdwr drivers Ord Tay Tlvéayopelwy dwevohOy, ws EAdo: 7é rives loropoie: cal Nixéduayos xai 
Nixoudyy caraxodovdadr Id uBdtxos. 

* He applied the term e/caywy# to the larger work on music which he says he intended to 
write. See Afanuale Harmonicum, p. 238, 6 ff. * Op. cit., vol. III, part 2, p. 124, note 2. 

82 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

but it is very important to take into account the theories advanced 
in the Theologumena Arithmeticae, where there is found a treatment of 
number very different from that of the Introduction. We must, there- 
fore, determine how far the Theologumena Arithmeticae, in its present 
form, may be used as valid evidence for Nicomachus’s views. A full 
discussion of this question has never been presented, nor can such a 
discussion be attempted here. It would involve a careful compari- 
son of Iamblichus’s citations of the book, in his commentary on the 
Introduction, and a study of the sources, in addition to a comparison 
of Photius’s epitome of the Theologumena with the longer form of the 
book. For the purposes of this study, however, probably the latter 
alone will yield sufficiently conclusive results. 

The title Theologumena Arithmeticae,’ as is well known, is today 
applied to two different ancient works, that of Nicomachus, and an 
anonymous treatise published in 1817 by Ast, and believed by many 
to have been compiled by Iamblichus, an assumption which is on the 
whole a likely one.2, The work of Nicomachus is not known to us at 
first hand, but we have an epitome of its contents by Photius,’ and 
Ast’s Theologumena was in part derived from it, as may be deduced 
from stylistic evidence, from the actual citation of Nicomachus in it, 
and from comparison with Photius. Photius’s account is summary 
in the extreme; for the most part he simply lists the epithets which 
the Pythagoreans applied to the numbers; and he seldom adds the 
reasons why they were bestowed. Ast’s text contains much more 
material of the latter sort, and if it can safely be used for evidence, it 
is plainly desirable to do so. 

Ast himself compared the epitome given by Photius with the text 
which he was editing, and stated the conclusion (p. 157) that his 
Theologumena was a different work from that of Nicomachus. “Be- 
sides,” he says, ‘‘ Photius took much from Nicomachus’s Theologumena 
which you will seek here in vain; and there is the additional fact that 
in this Theologumena Nicomachus’s Introduction to Arithmetic and his 
own Theologumena are often cited (as c. I, p. 4, 23; c. X, p. 42, 8). 
So without doubt a philosopher of the later time compiled our Theolo- 
gumena, taking from the mathematical works of Nicomachus, Anatolius 
(cf.c. II, p. 7,7; ILI, p. 14, 22; VI, p. 33; VIL, p. 41,7; X, p. 63, 23), 

1T have adopted this form of the Latin title, rather than Theologumena Artihmetica, as more 

correctly representing the Greek, Geodoyotmera ris dpcOunrinas. 
? Zeller holds this view. § Bibliotheca, Codex 187 (edition of I. Bekker, Berlin, 1824). 

WORKS OF NICOMACHUS 83 

and others, whatever seemed useful to him.”’ He then names a number 
of other scholars who held a somewhat similar opinion, some of them 
inclining to assign the compilation to Iamblichus. From a statement 
of Iamblichus himself we know that he had in mind the composition of 
such a work.’ 

Ast’s opinion seems, in substance, to have been adopted by most 
scholars. Yet all that he says may easily be true and at the same 
time the text which he published may be for the most part of Nico- 
machean origin. If Iamblichus, as is very probable, was the compiler 
of the Theologumena, we need only to inspect his Commentary on the 
Introduction of Nicomachus to be assured that in all likelihood he would 
not do violence to his source. Although in the Commentary he has 
added a considerable amount to the Nicomachean original, he contra- 
dicts it in nothing and adds nothing essential of hisown. Some of the 
additions, in fact, are apparently from the Theologumena Arithmeticae, 
and everything combines to show the author’s respect for Nicomachus. 
He makes it clear, in fact, that he does not intend to depart from the 
model he has selected, because he does not think it right to deprive 
Nicomachus of the honors he has won as an arithmetician and because 
he himself could not in any case do better independently. The 
same motives would determine his course in making a compilation of 
the Theologumena. 

However much truth may be at the basis of Ast’s remarks about the 
Theologumena Artihmeticae, we may still see in the treatise a compila- 
tion based almost entirely upon Nicomachus, aside from the obvious 
citations of Anatolius. For if some of the epithets of Photius are 
not found in Ast’s text, this 1s sufficiently accounted for by the fact 
that the latter has been both edited and abbreviated; conversely, if 
Ast’s text preserves something not mentioned in Photius, it is to be 
remembered that Photius is even more summary. The writer holds 
the view that the Theologumena of Ast is in fact mainly Nicomachean 
in origin, and that it may be used, with due discretion, to illustrate his 
opinions. It may be well to set forth briefly the grounds for such a 
belief. A laborious study of the question would doubtless correct cer- 
tain details, but the following statement seems to be supported by the 
evidence. 

1 Commentary on the Introduction of Nicomachus, p. 118, 15 (Pistelli): Sray cal roy Ad\dwy dwd 
povddos péypis alras dpiGudy éxdorov érarOtpara evdds dtjs wera thrde Thy eloaywyhr decxviwpev. 
? Ibid., p. §, 13 ff. (Pistellt). 

84 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Ast’s Theologumena Arithmeticae falls into ten chapters, each dealing 
with one of the numbers in the first decade; although Nicomachus’s 
treatise consisted of two books, according to Photius, it may have 
followed much the same arrangement. The only two sources of the 
compiler actually known are Nicomachus and Anatolius, if the numer- 
ous slight citations are not taken into consideration; for the latter 
were probably found already quoted in the original sources. Since 
we possess the full text of Anatolius’s On the Decad and the Numbers 
within It,’ it is a simple matter to extract from the whole the portions 
that were taken from him. Although the compiler omitted much of 
the Anatolian material at his disposal, probably because he preferred 
to incorporate the same topics from other sources, and though he 
has varied its order and phrasing somewhat and made a few additions, 
there is on the whole no reason to think that he used a text substantially 
different from the one published by Heiberg. The Anatolian sections 
of the Theologumena Arithmeticae are thus distributed :? 

I c and £, p. 6: ort “AvaroAws . . . wndevdos dptOyov; the intervening sen- 
tence is not in Heiberg’s text; then ort riyv povdda . . . rots ey aire 
doO nous. 

II A, p. 7: beginning of chapter to Acyor roy dvadoyia. 

III 8, p. 14: as indicated in Ast’s text. 

IV C, p. 23: xaXciras 6¢ airy to end. 

V A, p. 24: beginning of chapter to as dyAot ro dtaypappa. 
VI A, p. 33: beginning of chapter to dacrdcveas coparur &. 
VII A, p. 41-42: as indicated in Ast’s text. 

VIII 3, pp. 55-56: as indicated in Ast, to "EparorGévns pyoiv. 

IX B, p. 58: évveds dro reptocov to end. 

X C, pp. 63-64: as indicated in Ast’s text. 

Of the rest, a great part is undoubtedly Nicomachean. In certain 
sections, elther because there is correspondence with the epithets 
cited by Photius from Nicomachus, or because Nicomachus is actually 
named, there can be no question. The passages most clearly Nico- 
machean are the following : 

I B: p. 4, xal ore roy Gedy to the first Anatolian citation.? 

1 See p. go, n. 8. 

? In the following tabulation, for convenience, the sections of Ast’s text are in each case referred 
to by a Roman numeral showing the chapter (monad, dyad, etc.) and a letter indicating the order 
of the sections. 

+ Beginning at this point, the first 11 epithets given by Photius occur in order; the other 
18 are not mentioned. Nicomachus is cited at the beginning and there is no sign of internal 
breaks. 

WORKS OF NICOMACHUS 85 

II p: p. 8, dre dvds Aeyera to end. 
III a: p. 12, beginning of chapter to the Anatolian section, p. 14. 
III c: p. 15, top to p. 16, end of chapter.” 
IV B: Pp. 22, ort AloAov duo to the Anatolian matter.’ 
V B: p. 24, end of Anatolian section to the end of the chapter.* 
VI B: p. 33, after the Anatolian section, to p. 38, or: érra ray odapav «ri.® 
VII B: p. 42, after the Anatolian section, to p. 48, ort xai ra owéppata xrA.® 
VIII a: p. 54, beginning, to the Anatolian section, p. 55.7 
IX a: p. 56, beginning, to the Anatolian section, p. 58.5 
X A: p. 58, beginning, to the reference to Speusippus, p. 61.° 

There can be little question of referring the foregoing portions to 
Nicomachus. This leaves in question the following : 

I a: p. 3, beginning, to the first Nicomachean section, p. 4. 
I p: a few lines between the Anatolian sections on p. 6. 
I F: p. 7, end of the Anatolian section to end of the chapter.' 
II B: dvo yap dpibpoyv oyéots ravoxnpwy doriv, p. 8, at the end of the Ana- 
tolian section. 
: droAetreras by xrA., p. 8, to the Nicomachean section, p. 8. 
: p. 16, beginning, to p. 22, the Nicomachean section. 
: p. 38, after the Nicomachean section, to end of chapter. 
: p. 48, after the Nicomachean section, to end of chapter. 
: p. §6, doy) Trav povoixay Acywy, xrA. to end of chapter. 
: Pp. 61, Gre xai Srevourwos . . . to the Anatolian section. 

< 
— 
7g og A SF OO 

1 Parallels Photius; the 27th of his 51 epithets for the dyad is the last cited, and, of the first 
27,9 are omitted. This shows that there was much abbreviation. 

? Both these sections parallel Photius throughout (citing 12 of 50 epithets), but the order is 
varied. About half of Photius’s material relates to divinities and all such has been neglected. 
Nicomachus's name heads Section C. 

? A short section, but with many parallels to Photius. 

‘Of the epithets in Photius the first 15, and the roth, 21st, 23rd, 2q4th and 25th are given. 
With the mention of the 5 elements (p. 25; also in Photius) begins a list of pentadic groups in 
nature with another parallel with Photius (p. 26 bottom, dvexlay) at the end. The following 
passage on 5 as Justice is confirmed for Nicomachus both by Photius and by its use in Iamblichus, 
In Nicomacht Arithmelicam Iniroductionem, p. 16, 11 ff. Thence the parallelism with Photius 
continues, and the last paragraph is headed by Nicomachus’s name. ‘This is probably quoted 
verbatim, the rest summarized. 

* Of the epithets in Photius, Nos. 1, 3-6, 12, 14, 15, 18-20, 24-27 are given. 

* Caption contains Nicomachus’s name; no sign of breaks. The first two epithets of Photius 
occur (p. 43, bottom) and on p. 44 the next two, r¥x7, xaipés; after which the demonstration 
that 7 is effective in the working of the world and on human life (justifying xaipés) does not afford 
quotable epithets to Photius. 

7 Out of Photius’s 17 epithets this contains Nos. 1-3, 9-12, 16-17. 

§ Out of the 22 epithets of Photius, the rst-qth, 7th-11th, 13th, and zoth-22nd occur. There 
is also a reference at the beginning of the section to the topic of 5 as Justice already met. 

* Photius gives but 16 epithets; the rst and 3rd-16th occur in the passage. 

10 Chapter II probably should begin here. 

86 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Of the passages cited above, I p and F and II B are very short, 
and VIII c, from its character, is unimportant for the present purpose. 
‘The same may be said of X B, the quotation from Speusippus; it 
makes very little difference whether Nicomachus had already cited the 
passage or the compiler found it elsewhere. The other more important 
sections, I A, IIc, 1V a, VI c, VII c, are set down as doubtful chiefly 
because in them it is difficult to find consistent correspondence with 
Photius. This is not necessarily proof that they are not Nicomachean, 
either in whole or in part. At the beginning of each chapter Nicoma- 
chus seems to have devoted a paragraph or two to introductory re- 
marks of a general nature concerning the number in question, and 
these naturally enough might not include specific epithets. The 
latter of course are what Photius was interested in citing, as a glance 
at his report shows; consequently, he discovered little in the first few 
paragraphs to record. This may be the reason why Ia, IIc and 
IV a contain no parallels in Photius; each, if Nicomachean, must 
have stood at the beginning of the chapter. 

In the section I a, there is much that recalls the language of both the 
Introduction and the Nicomachean sections of the Theologumena 
Arithmeticae. One is inclined to think it Nicomachean in origin, but 
subjected to the editing of Iamblichus. The reference to the ‘Intro- 
duction’ could mean lamblichus’s Commentary, as well as our Intro- 
duction.’ When the writer says that in the Introduction the monad 
was seen to be both ‘pleuric and diametric,’ he refers to something 
mentioned not by Nicomachus, but by Iamblichus. Again, the ref- 
erence to ‘the lambdoid figure at the beginning of the Arithmetic’ 
cannot mean the Introduction, but is explained by Iamblichus, In 
Nicomachi Arithmeticam Introductionem, p. 11, 13 ff. 

Something similar may be said of II c, save that there are fewer signs 
of editing here than in the former case. Although with the exception 
of IV A, they do not come at the head of chapters, the suspected sec- 
tions IV a, VI c, and VII c may be said to have failed of parallels in 
Photius for a like reason; they are made up rather of accounts of the 
potencies of numbers in nature than of epithets. Evidences of Nicoma- 
chean origin are shown particularly in IVA. It contains on p. 22 
references to Heracles and Hermes, both mentioned in Photius,’ and 

1 Cf. Iamblichus, In Nicomachi Arithmeticam Iniroducttonem, p. 125, 14 ff. (Pistelli). 
?In Photius, however, after aléda (sic); cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, ibid., Alédov dicts, 
after which Heracles is again mentioned; and the latter is the real parallel. 

WORKS OF NICOMACHUS 87 

several references to other portions of the book which seem clearly 
enough Nicomachean.! In VII c, after a long series of instances to 
show that the heptad is influential in natural phenomena, — in human 
birth, life, and illnesses, — the epithets ’A@nva, xatpos, Toyn are given, 
which occur together in Photius. 

The examination of the text, then, has resulted in showing sections 
Is, Ifp, IIIa andc, IV B, VB, VIB, VI] B, VIII a, [IX a, and Xa 
to be quite certainly Nicomachean, and IV a probably so; whereas 
of Ia, IIc, VIc and VII c, it can at least be said that there is no 
reason why they should not be ascribed to him. Only Ip, IF, IIB 
and VIII c, with the quotations of Speusippus, are really left uncer- 
tain. ‘The conclusion to be drawn seems to be that, aside from the 
Anatolian passages, Ast’s Theologumena Arithmeticae is based almost 
entirely on Nicomachus; at least the most important parts seem to 
be, and the portions of which less can be said are chiefly enumerations 
of groups of certain numbers in natural phenomena which need con- 
cern us very little because after all they are non-essential in the dis- 
cussions which are to be entered upon. 

While this may be granted, the work of the editor can be seen in 
many places. The tell-tale or. often shows that he has omitted or 
abbreviated, and there is perhaps reason to believe that he has added 
somewhat, 1f section I A be taken as a criterion. But in general the 
treatise published by Ast gives the impression of being an integral 
work, however mutilated, in which the same underlying notions and 
the same vocabulary are uniformly used. One of the peculiarities 
which pervades the entire work is its predilection for etymologies — 
perhaps ‘puns’ would be the better word — and, as has been seen, 
there are frequent cross references from one part of the work to another. 
Certainly all things point to the assumption that the Theologumena 
Arithmeticae of Nicomachus underlies it all. 

1E.g., cf. p. 19: wepitooedhs yap wodhdais Huty GPG 7 buds, xrdr.; with p. 11, ode dpiuds 82 4 
duds, «rd. (source doubtful); also p. 20, the reference to afwy, ypévos, xaipds, dpa, which is re- 
peated, p. 23 (top), probably Nicomachean. At p. 21, the topic that 4 is the last of the initial 
series of perfect numbers; compare with this p. 13 at the beginning of the chapter on the triad. 

CHAPTER VII 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 

Any discussion of the philosophy of Nicomachus is necessarily in- 
complete. The Introduction to Arithmetic gives, to be sure, more 
information about the religious and philosophical doctrines of the 
author than its title would lead one to expect, but this, after all, is 
meager. Furthermore, in dealing with the Theologumena Arithmeticae 
there is always the danger that the compiler has cited some one other 
than Nicomachus, however thoroughly we may be convinced that 
Nicomachus is the chief source and that the sentiments there found, 
whatever their source, would be acceptable to him. But the chief 
difficulty lies in the fact that Nicomachus was a Neo-Pythagorean.! 

Modern readers find this sect hard to understand for several reasons : 
they were the inheritors of a tradition already confused and compli- 
cated by the most varied associations; they were mystics by tempera- 
ment, satisfied to see deep meanings in the time-worn formulas that 
had come down to them, and not always careful to explain all that 
they felt and believed; and our information regarding them is itself 
fragmentary. 

We are prone to emphasize the gap that lies between the old 
Pythagorean school and the new; in reality, in one way or another, a 
continuous tradition maintained itself down to the time of Nicomachus, 
and beyond. The Pythagorean school died, to be sure, in the sense 
of losing its independent existence, but Pythagoreanism did not die; 
and those to whom the survival of its doctrines was committed during 
this interval were often sympathetic enough. This can certainly be 
said of Plato and of his immediate successors, Speusippus ? and Xeno- 

1 On the Neo-Pythagoreans in general see Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen (4th ed.), vol. 
III, part 2, pp. 92 ff.; Chaignet, Pythagore, vol. II, pp. 215 ff. 

? Speusippus was the author of a book called wept IIv@ayopexa@y dpiduar, quoted (with this 
title) in Theologumena Arithmetica, pp. 61 ff. (Ast). Half of this book dealt with the varieties of 
the plane and solid numbers and the forms of the elementary corpuscles; the rest was devoted to 
the decad and its virtues. The Theologumena Arithmetica (ibid.) speaks of Speusippus’s interest 
in Pythagorean lore, especially in Philolaus. Diogenes Laertius, IV. 1. 5, cites among his works 
a Ma@nuarixés, Cf. Chaignet, op. cit., vol. II, p. 294. 

88 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 89 

crates,’ all of whom show distinctly Pythagorizing tendencies; in a 
less degree it is true of Aristotle, to whose antiquarian interest and 
collections we owe a large part of our information about Pythagorean- 
ism.” In this way the doctrines of Pythagoras become imbedded in 
the literature which was the basis of education and the subject of 
learned commentary in the Hellenistic period. The exegesis of the 
Timaeus in particular led to much use of number symbolism.® 
Furthermore, the doctrines of Pythagoras did not remain all this time 
in a static condition; the Academics, in particular, added their own 
speculations to those of the. older school. So it happens that when 
men again began to claim the name of Pythagorean and to disseminate 
anew the doctrines of the sect, they found the latter necessarily modi- 
fied by the development to which they had been subjected. Platonism, 
Aristotelianism, and Stoicism, all of which had been brought into 
association with the Pythagorean doctrines, left their mark upon the 
philosophy of Nicomachus and his fellows; after the advances in 
thought made by these schools, the Neo-Pythagoreans must needs 
state their position in the terminology that had now become universal. 
An even greater modification, perhaps, was in the directing of the 
activities of the new Pythagorean school into more bookish ways. 
With the exception of Apollonius of Tyana, who seems to have been 
a man of quite different temperament from the more easy-going 
Nicomachus, they were not so much concerned with purifications and 
ascetic rules as with intricate arguments about the virtues of numbers.‘ 
One finds no mention of these things in the Theologumena or the Intro- 
duction. Nicomachus would be known as a Pythagorean only by his 
absorbing interest in numbers, his reverence for Pythagoras, Philolaus, 
Archytas and the rest, and his repetition of the things which they had 

1 Diogenes Laertius, IV. z. 13, lists among his writings Ivéaydépea, To» wepl rd padjpara 
AiBria, Tept yewperpdr, Tept dp@udy, ApcOudv Oewpla, Taw wept derpodoylar, [epi yewperplas. 

His famous definition of the soul, ‘ number moving itself,’ indicates his Pythagorean leanings. 
Cf. Chaignet, op. cit., vol. II, p. 293. 

? Cf. Chaignet, op. cit., vol. I, p. 21. 

3 Plutarch’s essay, De Animae Procreattone in Timaeo (especially 12 ff.), well illustrates this 
fact. There is a widespread belief that Posidonius’s exegesis of the Timaeus dealt largely with 
such matters, and was the source of a series of treatises on the numbers, in which a Stoic flavor is 
to be distinguished; cf. Schmekel, Die Philosophie der mittleren Stoa, pp. 405 ff.; G. Borghorst, 
De Anaiolti Fontibus (Berlin, 1905), pp. 55 ff.; G. Altmann, De Posidonio Timaei Plaionis Com- 
mentatore (Berlin, 1906); but R. M. Jones, The Platonism of Plutarch, pp. 76-77 (especially n. 
21), points out that the matter is not proved. 

4Cf. Zeller (4th ed.), vol. III, part 2, p. 161: “Doch werden dieselben (i.e., asceticism, 
purifications) in unseren Fragmenten weder so haiifig beriihrt, noch gehen diese in ihren Anfor- 
derungen so weit, als man erwarten méchte.”’ 

go NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

said. His philosophy is, in fact, eclectic, with a Pythagorean back- 
ground. 

In Nicomachus, we clearly find that infusion of mysticism which 
manifests itself in the discovery of divinity in numbers and leads to 
rhapsodies over their virtues. As the author of the Theologumena, 
Nicomachus takes a place in the long series of writers who compiled 
treatises upon what may be called the ‘theology of numbers,’ to use 
the name which he himself employed, or ‘arithmology,’ a term revived 
by M. Armand Delatte, a recent writer on Pythagorean topics.’ 

The beginnings of arithmology are to be found as parts of general 
works in the earliest literature of the sect. In this the mathematical 
properties of the first ten numbers were already likened to and iden- 
tified with physical properties and sometimes with the gods.” Thus 
Philolaus identified seven with ‘the leader of the universe’? and had 
established a series of identifications for the numbers above 4.4. An- 
other example of the most ancient form of arithmology is the identi- 
fication of the odd with the male and the even with the female. After 
the Tlepi dvcews of Philolaus come the [epi rps Sexaddos of Archytas 5 
and a work by Speusippus ° in which apparently arithmology was 
more frankly the main theme; in the following years it is probable 
that it made its way into the Platonic commentaries,’ although there 
is great obscurity in its history at this point. 

The greatest development in arithmology took place, however, in 
the period extending from the second century before Christ down to 
the time of Neo-Platonism. The beginnings of this revivified interest, 
which eventually gave rise to numerous treatises,* more or less com- 

1 Fiudes sur la Littérature P-ythagoricienne (Fasc. 217, Bibliothéque del’ Ecole des Hates Etudes, 
Paris, 1915). On page 139 M. Delatte defines arithmology as ‘‘ce genre de remarques sur la 
formation, la valeur, et importance des dix premiers nombres, of se mélent la saine recherche 
scientifique et les fantaisies de la religion et de la philosophie.’” See ibid. on the history of the 
name. 

2 For notices of old Pythagorean arithmology, see Aristotle, Metaphysics, I. 5, and XIII. 4, 
1078 b 21. 

+ Philo, De Mundi Opificio, 33; Lydus, De Mensibus, II. 11. 

4 Theologumena Arithmelicac, p. 55 (Ast). 

§ Cited by Theon of Smyrna, p. 106, 10 (Hiller). 6 See p. ro. 7 See p. 27. 

8 This list contains three books devoted to arithmology alone: Nicomachus, Theologumena 
Arithmeticae (in Photius, Codex 187); the Theologumena Arithmeticae (Iamblichus?) edited by 
Ast, and Anatolius, Mept dexddos cal ray évrés abrfjs dpv@ucy (ed. Heiberg, Annales Interna- 
fionales d’Histoire, Congrés de Paris, 1900, se. sect., Histoire des Sciences, pp. 27 ff.). Works 
containing arithmological material incidentally: Varro, Hebdomades (or, De Originibus; in 
Gellius, III. 10; the heptad only); Philo Judaeus, Iep! 4p:@uGr (lost, but much material of the 
kind is found in De Mundi Opificio, Legis Allegoriae, Quaestiones et Solutiones in Genesim, etc.) ; 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS QL 

= 

plete, on the first decade of numbers, are not surely known, but there 
seems to have been an earlier compilation upon which both Varro and 
Philo drew and which was also the ancestor of the treatises of Theon, 
Anatolius, and some others. The interrelations of these authors have 
not yet been fully determined, but it is clear that one work lay back of 
them all. Thename of Posidonius has been suggested as their source,’ 
and very probably in his commentary on the Tzmaeus Posidonius 
used material of the kind; still, inasmuch as this unknown original 
arose in the very period when promiscuous Neo-Pythagorean falsifica- 
tions were being issued under the names of ancient authors, it is en- 
tirely possible that Posidonius figures in this tradition in some other 
capacity. However this may be, the series of writings mentioned con- 
tinues the tradition of arithmology in about the same style as before, 
making much of the mathematical virtues of numbers and their physi- 
cal analogies. 

When Nicomachus, as the author of the Theologumena Arithmettcae, 
enters this literary succession, it is somewhat to one side of the usual 
current and as the representative of a different tendency which had 
already made its appearance and begun a development parallel to 
that of the older tradition. The first known representatives of this 
later style of arithmology are the two documents studied by M. Delatte, 
the ‘Iepds Adyos in Doric prose and the Hymn to Number in Ionic verse, 
attributed to Pythagoras and Orpheus respectively, and supposed by 
M. Delatte to have arisen among the Pythagorean group in Italy.® 
M. Delatte does not specify their date, and indeed this is hardly possi- 

Theon of Smyrna, p. 99, 24 ff. (complete, Hiller); Clemens Alexandrinus, Siromaia VI. 16 
(heptad; based on Hermippus of Berytus, Ilepl ¢Sdopddos) ; Chalcidius, Commentarius in Timaco; 
Macrobius, Commentarius in Somnium Scipionis; Martianus Capella, De Nupitis Philologiae et 
Mercurtt, VII (complete); Lydus, De Menstbus (various chapters make an almost complete 
account); Favonius, Commentartus tn Somnium Sctpionts; Hierocles, Commentarius in Carmen 
Aureum. Furthermore, there are brief notices in the scholia upon Aristotle, in Plutarch, Sextus 
Empiricus, Stobaeus, etc., and the short Anecdofa published by M. Delatte, op. cit., pp. 167 ff. 
We know of other lost works probably to be included; see p. 33. 

1 The studies of Borghorst and Altmann (see p. 89) touched upon this question. The writer 
also has studied phases of the question in two papers, Posidontus and the Sources of Pythagorean 
Arithmology, Classical Philology, vol. XV (1920), pp. 309-322, and The Tradition of Greek Arith- 
mology, ibid., vol. XVI (1921), pp. 97-123. However the matter is decided, it is clear that the 
same compilation ultimately lies back of Varro, Philo, Anatolius, Theon, Clement (hence Her- 
mippus), Chalcidius and Lydus; perhaps it also influenced some of the others, though it was not 
their main source. Of course, in the vicissitudes of the tradition various changes came about 
and the accounts thus grouped are by no means identical. 

? See p. 89, n. 3. 

4 Op. cit., pp. 191 ff.; on their origin, see pp. 206 f., 211. 

g2 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

ble, but in all probability they arose at about the same time as the 
source previously mentioned. 

It is characteristic of this branch of the tradition to introduce many 
further identifications of the numbers with the gods, and that too 
under their cult names and stock epithets; arithmology thus became 
truly a theology of numbers, and great ingenuity was expended in the 
development of its complicated fabric. It is here that Nicomachus, 
as an arithmologist, belongs, and M. Delatte has demonstrated his 
use of sources of this kind. He is not forgetful, to be sure, of the older 
identifications, and was undoubtedly influenced by that side of the 
tradition as well. Thus he succeeded in the end in gathering and com- 
bining dozens of identifications for each number, the heirlooms of the 
previous centuries, each with its mystic meaning; and it is no wonder 
that the result is a perplexing mass in which it is hard to disentangle 
the many threads. But obscured as they are by mystic forms of 
utterance and confused by the presence of several types of thought, 
Nicomachus’s general philosophical principles can still be determined 
with some degree of coherency, albeit only upon the physical or cos- 
mological side, to the exclusion of ethics.' 

First, Nicomachus is a dualist. He states his position in a way 
that recalls Plato’s distinction between “that which ever exists, hav- 
ing no becoming”’ and “that which is ever becoming, never existent,” ? 
rather than the Stoic active and passive principles, dpaorixdy and 
awaQyrixov. On the one hand there are the “real things . . . which 
exist forever changeless and in the same way in the cosmos, never de- 
parting from their existence even for a brief moment,” and on the other 
‘‘the original eternal matter and substance”’ which was entirely “sub- 
ject to deviation and change.” * Itis not, however, original matter to 
which Nicomachus devotes his greatest attention, but rather material 

1 The most interesting, and almost the only, Nicomachean fragment with an ethical bearing 
is found in the Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 32 (Ast), and definitely ascribed to him: ‘ When 
men are injured, they are willing that there should be gods; but when they do an injury, they are 
not willing. They are injured, therefore, so that they may wish gods to exist; for unless they 
wish gods to exist they will not be constant; if then the reason why men are constant is the de- 
sire that gods exist, and they so desire whenever they are injured, the injury is to be sure a 
bad thing, but it 1s an expediency of nature, and an expediency of nature is a good thing, and na- 
ture is good, the same thing as providence. So harm comes to men in accordance with provi- 
dence.” 

2 Timaeus, 27 D. 

3 Introduction, I. 1.2: byra 6¢ 7a ward ra abra cal woadrws del diaredoivra dv rg xéouw cal 
ovdérore Tob elvar éfiorduera obdé él Boayd; I.1.3:... THs €€ dpxis didlov vAns cal broord- 
gews. .. OAn yao Se Sdns Fy rpewrd wal drown. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 93 

things as found in the world, that is, matter impressed with form; 
and it is correspondingly harder to determine his views concerning 
matter per se. The investigator here finds difficulties similar to 
those encountered in the exegesis of the Timaeus, and fewer data to 
work upon. 

Nicomachus held to a theory of the elements similar to that of Plato, 
including the doctrine that the corpuscles of the elements have the 
forms of the regular solids and may be reduced to triangles,’ but 
whether the ‘original matter’ of I. 1. 3 did or did not consist of the 
elements in mixture he does not explain. From the brief description 
quoted above, however, one may suspect that it did not as yet have 
even elementary form, and thus it would resemble the so-called ‘sec- 
ondary matter’ of the Timaeus. The recurrence of the same funda- 
mental problems in connection with both Nicomachus and Plato, as 
well as the obvious quotations and reminiscences of Platonic phrases 
in the Introduction, suggests strongly the marked influence of Plato 
upon Nicomachus in these matters.’ 

But if original matter is not thoroughly discussed by Nicomachus, 
ac least in his extant works, there is more to be learned about material 
things, upon which Nicomachus centers his attention in the [ntroduc- 
tion, and which — rather than matter per se — he commonly contrasts 
with the eternal entities. Material things are a combination of 
matter (evidently matter reducible to elements) with form, and the 
manner of combination is referred to simply as a ‘presence with’ 

1 Four elements are mentioned in Introduction, II. 1.1, but five, including ‘ether,’ in Theologu- 
mena Arithmeticae, p. 25 (Ast), with their corpuscular forms. Nicomachus declares in II. 7.4 
that the triangle is the element of plane figures (cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 18) and devotes 
II. 12 to proving it the element of polygons. Cf. also Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 8: didwep 
4 wpwrn ctvodos alr Gry rpG@roy wpicpévor whijOos dweréXeove, cToryetor Ta byrwy, & ay ef Tpolywvror 
peyeddy re kal dpiOudv cwparicar re cal dowudrwr. 

2 On ‘secondary matter’ in Plato, cf. Zeller, op. cit. (6th ed.), vol. II, part 1, p. 729; Baumker, 
Das Problem der Materie (especially pp. 142 ff.). In the course of his opening chapters of the Jn- 
troduction Nicomachus cites Plato thrice, Timaeus, 27 D (I. 2. 1), the pseudo-Platonic Epinomis, 
gor D (I. 3. 5), Republic, 526p Ff. (I. 3.7). He refers most often to the psychogony of the Timazus 
(Introduction, II. 2. 3; 18.4; 24.6) but also to the marriage number, in the Republic (II. 24. 11). 
Plato is mentioned also in II. 22.1; 28.6. For similarities of terminology, cf. the description of 
Svra, Introduction, 1.1.2: Ta card ra abrad xal doatrws del diaredovvra .. . xal obddwore rod evar 
éi:ordpeva, and Phaedo, 78 D: avrn 4 obola... ebrepoy woatrws del fye: kara Tadra # Addo 
&ddws; also Sophist, 248 a, etc.; Republic, 380 D: efwep ri éflaracro ris avrot lédas; Cratylus, 
439 E: pndev ébcordpevoy ris abrod lédas. With Nicomachus’s term, duwrdpws Svra, used of mate- 
rial objects (cf. p. 2,14; 3,15, Hoche), cf. Sophist, 234 B, duavupa tov byrwv; Parmenides, 133 D, 
ra d¢ wap’ uty ratra dudvupa bvra éxelvois. The word perovela, however, used in this connec- 
tion by Nicomachus (pp. 2,14; 3, 14, Hoche) is not Platonic, but peréye (p. 3, 16, Hoche) can 
be freely paralleled; e.g., Phaedo, 101 C. 

94 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

matter or a ‘sharing in’ the forms.’ Their material nature subjects 
these objects to constant change — becoming, decay, growth, diminu- 
tion, change in general — in which they imitate matter ;* their only 
stability, a merely relative one, comes from the formal element in 
them.° 

The impression of form upon a given quantum of matter halts, as 
it were, for a brief moment the ceaseless flow of change in which matter 
is involved; of it then we can say ‘It 1s’ and call it ‘a thing.’* But 
it follows at the same time that individual existence is possessed by 
material things, not naturally nor in their own right, but due entirely 
to the form which they share; they exist on sufferance, as it were. 
Nicomachus describes it by calling them opwrdpws ovra, ‘existent under 
the same names,’ because both their being and the name by which 
they are known belong not to them but to their forms.® The latter, in 
contrast, are ‘really existent’ or ‘properly existent’ things (xvupiws 
OvTa, OVTWS OVTa). 

It remains to inquire more closely into the nature of the forms them- 
selves. Eternal, immaterial, without beginning, these never change; 
their nature is fixed.® To describe them more definitely, they are 
“qualities, quantities, configurations, largeness, smallness, equality, 
relations, actualities, dispositions, places, times, all those things, in 
a word, whereby the qualities in each body are comprehended.” ’ In 
listing these abstracts, Nicomachus is apparently giving random ex- 
amples, with no serious attempt to cite only the higher and more gen- 

 Iniroduction, I. 1. 2 (p. 2, 13, Hoche): raira &y efm rd Avda xal dy card perovelay Exacror 
Aowwdy Ty duwrtuews Serwr cal cadouundrwr rode re Kéyera: «al fori, and I. 2.1: cad door atrar 
peréyet. 

I. 2.1: ra dé dv yevdoe re xal Popa cal abéjoen: cal perwoe: cal peraBohy wavrolg cal perovela 
palveras Sinvexas Tpewduera cal Aé-yerat per duwrduws éxelvor Svra, cad’ Scov abrdy peréxer, dori Ge 
Ty ¢avrayv dice obk Syrws byra- obde yap rd Bpaxtrarow éwl radro® diauéver, dAX’ del peraPalver 
wavrolws d\Aacodpueva, xrh. 

* This ‘stability’ is practically the ‘sameness’ of which Nicomachus speaks: see p. go. 

‘ réde rc in I. 1. 2 (quoted in n. 1, above); cf. note ad loc. This is an Aristotelian formula, 
but it is to be noted that Nicomachus finds reality, not in these individual objects, but in the 
ideal entities, wherein he is more a Platonist than an Aristotelian. 

' Cf. I. 2. 1 (quoted in n. 2, above) and I. 1. 2 (quoted in n. 1, above). 

67.2.1: GAN édxeitva per duda wal dldia cal dredebryra xal 8a warrds Suora xal dwapddX\acra 
wépuxe dcaredeiv, Woavrws TH abray otela éwidiayévorra, xal Exagror abradr xuplws ov Aéyera (the 
rest of the section is quoted above, n. 1). 

7 Introduction, I. 1. 3: 1a dé wepi atriy 4 xal abv airy Gewpotpera dowpara, olor woidryres, 
wocérnres, oxnuariopol, ueyéin, puxpérnres, lodrnres, oxdoes, évépyeca, diadéces, réwor, ypbro:, 
wdvra dwhds ols wepiéyerar ra év éxdory odpari, irdpye Kal éavrd dxlynra xal dperdwrwra, 
oupSefnxdrws dé weréye: cal wapawokate: Tar wepl rd vroxelpevor oOua waddr. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 95 

eral ideas ; ' in general they seem to represent only predicables, doubt- 
less suggested by the Aristotelian categories but neither identical with 
them nor employed in the same way ; Nicomachus speaks of them in 
a manner that reminds one rather of the independently and eternally 
existing Platonic idea.? In this detail of his system he has probably 
united Platonic and Aristotelian theory, but in general, hitherto, 
Platonic terminology and doctrine have predominated. We shall, 
however, encounter plain evidence of Stoic influence. 

The Stoic influence is manifest in Nicomachus’s doctrines about 
God. In the dim picture of divinity which Nicomachus gives us,’ we 
note resemblance to the mysterious deity of the Timaeus; it is pri- 
marily a world-creating God and one kindly disposed to the world, 
characterized by providence,* but clearly Stoic touches have been 
laid on the portrait, and the result is not far different from what is 
observed in Philo Judaeus, upon whom similar influences worked. 
God contains in himself all the ideal forms, which, as we have seen, are 
the essence of things and secure them and the world in general what- 
ever stability they have. 

In a remarkable passage of the Theologumena Arithmeticae,® which 

1 Tf this is a genuine attempt to list categories, it is unsuccessful, for according to Nicomachus 
himself some of them should fall under the head of others in the list; e¢.g¢., roeérys (cquivalent to 
7d woody) belongs under puéyeos (I. 2. 5); loérys is a oxéors (II. 6. 3, p. 84, 17 and 21). 

* The Aristotelian list is thus given in Categories, 4,1 b 25: TOv card pydeulay cuuwhoxhy 
heyoudrwr Exacroy fro ovclay gnyualve: } woody 4 wordy f wpds Ts H wod H wore F xeioOar f Exe F 
wou f wdoyey, 

Ci. Topica, I. 9, 1936 b 21. Nicomachus differs from Aristotle, it may be observed, in making 
these abstracts and conferring upon them cternal ideal existence independent of the material 
things with which they are connected. It is best to see in this a fusion of Platonism with Aris- 
totle; but it may be remembered that Archytas, in Nicomachus’s day, passed as the author of a 
work on the categories. It is surprising, too, that ovefa is omitted, if this is an Aristotelian list. 

* God is mentioned only twice in the Jntroduction, I. 4. 2; 6. 1. 

4 Plato was not the first to conceive of teleology, but his influence in bringing this notion into 
subsequent cosmological speculation was enormous. The present writer has discussed this matter 
in another place (The Hexaemeral Literature |Chicago, 1912], p. 3, n. 1, etc.). The assertion of the 
Timaeus (29 A) that God took an ‘eternal,’ and hence good, pattern for the world underlies the 
whole dialogue and makes teleology, or providence, a leading motif. In Nicomachus we have the 
direct statement that ‘the providence of the world-creating God wrought all things” (Theologu- 
mena Arithmeticae, p. 43 (Ast): 9 Tot koepowo.d Geot rpdvoia ra byra wdvra dweipydoaro, yeréoews 
pdy dpxne cal pliay dwd rot wpwroydvou dvds wornoauéry Tod wdera els dwépatiy cal ddoyolwary 
lévros dvwrdrov xadot, cupwAnpwoews b¢ Tedelwory kal Kardxdeoi dv adry 7H dexdd.), and we must 
certainly infer that Nicomachus conceived it to be out of good-will for the world that God followed 
a predetermined plan in creation. (See p. 107.) 

6P. 4 (Ast): cal dre rd Gedy Gyo d Nixduayos ry pordds épappbtey, owepuarixas brdpyorra 
wdvra tra dv ry htc Syra, ws alry év dpiOuy duwepidyerac durdwer tad doxotyra évarriwrara 
kar évépyecav elvar waoww dwAGs evavridryros rpdwos, kadws alr dppyry tevl pice: waveidhs ofca 
Spbn wap SAnv thy dpiunrixhy elaayuryhy... as ¢ odx Avev adr9s cvoracis dwids tivds, ovrws 

96 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

may be cited confidently because it is definitely referred to Nicomachus, 
the monad is compared with God, who, it is stated, is “in a seminal 
sense all things in nature,”’ just as in the Introduciton the monad is 
observed to embody potentially all numerical forms; again, “it (sc. 
the monad) generates itself and is generated from itself, is self-ending, 
without beginning, without end, and appears to be the cause of endur- 
ing, as God in the realm of physical actualities is in such manner con- 
ceived of as a preserving and guarding agent of nature.” 

It is noteworthy, too, that omepparirns AOyos occurs among the 
epithets of the monad in the epitome of Photius. The likeness of the 
Nicomachean God to the Stoic Divine Fire which contained ‘‘all the 
oreppatixot Acvyot, by which all things in accord with Fate come into 
being’’? must be apparent, although God, to Nicomachus, is not fire. 
God sums up in himself the Adyou, the principles of all things, and we 
shall probably not err in ascribing to Nicomachus, likewise, the doc- 
trine that the ideal forms are the thoughts of God, eternally present 
in his mind. 

The monad was likened, in the passage cited above, to God’s mind, 
which is said to be ‘‘ that thing in God which is the leader both in crea- 
tion and in every art and in every reasoning,” because, of course, it 
contains the forms, which are its thoughts; and again, in the same 
passage, God is called ‘artistic word’ or ‘reason’ (reyvuxds Adyos). 
This is the point of resemblance between Nicomachus and Philo, in 
whose De Mundi Opificio the vonrés Koo pos, the ideal world which was 
the pattern of this, is definitely declared to be God’s thought,’ and it 
52 ywpls adrijs yrapots ovripocoiy, ws @wrds KaGapol cupwwrdrns rdvrwr dwros oboys, cal HrALoedois 
kal jyenomxod, ty doley cad’ Exagcroy robrwr rp bey, xal pddeora, xabd pidorixh cal overarich nal 
Tir wokumyor Kal wdvv d:adopwrdrwy, ws éxetvos éf ovrws dvrixe:udrwr dppooas xal drwoas. 1d 3e 
way daurhy ye why ‘yerva cal d@ d¢aurfs yerrGra:, xal abroredhs wal Avapyos wal dredetryros xal 
diaporis alrla daivera:, xadws 6 Geds dv Tois Puotxois évepyijuact roovros éwivoetrar diagworixds cal 
Tar dtoewy TypnTinds. A€youesr od Tabryr ob pdvor Gedy, dAAd Kal poiy cal dpcerdénrur: voir pep, 
Sri rd dv Ge Fyenormwmraroy cal éy xooporola cal év wdoy dwikos réyry re cal Adyy, ef wal wh 
dridalvoire kad Exagrov SAns 3: évepyelas, vovs dori, ravrérys ris Oy xal duerdrpewros 3: éxi- 
orhuns, ws abr} wdvra wepieAngvia év dauvry car éxivoay, el cal xar' Exoraccy dy rots Toy Serwr 
elSeoiv, ws Adyos Tes Tex ixds dornws TY Gey, kal ob Kabiorapydry Tov cad davrhy Adyou, ovdé pedl- 
cragGa: Addo rivd daoa, dAKG drpewror ws dd\q0as cal potpa “ Arpowos. 

1 For example, cf. Iniroductton, 1. 16.8; I]. 8.3; 9.2; 10. 2; 11. 1-23 13.8; 14.13 15. 3. 

2 Placita Philosopherum, I. 7. 33 (= Diels, Doxographi Graeci, 305): of Erwikol voepdy Gedy 
dwogdalporrat, wip Tex wxdy ddy Badlfor él yéverww xécpou, dumrepiecdrnpds wdvras robs owrepuarixods 
Adéyous, xa” ous Fxacra xa’ eluapuérny yliverai. The owepparixol \oyo or ‘seed principles’ are the 
active, formal, divine element which, acting upon material things, produce their proper natures 
in the same way that seeds produce plants. 

1 De Mundi Opificio, 5: xa@dwep of» } dv ry dpxirexromxg wpodiarurwéetoa wékis Thy x dpa 
dxrds obx elyev, GAN eveadpdywro Ty Tov Texvlrov puyy, Toy adrdv rpdwow obde 6 ex Tr Wear 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 97 

is likewise the point of departure from the cosmology of the Timaeus, 
where the eternal pattern (wapddevyya) is independent of God’s mind. 

The same conclusion may be inferred from the statement already 
quoted to the effect that God is “the preserving and guarding agent 
of natures in the realm of physical actualities,” which is substantiated 
by another passage that designates him as “cause of ‘sameness’ and 
unchanging persistence” and matter as the cause of change in things.’ 
It is of course as the source of form, that which alone gives stability to 
material existence, that God isso denominated.” We shall find further 
evidence when we discuss the cosmogony of Nicomachus. 

Thus far, nothing has been encountered which could not have been 
uttered with equal propriety by any eclectic philosopher; but we must 
turn to the consideration of numbers, wherein Nicomachus’s Pythag- 
oreanism begins to make itself felt. In addition to the former state- 
ment that the eternal things, the forms, are quantities, qualities, ar- 
rangements and the like, we find Nicomachus also asserting that the 
world is ordered on a numerical basis.° 

The proper way to reconcile these two views seems to be by declar- 
ing numbers to be a superior kind of forms, out of which the other 
forms are made and under which they are classified. This appears 
to be the meaning of the statement that number was ‘the real eternal 
essence,’ ‘ and certain passages of the Theologumena Arithmeticae lead 
to the same conclusion, that numbers are the highest forms and that 
the properties seen primarily in them are also the essential properties 
of things in the world, conferred upon them by number. 

In one place, speaking of the hexad, Nicomachus says that the Pythag- 
oreans “revered it with distinguished praises, saying that the world 
is endowed with soul in accordance with it, and harmonized, and that 
koopos Addow Ay Exon rowor, Tor Oetow Abyor Tay Taira dtaxocutoarvra, xth.; 6: ef 5é res 
eAtoee yuurorépus xpycacGa: Tots dbvéuaciv, ovdéw Ay Erepov efx. roy vonror elvar xbopor # Geod 
Adyor dy Koruomwoolrros. 

1 Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 8 (Ast): dyridsagreddouérn (sc. 4 dvds) wapawAnolws ry Tot 
Geot pice: kara 7d abrhy pév THs weTarTwcews kal peraBorAns euwoinrixyy rois obo: pvoulferGat, 
Toy d¢ Gedy Tavréryros cal duerawtwrov diaporijs. 

2 See p. o9 for further discussion of the connection between ‘sameness’ and the ideal forms. 

4 Introduction, I. 4. 2; 6. 1. 

‘The whole passage (I. 6.1) is so important that it may well be cited: wdsra rd xara 
rexvixny S:€fodov bwd gicews dv ry xboup diarerayuéva ward pépos re xal Sha galverac xara 
dpdudy vwd ris wpovolas xal rot ra Sra Snusovpytoarros vod diaxexplo@ar re nal xexoourjodat 
BeBatovpévov rot wapadelypyaros olow Adyor wpoxyapdyyaros éx Tov éwéyew Tov dpiGudy rpovrocrdrra 
dy ry Tod Korpowowd Geod Siavolg, vonrdy avréy pdvoy nal warrdwagiw dudov, obclay pévror rh 

Syrws thy dldwor, fra wpds alrdv ws Adyor Texmxdy dworedkecOy Ta cUuWarTa Taira, xpdros, alencer, 
oupawds, dorpa, ffedcymol warroiot. 

98 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

animals and plants get completeness and persistence and careful health 
by its joining them and its share in their birth and its beauty and virtue, 
and the like, and they set about it with this line of reasoning : 

‘““The original universe, lacking order and shapeless and totally 
devoid of the things that give distinction according to the cate- 
gories of quality and quantity and the rest, was organized and 
arranged most clearly by number as the most authoritative and 
artistic form, and gained a share in a harmonious exchange and 
flawless consistency in accordance with its desire for and its receiving 
the impression of the peculiar properties of number.’’! From this 
one judges that all categorical distinctions are based ultimately upon 
number. 

Other passages assert that the universe is patterned after number; 
for example, in the Theologumena Ariihmeticae, p. 58 (Ast), we read: 
‘We have often anticipated ourselves in saying that the devising Mind 
wrought with reference to the resemblances and likenesses of number, 
as to a pattern that was perfect, the fabric and composition of the 
world and of all that is in it.””? This is confirmed as Nicomachean by 
the fact that the same things are said in Introduction, I. 4. 2 and I. 6. 1, 
whence we learn that arithmetic was preéxistent as a cosmic pattern 
in the mind of the creator, and that the material world was formed with 
reference to this model.® 

A distinction, which is left all too vague by our sources, is made, 
however, at this point. The number that preéxisted in God’s mind 
and was the basis of creation, a wholly conceptual and immaterial 
number, is not the same as that of which science treats, the num- 
ber that is constantly found in connection with material things and 
which measures them, their arrangements and theirmovements. This 
number is called ‘scientific’ (€mucrnmorkds), and Nicomachus 

1P. 33 (Ast): werd 8¢ rhv wevrdda roy s° ebtds dpidpdy evapyerrépos égéuruvor &yxwulocs, 
éwidoyitouern Selypaciw obx dudiBdbdos, car abrhy dupuydeOat xal cadynpyse Ga roy Kbopor, Tuxeiv 
re OdOTHTOS Kai Siapovns éwiuedovs Te wyvelas cal ra (wa wal rd HGuTa curddw re cal éxvyor7 Kal 
xaddorg xal dpery, xal r&v rowtrwr éweyelpouy 32 ovrws éwd-yorres: h ris €E dpyfs didlov Sq 
dxooula cal Soov éw airy duopdla ordpnols re wdvrwy dwdas Toy trparwrixdry, xard Tre wowr xal 
woody xal ras owas Kkarryoplas, dw dpiQuotd ws xupwwrdrov cal reyvixod efdous éxpléy, xal 
duexoouhOn tpavwrard re cal éuuedois éFaddayis kal dxodovilas denpdrov Ervye weracyoioa car 
Epectv xal dwéuatiy rar dprPuoi ldwwpdrwr. 

2 wrokddxs EbOquew clwbyres Tay Texwixdy voly wpds Tas dpifuot duepelas nal dopowwcers ws 
wpos wapdderyud ri wavredés dwepydoag@a: Thy Tot xéopov xal ray év xécup wdyrwr KaTacKev}p 
re xal cuoraciv, xTh. 

? Nicomachus does not say that the plan consisted of numbers, nor that the ideal elements of it 
were numbers; it was founded on number. Cf. p. 108. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 99 

sharply distinguishes it from the divine number in the discussion of 
I. 6. He deals only with scientific number in the Introduction; the 
divine number, which forms the pattern for the inferior variety as 
well as for all mundane things, we find dealt with in the Theologumena 
Arithmeticae, where are set forth the specific functions of the numbers 
in the universe and the divinities with which they are identified be- 
cause of fancied likeness. This divine number, we find, is decadic; 
the first ten terms show all the properties found in its entire fabric 
and the terms after 10 are simply a repetition.’ 

The divine numbers influence things through their properties, con- 
veying like qualities to the objects which they affect.2 One might 
perhaps assert that these properties are, therefore, more elementary 
than the numbers themselves, and presuppose a possible analysis of 
the divine number. This is true, but only to a certain extent. There 
are elements even of the divine number, and fundamental properties 
on which the characters of the various terms of the decade are founded ; 
but these elements are themselves in the decade, and the fundamental 
properties are made identical with the elements of number. The 
elementary things are the monad and dyad, ‘sameness’ and ‘other- 
ness,’ ‘odd’ and ‘even.’ 

The origins (apyai) of number, and indeed of all things, are the 
‘same’ and the ‘other,’ or ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness.’* They are 
the formal principles, which, when they enter into the composition of 
things, cause them either to persist in the same fashion, preserving 
their identity, or, in the case of ‘otherness,’ to change from their 
original forms and assume others.4 The former is characteristic of 
ideas and principles (e(3y, Adyor) because these keep uniform those 

1 Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 25 (Ast): Gri 8¢ Apyeras pew dwd povddos, reAewoirar de 4 
dpubpds else’, Nex Ohoerai wpoiovacv; p. 59 (they call the decad) wav dé 57: dpcOuds puoixnds wrelwy 
obdels doriy, GAN ef yé res éwivoetrat, carta wakivodlay éw avrévy wws dvaxuxNeirac: éxarorrds ‘yap 
Séxa Sexddes cat yidcds déxa exarovrddes xal pupids Séxa xididdes, xal AdAwy Exagros ourws 4 els 
4 els teva Tov évrds abtis dvarodiobjoerat wakcvodovperos. 

? This notion of the influence of numbers on things is at the heart of Pythagoreanism. Iambli- 
chus, In Nicomachi Arithmeticam Iniroductionem Liber, p. 78, 20 ff. (Pistelli), speaking of the 
monad and dyad, well illustrates the point: ws ydp 7d Gepudy Oepyalvery wéguxne ra wAnoidforra 
cal rd Wuxpdv Poyew nal 7d typdy bypalvery, obrws cai al ray Syrwy dpyal Amro tov AdAwy 
Suvduewr ofa: wdera rd peradaySdvorra abray card Tas olxelas duvdpers buOulfouvcr. 

1 These principles are treated most fully in Introduction, II. 17. 1; 18.1 and 4; 19.1 and 
20. 2. 

‘ This seems to be the significance of the terms ravrérns, érepérns, and it might be inferred 
from Introduction, I. 23. 4, especially cal dowep td oppayioripés rivos f wérpou wdera ra 

édunlwrovra peradauBdre ris duocbryros kal duwrvulas. He is here praising ‘ equality’ especially, 
but this is aligned with ‘sameness’ and ‘ inequality’ with ‘ otherness.’ 

100 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

things whereon they are impressed; whereas ‘otherness’ inheres par- 
ticularly in matter.’ 

Whether ‘otherness’ be matter itself or not, it is hard to say,? for 
Nicomachus often writes as though it were; at any rate, it is repre- 
sented as a tendency as old as matter and inseparable from it, bound 
into it by the force of Necessity, a cosmic power that is always arrayed 
against the efforts of ‘sameness’ and the order which ‘sameness’ repre- 
sents and strives to bring about. These are by no means original 
doctrines with Nicomachus, but were taken by him — as he substan- 
tially admits in IT. 18. 4 — from the ‘same’ and the ‘other’ (‘indivisi- 
ble’ and ‘divisible’) of Plato, and the ‘limiting’ and ‘unlimited’ of 
Philolaus. 

The Timaeus is, in fact, viewed in one light, the history of the con- 
test between the two forces of the Deity and Necessity, ‘sameness’ 
and ‘otherness.? So Nicomachus would have us view the constitu- 
tion of the world. It is made up of opposite and warring elements, 
the forces of ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness,’ which enter it through its 
dependence on numbers; but these have been reduced to harmony 
by the operation of the mathematical principles on which the world 
is constructed and governed; for the system of numbers is itself a 
harmony.’ Both elements are needful to make the universe, for ac- 
cording to the old saying of Philolaus, harmony is “the unification of 
the diverse and the concord of the discordant,” and there must, there- 
fore, be opposite elements in any cosmos. 

‘Sameness’ is further held by Nicomachus to be identical with the 
monad and ‘otherness’ with the dyad.* An explicit statement of 
this will be found in Introduction, II. 18.1; indications less clear occur 
elsewhere. This was not Nicomachus’s own theory, and consequently 
he does not demonstrate it formally, but it is easy to see what line 
of reasoning he would adopt. The fact that 1 multiplying itself or 

1 Tt is to be noted that in several passages Nicomachus uses the terms wepalvovra, dreipa, 
old Pythagorean names, for ideas and matter (the ‘limiting’ and the‘ unlimited’). In II. 18. 4 
they are quoted from Philolaus and then used independently by Nicomachus. Cf. also wepai- 
pero, I. 23. 4. 

? One may perhaps be misled by the identifications given by Photius in his brief summary of 
the Theologumena Arithmeticae, This is so brief that it cannot be certain that Nicomachus stated 
matters in the way reported. It is much safer to observe carefully the expressions of the Jntro- 
duction and of Ast’s text where it is reasonably certain that Nicomachus is cited. 

2 Cf. Introduction, II. 19. 1; I. 6. 2 ff. 

‘ Introduction, II. 18.1; also17.2; 18.4. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 4, Ast (quoted p. 9s, 
n. 5) says that they call the monad Mind, and that is ravrérys ris. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS IOI 

another number causes no change in numerical value,! whereas 2 or 
any other multiplier makes the product different from the multiplicand, 
had long been regarded as significant, and is cited by Nicomachus 
himself as evidence for the elementary character of the monad. But 
in ‘theological’ language it leads to the identification of the Monad 
with Prometheus: “‘ Wherefore they also call it Prometheus, the maker 
of life, from its never running forward in any way, and alone never 
departing from its own principle, nor allowing other things to do so, 
giving them a share in its own peculiar traits; for by however many 
intervals it be increased or by however many it increases (sc. others), 
it prevents them from running forward.”? There is here a charac- 
teristic Pythagorean play on the name Prometheus (mpoc px Geir, 
‘not to run forward’). 

We see, then, that the reason for the identification of the monad 
with ‘sameness’ is that the monad causes ‘sameness.’ Another way of 
stating the principle is that ‘sameness’ is generically (yextx@s) present 
in the monad; there is no difference between ‘sameness’ and ‘oneness,’ 
and the ‘same’ and the ‘one’ are identical.* Nicomachus’s meaning 
is admirably illustrated by a passage from Aristotle: “And these 
are called ‘same’ in the preceding way, but other things are called 
‘same’ absolutely, as ‘one’ is. For ‘same’ is predicated of those 
things whose matter is one, either in kind or in number, as well as of 
those whose essence Is one; and so it is evident that ‘sameness’ is a 
kind of ‘oneness’ of being, either of a plurality of objects or of one 
thing when one employs it as a plurality, as for example when one 
says that a thing is equal to itself, for then he employs it as two things.’’ ‘ 
In other words, ‘one’ is, like ‘same,’ the essential quality of the things 
which fall under the class ‘sameness,’ and can, therefore, be identified 

ILe, Mm =1; mx 1% = m, 

2Thkheologumena Aritlhmelicaec, p. 5 (Ast): 86 xal Tlpoun@éa putevovew abrir, Snuoupydr 
fwiryros, drd Tov rpdow pnierl rpdwry ety unde éxporray rod ldlov Advyou porwrdrny, undé Edda day, 
peradidoveay Tay Siwudrwr davrgs: drdoas yap Av adéngg dwooerdceccy } owdcas Av abtion, Beir 
xpoew kwrte: kal perawlrrew els roy €£ dpyqs davrqs Te xaxelywy ddyor. The text in the last few 
words is doubtless corrupt. 

7 Introduction, Il. 20. 2: ixavdy xal rovro rexuhpiov rot ravrérnros Kal érepéryros peréxery rad 
ely duddrepa, ¢repdrynros per doplorws, raurérynros b¢ wpicpérws, yerxws uev pordda xal dudda, 
iwoBeBynxdrws 5¢ wepocdy pew ravréryros did rd pordd: duoyerts elvai, Apriow Se drepédraros did 
rd dudde. 

‘ Metaphysics, IV. 8, 1018 a 4 ff.: kal 7d wey ovrws Kéyerar ratrd, rd 32 cad aird, dowep cal 
rd éy xal yap Gy 7 vA pla Felder HF dpup radra Adyera, cal dv } obcla pla, Gore parepdy Sri 7 
raurérns dvérys tls dorir Bo wherbvwr Tou elvat } brary ypqrat ws wAelogiy, olow bray Adyy avré avr 

rauréy ws duel yap xphrac atry. Cf. the collocation in Aristotle, Categories, 4 a 10, ravrdy xal 
dy dpbuy. 

102 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

with the class ina fundamental way. The case of the dyad and ‘other- 
ness’ is similar; ‘twoness’ and ‘otherness’ are in the last analysis 
identical.’ 

This identification of the monad and dyad with ‘sameness’ and 
‘otherness’ is employed further in Nicomachus’s system. ‘The monad 
and the dyad confer respectively ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness’ upon the 
numbers in the generation of which they play a leading part, that is, 
the odd numbers and squares on the one hand, and the even and 
heteromecic numbers on the other.” But whereas the monad and 
dyad partake of ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness’ directly or generically, 
yevixas, the latter do so in a secondary way, umoBeByxérws, or as 
species, — eldtxa@s, belonging to the genera founded on the monad and 
dyad.* They are characterized by additional properties, whereas the 
others are pure ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness.’ And if ‘sameness’ and 
‘otherness’ thus enter the numbers through their elements, the monad 
and dyad, it can be readily seen that they enter the constitution of 
all things in general, because the world and all in it are, according to 
Nicomachus, fashioned upon a numerical basis. That is, they are 
apxat tov odwv, ‘ elements of the universe.’ ® 

Upon these comparatively sane beginnings 1s built the complicated 
structure of further identifications among the numbers, dependent 
both upon these principles and others discovered among the properties 
of numbers, or even upon the fancied etymologies of their names; ® 
all the numbers of the decade are thus dealt with in turn. One 
object of identification suggests another similar to it; the mention 
of a god suggests the epithets and functions of that god; before 
the end is reached Nicomachus has propounded a series of astounding 
length in which hopeless confusion reigns. The same epithets are 
shared by several numbers,’ the same number receives contradictory 

1 Aristotle does not carry out this point in the passage quoted. 

2? The monad is the fundamental form of the odd numbers (II. 17. 2) and through them of the 
squares (IJ. 17.3; 19.1); thus both partake of ‘sameness’ (II. 18.1; 20.2,5). In the same way 
the dyad forms the even numbers directly, and through them the heteromecic numbers. 

* Cf. II. 20. 2, already quoted. ‘See p. 108. 

6 Introduction, II. 17. 2. 

* The following from the Theologumena Artthmeticae will serve as illustrations (cited by Ast’s 
pages): povds-yévey (3), Suds-dilévac (8), d0n-SudeOn, Sdocs (12), Sixn-dixn, “Iois-toos, Awuhrwp- 
Aids phrnp, ‘Péa-piocs (12), rTpids-drephs (15), Tpeiw (14), Terpds-rerAds (23), c&ds-€&s (48), 
“Hpa-dtp (58), dexds-dexds (59). As this was a favorite device of the arithmologists, it would be 
easy to cite similar examples from other Pythagorean sources. 

’ E.g., in Photius, Codex 187, the following epithets, among others, are assigned several num- 
bers: vois (1, 3), vAn (1, 2), "“Ardas (1, 10), déwy (1, 5), dppovla (2, 3, 4, 6), yduos (3, 5,6). The 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS | 103 

titles... How far the authors of such collections believed in what 
they wrote, and what good they felt they derived from their labor, 
perhaps only they could say. In some cases we can see that an 
identification is fairly reasonable and might have some meaning, but 
far more often it seems futile. 

An interesting fragment of Moderatus of Gades says that the Pythag- 
oreans used the numbers for the sake of clearness in teaching about 
first principles and forms, just as geometricians and schoolteachers 
use diagrams and characters: “And in this way they called the idea 
of ‘sameness’ and ‘oneness’ and ‘equality,’ and the cause of concord 
and sympathy in the universe and the cause of preservation of that the 
condition of which remains just the same, ‘one’; for the ‘one’ of 
sensible things is such because it is unified in its parts and concordant 
by participation in the first cause. And the idea of ‘otherness’ and 
‘inequality’ and of all that is divisible and in change, now in one state, 
now in another, they called the double ratio and the dyad, for such is 
the nature of 2 in sensible things also. And these principles do not 
form part of the doctrine of these men alone and not of the others; 
one may also observe that the other philosophers have handed down 
the tradition of certain forces which are unifying and dominant over 
the universe, and they too have certain principles of ‘equality’ and 
‘unlikeness’ and ‘otherness.’ ... And similarly with regard to the 
other numbers there is the same account; each one Is arranged under 
certain functions. To take another case, something exists in nature 
that has a beginning, middle, and end. Of this form and nature they 
predicate the number 3. Wherefore everything that involves a mean 
they say is ‘three-form.’ And the successive numbers are embraced 
by a certain single idea and power; this they called decad, as it were 
‘receiver.’”’? 

The generalization of Moderatus was perhaps once true, and might 
remain true for the simpler identifications, but another explanation 
must be sought for the extreme cases. It is probably near the truth 
to say that the Pythagoreans developed on the basis of early arith- 
mology a pseudo-science of peculiar attractions, to which it was easy 

fact that various epithets of the same gods appear complicates matters still more; e.g., AwéA\wy», 
etc., of 1, Aotlas of 3, éxdepyos of o. 

'For example, in Photius, Codex 187, the monad is both #Aws, ddauwla and exorwéla; 
2, fon and dueos; 4, like the hero of the Frogs, both ‘ Heracles’ and ‘ Dionysus.’ 

2 Sexds-Seyds, an etymology claimed by the early Pythagoreans. The passage quoted is 
found in Porphyry, Vite Pythagorae, 49 (p. 33, 30 ff., Nauck). 

104 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

to make additions by following the established rules. They were 
carried away by it; at the same time they were influenced by the 
superstitious regard for numbers that may still be observed in our own 
time, which must have been still stronger in the days when belief in 
demons, astrology, and compelling magic was not confined to the un- 
learned.' It is perhaps significant, in this connection, that the arith- 
mological treatises frequently make reference to astrology and other 
superstitions.” 

It would be a long and unprofitable task to set down here more 
than a brief outline of the arithmology of Nicomachus. Of the monad 
and the dyad something has already been said. In addition to its 
identification with God, Mind and the like,*® the monad is also likened 
to the first-born Chaos of Hesiod, because it is the first of the numerical 
series.4 Other epithets are ‘Sun’ and ‘Apollo,’ > ‘Zeus’s tower,’ and 
‘matter in a sense,’ because 2, the number consecrated especially to 
matter, is derived from the doubling of 1. 

The dyad naturally derives most of its titles from its character as 
‘otherness,’ the opposite of the monad.* Hence comes the title 
‘matter,’ and thence in turn ‘unequal,’ ‘excess,’ ‘deficiency’;’ but 
on the other hand ‘equality’ was seen in it because 2 X 2 = 2+ 2.8 

1Tannery, Pour l’Histotre de la Science Helléne, Appendix II, pp. 379-80, suggests that the 
enumerations found under the captions of various numbers (e.g., 4 elements and seasons, 5 ele- 
ments, zones, circles, senses, etc.) originated as a mnemonic device. Certainly if this is so, this 
origin was forgotten by the time of Nicomachus. 

? F.g., in treating the number 7, it is pointed out that this number governs the critical periods 
(xA:cwaxr#pes) of human life according to the ‘Chaldeans’ (i.e., astrologers): Varro in Gellius, 
IlI. ro; Clemens Alexandrinus, Siromaia, VI. xvi. 143, 1; Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 53 
(Ast). Lydus, De Mensibus, II. 3 and 7, has references to ‘the Chaldeans’ or ‘the Chaldean.’ Philo 
does not fuse astrology with his arithmology, but we learn that he had a deep aversion on reli- 
gious grounds to Chaldean astrology from the fact that he often condemns it (De Migratione 
Abrahami, 32, 33; De Abrahamo, 15; De Nobilitate, 5). 

3 Note that we nowhere get an absolute identification of the monad either with God or with the 
‘cosmic word.’ The monad ‘ fits’ or ‘is like’ these things, or ‘is called by these names.’ 

4 The epithets selected for mention in the following paragraphs are in the main taken from the 
lists preserved from Nicomachus by Photius; Ast’s text often explains the reason for their be- 
stowal. On the identification with ‘chaos,’ cf. Delatte, op. cit., p. 142. Other titles perhaps 
to be connected with this are etyyvets, ciyxpacts, ddaurla, cxorwila, xdepua, rdprapos, Ervé, 
dpixwdla, duséla, Bdpa@por vroxGéror, AKGn. 

® Probably explained by Lydus, De Menstbus, Il. 3: dwagépera: 5@ 4 words els "AwéAdwra, 
rourderiv els ror Eva Fdcor, xrd. Cf. also Jamblichus, In Nicomacht Artthmeitcam Intro- 
ductionem, p. 13 (Pistelli); Stobaeus, Eclogae, Prooem., 10 (vol. 1, pp. 21-22, ed. Wachsmuth- 
Hense); Plutarch, De Istde, 10; Zeller, op. cit., vol. III, 2, p. 139 (4th ed.); Chaignet, op. cit., 
vol. II, 109. With this epithet probably go also rupddcos, wpopyrys, Adycos. 

* Cf. pp. gg f. 

7 Cf. Theologumena Arithmelicae, pp. 10, 11; Lydus, De Menstbus, IT. 6. 

§ Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 10. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 105 

It is the root of all relativity, because 2:1 is the first ratio;’ and a 
very old epithet, repeated by Nicomachus, is ‘daring,’ derived from 
the idea that 2 first ‘dares’ to separate itself from the original unity.” 
It is to be noted that neither the monad nor the dyad, the elements of 
number, were regarded as numbers in the proper sense of the term.’ 
Among deities, Erato, Phanes, Zeus, Isis, Rhea-Demeter, Artemis, 
and Aphrodite were associated with the dyad.‘ 

The triad derives its most distinctive epithets from the notion that 
after the two elements of number, 1 and 2, which are not really num- 
bers, it is a true ‘combination of monads,’ the first actual number, 
because it has beginning, middle, and end. Hence its title ‘mean,’ 
and several others. Leto, Hecate, Thetis, Athena and other divinities 
are assigned to it,®° and this is the first number called ‘marriage,’ as a 
combination of odd and even numbers, ‘male’ and ‘female’ (1 + 2).’ 

The tetrad is a square,® is produced from 2 + 2 and 2 X 2, and had 
long been reverenced as potentially the decad, because 1 + 2+ 3+ 4 
= 10. Nicomachus took account of all these matters. Hermes, 
Hephaestus, Heracles, and Dionysus shared the tetrad: because the 
musical ratios are contained in it, it was called ‘harmony.’ !° 

1 This epithet is given by Anatolius, Theon (p. 100, 9 ff.) and the Theologumena Arithmeticae, 
p. 8 ad fin. 

2 Photius; Theologumena Artthmeticae, loc. cit.; Lydus, De Mensibus, II. 6; Plutarch, De 
Iside, 75; Martianus Capella, p. 259, 3 (motusque primi probamentum). Lydus refers this to 
Pherecydes. 

4See p.117. This is why the dyad is called peralyprov wAHOous cal porddos (cf. Theologumena 
Arithmeticae, p. 9, Ast), 4px} rod dprlov pévn, Alta od xar édvépyedy ww, Gvvayus, whdes wokuwiddxov 
(sic) "Ldns (?). 

4 For Erato, cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 11; Rhea, tbid., p. 12; Isis, ibid. Etymology 
probably has much to do with the epithets Rhea and Isis (péw, feos). Matter is unstable and 
may be called ‘ fluid.’ 

§ Probably this notion is at the bottom of the identifications wpwror wepiocds, porddwy 
gternua, weparwrixh Tis dweiplas ris év dprOuy, Syoiov, rabrdv, dudroyor, wpicpévov. peodrns, 
however, is explained differently in Theologumena Arithmeticae; 3 stands between the greater and 
the less, and hence is ‘mean,’ thus: 2 is greater than the preceding number, 1, and 4 is less than 
the preceding numbers, 1 + 2 + 3, while 3 = 1 + 2. 

6 Hecate of course for her three forms; Leto possibly because 1 (Apollo) + 2 (Artemis) = 3 
(their mother, Leto). Only the epithets Tprroyérera, Topyorla of Athena are given here. 

™Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 16. 

8 Tkeologumena Arithmeticac, p. 22, mentions this in connection with the epithet Hermes; it 
was also used by Anatolius, Theon, p. 101, 11; Philo, De Mundi Opificio, 16; Lydus, De 
Menstbus, IV. 44. 

® That is, it was the tetraktys of the Pythagoreans, by which they swore; Theologumena Arith- 
meticac, pp. 18, 22. Perhaps to this fact are due the epithets in Photius, rar guoixdy dworede- 
gpudtwy wiyyh, xAeldouyor THs Pioews, Puars. 

10 The topic harmony appears also in Anatolius, Theon, 101, 11 ff.; Philo, De Mundi Opificio, 
15. 

106 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

The pentad gains its glory from the fact that it is one half of 10,’ 
the arithmetical mean between any two numbers whose sum Is Io,” 
and the sum of an odd and an even number. The latter fact secures 
its place as ‘marriage’ and ‘Aphrodite,’ and it was of course pointed 
out that there are 5 elements and 5 zones on earth and circles in the 
heavens.’ Nicomachus’s most elaborate argument is devoted to es- 
tablishing 5 as Justice. 

The hexad is the first ‘perfect’ number; it is the product of an odd 
by an even term, and ‘cyclic’ or ‘spherical.’ Its most important 
identification was with the ‘soul,’® but it also was considered by Nico- 
machus as the marriage number par excellence, and ‘ Aphrodite.’ ° 

Seven was treated with peculiar veneration, largely because of its 
connection with the moon and temporal periods, and hence, sup- 
posedly, with physical phenomena, such as those of birth.’ This 
secured its titles ‘chance’ and ‘due season’ (réyn, katpds). Because 
of all the numbers of the decade it alone is both prime and does not 
as a factor produce any other number within the decade — neither 
generates nor is generated, as the Pythagoreans said — it is called 
‘Athena,’ the virgin goddess.® 

Eight, an unlucky number because children born in eight months 
were thought not to be viable,® is the first cube and hence was ety- 
mologically connected with Rhea-Cybele. Nine is a boundary, ‘hori- 
zon’ and ‘ocean,’ because after it there is repetition among the num- 
bers ;'° it is identified with the Sun, Hephaestus, Hera, Prometheus, 
Apollo, Ares, and Artemis. The decad, since it embraces all the num- 

1 Hence called duléeos, S:dupyala, by Photius: cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 32; perhaps 
Alxny oior Slyacrr, p. 31, for the same reason. 

2 Theon of Smyrna mentions this fact. 

* Photius mentions the elements (74 crotxeia rot wavrds xara rhy wevrdda); cf. Theologumeng 
Arithmeticae, p. 25; twveala, xuxdco¥xos in Photius refer perhaps to the zones and circles; cf. Theo- 
logumena Arithmeticae, sbid. 

‘Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, pp. 27 ff. ® Cf. pp. 109 f. 

6 Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 38. The point is that 6, as 2 X 3, is a more effective com- 
bination of ‘male’ and ‘female’ elements than 5s, or 2 + 3. 

7 The discussion of the Theologumena Arithmeticae takes the influence of 7 in gestation and in 
the ages of man asits chief theme here. The fact that the perfect number 28, which measures the 
lunar month, is 1 + 2+3+4+5+6-+ 7, was significant. 

® Photius cites the name Athena and several epithets of the goddess here; cf. Theologumena 
Arithmeticae, p. 53. This was one of the commonest identifications, found in practically all the 

arithmologies. In fact the number 7 was the one upon which most efforts were expended by these 

writers. 
* +rcréunva in Photius; cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 55, and Lydus, De Mensibus, III. 

SI. 
10 Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, pp. 56-57. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 107 

bers and furthermore all numerical forms, was called perfect, and for 
these reasons Nicomachus gives it the epithets All, Cosmos, Universe, 
Faith, Necessity, Might, Fate, Eternity, Atlas, Unwearied God, 
Phanes, Sun, Urania, Memory, Mnemosyne." 

Our data regarding the cosmogonic theories of Nicomachus consist 
chiefly of two passages of the Introduction (I. 6 and I. 4. 2), and two in 
the Theologumena Arithmeticae. One of the latter, concerning the 
hexad, has already been quoted; the other, relating to the decad, 
follows : 

“We have often anticipated ourselves in saying that the devising 
Mind wrought with reference to the resemblances and likenesses of 
number, as to a pattern that was perfect, the fabric and composition 
of the world and of all that is init. But since the whole was an un- 
limited multitude, and the whole substance of number is not to be 
followed out, it was not reasonable . . . to use an incomprehensible 
pattern, but there was need of due measure, so that the artistically 
contriving God might be greater than the bounds and measures set 
before him in creation and hold sway over them, and neither compress 
in niggardly fashion nor unharmoniously exceed to a lesser or greater 
degree than the fitting; but a natural balance, mean, and wholeness 
existed above all in this (sc. the decad); for embracing in principle 
all things in itself, solids and surfaces, even and odd and even-times 
odd . . . it had of itself no peculiar or natural variance otherwise, 
save in the fact that all things ran toward it and circled into it. Rea- 
sonably therefore he used it as a measure for the whole, and as it were 
a gnomon and a straight edge for the setting forth (sc. of all), fitting 
(sc. them to it); wherefore things from heaven to earth are found 
both as wholes and in part to have their ratios of concord based upon 
it and to be ordered after it.””* Then follow the identifications of 10, 
described above. 

1 Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, pp. 58-61, where most of them are explained. 

? P. 58, Ast (the first sentence will be found on p. 98; the rest is as follows): éwet 3¢ dépio- 
ror 7d Sdov wdOos hy xal ddvetlrqros # rod dpuod waca iwdcracis, ob hy eUroyow odd’ SAduws 
driornuomndy dweprrhrry xphoGar wapadelyparc, Eder 5¢ cupperplas va Tay wpoxerudywy adry Spwr 
cal pérpwr 6 rexvirns Oeds dv rq Syyovpyla wepryérnrar Kal wepixpartoy, cal uhre éw Eharrov pire 
éwl xdéov rod rpogtxorros Fro évdeds cvorelrAy f wryyuedhas bwepexréoy guocikh $€ Tis cverabula 
cal perpedrys cal Srwors dv ryde pddsora brfipye: wdvra pev owepparinds évrds abras wepiechnpuia, 
arepeda cal éwlweda, Aprid re wal wepogd wal dpromépicoa . . . pndewlary b¢ Ibidfovear F 
guockhy Gddkws wapaddAayhy cad davriw Eyovea, Sri wh war éxidSpouhy cal dvaxvcAnow rh els 
dauT#y. elxérws pérpy ray Sdwv alry kal Geren yradpor xal edfurrnply éxphoaro mpds ‘rhe 

wpodeorw dppothueros: Sidwep rods kar atrhy Adyous cuudwrous Uyorra Ta dw’ ovparod uéypi YAP 
ddog xepérrepby re xal xard udpos etploxera: wal Giaxexogunuéva nar abrir. 

108 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

The general doctrine here set forth ' appears to be essentially this : 
God, the supreme and original Being, has in his mind from all eternity 
number, all of the forms and properties of which are epitomized in 
the terms of the first decade. This is the divine or ‘conceptual’ num- 
ber. In the process of world creation God devises an ideal plan for 
the universe, and this plan was most probably not an independently 
existing idea, but actually in God’s mind. In it the numbers ‘prevail,’ 
that is, the ‘sameness’ of the forms of things is conferred by the monad, 
‘otherness’ by the dyad, their actuality as distinguished from poten- 
tiality by the triad — for the peculiar property of the triad is to have 
‘beginning, middle and end,’ and so to exist naturally and completely 
— and so on, down to completeness and order, which come from the 
decad. 

From the language of the Introduction (I. 6. 1) we must certainly 
understand that this pattern is not number alone, nor are the ideas 
and forms in it identical with numbers ; but simply that its components 
are determined, arranged and governed by number; and if the forms 
get ‘sameness’ from number, they thereby take from this source what 
is their essential nature. Following the outline of this plan, then, 
the material world is constructed ; and because there was a numerical 
frame for its plan, the material world too is ordered upon the principles 
of arithmetic. The number which is seen in the world, and that which 
is seen in its structure, is that which must be studied by those who 
desire to gain a knowledge of the truth in things,’ but it is not the 
divine number that existed from the first in God’s mind. Although 
it is like that divine number which shapes the general plan, still it is 
on a lower plane, a quality of material things and associated with them ; 
it is what we have found Nicomachus called ‘scientific’ number. 

A problem of interest and importance is, whether in Nicomachus’s 
cosmogony the act of creation was performed by God himself or by an 
intermediary divinity, a demiurge, according to the Platonic scheme. 
Nicomachus uses both the words Snovpyds and @eds, but there is 
very little evidence upon which to formulate a statement.’ On the 

1 Introduction, I. 4.3; 6.1, are also taken into account in the following. 

2 Introduction, I. 2. 3-5. 

3Cf. Introduction, 1. 4. 2: év ry Tot rexvlrov Geot diavolg. . . db Trav Skww Snusoupyds; 6. 1: 
roo ra Ska Snumoupyhoarros vol . . . dv ry Tod Kocuowaod Beod diavolg. On the use of Geds, see 
Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 4 (Ast), ror wept Geo Abyor; Tdy Hedy (22, Cf. P. 5, I, 7, 1, 
18, p. 8, 13); TY Kocpowa@ Sep, p. 43, 34. For Snwsoupydés as an epithet of the monad, see p. 5, 
at. Cf. also p. 50, 2, 6 rexvirns Geds dv ry Snwoupyla ; p. 58, 28, rox Tex wixdy voor. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NICOMACHUS 109 

other hand, in the Nicomachean system there seems to be something 
to correspond more or less exactly with the world-soul of the Timaeus. 
Nicomachus devotes much attention to the elaborate mathematical 
account in the latter dialogue of the making of the world-soul and its 
distribution in the world,! but whether it is merely with a view to 
facilitating the interpretation of the passages or because he substan- 
tially agrees with the doctrine, it is hard tosay. In the Theologumena 
Arithmeticae (p. 33 ff., Ast), ina context that is certainly Nicomachean, 
it is stated that the world is endowed with soul by virtue of the hexad. 
One portion of this passage has already been quoted, and we may add 
here the rest. 

“In another way soul is capable of articulating and arranging body in 
the same general way that psychic form is capable of doing so to form- 
less matter; and in general no number is more able to fit the soul than 
the hexad; no other would be called so much an articulation of the 
universe set up as maker of soul and discovered also capable of in- 
stilling the condition of life, whence it is called ‘hexad.’ That every 
soul is a harmonizing element, and that in harmony the most 
elementary concordant intervals are the sesquitertian and the 
sesquialter, by the combination of which the others are made up, is 
evident; for when it is present it makes peace, and orders well and 
fits best together the mingled opposites in the living thing, which yield 
and follow it, and it instills in this way health into the combination. . 
Indeed, so far as soul is present, it brings them together; but when it 
goes away, there comes about a breaking down of all the elements of 
the animal and a leaving of the ranks.”’ * 

He goes on to say that a half and a third part are necessary for the 
composition of the two elementary ratios of harmony mentioned, and 
that 6 has both; and in the succeeding remarks he states that the 
soul had to be solid and spherical. From 6 was derived one spherical 

1 Cf. p. 93, n. 2. 

2P. 34: tpbwow 3 Erepoy diapSpwrixh cal cuvraxrixh cwparos Wuxy, xaddwep puxixdy eldos 
dubpgpov vdAns, TH 5¢ ux 7d wapdwav ovbdels épapudtery Siwarar paddov diddos dpiOuds, ovw Aros 
Av ovrw didpOpwois ToD wawrds A€yoro, Yuyxowoids lordpevos, elpirxoudry wal THs fwrixis Elews 
duwointixh, wapd é&ds. dre wer appoorixh waoa yuxy, apuorlas d¢ ra croiyewdidcrara chupwra 
diaorhpara éwirperos cal nusddos, Gv card givGerivy Td Kowa TUuWANpoiTaL, mavepdy- wapovans per 
yap a’rijs elpnveder xal evraxret cai BédXriora évippoora rad éyKexptpéva rp ty édvarria, bwrelxovra 
wal dvraxodov@olrvra, cal dca roiro tryelav éuwowtca rH avyxpluari, Oepudy Puy py, iypdv Enpg, 
Bap) covdy, wuxvdv dpalw, cal rd dorxéra, A ywols dppovlas rims ovKn Avy curavacrpédoiro: curvTdp- 
xe ye why, dp Soov Puyh wdperri, cvvayuryds avrois: éfehOovons 8° abrijs, diddvees Taw dv rH kiwy 
wdvrwe xal \eworatla cupfalver. The etymology ¢fds-€fs is evident. 

110 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

number, from 5 another;! but the former was more suitable to soul 
than the latter, because 6 (2 X 3) is male-female or even-times odd, a 
combination of the male and female numbers, whereas 5 is male only. 
Of course the perfection of 6 was cited in this connection.’ 

The function of the world-soul is to establish harmonious working 
between the discordant elements composing the world; for, since they 
are constituted upon numerical principles, ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness’ 
enter the composition of things, the former on their formal, the latter 
upon their material, side, and confusion can be avoided only by the 
establishment of a harmony. The doctrine that harmony prevails 
in the universe is an old Pythagorean one.2 There is not much ma- 
terial in what we have of Nicomachus to show exactly how he worked 
it out. 

In the foregoing account of Nicomachus as a philosopher, the rela- 
tion of his thought to Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics has been pointed 
out ina general way. It has been seen, too, that his philosophy draws 
very close in many respects to that of Philo Judaeus; in general he 
is typical of his age. It must be granted that his achievements 
as an arithmetician were more important than his philosophical tri- 
umphs, and the modern reader, failing perhaps to take sufficiently 
into account the fact that in Nicomachus’s time the ‘theology of 
numbers’ was a well-recognized variety of speculation, bearing with 
it values which it is hard for us to comprehend, is likely to agree with 
the conclusion of Photius: “So it Is necessary, it would seem, to spend 
and expend a whole life for the sake of this theological juggling with 
numbers, and to be a sober philosopher in mathematics in order to be 
able to talk consummate nonsense.” 

1 Cf. Introduction, II. 17. 7. 

® Theologumena Arithmelicae, p. 34, top (Ast). Cf. Introduction, I. 16. Perhaps it is not en- 
tirely fanciful to see in the aliquot parts of 6 (1, 2, 3) a similarity to the ingredients of the world- 
soul inthe Timaeus. Nicomachus identified 1 with the ‘same’ and 2 with the ‘ other,’ as we have 
seen, and 3 is the combination 1 and 2. Nicomachus of course does not say anything about this 
likeness. 

® Introduction, Il. 19. 1, where the note may be consulted. 

CHAPTER VIII 
NICOMACHUS’S PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 

In the discussion of the philosophy of Nicomachus certain matters 
which belong with his theory of numbers have already been touched 
upon. In dealing further with that division of his doctrine, it will be 
found that though on basic matters he is in close agreement with non- 
Pythagorean writers, especially Aristotle, still the philosophic 
prejudices of his sect not infrequently intrude themselves and cause 
Nicomachus at times to bring non-mathematical elements into his 
arithmetical pronouncements. This, though fundamental, is after 
all not made the chief end in the composition of the Introduction, nor is 
it carried to an extent that would disturb the reader in ancient and 
medieval times, when all men to a surprising degree shared in the Py- 
thagorean veneration of numbers ; doubtless this is one characteristic of 
the book, together with its clearness, conciseness, and excellent organi- 
zation, which caused it to survive when so many Pythagorean treatises 
have utterly perished. 

Nicomachus’s theory of number takes its start from the assumption 
of the fundamental qualities ‘continuous’ or ‘discrete’ for all things 
in the universe, of both the eternal and the transient classes, into which, 
as has already been seen, he made the first division of existent things.' 
Continuous things he called jveapéva, ‘unified,’ or ad\Andovyovpeva, 
‘holding to one another,’ terms which testify to a notion that their 
parts are in direct contact, thereby unifying the object.? The dis- 
crete are Sunpnpeéva, ev mapabéca, olov xara owpeiayv, ‘separated 
into parts,’ ‘in the form of a setting forth side by side,’ ‘heap-like, 
as it were,’ * terms which suggest the conception of objects ranged one 
beside the other without touching or merging, with the parts of the 

1 Introduction, I. 2. 4. wooérnres and weyéy are among the eternals mentioned in I. 1. 3. 

2 In confirmation of this interpretation, cf. Aristotle, Cafegeriae, 4 b 25 ff.; where after classi- 
fying Quantum as discrete or continuous (see p. 113), he says: TOv mer ydp rod dpiOyol popluy 
obdels dori Koiwds Spos wpods by oumdwre: Ta popla avrov..., 7 bé ypayuh cuvey hs doriv’ tori yap 
AaPeiv coiwdy Spor wpdt by ra popla atrais curdwrrea, orvyuhy, Kal THs dwipavelas, ypauuhy, xrd. 

* Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 4, 30 (Ast): r&v Srhwv, édv re war ddAndouxlay eddy re 
ward wapdbeciv émivoduer atrhy cuverrdva, ... See also ibid., p. 17, 5 ff. 

lil 

112 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

collection keeping their identity ; perhaps this helps to an understand- 
ing of what is meant by the word ‘flow’ (yvua) in the definition of 
number. 

Nicomachus next tells us tnat an object in the continuous class 
is called ‘magnitude’ (péyefos) and one in the discrete ‘multitude’ 
(kn Oos); the two terms are used both as abstracts referring to the 
quality, and, as concretes, of objects of such natures.! Though these 
are mere statements and no discussion of them is found in our sources, 
we see from this that Nicomachus assumes continuity and discrete- 
ness to be qualities always associated with magnitude and multitude. 
He has not yet arrived at the definition of number, but only a single 
step further is needed. Magnitude and multitude per se are indefinite 
terms, ‘simply great’ or ‘simply many,’ as Nicomachus says.? With- 
out further limitation they are infinite; the ‘great’ can be infinitely 
subdivided and the ‘many’ infinitely increased. With such things 
science cannot deal. We can know about them and scientifically deal 
with them only when it can be said ‘how great’ and ‘how many’ they 
are. This is not to assert any new quality of magnitudes and multi- 
tudes, but merely to impose a limitation upon them, to renounce deal- 
ings with the ‘many’ and the ‘great’ per se and to occupy ourselves 
with magnitudes and multitudes of limited and known extent. 

It is in this sense, as opposed to péyefos and wAnGos, that Nicoma- 
chus employs the terms 70 w7Xixov (anAtxdrys) and 76 moadv (srodrys), 
which may be translated ‘quantity’and‘number.’ Furthermore, as will 
be seen, the latter is practically synonymous with number (apiApués), 
since the latter is defined as ‘limited multitude.’ In this account of 
the fundamentals of arithmetic, it is evident that Nicomachus is follow- 
ing Aristotle, although the terminology of the two differs. 

Aristotle’s words are sufficient evidence. ‘The term ‘quantum’ 
is used of that which may be divided into components, whereof either 
or each is naturally one thing or this thing (i.e., an individual thing). 
A quantum is multitude if it can be numbered, and a magnitude if it 
can be measured. And that is called a multitude which is potentially 
divisible into non-continuous things; a magnitude, into continuous. 
Of magnitude, that which is continuous in one direction is length; 

1 Introduction, 1.2.4; here they are individuals, but in I. 2. 5, genera; cf. I. 16.2; Theologumena 
Arithmeticae, p. 8, 21; PD. 9, 28, 34. 

2 dws pwéyas would be his expression; cf. dwik@s pwéyedos, dwkGs wAHO0s, p. 5, 7 (Hoche), 
and I. 14.1. What follows is based on I. 2. 5. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 113 

in two, breadth; in three, depth. And of these, limited multitude is 
number; length, a line; breadth, a surface; depth, a body.” ! 

Aristotle’s term 76 roa oy is used in a different sense; it is quantum, 
a general term, and not limited multitude. But this is the only seri- 
ous difference. Magnitude and multitude per se are péyefos and 
adnOos in both authors, and limited multitude dpiOuds. Aristotle 
does not call limited magnitude, 76 mnXixov, as Nicomachus does, but 
uses rather the specific names body, surface, and line, and he prefers 
ovveyys to mean ‘continuous,’ not adAndAovyovpevos.? These points 
of variation are, however, very slight, and to offset them we can point 
to parallels in Aristotle to the doctrine that magnitude and multitude 
are infinite per se.* Altogether Nicomachus’s dependence on him is 
obvious. 

This division of objects into quantities and numbers, too, furnishes 
Nicomachus the basis for the determination of the subjects of the 
sciences that treat of them, and the result is the guadrivium, a term ap- 
parently first used by Boethius and famous throughout the Middle 
Ages. Each half.of the field claims two sciences; numbers absolute 
or per se belong to arithmetic; numbers in their mutual relations, 
to music; geometry treats of quantity at rest, and astronomy of quan- 
tity in motion. As a matter of fact, the first two at least of these 

' Metaphysica, IV, 13, 10204 7 ff.: woodw Aéyerar Td Siaiperdw els dvuwdpyovra, dy éxdrepor A 
Exagrov lv ri wal rode re wépuxey elvar, whHO0s uev ob» woody ri day dpiunrdy 7, wéyedos o day 
perpyroy 7. Abyerac be wAHOos wey 7d Sarperdy Suvduer els wh curex sh, pbyedos be rd els covey 7’ 
peyédous 3¢ 7d dv db bv cuvexés ufos, 7d 3° éwl Sbo wAdros, 7d 5 éwl rpla BdOos. rovrwr 5é 
whf0os wey 7d wewepacuéroy dpiOubs, wyxos bé ypauuh, wAdros dé dwigdrea, BdOos 5¢ copa. 

? Cf. the following Aristotelian passages: Mectaphysica, 1054 a 22, Td ev yap 4 deypnudvor F 
Siaiperdy wAHObs Te A€yerar. Cf. bid. tors b 36; Physica, 233 a 11, uéyedos dwar dorl cuvexés 
xth.; De Caelo, 268 a 4 fi.; Categoriae, 4 b 20, rot 8¢ wocod 7d péy dori Siuwpiopué voy per olor dpid- 
wos kal Adyos, cuvexés 52 oloy ypauuy, érigdrea, cGua.... In Sextus Empiricus, Adversus 
Mathematicos, IV. 1, rd rocdy is divided into wéyeGos in continuous things (cvwexq) and dpxd- 
pés in discrete (see7tGra). 

*Cf. Metaphysica, 1066 b 7: ¥re was évdéyerac cad’ abrd elvar Awecpov, ef ph cal dpipds xal 
péyeOos, Gv wdGos rd Aweipow; 1085 b 24: bwijpxe yap... cal wewepacudvor wr Gos, éf ob al rewre- 
paouéwa: uorddes xal rot évbs* Ear: 5 Erepor atrd wAHO0s wal wriGos Aweipor. Cf. also De Caelo, 
271 b 33 ff. But no actually existent object in these genera can be infinite: Melaphysica, 
1066 b 18: dAX ddvvaroy rd évredexelg Ov Aweiporv’ woody yap drdyxn; similarly Physica, 
204 a 28. 

* Cf. Gow, History of Greek Mathematics (Cambridge, 1884), p. 72, n. 1. The division of the 
field in Theon of Smyrna, p. 15, 13 ff. (Hiller), is different: (a) arithmetic; (+) geometry, i.e., 
plane geometry; (c) stereometry, or solid geometry; (d) astronomy (derpovoula), concerned 
with moving solids. Besides these four, music deals with “ the movement, order, and harmony of 
the moving stars’’; elementary harmony — the mathematical theory of the concords, etc., — 
is attached to arithmetic. Note that o@a:pix} means astronomy, not stereometry, in Nicoma- 
chus; cf. the further references in I. 3. 7; 5. 2 and Philoponus on the latter passage. 

114 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

definitions are arbitrary and artificial, and in practice Nicomachus 
disregards them, discussing in a long section of the Introduction relative 
number,! which should fall under music, and furthermore treating 
numbers in another part of the book after the fashion of geometrical 
planes and solids. Nicomachus held, and demonstrated at length, 
that arithmetic is the fundamental and indispensable science, the 
basis of all the others.’ 

Nicomachus now comes to the formal, threefold definition of num- 
ber.‘ In the first place, he states, number is ‘limited multitude,’ 
7wrHG0s wpicpevoy; secondly, it is ‘a combination of monads,’ povddwr 
avornua; and thirdly, ‘flow of number, composed of monads,’ zroco- 
THTOS XUpa x povaduy ovykeievov. The first of these is identical with 
that which has already been defined as the subject of scientific study 
in the realm of multitude; it is equivalent to wogop, zroaorns, and has 
already been translated ‘number.’ Aristotle had stated his defini- 
tion of number in approximately these terms,° and Eudoxus also is 
reported to have adopted it.° According to this definition number is 
simply a species of the genus multitude, with the differentia limitation. 
Of the nature of this limitation Nicomachus has nothing to say, al- 
though some explanation is really necessary. 

In his second definition Nicomachus agrees with Theon of Smyrna’ 
and if we are to regard the testimony of Iamblichus on the point, the 
definition was as old as Thales and was derived by him from Egyptian 
sources.* This, too, comes closest of the three to Euclid’s definition, 
To €x povddwy avyKeipevov AO0s. 

The third definition has no exact parallels; the second definition 
given by Theon perhaps comes closest to it, “the advance of multi- 
tude beginning with the monad and its retreat ending in the monad”’ 
(mporodia pos 7ANOGovs amo povddos apyduevos Kat dvatodiopos eis 
povada karadyywy), and this in turn was practically identical with 

17. 17 — II. 5, and II. 21 to the end (the latter dealing with proportions). 

211. 6-17. 

71. 4-5. 

4 Introduction, I. 7.1. Heath, Htstfory, vol. I, p. 69. 

5 wAHOos,.. Td wewepacuéror dpiOuds, Metaphysica, IV. 13. 

8 +hHG0s apurpévoy, according to Iamblichus, In Nicomachi Arithmeticam Introductionem, p. 10, 
18 (Pistelli). 

7P. 18, 3 ff. (Hiller). 

® Tamblichus, p. 10, 8-1ro. Evuclid’s definition 1s found in the Elements, VII, def. 2. Amstoxenus 

used a definition like Euclid’s, according to the fragment of his Iepl dp:@unrixfs in Stobaeus, 
Eclogae I, Prooem. 6, vol. I, p. 20, 1 (ed. Wachsmuth-Hense = Diels, Fragmente der V orsokra- 

tiker, I', p. 346. 2). 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER II5 

the expression used by Moderatus of Gades, the Pythagorean.’ Of 
the three, this is the most truly Pythagorean, and it evidently has 
reference to that conception of number as a stream, moving out from 
the monad, of which more will be said later. 

The number which Nicomachus has just defined and which is dealt 
with in the Introduction is the ‘scientific’ number, and not, as the 
previous discussion has shown, to be identified with the conceptual 
number which was the basis of creation.? It is a matter of regret that 
there is nowhere a full explanation of the relation between these two 
numbers, and furthermore, that Nicomachus left without discussion 
here two subjects treated at some length by Theon of Smyrna,’ the 
monad and its counterpart, one, and the distinction between numbers 
and numerable things (apiOpol, apiOunra). On these subjects we 
are reduced almost to conjecture. 

As that of which every number is made up, and that into which it 
can be reduced ultimately by analysis,‘ the monad and the dyad are 
singled out by Nicomachus as the elements of number. This may seem 
strange, for the very definition of ‘element’ demands that it should be 
something ultimate, incapable of further analysis, and the dyad, which 
is twice 1, does not, apparently, answer this requirement. Even on 
Nicomachus’s own statement this can be alleged, for in certain pas- 
sages he clearly enough says that the dyad comes from the doubling of 
the monad,’ or that all numbers are made up of monads,° while on the 
other hand he often refers in the Introduction to the dyad, as well as 
to the monad, as an element of number.’ Yet this must be regarded 
as only a minor inconsistency, for it is certain that the dyad was ele- 
mentary according to his system of numbers, and the reason can be 
determined. 

1 Stobaeus, Eclogae I, Prooem. 8, vol. I, p. 21 (ed. Wachsmuth-Hense). 

2 See p. 98. 

*P. 18, 3 — 21, 19 (Hiller). 

‘ This is Nicomachus’s definition of ‘element,’ IT. r. 1. 

§ See Introduction, Il. 17. 1 (p. 109, 6 H.), and the division of 2 into 2 unities, asI. 8. 4-5. Even 
in the Theologumena Arulhmeticac, where for the most part the dyad is spoken of as elementary, 
it is implied that the monad produces it; e.g., p.6 (Ast): cal duddor yap wapexrixt dsagdopnetea, 
Cf. also the passages where the dyad and other numbers are thought of as progressing out of the 
monad; p. 116, with n. 2. 

® Jbid., I. 7. 1 (the definition of number); 8, 2; 10 (p. 16, 16 H.); 11, 3; II. 6. 2-3; 7.3. Cf. 
also such expressions as d:aAvéyueros els worvddas, II. 8. 1 and the following chapters. I. 11. 3 is 
particularly instructive. 

1 Tbid., 11. 1.1; 17.2; 18.1,4. The important passages of the Theologumena Arithmeticae will 
be cited in the following discussion. 

116 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

An explanation of the matter may be sought along two similar lines 
of argument which finally fuse. According to the first, one may re- 
gard the monad and the dyad as the sources, origins or beginnings 
(dpyai) of number, and in the second place, as its elements (orowyeia). 

Nicomachus’s method of approach along the first line is graphic and 
depends somewhat upon the help of geometry and its fundamental 
conceptions.! In geometry we begin with the point, which is indimen- 
sional. ‘This is the beginning of the first dimensional form, the line, 
and by movement the point generates the line. Now Nicomachus 
had a similar idea of the nature of multitude and number; they form 
a series, as it were a moving stream, which proceeds out of unity, the 
monad.? Just as the point is not part of the line (for it is indimensional, 
and the line is defined as that which has one dimension), but is poten- 
tially a line, so the monad is not a part of multitude nor of number, | 
though it is the beginning of both, and potentially both. The monad 
is unity,‘ absence of multitude, potentiality ; ° out of it the dyad first 
separates itself and ‘goes forward’ ® and then in succession follow the 
other numbers. Now all this concerns the monad far more than the 
dyad, and in fact it is the former which Nicomachus distinguishes as the 
apy7 par excellence; the dyad is rather ‘like a beginning,’ dpyoevdys.’ 

1 What follows is substantially the argument of Introduction, II. 6. 3 ff. 

? This, with the kindred idea that 1 contains all the numbers potentially, is why the monad is 
identified with the chaos of Hesiod, é& of rd Nowa ws ex porddos, Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 6 
(Ast). Cf. ibid., p. 11, 22 ff.: drt pheous wpary Eugacis év duddi, ws dwd onyelov ris povddos, 
dw Aweipor 8¢ rotro cal diatpetra: cal abfera:. 

‘1t was a well-known principle in antiquity that the beginning of a thing is not the thing itself : 
cf. II. 6.3. Although here it is distinctly stated that the monad is not dp:dyués, and in Theologu- 
mena Arithmeticac, p. 13 (cited, n. 6), that it is not rA#éos, still in one passage of this work, 
p. 18, 1 ff., it is called woody re: Lore yap woody rt 4 wovds Kal nad’ davrd dé Gewpodpuevor cal pordraror 
wepaivoy xal dAnOas dplfory. But it is at least certain that a special kind of roedv is here referred 
to, and the passage would also suggest that to Nicomachus jos connotes always plurality. 

‘ Theologumena Arithmeticac, p. 8: Tis... porddos Evworw Sndovons. Every thing is called 
‘one’ in accordance with it, zbid. See page 103. The monad is indivisible: Introduction, I. 8, 
4-5}; 10, 2. 

‘The monad potential number: Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 6, 9 ff.; p. 13, bottom, p. 17. 
Potentially all the forms of number; 7bid., p. 3; 4, 22; 5, 15,31, etc. In the Introduction, cf. 
I. 16.8; 9. 2,3} 10.2; 14.13 1§. 3}; 17-7: 

6 Theologumena Arilhmeticac, p. 13: rt } pév words Tod warrds dpiOuod Aéyor dduaréwwror, Eri 
xal ddidpOpwrov ws dv owéppari éy daury Exec, ) Suds 3¢ Ppaxeid ris dw’ dpiudy epoxdpnors, ob« 
Arrixpus 8¢ rocatrn did 7d dpyondés,  Tpids 52 Thy THs worddos Suvauy els dvépyeary xal éewéxragi 
wpoxwpety woiet. Cf. also the designation of the dyad as ‘daring,’ a common anthmological 
topic (see p. 105): wpoféBnxe yap dq éxl xrpaiiv (Theologumena Ariihmeticac, p. 7). 

1 Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 15: dpx} xar évépyesay dpwOuot f Tpids porddwy over hpare 
dpitouévouy words wer yap Tpéwor rivd 7 Suds dca 7d dpyoedés, cdornua 5é uorddos xal duddos 7 
rpias wpwrn. Cf. the preceding note. The monad alone mentioned as dpx%, Introduction, 
I. 8. 2; II. 6.3; 7.3. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 117 

For in the progress out of unity into multitude, he states, we do not 
encounter an actual number until we come to the triad! and the dyad 
is neither one thing nor the other.? 

The real grounds for this notion are not easy to grasp in the frag- 
mentary state of the evidence. It does not seem to be a conclusive 
reason that the dyad cannot be divided, like other even numbers, into 
both equal and unequal parts,’ nor that whereas 1, as the element and 
origin, gives a sum greater than its product (1 + 1 > 1 X 1), and true 
numbers characteristically give a product greater than their sum (e.g., 
3 X 3 > 3 + 3), the product of 2 by 2 is equal to the sum of 2 + 2, 
thus constituting 2 a middle ground between unity and multitude.‘ 
These are both alleged; but a more fundamental reason in the eyes of 
Nicomachus seems to be that real numbers must have form (eidos) 
and arrangement (cya), or, as he otherwise puts it, be a real ‘combi- 
nation’ (ovornua) of monads; and the dyad fails in all these particu- 
lars, while the triad satisfies the conditions. 

As Nicomachus says, ‘‘ Each thing in the world is ‘one’ in accordance 
with the natural and systematizing monad in it, and again everything 
is separable so far as it partakes of the dyad, connected with necessity 
and matter; wherefore first their congress produced the first multi- 
tude, the element of things, which would be a triangle, whether of 
magnitudes or numbers, bodily or bodiless. For as rennet curdles 
flowing milk by its peculiar creative and active faculty, so the unifying 
force of the monad advancing upon the dyad, source of easy movement 
and breaking down, infixed a bound, and a form, that is, number, upon 
the triad; for this is the beginning of actual number, defined by com- 
binations of monads. But the dyad too 1s a monad, because of its 
beginning-like nature.” ° 

1 Cf. the preceding notes. 

2 Cf. Theologumena Arithmeticac, p. 13 (cited p. 116); Pp. 9: Srt vooupévov whHOous xara rpidda 
Trou T dvriPewpevou TY wAHGE Kard Thy pordda peralymuov H duds avy ely. 

3 Tbid., p. 11: obx dprOuds 6@ m duds obdé Aprios, Ste wh evepyela: duddhec was dprios cai [oa xal 
Amoa Stuvara: 6 altos peplterGar, porn be 7 duds els Avica ovw Av pepiobely, cal els loa pepiobeioan 
hin dow, drordpou yévous abra gia, ws doxoecdys ris ofoa. Cf. the argument of Jnfroduction, 1. 8. 1-2, 
that the monad is the source because it is half of one number adjacent to it, whereas other num- 
bers are the half of the two adjacent terms. 

4 Theologumena Artihmeticac, p.g. Another argument somewhat of the same character is 
that of one or two objects we say évxd, dvixd, but of three, not rpisotxd, but simply rAq@urrind 
(rbid., p. 15, 21 ff.). 

5 Tbid., p. 8 (Ast): ér per of xagrév Ti év xéouy xard THe evalry pvoihy Kal ovetnparixhy 
povdda, dcacperdy d¢ wader Exacror, cad’ Boor dvaryxalov cal Udixq@s Suddos peréoye Sibwep 7 rowr7 

guivodos altOy rowror woicuévor whAGos awrerédece, cToOLyeror TaY Syrwy, 6 Av ely rolywroy peyeOur 
Te xal dpi@uGr cwuatixay re cal dowudrwr ws yap 6 dwds TO Keyxuuévoy ydha cvorpemer xara Td 

118 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

The dyad has no form, and the triad has, for the dyad, as ‘ otherness,’ 
is infinite: ‘It appears also to be the ‘infinite,’ since it is the ‘other,’ 
and this beginning with the next to one goes on to infinity.””* It is 
“without arrangement, for from the triangle and the triad the actual 
polygonals to an infinite number of sides advance; but no plane figure 
was ever composed of two straight lines or two angles; so it is in ac- 
cord with this alone that we have the ‘undefined’ and ‘without ar- 
rangement.’’’* One further factor to be taken into consideration 
is that the triad is the first to show what Nicomachus calls ‘natural 
sequence,’ that is, the possession of beginning, middle, and end. As 
such, it is the idea of completeness, and the dyad fails to measure up 
to its standard.® 

The second mode of demonstration, based on the elementary charac- 
ter of the monad and the dyad, is more satisfactory, and has already 
been foreshadowed in the discussion of Nicomachus’s philosophy. 
There it was seen that the monad and the dyad were actually identi- 
fied with ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness,’* that is, they are not so much 
numbers themselves as forms which are impressed upon numbers and 
things. If we put the matter on the basis of the Aristotelian logic of 
which Nicomachus is so fond, it becomes evident that they are not 
true numbers (evepyeiq, évredexeiq) but only forms, and as the sources 
of numbers, they are themselves potential numbers (Suvapec). 

The frequent occurrence of these terms makes it allowable to take 
this view. Furthermore, the analysis of numbers shows in them the 
presence of the monad and dyad, ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness,’ as 
elements. The chief instances mentioned by Nicomachus are the odd, 
square, and cubic numbers, which are characterized by ‘sameness,’ 
and the even and heteromecic numbers, which display ‘otherness.’ 

wordy Te kal épyacrixdy lilwua, ovrws } évwrixh Sévauus THs pworddos, wpoedOodca TF Sud, evwo- 
plas xal AUcews oloy ryyy, wépas éverwolncer, eldos 5¢, Swep doriv dpiduds, TF Tpiddi’ dpyh yap car 
évépyeray dpi@uod aurn, porddwy cverhpaciy dpifoudvov. povds 5¢ rpdwor rivdh cal » Suds did 7d 
dpyoedés. 

1 Ibid., p. 11: Sre 6 wal 7d Awecpow palvera:, efye wal 7d Erepory, rotro 8¢ dwd Trot wap ty 
dptduevoy els Aweipoy éxwlrret. 

? Ibid., p. 11: 87s m Buds palverar doynudrioros, efwep awd pdv rpvywvou cal rpiddos ra éx 
dwreipov rodtywra évepyela mpoxwpel, éx 5é porddos rdv6’ duod card Stvauiv brdpye, bwd 52 S00 offre 
etOeay wore ofde ywridy ebiirypaupor curicrara: gyfma’ card pdeny dpa altri rd dépicror cal 
doy nudriurror. 

3Jbid., p.14: Ere dé cal waca obcia didtodor Eyouca puvoixhy Spouvs Exe: rpeis, dpy hy, dxuty, 
redeurhy, olow wépara Kal péoor, diagrhuara 5é, olow abtnow cal pélow, Gore rhy per Suddos duo 
cal 7d éxdrepor éupalverfar Ty Tpidds Tar wepdrwr. See also tdid., p.15, top. Cf. the explana- 
tion of this by Moderatus of Gades, p. 103. 

4 See p. 100. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 119 

The reason why the odd and even have these qualities, as stated by 
Nicomachus,! is that ‘their species are formed’ (eidomoeto Par) by 
the monad and dyad respectively.*, The squares and cubes, on the 
one hand, and the heteromecic numbers, on the other, receive ‘sameness’ 
and ‘otherness’ from the fact that their composition is dependent upon 
the odd and even numbers, and, furthermore, they show it either in 
the equality of their sides, or, in the case of the heteromecic numbers, 
in their inequality.* The cubes in a special sense are the product of 
odd numbers, and partake of ‘sameness’ to an even greater extent.’ 
The elements, then, of these series are the monad and dyad, and, as we 
have seen, they are practically identified with forms. 

But after all the dyad is never quite on a level with the monad as 
an element; a minor indication of the feeling of Nicomachus is seen in 
his rather condescending remark that it is ‘a monad in a sense’ and in 
his designation ‘beginning-like’ for it.° For at bottom it is the monad 
that is the real beginning of the number series. It is that which ‘re- 
mains,’ ever the same itself and in mathematical operations conferring 
the same persistence upon other numbers; ® the monad too is poten- 
tially all numbers.’ It has already been noted that the numerical 
series is compared to a moving stream, progressing out of the monad, 
which occupies the place of a point, and in the first movement going on 
to the dyad, which introduces ‘otherness’ after the absolute unity of 
the monad.* The movement then extends to the triad, the first true 

1See Introduction, II. 17. 2, and Iamblichus, Jn Nicomachi Arithmeticam Iniroductionem 
Liber, p. 12, 26 ff. Though Nicomachus does not mention the matter, it was an old Pythag- 
orean notion that the ‘odd’ and ‘even’ were finite and infinite respectively because the one re- 
sists, the other admits, dichotomy: Simplicius, Physica Auscultaiio, p. 105 a: obros 5@ rap 
Awe:pov ray Aprioy dpwPudy FXevyor, bd 7d wav wey Apriov, Gs mac ol éfyynral, els foa Siaipeto Ga, 
rd 6é els [oa Scaipotpevoy Eweipov xara Thy Stxyoroulay. The behavior of ‘odd' and ‘even’ in ad- 
dition and multiplication was also observed. 

? Introduction, II. 17. 2; 18. 1,4; 20.2. The reason why the ‘ odd’ is ‘ given specific form’ by the 
monad seems to be at least partly accounted for by definition of the ‘odd’ (I. 7. 2); whereas 2 is 
always a factor of the ‘even.’ Furthermore these numbers were first in the two classes, though 
there was some dispute over this point, and seem to embody ‘oddness' and ‘ evenness’ in the same 
way as ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness.’ 

4Squares: Introduction, II. 17. 3; 18. 3; heteromecic numbers, zbid., and IT. 18. 1. 

4 Ibid., IT. 20. 5. 6 See p. 116, with notes 6 and 7. 

® Infroduction, IT. 6. 3; 17.4; Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 3, 2 ff. It is to be noted that por} 
and uéverw were technical terms in Neo-Platonic theology to describe the unchanging existence 
of God; cf. Plotinus, Enneades, I. 7. 1, and the Christian application of the same term in Augustine, 
De Genesi ad Littcram, IV. 18. 34. The Neo-Pythagorean doctrine of the monad probably plays 
a part in the development of this idea. 7 See p. 116, n. 5. 

8 Theologumena Artthmeticae, p. 8,11: dpx} Te xal ru@uny woarel rijs rod dpuod érepoedelas 
cat’ eixéva vAns; Introduction, II. 17. 5: érepérqros xaraperich. 

120 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

number, and so on to the decad, which in a sense repeats the monad.! 
That is, it has the functions in the series 10, 20, 30 . . . 100 which 
the monad has in the series 1, 2, 3 . . . 10, and all the terms between 
10 and 100 are made up of components from these two series singly or 
in combination. The series goes on still further, with 100, 1,000, 
and 10,000 successively assuming the position of the monad in their 
respective series or courses, and because of this they were called by the 
Pythagoreans “monads of the second, third, etc., courses.”” The 
Pythagoreans, it may also be remarked, did not recognize that 12, for 
example, might be made the end of the first series precisely as well as 
10; they were convinced that ro was divinely and naturally consti- 
tuted as the climax of the series and that no other could vie with it. 
It was an instance of the operation of ‘nature’ as opposed to ‘human 
convention’ — a contrast which Nicomachus 1s fond of pointing out? 
— and evidenced by man’s possession of ten fingers and toes, by the 
ten categories and the ten forms of relative number.’ 

In this movement of number from the monad Nicomachus pictures 
its advance by steps, or places (ywpaz), occupied by the successive 
terms (6pot) or number; for number, it will be remembered, is the 
property of the discrete. The number system is thus based on the 
integers, and Nicomachus does not consider zero a part of it.‘ The 
beginning of the series is 1, for although 1 and 2 are not really num- 
bers at all, they begin the numerical series, and we find Nicomachus 
constantly using them in exactly the same way as the others. 

Furthermore, the numerical series is ‘by marvellous and divine 
nature’ a harmony, that is, ‘a unification of the diverse and a concord 
of the disagreeing.’ *® All harmonies have to be constructed out of 
opposites, and in number these are of course the ‘same’ and the ‘other’ 
as seen especially in the odd and even numbers and in their derivatives. 
The odd and the even give evidence at the very start of the harmonious 
construction of the whole system by their occurrence in alternate places 
in the natural series.© The harmony of the numbers, which is of course 

! For number as a moving stream, cf.p.116. On the ‘monads of the courses’ and the Pythag- 
orean decimal system, cf. I. 19. 17 and note ad /oc. 

2 Cf. Introduction, I. 6.4; 23.7; II. 3. 2; 17.2; Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 3, 25 (Ast). 

* The only reference in the Jniroduction to the sacredness of the decad is IT. 22.1; but compare 
the Theologumena Arithmeticae throughout the chapter on the decad. 

4 The only reference to zero in the Jniroduction is in II. 6, 3, and here it is not a term. 

5 This is a quotation from Philolaus cited in II. 19.1. Most of the data upon the harmony of 
the natural series will be found in I. 6. 2 ff. 

8 Infroduciton, I. 6. 4. 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 121 

to Nicomachus evidence of the harmony of the universe, displays it- 
self in all sorts of regularities, observed in the relations of numbers ; 
those which Nicomachus delights to point out as proofs of the ‘good 
order,’ ! ‘friendship’ and ‘coéperation’ ? of numbers are for the most 
part the inflexible workings of rules, and the observation that numbers 
of certain specific characters occur at stated intervals either in the 
natural series or in some other regularly constituted group derived from 
it, as, for example, the odd numbers or the doubles... The discovery 
of other facts must have assisted the Pythagorean mathematicians 
greatly in their belief in harmony, for instance, the discovery of the 
musical concords in the first few numbers of the natural series and 
in the numbers of the sides, edges, and angles of the cube.* 

Harmony, however, must be founded not on a series of opposites 
only, but upon opposites which are not irrational to one another.° 
This requirement is met by the numbers of the natural series. They 
have certain fixed relations to one another, capable of expression and 
definition, which Nicomachus studies under the head of relative 
number.® The fundamental relation of any two terms is equality 
with one another ;’ other relations will vary to one side or the other, 
and numbers will exceed or be exceeded by one another according to 
the various ratios. We may leave to Nicomachus himself the exposi- 
tion of this subject, though it may be remarked that he gives an in- 
adequate definition of ratio.® 

Another characteristic of numbers, which does not concern their 
mutual relations so much as themselves absolutely, is their ability, 
according to the ideas of Nicomachus, to conform to geometrical ar- 
rangements.? Fundamentally this rests upon the definition of number 
as a combination of monads, and the further assumption that the 
constituent monads of any term are capable of arrangement (oy7pa). 
Granting this, the arrangements may be either linear, plane or solid, 
and may imitate any of the figures recognized by geometry. An ex- 

1 See edrafla, etraxros in Hoche’s index. 

2 Introduction, II. 19. 1. 

3 Instances of this sort are found in those sections where Nicomachus describes the ‘generation’ 
of certain types of numbers, e.g., the multiples, I. 18. 4 ff. The regular comparison of terms be- 
tween two series gives certain types of ratio in regular order; cf. I. 19. 8 ff. 

4 Introduction, Il. 15.4; 26. 2,0n the musical concords as discovered in the cube. Arithmo- 
logical writers point out that 4 includes the chief harmonies. 

5 Ibhid., I. 6. 3. 7 Thid., I. 23.6; ID. 1. 1-2. 

6 fbrd., I. 17, and following chapters. 8 Ibid., II. 21. 3; see the note ad foc. 

9 Ibid., II. 6 ff., treats of plane and solid numbers. 

122 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

ample of this sort of thinking has already been met, implicit in the 
statement that the triad has beginning, middle, and end, which can 
have no meaning unless it implies that the triad is to be regarded as 
a linear arrangement of three monads, 1 1 1.1 Numbers of this sort 
are called linear (ypappsxoi, II. 6.1). But these three monads can be 
as easily arranged in two dimensions as in one, and then they will 
form a triangle, .., and the same can be done with any of the 
numbers which are summations of the natural series from 1 to 
any given term. The triangular number is the elementary form of 
the plane number, just as the triangle is the element of plane figures 
in general ; * but the numbers are capable also of arrangements in the 
form of squares, pentagons and all the regular polygons, as well as in 
the form of parallelograms of all kinds. Furthermore, if a third 
dimension be added, and the monads grouped in more than one plane, 
all sorts of solid numbers can be constructed. 

One further point remains to be emphasized, namely, that the Py- 
thagoreans could not regard numbers in the cold, impartial manner of 
the modern mathematician and that Nicomachus is at one with them 
in this. Numbers are the sources of form and of energy in the world ; 
they are dynamic, active even on their own fellows; hence they con- 
vey to one another qualities and sometimes take on an almost human 
character in their capabilities for mutual influence. We have already 
noted that the monad donates ‘sameness,’ equality, and permanence, 
the dyad ‘otherness’ and inequality. In addition, the perfect numbers 
are compared to good things and are therefore few, while the ‘super- 
abundant’ and ‘deficient,’ like vices and bad things, are many.’ The 
decad possesses a different type of perfection, but one which distin- 
guishes it even more. 

All this is significant of a type of thinking that endows numbers 
with qualities which are not in any sense mathematical, regarding some 
as better or worse,* younger or older ° than others, and allowing them 

1See p.1o5. A similar conception is implied in the definition in I. 7.2. It may be noted that 
the dyad is called ex paros Apuoipos, Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 8. 

2 Iniroduction, II. 7. 4,5; 12. 8; Theologumena Arithmeticae, pp. 8, 18. For a rather full 
sketch of the further development of polygonal numbers the reader is referred to the chapter on 
‘‘Polygonal, Pyramidal and Figurate Numbers,” in L. E. Dickson’s History of the Theory of 
Numbers, vol. IT (Carnegie Institution, Washington, 1920), pp. 1-39. 

* Introduction, I. cc. 14-16. 

4 Ibid., I. 23. 4 implies that equality is ‘ better’ as well as ‘older’ than inequality. 

5 In ibid., I. 19. 8, 14, the multiple is shown to be ‘older’ than the superparticular. ‘More 
original ’ is doubtless the fundamental idea ; but by ‘older’ the Greek also connotes ‘ more honored.’ 

PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBER 123 

to transmit characters, like parents to their progeny. As a conse- 
quence, there is found in the Introduction a tendency to classify in 
groups of three, which has been noted by the historians of mathe- 
matics; indeed we read in the Theologumena Arithmeiicae that the 
number 3 seems to influence the science of arithmetic greatly because 
of the threefold classifications found there. That such a treatment 
of numbers is to be found in the Theologumena Arithmeticae is not at 
all surprising, but the /froduction itself is not by any means free from 
it, and though the modern reader may find such procedure unscien- 
tific, it lends the charm of quaintness to the book. 

1 Introduction, 1. 23. 6 (equality is the ‘mother and root’ of inequality); I. 4. 1 (arithmetic is 

the ‘mother’ of geometry, etc.). 
2 Theologumena Arithmelicae, p. 15, 23 ff. (Ast). 

CHAPTER IX 
TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS OF NICOMACHUS 

JUDGED by the standards of the mathematician, Nicomachus can- 
not rank with the leaders of the science even as it was known in an- 
tiquity ; estimated, however, by the number of his translators, scho- 
liasts, commentators, and imitators, he is undoubtedly one of the most 
influential. From his own day until the sixteenth century, among 
the Greeks, the Latins, and the Arabs, there was scarcely a place 
where he was not honored as an arithmetician, or a time when learned 
men failed to regard his work as the basis of the science. 

It is the Introduction to Arithmetic that won him this glory; the 
Manual of Harmony helped, for the scribes of medieval times made 
many copies of it, but this never became as celebrated as the other. 
Nor, it should be added, was the Geometrical Introduction valued so 
highly ; no copies of it survive, no references are made to it by name,! 
save by Nicomachus himself. In geometry Euclid reigned supreme, 
and if Nicomachus’s name is coupled with his, it is with the under- 
standing that the former is first in geometry, the latter in arithmetic. 
Perhaps the accident of having lived just when he did is responsible 
in some measure for Nicomachus’s great popularity; had the Middle 
Ages been so generously endowed as the time of the Alexandrian 
mathematicians or the Renaissance with the spirit of independent 
inquiry and the genius to carry it out, he would not have occupied his 
exalted place. As it was, however, the classic arithmetica which he 
represents ruled almost exclusively. 

Nicomachus was introduced to the Roman world not long after his 
death — perhaps even during his life—by Apuleius of Madaura, 
who Is said by Cassiodorus and by Isidore of Seville to have been the 
first to translate the Introduction into Latin.? This translation has 

1 Introduction, IT. 6. 1. 

2 Cassiodorus, De Artibus ac Disctplinis Ltberalium Litterarum, Migne, Patrologia Latina, 
vol. LXX, p. 1208 a-B; Isidore of Seville, Eiymologiae, Migne, Pairologia Latina, vol. LXX XII, 

Pp. 155. 
124 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 125 

disappeared without leaving a trace, as far as we know, and the De 
Institutione Arithmetica of Boethius,’ which is, as the author frankly 
admits, a version of the Nicomachean Introduction, became and re- 
mained the source through which the Latin-speaking portion of the 
world knew Nicomachus. This book 1s discussed in the later part of 
the present chapter. The Arabs learned of Nicomachus and his arith- 
metic through Thabit ibn Qorah (836—-go1 A.D.), whose translation of 
parts of the Iniroduciion is extant in manuscript form.’ 

Another sign of the popularity of Nicomachus is the large accumu- 
lation of scholia associated with the manuscripts of his Introduction 
to Arithmetic. Most important of these is the collection written by 
Johannes Philoponus of Caesarea, the grammarian and theologian of 
the sixth century, who is best known from his Aristotelian commen- 
taries and his treatise on the creation of the world. The scholia on 
Book I were published by Hoche (Leipzig, 1864), together with a 
scholium of Theodorus Protocensor, but those on Book II are not as 
yet edited. This collection is reported by Hoche to exist, in two re- 
censions, in the Géttingen, Hamburg, and Giessen manuscripts, which 
he consulted; it also exists in an Oxford manuscript and in one pre- 
served at the Escurial.*? Philoponus was not enough of a mathemati- 
cian to add anything of value to the subject-matter of Nicomachus, 
and his scholia are by no means so important as the commentary by 
Iamblichus, which will be discussed later. Other scholia, by Soterichus 
and by unnamed writers, have been found in the manuscripts and pub- 
lished ;* of unpublished material, the scholia of Asclepius of Tralles, 
reported to exist in a manuscript at the Escurial, promise the greatest 
interest.® 

1 Ed. G. Friedlein, Leipzig, 1867. 

2 Hoche, p. ix; Suter, Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber und thre Werke, in Ab- 
handlungen zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften (Leipzig, 1900), vol. X, pp. 35, 373 
Arabic manuscript in the British Museum, 426, 15°. 

2 Cf. Hoche, p. viii; H. O. Coxe, Cafologus Codicum Manuscri ptorum Qui in Collegits Aulisque 
Oxoniensibus Hodie Adservantur, Oxford, 1852, vol. I, under Greek MSS of Lincoln College library, 
No. XXXIII (a paper MS, of the beginning of the sixteenth century containing Nicomachus'’s 
Introduction and Philoponus’s scholia); MS X. I. 9 of the library of $. Lorenzo del Escurial (cf. 
Charles Graux, Essat sur les Origines du Fonds Grec de l'Escurial, Fasc. 46 of Bibliotheque de 
I’ Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Paris, 1880, p. 268). 

‘ Hoche published the scholia of Soterichus, Elberfeld, 1871; Nobbe (Leipzig, 1828 and 1862) 
those of the Niirnberg and Wolfenbiittel manuscripts, and Hoche (1863) those of the Giessen 
manuscript. 

® Cf. Hoche, p. ix; Graux, op. cil., p. 267, on the Escurial MS numbered T.I. 12. The library 

of New College, Oxford, has a MS of the /ntroduction ‘cum glossulis’ (cf. Coxe, op. cit., vol. I, 
under No. CCXCIX of the New College MSS). 

126 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Of the commentaries, the book of Iamblichus’ is the most impor- 
tant, but other works of a similar nature are known to have existed. 
There is still extant, for example, an anonymous Prolegomena to the 
Introduction to Arithmetic of Nicomachus, which was published by 
P. Tannery, but contains little to interest either the mathematician 
or the historian.2 It is reported that Proclus Procleius of Laodicea 
in Syria, who is not to be confused with Proclus Diadochus, and a 
certain Heronas, of the fourth or the fifth century at latest, also wrote 
upon the Introduction. 

The list of commentators and scholiasts is, however, not as long as 
that of the authors influenced by Nicomachus. Beginning with the 
well-known names of Martianus Capella, Cassiodorus, Isidore of Seville, 
and Michael Psellus, it includes dozens of writers on arithmetic from 
the tenth to the sixteenth century who followed him through the 
medium of Boethius. Of these something will be said in the following 
chapter; for the present we shall turn our attention first to Iamblichus, 
and then to Boethius, the two most noteworthy of the followers of 
Nicomachus. 

Iamblichus, philosopher and prolific writer, was a native of Chalcis 
in Coele Syria, which accounts for the pride expressed for his famous 
countryman in his Commentary. He lived in the fourth century, al- 
though his dates cannot be fixed exactly, and seems to have been 
educated in Rome among Neo-Platonic influences, which after all 
were not far removed from Neo-Pythagoreanism. At any rate his 
tastes led him to ascribe great influence in the world to numbers, and 
his interest in this phase of ancient philosophy is witnessed by the fact 
that, besides writing on the Introduction, he also compiled a Life of 
Pythagoras. He is reputed also to be the author of the compilation 
edited by Ast under the title Theologumena Arithmeticae. 

His Commentary is really a treatise on arithmetic based on the Jn- 
troduction, that is, a work having the same plan and purpose as the 
Introduction itself; we might perhaps call it a new edition. In gen- 
eral he follows the order set by Nicomachus and reproduces his ma- 
terial, but he has added many things. Some of these amplifications 
are merely further illustrative material and new observations on the 

1 In Nicomacht Arithmeticam Introductionem Liber (ed. H. Pistelli). 

2 In his edition of the works of Diophantus, vol. II, pp. 73-77. 

7On Proclus, cf. Suidas s.v. Eutocius, Ad Archimedis de Sphaera et Cylindro, II, p. 28 (ed. 

Bas.), mentions an dwépurqua els ry dpwunrixhy eloayoery}r by Heronas, who is otherwise un- 
known. 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 127 

tables of numbers which Nicomachus used; some of them are dis- 
cussions of the Pythagorean virtues of numbers; others are proposi- 
tions taken from earlier mathematicians which did not appear in the 
Introduction. One of the most valuable features of the book is the 
inclusion of notes on the history of certain theorems and upon ter- 
minology. In general, however, Iamblichus is not credited with the 
discovery of any new propositions of importance. The following 
summary of his Commentary and comparison with Nicomachus will 
explain its character : 

SUMMARY OF IAMBLICHUS’S CoMMENTARY 

er (Page references are to Pistelli’s edition) 

3, 5 — §, 25: Introduction, chiefly praise of Nicomachus. 

5, 26 — 10, 7 = Nicomachus, I. 1-5 in general; Iamblichus even gives indica- 
tion of the quotations made by Nicomachus. He omits chapter 6, an important 
one from the standpoint of Nicomachean philosophy. 

10, 8-24: Definitions of number, referring to Thales, Pythagoras, Eudoxus, 
Hippasus and Philolaus.! 

11, 1-26: A discussion of the monad. This topic is missing in the Introduction. 
But Theon of Smyrna speaks of it at some length.’ 

12, I — 13, 10 = Nicomachus, I. 7, in general; the odd and even. 

13, 10— 15, §: Material probably based on the Theologumena Arithmeticae, 
including the explanation of the ‘lambdoid figure’ which is there mentioned.’ 

15, 5-15: An account of the genesis of the odd and the even series from 1 and 
2 (not in Nicomachus). 

15, 16 — 16, 11, takes its start from Nicomachus, I. 8. 1-2, but leads into a dis- 
cussion of the number 5 as justice (pp. 16, 11 — 20, 6), which parallels Theolo- 
gumena Arithmeticae, pp. 28-30 (Ast). 

20, 7 — 35, 10 = Nicomachus, I. 8. 3 —c. 16; the varieties of the even and the 
odd, the superabundant, deficient, and perfect numbers. Nicomachus is 
followed substantially. It may be noted that criticism of Euclid for his defini- 
tions, a favorite topic of Iamblichus, appears in several places (pp. 20, 10-14; 
20, 19 — 21, 3; 23, 183 — 24, 14; 30, 28 — 31, 21). The most interesting is 
the last of these passages where Iamblichus maintains in opposition to Euclid 
that 2 is not prime.* Another passage (p. 34, 20 — 35, 10) deals with the vir- 
tues of 6 in the Pythagorean manner. On p. 27, 3 is found the statement that 
evOvperpixos and evOvypaypixds are additional names of prime numbers; Theon® 
also uses the former, and Thymaridas is here cited by Iamblichus as 
authority for the latter. 

See p. 114. ‘Cf. Nesselmann, op. cit., p. 242. 

? Theon of Smyrna, p. 18, 5 ff. (Hiller); see p. 37. ®P. 23, 12 (Hiller), 
* Theologumena Artlhmeticae, p. 3 (Ast). 

128 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

PAGE 
35, 11 — 43, 12 = Nicomachus, I. 17-21: the discussion of equality and in- 
equality, with no essential additions. 

43, 13 — $1, 20: The ‘three rules’ of Nicomachus, I. 23. 6 ff., are given, out of 
order, and then Jamblichus returns to the multiple superparticular, etc., as in 
Nicomachus, I. 22 and 23.1-3. The reversal of the ‘three rules’ (Nicomachus, 
II. 2) is omitted. 

51, 21 —52, 27 = Nicomachus, II. 3-4, but briefly. Nicomachus, II. 5, is 
omitted. 

52, 28 — 56, 17 contains four propositions that are not found in the Introduction. 

56, 23 — 72, 2 presents the subject of plane numbers, following Nicomachus, 
II. 6-12, but with the important addition (pp. 62, 18 — 68, 26) of the cele- 
brated ‘epanthema’ of Thymaridas.' 

72, 2— 93, 7 = Nicomachus, II. 17-20. The parallelism exists in a general way, 
but there are additions, especially that of the ‘diaulos’ theorem,? and Iamblichus 
brings out, in the discussion of the squares and heteromecic numbers, the 
Pythagorean aspects of the monad and dyad at greater length than did Nicoma- 
chus. There is further criticism of Euclid (p. 74, 24 ff.). On p. 82, 13 ff., he 
points out that the squares are alternately even and odd ° and all the heteromecic 
numbers even, principles which he applies to the exegesis of the Platonic ac- 
count of the ‘marriage number.’* On p. 83, to ff., we have the proposition 
that the products of squares by squares are squares; those of heteromecic 
numbers by heteromecic numbers are heteromecic numbers; and those of 
paxrot (promecic numbers) never squares. This principle appears in part 
later, on p. 90, 20. Iamblichus then sets up the table of squares and heteromecic 
numbers and discusses the properties that may be discovered therein, sometimes 
agreeing with Nicomachus and sometimes adding from other sources. 

The table is as follows: 

Squares, I 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 I00, 
Heteromecic numbers, 2 6 12 20 30 42 56 72 90 110, 

or, in general terms, 

Squares, a, (a + 1), (a + 2), (0 + 3)?, (@ + 4)?.... 
Heteromecic numbers, a, a(a+ 1), (2+ 1)(@+ 2), (@+ 2)(a+3).... 

The first set of observations, pp. 83, 27 — 87, 22, is in general agreement with 
Nicomachus (II. 19. 3-4; 20. 3-4). It is to be noted that Iamblichus omits 

1 See Nesselmann, of. cil., pp. 232 ff.; Heath, History, vol. I, pp. 94-96. 

? The theorem is based on the principle stated in the Introduction, II. 12. 2, that the sum of two 
consecutive triangular numbers is a square: 1+2+...+(@—1)+a+(¢a—1)+... 
+ 2+1= 7, The progress to and from a is compared to the Greek double race-course, Sfav- 
hos. Cantor, op. cii., vol. I, p. 460, implies that the theorem in this form may be the work of 
Iamblichus. This is very improbable, especially as Iamblichus designates it ‘ the so-called diau- 
los’ (p. 75, 25). It is found in Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 9 (Ast). Nesselmann, of. cit., 
p. 237 ff., discusses it fully. See Heath, History, vol. I, p. 114. 

1So Theon of Smyrna, p. 34, 3. 

4 Republic, 546 ff. 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 129 

PAGE 
the proposition of Nicomachus, II. 20. 1, that m* + m is always heteromecic, 
and he does not put in the same form the observation that the squares may be 
put into proportions with the heteromecic numbers as means.! 

The added propositions are these: 

84, 24: a(a + 1) + 2a? + (a + 1)(a + 2), and the like, give results that may be 
called dvozow (unlike; that is, the opposite of ‘like,’ which describes num- 
bers that share in ‘sameness’? because they are either odd or are summations 
of the odd series, squares). This is the converse of the proposition (p. 84, 18) 
that a? + 2a(a+ 1) + (a2 + 1)’, and the like, is always a square; which is 
stated in passing by Nicomachus (p. 117, 8-9). 

84, 27: a(a +1) + 2(a + 1)? + (2 +1)(@+ 2), and the like, always give a 

square. 

86, 15: ee Se is always a triangular number. The materials in this section, 
with the exceptions noted, are found for the most part in the Infroduction, but 
Iamblichus has somewhat varied their order and form. 

88, 15 — 91, 3: This section contains further observations based upon the same 
table of squares and heteromecic numbers; to judge from the way in which 
it is framed in the narrative, it would seem that Iamblichus intended it as an 
enlargement on the Nicomachean original. Asa matter of fact there is nothing 
of great importance in it that can be called original with Iamblichus; some of 
the material he seems to have derived from the Theologumena Arithmeticae or 
similar sources, some from the Introduction, and for some of the remainder 
earlier parallels can be pointed out. 

The propositions here added are these: 

It2+3..-t+9Of-I0+9..°+3F2+1= 100; 10+ 20+ 30 
...+9g90-+ 100+ 90...+ 30+ 20+ 10 = 1,000; 100+ 200 + 
300... + 900+ 1,000 + goo. .. + 300 + 200 + 100 = 10,000. This 
will be recognized at once as an application of the ‘diaulos’ theorem, 
based on material from the Theologumena Arithmeticae, which appeared 
earlier in the commentary. It can certainly not be original with 
Iamblichus, since, in addition to its probable Nicomachean, or even 
earlier, origin, it involves the Pythagorean conception of 1, 10, 100, 
T,000, . . ., aS povddes drAat, Sevrepwovpevat, rptwdovpevat, etc., a terml- 
nology employed by Nicomachus himself.*| The passage is, however, 
considered noteworthy by historians of mathematics in view of its 
significance in the development of a true decimal system. 

The theorem about special properties of squares (already found in Theon, 
P. 35, 17 ff.): 

m(m + 2) + 1 or m(m — 2) + 1 is always a square. 

aXma=ma. | vam 

1 Introduction, II. to. 4. 7 Cf. p. 118. *P.75, 25 ff. See p. 128, n. 2. 
4 Introduction, I. 19. 17 (but spelled devrepodouyérn, etc.). 

130 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

PAGE 
Any triangular number multiplied by 8 becomes a square when r is added. 

This proposition was known to Plutarch.! 

a? X BP is always a square. This is stated by Nicomachus, II. 24. ro. 

In a geometrical progression beginning with 1, if the term after 1 is a square, 
so are the others, i.e., the series is 1, m’, m'*, m®,.... This occurs in 
Euclid, Elements, LX. 9. 

If a:b = b:c, and @ is a square, ¢ is a square also (= Euclid, Elements, 
VIII. 22). 

If a? measures b?, a measures 6 (= Euclid, Elements, VIII. 14). 

ab is the geometrical mean between a? and 8? (cf. Euclid, Elements, VIII. 11, 
and Nicomachus, II. 24. 9). 

91, 3 — 93, 7: Pleuric and diametric numbers are discussed. This is a subject 
not treated by Nicomachus, but already known through Theon.? 

94, 8— 95, 15: Solid numbers in general, with their classification; this is based 
upon the material in Nicomachus, II. 13, 16. 1-2, 3 and 17.6. P. 94, 15 ff. is 
an added section upon the monad as potential surface and solid. 

95, 15 —97-7: Pyramids; the basis of the section is Nicomachus, II. 13, 14, 
but it is condensed. The description of the geometrical pyramid (Nicomachus, 
II. 13. 2-5) is omitted. There are added, however, some unimportant observa- 
tions on the table of pyramidal numbers (pp. 96, 6 ff.; 96, 13 ff.). 

97, 7 — 98,13: Cubes. The section is based in general on Nicomachus, II. 20. 5, 
with material from other contexts (e.g., cf. p. 97, 10 ff. with Nicomachus, IT. 15. 2, 
and p. 98, 2 f. with Nicomachus, II. 24.10). It is modeled as closely as possible 
after the section on the square and so contains certain parallels with Euclid 
(e.g., p. 98, 7 = Elements, VIII. 23; p. 98, 8 = Elements, VIII. 15; cf. also 
p. 98, 4 and Elements, IX. 3; and p. 97, 21 with Elements, IX. 8 and Theon of 
Smyrna, p. 34, 16 ff.). Of the other propositions there may be mentioned here 
p. 98, 5: “If, in a geometrical progression beginning with 1, the term after 1 
is a cube, the other terms are cubes” (cf. Euclid, IX. 9); and also the observa- 
tion on p. 97, 23 that a X a* = (a’)’. 

98, 14 ff.: Proportions. Iamblichus departs less from the Nicomachean model 
in the remaining portion of the book than in the previous parts. The added 
material is either unessential amplification or in the nature of historical notes 
and comments on the mathematical terminology ; among the latter are several 
bits of information that are very valuable. He tells us, for example (pp. 100, 
15 ff.; 113, 16 ff.), something about the history of the theory of proportions ; ? 
on p. 100, 1, he remarks that +6 dvdAcyov was properly applied to disjunct 
propositions or proportional series, whereas dvaAoyia meant the continuous .’ 
proportion; on p. 100, 15, there is inserted a valuable note on the difference 
between dvaAcyia and peosrys;* the information about the names éoryxvia 
and trevayria as applied to the harmonic proportion (pp. 108, 5 ff.; 110, 18 ff.) 
is also welcome. 

1 Platonicae Quaestiones, V. 2, 1003 F. * See the notes on Introduction, II. 22. 1 and II. 25, 1- 
2 See Cantor, op. cif., vol. I, p. 436. 4 See the note on Introduction, II. 21. 2. 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 131 

He strives for greater accuracy than Nicomachus in the definitions of pro- 
portion and ratio, and adds the statement that the interval between terms may 
vary while the ratio remains the same, or vice versa. ‘The ‘ratio of number to 
number,’ which was thought not to fall under any of the specified ten species of 
ratio and was classed by itself, is mentioned by both Theon (p. 80, 7) and Iam- 
blichus (p. 99, 15), but not by Nicomachus. Of the added matter, a good ex- 
ample is the set of rules for producing the various proportions (pp. ror, 24 ff.; 
106, 5 ff.; 112, 1 ff.). The ‘three rules’ given by Nicomachus (I. 23) will 
produce from three monads, three dyads, and the like, terms in geometrical 
progression, as Iamblichus notes. Similarly he constructs rules to make the 
arithmetical proportion, by taking the first number for the first term of 
the proportion; the first plus the second for the second term; the first plus 
the second plus the third for the third term. 

The most important additions, besides the historical notes, include the obser- 
vations of the properties of groups of three consecutive or regularly occurring 
numbers taken from the natural series (102, 17 ff.). He observes that 1, 2, 
3 = 6 (the second triangle); 1, 3, 5 = 9 (the second square); 3, 4, 5 = 12 
(the second pentagon) ; 1, 3, 5 give a square; 1, 4, 7 give a pentagon; and so 
forth. But since the first group, 1, 2, 3, gives 6, the other groups of three 
consecutive numbers from the series ‘are fashioned after’! the hexad; that is, 
if ro be taken as a unit (and the substitution made in each sum), all the sums 
will be 6. Thus 4, 5,6 = 15, equivalent tor + 5; 7, 8,9 = 24, equivalent to 
2-+ 4, and so forth. This manipulation of the number 1o is of course of the 
same character as that already observed in connection with the povades Sevrepw- 
Sovjevar (p. 88, 15 ff.). It may be noted also that Iamblichus omits mention 
of the peculiarity of the arithmetic proportion on which Nicomachus most 
prides himself (p. 125, 18-23, Hoche) and of the fact that the Pythagoreans 
called the cube ‘geometrical harmony’ (Nicomachus, IT. 26). 

Iamblichus’s Commentary, as the foregoing synopsis clearly enough 
shows, consists of a thoroughly Nicomachean framework overlaid with 
additions of various kinds. In mere extent these are quite consider- 
able, but aside from the one section containing the ‘epanthema’ of 
Thymaridas and the few statements of historical interest, their worth 
is very small. Many of them are merely observations based upon the 
tables used by both Nicomachus and lamblichus; a large number 
seem to depend upon Euclid; and another portion is derived from the 
Theologumena Arithmeticae, or something similar. After sifting out 
the statements obviously borrowed from these sources, nothing of 
importance is left to the credit of Iamblichus himself. It is note- 
worthy that he does not attempt to modify the definitions and classi- 
fications of Nicomachus. In general, the Nicomachean original, in 

1 The word elSoroetoGa: is used. The proposition occurs also in Theologumena Arithmeticae, 
p. 34 (Ast). See Heath, History, vol. I, p. 114. 

132 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Iamblichus’s hands, lost much of the clearness of statement and sim- 
plicity of arrangement which made it so useful and popular. 

When we turn to Boethius we meet with another admirer of Nico- 
machus who allowed himself to take even less liberty with his original. 

BoETHIUS AND NICOMACHUS 

It has long been recognized that the De Institutione Arithmetica 
of Boethius (here cited in the paging of the edition of G. Friedlein, 
Leipzig, 1867) has so little claim to originality that it may be called a 
translation of the Introduction of Nicomachus.! The judgment is a 
justone. A comparison of the two books will convince the reader that 
Boethius follows Nicomachus from first to last, expanding here and 
condensing there, as he says in his preface that he will do,? but never 
adding anything essential, either original or derived from other sources, 
that departs from his model. His additions seem to be in general 
mere development of the material which Nicomachus supplied — 
numerical examples, or explicit enlargement of statements left by 
Nicomachus in general form; and similarly his changes impress one 
as being observations or deductions made by Boethius himself on the 
basis of the work before him. There is little indication that Boethius 
used any other sources than the Introduction itself. It is a far more 
important question whether he has omitted anything of an essential 
nature in his translation, as we may term the De Institutione Arith- 
metica. 

As for this problem, a detailed comparison of the two books has 
brought the writer to the conclusion that the historians of mathe- 
matics, especially Cantor, have been unduly severe in dealing with 
Boethius. Granting that he was not an able mathematician — that 
he was content to follow Nicomachus so closely, and cannot be said to 
have improved upon him in any way, shows this clearly enough — it 
is nevertheless true that he presents, with certain limitations, a fairly 
adequate Latin version of the original, omitting few things which might 
have been included. His limitations as a translator will shortly ap- 
pear, and it will be seen that he omits certain sections. But he is 
not guilty of leaving out, as Cantor charges, some of the best things, 
from the mathematical standpoint, in Nicomachus. 

1 Nesselmann, op. cit., p. 221; Cantor, op. cil., vol. I, pp. 573 ff. 
2P, 4, 30 ff. 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 133 

Cantor says,' specifically, that he omits the propositions that the 
cubes are derived from the summation of the odd numbers (Nicoma- 
chus, II. 20. 5), and that the polygonal number with » angles and side 
ry and the triangular number with side y — 1 make together the po- 
lygonal with m + 1 angles and side r (Nicomachus, II. 12. 7). With 
regard to the first proposition Cantor is simply mistaken; the prin- 
ciple is amply stated in Boethius, IT. 39 (p. 136). He is more nearly 
right as to the second; Boethius in fact does not, like Nicomachus, 
sum up In a general statement this principle, but, aside from this, he 
fully parallels Nicomachus, II. 12. 5-7, giving specific instances of the 
working of the theorem for several of the polygonal numbers.? The 
fairest criticism to make of Boethius is that as a mathematical writer 
he displays too little originality, independence and progressiveness, 
and too much prolixity. 

In the composition of his treatise Boethius more often expands than 
condenses. His method is to intersperse between sections literally 
translated, or closely paraphrased, others in which the general prin- 
ciples stated by Nicomachus are furnished with exhaustive explana- 
tion and copious numerical examples. Nothing is left to the reader 
tosupply. Almost any chapter, compared with the original, will prove 
to be of this character. Boethius also supplies data in tabular form 
to a far greater extent than did Nicomachus. The order of the original 
is preserved for the most part, but occasionally a rearrangement is 
found. 

Inasmuch as these peculiarities are of minor importance and the 
omissions are rather to be considered, we may now turn to an enumera- 
tion of the more important of these. It will be found that Boethius 
had especial difficulty with both the logical terminology of Nicomachus 
and those passages in which the Pythagorean elements of the latter’s 
thought come out most strongly. 

The former difficulty led to no lengthy omissions, but inasmuch as 
Nicomachus was in general careful to adopt the terminology of Aris- 
totelian logic and to arrange his materials formally in genera and 
species, using frequently, for example, such terms as yévos, yevixws, 
eldos, eidixws, eidixds, idioma, ldixds, cupBeByxas, cupPeBnKkoras, 
ovpPBaiver, and the like, Boethius, finding himself at a loss to translate 

1 Op. cit., vol. I, p. 580. 

t Just the reverse of this situation is sometimes seen; Nicomachus enumerates details without 
making a generalization, and the latter is formulated by Boethius. See the list of additions made 
by Boethius, p. 136. 

134 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

them, often omitted a word or two. No one of these omissions is 
important in itself, but to lose most of the expressions of this type from 
the version prevents it from truly representing the original in at least 
this characteristic trait. Examples of such outright omissions are to 
be found, according to Hoche’s edition of Nicomachus, on p. 49, 5, 
ei\dica@s; Pp. 59, 3-6; Pp. 113, 25, Suomep . . . wptopevw Tovovror; 
Pp. I14, 3, Kal érepornros . . . aopiorias. The last two share in the 
involved and difficult Pythagorean logic with which Boethius quite 
naturally found difficulty. 

Of the omissions of Nicomachus made by Boethius the following, 
of somewhat greater extent than those already mentioned, are impor- 
tant enough to list: 

I. 1: The distinction between xvpiws ovra and Gpovipws cyra, so characteristic 
of Nicomachus. 

I. 3: One of the definitions of number (xA700s apurpevov, Nicomachus, p. 13, 
7) 

I. 9: Pp. 16, 1-3; 5-6; 18, 11-15. This can be ascribed to condensation. 

L. to? 1.9.2: 

I. 17: The direction to ‘check off the numbers,’ p. 33, 8 ff. 

I. 19: Part of I. 14. 2, the comparison of inequality to vices, ull health and the 
like. 

I. 20: The second mention of the perfect number 4,128 (p. 43, 17-20) and the 
statement that 1 is prime per se and not by participation (p. 44, 1-3). 

L..25: 1. 10.7. 

I. 32: P. 64, 21-22; I. 23. 5 entire (the reference to the ethical virtues) ; pp. 66, 
16-19, 22 — 67, 2; all of I. 23. 15, which is not unimportant; all of 
section 17 (this is made up of examples, some of which Boethius re- 
arranges and reports). 

II. 1: P. 74, 5-8 (the monad and dyad as elements). 

Mls gt His. 2. 

II. 9: P. 89, 3-5 (the arrangement of units in the geometrical number). 

II. 14: The rule for determining the side of the pentagonal number (p. 92, 
12-16). 

II. 18: The general theorem stated in IJ. 12.7. (See above.) 

II. 25: The reference to odyxioxa, p. 107, 15-21. Boethius excuses himself, 
however, for the omission. 

It can hardly be claimed on the basis of this list that the omissions 
made by Boethius seriously detract from the value of the De Institutione 
as a version. 

Boethius never sets himself in direct opposition to Nicomachus, 
but the statements of the two do not always agree exactly. Some- 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 135 

times these differences are merely variations in the illustrations, 
sometimes they seem to be formulations based upon the original; 
perhaps in a few cases Boethius did not fully comprehend the inten- 
tion of Nicomachus. The following instances may be considered : 

1. Boethius, after defining the even Nicomachus, p. 14, 1: 
as a number that can be divided 
into either two equal or two un- 
equal parts, says, I. 5, p. 14, 
23 ff.: praeter solum paritaits wrAnv THs €v attra dpyoedors Svados 
principem, binartum numerum, Gdrepov To dtyoropnya povoy exwdeyouerys 
gui in aequalem non recipit sec- TO eis toa, KTA. 
tionem, propterea quod ex duabus 
unitatibus constat et ex prima 
duorum quodammodo partiate. 

Since Boethius is so plainly wrong here, it is reasonable and charitable to 
suppose that the MSS are at fault and to correct his text (e.g., in aequalem 
to in inaequalia). 

2. Boethius, I. 9, p. 20, 19-21, says with regard to the even-times even numbers 
that when corresponding factors are multiplied the product equals the 
major extreme (i.e., of the even-times even series in question; e.g., in 
the series 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 4 X 8 = 32). Nicomachus puts it: The 
product of the means is equal to that of the extremes (I. 8. 14); but from 
his examples he makes it clear that the product of any two correspond- 
ing factors may be used. SBoethius has chosen, apparently, to express 
the matter in a different way. 

3. Boethius, I. 11, p. 26, 21, has duplices (sc. disponantur) : Nicomachus had 
said dpriaxts dpreot. 

4. The following passages are evidently meant to correspond: 

Boethius, I. 11, p. 25, 27-29, Nicomachus, I. 10, p. 22, 19-21, wAeiove 

Nam et partes solvuntur et Bev yap Tov évos Tunpara (ev To peifon 
usque ad unitaiem sectio illa epee Exwv Gparat, mAccova Se TOU évds 
non pervenil, sed ante unitaiem aTpnta) év Te €AarTove. 

invenitur terminus, quem Se- 
care non possis.' 

5. Boethius, I. 15, p. 32, 14: neque habel quicquam in se principalis intelle- 
gentiae; Nicomachus, p. 28, 12, xai ore ovx dpxoadys. 

6. Boethius, I. 18, p. 37, 25, datis enim duobus numeris tnaequalibus ; Nicoma- 
chus specified odd numbers. 

7. Boethius, I. 30, p. 64, 13-14; Nicomachus, p. 63, 8-9. Boethius in his 
table directs the reader to compare the third and fifth rows; Nicomachus, 
the odd rows, beginning with the fifth, to the third. 

' The text of Nicomachus has here been supplemented by Hoche, and it may be questioned 
whether it may yet be considered settled. 

130 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

8. Boethius, zbid., p. 64, 15 ff.; Nicomachus, p. 63, 11 ff. With reference to 

the same table Nicomachus tells us to compare the second and fifth, third 
and seventh, fourth and ninth rows, etc.; Boethius, the second row to 
the fifth, seventh, ninth, etc. 

9g. Boethius, II. 48, p. 157, 13: ef rursus minor terminus ad medit contra minorem 

terminum comparait differentiam triplus est; Nicomachus, p. 135, 3-4: 
Stagpopa Tay dxpwy mpos Stagdopay tray éAarrovwy. Both are working with 
the series 3, 4, 6; Boethius takes 3: (4 — 3) = 3:1, and Nicomachus 
derives the same in a different way, (6 — 3): (4 — 3) = 3:1. 

It is easy to see from the unimportant character of these deviations 
and from their comparative fewness in such an extended text that 
Boethius did not do violence to his model. 

Consideration of the additions made by Boethius will confirm this 
view. In this connection no mention need be made of the expansions 
already referred to, which merely weaken the book in contrast with 
the greater succinctness of Nicomachus, but do not impair its general 
accuracy. The following passages of Boethius may, however, be 
noted : 

I. 

2. 

an 

12. 
13. 

I. 1, p. 9: mthil enim quod infinitum est vel scientia potest colligi vel mente 
comprehend. 

Ibid., p. 11. The reference to the éonus does not occur in Nicomachus at 
this point (but cf. II. 29. 4). 

. I.12. The whole chapter, a description of the table, is apparently added 

by Boethius, but contains no new facts. 

I. 14, p. 31, 1-8: an added explanation with definition of the term ‘meas- 
uring.’ 

I. 23, p. 47, 15: tdem autem dico ‘numerat’ quod ‘metitur.’ 

Ibid., p. 48, 8: excepto ternario . . . praetermitiii. An added observation. 

Ibid., p. 48, 24: semperque una lerminorum intermissione si crescat adiectio, 
ordinatas te multiplicis numeri vices invenire miraberis. Nicomachus did 
not formulate this generalization from the specific facts which he had 
fully enumerated. 

I. 25, p. 52, 7-9: et deinceps . . . succrescunt. A case like the last. 

. II. 4, p. 89, 22: omnium intervallorum esse principium et natura insecabile, 

quod Graeci atomon vocant, id est tta deminutum atque parvissimum ut 
e1us pars invenirt non possi. 

. IL. 6, p. 91, 9: duae enim lineae rectae spatium non continent. 
. II. 25, p. r1z, 15 (definition of parallelepipeds): quae sunt, quotiens super- 

ficies contra se sunt, et ductae in infinitum nunquam concurrent. 

II. 30. Definitions of circle and square are given. 

II. 33. Nicomachus shows that two successive squares plus twice the in- 
cluded heteromecic numbers produces a square; Boethius in addition 
points out that two successive heteromecic numbers plus twice the in- 

TRANSLATORS AND COMMENTATORS 137 

cluded square gives a square, and that the squares thus produced are 
those of the odd and even numbers respectively.! 

14. II. go, p. 137, 13: ‘difference’ is defined. 

15. II. 41, p. 139, 13-19. A note on the origin of categories. 

16. II. 45. The whole chapter, a comparison of the three major types of pro- 
portion to oligarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, is an addition. 

None of these additions can be regarded as original with Boethius, 
save perhaps the last one, and none of them is of any importance, save 
the thirteenth. The fact that he was making a translation necessi- 
tated some of them; and some consist of the insertion of definitions 
or details that Nicomachus evidently found it not worth while to in- 
clude. 

The importance of the translation of Boethius lies in the fact that 
it was the chief medium through which the Roman world and the 
Middle Ages learned the principles of formal Greek arithmetic; the 
data adduced above will amply show that in general Boethius faith- 
fully followed his model. 

1 This proposition was given by Iamblichus (p. 84, 27); see p. 129. 

CHAPTER X 
THE SUCCESSORS OF NICOMACHUS 

EVEN in the time of Nicomachus Greek mathematics was in its 
decline; the golden age of the science had long passed. For more 
than a thousand years after Nicomachus we find few noteworthy con- 
tributions to the scientific theory of numbers anywhere in the world. 

One of these notable exceptions is Diophantus of Alexandria 
(c. 250 A.D.), who stands out as the greatest Greek contributor in the 
field of analysis. His Arithmetica includes material which we treat 
under algebra, and also subjects related to the theory of numbers. 
Furthermore Diophantus wrote a treatise, On Polygonal Numbers,! in 
which he adds several important theorems relating to polygonal num- 
bers. The proofs are Euclidean in form and the whole work reveals 
the hand of the master mathematician. 

The writers of the early Middle Ages who show the influence of 
Nicomachus were, like other writers of their day, not inclined to break 
away from the beaten path. The most prominent of these writers 
on arithmetic are Martianus Capella (fifth century after Christ), Cassi- 
odorus (¢. 490-c. 580 A.D.) and Isidorus of Seville (c. 570-636a.D.). If 
any one of these men had mathematical ability, the fact is not revealed 
by his discussion of arithmetic. We present an epitome of the content 
of the three works in question, in parallel columns and with references 
to Nicomachus, taking as the chief exponent of the group Martianus 
Capella, whose account is the most voluminous: 

CaPpELLA, Boox VII Istporvs? CASSIODORUS 
(ed. Eyssenhardt) 

First comes a discussion Enumeration of the four 1204 B-c: The priority of 
of the virtues of the mathematical sciences Arithmetic (Introduc- 
numbers 1-10 (cf. Theo- (cf. Introduction, I. 3); tion, I. 4-5) 
logumena Arithmeticae). notice of ancient au- 

thors on mathematics 
1204 C: Discrete quantity 

(Introduction, I. 2. 4) 
1T. L. Heath, Diophantus of Alexandria, A Study in the History of Greek Algebra (second edi- 
tion, Cambridge, 1910), pp. 247-259. ? Migne, Pairol. Lat., vol. LXCXXII, pp. 154-161. 
138 

SUCCESSORS OF NICOMACHUS 

CAPELLA 

P. 265, 4: Number de- 
fined (Iniroduction, I. 7) 
Ibid., 6: Classification,' 
a paribus par 
a paribus impar 
ab imparibus par 
ab imparibus impar 
Ibid., 9: Prime numbers 
(Introduction, I. 11) 
Ibid., 13: Numbers 1-10 
classified 
Ibid., 25: First series of 
numbers to 9, 
second to go, 
third to goo, 
fourth to 9,000 
P. 266, 14. The addition 
of odd numbers gives 

squares (Introduction, 
II. 9. 3, etc.). 
P. 267, 1: Definition of 

even and odd (Introduc- 
tion, I. 7) 
Tbid., 4: 
subclasses 
tion, I. 8 ff.) 

P. 268, 8: Another classi- 
fication, with definitions 
(of all numbers) : 
per se incompositt 
per se compostli 
inter se incomposilt 
inter se composili 
(Introduction, I. 11 ff.; 
as a classification of 
odd numbers only; the 
last type omitted)? 

Definitions of 
(Introduc- 

IsIDORUS 
Chap. 3 

Chap. 5 
pariter par 
partler impar 
impariter par 
impariter impar 

Chap. 5 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 
primus et simplex 
secundus et compositus 
medtocris 
(This classification is 

confined to odd num- 
bers.) 

139 
CASSIODORUS 

1204 D 

1205 A (like Isidorus) 

1205 B (agrees with Isi- 
dorus) 

‘This is unlike Euclid’s classification of even numbers, but agrees with Nicomachus and 
Theon; the terminology used by Capella, who gives a few Greek terms, is, however, rather that 

of Euclid, but following the other scheme of classification. 

stand either system of classification. 

2 This is rather Euclidean than Nicomachean. 

Wicomachus. 

Capella does not appear to under- 

Isidore and Cassiodorus, however, follow 

140 

CAPELLA 

IsIDORUS 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

CASSIODORUS 

P. 269, 24: Another classi- Ibid.: superflut, diminuli, 1206 A: superfluus, indi- 

fication; perfectt, am- 
pltores perfectis, imper- 
fecti' (Introduction, I. 
14 ff., of even numbers 
only) 
P. 270, 15: Plane and 
solid numbers (Introduc- 
tion, II. 6 ff.) 
P. 271, 5: Kinds of plane 
numbers; triangular, 
square, heteromecic (Jn- 
troduction, II. 7, 3) 
Ibid., 26: Similar plane 
numbers ” 
P. 272, 8: Relative num- 
ber (Introduction, I. 17. 
6 ff.) 
mulitplicalt 
ato) 

replicati 
got) 

membro membrisve an- 
tecedentes  (émtpopto, 
émipepeis ) 

membro membrisve in- 
fertores  (vmem.poptos, 
taremipepeis ) 

binis nominibus ust (mod- 
AarAaceryscpiont, etc.) 

(woAAarAa- 

(wroroAAarAa- 

perfectt (confined to 

even numbers) 

Chap. 7: discreli, con- 
tinentes; continentes = 
linear, plane and solid; 
circular and _ spherical 
numbers 

gens, perfectus 

1207 D (agrees with Isi- 
dorus) 

Chap. 6: first division into 1205 C-D, 1206 C— 1207A 

equal, unequal; the lat- 
ter into greater, less; 
the subspecies in agree- 
ment with Nicomachus 

(agrees with Isidorus) 

From this point on, there is no correspondence between the subjects 
treated by our three authors. Capella takes up, in order, equality 
(p. 272, 21; cf. Introduction, I. 17. 1-5), difference (distantia, ibid., 26; 
Sudornpa would represent the idea in Greek, and Nicomachus has no 
treatment of this subject), and the proposition that there may be the 
same difference between two terms, but a different ratio, depending 
upon their order (ibid., 30; cf. Introduction, II. 23. 1, although Nico- 

machus gives this no separate attention). 

He then takes up ratios 

(p. 273, 5 ff.) in much the same way as Nicomachus (Introduction, 

1 Euclid does not give these classes (except the perfect numbers alone). 
? An Euclidean topic. 

SUCCESSORS OF NICOMACHUS 141 

I. 18 ff.). The superparticular, it may be observed, is called mem- 
brorum ratio, that is, a ratio where the excess is a membrum (aliquot 
part) of the smaller number, as 9:6, and the superpartient is called 
partium raito, for here the excess is either one pars, or several partes 
(that is, what Nicomachus calls the ‘paronymous part’ of every num- 
ber, always unity, as } of 4). Capella even enumerates the zuOpéves, 
root ratios, using the Greek word. 

Toward the end Capella inserts certain material which does not 
occur in Nicomachus, but which is found, though not in the same 
order, in Euclid. Capella follows propositions but not the proofs as 
found in Euclid. Euclid, however, does not give any arithmetical 
illustration, but confines himself to the logical proof, employing lines 
as illustrative material, while Capella gives always the numerical 
illustration. Thus Capella states (p. 278, 17), without proof, that the 
product of an even number by an odd number is even, and of an odd 
number by an odd number is odd (p. 278, 18); Euclid gives these 
statements as propositions, IX. 28 and IX. 29. Similar propositions 
on the addition of a series of odd numbers or even numbers are given 
by Capella (p. 278, 24 — 279, 3) and by Euclid in IX. 21, 22, and 23; 
theorems involving subtraction of odd or even from even or odd num- 
bers appear in Euclid (IX. 24, 25, 26) and in Capella (p. 279, 18-26). 
Many other similar parallels could be presented, but this detailed 
analysis is hardly necessary. 

In general, we may say that Capella presents the numerical side of 
the greater part of the propositions of the seventh book of Euclid and of 
the simpler propositions of the eighth and ninth books, but not in the 
same order as in Euclid. He adds little that is new, and apparently 
sometimes does not comprehend the text of Euclid; corruptions due 
to transcribers must be considered as a possible explanation of the 
errors in the text as it stands. In passing, it is to be noted that in his 
discussion of music Capella avoids the mathematical treatment of 
numerical ratios which is commonly found in the early works in music. 

Isidore does not give the numerical illustrations of Euclidean proposi- 
tions, but follows more closely passages in Nicomachus relating to the 
limited number of topics which are discussed by him. Capella opens 
with an extended and mystical discussion of the numbers from one to 
ten, while Isidore discusses the etymology of the Latin words from one 
to ten, and for some larger numbers, only touching the mystical element 
with reference to the Scriptures. Distinctly different in Isidore is 

142 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

the reference to the infinity of numbers (numeri infinitt), showing that 
if you conceive of any number as terminating the series of numbers, 
adding one would give another larger number. This suggests Euclid’s 
proof that the number of primes is infinite. 

Isidore follows closely the text of Cassiodorus, employing frequently 
the actual phraseology of Cassiodorus. Isidore, however, enlarges oc- 
casionally, departing from the material of Boethius, while Cassiodorus 
does not. Isidore includes a brief discussion of arithmetical, geometri- 
cal and harmonical means which is not given by Cassiodorus. 

Both Isidore and Cassiodorus were ultimately dependent on Nico- 
machus, undoubtedly through Boethius, whom they cite; Capella 
also depended on Nicomachus, possibly through the translation of 
Apuleius, and used further material, including classifications found in 
Euclid, but through what mediation, if any, we do not know. 

Contemporary with Martianus Capella and with Proclus was the 
Greek Domninos of Larissa, whose treatise ' in many points is sug- 
gestive of the larger work by Capella. Domninos has been cited ? as an 
exponent of a movement away from Nicomachus to return to Euclid. 
Particularly noteworthy is his rejection of the theory of polygonal 
numbers, except plane and solid, possibly because this theory had been 
abused to the extent of attempting to calculate areas of polygons by 
means of the figurate numbers. His method of exposition is entirely 
similar to that of Nicomachus and Theon, not including any attempt 
at proofs. Domninos touches upon the implications of the decimal 
nature of the number system and refers to a projected elementary 
treatise on arithmetic, which, if completed, has not survived. 

Rabanus Maurus of the ninth century in his De Clericorum Institu- 
tione * follows textually brief portions of Isidore, but his discussion is 
much more attenuated than those of the three men just mentioned. 
Hugo of St. Victor of the twelfth century also includes a few lines on 
arithmetic (from Boethius) in his Eruditio Didascalica Neither 
of these men could be said to give real instruction in arithmetic. 

A treatise in Greek on arithmetic, which compares favorably in 
poverty of content with the Latin works that have been mentioned, 

1 Paul Tannery, Le Manuel d’Iniroduction Arithmétique du Philosophe Domninos de Larissa, 

Revue des Etudes Grecques, vol. 19 (1906), pp. 359-382. ? Tannery, loc. cit. 
4 Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. CVII, De Clericorum Inslitutione, chap. xxii, De Arithmetica, 
cols. 399-400. 

‘Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. CLXXVI, Eruditio Didascalica, Liber I, chap. viii, col. 755, 
and chap. xii, col. 756, De Arithmetica. 

SUCCESSORS OF NICOMACHUS 143 

is that commonly ascribed to Michael Psellus (1020-1105 A.D. ?).} 
This work, certainly of the eleventh century, presents the Nicoma- 
chean arithmetic again in the original tongue, but possibly through 
the mediation of the Latin translation. The discussion of the classes 
of numbers and progressions includes nothing new; the only varia- 
tion from the Nicomachean material appears to be the definition of 
multiplication as “taking the multiplicand as many times as there 
are units in the multiplier.” 

In the eleventh century appeared also treatises on an ancient arith- 
metical game, rithmomachia.” Therules of the game are fundamentally 
dependent upon the Nicomachean classifications of numbers; the game 
continued to be popular for several centuries and possibly aided to 
revive for a time the arithmetic which was being supplanted as a dis- 
cipline by the Hindu-Arabic system of computation. 

There is abundant evidence to show that the study of the mystical 
arithmetic and of the arithmetic as taught by Boethius continued in 
the church schools for more than a thousand years after Boethius. 
True contributions to the science of numbers, however, do not appear 
to have emanated from these institutions. For such contributions at 
this time to the progress of all science, we must look rather to the 
Arabs, to whom civilization is greatly indebted for the continued ad- 
vance of learning during the period when Europe was in darkness. 

The Arabic writers on arithmetic, from the eighth century through 
the fifteenth, were undoubtedly more or less familiar with the general 
content of Nicomachus and more certainly with Euclid, but their 
scientific inclinations led them fortunately to stress the new Hindu 
arithmetic, an instrument essential to scientific progress In many 
lines. 

It is not at all probable, as Cantor asserts,* that the famous Arabic 
mathematician, Al-Khowarizmi (c. 825 A.D.), wrote a speculative 
arithmetic along Greek lines. No work of Al-Khowarizmi suggests 

1 Michaelis Pselli Compendium Mathematicum (Leyden, 1647), containing the Quadrivtium 
ascribed to Michael Psellus and translated by Xylander; see P. Tannery, Zetischrift fiir 
Mathematik und Physik, Historisch-literarische Abtheilung, vol. XX XVII, p. 41. 

*Wappler, Bemerkungen sur Rhylhmomachie, in Zeitschrift fiir Mathematik und Phystk, Hts- 
torisch-lilerarische Abtheilung, vol. XXXVII, pp. 1-17; see Smith and Eaton, Rithmomachia, 
the Great Medicval Number Game, in American Mathematical Monthly, vol. XVIII, pp. 73-80. 

1 Geschichte dcr Mathematik, vol. I (3d edition), pp. 715-716; the error is due to a misinterpre- 
tation of a passage in Al-Khowarizmi’s arithmetic. Al-Khowarizmi refers to his ‘aljebr w’al- 
mugqabala,’ as ‘ another book in arithmetic’ (i.e., ‘in alio libro arithmetico '), and Cantor bases the 
speculative arithmetic on this phrase. 

144 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

more than casual interest in this field. Another Arab, Thabit ibn 
Qorah (826-go1), refers to the generation of perfect numbers and of 
‘amicable numbers,’ a pair of numbers such that each equals the sum 
of the factors of the other; he makes also direct reference to Nico- 
machus. Among his works is included Extracts from the Two Books 
of Nicomachus.’ 

Ibn Khaldun, in his encyclopedic work, takes up briefly the discus- 
sion of the arithmetica, mentioning the three types of even numbers 
and thus showing acquaintance with other Greek authorities than 
Euclid. He states, however, that while some ancient Mohammedans 
did treat this subject, modern writers were inclined to reject this type 
of work as serving no practical purpose.” 

Many treatises touching mystical arithmetic are still preserved in 
Arabic, Ethiopic, and related languages, although few of these have 
as yet received the serious attention of scholars.* 

The revival of learning in Europe, particularly scientific learning, 
was stimulated by the translation into Latin of Arabic works of science. 
The schools of the Arabs in Spain were open to the Christians, and the 
translations came largely from such students, resident in Spain. Not 
only works of Arabic origin, but also works ultimately Greek or Hindu 
in Origin, were translated into Latin from the Arabic. The twelfth 
century was notably the period during which the making of such trans- 
lations was in active progress,’ while the period from the thirteenth to 
the fifteenth century witnessed the popularization of the material 
given in the translations. 

Coincident with the study of the Greek geometry and the Hindu- 
Arabic arithmetic and the algebra of the Arabs was a European 
revival of interest in the Greek arithmetic. Such writers as Pope Syl- 
vester II of the tenth century ® and Johannes de Muris ® of the four- 
teenth century touched upon the Nicomachean arithmetic. The early 

1 Suter, Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber, pp. 35-37; the Arabic version is extant 
in the British Museum (426, 150). 

? MacGuckin de Slane, Prolégoménes Historigues d’Ibn Khaldoun, in Notices et Extrails des 
Manuscruls de la Bibliotheque Nationale, vol. 21, 1868, pp. 129-132. 

* Personal communication of my colleague, Professor Worrell, formerly director of the 
American School of Oriental Studies in Jerusalem. 

‘See Karpinski, Robert of Chester’s Translation of the Algebra of Al-Khowarizmi, in Bibliotheca 

Mathematica, 3d Senes, vol. XI, pp. 125-131. 
®Gerberti postea Silvestri II Papae Opera Mathematica (ed. Bubnov, Berlin, 1899), pp. 29- 

35. 
* See Karpinski, The “ Quadripartitum Numerorum” of John of Meurs, in Bibliotheca Mathe- 
matica, 3d Series, vol. XIII, pp. 99-114. 

SUCCESSORS OF NICOMACHUS 145 

printed works on arithmetic were, of course, largely devoted to the 
new system of arithmetic, popularizing the use of the Hindu-Arabic 
numerals. However, in the compendiums of arithmetic and in the 
encyclopedic works we find frequently extensive treatment of the 
speculative arithmetic, the Greek, as opposed to the practical compu- 
tations communicated by the Arabs. Thus, the Italian, Lucas de 
Burgo San Sepulchri, in his Summa de Arithmetica of 1494,' devoted 
folios 1-19 (38 pages) to the speculative arithmetic. Similarly the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bradwardin (c. 1290-1349), 
wrote a treatise, based on Boethius, called Arithmetica Speculativa, 
which was printed many times ? and which formed the basis of a work 
on arithmetic? by the Spaniard, Pedro Sanchez Ciruelo (¢. 1470- 
1560). to eee 

Jordanus Nemorarius, head of a Teutonic monastic order (who 
perished in 1236 in a shipwreck), wrote a thoroughly Greek arithmetic 
in ten books to which Faber Stapulensis added demonstrations. In 
the 1514 edition‘ are included the Arithmetica Decem Libris Demon- 
strata, a work on music after Greek models, by Faber Stapulensis, also 
an epitome of the arithmetic of Boethius, and a work on the game 
rithmomachia. 

Among the encyclopedias which treated the arithmetica may be 
mentioned the popular Margharita Philosophica of Gregorius Reisch 
(who died in 1525) and the Speculum Docirinale of Vincent of Beauvais 
(1190-1264). 

This list of writers on the arithmetica could be extended most 
materially. Briefly it may be said that the works which we have 
cited showing the continued use throughout Europe of the arithmetic 
of Nicomachus, as translated by Boethius, are typical of the period 
from the tenth to the sixteenth century. The extent of time and terri- 
tory included within the influence of Nicomachus and Boethius amply 
justifies the study of arithmetic of Nicomachus as a notable document 
in the history of learning. 

1 Copy in the University of Michigan Library. 

2 See Smith, Rara Arithmetica (Boston, 1908), vol. I, p. 61. 

>Cursus Quatuor Mathematicarum Artium Liberalium appeared in numerous editions; the 
Alcala, 1526 edition, is in the University of Michigan Library. Ciruelo was the author, also, of 
a work on the Hindu-Arabic art of reckoning. 

“TI am indebted to Mr. John G. White of Cleveland, Ohio, for the use of his copy of the 1514 
edition. 

CHAPTER XI 

THE MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT OF THE INTRODUCTION TO 
ARITHMETIC 

It would be gratifying indeed to print a fresh text of the Iniroduc- 
tion to Arithmetic, based upon a complete examination of the manu- 
scripts, and to supplement this by an adequate account of the 
manuscripts and their relationships. Unfortunately, this has proved 
impossible; the writer has not been able to devote the necessary 
time and travel to the task. Consequently Hoche’s text has been 
made the basis of the translation and commentary, and the remarks 
made in this chapter on the manuscripts and text are to be regarded 
as tentative, based as they are on fragmentary information. 

The editions of the Introduction to Arithmetic have been as follows: 

1. The first edition was that of Wechel (Paris, 1538). Wechel 
probably used a single manuscript, now lost, referred to as P in the 
following pages. 

2. The second was that of Friedrich Ast (Leipzig, 1817), containing 
also the Theologumena Arithmeticae. Ast used, besides the first edi- 
tion, the three Munich manuscripts, p», m, and S, but failed to realize 
the relative value of his sources and relied too much upon emenda- 
tion. 

3. Gottfried Miiller (Particula Nova Notitiae et Recensionis Codicum 
Manuscriptorum Qui in Bibliotheca Episcopatae Numburgo-Cizensis 
Asservantur, Leipzig, 1818) brought forward the Giessen codex, C, 
and published a collation of it with Ast’s edition. 

4. C. F. A. Nobbe (Specimen Arithmeticae Nicomacheae e Duobus 
Codicibus Manuscriptis, Leipzig, 1828) issued a brief notice of the 
Niirnberg and Wolfenbiittel manuscripts, N and I, with a text of the 
Introduction to Arithmetic, I. 1-3, and critical notes. 

5. Richard Hoche (Nicomacht Geraseni Pythagoret Introductionis 
Arithmeticae Libri IT, Teubner, Leipzig, 1866), using for the first time 
the Géttingen and Hamburg manuscripts, G and H, and to some ex- 
tent all those previously mentioned, produced the edition which is 

146 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 147 

stillstandard. He had preceded this with an article in a program of the 
gymnasium at Wetzlar (1862) in which G was for the first time used. 

The manuscripts mentioned and used by Hoche are the following: 

1. G, Codex Gottingensis philol. 66, a parchment manuscript of 
the tenth century, ili + 266 leaves, 113 by 15 cm., with columns 134 
by 10 cm. and 20 lines to the page in the text, 39 in the scholia. This 
contains the text of the Introduction, the commentary of Johannes 
Philoponus, and a scholium of Theodorus Protocensor. Corrections 
have been made throughout by a much later hand which Hoche calls 
G,. 

2. m, Codex Monacensis 238, paper, of the fourteenth century, con- 
taining only the first part of the Introduction as far as the words pds 
T@ OAw, I. 19. 4, p. 50, 2 Hoche. 

3. P, the first edition by Wechel (Paris, 1538). This deserves to 
be reckoned among the manuscripts, since the manuscript upon which 
it was based, apparently an ancient and a good one, has disappeared. 

4. C, Codex Cizensis, paper, of the last of the fourteenth or the 
early fifteenth century, containing the Introduction, another version 
of Philoponus’s commentary, and the problems printed upon pages 
148-154 of Hoche’s edition. 

5. p#, Codex Monacensis 76, paper, of the sixteenth century, which 
Hoche thinks a copy of C. 

6. S, Codex Monacensis 482, of the thirteenth or fourteenth cen- 
tury. 

7. H, Codex Hamburgensis, of the sixteenth century.! 

8. N, Codex Norimbergensis, of the last of the fourteenth or the 
beginning of the fifteenth century. 

9. I, Codex Guelferbytanus, of the early sixteenth century.’ 

The following manuscripts in addition are known to the writer 
through photographic or photostatic reproductions of a few pages of 
each, or through collations of typical passages made by friends: 

1o. A, Codex Atheniensis 1115, of the fifteenth century, in the 
National Library at Athens.* Paper; 138 pages at present, four hav- 
ing been lost at the beginning. It contains anonymous prolegomena 

1H. Omont, Manuscrits Grecs des Villes Hanseatigues, Hamburg, No. 48, 

70. von Heinemann, Handschrifien der hersoglichen Bibliothek zu Wolfenbiiltel, Wolfenbiittel, 
1913. 

* Cf. the catalog of the manuscripts of the National Library of Greece by J. and A. I. Sakkeliou, 
1892. Through the kindness of Professor F. W. Kelsey the wnter has secured. photographs of the 
first 26 pages, carrying the text to p. 29, 13 Hoche. 

148 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

to the Introduction to Arithmetic, then the two books of the Introduc- 
tion itself, and several other treatises. 

11. B, Codex Atheniensis 1238, in the National Library at Athens. 
136 leaves, on ordinary paper 22 by 17 cm., of about the beginning of 
the eighteenth century. This contains the text of Book I with the 
commentary ascribed to Proclus intervening between sections.’ 

12. J, in the Greek Patriarchal Library at Jerusalem, number 5 
of those given by the Patriarch Nicodemus, written by the scribe 
Maximus in 1801. 39 paper leaves, 39 by 23 cm., in single column, 23 
lines toa page. J is not a complete text, but a series of excerpts. 

13. V, Codex Ms. Gr. Ottoboniani Graec. Bibliothecae Vaticanae 
310. 160 leaves, grayish-brown paper about 17 by 10 cm., of the 
fifteenth century ; written in a compact hand in very black ink and with 
many abbreviations, 27 or 28 lines to a page. The Introduction is 
on foll. 124-160 r.* 

14. D, Codex Vaticanus Gr. 1709, of perhaps the fifteenth century ; 
fine heavy white paper 29 by 21 cm. with very wide margins, about 
26 lines toa page. There are several treatises besides the Introduction, 
which occupies foll. 203-210; the end is not extant. 

15. E, Codex Vaticanus Gr. 196, of perhaps the fifteenth century, 
on very fine heavy paper 29.5 by 21 cm. Nicomachus occupies foll. 
I-30. 

16. F, Codex Vaticanus Gr. 186, of apparently the sixteenth cen- 
tury; beautifully written on both sides of thick gray paper 63 by 
4% inches; scholia accompany the text of Book I, but not Book II. 

17. L, Linc. Coll. (c) Gr. 33, in the library of Lincoln College, Ox- 
ford.® 

1 The writer has from the same source photographs as far as p. 11, 5 Hoche. 

? Hoche, in his edition of the scholia of Johannes Philoponus (Leipzig, 1864), regards the com- 
mentary of Proclus as a recension of that by Philoponus. He there makes mention of this Athe- 
nian manuscript, which he had not seen, and correctly infers that it contains much the same com- 
mentary as the Giessen manuscript, C. 

+See the catalog of this library by A. Papadopoulos-Kerameus, Petrograd, 1891-90, vol. III, 
p. 181. A considerable portion of J is known to the writer through photographs secured by Pro- 
fessor Kelsey. Its superscription is: é« raw Nixoudyouv Tepacwot dtw BiSdtlwr dpe@unrixgs. 
éx roU wpwrov. At the end occurs the following notice: réhos ray éx rijs dpiOunricAs Nixoudyov 
Tepacivoi. ody Gey dvreypddy év Ira cwrnply awd, devo: «', dv wéder Tot Geot ‘IAnu did yeupds 
dvaflov dovAov rou Geov Mafiuov. 

‘Cf. Feron and Battaglini, Codices Manuscripti Graect Ollobontant Bibliothecae Vaticanae, 
Rome, 1893, p. 166. Descriptions and partial collations of this and the three following manu- 
scripts have been furnished by the writer’s colleague, Professor John G. Winter. 

5H. O. Coxe, Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum Qui in Collegiis Aulisque Oxontensibus Hodte 
Adservantur, Oxford, 1852, vol. I, Lincoln College, p. 17-18, No. XXCXTIT. 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 149 

18. O, New College B 299, at Oxford. Fifteenth century; the 
text of Nicomachus occurs on foll. 52-60." 

19. €, at the Escurial, numbered T-J-11. A folio manuscript 
of 222 leaves in several fifteenth-century hands, from the library of 
Hurtado de Mendoza. The Introduction to Arithmetic occupies foll. 
206r—2z10r, with marginal scholia.’ 

20. €2, number T-II-6 of the Escurial collection, a paper folio of 
114 leaves 30 by 20.5 cm., containing the Iniroduction with scholia; 
the two books are in different hands. Book I runs to fol. 97v, and 
Book II occupies foll. 103r-114v. Columns 22.5 by 15.5 cm.° 

21. €3, number X-I-g of the Escurial collection; a paper folio of 
266 leaves, 33.5 by 22.5 cm., written in one column 21 by 13.5 cm., 
19 lines to the column, in a sixteenth-century hand. Contains the 
Introduction with Philoponus’s commentary; from the collection of 
Hurtado de Mendoza. Book I on foll. 4r-48r, Book II on foll. 49r—-g1v.* 

22. e,, number 2-II-15 of the Escurial collection; fourteenth cen- 
tury, paper, 179 leaves 28 by 21 cm., with one column of writing 21.5 
by 14.5 cm., 36 lines to the column; worm-eaten. The Introduction 
begins with fol. 160r and continues through 171Vv.° 

23. e;, number T-III-12 of the Escurial collection; paper quarto of 
the fourteenth century, 81 leaves 21.8 by 14.2 cm., in one column 17 
by 10.5 cm., 31 lines to a column. Book I on foll. rr-21r, Book II 
on foll. 21r-42r.° 

24. Pi, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2483. This and the ten following 
manuscripts are in the Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris. Fourteenth 
century, 318 leaves, containing the Introduction with Philoponus’s 
commentary.’ 

25. P2, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2481. A fifteenth-century quarto 
of 147 leaves, paper, with the Introduction on foll. 1-52v, followed by 
Euclid.® 

1H. O. Coxe, op. cit., vol. I, New College, p. 107. Dr. Charles Singer, of Oxford, has furnished 
a note on this manuscript. 

2E. Miller, Catalogue des Manuscrtts Grecs de la Bibliotheque de l’Escurial, Paris, 1848, p. 109. 
The descriptions of this and other Escurial manuscripts are supplemented by notes and photo- 
graphs of specimen pages furnished by the writer’s colleague, Professor Henry Arthur Sanders. 

+ Miller, op. cit., pp. 125-126. 

4 Op. cil., p. 204. 

' Op. cit., DP. go. 

6 Op. cit., Dp. 253. 

7 Professor Sanders has also furnished descriptions of the Parisian manuscripts. H. Omont, 

Inventaire Sommaire des Manuscrits Grecques de la Bibliothéque Nationale, vol. III, p. 267. 
® Omont, ibid. 

150 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

26. p3, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2480. Paper quarto of the eight- 
eenth century, vill + 346 + 319 leaves, containing the Introduction 
with Philoponus’s commentary.’ 

27. px, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2479, thirteenth-century parch- 
ment (mostly sheepskin, but partly goat), 201 leaves; the Introduc- 
tion with marginal scholia of Soterichus.? 

28. ps, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2376. Paper, 251 leaves 32 by 
21.5 cm., in one column of 30 lines to a page, copied by Valeriano Al- 
bino in 1539; Book I on foll. 57r-78v, Book II on foll. 78v—1o1v. 
Figures and tables in the margin.’ 

29. Ps, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2375. Paper, 45 leaves 31.5 by 
20.5 cm., of the sixteenth century, copied by Constantine Palaeocappa ; 
contains Book I, chapters 1-17. 5 with Philoponus’s commentary.‘ 

30. Pz, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2374. Paper, of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, copied by Jean d’Otrante; 42 leaves, 32 by 22.8 cm., in single 
column of 24 lines; Book I on foll. rr—-21v, Book II on foll. 22r-42v.5 

31. Ps, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2373. Paper, of the fourteenth 
century, 124 leaves 25.3 by 17 cm., one column of 35 lines to the page; 
Book I on foll. rr-17r, Book ITI on foll. 17r-36v.® 

32. Po, Coislin., No. 174. Paper, fifteenth century, 441 leaves 31 
by 19.8 cm., in single column of 33 lines 20 by 11.5cm. Book I occupies 
foll. 41r-58; Book IT foll. 59-79v. Philoponus’s commentary ac- 
companies the text.’ 

33. Pio, Supplement Grec, No. 450; paper, fifteenth century, 183 
leaves 23.2 by 16.8 cm., with column of 21 lines 16.5 by 15 cm. Nico- 
machus occupies foll. 6r-68v, with no commentary.® 

34. Pu, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 2372; sheepskin parchment of 
the fifteenth century; 109 leaves 25 by 18 cm., with single column 
of 27 lines 18 by 11 cm.; formerly Medic.-Reg. 2657. Nicomachus, 
without commentary, appears on foll. 1-53, followed by other trea- 
tises.° 

There will next be listed manuscripts known to the writer only 
from their descriptions in the catalogues of various libraries : 

35. At the Escurial, Number 21 of the manuscripts of Cardinal 
Sirlet is said to contain Euclid followed by the text of the Introduction 
to Arithmetic."® 

1Omont, of. cié., vol. III, p. 267. 2 Thid. *Omont, vol. II, p. 248. 
4 Ibid. § [bid. 4 Ibid. 
7 Omont, op. ct., vol. TII, p. 148. 5Omont, op. c#f., vol. III, p. 264. 

*Omont, of. cit., vol. IT, p. 248. 10 Miller, op. cit., p. 324. 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 151 

36. At the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris, Ancien Fonds Grec, No. 
2377, contains Nicomachus with commentary; lines and part lines 
are in red, with much commentary intervening. Book I on foll. 
1r—-88v, Book II on foll. 89r—-161v.! 

37. At Hamburg, Mathematici Graeci, in folio, IV a. A paper 
manuscript of the fourteenth century; 55 leaves 25.2 by 16.5 cm., 
bound in parchment; the Introduction on foll. 1-53r, followed by Aris- 
totle’s Nicomachean Ethics.’ 

38. At Erlangen, a defective sixteenth-century manuscript.’ 

39. At Leyden, a paper codex of the fourteenth century, 40 leaves 
in large quarto, which belonged to Meibom and later to P. Burmann 
the second.* 

40. At Moscow, a paper codex of 1o1 leaves, of the fourteenth cen- 
tury, containing the Introduction with scholia on foll. 66 ff.5 

41. Cambridge University Library, Gg. I (ii), foll. 21-22, fifteenth 
century; apparently a brief series of excerpts from Nicomachus.*® 

42. Oxford, Bodleian Library, Selden Greek 19, of the fourteenth 
century; “‘Nicomachi Geraseni Arithmeticae libri duo imperfecti.” 

43. Cambridge University Library, Kk. V, 28, foll. 1-119v., fifteenth 
century. Foll. 1-88 contain the Introduction to Arithmetic and foll. 
89 ff. the Manuale Harmonicum. 

44. Vaticanus Graec. 199, consisting of one leaf only, fifteenth cen- 
tury.’ 

As the writer has already indicated, the following remarks are to 
be understood as in no sense constituting a formal attempt to classify 
the manuscripts of the Introduction to Arithmetic. They are based 
on three sources of information, Hoche’s apparatus criticus, photo- 
graphic reproductions of specimen pages, and partial collations made 
by friends. The first is avowedly not exhaustive, except for the first 

1 Note furnished by Professor H. A. Sanders. 

7H. Omont, Manuscriis Grecs des Villes Hanséaligues, number 47. 

4 Johann Conrad Irmscher, Handschriften-Katalog der kgl. Universitdis-Bibliothek 2u Erlangen, 
Frankfurt-a.-M. and Erlangen, 1852, number 94. 

4Geel, Calalogus Librorum Manuscriplorum Qui inde ab Anno 1741 Bibliothecae Lugduno 
Batavae Accesserunt, p. 37, number 126. 

§ Chr. F. de Matthaei, Accuraia Codicum Graecorum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecarum Meos- 
guensium Sanclissimae Synodi Nolilia ef Recensio, Leipzig, 1805, p. 147, Number CCXXIII. 

¢ Dr. Charles Singer, of Oxford, furnished the writer notes on numbers 41, 42, and 43. 

7 Professor John G. Winter’s note. Professor Winter informs me also that entries in the Cata- 
logus Waticanus Graecus indicate that the following Vatican codices contain the I#froduction to 
Arithmetic in whole or in part: Codd. Vat. Gr., 199, 1040, 1051, 1411, 195, 197, 256, 1026, 198; 
Book I only, Codd. Vat. Gr. 199, 256; excerpts, Cod. Pal. Gr. 129. 

152 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

three chapters of Book I, and the information derived from photo- 
graphs and collations has been in every instance fragmentary. From 
all three the most that might be claimed is a fairly accurate report 
of the readings of the majority of the manuscripts in the first three 
chapters of the Introduction. Obviously this is not a sufficient basis 
for conclusions of permanent value, and the following paragraphs are 
ventured only because nothing has previously been said of the charac- 
ter of the manuscripts which Hoche did not employ. 

It was not especially hard for Hoche, using only nine manuscripts, 
to see that GmP form one family and CuG,SHNT another, giving the 
following stemma: ! 

Archetype 

Family I Family II 

Were these the only manuscripts in existence their relationships would 
thus be represented with substantial accuracy, and indeed, even with 
added information, these groupings are in the main correct. When 
other manuscripts, however, are taken into the reckoning, it becomes 
evident that the text of Nicomachus was an exceedingly mixed one, 
and that clear-cut groupings are not so easy to make as perhaps 
Hoche thought. In particular, manuscripts exist which exhibit to 
a greater degree than SHNTGz, or even than Cy, certain characteristic 
readings of the group G:mP, or in other words, the differentiation be- 
tween Hoche’s two main families is rather a gradation than a series 
of clear-cut steps. 

To illustrate what may be said on these points, there follows a selec- 
tion of the thirty-seven readings in the first three chapters of the text 
which appear to the writer particularly significant. These are the 
passages on which the manuscripts seem to divide; the individual 
peculiarities of single manuscripts, misspellings, and minor changes 
in the order of words are not included. 

Page 1,10 dmAds 6 réyyns Twos, Gm PF ps 

arAws 7as 6 Teyyns Twos, CuBSHNTADELOVeE:-s Pi-2, 4-11 
Page 2, I ovoretiAas ravrwy ro ovoua, GmPH Vp; 

ovoteiAas To Ovouas, CuBSNDADEFO€i-5 Pies, 4-6, 8-11 

'G will be used ordinarily to indicate the first hand in G, unless it becomes necessary to dis- 
tinguish more clearly. 

Page 2, 2 

20 

20 

Page 3, I 

II 
12 

18 

19 

Page 4, 9 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 153 

THY év TouTw yroow, GmPCyrBV Dp; 

THY év TrouTw ravTwv yrwouw, SHNDADEFO€)-5 P1-2, 4-6, 8-11 

cixOTwWS Kal THY TaUTyS Opegvy, Gm PCHBAVEFE1, 3-4 P3,7, 11 

eixorws THY TauTns opefiv, SHNIDO€:2,5 Pi-2, 4-6, 9-10 

gopias opefivy, Gm PC uw BF €s Ps, 6-7 

codias edeow, SHNTAVDEO€C(-4 Pi-z, 4-5, 8-11 

Kai TAUTHV be THv copuv, GmPCpBSF €2 Ps,6,7,9 

cal atrny S¢ THv copiav, HNTADEOV €y, 3-5 Pi-2, 4-5, 8, 10-11 

éfioraueva, Gm PChBHAVEF €1-4 Po-7, 11 

agiorapeva, SNO DOE? Pi-z, 4-5, 8-10 

ravta (OF ravr') dy GmPF Pps. 

ratra 6 dy, CuBSHNTADEOV¢Et-s Pi-e, 4-5, 7-11 

ra dvAa cai dv xara, GmPF (om. xai F) pg 

ra dvAa cai (Ta) dida Sv xara, SHNTADEOVE,-s P 1-5, 8, 10-11 (Trav Ds) 

Ta dvAa Kai didwa Kai wy xara, Cy BDP7,9 

TaY Spovipws OvTwy Kai kaAoupevwv, GM BSHNDFes3,5 Ps, 6, 10 

Tw OpovUpws OvTwY KaAoupevwy, PCyuG, TAEOVe)-:, 4 Pi-2, 4-5, 7-9, 11 

Aeyerar, G,MPSNTCyBpes 

Aeyerat elvat, G,HADEFOV€\-5 P1-5, 7-11 

Tepi Ta VAiKa Kai GwpaTixa, add. SHAFV0O6€1-3 Pi-e, 4-5, 7, 10-11, OM. 
GmPCeBNIE€,-5 pe, s-9 

rept auTyv, GmPCpBSHNIDAEO€4-s Pi-2, 4-6, s-10 

TEpt aura, F V €1-3 Py-11 

our GUT), GmPCpBSHNIDEOV €4-5 Py-o, 4-8, 8-10 

ovv avrots, AF ei-3 Pz, 11 Ps (sup. lin.) 

puxporyres, GmPCuySHNAV Fe, 3-4 Pia. 

opuxpotyres, BPD EO€:2,5 Po, 5-10 

avis oTnres, om. GmPCpBSe:2,4 Pa, io, add. HNrADEFOV¢e,3.5 
Pi-2, 9, 11 

Ta €y éxacTy ropart, GmPCpBSHNAFV €1, 3-5 P1-2, 4-6, 8 (a add. 
AV €1, 34 Ps) 

Ta €v éxdorw cwyara, PDE 2 pr, 9-11 (@ add. Epy, 1) 

émdapevovra, GmPBAF V €1, 3-4 Pi, 6-8, 11 

dapevoyvra, CuSHNIDEEs pz, 4-5, 9-10 

ra de ev yevern, GmPFV py 

ravra 6€ éy yeverti, CuBSHNTADE€E:-s5 Pi-e, 4-8, 10-11 

peraBave, GmPCwNAFe, p71 

peraBarrA(X, BV 

perappel, SHI DEC, P1-2, 5-6, 8-10 

peTappel kai weTaPatve, es Ast. 

Ti To ov adel, GmPF ey-5 P7 

Ti TO ov pev det, CUBSHNTADEVE, P1-2, 5-6, 6-11 

nuiv, G (n4////) mMPAVEF e;, 4-5 Pa, 5, 7-8, 11 

éorTiv, Cpu BSNIDPe. s-10 

om. H 

154 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Page 4,12 deAgctvy, GmPChBHND 
dueEeAGciv, S (dteA€ty in marg.) AFVe1 P7, 10-11 
bceA Geiy, Ee, (ef in marg.) €; Do,5, 38-9 
16 xoopos Sévdpov, GmPCyBFDpz,7 
dévdpov xoopos, SHNTADEVeEz-s Ps, 8-11 
IQ gwpods, xopds, GmPEF es Peo, 7-9 
xopos, swpos, CuBSHNTPAD Vey Ps, 10-11 
20 <idoy rovrey, GmPCuBHAF Vp, 11 
rourwy cidav, SNI' DE€s Ds, 8-10 
TouTwy duo eidwv, Cs Do 
Page 5, 4 &da ratra, GmPBHFDps 
da tavrys, CuSAEVeq4-5 Pz, 10-11 
dc’ airs, NID pe. 
dua aris Do 
8 wore émuatnun, GmF VE Hes Pe, 5,7-9, 11 
émiornpn wore, Cu Be, 
om. wore, PSNIA (add. supra lin.) Dpio 
I5 oloy dpriov, GmPCyuBp7 
oloy Terpaywvoy dpriv, SHNTADEF Ve, p2.5, s-11 
17 peLov dAarrov yuov, GmPw»SHAEF V Py, 5, 7-8, 10-11 
quo peLov EAatrov, BCNT' Dpg 
Hyper eAaTTov, &4 
IQ apa, GmPFe, Po,5,9-1, OM. CuBSHNTADEV)+-3, 11 
IQ émAnyovra, G,mPBp7 
dtarAnpovra, CuSHNTAG,DEF Ve Pa, 5, 8-11 
Page 6,18 Soxovyr,, G H 
doxovvrt To, PBS 
doxowvri ra, MCUNTADEFV)o, 8-9 
Soxotwre Tov, G4 
Page 7, 6 s«wepwoxore? xai diopifera, Gm 
dtopiLera:, H 
oxoret kat duopiferar, SNTADEF Ve pa, 8-9 
wepioxore, PC» B 
7 xpy dvu, GmSNTADEVE, Po, 8-5 
def elvoux, PC un BH 
8 mpodwrcyGevra xai rpodiaBeBawhevra, Gm BF 
mporexGevra cai BeBatwhevra, & 
mporeyGevra xai dua SeBawheyra, SHNT 
mporcxGevta xai mpofeBawhevra, AV EDs 
duarexGevra, p 
mpoPeBawlevra, C 
apos SiaArexOerra xai da GeBawGevra, P 
mporexGevra, D pe,9 
Ir dvoAcyay, GmPF 
oporcyiav, Cu BSHNTADEVe; po, 5-9 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 155 

As far as this limited list of readings is at all significant, it shows, 
first, that the manuscripts may be roughly grouped. The most im- 
portant group is that composed of G, m, and P, which are nearly always 
(30 out of 37 times) associated and are clearly close relatives. G and 
m are even closer to each other than P is to either or both of them; 
they agree in 35 of the 37 cases. Other manuscripts, such as F, ps, pe, 
and p7, sometimes one, sometimes another, from time to time agree 
with GmP, but the latter combination is the one most often found to 
have the same reading. Another trio which similarly evidences re- 
lationship is C, n, and B. Among the rest it is not so easy to demon- 
strate close kinship. 

G is the oldest of the manuscripts, and one may safely agree with 
Hoche in thinking it the best representative of the primitive text, 
although it is not infallible. Though very like G, m cannot bea copy 
of it, and P, as Hoche noticed, is characterized by numerous blunders 
which may be the fault of an illiterate scribe or perhaps of Wechel or 
his typesetter. P, furthermore, shows a rather noticeable tendency 
to agree with CyB, possibly because of some contamination in its 
ancestry with manuscripts of that type. 

Although these two groups, GmP and CyB, stand out quite clearly by 
themselves, the tradition is in general a very mixed one, and it would 
be folly to attempt, on so meager information, to unravel all these 
tangled threads. The evidence seems to point to a series of revisions 
or recensions, more or less general, which has affected the later manu- 
scripts. The readings in pages 2. 13 (first example), 3. 12, 19, and 7. 11, 
among those cited above, are examples of the changes in the text 
that found their way into nearly all but GmP. Sometimes these are 
attempts at correction, often ill-advised and superficial, like the change 
so commonly introduced into the manuscripts in page 2. 13, the first 
of the passages just cited; this is an obvious effort to supply a balance 
that the scribe thought was needed, but it really mars the sense and 
can hardly have been the original text. 

In other cases the variant is the result of the introduction into the 
text of a marginal or interlinear gloss, or even a caption. Without 
much doubt the latter mischance has occurred at page 2. 19 in many 
manuscripts outside of the groups GmP and CyB. Perhaps the vari- 
ants in pages 2. 5, 13 (second example) and 7. 11 were originally glosses. 
Still others, and these are very characteristic of the group in which 
Hoche put SHNI, are in the nature of additions to the text, either 

156 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

of words easily understood, as in page 2. 15, or of extra terms in a series 
of Nicomachus’s examples, as in pages 3. 1 (second example) and s. 15. 
Simple corruptions have come in and have been perpetuated in many 
manuscripts ; see, for example, pages 4.12; 7.6, 8. Itis to be observed 
that GmP generally stand aloof from these apparent tamperings with 
the text. 

There is certainly evidence in plenty that two or more readings 
were known in very many passages. It is entirely possible that a 
single manuscript or a whole series of them would retain both the 
primitive reading and the gloss, and in subsequent copyings from such 
manuscripts sometimes one and sometimes the other reading would be 
reproduced. This may explain why the large group embracing 
SHNTADEFOLYV, the Escurial manuscripts and most of the Parisian 
ones, is seldom unanimous, and sometimes one, sometimes another, 
agrees with GmP, though as a whole they are characterized by the 
presence of the sort of variants that have just been described. Con- 
sequently it is difficult to discern clearly defined subfamilies among 
them, and together with CuzB one may venture to designate them as 
representing the vulgate text of the Introduction to Arithmetic. 

It must also be observed that manuscripts were frequently compared 
with one another and variant readings noted down, which doubtless 
were taken into the text as time went on. Evidence of this is easily 
discovered. Hoche’s apparatus shows clearly that the second hand 
in G introduced a number of readings from a manuscript of the vulgate 
type, and in the margin of A, referring to page 10. 13, 7) nusddLoy, is 
found the note, rovro én’ éviwy ov xetrar. H, in fact, omits the words 
referred to. Possibly comparison with other manuscripts explains the 
reading of m in page 6. 23, where it parts company with G and P and 
sides with the vulgate. The same explanation may explain the notable 
peculiarity of P already mentioned, its tendency to agree with CyB. 

C and p, as Hoche observed, are very much alike, but it is not prob- 
able that either is the direct source of the other. Of the additional 
manuscripts with which the writer is acquainted, B is to be associated 
with this pair and the three make up a subfamily characterized on the 
one hand by peculiar readings of their own —as, the addition of 
® \oore BC, \Gorre p in page 8. 19, and the elaborated reading 7 durAa- 
g.ov  TpiTrdovov 7F TeTpaTAaotov, page Io. 12 — and on the other by 
less frequently modifying the text in the manner of the vulgate and 
hence more nearly approaching the textof GmP. In illustration of the 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 157 

latter point such passages as pages 2. 2, 5, 7, 15, 3. 1 (first example), 18, 
4. 12, 16, 20, and 5.15 may be noted. Yet in many cases CwB are 
aligned with the vulgateagainst GmP ; for example, pages 1.10; 2. 1,13; 
3.12; 4.9,19; 5.8and 7.11. Sometimes these three disagree among 
themselves; B agrees with GmP somewhat more frequently than do 
the other two. 

In the following table will be found the percentages of agreement 
with G in the selected readings given above, for each of the manu- 
scripts : 

As far as these statistics are significant they confirm the observation 
that GmP and CyB form well-defined subfamilies and suggest that 
F, pz, Pe, and p; form a class intermediate between GmP and the 
vulgate. These four, however, do not by any means show the kinship 
evidenced by GmP and CyB;; in this sense they are not a family. 

The relations between the many representatives of the vulgate are 
so complicated that is is hardly possible to consider them seriously on 
the basis of the available data. Their percentages of agreement with 
G give a general idea of their interest and value for textual study. 
The likeness of some of them to one another is quite noticeable. To 
show a few of these relationships the following percentages of agree- 
ment among certain pairs and groups may be observed. They are 
reckoned on the data furnished by 35 of the selected readings already 
cited : 

SNID 62.7 | IDE 6s.6 | SH, HA, AVE,HN 62.7 

SND 65.6 |TE 74.1 | HV 68.4 
SN- 68.4 | TD 88.4 | AE 71.2 
sv 71.2 AV 82.7 
SN we. 
NID 79.8 

ND, NI 85.5 | 

158 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Of the new manuscripts, J is in some respects the most interesting. 
It has not been possible to compare it with the others in the paragraphs 
above, because it does not contain the first three chapters of Book I. 
It does, however, agree with P in such a remarkable manner that only 
two alternatives are open; it must be copied either from the lost source 
of P (or a manuscript of exactly the same nature), or from the printed 
first edition. While the former alternative is alluring, the writer is 
inclined to think the latter the more probable. Its extremely late date 
and the fact that it is only a collection of excerpts are important 
points. Furthermore, P seldom differs from the other manuscripts 
importantly without J differing in the same way; in other words, 
J shares the peculiarities of P. The most notable instance is the omis- 
sion by both of page 24. 2-4. Again, J disagrees with P in a fair number 
of instances, but never radically. The differences are slight omissions 
or transpositions which could easily be made in copying from the 
printed book, and variations of spelling or inflectional endings which 
might represent the efforts of a scribe, well versed in Greek, to correct 
the text of P, with its many blunders. There are in J practically no 
additions to the text of P, and such as occur may readily be explained 
in the manner just suggested.’ Altogether it is easier to believe J 
copied from, or is descended from, the printed first edition, with a 
number of arbitrary changes due to the copyist, than an almost mirac- 
ulously recovered representative of the manuscript text used by 
Wechel. 

A few remarks on certain readings in Hoche’s printed text are in- 
cluded at this point, and at the end of the chapter will be found an 
apparatus criticus for the first three chapters of Book I, based on 
Hoche’s, but enlarged and revised so as to report for this limited portion 
of the text upon all the manuscripts known in any way to the writer. 

P. 2,13. — Read ravra 8 dv ein ra ava (Hoche omits 8’ with 
GmP). This may be one of the cases to which Hultsch refers? where 
something has been lost in G which the others have preserved. The 
word here supplied is found in the other manuscripts and removes the 
asyndeton. 

1 The only notable one is !erw, added by J in page 15. 11, where C alone of the other manu- 
scripts (according to Hoche) agrees with J. This, however, is not a hard interpolation in a mathe- 
matical context, and the agreement with C may be only a coincidence, as there is little evidence 
of a special relationship between C and J. 

*In his review of Hoche’s edition, Newe Jahrbicher fiir Philologie und Pddagogik, vol. XCVII 
(1868), pp. 762-770, especially p. 763. 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 159 

P. 5, 5. — Hultsch (op. cit., p. 763) points out that the correct text 
is at d€ navTws TeTEepagpever eioly emoTHuat, since the reading of 
G (ai 6€ ai émornpat xrd.) shows clearly that ai émuornpar is a 
gloss. 

P. 6, 17-18. — Read kadas pou Soxovvti to. wept. Hoche, with 
G (and H?) omits rot; but the unanimous testimony of the other 
manuscripts makes it probable that a word has dropped out between 
Soxovurtt and wepi, for in all the others something is inserted, and tof 
seems to be best attested. Even m and P oppose G here, and it is 
easier to suppose that a word dropped out of G only, and was preserved 
in the rest, than that all the others were interpolated. 

P. 7, 1. — Read pwotxas (CuBNT po, 9, Nobbe), instead of Hoche’s 
povotkas (uovotwv, P) GmSH. The two forms are easily confused, 
but pwouras is the correct dialectic form and it is improbable that it 
would be restored by emendation. 

P. 9, 19 and p. 15, 1. — These are similar cases, both discussed by 
Hultsch (loc. cit., p. 764). In both these passages G omits the article, 
and av@pwros and kat apriomépirrov, respectively, are to be read. 

P. 16, 5. — Read €&s wdyras, which is found in G,SHA (although 
H in the margin has the other reading, é€ €vos, which does not neces- 
sarily occur in all the other manuscripts, for Hoche’s apparatus is 
not exhaustive). é€& €vds can mean only ‘from unity,’ but Nicomachus 
regularly says a6 povddos in this sense, as in the sentence immediately 
following. A corruption must have come into the family GmP. 

P. 19, 10. — Read eidixas for ideas. This is simply a matter of 
spelling; the adverb is to be connected with efdos (not (S:0s), but 
in late Greek it is sometimes spelled ideas. In p. 55, 20 GmP them- 
selves use the better spelling eidcnas and to avoid confusion it is better 
to use that form here also. 

P. 19, 8. — Omit, as a gloss, povov péoov. . . woAAatAactalopeévon, 
for the reasons stated by Hultsch (loc. cit., p. 763). 

P. 20, 1. — Nicomachus is stating that in the class of even-times odd 
numbers no factor can have a value of the same kind (even or odd) 
with its name, and to avoid a meaningless text it is necessary to read 
T@® €avTov Ovouzare with C, or to suppose that the original had avrov 
(cf. the reading of S, avdrov), of which the unintelligible ro attra 
évopatt, which appears in the others, is a corruption easily made. 

P. 20, 4.— We may accept Hultsch’s arguments for the doubly 
reduplicated form wvoparomerounpevor of G (loc. cit., p. 764). 

160 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

P. 23, 20. — avrwy, not avrwr, is doubtless the proper reading. It 
improves the Greek, and may easily have suffered corruption in GmP. 
CSHA have xara tnv éavrav ragw here, with order changed, but 
probably preserving the proper form of the pronoun. 

P. 24, 5. — Hultsch (Joc. ctt., p. 765) suggests that amroyerjoorrat, 
with GP, be read here instead of amoyerynoovran, on the ground that 
atroyiveofa: should be the passive of aroyexvav in mathematical 
language, just as yiveo@a: is the passive of -yyeryay in common speech. 
Nicomachus, however, is quite free to use the passive of yevvay. 

P. 25, 9. — In favor of retaining Hoche’s roAvrAactacpous, against 
tmokvrkaciacuov PCSH, it can be urged that the word means ‘result 
of multiplication’ in p. 133, 7, although Theon of Smyrna, who uses 
it frequently, seems always to employ it to designate the operation of 
multiplication itself (e.g., pp. 23, 18; 26, 5; 27, 7, 14; 28, 13; 29, 
18, etc., Hiller). 

P. 27, 6. — Read dvvauvro (omitting av) withGP. This is Hultsch’s 
suggestion, who calls attention to the use of the same unusual con- 
struction in p. 66, 22, where the manuscripts all agree (loc. cit., p. 766). 

P. 31, 5. — Hultsch (loc. cit., p. 765) would omit ay with GPJ and 
read €0é\ouev with P. Hoche’s text, however, should probably be 
retained, since Nicomachus’s usage in such constructions, where the 
subjunctive occurs, seems uniformly to employ av. Only in GPJ here, 
in Sin II, 2, 2, and in SH in II. 11. 2, is the word omitted, of the in- 
stances collected on p. 173. 

P. 33, 19. — Read €avrov for €avrwy. This is an excellent opportu- 
nity to restore an evidently correct text on the best authority, G). 
The only possible meaning of what Hoche prints is “those that are 
measured by unity alone in accordance with their own quantity,” 
that is, prime numbers, but this is not the correct sense. Of such 
numbers disposition has already been made; here he speaks of ‘‘ those 
that are measured by one (measure) alone in accordance with its own 
quantity,’ that is, the squares of odd prime numbers. The comma 
after moodrnra (line 19, Hoche) should be deleted. 

P. 35, 5. — JPCSH here have kept the better text, daog@aivov for 
amodaivovar. Cf. p. 36, 3. 

P. 35, 10. — Read mpoBd7Oy with PCSH for the syntactical reasons 
discussed elsewhere (p. 175). 

P. 35, 20. — We may agree with Hultsch (loc. cit., p. 766) that 
Kkarakeimerat is corrupt, kara- being a dittography from the numeral 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 161 

xa; but Aetzrera: fits better than his favored suggestion, Aoura ra. 

P. 42, 1. — Omit ris dpiOuds €or with Hultsch (loc. cit., p. 764). 

P. 42, 2. — Hultsch’s restoration of mpoxarny7@n from G,’s mpoxa- 
™ xOn is worthy of adoption (loc. cit., p. 766). 

P. 44, 21. — 9 THs todrnros is unnecessary, and, as the variation in 
the manuscripts shows, is probably a gloss. 

P. 54, 17. — Read dvicos (G2CS) for duoo.. The expression 
‘unequal heteromeces’ is meaningless, but avioots, referring to 
m\evpats, yields good sense. (I have considered the possibility that 
avuoakis has here been lost from all the manuscripts. The words 
avioaxis toot would correctly characterize the ‘heteromeces,’ and 
would balance toaxis toon above; it would also explain the retention 
of the senseless aveoot in G;. The change adopted, however, is less 
violent, and though II. 17.6 offers similar expressions, Nicomachus 
nowhere uses aviod«us avicos.) 

P. 120, 6. — Perhaps zoia should be inserted in this line; in the 
explanatory note on the passage I have stated reasons for thinking 
that the word may have fallen out. 

P. 125, 10-13. — Hoche reads idoy S€ tardpye Thode THS peadrnTos 

.. 70 kata ovvOeow Tay axpwr trodimddovoy 7 loov 7d pécor elvat 
(“it is the peculiarity of this proportion . . . that the sum of the 
mean terms is half or the mean term is equal’’), which certainly is 
corrupt, for the sum of the extremes is never half the mean term. Ast, 
without using C, emended, reading durAdovoy rod pécov 7 ivory Tots 
péeooss, Which is exactly the text of C. This gives good sense, for 
the sum of the extremes is “double the mean term or equal to 
the mean terms” (if there are two), and it must be substantially 
what Nicomachus really said. Unfortunately tbaodimAdovov (irodt- 
m\aavos, G) is attested by all the manuscripts but C, and we can 
hardly reject it. The simplest remedy is to read rov xara ovvGeow tov 
aKpwy vrodurkagLoy  ivoyv To wéoov elvas “the mean is half of the 
sum of the extremes, or equal to it,” interpreting ‘the mean’ to refer 
both to the single mean in the continuous proportion and to the sum 
of the two means in the disjunct. I am not sure that this is satis- 
factory, and suspect that the original text was more explicit ; but for the 
present this suggestion is the best that I can make. 

P. 110, 5. — Omit rotovrot, which has the support only of CSH, 
and can be dispensed with. 

P, 137, 22. — dpa, found in GP, is preferable to dpa. 

162 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

A CRITICAL APPARATUS COVERING CHAPTERS 1-3 OF Book I oF 
THE INTRODUCTION TO ARITHMETIC 

PaGE 1 (GmPCuhuBSHNTAVDEFLOexs pins)! 
Line 1 Tepacivov PD 
2 Il v@a-yopixov GmHV O€)-2,4 P2-5) Tl v@a-yopeiov NI'Feés, Tlv@ayopiou D, 
IIv@aywpiov E,om. PC u BJ Lpi-7 
3 daaywyns dpvunrucjs V Ps-5, eloaywyy dpOunricns E, cicaywyis Om. PN 
Boethius, cicaywyy 1/// dpWpryruqs G,, r Ins Mut. G,, coaywyy ris 
dpunriucns m, dpunrugs ccaywyy S, tov Tepacyvot dpiOpnrums cioa- 
ywyns mpwrov BiBrALov p 
4 av els duo D, ray cis ra 600 MHEP, mparov eis ra dio F, ris eis dvo ro 
pier ly de ff// te 
5 mpurws Pi 
6 mpoxarapfavros E €-3 Pi-2,6,8— wpivavro H, opi{ovro €s — rv pirocodiav 
Le, (rqv supra lin. es) 
piriav Procodias C1 
wayvTwy] povoy €, Py 

Oo o-=] 

ouvxeyunerw T' — cai om. CL 

10 drAa&s] was add. CuBSHNIADELOVeE‘-s P1-2,4-11 (Ps supra lin.) — 
Kal oKvTOTOuos OM. Po 

Il 7 gumeipos 7 Symsoupyias B, 7 Snpsovpyias eumetpos A 

PaGE 2 (GmPCuBSHNIAVDEFO6€:-s Pi-2, 4-11 Ps [ll. 4-9, 13-17]) 
Line ti ovorndAas A—ravrwyom. Cu BSNTADEFO¢€ 1-5 pi-2, 4-6, 8-11 
2 xaTrdAppw] perddAnyw A—rotrw] mdvrev add. SHNIADEFOe:-; 
P1-2, 4-6, 811 
3 yvoow Supra lin. py 
4 xai post cixorws OM. SHNIP'DO€:,5 Pi-s, 4-6, 9-10 
5 mpooxyopevoey] zpooryopacey E, éxakeoeyv NI’ Des — codias apegiv] codias 
édpeoty SHNTAV DEO}, Pi-2, «-5, 8-11 (Gpefv Iamblichus p. 5, épeow 
ibid. Pp. 10) 
6 éor¢é supra lin. pi — dAAws] dAAwv P3 — wapdcoy codd. — avvecradpévov 
add. I Po-10 — ooov | oruy €2 
7 autnyv HNTADEOVeE,, 3-5 Pi-2, 4-5, 8, 10-11 
8 opitero A—edva: post émorypnv add. A€e-4 Pi0-11— THS] Tols es 
Q dArfeias OM. ej 
IO drrawtov xaraAmw De 
Il ta cata] rad OM. €3, xara atra IT, xara ravra Pip— Kai woavros Kal os 
ou 
atrws C2 — duareAcivra G 
12 éfurrapeva | apioera eva, SNrDOe, Pi-2, 4-5, 8-10 

1 The manuscripts reported upon for a given page are thus noted. Page and line references 
are to Hoche’s edition. 

13 

17 
18 

4, 

7 

y jue 

8 
9 

10 
II 

Iz 

13 
I4 
15 
16 
17 
18 

19 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 163 

Trait av Pm, ratra & dv CuBSHNTADEOVE‘-5 Pi-2, 4-5, 7-11 — ey] 9 
Hp, — Kai wv] Kai (Ta AH) didta, wy SH NIADEOVeE)-5 Pi-5, 8-11) 
Kai didua cat Sy CuBp7,9— «ac om. F, cf. Iamblichus p. 5 — dv] 
Tay D3 

Aorov exacrov NI'DPo, Aouray P7 — dpwrvuws] Spwvduwy m B, dnoripws 
ovTw xaAounevwy H Bp, — xaiom. PC wG,TAEOV€i-2,4 Pi-2.4-5.7-9,11 

xai post re add. Oes pi-2,4,s— evar post A€yerar add. GFHADEFOVeé:-5, 
Pies, 7-11 

Syrov cai tAca IN Marg. €; — xai post pice OM. Ps 

éort Sua ravros AV €2, 4, Pii— éore] efor PT — rv eras. po 

dpx7s supra lin. ps—idkoryra] didtornra C4 

qv supra lin. es — d\Aaory B, dAnwry A— epi 7a tAuxd Kai cwparind add. 
SHAFV 0€1-3 pi-2, 4-5,7, 10-11 

wepi] we P4—atrynv] atra FV e1-3P7,11— «Kat om. NTADEV €3;— avry] 
avrots A F €1-3 Pz, u (-o1s supra lin. Ps) 

NOTOTHTES rovornres V 1,3 Pi — peyeBor P72 — oxnpario pot Sinagtiny ivornres 
om. p, (add. supra lin. manus secunda) 

(GmPCyuB S NFAVEDFe:e: [to line 3] es [to line 13] e4-5 pi-2 py [to 
line 17] ps-i) 

OMiKpOTyTes BIrDEO€:,5 Pe. 5-10, lo. Philoponus t — loornres] in marg. 
€3, duodrnres add. HNTADEFOV¢e 1. 3,5 Pi-2,5-9, 11, lo. Philoponus «¢ 

amAa@s] ciety add. D — wepiéxovra E 

cHpari] copara TDE@2P7, 9-11, &@ add. AEVj,3-4Pa.7,11.— xa atrd 
CAD, &y add. e, 

7 ovpBeBrnxorws Go DIS COrr. CX cupBeSyxora; cupPeByxorwy B— rwapa- 
woAa Bee es 

oupseBynxorws Se] peréyes cai Tov pereyovTwy KTA. P2, Tun BEeBnxoros Cs — 3] 
ooa P BDs 

8 om. E, add. supra lin.; om. ps, add. in marg. 

owpara Pz 

pev] xac add. NI'Dey Po, 4-6 — avda didia C 

advapaAaxra AP1, 10 

é€auTayv Cps r'D pi-2, 4, 7,9 — ovoia ] -ay Supra lin. €s (manus secunda) 
— dapevovra CuSHNI'DEE; Pro, 4-5, 9-10 

avtav] atrov edovs rovrey p—Ta] ratra CuBSHNITADE e,.3-5 
Pi-2, 4-8, 10-11 

room. HNTAV 

everar A 

pév] G, corr. ex xy — xabdcoy codd. 

THS €avTwv mroews P — eavTwy] atray wS &yP19 — ovrws] ovTrux €; 

ért tov avrov Cu.S p7 — diapery m 

peraPacver] peraBadrAQK BV, perappet SHIT DE €4-5 pio, m6. 8-10, erappel Kai 
petaBaiva e,; Ast — wavrotws G, COrr. ex mavroia — a@AAagoueva AP, 
dAaccopevoy S — xal xara A Pir 

TlAarwva S — by] pév add. CuBSHNTADEV €; Pj-2, 5-6, 11 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

(GmPCpBSHNIAVDEF.e, [to line 12] e4-5 p: [to line 3] pss, 7-11 Ds 
[to line r1}) 

ovx] wy SNI, ovx in marg. I — yevouevov m— pev om. Bey, det add. p, 

d€ om. pz 

3 aici FPp—xaf om. SDEVpi— xara] pera B—v’ aira P, travra D— 

PAGE 5 

Line 

1 

dofyry €1 

ytyvoxevoyv Gm —re om. HNI'DE, supra lin. es (manus secunda) 

Svrws] ov es (corr. supra lin. man. secunda) — ov] éAecye ratra 6 Tipatos 
mapa IAarwn add. p 

épieueOa réAovs B — airy pu 

id’ om. SAVEi,5 Pio-1, add. supra lin. e,; (manus secunda) 

qeiv] ne////G, om. H, éorw CuBSNI'D Po-19 — bs Edy] WHOn A Pur, ds 
Gu €; — codias] éoriv add. es 

pedis] épeors H, Fin marg., P2.s— rys] rots A Pr,11 (rps in marg. pi) 

ovra dé] 5€ OM. Pz 

SueAciv] SeferAGetvy S (SeeActy in marg.) AF Vex Pr, 10-11, SueAGety TE ey 
(eg in marg. €4) €s P2,s,s-9, re add. I, re xaf add. ps,9 — dpOpaca P — 
ra OM. P7 — cupBeByxorws m 

bv rotvey T' — xai cad’ T — Sy re xvpiws OM. Ps 

rep éoti] ovK OvTws Kupiug Kal Gvrwy Kupiws add. ey 

dAAnAoXoupeva A 

devdpov xoopos SHNTADEV€y-5 Ps, 9-11 — xat OM. S€y—dwep] a I py 
— idiws Kai xupiws B 

re om. H 

xaXetrai] cat add. Gm 

Twpos | om. Ps, wopos A Pu, xopos, o7wpos CeBSHNIADVe, Ps. 10-11; 
Boethius, erparos add. S pio — cai om. e4, Supra lin. és 

Sv0 dpa C — rovrwy cidav SN DEE; Ps, 3-10, rovrwr dvo cid@v €4 Pe 

vowioreoy] voyréeov SNT es Pz, 19 — éretdyy A Pil —xal wav peyeBos . . . 5,1 
mwAnGos OM. D 

azretpov I‘ — avrav G,P, éavrwy pSNTEV€s Po-10 

(GmPCuBSHNITAVDEFe, €; [through line 8] pe, 5, 7-11) 

elat BC — ydp Om. C — Sptoperys A Ps, 11 

gwavoeTat E Pps — rpoxorray A 

Splo wer ys Ps, 11 

dua tavrys CuSAEV€s,5 Py, 10-11, O¢ avryas NI'D po. 5, dua abras Do 
mpoxwpe] ywpet V, mpoxwpelv P7, tpoxPopet Pro 

ai &€ ai émornya G, al b€ émorjua dreipwv & ovd€rore haivera, ddAAa 
TavTws Tav merepagpevwr cioiv' SHAov d€ Ort 2p — wept werepagpevwy Px — 
cow] €or P 

gaivere COIT. IN daiverar A, patvovrar €; — dy OM. Po 

ovre ad init.] ob V pu, — re add. supra lin. A 

wore OM. PSNI A (Supra lin.) D pio — émorrypn woré Cp Bey — éxaTepov | 
cat add. mPCyS, erasum in G 

xa’ gaurd éxarepoy I — éorw A éorat Pz — rA€Cov HNI'DF po, 1 

Io 
II 
12 

14 
15 

16 

17 
18 

19 

PAGE 6 

Line 

un a WG WH & 

Oo oom OW 

10 

ii 

IZ 

14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

1Q 
20 

22 

23 

PAGE 7 
Line 1 
2 

MANUSCRIPTS AND TEXT 165 

an] ér' 2 P2,11, OM. B— ddwpiopevov] apuruevoy E, dpopwrpevov Ps 

pev] yap add. § P7, 10 — rocov G, 

THAtKOV] ToixtAov Pi (anAtkov in marg.) 

opare A —avro PDA Po 

otov] terpaywvov add. SHNTADEF Ve, po,5, 8-11, Boethius — repiocov 
NI — xai ra Gy — €oixwrws m 

éxov 70n CB 

yusov peiloy cAarrov CBNI'D Po, zyucw €Aarroy €y — éAaoooyv H, €\Aarov A 

vuicv A — cai ra G, — Sydrovore Codd. 

apa om. CuBSHNTADEV P7-8. 11 — dsaAnworrac CuG,SHNTADEFV 
€4 Pe, 5, 8-11 — émornpovexal rePodor 

(GmPCpBSHNIAVDEFE®;, Pz Ps [through line 12] p, [through line 8] 
Pa-9 Pio [through line 5] pi: [through line 17]) 

devxpurnoacs D — rov OM. P7 — rogov G, 

avro CNTADEV P2,11, avro py — ro post d€ om. T 

éxet ] eri PS 

povn | émpovy Ay Pu 

mepipopa] dopa A P2,5,11 — Ta avra] ta OM. PV, ravra BS Ps, ratra A 
Pio-11 — dkaxptBwoovor HEV, duxpiSwor A 

ovv post pey add. E V — jpenovw PH, dpeporv G, 

Trepipepopevoyv AE V pg 

ovTws B 

duvarov axpiBaca. PCwBE, dxpiBaoa dvvarov AV Ps, 11 — dxpeSwoarGa H 

9 copia HAE Ps, 1 

15 {wypadia . . . Gewpias . . . ovvepyiav S 

Bavevous Px, (corr. supra lin. man. sec.) — pds] eis E ps, 11 — Geopins 
A, Oewpias €y — ro. OM. m, ai F, rau A, wai add. H, re pur 

Aoyov PA 

auvepyeny B 

dAAa. Om. A — xai] 67 E 

To avro OM. H —aws OM. Peo,» 

Soxovvr:] ro add. PSB, ro mCpNTADEFV py, 8-9, cf. Io. Philoponus 
Ka, Tov €, — poOnyarixa P 

épGas om. Cu, In Marg. ey, dpGas avrois ere wept V, dps atrovs E — 
ota] o supra lin. add. A — éxadorw H — dpoveiv A ey Ps 

ras Gm, ras P, rns cett. — dAwy] aAAwy m, ////AAwy G, ovrwy D (om. rév) 
— dijows B 

re] tt G,P, ro E Pg — yewperpias G,CuHNTA€,— ras yewnerpias nal 
povoixas Kat doOunrixas S — nai om. F 

Kai odaipixas OM. G, P — wapedocay Po — ayyu H, dup B, quiv AV ey Pg 
(au supra lin. A, manus secunda) — cada A 

(GmPCyuBSHNTAVD [to line 20] E [to line 21] F [to line rs]ey po, 9-5) 
kai OM. F Pe — povorxav P, pwouds CuBNI'ps,9, pworxns A—ravra dé P 
Soxovvr’ eluev A (vac Supra lin. man. 2) pg—wepi yap ddeAded OM. G, 

166 

nw & Ww 

co 7 

20 
22 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Tay] Kai &, 

rpeis xai Sexarov H, rpurxedexdrov A, BiBAdov add. I 

ovrep CNTADEV& Pz, 9 

wenoxore] OM. H, cxoree SNTADEFV€;, Po. 2-0—xai doplera: om. 
PCuB, dwpifera: A 

xen] det PCy BH, elven post yoy add. ADE VPs-9— dvras om. PCB 

ra G, eX ro//// (rovs?) —wpodcyGevra xai BeBawwievra €4, rporexGevra xai 
daBeBouwevra SHNI, wzpodteyOara xai wpofeBawGevra AVEDPs 
(tro wAcover mporex evra xat add. man. 2 supra lin. A), duarcyGevra fy 
mpoBpeBawhevra C, mpos darexPerra xat duaBPeBawhevra P, rpodrcyGevra 
(om. xai rpodiaBeBawhevra) D Ps, s 

mv om. A— dvadoyiav] ouordoyiay CuBSHNTADEV€,4)pz, 8-9, Lo. Philo- 
ponus Cc. xe — piay OM. H, elpas piay Kai dvadavyvar ps 

KaTa Tov Tporov TovToy A — Tporov] To rpoanKov Pg 

ay om. D e& P2,9— 6 Acyopuevos p — dpOas] fyov add. A, dyev add. e4 pp — 
ra wavra SHAEV Ps, aravra NI'D 

pavOary NT, pavOdvo D py — rovrwv amavrov SHNADEV Pp, ro rour. dx T 

dAAos MCA — értyeipietras Po — trHv hirovogiuay NI DP, 9, codiay F 

dAX Om. V — ravra /////Ta G,, Tavra yap Ta m 

wavra tavra AV Py 

rovrov 6 SNI'D pg— rov copwrarov HAEV ey, 

re] apa S — dyAov &€ ore xai VE 

yap] 5€ Pp—or] os H—tiow 7 SND, teow H Kai I! — eoixaos NT DPyp — 

TavTa Ta] Ta TOWMTa D2 

(GmPCp BSHNIT AG, Po, 8-9) 

Hw THY Savoia S 

cvvtpodwy] cv Iwv D2 — Hyuiv] qpav C1 — Bpedav] érx add. SNT' Aey Po, 8-9 

ovTwy ére H, ovrwy OM. A 

re] om. NT, péy CuSADzo, 8-9 

mporov P—rav ... voyrixwy P, rg . . - vogroa NI, re éy (av Sup lin.) 
rais vonruxa A, Suavonrixna B— ra] ro &% 

ros paGyyacr doxouvros N Pe 

diavouas Kai Acywrpovs NI po 

$F 

SOM. Pg — orparor ///deva G — xai add. CxS 

yeopopias A—aovyxynoes P, cvyxions SNT 

52] 7 add. py — «ai datpovopia OM. S 

yewp///yias G,-av SNI'pg-9 — vauririas Cpe 

ciyepeias Gm, ebypeias P (in marg., yp. evxapias), edxaipias cett. — 
émtpdeoryTos P — mpodyAovem G,, -ovcas SNT 

el] & AGore add. CB, Adore p, & éraipe Po — emerAnrrwv OM. ey (xAyHr- 
rwv Supra lin.) — doe dediera: P 

dypynorov P — ravra OM. p — ra poPypara ravra NI'P29 

ms om. C 

CHAPTER XII 
THE LANGUAGE AND STYLE OF NICOMACHUS 

An elementary treatise on arithmetic is hardly the vehicle best 
fitted to exhibit the talents of a stylist. The requisites are the simple, 
natural excellences of clarity, accuracy, and purity of diction; rhetori- 
cal ornaments are out of place. Such a style is what one would ex- 
pect, and what, in general, one finds, in the Arithmetical Introduction. 
Nicomachus maintains throughout a tone of earnestness, which he does 
not lose in attempted ‘fine writing’ even in those portions, like the 
first six chapters and a few others, where he is not for the moment en- 
gaged in actual mathematical demonstration. Even here there are 
few rhetorical figures, although these are not entirely lacking even in 
the strictly mathematical sections. The rhetorical questions! are 
few but effective; the similes? not far-fetched and usually of real 
value for the exposition of the subject in hand. 

That Nicomachus was no mere amateur writer can be easily seen 
when the structure of his sentences and paragraphs is taken into ac- 
count. Clarity is usually present, and on the whole there are few ob- 
scure passages. ‘This is undoubtedly due to the fact that the author 
had a clear idea of what he wanted to say and a decided knack for 
logical exposition, so that his materials meet the eye in the order in 
which they are most easily understood. And it must also be allowed 
that he knew how to turn a good period ; * for even in the most techni- 
cal sections the periodic structure is frequently found, joined, to be 
sure, to sentences more loosely put together, since the subject is not 
one that easily is adapted to the periodic form. 

Join to what has already been said the observation that Nicomachus 
throughout preserves a decided enthusiasm for his subject,‘ and that 
he constantly puts himself, by little touches, sometimes attractively 
naive, into a personal relation with his readers, but without the sacri- 

IT. 4.1. 
27. 14.3; 15.1; 16.1; 23.4, 6; IL. 27.1. 
Cf. I. 6.1; II. 21.1, etc.; for a technical section, see II. 19. 1. 

4 Note the zest in I. 23. 4; 19. 20, 
167 

168 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

fice of dignity,’ and one has a fair idea of his merits as a writer. The 
faults into which he could easily be betrayed — dryness and excessive 
pedanticism— he has thusin large measure avoided. We may not 
claim for him superlative excellence, nor assert that his book has the 
liveliness or interest of a novel or a history, for the extended considera- 
tion of such a subject as arithmetic is apt to suffer from moments of 
aridity ; but it is just, I believe, to assert that Nicomachus, as a scientific 
writer, possessed assets which not all could claim, and that the Arith- 
metical Introduction on its own merits will engage the reader’s interest 
to a degree that is decidedly creditable for a book of its class. 

To the student of antiquity, however, Nicomachus’s language will 
be a matter of greater interest than his style. Contemporary with, 
or only a generation later than, the latest books of the New Testament, 
his writings may be expected to manifest certain of the non-classical 
peculiarities that are observed both in the New Testament, in the 
papyri, and in Greco-Roman writers generally. It is most just to 
compare Nicomachus with such writers as Lucian, for, like him, Nico- 
machus adopted the literary, not the contemporary spoken, style; 
that is, both are Atticists. But it must be recognized that his subject 
strongly influences Nicomachus’s language. He does not, like Lucian, 
employ the dialogue, but confines himself to sober exposition, so that 
his syntax of necessity shows less variety; there is, for example, little 
occasion for oratio obliqua. Still no late writer succeeded in sup- 
pressing entirely the marks of Hellenistic idiom, and there are many 
traces in the Introduction, which we shall proceed to review. 

One of the surest tests of Hellenistic Greek is its tendency to use py 
instead of ov.2, M7 came to be used with participles indiscriminately,’ 
and in the New Testament the older usage is so far abandoned that 
ov is quite regularly found in protases with the indicative* This 
last usage we cannot attribute to Nicomachus; he always uses py in 
protases and in conditional relative clauses, but with participles he 

1E.g., I. 14.5; 28. 1, 6. 

2On this in general, cf. Moulton, Prolegomena to a Grammar of New Testament Greek (Edin- 
burgh, 1908), Index, s.v. Negatives; Burton, Moods and Tenses of New Testament Greek (Chicago, 
1903), pp. 178 ff. ; Gildersleeve’s fundamental article in American Journal of Philology, I (1880) ; 
and E. L. Green, in Studies in Honor of B. L. Gildersleeve, pp. 471 ff. 

* Burton, sec. 485: ‘‘In the New Testament participles in all relations usually take u# as the 
negative.” Cf. Gildersleeve, American Journal of Philology,1, 55. Examples are given by 
W. Schmid, Der Ailticismus (Stuttgart, 1887), from Dio Chrysostom (vol. I, p. roo), Lucian 
(I, p. 246), Aristides (II, p. 61), etc. 

4 Burton, 469; Moulton, p. 171. 

LANGUAGE AND STYLE 169 

sometimes follows, sometimes abandons, the syntactical standards of 
classical Greek. By far the greatest number of times when py is 
found with the participle it is correctly used; ! in several more it will 
probably pass muster ;? but in a few cases it is undoubtedly incorrect 
on classical standards. Such are I. 3.1: éret rou mocov TO pev 
dparat Kal” éavrd, pyndepiay mpds addo oyéow exov xrd.; I. 23.8: 
olov vopous . . . ols maca7 mporeyOeioa mpdoBacts . . . evodwme py 
Aevroraxroupevy;* II. 22.1: at d€ ravrats vrevavTia: addau TpEis, 
LOiwy 1 TETEVXULAL OVOLAaT@Y, KTA. 

Sometimes jy is joined in this way to a genitive absolute, as in I. 16. 4: 
TapatAnciws mavras ... amoyervvyces ... pndevds mapadeuto- 
pevov; I. 23.8: yévorro yap . . . ra Tov moAAaTAaciov atravTa edn 

. wou pndev EMLTNOEVOVTOS unde auAkapBavovros; II. 22. 3: 
pndevos mapaderopevou und dreEatpoupevov; cf. also I. 11.1. The 
use of py in I. 7. 2, €ore O€ apriov perv, & oldy Te ets S¥0 loa StarpePjvat 
povados pécov 1 tapeumimrovons, may be regarded as justified in 
view of the generalizing and characterizing nature of the clause in 
which it stands, and there are many instances where Nicomachus 
negatives a participle with zy because it is equivalent to such a clause. 
But to sum up, there are only seven instances of the loose use of py in 
the Introduction, over against about twenty-four where the participle 
is correctly used, and about eleven where ov is correctly used with 
the participle. With other constructions, too — the infinitive,®> woare,® 
et and é€ay’ clauses — his usage ordinarily agrees with the classic 
standard. But I note rd pev yap mparorov avrav . . . cupBaiver 
Tous pey Umoddyous Exe Tovs aptiovs, adAov d€ obdauas ovdeva 
xth. (I. 19. 2), where pndape@s would be naturally called for ; and a simi- 
lar instance where ovdézore, not pynderore, is used with an accusative 

1]. 4. 2bis, aber; 6.3; 7. 2,3; 10.2, 5 bis; 13.1,8 bts; 16.4; 23. 8,11, 12; IDL. 11,1; 
W535 22.3: 27.1; 

2 A peculiar case in IT. 6.1: ra yap... brddoura wporwhnpwOhoerat Siadirderwr . . . Huwr 
kal wporeyvodoynodetwy Erepd riva wpodpyarépay Thy oxéycy fyovra... Te Kad avTd wor@ xal 
uh TO wpds Erepdy wws Zyorrst. The participle fyorr: can doubtless be regarded as characteriz- 
ing. In I. 10. 2; 13. 1 (cited in preceding note), the participles are in érav clauses. 

3Cf. I. 16.4: yéveris b¢ abrir yAagupd re xal dopadds ofre rapakelroved Tiva Tay Tedelwy, KTH., 
a very similar sentence where od appears, 

4T. 16.4319. 16; II. 6.1 bis; 22. 3 bis; 28.1, 6;in the genitive absolute, add I. 19. 8; IT. 9. 3; 
17.2. It may be added that adjectives that are equivalent to conditional relatives are cor- 
rectly negatived with u4 by Nicomachus: e.g., I. 16.4; IL. 3. 2 dts. 

5 «4 with infinitive: ITI. 2.4, 14. 5, I. 8. 2,6, 11; 9.2; 10. 3; dere uw with infinitive, I. 8. 8, 
ot with infinitive in direct discourse, IT. 20. 5. 

6 gere ob with present indicative, II. 17.1; Gore wA with infinitive, I. 8. 8. 

? These always have u4; e.g., II. 14. 5. 

170 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

and infinitive with ovpBaive (I. 12.1). There is one instance of py 
in a relative clause which is apparently not generalizing or charac- 
terizing: idtoy dé exer ) yewperpixy peodrns, § pndepia tov Aowrar, 
«rh. (II. 24. 3). This is a Hellenistic trait.1 The construction of py 
with the indicative in cautious assertions, however, is classical; it 
occurs in Introduction, I. 8. 7 and I. 0. 3.? 

To come next to the question of the use of the moods, it is most 
important to inquire whether in Nicomachus, as in Hellenistic Greek 
in general,’ the optative shows signs of obsolescence. My count 
shows twenty-six examples of the potential optative (twenty-five with 
av) and twenty-four of the optative in dependent constructions.‘ 
Perhaps the nature of the subject matter precludes the occurrence of 
the real optative in wishes; but there are a few additional circum- 
stances that betray the fact that Nicomachus, too, was beginning to 
forsake this mood. For one thing, in most cases where a protasis has 
the optative, its apodosis will show some construction other than the 
normal potential optative, either a future or a present indicative, or 
an imperative, or there may be no conclusion at all. Out of twenty- 
one optative protases there are only three followed by the potential 
optative in the apodosis.® It is also noteworthy that the optative 
occurs only three times in any other construction than these two, the 
potential and the optative protasis; it is found twice in final clauses 
and once after a verb of fearing. 

Among these examples of the optative there are a few that are note- 
werthy for their violation of ordinary classical syntax, although inall 
these cases the manuscript tradition must be taken into account, and 
at best we cannot be absolutely sure what Nicomachus wrote. One, 

1See Gildersleeve, American Journal of Philology, I, 54. Many examples given by Schmid, 

op. cit., from Philostratus (vol, IV, p. 92), Dio Chrysostom (I, 100), Lucian (I, 245), and others. 

1 Nicomachus uses the perfect each time. Cf. Moulton, of. ctt., pp. 192 f. (with citations of 
papyri). 

4 Moulton, op. ci., 194 ff. 

* Potential optative with dy, I. 1.2; 2.5; 4.2; 9.4; I¥.3}; 12.23 14.2; 15.1%} 19. 20; 23. 
g: ID. 6. 6% G..9 isp Fis 12.85 1g 8. gt at oe. Be 29.95 24.6 27: as: a7. 2 (with 
ws); 29. 1; in indirect question, II. 27. 2; without dy, I. 23. 8 (perhaps here should be added the 
optatives in protases with édvy or el . . . dy, I. 8.9; 12.2; II. 12.33; 24. 1). 

Optatives in dependent constructions: with el, I. 9. 6; 10. 10 bis; 13. 9 bts, 11, 13; 14. 3 bts; 
Il. 4. 3; 6.3; 12.4; 17.5, 7; 23.3; I. 23. 2; T.15.1 dts. With fa, IT. 27.1; 29. 1. With 
ddy, ef . . . dy, as above. 

+ Of the conditions cited in the previous note, only three, I. 15. 1 bis, II. 23. 2, have the optative 
in both clauses. Moulton, of. cil., p. 196, states, ‘‘ Neither in LXX nor in NT is there an example 
of ef with the optative answered with the optative with dv, nor has one been quoted from the 

_ oF 

papyn 

LANGUAGE AND STYLE 171 

and perhaps two, passages contain potential optatives without av.! 
This is a phenomenon attested for Hellenistic Greek, although it was 
not unknown earlier; there are many examples in Homer and cases 
continually occur in the poets, but probably it was not felt to be a 
good prose use in classical times.” Another peculiar usage, of which 
there are four examples, is of the use of édy or ei . . . ay with the 
optative, II. 12. 3: Kay rots wevraydvors of tpiywvo. mpootiBowwro 

.. . yernoovow, rr. (Ee rpiyev mpootefowro S, €t Tpiywvot mpoo~ 
Tievrat H); 1.8.9: e& y&vouro dy ovrws; I. 12. 2: ore dcadrvbeiy 
Gy eis exewous €€ Oy ouveoTnKker eimEep Kat perpyJetn ay Um avTor 
(av om. CSH); II. 24.1: day 5€ wdeioves opou elev (et CSH). 

It is very possible that these cases are all due to a late scribe, for 
there are no instances of such a construction in the New Testament 
and Moulton can find but one, in a Cyzicene inscription, elsewhere.’ 
There are a number of instances in Homer and other classical litera- 
ture where é€apy (ai xe) with the optative represents in indirect discourse 
an original subjunctive, but some of them have received special explana- 
tion and in the great majority of cases the editors have emended the 
texts. In general there is at present not sufficient evidence to fix 
upon this as a common prose construction of Hellenistic Greek. Per- 
haps one of the foregoing instances, I. 12. 2, may be explained on the 
ground that the clause with etzep is after all rather causal than condi- 
tional. Before leaving the optative, it may be remarked that, with 
his evident fondness for the potential construction, Nicomachus 
often employs it where an indicative would serve as well. 

In non-Atticizing Hellenistic Greek, consecutive clauses with wore 
tend to show the infinitive more than the indicative, and when the 
indicative is used, the clause is usually codrdinated with the main 
clause of the sentence, wore meaning ‘and so,’ ‘therefore’; the true 
consecutive clause with the indicative is rare.» Furthermore, the dis- 

1 yévorro, I. 23.8. Here Ast added 4y, but the MSS, followed by Hoche, agree in omitting it. 
In I. 11. 3 (p. 27, 6 Hoche), 4» is to be omitted; see p. 160. 

? See Smyth, Greek Grammar, 1821-1822; Kiihner-Gerth, I, 225 f.; Moulton, 198; Robertson, 
Grammar of the Greck New Testament, 937-938. 

+ Cited p. 239, third paragraph. Schmid, op. cit., cites examples from Lucian (vol. I. 244), 
Aristides (II. 59), Philostratus (one case, vol. IV, go). 

‘See the list in Kiihner-Gerth (ed. 1898), IT. 540, 4. 

‘ This is illustrated by Moulton’s statistics on the New Testament (p. 209; cf. Burton, 235). 
He finds eighty-three examples of Scre; in fifty-one the infinitive is used; of the remaining thirty- 
two which have the indicative, only a very few (he cites but two clear cases) are true subordinate 
consecutive clauses and in the others the particle means ‘and so,’ ‘ therefore.’ 

172 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

tinction between the infinitive, which normally expresses the result 
that the action of the main verb tends to produce, and the indicative, 
expressing the actual result, seems to be more and more ignored, and 
the infinitive comes to be used where the indicative would be more 
natural.’ 

In Nicomachus the use of ware conforms much more nearly to the 
classical usage than does that of the New Testament, where the in- 
dicative has all but disappeared from the real subordinate clause, for 
there are at least five cases where the indicative is clearly consecutive ; * 
but the infinitive 1s used nine times, and in most of these it would be 
difficult to insist that the result expressed is the tendency and not the 
actuality ;* in fact, in most of them the latter interpretation is the 
natural one. This is the only mark of looseness in Nicomachus’s 
usage, unless we include the fact that all the passages with the real 
subordinate indicative (save one where the quasi-future zpdaot 
occurs) employ the future tense. As noted above, wore, meaning 
‘and so,’ ‘therefore,’ occurs several times.* 

As one would expect of an author of his period, Nicomachus almost 
always uses the subjunctive with tva in final clauses. I have noted 
but two cases where the optative is found, strangely enough both after 
verbs in primary tenses, II. 27. 1: womep . . . adddov €€ addov Tpdrov 
arrorekeco Oar S¥vavrat ai mpodrexOetoa peoornres . . . iva eikdrws Kat 
érupa@rata KadowrTo ... ovrws xth.; II. 29. 1: Kupiws yap airy 

. appovia Gv exPein povn mapa tas adXas, etrep py Emimedos 
pyndé pa povy pecornt. cvvdeopern, dhra Suciv,  ovrw tpryn Su- 
aoTavoito, ws 0 KUBos, xth. To this may be joined the instance, re- 
ferred to above, of an optative after a verb of fearing, I. 3.7: as dus ef, 
OTe €orkas Sedvévat, py apa aypyora Tavra Ta paOypara mpoorarroynn,® 

1 Smyth, 2260 ff., and Goodwin, Moods and Tenses, 582 ff., leave no chance for the infinitive 
to express the idea normally conveyed by the indicative. But cf. Burton, 235: ‘‘Since, however, 
an actual result may always be conceived of as that which the cause in question is calculated 
or adapted to produce, the infinitive may be used when the result is obviously actual.” 

27. 8. 12; 13.6; 19. 2 (wpdew:); II. 15.3; 22. 3. 

71. 8.8, 10; 18.6; 19.17, 19; 20.2; 22.2; II. 8.3; 29.2. Save perhaps the first case, these 
may all be regarded as expressing real results. A good illustration of this type is I. 18. 6. 

‘See the examples cited in note 2. Gildersleeve, American Journal of Philology, VII, 173, 
remarks that the future indicative is common enough in this construction. 

$7. 10.10; 19.20; 20. 1; II. 17.1, 7; 21.3}; 24.11. 

€ This is an inaccurate quotation of Plato, Republic, 527 p: Hovs el, Fv 3 éyw, Sri Foxas 
Sedidr: rods woAdovs, wy Soxys Axpyora pabjpara wpoordrres. It is noteworthy that Theon of 
Smyrna, p. 3, 8, quotes it in almost the same form as does Nicomachus: 730s ef, Sri forxas Sed:- 
évac ph dxpnera ra padhuara mporrdrrowu. 

LANGUAGE AND STYLE 173 

These final clauses can be explained, to be sure, as presenting the 
purpose as a mere conception of the mind, without regard for its ful- 
filment, a notion which sometimes justifies the use of an optative 
after a primary tense in classical Greek;’ but Moulton? has very 
acutely observed that such an employment of the optative is a sign 
of a desire to Atticize, and they are perhaps best understood in that 
light, along with the object clause in I. 3. 7. 

After all, the most significant thing about Nicomachus’s use of the 
final clause is that no examples of the so-called ‘ecbatic tva’ * — in- 
troducing clauses that are not purposive at all, but are used as sub- 
stantives where the classical Greek would employ the infinitive — are 
to be found. In this he is quite classical. But sometimes his final 
clauses seem to express an idea very close to that of result, instead of 
purpose, as this example may suffice to illustrate: orav roivwy dvo 
dpwv axpwy Tpiyn dSvacTraTay audorépwr, Eire loaKis towy loads, iva 
KvBos 7, xrd., II. 29. 2. It is worth noting that in one case, II. 2. 1, 
povoy iva with the subjunctive means ‘provided only that’ and in- 
troduces a proviso. 

In clauses meaning ‘as long as,’ ‘as far as,’ there are many combi- 
nations: with the present indicative, péypis o¥, 12 cases;* péeypis 
6owv, I case; > éd’ ooov, 1 case; ® ews, 1 case;" peéypt, 1 case; *® with 
the subjunctive, péypis dv, 9 cases 3° péypis ov av, 1 case;'° éf’ ogov ap, 
1 case; ! €ws dv, 1 case.” 

This variation between the indicative and the subjunctive might 

1 See the list of optatives after primary verbs in Kiihner-Gerth, II, 383 b, ‘‘ wenn die Handlung 
des Finalsatzes, ohne Riicksicht auf ihre Verwirklichung, als bloss gedacht, als reine Vorstellung 
erscheinen soll.” Goodwin, Greek Moods and Tenses, 322-23, regards the optative in final clauses 
after a primary verb as very rare and to be viewed as a mere irregularity of construction, unless the 
leading verb implies a reference to the past as well as the present; but he has only the classical 
writers in mind. 

*P. 197. Cf. also Robertson, p. 983. The optative with fva after a secondary tense is not 
found in the New Testament. There are two examples of it after a primary verb (Ephesians, 
1.17; II Thessalonians, ii. 25), but the text is uncertain in both places and the former can be re- 
garded as a volitive optative (Robertson, loc. cit.). 

3See Moulton, p. 206. 

47.9.4: 10. 7, 8,9; 16.4; 18.15 19.6; 23.7; IL. 8.1; 9. 15 12.6; 13.5; 20. 5. 

SIT. 2.3: méypes Sow. 

67. 18.5: ép Scov Bovderal ris wapaxodovbetr. 

TID. 5.5: fws wpoxwperv OéAXecs (Fws dv ++. Oédys, SH) 

STI. 14. 5: wéxpt Bovdec. 

VELBA 10) 122 O..4s TORS 16: a3 59.°95 AL 4.93 Tre 

07. 13. 3: wéxpes ob Av wpoywperv €béhuper. 

MY, 18.6: &f Scov av evrovg ris Freo@ar. 

WIT. 13.9: fws dv y povds .. . pary. 

174 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

give rise to the suspicion that Nicomachus is less rigidly bound by 
the usual canons than a classical writer would be, and to a limited 
extent this is possibly so. But if closer attention is paid to the clauses 
themselves, his usage will be seen to conform fairly well to the recog- 
nized standards, which demand an indicative if the action is marked 
as a fact referring to a definite present or past occasion and the sub- 
junctive to refer to future or indefinite present time.’ It may be ob- 
served that every one of the examples with the indicative is of the type 
pexpt ob BovAe ‘as far as (up to the point that) you desire,’ * and the 
period of time during which this desire lasts is, in these clauses, con- 
sidered definite, so that their construction is normal. But the same 
interval may be also regarded as of indefinite extent, so that in a few 
clauses of a very similar nature the subjunctive is used.° 

This inconsistency, which is easily explicable and after all very slight, 
is really the only one present; for most of the examples are of a differ- 
ent kind and do not introduce the notion of desire at all. ‘Until (it) 
reaches the monad’‘ may be taken as typical of them; the subjunc- 
tive is obviously proper. It may be remarked that péypu (uéyprs) is 
Nicomachus’s favorite word of this group,° and that he uses it freely 
as a preposition in phrases like péypt tavrds, wéxypts azreipou, in con- 
formity with the general Hellenistic liking for the prepositional use 
of this and similar adverbs. In one phrase, thrice repeated, péypres 
dei, he shows an interesting parallel to the é€ws wdre of Revelation, 
vi. 10, which may be taken as additional evidence for Moulton’s 
contention that this is not a Hebraism.*° 

A few expressions also show peculiarity in the use of dv, namely: 
I. 13. 1, Oray perpetrar (perpyrar, C, perpovpevos, H); I. 13. 12, éay 
apoeBrnOn (e€av, om. H, rpoBd\nOyn, PCSH); I. 8. 7, 6 éav eyy (so GP, 
av cett.); I.9. 2, 6 éav evpeOn pépos eywy (av, CSH). Although all 
these expressions have the support of the oldest and best manuscript 

1 See Smyth, Greek Grammar, 1943, 2383. In the New Testament there are three examples 
of wéyp: (uéxpis of in two of them) followed by the subjunctive without d». See Robertson, 
975- Asa preposition it is common. 

*T. ro. 8 has wéyps of Zyeis, ‘as far as you can’; cf. also II. 2.3; butall the others are of the 
type indicated. 

'E.g., 1.9.4: méxpes dv wpoxywpety dOédps; II. 11.1: wéxpes dv res OfAQ and cf. I. 13.3; 18.6 
as cited above. 

47.8.4: wéxpes dv els rhy.. . wordda xararrhey, xrh. 

‘It occurs in 23 of the 27 cases cited above, besides many where it is prepositional; & ypu 
is attested by but one MS (H) twice; fws twice; wpl» not at all. 

§ Introduction, I. 23.8; II. 4.3; 12.5. Cf. Moulton, 107 n. Nicomachus also uses és del, 
I. 10. 6 bis, ef passim. 

LANGUAGE AND STYLE 175 

authorities, there must remain some question whether Nicomachus 
actually wrote them. But those which show a confusion of éay and 
ay are types of a very common Hellenistic phenomenon,' and must have 
come into the manuscript tradition very early. It is even possible 
that Nicomachus so wrote them. But the other two cases are more 
complicated. The instance in I. 13. 1 is generalizing ; in I. 13. 12, par- 
ticular. | 

The former is easy to parallel in the papyri? and the New Testament, 
and similar clauses even admit the past tenses of the indicative with 
av. It is but a single instance of the “weakening of the connexion 
between compounds of ay and the subjunctive” which Moulton dis- 
cusses on pp. 167 ff. The second example, if genuine, would have to 
be explained in a similar way, but though there are instances of éay 
with the present indicative in the New Testament expressing, as Burton 
thinks,® simple present suppositions, and many of éay with the future 
indicative,*® those where the past tenses are found with éay are so feebly 
attested that such usages, conceivable though they may be, are prob- 
ably best regarded as confined to the more illiterate.’ Nicomachus 
is much more likely to have written zpo8\n6p, which is the reading 
of four MSS. 

The use of periphrastic forms of the verb, which is more frequent 
in late than in classical Greek, 1s not very common in Nicomachus. 
I have noted only a few instances.’ It may be remarked that Nico- 
machus is fond of employing the perfect tense in the normal way, to 
indicate an action completed but continuing in force in the present. 

There are also marks of his post-classical usages in Nicomachus’s 
selection of words. Some, of course, which are purely mathematical 
terms, might well fail to appear elsewhere, even though they were 
known to earlier writers; but there are a considerable number among 
the less strictly arithmetical words which are not credited by the lexica 

1 Cf. Moulton, especially pp. 42 f. 

2 See Moulton, p. 168, for examples. 

2See Burton, 3009. 

‘Burton, 315. There are no instances of this common New Testament construction in 
Nicomachus. 

' Burton, 247. 

§ Moulton, p. 168; Burton, 254. 

7 Moulton, p. 168. 

81.5.1, eloly wvopacpéras asa present; I.14.1,¢lely. . . Siarpovpevor; IT. 6. 3, forrat dwéyouca ; 
II. 6. 7, elvac Necwoperorv. But it may be noted, in addition, that Nicomachus is very apt to use 

with eduf such words as ‘yerrnrixds, karaparixés, or éwsdexrixds in the sense of a simple verb; this 
is virtual periphrasis. 

176 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

to other writers, and still more used by Nicomachus that are found only 
in post-Aristotelian literature. Asa test of this, Nicomachus’s vocabu- 
lary may first be compared with two of the lists printed at the end of 
Thayer’s lexicon of New Testament Greek, one giving New Testa- 
ment words found in post-classical writers generally, and the other, his 
‘Biblical’ list, consisting of words that do not occur until 150 B.c. 
In common with the first group Nicomachus has @pnoxreia, vewrepixds, 
motamos (for zrotos), mpoxomy, and onpeovy; with the second he has 
avranoxpiverOat, Baduds, Emovvaywyy, Emiowpeve, cabefns, Kata 
rav. The lists as given by Thayer overlap, and some of the words 
last cited are to be found in both of them. 

Most of the late words introduced by Nicomachus may be classed, 
however, as new or uncommon compounds, not a few of which are 
possibly innovations of his own; many of them too are doubly or 
trebly compounded. Words assigned to Nicomachus only, or to the 
group embracing him together with the Theologumena Arithmeticae 
and Iamblichus’s Commentary, include dvtitapdvupos, a double 
compound ; also avtimerovOnots, apriaxws, aprioddvapos, aptiorayys, 
Sevrepodeto Bar, Sevreporayys, Sirdkaciacis, eurdéydnv, évavtiorrabety, 
EVAVYTLWYULELY, EVAYTLOVULOS, EMLKOPUMwaLS, KOpidwots, peclovaxis, 
povadiorl, mpooawpevats and ao7pavots. 

Other post-classical words that may be mentioned are the follow- 
ing: dvapditéxtws, avridiacréAhew, avTidiacTorAy, avTuTapwvupel- 
cba, avrirvykpivew, drapaBaros, dapaA\axtos, amapéyKXutTos, atap- 
eumodioroy, amiowots, amoiktAos, airoKaTacTatiKds, amromevoupile, 
dpriomépirros, avArta, yappoedas, Siayvwotikds, Suxordunpa, eido- 
moreco ar, e\domoinots, eudavraler Oa, éudartixds, EvapOpos, évarevi- 
few, évorrpiley, éEdtrwors, eEedvypds, emdivapever, emovvTiP&vat, 
émowpeia, emowpevats, emiTpoyaley, Erepoyeras, Erepwvupos, evie- 
pitnrros, Hpicevpa, Oupndia, iiix@s, Karddmus (as a Stoic term), 
KkatahdyAia, KaTapKTiKos, peyeOivev, pereuPorely, peoiteia, pera- 
Siwkis, ddvyoetia, Opwvupeiy, TapakodovOnua, wapatoAavery, mpoemt- 
oKOTELY, TpoOTTwpEvEY, TpovTOdELKYUVaL, TpoUTTOKEta aL, Tpoyapaypya, 
Cwavayvwcrs, TExvodoyia, UiTepexTrinrev, UTEpEeKTTWaLS, PriaddnAia, 
diiahAnros, ypnowsevery, Wuyoyorvia. 

To these may be added a few which are cited by W. Schmid? as 
late formations used by the Atticists and found also in Nicomachus: 
dvayvwopa, avradaipety, avriotpépe, emefevpioxe, émodvea, 

Os. cil. vol. PL nn 4041 FF. 

LANGUAGE AND STYLE 177 

évuTapye, Tapadecis, TEpiotacis, TepiKuKely, TPOTTwpEvELY, TPOEK- 
TiGevat, ovvvevev, puotodoyerv, multiples in -wwy (dturrAaciwy, etc.) 
and word-groups written together with but a single accent, like 
tovreott, Kald, kalleEns, woavet, and otovei. 

In matters of orthography and accidence Nicomachus does not 
depart so far from the literary standard; yet there are a few instances 
worthy of noticing, e.g., the non-Attic forms yiveoOar and ywaokew, 
with their compounds, are usual with him instead of the classical spell- 
ings, and we may mention the forms drodecxvvew, II. 1. 2; Suordvev 
(Suoravoiro), II. 29. 1; dvoparoreronpevoy, I. 9. 2,1 and wapédwxar, 
I. 3.4. (This, however, is in a quotation of Archytas.) He uses the 
forms mXeioves (I. 10. 3) and aAetova (I. 10. 4; 20. 1) instead of the 
contracted forms which were more common in Attic Greek, and varies 
between the forms wAetoy and adéov.? The spelling oo usually ap- 
pears instead of rr,° contrary to the Attic rule, but in a few words, 
notably dprimépurros, Sirras, karopurtopevov, éAdrrwy, Kpeirrov, and 
ratrew, tr is found, sometimes alternating with oo Among the 
words which occur more than once in the Introduction, tr is used 
exclusively only in éAarrwr. 

1 See, however, the critical note, p. 159. 

2 See W. Schmid, op. cit., vol. III, p. 24. wAéow was usual in the neuter. 

*See W. Schmid, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 579. Some of the words cited above are quoted by 
Nicomachus, and it is perfectly evident that he preferred oc. 

7 =e Original from 
Digitized by GOORTE ——_yivERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

PART II 

TRANSLATION OF THE INTRODUCTION TO ARITHMETIC OF 
NICOMACHUS OF GERASA, THE PYTHAGOREAN 

d by Google 
: 

Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

BOOK I 

CHAPTER I 

The ancients, who under the leadership of Pythagoras first made 1 
science systematic, defined philosophy ' as the love of wisdom. In- 
deed the name itself means this, and before Pythagoras all who had 
knowledge were called ‘wise’ indiscriminately —a carpenter, for 
example, a cobbler, a helmsman, and in a word anyone who was versed 
in any art or handicraft. Pythagoras, however, restricting the title 
so as to apply to the knowledge and comprehension of reality, and 
calling the knowledge of the truth in this the only wisdom, naturally 
designated the desire and pursuit of this knowledge philosophy, as 
being desire for wisdom. 

He is more worthy of credence than those who have given other 2 
definitions, since he makes clear the sense of the term and the thing 
defined. This ‘wisdom’ he defined as the knowledge, or science, of 
the truth in real things, conceiving ‘science’ to be a steadfast and firm 
apprehension of the underlying substance, and ‘real things’ to be those 
which continue uniformly and the same in the universe and never de- 
part even briefly from their existence; these real things? would be 
things immaterial, by sharing in the substance of which everything 
else that exists under the same name and is so called is said to be ‘this 
particular thing,’ * and exists. 

1In his introductory statements Nicomachus does not run counter to widespread beliefs of 
ancient times. The origin of the names‘ philosophy,’ ‘ philosopher’ (g¢:Aovogla, giddcogpos) was 
commonly ascribed to Pythagoras; compare the citations given by Ritter and Preller, Hist. 
Phil. Graec., 3, and (Plut.) Epit., I. 3. 8 (= Diels, Doxographt Graec., 280-281). As to the belief 
that Pythagoras corrected a wrong use of the terms, compare the following parallel with Nicoma- 
chus’s statements furnished by Ammonius (/n Porphyrii Isagogen Prooem., p.g, 7): ‘‘ Pythagoras, 
however, says, ‘ Philosophy is the love of wisdom,’ and he was the first to assail the error found 
among the ancients; for whereas they would call ‘ wise’ a man who pursued any art whatsoever 
. . . heshifted this epithet to God, so as to call him alone wise (God, I mean) and endowed with 
wisdom and knowledge of those things that are eternal" (6 uévrac Tlv@arydpas gyal, Schocodia dori 
g@itla codlas, xpwros Tw wapd Trois wahawrépos éwiords duaprjwari. drecdy yap éxetvon copdy 
wrbuatoy roy HeTivaody peridvra Téxrny . . . wellorqo: Thy wpogrryoplay Taudryy éwi rou Gedw we 
pbvoy éxetvov xadeioGar copdy, roy Gedy Gnu, codlay Te xal Thy Tov Svrwy didlwy Exorra yruoir). 

2 See Part I, p. 92. 

*+745¢ 7+: in Aristotle the technical expression for the particular thing of which being is pred- 
icated. The principles which Nicomachus calls Pythagorean are here expressed in Platonic and 

181 

3 

182 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

For bodily, material things are, to be sure, forever involved 
in continuous flow and change — in imitation of the nature and pe- 
culiar quality of that eternal matter and substance which has been 
from the beginning, and which was all changeable and variable! 
throughout. The bodiless things, however, of which we conceive in 
connection with or together with matter, such as qualities, quanti- 
ties,? configurations, largeness, smallness, equality, relations, actuali- 
ties, dispositions, places, times, all those things, in a word, whereby 
the qualities found in each body are comprehended — all these are of 
themselves immovable and unchangeable, but accidentally they share 
in and partake of the affections of the body to which they belong. 

4 Now it is with such things that ‘wisdom’ is particularly concerned, 

I 

bo 

but accidentally also with things that share in them, that is, bodies. 

CHAPTER II 

Those things, however, are immaterial, eternal, without end, and 
it is their nature to persist ever the same and unchanging, abiding by 
their own essential being, and each one of them is called real in the 
proper sense. But what are involved in birth and destruction, growth 
and diminution, all kinds of change and participation, are seen to 
vary continually, and while they are called real things, by the same 
term as the former, so far as they partake of them, they are not actually 
real by their own nature; for they do not abide for even the shortest 
moment in the same condition, but are always passing over in all 
sorts of changes. To quote the words of Timaeus, in Plato,? “What 
is that which always is, and has no birth, and what is that which is 
always becoming but never is? The one is apprehended by the men- 

Aristotelian terminology. Late Pythagoreans thus ascribed to their founder much that he never 
could have said. 

1 Philoponus (scholia tn Nic., ed. Hoche) on this passage says that Ammonius criticized 
Nicomachus for saying that matter is rperr} cal dd\Xow7%4. ‘He ought to have said rpewrixh wal 
dAowwrix, for the changes and variations take place about it ; it itself does not change nor vary ; 
for if it itself changed, there would have to be still another matter wherein it would vary and 
change. And so it is itself unchanging and unvarying, but its forms vary; I mean quantities, 
qualities, ...’’ Philoponus retorts that when change and variation take place, it really is the sub- 
strate which we say changes; the forms (qualities, etc.) predicated of it do not change; they pass 
away and come into being. It is to be noted that, as in the case of Plato, the question of ‘ primary’ 
and ‘secondary’ matter can be raised in connection with Nicomachus's doctrines; see p. 93. 

2 See Part I, p. 94. 

4 Timaeus, 27D. Nicomachus closely follows the original, with only minor variations. His 
quotations of Plato are not usually so exact; cf. I. 3. 5, 7. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 183 

tal processes, with reasoning, and is ever the same; the other can be 
guessed at by opinion in company with unreasoning sense, a thing 
which becomes and passes away, but never really is.”’ 

Therefore, if we crave for the goal that is worthy and fitting for man, 3 
namely, happiness of life’— and this is accomplished by philosophy 
alone and by nothing else, and philosophy, as I said, means for us de- 
sire for wisdom, and wisdom the science of the truth in things, and of 
things some are properly so called, others merely share the name — 
it is reasonable and most necessary to distinguish and systematize 
the accidental qualities of things. 

Things, then, both those properly so called and those that simply 4 
have the name, are some of them unified and continuous, for example, 
an animal, the universe, a tree, and the like, which are properly and 
peculiarly called ‘magnitudes’ ;? others are discontinuous, in a side- 
by-side arrangement, and, as it were, in heaps, which are called ‘multi- 
tudes,’ a flock, for instance, a people, a heap, a chorus, and the like. 

Wisdom, then, must be considered to be the knowledge of these 5 
two forms. Since, however, all multitude and magnitude® are by 
their own nature of necessity infinite — for multitude starts from a 
definite root and never ceases increasing; and magnitude, when 
division beginning with a limited whole is carried on, cannot bring 
the dividing process to an end, but proceeds therefore to infinity — 
and since sciences‘ are always sciences of limited things, and never 
of infinites, it is accordingly evident that a science dealing either with 

1 The word used by Nicomachus, edfwta, is once employed by Aristotle in the Ethica Nicoma- 
chea, I. 8. 1098 b 20 ff.: cuvddec 5¢ rw Ady Kal Td ed Civ Kal 7d eb wodrrew Tov eddaluora’ aoxeddv 
yap eitwla ris efpyrat xal edwpatia. The ‘happy life,’ in a certain definite sense, is the goal 
that is becoming a man, according to Anstotle. See zbid., I. 10. 1101 a 14 ff., I. 6. 10g7 b 25 — 
1098 a 20. 

2 On this and the following definitions, and their parallels in Aristotle, see p. 112 and notes. 

7 That is, multitude and magnitude per se and unqualified. This point is noted by Proclus, 
In Prim. Eucl. Elem. Lib. Comm., p. 6, 15 Friedl.: & re yap dp:wuds dwd povddos dptdyevos 
dwaverov xe: rhyv avénocw, del 52 6 AndOels wewépacra, cal } Troy peyeOw dialperis ew Awerpor 
xwpet, Ta Se Siacpotuera wdera Gora, cal car dvepyelay wewépacra: ta pdpta rod Shov. In 
the Theologumena Artihmeticae, p. 3 Ast, also there is reference to this matter in the same termi- 
nology: ‘‘ And it [sc. the monad] is evidently beginning, middle, and end of all, since it bounds the 
infinite division of the continuous in the direction of the smaller than itself, and in the direction of 
the greater it cuts off a similar increase in the discrete, and this not by our decree, but by that 
divine nature.” This passage is probably Nicomachean. Hero of Alexandria (Defintiion 119, 
in Hultsch’s Heronis Alexandrint Geometricorum et Stereometricorum Reliquiae, Berlin, 1864, p. 33) 
speaks of magnitude as “‘that which is increased and divided to infinity” (yéye@és dor: rd 
altardueroy cal reuvdueror els dweipor). 

‘The matter included in the rest of this section is touched on by Proclus, op. cif., p. 36. 3 
Friedl.: ériexoweity 3° ad rd wnXlxoy xal woody ofre péyePos dwdas ofre rXHOos GXAA Td Kad 

184 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

magnitude, per se, or with multitude, per se, could never be formulated, 
for each of them is limitless in itself, multitude in the direction of the 
more, and magnitude in the direction of the less. A science, however, 
would arise to deal with something separated from each of them, with 
quantity, set off from multitude, and size, set off from magnitude. 

CHAPTER III 

1 Again, to start afresh, since of quantity one kind 1s viewed by it- 
self, having no relation to anything else, as ‘even,’ ‘odd,’ ‘perfect,’ 
and the like, and the other is relative to something else and is conceived 
of together with its relationship to another thing, like‘ double,’ ‘greater,’ 
‘smaller,’ ‘half,’ ‘one and one-half times,’ ‘one and one-third times,’ 
and so forth, it is clear that two scientific methods will lay hold of 
and deal with the whole investigation! of quantity; arithmetic, ab- 
solute quantity, and music, relative quantity.’ 

2 And once more, inasmuch as part of ‘size’ is in a state of rest and 
stability, and another part in motion and revolution, two other sciences 
in the same way will accurately treat of ‘size,’ geometry the part that 
abides and is at rest, astronomy that which moves and revolves. 

3 Without the aid of these, then, it is not possible to deal accurately 
with the forms of being nor to discover the truth in things, knowledge 
of which is wisdom, and evidently not even to philosophize properly, 
for “just as painting contributes to the menial arts toward correctness 
of theory, so in truth lines, numbers, harmonic intervals, and the 
revolutions of circles bear aid to the learning of the doctrines of wis- 
éxdrepoy woiruévoy* rotro yap ddedovoas roy dwelpwy ras érmiortuas Karavoeiv, ws obx évdy Thr 
wad éxdrepow dweplay yrwoe: wepidaBety. This hestates with regard to Pythagorean mathe- 
matics, and in view of the agreement of terminology to be seen here and in the passage cited in 
the preceding note, it is probable that he used the work of Nicomachus as his authority. 

1 Nicomachus thus subdivides the subject matter and assigns the special fields of the four 
mathematical sciences: I, treating number (rd woody) (1) as such, absolutely («xa#’ davré), Arith- 
metic; and (2) relative number (xpds 4\Ao), Music; II, treating quantity (rd xmXxov) (1) at 
rest, Geometry ; (2) in motion, Astronomy (ega:pix4). Proclus, op. cil., Prol., p. 35. 21 ff., Friedl., 
gives the same division of the field of the mathematical sciences, using the same terms, in his re- 
port of the Pythagorean mathematics, probably drawing upon this work. It is to be noted that 
Nicomachus does not in fact adhere strictly to his classification, for he treats in this work of rel- 
ative number, which falls in the domain of Music, and in the discussion of linear, plane and solid 
numbers he comes close to Geometry. The classification of Theon of Smyrna (cf. Part I, p. 113, 
n. 4) includes Music (i.e., the mathematical consideration of harmony) under Arithmetic and 
avoids this inconsistency. 

? To illustrate what is meant by relative things Aristotle uses the example of double and half 
(Met., IV. 15. 1020 b 26). 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 185 

dom,” says the Pythagorean Androcydes.' Likewise Archytas of 4 
Tarentum,’ at the beginning of his treatise On Harmony, says the same 
thing, in about these words: “It seems to me that they do well to 
study mathematics, and it is not at all strange that they have correct 
knowledge about each thing, what it is. For if they knew rightly the 
nature of the whole, they were also likely to see well what is the nature 
of the parts. About geometry, indeed, and arithmetic and astronomy, 
they have handed down to us a clear understanding, and not least also 
about music. For these seem to be sister sciences; for they deal 
with sister subjects, the first two forms of being.” 

Plato, too, at the end of the thirteenth book of the Laws,*? to which 5 

! He is mentioned as a writer On Symbols (wept cvpBddwv) in the Theol. Arith., p. 40 Ast. 

2 The passage here quoted is found also, at greater length, in Porphyry, In Plolem. Harm., 
p. 236; a few words of the same passage appear in Iamblichus, In Nicomachi Ariithmeticam 
Introductionem Liber, p.g, 1 Pistelli; cf. Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokraitker, vol. I', pp. 330 
ff.,and Blass, in Mélanges Graux, pp. 574 & On Archytas, and the problem of the title of this 
work, see pp. 20 ff. 

* The Epinomis, from which Nicomachus here quotes 991 D ff., is now recognized as not genu- 
inely Platonic. Nicomachus doubtless cited the passage from memory, for he does not give it 
exactly; but he can hardly have distorted it as Hoche would make him. The portion of Hoche’s 
text that seems to demand correction is gavfoera: 5 av & KXéyouer dpGis, ef res els Evy BASrwy 
wdera parédver. This reading introduces a future indicative with dy, a construction not else- 
where found in Nicomachus, and one which a writer of his class would not be likely to use, although 
it occurs in late Greek. Certainly he would not thrust such a palpable modernism into a quo- 
tation of Plato. Hoche perhaps has not reported the manuscripts correctly on this passage; his 
apparatus sometimes is faulty (see Hultsch, in Neue Jahrbiicher fiir Philologie und Pddagogik, 
vol. XCVII, 1868, pp. 762 ff.). I have not had access to the manuscripts, but I note that C. F. A. 
Nobbe (Specimen Ariihmeticae Nicomacheae, Leipzig, 1828, p. 19), who used the Niirnburg and 
Wolfenbiittel manuscripts (N and I), omits ef here, and that Hoche does not report the fact. 
Now this word ef is the cause of all the difficulty with the text. It did not occur in the original, 
but it could easily have been inserted by a scribe who misunderstood the preceding dv. The 
familiarity of the phrase ef res would be another motive; ép@os res, on the other hand, is unusual. 
The introduction of ed, also, might bring in pav@dve: for pardeyp. I therefore read garhceras 
& dy, & Aéyouey, dpOds res els by BXéxwy wavra pavOdey. The change of the last word is supported 
by Nobbe’s manuscripts, but is not so necessary as the omission of ed. 

The original passage reads: “‘ Every geometrical figure, system of numbers, composition of har- 
mony and the regularity in the revolution of the stars must appear to one, who properly learns, 
to be one in principle in all cases; and it will so appear, if, as we say, one learns correctly, looking 
toone thing. For it will appear to them on consideration that there naturally exists one bond of 
all these things; and if any one will pursue these matters in another way, he must call to his aid 
Fortune, as we say. For without these sciences there will never arise a fortunate being in the 
cities; but this is the mode, this the nurture, these the lessons, whether hard or easy; this way 
must one proceed, and to neglect them is impious before the gods. ... And the man that has 
apprehended all this in this way, this man I call most truly wise, and so I also maintain both 
in jest and in earnest”’ (way didypappa dpifuot re ctornua nal dpyovlas cictacw dracav rijs 
re TaY doTpiby wepimopds Thy duodoylay ofcay ulay ardvrwy dvadaryvac def Tw KaTd Tpdror 
avd vorri, dvadaricera: dé, dv, & A€youer, dp0as Tis els bv BrXerwy parOdry decuds yap weducws 
wdvrwy roérwy els dvadarioerat dtavoovpévas: ef 6 AdAws wws raira perayepetral ris, rixny 
det xaheiv, Gowep xal A€youer. ob yap Avev ye robrTwy uhroré ris év wher eldaluwy yérnrac piais, 

186 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

some give the title Te Philosopher, because he investigates and de- 
fines in it what sort of man the real philosopher should be, in the 
course of his summary of what had previously been fully set forth and 
established, adds: “ Every diagram, system of numbers, every scheme 
of harmony, and every law of the movement of the stars, ought to 
appear one to him who studies rightly ; and what we say will prop- 
erly appear if one studies all things looking to one principle, for there 
will be seen to be one bond for all these things, and if any one attempts 
philosophy in any other way he must call on Fortune to assist him. 
For there is never a path without these; this is the way, these the 
studies, be they hard or easy; by this course must one go, and not 
neglect it. The one who has attained all these things in the way I 
describe, him I for my part call wisest, and this I maintain through 

6 thick and thin.” For it is clear that these studies are like ladders 
and bridges that carry our minds from things apprehended by sense 
and opinion to those comprehended by the mind and understanding, 
and from those material, physical things, our foster-brethren known to 
us from childhood, to the things with which we are unacquainted, 
foreign to our senses, but in their immateriality and eternity more 
akin to our souls, and above all to the reason ? which is in our souls. 

7 And likewise in Plato’s Republic, when the interlocutor of Socrates 
appears to bring certain plausible reasons to bear upon the mathemati- 
cal sciences, to show that they are useful to human life, arithmetic 
for reckoning, distributions, contributions, exchanges, and partner- 
ships, geometry for sieges, the founding of cities and sanctuaries, and 
the partition of land, music for festivals, entertainment, and the 
worship of the gods, and the doctrine of the spheres, or astronomy, 
for farming, navigation and other undertakings, revealing beforehand 
the proper procedure and suitable season, Socrates, reproaching him, 
says: “You amuse me, because you seem to fear that these are use- 
less studies that I recommend; but that is very difficult, nay, impos- 
sible. For the eye of the soul, blinded and buried by other pursuits, 
is rekindled and aroused again by these and these alone, and it is 

ANN’ obros 6 rpéwos, aury W Tpodh, Tatra rd padtpara, efre yadewd efre Addia, ravry wopevréor: 

dpedijoa 8¢ ob Oeuirdy dors Gedy . . . roy 5¢ Eduwapyra Tatra ovrws efknpéra, Tovroy Aéyw Tor 
ddnOécrara codwraroy, éy xal ducyupltoya: walftwr cal owovidiwr dua .. .). 

Theon of Smyrna quotes the first part of this passage, p. 84, 7 ff. Hiller, and the last part, 
p. 2, 16 ff. 

1 A reference to the voir as the highest part of the soul in accordance with the ancient view that 
the soul is made up of parts. 

TRANSLATION: BOORk I 187 

better that this be saved than thousands of bodily eyes, for by it 
alone is the truth of the universe beheld.” ! 

CHAPTER IV 

Which then of these four methods* must we first learn? Evi- 
dently, the one which naturally exists before them all, is superior 
and takes the place of origin and root and, as it were, of mother to 
the others. And this is arithmetic,’? not solely because we said that 
it existed before all the others in the mind of the creating God like 
some universal and exemplary plan, relying upon which as a design 
and archetypal example the creator of the universe sets in order his 
material creations and makes them attain to their proper ends; but 
also because it is naturally prior in birth, inasmuch as it abolishes 
other sciences with itself,* but is not abolished together with them. 

! The original passage (Republic, 527 D ff.) reads: ‘“‘‘ You amuse me,’ said I, ‘ because you are 
like one who fears the crowd lest you seem to enjoin useless studies. It is, however, not at all a 
trifling matter, but a difficult one to believe that in these studies some instrument of every man’s 
soul is cleansed and rekindled, which was being destroyed and blinded by his other pursuits, a 
thing more worthy to save than countless eyes: for by it alone is truth beheld.’” (780s el, 4p 
6 éyw, dri Fouwas Sedidri rods woddovs, wh Soxgs Aypyora padsuara wpocrarrey. 7d 3 toriv ob 
wdvu davdow d\Ad yarewdr wmigretcae Sri dv rovras rots padhuaciw dxdorov bpyardy re Puyis 
éxxa@alperal re xal dvatwwupeirat dwohAvuevor wal truddotperoy twd Tay Addu éwirydeupdrwy, 
Kpetrroy ov owbijra: puplwy dupdrwr' poyy yap airy dd\jGea dpara:). Theon of Smyrna (p. 3, 8 ff. 
Hiller) quotes this passage. 

* This group of studies, music, arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy, make up the ‘quadn- 
vium,’ or, as Boethius, who apparently first used the term, called it, ‘quadruvium.’ ‘ Trivium,’ 
to designate the study of grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic, may also go back to his time. See 
Gow, op. ci., p. 72, note. 

+ Plato also said that arithmetic should be first learned and that it is the basis of all other arts. 
Rep., §22 C: olov rovro rd xowdy, Gp waoa wpooxphyrac Téyvar Te wal didvowas xal dmiorhHua, 8 
cal wavrl évy wowros dedyxy pavOdvev, woiov; fn. 1d haddor rovro, Fv 5 éyw, Td Ey re xal 
Ta dvo wal rd rpla diayiyywower, Adyw 6¢ avrd éy xepadaly dpwWyudr re wal Aoyirudy. Ff ovyx 
ourw wepl rovrwy Eye, ws wdca tréyyn te xal dmiorhun dvayadtera: avrav péroxos yiyverGac; It 
is interesting to observe parallels to many of the topics of this chapter in Caxton’s Mfirrour of 
the World (Publications of the Early English Text Society, extra series, vol. CX, pp. 36-37): ‘The 
fourth scyence is called arsmetrique. This science cometh after rethoryque, ande is sette in the 
myddle of the vii sciences. And without her may none of the vii sciences parfyghtly ne weel and 
entierly be knowen. Wherfor it is expedyent that it be weel knowen and conned; ffor alle the 
sciences take of it their substaunce in suche wise that without her they may not be. And for this 
reson was she sette in the myddle of the vii sciences, and there holdeth her nombre; ffor fro her 
procede alle maners of nombres, and in alle thynges renne, come and goo. And no thyng is without 
nombre. But fewe perceyue how this may be, but yf he haue be maistre of the vii artes so longe 
that he can truly save the troughe.” 

‘Cf. below II. 22. 3. Nicomachus of course refers merely to abolishment in thought. Arith- 
metic, since it treats of numbers and numerical relations fundamental to the other sciences, Is 
logically prior to them, and if it did not exist they could not exist. Nicomachus uses both wpo- 

188 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

For example, ‘animal’ is naturally antecedent to ‘man,’ for abolish 
‘animal’ and ‘man’ is abolished; but if ‘man’ be abolished, it no 
longer follows that ‘animal’ is abolished at the same time. And 
again, ‘man’ is antecedent to ‘schoolteacher’; for if ‘man’ does not 
exist, neither does ‘schoolteacher,’ but if ‘schoolteacher’ is nonex- 
istent, it is still possible for ‘man’ to be. Thus since it has the prop- 
erty of abolishing the other ideas with itself, it is likewise the older. 

3 Conversely, that 1s called younger and posterior which implies 
the other thing with itself,’ but is not implied by it, like ‘musician,’ 
for this always implies ‘man.’ Again, take ‘horse’; ‘animal’ is 
always implied along with ‘horse,’ but not the reverse; for if ‘animal’ 
exists, it is not necessary that ‘horse’ should exist, nor if ‘man’ 
exists, must ‘musician’ also be implied. 

4 So it is with the foregoing sciences; if geometry exists, arithmetic 
must also needs be implied, for it is with the help of this latter that we 
can speak of triangle, quadrilateral, octahedron, icosahedron, double, 
eightfold, or one and one-half times, or anything else of the sort which 
is used as a term by geometry, and such things cannot be conceived 
of without the numbers that are implied with each one. For how can 
‘triple’ exist, or be spoken of, unless the number 3 exists beforehand, or 
‘eightfold’ without 8? Buton the contrary 3, 4, and the rest might be 

5 without the figures existing to which they give names. Hence arith- 
metic abolishes geometry along with itself, but is not abolished by 
it, and while it is implied by geometry, it does not itself imply geometry. 

CHAPTER V 

t And once more is this true in the case of music; not only because 
the absolute is prior to the relative, as ‘great’ to ‘greater’ and ‘rich’ 

yevéorepos and wpérepos in this passage with the meaning ‘ prior.’ Aristotle uses the term wpérepos 
and his logic forms the basis for Nicomachus’s present argument. Forinstance, in Met., 1o19 a1 ff., 
after discussing several forms of wpérepa and worepa, he has the following: 7a pévy 3% ovrw 
Aévyera: wpérepa xal vorepa, ra 8¢ ward piow Kal obelar, dca évddyerac elva: Avev Adrwr, éxeiva 
3 dvev éxelvwr ut = 7) Gtaupdoe: éxpijro TAdrwy. He also uses the verb curarapeto@a (‘ abolish’) 
as does Nicomachus: e.g., Met., 1059 b 39: 9 8¢ cvvavaipetra: trois yéveot ra efSy, Ta yéwy Ta8is 
dpyais foixe waddov’ dpxh yap Td cvvarvaipoiv. Cf. also Iamblichus Jn Nicom., p. 10, 2 Pistelli. 

1This form of argument also is Aristotelian, e.g., Top., VI. 6.17: éwigdpe: yap éxdory rap 
Siadopay Td olxeioy yévos, xaGdrep 74 wetdy cal 7d Slwour Td (por cuvemigépe:, Logically exhausted 
it stands in Top., II. 4. 111 a 25 ff. thus: ob yap dvayxaioy bea rp yévec dwdpye: xal ry elder brdpyer’ 
Boa 8¢ rq efSe: bwdpyer dvayeaiov xal ry yéver: doa yap ry “yéves ovx drdpxe, olde ry efSe- Soa 
be ry elSec py Uwdpye, ovx dvayxaioy Ty yéve: uh Uwdpxeiv. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 189 

to ‘richer’ and ‘man’ to ‘father,’ but also because the musical har- 
monies, diatessaron, diapente, and diapason, are named for numbers ; 
similarly all of their harmonic ratios are arithmetical ones, for the 
diatessaron is the ratio of 4:3, the diapente that of 3:2, and the 
diapason the double ratio; and the most perfect, the di-diapason, 
is the quadruple ratio. 

More evidently still astronomy attains through arithmetic the in- 
vestigations that pertain to it, not alone because it is later than geom- 
etry ' in origin — for motion naturally comes after rest — nor because 
the motions of the stars have a perfectly melodious harmony,’ but also 
because risings, settings, progressions, retrogressions, increases, and 
all sorts of phases are governed by numerical cycles and quantities. 

So then we have rightly undertaken first the systematic treatment 3 

of this, as the science naturally prior, more honorable, and more ven- 
erable, and, as it were, mother and nurse of the rest; and here we will 
take our start for the sake of clearness. 

CHAPTER VI 

All that has by nature with systematic method been arranged in 
the universe * seems both in part and as a whole to have been deter- 
mined and ordered in accordance with number, by the forethought 
and the mind of him that created all things; for the pattern was fixed, 
like a preliminary sketch, by the domination of number preéxistent * 
in the mind of the world-creating God, number conceptual only and 
immaterial in every way, but at the same time the true and the eternal 
essence, so that with reference to it, as to an artistic plan, should be 
created all these things, time, motion, the heavens, the stars, all sorts 
of revolutions. 

It must needs be, then, that scientific number, being set over such 
things as these, should be harmoniously constituted, in accordance 
with itself; not by any other but by itself. Everything that is har- 

1 Plato in Rep., 528 A—B points out that it is a mistake to study bodies (oreped) in motion be- 
fore studying them per se (abré xaé’ airé). 

? The music of the spheres. Boethius, 1.1, paraphrases: quod ermonicis modulationibus molus 
fpse celebratur aslrorum. 

1 This chapter, with I. 4. 2, gives the fullest information we have about Nicomachus’s theories 
of cosmogony. See Part I, p. 107. 

4 This is the eternal number, to be distinguished from the‘ scientific number’ mentioned in the 
next section. Cf. Part I, p. 98. 

2 

3 

Igo NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

moniously constituted is knit together out of opposites ’ and, of course, 
out of real things; for neither can non-existent things be set in har- 
mony, nor can things that exist, but are like one another, nor yet 
things that are different, but have no relation one to another. It re- 
mains, accordingly, that those things out of which a harmony 1s made 
are both real, different, and things with some relation to one another. 

4 Of such things, therefore, scientific number consists; for the most 
fundamental species in it are two, embracing the essence of quantity,” 
different from one another and not of a wholly different genus, odd and 
even, and they are reciprocally * woven into harmony with each other, 
inseparably and uniformly, by a wonderful and divine Nature, as 
straightway we shall see. 

CHAPTER VII 

1 Number‘ is limited multitude or a combination of units or a flow 5 
of quantity made up of units; and the first division of number is even 
and odd. 

2 The even ° is that which can be divided into two equal parts without 
a unit intervening in the middle;” and the odd is that which cannot 
be divided into two equal parts because of the aforesaid intervention 
of a unit. 

3 Now this is the definition after the ordinary conception; by the 
Pythagorean doctrine, however, the even number is that which ad- 
mits of division into the greatest and the smallest parts at the same 
operation, greatest in size and smallest in quantity, in accordance 

1 Note that the definition of harmony quoted from Philolaus in II, 19. 1 implies as much, and 
compare Part I, pp. 100, 120, on the general subject of harmony in the numerical system. 

? That is, they are elementary, for they are formed by the two elements of number, the monad 
and dyad respectively, and embody by reason of this origin ‘ sameness’ and ‘ otherness,’ the funda- 
mental cosmic forces. Ci. Part I, p. go. 

*Cf. Theon of Smyrna, p. 23. 3 Hiller: “And the even and the odd numbers alternate, being 
observed in alternate places” (¢paAAdt & eloly dAAAAcis of re Apri: cal olf wrepirrol wap fra 
Gewpoveror). 

‘Cf. Part I, p. 114, on these definitions. 

* The translation ‘ flow’ for xéua is that adopted by Heath (Euclid, IT. 280), whose note on defi- 
nitions of number may be consulted, xéua elsewhere in Nicomachus is used to mean ‘ series’ (see 
the Glossary), but probably the metaphorical idea is present even in those cases. 

® Theon of Smyrna, p. 21, 22 Hiller: wat Apriot péw eloiv ol dwidexdperot thy els foa Sialpeciv 

_ . wepiogol dé ol els Avia dcarpobuerot, etA. Euclid defines thus: “An even number is one 
that is halved” (dprios dpiOuds doriv 4 Slya Scacpobueror), Elements, VII, Def. 6. 
7See Part I, p. 122 with note 1. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I IgI 

with the natural contrariety ' of these two genera; and the odd is 
that which does not allow this to be done to it, but is divided into 
two unequal parts. 

In still another way, by the ancient definition, the even is that which 4 
can be divided ? alike into two equal and two unequal parts, except 
that the dyad,’ which is its elementary form, admits but one division, 
that into equal parts; and in any division whatsoever it brings to 
light only one species of number, however it may be divided, inde- 
pendent of the other. The odd‘ is a number which in any division 
whatsoever, which necessarily is a division into unequal parts, shows 
both the two species of number together, never without intermixture 
one with another, but always in one another’s company. 

By the definition in terms of each other, the odd is that which 5 
differs by a unit from the even in either direction, that is, toward the 
greater or the less, and the even is that which differs by a unit in 
either direction from the odd, that is, is greater by a unit or less by a 
unit. 

1 That is, halves are the greatest possible parts of a term in magnitude; and there is a smaller 
number of them than of any other fractional part. Thus greater magnitude of factors is associ- 
ated with a smaller number of them; this is the ‘ natural contrariety ’ of magnitude and quantity. 
Cf. Boethius, I. 4, for a discussion of this notion, and Iamblichus, p. 12, 3 ff. Pistelli. This 
principle may be illustrated by what was called the “lambdoid diagram” (see Part I, p. 127) 
from its likeness to the Greek lambda, A. This diagram sets forth in the form of the letter 
lambda, converging at unity, the series of natural numbers and the series of fractions, thus: 

5 t 

and soon. It will be noted that the corresponding integers and fractions show the ‘ natural con- 
trariety’ referred to. The diagram occurs in Iamblichus’s commentary (p. 14, 3 ff. Pistelli) fol- 
lowing on the discussion of these definitions, and it is referred to in Theol. Arith., p. 3 (bottom) 
Ast. 

? When an even number is divided into two parts, whether equal or unequal, these parts are 
always either both odd or both even (‘ only one species of number,’ as Nicomachus says). Iambli- 
chus, p. 12, 14 ff. Pistelli. See Heath, History, vol. I, p. 70. 

3 Tamblichus (p. 13, 7 ff. Pistelli) notes that the monad is distinguished from all the odd num- 
bers by not even admitting division into unequal parts, and the dyad from the even numbers by 
admitting division into equal parts only. Theon does not notice this property of the dyad, but 
discusses at some length the question whether the monad Is odd or even (p. 21, 24 ff. Hiller). 
On Nicomachus’s doctrine, that the monad and dyad are both elements of number and not them- 
selves numbers but its ‘ beginnings,’ compare Part I, pp. 116 ff. 

‘If an odd number is divided into two parts these will always be unequal and one odd, the 
other even (‘ the two species of number’), 

192 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

CHAPTER VIII 

1 Every number is at once half the sum of the two on either side of 
itself,! and similarly half the sum of those next but one in either direc- 
tion, and of those next beyond them, and so on as far as it is possible 

2 to go. Unity alone, because it does not have two numbers on either 
side of it, is half merely of the adjoining number; hence unity is the 
natural starting point of all number. 

3 By subdivision of the even,’ there are the even-times even, the 
odd-times even, and the even-times odd. The even-times even and 
the even-times odd are opposite to one another, like extremes, and 
the odd-times even is common to them both like a mean term. 

4 Now the even-times even * is a number which is itself capable of 
being divided into two equal parts, in accordance with the proper- 
ties of its genus,* and with each of its parts similarly capable of divi- 
sion, and again in the same way each of their parts divisible into two 
equals until the division of the successive subdivisions reaches the 

5 naturally indivisible unit. Take for example 64; one half of this is 
32, and of this 16, and of this the half is 8, and of this 4, and of this 2, 
and then finally unity is half of the latter, and this is naturally in- 
divisible and will not admit of a half. 

6 It is a property of the even-times even that, whatever part of it 
be taken, it is always even-times even in designation, and at the same 
time, by the quantity of the units in it, even-times even in value; 

1 Thus 5s is half the sum of 4 + 6, 3 +7,2+8, etc. Fora typically Pythagorean application 
of this principle cf. Theol. Arith., p. 28 f. Ast. 

? Euclid, among the definitions of Elem., VII, defines the even-times even, even-times odd, 
odd-times even and odd-times odd (the latter is “one which is measured by an odd number an 
odd number of times’’). Nicomachus confines himself to a tripartite division of the even only; 
Euclid’s classification applies to all numbers. The ‘odd-times odd’ of Euclid is not found in 
Nicomachus’s Jnéroduction at all, and in defining the three classes given by both Nicomachus and 
Euclid the former uses somewhat different formulas, which are consistently praised by Iamblichus 
in his commentary. (See the notes on I. 8. 7, above p. 127, and Nesselmann, p. 192.) Theon 
(p. 25, 5 ff. Hiller) gives the same classification as Nicomachus here, and like him refers to even 
numbers alone. His definitions are compared to those of Nicomachus in the following notes. It 
may be noted that ‘odd-times odd’ occurs in Theon as another name for the prime number 
(p. 23, 14 Hiller). See Heath, History, vol. I, pp. 70 ff., on the classification of numbers. 

* Theon of Smyma, p. 25, 7 ff. Hiller, gives the definition of the even-times even substantially 
as follows: It is a number that has three characteristics: (1) It is produced by the multiplication 
of two even numbers; (2) all its parts are even, down to unity; (3) none of its parts has its desig- 
nation in terms of an odd number. Euclid’s definition is: ‘The even-times even number is that 
which is measured by an even number an even number of times” (dptidacs Aprios dpcOpyds 

éoriv 6 bord dprlou dpi@uod perpovuevos xara Apruv dpiOudv), Elements, VII, Def. 8. 
‘*Tts genus’ is the even; cf. I. 7.2. So too Philoponus notes (ed. Hoche, p. 15). 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 193 

and that neither of these ' two things will ever share in the other class. 
Doubtless it is because of this that it is called even-times even, be- 
cause it is itself even and always has its parts,’ and the parts of its 
parts down to unity, even both in name and in value; in other words, 
every part that it has is even-times even in name and even-times even 
in value.* 

1 The specific things meant by ‘neither of these’ (éxdrepor rodrwr) are the ‘name’ (xporryoplay, 
Pp. 15,17 Hoche, or better Sua implied in dpridxts dpridvuuor, ibid.) and the ‘value’ (d¢rapus 
implied in p. 15, 18, dpridxis dpriodtvayor) of any part of the even-times even number. 
These “never share in another variety”; i1.e., another variety of number, or of even numbers, 
than the even-times even. They are called halves, fourths, eighths, etc. (even-times even names), 
and their values are always 2, 4, 8, 16, etc. (even-times even numbers). On the use of S¢vayus 
and dpriodévapos here, cf. on I. 8. 7. 

? Philoponus writes the following scholium upon this: ‘‘Here then Euclid is convicted of mak- 
ing a poor definition of the even-times even number in his Seventh Book ; for he says that an even- 
times even number is one that is measured by an even number an even number of times (4 bra 
dpriov dpiduot per povweros xara Apriovy dpifudy). For by this definition the merely even numbers 
also that are not even-times even, will be found to be even-times even; e.g., 24 15 not even- 
times even, for it is not subdivided to the monad; but according to Euclid it will be found to 
be even-times even; for, look you, it is measured by 4, an even number, an even number of 
times, 6; for 4 X 6 = 24. So his was a bad definition.”’ 

2 Cf. the note on I. 8. 6 for the meaning of this statement. The word translated ‘value’ is 
dvvayus, which as a mathematical term usually means ‘square’ or ‘square root,’ but in non-tech- 
nical Greek may bear the meaning assigned (e.g., Thuc., VI, 46, 3). The word is again similarly 
employed in section ro of this chapter and in I. 9. 2; 10. §; besides which the phrase dpredxis 
dprioduvayos seems to have the corresponding sense of “‘even-times even in value” (I. 8. 6). 
This interpretation has the support of Boethius, while Philoponus understands the passage differ- 
ently. Boethius, 1. 9, says, Sed ideo mihi videtur hic numerus pariler par vocatus, guod cius omnes 
parles et nomine ef quantiiale pares pariler inveniantur. ‘Quantity,’ however, does not represent 
Svvauis as well as ‘value,’ since it is strictly a case of number rather than of quantity. T,L. Heath 
understands évvajus in the sense proposed, and commenting on this passage of Nicomachus (Euclid, 
IT, 282) says: “‘He says... that any part, i.e.,any submultiple, of an even-times even number is 
called by an even-times even designation, while it also has an even-times even value .. . when ex- 

pressed as so many actual units. That is, the --th part of 2" (where m is less than 7) is called after 
37m 

the even-times even number 2”, while its actual value (6¢vayes) in units is 2"~", which is also an 
even-times even number.” 

On the other hand Philoponus (schol. 56 on I. 8. 6,p. 15 Hoche) says: “Since he does not employ 
the ordinary language of the usage of most people, I think it reasonable first to impart the mean- 
ing of the various terms and then to interpret the whole sense of what is said here. Now he calls 
duvduecs the numbers from which the parts of any number take their names, e.g., the half from 
2, etc.... Nowhe says that all the parts of the even-times even are themselves even-times even 
in name (dpridats dpriweupa), and the duvdwes, from which their names are taken, are even- 
times even powered (dpridais dprioddvanor). For example, the even-times even number 16 has 
as its second part 8, 4 as its fourth, 2 as its eighth; each of these parts is even-times even. ... 
So reasonably the parts are called even-times even in name because they take their names from 
even-times even numbers. . . . And the ‘powers,’ from which the parts are names, are even-times 
even powered (dpriduts dprwddvayo). .. . Similarly the expression ‘and in the number of their 
monads dpridxis dprioddvayow’; for 4 of 16, named from 4, has the number of monads of 4, from 
which it is named, dpriducs dpriodtvayor, So the expression ‘in the number of monads in it’ is to 
be taken either as applying to the designation of the fraction (uéprov) or as applying to the part 
(uépos) itself” (but he immediately states that he prefers the former explanation). What Philo- 

8 

194 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

There is a method of producing the even-times even, so that none 
will escape, but all successively? fall under it, if you do as follows: 

9o As you proceed from unity, as from a root, by the double ratio to 

Io 

infinity, as many terms as there are will all be even-times even, and it 
is impossible to find others besides these; for instance, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 
32, 64, 128, 256, 512. 

Now each of the numbers set forth was produced by the double 
ratio, beginning with unity, and is in every respect even-times even, 
and every part? that it may be found to have is always named from 

ponus understands by dprideis dpriodtvayos may be seen from his statement in this same scho- 
lium: ‘And 16 would be dpridecs dprioddvayos if from it there should be named some part of an 
even-times even number.” 

It is quite tempting to consider Sérajus the quotient of a factor when the latter is divided into 
the number under consideration, but the rendering adopted seems to fit the context better, while 
on the other hand Philoponus himself virtually confesses that his interpretation of S¢rayis does not 
hold in I. 9. 2 (To take a single example, the number 18, etc.), when he says, “‘If he meant ddvauis 
to be the number from which the part gets its name, and the half gets its name from 2, how 
is it that he says here that the half is odd in S¢vayus? We must therefore read with hyperbaton, 
i.e., ‘ the half, 9, evenly named in dévapcs (that is, from 2, for the half is the second part), is odd in 
its number, 9.’"" That is, in the text, rd per fuuocv dpriaxas wropacpudvor brdpyet & wepurody TH 
duvdpyec, he proposes to connect rp Surduer with dvopagyévor, a hyperbaton too violent to be 
probable. In I. 9. 2 S¢vapus seems certainly to mean ‘value,’ and it is hardly possible that it 
would be used in different senses in such similar contexts. A further question suggested by this 
passage is whether Nicomachus would class the monad as an even number, as, strictly speaking, 
is implied here. In the Theol. Arith., p. 3 Ast, we find the statement that the monad “embraces 
all things in potentiality,” and among the specific statements following it is said that “ it is even 
and odd and even-times odd.” The monad was called Male-Female, and this designation is 
perhaps connected with the notion that it is both even and odd. See Part I and on section 13 
below. 

1 Reading ¢&s (found in several MSS) for Hoche’s ¢§ évés. 

1 Boethius, I.9: Jilud atdem non minima consideratione dignum esi, quod cius omnis pars ab una 
parte quacumgue, quae intra ipsum numerum est, denominalur tanlamque summam quantilalis 
includit quota pars est alier numerus pariter parts illius, qut eum continel, quantilatis. Itaque fil, 
ut sibi partes ipsae respondcant, ul quota pars una esi, lantam habeai altera quantitatem, ef quota pars 
tsta est, fantam in priore summa necesse sit multiludinis invenirt. ‘This correspondence of factors 
is thus graphically shown in one of the MSS: 

1 y, 4 8 16 32 64 128 

and with an odd number of terms: 
1 2 4 8 16 32 64 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 195 

some one of the numbers before it in the series,! and the sum of units 
in this part is the same as one of the numbers before it, by a system 
of mutual correspondence, indeed, and interchange. If there is an 
even number of terms of the double ratio from unity, not one mean 
term can be found, but always two, from which the correspondence 
and interchange of factors and values, values and factors, will pro- 
ceed in order, going first to the two on either side of the means, then to 
the next on either side, until it comes to the extreme terms, so that 
the whole will correspond in value to unity and unity to the whole. For 
example, if we set down 128 as the largest term, the number of terms 
will be even, for there are eight in all up to this number; and they 
will not have one mean term, for this 1s impossible with an even number, 
but of necessity two, 8and 16. These will correspond to each other as 
factors; for of the whole, 128, 16 is one eighth and conversely 8 is 
one sixteenth. Thence proceeding in either direction, we find that 
32 is one fourth, and 4 one thirty-second, and again 64 is one half, 
and 2 one sixty-fourth, and finally at the extremes unity is one one- 
hundred-twenty-eighth, and conversely 128 is the whole, to correspond 
with unity. 

If, however, the series consists of an odd number of terms, seven 
for example, and we deal with 64, there will be of necessity one mean 
term in accordance with the nature of the odd;? the mean term will 
correspond to itself because it has no partner; and those on either side 
of it in turn will correspond to one another until this correspondence 
ends in the extremes. Unity, for example, will be one sixty-fourth, 
and 64 the whole, corresponding to unity; 32 is one half, and 2 one 
thirty-second; 16 is one fourth, and 4 one sixteenth; and 8 the eighth 
part, with nothing else to correspond to it. 

It is the property of all these terms when they are added together 
successively to be equal to the next in the series, lacking one unit, so 

1 wapdrupor .. . drt ray évrds abrov. érrds in this passage means ‘up to,’ as, e.g., also in 
I. 16. 3, and reference is made to the series of even-times even numbers given above. If any 
number of this series be selected (e.g., 64), its factors will all be numbers that have occurred in the 
series before 64; each factor contains as many units as one of these numbers (e.g., the fourth part 
contains 16 units), receives a name, as a factor, from one of them (e.g., 16 is called fourth from 
4) and reciprocally gives a name to another factor (e.g., 16 gives the name sixteenth to 4), xara 
dvriweploraciy xal duo fhy. It will facilitate the understanding of this and the following sections 
to note that when Nicomachus selects for his demonstration any specific even-times even number 
he considers it as the end of a series; e.g., 64 must be thought of as the series 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 
32, 64. 

* That is, in accordance with the definition of ‘odd.’ A unit always ‘intervenes’ to prevent the 
division of the odd number into halves; see I. 7. 2. 

I2 

196 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

that of necessity their summation in any way whatsoever will be an 
odd number,! for that which fails by a unit of being equal to an even 

13 number is odd. This observation will be of use to us very shortly 
in the construction of perfect numbers.” But to take an example, 
the terms from unity preceding 256 in the series, when added together, 
are within 1 of equaling 256, and all the terms before 128, the term 
immediately preceding, are similarly equal to 128 save for one unit; 
and to the next terms the sums of those below them are similarly 
related. Thus unity itself * is within one unit of equaling the next 
term, which is 2, and these two together fail by 1 of equaling the next, 
and the three together are within 1 of the next in order, and you will 
find that this goes on without interruption to infinity. 

14 This too it is very needful to recall: If the number of terms of the 
even-times even series dealt with is even, the product of the extremes 
will always be equal to the product of the means; if there is an odd 
number of terms, the product of the extremes will be equal to the square 
of the mean. For, in the case of an even number of terms, 1 times 128 
is equal to 8 times 16 and further to 2 times 64 and again to 4 times 32, 
and this is so in every case; and with an odd number of terms, 1 
times 64 equals 2 times 32, and this equals 4 times 16, and this again 
equals 8 times 8, the mean term alone multiplied by itself. 

CHAPTER IX 

1 The even-times odd‘ number is one which is by its genus itself even, 
but is specifically ®° opposed to the aforesaid even-times even. It is a 
number of which, though it admits of the division into two equal 

rl 

1 Substituting in the formula S = Be a 
Fr 

— the sum of n terms of this series is2°“". The 
—1 

(nm + 1)st term is 2/, and 2/ — 1 is one less, as Nicomachus says. 

? See chapter 16. 

3 Here treated as a member of the even-times even series. Cf. on I. 8. 7. 

‘Theon of Smyrna, p. 25, 19 ff. Hiller, thus defines: ‘‘'The even-times odd numbers are 
measured by the dyad and some odd number; upon division into equal halves, they always have 
odd halves” (dpriowépuroo: Sé eloww of bwd Suddos xai wepoco’ obrivocoty perpotpern, ofrives éx 
warTds wepiood pépy Exove: Ta Hyuloea card Thy els [oa dtalpeoiv). Euclid (Elements, VII, Def. 9) 
has ‘‘ An even-times odd number is one that is measured by an even number an odd number of 
times” (dpridxcs 38¢ wepioods doriv db wd dpriov dp@yod perpovperos card wepiocdr dpiOpdr). 

* Read el€:xGs, with Codd. Cizensis, Monacensis 482 and Hamburgensis, instead of la«cas 
(Hoche, following G). The word is evidently to be contrasted with rp yé»e and both are logical 
terms. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 197 

halves, after the fashion of the genus common to it and the even-times 
even, the halves are not immediately divisible into two equals, for 
example, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22, 26, and the like; for after these have been 
divided their halves are found to be indivisible. 

It is the property of the even-times odd that whatever factor it 2 
may be discovered to have is opposite in name to its value,’ and that 
the quantity of every part is opposite in value to its name, and that 
the numerical value of its part never by any means is of the same genus 
as its name.” To take a single example, the number 18, its half, with 
an even name, is 9, odd in value; its third part, again, with an odd 
designation, is 6, even in value; conversely, the sixth part is 3 and the 
ninth part 2; and in other numbers the same peculiarity will be found. 

It is possibly for this reason that it received such a name, that 3 
is, because, although it is even, its halves are at once odd. 

This number is produced from the series beginning with unity, with 4 
a difference of 2, namely, the odd numbers, set forth in proper order 
as far as you like and then multiplied by 2. The numbers produced 
would be, in order, these: 6, 10, 14, 18, 22, 26, 30, and so on, as far 
as you care to proceed. The greater terms always differ by 4 from the 
next smaller ones, the reason for which is that their original basic 
forms,*® the odd numbers, exceed one another by 2 and were multiplied 
by 2 to make this series, and 2 times 2 makes 4. 

Accordingly, in the natural series of numbers the even-times odd 5 

1 For 3¢»auis in the sense of “numerical value’ (i.e., here, odd or even), cf. I. 8. 7 and the note, 
as well as Boethius, I. 10: Accidtt autem his quod omnes partes contrarie denominatas habent, quam 
sunt quantitales ipsarum partium quae denominantur. Neque unquam fieri potest ut quaelibet pars 
huius numeri elusdem generis denominationem quantitatemque susci pial. 

2 It seems necessary to take the dative (r@ . . . dvéuare) with duoryery, and in that case the read- 
ing of C (€avrod) is to be preferred to the adr of G, read by Hoche. Nicomachus is pointing out 
that in this class of numbers no even factor can have an even name. Hoche’s text would be trans- 
lated “‘by virtue of the same name,” which is not clear. 

4 -yvduoves: This term is frequently used in arithmetic with reference to the odd numbers 
which are added together to make the series of square numbers, because when aes Tepeo” 
sented they may be successively affixed to the es pace 
previous figure in the characteristic form of 
the gnomon (see the Figure). Nicomachus, 
however, also employs the term with refer- 
ence to any set or series of numbers that may 
be successively added to form a second set or 
series. Thus the gnomons of the hexagonal 
numbers are the terms from the natural series anneal siti 
from 1 with a common difference of 4. (See II. rz. 1 ff. and II. 13. 4 We alan find the ee 
used in this wider sense by Theon of Smyrna (e.g., p. 37, 11 Hiller) and by Hero of Alexandria (Def. 

59, p. 21 Hultsch). For a discussion of the origin and use of the term see Cantor, o. cit., vol. I, 
pp. 161 ff. 

TE 

6 

| 

ho 

198 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

numbers will be found fifth! from one another, exceeding one another 
by a difference of 4, passing over three terms, and produced by the 
multiplication of the odd numbers by 2. 

They are said to be opposite in properties” to the even-times even, 
because of these the greatest extreme term alone is divisible, while of 
these former the smallest only proved to be indivisible; and in par- 
ticular because in the former case the reciprocal arrangement of parts * 
from extremes to mean term or terms makes the product of the former 
equal to the square or product of the latter; but in this case by the 
same correspondence and comparison the mean term is one half the 
sum of the extremes,‘ or if there should be two means, their sum equals 
that of the two extremes. 

CHAPTER X 

The odd-times even number is the one which displays the third 
form of the even, belonging in common to both the previously men- 
tioned species like a single mean between two extremes, for in one 
respect it resembles the even-times even, and in another the even- 
times odd, and that property wherein it varies from the one it shares 
with the other, and by that property which it shares with the one it 
differs from the other. 

The odd-times even number ® is an even number which can be 

1 That is, in the Greek manner counting in both the term from which one starts and the last. 
So the Olympic games, which we would say came every fourth year, were to the Greeks a ‘ fifth- 
year festival.’ 

2 E.g., 10 can be divided into two parts (5, 5), but neither is divisible by 2; while in the even- 
times even series each number can be divided, and its parts divided, down to the ‘ least part,’ 
1. ‘The greater extreme,’ speaking of the even-times odd, would be the even-times odd number 
itself under consideration. 

? Cf. I. 8. 10, where the reciprocal relation of the factors of the even-times even numbers was 
treated. Each factor of such a number is itself a term in the even-times even series, of which 1 
and the given number are regarded as the extremes (dxpéryres). For the relation between the 
product of the extremes and the square of the mean (or the product of two means), cf. I. 8. 14. 

4 Thus in the even-times odd series 

6, 10, 14, 18, 22, 
the mean term (14) is 4 the sum of the extremes (6 + 22 = 28); and in the series 
6, 10, 14, 18, 22, 26, 
the sum of the means (14 + 18 = 32) equals the sum of the extremes (6 + 26 = 32). 

§ Theon of Smyrna, p. 26, 5 Hiller, defines the odd-times even as a number produced by the 
multiplication of an odd by an even number, which has even halves when it is divided by 2, but 
on further division has some parts odd, others even (wepiooduis 5¢ Apriol elow, Gy d wohdkawha- 
g.aguds éx duety @vrivwrotv weptogod Kal dprlov ylvera:, mal woAAawhaciacGévres els [oa pew Apria 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 199 

divided into two equal parts, whose parts also can so be divided, and 
sometimes even the parts of its parts, but it cannot carry the division 
of its parts as far as unity. Such numbers are 24, 28, 40; for each of 
these has its own half and indeed the half of its half, and sometimes 
one is found among them that will allow the halving to be carried 
even farther among its parts. There is none, however, that will 
have its parts divisible into halves as far as the naturally indivisible 
unit. 

Now in admitting more than one division, the odd-times even is 3 
like the even-times even and unlike the even-times odd; but in that 
its subdivision never ends with unity, it is like the even-times odd and 
unlike the even-times even. 

It alone has at once the proper qualities of each of the former two,’ 4 
and then again properties which belong to neither of them; for of 
them one had only the highest term divisible, and the other only the 
smallest indivisible, but this neither; for it is observed to have more 
divisions than one in the greater term, and more than one indivisible 
in the lesser. 

Furthermore, there are in it certain parts whose names are not 5 
opposed to their values nor of the opposite genus,” after the fashion of 
the even-times even; and there are also always other parts of a name 
opposite and contrary in kind to their values, after the fashion of the 
even-times odd. For example, in 24, there are parts not opposed in 
name to their values, the fourth part, 6, the half, 12, the sixth, 4, and 
the twelfth, 2; but the third part, 8, the eighth, 3, and the twenty- 
fourth, 1, are opposed; and so it 1s with the rest. 

This number is produced by a somewhat complicated method, 6 
and shows, after a fashion, even in its manner of production, that it 
is a mixture of both other kinds. For whereas the even-times even is 
made from even numbers, the doubles from unity to infinity, and the 
even-times odd from the odd numbers from 3, progressing to infinity, 
this must be woven together out of both classes, as being common to 

péon dla diaipodvra:, card Se rds wrelovs Siaipéoas A pev Apria pedpyn, & Se wepiooda Eyovory). 
Euclid's definition (Elements, VII, Def. 10) is: ‘‘The odd-times even number is one that is meas- 
ured by an odd number an even number of times” (repioodacs dorids doriv 6 bd wepiogod dpiPuod 
per povperos xaTd Aprior apiludr). 

'Cf. I. g. 6. Itis to be observed that Nicomachus in speaking of these numbers conceives of 
them serially ; e.g., to him the even-times even number 16 carries with it the series 1, 2, 4, 8, 16; 
and so of the others; as 3, 6 (even-times odd), 3, 6, 12, 24 (odd-times even). 

2Cf.1.8.7; 9.2. ‘Of the opposite genus’ refers to evenand odd. The name is ‘contrary to 
its value’ if, e.g., the denominator of the fraction is odd and its value, or amount, even. 

200 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

7 both. Let us then set forth the odd numbers from 3 by themselves 
in due order in one series : 

33 5) 7) Q; If, 13) 15, 17; TQ, . 
and the even-times even, beginning with 4, again one after another in 
a second series after their own order : 
4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256,... 

8 as far as you please. Now multiply by the first number of either 
series — it makes no difference which — from the beginning and in 
order all those in the remaining series and note down the resulting 
numbers; then again multiply by the second number of the same series 
the same numbers once more, as far as you can, and write down the 
results; then with the third number again multiply the same terms 
anew, and however far you go you will get nothing but the odd-times 
even numbers. 

9 For the sake of illustration let us use the first term of the series of 
odd numbers and multiply by it all the terms in the second series in 
order, thus: 3 X 4, 3 X 8, 3 X 16, 3 X 32, and so on to infinity. 
The results will be 12, 24, 48, 96, which we must note down in one line. 
Then taking a new start do the same thing with the second number, 
5X 4,5 X 8, 5 X 16, 5 X 32. The results will be 20, 40, 80, 160. 
Then do the same thing once more with 7, the third number, 7 X 4, 
7X 8, 7 X 16, 7 X 32. The results are 28, 56, 112, 224; and in 
the same way as far as you care to go, you will get similar results. 

Odd numbers 

Se ee es 

Even-times even 
192 | 384] 768 
28 | 56 | 112 | 224 | 448 | 8096 | 1792 

360 | 72 | 144 | 288 | 576 | 1152 | 2304 
44 | 88 | 176 | 352 | 704 | 1408 | 2816 

Odd-times even 
numbers 

Breadth 

1o Now when you arrange the products of multiplication by each term 
in its proper line, making the lines parallel, in marvelous fashion there 
will appear along the breadth of the table the peculiar property of the 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 201 

even-times odd, that the mean term is always half the sum of the ex- 
tremes, if there should be one mean, and the sum of the means equals 
the sum of the extremes if two. But along the length of the table 
the property of the even-times even will appear; for the product of the 
extremes is equal to the square of the mean, should there be one mean 
term, or their product, should there be two. Thus this one species 
has the peculiar properties of them both, because it is a natural mix- 
ture of them both. 

CHAPTER XI 

Again, while the odd is distinguished over against the even in classi- 
fication and has nothing in common with it, since the latter is divis- 
ible into equal halves and the former is not thus divisible, neverthe- 
less there are found three species of the odd,! differing from one another, 
of which the first is called the prime and incomposite,? that which is 

1 There is great disagreement among the ancient authorities upon this classification. In the 
first place, Nicomachus confines these species to odd numbers, thus securing a threefold classifica- 
tion to balance that of the even numbers (see above). He is followed in this by Iamblichus 
(p. 26, 18), but Euclid (Elem., VII, Deff., 11-14) and Theon (p. 23, 6 ff. Hiller) make it a classifica- 
tion of both the even and the odd. Nicomachus then divides into (a) prime and incomposite; 
(b) secondary and composite; (c) that which is absolutely composite but relatively prime. Nessel- 
mann, op. cif., p- 194, points out that the latter two classes are not mutually exclusive, for 
b includes c. The difficulty is overcome by Iamblichus, who thus classifies: (¢) the absolutely 
prime, which is a priori relatively prime as well; (6) the absolutely secondary, which includes as 
sub-classes the relatively prime and relatively secondary; the two sub-classes are dependent upon 
the association of terms in specific instances. Euclid (foc. cit.) gives definitions of primes, rela- 
tive primes, composite, and relatively composite numbers. This need not of course imply a strict 
classification along these lines. Theon, however, seems to understand it as such, and to establish 
his classification after this model, making his definitions agree with those of Euclid: (a) abso- 
lutely prime; (6) relatively prime; (c) absolutely composite; (d) relatively composite. The 
last class does not correspond to any set up by Nicomachus; it consists of numbers like 8 and g 
taken in connection with 6. Cf. T. L. Heath on Euclid, Joc. cit., for an extended discussion; also 
his History, vol. I, pp. 72 ff. 

? Euclid defines a prime number as ‘one measured by unity alone’ (6 povdd: pdry uerpovpevos), 
Elem., VII, Def. 11. The number 2 satisfies his definition and is also called prime by Aristotle 
(Top., VIII. 2.157 a 39). But in Nicomachus prime numbers are a class of odd numbers, not of 
number in general. See Heath on the matter, Euclid, II, 284-85. Theon of Smyrna (p. 23, 9 
Hiller) defines the ‘absolutely prime and incomposite’ number as one ‘measured by no number but 
by unity alone’ (of brd pndevds wey dp@uod, urd pbyns 6¢ povddos merpovuercc). He states 
that these numbers were sometimes called ‘linear’ and ‘rectilinear’ (ypappsxol, eb@vperpixol) 
‘because lengths and lines are viewed in one dimension,’ and that they are also called ‘ odd-times 
odd’ (weptaadeis wepiocol). Theon leaves it vague whether he regards the dyad as prime; for 
alter stating that the even numbers are not prime because they are measured by other numbers 
than unity alone, he says that the dyad is an exception and is therefore called ‘odd-like’ (xa ol 
Norwol Aprioe kara ra adra bw Tivwy pectdvww THs powddos dpiPudy Karayerpourrac wAHY THs 
Suddos: ratry yap pdvy cupBéBnxev Swep xal evlas Tov wepico Gy, ro bwd wovddos perpeioPar pdbvor. 
dwak yap B’, 8": 3d xal wepiccoadhs elpyrat ravrd Tois wepiogois wmemovOvia). 

202 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

opposed to it the secondary and composite, and that which is midway 
between both of these and is viewed as a mean among extremes, namely, 
the variety which, in itself, is secondary and composite, but relatively 
is prime and incomposite. 

2 Now the first species, the prime and incomposite, is found when- 
ever an odd number admits of no other factor save the one with the 
number itself as denominator,’ which is always unity; for example, 
3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31. None of these numbers will by any 
chance be found to have a fractional part with a denominator different 
from the number itself, but only the one with this as denominator, and 
this part will be unity in each case; for 3 has only a third part, which 
has the same denominator as the number and is of course unity, 5 a 
fifth, 7 a seventh, and 11 only an eleventh part, and in all of them 
these parts are unity. 

3 It has received this name because it can be measured only by the 
number which is first and common to all, unity, and by no other; 
moreover, because it 1s produced by no other number combined with 
itself save unity alone; for 5 is 5 X 1, and 7 is 7 X 1, and the others 
in accordance with their own quantity. To be sure, when they are 
combined with -themselves, other numbers might be produced, origi- 
nating from them as from a fountain and a root, wherefore they are 
called ‘prime,’ because they exist beforehand as the beginnings of 
the others. For every origin? is elementary and incomposite, into 
which everything is resolved and out of which everything is made, but 
the origin itself cannot be resolved into anything or constituted out of 
anything. 

CHAPTER XII 

1 The secondary, composite,number ® is an odd number, indeed, be- 
cause it is distinguished as a member of this same class, but it has no 

1 As 2 in the case of 3. 

2dox%. Cf. the discussion of element (¢ro:yeior), IT. 1. 

3 Nicomachus does not admit even numbers into the class of composites, doubtless because he 
has already exhausted their classification. Theon of Smyrna, however, makes the composite a 
division of number in general and gives even numbers among his examples. As noted above, he 
distinguishes the ‘absolute composite’ numbers that can be measured by some smaller numbers 
and ‘relative composites,’ those which are measured by some measure, but are prime to each other, 
as 8, 6, 9, with the measures 2 and 3. In this connection 1 is not considered a common measure, 
for, as he states, it is not itself a number but the beginning of number. Euclid, Elements, VII, 
Def. 14, defines a composite number as ‘one measured by some number’ (cbvGeros dpiduds éorin b 
dpiGucp Tum per povperos). 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 203 

elementary quality, for it gets its origin by the combination of some- 
thing else. For this reason it is characteristic of the secondary number 
to have, in addition to the fractional part with the number itself as 
denominator, yet another part or parts with different denominators, 
the former always, as in all cases, unity, the latter never unity, 
but always either that number or those numbers by the combination 
of which it was produced. For example, 9, 15, 21, 25, 27, 33, 35, 393 
each one of these is measured by unity, as other numbers are,! and like 
them has a fractional part with the same denominator as the number 
itself, by the nature of the class common to them all; but by exception 
and more peculiarly they also employ a part, or parts, with a different 
denominator; 9, in addition to the ninth part, has a third part besides ; 
15 a third and a fifth besides a fifteenth; 21 a seventh and a third 
besides a twenty-first, and 25, in addition to the twenty-fifth, which has 
as a denominator 25 itself, also a fifth, with a different denominator. 

It is called secondary, then, because it can employ yet another meas- 
ure along with unity, and because it is not elementary, but is produced 
by some other number combined with itself or with something else; 
in the case of 9, 3; 1m the case of 15, 5 or, by Zeus, 3; and those fol- 
lowing in the same fashion. And it is called composite for this, or 
some such, reason: that it may be resolved into those numbers out 
of which it was made, since it can also be measured by them. For 
nothing that can be broken down is incomposite, but by all means 
composite. 

CHAPTER XIII 

Now while these two species of the odd are opposed to each other a 
third one? is conceived of between them, deriving, as it were, its 
specific form from them both, namely the number which is in itself 
secondary and composite, but relatively to another number is prime 
and incomposite. This exists when a number, in addition to the com- 
mon measure, unity, is measured by some other number and is there- 
fore able to admit of a fractional part, or parts, with denominator other 
than the number itself, as well as the one with itself as denominator. 

1 That is, the primes. 

? Theon of Smyrna (p. 24, 8 ff.) has this class, which he calls ‘ prime to one another and not 
absolutely prime,’ and he points out that 8, 9, and 10 are prime to the ‘absolute primes.’ Euclid 
defines relatively prime numbers as ‘those that are measured only by unity as the common meas- 
ure’ (xp@rot rpds ddAAHAous dpOuol elo of pordd: pbvy perpovpern corm uérpy), Elements, VII, 
Def. 13. 

a | 

204 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

When this is compared with another number of similar properties, it 

is found that it cannot be measured by a measure common to the 

other, nor does it have a fractional part with the same denominator 

as those inthe other. As an illustration, let 9 be compared with 25. 

Each in itself is secondary and composite, but relatively to each 

other they have only unity as a common measure, and no factors in 

them have the same denominator, for the third part in the former 
does not exist in the latter nor is the fifth part in the latter found in 
the former. 

The production of these numbers is called by Eratosthenes the 
‘sieve,’ because we take the odd numbers mingled together and indis- 
criminate and out of them by this method of production separate, as 
by a kind of instrument or sieve, the prime and incomposite by them- 
selves, and the secondary and composite by themselves, and find the 
mixed class by themselves. 

3 The method of the ‘sieve’ is as follows. I set forth all the odd num- 
bers in order, beginning with 3, in as long a series as possible, and 
then starting with the first I observe what ones it can measure, and I 
find that it can measure the terms two places apart, as far as we care 
to proceed. And I find that it measures not as it chances and at 
random, but that it will measure the first one, that is, the one two 
places removed, by the quantity of the one that stands first in the series, 
that is, by its own quantity, for it measures it 3 times; and the one 
two places from this by the quantity of the second in order, for this it 
will measure 5 times; and again the one two places further on by the 
quantity of the third in order, or 7 times, and the one two places still 
farther on by the quantity of the fourth in order, or 9 times, and so ad 
infinitum in the same way. 

4 Then taking a fresh start I come to the second number and observe 
what it can measure, and find that it measures all the terms four 
places apart, the first by the quantity of the first in order, or 3 times; 
the second by that of the second, or 5 times; the third by that of the 
third, or 7 times; and in this order ad infinitum. 

s Again, as before, the third term 7, taking over the measuring func- 
tion, will measure terms six places apart, and the first by the quantity 
of 3, the first of the series, the second by that of 5, for this is the second 
number, and the third by that of 7, for this has the third position in 
the series. 

6 And analogously throughout, this process will go on without in- 

w 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 205 

terruption, so that the numbers’ will succeed to the measuring func- 
tion in accordance with their fixed position in the series; the interval 
separating terms measured is determined by the orderly progress of 
the even numbers from 2 to infinity, or by the doubling of the position 
in the series occupied by the measuring term, and the number of times 
a term is measured is fixed by the orderly advance of the odd numbers 
in series from 3. 

Now if you mark the numbers with certain signs, you will find that 
the terms which succeed one another in the measuring function neither 
measure all the same number — and sometimes not even two will 
measure the same one — nor do absolutely all of the numbers set 
forth submit themselves to a measure, but some entirely avoid being 
measured by any number whatsoever, some are measured by one only, 
and some by two or even more. Now these that are not measured at 
all, but avoid it, are primes and incomposites, sifted out as it were by 
a sieve; those measured by only one measure in accordance with its 
own quantity ? will have but one fractional part with denominator 
different from the number itself, in addition to the part with the same 
denominator; and those which are measured by one measure only, 
but in accordance with the quantity of some other number than the 
measure and not its own, or are measured by two measures at the 
same time, will have several fractional parts * with other denominators 
besides the one with the same as the number itself; these will be sec- 
ondary and composite. 

The third division,* the one common to both the former, which is 
in itself secondary and composite but primary and incomposite in 
relation to another, will consist of the numbers produced when some 
prime and incomposite number measures them in accordance with its 

'Tt is generally assumed (as by Heath, History, vol. I, p. roo) that in the ‘sieve of 
Eratosthenes ‘ only the odd prime numbers take on successively the measuring function, and 
indeed this is all that is necessary, for, e.g., 9 is a multiple of 3 and all its multiples are 
likewise multiples of 3. The text, however, seems to imply that all the odd numbers should 
be used, although perhaps Nicomachus did not intend that he should be so strictly 
interpreted. 

* Reading ¢avrod (instead of édavray) with G,. The numbers referred to are the squares of 
odd prime numbers. 9, e.g., has ninths, of course, and as it is measured by 3, it will also have 

thirds, the denomination of which is derived from 3. 
3 Thus, if a, 6, m are odd numbers greater than unity, and m = ab, m is measured by a in the 

quantity of b, and vice versa, and m will have the factors ~ and : named respectively from 6 and a. 
ad 

4 Nicomachus evidently contemplates admitting into this division only the squares of prime 

odd numbers, though numbers like 15 (3 X 5) and 77 (7 K 11), when compared, would satisfy his 
requirements equally well. 

Io 

II 

I2 

13 

206 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

own quantity, if one thus produced be compared to another of similar 
origin. For example, if 9, which was produced by 3 measuring by its 
own quantity, for it is 3 times 3, be compared with 25, which was 
produced from 5 measuring by its own quantity, for it is 5 times 5, 
these numbers have no common measure except unity. 

We shall now investigate how we may have a method! of dis- 
cerning whether numbers are prime and incomposite, or secondary 
and composite, relatively to each other, since of the former unity is 
the common measure, but of the latter some other number also besides 
unity; and what this number is. 

Suppose there be given us two odd numbers and some one sets the 
problem and directs us to determine whether they are prime and in- 
composite relatively to each other or secondary and composite, and 
if they are secondary and composite what number is their common 
measure. We must compare the given numbers and subtract the 
smaller from the larger as many times as possible; then after this sub- 
traction subtract in turn from the other, as many times as possible; 
for this changing about and subtraction from one and the other in 
turn will necessarily end either in unity or in some one and the same 
number, which will necessarily be odd. Now when the subtractions 
terminate in unity they show that the numbers are prime and incom- 
posite relatively to each other; and when they end in some other 
number, odd in quantity and twice produced,’ then say that they are 
secondary and composite relatively to each other, and that their com- 
mon measure is that very number which twice appears. 

For example, if the given numbers were 23 and 45, subtract 23 from 
45, and 22 will be the remainder; subtracting this from 23, the re- 
mainder is 1, subtracting this from 22 as many times as possible you 
will end with unity. Hence they are prime and incomposite to one 
another, and unity, which is the remainder, is their common measure. 

But if one should propose other numbers, 21 and 49, I subtract the 
smaller from the larger and 28 is the remainder. Then again I sub- 

' This mode of determining common factors is found in Euclid (VII. 1; X. 2) and is commonly 
termed the Euclidean method of finding the greatest common divisor of numbers. 

2 Reference to the second example following will show that the term ‘ produced twice’ (did¢o- 
povperov) by this process is the final subtrahend, which is equal to the final remainder. Boethius, 
I. 18, is somewhat more explicit in describing the operation: Dafis enim duobus numeris tnaequailt- 
bus, auferre de matore minorem oportebtl, ef qui relictus fuertt, st maior est, auferre ex eo rursus mino- 
rem, si vero minor fueril, eum ex reliquo matore detrahere atque hoc co usque faciendum, quoad untlas 
ullima vicem retractionis impedial, aul aliguis numerus, impar necessario, si ulrigue numeri impares 
proponantur ; sed eum, qui relinguilur, numerum stbi ipst videbis aequalem. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 207 

tract the same 21 from this, for it can be done, and the remainder is 
7. This I subtract in turn from 21 and 14 remains; from which I 
subtract 7 again, for it is possible, and 7 will remain. But it is not 
possible to subtract 7 from 7; hence the termination of the process 
with a repeated 7 has been brought about, and you may declare the 
original numbers 21 and 49 secondary and composite relatively to 
each other, and 7 their common measure in addition to the universal 
unit. 

CHAPTER XIV 

To make again a fresh start, of the simple even numbers, some are 
superabundant, some deficient, like extremes set over against each 
other, and some are intermediary between them and are called perfect. 
Those which are said to be opposites to one another, the superabun- 
dant and deficient, are distinguished from one another in the relation 
of inequality‘ in the directions of the greater and the less; for apart 
from these no other form of inequality could be conceived, nor could 
evil,” disease, disproportion, unseemliness, nor any such thing, save in 
terms of excess or deficiency. For in the realm of the greater * there 
arise excesses, overreaching, and superabundance, and in the less 
need, deficiency, privation, and lack; but in that which lies between 
the greater and the less, namely, the equal, are virtues, wealth, modera- 
tion, propriety, beauty, and the like, to which the aforesaid form of 
number, the perfect, is most akin. 

Now the superabundant number * is one which has, over and above 
the factors which belong to it and fall to its share, others in addition, 
just as if an animal should be created with too many parts or limbs, 

1 Nicomachus refers here to the general relation of inequality which is opposed to equality 
(I. 17. 2) as one of the primary divisions of relative number. Technically equality and inequality 
are oyéees, ‘relations,’ the term applied here to inequality as it is to equality in I. 17. 4; sub- 
classes of the unequal, first the greater and the less (cf. I. 17. 6) and then the specific ratios (al 
Séxa dpifunrinal oxéoes, I. 23. 4) are also called ‘relations.’ For the notion oxéo:s and the 
kindred term Aéyos, ‘ratio,’ cf. on IL. 21. 2. 

2 According to Aristotle virtue is the mean, and vice is excess or deficiency. Cf. Eth. Nic., 
IT. 6. 1106 b 33, xat 3:4 rar’ ofv THs wey Kaxlas 7 UwepBory Kal H EANewus, THs O dperHs 7 perdrys. 
These are just the varieties that Nicomachus assigns to inequality, 

$Cf. Arist., Eth. Nic., as quoted in the preceding note and 1106 b 24: 4% 5 dperh wepl dn 
cal wpdtes dorly, év ols 7 pév UwepBody auaprdvera: xal 7 Ehrer~is [Yeyerar], Td be udoow dwarvetrar 
cal xaropGotrac: raira 8 dugw rs dperas. pecdtys res Apa é¢orly 7 dperi, croxacTih ye ofca 
TOU pécov. 

4 bwepredhs dpiGuds. Theon of Smyma, pp. 45, 10 ff., 46, 4, includes this class, but calls them 
vrepréheco, 

3 

208 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

with ten tongues, as the poet says,' and ten mouths, or with nine lips, 
or three rows of teeth, or a hundred hands, or too many fingers on one 
hand. Similarly if, when all the factors in a number are examined and 
added together in one sum, it proves upon investigation that the num- 
ber’s own factors exceed the number itself, this is called a superabun- 
dant number, for it oversteps the symmetry which exists between the 
perfect and its own parts. Such are 12, 24, and certain others, for 12 
has a half, 6, a third, 4, afourth, 3, asixth, 2, and a twelfth, 1, which 
added together make 16, which is more than the original 12; its 

4 parts, therefore, are greater than the whole itself. And 24 has a half, 

= 

no 

a third, fourth, sixth, eighth, twelfth, and twenty-fourth, which are 
12, 8, 6, 4, 3, 2, 1. Added together they make 36, which, compared 
to the original number, 24, is found to be greater than it, although 
made up solely of its factors. Hence in this case also the parts are 
in excess of the whole.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

The deficient number * is one which has qualities the opposite of 
those pointed out, and whose factors added together are less in com- 
parison than the number itself. It is as if some animal should fall 
short of the natural number of limbs or parts, or as if a man should 
have but one eye, as in the poem, “And one round orb was fixed in 
his brow’’;* or as though one should be one-handed, or have fewer 
than five fingers on one hand, or lack a tongue, or some such member. 
Such a one would be called deficient and so to speak maimed, after 
the peculiar fashion of the number whose factors are less than itself, 
such as 8or 14. For 8 has the factors half, fourth, and eighth, which 
are 4, 2, and 1, and added together they make 7, and less than the 
original number. The parts, therefore, fall short of making up the 
whole. Again, 14 has a half, a seventh, a fourteenth, 7, 2, and 1, 
respectively; and all together they make ro, less than the original 
number. So this number also is deficient in its parts, with respect 
to making up the whole out of them. 

1 The reference is to Homer’s description of Scylla, Odyssey, XII. 85 ff. 

* See also L. E. Dickson, History of the Theory of Numbers, Washington, 1909, vol. I, chapter I. 
3Cf. Theon, p. 46, 9 ff. 

‘The Cyclops. Cf. Hesiod, Theogony, 145. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 209 

CHAPTER XVI 

While these two varieties are opposed after the manner of extremes, 
the so-called perfect number ' appears as a mean, which is discovered 
to be in the realm of equality, and neither makes its parts greater 
than itself, added together, nor shows itself greater than its parts, 
but is always equal to its own parts. For the equal is always conceived 
of as in the mid-ground between greater and less, and is, as it were, 
moderation between excess and deficiency, and that which is in tune, 
between pitches too high and too low. 

Now when a number, comparing with itself the sum and combina- 
tion of all the factors whose presence it will admit, neither exceeds 
them in multitude nor is exceeded by them, then such a number is 
properly said to be perfect, as one which is equal to its own parts. 
Such numbers are 6 and 28; for 6 has the factors half, third, and 
sixth, 3, 2, and 1, respectively, and these added together make 6 and 
are equal to the original number, and neither more nor less. Twenty- 
eight has the factors half, fourth, seventh, fourteenth, and twenty- 
eighth, which are 14, 7, 4, 2 and 1; these added together make 28, 
and so neither are the parts greater than the whole nor the whole 
greater than the parts, but their comparison is in equality, which is 
the peculiar quality of the perfect number. 

It comes about that even as fair and excellent things are few 
and easily enumerated, while ugly and evil ones are widespread, so 
also the superabundant and deficient numbers are found in great 
multitude and irregularly placed —for the method of their dis- 
covery is irregular — but the perfect numbers are easily enumer- 
ated and arranged with suitable order; for only one is found among 
the units, 6, only one other among the tens, 28, and a third in the 
rank of the hundreds, 496 alone, and a fourth within the limits of 
the thousands, that is, below ten thousand, 8,128.2. And it is their 

1 Euclid’s definition, Elem., VII. 22, is: “A perfect number is one that is equal to its own parts.” 
Similarly Theon of Smyma defines it, p. 45, 10. See Heath, History, vol. I, p. 74. 

2 Subsequent investigation has determined seven more perfect numbers. T.L. Heath, His- 
tory, vol. I, pp. 74-75, and L. E. Dickson, op. c#., vol. I, chapter I. 

I. 2(2? —1) = 6, VII. 238 (219 — x), 

II. 2? (28 — 1) = 28, VIII. 2% (2% — 1), 
Ill. 24(22 — 1) = 406. IX. 2 (26 — 1), with 37 digits. 
IV. 2®(27 — 1) = 8,128. X. 288 (28° — 1), 

V. 22 (28 — 1) = 33,550,336. MI. 2126 (2127 — 7). 

VI. 2'® (217 — 1) = 8,568,910,416. 
Theon, in his notice of the perfect numbers, mentions only 6 and 28. 

Lo 

210 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

accompanying characteristic! to end alternately in 6 or 8, and always 
to be even. 

4 There is a method of producing them,? neat and unfailing, which 
neither passes by any of the perfect numbers nor fails to differentiate 
any of those that are not such, which is carried out in the following 
way. 

You must set forth the even-times even numbers from unity, ad- 
vancing in order in one line, as far as you please: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 
128, 256, 512, 1,024, 2,048, 4,096. ... Then you must add them to- 
gether, one at a time, and each time you make a summation observe 
the result to see what it is. If you find that it is a prime, incomposite 
number, multiply it by the quantity of the last number added, and 
the result will always be a perfect number. If, however, the result is 
secondary and composite, do not multiply, but add the next and ob- 
serve again what the resulting number is; if it is secondary and com- 
posite, again pass it by and do not multiply; but add the next; but 
if it is prime and incomposite, multiply it by the last term added, and 
the result will be a perfect number; and soon to infinity. In similar 
fashion you will produce all the perfect numbers in succession, over- 
looking none. 

For example, to 1 I add 2, and observe the sum, and find that it is 
3, a prime and incomposite number in accordance with our previous 
demonstrations; for it has no factor with denominator different from 
the number itself,’ but only that with denominator agreeing. There- 
fore I multiply it by the last number to be taken into the sum, that is, 
2; I get 6, and this I declare to be the first perfect number in actuality,‘ 
and to have those parts which are beheld in the numbers of which it 
is composed. For it will have unity’ as the factor with denominator 
the same as itself, that is, its sixth part; and 3 as the half, which is 
seen in 2, and conversely 2 as its third part. 

5 Twenty-eight likewise is produced by the same method when another 
number, 4, is added to the previous ones. For the sum of the three, 1, 

! Cf. Boethius, I. 20: Et semper hi numeri duobus paribus terminantur, 6 et 8, et semper allernatim 
in hos numeros summarum fine provenient, See p. 52. 

* Euclid (LX. 36) and Theon of Smyrna (p. 45, 14 ff. Hiller) report this method of discovering 
perfect numbers. * That is, 4. 

‘* Actual’ (évepyelg) is here specified because in sect. 8 Nicomachus designates 1 as a potential 
(Svvdue.) perfect number. On his use of Aristotelian terminology, as here, see p. 35. 

’ Boethius, I. 20, speaking of this matter says of 6: kabel unam quidem a se denominatam par- 
iem, id est, sextam, 3 vero medictatem secundum dualilatem, al vero 2 secundum coacervationem, id est, 
secundum lernarium, quontam coacervalt 3 mulliplicati sunt, 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 211 

2, and 4, is 7, and is found to be prime and incomposite, for it admits 
only the factor with denominator like itself, the seventh part. There- 
fore I multiply it by the quantity of the term last taken into the sum- 
mation, and my result is 28, equal to its own parts, and having its 
factors derived from the numbers already adduced, a half correspond- 
ing to 2; a fourth, to 7; a seventh, to 4; a fourteenth to offset the 
half; and a twenty-eighth, in accordance with its own nomenclature, 
which is 1 In all numbers. 

When these have been discovered, 6 among the units and 28 in the 6 
tens, you must do the same to fashion the next. Again add the next 7 
number, 8, and the sum Is 15. Observing this, I find that we no longer 
have a prime and incomposite number, but in addition to the factor 
with denominator like the number itself,’ it has also a fifth and a 
third, with unlike denominators. Hence I do not multiply it by 8, 
but add the next number, 16, and 31 results. As this is a prime, in- 
composite number, of necessity it will be multiplied, in accordance 
with the general rule of the process, by the last number added, 16, and 
the result is 496, in the hundreds; and then comes 8,128 in the thou- 
sands, and so on,” as far as it is convenient for one to follow. 

Now unity is potentially a perfect number, but not actually; for 8 
taking it from the series as the very first I observe what sort it is, 
according to the rule, and find it prime and incomposite; for it is 
so in very truth,* not by participation like the rest, but it is the primary 

l 

? Thomas Taylor (Theoretic Arithmetic, p. 33) gives the following table, showing how the per- 
fect numbers may be formed by Nicomachus’s method : 

Evenly even numbers : 
I, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1,024, 2,048, 4,006; 
Odd numbers produced by adding the above: 
I, 3, 7) 15', 31, 63, 127, 255", 1,023’, 2,047’, 4,005’, 8,191’; 
Perfect numbers: 
1, 6, 28, 496, 8,128. 
The odd numbers which are not prime, and hence cannot be used to make perfect numbers, are 
marked with an accent. 
+ This statement is to be understood in the light of Nicomachus’s essentially Pythagorean view 
of arithmetic, and with it should be compared IT. 17. 2 and incidental remarks elsewhere, e.g., 
II. 17. 4,5; 18. 1, 4 (end); 20. 2; 1.1 (end), etc. In II. 17. 2 it is stated that ‘sameness’ is found 
fundamentally in the monad, and most of the other passages cited bring out the principle that the 
odd numbers and the squares participate in ‘ sameness’ indirectly, through the monad, the monad 
being that which ‘determines the specific form’ of the odd numbers (e/doroetv), and the latter 
in turn acting as the bases (yrwyores) of the squares. Likewise ‘otherness’ inheres fundamen- 
tally in the dyad, and is hence conveyed secondarily, as it were, into the even numbers and the 
heteromecic numbers. A similar construction may be placed on the passage at hand; the only 
difference is that ‘primeness,’ instead of ‘sameness,’ is in question. The monad Is per se prime, 

212 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

g number of all, and alone incomposite. I multiply it, therefore, by 
the last term taken into the summation, that is, by itself, and my re- 

ro sult is 1; for 1 times 1 equals 1. Thus unity is perfect potentially ; 
for it is potentially equal to its own parts, the others actually. 

CHAPTER XVII 

1 Now that we have given a preliminary systematic account of ab- 
solute quantity we come in turn to relative quantity." 

2 Of relative quantity, then, the highest generic divisions are two, 
equality and inequality; for everything viewed in comparison with 
another thing is either equal or unequal, and there is no third thing 
besides these. 

3 Now the equal is seen, when of the things compared one neither 
exceeds nor falls short in comparison with the other, for example, 100 
compared with 100, 10 with 10, 2 with 2, a mina with a mina, a talent 
with a talent, a cubit with a cubit, and the like, either in bulk, length, 

4 weight, or any kind of quantity. And as a peculiar characteristic, 
also, this relation ? is of itself not to be divided or separated, as being 
most elementary, for it admits of no difference. For there is no such 
thing as this kind of equality and that kind, but the equal exists in 

5 one and the same manner. And that which corresponds to an equal 
thing, to be sure, does not have a different name from it, but the same; 

and other prime numbers are secondarily or by participation prime, for they are combinations 
of the monad (cf. I. 11. 3), though of no other numbers. The monad on the other hand can be 
broken up into no smaller components and is therefore elementary. It is further to be noted 
that the word for ‘ prime’ (#rpédros) is slightly ambiguous, and even in this specialized use of the 
word there must be a suggestion of the original sense, ‘ first.’ The monad is obviously ‘ first’ in 
a higher degree than any prime number. 

1 According to I. 3. 1, this subject belongs to music rather than to arithmetic. Cf. p, 114. 

2 That is, a thing of one class can never be said to be equal to a thing of a different class. 
Nicomachus does not state this principle in its broadest form, namely, that it is impossible to 
establish any ratio between objects of entirely different classes. The latter is the form in which 
Theon of Smyrna, p. 73, 16 ff., puts the matter, following, as he says, Adrastus. (See above, p. 41.) 
Nicomachus, however, demonstrates elaborately in I. 23. 6 ff. and II. x and 2 the proposition 
that the relation of equality is the element of all ratio, so that, if the connecting link be supplied 
for him, it may be said that he implies that only homogeneous things may have a ratio. Theon’s 
statement is as follows: “The ratio of analogy between two homogeneous terms is their definite 
relation (wo.d oxéors) to one another; e.g., double or triple. For as to the relation between un- 
like things, Adrastus says that it cannot be known; e.g., a cubit and a mina, a choenix and a 
kotyle, ‘white’ and ‘sweet’ or ‘warm,’ these things cannot be brought together and compared. 
But homogeneous things may be, e.g., lengths with lengths, surfaces with surfaces, solids with 
solids, weights with weights, . . . and whatever things are of the same genus or species and 
therefore have some mutual relation.” 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 213 

like ‘friend,’ ‘neighbor,’ ‘comrade,’ so also ‘equal’; for it is equal to 
an equal. 

The unequal, on the other hand, is split up by subdivisions, and one 
part of it is the greater, the other the less, which have opposite names 
and are antithetical to one another in their quantity and relation. 
For the greater is greater than some other thing, and the less again is 
less than another thing in comparison, and their names are not the 
same, but they each have different ones, for example, ‘father’ and ‘son,’ 
‘striker’ and ‘struck,’ ‘teacher’ and ‘pupil,’ and the like. 

Moreover, of the greater, separated by a second subdivision into 
five species,! one kind is the multiple, another the superparticular, 
another the superpartient, another the multiple superparticular, and 
another the multiple superpartient. And of its opposite, the less, 
there arise similarly by subdivision five species, opposed to the fore- 
going five varieties of the greater, the submultiple, subsuperparticular, 
subsuperpartient, submultiple-superparticular, and submultiple-super- 
partient; for as whole answers to whole, smaller to greater, so also 
the varieties correspond, each to each, in the aforesaid order, with 
the prefix sub-. 

! The terms here used are adapted from Boethius’s translations and are employed in Thomas 
Taylor’s Theoretic Arithmetic. The present classification was no doubt the ordinary scientific 
one, Theon (pp. 74, 20 ff.; 76, 1 &.), however, gives two different classifications, of which the 
latter is like that of Nicomachus, except that Theon adds the unnecessary class olf ovdérepo:. 
In p. 74, 20 ff. he divides ratios first into greater, less, and equal, and then the greater into mul- 
tiples, superparticulars and ‘those of neither class’ (ovdé¢repo:), the less into submultiples, sub- 
superparticulars and ‘those of neither class.’ It may be noted that in this context oddérepo: is 
properly used, and it might cover ratios of all the classes mentioned by Nicomachus other than 
those which Theon specifically includes. He proceeds (p. 74, 23 fi.) to enumerate the members 
of these classes which are also ‘concords,’ cvygwyrlac, in music, citing as obdérepo: the ratios 9:8 
(i.e., the ‘ tone’) and 256: 243 (i.e., the ‘ limma’), which, he says, are the ‘ beginnings’ of concord 
and are therefore neither themselves concords nor yet outside of concord. Next (p. 75, 17) he 
goes on to say that there are, however, certain other ratios spoken of in arithmetic, with which he 
will deal in due time; besides the ones given, ‘also superpartients, multiple superpartients and 
still others.” These he enumerates, as has been said, in his final statement (p. 76, 1 ff.) which 
agrees with Nicomachus save for the inclusion of the otd¢repo:; he takes pains to tell us that 
this is ‘the arithmetical tradition’ (xara rhv dpi@unrixhy wapddoc.v) and is the classification of 
Adrastus. It would seem fair to conclude, then, that the former classification is the musical 
tradition, and was not taken from Adrastus. Perhaps he has carried over from the ‘ musical’ list 
the ovddrepo:; it is not suitable in the second list, as Hiller notes (see his critical note), He uses 
this class to cover ‘ the ratio of number to number’ (a direct reference to Timaeus, 36 B) in p. 8, 
7, 1.€., the ‘limma,’ as before. Compare with Nicomachus’s list also Johannes Pediasimus, 
Geomeiria, in Neue Jahrb. f. Phil. u. Paed., vol. XCII, pp. 366 ff. (f. 43 b of the Munich MS 
there cited). 

214 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

CHAPTER XVIII 

r Once more, then; the multiple! is the species of the greater first 
and most original by nature, as straightway we shall see, and it is a 
number which, when it is observed in comparison with another, contains 
the whole of that number more than once. For example, compared 
with unity, all the successive numbers beginning with 2 generate in 
their proper order the regular forms of the multiple; for 2, in the first 
place, is and is called the double, 3 triple, 4 quadruple, and so on; 
for ‘more than once’ means twice, or three times, and so on in suc- 
cession as far as you like. 

2 Answering to this is the submultiple, which is itself primary in the 
smaller division of inequality. It is the number which, when it is 
compared with a larger, is able to measure it completely more than 
once, and ‘more than once’ starts with twice and goes on to infinity. 

3 If then it measures the larger number that is being compared twice 
only, it is properly called the subdouble,’ as 1 is of 2; if thrice, sub- 
triple, as 1 of 3; if four times, subquadruple, as 1 of 4, and so on in 
succession. 

4 While each of these, the multiple and the submultiple, is generically 
infinite, the varieties by subdivision and the species also are observed 
naturally to make an infinite series. . For the double, beginning with 
2, goes on through all the even numbers, as we select alternate numbers 
out of the natural series; and these will be called doubles in compari- 
son with the even and odd numbers successively placed beginning 

5 with unity. All the numbers * from the beginning two places apart, 
and third in order, are triples, for example, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24. 
It is their property to be alternately odd and even, and they themselves 
in the regular series from unity are triples of all the numbers in suc- 
cession as far as one wishes to go on with the process. 

6 The quadruples are those in the fourth places, three apart, for 
instance, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, and soon. These are the quad- 
ruples of the regular series of numbers from unity going on as far as 

1 Theon’s definition (p. 76, 8 Hiller) is: ‘It is the multiple ratio when the greater term con- 
tains the smaller more than once, 1.e., when the greater term is exactly measured by the smaller 
with no remainder,”’ Euclid (VII, Def. 5) has: ‘‘ A greater number is multiple of the less when it 
is measured by the less” (wodAawAdouos 52 6 peltwr rod é\drrovos Sray xarayerpHrac td Tov éAde- 
govos); the same definition as Euclid’s is given by Hero of Alexandria, Definitton 121, ed. Hultsch. 

2 Nicomachus more often uses the terms half, third, etc., for these fractions. 

‘'. «*® That is, from the natural series. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 215 

one finds it convenient to follow. It belongs to them all to be even; 
for one needs only to take the alternate terms out of the even numbers 
already selected. Thus necessarily it is true that the even numbers, 
with no further designation,' are all doubles, the alternate ones quad- 
ruples, those two places apart sextuples, and those three places apart 
octuples, and this series will go on, on this same analogy, indefinitely. 
The quintuples will be seen to be those four places apart, placed 7 
fifth from one another,’ and themselves the quintuples of the suc- 
cessive numbers beginning with unity. Alternately they are odd and 
even, like the triples. 

CHAPTER XIX 

The superparticular,’ the second species of the greater both naturally 
and in order, is a number that contains within itself the whole of the 
number compared with it, and some one factor of it besides. 

If this factor is a half, the greater of the terms compared is called 2 
specifically * sesquialter, and the smaller subsesquialter; if it is a 
third, sesquitertian and subsesquitertian; and as you go on through- 
out it will always thus agree, so that these species also will progress to 
infinity, even though they are species of an unlimited genus. 

For it comes about that the first species, the sesquialter ratio, has as 
its consequents ® the even numbers in succession from 2, and no other at 
all, and as antecedents the triples in succession from 3, and no other. 
These must be joined together regularly, first to first, second to second, 3 
third to third — 3: 2,6: 4, 9:6, 12: 8 — and the analogous numbers to 
the ones corresponding to them in position. 

ro 

1 rots dws dprios: that is, numbers not otherwise characterized than as even (as opposed, 
e.g., to the alternately occurring even numbers, or to even-times even numbers). 

? The reference is now to the ‘natural series’ 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., of which the author was speaking 
in sections 4 and 5 before he digressed in section 6 to point out how the even multiples are placed 
in the series of even numbers. 

+ Theon’s definition (p. 76, 21 ff.) is: “It is the superparticular ratio, when the greater term 
contains the less once and some one part of the less, i.e., when the difference between the greater 
and the less is such as to be a factor of the less.” 

‘xadeira:... el3uds: It is to be noted that this is a technical expression of logic. The genus 
in this case is the ‘superparticular,’ and the ‘ sesquialter’ is the species. The superparticular was 
itself treated above (I. 17. 7) as a species of the genus ‘ greater inequality.’ Boethius here, and 
generally, misses the technical force of yerxds and ¢ldixés in Nicomachus, and simply omits 
them in his translation. 

‘ The words translated ‘ antecedent ’ and ‘ consequent’ (wpédoyos, Uwédoryos) mean respectively 
the larger and the smaller terms in a ratio between unequal quantities. Boethius, I. 24, adopts the 
translations duces and comites (Voco autem matores numeros duces, minores comites). er. 

216 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

4 If we care to investigate the second species of the superparticular, 
the sesquitertian (for the fraction naturally following after the half 
is the third), we shall have this definition of it— a number which 
contains the whole of the number compared, and a third of it in addi- 
tion to the whole. We may have examples of it, in the proper order, 
in the successive quadruples beginning with 4 joined to the triples from 
3, each term with the one in the corresponding position in the series, 

5 for example, 4:3, 8:6, 12:9, and so on to infinity. It is plain that 
that which corresponds to the sesquitertian but is called, with the 
prefix sub-, subsesquitertian, is the number, the whole of which is 
contained and a third part in addition, for example, 3: 4, 6:8, 9: 12, 
and the similar pairs of numbers in the same position in the series. 

6 And we must observe the never-failing corollary of all this, that 
the first forms in each series, the so-called root numbers,’ are next to 
one another in the natural series; the next after the root-forms show 
an interval of only one number; the third two; the fourth three; 

7 the fifth four; and so on, as far as you like. Furthermore, that the 
fraction after which each of the superparticulars? is named is seen in 
the lesser of the root numbers, never in the greater. 

8 That by nature and by no disposition of ours the multiple is a more 
elementary and an older form than the superparticular we shall shortly 
learn, through a somewhat intricate process. And here, for a simple 

1 wu@uéves: properly ‘stock’ but here translated ‘root.’ wu@u4» is the technical designation for 
that one in a series of equal ratios which is expressed in the lowest terms; in the words of Theon of 
Smyma, p. 80, 15 ff.: “Of all the ratios grouped in one species (e.g., double sesquialter, etc.) 
those that are expressed in the smallest numbers and numbers prime to one another are called 
primary among those bearing the same ratio and roots (wv@uéves) of those of the same species.” 
wv6u%» is so used by Plato in the famous passage on the marriage number (Kep., 546 B-c). Apol- 
lonius of Pergae used the term wv@u%» in a somewhat similar way, to designate the units which 
serve as the ‘stock’ in numbers consisting of those units multiplied by 10 or its powers; thus 5 is 
the ruv@uyy of 50, 500, 5,000, etc. See Cantor, op. cit., vol. I, p. 347. Another use of the word 
wv@uyv is described by Heath, History, vol. I, p. 116. In the present case, if the sesquialters are 
derived from the double and the triple series, 

2 4 6 8rto, ete, 
3 6 9 215, etc, 

as described above, the ‘root sesquialter’ is the ratio 3 : 2, the ‘second from the root numbers’ is the 
ratio 6:4, etc. Boethius, I. 25, observes that the number of the ‘intervening numbers,’ of which 
Nicomachus is here speaking, is always one less than the number designating the order of the 
ratio in the series. E.g., in the third ratio of the series above, g: 6, there are two intervening num- 
bers between 9 and 6 (8 and 7). 

2 The number giving the name to each variety of superparticular (e.g., In the case of the ses- 
quifertian, one and one third, éwl r ptt os) is to be observed always in the first instance of that ratio, 
that is, in the ‘root numbers’ explained in the preceding note; and more specifically this number 
is always the smaller of the two in each ‘root ratio,’ e.g., 2 in 3: 2 (whence sesquialier, 7 us 6X05), 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 217 

demonstration, we must prepare in regular and parallel lines the mul- 
tiples specified above, according to their varieties, first the double 
in one line, then in a second the triple, then the quadruple in a third, 
and so on as far as the tenfold multiples, so that we may detect their 
order and variety, their regulated progress, and which of them 1s 
naturally prior, and indeed other corollaries delightful in their exact- 

ness. Let the diagram be as follows : 9 
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0) 10 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 
5 10 I5 20 25 30 35 40 45 5° 
6 I2 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 
7 14 21 280 350 (i QtiéSGH—ts—s«éC“B 7° 
8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 
9 18 27 36,45 54 «463 72s go 

10 20 30 40 5° 60 7° 80 go 100 

Let there be set forth in the first row the natural series from unity, 10 
and then in order those species of the multiple which we were bidden 
to insert. 

Now then in comparison with the first rows beginning with unity, 
if we read both across and up and down in the form of the letter 
gamma,' the next rows both ways, themselves in the form of a gamma, 
beginning with 4, are multiples according to the first form of the multi- 
ple, for they are doubles. The first differs by unity from the first, the 
second from the second by 2, the third from the third by 3, the next by 
4, those following by 5, and you will find that this follows throughout. 

The third rows in both directions from 9, their common origin, will be 
the triples of the terms in that same first row according to the second 
form of the multiple; the cross-lines like the letter chi,? ending in the 

= 

I 

! The top row and the left-hand column of the table, which we are directed to use, meeting at 
1 inaright angle, present the form of the Greek capital letter gamma, I’. With the terms in these 
series we compare those of row 2 and column 2, which meet in the term 4 and make the same figure, 
aT’; but these second rows are regarded, not as ending with 4, but as continuing to the terms 2 
in the first row and the first column, as Nicomachus’s immediately following observation shows 
and as Boethius (I. 27) interpreted him. The first term of the first series, 1, is surpassed by the 
first term of the second, 2, by 1, and son; cf. section 6 above. 

? Row 3 and column 3, which we now compare with row 1 and column 1, meet at the term 9 
at right angles and run beyond g to 3 in both the first row and the first column. They therefore 
present the appearance of the Greek capital letter chi (X), the two lines of which in inscriptional 
forms often make right angles. 

218 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

12 term 3 in either direction, are to be taken into consideration. The 
difference, for these numbers, will progress after the series of the even 
numbers, being 2 for the first, 4 for the next, 6 for the third; and this 
difference nature has of her own accord’ interpolated for us between 
these rows that are being examined, as is evident in the diagram. 

13 The fourth row, whose common origin in both directions is 16, and 
whose cross-lines 7 end with the terms 4, exhibits the third species of 
multiple, the quadruple, when it is compared with that same first 
row according to corresponding positions, first term with first, second 
with second, third with third, and so on. Again, the differences of 
these numbers are 3, 6, then 9, then 12, and the quantities that progress 
by steps of 3. These numbers are detected * in the structure of the 
diagram in places just above the quadruples, and in the subsequent 
forms of the multiple the analogy will hold throughout. 

14 Incomparison with the second line reading either way, which begins 
with the common origin 4 and runs over in cross-lines to the term 2 
in each row, the lines which are next in order beneath display the first 
species of the superparticular, that is, the sesquialter, between terms 
occupying corresponding places. Thus by divine nature,‘ not by our 
convention or agreement, the superparticulars are of later origin than 
the multiples. For illustration, 3 is the sesquialter of 2, 6 of 4, 9 of 
6, 12 of 8, 15 of 10, and throughout thus. They have as a difference ° 
the successive numbers from unity, like those before them. 

15 The sesquitertians, the second species of superparticular, proceed 
with a regular, even advance from 4:3, 8:6, 12:9, 16:12, and so 

16 0n; having also a regular increase ° of their differences. And in the 
other multiple and superparticular relations you will see that the re- 
sults are in harmony and not by any means inconsistent as you go on 
to infinity. 

1 The point is again that it is nature, and not we ourselves, that is responsible for this regularity. 
Cf. section 8 above and the note on section 14. 

1 y:acyol: That is, as before (see on section 11), lines in the form of the letter chi. 16 is their 
common origin, as their meeting point, but they run beyond it in all four directions. 

* These successive differences, that is, are nothing but the series of triples and therefore of 
course appear in the line above the quadruples in the table. 

‘ Nicomachus here contrasts ¢@vois, ‘nature,’ and védyos, ‘law’ or ‘convention,’ a common topic 
of philosophy since the sophistic period. Cf. Burnet, Greek Philosophy, Part I, Thales to Plato 
(London, 1914), pp. 105 ff. See p. 120. 

‘That is,3—2=1; 6—4=2; 9 —6 = 3; etc. The differences in order are the natural 
series, which was the case with the differences in the series of doubles (cf. section 11). 

‘In the series of sesquitertian ratios, 4: 3, 8:6, 12:9, 16:12, etc., the differences are, as before, 
I, 2, 3, 4, etc., so that ‘equal,’ feos, as applied here, means ‘ regular,’ i.e., ‘ regularly increasing.’ 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 219 

The following feature of the diagram, moreover, is of no less exact- 
ness. The terms at the corners are units; the one at the beginning 
a simple unit, that at the end the unit of the third course,’ and the 
other two units of the second course appearing twice; so that the 
product (of the first two) is equal to the square (of the last). Further- 
more, in reading either way there is an even progress from unity to 
the tens, and again on the opposite sides two other progressions from 
10 to 100. 

The terms on the diagonal from 1 to roo are all square numbers, 
the products of equals by equals, and those flanking them on either 
side are all heteromecic, unequal, and the products of sides of which 
one is greater ” than the other by unity; and so the sum ® of two suc- 
cessive squares and twice the heteromecic numbers between them is 
always a square, and conversely a square is always produced from the 
two heteromecic numbers on the sides and twice the square between 
them. 

An ambitious person might find many other pleasing things dis- 
played in this diagram, upon which it is not now the time to dwell, 

1 Ast, Theol. Arith., pp. 254-55, has in his note on this passage: “‘ Unitates sunt tres, prima 1, 
secunda 10, tertia 100 . . . é» dsadoptoe in distractione, h.e., oppositione vel decussatione.”” As 
Iamblichus explains (Jn Nicom., p. 88, 24 ff. Pistelli), ‘monads of the second and third courses’ 
(uovds devrepwooupérn, Tprwdovunérn) are Pythagorean terms for 10 and 100. This designation 
depends on their belief that the first decade epitomizes all number, and the following numbers 
simply repeat, in a sense, the first ro. Soin the Theol. Arith. (p. 59 Ast) we are informed that 
they called 10 Pan “because no number js naturally greater, but if any is so conceived it somehow 
circles about to it again in repetition; for the hundred is 10 decads, the thousand is ro hundreds, 
and each of the others will come, taking the return path either to it or to one of the numbers up 
to it.” This notion is of necessity linked with the doctrine that 10 is the perfect number, and as 
the author (probably Nicomachus himself) says just before the words quoted, ro exists as the 
epitome of all numbers in itself in order to offset and control unlimited multitude, to act as ‘“‘a 
measure for the whole and as it were a gnomon and a straight edge” in the hands of the creating 
deity. The units then form the first course, the tens the second, the hundreds the third, and so on, 
circling around 10 and its powers as the turning points of a race-course. Cf. also Nesselmann, 
Geschichte der Algebra, 1. Th., p. 239 (Berlin, 1842). The ‘ product of the first two,’ then, is 1 X 
100 = 100, and the ‘square of the other’ is ro or 100. 

2 Hoche here (p. 54,17 of the text) reads dmoo. It is hard to see what Amoco: ¢repophxes 
would be. It is better to read drlco:s with G, and two other MSS referring to wAevpais (or 
perhaps dvod«:s has dropped out of the text; dmodas Anco would be easily explicable and 
would balance lodxts feor). To illustrate the meaning of the passage it may be observed that 
the numbers ‘ flanking’ 4 are 2 and 6, which are respectively 1 X 2 and 2 X 3; 9g is flanked by 6, 
and 12 (2 X 3,3 X 4). Ingeneral m?*is flanked by (m — 1)mand (m+ 1)m.' On heteromecic 
numbers, see II. 17. 

+ Thus 6 is the heteromecic number between 4 and 9 and 4 + 9 + (2 X 6) = 25 = 5%. The 
general formula for this proposition would be m* + (m+ 1)? + 2 m(m + 1) = (2m + 1)? 
Again, 6and 12 flank 9; now 6 + 12 + (2 X 9) = 36 = 6, or, in general, (m —1)m+(m+1)m 
+ 27) = 4m’. 

17 

18 

1g 

20 

220 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

for we have not yet gained recognition of them from our Introduction, 
and so we must turn to the next subject. For after these two generic 
relations of the multiple and the superparticular and the other two, 
opposite to them, with the prefix sub-, the submultiple and the sub- 
superparticular, there are in the greater division of inequality the 
superpartient, and in the less its opposite, the subsuperpartient. 

CHAPTER XX 

It is the superpartient’ relation when a number contains within 
itself the whole of the number compared and in addition more than 
one part of it; and ‘more than one’ starts with 2 and goes on to all 
the numbers in succession. ‘ Thus the root-form of the superpartient 
is naturally the one which has in addition to the whole two parts of 
the number compared, and as a species* will be called superbipar- 
tient; after this the one with three parts besides the whole will be 
called supertripartient as a species; then comes the superquadnipar- 
tient, the superquintipartient, and so forth. 

The parts have their root and origin with the third, for it is impossible 

in this case to begin with the half. For if we assume that any num- 
ber contains two halves of the compared number, besides the whole 
of it, we shall inadvertently be setting up a multiple instead of a super- 
partient, because each whole, plus two halves of it, added together 
makes double the original number. Thus it is most necessary to start 
with two thirds, then two fifths, two sevenths, and after these two 
ninths, following the advance of the odd numbers; for two quarters, 
for example, again are a half, two sixths a third, and thus again super- 
particulars will be produced instead of superpartients, which is not 
the problem laid before us nor in accord with the systematic construc- 
tion of our science. 
3 After the superpartient the subsuperpartient immediately ® is pro- 
duced, whenever a number is completely contained in the one com- 
pared with it, and in addition several parts of it, 2, 3, 4, or 5, and 
so on. 

Lam! 

iN 

! Defined by Theon of Smyrna, p. 78, 6 ff. Hiller. 

2 See on I. 19. 2 (p. 215). 

4 That is to say, given a superpartient the existence of a subsuperpartient naturally follows. 
For if 9 is a superpartient of 7, being 17 of it, then 7 is contained in 9 1 times and is a sub- 
superpartient of 9. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 221 

CHAPTER XXI 

The regular arrangement and orderly production of both species ! 
are discovered when we set forth the successive even and odd numbers, 
beginning with 3, and compare with them simple series of odd numbers 
only,? from 5 in succession, first to first — that is, 5 to 3, — second to 
second — that is, 7 to 4, — third to third — that is, 9 to 5, — fourth 
to fourth — that is, 11 to 6, — and so on in the same order as far as 
you like. In this way the forms of the superpartient and the sub- 
superpartient, in due order, will be disclosed through the root-forms 
of each species, the superbipartient first, then the supertripartient, 
superquadripartient, and superquintipartient, and further in succession 
in similar manner; for after the root-forms of each species the ones 
which follow them will be produced by doubling, or tripling, both the 
terms, and in general by multiplying after the regular forms of the 
multiple. 

TABLE OF THE SUPERPARTIENTS 

Root-forms 5 3 Ir 6 Iz 7 
IolClC«O 22 12 26 I4 
5 9 33-18 39 21 
20 12 44 24 52 28 
25 15 55 30 65 35 
30 «18 66 36 78 42 
35 2! 77 42 QI 49 
40 24 88 48 104 56 
45 27 99 54 117 63 

It must be observed that from the two parts in addition to the 
whole which are contained in the greater term, we are to understand 
‘third,’* in the case of three parts, ‘fourth,’ with four parts, ‘fifth,’ 

1 The superpartient and subsuperpartient. 

2 xadapods . . . repiocovs pdvovs. Here xadapds means ‘pure’ in the sense of ‘with no ad- 
mixture from another class of terms,’ as in I. 22. 3, 4; IT. 27. 4. 

4 That is, when a superpartient contains, besides the lesser number, two parts of the lesser 
number, it is understood that those parts are thirds, etc. Cf. Boethius, I. 28: Hoc guoque tviden- 
dum esi, quoniam, cum duae partes ex minore plus in matoribus sunt, tertit semper vocabulum sub- 
auditur, ut superbipartiens . . . . dicatur superbipartiens fertias. . . 

‘ These terms represent the ratios, respectively, of 19, 13, 1$, 18 to 1. 

= 

a) 

3 

| 

th 

222 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

with five, ‘sixth,’ and so on, so that the order of nomenclature is some- 
thing like this: superbipartient, supertripartient, superquadripartient, 
then superquintipartient, and similarly with the rest. 

Now the simple, uncompounded relations of relative quantity are 
these which have been enumerated. Those which are compounded of 
them and as it were woven out of two into one are the following, of 
which the antecedents ' are the multiple superparticular and multiple 
superpartient, and the consequents the ones that immediately arise 
in connection with each of the former, named with the prefix sub-; 
together with the multiple superparticular the submultiple super- 
particular, and with the multiple superpartient the submultiple super- 
partient. In the subdivision * of the genera the species of the one will 
correspond to those of the other, these also having names with the pre- 
fix sub-. 

CHAPTER XXII 

Now the multiple superparticular is a relation * in which the greater 
of the compared terms contains within itself the lesser term more than 
once and in addition some one part of it, whatever this may be. 

As a compound, such a number is doubly diversified after the pecul- 
larities of nomenclature of its components on either side; for inas- 
much as the multiple superparticular is composed of the multiple and 
superparticular generically, it will have in its subdivisions according 
to species a sort of diversification and change of names proper both 
to the first part of the name and to the second. For instance, in the 
first part, that is, the multiple, it will have double, triple, quadruple, 
quintuple, and so forth, and in the second part, generically from the 
superparticular, its specific forms in due order, the sesquialter, ses- 
quitertian, sesquiquartan, sesquiquintan, and so on, so that the com- 
bination will proceed in somewhat this order : 

Double sesquialter, double sesquitertian, double sesquiquartan, 
double sesquiquintan, double sesquisextan, and analogously. 

Beginning once more: triple sesquialter, triple sesquitertian, triple 
sesquiquartan, triple sesquiquintan. 

! See I. 19. 2 and the note, on the terms ‘antecedent’ and ‘ consequent.’ 

* That is, just as submultiple superpartient corresponds to multiple superpartient, so submultiple 

superbipartient (a subclass) answers to multiple superbipartient, etc. 
* Theon of Smyrna, p. 78, 23 ff. Hiller, defines this ratio. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 223 

Again: quadruple sesquialter, quadruple sesquitertian, quadruple 
sesquiquartan, quadruple sesquiquintan. 

Again: quintuple sesquialter, quintuple sesquitertian, quintuple 
sesquiquartan, quintuple sesquiquintan, and the forms analogous to 
these ad infinitum. Whatever number of times the greater contains 
the whole of the smaller, by this quantity the first part of the ratio 
of the terms joined together in the multiple superparticular is named ; 
and whatever may be the factor, in addition to the whole several times 
contained, that is, in the greater term, from this is named the second 
kind of ratio of which the multiple superparticular is compounded. 

Examples of it are these: 5 is the double sesquialter! of 2; 7 the 3 
double sesquitertian of 3; 9 the double sesquiquartan of 4; 11 the 
double sesquiquintan of 5. You will furthermore always produce them 
in regular order, in this fashion, by comparing with the successive even 
and odd numbers from 2 the odd numbers, exclusively, from 5, first 
with first, second with second, third with third, and the others each 
with the one in the same position in the series. The successive terms 
beginning with 5 and differing by 5 will be without exception double 
sesqulalters of all the successive even numbers from 2 on, when terms 
in the same position in the series are compared; and beginning with 
3, 1f all those with a difference of 3 be set forth, as 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 
and in another series there be set forth those that differ by 7, to in- 
finity, aS 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, and the greater be compared with the 
smaller, first to first, second to second, third to third, fourth to fourth, 
and so on, the second species will appear, the double sesquitertian, 
disposed in its proper order. 

Then again, to take a fresh start, if the simple series of quadruples 4 
be set forth, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, and then there be placed beside 
it in another series the successive numbers beginning with 9g, and in- 
creasing by 9, as 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 54, we shall have revealed once 
more the multiple superparticular in a specific form, that is, the 
double sesquiquartan in its proper order; and any one who desires 
can contrive this to an unlimited extent. 

The second kind begins with the triple sesquialter, such as 7: 2,14: 4, 5 
and in general the numbers that advance by steps of 7 compared with 
the even numbers in order from 2. Then once more, 1o: 3 is the first 6 
triple sesquitertian, 20:6 the second, and, in a word, the multiples 
of ro in succession, compared with the successive triples. This indeed 

1 Because it contains 2 twice, plus 1; 1e., is 24 X 2. 

224 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

we can observe with greater exactitude and clearness in the table 
studied above, for in comparison with the first row the succeeding 
rows in order,! compared as whole rows, display the forms of the mul- 
tiple in regular order up to infinity when they are all compared in 
each case to the same first row; and when each row is compared to 
all those above it, in succession, the second row being taken as our 
starting point, all the forms of the superparticular are produced in 
their proper order; and if we start with the third row,’ all of those 
beginning with the fifth that are odd in the series when they are com- 
pared with this same third row, and those following it, will show all 
the forms of the superpartient in proper order. In the case of the mul- 
tiple superparticular, the comparisons will have a natural order of their 
own if we start with the second row and compare the terms from the 
fifth, first to first, second to second, third to third, and so on, and then 
the terms of the seventh row to the third, those of the ninth to the 
fourth, and follow the corresponding order as far as we are able to go. 

7 It is plain that here too the smaller terms have names corresponding 
to the larger ones, with the prefix sub-, according to the nomenclature 
given them all. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

1 The multiple superpartient * is the remaining relation of number. 
This, and the relation called by a corresponding name with the prefix 
sub-, exist when a number contains the whole of the number compared 
more than once (that is, twice, thrice, or any number of times) and 
certain parts of it, more than one, either two, three, or four, and so on, 

2 besides. These parts ‘ are not halves, for the reasons mentioned above, 
but either thirds, fourths, or fifths, and so on. 

3 From what has already been said it is not hard to conceive of the 

1 Referring to the table in chapter 19, the successive rows of which are multiples of the first 
(since this is simply the multiplication table). 

* That is, the comparisons are to be 5th row with the 3d, 7th with the 4th, oth with the sth, 
etc. Hence we will have: 

5 = 3 = 45 =— p = 14 1 7 * 
oa ; etc “. superbipartient ; 
a Ol wio¥: ee ere 
4 8 7a etc. = ; , supertripartient ; 
9 _ 18 27 ¢ 

I F : 
me = etc. = 7) superquadripartient, etc. 

=| 
Oo 

> Theon’s definition is found p. 79, 15 &. Hiller. 
4 See 20. 2 above. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 225 

varieties of this relation, for they are differentiated in the same way 
as, and consistently with, those that precede, double superbipartient, 
double supertripartient, double superquadripartient, and so on. For 
example, 8 is the double superbipartient of 3, 16 of 6, and in general 
the numbers beginning with 8 and differing by 8 are double super- 
bipartients of those beginning with 3 and differing by 3, when those 
in corresponding places in the series are compared, and in the case of 
the other varieties one could ascertain their proper sequence by fol- 
lowing out what has already been said. In this case, too, we must 
conceive that the nomenclature of the number compared goes along 
and suffers corresponding changes, with the addition of the prefix sub-. 

Thus we come to the end of our speculation upon the ten arithmetical 4 
relations for a first Introduction. There is, however, a method? 
very exact and necessary for all discussion of the nature of the 
universe which very clearly and indisputably presents to us the 
fact that that which is fair and limited, and which subjects itself 
to knowledge,” is naturally prior to the unlimited, incomprehensible, 
and ugly, and furthermore that the parts and varieties of the infinite 

! The principle about to be stated is that of the ‘three rules’ (Cantor, op. cil., vol. I, p. 431; 

+ 
Nesselmann, op. cil., p. 198), by following which, starting from three equal terms, other sets of 
three in different ratios may be derived, and by the reversal of which any proportion in three terms 
may be reduced to the orginal equality. The present purpose is to show that equality is more 
elementary than any form of inequality as measured by ratios (cf. II. 1. 1), and it follows for 
Nicomachus as a Pythagorean that what is true of numbers is also true of the universe, and that 
‘equality’ and ‘sameness’ are therefore elements and principles. The proposition was undoubt- 
edly not original with Nicomachus, for its history can be traced back several centuries. In Theon 
of Smyrna (p. 107, 24 Hiller) it is given on the authority of Adrastus, a Peripatetic, whose date 
is stated in the Pauly-Wissowa encyclopedia to be the middle of the second century A.p. 
E. Hiller (Rhein. Mus., vol. XVI, pp. 582 ff.) has shown that the book of Adrastus which Theon 
is probably quoting is his commentary on Plato’s Timaeus. It is further probable from the con- 
text of Theon that Eratosthenes (ca. 276-194 B.C.) knew the ‘three rules.’ He is there cited in 
these words: “‘So we shall take three magnitudes and the proportion residing in them and change 
the terms, and we shall show that all mathematics is made up of the proportion of quantities and 
that their source and element are the principle of the proportion” (AaBérres 84 rpla peydby xal 
rihy év robro dvadoylay xivicouer robs Spovs Kal delEouew Ore wdvra ra év Trois pwalhuaoiy €f 
dvahoylas woody rivwy ovyxeira: xal Eoriw avriw dpyh xal orocyeiow % THs dvadoylas pvcis), 
Another citation of Eratosthenes (Theon, p. 82, 22 ff.) informs us that the ‘principle (gers) of the 
proportion’ is ratio, which should be taken into consideration in connection with the statements 
above. Theon immediately adds, after the passage first cited, ‘But Eratosthenes says that he 
will omit the demonstrations’ (rds é¢ dwodeiteas 6 pew "EparocOérns pool wapahelvecr), and 
proceeds to give the ‘three rules’ as stated by Adrastus. Eratosthenes’s reference to ‘three mag- 
nitudes’ and ‘changing the terms,’ however, seems, especially in view of the context of Theon, 
to apply to nothing else than the ‘three rules,’ and it must be inferred from his own statement that 
he would ‘omit the demonstrations,’ that the latter were familiar to him. E. Hiller (Philologus, 
vol. XXX, pp. 60 ff.) has shown that this quotation of Eratosthenes is probably taken from his 
Il\arweexés, and that this, like the book of Adrastus, was a commentary on the Timaceus. 
©Cr.. Lig. 

226 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

and unlimited are given shape and boundaries by the former, and 
through it attain to their fitting order and sequence, and like objects 
brought beneath some seal! or measure all gain a share of likeness to 
it and similarity of name when they fall under its influence. For thus 
it is reasonable that the rational part of the soul will be the agent which 
puts in order the irrational part, and passion and appetite, which 
find their places in the two forms of inequality, will be regulated by 
the reasoning faculty as though by a kind of equality and sameness. 

5 And from this equalizing process there will properly result for us the 
so-called ethical virtues,? sobriety, courage, gentleness, self-control, 
fortitude, and the like. 

6 Let us then consider the nature of the principle that pertains to 
these universal matters. It is capable of proving that all the complex 
species of inequality and the varieties of these species are produced 
out of equality, first and alone, as from a mother and root. 

7 Let there be given us equal numbers in three terms, first, units, 
then two’s in another group of three, then three’s, next four’s, five’s, 
and so on as far as you like. For them, as the setting forth of these 
terms has come about by a divine, and not human, contrivance, nay, 
by Nature herself, multiples will first be produced, and among these 
the double will lead the way, the triple after the double, the quadruple 
next, and then the quintuple, and, following the order we have pre- 
viously recognized, ad infinitum; second, the superparticular, and 
here again the first form, the sesquialter, will lead, and the next after 
it, the sesquitertian, will follow, and after them the next in order, 
the sesquiquartan, the sesquiquintan, the sesquisextan, and so on ad 
infinitum ; third, the superpartient, which once more the superbipar- 
tient will lead, the supertripartient will follow immediately upon it, 

1 Whatever is absolutely indeterminate can never remain the same or even retain the same 
name even for an instant; for then it would be determined. Objects of this sort are to be looked 
for among the material things mentioned in I. 1.3. When they are impressed with form, they are 
no longer indeterminate but determined thereby; they remain like themselves and like their pat- 
tern, the ideal form, from one moment to the next, and can be called by the same name from time 
to time (‘partake of likeness and similarity of name’). As Nicomachus points out above (I. 1. 2 
— 2.1) it is only by virtue of the form with which they are impressed and not of themselves that 
such things have any existence and appellation; both their being and their name are those of the 
forms and not their own. 

? Aristotle gives sobriety (swppoatrn) as the mean in matters concerning pleasure and pain with 
licentiousness (d«oAacia) as the excess and no extreme to match it on the side of deficiency (Eth. 
Nic., 1107 b 4 ff.). Courage (dvdpela) he calls the mean between fear and recklessness, pé6fos 
and @dppy (ibid., 1107 a 33). Gentleness (wpaérys; the extremes dpy:Aérns, dopynola): see 

thid., 1108 a 4 ff.; self-control and patience (¢yxpdreu, xaprepla) are discussed together, ibid., 
1145 b 8 ff. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 227 

and then will come the superquadripartient, the superquintipartient,} 
and according to the foregoing as far as one may proceed. 

Now you must have certain rules, like invariable and inviolable 
natural laws, following which the whole aforesaid advance and progress 
from equality may go on without failure. These are the directions: ? 
Make the first equal to the first, the second equal to the sum of the 
first and second, and the third to the sum of the first, twice the second, 
and the third. For if you fashion according to these rules you would 
get first all the forms of the multiple in order out of the three given 
terms of the equality, as it were, sprouting and growing without your 
paying any heed or offering any aid. From equality you will first? 
get the double; from the double the triple, from the triple succes- 
sively the quadruple, and from this the quintuple in due order, and so 
on. From these same multiples in their regular order, reversed, there 
are immediately produced by a sort of natural necessity through the 
agency of the same three rules the superparticulars, and these not as 
it chances and irregularly but in their proper sequence; for from the 
first,* the double, reversed, comes the first, the sesquialter, and from 
the second, the triple, the second in this class, the sesquitertian; then 
the sesquiquartan from the quadruple, and in general each one from 
the one of similar name. And witha fresh start, if the superparticulars 
are set forth in the order of their production, but with terms reversed, 
the superpartients, which naturally follow them, are brought to light, 

1 xal edOds rd éwererrapepés (p. 66, 14 Hoche) is omitted by Codex G. 

? As stated by Theon of Smyrna, p. 107, 24 ff., Adrastus thus formulated the rule: ‘Given 
three terms in any proportion, if three others be taken formed from these, the first equal to the 
first, the second equal to the sum of the first and second, and the third the sum of the first, twice 
the second and the third, those thus taken will again be proportional.” Algebraically this method 
obtains from a, ar, ar? the series, a, a(1 +r), a(1 +r). All of the remaining results of this 
chapter are included in this formula. The examples given by Theon start with three equal 
terms, as here. 

* The results thus produced will be: 

I I 1 equality 

I 2 4 doubles 

I 3 9 triples 

I 4 16 quadruples 

I 5 25 quintuples, etc. 

Theon gives like results. 
‘ Theon includes this process in his discussion; its results are as follows: 

4 2 1, doubles reversed, giving 4 6 g, sesquialters 
0 3 1, triples reversed, giving 9 12 16, sesquitertians 
16 4 1, quadruples reversed, giving 16 20 25, sesquiquartans 

25 5 I, quintuples reversed, giving 25 30 36, sesquiquintans, etc. 

Io 

a 

"op tr 

228 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

the superbipartient from the sesquialter,’ the supertripartient from 
the sesquitertian, the superquadripartient from the sesquiquartan, and 
11 SO on ad infinitum. If, however, the superparticulars? are set forth 
with terms not in reverse but in direct order, there are produced 
through the three rules the multiple superparticulars, the double 
sesquialter out of the first, the sesquialter; the double sesquitertian 
from the second, the sesquitertian, the double sesquiquartan from the 
12 third, the sesquiquartan, and so on. From those produced by the 
reversal of the superparticular, that is, the superpartients, and from 
those produced without such reversal, the multiple superparticulars, 
there are once more produced, in the same way and by the same rules, 
both when the terms are in direct or reverse order, the numbers that 
show the remaining numerical relations. 
13 The following must suffice as illustrations of all that has been said 
hitherto, the production of these numbers and their sequence, and the 
14 use of direct and of reverse order. From the relation and proportion 
in terms of the sesquialter, reversed so as to begin with the largest 
term, there arises a relation in superpartient ratios, the superbipar- 
tient; and from it in direct order, beginning with the smallest term, 
a multiple superparticular relation, the double sesquialter. For ex- 
ample, from 9, 6, 4, we get either 9, 15, 25 or 4, 10, 25. From the 
relation in terms of sesquitertians, beginning with the greatest term, 
is derived a superpartient, the supertripartient; beginning with the 
smallest term, a double sesquitertian. For example, from 16, 12, 9 
comes either 16, 28, 49 or 9, 21, 49. And from the relation in terms of 
sesquiquartans, when it is arranged to begin with the largest term, is 
derived a superpartient, the superquadripartient ; when it starts with 
the smallest term, a multiple superparticular, the double sesquiquin- 
tan; for instance, from 25, 20, 16 comes either 25, 45, 81 or 16, 36, 81. 
15 In the case of all these relations that are thus differentiated? and 

1 Theon reports this matter as well. The results: 

Reversed superparticulars : Resulting superpartients: 
9 6 4 (sesquialter) 9 15 25 (superbipartient) 
16 12 9g (sesquitertian) 16 28 49 (supertripartient) 
25 20 16 (sesquiquartan) 25 45 81 (superquadripartient), etc. 
2 This gives the following results: 
Superparticulars : Multiple superparticulars : 
4 6 _— g (sesquialter) 4 10 25 (double sesquialter) 
9 12 16 (sesquitertian) g 21 49 (double sesquitertian) 
16 20 25 (sesquiquartan) 16 36 81 (double sesquiquartan). 
+ What Nicomachus meant by racay . . . raw diafevy dew dy, ‘the contrasted ratios,’ is shown 

by Iamblichus’s commentary, which here has ray rhaccouévwy cxécewr, They are the pairs of 

TRANSLATION: BOOK I 229 

of the one from which both of the differentiated ones are derived, 
the last term is always the same and a square; the first term becomes 
the smallest, and invariably the extremes are squares. 

Moreover the multiple superpartients and superpartients of other 16 
kinds are made to appear in yet another way out of the superpartients ; 
for example, from the superbipartient relation arranged so as to be- 
gin with the smallest term comes the double superbipartient, but, 
arranged so as to start with the greatest, the superpartient ratio of 
8:5. Thus from g, 15, 25 comes either 9, 24, 64 or 25, 40, 64. From 
the supertripartient, beginning with the smallest term, we have the 
double supertripartient, and, beginning with the largest, the ratio of 
11:7. Thus, from 16, 28, 49 comes either 16, 44, 121 oF 49, 77, 121. 
Again, from the superquintipartient, as, for example, 25, 45, 81, be- 
ginning with the lesser term we derive the double superquintipartient 
in the terms 25, 70, 196, but beginning with the greater a superpartient 
again, the ratio of 14:9, in the terms 81, 126, 196. And you will 
find the results analogous and in agreement with the foregoing in all 
successive cases to infinity.’ 

"| 

7 

ratios that may be derived from any given ratio by the application of the rules under discussion 
to the given ratio taken in direct and reversed order in turn, and it is because of the latter circum- 
stance that they are called ‘contrasted’ (so Ast, Theol. Arith., p. 268, distunclis et inter se oppost- 
fis, una mimirum recta, allera conversa). In further illustration of the meaning the ratios men- 
tioned by the author may be examined : 

Original ratios: 
Direct order, 4 6 9g 9 12 16 16 20 25; 
Reverse order, 9 6 4 16 12 9 25 20 16; 
Derived forms, 9 15 25 16 28 49 25 45 81; 
4 10 25 9 21 49 16 36 81 

Now whenever these derivative ratios are produced, (1) the last term, a square, is the same in each 
(25, 49, 81 in the scheme above); (2) the first term in the first derivative is the larger square of 
the original ratio, but in the second it is the smaller (‘it changes from the larger to the smaller’) ; 
(3) all the extreme terms are squares. 

1 Certain of the MSS (See the critical note, p. 70, 15 Hoche) here add: “Moreover in all the 
given series the extremes are always squares; and the mean terms are derived from their sides 
multiplied together; and the first term of the generating ratio becomes the smaller term of the 
ratio generated. And in both the ratios generated the last and greater square is the same.” 
This material was used by Ast to reconstruct the text of section 15, which would then read much 
like the addition to the text just translated. In comparing the ratios given in the preceding note 
it may be observed that in 4, 6, 9, for example, the mean, 6, is 2 X 3 (the product of the sides of 
the squares 4 and g) and the same is true of the rest. Then again the first term of 9, 6, 4 is the 
smallest of the series 9, 15, 25 derived from it, while the first term of 4, 6, 9 is the smallest of the 
derivative series 4, 10, 25, and so with the rest. 

I 

oS 

Lo | 

BOOK II 

CHAPTER I 

An element is said to be, and is, the smallest thing which enters into 
the composition of an object and the least thing into which it can be 
analyzed. Letters, for example, are called the elements of literate 
speech, for out of them all articulate speech 1s composed and into them 
finally it is resolved. Sounds are the elements of all melody; for they 
are the beginning of its composition and into them it is resolved. 
The so-called four elements of the universe in general are simple 
bodies, fire, water, air, and earth; ’ for out of them in the first instance 
we account for the constitution of the universe, and into them finally 
we conceive of it as being resolved. 

We wish also to prove that equality is the elementary principle’ 
of relative number; for of absolute number, number per se, unity 
and the dyad * are the most primitive elements, the least things out 
of which it is constructed, even to infinity, by which it has its growth, 
and with which its analysis into smaller terms comes to an end. We 
have, however, demonstrated that in the realm of inequality advance 
and increase have their origin in equality and go on to absolutely all 
the relations with a certain regularity through the operation of the 
three rules. It remains, then, in order to make it an element in very 
truth, to prove that analyses also finally come to an end in equality. 
Let this then be considered our procedure. 

CHAPTER II 

Suppose then you are given three terms, in any relation whatsoever 
and in any ratio, whether multiple, superparticular, superpartient, or 
a compound of these, multiple superparticular or multiple superpar- 

1 The ordinary list of elements for practically all Greek philosophy. These four were distin- 
guished as primitive bodies in immemorial antiquity, but the more scientific idea of them as ele- 
ments seems to have originated with Empedocles. On the matter see Burnet’s summary, Greek 
Philosophy, Part I, Thales to Plato, p. 26. 

2 See on I. 23. 4. * Cf. Part I, pp. 99 fff. ‘ That is, those given in I. 23. 8. 

230 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 231 

tient, provided only that the mean term is seen to be in the same ratio 
to the lesser as the greater to the mean, and vice versa. Subtract 
always from the mean the lesser term, whether it be first or last in 
order, and set down the lesser term itself as the first term of your new 
series; then put as your second term what remains from the second 
after the subtraction; then after having subtracted the sum of the 
new first term and twice the new second term from the remaining num- 
ber — that is, the greater of the numbers originally given you — make 
the remainder your third term, and the resulting numbers will be in 
some other ratio, naturally more primitive.’ And if again in the same 2 
way you subtract the remainder from these same terms,” it will be 
found that your three terms have passed back into three others more 
primitive, and you will find that this always takes place as a conse- 
quence, until they are reduced to equality, whence by every necessity 
it appears evident that equality is the elementary principle of relative 
quantity. 

There follows upon this speculation a most elegant principle, ex- 
tremely useful in its application to the Platonic psychogony * and 
the problem of all harmonic intervals; for in the Platonic passage we 
are frequently bidden, for the sake of the argument, to set up series 
of intervals of two, three, four, five, or an infinite number of sesquialter 
ratios, or two sesquitertians, sesquiquartans, sesquioctaves, or super- 
particulars of any kind whatsoever, and in each case three, four, or 
five of them, or as many as may be directed. It is reasonable that 4 
we should do this not in an unscientific, unintelligent fashion, it may 
be even blunderingly, but artistically, surely, and quickly, by the 
following procedure. 

CHAPTER III 

Every multiple will stand at the head * of as many superparticular 1 
ratios corresponding in name with itself as it itself chances to be re- 
moved from unity,° and no more nor less under any circumstances. 

1 This is because the process is the reverse of the former. Theon of Smyrna, p. 110, 19 ff., 
gives this rule, taking it from Adrastus. 

2 For example, take 8, 32, 128 (quadruple series). The first term of the new series will be 8; 
the second will be 32 — 8 = 24; the third will be 128 — [(2 X 24) + 8], or 72. This gives a 
triple series. Then similarly from 8, 24, 72 will be derived 8, 16, 32, the double series, and from 
the latter 8, 8, 8, a series of equal terms. 3See Plato, Timaeus, 35 A ff. 

‘ irytoerac: That is, with reference to the table in section 4; ‘will head a column.’ 

6 That is, in the list of doubles (see the table). 

232 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

2 The doubles, then, will produce!’ sesquialters, the first one, the 
second two, the third three, the fourth four, the fifth five, the sixth 
six, and neither more nor less, but by every necessity when the super- 
particulars that are generated attain the proper number, that is, when 
their number agrees with the multiples that have generated them, at 
that point by a divine device, as it were, there is found the number 
which terminates them all because it naturally is not divisible by 
that factor whereby the progression of the superparticular ratios 
went on. 

From the triples all the sesquitertians will proceed, likewise equal 
in number to the number of the generating terms, and coming to an 
end, after the independence of their advance is lost, in numbers not 
divisible by 3. Similarly the sesquiquartans come from the quad- 
ruples, reaching a culmination after their independent progression in 
a number that is not divisible by 4. 

3 As an example, since doubles generate sesquialters corresponding 
to them in number,’ the first row of multiples * will be 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 
32, 64. Now since 2 is the first after unity, this will be the origin of 
one sesquialter only, 3, which number is not divisible by 2, so that 
another sesquialter might arise out of it. The first double, therefore, 
is productive of but one sesquialter, and the second, 4, of two. For 
it produces its own sesquialter, 6, and that of 6, 9, but there is none 
for g because it has no half. Eight, which is the third double, is father 
to three sesquialters; one its own, 12; the second, 18, the sesquialter 
of 12; and third, 27, that of 18; there is no fourth one, however, be- 
cause of the general rule, for 27 is not divisible by 2. Sixteen, the 
fourth double, will stand at the head of four sesquialters, 24, 36, 54, 
and finally 81, so that they may of necessity be equal in number to 
what generated them; for 81 by its nature is not divisible by 2. And 
this, as you go on, you will find holds true in similar fashion to 
infinity. 

4 For the sake of illustration let there be set down the table of the 
doubles, thus: , 

1 gUeove:: In the same sense that the even numbers ‘produced’ sesquialters by the process 
of I. 19.2; but each double is here regarded as the source or producer not only of its own sesqui- 
alter, but also that of this sesquialter itself, and so on, as far as the ratio can be carried on in 
integers. 

2 The number of the multiple is of course that of its order in the series of doubles, or triples, 
etc. 
3 That is, doubles, the simplest subclass. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK [I 233 

The double ratio in the breadth of the table 
124 8 16 32 64 
3 6 12 24 48 96 
The triple ratio along 9 18 36 72 144 The sesquialter ra- 

the hypotenuse 27 54 108 216 tio in the depth 
81 162 324 of the table 
243 480 
729 
CHAPTER IV 
We must make a similar table in illustration of the triple: I 

The triple ratio in the breadth 

I 3 9 27 81 243 729 
4 12 36 108 324 972 

The quadruple 16 48 144 432 1296 The sesquiter- 
ratio on the 64 192 576 1728 tian ratio in 
hypotenuse 256 768 2304 the depth 

1024 3072 
4096 

In the foregoing table we shall observe that in the same way the 
first triple, 3, stands at the head of but one sesquitertian ratio, 4, its own 
sesquitertian, which immediately shuts off the development of another 
like it; for 4 is not divisible by 3, and hence will not have a sesquiter- 
tian. The second triple is 9, and hence will begin a series of only two 
sesquitertian ratios, 12, its own, and 16, that of 12; but 16 cuts off 
further progress, for it is not divisible by 3 and hence will not have a 
sesquitertian. Next in order is the triple 27, three times removed 2 
from 1, for the triples progress thus: 1, 3,9, 27. Therefore this number 
will stand at the head of three sesquitertian ratios and no more. The 
first is its own, 36; the second the sesquitertian of 36, 48; the third 
that of the last, 64, and this no longer has a third part and therefore 
will not admit of a sesquitertian. The fourth leads a series of four ses- 
quitertians and the fifth, of course, five. 

Such, then, is the illustration; and for the other multiples let the 3 
manner of your tables be the same. Observe that likewise here, as 
we found to be true in our previous discussion, Nature shows us that 
the doubles are more nearly original than the triples, the triples than 

234 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

the quadruples, these latter than the quintuples, and so on throughout. 
For the highest rows of figures, across the breadth of the tables, if 
they are doubles, will have doubles lying parallel to them, and the 
numbers lying diagonally, on the hypotenuse, will be of the next 
succeeding variety, greater by 1, that is, triples, seen also in a series of 
parallel lines. If, however, there are triples across the breadth, the 
diagonals will by all means be quadruples ; if the former are quadruples, 
then the latter are quintuples, and so forth. 

CHAPTER V 

t It remains, after we have explained what other ratios are produced 
by combination of ratios, to pass on to the succeeding topics of the 
Introduction. 

2 Now the first two ratios of the superparticular, combined, produce 
the first ratio of the multiple, namely, the double; for every double 
is a combination of sesquialter and sesquitertian, and every sesquialter 
and sesquitertian ' combined will invariably produce a double. 

For example,’ since 3 is the sesquialter of 2, and 4 the sesquitertian 
of 3, 4 will be the double of 2, and is a combination of sesquialter and 
sesquitertian. Again, as 6 is the double of 3, we shall find between 
them some number ® that will of necessity preserve the sesquitertian 
ratio to the one and the sesquialter to the other; and indeed 4, lying 
between 6 and 3, gives the sesquitertian ratio to 3 and the sesquialter 
to 6. 

3 It was rightly said, then, that the double, when resolved, is resolved 
into the sesquialter and the sesquitertian, and that when sesquialter 
and sesquitertian are combined there arises the double, and that the 
first two forms of the superparticular combined make the first form of 
the multiple. 

1 That is, when the last term of the first is the same as the first term of the second ratio; for 

given the general formula for the sesquialter, a + “; then the sesquitertian of the second term, 
| ee ee : ; ee 3.4 

a+=+-+4+ ao 2 a, is the double of the first term; or, more simply, 2 = 2, 
2 2 3 

2 Some of the MSS diagrammatically illustrate thus: 
2 3 4 

sesquialter sesquitertian | 
| double | 

1 That is, given a and 2 a, in double ratio, } K a = 3 X 24. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 235 

But again, to take another start, this first form of the multiple which 4 
has thus been produced, together with the first form of the superpar- 
ticular,’ will produce the next form of the same class, that is, the second 
multiple, the triple; for from every multiple and sesquialter combined 
a triple of necessity arises. For example,’ as the double of 6 is 12, and 
the sesquialter of this is 18, then immediately 18 is the triple of 6; 
and to take another method, if I do not care to make 12 the mean term, 
but rather 9, the sesquialter of 6, the same result will come about, 
without deviation and harmoniously; for while 18 is the double of 
9 it will preserve the triple ratio to 6. Hence from the sesquialter and 
the double, the first forms of the superparticular and the multiple, 
there arises by combination the second form of the multiple, the triple, 
and into them it is always resolved. For look you; 6, which is the 5 
triple of 2, will have a mean term 3, which will exhibit two ratios, the 
sesquialter with regard to 2, and the double ratio of 6 to itself. 

But if this triple ratio,’ likewise, the second form of the multiple, is 

‘ The sesquialter. 
? Diagrams given in the MSS: 

6 12 18 

double sesquialter These principles may also be 
| | demonstrated in general terms: 
arenes a) 

4 16 F 20 (or, 4, 5s 20) 
7 quadruple ‘ sesquiquartan 
5 | 29 30 (or, 5, 6, 30) 

quintuple sesquiquintan | 

Algebraic statements of the matter above: 

(a) m; 3m; (sm +5) = 4m, 

236 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

combined with the sesquitertian, which is the second form of the super- 
particular, there would be produced from them the next form of the 
multiple, namely, the quadruple, and this also will of necessity be re- 
solved into them after the same fashion as the cases previously set 
forth; and the quadruple, taking into combination the sesquiquartan, 
will make the quintuple, and, once more, the latter with the sesqui- 
quintan will make the sextuple, and soon tothe end. Thus the multi- 
ples in regular order from the beginning with the superparticulars in 
regular order from the beginning will be found to produce the next 
larger multiples. For the double with the sesquialter makes the triple, 
the triple with the sesquitertian the quadruple, the quadruple with 
the sesquiquartan the quintuple, and as far as you wish to proceed no 
contrary result will appear. 

CHAPTER VI 

1 Up to this point then we have sufficiently discussed relative number, 
by a process of selection measuring out what is easily comprehended 
and appropriate to the nature of the matters thus far introduced. 
Whatever remains to be said on this topic will be filled in after we have 
put it aside and have first discussed certain subjects which involve 
a more serviceable inquiry, having to do with the properties of 

‘- absolute number, not relative. For mathematical speculations’ are 
always to be interlocked and to be explained one by means of another.. 
The subjects which we must first survey and observe are concerned with 
linear, plane, and solid numbers, cubical and spherical, equilateral 
and scalene, ‘bricks,’ ‘beams,’ ‘wedges,’ and the like, the tradition 
concerning which, to be sure, since they are more closely related to: 
magnitude, is properly given in the Geometrical Introduction.? Yet 

OT, m#; m+™. (sm+3™ m) = 4m, 
3 

(5) m; 4m; (4m+4™) = sm, 
Or, ™; wos (am+% tm) = 5m. 
(c) m; 5m; (sm+5%) «6m 

OF, ; mei (sm+5™) = 6m, 
5 

1 Boethius, II. 4: Amat enim quodammodo matheseos speculatio alterna probationem rations 
constitut. ? Cf. p. 70. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 237 

the germs of these ideas are taken over into arithmetic, as the science | 
which is the mother of geometry and more elementary than it. For 
we recall that a short time ago we saw that arithmetic abolishes the 
other sciences with itself,’ but is not abolished by them, and conversely 
is of necessity implied by them but does not itself imply them. 

First, however, we must recognize that each letter by which we in- 
dicate a number, such as lota, the sign for 10, kappa for 20, and omega 
for 800, designates that number by man’s convention and agreement, 
not by nature. On the other hand, the natural, unartificial, and there- 
fore simplest indication of numbers would be the setting forth one 
beside the other of the units contained in each. For example, the 
writing of one unit by means of one alpha will be the sign for 1; two 
units side by side, that is, a series of two alphas, will be the sign for 
2; when three are put in a line it will be the character for 3, four in a 
line for 4, five for 5,and soon. For by means of such a notation and 
indication alone could the schematic arrangement of the plane and 
solid numbers mentioned be made clear and evident, thus: 

The number 1, a 

The number 2, aa 

The number 3, aaa 
The number 4, aaaa 
The number 5, aaaaa 

and further in similar fashion. 

Unity, then, occupying the place and character of a point, will be 
the beginning of intervals and of numbers, but not itself an interval 
or a number,’ just as the point is the beginning of a line, or an interval, 
but is not itself line or interval.* Indeed, when a point is added to a 
point, it makes no increase, for when an non-dimensional thing is added 
to another non-dimensional thing, it will not thereby have dimension ; 
just as if one should examine the sum of nothing added to nothing, 

1Cf. I. 4. 2-5. ? See p. 116. 

?With this passage should be compared Theon of Smyrna, p. 81, 6 ff., where ‘interval’ (did- 
ornua) is defined: ‘“ ‘Interval’ and ‘ratio’ (Aéyos) are different; for ‘interval’ is that which is be- 
tween homogeneous unequal terms, ‘ratio’ merely the relation of homogeneous terms to one an- 
other. Wherefore there is in the case of equal terms no interval between, but there is one and the 
same ratio, that of equality ; whereas in the case of unequals, there is one and the same interval 
from each to each, but a different and opposite ratio of each to each. For example, there is one 
and the same interval from 2 to 1 and from to 2, but a different ratio; 2:1 isa double ratio and 
1:2 1s one half.”” He then quotes Eratosthenes on the subject. This will explain what is said 
below as to intervals in connection with the relation of equality. 

238 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

which makes nothing. We saw’ a similar thing also in the case of 
equality among the relatives; for a proportion is preserved — as the 
first is to the second, so the second is to the third — but no interval 
is generated in the relation of the extremes to each other, as there is 
in all the other relations with the exception of equality. In exactly 
the same way ” unity alone out of all number, when it multiplies itself, 
produces nothing greater than itself. 

Unity, therefore, is non-dimensional and elementary, and dimension 
first is found and seen in 2, then in 3, then in 4, and in succession in 
the following numbers; for ‘dimension’ is that which is conceived of 
as between two limits. 

4 The first dimension is called ‘line,’ for ‘line’ is that which is extended 
in one direction. Two dimensions are called ‘surface,’ for a ‘surface’ 
is that which is extended in two directions. Three dimensions are 
called ‘solid,’ for a ‘solid’ is that which is extended in three directions, 
and it is by no means possible to conceive * of a solid which has more 
than three dimensions, depth, breadth, and length. By these are de- 
fined the six directions which are said to exist in connection with every 
body and by which motions in space are distinguished, forward, back- 
ward,‘ up, down, right and left; for of necessity two directions opposite 
to each other follow upon each dimension, up and down upon one, for- 
ward and backward upon the second, and right and left upon the third. 

1 The reference is the series of equal numbers employed in I. 23. 7 ff. In the series 1, 1, 1; 
2, 2, 2, etc., the ratio is the same between any pair of terms; the extremes have the same ratio 
as the means; that is, they are all equal, so there is no interval between the extremes. 

? The Neo-Pythagoreans commonly used this fact to substantiate their identification of the 
monad with God. Like God the monad is immutable and eternal (e.g., Chalcidius, Comm. in 
Tim., c. 39: sola inconcusso inure est algue in slatu suo perseverat; semper eadem . . . immutabilis, 
et singularitas semper). The name monad they derived from ‘remain’ (mords, uévecv) because 
the monad ‘remains’ the same under these conditions (cf. Theol. Arith., p. 3 Ast; Iamblichus J 
Nic., p. 11, 24 f.; Theon, p. 19, 7). See also II. 17. 4 below. 

* Philo Judaeus, De Decalogo, 7, also states that there can be only three dimensions (w)elous 
yap rp.ay duacrdces obx &yévynaer). 

‘ The six categories of relative position (and motion) also were frequently cited in Neo-Py- 
thagorean arguments; the topic was, moreover, invested with greater significance from the fact 
that Plato employed it, in close connection with the varieties of motion, in Timaeus, 43 8. Add- 
ing rotation, Plato mentions seven varieties of motion, 1bid., 34 a (cf. 40 A-B), and 10 (not all 
spatial however) in Laws, 894 c. The Neo-Pythagoreans regarded it significant of the peculiar 
virtues of 6, therefore, that there should be six ‘so-called spatial positions’ (Theol. Arith., p. 36 
Ast, al Aeyéuerat cwparikal wepurrdoeis; cf. also Philo, Leg. Alleg., I. 2; (Plut.) Epét., ITI. 
15, 10 = Doxog. Graec., 380, 24; M. Capella, VII, 736, who adds that the seventh, circular mo- 
tion, is eternal). Many of them similarly used the group of seven motions in praise of the num- 
ber 7 (e.g., Anatolius, ap. Theol. Arith., p.42 Ast; Lydus, De Mens., II, 11; Philo, De Mund. Op., 
41, and Leg. Alleg., I. 4; Macrobius, Comm. in Somn. Scip., I. 6. 81). Nicomachus, then, is 
using a topic very frequently employed. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 239 

The statement, also, as it happens, can be made conversely thus: 5; 
If a thing is solid, it has by all means three dimensions, length, depth 
and breadth; and conversely, if it has the three dimensions, it is al- 
ways a solid, and nothing else. 

That which has but two dimensions, therefore, will not be a solid, 6 
but a surface, for the latter admits of but two dimensions. Here too 
it is possible similarly to reverse the statement; directly stated, a 
surface is that which has two dimensions, and conversely, that which 
has two dimensions is always a surface. 

The surface, then, is exceeded by the solid by one dimension, and the 7 
line is exceeded by the surface by one, for the line is that which is 
extended’ in but one direction and has only one dimension, and it 
falls short of the solid by two dimensions. The point falls short of 
the latter by one dimension, and hence it has already been stated that 
it is non-dimensional, since it falls short of the solid by three dimen- 
sions, of the surface by two, and of the line by one. 

CHAPTER VII 

The point, then, is the beginning of dimension, but not itself a1 
dimension, and likewise the beginning of a line, but not itself a line; 
the line is the beginning of surface, but not surface; and the begin- 
ning of the two-dimensional, but not itself extended in two directions. 
Naturally, too, surface is the beginning” of body, but not itself body, 2 
and likewise the beginning of the three-dimensional, but not itself 
extended in three directions. 

Exactly the same in numbers, unity is the beginning of all number 3 
that advances unit by unit in one direction ; linear number is the be- 
ginning of plane number, which spreads out like a plane in one more 
dimension; and plane number is the beginning of solid number, 
which possesses a depth ® in the third dimension, besides the original 
ones. To illustrate and classify, linear numbers are all those which 
begin with 2 and advance by the addition of 1 in one and the same 

'73 dcacraréy is translated ‘that which is extended’; 8iudornyua is here translated by ‘di- 
mension,’ though in a general sense it might be rendered ‘extension.’ d:deracis is used as a 
synonym for didornpa, 

* These statements are paralleled in Photius’s report of a Life of Pythagoras (Codex 240, 

p. 249 a, 19 Bekk.). 
3 Cf. Plato, Timaeus, 53 Cc: 1d 8é rod odparos eldos wav xal Adbos Lye. 

240 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

dimension ; and plane numbers are those! that begin with 3 as their 
most elementary root and proceed through the next succeeding num- 
bers. They receive their names also in the same order; for there are 
first the triangles, then the squares, the pentagons after these, then 
the hexagons, the heptagons, and so on indefinitely, and, as we said, 
they are named after the successive numbers beginning with 3. 

4 The triangle, therefore, is found to be the most original and elemen- 
tary form of the plane number. This we can see from the fact that, 
among plane figures,” graphically represented, if lines are drawn from 
the angles to the centers each rectilinear figure will by all means be 
resolved into as many triangles as it has sides; but the triangle itself, 
if treated like the rest, will not change into anything else but itself. 

1 Nicomachus, here and in the following chapters, adopts the broadest view of what consti- 
tutes the class of plane numbers. Not all the ancients agreed with him; Euclid, in Elements, 
VII, Def. 17, defines the plane number as we should, as that which is produced when two numbers 
multiply each other, the multiplier and multiplicand being its sides (Sray &é d¥o dpsfuol wodda- 
whacidoavres ddAHAOUs woidel Tiva, d yerduevos éwlwedos xadefrai, wAevpal dé atvrod ol wod\AawAaci- 
deavres d\dHAovs dpifuol), and Theon of Smyrna twice defines them similarly (p. 31, 9 Hiller, 
Scot Uwd Sv0 dpwOudy wohkAa whacidforra:; p. 36, 5, of diyws wodAawhacratduern éxlredor). Th. 
Martin clearly explains the difference between this application of the term and its more com- 
prehensive use by Nicomachus: ‘“‘En effet, les nombres rectangles et carrés expriment la 
mesure des surfaces, et les nombres parallélipipédes rectangles et cubiques expriment la mesure 
des solides. Au contraire, les nombres triangles, pentagones, hexagones, etc., de méme que les 
nombres tétraédres, pentaédres, hexaédres, etc., n’expriment rien qu'une disposition imaginaire 
des unités dans l’espace” (Chapitres IX* ef XX* du Livre Second de 0'Iniroduction Arithmétique 
de Nicomaque de Gérase, Rome, 1858, p. 7). 

In spite of his definition, Theon of Smyrna lists triangular and other polygonal numbers, like 
Nicomachus, and consequently must have known and shared to a certain extent Nicomachus’s 
conception of them, whether or not he was aware of any inconsistency; and that this conception 
was somewhat generally current is shown by its appearance in the works of Philo Judaeus (see 
p. 32). Further, it may be noted that this notion of the polygonals is found in Diophantus 
when (De Polygonis Numeris, vol. I, p. 450, 3 Tannery) he remarks that “each of the numbers 
beginning with the triad and increasing by unity is a polygonal number in the first degree from the 
monad, and has as many angles as the number of units in it, and its side is the next number after 
the monad, 2” (fxacros rar dwd ris rpiddos dpw@pay avfoudrww powdds wohktywrds dors wpiror dwd 
ris porddos, cal fye:ywwlas rocavras boov éorly rd rhidos Tay év abr@ porddwy whevpd Te atroi 
doriv 6 défjs Tis povddos dpOuds, 6 8’). From Nicomachus’s point of view, evidently, the same 
number could be called linear, plane, or solid, according to the assumed arrangement of its 
component monads. 

2 Nicomachus here agrees with Plato, Timaeus, 53 c ff., in declaring the triangle to be the 
fundamental form of the plane surface. Plato in the passage cited uses the principle further 
to explain the forms of the minutest particles of the four elements. He agrees with Nicomachus 
in stating that all plane surfaces may be reduced to triangles (Timaeus, 53 c, 7 d¢ 690} rijs éxc- 
wédou Bdoews éx Tpvydrwr cuvéorynxe), but with reference to the subdivision of the triangle 
itself, he points out that each may be reduced by dropping a perpendicular from the apex (in- 
stead of drawing lines to the center, according to Nicomachus) to two elementary forms, the 
right-angled scalene or the right-angled isosceles. Cf. also Theologumena Arithmeticae, p. 18, 
Ast, and II. 12. 8 below. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 241 

Hence the triangle is elementary among these figures; for everything 
else is resolved into it, but it into nothing else. From it the others 
likewise would be constituted, but it from no other. It is therefore 
the element of the others, and has itself no element. Likewise, as 5 
the argument proceeds in the realm of numerical forms, it will confirm 
this statement. 

CHAPTER VIII 

Now a triangular number is one which, when it is analyzed into 1 
units, shapes into triangular form the equilateral placement of its 
parts in a plane. 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, and so on, are examples of it; 
for their regular formations, expressed graphically, will be at once 
triangular and equilateral. As you advance you will find that such 
a numerical series as far as you like takes the triangular form, if you 
put as the most elementary form the one that arises from unity, so 
that unity may appear to be potentially a triangle," and 3 the first 
actually. 

Their sides will increase by the successive numbers, for the side of 2 
the one potentially first is unity; that of the one actually first, that 
is, 3, is 2; that of 6, which is actually second, 3; that of the third, 4; 
the fourth, 5; the fifth, 6; and so on. 

The triangular number is produced * from the natural series of num- 3 
ber set forth in a line, and by the continued addition of successive 
terms, one by one, from the beginning; for by the successive combi- 
nations and additions of another term to the sum, the triangular num- 
bers in regular order are completed. For example, from this natural 
series, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, II, 12, 13, 14, 15, I take the first term 
and have the triangular number which is potentially first,1, A; then 
adding the next term I get the triangle actually first, for 2 plus 1 equals 
3. In its graphic representation it is thus made up: Two units, 
side by side, are set beneath one unit, and the number three is made 

1 This is again the distinction between potential and actual, and according also to Theon, 
p. 33, 5, the monad is the first potentially triangular number. On what potentiality might be 
conceived to mean in this case, cf. Boethius, II. 8: Nam si cunctorum mater est numerorum (sc. 
unilas), quicquid in his quae ab ea nascuntur numeris inventlur necesse esl ul ipsa naturali quadam 
polestate contineal. 

2 Theon of Smyrna, p. 32, 22 ff., notes this method of generating triangular numbers. Cf. also 
Johannes Pediasimus, Geometria, in Newe Jahrb. f. Phil. u. Paed., vol. XCII, 1865, pp. 366 ff. 
(f. 40 a of the Munich MS there cited). 

242 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

a triangle : Then when next after these the following number, 

3, is added, simplified into units, and joined to the former, it gives 6, 
the second triangle in actuality, and furthermore, it graphically repre- 

sents this number: Again, the number that naturally follows, 

4, added in and set down below the former, reduced to units, gives 
the one in order next after the aforesaid, 10, and takes a triangular 

form: pe e\ 5) after this, then 6, then 7, and all the numbers in 
aadaede 

order, are added, so that regularly the sides of each triangle will consist 

of as many numbers! as have been added from the natural series to 

produce it : 

CHAPTER IX 

1 The square is the next number’ after this, which shows us no longer 
3, like the former, but 4, angles in its graphic representation, but is 
none the less equilateral. Take, for example, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 
64, 81, 100; for the representations of these numbers are equilateral, 
square figures, as here shown; and it will be similar as far as you wish 

to go: 
I 4 9 16 25 
2 It is true of these numbers, as it was also of the preceding, that the 

advance in their sides progresses with the natural series. The side 

1 Theon of Smyrna, p. 37, 13 ff., states that the units in the sides will equal the last number 
added. 

? This number is treated by Theon of Smyrna (pp. 26, 14; 28,3; 34,13 39, 10), who repeats 
himself several times. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 243 

of the square potentially first, 1, is 1; that of 4, the first in actuality, 
2; that of 9, actually the second, 3; that of 16, the next, actually 
the third, 4; that of the fourth, 5; of the fifth, 6, and so on in general 3 
with all that follow. 

This number also is produced’ if the natural series is extended 
in a line, increasing by 1, and: no longer the successive numbers 
are added to the numbers in order, as was shown before, but rather 
all those in alternate places, that is, the odd numbers. For the first, 
I, is potentially the first square; the second, 1 plus 3, is the first in 
actuality; the third, 1 plus 3 plus 5, is the second in actuality; the 
fourth, 1 plus 3 plus 5 plus 7, is the third in actuality; the next is 
produced by adding 9 to the former numbers, the next by the addi- 
tion of 11, and so on. 

In these cases, also, it is a fact that the side of each consists of as 4 
many units as there are numbers taken into the sum to produce it. 

CHAPTER X 

The pentagonal number is one which likewise upon its resolution 1 
into units and depiction as a plane figure assumes the form of an equi- 
lateral pentagon. 1, 5, 12, 22, 35, 51, 70, and analogous numbers are 
examples. Each side of the first actual pentagon, 5, 1s 2, for 1 is the 2 
side of the pentagon potentially first, 1; 3 1s the side of 12, the second 
of those listed ; 4, that of the next, 22; 5, that of the next in order, 35, 
and 6 of the succeeding one, 51, and so on. In general the side con- 
tains as many units as are the numbers that have been added to- 
gether to produce the pentagon, chosen out of the natural arithmetical 
series set forth in a row. For in a like and similar manner, there are 
added together to produce the pentagonal numbers * the terms begin- 
ning with 1 to any extent whatever that are two places apart, that is, 
those that have a difference of 3. 

1 Cf. Theon of Smyma, J. cc. He adds the obvious generation of squares by multiplying num- 
bers by themselves (implied by Nicomachus, IT. 18. 3), and adds that the squares are alternately 
odd and even (p. 34, 3). The method of Nicomachus was known to the old Pythagoreans ; cf. 
Aristotle, Phys., IIT. 4, and Cantor, op. cit., vol. I, p. 160. 

2 So in the first square, 1, the side is 1 and only one term is taken to produce it. In the sec- 
ond, 4, the side is 2 and two terms are taken to produce it (1 + 3). Generally, the algebraic sum 
of 1,3,5 .. . to terms is n’. 

7 Cf. Theon of Smyrna, pp. 34, rt and 39, 14, on the derivation of pentagonals. 

244 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Unity is the first pentagon,' potentially, and is thus depicted: 

5, made up of 1 plus 4, is the second, similarly represented : 

12, the third, is made up out of the two former numbers with 7 added 
to them, so that it may have 3 as a side, as three numbers have been 
added to make it. Similarly the preceding pentagon, 5, was the com- 
bination of two numbers and had 2 as itsside. The graphic represen- 
tation of 12 is this: 

a 
a a 
a a a 
a a a 
a a a 

The other pentagonal numbers will be produced by adding together 
one after another in due order the terms after 7 that have the difference 
3, as, for example, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, and so on. The pentagons 
will be 22, 35, 51, 70, 92, 117, and so forth. 

1 The figures given are those found in MS G. The regular pentagonal arrangement is given 
by M. Martin (op. cit.) in a way to show the numbers added in each instance. He takes these 
from editions of Theon and Iamblichus, but cf. Hoche, p. 87, critical notes. On the other hand 
the statements of II. 12. 2 seem to favor the schemes given by G. 

Side : q (4) 

) (2) (3) 
Number added: . 4 Cy 7 AY 10 
5 12 22 

1 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 245 

CHAPTER XI 

The hexagonal, heptagonal, and succeeding numbers will be set 
forth in their series by following the same process, if from the natural 
series of number there be set forth series with their differences increas- 
ing by 1. For as the triangular number was produced by admitting 
into the summation the terms that differ by 1 and do not pass over 
any in the series; as the square was made by adding the terms that 
differ by 2 and are one place apart, and the pentagon similarly by add- 
ing terms with a difference of 3 and two places apart (and we have 
demonstrated these, by setting forth examples both of them and of 
the polygonal numbers made from them), so likewise the hexagons 
will have as their root-numbers ' those which differ by 4 and are three 
places apart in the series, which added together in succession will 
produce * the hexagons. For example, 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, and so on; 
so that the hexagonal numbers produced will be 1, 6, 15, 28, 45, 66, 
and so on, as far as one wishes to go. 

The heptagonals, which follow these, have as their root-numbers 
terms differing by 5 and four places apart in the series, like 1, 6, 11, 
16, 21, 26, 31, 36,andsoon. The heptagons that thus arise are 1, 7, 18, 
34, 55, 81, 112, 148, and so forth. 

1 That is, gnomons; the term being used in the broader sense. See on I. 9. 4, and cf. IT. 9. 3. 
2? MS G gives the following diagram of the hexagonal number 15: 

a 

246 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

3 The octagonals? increase after the same fashion, with a difference 
of 6 in their root-numbers and corresponding variation in their total 
constitution. 

4 In order that, as you survey all cases, you may have a rule generally 
applicable,” note that the root-numbers of any polygonal differ by 2 
less than the number of the angles shown by the name of the polyg- 
onal — that is, by 1 in the triangle, 2 in the square, 3 in the pentagon, 
4 in the hexagon, 5 in the heptagon, and so on, with similar increase. 

CHAPTER XII 

x Concerning the nature of plane polygonals this is sufficient for a 
first Introduction. That, however, the doctrine of these numbers is 
to the highest degree in accord with their geometrical representation, 
and not out of harmony with it, would be evident, not only from 
the graphic representation in each case, but also from the following: 

1 The following illustrations are from the same MS: 

Derivation of heptagonals : 
7 18 34 55 
I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, II, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 
Heptagonal Odagonal 
a 
a 
a 4 
a a 

a a 

a 

* Cf. also Theon, pp. 34, 6 and p. 40, 11 ff. The principle here stated by Nicomachus had already 
been given by Hypsicles (ca. 180 B.c.), whose theorem is cited by Diophantus (De Polygonis Nu- 
meris, Prop. IV) as follows: ‘If as many numbers as you please be set out at equal interval 
from 1, and the interval is 1, their sum is a triangular number; if the interval is 2, a square; if 
3, a pentagonal; and generally the number of angles is greater by 2 than the interval.” Dio- 
phantus gives this as a theorem of ‘Hypsicles ¢» 8pw,’ which may mean either that it occurred 
‘in a definition’ which he made somewhere in his writings, or that it was in a book called “Opos. 
Cf. Nesselmann, of. cit., p. 466; Gow, op. cil., p. 87. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 247 

Every square figure ' diagonally divided is resolved into two triangles 
and every square number is resolved into two consecutive triangular 
numbers, and hence is made up of two successive triangular numbers. 
For example, 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, and so on, are triangular 
numbers and 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, squares. If you add 2 
any two consecutive triangles that you please, you will always make a 
square, and hence, whatever square you resolve, you will be able to 
make two triangles of it. 

Again, any triangle * joined to any square figure makes a pentagon, 
for example, the triangle 1 joined with the square 4 makes the penta- 
gon 5; the next triangle, 3 of course, with 9, the next square, makes 
the pentagon 12; the next, 6, with the next square, 16, gives the next 
pentagon, 22; ro and 25 give 35; and so on. 

Similarly,’ if the triangles are added to the pentagons, following 3 

1MS G gives the following figure as an illustration. The principle may be proved from the 
formulas of arithmetic progression, 

S="(@+),b=a+ (n—1)d. 

Two successive triangular numbers, formed ac- 
cording to definition by the summation of s and 
v-+on 

n +1 terms respectively, will therefore be : 

w+ 3n+2 

and 

2 

The Neo-Pythagoreans employed an interesting development of this principle to display the 
relative characters of the monad and the dyad (cf. Theol. Arith., p. g Ast, and Iamblichus Jn Nic., 
p. 75, 20 ff.). The matter is stated in the Theol. Arith., I. c., as follows: The monad is the cause 
of squares not only because the odd numbers successively arranged about it give squares, but also 
“because each side, as the turning point (sc. of a double race course) from the monad as starting 
point to the monad as finish line has as the sum of its going forth and of its return its own square” 
(AX Srexal éxdory wrevpd, Gowep xaunrhp dwd vowAryyos wovddos els 5¢ vicoay pordda, wdduv elxe 
THs mpoddou kal dwavddou Thr cuvdecivy dp’ dauris avrdy roy rerpdywror), That is, to take the 
side 5, when the successive numbers up to 5 are set out as one side of the race-track, 5 is made 
the turning point and the other side is made up of the descending numbers to 1, e.g., 

, and their sum is n? + 22+ 1, which is (mn + 1)’, a perfect square. 

to? 3 4 
5 
zt? $3 4 
the sum of the whole series is 25, or 5. Theseries1 .. . 5, of course, is one triangular number, 
and the descending series 4 . . . 1 the immediately preceding one. From its resemblance to 

the double race course of the Greek games this proposition was apparently recognized under 
the name ‘diaulos’ (cf. Iamblichus, p. 75, 25). Its further application to the heteromecic num- 
bers is not pertinent to the present subject. 

? This may be seen by comparing the figure of the pentagon as shown in the diagrams ac- 
companying Chapter X; and it is an argument in favor of representing them as does MS G. 

+ This proposition and the preceding are special cases of the theorem that the polygonal 
number of r sides with side m, plus the triangular number with side » — 1, makes the polyg- 

onal number with ¢ +1 sides and side mn. Algebraically "ot (2 + nd) + nin to) = 
BE hy wd 42)), 

2 

248 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

the same order, they will produce the hexagonals in due order, and 
again the same triangles with the latter will make the heptagonals in 
order, the octagonals after the heptagonals, and so on to infinity. 

4 To remind us, let us set forth rows of the polygonals, written in 
parallel lines, as follows: The first row, triangles, the next squares, 
after them pentagonals, then hexagonals, then heptagonals, then if 
one wishes the succeeding polygonals. 

Triangles I 3 6 10 I§ 21 28 8360 = «45 55 
Squares Ir 4 9g 16 25 36 49 64 81 100 
Pentagonals 1 5 I2 22 35 5I 7O =O2 &I17 = 145 
Hexagonals 1 6 15 28 45 66 1 120 153 190 
Heptagonals 1 7 18 34 55 8r «12 148 189 235 

You can also set forth the succeeding polygonals in similar parallel 
lines. 

5 In general, you will find that the squares are the sum of the triangles 
above those that occupy the same place in the series, plus the numbers 
of that same class in the next place back;! for example, 4 equals 3 
plus 1, 9 equals 6 plus 3, 16 equals 10 plus 6, 25 equals 15 plus 10, 36 
equals 21 plus 15, and so on. 

The pentagons are the sum of the squares above them in the same 
place in the series, plus the elementary trnangles that are one place 
further back in the series; for example, 5 equals 4 plus 1, 12 equals 
9 plus 3, 22 equals 16 plus 6, 35 equals 25 plus 10, and so on. | 

6 Again, the hexagonals are similarly the sums of the pentagons above 
them in the same place in the series plus the triangles one place back ; 
for instance, 6 equals 5 plus 1, 15 equals 12 plus 3, 28 equals 22 plus 6, 
45 equals 35 plus 10, and as far as you like. 

7 The same applies to the heptagonals, for 7 is the sum of 6 and 1, 
18 equals 15 plus 3, 34 equals 28 plus 6, and soon. Thus each polyg- 
onal number is the sum of the polygonal in the same place in the series 
with one less angle, plus the triangle, in the highest row, one place 
back in the series. 

8 Naturally, then, the triangle is the element of the polygon? both in 
figures and in numbers, and we say this because in the table, reading 

1 That is, in the column next to the left. 
7Cf.Il. 7.4. Theol. Arith., p. 8 Ast, states that the triangle is the element of both magnitudes 
and numbers and is made by the congress of the monad and the dyad. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 249 

either up and down’ or across, the successive numbers in the rows 
are discovered to have as differences the triangles in regular order. 

CHAPTER XIII 

From this it is easy to see what the solid number is and how its 1 
series advances with equal sides; for the number which, in addition 
to the two dimensions contemplated in graphic representation in a 
plane, length, and breadth, has a third dimension, which some call 
depth, others thickness, and some height, that number would be a 
solid number, extended in three directions and having length, depth, 
and breadth. 

This first makes its appearance in the so-called pyramids. These 2 
are produced from rather wide bases narrowing to a sharp apex, first 
after the triangular form’ from a triangular base, second after the 
form of the square from a square base, and succeeding these after the 
pentagonal form from a pentagonal base, then similarly from the 
hexagon, heptagon, octagon, and so on indefinitely. 

Exactly so among the geometrical solid figures ; if one imagines three 3 
lines from the three angles of an equilateral triangle, equal in length 
to the sides of the triangle, converging in the dimension height to one 
and the same point, a pyramid would be produced, bounded by four 
triangles, equilateral and equal one to the other, one the original tri- 
angle, and the other three bounded by the aforesaid three lines. And 4 
again, if one conceives of four lines starting from a square, equal in 
length to the sides of the square, each to each, and again converging 
in the dimension height to one and the same point, a pyramid would 
be completed with a square base and diminishing in square form, 
bounded by four equilateral triangles and one square, the original 

1 Ast, Theol. Artth., p. 288, declares that xal wAdros (the reading of the Paris MS for Hoche’s 
cal kara whdros, p. 99, 5) is an interpolation, but Hoche retains the words on the authority of 
Philoponus. The triangular numbers are the differences in the table taken ‘in depth’ («ara 
Bdéos); for in reading down the second column the common difference is 1, that of the third 
column is 3, of the fourth 6, and so on, the differences agreeing in turn with each of the triangular 
numbers. This observation is omitted by Boethius, who devotes II. 19 to showing that the 
triangular numbers furnish the differences taken across the breadth. When the numbers of the 
table are compared with those of the same column but in the row next above, and the comparisons 
are carried across the whole table, the differences are found to be the triangular numbers. 
Algebraically the corresponding equation is the same as that givenin thenote above to IT. 12. 3. 

? That is, successive sections parallel to the base are triangular. On pyramids, cf. Theon, 
Pp. 42, 3 ff. 

250 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

5 one. And starting from a pentagon,’ hexagon, heptagon, and how- 
ever far you care to go, lines equal in number to the angles, erected 
in the same fashion from the angles and converging to one and the 
same point, will complete a pyramid named from its pentagonal, 
hexagonal, or heptagonal base, or similarly. 

6 So likewise among numbers, each linear number increases from unity, 
as from a point, as for example, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and successive numbers 
to infinity; and from these same numbers, which are linear and ex- 
tended in one direction, combined in no random manner, the polyg- 
onal and plane numbers are fashioned — the triangles by the combi- 
nation of root-numbers * immediately adjacent, the square by adding 

7 every other term, the pentagons every third term, and so on. In 
exactly the same way, if the plane polygonal numbers are piled one 
upon the other and as it were built up, the pyramids that are akin to 
each of them are produced, the triangular pyramid from the triangles, 
the square pyramid from the squares, the pentagonal from the penta- 
gons, the hexagonal from the hexagons, and so on throughout. 

8 The pyramids with a triangular base, then, in their proper order, 
are these: 1, 4, 10, 20, 35, 56, 84, and so on; and their origin is the 
piling up of the triangular numbers one upon the other, first 1, then 1, 
3, then 1, 3, 6, then ro in addition to these, and next 15 together 
with the foregoing, then 21 besides these, next 28, and so on to infinity. 

9 It is clear that the greatest number is conceived of as being lowest, 

1 The following diagrams are from Codex G: 
Pyramids on square, triangular and pentagonal bases: 

Pyramids numerically represented : 

a a om 

a a a 
a a : a a aa 
a aa a a «a 
a a «@ a a@eéE 
ce aga aa 
a dad@aese@ a 
First Pyramid Second Pyramid Third Pyramid 

‘They are built up in layers as it were (cf. sections 7, 9 infra), like piles of shot or spheres of 
any kind, and the layers are the triangular numbers in order. If all were put in triangular 
form, it would be clearer. 

: That is, gnomons; see on I. 9. 4. In this case the gnomons are the natural series. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 251 

for it is discovered to be the base; the next succeeding one is on top 
of it, and the next on top of that; until unity appears at the apex 
and, so to speak, tapers off the completed pyramid into a point. 

CHAPTER XIV 

The next pyramids in order are those with a square base which rise 1 
in this shape to one and the same point. These are formed in the same 
way as the triangular pyramids of which we have just spoken. For 
if I extend in series the square numbers in order beginning with unity, 
thus, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, and again set the successive 
terms, as in a pile, one upon the other in the dimension height, when I 
put 1 on top of 4, the first actual pyramid with square base, 5 is pro- 2 
duced, for here again unity is potentially the first. Once more, I 
put this same pyramid entire, composed of 5 units, just as it is, upon 
the square 9, and there is made up for me the pyramid 14, with square 
base and side 3 — for the former pyramid had the side 2, and the one 
potentially first 1 as a side. For here too each side of any pyramid 
whatsoever must consist of as many units as there are polygonal 
numbers piled together to create it. 

Again, I place’ the whole pyramid 14, with the square g as its base, 3 
upon the square 16 and I have 30, the third actual pyramid of those 
that have a square base, and by the same order and procedure from a 
pentagonal, hexagonal, or heptagonal base, and even going on farther, 
we shall produce pyramids by piling upon one another the correspond- 
ing polygonal numbers, starting with unity as the smallest and going 
on to infinity in each case. 

1 The square pyramids might be represented thus: 

a 2 a 
aa a @ aa 
aa a @ aa 
ada aad 

aaa a@aa 

aaa aad 

agaacda 

a@adada 

qaeadaada 

gaadgda 

These layers are to be piled one above the other in space, and thus the edges will contain as 
many units as ther: are layers, or, in other words, as many as the numbers of square numbers 
taken in addition. 

4 

5 

= 

ho 

252 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

From this too it becomes evident that triangles are the most elemen- 
tary; for absolutely all of the pyramids that are exhibited and shown, 
with the various polygonal bases, are bounded by triangles up to the 
apex. 

But lest we be heedless of truncated, bi-truncated, and tri-truncated 
pyramids, the names of which we are sure to encounter in scientific 
writings, you may know that if a pyramid with any sort of polygon as 
its base, triangle, square, pentagon, or any of the succeeding polygons 
of the kind, when it increases by this process of piling up does not taper 
off into unity, it is called simply truncated when it is left without the 
natural apex that belongs to all pyramids; for it does not terminate in 
the potential polygon, unity, as in some one point, but in another 
polygon, and an actual one, and unity is not its apex, but its upper 
boundary becomes a plane figure with the same number of angles as 
the base. If, however, in addition to the failure to terminate in unity 
it does not even terminate in the polygon next to unity and the first in 
actuality, such a pyramid is called bi-truncated, and if, still further, it 
does not have the second actual polygon at its upper limit, but only 
the one next beneath, it will be called tri-truncated, yes, even four 
times truncated, if it does not have the next one as its limit, or five 
times truncated at the next step, and so on as far as you care to carry 
the nomenclature. 

CHAPTER XV 

While the origin, advance, increase, and nature of the equilateral 
solid numbers of pyramidal appearance is the foregoing, with its seed 
and root in the polygonal numbers and the piling up of them in their 
regular order, there is another series of solid numbers of a different 
kind, consisting of the so-called cubes, ‘beams,’ ‘bricks,’ ‘wedges,’ 
spheres and parallelepipedons, which has the order of its progress 
somewhat as follows: 

The foregoing squares 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, and so on, which are 
extended in two directions and in their graphic representation in a 
plane have only length and breadth, will take on yet a third dimension 
and be solids and extended in three directions if each is multiplied by 

its own side; 4, which is 2 times 2, is again multiplied by 2, to make 8; 

9, which is 3 times 3, is again increased by 3 in another dimension and 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 253 

gives 27; 16, which is 4 times 4, is multiplied by its own side, 4, and 
64 results; and so on with the succeeding squares throughout. 

Here, too, the sides will be composed of as many units as were in 
the sides of the squares from which they arose, in each case; the sides 
of 8 will be 2, like those of 4; those of 27, 3, like those of 9; those of 
64, 4, like those of 16; and so on, so that likewise the side of unity, the 
potential cube, will be 1, which is the side of the potential square, r. 

In general, each square is a single plane, and has four angles and 
four sides, while each several cube, having increased out of some one 
square multiplied by its own side, will have always six plane surfaces, 
each equal to the original square, and twelve edges, each equal to and 
containing exactly the same number of units as each side of the original 
square, and eight solid angles, each of which is bounded by three edges 
like in each case to the sides of the original square. 

CHAPTER XVI 

Now since the cube is a solid figure with equal sides in all dimensions, 
in length, depth, and breadth, and is equally extended in all the six 
so-called directions,’ it follows that there is opposed to it that which has 
its dimensions in no case equal to one another, but its depth unequal 
to its breadth and its length unequal to either of these, for example 2 
times 3 times 4, or 2 times 4 times 8, or 3 times 5 times 12, ora figure 
which follows some other scheme of inequality. 

Such solid figures,’ in which the dimensions are everywhere unequal 
one to another, are called scalene in general. Some, however, using 
other names, call them ‘wedges,’ for carpenters’, house-builders’ and 
blacksmiths’ wedges and those used in other crafts, having unequal 
sides in every direction, are fashioned so as to penetrate; they begin 
with a sharp end and continually broaden out unequally in all the di- 
mensions. Some also call them sphekiskoi, ‘wasps,’ because wasps’ 
bodies also are very like them, compressed in the middle and showing 
the resemblance mentioned. From this also the sphekoma,’ ‘point of 
the helmet,’ must derive its name, for where it is compressed it imitates 
the waist of the wasp. Others call the same numbers ‘altars,’ using 

1 Cf. IT. 6. 4 and the note. 

? Cf. Theon’s brief account of the solid numbers, p. 41, 8 ff. He has only the name ‘little 

altars’ (cf. below) for scalene numbers. 
* The point of the helmet where the plume was affixed. 

| 

3 

me 

254 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

their own metaphor, for the altars of ancient style, particularly the 
Ionic, do not have the breadth equal to the depth, nor either of these 
equal to the length, nor the base equal to the top, but are of varied 
dimensions everywhere. 

Now whereas the two kinds of numbers, cube and scalene, are ex- 
tremes, the one equally extended in every dimension, the other un- 
equally, the so-called parallelepipedons are solid numbers like means 
betweenthem. The plane surfaces of these are heteromecic numbers,’ 
just as in the case of the cubes the faces were squares, as has been 
shown. 

CHAPTER XVII 

Again, then, to take a fresh start, a number is called heteromecic’ 
if its representation, when graphically described in a plane, is quadrilat- 
eral and quadrangular, to be sure, but the sides are not equal one to an- 
other, nor is the length equal to the breadth, but they differ by 1. 
Examples are 2, 6, 12, 20, 30, 42, and so on, for if one represents them 
graphically he will always construct them thus: 1 times 2 equals 2, 
2 times 3 equals 6, 3 times 4 equals 12, and the succeeding ones simi- 
larly, 4 times 5, 5 times 6, 6 times 7, 7 times 8, and thus indefinitely, 
provided only that one side is greater than the other by 1 and by no 
other number. If, however, the sides differ otherwise than by 1, for 
instance, by 2, 3, 4 or succeeding numbers, as in 2 times 4, 3 times 6, 
4 times 8, or however else they may differ, then no longer will such a 
number be properly called a heteromecic, but an oblong number. For 
the ancients of the school of Pythagoras and his successors saw ‘the 
other’ * and ‘otherness’ primarily in 2, and ‘the same’ and ‘sameness’ 

1 See the following chapter. 

2 There is no good English equivalent for é¢repou4ens. Boethius calls this number allera 
parie longior. To this class belong numbers of the type n(m + 1). The definition is repeated 
in II. 18. 2; cf. Theon, p. 26, 21 ff. 

**The other,’ ‘difference,’ ‘the same,’ and ‘sameness’ are Platonic terms, rather than early 
Pythagorean. They could have been included as opposites in the lists of such (the everorx la), 
such as that preserved by Aristotle in Me?., I. 5; but they do not occur there. On the other 
hand we are informed by Simplicius (Phys., 181, 7 p), quoting Eudorus, that the Pythagoreans 
made the dpxq# primarily ‘the one’ (rd év), secondarily ‘the one’ and its opposite, under which 
were Classified respectively ‘elegant things’ (dereia) and ‘trivial things’ (@adAa). This second 
déox%, Eudorus further says, was called the ‘indefinite dyad’ (dépioros Suds). This latter again 
is a Platonic term. ‘The same’ and ‘the other’ (ratrév, @drepor) may be seen in a Platonic 

context in the famous account of the making of the world-soul, Timaeus, 35 A ff. (See on IT. 18. 4), 
and are generally considered to be Pythagorean at least in ultimate origin. Plato, however, was 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 255 

in 1, as the two beginnings of all things, and these two? are found to 
differ from each other only by 1. Thus ‘the other’ is fundamentally 
‘other’ by 1, and by no other number, and for this reason customarily 
‘other’ * is used, among those who speak correctly, of two things and 
not of more than two. 

Moreover, it was shown that all odd number is given its specific 2 
form * by unity, and all even number by 2. Hence we shall naturally 
say that the odd partakes of the nature of ‘the same,’ and the even of 
that of ‘the other’; for indeed there are produced by the successive 
additions of each of these — naturally, and not by our decree — by the 
addition of the odd numbers from 1 to infinity the class of the squares, 
and by the addition of the evens from 2 to infinity, that of the hetero- 
mecic numbers.‘ 

There is, accordingly, every reason to think that the square once 3 
more shares in the nature of the same; for its sides display the same 
ratio, alike, unchanging and firmly fixed in equality, to themselves; 
while the heteromecic number partakes of the nature of the other; for 
just as 1 is differentiated from 2, differing by 1 alone, thus also the 

undoubtedly the one who contributed most to the vogue of these particular terms. Nicoma- 
chus’s present statements, then, may reasonably be regarded as in accord with later Pythago- 
reanism which was strongly influenced by Plato. Cf. also Theophrastus, Met., 33, p. 322, 
14 Br. Theon of Smyrna describes the heteromecic numbers in a manner that agrees in the main 
with Nicomachus. He briefly defines them (p. 26, 21) as ‘those with one side greater than the 
other by a unit,” and notes two methods of producing them in series, (a) by adding together in 
succession the terms in the series of even numbers, and (b) by multiplying together successive 
pairs of terms in the natural series. Both methods are mentioned by Nicomachus (sections 1, 2). 

1 Cf. the picturesque personification of Theon (p. 27, 1): ‘‘For the beginning of numbers, 
the monad, which is odd, secking ‘otherness,’ made the dyad heteromecic by its own doubling” 
() yap apy Tar dpiOydy, rourdariv 7 words, wepirrh ofca rihv érepdrnra fyrovca rhy dudda 
érepounxy Ty auras derrkaciacuyp érolnce). 

* A somewhat similar distinction in terms was adopted by the arithmologists (see p. 117, n. 4) as 
a topic in praise of the number 3 (See Theol. Arith., p. 14 Ast; Lydus, De Mensibus, IV. 64 
Wiinsch; Anatolius, p. 31, 8 ff. Heiberg; Chalcidius, In Timaeum, c. XXXVIII; Theon of 
Smyrna, p. 100, 13 ff. Hiller). The purport of these passages is that of 3 we can first use the 
term ‘all,’ for of one thing or two things we say ‘one’ or ‘both.’ The Theologumena Arithme- 
ticae adds that, in expressions like ‘thrice ten thousand,’ 3 is used as a symbol of plurality. The 
notion that 3 was Called ‘all’ as the first possessor of beginning, middle, and end is coupled with 
the statement above in some of the sources cited. These passages have a bearing on the present 
utterance of Nicomachus so far as they illustrate the Pythagorean idea that ‘otherness,’ repre- 
sented by 2, and ‘plurality’ are not identical. Duality and ‘otherness,’ first seen in and typified 
by 2, are elementary; plurality is derived. 

3 Boethius, 2. 27, gives the following explanation why the odd is founded (perfici is his expres- 
sion) on unity and the even on the dyad: Nam cutuscungue medtetas unus est, ille impar est; 
cuius vero duo, hic paritate recepla in gemina aequa distungitur. Cf. I. 7. 2. 

‘ This method of deriving the heteromecic series is given below in II. 18. 2 and 20. 3, and by 
Theon (p. 27, 8 ff., 31, 14 ff.). 

256 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

sides of every heteromecic number differ from one another, one differ- 
ing from the other by 1 alone. 

To illustrate, if I have set out before me the successive numbers in 
series beginning with 1, and select and arrange by themselves the odd 
numbers in the line and the even by themselves in another, there are 
obtained these two series : 

IT, 3, 5) 7) 9, IT, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27 
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28 

4 Now, then, the beginning of the odd series is unity, which is of the same 
class as the series and possesses the nature of ‘the same,’ and so whether 
it multiplies itself in two dimensions or in three ! it is not made different, 
nor yet does it make any other number depart from what it was origi- 
nally,’ but keeps it just as it was. Such a property it is impossible to 

5 find in any other number. Of the other series the beginning is 2, which 
is similar in kind to this series and imitates ‘otherness’; for whether 
it multiplies itself or another number, it causes a change,® for ex- 
ample, 2 times 2, 2 times 3. 

6 But in cases like 8 times 8 times 2, or 8 times 8 times 3, such solid 
forms are called ‘bricks,’ * the product of a number by itself and then 
byasmallernumber ; if, however, agreater height is joined to thesquare, 
as in 3 times 3 times 7, 3 times 3 times 8, or 3 times 3 times 9, or how- 
ever many times the square be taken, provided only it be a greater 
number of times than the square itself, then the number is a ‘beam,’ 
the product of a number by itself and then by a larger number. The 

1 éxiréSws 4 crepes: ‘as a surface or as a solid.’ 

? That is, when it multiplies any other number. Boethius, IJ. 28, says of unity: ... in 
tantum ciusdem nec mutabilis substantiae est, ut, cum vel se ipsa mulliplicaveril vel in planiiudine vel 
in profunditate, vel st alium quemlibel numerum per se ipsa multiplicel, a prioris quantilatis forma 
non discrepel. Cf. IT. 6. 3. 

*%xoeracts: literally ‘a standing out of’ (sc. its former state or, as here, number), hence, 
‘change.’ Cf. Aristotle, De Anima, 406 b 13, waaa xlynois Uxoracls dari Tov xtvovpévou F 
xuetrac. When 2 is the multiplier, the result is always different from the multiplicand; for 
Nicomachus’s number system, consisting of positive integers only, 2x is always different from x. 

4 Such a definition as this suits well certain kinds of Roman bricks which were square in their 
broadest aspect and relatively thin. The Romans introduced baked brick into Greek lands, and 
Nicomachus would doubtless be acquainted with this variety. Theon, p. 41, 8 ff., gives the 
same name and definition. Theon also similarly names and defines ‘beams’ and cubes, but 
for the ‘wedges’ he has only the name ‘little altars’ (cf. II, 16. 2) of the several that Nicomachus 
uses. Hero of Alexandria (Definition 113, in Hultsch, Heronts Alexandrint Geometricorum et 
Stereometricorum Reliqutae, p. 31) defines ‘bricks’ as solids with the length less than the breadth 
and depth, the two latter being sometimes equal (on the ‘bricks,’ cf. also Theon, p. 113, 5); and 
the ‘beam’ (ibid., Definition 112) he defines as a solid having a length greater than the breadth 
or thickness, the two latter being sometimes equal. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 257 

‘wedges,’ to be sure, were the products of three unequal numbers, and 
cubes of three equal ones. 

Among the cubes, some of them, in addition to being the product of 7 
three equal numbers, have the further property of ending at every 
multiplicationin thesame number as that from which they began ; these 
are called spherical, and also recurrent." Such indeed are those with 
sides 5 or 6; for however many times I increase each one of these, it 
will by all means end each time in the same figure, the derivative of 
6 in 6 and that of 5 ins. For example, the product of 5 times 5 will 
end in 5, and so will 5 times this product and if necessary, 5 
times this again, and to infinity no other concluding term will be 
found except 5. From 6, too, in the same fashion 6 and no other will 
be the concluding term; and so 1 likewise is potentially spherical 
and recurrent, for as is reasonable it has the same property as the 
spheres and circles. For each one of them, circling and turning around, 
ends where it begins. And so these numbers aforesaid are the only 
ones of the products of equal factors to return to the same starting 
point from which they began, in the course of all their increases. If 
they increase in the manner of planes, in two dimensions, they are 
called circular, like 1, 25, and 36, derived from 1 times 1, 5 times 5, 
and 6 times 6; but if they have three dimensions, or are multiplied 
still further than this, they are called spherical solid numbers, for 
example 1, 125, 216, or, again, 1, 625, 1,296. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Regarding the solid numbers this is for the present sufficient. The 1 
physical philosophers, however, and those that take their start with 
mathematics, call ‘the same’ and ‘the other’ the principles of the uni- 
verse, and it has been shown that ‘the same’ inheres in unity and the 
odd numbers, to which unity gives specific form, and to an even greater 
degree in the squares, made by the continued addition of odd numbers, 
because in their sides they share in equality ; while ‘the other’ inheres in 
2 and the whole even series, which is given specific form by 2, and partic- 

1 dwoxaracrarixol : So Theon of Smyrna, p. 38, 16 ff. Hiller, citing 5 and 6 asexamples. Lydus 
also (De Mensibus, IV. 76 Wiinsch) calls 5 a egaipa for the same reason. This property of s is 
mentioned also by Anatolius, p. 33, 2 ff. Heiberg; and by Capella, De Nuptiis Phil. et Merc., 

VII, 735 (who calls it apocatastaticus). Anatolius remarks on the similar property of 6; cf. 
also Theol. Arith., p. 35 Ast. In fact these propositions were regular topics of arithmology. 

258 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

ularly in the heteromecic numbers, which are made by thecontinued addi- 

tion of the even numbers, because of the share of the original inequality’ 

and ‘otherness’ which they have in the difference between their sides. 

Therefore it is most necessary further to demonstrate how in these two, 

as in origins and seeds, there are potentially existent all the peculiar 

properties of number, of its forms and subdivisions, of all its relations, 
of polygonals, and the like. 

First, however, we must make the distinction whereby the oblong 
(promecic) number? differs from the heteromecic. The heteromecic 
is, as was stated above,* the product of a number multiplied by another 
larger than the first by 1, for example, 6, which is 2 times 3, or 12, which 
is 3 times 4. But the oblong 1s similarly the product of two differing 
numbers, differing, however, not by 1 but by some larger number, as 
2 times 4, 3 times 6, 4 times 8, and similar numbers, which in a way 
exceed in length and overstep the difference of 1. 

3 Therefore, since squares are produced from the multiplication of 
numbers by their own length, and have their length the same as their 
breadth, properly speaking they would be called ‘idiomecic’ or ‘tau- 
tomecic’;‘ for example, 2 times 2, 3 times 3, 4 times 4, and the rest. 
And if this is true, they will admit in every way of sameness and equal- 
ity, and for this reason are limited and come to an end; for ‘the equal’ 
and ‘the same’ are so in one definite way. But since the heteromecic 
numbers are produced by the multiplication of a number by not its 
own, but another number’s length, they are therefore called ‘hetero- 
mecic,’ and admit of infinity and boundlessness. 

4 In this way, then, all numbers and the objects in the universe which 
have been created with reference to them are divided and classified and 
are seen to be opposite one to another, and well do the ancients at the 
very beginning of their account of Nature make the first subdivision 

bo 

1That is, a unit, for it was shown in II. 17. 2 that ‘the other is fundamentally other 
by the unit,’ and the difference between the sides of a heteromecic number is by definition 
a unit. 

2 epoutxns : Theon of Smyrna, p. 27, 23 ff., gives a similar definition of this class of numbers, 
though he calls them wapadAnAdéypaypor apiOuol, but in p. 30, 8 ff. he defines rpoujnes as the 
products of two unequal terms, which differ by 1, 2, or any other number, thus including the 
heteromecic among the oblong numbers. Theon gives the following classification of oblongs in 
connection with the definition just cited: (a) the heteromecic numbers are oblongs in a sense; 
(b) numbers that by one factoring are heteromecic, by another oblong, as 12, which is either 
3 X 40r2 X 6; (c) numbers that are oblong by all possible factorings, e.g., 40, which is 2 X 20, 
4 X10, or 5 X 8. 

*Cf. I. 17. 3. 

4 [3uophxeas .. . xal ravroutxes, as opposed to érepoutxes or wpouhnes. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 259 

in their cosmogony on this principle. Thus Plato! mentions the dis- 
tinction between the natures of ‘the same’ and ‘the other,’ and again, 
that between the essence which is indivisible and always the same and 
the one which is divided; and Philolaus® says that existent things 
must all be either limitless or limited, or limited and limitless at the 
same time, by which it is generally agreed that he means that the uni- 
verse is made up out of limited and limitless things at the same time, 
obviously after the image of number, for all number is composed of 
unity and the dyad, even and odd, and these in truth display equality 
and inequality, sameness and otherness, the bounded and the bound- 
less, the defined and the undefined. 

CHAPTER XIX 

That we may be clearly persuaded of what is being said, namely, 
that things are made up of warring and opposite elements * and have 

1 Cf. Plato, Timaeus, 35 a (Archer-Hind’s translation): ‘From the undivided and ever change- 
less substance and that which becomes divided in material bodies, of both these he mingled in 
the third place the form of Essence, in the midst between the Same and the Other; and this he 
composed on such wise between the undivided and that which is in material bodies divided ; 
and taking them, three in number, he blended them into one form, forcing the nature of the 
Other, hard as it was to mingle, into union with the Same,” etc. 

? Philolaus, the Pythagorean, was a native of Croton or of Tarentum. Ritter and Preller 
(Hist. Phil. Gr.) give 440 B.c. as his foruit. This fragment (1 b Chaignet, 3 Mullach) is found 
in much fuller form in Stobaeus, Ecl. Phys., I. 21. 7 (vol. I, p. 187, Wachsmuth-Hense). 

?Tt isa question whether Nicomachus here has in mind strictly Pythagorean ideas of the origin 
and constitution of the universe, or the Platonic account in the Timaeus, which is in fact strongly 
Pythagorean in tone. Elsewhere he refers to the Timaeus (I. 2.1; II. 2. 3; 18. 4; 24. 6) and 
emphasizes the fact that he hopes to make his work useful for the interpretation of Plato (IL. 
24. 11) and of the ancient texts read in the schools, among which the Timaeus was certainly in- 
cluded (II. 21. 1; 28.1). There is so much in common between Plato and the Pythagoreans 
that probably Nicomachus would think of both in making this statement. For the Pythagorean 
doctrine that chaotic matter was ordered on harmonic principles cf. Philolaus, in Stobaeus, 
op. cit., p. 189 (fr. 4 Chaignet, 3 Mullach): éwel d¢ ral dpyal trdpxor oby duotar odd" dudpudce 
Yooa, fin dddvaror hs xa adrais cogunOjuer, al uh dpporla éweyévero Wrimwr tpdwy eyédrero. 

Plato gives a clearer picture of the ‘warring and opposite’ constituents of the universe (Ni- 
comachus does not call them ¢ro:yxeia, ‘elements’) in Timaeus, 30 A: Boudrndels ydp 6 Geds dyaea 
pév wdvra, ddaipow de under elvar card Sivayuy, ovrw 5) war Scov hy dpardy rapadhafSuy oby hov- 
xlav Ayor dA Kivodperoy wAnupedas wal drdxrws, els rdiiv abro Hyayey éx rijs dratias... . 

That this rdéis is a harmony, and furthermore that it is a sort of mathematical harmony, 
Plato makes clear by showing that it is secured by the interweaving of the world-soul into the 
whole extent of the universe (36 £) and that the world-soul is constituted on harmonic principles 
(34c ff.). We may further compare 53 B: dred éwexetpeiro xoopeieGai 7d wav, wip wp@rov kal vdwp 
cal yiv cal dépa, Cyvn pew Exovra abray drra, warrdwaadl ye why diaxeluera Gowep elxds Exerv day, 
bray dwg Tims Gebs, ovrw 3) rére wepuxéra Taira wpdror diecxqulaaro elder! re wal dprOpors, 

The idea of a chaos of warring elements (frigida pugnabant calidis, umentia siccts, Ovid, Met., 
I. 19) is a commonplace in ancient literature after Hesiod (Cf. Classical Philology, VIII, p. 405 
with note 4). Cf. with this passage I. 6. 3. 

260 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

in all likelihood taken on harmony — and harmony! always arises 
from opposites; for harmony is the unification of the diverse and the 
reconciliation of the contrary-minded — let us set forth in two paral- 
lel lines no longer, as just previously, the even numbers from 2 by 
themselves and the odd numbers from 1, but the numbers that are pro- 
duced from these by adding them successively together, the squares 
from the odd numbers, and the heteromecic from the even. For if we 
give careful attention to their setting forth, we shall admire their mu- 
tual friendship and their coéperation to produce and perfect the re- 
maining forms, to the end that we may with probability conceive that 

also in the nature of the universe from some such source as this a 

similar thing was brought about by universal providence.’ 

Let the two series then be as follows: That of the squares, from 
unity, I, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144, 169, 196, 225, and 
that of the heteromecic numbers, beginning with 2 and proceeding thus, 
2, 6, 12, 20, 30, 42, 56, 72, 90, 110, 132, 156, 182, 210, 240. 

3 In the first place, then, the first square is the fundamental multiple* 
of the first heteromecic number; the second, compared to the second, 
is its sesquialter; the third, sesquitertian of the third; the fourth, ses- 
quiquartan of the fourth; then sesquiquintan, sesquisextan, and so 
on similarly ad infinitum. Their differences,* too, will increase ac- 
cording to the successive numbers from 1; the difference of the first 
terms is 1, of the second 2, of the third 3, andsoon. Next, if first the 
second term of the squares be compared with the first heteromecic num- 
ber, the third with the second, the fourth with the third, and the rest 
similarly, they will keep unchanged the same ratios as before, but their 
differences will begin to progress no longer from 1, but from 2, remain- 
ing the same as before, and according to the advance observed in the 
former comparison, the first to the first will be the first, or root-form, 
multiple, the second to the second the second sesquialter from the root- 

bo 

1 Cf. the remainder of the fragment of Philolaus quoted in the preceding note: rd pér dp 
duota Kal dudpura dpporlas obdévy éreddovro, rad dé dvduora unde dudpvda pydé looday i dvdyxa 
TG Toure dpporlg cuyKexdeioGat, al wédAdovri dy xéopyp xaréxerGar. The words are also quoted 
by Theon of Smyrna, p. 12, 10, and Ast on the passage cites further Iamblichus, Zn Nicom., 
p- 73, 1 Pistelli, and Asclepius, In Nicom. 

* rpdvoa, ‘forethought,’ may be also translated ‘providence’ and has reference to teleology. 
Even before Plato’s time the teleological idea was in the air, but it was Plato who first made it 
an essential part of the theory of the constitution of the universe. This is another indication 
that Nicomachus is decidedly a Platonizing Pythagorean. 

2 That is, the double (2 = 2 X 1). For the use of the term wv@yu%», cf. on J. 19. 6. 

4 That is, comparing homologous terms of the two series. The difference between 1 and 2 
is 1; between 4 and 6, 2; between 9 and 12, 3; and so on. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 261 

form, the third to the third the third sesquitertian from the root-form, 
and the succeeding terms will go on in similar fashion. 

Furthermore, the squares ! among themselves will have only the odd 4 
numbers as differences, the heteromecic, even numbers. And if we 
put ? the first heteromecic number as a mean term between the first two 
squares, the second between the next two, the third between the two 
following, and the fourth between the two next succeeding, therein will 
be seen still more regularly the numerical relations? in groups of three 
terms. Foras 4is to 2,sois 2 to1; and as 9Q is sesquialter to 6, so is 6 to 
4; and as 16 to 12, so is 12 tog, and soon, with both numbers and ratios 
regularly advancing. As the greater is to the mean, so will the mean 
be to the lesser, and not in the same ratio, but always a different one, 
by anincrease. In all the groupings, too, the product of the extremes 
is equal to the square of the mean; and the extremes, plus twice the 
mean, by exchange will always give a square.* What is neatest of all, 
from the addition of both® there comes about the production of the 
triangles in due order, showing that the nature of these is more ancient*® 

1 Squares: 1 4 9 16 25 36 49, etc. 

3 5 7 9 II 13, etc.; odd differences. 
Heteromecic: 2 6 12 20 #30 42 56, etc. 
4 6 8 10 12 14, etc.; even differences. 

1Cf. Theon, p. 28, 16 ff. Hiller. 

* That is, m*, m(m--+ 1), and (m+ 1)? always constitute the terms of a geometrical pro- 
portion. Theon notes this (c. 16), adding that the successive heteromecic numbers do not make 

& proportion with the included square; i.e., m(m — 1), m?, and m(m-+ 1) are not proportional. 
‘ The ratios formed as directed and the additional properties of the series may be seen in this 

table : 

Ratios Sum of extremes Plus 2 X mean term Sum 
I:2=2:4 5 = 4 sa 9 
4:6=6:9 13 + 12 = 25 
g:12 = 12:16 25 + 24 = 49 
16:20 = 20:25 4! + 40 = 81 

Generally, in the ratio m?:m(m-+ 1) = m(m + 1): (m+ 1)?, the sum of the extremes plus 
twice the mean will be 4 m* + 4 m+ 1, which is a perfect square. 

‘This may best be seen by setting the squares and heteromecic numbers alternately and 
combining them in pairs thus: 

I 2 4 6 9 12 16 20 25 30 
3 6 10 15 21 28 86360045 55 = triangular numbers. 

® This is significant to Nicomachus because he believed that the ‘same’ and the ‘other’ were 
the ultimate elements, and that they resided par excellence in the squares and the heteromecic 
numbers respectively (Cf. II. 17.3; 18.1). Now that into which all plane figures are ultimately 
analyzed is the triangle (II. 7. 4; cf. 12. 8); as Nicomachus himself shows; and it is to be re- 
membered that in the Timaeus the triangle is made the ultimate basis of the corpuscles of the 
elements, a theory which he doubtless has in mind. Therefore the present proposition confirms 
his position in holding ‘sameness’ and ‘otherness’ to be the most elementary things, prior even 
to the elementary triangle. An interesting confirmation of the interpretation above is found in 

| 

3 

262 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

than the origin of all things, thus: 1 plus 2, 2 plus 4, 4 plus 6, 6 plus 9, 
9 plus 12, 12 plus 16, 16 plus 20, and by this process the triangles, which 
give rise to the polygons, come forth in order. 

CHAPTER XX 

Still further, every square plus its own side becomes heteromecic, or 
by Zeus, if its side is subtracted from it. Thus, ‘the other’ is conceived 
of as being both greater and smaller than “the same,’ since it is produced, 
both by addition and by subtraction, in the same way that the two 
kinds of inequality’ also, the greater and the less, have their origin from 
the application of addition or subtraction to equality. This also is 
sufficient evidence that the two forms partake of sameness and other- 
ness, of otherness in an indefinite fashion, but of sameness definitely, 
1 and 2 generically,” but the odd of sameness after the manner of a 
subordinate species because it belongs to the same class as 1, and the 
even of otherness because it is homogeneous with 2. 

There is also a still clearer reason why the square, since it is the prod- 
uct of the addition of odd numbers, is akin to sameness, and the 
heteromecic numbers to otherness because it 1s made up by adding even 
numbers; for as though they were friends of one another, these two 
forms share in their two rows the same differences when they do not 
have the same ratios, and conversely the same ratios when they do not 
have the same differences. For the difference * between 4 and 2 in the 

Theol. Arith., 8 Ast (on the dyad) in a context certainly Nicomachean: ‘‘ Wherefore the first 
congress of these (sc. the monad and the dyad) first perfected defined multitude, the element 
of things, which would be a triangle both of magnitudes and of numbers somatic and bodiless; 
for as the rennet coagulates the running milk by its active and effective property, so the unifying 
force of the monad approaching the dyad, which is the source of facile movement and of disso- 
lution, gave a bound and a form that is a number to the triad; for this is the beginning of ac- 
tuality in number as that is defined by the combination of monads.”’ In the present text ‘their 
nature’ refers to the squares and heteromecic numbers and ‘the origin of all things’ to the tri- 
angle, as the elementary figure. 

1Cf. I. 17.6. The results obtained by adding to or subtracting their sides from the square 
numbers are as follows: 

4t2=—= 6=2X%3 4—-2= 2=1%X%2 

QtZ=I2=3X4 9-3= 6=2X3 

16+4=20=4X5 iG—4=12=3%X%4 

2a5+5=30=5X6 as—c=20=4X5 
or or 

m +m = (m+ 1m m — m= (m —1)m 

2 See p. ror for comment in this passage. 

3 The examples in the text show sameness of difference coupled with difference of ratio. For 
the converse, compare 4, 6, and 6,9. The ratio is sesquialter in both cases, but the difference 
varies. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 263 

double ratio is found between 6 and 4 as a superparticular; and again 
the difference between 9 and 6, as a sesquialter, is found between 12 
and 9 as a sesquitertian, and so on. What is the same in quality‘ is 
different in quantity, and just the opposite, what is the same in quan- 
tity is different in quality. Again, it is clear that in all their relations? 
the same difference between two terms will necessarily be called frac- 
tions with names that differ by 1, and be the half of one and the third 
of the other, or the third of one and the quarter of the other, or the 
fourth of one and the fifth of the other, and so on. 

But what will most of all confirm the fact that the odd, and never 
the even, is preéminently the cause of sameness, is to be demonstrated 
in every series beginning with 1 following some ratio, for example, 
the double ratio, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, or the triple, 
I, 3,9, 27, 81, 243, 729, 2,187, and as far as you like. You will find? 
that of necessity all the terms in the odd places in the series are squares, 
and no others by any device whatsoever, and that no square is to be 
found in an even place. 

But all the products of a number multiplied twice into itself, that is, 
the cubes, which are extended in three dimensions and seen to share 
in sameness to an even greater extent, are the product of the odd num- 
bers, not the even,‘ 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, and 216, and those that go on 
analogously, in a simple, unvaried progression as well. For when the 
successive odd numbers are set forth indefinitely beginning with 1, 
observe this: The first one makes the potential cube; the next two, 

1 This is substantially a repetition of the previous statement. In the terminology of Nicoma- 
chus two pairs of numbers have a relation (cxéots) qualitatively (wocdrqr:) alike if they exhibit 
the same ratio; numerically (woodryrc), if they have the same arithmetical difference. This 
terminology appears again in the discussion of the proportions; cf. 23, 4 below. 

*gxéees: That is, the comparisons of the pairs of terms from the two series; see on 21. 2 
below for a further discussion of the meaning of oxéors ‘relation.’ For illustration of the mean- 
ing, we may take pairs of homologous terms from the two series, as 1, 2; 4,6; 9,12; 16, 20; 
etc., and their differences 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 1 is the whole of 1 and the half of 2; 2 1s the halt of 
4 and the third of 6; 3 is the third part of 9 and the fourth of 12, etc. Or, compare 4, 2 with 
4,6; 9, 6 with 9, 12; etc. 

*Philo, De Mundi Opificio, 36, points out further properties of the table of doubles: “If one 
doubles he will find that the third from unity (i.e., counting both ends in the Greek fashion) is a 
square, the fourth a cube, and the seventh, arising from both the third and the fourth, a cube 
and square together.” Similarly Theon, p. 34, 16 ff., points out that the terms in every other 
place (he does not specifically say ‘odd’) of the series of multiples are squares, those In every 
third place cubes, and those in every fifth place both cubes and squares. He adds furthermore 
that squares are always divisible by 3 and 4, either as they stand or when 1 is subtracted, that 
those divisible by 3 when 1 is subtracted are always divisible by 4 if they are even, and vice versa, 
etc. 

‘See Part I, p. 133. 

264 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

added together, the second; the next three, the third; the four next 
following, the fourth; the succeeding five, the fifth; the next six, the 
sixth; and so on. 

CHAPTER XXI 

After this it would be the proper time to incorporate the nature of 
proportions, a thing most essential for speculation about the nature of 
the universe and for the propositions of music, astronomy, and geome- 
try, and not least for the study of the works of the ancients,’ and thus 
to bring the Introduction to Arithmetic to the end that is at once suitable 
and fitting. 

A proportion,” then, is in the proper sense, the combination of two 
or more ratios, but by the more general definition the combination of 

1 els rds TGv wadatdy suvavayrwces: Boethius, II. 40: ad velerum lectionum inielligentiam. 

? Two Greek words, dradoyla and peodrys, the former of which is used here, may be trans- 
lated ‘proportion,’ and Nicomachus points out that an dvadoyla is, strictly speaking, a combina- 
tion of ratios (like 1, 2, 4; i.e., in his classification only the ‘geometrical proportions,’ yewpe- 
Tpixal dyadoyla: or weodryres). Properly then an arithmetical progression of three or four 
terms (e.g., 1, 2, 3, OF I, 2, 3, 4) should not be called an dvadoyla, but in practice it is so called. 
It was formerly thought until Nesselmann cleared up the matter (Geschichte der Algebra, p. 210, 
note) that d»adoyla meant, properly, a proportion of four terms (i.e., a disjunct proportion; 
see section 6), and yeoérys a continued proportion (of three terms; cf. section 5). Arguing 
from the statements of Jamblichus (pp. 100, 15 ff. and 104, 19 ff. Pistelli; the latter passage runs 
) 8¢ devrépa perdrns 7 yewperpixh xuplws dvadoyla xéxAnrat, diubre Abyor roy adbrdy ol Spor 
wepiéxovory, dvd rév atrép héyor dueorGres) and Nicomachus himself (see II. 24. 1), Nessel- 
mann states that originally dvyadoyla was applied only to geometrical proportions and pécorns 
to the other two, the harmonic and the arithmetic, but that in later usage the distinction of terms 
vanished. It is certain that Nicomachus uses them indiscriminately of all three types. But the 
present passage makes the matter perfectly clear if the proper stress is laid on the words Aédyos 
and oxéo.s. Nicomachus here definitely states that a proportion (dvadoyla) is properly or 
strictly (xvplws) the combination of two or more ratios (Aéywr), but in a more general sense (xot- 
yérepor) a combination of relations (cxérewr). Now dédbyos is the term which properly means 
ratio, the measurement of one number in terms of another, and it is not used by Nicomachus 
with reference to the relations between numbers in any other sense (he does, to be sure, use Aéyos 
with other meanings, but not with reference to the relations between numbers; see the Glossary). 

Nicomachus is undoubtedly woefully lacking in precision when he defines Aéyor (section 3), 
but in his usage he is consistent. oxéo. on the other hand means simply relation and can refer 
to any kind of relation, including Aéyo proper and mere numerical excess or deficiency as well; 
it is therefore a more general term and sometimes, but not always, synonymous with Aéyos. 
Here, however, Nicomachus uses it in the general sense, so that it includes the relation of exceed- 
ing and being exceeded. He admits, then, that dvadoyla is used of arithmetic and harmonic 
progressions as well as of the true proportions, the geometric. It may be noticed that in dis- 
cussing arithmetic proportions Nicomachus does not use the term Adéyos to describe their mutual 
relation; in fact he says that they are not in the same Adyos (II. 23.1: Gray... wh pérror 
Abyos 6 abrds év rots Spois wpds dAAHAOUs ylenrar). In I]. 22. 3 (dv ydp rH rod dwhod dpocOuod 
guouwy dwd porddos exPéoe: . . . cwherar 6 ravrns udyns Adyos, where raérys = Tis docOunrixys) 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 265 

two or more relations, even if they are not brought under the same 
ratio, but rather a difference, or something else. 

Now a ratio’ is the relation of two terms to one another, and the 
combination of such is a proportion, so that three is the smallest num- 
ber of terms of which the latter is composed, although it can be a series 
of more, subject to the same ratio or the same difference. For ex- 
ample, 1 : 2 is one ratio, where there are two terms; but 2: 4 is another 
similar ratio; hence 1, 2, 4 is a proportion, for it is a combination of 
ratios, or of three terms which are observed to be in the same ratio to 
one another. The same thing may be observed also in greater numbers 
and longer series of terms; for let a fourth term, 8, be joined to the 
former after 4, again in a similar relation, the double, and then 16 after 
8 and so on. 

Now if the same term, one and unchanging, is compared to those on 

éyos does not mean ‘ratio,’ but ‘scheme,’ ‘plan,’ or, practically, ‘definition.’ In I. 5. 1 he 
speaks of dpyomxol Aéyo:, meaning the intervals of harmony, but only to point out that these 
are really ratios in the strict sense. 

A good illustration of the proper use of the words Aéyos and oxéois is found in Theon, p. 22, 19 
Hiller: av&éuevor 52 rods Adyous rijs wpds dAAHAOUs cxdcews avray pete (‘as they increase 
they diminish the ratios of their relation to one another’). He is speaking of the fact that in 
the natural series of numbers the ratios between the terms decrease as you ascend in the series, 
e.g., 2:1 > 3:2> 4:3, etc. Adyos is the ratio; oxéois means the general relation existing 
between pairs of terms, that is, the simple pairing and comparing of the terms. It is further 
to be noted with regard to the terminology of proportions that, according to Iamblichus (p. 99, 
25 ff.), dyvadoyla properly refers to the continued proportion (that in three terms), as opposed to 
To dvddo-yor, which means rather a geometrical progression and is the more proper term to apply 
to the disjunct proportion (in four terms). Needless to say, the distinction is not observed by 
Nicomachus. 

1 In view of what has been said in the preceding note this definition is a poor one, for it merely 
asserts that a ratio (Adyos) is a relation (¢xéors). Nicomachus is either guilty of carelessness, 
or, as is very probable, the word rod has fallen out before ox éo:s, leaving no trace in the MSS. 
The addition of this one word would make the definition fairly satisfactory, although it would 
still lack the precision of Euclid’s, or Theon’s. In mathematical language roid oxéors ‘a rela- 
tion of some kind,’ ‘a qualitative relation,’ means one that can be described as ‘of some kind,’ 
that is, double, triple, sesquialter, or the like, in other words, a ratio proper, and it would be con- 
trasted with roo} oyéois, ‘a relation of a certain amount,’ which would mean a relation where a 
mere arithmetical difference between the terms is in question. Euclid uses this terminology 
in his definitions of ratio and proportion in Book V, init.: ‘‘ Ratio is the qualitative relation with 
reference to size between two homologous magnitudes. Proportion is the likeness of ratios” 
(Adyos dort Sto peyeOSy opoyeray f ard wydkixérntd wow cyéots. dvadroyla 8 éorly 4 Tray 
Adywy duoidrns) ; cf. also Hero of Alexandria, Definition 127, ed. Hultsch, p. 36. As Nesselmann 
(Gesch. d. Alg., 212) showed, the inclusion of dvoyerdv, rydkcxérqra and duoidrys brings out points 
overlooked by Nicomachus, but even more important is xoid. On the necessity of terms in a 
ratio being homogeneous, see on I. 17. 4; Nicomachus neglects this matter. Theon’s definitions 
of ratio and proportion are more like Euclid’s, but that of proportion is either poorly stated or 
wrongly transmitted: ‘Ratio is the qualitative relation in analogy (xar dvddoyor) existing 
between two terms of the same genus” (p. 73, 16); “‘Proportion is the qualitative relation of 
ratios to one another” (p. 74, 12). 

266 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

either side of it, to the greater as consequent’ and to the lesser as ante- 
cedent, such a proportion is called continued; for example, 1, 2, 4 isa 
continued proportion as regards quality,’ for 4: 2 equals 2:1, and con- 
versely 1: 2 equals 2:4. In quantity, 1, 2, 3, for example, is a contin- 
ued proportion,’ for as 3 exceeds 2, so 2 exceeds 1, and conversely, as 1 
is less than 2, by so much 2 Is less than 3. 

6 If, however, one term answers to the lesser term, and becomes its 
antecedent and a greater term, and another, not the same, takes the 
place of consequent and lesser term with reference to the greater, such 
a mean and such a proportion is called no longer continued, but dis- 
junct; for example, as regards quality, 1, 2, 4, 8, for 2:1 equals 8:4, 
and conversely 1 : 2 equals 4: 8, and again 1: 4 equals 2: 8or 4: 1 equals 
8:2; and in quantity, I, 2, 3, 4, for as 1 is exceeded by 2, by so much 3 is 
exceeded by 4, or as 4 exceeds 3, so 2 exceeds 1, and by interchange, as 
3 exceeds 1, so 4 exceeds 2, or as 1 is exceeded by 3, by so much 2 is 
exceeded by 4. 

CHAPTER XXII 

1 The first three proportions,* then, which are acknowledged by all 
the ancients, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, are the arithmetic, 
geometric, and harmonic; and there are three others subcontrary to 

On the meaning of ‘antecedent’ and ‘consequent,’ see the note on I. rg. 2. 

?On the meaning of ‘quality’ referring to ratios, compare on II. 20.3. With reference to 
proportions, as here, the meaning Is consistent with the former usage. A proportion as regards 
quality (card woidrynra, xara 7d wordy, wordryTt) isa series of terms exhibiting similar ratios, 
and a proportion in quantity (xara rooéryra, xara Td woody, wooéryr:) is an arithmetical pro- 
gression, with a common difference. Cf. also II. 22.2; 23. 4 below. 

3 cuvnupévn: Theon, p. 82, 10, uses the term guvexs and diypyuéry for ‘disjunct’ (in Nicoma- 
chus, dietevypérn, sect. 6). 

‘ ITamblichus adds concerning the history of the proportions (p. 100, 19): ‘‘ But of old there 
were but three means in the days of Pythagoras and the mathematicians of his time, the arith- 
metic, the geometric, and the third in order, which was once called the subcontrary, but had its 
name forthwith changed to harmonic by the schools of Archytas and Hippasus, because it seemed 
to embrace the ratios that govern the harmonized and tuneful. And it was formerly called sub- 
contrary because its character was somehow subcontrary tothe arithmetic. ... After this name 
had been changed, those who came later, Eudoxus and his school, invented three more means, 
and called the fourth properly subcontrary because its properties were subcontrary to the har- 
monic . . . and the other two they named simply from their order, fifthand sixth. The ancients 
and their successors thought that this number, i.e., six, of means could be set up; but the moderns 
have found four more in addition, devising their formation from the terms and the intervals.” 
Cf. also p. 113, 16 ff. He adds (p. 116, 1 ff.) that the first six were in use from Plato’s time to 
Eratosthenes, and that the other four were devised by Myonides and Euphranor, both Pythago- 
reans, who lived later. Apparently Moderatus of Gades, as well as Nicomachus, employed all 
ten forms (see Proclus, In Tim., II. 18. 29 ff. Diehl). 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 267 

them, which do not have names of their own, but are called in more 
general terms the fourth, fifth, and sixth forms of mean; after which 
the moderns discover four others as well, making up the number ten,' 
which, according to the Pythagorean view, is the most perfect possible. 
It was in accordance with this number indeed that not long ago the ten 
relations? were observed to take their proper number, the so-called ten 
categories,* the divisions and forms of the extremities of our hands and 
feet, and countless other things which we shall notice in the proper 
place.’ 

Now, however, we must treat from the beginning, first, that form of 2 
proportion which by quantity ° reconciles and binds together the com- 
parison of the terms, which is a quantitative equality as regards the 
difference of the several terms to one another. This would be the 
arithmetic proportion, for it was previously reported that quantity is 
its peculiar belonging. What, then, is the reason that we shall treat 3 
of this first, and not another? Is it not clear that Nature shows it 
forth before the rest? For in the natural series of simple numbers, 
beginning with 1, with no term passed over or omitted, the definition 
of this proportion® alone is preserved; moreover, in our previous 
statements,’ we demonstrated that the Arithmetical Introduction itself 
is antecedent to all the others, because it abolishes them together with 
itself, but is not abolished together with them, and because it is im- 
plied by them, but does not imply them. Thus it is natural that the 
mean which shares the name of arithmetic will not unreasonably take 

1 The sacredness of the number ro was a favorite theme of the Pythagoreans. 10 symbolized 
for them the universe, and by the felraktys (1 + 2 + 3 +4 = 10) their most sacred oath was 
taken. It is the all-inclusive nature which they discovered in the decad that gained it its peculiar 
reverence from them, and Nicomachus here cites evidence of the type accepted by the Pythag- 
orean school to substantiate that property of the decad. It is well to note that in two other 
Nicomachean sources similar statements are found. Photius’s report of the Theologumena 
Arithmeticae represents the decad as the universe because there are 10 fingers, 10 toes, 10 cate- 
gories and ro parts of speech, and because it comprehends all solid and plane figures, all kinds of 
number and of numerical relations; and there is a close parallel passage in Ast’s Theol. Anih., 
p- 59. Another instance of the reverence paid to the decad and its supposed universal character 
among numbers was seen in I. 19.17 (Cf. the note). On the Pythagorean decad in general, cf. 
Philolaus, in Stobaeus, Ecl., I (Wachsmuth-Hense, vol. I, p. 16); Aristotle, Med., I. 5. 986 a, 8. 

? The reference is to I. 17. 7-8 and the following discussion. 

*The Aristotelian categories; cf. Part I, p. 95, notes 1 and 2. Boethius, II. 42, says that 
Archytas the Pythagorean first distinguished the categories, licef guibusdam sil ambiguum, and 
that Plato followed his distinction. There seems to have been a book on the categories (falsely) 
attributed to Archytas. See Part I, idid. 

‘ This seems to be a reference to the work called Theologumena Arithmeticae. 

' xara 7d xogdy: Cf. the notes on IT. 20. 3; 21. 5. 

84 ravrns udens Néyos; cf. on II. 21. 2. 7Cf. L. q. 2 ff. and the note. 

268 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

precedence of the means which are named for the other sciences, the 
geometric and harmonic; for it 1s plain that all the more will it take 
precedence over the subcontraries,’ over which the first three hold the 

4 leadership. As the first and original, therefore, since it is most de- 

I 

3 

4 

serving of the honor, let the arithmetic proportion have its discus- 
sion at our hands before the others. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

It is an arithmetic proportion,’ then, whenever three or more terms 
are set forth in succession, or are so conceived, and the same quantita- 
tive difference is found to exist between the successive numbers, but 
not the same ratio among the terms, one to another. For example, 1, 
2,3, 4, 5,6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13; for in this natural series of numbers, 
examined consecutively and without any omissions, every term what- 
soever is discovered to be placed between two and to preserve the arith- 
metic proportion to them. For its differences as compared with those 
ranged on either side of it are equal; the same ratio, however, is not 
preserved among them. 

And we understand that in such a series there comes about both a 
continued and a disjunct proportion; for if the same middle term an- 
swers to those on either side as both antecedent and consequent, it 
would be a continued proportion, but if there is another mean along 
with it, a disjunct proportion comes about. 

Now if we separate out of this series any three consecutive terms 
whatsoever, after the form of the continued proportion, or four or more 
terms after the disjunct form, and consider them, the difference of them 
all would be 1, but their ratios would be different throughout. If, 
however, again we select three or more terms, not adjacent, but sepa- 
rated, separated nevertheless by a constant interval, if one term was 
omitted in setting down each term, the difference in every case will be 
2; and once more with three terms it will be a continued proportion ; 
with more, disjunct. If two terms are omitted, the difference will 
always be 3 in all of them, continued or disjunct; if three, 4; if four, 
5; and so on. 

Such a proportion,® therefore, partakes in equal quantity in its 

| That is, the ‘fourth, fifth and sixth’ forms. Cf. section 1. The first three are the ‘leaders’ 

of the subcontraries because the latter are based on them. 
2 Cf. the definition in Theon, p. 113, 18 ff. 7Cf. on IL. 20.3; 21.5; 22. 2. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 269 

differences, but of unequal quality; for this reason it is arithmetic. 
If on the contrary it partook of similar quality, but not quantity, it 
would be geometric instead of arithmetic. 

A thing is peculiar’ to this proportion that does not belong to any 
other, namely, the mean is either half of, or equal to, the sum of the 
extremes, whether the proportion be viewed as continuous or disjunct 
or by alternation; for either the mean term with itself, or the mean 
terms with one another, are equal to the sum of the extremes. 

It has still another peculiarity ; what ratio each term has to itself,’ 
this the differences have to the differences; that is, they are equal. 

Again, the thing which is most exact, and which has escaped the 
notice of the majority,’ the product of the extremes when compared to 
the square of the mean is found to be smaller than it by the product of 
the differences, whether they be 1, 2, 3, 4, or any number whatever. 

In the fourth place,* a thing which all previous writers also have 
noted, the ratios between the smaller terms are larger, as compared to 
those between the greater terms. It will be shown that in the har- 
monic proportion, on the contrary, the ratios between the greater 
terms are greater than those between the smaller; for this reason 
the harmonic proportion is subcontrary to the arithmetic, and the 

1 The translation here follows the reading of Ast (7d card cUvOeciy TOv Axpwy Sierddovow Tob 
pécov A loov Trois péoos elvar). Stated in algebraic form, and letting a >) >c >d, the proposi- 
tions in this section are: 

I. (1)¢—6 =c —d, or (2)a—b = 5b — « (typical forms of the progression), 
then Il. (1)a +d =b+c,or (2) a+ c = 256. 
But if I is given, it is evident that the following also are true: 
Il, a—c =b —d (by alternation), 
then IV. a+d=6+c. 
The proposition is noticed by Theon, Joc. cit., and by Nicomachus himself in his Handbook of 
Music (c. 8, p. 251, 13 Von Jan). 

? Boethius, II. 43: Namgue omnis lerminus sibi aequalts est et differentiae differentits sunt aequales. 

* Boethius, IL. 43, says that this was discovered by Nicomachus. In general this proposition 
may be stated: If a—b = 6b —c, ® — ac = (2 — b) (6b — cc) = (a2 — BY = (6 —c)*. Nicoma- 
chus in his Handbook of Music (c. 8, p. 251, 15, Von Jan) again mentions this property of the 
proportion. 

‘ Thus in the series 1, 2, 3, comparing the ratio of the lesser terms (1, 2) and that of the greater 
(2, 3), 

i 

S51. 33 2: 

But in a similar comparison of the terms of the harmonic progression 3, 4, 6, 
' 4:3<.6:4. 

In a geometric progression, as 1, 2, 4, 

2:1 = 4:2, 
as Nicomachus proceeds to say. Nicomachus states that this fact had been noted by all previous 
writers. The statement is borne out by the fact that it occurs as early as Archytas (fragment 2, 
Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokrattker, I', p. 334, in Porphyry, Jn Ptol. Harm., p. 267). For its 
enunciation by Archytas, see p. 21, where he is quoted. 

5 

6 

“a 

270 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

‘. geometric is midway between them, as it were, between extremes, 

- 

3 

for this proportion has the ratios between the greater terms and those 
between the smaller equal, and we have seen that the equal is in the 
middle ground between the greater and the less. So much, then, about 
the arithmetic proportion. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The next proportion’ after this one, the geometric, is the only one 
in the strict sense of the word to be called a proportion, because its 
terms are seen to be in the same ratio. It exists whenever, of three or 
more terms, as the greatest is to the next greatest, so the latter is to the 
one following, and if there are more terms, as this again is to the one 
following it, but they do not, however, differ from one another by the 
same quantity, but rather by the same quality of ratio, the opposite 
of what was seen to be the case with the arithmetic proportion. 

For an example, set forth the numbers beginning with 1 that advance 
by the double ratio, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and so on, or by the triple 
ratio, 1, 3, 9, 27, 81, 243, and so on, or by the quadruple, or in some | 
similar way. In each one of these series three adjacent terms, or four, 
or any number whatever that may be taken, will give the geometric 
proportion to one another; as the first is to the next smaller, so is that 
to the next smaller, and again that to the next smaller, and so on as far 
as you care to go, and also by alternation. For instance, 2, 4, 8; the 
ratio which 8 bears to 4, that 4 bears to 2, and conversely; they do not, 
however, have the same quantitative difference. Again, 2, 4, 8, 16; 
for not only does 16 have the same ratio to 8 as before, though not the 
same difference, but also by alternation it preserves a similar relation 
— as 16 1s to 4, so 8 Is to 2, and conversely, as 2 is to 8, so 4 is to 16; 
and disjunctly, as 2 1s to 4, so 8 1s to 16; and conversely and in dis- 
junct form, as 16 is to 8 so 4 is to 2; for it has the double ratio. 

The geometric proportion has a peculiar property shared by none 
of the rest, that the differences of the terms? are in the same ratio to 

1 dvadoyla: Cf. Theon, pp. 107, § and 114,1 ff.,0n this proportion. Euclid defines numbers 
in proportion as follows: “‘ Numbers are in proportion when the first is the same multiple of the 
second as the third of the fourth, or the same part of it, or the same parts”’ (dp:@uol dvddoydy 
ela.v ray 6 wpwros Tov Sevrépov xal 6 tplros rot rerdprov lodecs 7 wokAawAdows 4 7d alrd pépos 
ra atra pépyn dow), Elements, VII, Def. 21. 

? Thus in the series 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, the ratio is double and the ratio between the successive dif- 
ferences (1, 2, 4, 8) is also double. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 271 

each other as the terms to those adjacent to them, the greater to the 
less, and vice versa. Still another property is that the greater terms 
have as a difference, with respect to the lesser, the lesser terms them- 
selves, and similarly difference differs from difference, by the smaller 
difference itself, if the terms are set forth in the double ratio; ! in the 
triple ratio both terms and differences will have as a difference twice 
the next smaller, in the quadruple ratio thrice, in the quintuple four 
times, and so on. 

Geometric proportions come about not only among the multiples, 4 
but also among all the superparticular, superpartient, and mixed forms, 
and the peculiar property of this proportion in all cases is preserved, 
that in the continued proportions the product of the extremes is equal 
to the square of the mean, but in disjunct proportions, or those with a 
greater number of terms,” even if they are not continued, but with an 
even number of terms, that the product of the extremes equals that of 
the means. 

As an illustration of the fact that in all the relations, all kinds of mul- 5 
tiples, superparticulars, superpartients, and mixed ratios the peculiar 
property of this proportion is preserved, let that suffice * and be sufh- 
cient for us wherein we fashioned, beginning with equality, by the 
three rules all the kinds of inequality out of one another, when they 
were In both direct and reverse order; for each act of fashioning and 
each series set forth is a geometric proportion with all the aforesaid 
properties as well as a fourth, namely, that they keep the same ratio‘ 
in both the greater and the smaller terms. Moreover, if we set forth 
the series shared by both heteromecic and square numbers, one by one, 

1 Doubles I 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 
Differences I 2 4 8 16 32 64 
Differences of differences 1 2 4 8 16 32 

In general, 2"*! — 2" = 2" 
Triples I 3 9 27 81 243 729 
Differences 2 6 18 54 162 486 

Differences of differences 4 12 36 108 324 
In general, 3**! — 3" = 3°(3 — 1) = 2 X 3" 
Quadruples 1 4 16 64 256 1,024 4,006 
Differences 3 #12 48 192 768 3,072 
Differences of differences 9 36 144 576 2,304 
In general, 4"*! — 4" = 4"(q — 1) = 3 X 4" 
? Thus in the series 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 
2 64 = 4% 32 = 8 & 16 (= 128). 
7Cf. 1. 23. 7 ff. 
‘ That is, in the series of doubles (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc.) the ratio between 32 and 16 is the 
Same as that between 2 and 1. 

272 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

containing the terms in both series, and then selecting the terms by 
groups of three beginning with 1, examine them, in each case setting 
down the last of the former group as the starting point of the next, 
we shall find that from the multiple relation — that is, the double — 
all the kinds of superparticulars * appear one after the other, the sesqui- 
alter, sesquitertian, sesquiquartan, and so on. 

6 It would be most seasonable, now that we have reached this point, 
to mention a corollary that is of use to us for a certain Platonic theo- 
rem :* for plane numbers are bound together always by a single mean, 
solids by two, in the form of a proportion. For with two consecutive 

t The series of squares and heteromecic numbers is 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, 16, 20, 25, etc. Taking them 
in groups of three as directed the following ratios appear: 

1,2,4 (double) 

4,6, 9 (sesquialter) 

9, 12, 16 (sesquitertian) 
16, 20, 25 (sesquiquartan) 

? The reference is to Timaeus, 32 A-B, and Nicomachus endeavors to elucidate a real difficulty 
in the Platonic text. In stating the case as he does at first briefly and summarily (“‘planes are 
always joined by one mean, solid numbers by two”), he doubtless quotes from memory, for he 
does not report Plato precisely. Plato does not say that planes can have but one mean, but that 
one suffices (el of» érlwedov . . . Eder ylyver@ar rd Tov warrds cOpa, ula perdrys Av ef jpxer rd re 
pel” daurns Evrdety xal daurhe viv 3é — orepecesdy yap avréy wpocixer elvat, ra 5¢ oreped ula 
pév odddwore, Sto 52 del perdryres Evvappérroverw...). But Nicomachus, going on to restrict 
the application of these two principles to consecutive squares and consecutive cubes would seem to 
be trying to impose upon the Platonic passage an interpretation which would stand mathematical 
scrutiny. 

The words used by Plato, éwlredov and orepedyv, are capable of a very broad interpretation 
and difficulties would then arise. For example, a plane number could be any number of the form 
ab, and supposing a, 5, c, and d to be prime integers, it would be impossible to find one rational 

mean between the plane numbers ab and cd, for V abcd would be irrational. However, it would 
always be possible to find a single mean between two successive squares, for if the squares are 
a? and (a + 1)?, a(a + 1) will be a geometrical mean between them. Furthermore, Nicomachus’s 
statement about the cubes helps to dismiss a real difficulty in the second part of the Platonic 
theorem, for there are certain solid numbers that can be put into a geometrical proportion with but 
one mean (e.g., Archer-Hind, ad /oc., cites 8, which is 2%, and 512, which is 8', and the proportion 
8:64 = 64:512). But if by solid numbers Plato meant consecutive cubes, as Nicomachus says, 
then it will be found that no single rational geometrical mean can be inserted between two such. 
For if the cubes are a? and (a + 1)', the geometrical mean would be a(a + 1)Wa(a +1) and 
would be irrational. 

At the hands of modern commentators the Platonic passage has been subjected to somewhat 
similar restriction. Archer-Hind in his note follows Martin for the most part, and declares his 
belief that Plato meant érlwredov and crepedr in the strictest possible sense, the former a number 
of two factors only, the latter of three, all the factors being prime integers, and that in the case 
of the solid numbers he restricts himself to cubes. Then it would be possible always to find one 
geometrical mean between two squares (as a?: ab = ab: %), though in other plane numbers two 
means might be possible; and the possibility of two cubes with but one rational geometrical mean 
will be excluded, for if x is the mean between a’ and 6, it will have the irrational value abV, ab, 
a and 6 being prime integers. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 273 

squares’ only one mean term is discovered which preserves the geo- 
metric proportion, as antecedent to the smaller and consequent to 
the greater term, and never more than one. Hence we conceive of two 
intervals? between the mean term and each extreme, in the relation of 
similar ratios. Again, with two consecutive cubes* only two middle 7 
terms in proper ratio are found, in accordance with the geometric 
proportion, never more; hence there are three intervals, one, that be- 
tween the mean terms compared to one another, and two between the 
extremes and the means on either side. Thus the solid forms are called 8 
three-dimensional and the plane ones two-dimensional; for example, 
1 and 4 are planes, and 2 a middle term in proportion, or again 4 and 9, 
two squares, and their middle term 6, held by the greater and holding 
the lesser term in the same ratio* as that in which one difference holds 
the other. The reason® for this is that the sides of the two squares, one 9 
belonging peculiarly to each, both together produced this very number 
6. In cubes, however, for example 8 and 27, no longer one but two 
mean terms are found, 12 and 18, which put themselves and the terms 

1 Cf. Euclid, Elements, VIII, 11: ‘There is one mean term in proportion between two square 
numbers, and the square has to the square double the ratio of side to side” (300 rerpaywdewy 
dp:Oudy els péoos dvddoydy deriv dpiGuds, xal 6 rerpdywvos wpds Tov Terpdywrow Simdaclova héyor 
tye. Hrep i whevpa wpds Thy whevpdy). Theon of Smyrna does not include this proposition, nor 
the following one, concerning cubes; this is strange, since he is professedly offering helps to the 
study of Plato. 

? Siagrjyara: The Greek word may also be translated ‘intervals.’ On the meaning of the 
word in this connection, cf. on II. 6.3. These differences will bear to each other the ratio of the 
terms (cf. sect. 3 above). 

3Cf. Euclid, Elements, VIII, 12: “There are two mean terms in proportion between two 
cubes, and cube has to cube thrice the ratio of side to side” (S00 cUBwy dpiOuay d00 péoo dvddoyér 
claw dpcBpuol, kal 6 xuBos wpds rd xiBor rprwhaclova Advyor Eye Hrep H rhevpa wpds Thy whevpdy). 

‘In general a proportion between successive squares would be a?:a(a +1) = a(e +1): 
(a-+1)*. The ratio of the sides would be a:a-+ 1. The differences on either side would be 
a-+a—a’=a,anda’+2a+1-—a?—a=a+1. So the differences have the same ratio 
as the terms themselves. In this kind of proportion the only ‘intervals’ are those between the 
first and middle terms and between the middle and last terms, whereas in any proportion with 
cubes as extremes, as a?: m = n: 5, there are three, between a and m, m and n, and a and PB. 
It is to be remarked that the same word, é:do7nwa, can be translated ‘interval’ and ‘dimension’ in 
speaking of geometric squares or cubes. To Pythagoreans such a coincidence would mean much. 

* If for example the cubes are a? and 6’, the proportion may be of the form a*: a4) = a*b: ab? 
= gb?: &; the constant ratio Is a:5, and the differences will be a* — a%b, att — a, and 
abt — &. But (a? — a%b)(ab? — b*) = (a*b — ab*)*. The differences therefore may be put in 
continued proportion 

#0) 5 oh oe 

ab —ah® ah —B 
That is, the ratio between the differences is the same as that between the terms. In the case 
of cubes of prime numbers there would be eight further possible forms of the proportion, all of 
which obey this law, as may be readily tested. If, however, the original numbers were not prime, 
the number of forms increases with the number of factors. 

, which reduces to 7 

Io 

I 

| 

274 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

in the same ratio as that which the differences bear to one another ; 
and the reason of this is that the two mean terms are the products of the 
sides of the cubes commingled, 2 times 2 times 3 and 3 times 3 times 2. 

In general, then, if a square takes a square, that is, multiplies it, it 
always makes a square ; but ifa square multipliesa heteromecic number, 
or vice versa, it never makes a square; and if cube multiplies cube, a 
cube will always result, but if a heteromecic number multiplies a cube, 
or vice versa, never is the result acube. In precisely the same way if an 
even number multiplies an even number, the product 1s always even 
and if odd multiplies odd always odd; but if odd multiplies even or 
even odd, the result will always be even and never odd.!' These mat- 
ters will receive their proper elucidation in the commentary on Plato,’ 
with reference to the passage on the so-called marriage number in the 
Republic introduced in the person of the Muses. So then let us pass 
over to the third proportion, the so-called harmonic, and analyze it. 

CHAPTER XXV 

The proportion that is placed in the third order is one called the 
harmonic,’ which exists whenever among three terms the mean on 
examination is observed to be neither in the same ratio to the extremes, 
antecedent of one and consequent of the other, as in the geometric 
proportion, nor with equal intervals, but an inequality of ratios, as in the 

1 The propositions stated here are: 
(1) m'n? is always a square; 
(z) m'n(n + 1) is never a square; 
(3) mn? is always a cube; 
(4) n(n + 1) is never a cube; 
(5) 2m X 2n is always even; 
(6) (2 m+ 1)(2" + 1) is always odd; 
(7) 2 m(2 + 1) is always even. 

The formula for the ‘marriage number’ occurs in the Republic, 546 a ff. The meaning of 
the passage is still disputed. Nicomachus may perhaps refer to some work of his in which he 
commented on the Republic. 

* ITamblichus (p. 100, 19 ff.) names this among the three kinds of proportion known to Pythag- 
oras and his school, by whom it was called twrevarria because it was considered to be subcon- 
trary to the arithmetic; the name, however, was changed to dpyomx?, harmonic, by the schools 
of Archytas and Hippasus, because they found in it the harmonic ratios. Iamblichus adds 
(p. 108, 3 ff.) that the fundamental forms (rv@uéves) of this proportion are 2, 3, 6 and 3, 4, 6, the 
multiples or superparticulars of which terms give other examples of it. On account of this limi- 
tation the name ‘fixed,’ ‘established’ (¢écrn«via) was given to the harmonic proportion by some. 
It will be noted that Nicomachus uses the examples mentioned, although he does not speak of 
such a limitation. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 275 

arithmetic, but on the contrary, as the greatest term is to the small- 
est, so the difference between greatest and mean terms is to the differ- 
ence between mean and smallest term.’ For example, take 3, 4, 6, or 
2, 3,6. For 6 exceeds 4 by one third of itself, since 2 is one third of 6, 
and 3 falls short of 4 by one third of itself, for 1 1s one third of 3. In 
the first example, the extremes are in double ratio and their differences 
with the mean term are again in the same double ratio to one another ; 
but in the second they are each in the triple ratio. 

It has a peculiar property, opposite, as we have said,” to that of the 
arithmetic proportion; for in the latter* the ratios were greater 
among the smaller terms, and smaller among the greater terms. Here, 
however, on the contrary, those among the greater terms are greater 
and those among the smaller terms smaller, so that in the geometric pro- 
portion, like a mean between them, there may be observed the equality 
of ratios on either side, a midground between greater and smaller. 

Furthermore, in the arithmetic proportion’ the mean term is seen 
to be greater and smaller than those on either side by the same fraction 
of itself, but by different fractions of the terms that flank it; in the har- 
monic, however, it is the opposite, for the middle term is greater and 
less than the terms on either side by different fractions of itself, but 
always the same fraction of those terms at its sides, a half of them or 
a third; but the geometric,® as if in the midground between them, 

' The general formula then is a:¢c = a — 6:b — cc. For Theon’s discussion see p. 114, 14 ff., 
Hiller. 

2 Cf. II. 23.6. TIamblichus (p. rro, 18 ff.) says that this was the opinion of the Pythagoreans 
but that some considered the harmonic proportion contrary to both the arithmetic and geometric. 
He then argues elaborately for the view expressed in the text, that it is subcontrary to the arith- 
metic only. 

* Compare the ratios of the terms in the harmonic series 3, 4,6 and the arithmetic series 3, 4, 5: 

4 = 1} (less) 4 = 11 (greater) 
S$ = 1} (greater) 5 = 11 (less) 

‘ The following examples will illustrate Nicomachus’s meaning. 

ARITHMETIC HARMONIC GEOMETRIC 

Series a“. 2 Ss £ fae £ 2 fp oh h F 31 4) 5 3r 4 6 4, 6, 9 
Differences ie se ee I, I 1,2 2,3 
Which are the following fractions of the mean 4 4 4 i i} 

1 

And the following fractions of the extremes 

xt 54 44 
In each case there are two differences. These are (a) in the arithmetic, the same fraction of the 
middle term but different fractions of the extremes; (6) in the harmonic, different fractions of 
the mean, but the same fraction of the extremes; (c) in the geometric, different fractions of both 
mean and extremes. 

’ What is meant by the elliptic statement of the text, ‘the geometric . . . neither in the 
mean alone, nor in the extremes alone, but in both mean and extreme,’ may be seen from the 
example in the preceding note. The middle term does not differ from both extremes by the same 

4 

5 

Ln 

276 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

shows this property neither in the mean term exclusively nor in the 
extremes, but in both mean and extreme. 

Once more, the harmonic proportion has as a peculiar property the 
fact that when the extremes are added together’ and multiplied by 
the mean, it makes twice the product of themselves multiplied by one 
another. 

The harmonic proportion was so called because the arithmetic 
proportion was distinguished by quantity, showing an equality in this 
respect with the intervals from one term to another, and the geometric 
by quality, giving similar qualitative relations between one term and 
another, but this form, with reference to relativity, appears now in 
one form, now in another, neither in its terms exclusively nor in its 
differences exclusively, but partly in the terms and partly in the differ- 
ences; for as the greatest term is to the smallest, so also is the differ- 
ence between the greatest and the next greatest, or middle, term to the 
difference between the least term and the middle term, and vice versa. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

In the classification of Being previously set forth we recognized the 
relative ? as a thing peculiar to harmonic theory ; but the musical ratios 
of the harmonic intervals are also rather to be found in this proportion. 
The most elementary is the diatessaron, in the sesquitertian ratio, 
4:3, which is the ratio of term to term ® in the example in the double 
ratio, or of difference to difference in that which follows, the triple, for 
these differences are of 6 to 2 or again of 6to3. Immediately following 
is the diapente, which is the sesquialter, 3 : 2 or again, 6: 4, the ratio of 

part of itself nor by the same part of the extremes; but from the first term by the same frac- 
tion of itself as the fraction of the last term by which it differs from the last term; and con- 
versely, sameness and difference of the fraction involved in comparing the terms do not lie, in 
this type of proportion, exclusively in the relations to the middle term, or in those of the middle 
term to the extremes. 

! Thus in 2, 3,6, (2 +6) X 3 = 24and2 X 2 & 6. 

In general qo 8 whence 6 = 2% and b(a +0) = 2 a€. 
c b—-e a+c 

? See I. 3. 1. 

* The examples referred to are the harmonic proportions cited in II. 25.1. The proportion 
in double ratio is 3, 4, 6, and that in triple ratio is 2, 3,6. The first two terms are in sesquiter- 
tian ratio in the former (4: 3) and the differences of 6 to 2 and of 3 respectively (4, 3) give the 
same ratio in the latter. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 277 

term to term.’ Then the combination? of both of these, sesquialter 
and sesquitertian, the diapason, which comes next, is in the double 
ratio, 6: 3 in both of the examples, the ratio of term to term.* The fol- 
lowing interval, that of the diapason and diapente together,* which 
preserves the triple ratio of the two of them together, since it is the com- 
bination of double and sesquialter, is as 6: 2, the ratio of term to term 
in the example in the triple ratio, and likewise of difference to differ- 
ence in the same, and in the proportion with double ratio it is the ratio 
of the greatest term to the difference between that term and the mean 
term, or of the difference between the extremes to the difference be- 
tween the smaller terms. The last and greatest interval, the so-called 
di-diapason, as it were twice the double, which is in the quadruple 
ratio,® is as the middle term in the proportion in the double ratio to the 
difference between the lesser terms, or as the difference between the 
extremes, in the example in the triple ratio, to the difference between 
the lesser terms. 

Some, however, agreeing with Philolaus, believe that the proportion 
is called harmonic because it attends upon all geometric harmony, and 
they say that ‘geometric harmony’ is the cube because it is harmo- 
nized in all three dimensions, being the product of a number thrice 
multiplied together. For in every cube® this proportion is mirrored ; 
there are in every cube 12 sides, 8 angles and 6 faces; hence 8, the mean 
between 6 and 12, is according to harmonic proportion, for as the 
extremes are to each other, so is the difference between greatest and 

' That is, the sesquialter ratio may be derived from the terms of the two harmonic proportions 
cited without calling in differences. 6:4 comes from the double ratio; 3: 2, from the triple. 

a 

3 erie eee (2, 3, 6 and 3, 4, 6) the diapason occurs among the terms (3: 6). 

‘ This, a triple ratio, is seen in the triple harmonic series 2, 3, 6 (a) in the terms 6 and 2; (6) in 
the differences (6 — 3 = 3 and 3 — 2 = 1); and in the double series 3, 4, 6 (a) in the ratio of 
6 to (6 — 4), i.e., 2, and (5) in the ratio between the difference of 6 and 3 and that between 4 
and 3. On the triple ratio as the combination of the double and the sesquialter, cf. II. 5. 4. 

The harmonic series 2, 3, 6 is of the type that Nicomachus used in illustration in IT. 5, as may 
be seen from the following arrangement : 

2 | : 3 6 
Sesquialter Double , 
( Diapente) , _ (Diapason) 

Triple 
(Diapason and Diapente together) 

' In the double series 3, 4, 6, it is the ratio of 4 to (¢ — 3 = )1; in the triple, 2, 3, 6, it is the 
ratio of (6 — 2 =) 4 to (3 — 2 =) 1. 

* Nicomachus shows first that this series, 6, 8, 12, conforms to all the tests of the harmonic 
proportion just stated, and then that all the ratios of the harmonic intervals are to be found 
among its terms and differences. 

278 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

middle term to that between the middle and smallest terms, and, again, 
the middle term is greater than the smallest by one fraction of itself 
and by another is less than the greater term, but is greater and smaller 
by one and the same fraction of the extremes. And again, the sum of 
the extremes multiplied by the mean makes double the product of the 
extremes multiplied together. The diatessaron is found in the ratio 
8:6, which is sesquitertian, the diapente in 12: 8, which is sesquialter ; 
the diapason, the combination of these two, in 12:6, the double ratio ; 
the diapason and diapente combined, which 1s triple, in the ratio of the 
difference of the extremes to that of the smaller terms, and the di- 
diapason is the ratio of the middle term to the difference between 
itself and the lesser term. Most properly, then, has it been called 
harmonic. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

Just as in the division of the musical canon,' when a single string is 
stretched or one length of a pipe is used, with immovable ends, and the 
mid-point shifts in the pipe by means of the finger-holes, in the string 
by means of the bridge, and as in one way after another the aforesaid 
proportions, arithmetic, geometric, and harmonic, can be produced, 
so that the fact becomes apparent that they are logically? and very 
properly named, since they are brought about through changing and 
shifting the middle term in different ways, so too it is both reasonable 
and possible to insert the mean term that fits each of the three pro- 
portions between two arithmetic terms, which stay fixed and do not 
change, whether they are both even or odd. In the arithmetic pro- 
portion this mean term is one that exceeds and is exceeded by an equal 
amount; in the geometric proportion it is differentiated from the 

1 The woveixds kava» was a measuring rod corresponding to, and placed by the side of, the 
monochord, on which by means of a movable bridge experiments were made to determine the 
musical intervals precisely, by the use of mathematics instead of by ear. The procedure in such 
experiments may be gathered from Boethius, Inst. Mus., IV. 5: Sit chorda intensa AB. Huic 
aequa sit regula, quae propostits pariitionibus dividatur, ut ca regula chordae apposita eaedem divi- 
stones in nervi longiludine signentur quas antea signaveramus in regula. Nos vero nunc tla dividi- 
mus quasi ipsam chordam et non regulam partiamur. He then describes the actual division. 
Apparently similar experiments could be made on one pipe of the flute. The word used by 
Nicomachus for ‘bridge,’ traywyevs, is properly referred to a movable, as opposed to a fixed, 
bridge (uayds) ; Ast in his note on the present passage cites a scholium on Ptolemy, Harm., 1. 8: 
payas 7 wh ayoudrn, bwayuryels 52 db dyopevos" Karaxpyorimds 82 xal wayds A€yera trayoryevs. 
The expression xdvwvros xararouy is the title of a work of Euclid. 

2 That is, they are properly called yeorédryres (‘means’) because the mean term, uéoos Spos, 
determines their character. 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 279 

extremes by the same ratio, and in the harmonic it is greater and 
smaller than the extremes by the same fraction of those same extremes. 

Let there be given then, first, two even terms, between which we 
must find how the three means would be inserted, and what they are. 
Let them be 10 and 40. 

First, then, I fit to them the arithmetic mean. It is 25, and the at- 
tendant properties of the arithmetic proportion are all preserved; for 
as each term is to itself, so also is difference to difference; they are in 
equality, therefore. And as much as the greater exceeds the means 
by so much the latter exceeds the lesser term; the sum of the extremes? 
is twice the mean; the ratio of the lesser terms? is greater than that of 
the greater; the product of the extremes’? is less than the square of the 
mean by the amount of the square of the differences; and the middle 
term‘ is greater and less than the extremes by the same fraction of it- 
self, but by different fractions regarded as parts of the extremes. 

If, however, I insert 20 as a mean between the given even terms, the 
properties of the geometrical proportion come into view and those of 
the arithmetic are done away with. For as the greater term is to the 
middle term, so is the middle term to the lesser; the product of the 
extremes is equal to the square of the mean; the differences are ob- 
served to be in the same ratio to one another as that of the terms; °® 
neither in the extremes ° alone nor in the middle term alone does there 
reside the sameness of the fraction concerned in the relative excess and 
deficiency of the terms, but in the middle term and one of the extremes 
by turns; and both between greater and smaller terms there is the 
same ratio. 

But if I select 16 as the mean, again the properties of the two former 
proportions disappear and those of the harmonic are seen to remain 

l4o +10 = 2% 25. 

225 > 4g. 

325? — (10 X 40) = 225 = 15°. 

4 As the numerical difference is constant, it follows that the mean is both exceeded and exceeds 
by the same fraction of itself (i-e., 4 or }). But 15 compared with the extremes is } of 10 and 
3% of 40. 

* The differences in the series 10, 20, 40 are 10 and 20. Both terms and differences are in the 
double ratio. 

® The reference is to the peculiarity of the geometrical proportion noted in IT. 25. 3. In this 
case the difference between 10 and 20 is the whole of 10 and half of 20; that between 20 and go 
is the whole of 20 and half of 40. If both the differences are viewed in relation either to the mean 
or to the respective extremes, the fraction is not constant; but if one difference be regarded as 
a fraction of the mean, while the other is regarded as a fraction of the extreme, there will be “‘iden- 
tity of the fraction of excess and defect.” 

4 

280 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

fixed, with respect to the two even terms. For as the greatest term? 
is to the least, so is the difference of the greater terms to that of the 
lesser; by what fractions, seen as fractions of the greater term, the 
mean is smaller than the greater term, by these the same mean term is 
greater than the smallest term when they are looked upon as fractions 
of the smallest term; the ratio between the greater terms is greater, 
and that of the smaller terms, smaller, a thing which js not true of any 
other proportion; and the sum of the extremes multiplied by the mean 
is double the product of the extremes. 

6 If, however, the two terms that are given are not even but odd, like 
5, 45, the same number, 25, will make the arithmetic proportion ; 
and the reason for this is that the terms on either side overpass it and 
fail to come up to it by an equal number, keeping the same quantitative 
difference with respect to it. 15 substituted makes the geometric 
proportion, as it is the triple and subtriple of each respectively; and 
if g takes over the function of mean term it gives the harmonic; for by 
those parts of the smaller term by which it exceeds, namely, four fifths 
of the smaller, it is also less than the greater, if they be regarded as 
parts of the greater term, for this too is four fifths, and if you try all the 
previously mentioned properties of the harmonic ratio you will find 
that they will fit. 

7 And let this be your method whereby you might scientifically fashion 
the mean terms that are illustrated in the three proportions. For the 
two terms given you, whether odd or even, you will find the arithmetic? 
mean by adding the extremes and putting down half of them as the 
mean, or if you divide by 2 the excess of the greater over the smaller, 
and add this to the smaller, you will have the mean. As for the geo- 
metric mean, if you find the square root of the product? of the ex- 
tremes, you will produce it, or, observing the ratio‘ of the terms to one 

1Jn the series 10, 16, 40 
(2) @ = 216 4, 
10 16—10 6 
(b) The difference between 40 and 16, 24, is 3 of 40, and the difference between 16 and ro, 

6, is 2 of ro. 

(c) #2 >. 
(d) (40 + 10) X 16 = 2 X (40 X 10) = 800. 

*In general terms, the arithmetic mean between a and b is a7 b , or, ifa <b, itisa + b = g, 

In general terms the geometric mean is ab. 
‘ Nicomachus is stating the following proposition put into general terms: given a and ar, @ 
2 

will form a geometric proportion with them and a: = = = :ar. This will hold good only for 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 281 

another, divide this by 2 and make the mean, for example, the double, 
in the case of a quadruple ratio. For the harmonic mean,’ you must 
multiply the difference of the extremes by the lesser term and divide 
the product by the sum of the extremes, then add the quotient to the 
lesser term, and the result will be the harmonic mean. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

So much, then, concerning the three proportions celebrated by the 
ancients, which we have discussed the more clearly and at length for 
just this reason, that they are to be met with frequently and in various 
forms in the writings of those authors.2/ The succeeding forms,* how- 
ever, we must only epitomize, since they do not occur frequently in 
the ancient writings, but are included merely for the sake of our own 

proportions of the type cited in Nicomachus’s example, those where the ratio is the quadruple. 

For if a: “2 =@:ar, then ar = ar and 4r—r?=o0. Only two values of r satisfy this con- 
2 2 4 

dition, 4 and o, of which the latter need not be taken into consideration when dealing with the 

number system of Nicomachus. Nicomachus should have directed that the square root of r be 
taken, not its half; then, provided that r were a perfect square, he could set up the proportion, 

a: avr =aVyr:ar. The number 4 Is the only one of which the half and the square root are 
identical (among the positive integers). 

1 Given a and ¢ (if a > c), the harmonic mean is (a — ce +c. This is equal to 2 a¢ | hwwhich 
a+ec ate 

was given above as the general formula for the harmonic mean (see on II. 25. 4) and would be 
a simpler one to follow. 

? That is, in the sections of the works of ancient authors read and interpreted in the schools 
(dvayviouara). 

*Theon of Smyrna also enumerated other proportions in addition to the first and principal 
three. In addition he says (p. 106, 13) there are the ‘subcontrary’ (sc. to the harmonic; cf. 
p. 115, 5 ff.), fifth and sixth, and then six more, subcontraries to the first six. This second set 
of six, however, he leaves without explanation or illustration. For the sake of the conspectus, 
the general formulae for the proportions as the two authors give them may be set down, letting 
a >6> cineach: 

NICOMACHUS THEON 
t. Arithmetic a—b=b—c (Il. 23.5) a-b=b—c (p. 113, 18). 
: b a 
2. Geor f=? IT. = . 2 f 
2 metric hae (IT. 24) ale (p. 114, 1) 
3. Harmonic ¢ 6-2 (II. 25) 2-8 (p. 114, 14). 
c b—ce c b—e 
4. Subcontrary to harmonic ey aa (II. 28. 3) pay aaa, (p. ris, 5). 
¢ a-—b a b-—e¢ 
, b b-—€e c_a-—b 
. Fifth f = . 28, = = . IIS, 12). 
5. Fifth form a (II. 28. 4) ta ar) (p. 115, 12) 
. b—c¢ b a-—hb 
6. Sixth f = . 28. = . 118, 20). 
ixth form = — (II. 28. 5) . (p. 115, 20) 

In the last three forms Theon consistently reverses the formulae of Nicomachus. 

= 

282 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

acquaintance with them and, so to speak, for the completeness of our 

2 reckoning. They are set forth by us in an order based on their opposi- 
tion to the three archetypes already described, since they are fashioned 
out of them and have the same order. 

3 The fourth, and the one called subcontrary,’ because it is opposite 
to, and has opposite properties to, the harmonic proportion, exists 
when, in three terms, as the greatest is to the smallest, so the difference 
of the smaller terms is to that of the greater, for example 3, 5,6. For 
the terms compared are seen to be in the double ratio, and it is plain 
wherein it is opposite to the harmonic proportion; for whereas they 
both have the same extreme terms, and in double ratio, in the former 
the difference of the greater terms as compared to that of the lesser 
preserved the same ratio as that of the extremes, but in this proportion 
just the reverse, the difference of the smaller compared with that of 
the greater. You must know that its peculiar property is this. The 
product of the greater? and the mean terms is twice the product of the 
mean and the smaller; for 6 times 5 is twice 5 times 3. 

4 The two proportions, fifth and sixth, were both fashioned after the 
geometrical, and they differ from each other thus. 

The fifth form exists,* whenever, among three terms, as the middle 
term is to the lesser, so their difference is to the difference between the 
greater and the mean, as in 2, 4, 5, for 4 is the middle term, the double 
of 2, the lesser, and 2 is the double of 1 — the difference of the smallest 
terms as compared with that of the largest. That which makes it con- 
trary to the geometric proportion is that in the former,‘ as the middle 
term is to the lesser, so the excess of the greater over the mean is to the 
excess of the mean over the lesser term, whereas in this proportion, on 
the contrary, it is the difference of the lesser compared to that of the 

a_a—5b 

1 The harmonic proportion is - = j The one now under discussion is of the form, 
¢ —€ 

¢ = ° In the example given the ‘elements compared’ are the extremes and differences 
G = 
respectively. 

? The statement is not correct; it should be that the product of the greater by the middle equals 

the product of the middle by the less multiplied by the ratio. For if = 2 ; where a >b>¢c, 

let r be the ratio. Then dcr will equal bc X Z or ab. Or the mean multiplied by the sum of the 
extremes equals the sum of the squares of the extremes, b(a¢ +c) = a? +c’, 

* That is, if > b > ¢, the proportion is 2 = *—<. 
iI— 

‘ That is, 6 4-9 f derived from 2 = 2) cf. IT. 24. 
c b—e b oc 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 283 

greater. Nevertheless it is peculiar to this proportion’ that the product 
of the greatest by the middle term is double that of the greatest by the 
smallest, for 5 times 4 is twice 5 times 2. 

The sixth form* comes about when, in a group of three terms, as the 
greatest is to the mean, so the excess of the mean over the lesser is to 
the excess of the greater over the mean, for example 1, 4, 6, for both 
are in the sesquialter ratio. There is in this case also a reasonable 
cause for its opposition to the geometrical; for here, too, the likeness 
of the ratios reverses, as in the fifth form. 

These are the six proportions commonly spoken of among previous 
writers, the three prototypes® having lasted from the times of Pythag- 
oras down to Aristotle and Plato, and the three others, opposites of 
the former, coming into use among the commentators and sectarians 
who succeeded these men. But certain men have devised in addition, 
by shifting the terms and differences of the former, four more which 
do not much appear in the writings of the ancients, but have been 
sparingly touched upon as an over-nice detail. These, however, we 
must run over in the following fashion, lest we seem ignorant. 

The first of them,’ and the seventh in the list of them all, exists when, 
as the greatest term is to the least, so their difference is to the difference 
of the lesser terms, as 6, 8, 9, for on comparison the ratio of each is seen 
to be the sesquialter. 

1 This statement again should be corrected in the same way as the former one. It can be 

stated that if I ; where a > 6 > cc, andr is the constant ratio,ab = acr. Forr = and 
¢ an ¢ 

ac X ® — gb. Nicomachus’s proposition applies only to cases where r = 2. 
c 

0 —¢ 

b a—b 
constant ratio being 3, sesquialter. From the geometric proportion © wt? tetnived of ox 5) 
2 c ¢ 

* General form, if a > 5 > cc, 

This gives from the series, 1, 4, 6, D iw : —. the 
4 — 4 

= 7 (See note on section 4). Here the ratio of differences is inverted. (Cf. Euclid, Elem., 
V., Def. 16: dvacrpoph Adyou éorl ARyus Tov Hyouuérou wpds Thy Uwepoy hp, U bwepéxye: rd Fyobperor 
rou érouévov. That is, as Heath puts it, conversion is taking instead of the ratio of ato 6 
the ratio of a toa—b. This is evidently not the sort of conversion here intended.) 

? Boethius, II. 52, says: ef Ace quidem sunt sex mediectates, quarum tres usque a Pythagora ad 
Platonem Aristotelemque manserunt. Post vero qui inseculi sunt has tres alias, de quibus supra 
disseruimus, suis commentariis addiderunt. See note on II. 22. 1. 

‘ The general form is = ; 

= Z iia >b>c. In the given series 6, 8, 9, we have 

aS 
8—6 2 

oo 

284 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

g The eighth proportion,’ which is the second of this group, comes 
about when, as the greatest is to the least term, so the difference of the 
extremes is to the difference of the greater terms, as 6, 7, 9; for this 
also has sesquialters for the two ratios. 

9 Theninth? in the complete list, and third in the number of those sub- 
sequently invented, exists when there are three terms and whatever 
ratio the mean bears to the least, that also the difference of the ex- 
tremes has in comparison with that of the smallest terms, as 4, 6, 7. 

10 ©0. The tenth,’ in the full list, which concludes them all, and the fourth 
in the series presented by the moderns, is seen when, among three terms, 
as the mean is to the lesser, so the difference of the extremes is to the 
difference of the greater terms, as 3, 5, 8, for it is the superbipartient 
ratio in each pair. 

11 To sum up, then, let the terms of the ten proportions be set forth‘ 
in one illustration, for the sake of easy comprehension : 

First: 1, 2, 3 Sixth: 1, 4, 6 
second: 1, 2,4 Seventh: 6, 8, 9 
Third: 3, 4, 6 Eighth: 6, 7,9 
Fourth: 3, 5, 6 Ninth: 4, 6, 7 
Fifth: 2, 4, 5 Tenth: 3, 5, 8 

CHAPTER XXIX 

t It remains® for me to discuss briefly the most perfect proportion, 
that which is three-dimensional and embraces them all, and which is 
most useful for all progress in music and in the theory of the nature of 
the universe. This alone would properly and truly be called harmony ° 

1 The general form, ifa > 5 > cis pe — ;» and in the given series 6, 7, 9, we have 
9 = 9—6 = 3, 
6° 90-7 2 
b_a-c 

The general form, if ¢>b>¢, is , and in the given series 4, 6, 7, we 

c b-ce 
fave OO 48, 
=) 3 

4 6-4 2 
? That is, ifa>b>c, : ap? and in the given series 3, 5, 8, $53 = 5 

4It is to be noticed that all the proportions can be formed from numbers in the first decade. 
§ ITamblichus calls this proportion woverx#, and says of it (p. 118, 23 Pistelli): evpyua 3 adryr 
gacw elvac BaBvAwvlwy, xal 8d T[lu@aydpov xpdrov els “EAAnvas é\Geir (“they say it was a dis- 
covery of the Babylonians, and that it was by Pythagoras first introduced among the Greeks’’). 
§ Cf. IL. 26. 2. 

b_a-—e 

TRANSLATION: BOOK II 285 

rather than the others, since it is not a plane, nor bound together by only 
one mean term, but with two, so as thus to be extended in three dimen- 
sions,’ just as a while ago it was explained that the cube is harmony. 

When, therefore, there are two extreme terms, both of three dimen- 
sions, either numbers multiplied thrice by themselves so as to be a cube, 
or numbers multiplied twice by themselves and once by another num- 
ber so as to be either ‘beams’ or ‘bricks,’ or the products of three un- 
equal numbers, so as to be scalene, and between them there are found 
two other terms which preserve the same ratios to the extremes alter- 
nately and together,’ in such a manner that, while one of them pre- 
serves the harmonic proportion, the other completes the arithmetic, 
it is necessary that in such a disposition of the four the geometric 
proportion appear,* on examination, commingled with both mean terms 
— as the greatest is‘ to the third removed from it, so is the second from 

1 Or, ‘three intervals’; for the sense, cf. IT. 24. 6. 

2 Ast thus comments on the words translated (¢vaAAdé, dvaylt): “ évadddé est permutato s. 
inverso ordine, et dvaulé promiscue s. inter se; dvaulE medii termini 8 et 9 [referring to the ex- 
ample 6, 8, 9, 12] ad extremos 6 et 12 ita se habent, ut aequalem inter se servent proportionem; 
8 enim ad 6 sesquitertiam habet rationem, ut 12 ad 9g; inverso autem ordine 12 ad 8 ita se habet, 
ut 9 ad 6; utriusque enim ratio est sesquialtera.”” Ast apparently means ‘alternately’ or ‘by 
alternation’ by ‘permutato sive inverso ordine’ (= ¢raAAdE), as his illustration shows. évaA\d£ 
is so used in II. 21. 6, but in the same section dvaplf is used in precisely the same way, both mean- 
ing ‘by alternation.’ So we must assume either that the terms are here used as synonyms, as in 
II. 21. 6, or that ¢évadAdé means ‘alternately’ and drawl something else, ‘directly,’ perhaps, as 
Ast would imply. It is quite certain that évad\\d=— means alternately. Cf. T. L. Heath on Eu- 
clid, V. Def. 12: ‘‘The word évaddd£ is of course a common term which has no exclusive reference 
to mathematics. But this same use of it with reference to proportions already occurs in Aristotle, 
Anal. Post., I. 5. 74a 18, wal 7d dvddovyor Ere évaddd£, ‘and that a proportion (is true) alternately, 
or alternando.’ Used with Adyor as here, the adverb é»adddé has the sense of an adjective, 
‘alternate’; we have already had it similarly used of ‘alternate angles’ (al éva\Adf -ywrlac) in 
the theory of parallels.” It is also clear that rods abrods \éyous refers to geometric propor- 
tion, not to the harmonic and arithmetic referred to after Gere, for Aéyos is not used of the rela- 
tion existing between the terms in arithmetic proportion. I have translated dvaulf ‘together’ 
but with some diffidence, taking the sense to be approximately that given by Ast. 

* Such a proportion is of the form a, pat 
tion, for the product of the extremes equals that of the means. Nicomachus further specifies that 
both @ and 6 are to be of the general forms m', m*n or Imn. In giving his example he considers 
unity a factor. Boethius, IJ. 54, thus describes this proportion : Haec aulem huiusmodt tnveniclur, 
si duobus terminis constilutis, qui ipsi tribus creverint intervallis, longitudine latitudine et profundi- 
tale, duo huiusmodi termini medti fuerini constiluti et ipst tribus intervallis notati, qui vel ab acgua- 
libus per aequales aequaliler sint producti vel ab tnaequalibus ad tnaequalia aequaliter, vel ab in- 
acqualibus ad aequalia aequaliter vel quolibet alio modo, alque ita, cum armonicam proporlionem 
custodiant, alio lamen modo comparati faciant arithmeticam medtetatem, hisque geometrica medietas, 
quae tnler ulrasque versalur, dcesse non possi. 

‘The Greek fashion of counting, that is, reckoning in both ends, is used in the specification 
of these terms. ‘By alternation’ here is duwAéydnr ‘in interlocking or interwoven fashion’; 
practically equivalent to éraAAde. 

a+b , 6. These will form a geometric propor- 

286 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

it to the fourth; for such a situation makes the product of the means 
equal to the product of the extremes. And again, if the greatest term 
be shown to differ from the one next beneath it by the amount whereby 
this latter differs from the least term, such an array becomes an arith- 
metic proportion and the sum of the extremes is twice the mean. 
But if the third term from the greatest exceeds and is exceeded by the 
same fraction of the extremes, it is harmonic and the product of the 
mean by the sum of the extremes is double the product of the ex- 
tremes. 

3 Let this be an example of this proportion, 6, 8,9, 12. 61s ascalene 
number, derived from 1 times 2 times 3, and 12 comes from the succes- 
sive multiplication of 2 times 2 times 3; of the mean terms the lesser 
is from 1 times 2 times 4, and the greater from 1 times 3 times 3. The 
extremes are both solid and three-dimensional, and the means are of 
the same class. According to the geometric proportion, as 12 is to 
8, so g is to 6; according to the anthmetic, as 12 exceeds 9, by so 
much does 9 exceed 6; and by the harmonic, by the fraction by which 
8 exceeds 6,’ viewed as a fraction of 6, 8 is also exceeded by 12, viewed 
as a fraction of 12. 

4 Moreover 8:6 or 12:9 is the diatessaron, in sesquitertian ratio; 9:6 
or 12:8 1s the diapente in the sesquialter; 12:6 1s the diapason in the 
double. Finally, 9:8 is the interval of a tone, in the superoctave 
ratio, which is the common measure of all the ratios in music, since it 
is also the more familiar, because it is likewise the difference? between 
the first and most elementary intervals. 

5 And let this be sufficient concerning the phenomena and properties 
of number, for a first Introduction. 

18 exceeds 6 by 2, or by $ of 6; 12 exceeds 8 by 4, or by 4 of 12; so 6,8, 12 is a harmonic series. 

2 Boethius has the following explanation: unde notum est, quod inter diatessaron et dtapente 
consonantiarum tonus differentia est, sicul inter sesquitertiam et sesquialleram proportionem sola 
est epogdous differentia (II. 54). 

PART Iil 

SUPPLEMENTARY AIDS TO THE INTERPRETATION OF THE 
INTRODUCTION TO ARITHMETIC 

JNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

I. EXTENSIONS OF A THEOREM OF 
NICOMACHUS 

Lonc before the time of Nicomachus the fact that the sum of the 
first 2 odd numbers gives m* was known. The theorem of Nicomachus 
states ! that if you take the mth sequence of odd numbers, calling the 
first 1, the second 3, 5, the third 7, 9, 11, and so on, you obtain n°. 

In considering this theorem it seemed to me that there should be 
analogous theorems for the fifth and seventh powers, and possibly for 
higher prime powers. The theorem for the fifth powers may be given 
as follows: 

In the series of odd numbers, the first gives 15; omit the next one, 
and the following 4 give 2°; omit the following 3, and the next 9 give 
3°; omit 6, and the following 16 give 4°; omit 10, and the following 

n(n + 1) 

25 give 5°; in general, omit terms or a number equal to the 

mth triangular number and take the (m + 1)’ following to obtain 
(n + 1)°. 

I 5» 73 Q) Il IQ, ZI, mone 35 
[3] 4terms [13,15,17] terms = [37, 39, - 47] 
49, 51, «. 79 IOI, 103, 105, ... 149 
16 terms [81, 83, ... go] 25 terms 
Each group of upper numbers consists of »? terms and the sum is n°; 

terms. 

each group of lower numbers consists of n(n + 1) 
2 

The general proof consists of the summation of the n* terms of the 
given arithmetical series and follows without difficulty. 
For the seventh powers the corresponding theorem is as follows: 
In the series of odd numbers, the first one gives 17; omit the next 3 
and the following 8 give 27; omit the next 15 and the following 27 give 
3’; omit 42 terms, take 64 and obtain 4’; omit go terms, take 125 
terms and obtain 5’; omit 165 terms, take 216 terms and obtain 6’; 
. In general, omit a number of terms given by the product of the 
nth triangular number, multiplied by the (7 + 1)* odd number which 

1 2.20.5. For the translation see page 263 of this volume. 

289 

290 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

is 2” +1, and the following sequence of (” + 1)*® terms will give 
(mn +1)’. 

The algebraic proof is again by summation of an arithmetical series 
and follows without difficulty. 

Both of these theorems and that of Nicomachus are special cases 
of the following more inclusive theorem : 

In the series of odd numbers the sequence of * terms, following 
upon the sequence of $(” — 1)n* terms which begin with 1, has as 
sum n**+!, For k = 1 this gives the theorem of Nicomachus and for 
“= 2 and 3 the theorems stated above. 

My colleague, Mr. Norman Anning, further extends this general- 
ization in the two following tables which give such sums to arrive at 
even as well as odd powers of k. 

In the series of odd numbers, if we omit the first p, then the sum of 
the next g is n***!; the possible values of » and g are exhibited in the 
following table : 

q Pp q 
(nm — 1)n* n . we € « 
4(n3 mes 1)n*—1 n*-) £(n*-3 = 1)n? n? 
4(n> — 1)n'-? nk? 4(n™-1 — 1)n) n 

Sumilarly for even powers of m, if we omit the first ~, then the sum of 
the next g terms is n*, values of p and q being given by the following 
table: 

q Pp q 
$(n? — 1)n n*- 4(nm*—-2 — 1)n! n 
3(nt — 1)nk? nit 5S oe 
And, of course, 
Oo n* 
kth powers can be so exhibited in 2(*) different ways; where 2(*) 

denotes the number of integers less than R. 
2 

My former colleague, Mr. E. B. Escott, generalized my theorem as 
follows: In the series of odd numbers if the first 4 n* (n'-**-1) terms 
be omitted, the sum of the next 7* terms is 2'. This gives my the- 
orem for ]=2k + 1, and Mr. Anning’s results for other values of I. 

These theorems are Greek in their nature and would have delighted 
the heart of Nicomachus. 

II. GLOSSARY OF GREEK TERMS 

Gye, (1) carry om an operation, I. Io. 2. 
Avow ayav = distunctio progreditur, 
Boethius. 

(2) draw lines, II. 7. 4. Boethius, pro- 
duceré, duceré. 

dyayh, procedure, I]. 14. 3. 
Arith., 6. 20. 

dStalperos, incapable of being divided (often 
= incapable of being halved), 1. 17. 4, 
9. 6, 11. I. Boethius, I. 13, me secari 
gueat; 1. 21, indevisa; 1. 11, guemt secare 
ston Possts. 

G&iidxpros, indiscriminate, not assorted, 1. 
13. 2. 

ébidoraros, not having extension, non-dimen- 
stonal, Il. 6. 3, 7. Boethius, Il. 4, seme 
intervall: demensione; ibid., intervailo 
¢arere, sine tnlervallo esse. 

dbtadople, fail fo atstinguish as different (in 
methods of selection), with acc., I. 16. 4. 

GSlyacros, incapable of being cut in two 
or Aalved, 1.9.1. Boethius, sadrvistbilis 
ef insecabilis, I. 10. 

é&Sivaros, intpossible, passim. 

&@porpa, a sust in addition, I. 14. 3. 

duohovOée, follow out, observe principles, 
I. 23. 3. So Diophantus, Arifh., 6. 4. 15. 

dxokov@la, order, seguence, 1. 18. I, 23. 2, 9. 

d&udAdovlos, (1) following, next in order, 1. 
19.5). 033 21.5.0, 6.3, 8.3.70. 2) 02. 2 

(2) of a principle, Aolding true, con- 
sistent, 1. 19. 11; Il, 2. 2; hence 4. éoriw 
= it follows; 1.16.1. Boethius, II. 25, 
oportet. 

(3) corresponding, 1. 21. 1. 

&xokotOes, (1) szmzlarly, IT. 11.1. 

(2) with dat. = im accordance with, 
according fo, 1, 23.7; II. 26. 2. 

Gxorpos, not governed by rule or method, 
I. 16.3. Boethius, a nudlocerto fine gene- 
ratos, 1. 20. 

&xpos, (1) masc., extreme term of any series, 
I. 23. 1§ (so Euclid, Diophantus); neut., 
I. 8. 11, 9. 6 (esp. extremes of propor- 
tions, II. 24. 4, etc.). Syn., dxporaros 

So Diophantus, 

2Q1 

(Gpos), axporns. Boethius, ¢stremitas, 
éxtremus lerminns, extrenius. 

(2) edge of a wedge, II. 16. 2. 

dxporaros (sc. Gpos), extreme term, 1. 
8. Io, etc. 

dxpérns, extreme, extreme term of a sertes, 
I. 8 3, 10, 9. 6, ro. 1, 16.13 II. 16. 3, 
etc. (Nicomachus prefers axpos, dxpov 
for the extremes in proportion in II. 
21 ff.). Boethius ezxtremus, etc., sum- 
mitas. 

&AAnAovyotpavos, continuous, 1. 2. 4. Boe- 
thius, continua ef suis partibus tuncta. 
Gdoyos, (1) unreasoning, of part of the soul, 
I. 23. 4. So dAoyws, without reason, 11. 

22.3. 

(2) Aaving no ratio (with = mpos with 
acc.), I. 6. 3. Euclid uses dAoyos in the 
sense of irrational. 

bra, a/pha, the sign for 1, II. 6. 2. 

éplmoros, indivisible (Platonic), II. 18. 4. 

Gudroyos, of sharing in, 1. 7. 4. 

GpoBh, carhange; xar duoBnv, by ex- 
change, 1. 8. 10, 9.6. Boethius, s#rvicerm. 

dvdye, reduce, referring to the reversal of 
an operation, I]. 2.2. Boethius, reduco. 
Cf. dvarodifomac. 

dvaxénre, cul of, preclude the continuance 
of an operation, II. 4. 1. Cf. daroxAciw. 

dvadoyle, b¢ analogous to, correspond to, 
L.22.25 TDL ag. 3. 

dvadoyla, (1) analogy, correspondence, I. 
13. 6. 

(2) a proportion (so Euclid, Diophan- 
tus, Archimedes; Boethius, Jrofpertio, 
proportionalitas, smedietas); properly, 
combination of ratios, I]. 21. 3, i.e., in- 
cluding only the ‘geometric proportion,’ 
II. 24. 1; but in practice extended to 
include ‘arithmetic’ and ‘ harmonic’ pro- 
portions, as IJ. 22. 1. Syn., peodrys (cf. 
II. 21.6). Kinds of proportion, II. 22. 1. 

(3) loosely used in sense of re/ation, 
ratio; 4 év npuodios oxeots Kai d., I. 23. 
14; II. 6. 3, 2. 1. 

2092 

dvédeoyos, corresponding, 1. 23. 17; ro ad, 
correspondence, I. 19. 13; meut. as adv., 
in. similar manner, 1. 18. 6. 
dvéduers, 2 breaking down into components, 
analysis, 11.1.2. Boethius, sofvz, resolve. 
dvadte, break down into components, resolve, 
I. ur. 3; IL 4. 1, 5. 4-5. v. Seadve. 
Boethius, solfvere, resolvere. 
dvaple, alfernately (i.e., in proportions if 
a:6=c¢:d, then a:c=6:d@), II. 21. 6, 
24. 2. But see note on II. 29. 2. 
Boethius, permutatim, Il, 40, persmixtint, 
permixte. 
dvawakwy, (1) vice versa, 1. 19. 19; II. 2. 1. 
(2) of proportions, dy iaversion, in- 
versely (cf. Euclid, V. 13, defined; so 
Archimedes), II. 21. 6. Boethius, con- 
versim, Il. 40. Syn., avacrpoduas. 
dvawhdooe, fashion, make, derive, Il. 28. 2. 
dvawoSl{opa:, pass., d¢ reduced by reversing 
a process, I]. 2.2. Cf. dvayw. 
dvarrpige, (1) reverse the order of terms 
(opp., 6p8as reBevat, xetwar), I. 23. 9; II. 
24. 5. 
(2) snvert a ratio, II. 28. 5. See note 
ad foc. for Euclid’s usage. 
(3) invert a proposition (syn., dyte- 
orpépw), II. 6. 5. 
dvagrpoot,, reversal of order, 1. 23. 13. 
Euclid, conversion of a ratio. 
dvarrpéges, in inverted order, 1.23.10; of 
proportions, zmversely (i.e., ifa:6 = ¢: 4d, 
then 4:a=d:c; syn., dvawaAww), II. 
24. 2. 
dveyelpe, arouse, 1.3.7; erect lines, II. 13. 5. 
Boethius, surgere. 
dvewibanros, incapable of receiving (e.g., 
division by a given measure), II. 3. 2. 
évOvraxote, correspond fo as equals, I. 17.5 
(cf. Boethius, guae ef guantitas compara- 
fur); as reciprocals, e.g., superparticu- 
lars to subsuperparticulars, etc., I. 19. 5, 
21. 3. 
énuordus, adv., an unegual number of times ; 
in the phrases a. avico: a. (numbers that 
are the product of three unequal factors, 
as mny), and ivaxts toot ad. (the products 
of two equal factors by a different one, as 
mn), I]. 17,6, 29.2. Cf. Boethius, ex 
aegualibus (inaeqg.) aegualiter (inaeg.) 
per aegualia (inaeg.) products. 
avuros, unegual, 1.19. 19, etc. Diophantus. 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

dvectrys, incguality, I. 14. 2,23. 6. Boe- 
thius, inaegualitas. Its two forms, I. 
14.2; the dyad, rpwry d., II. 18. 1. 

dvievape:, d¢ erected from a base, as pyra- 
mids, II. 14.1. Boethius, proficiscor. 

dvrawoxpivopa:, correspond to, used of cor- 
responding factors, as 8 and 2 in 16 
(8 = 4 and z = }), I. 8. 10, 11. Boe- 
thius, respondere. 

aQvrawéxmois, correspondence, I. 8. 11. 

dvragalperis, subtraction tn turn, used of 
the continued subtractions to find the 
common divisor, I. 13. 11. Cf. Boethius, 
vicissim tsta subtractio, 1, 18; reciproca 
deminutio, ibid. 

dvrapaiple, subtract in turn (cf. dvragdai- 
peots), 1. 13, 11-12. 

Gvreferdles, exanune in comparison with, 
compare, I. 13. 1, 14. 3. Boethius, comms- 
parati . . . ad se invicem, 1. 16. 

Qyribiacriflike, distinguish from, as con- 
trary, with dat., I. 9. 1, 17. 8, 18. 2. 
Boethius, obponere. 

éyrubarroAh, correspondence, used of paired 
factors of numbers (cf. dvraroxpivoya), 
I. 8. 11, 16. 5. 

dvriberos, of posite, 1. 17. 6, 8, 19. 20; IT. 6. 
4; compared, I. 20. 2. 

duriOéres, correspondingly, 1. 19. 18. 

dvrixapa, be opposed, be the opposite of, 
with dat., I. rr. 1, 13. 1, 16. 1; II. 16. 1, 
etc. Boethius, contra se positi. Dio- 
phantus uses the word of corresponding 
factors (Vv. avrawoxpivopat). 

dvrvAapBdve, fake in substitution (cf. dyri- 
riOnps), Il. 27. 5. 

dynwrapevuslopa, d¢ nanied from recipro- 
cally, I. 8. 10. 

dvriwapevupes, Aaving corresponding, but 
opposite, name (as double vs. sesquialter), 
II. 3. 1- Boethius, szserlrs. 

avrimeploracis, reciprocal opposition or cor- 
respondence of paired factors (v. dvra- 
woxpivopia:), 1. 8. 10 (see note ad /oc.), 
9. 6. Used also with reference to the 
operation of finding the common divisor 
in sense of shifting, exchange, 1. 13. 11. 

dvriotpibe, invert; d. Tov AGyov, state the 
converse, II. 6. 6. 

dvriorpodh, ef d., conversely, 1.9.2. Euclid, 
conver sto. 

dvriotpédes, conversely, 1. 16. 4. 

GLOSSARY 

avricvyxplve, compare over against, 1. 13. 
II, 20. I. 

dvrirlOnm, substitute for, Il. 27. 6 (cf. 
avTiapBavw). 

avrovopale, grve a corresponding, but oppo- 
site name, I, 22. 7, 23. I. 

dvrovopacla, corresponding opposite nomen- 
clature, 1. 23. 3. 

dvrovuplw, Aave a corresponding opposite 
name, 1.17. 6. 

dvumepBatas, without skipping, without omit- 
fing terms in a series, I]. 23. 1. 

&vw, (1) adove, one of the varieties of rela- 
tive position (v. wepioracis), II. 6. 4. 

(2) fop line of a table or diagram, II. 

3.3; 

bvebev, anew, again, 1. 10. 8, etc. 

dverare, Aighest in the classification of 
genera and species, I. 17. 2; fopmrost line 
of a table, II. 4. 3. 

averipw, above, before in the course of the 
treatise, II. 26. 1. 

Graf, once, faken once as a factor, 1. 8. 14, 
etc. Diophantus. 

dmapd\haxros, wachanging (Acyos), Il. 17. 3, 
19. 3 (Gpos), II. 21. 5. Neut. as adv., 
without fatl, without deviation, Il. 5. 4; 
also amapoAAaxtws, I. 23. 3- 

dwapeprébieros, without hindrance, of a 
regularly proceeding operation, I. 13. 6. 

&mrapos, /imtitiess, infinite, 1. 2.5, 18. 4, 19. I. 
feXpis arreipou, éx arepov, ad infinitum, 
I. 2. 5, 8. 9, 10. 9, 13. 3, etc. Diophan- 
tus, Euclid. 

dwhois, sizifle; hence, clear and easy, I. 
19. 8; II. 6. 2, 20. 5; z#composite, as ele- 
ments, Il. 1. 1; sof complicated, mere, 
without the restrictions of classification 
and definition, 11. 22. 3 (ad. dpeOpos), I. 
21. 3, the simple superparticular vs. the 
multiple superparticular, etc. Euclid; 
Boethius, srazplexr. 

anhés, smply, in a word, I. 22.5; Il. 1.1, 3, 
etc.; frequently qualifying nouns, signify- 
ing that they are to be taken absolutely, 
without such limitation as that of genus 
by a difference; e.g., I. 14. 1 (arAds 
dptiu, the merely even as opposed to 
dpruixis aptioc), I. 2. 5 (d. peyeOos, mag- 
nitude pér se, absolute); cf. 1. 18. 6; II. 
14. 5, 16. 2. 

Gwé, beginning with, Il. 19. 2, etc. (so 

293 

Diophantus); elvae &., fo be removed 
from, II. 3. 1; of cubes, constructed on 
a given side, II. 17. 7 (so Diophantus) ; 
To amo, fhe sguare of (so Diophantus), 
L..& 16 26-79; TL 29, Bh a oe. 4 a, 
etc. So used by Archimedes of geomet- 
rical squares. 

dmoPalve, result, I. 
L. 16..5; 

droyevvde, Produce by an operation, I. ro. 8, 
16, 4, 18. 1, ete. 

Grodelxvup., demonstrate, prove, I]. 1. 1-2, 
I7. 2, 18. 1, 22, 3. Diophantus; Euclid, 
dmooetts. 

Grodextinss, capadle of proving, I. 23. 6. 

aroblbwm, prve as a result, produce, 11. 5. 2, 
8. 3, 12.2; fo show a ratio, II. 5.2; ofa 
square showing four angles, II. 9. 1. 

drodorucds, Productive of, with gen., II. 
5. 1 ff. | 

awoxararrarikés, recurrent numbers, II. 17. 
7- Boethius, cyclic? vel spherici ; Euclid, 
V. oaipiKos. 

deroxkelw, lock off, preclude the continuance 
of an operation, II. 4. 1. 

dtroxopupde, complete, I]. 13. 5. 

Gwoxplvopa, answer fo, be compared with, 
have a ratio toward terms in a propor- 
tion, II. 21. §. Boethius, se conununs- 
care. 

GrokapBdve, acguire, reach a certain quan- 
tity, said of an ascending series, II. 3. 2. 

démok«lwe, /eave after subtraction, I. 13. 12. 

droAkfye, end, of the end of a process (freq. 
with eis povada), I. 10. 3, etc. 

dropsovpi{e, faper off, said of pyramids, 
II. 13. 9. 

Qnécracis, inferval, the number of terms 
regularly omitted in choosing from a 
series, I], 11. 1. 

dworiker pa, completed thing, 1. 4.2; the re- 
suét of an operation, I. 19. 16. 

dmoredte, complete, make, 1. 6. 1, 13.9; II. 
II. I, etc.; grve as the result of addition, 
I. 16. 1, 2, 4; II. 14. 3, etc.; give as 
the result of multiplication, I. 10. 8, 9, 
12,1; II. 15. 2, ete. 

dworduve, fake (cul) away from a series for 
separate consideration, II. 23. 3, 24. 5. 

GmOpnricés, (1) numerical, having to do 
with numbers, arithmetic, 1. 23. 4 (oxe- 
oes); 5. 1 (Acyo). 

23. §; of addition, 

204 

(2) 4 dpOunrucn, the science of number, 
arithmetic, 1. 3. 1, 4, 7; Ul. 6. 1, ete 
Boethius, arithmetica. 

(3) d. dvadoyia, pecorys, arithmetic 
proportion (i.e., progression) of the type 
a—b=c — d, II.23.1 (defined). Called 
also numerical (j KaTa. TO WOGOV THV TOV 
Opwy ovyKpiow oiKeovea, II. 22. 2; cf. 21. 
5-6, 23- 4). 

dpOude, (1) 2 number (Diophantus), I, 7.1 
(defined), 8. 1, etc. 

(z) collectively, of series of numbers, 
esp. the natural series (freq. 6 etraxros 
dpiGuos), 1. 18. 5, etc. Used of other 
series (e.g., the multiples of g), I. 22. 4. 
Boethius, #numerus. 

dppste, fit, agree with a principle, I. 22. 6; 
be suitable, I]. 21. 1; pass., de fitted to- 
gether, constituted, 1. 6. 2-3; Il. 26. 2. 

dppovla, Agrmony, II. 19. 1 (defined); of 
the spheres, 1. 5. 2. Usually, stusical 
harmony, 1. 3. 5; Il. 26. 1. Used as 
name for the cube, yewperptxy a., II. 26. 
2, 29. 1; of the ‘most perfect’ propor- 
tion, II. 2g. 1. 

dppovinds, Aarmeonic intervals, I. 3. 3; II. 2. 
3; of ratios, 1.5.1; of a theory, II. 26. 
1; of the title of a book of Archytas 
(dpyovixos [Adyos]), 1. 3.4. d. dvadoyia 
or pecorns, the harmonic proportion, Il. 
7. 1, 2%. 6; 

Gpridxis, adv., an even number of times. 
See dprios, dprioduvapos, dpriwvupos. 

dpriaxas, i an even fashion; d. wvopac- 
pevov, with an even name, 1.9.2. Opp. 
Wepicows. 

dprioyevts, even by genus, I. 8. 10. 

d&prioSivapos, even in value or amount; dp- 
Tiaxis d., éven-times even in value, 1. 
8. 6. 

dpriomépirros, even times odd, I. 9. 1 (de- 
fined) ; a species of the even, 1. 8. 3, 
I. g. §, 10. 1, etc. Boethius, pariter 
imipar. 

Gprios, cver, 1. 7. 2-4 (defined). Varieties, 
dpriaxis apTtov, Tepioodpriov, dpriomépir- 
rov, I. 8. 3, 9. 3, 10. 2, II. I,etc. amAas 
a., the even as such, distinguished from 
its species, I. 14. I. dpruixts a., the even 
times even number of the type 2", I. 8. 4 
(defined), etc. Boethius, Jar; parier 
par = dptiacts a.; Euclid. 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

dpriorayts, with an even number of terms, 
II. 24. 4. 

dpytyoves, of Primitive origin, 1.19. 8; II. 
6.1. 

apy éruiros, adj., original, archetypal, 1. 4. 2; 
Tad. 2. 

dpxh, (1) deginning, starting point, passim ; 
€£ dpyns as adj., original, 1. 9. 4 (of gruen 
numbers, I. 13. 13); orig? of lines, esp. 
of rows In a diagram, as I. I9. 13, 17. 

(2) source, origin of things in general, 

I. 11.3; II. 17. 1,19. 4. Boethius, Srin- 
cipium, caput, inilium. 

dpyxixés, original, primitive, 1.17.4; IL. 1.1, 
7+ 3, 19. 4. 

dpxoubhs, original, primal, 1.7.4; II. 6. 3. 

bpye, act., degin, be the first term in a series, 
II. 17. §; mid., with do, fake beginning, 
start from, 1.8.10, 11. 3,18.2,etc. apyo- 
pevos, with gen., is frequent adverbially. 

dorpovopla, astronomy, 1.3.7. Vv. oqaipexy. 

dotvberos, incomposite, not composed of fac- 
fors (of prime numbers, v. wpwros), I. 
11. 1 ff., 21. 3, 12. 2. Euclid. 

dopakts, unfailing, of a process, I. 16. 4. 

boxioros, incapable of separation, differen- 
tiation, used of a cyeéars, 1. 17. 4. 

Graxros, disarranged, not in due or natural 
order, not subject to regularity, I. 16, 3. 
Opp. evraxros. draxtws, I. 23. 9. 

Grpnros, not capable of being divided, 1. 10. 
4,9. 1. 

Gropos, rndivisible, without factors, of the 
monad, I. 8. 4-5, 10. 2, etc- 

at§le, pass., d¢ increased, I1. 13. 6, 15. 4, 
etc. ; de multiplied, I1.1§.2,17. 7. Used 
by Diophantus of numbers increasing 
from unity to infinity. 

alfno.s, mcrease, 1. 2. 1; augment, I. 109. 
15; increase, by multiplication, II. 17. 7. 

d&palperis, subtraction, II. 20. 1 (Diophan- 
tus); an operation of subtraction, 1. 13. 
12; II. 2. 1, 20. £. 

ddapdo, sudfract, 1. 13. 11, 12,13; II. 2. 1 
(so Diophantus, Archimedes). Boethius, 
atferre, detrahere, demere. 

adloryws, se? aside, seé down terms, II. 2. 3; 
mid., afer from in attributes, I. 10. 3. 

Bapss, stage, degree, rank, class, I. 16. 3. 
B400¢, depth, a dimension, II. 13. 1; hence, 
referring to a table, the direction up and 

GLOSSARY 

down the columns, I. 19. 11; II. 3. 4, 4. I. 
Boethius, allstudo, crassitudo, profun- 
daditas; Euclid. 

Béows, dase, I]. 13. 2, 14. 1 ff., 16.2. Dio- 
phantus, of triangles; Boethius, dass; 
Euclid. 

PAacrave, grow; hence, be produced, |. 
23. 8. 

Baplonos, /iftle altar, the name of a kind of 
solid called also odyvicxos, oxaAnvos, 
opyxicxos, g.v. Boethius, domiscus, 
arula, 

Bepss, same as Bwpioxos, 7. Vv. 

yoppoutds, after the form of Gamma (IP), 
i.e., at right angles, I. 19. 11. 

yiveris, origin, production, or mode of pro- 
duction, 1. 8. 8, 12. 1, 13. 2, ete. 

yevinds, Jerfaining to a genus, generic, 1. 
17. 2 (duaipecis), 19. 20 (axeors). -yert- 
xwratos, most typical of a class, I. 14. 2. 

yrds, as genera, generically, 1. 18. 4, 22. 
2; Il. 20. 2. Opp. iroBeBnxorws. 

yevvde, produce, make, create, 1. 10. 6, 22. 
3, etc. 

yervynrixds, Productive, Il. 3. 3, 19. 4. 

ylvos, genus, in the Aristotelian sense, I. 9, 
1,and passim. See eldos. 

yeaparpla, geometry, 1. 3. 2, 4. 5, 5-2, etc. 
Boethius, geometria. 

yeeopurpixds, ceometrical. sy. avaXoyia, pero- 
Tys, geometric proportion, typea:b=¢: d, 
I], 22. 1, etc. (so Diophantus). +. ¢ioa- 
yoy), introductory treatise on geometry, 
Il. 6. 1. Boethius, geometricus. 

yiyvopar, d¢ generated or produced by a 
process or principle, I. 9. 5; of multipli- 
cation, I]. 18. 2. So &s yevouevos = 
multiplied by 2,11. 15.2. The participles 
are used of the products of multiplication, 
I, ro. 8; II. 27. 5, 7 (cf. Diophantus, 
p. 170, 16T), or sums in addition, I. 16. 4 
(cf. Diophantus, p. 322, 7) in masc. and 
neut. 

yAadupés, neal, nice, exact, of rules, princi- 
ples, 1. 19. 6, 8. 

yrapev, the gromon of the sun dial; the 
carpenter's sguare. Used by Nicomachus 
of the numbers of a series which added 
together produce successively numbers of 
a certain type, II. 11. 1 (v. note ad foc.) ; 
esp. the odd numbers, I. 9. 4 (v. note 

295 

ad lo.). 
ménturmn. 

ypéppa, a /efter, used arbitrarily as a nu- 
merical sign, Il. 6, 3. Boethius, com- 
pendium, signum numert, notula. 

ypaunpt, a dine, I]. 6. 2 (defined, zdid., 4). 
Boethius, /fmea; Euclid. 

ypappinds, perlaining to lines ; of numbers, 
linear, II. 7. 3 (defined), 6. 1 (Boethius, 
lineares numert); of figures, geometric as 
opposed to numerical (dpeOuyrixos), II. 
7.4. Euclid. 

yerla, angie, II. 9.1; 15.4. Diophantus. 
orepea y., Solid angle, 11. 15. 4. 

Boethius, radix ef funda- 

Salxvups, show, display as having, I. 15. 1, 
Ig. 13; Il. 14. 4; demonstrate, prove, II. 
9. 3, 16. 3, 29. 2. Diophantus. 

Sexawkdores, fenfold, 1. 19. 8, 22. 6, etc. 

Sexds, the decad, the number ten (Sxatos 
apOuos, 11. 22. 1). Plur., the fen's, i-e., 
10-99, I. 16. 3. 

Bexrixds, capable of admitting an émitpiros, 
II. 4. 2. 

Sevrepoble, de of the second course (v. tpto- 
Sew), 1. 19. 17. 

Setrapos, second; hence, secondary (opp. to 
prime), I. 11. ff. Euclid; Boethius, 
secundus et composilus. 

Sevreporayhs, arranged in the second place 
in a series, I. 13. 5. 

Sid wacav, diapason, interval with ratio 
2:1, octave, lI. 26.1. Boethius, diapason. 

Sid wacsv dpa cal Sid wlvre, diapason and 
diapente together, interval with ratio 3: 1, 
II. 26. 1. Boethius, (stmul) diapente et 
diapason. 

Gia wivrs, Ziafente, interval with ratio 3: 2, 
II. 26. 1. Boethius, diapente. 

fia teoordpwv, dialessaron, the harmonic in- 
terval 4:3, II. 26. 1. Boethius, drates- 
saron. 

Sidypappa, (ad/e, diagram, 1. 19. 9. 

Biaypdde, make a table, II. 4. 1. 

Biaydnios, placed on the diagonal, |. 19. 19. 
duaywviws, diagonally, by a diagonal, iI. 
12. I. 

Sialedyvums, unyoke; hence, separate and 
oppose, 1. 23. 15. SeLevypévy dvadoyia, 
disjunct proportion, having four terms 
(opp. ovvnppevy), Il. 21. 6. Boethius, 
atstuncta ; Euclid. 

296 NICOMACHUS 

Sidfevfis, arsyunctton, of proportions, II. 
24. 4. 

bialperis, separation or division into parts. 
Diophantus. A class or division made 
by dividing, 1. 17. 2. 

Siatperds, capable of division, I. g. 6, 11. I. 
Boethius, a@ivistonem recipere; secttone 
solvt. 

Biapéw, azvide a geonfetrical figure, II. 12. 1. 
Diophantus; Archimedes; Boethius, d- 
widereé. ‘ 

Siaxplve, pass., with mpos, de distinguished 
from, 1. 11.1; 6€ separated or sified out, 
LE: £3.-8. 

Siakelerm, Zeave as an interval defween ; used 
in locating terms in a series, I. 13. 3. 
V. TapaAcirw, virepBaivw. 

SiadAdrre, vary from, Il. 17. 3- 

Siakurds, separable, capable of resolution, 1. 
E22: 

Siadktw, resolve, I. 12. 2; Il. 5. 3. Dio- 
phantus, so/ve a problem. 

Siapéve, Aold true, I]. 27. 5. 

Sidoracis, dimension (= ducrypa), II. 6. 
5-6. Euclid. 

Siarrards, extended, having dimension, 11. 
6.4. Boethius, distentus ; Euclid. 

SiacrAhkw, distinguish, make a atstinction, 
II. 18.2. Diophantus. 

Sidornpa, (1) interval, II. 6. 3, end (de- 
fined). Jnterval between numerical terns 
(= difference), II. 6. 3 (p- 84, I9 ff.) ; 
Il. 21. 3 (difference in arithmetic pro- 
gression). Usually = dimension (exten- 
ston), II. 13. 1, 1§. 2, etc. The three 
dimensions are enumerated in II. 6. 4. 

(2) the harmonic intervals, Il. 2. 3. 
Euclid; Boethius, :ntervailum. 

Siardle, preserve a ratio through a series of 
terms, I]. 23. 1, 24. 2. 

tiarnple, preserve a constant difference, 
II. 27. 6. 

Siadlpw, (1) differ in attributes, I. 10. 1 (cf. 
adiornpt) ; in quantity, I.9. 4; Il. 17. 1. 
Diophantus. 

(2) be greater than, 1. 19. 11. Boe- 
thius, franscendere ; superare, etc. 

Siadopd, difference (arithmetical), I. 19. 12 
(Diophantus) ; variation, 1. 23.6. Boe- 
thius, differentia, discrepantia. 

SlGepn, g7ve as the terms of a problem, II. 
z.1. Diophantus- 

OF GERASA 

Sex ts, sof consecutive, separated terms in a 
series, II. 23. 3. : 
Stiordvew, pass., d¢ extended. rpiyn 6., be 
extended in three dimensions, be a soltd, 

Il, 29. I. 

Sinddovpos, doubly truncated, of pyramidal 
numbers, II. 14.5. Boethius, és curtus. 

Sirkaclacig, doudliing, 1. 13. 6. 

Sirdaciat{w, double, 1. 21. 1. Diophantus. 

Simddowos, double, the relation (oyéeows) of 
doubles, 1. 3. 1, etc. Diophantus; Boe- 
thius, duplus. 

Siwdarlov, double (= Serdacios), I. 8. 10, 
etc. Diophantus. 

Sig Sa wacay, di-diafason, harmonic inter- 
val with the ratio 4: 1, IJ. 26. 1. Boethius, 
bis diapason. 

Sidopda, pass., de twice Produced by an op- 
eration, I. 13. 12, 13. 

bipdpnois, separation, opposition, 1. 19. 17. 

Biya, adv., zn fwo parts, 1.8. 4, etc. Dio- 
phantus. 

Sixdle, afvide inio two paris, 1. 7. 4, 8. 4, 
Q. I. 

Sixacpss, division into two parts, 1. 10. 2. 

8h, adv., zxfo fwo parts, 1. 11. 15 in two 
directions or dimensions, II. 6. 4. 

Sixorrarto, stand apart, be opposed, 11. 18. 4. 

S&ixorépypa, a division into two parts, 1. 7. 
4. Diophantus, deyoropa. 

Sox(s, z beam. Applied to numbers of the 
type a? where >a, II. 6.1, 15.1, 17. 
6 (defined), 29. 2. Boethius, tignuluse, 
docts, asser. 

Suds, the dyad, the number two, 1. 7. 4, 
13. 6; II. 19. 3, ete. 

Svacpdes, airing by two's, II. 19. 3. 

Sivayis, (1) value, amount, I. 8. 7, 10, 10. 
5, 9.2. Boethius, gvarntitas. 

(2) dvvdpet, potentially (opp. évepyeia), 
116035 TR Beep 9y 962,39, ete: 
Also xara Suvajuyv, in same sense, I. 16. 
10. Boethius, virtutle atgue potentia, vi 
Sua, potestate. 
Swbexds, the number twelve, 1. 19. 13. 

ipSopds, the number seven, 1. 13,13, 22. 3) 5. 

tyyis, zex?, esp. of terms next in a series, 
I. 9. 4, 19. 6, etc. 

fyxaupas, reside in, inhkere in, of regular 
order inherent in a series, I. 13. 6; d¢ 
given to, of names given, I. 22. 7. 

ee 

GLOSSARY 

elStuds, shecific, belonging to or pertaining 
toaspecies (elSos). Opp., yevixos. Hence 
eldixt oyéots, specific relation, a spectes 
of relation (equiv. to efdos) contained in 
a yevos, I. 21. 3, 22. 2 (€, troduaipecis) ; 
Ta ¢idixa = €idn, SHectes, 1. 22. 2. So 
€. roAAaTAacterpoptoy = multiple super- 
particular of a specific kind, 1. 22. 4. 
Adv. eidixas (opp., yerixws), 2 the man- 
ner of a species, as a species, as opposed 
to genus, I. 1g. 8, 20. I. 

alSorouw, create a species by furnishing its 
peculiar attribute, Il. 17. 2, 18. 1. Boe- 
thius, ferficere. 

elBerrolnots, creation as a species, I. 18. 1. 

elSos, Aznd, species, both in the Aristotelian 
sense (opp., yevos), I. 18. 4, 19. 2; Il. 4, 
3, 5. 4, etc., and generally, to mean va- 
riety, kind. Boethius, pars, specres. 

aluh, af random, 1. 13. 3- 

elxordubpoy, scosahedron, I. 4. 4. 

alg, one, Passim. 

tlraywyh, infroduction, introductory treattse, 
I. 23. 4; II. 12. 1, 22. 3, 29. §; referring 
tothe /ntroductio Arithmetica, 1. 19. 20; 
II. 5. 1, 21. 1; to the /nfroduction to 
Geometry, I1. 6. I. 

inarépwOev, in either direction on a diagram 
or table, 1. 1g. 11. . 

ixarépwh, on either side of a proportion, II 
25. 2-3- 

dxarovrds, plur., “Ae Aundreda's (100-999; 
cf. dexas), 1. 16. 3, 7, 19. 18. 

éxBeots, a series of terms, 1. 8. 11, 23. 7; 
etc.; also of the terms in a series, I. 8. 
10. Boethius, dsposttio. 

ixcapat, de set forth as terms ina problem 
or operation, I. 13. 7, 19. Io, 23. 8; II. 
10. 2, 17. 3, etc. (so Diophantus). Also, 
be placed, located, 1. 19. 13, 22. 3. 

txoragis, 2 change (cf. eiornm), I. 17. 5. 

dxrlOnps, set forth terms tn series, 1. 10. 7, 
etc. Diophantus; Boethius, a@ispfonere. 

dkatrrovdats, a less number of times (v. 
icaxis), Il. 17. 6. 

tharréves, i the way of being less; Sue- 
pew €., fo d¢ sntaller, II. 11. 4. 

Darréopa, fall short of, be less than, 1. 15. 
re FO. 921, § 

thdrrev, swaller, 1.9. 4, etc. Diophantus. 

Oralrrw, de deficient, fall short in quantity, 
I]. 15. 1; II. 17. 3. 

207 

Aras, deficiency, 1. 27. 4. 

Drums, deficient, as applied to a number 
the sum of whose factors is less than its 
own quantity, I. 14.13 15.1; 16.3. Boe- 
thius, dewinutus. 

iuBadAw, zzsert a mean term, II. 27. 4. Cf 
évappolw. 

epreptéxm, contain, I. 19. 5. 

dumdéyinv, in interlocking fashion ; of pro- 
portions, alfernando, II. 29. 2. 

tudalvw, make clear, 1. 1.1; adtsplay to 
view as having, I. 7. 4, 10. 1; HL. 22. 3. 

tphacis, demonstration, I. 19, 8. 

dvadNGE, alternating, one after the other, 
I. 6. 4; dy interchange, referring to 
proportions; i.e., if @:6=c:d, then 
a:c=6b:d (cf. dvamé), Il. 21.6. € 
moeiv, to make as a result in addition, 
I]. 19. 4. Boethius, Jerwutatim. 

dvavticbivapos, of opposite value, e.g., to its 
name, as when the foxrféA part of a num- 
ber is odd in amount, I. g. 2. 

dvayridopat, d¢ opposed, be contradictory, 1. 
Ig. 16. 

ivavriowable, Aave qualities opposite to (with 
dat.), I. g. 6, Io. 5. 

dvavriwvuple, Aqve an opposite name (Vv. 
évavTiwvupos), I. 10. 5. Boethius, con- 
trariam denominationem sumere. 

dvavriovupos, with opposite mame, e.g., to 
its amount (cf. évavriodivapos), I. 9. 2. 

lvapudlw, Af in, rnserft a mean term, II. 27. 
3. Cf. éuBarrAw. 

vas, the number nine, 1. 19. 11. 

ivbdxopat, adit factors, 1. 16. 2. 

dveaps, be contained in, of factors in a whole, 
| i Co a et ee 

dvépyaa, actuality, I. 1. 3; esp. évepyea, 
actually, in actuality, 1. 16. 4,8; IL. 8. 2, 
etc. (opp., duvvaye) ; also car’ évépyetay, 
J. 16.10. Boethius, actz vel opere. 

ivOewpéw, pass., be beheld in, conceived of in, 
hence twpited, 1. 16. 4. See note ad éoc. 

dvvodw, zvtagine, concerve, I]. 13. 3. 

ivouSas, so as to be unitary, |. 6. 4. 

ivéw, stake unitary; yvoeva, unttary, 1. 
2. 4. 

dyrarro, zusert means, I]. 27. 1. Cf. rarrw. 

iyrés, within, esp. in sense of #f fo, in the 
series terminated by, 1. 8. 10, 13, 16. 3. 

ivurdpyo, d¢ in, contained tn, of parts, I. 
22,2. 

298 

dyavos, Aexagonal numbers, II. 7. 3, 11. 1; 
12. 3. Boethius, exagonus. 
diahXdrre, pass. part., changing, varying, 
different, 11. 16. 2; é&nAAaypevws, tn a 
peculiar way, 1.12.1; 1 different ways, 
II. 20. 4. 
Garhkdcios, sextupie, 1. 18. 6. 
dtawhkée, reduce a number to units, II. 8. 3. 
Edwhoars, simplification, reduction, I]. 10.1. 
tds, fhe number six, hexad, 1. 16. 3. 
dferdle, examine, consider, 1. 19. 12; Il. 23. 
eee ae 
tracts, examination, test, 1.9.6; Il. 4. 3; 
arrangement, Il. 29. 2. 
d€4s, in order, in succession,1. 10.8. Boe- 
thius, wafuralifer constitutt. 
lis, state, condition, 11. 6. 1. 
ilornps, force out, change (with gen.), II. 
17. 4; mid., change, depart from, I. 
To@: 
dwaténqows, increase, II. 1. 2, 15. I. 
dwefeuplorke, devise in addition, 1]. 28. 6. 
driyévios, placed at an angle or corner, I. 
19. 17. 
drtBextixés, capable of admitting (v. ém- 
déxoua), IT. 4. 1. 
driBdyopas, be capable of, e.g., division, ad- 
mit of a factor, I. 9. 1, 11. 23 II. 4. 1. 
drixoptdwors, culmination, terminal number 
of a series, II. 3. 2. 
driupepts, a stuperpartient number; +o €., 
the superpartient, a ratio or relation, 1. 
17. 7, etc. Boethius, superpartiens. 
Varieties : 
triblrpiros, 14, 1. 23. 14; synonymous 
are Qurerirpiros, 1.23. 16, émdipepys, 
I. 20. 1. Boethius, superd:tertiis. 
ilmrpiréraprog, Ij, I. 21. 2; synony- 
mous are rpiuremrérapros, zbid., émt- 
Tpysepys, I. 20.1. Boethius, super- 
friguartus. 
briterpdteprros, 14, I. 21. 2; synony- 
mous are Tetpaxiovemtreprros, thid., 
émiretpayepys, I. 20. I. Boethius, 
superquadriguintus. 
brutréviexros, 13, I. 21. 2. 
rpcem(wepmros, 14, I. 23. 16. 
rerpakiredbéBSoposg, 14, 1. 23. 16. 
wevraxiremévaros, 13, |. 23. 17. 
beipépios, fhe superparticular, a ratio or 
relation, and variety of inequality, I. 17. 
7; defined, I. I9. 1. 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Varieties : 
hprddcos, I. 19. 2, or épypuadsos, I. 22. 
z, sesguiaifer (14). Boethius, ses- 
gualter, hemtoltus. 
dxirpros, I. 19. 2, sesquitertian (1}). 
Boethius, sesguitlertius. 
dwirérapros, I. 23. 14, sesquiquartan 
(11). Boethius, sesguiguartus. 
driweprros, I. 22. 2, sesquiquintan (1}). 
Boethius, sesguiguintus. 
ipexros, I. 23. 7, sesquisextan (1}). 
Boethius, sesguzsextus. 
iwéySoos, II. 2. 3, sesquioctave (1}). 
Boethius, sesguioctavus. 
deriweBos, Slane (usually neut.); applied to 
numbers (dpiOunrixoy é., I]. 7, 5), plane 
number; defined, II. 7. 3; 6. 13; geo- 
metrical planes (ypappixov ¢.), II, 7. 5; 
plane surface, II. 15.4; face of a solid, 
thid. Boethius, planae numerorum figu- 
rae. 
Varieties : tptywvos, rerpaywros, mrevta- 
ywvos, aywvos, érraywvos, II. 7. 3-4. 
émexomle, observe (11 connection with se- 
lecting terms from series, to conform to 
certain requirements), I. 13. 3, etc. 

émorhpy, science, knowledge, 1.1. 2, etc. 

bmorrypovinds, sczentific; €. dpiOucs, the 
number dealt with by science, I. 6. 1, 4; 
é. ueBodos, scientific method. 

motile, check off, 1. 13. 7. 

émovyrlénpas, add fo a previous sum, I. 16.7; 
T4262. 

émicwpela, summation, cumulative addition, 
Il. 1g 1. 

bmicapeta, add the terms of a series to- 
gether, II. 8. 3 (cf. mporawpew). Boe- 
thius, adgregare. 

imodpevets, (he addition of a term toa pre- 
vious sum, in érvowpeia, I. 16. 4. 

drirlOnus, ada, Il. 14. 3. 

éemobdvaa, a surface, superfictes, that which 
has two dtmensions, Il. 6. 4, 7. I-2. 
Boethius, superfictes. 

érréyavos, Acfiagonal number, II. 7. 3, 
II. I, 12. 3. Boethius, epfagonus. 

ends, (he heptad, the number seven, 1. 16. 5. 

toyaros, /asi, 1. 16. 4, 23.15; wmélzmate, 
I]. 1. 1. 

érapoyevde, be of a different genus, 1.10. 5. 

érepoyevts, of a different genus or kind, 1. 
6. 4, 23. 16; I]. 15. 1. 

GLOSSARY 

érepoptens, Acteromectc, a number of the 
type wt (mt +1), I. 19, 19; II. 17. 1 
(defined), 18.2, 16.3, 20.1, 24. 5. 
Boethius, parte altera longror, longilate- 
ries. 

trepov, offer, passim; ro €., ‘otherness, 
principle of difference and variation, Il. 
17. 2, 18.15 TO mpos €repov rws éxov, that 
which has some relation to another, the 
relative, Il. 6. 1. 

érepétys, difference, ‘otherness, the principle 
of difference (v. €repos), Il. 17. 1, 18. 1. 
Boethius, a/teritas. 

érepovupos, Aauing a different name, heter- 
onymous, applied to factors not named 
from the number factored itself, as 5, 
which is a ¢Atrd of 15, as opposed to 1, 
which is the fifteenth (and is called 
Tapwruyos), I. 11. 2, 12. I. Boethius, 
pars alient vocabull. 

érepwvuple, have a aifferent name, |. 17. 5. 

eiGeta, straight line (sc. ypaypn), II. 6. 2, 
7.4, 13.3. Boethius, dinea recte stants. 

eWUypaupos, rectilinear, 11.7.4. So Archim- 
edes. 

atoble, proceed well, 1. 23. 8. 

atpeois, discovery, method of discovery, 1. 
16. 3. 

evploxe, find, discover, passim; pass., de 
found to exist, I. 16. 3. 

etraxros, orderly, in natural or regular 
order, 1. 13. 6, 18. 5, etc. 

evratia, due, proper or natural order, II. 
1.2. Boethius, ordtnadilts compositio. 

ibappdte, 7, fest to see if requirements fit, 
I]. 27. 6. 

idetiis, in order, 1. 10.7; mai €., and so on, 
tbid., etc. 

tpodos, principle, method, 1. 10. 6; II. 20. 5. 

Tryepouov, Jeader, head, in the sense of heading 
a list, II. 4. 2; in sense of source as op- 
posed to derivation, II. 22. 3. 

nytopar, de first, lead, 1. 23.7; be head ofa 
series (and its starting point), IT. 3. 1; 
be prior to, Il. 22. 3. 

ploaa, Aal/f. 1. 8. 5. 

jploevpa, half, I. 9. 3. 

Hove, adj., Aalf, 1.8. 1; neut., substan- 
tively, I. 10. 2, etc. Boethius, sediefas, 
secunda pars. 

qrrev, suialler term of ratio, 1. 19. 7. 

299 

Oleis. Josition, IT. 8. 1. 

Gcwpdw, dehold, view, 1.13.1, 16. 4, 17. 2, 3, 
etc. Boethius, constderare. 

Geopnpa, Principle, 1. 23.6; II. 6. 1. 

Uinas, properly, peculiarly, 1. 9. 1 (but see 
note ad iloc.). 

Usopnfcns, wilh own length, proper length, 
epithet of squares, II. 18. 3. 

Bios, own, proper, passim; idia, apart, in 
one place, separately, 1. 13. 2, etc. 

lSidens, peculiar guatity, 1. 15. 1. 

Wlopa, peculiar guai:ity, 1.10.10. Boethius, 
proprietas. 

lrduis, an egual number of times; io. tvos, 
the same number taken the same number 
of times, i.e., of the type @*, a sguare, 
I. 19. 19; &. toog i., a number taken 
thrice as a factor, 2 cude, I]. 17. 6. Cf. 
also dvicvaxts. 

lrdpOpos, egual in number to (with dat.) 
E5552: 

lroyamoes, Aaving an egual number of angles, 
I]. 14. 5. 

lrofidorrares, Aaving the dimensions equal, 
of cubes, II. 16. 1. 

loéwkevpos, Aaving the sides equal, Il. 8. 1; 
of numbers, II. 6. 1. Opp. a«adyvos. 

tros, (1) egual/, passim, often equiv. to the 
sign =; T0t., eguality, 1. 17. 3. 

(2) regular, I. 19. 15, 18. 
Boethius, aeguals, aeguus. 

lads, equality, a cyeots, I. 17. 2. 

thius, aeguatitas. 

xaGapds, pure; hence, of one kind only, ex- 
clustvely, 1. 22. 3; Il. 27. 4. 

xaGefjs, 2 succession, in order, I]. 10. 3. 

KaBodukds, gerera/, 1. 16. 7; of the monad 
as the universal measure, I. 13. 13. 

Kavev, rod; povo.xos K., fAe measuring rod 
laid beside the monochord in experiments 
in harmony, II. 27. 1. 

kard, according to, by; in, at; xa’ éavro, 
absolute, 1. 11. 1, 13-1, 17. 1. 

Kkaraypabh, representation of numbers in a 

Boe- 

figure, Il. 9. I. 
karak«sae, pass., d¢ /eff in subtraction, I. 
13.13 

xarakfyo, end in (with eds, referring to the 
last digit of a number), I. 16.3; II.17.7; 
cf. reXevraw. Also used of the termina- 
tion of a process, I. 13. 11, 12. 

300 

xaréAntis, fermination of an operation, I. 
13. 13. 

katavrde, come fo the end of an operation, 
I. 8. 4. 

narapxrixds, beginning, initiating, I]. 17. 5. 

Karapxye, de the beginning of, gtve rise to, 
II. 3. 3, 4. I. 

xararrpéde, refurn, of cyclic numbers end- 
ing in the same digit, II. 17. 7. 

Karatronh, division, esp. the division of the 
monochord (cf. xavwv), I]. 27. 1. 

kare, below, one of the repurracets, II. 6. 4, 
13. 9. 

ketuar, b¢ placed, occupy a posttion in a 
series (defined by such expressions as 
wap €va, vrép eva éxatepwhev, wrép duo), 
I. 8.1, 13. 3; Ll. 9. 4, ete. 

xlynois, stotion, spatial motion (kata Torov) 
of six varieties, II. 6. 4. 

Kowvds, conimon, passim. 

xotvevie, be in community with, share, 1.11. 
1, 8. 6, 10. I. 

xéXoupos, truncated ; of pyramidal numbers 
(terminating in the polygonal number of 
the series homogeneous to its base next 
to unity in that series), I]. 14.5. Boe- 
thius, curtus. 

xopudt, apex of a pyramid, I], 13. 2; more 
generally, fof, 11. 16.2. Boethius, vertex, 
cacumen. 

noptowors, fermination in an apex, II. 14. 
Bs 

xéontivov, steve of Eratosthenes, his method 
of discovering prime numbers, I. 13. 2 ff. 
Boethius, criérum. 

xréopar, Aave factors, 1. 12. 1, 15. I. 

xuBixés, cudic numbers, II. 6. 1; 
sides, II. 24. 9. 

KbBos, cube, geometrical, I]. 29. 1; numer- 
ical, Il. 15. 1, 17.6 (defined). Boethius, 
CyOus. 

mumAdukds, cyc/ic number, one the square of 
which ends in the same digit as the orig- 
inal number, 11.17. 7. Boethius, ¢yclrcus. 

xtudos, circle, geometrical, II. 17. 7; used of 
celestial orbits, I. 3. 3. 

cubic 

AapBavea, fake, empPfoy in an operation, I. 
16. 4, etc.; reach, come fo, of a series 
reaching a certain point, II. 3. 2. 

Xela, pass., de /eff, in subtraction, I. 13. 12 
(Archimedes). So ro Acuropevoy, Acrd- 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Gev, remainder, II. 2. 1, etc. v. xaTa- 
Aeirw. Boethius, guod relinguitur. 

AoyQopas, concetve, tmapine, II. 13. 4. 

Adyos, (1) account, narrative, 11.7.5; def- 
nition, statement, proposition, II. 6. 5, 6; 
so, scheme, pian of the world, I. 6.1; cf. 
I. 23. 7; and pytpos Acyov éréyoucay, 
I. 4. I. 

(2) ratio, I. 8. to, etc. (Archimedes, 
etc.); II. 21. 2, 3 (defined) ; povorxoi X., 
II. 26. 1, 29.4; appowxds A., musical in- 
terval, 1.5. 1. 

Boethius, profportio. 

houwds, remiaining, other, 1. 13. 11; further, 
moré, Il. 4. 1; the remtainder in sub- 
traction, I. 13. 12. 

Aves, resolution, dtvision, 1. 10. 2. 

huw, resolve, I]. 12. 1, etc. Cf. avadtw, 
duadven. 

pobhpara, mathematics, Il. 6. 1. 

pyas, ereat, large ; To peya, greatness, 1.5. 1. 

plyeBos, magnitude, 1. 1. 3, 2. 4, 5- 

payeltve, make greater, 1. 21.1; of multi- 
plication, II. 15. 2. | 

plOodos, method, process, I. 13. 2. 

patovdes, a preater number of times, I1. 
17.6. v. ioaxis, dvoaxis. 

pecoupi[e, pass., b¢ diminished, taper, of 
pyramids, I]. 13. 2, 14. §. 

pive, with o avros, remain the same, 1. 23. 
15; €v Tw avrg, i.e., guantity, II. 27. f. 

pepltw, divide into parts, 1. 7. 2, lo. 2; 
II. 18. 4. 

wépos, fart, 1. 8. 4, 7, 9.2, 12. I, 14. 3, 
15. 1ff. Boethius, pears, farticula. 

parepBodde, interpose a difference between 
two terms, I. 19. 12. 

pacirela, rater position in the middle, |. 7. 2. 

uloros, middie, passim; ava pecov, between, 
1. 13. 1, etc.; To p., middle term of a 
series, I. 8. 14, etc. 

pecdrns, (1) wean, middle term of a series 
(general use), I. 8 10; muddle, middle 
space, Il. 23. 6; middle of a monochord, 
Il. 27.1; uddle term of a proportion, did. 

(2) a proportion (= dvadroyia, g.v., in 
Nicomachus’s usage) ; arithmetic, II. 29. 
I; geometric, II. 24. 1, 3, 4; harmonic, 
IJ. 25. 1. 
Boethius, sredtetas. 
peraBalye, go over to, change to, I. 23. 15. 

GLOSSARY 

perafsBdéle, wake to change, transpose, 11. 
27.1. 

peraysvierapos, /aler, posterior in origin, I. 
§. 2, 19. 14. 

perabibems, share (Trav avrov dkadoparv), II. 
20. 3. 

paraly pos, ptiddle ground, 1. 11.1; 16, 1; 
II. 25. 3, etc. 

parodapBdve, fake a share in the measuring 
function, I. 13. 73; cf. Il. 27. 6. 

perats, defween, II. 6. 3, etc. 

waramwlwre, change, II. 7. 4. 

perdoramis, shifting, changing, Il. 27. I. 

paroxh, Participation, 1. 16. 8. 

parpde, micasure, I. 
times the measure measures is expressed 
by xara with acc., cf. sid., 3); so ro 
perpeiy, fhe measuring function, |. 13. 6. 
Absolutely, ac# as measure, e.g., 1. 13. 9, 
a number is produced xara ryv éavrov 
woooTyta ... peTpnoavTos Twos, ‘by 
something acting as measure in accord- 
ance with its own amount’ (i.e., multiply- 
ing itself by itself). Pass., b¢ measured 
by, hence, Aave the measure as a factor, 
I. 11. 3, 13. 1 (Archimedes); perpnOyvar 
Kowww eT pw mpos Tiva, be commensurable, 
]. 13.1. Boethius, metiri, aumerare. 

pérmos, moderate, 1. 16. 1. 

pérpov, micasure, 1. 12. 2, 23. 4; the fune- 
tion of measure, 1.13.5; Kotwov p., Comt- 
mon divisor, 1. 13. 10. Boethius, com- 
munis mensura. 

piixos, dength, 1. 17. 3; dimension of a plane 
(with mwAdros), I]. 15. 2; of a solid, II. 
6.4. In a diagram, the long way, Aort- 
zontally, 1. 10. 10. Boethius, /ongitudo. 

pyxvve, make long, lengthen, 1. 19. 20; mul- 
tiply, 1.9. 4, 19. 19; I]. 29. 3. Boethius, 
mulliplicare. 

plyinv, promiscuous, mingling (adv. as adj.), 
I]. 24. 9. 

ptypa, compound, 1. 10. 10. 

plyyups, mingle, use together, Il. 5. 4. 

paxrés, wizxed, sharing qualities of more 
than one variety, 1. 13. 2; compound, as 
multiple superparticulars, II. 24. 4. 

paxpds, TO p., fhe lesser or least term of a 
proportion, II. 27. 4; also puxporepos = 
lesser term, 1. 23. 16. 

povds, one, mtonad, unity, passim. So arAy 

povas, one, 1. 19. 17; pe Sevrepodoupern, 

13. I (the number of 

301 

ten; the first (or unit) of the ten's, re- 
garded as a course, shid.; p. rpodovpern, 
one Aundred, tbhid. See note ad loc. 
Plur., warts, passim; also, the numbers 
r-g, I. 16. 3. 
povaikori, adv., in units, II. 8. 3. 
péprov, factor, aliguot part, 1. 11. 2, 13.1; 
part of the units in a number, II. 8. 1. 
pupids, plur., the fen thousands (10,000- 
99,999), 1. 16. 3. 

oybods, the ogdoad, octad, the number eight, 
i: 16.3; 

Syxos, bulk, 1. 17. 3; tev opyxay, body, II. 
16. 2. 

olxelog, own, proper, belonging properly ta, 
I. 22. 3; II. 22. 1, ete. 

olxade, make friendly, reconcile, in the 
sense of bringing into mathematical agree- 
ment and equality, II. 22. 2. 

oxrdyevos, xfagonal number, II. 11. 3, 12. 3- 

onrdeipoy, ocfahedron, I. 4. 4. 

oxrawkdoros, cighifold,1. 4. 4, 18. 6. 

SA0s, whole, passim; To oAov, the whole of a 
number dealt with, I. 8. 10; plur., aé// 
things, the universe, II. 17. 1. 

édAdrys, a whole, 1. 2. 5. 

dpoyerts, of the same genus with (with dat.), 
II. 20. 2. 

dpoyavios, with the same number of angtes, 
Hs 2s 7 

Suoos, dite, 1. 6. 3, 10. I, etc.; hence, con- 
sistent, not becoming unittke, 1. 2. 1; II. 
17. 3; of Guo = and so on, I. Q. 1. 

dpovorynpdves, after a simtilar scheme or 
freure, II. 14. 1. 

épodrns, drheness, similarity, 1. 23. 4; II. 
16..:2,:28..5. 

dpoorpéwes, in similar fashion, ll. 6. 6, 
lO. 2. 

dpode, make like; pass., de like, 1. 10. 3. 

éporayts, occupying a corresponding place 
in a series, 1. 19. 3; Opmorayws, I. 19. 13. 

épevuple, Have the same name, of factors, I. 
13.1. 

dpevupla, possession of the same name, esp. 
of sensible things, named after ideal 
things, I. 2. 4, 23. 4. 

épovupos. Aauing the same name or denomi- 
nation, homonymous, of factors, (¢.g.. 3, 
one third of 9, and 4 as the third of 12), 
I. 13. 1; of the arithmetic proportion, 

302 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

compared with the science of arithmetic, 
II. 22. 3. Boethius, aegurvoca pars. 

évopa, #ame, 1. 1.1, etc.; designation of 
factors (may be odd or even), I. 8. 7, 
9g. 2; of polygonal numbers (contains 
numerical element, II. I1. 4. 

ovopdle, name, prve a designation to, 1. 8.7, 
etc.; the special name expressed by an 
adv., dpriaxws 6., I. g. 2, or adv. phrase, 
pera THS UO wpoGerews G., I. 21. 3. 

Gvopacia, nomenclature, system of names, I. 
71. 25 

ovopatrowole, pass., de named, 1. 9. 2. 

okts, sharp, pointed, 11. 13. 2, 16. 2; Aigh- 
pitched tones, 1. 16. 1. 

omrlew, dackward, one of the types of motion, 
II. 6. 4. Boethius, retro. 

éréeros, whatever in number or order, II. 
it; 

opbdrns, directness of order, I. 23. 13. 

opOes, in direct order, not reversed, I. 23. 
11; II. 6. 6. 

épi{e, define, state a definition, I. 1. 1,2; cf. 
11.6.4; dimet, give a definite form,1. 23.4; 
restrict, in sense of setting forth as terms 
to be dealt with in a problem, I. 13. 11. 

Spos, (1) bound, limit, Il. 6. 3; hence, 
realm, bounds, 1. 16. 3. 

(2) definition, 1. 19. 4, 7- 3,5. Freq,, 
term, 1. 8. 10, 23. 7; II. 21. 3, 23. 6, ete. 
Boethius, definrtzo, terminus. 

érdaus, as vtiany tines as, 1. 13. 12. 

éraxuroty, Aowever many times, |. 23. 1. 

otSels, neut., nothing, i.e., zero, II. 6. 3. 

wdGos, property, II. 17. 7. 

wavrayx fj, (2 every direction, in each dimen- 
sion, II. 16. 2. 

wavraxéO., 2 every dimension, I]. 15. 3. 

wavroh, everywhere, on every side of a 
solid, I]. 14. 2. 

wapa, freq. except for, lacking, as mapa 
povaba, lacking one, I. 8. 12, etc.; com- 
pared with, in relation to (to express a 
ratio, = mpos), II. 25. I. 

wapaBdAhe, divide (orig., te compare with), 
Il. 27.7. Boethius, comrmuttere tuxta. 

wapaBoih, comparison, 1. 17. 3; division 
(cf. rapaBadAAw), II. 27. 7. 

wapdbaypa, example, evidence, proof, II. 
24. 5; display, example (diagram), II. 
28. 11; the cosmic plan, I. 6. 1 (4. 2). 

wapaba(xyupu, with woos, stow a ratio to, II. 
5: 5- 

wapdfcors, a placing or setting forth side by 
side; éy wapaGéca, of discrete objects, vs. 
continuous, I. 2. 4 (cf. owpeia). 

wapdxapar, occupy an adjoining position in 
series, I. 8. 2, 19. 19. 

wapaxokovide, carry out a process, I. 18. 5; 
follow, be corollary, I. 8. 6. 

wapaxokovGnpa, a consequence or corollary, 
Il. 19. 8; Il. 24. 6; concomitant property, 
| ee ae 2 

wapahapBdve, exntploy, 1. 16. 4; take over 
from another a function, I. 13. 5. 

wapah«we, #ass dy in selecting terms, II. 
23- 3; applied, in act., to the terms them- 
selves as a way of designating those used 
in a series; trois dvo pécovs waparci- 
movras, I. 13. 3 = every third term. 
Boethius, practerire. 

wapdhadns, am omission, II. 23. 3. 

wapadhdrropm, vary, differ, 11. 17. 3. 

wapakAnker(webov, parallelepipedon, Il. 15. 
1, 16.3. Boethius, parallelepipedus. 

wapdhAnhos, faraliel, of lines, I. 10. 10; of 
terms, etc., I]. 4. 3; sade dy side, con- 
secuéive, of terms in series, II. 6. 2, 23. 3. 

waparwife, stand by the side of in a table, 
I. 19, 19. 

wapavtde, pass., increase along with, 11. 8. 2. 

wapatinots, continued increase, I]. 11. 4. 

wapexrlOnut, sef forth in a parallel series, 
I, 22.4. 

wapepelwre, intervene, 1.7.2. Boethius, 
tntercedere. 

wapepdalve, show forth in the course of an 
operation, I. Ig. 14. 

wapéropat, d¢ concomitant, of qualities, I. 
16.3, 19.6; II. 6.4; carry ouéa process, 
I, 22. 6. 

wapovopalw, designate from or with refer- 
ence to, I. 22. 2. 

wapevupla, desiynation with reference to, 
I. 16. 5. 

wapavupos, aavied from; having the same 
name as, or a dertvative name, 1.19. 7; 
esp., of factors, fAat zich takes its de- 
nominator from the quantity of the fac- 
fored number, as one third of 3, I. 11. 2, 
etc. Cf. évavriwvupos, érepwrupos. 

was, aii, every. Esp. in phrases dua. rarros, 
pexpt waves, throughout ; éri wavrwv, in 

GLOSSARY 

each case. Cf. &a wacwy, dis &a racy, 
ha wacey dua xai dua wevre. 

wéoye, Aave a quality, 1. 15.1; Il. 17.7. 
Boethius, accidere. 

waxos, thickness (= Babos), a dimension of 
solids (not of surfaces), II. 13. I. 

mevrayevikds, Pentagonai, II. to. 1. 

mevrayencpss, formation into pentagonal 
shape, Il. 13. 2. 

mevrdyevos, pentagonal number, I. 7. 3; 
10. 1 (defined), etc. Boethius, pex- 
fagonus. 

wevraxdAoupos, five times truxcated, of pyra- 
mids, II. 14. 5. Cf. néAoupos, duxdAovpos. 

mevramkdcios, fivefold, I. 18. 7. Boethius, 
guintuplus. 

mevrawikacirns, the quintuple relation, I. 
5: 5 

wlvre, five; cf. dud wevre. 

wepalve, intr., come fo an end, be lrmited, 
Il. 18. 3; trans., define, limit, 1. 23. 4. 

mipaides, pass., de ended, of operations, I. 13. 
12-13; come to an end, terminate (with 
eis; of a series), I. 19. 13. 

wlpas, bound, limit, limiting surface, of the 
upper surface of a truncated pyramid, II. 
14. 5. : 

weprypaoe, pass., de dounded, II. 13. 3. 

mepidxa, (1) embrace, contain, Il. 24. 5. 

(2) pass., d¢ bounded, contained, used of 
solids, bounded by surfaces, II. 13. 3, 
14. 4. 

Boethius, continere. 

mepixvxddopat, stove aboul in a circular mo- 
tion, II. 17. 7- 

mepocdprios, ie odd-times even number, I. 
10. 1 (defined). Boethius, zpfariter par. 

mipirowie, be more than, exceed (with gen.), 
Il. 21. 6. 

weproods, odd; I. 7. 1 ff. (defined). Boe- 
thius, spar. 

mipiocorayts, 1% an odd piace, in a series, 
I. 22. 6. 

wiplotacis, relative position, II. 6. 4, 16. 1. 
The six varieties mpocw, omicw, dvw, 
xdtw, defia, apiotepa, II. 6. 4; these are 
opposite by pairs (dyriBeros) and one 
pair is attached to each dimension (zézd.). 
Boethius, #ofus; varieties, ante, retro, 
sintstra, dextera, sursum, deorsum. 

wnAlxos, Aow great; ro m., quantity, as opp. 
to number, I. 2. 5 (defined), II. 6. 1. 

393 

mnAixérns, miapnifude, size, 1. 7. 3. Boe- 
thius, I. 4, spatium. 

whtous, fashioning, creation, Il. 24. §. v. 
wAdoow. 

widoow, fashion, referring to the creation of 
numerical forms by rule, I. 23.8; II. 24. 5. 

whétos, breadth, a dimension of a solid, II. 
6.4; of a surface, with pyxos, II. 15. 2; 
in a diagram, the breadth across the page 
is xara m., Il. 3. 4, 4. 1, but up and down 
(v. unxos) in I. 10, 10; guotient, II. 27. 
7. Boethius, /afitudo. 

whative, broaden, acquire mXartos, II. 7. 3. 
Boethius, exfendere. 

weovduis (7) drat), more times than once, 
I. 18. 1, 22. 1, 23. I, ete. 

mwhavpd, side of a plane figure, II. 15. 4; of a 
number, a factor, I. 19. 19; edge of a 
solid, II. 15. 4. Boethius, /afus. 

whOos, mulittude, 1. 2. 4, 5,16. 2,7. I. 

winpotvres, completely, without remainder, 
of measuring, I. 18. 2. 

whivils, brick; a kind of solid number, the 
product of the square of a number bya 
smaller term (e.g., a°d if a > 4), II. 6. 1, 
17. 6 (defined). Boethius, /aterculus. 

woile, wtuliiply by or into (ért with acc.), 
Il. 27. 7; make, give asa result of addi- 
tion, II. 6. 3 (cf. 12. 2). 

mwonrinss, capable of making, productive of 
(with gen.), Il. 5.5. 

woniAla, variely, I. 19. 8, 22. 2. 

woxAdopas, Aave varieties, 1. 22. 2. 

moxlros, complicated, 1. 10. 6; various, I. 
23. 6. 

wos, of what sort; ro 7. = roworns, g-V-3 
applied to proportions, II. 21. 6, 23. 4. 

wovsrys, guality, esp. as applied to the 
relations of number, i.e., ratios; so that 
a proportion xara 7m. is one composed of 
true ratios vs. proportions xara wovornra 
(arithmetic proportions, where the rela- 
tion concerned is arithmetic difference), 
I]. 21.5, 24.1, 25.5. Boethius, guaditas. 

wokkdxig, a plural number of times (opp. 
awa), 1. 22. 2. 

wokhkawhacid{e, multiply, I. 8. 14, ete. 
(Archimedes); dy = dat., as I. Io. 8, 
16. 4 (so Archimedes); multiplied by 
itself = act. with reflexive rather than 
pass., II. 6. 3. Boethius, métiplicare, 
ducere ( per). 

304 

wohkawkacvemipepts, fhe multiple super par- 
tient, a cyéois or ratio, and a species of 
inequality, I. 17. 7, 23. 16. 
Its varieties as mentioned by Nico- 
machus are: 

SiwAarvembipephs (29: 1) double super- 
bipartient. Boethius, duplex super- 
bipartrens. 

SirAacumbirpros, another form of the 
preceding word. 

Siwkaciemrevrapephs (2$:1), double 
superquintipartient. 

Siwkaciemrerpapepis (24:1), dondle 
superquadripartient. Boethius, du- 

plex superquadripartiens. 
Simkacumrerpdweprros, another form 
of the preceding word. 
Sirkaciemirpepephs (2]:1), double su- 
periripartient. Boethius, duplex su- 
pertripartiens. 
Simdacverirpurérapros, another form of 
the preceding word. 
Boethius, multiplex superpartiens. 
wohkarAaciemupdpios, fe multiple super- 
particular, a oxéouw, and a form of in- 
equality, I. 17. 7, 22; 23. 14. 
The varieties mentioned by Nicomachus 
are as follows (v. I. 22. 2, 23. 14): 
Simkarud>yurdAcog (2): 1), double ses- 
guialter, 
Sirkaciepfpiovs, another form of the 
preceding word. 
Surkacter(tpires (24: 1), double sesgut- 

lertian. 

Surdacvertrérapros (2}: 1), double ses- 
guiguartan. 

S&icrkacvenl(reprrog (24:1), dondle ses- 
guiguintan. 

tpirhaciuephpicus (34:1), triple sesque- 
alter. 

Tprdaccenitpiros (3): 1), friple sesgut- 
fertian. 

Ttpimdkacvemrérapros (31:1), triple ses- 
guiguartan. 

Tpmwkacven(tepwros (34:1), friple ses- 
guiguintan. 

rerpaTAaciedtpirvs (4): 1), guvadruple 
Sesguiaiter. 

rerparAaciun(rpiros (4): 1), guadruple 
sesguilertian. 

vretpatAactmeritapros (44:1), guad- 
ruple sesguiguartan. 

NICOMACHUS 

OF GERASA 

rerpawhacunr(reprros (44:1), guad- 
ruple sesguiguintan. 
wevrawAacuphpiovs (54:1), guintuple 
sesqutalter. 
wevtawhacven(tmros (51:1), guintuple 
sesguitertian. 
wevTawAaciumrirapros 
fuple sesguiquartan. 
wevrawiacer(repwrog 
tuple sesquiguintan. 
Boethius, multiplex superparticularis. 
wolhawhdovos, the multiple, a cyéows, and a 
form of inequality, I. 17. 7, 18.1 (de- 
fined); neut., freq. as name of the rela- 
tion. 
The varieties mentioned by Nicomachus 
are as follows (v. I. 18. 1, 19. 5, etc.) : 
birkdoios (2:1), doudle. 
Tmwhkdacvos (3:1), triple. 
rerpawhao.os (4:1), guadrupie. 
wevrawAdows (5:1), guntuple. 
iamkdoios (6: 1), sean ple. 
oxrawkdaovos (8:1), octuple. 
SexamAdovos (10: 1), decuple. 
Boethius, multiplex (multiplicitas). 
wohvyeavos, folygonal number, 11. 12. 1, etc, 
The following varieties are mentioned by 
Nicomachus : 
tplyevos, triangular. 
TéTpdyavos, Sguare. 
mwevtadyevos, fentagonal. 
tdyevos, Aexagonal. 
érrdyevos, Aeptagonal. 
oxrdywvos, ocfagonal. 
wokvrkacté{e, same as roAAarAactalw, 9.v., 
II. 15. 4. 
wodvrAdaclacis, a multiplication (operation), 
| ORS aay 
wokumAacacyss, multiplication, product of 
multiplication, I. 10. 10. 
wokvnkdavos, multiple (another form of the 
word rroAAarAacwos), Il. 4. 3, 24. 5, etc. 
wokts, much, many. Comp., To mAéov, the 
greater (opp. To €Aarrov), a oyeois and 
species of the oyeors of inequality (= ro 
petfov, the more usual term), I. 14. 2. 
wordxts, iow many tines; to woo. = the 
number of times, 1. 13. 6. 
moods, of some amount; TO woodv, number 
(equiv. to rogorns), I. 17. 1,2, etc.; rom, 
as limited multitude, I. z. 5. Its classifi- 
cation, absolute and relative, I. 3. 1, etc. ; 

(53:1), gurn- 

(S$: 1), gutn- 

GLOSSARY 

with reference to proportions xara 70 
jwocov = Kata wogoryta (Vv. wocorys), 
Il. 21. 6. 

woodrns, number, numerical quantity (vs. 
rndixotys, guantily), 1. 11.3. The same 
as TO wocov, g.v.; with reference to pro- 
portions, dvaAoyia kara . is a ‘numerical’ 
proportion, i.e., one distinguished by 
equality of numerical differences, arith- 
metic proportion (opp. dvaAoyia, xara 
moaornra; cf. woorns), I]. 21. §, 24. I. 
Boethius, guanttfas. 

apr Pirepos, older, more primitive in origin, 
of mathematical forms, I. 19. 8. 

mpoarotelkvuas, demonstrate previously, I. 
16. 4. 

wpoawoblSepi, assign previously, I]. 22. 2. 

mpoBalva, go on, proceed to infinity, I. 19. 16. 

mpoPdAAw, pass., de given, of terms in a 
problem, I. 13. 12. 

mpéBacis, progression, I. 19. 8, 18, 21. 2. 
etc.; in the sense of a progressing series 
(of the odd numbers), I. 20. 2; cf. II. 9. 2. 

wpoPiBéfe, act., with personal subject, carry 
forward, set forth a series, 1. 16. 4; 
pass., b¢ carried forward, progress, go 
on, Il. 7. 3, U1. 1. 

mpoyewwlerepos, more original, 1. 18. 1; cf. 
rpeapirepos. Logically prior, I. 4. 2, 
5. 1, 3, etc. 

mpéyoves, ancestor ; that from which a thing 
is derived; hence the square is 7. of the 
cube, II. 15. 4. 

wmpoS«(xvups, pass., b¢ designated, grven as 
terms of a problem, II. 27. 7. 

wpoucriOnps, extend in series previously, II. 
12. 6. 

wponylopas, come before, rank before, Il. 22. 
3; pass. part., already mentioned, 1. 16. 5. 

apétiors, prefix (the prefix sud, vro-), I. 
17. 8, etc. 

wpéaps, go on, continue, 1. 18. 2, 4, 20. I, 
etc. 

mwpéxapat, d¢ sef before, as a thing to be 
done, I. 20. 2; d¢ gfven, as terms in a 
problem, II. 27. 2. 

mpoxowh, increase, amount of increase in a 
series, I]. 19. 133 progression with in- 
crease, of a series, I. 13. 6. 

wpoxéwre, intrans., tacrease, be increased, II. 
3. 2, etc.; dvot duacrypact, de sguared, 
I]. 17. 7. Boethius, praecedere. 

3°95 

wpédoyos, fhe antecedent, the greater term 
in a ratio between unequal terms, I. 19. 2. 
Boethius, ar. 

wpoptknys, oblong, a number that is the 
product of unequal factors differing by 
more than unity, Jromecic, 11.17. 1, 18.2; 
product, I1. 27.7. Boethius, antelongior, 
promeces, anteriore parte longior. 

wponlwre, intrans., go forward, be extended, 
IT. 18. 2. 

wpomdwrrea, jon, add, II, 21. 4. 

wpooylyvopat, Aappen to, be applied to, of a 
process applied to a number, II. 20. 1; 
be jotned to, II. 17. 6. 

wporemowpaiw, add into the summation of 
@ series, 1. 16. 5. 

mpoolevyvups, combine with, of combining 
geometrical figures, II. 12. 2. 

mpoonyopla, name, designation, 1. 9. 3, 8. 6, 
22. 7. 

wpécGeris, addilion, II. 7. 3, 20. 1, etc. 

wporKkraéopa, acquire in addition, II. 7. 3. 

wporkapBavw, fake, employ as a term intoan 
operation, 1. 16.4; take with, 11. 5.5; of 
addition, fo have something added, iI. 
20. 1 (so Archimedes); recerve, acquire 
another dimension, II. 13. 1, 15. 2. 

wpoomixe, jorn with, add, II. 12. 3. 

wporcwpeia, add in the summation of a 
series, I], 8. 3 Vv. émiowpevw. 

wporoépevots, an addition in the summation 
of a series, II. 8. 3. 

wpéoraypa, rule for procedure, 1. 16. 7, 
23. 8. 

mwpoorl@nus, add, of the operation of addi- 
tion (so Archimedes), II. 27. 7, 12. 2, 
3; combine in multiplication, I. 12. 2. 

xpéce, forward, one of the six varieties of 
motion, II. 6. 4; opp. dmiow. 

xpérave, propose a problem, I. 13. 11. 

wporl@nus, set before, give terms in a prob- 
lem, I. 13. 13; pass., de given (terms), I. 
13. 11. 

xpovméxapas, be Presupposed, preéxisi as a 
basis, I. 4. 4, 11. 3; IL. 18.1. 

mpoxaple, go on, continue, of a process, I. 8. 
13; with personal subject, I. 10. 9, etc. 
Boethius, sese supergredt. 

mpoxepnois, advance, progression in series. 
I. 13. 6. 

wperoyerts, first-dorn (i.e., of an elementary, 
primary nature) ; of the triangle, II. 12. 5. 

3c6 

wperos, Prime, a kind of the odd, I. 11. 2 
(defined). Boethius, primus et incom- 
posilus. 

wvQuevixds, fundamental, belonging to the 
simplest form (v. mv@unv), Il. 2. 2. 
muGpevixws, fundamentally, in simplest 
form, Il. 17. 1. 

wvOpiv, stock, fundamental form; the 
simplest form of a numerical relation (e.g. 
the double in simplest form is seen in 
22 )et. 19:69) 28s 1p Te i963: 

wupapnls, Pyramid, pyramidal number, 11. 
13. 2 ff. Geometrical pyramid, Il. 13. 
3. Boethius, pyramidus. 

wupapoudhs, Pyramidal number, II. 15. 1. 

pli{a, roof; as source, that on which other 
things are based, I. 4. 1 (of arithmetic), 
etc.; starting point, 1. 20. 2 (the fraction 
} is p. of the superpartient), 2. 5, root of 
multitude. Boethius, radrr. 

onpetov, port, I]. 6. 3, 13.3 ff.; a mark 
used to check off terms, I. 13. 7; an ar- 
bitrary sign for a number, II. 6.2. Boe- 
thius, uncle. 

rnpedse, sole down, 1. 10. 8,9; represent by 
an arbitrary sign, II. 6, 2. 

onpalwors, designation, representation, II. 
G.:9. 

wKxadnves, scalene, having unequal sides; a 
kind of solid number, II. 6. 1, 16. 2. 
Opp. icorAevpos. Cf. Bwpioxos, ody- 
kioxos, opyvioxos. Boethius, scalenos 
gradatus. 

oxowle, observe, 1. 13.4. Vv. émurxorew. 

omippa, seed; hence, origin, with the impli- 
cation of the potential existence of the 
completed thing, as in a seed, II. 1§. 1, 
18. 1. 

omipparicés, (ike a seed; originally, funda- 
mentally, 11. 17. 1. 

rréois, rest, I. 3. 2. 

orepeds, solid; applied to numbers, solid 
numbers, the products of three factors, 
I]. 6. 1, 7. 3. to o., solzd dody, II. 6. 4. 
orepens, like a solid, i.e., in three dimen- 
sions, II. 17. 4. Boethius, solidus (solt- 
aitas). 

orlyos, row, dine ina table, 1. 10.7. Serres 
of terms; pvawxos o., the natural series, 
II, 8. 3. 

oeroiyetov, element, Il. 1 (defined); of the 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

universe, #ozd.; used of equality, the ele- 
ment of relative number, II. 2. 2; also 
of the triangle. Boethius, edementum. 

rroayeeins, elementary, 1. 11. 3; applied to 
a triangle, Il. 7. 4, 8.1, 14. 4; the dia- 
pente, II. 26. 1; cf. also II. 29. 4. 

ora nddv, 77 series, in a row, II. 8. 3, etc. 

orvyyevis, of the same genus with, Il. 20. 3. 
Vv. Gpoyerns. 

obyKapar, de composed of (éx), I. 22. 2; IL. 
18. 4, etc. 

ovyxepakaiée, add together, 1. 8. 13; with 
eis TO avro, together, 14. 4, 15. 1, 16. 2. 

orvyxepakalepa, sur, in addition, I. 16. 5. 

rvyxedakalwots, sz, in addition, I. 8. 12. 

rvyxplye, compare, 1. 21. 1, etc. Boethius, 
comparare, aplare. 

riyxpois, comparison of numbers, I. 15. 1, 
22. 6, etc. 

orvleryvupt, zorn fogether numbers to form 
ratios, I. Ig. 3. 

ovuivyla, a pairing, a parr, Il. 19. 4; used 
of the ratios, II. 28. 10, 19. 4. 

gifvyov, a ferm paired with another in 
some relation (e.g., corresponding factors, 
as 16 and 8, of 128, are ov¢vya), I. 8. II. 

wvAAapBdve, fake in conjunction with, I. 
5. 2; Aelp, I. 23. 8. 

avhAnus, a combining, combination, I1.21. 2. 

ovpBalve, Aappen, come fo light, result, 
I. 10. 10; d¢ a fact, 1. 16. 3; impers., 2 
ts an attribute of, characteristic of (with 
dat.), I. g. 2, 10. 10, etc. 

ruperpia, agreement in measure with 
(zpos), I. 14. 3. 

cipperpos, aprecing in measure with, II. 3. 2. 

cupplyvums, combine terms to make a pro- 
portion, II. 21. 3. 

oipwas, alf fogether, as an expression for 
‘sum,’ I. 15. 2. 

oupriparpa, fermination, bound, of surface 
of truncated pyramid, II. 14. 5; last digit 
of a number, II. 17. 7. 

cupridke, suvolve in the composition or 
something, I. 21. 3, 22. 2. 

cuprinpéw, fll out toa certain quantity, I. 
tS. 29. TL S23: 2 

cupmAfpects, 2 filling out to equaitly with, 
Lage ks 

cuprpoxémrrw, increase together with, e.g- 
the differences of a series increase as the 
terms increase, I. 19. 12. 

GLOSSARY 

cupdevie, give consistent results, of opera- 
tions, I. 10, 9. 

oupdevia, concord, in harmony, II. 26. 1. 
Boethius, sywphonia. 

cépdeoves, agreeing, in agreement, 1. 19. 16; 
Il. 5.4. Too. = ovpdwya, II, 26. 1. 

ovvayw, produce, give as a result, in addi- 
tion, 1. 14. 43 éring together, combine, in 
addition, J. 16. 2. 

cuvalpolle, with ud &, add, I. 16. 2. 

rvvauddrepos, In plur., dof together (= the 
sum of two terms), I. 8. 13; similarly, 
tog., 1. 16.4. So Archimedes. 

cuvdwrro, join together ; cvvnppevn avaAdoyu, 
continued proportion, II. 21. 5-6 (v. da- 
fevyvyu). Boethius, continua. 

cuvide, dind together, connect, 11. 22.2; by 
proportional mean terms, II. 29. 1. 

ovveterale, examine together, compare, |. 
19. II. 

ouvixaa, succession ; év o. pnxuve, multiply 
in successton, Il. 29. 3. 

cuvex fs, next, following, of terms in series, 
I. 8.13; rw ao. dptOum, by regularly pro- 
pressing number, II. 8. 2. ovveyws, in 
succession, without omission, Il. 23. 1. 
Boethius, confinens. 

cvvéxo, joie by mean terms to make a pro- 
portion, II. 24. 6. 

civOcors, addition; ico xata o., egual by 
addition to (i.e., their sum equals) some- 
thing else, I. 10. 10; si, in addition, II. 
29. 2, 8. 3, 27.33; TO xata o., sum, II. 
23. $3; combination, I. 22. 2; Il. §. 1, 
21.3, Boethius, compositio. 

oiveros, composite, composed of factors 
(opp. wpwros, prime), I. 11. 1 ff.3 come 
posed of (éx or dwo), 1. 21. 3; Il. 2.1; 
To o., sum, I]. 27. 7. 

cvivOnpa, convention, as opposed to natural 
ordinance, I. Ig. 14; II. 6. 2. 

ouviorns, pass., de combined by addition, 
Il. 11.2; with €x, de composed of, I. 11. 
3; II. 5. 3, 4, etc.; mid., arise, be formed, 
I. 23. 14; II. 14. 2. 

cuvvete, converge, of the edges of the pyra- 
mid, II. 13. 3. Boethius, sacéinart. 

cuvredde, make, complete, produce, 11. 20. 1, 
27. 13 TO ovvTeAovpmevor, product, 1.8. 14. 

cuvTlOnps, combine by simple association, I]. 
5. 2,3, 4,5; aad, 1.8.1. 15. 1; I. 6. 3, 
26. 2, 27.7 (so Archimedes); fake as a 

3°97 

factor, in passive, with numeral adverb, 
povados wrevTaxts cuvreGeions 6 €, I. 11. 3. 
Boethius, redigere tn unum, addere, 
mungere. 

civrpus, three together, the sum of three 
ferms, I. 8. 13. 

cuvvdalve, weave fogether; hence, consti- 
tute (of = €x), I. 10. 6. Cf. Udos. 

cuvudleryps, arise along with (said of a 
thing of which the existence is implied in 
another), I. 20. 3, 21. 3. 

cuvevuple, Aave the same name, agree in 
name, 1. 17. 5. 

cucocwpete, add @ series together, make a 
summation, Il. 10. 2. 

oterrarts, composition, that of which a thing 
is made up, Il. 1. 1; Composttion, con- 
struction in a technical manner, accord- 
ing to rule, I. 8. 13, 3. 5; Il. 8. 3, 10. 2, 
14. 2. 

ctornpa, a system, systematic arrangement, 
I. 3. § (= Plato, Epiz., 991 D); @ comdbt- 
nation of things making up another thing, 
I. 7. 1, 8 10; IL. 5. 2, 26.1; hence, a 
combination by addition, sum, II. 11. 3, 
12. 5,73 @ combination of factors mults- 
plied together, Il. 24. 9. 

rhaipa, a sphere, I]. 17. 7. 
sphera. 

odhapixds, spherical numbers, II. 6. 1, 17. 7 
(defined). oaipexn, astronomy, 1. 3. 2. 
Boethius, sphericus. 

ronxlenos, a little wasp, applied to a kind 
of solid number (same as oxaAnvos, g.v., 
or odyvioxos), Il. 16. 2. 

ody, a wedge, II]. 16. 2. 

ronvicnos, a little wedge, a variety of solid 
number (= oxaAnvos, g.v., OF opyxio- 
xos), II. 16. 2, 17. 6 (defined). Boe- 
thius, cuseus, cuneolus, spheniscos. 

odtt, 2 wasp, II. 16. 2. 

oydors, (1) a non-mathematical term, state, 
condition, Aabitude, 11. 22. 1 (p. 123.1 H). 

(2) mathematical term, reation. In 

the most general sense. any relation be- 
tween two terms, including equality (II. 
6. 3) and inequality (I. 14. 2); hence, a2 
relation of excess or deficiency, measured 
by an arithmetical difference, but often 
applied to relations which are strictly 
Aoyo, ratios, I. 17. 4, 6, 19. 16, 21. 3; 
II. 6. 3, 19. 4, 21. 3, 4, etc. Especially 

Boethius, 

308 

of the ten ratios of relative number, II. 
22. I (p. 122.20 H), 24.5; I. 23.4. Boe 
thius, Azbifudo. 

oxfipa, form, figure, Il. 7. 4; of a geo- 
metrical figure as opposed to arithmetical, 
II. 12. I, 2; orepeov o., solid figure, I. 
13.4, ¥G6.2. 

oxnpatiie, represent by a figure, II. 8. 3. 

oxnpanopdss, figuration, II. g. I. 

oxnparoypadle, represent by a figure; act., 
intrans., admit af graphic representation, 
II. 8. 1; pass., II. ro. 2. Boethius, de- 
seribere. 

oxnparoypadla, representation by a figure, 
of numbers, II. 6. 2, 10. 2; éiedos a., 
plane figuration, Il. 13. 1. 

ox{w, divide (non-mathematical), 1. 17. 6. 
Boethius, secare. 

wale, preserve, hold true a ratio, II. 5. 2; 
of a principle, II. 22. 3, 24. 5. 

capa, Jody, as opp. to surface and line, 
He Fads 

rwpala, summation of a series, 1. 16. 4, etc. 
A heaping up of one thing with another; 
Ta kata o., discrete things, 1. 2. 4 (cf. 
Tmapadeas). 

cepte, add to a summation of a series, Il. 
8. 3. 

wopyddv, by summation or cumulative addi- 
tron, I], 11.1. 

réfis, order, proper order, passim; rage, in 
due order, 1.10.9; place, proper place in 
order, 1. 13. 5. 

ratre, pass., Place, gtve a position in series, 
I. 13. 4; tserf a mean to make a pro- 
portion, II. 27. 2; arrange, I. 10. 10; I. 
17. 3; regulate, I. 13. 6. 

ravropt«ns, of fhe same length, having both 
dimensions the same (epithet of squares, 
similar to idtouyens, g-v-), II. 18. 3- 

ratréy, fhe same (principle of sameness; = 
TavToTys; Opp. éreporys, Ta Erepov), II. 
17. 1,18. 3. Boethius, cadem natura, 

ravrétns, sameness (= ravroy), Il. 17. 1; 
tdentity, II. 27. 4. 

thaos, der fect, of numbers equal in amount 
to the sum of their factors, I. 14. 1, 16. 1; 
of perfection of the monad, I. 16. 10; the 
decad, Il. 22. 1; the di-diapason, I. 5. 1. 
Boethius, perfectus. 

redalmoris, completion, II. 13. 9. 

NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

rehevTdm, end, terminate, 1. 8.11; of pyra- 
mids terminating in a vertex. II. 14. 5; 
of numbers ending in same digit, IJ. 17. 
7. Cf. xararrnyw. 

redeurt, fermination, of the digit ending a 
number, II. 17. 7. 

réhos, end of a table, I. 19. 17. 

ténve, divide, esp. dcyy t., désect, 11. 27. 7. 

riscapes, four. Cf. dua trecodpuv. 

TéeTpAyovKds, Sguare; T. wAEvpa, sguare 
root, Il. 27. 7. 

rerpayavios, four-angled, quadrangular, II. 
iy aD 

retpayovopes, formation like a square, Il. 
g. I. 

retpdyavos, sguare number, I. 19. 19; Il. g 
(defined) ; r. cyypa (geometrical), sguare 
figure, IJ. 12. 1. Boethius, guadratus. 

TerpaxdAoupos, four-times truncated (Vv. Ko- 
Aovpos, dixdAoupos), II. 14. 5. 

Terpamkaciérns, fhe fourfold relation, I. 
5. 5. 

vetpdmwhavpos, four-sided, guadrilaterai, II. 
ri Yt, 

rerpds, fhe number four, 1.9. 4, 10. 7. 

vlna, assume, I. 19. 8, 8. 10; IL. 17. 2; 
make, as result of an operation, I. 20. 2; 
set down, as a term, II. 2. 1, 24. 5. 

w.l4vn, #urse, epithet of arithmetic, I. 5. 3. 

Tphpe, division, the operation, I. Io. 4. 

tpnrés, capadle of being divided, 1. to. 4. 

Touh, a dividing, 1. 7. 4, 10. 3; aivision, 
classification, 1. 7.1. Boethius, dfviszo. 

roviatos, fone, a musical interval with the 
ratio g: 8, Il. 29. 4. Boethius, sons. 

Trpraxorrébuos, fAirty-second, I. 8. 10. 

tpids, the triad, the number three, 1. 10. 6, 
13. 3, etc. 

tpyevile, arrange in triangular form, II. 
8. I, 3- 

Tpryevixds, friangular (pyramid), II. 14. 1. 

tpiryevicpes, formation hike a triangle, II. 
8. 1. 

tpryonorl, 12 friangular form, II. 8. 3. 

tplyevos, friangular number, 11. 8. 1. 
thius, ¢riangularts, triangulus. 

Tpixdhoupos, triply truncated (Vv. xoXovpos, 
dcxoAovpos), II. 14. 5. Boethius, ter curtus. 

rpioite, be of the third course (cf. devre- 
podew), I. 19. 17. 

rpiwkacidfe, multiply by three, 1.21. 1. 

Tpimkacérys, the threefold relation, Il. 5. 5. 

Boe- 

GLOSSARY 

Teh, in three dimensions or directions 
(with dacraros), II. 6. 4. 

bwaxovn, correspond to, have a relation to, 
of terms in proportions, II. 21. 6, 23. 2; 
in pass., be rmplied, 1. 21. 2. 

bwevdvrios, sudcontrary proportion, II. 22. 
1, etc. Boethius, ofposttus, contrartus. 

brevarniérys, Zhe state or relation of being 
subcontrary, II. 28. 5. 

vrevavrieass, sudcontrary relation, II. 28. 2. 

bwefarpde, remove terms from a series, II. 
23.: 4. 

bwempephs, sudsuperpartient, reciprocal ra- 
tio of the superpartient, I. 17. 8. Boe- 
thius, subdsuperpartiens. 

bwempépos, subsuperparticular, reciprocal 
ratio of the superparticular, I. 17. 8, 19. 
20. Boethius, sudsuperparticularis. 

twewlrpiros, subsesguitertian (3:4), a sub- 
superparticular, reciprocal of the sesqui- 
tertian, I. 19. 2. Boethius, sudsesguiter- 
tius. 

brepBalve, Jass over, used in locating terms 
in a series, e.g., 1. 13. 3, rév Svo pécous 
vrepBaivovra, “the term occurring after 
the omission of two numbers between”; 
go beyond, exceed, 1. 14. 3; Il. 18. 2; 
hence, de greater, II. 27. 6. 

brepBdddAw, exceed, 1. 16. 1, 2; wrepBadrAdv- 
Tws, with excess, II. 17. 6. 

trepacrlarre, pass by a point, be continued 
beyond, I. 19. 14. 

bwepdyw, exceed, 1. 17. 3. So Archimedes. 

tripwapar, d¢ located beyond in the next 
place in a series, II. 12. 5. 

tripoy 4, excess, I]. 27. 4,7. So Archimedes. 

wrepreAts, superabundant, a number the 
sum of the factors of which is greater 
than its own amount, I. 14. 1,3. Boe- 
thius, superfluous. 

bripdipe, exceed, be greater than,1. 9. 4; 
I. 275-3; 

twé, dy, of multiplication by, I. 8. 14, etc. 

76 umd, the product, 1. 8. 14, 19. 17; II. 
27+ 3) 4- 
as a prefix, sud, I. 19. 20. 

bwofalve, come underneath in the order of 
rows in a table, I. 19. 14; d¢ less than, 
Il. 27. 6; troBeBnxdrws, in subordinate 
manner, as of a species to a genus, II. 
20. 2. 

3°99 

brdSaypa, tlustration, exampie, 1.8. 13, etc. 

broSalavups, show, exhtbit, 1. 22. 6. 

bwdSatis, ustration, Il. 3. 4. 

bwobtalpovos, subdivision, I. 11. 1, 8. 3. 

brobiwhdotos, subdouble, i.e., half, a cxtows 
(species of vroroAAarAacws), I. 10. 10, 
18. 3 (defined) = nywovs; but the latter 
usually refers to the term gva fraction or 
part, trodirAdotos to it in its relation to 
the greater number. Boethius, sudduplus. 

twddoyos, the consequent, lesser term of a 
ratio, I. 19. 2. v. mpdAayos. Boethius, 
comes. 

bwropaporpés, a division into parts, 1. 8. 4. 

vrowlwre, fall under, be subject to (a meas- 
ure, wérpw), I. 13. 7; (a process) 8. 8. 

tworohAamhacumpepts, submultiple super- 
partient, a oxéors, reciprocal of the woA- 
Aawrhacuerpepyns (g7.v.), I. 17. 8. Boe- 
thius, submultiplex superpartiens. 

vrowohAawhacumpémos, submultiple super- 
particular, a oyxéouw, reciprocal of the 
wol\AamrAactempopws (¢g.v.), I. 17. 8. 
Boethius, submultiplex super particularts. 

bwowolkawhdoros, the submultiple, a cyéors, 
reciprocal of the moAAarAaows (¢.v.), 
I. 17. 8, 18. 2 (usually applied to numbers 
that measure a larger number with especial 
reference to their ratio to the latter; 
popwv, pépos are applied to them gua 
factors, parts). Boethius, sudmultiplex. 

bwordrre, bring under a ratio, II. 21. 2. 

broralve, sudiend an angle, II. 4. 3. 

vworerpawAdovos, fhe subguadruple (ratio 
1: 4), reciprocal of the quadruple, I. 18. 
3. Boethius, suédguadruplus. 

vrorlOnps, suppose, 1. 20.2; Place below, II. 
8. 3. 

tbrorpimhdetos, the subtriple (ratio 1: 3), re- 
ciprocal of the triple, 1. 18. 3; U1. 27. 6. 
Boethius, sudiripilus. 

tnprddios, fhe subsesguialter (ratio 1: 14 or 
2:3), reciprocal of the sesquiaier,1. 19. 
2. Boethius, subsesqualter. 

tplornas, mid., arise from, 1. to. 6. 

thos, a web, hence, structure, disposition of 
a table, I. 19. 133 vouxov v. Tov dprOpon, 
natural arrangement of number, the nat- 
ural series, I. 9. 5. 

inpos, Acight, a dimension of solids only 
(same as Baos), II. 13. 1. 

310 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

prahAnAla, mutual benevolence, applied to 
numbers, II. 19. 1. 

SADAndos, mutually benevolent, 11. 20. 3. 

dvoixés s#afural, esp. natural series of 
number (dpOues, orixos, exPeots, yvua), 
I. 19. 10; II. 8. 3, etc. 

iw, produce, generate, Il. 3.2; pass. be 
produced, Il. 5. 4. 

yapaxrhp, character, symbol in -notation, II. 
6. 2. 

xiacpes, cross-dines which make the form of 
the letter chi, I. 19. 13, 14. In the old 

form of the letter the lines cross in the 
manner of our sign for plus. 

xuuds, a thousand; plur., the thousands 
(1000-9999), I. 16. 3. 

xpdopasr, use, employ, I. 12. 2; pepeot xpa- 
oGa, Aave factors, 1. 12. 1. 

Kopa, (1) a pouring, flow; of number, I. 7. 
1 (as a definition of ‘ number °). 

(2) a series; the natural series (gvot- 
cov x-), I. 18. 4, 19. 6, etc. (doWpnrexov 
x:), II. 10. 2, 

xepa, place in a series, II. 20. 5; trans- 
ferred to the number indicating the place 
a term occupies in a series, I. 13. 6. 

III. A SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

This Bibliography is in no sense complete. In the case of modern works its 
chief purpose is to enable the reader to find quickly titles of work for which op. 
cit. has been used frequently. 

GREEK AND LATIN TEXTS 

Aristoteles. Many of his works have been quoted and many editions used. 

Boethius, De Institutione Arithmetica; De Institutione Musica. Edidit Godofre- 
dus Friedlein, 1867. 

Cassiodorus, De Arithmetica, Chapter IV in De Artibus ac Disciplinis Liberalium 
Litterarum. Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. LXX, cols. 1204-1208. 

Euclides, Opera Omnia. Ediderunt I. L. Heiberg et H. Menge. Leipzig, 1883- 
18809. 

Hero Alexandrinus, Geometricorum et Stereometricorum Reliquiae. Edidit Frideri- 
cus Hultsch. Berlin, 1864. 

Iamblichus, In Nicomacht Arithmeticam Introductionem Liber. Edidit Her- 
menegildus Pistelli. Leipzig, 1894. 

Joannes Lydus, De Mensibus. Edidit Ricardus Wuensch. Leipzig, 1898. 

Nicomachus, I[ntroductionis Arithmeticae Libri II. Recensuit Ricardus Hoche. 
Leipzig, 1866. 

Philo Iudaeus (Alexandrinus), Opera Quae Superswnt. Recognovit Leopoldus 
Cohn. Berlin, 1896-1915. 

Plato, Dialogi. Ex Recognitione Caroli Frideric! Hermanni. Leipzig, 1854- 
1870. 

Plutarch, Moralia. Recognovit Gregorius N. Bernardakis. Leipzig, 1908-1916. 

Theologumena Arithmeiicae. Edidit Fridericus Astius. Leipzig, 1817. 

Theon Smyrnaeus, Expositio Rerum Mathematicarum ad Legendum Platonem 
Utilium. Recensuit Eduardus Hiller. Leipzig, 1878. 

MopERN WorKS 

Burnet, John, Greek Philosophy, Part I, Thales to Plato. London, 1920. 

Cantor, Moritz, Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der Mathematik, vol. I (third edition). 
Leipzig, 1907. 

Chaignet, Antelme Edouard, Pythagore et la Philosophie Pythagoricienne. 2 vol- 
umes. Paris, 1873. 

Delatte, Armand, Etudes sur la Littérature Pythagoricienne, in Bibliotheque de 
l’ Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Fasc. 217. Paris, 1915. 

Diels, Hermann, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. Berlin. (The latest editions 
have been consulted.) 

gir 

312 NICOMACHUS OF GERASA 

Kisenlohr, August, Ein mathematisches Handbuch der alien Aegypter. Leipzig, 
1891. 

Heath, T. L., The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements. 3 volumes. Cambridge, 
1908. 

— (Sir Thomas), A History of Greek Mathematics. 2 volumes. Oxford, 1921. 

Nesselmann, G. H. F., Geschichte der Algebra, vol. I. Berlin, 1842. (Only one 
volume was published.) 

Peet, T. Eric, The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus. London, 1923. 

Von Jan, Karl, Musict Scriptores Graect. Leipzig, 1895. 

Zeller, Eduard, Die Philosophie der Griechen. Leipzig. (The latest editions 
have been consulted.) 

INDEX 

A 
Abacus, 6. 
Academy, mathematical interest in, 25-26. 
Adrastus, 27, 36, 41 0., 42M., 212n., 213 2., 
225 M., 227 N., 231 n. 
Ahmes manual, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
Akhmim papyrus, 7, ro. 
Alexander Polyhistor, 75. 

Alexandria, as mathematical center, 29, 75; | 

possible connection of Nicomachus with, 
74-76. 

Al-Khowarizmi, 143. 

Alphabetic numeral system, 68; conventional, 
not natural, according to Nicomachus, 237. 

‘Altars,’ 253. 

Altman, 37 n., 89 2., gr n. 

4y in Nicomachus, 174-175. 

Anatolius, 25 n., 84, 90, 105 n., 238 n., 255 n. 

Androcydes, 33, 34, 35, 185. 

Anning, 290. 

Antecedents and consequents, 215, 266. 

A pocatastaticus, 257 n. 

Apollonius of Tyana, 89; Life of, ascribed to 
Nicomachus, 81. 

Apuleius of Madaura, translator of Nicoma- 
chus, 71, 124. 

Arabic arithmeticians, 143-144. 

Archer-Hind, 272 n. 

Archimedes, 63, 70. 

the Decad, 90; reputed author of Cavegories, 
267 n. 

Aristaeon, 33. 

Aristotle, 6n., 55M., 74M., gon., 
102 D., 111 n., 181 n., 183 n., 184 n., 226 n., 
240 N., 254M., 256n., 266n., 283 n.; influ- 
ence of, on Greek arithmetic, 26; on Nicom- 
achus, 35, 905, 113, 118, 210; on ‘same’ 
and ‘one,’ ror; on magnitude and multi- 
tude, 112; definition of number, 114; on 
logical priority, 267 n.; ‘abolishment’ and 
implication, 188 n., 267; virtue a mean, 
207 Nn. 

Aristoxenus, 79 N., 114 N. 

Archytas, as a mathematician, 20-23, 269 n., | Boethius, 113, 125; 

274; cited by Nicomachus, 35, 185; On | 

IOI N., 

Arithmetic, Greek, nature of, 3-4; develop- 
ment of, before Nicomachus, 16-45; con- 
tent of, 46-65; work on, wrongly attributed 
to Nicomachus, 8o. 

Arithmetic progression (or proportion) in 
Greek arithmetic, 60; defined and described, 
267-270; see Proportion. 

Arithmology, 4, 9; history of, 90-92; of 
Nicomachus, 102-107. 

Artes, 16; arilhmeticac, unknown authors of, 
29-31, 32, 36. 

Asclepius of Tralles, scholia of, on Nicomachus, 
125, 260 n. 

Ast, Fr., 82, 146, 229 n., 249 n., 269 n., 285 n. 

Astrology, Eastern origin of, 10. 

Astronomy, Greek, sources of, 10; Thales’ 
service to, 17; work on, by Nicomachus, 
81. 

Attic system of numerical notation, 67. 

Augustine, 119 0. 

B 

Babylonian influence on astrology and astron- 
omy, 10; tables of squares and cubes, 15; 
‘musical proportion,’ 284 n. 

Baillet, 7 n. 

Baumker, 93 n. 

‘Beams,’ 256,736 .°° 

Berthelot, 9 n. 

De Institutione Ariih- 
melica, 132-139; notes pp. 180-286, passim. 

Borghorst, 37 n., 89 n., gr n. 

Bradwardin, Thomas, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, Arithmetica Speculativa of, 145. 

Bretschneider, 15 n. 

‘Bricks,’ 256,44,..,7 °° 

Brunschvig, 18 n. 

Burnet, John, 50., 15, 17n., 18n., 26n., 
218 n., 230 Nn. 

Burton, E. D., 168 n., 171 0., 175 n. 

Butherus, 33. 

Cc 

Cantor, M., 29M., 71 N., 75 N., 132, 133, 143, 
197 n., 216n., 225 N., 240 Nn. 

313 

314 

Capella, Martianus, 91; arithmetical doc- 
trines of, g1n., 105n., 138-142, 238n., 
257 Nn. 

Cassiodorus, 71 n., 78n., 124; arithmetic of, 
138-142. 

Categories, 95, 267. 

Caxton, Afirrour of the World, cited, 187. 

Chaignet, 33 n., 75 n., 88n., 89 n., 104 Nn. 

Chalcidius, g1 n., 238 n., 255 Nn. 

Circuelo, 145. 

Circular numbers, 257. 

Clemens Alexandrinus, 91 n., 104 0. 

Composite numbers, 202-203. 

Congruence, first appearance of, in history of 
mathematics, 58. 

Continuous and discrete, 111, 183. 

Cope, 16 n. 

Cosmogony of Nicomachus, 107-110. 

Coxe, 125 n. 

Critical apparatus of Introduction, I. 1-3, 162- 
166. 

Cubes, possess ‘ sameness,’ 119; in Jamblichus, 
130; production of, 57-58, 252-253; prop- 
erties of, 257, 263, 274; theorem of Nicoma- 
chus concerning, 289; extension and gener- 

alization of the theorem, 289-290. 

Cumont, 5 n., 10 0., 15 0. 

D 

Decad, sacredness and perfection of, 106, 219, 
267 n. 

Deficient numbers, 52, 208. 

Delatte, Armand, 90, 91 2. 

Democritus, 15. 

‘Diaulos’ theorem, 128-129, 247. 

Dickson, 120 n., 208 n., 209 N., 243 Nn. 

Diels, 17n., I9N., 21N., 22n., 260., 270, 
gs n., 114 0., 181 n., 185 n., 269 n. 

Dimensions, 238. 

Diodorus Siculus, ro n,. 

Diogenes Laertius, 3, 17 n., 27 n., 88n., 89 n. 

Diophantus, 70, 138, 246 n., 51, 240 nN. 

Division, Egyptian method of, 6. 

Domninos of Larissa, arithmetician, 142. 

Dupuis, 36 n. 

Dyad, an element, 99, 115-II9, 230; iden- 
tified with ‘otherness,’ 100, 211, 255, 257: 

E 
Eaton, 143 0. 
Egypt, methods of computation used in, 4, 
6-15. 
Egyptian festivals, work on, by Nicomachus, 
8o. 
Eisenlohr, 6 n., 12. 

INDEX 

Elements, doctrine of, in Nicomachus, 93; 
defined, 230. 

Epinomis, cited, 185. 

éxionua, 68. 

Equality as the element of ratio, 41, 53, 225— 
226, 230. 

Eratosthenes, 237n.; Platonicus of, in Greek 
arithmetic, 27,41 n.; influence of, on Theon, 
36, 41; ‘sieve’ of, 51, 204-206; the ‘three 
rules’ in, 35, 225 n., 206 n. 

Escott, 290. 

Escurial, manuscripts of Nicomachus at, 125, 
149. 

Eubulides, 33. 

Euclid, 4, 21n., 38n., 46-65, passtm, 114 2., 
138N., 139, I40D., IOI N., I192D., 1931., 
196n., 198N., 199 N., 201 N., 202 N., 203 1., 
206 N., 209 M., 2ION., 214 N., 240N., 265 N., 
270 N., 273N., 283n.; Sectio Canonis, 21; 
influence of, on Greek arithmetic, 28; on 
Nicomachus, 34; definition of number by, 
114. 

Eudemus, 17 n. 

Eudorus, 250 n. 

Eudoxus, 25, 26, 30, 114, 266 n. 

Euphranor, 20 0., 30, 266 n. 

Eusebius, 78 n. 

Eutocius, 3, 68, 126 n. 

Evans, 67 n. 

Even numbers, classification of, 49, 192; 
defined, 190-191; and odd, theorems relat- 
ing to sums, products, etc., of, 49, 274; 
partakes of ‘otherness,’ 255, 257. 

Even-times even numbers, 192-196. 

Even-times odd numbers, 196-198. 

F 

Faber Stapulensis, arithmetician, 145. 

Favonius, 91 0. 

Figurate numbers (plane and solid), ancient 
conceptions of, 55; Nicomachus’s doctrine 
of, 120-122, 239-240. 

Forms, doctrine of, in Nicomachus, 93-96. 

Fractions, treatment of, in Egyptian arith- 
metic, 7; Greek and medieval treatment of, 
+—8; unit, #bid.; in Greek notation, 69-70. 

Friedlein, 125 n., 182 n. 

G 
Gematria, 60. 
Geminus, 3. 
Geometric proportion (progression), in Greek 
arithmetic, 61, 63, 196; defined and de- 
scribed, 270-272. 

INDEX 

Geometrical computations in ancient Egypt, 14. 

‘Geometrical harmony,’ 20, 277-278. 

Geometrical Introduction, see Introduction to 
Geometry. 

Gerasa, home of Nicomachus, 72-73. 

Gerbert, 144. 

Gerhardt, 7o n. 

Gildersleeve, 168 n., 172 n. 

Gnomons, 56, 197, 245 N., 250 N. 

God, doctrine of, in Nicomachus, 95-97. 

‘Golden chain,’ 77. 

Gow, 16n., 29 n., 113 0., 246 n. 

Graux, 125 n. 

Greatest common divisor, 51, 206-207. 

Greek numerals, 66—70. 

Green, E. L., 168 n. 

H 

Harmonic proportion in Greek arithmetic, 62; 
defined and described, 274-276; reasons 
for the name, 276-278. 

Harmony in the world, 109-110; in numbers, 
121, 259. 

17M., 18n., 23 M., 28N., 290., 360., son., 
66n., 67n., 71M, 114 M., 128N., 13rn., 
138N., 190N., IQI N., 192 N., 193 D., 201 N., 
205 N., 209 n., 216 n., 283 n., 285 n. 

Heiberg, 3 n., gon. 

Heptagonal numbers, 245. 

Heracles, 86. 

Hermes, 86, 

Herodian, 67. 

Herodotus, 6 n. 

Hero of Alexandria, 70, 183 n., 197 n., 256 n., 
214 N., 265 n. 

Hesiod, 115 n., 208 n., 259 n. 

Heteromecic numbers, 57, 128, 219, 254, 258; 
and squares, 260, 274; partake of ‘other- 
ness,’ 255-257. 

Hexad the basis of soul, 97, rog—110. 

Hexagonal numbers, 245. 

Hierocles, 91 n. 

Hiller, E., 27 n., 225 n. 

tva in Nicomachus, 172-173. 

Hipparchus, to. 

Hippasus, 33. 

Hoche, Richard, editor of Nicomachus, 71 n., 
79 N., 125, 135 n., 146, 152, 158-161. 

Homer, 208 n. 

Hort, 72 n. 

Hugo of St. Victor, arithmetic of, 142. 

Hultsch, F., 3 n., 19, 70 m., 158-161, 183 n., 
185 n., 250n., 265 n. 

Hypsicles, 29, 246 n. 

Kaibel, 80 n. 

315 

I 

Iamblichus, 14, 16, 18n., 20M., 41N., 79N., 
80, 86, Iogn., 119 Mn., 176, 185 n., 188 n., 
IOI N., 201 N., 238 N., 244 0., 247 N., 260N., 
266 n., 274.N., 275N., 284n., 266n.; criti- 
cism of Euclid by, 49, 127; compiler of 
Theologumena Arithmeticac, 82; Commen- 
lary on the Introduction to Arithmetic, 126- 
132, 137 Nn. 

Ibn Khaldun, 144. 

‘Interval’ and ‘ratio,’ 237. 

Introduction to Arithmetic, by Nicomachus, 
purpose of, 16; relation of, to Platonic 
study, 28; comparison of, with Theon, 
37-45; manuscripts and text of, 146-166; 
editions of, 146. 

Introduction io Geometry, by Nicomachus, 
79, 124, 236. 

Isidore of Seville, 78n., 124; arithmetic of, 
138-142. 

Tsocrates, 16 n. 

J 

Jerusalem, manuscript of Nicomachus at, 
148, 158. 

Johannes de Muris, arithmetician, 144. 

Jones, R. M., 89 n. 

Jordanus Nemorarius, arithmetician, 145. 

K 

Heath, T. L., 4n., 5n., 7., 9n., 10n., rn, | Jebb, 16 n. 

Karpinski, 7n., 8n., 14 0., 7oN., 144 D, 
Karsten, 81 n. 
Kleinias, 33. 

L 

‘Lambdoid figure,’ 86, 127, ror. 

Language and style of Nicomachus, 167-177. 

‘Law’ (‘convention’) and ‘nature,’ 120, 218, 
237. 

Leonard of Pisa, 8, 14. 

Line, defined, 238-239. 

Linear numbers, 122, 239. 

Logistic, Greek, nature of, 3-4. 

|} Lucas de Burgo San Sepulchri, Summa de 

Arithmetica of, 145. 

Lucian, 76, 77. 

Lydus, Johannes Laurentius, 80, 90 n., 91 n., 
104 N., 105 N., 106 N., 238 N., 255 D., 257 0. 

M 
MacGuckin de Slane, 144 n. 
Macrobius, 238 n. 

Magnitude and multitude, 112, 183. 
Manual of Harmony, by Nicomachus, 76. 

316 

Manuscripts of Nicomachus, 146-159; at Es- 
curial, 125, 149. 

Marinus, 77 n. 

Martianus Capella, see Capella. 

Martin, Th. H., 27 n., 240N., 244 0. 

Mathematics, Greek, sources of, 3-15. 

Matter, doctrines about, in Nicomachus, 
92-94, 182. 

yh, use of, in Nicomachus, 168-170. 

Means, insertion of, between two terms, In 
Nicomachus and Theon, 64, 278-281; be- 

tween plane and solid numbers, 25, 272-_ 

273. 

péxps, etc., in Nicomachus, 173. 

Megillus, 33. 

Membrorum ratte, 141. 

pépos and yudpiov, distinguished, 53. 

Mieli, 18 n. 

Milhaud, 5 n. 

Minoan numeral system, 66-67. 

Moderatus of Gades, 30N., 33-34, 37; Cited, 
103, 118 n., 266 n. 

‘Monad,’ and ‘one,’ 22, 37; philosophic doc- 
trines of, in Nicomachus, 96; with dyad, 
as element, 99, 115-119, 230; identified 
with ‘sameness,’ 100, 211, 255-257; ‘of 
the second (third, etc.) course,’ 120, 129, 
219; see Unity. 

Moulton, 168 n., 1r7on., 171 D., 173 D., 174 0., 
175 n. 

Miiller, 146. 

Multiples and submultiples, 214-215. 

Multiple superparticular ratios, 222-224. 

Multiple superpartient ratios, defined and 
described, 224-225. 

Multiplication, Egyptian method of, 6; with 
Greek numerals, 68; table, 217. 

Music, lost work of Nicomachus on, 79. 

Musical intervals, 276; canon, 278; propor- 
tion (so called), 284-286. 

Myonides, 18 n., 30, 266 n. 

N 

Neo-Pythagoreans, 74-75, 88-92; writings of, 
relating to arithmetic, 32-33. 

Nesselmann, 71 n., 80 n., 127 N., 128 D., 132 0., 
192M., 201 N., 219 M., 225 n., 2460., 264N., 
265 n. 

Nicomachus, Rule of, 60, 61; estimate of, as 
a mathematician, 65; life of, 71-78; works, 
79-87; philosophy of, 88-110; ethical 
fragment of, 92; philosophy of number, 
111-123; translators and commentators of, 

124-137; manuscripts and text of, 146-166, 

language and style of, 167-177. 

INDEX 

Nobbe, C. F. A., editor of Nicomachean mate- 
rial, 146, 185 n. 

Notation, Greek arithmetical, 66-70; con- 
ventional and natural, according to Nicom- 
achus, 237. 

Number, classification of, by Theon, 38; 
elements of, 48; definitions of, 48, 114-115, 
190; as forms, in Nicomachus’ philosophy, 
97-99; divine and ‘ scientific,’ in Nicoma- 
chus, 98-99, 115; theory of, in Nicomachus, 
1II-123; harmony in, 120-121; non- 
mathematical qualities of, in Nicomachus, 
122-123. 

Numerals (Greek), 66-70. 

O 

Oblong numbers, 39; see Promecic. 

O'Create, 61 n. 

Odd numbers, classification of, 50, 201; 
defined, 191; partake of ‘sameness,’ 255, 
257, 263. 

Odd-times even numbers, 198-201. 

Omont, 147 D., 149 N., 150 n. 

Optative, in Nicomachus, 170-171. 

Orthography of Nicomachus, 177. 

@ore Clauses in Nicomachus, 171-172. 

P 

Papadopoulos-Kerameus, 148 n. 

Papyrus, Michigan, No. 621, 7. 

Parallelepipedons, 254. 

Paris, manuscripts of Nicomachus in, 149- 
150. 

Poertium raito, 141. 

Pauly-Wissowa, 72 0. 

Pediasimus, 124 0., 213 D., 241 0. 

Peet, 6 n. 

Pentagonal numbers, 243-244. 

Perfect numbers, 41, 52, 209-212. 

Periphrastic verb-forms in Nicomachus, 175. 

‘Phialite’ problems, 4, 9. 

Philip of Opus, 26. 

Philo Judaeus, 75, go n., 105 n., 238 n., 240N., 
263n.; arithmetical data cited by, 31-32; 
likeness to Nicomachus, 96. 

Philolaus, 119 n., 259 n., 267 n.; as a mathe- 
matician, 19-20; influence of, on Nicoma- 
chus, 35; cited by Theon and Nicomachus:, 
37; On Nature, go. 

Philoponus, Johannes, 147, 150, 182 n., 192 n., 
193 N., 194 N., 249 n., scholia of, upon Nicoma- 
chus, 72, 125. 

Philosophy, general, of Nicomachus, 88-110; 
of numbers, of Nicomachus, 111-113; mean- 
ing of the word, 181. 

INDEX 

Photius, 82-87, 100n., 102N., 103 D., 1o4Nn., 
Tos n., roO N., 110, 239 N. 

Plane and solid numbers, see Figurate numbers ; 
insertion of mean terms between, 272-273. 
Plato, 260n., 266n., 283n.; Charmides, 
scholium on, concerning logistic, 3-4; on 
Egyptian computation, 8; as a mathemati- 
cian, 23-25; commentaries on, in history of 
Greek arithmetic, 27; influence of, on 
Nicomachus, 36; citations of, by Nicoma- 
chus and Theon, 37, 41, 44; rational and 
irrational diameters in, 60; Laws, 8; Tt- 
MacUus, 41 Nl., 92-93, 95, 97, TOO, 109, 182, 
231 N., 238 N., 239M., 240N., 254N., 261 N., 
272n.; world-soul, 109, 231 n.; Epinomis, 
cited and ascribed to, 185-186; Republic 
cited, 44 n., 60, 172 n., 186, 187, 189 n., 216 n, 

Pleuric and diametric numbers, 41, 58-60, 
86, 130. 

Plotinus, 119 n. 

Plutarch, 89 n., 104 0., 105 n. 

Point, defined, 239. 

Polygonal numbers, in Theon, 40; Greek 
doctrines of, 55; theorem on derivation of, 
56, 246. 

Porphyry, 22 n., 33 0., 78, 79 N., 103 D., 185 n., 
269 n. 

Posidonius, 27; and arithmology, 9r. 

Positions, or directions, six distinguished, 238. 

Prime numbers, 202; and relatively prime, 
in Euclid, 51; relatively, 203-204; dis- 
covery of, by the ‘sieve,’ 204-206. 

Proclus, 3, 28n., 34 n., 60, 77, 142, 183 n., 
184 n., 266 n. 

Prolegomena to the Introduction to Arithmetic, 
anonymous, 126. 

Promecic (oblong) numbers, 39, 254, 258. 

Proportion, so-called ‘musical,’ 25, 65, 284- 
286; discovery of forms of, 30; treatment 
of, by Theon, 41-43, 62; by Iamblichus, 
130-138; im Greek artthmelica, 60-65; 
definition of, 264-265; continued and 
disjunct, 60, 266; kinds of, 266, 281, 283; 
arithmetic, 61, 267-270; geometric, 62, 
270-272; harmonic, 62, 274-278; fourth, 
fifth, and sixth types, 64, 281-283; seventh 
to tenth types, 64, 283-284. 

Prorus, 33. 

Psellus, Michael, 15, 143. 

Ptolemy, Claudius, 10, 71, 278 n. 

Pyramidal numbers, 249-251; 
bi-truncated, etc., 252. 

Pythagoras, 181, 254, 266, 283, 284; mathe- 
matical discoveries of, 18; 
Nicomachus, 79. 

truncated, © 

Life of, by 

317 

Pythagoreans, early, arithmetic among, 19; 
conception of figurate numbers, 55; theory 
of pleuric and diametric numbers ascribed 
to, 6o. 

Pythmens, 216, 260. 

Q 

Quadrivium, 113, 184, 187. 
‘Quality,’ of ratios, 263, 266. 

R 

Rabanus Maurus, arithmetic of, 142. 

Ratios, Theon’s account of, 41; kinds of, 213; 
combinations of, 234-236; defined, 265; 
see Interval. 

Recurrent numbers, 57, 257. 

Regula Nicomachi, 60, 61. 

Reisch, Gregorius, arithmetician, 145. 

Reuther, 80 n. 

Relative number, subdivisions of, 52, 212. 

Rhabdas, Nicolas, 8, 70. 

Rithmomachia, 143. 

Robbins, gt n., 95 n. 

Robertson, 171 n., 173 N., 174 0. 

‘Rule of Nicomachus,’ 60 n. 

S 

‘Sameness’ and ‘otherness,’ 99-102; identi- 
fied with monad and dyad, 100, 118, 254- 
255, 257-258; hence impressed on other 
classes of numbers, 257-258. 

Sanders, 69 n. 

Scalene numbers, 253-254. 

Schack-Schackenburg, 14 n. 

Schmekel, 37 n., 89 n. 

Schmid, W., 168 n., 171 n., 176, 177 Nn. 

Sciences, classification of mathematical, 113, 
184. 

Secondary (composite) numbers, 202-203. 

Series, arithmetical and geometrical, in Baby- 
lon and Egypt, 12-13. 

Sextus Empiricus, 113 n. 

‘Side and diagonal’ numbers, 60. 

‘Sieve’ of Eratosthenes for discovering prime 
numbers, etc., 51, 204-206. 

Simplicius, 33 n., 119 N., 254 N. 

Smith, D. E., 7on., 143 n., 145 n. 

Solid, defined, 238-239. 

Solid numbers, in Theon, 40-41; in Iambli- 
chus, 130; Greek doctrines of, 57. 

Soterichus, scholia of, on Nicomachus, 125, 
150. 

Soul, Nicomachean doctrines of, 97, 109; of 
the world, tro. 

| gwepuarirns Adyos, orepparixds Adyos, QO. 

318 

Speusippus, 19, 26, 88, go. 

Spherical numbers, 57, 257. 

Squares, theorems concerning, in Theon, 
39-40; in Iamblichus, 128-129; in Nicom- 
achus, 262-263, 274; divisibility of, 58; 
possess ‘sameness,’ 119, 255, 257, 262; 
graphically represented, 242-243; resolu- 
tion of, into triangles, 56, 247; and hetero- 
mecic numbers, 57, 260-262. 

Stobaeus, 33n., 34M., 1ogM., I1gN., 115 N., 
259 N. 

Stoic influence on Nicomachus, 95-96. 

Superabundant numbers, 52, 207-208. 

Superparticular, series of, derivation of, from 
multiples, 54, 231-234; defined and de- 
scribed, 215-220. : 

Superpartient ratios, defined and described, 
220; derivation of, 221. 

Surface, 238-2309. 

Suter, 125 N., 144 n. 

Sylvester II, Pope, arithmetic of, 144. 

T 

Tannery, P., 3n., 16, 21 0., 22, 7oN., roq n., 
126, 142 N., 143 N., 240 Nn. 

Taylor, Th., 211 n., 213 n. 

réxvas, 16. 

Ten, sacred, 267 n. 3 

Text of the Introduction to Arithmetic, sug 
gested changes in, 158-161. 

Tetraktys, 105, 267 n. 

Th&bit ibn Qorah, 125, 144. 

Thales, defines number, 12, 114; in history of 
mathematics, 17. 

Theodorus Protocensor, 
Nicomachus, 125, 147. 

Theologumena Arithmeticae, work of Nico- 
machus, 82; anonymous, 82; relation of 
anonymous, to Nicomachus, 84-87; cited, 
38 n., 42 n., 80 1., 90 N., 92 1., 93 NL, 
Q6-123, passim, I320., IQIN., I940., 
219 M., 229 n., 238 n., 240 0., 247 NL, 
248 n., 249 N., 255 N., 257 N., 262 n., 267 n. 

Theon of Smyrna, 18n., 20n., gon., 106n., 
113Mm., 127n., 128n., 172n., 184-280, 
notes passim; purpose of his book (aid 
in Platonic study), 28; influenced by Mod- 

scholium of, on 

INDEX 

eratus, 34; his life and book, 36-45, 46-65, 
passim; on unity, 48; date of, 71-72; 
classification of mathematical sciences by, 
comparison with work of Nicomachus, 113. 

Theophrastus, 27, 255 n. 

Thrasyllus, 36, 42, 71. 

“Three rules,’ 41, 53, 225-229; 
230-234. 

Thymaridas, 127, 131. 

Touraeff, 14 n. 

Triad, first actual number, 117. 

Triangle the elementary form, 240-241, 248. 

Triangular numbers, 39, 56, 129, 240-242; 
derivation of polygonals from, as elements, 
56, 247-249. 

Truncated, bi-truncated, etc., pyramids, 252. 

U 
Unity, odd or even, 48; compared to the 
geometrical point, 237; properties of, 238; 
beginning of number, 239; see Monad. 

reversed, 

V 
Varro, gon., ro4 n. 
Vatican, manuscripts of Nicomachus at, 157. 
Vincent of Beauvais, Speculum Docirinale of, 
145. 
Von Heinemann, 147 n. 
Von Jan, 71 n., 72n., 760., 79 n., 8on., 81 n. 

| WwW 
Wappler, 143 n. 
“Wasps,’ 253. 
Wechel, 146, 147. 
‘Wedges,’ 253.,2>6,°° 2 
Westcott, 72 n. 
Words, post-classical, in Nicomachus, 175-177. 
Worrell, 144 n. 

A 
Aenocrates, 26, 88. 

Z 

Zeller, 26n., 33 N., 710., 74n., 75, 81, 82n., 
88 n., 89 n., 93 N., 104 n. 

Zero not part of the Nicomachean number 
system, 48, 120. 

Zeuthen, 59 n., 82 n. 

University of Michigan Studies 
HUMANISTIC SERIES 
General Editors. FRANCIS W. KELSEY and HENRY A. SANDERS 
Size, 22.7 X 15.2 cm. 8°. Bound in cloth 
VoL. I. Roman HistorIcAL SOURCES AND INSTITUTIONS. Edited 

by Henry A. Sanders, University of Michigan. Pp. vii + 402. 
$2.50 net. 

CONTENTS 

1. THE MytTH AspouT TARPEIA: Henry A. Sanders. 

2. THE MOVEMENTS OF THE CHORUS CHANTING THE CARMEN SAE- 
CULARE: Walter Dennison. 

3. STUDIES IN THE Lives OF ROMAN EMPRESSES, JULIA MAMAEA: 
Mary Gilmore Williams, Mt. Holyoke College. 

4. THE ATTITUDE oF Dio Casstus TOWARD EPIGRAPHIC SOURCES: 
Duane Reed Stuart, Princeton University. 

5. THe Lost Epirome or Livy: Henry A. Sanders. 

6. THE PRINCIPALES OF THE EARLY EMPIRE: Joseph H. Drake, Univer- 
sity of Michigan. 

7. CENTURIONS AS SUBSTITUTE COMMANDERS OF AUXILIARY CORPS: 
George H. Allen. 

VoL. II. Worp ForMATION IN PrROvENCAL. By Edward L. 
Adams, University of Michigan. Pp. xvii + 607. $4.00 net. 

Vor. III. Latin Puitotocy. Edited by Clarence Linton Meader, 

University of Michigan. Pp. vii + 290. $2.00 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part I. THe USE OF IDEM, IPSE, AND Worps OF RELATED MEAN- 
ING. By Clarence L. Meader. Pp. 1-112. $0.75. 

Part II. A Stupy In LATIN ABSTRACT SUBSTANTIVES. By Manson A. 
Stewart, Yankton College. Pp. 113-78. $0.40. 

Part II]. THe USE oF THE ADJECTIVE AS A SUBSTANTIVE IN THE 
Dre ReruM Natura oF Lucretius. By Frederick T. Swan. Pp. 
179-214. $0.40. 

Part IV. AUTOBIOGRAPHIC ELEMENTS IN LarTIN INSCRIPTIONS. By 
Henry H. Armstrong, Beloit College. Pp. 215-86. $0.40. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

University of Michigan Studies — Continued 

VoL. IV. Roman History AND MyrTuHoLocy. Edited by Henry 
A. Sanders. Pp. viii + 427. $2.50 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part I. Stupies IN THE LIFE oF HELIOGABALUS. By Orma Fitch 
Butler, University of Michigan. Pp. 1-169. $1.25 net. 

Part II. THe MytTa or HeErcuLes aT Rome. By John G. Winter, 
University of Michigan. Pp. 171-273. $0.50 net. 

Part III. Roman Law Stoupies rm Livy. By Alvin E. Evans. Pp. 
275-354. $0.40 net. 

Part IV. Resoniscences or ENntus 1n Stuius Iraticus. By Loura 
B. Woodruff. Pp. 355-424. $0.40 net. 

VoL. V. Sources OF THE Synoptic Gospets. By Rev. Dr. 
Carl S. Patton. Pp. xiii + 263. $1.30 net. 

Size, 28 X 18.5 cm. 4to. 

Vout. VI. ATHENIAN LEKYTHOI WITH OUTLINE DRAWING IN 
GLAZE VARNISH ON A WHITE GrounD. By Arthur Fair- 
banks, Director of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
With 15 plates, and 57 illustrations in the text. Pp. viii + 371. 
Bound in cloth. $4.00 net. 

VoL. VII. ATHENIAN LEKYTHOI WITH OUTLINE DRAWING IN 
Matr CoLor ON A WHITE GROUND, AND AN APPENDIX: 
ADDITIONAL LEKYTHOI WITH OUTLINE DRAWING IN GLAZE 
VARNISH ON A WHITE GrRouUND. By Arthur Fairbanks. 
With 41 plates. Pp. x-+ 275. Bound in cloth. $3.50 net. 

VoL. VIII. Tse Otp TESTAMENT MANUSCRIPTS IN THE FREER 
CoLLecTion. By Henry A. Sanders, University of Michigan. 
With 9 plates showing pages of the Manuscripts in facsimile. 
Pp. viii + 357. Bound in cloth. $3.50 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part I. THE WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF DEUTERONOMY AND JOSHUA. 
With 3 folding plates. Pp. vi-+ 104. $1.25 net. 

Part IJ. THe WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF THE PSALMS. With 1 single 
plate and 5s folding plates. Pp. viii + 105-357. $2.00 net. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

University of Michigan Studies — Continued 

VoL. IX. THE NEw ‘TESTAMENT MANUSCRIPTS IN THE FREER 
CoLLecTion. By Henry A. Sanders, University of Michigan. 
With 8 plates showing pages of the Manuscripts in facsimile. 
Pp. x + 323. Bound in cloth. $3.50 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part I. THe WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF THE Four GosPELs. With 
5 plates. Pp. vu + 247. $2.00 net. 

Part I]. THE WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. 
With 3 plates. Pp. vil, 249-315. $1.25 net. 

VoL. X. THe Coptic MANUSCRIPTS IN THE FREER COLLECTION. 
By William H. Worrell, Hartford Seminary Foundation. With 
12 plates. Pp. xxvi + 396. Bound in cloth. $4.75 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part L THe Coptic PSALTER. The Coptic text in the Sahidic Dialect, 
with an Introduction, and with 6 plates showing pages of the Manu- 
script and Fragments in Facsimile. Pp. xxvi + 112. $2.00 net. 

Part II. A Homity oN THE ARCHANGEL GABRIEL BY CELESTINUS, 
ARCHBISHOP OF ROME, AND A HOMILY ON THE VIRGIN BY THE- 
OPHILUS, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, FROM MANUSCRIPT FRAG- 
MENTS IN THE FREER COLLECTION AND THE BRITISH Museum. The 
Coptic Text, with an Introduction and Translation, and with 6 plates 
showing pages of the Manuscripts in facsimile. Pp. 113-396. $2.50 
net. 

Vor. XI. CoNnTRIBUTIONS TO THE History oF SCIENCE. (Parts 
I and IT ready.) 

Part I. RoBERT OF CHESTER’S LATIN TRANSLATION OF THE ALGEBRA 
OF AL-KHOWARIZMI. With an Introduction, Critical Notes, and an 
English Version. By Louis C. Karpinski, University of Michigan. 
With 4 plates showing pages of manuscripts in facsimile, and 25 dia- 
grams in the text. Pp. vii+ 164. Paper covers. $2.00 net. 

Part II. THe Propromus or Nicotaus StTEeNo’s LatTIN DISSERTA- 
TION ON A SOLID Bopy ENCLOSED BY PROCESS OF NATURE WITHIN 
A Soutip. Translated into English by John G. Winter, University of 
Michigan, with a Foreword by William H. Hobbs. With 7 plates. 
Pp. vil + 169-283. Paper covers. $1.30 net. 

Part III. Vesuvius mm Antiquity. Passages of Ancient Authors, with 
a Translation and Elucidations. By Francis W. Kelsey. Illustrated. 
(In preparation.) 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

University of Michigan Studies — Continued 

Vor. XII. Srupres in East CHRISTIAN AND ROMAN ArT. By 
Charles R. Morey, Princeton University, and Walter Dennison. 
With 67 plates (10 colored) and 91 illustrations in the text. Pp. 
xiii + 175. Bound in cloth. $4.75 net. 

Parts Sold Separately : 

Part I. East CHrisTIAN PAINTINGS IN THE FREER COLLECTION. 
By Charles R. Morey. With 13 plates (10 colored) and 34 illustrations 
in the text. Pp. xili+ 86. Bound in cloth. $2.50 net. 

Part II. A Goitp TREASURE OF THE LATE ROMAN PERIOD FROM 
Ecyrt. By Walter Dennison. With 54 plates and 57 illustrations 
in the text. Pp. 89-175. Bound incloth. $2.50 net. 

Vor. XIII. DocuMENTS FROM THE CarRO GENIZAH IN THE 
FREER COLLECTION. Text, with Translation and an Introduc- 
tion by Richard Gottheil, Columbia University. (In press.) 

VoL. XIV. Two Stuprés In LATER RoMAN AND ByZANTINE ADMIN- 
ISTRATION. By Arthur E. R. Boak and James E. Dunlap, Univer- 
sity of Michigan. Pp. x + 324. Bound in cloth. $2.25 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 

Part I. THe MASTER OF THE OFFICES IN THE LATER ROMAN AND ByYZAN- 
TINE Empires. By Arthur E. R. Boak. Pp. x-+ 160. Paper covers. 
$1.00 net. 

Part IJ. Tse OFrrice oF THE GRAND CHAMBERLAIN IN THE LATER 
ROMAN AND ByzANTINE Empires. By James E. Dunlap. Pp. 161- 
324. $1.00 net. 

Vor. XV. GREEK THEMES IN MODERN MusicaL SETTINGS. By 
Albert A. Stanley, University of Michigan. With 10 plates. 
Pp. xxii + 385. Bound in cloth, $4.00 net. 

Parts Sold Separately in Paper Covers: 
Part I. IncmentaLt Music To Percy MACKAYE’s DRAMA OF SAPPHO 
AND PHaon. Pp. 1-68. $.go net. 

Part II. Music to THE ALCESTIS OF EURIPIDES WITH ENGLISH TEXT. 
Pp. 71-120. $.80 net. 

Part III. Music To THE IPHIGENIA AMONG THE TAURIANS BY EvRIPI- 
DES, WITH GREEK TEXT. Pp. 123-190. $.75 net. 

Part IV. Two FracMENTS oF ANCIENT GREEK Music. Pp. 217-225. 
$.30 net. 

Part V. Music to CANTICA OF THE MENAECHMI OF PLaAuTus. Pp. 
229-263. $.50 net. 

Part VI. Atris: A SympHontc Poem. Pp. 265-383. $1.00 net. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

=> ow 

University of Michigan Studies — Continued 

VoLt. XVI. NicoMAcHUS OF GERASA: INTRODUCTION TO ARITH- 
METIC. Translated into English by Martin Luther D’Ooge, with 
Studies in Greek Arithmetic by Frank Egleston Robbins and 
Louis C. Karpinski. Pp. vii + 318. Bound in cloth, $3.50 net. 

Vots. XVII, XVIII, XTX, XX. Royvat CORRESPONDENCE OF THE 
ASSYRIAN EMPIRE, Translated into English, with a translitera- 
tion of the Text and a Commentary. By Leroy Waterman, 
University of Michigan. (Jn press.) 

VoL. XXI. THE MINOR PROPHETS IN THE FREER COLLECTION AND 
THE BERLIN FRAGMENT OF GENESIS. By Henry A. Sanders, 
University of Michigan, and Carl Schmidt, University of Berlin. 
With plates. (Jn press.) 

VoL. XXII. A Papyrus CoDEX OF THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. By 
Campbell Bonner, University of Michigan. (Jn press.) 

FACSIMILES OF MANUSCRIPTS 
Size, 40.5 X 35 cm. 

FACSIMILE OF THE WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF DEUTERONOMY 
AND JOSHUA IN THE FREER COLLECTION. With an Introduc- 
tion by Henry A. Sanders. Pp. x; 201 heliotype plates. The 
University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1910. 

Limited edition, distributed only to Libraries, under certain conditions, A list of Libraries 
containing this Facsimile is printed in University of Michigan Studies, Humanistic Sertes, Vol- 

ume VIII, pp. 351-353. 

Size, 34 26cm. 

FACSIMILE OF THE WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF THE FouR GOSPELS 
IN THE FREER COLLECTION. With an Introduction by Henry A. 
Sanders. Pp. x; 372 heliotype plates and 2 colored plates. 
The University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1912. 

Limited edition, distributed only to Libraries, under certain conditions. A list of Libraries 
containing this Facsimile is printed in University of Michigan Studies, Humanistic Series, Volume 

IX, pp. 317-320. 

Size, 30.5 40.6 cm. 

FACSIMILE OF THE WASHINGTON MANUSCRIPT OF THE MINOR PROPH- 
ETS IN THE FREER COLLECTION AND THE BERLIN FRAGMENT 
OF GENESIS, with an Introduction by Henry A. Sanders. With 
130 plates. (In press.) 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

University of Michigan Studies — Continued 

SCIENTIFIC SERIES 

Size, 28 X 18.5 cm. 4°. Bound in cloth 
Vor. I. THE CIRCULATION AND SLEEP. By John F. Shepard, Uni- 
versity of Michigan. Pp. ix + 83, with an Atlas of 63 plates, 
bound separately. Text and Atlas, $2.50 net. 

Vo. II. StTuprES ON DIVERGENT SERIES AND SUMMABILITY. By 
Walter B. Ford, University of Michigan. Pp. xi+ 194. $2.50. 

Size, 23.5 X 15.5 cm. 
Vot. III. THE GEOLOGY OF THE NETHERLANDS EAstT INpDIEs. By 
H. A. Brouwer. With 18 plates and 17 text figures. Pp. xii + 
160. $3.00. 

Vor. IV. THe GLactaAt ANTICYCLONES: THE POLES OF THE 
ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION. By William Herbert Hobbs. 
With 3 plates and 53 figures. (In press.) 

University of Michigan Publications 
HUMANISTIC PAPERS 

General Editor: EUGENE S. McCARTNEY. 

Size, 22.7 X 15.2 cm. 8°. Bound in cloth 
THe LIFE AND WorKS OF GEORGE SYLVESTER Morris: A CHAP- 
TER IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN THOUGHT IN THE NINE- 
TEENTH CENTURY. By Robert M. Wenley, University of Michi- 
gan. Pp. xv + 332. $1.50 net. 

LATIN AND GREEK IN AMERICAN EDUCATION, WITH SYMPOSIA ON 
THE VALUE OF HUMANISTIC STuDIES. Edited by Francis W. 
Kelsey. Pp. x + 396. $1.50. (Out of print; new edition in 
preparation.) 

THE PRESENT POSITION OF LATIN AND GREEK, THE VALUE OF LATIN AND 
GREEK AS EDUCATIONAL INSTRUMENTS, THE NATURE OF CULTURE 
STUDIES. 

SYMPOSIA ON THE VALUE OF HUMANISTIC, PARTICULARLY CLASSICAL, 
STUDIES AS A PREPARATION FOR THE STUDY OF MEDICINE, ENGINEER- 
ING, LAW AND THEOLOGY. 

A SYMPOSIUM ON THE VALUE OF HUMANISTIC, PARTICULARLY CLASSICAL, 
STUDIES AS A TRAINING FOR MEN OF AFFAIRS. 

A SYMPOSIUM ON THE CLASSICS AND THE NEW EDUCATION. 

A SYMPOSIUM ON THE DOCTRINE OF FORMAL DISCIPLINE IN THE LIGHT 
OF CONTEMPORARY PSYCHOLOGY. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

NN i — 

University of Michigan Publications — Continued 

Size, 18 X 12 cm. 
THE MENAECHMI OF PrLautus. The Latin Text, with a Trans- 
lation by Joseph H. Drake, University of Michigan. Pp. xi 
+ 129. $.60 net. 
This edition of the Menaechmi was prepared, with stage directions, as a libretto for the 

presentation of the play at the University of Michigan in 1890. It was revised and republished 
In 1910, 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

Vot. I. Stupies IN SHAKESPEARE, MILTON AND DONNE. By Mem- 
bers of the English Department of the University of Michigan. 
Pp. villi + 232. Cloth. $2.50. 

VoL. II. ELIZABETHAN PROVERB LORE IN LYLy’s ‘EUPHUES’ AND IN 
PETTIE’s ‘PETITE PALACE,’ WITH PARALLELS FROM SHAKESPEARE. 
By Morris P. Tilley. (J press.) 

HISTORY AND POLITICAL SCIENCE 
The first three volumes of this series were published as ‘Historical Studies” under the 
direction of the Department of History. Volumes IV and V were published without numbers. 
Vo. I. A History OF THE PRESIDENT’S CABINET. By Mary Louise 
Hinsdale. Pp. ix + 355. Cloth. $2.00. 

VoL. II. ENGLIsH RULE IN GASCONY, 1199-1259, WITH SPECIAL 
REFERENCE TO THE Towns. By Frank Burr Marsh. Pp. 
xi-+ 178. Cloth. $1.25. 

Vo. II]. THE Coror LINE in Onto; A History or RAcE PREjv- 
DICE IN A TYPICAL NORTHERN STATE. By Frank Uriah Quillan. 
Pp. xvi+ 178. Cloth. $1.50. 

VoL. IV. THE SENATE AND TREATIES, 1789-1817. THE DEVELOP- 
MENT OF THE TREATY-MAKING FUNCTIONS OF THE UNITED STATES 
SENATE DURING THEIR FORMATIVE PERIOD. By Ralston Hayden, 
University of Michigan. Pp. xvi + 237. Cloth. $1.50 net. 

VoL. V. WILLIAM PLUMER’S MEMORANDUM OF PROCEEDINGS IN THE 
UNITED STATES SENATE, 1803-1807. Edited by Everett Somer- 
ville Brown, University of Michigan. Pp. xi + 673. Cloth. 
$3.50. 

Vor. VI. THe GRAIN SUPPLY OF ENGLAND DURING THE NAPOLEONIC 
Periop. By W. F. Galpin, University of Oklahoma. Pp. xi + 
305. Cloth. $3.00. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

University of Michigan Publications — Continued 

CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE MUSEUM OF GEOLOGY 

VoL. I. THE STRATIGRAPHY AND FAUNA OF THE HACKBERRY STAGE 
OF THE UPPER DEVONIAN. By Carroll Lane Fenton and Mildred 
Adams Fenton. With 45 plates, 9 text figures and one map. 
Pp. xi + 260. Cloth. $2.75. ; 

All communications relative to the Numbers of Volume II should be addressed to the 

Librarian, General Library, University of Michigan. 

Vor. II. No. 1. A Possible Explanation of Fenestration in the 
Primitive Reptilian Skull, with Notes on the Temporal Region 
of the Genus Dimetrodon, by E. C. Case. Pp. 1-12, with five 
illustrations. $0.30. 

No. 2. Occurrence of the Collingwood Formation in Michigan, by 
R. Ruedemann and G. M. Ehlers. Pp. 13-18. $0.15. 

No. 3. Silurian Cephalopods of Northern Michigan, by Aug. F. 
Foerste. Pp. 19-86, with 17 plates. $1.00. 

No. 4. A Specimen of Stylemys nebrascensis Leidy, with the Skull 
Preserved, by E. C. Case. Pages 87-91, with 7 text figures. 
Price, $0.20. 

No. 5. Note on a New Species of the Eocene Crocodilian Allo- 
gnathosuchus A. wartheni, by E. C. Case. Pages 93-97, with 1 
plate and 1 text figure. Price, $0.20. 

No. 6. Two New Crinoids from the Devonian of Michigan, by 
G. M. Ehlers. Pages 99-104, with 1 plate. Price, $0.20. 

PAPERS OF THE MICHIGAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCE, 
ARTS AND LETTERS 
(containing Papers submitted at Annual Meetings) 
Editors; EUGENE S. McCARTNEY AND PETER OKKELBERG 
Size, 24.2 X 16.5 cm. 8°. Bound in cloth 
Vot. I (1921). With 38 plates and 5 maps. Pp. xi+ 424. $2.00 
net. 
VoL. II (1922). With 11 plates. Pp. xi+ 226. $2.00 net. Bound 
in paper, $1.50 net. 
VoL. IIT (1923). With 26 plates, 15 text figures and three maps. Pp. 
xii + 473. $3.00 net. Bound in paper, $2.25 net. 

VoL. IV (1924), Part I. With 27 plates, 22 text figures and 3 maps. 
Pp. xii + 631. $3.00 net. Bound in paper, $2.25 net. 

VoL. IV (1924), Part II. A Key To THE SNAKES OF THE UNITED 
STATES, CANADA AND LOWER CALIFORNIA. By Frank N. Blan- 
chard. With 78 text figures. Pp. xiii +65. Cloth. $1.75. 

VoL. V (1925). Pp. xii+ 479. With 27 plates, 26 text figures and 
Imap. $3.0onet. Bound in paper, $2.25 net. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

HELLENIC HISTORY 
By GEORGE WILLIS BOTSFORD 
A survey of Greek life from its primitive beginnings to the year 30 B.c., with an account of the 

political, social, economic, artistic, intellectual, and religious development. 

dantly illustrated. 

XIV. 

A HISTORY OF ROME TO 

The book is abun- 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Country and People XVI. 
The Minoan Age 
The Middle Age: Transition from XVII. 
Minoan to Hellenic Life 
Economic Growth and Colonial Ex- XVII. 
pansion 
Evolution of the City-State, Am- 
phictyonies, and Leagues AIX 
Crete, Lacedaemon, and the Pelo- 
ponnesian League XX. 
Athens: From Monarchy to Democ- XXI-. 
racy 
Intellectual Awakening: (I) Social XXII 
and Literary Progress AAIIT 
Intellectual Awakening: (II) Re- XXIV. 
ligious, Moral,and Scientific Prog- XXV. 
ress XXXVI. 
Conquest of the Asiatic Greeks by 
the Lydians and the Persians XXVII 
The War with Persia and Carthage 
The Age of the War Heroes: | XXVIII 
(I) Political and Economic 
The Age of the War Heroes: 
(II) Society and Culture XAXIX 
The Age of Pencles : (I) Impenalism 
The Age of Pericles: (II) The Athe- XXX. 
nian Democracy 
Price $4.00 

CHAPTER 

The Age of Pericles: (III) So- 
ciety and Public Works 

The Age of Pericles: (IV) Thought, 
Culture, and Character 

The Peloponnesian War to the 
Beginning of the Sicilian Ex- 
pedition 

The Sicilian Expedition and the 
Last Years of the War 

A Cultural Revolution 

The Lacedaemonian Empire and 
the Ascendancy of Thebes 

Sicily and Magna Graecia 

The Rise of Macedon to 337 

Economy and Society 

Social Aspects of the State 

Art and Intelligence in the Fourth 
Century 

Alexander’s Empjre and the Hel- 
lenistic Kingdoms 

The Organization and Adminis- 
tration of the Hellenistic 

States 

Hellenistic Culture: (I) City 
Construction and 

Hellenistic Culture: (II) Philos- 

ophy, Science, and Literature 

965 A.D. 

By ArtHuR E. R. Boak, Professor of Ancient History in the University 
of Michigan 

A well-proportioned and accurately written history of Rome from the beginning of civilization 
in Italy to 565 a.D. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

The Sources for the Study of Early Roman History 

PART I 
The Forerunners of Rome in Italy 
PART II 
The Early Monarchy and the Republic, from Prehistoric Times to 27 B.C. 

PART III 

The Principate of Early Empire: 27 B.C.—285 A.D. 
PART IV 

The Autocracy or Late Empire: 285-565 A.D. 
Epilogue Chronological Table Bibliographical Note Index 
Price $3.25 

On sale wherever books are sold 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

HANDBOOKS OF ARCHAEOLOGY AND ANTIQUITIES 
EpITeD BY PERCY GARDNER anp FRANCIS W. KELSEY 

THE PRINCIPLES OF GREEK ART 

By Percy GarpNn_er, Litt. D., Lincoln and Merton Professor of Classical 
Archaeology in the University of Oxford. 

Makes clear the artistic and psychological principles underlying Greek art, 
especially sculpture, which is treated as a characteristic manifestation of the 
Greek spirit, a development parallel to that of Greek literature and religion. 
While there are many handbooks of Greek archaeology, this volume holds a 
unique place. 

New Edition. Illustrated. Cloth $3.25 

HANDBOOK OF GREEK SCULPTURE 

By ErRNest A. GARDNER, M.A., Professor of Archaeology in University 
College, London. 

A comprehensive outline of our present knowledge of Greek sculpture, dis- 
tinguishing the different schools and periods, and showing the development of 
each. This volume, fully illustrated, fills an important gap and is widely used 

as a text-book. 
Illustrated. Cloth $4.25 

ATHENS AND ITS MONUMENTS 

By CHarLtes HEALD WELLER, of the University of Iowa. 

This book embodies the results of many years of study and of direct observation 
during different periods of residence in Athens. It presents in concise and 
readable form a description of the ancient city in the light of the most recent 
investigations. Profusely illustrated with Half-tones and Line Engravings. 

Iliustrated. Cloth $4.00 

ROMAN FESTIVALS 

By W. WarDE Fow er, M.A., Fellow and Sub-Rector of Lincoln College, 
Oxford. 

This book covers in a concise form almost all phases of the public wor- 
ship of the Roman state, as well as certain ceremonies which, strictly speak- 
ing, lay outside that public worship. It will be found very useful to students of 
Roman literature and history as well as to students of anthropology and the 
history of religion. 
Cloth $2.50 
On sale wherever books are sold 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 

Ligne! Troan 

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

Ligne! Troan 

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 

Ios a ore i nn 
| ae F i | 

ite a" 
“— 
ee 2 nt iy a ile 

sift | ei ee i 

— | 
we i wh 
A a Woy
