P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI LIBRI 

THE 

ANNALS OF TACITUS 

EDITED 
WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 

BY 

HENRY FURNEAUX, MA. 

FORMERLY FELLOW AND TUTOR OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD 

VOL. I: BOOKS I—VI 

SECOND EDITION 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD 

Oxford University Press 
London Edinburgh Glasgoto Copenbagen 
New York Toronto Melbourne Cape Town 
Bombay Calcutta Madras | Sbangbai 
Humphrey Milford Publisher to the UNivEnsrTY 

THE ANNALS OF TACITUS 

FURNEAUX 

VOL. I. 

Div. Library, Ur'v. Calif., Santa Crug 

First edition 1883 
Second edition 1896 
Neprinted 1934 

Printed photographically from the sheets of 
the Second Edition in Great Britain by 
LOWE & BRYDONE, LONDON 

PA 
6705 

f= 
| 836 
Made 

MATT 70 0 auct, t 
ET OST. Tay Tyo .We—d eu 
-lD[—— A 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

IN sending out, after nearly thirteen years' interval, 
a new edition of this portion of the Annals, much of the 
Preface of 1883 has to be repeated, with additional 
acknowledgment of new sources of information since 
that date. 1 

The text is now that of Halm's fourth edition (1883), 
which has, however, been departed from in several places, 
for reasons given in each case!. In accordance with 
several suggestions, I have now added brief critical 
notes, which, it is hoped, will sufficiently show the 
. actual Medicean text, wherever it has not been retained, 
and the originator of that adopted in its place, as well 
as a few of the other emendations proposed. For all 
fuller information on this subject, the apparatus criticus 
of Baiter (in Orelli's edition) and Ritter (1863) must be 
consulted ?. 

The sections into which the chapters are sub-divided 
will be familiar to those acquainted with the Oxford 
text (Parker, 1869): they have been also specified in 

in the *editio princeps? Where Baiter 
and Ritter differ in their citation of the 

! See notes on I. 10, 35; 11, 1; 29,2; 
32, 35 34,15; 2-8, 4; 13, 35 22, 35 24, 

5; 30, 23 3. 18, 1; 19, 2; 20, 3; 61, 2; 
4- 33» 43 37,53 44 55 59,53 71, 55 6. 
11,7; 19, 1; 41, I. 

? [ have omitted notice of many faults 
of spelling, or other unmistakable cor- 
ruptions in the MS., corrected once for all 

MS. I have generally followed the latter, 
but I have sometimes been able to correct 
both by means of Andresen’s Programm 
‘De codicibus Mediceis Annalium Taciti,’ 
Berlin, 1892. 

VI PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

all references to other parts of Tacitus; which will, as 
it is hoped, greatly lessen the labour of consulting 
them !. 

In preparing the commentary all the principal editions 
have been freely used. Among earlier ones, especial 
obligation must be acknowledged to Walthers full 
summary of the chief textual criticism down to his 
own date (Halle, 1831), and the valuable edition of 
Ruperti (Hanover, 1834), in which all the Excursus of 
Lipsius, and- the chief results of the labour of other 
commentators down to that time are brought together. 
Among later editions those most consulted have been 
Ritter (Cambridge, 1848), Orelli (2nd ed., by Baiter. 
Zurich, 1859), E. Jacob (2nd ed., Paris, 1885). Draeger 
(5th ed., Leipzig, 1887), Pfitzner (2nd ed., Gotha, 1892), 
and Nipperdey (9th ed., by G. Andresen, Berlin, 1892), 
also the editions of two American scholars, that of Pro- 
fessor Holbrooke (London, 1882) and that of Professor 
Allen (Boston, 1890). 

lo these, most especially to Nipperdey and Andresen, 
I am repeatedly and constantly indebted; and it is the 
more necessary for me here to acknowledge my general 
obligation in the most emphatic manner, inasmuch as 
the special sources of each note are often too complex 
to be easily stated. 

Among separate works bearing on the criticism and 
interpretation of the text, those most used have been 
the old ‘Lexicon Taciteum ' of Bótticher (Berlin, 1830). 
and as much as has appeared of the complete and ex- 
haustive new Lexicon of Gerber and Greef (Leipzig, 
1377-1895)?, also Draeger's valuable treatise ‘ Ueber 

' Similar sections are given, in citations — four * fasciculi? had appeared; IL have now 
of Livy and other prose authors, from the — been able to use twelve, containing 1,376 
Teubner texts. pages, down to * reliquus." 

* At the date of my first edition only 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. vil 
Syntax und Stil des Tacitus' (3rd ed., Leipzig, 1882), 
Pfitzner, * Die Annalen des Tacitus kritisch beleuchtet ' 
(Halle, 1869), Johann Müller, ‘ Beitráge zur Kritik und 
Irklàrung des Cornelius Tacitus’ (3rd section, Ann. 
I-VI, Innsbruck, 1873), and dissertations by Ritter 
( Rheinisches Museum, 1861, 1862)', and E. Wolfflin ?. 

In illustration of the subject-matter much use has 
been always made of Mommsen's * Rómisches Staats- 
recht, and of his ' Res gestae Divi Augusti, or edition 
of and commentary on the * Monumentum Ancyranum, 
also of Marquardt's ‘ Rómische Staatsverwaltung, Fried- 
laender's * Darstellungen aus der Sittengeschichte Roms’ 
(sth ed., Leipzig, 1881), Otto Hirschfeld's ‘ Untersuch- 
ungen auf dem Gebiete der Róniischen Verwaltungs- 
geschichte ' (Berlin, 1876), and Dean Merivale's ' History of 
the Romans under the Empire. New editions of some 
of these works have appeared since the date of my first 
edition?, and many additions and alterations had con- 
sequently to be made in statements based on them; 
also since then the two parts of the third volume of the 
‘Staatsrecht’ have appeared (Leipzig, 1887, 1888), and 
a flood of light has been shed on the whole condition 
of the Provinces by the fifth volume of Mommsen's 
' Rómische Geschichte’ (Berlin, 1885) ; Various obli- 
gations to a large number of other works, which have 
been consulted for more special purposes, will be found 
mentioned in their places. 

' See Introd. i. p. 8, n. 1. 

* For full references to these sce Introd. 
v. p. 38, n. 5.  Referenoes to many other 
works bearing on special points will be 
found in various places in the Introduction 
and notes. 

* The first and second volumes of the 
* Staatsrecht' are now cited from the third 
edition (Leipzig, 1887), the *R. G. D. A.’ 

quardt's *Staatsverwaltung' 

from the second (Berlin, 1883), Mar- 
from the 
second (Leipzig, 1881-1885). 

' 4 In citing this I have given refer- 
ences both to the original work, and 

also to the English translation, * The Pro- 
,vinces of the Roman Empire’ (London, 

1886), 

vill PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

The first edition had also derived valuable assistance 
from two unpublished sources. 

Mr. T. F. Dallin, M.A., late Public Orator in the 
University of Oxford, and formerly Fellow and Tutor 
of Queen's College, had originally undertaken an edition 
of this portion of the Annals for the Delegates of the 
University Press; and the materials collected by him, 
unfortunately far less than could have been desired !, 
were entrusted to me after his death, to be used as 

I thought fit 2) - | 

Most kind and valuable assistance was also rendered 
to me by the Venerable Archdeacon Edwin Palmer, D.D., 
then one of the Delegates of the Press, not only in the 
shape of numerous suggestions tending to improve the 
substance and form of a large part of the Introduction 
and notes examined by him, but also by permission given 
to study and use the materials collected for lectures given 
on these Books of the Annals during his tenure of the 
Corpus Professorship of Latin, which were most helpful 
on a number of points of scholarship throughout the 
volume. I deeply regret that his lamented death pre- 
vented my receiving any additional advice from him in 
the present revision. 

On the other hand, the improvement of this edition 
has been very greatly assisted by.the criticisms made on 
its predecessor. The reviewers of the work, while most 
indulgent to its shortcomings, have very much helped 
me in removing them; and due attention has been also’ 
paid to many most valuable suggestions and corrections 
privately received. Among those friends who have thus 

! This would be fully accounted for by the Excursus on the ‘Lex Papia Poppaea,’ 
his untimely death, and by the pressure of and several notes or parts of notes, especi- 
other occupations in the years immediately ally on some of the early chapters of Bogk 
preceding it. iii, which are duly acknowledged where 

? J havetaken from them the chief part of they occur. 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 1X 

assisted me I must make special mention of Mr. F. 
Haverfield, who has called my attention to many points 
requiring reconsideration, and has directed me to many 
inscriptions and special treatises of which I should other- 
wise have been ignorant. 

Thanks to such aid, it will, I hope, be found that this 
edition, whatever its present demerits, shows a consider- 
able advance on the former, both as regards the cor- 
rection of errors, and the recognition of later means of 
information. In the Introduction, especially, large por- 
tions have been altogether re-written, and the whole 
carefully revised, and few pages of the notes are without 
more or less important additions and alterations ; while 
the amount of minor errors to be removed has proved 
to be far beyond what my critics had noted or I had 
myself expected to find. 

Under these circumstances the size of the volume has 
been perhaps unfortunately increased; and some apology 
seems due for an addition of about fifty pages to an 
amount of commentary which many may have already 
thought excessive. It was, however, hardly possible to 
bring the book up to date without some increase in bulk; 
and I may say that the new matter would have consider- 
ably exceeded the amount mentioned if it had not been 
compensated by omissions and curtailments wherever it 
seemed possible to make such without loss of usefulness. 

To any who have carried their studies deeply into the 
vast array of literature on Tacitus enumerated in the 
* Bibliotheca Scriptorum Classicorum ' of Engelmann and 
Preuss (8th ed., Leipzig, 1882) !, such a list of works 

! Nearly forty pages, most of them and the list of separate treatises on special 
closely printed in small type, are taken subjects or questions. Several pages more 
up with enumerations of editions or trans- would be required to complete the cata- 
lations of the whole or parts of Tacitus, logue to the present date. 

X PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

made use of as is given above, or to be gathered from the 
whole of this volume, will seem meagre in the extreme ; 
and even if only well-known writers be taken account of, 
I fear that the most competent critics will be mainly 
impressed by the omissions. But whatever hopes I had 
formed that the book would give more assistance than 
has been hitherto easily accessible to the general student 
of this portion of Tacitus have been far more than 
realized by the reception given to it, and by the demand 
for a new edition at an earlier date than I had expected. 
The defects still evident in it will not, I hope, be set 
down to negligence, but will be excused as those of an 
editor who has long since lost the experience which those 
engaged in teaching acquire of what is most likely to 
interest or perplex intelligent students. 

Classical authors are mostly cited from the texts of 
the Teubner series; and it is hoped that the abbrevia- 
tions used in referring to them, or to editors or other 
modern writers, will generally explain themselves. As 
regards Latin inscriptions, the * Monumentum Ancy- 
ranum' (Mon. Anc) is cited from. Mommsen's edition 
above referred to; the ' Oratio Claudii’ from the Appen- 
dix to Book XI, in vol. ii.; most others from the ‘ Cor- 
pus Inscriptionum Latinarum ' (C. I. L.) or the collections 
of Orelli and Henzen or of Wilmanns; Greek inscrip- 
tions are cited from Boeckh’s ‘ Corpus’ (C. I. G.) or the 
‘Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum' (C. I. Att.) ; a few 
more in both languages from the ' Ephemeris Epigraphica’ 
(Eph. Epig): any others given are usually cited at 
secondhand. In numismatics references are made to 
Eckhel (doctrina numorum veterum?) and to Cohen 
(€ Médailles Impériales, 2nd ed., 1879) ; on other works 
of art, mostly to J. J. Bernoulli (! Rómische Iconographie, 
Stuttgart, 1882-1894), sometimes to the ‘ Iconographie 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. xi 

Romaine' of Visconti and Mongez; on questions of 
Roman topography, mostly to Professor Middleton 
(‘The Remains of Ancient Rome, London, 1892), some- 
times also to Mr. Dyer and Mr. Burn. In references to 
Dr. Smith's Dictionaries, the authors of the articles are 
mostly cited by name; on questions of general Latin 
Lexicography it is to be understood that the Latin 
Dictionary of Messrs Lewis and Short is usually 
referred to. | 

It hardly needs to be said that, out of the larg 
number of references given, whether to ancient authors, 
to inscriptions, or to modern works, a vast majority had 
been already given in previous editions or lexicons, and 
are due to no research on my part. I may, however, say 
that, with some allowance for possible oversights, I be- 
lieve that I have verified all which are not expressly 
cited at secondhand, and that I have also verified and 
consulted a very large number more, which, for various 
reasons, it did not seem necessary to insert. 

OXFORD, Jay, 1896. 

INTRODUCTION. 

CHAPTER I. On the life and works of Tacitus; and on the first Medicean MS. 
CHAPTER II. Genuineness of the Annals. 

CHAPTER III. On the sources of information open to Tacitus for this period, and their 
probable value. 

CHAPTER IV. On the use made by Tacitus of his materials, and the influence of his 
ideas and opinions on his treatment of history. 

CHAPTER V. On the Syntax and Style of Tacitus, with especial reference to the Annals. 
CHAPTER VI. On the constitution of the early principate. 

CHAPTER VII. On the general administration and condition of the Roman world, 
at the death of Áugustus, and during the principate of Tiberius. 

CHAPTER VIII. On the estimate in Tacitus of the character and personal government 
of Tiberius. 

CHAPTER IX. Genealogy of the family of Augustus and of the Claudian Caesars, with 
notes. 

CHAPTER I. 

ON. THE LIFE AND WORKS OF TACITUS; AND ON 
THE FIRST MEDICEAN MS. 

THE personal history of Tacitus is known to us only from allusions 

to it in his own works, and from the letters of his friend, the younger . 

Pliny; from which sources, scanty as they are, we yet learn something 
more of his biography than is known of that of many other great 
writers. 

A few fixed dates help to determine others. He was betrothed in 
marriage during the consulship of his father-in-law, in 830, a.p. 777; 
he was praetor at the ludi saeculares celebrated by Domitian, in 841, 
A.D. 88?, It is also stated that his * dignitas ' or career of office began, 
with (as is generally assumed) the quaestorship, under Vespasian, and 
reached a second step, presumably that of a tribunate or aedileship, under 
Titus?. He would thus have filled these offices respectively not later 

! See Agr. 9, 7. 2 See Ann. 11. I1, 3. a: See Il $T, 
VOL. I. ! B 

2 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. I. 

than in 832 and 834, 4.D. 79 and 81; and would have been, on this 
supposition, at least twenty-five years old at the earliest of these dates. 

On the other hand, Pliny, who must have been born in 814 or 815, 
A.D. 61 or 62!, speaks of Tacitus and himself as *aetate propemodum 
aequales ;' adding, however, that the oratorical reputation of his friend 
was already established. when his own professional career began*. It 
appears to follow, that the birth of Tacitus, while it cannot be placed 
later than 807, 4.D. 54, can hardly have taken place much before that 

te. In other words, he must have been born in one of the last years 
of Claudius, or in the first of Nero *. 

His parentage and family are unknown. We can assume the nobility 
of no ‘Cornelius,’ as such, since the extension of that name to the 
10,000 freedmen of Sulla‘; and the cognomen is one of those which 
appear to indicate a servile origin". Even if this be so, most of the 
equestrian, and many even of the senatorial, families in this age could 
claim no higher origin *; and although the Cornelii Taciti are unknown 
in the Fasti, one of them at least had reached the ‘ equestris nobilitas’ 
of a procuratorship in the time of the elder Pliny?; and, as the name 
is rare, may probably have been related to the historian. It is again 
to be inferred that he belonged to a family of some consideration, from 
his admission to the quaestorship and senate, at the earliest, or almost 
the earliest, legal age. 

Throughout the letters of Pliny, in the allusions of Tertullian, Vopiscus, 
Jerome, and Orosius, and in the second Medicean MS., he has no fuller 
name than ‘Cornelius Tacitus, The praenomen ‘Gaius’ is given to 
him by Sidonius Apollinaris, a scholar of the middle of the fifth century *, 
but that of * Publius, given in the first Medicean MS., is now shown to 

be correct by an inscription*. ..<«. «- UE Lo xo wt 
. Assuming the genuineness of the Dialogue ‘de Oratoribus, we may 
suppose him to describe in it the studies of his boyhood, and their 

1 See Epp.6.20,5.  ? Epp. 7.20, 3,4. what long) between his tribuneship or 

5 It is suggested by C. L. Urlichs 
(De vita et honoribus Taciti, Wiirzburg, 
1879) that the ‘dignitas inchoata’ by 
Vespasian may have been no more than ad- 
mission to the *ordo senatorius' as *tri- 
bunus militum laticlavius ' (see Momms. 
Staatsr. i. 545), and that the quaestor- 
ship and actual admission to the senate 
may have been granted by Titus, and the 
further steps by Domitian. This would 
allow Tacitus to liave been born as late 
a3 S09, A.D.,56, which would bring his 
age nearer to that of Pliny, and would 
diminish. the interval (otherwise some- 

orna me ALBI aute! Bap. m e ee 

aedileship (which could thus be placed in 
A. D. 83) and his praetorship. It seems, 
however, doubtful whether ‘dignitas in- 
choata' could properly be used of any- 

. thing less than his admission to actual 

magistracy and to the senate. 

* Appian. B. C. 1. 100. 

5 See Merivale, Hist. ch. Ixviii, p. 605; 
referring to Zumpt, Bevólkerung im Al- 
terthum, p. 37. 

* Ann. 13. 27, 2. 

? Pl. N. H. 7. 17, $ 76. 

* Sid. Ap. Epp. 4. 14 (22 Baret). 

* See below, p. 4. 

Cuar. I.) 

LIFE AND WORKS OF TACITUS. 3 

defects!, corrected in his own case by an ardent study of the great 
classical models of Roman eloquence, particularly Cicero. He lays 
the scene of this Dialogue in 827, a.p. 74?, when he would be not more 
than twenty, possibly not more than eighteen years of age; and repre- 
sents himself in it as even then on terms of friendship with the leaders 
of the Roman bar*. There is considerable probability in the suggestion 
that he was also at some time a pupil of Quintilian *. 

Three years later, Cn. Julius Agricola, who had already reached the 
first rank in the state, and established the reputation which he was 
afterwards to extend, selected him, a young man of from twenty-one 
to twenty-three, as his son in-law *. The rank, and the personal char- 
acter of Agricola, justify us in assuming, that the chosen husband of 
his daughter would be a young man not only of moral excellence, but 
of already assured position and promise. 

Some two to four years later, he entered the senate as quaestor *. By 
the age of thirty-two or thirty-four, he had attained, besides the praetor- 
ship, a place among the * Quindecimviri sacris faciundis’,’ one of the old 
priestly colleges, the members of which were generally men of good rank 
and family. 

Up to this time Tacitus may be assumed to have lived in Rome, 
employed chiefly in the forensic practice, his eminence in which has 
been described by Pliny; perhaps also occupied in such literary work 
as could be safely pursued, or in collecting material for greater things in 
contemplation. | 

During the next four years, from 842 to 846, 4.p. 89 to 93, he was 
absent from Rome *, probably in command of some Caesarian province 
of the second rank?. That of Gallia Belgica has been suggested, as 
a position in which he may have acquired such personal knowledge as 
he shows respecting the German peoples. 

! Dial. 30-33. His assumption of the 
*toga virilis would about correspond 
with the beginning of the reaction under 
the Flavii, which extended not only to 
morals (3. 55, 5) but also to literature, as 
seen in the dethronement of Seneca (see 
on 13. 3, 2). 

. 17, 2: see Peterson and Gude- 

Dial. xlv. . 
5 Agr. 9, 7. He calls himself *iu- 

venis! at that time, and describes her as - 

* egregiae spei.' 

€ See above, p. 1. 7 Ann. 1I. 11, 3. 

* Agr. 45, 4. Some make his absence 
begin and end a year later, but he would 
appear to have left Rome nearly four 
years before the death of Agricola (Aug. 
23, A.D. 93). 

? For a list of such see below, ch. vii. 
p.116. He could also have been a *legatus 
legionis' in one of the greater provinces, 
but such a military post would have been 
less suitable to him. As proconsul of 
any of the senatorial provinces held by 
ex-praetors, or as legatus to a proconsul, 
he would only have been absent for onc 
year, nor would the ‘sortitio’ for such 
a province have come so soon after his 
praetorship. 

B 2 

4 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. I. 

The reign of terror during the last three years of Domitian, from 846 
to 849, A.D. 93 to 96, he appears to describe as an eye-witness '. 

Hitherto he must have been acceptable to the princes under whom 
he had lived?; and even in these last years he appears, by his own 
confession, to have shown no more courage or independence than the 
rest of the senate, with whom, in his self-reproach, he identifies himself '; 
but the lasting influence on his mind of the memory of this period will 
be found traceable in all his writings, and strengthened, rather than 
weakened, by the force of time*. It is hardly to be wondered at, that 
one who had lived through such scenes should be haunted through life by 
the spectre of Domitian. 

In 850 or 851, A.D. 97 or 98, he attained consular rank, as ' suffectus,’ 
and in that capacity delivered the funeral eulogy on L. Verginius Rufus, 
the famous legatus of Upper Germany of 4. p. 68°. 

In 853, A.D. 100, he was associated with Pliny in the prosecution, 
more successful in apparent than in substantial results, of Marius Priscus, 
proconsul of Africa*. It is on this occasion only that any particular 
cause pleaded by the great orator is recorded, or the grave dignity of his 
ora.ory especially mentioned *. 

Our only further knowledge of his personal history is given by 
a recently discovered inscription showing him to have been proconsul of 
Asia9. "The date, which is not given, would be in the usual course some 
twelve or fourteen or possibly sixteen years after that of the consulship, 

! Agr. 45, 4. 

? His language (in H. 1. 1, 4) seems to 
imply that in his offices he had been 
a * candidatus Caesaris." 

* Agr. 45, I. 

* See bclow, ch. viii. p. 157. 

5 See Pl. Epp. 2. 1, 6. The question 
of date turns on that of the death of 
Verginius, who has been generally sup- 
posed from this letter to have died in the 
lifetime of Nerva; but most recent au- 
thorities have followed Asbach in making 
him still living in 98. Pliny elsewhere 
(Pan. 58) says to Trajan, *erat in senatu 
ter consul, cum tu tertium consulatum 
recusabas. The third consulship refused 
by Trajan must have been that of A.D. 
99, and his refusal must have been made 
known at that time in 98 when he would 
have been designated to the office. There 
was therefore a senator living in that year 
who had been three times consul; and 
the rarity of this distinction, coupled 
with the fact that Verginius was certainly 
cos. iii in Jan. 97, leads to the supposi- 
tion that he must be referred to. On the 

. other hand, E. Klebs argues (Rhein. Mus. 

44. 1889, pp. 273-279) that, as Trajan 
gave several third consulships, Nerva may 
also have done so in more than the one 
instance known to us: and it is certainly 
difficult to suppose that the *princeps 
optimus atque — amicissimus! whom 
Verginius left living was other than the 
one nearest to him in age. to whom 
he owed his third consulship, and to 
whom he was returning thanks in the 
senate when he met with the accident 
which after some interval caused his 
death. 

$ Pl. Epp. 2. r1; Juv. Sat. 1, 49. 

7 Pl. Epp. 2. 11, 17. 

® See Bull. de corresp. Hellénique, 
1890, p. 621, No. 21. The inscription, 
with others there given, is from Mylasa in 
Caria, 'Aciavoi 'IGves (dv0v) IIo. KopygAig 
Taxírp (some names follow). The peo- 
ple are the xowdy of the Asiatic Ionians, 
and the name of the proconsul is inserted 
to give a date, the dative being used (as 
often) instead of a genit. to express the 
Latin abl. abs. 

Cuap, I.] LIFE AND WORKS OF TACITUS. 5 

or about A.D. 110-114. It would thus fall before the publication of the 
Annals, and adds to the interest of accounts there given of affairs in that 
province. Among his friends, besides Pliny, were the latter's friends, 
Justus Fabius! (probably the consul of a.p. ro2) and Asinius Rufus?; 
and his name appears to occur with other literary men in the will of 

" Dasumius, dated A.D. 109°. 

There is no evidence that he outlived Trajan, nor is he known to have 
left any children, but he was claimed as an ancestor by the emperor 
Marcus Claudius Tacitus, in the third century 5, and by Polemius, a friend 
of Sidonius Apollinaris, in the fifth®. It was probably at the earlier of 
these dates that the people of Interamna (Terni) the birthplace of 
Tacitus the emperor, claimed the historian also as their citizen; and 
erected a tomb to him, which remained till the latter part of the 
sixteenth century, when it was destroyed by order of Pius V, as that of 
an enemy of Christianity ^. 

The date of completion and publication of his various works rests on 
internal evidence. 

The Dialogue * de Oratoribus' is, by most critics, accepted as his, and 
as his earliest work. It professes to have been written some time after 
the discourse was held’, but can hardly be dated later than the earlier 
part of Domitian's rule 5. 

The * Agricola’ belongs to 850 or 851, A.D. 97 or 98. Some expres- 
sions in the beginning best suit the time when Trajan was associated 
with Nerva. At the end Trájan is styled ‘ princeps *.' 

The *Germania' is also to be assigned to the latter of these years, 
from a computation of time to the second consulship of Trajan”. 

The ‘ Histories’ must have appeared after the apotheosis of Nerva, but 
probably early in the principate of Trajan, before the * Annals’ were even 
contemplated !!, | 

This last work must have been completed when the conquests of 
Trajan had reached their highest point, in 868 or 869, A.D. 115 or 116, 
and before the retrocession under Hadrian ? 

! See Dial. 1, 1. 

* See Pl. Epp. 4. 15, I 

* Wilm. 314, p. 101; C. I. L. vi. 1350. 
The names ...*Secundo Cornelio’ 
are taken to be *Plinio Secundo Cornelio 
Tacito) That of Fabius Rusticus (see 
below, ‘p. 16) also occurs. : 

* Vopisc. Tac. c. 10, 3. 

5 Sid. Ap. Epp. 4. 14 (22 Baret). 

* Angeloni, Hist. di Terni ‘Rome, 
1616), p. 51 (cited by Ruperti). 

7 Cp. Dial. 1, 2, and 17, 2. 

$ See Peterson, Introd. to Dial. ch. i. 
Prof. Gudeman thinks it cannot have been 
written after the death of Titus: the dif- 
ference of style requires an interval of 
several years between it and the Germania 
or Agricola. 

? Agr. 3, ae 44 5. 

9 (j, 37, 2 

I THE Y. 3, B. They were in course of 
composition ‘when the Agricola was writ- 
ten. See Agr. 3, 4. 

33 Ann. 2. 61, 2; 4. 4, 6. 

6 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. 1. 

There is no evidence that his intention to write the history of Nerva 
and Trajan’, or his later project of writing that of Augustus *, were ever 
carried out. | 

The titles assigned to the two greater works require some remark. 
In the second Medicean MS., both ‘ Annals’ and ‘ Histories, without 
any distinguishing title, are numbered continuously as the ‘Books of 
Cornelius Tacitus. The latter, however, are called ‘Historiae’ by 
Pliny*, and are definitely cited, as a separate work under that title, by 
Tertullian *. 

For the title ‘Annales’ there is no earlier authority than the edition of 
Rhenanus (1544), who thought that he found it in the text. Tacitus 
does indeed, in one place, speak of his work as ‘ Annales nostri 5 and, 
in another, of his general purpose to relate events in their chronological 
order*. But there is no evidence that he intended the title distinctively 
for this work; and he elsewhere uses *annales' as a general term for 
‘history’. It is with equal generality that Jornandes speaks of him as 
* annalium scriptor ^ In the first Medicean MS. the books are entitled 
*ab excessu Augusti, a title analogous to that of the Histories of Livy, 
‘ab urbe condita.’ 

Of the manuscripts, it will be sufficient here to notice the first Medicean, 
comprising only the Books contained in this volume and forming the 
sole authority for them *. 

Ruodolphus, a learned monk of Fulda in Hesse Cassel, writing in 
the ninth century, cites Tacitus as speaking of the Visurgis, and would 
therefore appear to have known a manuscript containing these Books ™. 
The next intimation is from Poggio Bracciolini, who writes in 1425 
on a communication made to him from Germany, respecting some 
unknown works of Tacitus said to be preserved at Hersfeld, near Fulda. 
Nothing further is known till 1509?!', by which time the MS. now 

! H. r. 1, 5. facts. In this sense it is distinguished 

* Ann. 3. 24, 4. The testimony of 
St. Jerome (see below, p. 12) would show 
that no such-works existed in his time. 

* Epp. 7. 33, 1. Tacitus himself re- 
fers to them simply as ‘libri.’ (Ann. 
1I. 1I, 2.) 

* ‘Is enim (Cornelius Tacitus) in quinta 
Historiarum suarum bellum Judaicum 
exorsus, &c. Tert. Apol. adv. gentes, 
c. 16. 

5 4. 32; I- 

$ 4. 71,1. For exceptions, see below, 
ch. iv. p. 27, n. I. 

7 3. 65, 1; 13. 31,1, &c. In one place 
(Dial. 22, 4) he uses the term in a more 
restricted sense, of a dry chronicle of 

from ‘historia’ in Cic. de Or. 2. 12, 51. 

* Jornand. de Rebus Goth. I, 2. 

® The information here given is chiefly 
derived from the Preface to Ritter's edi- 
tion of 1864 (Leipzig), partly also from 
Orelli and Baiter. An account of the 
second Medicean MS. will be found in 
Introduction to vol. ii. 

10 The First and Second Books of the 
Annals contain the only mention of this 
river in the extant works of Tacitus. His 
MS. probably contained a good deal more, 
as he certainly shows knowledge of the 
Germania : see Introd. to that work, p. I. 

" A letter by Card. Soderini, dated 
Jan. 1. 15035 (see F. Philippi, in Philol. 

Cuap, I.] LIFE AND WORKS OF TACITUS. 7 

existing, purporting to be only the latter half of its original bulk !, 
appears to have been brought to Rome to Cardinal Giovanni de’ Medici 
(afterwards Leo X), who a few years later entrusted its publication to 
Beroaldus, in whose edition, published at Rome in 1515, these Books 
appear for the first time among the works of Tacitus *. 

There are some discrepancies as to the circumstances of its acquisition, 
and neither Fulda nor Hersfeld, but the monastery of Córvey, in West- 
phalia, is mentioned as the place of its discovery *. Bandini had assigned 
it to the eleventh century, but recent scholars think it as early as the tenth 
or even the ninth *, though there seems to be no evidence for Ritter's 
view that it is the same MS. known to have existed at Fulda. An 
excellent facsimile of the first page of Book III is given by Vitelli and 
Paoli*, and a photographic reproduction of the first page of Book I in 
M. Hochart's work *. ; 

The text, at various stages of its derivation, has sometimes suffered 
from a misleading half knowledge, and more seriously, at a later date, 
from complete ignorance of Latinity, added to carelessness of eye or 
ear, in its copyists, whereby words have been mutilated and wrongly 
divided, letters mistaken or transposed, syllables dropped or assimilated 
to those next to them, glosses have crept into the text, or ‘lacunae’ 
have passed unnoticed ". 

These errors had not wholly escaped the old revisers, whose erasures, 
linear and interlinear corrections, and dots placed above or below letters 

to be expunged, are now carefully noted *. 

45, 1886, pp. .376-380, and F. Ritter, 
Praef. p. viii), describes it as a recent 
arrival, quoting to a friend the mention of 
the Florentini in 1. 79. 

1 The ‘fasciculi, comprising 137 leaves 
in all, are numbered xvii to xxxiiii. The 
missing portion, or part of it, probably 
consisted of a MS. of Pliny's Epistles, 
now separated, but in the same library 
(Laur. 47, 36), of the same form and 
handwriting. It is thought by Ritter and 
other editors that it may.also have con- 
tained the ‘exemplaria,’ now lost, from 
which the existing MSS. of the minor 
works (see Introd. to Germ. and Agr.) 
were derived. 

3 Two editions had already appeared 
without them; that of Vindelinus de 
Spira (Venice, 1470), and that of Fran- 
ciscus Puteolanus (Milan, cir. 1476), be- 
sides some five reprints of one or other of 
these, down to 1512 (Ruperti, Praef. cxii). 

* See Ritter, Praef. viiii-xiii. The 
mystery respecting its discovery is suffi- 
ciently explained by a subsequent letter 

of Leo X (see Philippi, l. l. Ritt. p. xii), 
in which it is stated that the MS., which 
had reached him through several hands, 

. bad originally been stolen from Corvey. 

He mentions, as au argument to induce 
another monastery to entrust a literary 
treasure to him, the amends which he 
had made in this case for the fraud of 
his agent: the reparation had, however, 
consisted not in the restoration of the 
stolen MS., but in the gift of a bound 
copy of the printed work, supplemented 
by a grant of perpetual indulgence. 

* See W. Studemund (Hermes 8, 1874, 
232) and F. Ruhl (Rhein. Mus. 36, 1881, 
25), also Vitelli and Paoli (see next note). 

5 Collezione Fiorentina di facsimili pa- 
laeographici, Firenze, 1884, Fasc. 1. 

* See below, p. 8. | 

7 See Ritter, Praef. xxvi-xxxv, where in- 
stances of such errors are given, as well 
from this MS. as from those of other 
parts of the author. 

8 See the critical treatise of Pfitzner, 
p. 2, foll. 

8 INTRODUCTION. (Cuar. II. 

The MS. has also a considerable number of marginal corrections, 
which are cited by some editors as possessing authority, but which 
Ritter considers to be generaly no more than the conjectures of 
Beroaldus or of later critics. 

From the necessary, many editors have been naturally led on to 
more questionable corrections. The tendency to imagine an error 
wherever the language is exceptionally harsh or unusual culminates in 
the edition of Ritter above mentioned ; whose multitudinous excisions, 
insertions, and corrections, have mostly failed to meet with general 
acceptance, notwithstanding the ingenuity with which he has advocated 
them!, But on the actual state of the MS. text, his work is generally 
the best source of information ?. 

In spite of its errors, the first Medicean is generally considered to 
be the best, as well as the oldest, MS. of any part of Tacitus; and its 
orthography is for the most part adopted by Halm throughout his 
whole edition of the author *. 

CHAPTER II. 

GENUINENESS OF THE ANNALS. 

Ir his not. hitherto been thought necessary for any editor of this 
work to establish its genuineness; but the recent attempts‘ to. prove 
it to be a forgery by Poggio Bracciolini in the fifteenth century, while 
they cannot be said to have found such acceptance as to necessitate 
a full discussion*, may make it desirable briefly to subjoin some ex- 

1 Of his reasons in support of his 
changes, the portion affecting this MS. 
will be found in the Rheinisches Museum, 
vol. xvi. pp. 454-469; and xvii. pp. 99 - 
137. Criticisms on them will be found 
in Pfitzner (passim), and in Wolfflin's 
TREE, in Philologus xxvi. p. 96, 
foll. ' 

? Andresen has, however, shown in a 
recent treatise (de Codicibus Mediceis 
Annalium Taciti), that the collation of 
Baiter, though earlier, is often more ac- 
curate than that of Ritter, and that in 
some cases both have mistaken or over- 
looked the real reading. 

* Where the orthography of the same 
word is not uniform, it may often be 
supposed that the variation is due to 

Tacitus himself. See below, ch. v. $ 85. 

* *'Tacitusand Bracciolini.. The Annals 
forged in the fifteenth century’ [Ross], 
London, 1878. 
Annales et des Histoires de Tacite, par 
P. Hochart, Paris, 1890; also a second 
volume, ‘ Nouvelles considérations,  &c., 
Paris, 1894. Mr. Ross considers the 
Histories to be genuine, M. Hochart 
rejects both works; presumably also the 
other extant treatises ascribed to Tacitus. 

and^ apparently several other classical . 
. works. 

5 Those who desire a more full stdte- 
ment and examination of the theory of 
the first of these works may be referred 
to an article in the Edinburgh Review of 
October, 1878. 

*De l'authenticité des : 

NONE" Y] 

NI 
— -— 

EE pij 

Rie eaten Lee EET vam n Fite i oF 
ae ee 

v we TO SS E 

Cuap, 11.] . GENUINENESS OF THE ANNALS. 9 

ternal evidence to show that it is at least the work of an ancient 
author. 

We have no reason to suppose that any scholar of the time of 
Bracciolini had access to historians of this period who are lost to us. 
Even those whom we have must have been known to him only in 
manuscripts. The inventor of a Tacitean history of the principate of 
Tiberius or Nero must act as any scholar would now have to act who 
desired to compose a Tacitean history of that of Gaius or Domitian. He 
must make the best use of Dio Cassius and Suetonius, and of whatever 
could be gleaned from other authors, and must invent the rest of the 
material, as well as the form and language. Any careful comparison 
of the Annals with these sources will show how large a proportion 
of the whole narrative as it stands will have to be set down thus to 
invention; and in testing such a theory, the details become important, 
almost in proportion to their intrinsic unimportance. . 

If it can be shown that even a moderate number of facts, such as 
would be unlikely to occur to an inventor, stated in the Annals, and in 
no other extant author, are confirmed by coins and inscriptions, most 
of which were certainly, and all of them probably, unknown in the 
fifteenth century ; the supposition of so many felicitous accidents will 
be generally conceded to pass the bounds of reasonable probability. 

In the Books comprised in the first Medicean MS., the following con- 
firmations, most of which are already well known to editors, will be 
found :— 

1. Germanicus is stated to have been augur!, flamen?, and im- 
perator?; and all these titles are confirmed *. 

2. His eldest son Nero is stated to have been espoused to the 

daughter of Creticus Silanus*. An inscription gives the name ‘Junza 

Silant | f, sponsa Neronis Caes[ar:s] 5. 

3. The honours decreed to Germanicus at his death are enumerated 7, 
and in another place it is stated that those decreed to Drusus were in 
the main the same*. The remains of tablets recording these decrees, 

though extremely fragmentary, appear to suggest confirmation of some 

of the details, such as the insertion of the name in the Salian hymin, 
the exhibition of the effigy at the * Circenses, and the erection of arches 
(Jani) at three different places *. 
4. L. Apronius, and P. Cornelius Dolabella, stated to have been at 
different times proconsuls of Africa’, are shown to have been so by 
! I. 62, 3. ? 2. 83, 2. 5 2. 43, 3. 6 C. I. L. vi. 914. 
* 1. 58 7 2. 83, where see notes. ® 4. 9, 2. 

* Orelli, Insc. 3064; Wilm. 885; C. I. — ® Insc. Henzen, 5381, 5382. 
L. x. 1415. 1° 3. 21, 1; 4. 23, 2. 

we ms t 
v "ml ae Lm = lO MEE a ee ee eC. 
= ———- SS cl 

IO INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. II. 

coins struck there under their permission!. The same fact, and the 
year of office, are shown respecting L. Asprenas by an inscription *. 
Another shows M’, Lepidus to have been proconsul of Asia °. 

5. It is stated that the tribunitian power, though never given to 
Germanicus, was afterwards given to Drusus, about a year before his 
death*. This title, absent on all records of Germanicus, appears on 
coins of Drusus, but without record of more than a second year of 
office . 

6. It is stated, that in the inscription of a statue dedicated by Julia 
Augusta to. Augustus near the theatre of Marcellus, her name was 
placed before that of Tiberius*. 'The Praenestine Calendar gives (with 
a date) the fact, and the locality of this dedication, and places the names 
in this order, thus apparently following the original inscription *. 

7. An inscription * confirms the statement that Drusus, son of Ger- 
manicus, held the honorary office of praefectus urbi *. 

8. The statement, that Smyrna was chosen as the site of the temple 
to be erected by the cities of Asia to Tiberius, his mother, and the 
senate ?, is confirmed by a coin of that city, with a representation of 
the temple, and having all three names on the superscription '', 

9. The title of pontifex, given to L. Piso, better known as praefectus 
urbi ?, is confirmed by the ‘ Acta Arvalium **’ 

IO. The statement, that Theophanes of Mytilene had received divine 
honours from his countrymen !*, is confirmed by Mytilenaean coins bear- 
ing his effigy, with the word 6eós added to his name ' 

A few instances of less direct confirmation may here be added :— 

I. A soldier named Rufus Helvius is mentioned as having received 
a civic crown *, An inscription bears the name of * M. Helvius Rufus 
Civica, prim(us) pil(us), suggesting the assumption of a cognomen re- 
cording the distinction". 

2. C. Silanus is stated to have had a sister, Torquata, * priscae sancti- 
moniae virgo !*^ Inscriptions mention ‘Junza, C. Silani f., Torquata, as 
a Vestal virgin, and as chief of that body ? 

3. Julius Indus, one of the Treveri, is mentioned as in command of 

! Eckhel, iv. 139, 142. | V 4.15, 55 56, 3 
? See 1. 53, 9, and note. The criti- at Eckhel ii. P: Mionnet, iii. 219; 
cisms of M. Hochart on this inscription — S vi. 330. 
(the only one which he in any way notices) 12 6. 10, 3. 
are not convincing. 55 C. I. L. vi. 1, 2023. 
3 See on 4. 56, 3. 4.3. 86, 1. !* 6. 18, 5. 
* Eckhel, vi. 303, &c. I AM ii. 504; Mionnet, S. vi. 36. 
8 3. 64,2 16 3. 21 
T fac Orell. vol. ii. p. 388. 17 Insc. "Murat. 476, 11 (Borghesi). 
i , Insc. Orell. 667. 8 3. 69, 

$ 4. 36, 1. moe L. vi. I, 2127, 2128. 

Cua». II.) GENUINENESS OF THE ANNALS. II 

a ‘delecta manus !,' subsequently called an *ala* His name appears 
to suggest the origin of an ‘ala Indiana’ mentioned in several in- 
scriptions *. | 

4. Caninius Gallus is mentioned as one of the quindecimviri, and as 
‘ scientiae caerimoniarumque vetus ‘,’ a description suitable to a person 
who can be shown to have existed at that time, and to have been 
* magister fratrum Arvalium 5.' 

Other instances might, no doubt, be added, but the above will pro- 
bably be considered sufficient. 

Another curious apparent confirmation --will tend, if admitted, to 
carry back the date of these Books nearly to that of their reputed 
author. In the account of the Frisian rebelliom occurs the sentence 
‘ad sua tutanda digressis rebellibus ^ Ptolemy, writing in the gene- 
ration next to that of Tacitus, in his list of towns in north Germany 
inserts Ziarovrávóa as the name of a place’; which certainly looks 
as if he had the passage of the Annals before him, and misunder- 
stood it. 

In the later Books of the Annals, the principal inscription to be con- 
sidered is that containing parts of the speech of Claudius, which indeed 
from its dissimilarity in many respects to that given in the Annals has 
been cited as evidence on the other side. It must here suffice to refer 
to the reasons shown elsewhere? for thinking that the composition in 
the Annals was based on a knowledge of the original speech, though 
much freedom was used in dealing with it. 

Whatever may be thought of this, there'are other and more indisputable 
confirmations of statements found only in these Books, similar to those 
above noted in Books I-VI. "We may ask from what source Bracciolini 
could have ascertained, or by what felicity he could have imagined that 
Cadius Rufus was governor of Bithynia *, Eprius Marcellus of, Lycia 9, 
Tarquitius Priscus of Bithynia ?', L. Antistius Vetus of Asia , that Clodius 
Quirinalis was * praefectus classis 7°,’ and Gavius Silvanus tribune of a prae- 
torian cohort !*, that Silanus had a daughter Lepida™, that the names of 
Iulius Aquila!, Sextius Africanus", Verulanus Severus’, Funisulanus 

! 3. 42, 3. 3 3. 46, 3. editor, C. Müller, cites Ledebur as con- 
3 Insc. Orell. 4039; Henzen, 6722. sidering that the name may possibly be 
* 6. 12, 2. | that of a real place. 
5 C. I. L. vi. 1, 2025, 2027. * See vol. ii. p. 208, foll. _ 
* Ann. 4. 73, I. ? 12. 22, 4. 0-73. 33, 4- 
7 Geog. 2. 11, 27. Orelli refers to 1 14. 46, I. 12 16. 10, 2. 

Herm. Miiller (Die Marken des Vater- 1S 13, 30, 2, !* r5. 50, 3. 

landes, i. p. 118) as first calling attention 15 16. 8, 2. 1€ 14,15, T. 

to this. The MSS. of Ptolemy, however, 17 13. 19, 2. 
vary greatly in the word, and the latest 15 14. 26, 15 15. 3, I. 

I2 INTRODUCTION. [Cnuar. II. 

Vettonianus' are names of persons employed in public service at a time 
agreeing with that of their mention. None of these facts could have been 
derived from any other literature known to us; all are confirmed by coins 
or inscriptions of which Bracciolini and his contemporaries must have 
been ignorant ?. 

It seems hardly worth while to pursue this subject further. If it is 
thus clear that the * Annals' must have been written in ancient times, 
when sources of information now lost to us were in existence, and are 
likely to have been written before the date of Ptolemy, we are entitled to 
quote the testimony of Jerome, that Tacitus did write, in thirty Books, 
the history of the whole period, or, as he expresses it, *the lives of the 
Caesars,’ from the death of Augustus to that of Domitian? ; an arrange- 
ment of books answering to that of the second Medicean MS., which 
contains material purporting to be transcribed from an original of the 
date A.D. 395, or contemporary with Jerome‘. Also on this view the 
resemblances in Sulpicius Severus?, Ammianus 5, and other writers will 
rank as copies not as originals, and such knowledge of these Books as 
is shown in the Middle Ages becomes relevant’, especially the grounds for 

thinking that a MS. answerin 

g generally in contents to the second Medicean 

was known to Boccacio, who died before the birth of Bracciolini 5. 

! 15. 7, 2 

? See notes on all these places, An 
inscription also confirms the mention of 
the exile of Glitius Gallus and his wife 
Egnatia Maximilla, by showing them to 
have lived in Andros (see on 15. 71, 7). 
Another seems clearly to refer to the 
Vestal virgin Vibidia (see on 11. 32, 5). 

* Hieron. in Zach. B. iii. c. 14: *Cor- 
nelius Tacitus, qui post Augustum usque 
ad mortem Domitiani vitas Caesarum 
triginta voluminibus exaravit. The state- 
ment undoubtedly involves a difficulty, 
that of supposing the remainder of the 
Histories to have been written on so 
much less ample a scale than that of the 
extant portion. 

* See Orelli, Praef. p. xv. This date 
is appended to the Apuleius part of the 
MS., and may not belong also to the 
Tacitus part. 

> See on 15. 37, 8; 44. 2 

® These are fully given in an interesting 
treatise by E. Cornelius (Marburg,.1888) : 
Quomodo Tacitus, Historiarum scriptor, 
in hominum memoria versatus sit usque 
ad renascentes litteras. 

7 Besides Ruodolphus of Fulda (see 
above, p. 6) several others are cited by 
Cornelius. ‘It is interesting to note that 

the old scholiast on Juvenal, besides 
referring to Tacitus (the Histories) by 
name (on 2, 99; 14, 102), shows very 
close verbal resemblance to the Annals 
in relating the death of Seneca (on 5, 109), 
possibly also in the account of the death 
of Thrasea (on 5, 36), where he perhaps 
preserves words lost in Tacitus. 

* Cornelius has shown (1. 1. p. 42) that 
Boccaci? (Genealogia deorum, 3. 23) 
cites Tacitus by name in respect of his 
account of the Paphian worship of Venus, 
and transcribes, almost verbally, his:de- 
scription of the symbol of the goddess 
(H.2.3.5). Alsoin his de Claris mulieri- 
bus he mentions Agrippina the younger, 
Poppaea Sabina, Epicharis, Pompeia 
Paulina, and Triaria, and takes words 
and expressions respecting them frum 
I2. 67, 2-35; 15. 23, 1; 57> 35 64, 2; 
H. 3.77, 4. Also in his commentary on 
Dante (1. 333 and 400) some knowledge 
is stated to be shown of A. 15. 57 and 60. 
Also he speaks of his copy of Tacitus in 
a letter to a friend, and it appears to have 
once formed part of a library in Florence. 
I should add, however, that M. Hochart 
contests the genuineness of several of 

the treatises and documents above re- 
ferred to. 

Cur HI] TACITUS’ SOURCES OF INFORMATION. 13 

CHAPTER III. 

ON THE SOURCES OF INFORMATION OPEN TO TACITUS FOR 
THIS PERIOD; AND THEIR PROBABLE VALUE. 

NoTE.—H. Haupt, writing in 1885 (Philol. 44, pp. 132-163) on the portion of Dio 
which goes side by side with Tacitus, reviews some twenty-seven treatises up to that 
date, bearing on this subject or connected with it. The study of his abstract of them 
tends rather to bewilder than to instruct. A full and clear exposition of the whole 
subject is given in a recent work by M.' Philippe Fabia (Les sources de Tacite, Paris, 
1893), the larger part of which, however, deals with the Histories. 

I. .WRITTEN narratives of the general history of the period or of 
parts of it. 

It is not the habit of Tacitus to name his informants; and in the 
first six Books he bas done so twice orily, citing the history of the 
German wars by C. Plinius', and the memoirs of the younger Agrip- 
pina’, in each case for an incident relating to the elder Agrippina. It 
is stated in the latter case, and apparently implied in the former, that 
he is taking from a less usual source something overlooked by those 
whom he generally follows. .In the later Books we have references 
to the general history of Pliny?, to Cluvius Rufus‘, to Fabius Rusticus 5, 
and to Domitius Corbulo *. | 

General references are far more common; and give evidence that 
there were many such works, and that his history was mainly drawn 

from them *.. 

! 1.69,3.  ?* 4.5253 

* 13. 20, 3; 15.53, 4; perhaps also 13. 
31, I. 

* 13. 20, 3; 14. 2, I. 

5 13. 20, 2; 14. 2, 3; 15. 61. 6. 

5 15. 16, 1. | 

7 In the first six Books, besides general 
references to ‘ scriptores ' (2. 88, 1) ‘ scrip- 
tores annalium ' (4. 53, 3), ^ auctores' (t. 
81, 1), «auctores rerum ’ (3. 3, 2), temporis 
eius auctores' (5. 9, 3), and negative ex- 
pressions as ‘nullo auctore certo’ and 
‘neque quisquam scriptor" (4. I1, I, 5), 
we have * quidam tradidere (1. 13, 3; 53, 
9; 2. 17, 7 ; 29, 2; 40, 3), ' ferunt (3. 73, 
2), also *tradunt plerique? . . . ‘alii’ (1. 
29, 43 Cp. 2. 70, 3; 6. 7, 6), ‘alii’ (sc. 
‘tradunt’) ‘... quidam . . . sunt qui 
existiment" (r. 80, 3), and even ‘quae 
plurimis maxi ue fidei auctoribus 
memorata sunt rettuli" (4. 1o, 1), and 

' auctores." 

*secutus plurimos auctorum" (4. 57, 2), 
expressions which, when compared, scem 
to presuppose not less than some five or 
six such narratives. Inthe later Books it 
has been inferred from 13 20, 4 that only 
Cluvius, Rusticus, and Pliny were known 
to him, but in 14. 2, 4, after mentioning 
the two former, he adds, ‘ ceteri quoque 
We have also general plural 
expressions as *temporum illorum scrip- 
tores" (12. 67, 1) * plerique eorum tem- 
porum scriptores" (13. 17, 3), *sunt qui 

. sunt qui’ (14. 9, 1). * plerique tra- 
didere? (15. 54, 4) «quidam tradidcre’ 
(16. 3, 2), ‘sunt qui tradant’ (14. 37, 4), 
‘sunt qui ferant' (14. 59, 2). Josephus 
plainly states (Ant. 20. 8, 3) that many 
(roAAof) had written the history of Nero, 
and divides them, like Tacitus, sharply 
into two classes, and holds both to be 
alike untrustworthy. 

I4 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. II], 

Of these many, a few names only can be now supplied. In extant 
literature, our only contemporary accounts of the time of Tiberius are 
contained in one or two passages of Valerius Maximus!, and in the 
work of M. Velleius Paterculus, who, besides considerable notice of 
the earlier life of Tiberius, gives, in the last nine chapters, a slight 
sketch, without any regular narrative, of the first sixteen years of his 
principate?, published in 783, a.p. 30, and dedicated to M. Vinicius, 
then one of the consuls ?. 

If any others published, during the lifetime of Tiberius, any account 
of his government, their names as well as their writings are lost to us; 
but some works produced soon afterwards are on record: amongst 
which a stock of material of most questionable value, is contributed 
by the imperial family itself. 

Tiberius himself composed a brief summary of his life*, which, like 
that of Augustus, may probably have been appended to his will, and 
intended for inscription on his tomb. It must, however, have lacked 
the skill of the famous * Marmor Ancyranum,' for our solitary reference 
to it cites it only as containing a glaring and audacious falsehood 5. 

The memoirs of the younger Agrippina have been already mentioned. 
We have also a stray reference to them in Pliny the Elder*, but by the 
time of Tacitus they seem to be a forgotten book’. It is impossible 
to estimate how far they had already done their work by influencing 
intermediate writers, or how much of the court scandal, in which 
Suetonius revels, and which even MA does not always disdain, 
flowed originally from this polluted source? 

Claudius is also recorded to have written an autobiography in 
eight Books, ‘magis inepte quam ineleganter;' and a general history 
from the close of the civil wars, of which two Books were' written in 
his youth, at the suggestion of Livy and with the assistance of Sulpicius 
Flavus, and the remaining forty-one Books during his principate?. It 
is not known whether it extended beyond the lifetime of Augustus, 
though the apparent length of the work may make it probable. 

! See Val. Max. 2. 9, § 6; 5. 3, § 3, 
and the apparent allusion to the con- 
spiracy of Seianus, 9. 11, § 4. 

? Vell. 2. 126, 1. 

* Dates of events are often computed 
by him from this year, as 1. 8, 1, etc. 

* *Commentario quem de vita sua 
summatim breviterque composuit," Suet. 
Tib. 61. 

5 Suet.l.l. See below, ch. viii. p. 151, 7. 

* Plin. N. H. 7. 8, 6, $ 46. 

7 See 4. 53, 3- 

Pod TEM me 

-— eee ee 

* The chief defenders of Tiberius dilate 
greatly on the influence of these memoirs, 
and a treatise on them in 91 pages has 
been written. by R. Raffay (Wien, 1884), 
but the evidence is very slender to sup- 
port any general theory. . If they were 

published as late in her life as there 

seems some reason for thinking probable 

(see note on 4. 53, 3), they are hardly 

likely to have been used by writers of the | 

date of Nonianus or Bassus. 
® Suet. Cl. 41. 

Cuap. II.) TACITUS’ SOURCES OF INFORMATION, IS 

Turning from these to more neutral authorities, we find first in date 
the name of M. Seneca the rhetor, whose history, from the beginning 
of the civil wars to the last days of his own life, would seem, from an 
expression used by his son, to be intended as a corrective of prevalent 
untruthfulness!; and was therefore probably anti-Caesarian in its tone. 
He is believed to have died early in the principate of Gaius, so that his 
work must have been mainly composed before that time, and the death 
scene of Tiberius, which he described ?, may have been its closing point. 

Next to him, we have two names more distinguished, apparently the 
best known writers of this period *. 

M. Servilius Nonianus, who was consul in 787, a.p. 35‘, and died in 
812, A.D. 59, after a successful forensic career, wrote history in his 
later years*. We hear that Claudius himself came to one of his recitals *. 
The elder Pliny once calls him the first man in the state"; and Quin- 
tilian, who had heard him, blames only his want of conciseness?. "The 
period covered by his historical works is unknown, but he is supposed 
to be the ‘vir consularis’ cited by Suetonius, as the authority for an 
incident in the later years of Tiberius *. 

Aufidius Bassus, though somewhat older than Nonianus? seems 
to have died a year later". He wrote, besides a separate work on the 
German wars ?, a general history, to which a continuation in thirty-one 
Books was written by the elder Pliny ?, who also wrote another work, 
in twenty Books, on all the Roman wars in Germany *, Some at least 
of the work of Bassus, in which the death of Cicero was described, 
must have been extant in the time of M. Seneca "5, but it was probably 
afterwards continued to a later date, perhaps to the time of Claudius, 

1 * Ab initio bellorum civilium, unde 
primum veritds retro abiit, paene ad 
mortis suae diem, L. Seneca, Fr. 15 
(Haase). 

? Suet. Tib. 73. The words ‘Seneca 
scribit? could refer to some lost work of 
L. Seneca, and some consider that M. 
Seneca, who states (Controv. 1. Praef.) that 
he could have seen and heard Cicero, 
must have died before Tiberius. He was, 
however, certainly alive in A.D. 34 (see 

note on 6. 29, 4). 

» 3 Quintilian (10. I, 102-103) selects 
these for special mention among the 
successors of Sallust and Livy; ‘Servilius 
Nonianus . . . et ipse nobis auditus est, 
clarus vi ingenii et sententiis creber, sed 
minus pressus quam historiae auctoritas 
postulat Quam paulum aetate prae- 
cedens eum Bassus Aufidius egregie, utique 
in libris belli Germanici, praestitit genere 

ipso, probabilis in omnibus, sed in quibus- 
dam suis ipse viribus minor.’ Also Tacitus 
himself (Dial. 23, 2) makes Aper contrast 
the ‘eloquentia’ of these two with the 
ruggedness of old writers. These criti- 
cisms relate only to style, and of their sub- 
stantial value as historians nothing what- 
ever is known. 

* 6. a1, 1. 5 14. 19. 

$ Pl. Epp. I. 13, 3. 

7 * Princeps civitatis Pl. N. H. 28. 
2, 5, 29. 

* Quint. 1. 1. ? Suet. Tib. 61. 

20 Quint. 1. 1. 

1 L, Seneca, Fp. 30. 

13 See Quint. (1.1.), who perhaps speaks 
only of those parts of his general history . . 
in which this subject was prominent. 

13 P]. Epp. 3. 5, 6. 

14 Td. 3. 5, 4. E 

15 M, Seneca, Suas, 6, 18, 23. 

16 INTRODUCTION. (Cuap. III. 

as Pliny speaks of his own continuation of it as a ‘history of his own 
times !.' 

The combined works of Bassus and Pliny would cover more than 
the whole period included in the Annals*. Many facts are also known 
to us through allusions in the Natural History of the latter author and 
in the works of Seneca and of Josephus, and in the interesting contem- 
porary view of Gaius given by Philo*. But the chief authorities used 
by Tacitus in the later Books must have been those alluded to by him *. 
Of these, M. Cluvius Rufus is known to us as a consular before the 
death of Gaius*, the companion of Nero to Greece", legatus of Spain 
under Galba’, and as one of the train of Vitellius?. His work has 
been thought to have begun as early as the time of Gaius; it would 
appear to have gone down to the death of Vitellius*, whom the historian 
outlived by about a year. From a remark addressed by him to Verginius '? 
we should gather that he had a high view of the obligations of a historian. 
Pliny, though no doubt diligent, would seem, to have been somewhat 
uncritical" and accumulative ?, The third, Fabius Rusticus, is described 
as too partial to his patron Seneca, but as being in eloquence and 
brilliancy the Livy of his age ?. As he described Britain, his work 
probably began not later than the time of Claudius. We.have no 
allusion to it later than the time of Nero, but he appears io have been 
still living in the midst of the principate of Trajan'*. These writers do 
not quite belong to the same generation. At the death of Nero, Cluvius 

! N. H. Praef. 19, 20. The fact that 
prodigies are noted ir the last five, but 
not in the earlier Books of the Annals, 
has been taken to indicate that Tacitus 

would be included in the *sunt et alii 
scriptores boni?! We should infer that 
they were less remarkable for style, but 
Cluvius is called ‘vir facundus! in H. 1. 

here begins to follow an authority more 
careful to record those reported, such as 
Pliny.. Also Pliny, in speaking of his 
history as beginning * a fine Aufidi Bassi,' 
has been thought to imply that the latter, 
like Livy, broke off abruptly at some un- 
important point. 

* The history of Pliny extended to 
the time of the Flavian Caesars. See 
N. H. 1.1. 

* We have no means of knowing 
whether Tacitus made any use of Philo, 
and there are no traces of his having con- 
sulted Josephus. 

* See above, p. 13. None of these are 
mentioned in the ‘ Dialogus,' the assumed 
date of which is perhaps too early for 
them. In the passage of Quintilian 
following that cited above, the historian 
whom he strongly praises, but does not 
venture to name, is thought to be Rusticus. 
Pliny and Cluvius are not mentioned, but 

8, 2, and ‘eloquentia clarus’ in H. 4. 

sq. 

5 Jos. Ant. 19. 1, 13. 

* Suet. Ner. 21; Dio, 64. 14, 3. 

7H. 1. 8, 2. * H. 2. 65, 1, 4. 

? The evidence of H. 3. 65, 4 is doubt- 
ful, but he certainly wrote of Otho. See 
Plut. Oth. 3, and the discussion noticed 
below (ch. iv. p. 23, note 1) as to the source 
of Tacitus (in that part of the Histories) 
and Plutarch (in those ‘ Lives’). 

10 See Pl. Epp. 9. 19, 5. 

See 15. 53; 5 

7! See note on I3. 3I, I. 

18 Ann. I3. i. 3; Agr. IO, 3. 

' Agr. l.l. The description may how- 
ever have belonged to his account of the 
rebellion under Nero. 

15 He is generally identified with the 
Fabius Rusticus mentioned in the will 
of Dasumius, dated 862, A.D. 109. See 
above p. 5, note 3. 

—- 

Cu. UL] TACITUS’ SOURCES OF INFORMATION. 17. : 

must have been nearly seventy, Pliny was forty-five, Rusticus probably — 
younger, so that, if their date of publication answered to their age, the 
second could probably have used the first, and the third both the others. 
The work of Cluvius, if the long account given by Josephus of the death 
of Gaius was taken from him, must have been voluminous, and the 
thirty-one Books of Pliny cover the history of probably not more than 
twenty years. : 

It has been shown! that Tacitus has referred to the special history 
of Domitius Corbulo*; and he may also have used that of Suetonius 
Paulinus?: but with these our definite knowledge of even the names of 
original authorities for this period ends.  Bruttedius Niger, aedile in 775, 
A.D. 22 *, was a writer of history, but our only reference is to his notice 
of the death of Cicero*; also Tuscus, the accuser of Scaurus, appears to 
have written a foolish history of some sort*. The references to 
Lentulus Gaetulicus, the poet and epigrammatist?, and to Licinius 
Mucianus*, hardly prove them to have been historians; Cremutius 
Cordus appears to have left off at an earlier date *; Vipstanus Messala '? 
to have begun at a later. 

Further contemporary materials would no doubt be found in separate 
notices of famous men, not only in the form of funeral orations, but 
also in that of more detailed biographies, such as those of Thrasea and 
Helvidius by Arulenus Rusticus and Herennius Senecio, and such 
other precedents as Tacitus alludes to for his own biography of 
Agricola". The fulness of detail found in the description of all the 
actions of Germanicus, and even of the progress of his remains to 
Rome, and of the proceedings after his death, appears to suggest the 
existence of some such special source of information ’*; the more so 

1 See above, p. 13. 

3 Allusion is also made to it in Pl. N. H. 
2. 70 (72), 180. 

* See Id. 5. 1 (1), 14. 

* Ann 3. 66, 2. 

5 M. Seneca, Suas, 6. 20, a1. 

* See note on 6. 29, 4. 

7 Mart. Praef. 1; Pl. Epp. 5. 3, 5; 
Suet. Cal. 8. 

® Pl. N. H.(several places). 

? Ann. 4. 34, I ; cp. Suet. Tib. 61. 

10 H. 3. 25, 3; 28, 1. : 

! Apr. I, &c. 

1? That we trace here some source of 
a different kind from that of the main 
narrative, seems suggested by the element 
of romance entering into the account (see 
2. 9, 1; 17, 2; 23, 3, 24, 6, and notes), 
the apparition of Varus to Caecina (1. 65, 

VOL. I. 

2), the popular misgivings at the triumph 
(2. 41, 5), oracular presage of Germanicus’ 
death (2. 54, 5), &c. If, as Asbach 
argues, a similar vein of romance per- — 
vades the whole account of both the 
Pannonian and German mutinies. this also 
is more likely to have been found in some 
source than invented by Tacitus himself. 
Probability is certainly strained in the 
revulsion of feeling ascribed in the one 
case to the eclipse and storm. and in the 
other to the departure of Agrippina, and 
Dio, while not wholly ignoring such 
agencies, appears to preserve traces of 
a more ordinary and. matter-of-fact version 
(87,4, 43 5, 7), in which the firmness of 
all in command is the main cause of their 
success. The narrative, though partly 
belonging to Drusus, tends by comparison 

18 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». III. 

as he is known to have been accompanied in Germany by Pedo Albi- 
novanus!, and at the time of his death by another man of letters, 
Vibius Marsus ?. 

It was perhaps from such biographies that Tacitus enriched his 
record of the scenes of the last years of Tiberius with cases unknown 
to or unnoticed by his usual authorities *. 

Collections of letters, similar to those of the younger Pliny, may 
also have been made by public men; and the distinguished orators 
of the period, such as Q. Haterius*, L. Arruntius®, Domitius Afer, 
and others, were probably in the habit of revising and publishing their 
speeches’. The speech of P. Vitellius at the trial of Cn. Piso* is 
referred to by the elder Pliny’. 

2. ‘Acta senatus, also called ‘acta patrum! or ‘commentarit 
senatus!', The composition, or at least the publication of a record 
of proceedings in the senate was instituted by Julius Caesar in his 
first consulship '"*. Augustus is said to have suppressed the publication 
of this journal?, By the time of Tiberius the senator superintending 
the ‘acta’ was appointed by the princeps'*, which suggests the pos- 
sibility of garbling the record. Some account of proceedings in the 
senate, probably much abridged, appears still to have been made public 
in the ‘acta populi 5;' and the archives of the senate themselves would 
presumably have been open to a senator. Though Tacitus refers to 
them at a later date '5, it has been thought that for the earlier period he 
was for some reason unable to consult them. It is certainly remarkable, 
that in places where we should most expect a reference to them, other 
authorities are cited! We have on the other hand references to extant 
speeches or letters addressed by the princeps to the senate, which 
might more naturallv be supposed to exist in the register of its pro- 
ceedings than in a separate form; and throughout the narrative, nothing 

to the exaltation of Germanicus, who 

? N. H. 11. 57 (71), 187. 
orders no executions, is made personally 

10 g. 4, I. On these records generally 

responsible for none of the severities, and 
plays a more dramatic, though really less 
resolute part generally. 

! See note on 1. 60, 2, and Appendix to 

Book II. 
3 See 2. 74, I, &c. * 6. 7, 6. 
4 4.61, I. 5 See on 6. 7, I. 

* 4. 52. 7 ; Dial. 13, 3; 15, 3, &c. 

7 The collection made by Mucianus, 
of eleven Books of *Acta' (probably 
speeches) and three Books of ‘Epistles,’ 
was evidently known to Tacitus (Dial. 
37, 2), but seems to have been compiled 
from authors who were then ancient. 

Ü 

3- 13, 3. 

see Staatsr. iii. pp. 1015-1021. 
M 15. 74. 3. 13 Suet. Jul. 20. 
18 Suet. Aug. 36. M 5.4, I. 
15 16. 22, 6; Pl. Epp. 7. 33, 3. See 

. Staatsr. 1.1. 1018, 1. 

16 15. 74, 3. This passage and Suet. 
Aug. 5 are noted by Mommsen (1. 1. 1021, 
1) as the only distinct references to 
these documents in ancient literature. 
The attempt to alter the text of 1. 81. 1, 
so as to make it also refer to them has 
not been generally followed. 

7 See Nipp. Introd. p. 24. 

18 See 1, 81, 1; 2. 88, 1. 

19 See 1. 81, 15 2. 63, 4. 

Cur. HL] TACITUS' SOURCES OF INFORMATION. I9 

is more apparent than the large proportion of space given to debates in 
the.senate, and the fulness of detail with which they are recorded. 
Often!, the minute relation of somewhat dry particulars would suggest 
that, if Tacitus had not himself consulted the ‘acta,’ his informant had 
done so; yet perhaps even this record can be otherwise accounted for, 
and certainly much else that is given, especially the representations 
of the feeling in the house and the impression produced by speakers *, 
could have come from no official register, and would most probably 
be sought in the personal recollections or published letters or other 
memoranda of senators of the time. 

3. ‘Acta populi, called also simply *acta?,' or ‘acta publica ‘,’ ‘acta 
diurna urbis 5 * diurna actorum scriptura *, ‘diurna populi Romani *, 
or ‘libri actorum * This gazette also began with the first consulship 
of Julius Caesar?, and contained much of the matter of a modern 
newspaper. It was a court journal, and contained the names of those 
present at the levee of the princeps'5; also the proceedings in the law 
courts, taken down by ‘actuarii,’ appeared in it", and probably obituary 
notices of eminent men. A caricature of its contents may be seen in 
the mock journal of the estate of Trimalchio™. It seems to have been 
a bare record of the events of the day, often of such as the dignity 
of history would despise '’, useful only to check or supplement a de- 
scriptive narrative. | 

4. ‘Commentarii principum, the private journals of the princeps, 
handed down to his successors, could only be a source of history as 
far as the princeps chose to make them known. Among their contents 
would-be the secret history of the delations; a statement relating 
to these is made from them by Nero™; a vain request for their publi- 
cation is part of the reaction against informers at the accession of 
Vespasian !5, but even then their secrecy was preserved. A question 
asked by the younger Pliny is answered from them by Trajan!5 It 
is thought that Suetonius, as * magister epistolarum' to Hadrian", may 

© See Staatsr. ii. 813. Offence was 

! E. g. I. 79; 2. 47; 3. 60-63; 4. 

14; 55. taken at.the insertion in it of the names 
? E.g. 2. 38,7; 3.17, 2; 59, 35; 69, of those paying similar respect to Livia 
754.9, 15 31, 2; 70, 4; 6. 24, 4. In- or Agrippina (Dio 57. 12, 2; 60. 33, 1). 

stances in the later Books are fewer, but 
cp. I2. 5-7; 53; 13. 4-5; and especially 
16. 27-32. 

* Juv. 2, 136; Suet. Cal. 8. 

IU 24, 4. 113 31, I. 
$3:3.4. 16. 22, 6. 
* Juv. 9, 84. 

? Suet. ful 20. We should suppose 
that copies were preserved in public 
libraries. 

C 

H Suet. Jul. 55. ? Petron. Satyr. 53. 
" 13. 31, I 

* 13. 43) 4 
3 H.4.4 

o, 6. 

IF PL Epp. ad Trai. 71; 72 (65; 66 
Keil]. Pliny desires to test the accuracy 
of the copies of imperial edicts or letters 
current in the province. It appears that 
even privileges granted to individuals 
were registered in them. 

Y Spart. Vit. Hadr. c. 11. 

2 

20 INTRODUCTION. (Crap. III. 

have had access to them. It is stated that Gaius burnt at his accession 
an important part of the journals of Tiberius, containing the record 
of the condemnation of Agrippina and her sons, and made solemn 
profession that he had never read them!, However this may be, 
other journals of this prince are said elsewhere to have been preserved, 
and to have formed the favourite study of Domitian *, 

5. Public Inscriptions. It is needless to speak of the multitude which 
must have been at the time in existence, or of their manifold value to 
historians. Tiberius is stated to have taken great pains early in his 
principate to preserve and restore ancient documents?, We have, how- 
ever, no evidence that Tacitus was in the habit of consulting inscriptions, 
though he makes mention of decrees so recorded*, and once refers to 
such evidence of the letters added to the alphabet by Claudius 5. 

6. Pamphlet literature, chiefly satirical, Probably, in spite of repres- 
sion, this existed in considerable amount*, and may have been the 
ultimate source of much that we find in Suetonius. 

7. Tradition. The lifetime of Tacitus was not so far removed from 
the days of even Tiberius, but that many traditional anecdotes were 
still current. He states a report of this kind, for what it is worth, in 
his account of the trial of Cn. Piso*; he mentions, in order to refute 
it, an idle tale respecting the death of Drusus, son of Tiberius?; he 
seems to refer to oral testimony of living persons on the reality of the 
Pisonian conspiracy *; and elsewhere contrasts ‘fama’ with * auctores !5,'" 
and some of his vague expressions, such as ' traditur, *ferunt, * memoriae 
' proditur, may in some cases designate such floating stories. 

It will thus be seen that as far as the mere amount of material is 
concerned, the resources at the command of Tacitus were as ample as 
are found at most periods of ancient history. 

Much, however, of this abundant material must have been untrust- 
worthy. The first fundamental defect to notice is that which has been 
prominently put forward by Dio, at the transition point in his narrative !!. 

1 Suet. Cal. 15. Dio states that Gaius 
only pretended to burn them (59. 4, 3; 
Io, 8) but that Claudius really did so (60. 

» 5^ 
"4 Praeter commentarios et acta Tiberi 

Caesaris nihil lectitabat" (Suet. Dom. 
20). 
* Dio; ST. 16, 2. The expression 87- 

péoia ypappara may include records in 
sculpture as well as in writing. 

* 3- 57, 25 63, 73 12. 53, 5. For 
a knowledge of the decree noted in the 
last passage he may have been indebted 
to his friend Pliny: see note l. l. The 

‘publica acta’ of 12. 24, 4, are probably 
inscriptions. 

5 II. I4, 5. 

* We have mention of the lampoons 
of Cassius Severus (1. 72, 4; 4. 21, 5), 
i aria 48, 1), Veiento ra 50, 1), 8c. 

7 3. 16, 1 $ 4. IO, I 

? See 15. 73, 3. He may also have 
learnt from some such source the words 
of de. spoken of as ‘non vulgata" 
(15. 67, 4). ? 14. 2, 4. 

“4 See the whole passage, Dio, 53. 19, 
and the comment in Merivale, ch. xxxiii. 
p. 67, &c. 

Cur. IL] ZACITUS' SOURCES OF INFORMATION. 2I 

He, with all the materials before him which we have, and much more 
which we have not, finds himself, at the establishment of the principate, 
passing from daylight into comparative darkness, deepening, no doubt, 
towards his own time, as publicity was more and more suppressed. 

In former days, public affairs were discussed before senate and people, 
by persons of every shade of opinion; now the forum was silenced, even 
the minutes of the senate were no longer published, and the vast depart- 
ments centred in the princeps received their intelligence and transacted 
their business in private, and communicated no more than they thought 
fit. What was divulged could not be tested, and those who disbelieved the 
information had only surmise to substitute for it. Sometimes, no doubt, 
light was afterwards thrown on a dark place, through the record of their 
own transactions by public men’, or authentic private communications 
which found their way into history, and exposed the falsifications of an 
imperial bureau. Tacitus, for instance, or his informants, seem .to have 
had means of knowing that the official report of Tiberius on the Gallic 
revolt was no more nor less than truth? ; and that, on the other hand, he 
had concealed the extent of the losses inflicted by the Frisii*. It must be 
plain, to take no further instances, that our full narrative of the Pan- 
nonian and German mutiny, and of the German wars, can be no mere 
transcript of the report laid before the senate *. 

But as regards all matters not forcing themselves by their magnitude 
on public notice, much of the most interesting history must have been 
buried for ever in the archives of the prince. To illustrate this, we may 
compare the information, scanty as it is, which we have in the Annals, of 
the grievances, deputations, inner life of a senatorial province such as 
Asia, with the absence of even any similar accounts of any Caesarian 
province during this period. We should have known little enough, from 
official, or indeed from any purely Roman sources, of the grievances 
brought by Philo before Gaius, or of the oppressions which goaded 
Judaea to desperation 5. 

Many again of the state trials which form so large a part of domestic 
history were either before the emperor's private court *, or cases in which 
the senate merely registers a sentence, passed on receipt of a letter or 
notes of evidence from the prince or even his minister *. 

Authentic information thus was scanty, but Tacitus notices a further 

! Such as the memoirs of Paulinus, 5 Note the meagre account which suf- 
Corbulo, and Mucianus, already noticed. ^ ficed for a Roman, of all the relations of 
Possibly Sallustius Crispus was authority Rome with the Jewish nation (Hist. 

for the matters in 1.6; 2. 39-40. 5. 9-10). 
$3475 1s 5 4. 74, I. 6. 10, 2; II. 3, 1 (where see notes). 
#76595 3. 7 4. 70, 1; 6. 47, 4, &c.; Dio, 58. 21, 3. 

22 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». III. 

defect in his authors, from the faint interest taken even in what they 
might have known. Men were ‘ignorant of politics, as being no business 
of theirs!" but that of their rulers. Whoever has taken notice of the 
* indiligentia veri’ possible, even now, under circumstances of the utmost 
publicity and fullest extension of public responsibility, even among poli- 
ticians and political writers, on such public affairs as do not touch them 
immediately, will appreciate the profound truth of this remark of Tacitus, 
at a time when neither such publicity nor responsibility existed. 

Lastly, Tacitus divides all the chroniclers under the principate *, or at 
least all the successors of the great historians of Augustus ?, into two 
sharply-contrasted classes, the one, of those who wrote to flatter the 
ruling prince, the other, of those who poured out their pent-up rancour 
after his death. | 

We need not assume that each prince had his chroniclers of both these 
classes. In the case of Tiberius especially, it has been already noticed *, 
that (except the few pages of Velleius already mentioned) no historian 
is known even by name to us, as having published any account of the ‘res 
Tiberii, *florente ipso" Without assuming that none existed where 
none are known to us, we may reasonably suppose that few, if any, cared 
to publish contemporary history under a prince whose aversion to 
flattery is stated to have been at least as great as his fear of freedom 5; 
while the subsequent rule of the son, brother, and grandson of Ger- 
manicus left abundant opportunity for the multiplication of virulent 
attacks on the great reputed enemy of that house. 

We are really no less in the dark as to those who may have written on 
Gaius, Claudius, or Nero, ' florentibus ipsis' ; but it is obvious that the 
same historian may have belonged to both classes in different parts of 
his narrative ’, even if he could not change sides on the same prince with 
the versatility of Seneca *. 

! * Inscitia reipublicae ut alienae' (Hist. 

I. I, 2). 

? Hist. l. 1. * Ann. I. I, 5. 

* See above, p. 14. 

5 Bruttidius and Tus:us (see above, 
p. 17) if they wrote any contemporary 
history at all, no doubt belonged to this 
class. The work of Velleius is criticized 
below (ch. viii. p. 155). The general tone 
of such writers may be inferred from the 
language of literature in general towards 
the ruling prince; as from that of 
Vergil and Horace to Augustus, Seneca 

(see vol. ii. Introd. p. 23) to Claudius, 
Lucan (Id. p. 76) to Nero, Quintilian, 
Statius, Silius Italicus, and Martial to 
Domitian. 

* 3. 87, 3. 

7 Tf, for instance, Nonianus and Bassus 
published under Claudius, they would 
have written of that prince as courtiers, 
and of Tiberius probably as enemies. 

* Compare the ‘Consolatio ad Poly- 
bium" written in the lifetime of Claudius 
with the * Ludus' published a month after 
his death: see vol. ii. Introd. pp. 23, 45. 

Cur. IV.) TACITUS USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 23 

CHAPTER IV. 

ON THE USE MADE BY TACITUS OF HIS MATERIALS, AND 

THE INFLUENCE OF HIS IDEAS AND OPINIONS ON HIS 
TREATMENT OF HISTORY l. 
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 
PAGE 
Use made by Tacitus of his materials ; . i ; i ; : & 23 
His professed purpose in, writing history . : ; ; : : : ke. 27 
His general view hardly affected by his fatalism : i ; : . 29 
His apparent pains to ascertain truth and preserve impartiality ; : . 31 
The Annals, nevertheless, generally charged with unfairness  . ; : . 33 
General defects of Roman historical criticism . . . : . : . 34 
Political sympathies and antipathies of Tacitus . ; . ; ; , .. 35 
Influence of the tendency of the age to satire. ] ; : : à . 36 

THE question of the use made by Tacitus of the sources open to him 
has been of late chiefly discussed as regards the Histories, and in relation 
to the close resemblance of portions of that work to Plutarch’s Lives of 
Galba and Otho’, which, on the supposition that neither author has 
used the other?, would show that both had closely followed some 
common source, that not only the substance, but sometimes the form, 
and even an epigrammatic turn of expression had been adopted as it 
stands by both *, and that in some cases even a citation of discrepancies 
between authors is given at second-hand® Portions of Livy can be 
shown to stand in a similar relation to Polybius, and it is contended that 
such close following of a single author is very general among ancient 
historians, and that the reputation of great writers rests more on literary 
skill than industrious research. 

The question respecting the Histories, which cannot here be dis- 
cussed, turns, it should be remembered, only on a small portion, and 
probably in the author's opinion a less important portion of that work °; 

! In the first part of this chapter 
several obligations have to be acknow- 
ledged to the work of M. Fabia (see p. 13.) 

? Many of the works spoken of above 
(ch. iii. Introductory note) turn on this 
subject. ‘The most generally known is 
Mommsen's Essay (* Tacitus und Cluvius") 
in Herm. iv. (1870) pp. 295-325, and the 
most complete in English is Mr. Hardy's 
Introduction to his edition of these two 
‘Lives’ | 

* 'This supposition is by no means un- 
contested, and can hardly be called estab- 
lished. 

* E. g. ‘cum timeret Otho, timebatur ' 
(H. 1. 81, P ‘flagitia invicem obiccta- 
vere, neuter falso’ (H. 1. 74, 2). 

5 Cp. H. r. 41, 6, with Plut. Galb. 27. 
Mr. Hardy notes (Introd. p. xxxvi) other, 
but somewhat less clear instances. See 
below, p. 24, note 5. 

* Speaking roughly, the First Book, and 
first half of the Second Book : but a con- 
siderable portion even of this part lies 
outside Plutarch, and the first half of the 
latter's Life of Galba is outside the His- 
tories. 

24 . INTRODUCTION. [Cua». IV. 

in the later and principal part of which Tacitus is not known to have 
been preceded by any general historian, and is known to have taken 
pains in’ collecting material and to have had a reputation for ‘ dili- 
gentia’.’ It is thus evident that he had formed a habit of research before 
he came to the composition of the Annals. 

As regards this work, we have only its own evidence to go upon; 
but it seems no more than bare justice to suppose, in the absence of 
clear evidence to the contrary, that when he expressly states that he has 
consulted an author or other source, he has done so, and such references 
could hardly be second-hand without some literaty dishonesty. This 
would apply in one instance to the memoirs of Agrippina ?, in another 
to the ‘acta publica 5,' in another to the * commentarii senatus‘,’ and in 
a few cases to authors not named 5. 

It should also take positive evidence to make us believe that strong 
and general negative expressions * are made wholly without verification, 
or that the general imputations of servility or malevolence made against 
previous historians as a whole* do not presuppose some wide reading 
and personal research; and although in the great majority of references 
words are used not inconsistent with the supposition of second-hand refer- 
ence?, even these would oftener than not be a matter of personal observa- 
tion, if we credit him with any comparison of his predecessors at all ?. 

In the earlier and larger part of the Annals? he may probably have 
made chief use of Nonianus or Bassus, but we can hardly suppose that 
his narrative would have been as many-sided as it is if one of these had 

! Plinys account of the eruption of * E. g. * nullo auctore certo firmantur ' 
Vesuvius is written in answer to a re .. . ‘neque quisquam scriptor extitit" 

quest: ‘ petis ut tibi avunculi mei exitum 
scribam, quo verius tradere posteris possis." 
Elsewhere (Ep. 7. 33), in desiring that 
some notice of his part in the trial of 
Baebius Massa should be recorded, he 
assumes that what was to be found in the 
‘acta publica’ would not have escaped 
his research (‘demonstro ergo; quam- 
quam diligentiam tuam fugere non possit, 
cum sit in actis publicis) Also Orosius 
(7. 10, 4) cites as the chief authority on 
the Dacian wars of Domitian * Cornelius 
Tacitus, qui hanc historiam diligentissime 
contexuit." 

9 4. 535 3- * 3+ 32 

* 15. 745 3: 

5 2. 88,1; 3. 3, 2. I should include 
with these the ‘invenio apud quosdam 
auctores’ of H. 2. 37, 1, which has been 
claimed as a second-hand reference, 
but which the resemblance in Plut. Oth. 

does not seem sufficient to prove to 

SO. 

(4. 11, I, 4), ‘a scriptoribus annalium 
non traditum ' (4. 53, 3). 
I. I 

. I, 5. 

* E.g. (tradunt auctores, ‘traditur,’ | 
&c.: see above, p. 13, note 7. 

® Pliny, who is more likely to under- 
rate than to exaggerate the difficulties of 
a study only known to him as an outsider, 
says of the writing of history already 
treated by others (Epp. 5. 8, 12), * parata 
inquisitio sed onerosa collatio. The latter 
term, while plainly distinguished from 
original research for facts hitherto un- 
collected, seems at least to presuppose 
a careful comparison of existing narra- 
tives. Nor could the obligations of the 
historian of a special period, like Tacitus, 
be measured by those of a writer like 
Livy, whose work covered many centuries. 

1” Probably the first twelve Books (see 
p. 15), but for the latter part of this 
portion Cluvius and Rusticus (see p. 16) 
may also have come in. 

Cur.1V]] TACITUS’ USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 25 

been followed to the exclusion of the other!, or both to the exclusion of 
all besides them. Contemporary history has to be gradually built up 
by incorporating fragmentary narratives into systematic treatises, and 
only by degrees attains completeness. Nonianus, a pleader and senator 
of long standing, would have had much personal knowledge of a limited 
kind?: Bassus, who may not have been a senator at all?*, might easily 
have had greater experience elsewhere, and in his turn may have had 
shortcomings * which Pliny and others could supplement. 

Nor are we without positive evidence that Tacitus had noticed omis- 
sions in his chief authorities for this period. "They had cut short the 
dreary recital of state trials and left him to search elsewhere to complete 
the record^. No previous writer, Greek or Roman, seems to have done 
full justice to Arminius*. No one earlier than Pliny had preserved the in- 
cident turned to such account by Seianus against Agrippina"; her important 
political move in seeking a second husband would have been unknown 
but for her daughter's memoirs?; the presage respecting Galba's future ? 
would have been recorded by no one who wrote before its fulfilment. 

Of the three leading authors named for the Neronian period”, 
Cluvius alone is never quoted with disapproval Still, if he were the 
main source, the references to the others could hardly be second-hand ", 
and they may have known much that he did not. He would represent 
the best element in the ‘comitatus’ of Nero? ; Pliny, besides being the 
man of widest reading, would have had most knowledge outside Italy * ; 
Rusticus, with whatever reserve his statements were to be received, 

would have known most of Seneca’s life and policy ™. 

! The allusion to them in Dial. 23, 2 
would indicate acquaintance with both, 
but preference for neither. 

2 ‘The record of senatorial proceedings, 
occupying so much space in the first six 
Books, and showing so many traces of an 
eye-witness (see p. 19), or the notice 
of the interference of Tiberius in the 
praetors' courts (1. 75, 1), or the tumult 
round Claudius (12. 43, 2) might well 
have come from him. 

* He is thought to have been of lower 
rank, as no notice is taken of his death, 
which probably occurred before the Annals 
break off. | 

* He had certainly written on the Ger- 
man wars (see above, p. 15), yet Pliny 
thought it needful to rewrite that subject, 
and seems to consider himself the first to 
do justice to Drusus (Pl. Epp. 3. 5, 4). 

* 6. 7, 6. 

5 2. 88, 4. 7 1. 69, 3. 

? 4, 53. 3. ? 6. 20, 3. 

10 In what remains of that of Claudius, 
no authority is cited by name. 

! It has been suggested above (p.17) that 
he is likely to have written before them. 

12 He had never stooped to be an accuser 

: (H. 4. 43, 1), but had taken part in Nero's 

performance in Greece (Suet. Ner. 21), 
and would have no doubt strongly de- 
scribed the pressure put on men of rank 
to act thus (cp. 14. 14, 5, &c.). 

13 He is known to have been in Africa, 
Germany, and Spain. Many notices in 
the later Books of the Annals are such as 
it would have been characteristic of him 

“to collect, as the prodigies (12. 43, 1, and 
later): cp. also 12. 63, 2; 13. 245 58; © 

14. 22; 47, 3; 15. 18, 35 22, 35 32, 2; 
34,1; 16. 13, I. 

!* He is cited for an incident in relation 
to Seneca's end (15. 61, 6), and may well 
have been the authority for the last scene 
(c. 62-64), and other facts (as c. 45, 6), 
evidently from a laudatory source. 

26 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. IV. 

Speaking generally, we find that Tacitus disdains all notice of adula- 
tory writers; the contrasted opinions being generally more or less hostile ; 
that he only names his chief authors where they disagree!, but that he 
sometimes checks them by other sources *, and does not always follow 
the same authority in his earlier and later works *. 

The points of contact between Tacitus and Suetonius, more numerous 
in the earlier * than in the later Books of the Annals 5, and far more so in 
the Histories than in either *, do not decide the question whether the latter 
author used the former or both followed a common source’. On the 
whole, the differences are far greater than the resemblances, as might be 
expected from the individualities of the writers, and from the different 
point of view of a biographer and.a historian. Suetonius probably used 
more numerous sources 5, but took only what suited him from each. 

In the case of Dio, even where some direct use seems indicated *, the 
question is complicated by the long interval of time, allowing the sup- 
position that he may have known Tacitus through intermediate works”. 
We should not suppose that the writer of a complete Roman history 
could use many sources for any one period, but it is to be noticed that 
he often gives particulars omitted by Tacitus and sometimes adopts 

a different scale of proportion "'. 

1 See the general rule laid down early 
in the history of Nero (13. 20, 4): ‘nos 
consensum auctorum secuturi, si qui di- 
versa prodiderint, sub nominibus ipsorum 
trademus.' It is there applied only to the 
three leading authors, and apparently not 
always followed. 

? The solitary reference to the ‘ acta 
publica’ (3. 3, 2) proves no further use of 
them. He had noticed an omission in his 
authors, and looked to see if it was an 
error. The references to other sources in 
1. 69,3; 4. 53, 3; 13. 74, 3 are different. 
He had found something in each case, 
and cannot be supposed to have specially 
searched for it. This would argue some 
general, but not necessarily extensive, 
study of the source referred to. 

$ The account of the relations of Nero 
and Otho with Poppaea differs materially 
from that in the Histories (see on 13. 45, 
4), and that of the British rebellion from 
the version in the Agricola (vol. ii. Introd. 
pP. 143-144). 

* See notes on I. 6, 5; II, 1; 72, 43 
6. 25, 4; also the verbal resemblance of 
4- 36, 2 to Suet. Tib. 37, and above all the 
letter of Tiberius (6. 6, 1; Suet. Tib. 57). 

5 In these very few are noticed, such as 
the words on the dedication of the gym- 
nasium (14. 47, 3; Suet. Ner. 33) and 

some points in the account of the death of 
Britannicus (13. 15- 17 ; Suet. Ner. 33). 

* See the very full citation of parallel 
passages in Lehmann's Claudius, pp. 

7. 

T he latter view has been generally 
taken, but E. Cornelius (see p. 12, note 
6) argues from scattered Tacitean ex- 
pressions in Suet. as * inpatiens secreti ' 
(Ner. 12; H. 1. 17, 4), ‘spiranti adhuc’ 
(Cal. 12; 1.5, 5), * vergente die ' (Oth.7;13. 
38, 7), &c., that he had directly used him. 

5 Lehmann collects (p. 49, note 7) a 
long list of authors cited by him and un- 
known to us, but almost all of them 
belong to the first two ‘ Lives.’ ; 

? The chief passage is that on the case 
of M. Terentius, in which Dio (58. 19, 3) 
closely agrees with Tacitus (6. 8), and 
which the latter tells us was omitted by 
previous historians. In the presage re- 
specting Galba (see above, p. 25) he shows 
strong verbal agreement with Tacitus, but 
with some difference of date and circum- 
stances (see note). ° 

9 It is suggested that he may have used 
the éxarovraería (history of the century 
from Actium to Vespasian) of Appian, 
who could himself have used Tacitus. 

11 For instance, the campaigns in Ger- 
many, occupying so large a part of Ann. 

Cua. 1V.] TACITUS’ USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 27 

In closing this part of the subject, one on which, notwithstanding all 
that has been written, certainty of any kind is rendered impossible by 
the loss of all the sources which our historian could have followed, 
attention should be called to what at least is undeniable, the literary art 
with which the heterogeneous material is arranged and handled, espe- 
cially the skill with which a framework mainly annalistic' is adapted to 
dramatic effect, so as to make each successive Book unfold a scene in 
the tragedy *, and, in spite of much monotony of subject *, to sustain from 
beginning to end the reader's interest. 

It is of more importance to note the historical purpose of his 

work. 

The chief aim proposed by him as a historian is the elevation of 
public morality, by leading those who study the judgment of the present 

on the past, to attach value to that of the future on themselves. 

I and 2, are dismissed by Dio (57. 18, 1) 
in one or two lines. He must have fol- 
lowed a source in which small space was 
given to them and in which (see above, 
p. 25) Arminius was almost ignored. Also 
we have very scanty record of the events 
belonging to the latter part of Ann. 4, but 
here probably some of Dio's work is lost 
to us. On the other hand the funeral and 
other posthumous honours of Augustus 
occupy far more space in Dio (56. 31-47) 
than in Tacitus. With the later Books of 
the Annals comparison is difficult, as Dio 
is there abridged or in fragments; but here 
we should judge that he gave more space 
(62. 1-12) than Tacitus to the British 
rebellion. It is unfortunate that in some 
places where he gives most detail, as on 
the fall of Seianus (58. 8-16) and the last 
days of Nero (63. 22-29), we are unable 
to compare them. 

! See above, p. 6. In one place (6. 
38, 1) a departure from chronological 
order has been introduced to break the 
monotony of the domestic record, in an- 
other (12. 40, 8) to impress detached 
events more on the memory, in another 
(13. 9, 7) it is noted without reason given, 
in many others it is left to be seen from 
the narrative itself (cp. 11. 8, 1; 13. 53, 
I, &c.). Sometimes a previous or sub- 
sequent event is brought into connexion 
with one mentioned in its proper place 
(2. 27, 1; 63. 5-7; S8, 3; 3. 55; 12. 
56-57; 13. 32, 5, &c.), sometimes ap- 
parently misplaced by error (2. 32, 5; 
15. 43, 3, and notes). Such departures 
are far more numerous in the later than 

* I hold 

in the earlier Books, and the two chief 
instances, the narratives of Eastern and 
British affairs, are thereby very difficult 
to reduce to any chronological order. 
See vol. ii. Introd. chaps. 3 and 4. 

3? The Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Books 
give each a descending stage in the history 
of Tiberius (to whose first and best period 
the three earlier Books are allotted), and 
each leads up to an important crisis, the 
retirement to Capreae, the fall of Seianus, 
the death of the emperor himself. The 
close of the Eleventh and Twelfth Books 
are similarly marked. In Nero’s case, 
one Book describes his first and best five 
years, the next begins and ends with his 
two chief domestic atrocities, the next and 
only other complete Book centres in his 
triumph over the first attempt at his over- 
throw. Often a concluding sentence leads 
up to what is to come: the last words of 
the First Book point to the growth of an 
iron rule out of the show of freedom, those 
of the Fourth to the imminent fall of 
Seianus, those of the Eleventh to the fatal 
marriage with Agrippina, those of the 
Fourteenth foreshadow the impending 
conspiracy, those of the Fifteenth give the 
first hint of the rising of Vindex and the 
fall of Nero. Where there is no such 
purpose, as in the Second and Third, the 
Book ends with a sonorous sentence such 
as would enhance the effect of oral recita- 
tion. 

3 See the complaints in 4. 32-33; 16. 
16. This monotony is often broken by 
skilful digression, as in 3. 36-28 ; 4. 5-6; 
6. 22; 28; 12. 24, &c. 

28 INTRODUCTION. [Cnuar. IV. 

it the chief office of history to rescue virtue from oblivion, and that base 
words and deeds should have the fear of posthumous infamy ?.’ 

Even his own age, he feels assured, is not without noble characters 
deserving of such record. The operation of traceable causes, or even 
the revolution of a kind of cycle, can again bring good after evil, as 
fertile succeed to barren seasons?. An Agricola is as worthy of imita- 
tion as the heroes of antiquity, and, by being recorded for posterity, may 
receive the imperishable statue erected by those whose lives are formed 
- on his *. 

We may compare with this the nearly similar moral purpose professed 
by Livy ; to lead men to avoid the evil and choose the good, by exhibit- 
ing the intrinsic character and consequences of both. ‘ This it is that is 
so salutary and fruitful in historical study, that you see specimens of 
every type of character conspicuously displayed; and may hence take 
models for yourself and your country to imitate, or instances of what is 
vile in its beginning and issues, to avoid *.' 

Side by side with this runs another, but a closely connected purpose, 
that of being the means of teaching a political wisdom suitable to the 
times. He reminds the reader, that as men had of old to study the 
tempers of the aristocracy or the people, so, under a virtual monarchy, 
even the apparent trifles which he collects and puts on record will 
have their use, as men learn what is advantageous or pernicious more 
readily from the examples of others than from any forethought of their 
own 5, | 

This purpose, though apparently less exalted than the other, aims no 
less in result at elevating the character of public men. For the lesson 
which he desires to teach is that *even under bad princes there can be 
good citizens $' and that the most admirable is generally also the most 
successful; neither the base courtier who, by any reaction, or even by 
the mere desire for a new instrument ", is unmade in a moment by the 
breath that made him, nor the proud and impracticable ‘ irreconcileable,’ 
like Helvidius Priscus, who ostentatiously flings away his life ®, but the 
dignified reserve and moderation, ‘ removed alike from perilous disrespect 
and loathsome servility,’ which sustained the position of a Manius Lepidus 
under Tiberius*®,.a Memmius Regulus under Nero", and an Agricola 
under Domitian ™. | 

! Ann. 3. 65, 1; see also Agr. I, J. * Livy, Praef. 10. * Ann. 4. 33, 2. 

His idea of virtue, as Von Ranke notes 6 Agr. 42, 5. 7 Ann. 4. 71, I. 
(Weltgesch.), is the Roman idea, con- ; «Lu ® Ann. 4. 20, 4. 
sisting in courage, resólution, fidelity. 10 Ann. 14. 47, I. 

? 3. 55, 6 ; cp. 2. 88, 4. 11 Agr. 42-44. This idea is on the 
* Agr. 46, 3. whole consistently maintained, but his 

Cur. 1V.] TACITUS" USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 29 

It is with these purposes that we are to suppose him to have dealt 
with his materials ; on these that his sense of historical proportion, in the 
topics made more or less prominent or wholly omitted, may be taken to 
be mainly grounded’. Even granting the defects incident to history 
thus written for a purpose; his aim and range of subject elevate his 
work above mere biographies, such as those of Suetonius. Much as all 
history at such a time must dwell on the personal qualities of the prince, 
he has never made these his subject in themselves; but always in some 
subordination to their effect on the personal government and admini- 
stration of the empire. The designation of his work by St. Jerome, 
as ‘ Lives of the Caesars *,' needs but to be mentioned, to show its entire 
inadequacy. 

Yet again, the purpose in view alone justifies to himself, and is expected 
to justify to the reader, the monotony of his theme; the weary record of 
‘cruel mandates, perpetual accusations, treacherous friendships, destruc- 
tion of the guiltless’; forming in his mind so painful a contrast to the 
roll of foreign conquests and great domestic struggles which his prede- 
cessors were privileged to unfold*. Much indeed that would have been 
far more interesting to ourselves has thus been sacrificed, but he is at 
least entitled to the credit of having adhered steadily to his plan *. 

The apparent inconsistency in the profession of a didactic purpose by 
an author who inclines to fatalism, is to be met by showing that the 
opinions of Tacitus on this subject are neither so prominent nor so 
definite. as to make such inconsistency palpable, and that the saving 
clauses in his creed evidently sufficed to prevent his being himself 
perplexed by it. 

The principal passage on the subject does not directly treat of the 
freedom of human action, but raises the question whether prosperity and 
adversity and the chief occurrences of life are due to chance or fate’. 

earliest manifesto (see Introd. to Agr.) is 
the most strongly directed against the 
Republican extremists who evidently de- 
nounced his own and his father-in-law's 
acquiescence under Domitian. In the 
Histories, Helvidius is on the whole ad- 
mired, but his defects are noted (H. 4. 
4-9, &c.), and the historian's sympathies 
are rather with the * modestissimus quis- 
que’ who ignored his ‘ sententia' (4. 9, 3) ; 
nor is the disinclination of the senate to 
proceed to extremity against the tools of 
Nero (H. 4. 44, 1) expressly censured. 
In the Annals, although moderate men 
are strongly commended (see above?, and 
Thrasea is by no means indiscriminately 

praised (see vol. ii. Introd. p 80), the trial 
and death of this great leader of opposition 
are described with unstinted admiration, 
and the imputations against the Stoic 
creed are only put into the mouth of the 
accusers. | 

! Reasons for the prominence given to 
particular topics are stated in I. 73, 1; 
2. 27, 15; 3. 65, 1 ; 4. 32-33, &c. 

2 See above, ch. ii. p. 12. ? 4.33, 3. 

* Many such omissions as those noted 
by Mr. G. A. Simcox (Hist. of Latin 
Literature, ii. p. 175) seem due to the 
limit which Tacitus thus imposes on 
himself. | 

5 6, 32 (where see notes). 

30 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. IV. 

The latter would imply the agency of the gods, who are elsewhere 
recognized as originators of destiny’, and rulers of man and nature ?, 

sometimes as caring at least to punish ?, if not to protect *, sometimes as 
» those who would bless us if our sins permitted them ^, sometimes as 
pursuing their purpose with sublime indifference to our good deeds 
or evil ®. 

The Epicurean doctrine, that the deity cares for none of us, that good 
or bad are fortunate or unfortunate as blind chance may guide, is briefly 
dismissed in this passage. In an atheistic form it was no doubt un- 
acceptable to Tacitus and to general opinion, though popular enough, 
as Pliny has shown’, when brought into apparent harmony with religion 
by the elastic theology which worshipped Fortune as a goddess? and 
reconciled opposites by the apotheosis of a negation. 

The Stoic theory, as stated in the same place, besides repeating the 
well-known doctrine, that the good are never really miserable nor the 
wicked happy, reconciles destiny and freewill by supposing that after 
man has made his ‘ choice of life,’ its consequences are determined, not 
by planetary influences but by natural causation. A more extreme, and 
apparently more popular theory, to which Tacitus evidently inclines, 
would hold that our destiny is fixed from the moment of our birth, and 
could be foretold from our horoscope, were we sure of our interpreter ; 
but that the true professors are few, and the art discredited by the 
multitude of quacks, 

Believing in astrology, he believed also in prodigies and omens ® as 
means whereby the future was revealed; but here again he would say 
that misinterpretations were rife, and that many prognostications were 
only recognized as such after the event, — 

Elsewhere he often uses popular language in which fortune and 

! Thus *fatalem rabiem" is explained 
by *deum ira’ (1. 39, 8). Cp. also 2. 
"1, 2. 

? See 12. 43, 33 14. 5, 1, &c. 

5 4. 1, 3; 16. 16, 3. 

* See H. 1. 3, 3, where he appears to 
follow Lucan, 4. 807. 

5 Cp. *propitiis, si per mores nostros 
liceret, deis’ (H. 3. 72, 1). 

Cp. * aequitate deum erga bona mala- 
que documenta’ (16. 33, 1). 

T See N. H. 2. 7 (5), 22, where he looks 
on such a goddess as a mere invention 
(cp. Juv. 10. 366), but as the only deity 
popularly worshipped. He adds that the 
alternative of astrological fatalism sup- 
poses the deity to have ordained once for 
all, and then to rest for ever. 

§ Tacitus often personifies ‘ fortuna,’ as 
in 3.18,6; H.2.1,1; 4. 47, 2, &c. The 
mixture of sceptical and theological ideas 
in the first of these passages is note- 
worthy. 

? See above, p. 16, note 1, also 12. 
43, 15 64, 1; 14. 32, 1; 15. 7) 33 47, 
I, &c. The miracles of Vespasian are 
viewed as omens, H. 4. 81, 1. He . 
makes no such apology as that of Livy 
(43. 13, 1). P 

19 Cp. ‘quae adeo sine cura deum eve- 
niebant' (14. 12, 4); 'quod in pace 
fors seu natura, tunc fatum et ira dei 
vocabatur' (H. 4. 26, 2). Similar mis- 
interpretations are hinted at in 13. 17, 25 
H. 2. 91, r. 

11 See H. I. 10, 7. 

Cma IV.]. 7ZACITUS' USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 31 

destiny are mingled and confused !, and the latter appears often to mean 
no more than the operation of some inexplicable cause *, or sometimes 
only that which would happen in the ordinary course of nature if men 
made no effort to supersede it*. When he has to explain the steady 
career and position of a Manius Lepidus, he feels that it must be due not 
altogether to destiny, but in part at least to his own personal qualities *. 

On the whole, his doctrine has thus neither the precision nor the 
embarrassing consequences of a philosophical theory, and is rather such 
as would be expected in one who held that, while a tincture of deeper 
studies formed part of necessary culture’, it was not well for a Roman 
senator to go too far in them*. His creed serves him at times to point 
a moral, rather than affects his general view of historical events *. 

Writing with a moral purpose, it is needless to say that Tacitus holds 
himself bound to tell the truth without prejudice or favour*. "That he is 
no careless follower of previously written narratives has been already 
shown?; while the accuracy in detail, both of himself and his informants, 
is in no slight degree evidenced by confirmatory inscriptions, such as those 
already cited '? ; and by the paucity and insignificance of such errors of 
fact as have been clearly brought home to him”. What is probably the 
weakest point in his narrative, the want of precision in its geography ", 
is a defect which he shares with Livy, Sallust, and other authors, who 
have had to describe military movements on an extensive scale without 
the aid of maps ?*. | 

T wo points may here be noted, in which this obligation to veracity is 
consciously relaxed. 

Firstly, in the account of battles, at least of disastrous battles, hé 

1 See notes on 6, 22. 

* Cp. 3. 30, 73 55, 6; 13. 12, a. So 
when the blindness of Varus, and the power 
for evil wielded by one so mediocre as 
Seianus, are referred to fatality or wrath 
of heaven (1. 55, 4; 4. 1, 3), it is meant 
that no traceable cause can account for 
them. 

* Cp. the use of *fatum,' of natural : 

death (1. 3, 3; 2. 42, 5; 71, 2), implying 
that a man baulked his destiny by killing 
himself or by being killed. So Tiberius 
left to *fate' what it was too great an 
effort to settle (6. 46, 5). 

: 4- 20, 5. 5 Dial. 19, 5. 

Agr. 4, 4. ] 

7 On the whole subject, see Nipp. In- 
troduction, pp. 17-20. 

5 Ann. I. 1,6; H. 1. 1, 4. 

* See above, pp. 25, 26. 

19 See ch. ii, throughout. 

"Eg. 41,3; » 52, 8; 3. 29, 3; 
4 44, 35 13. 33, 5; 16. 17, a 

7 See notes generally on the cam- 
paigns of Germanicus and Corbulo, the in- 
cursions of Tacfarinas, British expeditions, 

c. 

13 See the defects noted even in Poly- 
bius (Arnold, Hist. of Rome, vol. iii. 
note F.) The defects in the military 
narratives of Tacitus are, however, not 
confined to want of geographical precision. 
The whole scene is conceived in the 
Spirit of an orator, and rhetorical de- 
scriptions of battles or episodes illus- 
trating the personality of the leader take 
the place of any intelligible account of 
campaigns. If through these defects he 
is not, as Mommsen calls him (see vol. ii. 
Introd. p. 144), *the most unmilitary of 
historians,' it is because Livy might well 
dispute the palm with him. 

32 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. IV. 

considers it a point of patriotism to conceal the number of Roman 
slain. This reticence, observable throughout his narrative, especially in 
the account of the campaigns of Germanicus, appears to have been 
deliberately adopted as a principle, and grounded on precedent, in a lost 
part of the Histories’. 

The second exception relates to the practice, so common among 
ancient historians, and never regarded by them as a breach of truth, 
of composing imaginary speeches purporting to be historical?. There 
is, however, reason to believe that Tacitus recognized some limit in 
this respect, as may be seen by the comparison elsewhere made between 
the speech assigned to Claudius on the concession of full citizenship to 
the Gauls? with the extant fragments of the actual speech *, which would 
lead us to conclude, that in such documents as the recorded letters and 
speeches of the princeps to the senate, Tacitus while feeling at liberty 
to condense, rearrange, and generally to deal with the form as he 
thought fit, and to assimilate the style and language to his own for the 
sake of literary homogeneity °, does consider himself under an obligation 
to preserve the substance of what was really said, and that such passages 
are, to this extent, historical?^: though a much smaller measure of truth 
may be supposed -in less known or less famous senatorial speeches’ ; 
and still less, or rather none, in such orations as those of Calgacus to 
his countrymen’, or in the address of Germanicus to the mutinous 
legions, or that to his friends around his death-bed *. 

Besides the emphatic profession of the historian's obligation to impar- 
tiality, we have to note the full belief of Tacitus that he has the means 

1 Orosius (vii. ro, 4), speaking of the 
defeat of Fuscus by the Dacians, says, 
* Corn. Tacitus, qui hanc historian dili- 
gentissime contexuit, de reticendo inter- 
fectorum numero, et Sallustium Crispum 
et alios auctores quam plurimos sanxisse, 
et seipsum potissimum elegisse dicit.’ 
See Merivale, Hist. ch. lxi. p. 105. For 
exceptions, see I4. 37, 5; Agr. 37, 6. 

2 It is noted that this is the form in 
which motives for actions are commonly 
traced, with the idea (see Thuc. r. 22, 1) 
of making the speaker say what appears 
to the historian most suitable to the case. 

5 YI, 24. 

* See Appendix to B. xi. 

5 He himself describes such adaptation 
by the word * invertere' (15. 63, 7). 

* This would probably apply to the 
speeches, edicts, or letters of Tiberius 
(8. 63 12; 53; 4. 37) as distinct from 
the one passage in which his actual words 
are quoted (6. 6, 1). Suet. seemstoquote 

from some speeches more closely (Tib. 
67). Shorter quotations of the substance 
of letters, &c., are very frequent. 

7 See 3. 33-34; 14. 43-44, &c. The 

speech of Lepidus (3. 50) much resembles 

that given’ at a later date to Thrasea 
(14. 48), and both express the more 
politic attitude of the opposition: while 
the defence of Cordus (4. 34-35) has (as 
Asbach notes) the character of a mani- 
festo of the historian's own sentiments. 

* Agr. 30-32. Even here the historian 
speaks as if he was following a tradition 
(‘in hunc modum locutus fertur").  As- 
bach notes that rhetorical commonplaces, 
as the aspiration for liberty, resolution to 
conquer or die, &c., enter largely into all 
these speeches (cp. 2. 15, 43 4- 35. 4 
&c.), but that all have a local colouring 
thrown over them. 

? 1. 42; 43; 2.71. The former speech 
shows imitation of one in Livy (see note 

On I. 42, 4). 

Cur IV.]. TACITUS" USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 33 

of reaching truth, by weighing in the scales of justice the indiscriminate 
praise or censure of earlier writers. He is more conscious of the difficulty 
of writing on the Flavian Caesars, to whom he was personally indeb:ed !, 
than on the period covered by the Annals, one in which, as he believed, 
* the grounds of resentment or partiality were far removed from him ?.' 

In one case, when he discusses and rejects a scandalous tale, he begs 
the reader to take it as a specimen ?, implying that he has rejected many 
other such; which a comparison with Dio or Suetonius will sufficiently 
confirm. A single instance may here deserve notice, from the attempts of - 
commentators to force it into compatibility with his narrative. Suetonius 
tells a story, partly perhaps derived from Seneca‘ and the elder Pliny 5, 
that Tiberius, when already princeps, spent thirty-six hours in a con- 
tinuous drinking bout with L. Piso and Pomponius Flaccus, both of 
whom were rewarded for their boon companionship—‘ alteri Syriam 
provinciam, alteri praefecturam urbis confestim detulit®’ But according 
to the text of Tacitus in the MS., Piso, at his death in 785, 4. p. 32, had 
been twenty years praefect, and had therefore held that office under 
Augustus". This is got rid of by the supposition that twenty years 
is a round number, or that in some earlier MS. in which numerals were 
used, ‘xx’ and ‘xv’ have been confused. But the story limps elsewhere: 
for the appointment of Flaccus to Syria cannot be dated before 785, 
A.D. 32*. This again is met by referring ‘confestim’ to Piso alone; 
which, if open to no other objection, spoils the point of the story by 
destroying the plausible connexion of cause and effect, and by making 
Suetonius gravely connect this appointment with a debauch of some 
fifteen years before it, when the consulship? and the governorship of 
Moesia '* had intervened. The suggestion is surely more probable that 
Tacitus was aware of this story, saw its inconsistency with facts and dates, 
and rejected it without even noticing it. 

In spite, however, of his diligence, his firm conviction of his own 
impartiality, and his belief that he treads on firmer ground in describing 
times further off from his own, it has been the general verdict of modern 
criticism, that *the Histories of Tacitus are more to be relied on than his 
Annals", and the latter are even maintained to be ‘almost wholly 
satire '2.’ The very excellences of the book are also noted as its defects. 

LH. I. 1,4. ? Ann. I. I, 6. but it becomes an undoubted fact with 
3 4. IT. * Ep. 83, 14. Suetonius. 
5 N. H. 14. 22 (28), 145. 7 See notes on 6. 11. 
* Suet. Tib. 42. Seneca mentions only * See notes on 6. 27. 
that Piso had a habit of drinking; Pliny .  * 2. 41, 2. 9 2. 66, 3. 
gives the part relating to him of this "n Merivale, Hist. ch. lvii. p. 467. 
story as a mere ‘ belief of some persons ;’ ? Id. ch. lxiv. p. 343. 

VOL. I. D 

34 INTRODUCTION. [Cuap. IV. 

. It is not in the bare facts, which, as stated above, are rarely known to 
be erroneous, and not often suspected of being so; but in the artistic 
treatment of the facts, the brilliant colouring, the effective contrasts, the 
dramatic situations, above all, in the subtle interpretation of motives, that 
the injustice is mostly conceived to lurk. 

Again, the further he recedes from his own time, the greater, instead 
of the less, becomes the suspicion of unfairness. His portraiture of 
Claudius and Nero is less assailed than that of Tiberius, which, although 
the most elaborate analysis of character in all his writings, is also most 
often attacked as untrustworthy. 

It will be the work of other chapters to follow him in detail through 
the whole period, and to point out such inconsistenciés and unfairnesses 
as may seem traceable: but we may here notice such general considera- 
tions as make it probable that he has dealt less than justice to the early 
Caesars. 

One chief cause will be found in the fact that in the Annals generally, 
and in the early portion especially, he is beyond the limits of his own 
knowledge, and forced to depend on written authorities; and in the 
defects of his own and their methods of dealing with historical evidence. 

The Roman critical faculty, never so keenly on its guard against 
inaccuracy in substance as against solecisms in language!, seems 
generally to have spent the force of its historical judgment in dealing 
with discrepancies between informants, without recognizing the in- 
sufficiency of even their united testimony to establish what was beyond 
their means of knowledge. Such is the general attitude of Livy 
towards his chroniclers; such again appears to be that of Tacitus 
towards his *auctores He could firmly reject a floating tale which 
they had never recognized, and which was otherwise improbable?; he 
could supplement their defects in detail, judge freely between their 
differences; we can imagine him to have rejected, even in the face of 
testimony, a statement evidently inconsistent with itself or exaggerated : 
but where a story was generally accepted, and did not bear plain marks 
of overstatement or incredibility *, we cannot suppose it to have occurred 
to him to ask whether its subject was one on which his authorities 
were competent to speak. For instance, the details of a private cor- 
respondence between Tiberius and Seianus are given. without expressed 
or implied suspicion‘, though it appears to, us almost impossible to 
imagine authentic evidence of them. | 

1 See the remarks of Merivale, Hist. (H. 2. 50, 3) is capable of a general ap- 
ch. BI 305. plication, * volgatis traditisque demere 

. TI. ; fidem non ausim.' 
* His sentiment in relating a prodigy © * Ann. 4. 39; 40. In a similar case, 

Cuar. 1V.] TACITUS' USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 35 

Any such misleading effect of a ‘consensus auctorum" would be 
aggravated, if, as has been seen to be probable in respect to the prin- 
cipate of Tiberius, the original authorities belonged almost wholly to 
the hostile section’. "The critic might feel that he had made a con- 
siderable deduction for their prejudices, and might naturally consider 
that this was sufficient. | 

It is also noteworthy that he treats the testimony of his authorities 
as evidence not only for an act but for a motive?; and only with diffi- 
dence suggests an explanation of his own’. Here it is probable that 
the discrepancy of his witnesses left him much room for choice, and 
enabled him, without going beyond the alternatives suggested by them, 
to interpret the acts in accordance with his general conception of the 
character. 

Further explanation must be found in the personal opinions of 
Tacitus, and in the circumstances of his life. 

His political attitude to the early Caesars could not really be one of 
indifference; for the revolution which they accomplished and con- 
solidated was with him the main cause of the degeneracy of his own 
age. Loyal as he is to the emperors under whom he wrote; who had 
‘combined monarchy with freedom *' and brought about ‘an age of 
rare felicity, in which men might think what they would and say what 
they thought®;’ he could see that the remedy worked far more slowly 
than the disease*, and feel the more resentment against the supposed 
authors of the latter. 

His political sympathies are those of the idealist rather than the 
statesman; his golden age is before the dawn of history’, and his 
golden age of Rome, the old Republic seen through the mist of ages, 
the time when *equitable legislation was crowned by the Laws of the 
Twelve Tables*;' or, at latest, the days before the fall of the great 
foreign powers had developed the dangers of security and peace’. 
Himself probably no more connected with the old families than was 
Cicero, he yet cannot divest himself of the reverence inspired by their 
glories in the history of the early period ?. Blind to the misgovern- 
ment which alone made revolution possible, he can see only the in- 
trigues of ambitious men who brought about the fall of *liberty.' 

the alleged letter of Lentulus Gaetulicus ? H. 2. 38, 2. 

is cautiously given as a mere ‘persistent 10 As instances of his sympathy may be 

rumour,’ 6. 30, 4. noted his tone in speaking of the men- 
1 See above, ch. iii. p. 22. dicancy of Hortalus (2. 37) or the crimes 
3 Cp. 1. 80, 3, &c. of Lepida (3. 23); and the aggravation 
3 See 4. 57, 2. * Agr. 3, I. in his eyes of the guilt of Livia by her 
5H. 10, 5. * Agr. 1. 1. adulterer being no more than a * munici- 
7 Ann.3. 26,1. ? 3.27, 1. pal ' (4. 3, 4). 

36 INTRODUCTION. (Crap. IV. 

Gracchus with him ranks no higher than Saturninus'; not even Sulla 
or Pompeius had disinterested aims? ; the dictatorship of the first Caesar 
seems only to form part of the twenty years of anarchy?. There are in- 
dications enough that his view of Augustus was as different from that 
of Vergil or Horace as his Tiberius from the Tiberius of Velleius *. 
The ‘ weariness of civil strife*" which had followed Actium was em- 
ployed by Augustus first to ‘secure his own ascendency,’ and then to 
give ‘laws which we were to enjoy in peace and under monarchy*.' 
From this time *the old morality disappeared in the revolution; men 
cast aside their position of civic equality and looked for orders to the 
prince*;' hence begins the servile age of sycophants and courtiers. 
The restoration of the Republic is still so far conceived to have been 
possible 5, that Germanicus and his father are imagined to have contem- 
plated it*, and popularly held to have been victims of their love of 
liberty *. The vices of the senatorial rule, the improvement of pro- 
vincial administration under the empire, are ignored even at the mo- 
ment when they are admitted" ; and the first Caesars are assumed to 
be mainly responsible for the degradation which had changed the 
senate that confronted Pyrrhus or Hannibal to that which had dragged 
its own members to prison at the bidding of Domitian ". 

Our estimate must also take account of the author's literary ten- 
dencies. In one sense, not the Annals alone, but all the works of 
Tacitus are satire; for satire, in the various forms which it took under 
Persius, Petronius, Martial, Juvenal, was the chief literary force of the 
age *; and a writer out of harmony with the times of which he writes 
had a whole armoury of sharp-edged maxims ready to his hand. *In- 

! Ann. 3. 27,3. ? H. 2. 38, 3, 4. and Trajan, but because he is speaking of 

* Ann. 3. 28, 2. 

* See especially the prominence given 
to the hostile opinion (1. 10). 

ae oe p.73. * 3. 28, 3. 

T2, E 

* On this the testimony of his writings 
is hardly uniform. In Agr. 42, 5, the 
Republic is the *inlicita? which some ad- 
mired: monarchy is essential to peace 
and order (H. 1. 1, 2): Galba is made to 
affirm the same necessity, and to speak in 
the terms of Nerva's policy (H. 1. 16, 1): 
good rulers with liberty of thought and 
speech are all that can be desired (Agr. 
3, 1; H. 1. 1, §), and even if this ideal is 
not realized wise men make the best of 
such as they get (H. 4. 8, 3). If a differ- 
ence is noted in the passages of the Annals 
here cited, it is perhaps not because the 
author changed his opinions as he grew 
older and lost faith in the ideal of Nerva 

earlier times, when, as at the death of 
Augustus, there were yet those living, 
however few, who had seen the Republic 
(1. 3, 7), and survivals of liberty were 
more frequent (1. 74, 6), and its restora- 
tion was conceivably feasible, had the 
En pire passed into the hands of one who 
favoured such an idea, It is unfortunate 
that we have not his view of the time 
when such restoration of the Republic 
was discussed at the death of Gaius, or 
fought for (as some think) by Vindex 
(see vol. ii. Appendix iii. p. 635). 
, 18-3. 81, 3. 

12 Agr. 45; I. The ideal of the senate 
is described in Otho's speech (H. 1. 84, 
5-10). 

/5 This is well shown by Mr. Simcox in 
the History of Latin Literature already 
mentioned. 

Cnar. IV.) TACITUS' USE OF HIS MATERIALS. 37 

mitior quia toleraverat!':' ‘acerrima proximorum odia?:' 'causae in- 
imicitiae acriores quia iniquae?:' ' proprium humani generis odisse 
quem laeseris*'—these and a hundred such are the forms in which 
the stern and bitter experiences of the historian's life express themselves. 
There are no such arrows in the quiver of Augustan literature ; they are 
hardly so barbed even in Juvenal. Again, we have the satiric tendency, 
prevalent especially in the Annals, to take extreme acts as typical of the 
man, and extreme men as typical of the age. Not, however, that such 
exaggerations are on one side only: the great literary artist knows too 
well the effect of a heightened contrast to neglect the opportunities held 
out to him. Even on such neutral ground as the subject of the 
‘Germania’ this is thought to have affected the historical fidelity of 
Tacitus; and in the portraiture of Rome under the Caesars, the tempta- 
tion was far more irresistible. Hence the effort to idealize a Germanicus, 
a Corbulo, or an Agricola, and others who might be mentioned; and the 
tendency to surround with glory the death-scene of the martyrs. 

Between this sharply-drawn contrast of hideous vices and heroic 
virtues, the neutral multitude of ordinary men on the dead level of 
average mediocrity of character in all ranks of life, however deeply 
interesting to those who would truly trace the general tendencies ofan 
age, fade as completely out of sight as the shadowy rank and file of 
the Homeric armies. 

! Ann. I. 20, 2. ? H. 4.70, 3. ? Ann. 1. 33: 3- * Agr. 42, 4. 

38 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

CHAPTER V. 

ON THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS, WITH ESPECIAL 
REFERENCE TO THE ANNALS. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

General Remarks " à : 1 . pp. 38-42 

Syntax. SECTIONS 
I. Nouns and Pronouns 1-9 

II. Cases of the Noun 10-37 

III. Verbs . 38-42 

IV. Moods and Tens 43-53 

V. Participles : 54-55 

VI. Prepositions . : à 56-63 

V II. Adverbs and Conjunctions 64-68 

Style. 

I. New words or new senses of words 69-72 

II. Rhetorical and poetical colouring 73-79 

III. Influence of the study of brevity 80-84 

IV. Influence of the study of variety in expression 85-94 

V. Influence of imitation 95-97 

Tue Lexicon Taciteum of Bótticher!, the Excursus of Roth on the 
Agricola ?, and the ‘Index Latinitatis" in Ruperti's edition *, represented 
for some time the chief results of the labour of scholars on this subject ; 
but the literary activity of recent years in Germany has superseded those 
by a large number of treatises, mostly on special points, many of which 
are gathered up into and supplemented by the valuable treatise of 
Dr. Draeger*, still the most complete and systematic work on the 
subject, from which far the greater part of the substance of what is here 
given has been derived, and to which all who desire further information 
are throughout referred *. In the necessarily limited selection here made, 
it js intended to illustrate not only such points of usage and style as are 
? Nürnberg, 1833. 

! Berlin, 1830. logus (xxiv. 115-123; xxv. 92-134; xxvi. 

> Hanover, 1834. 

* Ueber Syntax und Stil des Tacitus, 
3d ed., Leipzig, 1882. Those who desire 
a more concise treatise may be referred to 
Gantrelle's Grammaire et Style de Tacite, 
2d ed., Paris, 1882. 

* Much use has also been made of the 
valuable dissertations by W6lfflin in Philo- 

92-166; xxvii. 113-149), and in Bursian’s 
Jahresberichte (iii. 756-787); also of 
the third and fourth parts of Joh. Müller's 
Beitráge zur Kritik und Erklárung des 
Corn. Tacitus (Innsbruck, 1873), and of 
the notes of Heraeus on the Histories, 
and of Prof. Gudeman (1894) on the 
Dialogus. 

Cur. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 39 

wholly peculiar to Tacitus, but also the most remarkable of those which, 
though adopted from earlier writers, are used by him with characteristic 
boldness and freedom. 

Among the features of the Latinity of what is called the silver age, 
. one of the most prominent is the introduction into prose of words and 
forms of expression from the great classic poets, who had by that time 
become the text-books of every grammar-school!. "That this extended 
to all kinds of prose composition, may be illustrated from the. fact that 
out of a list, gathered from Tacitus, of nearly roo words, more or less 
frequent in Augustan poetry, but absent from Augustan or classic prose, 
more than half had already won a place in intermediate prose literature, 
mostly in the plain, matter-of-fact descriptions of the elder Pliny *. 
Another such:list might easily be framed from Livy, to show by a com- 
parison with Caesar, or even Sallust, the influence of poetic diction on 
historical prose, in the latter part of the Augustan age itself. 

Partly through this adoption of poetic language, partly through the 
increasing taste for what was Greek, as such’, Latinity had also become 
more tolerant of Greek words and grammatical Graecisms. 

In Tacitus, the first of these general tendencies is abundantly pro- 
minent*; the latter he may probably have looked upon as a corruption, 
as he shows no disposition to add to the Graecisms or Greek words 
already in use*. His earliest treatise, the * Dialogus, shows even 
a reaction in the direction of Ciceronian Latinity *; his later writings, 
while showing less and less trace of Cicero’, have acquired so marked 
an individuality of style *, that even a fragment, long lurking unsuspected 
in the pages of Sulpicius Severus, has been claimed for Tacitus with 
good grounds on internal evidence alone *. 

The special qualities of his style are no doubt ‘due, in no small 
measure, to his professional career. As the first forensic orator of the 
day, we might assume that he had perfected such gifts as were pre- 
scribed to a pleader by the prevailing fashion; and he has himself 
described to us the difference between the rolling periods of Ciceronian 
eloquence and the style demanded in his own age, when jury and 

1 Juv. 7. 226. 

3 See Draeger, $ 249, t. 

5 See Juv. 3. 61, &c. 

* See below, $$ 70, 72, and several 
others. 5 See § 95. 

* See Dr. $ 259, 1, also Peterson and 
Gudeman. 

7™ The chief instance is found in the 
reminiscences of De Orat. 3. 2, 3, in Agr. 

44, 45- E 
* Prof. Allen well notes (Introd. xxxii) 

that he is hardly less strongly contrasted 
with Pliny and Quintilian than with Cicero 
and Sallust. These writers represented 
the more simple and colloquial style of 
the silver age, which stood to earlier 
Latin somewhat as modern English to 
that of Johnson. 

* See Sulp. Sev. Hist. Sacr. 2. 30, 6; 
Jac. Bernays, Uber die Chronik des Sulp. 
Sev., Berlin, 1861 ; Milman, Hist. of the 
Jews, bk. xvi. p. 366, note. 

40 INTRODUCTION. [Cnuar. V. 

listeners soon wearied of a long harangue, were impatient of the 
speakers preamble, and recalled him peremptorily from a digression ; 
so that brevity had become the soul of wit, rapidity and incisive bril- 
liancy the qualities most sure to reward the pains taken to acquire them. 
He tells us of pupils listening eagerly, and reporting to their friends 
at a distance the last pungent epigram, or glowing poetic passage. 
‘For poetic grace is now demanded of the orator, not marred with 
the rust of Accius or Pacuvius, but fresh from the treasury of Horace, 
of Vergil, or of Lucan! ‘Tacitus was thus under influences both 
general or literary and also special or professional, in adopting the 
poetical colouring so characteristic of him; but it is perhaps due to 
individual taste that the poetical element in his writings is almost wholly 
Vergilian ?. 

Besides carrying much of his habitual style into the composition of 
history, he evidently studied, as modes of historical writing, his chief 
predecessors in that field, for whom he expresses such genuine ad- 
miration. Of this kind, the chief influence on him known to us, is 
that of Sallust and Livy, who, though rarely expressly mentioned 3, 
leave their traces in a number of forms of expression throughout his 
writings *; the former being naturally his model of terseness, the latter of 
eloquence ; with his own taste to blend and modify them 5. 

He has himself told us of his own painful consciousness of the dull 
monotony and repulsive sadness of great part of his narrative, compared 
with the range of subject and fiee treatment of the old historians *. 
Hence, in the true skill of an advocate with a tedious case, he would 

' See the description given by Aper 
(the chief representative of the modern 
school) in Dial. 19-20. 

2 The debt of Tacitus to Vergil will be 
apparent throughout this chapter (see 
especially $8 70; 72; 97) and from the 
notes passim, and is much more fully set 
forth in the treatise of H. Schmaus, 
Tacitus ein Nachahmer Vergils, Bam- 
berg, 1884. It is there shown that of 
319 words apparently originating in Ver- 
gil, 57 are found in Tacitus (most of them 
haviny, however, found their way into inter- 
mediate prose) and that such usages as 
those noted in §§ 4; 12; 33€; 40; 41; 
43, appear very often to be derived from 

m. 

3 «C, Sallustius rerum Romanarum 
florentissimus auctor’ Ann. 3. 30, 3; 
* Livius veterum, Fabius Rusticus recen- 
tium eloquentissimi auctores ’ Agr. 10, 3. 

* The influence of Sallust on Tacitus 
has been shown by several writers, es- 

pecially in G. Schoenfeld's treatise De 
Taciti studiis Sallustianis, Leipzig, 1884. 
It is most prominent in the Germania 
and Agricola (see Introductions to those 
treatises), but is also evident in the Annals 

in many words and senses of words (see 

notes passim‘ and many of the syntactical 
usages noted below, as well as in, the 

imitation of actual expressions (see § 97), 

in the descriptions of the characters of 
Seianus and Poppaea (see on 4. 1, 4; 13. 

45, 2), and in some speeches (see on 3. 50, 

I; 14. 43,1). If the influence of Livy is 

lest apparent, it is because he also has 

frequently followed Sallust, and the re- 

semblances in Tacitus could often be as- 

signed to either. ] 

5 The instances in which he is thought 
by Zimmermann and others to have fol- 
lowed Seneca in the Annals do not seem 
strong : see notes on 3. 26,1; 4. 18, 3; 
6. 6, 25; 10,2. 

$ Ann. 4. 32. 

Cur V] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 4I 

the more studiously seek to create variety, and stimulate the flagging 
interest of the reader, even by ever so short an episode!; by a de- 
parture from his usual order of narrative?; by multiplying ahead 
and even fancifully, the expressions for constant occurrences*; by 
a hundred small variations in the structure or arrangement of sentences‘; 
by straining more and more after novelties, or by occasionally reviving 
archaisms in vocabulary or phrase’; by anything to break the weary 
sameness of his chronicle of tyranny. 

The old criticism, tracing the characteristics of the style of Tacitus 
to poetic colouring, and to the study of brevity and of variety 5, will be 
seen to be well founded, and to be capable of explanation from the 
circumstances of his life and nature’ of his subject; and to show the 
natural gifts, not unmixed with the natural defects, of the most finished 
pleader of an age which required above all that its orators should be 
terse, brilliant, and striking. 

Historical style was all the more likely to be rhetorical, owing to the 
custom of oral recitation. From many instances in which the effect 
on the ear seems to be studied, and others in which oral emphasis 
would have removed an ambiguity, it is not improbable that Tacitus 
may have adopted this general practice. 

To these should be added the most truly personal of all his traits 
of style, the elevation and dignity (eeuvórgs) known to have characterized 
the orator’, and which, in the relation not only of great matters, but 
also of what is trivial, or even revolting, appears never to be lost sight of 
by the historian. 

The foliowing instances are almost wholly restricted to the Annals: 
not only on account of the limits of the present work, but also because 
these are the most truly Tacitean of all the writings of Tacitus; many 
uses and expressions, rare or evén unknown in his earlier writings, being 
in them frequent and even habitual *. 

The arrangement of Draeger, whose sections are cited throughout, is 
far more elaborate and scientific than that here given, which has been 
simplified for convenience of general reference. It will be evident that 

! See above, p. 27, note 3- 
2 See 1. 1. vnc I. 
3 See § 93. * See §§ 85-92. 

* 'This increasing preference of unusual 
or even obsolete expressions is shown by 
Wolfflin (Phil. xxv. p. 95 foll.) to be the 
true key to the difference between the 
earlier and later writings. 

‘© Botticher (Proleg. lxvi, &c.), whom 
I have followed in arranging much of the 
subject under these heads. See §§ 72-92. 

7 Plin. Epp. 2. 11, 17. 

* This has been very fully shown by 
Wolfflin (Phil. xxv. 95-127). See also 
below, $$ 22 b, 31, 36, 37, 40, 64, 69, 77, 
89. The style and language of the * Dia- 
logus ' are exhaustively treated by Gude- 
man, and more concisely by Peterson ; 
those of the Germania and Agricola briefly 
in Introd. to those treatises ; and material 
for similar treatment of the Histories is to 
be found in the notes of Heraeus. 

42 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

many obligations are also due throughout to the Grammars of Zumpt, 
Madvig, Kennedy, and Roby, especially the last. 

SYNTAX. 

I. Nouns and Pronouns. 
A. SUBSTANTIVES. 

]. Abstract Nouns. The use of such in the plural is hardly more 
frequent in Tacitus than in Cicero or Livy, but is extended to new 
instances, such as aemulatus (dz. eip.) 13. 46, 6; auditus 13. 5, 2; dig- 
nationes (dr. eip.) 2. 33, 5; and to such as are elsewhere very rare, as 
infamiae (Plaut.) 4. 33, 4; simulationes (Pl. min.) 5. 54, 2; 6. 45, 6, &c. 

His use of abstract for concrete is somewhat more. characteristic : 
as amicitia = ‘ friends,’ 2. 27, 2; 77, 1; consilia = ‘ advisers,’ 4. 40, 2; 
iura = ‘charters,’ (ám. eip.) 3. 60, 4; liberalitas = ‘gift, 2. 37, 2, &c.; 
matrimonia = ‘ wives,’ 2. 13, 3; origo = ‘ancestor,’ (Verg.) 4. 9, 3, &c. ; 
regna = ‘kings,’ (Stat.) 3. 55, 3. Dr. § 2. 3. 

2. Rare singular forms are found, as angustia (Pl. mai.) 4. 72, 2; 
verbere (poet. and Sen.) 5. 9, 2; 6. 24, 4. Also singular and plural 
are often interchanged, as patres eques 1. 7, 1; 4. 74, 5 ; eques pedites 
3. 46, 5, &c.; cp. 2. 56, 15; 60, 4; 15. 48, 1, &c. Such instances are 
also found in Livy. Dr. § 4-5. Also rhetorical plurals (as in 1. 10, 3) 
are common in all his writings. 

3. The adjectival use of substantives in apposition is frequent, 
as in poetry. Thus imperator populus 3. 6, 2; mare Hadria 15. 34, 2; 
mare Oceanus I. 9, 6; H. 4. 12, 2; sidus cometes 14. 22, 1, &c. This 
usage also is found in Livy (Dr. on Ann. 3. 6, 2). Dr. $ 76. 

On the accusative in (so-called) apposition to a sentence, see below, 
$ 12 a; on the nominative in parenthetical apposition, see $ 82. 

B. ADJECTIVES. 

4. The substantival use of adjectives is more frequent than in 
the classics. Dr. $ 7; Gudeman, Introd. to Dial. civ. 

(a) Masculine, as equestres 12. 60, 3; militares 3. 1, 2; nulli 2. 77, 
6 (where see Nipp.); also in sing., as equester 13. 10, 3. This usage 
is extended to participles, as praesidentium 3. 40, 4; vincentium 14. 
36, 2, &c. Gudeman cvii. 

(5) Neuter singular, without the usual classical restriction to pre- 
dicates and'to the usage with such verbs as * dicere, 'facere, ‘ postulare ' 

Cur.V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 43 

(see Nipp. on 6. 24, 3). Thus egregium 3. 70, 4; 6. 24, 3; honestum 
3. 65, 1; triste... providum 15. 34, 1, &c.; also often with prepositions, 
as in lubrico 1. 72, 3; in barbarum 6. 42, 1 (see § 60); and as a simple 
abl. of place where (see § 25), and with genit. following (see § 32 a). 

(c) Neuter plural, often in place of an abstract substantive, as falsa 
2. 82, 8, &c.; incerta 2. 39, 5; occulta 2. 88, 1; obscura, vera 4. 58, 3; 
and very often with a genit. following ($ 32 4). See Nipp. on 2. 39. 
Here may also be noted the frequent application of neuter adjectives to 
masc. or fem. substantives, as 1. 46, 1 (where see note). Dr. $ 3o. 

5. The adverbial use of neuter adjectives is extended from the 
more regular (as multum, nimium, postremum, potissimum, summum) 
to more distinctly poetical usages, as aeternum 3. 26, 3, &c.; inmensum 
3- 30, 2, &c.; praeceps 4. 62, 3; recens 2. 2r, 1, &c. (on their use in the 
accus. see $ 13). Dr. $22, Nipp. on 3. 26,3. Also the adverbial use 
of an adjective as secondary predicate (Roby 1069), as diversi 2. 73, 
6, &c.; occulti 4. 12, 1, &c.; properus 6. 44, 1, &c. ; rarus 2. 57, 4, &c.; 
is more common than in classical prose. Dr. $ 8. 

6. The brachylogical uses of an adj. for an objective genit. as 
externo metu 2. 44, 2; ambitionem militarem 3. 14, 1, and of adjectives 
of all genders for a subordinate clause (see § 55 4), should also be 
noted. The latter usage is especially frequent in Hist. and Ann. Gud. 
on Dial. 5. 23. 

7. New forms of comparison, both of adjectives and participles, 
had been freely introduced by Cicero and,Livy. Besides adopting such, 
from them and others, Tacitus appears to have added analogous forms, 
such as curatissimus 1. 13, 7; flagrantissimus 1. 3, 2, &c. ; inplacabilius 
I. I3, 5; inprovisior 2. 47, 1; instantius 6. 35, 4; obaeratior 6. 17, 4; 
probably vulgarissimus (dz. eip.) 13. 49, 1. Many others are rare or 
poetical. Dr.$ 9. 

.C. Pronouns. 

8. Tacitus omits with unusual frequency pronouns belonging to 
the third person, especialy in the accus. sometimes even so as to 
involve harshness or obscurity. Among the more notable instances are 
those of the omission of se in 1. 35, 5; 2. 71,8; 83, 4; 4.59, 5; 13. 2, 
2, &c.; and of eum in 1. 69, 3; 3. 49, 1; 4. 58,4; 71,5; I5. 30, 1, &c. 
Also an abl., such as iis, or quibus, is constantly omitted in concise uses 
of the abl. abs. (see below, $ 31 c). Omissions are found of the genit. of 
such pronouns, as in 4. 70, 4; or dat, as in 4. 7, 4. A few instances 
occur of omissions of pronouns of the first or second person, as 

44 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. V. 

nos I. 22, 3; me 4. 38, 1; 12. 21, 1; nobis 3. 54, 5. See Joh. Müller 
on I. 27, 2; Pfitzner (die Annalen des T. Kritisch beleuchtet), p. 113; 
Nipp. on 1. 29; 5. 10; Gud. on Dial. 32, 8. 

9. The use of quis for quisque in the constant form ut quis, 
e.g. I1. 69,2 ; 2. 24, 6; 73,6; 83, 1, &c., appears to be strictly Tacitean 
(Bótticher). Other usages, though rare, are not without earlier pre- 
cedent ; e.g. quis for uter 1. 47, 2; 3. t, 4 (Livy); quis ille, hic ille (with 
brachylogy) 11. 7, 1; 12. 36, 2; 14.22, 4 (Cic); quidquid istud 1. 42, 2; 
eius for suus 4. 67, 1 (Caes. and Cic.); suus for eius 4. 36, 3, &c. 
Dr. $ 10-20. 

II. Cases of the Noun. 

A. ACCUSATIVE. 

10. The accusative of place towards which motion takes place 
(Roby 1108), as used of the names of countries or large islands, is 
generally confined in classical prose to Greek names with the Latinized 
ending in ‘-us,’ as Aegyptum 2. 59, 1 (Madvig 232, Obs. 4), but is also 
used by Tacitus, as by poets (e.g. Verg. Ecl. 1. 64) with greater latitude, 
as perhaps Hiberos 12. 51, 4 (where see note), &c.: analogous to this is 
) campos propinquabant 12. 13, 1; and the accus. with proximus 15. 15, 6. 

Such accusatives, though always rare, are not unexampled in earlier 
prose. Dr. § 38. 

11. The poetical or Greek accusative of the part concerned 
(Roby r1o1, 1102), as contectus humeros 2. 13, 1, is used more freely 
by Tacitus than by any prose writer except Apuleius, not only in its 
more usual application to the bodily members, but in such expressions 
as clari genus 6. 9, 5; adlevatur animum 6. 43, 3; and in the military 
phrase frontem . . .tergum...latera...munitus 1. 50, 2. Dr. $. 39, Wolfflin 
(Phil. xxv. 115); Madv. 237 c. 

12. Transitive accusatives. Dr. $ 4o. 

(a) Tacitus often expresses the effect or purpose of an action by an 
accusative clause in (so-called) apposition to the sentence, i. e. explanatory 
of the notion contained in the verb and its adjuncts; such verb implying 
some general notion of doing or suffering on which these accusatives 
depend. See 1. 27, 1 (and Nipp. there); 49, 5; 74, 3; 2-64, 6; 6. 37, 
2, &c. Instances are found in Sallust and Livy and in poets. Dr. § 77; 
Her. on H. 1. 44, 12. For other parentheses see § 82. 

(P) The poetical accusative with verbs expressing affections is not un- 
frequent in Tacitus, and is extended by him to some instances not found 

Cuar. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 45 

in edrlier prose, as pavescere I. 59, 7, &c.; expavescere H. 2. 76, 3. 
Cp. Madv. 223c, Roby 1123, Kennedy 127. 

(c) A full list is given by Dr. of compound verbs used by Tacitus with 
ia simple accusative where a repetition of the preposition or a dative would be 
regular. ‘To verbs previously so used in prose he would appear to have 
added several, as adcurrere 15. 53, 3; advehi (with acc. pers.) 2. 45, 4; 
elabi 1. 61, 6, &c.; erumpere 12. 63, 2; exire 6. 49, 3; intervenire 3. 23, 
I; inrepere 4. 2, 3; praecellere 2. 43, 7; praeiacere 12. 36, 4; praeire 
2.83,2; praeminere 3. 56, 2, &c. His chief characteristic in this respect 
is the number of verbs so used by him. Qn the general usage, see 
Roby 1121, Zumpt 387, note. 

(2) The Graectsm, introduced by Vergil and occasionally found in 
prose from Sallust, of an accusative of the object after middle and passive 
verbs, generally confined to induor and similar verbs, is used by Tacitus 
with more latitude, e.g. falsa exterritus 4. 28, 4 (MS.); arguitur plera- 
que, ... quae revincebatur 6. 5, I, 2; casus... expressam H. 3. 74, 2. 
This must be carefully distinguished from the usage above ($ 11); as 
* indutus vestem ' is a wholly different accus. from * indutus humeros." 
See Roby 1126, 1127, Kennedy 123. 

13.. The poetical or Greek adverbial accusative of a neuter 
adjective is adopted, as falsum renidens 4. 60, 3. To this head belong 
several of the adverbial adjectives noted above ($ 5). This construction 
is akin to that noted above (§ 12 7); as is also the quasi-cognate accus. 
with evincere 12. 60, 5, and pervincere 12. 59, 4. Dr. $ 41, Roby 1096, 
1100, Kennedy 122, 5. 

14. Other adverbial accusatives, such as id aetatis, id temporis 
(both in Cicero), are adopted, and similar new expressions added, as id 
auctoritatis 12.. 18, 1; idem aetatis 13. 16, r. Also the day of the 
month is put in the accus., 6. 25, 5; 50, 6, &c. Dr. $ 44, Roby 1092, 
Kennedy 123, 4. 

B. Dative. 

15. The dative of indirect object, with implied local relation 
(literal or figurative), where the abl. with prep. would be more usual 
(Roby 1144), is adopted chiefly from poets and Livy. Among verbs 
with which it is used are abstrahere 2. 5, 1, &c.; excusari 1. 12, 3, &c.; 
eximere 1. 48, 2, &c.; extrahere 6. 23, 5; proripere 4. 45, 4. Dr. ($ 46) 
refers other instances to this head (see 4. 72, 2; 13. 42, 4). 

16. The Greek attracted dative (Sovdopévos jv), elsewhere restricted 
in Latin to volenti and volentibus, is extended to invitis aut cupientibus 

46 INTRODUCTION. Cua». V. 

erat 1.59, r. Dr. $ 48. The ordinary usage whereby, in expressions 
such as cui nomen est, the name itself is attracted to the case of the 
pronoun, is restricted by Tacitus to adjectives (as 1. 31, 2; 2: 8, 1, &c.): 
the nominative (as 1. 45, 1, &c.), or, rarely, the genitive (see note on 
4.59, 2), being used of substantives. (Nipp. on 2.16.) Cp. Madv. 246, 
Obs. 2. 3. 

17. The *dativus commodi is extended to such usages as sibi 
... procubuisse 1. 59, 4; sibi...firmabat 1. 71, 5; ut mihi informis, sic 
tibi magnifica 12. 37, 2; perhaps non referre dedecori 15. 65, 2. 
Dr. $ 49. . 

18. The dative of the agent or subjective dative is used, without 
restriction to the gerundive or to passive participles or adjectives in 
‘-bilis’ (Roby 1146), and without any notion of the interest of the agent 
(Madv. 250 a), in more than thirty places, e. g. sibi... adspici 1. 17, 10; 
propinquis. ..removeretur 2. 50, 4. Cp. 2. 57, 53 3- 3 33 20, 3, &c. 
It is not easy always to distinguish this dative from such ablatives as are 
noted in $ 27. Dr. $ 51, Nipp. on 2. 50, Her. on H. 1. 11, 8, Gud. on 
Dial. 4, 8. 

19. The dative of a noun so closely connected with another 
that a genitive would be expected (Roby 1154), frequent in poets, is 
also frequent in Livy, and still more in Tacitus; e.g. rector iuveni 1. 24, 3; 
paci firmator 2. 46, 6; and very many others. Dr. § 53. 

20. The dative of the thing as object, often used with adjectives 
or participles, as promptus I. 2, 1, &c.; intentus 1. 31, 2; facilis 2727, 2, 
&c.; appears to be an extension of the usage with persons. See Nipp. 
on rr. 21, Madv. 247. 

21. The dative after compound verbs, where accus. with prep. 
would be usual, is also poetical, as pectori adcreverat 1. 29, 1 (where 
see note); penatibus induxerit 5. 1, 3, &c. 

22. Dative of work contemplated. Roby 1156, 1382. 

(a) Gerund. Such expressions as restaurando sufficeret 3. 72, 4; 
testificando vulgabat 13. 11, 2 (cp. 15. 16, 2); appear to be exten- 
sions of the classical phrases solvendo esse, scribendo adesse. Dr. 
$ 206 A. 

(6) Gerundive. It is characteristic of Tacitus to employ this usage 
with increasing, and latterly with great frequency: only three instances 
being found in the minor works, and thirteen in the Histories, while it 
. abounds in the Annals more than in any other Latin author. It is 
used with more than twenty adjectives (see 1. 23, 55 37,13 2 57) 3» 

Cuar. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 47 

&c.), and much oftener with verbs; often so as to .be fully equivalent to 
a final clause: e.g. with deligere 2. 4, 1, &c.; digredi 11. 32, 2; 
eximere 3. 22, 6; immittere Ir. I, 1; mittere 1. 60, 2, &c.; praemittere 
15. IO, 6; venire 6. 43, 3, &c. - Dr. $ 206 B, Wolfflin, Phil. xxv. 114, 
Madvig 415, Obs. 2, and S. B. Platner, Amer. Journ. of Phil. ix. 4. 
Compare the genitive below, $ 37. 

(c) Apparently by an extension of such usages as ‘receptui canere,’ 
&c., a simple dative is used with transitive or often with intransitive verbs, 
with the force of a final clause; as morti deposcit 1. 23, 6; incessit 
itineri et praelio 1. 51, 4; factum est senatus-consultum ultioni iuxta et 
securitati 13. 32, 1. For other instances, see Dr. $ 52, Nipp. on 1. 5r. 

23. The dative expressing that which a thing (or person) serves 
as or occasions, or predicative dative (Roby 1158), most frequent in 
the case of forms in '-ui, and especially used with the verb esse, is 
common in Tacitus. Roby has collected (Pref. xxv-lvi) a list of about 
180 words so used by writers not later than Suetonius, of which thirty- 
eight are used by Tacitus, about five by him alone. It is still more 
characteristic, that out of only eleven instances collected of the use of 
such a dat. in apposition, eight are from Tacitus, who thus uses usui 
and ostentui twice (Ann. rz. 14, 5; H. 3: 20, 6; Ann. 12. 14, 6, and 
probably H. 1. 78, 1), and dehonestamento, documento, obtentui, subsidio - 
once each (12. 14, 6; 15: 27, 2; H. 2. 14,6; 12. 29, 2). On the dis- 
tinction between this dat. and that in § 22, see Roby |. l. 

C. ABLATIVE. 

24. The ablative of place whence, which, as used of countries or 
large islands (Roby 1258), is not unclassical (though styled a solecism 
in Quintilian 1. 5, 38) in the case of Latinized Greek names in ‘-us’ 
(cp. $ 10, and Nipp. on 2. 69, 1), is used.more freely by Tacitus than by 
any other writer; e.g. Armenia 1. 3, 3; Etruria Lucania et omni Italia 
II. 24, 2; Suria 13. 35, 2, &c. A similar abl. of common names is 
used, without the ordinary restriction to domo, rure, humo (Madv. 275), 
as fuga impediverat 1. 39, 6; progrediuntur contuberniis 1. 41, 2, &c.; 
often by exerting the force of a prep. in composition, as in the extension 
of the usual phrase abire magistratu to abire sedibus 2. 19, 2; and in 
the abl. with abhorrere 1. 54, 3; deportari 14. 45, 4; depromere 6. 40, 
I: effundere 2. 23, 2; emergere 1. 65, 2; eruere 2. 69, 5 ; extrahere r. 
39, 4, &c. Analogous is the abl. with recens 1. 41, 5, &c. Dr. $ 56. 

25. The ablative of place at which (Roby 1170) is used with the 
same freedom as in poetry (Id. 1173, Madv. 273, Obs. 2, Kennedy 155, 

48 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

2), whether as expressing direction, in a quasi-instrumental sense analo- 
gous to ‘via,’ as porta triumphali 1. 8, 4; finibus Frisiorum 1. 60, 2; 
litore Oceani 1. 63, 5; or, much oftener, position, as structis molibus 
2. 60, 4; toro 3. 5, 6; saxis et aere 4. 43, 2; campo aut litore 4. 74, 6; 
tumulo 14. 10, 5; foro ac templis 14. 61, 1, &c.; also neut. adjectives, 
as medio r. 61, 3; 2. 52, 6, &c.; plano H. 3. 19, 3; vicino Id. 38, 2, 
&c. often with a genit. following. Dr. $ 57. Many instances are 
collected by Nipp. on 1. 60; 2. 52; 3. 61. 

26. The ablative of time throughout which, almost wholly post- 
Augustan (Roby 1184, 1185), is found not only in such expressions as 
quattuordecim "annis 1. 53, 6 (Cic.); but also such as triumviratu 3. 
28, 3; bellis civilibus 6. 11, 3; triumphis, votis 15. 45, 2. On the other 
hand, Tacitus often uses *in' to express time when, or in the course of 
which (Roby 1180, 1182), as tali in tempore 2. 84, 3; eo in tempore 
II. 29, 1, &c., whence later authors (as Lactantius) even say ‘in hieme, 
‘in aestate. Dr. $ 58, Zumpt 596. | 

27. The extension of the instrumental ablative to personal agents, 
though poetical in its free use, is not without classical precedents (Roby 
1220), as centurione comitatus (Cic.) 14. 8, 5; cp. legionibus petitum 2. 
46, 2; corruptoribus tentare 2. 79, 4; Artabano perculsus 6. 44, 3; 
and other instances in which the personality is not prominent. See 
Nipp. on 2. 79; 6. 44. Such ablatives might often be taken as datives 

(see $ 18). Dr. $ 59. 

28. The ablative of manner is employed with unusual boldness, 
without the addition of an adjective (Roby 1236, 1239), as spe vel 
dolore 1. 59, 1; clamore et impetu 1. 68, 4; ordinibus ac subsidiis 2. 
80, 6; catervis 4. 51, 1; multis milibus 6. 37, 4 ; convivio I3. 20, 5, 
&c., often in the gerund, as excusando r. 1o, 7 (see Gud. on Dial. 11, 6). 
Some instances in which a single word has the force of an abl. abs. 
are perhaps best thus explained, as visu 3. 14, 3, &c. (see Nipp. on 
4.51, I). In some instances, as leviore flagitio 1. 18, 5, such an abl. is - 
a condensed sentence. Dr. § 60. This abl. is often very near in mean- 
ing to those noted in $$ 27, 30, and is sometimes interchanged with such: 
see Her. on H. 2. 12, 11; 3. 10, 13. 

29. The use of the ablative of quality (as of the corresponding genit. 
see $ 34) of persons, without the addition of a common name (see Madv. 
287, Obs. 3), rare in Caesar, Cicero, and Livy, is common in Tacitus; 
as artibus egregiis I. 13, 1, &c. Cp. 1. 19, 2; 4. 29, 1; 6. 48,7; 16. 
18, 1. Often it expresses any circumstance attaching to a person or 
thing, as legionariis armis 3. 43, 2; mercennario milite 6. 34, 5; pro- 

Cua. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 49 

fectio arto comitatu 4. 58, 1 ; testamentum multo rumore 3. 76, 2 : see 
also notes on 14. 23, 3; I5. 29, 43 54, I. Sometimes the adj. is . 
represented by a genit, as mariti animo 1. 57, 5; pacis artibus H. 
1.8,2. Dr. $ 61. See Nipp. on 3. 43; 76; Joh. Müller, Beitr. 4. 
39 foll. 

|. 80. The causal ablative is used rarely in the Histories, often in the 
Annals, in cases where the use of a prep. or of a genit. with * causa’ or - 
‘gratia’ would be expected; both of subjective motives, as iactantia 
gloriaque 1. 8, 2; caritate aut reip. cura 1. 10, 6; conscientia 1. 57, 2 
(cp. 1. 76, 6; 3. 44, 4); and also of objective causes, as dissensione 
ordinum 3. 27, 2; atrocitate 11. 28, 3; defectione r2. 10, 1; fervore 
I3. 16, 3; claritudine 13. 23, 1; cohortationibus 14. 30, 3; utilitate 
15. 44, 8; adfluentia 16. 18, 4. See notes on 2. 75, 1 ; 3. 24, 5 (and 
Nipp. there), Ruperti on 14. 5, Dr. $ 64, Roby 1228, Madv. 256, Obs. 2, 
Zumpt 454. | 

31. Some characteristic uses of the ablative of attendant circum- 
stances, or ablative absolute, are to be noted. 

(a) The use of a participle in this case as predicate, with a sentence as 
subject (Roby 1252). This usage, very rare before Livy, occurs never 
in the minor writings of Tacitus, only six times in the Histories, but 
repeatedly in the Annals. Among the participles which Tacitus appears 
to be the first so to use are adiecto 4. 70, 7; credito (dz. eip.) 3. 14, 4; 
distincto (dr. eip.) 11. 38, 2 ; intellecto 1. 49, 3; pensitato 3. 52, 4; 12.17, 
3 (only); praedicto (dr. eip.) 16. 33, 3; quaesito 2. 9, 1; 6. 15, 1 (only); 
repetito 3. 33, 1 (dm. eip.); scripto (dr. eip.) 13. 56, 4, &c. Dr. $ 213. 

(6) The neuter adjectives similarly used, as periculoso 1. 6, 6; libero 3. 
60, 6, are probably to be taken, with Bótticher, as following the Greek 
usage with the (not always expressed) participle of einí: thus iuxta peri- 

culoso = ópoíes emxiwdvvou (Óvros). Substantives are also so used:'see 
On II. I2, 3. | 

(c) An adjective or participle often stands conctsely in this case by itself, 
when the subject has been recently expressed, as cohibita 3. 33, 13 conce- 
dente 6. 16, 5; invalido 6. 47, 4; or even when a subject, whether 
. definite or indefinite, can be supplied from the sense, as orantibus r. 29, 
2; subitis H. 1. 7, 4; requirentibus H. 1. 27, 3, &c. (see $ 54); such 
instances are found also in Caes. and Livy, but are not always clearly 
distinguishable from datives. Dr. $ 212 a, b, Nipp. on r. 29 ; 5. 10- 

(2) The transitive use, in this case, of deponent participles, as secutus 
6. 17, 43 11. 25, 1 ; ausus I2. 32, 2; adgressus 13, 43, 8; transgressus 
VOL. I.- E 

50 INTRODUCTION. [Cuap. V. 

H. 2. 11, 5, is an extension of the use of omnia pollicito in Sallust, Jug. 
103, 7, and gratum elocuta in Hor. Od. 3. 3, 17. Dr. § 212 c, Wolfflin 
(Phil. xxvi. 134). | 

D. GENITIVE. 

32. Partitive or quasi-partitive. The abundance of such genitives 
is characteristic of Tacitus, as also the frequency with which the partitive 
idea is almost or altogether lost sight of, and the genit. equivalent to 
a simple adj. as in poetry. Cp. strata viarum (Lucr. and Verg.). 

(a) After neuter singular, without the usual restriction to an adj. or 
pron. in the nom. or accus. (Roby 1296): thus umido, lubrico paludum 
I. 61,2; 65, 6. The use of such a gen. after an adj. or pron. governed 
by a preposition is especially rare (Madv. 285, Obs. r), as in prominenti 
litoris 1. 53, 7; post multum vulnerum 12. 56, 5. Dr. $ 66 a, b. 

(B) After neuter plural, still more frequent: as cuncta curarum 3. 35, 
1; cuncta scelerum 14. 60, 1 ; tacita suspicionum 4. 41,1; simulationum 
falsa 6. 45, 6 ; ardua Alpium H. 4. 70, 1, &c. Dr. ($ 66 b) gives a full list 
of words so used; cp. Her. on H. 1. 10, 14, Madv. 284, Obs. 5, 
Kennedy 172, 8. 

(c) Also very common a/zer masculine or feminine, as with pauci, 
multi, alii, &c., and in such expressions as quinque consularium 3. 28, 
6; leves cohortium 3. 39, 1; cunctis civium 1I. 22, 4. See the full 
list given by Nipp. on 3. 39. 

(d) With adverbs. ‘Tacitus adopts freely Livy's extension of the 
Ciceronian usage with ubi, ubicunque, longe, to eo, and huc: as eo 
furoris 1. 18, 2, &c.; huc adrogantiae 3. 73, 1, &c. Dr. (§ 67) notes 
with this the gen. after sponte 2. 59, 3, &c. (Luc. and Pl. mai.). 

(e) The genitivus apposttionis (Dr. § 74), as uligines paludum r. 17, 5, 
though more properly to be styled a defining gen. (Madv. 286), is akin 
in meaning to those mentioned. The gerundial genit. is so used in 
3. 63, 5; 4. 2, 4- 

(f) The expression pensi habere in Dial. 29, 1 (where see Gudeman); 
H. 1. 46, 4; Ann. 13. x5, 5, adopted from Sallust, Livy, and Quintilian, 
and perhaps misunderstood in its construction by Tacitus (Roby 1301), 
as also the phrase nihil reliqui facere (1. 21, 4), are referred to this head 
by Madvig (285, Obs. 2); by Dr. ($ 73) to the EE (or locative, Roby 
1186) of price. 

33. Objective Genitive (Roby 1312). 

(a) The genitives mei, sui, §c., are used freely for the possessive pronoun, 
utthout the usual restriction to cases of special emphasis (Madv. 297 b, 

Cu. V] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 51 

Obs. 2), as nostri origine 2. 54, 3; sui incessu 4. 24, 2, &c. In this 

usage Tacitus is surpassed perhaps only by Apuleius. Nipp. on 12. 37, 
Dr. $ 68a. 

(b) With verbs, such a genthive is used, by Tacitus alone, with monere r. 
67, x (as in classical prose with its compounds); with adipisci 3. 55, 1 ; 
and apisci 6. 45, 6 (on the analogy of potiri). The use with egere (4. 20, 
4, &c.) and indigere (6. 46, 9, &c.) is more common. Dr. § 68 b. 

(c) The elliptical genitive, so constant with verbs of judging or accusing. 
ts extended by Tacitus to some new examples, as postulare 1. 74, 1, &C. ; 
perhaps urguere (dm. eip.) 6. 29, 3. Dr. § 69. 

(d) With participles. This usage is more common in Tacitus than in 
any of his predecessors, though perhaps no participle is first so used by 
him. A list of thirteen is given by Dr. ($ 70), many of which occur 
frequently, as cupiens 1. 75, 4, &c. ; inpatiens 2. 64, 4, &c. ; intolerans 
1. 3I, 4, &c. ; retinens 2. 38, 9, &c. ; sciens 1. 64, 6, &c.; and others. 

(e) With adjectrves, also characteristic of Tacitus as regards extreme 

boldness and frequency. Dr. $ 71, Zumpt 437, Gudeman on Dial. 
13, 22. 

(ac) Expressing direct object, like the participles above (d), where 
a participle with accus. might be substituted (Roby 1312): as with formi- 

dolosior 1. 62, 3; pavidus 4. 38, 1; praescius 6. 21, 5; providus, 4. 
38, 1, &c. 

(8) Expressing a remoter object, where the abl. with prep. would 
be usual (Roby 1318): so exitii certus 1. 27, 3; incerta ultionis 2. 75, 1; 
potentiae securus 3. 28, 3; and many cthers, and gerundial genit. as 

ambiguus imperandi 1. 7, 4, &c., noted as a characteristic usage of the 
Annals by Platner (see on 22 b). 

(y) Expressing the thing in point of which a term isapplied 
to a person; an especially poetical and Tacitean usage (Roby 1320), 
but occasionally found in Sallust. A very frequent example is the 
(perhaps) locative animi (Roby 1168), as 1. 32, 5; 69, 2, &c. (often also 
in Verg. and Liv.); also the genitives with atrox (dz. eip.) 12. 32, 1; 
manifestus 2. 85, 3, &c. ; melior 3. 74, 1 ; modicus 2. 73, 3 ; occultus 4. 
4,2; pervicax 4. 53, 1; praeclarus 4. 34, 4; praestantissimus 6. 6, 2; 
procax (dm. eip.) 13. 46, 5; segnis 14. 33, 4; spernendus 14. 40, 3; 
validus, 4. 21, 5; vetus I. 20, 2 ; and others. Sometimes two genitives 
are concisely used where accusatives with inter would be expected, as 
with ambiguus 2. 24, 6; 40, 2 ; and trepidus 6. 21, 4. The anomalous 
genit. pers. with aequus in 6. 36, 5, may have some affinity with these. 

E 2 

52 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

34. The genitive of quality is used with the same brachylogy as the 
corresponding abl. ($ 29): so Lentulus senectutis extremae 4. 29, I; 
velut eluctantium verborum 4. 3r, 4; effusae clementiae 6. 30, 3; 
ademptae virilitatis 6. 31, 3. Such brachylogy is also found in Caesar 
and Livy. Dr. $ 72. 

35. Such genitives as morum 1. 80, 2; flagitii 3. 20, 2 (where see 
Nipp.); sui muneris 15. 52, 4; consilii G. 6, 6 ; also concise uses of the 
gen. of sort, as Vannius gentis Quadorum 2. 63, 7 (where see Nipp.) ; 
may be taken as qualitative, or may be referred to the class noted in $ 32. 

36. The elliptical genitive of the gerund is an idiom without real 
‘parallel in any other author. The only instances are in the later books 
of the Annals: nec grave...retinendi 13. 26, 4 (where see Nipp.) ; 
penitus infixum erat . . . vitandi 15. 5, 3; maneat . . . potentiam . . . 
ostentandi 15. 21, 3. The gerund qualifies the substantival notion of 
a burden (implied in ‘grave’) or a custom (implied in ‘fixum’ or 
‘maneat’). Dr. § 204, Kennedy 185. Some editors consider all three 
passages corrupt. 

37. The gerundive genitive (see the corresponding dat. § 22 b) is 
used more frequently by Tacitus than by any other writer, and, in its 
most remarkable forms, is especially characteristic of the Annals (Wolfflin, 
Phil. xxv. 113). The usages may be thus classified :— 

(a) Jn tts simplest form, it is par! of an ordinary defining genitive: the 
expressions * oratores pacis ' and * oratores pacis petendae’ being equiva- 
lent (see Roby, Pref. lxvii). | 

(4) Zhe gerundive becomes a more essential part of the expression, 
and, with the noun, has the force of a genitive of qualify : as bzllum 
abolendae infamiae 1. 3, 6; pecunia omittendae delationis 6. 30,1. Cp. 
3. 27, 1, &c. | 

(c) The expression above might be wsed predicatively with ‘esse’ 
expressed (Liv.) or implied (Sall. Jug. 88, 4), or with ‘ videri, as quae 
conciliandae misericordiae videbantur 11. 3, I. 

(d) The genitive qualifies the whole sentence (Roby 1288), as Aegyptum 
proficiscitur cognoscendae antiquitatis 2. 59, 1. Cp. 3. 9; 25 41, 4; 13. 
11,2, &c. This usage, though fqund in Terence, Sallust, and Velleius, is © 
distinctly Tacitean by reason of its comparative rarity both before and 
after him. It may be best taken as a Graecism, like rd Ayorixdy xa8fjpe 
ToU Tas ipoocdous uüÀAow iévac abrQ (Thuc. r. 4). Wolfülin would supply 
the idea of a substantive, as * proficiscitur, quod (sc. proficisci) cogno- 
scendae antiquitatis erat. The gerundial gen. is rarely thus used, as in 

3.27, 2. 

Cur V. THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 53 

Nipp. (on 2. 59) gives a somewhat different classification of these 
usages. See also Platner, as quoted on $ 22 b. 

III. Verbs. 

38. (a) Verbs of speaking or thinking are omitted more frely than by 
classical writers (see Madv. 479), when the language clearly shows itself 
to be that of a speech, or when the thought or speech has been indicated 
in the context: as 1. 9, 4 ; 38, 3; 2. 5, 3, &c.; also especially in lively 
descriptions, as 1. 41, 2; I4. 7, 2, &c. Dr. $ 34, Nipp. on 1. 9, Gud. on 
Dial. 10, 33, Roby 1441. 

(b) Verbs of moving and acting are also offen omitled, especially in vivid 
description or rhetorical passages, as in 1. 43, 1; 4. 38, 5; 14. 8, 4, &c. 
Verbs of moving are frequently omitted in Cicero's letters, but such 
ellipses are rare in historica] narrative. . Dr. $ 35, Nipp. on 4. 57. 

In several instances belonging to (a) or (4), the reading is questioned. 
See notes on 4. 12, 65; 57, 1; 14. 61, 3. &c. 

39. Some omissions of parts of the verb ‘esse’ are characteristic of 
Tacitus by their frequency. Dr. § 36. For the general rules, see Roby 
1442-1444. (In several places, some editors insert the verb.) 

(a) In the indicative, the omission of ‘erat,’ *erant, &c., as 1. 34, 1; 
2. 6,2; 3.65, 2 ; 6. 35, 2) &c. (rare in Cicero, more common in Sallust 
and Livy, still more in Vergil), especially the omission in rela.ive or 
dependent clauses, as in cuius manu 1. 7, 9; and with ubi 2. 85, 3 
(Sallust) ; donec 4. 74, 6; ut quis 1. 69, 2, &c. See Wolfflin (Bursian's 
Jahresberichte, ii. 759). 

(2) Zn the subjunctive, the omission when another subjunctive follows, 
aS I1. 9, 15; 35. 1 ; 65, 1, &c.; very rarely without it 1. 7, 2; H. x. 85, 
5; also in indirect speech, as 1. 11, 2; 4. 39, 43 13. 555 5 ; rarely. (as 
II. 35, 2 ; 15. 49, I) in the perf. tense (Gud. on Dial. 18, 12). A few 
instances occur in Cicero, &c., but the usage appears to be rare in prose 
at all times. See Nipp. on 1. 7; Her. on H. 1. 21, 10. 

(c) In the infinitive, the omission of ‘fore, as in 2. 15, 3; and of 
* fuisse," with participles, as in 2. 31, 4; 73, 45; 3. 16, 1; 17, 1 ; 22, 6, 
&c.; when the context makes it plain what tense is meant. A few 
instances occur in Sallust and Livy. All these ellipses of verbs are 
treated very fully by G. Clemm (see on $ 80). 

40. The poetical use of simple verbs for compound, occasional 
in earlier prose, is rare in the minor works, not common in the Histories, 
but abundant in the Annals. Dr. (§ 25) instances thirty-nine ; of which, 

54. INTRODUCTION. [Cnuar. V. 

in Book I alone, may be noted ardescere 73, 1; asperare 72, 5; firmare 
71, 5; gravescere 5, 1 ; notescere 73, 3; piare 42, 2; ponere (— propo- 
nere) 7, 5; solari 14, 4. 

41. The intransitive use of verbs usually transitive, as circum- 
fundere 3. 46, 5; flectere 1. 34, 5, &c. ; movere 15. 46, 3; mutare 2. 
23, 4; rumpere 2. 17, 6; turbare, 3. 47, 2; vertere 1. 18, 3, &c., is 
rather more common than in earlier prose. On the other hand some 
verbs usually in prose intransitive, as festinare and properare, are very 
often transitive : see Nipp. on 13. 17. 

42. Some other uses are more or less peculiar. Dr. § 26. 

(a) The poetical personal passive of intransitive verbs, as triumphari 12. 
I9, 3; regnari 13. 54, 2; dubitari 14. 7, 1. 

(6) Coepi zs used freely not only (as in classical prose) with passives 
having a middle force (as fieri, haberi, duci, augeri, moveri), but without 
such resiriction, as Y. 34. 2; 4. 63, 1; H. 1. 16, 2, &c. (so Livy and 
Curtius) ; so also desino, as 1. 13, 6. Tacitus also uses coeptus actively, 
as in I. 65, 3, &c., and never uses the passive form coeptus sum. 

(c) Some rare or poetical passive uses of deponent participle forms, as 
ausus 3. 67, 4 (ám. éip.); the substantival ausum 2. 39, 3, &c.; and 
inausum 1. 42, 3; and the adjective inexpertus 1. 59, 7, &c. 

(d) Lhe use of a plural verb as predicate to two distinct singular personal 
subjects, as 1. 68, 6; 2. 53,33 3-18, 3; 02, 3; 11. 32, 2, &c. Seethe 
full list in Nipp. 2. 42, and his appendix on r2. r2, showing the contrary 
use of a singular predicate where a plural would be expected. See also 
Gud. on Dial. 42, 6. <A few instances are found in Livy. 

(e) Zhe plural predicate with collectives, as proximus quisque 14. 18, 2, 
&c.; pars 2. 24, 2; vexillum 3. 21, 2, &c., has ample precedent in 
Sallust and Livy, but is otherwise rare in earlier prose: see Her. on H. 
I. 35, 5; Gud. on Dial. 1, 17. For a very strong instance, see 14. 
26, 3. 

IV. Moods and Tenses. 

A. INFINITIVE. 

43. The simple infinitive (inf. of direct object, Roby 1344) is often 
used by Tacitus, as by other prose writers of that age and earlier poets, with 
verbs not usually taking this construction in classical prose; such as 
those which contain a complete idea in themselves, or which figuratively 
denote an inclination or effort (Madv. 389, Obs. 2), or such as denote an 
influence over others and take an accus. or dat. (Id. 390, Obs. 4, 5, 6) 

Cua. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 55 

Dr. ($ 145) gives a list of more than fifty such words so used by Tacitus, 
of which the great majority are used by him only in the Annals. In 
respect of the following, the usage is altogether confined to him: aemulor 
H. 2. 62, 4 (ár. eip.); ambio Ann. 2. 43. 3; amplector H. 3. 84, 3; 
compono Ann. 3. 40, 3 (dr. «ip.) ; induco 1a. 9, 1 (dr. ep.) ; inlicio 2. 37, 
23 4. I2, 7; nuntio (to command by messenger) 16. 11, 1 (dr. eip.); 
perpello 6. 33, 1, &c.; scribo (to command by letter) 12. 29. 2; 15. 25, 
6. Several others appear to be so used in no earlier prose author. 

44. The accusative with infinitive (inf., as oblique predicate, Roby 
1351) is used, with considerably more freedom than that of earlier writers, 
with verbs more or less analogous to those falling under the usual rules 
(see Madv. 394, &c., Roby 1. ). New in Tacitus is the extension of 
this construction to adnectere 4. 28, 2; illacrimare 2. 71, 4 ; impetrare 
I2. 27,1; urguere 11. 26, 1 ; also to some verbs of accusing, as incusare 
3. 38, 4 (all am. cip.). Many others are elsewhere very rare. Of the 
whole list of more than twenty given by Dr. ($ 146) by far the larger 
number are from the Annals Tacitus follows Livy in extending this 
construction to negative expressions of doubt, as 2. 26, 2; 36,2; 43, 4; 
3. 29, 2 ; 4. 70, 7, &c., with which it is used only once by Cicero (ad 
Fam. 16. 21, 2), never by Caesar or Sallust. On the Graecism by which 
it is used in a hypothetical clause in oratio obliqua, see notes on 2. 33, 5. 
For other remarkable uses of this construction, see notes on 1.69, 1; 72, 
2; 79, 3; 14. 18, I. | 

45. The so-called nominative with inflnitive (inf. as direct 
secondary predicate, Roby 1353) is used in some cases where the im- 
personal construction would be usual in classical prose. See Madv. 
400 c, Obs., Zumpt 607, note. Among such may be instanced this con- 
struction with adnotor 13. 35, 6; dubitor 3. 8, 4; intellegor 1. 61, 5; 
speror H. 2. 74, 3; and especially with tenses compounded of the past 
participle, as creditus est 6 50, 6; 14. 65, 1, &c. On the other hand, 
we have also the impersonal forms creditur 2. 69, 5, &c.; traditur 4. 57, 
4; narratur G. 33, 1 ; and others. "Tacitus appears to prefer the per- 
sonal construction where a single personal subject is spoken of, and the 
impersonal in other cases, but even this rule is by no means without 
exceptions. The personal construction is used generally with verbs of 
accusing (see $ 44), as with accusor 4. 22, 4; arguor 2. 50, 3; convincor 
4. 31, 5; deferor 2. 27, 1; incusor 6. 3,3. Dr. $ 152a, Nipp. on 2.69; 
3. 8; 6. 50; 13. 23. 

46. The Historic infinitive (inf. as primary predicate to a subject in 
the nominative, Roby 1359) is naturally frequent in lively descriptions. 

56 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

(a) Ln place of the principal verb, e. g. six times in 1. 16, ten times in 
Agr. 38. Even this is surpassed by Sallust, Jug. 66, r, where it occurs 
eleven times; and by Apuleius, Met. 8. 7, where it occurs twelve times in 
one period. Tacitus has it also in the passive, as vitari, deseri 4. 69, 6; 
40, 4. Dr. § 28d. 

(6) In temporal clauses, when the time at which a state of things began 
has been already specified by a finite verb (Madv. 392): thus with cum 
2. 31, 13 40,1; 4. 50,6; 6. 44, 3; with ubi 6. 19, 4; with donec r3. 
57, 6. 'This usage is found, but very rarely, in Sallust (as Jug. 98, r). 
and Livy (as 2. 27, 1). See Dr. $ 172 a. 

(c) Tacitus alone uses it with such particles in the first clause of a 
protasts ; but only when a clause with a finite verb depending on the same 
particle follows ; thus with ubi 2. 4, 4; 11. 37, 3; 12. 51, 2; with post- 
quam 3. 26, 3; with donec 13. 57, 6; with ut H. 3. 31, 6. Dr. §172 b, 
Nipp. on 2. 4. 

47. The epexegetic infinitive (or inf. as genit, or ablat, or ad- 
verbial accus.) is used, as by poets, where gerund, or gerundive, or other 
construction, would be used in classical prose (see Roby 1360, 1361). 
It is so used by Tacitus with several adjectives or participles; as with 
certus 4. 57, I; properus 4. 52, 2 (dm. dp.); manifestus 2. 57, 4; 
factus ... et exercitus 14. 56, 5. Among earlier writers, Horace most 
frequently uses this Graecism. Dr. $ 152 b, Roby 1361, Kennedy 
180, 2. 

B. INDICATIVE AND ITS TENSES. 

48. The Historic present is extremely frequent. It is so far treated 
as a past tense as to be once coupled with the perfect, H. 3. 16, 4 mis- 
cetur intulitque; and to be coupled with an imperfect in a dependent 
clause, as nihil reliqui faciunt quominus . .. permoverent 1. 21, 4; especially 
(as in Cicero, &c.) when such a clause precedes it, as ut omitteret maritum, 
emercatur 13. 44,1. Dr.§ 27 c. — 

49. Tacitus carries much further the usage, very rare before Livy, of 
interposing, in the midst of *oratio obliqua,’ a parenthetical or 
explanatory relative clause in the indicative. Parenthetical clauses 
. are found chiefly with dum, as 2. 81, 3; 13. 15, 73 14. 58. 4; 15. 45, 
6; 59, 6, &c. (see Gudeman on Dial. 32, 33); also with quia 3. 6, 5; 
4. 25, 1, &c. ; with sive r. 10, 1; with postquam 4. 10, 3 ; with quotiens 
14. 64, 5. Among the relative clauses are qui fecere r. ro, 1; quae 
petiverant 1. 36, 4; quae expresserant 1. 39, 3; and many others. Dr. 
§ 151, Nipp. on x. ro. On other parentheses see $ 80, and on other 

Cua. V.]] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 57 

changes from ‘obliqua’ to ‘recta oratio, see § 94.  Pfitzner (Die 
Annalen kritisch beleuchtet, p. 178) shows rules by which this usage 
appears to be limited. 

50. The rhetorical use of the indicative for subjunctive in the 
apodosis of conditional sentences, when the leading proposition is con- 
ceived as independent of the condition (see Madv. 348, Zumpt 519), is 
remarkable in Tacitus for its frequency. 

(a) In the perfect or historical present, with suppression or contraction 
of the proper apodosis, as bellum ... mandat, ni deditionem properavissent 
2. 22, 3 (as though ‘et bellum iis illatum esset' had been added). Cp. 
16. 28.3; H. 1. 64, 4; Agr. 4, 1. Dr. $ 199. 

(6) In the imperfect. 

(1) Of an in&omplete action or tendency, to show vividly what 
was on the point of happening ; the protasis almost invariably (an ex- 
ception is noted in 1. 23, 3) following the apodosis, and being almost 
invariably introduced by ‘ni,’ as ferrum parabant, ni 1. 23, 6; deferebat 

. , 1135, 5; trudebantur..., ni 63, 3; and very many others. Dr. 
$ 194, Zumpt 519 b, Roby 1574. An ellipsis may be supposed here as 
in the case above. 

(2) To express what might, would, or should have been, in 
forcible contrast to what actually is; as si...aspernaretur, tamen 
indignum erat 1. 42, 5 (where see Nipp.). Roby 1535 c, Madv. 348 e. 
Here the protasis always precedes, except in H. 4. 19, 4. 

(c) Ju the pluperfect. Either to express a state of things which had 
already existed for some time, and would have continued to exist; or, 
in a vein of rhetorical exaggeration, as if what would have happened, 
had happened; as impleverat 4. 9. 1 ; contremuerant 6. 9, 6 ; oppressa 
6. 43, I; exstimulaverant 15. 50, 6. Also, without any expressed pro- 
tasis, to express what is no longer possible, as malueram r5. 2, 3 (where 
see Nipp.). Dr. $$ 28, 194, Madv. 348 c, Roby 1535 d, 1574, 4. 

C. SusjuncT:vE or Conjuncrive. 

51. The Hypothetical subjunctive, with condition not formally 
expressed, or Potential subjunctive (Madv. 350, Roby 1534, foll.), 
and some forms of the optative or jussive subjunct. (Zumpt 529, Roby 
1584, foll.), are used with characteristic freedom in various tenses, and 
with various meanings. _ 

.(a) Present, as mereare . . . recipias 1. 28, 7, &c. 

(6) Imperfect, as discerneres 3. 1, 5; requireres 13. 3, 6, &c. 

(c) Aoristic perfect, very frequently, in modest assertions, and in nega- 

58 | INTRODUCTION. (Cuar. V. 

tions of possibility, as with suffecerint 3. 50, 1; abnuerit 4. 3, 3; adpu- 
lerit 4. 67, 2, &c. ; in expressions of prohibition even with the third 
person, as nemo... contenderit 4. 32, 1. The usage is not common 
except in Cic. (Gud. on Dial. 35, 6). See a full list in Dr. $ 28, who 
notes the rare use of this tense in such dependent sentences as ut sic 

dixerim 14. 53, 4; ne... abierim 6. 22, 6 (where see notes, also Gud. 
on Dial. 34, 7). 

(d) With these may be mentioned ¢he use of this mood with quamquam, 
frequent in Tacitus (e.g. t. 3, 5; 24, 43 3-55, 4; 4. 67, 1, &c.), as in 
other post-Ciceronian prose and in poetry. Dr. § 201, Roby 1697. 

52. The subjunctive of cases frequently occurring, very rarely 
found in Cicero, Caesar, or Sallust, but oftener in Livy, &c., becomes 
more common in and after Tacitus (see Dr. $$ 159, 165, Madv. 359, 
Roby 1716): with cum, as I. 4, 8; 2. 48, 2; qui 6. 8, 43 quo 4. 70, 3; 
quoquo 3. 74, 3; quotiens 2. 2, 5, &c.; seu 4. 60, 3, &c. ; ubi 1. 44, 8; 
unde 13. 45. 3; ut quis 1. 27, t, &c. ; and many others. See Dr. l.l. 
and $ 192, Nipp. on r. 44 ; 3. 74. 

Analogous probably to this usage is that of the subjunct. with quan- 
tum, apparently peculiar to Tacitus, and found only in 6. 19, 53 23, 43 
13. 42, I. Dr. $ 159, Nipp. on 6. 19. 

53. Tacitus follows Livy and others in using the subjunctive of 
facts with donec, both in the present and imperfect tenses, as 
donec... misceatur 2. 6, 5; donec... deterrerentur 1. 1, 4; oraret I. 
13, 7; dederetur r. 32, 4, &c. Roby 1670, Dr. $ 169. For a complete 
list of passages, see Gerber and Greef, Lex. s. v. The subjunct. is also 
used to denote a fact, with quamvis, as 1. 68,7; 2.38, 10;  1.20,3, &c.; 
as also very often in Suetonius and later writers. Dr. $ 201. | 

V. Participles. 

On the usage of the ablative absolute of participles; see § 31; on the 
genitive with participles, $ 33; on the frequency of participial clauses, 

$ 81; and on the implied idea of a participle of ‘esse’ $ 31 b, Gud. on 
Dial. 9, 20. 

54. The frequent concise expressions by means of participles 
are noteworthy. | 

(a) Aoristic present, often with substantival force, as trucidantium . . . 
exturbantium 2. 2, 4; accusante 6. 18, 2, &c.; hortante 6. 29, 7; prae- 
monente II. 25, 3; cognoscens 12. 48, 1 ; and others. A few instances 

Cur. V] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 59 

are found in Sallust, Livy, Vergil : also in Greek, as émayouévoss Thuc. 2. 
2, 5; AapBdvovres Xen. Hell. 2. 4, 25. Dr. § 207. 

(5) Aoristic perfect, not only, as in classical prose, of deponents, but 
also of passive verbs, as occisis, I. 77. r1; missis 4. 55, 7; deusto 4. 
64, 1; exactus 6. 3, 3; spoliatis 15. 45, 2; interfecto 16. 21, 15; and 
others. Dr. $ 209. 

(c) In 3. 13, 2, convictum and defensum are used with the force of 
condensed conditional clauses. 

(d) The future participle is constantly used (often with tamquam or 
quasi: see § 67) to express purpose, as invasurus 1. 36, 2; certaturus I. 
45. 35 adfuturus 2. 17, 1, &c., or result, as mansurae 4. 38, 2, &c. The 
dat. or abl. absol. of this part. has still more distinctly the force of a con- 
densed clause, as tracturis 1. 31, r; cessuris I. 46, 3; pugnaturis 2. 
8o, 4, &c. This usage is nct unfrequent in Livy and Plin. min. and 
abundant in Curtius. Dr. $ 208, Roby 1115, 3, Zumpt 639, note. 

55. Participles are constantly used, for brevity, in place of 
abstract verbal substantives or equivalent expressions, especially as 
subject of a verb. 

(a) Present, rarely, as Agrippina... tegens 4. 12, 2; Caesar... ac- 
cipiens 4. 34, 2. Dr. $ 210, 1. 

(6) Perfect, very frequently : 

(1) Where an abstract noun followed by a genitive would 
be expected; as occisus Caesar 1. 8, 7; mutatus princeps I. 16, 1; 
fama dediti Segestis . . . rapta uxor 1. 59, I, 2; and very many others. 
This usage is mostly confined to Livy and other historians, and espe- 
cially common in Tacitus. Adjectives are also constantly thus used, as 
gnarus... hostis r. 36, 2; and others. Dr. $ 210, 2, Madv. 426, Roby 
I41O. 

(2) In the neuter nominative, with or without a substantive, 
where a sentence with quod would be expected. One or two 
such instances are found in Cicero, none in Caesar or Sallust. Livy has 
several such, as degeneratum, perlitatum, tentatum, &c. So Tacitus 
has nihil occultum 3. 9, 3; cuncta... composita 2. 57, 1, &c. For 
the participle may stand a substantive (as 1. 19, 5; 33, 6), adjective (as 
H. 3. 64, 1), or pronoun (as 6. 47, 4). Dr. $211, Madv. 426, Obs. r, 
Roby 1411, Nipp. on 3. 9; 6. 47, Her. on H. r. 5t, 21. 

VI. Prepositions. 
56. Many usages connected with these have been already noticed, 
such as their omission ($$ 5, 10, 12 c, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30), and the 

60 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. V. 

substitution of other expressions, where constructions with prepositions 
would be usual ($$ 15, 18, 20, 33 e, 37). On the anastrophe of preps., 
see $ 77. See also Nipp. on 2. 68; and, for other usages not noticed 
in the following sections, see Dr. $$ 80-105. 

57. Apud is used, never in the minor writings, rarely in the Histories, 
and very often in the Annals, with the names of places and countries, or, 
analogously, with general names, where a simple locative, or the ablative 
with zz, would be usual, as apud urbem Nolam r. 5, 5; Misenum apud 
et Ravennam 4. 5, 1; apud Rhodum 6. 20, 3; arae apud quas r. 61, 5; 
apud paludes 1. 64, 3. A few instances are found in earlier prose. For 
a peculiar figurative sense, see 1. 31, 5, and note. Dr. $ 82, Roby 1858. 
Nipp. on r. 5, Her. on H. r. 49, Gerber and Greef, Lex. s.v. 

58. Circa has the metaphorical meaning of ‘concerning,’ or ‘in 
relation to’ (like dut); as circa artes bonas 11. 15, 1; circa necem Gai 
Caesaris 11. 29, 1; circa scelera 16. 8, 3. This meaning is found in 
Seneca and Pliny mai. and is very frequent in Quintilian. Dr. § 86, 
Roby 1867, Gud. on Dial. 3, 17. 

59. Erga has the sense of ‘against,’ or ‘in relation to,’ as fastus erga 
... epulas 2. 2, 5 (where see note); erga Germanicum 2. 76, 3; fama 
erga ...exitus 4. II, 3; anxii erga Seianum 4. 74, 5, &c. These uses 
are very rare before Tacitus, and prominent in his works. Dr. § 98, 
Roby 1931, 1932. See the full list of instances in Gerber and Greef, 
Lex. 

60. In. 

(a) With ablative singular, often used with neuter adjectives, like év, in 
adverbial phrases expressing circumstances attending an action or person; 
as in levi 3. 54, 6; in arto 4. 32, 3; and many others. Some such 
phrases are found in Cicero and Sallust, and many in Livy. Other uses 
are noted on 2. 37, 1 ; 41,5, $ 26. Dr. $ 80a; Roby 1975, 1976. 

(b) With accusative. The most characteristic usage is that adopted 
chiefly from Sallust and from Greek usages with eis, émi, or spós, whereby - 
this construction expresses the effect intended or resulting; as in the 
phrases in maius vulgare, credi, audiri, &c., 3. 12, 6; 44, 15; 4. 23, 2; 
aucta in deterius 2. 82, r; in falsum 3. 56, 6. So also in incertum 
I. II, 4; in lacrimas 1. 57, 5; in speciem ac terrorem 2. 6, 3; in 
mortem 4. 45, 1; in eundem dolorem 6. 49, 3; in agmen r5. 71, 10. 
Roby 1974, Nipp. on 2. 13. Also to be noted is the use of this 
construction with almost the force of a simple dat., as 1. 76,5; 2. 39, 3; 
48, 1; 4. 2, 1 (see notes in each instance); 9, 2; 6. 22, 2; 12. 32, 4; 

Cuar. V.]] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 61 

and the use of cedere in aliquem 1. 1, 3. For more isolated usages, see 

1. 14, 3; 55,23 2. 45 3; 80, 73 4. 25,2; 56,2; 12. 6, 5; 25,1. Dr. 
$ 80 b. 

61. Juxta is often used metaphorically, both as an adverb, in the 
sense of ' pariter, as iuxta periculoso 1. 6, 6, &c. (Sall. and Liv.); and as 
a preposition, in the sense of ‘ next to,’ or ‘close upon,’ as iuxta seditio- 
nem, iuxta libertatem 6. 13, 1; 42, 3 (a few instances in Sall. Liv. Pl. 
mai.) Dr. $ 100, Roby 2014, 2016. 

62. Per. The accus. with this prep. has constantly the force of an 
instrumental, causal, or modal abl, as per acies 1. 2, 1; per nomen 
I. 17, 5; per superbiam 1. 61, 6; .per ferociam 2. 17, 1; per occultum 
4. 11, 15 per opes 6. 22, 4 (where see note). Hence it is often inter- 
changed with such constructions, as in 1. 2, 1; 7, 10; 11, 7; 56,6; 
4. 55, 7, &c. See $ 88. Dr. $$ 89, 105, G. and G. Lex. pp. 1092-1097. 

63. The following preps. are rare, and apparently in no earlier 
prose :— 

Abusque 13. 47, 2; 15. 37, 5 (Verg.). 

Adusque 14. 58, 4 (Verg. Hor. Ov.). 

Simul 3. 64, 3; 4. 55, 3; 6. 9, 5 (Hor. Ov. Sen. trag. Sil); ap- 
parently a Graecism founded on the usage of dua, Dr. $ ror. 

Among various uses of preps. noted in their places, are those of ab t. 
26,2;.3. 69,2; 4. 20, 4; 16. 9, 5; ad 1. 40, 3; 16. 23, 3; ante I. 27, 
I ; Citra 12. 22,3; de I. 12, 55; 15, 3; eX 1. 24, 1 ; 29, 3; inter 1. 50, 7; 
intra 3. 72, 5; penes 4. 16, 3; post 1. 68, 6; 4. 40, 2; and note on 
I. 27, 1 ; Sub 3. 68, 1. 

VII. Adverbs and Conjunctions. 

64. Comparative sentences, though almost always fully expressed 
in the minor writings, are abbreviated, not unfrequently in the 
Histories, and very often in the Annals; with but few precedents in 
Sallust and Livy. 

(1) By supplying magis or potius from a following quam 
(as in Greek paddov from 5), as pacem quam bellum r. 58, 2; consilii 
quam formidinis G. 6,6; cp. 3. 17, 75; 5. 6,5; 14. 61,6. The omission 
of quam in 4. 63, 2, is ate a Graecism. 

(2) By the use of a positive, with udo. in the relative 
clause, without the addition of magis, as quanto inopina, tanto 
maiora 1. 68,5. Cp. 1.575, 15 3- 5 4; 46,4; 4: 48,5; 6.21, 4; 45,2 
12. 11, 2. Sometimes comparative and positive are joined, as 2. 5, 2 ; 
3: 43, I 

62 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

(3) By the omission of tanto or eo magis in the apodosis, 
as quanto incautius efferverat, poenitentia patiens I. 74, 7; Cp. I. 2, I j 
4. 69, 45; 6. 19, 5; 26, 3. In 3. 8, 1, tam is similarly omitted. The 
rule of Nipp. (on r. 68, see also Roby 1205), that in all such cases the 
clause so marked is to be taken absolutely, seems hardly to be established. 
Dr. $ 18r. Her. on H. 2. 99, 7. 

With these usages may be compared the abbreviation of adversative 
sentences by using, after non modo, either sed without etiam, as r. 60, 
I, &c.; or etiam (or quoque) without sed, as 3. 19, 2; 4. 35, 1; Or 
omitting sed after a negative clause, as in 4. 54, 4. This usage is found 
also in Livy. Dr. $ 128, Nipp. on 4. 35, Gud. on Dial. 6, 19. 

65. The omission of conjunctions (asyndeton) is very frequent, 
either in lively narrative, as inserunt . . . offerunt . . . intendunt 1. 28, 5; 
amplecti adlevare hortari 12. 51, 3 (cp. 41, 4; 64, 15; 70, 4, &c.); or 
in enumerations, as senatus magistratuum legum r. 2, 1 (cp. I. 3, 3; 
35, 1; 60, 3, &c.); or in summing up, as legiones provincias classes, 
cuncta 1. 9, 6 (cp. 1. 68, 7; 12. 65, 4, &c.); or to point a climax, as 
manu voce vulnere 2. 17, 5; sanie odore contactu 4. 49. 4; tempus. 
preces satias 6. 38, 1, &c.; or an antithesis, as lacrimas gaudium questus 
adulationem r. 7, 2 (cp. 4. 49, 3; 60, 3; 6.19,3; 15.27, 4, &c.). Such 
asyndeta are more or less common in rhetorical writings, as in the 
orations of Cicero, in Sallust, Livy, &c. See Ritt. on 11. 6, Nipp. on 
4. 435; I2. 19, Her. on H. 2. 70, 15, and a full account in Dr. 
$$ 133-138. | 

66. Tacitus adopts from Livy, but employs oftener, the concise 
Greek use of adverbs as attributive adjectives, as circum 4. 55, 

8, &c.; superne . . . comminus 2. 20, 3, &c. Dr. $ 23, Madv. 301 c, 
Obs. 2. 

67. The frequent use of tamquam, quasi, and velut, in ex- . 
pressions of the alleged or imagined reason or purpose of an 
act, or the grounds of a charge or belief, like that of ws with participles 
or prepositions (see L. and S. Lex.-s.v. C. 1. 11), has been very fully 
examined by Wólfflin and others (see below). It would appear that the 
distinctions which some have attempted to draw between the force of 
these words can hardly be sustained; that the question of reality or 
pretence is on the whole left open, though the latter view is not un- 
frequently suggested by tamquam, and still oftener by quasi or velut ; 
and that the chief distinction between the two latter is that velut is 
preferred in the earlier writings, quasi rarely used except in the Annals. 

On the use of tamquam, cp. 1. 12, 6; 2. 84, 35; 12. 39, 55 13: 43 75 

Cur V.]] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 63 

14. 4I, I, &c.; on that of quasi, 1. 35, 4; 6. 11, 5; 12. 47; 33 52,1; 
I3. 18, 3; 14. 65, 1, &c.; on that of velut, 6. 50, 4; 15. 53, 3; 16. 2, 
I, &c. A similar use of ut may be noted in r. 47, 5; 3. 74, 5; 12. 52, 

I; 14. 8, 2. Nipp. on 3. 72; 6. 11, Dr. $ 179, Wolfflin, Philol. xxiv. , 

115-123, Pfitzner 160-165. 

68. Among various uses may be noted those of adeo non 3. 34, 3, 
&c.; adhuc 3. 26, 1, &c. (Dr. § 24): aeque quam 2. 52, 5, &c. (Dr. 
$ 176); an (in indirect questions) 1. 5, 4; 2. 9, 15; 3. 12, 3; 15. 16, 2 
(Dr. $ 153); aut 1. 55, 2; 3. 34, 8; 13. 21, 7, &c. (Dr. $ 129); ceterum 
I. IO, 1, &c. (Dr. $ 21); diu 4. 69, 4; donec 1. 68, 6; dum (causal) 
2. 88, 4, &c. (Dr. $ 168); et (in negative clauses) 1. 4, 1; 38, 4 (see 
Nipp.); 70, 5, &c. (Dr. $ 107); et (with simul in temporal clauses) 1. 65, 
5, &c. (Dr. $ 110); et alii (— alii... alii) t. 63, 7, &c. (Dr. $ 117); et 
. . . quoque 4. 7, 4 (Dr. $ 121); impune (as predicate) 1. 72, 3, &c. (Dr. 
$ 33); non saltem 3. 5, 5 (Dr. $ 24); perinde 2. 88, 4, &c. (Nipp.); 
perinde quam 2. 1, 2, &c. (Dr. $ 175); perinde quam si r. 73, 5, &c. 
(Id.); quatenus 3. 16. 5; quin 6. 22, 5; 12. 6, 2; 13. 14, 4; 14. 29, I, 
&c. (Dr. $ 186); quod 3. 54, 6 (Dr. $ 141); quominus 1. 21, 4, &c. (Dr. 
$ 187); quoque non 3. 54, 11 (Nipp. and Dr. $ 122); si 1. 11, 5; 48, 
1, &c. (Dr. $$ 191, 193); sive and seu 1. 6, 6; 2. 24, 6, &c. (Dr. $ 129); 

ut (dep. on placitum, sino, subigo, &c.) 1. 36, 45 43, 3; 2. 40, 5, &c. 

(Dr. $ 342); ut (conditional) 4. 38, 1; ut (restrictive) 4. 62, 4; utcumque 
2. 14, 4, &c. (Dr. $ 24); vel (— aut) 14. 35, 5 (Dr. $ 129). See also 
$$ 46 b, c, 49, 51 d, 52, 53. 

| STYLE. 
I. Mew Words or new Senses of Words. 

69. Even where he follows other writers, Tacitus, especially in the 
Annals, constantly prefers unusual forms of diction, e. g. claritudo 
and firmitudo to the forms in *-as;' cognomentum and levamentum to 
the forms in *-men;' medicamen, fragmen, tegumen to the forms in 
E -mentum' (see Wolfflin; Philol. 25, pp. 99, 100). The same tendency 
leads him to innovate on his own account, and the following words in 
the Annals, many of which are dr. eip., appear to have been invented by 
him :— 

(x) Verbal Substantives. 

(a) in -/or, -sor, and -/rzx, adcumulator 3. 30, 2; concertator 14. 29, 
2; condemnator 4. 66, 1; cupitor 12. 7, 4, &c.: defector 1. 48, 1, &c.; 
detractor 11. 11, 6, &c.; -exstimulator 3. 40, 1, &c.; patrator 14. 62, 5; 

64 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». V. 

profligator 16. 18, I; regnatrix 1. 4, 4; sanctor 3. 26, 6; subversor 
3. 28, 1. See Dr. $ 6. 

(b) in -us (genit. -us), aemulatus 13. 46, 6, &c. ; distinctus 6. 28, 5; 
escensus I3. 39, 6; provisus (only abl.) 1. 27, 2, &c.; relatus 15. 22, 1 
&c.; subvectus 15. 4, 4. Tacitus uses nearly 200 words of this form, 
most frequently in the ablative. 

(c) in -menfum, imitamentum (only in Annals) 3. 5, 6, &c.; medita- 
mentum I5. 35, 4, &c. ; vimentum 12. 16, 3. More than sixty words of 
this form are found in Tacitus, many of which are elsewhere rare. 

(2) Negative words formed with ‘in,’ incelebratus 6. 7, 6; in- 
prosper 3. 24, 2, &c.; inreligiose 2. 50, 2; inreverentia 3. 31, 6 (see 
note); inturbidus 3. 52, 1, &c. 

(3) Words with the prefix ‘per’ and * prae, peramoenus 4. He 
3; perornare 16. 26, 3; perseverus 15. 48, 5; persimplex 15. 45, 6 
perstimulare 4. 12, 7; pervigere 4. 34, 6; praecalidus 13. 16, 3; ae 
colere 14. 22, 4 (see note); praegracilis 4. 57, 3; praerigescere 13. 35, 
6: praeumbrare 14. 47, I 

(4) Frequentative verbs, appellitare 4. 65, 1; auctitare 6. 16, I 
A general preference of such verbs to the simple forms is noticeable. 

(5) Not classified, adulatorius 6. 32, 7; antehabere r. 58, 6, &c.; 
adpugnare 2. 81, 1, &c. ; binoctium 3. 71, 3; concaedes r. 50, 2; de- 
lectabilis 12. 67, 1; deprecabundus 15. 53, 2; emercari (only in later 
books of Ann.) 12. 14, 1, &c.; genticus 3. 43, 3; 6. 33, 3; gladiatura 
3- 43, 3 ; histrionalis 1. 16, 4, &c. ; immunire 11. 19, 3; infensare (only 
in Annals) 6. 34, 1, &c. ; libitum (subst.) 6. 1, 5, &c. ; lucar 1. 77, 5; 
postscribere 3. 64, 2; prodigentia (only in Annals) 6. 14, 1, &c.; pro- 
fessorius 13. 14, 5; properato (adv.) 13. 1, 4; propolluere (?) 3. 66, 4 ; 
provivere 6. 25, 1; quinquiplicare 2. 36, 5; sacrificalis 2. 69, 3; ses- 
quiplaga:15. 67, 8; superstagnare 1. 79, 2; superurgere 2. 23, 4. 
Dr. $ 249, 2 

70. The following poetical words in the Annals appear to be 
among those first introduced by Tacitus into prose :—adolere (to 
kindle) 14. 30, 4 (Lucr. Verg.); adsultus 2. 21, 1 (Verg.) ; advectare 
6. 13, 2 (Val Fl); ambedere 15. 5, 4 (Verg); brevia (-— shoals) 
I. 70, 3; 6. 33, 5 (Lucr. Verg); celerare 2. 5, 2, &c. (Lucr. Verg); 
densere 2. 14, 4 (Lucr. Verg.); didere 11. 1, 2 (Lucr.); eburnus a. 
83, 2; 4. 26, 4 (Verg.); evincire 6. 42, 6, &c. (Verg. Ov.); exspes 
6. 24, 3 (Hor. Ov); honorus r. ro, 7, &c. (Val. Fl. and Stat.) ; in- 
clementia 4. 42, 3 (Verg. Stat.) ; incustoditus 2. 12, 5, &c. (Ov. Mart.) ; 
indefessus 1. 64, 5, &c. (Verg. Ov.); insatiabiliter 4. 38, 6 (Lucr.); 

Cu». V] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 65 

intemeratus 1. 42, 3 (Verg. Ov.); inviolabilis 3. 62, 1, &c. (Lucr.Verg.) ; 
lapsare 1. 65, 6 (Verg.) ; livere 13. 42, 4 (Ov. participle Verg.); mer- 
sare 15. 69, 3 (Lucr, Verg. Hor.) ; notescere 1. 73, 3, &c. (Cat. Prop.) ; 
penetrabilis 2. 61, r (Verg. Ov.); praescius 6. 21, 5, &c. (Verg. Ov.); 
prolicere 3. 73, 4 (Plaut. Ov.); properus 1. 65, 4, &c. (Verg. Ov. but 
only in Tac. with genitive or infinitive); provisor 12. 4, 1 (Hor.) ; re- 
clinis 13. 16, 5, &c. (Ov. &c.); secundare 2. 24, 4 (Verg. &c.); sonor 
I. 65, 1 (Lucr. Verg.); transmovere 13. 35, 2 (Ter. Mart.); trudis 
3. 46, 6 (Verg.); valescere 2. 39, 5, &c. (Lucr.). Dr. $ 249, 1; see 
above p. 39. 

71. The following words in the Annals, besides many of the meta- 
phors noted below ($ 74), are used by Tacitus in a, sense peculiar to or 
originating with himself: advertere (in aliquem — to punish) 2. 32, 5, 
&c.; amovere (to banish) 1. 53, 6, &c.; auraria (= aurifodina) 6. 19, 1; 
conexus (of relationship) 2. 50, 1; 4. 66, 2; gnarus (— notus) 1. 5, 4, 
&c.; inauditus 2. 77, 5, &c.; proicere (to defer) 2. 36, 3; novissima 
(the extreme penalty) 6. 50, 8, &c.; repens (2 recens) 6. 7, 4, &c.; 
suspectare I5. 1, &c.; Dr. § 250. 

72. The following are used in senses hitherto exclusively poetical :— 
abitus (outlet) 14. 37, 3 (Verg); circumfluus (surrounded by water) 6. 
37, 4 (Ov. &c.); cura (a written work) 3. 24, 4, &c. (Ov.); demissus 
(descended) 12. 58, 1 (Verg.); educere (to build up) 2. 61, 1, &c. 
(Verg.); evictus (prevailed upon) 4. 57, 5, &c. (Verg.); intentatus 
(untried) 1. 50, 3, &c. (Verg. Hor.) ; sistere (to build) 4. 37, 4, &c.(Sil.). 
See Dr. § 250, and full lists in Bótticher, Lex. Proleg. p. xlv., liii. 

Besides these are to be borne in mind the very numerous syntactical 
usages introduced by Tacitus into literature, or into prose, mentioned in 
previous sections. 

II. Rhetorical and Poetical Colouring. 

To this head really belong a great number of the words and usages 
already mentioned. Instances of artificial rhetorical structure, such as 
chiasmus (see 1. 63, 4 ; 3. 53, 33 I2. I, 4; IO, 2, &c., Dr. $ 235, Gud. 
Dial. cxvi), also the pathos of such passages as 6. 24, 2; 39, 2; 13. 17, 
3: 14. 64 &c., should be noted. 

73. Tacitus often adds emphasis by rhetorical repetition (ana- 
phora) of a word common to more than one member of a sentence, not 
only in speeches, but in narrative; as non 1. 1, 3; ad (three times) 
I. 11, 5; ut 1. 62, 1; statim 2. 82, 7; illum 4. 15, 55; quos 4.49, 4; 
and many others. Nouns are thus repeated in contrasted parallel sen- 

VOL. I. F 

66 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar, V, 

tences, as miles r. 7, 7; gravis 1. 10, 4, &c. Dr.$ 240. Such repeti- | 
tions, as also the accumulation of synonyms (see 12. 57, 3, and note, 
Dr. $ 242) are far more common in the earlier works. See Introd. to 
Germania, p. 10, Gud. Introd. to. Dial. cxvi, cxvii, Peterson, do. li. 
Pleonasms (see r1. 7, 4; Dr. $ 241) are never frequent, but are mostly 
found in expressions of beginning, as initio orto, &c. (see Gud. on Dial. 
11, 8, Her. on H. r. 39, 10). 

74. Metaphors. A full list and classification of these is given in 
Dr. § 248. Among the most characteristic are some of the metaphorical 
applications of verbs expressing 

(1) Movement; so vergere is often applied to age or time, as 2. 
43, 1; 4.8, 5; 11. 4, 4; 13. 38, 7, &c. 

(2) Clothing or stripping; so induere r. 69, 2, &c.; ‘exuere 
1. 2, I, &c. See note on r. 69. 

, (3) Burning; as ardescere, of passions, 3. 17, 2; 54, 2 ; 11. 25, 8 
I6. 29, 1, &c.; or of a sharpened dagger, as 15. 54, 1 (Lucan, and 
* ardentes sagittae ' Hor.). 

(4) Breaking; as abrumpere 4. 50, 3; 60, 2; 16.18, 6; perrumpere 
3. 15, 43 4. 40, 7 ; rumpere I. 42, 4; 6.20, 1, &c. 

(5) Binding or entangling ; as veneno inligare 6. 32, 3 (dr. eip.) ; 
innexus 6. 36, 5; consiliis permixtus 3. 38, 2. 

(6) Revolution; as volvere (to ponder) 1. 64, 7; 3. 38, 2, &c.; re- 
volvere 3. 18,6; 4. 2x, 2; provolvere (to dispossess) 6. 17, 4; and js 
degrade) 14.2, 4 (ám. eip.). — 

(7) Swallowing, &c.; as hauriri, not only of perishing by water, 
I. 70, 43 2. 8, 3, &c., but also by fire, 3. 72, 4. 

(8) Loosing; as exsolvere, of opening veins, 4. 22, 4, &c.; of 
raising a siege, 3. 39, 1; of simplifying legal intricacies, 3. 28, 6. 

We may also note metaphorical senses of adjectives; as aestate adulta 
2.23, 1 (cp. II. 31, 4; 13. 36, 1); angusta et lubrica oratio 2. 87, 3; 
tumidi spiritus 4. 12, 7; also adverbs, as colles clementer adsurgentes 
13. 38, 5; and substantives, as moles 2. 78, 1, &c.; saevitia annonae 
2. 87, r ; locorum fraus 12. + 33,2 ; locorum facies 14. 10, 5; modestia 
hiemis 12. 43, 3- | 

75. Person?fication is implied in many of the bold figures used ; 
such as seditionis ora vocesque I. 31, 5; vestigia morientis libertatis 
I. 74, 6, &c. The Tiber is personified 1. 79, 4; lux r. 70, 7; also fre- 
quently dies, e. g. 14. 41, 1; nox, e.g. I. 28, 1; 2. 14, I; I3. 17, L 
annus (as sometimes in Cic. and Liv.) very often, e. g. 1. 54, 15 2. 53.1 
4. 14, 15 15, I5 23, 1; 6. 45, 1, &c. Dr. § 257. 

Cua. V.] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 67 

76. Hendiadys, or the coordination of two words, of which one, 
usually the second, defines the other like an adjective or genitive (see 
Madv. 481 a), appears to be used by Tacitus, after the example of poets 
(as Verg. G. 2. 192), more frequently than by earlier prose writers; and, 
though many of the examples usually cited (see Ruperti, Ind. iii.) are 
hardly genuine, many remain; e.g. tempus atque iter 2. 34, 6; gaudio 
et impetu 3. 74, 6; famam et posteros 11. 6. 1; testamenta et orbos 
13. 42, 7, &c. Introd. to Germania, p. 10, Dr. § 243. 

77. Anastrophe of prepositions, though restricted to the usual 
limits (see Mádv. 469) in the minor works, and rarely extended beyond 
them in the Histories, is used with more poetical freedom in the Annals, 
. than in the work of any other prose author. 

(1) After a substantive without an attribute; e.g. abusque 
13. 47, 2, &c.; coram I. I9, 3, &C. ; extra 13. 47, 2 ; infra 11. 20, 4; 
inter 6. 41, 2, &c.; intra 3. 75, 4, &c.; iuxta 2. 41, 1, &c.; propter 
4. 48, 1, &c.; super 16. 35, 2: sometimes even after a genit. as 3. 1, 1; 
13. 15, 85; 14. 9, 3. 

(2) Between two coordinated substantives; e.g. inter 4. 50, 3; 
59, 2; 69, 2, &c. This and the above usage do not extend to mono- 
syllabic preps.. 

(3) With substantive preceding and attribute following; 
e.g. ab 3. 10, 4; in 11. 3, 2; 12. 56, 1, &c.; intra 11. 36, 4. 

. (4) Between a substantive and dependent genitive; e.g. 
ab 4. 5, 4; ad 3. 72, 2, &c. ; apud 6. 31, 4; inter 4. 16, 6, &c. 

(5) Between two substantives in apposition; e.g. ab 2. 60, r1, 
&c.; apud 4. 43, 6; in 15. 53, 3. 

(6) After two coordinated substantives; e.g. inter 1. 60, 5; 
coram 4. 8, 7, &c.; simul 4. 55, 3. 

Of these, all except (2) are used by Tacitus only in the Annals, and few 
instances occur in earlier prose. Dr. $ 225, Wolfflin, Philol. xxv. 115, 
Nipp. on 1. 60; 2. 60; 3. 1; 10; 72. 

78. Anastrophe of conjunctions is also very common ; among the 
stronger instances is the position of si as fourth word 14. 3, 3; ut as 
fifth 12. 49, 3; quasi as seventh 14. 52, 1; cum as tenth 1. 63, 6. But 
such instances, as well as those of anastrophe of relative pronouns, as in 
4- 33, 23 12. 61, 4; or of adverbs, as adeo 13. 35, 1, &c., are not 
without classical precedent. Dr. $ 227, 228, Nipp. on 12. 51; 15. 39. 

79. The occurrence of metrical lines, or parts of such in 
Tacitus requires notice.chiefly because it has been noticed (Bétticher, 
Proleg. p. xcvi., Ruperti Ind. iii, Dr. $ 255, Nipp. on 1.1). Most of 

F2 

68 INTRODUCTION. [Caar. V. 

the instances are trivial (see the so-called hexameters in 3. 44, 4 ; 15. 
9, 1; 73, 4; Agr. 10, 4); one only is noteworthy for its rhythm 
(auguriis patrum et prisca formidine sacrum G. 39, 2), and one other 
- for its position, as forming a complete period, and as the opening 
sentence of the Annals. The hexameter with which Livy begins is, 
as far as it goes, much more rhythmical, and he has many more such 
verses or parts of verses than Tacitus. No more can be proved, than 
that the ear of neither of these historians was so sensitive in avoidance 
of such cadences, as that of Cicero (see de Orat. 3. 47, 182 ; Orat. 56, 
189) or Quintilian (see 9. 4, 72). 

III. Znffuence of the Study o f Brevity. 

80. Ellipses, and similar abbreviated expressions. By far the 
most important of these are found in syntactical usages already noticed, 
in a large proportion of which the desire of brevity of expression appears 
prominent ; especially in the omission of pronouns ($ 8), of verbs ($$ 38, 
. 39), of prepositions (see references on $ 56), and other particles ($$ 64, 
65); in the fondness for concise constructions with the infinitive ($$ 42, 
43, 44, 46), with gerund and gerundive ($$ 22, 36, 37), with in and the 
accusative ($ 60 2), with nisi and ni ($ 50). A few other ellipses are 
noted by Dr. § 238, such as omissions of pars (4. 20, 3), annus (11. rr, 
I), dies (4. 45, 4), lex (3. 25, 1), uxor (4. 11, 4), filia (12. 1, 3), &c.; 
many of which would be common in any approach to colloquial forms, 
as in comic poets and in the letters of Cicero, as well as in inscriptions. 
See Gud. Introd. cxviii, and the special treatise of G. Clemm * De brevilo- 
quentiae. Taciteae quibusdam generibus, Leipzig, 1881. 

81. The frequent use of participial clauses tends to conciseness 
(see $$ 31, 54, 55), and is characteristic of Tacitus; as is illustrated by the 
comparison made by Draeger ($ 238) between simple narrative passages 
of the same length, in Caes. B. G. 2. 1-2; Sall. Jug. 6-7; Liv. 21. 5; 
and Ann. 2. r1—12; in which, respectively, the participial clauses are 5, 
10, 16, and 24. Instances of such participial and also of adjectival 
clauses are given by Nipp. on 3. 55; 4. 64. 

82. Parentheses. Besides the explanatory accusative already noticed 
($ 12 a), Tacitus frequently has a parenthetical word or expression in 
apposition in the nominative, equivalent to a complete relative clause; as 
vix credibile dictu 1. 35, 6; mirum dictu 2. 17, 4; incertum is thus 
used by Livy, &c.; dubium by Ovid, &c.; rarum by Tacitus alone, and 
chiefly in the Annals, 1. 39, 7; 56, 2; 6. 10, 3; 13. 2, 2; also H. 4. 
12, 3. For more complete parenthetical sentences, see 4. 55, 6; 12. 

Cu V] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. . 69 

42, 4; and for parentheses inserted in oratio obliqua, see $ 49. Dr. 
$ 139, Wólfflin, Philol. xxvi. 107, Nipp. on 1. 39; 12. 42; 61 ; Her. on H. 
I. 62, II ; 3. 31, 20. 

83. Zeugma, or the reference to two objects of a verb strictly applic- 
able only to the nearest, is also an effort at brevity, even with the risk 
of harshness; and is more common in Tacitus than in any other writer. 
See the use of redimi 1. 17, 6; probabam 1. 58, 2; permisit 2. 20, 2; 
appellans 2. 45, 4; intentarent 3. 36, 2; fore 6. 21, 5 ; nequibat 12. 64, 
6 ; and very many others. Akin to this is the frequent use (by Syllepsis) 
of a verb with two objects in different senses, as 1. 71, 5 ; 2. 44, 3, or of 
a noun exclusively masculine for persons of both sexes, as filii 11. 38, 3; 
fratres 12. 4, 2; privigni 4. 71, 7; pronepotes 5.1, 4. Dr. $ 239, 3, 4. 
Also akin to this is the supplying a plural verb from a singular, as in 
3- 29, 5; or an affirmative sense from a negative, as in 12. 64, 6; 13. 
56, 3. 

84. Pregnant constructions ; many such have been mentioned under 
other heads (see references on § 80): to which may be added such expres- 
sions as ius legationis . . . miseratur 1. 39, 8; proruunt fossas 1. 68, 2; 
pericula polliceri 2. 40, 3; ad principem distulerant 3. 52, 3; iniurias 
largiri 3. 70, 2; permoveor ... num 4. 57, 2, &c. ; also pregnant mean-. 
ings of words, as venenum 3. 22, 2; 4. 10, 2; aegritudo 2. 69. 4; 
senecta II. 26, 2; infantiam 11. 34, 1 ; gratia r2. 7, 4; Chaldaeos 12. 
22, I ; ferrum 15. 55, 3, &c: Dr. $ 239, 2. 

IV. The Study of Variety in Expression. 

85. Besides aiming at novelty through the introduction or adoption of 
unfamiliar words or senses of words (see §§ 69-72), Tacitus constantly 
seeks to avoid monotony by varying forms of the same word. 
Thus Artaxata is twice feminine, five times neuter (see on 2. 56, 3); 
Tigranocerta four times used in each form (see 14. 24, 6): the form 
Vologeses is perhaps sometimes changed to Vologesus (see on 12. 14, 8). 
So als: we have alioqui and alioquin; anteire and antire ; balneae and 
balneum ; dein and deinde; grates and gratias agere; inermis and 
inermus ; senecta and senectus, &c. In many other cases such variations 
have been treated by editors as errors of copyists. See W6lfflin, Philol. 
XXV. 99—106; 121-127. 

86. Names often mentioned are varied. Thus we have Gallus, 
Asinius Gallus, and Gallus Asinius, &c.; or the cognomen alone 
repeated, when the name has been given more fully above, as Trionis 
2. 28, 4; Lepida 12. 64, 5, &c. ; also the names of relatives mentioned 

7o INTRODUCTION. (Crap. V. 

together are often varied, as hunc [Gracchum] pater Sempronius . . . tulerat 
4. 13, 4; pater Scriboniani Camillus 12. 52, 2; Crispum . . . C. Sallustius 
3. 30, 3; Valerius Messalla, cuius proavum . . . Corvinüm 13. 34, 1, &c. 
Nipp. on 4. 13, Joh. Müller, 4, pp. 15, 16. Sometimes general terms are 
thus varied to avoid repetition, as nomen. . . cognomentum . . . vocabu- 
lum 2. 6, 5. Dr. $234. | 

87. Prepositions with similar meanings are often interchanged, 
a in... ad rz. 28, 7, &c.; inter...apud 3. 40, 1; in...apud 6. 22, 2; 
per...in 4. 55, 7, &c. Several such instances are found in Livy, few in 
other works of Tacitus than the Annals. Dr. $ 104. 

88. Cases with prepositions are interchanged with simple 
cases: as for instance a dat. with accus. after ad or in; e.g. with oppor- 
tunus 2. 6, 4; promptus 4. 46, 4; referre 14. 38, 5; and such an accus. 
with gerundive dat. 2. 37, 6: see also $ 62. Dr. $ 105. 

89. Copulative conjunctions are constantly varied in different 
clauses, especially in the Annals, sometimes no doubt to graduate the 
connexion (see on I. 1, 5), but at other times apparently for elegance. 
Cp. the change of et and ac 4. 26, 4; ac... que...et 15. 25, 6; que... 
et...et...ac 2. 60, 4. See Dr. $ 115, Nipp. on 4. 3. 

90. After as»ndeta (see § 65) conjunctions are introduced; as 
classes regna provinciae...aut...et...ac 1. r1; 6; inlustres ignobiles 
dispersi aut aggerati 6. 19, 3; see also 12. 64, 3; 15.26, 1. Dr. $$ 106, 
140, Nipp. on 1. 11; 2. 81; Her. on H. 1. 51, 25. Here again different 
degrees of connexion are often intended to be expressed. 

91. A large number of miscellaneous variations of expression in corre- 
sponding clauses are brought together by Draeger ($ 233), from which the 
following are selected. In a few of them Tacitus has followed Livy. 

(1) Change of case or number: Spartanorum... Atheniensibus 3. 
26, 4; clari genus...summis honoribus 6. 9, 5; effusae clementiae... 
modicus severitate 6. 30, 3; see note on 2. 3, 2; on change of number 
see $ 2. 

(2) Active and passive: omissa sunt aut... oblitteravit 2. 83, 5; 
cp. 6. 44, 2; H. 4. 65, 3; Nipp. on 3. 21, Gud. on Dial. 8, 24. 

(3) Ablative and participle: metu ...diffisus 2. 1, 2; metu...an 
ratus 2. 22, 2; cp. I5. 36, 6; 38, 5; 56, 3. 

(4) Preposition and participle or adjective: ad gradum... 
procedentibus 1. 64, 2; procaces...in spe 14. 15, 8. 

(5) Adjective and genitive: Parthorum... Romanas 2. 3, 2. 

(6) Present participle and gerundial ablative (only in the 

Cuar. V.]] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 71 

Annals): adflictando ...ciens 2. 81, 1; trahens... interpretando 13. 
47, 1; adsurgens... populando rg. 38, 4. 

(7) Gerundive and ut or neu: appellandam... ut adscriberetur 1. 
14,2; habenda...utque 2. 36, 1; cp. 3. 175, 85 63, 15 4. 9, 1; 20, 2. 

(8) Noun and subordinate clause, with quod or quia, &c.: 
amicitia...et quod 4. 18, 1; gnarus meliorum et quae 4. 31, 2; alii 
modestiam, multi quia diffideret 4. 38, 4; and many others; as 2. 63, 4; 
3- 44, 43 4- 24, 2; 13. 44, 1, &c. Sometimes an infin. answers to a 
noun, as 3. 22, 2; 4. 3, I, &c. 

(9) Adjective or párticiple and final clause: as rati...an ne 3. 
3» 3; sive fraudem suspectans sive ut 13. 39, I. 

92. The effort for variety, added to that for brevity, is found 
sometimes to result in considerable complication of periods ; 
as for instance in the passages beginning ‘igitur Tacfarinas’ 4. 24, 1; 
‘nam postulato Votieno' 4. 42, 2; ‘at Sabinus' 4. 47, 1: sometimes 
even in anacolutha, as 12. 52, 3; 14. 9, r (Dr. $ 254). On the general 
structure of periods in Tacitus, and on some passages of exceptional 
complexity, as 1. 2, 1; 6,6; 13. 54, 5, see Dr. $ 232; also the notes 
On I. 8, 4; 4. 33, 4 ; 44, 3; and Joh. Müller on those passages. 

93. It is extremely characteristic of Tacitus to introduce the utmost 
possible variety into the expressions for facts that have to be very often 
stated. A large collection of such is made in Bétticher, Proleg. lxvii-lxix, 
and Dr. $ 252. Among them may be noted the following :— 

(1) Death: about fifteen various expressions are found, as obire; 
oppetere; finire (6. 50, 9 dm. eip.) ; concedere; excedere ; vita cedere; 
vita concedere; &c. 

(2) Suicide: ten or more expressions are found, as se vita privare; 
vim sibi afferre; finem vitae sibi ponere (6. 40, 4) ; &c. 

(3) Suicide by opening veins: more than ten forms of expression 
are found, as venas exsolvere, resolvere, abrumpere, interrumpere, &c. 

(4) Suicide by stabbing: ferro incumbere; se ipsum ferro transi- 
gere; suo ictu mortem invenire; &c. 

(5) Suicide by starvation: vitam abstinentia finire ; egestate cibi 
perimi. 

(6) Interdiction of fire and water: aqua et igni interdicere, 
arcere, prohibere. 

(7) Approach of evening: about eight distinct expressions are 
noted. See 1. 16, 5; 65, 9; 2. 21, 4; 39, 5; &c. 

(8) Contrast between what is shown and concealed: palam 

72 : INTRODUCTION. (Cuar. V. 

...in occulto r. 49, 2; palam...secreto 2. 72, 2, &c.; cp. 4. 1, 43 
6. 7, 4; 12. 7, 6; 13, 1, &c. 

94. The monotony of reported speeches in oratio obliqua is 
often varied (as also not unfrequently in Liv.) by an abrupt transition 
to oratio recta; as 2. 77,2; 3.12, 4 ; 46. 33 4. 40, 5; I1. 30, 5; 
H. 3.2, 8. The transition has also the effect of a rhetorical climax (Dr. 
$ 256). On smaller parenthetical suspensions of oratio obliqua, see 
$ 49. 

IV. Influence cf Imitation. 

95. Graecisms. Nearly all of those found in Tacitus appear to have 
been already more or less naturalized in Latin. Most of them have 
been already noticed (see §§ 11, 12 d, 13, 16, 18, 37 d, 54, 60 4, 63, 64, 
66, 67*. To these may be added the use of si with expressions of fear, 
&c., as I. IT, 5; such a genitive as diversa omnium 1. 49, 1; the con- 
struction nisi forte... plures curas, &c., 2. 33, 5; and the phrase ut 
quisque audentiae habuisset r5. 53, 3. The list of Greek words used 
by him (see Nipp. on 14. r5, 6) is not large, and consists wholly of 
terms more or less technical, and which have no strict Latin equivalent. 
Dr. §§ 67, 147, 191, 258. 

96. Latin archaisms. The desire of novelty in diction appears to 
have led Tacitus sometimes to revive obsolete words and forms from old 
writers, in preference to employing those which were usual (Wolfflin, 
Philol. xxv. 106, &c.). Among such may be noticed dissertare 12. 11, I 
(Cato and Plaut.); mercimonium 15.:38, 2 (Plaut.); perduellis 14. 29, 2 
(Enn. Plaut, &c.); truculentia 2. 24, 1 (Plaut.); also the accus. with 
fungor 3. 2, 2; and with potior 11. ro, 8. Dr. $ 258. 

| 97. The debt of Tacitus to previous historians, and to the 
great classic poets, is chiefly to be seen in very many of the syntac- 
tical usages already mentioned, and in the lists of poetical words and 
senses of words (see $$ 70, 72). Many other instances will be found 
noticed in the notes throughout: a few of the more striking are here 
selected from the fuller lists given by Dr. ($ 259) and Wolfflin (Philol. xxvi. 
122-134), and in special treatises. 

(*) Sallust (see also above, p. 40, note 4). Annals. 
Cat. 6. 1r urbem Romam habuere initio Troiani - . v dE 
Fr. inc. 92 D, 60 K,.37 G. genua patrum advolvuntur . 1. 13, 4 

Jug. 51, 1 fors omnia regere . . ‘ i : . 1.49,2 

Cur V.]] THE SYNTAX AND STYLE OF TACITUS. 73 
Fr. H. 1. 48, 3 D, 51 K, 144 G. se e contempto metuen- Annals. 
dum effecit : 4644.2 
Jug. 8o. 5 quis omnia honesta "s inlionestd vendere 
mos est . : 2. 38, 1 
Fr. H. 1. 71 D, 69 K, gg Gx cornicines occanuere . 2. 81, 2 
Jug. 6. 3 studia Numidarum in Iugurtham accensa . 3. 4.3 
Fr. H. 1, 61 D, 61 K, 81 G, suopte ingenio (of things) 3. 26, 2 
Fr. H. r. 88 D, 98 K, 63 G. neque animo neque auri- 
bus aut lingua competere . . 3. 46. 1 
Jug. 45, 1 magnum et sapientem virum fuisse: comperior. 4. 20, 4 
Jug. 20, 7 cum predatoria manu 4. 24, 3 
Jug. 4, 9 ad inceptum redeo . ; 4. 33, 6 
Fr. H. 3. 67, col.:4 D, 77 K, 76 G. iuxta “eediuotien 
erant ; 6. 13, I 
Fr. inc. 55 D, 21 K, 24 G. more RE bros süniptis 
tergis atque redditis . 6.35.2 
Jug. 21, 2 uno die. . . coeptum atque € bellum . I2. 16, 4 
Jug. 70, 2 carum acceptumque popularibus suis . I2. 29, I 
Fr. H. 1. 18 D, 20 K, 19 G. in tempore bellaturi . I2. 50, 4 
Fr. H. 3. 41 D, 53 K, 40 G. vis piscium . 12. 63, 2 
Jug. 73, 5 in maius celebrare . : i ; . 13. 8,1 
Jug. 47, 2 frequentiam ai Men et commeatuum  . 14. 33, I 
Jug. 25, 3 bonum publicum ... privata gratia devictum . 14. 38, 4 
Cat. 2, 3 aequabilius atque constantius 0821, 5 
Fr. H. 2. 30 D, 36 K, 66 G. advorsa in pravitatem ds | 
clinando . 15. 26, 3 
Fr. H. 4. 31 D, 56 K, 33 3G. volentis pei facte . 15. 36, 6 
Jug. 5, 3 pauca supra repetam ; . I6. 18, 1 
(2) Livy. | 
". 5, 6 stolide ferocem viribus suis . I. 3,4 
8. 32, 13 extrema contio et circa Fabium diebus I. 35, 6 
28. 27, 3 ne quo nomine quidem adpellare debeam, scio, 
&c. : "u t. 42, 4 
3- 49, 3 Si iure reris vim diene conaretur 2. 80, 4 
3. 53, 2 liberatores haud dubie 2. 88, 3 
27. 33, 5 prosperam pugnam fecerunt 3. 21, 6 
6. 8, 2 senecta invalidum , 1 e 3043.4 
3. 27, 7 puncto saepe temporis maximarum rerum mo- 
menta verti e Be 4,2 
: 37, 14 velut indagine ; . 13. 42, 7 
7. 17, 3 the whole description —— eorum, &c. . 14. 30, I 

fe cR mo or, 

74 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. V. 

(3) Horace. Annals. 

Ep. J. 11, 6 odio maris atque viarum (cp. Od. 2. 6, 7) . 2.14,6 

Od. 2. 16, 25 laetus in praesens . : ; . 11.95, I 

Od. 1. 37, 9 contaminato cum grege . . 15. 35, 8 

(4) Vergil (see also $$ 70, 72, 74, 76, 77 and above, p. 40, 

note 2). 

Aen. 4, 15 fixum immotumque I. 47, 1 
» 6,103]laborum... facies I. 49, I 
» IO, 308 rapit . . . aciem I. 56, 1 
;» 10, 850 vulnus adactum: 1. 61, 6 
» 9; 137 exscindere gentem i 2. 25, 4 
» 3, 176 tendoque . . . cum voce manus 2. 29, 2 
» 3, 651 omnia conlustrans 2. 45, 4 
» 2, 15 instar montis - 2. 61, 1 
» 9, 763 ingerit hastas 2. 81,2 
» 2,75 quae sit fiducia capto 3. I1, 2 
» I, 359 argenti pondus et auri 3. 52 5 
» 9. 73 tum vero incumbunt 4. 24,1 
» I, 264 populosque . . . contundet 4. 46, 1 

'» I,I1Ó65 vivo... Saxo 4.55) 5 
» 4, 388 sermonem abrumpit 4. 60, 2 
» 10, 630 manet . . . gravis exitus 4. 74, 5 
» 2, 129 rumpit vocem 6. 20, I 
» 6, 423 fusus humi . ii. 3554 
». 10, 669 expendere poenas I2. 19, 4 
» 9, 397 fraude loci . I2. 33, 2 
» 2, 374 rapiunt (= didtnr I3. 6,1 
» 6, 55 funditque preces . 14. 30, I 
» IO, 532 belli commercia à ; . 14. 33, 6 
» 3, 55 fas omne abrumpit ; ; ; 215. 2,3 
» 1I, 335 rebus succurrite fessis . — . I$. 50, 1 
» 2,369 mortis imago . . ; : ; . 15. 70, I 
» 8, 579 abrumpere vitam ; ; : : . 16. 28, 6 

(5) Ovid. 

Trist. 2, 124 citraque necem tua constitit ira . ; . I2. 22, 3 

n— nl À——ÓM —— M —— —— M — ————— — 

Cuar, VI.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 75 

CHAPTER VI. 

ON THE CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

Powers and titles acquired by Augustus priorto 727, B.C. 27. : : . 75 
Constitution of the principate in that year .- i ‘ : MT 
Subsequent changes during and shortly after his iedre . à . ; . 79 
Magistracies comprised in the principate— 

I. Proconsulare imperium . : . i : : ; . 8t 

2. Tribunitia potestas . ] . ‘ : ; : . . 83 

3. Other magisterial powers ‘ à à , : i : ; . 85 
Legislative and judicial powers - $^ ho 4 86 
Relation of the principate to the people End SUR GdPRC ; : . à . 89 
Functions left to the magistrates of the state , , i s : : . 90 
Functions left to the senate . , 92 
Means taken by the princeps to control the election of magistrates, ind, thereby, 

of senators . " , i P : à . 94 
His modes of influencing the hous of asuccessor . .  . 97 
Power of the senate during vacancy of the principate, and in respect of the deposi: 

tion of a princeps . : ; . 98 
Importance with Romans of apparent reapect for constitutional formé . i . 99 

NoTE.—The greatest part of the material of this portion is derived from Mommsen’s 
* Rómisches Staatsrecht,’ vól. ii. part 2; part also from his commentary on the * Marmor 
Ancyranum,’ and from Professor Pelham's article * princeps’ in Dict. of Ant.. 

THE constitution of the principate is, dated most properly from the 
acts of Jan. 13, 727, B.c. 27, and from enactments in the preceding 
year; but account must be taken both of powers held by the first 
* princeps ' before that date, and of those which he subsequently acquired. 

Gaius Caesar Octavianus, in his nineteenth year, had raised forces on 
his own authority! ; and his position was legalized by a decree of the 
senate proposed by Cicero on Jan. 1, 711, B.c. 43, by which he acquired 
the rank of propraetor, with a military imperium ? which during the rest 
of his long life never left him ; so that his ‘ dies accepti imperii" is either 
reckoned from this*, or from the consulship, which on August 19 in the 
same year followed it *, and was his first actual magistracy. 

His permanent imperium, however, during these years comes through 
the irregular and mainly usurped powers of the triumvirate; a plebiscite 
having been hurried through the comitia on Nov. 27 of the same year 

. «Privato consilio Mon. Anc. i. 1; ? He assumed the fasces on Jan. 7 

cp. 13. 6, 4; Staatsr. ii. 654. (C. I. L. x. 8375). 
2 Cic. Phil. 5. 17, 46; Mon. Anc. i. 5. * See note on Ann. 1. 9, I 

D 0——- —-e0-—- Re —— " 

76 INTRODUCTION. (Car. VI. 

by the tribune P. Titius, creating 'triumviri reipublicae constituendae,’ 
with consular power, for five years! ; at the end of which they assumed 
another five years of power by their own act, without any formal vote ?. 

At some eaily date during this period Caesar had assumed a tide 
of permanent importance, the *praenomen imperatoris? Suetonius 
ascribes this praenomen to the dictator *; who, however, appears from 
inscriptions to have borne the title immediately after his family name, 
before his titles of office*. It is suggested that the title, in this position, 
became a kind of additional cognomen, such as his heir might adopt ; 
and that, in usage, he might be styled indifferently * Caesar Imperator ' 
or ‘Imperator Caesar, as men might speak of ‘ Aemilius Paullus" or 
* Paullus Aemilius*. However this may be, this praenomen is hence- 
forth always assumed by Octavianus, his proper praenomen and gentile 
name drop out of sight, and he becomes ‘ Imp. Caesar. iii vir R. P.C." 

From this must be distinguished the ‘nomen imperatoris, which also 
he now began to assume as a permanent title, "This was given, as in 
old times, by acclamation on the field of battle*, and was received by 
Augustus twenty-one times in his life 5, for victories gained in person 
or through lieutenants"; of which he had already numbered seven in 
725, B.C. 29 ™. 

Also it appears that, in some form, he had received in 718, B.c. 36, 
a tribunician power?. Whether we take the authority followed by 
Appian and repeated by Orosius, stating that he was in that year 
chosen tribune for life'*; or that followed by Dio, according to which 
the sacrosanctity and seat of a tribune were decreed to him in this 
year, and the power itself in 724, B.c. 30? ; he will in either case have 
held it before 731, B.c. 23, from which daie the years of its tenure as 
a title are numbered ™. 

' App. B. C. 4.7. Tacitus declines to 
call their forces * publica arma’ Ann. 1. 
2, I. 

* App. B. C. 5. 95. 

? See the Fasti of 714, B C. 40, and 
the Inscr. C. I. L. v. 525; Orell. 565; 
Wilm. 878. 

* Suet. Jul. 76. Dio speaks of it only 
as a permanent title (43. 44, 2). 

* Inscr. C. I. L. i. 620; Orell. 582. 

* Staatsr. ii. 769, 5. 

7 E.g. Inscr. Orell. 594. This form 
appears in the Fasti from 714, B.C. 40: 
Staatsr. ii. 766, 3. 

* This appears thus on the coins of all 
the triumvirs. Those of Antonius bear 
latterly * Imp. iiii,’ 

® See on 3. 74, 6. He was first so 

saluted after Mutina (Ap.15,711, B.C. 43): 
sce Dio, 46. 38, I. 

10 1. g, 2. Tiberius received it eiyht 
times (see ch. ix, note 28), Claudius 
twenty-seven times (vol. ii. Introd. p. 38). 

! See 2. 18, 2; 22, I. . 

! See below, p. 77, note 6. 

5 On this power as held by the dictator 
Caesar, see on 3. 56, 2... 

H App. B. C. 5. 132; Oros. 6. 18, 34. 
Dio (53. 32, 5) makes this take place 
in B.C. 23, but it is an error to sup- 
pose that he was ever formally tribune. 
For the distinction between such office 
and the tribunician power, see below, 

. 83. | 
Pu Dio, 49. 15. 6; 51. 19, 6. 
16 See below, p. 79. 

" - — - 

Ln — —Ó— 

Caar. VIL} CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 77 

By the end of the second * quinquennium,' at the close of 721, B.c. 33, 
Lepidus had been deposed, and war with Antonius was imminent. 
Hence, though Antonius appears to have styled himself * triumvir ’ till 
his death’, Caesar (at least in his retrospect) limits the formal term of that 
‘Office to the ten years?; and then claims a power quasi-dictatorial, or 
a virtual concentration of the whole triumvirate in himself, not, apparently, 
by formal vote, but by general consent. ‘Juravit in mea verba tota Italia 
sponte sua, et me b[ello] quo vici ad Actium, ducem depoposcit?. * Per 
consensum universorum [potitus rerum omn]ium’ (éyk[par]js yevóuevos 
Távrev rà» mpayuárov) *. 

Also, after a short second consulship | in 721, B.C. 33, he enters on 
a continuous series of nine consulships, his third to his eleventh, 723-731, 
B.C. 31-23 *. 

The following inscription of the year 725, B.c. 29, shows the ádss 
which he then bore, but makes no mention of the tribunician power :— 
‘Imp. Caesari, Divi Juli f., cos. quinct., cos. design. sext., imp. sept *. 

We come now to the acts of 726, 727, B.c. 28, 27, the tendency of 
which is described from very different points of view. Caesar himself 
claims to have then restored the Republic: * Rempublicam ex mea 
potestate in senat[us populique Romani a]rbitrium transtuli ^ This 
statement is echoed by writers near the time?, and a coin of this date 
describes him as ‘ libertatis P. R. vindex * On the other hand, Dio 
alludes to this time as the date of a re-established monarchy", and 
Tacitus as the period when the ascendency of Caesar was secured. 
The reconciliation is simple: the extraordinary dictatorial and con- 
stituent powers surviving from the triumvirate, after spending their 
force in these enactments ?, are surrendered, and all the arbitrary acts 
of that period cancelled ^; but the permanent constitution of the prin- 
cipate begins. The scnáte and the comitia resume their regular func- 
tions; and, after an ostensive restoration of all the provinces, armies, 
and revenues '* the unarmed provinces are actually given up, and those 

" Mon. Anc. vi I3. See Staatsr. ii. 
745 foll. ; Rushforth, Insc. p. 4. 

* Ov. Fast. 1, 589; Vell. 2. 89, 3 

? Eckhel, vi. 83 ; Cohen, i. p. 92. 

10 "Ek 5€ Tovrou povapyxetabat avis axpi- 

Bas fjptavro 52. i, 1. 

! Staatsr. ii. p. 718. 

2 Tipi]ày ávópàv évevóug(v 5]guocíov 
mpayyatav karopÜoTi)s Gcuvexéow éreciv 
déxa Mon. Anc. Gr. iv. 1. Some power 
‘ reip. constituendae ' must be conceived to 
have survived to B.C. 27; see below, 

note 12. 

* Mon. Anc. v. 3 

* Id. vi. 13, and Gr. xvii. 19. 

5 Mommsen shows (870, 2) that Suet. 
(Aug. 26) is probably in error in re- 
presenting several of these as held for 
parts of the year only. 

* C.I.L. vi. 873; Orell. 596; Wilm.879. 

! * Potentiae securus, dedit i iura quis 
pace et principe uteremur’ 3. 28, 3. 

2 ]t is thought by Mommsen that 
the expression * dedit iura ' (Tac. |. 1.) im- 
plies autocratic legislation without the 
comitia. 

122 DI; 83. 2. 5. 

^ Id. 53. 4, 3; 9, 6. 

78 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

requiring military force’, with the legions stationed in them, are retained, 
professedlv for ten years only?;’ while, in his home government, Caesar 
‘claims only to be consul, and to be satisfied with his tribunician right to 
protect the people *.' 

It is claimed as proof of his moderation or discretion, that his con- 
stitulion made him not king or dictator but ' princeps *;' and he is 
careful to state that, while thus holding the first rank in the state, he 
had no more power than his colleagues in any magistracy*. This 
appellation has been commonly identified with that of * princeps senatus,’ 
which had been some thirty-three years dormant; an honorary rank, 
conferring no other privilege than that of being asked first, when the 
consuls designate were absent. That Caesar was ‘princeps senatus' 
from the census-list of 726, B.c. 28, to his death, is affirmed by him- 
self*: and such designation is the natural mode of reminding senators 
at each revision of the list that he was one of themselves”. But, from 
the earliest date; he is always spoken of not as ‘princeps senatus, but 
as simply ‘princeps*;’ and speaks thus of himself?. Also a saying 
quoted of Tiberius makes him express by that title his relation, not 
to the senate, but to the citizens ^; and the earlier Greek. writers render 
the words by 5yyeuó». It is therefore probably to be considered as 
a separate designation, originating at the same date, which had become 
confounded with * princeps senatus' (mpóxp«ros rijs yepovoias), by the time 
of Dio’. Such a term would seem to convey no more than the fact 
that Caesar was the foremost citizen of Rome ^; and had been so used 
of Pompeius by Cicero !* and Sallust ^, Even long after it had become 
distinctive, it is still used informally by the elder Pliny of Servilius 
Nonianus !* ; and at all times so far refused to pass into a definite title, 

! At this date, these were the Gauls, 
Spain, and Syria, but many modifications 
of the arrangement subsequently took 

7 Cp.thelanguageofVitellius, H. 2.91, 5. 
* E. g. Hor. Od. 1. 2, 50. 
? * Me principe’ Mon. Anc. ii. 45; vi. 9. 

place (see below, ch. vii). Also Egypt 
was never under the senate. 

? Dio, 53. 12, 2; 13, I. 

* Ann. I. 2, I. The absence of any 
word like * mox’ with * tribunicio iure’ is 
evidence that Tacitus knew this power to 
have been held by Augustus contempo- 
raneously with his consulships. 

* 1.9, 6. 

5 Mon. Anc. Gr. xviii. 6, 

© TIp@rov. dfiwparos Tówov éoxov Tis 

cuyxAnrov axpe ravtns THs jjuépas, is 
taita éypapov, éni ern reocapákovTa 
Mon. Anc. Gr. iv. 3. The. years are 
reckoned from 726, B.C. 28 (Dio, 53. 1, 3), 
to 767, A.D. I4, not inclusively, 

10 Acasórns này Tüv boUAov, abrokpárop 
52 tay orpariatay, Twy 06 87) Xovrov mpó- 
xpirds elue Dio, 57. 8, 2. 

1 Mon. Anc. Gr. vii. 9, &c.; Strab. 7. 
5, 3, P. 314, &c. 

3 L. 1. He also speaks of this title as 
given to Pertinax (73. 5, 1), but as excep- 
tional. 

13 See Staatsr. ii. 774; Prof. Pelham, D. 
of Ant. ii. p. 483. 

1* Ad Fam. 1.9, 1I. 

15 H. 3. 61 D, 82 K, p. 152, 33 G (speech 
of Macer). 

16 * Princeps civitatis’ N. H. 28. 2, 5, 29. 
Cp. the expression of Tacitus in Ann. 3. 
75, t. 

Cuar, VI.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 79 

that it never appears in the regular list of those borne by the Caesar, 
and when used at all in inscriptions, has almost always some personal 
term of honour accompanying it, as *princeps optimus, *princeps et 
.conservator ',’ &c. 

His new position is, as it were, consecrated by the title of Augustus, 
decreed by the senate?, and assumed on the r6th of January 727, 
B. C. 275; a title expressive of sanctity, and a step to the divine honours 
paid to him, even during life, in various parts of the empire‘. This 
title is always distinctive of the * princeps,' and, until the division of the 
empire in later times, is shared with no one. 

In the middle of 731, B.c. 23, Augustus closed his series of consulships, 
afterwards holding this office twice only, each time for a few days, on the 
introduction of his grandsons to public life*. Some of the most essential 
privileges of that office are still reserved to him *, but increased stress is 
now laid on the tribunician power, which from this time is assumed as 
a title and reckoned annually from June 277. There is no trace of 
annual re-election, and the object of the change seems to be merely to 
substitute some other computation of his years of rule for that supplied 
by his consulships. It has been thought that a nominal change was 
made from ‘ius tribunicium ' to *tribunicia potestas", and that the power 
was further defined and amplified. 

A further step is marked by the offer made to him in 7 35, B.C. 19, of such 
censorial power as belonged to the ‘regimen legum et morum ?' It is 
also stated by Dio that he received at the same time for life the consular 
power, with its insignia, the regular attendance of twelve lictors, and 
a curule chair between those of the consuls of the year ?. "This is now 
generally treated as an error, except so far as relates to the mere 
assumption of the insignia". Augustus himself mentions two facts 
only that bear upon the point. Firstly, that in 732, B. c. 22, he refused 
the dictatorship, and also both the annual and perpetual consulship ?*. 
Secondly, that twice in the latter part of his life he held a census with 

1 Inscr. Orell. 35; 617; (C. LL. ii. to his colleagues, Germanicus, Drusus, 

Seianus. 

2048; Wilm, 906). 

3 Aóvypari GvykAfjrov XeBaorós mwpo[c- 
7'yopev6 v Mon. Anc. Gr. xvii. 22. 

3 Kal. Praenest. Orell. ii. pp. 382, 409; 
Staatsr. ii. 847. 

^* See on 1. 10, 5. These honours are 

very sparingly assumed by Tiberius. See 
4- 37-38, &c. This sacredness is quite 
distinct from the personal sacrosanctity 
conferred by the tribunician power. 
. $ 749, 752, B.C. 5,2. Tiberius assumed 
the consulship only three times during his 
principate, and in each case to add honour 

Subsequent emperors held the 
office much oftener (see Staatsr. ii. 1095 
foll.), and almost always in the first year 
after their accession. 

6 See below, p. 81. 

7 Fasti, 731. (Augustus postquam 
consu'latu se abdicavit, trjib. pot. annua 
facta est] ' Staatsr. 795, note r. | 

* See note on I. 2, 1. 

? See below, p. 85, note 8. 

10 Dio, 54. IO, 5. 

1 Staatsr. ii. 872, note 2. 

13 Mon. Anc. Gr, iii. 2, 9. 

80 INTRODUCTION. (Cuar. VI. 

‘consulare imperium !,' censorial power being, in the theory of the con- 
stitution, inherent in the consular, before the existence of the censorship 
as a separate office. It is inferred, both from what he says and from 
what he appears to imply, that this ‘consulare imperium’ was used for 
this purpose only, and that no general or permanent consular power was 
ever assumed ?, 

During the remainder of this principate the chief points to notice are 
the successive quinquennial or decennial renewals of the * imperium? ;' 
the assumption, on the death of Lepidus in 742, B. c. 12, of the office 
of * pontifex maximus *,' always henceforth held by the princeps until in 
the fourth century it came to he refused by Christian emperors and 
passed to the bishops of Rome’; and the formal acceptance, on universal 
acclamation, of the title ‘Pater Patriae' in 752, B. c. 2°. 

The following inscription gives his titles nearly at the close of his life : 
‘Imp. Caesar, Divi F., Augustus, Pontif. Maxim., Cos. xiii, Imp. xx, 
Tribunic. Potestat. xxxvii, P.P.7’ 

"The first succession to the principate must have been modified by the 
fact that the successor was already ‘collega imperii, and had the tri- 
bunician power, and afterwards numbered his years of this office 
without recognizing any change at the death of Augustus. He also 
dropped the fiction of periodical renewal of imperium, though a decen- 
nial festival was held?. He must have at least received by decree the 
title of ‘ Augustus’ which, though he affected some reserve in its use", 
appears on all his coins and inscriptions; but he never allowed himself 
to be called * pater patriae”.’ It is also noteworthy that neither Tiberius, 
Gaius, nor Claudius, uses the ‘praenomen imperatoris? The titles 
borne by Tiberius at the close of his life are seen from an inscription 
quoted elsewhere ?*. | | 

Gaius appears, from the account of Dio, to have been the first to 
receive all the powers of the principate by a single decree "; while 

! Mon. Anc. Lat. ii. 5, 8. 

? The same inference is suggested by 
what appears to be a temporary assump- 
tion of consular power by Claudius to 
hold games (Dio, 60. 23, 4. In the case 
of Augustus the language is less explicit, 
and could be understood of calling into 
action an inherent power. 

* Dio, 53. 16, 2, &c. 
1088, 2. 

*. Mon. Anc. Lat. ii. 23-28 ; Gr. v. 19— 
vi. 6; Kal. Praen. March 6. 

5 See Staatsr. ii. 1108, 5. The pun 
was also member of all the other priestly 
colleges, but generally without their recog- 
nition in his titles. 

See Staatsr. ii. 

* Mon. Anc. vi. 24; Gr. xviii. g. He 
is called *pater' many years earlier in 
Hor. Od. 1. 2, 50. 

7 Ins.r. Orell. 604. Prof. Pelham 
contrasts such an inscription with the 
long list of titles accumulated on later 
emperors. 

® See on I. 3, 3. | 

* Dio, 57. 24, 1 ; 58. 24, 1. 

10 Suet. Tib. 26; Dio, 57. 2, 1. 

EH ,59,92; 43.987,3. 

12 Staatsr. ii. 769. 

18 See ch. ix. note 28. 

! Dio, 59. 3, 2. For later instances see 
12. 69, 3, and note, H. 1.47,2; 2. 55, 3; 

4 3s 4- 

Caar. VIL} CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 8r 

Claudius was the first to take the name of ‘ Caesar,’ to which he had no 
family claim, as a name of the princeps and his house. 

It has been seen that the term ‘princeps’ in itself implied no 
monarchy, or even magistracy ; but in fact stood for a combination of 
magisterial powers, so as to be contrasted as a kind of greater magistracy 
with the office of consul, praetor, or aedile’. The boast of Augustus, that 
his eminence in rank gave him no more power than his colleagues in 
any office?, can only apply, even in the letter, to such a case as that of 
his consulships, and has no meaning in relation to the most essential 

powers of the principate, the ‘proconsulare imperium’ and *tribunicia - 

potestas, in which he had, as a rule, no colleague. Nor were these 
powers confined to their original limits, but received great successive 
extensions by steps not now always traceable. 

I. The ‘imperium,’ commonly called *proconsulare?*, is the most 
essential element of his power. ‘Imperium’ had always necessarily 
belonged to some definite magistracy, and at the first settlement in 727, 
B.C. 27, and for four years afterwards, Augustus was continuously 
consul; whence it is probable that the power exercised by him during 
this period was no other than the ancient supreme ‘imperium’ of the 
consuls over all other authorities at home and abroad ‘, coupled with the 
assignment of a ‘ provincia’ embracing all the most important portions 
of the empire. On his permanent deposition of the consulship in 731, 
B. C. 23, a more formal definition of the ‘imperium’ still reserved to him 
was required, and we find from enactments passed in this year and 
shortly afterwards?, that besides the command, which would have 
become proconsular, of the Caesarian provinces, certain powers, differing 
from those of ordinary proconsuls, and distinctly consular, were expressly 
reserved to him, namely, an *imperium maius' over all governors of 
provinces, even those appointed by the senate, and the retention of his 

‘imperium’ 

3: 53, 4- 

* Mon. Anc. vi. 2r. See above, p. 78. 

3 For the view here taken, so far as it 
differs from Mommsen's, I have been in- 
debted to an Essay by Prof. Pelham in 
journ. of Philol. xvii. pp. 37-52. 

* Prof. Pelham appears rightly to argue 
that, though from the time of Stila the 
consulship had in fact become an urban 
and domestic magistracy, its foreign and 
military powers were rather in abeyance 
than abolished. Cp. the language of 
Cicero, *consules quibus more maiorum 
permissum est omnes adire provincias ' 
(ad Att. 8. 15, 3); *omnes enim in consulis 

VOL. I. 

in Italy and even within the pomerium of Rome, besides 

iure et imperio debent esse provinciae" 
(Phil. 4. 4, 9). In recognition of the 
consular or proconsular imperium of the 
princeps, the governors of his provinces, 
even when of consular rank, were only 
* legati Augusti propraetore,’ while sena- 
torial governors, even when not of con- 
sular rank, were styled proconsuls. 

* Dio, 53. 33,5; 54. 3, 3; 19,5. The 
enactments here grouped together belong 
to Db 732, and 735, B.C. 23, 22, and 19. 

* On the limitation ‘extra urbem! in 
the case of other holders of this power, 
see below, p. 98, note 6. 

eme. 

82 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VI. 

what appears to be a consular, as distinct from his already existing 
tribunician power of convoking and consulting the senate, the presidency 
at its debate, and precedence of others in bringing one subject before 
it at each sitting’, as well as the consular insignia of twelve lictors, and 
a curule chair between those occupied by the consul of the year. 

It is plain to see that he had no reason for desiring or accepting either 
the consulship itself, or any general or titular consular power?, and that 
his position caused other privileges to attach themselves to it?*, not 
perhaps definitely based on powers expressly conferred, but conceived as 
having been generally inherent in the chief magistracy of Rome, when it 
embraced in itself the functions afterwards subdivided, as among censors, 
praetors, and aediles. The powers, as originally assumed by Augustus, 
might seem only a step beyond several republican precedents ‘, and his 
action in B. c. 27 and 23, bore the appearance of surrender rather than 
aggrandizement; but in result the whole power of the sword was sur- 
rendered into his hands. He has supreme command over all troops, 
wheresoever stationed 5, with him rest all ordinances respecting their levy, 
payment, and dismissal, the appointment of officers and regulation of 
the military hierarchy: senatorial proconsuls had not power over the life 
of a soldier *; and even in their provinces he has the right to collect fiscal 
revenue *. 

He levies war, makes peace or treaty *, and represents the state in 
relation to all foreign or dependent powers. Again, he is the high 

1 This would appear from Dio's words, 
in which, after xpnparicew wept évds Tivos, 
xa’ éxagtny BovAfjv, he adds «av pr bra- 
Te/p. This ‘ius primae relationis" was 
no doubt consular, and subsequent em- 
perors obtained right of precedence for 

as many as five ‘relationes’ at a sitting. - 

Prof. Pelham appears rightly to identify 
this with the privilege ‘relationem facere,’ 
given in Lex de imp. Vesp. 4, which 
Mommsen had formerly (but not in Staatsr. 
ed. 3) explained of submitting motions in 
writing, without being present. This the 
princeps could no doubt do, and Tiberius 
often did so; his letter being apparently 
by a fiction treated as an * oratio (see 3. 
57, 1, compared with 56, 1). It isto be 
noticed that when Caesar put the question, 
the magistrates, even the consuls, were so 
far ‘privati’ as to be asked their 'sen- 
tentia" (3. 17, 8). It appears also that 
he could dispense with some legal for- 
malities in summoning the senate (Lex. 
deimp. Vesp. 8). © 

? See above, p. 79. It may be re- 

membered that a consular power, distinct 
from the actual consulship, was the form 
under which the triumvirs had ruled (see 
above, p. 76). and Augustus would hardly 
wish to revive this memory. 

3 Some of these are specified below, 
to which may be added that of * nomina- 
ting' candidates for magistracies, which 
appears in some sort to assume that the 
princeps was personally holding the co- 
mitia (see below, p. 94), which (in the 
case of elections to the greater magistra- 
cies) would be a consular function. 

* See below, p. 99. 

5 Thus the proconsul of Africa reports 

on military matters to the emperor as his 

superior officer, not to the senate: see on 
3. 32, 1. 
6 Dio, 53. 13, 7. For an exception, 
see On 3. 2I, I... | 
7 See on 4. 6, 5; 15, 3, and below, 
P- 92, note I. 
‘Foedusve cum quibus volet facere 
liceat' Lex de Imp. Vesp. i. See below, 

P894 | 

Car, VI.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 83 

admiral of the empire, with fleets near at hand’; and, besides the troops 
attached to these, not only the praetorian guard, his proper household 
brigade, but even the police and night-watch of the city, owned no 
allegiance to any magistrate of the republic, but only to Caesar and his 
praefects, and formed no insignificant force at his disposal on the spot? ; 
while the validity of his imperium within the walls explains his power to 
put to death citizens even of senatorial rank*: and he is so far the 
‘imperator’ of the whole Roman world, that the whole senate and 
people, and even the provinces, take the ‘sacramentum’ in his name, 
binding themselves in the most solemn terms to maintain his authority 
against all enemies, and not to hold even their own children dearer *. 
Naturally, in time the * imperator and ‘ princeps' became synonymous 5, 
and this power was held sufficient in itself to constitute a principate ; 
and, although formally given by senatorial decree, retained an ominous 
memory of the old popular or military origin of an ‘imperator’s’ title *, 
and of the irregular democratic command of Augustus * by universal 
consent ",' out of which this form of ‘imperium’ had risen; so that even 
a constitutional ruler like Vespasian takes the salutation and ‘sacra- 
mentum ' of the soldiers as a valid title, and reckons from it, not from 
the senatorial decree, his ‘dies accepti imperii* Hence the revelation 
of that * state secret’ so fruitful in subsequent history, that ‘a “ princeps " 
could be made elsewhere than at Rome?;' and hence the *imperator,' 
even in profound peace, felt that ‘he held a wolf by the ears”,’ and 
was safe only as long as the soldiers were contented. 

II. The tribunician power, which had belonged, as we have seen, in 
some form to Augustus from a very early stage of his career, and to the 
dictator before him, still more emphatically recorded the democratic 
character of Caesarism, and was not, like the formal office of tribune, 
untenable by a patrician. Gracchus and others had shown the formid- 
able political strength of the tribunate, not only as regarded its wide and 
indefinite coercive powers, but also in its. legislative initiative. Experience 
had no less shown its inherent weaknesses, the liability to paralysis by 
the veto of a colleague, the annual tenure with a doubtful chance of 
re-election, and the want of armed support in case of the last appeal to 

1 4. 5, I. E RT. ceps; but the ‘praenomen imperatoris, 

5 Dio, 53. 17, 6. though originally unconnected with this 

*1. 7, 35 34, 1. The form of oath power (see above, p. 76), may in later 
may be seen from a Lusitanian inscription — times have been taken to denote it. 

(Orell. 3665, Wilm. 2839, C. I. L. ii. 172) 
of the date of the accession of Gaius. See 
Staatsr. ii. 792. 

* ' The *imperium proconsulare' does 
not appear among the titles of the prin- 

G 2 

* See on 3. 74, 6. 

7 See above, p. 77, and Mon. Anc. 
vi. 14. 
* Suet. Vesp. 6. VE q1.35 3. 
10 Suet. Tib. 25. 

84 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

force. But from the tribunician power of the Caesar all these weaknesses 
were removed. The tribunes of the year were in no sense his colleagues, 
and their voice was powerless against his! ; the office was held for life ; 
and the power of the sword was known to be in reserve. This office 
fully retained memory of its popular origin; for the decree of the senate 
conferring it was only preliminary to a ratificatory ‘lex’ or ‘ plebiscite,’ 
which survived even the general abolition of the comitia*.’ A fragment 
still remains of the so-called ‘lex. de imperio Vespasiani 5,' which, while 
apparently conveying in form the tribunician power, specifies far more 
prerogatives than such as belong to the conception of that office, and 
must either be taken to show an almost indefinite extension of its idea, 
or to include other distinct powers vested in the princeps, perhaps all 
such as were considered to require a 'lex' to define and ratify them *. 
That this power would of itself give full right to convoke and consult 
the senate, is matter of course?, and the special privileges mentioned 
above ® as belonging to the princeps in doing so, if they are not rightly 
viewed as part of his ‘imperium,’ must be taken to belong to his 
tribunician power. It is at any rate in virtue of that power that he had 
absolute control of its proceedings when convoked, and we find it his 
habit either to guide their decision by speaking first or to reserve him- 
self to the end’, so as either by formal veto* or less formal modification? 
to amend the proposals of others. No less complete and no less 
indefinite in its extension must have been his tribunician power of 
controlling the action of other magistrates, and it appears that the ‘ius 
auxilii, ad tuendam plebem, and general coercive power even originally 
extended a mile beyond the pomerium ", and must ultimately have been 
unrestricted by any limit of distance .. If we look at this unlimited consti- 
tutional power of initiation, revision, coercion, and the formidable elasticity 
with which it might be made to apply on almost any and all occasions, 

1 E.g. in 1. 77, 3, it is mentioned that 
a tribune uses his ‘intercessio,’ but that 
it was valid only because Tiberius per- 
mitted it. See also p. 91, note 1. It 
is probable that the tribunician power 
of Caesar was defined as a ‘ potestas 
maior' to that of the tribunes of the 
year. 

2 This is shown by several references 
to the ‘Acta Arvalium.' Staatsr. ii. 875, 2. 
The words of Dio (53. 32, 6) seem to 
show that such a *lex' was first passed 
in B.C. 23. 

3 C. I. L. vi. 930; Wilm. 917; Orell. 
i. p. 567 ; Staatsr. ii. 877; Rushforth, 70. 

* Staatsr. ii. 881. Prof. Pelham (1. 1. 
pP. 45, foll) argues against Mommsen 

that the ‘imperium’ itself, as well as the 
‘tribunicia potestas, was ratified and 
defined by the ‘ lex.’ 

5 It is expressly stated (1. 7, 5) to have 
been so used by Tiberius, before his for- 
mal acceptance of the principate. 

* See p. 82. 7 See 1. 74, 6 

* As 3. 70, 2; 13. 43, 7, &C.: Cp. Tr. 
I3, 4; 14. 48, 3, &c. Tiberius is de- 
scribed as rescinding decrees already 
passed (Suet. Tib. 33). 

® As 3. 18, 1, &c. 

10 Dio, 51. 19, 6, speaking of the year 
724, B.C. 30. 

" Tiberius, when associated in this 
power, is said to bave exercised it at 
Rhodes, Suet. Tib. 11. 

a a RÀ — — —— —:á —— — -— T m mcam 
— Án — 

Cur, VI] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 85 

and the personal sacrosanctity attached to it, we can readily under- 
stand that it was regarded as in some respects more important than even 
the imperium, and is described by Tacitus as a ‘title of supremacy 
devised by Augustus, to make him pre-eminent over all other authorities, 
without assuming the name of king or dictator 

III. The remaining magisterial functions are in their character chiefly 
censorial or consular-censorial?. The censorship itself fell into abeyance | 
from 730, B.c. 24, till it was assumed temporarily by Claudius? and 
Vespasian *, and for life by Domitian*. But Augu:tus makes use on 
one occasion (726, B. c. 28) of his consulship, and twice (746 and 767, 
B. C. 8, A.D. 14) of an ‘imperium consulare 5, to hold a * census populi," 
with which, on each occasion, a formal * lectio senatus’ appears to have 
been joined’: he also, though he refused the actual office of ‘ corrector 
morum ' no less than three times pressed upon him, certainly exercised 
under another form, as did his successors after him, some substantial 
functions of a ‘cura’ or * praefectura morum ?' : it is also clear that in 
particular, from and after 745, B.c. 9°, he revised annually the ‘album 
senatorium, and either then or as occasion offered, expunged names, 
though perhaps only of those who had lost their qualification for that 
rank". We also hear, during and after this principate, of similar regular 
revision of the * decuriae equitum" for judicial purposes", and of the 
*turmae equitum equo publico ??;' besides special gifts or withdrawals 

! 3. 56, 2. See Pelham, 1.1. p: 5o. 233). See Mommsen, R. G. D. A. l.l. 

? See above, p. 79. 

3 Suet. Cl. 16. 

* Suet. Vesp. 8-9. 

? Dio, 67. 4, 3 

$ See above, p. 79. 

7 See the whole passage, Mon. Anc. ii. 
I-1I. 

5 It has generally been assumed, on 
the testimony of Suet. Aug. 27, and Dio, 
54. 10, 5; 30, I, that Augustus was ap- 
pointed, at first for periods of five years 
and then permanently, émipeAgrüs kai 
émavopÜwer!s Tav Tpómov, but his own 
words as now read in the Greek version 
(iii. 11-21) of the Monumentum Ancyra- 
num seem decisive the other way. After 
stating that this office was offered to him 
in 735, 736, and 743, B.C. 19, I8, 11, he 

adds: ápx?)v obócuíav mapa Ta waTpia 0n 
Kdopevny ávebetaugv: & 56 róre Di poU 
7 oUykAngros olkovopeta0aa éBovAero, THs 
Snuapyinns éfovaias dv érédeoa (another 
proof of the elastic nature of that power 
above noted). His ‘cura morum' is 
alluded to by Horace (Od. 4. 15, 9; Ep. 
2. 1, 2) and Ovid (Met. 15, Au: Trist. 2, 

and Staatsr. ii. 706, 1098 foll. 

® Dio, 55. 3 3 

10 The ‘publica morum correctio" of 
Tiberius is spoken of in Suet. Tib. 42 
(see Staatsr. ii. 1c6o, n. 3), and he 
is mentioned as striking off the names 
of some who had become poor by 
extravagance (2. 48, 3) and of one who 
had not sworn to the ‘acta’ of Augustus 
(4. 42, 3). A similar action of Claudius 
(12. 52, 4) is to be distinguished fróm 
the more general power of expulsion 
exercised when he was actually censor 
(11. 25,5), and by his colleague Vitellius 
(12. 4, 4) Dio, in speaking of the 
emperor's general power of cnrolling 
and expelling senators (53. 17, 7) is really 
referring to his own time. 

1 p], N. H. 33. 1, 30; Suet. Aug. 32; 

Tib.4 ,51; Cl 15. This was originally 
the function of the praetor. See Cic. 
Clu. 43, 121. 

13 Suet. Aug. 38. We find ‘ censoria po- 
testas,’ for the time being, conferred on 
senators to whom this duty was delegated. 

| See 3. 30, 2. 

86 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

of equestrian privileges!, and the creation from time to time of new 
patrician houses?. "These functions, as well as various minor censorial 
duties, such as the regulation of public buildings, of the course of the 
Tiber, &c., or aedilician, as the *cura annonae, were undertaken or 
delegated by the princeps?, whether as possessed of any general quasi 
consular power *, or as in some way conceived as the chief magistrate of 
the state. 

In describing the growth of the power of Augustus from its modest 
beginnings, Tacitus says that he gradually engrossed more and more of 
the senatorial, magisterial, and legislative (or comitial) functions 5. His 
encroachments on the senate and magistrates of the Republic will be 
readily understood from the sketch already given of his powers; other 
magisterial encroachments may be seen in the multiplication of his own 
officers, to whom he delegated duties either purely military, as to the 
' praefectus praetorio ;' or of a mixed character, as to the * praefectus 
urbi! or ‘praefectus vigilum ;' or purely civil, as to the * praefectus 
annonae, by whom he was assisted in superseding a function .of the 
aediles 5 and in discharging what Tiberius stated to be his most arduous 
and unremitting duty”. Besides all these, we find, certainly from the 
time of Claudius, if not earlier, a constantly increasing staff of imperial 
procurators either of equestrian rank or freedmen, in Italy and the pro- 
vinces, whose functions tend more to supersede those of senatorial officers *. 

In respect to the laws, Caesar assumed extensive powers both legis- 
lative and judicial. 

It is obvious that in right of his tribunician power he could initiate 
legislation; and the *leges Iuliae’ of 736, B.c. 18, were proposed 
by Augustus in person in the forum’: but such instances appear to 
be very rare. On the other hand, there are abundant instances of 
direct legislative action, even by the earliest principes, through ordi- 
nances!*, forming part of their ‘acta,’ and having the force of law”. 
Such power is derivable from that exercised in old times by those 

I H.1.13, 257.3. 57, 4. 

* 11. 25, 3 and note; Agr. 9. 1; Mon. 
Anc. ii. I. 

3 Suet. Aug. 37. See Staatsr. ii. 1044, 
1100. 

* See above, p. 82. 

5 1.2, 1. Prof. Pelham (D. of Ant. 
ii. p. 486) has fully traced the gradual 
growth of the powers of the princeps, 
summing up the changes under four 
principal heads. 

$ See Liv. 10. 11, 9, &c. 

7 3. 54, 8. 

* See 4. 15, 35 12. 60, 1, and notes, 

vol. ii. Introd. p. 35, and on the whole sub- 
ject, Hirschfeld, Untersuchungen, passim, 
and his summary, p. 289. 

? Sen. de Benef. 6. 32, 1: 
ii. 832. 

? Gaius 1. 5 * Constitutio principis est 
quod imperator decreto vel edicto vel 
epistula constituit; nec umquam dubita- 
tum est, quin id legis vicem obtineat, cum 
ipse imperator per legem imperium ac- 
cipiat.’ 

11 On the oath to the ‘acta,’ see on I. 
72, 15 4. 42, 3, &c. 

see Staatsr. 

zo T. -————— -— am m —-— 22-7 72 — - —- 

Cuar. VIL.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 87 

who held the ‘imperium’ of the state, and the authority of the senate 
to ‘give laws' in its name’. Many such imperial *leges datae' are 
mentioned, and fragments of some are preserved? ; many of them giving 
colonial or municipal: rights *, or ordaining statutes for such com- 
munities *. Again, the citizenship, formerly given, as a rule, by plebiscite, 
but often also through authority committed to commanders, as Marius, 
Pompeius, &c.5, is now formally given by the princeps, both to in- 
dividuals *, usually as the reward of service in the auxiliary forces’, 
and also to whole communities *. The legal force of these edicts and 
rescripts, though strictly limited to the life of the princeps, was in most 
cases permanent through confirmation of his ‘acta’ after his death. 

Again, by his indirect and direct judicial power, he became practically 
the sole fountain of justice. Besides framing the lists of *iudices 
selecti? and regulating their duties, Augustus had, in 726, p.c. 28, 
‘and often afterwards,’ selected the ‘praetor urbanus," ‘ extra sortem ".’ 
The princeps frequently sat as assessor at the praetor's side ?, and even 
in absence appears to have been treated as present by the fiction of 
a ‘calculus Minervae' deposited in his name. Tiberius constantly 
presides in person at the senatorial high court of justice ™, influencing 
it by his manner no less than his vote; and exercises his power of 
intercession, whether in refusing to admit the case'*, or in modifying 
the sentence, either at the time '’, or before its formal enrolment". The 
power of pardon, vested in some form and to some extent in every 
magistrate *, and substantially reserved by the old constitution for the 
people *, has now, so far as it exists, passed directly or indirectly to 
Caesar ?!, as in some sense their representative. 

! Cic. Verr. ii. 2. 49, 121 ‘ Quas leges 1S Dio, 51. I9, 7, on the year 724, 
sociis amicisque dat is qui habet imperium — B.C. 30. See Staatsr. ii. 958. 
a populo Romano, auctoritatem legum 4 See 3. 12, I, &c. 
dandarum a senatu, hae debent et populi 18 See 4. 34, 2, &c. 
Romani et senatus existimari." 16 See 3. 70, 2, &c. 
* E.g. ‘Aes Salpensanum,' ‘Aes Ma- U As 3. 18, i, &c. !* See 3. 51, 

lacitanum,' belonging to the time of 9 See Plin. Epp. ad Trai. 31; 32; 36, 
rou See Henzen, p. 524. 57. 
* E.g. 14. 27, 2. ? By 'leges Valeriae de provocatione" 

* See Plin. Ep. ad Traj. 79. 

5 See Cic. Balb. 8, 19 ; 20, 46. 

* See 1. 58, 25; 3. 40, 2; 6. 37, 4, &c. 

' See the ‘diplomata militaria ' or 
* tabulae honestae missionis,' C. I. L. iii. 
P. 343, &c., and Wilm. go4, &c. 

* E. g. H. I. 8, 3. 

* *Adlectus inter selectos ab Imp. Caes. 
Aug. Henzen, 6158. 

' Suet. Aug. 32. 

! Dio, 53. 2, 3. 

1.75)! 

Liv. 2. 8; 3. 55; 10. 9. 

1 See Staatsr. ii. 884, and an essay by 
Mr. A. H. Greenidge in Class. Rev. viii. 
429-437. There does not appear to have 
been in the imperial constitution a formal 
or regular sovereign power of pardon, 
but as regards the revision or rescission 
of sentences, it is clear that the princeps 
had direct power over those of his own 
court or those of his vicegerents, and that 
the senate had not, according to Tacitus 
(see 3. 51, 4), any power of revising its 

zi 

Sze 

88 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VI. 

The most peculiar judicial prerogative, consisting in the right of the 
princeps to try offences of all kinds in a private court of his own, is 
traceable as early as the time of Augustus’. This court, usually, but 
not invariably *, restricted to cases of criminals of rank, probably arises 
from the validity of the * proconsulare imperium,' and consequent power 
of life and death, within the pomerium?. Its exercise was optional, 
at the request of the accuser or accused; thus Tiberius was asked 
to try Cn. Piso, and, after preliminary investigation, exercised his power 
by ‘remitting’ the case to the senate *; upon which it was his usual . 
practice to devolve judicial responsibility, even in cases most natur- 
ally belonging to, his personal jurisdiction . We find instances of 
such private trials after his retirement to Capreae *, though even then 
he more commonly calls in the consuls and senate to pass sentence on 
the record sent to them’. After him, these private courts became such 
an engine of tyranny * as to lead to a reaction at the accession of Nero* 
and again under the first Flavian Caesars *. From this high criminal 
jurisdiction flows that delegated to others, as to the * praefectus urbi ' 
at home”, and ‘legati’ in the provinces, who however were obliged to 
allow the appeal to Caesar, in capital charges affecting a Roman 
citizen >’. 

The civil jurisdiction of the princeps sitting personally, whether as 
a court of first instance or of appeal, is also found as early as the time 
of Augustus? and Tiberius *. This also might be, and was delegated, 
with appeal from the delegate to the delegant. "On this subject most of 
the information comes from jurists of much later date °°. 

We also trace an informal board of assessors as well as üderatess 
from the earliest date!* till the retirement to Capreae, and again under 

own sentences, and that any subsequent 
decree of restitution must have been, like 
all other decrees, subject to the emperor's 
permission, if not actually originated. by 
him. For instances of pardon, see t 31, 
1; 12. 8, 3; 13. 11, 25 14. 12, 6; "E f 
€2, 3. In saying (Cl. 12) that Claudius 
restored no exiles without authority of 
the senate, Suet. seems to note something 
exceptional (cp. Vita Antonini Pii 6, 3), 
however the action without it might be 
a stretch of power. 

! Suet. Aug. 32. Staatsr.ii. 959. Some 
consider this meant by the power éxxAgróv 
wp i given in 724, B.C. 30 (Dio, 51. 
19, 7). 

? Suet. Aug. 51. 

3 ore: 83, and cp. H. 3. 68, 3; 
Dio. 53. 17, 6; 32, 5. | 

* See 3. 10,6. * Relationem remittere" 

isa ioecisl privilege of the princeps. Lex 

de Imp. ep 5. Cp. Plin. Epp. 4. 9, 1 

* accusatus . .'ad senatum remissus diu 
pependit.' 
pu. * See 6. 10, 2. 

' See 6. 47, 4, &c. 

* For instances under Claudius, see 11. 
2, I, &c. 

: See 13. 4, 2. 

10 Suet. Tit. 9; Dio, 67. 2, 

6, 11, 4. A collision of ‘his juris- 
diction with that of the praetor is noted 
in 14. 41, 2. 

! Acts 22, 24; Plin. ad Trai. 96, 4. 

18 Va]. Max. 7. 7, 4 ; Suet. Aug. 33. 

14 3, 48, 1. For the practice of Claudius, 
see 12. 43, 2, and note. 

15 See Staatsr. ii. 974 foll. 

!* Suet. Aug. 33; Ann. 3. 10, 6; Dio, 
57. 7 3 

Cmar. Vi.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 89 

Claudius!; which passed, at a later time, into a permanent body of 
salaried jurists ?, 

This body is distinct from the more definite political committee of 
twenty senators, regularly appointed in virtue of magistracy or by lot’, 
for discussion of questions to be afterwards submitted to the full house *; 
though these persons might also occasionally act as judicial assessors 5. 
These again must be distinguished from the confidential advisers of the 
princeps, as Sallustius Crispus, Seneca, &c., and from the cabinet council 
of ‘proceres’ summoned on emergencies *. 

Notwithstanding these powers, the early ‘princeps’ has no such 
monarchy as that of Diocletian or Constantine ; nor, on the other hand, 
does the principate follow the democratic lines traced by the dictator 
Caesar, whose memory Augustan literature seems to have been instructed 
rather to obliterate than to glorify *. 

The popular assemblies, suspended by the triumviri, restored, but 
gradually controlled by Augustus*, are practically abolished at his 
death *. From this time, whatever share they may have retained in the 
forms of legislation ', their most important function, that of electing 
the magistrates of the state, survives at most in the plebiscite, following 
a 'senatus-consultum,' by which tribunician power is conferred on the 
princeps or his associate!!; or, in other elections, in a mere formal 
' renuntiatio' of the choice made by the senate ?, The importance of 
this change is only paralleled by the ease with which it appears to have 
been effected. 

While the people thus cease to have any direct share in government, 
and find their only representation in the democratic side of imperialism, 
the Caesars have made their peace with the aristocracy, and in outward 
form share a dual government with it. There are two sets of magis- 
trates; on the one hand, the old republican and senatorial hierarchy of 
consuls, praetors, &c.; on the other, the praefects and other delegates 
of the princeps: the former, as of old, elected to office, grouped in 
' collegia, partitioning duties by lot, with annual tenure: the latter 

! Dio, 60. 4, 3. ? Staatsr. ii. 989. by Gaius (Suet. Cal. 16) hardly needs 

* Dio, 53. 21, 4. 
* Suet. Aug. 35. 5 Dio, 1. 1. 

$ See 15. 25, 2, and note, and the mock ' 

representation of such a ‘concilium’ as 
summoned by Domitian in Juv. Sat. 4, 
where it consists of the praef. praetorio, 
praef. urbi, and seven leading senators. 

7 The silence of Horace, and reserve of 
Vergil, respecting him, have been often 
remarked. 

*. Suet. Aug. 40, 56 : see Staatsr. ii. 916. 

? 1, 15, I... The shortlived restoration 

mention. 

10 * Senatus consulta’ and *leges" are 
still formally distinct (see 4. 16, 4, &c.), 
but the former often take the place of the 
latter (see 12. 7, 3, and note): the mode 
of enactment of the few * leges' cited as 
belonging to the time of Tiberius, such as 
the * lex Iunia Norbana’ and ‘lex Visellia,’ 
is unknown. For a few later * leges! see 
D. of Ant. s.v. ‘lex,’ p. 34. 

11 See above, p. 84. 

13 Dio, 58. 30, 4; Suet. Dom. 10. 

i 

| 

SS Ret 

go INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VI. 

appointed by Caesar, having no colleagues’, with duties specifically 
assigned by him, and holding office during his pleasure. 

The old magistrates are indeed styled ‘mere names?;' still it is 
admitted that, in the best days of Tiberius, ‘consuls and praetors had 
their proper state, even the lesser magistrates had their powers in 
exercise *;' and this admission can be supported by detail. 

The office of consul, though no longer, as a rule, tenable throughout 
the year, and lowered as a distinction by the multiplication of ‘ consules 
suffecti, or of ‘consulares’ who had received only the ‘ ornamenta,' yet 
shares such dignity as remains to the senate ; with whom the consuls are 
the official channel of communication ‘, and its regular presidents when 
it meets either as a deliberative * or judicial* body. They can also still 
issue edicts to the people’, and a survival even of their old summary 
power of life and death is yet traceable*. It is indeed probable that the 
. Other magistrates, both through increase of their number, and through 
transference of many of their duties to imperial officers, must have often 
had merely honorary functions; stil, of the twelve praetors, the two 
foremost have their old ‘ iurisdictio * and others preside at the ‘ quaes- 
tiones perpetuae ';’ also the important charge of the aerarium !!, and -he 
‘cura ludorum,’ transferred from the aediles!?, belonged to this body. 
The aediles, of whom probably two were curule and four plebeian, 
though no doubt relieved of their ‘cura annonae' by the * praefectus,' 
retain a certain ‘cura urbis' with power to regulate markets and prices ", 
to control places of public resort !*, and to impose fines '5. 

The ten tribunes of the people appear still to have retained their seat 
of honour in senate !* and theatre "*, their viatores ??, and also their ‘ ius 
relationis *, and some coercive powers”, and, on sufferance, even their 

! A solitary exception is shown in the 
'* praefectura praetorii, usually shared 
between two. 

" * Eadem magistratuum vocabula" 1. 
3; f: 

> 4. 6, 3. 

* See 1. 73, 3; 6. 39, 2, &c. 

5 See 1. 13, 4, &c. They could initiate 
without the princeps, but gene shrunk 
from doing so: see 13. 20. 2 ; 14. 49, 2. 

6 See 1. 73, 3; 2. 28, 45; 50,2; 3. 10, 
I, &c. 

7 6. 13, 3. 

8 See 2. 32, 5. Even the powers con- 
ferred by the old * ultimum senatus con- 
sultum ' are still, by a fiction, treated as 
inherent in their office, 4. 19, 2. On the 
connexion of these powers with the 
criminal jurisdiction of the senate, see 
below, p. 93. 

® See Ann. I. 15,5; Agr. 6, 4. 

19 See Staatsr. ii. 201. 

! p, 75, 4; Suet. Aug. 36. For sub- 
sequent changes under Claudius and Nero, 
see 13. 29, 2. 

9? Dio, 54. 2,3. See Ànn. 1.15, 5 ; 77, 
2, &c. 

18 See 3. 52, 3, &c.; Suet. Tib. 34; 
Claud. 38. 

M As baths (Sen. Ep. 86, 10), popinae 
(Mart. 5, 84, &c.), and lupanaria (Ann. 2. 
85,2) 

15 See 13. 28, 4, and on their office to 
burn books, 4. 35, 5. 

6 Suet. Claud. 23. 

17 Dio, 49. I5, 6. 

18 Ann. 16. 12, 2. 19 6. 12, 1. 

? On the powers of this kind still left 
to them, see 13. 28 and notes; Plin. Epp. 
T. 23, 23 9. 13, 19. 

Cuar, VI.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 9t 

* intercessio !.' Of the quaestors, two are charged with communication 
between Caesar and the senate?; four, until the time of Claudius, have 
* provinciae" in Italy*; one is attached to each consul‘; one accom- 
panies the proconsul to each senatorial province*. This office would be 
always keenly sought 5, as admitting to the senatorial rank with all its 
duties and privileges; the praetorship and consulship, again, would be 
the highest objects of senatorial ambition, not only as adding to the 
‘ nobilitas? of families, but as stepping-stones to provincial governments ; 
the praetorship to those of the second rank, the consulship, both to the 
greater Caesarian provinces and to the great senatorial prizes of Asia 
and Africa". On the other hand, the offices of aedile and tribune, 
though one or other seems usually to have formed part of the ‘ cursus 
honorum $' had so far fallen into disrepute, that properly qualified 
candidates were apt to be wanting?. The lesser magistracies, held 
before the quaestorship, and often, collectively designated as the ‘ viginti- 
viratus '^'' consisted of four separate boards. (1) The * tresviri capitales ' 
were still charged with the duty of executing capital sentences, burning 
books, &c. "; but their summary jurisdiction at the Moenian column” 
soon probably wholly or mainly passed to the praefectus urbis. (2) 
The ‘tresviri monetales,' or ‘ tresviri aere argento auro flando feriundo ’ 
must have had their office restricted to the copper coinage still struck by 
the senate. Their names disappear from the coinage from and after 
the later years of Augustus '*, (3) The 'quattuorviri viis in urbe pur- 
gandis' appear to have been subordinate officers to the aediles !*. (4) 
The ' decemviri stlitibus iudicandis, a very old separate board, became 
now presidents of the centumviral courts !5, It is evident that all these 
greater and lesser magistracies filled considerable departments of the 
home government; and it is also known that the concurrent, and, ulti- 
mately, encroaching functions of Caesar's ' praefecti at home and 

Probably patri- 

1 See above, p. 84, also 6. 47, 1, and 
H. 4. 9, 2 (according to Mommsen the 
last known instance). On an attempt to 
make the intercession a reality, see 16. 
26, 6. 

? The *quaestores Caesaris! or ‘ Au- 
gusti, See16.27,2, and note, Suet. Tib. 6. 

3 See on 4. 27, 2. 

* See 16. 34, 1: perhaps two (cp. Dio, 
48. 43, 1). 

5 1. 74, 1 ; Agr. 6, a, &c. 

* This is implied in 11. 23, 3, &c.- 

7 The mere * ornamenta consularia ' or 
* praetoria,' which might be given to non- 
senators (see 12. 21, 2, and notes), would 
be honorary only and would not be a title 
to provincial governments. 

* See Agr. 6, 3, &c. 
cians, who could neither be tribunes nor 
plebeian aediles, passed at once from 
quaestors to praetors. 

* This is stated of the tribuneship (Suet. 
Aug. 40;, and of the aedileship (Dio, 55. 
24,9). An attempt was made to ennoble 
this office by its tenure by Agrippa, al- 
ready a consular (Dio, 49. 43, 1), and 
Marcellus (Ann. 1. 3, 1). On the tribune- 
ship, see also Plin. Epp. 1. 23. 

10 See 3. 29, 1; Dio, 54. 26, 6. 

BY Bs Oy AS Agh 3, T 

1? Cic. Div. in Q. Caec. 16, 50. 

13 Staatsr. ii. p. 602. 

* [ex Iulia mun. 50; Staatsr. ii. p. 603. 

15 Suet. Aug. 36; Dio, 54. 26, 6. 

92 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

procurators abroad began by being far less than they ultimately 
became '. 

Thus the two classes of magistrates coexisted ; and a similar duality 
pervades the whole government. We have the two classes of provincial 
governments; the senatorial proconsuls, appointed by lot, with annual 
tenure; and Caesar's legati and procurators, specially designated, and 
continuing during his pleasure. "There are two judicial systems ; on one 
side the consular-senatorial high court, the tribunals of the praetor and 
iudices, and of the centumviri; on the other, the personal court of the 
princeps and those of his delegates. There are two treasuries, each of 
which receives and expends public money ?; even two coinages, as the 
princeps coins gold and silver, and the senate copper °. 

In some departments, indeed, of the thus divided government the 
senate has, in outward show, more even than its old constitutional 
power‘. In form, since the abolition of the comitia, it elects the magis- 
trates of the state, who, through such election, themselves become 
senators; and its decrees gradually take the place of formal laws*. In 
form, again, even the choice of a princeps rests with it. In several other 
departments, its formal powers, if not increased, are yet retained*. The 
domestic history of this period is still mainly a record of its debates and 
decisions ; nor is the right to express opinion limited strictly to the 
question before the house’. Formally, again, it is still the fountain of 
" honour ; triumphs* and triumphal insignia *, days of public rejoicing '? 
and other compliments to the ruling family", public. funerals *? and 
other memorials to the dead ?, are awarded by its decree. By its decrees, 
again, vices !*, disorder *, unlawful religions?*, are repeatedly rebuked or 
dealt with, 

Still more remarkable is the institution and development at this time 
of the senatorial high court of criminal judicature ", whose proceedings 
occupy so large a space in the history of this period. It may not im- 

1 On the praef. urbis, see 6. 11; on the * See the distinction of departments 

praef. praetorio, 4. 2; on the original 
functions of procurators, 4. 15, 3; on a 
later assignment of jurisdiction to them, 
12. 60, I. 

* The fiscus is probably not recog- 
nized as a public treasury before the 
pr of Claudius: see vol. ii. Introd. 

. 28. 

3 See Staatsr. ii. 1025, &c: 

* On the whole subject of the senate 
under the emperors, only a general refer- 
ence can here be given to Staatsr. iii. 
1252 foll. 

5 See on 4. 16, 4. 

laid. down in Nero's opening speech (13. 
4, 3), and the subjects mentioned in 13. 
49; 2. 
7 See 2. 33, 25 38, 33-3- 34, 1, &c. 
* 1. 55, 15 3-11, 1. E 
I. 72, 1 ; 2. 52, 9, &c. 
- 32, 35 3-47, 3, &c. 
- 14,15 3-57, 23 64, 3, &c. 
. 48, 15 4.15, 3; 6. 11, 7, &c. 
. 83, 2; 4. 9, 2, &c. 
. 33, 15 85, 1, &c. 
«20553 4-14.43 6. 13, 3, &c. 
"a. 33, 8; 85, 5; &c. 
7 See Staatsr. ii. 118-125. 

9 
10 

ne 
bo 
mt © & O9) m" v9 

Cuar. VIL] CONSTITUTION OF THE. EARLY PRINCIPATE. 93 

probably have arisen out, of a survival of the old criminal jurisdiction of 
the consuls ', the senate being conceived as his assessors, as the ‘iudices’ 
were those of the praetor?; and cases could be brought. before either of 
these courts or the personal court of the princeps*. In practice, the 
senate becomes under Tiberius by far the most important criminal 
tribunal of the state, dealing generally with the greatest‘, especially 
with political, offences, and with criminals mostly of senatorial or eques- 
trian rank or family 5. The court is competent to refuse to receive 
a case *, and has some discretion in respect of sentence onthe accused * 
or amount of recompence to the informer 5, but is described as powerless 
to reconsider a sentence once passed °. 

Abroad, though no longer controlling the greater provinces, it formally 
retains its old power over those remaining to:it. To these it appoints 
governors, as of old, by lot or otherwise '°; from these it receives all 
deputations for redress of grievances; ‘one such scene, that of the 
audience of the many embassies on the right of asylum, being described 
as unusually impressive“. Petitions, at other times, are addressed to it 
for relief of burdens ??, and for erection or restoration of temples ? ; and 
judicial questions of boundary '*, or property 5. We have even survivals 
of the old correspondence with foreign princes '*, and embassies of honour 
to such as have deserved well of Rome ". 

The princeps keeps the senate constantly informed by reports of all 
the more important occurrences in the provinces ? ; and it surprises us to 

! See above, p. 76, note 4. 

? The magistrate presiding appears no 
less bound by their decision, which was 
sometimes, but not as a rule, given on 
oath (see I. 74, 5 ; 4. 21, 5). The process 
is called technically * cognitio patruin,’ as 
distinct from the ‘iudicia’ of the praetor’s 
court. See 1.75, 1. 

* This may be illustrated by the trial 
of Piso, who at first assumes or affects to 
assume that the process will be the or- 
dinary ‘ quaestio de veneficiis' before the 
praetor (2. 79, 2). Trio lays a charge 
before the consuls, when: by another move 
it is carried before the princeps, who 
after an informal hearing ‘remits’ it to 
the senate (3. 10), choosing this course 
rather than that of sending it to the 
praetor (3. 12, 10). It is implied that 
any of these three tribunals could have 
heard the case. 

* That it was not restricted to these 
would appear from 3. 22, 1; 14. 40,1; 
H. 4. 45, 1, &c.: see Staatsr. ii. 120. 

5 Criminals of lower rank are mentioned 
in 2. 32, 5; I5. 20, I, &c., also foreign 

princes 2. 42, 5; 67, 3, &c., also slaves 
(14. 42, 2) or rreedmen (Plin. Epp. 8. 14, 
12) of senators. 
© 4. 21, 45; 13. IO, 3. 
t , 9. 50, &c. 
Q4 20, 3, &c. 
? 3. 51, 4. See above, p. 87, note ar. 

V See 3. 32, 1; 35, 1; 58, 1, &c. 

M 3. 60, 6. 

7 1,276,4; 2. 47, 35 4. 13, 13 12. 58; 
61; 62, &c. On such questions the 
initiative appears usually to rest with 
Caesar. 

u 4155: 3511 45 65 55,1 

! 4. 43,1. * 4: 43, T. 

* 2. 88, r. Embassies from foreign 
powers, though addressed to the princeps, 
are sometimes heard by him before the 
senate: see I2. IO, 1, and note. 

17 4, 26, 4. 

?* On the constant consultation of the 
senate by Tiberius, see Suet. Tib. 39 
Dio, 57. 7, 2. He reports to it on the 
suppression of the mutiny (1. 52, 2), the 
state of the east (2. 43, 1), the Gallic 

rebellion (3. 47, 1), &c. Subsequently 

94 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar, VI. 

find, that even on purely military questions, though their unasked inter- 
ference is resented’, they are represented as sharing a responsibility *. 

To maintain such double government in true equilibrium would be 
impossible, even if honestly attempted ; but the hollowness of this ap- 
: parent duality is clearly seen, not only in that the power of the sword is 
wholly excepted from it, but also in the securities taken by the princeps 
to ensure a subservient senate. - 

Admission to this body, as well as promotion to its higher ranks, was 
ordinarily gained through magistracy ; and the abolition of the comitia 
would have left the senate self-elective, were not the choice of candidates 
influenced in two distinct modes by Caesar. 

(1) Any influential citizen in the old Republic might informally com- 
mend a candidate, by introducing him to the tribes, and canvassing for 
him. Augustus originally supported his friends in this manner?; but in 
and after 761, a.p. 8, a formal written * commendatio ' is substituted *. 
Henceforth in each election we have * candidati Caesaris 5 in respect of 
whom the comitia, and afterwards the senate, have a mere congé d’¢lire®; 
and this right of * commendatio ' is strictly guaranteed in the ‘lex’ con- 
ferring the principate at each succession". "The proportion of such 
candidates is definite, and not large ; in the quaestorship apparently only 
two* out of twenty *, in the praetorship four out of twelve '^; with some 
unknown proportion of tribunes and aediles !'. 

(2) The presiding magistrate at the old comitia could always refuse to 
receive the name of, and reject votes tendered for, an unqualified candi- 
date ?. Out of this grew a right, claimed by Caesar as chief magistrate, 
to ‘nominate’ candidates, as well as to * commend 5^ Such * nominatio,' 
made by publishing a list of candidates, implied no more than that they 
were qualified to receive votes, and might contain any number of names; 
but it was the interest, and probably a common practice, of the princeps, : 

such reports become rare except where ^ number. There was also right of commen- 

request is made for a decree of triumphal 
honours. See Staatsr. ii. 957.' 

1 6.5, I. 

* I. 25, 3; 26, t. 
probably insincere. 
presents the senate as partly responsible 
for the choice of Cn. Piso as legatus of 
Syria (3. 12, 2). 

3 aet Aug. 56. 

* Dio, 55. 34, 3. A return to the prac- 
tice of the dictator (Suet. Jul. 41): see 
Staatsr. ii. 921. 

5 Vell. 2.124, 4. Cp. Ann. t. 15, 2, &c. 

* ‘Sine repulsa et ambitu designandos ' 
Ann. 1.1. | 

? 'The lex de Imp. Vesp. 12, fixes no 

The words are 

Tiberius also re- 

dation to priesthoods : see on 3. 19, I. 

* ‘Quaestores Caesaris ' and ‘ quaestores 
candidati Caesaris" are generally identified, 
Staatsr. ii. 529. 

* 11. 22,9. The doubling of the number 
by the dictator Caesar (Dio, 43. 47, 2) was 
probably not permanent. 

V 1,15,2. The number 12 is sometimes 
exceeded. See on 2. 32, I. 

! As to tribunes and aediles, it is only 
known that some were *candidati Cae- 
saris. See Staatsr. ii. 926. 

 E.g. Liv. 7.22; 9.46. The phrase 
is ‘accipere nomen’ or * rationem habere 
alicuius.' See also Vell. 2. 92, 3. 

? See Dio, 53, 21, 7 ; 58. 20, 8. 

Cua». VI.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 95 

to name no more nor fewer candidates than there were vacancies! ; and 
thus to reduce the whole election to a sham; for, though the presiding 
consul had probably power to publish a supplementary list?, those 
‘nominated’ by Caesar would be sure of preference. In the choice of 
consuls this mode of influence seems to have been adopted. There is 
no trace of formal * commendatio,' or of special * candidati Caesaris ' for 
this office, but care seems to have been taken always to control the 
elections by nominating only two candidates *. 

Again, candidates for the quaestorship, which gave admission to the 
senate, must have been * tribuni militum," or have served on the ‘ viginti- 
viratus 5/ and had usually filled both positions. Of these qualifications, 
the first, as a military rank, could clearly be only obtained with consent 
of Caesar *. 

Besides those entering the senate through magistracy, others are men- 
tioned in inscriptions, as early as the time of the censorship. of Claudius 
and that of Vespasian, as ‘adlecti a principe®,’ and names were no 
doubt added at the ‘lectiones senatus' held by Augustus’. Such 
'adlecti have usually a rank assigned as if they had been qualified by 
office *. The exclusion of senators on the annual revision of the list 
has been already mentioned, as well as the constant control of that body 
by the rights of ‘relation’ and ‘intercession *;' to which may be added 
the power of preventing obnoxious senators from drawing lots for 
provinces "^. 

The duality of government is thus shown to be fictitious; but it was 
the policy of most principes, especially of Augustus and Tiberius, to lay 
‘public affairs and the most important matters relating to individuals’ 
before the senate, *to allow the chief men to debate, and even to check 

their servility".’ Besides the formal share of government already men- 

! See 1. 14, 6. 

2 The language of Plin. Pan. 69 appears 
to imply that those who were neither 
‘commended’ nor * nominated ' by Caesar, 
had yet hope of election. See Staatsr. 
ii. 918, 1. 

3 See on 1. 81. Afterwards they seem 
more directly appointed by Caesar. See 
H. 1. 77, 2; 2. 71, 3; Staatsr. ii. 924. 

— * See on 3. 29, 1. : 

5 In form, some are still ‘a populo,’ 
others * Augusti. See Marquardt, Staatsv. 
ii. p. 365. Another mode by which em- 
perors designated young men of senatorial 
families for a senatorial career was by the 
bestowal of the ‘latus clavus’ (Staatsr. 
ii. 920) before or at the time of the mi- 
litary tribuneship (see above, p. 2, note 3). 

* Henzen, Inscr. 6005, &c. Staatsr. 
ii. 939. After the time of Domitian, 
‘adlectio’ is made without any special 
ceasorial power. 

7 See above, p. 85, and Mon. Anc. 
ii. I. 

* «Inter. tribunicios,’ ‘ praetorios,’ &c. 
Orell. Inscr. 1170, &c. ‘Adlecti inter 
consulares" are not found till the third 
century. Staatsr. ii. 942. 

? See above, p. 84. 

? Ann. 6. 40, 3. Another means of 
control over the senate consisted in the 
appointment by Caesar of the registrar 
of their ‘acta’ (5. 4, 1), so as to ensure 
suppression of obnoxious records. 

| 4. 6, 2. See especially Suet. Tib. 
30. 

96 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VI. 

tioned as left to them, we find, as an additional recognition of their 
dignity, that even the commanders of the legions, and the governors of 
the greater Caesarian provinces, in whose choice the Senate has no 
share, are yet always chosen from its ranks!. "The subsequent gradual 
decay of its power is due to its own increasing incapacity, as well as to 
the encroachments of the emperors 2 

Similar prudent moderation marks the position and demeanour of the 
early Caesars in other respects; notwithstanding that Oriental ideas of 
monarchy could not fail to modify the professed idea of the Augustan 
constitution, whereby the princeps was but the first citizen of Rome *. 
The sacrosanctity not only of his person, but of his effigy *, the reverence 
paid to it and to his name, could not long remain dissociated from ideas 
of royalty. The vast patronage at his disposal would of itself surround 
him with the atmosphere of a court and its crowd of petitioners for 
favour®. His daily levee was thronged by magistrates and senators of 
highest rank, as those of other Roman nobles by their humble clients ; 
while the assemblage on greater occasions approached a national 
gathering *. The ‘cohors amicorum, though an old Republican insti- 
tution, acquires a new significance, and has its hierarchy of grades, 
grounded partly on the rank or official position, but chiefly on the actual 
personal intimacy of the friend’. The interchange of presents on gala 
days °, the invitation to occasional banquets °, the selection of a person 
as a companion in travel’, were valued. as marks of special favour ; 
the formal renunciation of friendship was tantamount to a sentence of 
banishment”. Yet, on the other hand, the early princeps disclaims the 

public title of ‘dominus™;’ nor has he throne or diadem, but the familiar 

! Senators were altogether excluded from 
the provinces (increasing in importance 
after Angustan times) held by procurators, 
and from the still more important govern- 
ment of Egypt. 

* See Vol. ii, Introd. 35, Hirschfeld, 
283 foll. We can thus understand Nero's 
threat (Suet. Ner. 37) to abolish the 
senate and govern the empire wholly 
through knights and freedmen. 

* For a full account of the court of the 
princeps and its ceremonial, see Fried- 
laender, Sitteng. i. ch. 2, Staatsr. ii. 833 
foll. The subject belongs chiefly to a 
later period. It may here be mentioned 
that Tiberius prohibited the daily kiss, 
apparently introduced from the East by 
Augustus, and limited the gifts (‘strenae’). 
Sce Suet. Tib. 34. 

* See 3. 36, 1, and note. 

5 See the reasons for retirement, pressed 
on Tiberius by Seianus (4. 41, 4). 

$ See Dio, 56. 26, 3, &c. 
? On the distinction * primae et secundae 
admissionis' and the republican prece- 
dents, see Friedl. l.1. p. 119, who also 
gives a full list of the friends of the 

. Caesar, from the time of Augustus, p. 

182 foll. 

* Especially on the 1st of January. See 
Dio, 54. 35, 2, &c. 

? * Solennes cenae' (Suet. Tib. 34). 

10 The ‘comitatus’ usually included 
senators and knights, and others of 
neither rank, who are rather ‘ grati’ than 
‘amici.’ See note on 4. 58, 1; also Suet. 
Tib. 46. 

11 See 3. 24, 5. The banishment of 
Ovid was more formal, but apparently 
by mere command, without judicial pro- 
cess. 

13 3, 87, 2 (where see note). On the 
use of this title in ordinary life, see 
Friedl. i. p. 393 foll. 

Cur, V.]. CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 97 

curule chair, the laurel-wreath and lictors!. His household troops keep 
the old title of * cohors praetoria, Nor is Dio right in representing him 
as ‘legibus solutus?;' his special exemption from some laws? implying 
that he is bound by all others. Again, his family have no dignities 
except by special decree. Livia, the type in early times of exceptional 
female privilege, received tribunician sanctity, and was màde ‘sui iuris ' 
in her husband's lifetime *: her honours at his death were strictly 
limited5; her deification at the üme of her death refused *; her political 
infliénce was only personal: not till after Domitian docs * Augusta’ 
become a regular title’: only Agrippina seems substantially to share 
the power of husband or son, and to be in very deed an *empress*:"' 
the association of the sisters of Gaius in the oath? seems a mere freak 
of power: sons of the ruling house are no more than, and are not 
always, ‘ principes iuventutis "' in youth; and are afterwards enabled 
only by special decree?! to forestall the lawful age for magistracies: the 
households of Caesar are at first no greater than those of other eminent 
citizens 2; his secretaries, accountants, &c., no higher than freedmen. 
It was however inevitable that the extreme importance of the office 
should exalt its holder, and we find by the time of Claudius that his 
three principal freedmen, especially the chief treasurer of his ‘ fiscus,’ 
have become the most important functionaries in the state '? 

Nor could the princeps formally name a successor; much as he could 
do indirectly to guide the choice of one. The person left heir in his 
will had a position of vantage by succeeding to the ‘ aad in which 
public money was mingled with the ‘res privata principis:’ yet neither 
Livia'* nor Tiberius Gemellus!* acquired by heirship any share of 
empire. An act of adoption by the princeps is figuratively called by 
Tacitus * comitia imperii '5;" but such adoption was not limited to one” 

1 See Staatsri ii. 806. 

cver from I4. 7, 5, that the praetorians 
* Did; 53. 18, 1, 

were «toti domui obstricti ' in Nero's 

* See Lex de Imp. Vesp. 24. For the 
language of later jurists see Staatsr. ii. 
751. It is noted that the emperor had 
no constitutional power to depose a 
magistrate except by passing a ‘lex: 
see Ho 5$. 35 4c. 45-2) Staats, ii. 

30. 

. Dio, 49. 38, 1 (719, B.C. 35). Octavia 
received the same privilege with her. 

* 1. 8, 2; 14, 1. On subsequent marks 
of respect, see 3. 64, 3; 71,15; 4. 15, 4; 
16, 6 

9:5; 22 1. 

7 Staatsr. ii. 821. 

* On  Agrippina's ascendency, see 
vol. ii. Introd. p. 43 foll., 53 foll. 

? Suet. Cal. 15. It would seem how- 

VOL. I. 

time. 

10 See on I. 3, 2; 12. 4I, 2. 

7 See on 3. 29, I 12 See 4.6, 7. 

73 See vol. ii. Introd. p. 38, Staatsr. 
ii. 836 foll., px passim. Vi- 
tellius (H. 1. ob) and after him 
Hadrian, MA 'a recognition of the 
importance of these offices by giving them 
to knights. 

14 See 1. 8, 1; Suet. Aug. Ior. 

‘5 Suet. Tib. 76. In this case the will 
was set aside. 

HOH 1.14.1 

17 Gaius and Lucius were adopted to- . 
gether (see on I. 3, 2), as were afterwards 
Tiberius and Agrippa Postumus (Suct. 
Tib. 15). 

98 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

and hardly receives its full significanee till the adoption of Trajan. 
Similarly the title of * princeps iuventutis though sometimes taken to 
mark out a successor!, might be shared by more than one?, and was 
usually dropped at manhood. Far more influence would be exerted 
by the association of an intended heir in the ‘ proconsulare imperium,’ 
or 'tribunicia potestas, or, as was the case with Tiberius, in both *. 
But this step was rarely taken, and might even be dangerous, for not 
every heir could be so trusted *. * Proconsulare imperium’ seems indeed 
capable of degrees, and was given to Germanicus *, probably to Drusus °, 
probably also to Seianus’, in a lower form than the full ‘consortium’ 
held by Tiberius? with Augustus. The tribunician power seems to be 
treated as more significant, and is shared still more sparingly; with 
Augustus only by Agrippa and Tiberius, with Tiberius only by Drusus *; 
never again, till shared by Titus with Vespasian?: and even Tiberius, 
when first admitted to share that power, must have felt that others stood 
nearer to the succession than he. 

But whatever the position of the expectant successor, the formal 
choice lay with the senate, and its ratification with the comitia !!, and 
the powers were again defined at each succession’. In any case, the 
principate is no monarchy in which 'the king never dies;' there is 
always an interval, during which its character as an excrescence of the 
revolution reappears, in that no ' interrex' is needed as if the republic 
had been left without chief magistrates. The competence of the consuls 
still survives; to them a living princeps can pretend ™, or even offer '* 
to resign; and at his death they carry on government during the 
interval ^, and the form of the constitution is still complete. 

The senate again at these epochs may assert itself by * condemning 
the memory !*' of the dead, whether by omitting his name from the list 

! Gaius Caesar is called *iam desig- 
natus princeps' in the cenotaph of Pisa, 
Orell. 643 ; Wilm. 883. 

? As by Gaius and Lucius. 

* See on I. 3. 3. 

* See on 3. 56, 3. 

5 See 1. 14, 4. It was not valid in the 
East without a fresh decree (2. 43, 2). 

* It is probable (see 1. 14, 5) that 
Drusus had it after his consulship; but 
it was not valid within the. pomerium 
(see 3. 19, 4). : So that of Nero under 
Nae was only ‘extra urbem’ (12. 
41. 2). 

7 Seianus is called * adiutor, not ‘ col- 
lega' (4. 7, 2). The term in 5. 6, 2, is 
of doubtful meaning. 

* Suetonius (Tib. 21) only speaks of 

an enactment ‘ ut provincias cum Augusto 
communiter administraret, simulque cen- 
sum ageret, but the command of the 
guard, taken at once by Tiberius after the 
death of Augustus, appears to show that 
he had also imperium within the city. 
The words of Velleius (2. 121,3), 'aequum 
ius in omnibus provinciis exercitibusque’ 
would probably imply the right to com- 
mand the praetorians. 

* See 3. 56, 5, and notes. 

10 Suet. Tit. 6. 

11 See above, p. 84. 

7 As in the Lex de Imp. Vesp. 

13 As Tiberius, 4. 9, I. - 

^ As Vitellius, H. 3. 68, 3. 

1 Ann. I. 7, 4; Dio, 60. 1, I. 

16 See Staatsr. ii. 1134. 

— — 

Cur, V.] CONSTITUTION OF THE EARLY PRINCIPATE. 99 

of precedents in the ‘lex’ of his successor’, or by the milder aripia of 
refusing deification?. Among other formidable ‘ secret principles of the 
constitution ' revealed in 821, A.D. 68, was also this, that the senate could 
even unmake and outlaw a living princeps, through the old formula, 
invoked by Tiberius against his own natural heirs?, of declaring him 
a public enemy *. 

Without doubt the early principes owed much of the stability of 
their rule to their subtle manipulation of republican ideas. Not even 
‘the extinction of the bolder spirits by proscription and battle ^, and the 
growth of ‘a generation bent on slavery 5^ helped them more than 
the homage paid at least in the letter to constitutional forms, the respect 
for which, even in the character of fictions and survivals, is so marked 
a trait of the Roman mind; especially at a time when demoralisation 
and its remedies were alike felt to be burdensome’, and men could 
neither bear complete bondage nor complete liberty 5. If Julius Caesar 
might have pleaded that he had but gone a step further on the path of 
Sulla; Augustus, with far more prudence, made a show of imitating 
the great autocrat of the aristocracy only in his wish to abdicate; while 
ruling under more skilful disguise, and with more complete precedents. 
Men might recollect, and were, no doubt, industriously reminded, that 
even his more irregular powers were severally such as their fathers had 
acquiesced in: that there had always been a constitutional right to com- 
mend and to reject candidates for a magistracy?: that the senate had 
been always in theory no more than an advising body: that a * cohors 
praetoria' was as old as the days of Scipio Africanus !?: that Gracchus 
had contemplated, and partly realised, a continuity of ‘ tribunician 
power:' that Marius and Sulla, and still more Pompeius, and yet more 
recently Cassius ", had held an ‘ imperium maius,’ embracing more than 
one province: that Pompeius again, most dangerous innovator of all, had 
been admiral of the state, with power to send his fleets where he would "^; 
and had even been consul at home, while holding ‘proconsulare im- 
perium" abroad, administered by legati in his name". It was by 

1 Thus the names of Gaius and Nero, S Oe X. 4365,93, 

Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, are omitted 
from the Lex de Imp. Vesp. The ‘re- 
scissio actorum" rested rather with the 
successor. See Suet. Cl. 11, Staatsr. ii. 
1129. 

? Tiberius, though his name was not 
omitted like those mentioned above, 
was not deified, nor were his ‘acta’ in- 
cluded in the annual oath of maintenance. 
See Dio, 59. 9, I. 

3 Suet. Cal. 7. 

* Suet. Ner. 49, Staatsr. ii. 1133. 

7 “Nec vitia nostra nec remedia pati 
possumus ' Liv. Praef. 9. 

* Imperaturus es hominibus qui nec 
totam servitutem pati possunt nec totam 
libertatem H. 1. 16, i1. 

? See above, p. 94. 

10 Festus, s. v. 

1 See Cic. Phil. 11. 12,730. 

1? *()mnes terras Cn. Pompeio atque 
omnia maria esse permissa' Cic. Leg. 
Agr. 2. 17, 46. 

13 See Staatsr. ii. 870, 3. 

100 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VI. 

a strange irony of fate that, not only demagogues, but even the last great 
champions of the ‘ optimates, supplied the leading political ideas of the 
Caesars; and that it was by weapons drawn mainly from its own 
armoury that the senatorial rule had perished. - 

CHAPTER VII. 

ON THE GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND CONDITION OF THE 
KOMAN WORLD AT THE DEATH OF AUGUSTUS, AND DURING 
THE PRINCIPATE OF TIBERIUS !. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 
Population of Rome and its classes—(a) senators, (4) knights, (c) plebs, 

(d)slaves* .. * ; ; : ; : . 100 
Police and general óondilion of the ‘by ‘i people . : i ‘ ; . 106 
Condition and population of Italy  . , ; í i; . ; . 107 
The Provinces— 

Boundaries of the empire at the death of Augustus . ‘ i 109 

List of senatorial provinces, and further account of the two Donc! 

ones, Asia and Africa ‘ A i : , ; , ] . II2 

Caesarian provinces .. : : . 116. 

General administration of provinces during. this period ; . . ly 

Dependent states and principalities. . 3 . ©. .-.. . 120 
Military and naval forces . AE PM i ; ; ; . : : od 
Consolidation of the empire . ‘ : : i ; . I29 
Approximation to unity in language, sius. sdlición , í : ; : . 130 

Ix the selection of what can here be said on this great subject, chief 
stress must be laid on the information furnished by Tacitus himself. 
Among modern works, especial obligations must be acknowledged to 
Mommsen, Rómische Geschichte, vol. v, Marquardt's Rómische Staats- 
verwaltung, and Friedlaender's Sittengeschichte, to which those who 
seek further information must be referred. 

THe Prkorrke or Rome. 

Towards the aristocracy the policy of Augustus and Tiberius was 
eminently conservative; and though many noble houses had perished in 
the: revolution, many others were saved from decay by imperial gifts’, 
sufficiently frequent to be almost regarded by a Hortensius as his right ?. 

! The changes in administration in- ? See 1. 75, 5; 2. 37, 1; Suet. 

troduced by Claudius and Nero are Aug. 4i. 
noticed in vol. ii. Introd. ch. 3. 1 26937, 7: 

* 
à 

—ÀÀ E - « > 
pum —Pm—— a ol —C— re e 

Cui VIIL.] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. | 1oi1 

Tiberius is also specially recorded to have considered nobility of ancestry 
in his award of honours'. Consequently, we still find under him not 
only the Aemilii Lepidi? and Calpurnii Pisones? holding their heads 
almost as high as under the Republic, but also many other time-honoured 
names frequent in high positions, such as those of Aurelius Cotta *, 
Cassius Longinus", Cornelius Lentulus*, Cornelius Sulla Felix’, Do- 
mitius Ahenobarbus?, Furius Camillus®, Junius Silanus'?, Mamercus 
Scaurus !, Scribonius Libo ?, Sulpicius Galba ??, Valerius Messalla !*, and 
others. Such families showed their pride of ancestry in the host of 
ancestors surrounding their atrium and paraded at their funerals!^; 
and even their unworthy members seem to have retained no small share 
of popular reverence ", Side by side with these are the houses that had 
come to the front in the revolution, as the descendants of Agrippa”, 
Pollio ?, and Taurus”, or those since ennobled, as the Vitellii ? ; while 
a Sulpicius Quirinius * under Augustus, or a Curtius Rufus? under 
Tiberius, are examples of men of the people rising to rank by personal 
energy. Such decay of old families as belongs to this stage, seems thus 
to be traceable to little else but their own hideous gluttony and luxury *?*, 
and ruinous ostentation ? ; to their vast parks and villas which helped to 
make the food of Italy dependent on wind and wave *, and which had 
seemed, even in the time of Horace, to be crowding the fish out of the 
sea and leaving on land few acres for the plough”. 

It must be borne in mind that senatorial families must have ranged in 
wealth from the bare census of a million H.S.%, exceeded by many 
knights and even freedmen, to the 4oo millions of an augur Lentulus **. 
The greatest, with their vast estates and slave-gangs in Italy and the 
provinces, and often with great sums employed in trade and usury, 
through indulgent administration of prohibitory laws? lived on a 
princely scale, and rewarded their host of retainers with almost royal 

Y 4:6, 4. 15 f, 77, 3, &c. His descendants by 

2 See 3. 22, 1; 6. 27, 5; and notes. Julia are not here meant. 

13 4.43; 4. * 1, 13, 0, Ke: 

$353; 5; oc * 6. 15, 1,6 we Se Pe ? 

$ 4. 46, 1, &c. 545,18, I, X6 ?. See Suet. Vit. 2. 

V4. 75, E, 6 9 2. 52, 5, &c. 33,4. 4 

19 2, 59, I, &c. +f gr. $t, 3. 

"V p, 13, 4, &c. He is said to have *4 3. 55, I. See Vol. ii. Introd. p. 69. 
been the last of his house. See note on 7| «Studio magnificentiae  prolabe- 
6.39, 4. bantur 1. ]. 

1? 2. I, 1, &c. 76 3. 533 55 54, 73 12. 43, 4- 

54.52, t, 6 : 7 Cp. Hor.Od. 3. 15, 1; .3- 1, 35 

^ 1, 8, 5, &c. % See note on I. 75, 5. 

> 3..27, 2, BG. V 3. 76, 4. &c. ?? See note on 3. 59, I. 

7 Sympathy is shown on this ground 8° «Neque enim quisquam tali culpa 

to the undeserving Lepida. See 3. 23, I. — vacuus' 6. 16, 5. 

4. «m 

102 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VII. 

munificence!. On the other hand, the amount of state and style of life” 
imposed even on the poorest would make many anxious to lay down 
their rank?, and many outsiders of moderate means well-satisfied not to 
enter it‘. On the whole, however, such a position was the great object 
of ambition, and admission to its ranks or a rise in them was sought by 
fair means or foul. The base side of senatorial character is abundantly 
brought before us by Tacitus ; on the other hand, it is but fair to recol- 
lect that from this class come the series of provincial governors, of 
whom few are unequal to their place, and many show high qualities of 
the soldier and statesman, while even so low a nature as that of L. Vitel- 
lius rises above itself under the responsibilities of power". At home 
again even the pliant Ateius Capito shares with his nobler rival Antistius 
Labeo the glory of founding the system of jurisprudence which forms the 
greatest legacy bequeathed by Rome to the world *. 

The second or equestrian order had also undergone many changes 
under Augustus"; who, besides reconstituting the judicial body into four 
decuriae each about 1000 strong, of whom the first three were essentially 
equestrian?*, had also reorganized and frequently revised the list of 
* equites equo publico, who, as a more select body within the mass, are 
alone properly called *equites Romani.’ Their solemn processions were 
revived?, and the expectant heirs of the empire, Gaius and Lucius, 
became their heads, under the title of * principes iuventutis 9, The ‘ius 
anulorum,’ still, as would appear, not permitted beyond this select body !!, 
was further subjected in the ninth year of Tiberius to stringent regula- 
tions respecting birth as well as census '?, Within this body again we 
find from the time of Augustus a still more select equestrian aristocracy 

! Messalinus Cotta (see on 2. 32, 2) 
was long remembered for his munificence 
(Juv. 5, 109; 7,95); which is illustrated 
by an inscription (C. I. L. xix. 2298), 
recording repeated gifts of 400,000 H.S. 
to a freedman, and other bounty to his 
family. See Friedl. i. 220. 

* In the time of Tiberius, a house 
rented at 6000 H.S. would be almost 
too mean for a senator. Vell. 2. 10, 1. 

? 1. 755 5. 

* Cp. the sentiment of Horace, Sat. 
I. 6, 100-109. | 

* 6. 32, 6. 

*;See- 3. 75. 

7 On the position of this body under 
the early empire see Staatsr. iii. 489 foll., 
and Prof. Wilkins in D. of Ant. i. 757. 

® See Pl. N. H. 33. 1 (7), 30. It would 
appear that Augustus did not really re- 
constitute the ‘tribuni aerarii, to whom, 

as representatives of the plebs, his fourth 
* decuria' practically corresponded ; but 
formed his first three * decuriae ' of senators 
and knights mixed; and that, when the 
senate itself became a judicial body, 
senators probably ceased to sit on the 
* decuriae iudicum," which thus come to 
be called ‘decuriae equitum" (3. 20, 2; 
14. 20, 7 ; Suet. Tib. 41). See Marquardt, 
Hist. Eq. Rom. p. 5o, note. Subsequently, 
the fourth ‘decuria,’ originally plebeian 
(Suet. Aug. 32), became equestrian, and 
a fifth was added by Gaius, See Staatsr. 
iii. 525 foll. 

® See on 2. 83, 5. 

19 T. 3, 2. 

4 Plin. 1.1. 

13 Plin. l.] 32. The regulation was 
futile, as freedmen and the sons of such 
constantly attained this rank ; see 13. 27, 
2, &c. 

——— : 
i rel — —— rv pir eraty rar An catt 

Cua» VIL], ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. | 103 

under the title of *equites inlustres' or other similar names!; men of 
senatorial census, or even among the wealthiest in the state?, who 
remained within the equestrian rank from choice. Of these the most 
famous was Maecenas, and those who filled similar positions in imperial 
confidence after him, as Sallustius Crispus? and Seianus, and many 
others who by filing such offices as the important ‘praefecturae’ in 
Rome * and that of Egypt? held a position superior to most senators *. 
The equestrian order was thus a gainer by the revolution, both through 
the relative depression of the order above them, and through the special 
career of emolument and distinction held out to them. Throughout 
the empire, the *societates' of persons qualified for this rank farmed the 
revenue’, and the residence of their superiors at Rome left them the 
aristocracy of municipal Italy and the provinces, and many might pass 
from the lower to the higher rank of their order by the emperor's favour. 
The gift of this higher rank, that of *Eques Romanus' in the proper 
sense, tenable for life, and always kept by the princeps in his own hands, 
opened a public career of continually increasing dignity and importance, 
starting with officerships in the army 5, and leading up, through one civil 
appointment after another, to what were in fact the most influential posts 
in the state*. Thus had the emperors set up beside the old hereditary 
senatorial nobility a personal nobility of their own creation, and turned 
to their advantage and the public service the long-standing rivalry of the 
orders ?*. 

The resident senators and knights with their wives and children, and 
many of the families of those absent on foreign service, formed an upper 
population in Rome, variously estimated at from 10,000 to nearly 50,000 !'. 
To these wealthy classes belonged most of the * domus' or palaces”, 
filling, with their gardens and grounds, so large a portion of the city ; 
which, with the great addition made by Augustus to the public buildings 

! See note on 2. 59, 4. 

? Vedius Pollio (see on r. 10, 4) was 
a knight of enormous wealth, of freedman 
parentage. Dio, 54. 23, I. 

” See 3. 30, 4 

* The * praefectus urbi’ was a senator 
of consular rank, but the ‘ praefecti prae- 
iorio, ‘annonae,’ and ‘vigilum,’ were 
knights. 

ke: Pe Pes Oe 

* See the account given of Seneca’s 
brother Annaeus Mela in 16. 17, 3. 

7 See 4. 6, 4, and note. 

* Those below equestrian rank could 
not rise above the position of centurion. 

? The equestrian ‘ cursus honorum’ may 

be illustrated by the inscription to Va- 

lerius Proculus (Wilm. 1256), who was 
successively praefectus cohortis, legionary 
tribune, praefectus classis, procurator of 
five provinces rising in importance, prae- 
fectus annonae, and lastly praefectus 
Aegypti. See also Wilm. 1249 b. Tacitus 
calls a procuratorship *equestris nobi- 
litas" (Agr. 4, 1), and the vast number 
and variety of such offices, in,and after 
the time of Claudius, will be seen from 
Hirschfeld, Untersuchungen passim. 

V Staatsr. iii. 495. 

1! See Marquardt, Staatsv. ii. p. 124; 
Friedl. i. p. 52; Dyer, Dict. of Geog. 
‘Roma,’ p. 747. 

13 On the distinction of ‘domus’ and 
* insulae,' see 6. 45, 1, &c. 

104 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VII. 

and open spaces, must have compressed into closer and closer quarters 
the vast crowd occupying the chambers in the ‘insulae’ or blocks of 
buildings, towering often seventy feet high !, where the * plebs' found such 
lodgings as they could afford, and, in the labyrinthine streets of ‘vetus 
Roma' before the fire of Nero?, lived in probably even greater dis- 
comfort than in the time of Juvenal?. The plebs, however, had its 
many grades of position within its ranks. Many must have been only 
barely below the equestrian census*, and many others, if not, like the 
senators and equites, great capitalists, must have earned in various ways 
large incomes, in the thousand callings and trades of Rome. To this 
class also belonged vast numbers, among freeborn or freedmen, of what 
are now called the liberal professions. The schoolmaster, as Orbilius ° 
or Verrius Flaccus?; the rank and file of advocates’, who managed 
cases beneath the dignity of the great senatorial pleaders; many, if not 
most of the teachers of rhetoric?; lawyers even of such reputation as 
Masurius Sabinus?, were still plebeians. Such again, prabably not so 
often freeborn Romans as freedmen or foreigners, were the architects, 
sculptors, painters, and other artists, the musicians and players!?, the 
physicians! and practitioners of the forbidden arts of astrology’? and 
magic. Another large class would include the inferior officials in the 
public service, scribes, apparitors, attendants on magistrates, and many 
other walks of middle-class life which cannot here be specified. 

Below all these lay a great mass of poverty, ranging from those who 
had more or less scanty or precarious earnings down to the beggars who, 
as now, infested the public places. For all this poorer section, one so 
large as to call itself as a whole the * plebs urbana 5 such provision as 
would answer to a modern poor law was made by the monthly corn dole 
and other occasional subsidies '*. Also large numbers of the poorer and 

1 Augustus had fixed this limit (Strab. 

5. 3, 7. p. 235), which would be far 

below the height of many houses in the, 

old city of Edinburgh. Probably this 
restriction was not always observed : see 
note on 15. 43, I. 

? 15. 38, 4; Liv. 5. 55. 

3 Juv. 3. 193-225. 

* Hor. Ep. 1. 1, 58. 

5 Id. Ep. 2. 1, 70. 

$ A freedman, whose reputation as 
a teacher induced Augustus to employ 
him to teach his sons, and who became 
a famous grammarian. Suet. de Ill. Gr. 

17. 

7 ¢Cogitaret plebem quae toga enite- 
sceret’ 11.7, 7. In the time of Juvenal 
( 7, 106, sqq.) they were an ill-paid order. 

* Blandus, in the time of Augustus, 

was the first knight who ever adopted 
this profession. See note on 6. 27, I. 

* He was made a knight by Tiberius, 
but not till -he was fifty years old. On 
plebeian lawyers, cp. Juv. 8. 49. 

!? The singer Tigellius was a Sardinian 
(Hor. Sat. 1. 3, 3); most of the *his- 
triones’ were freedmen. See notes on I. 
54, 3. &c. 

! Antonius Musa, a freedman, was 
made a knight (Dio, 53. 30, 3). .On do- 
mestic physicians, see on 4. 63, 3. . 

" As Thrasyllus (6. 20, 3). 

"^ Mommsen notes (Staatsr. iii. 461, 2) 
that in Mon. Anc. ‘ plebs quae frumentum 
accipiebat, * plebs urbana, and * plebs 
Romana’ are synonymous. 

1* It is generally supposed that these 
distributions rested on the basis of.the 

m —À e D "DEI -— nd 

Cm. VII] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. . 105 

mary also of the better classes got what they could from the position of 
clients of noble houses. On the ‘clientela’ under the empire most of 
our information is of later date; but it would seem even from Horace 
that the old ideas! and old personal relation of clientship * had passed 
away, and that already great men had their ostentatious crowds ? of such 
dependents. Still Augustan literature knows nothing of the scramble for 
the ‘sportula,’ or the ignominious position of a Trebius at the table of 
a Virro. 

Side by side with the rapidly diminishing *plebs ingenua *' was the 
swarm of freedmen. Most of these were probably still outside the pale 
of the tribes, and none had yet the political and social position in which 
this class are found a generation later*. Even at this date there are 
those whose wealth at least might vie with that of the nobles’, and great 
numbers must have belonged to professions or callings requiring high 
education and earning high payment. The remainder probably swelled 
the ranks of the client-class. Augustus endeavoured both to limit 
manumission by enactment and precept *, and also to utilise freedmen in 
the service of the state; in which they formed the bulk of the ‘ vigiles *,' 
and were even drafted wholesale into the legions after the catastrophe of 
Varus'^; while under Tiberius a large number were deported to be 
made useful or left to perish in Sardinia", and a law was passed to define 
the status of a class of this order ™. 

Any numerical estimate of the * plebs urbana’ with their wives and 
families rests almost wholly on guess-work. We cannot tell how many 

of the suburban or even nearest rural population may have helped to 

swell the numbers of the 200,000 recipients of public corn under 
Augustus ?, or the 250,000 to 300,000 sharers in his occasional ‘ con- 
giaria!*' It is therefore not surprising that calculations from such 

tribes (the richer ‘tribules’ being 7 The wealth of Licinus under Augustus 

excepted), and that it was mainly for 
this purpose that the tribal organization 
was kept up: see Staatsr. ili. 445, and 
Mr. Hardy in D. of Ant. s. v. ‘tribus.’ On 
the distinction between the cheap sale 
and gratuitous assignment of corn, see 
on 2. 87, I. 

! * Clienti promere iura* Ep. 2. 1, 104. 

? Horace gives a picture of friendly 
clientship in the later Repvblic, in the 
story of Philippus and Volteius (Ep. r. 
7, 46 foll.). : 

8 * Turba clientium ' Od. 3. r, 13. 

54.25 3. 

* ‘Those who received corn must ap- 
parently have been enrolled, and later the 
tribes were full of them (13. 27, 1). 

$ See Vol. ii. Introd. p. 38, &c. 

is proverbial (see Juv. 1, 109, and Mayor, 
ad loc.); and under Tiberius we hear of 
a freedman temporarily praefect of Egypt 
(Dio, 58. 19, 6) ; and of others, Tha!lus, 
Euhodus (Jos. Ant. 18. 6, 4, 8), and 
Nomius (Plin. N. H. 13. 65, 94), as rich 
and influential. 

5 He restricted those to be manumitted 
by will to 100, and advised his successors 
a be sparing in the practice. Dio (Xiph.) 

. 33, 3- 

] * Strab. 5. 3, 7, 235; Dio, 53. 26, 4. 

!9 * Vernacula multitudo I. 31, 4. 

1 2. 85, 5. : 

'3 «Lex Iunia Norbana, in 772, A. b. 
I9. Seeon 13. 27, 4. 

'S Mon. Anc. iii. 21. 

^ Jd. iii. 14-16. 

106 INTRODUCTION. [Cuap. VII. 

data give a result varying from more than a million to less than half 
that sum !. 

Similar uncertainty attends the attempt to estimate the mass of public 
and private urban slaves. They are generally called a vast multitude’; 
the ‘familia’ of Pedanius Secundus alone numbers 400°; still the 
majority of the plebs must have had none or next to none, and many 
poor knights or senators very few. A reasonable estimate takes them at 
800,000 or 900,000, who, with perhaps 60,000 peregrini, and a garrison 
of 20,000 *, may make up the million and a half to two millions of souls 
in Rome 5. 

To this vast crowd the chief gift of Augustus was a fairly efficient 
organization of police. The city was partitioned into fourteen * regiones, 
each allotted to the charge of one of the magistrates for the year *. 
Under these were grouped the 265 ‘vici’,’ or quasi-parochial corpora- 
tions, choosing each their four wardens or ‘ vico-magistri 5, whose duties, 
though mainly religious, were also in part constabulary ®, at least till the 
institution in 756, a.D. 6, of the * vigiles °” who were so distributed that 
each cohort, 10oo strong, had watch and ward of two regions !!, to guard 
from fire and robbety; both of which were still rife enough in crowded 
districts, and streets lit only by the poor passenger's lamp-wick, and now 
and then by the rich man's torch train 7, Besides the ‘ vigiles, the urban 
and praetorian guards were in reserve, if needed, and the police magis- 
tracy, beyond such powers as remained to aediles and other magistrates P5, 
rested with the city praefect '*. 

The principate of Tiberius seems on the whole to mark the period 
when the populace are least considered !5. They take the oath of allegiance 
at his accession !5, and then seem to retire from prominence. "They have 
no votes to sell", the general tie of clientship had thereby become 
more unmeaning, and the rabble are not yet the ‘clientela Caesaris. 

? Dio, 1.1. 

p. 52; Merivale, Hist. c. xl. p. 495, &c.; — 205. 

Dyer, 1. 1. p. 747. 10 Dio, 55. 26, 4: see Staatsr. ii. 1055, 
739,53. 85 4. 275 3 Purser, D. of Ant. s.v. ‘exercitus,’ p. 
* 14-454... 
* I.e. the vigiles, urban cohorts, and, 

! See Marquardt, ii. p. 124; Friedl. i. See Marquardt, iii. p. 

95. 
" Paulus, Dig. 1. 15, 3. See Mar- 

from the ninth year of Tiberius, nine 
praetorian cohorts. 

5 See the authorities above cited. 

$ Dio, 55. 8, 6, under the year 748, 
B.C. 6. On the organization of Rome 
generally by Augustus see Rushforth, 
Insc. p. 28 foll. 

7 Plin. N. H. 3. 5, 66. 

§ Suet. Aug. 30; Dio, 55. 8, 6. 

quardt, ii. p. 484. 

12 Juv. 3, 197, foll.; and 278, foll. 

13 See above, ch. vi. pp. 90, 91. 

M. 6. 11. It seems probable (see Staatsr. 
ii. 1032, Hirschfeld, 143, 284) that the 
administration of the city of Rome was 
modelled on that of Alexandria. 

!5 See above, p. 89. 

"pom V Juv. 10, 77. 

— ID—— iis 
"pm anestesia ea aA SS TAS Be oe 

Cu. VIIL.] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. — 107 

Their only interest is in their bread and their amusements’, and in both 
they seem to have their grievances. To keep famine at bay is indeed 
felt by the princeps to be his most arduous task ?, and to require efforts 
far exceeding those of Augustus®. Still, the cry for bread, finding 
expression at the great popular gatherings of the games, is fierce and 
even menacing *; in the general poverty even a small tax seems burden- 
some*; and, beyond doing his utmost for the food supply, Tiberius 
keeps them at a distance. The legacies of Augustus are paid grudgingly °, 
* congiaria' are infrequent’; and, though the people have the cheap 
daily lounge of their public baths, thanks to Maecenas and Agrippa, and 
their ‘circenses’ and new ‘ludi Augustales?;" yet the presence of the 
princeps at their games, if vouchsafed at all, is no longer genial*, and the 
sanguinary excitement of gladiatorial shows so rare, that crowds flock 
to one given by private speculation in the neighbourhood? Their 
moods are schooled and rebuked ? by edicts, their murmurs treated as 
vapour *, their compliments declined'*, One genuine enthusiasm, that 
for Germanicus and his house '’, seems left to them ; otherwise those for 
whom none care, care for none; and find it their one sound instinct to 
side with fortune and to hate the fallen '*; worthy parents of those who, 
half a century later, looked on civil war in the streets as only a more 
exciting gladiatorial combat "". 

ITALY. 

Few changes of importance in the administration or condition of Italy 
belong to this period. Augustus was but recognising facts already 
accomplished, in fixing the western frontier of ltaly at the line of the 
Varus (Var)?? and of the small province of the maritime Alps? : a small 
semi-independent state being reserved in the district of the Cottian Alps 
round Segusium (Susa) near Turin? On the east, Istria was included, 
the Arsia (Arsa) being fixed as the boundary towards Illyricum ?. 

1 Juv. 10, 8o. are described as ‘novarum rerum cupiens 

? 3. 54, 8; 4. 6, 6. 36. 13.2. pavidusque.' 

* Ann. I. 1. S uS. HH, 3.83. 1. 

* Dio, 57. 14, 2. 18 The restoration and extension of the 

7 See 2. 42, 1; 3. 29, 3. great Italian roads is mentioned below, 

51-1525 54,3... .*- 1954/33. 10, 6. p. r10. For a general summary see 

| 4. 62, 3; Suet. Tib. 47. Rushforth, pp. 33-42. 

58-158, 05.3.6; 15 4.07, 1. 19 Plin. N. H. 3. 5, 44; Luc. 1, 404. 

15.6, 13, 3. 35 |, 15, 2, &c. *? Ann. 15. 32, 1; H. 2. 12, 5. 

* As the title of * pater patriae! 1. 72, ?! The native prince, Cottius, ranked 
2; 2. 87, 2. as ‘ praefectus. Insc. Orell. 626. Under 

5 See 1. 33; 2.41; 82; 3. 1-6; 11; Nero it became a province. Suet. Ner. 

- 18. 

5. 3-5. 
'5 Jur. 10, 73. In 15. 46, 1, the rabble ?? Plin. N. H. 3. 5, 44. 

Lol ioc 

108 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VIT. 

Augustus had also given the peninsula its first organization as a whole, 
by mapping it out into the eleven regions recorded by Pliny!; an 
arrangement which, though probably intended only to facilitate a census, 
became the permanent basis of its administration, which in other respects 
appears to have undergone little change till the second century a.p.*. 

The probable population of Italy at this time can be barely guessed 
at?; but there is abundant evidence that the free rustic people, rapidly 
diminishing as early as the time of the Gracchi 5, and further thinned by 
civil wars, had sunk far below the number that could have been employed 
or supported; probably even below the 3«uw7 oAcyavOpenía" of the time of 
the dictator Caesar. Strabo attests the depopulation of southern Italy *: 
Livy is no less explicit on that of the central districts, and is amazed that 
the country which once sent forth the Aequian and Volscian armies could 
now barely recruit the household troops of Rome, and would be a desert, 
but for the slave-gangs’: the most eloquent words ascribed by Tacitus 
to Tiberius dwell on the scanty produce of a soil that cannot have been 
cultivated to its best*. Pliny traces the evil to the *latifundia, which 
had extinguished all careful and energetic husbandry?; the words of 
Tiberius point scornfully to the tracts made wholly unproductive by the 
noble mansions with their parks and pleasure grounds ". Probably the 
rich and fertile Transpadane district, less devastated by civil war, and 
apparently more free from the curse of the chained slave-gangs !', may 
have formed a contrast to the general state of the peninsula, in which the 
huge city, and many flourishing towns", must have made the desolation 
of other towns and of the rural districts only more evident. 

Love of country life, with its frugal simplicity and healthy habits, is 
undoubtedly genuine in Horace ; and the ideal of such a life, or of that 
of a retired Italian town, is professedly admired by many a Roman who 
knew as little of it as the money-lender Alfius", or who had little real 
intention to take refuge at Cumae with Umbricius™, or to change the 

! N. H. 3. 5, 46, &c. See Marquardt, V PL Epp. 39. 19, 7 

Staatsv. i. p. 219. 
? Spart. Hadr. 22, 13. 

* Merivale (ch. xxxix. p. 432) would 

estimate it as high as thirteen millions; 

which, when all the towns are allowed — 

for, and the rural slaves, would still 
leave the free rustic population, scanty 
for the area. But probably this total 
is far too high. 

* Plut. Ti. Gracch. 8. 

5 Dio, 43. 25, 2. 
* E. g. 6. 1, 2, 2533 3, 5, 281. 
1-6. 13, 5, 
" 3. 54, 7: Cp. I2. 43, 4, and note. 
* N. H. 18. à, 35. 1 ut 3. 54, T- 

13 Augustus, though apparently unable 
to deal with rural depopulation, must 
have materially strengthened the Italian 
townships by the twenty-eight colotties 
which he claims to have founded, and to 
have left populous and.flourishing at the 
end of his rule (Mon. Anc. v. 36). For 
the list and the difficulties respecting it, 
see Mommsen ad loc.. His politica] sa- 
gacity led him to change the established 
custom of sending the veterans of a single 
legion to one and the same place: see 
I 4. 27, 4, and note. 

53 Hor. Epod. 2, 67. 

M Juv. 3, 1, sqq. 

Cuar. VIL]. ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. | 109 

perilous distinctions of Rome for the simple duties of an aedile at 
Ulubrae’. As a fact, the tide still set from Italy, as from the rest of the 
world, to Rome: nor do sober critics in any age take the ideal pictures 
of retired life as altogether serious. However the contrasts drawn by 
Roman writers are so far substantiated, that Vespasian not only learnt, 
in a municipal home, the habits which trained him to be the reformer of 
imperial extravagance; but was also enabled, by a stream of new men 
of similar origin, to recruit the effete Roman aristocracy with an infusion 
of healthier blood ?. 

THE PROVINCES. 

The great work of Augustus in the enlargement and settlement of the 
empire can be here but very slightly glanced at. ‘There appears to be 
substantial truth in his boast that he had advanced the limits of every 
province which had independent nations on its frontier?; and if we 
were to compare the dominion as he left it with that ‘existing at the date 
of Actium, we should see to how great an extent the coherent * Imperium 
Romanum’ of our maps was his creation. ‘The conquest of Gaul had 
indeed already pushed the frontier to the ocean, but this was flanked on 
either side by an imperfectly subdued Spain and a wholly free Germany ; 
a vast, independent tract surrounded and isolated Italy itself,, Macedonia, 
and the subdued portion of Illyricum ; in the east the provinces of Asia, 
Bithynia, Cilicia, have a similar isolated and patchwork character. Nor 
in the earlier part of his sole rule, and the years preceding it, were the 
dangers of even foreign aggression in various parts by any means 
visionary. Gerrmans from beyond the Rhine ravaged Gaul*; a Dacian 
horde swept over Illyricum as far as Apollonia, and the Bastarnae over 
large parts of Thrace^; Parthia had taken advantage of the dissensions 
of the triumvirs to hold Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor for two years 
at its mercy *; in Egypt, Roman territory was invaded by the troops of 
the Nubian queen Candace’; in Africa the Garamantes and others had 
to be kept at further distance *. 

Of all the problems presenting themselves, the most important was 
that of the central European frontier, and it cannot be matter of surprise 

1 Juv. 16, 102. 5 Momins, I. 1. 21, ET. t. 15. 

? Suet. Vesp. 2; Ann. 3. 55, 4. 

5 *Omnium provinciarum populi Ro- 
mani, quibus finitimae fuerunt gentes quae 
non parerent imperio nostro, fines auxi ' 
Mon. Anc v. 9, where see Mommsen. 

* The ‘clades Lolliana’ (see on 1. 10, 3) 
is the most important of these incursions. 
See Momms. Hist. v. 23, E. T. i. 25. 

* [n 713-14, B.€. 41-40: see vol. ii, 
Introd. 97. 

7 In 730 or 731, B.C. 24 or 23: see 
Momms. l. 1. 594, E. T. ii. 275. 

* Successes were gained against these 
by L. Cornelius Balbus (735, B.C. 19) 
and others. See Momm. l. l. 630, E. T. 
li. 315. 

INTRODUCTION. (Car. VII. 

IIO 

that so cautious a ruler concentrated his attention here, and disregarded 
the Parthian and British projects of his uncle’. It is here that we find 
his chief achievements, balanced it is true by his one disastrous failure. 

When the empire came into his hands Rome had not full access even 
to the Alpine passes; on the southern slopes of which were still 
mountain tribes who plundered the Transpadana ?, and when pressed fell 
back on their brethren on the northern side; in the Greek peninsula the 
Romans were hardly masters of the Balkan (Haemus) and had little 
more of Illyricum than the borders of the Adriatic *. 

It is impossible here to trace the steps by which, mainly through the 
instrumentality of his trusted friend and son-in-law Agrippa, and of his 
stepsons Tiberius and Drusus, this state of things resulted in a succession 
of new provinces, Vindelicia and Raetia, Noricum, Pannonia, Moesia, 
all resting on the natural frontier of the Danube, now for the first time, 
and almost for its whole course, made a Roman river. 

Westward, the aim proposed, and with some exaggeration claimed as 
realised, was the establishment of an ocean frontier from Cadiz to the 
mouth of the Elbe*. The main portion of this was completed by 
Agrippa's slow subjugation of Spain 5*, and it is undoubtedly true that for 
twenty years a province of Germany from the Rhine to the Elbe was in 
existence, which, notwithstanding the disaster of Varus, Augustus still 
affects to regard as ‘de iure' Roman soil. Even after its abandonment, 
it is the military rather than the political frontier which recedes to the 
Rhine 5, and considerable territories on its right bank still are Roman’; 
and it is possible that the debateable land ® called the ‘agri decumates,’ 
afterwards enclosed in the well-known ‘limes’ connecting the Rhine and 
the Danube, may have begun at an early date to be occupied by Gauls 
under some sort of Roman protection *, 

Upon the conquests followed a great work of organization and 
settlement, which can be only briefly glanced at. The great roads 
of Italy, themselves thoroughly restored and extended”, are connected 

1 See Vol. ii. Introd. pp. 97, 127. 

? Momms. 1.1.14, E. T. i. 15. On the 
reduction and organization of the Alpine 
region, see Rushforth, p. 36 foll. 

* Momms. 1. l. p. 178, E. T. i. 19s. 

* *Gallias et Hispanias provincias et 
Germaniam qua includit Oceanus a Gadi- 
bus ad ostium Albis fluminis pacavi' 
Mon. Anc. v. 10. 

5 This was substantially completed in 
735, B.C. 19, but the country still required 
a strong garrison: see Momms. 1. l. 58, 
E. T. i. 65. 

* Allthe standing camps of the legions 
are on it. 

7 The Batavi between the branches of 
its bifurcation (2. 6, 4) and the. Frisii 
(4- 72, 1) and Chauci (1. 38, 1) altogether 
beyond it are subject, and the outpost at 
Aliso (2. 7, 4) and ‘ limites’ beyond the 
river (1. l. and 1. 50. 2) are still kept up. 

* *Dubiae possessionis solum! (G. 29, 4). 

® See G. 1. 1. and notes. 

1° Augustus himself (B.C. 27) undertook 
the restoration of the via Flaminia to 
Ariminum and required several ‘ trium- 

Car. VII.) ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. . 111 

with the Alpine passes opening out regular communication with Gaul 
and the Danubian provinces, secured by important towns, among which 
Augusta Praetoria (Aosta), at the meeting point of two great roads, 
may be specially mentioned’. In the newly won territory, Augusta 
Vindelicorum (Augsburg) is an important centre of traffic with friendly 
Germans in the time of Tacitus?. Gaul owes to Augustus its organi- 
zation *, the systematic census on which its tribute was permanently 
based *; the constitution of the diet of the sixty-four cantons®, and the 
supreme position of Lugdunum, and the worship of the emperor there 
established °. 

In the eastern portion of the empire we have no important conquests. 
Thrace was still left in what proved to be an unsatisfactory position of 
vassalage", but the empire in Asia Minor by the annexation of the 
dominions of the Galatian king and of Paphlagonia became a compact 
territory extending to the Halys and Mount Taurus*, while the great 
province of Syria, except where it touched the Euphrates, was flanked and 
protected by vassal kingdoms?. ‘To make the statement in the * Monu- 
mentum Áncyranum ??' correct, we should suppose also that the frontiers 
of Egypt had been advanced at the expense of the Aethiopian aggressors, 
and those of Cyrenaica and Africa at that of the Marmaridae and 
Garamantes. 

In the statement that at the death of Augustus the empire was 
bounded by the ocean or by distant rivers”, these provinces are left out 
of sight; but we know that in the time of Tiberius Egypt ended at 
Elephantine and Syene " and that the other African provinces must have 
been always limited to the strip possessed by Hellenic, Phoenician and 

phales’ to restore other roads from their 
* manubiae. Mon. Anc.iv. 19 and Momm- 
sen ad loc., Suet. Aug. 30. 

! See Momms. Hist. v. 17, E. T. i. 19. 

* Ge 4i, I. 

3 The subdivision of Gallia Comata into 
three provinces dates probably from 738- 
741, B.C. 16-13, orearlier. See Momms. 
Hist. v. 76, E. T. i. 84, foll. 

* See 1. 31, 2, and note. 

5 Momms. l. l. 84, E. T. i. 93, Mar- 
quardt i. 268, Rushforth, Insc. p. 16 foll. 

$ Momms. l.l. The foundation of the 
colony itself dates from 711, B.C. 43 (Dio, 
46. 50, 5). 

7 See 2. 64, 3, and note. On the sub- 
sequent annexation by Claudius, see vol. ii. 
Introd. 31. 

5 Within this area the small independent 
state of Lycia was the only exception (see 

on 13. 33; 4). 

® On the north were Cappadocia and 
Commagene (annexed to the empire in 
771, A.D. 18: see 2. 66, 4), and others 
mentioned in 4. 5, 4, and note. On the 
south, besides Judaea, the city and state 
of Palmyra, and the Nabataean kingdom, 
of which Petra is the capital, though out- 
side the actual empire, were in a de- 
pendent position. See Momms. l. l. 423, 
479, E. T. ii. 93, 148. 

1° See above, p. 109. 

11 See 1. 9, 6. Taking these to be the 
Rhine, Danube, Halys, and Euphrates, it 
has been shown that this is inexact as 
regards the first of these rivers, and it can 
be only true of a very small part of the last. 
After the incorporation of Cappadocia 
and Commagene, the Euphrates becomes 
the frontier for some three degrees of 
latitude. 

me OES, 

112 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VII. 

Libyan (or Berber) peoples’, as distinct from the abode of the Aethiopian 
and Gaetulian races. 

The most permanently important change dating from Augustus in the 
administration’ of the provincial empire is the division of it between 
himself and the senate?. Out of the distinct governments, about thirty 
in number ?, subsisting at his death, only the following, and these not at 
all times, remain in the hands of the senate: 1. Sicily; 2. Sardinia and 
Corsica‘; 3. Hispania Baetica; 4. Gallia Narbonensis; 5. Macedonia ; 
6. Achaia?; 7. Asia; 8. Bithynia (with part of Western Pontus); 
9. Cyprus; ro. Crete and Cyrenaica *; r1. Africa (with New Africa or 
Numidia) It has been mentioned above? that the governors of these 
provinces were appointed usually by lot, with annual tenure; Asia and 
Africa being reserved for consulars, the others, as a rule, given to 
‘ praetorii ;' but that both classes of governors are properly styled pro- 
consuls *, and have, as in old times, each his attendant quaestor; and 
also, in praetorian provinces one, in consular three ‘legati®;’ who are 
styled ‘legati propraetore °°,’ though. sometimes even consulars?. The 
proconsul received a salary from the treasury ? and had also the lictors 
and other insignia of his rank, except the military dress and sword, 
withdrawn to denote that he had no longer power to execute a soldier " 
Some further check was placed on him by the presence of a Caesarum 
officer, the * procurator fisci,’ whose functions, originally strictly limited ?*, 
received such extension as to encroach considerably on those of both 
quaestor and proconsul !5, | 

Some illustration of the mode of "— to and tenure of these 
proconsulates may be drawn from such lists as can be compiled of the 

! On these see Mommsen, Hist. v. 
ch. 13. The most ancient account of 
them is in Hdt. 4. 145 foll. In the 
time of Claudius this part of the empire 
was completed to the Straits of Gibraltar 
by the annexation of Mauretania : see 
vol. ii. Introd. 30. 

2 See chap. vi. p. 77, &c. 

* 'The combinations or subdivisions of 
provinces at various times make the 
number variable. At the death of Trajan, 
when the empire stood at its highest 
point, there appear to have been forty-five 
pou governments. See Marquardt, 

4 

UE dose were counted as senatorial in 
the original division, but, as a fact, were 
under Caesarian governors from A.D. 6 

to 66. See on 2. 85, 5; 13. 30, H. 

Marquardt, Staatsv. i. 248. 

5 Macedonia and Achaia were trans- 
ferred to Caesar from 768 to 797, A.D. 
15-44. See 1. 76, 4; Dio, 60. 24, 1 

$ See 3. 38, 1; 70, I. 

7 See ch. vi. pp. 92, 93. 

8 See note on I. 74, 1. 

? See on 4. 56, 3. 

10 Staatsr. ii. 246. The , Quaestor has 
also the title * pro praetore.' 

" As Vitellius, Suet. Vit. 5. 

12 * Salarium proconsulare (Agr. 42, 3); 
cp. Dio, 52. 23, 1. | 

5 Dio, 53. 13, 6. The exceptional 
position of the proconsul of Africa, in 
this respect, is noted below. See 3. 21, 1. 

* 4. 15, 3; Dio, 57. 23, 5 

15 The great increase in the number 
and importance of these officers begins 
to date from Claudius: see 12. 60; Suet. 
Cl. 12. 

ed 

D WE SENE e SAEC qm Á Nee — A — ae 

— a mr "Án 

Cur. VII.) ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 113 

proconsuls of Asia and Africa in the time of Tiberius. In Asia the 
following can be made out’: 

1. L. Valerius Pot. f. Messalla Volesus, cos. 758, a. D. 5; procos. about 
765, A.D. 12*. 

2. Q. Poppaeus Q. f. Q. n. Secundus, cos. suff. 762, 4. D. 9°; procos. 
about 772, A.D. 19*. 

3. C, Junius C. f. M. n. Silanus, cos. 763, 4. p. 10; procos. 11374; 

A. D. 20-21 5, 

4. M. Aemilius L. f. Lepidus, COS. 759, A.D. 6; procos. 774—5, A. D. 

21—22 °, 

on 

. C. Fonteius Capito, cos. 765, A.D. 12; procos. in some year before 

478, A.D. 257; perhaps substituted for Ser. Cornelius .Malu- 
ginensis (cos. suff. 763, a.D. 1o), who was disqualified to be 

procos. in 775, A. D. 22°, 

6. M’. Lepidus, cos. 764, A.D. 12; procos. 779—780, A. D. 26-27 *. 

7. Sex. Appuleius, Sex. f. Sex. n., cos. 767, A.D. 14°; procos. Proueby 
between 780 and 783, a.p. 27-30 !!. 

8. Sex. Pompeius, Sex. f. Cn. n,, cos. 7567, A.D. 14; procos. also 
probably between 780 and 783, a.p. 27-30%. 

9. P. Petronius '*, P. f., cos. suff. 772, A.D. 19; procos. probably for 
six years, from 782 to 788, 4.D. 29-35 "^. 

Io. C. Asinius, C. f. C. n. Pollio, cos. 776, A.D. 23 probably not DS 

till the time of Gaius ". 

The proconsuls of Africa can be less fully made out, and appear to 
have oftener exceeded the limit of annual tenure :— 

I. L. Asprenas, cos. suff. 759, A.D. 6; procos. 767, A.D. 14 ?? 

2. L. Aelius Lamia, cos. 756, a.p. 3; procos. probably between 768 

and 770, 4.D. 15 and 15 '*. 

3. M. Furius P. f. P. n. Camillus, cos. 761, a.p. 8; procos. 770-771, 

A.D. 17—18 ?9, 

1 These names are taken from the list 
in Waddington's Fastes des Provinces 
Asiatiques. 

? See 3. 68, 1; Sen. de Ira, 2. 5, 5. 

* Dio, 56. 10, 3. 

* Coin of Pergamum with heads of 
Augusta and Tiberius, 

5 3. 66-69. 

6 See on 3. 32, 2. 

7 4. 36, 4. 

® 3. 58, 1; 71, 3. 

: x on 4. 56, 3. 

0 3- 
à An Inscr. at Assos (C. I. G. 3571) 
VOL. I. 

attests the fact of his proconsulate, but 

the date is cM 

12 I. 753 
15 Va]. Max. 2.6,8. "The date is con- 
Ew 
3. 49. 2; 6. 45, 4. 

15 For the evidence, see Waddington, 
P. E 119, ides 

a Medal at Sardis cominemorating 
Drusus and Germanicus (Waddington). 

18 See note on I. 53, 9. 

9? See note on 4. 13, 5. 

? 3. 52. 

ail 

terna. 

II4 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VII. 

4. L. Apronius, C. f. C. n, cos. suff. 761, a.p. 8; procos. for three 
years, 771—774, A.D. 18-21 

5. Q. Junius Blaesus, cos. suff. 763, a.D. 10; procos. extra sortem, in 
774 and 775, A.D. 21, 22*. 

6. P. Cornelius Dolabella, cos. 763, a.D. 10; procos. 777, A.D. 24 *. 

7. C. Vibius Marsus, cos. suff. 770, A.D. 17; procos. three years, 

probably 780-782, a.p. 27-29 *. 

8. M. Silanus, cos. 772, a.D. 195; procos. apparently for six years, 

785-790, A.D. 32-37 *. 

Augustus had re-established the rule enforced by Pompeius, prescribing 
an interval of five years between the tenure of magistracy and the ' sor- 
titio provinciae". It is however plain from the above lists that the 
interval in the case of consular provinces was now usually much longer. 
This would be the natural consequence of the increased number of con- 
sulars resulting from the frequent appointment, especially after 742, B.c. 
12 *, of *consules suffecti;' which would tend to produce an increasing 
stagnation in the succession to proconsulships. This again was remedied 
in various ways. Some consulars were disqualified *, others set aside by 
the senate '* or by Caesar ™, others declined the *sortitio ^ "The lists 
also show that the order of seniority was not always adhered to; being 
probably modified by the preference enjoined by the ‘ Lex Papia 
Poppaea ™,’ and probably also by a postponement of the turn of any 
who, when their time came, were absent from Rome. 

A few words may be added on the extent and resources of these two 
provinces, the great prizes left to the senatorial award. 

Asia on the north was bounded by the line of the Rhyndacus, on the 
south by that of the Calbis; the two lines enclosing a kind of triangle, 
having its apex near Philomelium, and comprising, with nearly all 
Phrygia, Mysia, Lydia, and Caria, the Aeolian, Ionian, and Dorian Greek 
cities, with most of the adjacent islands, inclusive of the Cyclades**. The 
chief city and residence of the governor was Ephesus; but several others - 

, are entitled uyrpomóAes, two have the rank of coloniae, at least nineteen 
that of *civitates liberae *’; and it is stated to have contained in all five 
hundred urban communities, of whose constant rivalries we have a glimpse 

! See on 3. 21, I. o ? As Ser. Cornelius Maluginensis, 3. 
2 8: 35 23. 58, I. ? 4. 23, 2. 71, 3. See 3. 32, 2. 
* Eckhel, iv. 148; pine vi. 589. "ASC. Galba, 6. 40, 3. 
See note on 2. 74, 1. 7 As Agricola, Agr. 42, I. 
5 2. 59, I. 13 See 2. 51, 2; Appendix to B. iii. 
* H. 4 48, 2; Marquardt, i. p. 468; rg Onthese boundaries, see Waddington, 
C. I. L. xiv. 3665; Henzen, Scavi, p. 11. — Fastes des Provinces Asiatiques; and 
” Dio. 53. 14, 2. Marquardt, Staatsv. i. p. 334. 

* See C. I. L. i. p. 546. 5 Marquardt, i. p. 347. 

Cua. VIL], ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 115 

in the contentions for right of sanctuary and respecting the temple to 
Tiberius?! Only a passing reference can here be made to the exceptional 
knowledge possessed by Tacitus of this province *, to its prominence in 
the business before the senate ?, and to the evidence of its great resources 
and high civilisation at all times *, as well as of its gradual recovery from 
the ravages of war and extortion ^; and the general qualities which, in 
spite of imperial vigilance, made it in the time of Nero, hardly less 
than in that of Cicero, a snare to governors. 

Africa was bounded on the east by * Philaenorum arae, at the eastern 
recess of the Great Syrtis, near Muhktar ; while on the west, during the 
independence of Mauretania, the boundary between them was fixed at 
Saldae?, identified with Bádjáya (Bougie). It had thus a coast line 
extending some fifteen degrees of longitude, and comprising the greater 
part of modern Tripoli, the whole of Tunis, and a considerable portion 
of Algeria. In the time of Pliny it contained thirty ‘civitates liberae,' 
fifteen * oppida civium Romanorum,' and six coloniae *; the most famous 
towns in these two latter classes respectively being Utica and 
Carthage”, 

Our record of African events at this time mentions only the predatory 
warfare of Tacfarinas"; but there is abundant other evidence that Africa 
was in many respects the most important senatorial government, and 
therefore with reason the most jealously watched by Caesar. Next to 
Egypt it was the most important source of the corn supply of Italy ? 
and, probably on this account, the proconsul was assisted or controlled 
not by one, but by two or more ‘ procuratores fisci ?.' Again, here alone 
the senatorial proconsul has regular command of a legion!'*, and the 
chance of winning military renown; an exceptional position which Gaius 

1 See 3. 60-63; 4. 55-56. .* Strabo, p. 831. On the formation of 
? On his proconsulate, see above, p. 4. — the provinces of Mauretania, this became 
* E.g. 2. 47; 66, &c.; 4. 13; 14; the western limit of Mauretania Sitifensis ; 
15; ; 86; and above, n. 1. which reached eastward to the Ampsagas, 

* E.g. Cic. Leg. Man. c. 6; Ep. ad which is thus the western limit of Africa 
Q. F. 1, 1. Itsfamousoratorsarealluded — in Plin. N. H. 5. 4, 29. 
to in Ann. 3. 67, 2. ? Plin. N. H. 5..4, 29. He numbers 
5 Their gratitude finds expression in on the whole 516 communities, mostly 
the prominent worship of Emperors, as Phoenician towns or Libyan tribes. See 
of Augustus at Pergamum, Tiberius at Mommsen, I. 1. 646, E. T. ii. 331. 
Smyrna. The recovery was not shared by ? Plin. 1. l. $ 24. 

the islands, which are chiefly known as i 2. 523 3.203 32; 73; 4. 23. See 
places of exile. On the general condition Mommsen, Hist. v. 633, E. T. ii: 317. 

of the province it is only possible here to 12 [ts fertility is often extolled by 
refer to Mommsen, Hist. v. ch. 8. Horace, e. g. Od. 1. 1, 10; 3. 16, 31 ; Sat. 

* * In provincia tam corruptrice ' Cic.  2.3,87. SeeMommsen, Hist. v. 651, E. T. 
ad Q. F. 1. 1,6, $ 1 D dives — ii. 336. 

et parata peccantibus AE 6,2 13 H. 4. 50, 3. 
' Plin. N. H. 5. 4, 29; "Mela, I. 4 The presence of a second legion is 
7, 33- exceptional. See note an 4. 6, 3. 

I 2 

- MP tm 
s raw Boe 

116 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VII. 

removed by introducing a co-ordinate * legatus Augusti, who had command 
of the troops, and perhaps also some territorial government !. 

The Caesarian provinces? can be classified in three ranks, of which the 
two first answer to the two classes of senatorial provinces; the legati 
being in the greatest provinces always of consular, and in those of the 
second class, of praetorian rank?; although, in recognition of the ‘ pro- 
consulare imperium ' as vested in Caesar, all have the uniform title of 
* legati Augusti propraetore, and the same insignia of five fasces, with the 
military dress and sword‘; their difference of rank being only noted by 
the addition of their titles of ‘vir consularis" by those who were such. 
To the highest class belong all those provinces involving important 

military commands ; 

death of Augustus *: 1. Hispania Tarraconensis ; 

of which the following had been established at the 

2. Germania superior ; 

3. Germania inferior" ; 4. Pannonia; 5. Moesia; 6. Delmatia (or Illyri- 

cum) ?; 7. Syria (with Cilicia) *. 

same period, will comprise : 

I. Lusitanià ; 
dunensis; 4. Gallia Belgica ?? ; 5. Galatia "; 6. Pamphylia. 

The second class, as constituted at the 

2. Aquitania ; 3. Gallia Lug- 
A third class 

of provinces had no higher officer than the ' procurator Augusti, who 

appears as a subordinate officer in greater provinces ??, 

To this class 

belong at this time ? : 1. Alpes Maritimae; 2. Raetia; 3. Vindelicia '* ; 

! H. 4. 48, 2; Dio, 59. 20, 7. Dio, 
who is perhaps describing what existed 
at his own time, indicates the creation of 
a separate province, which might possi- 
bly be that of Numidia. Tacitus speaks 
of a divided command within»the same 
province analogous to the ‘ Germaniae." 
(See note 7, Rushforth, Inscr. p. 130). 

* On the administration of these pro- 
vinces generally, see Staatsr. ii. 1087 - 1095. 

3 See the distinction between these two 
grades of governors in Spain (Strab. 3. 4, 
20, 166). 

* Dio, 53. 13, 6. 

5 Or * consularis legatus, as H. 1. 56, 
I; 2. 86, 4. 

* From the time of Claudius, Britannia 
would be added to this list. 

7 The two‘ Germaniae ’ were not at this 
datestrictly provinces, but *exercitus' under 
separate command within the limits of 
Gallia Belgica, with (at first) a supposed 
right in abeyance over further Germany 
(see above, p. 110). See Mommsen, Hist. v. 
108, E. T.i. 118; Rushforth, Latin Inscr. 
p. 108. They became, however, fully dis- 
tinct provinces, and Tacitus, while some- 
times speaking more strictly (1. 31, 2 ; 6. 
30, 2; 13. £3, 2, &c.), sometimescalls them 

such (3. 41, 35 4 73) 1; 13. 53, 4)- 

* See 4. 5, 5, and note. 

* On the union of Cilicia with Syria, 
see Ann. 2. 78, 3; 80, t, &c. 

1° During most of the time of Augustus 
and the first three years of Tiberius, some 

eniinent person, as Agrippa, Drusus, Ti- 

berius, or Germanicus, in charge of the 
German war, governed also the three 
Gaulish provinces, with legati under 
him. See Marquardt, i. p. 267. 

1 With ‘Pontus Polemoniacus, from 
Nero'stime, Marquardt, i. p. 360. 

13 It is very probablethat Hirschfeld is 
right in maintaining (Unters. p. 287, foll.) 
that no province except Judaea was go- 
verned by a procurator before the time of 
Claudius, and that to the other provinces 
of this class only military * praefecti ' 
of equestrian rank were sent; the civil 
administration devolving on the staff of 
some neighbouring province. 

13 To these were added Thracia and 
the two Mauretaniae in the time of 
Claudius, and the Alpes Cottiae in the 
time of Nero. See H. 1. 11, 5; Suet. 
Ner. 18. Also Cappadocia belonged to 
this class from the time of Tiberius to 
that of Vespasian, who placed it under 
a consular legatus. Suet. Vesp. 8. 

^ Vindelicia was perhaps at this time 

Cuarp. VIIL.] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 117 

4. Noricum; 5. Judaea (when not under native princes)’. The procurator 
of Judaea was certainly in'some cases responsible to the legatus of Syria ?, 
and perhaps all such governors were at first subordinated to their 
nearest 'legati! An exception to all these classes is the position of 
Egypt, which although recognised in terms as part of the Roman Empire 5, 
and equal in population and military force to a Caesarian province of 
the highest rank *, was held by the emperor not as part of his dyarchy 
with the senate, but as part of his own domain and as representative of 
its kings, with an equestrian praefectus as vicegerent*; senators being not 

only excluded from all office in it, but even forbidden to enter it*. 
The governors appointed by Caesar held office during pleasure and 

for no fixed term”, 
usual *. 

though a period of from three to five years seems 
Tiberius is especially noted for continuing them in office during 

periods of indefinite length ?; as may be illustrated from such lists as 
can be made of the governors of important provinces during this period. 
In Syria we find only the following '? :— 

1. Q. Caecilius Metellus Creticus Silanus, cos. 760, a.p:7; legatus 
Syriae from at least 763-4, A.D. ro—11 !!, to 770, A.D. 17 *. 
2. Cn. Calpurnius Piso, cos. 747, B.c. 7; legatus 770-772, a.p. 

17-19 5. 

3. L. Aelius Lamia, cos. 756, 4.D. 3; 

leg. Syr. for many years end- 

ing in 785, A.D. 32 !*, and pore even the next regular successor 

to Piso ™. 

4. L. Pomponius Flaccus, cos. 770, a.p. 17; leg. Syr. 785-786, 4.p. 

32-33 ". 

5. L. Vitellius, cos. 787, A.D. 34; leg. Syr. 788—792, a.D. 35-39 ". 

17, 6), but 

separate. from Raetia (2. 
H.1. 

afterwards certainly joined with it. 
1,35 $54 &c. 

! I. e. 759-794, ^. D. 6-41; and again 
after 797, A. D. 44. 

3 Thecases in I2. 54,5; Jos. Ant. 18. 4, 
2, seem ratherexceptional, See Mommsen, 
Hist. v. 509, E. T. ii. 185. 

3 Cp. *Aegyptum imperio pop. R. 
adieci, Mon. Ane. v. 24. 

* See 4. 5, 4, and note. 

* See H. 1. 11, 1, and on his then ex- 
ceptional jurisdiction, 12. 60, 3. 

See 2. 59, 4, and note. Mommsen 
(l. 1. 555, E. T. ii. 233? illustrates the 
position by supposing such a case as 
that the colonies were governed by the 
Empress of India without any account 
taken of ministers or Parliament; a com- 
parison which hardly expresses the differ- 

ence of Egypt from other Caesarian Bs 
vinces. 

7 Dio, 53. 13, 6. 

* Dio, 52. 23, 2, where this is repre- 
sented as the advice of Maecenas. 

? Ann. 1. 80, 2. 

10 See Zumpt, Comm. Epigr. vol ii. 
pp. 125-135: and the full list in Mar- 
quardt, i. 418. 

5 Mommsen, Res gestae Divi Aug. 
(Mon. Anc.), p. 166. 

329. 3 3. 43-69, &c. 

* « Administrandae Suriae i imagine tan- 
dem -exsolutus,’ as having been kept in 
Rome, 6. 27,2 

'S The irregular appointment of Cn. 
Sentius intervened for a time: see on 
2.24, T. 16 6, 27, 3 

" See 6. 32,5. Probably the office had 
been vacant since the death of Flaccus. 

Boc 

———— -— Li 

wh. T 
j^ mee, 
T beaks 

Cotto wei mlt 

PEN 

Wu, Ets 
C MW Om gen v. 
ice 

iier ups Re E NUN CUN, 
dace euiiers ropes 

118 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VII. 

In Lower Germany we have only record of three legati :— 

I. A. Severus Caecina, legatus probably from about 767—772, A.D. 
14-19’. ! 

2. C. Visellius Varro, cos. suff. 765, A.D. 12; mentioned as legatus in 
414, AD. 21*. 

3. L. Apronius, cos. suff. 761, A.p. 8; legatus in 781, A.D. 28?; and 
appearing still to be so in 787, A.D. 34 *. 

The long tenure of appointments under Tiberius is further illustrated 
by the fact that in Upper Germany C. Silius (cos. 766, a.p. 13) was 
legatus from 767 to 774, A.D. 14-215; and C. Lentulus Gaetulicus 
(cos. 779, A.D. 26) from 782 to 792, 4.D. 29-395; while L. Arruntius 
was nominally legatus of Spain for at least ten years" ; and Poppaeus 
Sabinus had charge of important provinces for no less than twenty-four 
years?. The procuratores also were constantly retained in office *. 
Among the higher class of such, it is known that Valerius Gratus '* and 
Pontius Pilatus" were respectively eleven and ten years procurators of 
Judaea ; 768—779, and 779—789, a.D. 15-26, and 26-36. 

The legati and procurators had fixed salaries from the treasury "; and 
the former were assisted by their * legati legionum ' as vicegerents ", while 
in financial matters the procurator corresponded to the proconsul's 
quaestor !* | 

Thesei vast provinces cannot be here described; by far the most 
important were the * Germaniae' and Syria 5. In each of the two former, 
the legatus and his four legions lived as in a camp, confronted by warlike 
tribes, and also liable to furnish troops for a not impossible Gaulish 
rising '*, and were well aware of the fatal truth that the existence of 
the empire and dynasty depended on their fidelity ". In Syria, the 
garrison of similar strength, if actually enervated by peace, had yet the 
whole prestige of Rome in the East depending on it; while the tact and 
firmness of its ruler would alike be exercised in controlling the mixed 
crowd, Greek, Phoenician, and Jewish, made subject to him, especially in 
his vast capital, Antioch : which, in population surpassed only by Rome and 

t 3731; 2,$6.; 3. 33, I. vinces seem of later date (Marquardt, 
4 3.41, 3; deae E. i. p. 551), but there may probably have 
* 6. 30, 3. 0039 4.18, I. . been now some such officers in great 
$ 6. 30, 3; Dio, 59. 22, 5. provinces such as Syria. 
7 6.27, 3 * 6. 39. 3. 44 Marquardt, i. p. 556. 
9 See 4. 6, 5. 'S Britain would afterwards fully rank 
10 Jos. Ant. 18. 2, 2. with either of these. 
! Td. 18. 4, 2. !* See 3. 40, &c. ; also the great rising 
'? Dio, 52. 23, I. For the various of Vindex in 821, A.D. 68. 

amounts, see Marquardt, i. p. 416. "7 Cp. ‘sua in manu sitam rem Roma- 

^" The *legati iuridici' in these p.o- nam,’ 1. 31, s. 

Ca^», VII.]. ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 119 

Alexandria, and in area and magnificence rivalled by neither’, would, by 
its seductions, as well as those of its famous suburb of Daphne ?, be fatal 
to many a soldiers discipline*. Next to these, Egypt, with its vast 
granaries, strange fanaticisms 5, and the motley crowd of Alexandria, prob- 
ably greater, and certainly far more turbulent than that of Antioch 5, 
with its vast granaries, and terrible power of menacing Rome itself with 
famine ; must have been the chief object of solicitude to Caesar. 

The amount of provincial revenue was probably not reduced, but the 
mode of assessment reorganized *; and, in general terms, it is admitted 
even by Tacitus, that the provinces were better off under the principate 
than under the Republic’, and were treated with marked justice and 
moderation during at least the early years of Tiberius*; and that the 
Caesarian provinces were so far more economically governed than the 
senatorial, that a change from one to the other was a virtual abatement 
of tribute*. In both classes of provinces, extortion was severely checked ” 
instead of being criminally connived at; and governors were warned to 
shear, not flay, their sheep !", whose prosperity had become the common 
interest of ruled and ruler. 

Nevertheless, it is easy to exaggerate the beneficial results and to 
overlook the still existing evils ", Conviction of the guilty did nct 
necessarily imply restitution to the pillaged ^; and the punishment 
must have been often inadequate'*, and have failed to deter others. 
In the last years of Augustus, the atrocities of Volesus Messalla in 

1 See Mommsen, I. 1. 456, E. T. ii. 126, 
foll. It was the only city of antiquity 
whose streets were lighted at night. 

?^ Ann. 2. 83,3. Foradescription, see 
Gibbon, ch. 23. 

3 See the description of the Syrian 
legions in Corbulo's time (13. 35, 1-3). 

* See H. 1. 11, 1, &c. ; Mommsen, I. 1. 
579, E. T. ii. 260, foll. The population 
of the whole country is estimated at about 
seven millions. 

5 See Mommsen, l. l. 581, foll., E. T. 
ii. 262, foll. This vast mass of Greeks, 
Jews, &c., was asalien to the Egyptians 
proper as the English in India to the 
natives. It is noticed by Friedlander 
(Sitteng. ii. p. 124) that Alexandria is far 
more celebrated than Antioch in the litera- 
ture of the first and second century A.D. 
See his description of it (Id. p. 133, foll.). 
For the probability that it furnished to 
Rome a model of civic administration, see 
above, p. 106, n. 14. 

* By means of the great provincial 
census (damoypady) commenced in 727, 

B.C. 27, and probably revised every five 
years. See note on 6. 41, 1, and Prof. 
Wilkins in D. of Ant. i. p. 403. 

7 See 1. 2, 2. 

$5 3. 0,75 

? 1. 76, 4. The longer tenure of office 
by Caesarian legati, even if excessive under 
Tiberius (1. 80, 2) must have generally 
worked better than the annual change of 
proconsuls in senatorial provinces. 

 'This'is shown by the numerous con- 
victiens mentioned below. It is noted 
that provincials themselves are encouraged 
to appear as accusers (3. 67, 2; 70, 1; 
4. 15, 3, &c.) ; and if influential, are even 
courted by governors (15. 21, 2). 

! Suet, Tib. 32; Dio, 57. 10, 5. 

12 Juvenal's advice to a provincial go- 
vernor (8, 87-139) gives a sufficiently 
dark picture of the cruelty and extortion 
still practised in his time. 

13 See 4. 20, I. Cp. ‘tu victrix pro- 
vincia ploras’ Juv. I, 50. 

* As that of Marius Priscus, Juv. 1, 

49. 

Sw Saree 

I20 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VII. 

Asia! were such as could hardly have been exceeded under the Re- 
public :. in the same province, within the next ten years, another pro- 
consul? and a procurator? are convicted of extortion ; and proconsuls 
of two other provinces* are condemned on equally serious charges : 
nor does Silius come with cleaner hands from Germany*: in Spain 
a legatus is assassinated through some money grievance, of which we 
have only the Roman version *: the. Frisii are goaded into rebellion 
by the exactions of a subordinate officer’; and the chief Gaulish tribes 
driven to the same course by a load of debt?, probably not uncon- 
nected with ruinous requisitions for the wars of Germanicus?: Pontius 
Pilate was allowed ten years of misgovernment in Judaea  : and fuller 
records from the provinces themselves would probably have shown 
many other such blots on the administration, under even one of the 
most frugal and vigilant of the Caesars. 

With the provinces should be enumerated the semi-independent states 
and kingdoms, whose position must have varied greatly. Some were 
small free states, as Samos '*, Rhodes ?, Lycia™; analogous to the many 
free cities within the provinces. In others the prince had the title of 
‘praefectus’ (as Cottius 5), or the position in fact (as Herod and his 
sons) of a procurator’*; or may have been under a similar control to 
that exercised over the Thracian princes?". Juba and his sons in 
Mauretania, and the princes left in Cilicia!?, may have been free 
from other obligations than to furnish troops on demand *. The Cap- 
padocian king was even liable to be brought before the bar of the 
senate”, The relation of Commagene is unknown? Beyond this 
the Armenian kingdom and the smaller Caspian principalities ? seem 
to have accepted a kind of Roman suzerainty as their best protection 
against Parthia. In all these, complications were apt to arise demanding 
the interposition of the Roman government. Rulers set up by Rome were 
naturally unpopular, and their subjects showed their insubordination as 

1 * Cum trecentos uno die securi per- — government in the later years of Claudius, 
cussisset, incedens inter cadavera superbo see vol. ii. Introd. 39, and for the salutary 
vultu. .. Graece proclamavit: O rem re- — action in the early time of Nero, id. 56. . 

giam. Sen. de Ira, 2. 5, 5. 7 N.H.5.31, 135. 3% See on 12.58,2. 

2 3. 67,2. $ 4.15, 4. 1* See on 13. 33, 4- 

* 3. 70, 1; 4. 13, 2. 5 4. 19, 5. 55 Inscr. Orell. 626. 

5 4.45, 5- T 4. 72,1. 16 See Marquardt, i. p. 408. - 

* 3. 40, 1. Heavy tribute, cruel and 1 Part of Thrace at least had to furnish 
haughty governors are complained of troops. (4. 46, 2), and the prince in his 
(8 4). minority had a Roman tutor (2. 67, 4). 

? Offerings, represented as wholly vo- 18 His kingdom is distinctly * donum 
luntary (1. 71, 3), are yet admitted: to — populi Romani’ (4. 5, 3). 
have exhausted their means. See 2. 5, 3. I9 2, 42, 7 ; 6. 41, 1, &c. 

. ?* Jos. Ant. 18. 3 and 4. | 9 2:278,33-4.24, 3. 5 2,42, 5. 

! For the corruption of provincial 8.3.42, 7. ? See 4. 5, 4. 

—— —Á — Iu a — 

Cur VILL] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 121 

best they could. Thrace is more than once disturbed by internal conflict !, 
similar accounts are given from Cilicia? Mauretanian bands join Tac- 
farinas?, the Nabataean prince carries on small hostilities on his own 
account with Judaea *, and the whole Roman policy in the East turns on 
the dynastic troubles of Armenia*; so that from one quarter or another 
there were rarely wanting causes of anxiety to emperors most of all 
anxious for the maintenance of existing settlements 5, 

Many of these kingdoms were subsequently incorporated into the 
empire; but the conquest of Britain is the principal departure, prior 
to Trajan, from the cautious advice of Augustus*. The campaigns of 
Germanicus did but avenge the fate of Varus, and secure the frontier by 
spreading terror beyond : though visions may have passed before his own 
mind of a frontier on the Elbe?, which he never really reached'^, and which 
fades more and more out of Roman knowledge "'. 

Tue MirirARY AND Navar Fonctks. 

The vast army which had come under the command of Augustus, 
through the addition of the legions of Lepidus to his own and the 
subsequent union of as much as he retained of this combined force 
with the legions of Antonius, was reduced by him after Actium to 
a standing army apparently not exceeding eighteen legions; of which 
twelve, numbered consecutively, had been always his own, and six, also 
bearing .numbers below twelve, had belonged to his colleagues!??. Eight 

! See 2. 64, foll.; 3. 38,foll.; 4. 46, 
foll. 

3 See 2,42, 1 ; 6. 41, t. 

» 96:3; 63, 33 4.233. T. 

* See Mommsen, Hist. v. 478, E. T. ii. 
150. 

* See vol. ii. Introd. ch. 4. 

* * Neconposita turbarentur ' 2. 65, 1. 

the Illyrian rebellion, but it is argued that 
twenty-two existed before that date, and 
that perhaps the original reduction never 
went below that number. All the legions 
numbered above 12, and also several 
within that number, are absent from all 
- inscriptions or other records before 759, 
A.D. 6; but if we accept the statement 

7 See Suet. Cl. 25; Ner. 18; Vesp. 8, 
vol. ii. Introd. 30, 9o. 

5 Ann. I. 11, 7. ? 0.22, 1; 

10 See on 4. 44, 3. p EXP ENS 

? Mommsen's view (R. G. D. A. pp. 
68-75) that the legions originally thus 
reduced and numbered (partly, as he 
thinks, with a desire to conceal the real 
number), were augmented by eight at the 
time of the Illyrian rising in 759, A.D. 6, 
has found general acceptance, and is de- 
fended by him against some objections to 
his earlier statement of it. For a more 
recent criticism of it, readers are referred 
to an essay by Mr. Hardy in Journ. of 
Phil. xxiii. 29-44. It is admitted that 
four legions were enrolled at once to meet 

that before the Illyrian outbreak twelve 
legions had been collected for the attack 
on Maroboduus (see 2. 46, 2, and note), 
it seems difficult to suppose that only six 
were left for Syria, Egypt, Africa, and 
Spain, though these garrisons may have 
been temporarily below their normal 
strength, and thus may not have exceeded 
perhaps eightlegions. The accounts of the 
extreme gravity of the rebellion justify the 
supposition of a large increase made in 
the army to cope with it, and the extreme 
difficulty found in raising two more 
legions after the disaster of Varus is 
perhaps best explained by the severity of 
the conscription during the years im- 
mediately preceding. 

122 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar, VII. 

more legions, numbered from 13 to 20, can be shown to have existed 
during the great rising in Pannonia and Illyricum in 759-762, a. n. 6-9; 
and were probably in great part raised to meet that crisis. Of these eight, 
three, the 17th, 18th, and r9th, were annihilated with Varus and never 
reconstituted! ; but two others, the 21st and 22nd, were enrolled after 
that disaster ?. 

We can thus explain the absence of some numbers and duplication 
or even triplication of others, in the following list of the legions as 
existing in the time of Tiberius. The number and local disposition of 
several can be supplied from Tacitus; for others, as well as for the titles 
borne by all, the chief evidence is to be found in numerous inscriptions. 

Legion. Where quartered ?. 

Lower Germany. 

Provincial Summary. 
Spain (3). 

IV. Macedonica. 
VI. Victrix. 

J. Germanica 

lI. Augusta Upper Germany. 

III. Augusta Africa. X. Gemina. 
III. Gallica Syria. Lower Germany (4. 
III. Cyrenaica . Egypt. I. Germanica. 
; man ai V. Alaudae. 
IV. Macedonica . Spain. XX. Valeria Victrix. 
IV. Scythica Moesia. Aoc Sapa 
U i 
V. Macedonica Moesia. PE 
II. Augusta. 
V. Alaudae Lower Germany. XIII. Gemina. 
"- A XIV. Gemina Martia Victrix. 
VI. Victrix . Spain. XVI. Gallica. 
VI. Ferrata. Syria. Pannonia (3). 
VII. (Claudia] . Delmatia. | VIII. Augusta. 
VIII. Augusta Pannonia. xs PEUT 
IX. Hispana Pannonia. Delmatia (2). 
S PES SER o afterwards Claudiae. 
X. Gemina. Spain. ° 
XI. [Claudia] Delmati areas 
. [Claudia] . elmatia. IV. Scythica. 
XII. Fulminata. . Syria. V. Macedonica. 

! Evidence as to the two latter is fur- 
nished by Ann. 1. 60, 4, and Inscr. Orell. 
621. From the absence of any subsequent 
mention of a 17th legion, it is inferred 
that this was the third. 

? Of these the 21st furnishes the ‘ ver- 
nacula multitudo! of 1. 31, 4; the other 
is presumed to have been raised with it. 
See Mommsen, |. ]. On the error of sup- 
posing that the 1st legion was also raised 
at this date, see on 1. 42, 6. 

3 Tacitus specifies the legions of Pan- 
nonia (I. 23, 6’, of Lower Germany (1. 

- 31, 3), and of Upper Germany (1. 37, 4), 

and two of the Syrian legions (2. 57, 2; 
79, 3). The gth legion was temporarily 
in Africa (3.9, 1; 4. 23, 2), and is counted 
there in the general summary (4. 5, 3*- 
On the whole list, see Mommsen, R. 

D. A.1.1.; Marquardt, Staatsv. ii. p. 446; 
Mr. Purser in D. of Ant. s.v. *exercitus ' 
p. 788. 

MN o 
—- —-— - 

Cur. VII.] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 123 

Legion. Where quartered. Provincial Summary. 
XIII. Gemina Upper Germany. Byria (4). 
XIV. Gemina Martia Victrix Upper Germany. a oe 
: lina . T X. Fretensis. 
XV. Apollinaris Pannonia XII Fulminata. 
XVI. Gallica. Upper Germany. Egypt (2). 
XX. Valeria Victrix Lower Germany. III. Cyrenaica. 
: XXII. Deiotariana. 
XXI. Rapax Lower Germany. Africa (1). 
XXII. Deiotariana . Egypt. III. Augusta. 

By the year 882, A. D. 69, we find the number of legions increased 
to thirty-one, in consequence of the occupation of Britain and other 
subsequent events; but it is subsequently reduced to thirty. The local 
disposition is also altered by that time in many cases !. 

The legion consisted, as at other times, of ten cohorts, divided into 
thirty maniples and sixty centuries*; but we have no certain information 
of its numerical strength. The estimate of 6100 foot and 726 horse 
given by Vegetius?, would certainly not agree with that of this time in 
respect of the ‘equites legionis, who appear now to have only num- 
bered 120‘, nor is there any evidence that the first cohort was now, as in 
the time of Vegetius, twice the strength of the others*. If a medium 
estimate of about eighty men to the century be taken ®, the total strength 
of the legion, including its officers, its cavalry, and those in charge of the 
* ballistae ' and other engines forming its train of artillery’, would amount 
to rather more than 5000. 

The old names ‘hastati,’ *principes, and *pilani, survive?; and, 
though no longer designating any difference of equipment, denote pre- 
cedence in honorary rank. Each cohort contained two centuries, or one 
maniple, of each of these; and the cohorts also rank in honour accord- 
ing to their number. This hierarchy of rank serves to place the sixty 
centurions in a constantly ascending series; the maniple, rather than 
the century, being the unit of the legion, and being under the command 
of the first of its two centurions. The lowest centurion would thus be 
the subordinate centurion of the ‘hastati’ of the tenth cohort, styled 
* decumus hastatus posterioris centuriae, or * decumus hastatus posterior ; ' 

! For the legions of still later date, as 
related to these, see Dio, 55. 23, 24. 

? Gell. 16. 4 (quoting Cincius). 

* Veg. 2, 6. 

4 Jos. B. J. 3. 6, 4. They were prob- 
ably on the footing of auxiliaries in respect 
of not being citizens. See Nipp. on 4. 

» 

73 
* Veg. 2,6. See note on 3. 21, 2. 

* Hygin. § 1, 2. 

7 Cp. *Quintae decumae legionis bal- 
lista’ H. 3. 23, 2; Jos. Bell. Jud. 5. 6, 3; 
Marquardt, ii. p. 526. 

* The older term *'triarii" seems ob- 
solete, and the term for the * ordo' and 
its centurion is not * pilanus' but ‘ pilus.’ 
See Marquardt, ii. p. 373, n. 2. * Pilanus' 
is found in Varro and Ovid. 

INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VII. 

I24 

and the highest, the commander of the maniple of * pilani' in the first 
cohort, who would be fully styled *primae cohortis pilus prior,’ or more 
commonly * centurio primipilus’ or * primopilus '.' .In passing through 
all these gradations, the centurion changed his century at each successive 
step’, and in this highest position had custody of the legionary eagle, 
with large accompanying emoluments?; ranked next to the ‘tribuni’; and 
was admitted with them to the council of the general*. The centurions 
appear to have still appointed their subordinate officers?, but to have 
been themselves now directly appointed by the emperor, often as 
a personal favour *, and, apparently, without previous service *. 

Augustus had perpetuated the custom introduced by the dictator 
Caesar *, of placing the whole legion under the command of a ‘ legatus.' 
These ‘legati legionum ?' are senators of praetorian rank, or ina position 
to expect such rank ©, and, as has been seen, ranked also as provincial 
vicegerents under the *legatus Augusti !'.' 

The position of the legionary ' tribuni. militum’ now becomes some- 
what anomalous; inasmuch as they are no longer, as formerly, com- 
manders in turn of the legion”, and several of their other duties > must 
.have been transferred to the ‘praefectus castrorum!* Nor do they 
appear to have commanded the legionary cohorts, which, so far as they 
had a separate command, may probably have been placed each under its 
first centurion ^, Such of their duties as are still traceable can hardly be 
generally characterized !*; and this rank becomes hardly so much one 
of military promotion, as a * tirocinium" for young men of the highest 
families ", and a stepping-stone to the quaestorship and senate '*. 

Auxiliary Citizen Troops: 
1. ‘ Vexillarii,’ or * veterani sub vexillo retenti.’ Augustus had ordained 
that the legionary soldier should be dismissed with gratuities after a term 

? See Ann. 1.44, 3; 4-73.43 14.32, 6, &c. 

10 2. 36, 1; 14. 28, 1; note on 12. 49, 3- 

11 See above, p. 118. 

13 Polyb. 6. 34;.1.. We find a tribune 
in command, where the legatus legionis 
had fled. Cp. H. 2. 85, 3, with 3. 9, 4 

1 The intermediate order of rank of the 
centurions between the highest and lowest, 
and the meaning of the expression ‘ primi 
ordines' (see I. 29, 2), is a question of 
considerable Sousa E ; see the discussion 
of it by Mr. Purser, 1. 1. p. 799. 

3 Veg. 2, 21. 

"f Locupletem na apt Juv. 14, 197. 

s Polyb. 6.24,2 

5 As ‘ optiones ' Veget. 2, 7. &c. 

* Cp. ' vitem posce libello' Juv. 14, 193. 
See also Marquardt, ii. P. 377- 

"Ex TOv dm’ ápxfjs ékarovropxnoávrav 

Dio 52. 25, 7. 

" Caes. B. G. 1. 52, 15 3. 20, 3; 5.1, 
1, &c. 

18 See Marquardt, ii. p.458. 

14 See 1. 20, I. 

15 See Marquardt, ii.p.371. Atalater 
date there is some evidence of command 
of cohorts by tribunes (Veg. 2. 12). 

16 See 1. 37, 1 ; 44, 4 ; also Marquardt, 
ii. p. 460; Mr. Purser, l. l. p. 797. 

E. g. Suet. Tib. 9. It had often been 

SO under the Republic: see Purser, l. l. 

18 See above, ch. vi. p. 95. 

Cur.Vil.] ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 

125 

of service originally fixed at sixteen’, and later at twenty years’ service *. 
Probably the same events which led to the enrolment of additional 
legions, combined with the exhaustion of the * aerarium militare *,' led 
him to postpone his obligations by a characteristic fiction; by which the 
veterans, though removed from the legion and released from the oath, ' 
were kept together under separate colours, perhaps exempted from camp 
iduties and reserved for battle‘, but awaiting indefinitely their final dis- 
charge and reward. The words * vexillum; ‘ vexillarii,’ and ‘ vexillatio,’ 
though often used of any legionary detachment under separate command’, 
appear to have a special application to these troops, who are distinguished 

from the legions by Tacitus in several places*. 

They might be quar- 

tered with’, or separated from their legions *, and, perhaps by combina- 

tion, are sometimes 1000 strong’; but if the number 500, the only 

estimate of such a battalion given in these Books, may be treated as the 
normal strength of those belonging to one legion”, it would agree with 
the computation of Hyginus, who reckons them as equivalent to an 

extra cohort !!, 

2. ‘Cohortes civium Romanorum ' are mentioned in several inscriptions, 
usually as volunteers, frequently as Italians; and may probably have 
been generally formed of such as chose a military profession, and who 
lived in other districts than those from which the home army was raised "*. 
There appear to have been at one time at least thirty-two such cohorts'*; 
but they are omitted in the general summary of Tacitus’, though men- 
tioned with the legions in the will of Augustus 5, 

Other auxiliary forces, * Cohortes alaeque soctae. 

These forces are too numerous and manifold to be here described ; 
their titles are given in a multitude of inscriptions ", and their total 
strength is estimated by Tacitus as being much the same in the aggregate 

! Dio, 54. 25, 6. 

Y Id, Es. 22, ). 

Jf Id. $5, 25, 4:5 Ann. f. 7B, à. 

* See 1. 36,4. Whethersuch wasalready 
the position of * veterani sub vexillo" is 
doubtful. See note there. 

VE 45735, 11 345 M, 13 H.. 3,345 
& 656,1; 99,21 100, 25. 3. 22, 4; &c. 

© E.g. 1.172,45 26,25 35, 23 36, 45 
30:25 445,05 3. 241,2 ; HI. 2. 11, 5. 

* veteranorum exercitus ' Inscr. Orell. 3877. 

T E.g. 1. 39, 2. 

* E.g. I. 44, 6. 

? Inscr. Henzen 5456. 

Ps ato 

? De M. C. $ 5. May it be possible 
that this is the origin of the doubling of 

the first cohort in the time of Vegetius ? 
See above, p. 123. 

1? See Inscr. Henzen 6709. The ‘co- 
hors Italica! of Acts 10. 1 appears to 
be of this description ; possibly also the 
* cohors Augusta of Acts 27. I. Other 
such were .perhaps in Egypt, but the 
evidence of Strab. 17. 1, 12, 797, is 
doubtful. 

18 Mommsen, R. G. D. A. p. 72, n. 1, 
inclines to trace their origin to the ‘co- 
hortes libertinorum voluntariae,’ raised 
by Augustus. 

!* Inscr. Henzen 6756, &c. 

xd A. Ii 3 Bx 

7 See Inscr. Henzen, Index, pp. 134- 
142; Wilm. Id. 590-596. 

126 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VII. 

as that of the legions'. Commanded by separate officers ?, such forces, 
when attached to the legion, were under the supreme command of its 
*Jegatus, and compensated for its weakness in cavalry 5,. besides supple- 
menting it with light-armed troops of various descriptions *, and with 
others armed and disciplined like the legions themselves *®. Other such 
forces were more locally distributed 5, and furnished protection where no 
legionary troops were stationed". It is shown by inscriptions that they 
were in early times mostly employed in their own native provinces 5. 
Other more irregular or temporary forces are spoken of as ‘ tumultuariae 

catervae °,’ and the ‘ 

iuventus’ or militia, kept up in some provinces at 

their own cost, are occasionally employed with imperial troops, though 

not considered to belong to them ?^, 

The forces of vassal princes were 

also placed under requisition when needed ™. 

Spectal forces of Italy. 
A.— Military. 

T. Praetorian cohorts. 

These are stated to have been nine in number 

in the time of Tiberius ?; each cohort being apparently 1ooo strong ", 
including a force of cavalry !*; and all having their headquarters in the 

camp just outside the ‘ agger !5.' 

These cohorts were increased to twelve 

probably by Claudius !5, to sixteen by Vitellius ", reduced again to nine 
by Vespasian !5, and subsequently fixed at ten ?*, 

! 4. 5, 5. ‘Cohortes’ and ‘alae’ 

were sometimes ‘quingenariae,’ sometimes 

‘miliariae,’ in round numbers 500 and 
1000 strong. 

; Usually * praefecti, sometimes ‘tri- 
buni.” See Inscrr. 

* Smaller forces of cavalry were also 
attached to such auxiliary cohorts as are 
called *equitatae ': see Purser, 1. 1. 790. 

* I1. 51, 75; 2. 16, 5, &c. Cp. the ex- 
pression ‘ ferentarius miles, and the con- 
trast of their arms with those of the legions 
in 12. 36, 6. 

5 3. 43, 2, &c. 

* * Apud idonea provinciarum’ 4. 5, 5 

* A considerable force of this descrip- 
tion was stationed in some provirices, as 
Mauretania, Raetia, Noricum, Thrace, 
Judaea, Galatia, and a few soldiers served 
as police in even senatorial provinces (4. 
15, 3); see Purser, l.l. 796. 

* The chief exceptions are where a 
country required more cohorts than it 
could furnish, as the ‘Germaniae,’ or 
furnished more than it needed, or those 
in which the presence of native troops 

might be dangerous, as Britain (cp. Agr. 
31, 1). ? 1. 56, 15; 15. 3, 3- 

10 See an article by Mommsen ‘die 
Rómischen Provincialmilizen’ (Herm. 
xxii. 547-558), and an abstract of it in 
Class. Kev. ii. 158. It is shown that no 
such force existed in senatorial provinces, 
but that they are found in most of the 
Caesarian. Tacitus speaks of them in 
Cappadocia (12. 49, 2 2. Noricum (H. 3. 
5, 51), Raetia (H. 1.68, 2), the Maritime 
Alps (H. 2. 12, 5), among the Helvetii 
(H. 1. 67, 2), and in Gaul generally (H. 
5. 26, 4). The large force raised by Vindex 
against Nero (vol. ii. p. 637) must have 
mainly consisted of such. 

T See 4. Fs 35 401 513 n1i 38, 6; 
H. 5. 1, 3, & 

B 4 5, 4. 5 H. 2. 93, 3. 

4 1, 24, 3; 12. 56, 3 Apparently a 
‘turma’ of horse went with each ‘ centuria.’ 
Marquardt, ii. p. 477. 15 4.2,2 

16 See vol. ii. Introd. 36, n. 2. 

 H. 2. 93, 3 

1* Dipl. C. I. ji iii. p. 853; Wilm. 2866. 

9 Inscr. Henzen 6862. 

Cuar. VIL], ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 127 

2. Urban cohorts. Of these, the * proprius miles’ of the * praefectus 
urbis’,’ three were kept in Rome under Tiberius ?, and the total number 
probably became six under Claudius and Nero ?, and four under Vitellius 
and Vespasian *; and they are so far joined to the praetorians as to be 
numbered in a series beginning where the former end, as the tenth to the 
thirteenth 5. The praetorian cohorts have titles, as ‘pia vindex,' &c., the 
urban are known by their numbers only *. 

The home army had the privilege of being professedly enlisted from the 
old recruiting grounds of the Republic’. "The rest of Italy, so far as its 
scanty free population admitted it, might help to keep up the legions and 
other cohorts of citizens, but for soldiers of all kinds the main supply was 
now drawn from foreign sources 5, the auxiliary troops being drawn from 
the Caesarian provinces only, the legionaries from all provinces alike, 
and, even in the time of Augustus, by no means exclusively from 
those who were already citizens by birth?, Voluntary enlistment seems 
usual, but *delectus' in the provinces preferable!?; and the number 
required was no doubt kept down to a minimum by withholding the 
* missio !'.' 

B.—Naval. 

The fleets of Misenum and Ravenna ?? are each dignified with the title 
* classis praetoria", but otherwise rank below not only the household 
troops but the legions, The admiral, ‘ praefectus *, ranks below the 
* praefectus praetorii '5,' and is either a knight or sometimes a freedman '*. ~ 
The marine soldiers, ‘ classiarii, are not Roman citizens, and, though of 

a Hot 54 

? Ann. 4/5, 4. See note on 3. 41, 2. 

3 See vol. ii. Introd. 36, n. 2 ; Purser, 
794. Some consider the increase to have 
been greater. 

* H. 2. 93, 3; Dipl 1. l. Vespasian 
added another to serve abroad. 

5 See Henzen, Index, p. 132. 

* Id. p. 131. I have followed Tacitus 
(4. §, 5), in not here mentioning the 
* vigiles, on whom see above, p. 106. 

7 4. 5, 5s 

5 See 3. 40, 5 ‘Inops Italia, inbellis 
urbana plebes, nihil validum in exercitibus 
nisi quod externum.’ 

? On the whole subject see Mommsen 
in Herm. xix. 1-78 and 210-234 (‘die 
Conscriptions-ordnung der Róm. Kaiser- 
zeit’) also Mr. Hardy in Class. Rev. iii. 
112, foll, and Mr. Purser, 1.-1. 805, foll. 
Besides the * vernacula multitudo enlisted 
in Rome itself on emergency (see 1. 31, 4, 
and note), it is shown that although the 
Illyricanand probably most of the western 

legions were recruited from countries 
where civic communities were numerous 
(cp. 16. 13, 4), those of the Fast were levied 
from provinces where such communities 
were few (cp. 13.7.1; 35, 4), and that such 
recruits could rarely have been citizens be- 
fore enlistment. But see Seeck, Rh. Mus. 
xlviii. 4.4; 4- 

"4 * Missiones veteranorum  rarissimas 
fecit' Suet. Tib. 48. 

7 Ann. 4. 5, 1; Marquardt, ii. 502. 

18 See Inscr. Henzen, Index, p. 142. As 
a fixed and regular title, the epithet ap- 
pears to be of later date. (Mommsen, 
Staatsr. ii. 863, 5.) It is analogous to 
that of * cohortes praetoriae. 

1* The elder Pliny, who held this office 
at his death, had been previously * prae- 
fectus alae' and procurator. 

15 E. g. Lucilius Bassus, H. 2. 100, 4. 

!$ E.g. Anicetus, Ann. 14. 3, 5; cp. 
C. I. L. iii. p. 844. At Ravenna there is 
only record of equestrian praefecti. E.g. 
13. 30, 2. 

128 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VII. 

more consideration than the rowers’, are so far on a par with them that 
we find both rewarded with the * civitas' after twenty-six years’ service *. 
The ships are usually either ‘triremes’ or * Liburnae*, and are dis- 
tinguished by names like modern ships*. The captains, whether of 
triremes or Liburnians, are designated as 'trierarchi5 We have no 
knowledge of the strength of these fleets; which are little mentioned in 
general, but acquire some prominence in the civil war of 822, A. D. 69. - 

Various auxiliary fleets, whether of ships of war* or transports’, 
existed in the provinces, and are mentioned in various inscriptions *. 

The total strength of all these forces can be only very roughly esti- 
mated. Taking the legion with its auxiliaries at 10,000, we have a total 
of 250,000 for the main armies; to which the home army, the ‘clas- 
siarii and all the various detached forces may add a further total of 
100,000. ‘This it should be remembered represents at that time the 
whole military and naval force of the civilised world. 

On the pay and grievances of the soldier it is sufficient to refer to the 
narrative of the mutiny?*, and the contrast there drawn between’ the 
legionaries and the praetorians; while a more favourable estimate of 
military privileges, at a somewhat later date, can be formed from the six- 
teenth Satire of Juvenal; and some information as to the rewards on 
retirement, chiefly the gift of * civitas' to auxiliaries, and the ratification 
of marriages generally !*, can be gathered from the various ‘ diplomata !'." 
To those of higher rank, many further advantages were attainable. 
Centurions, besides being promoted to such posts as the command of 
auxiliary cohorts or squadrons’, or the rank of * praefecti castrorum !5,' 
had regular pensions on retirement !*, and the ‘ primipili’ appear to have 
retained even for life the title of 'primipilares 5 and to have been 

appointed to responsible posts in the army, or as subordinate governors 
of provincial districts '5. 

! See on 14. 4, 5. 

3 See the *diplomata' cited by Mar- 
quardt, ii. p. 510, 2. 

3 The inscriptions show a few ships 
above triremes: the ‘ biremes’ (4. 27, 
I, &c.) are probably the same as the 
* Liburnae.' 

1! See Henzen, Index, p. 143. 

5 H. 2. 16, 3: for ‘navarchi,’ see 15. 

I, 2. | 
ua * Sociae triremes ' Ann. 4. 5, 5. 

7 See 2. 6, &c. 

* E.g. ‘classis Germanica, ‘ Moe- 
sica,’ * Pannonica,' ‘Syriaca.’ See Henzen, 
Index, p. 142, and the Gallic fleet, 4. 5, 1. 

"8 See Ann. 1.17; 26; 35 ; 36; 78. 

19 On this subject, see Purser, 1.1. p. 
809, foll. 

" These are collected in C. I. L. iii. 
p. 843, &c. For specimens, see Henzen 
6857, &c. ; Wilm. 904, &c. 

? Esp. * primipili, cp. Henzen, Inscr. 
6947. 13 7, 20, 2. 

++ These were reduced by Caligula: see 
Suet. Cal. 44. 

18 * Primipilaris senex ' Quint. Inst. Or. 
6. 3, 92: see note on I2. 7, 4. 

*$6 Marquardt, ii. p. 376. See 2. 11, 2; 
4. 72,2; 13. 36,2; H. 1. 31, 3; 87, 3; 
2. 22, 63 3. 70, 15 4. 15, 6. They had 
often equestrian rank on retirement. See 
Mart. 6. 58, 10. 

a EMIL ade p -— — a— cm ——— D————— m -— . —— 
npe m 

Cua. VIL], ROME UNDER AUGUSTUS AND TIBERIUS. 129 

CONSOLIDATION OF THE Empire. 

Augustus is said to have bequeathed at his death not a mere aggregate 
of territories, but an organized whole’, and one which seemed to himself 
to have reached its proper limit?. The administration, especially of the 
provinces and armies, was centralized in a way previously unknown, 
and the improvement of roads? and institution of. couriers‘ gave new 
rapidity to inter-communicatión: and, not to speak of his periodical 
financial statements?, his summary of the whole position of the empire, 
published after his death *, must have given to the senate a new insight 
into its organization. If, beyond this, neither he nor his successor had 
devised any plans for bringing the whole mass into a condition of homo- 
geneous unity, it is none the less evident that tendencies in this direction 
were constantly operating. The practical recognitien of common inter- 
ests between rulers and ruled; the security of traffic; the vast require- 
ments of the city of Rome, both as regards necessaries of life" and 
luxuries*; the: local centres of traffic afforded especially by camps and 

^. colonies?; must have tended, even more than the centralized government, 

to level the barriers of nations. Two languages again were more.and 
more taking the place of a Babel of tongues: the prevalence of Greek 
in the East may be estimated from the extent of its use among even 
a race so tenacious of nationality as the Hebrews”; while, in the West, 
Latin, already prevalent in Gaul, making the vernacular forgotten in 

many parts of Spain", and generally spoken also in Pannonia! was | 

not wholly lost even by Rome's bitterest enemies ?? ; and, as the general 
official language of the empire, had some hold even in the East !*. 

Again, though Tiberius probably imitated the reserve of Augustus in | 

bestowing the ‘ civitas!^;' yet even this great equalization of privilege must 

! * Cuncta inter se conexa" I. 9, 6. 

3 See 1. I1, 9... 

* For his reconstruction of the roads 
of Italy, see above, p. 110. In the pro- 
vinces especial mention may be made of 
the great road connecting Spain and 
]taly,see Mommsen, Hist. v. 67, E.T. 1. 74. 

* Suet. Aug. 49. On the rapidity of 
communication, see note on I.'16, I. 

5 'This custom wasdropped by Tiberius, 
| and revived by Gaius, Stet. Cal. 16. 

l. 11,7. 

7 E.g. the corn trade. 

* Augustus enumerates ten provinces 
in which he had planted military colonies 
(Mon. Anc. v. 35), and Mommsen (ad 
loc.) enumerates in these and in Illyricum 
(apparently reckoned with Italy) some 

VOL. I. 

nineteen such foundations, many of which ' 

became very important. After him, no 
more were founded till the time of Claudius 
(see vol. ii. Introd. p. 34). 

10 It is implied in Acts 32. 2 that Greek 
would have been intelligible, though less 
so than Syro-Chaldaic, to most of the 
crowd at Jerusalem. 

1 Strabo, 3. 2, 15; p. 151. 

13 Vell. 2. 1IoO, 5. 

13 As Arminius. See 2. 10, 3. 

14 Besides the trilingual inscription cn 

i the cross, and Latin words in N. T., the 
* 3. 53,5, &c. See Friedl. vol. iii. ch. 1. 

mixture in the names of Jewish persons 
is noticed, as ‘Simon ‘the Cyrenian, thc 
father of Alexander and Rufus' (Mark 
15. 21). See Merivale, ch. xxxix. p. 377. 

% Suet. Aug. 40. We find it however 
given by Augustus not only to individuals 

NT. uem 

130 INTRODUCTION. (Cuap. VII, 

have been steadily extendíng itself. By the manumission of slaves, 
which, in spite of checks imposed upon it, must have been constant, any 
Roman could call into existence those who at a stroke of the wand 
succeeded to most !, and whose sons would succeed to all, civic privileges. 
Many a Roman pauper by transplantation to a colony became there the 
parent of a prosperous civic family. Many an auxiliary soldier, already 
habituated to Roman customs by service under the standards, received 
the civitas on his discharge?, and his sons might serve and rise in the 
ranks of the legions and thus lay the foundation of a career of honour. 

Lastly, in spite of the vast diversity of tolerated religions, some traces 
of common religious ideas begin to develop themselves. The restora- 
tion of religion had formed a great part of the policy of Augustus, and 
his aspirations are devoutly seconded by the poets of his court *. Besides 
the rebuilding or restoration of almost every temple in the city‘, he had 
endeavoured to bring home religion to the mass of the people by a kind 
of parochial system, in the worship of the ‘ Lares compitales' at the 300 
chapels 5 instituted in the various vici, under the ministration of their 
freedmen priests (* Augustales") and superintendence of the ‘vicoma- 
gistri*^ With these the worship of his own ‘Genius’ was associated’, by 
which constant usage, as well as by the *ludi compitalicii 5^ the political 
order was connected with the sacred ideas of domestic security; not 
only in Rome and Italy, but in many parts of the empire*. To this was 
added afterwards throughout the empire the later cult.of the ' Divus 
Augustus’ and his deified successors ; as also in some cases, that of the 
living Caesar, associated with the imperial city": the whole forming a kind 
of apotheosis of order and peace, which appears to have been for the 
present the nearest approach to an universal religion. 

Otherwise there was more interchange than fusion of manifold reli- 
gions, Temples to Jupiter Capitolinus are found in provinces ?; and, in 
turn, whatever was atttactive in provincial religions struck root in Rome; 
and supplied, what the colder forms of the state ritual failed to supply, 
soine food for the fervour of religious enthusiasm and for speculative 
theology. Many foreign religions obtained special licence, and even the 
* See Marquardt, iii. p. 204. j 
? Ovid, Fast. 5, 145; Hor. Od. 4.5,34. 

* Suet. Aug. 31. 
® Sacrifice for the health of Augustus 

(e.g. 1. 58, 2), bat to communities (Suet. 
Aug. 47); of which Utica is an instance. 
Dio, 49. 16, 1. On the great contrast in 
the practice of Claudius see vol. ii. Introd. 

PP. 33; 39- ] 
! See Persius, Sat. 5, 78. 
3 See the ‘diplomata’ above referred 
to, p. 128. 
3 As in Vergil end Horace frequently. 
* Livy, 4. 20, 5; Mon. Anc. iv. 1-26. 
* Verg. Aen. 8, 716. 

was offered daily in the Jewish temple. 
Philo. leg. ad C. c. 36, 588. 

10 See 1.10, 85 54, 1; 78, 1. 

" For the practice of Augustus in his 
lifetime, see on 1. 10, 5; 78, 1; for that 
of Tiberius see 4. 15; 37; 55, and notes. 

12 Pausan. 2, 4. 

—— —-—— 

Cur. VIL] | 7Z7BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. I3I 

illicit might enjoy practical impunity, till circumstances pointed attention 
to them ; as in the suppression of Isiac rites by Agrippa! ; or the stern 
vengeance taken by Tiberius on the priests of this cult for a flagrant 
moral scandal?; or the deportation of Jews arising out of a gross pecu- 
niary fraud? ; the penalty being apparently in neither case such as sensibly 
to abate the prevalence of such worships *. 

Nor could any coercion keep out the forbidden mysteries of astrology 
and magic?; the former of which had the direct countenance of Tibe- 
rius, though his protection of Thrasyllus® did not interfere with the 
chastisement of the meaner herd". The influence of all foreign super- 
stitions on a less strong mind may be seen in the case of Germanicus ; 
in the restless search after foreign oracles, worships, miracles?, which 
seems to have so far guided his movements in the East; and in the 
belief shared by his friends as well as himself, that the magician was as 
capable of causing his death as the poisoner *. 

Meanwhile, the only religion capable of taking the place both of the 
effete ideas of old Roman worship, and of the gross fanaticisms of foreign 

superstition, was known as yet only to a few poor Jews, and hardly 
reaches to the outer world till the time of Claudius ?*. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

ON THE ESTIMATE IN TACITUS OF THE CHARACTER AND 
PERSONAL GOVERNMENT OF TIBERIUS. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

First period. Life of Tiberius prior to his principate ; ; ‘ ; ; "Iga 
Second period, 767-775, A.D. 14-22 . ' . . . í ; ‘ e 397 
Third period, 776-781, A.D. 23-28 . ; $ 2 ; ; ‘ a he 
Fourth and fifth periods, 782-790, A. D. 29-37 . ‘ ; : : « 449 
Testimony of other authors : ; : ; $ ; . . 155 
General conclusion . ‘ . . : : ; . : . . 158 

NoTE.—Several of the works on this subject are mentioned by Nipp. (Introd. p. 34 
note); but the most complete sketch of the literature of the question known to me is 
contained in the treatise of Professor Iginio Gentile, * L'imperatore Tiberio secondo la 

In 733, B.C. at. Dio, 54. 6, 6. ... quod in civitate nostra et vetabitur 
2 Jos. Ant. 18. 3, 4 ; Ann. 2. 85, 5. semper et retinebitur' H. 1. 22, 2. 
* Jos. 1l. L, Ann. 1. I. 6 6. 20, 3. YS. 39, KR. 
* On the measures taken by-Claudius 8 See 2. 54 ; 61. 
with regard to the Jews, see vol. ii. Introd. ? 2. 69, 5 
pp. 29, &c. 10 On the first persecution of Christians 

5 See 2. 27, 2, &c. ‘Genus hominum by Nero see Appendix to B. 15. 
K 2 

I" ig d 
IH IT EHE 

132 INTRODUCTION. (Cua». VIII. 

moderna critica storica (Milan, 1887). Among English works the most thorough- 
going defences of Tiberius are those by Professor Beesly (Catiline, Clodius, and 
Tiberius, London, 1878) and by Mr. Baring Gould (Tragedy of the Caesars, London, 
1892), and the most balanced judgment is that of Dean Merivale (Hist. Vol. v). 
A clear and fair estimate is also given in the Introduction to Professor Allen's 
edition (1890). 

Many obligations, not easy to specify in their places, must be here acknowledged to 
several works, especially that of Professor Gentile ; but my chief endeavour has been 
to give an independent judgment on the facts and interpretations of facts contained in 
Tacitus and other original authorities. 

Tacitus would undoubtedly wish his readers to take, as his most 
deliberate judgment on Tiberius, the summary at the end of the Sixth ” 
Book, where his life is marked out into periods, showing a gradual 
moral deterioration, affecting both his private habits and personal 
government!, It will therefore be convenient to examine these suc- 
cessively. . | 

I. * Egregium vita famaque quoad privatus vel in imperiis sub Augusto 
vixerat.' | | : 

This emphatic praise, from so unfavourable a witness, though perhaps 
qualified by insinuations of latent cruelty*, and tales, which we seem 
intended to believe, of a foretaste at Rhodes of Capreae?, must at least 
be taken as an admission that his public life to his fifty-sixth year was 
unimpeachable, and seems to carry with it a disbelief in the tales of 
drunkenness caught up hy Suetonius *. 

‘From earliest infancy, his lot was one of peril^' Born in the 
year of Philippi* (712, s.c. 42), he shared in the very beginning of life 
the hurried flight of his parents from Perusia: he was only four years old 
when his mother became the wife of the triumvir; only nine" when his 
father's death transferred him to the tutelage of his stepfather, who two 
years later became the undisputed master of the Roman empire. From 
this point, his life, in the judgment of popular exaggeration, seemed 
enviable in the extreme. He is ‘ brought up from childhood in a reigning 
family, loaded with consulships and triumphs in his youth*' To a more 
careful observer, the thirty-five years next ensuing are a history of 
harassing intrigues and rivalries® and souring disappointments, hardly 
compensated by ultimate success. 

He assumed the ‘toga virilis’ in 727, B.c. 27, and by special privilege 

1 6. 51, f. * Suet. Tib. 5. 
: = E 3. ' Suet. Tib. 6. 
at is given as a rumonr, I. 4, 4, is I. 4, 4. 
assumed as a fact, 4. 57, 4. f * * Multis aemulis conflictatus est' 6. 

* Suet. Tib. 42. 5 6. 51, 2. ^. 8I, 2. 

Cu. VIL] TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 133 

became quaestor in his nineteenth year, in 731, B.c. 23! ; at which time 
the death of young Marcellus, who was about a year older, removed 
the first of his various rivals from his path?. He was praetor in 737, 
B.C. 17, at the age of twenty-five, and consul in 741, B.c. 13, at the age 
of twenty-nine *. 

Side by side with his advancement in civil offices came a succession 
of military commands. After a *tirocinium' as military tribune in the 
Cantabrian war, he was sent in 734, B.c. 20, in his twenty-second year, 
with forces to the East, to give a king to Armenia; and had the honour 
of bringing back the standards lost with Crassus‘. In 732, B.c. 15, he 
shared with his brother Drusus the more arduous task of subduing the 
mountaineers of the Grisons and Tyrol® ; a service which probably gave 
the youths their ‘nomen imperatorium $' About this time he received in 
marriage Vipsania Agrippina, daughter, by a former wife’, of Agrippa, 
who now stood next to Augustus as his son-in-law * and his colleague i in 
the tribunician power *. 

Whatever hopes may have been raised by the unexpected death of 
Agrippa, in 742, B.c. 12, at the age of fifty-one—which left only two 
boys, aged eight and five!*, between the stepsons and the succession— 
would fade gradually as time went on and the lads grew older; while the 
immediate disastrous consequence to Tiberius was the shadow cast over 
his domestic life, by his forced divorce from Vipsania, to whom he was 
deeply attached !!, and his marriage, for mere dynastic reasons, to Julia, 
who may have courted him as a lover, but despised him as her husband, 
and showed her contempt by her outrageous profligacy ?. Almost 
immediately after this marriage he was sent to suppress a rising in 
Delmatia and Pannonia ?; and after the death in 745, B.c. 9, of his 
brother Drusus, at the head of whose funeral train he marched on foot in 
mid-winter from the Rhine to Rome", he prosecuted the war in Germany"; 
for successes in which he was rewarded in 745 and 747, B.c. 9, 7, by 
triumphal distinctions of some kind '* and a second consulship in the 
latter year. In 748, B.c. 6, he seemed still more fully to fill the 

1 Dio, 53. 28, 3. At about this age he 10 A third was born afterwards. 
conducted an important accusation, that of "' Suetonius (Tib. 7) gives a touching 
: Fannius Caepio (see.on I. 1o, 3) forcon- anecdote of their only meeting after the 
spiracy against the life of Augustus (Suet. — divorce. 

Tib. 8). 13 j, 53, 2; Suet. Tib. 7. 
i Sue Tee Tin Pa « Dio. 4 ; Suet. Tib. 7 
uet. Tib. y, Amn, 2. 3, 4. ; . Tib. 7. 
5 Suet. Tib. 1.1.; Hor. Od. 4. 14. * Vell 2. 97, 2; Suet. Tib. 9; Dio, 
$1. 3,I. 55. 6, 1. 
7 Pomponia, daughter of Atticus the 7h On the exact nature of these there 
friend of Cicero. See 2. 43, 7. appears to be some discrepancy between 

* Dio, 54. 6, 5. ? See 3 56, 3. ell. 2. 97 4 and Suet. Tib. 9. 

» 

so 

INTRODUCTION. (Cuar. VIII. 

134 

place of Agrippa, by receiving for five years the tribunician power; 
a position which Augustus felt he could safely trust to one of such an 
* unambitious temperament !.' 

It was now that he formed his strange resolution of retirement to 
Rhodes, and with great difficulty obtained the necessary permission *. 
The conduct of his wife is assigned as the most potent reason"; an in- 
fluential second motive can be traced in the rise to manhood of the 
young Caesars: and his retirement of seven years is characterized by 
studious, not to say pedantic pursuits *, and initiation by Thrasyllus into 
the dangerous mysteries of astrology, which took so firm a hold upon his 
mind 5. After the banishment of Julia in 752, B.c. 2, he had desired, 
but had not been permitted, to return. The protection of his tribunician 
power expired, and the rest of his absence was a scarcely disguised 
exile*; in which he was made to feel once for all that a private position 
to one in such a rank was impossible, by being exposed to insult and 
even to peril of life, during the progress of Gaius Caesar to the Fast 
under the sinister influence of M. Lollius". In 755, a.p. 2, the year of 
the death of Lucius Caesar, he obtained leave to return to Rome; but 
lived in complete retirement till the death of Gaius in 757, A.D. 4, caused 
a complete change in his position. 

Now, at the age of forty-six, he was adopted into the family of the 
Caesars *, his tribunician power was renewed for another five years *, and 
he was displayed as the heir before the greatest armies of the state '*. If 
we are to believe Velleius, he was welcomed by the legions with raptures 
of enthusiasm, and his achievements in the next seven years place him 
in the front rank of Roman generals”. The aim of these military 
operations was to complete the conquest of the great province in further 
Germany, and to secure a frontier on the Elbe. In the two campaigns 
of 757 and 758, a.p. 4 and 5, the resistance in North Germany appeared 
to have been broken ; a third campaign was intended, by a concentrated 
attack with twelve legions on Bohemia, to crush Maroboduus, who had 
organized what might be called an empire of South Germany ? ; when the 
blaze of rebellion in Pannonia and Delmatia in 759, A.D. 6, taxed all the 

L 

3- 56, 4. y s 2. 103, 2), 757, A.D. f The renewal of 
2 Suet. Tib. ro. Historians are evi- y 

trib. pot. may probably have dated from 

dently right in making this period of 
effacement and peril the chief crisis affect- 
ing his character previous to his rule. © 

5 I. 55, 2. * Suet. Tib. 11 

5 6. 20, 3. € Suet. Tib. 11-12. 

7 3. 48, 3; Suet. Tib. 13. 

* Suet. Tib. 15. His adoption took 
place June 26 (Kal. Amit.) or 27 (Vell. 

July t. See Staatsr. ii. p. 797, 3. 

» See note on I. 10, 7. 

19 343.3. 

1 Vell. 2. 104, &c. 

12 The chief authority for these cam- 
paigns is Velleius, who served in them. 
On their strategy, see the remarks of 
Professor Beesly. | 

Cur. VII.) ZIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. I25 

resources of Rome to face a crisis which, with some apparent forgetfulness 
of the Teutons and the Cimbri, is called the gravest since the Punic 
wars’, By the time that this was quelled all had been lost in Germany 
by the annihilation of the army of Varus in 762, 4. D. 9*; and nothing 
remained but to exact vengeance and secure the frontier. The schemes 
of German conquest would seem to have been less nearly executed, or 
their feasibility more misconceived, than our authorities admit to us; but 
the restoration of order within the empire at least was complete and 

permanent, and the triumph of Tiberius in 765, a.p. 12, well earned *. ' 

Nor is there reason to doubt the most distinguishing trait of his general- 
ship, his carefulness of his soldiers’ lives *, a duty more than ever incumbent 
on a general who knew that almost the last reserve of Rome was in the 
field. Rewarded, besides his triumph, with a permanent renewal of 
tribunician power °, and a ‘ proconsulare imperium ' apparently coordinate 
with that of the princeps *, he had again set out for Illyricum when the 
. Jast illness of Augustus recalled him hastily to Italy, which for the remain- 
ing twenty-three years of his life he never quitted. 

Our attention throughout this period must be mainly directed to the 
circumstances which formed the character of the future prince. It was 
evidently always the dearest wish of Augustus to found a family dynasty. 
The principate could never be formally bequeathed*, and, by the first 
princeps, even the custom of succession had wholly to be created; but 
hé seems clearly to have seen that with tact and discretion he could 
practically name his successor ; and, though a sonless man, had no such 
noble ambition as Galba conceived and Nerva realized, of directing 
choice to the worthiest. Yet he could see that his intended successor 
must be ripe in years and tried in service, prominent enough to be such 
as a free state might be supposed to choose. Again, the precariousness 
of his own health obliged Augustus always to contemplate the possibility 
of a speedy as well as a distant succession. Hence it was always his 
policy to surround his throne with props *, and to have different heirs in 
various grades of expectancy. In the first rank were his nearest relatives, 
to be his choice if time allowed him to make them sufficiently prominent. 
Such in the earlier years was Marcellus, and such in later times were 
Gaius and Lucius Caesar. Secondly, there must be another in reserve, 
already ripe in years and tried in real life, who might fill the chief place 

- ! Suet. Tib. 16. On this war, see Vell. * This renewal had probably taken 
3. 110-116. On the large force raised to place during his absence. See note on 

deal with it, see above, p. 121, note 12. I. 10, 7. 
3 See Vell. 2. 117-120. * See above, ch. vi. p. 98. 
? Vell.3. 121,3. * Id. 114. 3 See ch. vi. p. 97.. 
5 On the difficulty of finding soldiers, ? * Quo pluribus munimentis insisteret’ 

see Dio, 55. 31, 1 ; 56. 23, 2. I3.5. 

136 INTRODUCTION. 

in case of a sudden vacancy ; but who, after a sacrifice of the best years 
of his life for the ruling house, might expect to be summarily set aside 
for a youth, if circumstances hereafter made it feasible. Such in the 
earlier years was Agrippa, and such was in later times the position of 
Tiberius. Each was victim in turn to the matrimonial arrangements 
which Augustus always carried out with more than a Roman's disregard 
of natural affection, often with a cynical contempt even for common 
decency. Each had endeavoured to escape from an intolerable position 
by retirement from Rome. Agrippa, had he lived long enough, would 
probably again have had to retire before his own sons, adopted into the 
family of the Caesars over his head. Tiberius, even at the death of Gaius, 
had Germanicus been ten years older or Augustus ten years younger, 
‘would probably have been again postponed to the grandson of Octavia, 
whose children by Agrippina would still more nearly represent the true 
blood of Augustus *. 

We may well believe that a sense of public * duty co-operated with the 
solicitations of Livia, in procuring the adoption of her son, which she so 
often recalled to him in after times as the crowning service of her life 5. 
Still, with the tenacity that marked all his policy, Augustus seemed even 
then to leave a chance open for future family schemes, not only by him- 
self adopting at the same time the worthless Agrippa Postumus 5, but 
also by compelling Tiberius, as the price of his own adoption, to adopt 
Germanicus", and tb"s to prejudice the position of his son by blood, 
Drusus, who was a year or two younger. Even the prospect of a possible 
civil war could not turn the old man from a scheme which might one 
day bring back the inheritance of the Caesars to his own direct descen- 
dants. Hence the undisguised coldness of. Tiberius and Livia towards 
Germanicus and his house, and the suspicions, not the less real because 
baseless, that the young man might turn his popularity to disloyal 
use ; hence the idea that even Agrippa, though formally banished in per- 

[Caar. VIII. 

1 To secure one political ally he had 
himself set aside the daughter of Servilius 
for Clodia (Suet. Aug. 62); to win 
another, he married Scribonia (App. B.C. 
5. 53), whom he divorced, on the day of 
her daughter's birth (Dio, 48. 34, 3), for 
the scandalous marriage with Livia (Ann. 
I. 10, 4). For like reasons he sacrificed 
Octavia to Antonius, and compelled 
Agrippa possibly to divorce Pomponia 
for Marcella, certainly Marcella for Julia, 
who was given, for mere dynastic reasons, 
io three successive husbands. The cruel 
divorce of Tiberius from Vipsania is 
mentioned above. 

? On the retirement of Agrippa at the 
rise of Marcellus, see 14. 53, 3, and note; 
Vell. 2. 93, 2; Dio, 53. 32, 1. 

* See ch. ix. This marriage took place 
about A.D. 5, but was no doubt previously 
arranged. 

* Suet. (Tib. 31) states thar Au- 
gustus declared on oath, ‘se reipublicae 
causa adoptare eum.’ The sinister 
motive imputed to him by his detrac- 
tors (see 1. 10, 6) is rejected even by 
Suetonius. 

* 4-575 4. 

* Suet." Tib, 15. 

7 1. 3, 5; Suet. 1. 1. 

Cur. VIL]  TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 137 

petuity, was still formidable while he lived, and might any day return to 
favour !. 

Augustus again, while addressing Tiberius by letter in a fulsome strain 
of palpable exaggeration?, is said to have often jested to his courtiers 
about the poor Roman people, who were to be *so deliberately masti- 
cated ; ' often to have broken off lively conversation at his approach *, and 
even in a public rescript to have * taunted him with his personal peculi- 
arities under colour of apology * . The epigrammatists who did not spare 
Tiberius even as a prince °, assuredly did not spare him all this time*; and 
even a posthumous stroke was dealt in the will which made him principal 
heir, by a pointed allusion to those who should have filled his place’. 

Such circumstances, acting on such a temperament, produced much 
such a character as we should expect. We are to think of the man 
Tiberius as one naturally austere, reserved, and distant?; the best of 
whose life had been spent in camps or in retirement; whose position at 
court had been generally more or less overshadowed by rivals; and 
whose domestic life had been wrecked for political objects in which he 
had no-primary interest; while he had been schooled for years in repres- 
sion and disguise, with fatalists always at his elbow to tell him that his 
day of revenge would come?. He had lived in the coldest shade of 
neglect, as well as in the full sunshine of flattery, and could rate the 
homage of senate and people at its proper worth *. Of all views of h's 
character, none is more amply borne out by facts than that which states 
that his resolution was as weak as his penetration was keen”; so that, 
the more clearly he could read men's minds, the more he was at a loss 
to deal with them. It is in this mixture of strength and weakness”, as 
well as in the union of his natural self-distrust ?, reserve, and austerity, 
with the souring experiences of a lifetime, that we find the leading traits 
of gel of the future ruler. 

* Occultum ac subdolum angen virtutibus, donec Germanicus 
ac ates superfuere.’ 

This period, the first eight years of -this principate, treated by Tacitus 

* 

315.5, 2 2 See Suet. Tib. 21. tances, with which Seneca charges him (de 

* Id. * 1.10, 7. Ben. 5. 25, 2), may often have had aust 
5 1. 72, 5 ; Suet. Tib. 59. $ Ib. ground. 
7 Suet. Tib. 23 * Quoniam atrox fortuna It [, 80, 3 

Gaium et Lucium filios mihi eripuit.’ 

* * Tristissimum, ut constat, hominum ' 
Plin. N. H. 28. 2 (5), 23. 

. * *Circa deos ac religiones neglegentior, 
quippe addictus mathematicae, plenusque 
persuasionis. cuncta fato agi' Suet. Tib. 
69. Seeon 6. 21. 

‘© ‘The coldness towards old acquain- 

12 Professor Beesly has well noted the 
indications of such a temperament in his 
physiognomy, as in the well-known Vati- 
can statue (Mus. Chiarom. 494). 

13 See on I. 11, I, &c., and especially 
4- 38, 4, where his diffidence is variously 
explained, as due to modesty, self-de- 
preciation, or meanspiritedness. 

138 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VIII. 

in the first three Books, and reviewed at the beginning of the Fourth, is 
at once that on which his information is most full, and his estimate most 
questionable : the whole time being thus summarily dismissed, not as that 
in which the purpose was most sincere, but in which the disguise was best 
sustained. 

The fact of generally just and moderate government is admitted and 
indisputable. We are told of constant consultation of the senate, even 
on matters not strictly belonging to their cognizance!; and its chief 
members are encouraged to discuss, and rebuked for servility?; that the 
affice of the magistrates of the republic is respected? ; the laws, with one 
exception *, uprightly administered; that in the bestowal of dignities the 
worthiest were selected; that Tiberius set an example of frugality, both 
in the moderate size and number of his Italian estates, amid the vast villas 
of the nobles *, and in unostentatious management and retinue ; as well 
as an example of moderation in conducting disputes with other citizens 
as between equals in the law-courts. It is further admitted that these - 
characteristics at home were accompanied by clemency and vigilance 
abroad: that no new burdens were laid on the provinces; the old ones 
adjusted with care and remitted on occasion; personal violence and 
confiscation scrupulously avoided ; cruelty and extortion in governors 
duly punished; fiscal procuratorships conferred on men of character, 
even without personal knowledge; and their tenure indefinitely extended, 
as if to diminish temptation to peculation, by giving men time to grow 
rich without it. | | 

Many even of what seemed to Tacitus defects of policy, would be 
merits to an impartial critic ; who, for instance, would hardly be induced 
to believe that Germanicus, whose chief recorded achievements are those 
of mere ravage and massacre 5, or ostentatious and futile obsequies to the 
remains of those who fell with Varus", or at best barren victories in the 
field*, balanced by disastrous retreats*, and entailing untold requisitions 
on Gaul '*, was recalled from an all but completed conquest ™. 

"The general foreign policy of such a ruler naturally finds little favour 
with an historian who looked back with fondness to the military glories of 
the old Republic ?, and was writing when the star of conquest was again 
in the ascendent, when the eagles had advanced to the Carpathians and 
the Pruth, and beyond the Euphrates and Tigris, the fleet to the Persian 
Gulf and the Indian Ocean. His disdain is natural for the old * narrow 

! See 4. 6, 2, and note on 1, 52, 2. 61.51; 56. 71.61. * 2.16, &c. 
* E.g. 3- 47) 43 59, 2. ° 1. 63-71; 2. 23 ? See 2. 5, 3 
5 On their function at this time, see " 2. 26, a. For a general view of his 

ch. vi. p. 90, foll. . campaigns, see App. ii. to Book ii. 
* See below, p. 141. 5 See 3. 53, 5. B 45 32,2: 

Cuar VIII.) 77BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 139 

limits of empire ',' for the ‘timid or envious’ advice of Augustus ?, and 
for a prince who ‘cared not to extend the frontier, and under whom 
‘peace was slightly if at all disturbed?.' Yet this policy, while prudent 
and consistent, was not undignified. The civil war of Arminius and 
Maroboduus * fully attests the wisdom of leaving Germany to its internal 
conflicts. The anxiety to preserve order, and to settle difficulties 
without recourse to arms’, will commend itself no less than the just 
partition of Thrace under its own princes?; the acquisition of Cappadocia 
with advantage both to its own inhabitants and to the Roman people*; 
and the maintenance of prestige in the East without open breach with 
Parthia; while Armenia is secured to the Roman interest through a prince 
of Roman sympathies, yet not too Roman for his subjects '°. 

Again, the severe punishment of governors for extortion will be 
generally held deserving of more praise than is awarded by the historian, 
who, even when candidly admitting a case of proved guilt in this respect, 
appears to lay no stress upon it™. Nor can we share his apparent regret 
that largess was not lavished on the needy descendant of the Hortensii ? ; 
the more so as it is admitted that Tiberius cared not, at least at this time, 
to enrich himself ?, or to be sparing of bounty to persons or communi- 
ties ^ on just occasion. 

Again, when all his resources were strained to feed the people’, we 
should hardly blame the economy, even if we are allowed to imagine no 
better motive, from which their mere amusements were curtailed ?". 

To say that he was austere and generally feared 5, is to say that his 
disposition was such as nature and circumstances had made it; nor is 
his carelessness of popularity unaccompanied with the rational desire of 
solid approval ??. 

The evidence on which the whole of this period is pronounced to be 
one of mere sustained hypocrisy, is best challenged i taking the leading 
instances alleged. - 

The first instance is at the outset, when a show is made of declining 
the principate which every step had been taken to secure. Undoubtedly 
the reluctance was so far insincere, that his Rhodian retirement must 
have taught him, that for one so placed, the only safety was to rule; but 

Q4 4, 6. 5-1; 115 v. free from the defects of Vonones. See 2. 
> 4. 32, 3. * 2. 44; 65. 56, 2. 
53, 26, 3. Many other such conflicts " E.g. 1.74, 73 3-38, 1; 70, 1; 4. 19, 
are mentioned in the note there. 5, &c. | 
* * Ne conposita turbarentur’ 2. 65, 1. 17 4. 37-38. 13 3. 48; 3. 18, 2. 
7 2. 64, 2. 2. 67, 4; 14 See note on I. 75, 4. 
? By its revenue the ‘ Pen EN. was 15 2.475, 35 4. I3, 1 
reduced (2. 42, 6); yet the burdens of its € 3. 87, 1; 4. 6, a 

18 s 

people were lessened (2. 56, 4). 7 4. 54,33 4 62, 3.° 
10 Artaxias was the people's choice, and 2 Oderint, dum probent? Suet. T ib. 59. 

~= 

I 
. 
igh 

140 INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VIII. 

if we suppose his natural irresolution to have mingled with his disguise, 
he would not be the only one whose self-reliance had failed him at the 
crisis of his fortunes: and of the reasons given for his conduct, two at 
least are thoroughly substantial. As regards the armies, he certainly did 
‘hold a wolf by the ears !,' whether he was aware of the actual mutiny or 
not: and the constitution ‘of the principate, as well as the absence at this 
date of any monarchical or dynastic tradition *, required him to secure his 
position by laying all stress on the apparent free choice of the senate *. 
Another leading instance is soug»t in his whole conduct to Germanicus *, 
which again, even in its most questionable points, shows habitual irresolu- 
tion rather than malice. The position in which Germanicus is found 
at the death of Augustus? is strengthened rather than impaired*; he is 
allowed to levy war in such mode and on such scale as he pleases; his 
distinctions are more than equal to his deserts’; his recall, as has been said 
above, is justifiable. Yet it is but natural that the compulsory adoption * 
should rankle in a mind so disposed to brood on its grievances ®: and, 
side by side with the confidence which Tiberius felt when great armies 
were under his sons", might lurk some distrust of the young man's po- 
pularity, and of the masculine energy of his wife’. Thus we discern 
a motive for sending him to the East, where the legions did not know 
him, and for replacing a legate so connected with him as Creticus Silanus !* 
by one who could be trusted at least to hold his own. Cn. Piso, again, 
was much to be mistrusted. "The proudest member of one of the noblest 
houses yet left!*, he had spoken out in the senate !^, and had perhaps been 
noted by Augustus as dangerous. Yet his wife stood high in the favour 
of Augusta ", and he could hardly be passed over in the award of pro- 
vinces. It is reasonable to suppose that the one mistrust was set against 
the other, that he was to be some check on his young * imperator !5,^ who, 
in turn, was to check him by an ‘imperium maius' on the spot ?, Such 
1 Suet. Tib. 25. He probably also dis- — him (1. 62, 3), to recall him ‘ per invidiam ' 
trusted the senate and citizens generally (2. 26, 6), to send him to the East with 

and remonstrates with his friends, * ‘ut ig- sinister motives (2. 5, 1 3 42, D. to rejoice 
naros quanta bellua esset imperium.’ The du at his death (3. 4, 5) ^ 

whole passage in Suet. addssome important 3, 5- I. 14, 4. 
and apparently true touchesto the account i See. 1. 55, 1; 58, 9. * p. 138. 
in Tacitus. * See above, p. 136. 

2 See above. p. 135. . P See 1. 7, 11, and pote there: 

5 1, 7, 10. That republican sentiments M 2, 44, I. | 12 t. 69, 4. 
were shared by many of the senate (cp. I. 5 23:43, X 1 Tbid. 
4, 2) is to be admitted, and that the out- 15. Y, 545 6. 1513; 3. 
ward show of adulation covered a treasured 7 2. 43, 5, &c. 
recollection of Cato, Brutus, and Cassius : ?* Germanicus is'so styled, 3. 12, 4. 
cp. 3. 76, 53 4. 34, 1, &c. 19 The language used by Tiberius as to 

* His praise of him is said to betray — his appointment (3. 12, 2) is remarkable. 
insincerity by its exaggeration (I. 52, 3; — 'Germanico adiutorem a se datum auctore 
cp. 2. 43, 1), he is made.to misinterpret — senatu." 

Cua. VIL] ZIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. I4I 

a view is consistent with the belief that the full extent to which such rivalry 
might be pushed was not foreseen. Nor need a word here be said on 
any insinuation of the complicity of Tiberius in a death ascribed by the 
superstitious to witchcraft, and by those who dispensed with evidence to 
poisoning ! : still less on the imagination’ apparently for a moment enter- 

tained by Tacitus that the really fatal charge against Piso, that of levying 

civil war in the province, was somehow the outcome of a deep-laid plot 
of Tiberius to destroy him ’. | 

We pass to the state trials, especially those for * maiestas,' the one point 
excepted in the summary? from the generally just administration of laws 
. during this period. 
Tacitus is himself our best authority as to the offences originally and 
. subsequently made indictable under this term‘; which appears to have 
been gradually defined, with increasing width, by the ‘leges’ * Appuleia’ 
(654, B. c. 100), ‘ Varia’ (663, B.c. 91), ‘Cornelia’ (during the rule of 
Sulla), and ‘Iulia’ (enacted by Augustus)"; and which, even in the time 
of Cicero, has a formidably elastic meaning, which would hardly require 
pressing to make it cover the most trifling acts alleged to imply disrespect * 
. or the slightest approach to offensive words’. This latter application is, 
however, at least extremely limited* until the time of "Tiberius, under 
whom it is extended not only to libels written and published but even to 
spoken words*, an extension involving all the terrors of espionage in 
private life; and the strict limitation to libels on the prince and his family ? 
is disregarded in practice. It should be remembered also that Roman 
law was not without other means of dealing with either treasonable acts 

or scandalous libels, and that the law of ‘maiestas,’ probably from its 

more sweeping character, was one which it had been apparently thought 
prudent to hold in reserve. We should gather that it had been for the 
most part dormant under Augustus, as the praetor asks Tiberius in the 
|» year following his accession, whether he is to entertain charges under it", 

! This charge evidently broke down, 
but was still believed. See 3. 14, 2, 4. 

3 See on I. 13, 3.. 3 4. 6,3. | 

* 1. 72, 3, where see notes, and Mr. 
Whittuck in D. of Ant., s. v. 

5 A law prescribing the penalty of exile 
was p by the dictator Caesar (Cic. 
Phil. 1. 9, 23), and Antonius professed to 
be carrying out his ‘acta’ by giving the 
right of *provocatio' under it (Ibid. 9, 21). 
For extensions due to Augustus, see I. 72, 
4; 3. 24, 3. He also poer defined 
more stringently its applicability to pet- 
sonal offences against the emperor as the 
foremost of those «quibus populus po- 
testatem dedit" (see below). 

* For such charges see 1. 73,2; 74, 43 
3. 36, 1, and notes, and Suet. Tib. 58, 
Sen. de Ben. 3. 26. 

7 «Maiestatem minuere est de dig- 
nitate, aut amplitudine, aut potestate 
Populi aut eorum quibus populus po- 
testatem dedit, aliquid derogare' De Inv. 
2. 17. 

* See on I. 72, 4. 

. * We find such a charge (though not 
a conviction) as early as the second year 
of his rule (1. 74, 3). For later cases see 
4- 21, 35 42, 216. 7, 4, &c. 

P 8e 4. 34, 3- _ 

"E.g. 3: 49) 13 4- 34, UE. 

13 See 1. 72, 4, and note. 

INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. VIII. 

142 

He is told that *the laws are to be enforced, and an immediate crop of 
charges is the result. The whole of the rule of Tiberius is thus an 
exceptional period of the activity of this law, immediately afterwards 
professedly suspended by Gaius, and really so from the accession of 
Claudius, till it was revived, as a potent engine of tyranny, in the eighth 
year of Nero’. It should be further mentioned that the strict legal 
penalty is a severe form of exile, and that all infliction of death under 
this law is an excess. 

During this first period, about twelve trials? may be noted, in which 
this is either the sole charge, or more frequently coupled with others *. 
In two cases acts are alleged, which in any age would have been treason- 
able *, if proved; in the others the charge is grounded either on a more 
or less strained interpretation of acts, or, in one or two cases, on words *. 
It should be added, that in three cases the charge of ‘maiestas’ is dis- 
missed before trial; and that three others result in acquittal*; and 
that the one case in which death is inflicted for an offence of words takes’ 
place in the absence of Tiberius, who finds fault with, and takes measures 
to prevent in future so precipitate a sentence ’. 

It may be admitted that the number of cases is not large in itself, and 
that many among this number seem due to the desire of accusers to 
secure a conviction by multiplying counts in the indictment, especially by 
adding a charge not less sweeping and formidable than the modern 
phrase of ‘conduct calculated to bring the government into contempt ;' 
a charge especially difficult to meet under such a constitution as that of 
the Caesars, resting on innumerable vague lines and fictions. We may 
also admit that Tiberius, though with frequent vacillations of purpose’, 
shows on the whole at present no disposition to press for convictions, or 
for extreme sentences upon conviction. On the other hand, even a small 

1 See 14.48, 3, and note. 
2 See 3. 50, 6, and note. 

3 Such a case as that of Libo Drusus. 

is here included for convenience, though 
not strictly one of ‘maiestas.’ It is 
not clear that we have before us all the 
cases on record, for we should suppose 
from 1. 72, 4, that some charges of * ma- 
iestas’ were brought before the 
court, but Tacitus mentions only those 
which came before the senate, perhaps 
not all of these. It should also here be 
mentioned that recent writers on the sub- 
ject vary in their numerical reckoning of 
such trials throughout this rule. This 
is probably due to the fact that charges 
for political offences are often mixed 
up with others. In Diirr’s treatise Die 

raetor's 

Majestatsprocesse unter dem Kaiser Tibe- 
rius (Heilbronn Progr. 1879-80), the 
list of cases is classified according to the 
specific heads of * maiestas! under which 
they severally fall. 

* *Omnium accusationum complemen- 
tum’ 3. 38, I. 

5 Cn. Piso, and Antistius Vetus(3. 38, 2). 
.$ 1.74, 33 3-49, 1- In some cases the 
nature of the charge is unspecified, as in 
3. 37, 1; 66; 2. In the later Books this 
is oftener the case, cp. 4. 31, 7; 66,1; 6. 
9, 5; 47, 1-2. f 

! 1.733 3. 70 2. — 

* 1. 74, 73 2 50, 4; 3. 38, I (comp. 

? 3. 5I, 2. 

10 See especially the narrative of the 

trial of Aemilia Lepida, 3. 22, 3. 

Cm» VII] 7T7BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 143 

numerical list of such trials becomes considerable, when viewed in relation 
to a period of profound tranquillity and acquiescence; when, with in- 
significant exceptions, the air is stirred by no conspiracies’, and the 
nobles are servile, even to the disdain of their ruler?. We are far 
removed, both from such an open outbreak in the senate as that which 
had forced Augustus to withdraw the ‘Lex Iulia maritalis*, and even 
from the independent attitude of the Stoic aristocrats under Nero; and 
the opposition has shrunk into epigrams *, the babble of ‘dinner parties 
and places of resort 5, *idle murmurs 5, * whispers or suspicious silence*;' 
in a word, into what no despotism has ever been able to repress, and what 
no strong government need ever consider dangerous. 

Nor are the charges in themselves so noteworthy as the accompany- 
ing growth of an organized system of delation, destined to acquire such 
fatal prominence for nearly a century afterwards. In Rome, at all times, 
the absence of a public prosecutor threw the duty of accusation on 
individuals?*; and the desire to conduct an impeachment was always 
strong among Roman orators; all the-more so under the Empire, from 
the closing of other roads to distinction, and the increasing prevalence of 
rhetorical schools, in which the brilliant strokes of a fashionable accuser 
are held up to the admiration of the rising generation®. Even for men 
of rank and wealth”, still more for the needy and obscure !!, such a career 
had thus manifold attractions. But Roman moral sentiment drew a strong 
distinction between those who had a right to accuse or were deputed to 
do so, and those who voluntered for the duty and made it their professional 
calling 2; confining to the latter class the odious name of ' delator 5" 

1 Libo Drusus, if Tacitus is to be be- * * Inani rumore’ I. 15, 2. 

lieved, was no real conspirator (2. 30, 2). 3 
The only instance of more importance is 
the attempt of Clemens to personate 
Agrippa, which is stated to have been 
influentially supported (2. 40, 6). Even 
in the later years there is no substantial 
evidence of any plot against him except 
that of Seianus, yet it is only by such 
evidence that, as in the case of Elizabeth 
in England, exceptional repressive severity 
would be justified. We have, on the whole, 

more evidence of plots against the life o£ 
Augustus, yet in spite of the * saevitia ' of 

his early character, the list of persons put 
to death or forced to suicide (see 1. 10, 3) 
or even banished in his forty-four years of 
autocracy is as far as we know very small. 

3 3. 65, 3. 5 See Dio, 54. 16. 

* 1. 72, 5. Some of these were no doubt 
very gross (see Suet. Tib. 59), yet Julius 
Caesar had borne with worse from Catullus. 

5 ‘In conviviis et circulis' 3. 54, 1. 

3. 1I, 3. 

* This was of course the case with 
many otherchargesthan those of * maiestas,' 
especially those of * repetundae,' &c., which 
Roman governors so often deservedly in- 
curred. 

® Many famous delators are criticized, 
from a merely rhetorical point of view, 
by M, Seneca and Quintilian. 

10 * Primores senatus? (6. 7, 4), such as 
Mamercus Scaurus (3. 66, 2, &c). 

" As Junius Otho (3. 66, 4). By along 

established pernicious custom they were 

to be paid out of the property of the 
accused, and naturally fastened upon the 
richest victims, They received at least 
one-fourth, and often enormous sums: see 
on 4. 20, 3. 

12 Pliny says (Epp. 3. 7, 3) in censure 
of Silius Italicus ‘credebatur sponte ac- 
cusasse,’ 

13 The word is wholly post-Augustan. 

4 
eo ly 

INTRODUCTION. [Cna». VIII, 

144 

By considering the strength of the impelling motives, we are led to see 
a plain truth in the maxim of Domitian at his best time, that ‘the prince 
who does not check accusers stimulates them! :' and there can be no 
doubt that Tiberius encouraged them from the first, at least in this sense 
and even in a more substantial manner?; and that (notwithstanding 
a few precedents under Augustus?) his principate is so marked by the 
development of the profession of delation, chiefly in connexion with 
charges of treason, as to be not unjustly termed the period of its origin *. 

We must suppose him to have intended the natural consequence, to let 
men see that the accuser was always on the watch 5, that even trivial acts - 
or mere words, even the pasquinades so natural to Italian scurrility, were 
well within the scope of the law and placed them at his mercy ; that by 
legal fictions their own household might be forced to be witnesses against 
them 5, that whatever could be wrung from tortured: slaves was evidence, 
that the senate was only too forward to condemn, while the princeps 
reserved to himself the credit of extending clemency to the convicted, and 
that their life and fortune depended on his forbearance *. 

We need not attribute this to any other motive than to his general 
policy of keeping himself in the background and using the instrumentality 
of others, and to that constitutional self-distrust and suspicion, which 
made him even at the outset feel insecure, unless surrounded by an atmo- 
sphere of intimidation. On any interpretation, while giving far more credit 
than Tacitus gives at this time for a genuine desire to govern well, we are 
compelled to qualify our praise by *si maiestatis quaestio eximeretur.' 

III. *Inter bona malaque mixtus, incolumi matre.' 

Such is the summary of the six years comprised in Book IV., 776-781, 

! Suet. Dom. 9. 

* Even in the early period we find 
them rewarded with political promotion, 
and sharing all the property (2. 32, 1). 

. 5 Besides the case of Cornelius Gallus, 
we have a more svstematic encourage- 
ment under the ‘lex Papia Poppaea. See 

3. 28, 4. B 
* Cp. the langnage of Tacitus, ‘qui 
formam vitae iniit," &c. (1. 74, 1); ‘tum 

primum reperta sunt mala,’ &c. (2. 27, 1). | 

Tiberius, in a speech probably among the 
records of the senate, calls the delators 
the *custodes' of the laws (4. 30, 3). 
Such punishment as some of them receive 
is either when their charges signally fail, 
or when they are themselves otherwise 
incriminated, chiefly as partisans of 
Seianus, 

5 Delation might be private and secret 
(6. 7, 4). 

* 2. 30, 3. 

7 The fact, so strongly pressed by the 
apologists, that Tiberius at first almost 
constantly, at all times more or less fre- 

quently thus intervened, must be considered 

in the light of the other fact that he alone 
could do so. The consuls probably had 
not the power, and certainly would not 
take the responsibility of refusing to sub-- 
mit to the senate any information laid 
before them, nor would the senate risk 
the imputation of laxity in dealing with 
offences against its ruler. Unless therefore 
the permanent activity of the law of * ma- 
iestas’ was to bring with it a continuous 
reign of terror, the prince must either 
check the evil at its source by repressing 

. delation, or intervene to dismiss charges 

and modify sentences. The better rulers 
chose the former course, Tiberius the 
latter, and it can hardly be matter of 

wonder that he was thought to be acting ~ 
a part, as was afterwards Nero (14. 48, 3). 

Cur. VIII.] TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. I45 

A.D. 23-28, the ninth to the fifteenth of the rule of Tiberius, and the 
sixty-fourth to the seventieth of his life. The words seem a platitude, 
and the * bona,' if not admitted to have been real before, must be sup- 
posed less real now. "Tacitus must be understood to mean that some evil 
traits, such as cruelty and covetousness!, begin to escape their disguise, 
but that the appearance of many virtues is kept up. 

It is at this stage that the figure of Seianus is brought more distinctly 
to the front as the leading influence of the period’, though still held in 
check by Augusta. His portrait, if we had it complete, would no doubt 
have been found to be drawn with only less elaboration than that given 
to Tiberius himself, and the steps of his rise are still left clearly indicated 
to us. He is the personal adherent of Tiberius alone, dissociated alike 
from the rest of the imperial family and from the senate. We have him 
described, succeeding to the ‘ praefectura praetorii" as an unimportant 
office, and making it the most important position in the state ?, already, 
though only a knight, admitted to some share in the ‘imperium’ of the 
prince 5, enabled by skilful pretexts to bring about a change more fraught 
with results in later Roman history than any other event of this principate, 
by concentrating the guard in a barrack close outside the walls, and 
bringing them far closer than before to his personal influence *, promptly 
. retrieving the one false move of too bold a request for the hand of Livia $, 
and soon more than restoring his position by a lucky act of self-devotion*: 
step ‘by step his great aims are steadily advanced, Drusus is got rid of, the 
family of Germanicus undermined by a series of attacks?, and by the 
overthrow of one friend after another?: through him alone can the great 
prizes of state be reached '°, nobles stooped to compliance to win so much 
as an interview, and paid court even to his menials !, to be accused by 
one of his creatures was to make condemnation inevitable ™. 

This whole period is described in an eloquent passage as a dreary 
. chronicle of ‘cruel orders, incessant accusations, treacherous friendships 5." 
Under an exaggeration, similar to that of earlier passages 4, we discern 

this truth, that the record of trials, mostly for state offences, is almost the. 

sole domestic history of the time ; and that, besides a large increase in 
the number of such cases, from about twelve in eight years to about 

! Cp. ‘Saevire ipse aut saevientibus tion of *collega' 4. 7, 2. See ch. vi. 
vires praebere' (4. 1, 1). Greed for con- p. 98. 

fiscation is alleged to show itself first at © 3:3, 13. * 4. 39-41. 
the trial of Silius. See 4. 20, 2.. T 4. 59, I-4. ! 
3 4, 1, 2; W 414,94 T7214 $59, 51-69, T. 
* * Vim praefecturae modicam antea in- $54.38, Es Ba, 1; 08, t 
tendit ' 4. 2, I. 9. 41,4 OB. 3. 1 4.74; 37T- 
4 He is styled ‘adiutor imperii, which UP ie Py "9 Ae SS eB 
is implied to be a step to the full posi- M See 3. 3%, 1; 44, 2. 

VOL. I. L 

9 m uar - 
. cap Ms 

146 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VIII. 

twenty in six', we have also an increase in the espionage of informers 
and in the severity of sentences. 

Many distinctions must however be drawn. Serious charges were 
brought, and some of them really proved, against Silius*, Serenus, 
Lucilius Capito‘; and the gratitude of the cities of Asia® must be set 
against the murmurs of Roman nobles. All would now respect the 
indignant protest of Tiberius against leniency to Suillius, convicted of 
selling justice; and the later history of the man is admitted to have 
shown, that compassion was undeserved*. Nor will any regret the 
punishment of informers for false or vexatious charges". Three again 
are acquitted *, another saved by indefinite adjournment’, another par- 
doned amidst genuine applause'*, in another case the gravest part of 
the charge is allowed to drop !', in another expulsion from the senate is 
the only penalty ™, in another the sentence is unknown ?*, 

Granting however that the numerical list shrinks thus considerably on 
investigation, many cases will still remain showing an increased sensitive- 
ness to libels and vindictiveness in punishing them. Charges of this 
kind, if not, in the former case, actually entering into the indictment, help 
to bring about the downfall of Silius '* and L. Piso’; it is for these that 
Votienus is condemned to exile**, and that Cassius Severus, an old 
offender ", has his punishment increased !*, By a further stretch, the law 
is made to reach Cremutius Cordus for a work which, according to one 
account, was of old standing and had even been recited before Augustus "5, 
and for a mere passage in which the eulogy was awarded to Cassius 
which had once been spoken over him by Brutus?. We are assured 
that the whole circumstances of the trial left the accused no prospect of 
escaping condemnation but by suicide. 

Sometimes again conviction is alleged to have been enforced where 
proof was wanting; as in the trial of old Serenus on charges of con- 
spiracy preferred by his son; charges which were certainly dismissed as 
absurd in respect to some of the persons implicated in them, and on 
which the evidence is stated to have altogether broken down?! Yet 
Tiberius is represented as insisting upon a condemnatory vote, though 

! Trials for ordinary criminal offences, * 4. 31, 6. 

such as some of those in c. 22; 42; 52. 7 4. 81, 7. The most formidable are 
are omitted, but the list is not confined said to have esca (c. 36, 5). 
to such as are strictly cases of maiestas. 5 4. 13, 35 36, 4. 9 4. 66, 3. 
We may add from Dio (57. 22, §) the dey Oat Ic H3. 2l As 
name: of Aelius Saturninus, thrown from 13 4. 42, 3. 1S 4. 52, 6. 
the Tarpeian rock for libellous words in HK. 4. 18, 2. 13 4. 2I, 2. 
776, A.D. 23. 0.204353. 17 See 1,72, 4. 
2 4. 19, 5. | 5 4. 13, 2. 18 4. 21, 5 9 Suet./Tib. 61. 

$ 4. 15, 3. 9 4.34, 1; Suet. 1. 1. 
5 4.15, 4- ? 4. 29, I. 

Cama» VIII.] TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 147 

interposing to modify the proposed penalty of death or stricter banish- 
ment’, satisfied apparently with the conviction itself. 

Lastly, at the close of this period, in the case of Titius Sabinus we are 
informed of disgraceful expedients to procure evidence?, of a hurried 
vote and immediate execution without trial, on the very opening festival 
of the new year, in obedience to a missive from the prince*. There may 
have been more in the case than is reported *, but the ominous beginning 
of the terrible letters from Capreae must be noted here. 

Informers again appear to be more openly encouraged, sometimes 
protected from just retribution in case of falsehood ®, and secured of their 
reward, even where condemnation was anticipated by suicide*. Confisca- 
tions also now begin to appear, and so far bear out the imputation that 
an appetite for them has arisen’. 

Yet the candour of Tacitus shows much of the better and greater side 
of the character still remaining in the dignified address on the death of 
Drusus*, energy in public business?, prompt investigation of a crime”, 
strict repression of a popular scandal!!, resolute disdain of extravagant 
honours”, munificence on occasion of a public disaster ". Much again of 
mere gratuitous insinuation may yet be cast aside: such as that he was 
jealous of honour paid to young Nero and Drusus '*; attended to public 
business only to disarm suspicion ^; refused a temple from mere mean- 
spiritedness ^; suppressed mention of military disasters because he dared 
trust no one to levy war"; and the like. The memoirs of the younger 
Agrippina are once at least’*, and probably more than once ?, laid under 
contribution, with other matter which must be received with much reserve”’. 

Still, after all deductions made, there seems to be evidence that, 
besides the increased sensitiveness to attack, already noticed, a change 
is growing upon him, a consciousness of failing powers”, in which even 
the offer to resign may have been half-sincere?, a growing dread of 
conspiracies and of those in whose interest they might be supposed to 
take place; whereby the house of Germanicus, still in favour at the 
beginning of this period ?, are on the brink of destruction at its close *?*. 
How far their conduct justified, or could be made to appear to justify, 
such estrangement, can be never known ?, We can see that their position 

E 4.30, 1. 3 4. 68; 69. 3. 6, 70. 20 See on 4. 39; 40. X dk 

* Seeonc. 70,1. * 4. 31,8; 36, 5. WE n ee 

$4: 30. 3. T. 4. 20, 2. ?33 4. ,6. Nero wasquaestor, probably 
S 4.3. ik ip 13, T about A.D. 25, but held no subsequent 
ia > ee dae Oy Ye We magistracy; see ch. ix. note II. 

7 4. 373 38. 18 4. 64, 1. ^ 4. 70, T- 

ee wor sale oe ?5 Tacitus constantly assumes the false- 
18 4, 38, 4. W. As 74, 1. hood, the apologists of Tiberius as con- 
Áo 5 3. 19 E.g.c. 52; 54; 60.  stantly assume the truth of such charges 

L 2 

148 INTRODUCTION. [Cna», VIII. 

was sufficiently secure at the outset to have made it their best policy 
calmly to bide their time for a succession which every year of experience 
and public life would have the more assured to Nero: we can also see 
that Seianus had an obvious motive for insidious attacks on them; and 
may even have forced them to intrigue in self-defence: and that, with or 
without such incentives, the fiery and domineering nature of Agrippina! 
may have made her play only too readily into his hands. 

These causes at any rate tended to promote the ascendency of the only 
real minister whom Tiberius ever had. It is by playing on these weak- 
nesses that Seianus is represented to have induced him to take the great 
step which marks the close of this period; that of permanently withdraw- 
ing from Rome?, and fixing his headquarters in the natural island- 
fortress of Capreae?*. Accepting, on general authority, the counsel of 
this adviser as the primary motive for such seclusion, Tacitus adds, with 
perhaps more than due stress, others which we may place in the second 
rank*. The dictation still exercised by Augusta, even at the age of 
eighty-five, is intolerable to an almost septuagenarian son, and amounts 
to a virtual claim to share the power which she had won for him. His 
habits of life are said to have driven him to fly the restraint of society: 
even his personal appearance to have led him to shun the eyes of men. 
The tall gaunt form, awkward even in its erectness*, has contracted an 
ungainly stoop; the countenance, so refined and distinguished in his 
busts and coins, is said to have become a loathsome spectacle. What- 
ever may be the explanation or excuse, the fact itself remains that for 
the last ten years of his rule he withdraws from all publicity, from all 
personal intercourse with the senate and almost all with its magistrates, 
and that the accessibility and civic life hitherto associated with a Roman 
princeps pass into the seclusion of an Eastern sultan. 

The period which begins with the concentration of a body-guard 
seems aptly to end with almost a self-imprisonment: and we appear to 
see a picture, neither inconsistent nor indistinct, of a phase intermediate 
between his best and worst; one of an old age of increasing timidity, 
suspicion, and isolation, aggravated by a counsellor whose interest it was 

as are noticed in 4. 67, 6. Some light 
‘seems to be thrown upon them by the 
fact that the letters of indictment against 

Agrippina and Nero (5. 3, 3), which we 

should certainly take to be public docu- 
ments, preserved in the * acta senatus,' are 
expressly stated to have contained no such 
charge (see below, p. 149). As regards 
the former, even the posthumous invective, 
(6. 25, 3), no doubt similarly preserved, 
while bringing an entirely new charge, 

appears still to be silent on this head. 
On what evidence, true or false, and at 
what time the senate was induced to 
declare Nero and Drusus ‘ hostes publici’ 
(Suet. Tib. 54; Cal. 7), is wholly un- 
known. 
! * Aequi inpatiens, dominandi avida 

6. 35,3. See especially the description in. 

4: 53-54. 
* 4. 415 57. 3467. 
© 4. 57) 3) 4 5 Suet. Tib. 68. 

be 

Cua VIL]  77BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 149 

to aggravate, and tending to bear the fruit naturally borne by such 
qualities, when, to the misfortune of mankind, they are armed with 
power. ! | 

IV and V. *Intestabilis saevitia, sed obtectis libidinibus, dum Seianum 
dilexit timuitve: postremo in scelera simul ac dedecora prorupit, post- 
quam remoto pudore et metu suo tantum ingenio utebatur.' 

These two periods, comprising together eight years and a quarter, 
782-790, A.D. 29-37, may be taken together, and must in great part be 
studied without the aid of Tacitus. 

The Fifth Book opens with the death of Augusta, who, after having 
been charged, by hints more or less explicit, with every death in the 
house of the Caesars, is now represented no longer as the ‘ terrible step- 
mother, but as the sole remaining protection of the family supposed to 
have been most obnoxious to her’. In another place such discrepancies 
are loosely accommodated by saying that she ostentatiously supported in 
adversity those whom she had secretly undermined in their prosperity *. 
The verdict of historical criticism has generally acquitted her of these 

imputations, and regarded her, throughout the long and unbroken period - 

of her ascendency, as a softening and moderating influence on her 
husband and her son. And indeed, whatever her personal feeling 
towards the house of Germanicus, we may suppose her sufficiently 
imbued with the policy of Augustus?, to see that her son had far more 
to gain than to lose by surrounding himself with family support ; and that 
it would not be desirable for him at the age of seventy to be left with no 
heir but his gtandson Tiberius Gemellus, a boy of ten years old *. 

Her overpowering influence, even to the.close of life, is pictured in 
the description of Tiberius and Seianus ‘ breaking loose, as if freed from 
bit and bridle 5' and hastily despatching to the senate the charges already 
drawn up, but kept back by her intercession, against Agrippina and 
Nero. The former is accused of arrogant language, the latter of pro- 
fligacy, a charge which the general vicious propensities of this family 
render only too probable, but which we must.suppose to have been 
seized as a handle of attack in default of other charges. It is expressly 
asserted that no act of treason was alleged against either, and we infer 
that no evidence of such could have been forthcoming*. The character- 
istic irresolution of the rescript left the senate perplexed, and even 
a second more peremptory mandate still reserved the sentence to be 
passed". With precautions against rescue which attest their popularity °, 

oy ae d. * See ch. ix. note 35. 1 5. 5, 2, 
1.4. 91, 9. $$ 53;3. 5 Suet. Tib. 64. 

3 See I. 3. "i ox. 

ISO INTRODUCTION. [Cua». VIII. 

they were hurried away to their island prisons, and, about a year later, 
the second son, Drusus, was consigned to a dungeon in the Palatium !. 
The goal at which Seianus was straining seemed within view ; yet, in 
spite of all the honours which he was allowed to enjoy or hope for, his 
triumph was incomplete, and his position insecure, for Tiberius character- 
istically stopped short when his mind seemed made up. More than two 
years passed? before the exile of Nero was followed by his execution or 
compulsory suicide?; Agrippina and Drusus still lived on ; Gaius was in 
favour, and was pointed out as heir*; Seianus was not yet united to the 
house by marriage, nor colleague in the tribunician power. Tiberius 
was never wholly blinded; and from his natural temperament, when 
other causes of apprehension were removed, could hardly fail to suspect 
the minister himself. Hence the conspiracy to destroy Tiberius and 
Gaius is represented as a desperate stroke in self-defence. The plotter 
had however met his match ^, and fell with a crash to which Dio could 
find no parallel till the fate of Plautianus in his own time *. 

Seianus has not generally found favour even with the defenders of 
Tiberius, but has rather been made the scapegoat of his prince. He 
represents no doubt a period in which, from growing distrust of the 
nobility, Tiberius had resolved to throw himself on the support of * novi 
homines, and his portrait is such as aristocratic painters draw’. Yet 
it is admitted that his influence was, at least at the outset, good *; and 
that his fall was at least as great a calamity as his ascendency?. And 
when we ask definite questions—Did he poison Drusus? Did he bring 
about the retirement to Capreae? Did he compass the fall of the family 
of Germanicus? Did he conspire against his master's life?—we see 
that the positive evidence is weak. The first charge, resting, it would 
seem, only on the evidence of tortured slaves’, was preferred eight 
years afterwards by Apicata, whose knowledge could but have been 
at second hand", and who had every motive for aiming a deadly blow 
at her rival Livilla, at a time when any genuine investigation was im- 
possible. On the second question, we have the doubts of Tacitus 
himself, who suggests other motives for our consideration ??, On the 

! See the summary of events prefixed 
to Book VI. 

3 See Dio, 58. 8, 4; Suet. Tib. 61. 

* Suet. Tib. 54. * Dio, 58. 8, 1. 

* * [sdem artibus victus est’ 4. I, 3. 

* 58. 14, I. 

* 'The additional touch thrown into the 
guilt of Livia, 'seque ac maiores et 
posteros municipali adultero foedabat,' 
(4- 3, 4), has been often noted. 

* *Incipiente adhuc potentia bonis 
consiliis notescere volebat ' 4. 7, I. 

? * Pari exitio viguit ceciditque’ 4. 1, 
3. In 6. 51, 6 his death is represented as 
having removed the last restraint. Cp. 
also the language of Suet. Tib. 61. 

19 4. 8,1; 11, 4. 

11 She had been divorced some time 
previously. See 4. 3, 5. 

13 4. 57, 2. 

= pum a SS nr pesa pond dedii cd ad 

Cuar VIL] T7JBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 

ISI 

third, the loss of the Fifth Book makes our knowledge most imperfect ; 
but the actual charges against Agrippina and Nero, as has been already 
shown!, bear no evident marks of fabrication or even exaggeration ; 
and the evident animosity underlying them may be as probably as- 
signed to the suspicious nature of Tiberius himself, as to the prompt- 
ings of his minister. The final conspiracy, though related as an un- 
doubted fact by Josephus?, and evidently believed by Tacitus? as well 
as Suetonius *, would yet seem to have been disbelieved by those whom 
Dio has followed?, and certainly never to have been formally proved 
to the senate which condemned; and, more strangely still, to have 
been ignored by Tiberius himself, when seeking to justify the execution 
to posterity ". 

On the other hand, if the generally unscrupulous and ambitious 
character of Seianus be assumed; every act in the drama as described, 
from the concentration of the guards to the final plot, appears to follow 
obviously from what had preceded it; to be suggested by an adequate 
motive; to be the natural step to take at that particular stage. If 
therefore the familiar story of his career is left to stand, it would seem 
to be one of those cases in which a history, by its thorough coherency 
and intrinsic probability, appears to prove itself. 

From the point at which we recover the guidance of Tacitus all 
the rest of his narrative is little more than that of a prolonged reign 
of terror. ns 

Tiberius is rhetorically described as never tired of trials and con- 
demnations and never satiated*, even stimulated by them to further 
carnage?, like a wild beast who has tasted blood. We are told of 
universal panic, in which even the highest stooped.to the informer's 
trade, for self-preservation, or even as if infected by a plague; that men 
perished for old offences as much as for recent; for words as well as 
deeds; even for words spoken in private life'^; that even the walls 
seemed to have ears. 

Here again the description seems to outstrip the facts. We still note 

! See above, p. 149 and 5. 3, 3. 

2 Jos. Ant. 18. 6, 6. 

* He alludes to it in 6. 8, 11; 14, 1; 
I2, 2, etc., and to Satrius Secundus its 
betrayer 6. 47, 2. 

* * Seianum res novas molientem * Suet. 
Tib. 65. 

* Dio represents him as having lost 
his opportunity to conspire by want of 
spirit (58. 8, 2). 

$ Juvenal, who hints at some dark 
scheme on foot (10, 75), yet makes men 

ask significantly * Quo cecidit sub crimine ? 
quisnam delator? quibus indiciis quo 
teste probavit ?' 
7 Suet. Tib. 61 * Ausus est scribere Seia- 
num se punisse, quod comperisset furere 
adversus liberos Germanici filii sui. Suet. 
adds, to show the evident falsehood, 
* Quorum ipse alterum suspecto iam, al- 
terum oppresso demum Seiano interfecit.' 
* 6, 38, 1. 
? * [rritatus suppliciis’ 6. 19. 2. 
x77 

. Success. 

152 INTRODUCTION [Cuar, VIII. 

cases of pardon! and acquittal*; some escape by giving information? ; 
others by adjournment‘; or by being merely ignored 5; others receive 
less sentences than death*; in others the sentence is not stated’; and 
in all this crash prudent men, like M'. Lepidus*, L. Piso*, Aelius 
Lamia ?°, Poppaeus Sabinus !', can still hold their own in honour. 

We have, indeed, a weary list of victims, of whom about forty names 
are specified; who were either put to death or committed suicide before 
the last extremity. Among them are Agrippina ? and her second son”, 
and her old enemy Plancina!5; Tigranes, ex-king of Armenia’; the 
disünguished senators Asinius Gallus !5 and L. Arruntius" ; and others, 
noble and ignoble, foreigners as well as native citizens. To these an 
addition must be made for such names as may have been noted in the 
lost part of Tacitus '?^; also for the recorded execution at once of an 
unnamed number, detained in prison as accomplices in the conspiracy of 
Seianus?. On this occasion, the ‘immensa strages’ of Tacitus may 
probably be reduced to the ‘twenty in one day’ of Suetonius??: but 
when all allowance is made, probably not less than 80 lives in all may 
have perished in the six years' reign of terror; for most of which the 
responsibility must rest on the prince?, though at the extreme end 
Macro appears to have acted in his master's name ?* 

Distinctions must be again drawn, as before Much noble and 
probably much innocent blood was shed ; but much that was noble was 
probably not innocent, and much was neither noble nor innocent, but 
that of the creatures of Seianus, who had staked their chances on his 
None need pity Latinius Latiaris?, Vescularius Flaccus ?*, 
Julius Marinus *, Fulcinius Trio**, or any others of the like description ; 
nor is anything recorded even of so prominent a man as Asinius Gallus, 
or of many others, which should make them deserving of special sym- 
pathy: the suicide of Cocceius Nerva ?', probably also of Arruntius *5, is 

! 6. 5, 2. 
? 6. 9, 1, 6; Arruntius must also have 
been accused and acquitted (6. 7, 1). 
7 

8 . 4 
(opu 66 2 18, 2- 
212064 ceo ; 2-3. 
E 55:451. . a pl 4- 
. IO, 3. 9:6. 27,2. 
1! 6. 39, 3 12 6. 25, I. 
13 6.23, 4 1:6. 36.4. 
15 6. 40, 2 5:6, 25, 1. 
17 6. 48, 2 

16 E. g Ollius (13. 45, 1), Carnulus 
and Pnrconius (Suet. Tib. 61), Fufius 
Geminus (Dio, 58. 4, 5), Syriacus (Id. 58. 
3, 7), Curtius Atticus (Ann. 6. 10, 2), 
Bruttedius Niger (Juv. 10. 82). | 

?? 6, 19, 3. ? Suet. Tib. 61. 

? Very few are privately tried before 
Tiberius (see 6. 1o, 2, perhaps also 18, 3), 
the rest before the senate; but the general 
mention of letters of indictment from the 
emperor (cp. 6. 3,4; 7, 3; 9, 2, &c. and 
the significance of their absence in 6. 47, 
4), or of letters from the consuls to him 
and his replies to them (6. 39, 2), lead 
us to conclude that they acted under 
direct instructions, which, however worded 
(cp. ‘facta patribus potestate statuendi’ 
6. 7, 1), must have been in their judgment 
peremptory. 

* 6. 47, 4 

ee ae 10, 2, 
él, . 38, 2 

" 6, 26,1 3$ 6. 48, 2 

Cua» VII.) 7J/BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 

I53 

their own gratuitous act. But there are circumstances of horrible 
cruelty in the execution of the young children of Seianus!, and of the 
aged mother of Fufius Geminus *, and in the causes assigned for the 
destruction of the descendants of Theophanes?: and even if these were 
all, such cases are hardly palliated by being few *. 

‘It is difficult to discuss the tales of abominable profligacy, which 
occupy four chapters of Suetonius, and not much: more than twice as 
many linesin Tacitus®. The absence of indication of any special source 
from which they were derived, or of any variance among the authorities 
in respect of them, would suggest that they were found in the writers 
whom he chiefly follows*. "This would lead us to lay less stress on the 
argument that our earlier extant writers, as Philo and Josephus, Seneca 
and the elder Pliny, show no knowledge of these stories, the more 
so as their incidental notices of Tiberius would not-have necessitated the 
mention of what they might have known’. But to suppose such tales to 
be part of the genera) and probably contemporary tradition is in no way 
to exempt them from criticism, and they are very strongly criticised. 

The age was certainly one of great and increasing profligacy, but 
the prince himself is represented by hostile authors as shocking even 
the standard of those times by his enormities, by extreme apologists as 
almost alone free from the universal taint, and it is more difficult to 
find grounds for a middle view than to accept either without reserve. 
Tacitus asserts that latterly less and less concealment was practised 5, 
and that victims were sought out from families of position *, Suetonius 
has raked together names and details somewhat harder to fabricate 
than vague general charges??; but the secluded life which would 
give scope for such outrages no less facilitated unlimited invention of 
scandal; archives of state trials may often have preserved records of 
mere unproved or even disproved libels, afterwards accepted as facts", 

1 g. 9. 2 6. 10, I. as witnessing a drinking feat, speaks of 

* 6. 18, 5. 

1 The extreme apologists appear to 

take for granted that in all such cases 
the statement of facts is untrustworthy. 

5 The same brevity is seen in his 
account of the enormities of Nero, and 

appears due to an unwillingness to dwell - 

on such subjects. 

6 On these see above ch. iii. p. 13, 
foll. It would be still open to suppose 
that these authors had themselves drawn 
from such a source as the memoirs of 
Agrippina. 

* Beyond' mere absence of mention, 
perhaps the only passage to be noted is 
that in which Pliny, speaking of Tiberius 

him as * in senecta iam severo atque etiam 
saevo alias' (14. 22, 28, 144), but ap- 
parently only in contrast to his alleged 
fondness for wine in youth. We cannot 
lay much stress on the fact that he speaks 
of Capreae (3. 6, 12, 82) as ‘ Tiberi arce 
nobiles’ (not ‘ infames! ) or that he 
mentions other qualities, calling him 
* minime comis imperator ' (35. 4, 10, 28) 
and ‘tristissimus, ut constat, hominum" 
(28. 2, 5, 23). 
8 6. 51, 6. 

* 6. I, 5. 

10 Suet. Tib. 42-45. 

! See 6. 38, 3; Dio, 57. 23, 2, and the 

remarks of Merivale ch. Siv. P. 172. 

154 INTRODUCTION. [Cnar. VIII. 

and the little corroborative evidence cited is inconclusive’, On the 
other side, attention is pointed to the description of the train which 
attends him into his retirement ?, and to the survival of another version of 
his life there in the satirist’s description of him at the time of the fall 
of Seianus as surrounded by no worse than a crew of astrologers?. In 
this weakness of evidence, it is natural that great stress should be laid 
on the strong intrinsic improbability that a self-control apparently well 
sustained to the age of seventy should then altogether give way, and 
that a life of such sensuality should last without medical aid to nearly 
seventy-eight. Upon the whole, therefore, the most just as well 
as the safest verdict appears to be that of acquittal, or at least ‘not 
proven *.' 

There are still flashes of vigour, as in the blow which struck down 
Seianus ; and the display of energy in the East into which the taunts 
of the Parthian king had goaded him*. Again, if he was keen to fill 
the *fiscus*, he could still be munificent in the use of it, either to 
restore financial confidence’, or, as before, to relieve the sufferers by 
afire*; He still organizes the corn-supply of Rome*; even interests 
himself in such minor matters as the authenticity of the Sibylline 
canon ??, 

In general, however, the aduiniseslion is described as sinking into 
neglect and disorder; ambassadors and suitors were unable to get 
a hearing"; the *decuriae equitum are no longer filled up!*; Asinius 
Gallus is kept three years awaiting his trial? ; the financial sonenis 
hitherto published periodically, as by Augustus, cease to appear?*; the 
legacies of his mother remain unpaid)^; the best men hang back from 
public service 1^; some are kept for years from going to the province which 

! 'The names of infamy associated, if 
not certainly with Tiberius, at least with 
the time and place of his retreat (6. 1, 4; 
Suet. Vit. 3), seem also to be found in 
Rome (Suet. Cal. 16); the vile mosaics 
&c., stated to have been found in the 
villas at Capreae (Merivale, l. l. p. 293 
note), may be of uncertain date; the 
procuratorship ‘a voluptatibus,’ described 
as instituted at this time (Suet. Tib. 
42), and known to us from  inscrip- 
tions, is taken to be an office connected 
with games and festivals (cp. Hirschf. 
pir 185, 1, and the use of * voluptates' 

n 4. 62, 3), but, if so, must have been 
then little needed. 

2 4 58, I. 

3 Juv. 1o, 93. 

* See the remarks of Merivale d.1), 
who while declining to affirm or deny 

the fidelity of the picture, notes that even 
were it true, ‘the age and the class must 
bear their share of the common guilt.’ 

5 6. 31. eo * 6. 17, 4. 

* 6.45, 1. * 6. 13,2 0 6. 12. 

^ The dilatoriness in the whole affair 
of Herodes Agrippa leads Josephus 
(Ant. 18. 6, 5) to say with emphasis that 
Tiberius was peAAris ei wai Tis dAAos 
BaciXéov 1) rvpávvov. 

12 Suet. Tib. 41. Gaius had to make 
up a deficiency (Dio, 59. 9, 5). 

13 See 6. 23, 3. Suet. (61) and Dio (58. 
3) assign such a delay to intentional 
cruel 

14 Cp. Suet. Cal. 16; Dio, 59. 9, 4. 

'5 See 5. 1, 6 and note. 

16 6. 27, 3. This is hardly to be ex- 
plained by their diminished power of 
extortion. Merivale, c. xlvi. p. 333. 

Cuap, VIII.] 

TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 

I55 

the emperor had himself nominally entrusted to them’; others are left - 
year after year at their posts with apparent indifference to their merits ?, 
whether they were judicious, as Poppaeus Sabinus ?, feeble, as Apronius *, 
crue] and oppressive, as Pontius Pilate 5, or contumacious and dangerous, 
as Gaetulicus*, Even the senatorial provinces, as Asia and Africa, seem 
to feel the effects of the general irregularity’; and even the security of 
the frontier is said to be no longer fully maintained *. 

Some apparent taint of insanity seems to come in, completing and 
partly explaining the whole: perhaps traceable sometimes in the clear 
evidence of public documents ; as in the attempt, in his published auto- 
biography, to explain the condemnation of Seianus by a falsehood of 
childish transparency ? ; or in the famous words preserved of his letter to 
the senate, publishing to the world his agony of soul'*, Again, at one 
time reproach seems to lacerate him', at another he parades it?; 
he hovers round and round Rome and never enters it? ; shifts his place 
restlessly in the last stage of decrepitude *. It is of little moment to 
decide between various reports of his end, or to know exactly how 
the last few sands ran out of a life that to any good purpose had been 
extinct for years. 

As.a set off against the judgment of Tacitus has been often sought in 
the contemporary panegyric of Tiberius by Veileius!'5, a few remarks 
upon it.appear here necessary. This writers means of information are 
indeed unquestionable !* ; but his burst of courtly rhetoric, over even the 
slightest service of his hero, takes away credit from his record of more 
substantial achievements, even when described by him as an eye-witness. 

! Arruntius was thus kept ten years or 
more from Hispania Tarraconensis, Aelius 
Lamia many years from Syria, and yet 
allowed afterwards to be * praefectus urbi" 
(6.27, 2-3). These great provinces must 
have been left all this time to subordinate 
officers. 

? On the reason given for this see below, 
p. 157. The custom must have been so 
far evil that it blocked the legitimate 
avenues to distinction. 

3 6.39, 3. * See 4. 74, I, and note. 

5 Jos. Ant. 18, 3 and 4. The recall of 
Pilate is there stated to have been made, 
not by Tiberius, but by L. Vitellius as 
legatus of Syria. 

* 6. 30, 7. Cp. Dio, 59. 22, 5. 

7 See above, ch. vii. pp. 113, 114. 

* * Armeniam a Parthis occupari, Moe- 
siam a Dacis Sarmatisque, Gallias a 
Germanis vastari neglexit' (Suet. Tib. 

41). The first statement is clearly untrue, 
the others we have no means of checking, 
but it is known that the Frisii (see 4. 74, 
1) retained their independence till the 
time of Claudius (11. 19, 2). 

® See above, p. 151, n. 7. 

" Ann. 6.6, 1. Ho4. 42, 2. 

7 6.24, 3; 38, 3. Cp. Dio, 58. 23, 1. 

13 6. 1, 15; 15,6; 39, 2. 

^ 6. 5o, 2. Merivale (l. l. p. 300) 
would assign the general execution men- 
tioned in 6. 19, 2 to a fit of madness. 
Those who accept the accounts of his 
abnormal profligacy would also generally 
explain them thus. : 

*5 This history was published in 783, 
A.D. 30, and dedicated to M. Vinicius, 
consul of that year. 

5 He had served many years under 
Tibeiius, and was one of his first list of 
praetors. See on I. 15, 2. 

156 INTRODUCTION. [Caar. VIII. 

When, for instance, we are given to suppose that Tiberius at the age of 
nineteen had almost saved Rome from famine as quaestor!; and at 
twenty-five had virtually subjected Armenia and terrified Parthia ?; we 
are forced to ask how much similar exaggeration may lurk in the history 
of the German and Illyrian campaigns. Sometimes, too, this rhetoric is 
confronted by stubborn realities. Against the alleged all but complete 
subjugation of Germany ? must be set the fact, that the single defeat and 
annihilation of a force of some 30,000 men rolled back the tide of con- 
quest from Germany, not temporarily, but for ever. "The account of the 
passionate enthusiasm, with which the legions are said to have welcomed 
Tiberius on his return *, must be read in the light of our knowledge that 
his name ten years later had assuredly no magic, either for veteran or 
recruit, among the armies that had known him best. Even Julius Caesar 
. had to face the mutiny of a legion ; but popular generals have not often 
been met by the wholesale defection of their armies *. | 

In the notice by Velleius of this principate, we have no right to expect 
details from a sketch of sixteen years contained in eight chapters; yet his 
suppressions at times are most significant. Four years had passed since 
Tiberius had permanently left Rome; yet his retirement is not even 
glanced at. On all the state trials of these years, we have only a line in 
reproach of the crimes of Libo Drusus, Silius, and Piso"; and a hint 
of the shame and sorrow supposed: to have been felt at the. conduct 
of Agrippina and Nero*. We seem forced to conclude that on these 
subjects the silence of Velleius is more eloquent than the epigrams of 
Tacitus?. Are we prepared, again, to take his verdict on Seianus as well 
as on his master? to see in him the Laelius to this Scipio, the Agrippa 
or Statilius Taurus to this Augustus'?? The impression left upon us 
becomes on the whole that of a fairly skilful apology, saved from palpable 
falsehood by ignoring what it is difficult to defend, and laying stress upon 
what is undeniably praiseworthy. 

On other authors less need here be said. No critic will expect to find 
truth of value in the few scattered allusions of Valerius Maximus, Philo, 

1 Vell. 3. 94, I. ?11$2. ® The cautious obscurity with which 

3 Id. 2. 97,.4 ; 106, 1; 108, 1. 

* Id. 2. 104, 4. 

5 That Germanicus had but to give the 
word, and the legions would have saluted 
him as their emperor and marched on 
Rome, is as expressly asserted by Velleius 
(2. 128, 2) as by Tacitus (1. 35, 3). 

6 See 4. 57, I 

7 Vell. 2. 130, 3: from the order of 
mention, it seems that L. Piso (see 4. a1, 
1) is meant. * Vell. 2. 130, 4. 

the death of Agrippa Postumus is touched 
upon (2. 112, 7) is also noteworthy, The 
sending of Germanicus to the East is only 
touched in a single line, and nothing i is 
said of his doings there or of the. circum- 
stances of his death. 0 Id, 2. 127. 

! Valerius nowhere names Tiberius, 
but occasionally alludes to him, especially 
in the dedication. Another passage speaks 
of the punishment of a nameless parricide,. 

who is evidently Seianus (9. 11, 4). 

ee ee 

i eee a——— ee oe 

157 

it must be borne in mind, has a purpose to serve, in setting off a special 
grievance by a contrast of general beneficence of imperial government’. - 
Seneca speaks most emphatically of the *accusandi frequens et paene 
publica rabies" which under this prince caused more loss of civic lives 
than any civil war*. The chief definite statement of Josephus, that the 
long tenure of office by provincial governors was the result of a deliberate 
intention to make them less eager pillagers?, reads like the mere excuse 
of Tiberius or his friends for the irresolution and dilatoriness of which we 
have such abundant other evidence ; and might have seemed questionable 
to Josephus himself if he had thought of the ten years of Pilate. 

If we cannot check Tacitus by these, we may in turn check by him the 
keener. appetite for scandal of Suetonius, many of whose tales he must 
have known but disdained to notice *, and some of whose generalisations 
he has given us the means of reducing to single instances 5. | 

Also his more careful discrimination checks the loose credulity of Dio, 
whose bewildered judgment seems at last to take refuge in a desperate 
attempt to reconcile conflicting testimony by fusion; in the statement 
that Tiberius * had many virtues and many vices, and exercised each as if 
they had been his only qualities *.' 

The appeal from Tacitus appears thus to lie to Tacitus alone; to his 
candour and sense of truth, to his admissions of fact; against his insinua- 
tions and interpretations of motives, against his evident prejudices. That 
he was no friend to the founders of the principate" has been already 
shown’; and, with all allowance for the sincerity of his disclaimer 5, 
special grounds of animosity against Tiberius appear discernible. He 
had seen in his own day ‘the extremity of slavery, when even the inter- 
change of speech and hearing was destroyed by espionage?*. He tracks 
back this systematic delation to its source, and, as it were, charges this 
prince with its full-developed iniquity; seeing in these trials for treason 
far more than the bare facts which he relates, and imagining Carus and 
Massa, and the rest of the vile brood of his own time, as already appearing 
within view ?, It would be natural that the memory of the tyrant under 

Cua VIL]: TIBERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. 

! Leg. ad Gaium, 2. 

? De Ben. 3. 26, 1. He goes on to de- 
scribe it in terms quite as strong as those 
of Tacitus in 6. 7, 4. The evidence of 
Seneca, as far as it goes, is, except for his 
silence on the subject of profligacy (see 
P 1&3), not more favourable than that of 

acitus ; see below, p. 158, n. 6, and notes 
on 1. 75.6 : 2. 27, 1; 48, 3 ; 4. 12, 15 34, I, 
and G. Dirichlet, Der Philosoph Seneca als 
Quelle für die Beurtheilung der ersten R6- 
mischen Kaiser,’ Progr. Kónigsberg, 1890. 

* Ant. 18. 6, 5. See note on r. 8o, 2. 

* For a probable instance, see above, 
ch. iv. p. 33. 

* Compare e.g. Suet. Tib. 61 with 4. 
70, 2; 5. 9, 3, and Suet. 32 with 3. 
21, 4. 

* Dio, 58. 38, 5. 

T See above, ch. iv. p. 35. 

© 11,96. 

? Agr. 2, 3. ' 

10 See I. 74, I1; 2. 27, I, and above, 
p. 141, 

158 INTRODUCTION. {Cuar, VIII. 

whom the historian had lived should enter into the portrait of that pre- 
decessor in whose private memoirs he was said to find his chief mine of 
political wisdom ', and whom, notwithstanding many differences, he most 
nearly resembled. 

His own age, again, suggested not only a resemblance but a contrast ; 
between the first encouragement of delation and its first firm repression ; 
between a timid or cautious foreign policy and a career of conquest ; 
possibly even between a prince beyond all others parsimonious in building ?, 
and the grand architectural achievements of Trajan. Other contrasts 
were ready to hand within the work itself, helping him to set off the 
qualities of Tiberius by the idealised virtues of Germanicus*, or even by 
the character of the hasty and passionate but not ungenerous Drusus *. 

Still, when all this is allowed for, much remains, and the extreme 
apologists who appear to construct out of their own inner consciousness 
an ideal. Tiberius, merciful almost to weakness, and the forbearing 
victim of almost incessant conspiracies, are compelled to ignore 
or arbitrarily rule out of court much substantial evidence®. The stages 
and periods of change noted by Tacitus can be on the whole made out *, 
though we should consider the explanation put into the mouth of Arruntius, 
that the character of Tiberius * had been thrown off its balance by the 
force of despotism ", to be nearer tbe truth than the theory adopted 
by the historian as his own, that of a true character asserting itself by 
slow degrees against the disguise of hypocrisy °. 

We have on the whole the character of a prince whose friends might 
well have written * infelix vitae diuturnitate?" upon his epitaph. Had he 
died in the lifetime of Augustus, general opinion would have pronounced 
him *imperii capax. At the end of eight years’ rule he would have left. 
a name among the best princes of the second rank. Even at seventy his 

! See above, p. 20, n. 2. 
6. 45, 2. 3 See I. 33, 5, etc. 
* See 2. 43, 75 3-37, 3, etc. The in- 
fluence of such a study of contrast has 

been already alluded to. See ch. iv. p. 37. - 

5 For instance, the records of the senate, 
if falsified at all, must have been falsified 
in the interest of the prince (see ch. iii. 
p. 18), and the speeches or letters of the 
emperor to that body must be substan- 
tially authentic. . 

$ The general fact of deterioration is 
attested by earlier writers. Seneca, in 
comparing previous good periods with 
the early rule of Nero, says (de Cl. 1. 
1, 6), ‘nemo iam divum Augustum, nec 
Tiberii Caesaris prima tempora loquitur.’ 
Pliny, with significant reserve, speaks of 

Tiberius (34. 8, 19, 62) as * imperiosus 
sui inter initia principatus. Dio (57. 18, 
10) has followed a source making the 
death of Germanicus a turning point. 
Perhaps the most probable view is that of 
Prof. Allen (Introd. $:9), who thinks the 
great crisis in the character of Tiberius 
was due to the series of events from 
A. D. 29, the revelation of the alleged con- 
spiracy of Agrippina and his sons, of the 
treachery of Seianus, and of the murder 
of Drusus. 

* *Vi dominationis convulsus et mu- 
tatus ' 6. 48, 4. * 6. 51, 5. 

* In contrast to Titus, who is styled 
‘felix brevitate regendi! by Ausonius 
(Ordo Imperat.); an estimate agreeing 
with that of Dio (66. 18, 5). 

Cua. VIII.) 7T7BERIUS AND HIS GOVERNMENT. I59 

memory would have escaped the worst stains cast upon it. Yet, had 
he lived up throughout to the level of his best time ; his want of originality 
and self-reliance, his pedantic adherence to the rules, without grasping 
the great ideas of his predecessor!, would have made it no more than 
a period of good administration without advance?; and a rule which in 
duration is equalled by none till Antoninus Pius, and exceeded by none 
till Constantine, would probably have been barren of historical interest. 
To waive all comparison with the great names of Roman Imperialism, 
even a much weaker ruler, Claudius, has left his mark more on the history 
of the empire. Nor is a change of character, even late in life, in his case 
difficult to explain. At the best, his virtues were those of the subject 
or subordinate ruler rather than of the autocrat; and the principate 
found him timid, irresolute, and self-distrustful, when he had no superior 
to rely upon. Hence the necessity always, in estimating his conduct, to 
allow for the influence of some stronger will, such as the imperiousness 
of his mother, or the craft of Seianus ; and hence, when all these were 
removed, the neglect even of routine duties for want of a trusted adviser 
at his side. Hence again the sense of isolation? redoubling his fears, and 
making him see a fresh enemy at every turn, who must be struck down 
to make life safe to him. 

He is, indeed, probably entitled to all the credit that has been claimed 
for him, as throughout a just and liberal ruler of the provinces‘; the 
evidence for which is by no means confined to the early period of his 
pfincipate. The temple founded in Asia in 776, a.p. 23°, the similar 
request from Hispania Baetica in 778, a.p. 25°, appear genuine expres- 

1 Cp. ‘Consilium id D. Augustus voca- — have received but slight and temporary 
bat, Tiberius praeceptum ' Agr. 13, 3. As amendment (3. 28,6),the* faenebre malum' 
an instance of this deference in a small is dealt with by obviating a temporary 

matter, see I. 77, 4. : 

2 It has been noticed (see Edinb. Rev. 
Jan. 1894, p. 87) how little this most 
stay-at-home of emperors did for the city 
in which so many of his years were passed. 
He gives it next to no public buildings 
(6. 45, 2), no such aqueducts as that 
begun by Gaius and completed by Claudius 
(see II: 13, 3, and note), no improvement 
of the slums of *vetus Roma,’ nor even 
an enforcement of some existing rules 
(see on I5. 43, 1). Again, though the 
* annona ! is claimed as his constant care 
(3. 54, 8), it is left for Claudius to im- 
prove the harbourage of Ostia (vol. ii. 
Introd. p. 25). We notice also an absence 
of any comprehensive legislation even 
where there seemed to be need of it. The 
abuses of the lex Papia Poppaea seem to 

crisis and then letting it drop (6. 17, 4-5). 

8 Suet. states (Tib. 55) that of his old 
friends and his original council of twenty, 
but two or three were left; but that he 
had destroyed most of them himself. 

* Here again we notice the absence of 
large and comprehensive measures affect- 
ing the provinces, such as had been often 

set on foot by Augustus or such as the 

extension of the higher civic privileges to 
Gaul by Claudius on 23-25). Also the 
foundation of provincial colonies ceases 
entirely from the death of Augustus until 
its revival by Claudius (vol. ii. Introd. 34). 
Nor, whatever may have been his inten- 
tions (4. 4, 4), did Tiberius ever as prin- 
ceps set foot in any province. 
: 4 I5, 4 
4: 37,1. 

I60 INTRODUCTION. [Caar. VIII. 

sions of gratitude for punishment of official oppression’; and it is prob- 
ably only because the latter application was refused, that more were not 
forthcoming?. Coinage * and statue * alike attest the feeling of Asia for 
his liberality after its ruinous earthquake ; inscriptions in the provinces? 
and even in Rome ® give him epithets by no means constantly applied to 
princes in such documents. 

But, after all, the heart of the empire was still the senate of Rome in 
its relation to the prince’: and if those who should have been the most 
valued instruments of his administration are seen shrinking terror-stricken 
from the public service, and absorbed in the effort to save themselves ; 
it is impossible that the general effect could have been other than 
disastrous. 

If our other evidence were more questionable than it is, the decline of 
literature would go far to confirm it. Not but that even the Augustan age 
is nearly stripped of literary genius, as the great spirits born and trained: 
under the Republic pass away ; and the few survivors at thé succession 
of Tiberius attest by their position the change of times. The great 
historian of Rome had, as it seems, abruptly closed his work, and retired 
to his native Padua ; the only great living poet was pining in exile on the 
Euxine. But from even the survival of such names it is indeed a descent, 
toa generation in which Velleius and Valerius Maximus, the fables of 
Phaedrus, and the rhetorical writings of M. Seneca, make up all the 
literature before us*; and in which there is little evidence of greater 
works lost. Thus it was not only the disaffected Roman nobility that 
felt a leaden rule upon them: far higher elements of national life are 
stagnating under peril and suspicion; and the result is a barrenness of 
intellectual activity, compared to which even the time of Nero or Domitian 
is an age of fertility. 

1 This is asserted in the first case, and 
probable in the second. See notes. 

3 For the record of two other such 
dedications to him, both in senatorial 
provinces, see note on 4. 38, 4. 

? ‘Civitatibus Asiae restitutis" Eckhel, 
vi. p. 192; Cohen, i. p. Ie 

* See notes on 2. 47, 1. 

5 E.g. * Princeps et conservator ’ (Baeti- . 

ca). See Orelli, 616, 617, and C. I. L. ii. 
2038 (where its genuineness is vindicated 
against Henzen). 
: "Optimi ac iustissimi principis 'C.I L. 
vi. 1, 93; ‘ principi optimo' Henzen 5393. 
* Tt must be evident that a periodical 

revision and * lectio" of the senate would 
be desirable and even necessary. Augus- 
tus three times held such a ‘lectio’ “Mon. 
Anc. ii. I), and it was revived by Claudius 
(cp. 11. 25, 5; 12. 4, 4); but Tiberius, 
though acting in a few individual cases 
(2. 48, 2; 4. 42, 3), seems to have shrunk 
from this.responsibility. 

8. The Geography of Strabo should be 
considered an Augustan work, though it 
received additions during the early years 
of Tiberius. A technical treatise, such 
as Celsus de Medicina, need not here be 
taken account of, if rightly assigned to 
this time. 

Cur.IX.] GENEALOGY OF THE FAMILY OF AUGUSTUS. 161 

CHAPTER IX. 

GENEALOGY OF THE FAMILY OF AUGUSTUS AND OF THAT 
OF THE CLAUDIAN CAESARS, WITH NOTES. 

OwiNc to constant intermarriages between members of the imperial 
family, the relationships between many of the persons whose names 
occur in these tables are extremely intricate, even without considering 
the further complication introduced by adoptions. Thus the children 
of Germanicus are on their mother's side direct descendants of Au- 
gustus, and on their father's side direct descendants of Octavia, as well 
as descendants of the Claudian house. The emperor Nero, besides 
partaking of all these relationships through his mother, was also directly 
déscended from Octavia on his father's side. All the descendants of 
Drusus, brother of Tiberius, trace a similar descent through Antonia ; 
the children of Drusus, son of Tiberius, become members of that 
family through Livilla; and the children of Claudius by Messalina are - 
again through her father and mother doubly descendants of Octavia. 
Tiberius and the two Drusi, his brother and son, are thus the only 
members of the Claudian stock who stand in no blood-relationship 
to Augustus; and Stem B might have been almost wholly included 
under A. | | | 

It is hoped that the arrangement here adopted will indicate intel- 
ligibly all the relationships of consanguinity. Of the adoptions, the 
most important to bear in mind are those of Octavius by the will of 
Julius Caesar, of Tiberius by Augustus, of Germanicus by Tiberius, and 
of Nero by Claudius. 

It is impossible here to speak of the multitude of representations 
existing in art of most of the principal persons here mentioned; 
specimens of which most students must have had more or less oppor- 
tunity of inspecting for themselves. For the benefit of those to whom 
books are more accessible than museums, it is sufficient here to refer to 
the numerous excellent illustrations and careful judgment on the many 
questions of identity or of apparent truth of portraiture in J. J. Bernoulli’s 
Romische Iconographie, part ii. vol. i.; and to the older but very beautiful 
plates in the Jconographie Romaine of Visconti and Mongez. A still 
larger number of extremely interesting illustrations belonging to the 

VOL. I. M 

162 INTRODUCTION. [Cuar. IX. 

imperial family of this period is given in Mr. Baring Gould's Zragedy of 
the Caesars (Lond. 1892, see some criticisms in: Quart. Rev. Oct. 1894, 
p. 515, and C/ass. Rev. vii. 54, foll.), numerous engravings from coins in 
Cohen's Médailles Impériales (2nd ed. Paris, 1879), and portraits from 
gems &c. belonging to Augustan times in the editions of Horace by Dean 
Milman (1849) and Mr. C. W. King and Professor Munro (1869). 

"Lc T AA 

—— 

et atl 

"£9 "av 'grg p 
'"nusepg "Tr (fz) 
| 
"VS ‘a v ‘Log ^p 
“rh ‘av **6/ 'p "SUIAT[9O 9 'd^v ‘Lg 'D 6 "v ‘79g D Fr "1v ‘Lol q 
verrsuiq vying (ve) ‘spidey erunp (£c) verunt (ez) "mung q (12) 'Suuwprg "I (ot) 

'suustg ^w (61) 
("£1 2704) I | 
C91 2701) ($1270) — ("1 230v) "iv av **64 
‘Ib-av ‘gf av "6S ‘av ‘ye -uef 'p (t1 2701) (‘or 2701) ‘eptdery | -*6r av ‘cZ£ ‘soo 
*6L'p ‘162 "p '£1g ‘p 'tr ‘ay '594 '££ cav *4glp | errurey (21) dz -snuvpg snrune AX 
*'g1 'q^v “Lr 'q'v “Cr Qv ‘gol «1€ uy 'ü d 'q'Y C11 23704) ] 
'44:q — *odli:q — "gr'oN q Iv av [jd (Cv'InboIIVO) 'ogl "aq. '1i£canv ‘¥gl ^p 
"SIITAVI IO — 'e[[s "wutd ‘V6L *p _HV8HVO ‘spidey -avsevp ‘9 ‘av ‘6SL 7q | C80) "smprderr (S1 jon) 
wring (gi) -nag (Ar -duSy (91) eruosewo = SOIVO (51) wrmurey —snsniq (kr) "2esowo ore (£1) = “SHINE surmuey "WC (11) -ermsuaq 
(4 2702) 
'gt ‘av *1g4 'P 
"imf (tcc d^ 7 *esngnsq suruey *r 
(-6 2701) Cg 7702) 
£e "bia v '49L^p '££ ‘av '9g4 *gr 10 "p ‘2 av (*9 2701) 
E tI ou 'tbL:q CS -g) 'S «qv *gS4 “119 "ur ("peq101320). ‘SSL *61 dog "p *b cav ‘LEZ ‘12 "qo qp 
"snumj4soq 188997) "Prou obl uq ‘spidey — "Zrcoua ‘LEL qQ (9 *g) ' ‘oe ‘ora “PEL *q 
sddpsy (o1) snorusuriepy) ':*-L-** SUITOENV (6) eiruoy = Tego) "I (4) "STAT °° — * * * "198e9Q "OQ (9) 
! 
*(8 gow) '(9t) ose 33g 
"bicav ‘Lol ‘p | C 2709) *t1 ‘ova ‘eb -p 
(‘2 *g) '6€ ‘ora *S14 q '£9 *»'a ‘169 “q 
"OXON surpu*[O Ty? Rott; "enne (S) e] © t l| LL eee “eddjisy SnruesdrA *TW 
(€ ou) “v1 ^ar v '494 ‘61 :3ny ^p ‘aded jxou sog ('t 730%) 
'£9 0:8 ‘169 ‘Ex ‘dag -q I ‘Ora '£€bl “ND *p 
"I “@ 99S: [Snnsnbnv uvsuvo) (€ 2702) "F9 ‘Ora ‘069 "115 *q 
"ISI wary tco = * °° “enpasyog "O (P) Cc dh ^o epuoquog woupu epAsjoQ (f) —— "aopeur #146900 (c) 
"Eb Oa '114^p — 198297) 10}BJOIP aq Jo 193sis "veru f | ("1 pow) “gS ‘oa ‘969 "p — ;- | 
jo pue ‘snqyeg snny ‘JW Jo Jo}qdnep ‘zope eyy * "c dz ^ ^ ooocsurAS300 O0 (I) °° 77 * * 7 "enmsqouy 

'snisnsny fo sjuppuassap ]D42;U]J02 PUD j34WT 
"y W31S 

‘Eg ‘av ‘91g "p 29 q 

'8 99S '-s3ny erpnsto (cv) 
a (82 210€) (‘¥e 27016) (‘Ez 2701) 
"gk 'q'v ‘10g ‘p '$9 qv "89 'qvv *1 tg 66 oun f D 
(4 qd) "ye "J'Y JJ "I2 'q *g1g P “LE 'q'v ‘062 ‘Gx "29d ‘q_ B 
199090 "SUTIUSSO T ""upessew =“ wurqeg | [UVSHVO SOIGAWIO OHSN] (big) 
SNIPRVIO TL — spree, (ih) 9TII)938 — vovddog — ‘snqreqouSyy supjpuoq “Ty (ob) — eraAs300 
*(1£) aaoqe oes (‘ee 2201) 
'Sn39q19q *(91) 't£ -a'v ‘SgZ ‘soo 
ST[Vsse PL . ‘epydery 6S *a v *11g ^p "SnUuorssuq 9AOQ* 29S snqieqoueqy 
suHereA "y = srruoq (gt) "hnmoq (42) ^: = + ** eds ^ * : — ^ ++ eujddgisy + suppuroq (uo (9£) 
"A 99S 
— (‘12 2409) . 
*(£ *g) 4€ *a:v ‘06 *p Se *a'v ‘gl p : 
"susuiq *9£ ‘ora 'gi4 'q ("ot 2302) '91 ‘o'a '£g4 ‘sop (gf) a08 
suppnvIo 0p - *6€ ‘ova “G14 *q 'snqasqoueqy. | one — SEA 
OIM ^'—-** ju ot “1OIVUl € 6:) -L su " ". A : |i 9 
à - ] mary ( ) ] dnd ( 2 Se ont en T. sjornddy (££)  vrpusio (e£) SuHOTOA "wa (1£) 
eddjisy 
supejeH (6t) (31 2702) 
; ' *IOItUI ‘snusiddy sngvquvg 
‘mrmogry ‘ry (Sf) | 'sujerüdd y ‘xeg = ereoxvgg (4c) SuHOe[9A JW 
'supe19H * = (7) vruvsdrA (5€) 
(Chr aon) 
(61 270) — '($) aaoqe 25s "Ec org "£4 p 
"snpmojuy *IOUrur "eddji3w (8) aaoqge os "Eh sora "114 *q 
enzo cbs STloomw A (gt)--suruesdzA "Wr ‘sre = “enqoors AL “WE (9c) 
"of ‘ora ‘bel "p | . '(€) sa0qe aes | "pb cora “Er ^p 

"DunüH]'suprouy “prs at ts 1outu 9erAw30Q -L -supeoreyr ‘O 

'(panut;uo?) NY WALS 

("6€ 27010) 

'£6 'q'v *gog ‘p CLE 2jou) (*9€ 2701) 
‘ev 10 1b cav '864 '99 d Y "poouprio ur *p 't9 ‘a'v 'Srg "p. 
10 *6L'£r*qogp:q — (gf 20) ‘61g "p "oe ‘ary ‘ELL ‘NVI T 
"uopuejHg  '£9'Tq'v'$ig'p 'epuoguy — "juejupuv p 210Jpoq 10 up'q © supreqna ‘O (91) 
snrpnw[O “HL ($1) "vraesoo (1) erpneto (£1) "wrpnsro (c1) susnaq (rr) 
oe ee ee (‘SE aon) . 
Ez -avigll-p “LE ‘av ‘06L ^p (‘WE s702) 
61 av ‘elZ q -'6r'av 'c44 'q EF av Cer y) 
CEE 270%) "199990 (suppourr))  ‘spuvr | '964:p  "zeseso 
“$5 “ary ‘Log ‘Er 120 p suoruwuLrep) (or) zwseeQ “EZ, (6) sumrequar ‘Ot: erm t (¢)—=oz0 nT 
7 ‘OI 2a. yv "1 duy 3 l i 
C@VSHVO SNIdAVTIO IL|| (r^v) | 
C9r v) 'Snopuurior) O10 NT "sumesseyr|"wupjeeq | wrruvm?ro 
wupddiisSy—snsuiq snrpuer) ‘ty (4): wpepeA -- wney -- vnnvia 
(CN 998 ! 
—— (TE 2702) 
'6r ‘a'v ‘tll -‘p 
oC ("££ 2702) 'Sr a (*o£ 2704) 
Ef "IE ^a v ‘gl -p 6EL ‘be Kew *q "fe ‘av ‘oll "p "£1 
"S[ITAT'T 10 C6*v) 'I69090) *(9) 908 | ‘ora 'rh4 "115 '8 329 *q 
sAFI (9) ""uHidns y—snoruvurrop (S) "STATT = 199e9() snsniq (+) 
(gt 2701) “LE *a'v Ct 2700) 
("6t 270%) *6 -ya ‘off ‘gt yore p 'Ot "qv 
'S*Z 4dos ‘p ‘gf *»& ‘gt -q | (‘of y) "ev “ora ‘el ‘gr ANS '€LL ^p 
'"SuOTUSULIOf) SDIEAIS)JU Aourur USnizsnbnvuvssvo TL] | eurddufy 

'susuxq suypne[O ore w (£) -Leruoqu y- CS$*y) "emmge--oadeN surpneto "TL (£t)zb wpmrwsdpA 
[| . 

6r ‘a'v 'egl p 
"gt ‘ora ‘ord ‘snjsndny | (9z2704)'£€ -»m "Ie p 
03 ‘a ‘45 10 gS -5'8 | 'snoos)snrpnv[) dd y jo 
*469 10 969 ‘of "uef *q | uos e moi popusosap 
"SiIrsniq erapq-c-'oiesr surpnro T], (1) 

'$4D32D7) UDIpHD))) my fo M(uup, 
'"V WALS 

NOTES. 

STEM A. 

1. A(1). Tue family history of the Octavii, with further account of the 
father and mother of Augustus, is given by Suetonius (Aug. 1-4). The 
distinctions of his father are enumerated in an inscription (Orell. 592), 
which states that he was twice trib. mil., also quaestor, plebeian aedile, 
iudex quaestionum, praetor, and proconsul of Macedonia, where he 
became entitled to the name of imperator. The date of his praetorship 
was 693, B.C. 61; and he was prevented from becoming a candidate 
for the consulship in 696, s.c. 58, by his death at the very beginning 
of that, or at the end of the previous year. 

2. A (3). The frequency of betrothal, and even nominal marriage, 
during mere childhood, among Romans at this time (see Friedlaender, 
Sitteng. i. p. 504, foll), makes it possible to reconcile some such a date 
as that given for Octavia's birth with her betrothal or marriage to 
C. Marcellus in 700, B.c. 54; in which year it was also contemplated 
to give her in marriage to Cn. Pompeius (Suet. Jul. 27). Marcellus, who 
was a leading opponent of Julius Caesar, but subsequently reconciled to 
him, had just died when Octavia, with contempt for all usual decorum 
(see Dio, 48. 31, 3), was hastily married to M. Antonius in 713, B.C. 41, 
by one of the articles of the compact at Brundusium. On the honours 
paid to her at her death, see Dio, 54. 35, 4, on its date Suet. Aug. 61. 

3. A (4). Octavius assumed the name of C. Julius Caesar Octavianus 
in consequence of his adoption by the dictator's will: hence Cicero 
styles him * C. Caesar’ in official language (Phil. 5, c. 16-19), and some- 
times in private letters ‘Octavianus’ (ad Att. 16. 18, 1; 11,6,etc.). On 
the subsequent history of his names and titles, see vi. p. 75, foll. He 
had been first betrothed to a daughter of P. Servilius Isauricus; after- 
wards, on his first reconciliation with Antonius, to a step-daughter of the 
latter, Clodia or Claudia, daughter of Fulvia by P. Clodius. His marriage 
with Scribonia was contracted in 714, B.c. 40, to conciliate Sex. Pom- 
peius, whose father-in-law, L. Scribonius Libo, was her brother. She 
was much older than Octavianus, had been twice previously married, 

NOTES. STEM A. 167 

and had children by P. Cornelius Scipio; one of whom, Cornelia, wife 
of Aemilius Paullus, has been immortalised by Propertius (El. 4, 11). 
He divorced Scribonia the next year, 715, B.c. 39, when her daughter 
Julia was just born; and early in 716, B.c. 38, took place the marriage 
with Livia, which, though contracted under scandalous circumstances, 
resulted at least in a lasting attachment. Scribonia is styled in in- 
scriptions * Scribonia Caesaris ' (Orell. 612, Henzen 5362). She lived to 
share voluntarily the exile of her daughter in 752, B.c. 2 (Vell. 2. 100, 5). 

4. Agrippa inscribes himself on the Pantheon, *M. Agrippa L. F.,’ 
omitting, as he usually did, his ignoble gentile name. He obtained 
three consulships, of which two were consecutive (see r. 3, 1), and the 
honour, said to be unprecedented, of the ‘corona classica" (Vell. 2. 81, 
2) He was also the first ever admitted to share the tribunician power 
of the princeps (see 3. 56, 3). He was first married, probably in 718. 
B.C. 36, to Pomponia, daughter of T. Pomponius Atticus the friend of 
Cicero, by whom he had Vipsania Agrippina, married to Ti. Claudius Nero 
(see B, note 2). Pomponia, if still alive, must have been divorced when he 
married Marcella in 726, p.c. 28 (Dio, 53. 1, 2), who in her turn was 
given up in 733, B.c. 21, to enable him to marry Julia (Dio, 54. 6, 5). 

5. A (5). Julia was married at the.age of fourteen to Marcellus, in 
129, B.C. 25, and four years later to Agrippa, who was of the same age 
as her father. On other projected marriages for her, see note on 4. 40, 
8; on her subsequent marriage in 743, B.c. 11, to Tiberius Nero, her 
exile in 752, B. c. 2, and her death in 767, A.D. 14, see 1. 53; Suet. Aug. 
65, 66; Tib. 5o. 

6. A (6). On Gaius Caesar and Lucius Caesar, see 1. 3, etc. Their 
honours and titles are gathered from Mon. Anc. (ii. 46, etc.), and from 
several inscriptions (Orell. 633-644). Gaius was pontifex, augur, consul 
(754, A.D. 1), princeps iuventutis, and imperator, apparently for the capture 
of Artagira (Henzen, p. 60). Lucius was augur, cos. design. and princeps 
iuventutis. The betrothal of Lepida to him is mentioned in 3. 23, 1. 
A long inscription is preserved recording the honours paid to the 
memory of both princes by the magistrates and citizens of the ‘ colonia 
Iulia Pisana’ (Pisae in Etruria), of which they were patrons (Orell. 642, 
643). The dates of their deaths are from Insc. Orell. 644. 

7. A (8). On the younger Julia, her exile and her death, see 3. 24, 5; 
4. 71,6; Suet. Aug. 64,65. Her husband was son of the censor Paullus 
and Cornelia, and thus grandson of Scribonia (see note 3). Her son, 
M. Lepidus, a man of most profligate character, was put to death by Gaius, 
who had previously given him Drusilla in marriage, and meditated desig- 
nating him as his successor. See note on 14. 2, 4; Dio, 59. 22, 6. 

168 INTRODUCTION. 

8. A (9). The date of Agrippina's death is given in 6. 25, 5. The dates 
of her birth and marriage, and those of the birth of her children, are 
given as determined by Mommsen (Hermes, xiii 245-365). Her 
mortuary inscription is preserved (C. I. L. vi. 886, Rushforth 54). 

9. A (10). Agrippa Postumus was adopted by Augustus at the same 
time with Tiberius in 757, A.D. 4; and is styled * Agrippa Caesar’ in 
inscriptions (C. I. L. x. 405, Henzen 5378), and on a medal struck at 
Corinth, which gives also his effigy (Cohen, i. p. 187). He was removed 
to Surrentum (Suet. Aug. 65) abcut 760, A.D. 7, and thence to Planasia. 
On his death, see 1. 6. 

10. A (12). It is generally supposed that the Silanus to whom Aemilia 
Lepida was married was the consul of 772, A.D. 19, on whom see note 
on 2. 59, I. Pliny records (N. H. 7. 13, 11, 51) that their eldest son, 
M. Silanus (on. whom see note on 13. 1, 1), was born in the last year 
of Augustus, who had thus lived to see his great-great-grandson. For 
L. Silanus (20), see notes on 12. 3, 2; for D. Silanus (21), see on 12. 
58, 1; for Junia Calvina (22), see on 12. 4, 1; for Junia Lepida (23), 
see on 16. 8, 2. L. Silanus (25) (on whom see 15. 52, 3; 16. 7, 2), 
who, like his uncle (21), bore the name of. Torquatus (on which see 3. 
69, 9), appears to have been the last of this family, and, except the 
emperor Nero, the last surviving male descendant of Augustus. 

11. A (13). Nero Caesar was born probably in the middle of 759, A.D. 
6 (see Henzen, p. 60), and was betrothed in childhood to a daughter of 
Creticus Silanus (2. 43, 3), and married to Julia in 773, A.D. 20, on his 
entry into public life (3. 29, 4). Tacitus describes his character (4. 15 ; 59), 
the plots against him (4. 60; 67), and the formal charges brought against 
him (5. 3). On these he was banished to Pontia, and subsequently 
pronounced a public enemy (Suet. Cal. 7) and put to death or compelled to 
suicide (Suet. Tib. 54), shortly before the fall of Seianus. His titles were 
those of flamen Augustalis, scdalis Augustalis, sodalis Titius, frater arvalis, 
fetialis, quaestor. .C. I. L. vi. 913, Lehmann, Claudius, 95-109. 

12. A (14). Drusus Caesar was born probably in the latter part of 760, 
A.D. 7 (see Henzen, p. 6o). His entry into public life is mentioned in 
4. 4, 1; his character in 4. 60, 5. He was also denounced as a public 
enemy (Suet. Cal. 7), and imprisoned in the Palatium, where he died 
(6. 23, 4). His marriage with Aemilia Lepida was mentioned in the lost 
part of Book v. (see on 6. 40, 4), his previous betrothal to a sister of Otho 
in Suet. Oth. 1. His titles are given as follows, praefectus urbi (see 4. 
36, 1), sodalis (or flamen) Augustalis (Insc. Orell. 667), and pontifex ; 
Henzen 5386; C. I. L. iii. 1, 380, Lehm. 110-119. 

13. A (15). Gaius Caesar, generally known by his nickname ‘ Caligula’ 

0 ——EAEmENEEEUT — ——79- RRR 000070007 700777 
—— - DL 

NOTES. STEM A. 169 

(see 1. 41, 3), on the condemnation of his mother and brothers, passed 
under the tutelage of Antonia, and afterwards lived with Tiberius at 
Capreae: see 6. 20, 1; Suet. Cal. 10. He is styled at this time * C. Caesar 
* Germanicus, with the titles of pontifex and quaestor (Henzen, Insc. 
5396), to which offices he was elected in 784 and 786, a.p. 31 and 33 
(Dio, 58. 8, 1; 23, 1). As princeps he retains the name of Germanicus, 
after that of Augustus (Insc. Orell. 702). After his first marriage with Junia 
Claudilla, daughter of M. Silanus (6. 20, 1; Suet. Cal. 12), he had as 
wives Livia Orestilla and Lollia Paulina, before Caesonia (Suet. Cal. 25). 
The assassination of Gaius was followed immediately by that of Caesonia 
and her child (Suet. Cal. 59). 

14. A (36). Agrippina was born at * Oppidum Ubiorum’ (12. 27, 1), 
and her birthday is preserved: see on 14. 12, 1x. The year has been 
thought to be a.p. 14 (see note on 1. 44, 2), but is here given as fixed by 
Mommsen (see note 8) from other dates (cp. note on 1. 69, 1). On her 
marriage to Cn. Domitius (36) in 781, a.p. 28, see 4. 75, 1. On her 
banishment by Gaius in 792, 4.5. 39, andrecall by Claudius in 2o A.D. 4I, 
see Dio, 59. 22, 8; 60. 4, 1; for her second husband Crispus Passienus, 
see on 6. 20, 2; on her marriage to her uncle Claudius, in 802, A.D. 49, 
and subsequent history, see 12. 5, etc. In earlier inscriptions she is styled 
‘Agrippina’ (or ‘ Iulia Agrippina’), * Germanici Caesaris filia ' (Orell. 671, 
673); but after 803, A.D. 50 (see 12. 26, 2), she is styled on coins and 
inscriptions ‘Agrippina Augusta,’ or Iulia Augusta Agrippina. C. I. L. vi. 
921, Henzen, 5387. 

15. A (17). The dates of birth of Agrippina and Julia agree with 
the statement of Suet. (Cal. 7), that the three sisters were born in the 
space of three years (‘continuo triennio") Drusilla was born in 
Germany. (Suet. Cal. 8; cp. 2. 41, 2 note) Her marriage to 
L. Cassius took place in 786, A.D. 33 (6. 15, 4). She was afterwards 
married to M. Lepidus (Dio, 59. 11, 1). See A (11). In inscriptions 
during her life she is styled ‘Iulia Drusilla Germanici f' (Insc. Orell. 
672), but afterwards ‘ Diva Drusilla’ (Orell. 674; Henzen 5389), in con- 
sequence of the divine honours. decreed by order of Gaius at her death 

in 791, A.D. 38. Suet. Cal. 24; Dio, 59. 11. 
| 16. A (18). Julia is so called by Tacitus, by Dio, and on a coin 
(Eckhel, vi. p. 231); but.this name is borne by all the three sisters (see 
notes 14, 15); and Suetonius distinguishes her as Livilla (Cal. 7). Each 
name is supported by inscriptions, as *Iuliae Germanici Caesar. filiae,' 
and ‘Livilla Germanici f^ (Insc. Orell. 676, 677). Tacitus gives the 
year of her birth and the place Lesbos) 2. 54, 1; and the year of her 
marriage to L. Vinicius (786, A.D. 33), 6. 15, 1. She shared the banish- 

170 INTRODUCTION. 

ment and recall of Agrippina (note 14), but was soon after again banished 
and put to death at the instigation of Messalina, Dio, 60. 8, 5. Sue- 
tonius (Cal. 7) mentions the death in childhood of three other children of 
Germanicus and Agrippina, born apparently in the years 761—764, A.D. 
8-11 ; and inscriptions are found recording the place of their cremation. 
One of them appears to have been called Tiberius, another Gaius (Insc. 
Orell. 668, 669, 670). It is also stated by M. Seneca (Controv. 4) that 
Quintilius Varus (see on 4. 66, 1) was a son-in-law of Germanicus; but 
it is not known how this was the case. On the probable birth of another 
child, see note on I. 44, 2. 

17. A (26). A marriage had been projected in 715, B.c. 39, between 
Marcellus and the daughter of Sex. Pompeius. His marriage with Julia 
daughter of Augustus took place in 729, p.c. 25 (Dio, 53. 27, 5), in which 
year Plutarch states (Ant. 87) that Augustus also adopted him ; but this 
statement appears to require confirmation. He had been admitted to 
the senate with praetorian rank; but his first and only actual magistracy 
was the curule aedileship, held in his twentieth year, which was also the 
year of his death. See 1.3, 1; Propert. 3. 18, 13-20; Verg. Aen. 6. 
861-884. 

18. A (27). It is known that there were two * Marcellae' (Suet. Aug. 
63; Insc. Henzen 5373, 5374) and that one of them, generally taken to 
be Marcella minor, was married to Agrippa (see note 5) and to Iullus 
Antonius (see note on 4. 44, 5). That the other was married to M. 
Valerius Barbatus Appianus and to Sex. Appuleius, is a supposition to 
explain the relationships mentioned in 4. 52, 1; 2. 50, 1; where see 
notes. Nothing appears to be known of the date of birth or death of 
either sister. 

19. A (28). Suetonius states (Aug. 63) that Agrippa had children by 
Marcella. That one of these was a daughter, probably another Vipsania, 
and was married to Q. Haterius, is an inference from the name of 
Haterius Agrippa, and from the mention made (2. 51, 2) of his relation- 
ship to Germanicus. 

20. A (29). Tacitus twice (4. 44, 3; 12. 64, 4) speaks of the wife of 
Domitius as ‘ Antonia minor ;' but Suetonius (Cal. 1; Cl. 1; Ner. 5)appears 
to be right in assigning this marriage to Antonia maior, and in making 
Antonia minor the wife of Drusus. "The marriage with Domitius (on 
whom see 4. 44, 3; Suet. Ner. 4) is said to have been projected as early 
as 717, B.C. 37 (Dio, 48. 54, 4); at which time it would appear from 
dates furnished by Plutarch (Ant. 33, 930; 35, 931) that the elder 
Antonia was but an infant, and the younger yet unborn. 

21. A (30). The statement of Dio (59. 3, 4), that Gaius on his accession 

NOTES. STEM B. 171 

gave his grandmother Antonia the title of * Augusta,' is confirmed by an 
Arval Table of Jan. 31, a.p. 38, recording a sacrifice on her birthday 
(C.I.L. vi. 2028 c). She soon afterwards died or was put to death, and 
the title, said to have been declined by her in her lifetime, was renewed 
by Claudius (Suet. Cl. 11), and appears on his inscriptions (Orell. 649, 650, 
etc). We hear of a temple erected to her, probably by Claudius (Pl. N. 
H. 35. 10, 36, 94); and a basilica at Rome appears to have borne the 
name of both sisters, * Basilica Antoniarum duarum' (Henzen 7263). 

22. A (36). On Cn. Domitius, first husband of the younger Agrippina, 
see 4. 75, I. On Domitia, 13. 19, 4; 21, 5; on Domitia Lepida, rr. 
37, 4; 12. 64, 4; on her second husband, App. Junius Silanus, 4. 68, 1. 
The family history of the Domitii Ahenobarbi is given more fully in 
Suet. Ner. 1-5. 

23. A (40). For the original name of Nero, see on 12. 3, 2. After 
his adoption in 803, a.p. 50 (12. 25, 1), he becomes * Ti. Claudius Nero 
Caesar’ (Henzen 5405), or ‘ Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Germanicus ; ’ 
and bears titles of membership in the four priestly colleges, and those of 
cos. design. and princeps iuventutis (Orell. 650, 726); and had also 
*proconsulare imperium extra urbem’ (12. 41, 2). As princeps he is 
usually styled * Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus ' (Orell. 728), 
and often assumes the * praenomen imperatoris, disused since the time 
of Augustus (Mommsen, Staatsr. ii. p. 769), besides the * nomen impera- 
toris, received eleven times or more (Orell. 732, cp. Henzen 5189). 
On his marriage to Octavia, see 12. 58, 1; on that to Poppaea, 14. 60, 1; 
on that to Statilia Messalina, Suet. Ner. 35, and note on 15. 68, 5. 

24. On the title of Augusta given to Poppaea, see 15. 23, 1 ; on her 
death and funeral, 16. 6; on her deification, 16. 21, 2. 

25. A (41). Messalina is thought to have been only thirteen or fourteen 
at the time of her marriage and twenty-three or twenty-four at her death 
(see vol. ii. Introd. 42, and note on 11. 38, 4). The title of * Augusta, 
not permitted (Dio, 60. 12, 5), is given to her on some provincial coins, 
and on some inscriptions (Henzen 5402). The relationship of her father 
to Claudius, mentioned by Suetonius (Cl. 26), is explained above (note 18). 

STEM B. 

26. B (1). On the family history of the Claudii Nerones, and of the 
Livii Drusi, see Suet. Tib. 1-4, where it is shown that the father of Livia 
was also descended from another son of App. Claudius Caecus, and 
was adopted by a Livius Drusus, probably the famous tribune of 663, 
B.C. 91 (see note on 5. 1, 1). Two inscriptions (C. I. L. ix. 3660, 3661, 

172 INTRODUCTION. 

see also Henzen 5365) appear to give the name of her father, ‘ Livius 
Drusus Claudianus' (see Vell. 2. 75, 3) ; and that of her mother as 
Alfidia. - Ti. Nero was quaestor, pontifex, praetor (Suet. Tib. 4), and 
gave up his wife to Octavianus in 716, B.c. 38, before the birth of 
Drusus. He died when his eldest son was nine years old (Ibid. 6). 
Livia became by adoption in 767, 4.p. 14, ‘ Iulia Augusta, Divi Aug. f.' 
(Insc. Orell. 615, etc.) Though not deified at her death (see 5. 2, 1), 
she became so after the accession of Claudius (Dio, 60. 5, 2), and shared 
a temple with Augustus in the Palatium (Insc. Orell. 2446). Even in 
her husband's lifetime she was entitled * Livia Augusti dea’ in an in- 
scription in Sicily (Orell. 614), and at other times received abroad other 
titles not formally allowed (see notes on 1.14, 1); and her birthday 
was kept after her death (see 6. 5, 1). | 

27. On the parentage of Vipsania (who is called simply * Agrippina’ 
in Suet. Tib. 7; Insc. Orell. 658), see note 4. She was betrothed to 
Tiberius Nero in infancy (* vix annicula’ Nep. Att. 19), but the date of 
their marriage is not known. On the distress of Tiberius at being forced 
to divorce her and to marry Julia, see ch. viii. p. 133; on her sub- 
sequent marriage to C. Asinius Gallus Saloninus see 1. 12, 6; and on her 
death, 3. 19, 4. She had several children by her second marriage, for 
whom see on 3. 75, 1; 4.1, 15; 34, 1; 6. 23, 3. 

28. B (2). Tiberius down to the time of his adoption bears the name 
‘Ti. Claudius Ti. f. Nero,’ his titles being those of his two consulates, 
with those of pontifex and imperator, and, after 748, B.c. 6, the years 
of tribunician power: see Insc. Henzen 5375. After his adoption he 
becomes * Tiberius Caesar, Augusti f., Divi nepos' (Insc. Orell. 683), 
but usually drops the gentile name Julius. During his principate, the 
name Augustus, though not allowed by him in ordinary use (Suet. Tib. 
26 ; Dio, 57. 2), always appears on coins and inscriptions. ‘The ' prae- 
nomen imperatoris" was not adopted, though found sometimes in pro- 
vincial inscriptions (see C. I. L. viii. 2, Index, p. 1038). The years of 
his tribunician power continue to be reckoned, inclusive of those which 
he shared with Augustus; and the number of times on which he was 
saluted imperator (see on 2. 18, 2) are added. Hence his mortuary 
inscription (Orell. 691) runs thus: * Ossa Ti. Caesaris, Divi Aug. F., Aug., 
Pont. Max., Trib. Pot. xxxiix., Imp. viii., Cos. v^ | 

29. B (3). Neither Drusus nor his second son was ever adopted 
into the family of the Caesars. In life, Drusus was entitled augur, consul 
(745, B.c. 9), and imperator :- after his death-the surname * Germanicus ' 
was conferred on him and his family (Suet. Cl. 1 ; cp. Henzen 5315). 
His eldest son was thus entitled to bear the name, before his own 

NOTES. STEM B. 173 

achievements in Germany, and on his adoption into the family of the 
Caesars in 757, A.D. 4, his brother assumed it (Suet. CI. 2) as representa- 
tive of his father's house. 

.. 80. B (4). Drusus Caesar bears the titles of augur, pontifex, quaestor, 
sodalis Augustalis (see 1. 54, 2), flamen Augustalis (see on 2. 83, 2), 
Cos. ii (768, 774, A.D. 15, 21), trib. pot. ii (see on 3. 56, 1), xv vir 
sacris faciundis, Orelli 211, 652. For the grounds on which the date 
of his birth is assigned, see note on 3. 56, 7 ; for the honours awarded 
at his death, see notes on 4. 9, 2. 

31. B (5). Germanicus is known only by his adoptive name, as 
* Germanicus Caesar;' once apparently (see ,Henzen, p. 60) as * Ger- 
manicus Iulius Caesar.’ There is no record of his praenomen, or of 
any original cognomen. The date of his birth is given as established 
by Mommsen (see above, note 8). In life, he bears the titles quaestor 
(760, A.D. 7, Suet. Cal. 1), augur, flamen Augustalis (see on 2. 83, 2), 
Cos. ii (765, 771, A.D. 12, 18), Imp. ii (see on 1. 58, 8), sometimes 
(C. I. L. v. 4308, x. 513), perhaps wrongly, pontifex. See Orelli 655, 660, 
etc. On the further honours decreed at his death, see 2. 83, and notes. 

32. B. (6). The name is always given as ‘ Livia’ by Tacitus and in 
inscriptions (e.g. Orell. 653, 1724, 2846, etc), but by Suet. (Cl. 1), 
and Dio (57. 22, 2, etc.) as ‘ Livilla.” Her first marriage to C. Caesar 
is mentioned in 4. 40, 5; her complicity in the murder of Drusus in 
4- 3, 3, etc.; her death in Dio, 58. 11, 7. .Onthe question whether she 
was ever betrothed to Seianus, see note on 4. 40, II. 

33. B (7). The original names of Claudius are given i in Suet. Cl. 2, 
and in several inscriptions. His titles, prior to his principate, are those 
of augur, sodalis Augustalis. (1. 54, 2), sodalis Titius, consul (suff. 790, 
A.D. 37, Suet. Cl. 7): he had also previously received * ornamenta con- 
sularia’ (Suet. Cl. 5): see Henzen 5399, etc. As princeps, he is the 
first who assumed the name of ‘Caesar’ as an imperial cognomen, 
without ever having been adopted into the family; but, unlike his pre- 
decessors, he always retains his gentile name, and is generally known 
by it; his full name being ‘ Ti. Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus.’ 
It may be noted that he accepted the ‘nomen imperatoris" no less than 
twenty-seven times (Insc. on the Aqua Claudia, Porta Maggiore, Rome, 
Orelli 54). He was betrothed in youth to Aemilia Lepida (A. 12), and 
to Medullina (Orell. 716), besides contracting the four marriages here 
given ; on all of which, and on his children by the first three, see Suet. 
Cl. 26, 21. 

34. B (8) On the first marriage of Julia, see 3. 29, 4; on the 
second, 6. 27, 1; on her son Rubellius Plautus, 14. 22, 2, etc.; on 

174 INTRODUCTION. 

her death, at the instigation of Messalina, 13. 32, 5; 43, 3; Dio, 60. 
18, 4: on her alleged betrothal to Seianus, see note on 4. 40, 11; 
6. 27, I. ! 

35. B (9, 10). On the date of birth and names of the twin sons of 
Drusus, see note on 2. 84, 1. Tiberius Gemellus was named in his grand- 
father's will joint-heir with Gaius (Suet. Tib. 76), who adopted him and 
caused him to be entitled princeps iuventutis (Suet. Cal. 15), but soon 
afterwards put him to death (Id. 23): see on 6. 46, 1. 

36. B (rr) On the projected marriage between the daughter of 
Seianus and young Drusus, see note on 3. 29, 5; on his death, Suet. Cl. 
27. His sister Claudia was exposed when a few months old, on sus- 
picion of illegitimacy (Suet. 1. 1.). 

37. B (13). Claudia Antonia (Insc. Orell. 679, 680), the ‘ Antonia’ of 
Tacitus and Suetonius, is thought to have been born about 780, A.p. 
27, and was married to Cn. Pompeius Magnus and Faustus Sulla (CI. 
27). Suet. states (Ner. 35) that on her refusal to marry Nero, she was 
put to death by him on an improbable charge of complicity in Piso's 
conspiracy (see 15. 53, 4). 

38. B (14). The date of birth of Octavia is not known (see note on 
14. 64, 1), but representations in art (see Visconti, Pl. 29) would show 
her to have been older than her brother. She had been betrothed to 
L. Silanus (A. 20) before her marriage to Nero (12. 13, 2). On her 
divorce and death, see 14. 60-64. 

39. B (r5). On the discrepancy of a year in the dates assigned to 
the birth of Britannicus, see notes on 12. 25, 3; 13. 15, x. In 13. 17,3, 
he is called ‘ the last blood of the Claudii,’ as the last male representative 
of that noble house, to which Nero belonged only by adoption. 

i ed puc 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER I 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

Ch. 1-4. Introductory. 

1. Periods of Roman History, and reasons for selecting this one. 2. Growth of the 
power of Augustus. $38. His plans for the succession. 4. His decline of life. 
Opinions of men respecting the future. 

A. U.C. 767, A. D. 14. Sex. Pompeius, Sex. Appuleius, coss. 
Ch. 5-15. Death of Augustus and succession of Tiberius. 

5. Last illness and death of Augustus (August, 19), Tiberius assumes the position 
of successor. 6. Agrippa Postumus put to death. 7. Servility of the senate and 
people; caution of Tiberius. 8. The will of Augustus; debate in the senate on his 
funeral. 9,10. Favourable and unfavourable judgments of his character and policy. 
Temple and divine honours decreed to him. 11, 12, 13. Apparent reluctance of 
Tiberius to accept the principate; offence taken by him at observations of Asinius 
Gallus, L. Arruntius, Q. Haterius, and Mamercus Scaurus. 14. Honours to Livia 
Augusta and to Germanicus. 15. Election of praetors ; transference of comitia to 
senate; institution of *ludi Augustales.’ 

Ch. 16-30. Mutiny of the Pannonian legions. 

16-19: Outbreak of the mutiny; conduct and demands of the soldiers; Blaesus, son. 
of the legatus, sent as their delegate to Rome. 20-23. Further progress of tlie 
mutiny, and complete break-down of all discipline. 24-27. Despatch of a force 
from Rome under Drusus and Seianus; continued contumacy of the legions and 
danger of Cn. Lentulus. 28. Revulsion of feeling produced by an eclipse of the 
moon (Sept. 26). 29,30. Restoration of order; delegates sent to Rome; punish- 
ment of the ringleaders, and departure of Drusus. | 

Ch. 31-52. Mutiny and subsequent campaign of the German legions. 

91, 2. Outbreak of mutiny in Lower Germany. 33-35. Action of Germanicus; his 
address to the soldiers and peril at their hands. 36-38. Concessions made for the 
time; withdrawal of the legions to their winter camps.- 89, 40. Fresh outbreak at 
Ara Ubiorum on arrival of an embassy from Rome; Agrippina .and her son sent 
away to the Treviri. 41-48. Change of feeling, taken advantage of by Germanicus 
in his speech. 44. Military trial of offenders and restoration of order. 45-49. 
Similar measures taken in the other camp at Vetera; state of feeling at Rome; 
resolution of Tiberius to stay there. 50-52. Expedition against the Marsi; feeling 
of Tiberius respecting the events. 

Ch. 53. Death of Julia, daughter of Augustus; Sempronius Gracchus put to death. 

Ch. 54. Institution of sodales Augustales; turbulence at the lndi Augustales. 
VOL. I. | N 

178 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U. C. 768, A. D. 15. Drusus Caesar, C. Norbanus, coss. 

Ch. 55, 56. Arminius and Segestes the heads of pe among the Germans; expedi- 
tion in the spring against the Chatti. 

Ch. 57—59. Segestes rescued from his enemies; the wife of Arminius taken; the 
Cherusci roused to war by Arminius. 

Ch. 60-63. Expedition, chiefly conducted by ships, to the Amisia, and thence against 
the Cherusci; burial of the remains of the army of Varus. 

Ch. 64-69. Difficult and dangerous retreat of Caecina by land; the destruction of the 
bridge over the Rhine prevented by Agrippina. 

Ch. 70, 71. Peril of another force marching by the sea-shore; efforts to repair the 
losses of the army. 

Ch. 72-81. Events at Rome during the year. 

72-74. Triumphalia decreed. Title of *pater patriae' refused by Tiberius ; revival 
of law of maiestas; charges against two knights and Granius Marcellus; conduct of 
Tiberius. 75. His supervision of the law courts, and liberality to some senators. 
76. Flood of the Tiber. Achaia and Macedonia transferred from the senate to 
Caesar; Drusus presides at a gladiatorial exhibition. 77. Repetition of disturb- 
ance at the theatre, and measures taken. 78. Temple to Augustus in Spain, Edict. 
of Tiberius on the centesima and on the dismissal of soldiers. 79. Debate on 
proposals to obviate the floods of the Tiber. 80. Macedonia and Achaia combined 
with the government of Moesia; habit of Tiberius to continue the same persons in 
. Office; and reasons for it. 81. His mode of conducting the election of consuls, 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER I. 

1. URBEM Romam a principio reges habuere ; libertatem et 

29 consulatum L. Brutus instituit. 

dictaturae ad tempus sume- 5. 

bantur; neque decemviralis potestas ultra biennium, neque 

3 tribunorum militum consulare ius diu valuit. 

non Cinnae, non 

Sullae longa dominatio: et Pompei Crassique potentia cito in 

CRITICAL NOTES. 

In these the Medicean text is given without any distinguishing 

letter. Of the others, B. — Beroaldus, R. = Rhenanus, L. = Lipsius. 
Annalium ins. R. 

T. On the praenomen of the author 
and title of the work, see Introd. i. 
pp. 2, 6. 

4. Urbem Romam, &c. The thought 
implied in these sentences is that the 
periods of Roman history coincide with 
permanent changes in the form of govern- 
ment, in which only temporary changes 
intervene between the expulsion of the 
kings and the principate of Augustus; 
. and that the works of previous writers 
have left no earlier period open to him- 
self than that which he chooses. On the 
hexameter line formed by these words, 
see Introd. v. $ 79. They show a remi- 
niscence of Sall. Cat. 6, 1. 

habuere, ‘governed,’ as used of pro- 
vinces, 4. 5, 2; 12. 54, 3. 

libertas, used generally of repüblican 
institutions, as c. 33, 4, &c.; so also by 
Livy, as 2. 1, 7; 3. 38, 2, &c. 

5. ad tempus, ‘for the occasion’ 
(apds xatpév’\; so *dux tumultuarius et ad 
tempus lectus’ Liv. 28. 42, 5; cp. 4. 19, 1, 
and ‘in tempus’ (c. 37, 1, &c.). 

6. ultr& biennium. Tacitus may 

only mean that it did not last out a third 
year, or probably follows the received 
account given by Livy and others, ac- 
cording to which the *potestas' (‘iusta 
potestas") of the decemvirs lasted but 
two years, 303, 304, B.C. 451, 450; their 
farther rule being mere usurpation. Mili- 
tary tribunes with consular power were 
substituted for consuls during most of the 
years from 310 to 387, B.C. 444-367 (Liv. 
4. 7, to 6. 42); but are not a fixed insti- 
tution, as consuls or dictators frequently 
intervene. The ‘despotism’ (* dominatio?) 
of Cinna lasted during his four successive 
consulships, 667—670, B.C. 87-84; that of 
Sulla during his dictatorship, 672-675, 
B.C. 82-79. 

8. potentia, ‘political ascendency.’ 
The term distinguishes the coalition of 
influence, often called ‘the first trium- 
virate,’ formed in 694, v. C. 60, at which 
time Pollio’s history of the civil war 
began (Hor. Od. 2. 1, 1), from the union 
of the leaders of thrce armies (‘arma’), 
which brought about the second, or true 
‘ triumvirate.’ 

N 2 

Fr 
et 

. sion is varied in 4. 32, 1, 

180 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

Caesarem, Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum cessere, 
qui cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa nomine principis sub impe- 

rium accepit. 

sed veteris populi Romani prospera vel adversa 4 

claris scriptoribus memorata sunt; temporibusque Augusti di- 
5 cendis non defuere decora ingenia, donec gliscente adulatione 

deterrerentur: 

Tiberii Gaique et Claudii ac Neronis res floren- 5 

tibus ipsis ob metum falsae, postquam occiderant, recentibus 

odiis compositae sunt. 

inde consilium mihi pauca de Augusto 6 

et extrema tradere, mox Tiberii principatum et cetera, sine ira 
ct studio, quorum causas procul habeo. 

2. Postquam Bruto et Cassio caesis nulla iam publica arma, 
Pompeius apud Siciliam oppressus, exutoque Lepido, interfecto 

!. cessere, * passed into the hands of,’ 
used with ‘in imperium,’ by Livy; by 
Tacitus also with accusative of a person, 
as 6. 43, 1, &c., or of a personification, 
aS 2. 23, 3. 

2. imperium. This word, like the 
others, has also its definite meaning, 
‘took the whole state under military 
command, with the title of prince.’ On 
this power and title, and the limitation 
with which ‘ cuncta' is to be understood, 
see Introd. vi. p. 77 foll. 

3. veteris populi, &c. The expres- 
to ' veteres 
populi Romani res.” In H. r. 1, 1 ‘dum 
res populi Romani memorabantur’ is 
used to imply an antithesis, perhaps not 
wholly absent in the other places, between 
national history and mere ‘res principum." 

4. claris scriptoribus. On this da- 
tive, see Introd. v. $ 18; and on the ge- 
rundive dative with ‘defuere,’ ibid. § 22h; 
H. 3. 54,3. This use of * dicere,' though 
mainly poetical, is found in Sall. (Jug. 95, 
2* and Liv. (7. 29, 1, &c.). 

5. decora ingenia, e.g. Pollio, Livy, 
Q. Labienus, Cremutius Cordus, and 
others. Some writers of later history, as 
M. Seneca and Aufidius Bassus, included 
the time of Augustus in their work. See 
Introd. iii. p. 15. 

6. deterrerentur. On the use of the 
subj. of facts with * donec,' see Introd. v. 
§ 53. The reason here assigned may have 
been that which induced Livy to conclude 
his on in 145» B.C. 9. 

que ... ... &c. Such variation 
of Sonjuncioné is often adopted for 
elegance (see Introd. v. $ 89), but here, 
as Nipp. suggests, is intended to combine 

in pairs the two Julian and two Claudian 
Caesars, as in H. 2. 76, 4- 

7. falsae, ‘falsified,’ as ‘falsae tabu- 
lae' (Suet. Aug. 19), &c. 

8. compositae. ‘Componcre res’ is a 
condensed expression, like * componere 
Iliaca tempora' Vell. 1. 3, 2, &c. On 
the chief historical works which Tacitus 
may have used, see Introd. iii. pp. 13-18. 

9.'cetera, i.e. to the death of Nero, 
or end of, &. D. 68, after which the ‘ His- 
tories,’ already published, begin. 

10. quorum oausas, i.e. * iniuria! or 
‘beneficium.” The whole passage in 
H.1.1 should be compared with this. On 
the apparent belief of Tacitus in his own 
impartiality, see Introd. iv. p. 32 foll. 

1I. caesis, used, like ‘ interfecto ' be- 
low, with some rhetorical license, of self- 
inflicted deaths. 

publica arma, ‘ army of the Republic.’ 
It is implied that the forces of the trium- 
virs, as well as those of Pompeius, were 
mere ' privata arma,’ and that Brutus and 
Cassius represented the State. Augustus, 
in Mon. Anc. i. Io, represents them as 
exiles by judicial sentence, and outlaws in 
arms against their country. 

12. Pompeius, &c.. Sex. Pompeius 
was ‘crushed’ (*oppressus,' used thus of 
decisive defeat, 3. 41, 3, &c.) by Agrippa 
off Naulochus, near Pelorum, Sep. 3, 718, 
B.C. 36. His death took place in Asia in 
the following year. Lepidus was at the 
same time ‘stripped of power’ (‘exuto’); 
his army of twenty legions being induced 
to desert him, and no office left to him 
but that of ‘ Pontifex maximus,’ which 
he was allowed to retain in seclusion at 
Circeii till his death in 741, B.C. 13. 

4. )3 37, 6, &c. 

LIBER I. 

CAP. 1, 2. 181 

Antonio, ne Iulianis quidem partibus nisi Caesar dux reliquus, 
posito triumviri nomine consulem se ferens et ad tuendam 
plebem tribunicio iure contentum, ubi militem donis, populum 
annona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit, insurgere paulatim, munia 
senatus magistratuum legum in se trahere, nullo adversante, 
cum ferocissimi per acies aut proscriptione cecidissent, ceteri 
nobilium, quanto quis servitio promptior, opibus et honoribus 
extollerentur ac novis ex rebus aucti tuta et praesentia quam 

2 vetera et periculosa mallent. 

neque provinciae ilum rerum 

statum abnuebant, suspecto senatus populique imperio ob cer- 

8. at: ac B. 

I. Iulianis, *Caesarian. This term, 
applied to the troops of Julius Caesar 
(Suet. Jul. 75), as is also ‘ Caesariani’ 
(Bell. Afr. 13, 1), is here applied after 
his death to the party of the triumvirs ; 
as that of the senate or *optimates' is 
still, after the death of its leader, styled 
*Pompeianae partes’ (c. 10, 1). Sex. 
Pompeius is regarded here as external to 
both these parties. 

2. posito triumviri nomine, &c. 
On this whole passage, see Introd. vi. 
pp- 77; 78. 
Staatsr. ii. 873, 1) that Tacitus must be 
here speaking of the tribunician power at 
an earlier date than that of 731, B.C. 23. 
See Introd. 1. l. p. 78, n. 3. - 

se ferens, * displaying - himself,’ as 12. 
His consulships and, from 
731, B.C. 23, his tribuniciZn power, ap- 
pear in his list of titles; while the * pro- 
consulare imperium’ and ‘principate’ do 
not. See Introd. vi. pp. 78, 81, 83, n. 5. 

ad tuendam plebem. This, the 
original conception of the office of tri- 
bune, may «well have been put forward by 
Augustus to conceal the very special and 
extensive character of the powers assumed 
by him under that title. See 3. 56; In- 
trod. vi. p. 83 foll. ; Mommsen, Staatsr. 
ii. 878 foll. It is.also possible that the 
original conception of his *ius tribuni- 
cium ' had included no more than this. 

3. donis. A gift is specified, out of 
the spoils of war, of 1000 H. S. each to 
125,000 veterans settled in colonies, in 
725, B.C. 29 (Mon. Anc. iii. 17): cp. also 

Dio, 51. 17, 7; and, on his. more usual 

.bounties to soldiers, Suet. Aug. 49. 

4. annona. This refers not to the 
regular corn dole, which he limited rather 
than extended (Dio, 55, 10, 1), but to his 
careful organization of the supply from 

It is evident (see Mommsen, © 

Egypt and elsewhere, and to special dis- 
tributions, gratuitous or at a price below 
cost, in times of scarcity (Suet. Aug. 41). 
He records twelve such * frumentationes,' 
given at his own cost in one year (731, 
B.C. 23), as well as several * congiaria ' 

in money at various times. Mon. Anc. 
iii. 7-21. 
otii, ‘rest,’ after revolution: cp. 

Verg. Ecl. 1, 6. 

insurgere paulatim. On the gradual 
extension and encroachment of the powers 
of Augustus, see Introd. vi. pp. 86 foll. 
The expression *legum et magistratuum 
munia in se trahens ' is repeated 11. 5, I. 

6. ferocissimi, ‘the boldest spirits’; 
often used in a good sense, as is also 
‘ferocia’ (c. 12, 6): on the use of ‘ per,’ 
see Introd. v. § 62. 

7. servitio. The dative is o'ten thus 
used by Tacitus with ‘promptus,’ as 
c. 48, 3; 4. 46, 4, &c., rarely by other 
authors, as Liv. 25. 16, 12. See Introd. 
v. $ 20 ; and, on his frequent abbreviation 
of comparative sentences, ibid. $ 64: *opes' 
and ‘honores’ are often coupled, as in 
4- 34, 6; 6. 8, 8, &c. 

8. tuta, &c. 
antithesis of ‘tuta’ and *periculosa': 

"preferred the present institutions with 
their seeurity, to the -6ld with their 
Q 

peris 

9. neque... &bnuebant. This im- 

The stress is on the ' 

Qi 

portant admission appears to understate . 

the fact. 

gustus, see Suet. Aug. 59; Dio, 5I. 20, 

7, &c., and on those to Tiberius, 4. 15, 4; 
ws 

ate certamina potentium. Those of 

rivals, such as Marius and Sulla, Pompeius 

and Caesar; whose civil-wars affected even 

the provinces. 

See Introd. vii. p. 119. On — 
the honours given. by provinces to Au- 

IO 

182 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

tamina potentium et avaritiam magistratuum, invalido legum 
auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur. 

3. Ceterum Augustus subsidia dominationi Claudium Mar- 
c cellum sororis filium admodum adulescentem pontificatu et 
.— 7s curuli aedilitate, M. Agrippam ignobilem loco, bonum militia 
.et victoriae socium, geminatis consulatibus extulit, mox defuncto 
Marcelló^ generum sumpsit; Tiberium Neronem et Claudium 
Drusum privignos imperatoriis nominibus auxit, integra etiam 

tum domo sua. 

nam genitos Agrippa Gaium ac Lucium in 2 

familiam Caesarum induxerat, necdum posita puerili praetexta 
principes iuventutis appellari, destinari consules specie recusantis 

9. dum (cp. c. 77, I, &c.) : tum Wolf. 

I. legum, the laws ‘de pecuniis re- 
petundis.’ 

2. ambitu, ‘intrigue,’ or ‘ solicita- 
tion’; cp. c. 7, 10; 75, I (where it is 
explained by ‘ potentium preces"), &c. It 
is thus here distinguished from bribery, 
for which it is often a synonymous word. 

postremo. This emphasizes the more 
probable alternative, as ‘sive..., seu 
..., ad postremum vel odio’ H. 1. 39, 2. 

3. Ceterum. On various uses of this 
word in Tacitus, see Gerber and Greef, 
Lex. It marks here merely a transition 
to another part of the same subject, as in 
2. 5, 1; 42, 1 ; 61, 1, &c. 

subsidia dominationi. The dative 
is used with subsidium by Cic. (Att. 1. 
10, 4; de Or. 1. 60, 255). On the ap- 
position, see Introd. v $ 12a. 

Marcellum. On the relationships and 
other biographical details respecting all 
the persons mentioned in this chapter, see 
the pedigrees and notes in Introd. ix. 

4. pontificatu. Membership in the 
great priestly colleges was often given to 
very young men of high rank : cp. 3. 29, 3; 
note on 12. 41, 2; Staatsr. ii. I III, n. 2. 

6. geminatis, ‘ piled one upon another,’ 
i.e. ‘consecutive.’ This was the case with 
his second and third consulships, 726, 727, 
B.C. 28, 27; his first consulship in 717, 
B. C. 37, having no peculiar significance. 
Under the principate, a second consulship 
is rare, a third very rare, and continuous 
consulships unknown, except in the case 
of the princeps himself, or persons ex- 
tremely near to him. 

8. imperatoriis nominibus. On this 
title, and its distinction from the ‘prae- 
nomen imperatoris,’ see 1. 58, 9; Introd. 
vi. p. 76; Staatsr. ii. 1155, 4. The date 

II. destinare : text Acidalius. 

at which it was given to them is uncertain, 
the'inscription usually cited (C. I. L. ix. 
2443; Henzen 5375), being subsequent to 
the death of Drusus. 

integra, ‘furnished with heirs,’ cp. 
‘plena domus' 4. 3, I, ‘vacui penates’ 
6. 51, 4. 

10. induxerat. This adoption took 
place in 737, B.C. 17; when Gaius was in 
the third year of his age, and Lucius just 
born, Dio, £4. 18, 1. 

necdum, &c. It appears from Mon. 
Anc. (see next note) that these honours 

. were decreed not before, but at the time 

of the assumption of the ‘ toga virilis.’ 

Ir. appellari... destinari. .. cupi- 
verat. The sense is equivalent to ‘ap- 
pellati . . . destinati . . . id quod cupi- 
verat. Augustus represents the facts as 
follows: *Gaium et Lucium Caesares 
honoris mei causa senatus populusque 
Romanus annum quintum et decimum 
agentis consulis designavit, ut eum magis- 
tratum inirent post quinquennium. Et 
ex eo die quo deducti sunt in forum, 
ut interessent consiliis publicis, decrevit 
senatus. Equites autem Romani universi 
principem iuventutis utrumque eorum 
parmis et hastis argenteis donatum appel- 
laverunt' Mon. Anc. ii. 46—iii. 6. The 
title of * princeps iuventutis ' is analogous 
to that of * princeps senatus,' and appears 
to be new at this time, the old priority 
in the *centuriae equitum equo publico" 
being that of ‘seviri’ (Staatsr. ii. 826). 
On the significance of the title as desig- 
nating an heir to tbe principate, sce 
Introd. vi. p. 98. The ‘ show of refusal’ 
appears to have been that Augustus 
thought it prudent to modify the offer of 
an immediate consulship for the youths, 

LIBER I. CAP. 3. 183 

Anka . aa 
3 flagrantissime cupiverat. ut Agrippa vita doncc Luciu 

Caesarem euntem ad Hispaniensis exercitus, Gaium remeantem }.4, 
Armenia et vulnere invalidum mors fato propera vel novercae 
Liviae dolus abstulit, Drusoque pridem extincto, Nero solus e [ qo 
privignis erat, illuc cuncta vergere: filius, collega imperii, consors 5 
tribuniciae potestatis adsumitur omnisque per exercitus osten- 
tatur, non obscuris, ut antea, matris artibus, sed palam hortatu. 

4nam senem Augustum devinxerat adeo, uti nepotem unicum: 
Agrippam Postumum, in insulam Planasiam proiecerit, rudem 
sane bonarum artium et robore corporis stolide ferocem, nullius ro 

5 tamen flagitii conpertum. at hercule Germanicum Druso ortum 
octo apud Rhenum legionibus inposuit adscirique per adop- 4*j. 
tionem a Tiberio iussit, quamquam esset in domo Tiberii filius 

6 iuvenis, sed quo pluribus munimentis insisteret. bellum ea - 
tempestate nullum nisi adversus Germanos supererat, abolendae 15 

int 

9. proieceret: proiceret B, text Ritt. I4. monimentis : text L. 

See proiecerit. Ritter compares other 

by interposing a ‘quinquennium.’ 
Dio, 55. 9, 2. 

I. vita concessit. On the variety of 
expressions denoting death in Tacitus, 
see Introd. v. $ 91, and reff. there. The 
use both of this expression (3. 30, 1 ; 6. 
39, 3, &c.) and of *concedere' by itself 
in this sense (4. 38, 3; 13. 30, 4), are 
peculiar to Tacitus. 

3. Armenia. On this ablative, see 
Introd. v. $ 24: so *abscedere Armenia’ 
in 13. 7, 25; 15. 6, I. 

fato, often used of natural as opposed 
to violent death. Cp. Introd. iv. 31, n. 3. 

5. illuc cuncta vergere, *all centred 
in him.’ *Illuc' is used of persons, as 
in H. 3. 38, 6. 

collega imperii, as having *aequum 
ius in omnibus provinciis exercitibusque’ 
(Vell. 2. 121, 3: cp. Suet. Tib. 21). On 
the association of persons with the prin- 
ceps in this ‘imperium,’ see c. 14, 4; 
Introd. vi. p. 98 ; Staatsr. ii. 1151. 

consors trib. pot.: see Introd. 1. 1.; 
Staatsr. ii. 1160. Tacitus must here refer 
to the renewal of this power to Tiberius, 
who had already held it when he was not 
regarded as heir. See on 3. §6,°3; for 
the dates, see on c. Io, 7. 

6. omnis: really only in two, but 
these the most important armies, those of 
Germany and Illyricum. 

7. palam, adjectival: cp. t1. 22, I; 
16. 5, 3. 

9. Planasiam, Pianosa, near Elba. 

similar uses of the perf. subj. after a pre- 
ceding pluperf. in 2. 81, 1; 3. 21, 2; 
4. 51, 3. Thus Livy has *tantum . .. 
opes creverant ... ut... ausi sint ' (1. 3, 
4). The event is regarded simply as past, 
rather than as related to other past events 
(Roby 1516). See also Draeger, Synt. 
und Stil, $ 182. 

10. sane, concessive, as c. I0, 2; 3. 5, 
4, &c. The words * robore... . ferocem" 
are a close reminiscence of Liv. 7. 5, 6 
(see Introd. v. § 97), where, as here, 
*ferox' means *confident.' Cp. also *ad- 
versus singulos ferox' (Liv. 1. 25, 7). 
Livy also uses * conpertus' with genit. of 
crime, 7. 4, 4; 22. 57, 3, &c. a 
II. hercule, a formula of strong cori- 

trast (c. 17, 7 ; 26, 3, 3. 54, 6; 12. 43, 4), 

here seeming to imply that Livia's influ- | 

ence had failed in this case. Germanicus 
had served under Tiberius. in Germany in 
764, A.D. I1 ; and attained the command 
there after his consulship in 766, A.D. 13. 
Suet. Cal. 8. 

I2. &dsoiri. This word appears only 
used by Tacitus (H. 4. 34, 2; 80, 1; and 
dub. lect. Agr. 19, 2), and by Vergil 
(Aen. 12, 38). Tacitus oftener employs 
(see Nipp.) the usual word ‘ adsciscere.’ 

I3. esset. On the subj. with * quam- 
quam,’ see Introd. v. $ 5o. Tacitus also 
uses, though less frequently, the regular 
construction with the indic. See Nipp. 

I5. &bolendae infamiae. On the ge- 

194 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 767. 

magis infamiae ob amissum cum Quintilio Varo exercitum quam 
cupidine proferendi imperii aut dignum ob praemium. domi res 7 
tranquillae, eadem magistratuum vocabula; iuniores post Ac- 
. tiacam victoriam, etiam senes plerique inter bella civium nati: 
5.quotus quisque reliquus qui rem publicam vidisset? 

4. Igitur verso civitatis statu nihil usquam prisci et integri 
moris: omnes exuta aequalitate iussa principis aspectare, nulla 
in praesens formidine, dum Augustus aetate validus seque et 

domum et pacem sustentavit. 

postquam provecta iam senectus 2 

aegro et corpore fatigabatur, aderatque finis et spes novae, pauci 
bona libertatis in cassum disserere, plures bellum pavescere, alii 

cupere. 

pars multo maxima inminentis dominos variis.rumoribus 3 

differebant: trucem Agrippam et ignominia accensum non aetate 

neque rerum experientia tantae 

rundive genitive, see Introd. v. $ 37. On 
the defeat of Varus in 762, A.D. 9, see 
Vell. 3. 117-119; Dio, 56, 18-24. 

3. vocabula, ‘titles, as ‘summi fas- 
tigii vocabulum" 3. 56, 3. On the func- 
tions of the old magistrates at this time, 
see Introd. vi. p. 9o toll. The censorship 
alone was formally dropped. 

5. rem publicam, ‘the Republic,’ 
the real constitution of the ‘senatus 
populusque Romanus,’ which he considers 
that those born since Actium, or even 
during the civil wars, had never really 
seen. So in 4. 19, 3, it is implied that 
Rome had come to have no ‘res publica’ 
and no real consuls. Galba is made to 
say (H. 1. 16, 1) that the ‘res publica’ 
would be revived if Rome could do with- 
out a * rector, and in H. 1. 50, 4, an *im- 
perium" such as that of Julius or Augustus 
Caesar (cp. 1. 1, 3) is contrasted both with 
the ‘res publica’ and with a mere rule of 
disorder. 
there was no woAtreia and no true woAira 
under a rUpavvos. ‘ Vidisset’ appears to 
be a potential subjunctive. 

6. prisci et integri, more closely 
coupled than if ‘neque’ had been used. 
For similar uses of ‘et’ in negative 
clauses, see c. 70, 5, and Draeger, Synt. 
und Stil, § 107. ‘ Moris’ would naturally 
mean ‘constitutional usage’ rather than 
‘morality’; but the latter is suggested 
by the addition of ‘integri,’ and may 
probably be the meaning of ‘mos’ in 
3. 28, 25 16. 5, 1. 

7. exuta &equalitate. This phrase is 
used in 3. 26, 3, of those who seek pre- 

A Greek would thus say that: 

moli parem, Tiberium Neronem 

eminence, as here of those who accept 
a position of inferiority. The application 
of the word to political equality (icor:pia) 
appears to be peculiar to Tacitus: see 
3. 74, 6; H. 2. 38, 2. 

8. seque et. This combination of con- 
junctions is found in some ten other places 
in Tacitus and in Sall. and Liv. (Dr. $ 123). 
On the use below of ‘et’ for ‘etiam,’ see 
Id. $ 108. *Aderat finis' is repeated in 
3. 71, I. 

1I. in cassum, ' idly,' as mere declama- 
tion. | 

disserere often takes the accusative in 
Tacitus (2. 37, 1; 6. 34, 5, &c.), as also 
in Sall (Cat. 5, 9), and Liv. (41. 6, 4), 
without the restriction, usual in Cicero, to 
the accus. of pronouns, or of adjectives 
expressing amount, as ‘ pauca, *multa,' 
&c. See Nipp. 

bellum, i.e. such a military insurrection 
as was in fact imminent. For the accus. 
Cp. €. 59, 7; 14 30, 2, &e. 

13. differebant. This is explained as 
equivalent to * varios rumores differebant 
de principibus ’ (Gerb. and Greef, Lex.) ; 
bat the verb, when used with. accus. pers., 
as in old poets and Propertius, appears to 
modify its ordinary sense of ‘ divulgare;' 
as found with acc. rei (3. 12, 7 ; 4. 25, 
5, &c.), to one more akin to the force of 
‘distrahi fama’ (3. Io, 5). Cp. the 
analogous uses of ‘diffamare aliquem’ 
(c. 72, 4, &c.) and ‘aliquid’ (14. 22, 5). 

I4. experientia. This sense of * know- 
ledge gained by practice,’ is almost wholly 
kb per (G. 1. 4, &c.) and Tacitean (as 
c. 46, 2, &c.). 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. CAP. 3 4. 185 

maturum annis, spectatum bello, set vetere atque insita Claudiae 
familiae superbia, multaque indicia saevitiae, quamquam preman- 
4 tur, erumpere. hunc et prima ab infantia eductum in domo reg- 
. matrice; congestos iuveni consulatus, triumphos ; ne iis quidem 
annis, quibus Rhodi specie secessus exul egerit, aliud quam iram 5 
5 et simulationem et secretas lubidines meditatum. accedere ma- 
trem muliebri inpotentia : serviendum feminae duobusque insuper 
adulescentibus, qui rem publicam interim premant, quandoque 
distrahant. | 
5. exulem: text Muretus ; aliquid : aliud Nipp. 

moli parem: so ‘par negotiis, 3. 30, 
5; 6. 39, 3, &c. ‘Moles’ of weight of 
empire, c. II, 2. 

Neronem. This name, though still 
used here and in c. 5, 6, was dropped on 
his adoption. See Introd. ix. note 38; 
and, on his age and services, ibid. viii. 
PP- 134; 135. ; ; 

2. superbia. This characteristic of 
the Claudii is repeatedly insisted on by 
Livy (e. g. 2. 56), whom Suet. has followed 
(Tib. 3). For the arguments by which it 
is maintained that the traditional policy 
of this family has been misconceived, 
see Mommsen, Hist, E. T. vol. i. Ap- 
pendix. 

3. et. This would naturally be fol- 
lowed by another *et' or *neque,' but 
the construction, besides the change of 
subject in *congestos, &c., is varied by 
the introduction of a climax with *ne... 
quidem.’ *Regnatrix' is dw. elp., used 
invidiously of the * domus principis, On 
the fondness of Tacitus for such verbal 
substantives, see Introd. v. $ 69. 

prima ab infantia, &c. On the events 
of the early life of Tiberius, see Introd. 
viii. pp. 133, &c. He had only held two 
consulships, at the age of 39 and: 35 ; and 
his triumphal honours are maintained by 
himself and his partisans (see 3. 47, 5, 
and note there) to have been far below 
what he could have claimed. Tacitus, it 

should be observed, is not here speaking - 

in his own person. 

5. exul: so most edd. giving ‘agere’ 
the force of * degere, as in 2. 42, 3; 3. 48, 
2, &c. Cp. ‘ubi specie studiorum nomen 
exilii tegeretur’ 3. 44, 5. * Exulem' would 
appear to imply that he had put on the 
character of an exile, which seems in- 
consistent with the suggestion contained 
in *specie secessus. It might perhaps be 
contended that he was not in fact an exile, 

and that * exulem egerit" would only mean 
that, without being, or himself pretending 
to: be such, he appeared to the world to 
be an exile; as in the similar passage 
* obnoxium et trepidum egit' (Suet. Tib. 
I2). On his retirement to Rhodes, see 
Introd. viii. 134. 

aliud quam. The MS. text, though 

retained by Baiter, Ritt., and Allen, has 

hardly been successfully defended. In 
Cic. de Inv. 1. 54, 104 ‘ nec alicui umquam 
usu evenerit,' there is no further difficulty 
than the substitution of ‘alicui’ for the 
more natural *cuiquam'; but here the 
addition of *aliud' seems needed. An 
alternative suggestion is that of ‘aliud 
quid' (Draeger), but this appears rather 
to mean 'something else'; a meaning 
which ‘aliquid’ (see Verg. Aen. 2, 48; 
9, 186) might also bear. See Nipp. 
iram, ‘resentment’ against all who 
slighted him; see 2. 42, 4. The ‘lubi- 
dines' here only charged against. him 
by popular rumour, are assumed later as 
a fact; see 4. 57, 4. 

7. inpotentia, ‘imperiousness’: cp. 
Sen. Cons. ad Helv. 14,2. This, if taken 
to be the general characteristic of Livia, 
would seem very wide of truth; but aptly 
expresses her uncontrolled and exacting 
demands upon her son. Cp. 4. 57, 4, and 
the contrast ‘ mater inpotens, uxor facilis’ 
(5. I, 5), where see note. 

duobus,Germanicus and Drusus Caesar. 

8. interim, opposed to *mox" 14. 41, 
2, as here to quandoque. . In post- 
Augustan Latin it is often nearly equiva- 
lent to ‘nonnumquam.’ * Quandoque ' has 
the indefinite sense of *at some time" in 
4. 28, 3; 6. 20, 3; also in Liv. and 
Cic. Ep. A" 

premant... distrahant. The first, 
by monopolizing the prizes of the state, | 
the latter, by disputing the succession. 

186 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 767. 

5. Haec atque talia agitantibus,gravescere valetudo Augusti, 

et quidam scelus uxoris suspectabant. 

quippe rumor incesserat, 

paucos ante menses Augustum, electis consciis et comite uno 
Fabio Maximo, Planasiam vectum ad visendum Agrippam; 

5 multas illic utrimque lacrimas et signa caritatis, spemque ex eo 3 

fore ut iuvenis penatibus avi redderetur: quod Maximum uxori 

Marciae aperuisse, illam Liviae. 

gnarum id Caesari; neque 

multo post extincto Maximo, dubium an quaesita morte, auditos 
in funere eius Marciae gemitus semet incusantis, quod causa 
10 exitii marito fuisset: utcumque se ea res habuit, vixdum in- 
gressus Illyricum Tiberius properis matris litteris accitur ; neque 
satis conpertum est, spirantem adhuc Augustum apud urbem 

7. C. (corr. G.) nauum: text L. 

I. Haec atque talia. This, or * haec 
ac talia,’ is a common formula in Tacitus, 
as 2. 38, 7; 4. 60, 15; 6. 223, 15; and many 
other instances given by Nipp. 

agitantibus. On this concise use of 
the abl. abs. see Introd. v. $ 31 c. 

gravescere valetudo. "This phrase is 
repeated 6. 46, 9. The previous use of 
the verb, except in Pl. N. H. (11. 41, 96, 
236), is wholly poetical. 

2. scelus, used specifically of poisoning, 
as in 4. 10, 2; 6. 33, I. 
poisoned figs, see Dio, 56. 30, 2. 

suspectabant. This verb is often used 
in this sense by Tacitus, as 11. 16, 5, &c., 
and first so used by him. 

quippe, suggesting a motive for the 
alleged crime. "The story is alluded to 
by Pliny, N. H. 7. 45, 46, 150. Plutarch, 
who tells the story with much difference 
of circumstances (wept áboAeaxías c. 11), 
knows nothing of the voyage to Planasia. 

3. consciis . . . comite, The ‘comes’ 
actually attends him, the *conscii may 
only have been aware of the plan. 

4. Fabio Maximo. His full name, 
Paullus Fabius Q. f. Maximus, is given 
in the ‘Acta Arvalium' (C. I. L. vi. 1, 
2023 a), from which it appears that he 
was still alive on May 14 of this year. 
He is chiefly known as the friend of Ovid, 
who addresses epistles to him (ex P. 1. 2, 
&c.), had hoped for much from his inter- 
cession, and deplores his death (ibid. 4. 6, 
9-14). Several further particulars about 
him are collected by Nipp. 

7. Marciae. She is also mentioned by 
Ovid (Fast. 6. 801, &c.), and was cousin 
of Augustus (C. I.G. 2629); being daughter 
of the marriage of his mother's sister, Atia 

On the tale of . 

minor, to the Philippus mentioned 3. 72, 2, 
son of the Philippus whom Atia maior 
secondly married (Borghesi, v. 139): see 
Nipp. 

gnarum, often used passively by Tacitus 
(c. 51, 4; 63, 3, &c.), and so rarely else- 
where (Apul. Mag. 12. 281,9) that the 
use may be called peculiar to him. On 
the less rare similar use of * ignarus,' see 
2. I3, I, &c. 

8. dubium. On such parentheses, see 
Introd. v. $ 82, and note on 14. 64, 1. 

quaesita: so used of what is studied 
or unnatural, 3. 57, 1; 5. 3, 3; 6. 50, 13 
here of suicide. The fact is given as 
doubtful (*dubium an’ =‘ perhaps’), but 

‘as taken for granted by Marcia. 

Io. utcumque, &c. Tacitus thus dis- 
misses for what it is worth both the charge 

. of poisoning and the tale which supports 

it. The latter is accepted without question 
by Dio (56. 30, 1) : but that Augustus in 
his extreme infirmity could take such a 
voyage at all is improbable, as Pianosa 
must be some forty miles from the nearest 
mainland, and much further from any 
probable port of embarkation; and it is 
still more unlikely that Livia, who was in 
constant attendance on him, should have 
been ignorant of it. 

vixdum ingressus, &c. The circum- 
stances of the last journey of Augustus in 
company with him are given in Suet. Aug. 

, 98. : 0 
9f I ; . spirantem, &c. That Tiberius found 
him alive is accepted without question by 
Vell, (2. 123, 3), and by Suet. (Aug. 98; 
Tib. 31). Dio (56. 31, 1) thinks the other 
view better attested. 

apud, for ‘in’: see Introd. v. § 57. 

4 

b 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

6 Nolam an exanimem reppererit. 

CAP. 5, 6. 187 

acribus namque custodiis do- 

mum et vias saepserat Livia, laetique interdum nuntii vulga- 
bantur, donec provisis quae tempus monebat simul excessisse 
Augustum et rerum potiri Neronem fama eadem tulit. 

| 6. Primum facinus novi principatus fuit Postumi Agrippae 5 
caedes, quem ignarum inermumque quamvis firmatus animo 

2 centurio aegre confecit. 

nihil de ea re Tiberius apud senatum 

disseruit: patris iussa simulabat, quibus praescripsisset tribuno 
custodiae adposito, ne cunctaretur Agrippam morte adficere, 

8 quandoque ipse supremum diem explevisset. 

multa sine dubio 

saevaque Augustus de moribus adulescentis questus, ut exilium 
eius senatus consulto sanciretur perfecerat: ceterum in nullius 
umquam suorum necem duravit, neque mortem nepoti pro se- 

4 curitate privigni inlatam credibile.erat. propius vero Tiberium 

I. acribus ...custodiis. For similar 
precautions, see 12. 68, 1 : ‘acer’ is often 
used for ‘diligent,’ as 2. 43, 3; 3. 48, 
2, &c. ‘Namque’ is thus in anastrophe 
in 2. 43, 5, and other authors (see Gud. 
on Dial. 19, 6 

3. excessisse: so used especially of 
one deified, as c. 33, I, and ‘excessus’ 
C. 7, 25 14, 4, &c.: cp. ‘post obitum 
vel potius excessum Romuli' Cic. Rep. 2. 
30,53. . 

4. rerum potiri. The will of Augustus 
was not yet known, nor the successor 
formally chosen by the sénate; but Tiberius 
was already practically master of the 
Roman world. Hence the next chapter 
speaks of the * novus principatus.' 

5. Primum facinus, &c. See the 
similar expressions in 13. 1, 1 ; H. 2.64, 2. 

6. quamvis firmatus animo, ‘not- 
withstanding his resolve. The expression 
appears to be taken from * irmatus animi" 
(Sall. H. 3. 17 D, 15 K, 52 G). Tacitus 
also seems to follow Sallust in using the 
rarer form * inermus.' 

7. centurio. Suet. (Tib. 23) loosely 
confuses the tribune through whom the 
order passed with the centurion who 
executed it. These officers probably be- 
longed to the praetorian guard, from which 
apparently detachments or officers were 
sent at other times to put persons to 
death: see c. 53, 7-9; I4. 58, 3; 16. 9, 
3; 15, I. 

aegre: his strength is noted, c. 3, 4 

8. praescripsisset. The subjunctive 
gives the representation of Tiberius. 

9. custodiae adposito, ‘set over the 

guard,’ or ‘set over him for a guard’; the 
latter is the explanation generally given 
here and in H. 1. 43, 1 (‘custodiae 
additus"): the former best agrees with 
2. 68, 3 ‘priori custodiae regis adpositus ;’ 
the latter with the *adpositi custodes’ of 
4. 60, 1. On the dative of purpose in 
Tacitus, see Introd. v. § 23. 

10. quandoque, not used:as in c. 4, 5, 
but = * quandocunque,' as 4. 38, 3, &c. 

II. s&eva questus, He issaid to have 
spoken of him and the two Juliae as 
‘tres vomicas ac tria carcinomata sua’ 
Suet. Aug. 65. 

12. senatus consulto. The kinds of 
sentence .by which persons might be 
banished are compared in 3. 24, 6, and 
Ov. Trist. 2, 131, &c. 4. By decree of 
the senate. 2. By sentence of the law- 
court. 3. By edict of the ' princeps,' as 
in Ovid's own *relegatio. 4. By mere 
‘renuntiatio amicitiae principis, This 
would cease with the life of the prince 
(3. 24, 5), the others, or at least the two 
first, were permanent: cp. ‘cavit etiam 
5S. C. ut eodem loci in perpetuum con- 
tineretur’ Suet. Aug. 65. See Staatsr. ii. 
1124, n. I. ^ 

13. duravit, ‘hardened himself,’ as 
I4. I, 6, &c.: cp. *cuius manus in hoc 
supplicium durassent' Petr. 105; ‘non 
durat ultra poenam abdicationis’ Quint. 
9. 2,88; *durare ad sanguinem" Id. Decl. 
279. This sense is oftener found in the 
transitive form, as 3. 15, 4, and passive, 
as H. 4. 59, 2. | 

I4. erat gives the belief at the time, as 
‘credebantur’ c. 53, 5; ‘constabat’ 4. 

188 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 767. 

ac Liviam, illum metu, hanc novercalibus odiis, suspecti et invisi 
iuvenis caedem festinavisse. nuntianti centurioni, ut mos mili- 5 
tiae, factum esse quod imperasset, neque imperasse sese et 
rationem facti reddendam apud senatum respondit. quod post- 6 

5 quam Sallustius Crispus particeps secretorum (is ad tribunum 
miserat codicillos) comperit, metuens ne reus subderetur, iuxta 
periculoso ficta seu vera promeret, monuit Liviam ne arcana 
domus, ne consilia amicorum, ministeria milituni vulgarentur, 
neve Tiberius vim principatus resolveret cuncta ad senatum 

10 vocando: eam condicionem esse imperandi, ut non aliter ratio 
constet quam si uni reddatur. 

7. At Romae ruere in servitium consules, patres, eques. 
quanto quis inlustrior, tanto magis falsi ac festinantes, vultuque 2 
composito, ne laeti excessu principis neu tristiores primordio, 

15 lacrimas gaudium, questus adulationem miscebant. Sex. Pom- 3 

14. tristior: text margin, and B. | 

74, 5: ‘est’ would give the writer's 
opinion. 

2. festinavisse. The transitive use is 
mainly poetical, but adopted by Sall. and 
thence by Tac., as 4. 28, 2; 14. 33, 6. 

nuntian ti, &c. This is one of the 
places (see Introd. iv. p. 26) where the 
verbal resemblance of Suet. (Tib. 22) to 
Tacitus is strongest. 

5. Sallustius Crispus is employed 
again on secret service, 3. 40, 3. Fora 
general account of him, and of his cha- 
racter and services, see 3.30. ‘ Particeps 
secretorum ’ , appears to mean ‘admitted 
to privacy’ (cp. 3. 8, 4; 4. 7, 41 13. 
18, 3; H. 1. 10, 4, &c.), and thus 
describes his position in similar terms to 
those of Seneca, who styles him (de Cl. 
I. 10) * interioris admissionis amicus.’ On 
the ‘comites Augusti, or ‘cohors ami- 
corum,’ see Introd, vi. p. 96; Staatsr. ii. 
835; Friedlaender, Sitteng. i. 179. 

6. reus subderetur. ‘This expression, 
in c. 39, 4; 15. 44, 3, and other uses of 
 * subdere,' as 3. 67, 3; 4. 59. 5; 6. 36, 1, 
&c., all signify a fraudulent substitution 
Or false suggestion. 

iuxta ,Periculoso, ‘as it was equally 
perilous.’ On ‘ iuxta,’ see Introd. v. § 61, 
and on the abl. abs., ibid. § 31 b. 

9. da omitted in the first place, as 
in 2. 17, 8; 3. 18, 6, &c., and in poets. 

IO. eam condicionem, ‘ it is of the 
essence of ruling, that accounts will not 

15. adulatione: adulationes L, text Heinsius. 

come right if audited by others than the 
ruler' ‘This may mean either that the 
ruler must give account of his actions to 
no one; or that his subordinates, above 
all his ‘military subordinates, to whom 
Tiberius here professes to have given no 
orders, must be responsible to him alone: 
it is implied either way that much must 
be done by or for an autocrat which will 
not bear investigation. On ‘condicio,’ 
cp. * condicio vivendi’ Hor. Sat. 2. 8, 65. 
The metaphor *ratio constat ' seems to be 
suggested by ‘rationem reddendam: in 
Pl. Min, e.g. in Epp. 1. 5, 17; 1.9, 1; 
2. 4, 4, &c., * ratio constat" comes to mean 
‘it is good,’ or ‘ reasonable.’ 

12. consules, patres,eques. On the 
asyndeta, see Introd. v. § 65; on the 
singular for plural, as in ‘eques,’ and, 
below, ‘ miles,’ see ibid. $ 2. ‘Ihe collec- 
tive sing. * eques ' is used of the equestrian 
order in 4: 74, 5, &c., also in Hor. (Epp. 
2. 1, 155), Martial, and Suet. 

13. falsi, ‘hypocritical,’ as 3 3,13 13. 
13, 4, &c. The use seems taken from 
Sall., who has ‘ambitio multos mortales 
falsos fieri subegit’ Cat. 10, 5. 

14. composito,.so of studied effects in 
word or look, 2..34, 6; 3- 44; 4, &c. 

ne laeti, sc. ‘ essent.’ See Introd. v. 
§ 39 b, and Nipp. here. 

8. Sex. Pompeius et Sex. Appuleius. 
These consuls are stated by Dio (56. 

:29, 5! to have been related to Caesar; 

4 

5 tamquam vetere re publica et ambiguus imperandi : 

$1 / 
168 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 6, 7. 189 

peius et Sex. Appuleius consules primi in verba Tiberii Caesaris 
iurávere, apudque eos Seius Strabo et C. Turranius, ille prae- 
toriarum cohortium praefectus, hic annonae; mox senatus miles- 
que et populus. Nam Tiberius cuncta per consules incipiebat, 

quidem, quo patres in curiam vocabat, nisi tribuniciae potestatis 
6 praescriptione posuit sub Augusto acceptae. verba edicti fuere 
pauca et sensu permodesto: de honoribus parentis consulturum, 
neque abscedere a corpore, idque unum ex publicis muneribus 

1. Apuleius: text B; cp. 2. 50, 1, and Inscrr. 
2. selu strabo: text margin,and B. 

which explains thcir continuance in office 
thronghout the year. Pompeius, who is 
mentioned 3. 11, 2; 32, 2, and as a friend 
of Ovid (ex P. 
shared in the relationship indicated in 2. 
27,2. That of Appuleius may be gathered 
from 2. 50, I 

- 1, primi... iuravere. This oath 
(* sacramentum in nomen Tiberii’ c. 8, 5) 
taken by the whole people, and by the 
provinces (c. 34, 1), is a recognition of 
Caesar's supreme * imperium? throughout 
the empire. See Introd. vi. p. 81; Staatsr. 
ii. p. 792. It must be distinguished from 
the oath taken to maintain the acta (see 
c. 72, 2). The consuls, as the chief sena- 
torial magistrates, appear here, after them- 
selves swearing allegiance, to administer 
the oath to the two chief non-senatorial 

officers (on whom see Introd. vi. 86). All. 

other magistrates or praefecti appear to 
take it only as members of the senate or 
equestrian order. It is thus possible that 
the absence of separate mention of the 
*praefectus urbis; who was always a 
sehator, may no more prove that office to 
have been in abeyance than the regular 
senatorial magistracies (see on 6. 11, 6). 
The *praefectus: vigilum? is also un- 

. mentioned. 

2. Beius Strabo, the father of Seianus 
(Cc. 24, 3; 4. 1, 3), afterwards praefectus 
of Egypt (Dio, 57. 19, 6). His praeno- 
men was Lucius (C. I. L. vi. 9535). 

C. Turranius, probably the first holder 
of the office, which was of recent institu- 
tion (Staatsr. ii. 1041). He was still 
holding i it thirty-four years later (11. 31, 17, 
though Seneca makes him already ninety 
in the time of Gaius (Brev. Vit. 20, 2). 

. 3. senatus milesque et populus. 
These are coupled as making up the 

4. I, 4, 8), may have. 

whole civil population, 11. 3o, 5, ‘ popu- 
lus’ being equivalent to *plebs' (cp. 
* militi patribusqu e et plebi" 14. 11, 1); 
and the * equites" being for some not ob- 
vious reason included with it. 

4. per consules, &c. On the ad- 
ministration during the vacancy of the 
principate, see Introd vi. p. 98: On the 
position of Tiberius at this fime, see 
ibid. viii. p. 139. . 

5. ambiguus imperandi, 'as if he 
had not made up his mind to rule:’ cp. 
'ambiguus consilii" (H. 2. 83, 2, &c.). On 
this genitive, see Introd. v. $ 33e. B. Dr. 
notes that its use with ‘ ambiguus’ is new 
in T acitus, but analogous to that with 
* dubius' and * incertus ' in Livy. 

». praescriptione, ‘ under the title of.’ 
Nipp. notes that the edict would run thus: 
* Ti. Caesar trib. pot. xvi. dicit It would 
thus seem as if he had not power to con- 
voke the senate as ‘ collega imperii." 

posuit. This verb is used for *pro- 
ponere" only here and 4.27, 1. On other 
such uses of simple verbs for compound, 
see Introd. v. $ 40. 

9. neque abscedere. These words are 
added to excuse his absence from Rome. 
The body of the princeps might be re- 
garded as in charge of the state, and the 
attendance on it night thus be taken (as 
in Nipp.) to be a ‘publicum munus, 
though these words apply better to this 
summoning of the senate. The edict was 
issued at Nola; whence the body was 
borne by local magistrates at each stage 
to Bovillae, and thence to Rome by 
knights on the day before the senate met 
(Suet. Aug. 100; Dio, 56. 31, 2). The 
respect paid by Tiberius was similar to 
that shown by Augustus himself to the 
remains of Drusus (3. 5, 2). 

ne edictum 5 

5 

1o 

Igo P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 767. 

usurpare. sed defuncto Augusto signum praetoriis cohortibus 7 
ut imperator dederat; excubiae, arma, cetera aulae; miles in 
forum, miles in curiam comitabatur. litteras ad exercitus tam- 8 
quam adepto principatu misit, nusquam cunctabundus nisi cum 
in senatu loqueretur. causa praecipua ex formidine, ne Ger- 9 
manicus, in cuius manu tot legiones, immensa sociorum auxilia, 
mirus apud populum favor, habere imperium quam exspectare 
mallet. dabat et famae, ut vocatus electusque potius a re pub- 10 
lica videretur quam per uxorium ambitum et senili adoptione 
inrepsisse. postea cognitum est ad introspiciendas etiam pro- 11 
cerum voluntates inductam dubitationem : nam verba vultus in 
crimen detorquens recondebat. 

8. Nihil primo senatus die agi passus es/ nisi de supremis 
Augusti, cuius testamentum inlatum per virgines Vestae Tibe- 

Ir. indutam I. F. Gron. and others. 13. est ins. Nipp. 

I. signum = ‘tesseram,’ as 13. 2, 5, &c. — videretur, as in 2. 53, 3; 58, I, &c.: 

At the death of Gaius this was given by 
the consuls (Jos. Ant. 19. 2, 3); but the 
action of Tiberius is fully explained by 
his being * collega imperii.' 

2. exoubiae. A cohort of praetorians 
kept guard at the house of the princeps 
and attended him elsewhere (H. 1. 24, 2; 
29, 2), but dressed only in the toga (ibid. 
38, 5): cp. Staatsr. ii. 807. 

cetera aulae, ‘the other accompani- 
ments of a court? ‘Aula’ is generally 
used by Tacitus of the * cohors' or cour- 
tiers, as 2. 43, 5; H. r. 13, 10. 

3. in curiam: it is not meant that they 
entered the senate house, as Tiberius at 
a late date requested that a few officers 
might do (6. 15, 5): see Staatsr. iii. 909. 

4. adepto, here alone passive in 
Tacitus: so in Cic., Sall., 8c. 

cum... loqueretur. On this sub- 
junctive, see Introd. v. § 52. 

5. praecipua. He had also similar 
fear of the Pannonian legions; and others 
bring in here the plots, supposed to be 
already in progress, of Libo (2. 27) and 
Clemens (2. 39). Suet. Tib. 25. 

7. apud populum favor: see 2. 41; 
82; 4. 57» 5- 

8. dabat et famae, ‘it was his con- 
cession to public opinion.’ ‘The full ex- 
pression ‘ das aliquid famae?’ is found in 
Hor. Sat. 2. 2, 94. The accusative, here 
and in 13. 49, 5, thus omitted with ‘dare,’ 
is not unfrequently absent from * tribuere :’ 
the object here is supplied from ‘ut... 

‘fama’ is used for public opinion in 4. 
40, I, &c. 

g. senili, overstated, as Augustus was 
only sixty-five at the time of the adoption. 
The share of Livia in it is dwelt upon in 

C. 3. 3, and 4. 57, 4. Dio (57. 3, 3) 
strangely puts this explanation as matter 

of his own hearsay (fjóg fjkovaa Ot x.7.A.). 

II. voluntates, i.e. the disposition of 
each individual. 

inductam, ‘was put on,’ like a mask. 
Thus ‘inducere plumas’ Hor. A. P. 2. The 

. metaphor in 4. 70, § is different. 

I2. detorquens, ' misinterpreting.’ So 
‘calumniando detorquendoque’ Liv. 42. 
42; 5. 

recondebat, ‘would store in memory ;' 
so used of Tiberius, c. 69, 7. Cp. ‘in 
animo revolvente iras' 4. 31, 2; also 4. 

29, 5; 71, 5. . Thus Domitian is said 
D os odium" Agr. 39, 4. 
13. Nihil . . . passus. The loss of 

est from the MS. is not easy to explain, 

but perhaps Nipp. is right in thinking its 
absence with a transitive deponent so 
exceptional as to justify the insertion. 

supremis. This àppears to mean 
*obsequies" in 4. 44, 6; but more com- 
monly ‘death,’ as in 3. 49, 1; 6. 50, 3; 
12. 66, 2, &c. 

I4..per virgines Vestae. Wills, trea- 
ties, and other documents, and sums of 
money, were deposited for safety with the 
Vestals (Suet. Jul. 83; Plut. Ant. 943; 
Dio, 48. 37, 1), or in other temples (Juv. 

A. D. 14.] 

2 rium et Liviam heredes habuit. 

LIBER I. CAP. 7, 8. 

I9I 

Livia in familiam Iuliam no- 

menque Augustum adsumebatur; in spem secundam nepotes 
pronepotesque, tertio gradu primores civitatis scripserat, plerosque 

3 invisos sibi, sed iactantia gloriaque ad posteros. 

legata non 

ultra civilem modum, nisi quod populo et plebi quadringentiens 5 
triciens quinquiens, praetoriarum cohortium militibus singula 

3. Augustae (corr. from Augustü or Augusta): text Iac, Gron. 

sestertium ins. Ritt. 

8,143; 14,260, &c.). This will is given, 
with some variations and additions, by 
Suet. (Aug. 101), and Dio, or Xiphil. 
(56. 32), whose accounts should be com- 
pared throughout with Tacitus. 
states that it had been deposited with the 
Vestals sixteen months previously. Chari- 
sius (1. 80, P ; 104 Keil) quotes from it, as 
still extant in the fourth century, * gausapes, 
lodices purpureas et colorias meas.' 

I. heredes, in the proportion of two- 
thirds to Tiberius, one-third to Livia (Suet. 
1.1). Dio adds that a decree was passed to 
exempt her irom the disabilities of the 
law (Lex Voconia, cp. Dio, 56. 10, 2). 
On the relation of heirship by will to 
succession in the principate, see Introd. 
vi. p. 97 ; Staatsr. ii. 999, n. I. 

2. Augustum, possibly the original text 
of Med. (see crit. note): ‘adsumebatur’ 
‘could hardly be used with * Augustae,’ 
as no such name previously existed. 
* Augustum is an adj, as in ‘mensis 
Augustus, &c. Cp.'nomen Sempronium" 
(c. 53, 8), ' Furium" (2. 52, 7), * Africanum 
cognomen’ (Liv. 30. 45,6). She is always 
called Augusta by Tacitus henceforth. 
On the titles borne by her, see Introd. ix. 
note 26, and on subsequent ‘ Augustae,’ 
Momms. Staatsr. ii. p. 788. The title 
‘Augustus’ was conferred on Tiberius 
with the principate itself, but not generally 
used by him. See Introd. ix. note 28. 

. in spem secundam, sc. 'scripserat.' 
An elegance of expression for ‘heredes 
secundos,’ ‘heirs in default.’ Suet. gives 
the proportion as one-third to Drusus, 
two-thirds to Germanicus and his three 
sons. Agrippa Postumus and Julia are 
disinherited. 

3. primores civitatis, ‘ propinquos 
amicosque complures' (Suet.). This posi- 
tion would be an empty compliment, and 
is therefore set down to meret ostentation. 

4. sed, ‘yet he named them: cp. 
‘sed quo,’ &c., c. 3, 5. 

gloria, often of ‘love of fame,’ see 
Nipp. onc. 43. Such expressions as ‘fama,’ 

Suet. — 

5. cccexxxv : 

‘memoria, &c., ‘ad posteros," are frequent 
in Livy, as 2. 10, 11, &c.: see Nipp. 

legata. Dio states that many rela- 
tives, also strangers, knights as well as 
senators, even foreign kings, were among 
the,legatees. Suet. adds that in the will 
Augustus estimated the residue to the 
heirs at not more than 150 million H. S. ; 
and stated that he had himself received in 
twenty years legacies amounting to 1,400 
(or perhaps 4,000) million H. S., which, 
besides two ‘patrimonia’ and other in- 
heritances, had been spent on the public 
service. Directions and provision were 
made for prompt payment, but some delay 
ensued (Suet. Tib. 57; Dio, 57. 14, 1). 

5. civilem, that of an ordinary citizen: 
so 'civilia' c. 12. 6; ‘civile ingenium" 
C. 33. 5, &c. 

populo et plebi. Suet. states these 
bequests thus, * populo R. quadringenties, 
tribubus tricies quinquies sestertium." 
This could hardly be taken otherwise than 
as meaning that the former sum was to be 
paid into the * aerarium ' (cp. this special 
use of ‘populus’ 6. 17, 4; also * pecunia 
publica’ 4. 15, 3; * publicari" 6. 19, 1); 
and the latter sum distributed, 100,000 
H.S. to the poorer members of each tribe: 
cp. Staatsr. iii. 444, n. 4. We have a 
similar payment to the treasury, coupled 
with a distribution, in 13. 31, 3. But it 
is hardly likely that the ‘plebs’ were 
equally distributed over the rustic as well 
as urban tribes; while a total of only 34 
million H.S. would presuppose either a 
very small share or few sharers, If we 
accept from Dio (57. 14, 2) that the share 
amounted to 260 H.S., and suppose the 
recipients to have been even fewer than 
the 250,000 to 320,000 who shared the 
various *congiaria of Augustus (Mon. 
Anc. iii. 7-21), we are forced to suppose 
that the whole sum, * populo et plebi,’ 
must have been distributed. In that case 
we should have to set aside the distinction 
drawn by Suetonius as an error, and to 
suppose that * populo et plebi? are used, 

192 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

nummum milia, wrbanis quingenos, legionariis aut cohortibus 
civium Romanorum trecenos nummos viritim dedit. tum con- 4 
sultatum de honoribus; ex quis qz; maxime insignes visi, ut 
porta triumphali duceretur funus, Gallus Asinius, ut legum la- 
5 tarum tituli, victarum ab eo gentium vocabula anteferrentur, L. 

Arruntius censuere. 

addebat Messalla Valerius renovandum 5 

per annos sacramentum in nomen Tiberii; interrogatusque a 
Tiberio num se mandante eam sententiam prompsisset, sponte 
dixisse respondit, neque in iis quae ad rem publicam pertinerent 
10 consilio nisi suo usurum, vel cum periculo offensionis: ea sola 

I. urbanis quingenos ins. Sauppe. 
visi om. Nipp. 

3. qui ins, Bezzenberger, hi visi Heraeus, 

6. Messala : so 3. 34; 68; 6.11; 11.6; 13. 34; H. 3. 11: 

Messalla 4. 34; H. 3.9; 18; 25; 28; 4. 42. 

as in the ‘ populo plebique’ of old formu- 
lae, &c. (cp. Cic. Verr. 5. 14, 36; pro 
Mur. 1,1 ; Liv. 29. 27, 2, and other refer- 
ences in Staatsr. iii. 6, 4), and that the 
whole sum was to be distributed among 
the *plebs Romana’ or ‘plebs urbana 
(see Introd. vii. p. 104, n. 13), i.e. the 
‘body of citizens who usually shared in 
imperial gifts. 

1. urbanis quingenos, inserted from 
the statement in Suet. and Dio. It has 
been thought that the force did not yet 
exist, but we have no record of their in- 
stitution between this and the mention of 
them in 4. 5, 5. 

cohortibus civium X. On these 
cohorts see Introd. vii. p. 125. They are 
omitted by Suet. The expression of Dio 
(moArTin@ WAGE) would include them. 
‘Aut’ can have the force of ‘ et vicissim,’ 
as in 2. 47, 4, &c. 

3. ex quis qui maxime insignes visi. 
Most critics have felt that this passage 
can hardly be sound as it stands in the 
MS.; but the omission of ‘visi’ is met 
by the difficulty of accounting for its 
presence. The suggestion that ‘qui’ may 
have dropped out after ‘quis,’ is free from 
objection, and allows a demonstrative to 
be supplied from it as the object of ‘ cen- 
suere. There is still a confusion of con- 
structions, through the attempt to combine 
in one sentence the proposals made and 
the names of the proposers. A similar 
desire to condense has produced the same 
effect elsewhere, as in 2. 64, 4 (‘ ipsorum- 
que regum ingenia, &c.), and 11. 29, 2 
(*dein metu,' &c.). For a full discussion 
pf this passage, see Joh. Müller, Beitrage, 
sect. 3, pp. 1-5. 

4. porta triumpbali. This gate, prob- 

ably closed except at triumphs, is sup- 
posed to have stood between the ‘Porta 
Flumentana' and ‘Carmentalis.? See 
Burn (p. 46), Dyer (D. of Geog. * Roma,’ 
P. 752), Middleton, i. p. 127. | 

5. tituli, ‘inscriptions, e.g. ‘de 
adulteriis,’ ‘de maritandis ordinibus,' &c. 

vocabula, *names:' cp. c. 3, 7; used 
of proper names, 2. 6, 5, &¢. On Gallus 
Asinius and L. Arruntius, see more fully 
C. I2; 13. 

6. addebat. On the habit * egrediendi 
relationem, see 2. 38, 3. On this day the 
deliberations were more strictly limited to 
the question than usual: see above, § I. 

Messalla Valerius, son of Messalla 
Corvinus, and brother of Cotta Messalinus 
(2 32, 2, &c.). He was consul in 751, 
B.C. 3 (Suet. Galb. 4); as was his son in 
773, A.D. 20 (3. 2, 5;, and his grandson in 
811, A.D. 58 (13. 34, 1). He is also 
known as having won *triumphalia' in 
Pannonia (Vell. a. 112), as a friend of 
Tibullus (2. 5. 17), and of Ovid (ex P. 
I. 7; 2. 2), a speaker (3. 34, 2), and writer 
(Suet. Aug. 74); but of servile character 
(here, and 3. 18, 3). Further references 
to him are given by Nipp. | 

renovandum, &c. This annual re- 

 newal of the ‘sacramentum’ had become 

a regular custom on the first of January 
by 822, A.D. 69 (H. 1. 55, 1). We also 
hear of such renewals on the anniversary 
of accession (Pl. ad Trai. 52). See Staatsr. 
ii. p. 793. 

Io. offensionis. Dr. notices that this 
fórm is used invariably in the Annals, as 
* offensa? invariably in the other works. 

ea sola species, &c., i.e. this show 
of independence was the only form of 
flattery not stale. | 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 8, 9. I93 

6 Species adulandi supererat. conclamant patres corpus ad rogum 
remisit Caesar adroganti mode- 
ratione, populumque edicto monuit ne, ut quondam nimiis studiis 
funus divi Iulii turbassent, ita Augustum in foro potius quam in 
7 campo Martis, sede destinata, cremari vellent. die funeris milites 5 
velut praesidio stetere, multum inridentibus qui ipsi viderant 
quique a parentibus acceperant diem illum crudi adhuc servitii 
et libertatis inprospere repetitae, cum occisus dictator Caesar 
aliis pessimum, aliis pulcherrimum facinus videretur: nunc senem 
principem, longa potentia, provisis etiam heredum in rem pub- 
licam opibus, auxilio scilicet militari tuendum, ut sepultura eius 

umeris senatorum ferendum. 

quieta foret. 

9. Multus hinc ipso de Augusto sermo, plerisque vana miran- 
tibus, quod idem dies accepti quondam imperii princeps et vitae 
supremus, quod Nolae in domo et cubiculo in quo pater eius 

8. inprospera repetita: text L. 

2. remisit, ‘Caesar, with haughty 
condescension, excused them,' i.e. from 
the ‘duty,’ as they had themselves ap- 
parently termed it (‘ferendum’). His 
arrogance may have consisted in the use 
of ‘remitto’ or some such word, implying 
a right to command the service which is 
thus waived. ‘Remittere’ has the force 
of excusing from a duty, as ' remissa cura’ 
(3. 55, 1), * remisisse reipublicae novissi- 
mum casum' (H. 2. 48, 4 * remitto .. 
ne..dorsum demulceatis’ (Liv. 9. 16, 
16). It does not here convey a prohibi- 
tion; and the body was borne by senators 
according to Suet. (Aug. 1co); which 
honour had been previously paid to Sulla 
(App. B. C. 1. 106), and was here the 
natural climax to the previous bearing by 
*decuriones' and by knights. See on c. 7, 6. 

3. edicto. This also would be by 
virtue of his tribunician power (see c. 7, 5). 
Similar edicts are mentioned 3. 6, 1; 4. 
67, 1. 

4. funus divi Iulii. The chief au- 
thorities for the famous scene at that 
funeral are Suet. Jul. 84; Plut. Caes. 68; 
Dio,-44. 36-50. 

in Campo Martis. The pile was near 
the ‘mausoleum’ built by Augustus in 
726, B.C. 28 (Suet. Aug. 100); the lower 
portion of which still remains. It is called 
*tumulus Augusti,' * Caesarum, or ‘ Iuli- 
orum ': see 3. 4, 15; 9, 2; 16. 6, 2. 

6. velut: see Introd. v. $67. 

VOL. I. 

O 

7. &cceperant: so of tradition, 2. 
59, 2 ; G. 27, 3 (where see note), &c. 

crudi adhuc servitii, * when slavery 
had not ripened:' cp. ‘cruda marito' 
Hor. Od. 3. 11, 12. Mr. Dallin would 
take it to mean * when slavery was not yet 
incorporated into their system,' the meta- 
phor being that of an undigested meal 
(cp. Juv. 1, 143; ‘cruda studia" Petron. 
4, &c.). Mr. Frost takes the metaphor 
to be that of an unhealed wound. 

8. occisus Caesar. On this use of 
the participle, see Introd. v. $ 55 b. 

10. inrem publicam, resources against 
the commonwealth. Cp. c. 10, 4; 3. 
24, 2. "The allusion here is to the will 
lately read. 

13. plerisque, 'the majority, as op- 
posed to the ‘prudentes.’ Usually in 
Tacitus it means *permulti and Nipp. 
would so take it always: cp. 3. 1, 2: 
* vana,' mere accidents. 

14. idem dies, August 19, the anni- 
versary of his first election to the con- 
sulship; which was his first actual 
magistracy, though he already.had an 
‘imperium’ (cp. c. Io, 1) : the date of 
which (as in C. I. L. xii. 4333, Orell. 
2489), or some greater subsequent epoch, 
is usually observed as an anniversary: 
see Staatsr. ii. 747. The coincidence 
here is sufficient: for those who sought 
such. 

I5. pater: see Introd. ix. note I. 

194 

Octavius vitam finivisset. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

| A. U.C. 767. 

numerus etiam consulatuum cele- 2 

brabatur, quo Valerium Corvum et C. Marium simul aequaverat, 
continuata per septem et triginta annos tribunicia potestas, 
nomen imperatoris semel atque viciens partum aliaque honorum 

5 multiplicata aut nova. 
tollebatur arguebaturve. 

at apud prudentes vita eius varie ex- 3 
hi pietate erga parentem et necessitu- 4 

dine rei publicae, in qua nullus tunc legibus locus. ad arma civilia 
actum, quae neque parari possent neque haberi per bonas artes. 
multa Antonio, dum interfectores patris ulcisceretur, multa Le- 

10 pido concessisse. 

postquam hic socordia senuerit, ille per libi- 5 

dines pessum datus sit, non aliud discordantis patriae remedium 

fuisse quam z/ ab uno regeretur. 

non regno tamen neque dic- 6 

tatura, sed principis nomine constitutam rem publicam ; mari 
Oceano aut amnibus longinquis saeptum imperium; legiones, 
15 provincias, classes, cuncta inter se conexa ; ius apud cives, mo- 

9. tunc: dum Mur., cum Haase, tunc cum Ritt., tunc... ut ulciscerentur Pfitzner. 

ulciscerentur: text L. 

I. numerus. His thirteen consulships 
equalled the sum of those of Marius, 
who alone had been seven times, and 
Valerius Corvus, best known of the only 
two recorded to have been six times 
consul. | 

3. septem et triginta, a round num- 
ber, reckoning from June 27, 731, B.C. 23. 
On the first beginning, and subsequent 
reckoning of the years of this power, see 
Introd. vi. pp. 76, 79. 

4. nomen imperaforis: see C. 3, 1; 
Introd. vi. p. 76; Staatsr. ii. 781. The 
first occasion appears to have been Mu- 
‘tina; the last, subsequent to the date of 
an inscription of this very year (Introd. 
l. 1. p. 80). 

alia honorum. On the genitive, see 
Introd. v. $ 32b. *Multiplicata! may 
refer to the repeatedly bestowed title of 
*pater patriae, and the periodically re- 
newed ‘imperium,’ &c.; ‘nova’ to the 
new forms taken by thesk and other 
powers, to the title of ‘ Augustus,’ &c. 
See Introd. vi pp. 76-80, Mon. Anc. 
ii, 15-41, vi. 16-21, &c. | 

6. hi. This has no proper construc- 

tion, a verb of speaking being supplied - 

from ‘extollebatur arguebaturve. On 
the omission of such verbs by Tacitus, 
see Introd. v. 38a. The view in this 
chapter may be compared to that given 
by Dio in the funeral oration supposed to 
be spoken by Tiberius (56. 35-41). 

12. ut ins. Ferretti. 

parentem, used like ‘ patris' below, of’ 
his adoptive father. 

8. haberi: cp. c. I, 1; ‘civil war, 
which can neither be levied nor con- 
ducted by honourable methods. ‘ Bonae 

‘artes’ is used similarly, c. 28, 5. 

9. dum, generally explained here as 
= provided that ;’ though it might also 
be taken in a temporal sense. 

IO. concessisse. The meaning is that 
the crimes of the triumvirate were those 
of his colleagues, tolerated by himself 
only to secure his great object: cp. 
‘Caesar percussoribus patris contentus 
fuit? Florus, 4. 6. Suetonius (Aug. EA 
states that, though more reluctant . 
begin a proscription, he carried it out 
more vindictively than his colleagues. 

12. non regno, &c.: see Introd. vi. 
p. 78. The emperor is styled BaotAevs in the 

: New Testament and elsewhere in Greek 

Oriental writing: Staatsr. ii. 764, n. 3. 

13. mari Oceano. On these adjectival 
substantives, see Introd. v. § 3. 

14. longinquis. The Rhine, Danube, 
Halys, and Euphrates. On this descrip- 
tion of the frontier, see Introd. vii. p. 11r. 
Stress here is laid on *longinquis, to 
show the distance of any danger. 

legiones, &c.: see on 4. 5; 
Introd. vii. p. 121 foll. ; 

15. ius apud, ‘justice in dealing with.’ 

modestiam, ‘moderation, as 3. 12, 
10, &c. On the change in the condition 

and 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

destiam apud socios ; 

CAP. 9, 10. 

urbem ipsam magnifico ornatu; 

195 

pauca 

admodum vi tractata quo ceteris quies esset. 
10. Dicebatur contra: pietatem erga parentem et tempora | 5. ^ 

rei publicae obtentui sumpta : 

exercitum, corruptas consulis legiones, simulatam Pompeianarum 

gratiam partium ; 

mox ubi decreto patrum fasces et ius prae- 

toris invaserit, caesis Hirtio et Pansa, sive hostis illos, seu Pansam 
venenum vulneri adfusum, sui milites Hirtium et machinator 

doli Caesar abstulerat, utriusque copias occupavisse ; 

extortum 

invito senatu consulatum, armaque quae in Antonium acceperit 

contra rem publicam versa ; 

of the provinces, see c. 2, 2, and Introd. 
vii. p. I19. 

I. magnifico ornatu, abl. of quality. 
Some of the buildings of Augustus are 
noted in Mon. Anc. iv. and vi.; also in 
Strab. 5. 3, 8, p. 235. He is said (Suet. 
Aug. 28) to have boasted that he had 
found Rome a city of brick, and left it 
one of marble. For an account of his 
chief works, see Dyer, Hist. f the City 
of Rome, sect. iii. 

pauca. This refers to the suppression 
of such conspiracies as are mentioned in 
the next chapter. 

3. Dicebatur contra. Lips. remarks 
that the leaning of Tacitus to this view is 
shown by its fuller statement. 

4. obtentui, ‘for a pretext.’ On this 
dative, see Introd..v. § 23. 
ceterum — revera autem.’ This sense 

is especially Tacitean, and (except H. 4. 
3, 5) found only in the Annals ; as c. 14, 
33 44. 6; 14. 58, 33 15. 52, 3. A 
similar sense is found in Sall. Jug. 76, 1, 
and in Livy. 

5. veteranos. Those settled by the 
dictator at Calatia and Casilinum, 'in- 
duced, about October 710, B.C. 44, by 
a bribe of 500 denarii ‘each,’ to join 
Octavianus (Cic. Att. 16. 8, 1). Others 
joined afterwards (Vell. 2. 61, 1). 

privato. Cp. Mon. Anc. i. 1 * annos 
undeviginti natus exercitum privato con- 
silio et privata impensa comparavi.' 
Appian (B. C. 3. 40) rates it at an ill- 
organized force of about 10,000. 

6. consulis, i.e. Antonii. The le- 
giones * Martia and ‘ Quarta,’ summoned 
by him from Macedonia, deserted to 

oO 

proscriptionem civium, divisiones 
2 agrorum ne ipsis quidem qui fecere laudatas. 

sane Cassii et 

Octavian at the end of November. Cic. 
Phil. 3. 3, 6; App. B. C. 2. 45. 

Pompeianarum : see on ‘ Julianae 
partes’ c. 2, I, Drager (§ 223) notes 
this arrangement of the four words as a 
play of rhetoric very unusual in Tacitus 
(cp. 3. 30, 7, and Gud. on Dial. 12, 8) 
or Cicero, but more frequent i in Livy. 

7. ius praetoris. The imperium and 
rank of propraetor, decreed by proposal 
of Cicero, Jan. 1, 711, B.C. 43 ; see Cic. 
Phil. 5. 16, 45. He received the fasces 
on the 7th, which was thus his first ‘ dies 
imperii? See on c. 9, I. 

8. invaserit. This, like *acceperit' 
below, belongs naturally to the * oratio 
obliqua. On the interposition of indi- 
cative clauses, as ‘abstulerat’ and'*'fe- 
cere,' see Introd. v. $ 49, and Nipp. here. 
For the sing. *abstulerat' see on 12. 12, 3. 

caesis. Hirtius was killed Apr. 27; 
Pansa died of his wounds at nearly the 
same ‘time. This insinuation against 
Caesar is alluded to in a letter of uncer- 
tain date (pseudo-Brutus ad Cic. 1, 6), 
and given more fully in Suet. Aug. 11. 

II. senatu; best taken as a form of the 
dative, as in 3. 47, 1: cp. ‘luxu’ 3. 30 
4; ‘decursu’ 3. 33, 3, &c. It rested with 
the senate, or rather with the senator 
who held comitia as ‘ interrex,’ to allow 
him to stand for the consulship without 
being duly qualified (Introd. vi. 94). 

12, divisiones agrorum, assignments 
of lands to soldiers in 713, B.C. 41, 
alluded to by Vergil (Ecl. 1 and 9). 

I3. sane, concessive, as 3. 5, 4; 6. 14, 
4; 48, 4, &c.: the parenthetical clause 
* quamquam... remittere’ qualifies even 

2 

Oo 

43 Aer 5 ^ 

ceterum cupidine dominandi con- "16:4... 
citos per largitionem veteranos, paratum ab adulescente privato 5 61,* ; 

2 

196 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

Brutorum exitus paternis inimicitiis datos, quamquam fas sit 
privata odia publicis utilitatibus remittere: sed Pompeium ima- 
gine pacis, sed Lepidum specie amicitiae deceptos; post Anto- 
nium, Tarentino Brundisinoque foedere et nuptiis sororis inlectum, 

5 subdolae adfinitatis poenas morte exsolvisse. 

pacem sine dubio 3 

post haec, verum cruentam : Lollianas Varianasque clades, inter- 
fectos Romae Varrones, Egnatios, Iullos nec domesticis absti- 4 
nebatur: abducta Neroni uxor et consulti per ludibrium ponti- 

. 7. iulios: Tulos L., Iullos Andresen: see 3. 18, 15 4. 44, 5. 

this concession, and * paternis inimicitiis ' 
is invidiously substituted for the * pietate 
erga parentem" of c. 9, 4: ‘remittere,’ 
* to sacrifice,’ as ‘memoriam simultatium 
patriae remitteret' Liv. 9. 38, 12. Au- 
gustus maintains that he did not use force 
against the assassins till they had been 
legally exiled (by the ‘lex Pedia,’ Vell. 2. 
69, 5), Man. Anc. i. Io. 

2. sed... sed. On such rhetorical 
repetitions, see c. 38, 3, &c., and Introd. 
v. § 73. It is implied that there was no 
palliation in these cases. 

imagine pacis: so ‘imagine cog- 
nitionis’ 3. 17, 6. The allusion is to 
the stipulations towards Sex. Pompeius 
agreed upon at the treaty of Misenum in 
718, B. C. 39 (Dio, 48. 36, 4), which were 
not fulfilled. 

3. specie amicitiae. This refers to 
the general treatment of Lepidus as 
triumvir, rather than to the immediate 
occasion of his being robbed of his army 
(see c. 2, 1). 

post. Nipp.shows that this must be 
taken only with * poenas . . . exsolvisse,' 
the treaties referred to being prior to the 
overthrow of Pompeius and Lepidus. 
That of Brundusium was made in 714, 
B. C. 40 ; that of Tarentum in 717, B C. 37. 
Nipp. also explains the inversion here of 
their chronological order, as meant to lay 
stress on the marriage with Octavia 
vt subdola affinitas"), which was one of 
the provisions of the earlier treaty. 

5. 8ine dubio, concessive, as in c. 6, 
3, &c. 

6. Lollianas. The defeat of Lollius 
by some German tribes in 738, B.C. 16 
(Dio, 54. 20, 5), though * maioris in- 
famiae quam detrimenti ' (Suet. Aug. 23), 
involved the loss of an eagle, and caused 
Augustus to go as far as Gaul (Vell. 2. 
97, 1): on the ‘clades Variana,’ see c. 3, 
6, &c. 

7. Varrones, &c. These, like ‘ Lol- 
lianas’ and ‘ Varianas,’ are rhetorical 
plurals; ‘executions at Rome of a Varro, 
an Egnatius, an Iullus.’ L. Licinius 
Muraena (Hor. Od. 2. 10), afterwards by 
adoption Terentius Varro Muraena, suf- 
fered death with Fannius Caepio for con- 
spiracy against the life of Augustus in 
731 or 732, B.C. 23 or 22 (Dio, 54. 3; 
Vell. 2. 91). He was brother to Pro- 
culeius and Terentia (Dio, l. ].). Egna- 
tius Rufus, a popular aedile and praetor 
in two successive years. failing afterwards 
to reach the consulship, formed a plot 
with others against the life of Augustus, 
and was put to death in prison in 735, 
B.C. Ig. Velleius loads him with abuse 
(2. 91, 3’. Iullus Antonius, son of the 
triumvir by Fulvia, was advanced by 
Augustus to the highest rank, and mar- 
ried to Marcella, daughter of Octavia; 
see Introd. ix. note 18. He was forced 
to suicide in 752, B.C. 2, for adultery 
with Julia (Vell. 2. 100, 4); which was 
held to amount to treason (see 3. 24, 3). 
The form *Iullus' (taken as an unpre- 
cedented praenomen) is supported by 
Mommsen (Hermes xxiv. 155) from in- 
scriptions (as C. I. L. vi. 12010) and the 
MSS of Dio (51. r:, 7, &c.), and is 
probably the true reading here corrupted 
into *Iulios' (which could not be thus 
used by itself as a distinctive name), and 
is also to be read in Hor. Od. 4. 2, 2; 
the trisyllabic * Iulus' being apparently 
a creation (perhaps from a mistaken 
Greek etymology) of Vergil. *Iulius' is 
formed from *Iullus' as * milia' from 
‘mille,’ Messalina from * Messalla,’ &c. - 

8. abducta, &c. Some such verb as 
* memorabatur' has to be supplied fróm 
the negative clause. On the. marriage 
of Livia, see 5. 1, 3. The answer of the 
pontiffs to this * mockery of consultation' 
is given by Dio, 48. 44, 2. 

A. D. 14.] 

LIBER JI. 

CAP. 1o. 197 

fices an concepto necdum edito partu rite nuberet ; Q. T Tedii et 
Vedii Pollionis luxus; postremo Livia gravis in rem publicam 
5 mater, gravis domui Caesarum noverca. nihil deorum honoribus 
relictum, cum se templis et effigie numinum per flamines et 

6 sacerdotes coli vellet. 

ne Tiberium quidem caritate aut rei 

publicae cura successorem adscitum, scd quoniam adrogantiam 
saevitiamque eius introspexerit, comparatione deterrima sibi 

7 gloriam quaesivisse. 

etenim Augustus paucis ante annis, cum 

Tiberio tribuniciam potestatem a patribus rursum postularet, 
quamquam honora oratione, quaedam de habitu cultuque et 

I. nuberetque tedii: text Victorius, [que tedii et] Nipp. 

I. Q. ¢ Tedii. The choice is between 
a name otherwise unknown, and a variety 
of conjectures, as * Q. Pedii’ (Wolf, from 
Suet. Jul. 83, &c.), *C. Matii’ (Freinsh., 
from 12. 60, 6), neither of whom is 
noted for luxury; or *Q. Alledii’ (Roth 
from Juv. 5, 118), whose date is un- 
known.  Hirschfeld's *Q. Vitellii! is 
supported by 2. 48, 3, but we do not 
know that he was of such exceptional 
prominence under Augustus as to be 
classed with Vedius Pollio. 

2. Vedii Pollionis, a knight of low 
birth and vast wealth (cp. Dio, 54. 23, 1), 
noted for throwing live slaves to his 
lampreys. even in presence of Augustus 
(Pl. N. H. 9. 23, 39, 77 ; Sen. de Ira, 3. 
40); who show«d his indignation at the 
time, and on inberiting his villa at Pausi- 
lipum destroyed it for its associations 
(Ov. Fast. 6, 639, &c.). It is made 
a reflection on him, that such a man was 
ever his friend. 

gravis. She is ‘gravis. mater, as 
having forced her son into the succession ; 
‘noverca,’ as having, in popular belief, 
caused the deaths of his competitors, 
Gaius and Lucius; see c. 3, 3, &c. ‘In 
rem publicam may be taken as in c. 8, 
7, or as in c. 76, 5. Cp. Cic. Balb. 9, 
24 *est in populum Romanum grave.' 

4. templis et effigie numinum. 
These appear to be better taken as abl. 
instrum. than resolved, as Nipp. proposes, 
into two constructions by taking the 
former as abl. of place (as 3. 61, 1, &c.), 
the latter as abl. modi. ‘ Effigies ‘numi- 
num’ = ‘quales numinum esse solent,’ 
Ls atico with divine atributes,’ as the 
thunderbolt, &c. 

5. vellet, used invidiously of mere 
permission. According to Suet. Aug. 52, 
and Dio, 51. 20, 8, temples to Augustus 

in his lifetime were not allowed by him 
in Rome, and, in the provinces, only in 
association with the worship of Roma 
(see on c. 78, §; Rushforth, p. 44). Dio 
wrongly adds that he allowed no such 
worship in Italy, where it is plain from 
inscriptions, that at least a local wor- 
ship and ‘ flamines’ of Augustus existed 
during his lifetime in various towns: see 
Orelli and Henzen, Insc. 642, 643, 3874, 
5814, 5994, 7079; Staatsr. ii. 757, 1; 
Hermes xvii. 642; Rushforth, n 51. But 
the * flaminium Augusti,’ dating from the 
time of the apotheosis (see below), as 
one of the greater priesthoods at Rome, 
is rightly distinguished by Nipp. from 
these. See Introd. vii. p. 130. 

ne Tiberium, &c. Even Suetonius 
rejects this imputation (Tib. 21) ; nor does 

acitus elsewhere refer to any other cause 
than the influence of Livia (4. 57, 5). 

7. deterrima, concisely for * cum de- 
terrimo homine": cp. 3. 72, 2, &c. 

8. paucis ante annis, i.e. at the date 
of the last renewal. His second tenure 
of this power, dating probably from July 
I, 757, A.D. 4 (see Introd. viii. p. 134), 
is supposed by Dio (55. 13, 2) to have 
been for ten years, and a renewal is dated 
in 766, A.D. 13 (56. 28, 1); but probably 
Suet. is right in making the term five 
years (Tib. 16), whereby the renewal 
would fall in 762, A.D. 9. Asit had not 
expired at the death of Augustus (see 
c. 7, 5), the last ERE WA was probably 
for life. 

IO. honora: cp. 3. 5, 1; 4. 68, 4; one 
of the poetical words of Tacitus (Introd. 
v. $70). The negative ‘inhonorus’ had 
been used in prose by Pl. mai. 

habitu, ‘deportment. He walked 

*cervice rigida et obstipa, a adducto are 
vultu, plerumque tacitus’ Suet. Tib. 68. 

tn 

*J 

198 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

. . . . . Í 
institutis eius iecerat, quae velut excusando exprobraret. | cete- 8 
rum sepultura more perfecta templum et caelestes religiones 

decernuntur. 

11, Versae inde ad Tiberium preces. 
de magnitudine imperii, sua modestia. 
mentem tantae molis capacem: 

et ille varia edisserebat 
solam divi Augusti 2 
se in partem curarum ab illo 

vocatum experiendo didicisse quam arduum, quam subiectum 

fortunae regendi cuncta onus. 

proinde in civitate tot inlustribus 3 

viris subnixa non ad unum omnia deferrent: plures facilius 

munia rei publicae sociatis laboribus exsecuturos. 

plus in4 

oratione tali dignitatis quam fidei erat; Tiberioque etiam in 
rebus quas non occuleret, seu natura sive adsuetudine, suspensa 
semper et obscura verba: tunc vero nitenti, ut sensus suos 

4. uariae disserebat: varie disserebat B., Halm, text Linker. 

eultu, ‘style of dress’ (joined with 
‘habitu’ 2. 59, 3); so in 2. 75. 3; 6. 32, 
4, and Livy. 

I, institutis, ‘manners’: cp. ‘ insti- 
tuta Parthorum’ 6. 32, 4. 

iecerat, ‘had dropped expressions’ ; 
so 4. 68, 4; 6. 4, 3, &c., Sall., Liv. 

velut: cp. c. 8, 7, &c. The ‘taunt 
under colour of excuse' is said to have 
been * naturae vitia esse, non animi’ Suet. 
Tib. 68. For the gerundial modal abl. 
cp. Gud. on Dial. 11, 6. 

2. sepultura more perfecta. The 
ceremonies are fully described by Suet. 
and Dio ; the latter gives a long ‘ laudatio" 
purporting to be spoken by Tiberius, but 
probably a mere composition. 

templum. This was built by Augusta 
and Tiberius (Dio, 56. 46, 3) at the side 
of the Palatine, near the Forum. For 
notices of it see Dyer (D. of Geog. ‘ Roma,’ 
p. 805); for its probable identification 
with existing remains, see Middleton, 
i. 273 foll. 

caelestes religiones. The date of 
this apotheosis is fixed as 15 Kal. Octob. 
(Sept. 17) by the kalendar of Amiternum, 
Orell. Inscr. ii. p. 398. The same decree 
probably created Germanicus and Augusta 
* flamen' and * flaminica Augustalis’: see 
notes on c. 14, 3; 2. 83, 2. On the crea- 
tion of the college of * sodales Augustales,' 
see c. 54, I. 

4. Versae inde, &c. On the conduct 
of Tiberius during this scene, see Introd. 
viii. p. 139. Velleius, probably an eye- 
witness, describes it from his own point 

of view (2. 124). Suet. (Tib. 24) shows 
some verbal resemblance, but more im- 
portant differences. 

varia edisserebat ; so Bait. and Ritt. : 
similar errors in division of words in the 
MS., are ‘in editiorae nisus' (c. 70, 6), ‘in 
adiacentiae rupturum ' (c. 79, 3), &c. (cp. 
H. 4. 81, 4): 'edissere' is used in H. 
3. 52, 2. * Varie disserebat' is supported 

. by 3. 59, 1, and read by most editors. 

5. modestia, ‘diffidence.’ This quality 
in him is contrasted in 3. 56, 4, with the 
* magnitudo' of Augustus, as here with 
that of the empire; and is elsewhere 
spoken of by himself as his ‘pudor’ 
(c. 12, 3), or * moderatio' (2. 36, 2). 
Dio (57. 2, 4) reports hira as also pleading 
his age, and defcctive eyesight. 

7. quam arduum. On the omission 
of * esset,' see Introd. v. § 39 b. 

9. non is used instead of ‘ne’ to 
emphasize *ad unum, the context im- 
plying the antithesis ‘sed ad plures. 
Nipp. illustrates, both from Cic. and Liv., 
this use, which is more common in poets 
and silver age prose; e.g. ‘non Teucros 
agat' Verg. Aen. 12, 78. 

II. fidei, *honesty': 
C82, 3. 

I2. occuleret. 
Introd. v. $ 52. 

suspensa, 'hesitating, as II. 34, 2; 
H. 3. 37, 2. Tiberius is described as 
* velut eluctantium verborum ' (4. 31, 4); 
* validus sensibus aut consulto ainbiguus ' 
(13. 3, 5) ; and these traits are rhetorically 
exaggerated by Dio (57. 1). 

cp. «fida oratio" 

On the subjunctive, see 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 

IO—I2. 199 

penitus abderet, in incertum et ambiguum magis implicabantur. 
5 at patres, quibus unus metus si intellegere viderentur, in questus 
lacrimas vota effundi; ad deos, ad effigiem Augusti, ad genua 
Ipsius manus tendere, cum proferri libellum recitarique iussit. 
6 opes. publicae continebantur, quantum civium sociorumque in 5 
armis, quot classes, regna, provinciae, tributa aut vectigalia, et 

7 necessitates ac largitiones. 

quae cuncta sua manu perscripserat 

Augustus addideratque consilium coercendi intra terminos im- 
perii, incertum metu an per invidiam. 

12. Inter quae senatu ad infimas obtestationes procumbente, 16 
dixit forte Tiberius se ut non toti rei publicae parem, ita quae- 

I. in incertum. On this use of ‘in’ 
" to express result, see Introd. v. § 60 b. 

2. unus metus si intellegere vide- 
rentur, ‘whose only ground of fear lay 
in betraying their insight. ‘Metus si’ 
(cp. 16. 5, 3) is very rare, but may be 
compared with the use of ‘si’ with ‘ miror,’ 
‘mirum,’ &c. Here, as in ‘formido... 
si’ (11. 28, 1), it is mcant that they feared 
the consequence of detection, rather than 
detection itself; as is shown in the fuller 
expression ‘si intellegere crederetur, vim 
metuens' (2. 42, 5). The same kind of 
dissimulation is described in 14. 6, 1; H. 
4. 86, 1. 

3. effundi, reflexive pass., * burst into ' : 
cp. 3. 23, 1 ; 4. 8, 3, &c. 

4. libellum. This was one of three 
documents deposited by Augustus with 
his will:: see Suet. Aug. 101. Another 
contained instructions for his funeral; the 
third, the ‘Index rerum gestarum! to be 
inscribed on his tomb, was the original 
of the * Marmor Ancyranum.' The docu- 
ment here described seems more comprc- 
hensive than the balance sheet (* rationes 
imperii,' or * rationarium ), which he had 
periodically published: see Staatsr. ii. 
1025. Tiberius orders the recital, to show 
the magnitude of the whole, and to suggest 
partition of functions. 

5. opes, used of resources, including 
both the forces and revenue: so *opes 
viresque' H. 1. 61, 1; 4. 86,2... 

6. quot classes, &c. Nipp. notes the 
change from two clauses without connect- 
ing particles to a third coupled by ‘et,’ 

as well as from the asyndeta included. 

under the first clause to the connexion by 
‘aut’ and ‘ac’ of the subordinate mem- 
bers of the two other clauses. Many 
instances of such variations are given in 

his note, and in Drager § 140; see Introd. 
v. $ go. On the fleets, see Introd. vii. 
p. 127 ; and on the dependent kingdoms 
(* regna ^), ibid. p. 120. 

tributa aut vectigalia, 'direct and 
indirect taxes': sce on I3. 50. 

7. necessitates: cp. 2. 27, 2; here like 
* publicae necessitates ' in Liv. 23. 48, 10, 
of regular charges on the revenue, as dis- 
tinct from the voluntary ‘ largitiones," such 
as ‘ frumentationes,' ' congiaria,’ &c. (Mon. 
Anc. iii. 7, &c.)). ‘Ac’ couples closely 
the two kinds of expenditure, in contrast 
to the kinds of income. 

8. addideratque, &c.: in Dio (Xiphil.’, 
56. 33, 3, this is represented as contained 

! in a fourth document, which is also stated 

to have recommended some division of the 
functions of government. Nipp. notes that 
the reconquest of Germany to the Elbe 
would not be looked upon as an extension 
of empire. 

9. metu an per invidiam. On the 
variation of construction, see Introd. v. 
$ 62. Tacitus, living in the midst of the 
conquests of Trajan, treats this prudence 
as contemptible: see Introd. viii. p. 138. 

IO. Inter quae. Nipp. shows by many 
examples (c. 15, 3, &c.) the fondness of 
Tacitus for this expression, as also for 
‘post quae’ (c. 13, I, &c.), * adversus 
quae’ (3. 59, I, &c.), * ob quae’ (2. 30, 4). 
Instances are found in Livy. 

1I. dixit forte, ‘dropped the expres- 
sion,’ as if unguardedly. Dio (57.2, 4: 
states that he definitely offered to take 
one of three departments, either Rome 
and Italy, or the armies, or the provinces. 

ut... ita, ‘although ... yet.’ In this 
usage (cp. c. 42, 55 3- 43, 43 4- 33) 33 
37, 5; 71, 1, &c.) Tacitus follows Livy 

(3. 55, 15, &c.). 

Cre 

het 
Ce 

200 

cumque pars sibi mandaretur, eius tutelam suscepturum. 
Asinius Gallus 'interrogo' inquit, ‘Caesar, quam partem rei 
perculsus inprovisa interrogatione 3 

publicae mandari tibi velis.' 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM [A.U.C. 767. 

tum 92 

paulum reticuit: dein collecto animo respondit nequaquam de- 
corum pudori suo legere aliquid aut evitare ex eo, cui in uni- 
versum excusari mallet. rursum Gallus (etenim vultu.offensionem 4 
coniectaverat) non idcirco interrogatum ait, ut divideret quae 
separari nequirent, sed ut sua confessione argueretur, unum esse 
rei publicae corpus atque unius animo regendum. addidit laudem 5 
de Augusto, Tiberiumque ipsum victoriarum suarum quaeque in 

toga per tot annos egregie fecisset admonuit. 

nec ideo iram 6 

eius lenivit, pridem invisus, tamquam ducta in matrimonium 
Vipsania M. Agrippae filia, quae quondam Tiberii uxor fuerat, 
plus quam civilia agitaret Pollionisque Asinii patris ferociam 

retineret. 

13. Post quae L. Arruntius haud multum discrepans a Galli 

8. sed et: text L., perhaps sed ut et Halm, sed et . . . ut argueretur Müller. 
14. polionis here and 2. 86, 2. 

2. Asinius Gallus, in full C. Asinius 
C. f. Gallus Saloninus. He was consul 
746, B.C. 8, proconsul of Asia two years 
later; and is known as an orator and man 
of letters (see Nipp.). He is frequently 
mentioned in these Books, as c. 8, 4; 13, 

2; 76,2; 2. 32, 41 33, 33 35. I3 4. 20, 

2; 30,2; 71,3; 6.23, 1. His parentage 
and marriage are given in this chapter. 
On his sons see note on 6. 23, 3. 

4. collecto animo, ‘recovering selí- 
possession.” Dio (57. 2, 6) gives his 
answer as xal mas olóv ré éor( TÓv abrÓv 
Kai véuew Tt kal alpetoOa ; in the reply of 
Gallus, his account agrees exactly with 
Tacitus. 

6. excusari. With the doubtful ex- 
ception *excusatus honoribus' (Pl. Pan. 
57), this verb is nowhere found with a 
dative of the thing; but the construction 
is analogous to that of ‘captae prohibere 
. .. Poenos aquilae’ (Sil. 9. 27), &c. 

rursum: cp. c. 80, 3, and note. 

8. sed ut. Orelli retains ‘et,’ which 
may be taken as —*etiam'; but the 
change of subject from ‘divideret’ to 
 arguerctur appears to render the repeti- 
tion of * ut" necessary. 

9. addidit laudem de Augusto. The 
expression is explained by Nipp., who 
shows that *laus ' is equivalent to * oratio 
laudatoria. The object of his speech is 

to show the advantage of single rule by 
reference to Augustus, and the capacity of 
Tiberius by reference to his services. 

11. ideo, used as in c. 72, 3; 2. 42, 1; 
3. 25, 2, &c. in the sense of ‘for all that.’ 
Dio (57. 2, 7) connects the subsequent 
fate of Gallus with this speech. Tacitus 
(c. 13, 2) gives an additional reason for 
the jealousy of Tiberius. 

12. tamquam. On the use of this 
word, sce Introd. v. $ 67. 

ducta, &c. On Vipsania, see Introd. ix. 
note 27 ; on her divorce, ibid. viii. 133. 

14. civilia: see c. 8, 3, &c. 

ferociam, 'spirit': cp. 2. 43, 3, &c., 
and *ferocissimi' c. 2, 1. Dio (57. 2, 8) 
speaks of the wappnoia of Pollio. Velleius 
(2. 86, 4) vives his refusal to follow Caesar 
to Actium, *discrimini vestro me subtra- 
ham, et ero praeda victoris. Other in- 
stances of his freedom of speech are given 
in Suet. Aug. 43. 

16. L. Arruntius, also very frequently 
mentioned in these Books (c. 8, 4; 76,3; 
79, 15 3. 11, 2; 31. 5; 6. 5, 1; 7, 1; 
27, 3; 47. 33; 48), was consul in 759, 
A.D His father, consul in 732, B.C. 22, 
is probably the same who held an im- 
portant command in Caesar's fleet at 
Actium (Vell. 2. 85, 2). Seneca speaks 
of one or the other of these as * vir rarae 
frugalitatis! Ep. 114, 17. 

A. D. 14.] 

oratione perinde offendit, quamquam Tiberio nulla 

LIBER I. CAP. 12, 13. 

2OI 

vetus in 

Arruntium ira: sed divitem, promptum, artibus egregiis ct pari 

2 fama publice, suspectabat. 

quippe Augustus supremis sermo- 

nibus cum tractaret, quinam adipisci principem locum suffecturi 
abnuerent, aut inpares vellent, vel idem possent cuperentque, 
M'. Lepidum dixerat capacem sed aspernantem, Gallum Asinium 
avidum et minorem, L. Arruntium non indignum et, si casus 
3 daretur, ausurum. de prioribus consentitur, pro Arruntio quidam 
Cn. Pisonem tradidere; omnesque praeter Lepidum variis mox 

4 criminibus struente Tiberio circumventi sunt. 

etiam Q. Hatcrius 

et Mamercus Scaurus suspicacem animum perstrinxere, Haterius 

6. M.: M.’ L.; see note. 

2. artibus, 'accomplishments': cp. 
*inlustres domi artes’ 4. 6, 2; also 3. 70, 
I; 12. 6, 25; 14. 55, 6. In 6. 7, 1 he 
speaks of the ‘sanctissimae artes’ of Ar- 
runtius; in II. 6, 4, a speaker mentions 
his * incorrupta vita et facundia," classing 
him even with Pollio and Messalla. 
Seneca, however, if he refers to this 
Arruntius (see above), considers the style 
of his History of the Punic wars an 
exaggeration of the mannerisms of Sallust. 

pari fama. publice, ‘with corre- 
. sponding. public reputation.’ * Publice' is 
best taken, with Ruperti, as = * iudicio 
omnium.’ 

4. principem, adjective, as 3. 75, I; 
4. 38, 1; 60, 4, &c. On the frequency 
of such adjectival substantives, see c. 9, 6. 

suffecturi is best taken absolutely, as 
in G. 13, 1, &c., so as to leave ‘ adipisci’ 
dependent only on the verbs: though 
‘sufficere’ takes an infinitive in Verg. 
Aen. 5, 22. 

5. vel certainly stands sometimes in 
Tacitus for ‘aut,’ as 13. 41, 3; 14. 35, 4, 
&c.; but here Nipp. appears rightly to 
show that, as in 14. 3, I (‘in hortos aut 
Tusculanum vel Antiatem in agrum "), he 
is not so much contrasting three classes 
with each other, as two of them with 
a third; those who, with or without 
capacity, would desire the position, with 
those who would not. ‘idem’ nom. plur. 

6. M'. Lepidum. This praenomen is 
given in full, 3. 22,2. Elsewhere the MS. 
always reads M., thus confusing this 
Lepidus with another, whose praenomen 
* Marcus' is written full in 3. 32, 2 (where 
see note). On Manius Lepidus see further 
3.35, 15 50, 15 4.20, 3; 56, 3; 6. 27, 4 
He was consul in 764, A.D. II. 

7. et is a variation for the preceding 
* sed,' and often stands for an adversative 
particle, where the words sufficiently 
convey the opposition, as *turbidos et 
nihil ausos ' c. 38, 4 Cp. I2. 52, 3; 14. 
65,2; and ‘neque’ ( 2 ' sed non’) 6. 33 

casus, ‘opportunity’; so 11. 9, I; 1 
28, 1; 50,13 13. 36,2: chiefly from Sall. 
e. g. Jug. 25, 9, &c. 

9. Cn. Pisonem: see c. 74, 6; 2. 43, 
3, &c. 
omnes. This should apply to all the 

other three ; but the absurdity of supposing 
that Tiberius contrived the fall of Piso 

makes Nipp. contend that the remark 

about him is parenthetical, and that only 
two out of the three originally inentioned 
are referred to. In any case Tacitus over- 
steps his own facts, for Tiberius is ad- 
mitted to have been probably not cognisant 
of the charge against Arruntius (6. 47, 4); 
so that ‘omnes’ is justified only by the 
fate of Gallus some sixteen years later: 
see on 6. 23, 1 

Io. Q. Haterius, a consular (2. 33, I), 
probably cos. suff. in 745, B. C. 9 ( Borghesi); 
a man of servile disposition (3. 57, 3), and 
a fluent but careless speaker (4. 61, 2). 
On his probable marriage with a daughter 
of Agrippa, see Introd. ix. note 19. 

1I. Mamercus Scaurus, of similar 
character (3. 66, 3), was cos. suff. probably 
in 774, A.D. 21 (Borghesi: see Nipp. on 
3. 66, and Klein, Fasti Cons.). On his 
accomplishments and fate see 6. 29, 4; 
where his death, twenty years after this 
date, is ascribed to the influence of 
Macro. 

animum perstrinxere, prob. like 
‘aures perstringere’ (‘to jar’) in Dial. 
27,2; Hor. Od. 2. 1, 18. 

er 

bn 

o 

. c c —À ^ i ge dia ponia OE ont. eek, 

IO 

202 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A.U. C. 767. 

cum dixisset ‘quousque patierie, Caesar, non adesse caput rei 
publicae?') Scaurus quia dixerat, spem esse ex eo non inritas 
fore senatus preces, quod relationi consulum iure tribuniciae 

potestatis non intercessisset. 

in Haterium statim invectus est ; 5 

Scaurum, cui inplacabilius irascebatur, silentio tramisit. fessusque 8 
clamore omnium, expostulatione singulorum flexit paulatim, non 
ut fateretur suscipi a se imperium, sed ut negare et rogari 

desineret. 

introisset ambulantisque Tiberii genua advolveretur, prope a 
militibus interfectum, quia Tiberius casu an manibus eius inpe- 

ditus prociderat. 

neque tamen periculo talis viri mitigatus est, 

donec Haterius Augustam oraret eiusque curatissimis precibus 

protegeretur. 

14. Multa patrum et in Augustam adulatio. 

I. apud te: caput R. 

I. quousque, &c. The whole sentence 
might give offence from its tone of im- 
patience, like the ‘aut agat, aut desistat ' 
of some other speaker (Suet.. Tib. 24); 
and ‘caput reipublicae" is an expression 
more suited to the senate (cp. H. t. 84, 6), 
than, at this early date, to the * princeps.' 
The words of Scaurus would be more 
offensive, as insinuating that Tiberius was 
not in earnest. 

3. relationi consulum. The terms 
of such a *relatio' can be gathered from 
H. 1. 47, 2, and more fully from the 
‘Lex de Imp. Vespasiani. On the pre- 
sent occasion the powers already pos- 
sessed by Tiberius (see Introd. vi. pp 80, 
98) would require fresh definition: see 
Staatsr. ii. 786, foll. 

5. tramisit. This verb is used in this 
age in the sense of * praetermittere,’ with 
‘silentio’ or similar words, and with 
accus. of the thing (as 14. 12, 2, &c.) or 
the person (as 13. 22, 3, &c.). 

6. flexit, sc. ‘se,’ as 4. 37, 2, &c. 
Suet. (Tib. 24) says that he complained 
* miseram et onerosam iniungi sibi servi- 
tutem,' and consented only with the re- 
servation * dum veniam ad id tempus, quo 
vobis aequum possit videri, dare vos ali- 
quam senectuti meae requiem. From 
the silence of Tacitus it has been doubted 
whether any formal decree was passed; 
but we can hardly suppose that Tiberius 
thus left his position unsecured, and 
he: could not have formally become 
‘princeps’ or ‘Augustus’ without such 
decree. 

> 

alii parentem, 
12. etusque: text L. 

7. ut fateretur, ‘to declare’; cp. a. 
13, 1 ; Dial. 17, 4. 

8. constat Haterium. Suet. (Tib. 
27) tells this story without the name of 
the person, only to illustrate the aversion 
of Tiberius to such prostrations. 

9. genua advolveretur. This constr., 
taken from Sall. (see Introd. v. $ 97, 1), 
is used by Tacitus, 6. 49, 3; 15. 71, 1; 
H. 4. 81, 2. On other such accusatives 
after compound verbs, see Introd, v. 
§ 12c. Hehas the more usual dat. with 

* advolvi! c. 23, 2, &c., and ‘ provolvi' 

12. 18, 3, &c. 

Io. an, used in expressions of doubt with 
almost the force of * aut,’ often in Tacitus, 
as c. 65, 3; 2. 38, 9; 42, 5; H. 1. 7, 2, 
sometimes in Cic. Sall. Liv.: see Nipp. 
and Madv. 423, I. 

12. oraret. On the subjunctive of facts 
with * donec,’ see on c. I, 4. 

curatissimis, * her most solicitous en- 
treaty.’ ‘Curatus’=‘ accuratus' in 2. 27, 
I; I4. 21, 2; 16.22, 6; and in Pl. min. 

I4. parentem ... matrem. Probably 
Walther is right in thinking the question 
between these titles merely one of sound. 
Both ‘pater’ and ‘parens’ ‘patriae’ 
appear to have been used of Cicero (Juv. 
8, 243) and Julius Caesar (Suet. Jul. 76; 
85).. On the titles borne by the wife or 
mother of the princeps, see Staatsr. ii. 
p.821. Provincial coins and inscriptions 
exist giving to Augusta titles formally 
disallowed, as ‘mater patriae' and even 
* genetrix orbis' : see Eckhel, v. 154-156; 
Cohen, i. p. 169, 3; Rushforth, Insc. p. 67. 

constat Haterium, cum deprecandi causa Palatium 7 

2 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 13—15. 

203 

alii matrem patriae appellandam, plerique ut nomini Caesaris 

8 adscriberetur 'Iuliae filius' 

censebant. 

ille moderandos femi- 

narum honores dictitans eademque se temperantia usurum in 
iis quae sibi tribuerentur, ceterum anxius invidia et muliebre 

fastigium in deminutionem sui accipiens, ne lictorem quidem : 

ei decerni passus est aramque adoptionis et alia huiusce modi 
4 prohibuit. at Germanico Caesari proconsulare imperium petivit, 
missique legati qui deferrent, simul maestitiam eius ob excessum 

5 Augusti solarentur. 

6' causa quod designatus consul Drusus praesensque erat. 

quo minus idem pro Druso postularetur, ea 

candi- 

datos praeturae duodecim nominavit, numerum ab Augusto 
traditum ; et hortante senatu ut augeret, iure iurando obstrinxit 

se non excessurum. 

15. Tum primum e campo comitia ad patres translata sunt: 

4. his: iis Muretus. 

1. appellandam...ut. On this varia- 
tion of construction, see Introd. v. § 91, 7. 
. .2. Iuliae fllius. The title * Divi Aug. 

f' is regularly borne by Tiberius on 
inscriptions. For him to have also borne 
his mother's name is noted by Orelli as 
wholly without Roman precedent, though 
an old Etruscan custom. 

4. ceterum : cp. c. IO, I. 

5. fastigium, used of ‘rank’ by Livy 
and later authors. When the highest 
rank is spoken of, as here, an adjective 
is usually added; but cp. ‘initia fastigii ' 
3. 29, 2; and ‘stare in fastigio elo- 
quentiae' Quint. 12. I, 20. 

in. This hardly expresses here result, 
as in c. II, 4, &c.; but rather how an act 
or event is interpreted, as in 6. 13, 4 ; 12. 
43, 2; 16.18, 2: cp. ‘in omen acceptum" 
Liv. 21. 63, 14. 

ne lictorem quidem. It appears 
from Dio (56. 45, 2) that she had a 
. lictor when in performance of her duties 
as priestess of Augustus. Two were 
assigned to Agrippina, evidently as 
* flaminica Claudialis ' (13. 2, 6). 

6. aram adoptionis. Altars are often 
erected as monuments, without implying 
any act of worship. Thus we have ‘ara 
ob Agrippinae puerperium’ (Suet. Cal. 
8); and altars to personifications, as 
* ultionis' (3. 18, 3) ; * clementiae,' * ami- 
citiae ' (4. 74, 3). 

7. proconsulare imperium, probably 
a renewal, in consequence of the death of 
Augustus (Staatsr. ii. 1158, 3), of that 

which he had received in 764, A.D. 11, as 
an ‘imperium maius' in Gaul and Ger- 
many (c. 31, 2). ‘hat he was not fully 
*collega imperii' with Tiberius is im- 
plied in 2. 43, 2. See Introd. vi. p. 98; 
Staatsr. ii. 1151, &c. 

9. solarentur. On the frequent poetical 
use in Tacitus of simple for compound 
verbs, see Introd. v. $ 40. 

Io. quod designatus consul, &c. The 
explanation appears to be, that such an 
‘imperium,’ valid only ‘extra urbem" 
(12. 41, 2), would not be suitable to one 
who was to hold an urban magistracy. 
Nipp. and Mommsen (Staatsr. ii. 1152, 1) 
think that the allusion to his presence 
points to the delicacy of his having him- 
self to give the first vote. This, however, 
appears not to hold in a relatio Caesaris ' 
(a. 17, 8); and, in any other ‘relatio,’ 
might be obviated (3. 22, 6). Drusus, no 
doubt, had this imperium when sent to 
Illyricum (2. 44, 1). 

II. nominavit. On the ‘nominatio 
candidatorum," see Introd. vi. p. 94. The 
number twelve was occasionally exceeded 
both by Augustus (Dio, 56. 25, 4) and 
by Tiberius (2. 32, 1; Dio, 58. 20, 5); 
but is retained as the normal number. 
See 2. 36, 1; Staatsr. ii. p. 919. 

12. obstrinxit. This verb is used ab- 
solutely, as in 4. 31, 5; ‘se’ being here 
taken with *excessurum.' In 13. II, 2, 
Tacitus has *clementiam suam obstrin- 
gens,’ in the sense of ‘solemnly promising.’ 

14. Tum primum, i.e. in the election 

bnt 

o 

204. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A.U. C. 767. 

nam. ad eam diem, etsi potissima arbitrio principis, quaedam 

tamen studiis tribuum fiebant. 

neque populus ademptum ius 2 

questus est nisi inani rumore, et senatus, largitionibus ac precibus 
sordidis exsolutus, libens tenuit, moderante Tiberio ne plures 
5 quam quattuor candidatos commendaret, sine repulsa et ambitu 

designandos. 

inter quae tribuni plebei petivere, ut proprio 3 

sumptu ederent ludos, qui de nomine Augusti fastis additi 

Augustales vocarentur. 

sed decreta pecunia ex aerario, utque 4 

per circum triumphali veste uterentur: curru vehi haud per- 

missum. 

mox celebratio annua ad praetorem translata, cui inter 5 

cives et peregrinos iurisdictio evenisset. 

of these praetors. The first consular 
elections are spoken of in c. 81. It is 
implied in the context, and in Vell. 2. 
126, 2, that the new rule obtained hence- 
forth in all elections. On this important 
change, see Introd. vi. p. 89. 

1.:&8d eam diem. Augustus is stated, 
after the restoration of the comitia (Suet. 
Aug. 40), to have superseded them in 
cases of exceptional turbulence (Dio, 54. 
IO, 2; 55. 34, 2). The general prevalence 
of ordinary canvassing is seen from the 
description of Horace, Epp. 1. 6, 49, &c. 

potissima. ‘This may probably refcr 
to the choice of consuls, which appears 
to have passed from popular control in 
the iater years of Augustus (Dio, 1. 1.). 

3. inani rumore, ‘in idle murmurs.’ 
‘Rumor’ used of popular talk, as 3. 29, 
5, &c. On the temper of the people, 
cp. Juv. 10, 73, also Introd. vii. p. 107. 

precibus exsolutus. Senators were 
themselves the candidates for all offices 
above the quaestorship. 

5. quattuor... commendaret. On 
the «commendatio, as distinct from the 
* nominatio' of candidates by the prince, 
see Introd. vi. p. 94 ; Staatsr. ii. 92r, foll. 
The proportion of four applies to the 
election of praetors only, but the in- 
sertion of * praeturae' appears unneces- 
sary (see Staatsr. ii. 926, 2). Velleius 
states (2. 124, 4) that on this occasion 
the two first *candidati Caesaris' were 
* nobilissimi ac sacerdotales viri,' the two 
others Velleius himself and his brother ; 
and that Tiberius was in fact giving effect 
to a previous designation by Augustus. 

5. tribuni plebei. Dio (56. 46, 4) 
connects the selection of the tribunes 
for this duty with the sanctity of their 

: annua or annuum margin, [annum] Nipp. 

office (ws xal lepompemets óvres), A more 
natural explanation may be found in the 
tribunician power of the person com- 
memorated. 

7. de nomine, ‘named after’: cp. 6. 
34, 4. The phrase is poetical: cp. Lucr. 
6, 908; Verg. Aen. 1, 277, &c. 

fastis additi. The ‘ Ludi Augustales,’ 
or * Augustalia,’ were held either on Oct. 9 
(Kal. Ant.), or Oct. 12 (Kal. Amit.) : see 
Orelli, Inscr. ii. p. 400; C. I. L. ix. 403. 
That they date as a fixed institution from 
this time is stated here and in c. 54, 1 ; but 
the first celebration is inferred from Kal. 
Amit. (cp. Dio, 54. 10, 3) to have been 
decreed in 735, B.C. 19, and stated by 
Dio (54. 34, 2) to have been held in 743, 
B.C. II, where perhaps the distinction 
drawn between them and the festival on 
his birthday, Sept. 23 (Kal. Maff., Orelli, 
ii. p. 395), is, as Nipp. thinks, incorrect. 
The two seem confused in Dio (Xiphil.), 
56. 29, 2. 

8. vocarentur carries on the * oratio 
obliqua.' 

decret& pecunia . . . utque. A 
similar double construction is used with 
this verb in 4. 16, 6; 14.12, 1, &c. ; also 
with ‘perspecto’ 3. 63, 2; ‘nozcenda’ 
4. 33, 2; ‘ cireumspecta ' I4. 33, 2. 

9. curru. The praetor celebrating the 
‘Ludi Magni’ had the chariot as well as 
the triumphal robe (Plin. N. H. 34. 5, 11, 
20; Juv. 10, 36; 11, 192) ; but the for- 
mer belonged to such only as had ordi- 
narily the ‘sella curulis, its symbol and 
survival (Staatsr. i. 394), and would 
therefore naturally be out of place for 
tribunes. 

Io. annua. Neither this nor ‘annuum’ 
appears needed; and it is suggested by 

——— -— T Lo owe 

"c a — ERREUR: EA ao 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. CAP. 15, 16. 205 

16. Hic rerum urbanarum status erat, cum Pannonicas legiones 
seditio incessit, nullis novis causis, nisi quod mutatus princeps 
licentiam turbarum et ex civili bello spem praemiorum osten- 

2 debat. castris aestivis tres simul legiones habebantur, prae- 
sidente Iunio Blaeso, qui fine Augusti et initiis Tiberii auditis 5 

8 ob iustitium aut gaudium intermiserat solita munia. eo principio 
lascivire miles, discordare, pessimi cuiusque sermonibus praebere 
aures, denique luxum et otium cupere, disciplinam et laborem 

4aspernari. erat in castris Percennius quidam, dux olim thea- 

6. [aut gaudium) Muretus, Nipp. 

Nipp. that ‘annum ad’ is corrupted from 
‘ad eum,’ or that the text preserves part 
of a marginal ncte explaining * mox' by 
post annum.’ 

Il. evenisset, sc. ‘sorte’: * obvenire’ 
is thus used 3 33. 1: 4. 56,3; Agr. 6,4; 
and both verbs thus by Livy, &c. 

1. Hic...status erat. An important 
date in connexion with this mutiny is fur- 
nished by the eclipse (see c. 28, 1) which 
marks its close. ‘Though the precise lo- 
cality of the ‘castra aestiva’ is unknown, 
‘some inference as to the rapidity of com- 
munication within the empire may still 
be drawn from the íact that, between 
August 19 and September 26, time was 
found, (1) for the news of the death of 
Augustus to reach Pannonia, (2) for the 
mutiny to develop itself, and for news of 
it to reach Rome, (3) for the march of 
Drusus and a considerable force from 
Rome to the spot. For many other such 
evidences, see Friedlander, ii. p. 18. &c. 
The impossibility is not as great as As- 
bach represents it; especially as it may 
be (see c. 5, 6) that Augustus really died 
before Aug. 19, and that news was 
sent to the armies (cp. 6. 50, 6) before it 
. was published in Rome. Dio (57. 3, 1) 
may be right in saying that Tiberius had 
already suspicions of this and the German 
army, when he hesitated to accept the 
principate; but the mutiny can hardly 
have been already known to have broken 
out, as Suet. (Tib. 25) states. 

Pannonicas. Pannonia was among 
the most important Caesarian provinces, 
its *legatus' being always of consular 
rank (see Introd. vii. p. 116). It extended 
along the Danube from Carnuntum, be- 
low Vienna, to Belgrade, its western boun- 
dary from that river to the Drave being 
nearly that of Hungary. Most of Il- 
lyricum was placed under its * legatus, and 

that name is sometimes given to it (see 
on c. 46, 1); though the maritime part 
of Illyricum, the * Delmatia' of 4. 5, 5, 
was at this time separately governed 
by P. Dolabella (Vell. 2. 125, 5). See 
Marquardt, i. 292, 295; Momms. Hist. 
v. ch. 6. 

2. incessit, so with acc. pers. in 3. 71, 
3; H. 3. 2, 4; 5. 23, 1, after Livy. 

nullis novis causis, best taken as 
abl. abs.: cp. c. 31, 1; 4. 22. I, &c. 

4. tres simul legiones. These are 
specified in c. 23, 6; 30, 4. On their 
full titles, see Introd. vii. p. 122. The 
winter quarters of each legion were 
usually separate (see 2. 57, 2, &c.), or 
at most two were quartered together 
(c. 39, 2; 45, 1). Domitian enforced 
strictly the separation of the legions (see 
on c. 20, 1). 

5. Iunio Blaeso. Inscriptions, cited 
by Nipp. show that Blaesus had been 
proconsul of Sicily after his praetorship, 
and consul suffectus in 763, A.D. 10. 
Afterwards we hear of him as having for 
his nephew Seianus, through whose in- 
fluence he became ‘extra sortem ' pro- 
consul of Africa, and gained the 'tri- 
umphalia’ and the title of * imperator" 
(3. 35, 2; 72, 6; 74, 6); and at whose 
fall he perished (see 5. 7, 2). 

6. aut gaudium. These words may 
be an insertion ; but it is certainly in the 
manner of Tacitus to add such an alterna- 
tive clause answering to * initiis Tiberii," 
and ‘aut’ may. be taken as in c. 8, 3: 
though the * iustitium ' is sufficient reason 
by itself for suspension of military activity, 
and is referred to as such in the case of 
the German army (c. 50, 1). 

9. dux... theatralium op»rarum. 
Any persons employed in theatres as 
scene-shifters, stage-carpenters, &c. might 
be called *theatrales operae’; but from 

10 

206 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

tralium operarum, dein gregarius miles, procax lingua et miscere 

coetus histrionali studio doctus. 

is inperitos animos et quaenam 

post Augustum militiae condicio ambigentes inpellere paulatim 
nocturnis conloquiis aut flexo in vesperam die,et dilapsis meli- 
5 oribus deterrimum quemque congregare. | 

17. Postremo promptis iam et aliis seditionis ministris velut con- 
tionabundus interrogabat, cur paucis centurionibus, paucioribus tri- 
bunis in modum servorum oboedirent. quando ausuros exposcere 2 
remedia, nisi novum et nutantem adhuc principem precibus vel 
armis adirent? satis per tot annos ignavia peccatum, quod tricena 3 
aut quadragena stipendia senes et plerique truncato ex vulne- 

ribus corpore tolerent. 

ne dimissis quidem finem esse militiae, 

4. delapsis: text Muretus. 

the mention here of a body organized 
under a *dux,' and from the special ac- 
quirement of Percennius (* miscere coetus 
. doctus ' ) it is generally inferred that 

the ‘ operae here spoken of were the pro- 
fessional ‘claqueurs,’ of whose existence 
there is abundant evidence an Fried- 
lànder, ii. 430; Marqu uardt, iii. - 542), 
and whose ' fuglemen are styled * duces’ 
(Suet. Ner. 20), or ‘signiferi’ (Id. 26), or 
‘capita factionum ' (Id. Tib. 37). Such 
service in applauding is itself spoken of 
as ‘ theatralis opera" in Plin. Epp. 7. 24, 
7, and is here called ‘histrionale studium ’; 
an expression apparently equivalent to 
the ‘histrionalis favor’ of Dial. 29. 3 
(the only other place in which the adj. is 
found), which certainly means ‘ favor 
erga histriones.’ 

I. miscere, ‘to stir’: cp. ‘ turbidus 
miscendis seditionibus ' H. 4. 68, 7. 

4. dilapsis. The full expression ‘ in 
tentoria dilabi’ is found in H. 3. 10, 7. 

6. iam et. WoOlfflin notes that Taci- 
tus, apparently for euphony, always uses 
this expression for ‘iam etiam’ (G. 15, 3; 
H. 1.22, 3, &c.). It seems therefore un- 
desirable to follow Nipp., who separates 
* promptis' from * ministris" by placing 
a comma at ‘iam.’ These ‘abettors’ 
are distinguished from the ‘duces’ of the 
mutiny, of whom more were afterwards 
added to Percennius : see c. 22, I. 

contionabundus, elsewhere found 
only in Livy, who uses it several times, 
and whose Ui prope - contiona- 
bundus’ (3. 47, 3 ; 2I. 53, 6) conveys the 
same idea as ' velut! here; that of collo- 
quial speech so public and emphatic as 
almost to amount to a set harangue; in 

contrast to the more secret ‘nocturna 
colloquia? of c. 16, 5. 

7. paucis. The legion had sixty cen- 
turions, and six tribunes. See Introd. vii. 
Pp. 123. 

8. ausuros, the regular use of the 
accus. with infin. where the first person 
( audebimus ") would be used in ‘ oratio 

recta’: cp. H. 3. 13, 6, &c. ; Madv. 
$ 405. 

9. nutantem, ‘tottering,’ not yet firm- 
ly seated. 

10. tricena aut quadragena. On the 
regular term of military service, and its 
prolongation by Augustus through the 
institution of * vexillarii, see Introd. vii. 
p.125. Mommsen notes ' De prov. Del- 
matiae re militari" (C. I. L. iii. p. 282), 
that such long periods of service as are 
here mentioned are borne out by inscrip- 
tions earlier than the time of Claudius; 
one of which (2014) records a veteran of 
thirty-three *stipendia, another (2818) 
would apparently, if complete, record one 
of thirty-eight, another (2710) a centurion 
of forty, and Delmatian military tomb- 

stones suggest twenty-five or twenty-six 

years' service as usual. Juvenal (14, 191) 
makes a man, become ‘primipilus’ at 
the age of sixty. 

12. dimissis, used here like ‘ dimit- 
terentur’ in c. 78, 2, and ‘ exauctorari’ in 

'€. 36, 4, of the. fictitious discharge by 

which men were removed from the ranks 
of the legion to the condition of ‘ vexil- 
lari. If the latter were always exempt 
from camp duties (see on c. 36, 4), the 
*eosdem labores' of this passage is an 
exaggeration.: 

4 

A Dora LIBER I. 

CAP. 16, 17. 

207 

sed apud vexillum tendentes alio vocabulo eosdem labores per- 

5 ferre. 

ac si quis tot casus vita superaverit, trahi adhuc diversas 

in terras, ubi per nomen agrorum uligines paludum vel inculta 

e montium accipiant. 

enimvero militiam ipsam gravem, infruc- 

tuosam: denis in diem assibus animam et corpus aestimari: 
hinc vestem arma tentoria, hinc saevitiam centurionum et vaca- 

7 tiones munerum redimi. 

at hercule verbera et vulnera, duram 

hiemem, exercitas aestates, bellum atrox aut ' sterilem pacem 

8 sempiterna. 

nec aliud levamentum quam si certis sub legibus 

militia iniretur, ut singulos denarios mererent, sextus decumus 

I. t | tentes (with space of two letters at the end of the line): retentos B, text Iac. 

Gronovius. 

I. vexillum. This, as distinct from 
‘signum’ (c. 18, 3), is the ensign of 
cavalry (H. 2. 11, 4, &c.), and of any 
detached legionary forces (cp. Introd. vii. 
p. 125). 

tendentes, ‘living in tents,’ as 13. 36, 
5; H. 1. 31, 2, &c. The alternative re- 
storation ‘ retentos’ is supported by c. 36, 
4, &c. 

2. vita superaverit, 
in Caes. B. G. 6. 19, 2. 

adhuc =‘ insuper, as c. 48, 1; 4. 55, 
7; 14. 52, 2, &c.; so once in Plautus, 
and often in post- Augustan writers, 

diversas, ‘distant,’ as 2. 60, 2; 4. 46, 
3, &c. ; after Vergil (Aen. 3, 4, &c.) and 
Ovid (Trist. 4. 2, 69). 

3. per nomen agrorum, &c. On 
this use of the accus. with *per' for a 
simple abl., see Introd. v. $ 62; and on 
the genítives * uligines paludum’ and ‘ in- 
culta montium,’ ibid. § 32. The pecuniary 
gratuities given by Augustus to soldiers 
on discharge (see Mon. Anc. iii. 37, and 
Mommsen ad loc.; Dio, 54. 25, 5; 55. 
23, I), are either rhetorically ignored, or 
must have been discontinued, and an as- 
signment of land substituted. 

4. enimvero, used, like dAAd pny, to 
anticipate an objection, such as, that sol- 
diers might save out of their pay. 

5. denis in diem assibus : see below, 
on ‘singulos denarios." 

6. hinc vestem, &c. "The enactment 
stated (Plut. C. Gracch. 5, 837) to have 
been procured by Gracchus, providing 
the soldier with clothing at the public 
cost, must have become obsolete; while 
the later enactments providing for their 
arms and equipment (Marquardt, ii. 97, 
n. 1) had not yet come into force. From 
the absence of any allusion to food, it 

*outlived?: so 

appears that they received rations of com 
besides their pay, a privilege not granted 
to the praetorians till the time of Nero 
(see 15. 72, 1; Suet. Ner. 10). 

saevitiam centurionum et vaca- 
tiones munerum: both expressions de- 
note the same practice. If centurions 
knew that a soldier had money to spare, 
they laid additional tasks on him to 
make him purchase furlough or exemp- 
tion. A full description of this system, 
and ofthe demoralization resulting from 
it, is given in H. 1. 46. 

7. redimi. This verb can be used, 
in different senses, as well with *saevi- 
tiam" as with ‘ vacationes’; having often 
the meaning of ‘ buying off’ what is un- 
pleasant, as well as of * buying' what is 
desirable. It would not however be used 
with equal propriety of the stoppages for 
necessaries, such as ciothes, &c. ; so that 
for these the sense of the simple verb 
*emi' appears to be supplied from its 
compound, as * petivere' from the follow- 
ing * repetivere' in I5. 11, 2. 

hercule. This points the contrast 
between scanty pay and abundant hard- 
ships. : 

8. exercitas, ‘spent in toil’: cp. * aes-- 

tatem inquietam exercitamque' Pl. Epp. 
7.2, 2. So ‘exercita militia' c. 35, 2. 
9. certis . . . legibus, ‘ fixed condi- 
tions,' as opposed to the illusory rules by 
which their discharge was now delayed. 
IO. singulos denarios. - Pliny, in his 
account (N. H. 33. 3, 13, 45) of the low- 
ering of the copper standard in the Han- 
nibalic war, whereby the *as' became 
only ds of the * denarius,' adds‘ in militari 
tamen stipendio semper denarius pro de- 
cem assibus datus;' which may be ex- 
plained to mean that the soldiers received 

208 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 767. 

stipendii annus finem adferret, ne ultra sub vexillis tenerentur, 

sed isdem in castris praemium pecunia solveretur. 

an praetorias 8 

cohortes, quae binos denarios acceperint, quae post sedecim 

annos penatibus suis reddantur, plus periculorum suscipere? non 10 

5 obtrectari a se urbanas excubias: sibi tamen apud horridas gentes 

Io 

e contuberniis hostem aspici. 

18. Adstrepebat vulgus, diversis incitamentis, hi verberum 
notas, illi canitiem, plurimi detrita tegmina et nudum corpus 

exprobrantes. 

postremo eo furoris venere, ut tres legiones mis- 2 

cere in unam agitaverint. depulsi aemulatione, quia suae quisque 8 
legioni eum honorem quaerebant, alio vertunt atque una tres 
aquilas et signa cohortium locant; simul congerunt caespites, 4 

3. accepit (for accepit) : text margin and B, acciperent Faern. 

the same fraction of the *denarius' as 
before. At that time their pay is reck- 
oned by Polybius (6. 39, 12) at two obols 
or } of the ‘ denarius,' = 53 ofthe reduced 
“asses.” It would appear that subse- 
quently, when the pay was nominally 
doubled by Julius Caesar (Suet. Jul. 26), 
it was really raised, not to 10$, but only 
to 10 ‘ asses,’ and that the account given 
by Pliny is so far untrue. But they now 
demand, not merely this extra fraction, 
but the full * denarius,' alleging that tke 
praetorians, whose pay was, by regula- 
tion, only the double of theirs (Dio, 53. 
I, 5), received actually two full * denarii,’ 
— 32 * asses. For further information, see 
Marquardt, ii. 95, foll.. Mr. Purser in D. 
of Ant. s.v. ‘exercitus,’ p. 809. It has 
been thought that we have here the ex- 
agyeration of the speaker, and that the 
pay of the praetorians cannot really have 
been so much greater. This grievance 
is certainly throughout less prominent 
than that of the delayed discharge (see 
C. 19, 4, &c.), and the concessions offered 
even in the extreme crisis (c. 36, 4) con- 
tain no allusion to it. 

sextus decumus: the limit of the 
earlier regulation of Augustus (Dio, 54. 
25, 6). 

2. isdem .in castris, i.e. at the time 
and place of their discharge. This is 
opposed to *ultra...tenerentur,' as * pe- 
cunia ' is to the assignations of land. 

3. &eceperint. The tense refers back 
to the time (727, B.C. 27) when double 
pay was assigned to the practorians (Dio, 
53. 11, 5). ' Acciperent ' would not answer 
well to ‘ reddantur." 

post sedecim annos. Instances of 
longer service among praetorians are 
found, but may probably have been vo- 
luntary. An inscription (Henzen 6846) 
mentions one of thirty years' service. 

5. obtrectari. This verb has an ac- 
cus. of the thing in Liv. 4:. 37, 6. Here 
it is ironical. *We do not speak dis- 
respectfully of a sentinel's watch in Rome; 
but our quarters are among savage races, 
with the enemy in sight On the dative 
* sibi,' see Introd. v. $ 18. 

7. Adstrepebat, ‘were chiming in.’ 
The word is post-Augustan, and rare 
except in Tacitus, who often uses it, 
repeating this expression, 11. 17, 5; 12. 
34 4; H. 2. go, 72. ‘Incitamentum’ is 
also rare except in Tacitus: see Gudeman, 
Dial. Introduction, xlvi. 

9. exprobrantes, ‘showing indignant- 
ly^ Cp. the description in c. 35, I. 

eo furoris.  Nipp. points out that 
the object of confusing the legions might 
be to make their cqmparative guilt indis- . 
tinguishable. The atrocity of the act 
would consist in its being a violation not 
merely of ‘esprit de corps,’ but of the 
* cultus" of the emperor and the eagles, 
of which each legion .was a separate 
centre: see Cc. 39, 7; 4. 2, 4, &c. For 
the use of the perf. subj. ‘agitaverint,’ 
see on c. 8o, 4. 

II. eum honorem. The distinction, 
though not expressly mentioned, must be 
supposed to be that of giving its name to 
the combined body. 

I2. signa cohortium. Vegetius (2, 13) 
states that in his time the legionary 
cohorts had their distinctive ensigns 

are m Lm mm 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. CAP. 175-19. 209 

5b exstruunt tribunal, quo magis conspicua sedes foret. prope- 
rantibus Blaesus advenit, increpabatque ac retinebat singulos, 
clamitans *mea potius caede imbuite manus: leviore flagitio 
6 legatum interficietis quam ab imperatore desciscitis. aut inco- 

lumis fidem legionum retinebo, aut iugulatus paenitentiam ad- : 

celerabo.’ 
19. Aggerabatur nihilo minus caespes iamque pectori usque 
adcreverat, cum tandem pervicacia victi inceptum omisere. 
2 Blaesus multa dicendi arte non per seditionem et turbas desi- 
deria militum ad Caesarem ferenda ait, neque veteres ab im- 

peratoribus priscis neque ipsos a divo Augusto tam nova peti- 
visse; et parum in tempore incipientes principis curas onerari. 
3si tamen tenderent in pace temptare quae ne civilium quidem 
bellorum victores expostulaverint, cur contra morem obsequii, 
contra fas disciplinae vim meditentur? decernerent legatos seque 
7. aggerebatur : text Walther. eiusque: text margin and B, eius usque Bezzen- 
berger, 
(‘dracones’); but it is generally held /? Aggerabatur. This correction is 
that at this date the cohoit can only be supported by c. 61, 3, &c., and by the 
shown to be distinguished by the ‘signa’ fact that the MS. text should have been 
of its three maniples (see c. 34, 4). written * adgerebatur,' in consistency with 
The passage in Caesar B. G. 2. 25, 1 such places as 2. 57, 3, and with the 
(*quartae cohortis . . . signifero inter- orthography of similar words, as here 
fecto, signo amisso"), which has been ‘adcelerabo’ and * adcreverat.' 
thought to show that special ensigns pectori...adcreverat. Sucha dative 
of cohorts must have always existed, can is used with ‘advolutus’ (c. 23, 2), with 
be otherwise explained : see Domaszewski ‘adrepete’ (c. 74, 2; 3. 50, 5), &c.: cp. 
* Fahnen im Rómischen Heere,' p. 23. * adpulsas litori (H. 4. 84, 4, from Verg. 
I. exstruunt tribunal. Such a  Aen.T7, 39): see Introd. v. $ 21. 
structure is called * suggestus ' in c. 44, 4, 9. mult& dicendi arte, an abl. of 
and, besides giving dignity to the place quality: see Introd. v. § 29. 
where the eagles and standards were col- . desideria, used of requests or petitions, 
lected, would serve as a platform for the as of soldiers (c. 26, 4; Suet. Aug. 17), 
speakers. and of provinces (Plin. Pan. 79). 
properantibus. Such a case of the I2. parum in tempore... onerari, 

participle is found with *advenit' H. 4. ‘it was a most inopportune aggravation.’ 
62, 3; Liv. 9. 5, 11, and is probably here For this use of ‘in tempore’ ( = év xatpq) 
a dative like * pectori adcreverat' c. 19, 1 cp. 3. 41, 3; and for that of ‘ onerari,’ 
(Introd. v. $ 21), but might also be taken c. 69, 7; 16. 30, 4; H. 2. 52, 3; 
as abl. abs. (ibid. § 31 c). 64, 3, &c. 

3. leviore flagitio. Nipp. notes here I4. cur... meditentur. Ernesti's 
the condensation of expression by which correction * meditarentur' has been re- 
a modal ablative contains the predicate jected by all modern editors. In cases 
of a sentence, and is equivalent to ‘levius where either the subjunct. pres. or imperf. 
flagitium erit, si, &c.: other such in- might be used, they are sometimes inter- 
stances are * minore discrimine sumi prin- changed (cp. H. 4. 81, 4, and other in- 
cipem quam quaeri' (H. 1. 56, 5), and stances here given by Nipp.); besides 
* maiore animo tolerari adversa quam re- which Mr. Frost notes special reasons 
linqui’ (H. 2. 46, 4), and the similar here for the use of the present; as ‘si... 
* minore detrimento , . . vinci’ Sall. Jug.  tenderent? puts a supposition, while 
54, 5. *cur... meditentur' implies a fact. 

VOL. I. - P 

v 
[911 

I e nae en m e me M RA os 

210 

coram mandata darent. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 767. 

adclamavere ut filius Blacsi tribunus 4 

legatione ea fungeretur peteretque militibus missionem ab se- 

decim annis: cetera mandaturos, ubi prima provenissent. 

pro- 

fecto iuvene modicum otium: sed superbire miles, quod filius 
5 legati orator publicae causae satis ostenderet necessitate expressa 
quae per modestiam non obtinuissent. 

20. Interea manipuli ante coeptam seditionem Nauportum 
missi ob itinera et pontes et alios usus, postquam turbatum in 
castris accepere, vexila convellunt direptisque proximis vicis 
10 ipsoque Nauporto, quod municipii instar erat, retinentis cen- 
turiones inrisu et contumeliis, postremo verberibus insectantur, 
praecipua in Aufidienum Rufum praefectum castrorum ira, quem 
dereptum vehiculo sarcinis gravant aguntque primo in agmine, 

9. accipere (corr. accepere). 

I. fllius Blaesi, probably the same 
who served afterwards under his father 
in Africa (3. 74, 2), and one of the two 
whose deaths are mentioned in 6. 40, 3. 

2. ab sedecim, ‘after sixteen years.’ 
The same expression is used c. 26, 2; 
cp. ‘a summa spe’ 6. 50, 8; ‘ab hac 
contione? Liv. 24. 22, 6, &c. 

3. provenissent. The use of this 
word in the sense of ‘to prosper’ (as 
4. 12, 3; 14. 25, 2, &c.) is frequent in 
‘Tacitus, and almost peculiar to him. 

4. filius... orator .. . ostenderet. 
On this concise construction, see Introd. v. 
§ 55b. 2. 

5. expressa, ‘extorted’: so c. 39, 3; 
78, 3; and often in Livy. 

6. obtinuissent, potential subjunc- 
tive: see Introd. v. $ 51. 

-. Nauportum. The district of this 
town bordered on that of Tergeste 
(Trieste), Vell. 2. 110, 4, at the point where 
the land transport from Aquileia is suc- 
cceded by a navigable river, the Keprópas 
of Strab. 4. 6, 10, 207, falling into the 
Save. ]t is identified with Ober-Laibach 
in Carniola: see C. I. L. iii. p. 483. It 
ix described below as of the size and 
character of a municipal town (cp. ‘in 
modum municipii exstructus locus’ H. 1. 
67, 4: Id. 4. 22, 1), but its importance 
was diminished by the colony ten miles 
below it at Emona (Laibach): see Pl. N. 
H. 3. 24, 28, 147, C. I. L. iii. p. 488. 

8. ob itinera. The employment of 
detachments (* vexilla ') of the legions in 
road-making is attested by nuinerous in- 
scriptions: as an instance belonging to 
this date and this part of the empire may 

^. 

be noted the five roads leading from 
Salonae laid down by P. Dolabella, 
legatus of Tiberius A. D. 14-19 (Momm- 
sen on C. Ll.iii. 3000). For others, 
see Marquardt ii. 569, D. of Ant. i. 811. 

I2. Aufidienum. The termination of 
this gentile name is noted as Umbrian. 

praefectum castrorum. These offi- 
cers are frequently mentioned from the 
time of Augustus, and seem usually to 
have been promoted from the rank of 
centurion (cp. I3. 9, 3, with 39, 2), as a 
reward of long service (Veget. 2, 10). 
Even in a camp containing several 
legions, one praefect only is usually found 
(e.g. c. 23, 4; 32, 60). While thus not 
necessarily connected with any particular 
legion, he has disciplinary power, though 
not that of life and death (see c. 38, 2), 
and appears to command a legion in the 
absence of its ‘legatus’ (14. 37, 6; H. 2. 
29, 3), and in Egypt (Jos. B. J. 6. 4, 3), 
where there were no *legati! After 
Domitian ordained that every legion 
should have a separate camp (Suet. 
Dom. 7), the *praefectus castrorum le- 
gionis’ becomes in the second century 
* praefectus legionis' (an abbreviation 
found once or twice at earlier dates), 
and ultimately takes the place of the 
*legatus legionis. See Wilmanns in 
Eph. Epig. i. 81-105, Marquardt ii. 
458, D. of Ant. i. 798. 

I3. vehieulo. From a comparison of 
* corpori derepta ' (13. 57, 7), this would 
appear to be a dative. Otherwise the 
verb more often takes an ablative. Both 
constructions are poetical. 

4. clamitantes. 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 19-22. 

2II 

per ludibrium rogitantes an tam immensa onera, tam longa itinera 

2 libenter ferret. 

quippe Rufus diu manipularis, dein centurio; 

mox castris praefectus, antiquam duramque militiam revocabat, 
vetus operis ac laboris et eo inmitior, quia toleraverat. 
21. Horum adventu redintegratur seditio, et vagi circumiecta 

2 populabantur. 

Blaesus paucos, maxime praeda onustos, ad ter- 

rorem ceterorum adfici verberibus, claudi carcere iubet; nam 
etiam tum legato a centurionibus et optimo quoque manipularium 
3 parebatur. illi obniti trahentibus, prensare circumstantium genua, 

ciere modo 
manipularis 

obtestantur, 

5 diam metum et iras permoverent. 

nomina singulorum, modo centuriam quisque cuius 
erat, cohortem, legionem, eadem omnibus inminere 

simul probra in legatum cumulant, caelum ac deos 
nihil reliqui faciunt quominus invidiam misericor- 

adcurritur ab universis, et 

carcere effracto solvunt vincula desertoresque ac rerum capitalium 

damnatos sibi iam miscent. 

22. Flagrantior inde vis, plures seditioni duces. et Vibulenus 

4. intus: invictus margin, vetus L, intentus Heins. 

4. vetus operis. This emendation 
is generaly adopted; such a genitive 
with ‘vetus’ being in accordance with 
the usage of Tacitus (as in 6. 12, 2; 44, 
r, &c.), and suited to ‘quia toleraverat.’ 
The alternative ‘intentus’ has in its 
favour the fact of similar accidental 
omissions of a svllable in the MS. (as 
‘reditus’ for ‘rediturus’ 2. 63, 5); and 
though no genitive with this word is 
found, such a construction would be 
analogous to * ferox scelerum" (4. 12, 3), 
or other genitives of relation. 

7. carcere. Such a place of custody 
formed part of all ‘castra stativa’: cp. 
* militari custodia’ 3. 22, 5; ‘longo 
castrorum in carcere, mansit’ Juv. 6, £60. 

8. etiam tum. This period is dis- 
tinguished from the complete break-down 
of discipline described in c. 23. 

10. centuriam...cuius manipularis 
erat, ‘the century in whose ranks he 
served. * Manipularis' is related no less 
to ‘centuria’ than to * manipulus, being 
merely a term for the rank and file of a 
legion as distinct from its officers: cp. 
* manipularis, dein centurio (c. 20, 2). 

I2. probra in legatum cumulant. 
This construction *cumulare aliquid in 
aliquem ' is almost confined to Tacitus: 
Cp. I3. 2, 5; 14. 53, 2. Curtius has 
* cumulare... res in unum diem.’ 

I3. nihil reliqui faciunt, ‘leave 
nothing undone. The phrase is used in 
this sense in Caes. B. G. 2. 26, 5; Sall. 
Cat. 11, 7 ; and Atticus (ap. Nep. 21,5) ; 
as also ‘nihil reliquum fieri" Sall. Jug. 
76, 4 ; the expression being in all places 

negative, On the genitive, see Introd. v. 
§ 32f. 
quominus, here with the force of 

*quin, as often in Tacitus (5. 5, 2; 13. 
14; 3; 14. 39, 2, &c.), but, according to 
Dráger, in no other author. Conversely, 
* quin' 2 * quominus ' in I4. 29, I. 

14. permoverent, ‘stir to their depths.’ 
In the use of this word with an accus. of 
the feeling excited (as 3. 23, 1 ; 16. 32, 
2) Tacitus is preceded only by Quintilian 
(12. 10, 36). The imperfect is adapted 
to the really past force of the historic 
present: see Introd. v. $ 48. 

16. iam, perhaps too forcible to be 
taken (as by Mr. Frost) in the sense of 
#5n=‘from this point, as ‘cetera iam 
fabulosa! (G. 46, 5). Walther would 
take it to mean 57 (‘even associate with 
themselves’), and considers that in H. 1. 
I5, 8, ‘etiam’ has similarly the force of 
kai 57. 

17. plures seditioni duces. These 
are distinguished from the * ministri ' pre- 
viously abetting Percennius (c. 17, 1). 
On the dative, see Introd. v. $ 19. 

P2 

212 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 67. 

quidam gregarius miles, ante tribunal Blaesi adlevatus circum- 
stantium umeris, apud turbatos et quid pararet intentos 'vos 
quidem' inquit * his innocentibus et miserrimis lucem et spiritum 
reddidistis: sed quis fratri meo vitam, quis fratrem mihi reddit? 

5quem missum ad vos a Germanico exercitu de communibus 
commodis nocte proxima iugulavit per gladiatores suos, quos in 
exitium miliÀtum habet atque armat. responde, Blaese, ubi 2 
cadaver abieceris: ne hostes quidem sepultura invident. cum 3 
osculis, cum lacrimis dolorem meum implevero, me quoque 

10 trucidari iube, dum interfectos nullum ob scelus, sed quia utilitati 
legionum consulebamus, hi sepeliant.' 

23. Incendebat haec fletu et pectus atque os manibus ver- 
berans. mox disiectis quorum per umeros sustinebatur, praeceps 2 
et singulorum pedibus advolutus tantum consternationis invi- 

15 diaeque concivit, ut pars militum gladiatores qui e servitio Blaesi 
erant, pars ceteram eiusdem familiam vincirent, alii ad quae- 
rendum corpus effunderentur. ac ni propere neque corpus ullum 3 
reperiri, et servos adhibitis cruciatibus abnuere caedem, neque 
illi fuisse umquam fratrem pernotuisset, haud multum ab exitio 

8. ablegeris: text margin. 

2. quid pararet intentos, ‘watching 
what he would do,’ an unprecedented 
construction, due to the desire of brevity ; 
* intentos for ‘ intente observantes." 

5. & Germanico exercitu, perhaps 
a touch thrown in by Tacitus or his 
authority. The revolt of the German 
army could not have been then known. 

6. gladiatores. Provincial governors 
kept troops of gladiators, to court popu- 
larity by shows (see Friedl. ii. p. 327), 
till the practice was forbidden by Nero 
(13. 31, 4). The subject of ‘iugulavit’ is 
supplied from the sense, as in c. 52, 1; 
2. 70, 2, &c. 

7". ubi... &bieceris; equivalent to 
* ubi abiectum reliqueris' : cp. *abiecti in 
via cadaveris ' Suet. Ner. 48; *eoloco... 
abiecit ' Id. Galb. 20. 

8. sepultura invident. The com- 
piete form of this construction would 
have also a dative of the person. It 
is noticed by Quint. (9. 3, 1) among the 
conceits of his day, * paene iam, quidquid 
loquimur, figura est, ut hac re invidere, 
non, ut omnes veteres et Cicero praecipue, 
huic rei? It is especially common in the 
Epistles of Pliny (as 2. 10, 2, &c.), but is 

11, ii: hi Mur. and L. 

12. incedebat: text R. 

found earlier, as ‘non inviderunt laude 
sua mulieribus? (Liv. 2. 40, 11), and 
' invidet igne rogi miseris" (Luc. 7, 798). 
Walther explains it as a Latin equivalent 
of the Greek genit. with q6ovetv, also 
directly imitated in Latin, as ‘neque ille 
sepositi ciceris, nec longae invidit avenae" 
(Hor. Sat. 2. 6, 84). 

12. Incendebat haeo, ‘he was giving 
these words more power to kindle;' cp. 
* sermones audita mors .. . incendit' (2.82, 
4) and ‘haec accendebat’ (c. 69, 7): 
derived from such Vergilian metaphors 
as ' pudor incendit vires’ (Aen. 5, 455), 
and * incendentem luctus’ (9, 500). 

I4. pedibus advolutus. This con- 
struction here, and in c. 32, 4, is analo- 
gous to that of ‘ pectori adcreverat' c. 19, 
I. Elsewhere Tacitus uses the accusa- 
tive with this verb, as c. 13, 7, &c. 

I9. pernotuisset. Besides Tacitus (cp. 
12. 67, 15; 13. 25, 2; 14. 8, 2) Quintil- 
ian alone appears to use this word. A 
similar anecdote to this, though without 
the additional touch, that no such bro- 
ther had existed, occurs in early Roman 
history (Liv. 3. 13; 24). Bacon (De- 
Augm. vi. 4, sub fin.), confounding Vi- 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. CAP. 22-24. 213 

4legati aberant. tribunos tamen ac praefectum castrorum extru- 
sere, sarcinae fugientium direptae, et centurio Lucilius interficitur, 
cui militaribus facetiis vocabulum * cedo alteram ' indiderant, quia 
fracta vite in tergo militis alteram clara voce ac rursus aliam 

5 poscebat. ceteros latebrae texere, uno retento Clemente Iulio, 
qui perferendis militum mandatis habebatur idoneus ob promp- 

6 tum ingenium. quin ipsae inter se legiones octava et quinta 
decuma ferrum parabant, dum centurionem cognomento Sirpicum 
illa morti deposcit, quintadecumani tuentur, ni miles nonanus 
preces et adversum aspernantis minas interiecisset. 

24. Haec audita quamquam abstrusum et tristissima quaeque 
maxime occultantem Tiberium perpulere ut Drusum filium cum 
primoribus civitatis duabusque praetoriis cohortibus mitteret, 

4. facta uitae: text B. 

bulenus with Percennius, illustrates from 4; 3. 19, 3; 6. 7, 6, &c. See Drager, 

en 

this story some striking remarks on the 
force of ‘ Actio Theatralis.’ 

I. aberant. On this indicative, as on 
*ferrum parabant . . . ni’ below, see 
Introd. v. $ 5o b. The latter passage 
gives the usual order of the clauses, the 
priority of the dependent clause being 
noted elsewhere only in H. 4. 18, r. 

3. vocabulum, often used for a proper 
name, as c. 8, 4, &c. That it here means 
a nickname is indicated by ‘militaribus 
facetiis, as in c. 41, 3, by ‘militari 
vocabulo. Another military ‘sobriquet’ 
(‘manu ad ferrum") is called ‘signum’ 
by Vopiscus (Aurel. 6, 2). 

4. vite. The vine-rod is the * insigne' 
of the centurion (cp. *vitem posce’ Juv. 14, 
193), and was specially reserved for the 
punishment of the citizen soldier. Thus 
Scipio at Numantia, according to Livy 
(Epit. 57), ‘quem militem extra ordinem 
deprehendit, si Romanus esset, vitibus, 
si extraneus, fustibus cecidit, Hence 
Pliny (N. H. 14. 1, 3, 19) says of it 
‘etiam in delictis poenam ipsam honorat." 

6. perferendis . . . mandatis ... 
idoneus. ‘Idoneus’ takes a gerundive 
dative (cp. Quint. 2. 10, 6), as many other 
words in post-Augustan Latin. Dr. in- 
stances ‘callidus,’ *opportunus, *inha- 
bilis," and ‘aptus.’ ‘ Perferre’ has often 
in Tacitus the sense of ‘delivering a 
message,’ as c. 26, 15 57, 33 3.10, 2; 
I4. 7, I. 

8. dum. This conjunction is constant- 
ly thus used by Tacitus where not only a 
temporal but a causal connexion is indi- 
cated: cp. c. 50, I; 54, 3; 2. 8, 3; 88, 

Synt. and Stil, $ 168, and a full list of 
instances in Gerber and Greef. Lex. s. v. 
cognomento Sirpicum. 'Cognomen- 
tum’ usually denotes a real name (cp. 
2. 6, 53 9, 2; 60, 3, &c.), and Nipp. 
appears rightly so to take the word here, 
though no such name as ‘Sirpicus’ is 
otherwise known: a nickname would prob- 
ably have been explained, as ‘cedo 
alteram ' above, or ‘ Caligula,’ c. 41, 3. 

9. morti deposcit, ‘demands for 
death,’ i.e. ‘with a view to his death.’ 
On this dative of work contemplated, 
see Introd. v. $ 32 c; also note on c. 51, 
4, and Madv, § 249. 

II. quamquam, with adj. or part.= 
kainep, often in Tacitus, rarely in Cic., 
Sall., or Livy. 

abstrusum, ‘ reserved,’ apparently only 
here used of persons. Similar uses of 
*tectus, ‘occultus,’ &c. are frequent in 
Tacitus, but less peculiar to him. 

I3. primoribus civitatis, used in 
3. 65, 2, in contradistinction to the mass 
even of consulars, and probably implying 
family nobility as well as personal rank. 
One of those now sent is mentioned by 
name (c. 27, 1), Cn. Lentulus. 

praetoriis cohortibus. See note on 
2. 16, 5. It is shown by gravestones 
that a part of this force was once stationed 
at Aquileia ; but Patsch (Archaeol. Epig. 
Mittheil. xiv. 102-107) is probably rignt 
in connecting them with the temporary 
residence of Augustus and others of his 
family there in B.C, 12-10: see Suet. 
Aug. 20, Tib. 7. 

214 

nullis satis certis mandatis, ex re consulturum. 
delecto milite supra solitum firmatae. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

et cohortes 
additur magna pars 

praetoriani equitis et robora Germanorum, qui tum custodes 
imperatori aderant; simul praetorii praefectus Aelius Seianus, 
5 collega Straboni patri suo datus, magna apud Tiberium auctori- 
tate, rector iuveni et ceteris periculorum praemiorumque osten- 

tator. 

Druso propinquanti quasi per officium obviae fuere le- 

giones, non laetae, ut adsolet, neque insignibus fulgentes, sed 
inluvie deformi et vultu, quamquam maestitiam imitarentur, con- 

tumaciae propiores. 

2 
3 

4 

25. Postquam vallum introiit, portas stationibus firmant, globos . 

II. introit: text L (cp. 15. 64, 4; iniit c. 34, 2, &c.). 

I. nullis satis certis mandatis. 
Nipp. notes that Tacitus often tolerates 
three * homoeoteleuta,' as in c. 5, 5 (* pro- 
peris matris litteris), and in one place 
five, ‘ignis, patulis magis urbis locis' 
(15.740, 2). 

ex re consulturum, ‘to decide ac- 
cording to circumstances:' so ‘ex me- 
moria (2. 63, 1); ‘ex delicto! (3. 27, 2) ; 
and commonly * ex sententia," &c. 

2. delecto, i. e. chosen from the other 
cohorts. 

3. praetoriani equitis. On this force, 
see Introd. vii. p. 126. 

Germanorum. A body of Batavian 
horsemen had been attached to the per- 
son of Augustus (Dio, 55. 24, 7). These 
and any other Germans of the bodyguard 
had been dismissed after the defeat of 
Varus (Suet. Aug. 49), but had evidently 

been already restored. A similar force is 

mentioned under Gaius (Suet. Cal. 43), 
and Nero (13. 18, 4 ; 15. 58, 2), but their 
dismissal by Galba (Suet. Galb. 12) was 
probably final, as Tacitus speaks of them 
in the past. They were armed slaves 
rather than soldiers, and were divided 
not into ‘turmae’ or *centuriae,' but as 
a ‘collegium’ into ‘decuriae.’ See 
Marquardt, Staatsv. ii. 487, D. of Ant. 
i. 795. Afterwards, the *equites singu- 
lares? appear to take their place (Staatsr. 
ii. 808, Marquardt, ii. 488). 

4. Beianus. Here first mentioned. 
His early history is given in 4.1. His 
father has been mentioned (c. 7, 3). 

5. collega. Maecenas is represented 
(Dio, 52. 24, 1) as advising Augustus, as 
a measure of safety, to share the ‘ praefec- 
tura praetorii ' between two; and this 
was generally the rule, though with many 

exceptions, such as the sole command 
later of Seianus, of Macro, of Burrus 
(12. 42, 2), Arrius Varus (H. 4. 2, 1), &c. 
(see Staatsr. ii. 866). All other *prae- 
fecturae' were administered by a single 
praefect. 

6. reotor iuveni. 
Introd. v. $ 19. 

ceteris periculorum praemiorum- 
que ostentator, ‘to hold before the 
rest their perils and rewards.’ * Ceteri' 
must apparently refer only to the troops 
sent from Rome, as the legions do not 
appear in view till the next sentence. The 
praetorians, whose privileges were the eye- 
sore of the legions (c. 17, 9), were not 
likely to make common cause with them, 
but might flinch from confronting them. 
Hence their own commanding officer, 
whose influence with the princeps was 
a guarantee that he,could make good his 
words, is specially charged to warn them 
how much they had to lose or gain by 

On the dative, see 

their behaviour. 

7. per officium, ‘by way of respect:' | 

cp. 6. 50, 4; 12. 56, 4, &c., and, for the 
use of ‘ per,’ Introd. v. $ 62. 

8. neque insignibus fulgentes, ‘nor 
glittering with decorations,’ i.e. with the 
‘dona militaria’ (cp. c. 44, 7 ; 3. 21, 3, 
&c.), forming the full dress of the Roman 
soldier. The eagles and standards might 
be more or less adorned, to show joy (15. 
29, 4) or mourning (3. 2, 2). 

II. portas stationibus firmant, &c. 
These precautions appear intended to bar 
the entrance of the force with Drusus, 
the main body of which appears to have 
remained outside (see c. 30, 1), though 
some escort entered with him (cp. ‘ut 
quis praetorianorum,’ &c., c. 27,1). As 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 24-26. 

215 

armatorum certis castrorum locis opperiri iubent: ceteri tribunal 

2 ingenti agmine circumveniunt. 
poscens. 

stabat Drusus silentium manu 

illt quotiens oculos ad multitudinem rettulerant, vocibus 

truculentis strepere, rursum viso Caesare trepidare; murmur in- 
certum, atrox clamor et repente quies; diversis animorum motibus 
3 pavebant terrebantque. tandem interrupto tumultu litteras patris 
recitat, in quis perscriptum erat, praecipuam ipsi fortissimarum 

legionum curam, quibuscum plurima bella toleravisset ; 

ubi 

primum a luctu requiesset animus, acturum apud patres de pos- 
tulatis eorum ; misisse interim filium, ut sine cunctatione con- 
cederet quae statim tribui possent ; cetera senatui servanda, quem 
neque gratiae neque severitatis expertem haberi par esset. 

26. Responsum est a contione, mandata Clementi centurioni 

2 quae perferret. 

is orditur de missione a sedecim annis, de 

praemiis finitae militiae, ut denarius diurnum stipendium foret, 

ne veterani sub vexillo haberentur, 
3 senatus et patris obtenderet, clamore turbatur. 

ad ea Drusus cum arbitrium 
cur venisset 

neque augendis militum stipendiis neque adlevandis laboribus, 
denique nulla bene faciendi licentia? at hercule verbera et necem 

3. sedtulerant: text D. 

the winter camp of one or more of the 
legions was chosen by Lentulus as a 

refuge, and had been previously occupied 

by Drusus and his retinue (cp. ‘repe- 
tentem" c. 27, 2); it is inferred that it was 
near, and may have formed the night 
quarters of the praetorians, who appear 
to be now watching the issue close out- 
side the gates of the summer camp (cp. 
* adcursu multitudinis' c. 27, 3). 

2. stabat. Nipp. notes the verb here, 
as often, placed first to give liveliness 
to the description : : cp. ‘stabant’ (c. 44, 
4), *incedebat' (c. 40, 4), &c.; and the 
present, * sternuntur,' &c. c. 70, 4. 

4. murmur incertum, &c., ‘there 
were confused utterances, fierce cries, and 
sudden lulls; they were terrified or terrible 
as. their emotions changed.’ * Pavere' 
np ‘terrere’ stand thus in contrast in 

€. 29, 3, and answer here to the *quies' 
and ‘clamor’ above. In the passage 
of Silius (10, 396), which Tacitus seems 
to have in mind, * clamor saepe repens 
et saepe silentia fixis in tellurem oculis. 
the cries and. silence are both marks of 
fear. 

.8. plurima bella, This refers to the 

earlier war from 742 to 745, B. C. 12-9, 
and to the great rebellion of 759-762, 
A.D. 6-9. See Introd. viii. pp. 133, 135. 

I1. quem neque, &c., ‘which should 
not be treated as having no right to 
concede or to resist." The opposition 
between ' severitas' and ' largitio ' in c. 36, 
3, seems to show. that this is its meaning 
here in opposition to ‘gratia.’ Nipp. 
takes it as alluding to the power to punish 
(cp. c. 46, 2, &c.). Here, however, the 
only question reserved by Drusus is 
whether certain concessions should be 
made or not (c. 26, 5). The retort 
below (c. 26, 6), that if the senate be 
consulted on military rewards it should 

Ot 

ome 
9 

also be consulted : on punishments, is | 

made by the soldiers themselves, to show 
that they saw through the pretext. 

16. arbitrium ... obtenderet, ‘ was 
pleading the authority ;' i.e. that they 
must decide. ‘Obtendere’ is often thus 
used by Tacitus, as also by Quint. and 
Pl, Min., in speaking of a plea or pretext, 
e.g. 3. 17, 2; 35, 2, &c. : cp. the subst. 
* obtentui' (c. 1o, 1, &c.). 

18. augendis. On this gerundive dative, 
see Introd. v. § 22 b. 

IO 

216 

cunctis permitti. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. UsC. 767. 

Tiberium olim nomine Augusti desideria le- 4 

gionum frustrari solitum : easdem artes Drusum rettulisse. num- 5 
quamne ad se nisi filios familiarum venturos? novum id plane 
quod imperator sola militis commoda ad senatum reiciat. eundem 
5 ergo senatum consulendum, quotiens supplicia aut proelia indi- 
cantur : an praemia sub dominis, poenas sine arbitro esse? 

27. Postremo deserunt tribunal, ut quis praetorianorum mili- 
tum amicorumve Caesaris occurreret, manus intentantes, causam 
discordiae et initium armorum, maxime infensi Cn. Lentulo, 
quod is ante alios aetate et gloria belli firmare Drusum crede- 

batur et illa militiae flagitia primus aspernari. 

nec multo post 

3. nisi ad se: text L, nisi [ad se] Ritt. 

I. cunctis, a rhetorical exaggeration. 
Even the centurion had his vine-rod (see 
c. 23, 4) ; but capital punishment could 
be inflicted on a soldier, in Caesarian 
provinces, by no lower officer than the 
‘legatus Augusti; in senatorial pro- 
vinces, not even by the proconsul. See 
Dio, 53. 13, 6. : 

2. rettulisse, ‘had repeated’: cp. 4. 
4, 3; also *veterem Valeriae gentis... 

laudem rettulisset" (Cic. Flacc. 1, 1); ' 

* cum aditus consul idem illud responsum 
rettulit" (Liv. 37. 6, 7); ‘nota refert 
meretricis acumina' (Hor. Epp. 1. 17,55). 

numquamne ad se nisi. The gene- 
ral agreement with this transposition (cp. 
* adversum ferri! c. 65, 7) makes it need- 
less to examine Walther's explanation of 
the words as they stand in the MS., as an 
exaggeration put into the mouth of the 
speaker, making the grievance peculiar 
to themselves. 

3. filios familiarum, i. e. persons not 
‘sui iuris.' The incompetence to redress a 
military grievance has no real connexion 
with the disabilities of a ‘ filius-familias ;’ 
which may be illustrated by the account 
of Tiberius after his adoption (Suet. 
Tib. 15), ‘neque donavit neque manu- 
misit, ne hereditatem quidem aut legata 
percepit aliter, quam ut peculio referret ac- 
cepta.’ The word is merely contemptuous, 
and means, ‘Are our rulers never 
themselves to visit us?’ 

novum id plane. Here ‘plane’ (on 
which cp. 3. 34, 4) is ironical, as in Dial. 
26, 32 (Gud.). The main stress islaid upon 
*commoda;' but ‘militis’ is also em- 
phatic in relation to ‘imperator.’ That 

the senate could never interfere with 

tailitary matters. not specially referred to 

it, is plain from 6. 3, 1; and the refer- 
ence to it, as in c. 6, 5, appears to be an 
evasive devolution of responsibility. On 
the practice of Tiberius, see note on 
C. 52, 2. 

6. sub. dominis; this is used in- 
vidiously, ‘under despotism.’ Augustus 
and Tiberius alike repudiate the title of 
‘dominus’ as an insult. See 2. 87, 2; 
Suet. Aug. 53; Tib. 27. 

sine arbitro, ‘wholly uncontrolled,’ 
used of mere intervention, as ‘ Armenii 
sine arbitro relicti sunt’ 15. 17, 5; 
‘mortem sine arbitro permittens’ 16. 
11, 6. 

8. manus intentantes, ‘using threat- 
ening gestures’: cp. 3. 36,1; H. 1. 69, 
3, &c. ; and ‘intenderat manus’ 4. 3, 2. 

causam discordiae. On this appo- 
sition, see Introd. v. $ 12 a, and many 
other instances given by Nipp. here. 

9. Cn. Lentulo. The allusion to his 
age and military reputation appears to 
show that the person intended is Cn. 
Cornelius L. f. Lentulus. who was cos. in 
736, B.C. 18, and had gained triumphal 
distinctions for his victory over the Getae 
or Daci. See the notice of him at his 
death in 778, A.D. 25 (4. 44, 1). He is 
also evidently the person mentioned in 
2. 32, 2; 3. 68, 3 ; 4. 29, I. 

10. ante alios : cp. nobilitate opibusque 
ante alios’ H. 4. 55, 1; ‘muri labore et 
opere ante alios? H. 5. 12, tr. The con- 
struction resembles others (see Introd. v. 
§ 31 b) in which the idea of a participle 
of ‘sum’ is supplied (cp. 2. 43, 4, &c.). 
The use of *ante' (as 13. 54, 5, &c.) and 
*post' (as H. 2. 77, 1) to express su- 
periority and inferiority, is very rare in 
classical Latin: sce Gud. on Dial. 26, 31. 

8 

2 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. CAP. 26-28. 217 

digredientem cum Caesare ac provisu periculi hiberna castra 
repetentem circumsistunt, rogitantes quo pergeret, ad impera- 
torem an ad patres, ut illic quoque commodis legionum adver- 
saretur; simul ingruunt, saxa iaciunt. iamque lapidis ictu 
cruentus et exitii certus adcursu multitudinis quae cum Druso 
advenerat protectus est. 

28. Noctem minacem et in scelus erupturam fors lenivit: 
nam luna claro repente caelo visa languescere. id miles rationis 

I. eum: cum margin and B, eum cum Ritt. 8. clamore pena : text L, claro 

plena Weissenborn and Baiter, clariore plena Salinerius. 

I. digredientem cum Caesare. This 
reading has been generally adopted, and 
is most fully discussed by Joh. Müller 
(Beitráge, sect. 3), Pfitzner (p. 114), and 
Wolfflin (Philol. xxvi. 103). The inter- 
pretation of ‘cum Caesare! as equivalent 
to ‘a Caesare," cannot be justified by such 
phrases as * disceptare cum aliquo,' or by 
general Latin usage. Nor does Tacitus 
seem to mean:that Drusus was also him- 
self intending to retreat to the winter 
camp; for so important a fact would 
hardly have been mentioned thus inci- 
dentally. But it may be that Drusus, 
with such small retinue as he had about 
him, was escorting Lentulus to the gate, 
outside which the main body of his own 
troops were waiting, and close to which 
the scene probably occurred. Thus ‘cum 
Caesare' would mean * prosequente Cae- 
sare,’ as ‘cum custodibus" (Sall. Cat. 46, 
5), *cum Cassio' (Id. Tug. 33, 1). The 
retention of ‘eum,’ with the supposition 
that a prep. (as ‘a’ or * cum?) has dropped 
out after it, is open to the objection that 
this pronoun would usually be omitted by 
Tacitus ; cp. ‘ abeuntem’ (2. 34, 2); ‘ sacri- 
ficantem’ (4. 52. 3), &c.: see Introd. v. § 8. 

provisu. This word, used only in the 
abl., is peculiar to Tacitus, and has gene- 
rally the meaning of ‘forethought.’ Here, 
as in H. 3. 22, 3 ‘ne oculi quidem provisu 
iuvabant,' it has the force of ‘foreseeing’ 
(cp. ‘ providebat’ 4. 41, 3, &c.; *ubi... 
provideri nequeat ' Liv. 44. 35, 12), usually 
expressed by ‘ praevideo.’ 

2. repetentem. See note on c. 25, I. 

5. multitudinis, ‘the main body. 
The words ‘quae cum Druso advenerat ' 
do not express their position at this mo- 
ment, but merely serve to distinguish this 
force from the Pannonian troops. Prob- 
ably, though outside (see c. 30, 1), they 
were close at hand, and might thus be 

able to see the danger of Lentulus, and to 
rescue him by a demonstration, if we sup- 
pose the assault to have been made when 
he was close to the gate, and thus seen to 
be quitting the camp. 

7. Noctem minacem. On such per- 
sonifications, see Introd. v. $ 75. 

8. olaro repente. Most editors adopt 
this emendation. The position of ‘repente,’ 
though hardly natural, would be such as 
often results in Tacitus from an apparent 
desire toimprove the sound ofthe sentence; 
and the eclipse, though itself gradual, may 
have suddenly attracted notice. The read- 
ing ‘claro plena’ supposes a reminiscence 
of Cic. de Rep. 1. 15, 23 ‘quod serena 
nocte... plena luna defecisset.’ 

languescere. This word is nowhere 
else used of an eclipse, but Pliny (N. H. 
27. 13, 10g, 133) uses it of paling colour, 
‘color in luteum languescens.’ This eclipse 
took place Sept. 26, 3 to 7 a.m., and thus 
fixes the chronology of these events. See 
on c. 16, 1. 

rationis ignarus. The scientific ex- 
planation of eclipses was well known to 
educated Romans as early as Lucretius 
(5, 731, &c.) and Cicero (de Divin. 2. 6, 
17), aud, if the story of C. Sulpicius Gallus 
(Liv. 44, 37) be true, even as early as 
B.C. 168 (see also Cic. de Rep., 1. 1.). 
A similar contrast is shown by the ignor- 
ance of the Athenian army, and even of 
Nicias (Thuc. 7. 50; 4), of the scientific 
theory which had been laid down, though 
in the face of much prejudice, by Anaxa- 
goras (Plut. Nicias, c. 23*, and which, 
from the account of Herodotus (1. 74, 3), 
was known even to Thales We may 
notice that even Vergil (G. 2, 475) speaks 
in language adapted to popular supersti- 
tion (* Defectus solis varios lunaeque la- 
bores’); and that this idea of a conflict 
with enchantment, in which the moon was 

LST) 

IO 

218 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 76%. 

ignarus omen praesentium accepit, suis laboribus defectionem 
sideris adsimulans, prospereque cessura qua pergerent, si fulgor 

et claritudo deac redderetur. 

igitur aeris sono, tubarum cornu- 3 

umque concentu strepere ; prout splendidior obscuriorve, laetari 
5 aut maerere ; et postquam ortae nubes offecere visui creditumque 
conditam tenebris, ut sunt mobiles ad superstitionem perculsae 
semel mentes, sibi aeternum laborem portendi, sua facinora 

aversari deos lamentantur. 

utendum inclinatione ea Caesar et 4 

quae casus obtulerat in sapientiam vertenda ratus circumiri 
tentoria iubet ; accitur centurio Clemens et si alii bonis artibus 5 
grati in vulgus. hi vigiliis, stationibus, custodiis portarum se 

I. asuis: ac suis margin, suis Freinsheim. 
cessurum qua Nipp., quae pararent Seyffert. 

uigiliis: ii L, hi Weikert. 

to be aided by the din of metal, though 
deplored as a superstition by Pliny (see 
below), was not only rife in the time of 
Juvenal (Sat. 6. 442), but even, as Lipsius 
notes, was a belief among Christians in 
the time of Maximus Taurinensis(A.D. 450). 

I. suis. Most editors have adopted 
this reading. ‘Ac suis’ is accepted by 
Walther, who considers that ‘ac’ joins 

*adsimulans' to *ignarus'; but we can. 

hardly suppose that l'acitus would have 
put such a clause alter *accepit.  Pfitzner 
(p. 61) conjectures that *asuis' may re- 
present ‘assiduis’ (cp. * tentes c. 17, 4); 
which is supported by * aeternum laborem ' 
below ; but we appear here to require the 
pronoun to show to what * labores! those 
of the moon are compared. 

2. prospereque cessura qua perge- . 

rent. Halm follows Nipp. in reading 
*qua, but appears rightly to think the 
further alteration of *cessura' to ‘ces- 
surum ' needless. The sentence is equiva- 
lent to ‘resque prospere cessuras, ea via 
qua pergerent,’ ‘that the course on which 
they were advancing (that of mutiny) 
would succeed. ‘ Quae,*which is retained 
by Orelli, might be taken as a quasi- 
cognate accusative, analogous to * pergere 
iter, &c., but has no direct parallel. In 
any interpretation, the sense of such a 
participle as * putans' is supplied from 
* adsimulans.' 

3. claritudo : see note on c. 43, 3. 

aeris sono...strepere. Anexplana- 
tion of this practice may be gathered from 
Pliny (N. H. 2. 12, 9, 54) * misera homi- 

2. quae: quo, ad quae, &c. al., 
8. aduersari; text R.- 1I. in 

num mente in defectibus scelera aut 
mortem aliquam siderum pavente... at 
in luna veneficia arguente mortalitate et 
ob id crepitu dissuno auxiliante.' For 
other allusions to it, see Liv. 26. 5, and 
passages referred to in note above. 

4. prout. splendidior obscuriorve. 
If the sky was still clear of cloud (as 
would seem from the next sentence), and 
the mere progress of the eclipse is meant, 
'Tacitus would appear to be describing 
not the real phenomena, but the fancies 
of the soldiers. It is however possible 
that. he may mean to describe something 
of this kind; that their spirits rose after 
the time of greatest obscuration was past, 
but that soon after this the moon became 
permanently hidden by clouds; and that 
even this common phenomenon, coupled 
with the eclipse, worked upon their 
minds. 

II. in vulgus: cp. c. 76,5; Introd. v. 
8 60 b. 

vigiliis, stationibus, custodiis por- 
tarum. The two former are often men- 
tioned together, as c. 32, 6; 11. 18, 3; 
13. 35, 3. ‘Stationes,’ or ‘pickets’ detached 
on guard, would be on duty both by day 
and night, * vigiliae" by night only, and 
the latter may be distinguished from the 
former, by being either (as Ritter thinks) 
the night-patrol charged with the duty of | 
going round the camp, or (as Nipp. thinks) 
the sentinels, as distinct from the pickets. 
* Custodiae portarum" are a class of the 
'stationes': cp. ‘portas stationibus fir- 
mant" (c. 26, 1). 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

6 inserunt, spem offerunt, metum intendunt. 

CAP. 28, 29. 

219 

' quousque filium 

imperatoris obsidebimus? quis certaminum finis?  Percennione 
et Vibuleno sacramentum dicturi sumus?  Percennius. et Vibu- 
lenus stipendia militibus, agros emeritis largientur? denique pro 
7 Neronibus et Drusis imperium populi Romani capessent? quin 
potius, ut novissimi in culpam, ita primi ad paenitentiam sumus? 
tarda sunt quae in commune expostulantur: privatam gratiam 

8,statim mereare, statim recipias. 

commotis per haec mentibus 

et inter se suspectis, tironem a veterano, legionem a legione 
9 dissociant. tum redire paulatim amor obsequii : omittunt portas, 
signa unum in locum principio seditionis congregata suas in sedes 

referunt. 

29. Drusus orto die et vocata contione, quamquam rudis 
dicendi, nobilitate ingenita incusat priora, probat praesentia ; 
negat se terrore et minis vinci: flexos ad modestiam si videat, 
si supplices audiat, scripturum patri ut placatus legionum preces 

2 exciperet. 

r 
17. aponius: 

I. intendunt, often used in the sense 
of *augere, but such meaning, though 
suitable, is probably not thought of here. 
The similar expressions ‘intento mortis 
metu" (c. 39, 4), * intenta pericula’ (3. 48, 
4), and ‘offerunt’ in the corresponding 
clause, suggest that it is here equivalent 
to ‘intentant,’ and a metaphor from 
threatening gestures. 

2. obsidebimus. That Drusus was 
in some sense a prisoner in the camp, 
would appear from their conduct on bis 
entry ('portas stationibus firmant, &c., 
C. 25, 1), and from the exclusion (as has 
been suggested above: see c. 25, 1; 27,3) 
of the main body of his escort. Dio adds, 
perhaps from another version of the stor 
(57. 4, 4), «ai abroy THs vvxTÓs mepiejpov- 
pucav, pn Scapvyy: see Introd. iii. p. 17, 
n. I2. 

5. Neronibus et Drusis. The plural, 
as in 11. 35, 2, denotes the ruling family ; 

which represented both the * Claudii 

Nerones,’ and also the ‘ Livii Drusi. 

6. in culpam...ad paenitentiam: 
cp. ‘in audaciam . . . ad formidinem" (4. 
51, 3), and other such change of preposi- 
tions for the sake of variety (Introd. v. 
$87). That those addressed, as well as the 
speakers, are among the less guilty, is skil- 
fully assumed to quiet their fears (Nipp.). 

orantibus rursum idem Blaesus et L. Aponius, eques 

Apronius B. 

8. mereare .. . recipias, potential 
subjunctives. See Introd. v. $ 5r. 

9. tironem. This word, here and in 
C. 42, 7, seems extended to include all 
who had not completed their term of 
service. Elsewhere, as in 2. 78, 3, it has 
its ordinary meaning. 

13. orto die. Only one day and night 
had passed since he entered the camp 
(c. 25, 1). On the whole time covered 
by these events, see on c. 16, 1. 

I4. nobilitate. This word has here 
something of a moral sense like that of 
(evvaiórgs, ‘generosity.’ lt appears also 
to have a similar though less definite 
sense in H. 1. 30, 1 ‘ nihil adrogabo mihi 
nobilitatis aut modestiae. 

I5. terrore et minis. Here, as in 
‘nihil... prisci et integri (c. 4, 1), and 
other uses of ‘et’ in negative clauses, the 
words are more closely coupled than if 
‘nec’ had been used. 

17. exciperet. The tense probably (see 
Walther) is used to denote a more un- 
certain consequence, ‘Excipiat’ would 
have implied a tone of authority. 

orantibus, ‘ on their petition,’ i. e, that 
he would so write. On this abl. abs., see 
Introd. v. § 31 c. 

idem Blaesus; see c. 19, 4. 

On 

en 

IO 

220 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 767. 

Romanus e cohorte Drusi, Iustusque Catonius, primi ordinis 

centurio, ad Tiberium mittuntur. 

certatum inde sententiis, cum 

alii opperiendos legatos atque interim comitate permulcendum 
militem censerent, alii fortioribus remediis agendum: nihil in 
vulgo modicum ; terrere, ni paveant; ubi pertimuerint, inpune 
contemni: dum superstitio urgeat, adiciendos ex duce metus 

sublatis seditionis auctoribus. 

promptum ad asperiora ingenium 

Druso erat: vocatos Vibulenum et Percennium interfici iubet. 
tradunt plerique intra tabernaculum ducis obrutos, alii corpora 

extra vallum abiecta ostentui. 

30. Tum ut quisque praecipuus turbator conquisiti, et pars, 
extra castra palantes, a centurionibus aut praetoriarum cohor- 
tium militibus caesi; quosdam ipsi manipuli documentum fidei 

tradidere. 

L. Aponius. Nipp. appears rightly 
to retain here the original text; the dc- 
scription given of the person being 
more suitable to a less known name 
(cp. H. 1. 79, 8, &c.) than to that of a 

consular family such as the Apronii - 

(see c. 56, 1, &c.). The identification 
with the Apronius Caesianus of 3. 21, 
6 appears to be impossible (see note 
there). 

I. cohorte, ‘the retinue,’ as 6. 9, 2. 
The idea of such a ‘cohors amicorum" 
attending the princeps or members of his 
family in travel, appears to be derived 
trom the ‘cohors praetoria’ or staff of 
a provincial governor under the Republic 
(Cic. Verr. 2. 1, 14, 36, &c.). See Fried- 
laender, i. p. 122, &c. 

Iustus Catonius. This is probably 
the same person who was afterwards 
'* praefectus praetorio, and was put to 
death by Messalina in 796, A.D. 43 (Dio, 
60. 18, 3). ‘Primi ordinis cénturio’ and 
other similar expressions are found often 
in and after Caesar, and from about the 
time of Hadrian the term appears defi- 
nitely to denote perhaps, as Mommsen 
thinks (Eph. Epig. iv. 239), the three 
leading centurions of the first cohort, or 
perhaps, as Marquardt contends (Staatsv. 
li. 371), the * centurio pilus prior’ of each 
of the ten cohorts: see Dict. of Ant. i. 
p. 799. At this date it is probably not 
à technical term : in some cases (as here 
and c. 6I, 5) it might mean ‘centurio 
primipilus,’ and where it evidently denotes 
a larger number (e. g. H. 3. 22, 5; 5. ao, 

2), it might mean those personally most 
prominent. 

3. opperiendos legatos, i.e. that no 
punishment should be inflicted till they 
returned. 

6. ex duce metus. The phrase ' metus 
ex aliquo,’ even without a verb, is frequent 
in Tacitus (e.g. 2. 38,6; 72, 2; 3. 05, 1, 
&c.),and appears grounded on such expres- 
sions in Livy as ‘ira ex clade’ (2. 51, 6), 
and ‘luctus,’ ‘dolor,’ &c., ‘ex re aliqua.' 

7". promptum ad asperiora. : On 
the temperament of Drusus, see c. 76, 5; 
4. 3, 2. Dio (57. 13, 1) calls him doed- 
yéatatos kal wpdraros, exaggerating the 
worst side of the passionate but generous 

nature ascribed to him by Tacitus, and 

appealing to the slight evidence that the 
sharpest swords were called from him 
Apovaíava. 

9. obrutos, ‘were hastily buried’: 
cp. ‘cadaver levi cespite obrutum est’ 
(Suet. Cal. 59). This version of the story 
is adopted by Dio (57. 4, §), who gives 
no other. 

Io. ostentui, ‘as a gazing-stock ' (cp. 
I5. 29, 7). On this dative, see Introd. v. 
$ 23. This word had been already thus 

used by Sallust (Jug. 24, 20; 46, 6), but 

with a different meaning. 

II. turbator. This word is almost 
confined to Livy and Tacitus, and here 
only (acc. to Drager) used without genit. 

I2. centurionibus, &c. The centuri- 
ons had fled for refuge (c. 23, 5), probably 
to the protection of the praetorians re- 
maining outside. 

3 

4A 

auxerat militum curas praematura hiems imbribus 2 

A. D. 14] LIBER I. 

CAP. 29-31. 

22I 

continuis adeoque saevis, ut non egredi tentoria, congregari inter 
se, vix tutari signa possent, quae turbine atque unda raptabantur. 
3 durabat et formido caelestis irae, nec frustra adversus impios 
hebescere sidera, ruere tempestates: non aliud malorum leva- 
mentum quam si linquerent castra infausta temerataque et soluti 
4 piaculo suis quisque hibernis redderentur. primum octava, dein 
quinta decuma legio rediere: nonanus opperiendas Tiberii epis- 
tulas clamitaverat, mox desolatus aliorum discessione inminen- 
5 tem necessitatem sponte praevenit. et Drusus non exspectato 
legatorum regressu, quia praesentia satis consederant, in urbem 

rediit. 

81. Isdem ferme diebus isdem causis Germanicae legiones 
turbatae, quanto plures, tanto violentius, et magna spe fore 
ut Germanicus Caesar imperium alterius pati nequiret daretque 
2 se legionibus vi sua cuncta tracturis. duo apud ripam Rheni 

10. considerant: text R. 

I. egredi tentoria. The active use 
of this verb originates with Caesar and 
Livy. Tacitus uses it also thus meta- 
phorically, as ‘ egredi relationem ’ (2. 38, 
3); «neque . . . praeturam egressa’ (3. 
. 30, 2). 

congregari. Ritter’s repetition of 
‘non’ before this word receives support 
from H. 4. 33, 2; Dial. 23, 3; but it is 
not impossible that Tacitus may have 
omitted it here, as having an ill sound 
before ‘con, though such a juxtapo- 
sition is sometimes tolerated by him 
(2. 55, 2). 

3. tutari, ‘to keep them standing.’ 
The fall of the eagles would be thought 
ominous, and was so regarded in the ex- 
pedition of Crassus, See Flor. 3. 11, 3 
(1. 460). .— | 

3. formido . . . nec... hebescere. 
The idea of the principal verb is supplied 
from *formido'; the words being their 
own expression of their fears. 

frustra. In several passages of Cicero 
the ordinary meaning, ‘ without effect,’ 
passes into that of ‘without a purpose’ ; 
whence, by another step, the word comes 
to mean ‘without cause’ or ‘reason,’ 

. *groundlessly’; as here, and in 3. 58, 1; . 

6. 6, 2, and in several other places in 
Tacitus (see Nipp.), as also often in 
Quintilian. 

4. hebescere, ‘grew dull.’ This word, 
like ‘languescere’ in c. 28, 1, is nowhere 

15. tracturus: text Freinsheim. 

else used of an eclipse. 'The figure may 
erhaps have been suggested by the * stel- 
is acies obtusa videtur' of Vergil (G. 1, 

o0 . 

m piaculo, ‘from guilt. This mean- 
ing is found in old writers, also in Vergil 
(Aen. 6, 569), and Livy (5. 52, 8). Ta- 
citus does not elsewhere use it in this 
sense. 

7. epistulas. This u se of the plural, 
as in c. 36, 4; 2. 70, 3; 78, 1; and many 
other places (see Nipp.), is peculiar to 
this age, but probably suggested, as 
Nipp. notes, by the classical use of *lit- 
terae, which has this meaning in the 
plural only. 

8. desolatus, ‘isolated’: so *filia... 
desolata' 16. 30, 4. This use of the word 
appears to originate in such an expression 
as ‘desolati manipli' of Vergil (Aen. 11, 
870). 

Jo. praesentia, ‘affairs on the spot’: 
so in c. 45, 1; 2. 47, 4; and * ubi prae- 
sentia satis composita sunt’ (11. 18, 2). 

consederant. The MS. form is found 
in Enn. ap. Gell. 4. 7 *qui propter Han- 
nibalis copias considerant'; also in Liv. 
28. 12, 15. Tacitus, though fond of 
such archaisms, always uses elsewhere 
the *e' form of this perfect (c. 61, 3, 
&c.). : 

I5. tracturis. On this concise use of 
the future participle, see Introd. v. § 54 d. 
The text has been generally thus cor- 

bed 
om 

222 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 767. 

exercitus erant: cui nomen superiori, sub C. Silio legato, in- 
feriorem A. Caecina curabat. regimen summae rei penes Ger- 
manicum, agendo Galliarum censui tum intentum. sed quibus 8 
Silius moderabatur, mente ambigua fortunam seditionis alienae 
5 speculabantur: inferioris exercitus miles in rabiem prolapsus 
est, orto ab unetvicensimanis quintanisque initio, et tractis prima 
quoque ac vicensima legionibus: nam isdem aestivis in finibus 
Ubiorum habebantur per otium aut levia munia. igitur audito 4 
fine Augusti vernacula multitudo, nuper acto in urbe dilectu, 

rected ; ‘sua,’ here, as at the end of this 
chapter, being more properly referred to 
the legions; and ‘trahere’ being else- 
where used (cp. ‘ tractis’ below, and H. 
2. 86, 4; 3. 44, 1) of troops inducing 
others to follow their lead. 

duo...exercitus. It has been noted 
(Introd. vi. 116, n. 7) that we have not at 
this date, strictly speaking, provinces of 
‘Germania superior’ and ‘inferior,’ but 
rather a ‘superior’ and ' inferior exercitus 
in Germania,’ occupying a military dis- 
trict within Gallia Belgica, coinciding 
with the line drawn between subject Ger- 
mans (whether beyond or within the 
Rhine) and Gauls; a line coinciding in 
the rper district mostly with the Vosges, 
in the Lower partly with the lower course 
of the Scheldt (Pl. N. H. 4. 14, 28, 98). 
These armies were under consular legati, 
independent of each other, but under 
obligation to furnish troops for each 
other's district or for Gaul when required 
(see 3. 42, 2; 43, 43 4. 73,15 13. 56, 4). 
The headquarters were at Mainz and 
Koln. It is thought (but see Momms. 
Hist. v. 108; E. T. i. 118) that in the 
early period the civil government still 
belonged to the legatus of Belgica, but 
before the end of the first century, per- 
haps from the time of Domitian, they are 
two distinct provinces. See Marquardt, 
i. 275; Riese, in West-Deutsche Zeit- 
schrift, Korrespondenz-Blatt. xiv. 146- 
159. For the legions, see Introd. vii. 122. 

I. C. Silio. He had been cos. in 766, 
A.D. 13; and received the ‘ triumphalia’ 
later (c. 72, 1) On his subsequent 
achievements, see 3. 42, 2, &c.; on his 
trial and death, 4. 18-19; on his son's 
share in the infamy of Messalina, 11. 12, 
&c. The poet Silius Italicus may have 
been related to him. 

2. A. Caecina. As legatus in Lower 
Germany, he must have been of consular 
rank; he also received ‘triumphalia’ (c. 

72, 1), was a veteran soldier (c. 64, 1), 
and had won distinction in Pannonia and 
Moesia in 759, 760; A.D. 6, 7 (Vell. a. 
II2, 4; Dio, 55, 29-323). He is subse- 
quently mentioned with the cognomen 
‘Severus’ (3. 18, 33 33, 1). ‘Curare’ 
and ‘cura’ are used by Tacitus (after 
Sall.) of military command (cp. 6 30, 3; 
I3. 20, 2; and Heraeus on H. 2. 24, 11), 
and often in inscriptions. Nipp. notes 
here the variation of expressions, ‘sub,’ 
‘curabat,’ ‘ regimen summae rei,’ ‘ mode- 
rabatur.’ | 

regimen summae rei. Silius and 
Caecina were the 'legati Augusti pro- 
praetore’ in the two ‘exercitus’; Ger- 
manicus had *proconsulare imperium’ 
(see on c. I4, 4) over these and the 
‘ Galliae. 

3. agendo Galliarum censui: ‘cen- 
sum agere' is a common phrase (14. 46, 2; 
Liv. 3. 22, 1, &c.), as also‘ censum acci- 
pere ' (c. 33, 1), of those who received the 
returns of property which the subjects had 
to furnish (* censum deferre," as 6. 41, :, 
&c.). On such returns would rest the 
apportionment of the great tribute of forty 
million H. S., laid on Gaul as a whole 
(Suet. Jul. 25). The first systematic cen- 
sus of Gaul appears to have been held by 
Augustus in 727, B.C. 27 (Dio, 53. 23, 5), 
and revised by Drusus in 7423, B.C. 12 (Liv. 
Epit. 136; 137 ;. * Oratio Claudii* ii. 37) ; 
and again revised now, and later (2. 6, 
I; I4. 46, 2). See Staatsr. ii. 1091; 
Marquardt, ii. 213. 

8. Ubiorum. This tribe in the time 
of Julius Caesar lived beyond the Rhine, 
but was already assimilated to Gallic 
civilization (B. G. 4. 3, 3), and trans- 
plauted, with its own consent, by Agrippa 
(12. 27, 2; G. 28, 5; Strab. 4. 3, 4, 
P. 194), probably in 716, B.c. 38 (Dio, 
48, 49). On its * oppidum,' see c. 36, I. 

9. vernacula multitudo. In Caes. 
B. C. 2. 20, 4 (cp. Bell. Al. 53, &c.; Bell. 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 31, 32. 

223 

lasciviae sueta, laborum intolerans, implere ceterorum rudes 
animos: venisse tempus quo veterani maturam missionem, iu- 
venes largiora stipendia, cuncti modum miseriarum exposcerent 

5 saevitiamque centurionum ulciscerentur. 

non unus haec, ut 

Pannonicas inter legiones Percennius, nec apud trepidas mili- 
tum aures, alios validiores exercitus respicientium, sed multa 
seditionis ora vocesque: sua in manu sitam rem Romanam, 
suis victoriis augeri rem publicam, in suum cognomentum ad- 

. Scisci imperatores. 

32. Nec legatus obviam ibat : 

2 stantiam exemerat. 

quippe plurium vaecordia con- 

repente lymphati destrictis gladiis in cen- 

turiones invadunt: ea vetustissima militaribus odiis materies 

8 et saeviendi principium. 
I; impellere Acid. 

Hisp. 7, &c.), legions levied from natives 
of a province are called ‘ vernaculae’ 
(see Momms. Hermes, xix. 13-18). Here 
the term is used of the lowest and mostly 
non-civic class of Roman population ; for 
in the levy held ‘ nuper,’ i. e. in 763, A.D. 
10, after the defeat of Varus, freeborn 
citizens were so scarce and so reluctant 
to serve, that Augustus, besides taking 
other strong measures (Dio, §6. 23, 3), 
enlisted numbers of freedmen, and even 
slaves manumitted for the purpose (Suet. 
Aug. 25). This dorids óxAos (Dio, 57. 
5, 4), may have been drafted into others, 
besides the newly-formed Twenty-first 
legion (see Introd. vii. p. 122). Sue- 
tonius (1. 1), so far as he refers to these, 
seems to be wrong in saying that this 
*libertinus miles’ was kept distinct from 
the legions. 

I. sueta. This part. thus takes a dat. 
in 2. 52, 2, &c. ; and the verb in 2. 44, 1. 

intolerans, used with the genit. in 
2. 75, 1; and Livy 9. 18,1; as is also 
* tolerans ' 4. I, 4. 

implere, needlessly altered to * impel- 
lere ' to assimilate the expression to c. 16, 
&: ‘implere animos! is used in 4. 9, 1, 
and Sil. 1, 105. The speech with which 
their minds were filled is to be gathered 
from the context. 

5. apud...aures. A not uncommon 
phrase in Tacitus (2. 39, 4; 4. 29, 4, 
&c.),=‘apud aliquem’; ‘aures’ being 
quasi-personified. See note on I3. 22, 3. 

8. augeri rem publicam. ‘The em- 
pire was being extended.’ They consider 
themselves as not merely defending a 

2. uenisset : 

prostratos verberibus mulcant, sexa- 

text B. I3. sexageni: see note. 
frontier, but as still engaged, under Ger- 
manicus, in a project of conquest. 

in suum cognomentum adscisci, 
‘took from them their name,’ i.e. that of 
* Germanicus,' conferred at the death of 
Drusus on his posterity (Dio, 55. 2, 3), 
and hence borne by their present leader, 
and by his brother Claudius (Suet. Cl. 1). 
It was also, rarely, borne by Tiberius 
(Dio, 57. 8, 2, perhaps also C. I. L. vi. 
20238). Compare * adscivit in nomen,’ 
of adoption, 3. 30, 3, &c. 

9. imperatores. The elder Drusus 
had the permanent ‘nomen imperatoris ' 
(see c. 3, 1); as, perhaps, already had 
Germanicus (see on c. 58, 9), who is at 
any rate called * imperator' (c. 41, 2; 44, 
7), probably in virtue of his * imperium 
proconsulare.’ 

10. Nec legatus, &c., in contrast to 
the action of Blaesus (c. 18, 5). 

plurium, ‘the more part,’ as 2. 38, 7; 
3. 42, 1, &c..; cp. Her. on H. 1. 39, 5; 
also in Plaut. as Trin. 2. 2, 14 * quin prius 
me ad pluris penetravi.’ 

constantiam  exemerat, ‘had un- 
nerved him': cp. 'eximere consilium,' 
* dissimulationem ’ (11. 32, 4; 13. 15, 3). 

II. lymphati, a poetical word, but 
already in Livy (7. 17, 3), equivalent to 
vuppdAnmros, *Lympha' being another 
form of * Nympha ' (Hor. Sat. I. 5, 97; 
Orell. Insc. 1637, 1638, &c.). 

I2. invadunt, with prep. here and 
c. 67, 4, and usually in Cic.: elsewhere 
Tacitus uses the simple accusative. 

I3. sexagenis singulos. This emenda- 
tion appears to have occurred inde- 

v 

o 

5 est, donec ad exitium dederetur. 

10 

224 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 767. 

genis singulos, ut numerum centurionum adaequarent: tum 
convulsos laniatosque et partim exanimos ante vallum aut in 

amnem Rhenum proiciunt. 

bunal pedibusque Caecinae advolveretur, eo usque flagitatus 

Cassius Chaerea, mox caede 

Gai Caesaris memoriam apud posteros adeptus, tum adulescens 
et animi ferox, inter obstantes et armatos ferro viam patefecit. 
non tribunus ultra, non castrorum praefectus ius obtinuit: vi- 6 
gilias, stationes, et si qua alia praesens usus indixerat, ipsi par- 

tiebantur. 

id militares animos altius coniectantibus praecipuum 

indicium magni atque inplacabilis motus, quod neque disiecti 
aut paucorum instinctu, set pariter ardescerent, pariter silerent, 
tanta aequalitate et constantia, ut regi crederes. 

12. nil: aut J. H. Nolte, Halm; nec Grotius, Nipp., Bait.; nil disiecti neque 

Heraeus; disiecti nil neque Müller. 

pendently to many minds. Mr. H. D. 
Darbishire suggests it in Rhein. Mus. 
xliv. (1889), 319; and according to Wolf- 
flin (1. 1. 448) it had been also suggested 
by Speijer (1886), Ortmann (1882), and 
Zumpt. It has also been independently 
suggested to me by Mr. Raper. It would 
be clearly impossible for sixty to scourge 
at once, and they would think it tedious 
to give each a blow in succession. The 
grim humour consists in giving each cen- 
turion as it were one stripe for himself, 
and one for each of his colleagues. With 
the usual reading we must suppose that 
the legion views itself as one body, chas- 
tised by sixty, each of whom was to suffer 
the same in turn. 

2. convulsos laniatosque, ‘with 
limbs dislocated and mangled.’ Thus 
Lucretius has *artus. .. convulsi '(3, 343), 
and M. Seneca ‘convoisis laceratisque 
membris, of persons racked (Contr. 2. 
13, 6). This seems better than Nipp.'s 
explanation, ‘plucked from the ground,’ 
like * vexilla convellunt’ (c. 20, 1). 

3. Septimius . . . Cassius Chaerea. 
It is implied that both these were centu- 
rions. ‘The former is otherwise unknown 
(perhaps a praenomen T. is lost) ; Chae- 
rea was in 794, A.D. 4I, a tribune in the 
praetorian guard, and, if rightly then 
called ‘elderly’ (Suet. Cal. 56), cannot 
have been now much under thirty. 

7. animi ferox. See Introd. v. $ 33 
ey. With this particular word such a 
genitive appears elsewhere to be found 

only in 4. 12, 3; H. 1. 35, 2; Ov. Met. 
8, 614. 

et armatos. This adds force to 

* obstantes,’=‘et quidem armatos. Cp. 
* vetera et inania ' 3. 13, 2, &c. 
8. vigilias, stationes. Cp. c. 28, 5. 

IO. altius coniectantibus, ‘to more 
penetrating judges of the soldier's char- 
acter’: ‘altius’ is thus concisely used 
with ‘ maerere’ (2. 82, 5), * disserere' (3. 
25, 3), * exponere ' (3. 62, 4), * expedire ’ 
(H. 4. 12, 1). For ‘coniectare aliquem,’ 
in the sense of ‘estimating,’ cp. ‘ne 
ceteri ex Paeligno coniectarentur' (12. 
49, 3)- 

II. disiecti=‘sparsi,’ as c. 61, 33 3. 
2, 5; 4. 46, 3, &c. 

12. aut. The various emendations of 
the MS.text are hardly felicitous. * Neque" 
might have the force of ‘ne... quidem’ 
(cp. 4. 34, 3), or might have been re- 
peated with another word before ‘ neque 
disiecti, or an erroneous transposition 
(see crit. note) like that of ‘ad se nisi’ 
(C. 2, 5), may have taken place ; in either 
of which latter cases ‘nil’ might stand, 
with a verb such as ‘agerent’ supplied 
from the context (see Introduction, v. 
$ 38 b). 

pariter, ‘as one man. This word 
often has the force of ‘simul,’ as c. 47, 
3, &c. 

ardescerent, for * exardescerent': one 
of many simple verbs used poetically for 
compounds (Introd. v. $ 40). 

I3. aequalitate, ‘uniformity.’ This 

Septimius cum perfugisset ad tri- 4 

5 

7 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 32, 33. 

225 

33. Interea Germanico per Gallias, ut diximus, census ac- 

2cipienti excessisse Augustum adfertur. 

neptem eius Agrip- 

pinam in matrimonio pluresque ex ea liberos habebat, ipse 
Druso fratre Tiberii genitus, Augustae nepos, set anxius occul- 
tis in se patrui aviaeque odiis, quorum causae acriores, quia 5 

3 iniquae. 

quippe Drusi magna apud populum Romanum me- 

moria, credebaturque, si rerum potitus foret, libertatem reddi- 

4 turus; unde in Germanicum favor et spes eadem. - 

nam iuveni 

civile ingenium, mira comitas et diversa ab Tiberii sermone 

5 vultu, adrogantibus et obscuris. 

accedebant muliebres offen- 

siones novercalibus Liviae in Agrippinam stimulis, atque ipsa 
Agrippina paulo commotior, nisi quod castitate et mariti amore 
quamvis indomitum animum in bonum vertebat. 

9. adtiberii: a Tiberii B, text Weissenborn. 

use occurs in Cic., &c.; but with Tacitus 
the word is more commonly equivalent 
to lcoripía, as c. 4, 1, &c. 

I. census accipienti : see on c. 31, 2. 

2. neptem. On the descent, family 
connexions, and children of Germanicus 
and Agrippina, see Introd. ix. 

3. plures, ‘several’: so in 2. 8, 3; 
3. 33, 13 34,10; 4. 55, 1 ; and often for 

*complures, which Tacitus uses three . 

times only. 

5. patrui. Nipp. notes that Tacitus 
usually (e.g. 32. 5,23 43, 653. 3,33 5 
5; 17, 5; 31, T) describes the relationship 
of Tiberius and Germahicus as it was 
by blood; but makes them in their own 
speeches use the terms of their adoptive 
relationship (e.g. c. 42, 1; 2. 71, 33 3- 
12, 8); an apparent exception, in 2. 14, 
6, being due to the necessity of mention- 
ing both Drusus and Tiberius. 

acriores, quia iniquae. Tacitus had 
already said *proprium humani generis 
odisse quem laeseris’ (Agr. 42, 4) ; and 
Seneca had preceded him with ‘ pertina- 
ciores nos facit ‘niquitas irae’ (de Ira 3. 
29, 2). On his fondness for such maxims 
see Introd. iv. p. 37. The fact of human 
nature here asserted is explained by Nipp. 
on the supposition that a sense of our 
own baseness leads to hatred of one who 
suggests the thought of it. 

7. credebaturque, &c. The improb- 
able tale respecting a letter addressed to 
Tiberius, and by him betrayed to Augus- 
tus, in which Drusus had mooted a scheme 
for compelling a restitution of the Repub- 
lic, seems refuted by the position in which 

VOL. I. 

Augustus retained him till his death, at 
the head of his greatest army: he may 
have used expressions suggesting this 
belief as to his republican sentiments, 
which was evidently prevalent (see 2. 41, 
5; 82, 3; Suet. Cl. 1), though Tacitus 
nowhere expressly endorses it, as regards 
him or Germanicus, 

9. civile: cp. c. 8, 3, &c. 

Io. adrogantibus et obscuris. Both 
adjectives belong to both substantives, 
as a countenance may be called * ob- 
scurus, in the sense of ‘inscrutable.’ 
The application of this word to personal 
character (as 4. I, 3; 6. 34, 4; Agr. 42, 
4), is sanctioned by Cicero and Horace. 

muliebres offensiones, ‘feminine 
Jealousies’: cp. ‘muliebres causae’ 12. 
64, 3. The ‘novercales stimuli’ are one 
cause of such jealousies, and the irrita- 
bility of Agrippina is another; but the 
construction is changed by supplying 
* accedebat ' from above, with the sentence 
* Agrippina ...commotior ' as its subject ; 
like the participial construction so frequent 
in Tacitus (Introd. v. $ 55). 

II. novercalibus. Augusta was really 
her mother's stepmother; but many such 
terms are carried back a step, as * amita’ 
(2. 27, 2), * avunculus ' (2. 53, 3), &c. 

12. commotior, ‘the fact that (cp. c. 
36, 2) she was excitable’: cp. *'verbis 
commotior ' (2. 25, 3); also 4. 3, 2; 6. 
45, 6; 11. 12, 1. The temper of Agrip- 
pina is uniformly described as to the last 
degree passionate and  ungovernable. 

Cp. 2. 73, 13 3 1, 15 4. 53, 35 53 1, 
&c. 

I 

o 

n 

10 

226 

P. €ORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 767. 

34. Sed Germanicus quanto summae spei propior, tanto 
impensius pro Tiberio niti, seque et proximos et Belgarum 

civitates in verba eius adigit. 

dehinc audito legionum tumultu 

raptim profectus obvias extra castra habuit, deiectis in terram 

oculis velut paenitentia. 
audiri coepere. 

postquam vallum iniit, dissoni questus 
et quidam prensa manu eius per speciem ex- 

osculandi inseruerunt digitos, ut vacua dentibus ora contingeret ; 
alii curvata senio membra ostendebant. adsistentem contionem, 
quia permixta videbatur, discedere in manipulos iubet: sic 
melius audituros responsum ; vexilla praeferri, ut id saltem 

discerneret cohortes: tarde obtemperavere. 

tunc a veneratione 

Augusti orsus flexit ad victorias triumphosque Tiberii, prae- 

2. seque, with 7 (probably = *et") written above in a later hand: sequanos margin 
and B, sequanos, proximas et Nipp., text Haase, Baiter. 

nisi quod, ‘were it not that.’ The 
use of this expression to qualify what has 
been stated (as 6. 24,2; H. 4. 39, 2) is 
Ciceronian; but its use here (as in 14. 
14, 6; Agr. 6, 1) is noteworthy, as quali- 
fying something only implied in thought : 
as that her temper would have deserved 
a bad name but for the course it took. 

quamvis indomitum, ‘a temper how- 
ever ungovernable.’ *Quamvis' is thus 
used in 6. 50, 1; 15. 24, 1; 16. 16, 1; 
and * quamquam ' in c. 76, 5. 

in bonum vertebat, ‘gave a good 
direction to’; i.e. by enlisting such quali- 
ties on the side of virtue and in the cause 
of her husband. Thus it is said of her 
* virilibus curis feminarum vitia exuerat’ 
(6. 25, 3). Orelli less well explains it by 
* redimebat ' (* compensated ^. 

2. pro Tiberio niti: cp. ‘nullo pro 
Galba nitente? H. r. 55,4. 

seque et proximos: see critical 
note. *Sequanos proximos ’ (which Halm 
adopts) couples a portion of a single tribe 
to the whole province of * Gallia Belgica’ ; 
while Nipp.'s reading would necessitate 
the explanation of ‘ et’ as = ‘etiam’ (as 
*aegro et corpore’ c. 4, 2, &c.), which 
seems here without force. Germanicus 
would naturally take the oath himself, 
and then tender it to those about him 
(see on c. 7, 3), such as his * amicorum 
cohors’; who might be spoken of as 
* proximi (cp. 4. 12, 7, &c.). 

3. in verba eius. The ‘princeps,’ 
though absent, is conceived as dictating 
the oath of allegiance to him: cp. H a. 
14, I, &c. This is the first instance on 
record, and probably the first actual 

, peravere’) to his next order. 

instance, of extension of the ‘sacra- 
mentum, not only (as in c. 7, 3) to 
civilians, but even to provincials. A 
similar course was taken in Syria on the 
death of Tiberius (Jos. Ant. 18. 5, 3). 
For the practice later, see Pl. ad Trai. 52. 
Cp. Staatsr. ii. 793. 

6. audiri coepere. On the inf. pass. 
with this verb, cp. Introd. v. $ 42 b. 

exosculandi. This word is confined 

to writers of this age. and appears to be 

stronger thàn the simple verb. 

9. sic melius audituros responsum, 
* they replied that they would hear better 
as they were,’ i.e. crowding round him 
in a mass. This refusal is contrasted with 
the reluctant obedience (*tarde obtem- 
On this use 
of ‘sic’ cp. ‘sic quoque? (4. 40, 4; 15. 
17, 3’. Some have thought that ‘ est.’ 

which occurs with ‘responsum’ in c. 26, | 

1, should be here inserted. 

10. vexilla: sc. *manipulorum': see 

note on c. 18, 3. The inaccurate use of 
* vexilla! (see on c. 17, 4) for ‘signa’ 
may be compared with H. 1. 36,1; 3. 
82, 2; and ‘vexillarius’ for ‘ signifer? in 
H. 1. 41, 1r. To bring the standards to 
the front would infuse some order into 
the mass, as the soldiers would instinc- 
tively group themselves round them (see 
c. 38, 4), and a kind of formation in 
cohorts would result. £ 

II. veneratione, expressions of;reve- 
rence.’ The word is especially suitable 
to a deified emperor, though not restricted 
to such: cp. 12. 42, 3. 

I2. flexit. This verb is used intransi- 
tively by Verg. Liv., &c. © Its application 

. ae 

A.D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 34, 35. 

227 

cipuis laudibus celebrans quae apud Germanias illis cum le- 
6 gionibus pulcherrima fecisset. Italiae inde consensum. Galliarum 

fidem extollit; nil usquam turbidum aut discors. 
vel murmure modico audita sunt. 

silentio haec 

35. Ut seditionem attigit, ubi modestia militaris, ubi veteris 
disciplinae decus, quonam tribunos, quo centuriones exegissent, 
rogitans, nudant universi corpora, cicatrices ex vulneribus, 
verberum notas exprobrant; mox indiscretis vocibus pretia 
vacationum, angustias stipendii, duritiam operum ac propriis 
nominibus incusant vallum, fossas, pabuli materiae lignorum 
adgestus, et si qua alia ex necessitate aut adversus otium 
2 castrorum quaeruntur. atrocissimus veteranorum clamor orie- 
batur, qui. tricena aut supra stipendia numerantes, mederetur 
fessis, neu mortem in isdem laboribus, sed finem tam exercitae 

8. uniuersa : text L. 

to a turn of speech (cp. 6. 15, 5; 13. 3, 
2), or thought (cp. 4. 37, 25; 41, 2), 
appears to be Tacitean. 

I. illis cum legionibus. Inc. 42, 6, 
the First and Twentieth are particularly 
mentioned. On the German campaigns 
of Tiberius, see Introd. viii. p. 134. 

3. nil usquam, &c. This general 
acquiescence in the succession of Tiberius 
is recorded by Dio (57. 7, 1). 

modestia, here ‘ subordination,’ as in 
c. 49, 6, &c. Cp. c. t1, 1. 

8. exprobrant: cp. c. 18, I. 

indiscretis, ‘ undistinguishable’: so 
* proles indiscreta" Verg. Aen. to, 392: 
not opposed to propriis. The several 
cries are shouted at once confusedly. 

pretia vacationum: see on c. 17, 6. 

9. propriis nominibus, ‘ specifically.’ 
They complain of hard work generally, 
and particularize these kinds of it. 

10. inousant. A similar position of a 
verb belonging to two or more sentences 
is noted by Nipp. in ‘ tradidit" (2. 48, 1) ; 
* Jabefecit ' (6. 29, 5); ‘veni’ (H. 1. 83, 
2); ‘cinxerant’ (H. 2. 25, 1); but as 
otherwise rare except in poetry. . 

materiae lignorum, ‘timber and fire- 
wood. The terms are thus distinguished 
by Ulpian (Dig. 32. 55, pr.), *ligni appel- 
latio nomen generale est, sed sic separatur, 
ut sit aliquid materia, aliquid lignum: 
materia est, quae ad aedificandum, ful- 
ciendum necessaria est; lignum quidquid 
comburendi causa paratum est. A similar 
distinction is drawn by Pliny (N. H. 16. 

40, 76, 206), *cornus non potest videri 
materies propter exilitatem, sed lignum '; 
and * materies' has this specific sense as 
early as Caesar (B. G. 4. 17, 8). 

II. si qua alia, &c., ‘whatever other 
employments are suggested by their needs, 
or devised to prevent idleness’: for works 
undertaken with the latter object, see 
C. 20, 13 II. 20, 2; 13. 53. 3. 

12. veteranorum: see c. 17, 4. On 
the question whether ‘in isdem laboribus" 
here, and * eosdem labores! there, are to 
be taken as exaggerations, see on c. 36, 4. 

13. mederetur...neu mortem... 
sed finem ...or&bant. The harshness 
of such a combination of constructions 
with ‘orabant’ appears to be unprece- 
dented ; nor is any other instance given 
of a verb followed by ‘neu’ or ‘neve’ 
except as coupling a coordinate verb (e.g. 
16. 34, 2). Ernesti maintained that *mor- 
tem’ should either be altered to ‘ more- 
rentur' or followed by *obirent'; the 
latter is inserted by Nipp. after *labori- 
bus, where it might have dropped out 
through resemblance of sound. The 
change of construction which would still 
remain, from a dependent clause to a 
simple case, may be paralleled by that 
of * angebatur' (c. 52, t), and by several 
instances of such a change in the reverre 
order (Introd. v. $ 91: Drager, Synt. und 
Stil, $ 233). The construction may be 
designedly abrupt, like that in c. 41, 2, 
and the accusatives exclamatory, 

I4. exercitae:; cp. c. I7, 7. 

Q 2 

nm 

10 

"d 
eye 

228 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

militiae neque inopem requiem orabant. fuere etiam qui legatam 8 
a divo Augusto pecuniam reposcerent, faustis in Germanicum 

ominibus ; et si vellet imperium, promptas ves ostentavere. 

vero, quasi scelere contaminaretur, praeceps tribunali desiluit. 
opposuerunt abeunti arma, minitantes, ni regrederetur ; at ille 5 
moriturum potius quam fidem exueret clamitans, ferrum a latere 
diripuit elatumque deferebat in pectus, ni proximi prensam 

dextram vi adtinuissent. 

extrema et conglobata inter se pars 6 

contionis ac, vix credibile dictu, quidam singuli propius ince- 
dentes, feriret hortabantur ; et miles nomine Calusidius strictum 

obtulit gladium, addito acutiorem esse. 

saevum id malique 7 

moris etiam furentibus visum, ac spatium fuit quo Caesar ab 
amicis in tabernaculum raperetur. 

36. Consultatum ibi de remedio: etenim nuntiabatur parari 
legatos qui superiorem exercitum ad causam eandem traherent : 
destinatum excidio Ubiorum oppidum, imbutasque praeda manus 

3. promtas: promptos R, text Walth. 

2. reposcerent, ‘demanded of him.’ 
Orelli notes that this implied a recogni- 
tion of Germanicus as the lawful heir; 
which was also probably expressed in 
more distinct terms (‘faustis ominibus’). 
Dio (57. 5, 1) represents them as going 
to greater length (avroxpdropa iwexáAe- 
cav). On the legacy demanded see c. 
8, 3. 

3. promptas res ostentavere. This 
reading is supported by ‘ promptasque 
res ostentante" (12. 12, 5). Those who 
read ‘ DIO ptor. suppose ‘se’ to be 
supplied, as with *moriturum' below, 
and in other instances, such as 4. 59, 5; 
5. 5, 2; &c. :Other corrections are 
‘promptos se’ (Jahn) or ‘ prompta’ 
(Heinsius), which appears to need such a 
word ‘studia,’ as in 2. 76, 1. 

4. desiluit.| This verb has a simple 
abl. rg. 28, 5: elsewhere the usage is 
almost wholly poetical. 

6. moriturum potius quam fidem 
exueret. The full construction would 
be ‘potius quam ita victurum, ut,’ &c. 
For similar abbreviations see ‘ exceden- 
dum potius, quam . . . pellerentur' (Agr. 25, 
3) and * perpessus est omnia potius, quam 

. indicaret? (Cic. Tusc. 2. 22, 52, 
where Kühner gives other instances). 

7. diripuit. The alteration to *de- 
ripuit' is wrong; 'diripit ensem" being 

7. deripuit B. 

the Medicean text in Verg. Aen. 10, 475, 
and the proper word, as Nipp. shows, 
for the wearer, who could not be said to 
* snatch down’ his sword. 

8. adtinuissent. This word is con- 
stantly used for * retinere? by Tacitus (as 
C. 50. I, 2; 2. IO, 2, &c.) ; but otherwise 
so only by Plaut. and Sall. 

9. quidam singuli. In contrast with 
* conglobata,' as * propius incedentes! with 
* extrema pars.' 

12. Spatium, ‘a pause,’ during which 
their attention was drawn to Calusidius, 
and Germanicus could be got away unob- 
served. Orelli. 

I4. etenim. This introduces conside- 
rations which make the need of remedial 
measures more pressing. 

I5. superiorem : see c. 3I, 2. 

16, Ubiorum oppidum, ‘the capital: 
so * Batavorum oppidum' H. 5. 19, 2: 
see on c. 37, 3 (civitas Ubiorum’). The 
conversion of this town into the famous 
‘Colonia Agrippinensis’ (Koln) in 803, 
A.D. 50, is mentioned in 12. 27, I. 
Agrippina, from whom it took this title, 
was born here probably in 768, A.D. 15. 
See Introd. ix. note 14. 

imbutas praeda manus, ‘troops 
steeped in plunder.’ This sense of 
‘manus,’ if less suited to ‘imbutas,’ is 
more so to *erupturas'; and the whole 

tum 4 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

2in direptionem Galliarum erupturas. 

CAP. 35-37. 229 

augebat metum gnarus 

Romanae seditionis et, si omitteretur ripa, invasurus hostis: 
at si auxilia et socii adversum abscedentis legiones armarentur, 

3 civile bellum suscipi. 

periculosa severitas, flagitiosa largitio: 

seu nihil militi sive omnia concederentur, in ancipiti res publica. 
4 igitur volutatis inter se rationibus placitum ut epistulae nomine 
principis scriberentur: missionem dari vicena stipendia meritis. 
exauctorari qui sena dena fecissent ac retineri sub vexillo cete- 
rorum inmunes nisi propulsandi hostis, legata quae petiverant 

exsolvi duplicarique. 

97. Sensit miles in tempus conficta statimque flagitavit. 

missio per tribunos maturatur, 

5. sibi omnia: seu margin and Buit., sive Iac. Gron. 

metaphor resembles that of H. 3. 15, 4 
‘ut civili praeda milites imbuerentur.’ 

3. auxilia et socii, perhaps a hen- 
diadys, but probably to be distinguished, as 
by Ritter ; the former being those already 
under arms, the latter those who might 
be levied. 

4. suscipi. The construction, though 
varied, still depends on ‘ augebat metum." 
*'That to arm the allies, &c., was to 
undertake a civil war.' 

severitas. This appears to mean 
‘rigour,’ i. e. peremptory refusal (as prob- 
ably in c. 25, 3), and answers to the 
'seu nihil? below, as does its opposite 
‘largitio’ to ‘sive omnia.’ The notion 
of ‘punishment’ (as in c. 46, 2, &c.) 
seems out of place here, as such measures 
could not have been at present contem- 
plated as practicable. 

5. concederentur. The MS. text is 
defended by Nipp., Pfitzner, &c., as the 
language of dramatic description; the 
historic present *est' being supplied with 
* periculosa, &c., and with ‘in ancipiti." 
On the other hand it is more natural to 
suppose the same construction to be 
carried through ; and the omission of a 
syllable is shown by Baiter (from 3. 2, 
1; 3,13 67,33 4. 59, 55; probably also 
3. 17, 8) to be a characteristic error of 
this MS. 

6. inter se. A comparison of one 
plan with another is implied in ‘volu- 
tatis, Nipp. notes ‘artificumque manus 
inter se... miratur' Verg. Aen. I, 455. 

7. missionem dari... exauctorari. 
The latter of these words usually implies 
full discharge, whether honourable or 

largitio differebatur in hiberna 
concedentur: text R, 

otherwise; but here it is qualified by the 
context, so as to express such relaxation 
of the ‘sacramentum’ as may have taken 
place when the legionary soldier became 
a 'vexillarius' (see c. 17, 4). Similar 
qualification attaches to ‘dimissis’ (c. 17, 
4); ‘missi’ (c. 39, 2); and ‘dimitteren- 
tur’ (c. 78, 3); and ‘missio’ is used of 
both kinds of discharge (c. 37, 1; 40,1; 
52, 1). The terms offered are a com- 
promise between two regulations of Au- 
gustus by which the time of full discharge 
was fixed, first at sixteen, afterwards at 
twenty years (Dio, 54 25, 6; 55. 23, 1): 
but this concession, though carried out at 
present (see below, and c. 39, 1), was not 
perpetuated (see c. 78, 3). The promi- 
nent mention of immunity from camp 
duties would show it to have been a new 
concession, not a standing privilege of 
the veterans, who are certainly made to 
assert (c. 17, 4) that they have the same 
work as others (*eosdem labores"). Their 
language in c. 35, 2, is thought to point 
the other way, as they do not there ex- 
pressly join in the complaint made by the 
others respecting camp duties. 

10. duplicari. This gift, noted by 
Suetonius (Tib. 48) as the only donative 
from Tiberius to the soldiers, except that 
to the praetorians and some others at the 
fall of Seianus, was hardly a voluntary 
gift here, but was voluntarily extended to 
the Pannonian army (c. 52, 3). 

II. in tempus, ‘to meet the emer- 
gency’; cp. ‘ad tempus’ c. t, 2. 

12. missio, used here and below of 
both kinds of discharge: cp. c. 36, 4. 

differebatur, * was to be deferred.’ 

en 

lo 

*)1 

10 

230 

cuiusque. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U.C. 767. 

non abscessere quintani unetvicensimanique, donec 2 

isdem in aestivis contracta ex viatico amicorum ipsiusque 

Caesaris pecunia persolveretur. 

primam ac vicensimam legiones 3 

Caecina legatus in civitatem Ubiorum reduxit, turpi agmine, 
cum fisci de imperatore rapti inter signa interque aquilas ve- 
herentur. Germanicus superiorem ad exercitum profectus se- 4 
cundam et tertiam decumam et sextam decumam legiones nihil 

cunctatas sacramento adigit. 

quartadecumani paulum dubita- 5 

verant: pecunia et missio quamvis non flagitantibus oblata est. 
38. At in Chaucis coeptavere seditionem praesidium agi- 
tantes vexillarii discordium legionum et praesenti duorum : 

militum supplicio paulum repressi sunt. 

I. quintaniunt etuicessimanique : text D. 

Ruperti and Nipp. 

I. non abscessere, ‘would not leave.’ 
It is implied that after receiving payment 
they departed to * Vetera’ (c. 45, 1). 

2. viatico, used generally of a sol- 
dier's private stock or savings, as H. 1. 
£7, 5; Hor. Epp. 2. 2, 26; Suet. Jul. 
68, &c. 

3. primam, &c. The previous sen- 
tence would lead us to suppose that these 
legions had not, like the two others, 
insisted on immediate payment: 
Caecina is next mentioned (c. 48, 1? as 
in command, not of these legions at Koln, 
but of the two others at Vetera. 
would give support to Mommsen's sug- 
gestion (Hermes, xiii. 256, n. 3) that the 
pissage is mutilated and should run 
somewhat thus: * primam ac vicensimam 
legiones Germanicus iu civitatem Ubio- 
rum reduxit, quintam et unetvicensimam 
Caecina legatüs in Castra Vetera, turpi 
agmine. &c. It would seem, however, 
as if Vetera had not been mentioned 
before c. 45, I. and these two legions 
are also implied to have received money 
in c. 42, 7. It may have been thought 
unsafe to defer in their case what had been 
given on demand to the others, but it 
is strange that Tacitus should not have 
said so. 

4. civitatem Ubiorum. This expres- 
sion could be used of the whole district, 
as in I3. 57, 4; but the locality is here 
certainly identical with that of ‘ara Ubi- 
orum" (see on c. 39, I). 

5. de imperatore rapti. These words 
are emphatic, and contain the explanation 
of ‘turpi agmine.' The plundered money 
may have been pointed to with pride; 

also . 

This | 

iusserat id M'. Ennius 2 

12. mennius: M. Ennius Heins., text 

but the practice in itself of depositing 
morey with the standards was usual, 
and was encouraged, and even to some 
extent enforced, to make the soldier 
thrifty, and to bind him to the colours 
(Veg. 2, 20). Domitian however con- 
sidered it prudent to limit each man's 
deposit to 1000 H. S. (Suet. Dom. 7*. 
6. superiorem: cp. c. 31, 2. 
these legions see Introd. vii. p. 122. 
to. in Chaucis. This tribe occupied 

On 

. a very large space (G. 35), apparently on 

either side of the lower Weser. Pliny 
(N. H. 16. 1, 1, 2) divides them into 
* maiores! and ‘minores’; one or the 
other of whom, along the coast between 
the Weser and Ems (cp. 2. 24, 3), came 
under Roman: control (cp. c. 60, 3), but, 
like their neighbours the Frisii (4. 72, 1), 
afterwards revolted (11. 18, 1; H. 4. 79, 
35 5. 19, 2; Suet. Cl. 24). 

coeptavere. This verb, rare else- 
where in prose, is often used by Tacitus 
to express an attempt, whether successful 
or otherwise: cp. c. 45, 25; 2. 81, 15 4. 
I9, 4; 24, 2, &c. 

II. vexillarii, ‘detachments’ (see on 
C. 17, 4). The ‘veterani sub vexillo’ 
cannot be here meant, as they were still 
at headquarters (cp. c. 35, 2; 39, 1). 

discordium, ‘ disaffected.’ Thus ‘dis- 
sideat’ (c. 46, 1) ; ‘ discordare' (3. 40, 4); 
* discordia! (H. 2. 76, 9), &c., are used 
of soldiers, not as disagreeing among. 
themselves, but as mutinous. 

I2. M’. Ennius. ‘Mennius’ is not a 
known Roman name; and the correction 
is supported by the error ‘ Lennium’ for 
L. Ennium in 3. 70, 2, and by the general 

A.D. 14.) LIBER I. CAP. 37-39. 23I 

castrorum praefectus, bono magis exemplo quam concesso iurc. 
3 deinde intumescente motu profugus repertusque, postquam in- 
tutae latebrae, praesidium ab audacia mutuatur: non praefectum 
ab iis, sed Germanicum ducem, sed Tiberium imperatorem 

4 violari. simul exterritis qui obstiterant, raptum vexillum ad 5 

ripam vertit, et si quis agmine decessisset, pro desertore fore 
clamitans, reduxit in hiberna turbidos et nihil ausos. 

39. Interea legati ab senatu regressum iam apud aram Ubi- 
20rum Germanicum adeunt. duae ibi legiones, prima atque 
3 vicensima, veteranique nuper missi sub vexillo hiemabant. 

vidos et conscientia vaecordes intrat metus, venisse patrum iussu 
4 qui inrita facerent quae per seditionem expresserant. utque mos 
vulgo quamvis falsis reum subdere, Munatium Plancum con- 
sulatu functum, principem legationis, auctorem senatus consulti 
incusant; et nocte concubia vexillum in domo Germanici situm 

practice of mentioning officers of this rank 
by two names (c. 29, 1; 13. 39, 2). The 
preference of M', rather than M, as the 
praenomen, rests on a suggestion of the 
possible identity of this person with a 
Mávtos "Evvcos mentioned in the Pannonian 
war (Dio, 55. 33. 2). 

I. concesso iure: 
26, 3. 

2. intumescente motu: cp. quoniam 
Galiiae tumeant’ (H. 2. 32, 1). Similar 
metaphors, originating apparently in the 
“monet .. . tumescere bella’ of Verg. G. 
I, 465, are found in Liv., &c. 

6. ripam. Tacitus perhaps did not 
know what river was meant, or may have 
. thought it to be the Rhine (as in c. 
36, 2). From the position of the Chauci, 
we should take it to be the Ems. 

7. hiberna, probably at ‘ Vetera’; 
which would be nearer to the Chauci 
than the other winter camp. 

turbidos. This is best taken in its 
usual sense as 'seditious' (cp. c. 34. 6; 
43, 5, &c.), in which case ‘et’ would 
contain an adversative force (see note on 
C. 13,2). On the use of * et’ with a nega- 
tive, instead of * neque' with an affirmative 
pronoun or adverb, see Madvig, § 458a, 
Obs. I. Nipp. shows by many instances 
the fondness of Tacitus for such con- 
structions, especially for * et ' with ‘nullus,’ 
* numquam, ' ‘nihil,’ and ‘ nemo.’ 

8. legati. Their mission had próbably 
no- connexion with the mutiny; but was 
to convey to him the ‘ proconsulare im- 

perium ' (cp. c. 14, 4). 

see on c. 20, I1; 

: regressum, i.e. from the Upper army 
(cp. c- 37) 4). 

aram Ubiorum. In 822, A.D. 69, the 
winter camp of the first legion was at 
Bonn (H. 4. 25, 1). But that the * oppi- 
dum Ubiorum’ is here meant is clear 
from the distance of Vetera (c: 45, 1), 
and from the fact that the subsequent 

-— 
*)i 

‘Colonia’ derives a title from an altar . 

situate in it, being styled in some inscrip- 
tions and coins * Claudia ara' or * Colonia 
Claudia ara Agrippinensis’ (see Mar- 
quardt, Staatsv. i. 272, 5). On this altar 
and worship see on c. 57, 2. 

IO. sub vexillo. 
to take these words as qualifying * missi ' 
(‘ita missi ut sub vexillo retinerentur ’). 
The other explanation, joining ‘sub vex- 
illo hiemabant,’ forces us to apply the 
verb with these words to.the veterans, 
and without them to the legions. 

II. conscientia, ‘ consciousness 
guilt,’ as in c. 57, 2, &c. 

12. expresserant: cp. C. I9, 5, &c. 

13. subdere : cp. c. 6, 6, &c. 

Plancum. His title in the Fasti (as 
cos. in 766, A.D. 13, with C. Silius) is 
L. Munatius L. f. L. n. Plancus. He 
might be son or grandsen of the famous 
consul of 712, B.C. 42, well known in 
the history of the triumvirate, and stig- 
matized by Velleius (2. 83). Plancina 
(2. 43, 4) was probably his sister. 

I5. vexillum. The absence of any 
explanation of this word suggests that 
the flag is that already mentioned above 
(* sub vexillo). Germanicus is living in 

of 

It appears to be best . 

pa- To 

232 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 767. 

flagitare occipiunt, concursuque ad ianuam facto moliuntur fores, 
extractum cubili Caesarem tradere vexillum intento mortis metu 
subigunt. mox vagi per vias obvios habuere legatos, audita 5 
consternatione ad Germanicum tendentes. ingerunt contume- 6 

5.lias, caedem parant, Planco maxime, quem dignitas fuga impe- 
diverat ; neque aliud periclitanti subsidium quam castra primae 
legionis. illic signa et aquilam amplexus religione sese tuta- 7 
batur, ac ni aquilifer Calpurnius vim extremam arcuisset, rarum 
etiam inter hostes, legatus populi Romani Romanis in castris 

a house, probably the regular winter c. 63, 3; 13. 16, 6, &c. This noun ap- 

residence of the * legatus, and the soldiers 
assaulting him are also outside the legion- 
ary camp. It is suggested that these are 
the veterans, whose ‘vexillum’ had no 
place among the standards of the legions, 
and was retained in the keeping of 
Germanicus. They had their discharge, 
but had possibly not, like the legions 
(see c. 37, 3, and note), received their 
money, or had further. expectations on 
final dismissal, and in their vague fear 
that all might be revoked, demand pos- 
session of their ‘ vexillum ' as a guarantee: 
see Nipp. and Domaszewski, * Fahnen; 
p.25. The legions, who had less to lose, 
seem less prominent in this outbreak, 
though even among them Plancüs was 
not safe. 

was given (Caes. B. G. 2. 20, 1; Plut. 
Fab. 15, 182), would make the demand 
for it imply an intention to elect a new 
general, of which there is no evidence ; 
though Germanicus (c. 43, 2) is repre- 
sented as imagining such an act in the 
case of his death. 

situm = ‘positum.’ So used of 
statues, &c., c. 74, 4; 2. 37, 33 4. 64, 3. 
See also 2. 7, 3. 

I. occipiunt; cp. 3. 2, 5; 6. 45, 6, 
&c. A word generally archaic, but 
adopted by Tacitus from Livy. 

moliuntur, ‘ break open’: 
8; H. 2. 22, 3; Liv. and Curt. 

2. extractum. 

1. 1, 11). The case is probably abl., as 
in Horace (1. 1.); but in 6. 23, 5, the 
MS. text * extractum custodiae’ is gene- 
rally accepted. 

4. consternatione, ‘the tumult’: cp. 

The alternative supposition, . 
that the ‘ vexillum is the red flag of the | 
gencral-in-chief, by which signal for battle 

cp. 3. 82, - 

' actually borne by a lower officer of this 
This implies some. 
compulsion, but not necessarily physical . 
force; cp. *contuberniis extracti (15. 13, | 
2); ‘rure extractus in urbem’ (Hor. Sat. . 

pears to originate with Livy, but the verb 
(cp. H. 3. 79, 3) is found eailier. | 

&. impediverat, here alone in Tacitus 
with simple abl. on the analogy of ‘ pro- 
hibere.’ 

6. castra primae legionis. The 
context implies perhaps that his assailants 
followed him into this camp, and cer- 
tainly that some of the legion, who are 
addressed as guilty by Germanicus, 
attacked him there. Domaszewski (see 
on c. 42, 6) notes that when there were 
only three legions in Lower Germany, 
two had winter quarters at Vetera and 

. one at Koln; hence when a second legion 

was allotted to the latter place, the two 
had’ separate camps. . 

7. religione: see note on c. 18, 2. On 
the sanctity of the eagles and other stan- 
dards cp. 2. 17, 2, and ‘conversus ad 
signa et bellorum deos' (H. 3. 19, 7); 
also Dion. Hal. 6, 45 rabra . . .(o rep idpu- 
pata Oewy iepà vopiferar, Catiline kept 
an eagle of Marius in a shrine within his 
house (Cic. Cat. 1. 9, 24) ; and the legi- 
onary eagle is stated by Dio (40. 18, 1) 
to have bcen kept in camp in a portable 
shrine. Even in old times it was a prac- 
tice to swear by the standards (see Liv. 
26. 48, 12). See other evidence of their 
sanctity in Marquardt, ii. 438. 

8. aquilifer. The eagle of the legion, 
placed under charge of its ‘ centuriv 
primipilus ' (see Introd. vii. p. 124) was 

title, mentioned in several inscriptions : 
see Henzen and Wilmanns, Indices, Caver 
in Eph. Epig. iv. 371, and representations 
in art of the eagle and its bearer in Do- 
maszewski, *Fahnen,' p. 29, foll. 

rarum etiam, &c. On such paren- 
theses see Introd. v. $ 82. A similar - 
outrage on ‘ legati' is similarly spoken of 
in H. 3. 8o, 3. 

A.D. 14.] LIBER 1. 

CAP. 39, 40. 233 

8 sanguine suo altaria deum commaculavisset. luce demum, post- 
quam dux et miles et facta noscebantur, ingressus castra Ger- 
manicus perduci ad se Plancum' imperat recepitque in tribunal. 
9 tum fatalem increpans rabiem, neque militum sed deum ira 
resurgere, cur venerint legati aperit; ius legationis atque ipsius 5 
Planci gravem et inmeritum casum, simul quantum dedecoris 
adierit legio, facunde miseratur, attonitaque magis quam quieta 
contione legatos praesidio auxiliarium equitum dimittit. 

40. Eo in metu arguere Germanicum omnes, quod non ad 
superiorem exercitum pergeret, ubi obsequia et contra rebellis 1o 
auxilium: satis superque missione et pecunia et mollibus con- 
2 sultis peccatum. vel si vilis ipsi salus, cur filium parvulum, cur 
gravidam coniugem inter furentes et omnis humani iuris viola- 

3 tores haberet? illos saltem avo et rei publicae redderet. 

diu 

cunctatus aspernantem uxorem, cum se divo Augusto ortam 
neque degenerem ad pericula testaretur, postremo uterum eius 
et communem filium multo cum fletu complexus, ut abiret 
4 perpulit. incedebat muliebre et miserabile agmen, profuga ducis 

I. altaria deum. These, as well as the 
standards and the image of the emperor, 
stood in the principia. See 4. 2, 4. 

2. noscebantur, ‘were capable of 
recognition’: cp. c. 62,1; 4. 62, 5; H. 
I. 90, 3. 

ingressus castra: see above. 

3. imperat recepitque. The his- 
torical present is easily interchangeable 
. with a perfect, as 2. 7, 1; 20, 2; I4. 4, 
6, &c. 

4. fatalem increpans rabiem. *Ra- 
bies' is thus used of mutiny in c. 31, 3. 
: The use of ‘ fatalem ' (cp. 5. 4, 25; 15. 61, 
6; and note on 3. 30, 2), which is ex- 
plained by *deum ira' (cp. 16. 16, 3), 
treats them as hardly responsible beings, 
and softens the censure conveyed in ‘in- 
crepans’; from which word some such 
sense as that of 'dicens' is supplied by 
* zeugma' with ‘ resurgere.' 

5. ius legationis, sc. ‘ violatum.’ 
On such pregnant constructions see In- 
trod. v. $ 84. » 

7. miseratur, 'expresses sorrow for.' 
So ‘defendere,’ ‘to plead in excuse,’ 13. 
43, 4, &c. 

g. metu, perhaps here used of circum- 
stances causing fear, rather than fear itself; 
cp. ‘ostendere metum ex Tiberio’ (2. 72, 
2j; ‘metus temporum ' (H. 1. 49, 6); ' pro- 

visum adversum metus’ (II. 2. 12, 3), &c. 
A similar use of ‘terror’ (11. 19, I, &c.) 
is classical, and * formido' (Agr. 22, 1) is 
so used by Sallust. 

14. &vo. Onthe use of terms of adop- 
tive relationship see on c. 33, 3. That 
of the boy alone is mentioned, as he, 
in virtue of this adoptive relationship, 
stood nearer than Agrippina to Tiberius. 
Nipp. 

diu cunctatus aspernantem... per- 
pulit. Two distinct causes are assigned 
for the delay ; his own hesitation, and the 
pride of his wife ; which latter.is explained 
by ‘cum se... testaretur.' 

16. degenerem. ‘This poctical word 
had been introduced into prose by Liv. 
and Pl. Mai. The construction, appearing 
to be shortened for ‘ad pericula subeunda," 
is analogous to that of ‘ praecipuos ad 
scelera,' ‘ad pericula' (6. 7, 3; 14. 58, 1), 
and many other uses of ‘ad’ with the 
force of ‘in reference to’: see 2. 2, 2; 
Her. on H. 2. 97, 7. 

18. incedebat. This implies the ab- 
sence of such vehicles as would usually be 
provided. ‘Muliebre’ and * miserabile" 
are also emphatic, and the order of words 
is studied for effect. ‘They were starting 
on foot, a train of women, and in pitiable 
plight.’ 

tud 

5 

IO 

234 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

uxor, parvulum sinu filium gerens, lamentantes circum amicorum 
coniuges, quae simul trahebantur, nec minus tristes qui mane- 
bant. ; 
41. Non florentis Caesaris neque suis in castris, set velut in 
5 urbe victa facies; gemitusque ac planctus etiam militum aures 

oraque advertere : progrediuntur contuberniis. 

quis ille flebilis 2 

sonus? quod tam triste? feminas inlustres, non centurionem 
ad- tutelam, non militem, nihil imperatoriae uxoris aut comitatus 
soliti: pergere ad Treveros [et] externae fidei. pudor inde et 8 
miseratio et patris Agrippae, Augusti avi memoria, socer Drusus, 

7. quid Heins., Nipp., Ritt. 
but Trever. five times in 3. 40-45. 
Nipp., tradi (committi, dedi) fidei others. 

2. qui manebant, i.e. the husbands 
and friends parting from them. - 

4. florentis, ‘in prosperity’: cp. c. 53, 
2; 16. 33, 1, &c. 

5. facies. Gronov. has rightly ex- 
plained this, as not * facies Caesaris,' but 
‘facies rerum’ (cp. c. 49, 1; H. 2. 89, 
3, &c.) ‘non florenti Caesari, sed urbi 
captae conveniens. It seems better, with 
Nipp., to place a semicolon at ‘facies,’ 
and to take the sentence in apposition 
with the last of the preceding chapter, 
than, with Halm, to join it with ‘ gemi- 
tusque,' &c., as subject of * advertere.’ 

6. &dvertere, ‘attracted,’ as 2. 17,2; 
4. 21, 5; 6. 44, 1, &c. For other uses of 
the word see 3. 52, 2; 4. 54, 2, &c. 

progrediuntur contuberniis: cp. 
* progredior portu Verg. Aen. 3, 300, and 
other such ablatives in Introd. 5. $ 24. 

quis ille, &c. ‘he construction is here 
to be taken as designedly broken and 
exclamatory, to express the agitation of 
the speakers. *What is this sound of 
mourning? What this sight so sad? 
Here are women of rank—not a centurion 
—not a soldier as escort—not a mark of 
the general's wife or of her usual retinue— 
setting out for the Treveri!' &c. Such 
exclamatory sentences are given in 14. 8, 
4, and, according to some, in c. 35, 2 
(‘neu mortem,’ &c.). With ‘quod,’ we 
should expect a substantive (cp. ‘quod 
nomen’ c. 42, 4); and, though ‘triste’ 
may have a substantival force (as ‘triste 
...evenit' 15. 34, 1; ‘triste lupus sta- 
bulis’ Verg. Ecl. 3, 80), the addition of 

‘tam’ supports the conjecture that ‘iter’ - 

(E. Jacob) or ‘ spectaculum,’ answering 
to ‘sonus, may have dropped out. 

9. Treviros here twice and in most places in Hist., 
(et] Halm, fidei sedem Müller, externam fidem 

9. ad Treveros [et] externae fidei. 
If we are to follow most commentators in 
taking the last words as a concise genitive 
of quality (cp. Introd. v. $ 34); they should 
certainly be joined closely to ‘ Treveros,’ 
without a needless and even misleading 

conjunction. ‘ Et’ appears also redundant 

before * externae’ in H. 5. 10, 3. But the . 
force of such an expression here (as of 
‘externa superbia' in 15. 31, 2), should 
be *homines talis fidei, qualis apud ex- 
ternos esse solet,' i. e. * parvae fidei'; an 
interpretation which, if open to no other 
objection, misrepresents the thought of 
the speakers, which is ríot one of anxiety 
for Agrippina's safety, but of self-reproach, 
that the fidelity of foreigners should be the 
refuge of a Roman general's wife against 
a Roman army. The alternative explana- 
tion, taking *externae fidei" as a dative 
adapted in construction to the idea of 
some such verb as *committi, supplied 
by zeugma from *pergere, is hardly 
justified even by the boldness with which 
Tacitus uses this figure (see Introd. v. $ 83). 
It is possible, as suggested by Mr. Haver- 
field, to put a stop after * Treveros,’ and 
read ‘externae fidei pudor inde, which 
would not perhaps be harsher than some 
other concise expressions ; otherwise some 
corruption is to be suspected ; though no 
emendation has won general acceptance. 
On the Treveri see 3. 40, I, &c. © 

IO. socer Drusus, &c. All these clauses 
express the thoughts influencing the sol- 
diers, and lead up to 'sed nihil, &c. 
The passage begins regularly, but ab- 
ruptly passes from * patris. . . memoria’ 
to a pregnant construction, in which men- 
tion of the object of thought implies the 

A. D. 14.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 40-42. 

235 

ipsa insigni fecunditate, praeclara pudicitia ; iam infans in castris 
genitus, in contubernio legionum eductus, quem militari vocabulo 
Caligulam appellabant, quia plerumque ad concilianda vulgi 
4 studia eo tegmine pedum induebatur. sed nihil aeque flexit 
quam invidia in Treveros: orant obsistunt, rediret maneret, 
pars Agrippinae occursantes, plurimi ad Germanicum regressi. 

‘Bisque ut erat recens dolore et ira, 

coepit. 

apud circumfusos ita 

42, ‘Non mihi uxor aut filius patre et re publica cariores 
sunt, sed illum quidem sua maiestas, imperium Romanum ceteri 
2 exercitus defendent. coniugem et liberos meos, quos pro gloria 
vestra libens ad exitium offerrem, nunc procul a furentibus sum- 
moveo, ut quidquid istud sceleris imminet, meo tantum sanguine 
pietur, neve occisus Augusti pronepos, interfecta Tiberii nurus 

thought itself. For a similar transition 
cp. ‘cum...ad memoriam coniugii et 
infantiam liberorum revolveretur’ (11. 34, 
1). Wolf remarks that here the change 
seems designedly introduced, as if to de- 
note that not merely the recollection, but 
the image itself of Drusus, their former 
beloved commander, is as vividly before 
them as those whom they actually saw. 
The relationship expressed is throughout 
that of Ayrippina. | 

1. insigni fecunditate. Of the nine 

children whom she had in all, three were | 

now living, and six had been born. See 
Introd. ix. 

in castris genitus. Gaius was now 
just two years old. Tacitus here follows 
the popular belief, as expressed in an 
epigram quoted by Suetonius (Cal. 8), 
‘In castris natus,’ &c. But he was born 
when his father, as consul, was in Rome; 
and Suetonius (1. 1.) shows, from a letter 
of Augustus, that the child was in Italy 
not long after the date of birth; and that 
the birthplace was stated in the ‘acta 
publica ' to have been Antium. 

2. militari vocabulo : see on c. 23, 4. 

3. ad concilianda vulgi studia. ‘Ihe 
‘caliga’ was not worn by officers above 
the rank of centurion, and is thus so far 
characteristic of the common soldier, that 
* caligatus' is used for ‘miles gregarius ' 
(Suet. Aug. 25; Vit. 7), and ‘in caliga,’ or 
‘a caliga ' for ‘in,’ or ‘from the ranks '(Pl. 
N. H. 7. 42, 44, 135 ; Sen. de Benef. 5. 16, 
2) Hence it is called * habitus greyalis’ 
(c. 69, 5), or *imanipularius' (Suet. Cal. 9). 

4. aeque...quam: cp. 14. 38, 3, &c. 
In prose from Livy, who appears to take 
it from Plautus. — . 

5. orant. obsistunt, &c. The con- 
struction is again designedly abrupt: 
‘orant’ is explained by *'rediret, * ma- 
neret’; ‘obsistunt’ refers strictly to ‘ pars 
. . . Occursantes, and more loosely to 
* plurimi . . . regressi. The alliteration 
adds to the rhetorical effect of the asyn- 
deta: op. 'pergerent properarent’ c. 51, 7, 
and a different form in c. 58, 6. 

7. recens dolore et ira, ‘ fresh from,’ 
i.e. with their influence still strong upon 
him: cp. ‘recens victoria’ H. 3. 77, 5. 
So one who had been lately praetor is 
called * recens praetura' (4. 52, 2). The 
more classical construction would be with 
the prep. as ‘recens a vulnere Dido’ 
Verg. Aen. 6, 450; but the usage here is 
analogous to that of the abl. of place 
whence (see Introd. v. 24). 

10 

II. liberos; a rhetorical plural, one 

child only being present. 

13. istud sceleris, partitive genitive, 
like *quicquid . . . auctoritatis' 14. 43, 2. 
On the freedom with which such are used 
by Tacitus cp. Introd. v. $ 32. 

I4. pietur. Nipp. has noticed the pecu- 
liar use of this word here to denote, not 
an expiation of guilt, but an act on which 
guilt might exhaust itself. Cp. Prop. 4 (3). 
19, I8 (of Medea) ‘quo tempore matris 
iram natorum caede piavit amor. The 
word is generally poetichl, the usual prose 
word being *expiare.' | 

5 

10 

236 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 767. 

nocentiores vos faciant. quid enim per hos dies inausum inte- 3 
meratumve vobis? quod nomen huic coetui dabo?  militesne 4 
appellem, qui filium imperatoris vestri vallo et armis circumse- 
distis? an cives, quibus tam proiecta senatus auctoritas? hos- 
tium quoque ius et sacra legationis et fas gentium rupistis. 
divus Iulius seditionem exercitus verbo uno compescuit, Quirites 5 
vocando qui sacramentum eius detrectabant: divus Augustus 
vultu et aspectu Actiacas legiones exterruit: nos ut nondum 
eosdem, ita ex illis ortos si Hispaniae Suriaeve miles asperna- 
retur, tamen mirum et indignum erat. primane et vicensima 6 

I. faciat: text Ritt, 
reads uniformly Suria. 

I. inausum intemeratumve. Both 
words appear first in Vergil (Aen. 7, 308; 
2, I43, &c.). The former, found here 
alone in Tacitus, occurs in earlier prose 
(Sen. Ep. 91, 15); the latter seems 
introduced into prose by Tacitus, but 
used freely by him, even where the pas- 
sage is not rhetorical (as c. 49, 6, &c.). 

2. quod nomen, &c. That this speech 
is mainly composed by the author, would 
appear from the evident reminiscence 
here of that purporting in Livy (28. 27) 
to have been addressed by Scipio Afri- 
canus to his mutinous troops: *ad vos 
quemadmodum loquar, nec consilium, nec 
oratio suppeditat; quos ne quo nomine 
quidem appellare debeam, scio. Cives? 
qui a patria vestra descistis: an milites? 
qui imperium auspiciumque abnuistis, 
sacramenti religionem rupistis.' 

3. vallo et armis circumsedistis. 
Walther rightly treats this as rhetorical 
and figurative; as neither the occurrences 
in the summer camp (c. 35), nor those 
in the winter quarters (c. 39), bear out 
a literal interpretation. 

4. proiecta, ‘trampled under foot’: so 
* proiectum consulare imperium’ Liv. 2. 
27, I1. In 3. 65, 4, it is adjectival, in 
the sense of ‘abject.’ The contempt for 
the senate is that implied in their treat- 
ment of its delegates (c. 39, 6). 

hostium quoque ius, ‘even rights 
accorded to enemies’; i.e. ‘laws of 
war.’ This and the two following ex- 
pressions are all a rhetorical amplifica- 
tion of one idea, the conjunctions being 
epexegetical. 

5. sacra, ‘sanctity’: cp. 2. 65, 4. 

fas gentium, ‘international obliga- 
tion’; i.e. ‘law of nations.’ Cp. ‘fas 

g. syriae: Med. i. has this form eleven times, suria eight 
times, Med. ii. almost always the former ; 

Baiter and Ritt. follow the MSS., Halm 

disciplinae’ (c. 19, 3); ‘fas patriae’ (2. 
10, 1), &c. | 

6. divus Iulius, &c. Two mutinies 
in his time are mentioned by Suetonius 
(Jul. 69; 70); and this circumstance is 
referred to the latter of them (that of the 
tenth legion near Rome in 707, B. C. 47) 
by him, as also by Appian (D.C. 2. 93), 
and Dio (42. 53, 3). Merivale (ch. xvi. 
p. 222) prefers the authority of Lucan 
(5, 358), who tells this story of the earlier 
mutiny at Placentia in 705, B.C. 49. In 
H. 3. 24, 3, Antonius Primus is made to 
reproach soldiers as * pagani'; and Alex- 
ander Severus is recorded (Lamprid. 52) 
to have often disbanded legions by merely 
styling them * Quirites.' 

7. divus Augustus, &c. Other ac- 
counts of this mutiny represent Augustus 
as having hastily returned to Brundusium 
in the winter following Actium, and ap- 
peased the military discontent by rewards 
(Suet. Aug. 17; Dio, 51. 3, 4). There 
may be here some confusion with the 
incidents of an earlier mutiny, in 719, 
B. C. 35, which appears to have been more 
formidable, and more energetically dealt 
with: Liv. Epit. 131 ; Dio, 49. 34. 

8. nos. The context shows that this 
refers to himself alone; Tiberius not 
being of the blood of Augustus, nor un- 
known (see 2. 3, 4) to the Syrian legions. 

ut...ita. Seeon c. 12, 1. 

9. Hispaniae Suriaeve; i.e. ‘an 
army to which I was personally un- 
known.' 

Io. erat. On the force of this indicative 
see Introd. v. $ 50 b, 3. Nipp. has here 
collected instances of it, as also of the 
subjunctive in similar expressions. 

primane, &c. The construction is 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 42, 43. 

237 

legiones, illa signis a Tiberio acceptis, tu tot proeliorum socia, 
7 tot praemiis aucta, egregiam duci vestro gratiam refertis? hunc 
ego nuntium patri, laeta omnia aliis e provinciis audienti, feram? 
ipsius tirones, ipsius veteranos non missione, non pecunia sati- 
atos; hic tantum interfici centuriones, eici tribunos, includi le- 
gatos, infecta sanguine castra, flumina, meque precariam animam 

inter infensos trahere. 

43. Cur enim primo contionis die ferrum illud, quod pectori 
meo infigere parabam, detraxistis, o inprovidi amici? melius 
2 et amantius ille qui gladium offerebat. cecidissem certe nondum 
tot flagitiorum exercitui meo conscius; legissetis ducem, qui 
meam quidem mortem inpunitam sineret, Vari tamen et trium 
3 legionum ulcisceretur. neque enim di sinant ut Belgarum quam- 

partly interrogative, partly exclamatory, 
as suited to the excitement of the speaker. 
In.the following words we should natu- 
rally refer *illa' to the First, ‘tu’ to the 
Twentieth legion; but the latter was 
certainly newly raised at the time of the 
Pannonian rebellion (see Introd. vii. 
p. 122), and possibly by Tiberius himself, 
whereas there must have been always 
a First legion in the Roman army, and 
the supposition that it may have been 
cut to pieces in the ‘clades Lolliana’ or 
* Variana, and afterwards reconstituted 
under the same title, rests on no evidence, 
and is not probable. The true solution 
seems to be that which I had suggested 
in the first edition, and which is now 
strengthened by the argument of Domas- 
zewski (West-Deutsche Zeitschrift, Korre- 
spondenzblatt, xii. 1893, p. 2623, foll.: 
see also Mr. Hardy in Journ. of Philo]. 
xxiii. p. 38), that the reference, as some- 
times elsewhere (see c. 70, 6, and note), 
is determined by other circumstances than 
the order of mention. The scene is in 
the camp of the First legion (c. 39, 6), 
which confronts the tribunal of the 
speaker, and is addressed as *tu, the 
* prima Germanica which may well have 
shared in all the warfare of Tiberius. 
The Twentieth, though nearer in the 
order of previous mention, is supposed 
to stand in the background, more remote 
in fact and thought, and is spoken of 
as Silla.’ 

2. egregiam. In his frequent ironical 
use of this word (c. 59, 3: 3. 17, 5; 
H. 1. 33, 3; 4. 32, 4), Tacitus appears 
to follow Vergil (Aen. 4, 53). 

duci: sc. *'Tiberio. The allusion 
to their former service under him is still 
sustained. 

5. includi legatos. The mention of 
these as a climax to centurions and tri- 
bunes, as well as the inapplicability of 
* includi' to the delegates of the senate, 
who had already departed (c. 39, 8), 
suggests that the *legati legionum" are 
meant. No act of violence to these has 
been mentioned, but all the superior 
officers must have been under some con- 
straint, which would justify their being 
spoken of as * imprisoned,’ without greater 
rhetorical licence than that of ‘infecta 

qn 

nt 

sanguine castra, flumina' (cp. c. 32, 3), &c. . 

6. precariam, ‘on sufferance': cp. 
* precaria vita’ H. 4. 76, 5; *precarium im- 
perium’ H. 1. 52, 6 (where see Her.), &c. 

8. Cur enim, &c. The thought is, 
‘I am living on sufferance, and it is the 
fault of my short-sighted friends that 
I am living at all.' 

9. melius, sc. *fecit On the omission 
of such verbs see Introd. v. $ 38 b. 

1I. tot flagitiorum ... conscius, * im- 
plicated with my army in so many out- 
rages.’ As responsible for its discipline, 
he treats himself as involved in what he 
had not prevented. Cp. ‘quasi scelere 
contaminaretur' (c. 35, 4). On the con- 
struction, cp. ‘alius alii tanti facinoris 
conscii" Sall. Cat. 22, 3; ‘si conscius 
Dymno tanti sceleris fuissem ' Curt. 6. 10, 
20. Theconstruction avoids the awkward- 
ness of a double genitive, and, with the 
dative of a personal pronoun, is usual. 

I3. sinant, ut. This construction is 
found only a few times in Terence, and 

o 

238 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 767. 

quam offerentium decus istud et claritudo sit, subvenisse Romano 

nomini, compressisse Germaniae populos. tua, dive Auguste, 4 

caelo recepta mens, tua, pater Druse, imago, tui memoria isdem 

istis cum militibus, quos iam pudor et gloria intrat, eluant hanc 
5 maculam irasque civiles in exitium hostibus vertant. vos quoque, 5 
quorum alia nunc ora, alia pectora contueor, si legatos senatui, 
obsequium imperatori, si mihi coniugem et filium redditis, dis- 
cedite a contactu ac dividite turbidos: id stabile ad paeniten- 
tiam, id fidei vinculum erit.’ 

44. Supplices ad haec et vera exprobrari fatentes orabant 
puniret noxios, ignosceret lapsis et duceret in hostem: revoca- 
retur coniunx, rediret legionum alumnus neve opses Gallis tra- 
deretur. reditum Agrippinae excusavit ob inminentem partum 2 

10 

4. fluant: text B. 

once in Curtius, ‘ nec di siverint ut. 
quisquam . . . possit’ (5. 8, 3). 

I. claritudo.. Wülífiin notes (Philol. 
xxV. 99) that Tacitus shows a growing 
preference for this more archaic form 
(Cato, Sisenna) instead of the Ciceronian 
' claritas, throughout the Annals, especi- 
ally in the last six Books, where the latter 
word occurs once (16. 30, 1), the former 
twenty times. Except in c. 28, 2, it is 

used always figuratively, whether of per-. 

sonal renown (as here, and II. 10, 5; 
14. 53, 4, &c.), or of distinguished an- 
cestry (as 2. 43, 6; 6. 47, 3, &c.). 

3. imago, to be taken figuratively, and 
‘tui. memoria’ as its explanation. That 
the legions still bore the effigy of one long 
dead and never deified is most improbable; 
and the apostrophe to Augustus (‘tua ... 

caelo recepta mens’) appeals equally to 

the imagination. 

| he gloria, ‘pride’; as *iactantia glo- 
riaque ' (c. 8, a). Thus *pudor' and 
‘gloria’ are joined in H. 2. 21, 6; cp. 
* generandi gloria mellis! (Verg. G. 4, 
205). It is also used in a bad sense, as 
* vaingloriousness " (14. 15, 3, &c.). 

hanc maculam. This is by some 
wrongly referred to the defeat of Varus, 
of which ‘illam’ would rather have been 
used. It means the stain of mutiny, and 
is explained by ‘iras civiles," as ‘eluant’ 
by ‘in exitium hostibus vertant. The 
expedition i in c. 49, §, is called ‘ piaculum 
furoris': cp. also c. 51, 7. 

&. vos quoque, &c. The speaker is 
represented as skilfuly imagining the 

. and abl. o 

existence of the change of feeling which 
he desires to produce. 

6. si legatos senatui . . . redditis. 
They would give him back his wife and 
son by so behaving that he could safely 
recall them. The figure of ‘ giving back 
to the senate its delegates" seems more 
farfetched, and merely to denote due 
recognition of them as such; unless we 
dr ai him to represent them rhetori- 
cally as still in the pcwer of the legions, 
and not yet in safety. 

8. & contactu, ‘from contagion’: so 
used P odi in 4. 49, 4, and figuratively 
often in Tacitus, as 6. 7» ^ &c. 

dividite = ‘ secernite': cp. * provinciae 
que mari dividuntur! (2 43. 2); * dividere 

efensionem’ (3. 15, 3). Earlier prose 
writers glee always to add the BIE: 
separation. 

10. Supplices, &c. Onthe improbabili- 
ties of the narrative seg Introd. iii. P. - 
n.12. Ad haeo, ‘at these words’: 
H. 3. 70, 6. 

II. et duceret. The conjunction here 
couples a future action to the clauses 
referring to the settlement of the mutiny 
itself[ For instances of such combina- 
tions see Her. on H. r1. 51, 2 

I3. reditum Agrippinae excusavit, 
Elsewhere, the accusative with this verb 
either denotes that which has been done, 
and is apologized for; or (as in 3. 11, 2, 
&c.) that which is pleaded in excuse. 
Here it means ‘excusavit Agrippinam, 
quod non rediret." 

inminentem. This belongs properly 

L0 ———————EENMEI BA ee we mw oo —  — -— —— M — Maser sence ^e Bae ^ 
z z i; 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 43, 44. 239 

8et hiemem; venturum filium: cetera ipsi exsequerentur. dis- 
currunt mutati et seditiosissimum quemque vinctos trahunt ad 
legatum legionis primae C. Caetronium, qui iudicium et poenas 
de singulis in hunc modum exercuit. stabant pro contione 
4 legiones destrictis gladiis; reus in suggestu per tribunum os- 
tendebatur: si nocentem adclamaverant, praeceps datus truci- 
5 dabatur. et gaudebat caedibus miles, tamquam semet absol- 
veret; nec Caesar arcebat, quando nullo ipsius iussu penes 
6 eosdem saevitia facti et invidia erat. secuti exemplum veterani 
haud multo post in Raetiam mittuntur, specie defendendae pro- 
vinciae ob imminentis Suebos, ceterum ut avellerentur castris 

to. ‘partum,’ but may extend its force 
somewhat to 'hiemem." An altar at 
Ambitarvium, a Treveran village near 
Coblenz, inscribed ‘ob Agrippinae puer- 
-perium,’ is recorded to have been seen by 
Pl. Mai. (Suet. Cal. 8). It has been held 
by some that the birth must have been 
that of the younger Agrippina, and that 
either this narrative, or the statement in 
I2. 27, 1, must be wrong. The supposi- 
tion of Mommsen (Hermes, xiii. 256, foll.) 
is more probable, that neither of the 
children born in Germany (Introd. ix. 
note 14; I5) were born in this year; and 
that we must suppose at this time the 
probably premature birth of a child which 
never lived, and has no place in the list 
given bv Suetonius. 

2. vinctos: for the pl. see Introd. v. 
$ 4a e. 

3. legatum legionis. Onthese officers 
see Introd. vii. p. 124. 
|. poenas...exercuit, apparently taken 
from Vergil ( Aen. 6, 543) ; with its strange- 
ness softened by combination with the 
regular phrase ‘ iudicium exercere.' 

4. pro contione. This construction 
is familiar in the phrase * laudare aliquem 
| pro contione' (2. 22. 1 ; Sall.; Liv., &c.), 
where it is generally explained to mean 
‘before the assembly. . But here the 
legions are the assembly. Also, there 
appears to be some evidence that the 
‘tribunal’ may itself be called ‘ contio.’ 
Even thus, if ‘pro contione’ were equi- 
valent to ‘ pro tribunali,’ and analogous 
in Tacitus to ¢ pro ripa,’ ‘ pro munimentis,’ 
‘pro muris" (2. 9, 33 I3, 4; 81, 1); it 
would describe the position of the speaker 
standing forth on the platform, rather than 
the audience facing it. Unless therefore 
we take the phrase to mean no more than 
that they ‘ stood forth assembled,’ we must 

explain it (with Nipp.) to signify * after 
the fashion of an assembly’ (cp. 4. 38, 2), 
i.e. not an irregular crowd, yet with the 
implied meaning that it was not strictly 
a * contio convened by the general, but 
one self-constituted. No such use of the 
phrase has been however found elsewhere. 
A rude trial of this kind, in which soldiers 
were allowed to butcher those whom they 
pronounced guilty, is called ‘ priscus mos’ 
in Ammian. 2. 9, 5. 

5. suggestu. This is the regular term 
for the ‘tribunal’ or platform in camps, 
as H. 1. 36, 1; 55, 5; Caes.; Liv., &c. 
The construction of such with piled up 
turf is described in c. 18, 4, but it might 
often be a more permanent structure. 

9. secuti exemplum ; sc. ‘legionum.’ 
The ‘ veterani sub vexillo’ are here clearly 
distinguished from the legions. 

To. Raetiam. This name strictly an- 
swers to the modern Grisons and Tyrol, 
but often, as here, is taken to include the 
frontier country of Vindelicia ; which com- 
prised southern Bavaria between the Inn 
and the upper Danube, and extended later 
to the ‘limes Romanus.’ See Introd. vii. 
p.110. Both countries were reduced to 
subjection by Drusus and Tiberius in 739, 
B.C. I5 (Liv. Epit. 138; Vell. 2. 39, 3; 
Hor. Od. 4. 4 and 14). Their only im- 
portant town was ‘ dip im Vindelicorum ’ 
(Augsburg): see G. 41, I 

11. Suebos. The various tribes grouped 
under this name extended in the time of 
Tacitus from the Baltic to the Danube 
(cf. G. 38-43); here the Marcomani of 
Bohemia and others subject to Maro- 
boduus are meant: see on 2. 44, 5. 

ceterum : cp. c. 10, I. 

M xoig iA Nipp. takes this as dat.; but 

Me has the abl. ‘ complexu avolsus 
E 4, 616). 

\ 
1 

240 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

trucibus adhuc non minus asperitate remedii quam sceleris me- 

moria. 

centurionatum inde egit. 

citatus ab imperatore nomen, 7 

ordinem, patriam, numerum stipendiorum, quae strenue in prae- 

liis fecisset, et cui erant dona militaria, edebat. 

si tribuni, 

5legio industriam innocentiamque adprobaverant, retinebat or- 
dinem: ubi avaritiam aut crudelitatem consensu obiectavissent, 

IO 

solvebatur militia. 

45. Sic compositis praesentibus haud minor moles supererat 
ob ferociam quintae et unetvicensimae legionum, sexagensimum 
apud lapidem (loco Vetera nomen est) hibernantium. nam primi 2 

4. donaria: dona Victorius (cp. 6. 48, 3). 

. trucibus, ‘ gloomy’: * lucosque 
eelosta relligione truces’ ' Claud. Laud. 
Stil. 1, 239. 

2. centurionatum inde egit. The 
sense required is that of * centuriones re- 
censuit,' or *creavit'; the former process 
alone being described, but the latter im- 
plied ; as the vacancies of those dismissed 
or killed (c. 32, 3) had to be filled up. 
But ‘centurionatus,’ which (according to 
Nipp.) is found only in Val. Max. 3. 2, 23, 
and in an inscription of Antonine times 
(C. I. L. X. 3340), must mean, like the 
rather kss rare ‘centuriatus’ (Cic. and 
Suet. Gramm. 24), ‘the office of centurion’ 
(cp. *optionatus, *decurionatus, &c.) ; 
and thus the centurion himself should 
p be said *centurionatum agere. It 

S pears possible, on the analogy of 
edi ectum agere,’ to make the phrase 
mean ‘to hold an election of centurions’; 
but more probably the passage is corrupt. 
The most plausible emendation, however, 
‘centurionum reatum’ (Bernhardy, cited 
by Baiter), introduces a word unknown in 
Tacitus and very rare otherwise; and one 
which hardly seems to bear the meaning 
here required. 

4. dona militaria, ‘decorations.’ Such 
are mentioned in 3. 21, 3; Juv. 16, 57-60; 
and many inscriptions. (see Henzen, Index, 
p- 144). The brilliant appearance of an 

army when these were worn, as in full - 

dress, is described in H. 2. 89, 3. 

si... adprobaverant,...ubi. 
obiectavissent. ‘Si’ and * ubi" are inter- 
changed (both with indic.) in 4. 17, 1; 

si’ and ‘ut’ (both with subj.) in 11. 28, 
3; and such changes are frequent: see 
Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 233. The moods 
are interchanged, as here, in 6. 18, 5 (where 
see note), &c. Here there appears to be 
a compromise between the subj. of re- 

reckoned from Koln. 

5. ordines: text Kiessling. 

peated action, usual in writers of this age, 
and the indic. of earlier writers. See 
Introd. v. § 52. Walther takes it to imply 
that approval was the rule and disapproval 
the exception. 

6. avaritiam, in selling ‘ vacationes.’ 
See on c. 17, 6 

7. solvebatur militia. This would 
have the character of an ‘i ignominiosa 
missio'; as distinct from the * honesta,’ 
on completion of service, and * causaria,'" 
for disease. Dig. 49. 16, 13. 

8. praesentibus: cp. c. 30, 5; II. 
18, 2. ; 

moles, ‘difficulty’; as 2. 78, 1, &c. 
This use of the word had been already 
adopted by Livy (25. 11, 18) from Vergil 
(Aen. I, 33, &c.). 

9. quintae et unetvicensimae. On 
the departure of these legions from the 
summer camp cp. c. 37 3 

IO. Vetera. This station: though here 
described as if unknown to the reader, 
had been frequently mentioned in the 
‘ Histories.’ The full name, ‘ Vetera 
castra,’ is given in H. 4. 21, 1; 5. 14, I. 
The locality is identified by Schneider 
(Rhein. Geschichtsblatter, ii. 85) with the 
Fürstenberg, near Xanten (below Wesel), 
where remains exist. This would well 
suit the distance (sixty Roman miles), if 
The Itinerary of 
Antoninus (p. 370, cited by Orelli), placin 
it at a distance of sixty-three *milia passuum 
from Bonn, cannot on this supposition be 
correct. From observing that Tacitus 
says ‘nomen est’ (not.‘ erat’), and at the 
first mention in Hist. (4. 18, 6) uses similar 
words (‘castra quibus Veterum nomen est’), 
and from the fact that in his day this camp 
was no longer kept up, being superseded 
by ‘Colonia Traiana’ nearer Xanten, it 
has been thought by Schneider that he 

si 8 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 44-46. 241 

seditionem coeptaverant : atrocissimum quodque facinus horum 
manibus patratum ; nec poena commilitonum exterriti nec pae- 
3 nitentia conversi iras retinebant. igitur Caesar arma classem 
socios demittere Rheno parat, si imperium detrectetur, bello 

certaturus. 

46. At Romae nondum cognito, qui fuisset exitus in Illyrico, 
et legionum Germanicarum motu audito, trepida civitas incusare 
Tiberium quod, dum patres et plebem, invalida et inermia, 
cunctatione ficta ludificetur, dissideat interim miles neque du- 
orum adulescentium nondum adulta auctoritate comprimi queat. 
2ire ipsum et opponere maiestatem imperatoriam debuisse ces- 
: suris, ubi principem longa experientia eundemque severitatis 
3 et munificentiae summum vidissent. an Augustum fessa aetate 

II. imperator iam: text B. 
(Andresen Codd. Med. p. 4). 

speaks of it as *the old (i.e. disused) 
camp,’ and that its name during its occu- 
pation is unknown to us. The alternative 
view (see Düntzner, Bonn. Jahrb. 1xxiii. 21) 
would make it a Celtic name like Bonna, 
Novesium, &c. 

primi coeptaverant: see c. 31, 3. 

2. paenitentia. With this *commi- 
litonum’ may be again supplied, or it 
may be taken (with Nipp.) to mean their 
own penitence. 

3. arma. This is often used for * mi- 
lites,’ as in c. 1, 3, &c. Here the legions 
especially are meant, as the *socii' are 
mentioned separately. 

classem. This was perhaps a flotilla 
temporarily got together for use on the 
river. It is known, however, that a stand- 
ing German fleet of seagoing ships existed 
in the time of Drusus (Flor. 4. 12, 26; 
Suet. Cl. 1), and was employed in 758, 
A. D. 5, by Tiberius, who carried it to the 
Elbe (Vell. 2. 106, 2). and even to the 
Cimbri, or Jutland (Mon. Anc. v. 14). 
Germanicus used (c. 60, 3) and augmented 
it (2. 6, 2). It is styled in later inscrip- 
tions ‘Classis Germanica ' (or * Augusta 
Germanica ') P. F. (* pia fidelis") : Orelli 
3600; Henzen 6865-6867. 

6. Illyrico. This term had originally 
a very wide ethnographical sense (see 
Marquardt, i. p. 295), and is often taken 
to include not only Delmatia-and Pan- 
nonia, but even Moesia: see Suet. Tib. 
16, &c. 

8. invalida et inermia, ‘the feeble 
and defenceless element’: cp. ‘quod im- 

VOL. I. 

12. Ritt. wrongly gives the Med. text as longe 

becillum aetate, &c. (c. 56, 3). Nipp. 
has here collected many instances from 
Tacitus of the substantival application of 

neuter adjectives to masc. or fem. sub- 

stantives. to denote them as beings, or 
things. of a certain class. It is not how- 
ever peculiar to him, but classical: see 
Madv. 211 b, Obs. 1, Dr. Synt. u. Stil, 
$ 30, Her. on H. 2. 20, 11. 

9. cunctatione: see c. II, &c. 

dissideat, ‘mutinies’: cp. ‘discors,’ 
c. 38, 1, &c. 

Io. adulescentium. Germanicus was 
twenty-nine, Drusus about twenty-six 
years old. See Introd. ix. note 30, 31. 

II. opponere, 'to confront them with.' 

cessuris: cp. 'tracturis' c. 31, I. 

12. experientia : cp. c. 4, 3. 

severitatis et munificentiae sum- 
mum, 'with sovereign power to punish 
and reward. ‘Severitas,’ though ap- 
parently used differently in c. 25, 3; 36, 
3, has certainly this force in 3. 21, 2, &c. 
On the genitive see Introd. v. $ 33, e, y. 
The words might also be taken, with 
Zumpt (447, n. 1), like * praestantissimus 
sapientiae ' (6. 6, 2), to mean ‘severitatis 
et munificentiae summae"; but the position 
of Tiberius, as compared with that of his 
sons, seems here to be thought of rather 
than his character. 

13. an Augustum, &c. The speakers 
exaggerate the frequency of these expe- 
ditions, and invent the contrast of age. 
We know of no later expeditions of 
Augustus to Germany (or rather Gaul) 
than those of 738, B.C. 16, and 746, B. c. 8 

212 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 767. 

totiens in Germanias commeare potuisse: Tiberium vigentem 
annis sedere in senatu, verba patrum cavillantem? satis pro- 4 
spectum urbanae servituti: militaribus animis adhibenda fo- 
menta, ut ferre pacem velint. 

5 4". Inmotum adversus eos sermones fixumque Tiberio fuit 
non omittere caput rerum neque se remque publicam in casum 
dare. multa quippe et diversa angebant: validior per Ger- 2 
maniam exeteitus, propior apud Pannoniam; ille Galliarum 
opibus subnixus, hic Italiae inminens: quos igitur anteferret? 

10 ac ne postpositi contumelia incenderentur. at per filios pariter 8 
adiri maiestate salva, cui maior e longinquo reverentia. simul 4 
adulescentibus excusatum quaedam ad patrem reicere, resisten- 
tisque Germanico aut Druso posse a se mitigari vel infringi: 
quod aliud subsidium, si imperatorem sprevissent? ceterum ut 5 

c 
IO. intenderentur : 

(Dio, 54. 19; 55. 6), in ne forty-seventh quos. The use of this pronoun in 

and fifty-fifth years of his age. Tiberius, 
though far stronger for his years, was 
already fifty-six. The absence of any 
warning of this exaggeration suggests that 
Tacitus was himself misled by it. 

fessa aetate. This is a common 
expression in Tacitus, as 3. §9, 6; 14. 33, 

4, &c. 

2. cavillantem, ‘ ‘ quibbling at. The 
word usually means ‘to jest’ or 'satirize,' 
but is so used in Liv. 3. 20, 4. ‘ cavillari 
tum tribuni': cp. ‘cavillante circa crus’ 
(of the cobbler) Pl. N. H. 35. 10, 36, 85. 

3. servituti, invidiously contrasted 
with ‘ pacem." 

. 5. Inmotum... fixumque, one of the 
many imitations in Tacitus of Vergil (see 
Introd. v. $97, 4). 

6. omittere, ‘to leave unguarded’; as 
c. 36, 2, &c. 

caput rerum: so ‘caput rerum 
Urbem" (of Rome) H. 2. 32, 5. On a 
similar occasion, later, we have the same 
idea in other words, ‘omissa urbe, unde 
in omnia regimen ' (3. 47, 2). 

s6...in casum dare. Cp. 12. 14, 3 
‘rem i in casum dare’; and 2. I1, 1: such 
phrases are analogous to *rem in casum 

: committere ' (Liv. 4. 27, 6), and ‘ dare 
se in viam" (Cic. Fam. 14. 12), or ‘in 
fugam" (Id. Verr. 4. 43, 95). 

7. per, ‘throuphout? i.e. distributed 
over. 

9. subnixus, 
II. 3;. 11. I, 2. 

‘supported by’: cp. ©. 

the sense of ‘uter’ is rare, but found in 
the best authors’: cp. ‘ controversias . 

quisnam antef-rretur' (Caes. B. G. 5. 44. 
2); ‘quem velis, nescias, i.e. Antonius 
or Octavianus (Cic. Att. 16. 14, 1) : cp. 
also Cic. ad Fam. 7. 3, 1; Verg. Aen. 
12, 719; 727; and several other instances 
cited by Nipp. Gudeman notes (Int. to 

Dial. cxvi) the rarity of the post-positive 

use of 'igitur' in Tacitus (seven out of 
174 instances in Gerber and Greef). 

Io. ac ne. From ‘ angebant’ are sup- 
plied both the idea of doubt (with ‘ quos 
anteferret’), and of fear (with ‘ne. 
incenderentur’). ‘Acne’ is used in H. 
2. 34,2; 3. 46, 3, to subjoin an additional 
motive for an action. The correction of 
the text is needful: ‘intendo’ has often 
the sense of ‘to intensify,’ but is not used 
with an accusative of the person.. 

I2. excusatum. This participial ad- 
jective, in the sense of ‘ excusable,’ is post- © 
Augustan and rare. The adverbial com- 
parative is found in 3. 68, 1, and other 
adverbial or adjectival uses in Sen. ., Quint. 
and Pl. Min. | 

14. ut...iturus. Dráger notes that, 
before Livy, this rendering of the Greek 
construction of a participle with ds is 
very rare, and not found with the future 

participle. Tacitus has ‘ut. . arguens ' 
| 4 33; 2 ‘ut. . transmissurus’ (H. 2. 
8,4); ' . positurus’ (H. 3. 68; 4). 

Bee eri Ee in Introd. v. d$ Of 

A. D. 14.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 46-48. 

243 

iam iamque iturus legit comites, conquisivit impedimenta, ador- 
navit naves: mox hiemem aut negotia varie causatus primo 
prudentes, dein vulgum, diutissime provincias fefellit. 

48. At Germanicus, quamquam contracto exercitu et parata 
in defectores ultione, dandum adhuc spatium ratus, si recenti 
exemplo sibi ipsi consulerent, praemittit litteras ad Caecinam, 
venire se valida manu ac, ni supplicium in malos praesumant, 

2 usurum promisca caede. 

eas Caecina aquiliferis signiferisque 

et quod maxime castrorum sincerum erat occulte recitat, utque 

cunctos infamiae, se ipsos morti eximant hortatur: 

causas et merita spectari : 
8 noxios iuxta cadere. 

nam in pace 

ubi bellum ingruat, innocentes ac 
illi temptatis quos idoneos rebantur, post- 

quam maiorem legionum partem in officio vident, de sententia 
legati statuunt tempus, quo foedissimum quemque et seditioni 

4 promptum ferro invadant. 

tunc signo inter se dato inrumpunt 

contubernia, trucidant ignaros, nullo nisi consciis noscente quod 

caedis initium, quis finis. 

8. promisca: so Med. i. and Halm always, Med. ii. sometimes (14. 14, 3; 15.9, 2; 

16. 16, 4) promiscuus. 

I. legit... conquisivit ... adornavit. 
On the fondness of Tacitus for asyndeta 
in lively narrative see Introd. v. $ 65. 
In such clauses he oftener uses the his- 
torical infinitive (as 2. 3!, 1), or present 
(as H. 2. 22, 3), and puts the verb usually 
at the beginning of its clause, but some- 
times for variety at the end in the last 
clause (as c..68, 2; 2. 29, 1). Other ex- 
amples are here collected by Nipp. 

2. causatus, ‘pleading’: cp. 13. 44, 2, 
&c.; freq. in poets and Livy. 

primo, ‘at first,’ i.e. for a short time. 
These were the first, the people the next, 
the provinces the last to see through it. 

3. vulgum. This accus, found in 
Lucr., Verg., and Liv., is not unfrequent 
in Tacitus: cp. 3. 76, 3; 4. 14. 4: 6. 44, 
1; and several references given by Nipp. 

5. dandum... spatium. This is 
equivalent to ‘exspectandum’; with which 
verb, or with such As express or imply 
design, or attempt, * si’ is often used in 
the sense of ‘whether,’ or ‘in case that.’ 
See Madv. 451d; Her. on H. 1. 31, 10. 
Drager (§ 193) notes the usage as found 
in Cicero and Caesar, and especially in 
Livy, and that it is not really a Graecism. 
For * sibi consulere ' cp. H. 1. 54, 4. 

6. exemplo, that of the two other 

legions (c. 44). 

Caecinam. Unless there is some error 
(see note on c. 37, 3), he must have gone 
on to ‘ Vetera’ soon after leading the two 
other legions to the ‘ civitas Ubiorum,’ as 
he is not mentioned in the events there 
(c. 39-44). 

7. praesumant: cp. 2. 73, 6; 3. 46, 
2, &c. The word is confined to poets 
and post-Augustan prose. 

8. aquiliferis signiferisque. Of the 
former (see c. 39, 7) there would be one in 
each legion, of the latter, one in eacli mani- 
ple (see on c. 18, 3; 34, 4; and Domas- 
zewski, ‘ Fahnen,' p. 36 foll. ). As there were 
no centurions left (c. 32, 3), he has to act 
through these as the next officers in rank. 

IO. eximant. The dative with this 
verb, frequent in pocts and post-Augustan 
prose, is generally used by Tacitus (cp. 
C. 64, 45 2. 55, 35 3. 18, 1, &c.), Baader 
in Agr. 3, 3, and perhaps i in 14. 64, 1 

II. Gausas, ‘excuses’: so ' causam 
seditioni' (H. 4. 19, 1); Saccipio causam' 
(Cic. Fam. 16. 19). 

I5. promptum. On the dative with 
this word see c. 2, 1 

I6. nullo... noscente, ‘none being 
able to ascertain ' cp. c. 62, 1; and 
‘arma,’ ‘ principia noscere ' (‘to distin- 
pes AE 1. 68, 1; 2. 93, I. 

quod. _ initium, quis finis. Wal- 

R 2 

5 

Io 

aet 
en 

244 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 767. 

49. Diversa omnium, quae umquam accidere, civilium ar- 

morum facies. 

non proelio, non adversis e castris, sed isdem 2 

e cubilibus, quos simul vescentis dies, simul quietos nox habu- 

erat. discedunt in partes, ingerunt tela. 

palam, causa in occulto ; 

cetera fors regit. 

clamor vulnera sanguis 

caesi, postquam intellecto in quos saeviretur, pessimi quoque 

arma rapuerant. 

neque legatus aut tribunus moderator adfuit : 
permissa vulgo licentia atque ultio et satietas. mox ingressus 4 

castra Germanicus, non medicinam illud plurimis cum lacrimis 
sed cladem appellans, cremari corpora iubet. 

Truces etiam tum animos cupido involat eundi in hostem, g 

piaculum furoris; nec aliter posse placari commilitonum manes, 

quam si pectoribus impiis honesta vulnera accepissent. 

ardorem militum Caesar iunctoque ponte tramittit duodecim 
milia e legionibus, sex et viginti socias cohortis, octo equitum 
alas, quarum ea seditione intemerata modestia fuit. 

ther would esplain the interchange of 
‘qui’ and ‘quis,’ by supposing that more 
stress is laid in the first clause on the 
noun, in the second on the pronoun. But 
often the use of ‘quis’ for ‘qui,’ or the 
reverse, seems to turn on euphony. See 
une 134, note; Madvig 85, Obs. 1. 

. Diversa omnium. The words 
event be rendered ‘ unlike this was the 
appearance,’ &c.; but more probably the 
genitive is a Graecism like that found 
often in Horace with words expressing 
separation; as ‘abstineto i irarum," ' sceleris 
purus,’ *operum vacuus,' &c.: cp. Zumpt 
469 ; Madv. 29o, Obs. 3 

2. facies. This word is used in the 
sense of ‘aspectus rei’ by Sallust (Jug. 
78, 3, &c.) and Vergil, from whom (Aen. 
6, 104) Tacitus ote * Jaborum facies’ 
(H. 3. 39 I): cp. ‘facies belli’ (H. 1 
85, 2}, ‘ pugnae "(H. 2. 42, 4) * Jocorum' 
(Ann. I4. 10, 5), * victoria? ' (Agr. 38, 2). 
See above, c. 41, I. 

4. discedunt in partes. Nipp. notes 
the ideas supplied from this above by 
zeugma ; as ‘not confronted in battle, nor 
starting from opposite camps." 

5. cetera, ‘the issue.’ ‘Fors omnia 
regere’ is found in Sall. Jug. 51, I. 

". arma rapuerant, a Vergilian phrase 
(Aen. 7, 340; 8, 220): cp. 2. 19, 2, &c; 

9. illud. This use of a pronoun in the 
neuter, where its gender would more 
classically be attracted to that of the 

noun referred to, is common in Tacitus, 
who thus uses *istud" (2. 38, 4), 'illud* 
(4. 19, 3), and ‘id’ (16. 32, 2). Several 
other instances are collected by Nipp. 
The usage appears to occur first in Vergil, 

e.g. Aen. 3, 173 ‘nec sopor illud erat. 

II. etiam tum: this is taken closely 
with * truces.’ 

animos cupido involat. This phrase 
is noted by Draeger as aw. elp.; but the 
construction of ‘involare’ with the accusa- 
tive, found also H. 4. 33, 2, and in Pl. 
Mai. &c., is analogous to that of many 
verbs compounded with ‘in,’ as * inrum- 
pere,’ &c. 

I3. honesta, i.e. the wounds o* ; honour- 
able battle, contrasted with * impiis,' pol- 
luted by civil war. Cp. ‘impius... miles’ 
(Verg. Ecl. 1,71). - 

sequitur, ' ‘seconds’: cp. ‘adulationem 

. sequitur’ (3. 69, 1). Dio (57. 6, 1) 
makes Germanicus himself originate the 
expedition, ponnees p?) wal at&s oraciá- 
owe, 

I5. e legionibus, i.e. from the four 
legions of the Lower army. These de- 
tachments, amounting to about half their 
strength, are designated by the legionary 
names in c. 5I, 5. 

16. quarum applies to * cohortes' and 
*alae. The auxiliary troops generally 
had no share in this mutiny. See c. 36, 2. 
: modestia, ‘subordination ' ; as c. 35, I. 

et quidam bonorum 3 

sequitur 6 

A.D. 14.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 49, 50. 

245 

50. Laeti neque procul Germani agitabant, dum iustitio ob 

2amissum Augustum, post discordiis attinemur. 

at Romanus 

agmine propero silvam Caesiam limitemque a Tiberio coeptum 
scindit, castra in limite locat, frontem ac tergum vallo, latera 

8 concaedibus munitus. 

inde saltus obscuros permeat consultat- : 

que ex duobus itineribus breve et solitum sequatur an inpe- 
4 ditius et intemptatum eoque hostibus incautum. delecta longiore 
via cetera adcelerantur: etenim attuleiant exploratores festam 

1. agitabant = *degebant': so 4. 46, 1; 
1I. 21, 2, &c.: cp. ‘agere’ c. 68, 1, &c. 
Sallust often so uses both, Livy the latter. 

iustitio. See c. 16, 2. 

2. at Romanus, &c. Knoke (‘die 
Kriegszüge des Germanicus,’ pp. 23-34) 
and other writers referred to by him and 
by Nipp., have endeavoured to elucidate 
the topography of this campaign. The 
difficulty, not to say the impossibility, of 
doing so lies in the fact that the ‘silva 
Caesia’ and ‘limes Tiberii’ are nowhere 
else mentioned, and that the locality in- 
habited by the Marsi is unknown (see note 
on § 6). It seems thus hardly possible 
to go beyond the likelihood that the Ro- 
mans may have advanced, probably from 
Vetera, along the left bank of the Lippe, 
and then struck southward through a 
comparatively unknown country (* saltus 
obscuros’) towards the upper Ruhr, and 
that the tribes living north of the Lippe 
endeavoured to intercept their retreat. 
On the campaigns generally see Appendix 
ii. to Book ii. 

3. Caesiam. This forest must have 
' been within a day's march of the point of 
crossing, and may have been widely ex- 
tended. Some think the name traceable 
in Coesfeld, north of the Lippe. Others, 
agreeing with Lips., that the name should 
probably be ‘Haesiam’ (connected with 
that of the German war-god), think that 
it may survive in the village of Heisingen, 
near Essen. | 

limitem. ‘This term is explained by 
Mommsen (see Hist. v. 111, n. 1, E. T. i. 
122, n. I) to denote the imperial barricaded 
road, forming the boundary where no na- 
tural frontier existed, preventing maraud. 
ing parties and restricting traffic. This 
particular one may have been a line of 
communication with the outpost of Aliso 
(2. 7, 5). Veith (cited by Nipp.) would 
identify it with existing traces of lines 
north of the Lippe; but the Roman line 
of march was more probably south of 
that river. 

coeptum, ‘laid out! So ‘‘hortos) 
a Lucullo coeptos’ 11. 1,1. The word 
does not in such places imply incom- 
pleteness of work, but rather the capa- 
bility of extension. Nipp. 

4. scindit, ‘penetrates,’ or ‘passes 
through.’ It is hardly likely that this 
first march, * propero agmine,’ through a 
forest within the ‘limes,’ involved any 
considerable clearance of obstacles, such 
as Caecina was sent on to effect in the 
further march ; nor need we suppose that 
the ‘limes’ had to be cut away to pass 
it; as such barriers had always passages 
at one or more points secured by forts. 

in limite. The expression would seem 
to imply that this ‘limes’ was a broad 
embankment with a double ‘ vallum,’ on 
which could be formed a long narrow 
camp, secured in front and rear, and re- 
quiring only a slight protection on the 
flanks to complete it. It is perhaps also 
possible to take the words, with Walther, 
to mean only that the camp was at or 
close to the barrier. 

frontem ... munitus. On the fre- 
quency of this poetical or Greek accus. in 
‘Tacitus see Introd. v. § 11. 

5. coneaedibus. The word appears 
to be found only in Vegetius and Am- 
mianus, but such barricades of felled 
trees to protect the flanks are described 
in Caes. B. G. 3. 29, 1. 

saltus obscuros. These lay between 
the ‘limes’ and the ‘ Marsi' (see below). 
It is suggested by Knoke that he may 
have left the line of the Lippe at Dorsten, 
and struck south, taking one of the roads 
leading to Herdecke, at the meeting- point 
of the streams of the upper Ruhr. 

7. incautum. This passive sense is 
found in poets; also in Sallust (* incautos 
agros invasit! H. Fr. inc. 46 D, 13 kh, 
3, 71 G), and Livy (‘quod neglexeris in- 
cautum . . . habeas’ 25. 38, 14. 

8. cetera, in contrast with ' delecta 
longiore via.’ 

JA 

misque pervastat. 

246 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 767. 

eam Germanis noctem ac sollemnibus epulis ludicram. — Caecina 5 
cum expeditis cohortibus praeire et obstantia silvarum amoliri 

iubetur: legiones modico intervallo sequuntur. 

iuvit nox si- 6 

deribus inlustris, ventumque ad vicos Marsorum et circumdatae 
5 stationes stratis etiam tum per cubilia propterque mensas, nullo 
metu, non antepositis vigiliis: adeo cuncta incuria disiecta erant 7 
neque belli timor, ac ne pax quidem nisi languida et soluta inter 

temulentos. 

51. Caesar avidas legiones, quo latior populatio foret, quattuor 
in cuneos dispertit; quinquaginta milium spatium ferro flam- 

non sexus, non aetas miserationem attulit : 2 

profana simul et sacra et celeberrimum illis gentibus templum 

I. sollemnibus epulis ludicram, ‘a 
night of games at the festival banquet." 
The great national game of the Germans 
is described in G. 24, 1 *genus specta- 
culorum unum atque in omni coetu idem. 
Nudi iuvenes, quibus id ludicrum est, inter 
gladios se atque infestas frameas saltu 
laciunt.' 

-4. Marsorum. This people appear in 
these Books (cp. c. 56, 7 ; 2. 25, 2) as one 
of the chief names in this part of Ger- 
many, like the Cherusci and Chatti, and 
are mentioned by Strabo (7. 1, 3, p. 290) 
as having retreated before the Romans 
into the interior, but in the ‘ Germania’ 
appear only as an ‘antiquum nomen’ 
(c. 2, 4). Nipp. gives the probable 
explanation, that the name is that of a 
combination or aggregate of some such 
tribes as those mentioned in G. 34, 1, and 
that it had become dissolved by the time 
of Tacitus. 

cireumdatae: probably, as Joh. Müller 
suggests, * vicis' should be supplied, and 
* stratis ’ should be taken as abl. abs. 

6. antepositis, ‘placed in front of 
them’; so *antepositis propugnaculis" 
12. 56, 3. 

disiecta, ‘ disorganized’: cp. * disiec- 
tas per catervas! 2. 45, 3. For other 
senses of the word cp. c 33, 7, &c. 

7. ne nax quidem, &c., ‘even their 
peace was but the stupified and reckless 
ease of the drunken.’ Drager notes the 
application in Cicero of ‘ languidus’ to 
such conceptions as * senectus,' ‘ studium,' 
*voluptates': *inter temulentos' is re- 
peated from H. 1. 26, 2; 80.3; and this 
prep. is often used thus concisely (cp. H. 
I. 1,2; 34, 2; 2. 92, 2; G. and G. Lex. 
p. 667 a), where an abl. abs, or such 

a causal clause as * cum temulenti essent,' 
would be expected. 

9. avidas. Tacitus appears to follow 
Horace (Od. 3. 4, 58) in using this word, 
without qualification, of eagerness for 
battle. 

Io. cuneos. This formation would 
appear suitable rather to battle than to 
marching; but the word is capable of 
a more general meaning, equivalent to 
*columns,' as in 16. 37, 1; also as used 
in opposition to * catervae' (H. 2. 42, 4), 
and to * porrecto agmine’ (II. 5. 16, 1), 
and by Cuitius (3. 2) of the Macedonian 
phalanx. The four *cunei' answer, no 
doubt, to the fourlegions. It is suggested 
by Knoke that the area of fifty miles de- 
vastated may have been that of the four 
valleys of the upper Ruhr and its three 
chief tributaries. 

II. non sexus, &c. We have similar 
complacent descriptions of massacre in 
C. 56, 3; 2. 21, 3, 25, 4; yet ‘ mansue- 
tudo in hostes' is noted as a special 
characteristic of Germanicus (2. 72, 3). 
Orelli supposes that the duty of avenging 
Varus would justify such extremities of 
warfare in the mind of a Koman. It is 
more probable that such acts towards 
barbarians would not appear to require 
justification ; though the soldiers are made 
to express special indignation against 
* perfidious peacebreakers ' (2. 13, I). 

12. templum quod Tamfanae voca- 
bant. As the Germans are stated to have 
had no temples (G. 9, 3), it is thought 
that here and in G. 40, 4 the word may 
be used of a consecrated grove containing 
the altar, like the * lucus Baduhennae’ in 
4. 73, 7. The attributes of this deity are 
unknown : the form * Tanfanae' is nearer 

A.D. 14.] 

3 quod Tamfanae vocabant solo aequantur. 
4qui semisomnos, inermos aut palantis ceciderant. 

LIBER I. CAP. so, 5r. 

247 

sine vulnere milites, 
excivit ea 

caedes Bructeros, Tubantes, Usipetes; saltusque per quos exer- 

citui regressus insedere. 
5 et proelio. 

quod gnarum duci incessitque itineri 
pars equitum et auxiliariae cohortes ducebant, mox 

prima legio, et mediis impedimentis sinistrum latus unetvicensi- 
mani, dextrum quintani clausere, vicensima legio terga firmavit, 

6 post ceteri sociorum. 

sed hostes, donec agmen per saltus por- 

rigeretur, immoti, dein latera et frontem modice adsultantes, 

I. tafanae: Tanfanae B. 

to the name as foünd in a German line of 
the ninth or tenth century (cited by Nipp.) 
* Zanfana sentit morgane feiziu scáf clei- 
niu’ (‘Zanfana sendet morgen kleine 
feiste Schafe ’). 

3. palantis, ‘stragglers,’ as in c. 30, I. 
It is meant that all the enemy were in 
one or other of these three conditions ; 
many possibly in more than one. 

3. Bructeros. This tribe, divided in- 
to ‘maiores’ and ‘minores,’ appear to 
have occupied a tract between the Lippe 
and the upper part of the Ems, near the 
modern Münster, and on both sides of 
the former river (Strab. 7. 1, 3, 291). 
They had been reduced by Tiberius (Vell. 
2. 105, I), but had risen against Varus, 
one of whose eagles they had captured 
(c. 60, 4). They take part in the rising 
of Civilis (H. 4. 21, 3; 61, 3, &c.) : the 
statement of Tacitus, that they had been 
annihilated by his own time, appears to 
be incorrect (see G. 33, I, and note). 

Tubantes. These are mentioned 
in 13. 55, 5; 56, 6; and, though not 
noticed in the * Germania, were known 
to Ptolemy, and much later (see Dict. of 
Geog.). They appear to have moved 
gradually from their original locality near 
the Yssel in a south easterly direction 
(see on 13. £5, 5), and to have lived at 
Ptolemy's time south of the Ruhr. 

Usipetes. These are elsewhere called 
‘Usipi’ (e.g. 13. 585. 5; 56, 6), and 
closely joined with the Tencteri (G. 32, 
1, &c.). These two tribes fronted the 
Rhine throughout a considerable part of 
its course. The Usipi furnish a cohort to 
the army of Britain in the time of Domi- 
tian (Agr. 38, 1), but are unknown after 
the date of the ‘ Germania.’ 

4. gnarum : cp. C. 5, 4. 

incessitque itineri et proelio, ‘he 

ordered his advance alike for march- 
ing and fighting.’ Such a disposition of 
troops is similarly described in 13. 40, 
2 ‘viae pariter et pugnae composuerat 
exercitum ' ; in Livy (3. 27, 6) by ‘non 
itineri magis apti quam praelio' ; and in 
Curtius (3, 8) by *itineri simul paratus 
et praelio. On the dative see note on 
c. 23, 6. Here (through use of an in- 
transitive verb) the substantive on which 
such dative usually more or less depends 
(see Roby, 1156) is absent. ‘Incessit’ 
has the force of *incessum instituit, as 
* honori decucurrit’ (2. 7, 4) is equivalent 
to * honori decursum duxit,’ and as 'sig- 
num’ is supplied in the phrase ‘ receptui 
canere.' : 

5. auxiliariae cohortes. As it is 
plain from what follows that these did 
not all march in front, the suggestion 
of .Nipp. is probable, that some numeral, 
such as x, may have drcpped out after, 
or become altered into ‘et.’ 

ducebant ; absolutely, as #youpza: is 
often used. The arrangement, nearly the 
same as in c. 64, 8, is one of the forms of 
the * quadratum agmen,' other dispositions 
of which are given in Marquardt, Staatsv. 
ii. p. 423. 

8. porrigeretur. This verb is here 
used of extension of columns in file, 

en 

more usually of extension in line (as H. 5. 

16, 1 ; Agr. 35, 4). "MM 

9. adsultantes. The accus. with this 
verb, as also that with * incurrere ' below, 
are instances of the fondness of Tacitus 
for such constructions with compound 
verbs: see Introd. v. $ 12c. ‘ Adsultare,' 
not apparently found earlier than in Pl. 
Mai., and chiefly in Tacitus, is elsewhere 
used by him with a dat. (as 2. 13, 4, &c.), 
or absol. (as 11. 31, £, &c.). 

248 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 767. 

tota vi novissimos incurrere. turbabanturque densis Germa- 7 
norum catervis leves cohortes, cum Caesar advectus ad vicensi- 
manos voce magna hoc illud tempus oblitterandae seditionis 
elamitabat: pergerent, properarent culpam in decus vertere. 
5 exarsere animis unoque impetu perruptum hostem redigunt in 8 
aperta caeduntque: simul primi agminis copiae evasere silvas 
castraque communivere. quietum inde iter, fidensque recentibus 9 
ac priorum oblitus miles in hibernis locatur. 
52. Nuntiata ea Tiberium laetitia curaque adfecere: gaudebat 
10 oppressam seditionem, sed quod largiendis pecuniis et missione 
festinata favorem militum quaesivisset, bellica quoque Germa- 
nici gloria angebatur. rettulit tamen ad senatum de rebus 2 
gestis multaque de virtute eius memoravit, magis in speciem 
verbis adornata quam ut penitus sentire crederetur. paucioribus 8 
15 Drusum et finem Illyrici motus laudavit, sed intentior et fida 
oratione. cunctaque quae Germanicus indulserat, servavit etiam 

apud Pannonicos exercitus. 

I. incurrere, used with simple acc., 
here and in 2. 17, 1, after Sall. H. inc. 
64 D, 3o K, 13 G. 

3. illud tempus, ‘ bs opportunity 
they had desired ' (c. 49, 5 

6. evasere, often ne in Tacitus 
(3. 14, 53 5. IO, 4, &c.), also in Livy, bar 
mostly in poets. 

7. recentibus. Gerber and Greef note 
several certain datives with ‘fido’ in 
Tacitus, and no certain instance of abl. 

11. festinata. This passive (as 6. 40, 
1, &c.), like the transitive active (c. 6, 4), 
is poetical, but already used in prose by 
Sallust. 

quaesivisset, ‘had courted’; in sub- 
junct., as part of the thought of Tiberius, 

who is taken by some to be the subject of 

the verb, and supposed to view himself as 
compromised by what was done in his 
name (c. 36, 4). But ' Germanicus ' can 
be supplied from the following words, as 
is the object of * raperet’ in 2.55, 3 ; and 
the change, from a dependent clause to a 
simple case, would resemble that noted 
on c. 35, 2 

bellica quoque... gloria, &c. Prob- 
ably, as c. 55, 1 would show, the insig- 
nificant campaign ju:t concluded had 
been greatly overrated at Rome through 
the popularity of Germanicus. Other- 
wise, it seems incredible that it could 
have excited jealousy, or dread of his 

increased importance. The feelings of 
Tiberius seem to be imagined from the 
conception of his character. 

12. rettulit . . . ad senatum. Dio 
(57. 6, 2) states that he also sent compli- 
mentary letters to Germanicus himself 
and to Agrippina. "The practice of laying 
before the senate even matters not strictly 
within their proper business is character- 
istic of Tiberius, and appears in 2. 43. 1; 
63,3; 88,1; 3.47,1; 4. 15, 3; and 
several other cases are referred to in Suet. 
Tib. 30: see Introd. vi. pp. 93, 95. 

13. magis in speciem, &c., * with a 
verbiage too ostentatious to win credit 
for sincerity.’ For ‘in speciem ' cp. 2. 
6, 3; and for other such uses of ‘in’ see 
Introd. v. § 60 b. 

I5. intentior, ‘more in earnest ': cp. 
3. 35, 25 13-3, 13 15. 62, 2, &c. 

fida. The application. of this word 
to inanimate things, though common in 
poets and post. Augustan prose writers, 
seems confined to them. 

16. indulserat, ‘had conceded ’: cp. 2. 
38, 3; 11. 20, 3, &c. The passive is 
found in Liv. 40. 15, 16; otherwise this 
use appears only in the silver age. 

17. exercitus. This plural might be 
understood here of the separate armies of 
Pannonia and Delmatia (cp. 4. 5, 4), 
both loosely styled ‘Pannonici.’ But — 
nothing has been said about the Delma- 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 51-53. 

249 

53. Eodem anno Iulia supremum diem obiit, ob impudicitiam 
olim a patre Augusto Pandateria insula, mox oppido Reginorum, 

8 qui Siculum fretum accolunt, clausa. 

fuerat in matrimonio Ti- 

berii florentibus Gaio et Lucio Caesaribus spreveratque ut in- 
parem; nec alia tam intima Tiberio causa cur Rhodum absce- 
3 deret. imperium adeptus extorrem, infamem et post interfectum 
Postumum Agrippam omnis spei egenam inopia ac tabe longa 

4 peremit, obscuram fore necem longinquitate exilii ratus. 

par 

causa saevitiae in Sempronium Gracchum, qui familia nobili, 
sollers ingenio et prave facundus, eandem Iuliam in matrimonio 

5 Marci Agrippae temeraverat. 

tian army, and *exercitus' appears to be 
often equivalent to * legiones,' e. g. 3. 12, 
6; 4.47, 1; H. 3. 15, 1, &c. 
1. Iulia, the only child of Augustus. 
" On her marriages see Introd. ix. note 5. 
All authorities are agreed upon her vices : 
see 3. 24, 2; Vell. 2. 100, 3; Sen. de 
Ben. 6. 32, 1 ; Suet. Aug. 65; Dio, 55. 
10,12. Some of her sayings and personal 
traits have been preserved by Macrobius 
(Sat. 2. 5). She was fifty-three years old 
at her death, and had lived fifteen years 
in exile, which at first was voluntarily 
shared with her by her mother (Dio, 1. 1.). 

2. Pandateria, Vandotena, a little 
north of the bay of Naples. It was after- 
wards the place of exile of Agrippina 
(Suet. Tib. 53), and of Octavia (14. 63, 
1). Julia was kept there five years, her 

.removal to Regium being a slight indul- 
gence (Suet. Aug. 65). 

Reginorum. The orthography of the 
MS. is confirmed by inscriptions (e. g. 
Orell. 3308, 3838, &c.). Nipp. notes that 
the clause ‘qui . . . accolunt' is added 
to distinguish it from Regium Lepidi 
(Reggio), between Parma and Modena. 
Banishment often took the form of restric- 
tion to a town: cp. 13. 47, 4. 

3. fuezat in matrimonio, &c. On 
her marriage to Tiberius, his retirement 
to Rhodes, and the death of her sons, see 
Introd. viii. pp. 133, 134. 

4. inparem, ‘beneath her’; so ‘ma- 
ternum genus inpar ' (H. 2. 50, 1). Cp. 
Sall. Jug. 11, 3; Liv. 6. 34,9. In family, 
Tiberius was far above her former hus- 
band, Agrippa, but had hardly as good 
a position in the state; and her sons, as 
adopted into the house of the Caesars, 
and heirs-designate of Augustus, would 
rank above her husband. 

nec is libidini finis: traditam 

5. tam intima, ‘so real. ‘Tam’ is 
used to add force to a superlative by Cic., 
as ‘tam gravissimis iudiciis’ (Phil. 12. 
5, 11) and ‘ tam maxime ' (de Am. 23). 

7. egenam. Livy, in a poetical pas- 
sage (9. 6, 4), adopts the Vergilian *om- 
nium egeni’ (Aen. 1. 599) ; and Tacitus 
uses this poetical word with genit. (as 4. 
30, 2, &c.), or abl. (asu2. 46, 2). 

inopia ac tabe longa, ‘ by privation 
and slow decay,’ i.e. ‘ tabe per inopiam 
facta.’ Suetonius (Tib. 50) says that, 
after the death of Augustus, Tiberius 
aggravated her restrictions, and withdrew 
her ‘ peculium’ and annual allowance. 
Though she: died within the year, her 
privations may thus have lasted three or 
four months. At the time of her exile 
Tiberius is described as at least out- 
wardly acting with generosity on her 
behalf (Suet. Tib. 11). 

8. longinquitate, ‘duration.’ She had 
been forgotten so long that none would 
ask how she died. This sense is fully 
supported (cp. ‘ longinquitas morbi" Cic. 
Phil. 1o. 8, 16) ; and Ritter's reference to 
6. 14, 4 hardly proves that any place 
within Italy could be called * distant.’ 

9. Sempronium Gracchum. There 
is evidence ( Eckhel, v. 304; C. I. L. vi. 1, 
1515) that his praenomen was * ‘Tiberius,’ 
and that he had been ‘iii vir monetalis ' 
and ‘ quaest. design.'; and Nipp. suggests 
that he may be the same who is men- 
tioned as a tragedian by Ovid (ex P. 4. 
16, 31), and of whom three or four lines 
and some titles are preserved by Priscian 
and others (Ribbeck, p. 196). 

10. prave facundus, ‘ of unscrupulous 
eloquence’: cp. * pudens prave" (‘ with 
false modesty ’) Hor. A. P. 88. 

11, temeraverat. This poetical word 

eye 

n 

IO 

250 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 767. 

Tiberio pervicax adulter contumacia et odiis in maritum ac- 
cendebat ; litteraeque quas Iulia patri Augusto cum insectatione 
Tiberii scripsit a Graccho compositae credebantur. igitur amotus 6 
Cercinam, Africi maris insulam, quattuordecim annis exilium 
toleravit tunc milites ad caedem missi invenere in prominenti 7 
litoris, nihil laetum opperientem. quorum adventu breve tempus 8 
petivit, ut suprema mandata uxori Alliariae per litteras daret, 
cervicemque percussoribus obtulit, constantia mortis haud in- 
dignus Sempronio nomine: vita degeneraverat. quidam non 9 
Roma eos milites, sed ab L. Asprenate pro consule Africae 
missos tradidere auctore Tiberio, qui famam caedis posse in 
Asprenatem verti frustra speraverat. 

54. Idem annus novas caerimonias accepit addito sodalium 
Augustalium sacerdotio, ut quondam Titus Tatius retinendis 

is also brought into prose by Livy (26. 
I3; 13, &c.) : it is generally figurative in 
Tacitus, as c. 30, 3, &c. 

I. contumacia et odiis, *through 
defiance and antipathy,’ ive. by rousing 
these feelings in her. Nipp. compares 
‘ira magis quam metu . . . accenderant’ 
(15. 4, 4)- 

3. scripsit. This is a mere aorist, 
denoting a past event, as 'inposuit' (6. 
31, 2), * patefecit" (11. 9, 4), &c., whereas 
* credebantur ' expresses the belief at the 
time when the letters were written. 

4. Cercinam, the ‘Karkenah’ or 
* Kerkena ' islands, in the Lesser Syrtis. 

quattuordecim annis. On this ab- 
lative see Introd. v. $ 26. As this 
computation would make his exile date 
from a year later than that of Julia, Nipp. 
suggests that he was the person whose 
punishment was deferred till the expira- 
tion of his tribuneship (Dio, 55. 10, 15). 

8. constantia mortis: cp. ‘con- 
stantia exitus ' 15. 49, 2; 63, 4. 

9. vita, best taken as a modal abl., 
similar to * constantia. Mr. Frost takes 
it as the subject of the verb. 

1o. L. Asprenate. L. Nonius As- 
prenas was cos. suff. in 759, A.D. 6 
(Henzen 7130). An African inscription 
in duplicate (C. I. L. viii. 10018, 10023) 
records the making of a road by the 
Leg. iii. Augusta in his proconsulate, and 
the. words ‘Imp. Caes, Augusti f., Au- 
gustus, tri. pot. xvi, give a date exactly 
agreeing with this year, the inscription 
being apparently written so soon after 

the death of Augustus that the writer 
was uninformed of his deification, or of 
the refusal of the praenomen * Imp.’ by 
Tiberius. Another inscription (C. I. L. 
vi. 1371) gives the names of his wife 
Calpurnia, daughter of L. Piso, and of 
three sons. Probably a grandson is 
mentioned in H. 2. 9, I. Other family 
particulars are given by Nipp. He 
takes part in a debate in 3. 18, 5, and is 
perhaps the orator, whose fame had died 
with him, mentioned in M. Seneca 
Controv. 10, praef. 2; probably also the 
nephew of Varus honourably mentioned 
in Vell.2. 120. | 

I2. speraverat. This expresses the 
opinion of Tacitus, whereas ‘speraverit,’ 
the conjecture of Freinsh. and Ern., would 
express that of his authorities. 

I3. annus... &ccepit. On such per- 
sonifications see Introd. v. $ 75. 

sodalium Augustalium. These are 
mentioned in 3. 64, 3; H. 2. 95, 3; Suet. 
Cl. 6; Galb. 8; and in numerous in- 
scriptions (see Henzen 6045; Index, 
p. 46, &c.). They ranked with the great 
priestly colleges, and rose to the number 
of twenty-eight members: when, after 
the deification of Claudius, his cultus 
devolved on them, they are sometimes 
styled ‘sodales Augustales Claudiales.’ 
Afterwards their institution served as a 
precedent for the creation of *sodales 
Flaviales, * Hadrianales,’ &c. See Mar- 
quardt, iii. 469, foll, and a treatise by 
H. Dessau in Eph. Epig. iii. 205-229. 

A. D. 14.] LIBER I. 

2 Sabinorum sacris sodales Titios instituerat. 

CAP. 53, 54. 

251 

sorte ducti e pri- 

moribus civitatis unus et viginti: Tiberius Drususque et Clau- 

3 dius et Germanicus adiciuntur. 

coeptos turbavit discordia ex certamine histrionum. 

ludos Augustales tunc primum 
indulserat 

ei ludicro Augustus, dum Maecenati obtemperat effuso in amo- 
rem Bathylli; neque ipse abhorrebat talibus studiis, et civile 

4 rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi. 

alia Tiberio morum via: 

sed populum per tot annos molliter habitum nondum audebat 

ad duriora vertere. 

1. tatios: Titios Vertran. 

I. sodales T'itios. "This old religious 
brotherhood is mentioned by Lucan 
(1, 602), Suetonius (Galb. 8), and in 
many inscriptions, e.g. Orell. 746, 890, 
2364, 2365, 2366, &c. Tacitus clse- 
where (H. 2. 95, 3) ascribes the founda- 
tion to Romulus in honour of Tatius; 
which is more likely to have been the 
received form of the legend, inasmuch 
as Tatius, who (see Liv. 1. 10-14) is 
really known only as the eponymus of 
this priesthood and of the old century 
or tribe of the Titienses, was certainly 
honoured by sacrifices (Dion. Hal. 2. 52), 
and may be a god * Euhemerized’ into a 
man. See Seeley, Hist. Exam. of Livy, 
B. 1. pp. 37, 73, &c. Nothing is known 
of the functions of this priesthood: but 
Varro (L. L. 5, 85), in connecting their 
name with * aves Titii, appears to asso- 
ciate them with augury. Tacitus here 
supposes ‘them to have kept up the 
Dee religion. See Marquardt, iii. 
449. 
sorte ducti, &c. In Suet. Galb. 8, 
we find evidence of subsequent elections 
by cooptation, but the general mode of 
election is not known. On *primores 
civitatis ’ see note on c. 24, I. 

3. adiciuntur; i e. as supernumerary 
or honorary members. Such were often 
added by senatorial election (see on 3. 
19, I) The addition of Claudius is 
remarkable, as he was not included in 
the Julian family. On the distinct office 
of ‘ flamen Augusti ' see on c. Io, 5, 8. 

tune primum coeptos. On the ap- 
parent earlier existence of these games 
see on C. I5, 3. 

4. discordia, probably ‘turbulence’: 
cp. ‘discors’ c. 38, 1, &c. Dio (56. 47, 
2) states that one of the actors struck 
for higher pay, and that the people sup- 
ported him so warmly that the tribunes 
were forced on the same day to convene 
the senate to authorize the increase. 

e 

histrionum. This word (interchanged 
with * mimus ' in c. 73, 2, 4) is generally 
applied by Tacitus (e.g. c. 77, 2, &c.) 
and writers of his age (e.g. Juv. 7, 90) 
to the ópxyoraí, who, from the time of 
Augustus (see Suct. Aug. 45, &c.) are 
called * pantomimi. The art of repre- 
senting characters by dumb-show (de- 
scribed as ‘saltare Agamemnona,’ ‘ Ocdi- 
pum,’ ‘Ledam,’ &c.), though in some 
form as old as the earliest ltalian drama 
(see 4. 14, 4; Liv. 7. 2), received such 
development at that time from Bathyllus, 
Pylades, and Hylas, that they have been 
called its inventors (Zosimus 1.6). Some 
description of it may be seen in Macrob. 
2,7; Lucian de Salt. c. 67, &c. 

indulserat. Suetonius (Aug. 45) de- 
scribes his interest in all public amuse- 
ments, but adds that his indulgence to 
the *histriones' was not untempered by 
severity; for Hylas and another were 
scourged, and Pyladcs temporarily ban- 
ished (see Dio, 54. 17, 4) by his order. 

5. dum. See note on c. 23, 6. 

6. Bathylli; he was a freedman and 
client of Maecenas, and the chief rival of 
Pylades. See Dio, 54. 17, 4. 

abhorrebat talibus studiis. In 
Tacitus (14. 21, 2; H. 4. 55,3; 5. 24, 1) 
the case is doubtful; a simple abl. would 
correspond to Ov. Met. 3, 145 (‘ meta 

distabat utraque’), a dat. would follow 

liv. 2. 14, I (‘ profectioni abhorrens ^). 
With such verbs both usages are poetical, 
the former especially (see Zumpt 468). 

7. morum via, ‘his character took 
a different course Cp. the use of ‘ via’ 
alone, 4. 7, 1. Tiberius is described as 
* tristissimus hominum ' ; see Introd. viii. 
137. 
a habitum, ‘held in hand,' ‘ governed’: 
cp. ‘ Hispaniae .. . habebantur' 4. 5, 2; 
* corruptius habiti (liberti)' H. 1. 22, 1. 

nondum audebat. Dio states. (57. 
II, 5) that he was constantly present at 

252 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

55, Druso Caesare C. Norbano consulibus decernitur Ger- 
manico triumphus manente bello; quod quamquam in aestatem 
summa ope parabat, initio veris et repentino in Chattos excursu 

praecepit. 

the regular entertainments during the 
earlier years of his rule. Occasional 
treats, as gladiatorial shows, became 
very rare under him : see 4. 62, 3. 

ad duriora, ‘to, sterner courses’; 
* duris iudicibus' is used in a good sense 
(15. 55, 5). Cp. ‘dura virtus' G. 31, 5. 

1. Druso Cassare C. Norbano. 
* Flaccus, the cognomen of the latter, is 
given in Suet. Vit. 3, and in Fast. Ant. 
(C. I. L. x. 6639, Henzen 6442), which 
also give M. Silanus (see on 3. 24, 5) as 
cos. suff. Flaccus had been praetor in 764, 
A. D. II (see Nipp. and Henzen, Act. Arv. 
Index, p. 192). 

2. triumphus, celebrated two years 
later(2. 41, 2). See on c. 52, 1, Append. 
ii. to Book ii. On the reservation of the 
full honours of a triumph, or of an 
ovation (3. 11, 1^ for the imperial family, 
see note on c. 72, I. 

manente bello. This.was irregular, 
though not without precedent. At the 
time of the actual celebration of this 
triumph, the war was held to be virtually 
concluded : see 2. 41, 3. 

3. initio veris et repentino... ex- 
cursu. Nipp. has collected many in- 
stances of the somewhat unusual, and 
especially Tacitean, insertion of a con. 
junction in such sentences. It is intended 
here to indicate two distinct contrasts. 
that of ‘in aestatem" to ‘initio veris, 
and that of ‘summa ope’ to ‘ repentino 
excursu.’ 

Chattos. On this tribe, the most power- 
ful of western Germany, see G. 30-31, 
and notes, Momms. Hist. v. 135, foll., E. T. 
i. 149, foll. Though always hostile to 
the Cherusci (see 12. 28, 2, &c.), they 
are also constant enemies of Rome, and 
are mentioned down to the fourth cen- 
tury. Their district formed part of the 
widespread * Hercynius saltus ' (G. 30, 1), 
and their name is considered to survive 
in the modern Hessen, which, with part 
of Nassau, represents their locality at this 
time. 

4. praecepit, ‘anticipated’; cp. 2. 
35, 3, and ‘tempore praecepto' Liv. 1. 
7, I, &c. 

nam, apparently explanatory of * quam- 
quam ... parabat ' ; the dissension opened 

nam spes incesserat dissidere hostem in Arminium 2 
5 ac Segestem, insignem utrumque perfidia in nos aut fide. 

Ar- 3 

an opportunity for a vigorous attack on 
the Cherusci. The weakness of central 
authority among German tribes may be 
noted here. Arminius is no doubt the 
* dux! (G. 7, 1), but his opponent Se- 
gestes would be politically his equal, if 
equally popular (c. 57, 1). Inguiomerus 
has a position of his own, changes from 
the Roman to the national side (c. 60, 1), 
divides the generalship (c. 68, 1), and 
afterwards goes over to Maroboduus 
(2. 45, 2), and the ‘comitatus’ of each of 
these chiefs follows their leader, not the 
nation (C. 57,4; 2. 45, 2): see E. Heyck, 
Neue Heidelb. Jahrb. 1895, p. 133. 
dissidere ...in, ‘ were forming factions 
of. This new construction is explained 
by Nipp. as analogous to the personal 

®accus. with ‘in’ atter verbs of distribu- 

tion, as *distribuo' (2. 8, 1; Cic. Clu. 
27, 74), ‘divido’ (2. 67, 4; Liv. 40. 59, 
2), *partior' (H. 3. 58, 3; Verg. Aen. 
I, 194), &c. The present is used, as it 
is hoped that this had already begun: cp. 
2. 34, I. 

Arminium. This prince, here first 
mentioned by Tacitus, is in Strabo 'Ap- 
pévos, both forms being equivalents of 
‘Hermann.’ His character and career 
are summed up in 2. 88. It is to be 
gathered that he was of the royal race 
of the Cherusci, son of Segimerus, and 
nephew of Inguiomerus, that he had a 
brother Flavus, who married a princess 
of the Chatti, and had a son Italicus. 
Cp. c. 60, 1; 2. 9, 2; 88; 11. 16; 17: 
Vell. 2. 118, 2. On his wife and son 
see C. 57; 58. Velleius states (1. 1.) that he 
had gained Roman citizenship and even 

' equestrian rank by military service (cp. 2. 

10, 3); whence it is inferred that he 
must have borne, though he had no 
doubt renounced, a full Roman name, 
probably including the * gentile nomen ' 
of ‘Iulius’ (cp. 3. 40, 1). See Hübner 
(Hermes x. 393-407). 

5. Segestem: his son Segimundus is 
mentioned (c. 57, 2), as also (c. 71, 1) a 
brother Segimerus and his son. 

perfidia . . . aut fide, ‘the one for 
treachery, the other for fidelity.’ On this 
use of * aut’ cp. pro... decore aut... 
libertate’ (2. 46, 3) ; *cultus. . . utrisque 

A. D. 15.) 

LIBER I. 

CAP. 55, 56. 253 

minius turbator Germaniae, Segestes parari rebellionem saepe 
alias et supremo convivio, post quod in arma itum, aperuit 

suasitque Varo ut se et Arminium et ceteros proceres vinciret : - 

nihil ausuram plebem principibus amotis, atque ipsi tempus 

4 fore, quo crimina et innoxios discerneret. sed Varus fato et: 

vi Armini cecidit: Segestes quamquam consensu gentis in 
bellun tractus discors manebat, auctis privatim odiis, quod 
Arminius filiam eius alii pactam rapuerat, gener invisus inimici 
Soceri; quaeque apud concordes vincula caritatis, incitamenta 
irarum apud infensos erant. | 

56. Igitur Germanicus quattuor legiones, quinque auxiliarium 
milia et tumultuarias catervas Germanorum cis Rhenum co- 
lentium Caecinae tradit; totidem legiones, duplicem sociorum 
numerum ipse ducit, positoque castello super vestigia paterni 

6. armeni: so spelt in 2. 88, 3; 11. 16, 2, 7. 

Dianam aut Apollinem venerandi (3. 
63, 6); and Nipp. on2. 30. 

I. parari rebellionem . . . aperuit. 
His conduct is stated below as repre- 
sented by himself (c. 58), and is men- 

tioned by Velleius (2. 118, 4); but he | 

does not appear in the narrative of Dio 
(56. 18, &c.). Germans used to discuss 
important matters over their feasts (G. 
22,3; H. 4. 14,3) ; but on this occasion 
the chiefs appear to have been guests of 
Varus (c. 58, 4). 

4. principibus, here apparently equi- 
valent to * proceres,' but usually denoting 
German magistrates rather than nobles: 
see Introd. to Germania, p. 21. 

5. crimina et innoxios. This inter- 
change of persons and things, similar to 
‘insontibus ..., manifestis flagitiis" (II. 
26, 2), and one of many variations noted 
by Dráger ($ 233), is made more natural 
by the frequent use in Tacitus of abstract 
for concrete (Introd. v. $ 1). 

fato. On the conception of fate in 
Tacitus see Introd. iv. p. 29. The blind- 
ness of Varus is similarly explained by 
Velleius (2. 118, 4). 

8. filiam. Seec. 57, 5 

inimici soceri. These words are 
taken by Halm as in the nominative 
plural, on the supposition that the father 
of Arminius is the Segimerus mentioned 
by Dio (56. 19, 2) as sharing in the re- 
bellion, and that he and Segestes were 
therefore enemies. But Segimerus, who 
was probably now dead (see 2. 10, 1), 

8. inimicus socer Pichena. 

seems not here thought of; so that it is 
better to take the words as genit. sing., 
and explain them by supposing that 
‘invisus’ and ‘inimici’ are to be dis- 
tinguished ; the meaning being that Ar- 
minius, already at enmity with Segestes 
on public grounds, was additionally 
hateful to him from the way in which 
he became his son-in-law. This would 
be expanded in the next sentence (' quae- 
que...erant^, where ‘apud infensos’ 
answers to *inimici, and ‘ incitamenta 
irarum' to * invisus. Nipp. had formerly 
read ‘inimicus so:eri’ from the analogy 

. of ‘invisus avunculo infensusque' (H. 4. 

70, 3), and from the likelihood of a loss 
here of the terminal ‘s.’ 

11. Igitur: this takes up the narrative 
from * praecepit (c. 55, 1). 

I2. tumultuarias: so in I5. 3,3; H. 
4. 20, 2; 66, 1; and often in Livy, for 
troops levied on an emergency. Such 
are also called ‘subitus miles’ (H. 4. 
76, 2), and ‘subitarii’ (Liv. 3. 4, 11). 

I3. Caecinae. The service for which 
he was detached is shown below, where 

the mention of the Marsi suggests that . 

his advance was in the same direction as 
that of last year (c. 50, 51). 

totidem legiones. The four legions 
of the Upper army (cp. c. 37, 4) are 
under the special command of Germa- 
nicus in this campaign; hence their 
legatus, Silius, is unmentioned. See 
C2923, 

14. paterni praesidii. Taurus (cp. 12. 

5 

10 

254 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

praesidii in monte Tauno expeditum exercitum in Chattos rapit, 

L. Apronio ad munitiones viarum et fluminum relicto. 

(rarum illi caelo) siccitate et amnibus modicis inoffensum iter 
properaverat, imbresque et fluminum auctus regredienti metue- 

bantur. 

sed Chattis adeo inprovisus advenit, ut quod imbe- 8 
cillum aetate ac sexu statim captum aut trucidatum sit. 

iu- 4 

ventus flumen Adranam nando tramiserat, Romanosque pontem 

coeptantis arcebant. 

dein tormentis sagittisque pulsi, temptatis 5 

frustra condicionibus pacis, cum quidam ad Germanicum per- 
fugissent, reliqui omissis pagis vicisque in silvas disperguntur. 
Caesar incenso Mattio (id genti caput) aperta populatus vertit 6 
ad Rhenum, non auso hoste terga abeuntium lacessere, quod 
ili moris, quotiens astu magis quam per formidinem cessit. 
fuerat animus Cheruscis iuvare Chattos, sed exterruit Caecina 7 

4. metuebatur: text L. 

28, 1; Mela 3. 3, 30) is the high tract, 
now again known by the name, extend- 
ing, nearly parallel with the Main, from 
the Rhine to the Nidda between Wies- 
laden and Homburg. The fort might 
be that described in Dio (54. 33, 4), as 
built by Drusus wap’ aüro To 'Prjvo. 

I. T&pit =‘ raptim ducit : so 4. 25, 2, 
&c.; Liv.3. 23. 3; taken apparently from 
Vergil (Aen. 7, 725; 10, 178; 308). 

?. L. Apronio. This legatus, who 
received ' triumphalia' this year (c. 72, 
1), appears from the Fasti (C. I. L. i. 
p. 548) to have been cos. suff. in 761, 
A.D. 8. He is generally identified with 
the Apronius who had served in Delmatia 
(Vell. 2. 116, 2), and with the proconsul 
of Africa in 773, A.D. 20 (3. a1, 1); 
probably also with the legatus in Lower 
Germany of 781, A.D. 28 (4. 73, 1; 6. 
30, 3). 

3. rarum : cp. the similar parenthesis, 
c. 39, 7. For the climate see G. 5, r. 

inoffensum, ‘uninterrupted,’ poetical, . 

and in prose from L. Seneca: the tran- 
sitive *properare, found in Sallust, is 

also chiefly poetical: see Nipp. on 
13. 17. 
4. metuebantur. This correction 

seems required, as *auctus' is probably 
plural, as well as * imbres. 
7. Adranam, the Eder, which takes 
a north-easterly course, and, a little above 
Cassel, joins the Fulda, itself a tributary 
of the Weser. | 
10. pagis vicisque. Roman writers 

7. tramiserit: text Acid. 

probably learnt from Caesarto apply these 
familiar terms to definite local subdivi- 
sions of Gauls and Germans. Among the 
latter (cf. G. 12, 3, &c.), they probably 
more or less corresponded with the later 
* Gau? and ‘Dorf,’ and thus with the 
English ‘shire’ (or perhaps ‘hundred ’) 
and ‘township.’ See Introd. to Ger- 
mania, pp. 22-23. 

II. Mattio. This place must be north 
of the Eder, and has been identified with 
varicus localities, one of which, Maden, 
near Gudensburg, appears to preserve the 
name. The Mattiaci, mentioned later as 
under Roman rule (11. 20, 4 ; G. 29, 3, 
where see note), lived in Nassau; their hot 
springs (Pl. N. H. 31. 2, 17, 20) being 
those of Wiesbaden, and their chief town 
* Mattiacum' (Ptol. a. 11, 29) probably 
Marburg on the Lahn. 

I3. quotiens astu, &c.: see 2. 14, 5, 
and note. | 

14. Cheruscis. This great tribe, known 
by name to Caesar (B. G. 6; 10, 5), was 
at the head of the German resistance from 
the rising against Varus to the death of 
Arminius, but in the time of Tacitus they 
had been overpowered by the Chatti, and 
are spoken of as peace-loving and indolent 
(G. 36). The name survives in the fourth 
century (Claud. Bell. Get. 420). Their 
country was north-east of that of the 
Chatti, and between the Weser and the 
Elbe, in portions of Hanover, Brunswick, 
&c.; with a confederation embracing many 
of the western tribes. 

s 

nam 2 

A. D. 15.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 56, 57. 

255 

huc illuc ferens arma; et Marsos congredi ausos prospero 

proelio cohibuit. 

57. Neque multo post legati a Segeste venerunt auxilium 
orantes adversus vim popularium, a quis circumsedebatur, va- 

lidiore apud eos Arminio, quoniam bellum suadebat: nam bar- 5 

baris, quanto quis audacia promptus, tanto magis fidus rebusque 

2 motis potior habetur. 

addiderat Segestes legatis filium, nomine 

Segimundum: sed iuvenis conscientia cunctabatur. quippe anno 
quo Germaniae descivere sacerdos apud aram Ubiorum creatus 

8 ruperat vittas, profugus ad rebelles. 

adductus tamen in spem 

clementiae Romanae pertulit patris mandata benigneque ex- 

4 ceptus cum praesidio Gallicam in ripam missus est. 

Germanico 

pretium fuit convertere agmen, pugnatumque in obsidentis, et 
ereptus Segestes magna cum propinquorum et clientium manu. 
5 inerant feminae nobiles, inter quas uxor Arminii eademque filia 
Segestis, mariti magis quam parentis animo, neque evicta. in 

5. quó (acai quando B: cp. c. 59, 7. 

6. rebus commotis : text L. 

16. uicta (so Müll., Ritt., Nipp.) : text Spengel. 

6. quanto: cp. ‘quanto inopina’ c. 68, 
5. On the abbreviation of comparative 
sentences in Tacitus see Introd. v. § 64. 

audacia promptus: so in 14. 40, 3; 
cp. the similar ablatives ‘animo,’ ‘ ser- 
mone promptus ' (14. 58, 2; H. a. '86, 3). 
The dative is more usual, as in c. 2, I, &c. 

rebusque motis. This correction. is 
generally followed: (cp. 14. 61, 4);'the 
simple verb, as noted by Walther, being 
chiefly used by Tacitus of political dis- 
turbance (as 2. 1, 1 ; 43, I, &c.). 

8. consoientia : Cp. C.. 39, 3 The 
abl, as also * memoria ' below, i is causal : 
see Introd. v. $ 30. 

Germaniae. This plural, analogous 
to * Galliae, &c., is used of the parts which 
were or had been subject to Rome (2. 73, 
3; 3. 46, 2; 11. 19, 7; Agr. 15, 4), as 
distinct from ‘Germania,’ the general name 
of the country : Marquardt, i. 272, n. 4. 

aram Ubiorum: cp. c. 39, 1. The 
' selection of a Cheruscan, not a Ubian, as 
priest, would show that this altar, probably 
dedicated to Augustus and Roma, or per- 
haps to Augustus and Julius,(see on c. 59, 
6) was intended to be a centre of this 
worship, and of Roman government gene- 
rally, for all the then subject part of 
Germany, as was gi dax for Gaul, 
and Camulodunum afterwards (see 14. 

31, 6) for Britain. Segimundus was pro- 
bably chosen as being, through his father 
(cp. c. 58, 2), a Roman citizen. 

II. benigne exceptus. He was evi- 
dently yet treated as a prisoner, and, 
according to Strabo (7. I, 4, p. 291), 
was exhibited as such in the triumph. - 

12. Gallicam. Nipp. compares ‘in 
Gallias traiecti’ (12. 39, 4), as showing 
that, though now peopled by Germans, 
this side of the Rhine was still regarded 
as Gallic soil. 

13. pretium. This abbreviation of 
* operae pretium’ (2. 35, 1; H. 3. 8, 2) 
appears to occur in Tacitus alone. 

convertere. He was in retreat to the 
Rhine: (c. 56, 6), and wheels round to 
some point in the enemy's country. 

14. clientium. On the ‘ comitatus’ of 
a German prince cp. G. 13-14, and notes. 

I5. uxor, &c.: cp. c 55> 4 Strabo 
(1.1.) gives her name as @ovoverta, which 
Grimm takes to be intended for Thurs- 
hilda, Thusshilda, or Thursinhilda. 

16. mariti... &nimo. Nipp. notes 
a similar genit., depending on an abl. of 
que ,inH.r.S$8,a( pacis artibus *); 

. 5. 6, 5 (‘specie maris"). 

ks in lacrimas. For this emenda- 
tion cp Il. 37) 4i H. a. o^ 4; for the 
use of ‘in,’ Introd. v. ghe 

10 

Land 

256 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 768. 

lacrimas neque voce supplex, compressis intra sinum manibus 

gravidum uterum intuens. ferebantur et spolia Varianae cladis, 6 

plerisque eorum qui tum in deditionem veniebant praedae data: 

simul Segestes ipse, genns visu et memoria bonae societatis 
5 inpavidus. 

58. Verba eius in dise modum fuere : *non hic mihi primus 
erga populum Romanum fidei et constantiae dies. ex quo a2 
divo Augusto civitate donatus sum, amicos inimicosque ex vestris 
utilitatibus delegi, neque odio patriae (quippe proditores etiam 

ro iis quos anteponunt invisi sunt), verum quia Romanis Germanis- 
que idem conducere et pacem quam bellum probabam. ergo 8 
raptorem filiae meae, violatorem foederis vestri, Arminium apud 
Varum, qui tum exercitui praesidebat, reum feci. dilatus seg- 4 
nitia ducis, quia parum praesidii in legibus erat, ut me et Armi- 
15 nium et conscios vinciret flagitavi: testis illa nox, mihi utinam 
potius novissima! quae secuta sunt, defleri magis quam defendi 5 
possunt: ceterum et inieci catenas Arminio et a factione eius 
iniectas perpessus sum. atque ubi primum tui copia, vetera novis 6 
et quieta turbidis antehabeo, neque ob praemium, sed ut me per- 
20 fidia exsolvam, simul genti Germanorum idoneus conciliator, si 
paenitentiam quam perniciem maluerit. pro iuventa et errore 7 
filii veniam precor: filiam necessitate huc adductam fateor. 
tuum erit consultare, utrum praevaleat, quod ex Arminio concepit 
an quod ex me genita est. Caesar clementi responso liberis 8 
25 propinquisque eius incolumitatem, ipsi sedem vetere in provincia 
, e 

21. permitiem Med. i. constantly. 25. uetera: Vetera (c. 45, 1) Jac. Gron. 
4. bonae societatis, ‘alliance faith- 18. tui copia, ‘access to you’: so 
fully kept,’ like * bona fides,’ &c. *eius copia' Plaut. Trin. 3. 2, 45; Ter. 

8. civitate donatus. On the bestowal Phorm. 1. 3, 63; oftener with *con- 
of the * civitas' by the princeps see Introd. — veniendi. 

vi. p. 87; Staatsr. ii. 89r. I9. antehabeo, a new word (Introd. v. 
ex, ‘in accordance with’ ; analogous 69, 5), only here and 4. 11, 5. 
to ‘ex sententia,' ‘ex more,’ &c. 21. paenitentiam quam perniciem. 

fI. conducere, sc. ‘indicabam, sup- The alliteration here (cp. c. 41, 4) adds 
plied by zeugma from ‘ probabam.' On to the antithesis: cp. 6. 8, 3; H. t 48, 1, 
the omission of ‘ magis’ before ‘quam’ ^ and other instances given by Nipp. This 

cp. Introd. v. $ 64. rhetorical figure is especially common in 
I2. raptorem ... violatorem. These the Germania and Agricola. See Introd. 
poetical words are suited to a rhetorical G. p. 10. 
passage, ig former being thus used in 23. praevaleat, sc. * apud te’: cp. 12. 
Vell. 2. 27, 1; the latter in. Liv. 4. 19, 3. 64,6 
15. nox, that of the banquet, c. 55, 3. 25. vetere in provincia. The expres- 

16. quae secuta. This glances at his sion * vetus provincia’ distinguishes, in 
share in hostilities, as ‘consensu gentis in such cases as Africa (3. 74, 5) and Sicily 
bellum tractus’ (c. 55, 4). (Liv. 24. 44, 2; 25. 3, 5), the original 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. CAP. 57-59. 257 

9 pollicetur. «exercitum reduxit nomenque imperatoris auctore 
Tiberio accepit. Arminii uxor virilis sexus stirpem edidit: edu- 
catus Ravennae puer duo mox ludibrio conflictatus sit, in tempore 
memorabo. 

59. Fama dediti benigneque excepti Segestis vulgata, ut qui- 
busque bellum invitis aut cupientibus erat, spe vel dolore accipitur. 

2 Arminium super insitam violentiam rapta uxor, subiectus servitio 
uxoris uterus vaecordem agebant, volitabatque per Cheruscos, 

$8 arma in Segestem, arma in Caesarem poscens. neque probris 
temperabat: egregium patrem, magnum imperatorem, fortem 

4 exercitum, quorum tot manus unam mulierculam avexerint. sibi 
tres legiones, totidem legatos procubuisse ; non enim se prodi- 
tione neque adversus feminas gravidas, sed palam adversus 

portion from later acquisitions ; and the own writings, generally uses a plural verb 
‘German’ districts within the ‘victa ripa’ — in the Histories (e. g. 1. 10, 6; 64, 3:2 
(c. 59, 6) may possibly be thus designated, 63,1; 4. 3, 3, &c.), and a singular i in the 
if we suppose the country which had risen Annals (e.g. 2. 32, 43 43,1; 16. I4, I 
against Varus to be still regarded as a &c.); the change being part of the grow- 
province in a state of revolt; which other ing preference for unusual forms of ex- 
expressions (e. g. ‘ rebellio,’ ‘ rebelles, &c.) pression, generally traceable in his style. 
appear to assume. 6. invitis...erat. On this Graecisin 
I. nomen imperatoris: see on c. 3, I. cp. Introd. v. 6 16. Ni ipp. notes that only 
The words * auctore Tiberio' show that it — * volens' is elsewhere so used, Agr. 18, 1; 
was conferred by means of a 'senatus H. 3. 43,2; Sall. Jug. 84, 3; 100, 4; Liv. 
consultum,' as was also the ‘proconsulare — ar. 50, 10. 
imperium" (c. 14, 4): see Staatsr. ii. spe vel dolore, abl. of manner: cp. 
p. 1156. Germanicus had this title twice Introd. v. $ 28. 
(Inscr. Orell. 655, 660, &c.), and this is 7. super, ‘besices’; so in 3. 63, 3; 
thought to be the second time; as a frag- — 67, 3; 4. 11, 1, &c., and often in Livy. 

ment of an inscription seems to give him rapta uxor, &c., ‘the thought of his 
the title during the life-time of Augustus — wife's seizure, and enslavement of her 
(see Mommsen, R. G. D. A. p. 18). unborn child’: cp. ‘an excidit trucidatus 

2. virilis sexus stirpem. His name  Coibulo' H. 2. 76, 6, &c. 
is given by Strabo (7. I, 4, p. 291) as 9. probris, probably dat.: cp. 13. 
@ovpedrkds. 3, 2. 

3. Ravennae. This was also the 10. egregium, &c. Tacitus seems here 
place of exile of Maroboduus (2. 63, 5). to have in mind the passage of Verg. 
Such persons were no doubt held in Aen. 4.93, &c. 
custody by the officers of the fleet there. II. Sibi. On this dative see Introd. v. 

ludibrio. In the case of Vonones § 17: cp. ‘quibus . . . legiones procu- 
(2. 4, 5), this term is used of the mockery buevint’ H. 4.17, 6. On the three iegions 
of royal state kept up in captivity. The see Introd. vii. p. 122. 

allusion here is unknown, and may perhaps 12. totidem legatos. Varus was him- 

. be to some insult by Gaius. self the 'legatus Augusti, but he is 
conflictatus, ‘harassed’: cp. 6. 51, 2. — separated from the legati in c. 61, 6, and 

in tempore, ‘at the proper time’: the context seems to show here that the 
cp. c. 19, 2. This mention must have  *legati legionum" are meant. The fate 

been made in some lost part of this work. of a legatus named Numonius Vala is 

It would certainly appear, as Nipp. sug- mentioned in Vell. 2. 119, 5 

gests, from 11. 16, 1, that the son of I3. palam. Hisattack, though by way 

Arminius was not living at that date. of stratagem, is viewed as open war, com- 
4. memorabo. Wolifflin notes (Philol. pared to the treason of Segestes. 

xxv. p. 97) that Tacitus, in referring to his 

VOL. I. S 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [(A.U.C. 768. 

258 

armatos bellum tractare. cerni adhuc Germanorum in lucis signa 6 - 
Romana, quae dis patriis suspenderit. coleret Segestes victam 6 
ripam, redderet filio sacerdotium hominum : Germanos numquam 
satis excusaturos, quod inter Albim et Rhenum virgas et secures 
&et togam viderint. aliis gentibus ignorantia imperi Romani 7 
inexperta esse supplicia, nescia tributa; quae quoniam exuerint 
inritusque discesserit ille inter numina dicatus Augustus, ille 
delectus Tiberius, ne inperitum adulescentulum,.ne seditiosum 
exercitum pavescerent. si patriam parentes antiqua mallent 8 
10 quam dominos et colonias novas, Arminium potius gloriae ac 
libertatis quam Segestem flagitiosae servitutis ducem seque- 

rentur. 

e 
3. sacerdotium : hominum germanos. 
(cp. c. 57, 1): quando B. 

I. bellum tractare: cp. 6. 44, 3; H. 
4.73,4. A phrase formed on the analogy 
of * negotium tractare,' &c. 

3. sacerdotium hominum. In the 
MS. text the colon appears to be from the 
same late hand as the ‘e,’ and inserted to 
indicate that ‘hominem’ is to be taken 
with the following words, and referred to 
Segestes. But the sense thus given is not 

ood (see next note), and if we suppose 
the priesthood to be to Augustus, or to 
him and Julius (see c. 57, 2), sacerdotium 
hominum may well be a contemptuous 
expression, like ‘inter numina dicatus’ 
ow, from a German who recognised no 
such divinities. For other conjectures see 
Baiter, Ritt. and Halm. That of * hostium' 
(Nipp from Halm; Ed. 1), and ‘hoc unum’ 
(Bezzenberget, retaining the colon of the 
MS.), seem best. 

Germanos numquam ... excusa- 
turos, &c. ‘True Germans could never 
make sufficient apology to themselves, 
for that they have seen the fasces and the 
toga between the Rhine and Elbe.’ ‘ Ger- 
manos' is no doubt in indignant contrast 
to Segestes; but to read ‘hominem,’ or 
supply 'Segestem with ‘excusaturos’ 
seems beside the mark. The sentence 
‘quod . . . viderint' describes the insignia, 
not of Roman military invasion, but of 
Roman rule, as they had seen it before the 
defeat of Varus; and Segestes could hardly 
be regarded as the cause of this. The 
dhonght is that the Germans could never 
forgive themselves for having allowed 
Roman dominion to exist at all among 
them, and would now be doubly culpable 
to suffer its restoration, 

4. exsecraturos Wurm. 6. qud 

5. aliis gentibus, &c.; i.e. those who 
knew it not might think it good for them ; 
those who have felt it and cast it off, 
should not now fear enemies less for- 
midable than those whom they baffled. 
‘Ignorantia’ is a causal abl.: cp. c. 
57, 2. 

6. nescia. This is passively used in 
16. 14, 3, and in Plautus: cp. ‘ gnarus,” 
* ignarus ' c. 5. 4, &c. 

7. dicatus. ‘Dico’ appears to be 
very rately (as Pl. Pan. 11), ‘dedico’ not 
frequently, used of consecration or deifi- 
cation of persons. 

8. delectus. Nipp. appears rightly 
to see in this an ironical allusion to him 
as professedly the princeps of the state's 
free choice (c. 7, 10). The explanation 
‘chosen for this war, like ‘Titus per- 
domandae Iudaeae delectus! (H. 5. 
I, I), would have no special significance 
here. 

adulescentulum. The age of Arminius 

(see 2. 88, 4) was very nearly the same as 

that of Germanicus, but he had had far 
more experience in war. | 
10. colonias novas. The antithesis to 
*antiqua' would show that *novas' be- 
longs to the general contrast, and does 
not merely distinguish new colonies from 
older ones ; but a special contrast appears 
to be drawn between dwelling in their 
fatherland, and migrating to ‘ new settle: 
ments,’ such as those of many tribes, 
and now of Segestes and his train, on 
the ‘victa ripa. That the Romans, if 
they conquered Gerinany, would plant 
Roman colonies in it, is not here to the 

point. 

A.D. 15.] 

LIBER I. CAP. sg, 6o. 

259 

60. Conciti per haec non modo Cherusci sed conterminae 
gentes, tractusque in partis Inguiomerus Arminii patruus, vetere 

2apud Romanos auctoritate; unde maior Caesari metus. 

et ne 

. bellum mole una ingrueret, Caecinam cum quadraginta cohortibus 
Romanis distrahendo hosti per Bructeros ad flumen Amisiam 

3 mittit, equitem Pedo praefectus finibus Frisiorum ducit. 

ipse 

inpositas navibus quattuor legiones per lacus vexit ; simulque 

pedes eques classis apud praedictum amnem convenere. 

Chauci 

4 cum auxilia pollicerentur, in commilitium adsciti sunt. Bructeros 
sua urentis expedita cum manu L. Stertinius missu Germanici 
fudit; interque caedem et praedam repperit undevicensimae 
5 legionis aquilam cum Varo amissam. ductum inde agmen ad 

2. ueteri: text Wesenberg : cp. c. 4, 3; 7, 4, &c. 

I. sed, without ‘etiam’: for such ab- 
breviations see c. 77, 1; 81, 1; Introd. v. 
$ 64, and other forms given by Nipp. 
here. 

2. Inguiomerus, mentioned in this 
and the next campaign (c. 68, 1; 2.17.8; 
21, 2), and with Maroboduus (2. 45, 2). 

4. quadraginta coh. Romanis. This 
appears, as Nipp. notes, to be merely 
a change of expression for four legions, 
being those of the Lower army (c. 64, 8). 

5. distrahendo hosti... mittit; on 
this dative see Introd. v. § 22,6. It is 
similarly joined to ‘mitto’ in 2. 1, a. 

per Bructeros. Cp. c. 51, 4. His 
route would be across the Lippe, and 
through Westphalia. 

6. Pedo; probably Pedo Albinovanus, 
to whom Ovid addresses an epistle (ex P. 
4. 10), and who wrote a poem on the 
campaigns .of Germanicus, of which M. 
Seneca (Suas. 1, 15) has preserved a frag- 
ment. See Appendix i to Book ii. 

finibus. On this peculiar local abla- 
tive see c. 8. 4, and Introd. v. $ 25; and 
instances collected here by Nipp. It might 

be possible to take *finibus Frisiorum' | 

with * praefectus,' and to suppose Pedo to 
be such an officer as Olennius in 4. 72, 2; 
but some indication of the route taken 
seems here needed. 

Frisiorum. This tribe, at present 
subject to Rome (see 4. 72, 1), is divided 
by Tacitus (G. 34, 1) into * maiores ' and 
‘minores. The Frisii occupied most of 
the coast of Holland, where part of their 
territory still retains the name of Friesland. 
They continued to be important after their 
revolt from Rome, and formed part of the 
English conquerors of Britain. 

8. classes: text L. 

7. lacus. See 2. 8,1; G. 34,1. One 
of these is the lake Flevo of Mela 3. 
2, 24. Since the great inundations of 
the thirteenth century, these lakes have 
become merged in the Zuider Zee. He 
must have gone round by sea to the mouth 
of the Ems. 

8. praedictum. Nipp. takes this to 
mean *'before-mentioned,' as in Liv. 1o. 
14, 7; and often in Velleius. In 2. 6, 4, 
&c , it means ‘ appointed,’ and may be so 
taken here. Knoke suggests Rheine, others 
some place lower down the Ems or at its 
mouth, as the meeting-point. 

Chauci. See c. 38, 1. 

9. in commilitium adsciti, repeated 
from H.3.5,2. ‘Commilitium’ is found 
first in Ovid and Velleius. . 

10. L. Stertinius, mentioned often 
during these campaigns, and always as 
a leader of cavalry and light troops. Cp. 
C. 71, 1; 2.8, 45; 11, 4; 17, 15 22, 3. 

II. undevicensimae legionis aqui- 
lam. This passage identifies one of the 
legions lost with Varus. See Introd. vii. 
p.122. Respecting the recovery of other 
eagles see on 2. 25, 2; 41, I. 

‘12, ductum inde agmen, &c. The 
*agmen' seems clearly to be not the 
advanced force of Stertinius, but the whole 
army, on the route of which from the 
mouth of the Ems we are left wholly in 
the dark. The district between the Ems 
and Lippe would geographically be that 
between Münster and Paderborn, where 
alone they approach each other; and 
Germanicus after his long circuit would 
thus have got to a point which could 
have been reached in a few days by a 
direct route from Vetera: see Appendix ii 

S 2 

om 

uu 

o 

“ya 

260 

. P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

ultimos Bructerorum, quantumque Amisiam et Lupiam amnes 
inter vastatum, haud procul Teutoburgiensi saltu, in quo reliquiae 
Vari legionumque insepultae dicebantur. 

61. Igitur cupido Caesarem invadit solvendi suprema militibus 
ducique, permoto ad miserationem omni qui aderat exercitu ob 
propinquos,amicos, denique ob casusbellorum et sortem hominum. 
praemisso Caecina, ut occulta saltuum scrutaretur pontesque et 2 
aggeres umido paludum et fallacibus campis inponeret, incedunt 

maestos locos visuque ac memoria deformis. 

to Book ii. Dünzelmann (‘ Das Rómische 
Strassennetz in Norddeutschland,' Jahrb. 
f. Class. Philol. Supp. xx. pp. 96-109) 
argues that the Lupia of Tacitus (cp 2. 
7,1; H. 5. 22, 5) is not the Lippe but 
the Hunte (falling into the Weser), noting 
that the Aovaias of Strab. 7, 1, 3, 291, is 
described as flowing northward like the 
Amisia and Visurgis. Such a supposition, 
if it reduced, would not remove the. difh- 
culty of explaining the line of march here, 
and is open to other objections. The Lupia 
in Hist. 1. 1. must surely be a tributary of 
the Rhine; and Romans from the time of 
Mela (3. 3, 30) knew it to be such; nor 
does the Hunte suit well with Dio 54. 
33; 1. It is best to suppose that the 
Lippe is meant, but that Tacitus had not 
a clear idea of its course, and that at 
what point the ‘ultimi Bructerorum’ are 
to be placed, and what distance from the 
‘saltus Teutoburgiensis’ may here be 
meant by ‘haud procul’ (see G. and G. 
Lex.), are wholly insoluble questions. 

2. inter. On the position of the prep. 
cp. Introd. v. 77, 6. 

Teutoburgiensi saltu. The name is 
given only here, and the identification, 
notwithstanding all the industry spent on 
it, is most uncertain. In F. Knoke’s work 
100 pages are given to the discussion of 
other views and establishment of his own ; 
but the data furnished by our accounts of 
the disaster (see Vell. 2. 118; Dio 56. 
20-22) are very slender. The summer 
camp of Varus was probably near the 

junction of the Werra and Weser, whence 
he could no doubt have securely retreated - 

to Vetera, probably by way of Aliso (see 
2. 7, 5): to make him take a more 
circuitous route, a rising was concerted 
in some other quarter ; in his route to or 
from which he was surprised and sur- 
rounded in a region of forest and marsh. 
His line of march may thus have been 
almost any other than the direct course 

prima Vari castra 3 

to Vetera, and the scene of the disaster 
might be almost anywhere between the 
middle Weser and the Ems. Of the 
localities thought most probable, that of 
Detmold and the Osning, or that betwcen 
Beckum and the Lippe, are generally 
thought too near the Roman territory ; 
but both have found recent advocacy, the 
former district that of P. Hofer (‘die 
Varusschlacht, Leipzig 1888*, the latter 
that of Prof. Allen (Excursus), both of 
whom consider that the whole narrative 
points to a spot near to the Bructeri 
(see here’, and to Aliso (see 2. 7, 5, and 
note). Mommsen, whose view is probably 
the most generally accepted (see Hist. 
v. 43, n. 1, E. T. i. 47, n. 1, and other 
writings), inclines to place it near Darenau, 
north of Osnabriick, where a very large 
number of Roman coins, dating not later 
than B.C. 1, have been found, which might 
have sunk into the marshy ground and 
escaped the captors. Knoke would place 
the locality south of Osnabriick, in the 
defile north-west of the pass of Iburg, on 
a small stream called the Diite, a tributary 
of the Hase; Diinzelmann (see previous 
note), east of the Dümmer-see, near 
Diepholz. 

7. ocoulta saltuum : on this genit. and 
* umido paludum,' see Introd. v. $ 32. 

rontes et aggeres: these are coupled . 
again in 4. 73, 2. On the former see 
note on c. 63, 6; the latter appear here, 
and in 2. 7, 5, to be roads roughly con- 
structed bv.embankment. 

8. incedunt. This verb has an accu- 
sative of place only here and in I4. 15, 
6; 22, 6. 

g. maestos locos: such an application 
of ‘ macstus ' is frequent in poetry. Tacitus 
uses another such figure (* tacentes loci’) in 
H. 3. 84, 6. The plural ‘loci,’ used 
rather of distinct spots than of localities 
(cp. 13. 36, 1), is rare, but in Sall. and 
Liv. as well as in poets. 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. CAP. 60, 61. 

lato ambitu et dimensis principiis trium legionum manus osten- 
tabant; dein semiruto vallo, humili fossa accisae iam reliquiae 
consedisse intellegebantur: medio campi albentia ossa, ut fuger- 
4 ant, ut restiterant, disiecta vel aggerata. adiacebant fragmina 
telorum equorumque artus, simul truncis arborum antefixa ora. 
5 lucis propinquis barbarae arae, apud quas tribunos ac primorum 
6 ordinum centuriones mactaverant. et cladis eius superstites, 
pugnam aut vincula elapsi, referebant hic cecidisse legatos, illic 
raptas aquilas; primum ubi vulnus Varo adactum, ubi infelici 
dextera et suo ictu fnortem invenerit ; quo tribunali contionatus 

5. simul... ora after mactaverant Haase. 

261 

visu, *the actual appearance,' as op- 
posed to the associations ,* memoria ’’. 

prima&...oeastra. It is noticed that 
the order of description follows that of 
the retreat of Varus. This may have been 
adopted for pictorial effect ; as the advance 
of Germanicus was probably in the reverse 
direction (except on Knoke's supposition). 
Details of the march and encampments of 
Varus are given in Dio, 56. 20-22; but 
some part of his narrative, occupying at 
least a leaf of MS., is lost. 

I. principiis, ‘the headquarters,’ or 
central space, from the measurement of 
which that of the whole camp was taken, 
containing the ‘ praetorium,' * augurale,' 
&c., and space to collect the troops for an 
address (c. 67, 1, &c.). This camp, besides 
having a wide circuit (‘lato ambitu ’), had 
this space regularly marked out, on a scale 
suitable to the whole force. 

trium legionum manus ostenta- 
bant, ' showing the work of three legions,’ 
i. e. of the undiminished army. 

2. semiruto, ‘half-levelled’: cp. 4. 
25,1. The word is frequent in Livy, who 
opposes it to ‘integer’ (36. 24, 6). It is 
implied that thc first camp was still com- 
paratively perfect, and that this second 
must have,been slenderly constructed. 
Dio (56. 22, 2) speaks also of three $v- 
Aaxrijp.a, not mentioned here. 

accisas, ‘diminished’: cp. 
tes’ Liv.6. 5, 2,&c. 

- 3. consedisse intellegebantur. On 
this infinitive cp. Introd. v. § 45. 

medio campi, i.e. in the space be- 
yond the second camp, where the final 
carnage took place. Some take it of the 
space between the two camps. 

ut fugerant .. . aggerata, ‘scat- 
tered or heaped, according as the men 

* accisae 

had fled or rallied’: * dispersi' and ‘ag- 
gerati’ are thus opposed in 6. 19, 3. 

4. fragmina. Tacitus prefers this 
chiefly poetical word to the classical 
* fragmentum" : cp. Introd. v: $ 69. 

5. simul. The idea of proximity is 
supplied from * adiacebant.' 

ora. Nipp. rightly maintains that this 
can only mean the skulls of men; though 
the Germans are said (see Orelli) to have 
sometimes set up the heads of horses 
offered in sacrifice. 

6. barbarae, so called with special 
allusion to the human sacrifices. To 

On 

some of their gods such were regularly - 

offered (G. 9, 1) ; and sometimes (cp. 13. 
57, 3) the whole conquered army, and 
all belonging to it, was massacred in 
discharge of a vow. 

primorum ordinum: cp. c. 29, 2. 

7. superstites: some were rescued by 
the reserve force under Asprenas, others 
subsequently ransomed. Dio, 56, 22, 4. 

8. elapsi, with accus. in 4. 64, 3; H. 
3. 59, 4. The usage is apparently pecu- 
liar to Tacitus: cp. Introd. v. $ 12 c. 

legatos: see on c. 59, 4. 

9. vulnus ... adactum, from Very. 
Aen. 10, 850. Cp. ‘ vulnus adegit ' in 6. 
35, 4; and * vulnera (for * ictus") derigere ' 
(Verg. Aen. 10, 140, and H. 2. 35, 2). 

infelici, i. e. that could only help him 
in his despair. ; 

10. invenerit. Nipp. gives other in- 
stances (c. 76, 6; 6.45,5; H. 1. 34, 3) 
where this tense stands, in ‘ oratio indi- 
recta,’ where that of the principal verb 
would naturally require a pluperfect. 
Here it seems intended to assist the 
liveliness of the description by a nearer 
approach to the words of the describers. 

Cc 

262 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 758. 

" Arminius, quot patibula captivis, quae scrobes, utque signis et 

“st 

10 

aquilis per superbiam inluseric. 

62. Igitur Romanus qui aderat exercitus sextum post cladis 
annum trium legionum ossa, nullo noscente alienas reliquias an 
suorum humo tegeret, omnes ut coniunctos, ut consanguineos, 

aucta in hostem ira, maesti simul et infensi condebant. 

primum 2 

extruendo tumulo caespitem Caesar posuit, gratissimo munere in 

defunctos et praesentibus doloris socius. 

quod Tiberio haud 8 

probatum, seu cuncta Germanici in deterius trahenti, sive exerci- 
tum imagine caesorum insepultorumque tardatum ad proelia et 
formidolosiorem hostium credebat ; neque imperatorem auguratu 
et vetustissimis caerimoniis praeditum adtrectare feralia debuisse. 

2. inluserint Heraeus. 
Andr. 

I. patibula. This word appears usu- 
ally to denote a kind of cross; as 4. 72, 
5; H.4.3,3 GF * patibulo eminus adfi- 

batur ' Sall. H. 4. 40 D, 48 K, 24 G). 

14. 33, 6, it is distinct from ‘ crux,’ as 
in a fragment of Plautus, * patibulatus 
ferar per urbem, deinde adfigar cruci,' 
where it appears to be the same as the 
‘furca,’ or yoke, in which the head an 
hands were held as in a pillory. 

scrobes. As they plainly did not 
care to bury the dead, this apparently 
refers to living burial. The Germans 
(G. 12, 1) used to bury cowards and in- 
famous profligates alive in morasses. 

ut, ‘how’: see 3. 9, 1, and note. 

3. Igitur. This seems to take up 
the relation of what was done, from that 
of the intention (c. 61, 1). 

qui aderat exercitus. The repeti- 
tion of these words from c. 61,1 has been 
treated by Ern. as an interpolation, by 
Nipp. as a kind of lyrical antistrophe, or 
imitation of the repetitions of sentimental 
poetry. The contrast of the living with 

the dead, the victorious with the slaugh- 

tered army, is evidently prominent in the 
mind of the writer; and it seems hardly 
possible, where the composition is so 
elaborate, to suppose such an oversight as 
that of the repetition noted by Drager of 
‘ad eas res conficiendas’ in two succes- 
sive sentences of Caesar (B. G. 1. 3, 2, 3). 

sextum post cladis annum. ‘Ihe 
use of such an expression for ‘sexto anno 
post cladem,' is noted as rare (Madv. 
276, Obs. 6); but several instances from 
writers of this age are collected by 

Nipp., e. g. *post decimum mortis annum ' 

3. Romanis (Andresen de codd. Med. p. 4) : omnis conj. 

Pl. Epp. 6. 10, 3; *ante quintum mensem 
divortii Suet. Cl. 27: see also H. a. 
70, 2. 
9. trahenti, ‘interpreting’; so used 
with ‘in’ or ‘ad,’ after the exainple of 
Sall. and Liv., of the judgement formed 
on an action (as 4. 64, I, &c.), or the 
motive assigned to it (as 3. 22, 6; H. 2. 
20, 1, &c.) : cp. ‘ varie trahebant" c. 76,6. 
11.formidolosiorem, ‘ moretimorous’; 
rarely so used, and (according to Drager) 
here only with genitive of the object, on 
the analogy of ‘ pavidus,’ &c. 
- auguratu . . . praeditum, ‘ invested - 
with the augurship, and its time-honoured 
ritual.’ * Caerimoniae,' from denoting the 
duties of a religious office, comes, in 
Tacitus, almost to stand for the office 
itself: cp. c. 54, r, and ‘ad capessendas 
caerimonias" 4. 16, 6. On the priest- 
hoods held by Germanicus see 2. 83, 2. 
I2. &d£rectare feralia. Suetonius 
(Cal. 3) represents him as collecting the 
remains with his own hand, which is more 
likely to have amounted to technical pol- 
lution than what is here stated ; though 
the line drawn is uncertain, and probably 
varied in different priestly colleges. Gel- 
lius (10, 13) says of the flamen Dialis; 
*mortuum numquam attingit. — Funus 
tamen exsequi non est religio. Tiberius, 
then one of the pontiffs, is said by Dio 
(56. 31, 3) to have received a kind of in- 
demnity for touching the body of Augus- 
tus and escortihg it; and afterwards, 
when * pontifex maximus,’ to have inter- 
posed a veil when pronouncing the 'lau- 
datio ' of his son, lest the sight of a corpse 
should pollute him (Sen. cons. ad Mar- 

A. D. 13.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 61-63. 

263 

63. Sed Germanicus cedentem in avia Arminium secutus, ubi 
primum copia fuit, evehi equites campumque, quem hostis inse- 

2 derat, eripi iubet. 

Arminius colligi suos et propinquare silvis 

monitos vertit repente: mox signum prorumpendi dedit iis quos 

8 per saltus occultaverat. 

tunc nova acie turbatus eques, missae- 

que subsidiariae cohortes et fugientium agmine impulsae auxer- 
antconsternationem ; trudebanturque in paludem gnaram vincen- 
tibus, iniquam nesciis, ni Caesar productas legiones instruxisset : 
4 inde hostibus terror, fiducia militi ; et manibus aequis abscessum. 
5 mox reducto ad Amisiam exercitu legiones classe, ut advexerat, 
reportat; pars equitum litore Oceani petere Rhenum iussa; 
Caecina, qui suum militem ducebat, monitus, quamquam notis 
itineribus regrederetur, pontes longos quam maturrime superare. 

ciam I5, 3) : yet Dio rejects this explana- 
tion (though offering no other, of a 
similar action of Augustus at the funeral 
of Agrippa (54. 38, 4). Again; holders 
of priestly offices constantly commanded 
armies, and seem to have incurred no 
. pollution from the camage of battle. 

I. Sed Germanicus, &c. It is to 
be noted (see Appendix ii to Book ii) 
that we have in these few lines the ac- 
count of the chief object of this campaign, 
the attempt to bring Arminius to battle. 
The direction of march is in no way 
indicated. Knoke’s view, that this battle 
took«place at Barenau (where Mommsen 
places the defeat of Varus) is consistent 
with his scheme of the whole campaign, 
but otherwise unsupported. 

2. copia, * opportunity'; usually with 
genit., as c. 58, 6 ; 3. 7, a, &c. 

evehi, ‘to charge’: cp. *longius 
evectum’ 12. 14, 4; *evectus. . . equo' 
Liv. 4. 33, 7. 

3. eripi, ‘to be carried by a rush,’ 
probably a military term, used also in 
the circus of a driver who takes his 
opponent's ground (cp. ‘aequore erepto’ 
Sil. 16, 390). 

6. subsidiariae, ‘of the reserve,’ as 
Caes. B. C. 1. 83, 2; Liv. 9. 27, 9. 

7. gnaram: cp. c. 5, 4. 

9. manibus aequis; so used by Livy 
(27. 13, 5), as * aequa manu’ by Sallust 
(Cat. 39, 4). It is to be noted that the 
Romans certainly retire with loss, and 
that we have thus an admission of failure 
in the only engagement of the whole 
army recorded in this campaign. 

10. ad Amisiam. The point of dis- 

embarkation (see on c. 60, 3) appears to 
be intended. 

legiones...reportat. These words 
rn to be both inaccurate and out of 
place. The legions of Caecina have to 
be excepted; and, of the remaining four, 
two were to make part of their retreat 
by land; nor does the narrative of the 
movements of any part of this body-begin 
till c. 7o. The conjecture of Doed., 
* duas legiones, would stand very awk- 
yardly, unaccompanied by any statement 
about the others. 

Il. pars equitum. The retreat of this 
body may have been unaccompanied by 
important incidents. Probably we have, 

in c. 71, an account of the movements of . 

the other portion (see note there); as the 
narrative of Caecina's retreat mentions no 
troops but the legions. 

litore Oceani: cp. ‘finibus Frisio- 
rum’ (c. 60, 2). 

12. notis itineribus. His retreat was 

not by the same route as his advance. 

* per Bructeros’ (c. 60, 2), for the ‘pontes’ 
are mentioned below as fallen into dis- 
use and decay; but his knowledge might 
date from other times of his forty years’ 
service (c. 64, 6). 

I3. pontes longos. -Nipp. notes the 
practice of making such causeways by 
mere timbers laid roughly over marshy 
ground, as probably in c. 61, 2: cp. 
* pontibus palude constrata ' (Hirt. B. G. 
8. 14, 4); but the narrative here seems to 
describe more regular, though decayed, 
structures. The locality could only be 

fixed by knowledge of the point of de- | 
parture. If Caecina was not detached . 

5 armisque militem cum antevenisset. 

264 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 768. 

angustus is trames vastas inter paludes et quondam a L. Domitio 6 
aggeratus; cetera limosa, tenacia gravi caeno aut rivis incerta 
erant; circum silvae paulatim adclives, quas tum Arminius 
inplevit, compendiis viarum et cito agmine onustum sarcinis 

Caecinae dubitanti, quo- 7 

nam modo ruptos vetustate pontes reponeret simulque propul- 
saret hostem, castra metari in loco placuit, ut opus et alii proelium 

inciperent. 

64. Barbari períringere stationes seque inferre munitoribus 
nisi lacessunt, circumgrediuntur, occursant: miscetur operantium 
bellantiumque clamor. et cuncta pariter Romanis adversa, locus 2 
uligine profunda, idem ad gradum instabilis, procedentibus 
lubricus, corpora gravia loricis; neque librare pila inter' undas 

poterant. 

9. sequi: 

till after the retreat of the whole army 
to the lower Ems, his line of march to 
Vetera would lie across the great Bour- 
tanger morass. But this route would lie 
through the friendly Frisii and Chauci, 
far from the strongholds of Arminius, 
and from any heights deserving the name 
of mountains (c. 64, 7). If he was sent 
off after they had reached the Ems, but at 
a higher point on that river, a suitable 
locality can be found, with Nordhoff and 
Westhoff ( Bonn. Jahrb. xcvi. 189, foll.) in 
the Merfelder Bruch, near Coesfeld, on.an 
apparently Roman road leading from near 
Greven to Borkea and thence to Xanten. 
If, as seems suggested by the descrip- 
tion of Arminius overtaking him |$ 6), his 
march began nearer to the scene of the 
battle, the route can in no way be fixed, 
and even such a circuit as that supposed 
by Knoke, round the cast and north of 
the Dümmer See, is possible. At all 
these places remains of ancient causeways 
have been found. It will be observed 
that we have only a record of three days' 
march (c. 63, 7; 65, 9; 68, 7), the re- 
maiuder being supposed to be uneventful. 
I. L. Domitio, the grandfather of 
Nero, whose achievements in Germany are 
mentioned in 4. 44, 3; Dio, 55. 10a. 
His great exploit, the crossing of the 
Elbe, took place (see Dio 1.1. and note on 
Ann. l. 1:) at some point reached from 
Vindelicia and southern Germany, so that 
we cannot connect his route to it with any 
probable situation of these causeways. 
.2. gravi, perhaps ‘foul’: cp. ‘odor 

contra Cheruscis sueta apud paludes proelia, procera 3 

text D. 

caeni gravis’ Verg. G. 4, 49. The word 
*caenum' generally carries the idea of 
loathsomeness: cp. *male olere omne 
caenum’ Cic Tus... 4. 24, 54. 

7. in loco, ‘ where he was,’ i e. where 
he had to repair the bridge: cp. 4. 47, 3; 
13. 41, I. 

opus et alii proelium. Such a1 
expression is not strictly identical with 
‘alii’... ‘alii,’ but rather distinguishes 
the action of the smaller from that of the 
larger body: cp. ‘ virgis caedi, alii securi 
subici" Liv. 3. 37, 8; * navibus iunctis... 
alii vadis . . . conati ' Caes. B. G. 1. 8, 4. 
The novelty in Tacitus, as Drager points 
out, lies in the insertion of ‘et’: cp. 
* fictis causis ct alii per speciem honoris ' 
12. 41, 5; ‘libertate et alii pecunia 
donati" 15. 54, 2. Several other instances 
are given by Nipp. on c. 17. The ‘opus’ 
appears to be that of repairing the road 
(cp. * quod effectum operis! c. 64, 5). 

9. munitoribus, ‘ the working party.’ 
The word is uncommon, but the phrase 
* munire viam ' familiar and classical. 

IO. nisi. The inf. is used with this 
verb by Sallust (Jug. 25, 9), Nepos, and 
Ovid ; as also, rarely, with * adnitor ' (H. 
5. 8, 2), and * obnitor’ (Vell. 1. 9, 6). 

12. &d gradum, *to take firm stand 
upon.’ Nipp. compares ‘gradu immota" 
(14. 37, 1), ‘stabili gradu’ (H. 2. 32, 2), 
and the frequent phrase * gradu deicere.' 

14. sueta. The application of this 
word to things, as in ‘sueto...con- 
tubernio' (II. 2. 80, 5), is rare, and 
chiefly found in Apuleius. 

A.D. 15.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 63-65. 265 

membra, hastae ingentes ad vulnera facienda quamvis procul. 
4nox demum inclinantis iam legiones adversae pugnae exemit. 
& Germani ob prospera indefessi, ne tum quidem sumpta quiete, 
quantum aquarum circum surgentibus iugis oritur vertere in sub- 

iecta, mersaque humo et obruto quod effectum operis duplicatus 5 

6 militi labor. quadragensimum id stipendium Caecina parendi 
aut imperitandi habebat, secundarum ambiguarumque rerum 

7 sciens eoque interritus. igitur futura volvens non aliud repperit 
quam ut hostem silvis coerceret, donec saucii quantumque gra- 
vioris agminis anteirent; nam medio montium et paludum porri- 

8 gebatur planities, quae tenuem aciem pateretur. deliguntur le- 
giones quinta dextro lateri; unetvicensima in laevum, primani 
ducendum ad agmen, vicensimanus adversum secuturos. 

65. Nox per diversa inquies, cum barbari festis cpulis, laeto 
cantu aut truci sonore subiecta vallium ac resultantis saltus com- 
plerent, apud Romanos invalidi ignes, interruptae voces, atque 
ipsi passim adiacerent vallo, oberrarent tentoriis, insomnes magis 

2. mox: nox ed. Froben, 1519. 

procera membra: cp. the descrip- 
tion of the Germans in 2. 14, 5; and the 
citation in note there from G. 4, 1. 

I. hasta? ingentes: cp. 'enormes 
hastas! 2. 14, 3; the * maiores lanceae’ 
of G. 6, 1. 

2. inclinantis iam: cp. 'acies in- 
clinatas iam’ G. 8, 1. The verb is 
used of troops giving way, in the active 
in H. 3. 83, 1, and in both voices by I ivy. 

pugnae exemit: cp. c. 48, 2. 

4. in subiecta, i.e. ‘in loca iugis 
subiecta ': cp. * subiecta vallium" c. 65, 1. 

6. quadragensimum : see note on his 
own speech, 3. 33, 1. ‘Stipendia me- 
reri would not be strictly used of a 
magistrate in military command: see 
Staatsr. iii. 540. 

7. aut: see above, c. 55, 2. 

8. volvens, ‘ pondering’; for ‘volvens: 
animo' : cp. 3. 38, 2, &c.; so in Sall. 

Verg., and Liv.: cp. the similar use of 
* volutare ’ c. 36, 4 (also in Livy). 

9. quantum, ‘ what there was of, the 
whole’: cp. 2. 38, 2, &c. 

10. medio: cp. Introd. v. $ 25: * mon- 
tium, apparently the ‘silvae paulatim 
adclives ' of c. 63, 6. 

II. tenuem, *a thin line’ : ‘ pateretur ’ 
is a potential subjunctive. 

deliguntur legiones, &c. ‘The same 

3. tam: corr. iam, tum B. 

legions are similarly\disposed in c. 51, 5. 
The variation of expression, both in the 
subject forms and in those denoting. the 
action, is noted by Wolfflin (Philol. xxv. 
p. 121) as characteristic of the later style 
of Tacitus, compared with the Ciceronian 
symmetry of such periods as ‘ studium 
...inlustrjus’ (Dial. 5, 2), * praeponere 
. .. hnumerare' (G. 30, 2). 

14. per diversa, from different causes 
on each side. 

inquies: cp.c. 68, 1, &c. The word 
is first found in Sall, thence passing to 
Vell. and Pl. Mai. Within these few 
lines four poetical words are noted, 
'sonor, *resulto, *oberro, and ‘pers 
vigil’; the first of which, as also *inde- 
fessas ' (c. 64, 5), is introduced into prose 
by Tacitus (Introd. v. $ 70). 

I5. cantu ... sonore. On the German 
war songs and cries (* barditus’), see C. 
3, 1, and notes. 

16. voces, perhaps best. taken of the 
challenge of the patrol (cp. *intermisso 

: Signo et vocibus' H. 5. 22, 5), wanting 

its usual regularity and promptness. On 
the omission of * essent ' cp. c. 7, I. 

17. adiacerent vallo. In 4. 48, 5, 
* munitionibus adiacerent' is used of 
troops listless from negligence, as here 
from despondency. 

od 
Pal 

un 

IO 

266 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 768. 

quam pervigiles. ducemque terruit dira quies: nam Quintilium 2 
Varum sanguine oblitum et paludibus emersum cernere et audire. 
visus est velut vocantem, non tamen obsecutus et manum inten- 
dentis reppulisse. coepta luce missae in latera legiones, metu 8 
an contumacia, locum deseruere, capto propere campo umentia 
ultra. neque tamen Arminius quamquam libero incursu statim 4 

.prorupit: sed ut haesere caeno fossisque impedimenta. turbati 

circum milites, incertus signorum ordo, utque tali in tempore sibi 
quisque properus et lentae adversum imperia aures, inrumpere 
Germanos iubet, clamitans ‘en Varus eodemque iterum fato 
vinctae legiones!" simul haec et cum delectis scindit agmen 5 

i 
3. intendentes: tendentis Haase, manus intendentem Sirker. 
et eodem L, text Ritt. 1848, Varus alter eodemque conj. Müller. 

victae B. © 

I. dira quies, taken apparently from 
Lucan 7. 26 ‘dira quies et imagine 
moesta diurna.’ In this and similar uses 
of * quies’ in Tacitus (2. 14,1; I1. 4, 33 
12. 13, 3; 16.1, 1), the word can always 
bear its usual meaning; the dream by 
which the rest is accompanied being in- 
dicated by the epithet or context. But 
in Vergil's: Par levibus ventis, volucrique 
simillima somno’ (Aen. 2, 794; 6, 792» 

If. 

M somnus" stands for the dream itse 

3. paludibus emersum. On the 
abl. see Introd. v. $ 24. Thus Sallust 
has * navigia fundo emergunt! (H. 4. 22 
D, 37 K, 17 G), but Livy ‘ex... palude 
emersus ' (I. 13, 4). 

3. manum intendentis reppulisse, 
* thrust aside his hand as he held it out 
to him.' Usually * manum intendere ' ex- 
presses a hostile gesture, as 4. 3, 2, &c. 

4. coepta luce. On the use of this 
verb in Tacitus see Introd. v. § 42 b. 

missae in latera, according to the 
plan formed in the night (c. 64, 8). 

5. campo umentia ultra. This would 
appear not to be the ‘ planities' (c. 64, 7) 
bordering on the wooded heights occu- 
pied by the enemy, which they were in- 
tended to occupy so as to hold him in 
check; but arother solid spot, on the 
further side of the morass ; the occupation 
of which left the baggage, struggling 
along by way of the causeways through 
marshy ground, exposed. 

7. caeno fossisque. Nipp. rightly 
takes these as abl. as also * criminibus 
haerebant' (4. 19, 5). Cp. * haeret pede 
Is " (Verg. Aen. 10, 361) ; *currus illuvie 

aerebant ' (Curt. 8, 4) : see note on c. 68, 

Io. et eodemque: 
1I. vinctae : 

3. In earlier prose we should have ex- 
pected ‘in caeno,’ &c., but such an abl. 
may be regarded as quasi-instrumental. 
It seems necessary to suppose the‘ fossae" 
to be natural holes or fissures ; a mean- 
ing somewhat supported by Bell. Afr. 50, 
4 ‘ne in fossa... opprimerentur' (where 
the word means a ravine). 

8. utque. We have here, as Nipp. 
shows, two concurrent constructions with 
‘ut.’ The ‘ut’ before ‘ haesere,’ in the 
sense of *when, extends its force to 

*'aures'; and the parenthetical ‘ut tali 

in tempore’ (=‘ ut fieri solet tali in tem- 

. pore’: cp. 2. 82, 1; H. 3. 71. 4; G. 2, 

4; 22, 1 ; Agr. 11, 1) is interposed. The 
words *tali in tempore’ (2. 84, 3; 16. 
26, 8) may be a reminiscence of Lucr. 
I, 94. - | | 

sibi ...properus. Cp. 'sibi...ten- 
dentes' H. 1. 13, 3. 

10. eodemque : scecrit. note. In two 
similar errors in the second Medicean 
MS.,:' argenti et aurique' (H. 4. 53, 4), - 
* Gallias et Germaniasque ' (H. 4. 54, 1), 
an accidental transposition appears not 
improbable, and the ‘ que’ may well have 
belonged originally to * argenti' and to 
* Gallias; Here possibly some word 
after ‘et’ has been lost: possibly, as : 
Ritter suggests, the copyist of some 
earlier MS. overlooked *que' in an ab- 
breviation, and added ‘ et.’ 

II. vinctae. The dot in the MS. 
has given rise to the correction ‘victae,’ 
which would be a natural exaggeration 
of the success described in c. 64, 4. On 
the other hand, ‘ vinctae ' would resemble 
the language of Calgacus, ‘ vinctos di 

A. D. 13.] LIBER I. CAP. 6s, 66. 267 

6 equisque maxime vulnera ingerit. illi sanguine suo et lubrico 
paludum lapsantes excussis rectoribus disicere obvios, proterere 
7 iacentes. plurimus circa aquilas labor, quae neque ferri adversum 
8 ingruentia tela neque figi limosa humo poterant. Caecina dum 
sustentat aciem, suffosso equo delapsus circumveniebatur, ni 5 
9 prima legio sese opposuisset. iuvit hostium aviditas, omissa 
caede praedam sectantium ; enisaeque legiones vesperascente die 
10 in aperta et solida. neque is miseriarum finis. struendum vallum, 
petendus agger, amissa magna ex parte per quae egeritur humus 
aut exciditur caespes; non tentoria manipulis, non fomenta 
sauciis; infectos caeno aut cruore cibos dividentes funestas 
tenebras et tot hominum milibus unum iam reliquum diem 

lamentabantur. 

66. Forte equus abruptis vinculis vagus et clamore territus 
2 quosdam occurrentium obturbavit. tanta inde consternatio inru- 
pisse Germanos credentium, ut cuncti ruerent ad portas, quarum 
decumana maxime petebatur, aversa hosti et fugientibus tutior. 
3 Caecina comperto vanam esse formidinem, cum tamen neque 

3. " adversü " ferri (”” " in later hand). 

nobis tradiderunt' (Agr. 32, 3); and 
* velut vincti" is used of troops encum- 
bered by baggage and sticky ground 
(H. 1.79, 3): cp. Liv. 28. a, 9. 

simul haec et, a poetical expression 
(Stat. Theb. 2, 659). The usual formula 
‘simul et...et'1s modified to ‘simul 
... et in 4. 25, 3; H. 3. 13, 3; Sall. 
Jag. 97, 4. 

2. lapsantes: cp. H. 1. 79, 5. In 
Vergil (Aen. 2, 551), and apparently not 
in prose before Tacitus. 

3. ferri adversum. The transposi- 
tion taken to be indicated by the double 
commas is now generally adopted. Other- 
wise ‘adversum ferri’ must be supposed 
to take an accusative, like such com- 
pounds as * inrumpere' (c. 48, 4), &c. 

4. figi...humo: cp. * haesere caeno 
fossisque, above, ‘figere animo’ Agr. 
45, 5, &c. ; 

5. suffosso equo; so in 2. II, 4, and 
v. l. in Verg. Aen. 11,671. Cp. *equis 
. .. ilia subfodere' Liv. 42. 59, 3. 

7. vesperascente die; also in 16. 
34, 1; H. 2. 49, 3. On the variety of 
expressions for this fact used by Tacitus 
see Introd. v. $ 93. 

8. aperta et solida. This again 
seems different from either of the solid 

9. perque geritur: text R. 

spots before mentioned, and beyond the 
morass traversed by the * pontes.’ Cp. 
c. 68, 4 ‘non hic silvas nec paludes.' 

9. agger, ‘material for the mound’: 
cp. ‘aggeris petendi causa ' (Caes. B. G. 
2. 20, 1), *longius agger petendus ' (Id. 
B. C. 1. 42, 1). See note on 2. 81, 2. 
The mound is here distinguished from 
the palisade (vallum) surmounting it. 

amissa, &c. Nipp. notes the circum- 
locution used to avoid ‘calling a spade 
a spade.’ 

10. fomenta, ‘ appliances’: cp. c. 69, 
2, &c. . 

II. funestas. The darkness was ‘ that 
of the grave,’ i.e. ominous of their fate. 
Cp. ‘feralibus ...tenebris’ 2. 31, 2. 

14. equus abruptis vinoulis, probably 

a reminiscence of Verg. Aen. II, 492. 

17. deoumana. The‘ porta praetoria,' 
to which this was opposite, faced the 
enemy, or the direction of march, or, in 
stationary camps, the east. Veget. I. 23. 

aversa hosti. In no other place is 
*aversus' certainly used with the dat. ; 
but possibly so in ‘aversus mercaturis' 
(Hor. Sat. 2. 3, 107), *aversum prae- 
liantibus' (Sall. Jug. 93, 2), 'aversus 
contubernio ' (Col. 2. 1. 4). 

18. comperto. On this abl. abs. see 

[jJ 

5 

268 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . ([A.U.C. 768. 

auctoritate neque precibus, ne manu quidem obsistere aut re- 
tinere militem quiret, proiectus in limine portae miseratione 
demum, quia per corpus legati eundum erat, clausit viam: simul 
tribuni et centuriones falsum pavorem esse docuerunt. 

67. Tunc contractos in principia iussosque dicta cum silentio 
accipere temporis ac necessitatis monet. unam in armis salutem, 
sed ea consilio temperanda manendumque intra vallum, donec 
expugnandi hostes spe propius succederent ; mox undique erum- 
pendum: illa eruptione ad Rhenum petveniri. quod si fugerent, 2 
1o pluris silvas, profundas magis paludes, saevitiam hostium super- 
esse; at victoribus decus gloriam. quae domi cara, quae in 3 
castris honesta, memorat; reticuit de adversis. equos dehinc, 4 
orsus a suis, legatorum tribunorumque nulla ambitione fortissimo 
cuique bellatori tradit, ut hi, mox pedes in hostem invaderent. 

68. Haud minus inquies Germanus spe, cupidine et diversis 
ducum sententiis agebat, Arminio sinerent egredi egressosque 
rursum per umida et inpedita circumvenirent suadente, atrociora 
Inguiomero et laeta barbaris, ut vallum armis ambirent: promp-- 

‘or 

4. docuerant Haase. 

Introd. v. § 31a. *Comperto' isso used them in camp’; i.c. their past victories. 

in 4. 36, 4. &c., also in Sall. and Liv. 

2. proiectus in limine portae. A 
similar action is recorded of Cn. Pompeius 
as a young man, at a time of treason in 
the camp (Plut. Pomp. 3, 2, 620). 

5. in principia: see on c. 61, 3. 

6. temporis ac necessitatis, ‘of the 
crisis and urgency.’ The words are nearly 
a hendiadys, and are taken by Roth as such. 

monet. The construction is analogous 
to that of *admoneo. The simple verb 
is nowhere else used with a genitive, 
except probably in 2. 43, 5. 

8. expugnandi hostes spe. Nipp. 
explains this inversion as an affectation 
of style, indulged in where no misunder- 
standing could result. Several instances 
are cited by him, the most striking being 
* ardore retinendae Agrippinam potentiae 
eo usque provectam ' I4. 2. I. 

perveniri. Mr. Frost appears 
rightly to understand the present tense as 

. & stroke of rhetoric: ‘ This sally carries 

you to the Rhine. It may not be meant 
that they were near it, but that there would 
be no further difficulty. 

I1. quae domi cara, quae in castris 
honesta, *all that was dear to them at 
home, all that had been honourable to 

Nipp. takes it of military honour in 
general. 

12. adversis, ‘ disasters’ (cp. 14. 38,5; 
15. 26, 3, &c.), e.g. those of the previous 
days, in contrast to ‘ honesta.’ | 

I3. orsus a suis, ‘first his own, then 
those of the legati and tribunes. Officers 
may have had more than one horse each, 
and even the addition of a few to the 
mounted troops would be important, if we 
suppose that he had only his 'equites 
legionum' (see note on c. 63, 5), who 
would be less than 50o in all (see Introd. 
vii. 123) ;. and that many horses had been 
killed the day before (c. 65, 5). 

nulla ambitione, * without respect of 
persons'; i.e. to the bravest, whoever 
they: might be, and irrespective of any 
solicitation on their part: cp. ‘sine am- 
bitione’ 4. 64, 2; also 2. 38, 4, &c. 

16. agebat, absol. as 3. 19, 25; 38, 4; 
H. 3. 44, 2, &c.: cp. ‘agito’ c. 50, 1. 

17. atrociora, ‘more spirited’: cp. 
‘pugna atrocior’ Liv. I. 27, 17, ‘atrox 
animus’ Hor. Od. 2.1, 24; and the similar 
sense of ‘ferox’ and *ferocia' c. 2, 1; 
12, 6, &c. 

18. promptam, ‘easy’: cp. promptam 
. . . possessionem 2. 5, 4, &c. 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 66-69. 

269 

tam expugnationem, plures captivos, incorruptam praedam fore. 
2 igitur orta die proruunt fossas, iniciunt crates, summa valli pren- 

3 sant, raro super milite et quasi ob metum defixo. 

postquam 

haesere munimentis, datur cohortibus signum cornuaque ac tubae 

4 Concinuere. 

exim clamore et impetu tergis Germanorum cir- 

cumfunduntur, exprobrantes non hic silvas nec paludes, sed 

Baequis locis aequos deos. 

hosti facile excidium et paucos ac 

semermos cogitanti sonus: tubarum, fulgor armorum, quanto 
inopina, tanto maiora offunduntur, cadebantque, ut rebus secundis 

6 avidi, ita adversis incauti. 

Arminius integer, Inguiomerus post 

grave vulnus pugnam deseruere: vulgus trucidatum est, donec 

7 ira et dies permansit. 

nocte demum reversae legiones, quamvis 

plus vulnerum, eadem ciborum egestas fatigaret, vim sanitatem 
copias, cuncta in victoria habuere. | 

69. Pervaserat interim circumventi exercitus fama et infesto 
Germanorum agmine Gallias peti, ac ni Agrippina inpositum 

9. offenduntur: offeruntur margin, text R. 

2. proruunt fossas. The fuli expres- 
sion, as used by Livy (9. 14, 9*, ‘cum pars 
fossas explerent, pars vellerent vallum 
atque in fossas proruerent, is here con- 
densed into a pregnant construction. On 
other such in Tacitus cp. c. 39, 8, and 
Introd. v. $ 84. . 

iniciunt crates. Caesar describes the 
use of such temporary bridges at Alesia 
(B. G. 7. 79, 4° ' fossam cratibus integunt, 
atque aggere explent.' 

prensant: cp. ‘ prensant fastigia dextris’ 
Verg. Aen. 2, 444. | ; 

3. super: cp. ‘incensa super villa’ 3. 

46, 7; a rare use, but in Caes., Verg., &c.. 

defixo, ‘rooted to the spot’: cp. 
* pavore defixis" 13. 5, 3; also 14. 10, 1; 
Agr. 34, 3. 

4. haesere munimentis. This is 
*aken by Nipp. as a dative, but seems 
very similar to * inaequalibus locis haere- 
bant' (Agr. 36, 3) ; which is generally 
explained to be an ablative, whether of 

place, or of instrument (cp. c. 65, 4). - 

Thus it would here mean ‘ were impeded 
by’ (i. e. * were trying to surmount ’) ‘the 
outworks.’ As a dative, it would mean 
. *were clinging to. 

5. impetu, abl. of manner: cp. c. 59, 
I, &c., and Introd. v. $ 28. 

tergis ... circumfunduntur, i.e. by 

a sally from the gates. 

6. exprobrantes, ‘with the taunt’; 
used absol. in 14. 62, 3; also with accus. 
of the thing, as c. 18, 1, &c. 

8. quanto inopina: cp. c. 57, 1; 
Introd. v. § 64, 2: and the full illustration 
of this usage in Nipp.’s note here. | 

Io. avidi, taken absol. as in c. 51, 1, &c., 
as is also ‘incauti’; * rebus secundis' and 
* adversis' being abl. abs. The dative is 
used with both (11. 26, 4; H. 1. 7, 4); 
but would not suit the sense here. 

post...vulnus; a condensed or preg- 
nant construction requiring a participle or 
equivalent expression to complete it: cp. 
4. 40, 2, and ‘post Cremonam' H. 3. 
49, 1. Probably it is to be derived from 
such Horatian usages as ‘ post vina' (Od. 
1. 18, 5); ‘post te’ (Od. 3. 21, 19), 
&c. .See also Wolfflin (Philol xxvi. 
P. 133). 

II. deseruere. On the characteristic 
use in Tacitus of a plural predicate with 
singular subjects in adversative clauses, 
see Gudeman on Dial. 42, 6. 

donec, used often by Tacitus, rarely in 
earlier prose, in the sense of * quamdiu," 
with pres., imperf., and fut. indic. 

12. quamvis. On the subjunct. of facts 
with this word cp. Introd. v. $ 53. 

13. egestas. This has a genit. obj. in 
6. 33, 1; Sall. Jug. 44. 4, &c. 

On 

Lo] 

o 

5 

270 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 768. 

Rheno pontem solvi prohibuisset, erant qui id flagitium formidine 
auderent. sed femina ingens animi munia ducis per eos dies 2 
induit, militibusque, ut quis inops aut saucius, vestem et fomenta 
dilargita est. tradit C. Plinius, Germanicorum bellorum scriptor, 8 
5 stetisse apud principium pontis, laudes et grates reversis legioni- - 
bus habentem. id Tiberii animum altius penetravit: non enim 4 
simplices eas curas, nec adversus externos studia militum quaeri. 
nihil relictum imperatoribus, ubi femina manipulos intervisat, 5 
signa adeat, largitionem temptet, tamquam parum ambitiose 
10 filium ducis gregali habitu circumferat Caesaremque Caligulam 
appellari velit. potiorem iam apud exercitus Agrippinam quam 6 
legatos, quam duces; conpressam a muliere seditionem, cui no- 

£f. laudis: laudis et gratis Halm conj. (cp. 6. 2, 5). 

7. militü: militem corr. 

and B, studia militum Heraeus, militum studia Doed. 

I. pontem ; probably that mentioned 
in c. 49, 6. 

prohibuisset. This verb is used with 
accus. and inf. pass. in 4. 37, 4; H. 1. 63, 
4, Where Her. cites Cic., Caes, Liv. The 
fact of Agrippina's presence in this locality 
at this date supports the received account 
of the birthplace of her daughter (see on 
C. 44, 2). 

formidine. It is evident from the 
prominence of Agrippina that Germanicus 
and the main body had not returned. The 
camp must therefore have been very 
slenderly garrisoned. | 

2. auderent. Tacitus has nearly fifty 
instances (more than any other prose 
author) of the accus. with this verb. 

ingens animi: cp. c. 32, 5. 

3. induit. "The metaphorical uses of 
this word, as ‘induere seditionem" (2. 15, 
2); * habitum ac voces’ (4. 12, 1) ; ‘diem’ 
(6. 20, 1); ‘diversa’ (6. 33, 3); *adula- 
tionem! (6. 42, 1); ‘hostilia’ (12. 40, 3) ; 
* proditorem et hostem" (16. 28, 3), &c.; 
are among those most characteristic of 
Tacitus : still more frequent are those of 
*exuere'; e.g. c. 2, 13 4, 13 59, 735; 75 
4; 2. 72, 1; 8. I2, 4; 4. 72, 1; 6.8, 1, 
&c. See Introd. v. $ 74. 

vestem et fomenta; i.e. ‘clothes to 

the former, medicaments to ‘the latter.’ 
Of the instances cited by Nipp. of this use 
of ‘et,’ the most apposite is ‘trunca... 
manu et professoria lingua’ (of Burrus 
and Seneca) 13. 14. 5. 

4. C. Plinius. Onhis historical works 
see Introd. iii. p. 15. 

5. laudes et grates... habentem. The 

nearest to this new expression for ‘ gratias," 
or ‘grates,’ or ‘laudes gratesque agere' 
(see instances in Nipp.), is «laudibus... 
quas...de nobis haberi... renuncia- 
verunt! Cic Att. I3. 38, 1; 'grates ago 
habeoque’ Curt. 9. 6, 17. 

6. penetravit: ‘penetrare aliquid’ 
(4- 44» 3: 15. 27, I, &c.) is poetical and 
post- Augustan. 

non enim. The verb of ‘thinking’ 
is supplied from ‘id animum penetra- 
vit. 

7. simplices, ‘without ulterior pur- 
pose. Thus ‘simplicius’ (4. 40, 3; H. 3. 
53. 6). * simplicissime' (H. 1. 15, 8), and 
* simplicitas! (6. 5, 2, &c.), are used to 
express sincerity or frankness. 

studia militum quaeri. The correc- 
tion * militem " might bear a sense some- 
what like that of ‘cunctos...sibi... 
firmabat’ c 71, 5. On the supposition 
that a word is lost, the insertion of ‘studia’ 
is better supported (cp. 2. 5, 2; 3. 12, 6; 
H. 1. 23, 1 ; 64, 4) than that of * gratiam" 
(Haase) or ‘favorem’ (Ritt.), and, as 
* externos ' ends a page, it is more likely 
to have dropped out here than after 
* militum." 

9. tamquam parum ambitiose — 
* tamquam non satis ambitiose," * as if she 
did not court them enough by,’ &c. On 
the * gregalis habitus ' cp. c. rs 3. 

10. Caesarem, emphatic, ‘ likes to hear 
a Caesar called Caligula.' 

I2. conpressam ... seditionem, an 
invidious exaggeration of the facts men- 
tioned c. 40-41. 

nomen principis, probably alluding 

LA — — EEUU Pe, Mawc—7 N.S OORmESYTENX XD, DUM 

A.D. 15.) 

IT» Zs FL DAP Tc DEW MOOR E SUPE ica i anon een 

LIBER I. CAP. 69, 70. 271 

7 men principis obsistere non quiverit. accendebat haec onerabat- 
que Seianus, peritia morum Tiberii odia in longum iaciens, quae 

reconderet auctaque promeret. 

70. At Germanicus legionum, quas navibus vexerat, secundam 
et quartam decumam itinere terrestri P. Vitellio ducendas tradit, 
quo levior classis vadoso mari innaret vel reciproco sideret. 
2 Vitellius primum iter sicca humo aut modice adlabente aestu 
quietum habuit: mox inpulsu aquilonis, simul sidere aequinoctii, 
3 quo maxime tumescit Oceanus, rapi agique agmen. et opple- 
bantur terrae: eadem freto litori campis facies, neque discerni 
4 poterant incerta.ab solidis, brevia a profundis. sternuntur flucti- 
bus, hauriuntur gurgitibus; iumenta, sarcinae, corpora exanima 
interfluunt, occursant. permiscentur inter se manipuli, modo 
pectore modo ore tenus exstantes, aliquando subtracto solo 
5 disiecti aut obruti. non vox et mutui hortatus iuvabant adversante 
unda; nihil strenuus ab ignavo, sapiens ab inprudenti, consilia a 

16. aprudenti : text L. 

to their treatment of the letters written 
* nomine principis" c. 36, 4. 

I. accendebat hasc: cp. * incendebat 
haec' c. 23, tr. 

onerabat : cp. c. 19, 2, &c. 

2. odia in longum iaciens, ' sowing 
seeds of jealousy for a distant future. 
A less bold similar metaphor is ‘ futuris 
. . . caedibus semina iaciebantur ' 6. 47, 1. 

quae reconderet, &c., ‘for him to bury 
and bring to light with increase. These 
words explain ‘in longum,’ and describe 
the same trait in Tiberius which is men- 
tioned in c. 7, 11; 3. 64, 3; 4. 71, 5. 

4 At Germanicus, &c. This narra- 
tive is taken up from the end of the move- 
ment described by *reducto ad Amisiam 
exercitu ' (c. 63, 5’, and the tense of * vex- 
erat’ (used for ‘ advexerat,’ as * vectum ' 
for *advectum ' 11.14, 2)-is referred to 
the time mentioned in c. 60, 3. 

.5. P. Vitellio, uncle of the subsequent 
emperor, often mentioned as with Ger- 
manicus, and an accuser of Cn. Piso (see 
2.6,15; 74, 25 8. 10, 25 13, 3; 17, 43 
19, I); also thought (see Nipp. on 2. 74) 
to have been procos. of Bithynia in 771, 
A.D. 18: on his death see 5. 8. 

6. vadoso mari, that off the coast 
near the mouth of the Ems. 

reciproco sideret, 'ground less heavily 
at ebb-tide,' i. e. sooner get afloat again 
after grounding. ‘ Reciprocus’ has this 
sense frequently in Pl. N. H.; and ‘sido’ 

is thus used in 2. 6, 2, and in Livy and 
poets. 

8. inpulsu. This abl. might be instru- 
mental, but being here coordinate with 
* sidere,' is probably to be taken as causal. 

sidere aequinoctii: ‘sidus’ is used 
of the season of the year by Vergil, * hi- 
berno moliris sidere classem" (Aen. 4, 
309). The autumnal equinox gives. a 
date of the conclusion of this campaign. 

9. rapi agique, ‘ lose footing and are 
swept away.’ Walther thus distinguishes 
these nearly synonymous words. 

11. brevia. This poetical term (Verg. 
Aen. 1,111; Luc. 9, 3:8), taken apparently 
from the Greek 8;axéa ( Hdt., Thuc., &c.), 
is used in prose by Tacitus alone. Cp.6. 
33, 5 (where ‘fretum’ is again used, as 
here, poetically for ‘the sea") ; also‘ breve 
et incertum' 14. 29, 3. 

sternuntur; sc. homines, supplied 
from *agmen.' Individuals are spoken of 
here, and whole * manipuli ' further on. 

ont 

o 

14. subtracto solo, ‘out of depth.’ 

Tacitus seems to take the words, but not 
the meaning, from Vergil (Aen. 5, 199). 

15. vox et mutui hortatus. The 
words are here joined closely in a hen- 

diadys =‘ the voice of mutual encourage- — 

ment’; whereas ‘nec’ would distinguish 
the former, as the word of command, 
from the latter, as the encouragement of 
comrades. See note on c. 4, I. 

16. ab inprudenti. This correction 

^J 

272 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 768. 

casu differre: cuncta pari violentia involvebantur. tandem 6 
Vitellius in editiora enisus eodem agmen subduxit. pernoctavere 
sine utensilibus, sine igni, magna pars nudo aut mulcato corpore, 
haud minus miserabiles quam quos hostis circumsidet: quippe 
illic etiam honestae mortis usus, his inglorium exitium. lux 7 
reddidit terram, penetratumque ad amnem [Visurgin], quo 
Caesar classe contenderat. inpositae dein legiones, vagante fama 8 
submersas ; nec fides salutis, antequam Caesarem exercitumque 

TO 

reducem videre. 

71. lam Stertinius, ad accipiendum in deditionem Segimerum 
fratrem Segestis praemissus, ipsum et filium eius in civitatem 

4. circumsidebat Uilichs, Nipp. 
Unsingim Alting. 

is supported by the occurrence of a simi- 
lar error (‘non prudentem,’ for ‘non in- 
prudentem?) in 4. 70, 6. Some have 
here followed Wolf in reading ‘ab 
rudi': but ‘sapientes’ is opposed to 
* inprudentissimi ' by Seneca (Epp. 14, 
2; 90, 33); also ‘sapientes’ has the 
force of *prudentes' in Agr. 27, 2, and 
here corresponds to *prudentes' in a 
similar passage (2. 23, 2). The two 
terms are here explained by ‘ consilia! 
and * casu,' denoting the mode of action 
of persons of each class. 

I. involvebantur, sc. ‘ fluctibus' ; so 
* auster aqua involvens navemque virum- 
que? Virg. Aen. 6, 336. In 14. 30, 3, 
and in Verg. G. 2, 308, it expresses a 
similar envelopment in flames. Cp. also 
* fraudibus involutos? 16. 32, 3. 

3. utensilibus, ‘necessaries,’ used 
specially of food in 2. 60, 5; 15. 39, 
2; and in 3. 52, 3, even of luxuries of 
diet. | | 

5. illic = *apud illos'; so H. 2. 47, 
3; 5. 4, I; and *hinc' Ann. 3. 10, 6, 
&c. ‘Hic’ and ‘ille’ are referred here 
to the nearer and more remote objects of 
thought, irrespective of the order of 
mention; as in 6. 37, 2; H. 2. 77, 4; 
4. 27, 3: cp. ‘huic’ Ann. 2. 77,1; ' illi? 
2. 82,7 ; and note on c. 42, 6. 

honestae mortis usus, 'have the 
resource of even honourable death.' Cp. 
‘bene morte usum" 6. 48, 5. 

lux, personified, as in Liv. 9. 30, Io, 
*lux...oppressit. See Introd. v. § 75. 

6. reddidit, ‘ showed again’; ‘the 
tide and flood having receded.. 

amnem ([Visurgin]. It seems im- 
possible to retain this name by sup- 

6. [Visurgin] L and Mercer, Vidrum L, 

posing (with Knoke) a sudden change 
of movement eastward. We have here. 
described evidently a part of the retreat 
along the coast, and apparently occupy- 
ing only two days and a night. To make 
the ships more manageable at sca, these 
two legions must have been sent on from 
the naval rendezvous, at or near the 
mouth of the Ems, by much the same 
route as the ‘pars equitum’ (c. 63, 5); 
and must have been taken on board at 
the mouth of another river further on, 
perhaps left unnamed and then wrongly 
named. in a gloss. The conjecture ‘ Vi- 
drum’ is taken from the Ovidpos of Ptol. 
2, 11, § I (supposed to be the Vecht, 
now falling into the Zuider Zee); ‘ Un- 
singim’ is imagined as a Latin name for 
the Hunse, whichsuits the geography best. 

g. reducem, sing.; the principal ob- 
ject of thought being Caesar: cp. Nipp. 
Appendix to 12. 12. 

Io. Iam Stertinius, &c. It is sug- 
gested by Nipp. that, as this officer usually 
commands cavalry and light troops (see 
on c. 60, 4), the ‘pars equitum, men- 
tioned in c. 63, 5, were led by him, and 
after their retreat are sent again from 
Kóln on this service. It is also possible 
that we have here some account of the 
other * pars equitum," who are otherwise 
unnoticed. - 

Segimerum. Vell. (2. 118, 2) gives 
this name also to the father of Arminius. 
On the family see notes on c. 45, 57. 

II. filium: Strabo (7.1, 4, p. 292) 
gives his name as XeoíOuxcs, and that of 
his wife as ‘Popis, Ovxpopipov Ouvyarnp, 
hyepdvos Xàrrov. 'Akrovpépov has been 
suggested as a correction (see 11. 16, 2). 

A. D. 15.) LIBER I. CAP. 370—752. 273 

2 Ubiorum perduxerat. data utrique venia, facile Segimero, cunc- 
8 tantius filio, quia Quintilii Vari corpus inlusisse dicebatur. ce- 
terum ad supplenda exercitus damna certavere Galliae Hispaniae 
Italia, quod cuique promptum, arma equos aurum offerentes. 

4quorum laudato studio Germanicus, armis modo et equis ad 5 

5 bellum sumptis, propria pecunia militem iuvit. utque cladis 
memoriam etiam comitate leniret, circumire saucios, facta singu- 
lorum extollere; vulnera intuens alium spe, alium gloria, cunctos 
adloquio et cura sibique et proelio firmabat. 

72. Decreta eo anno triumphalia insignia A. Caecinae, L. 

2 Apronio, C. Silio ob res cum Germanico gestas. nomen patris 
patriae Tiberius, a populo saepius ingestum, repudiavit; neque 
in acta sua iurari quamquam censente senatu permisit, cuncta 

2. quinctilii (here only) : see Baiter. 

7. circumire saucios: charge ofthe The selection appears to be grounded 
wounded probably still devolved on the — on rank (these three legati alone being 
chief officers abroad, as on the nobility in | consulars); for the personal service of 
old times at Rome (see on 4. 63, 3). Silius is unmentioned, and that recorded 
Military hospitals, or * valetudinaria’ are — of Apronius (c. £6, 1) trivial. The award, 
mentioned (Veg. 2. 10, &c.), and legions as that in c. 55, I, seems to show that 
had * medici' (cp. Inscr. Orell. 448, the success was exaggerated at Rome. 

3508) ; but from what date is doubtful. . II. nomen patris patriae. This title, 
8. spe... . gloria, the hope of future already given by acclamation.to Cicero 
or memory of past victories. (Juv. 8, 243), and in 709, B.C. 45, to 

9. sibique et proelio firmabat : Julius Caesar (App. B. C. 2. 106), was 
* sibi firmare’ (‘to secure to oneself’) is formally accepted by Augustus, from the 
used in 3. 60, 1; H. 5. 4, 1. Here, the united voice of senate, knights, and 
double application involves a syllepsis. people, on Feb. 5, 752, B.C. 2 (see Mon. 

10. triumphalia insignia. ‘lhe re- — Anc. vi. 34. and Mommsen, ad loc.); 
gular phrase in inscriptions (e.g. Henzen, but had been informally used much 
Index, p. 150; Wilmanns, Index, p.609) earlier (cp. Hor. Od. 1. 2, 50). The case 
is ‘triumphalia ornamenta ' ; and theterm of Cicero negatives the supposition of 
is thus analogous to that of *consularia Dio (53. 18, 3), that some recognition 
ornamenta ' (bestowed from the time of of a general ‘patria potestas’ was im- 
the dictator Caesar: cp. Suet. Jul. 76), — plied in it. Tiberius persisted in refusal 
and others, signifying that the dignity — (2. 87, 2; Dio, 58. 12, 8); and the title 
and insignia of an office were given with- ^ is absert from his coins and inscriptions. 
out the office itself. Thus, without an I2. ingestum, ‘imposed by acclama- 
actual triumph, persons were entitled to tion’; more usually of reproaches, &c., 
be called *triumphales' (3. 30, 4, &c.), as 4. 42, 1, &c. 
and to ennoble their family-by * laureatae 13. in acta sua iurari. This oath, an 
statuae’ (4. 23, 1): see Staatsr. 1. 465. outgrowth of that taken in respect of the 
Some suppose this minor honour to have laws by the old magistrates (Staatsr. i. 
been first given to Tiberius (Suet. Tib. — p. 621), is fourd in 709, B.C. 45, the 
9). The full or *iustus triumphus, formula being ‘se nihil contra acta 
though freely given during the earlier — Caesaris facturum ' (App. B. C. a. 106), 
part of the rule of Augustus (Suet. Aug. and was enforced more stringently, in 
38), is ever afterwards, probably from respect of the ‘acta’ of the late dictator, 
740, B.C. 14 (see Dio, 54. 24, 8), re- by the triumvirs on Jan. I, 713, B.C. 4a 
served for the imperial family: see c. 55, (Dio, 47. 18, 3): in respect of the acta 
1, &c. of Augustus, it is first mentioned as taken 

A. Caecinae, L. Apronio, C. Silio. in 729, B.C. 29 (Id. 51. 20, 1), Tiberius 

VOL. I. E | T 

274 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

mortalium incerta, quantoque plus adeptus foret, tanto se magis 
in lubrico dictitans. non tamen ideo faciebat fidem civilis animi ; 8 
nam legem maiestatis reduxerat, cui nomen apud veteres idem, 
sed alia in iudicium veniebant, si quis proditione exercitum aut 
5 plebem seditionibus, denique male gesta re publica maiestatem 
populi Romani minuisset: facta arguebantur, dicta inpune erant. 
primus Augustus cognitionem de famosis libellis specie legis cius 4 
tractavit, commotus Cassii Severi libidine, qua viros feminasque 
inlustres procacibus scriptis diffamaverat: mox Tiberius, consul- 
10 tante Pompeio Macro praetore, an iudicia maiestatis redderentur, 

8 
2. dictan: text Mur. 

himself took the oath to the acta of 
Augustus (Id. 57. 8, 5), and enforced it 
strictly (see 4. 42, 3); and the oath, as 
time went on, upheld the ‘acta’ of all 
princes not specially passed over, as 
became the case with Tiberius himself 
(Dio, 59. 9, 1). It was taken on Jan. 1, 
first by magistrates, then by all senators 
(see 13. 11, 1; 16. 22, 1 ; Dio, 53. 28,1; 
58. 17, 2); and is distinct from the 
'sacramentum in nomen principis" (sce 
c. 7 3)- 

permisit. The use of this verb with 
accus. and inf. pass., as in 14. 12, 6; H. 
I. 47, 3, &c., as also that of ‘oro’ (11. 
Io, 8), and other verbs denoting permis- 
sion, request, or direction, is noted by 
Madvig (396, Obs. 1) as contrary to the 
usage of the best writers: see on c. 74, 
7; 79, 3, and Drager, § 146. 

2. in lubrico: cp. 6. 51, 3. Other 
metaphorical uses of the word occur in 
2. 87, 2; 6. 49, 3, &c. 

3. legem maiestatis reduxerat. On 
the history of this law and its applica- 
tion under the Republic see Introd. viii. 
P I4I. The same expression is used in 

liny, Pan. 11 ‘dicavit caelo Tiberius 
Augustum, sed ut maiestatis legem re- 

duceret ; but the implied assertion that . 

it had become obsolete must be qualified 
by the fact of its extension and recent en- 
forcement by Augustus: see below. 

4. si quis... seditionibus. These 
two instances seem cited from Cicero, 
who specifies them as cases falling under 
the law (de Orat. 2. 39, 164; Partitt. 30, 
105). The idea of some such verb as 
‘laesisset’ is supplied by zeugma from 
* minuisset.' | 

6. populi Romani. These words seem 
intended to stand in contrast to its appli- 

4. ut: aut D. 

cation in later time to the * maiestas ' of 
the princeps only. | 

dicta inpune erant. That pas- 
quinades were capitally punishable, even 
by the laws of the Twelve Tables, is 
affrmed in Cic. de Rep. 4. io, 123 cp. 
Hor. Ep. 2. 1, 150, &c. On the applica- 
bility of the law of * maiestas’ to them, 
see next note. ‘Inpune esse’ is found 
again, 2. 52, 9: 3. 28, 2; 12. 54, 1; G. 
25, 2; ‘impune habendum' 3. 70, 3. 

7. primus Augustus: cp. Suet. Aug. 
&5. Seneca says (de Ben. 3. 27, 1) ‘sub 
divo Augusto nondym hominibus verba 
sua periculosa erant, iam molesta.’ Yet 
the ‘Lex Cornelia.’ even if allowed to 
slumber, appears definitely to have brought 
the public utterance of libels under this 
offence. ‘Est maiestas, et sic Sulla voluit, 
ne in quémvis impune declamari liceret’ 
(Cic. ad Fam. 3. 11, 2). 

famosis, ‘slanderous’: 
Hor. Sat. 2. 1, 68, &c. 

8. Cassii Severi. On his character 
see 4. 21, 5. He was probably banished 
in 765, A.D. 12, when Dio (56. 27, 1) 
mentions proceedings taken against libel- 
lers, but does not give their names. The 

cp. 16. 29, 4; 

" chronology of Jerome (see on 4. 21, 5) 

would give a date four years earlier. 
diffamaverat. This verb, first. 

found in Ovid, is used of a personal 
object also in 15. 49, 6, and with accus. 
of the report spread in 14. 22, 5: cp. the 
similar uses of ‘ differre" c. 4, 3. 

10. Pompeio Macro. On his parentage 
and death see on 6. 18, 4. 

iudicia ...redderentur. This is not 
strictly equivalent to ‘ius reddere’ (‘to 
give sentence,’ e.g. 6 11, 1; 13. 51, I, 
&c.), but rather to ‘iudices dare,’ i.c. to 
receive a case and assign jurors to try it: 

A. D. 15.] 

LIBER I. CAP. 72, 73. 

275 

& exercendas leges esse respondit. hunc quoque asperavere carmina 
incertis auctoribus vulgata in saevitiam superbiamque eius et dis- 

- 

cordem cum matre animum. 

73. Haud pigebit referre in Falanio et Rubrio, modicis equiti- 
bus Romanis, praetemptata crimina, ut quibus initiis, quanta 
Tiberii arte gravissimum exitium inrepserit, dein repressum sit, 
2 postremo arserit cunctaque corripuerit, noscatur. Falanio obicie- 
bat accusator, quod inter cultores Augusti, qui per omnes domos 
in modum collegiorum habebantur, Cassium quendam mimum 
corpore infamem adscivisset, quodque venditis hortis statuam 
Augusti simul mancipasset. Rubrio crimini dabatur violatum 

cp. iudicium redditur an reus sit causa 
mortis Quint. 7. 4, 43. 

I. exercendas leges. Suet. (Tib. 58) 
gives the same words, We should infer 
that, besides the numerous trials for 
* maiestas ' held before the senate, which 
alone are reported by Tacitus, other per- 
sons, probably of lower rank, must have 
been tried under this law before the 
praetors. 

carmina. Some such pasquinades are 
quoted by Suetonius (Tib. 59).' Paco- 
nianus was charged later with a similar 
offence (6. 39, 1). We are not told that 
these charges were taken up; and Suet. 
states (Tib. 38) that he was first tolerant 
of libels. | 

2. discordem cum matre animum : 
cp. 3. 64, 1; 4. 57, 4- 

4. modicis equitibus. Those are 
meant who had little or no more than 
the bare equestrian census, as distinct 
from the *illustres equites’; on whom 
see 2. 59, 4. Cp. ‘ modicos senatores ' 
11. 7, 7. 

5. praetemptata, * essayed' ; a poeti- 
cal word, found in prose from Pl. Mai. 

6. dein repressum sit, &c. It is 
possible to extend * Tiberii arte’ to these 
words, as denoting not any special 
period of repression during his time (for 
the reference to 3. 56, 1 is irrelevant to 
this law), but his general tendency, 
during all the years immediately suc- 
ceeding this revival of the law, to mo- 
derate the zeal of accusers under it. See 
Introd. viii. p. 144, n. 7. Or we may 
limit * Tiberii arte’ to *inrepserit, and 
find the period of repression in the in- 

terval Lefore its revival noted in 815,. 

A.D. 62 (14. 48, 3). Lipsius understands 
it of the reaction under Vespasian and 
Titus; but the words of Tacitus seem 

to confine the periods at least within the 
limits of this work. The subsequent out- 
burst (* postremo arserit’ &c.) might, no 
doubt, equally snit the history of the 

last years of Tiberius, or of Nero, or of 

Domitian. 

8. cultores Augusti. Similar titles 
are found in inscriptions, e.g. * imaginum 
domus Aug. cultores’ (Orell. 738) ; *cul- 
tores domus divinae et fortunae Aug.’ 
(Id. 1662). The ‘cultus’ of Augustus 
and his family in private houses is illus- 
trated by the description in Ovid (ex P. 
4. 9, 105-110) of a shrine in his own 
house with images of Augustus, Augusta, 
Tiberius, and the two grandsons. This 
passage shows that such private ‘ cultus ' 
had existed while Augustus was living, 
in a form probably analogous to the 
municipal worship (see on c. 10, 5); also 
that the greater houses (‘domus’) kept 
up for it, each for themselves or in com- 
bination, a body or bodies of persons of 
low rank, constituted, as it were, in * col. 
legia, i.e. analogous to the * collegia 
cultorum’ of a less private character. On 
this ‘cultus’ generally see Marquardt, 
iii. 463, &c. 

9. habebantur, ‘were kept up’: cp. 
“mos habebatur' (13. 16, 1*, and many 
instances, collected here by Nipp., of 
more or less kindred uses of this verb in 
Tacitus and Sallust. 

1o. statuam Augusti... mancipasset. 
Lipsius quotes the maxim of jurists * non 
videri contra maiestatem fieri ob ima- 
gines Caesaris nondum consecratas, im- 
plying that consecrated statues might 
not be sold. 

11. violatum periurio numen. A 
charge apparently of this character (‘vio 
latum Augusti numen") is afterwards more 
seriously taken up (3. 66, 2). That men 

T 2 

ut 

19 

276 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 768. 

periurio numen Augusti. quae ubi Tiberio notuere, scripsit con- 3 
sulibus non ideo decretum patri suo caelum, ut in perniciem 

civium is honor verteretur. 

Cassium histrionem solitum inter 4 

alios eiusdem artis interesse ludis, quos mater sua in memoriam 
Augusti.sacrasset; nec contra religiones fieri, quod effigies eius, 
ut alia numinum simulacra, venditionibus hortorum et domuum 
accedant. ius iurandum perinde aestimandum quam si Iovem 5 
fefellisset : deorum iniurias dis curae. 

14, Nec multo post Granium Marcellum praetorem Bithyniae 
quaestor ipsius Caepio Crispinus maiestatis postulavit, subscri- 

I. nomen : text Freinsheim. 

swore by the *numen Augusti’ in his 
lifetime, appears from Hor. Epp. 2. 1, 
16. Specimens of such oaths are given 
by Marquardt (Staatsv. iii. p. 463) from 
C. I. L. ii. 172, and C. I. G. 1983. 

I. notuere. This verb, frequent in the 
Annals (e.g. 4. 7, 3; 6. 8, 10; 12. 8, 5, 
&c.), is one pf those found in no earlier 
prose (Introd. v. $ 70). | 

consulibus. As the praetor presided 
in the law-courts, so the consuls preside 
at all judicial proceedings in the senate ; 
on which see Introd. vi. p. 92. 

: 2. caelum ( —* caelestes honores ), an 
expression somewhat startling from its 
conciseness: see E. Jacob. 

4. ludis, &c. Dio (56. 46, 5) describes 
this three days' festival held by Livia in 
the Palatium, as dating from the apo- 
theosis; but the words of Tacitus imply 
its earlier existence. It is generally iden- 
tified with the scenic ‘ludi Palatini" 
(Suet. Cal. 56) described by Josephus 

'(Ant. 19. 1, 13), in his account of the 

assassination of Gaius during them. 

7. perinde...quam si: cp. 13. 49, 
3. The expression is peculiar to Taci- 
tus, who has also ‘ perinde quam’ (2. 1, 
2,&c.). 'Perinde' and ‘ proinde' are often 
confused in the MS. through abbreviations 
(cp. 3. 17, 53 4. 20, 6, and notes there). 

8. deorum iniurias dis curae. This 
is an old maxim of Roman Law, which 
therefore refrained from imposing legal 
penalties for perjury: cp. the juristic 
rule * Iurisiurandi contempta religio satis 
deum ultorem habet' (Cod. 4. 1, 3). In 
some cases however perjury * per Genium 
principis" was * maiestas': see Staatsr. 
li. 810. 

9. praetorem. Bithynia was governed 
by senatorial proconsuls of praetorian 
rank. Its governor is properly styled 

‘proconsul’ (cp. 16. 18, 3’, but here, 
as in 4. 43, 5 (' praetorem Achaiae"), 
‘praetor’ is used, as also by Cic. Liv. 
&c. (see Staatsr. ii. 240, 5), of a governor 
as such: cp. * praetorium," * cohors prae- 
toria,’ &c. In 4. 15, 3, it is used even 
of the consular proconsul of Asia. The 
name of Granius Marcellus is found on 
coins of this date of the Bithynian Apa- 
meia: see Nipp. 

Bithyniae. This province included 
not only the country generally known 
by that name, separated from Mysia and 
Phrygia by the Rhyndacus and Olympus, 
and extending eastward to the Parthe- 
nius; but also the western part of the 
Pontic kingdom, added to it by Cn. 
Pompeius, and extending along the Paph- 
lagonian coast to the Halys. The chief 
towns in Bithynia are Nicomedeia and 
Nicaea, and in the Pontic portion Amas- 
tris and Sinope (the latter a colony of 
Julius Caesar). The province was sub- 
sequently Caesarian, and much of our 
knowledge of it is derived from the 
correspondence of the younger Pliny, as 
its governor, with Trajan. See Staatsv. 
i. 349, foll. | 

10. quaestor ipsius. This was con- 
trary tó Roman sentiment. See Cic. Div. 
in Caec. 11, 18. 

postulavit. The genitive with this 
verb, on the analogy of ‘ accuso,’ &c. is 
confined to Tacitus (3. 66, 3; 70, 2, &c.) 
and Suetonius. : 

subscribente. This term, in the sense 
of ‘signing the accusation, might be 

' used of the principal or sole accuser ; but 

evidently here, as in many other places 
(cp. Cic. ad Q. F. 3. 3, 2; Vell. 2. 69, 
5; and *'subscriptor, *subscriptio' Cic. 
Div. in Caec. 15, 47-49), denotes fhat 
he appeared as subordinate to Crispinus. 

| 8 postremum sibi invenere. 

4 reo. 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 73, 74- 

277 

bente Romano Hispone: qui formam vitae iniit quam postea 
2 celebrem miseriae temporum et audaciae hominum fecerunt. nam 
egens, ignotus, inquies, dum occultis libellis saevitiae principis 
adrepit, mox clarissimo cuique periculum facessit, potentiam apud 
unum, odium apud omnis adeptus dedit exemplum, quod secuti 
ex pauperibus divites, ex contemptis metuendi perniciem aliis ac 

sed Marcellum insimulabat sinistros 

de Tiberio sermones habuisse, inevitabile crimen, cum ex moribus 
principis foedissima quaeque deligeret accusator obiectaretque 

nam quia vera erant, etiam dicta credebantur. 

addidit 

Hispo statuam Marcelli altius quam Caesarum sitam, et alia in 

5b statua amputato capite Augusti effigiem Tiberii inditam. 

ad 

quod exarsit adeo, ut rupta taciturnitate proclamaret se quoque 
in ea causa laturum sententiam palam et iuratum, quo ceteris 

8 eadem necessitas fieret. 

manebant etiam tum vestigia morientis 

7. insimulabat Caepio Ritt. ; insimulabant Müller. 

I. Romano Hispone. M. Seneca, who 
gives his name as ‘Hispo Romanius,’ 
mentions him often, and once (Contr. 26, 
17) says of him *erat natura qui aspe- 
riorem dicendi viam sequeretur.' 

qui formam, &c. This probably re- 
fers to Hispo, who, besides being nearest 
in order of mention, is known, if not as a 
professional informer, at least as a pro- 
fessional rhetorician (see above); and 
who is more likely to be *egens' and 
‘ignotus,’ than a quaestor, who was pre- 
sumably a senator. But it is difficult, 
after so long a parenthesis, to take 
* Crispinus ! to be the subject of * insimu- 
labat'; and also difficult to refer that 
verb to Hispo, whose separate charge is 
specified below. Nipp. thinks that ‘qui’ 
must refer to Crispinus, and that * sub- 
scribente . .. Hispone' is parenthetical, 

and cites parallels from Caes. and Cic. : 

The reading ‘ insimulabant" would make 
this part their joint charge. 

2. celebrem, probably ‘often prac- 
tised’: cp. 12. 61, 1, and note on 16. 29, I. 

.miseriae .. . audaciae. On such 
plurals of abstract nouns see Introd. v. 
$ 1; Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 2. 

4. &drepit. The dative with this 
verb (cp. a. 50, 5) is otherwise only used 
by Pl. Mai. 

7. postremum sibi : see 4. 71, I, &c. 

sed, used to mark a return from a 
digression, as in 3. 62, 3; 63, 5, &c. 

9. obiectaretque reo, ‘and charged 
the accused with mentioning them.’ 

Io. quia vera, &c., ‘their truth would 
stand for evidence of their utterance.’ 

II. sitam=‘positam’: cp. c. 39, 4. 

12. amputato, &c. The destruction 
of a statue was a@ significant act (cp. 3. 
14, 6; Juv. 1o, 58); but adaptation of 
new heads was common in Pliny's time, 
who says (N. H. 35. 2, 4) * surdo figura- 
rum discrimine statuarum capita permu- 
tantur." 0. 

inditam. This verb generally takes 
dat., or ‘in’ and acc., here alone abl. 
with ‘in.’ 

14. palam et iuratum. ‘The former 
word is in contrast to voting secretly by 
‘tabellae’ (see Staatsr. iii. 993), the latter 
implies such a formula as that in 4. 31, 
5 ‘ut iureiurando obstringeret, e. re- 
publica id esse.’ Cp. c. 14, 6, and 
‘indicio iurati senatus’ 4. 21, 5; also 
Staatsr. iii. 979, 5. 

quo...fieret. The explanation is 
that of the historian, the ‘necessitas’ 
that-of also voting openly and on oath.. 

I5. vestigia morientis libertatis. 
On the personifications in Tacitus see 
on c. 70, 7. For the figure * manent 
vestigia! cp. 15. 42, 4; H. 5. 7, 1; and 
* manebat imago reipublicae 13. 28, 1. 
The figurative use of * morior' is Cice- 
ronian, but hardly appropriate to the 
metaphor here. 

On 

beg 

o 

I 

ws 

o 

278 

libertatis. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

igitur Cn. Piso ‘quo’ inquit ‘loco censebis, Caesar? 

si primus, habebo quod sequar: si post omnis, vereor ne inpru- 

dens dissentiam.’ 

permotus his, quantoque incautius efferverat, 7 

paenitentia patiens tulit absolvi reum criminibus maiestatis: de 
pecuniis repetundis ad reciperatores itum est. 
75, Nec patrum cognitionibus satiatus iudiciis adsidebat in 

cornu tribunalis, ne praetorem curuli depelleret ; 
coram adversus ambitum et potentium preces constituta. 
dum veritati consulitur, libertas corrumpebatur. 

multaque eo 

inter quae Pius 3 

Aurelius senator questus mole publicae viae ductuque aquarum 

I. Cn. Piso: see on c. 13, 3, &c. 

quo...1oco. On the usual custom 
of the princeps, to vote first or last, see 
Introd. vi. p. 84. Dio (57. 7, 4) de- 
scribes Tiberius as interposing his ‘ sen- 
tentia ' also at other stages, or sometimes 
informally intimating his opiaion. 

3. quantoque, &c., ‘ with a repentant 
submission proportioned to the indiscre- 
tion of his outburst.’ On the use of the 
positive see c. 68, 5. 

. tulit, possibly ‘permitted,’ but 
probably best interpreted. by *laturum 
sententiam’ above, as meaning that he 
gave the first vote for acaneer On the 
acc. and inf. cp. c. 72, 

absolvi. Suetonius "Tib. 58), if he is © 

telling the safne story, appears to speak 
inaccurately. ‘Statuae quidam Augusti 
caput demserat, ut alterum imponeret : 
acta res in senatu est, et, quia ambigeba- 
tur. per tormenta quaesita est. Damnato 
reo, &c. 

5. reciperatores. Frequent mention 
is made of such a judicial board ; one of 
their chief functions being the assessment 
of claims preferred by provincials against 
Romans. Thus in Liv. 43. 2, 3, five 
senators, under this title, are appointed 
by the practor at the instance of the 
senate, to adjudicate on the complaint of 
Spain. See also Liv. 26. 48, 8; and 
Weissenborn ad loc. It is here implied 
that the trial of Marcellus became a 
mere civil question of damages, the 
criminal charges being dropped, though 
perhaps his senatorial rank was forfeited 
(see Pl. Ep. 4. 9, 19). Pliny (Epp. 2. 
11,2) protests against an attempt to give 
a similar turn to the trial of Marius 

Priscus, ‘ excessisse Priscum immanitate et 

saevitia crimina quibus iudices dari pos- 
sent, cum ob innocentes condemnandos, 
interficiendos etiam, pecunias accepisset." 
Cp. also Id. 4. 9, 16; 6. ay, 10. 

6. cognitionibus, used specially of 
trial before the senate (2. 28, 4, &c.) or 
the princeps (3. 10, 3): see Staatsr. ii. 
121, 964. 

in cornu tribunalis. Suet. states 
(Tib. 33) that he sat ‘iuxtim vel ex 
adverso in parte primori’; i.e. on an- 
other tribunal facing that of the praetor 
(see also Dio, 57. 7, 6). 

". curuli, so used without ‘sella’ by 
writers of the silver age: cp. H. 2. 59, 
4; Pl. Mi., Suet. 

8. potentium preces, i.e. those of 
influential * advocati, rather a paiticular 
form of * ambitus than a synonym for 
it. Suetonius (l. 1.) gives a more de- 
tailed description, ‘si quem reorum elabi 
gratia rumor esset, subitus aderat, iudi- 
cesque aut e plano aut e quaesitoris 
tribunali legum et religionis et noxae, 
de quo cognoscerent, admonebat. Cp. 
*accessit . . . iudiciis gravitas' Vell. 2. 
126, 2. 

9. veritati. This word is here nearly 
equivalent to * aequitas ': cp. ‘ veritas 
mea’ 3. 16, 5 ; ‘ex vero statuisse ' 4. 43, 
4; also * verum' Hor. Epp. 1.7, 98; 12, 
23; Liv. 2. 48, 2; 3 40, 11; and ‘ iudi-- 
cem a veritate dcpelli ' Quint. 5, Pr. 1. 

libertas, ‘the independence of judges.’ 
Tacitus, though he has been blamed for 
this sentiment, is plainly no defender of 
judicial corruption, but may have rightly 
held the coercion of judges by the prin- 
ceps to be liable to result in still more 
flagrant injustice than that which it 
might prevent. 

inter quae. There words appear only 
to connect this case with his general in- 
terest in questions of justice; for the 
context, ‘auxilium patrum invocabat,’ 
shows that this is not an action at law, 
but a petition to the senate. 

10. senator. The apparently super- 
fluous use of this word here and in 3. 

set 2 

A. D. 15.) LIBER I. CAP. 74-76. 279 

4 labefactas aedis suas, auxilium patrum invocabat. . resistentibus 
aerarii praetoribus subvenit Caesar pretiumque aedium Aurelio 
tribuit, erogandae per honesta pecuniae cupiens, quam virtutem 

6 diü retinuit, cum ceteras exueret. Propertio Celeri praetorio, 
veniam ordinis ob paupertatem petenti, deciens sestertium largitus 

6 est, satis conperto paternas ei angustias esse. temptantis eadem 
alios probare causas senatui iussit, cupidine severitatis in iis etiam 

7 quae rite faceret acerbus. unde ceteri silentium et paupertatem 

confessioni et beneficio praeposuere. | 
e e e *. . e. ¢ e 
76. Eodem anno continuis imbribus auctus Tiberis plana urbis 

^ 

36, 2 is generally taken to imply that 
the persons are ‘pedarii senatores' (cp. 
3. 65, 2) only. Where it is used (e.g. 
4. 31, 73 11. 35, 7) of ‘ praetorii,' it is 
to distinguish them from the non-sena- 
torial persons mentioned in the passage. 
mole. Nupp. argues that, as ‘ductus’ 
means ‘the operation of conducting’ of 
water, ‘moles’ is ‘the construction’ 
of the road, as in ‘machinas molemque 
operum Batavis delegat’ (H. 4. 28, 5); 
but it seems doubtful whether ‘ ductus 
aquarum’ may not have acquired the 
meaning, which it appears to have later, 
of the actual conduit or aqueduct itself. 
2. aerarii praetoribus. The charge 
of the ‘aerarium,’ formerly held by 
quaestors, had now, by an ordinance of 
Augustus, been allotted to some of the 
praetors of the year. A subsequent modi- 
fied reversal of this change by Claudius 
was again reversed by Nero. The history 
and details of the changes are given in 
13. 29, where see notes: cp. also H. 4. 

js | 
? 3. tribuit, as a gift from himself. 
erogandae...cupiens. Many in- 
stances are recorded of his liberality to 
individuals (2. 37, 1; 48, 1; 86, 2; 4. 
64, 1; 6. 17, 4; 45, 1) and to provincial 
states (2. 47, 3; 4. 13, I). Suetonius 
(Tib. 47, 48) speaks. depreciatingly of 
these acts. The genitive with * cupiens,' 
used by Tacitus in the Annals only (6. 46, 
2; 14. 14, 4; 15. 46,1; 72, 4; 16. 6, 1), 
seems to be an instance in which he has 
gone back to a Plautine usage. 

4. diu. Even the absence of criminal 
covetousness (3. 18, 2) is represented as 
afterwards no longer characterising him : 
see 4. 20, 2; 6. 19, 1 ; and several stories 
collected in Suet. Tib. 49. As regards 

7. causa : 'causam B, text Sirker (cp. Suet. Tib. 47). 

his munificence, we must set against these 

insinuations the fact that one, at least, of. 

en 

its chief instances (6. 45, 1) is among the _ 

last acts of his life. 

t. veniam ordinis, ‘leave to resign 

senatorial rank.'' The establishment of 
a senatorial census (see next note) in- 
volved loss of rank by impoverishment, 
aud those who did not thus ask leave 
were compelled to resign or struck off: 
see 2. 48, 3; 12. 52, 4. ‘Orco’ is used 
specially of the senate (e.g. 11. 25, 5; 
13. 11, 2; 32, 2), and of its municipal 
counterpart (13. 48, 1; H. a3. 52, 3). 
deciens sestertium. This sum had 

been fixed as the senatorial census by 

Augustus (Dio, 54. 17, 3), who had be- 
stowed a similar gift on Hortalus (2. 37, 
2). Nero gave annual sums in. similar 
cases (13. 34, 2) as also did Hadrian. 
and others: see Staatsr. iii. 883. 

6. paternas, ‘ inherited,’ i.e. not due 
to his own extravagance. Cp. 3. 32, 2. 

7. alios: Seneca (de Ben. 2. 7, 2) men- 

tions Marius Nepos, on whom see 2. 48, | 

3. To another applicant, Acilius Buta, 
who had spent a Jarge patrimony, he said 
* sero experrectus es’ (Sen. Ep. 122, Io). 

8. acerbus. .The demand for proof 
was ‘rite factum" ; the publicity imposed 
on it is here called harshness: cp. S n. 
de Ben. 2. 8, 1. Dio (57. 10, 4) says 
that he also paid over his gifts openly, 
finding that many private gifts of Augus- 
tus had been filched in transit. 

10. Tiberis, &c. The frequency of 
these inundations is noted throughout 
Roman History (cp. Gibbon, ch. lxxi; 
Merivale, ch. xli; Friedlander, i. p. 27, 
&c.), and (notwithstanding the rise of 
the soil by accumulations) in modern 

times also. 

280 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 76s. 

stagnaverat; relabentem secuta est aedificiorum et hominum 
strages. igitur censuit Asinius Gallus ut libri Sibullini adirentur. 2 
renuit Tiberius, perinde divina humanaque obtegens; sed re- 3 
medium coercendi fluminis Ateio Capitoni et L. Arruntio manda- 
5tum. Achaiam ac Macedoniam onera deprecantis levari in 4 
praesens proconsulari imperio tradique Caesari placuit. edendis 5 

2. sybillini: sibulla twice in 6. 12, sibylla in 15. 44, 1. 

I. stagnaverat, ‘had flooded. The 
verb is mostly poetical and post-Augus- 
tan, and very rarely transitive. Cp. 
doen) stagnata paludibus ' Ov. Met. 15, 
269. 

relabentem . . . strages. Probably 
‘relabentem’ is aoristic (see Introd. v. 
§ 54 a), and ' strages' is to be taken in 
two senses, of the fall of bnildings, and 
of mortality among human beings; as 
the stagnant water may have bred a pes- 

tilence, which was the most usual occa-- 

sion for consulting the Sibylline books. 
In a similar flood in H. 1. 86, 23, the 
river is described as ‘strage obstantis 
molis refusus, *strages' having its more 
proper meaning of a confused heap: To 
make the passage here mean that such 
a mingled mass of building material and 
human bodies was carried along with the 
retiring waters, we should require ‘ seque- 
batur'; but it may possibly be meant 
that such a mass ‘ensued,’ i.e. was the 
spectacle presented to view. 

2. libri Sibullini. The new collection 
of these prophecies, formed after the de- 
struction of the old books with the Capi- 
toline temple in 671, B.c. 83 (Dion. Hal. 
4, 62), had been revised by order of 
Augustus (see on 6. 12, 3), who placed 
those approved in gilded caskets in the 
pedestal of the statue of Apollo in the 
Palatine temple (Suet. Aug. 31). Tibe- 
rius, annoyed at the circulation of a pro- 
fessed prophecy, is said to have ordered 
a further revision and the destruction of 
the spurious (Dio, 47. 18, 4). On the 
whole subject see Marquardt, iii. 350, foll. 

3. perinde. The combination of this 
word with 'et' or *que' is Tacitean 
(2. 2, 6; H. 5. 6, 5). E c. 73, 5. 

divina ...obtegens. It is an obvious 
explanation, that he considered this a 
case for the engineer rather than the 
prophet. His fatalism (see 6. 20, 3; 
Suet. Tib. 69) may also have influenced 
his refusal. That he did, however, con- 
sider the suppression of prophecy poli- 
tically desirable, would appear from his 

action (see above) respecting the Sibyl- 
line prophecies, and also from his attempt 
(see Suet. Tib. 63) to restrict the con- 
sultation of * haruspices,' and to abolish 
all the oracles near Rome. 

remedium coercendi, defining geni- 
tive: cp. *effugium . . . prorumpendi’ 2. 
47, 2, &c. See Madv. § 256. 

4. Ateio Capitoni. This great jurist 
(see 3. 70, 2; 75, 1) was ‘curator aqua- 
rum, in succession to Messalla, from 
766-776, A.D. 13-23. Frontinus de 
Aquaed. c. 102. 

L. Arruntio: cp.c. 13, 1, &c. Their 
recommendations are discussed below 
(c. 79). It is probable that Dio (57. 
I4, 7) is right in assigning to this time 
the institution of a permanent board of 
five *curatores alvei Tiberis, ascribed 
by Suetonius (Aug. 37) to an earlier 
date. See Staatsr. ii. p. 1046. 

5. Achaiam. Achaia, governed before 
with Macedonia, appears not to have 
been formed into a separate senatorial 
province till 727, B.C. 27. It included 
Thessaly and Epirus (cp. 3. 53, 1), be- 
sides Greece proper. Of its many famous 
cities, the metropolis, and seat of govern- 
ment, was the great Julian colony of 
Corinth. See Marquardt, i. 330, foll. 

Macedoniam. This country was re- 
duced to a province in 608, B.C. 146, 
some twenty years after its submission. 
]t was separated by the Drilo and Mt. 
Scordus from Delmatia and Moesia, and 
by the Nestus from Thrace ; its southern 
limits being the northern boundaries of 
Achaia. Its chief cities were Thessa- 
lonica and the colonies of Dyrrhachium 
and Philippi : Marquardt, i. 318. 

levari...proconsulari imperio. It 
is implied that the Caesarian government 
was less costly. One explanation is sug- 
gested by c. 80, 1, that the expense of 
separate staffs was saved by giving one 
‘legatus’ charge of two or more pro- 
vinces. Macedonia and Achaia were 
restored to the senate by Claudius in. 
797, A.D. 44 (Dio, 60. 34, 1; Suet. Cl. 25). 

A. D. 15] LIBER I. 

CAP. 16, 77. 

281 

gladiatoribus, quos Germanici fratris ac suo nomine obtulerat, 
Drusus praesedit, quamquam vili sanguine nimis gaudens ; quod 

6 zz vulgus formidolosum et pater arguisse dicebatur. 

cur absti- 

nuerit spectaculo ipse, varie trahebant ; alii taedio coetus, quidam 
tristitia ingenii et metu conparationis, quia Augustus comiter 

7 interfuisset. 

non crediderim ad ostentandam saevitiam moven- 

dasque populi offensiones concessam filio materiem, quamquam 

id quoque dictum est. 

77. At theatri licentia, proximo priore anno coepta, gravius 
tum erupit, occisis non modo e plebe set militibus et centurione. 
vulnerato tribuno praetoriae cohortis, dum probra in magistratus 

2 et dissensionem vulgi prohibent. 

actum de ea seditione apud 

patres dicebanturque sententiae, ut praetoribus ius virgarum in 

3 histriones esset. 

intercessit Haterius Agrippa tribunus plebei 

increpitusque est Asinii Galli oratione, silente Tiberio, qui ‘ea 

4 simulacra libertatis senatui praebebat. 

2. praesidit : text B. 
militibus : sed margin, etiam Nipp. 

2. quamquam vili, ‘true, that it was 
but worthless blood’: cp. *quamquam 
fas sit’ c. 10, 2. The extenuation is 
characteristic of Roman sentiment. On 
the character of Drusus see on c. 29, 4. 

quod in vulgus formidolosum, &c. 
Cp. ‘in vulgus! c. 28, 5; 2. 59, 2, &c. 
(see Her. on H. 1. 71, 12); Liv. 3. 8, 2; 
Cic. (Her. 1.:1.), and other uses of this 
construction with nearly the force of a 
simple dat. (c. 73, 1; Introd. v. § 60 b). 
With ‘formidolosum,’ ‘erat’ might be 
supplied, or it might be in apposition 
with ‘quod,’ and ‘et’ might have the force 
of ‘etiam’; ‘which even his father was 
said to have censured, as alarming to the 
people’ (the * vilis sanguis ' of Rome). 

3. abstinuerit. On the tense see on 
c. 61, 6. 

4. varie trahebant. On this sense of 
‘trahere’ cp. c. 62, 3. 

alii... quidam, ‘abstinuisse dicebant’ 
is to be supplied. 

taedio coetus, 
was irksome.’ 

5. tristitia. On his character, and 
the contrast in this respect with Augustus, 
see C. 54, 4, and note, Suet. Aug. 45. 

6. non crediderim, &c. On the re- 
jection of scandals by Tacitus, and on his 
reference to tradition as an authority for 
motives, see Introd. iv. pp. 33, 35. 

3. in ins. from margin, vulgo J. F. Gron. 

*because a crowd 

valuit tamen intercessio, 

IO. et 

9. proximo priore anno: see C. 54, 
3. 'Proximo' could have well stood 
alone, as in c. 22, 1; 78, 3, &c.; but 
* proximus superior' and *inferior' are 
used with apparently equal redundancy 
by Cicero (Orat. 64, 116; de N. D. 2. 
20, 52). 

10. occisis, aoristic perfect; cp. Introd. 
v. $ 54 b. 

set. The ‘et,’ closely followed by 
another ‘et,’ can hardly stand. ‘Set’ is 
suggested by the marginal ‘sed, and 
can stand without ‘etiam,’ as in c. 60, 1. 
‘Etiam,’ followed by * militibus, could 
have been easily corrupted into ‘et,’ and 
is used thus without *sed' in 4. 35, 1, 
where similar stress is laid on the second 
clause. 

1I. praetoriae cobortis. One of these 
cohorts was usually present, and an at- 
tempt afterwards to dispense with it only 
resulted in riot: see 13. 24, 1; 25, 4. 

14. intercessit. On the position of 
tribunes, and permissive exercise of their 
veto at this time, see Introd. vi. p. 91. 

Haterius Agrippa, mentioned as a 
relation of Germanicus and as praetor 
(2. 51, 2, where see note), as consul 
3. 49. 4; 52, I), and as a man of pro- 

igate character (6. 4, 5). 

16. simulacra: cp. 'durat simula- 

crum 6. 11, 3. A similar dispute between 

“3a 

282 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

quia divus Augustus immunes verberum histriones quondam 

responderat, neque fas Tiberio infringere dicta eius. 

de modo 

lucaris et adversus lasciviam fautorum multa decernuntur; ex 
quis maxime insignia, ne domos pantomimorum senator introiret, 
5ne egredientes in publicum equites Romani cingerent aut alibi 
quam in theatro sectarentur, et spectantium immodestiam exilio 
multandi potestas praetoribus fieret. 

78. Templum ut in colonia Tarraconensi strueretur Augusto 

6. spectarentur: text Wolfflin. 

praetor and tribune is called * imago rei- 
publicae" in 13. 28, 1. Cp. ‘imago 
libertatis c. 81, 4; ‘antiquitatis’ 3. 
6o, 1. 

I. immunes verberum. Augustus 
appears from Suetonius (Aug. 45) to have 
allowed the magistrates some power 
of chastising actors ('coercitio ) at the 
actual time and place (*ludis et scena "); 
and to have himself ordered some to be 
scourged (see on c. 54, 3) But this 
resolution appears to have aimed at the 
restoration of the general power as 
existing ‘omni loco et tempore, lege 
vetere" (Suet. l. 1.). The penalty sub- 
stituted seems to be banishment from 
Italy (4. 14, 4; 13. 25, 4); which had 
also been inflicted under Augustus: see 
Suet. 1. 1. 

2. neque fas, &c. This obligation 
is stated, professedly in his own words, 
4. 37, 4. Cp. Agr. 13, 3 (' consilium id 
Augustus vocabat, Tiberius praeceptum?) ; 
and Introd. viii. p. 159. 

de modo lucaris. These words, and 
*mercedibus scenicorum recisis’ (Suet. 
Tib. 34), show that the high pay at first 
demanded at the ‘ Augustalia’ (see on 
C. 54, 3) was not kept up. ‘Lucar’ is 
elsewhere found only in juristic writers or 
inscriptions. 

3. fautorum. The context shows that 
all patrons are meant, not merely the 
* theatrales operae ' (c. 16, 4). * Lascivia' 
is here * recklessness, as in H. 1. 48, 4; 
G. 24, 2, &c. 

4. ne domos, &c. The laxity here 
condemned probably dated from the pa- 
tronage of Augustus and Maecenas (see 
on C. &4. 3) and these prohibitions 
appear to have been wholly ineffectual. 
Seneca says (Ep. 47, 17) ‘ostendam 
nobilissimos iuvenes mancipia pantomi- 

morum,' and (Quaest. Nat. 7. 32, 3). 

*mares inter se uxoresque contendunt 
uter det latus illis’ (‘successoribus Py- 

.* ne.' 

8. terra conensi : text B. 

ladis et Bathylli’). Pliny (N. H. 29. 1, 
5. $ 9) says of Thessalus, a physician of 
Nero, * nullius histrionum . . . comitatior 
egressus in publico erat’; and Juvenal 
(7. *8) ‘quod non dant proceres, dabit 
histrio, &c. 

6. sectarentur. This conjecture is 
recommended by its avcidance of the 
awkward introduction, by *aut, of a 
change of subject, and by the probability 
that * spectarentur' may have arisen out 
of ‘spectantium’ following. The MS. 
text would make the prohibition that of 
performances in private houses, where no 
control could be maintained (cp. 4.14, 4). 
There is evidence that rich persons kept 
actors for their private use, as Ummidia 
Quadratilla (Pl. Epp. 7. 24, 4), or hired 
them out. See Marquardt, iii. 539. 

et. With this *ut' is supplied from 
Nipp. notes 3. 51, 3 ‘idque... 
spatium prorogaretur’; and 3. 69, I 
‘idque princeps diiudicaret.' In c. 79, 
I, * idque' stands for ‘et ne id.’ 

exilio. This would imply power to 
inflict a lesser penalty, as imprisonment 
(see 13. 28, 1'.. Lipsius refers to a ‘lex 
de poenis ' (Pandect. Lib. 28) arising out 
of this decree. 

8. colonia Tarraconensi: the modern 
Tarragona, a colony of Julius Caesar, 
further dignifed with the title *Colonia 
Iulia Victrix Triumphalis Tarraco' (Mar- 
quardt, i. 255, 6). the chief city of the 
great province Hispania Tarraconensis 
(on which see 4. 5, 2). That it already 
had an altar to Augustus is shown by an 
anecdote in Quint. 6. 3. 77 ‘ Augustus 
nunciantibus Tarraconensibus palmam 
in ara eius enatam, apparet, inquit, quam 
saepe accendatis. The temple is repre- 
sented on coins, and appears to have 
been inscribed ‘Deo’ (not * Divo’) *Au- 
gusto ' (Eckh. i. pp. 57, 58), and was the 
centre of this worship for the whole pro- 
vince. 

5 

A.D. 15.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 77-79. 

283 

petentibus Hispanis permissum, datumque in omnes provincias 

2 exemplum. 

centesimam rerum venalium post bella civilia insti- 

tutam deprecante populo edixit Tiberius militare aerarium eo 
subsidio niti ; simul imparem oneri rem publicam, nisi vicensimo 

3 militiae anno veterani dimitterentur. 

ita proximae seditionis 

male consulta, quibus sedecim stipendiorum finem expresserant, 

abolita in posterum. 

. 'J9. Actum deinde in senatu ab Arruntio et Ateio, an ob 
moderandas Tiberis exundationes verterentur flumina et lacus, 
per quos augescit; auditaeque municipiorum et coloniarum 

I. datum ...exemplum. Soon after 
Actium, Augustus had allowed temples, 
to himself and Roma, at Pergamum in 
Asia, Nicomedeia in Bithynia, Ancyra 
in Galatia, and elsewhere (see 4. 37, 43 
Dio, 51. 20, 7), besides altars (see above, 
also c. 39, 1) ; but the example now set 
may well have consisted in its being the 
first national temple to * divus Augustus' 
alone, and in the necessity imposed on 
other provinces to act likewise. 

2. centesimam rerum "venalium. 
Possibly the idea of this tax was sug- 
gested by its use in Egypt: see Mar- 
quardt, ii. 278. On its further history 
see 2. 42, 6. 

3. militare aerarium. Augustus thus 
describes the institution of this treasury 
(Mon. Anc. iii. 35), * M. Lepido et L. 
Arruntio cos (759, A.D. 6), in aerarium 
militare, quod ex. meo consilio constitu- 
tum est, ex quo praemia darentur mili- 
' tibus, qui vicena plurave stipendia eme- 
ruissent, H. S. milliens et septingentiens 
Ti. Caesaris nomine et meo detuli.’ This 
treasury was placed under three *prae- 
fecti" (Inscr. Orell. 946, &c.) of praetorian 
rank, chosen at first by lot, afterwards 
by selection; and, as funds fell short, 
received other taxes, as the * vicesima 
hereditatum" (Dio, 53. 25, 5', some 
confiscated property, as that of Agrippa 
Postumus (Dio, 55. 32, 2), and some 
foreign revenues (2. 42, 6). A deficiency 
in its funds may have caused the substi- 
tution of land gifts for money, which 
seems implied in c. 17, 5. 

4. simul, ‘even with its help.’ 

nisi vicensimo, i.e. unless the con- 
cession lowering the time of their * mis- 
sio’ from the twentieth to the sixteenth 
year of service (see c. 36, 4) were re- 
voked. As the dischage then given after 
sixteen years, was only * missio sub 

vexillo, it would here seem that some 
gratuity was payable at that stage. In 
the * diplomata,' twenty years' service is 
a minimum, the formula for legionaries 
being *qui vicena aut plura stipendia 
meruerant,' The praemium given by 
Augustus on full discharge was 12,000 
H. S. to the legions (Dio, 25. 23. 1); 
but Tiberius is said to have avoided 
* missiones! as much as possible (Suet. 
Tib. 48), and Gaius to have reduced the 
gratuity by one half (Suet. Cal. 44). 

6. sedecim stipendiorum finem. 
Nipp. follows Walther in explaining this 
as a genitive of quality. 

expresserant: cp. c. I9, 5. 

8. Actum ... an, ‘the question was 
raised, whether, &c. Their appointment 
was mentioned in c. 76, 3. 

Io. augescit; ind. pres. because this 
fact is no part of the question. 

municipiorum et coloniarum. These 
terms are constantly used together by 
Tacitus (cp. 3. 55, 4; 4. 67, 1; 15. 33, 
3; H, 2. 20, 1; 56, 1; 62, 4, &c.) to 
designate the towns of Italy; the term 
* praefectura! being obsolete, and *'co- 
lonia ' taken to include both Roman and 
Latin colonies. The old distinction 
between these terms (see Watson, Select 
Letters of Cicero, Appendix xii; D. of 
Ant. i. p. 483) had become very obscure 
and obsolete, and Tacitus appears, be ow 
in this chapter, and perhaps in 3. 2, 2, 
to use * coloniae ' as a common term for 
both; but to attain colonial rank was 
still an honour to an Italian town (14. 
37, 2). Of the towns here mentioned, 
Florentia alone was a colony, and that 
from recent date. These *legationes ' 
were generally addressed to the senate: 
cp. 13. 4, 3; 48, 1, &c., Staatsr. iii. 

. 1198. 

5 

en 

284 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

legationes, orantibus Florentinis, ne Clanis solito alveo demotus 
in amnem Arnum transferretur idque ipsis perniciem adferret. 
congruentia his Interamnates disseruere: pessum ituros fecun- 2 
dissimos Italiae campos, si amnis Nar (id enim parabatur) in 

rivos diductus superstagnavisset. 

nec Reatini silebant. Velinum 3 

lacum, qua in Narem effunditur, obstrui recusantes, quippe in 

adiacentia erupturum ; 

optume rebus mortalium consuluisse 

naturam, quae sua ora fluminibus, suos cursus utque originem, ita 
fines dederit; spectandas etiam religiones sociorum, qui sacra et 

lucos et aras patriis amnibus dicaverint : 
nolle prorsus accolis fluviis orbatum minore gloria fluere. 

quin ipsum Tiberim 4 

preces coloniarum seu difficultas operum sive superstitio valuit, 
ut in sententiam Cz. Pisonis concederetur, qui nil. mutandum 

censuerat. 

3. ante manates: 

text L, concederent Doederlein. 

I. ne Clanis, &c. The marshes near 
Cortona and Arretium are the source of 
the Chiana (Clanis), and also of streams 
flowing north into the Arno. | 

2. idque... adferret. On ‘ idque’ 
see note on c. 77, 5. ‘Adferret’ is used 
as ‘ traheret ’ (2. 58, 1), ‘maneret’ (2. 
81, 3), ‘exstrueret’ (4. 37, 1), &c.; in 
all of which cases a request that a 
thing may or may not happen, is ad- 
dressed to those with whom it rests to 
permit or hinder it. See Nipp. on 2. 58. 

3. Interamnates, of Interamna (Ter- 
ni), in Umbria, between two branches of 
the Nar (Nera). 

5. superstagnavisset, dm. «ip. 
the simple verb cp. c. 76, 1. 

Reatini. Of Reate (Rieti) in Sabina. 
Between this place and Interamna, the 
lake and river’ Velinus are discharged 
into the Nar through the passage cut by 
M’. Curius (Cic. Att. 4. 15, 5), forming 
the famous Falls of Terni. The expres- 
sions here used seem to show that it had 
come to be regarded as a work of nature. 

6. lacoum . . . obstrui recusantes. 
The accus. and inf. with this verb occurs 
only here and PI. N. H. 29. 1, 8, 16 ; but, 
like that with *obsisto' (G. 34, 3), and 
the more common use with ‘ prohibeo’ 
(c. 69, 1, &c.), is analogous to the usage 
with verbs having the opposite sense of 
permitting, &c. See onc. 72, 2; 74, 7. 

8. ora, ‘ outlets.’ 

On 

text B, Antemnates Pich. 
Nipp., eorum Ritt., sodaliciorum conj. Miiller. 

5. deductus: text B. 
13. Cn. ins. Nipp. 

9. maiorum 
concederet : 

9. sociorum. Those who alter the 
text argue that the Italians, who can 
alone be meant, could not at this time 
be called ‘socii.’ But the term would 

"suit the original dedicators; who, though 

their own descendants would no longer 
generally so style them, might still be 
spoken of under such a title inthe Roman 
senate. 

sacra, &c. A worship of the Clitum- 
nus, at its source, is mentioned in PI. 
Epp. 8. 8, 5. ! 

10. patriis, ‘ of their fatherland’: cp. 
' insignibus patriis? 15. 29, 4; * abietibus 
patriis Verg. Aen. 9, 692, &c. — 

Tiberim, &c.. On this personification 
cp. Introd. v. $ 75. 

13. Pisonis. The last mention of 
Cn. Piso (c. 74, 6) is perhaps sufficiently 
recent to make it unnecessary to insert 
*Cn. No other Piso has as yet been 
mentioned. 

concederetur. This has been ge- 
neraly adopted. The instances given 
by Baiter of a similar error are, however, 
all in the second Medicean MS.; and 
* senatus,' mentioned at the beginning of 
the chapter, might possibly be supplied 
as the subject of this sentence recording 
their final decision. 

nil mutandum. A ‘fossa’ made by 
Nerva or Trajan is mentioned i in Pl. Epp. 
8.17, 2 

seu 5 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. 

CAP. 79, 8o. 

285 

80. Prorogatur Poppaeo Sabino provincia Moesia, additis 
2 Achaia ac Macedonia. id quoque morum Tiberii fuit, continuare 
imperia ac plerosque ad finem vitae in isdem exercitibus aut 
8 iurisdictionibus habere. causae variae traduntur: alii taedio novae 
curae semel placita pro aeternis servavisse, quidam invidia, ne 

4. varie Acidalius and Haase. 

1. Prorogatur. The tenure of a Cae- 
sarian province was strictly during the 
pleasure of.Caesar (Dio, 53. 13, 6); buta 
period of three to five years appears, from 
the advice attributed to Maecenas (Dio, 
52. 23, 2), to have been customary. Sa- 
binus had probably been appointed in 
764, A.D. 11. See next note. 

: Poppaeo Sabino. His full name in 
the Fasti Cap. as cos. 762. A.D. 9, is C, 
Poppaeus Q. f. Q. n. Sabinus. He was 
the father of Poppaea Sabina (on whom 
see II. 2,2), and, through her, the grand- 
. father of Poppaea the wife of Nero 
(13. 45, 1, &c.). Hereceived triumphal 
honours in 779, A.D. 26 (4. 46, 1), and 
died in 788, A.D. 35; having governed 
important provinces for twenty-four years 
; duod par negotiis neque supra erat’ 
(6. 39, 3). 

Moesia. This was a Caesarian pro- 
vince of the first rank, bounded north 
and east by the Danube and Euxine (see 
note on 2. 65, 5), and parted from Thrace, 
Macedon, and lllyria, by the range of 
Haemus and Scordus, and the Drinus 
and Savus; thus comprising the whole of 
Servia and Bulgaria, and having a gar- 
rison of two legions (4. 5, 5). It was 
established at some time late in the life 

of Augustus (cp. Ov. Trist. 2, 197), and — 

was divided into two by Domitian. . The 
importance of most of its towns is of 
later date; but Tomi, on the coast, is 
known as the place of exile of Ovid. See 
Marquardt, i. 301, foll. 

additis Achaia ac Macedonia. Ac- 
cording to Dio (58. 25, §) this arrange- 
ment held throughout the lifetime of 
Sabinus, and was continued under his 
successor Memmius Regulus, and ap- 

parently till the restoration of these pro-. 

vinces to the senate (see c. 76, 4). Tacitus 
bears out this account by speaking of 
him as commanding in the Thracian war 
troops sent from Moesia (4. 46-51), as 
governing Macedonia and Achaia still 
later (5. 10, 3), and as holding ‘ maximae 
provinciae’ up to his death (see note 
above). On the other hand he mentions 

at various times other governors of Moe- 
sia; namely, Ti. Latinius Pandusa and 
his successor Pomponius Flaccus in 772, 
A.D. 19 (2. 66, 3); probably P. Vel- 
laeus in 774, A.D. 21 (3. 39, 1); and 
Pomponius Labeo in 779, A.D. 26(4. 47, 
I; 6. 29, 1): but of these only Flaccus, 
who was appointed for a special purpose, 
is known to have been a consular, and 
Labeo was certainly not such (see on 
4. 47, 1). It is therefore possible that 
these were subordinate to Sabinus, whose 
position may have resembled that of 
L. Vitellius in 788, A. p. 35 (6. 32, &). 
2. morum. This plural form of the 
classical * moris est,’ appears to be new. 
On similar genitives see Introd. v. $ 35. 
continuare imperia. For instances 

. see Introd. vii. pp. 117, 118. The same 

rule applied to his fiscal officers: see 
4- 6, 5. 

4. iurisdictionibus. In Cicero's time 
the government of a peaceful province 
was mere ' iurisdictio' (ad Q. F. 1. 1, 7). 
Hence Ern. and others refer this term 
here to the senatorial provinces. But 
only the direct appointments of Tiberius 
seem here spoken of, and among the 
Caesarian there were peaceful provinces, 
to which the term may well be applied. 

causae, &c. Tothose here mentioned 
may be added that which Josephus (Ant. 
18. 6, 5) quotes as assigned by Tiberius 
himself, that ‘it is better to leave the 
gorged flies on a sore than to drive them 
off’ (see Introd. viii. p. 157) ; and the 
complaint, also alleged by himself, that 
the best men constantly declined the 
office (6. 27, 3). Dio (58. 23, 5) alleges 
the reduction in the ranks of the senate 
as the cause, in later years, of the pro- 
longed tenures of all provinces. 

alii, sc. tradunt, supplied from * tra- 
duntur. 

5.semel placita. Orelli illustrates 
this habit, even in small matters, from 
the fact that the types of his coinage 
show hardly any change after this year 
( Eckh. vi. 188). 

gi 

286 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 768. 

plures fruerentur; sunt qui existiment, ut callidum eius ingenium, 
ita anxium iudicium ; neque enim eminentis virtutes sectabatur. 

et rursum vitia oderat: 
dedecus publicum metuebat. 

ex optimis periculum sibi, a pessimis 
qua haesitatione postremo eo pro- 4 

5 vectus est, ut mandaverit quibusdam provincias, quos egredi urbe 

10 

non erat passurus. 

81. De comitiis consularibus, quae tum primum illo principe 
ac deinceps fuere, vix quicquam firmare ausim: adeo diversa 
non modo apud auctores sed in ipsius orationibus reperiuntur. 
modo subtractis candidatorum nominibus originem cuiusque et 2 

. ut callidum, &c., ‘that his de- 
m was as irresolute, as his perception 
was acute. On the apparently true 
insight here shown into his character, 
see Introd. viii. p. 137, &c. 

3. rursum, ‘on the other hand :? cp. 
€. 12, 4; 2. 39. 4 ; 11. 28, 3; 13. 14, 5, &c. 

5. ut mandaverit. Tacitus uses the 
historical perf. subj. as an aorist, in 
consecutive sentences, with more free- 
dom than any other writer except Sue- 
tonius: cp. c. 18, 2; 56, 3; 2. 30, !; 
55, 35 81, 1, &c. ; Dráger, Synt. und Stil, 
§ 182; Madv. 382, Obs. 1; and Mr. 
Kirkpatrick in Class. Rev. iv. 343. 

quibusdam. The only cases known 
are those of L. Arruntius and Aelius 
Lamia; see 6. 27, 2, 3. It is stated by 
Suetonius (Tib. 63) that he treated them 
as governors, and gave them instructions, 
to be executed by their ‘legati’: a 
governor of Syria was similarly kept at 
home by Nero (13. 22, 2). 

6. non erat passurus. Nipp. notes 
this as implying, not that he had made 
up his mind at their appointment (in 
which case there would be no *haesi- 
tatio '), but that the moment never came 
when he would let them go. 

7. comitiis: used of election by the 
senate, as in c. 15,1. That the consular 
as well as other elections were so con- 

ducted, is shown by an inscription cited | 

below, 
to the 
20, 3). 

tum primum. The consuls for this 
year had been designated before the death 
of Augustus (c. 14, 5). With ‘deinceps,’ 
‘illo principe’ is again supplied ; no allu- 
sion being here made to the practice of 
his successors. 

8. firmare, for ‘adfirmare’; so 6. 6,2; 
28, 6; 50, 6, "Be, 

and by the temporary restitution 
people under Gaius (Dio, 59. 

9. non modo. Nipp. here notes the 
apparently inadvertent repetitions found 
sometimes in Tacitus, as here ‘ modo’ . 
‘modo,’ also ‘ eximeretur’ ' exemit 
(3. IX, 1); ‘nisi’ nisi? (3. B9. 25 

‘simul’... ‘simul? (4. 16, 1), &c. On 
the other hand, the repetition here of 
* subtractis ' . ^ subtracta ' ; as of ' pa- 
rentur'. * parentur ! (2. 33, 4); ‘venas’ 

. * venas? (6. 9,^ 4), are intentional. 
Many instances of each kind are cited here 
by Nipp. from a much larger list,in Joh. 
Müller (Beitráge, sect. 4. 11-18). 

ipsius orationibus. These would pro- 
bably be recorded in the ‘acta senatus ' ; 
but it is remarkable that Tacitus does not 
cite the *acta' themselves as evidence. 
See Introd. iii. p. 18. 

10. modo, &c. Although an inscription 
(C. I. L. ix. 2342) records a person as 

‘per commendation(em) Ti. Caesaris Au- 
gusti ab senatu co(n)s(ul) dest(inatus),' 
this passage appears clearly to show that 
his control of these elections was informal, 
and not analogous to the special * com- 
mendatio' of ‘candidati Caesaris’ for 
other magistracies. ‘See on c. 15, 2; and 
Introd. vi. p. 94. Tacitus is here describ- 
ing three modes of informal recommenda- 
tion: (1) by giving two names to the 
consuls, and stating that no others had 
offered themselves; which amounts to a 

*.nominatio ' (see on c. 14, 6 ; and Infrod. 

I. 1.) of two candidates only : (2) and (3) 
without even formal ‘nominatio’ ; by in- 
dicating in a speech or letter (without 
names) the persons whom he preferred ; 
or by intimating to * candidati ' that they 
need not canvas, and leaving it ap- 
parently to them to make this known. 

subtractis, ‘being suppressed’ : cp. 
‘aliis nominatis me unum subtrahebat ' 
(Curt. 6. 10, 7). 

A. D. 15.] LIBER I. CAP. 89, 8r. 287 

vitam et stipendia descripsit, ut qui forent intellegeretur: ali- 
quando ea quoque significatione subtracta candidatos .hortatus, 
ne ambitu comitia turbarent, suam ad id curam pollicitus est. 

3 plerumque eos tantum apud se professos disseruit, quorum 
nomina consulibus edidisset ; posse et alios profiteri, si gratiae 5 
aut meritis confiderent: speciosa verbis, re inania aut subdola, 
quantoque maiore libertatis imagine tegebantur, tanto eruptura 
ad infensius servitium. 

8. FiNIT P. CORNELI Lisp. I. INciriT LIBER II. 

BOOK II. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U. C. 769, A.D. 16. Statilius Sisenna Taurus, L. Libo, coss. 

Ch. 1-4. State of affairs in the East. 

1, 2. Unpopularity of Vonones, who had been educated in Rome and had suc- 
ceeded to the throne of Parthia. 3, 4. Vonones, driven out by Artabanus, 
accepted as king of Armenia, but afterwards removed by the Romans into Syria. 

Ch. 5-20. Campaign of Germanicus. 

5, 6. A large fleet formed and concentrated at the * Insula Batavorum.’ 7. Expe- 
dition against the Chatti and to the Lupia. 8. Route of the army to the Amisia 
and thence to the Visurgis. 9, 10. Colloquy of Arminius and Flavus. 11. The 
Romans cross the Visurgis. 12, 13. The temper of the soldiers ascertained by 
Germanicus. 14. His dream, and address to the army. 15. Address of Arminius. 
16-18. Battle of Idisiaviso; Tiberius saluted as *imperator, and trophy erected. 
19-22. Second Roman victory in a position chosen by the Germans; submission 
of the Angrivarii. 23, 24. Disastrous storm on the retreat. 25. Renewed attack 
on the Chatti and Marsi. 26. Germanicus recalled by Tiberius to his triumph 
and a second consulship. 

Ch. 27-31. Impeachment of Libo Drusus for revolutionary designs; his suicide. 

32. Rewards of the accusers; servility of senators; punishment of astrologers and 
magicians. 

Ch. 33-38. Debates in the senate. 38. On the luxury of the age. 84. Outspoken 
words of L. Piso; his suit with Urgulania. 35. On the adjournment of business. 
36. On holding elections five years in advance. 37, 38. The petition of Hortalus 
rebuked. 

Ch. 38, 40. Attempt of a slave to personate Agrippa Postumus. 

A. U.C. 770, A.D. 17. C. Caelius, L. Pomponius, coss. 

Ch. 41. Triumph of Germanicus (May 16); feeling of the people. 42. Cappadocia 
reduced to a province on the death of Archelaus. 43. Germanicus appointed with 
general powers to settle matters in the East; Cn. Piso made governor of Syria. 
44-46. Drusus sent to Illyricum to watch the struggle between Maroboduus, king 
of the Suebi, and Arminius, who had defeated him with the Cheruscans. 47, 48. 
Liberality of Tiberius to the cities of Asia ruined by an earthquake, and to various 
persons at Rome. 49. Dedication of temples. 50. Trial of Appuleia Varilla. 
51. Contest on the election of a praetor. 52. Beginning of the predatory war of 

. Tacfarinas in Africa; his defeat by Camillus. 

VOL. I. | U 

|2 

| 3 

290 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A.U. 0.771, A.D. 18. Ti. Caesar Augustus III, Germanicus Caesar II, coss. 

Ch. 58-58. Actions of Germanicus in the East. 
5. His route to Athens. 53. Birth of Julia at Lesbos; journey y of Germanicus to 
the Euxine and return by Ilium and Colophon. 55. Conduct of Piso at Athens; 
corruption of the Syrian legions by him and Plancina. 56. Germanicus crowns 
Artaxias king of Armenia and sends governors to Cappadocia and Commagene. 
57. Dissensions between Germanicus and Piso. 58. Overtures from Artabanus 
king of Parthia; Vonones removed to Cilicia. 

A. U. C. 772, A.D. 19. M. Silanus, L. Norbanus, coss. 

Ch. 58-61. Travel of Germanicus in Egypt ; vispieisure of Tiberius ; visit to Thebes, 
the Memnon, Syene, and Elephantine. 

Ch. 62, 63. Maroboduus forced to take refuge in Italy and je at Ravenna; 
similar fate of Catualda who had overthrown him. 

Ch. 64-07. Rhescuporis, king of Thrace, who had seized and killed his bine 
Cotys, entrapped by Pomponius Flaccus, and condemned at Rome; Thrace divided 
between his son and nephews. 

Ch. 68. Vonones attempts to escape, and is killed. 

Ch. 69-73. Illness and death of Germanicus. 

' 69. Illness of Germanicus; conduct of Piso; suspicions of poison and witchcraft. 
70. Final breach with Piso, who is ordered to leave the province. 71, 72. Last 
words and death of Germanicus. 73. His funeral; comparison with Alexander the 
Great. 

Ch. 74-81. Events in the East after his death. 
74. Sentius chosen governor of Syria; evidence collected against Piso. 75. 
Agrippina sets out for Rome. 76, 77. Advice given to Piso. 78. His resolution 
to reclaim his province by force. 79. His meeting with the ship of AgHppina: 
80, 81. His occupation of a fort in Cilicia and surrender. 

Ch. 82,83. Feeling in Rome, and honours decreed to the memory of Germanicus. 
84. Twin sons born to Drusus and Livia. 

Ch. 85. Decrees against female profligacy, and against the Isiac and Jewish worships. 
86. Election of a vestal. 87. Corn sold at a fixed price, with compensation to 
dealers; Tiberius refuses the title of * pater patriae.' 88..Offer to poison Arminius 
rejected ; notice of his death and achievements. 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER Il. 

l. SISENNA Statilio [Tauro] L. Libone consulibus mota 
Orientis regna provinciaeque Romanae, initio apud Parthos orto, 
qui petitum Roma acceptumque regem, quamvis gentis Arsaci- 

darum, ut externum aspernabantur. 

is fuit Vonones, obses 

2 Augusto datus a Phraate. nam Phraates quamquam depulisset 
exercitus ducesque Romanos, cuncta venerantium officia ad 

2. ab excessu diui Augusti. 

4. [Tauro] Ritt. 

8. aprahate and prahates 

(corr. phrahates): in 6. 31—32 four times phraates ; in 11. 10; 12. 10 Med. ii. prahatis 

and praatis. 

4. Bisenna Statilio [Tauro]. The 
name is thus given in the Fasti (C. I. L. 
i. p. 475, x. 6639), but the mention of 
another cognomen, after one cognomen 
and a gentile name, is noted as contrary 
to the usage of Tacitus. The full names 
in Dio (Argum. of B. 57) are T. Statilius 
TT. f. Sisenna Taurus, and L. Scribonius L. 
f. Libo. On the latter see c. 29, a. 

6. gentis Arsacidarum. This dy- 
nasty created, cir. B.C. 250, the Parthian 
Empire, which lasted till cir. A.D. 230, 
and included nearly all the eastern por- 
tion of the Syro-Macedonian dominions, 
from the Euphrates to the Hindoo Koosh 
and the desert of Carmania; the chief ex- 
ceptions being the partially, and, at times, 
wholly independent kingdoms of Northern 
Media (Atropatene), and of * Armenia 
maior.' Its history is fully treated in Prof. 
Rawlinson's ‘Sixth Oriental Monarchy’ 
(London, 1873), and the chronology has 
been determined from numismatic data. 
See Prof. Percy Gardner, ‘Coinage of 

Parthia ' (Part v. of * Nümismata Orient- 
alia,’ London, 1877), whence most of the 
dates here given are taken. 

7. is fuit. Nipp. notes the recurrence 
of this mode of expression in 4. 15, 2; 
13. 42, 1; H. 3. 47, 13 4. 11, 3. 

8. nam Phraates. For a general 
sketch of the policy of Rome towards 
Parthia and Armenia; from the time of 
Augustus to that of Nero, see vol. ii. 
Introd. ch. iv. This Phraates was the 
fourth of that name and fifteenth king of 
the dynasty, and reigned from B.c. 37 to 
B.C. 2. Therepulse of the Romans alluded 
to is that of M. Antonius and his lieu- 
tenant Oppius Statianus in 718, B.C. 36. 
The force under the latter was annihilated. 
See Dio, 49. 24-32. 

9. venerantium, a form of defining 
genitive equivalent to * venerantibus pro- 
pria': cp. ‘supplicia civium 6. 40, 2; 
* illecebrae peccantium ' Agr. 4. 3; ‘ser- 
vientium poenae ibid. 32, 5. 

officia. The chief mark of respect 

U2 

n 

“7 

292 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A.U. C. 769. 

Augustum verterat partemque prolis firmandae amicitiae mis- 

erat, haud perinde nostri metu quam fidei popularium diffisus. 
2. Post finem Phraatis et sequentium regum ob internas 

caedcs venere in urbem legati a primoribus Parthis, qui Vono- 

nem vetustissimum liberorum eius accirent. 
credidit Caesar auxitque opibus. 
mox subiit pudor degeneravisse 3 

ut ferme ad nova imperia. 

magnificum id sibi 2 
et accepere barbari laetantes, 

Parthos: petitum alio ex orbe regem, hostium artibus infectum ; 
iam inter provincias Romanas solium Arsacidarum haberi dari- 
que. ubi illam gloriam. trucidantium Crassum, exturbantium 4 

e 
6. accipere: cp. c. 38, 7. 

lay in his restoration, in 734, B.C. 20, of 
the standards taken from Crassus and 
others (Dio, 54. 8, 1). Cp. ‘ Parthos 
trium exercituum Romanorum spolia et 
signa reddere mihi, supplicesque amici- 
tiam populi Romani petere coegi" (Mon., 
Anc. v. 40). The homage alleged here, 
and in Hor. Ep. 1. 12, 27, would appear 
from Dio (1. 1.) to be overstated. 

I. partemque prolis. Strabo (16. 1, 
28, 748) states that he sent four sons, 
Seraspadanes, Rhodaspis, Phraates, and 

. Vonones, with two wives and four sons 

belonging to them. In Mon. Anc. vi. 3, 
these are described as *filios suos nepo- 
tesque omnes, "This surrender was made 
to M. Titius (Strebo, l. 1, legatus of 
Syria between 743 and 747, B.C. 11-7 
(Rawlinson, p. 211). The first two are 
shown by an inscription (C. I. L. vi. 1799, 
Or. 638) to have died in Rome. 

firmandae amicitiae. On this dative 
with * mittere" cp. 1. 60, 2. 

2. haud perinde...quam : cp. c. 5, 
3, &c.; also without a negative in 6. 3o, 
4; 11. 10, 5, &c., and in Suet. Thesame 
reason for this action of Phraates is given 
by Strabo (l. 1.) 8e8igs rds ordoes xai 
Tous émiÜcuévovss a’r@. Cp. Mon. Anc. 
(1. 1.) ‘non bello superatus, sed amicitiam 
nostram per [liberorum] suorum pignora 
petens.' It would thus appear that ' obses 
datus," above, is not to be taken strictly. 

3. Post finem, &c.  Phraataces, a 
natural son of Phraates, murdered his 
father and succeeded him, and was him- 
self forced to give way to Orodes, also an 
Arsacid, who was assassinated by his sub- 
jects (Jos. Ant. 18. 2, 4). Phraataces was. 
king as early as August B.C. 2, and had 
an interview with Gaius Caesar in the 
East: see Dio, 55. 10 a, 4 (Dindorf): 

cp. Vell. 2. 101, 2. His coins date to 
A.D. 4; and the assassination of Orodes 
appears to have taken place in A. D. 7 or 
8, in the latter of which years the coinage . 
of Vonones begins. He may have been 
sent for earlier, as we hear of a Parthian 
embassy to Rome apparently in 758 or 
759, A. D. 5 or 6 (Suet. Tib. 16). 
internas, ‘domestic,’ used of ‘dis- 
cordiae ' (c. 26, 3), ‘certamina’ (c. 54, 2), 
and domestic affairs generally (4. 32, 2). 

4. primoribus, more properly called 
‘megistanes’ (*mehestàn ), 15. 27, 4; 
Suet. Cal. 5. 

5. vetustissimum. Of the others, 
Phraates was certainly alive (6. 31, 4); 
so that either Strabo (l. 1), who places 
Vonones last, may not give a correct 
order of seniority, or Josephus (1. 1.) may 
be right in saying that he was selected as 
the fittest. 

6. Caesar. Augustus, who has been 
mentioned (c. 1, 2), is intended by this 
name here and in c. 3. 

auxit, ‘enriched him’; so in 11. 8, 6: 
cp. I. 3, 1; 42, 6; 11. 16, 3, &c. 

laetantes .. . &d: so ‘laeto milite 
ad mutationem ducum’ H. 2. 36, 4. This 
mode of expressing relation is frequent in 
Tacitus with adjectives or participles, e.g. 
1.40, 33 43,53 6. 7, 3; 8, 4; 29, 5, &c. 

8. alio ex orbs. The Parthians are 
made to speak of their empire as a world 
in itself, as the Romans would speak of 
* noster orbis' (G. 2,1; Agr. 12, 3) or 
7j olxovpévyn (St. Luke 2, 1, &c.). ' 

10. trucidantium ... exturbantium, 
used aoristically: see Introd. v. 8 54. 
On the defeat and death of Crassus in 
701, B.C. 53, see Plut. Crass. 27-31, 560- 
563; Dio, 40. 16-27, &c.; on that of 
Antonius sce above, c. I, 2. 

A. D. 16.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 1-3. 293 

Antonium, si mancipium Caesaris, tot per annos servitutem 
5 perpessum, Parthis imperitet? accendebat dedignantes et ipse 
diversus a maiorum institutis, raro venatu, segni equorum cura ; 
quotiens per urbes incederet, lecticae gestamine fastuque erga 
6 patrias epulas. inridebantur et Graeci comites ac vilissima uten- 

silium anulo clausa. 

sed prompti aditus, obvia comitas, ignotae 

Parthis virtutes, nova vitia; et quia ipsorum. moribus aliena. 
perinde odium pravis et. honestis. 

3. Igitur Artabanus Arsacidarum e sanguine apud Dahas 
adultus excitur, primoque congressu fusus reparat vires regnoque 

7. maioribus: text Muretus. 

2. accendebat: cp. ‘incendebat’ 1. 
23, 1, &c. ‘ Dedignor' is chiefly poetical, 
and elsewhere in Tacitus takes an infin. 
(€. 34, 8, &c.) or accus. (14. 46, 2). 

ipse, his character, as distinct from 
his antecedents. 

3. raro venatu, segni . . . cura, 
usually taken as abl. of quality; but 
* gestamine' and ‘fastu’ would be more 
naturally instrumental, and no change of 
construction need be supposed. Justin 
states (41. 3, 3) that the Parthians ate 
no flesh but that taken in the chase, and 
were never seen out except on horseback. 

4. quotiens . . . incederet, subjunct. 
of repeated action: cp. Introd. v. $ 52. 

lecticae gestamine: cp. 'gestamine 
sellae’ 14. 4, 6; 15. 57, 3; and * eodem 
gestamine' 11. 33, 3. The word, gene- 
rally poetical and post- Augustan, is other- 
wise almost exclusively used of that which 
is worn or borne. 

erga. The use of this word to express 
any feeling or mere relation towards a 
person or thing, is especiaily, though not 
exclusively, "lacitean. See Introd. v. 
$59; Nipp.on c. 76. For other instances 
of its use in application to things or 
abstract conceptions, cp. 4. 20, 2; 1I. 
25,8; 16. 33; 1, &c. ; and a few earlier 
instances, as *erga meam salutem" Cic. 
Prov. Cons. 1, 1; Att. 8. 3, 2. 

5. epulas, the feasts with the ‘ me- 

gistanes, only suspended as an act of . 

mourning (‘iustitii instar’), Suet. Cal. 5. 

Graeci comites, probably men of 
letters, as those with Tiberius (4. 58, 1). 

utensilium, ‘stores’: cp. 1. 70, 6. 

6. anulo clausa: cp. Plin. N. H. 33. 
1, 6, 26 *nunc cibi quoque ac potus anulo 
vindicantur a rapina ' ; also Plaut. Cas. 2. 
1, 1; Cic. ad Fam. 16. 26, 2; Hor. Ep. 

| particulars. 

2. 2, 134; Juv. 14, 132, &c. These pre- 
cautions against pilfering slaves would 
seem mean to Parthians. 

prompti aditus, &c. It seems best 
to supply * erant,' not with these clauses, 
but with ‘nova vitia,’ taken as predicate 
to the whole, and explained by ‘ et quia,’ 
&c., following. 

obvia, 'affable, i.e. ready to meet 
all halfway: cp. ‘obvium obsequium" H. 
I. I9, 2; and 'obvius' thus used of a 
person in Plin. Epp. r. 10, 2. 

9. Arsacidarum e sanguine, by his 
mother's side only (6. 42, 4): on his 

. father's side he was probably a Dahan, or 

-of Hyrcanian or Carmanian blood; see 
6. 36,5. According to Josephus (Ant. 18. 

2, 4), he was king of Media, i.e. of the 

independent part, Atropatene. 

Dahas. 
on the Arii (11. 10, 3), and grouped by 
Strabo (11. 8, 2, 511) with the Sacae 

. and Massagetae, must have then lived 

between the Caspian, the sea of Aral, and 
the Oxus; though the modern Daghestan 
shows trace of them at some other time 
further west. They are known as a war- 
like race to Vergil (Aen. 8, 728). | 

- 10. primo congressu fusus. This vic- 
tory is commemorated by coins, dating 
A.D. 9-11, inscribed BactAeds 'O: wns v«- 
«knoas 'ApráBavov. It is seen that these 
coins are wholly distinct from the usual 
Parthian types, and thus illustrative of the 
difference of Vonones from the national 
character: see the engraving, Rawl. 
p. 223; Gardner, p. 47, and Pl. v. 

reparat vires, by a retreat to Media : 

see Josephus (l. Ll), who adds further 
The coinage of Artabanus 
begins in A. D. IO Or II, 

This Scythic race, bordering 

[d 

[e] 

un 

1o 

294 
potitur. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 769. 

victo Vononi perfugium Armenia fuit, vacua tunc inter- 2 

que Parthorum et Romanas opes infida ob scelus Antonii, qui 
Artavasden regem Armeniorum specie amicitiae inlectum, dein 
catenis oneratum, postremo interfecerat. eius filius Artaxias, 8 
memoria patris nobis infensus, Arsacidarum vi seque regnumque 
tutatus est. occiso Artaxia per dolum propinquorum, datus a 4 
Caesare Armeniis Tigranes deductusque in regnum a Tiberio 

Nerone. 

nec Tigrani diuturnum imperium fuit neque liberis 5 

eius, quamquam sociatis more externo in matrimonium reg- 

numque. 

4. Dein iussu Augusti inpositus Artavasdes et non sine clade 

I. vacua, without a head: cp. 6. 34, 
3; 5I, 4, &c. 

interque, &c. Asonly their alienation 
from Rome is spoken of, Nipp. is perhaps 
right in taking this not with * infida,’ but 
ot geographical position only. 

2. Parthorum et Homanas. On such 
variations see Introd. v. $ 91: cp. c. 17, 
6; 60, 4; 3. 2, 1 ; 15. 6, 6: also ‘inter 
regem Macedonum Poenumque ducem’ 
Liv. 23. 34, 7, ‘inter Macedonum Ro- 
manaque castra" Id. 36. 29, 5. 

ob scelus Antonii. Artavasdes I was 

‘son of Tigranes I (known in the cam- 

paigns of Lucullus and Pompeius),. and, 
. after a reign of twenty years was cap- 

tured by Antonius in 720, B. C. 34: Dio, 
49- 39, 4; Vell. 3. 82, 3. He was put to 
death by Cleopatra, after Actium, to win 
the alliance of the Median king, his 
enemy (Dio, 51. 5, 5). 

4. filius Artaxias. He had been made 
king by the military chiefs on the capture 
of his father, and though at first defeated, 
had made good his position in the follow- 
ing year: see Dio, 49. 39, 6; 40, 1; 44, 

He put to death all Romans in his 
dominions (Id. 51. 16, 2). 

5. que... que, see on 16, 16. 1. 

6. occiso Artaxia, &c.: cp. Mon. Anc. 
v. 24 ‘ Armeniam maiorem interfecto rege 
eius Artaxia cum facere possem provin- 
ciam, malui maiorum nostrorum exemplo 
regnum id Tigrani regis Artavasdis fiiio, 
nepoti autem Tigranis regis, per Ti. Nero- 
nem tradere, Josephus (Ant. 15. 4, 3) 
represents Artaxias as expelled by Tibe- 
rius. The date is that of the restoration 
of the standards (see note on c. 1, 1); 
and the statement of Augustus above, 
that Armenia lay at his mercy, is magni- 
fied into a conquest by Horace (Epp. 1. 
12, 16) and Velleius (2. 94, 2), and in 

coins of this date (see Momms. on Mon. 
Anc. p. 112), inscribed * Armenia capta.’ 

8. nec Tigrani, &c. The confused 
record of this period has been reduced to 
some order by Visconti (Icon. Grecque, iii. 
P. 305. foll), Rawlinson (p. 206, &c.), 
and Mommsen (on Mon. Anc. pp. 109- 
117) The children of this Tigranes II, 
joined in marriage and in regal power, 
were Tigranes III and Erato, who are 
recorded on the two sides of the same 
coin, as BacAeds BaciAéowv Tiypayns, and 
'Eparà Baordws Teypavov ddeAgn (Vis- 
conti, Pl. 57). 

9. more externo. As examples of 
this Eastern custom may be cited Mau- 
sólus and Artemisia in Caria, and several 
during the Ptolemaean dynasty in Egypt. 

II. Artavasdes. This piince is un- 
noticed in Mon. Anc. which speaks gene- 
rally (v. 28) of a period of revolt (*gentem 
postea desciscentem et rebellantem’), A 
solitary coin is however extant, bearing . 
the head and title of Artavasdes, and on 
the reverse the head of Augustus, with 
the inscription 0«o0 Kaícapos Evepyérov ; 
which must belong to the son of Ario- 
barzanes (see on $ 3) or to this king, to 
whom Prof. Percy Gardner (Num. Chron. 
N. S. 12. pp. 9-15) inclines to refer it. 
Nipp. thinks he may have been a brother 
of Artaxias and Tigranes II. Tigranes 
and Erato, who had been set aside for. 
Artavasdes, appear to have inflicted this 
‘clades’ and driven him out with Par- 
thian aid. The only evidence of date is 
supplied by the’ statement that Tiberius 
was to have gone to deal with the Ar- 
menian revolt at the death of Tigranes, 
but for his retirement to Rhodes, 748, . 
B. C. 6 (Vell. 2. 100; Dio, 55. 9, 4; Zon. 
10. 35, 36). All was thus left unsettled 
till the mission of Gaius. 

A. D. 16.] 

LIBER II. CAP. 3-5. 

295 

2 nostra deiectus. tum Gaius Caesar componendae Armeniae 
deligitur. is Ariobarzanen, origine Medum, ob insignem cor- 
poris formam et praeclarum animum volentibus Armeniis prae- 
8 fecit. Ariobarzane morte fortuita absumpto stirpem eius haud 
toleravere; temptatoque feminae imperio, cui nomen Erato, 
eaque brevi pulsa, incerti solutique et magis sine domino quam 
4in libertate, profugum Vononen in regnum accipiunt. sed ubi 
minitari Artabanus et parum subsidii in Armeniis, vel, si nostra 
vi defenderetur, bellum adversus Parthos sumendum erat, rector 
Suriae Creticus Silanus excitum custodia circumdat, manente 
5luxu et regio nomine. quod ludibrium ut effugere agitaverit 

Vonones, in loco reddemus. 

5. Ceterum Tiberio haud ingratum accidit turbari res Orientis, 
ut ea specie Germanicum suetis legionibus abstraheret novisque 
2 provinciis inpositum dolo simul et casibus obiectaret. at ille, 
quanto acriora in eum studia militum et aversa patrui voluntas, 

celerandae victoriae intentior, tractare proeliorum vias et quae 

8. si nos aui: text B. 

I. Gaius Caesar. He was in the 
East from 753, B.C. I, till his death on 
Feb. 21, 757, A.D. 4.  Tigranes had 
fallen in battle with his neighbours, Erato 
retired, and Phraataces wás induced to 
withdraw his support (Dio, 55. 10. a, 5). 

2. origine Medum: cp. Mon. Anc. 1.1. 
* domitam per Gaium filium meum regi 
Ariobarzani, regis Medorum  Artabazi 
filio, regendam tradidi. The royal house 
of Media was related to those óf Armenia 
and Parthia (Strab. 11. 13, 1, 533). Some 
hostilities ensued, in the course of which 
Gaius received his death-wound. 

4. Stirpem eius: cp. Mon. Anc. 1. 1. 
* et post eius mortem filio eius Artavasdi. 
Quo interfecto Tigranem, qui erat ex 
regio genere Armeniorum oriundus, in id 
regnum misi' It has been thought that 
there was only one Artavasdes, and that 
Tacitus has in error placed him earlier 
(see $ 1). This Tigranes IV, unnoticed 
here by Tacitus, is identified by Momm- 
sen with the one mentioned in 6. 40, 2, 
and appears to have been son of Alex- 
ander (son of Herod the Great) and of 
a daughter of Archelaus of Cappadocia 
(see c. 42, 2), who had apparently mar- 
ried an Armenian princess. 

5. Erato, supposed to be the same 
mentioned on c. 3, 5, who would thus 

have returned a third time to the throne. 
Of this there is no other evidence. 

6. soluti, ‘disorganized’: cp. ‘ soluta 
pax ' 

historical infinitive see Introd. v. $ 46 c. 

9. defenderetur, sc. ‘ Vonones, süp-. 

plied from the sense, 
IO. Creticus Silanus: cp. c. 43, 3. 
12. in loco: cp. ‘desipere in. loco’ 

Hor. Od. 4. 12, 28: also ‘in tempore’ r.- 

I9, 2; *suo'loco' H. 4. 67, 3: see c. 68. 
14. suetis legionibus, probably a 

dative: cp. c. 26,6; Introd. v. $ 15... 
16. aversa. On the positive, and the 

ellipse of ‘tanto,’ see Introd. v. § 64. 

17. celerandae victoriae: cp. *ob- 
pugnationem ,. .celerare" 12. 46, 4. This 
verb seems found in no earlier prose. 
‘Intentus’ takes a gerundial dative in 1. 
31, 2; Liv. 10. 42, 1, &c. 

proeliorum vias, ‘methods of at- 
tack': cp. *viam belli' Liv. 38. 18, 9; 
680t voAéuov Thuc. 1. 122, 1 ; and other 

. metaphorical uses of ‘via,’ as 1. 54, 4, 

&c. ; *eloquentiae itinera' Dial. 19, 5; 
* vias pecuniae ' Cic. ad Q 
Pfitzner explains it of the land and sea 
routes compared below ; Schmaus would 
read ‘vices’ (cp. Agr. 18,1; Stat. Theb. to, 
754), explained by ‘saeva vel prospera." - 

- 

m= 

I. 50, 7. 
7. ubi minitari. On this use of the - 

.F.I 1, 5, 15. 

Qo 

5 

296 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 769. 

sibi tertium iam annum belligeranti saeva vel prospera evenis- 

sent. 

fundi Germanos acie et iustis locis, iuvari silvis, paludi- 8 

bus, brevi aestate et praematura hieme; suum militem haud 
perinde vulneribus quam spatiis itinerum, damno armorum ad- 
5 fici; fessas Gallias ministrandis equis ; longum impedimentorum | 

agmen opportunum. ad insidias, defensantibus iniquum. 

mare intretur, promptam ipsis possessionem et hostibus ignotam, 
simul bellum maturius incipi legionesque et commeatus pariter 
vehi; integrum equitem equosque per ora et alveos fluminum 

10 media in Germania fore. 

6. Igitur huc intendit, missis ad census Galliarum P. Vitellio 

et C. Antio. 
praeponuntur. 

Silius et Anteius et Caecina fabricandae classi 
mille naves sufficere visae properataeque, aliae 2 

breves, angusta puppi proraque et lato utero, quo facilius fluctus 
15 tolerarent ; quaedam planae carinis, ut sine noxa siderent ; 
plures adpositis utrimque gubernaculis, converso ut repente re- 

6. oportunum (so elsewhere). 
Nipp. 

1. tertium. Besides previous service 
under Tiberius, he had been in command 
from 766, A. D. 13; but his first campaign 
was that of the next year (1. 49-51). 

2. iustis locis, ‘on fair ground,’ equi- 
valent to * aequis locis’ (1. 68, 4, &c.), 
i. e. such as Romans thought fair to them- 
selves. The expression is ám. eip., and 
seems borrowed from, though not strictly 

analogous to, ‘iustum proelium, ‘iusta 
acies, * iustus amnis,’ &c. | 
5. fessas Gallias, &c. In r. 71, 3, 

these supplies were said to have been 
eagerly offered. 

7. promptam ipsis, &c., either ‘it 
was an element which they could readily 
occupy, and was unfamiliar to the enemy’ 
(the Germans having no ships), or ‘ the 
could thus easily occupy the enemy's 
country, and without his knowledge.’ 
On this use of * promptus' cp. c. 2, 6; 
I. 68, 1, &c. On this sense of * pos- 
sessio cp. ‘ possessa Vicetia,’ *Mevania' 
H. 3. 8, 25; 59, 1. 

8. maturius incipi. Nipp. notes that 
the sea route is practicable earlier in the 
season than the forest roads ; also that, 
as is implied, the march is not retarded 
by the baggage. In the advance of 
Tiberius from the Rhine to the Elbe in 
758, A. D. 5, the army marched by land, 
" but was supported by a fleet. See Vell. 
2. 106, 3. 

12. cantio: text Orsini. 

[et Anteius] Urlichs, 

1I. huc intendit: cp. 3. 37, 3; ' illuc 
intenderat’ H. 4. 79, 3; 'huc incli- 
narat' H. 3. 27, 1, and the full expres- 
sion (‘intendere animum alicui rei") 
c. 61, r. 

ad census Galliarum : see on I. 31. 2. 

P. Vitellio: see 1. 7o, 1. The read- 
ing ‘C. Antio' is supported by the 
name ‘C. Antius Titi fi.’ on a votive in- 
scription at Langres (Orelli 1415). Nipp. 
takes ‘et Antelus’ to be a repetition 
from it. It is certainly strange to find 
an unknown person mentioned by one 
name only, side by side with Silius and 
Caecina; but a praenomen ‘A’ or * T' 
may have dropped out. The name occurs 
in 13. 22, 2. 

I4. utero. This word, though nowhere 
else used for the *alveus' of a ship, is 
used of the wooden horse (Verg. Aen. 2, 
52), and of a * dolius' (Col. 12. 4, 5). 

I5. planae carinis. Similar ships were 
built to attack Mona (14. 29, 3), and the 
Gauls used such in Caesar's time ‘quo 
facilius vada ac decessum aestus excipere 
possent ' B. G. 3. 13, 1. 

16. plures... gubernaculis. Ships 
able to go either way are described as 
used on the Euxine (l1. 3. 47, 4), and by 
the Suiones (G. 44, 2). Their chief use 
here would seem to be for narrow 
rivers. 

at $514 

A. D. 16.] LIBER I]. 

CAP. 5, 6. 297 

3 migio hinc vel illinc adpellerent; multae pontibus stratae, super 
quas tormenta veherentur, simul aptae ferendis equis aut com- 
meatui; velis habiles, citae remis augebantur alacritate militum 
4 in speciem ac terrorem. insula Batavorum in quam convenirent 
praedicta, ob faciles adpulsus accipiendisque copiis et transmit- 

5 tendum ad bellum opportuna. 

nam Rhenus uno alveo conti- 

nuus aut modicas insulas circumveniens apud principium agri 
Batavi velut in duos amnes dividitur, servatque nomen et vio- 
lentiam cursus, qua Germaniam  praevehitur, donec Oceano 
misceatur: ad Gallicam ripam Jatior et placidior adfluens 
verso cognomento (Vahalem accolae dicunt) mox id quoque 
vocabulum mutat Mosa flumine eiusque inmenso ore eundem in 

Oceanum effunditur. 

I. pontibus. The word appears no- 
where else to mean a ‘deck, though the 
* pontes ' of a tower have been taken to 
mean its floors in Verg. Aen. 9, 530; 12, 
675. Possibly some partial deck across 
the midships is meant, which would have 
the appearance of a bridge when viewed 
from the prow or stern. 

super quas. The ships are the main 
subject of reference throughout, so that 
Ern's correction ‘quos,’ as referring to 
* pontes,' is needless. 

3. velis habiles, &c. This applies to 
the whole fleet, which is subject of *auge- 
bantur,’ and to which the other nomina- 
tives ('aliae,. &c.) are in apposition. 
Nipp. *'Citae' may be a participle. 

augebantur. This may mean that the 
soldiers showed their zeal by building 
them higher than was usual, to look 
more imposing (cp. I5. 9, 1, and ‘ vallum 
turresque castrorum augebat' H. 4. 34, 
8); or perhaps better, that the spirit of 
the soldiers made the fleet seem still 
more imposing and formidable. On the 
force of ‘in’ cp. Introd. v. $ 60 b. The 
form of the similar expression ‘ acies in 
speciem simul ac terroiem . . . constiterat ' 
(Agr. 35, 3), would show that the words 
are not here strictly a hendiadys, though 
in meaning nearly such. 

4. insula Batavorum: see G. 29, 1; 
H. 4.12, 2, &c. It was known to Caesar 
(B. G. 4. To, 1), and is called * nobilissima" 
by Pliny (N. H. 4. 15, 29, 101). The 
modern district Betuwe prescives the 
name. The true mouth of tbe Rhine as 
here described is the now insignificant 
stream still called the old Rhine, passing 
by Utrecht and Leyden. For a further 

account see Mr. Long in Dict. of Geog., 
s. v. * Batavi.’ 

5. &dpulsus, ‘landing-places’: cp. ‘ad- 
pellerent,’ above. 

accipiendis .. . transmittendum. ad 
bellum. On such variations see Introd. 
v. § 88. Drager notes'this one in particular 
as peculiar to the Annals: cp. c. 37, 6; 

en 

also ‘accipiendis . .. ordinibus... ad ex- _ 

plicandas . . . turmas' 13. 38, 5, aud 
others. 

transmittendum, ‘to carry across the 
frontier’: cp. H. 2. 17, 1; 3. 5, 1, and 
* transmittant bellum’ Liv. 21. 20, 4. 

8. velut, i.e. not strictly two; for only 
one branch retains the name. 

9. praevehitur. Tacitus often uses 
verbs compounded with * pe ' for those 
with * praeter ' ; as * praefluere' c. 63, 1; 
* praegredi ' 14. 23, 4; ‘ praelegere’ c. 79, 
1; * praelabi' H. 2. 35, 1; * praelatus ' 6. 
35, 5: cp. Hor. on H. 4. 71, 22. In 
most of them he follows Livy or poets. 

donec, with subjunct. of facts: cp. 1. 
I, 4, &c.; Introd. v. § <3. 

10, placidior adfluens : cp. ' violentior 
effluit amnis ' Verg. G. 4, 373. 

1I. cognomento: cp. 1. 23, 6. Nipp. 
notes here the interchange for variety's 
sake, of ‘nomen’... ‘cognomento’... 
‘vocabulum’; and similar changes in 3. 
56, 2; also ‘nominibus’ ... ‘appella- 
tiones’ . . ..*nomina? . . . * vocabulum ' 
(G. 2, 3), &c. The construction passes 
on from ‘adfluens’ to *mutat, as if 
* Vahalis. . . vocatur' had intervened. 

Vahalem. In Caes. B. G. 4. 10, I 
the Waal is called 'Vacalus,' in Sid. 
Apoll. (see Nipp.) ‘ Vachalis.’ In H. 5. 

19, 3, Tacitus calls the Waal the Rhine, 

298 

7. Sed Caesar, dum adiguntur naves, Silium legatum cum 
expedita manu inruptionem in Chattos facere iubet : ipse audito 
castellum Lupiae flumini adpositum obsideri, sex legiones eo 
duxit. neque Silio ob subitos imbres aliud actum quam ut 2 

5 modicam praedam et Arpi principis Chattorum coniugem filiam- 
que raperet, neque Caesari copiam pugnae opsessores fecere, ad 
famam adventus eius dilapsi: tumulum tamen nuper Varianis 8 
legionibus structum et veterem aram Druso sitam disiecerant. 
restituit aram honorique patris princeps ipse cum legionibus 4 

10 decucurrit; tumulum iterare haud visum. et cuncta inter cas- 5 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 769. 

tellum Alisonem ac 
munita. 

Rhenum .novis limitibus aggeribusque per- 

e 
6. facere. 

- 

and in H. 5. 23, 2 speaks as if the Maas 
received the whole Rhine. 

1. adiguntur: ‘naves adigere' seems 
‘a regular phrase (cp. 11. 18, 2; H. 2. 83, 
2; 3- 47, 3) to express the concentration 
or collection of a fleet at one spot. 

2. Chattos. This expedition, like that 
of last year (1. 55, 1), seems intended to 
prevent their assisting the Cherusci. 

3. castellum., Nipp. thinks that, had 
‘Aliso been meant, the name would have 
been given here, and that some fort fur- 
ther eastward must be meant. If how- 
ever Aliso was as far distant as most 

suppose it to be (see below), it is un- - 

likely that any further point on the Lippe 
could have been occupied. 

5. principis. The Chatti appear to 
have had no kings (cp. c. 88, 1 ; 11. 16, a). 
Whether in such states there was one 
puc ‘princeps’ is doubted: see 

trod. to G. p. 19, and note on G. 10, 4. 

7. nuper: see 1. 62, 1. 

8. sitam. The use of this word in the 
sense of ‘ conditus ' (as in 3. 38, 6; 4. 55, 
6; 6. 41, 2, &c.) is peculiar to Tacitus. 
Drager, connecting it with a particular 
use of ' sistere ' (see 4. 37, 4), appears to 
take it as a form of passive participle of 
that verb. But the use noted on I. 39, 
4 connects this with the ordinary senses of 
the participle of ‘sino.’ * Druso' must 
be dat. commod.answering to 'legionibus.' 
The altar may have been commemorative 
(see on 1. 14, 3). or set up for the private 
worsbip of his * Di Manes’ (cp. c. 83, 3), 
probably at the place of his death, which 
was some 200 Roman miles from the 
Rhine (Val. Max. 5. 5, 3), probably near 

the nliddle Weser (see Momms. Hist. v. 
27, E. T.i. 30). We gather that it must 
have been near the scene of the disaster of 
Varus, but the distance of either from 
Aliso can hardly be inferred from what is 
here stated. 

10. deoucurrit. The ‘decursio fune- 
bris’ is alluded to in Verg. Aen. 11, 188; 
Luc. 8, 735; and described with more 
detail in Stat. Theb. 6, 213, &c. The 
custom is described as observed even by 
the army of Hannibal (Liv. 25. 17, 5), and 
corresponds to the procession of chariots 
round the dead Patroclus (Il. 33, 13). For 
the dat. * honori! cp. Introd. v. § 23. 

haud visum. He may not have actually 
reached the spot, though he seems to 
have been near it. 

II. Alisonem. This fort is mentioned 
as defended for a time, and then.evacuated, 
after the disaster of Varus (Vell. 2. 120, 
1). Itis inferred that it had been after- 
wards reoccupied by Tiberius. It can 
hardly be other than that built by Drusus 
at the junction of the Aoumias and 'EAÍcov 
(Dio, 54. 35, 4), and, if its site could be 
fixed, would help to determine that of 
other. places. Knoke, with whom Nipp. 
and Allen agree, placed it near Hamm, 
where the Ahse meets the Lippe; but the 
best supported view, that of Mommsen, 
Hofer, and others, takes it to have been 
müch further eastward, at the junction of 
the Alme and Lippe, near Paderborn, at 
or close to a place still called Elsen, and 
thus probably where Tiberius once had a 
winter camp ‘ad caput Lupiae' (Vell. 2. 
105, 3). This view is favoured by the 
fact that roads, apparently Roman, are 

A. D. 16.) 

LIBER 1l. 

CAP. 7, 8. 299 

8. Iamque classis advenerat, cum praemisso commeatu et 
distributis in legiones ac socios navibus fossam, cui Drusianae 
nomen, ingressus precatusque Drusum patrem ut se eadem au- 
sum libens placatusque exemplo ac memoria consiliorum atque 
operum iuvaret, lacus inde et Oceanum usque ad Amisiam flu- 

2 men secunda navigatione pervehitur. 

classis Amisiae ore relicta 

laevo amne, erratumque in eo quod non subvexit az? transposuit 
militem dextras in terras iturum ; ita plures dies efficiendis pon- 

3 tibus absumpti. 

et eques quidem ac legiones prima aestuaria, 

nondum adcrescente unda, intrepidi transiere : postremum auxi- 
liorum agmen Batavique in parte ea, dum insultant aquis artem- 

4 que nandi ostentant, turbati et quidam hausti sunt. 

metanti 

castra Caesari Angrivariorum defectio a tergo nuntiatur: missus 

6. ore ins. Seyffert. 
posuit] al. 

traced considerably beyond Hamm, and 
that the valley of the Alme affords a good 
starting-point for a march to the Weser, 
the presumed object for which this out- 
post was maintained: see Momms. Hist. 
v. 31, E: T. i. 34. 

limitibus aggeribusque: for the 
former see note on I. 50, 2; for the 
latter, on Y. 61, 2. 

2. distributis in: cp. 1. 55, 2; c. 67, 
4; 3- 38, 4, &c. 

Drusianae: see Suet. Cl. 1. This 
work included both the construction of 
the * Neue Yssel,' connecting the Rhine 
near Ámnheim with the old Yssel at Does- 
burg, and a widening of the latter river 
to its mouth. 

3. eadem ausum. Drusus was in 742, 
B.C. 12 (Dio, 54. 32, 2), the first Roman 
to sail on the northern ocean. Suet. Cl. 
I: cp. Strab. 7. 1, 3, 290. The same route 
was taken in 768 A.D. 15, by a part 

. of the army (1. 60, 3), and afterwards by 
Corbulo (11. 18, 2). - 

6. classis Amisiae ore, &c. ‘Ore’ 
could easily have been lost before ‘ relicta.' 
Tacitus would not have called the river 
*amnis Amisiae, but ‘amnis (or*'flumen?) 
Amisia’ (cp. c. 23, 1; 1. 32, 3, &c.) : and, 
though there appears to have existed a 
place called 'Audc«a (Ptol. 2. 11, 28), or 
Apiooa (Steph. Byz.), he would hardly 
have spoken of it without removing am- 
biguity by adding *oppido. In the next 
line, the addition of *aut' would make 
the criticism assert that Germanicus ought 
either to have sailed his fleet up the river 

7. aut ins. Wurm, et ins. Seyffert, [subvexit] or [trans- 
13. angriuoriorum : text B, Ampsivariorum Giefers, Halm. 

(cp. ‘subvehebatar’ c. 60, 1) to a part 
where little or no bridging would have 
been required, or to have landed the 
troops at once on the right bank ,see 
other readings) ,As regards the fact, 
Germanicus probably thought it necessary 
to secure his retreat by a bridge (cp. c. 11, 
1), and it is probable (see App. ii. to Bk. 
ii.) that only a part of the fleet was 
left here. 

8. pontibus. Thatthis plural might 
be used of a single bridge, would appear 
from * póntem ' and * pontes' being used 
of the same structure interchangeably in 
Cic. Fam. 10. 18, 4; 23, 3. The chief 
use of this bridge would be for the bag- 
gage; the troops being represented as 
taking advantage of the low tide for at 
least part of the way. 

9. aestuaria, ‘tidal marshes’: cp. 4. 
73, 2; II. 18, 2; 14. 32, 2, &c.; the 
*stagna . . . inrigua aestibus maritimis" 
of Livy 10. 2, 5. By ‘prima’ would ap- 
pear to be meant those next to the chan- 
nel of the river. 

1I. in parte ea, i.e. ‘in extremo ag- 
mine.’ 

12. metanti castra. This should 
naturally be at the. close of the first day's 
march; but as no mention is made of the 
route from the Amisia, and the next 
words speak of the Visurgis, a camp near 
that river may be meant, which would 
better suit the mention of the Angrivarii. 

13. Angrivariorum. This people is 
mentioned as bordering on the Cherusci 
beyond the Weser (c. 19, 3). To imagine 

en . 

1o 

300 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 769. 

ilico Stertinius cum equite et armatura levi igne et caedibus 
perfidiam ultus est. 
9. Flumen Visurgis Romanos Cheruscosque interfluebat. eius 

in ripa cum ceteris primoribus Arminius adstitit, quaesitoque an 

5 Caesar venisset, postquam adesse responsum est, ut liceret cum 
fratre conloqui oravit. erat is in exercitu cognomento Flavus, 2 
insignis fide et amisso per vulnus oculo paucis ante annis duce 
Tiberio. tum permissu .. progressusque salutatur ab Arminio; 3 
qui amotis stipatoribus, ut sagittarii nostra pro ripa dispositi 

10 abscederent postulat, et postquam digressi, unde ea deformitas 
oris interrogat fratrem. illo locum et proelium referente, quod- 4 
nam praemium recepisset exquirit. Flavus aucta stipendia, 5 
torquem et coronam aliaque militaria dona memorat, inridente 
Arminio vilia servitii pretia. 

15 10. Exim diversi ordiuntur, hic magnitudinem Romanam, 
opes Caesaris et victis graves poenas, in deditionem venienti 

8. permissu : permissum B, permisso praesidio Müller. 

them as on the rear of Germanicus, and 
to explain 'defectio, we must suppose 
that a part of the race lived west of the 
Weser, and had been subject to Rome. 
This is consistent with the mention of 
them ata later date as bordering on the 
Frisii (G. 34, 1), though perhaps hardly 
so with the position assigned to them by 
Ptolemy (2. 11, 16) between the greater 
Chauci and Suebi. The view that those 
meant are here, and in c. 22, 3; 24, 5, the 
Ampsivarii makes the name (* Emsfahrer ") 
denote their position, and points out that 
their chief, Boiocalus, is stated to have 
served under Tiberius and Germanicus, 
and that they ceased to exist after 811, 
A.D. 58 (see 13. 55-56). It is very pro- 
bable that the two are closely related, 
and are here confused by Tacitus. 

. I. Stertinius: see 1. 60, 4. 

3. Visurgis. We have no clue to the 
locality, but it has been pointed out that 
the Komans would have to occupy the 
pass of the *Porta Westphalica' before 
crossing, as they probabiy did, a little 
above it. Merivale (c. xlii. p. 50) re- 
marks that the probable breadth of the 
river gives an air of romance to this 
alleged conversation across it. The dream 
(c. 14, 1) and the omen (c. 17, 2) are con- 
ceived in a similar spirit. 

interfluebat. The verb is used with 
this construction in H. 3. 5, 5; Liv. 27. 

29, 9: cp. ‘interluo’ 6. 1, 1, and other 
verbs so used in poefs and late authors: 
see Introd. v. $ 12 c. 

4. adstitit. He was in advance of 
his main body (c 11, 1). 

6. Flavus. On his wife and son see 
II. 16, 2. 

7. paucis ante annis, probably dur- 
ing the later campaigns of Tiberius after 
the defeat of Varus, 762-764, A.D. 9-11. 

8. tum permissn. It is supposed that 
* Caesaris deducitur, or other words to 
that effect (see Nipp.), have dropped out. 
This abl. is thus used with a verb in 
2. 59, 4. The correction * permissum ' is 
supported by similar omissions of the final 
letter; but we should expect ‘tum’ to. 
introduce something more than the bare 
fact of permission. 

13. militaria dona: see on I. 44, 7, 
&c. 

14. vilia, i.e. from the view of Arminius 
himself, * the low wages he had earned by 
bondage.’ 

15. diversi, ‘in opposite strains’: cp. 
‘diversi interpretabantur' c. 73, 6; ‘di- 
versos reperies ' 6. 22, 2. 

ordiuntur, perhaps with accus. as in 
12. 5, 4; 15. 26, 3; 51, 4; but the sense 
of some such word as * referens" is cer- 
tainly supplied below, and probably 
throughout. 

A. D. 16.] LIBER Il. CAP. 8-11. 301 

paratam clementiam ; neque coniugem et filium eius hostiliter 
haberi: ille fas patriae, libertatem avitam, penetralis Germaniae 
deos, matrem precum sociam: ne propinquorum et adfinium, 
denique gentis suae desertor et proditor quam imperator esse 
2 mallet. paulatim inde ad iurgia prolapsi quo minus pugnam 
consererent ne flumine quidem interiecto cohibebantur, ni Ster- 
tinius adcurrens plenum irae armaque et equum poscentem Fla- 
3 vum adtinuisset. cernebatur contra minitabundus Arminius 
proeliumque denuntians; nam pleraque Latino sermone inter- 
iaciebat, ut qui Romanis in castris ductor populafium meruisset. 
11. Postero die Germanorum acies trans Visurgim stetit. Cae- 

sar nisi pontibus praesidiisque inpositis dare in discrimen legiones 
2haud imperatorium ratus, equitem vado tramittit. praefuere 
Stertinius et e numero primipilarium Aemilius, distantibus locis 

3 invecti, ut hostem diducerent. qua celerrimus amnis, Chario- 
valda dux Batavorum erupit. eum Cherusci fugam simulantes 
in planitiem saltibus circumiectam traxere : dein coorti et undi- 
que effusi trudunt adversos, instant cedentibus collectosque in 
4 orbem pars congressi, quidam eminus proturbant. Chariovalda 
diu sustentata hostium saevitia, hortatus suos ut ingruentes ca- 
tervas globo perfringerent, atque ipse densissimos inrumpens, 

I4. primillarium: text B. 
gerent L, text Bezzenb. 

I. coniugem et fllium : see 1. 57, 5; 
58, 9. They may be supposed to have 
been in *libera custodia ' at Ravenna. 

2. fas patriae: cp. I. 42, 4. 

penetralis . . . deos, In 11. 16, 8, 
Flavus is called the enemy of the ‘ Dii 
penates" of his country; for which * dii 
penetrales ' is, according to Cicero (N. D. 
2. 27, 68), a poetical equivalent, and is so 
used in Sen. Trag. 

3. matrem. From the mention of his 
mother only, it is inferred that his father 
was dead. See on I. 55, 4. 

4. desertor et proditor, so joined in 
H. 1. 72, 2; 2. 44, 3; not strictly sy- 
nonyms. 

imperator, used of barbarian leaders, 
as in C. 45, 3; 12. 33, I. 

10. Romanis in castris : cp. Vell. 2. 
118, 2 * adsiduus militiae nostrae prioris 
comes, [cum] iure etiam civitatis Ro- 
manae ius equestris consequens gradus.' 
His position would be like that of Chario- 
valda (c. 13. 3) or the Nervian chiefs 
under Drusus (Liv. Epit. 141). 

15. deducerent: text R.. 
ipsis : ipse in B, ipse Weissenboin. 

21. fringerent: fran- 

I2. dare in discrimen: see note on 
I. 47, 1. 

13. imperatorium. Drager notes as 
a novelty the substantival use of this 
word ( =‘ good generalship ’). 

14. primipilarium, those who had 
served the office of * primipilus’; analo- 
gous to ‘consulares,’ &c. On the ‘cen- 
turio primipilus,’ and on the privileges of 
a ‘ primipilaris,’ see Introd. vii. pp.124,128. 

Aemilius, probably the same men- 
tioned in 4. 42, 2. Nipp..refers to him 
the following inscription, found at Capua 
(C. I. L. x. 3881), * Paulo Aemilio, pri- 
mipilo, bis praefecto equitum], tribuno 
chortis iiii praetorjiae].’ He is evidently 
here acting as ‘ praefectus equitum." 

16. erupit, sc. ‘ex amne? 

I7. circumiectam, ‘surrounded by’ ; 
usually with a dative of the thing sur- 
rounded, as ‘moenia regiae circumiecta’ 
H. 5. 11, 7; but here with a construction 
analogous to that usual with *circum- 
datus.’ 

21. globo, ‘massed together,’ abl. of 

mt 

5 

IO 

15 

302 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 769. 

congestis telis et suffosso equo labitur, ac multi nobilium circa : 
ceteros vis sua aut equites cum Stertinio Aemilioque subveni- - 

entes periculo exemere. 

12. Caesar transgressus Visurgim indicio perfugae cognoscit 
5 delectum ab Arminio locum pugnae ; convenisse et alias nationes 
in silvam Herculi sacram ausurosque nocturnam castrorum op- 
pugnationem. habita indici fides et cernebantur ignes, suggres- 2 
sique propius speculatores audiri fremitum equorum inmensique 

et inconditi agminis murmur attulere. 

igitur propinquo summae 3 

rei discrimine explorandos militum animos ratus, quonam id 
modo incorruptum foret, secum agitabat. tribunos et centu- 4 
riones laeta saepius quam comperta nuntiare, libertorum servilia 
ingenia, amicis inesse adulationem ; si contio vocetur, illic quo- 
que quae pauci incipiant reliquos adstrepere. penitus noscendas 
mentes, cum secreti et incustoditi inter militaris cibos spem aut 

metum proferrent. 

18. Nocte coepta egressus augurali per occulta et vigilibus 
ignara, comite uno, contectus umeros ferina pelle, adit castrorum 

manner: cp.Introd.v. $ 28. The term is 
often used of soldiers (e.g. 1. 25, 1; 4. 
RO, 4; I2. 43, 25; 14. 61, 2, &c.; and 
Liv.) but appears not to denote any 
definite formation : cp. Veg. 3, 19 * globus 
autem dicitur, qui a sua acie separatus, 
vago superventu incursat inimicos, contra 
quem alter populosior vel fortior immit- 
titur globus.” See Marquardt, ii. 425. 

ipse...inrumpens. The simple ac- 
cusative with such verbs is often found 
(Introd. v. $ 72 c); and Nipp. points out 
that ‘inrumpere aliquid,’ and ‘in aliquid,’ 
are distinct in Tacitus; the former mean- 
ing ‘to break into’ (as 1. 48, 4, &c.), the 
latter ‘to break loose against ’ (as 6. 16,1). 
For an exception see Gudeman on Dial. 
II, 15. 

I. suffosso equo : cp. I. 65, 8. 

labitur, used by poets to express fall- 
ing in death: cp. Verg. Aen. 2, 250; Ov. 
A. A. 3, 742; Luc. 2, 265, &c. 

4. transgressus, crossing with the 
army by the bridge (c. 11, 1). 

6. Herculi. 
have identified with Hercules both a Ger- 
man hero and a German god, the former 
being taken to be Irmin, the latter Thor. 
See G. 3, 1; 9, 1, and notes. It is noted 
(see Orelli) that at Bückeberg (see on c. 
16, 2) remains of an ancient German altar 
have been found. 

The Romans appear to - 

7. suggressi. This verb has been 
thought to be confined to thé Annals (4. 
47, 2; 13. 57,6; 14. 37, 15 18. 11,1), 
but is found in Sall. H. 4. 67 D, 68 K, 
76 G. 

9. summae rei discrimine: cp. 
H. 5. 15, 3; also ‘summa belli’ c. 45, 5; 
* summum discrimen ' H. 3. 6, 3. 

Io. explorare, ‘to test. This sense 
originates in poets and Livy, and is fre- 
quent in Tacitus, e.g. 12. 66, 5; 13. 16, 
2, &r.: cp. 'secundae res . . . animos 
explorant’ H. 1. 15, 5; ‘pace explo- 
ratos? Agr. 29, 2. 

1I. incorruptum, ‘genuine’; so used 
with ‘fides,’ * iudicium, &c. 

14. adstrepere : cp. 1. I8, I, &c.; with 
accus. H. 4. 49, 5. 

17. egressus augurali. Hyginus (de 
mun. cast. II) speaks of an ‘ augura- : 
torium on the right of the general's tent, 
leading to the .‘via principalis! See 
Marquardt, ii. 412. If ‘augurali’ is so 
taken here, it is an abl. of direction 
(cp. I. 60, a, &c.) : but Quint. states (8. 
2, 8) that in his time the general's tent 
was itself called ‘augurale, a meaning 
better suited to this passage, and not less 
so to I5. 30, I. The abl. could depend 
on ‘egressus, the direction being indi- 
cated by ‘ per occulta,’ &c. 

18. ignara =‘ ignota’: cp. 3.69, 3; 4- 

A.D. 16.] LIBER Il. CAP. 11-14. 

393 

vias, adsistit tabernaculis fruiturque fama sui, cum hic nobilita- 
tem ducis, decorem alius, plurimi patientiam, comitatem, per 
seria per iocos eundem animum laudibus ferrent reddendamque 
gratiam in acie faterentur, simul perfidos et ruptores pacis ultioni 
2 et gloriae mactandos. inter quae unus hostium, Latinae linguae 5 
sciens, acto ad vallum equo voce magna coniuges et agros et 
stipendii in dies, donec bellaretur, sestertios centenos, si quis 
8 transfugisset, Arminii nomine pollicetur. intendit ea contumelia 
legionum iras: veniret dies, daretur pugna ; sumpturum militem 
Germanorum agros, tracturum coniuges ; accipere omen et ma- 
4trimonia ac pecunias hostium praedae destinare. tertia ferme 
vigilia adsultatum est castris sine coniectu teli, postquam crebras 

IO 

pro munimentis cohortes et nihil remissum sensere. 
14. Nox eadem laetam Germanico quietem tulit, viditque se 
operatum et sanguine sacri respersa praetexta pulchriorem aliam 

8. intendit (wrongly read as incendit) : see Andresen de codd. Med. p. 4. 

margin, B, Ritt., Nipp. 

8, 3; 6. 22. 5, &c. ; also in Sall, Verg., 
Ov., Sen. On the similar use of * gnarus 
see I. 5, 4. 
ferina pelle; perhaps to assume the 
/ rip of a German auxiliary. See 
G. 17, 2; Caes. B. G. 6. 21, 5. 
I. adsistit, with dat. as 
divinis’ Hor. Sat. 1. 6, 116, &c. 
3. eundem animum, his even tem- 
per in grave or gay moments.’ Nipp. 
thinks that Germanicus, as he is described 
in c. 72, 3, could not jest with his men, 
and that we must read ‘eundem in ani- 
mum’; i.e. ‘with words, whether i in jest 
or earnest, to the same purport.’ This 
correction can hardly reconimend itself. 

* adsisto 

4. ruptores pacis, in their rising . 

against Varus. 

5. mactandos, ‘must be offered as 
victims to vengeance and glory. On 
such personifications cp. 4. 74, 3, &c. 

y? centenos, i. e. twenty-five ‘denarii’ 
or one ‘aureus.’ Germans near the fron- 
tier were more or less familiar with Ro- 
man money (G. 5, 4). Such a bribe 
might be given to small bodies of soldiers 
on occasion ( H. 1. 24, 2); but the offer of 
regular pay so vastly above the Roman 
scale (see on 1. 17, 6) implies an almost 
hopeless attempt. 

8. intendit, the true MS. text (see 
crit. note), and the usual verb with acc. 
of the thing increased (4. 2, 1; 12. 35, 2; 

I5. Sacro 

I3. 18, 4, &c. ), as ‘incendere’ with acc. 
pers. (1. 47, 25 4. 355 8 &c.). 

10. matrimonia, for ‘ coniuges’: cp. 
Introd. v. $ 1. Here the concrete has 
been already twice used. 

12. adsultatum : see note on t. 5I, 6. 

13. pro munimentis. There might be 
outposts beyond the enclosure (see 13. 36, 

5; Marquardt, ii. 409) ; but in such uses 

of ' ' pro the meaning is ‘generally ‘ upon,’ 
or ‘at the front of,’ as ‘ pro ripa, c. 9, 3: 
see on I. 44, 4. 

I4. quietem : see on I. 65, 2. 

15. operatum. The use of this par- 
ticiple, with an aoristic or present force, 
in the, special sense of ‘sacrificing’ (like 
the Greek use of Zp3ev or BéCei), is found 
in Vergil (G. 1, 339), Tibullus (2. 5, 95), 
and Propertius (2. 33 2). The expres- 
sion ‘ operari sacris’ (Hor. Od. 3. 14, 6; 
Liv. 1. 31, 8) connects this with the 
general sense of the word, as used in 
3. 43,1; H. 5. 20, 2, &c. 

sanguine sacri. The use of ‘sa- 
crum’ for *hostia, though strictly only 
supported by the old formula ‘ inter 
sacrum saxumque stare’ (Plaut. Capt. 3. 
4, 84; Cas. 5. 4, 7 ; Apul. M. 11. p. 271, 
813), is hardly a violent transition from 
the general use of the word. ‘Sacro’ 
was supposed to be the MS. text by the 
older editors. 

praetexta. Lips. cites Quint. Decl. 

IO 

304 

manibus aviae Augustae accepisse. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 769. 

auctus omine, addicentibus 2 

auspiciis, vocat contionem et quae sapientia provisa aptaque 

inminenti pugnae disserit. 

non campos modo militi Romano 3 

ad. proelium bonos, sed si ratio adsit, silvas et saltus; nec enim 
5 iamensa barbarorum scuta, enormis hastas inter truncos arborum 
et enata humo virgulta perinde haberi quam pila et gladios et 

haerentia corpori tegmina. 

denserent ictus, ora mucronibus 4 

quaererent : non loricam Germano, non galeam, ne scuta quidem 
ferro nervove firmata, sed viminum textus vel tenuis et fucatas 
colore tabulas ; primam utcumque aciem hastatam, ceteris prae- 

usta aut brevia tela. 

iam corpus ut visu torvum et ad brevem 

impetum validum, sic nulla vulnerum patientia: sine pudore 

2. praeuisa: text Iac. Gron. 

340, speaking of this as the sacred robe 
‘quo sacerdotes velantur, quo magis- 
tratus, — Germanicus was augur and 
flamen Augustalis (see on 2. 83, 2), and 
had * imperium. proconsulare.’ 

I. auctus, ‘invigorated ' ; as if *auctus 
animo' had been used: cp. ‘novis ex 
rebus aucti ' (sc. ' dignitate ") 1. 2, I. 

addicentibus. T his verb in this sense 
has usually ‘ aves" as subject ; ; so that 
‘auspicia,’ as * augurium" in c. 17, 2, is 
used of the actual omen. 

2. quae sapientia provisa, ‘what by 
his wisdom had been taken thonght for’: 
cp. * quae provideri astu ducis oportuerit, 
provisa ' H. 5. 17, 4; ‘cuncta praelio 
provisa! 4. 25, 3; ‘omnia suis provisa ' 
Sall. Jug. 49, 2. Tacitas omits this part 
of the speech, as less suitable to rhetorical 
treatment. 

5. enormis hastas: see c. 2I, 1; I. 
64, 3; H. 5. 18, r. That these were 
few, is stated below, and in G. 6, 1 * rari 
gladiis aut maioribus lanceis utuntur." 

6. haberi -—* habilia esse’; ‘ could be 
managed.’ 

7. tegmina. Lips. takes this of the 

* scutum pectori adpressum ' (C. 21, 1); 
but the expression better suits the Roman 
armour generally. 

denserent. Neither ‘denseo’ nor the 
more common ‘denso’ are found else- 
wheie in Tacitus; and in other authors 

the MSS. appear often to confuse the 

forms. The command here is to ‘ plant 
blows thickly’: cp. ‘hastilia denset' 
Verg. Aen. 11, 650. 

8. non loricam: * paucis loricae ; vix 
uni alterive cassis aut galea' G. 6, 3 
The latter fact explains the command 

.293. 

here to strike at the face (cp. c. 21, 1), 
which, even in fully armed soldiers was 
the most unguarded part. The Romans 
strike thus at the Latins (Liv. 8. 10, 6;, 
and Merivale (c. xvii. p. 297) thus 
explains the command of Caesar at Phar- 
salus (* miles, faciem feri ). 

nervo, rhetorically for leather, 
as 'subtextaque tegmina nervis' Sil. 4, 

viminum textus; like the shields of 
the Aduatici (Caes. B. G. 2. 33, 2). 

fucatas colore: cp. ‘nulla cultus iac- 
tatio: scuta tantum lectissimis coloribus 
distinguunt! G. 6, 2 (where see note). 
Orelli traces in this the origin of the 
mediaeval devices on shields. 

Io. utcumque, ‘somehow’; i.e. the 
first rank (and that only) had’ lances, 
such as they were (their defects having 
been already noted). The word is to be 
taken closely with ‘hastatam’; as in 12. 
BI, 2 (“primam utcumque fugam ... 
toleravit"), with *toleravit. Its use as 
limiting a verb or participle is especially 
frequent in Livy (e. g. 29. 25, 1). 

11. , brevia. These would be the ‘ fra- 
meae" described in G. 6, 1 (where -see 
note), as * angusto et brevi ferro,’ and as 
the German general weapon for distant 
and close fighting. The * praeusta tela’ 
would have no iron head at all. 

corpus: see below, c. 21, I, and the 
description in G. 4, 1 *omnibus truces 
et caerulei oculi, rutilae comae, magna 
corpora et tantum ad impetum valida.' 
Livy thus describes the military qualities 
of Gauls, 5. 44, 4; 10. 28, 2. 

I2. sine pudore, &c. To give way 
before a direct attack was part of their 

A. D. 16.] LIBER Il. CAP. 14, 15. 

305 

flagitii, sine cura ducum abire, fugere, pavidos adversis, inter 
6 secunda non divini, non humani iuris memores. si taedio via- 
rum ac maris finem cupiant, hac acie parari: propiorem iam 
Albim quam Rhenum neque bellum ultra, modo se, patris 
patruique vestigia prementem, isdem in terris victorem sis- 
terent. 

15. Orationem ducis secutus militum ardor, signumque 
3 pugnae datum. nec Arminius aut ceteri Germanorum proceres 
omittebant suos quisque testari, hos esse Romanos Variani ex- 
ercitus fugacissimos, qui ne bellum tolerarent, seditionem indu- 
erint; quorum pars onusta vulneribus terga, pars fluctibus et 
procellis fractos artus infensis rursum hostibus, adversis dis obi- 
ciant. nulla boni spe. classem quippe et avia Oceani quaesita, 
ne quis venientibus occurreret, ne pulsos premeret: sed ubi 
miscuerint manus, inane victis ventorum remorumve subsidium. 

1I. tergü: text Muretus. 

regular tactic (G. 6. 6) ; but the chival- 
rous courage of at least the chiefs and 
their ‘comitatus’ is celebrated (Id. 
14, 2). 

.I. adversis, inter secunda. The 
interchange of prepositional clauses with 

simple cases is very common in Tacitus. - 

Most commonly the dative is so inter- 
changed (e.g. c. 6. 4; 442, 1; 46, 4; 

11. 21, 4, &c. : cp. Drager, Synt. und Stil, 
§ 105) ; but probably here Nipp. is right 
in taking ‘adversis’ as an abbreviated 
abl. abs., akin to those noted in Introd. v. 
$31. He also thus explains ‘ firmus ad- 
versis ' Agr. 35, 4 ; * sperat infestis, metuit 
secundis ' Hor. Od. 2. to, 13. 

2. viarum ac maris, one of the few 
direct reminiscences of Horace apparent 
in Tacitus : see Introd. v. $ 97. 

. 4. ultra. If this force was crushed, 
no hostile tribes remained in north Ger- 
many. Maroboduus in the south (c. 44, 
&c.) and the Snebi beyond the Elbe were 
neutral. 

patris patruique. Drusus had reached 
the Elbe in 745, B. C. 9 (Dio, 55. 1, 2); 
Tiberius in 758, A. D. 5 (Vell. 2. 106, 2). 

5. sisterent: cp. ‘ut eum in Suria... 
sisterent’ H. 2. 9, 2; and the uses in 
Vergil, as *o qui me. .. sistat! G. 2, 

488; ‘te limine sistam’ Aen. a, 620; — 

with Vitellius (ibid. 70). 

9. hos esse... fugacissimos. There 
were some survivors of that disaster in 
the present army (cp. 1. 61, 6); and the 
preservation of the reserve force of two 
legions under Asprenas (Vell. 2. 120, 1) 
may give more colour to the sarcasm, 
in which Tacitus appears to imitate that 
already ascribed by him to Agricola, ‘hi 
ceterorum Britannorum fugacissimi, ideo- 
que tamdiu superstites" (Agr. 34, 1). 

10. induerint. Themetaphorisusually 
that of assuming a character (cp. t. 69, 
2), not necessarily a false one; but it is 
here meant that mutiny was a mere pre- 
text to get out of service. 

11. terga. The objection of Walther, 
that an advancing army could not be said 
‘terga obicere,’ need not be pressed. The 
point is that as they had fled before they 
might be expected to fly again: ‘some 
meet the enemy again with wounds on 
their backs, some with -limbs maimed by 
wave and storm ;’ alluding to those who 
had retreated with Caecina (1. 63-68), or 
The thought is 
repeated from H. 5. 16, 3 ‘superesse, qui 
fugam animis, qui vulnera tergo ferant. 

15. miscuerint manus, a poetical 
phrase: cp. Prop. 2. 27, 8, as also ‘ mis- 
cere ictus’ (Agr. 36, 2); ‘ proelia, *vul- 
nera ' (Verg.) ; ‘arma’ (Lucan.). 

‘classem . . . sistet in oris’-Aen. 3, inane, sc. ‘fore’: cp. H. 3. 60, 5, &c.; 
I17. | Sall. Jug. 88, 4. 
7. secutus . . . ardor: cp. 14. 36, 5. | 

VOL I. 

tn 

. 1; 3. 21, 2; 42, 2, &c. 

306 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 769. 

meminissent modo avaritiae, crudelitatis, superbiae: aliud sibi 4 
reliquum quam tenere libertatem aut mori ante servitium ? 

18. Sic accensos et proelium poscentes in campum, cui Idisia- 
viso nomen, deducunt. , is medius inter Visurgim et colles, ut 2 
ripae fluminis cedunt aut prominentia montium resistunt, in- 

aequaliter sinuatur. 

pone tergum insurgebat silva, editis in 3 

altum ramis et pura humo inter arborum truncos. campum et 4 
prima silvarum barbara acies tenuit: soli Cherusci iuga inse- — 

dere, ut proeliantibus Romanis desuper incurrerent. 

3. idista uiso : Idistaviso vulgo, text J. Grimm, Idisiavisa Müllenhoff. 

I. meminissent: cp. ‘meminissent 
. .. proeliorum! c. 45, 5; equivalent to 
an imperf., as * memini ' to a present. 

aliud sibi reliquum. The omission 
of an interrogative particle, though not 
unusual with Tacitus in energetic pas- 
sages in oratio directa, as *sequitur, ut 
omnes, &c. 12. 37, 3, ' vivere ego... 
poteram ' 13. 21, 8, and in other authors 
(cp. Madvig, $ 450), is most unusual in 
oratio obliqua. No other instance ap- 
pears to be given but 14. 61, 5 * malle 

pulum Romanum,' &c., where the read- 
ing (see note) is questioned. 

3. Idisiaviso, explained by Grimm to 
mean 'Nympharum pratum" (‘ Elfen- 
wiese"); the first part being the plural of 
the old German * Idis' (*nympha ’); such 
nymphs being represented in an old poem 
as controlling destiny like the Valkyries 
(see the quotation in Orelli's note). Nipp. 
takes the case here as nom. according to 
the general usage of Tacitus in respect of 
substantives : e.g. I. 45, 13 €. 4, 3; 80, 

stances, see his note; for exceptions, and 
for the usage with adjectives, see note on 
4- 59, 2; Introd. v. $ 16. 

4. is medius, &c. The obscurity of 
the whole geography of this campaign 
(see c. 9, 1) must affect all attempts to 
fix this locality, supposed to lie between 
the ‘porta Westphalica’ and Hameln, 
not far from Bückeberg (Momms. Hist. 
v. 49, E. T. i. 54). Knoke, in a ve 
full dissertation, based on a most careful 
study of the locality, but attaching too 
much weight to the details of Tacitus, 

thinks that the Germans occupied the 

hills rising above Eisbergen and facing 
west ; that the Roman position faced east 
and had an opening on the left suitable 
for the movement of Stertinius (c. 17, 1): 

For other in- 

1 see his map or the reduced copy in Allen's 

edition. 

ut ripae, &c. This passage is very 
fully discussed by Knoke (pp. 405-415). 
There is apparently an antithesis between 
*ripae fluminis? and * prominentia mon- 
tium, also between 'cedunt' and ‘ re- 
sistunt, and the whole sentence expands 
* inaequaliter sinuatur.’ This seems best 
explained, with Ern.^and Duebner, by 
supposing the meaning to be that the 
winding plain varies in breadth, being 
broader where the river gives way to 
(recedes from) the mountains, narrower 
where the mountain spurs resist its ap- 
proach (project against it). The chief 
alternative view, that of Doed., Nipp., &c., 
would take the meaning to be that the 
plain winds irregularly, i.e. southward 
and northward, the former, when the river 
recedes from the hills, the latter, when 
the mountain spurs come to a standstill 
(cp. 13. 57, 6), or abruptly cease. The 
antithesis of ‘cedunt’ and *'resistunt? 
seems here weakened. | 

6. tergum, sc. ‘Germanorum.’ Duebn. 
observes that the description is that of 
a pine wood; and the epithet ‘pura’ 
(‘without brushwood ') seems taken from 
the ‘purus campus’ of Vergil (Aen. 12, 
771), and Livy (24. 14, 6). 

7. campum, &c. The main body 
was drawn up on the plain or in the out- 
skirts of the wood rising behind it: the 
heights occupied by the Cherusci were 
probably those extending towards the 
north, forming the extreme German right, 
whence they could take the Romans in 
flank as they advanced.  Nipp. places | 
them on the heights to the east, form- - 
ing the German centre (c. 17, 5). 

9. proeliantibus. Nipp. takes thisto 
be abl. abs, as Tacitus usually has the 

noster 5 

A.D. 16.) LIBER Il. 

CAP. 15-17. 307 

exercitus sic incessit: auxiliares Galli Germanique in fronte, 
post quos pedites sagittarii; dein quattuor legiones et cum 
duabus praetoriis cohortibus ac delecto equite Caesar; exim 
totidem aliae legiones et levis armatura cum equite sagittario 
ceteraeque sociorum cohortes. intentus paratusque miles, ut 5 
ordo agminis in aciem adsisteret. | 

17. Visis Cheruscorum catervis, quae per ferociam proru- 

perant, validissimos equitum incurrere latus, Stertinium cum 

ceteris turmis circumgredi tergaque invadere iubet, ipse in 

2 tempore adfuturus. 

interea pulcherrimum augurium? octo aqui- 

lae petere silvas et intrare visae imperatorem advertere. ex- 
clamat irent, sequerentur Romanas aves, propria legionum 

3 numina. 

simul pedestris acies infertur et praemissus eques 

9. tergaue: text L. 

accus, with * incurrere' (e.g. c. 17, 13 1. 
51, 6, &c.). 

I. sio incessit: compare the march- 
ing order in 1. 51, 5, and note there. 

3. praetoriis cohortibus: these are 
mentioned again c. 20, 6. It is possible 
that each of the two legati, Silius and 
Caecina, had a personal guard, as under 
the Republic (cp. Sall. Cat. 60, 5; Cic. 
Ep. ad Fam. 10. 30, 1, &c.). But Nipp. 
appears rightly to argue that the term 
must at this time naturally refer to the 
force so well known under the name; and 
that, as two such cohorts were sent with 
Drusus to Illyricum (1. 24, 1), two others 
.may have been sent out to Germanicus 
at the time of the mutiny or afterwards. 
The mission of praetorian cohorts to meet 
him on his return (Suet. Cal. 4) is rather 
against the supposition that he had such 
a force permanently attached to him 
(see also 3. 2, 1), though he would pro- 
bably have had a small guard of honour 
at Rome (Staatsr. ii. 824). 

5. ceteraeque, possibly, as Ritt. thinks, 
the troops specially enrolled (1. 56, 1); 
the auxiliaries regularly belonging to the 
legions having been already mentioned, 
as * levis armatura,' &c. 

intentus paratusque. These words 
are a kind of formula, used in Sall. Cat. 
27,2; Jug. 49, 3; and often in Livy. 

6. adsisteret. Tacitus has often this 
word in a military sense, usually meaning 
to take up a position, as C. 17, 4; 19, 4; 
12. 56, 3; 14. 34, 3; H. 3. 63,1; 82, 3. 
Here it is taken with brachylogy, as equi- 
valent to *consisteret et se explicaret’ ; 
‘that the order of march might deploy 

: into line of battle ;’ i.e. that each should 

stand next in line to those to whom they 
had deen next in column. The head of 
the column appears to have formed the 
left wing, facing the Cherusci (c. 17, 6). 

7. Visis Cheruscorum catervis. It 
would seem that the height which they 
occupied, though prominent, afforded 
cover; and that they were to have been 
concealed till the moment of attack (c. 
16, 4); but their impetuosity betrayed 
their position. The attack in flank 
seems directed against them, that in the 
rear against those in the wood. See 
§ 3. 
IO. augurium, used, like ‘atspiciis’ 
(c. 14, 2), of the omen. So in Liv. &c. 
The verb is adapted to the noun in apposi- 
tion, as in 3. 21, 2 ; 13. 37, 4 (where see 
Nipp.) ; 14. 27, 2, &c. 

octo aquilae. Critics have super- 
fluously noted, that eagles are now rarely 
if ever seen in those parts, and that their 
nearest representative, the * vultur albu- 
cillus,’ is not gregarious. The number, 
one for each legion, shows the vein of 
romance. Sce onc. 9, I. 

advertere : see on I. 41, I. 

13. numina. The passages cited on 1. 
39, 7, justify the rhetorical application 
of this term to the eagles. Nipp. notes 
that the word has the special meaning of 
* guardian’ or ‘ guiding spirits.’ 

infertur = 'immittitur, The more 
usual expressions are ‘inferre arma,’ 
‘signa,’ ' pedem,' &c., as often in Liv. 

eques. The words ‘postremos et 
latera’ would show that both divisions of 
cavalry mentioned above are meant. 

X 2 

qn 

308 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 769. 

postremos ac latera impulit. mirumque dictu duo hostium ag- 4 
mina diversa fuga, qui silvam tenuerant, in aperta, qui campis 
adstiterant, in silvam ruebant. medii inter hos Cherusci colli- 5 
bus detrudebantur, inter quos insignis Arminius manu voce 
vulnere sustentabat pugnam. incubueratque sagittariis, illa rup- 6 
turus, ni Raetorum Vindelicorumque et Gallicae cohortes signa 
obiecissent. nisu tamen corporis et impetu equi pervasit, oblitus 7 
faciem suo cruore, ne nosceretur. quidam adgnitum a Chaucis - 
inter auxilia Romana agentibus emissumque tradiderunt. virtus & 
seu fraus tadem Inguiomero effugium dedit: ceteri passim 
trucidati. et plerosque tranare Visurgim conantes iniecta tela 
aut vis fluminis, postremo moles ruentium ‘et incidentes ripae 
operuere. quidam turpi fuga in summa arborum nisi ramisque 9 

13. obruere conj. Ritter. 

I. impulit, ‘drove from their position’: 
cp. ‘impulsae’ 1. 63. 3. 

duo... agmina. It may be sup- 
posed that Stertinius had driven forward 
the Germans from the rear, the advance 
of infantry had driven back their front 
into the wood, aud the flank attack was 
dislodging the Cheruscans, who would 
thus be forced into the space between 
these two routed masses. For another 
view see Nipp. 

2. campis. Nipp. thinks that ‘in’ is 
required, as in Agr. 36, 2 ‘qui in aequo 
adstiterant,’ and 12. 56, 3 ‘in ratibus ad- 
stiterant’; but the text may be defended 
by the general free use in Tacitus of the 
local abl. | Introd. v. § 25). 

3. collibus. On this abl. cp. Introd. 
v. § 24. 

4. manu voce vulnere. These asyn- 

deta appear to form a partly alliterative 

climax (see Introd. v. $ 65; * voce vultu 
oculis? 16. 29, 1; and H. 3. 58, 5); so 
that *manu' as the weaker word would 
mean mere gesture (cp. ‘manu ac voce’ 
H. 3. 29, 4), and ‘vulnere’ * by display- 
ing his wound,’ and as it were demanding 
the same sacrifice from his men. Nipp. 
takes ‘manu’ to mean ‘by dealing 
blows,’ and thinks that from the order 
of the words the ablatives depend on 
* sustentabat, as in H. 3. 17, I (‘con- 
silio manu voce insignis hosti") on *in- 
signis." 

5. incubuerat, ‘had thrown the force 

of his attack’: 

cp. *eodem incubuerat ' 
H. 3. 29, 1. 

sagittariis, i.e. the ‘pedites sagit- 
tarii, whose position (see c. 16, 5) would 
be on the right of the Gaulish and 
German auxiliaries; who, being in the 
front of the order of march, would form 
the left wing in line of battle (cp. 16, 5). 
Among the German cohorts would be the 

. Chauci; and the Raetian and Vindelician 

contingents are reckoned with them. 

illa, sc. parte: cp. *ne pervium illa 
foret' H. 3. 8, 3; and G. 34, 2, and 
note. . 

rupturus. The intrans. use of this 
verb is extremely rare, but follows a fre- 
quent and classical use of * perrumpere. 
On the participle cp. * adfuturus' above, 
and see Introd. v. § 54d. He tried to 
break through with his force, but escaped 
singly (* pervasit "). 

6. Rastorum Vindelicorumque: see 
I. 44, 6. On the service of such co- 
horts in other provinces than those from 
which they were raised see Introd. vii. 
126, n. 8. | 

signa obiecissent. That each aux- 
iliary cohort had its standard, is shown 
by such passages as Liv. 25. 14, 4; 27. 
13, 7 ; and by mention of their ‘ signiferi ' 
in inscriptions. By bearing their standards 
against him they opposed a compact body 
of resistance (see note on I. 34. 4). 

8. Chaucis: see I. 38, 1; 60, 3. 

IO. Inguiomero: see 1. 6o, 1. 

13. operuere, used by zeugma with 
‘tela’ and ‘ vis fluminis.' 

nisi, ‘climbing,’ a poetical use: e. g. 
Verg. G. 2, 438; Aen. 2, 443. 

A. D. 16.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 17-19. 

309 

se occultantes admotis sagittariis per ludibrium figebantur, alios 

prorutae arbores adflixere. 

18. Magna ea victoria neque cruenta nobis fuit. 

quinta ab 

hora diei ad noctem caesi hostes decem milia passuum cadaveri- 
bus atque armis opplevere, repertis inter spolia eorum catenis, § 

2quas in Romanos ut non dubio eventu portaverant. 

miles in 

loco proelii Tiberium imperatorem salutavit struxitque aggerem 
et im modum tropaeorum arma subsc.iptis victarum gentium 

nominibus imposuit. 

19. Haud perinde Germanos vulnera, luctus, excidia quam 1o 

2 ca species dolore et ira adfecit. 

qui modo abire sedibus, trans 

Albim concedere parabant, pugnam volunt, arma rapiunt ; plebes 
primores, iuventus senes agmen Romanum repente incursant, 

8 turbant. 

2. adflixere, ‘dashed to the ground’; 
so Sall. Jug. 101, 11; Liv. 28. 19, 11. 

3. Magna, &c. The victory is shown 
to be exaggerated by the speedy collection 
of the Germans again. 

5. catenis, &c. A similar story is told 
of the expedition of Flaminius against 
Hannibal (Polyb. 3. 82), and of M. An- 
tonius when invading Crete in 680, B.C. 
74 (Florus 3.7, 2) 

6. in Romanos. The force of ‘in’ 
approaches to that noted on 1 76, 5. 

7. Tiberium imperatorem saluta- 
vit. For the ancient custom see 3. 74, 
6. This passage illustrates the principle 
of regarding the chief command and 
‘auspicia’ of all the armies, as inherent 
in the ‘imperium’ of the princeps: cp. 
* exercitum Tiberii Caesaris’ (c. 22, 1); 
also c 41, I, and the language of 
Horace (Od. 4. 14, 33) to Augustus on 
the victories ot his stepSons, ‘te copias, 
te consilium ct tuos praebente Divos.’ 
Such ‘salutatio’ was addressed to the 
effigy of the princeps (see Pl. Pan. 56) ; 
and most of the twenty-one times on 
which Augustus (I. 9, 2), and some of 
the eight on which Tiberius (Insc. Orell. 
691) received this title, were thus vicari- 

ously gained. Eckhel (vi. 190) thinks it. 

was not accepted on this occasion, as the 
title ‘Imp. vii’ does not change to ‘ Imp. 
viii ' till 773, A. D. 20. 

8. in modum tropaeorum. The ex- 
pression shows that this structure was 
not in the strict form of a trophy (see 
Verg. Aen. 11, 5-11). Another such is 
described below (c. 22, 1). The adoption 

postremo deligunt locum flumine et silvis clausum, 

of this Greek eustom by the Romans does 
not appear to be traceable earlier than 
633, B. C. 121 (see Flor. 3. 2, 6 ; Strab. 
4- I, II, 185) ; and such commemoration 
of victories on the spot was less common 
with them than triumphal arches or other 
memorials at Rome or in provincial 
towns: see 15. 18, 1, &c. 

11. ea species, ‘that spectacle’: cp. 
3. 60,6; Cic. Phil. 11. 3, 7, &c. 

abire sedibus: cp. ‘abire Suria' c. 
69, 3; * abireincepto' 6. 22,6; also Plaut. 
Am. 1. 1,54; Verg. Ecl. 7,56; Val. Max. 
4.5,4; Just. 4. 5, 2; 7. 3, 4. The use 
is classical in such phrases as *abire ma-, 
gistratu’; the extension in these passages 
similar to many noted in Introd. v. $ 24. 

12. plebes primores, &c. The asyn- 
deta give liveliness. |. See Introd. v. § 65. 
I4. deligunt locum, &c. The geo- 

graphy is still vague and theories are many. 
Some have thought that Germanicus was 
already in retreat, others (from c. 22, 1; 
41, 2) that he had reached some tributary 
of the Elbe, or had mistaken the Leine or 
Aller for such. More generally it is 
thought that the river spoken of is still 
the Weser, and that the locality is to be 
sought somewhere northwards of the 
former battle, and near the Steinhuder 
Sea (see Momms. Hist. V. 49, E. T. i. 54%. 

"The Angrivarian * agger ' must have faced 

north ; aud the Germans posted on it could 
retreat into a wood, surrounded on the 
other side by a morass (see here and c. 20, 
7), but accessible at other points besides 
those covered by the * agger ' (c. 20, 2, 3), 
and with detached woods in which their 

310 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 769. 

arta intus planitie et umida: silvas quoque profunda palus 
ambibat, nisi quod latus unum Angrivarii lato aggere extulerant, 
quo a Cheruscis dirimerentur. hic pedes adstitit: equitem 4 
. propinquis lucis texere, ut ingressis silvam legionibus a tergo 
5 foret. j 
20. Nihil ex his Caesari incognitum: consilia locos, prompta 
occulta noverat astusque hostium in perniciem ipsis vertebat. 
Seio Tuberoni legato tradit equitem campumque ; peditum aciem 2 
ita instruxit, ut pars aequo in silvam aditu incederet, pars ob- 
io iectum aggerem eniteretur; quod arduum sibi, cetera legatis 
permisit. quibus plana evenerant, facile inrupere: quis in- 3 
pugnandus agger, ut si murum succederent, gravibus superne 
ictibus conflictabantur. sensit dux inparem comminus pugnam 4 
remotisque paulum legionibus funditores libritoresque excutere 
15tela et proturbare hostem iubet. missae e tormentis hastae, 5 
quantoque conspicui magis propugnatores, tanto pluribus vul- 
neribus deiecti. primus Caesar cum praetoriis cohortibus capto 6 

6. iis: his Oberlin. 

cavalry were tied. The Roman position 
had mountains and the river in its rear 
(c. 20, 7). Knoke finds a locality suiting 

this description and containing remains , 

of such an * agger ' at Leese, some twenty 
miles north of Minden, and notes (p. 545) 
a find en the spot of such stones as 
* Jibriteres ' (c. 20, 4) would have used. 

2. Angrivarii. Ritter connects the 
name of this people with ‘ Anger,’ as 
‘lowlanders.’ They occupied part of 
Hanover. east of the Weser, and, if the 
MS. text in c. 8, 4 is correct (see note), 
extended on the west also of that river. 

extulerant, ‘had raised’; soin Caes., 
&c.; cp. * elatum" I. 35, 5, &c. 

3. hic, sc. ‘in aggere." 

6. prompta refers to the infantry in 
sight on the * agger, as ‘occulta’ to the 
horsemen hidden in the woods. This 
sense of * promptus ' is rare, but found in 
Cic., Sall., &c. 

8. Beio Tuberoni: see 4. 29,1. He 
was afterwards cos. suff. (see on c. 53, 1) 
and is one of the ‘consulares fratres ' 
(Vell. 2. 127, 3) of Seianus. Nipp. thinks 
he had succeeded to L. Apronius, who is 
noted (c. 32, 4) as in Rome. 

10, eniteretur; with simple accus. 
only here and H. 1. 23, 2; Colum. a. 2, 

14. libratores B. 

27 ; often with ‘in,’ as c. 80, 7; 1. 65, 9; 
70, 6. 

sibi, sc. ‘sumpsit,’ supplied by zeugma 
from ‘ permisit.’ 

12. succederent = ‘scanderent’: cp. c. 
81. 2, and several passages in Livy. With 
the accus. the word has this sense 
usually, but not invariably (cp. Liv. 38.9,7). 

superne: this and ‘comminus’ are 
here attributive: see Introd. v. $ 66. 

I4. funditores libritoresque. In 13. 
39, 5, these are coupled as different kinds 
of slingers of * glandes,' and both distin- 
guished from the engineers of the *tor- 
menta. Festus describes as ‘ librilla,’ 
or ‘ librilia,' certain ‘instrumenta bellica, 
saxa scilicet ad bracchii crassitudinem in 
modum flagellorum loris revincta'; and 
Caes. (B. G. 7. 81, 4) says ‘ fundis, libri- 
libus, sudibusque . . ., ac glandibus Gallos 
perterrent’ (where some take * librilibus" 
as an adj.). In both passages of Tacitus, 
the Medicean MSS. give this form; the 
‘libratores’ mentioned in inscriptions ap- 
pear to be a special rank in the legions 
(see Orell, 3493; Wilmanns 785, 1478, 
1553), perhaps more akin to the civil 
engineers known under this name: see Pl. 
Epp. ad Trai. 41 (50), 3, &c. 

17. praetoriis cohortibus : see c.16, 5. 

A. D. 16.] LIBER Il. CAP. 19-22. 

31I 

vallo dedit impetum in silvas; conlato illic gradu certatum. 
7 hostem a tergo palus, Romanos flumen aut montes claudebant : 
utrisque necessitas in loco, spes in virtute, salus ex victoria. 

21. Nec minor Germanis animus, sed genere pugnae et ar- 
morum superabantur, cum ingens multitudo artis locis prae- 
longas hastas non protenderet, non colligeret, neque adsultibus 
et velocitate corporum uteretur, coacta stabile ad proelium ; 
contra miles, cui scutum pectori adpressum et insidens capulo 
manus, latos barbarorum artus, nuda ora foderet viamque strage 
hostium aperiret, inprompto iam Arminio ob continua pericula, 

2sive illum recens acceptum vulnus tardaverat. quin et In- 
guiomerum, tota volitantem acie, fortuna magis quam virtus 

3 deserebat. et Germanicus quo magis adgnosceretur, detraxerat 
tegimen capiti orabatque insisterent caedibus : nil opus captivis, 

4 solam internicionem gentis finem bello fore. iamque sero diei 
subducit: ex acie legionem faciendis castris: ceterae ad noctem 
cruore hostium satiatae sunt. equites ambigue certavere. 

22. Laudatis pro contione victoribus Caesar congeriem ar- 
morum struxit, superbo cum titulo: debellatis inter Rhenum 

10. Arminio ins. margin and B. — 18. congerie marmorum: congeriem marmorum 

On 

margin, text B. 

I. dedit impetum, noted as a fa- 
vourite expression of Liv. (e. g. 2. 19, 7; 
51, 4; 8. 5, 10; 4. 28, I, &c.), who 
also has ‘dant impressionem ' 4. 28, 4. 

conlato gradu, ‘foot to foot’; so 
H. 2. 42,4: cp. Liv. 7. 33,11; and‘ pede 
conlato ' Id. 6. 12, 10, &c. 

6. colligere, ‘to recover. This meta- 
phor, nowhere else thus used, is explained 
by Nipp. as grounded on the resem- 
blance of the hand over hand movement 
to that of gathering in a rope. Pliny 
(Epp. 2. 1, 5) has * librum colligere,' to 
catch or recover a falling book. | Cp. also 
* gressum,' * gradum colligere, &c. 

adsultibus, probably borrowed from 
Verg. Aen. 5, 442, the only previous in- 
stance of the word. 

8. adpressum. The participle ap- 
pears only here, the verb only in 16. 15, 
4, and Pl. Mai. The curved form of the 
Roman scutum is contrasted with the 
broad flat German shield. 

insidens, ‘firmly grasping.’ Lips. 

9. ora foderet: see c. 14, 4. 

10, inprompto, only in Liv. 7. 4, 5; 
and Auson. For the following ‘sive’ 

(‘or perhaps") cp. 13. 15, 6; H. 1. 18, 2. 
II. recens, adverbial: cp. Introd. v. 
$ 6; so in Sall. and Liv. Wolfflin notes 
that it is only so used with participles or 
adjectives taken participially. | 
I2. tota volitantem acie, local abl. 

The whole expression is taken from Livy: 

(4. 19, 2), who closely follows Cicero (in 
Pis. 12, 26) ‘cum... volitaret tota urbe.’ 

I4. insisterent, ‘persist in the car- 
nage’: cp. ‘ perdomandae Campaniae in- 

sistere" H. 3. 77, 4. On these extremities 

of warfare see 1. 51, 2. 

15. sero diei. This substantival use 
of *serum' is from Livy (e.g. 7. 8, 5; 
26. 3, 1, &c.) ; so medium diei" (11. 21, 
2), also from Livy : cp. Her. on H. 1.62, 
73 3- 79) I. : . 

17. ambigue, ‘with doubtful issue’ 
(cp. c. 88, 3}; a virtual admission of de- 
feat. The body, * quibus plana evenerant ' 
(c. 20, 3), were the second division o 
infantry. 

I8. pro contione : see on I. 44, 4. 

congeriem, here alone in Tacitus, 
after Liv., Plin. Ma., &c. This trophy 
would resemble that described in c. 18, 2. 

312 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 769. 

Albimque nationibus exercitum Tiberii Caesaris ea monimenta 

Marti et Iovi et Augusto sacravisse. 
invidiae an ratus conscientiam facti satis esse. 

de se nihil addidit, metu 2 
mox bellum in 8 

Angrivarios Stettinio mandat, ni deditionem  properavissent. 

5 atque illi supplices nihil abnuendo veniam omnium accepere. 
28.. Sed aestate iam adulta legionum aliae itinere terrestri in 

hibernacula remissae; plures Caesar classi inpositas per flumen 

Amisiam Oceano invexit. 

ac primo placidum aequor mille 2 

navium remis strepere aut velis inpelli: mox atro nubium globo 
10 effusa grando, simul variis undique procellis incerti fluctus 
prospectum adimere, regimen inpedire; milesque pavidus et 
casuum maris ignarus dum turbat nautas vel intempestive iuvat, 

officia prudentium corrumpebat. 

omne dehinc caelum et mare 3 

omne in austrum cessit, qui umidis Germaniae terris, profundis 

I. munimenta: text L. 
14. tumidis: humidis R, text Faern. 

I. Tiberii Caesaris: see on c. 18, 2. 

3. bellum .. . mandat, ni propera- 
vissent. 
struction see Introd. v. $ 50 a. 

4. Angrivarios. Germanicushad crossed 
their frontier at the * agger ' (c. 20, 2), and 
they are named among the conquered na- 
tions (c. 41, 2); so itis possible to sup- 
pose that they were there invaded. But 
* mox ' seems to imply an interval of time, 
and at the beginning of c. 23 Germanicus 
had returned to the Ems; and the ex- 
pressions used (*supplices,' &c.) lead us 
to suppose that the same kindred tribe, 
or western portion of the tribe, whose 
* defectio ' was chastised (c. 8, 4), are here 
spoken of as reduced to full submission. 

6. aestate adulta. Lips. cites Ser- 
vius, on Verg. G. 1, 43, as stating that 
each season was divided into periods of a 
month each, during which it was said to 
be ‘novus,’ ‘ adultus, or‘ praeceps! The 
terms answer to the Greek iorapévou, pe- 
co)üvros (or áxuágovros), and AmJyovros; 
and the time here specified would answer 
to the middle of july. Tacitus has also 
* adulto autumno ' 11, 31, 4; ‘donec ver 
adolesceret' 13. 36, 1; ‘adulta nocte’ 
H. 3. 23, 4; and other such uses. 

8. invexit; with dat. in Suet. Aug. 
41 ; Curt. 9. 2, 27. 

mille navium : cp. c. 6, 2. 

9. velis inpelli, *was stirred by the 
sailing.’ The sails which move the ship 
may seem mediately to move the sea as 

3. factis: text Aldus. 

On the ellipse with this con-. 

4. Ampsivarios (c. 8) Halm. 

oars do: cp. Verg. G. 1, 254 ' remis in- 
pellere marmor. Mr. Goodhart (Class. 
Rev. ii. 227) would put a colon at ‘aequor,’ 
so as to take ‘mille navium’ as subject of 
the infinitives ; but Tacitus never uses the 
sing. ‘ mille’ as subst. with genit. 

globo effusa. This simple abl. is 
found in Sall. Jug. 69, 2 (‘effusum op- 
pido’), and often in Liv. 

II. regimen, ‘the steering’; used of 
the rudder itself by Ovid (M. 11, 552), &c. 
The word, especially frequent in Tacitus, 
is previously almost confined to poets and 
Livy. 

I3. officia prudentium corrumpe- 
bat: the verb means ‘to nullify’ in 15. 
71, 4; H. 4. 34, 8. Similar terms are 
used in H. 4. 16, 5; Liv. 22. 19, 8, in de- 
scribing scenes of confusion at a sea-fight. 

I4. in austrum cessit. For this ex- 
pression cp. I. 1, 3. Here a contrast is 
intended to the * variae procellae Nipp. 
notes that the wind was strictly S. W. 

umidis. Orelli and Nipp. retain *tu- 
midis’; the former explaining it to mean 
‘mountainous,’ on the theory that moun- 
tains cause or collect storms (see Agr. 
Io, 6); the mountains here being those of 
the interior to the south. Nipp. adopts 
Walther's explanation, *swollen with mois- 
ture'; such being the description of the 
country (H. 5. 14, 3; 17, 3), and the ex- 
pression like * vere tument terrae’ (Verg.. 
G.2, 324). The ablatives are probably 
absol., explaining ‘immensonubium tractu,’ 

A. D. 16.] 

LIBER Il. CAP. 22-24. 

319 

amnibus, immenso nubium tractu validus et rigore vicini sep- 
tentrionis horridior rapuit disiecitque naves in aperta Oceani aut 

insulas saxis abruptis vel per occulta vada infestas. 

quibus 

4 paulum aegreque vitatis, postquam mutabat aestus eodemque 
quo ventus ferebat, non adhaerere ancoris, non exhaurire in- 5 
rumpentis undas poterant: equi, iumenta, sarcinae, etiam arma 
praecipitantur, quo levarentur alvei, manantes per latera et fluctu 

superurgente. 

24. Quanto violentior cetero" mari Oceanus et truculentia 
caeli praestat Germania, tantum illa clades novitate et magni- 1o 
tudine excessit, hostilibus circum litoribus aut ita vasto et pro- 

2 fundo, ut credatur novissimum ac sine terris mare. 

pars navium 

haustae sunt, plures apud insulas longius sitas eiectae ; milesque 
nullo illic hominum cultu fame absumptus, nisi quos corpora 

3 equorum eodem elisa toleraverant. 

Chaucorum terram adpulit; quem per omnes illos dies noctes- 

which contains the cause: cp. Sen. Nat. 
Quaest. 5..12, 5 'facit ergo ventum re- 
soluta nubes." 

2. disiecit naves; so also Liv. 30. 
24,7; from Verg. Aen. 1, 43. 

3. insulas. ‘These appear to be dis- 
tinct from the distant islands of c. 24, 2, 
and must be those near the mouth of the 
Ems or Weser. The quicksands described 
would perfectly suit the islands bordering 
on the * Wadden’ shoals, but no rocky 
island can be found nearer than Heligo- 
land. The rocks appear therefore to be 
the addition of romance, as in c. 24, 3. 

4. paulum, ‘for a time’ (cp. 1. 12, 3; 
37, 5, &c.), not synonymous with ‘ aegre.' 

postquam mutabat, &c. The tide 
had hitherto offered some resistance to 
the wind. The sentence shows reminis- 
cence of Livy (26. 45, 8), ‘acer... Sep- 
temtrio . . . inclinatum stagnum eodem 
quo aestus ferebat. ‘Muto’ is intrans. in 
12. 29, I, and olten in Livy; as is also 
* fero ' in such phrases as * via,’ ‘ res ' (cp. 
8. 15, 2), ‘animus fert; and, in Caes. 
(B. G. 3. 15, 3), in the same expression as 
here, *quo ventus ferebat? ; also in Livy 
. 1. 3, 65s)... eo vestigia ferrent. 

7. manantes superurgente. 
* Manantes' is best taken as belonging to 
both clauses. The ships are dripping, 
from leakage through the sides (cp. ‘laxis 
laterum compapibus, &c. Verg. Aen. 1, 
122), and from waves breaking over. 
* Superurgeo' is otherwise unknown, and 

perhaps (with Doed.) the word should be 
written ‘ divisim.' | 

9. truculentia, one of the words 
which Tacitus appears to have resusvi- 
tated, from Plaut. Truc. 3. 2, 7 (seeIntrod. 
v. $ 96). The adj. is used figuratively of 
the sea in Catull. 63, 16; 64, 179. 

Io. praestat... excessit. That which 
is exceeded is supplied from the context. 
Cp. c. 33, 2, and *' praestitisset ' c. 73, 4. 

II. ita vasto et profundo. It scems 
better to supply ‘mari’ from the follow- 
ing * mare,' than to alter the latter to the 
former (with J. F. Gron.), or (with Nipp.) 

. to take * vasto et profundo ' as having an 

indefinite subject, or as substantives. 
* Around them were shores peopled with 
enemies, or (on the other side) a sea so 
wide and deep that they imagined it to 
be the end of the world, with no land 
beyond. On the use of ‘circum,’ cp. 4. 
55, 8; * nullis contra terris ' (Agr. 1o, 2); 
and the use of * palam 11. 22, 1 ; 16. 5, 
3; also Introd. v. $ 65. 

I3. insulas longius sitas, distinct 
from those mentioned in c. 23, 3, and 
probably those off the west coast of 
Schleswig. | 

15. elisa, ‘ad litus eiecta.’ 

toleraverant, ‘had maintained,’ i. e. 
up to the time of their discovery. The 
verb, in this sense, has a personal accus. 
in Caes. and Plin. Mai. 

16. adpulit. Suet. thus uses ‘ Derto- 
sam adpellere, ‘Regium ... nave ad- 

sola Germanici triremis 15 

314 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 769. 

que apud scopulos et prominentis oras, cum se tanti exitii reum 
clamitaret, vix cohibuere amici quo minus eodem mari oppe- 

teret. 

tandem relabente aestu et secundante vento claudae 4 

naves raro remigio aut intentis vestibus, et quaedam a validiori- 
5 bus tractae, revertere ; quas raptim refectas misit ut scrutarentur 

insulas. 

collecti ea cura plerique: multos Angrivarii nuper in 5 

fidem accepti redemptos ab interioribus reddidere: quidam in 

Britanniam rapti et remissi a regulis. 

ut quis ex longinquo 6 

revenerat, miracula narrabant, vim turbinum et inauditas volu- 
ro cres, monstra maris, ambiguas hominum et beluarum formas, 

visa sive ex metu credita. 

25. Sed fama classis amissae ut Germanos ad spem belli, ita 

Caesarem ad coercendum erexit. 

C. Silio cum triginta peditum, 2 

tribus equitum milibus ire in Chattos imperat; ipse maioribus 
15 Copiis Marsos inrumpit, quorum dux Mallovendus nuper in 
deditionem acceptus propinquo luco defossam Varianae legionis 

aquilam modico praesidio servari indicat. 

6. Ampsivarii Halm (c. 8). 

pellere* (Galb. 10; Tit. 5); and also 
(Aug. 98) uses the verb, of a ship, abso- 
lutely, as in 4. 27, 1 Both constructions 
are rare. 

I. scopulos : cp. c. 23, 3. 

2. oppeteret, used without * mortem' . 

by Vergil (Aen. 1, 96, &c.), and in prose by 
Pl.Mai. * Eodem mari, local abl. 

3. secundante vento, after the wind 
had changed (as well as the tide), and 
blew towards land. The same expression 
occurs in Just. 26. 3, 4; otherwise this 
verb is confined to poets, and takes an 
'accus. 

claudae, *crippled'; used of ships in 
Lucr. 4, 436; Liv. 37. 24, 6; Curt. 9. 9, 
I3. Vergil (Aen. 5, 271, &c.) compares 
a shattered ship to a wounded serpent. 

4. intentis vestibus. Similar con- 
trivances are described in H. 5. 23, 1; 
Juv. 12, 67. 

6. Angrivarii: see c. 22, 3, and note. 
The contrast *ab interioribus' perhaps 
points onlyto tribes more remote from the 
frontier (cp. 6. 43, 1, &c.). Any who were 
wrecked on the coast beyond the Weser 
were probably in hostile hands. The 
mention of the British princes here is an 
evidence of friendly relations then be- 
tween that country and Rome. 

IO, monstra maris. Pedo Albinova- 

16. loco: luco L. 

missa extemplo 8 

17. indicarat conj. Halm. 

nus (see on I. 60, 2), though probably 
an eyewitness, appears to have drawn on 
imagination in his narrative (see Appen- 
dix i at the end of this Book): and this 

. shipwreck and its wonders probably soon 

passed into the hands of declaimers, with 
such basis of fact as seals or birds strange 
to southern navigators may have supplied. 

ambiguas ; so used with genit. of the 
alternatives inc. 40, 2. The use with a 
single genit. is noted on I. 7, 4 

I4. ire ... imperat: ich an inf. 
oe v. § 43) is found in poets and in 

all. 

in Chattos. These expeditions ap- 
pear to be a fresh start after the forces 
had been collected at head quarters. That 
against the Chatti may have been merely 
a demonstration, like that mentioned in 
c 7, I, to keep them from. assisting their 
neighbours; the attack on the Marsi 
probably took the same direction as that 
described in I. 50, and was similarly in- 
tended to restore the morale of the troops. 
The recovery of the eagle seems inci- 

- dental. 

I7. aquilam. One eagle had been 
regained the year before (1. 60, 4), and 
the third is stated to have been recovered 
from the Chatti in the first year of Clau- 
dius (Dio, 60. 8, 7); so that the story 

A. D. 16.] LIBER II. CAP. 24-26. 

315. 

manus quae hostem a fronte eliceret, alii qui terga circumgressi 
4 recluderent humum ; et utrisque adfuit fortuna. eo promptior 
Caesar pergit introrsus, populatur, excindit non ausum congredi 
hostem aut, sicubi restiterat, statim pulsum nec umquam magis, 
5 ut ex captivis cognitum est, paventem. quippe invictos et nullis 5 
casibus superabiles Romanos praedicabant, qui perdita classe, 
amissis armis, post constrata equorum virorumque corporibus 
litora eadem virtute, pari ferocia et velut aucti numero in- 
rupissent. | 
26. Reductus inde in hiberna miles, laetus animi quod ad- 
versa maris expeditione prospera pensavisset. addidit munifi- 
centiam Caesar, quantum quis damni professus erat, exsolvendo. 
2nec dubium habebatur labare hostes petendaeque pacis con- 
silia sumere, et si proxima aestas adiceretur, posse bellum 
3 patrari. sed crebris epistulis Tiberius monebat rediret ad de- 
cretum triumphum : satis iam eventuum,satis casuum. prospera 
illi et magna proelia: eorum quoque meminisset quae venti et 
fluctus, nulla ducis culpa, gravia tamen et saeva damna in- 
tulissent. se noviens a divo Augusto in Germaniam missum 

Ln] 

plura consilio quam vi perfecisse. sic Sugambros in deditionem 

given by Florus (4. 12, 38), of the pre- 
servation of one at the time by its bearer, 
appears to be a fiction. 

2. recluderent: so ‘tellus . . . reclu- 
ditur Verg. G. 2, 423. The verb is often 
used by Tacitus, but otherwise almost 
exclusively in poets. 

3. excindit, used of extermination, 
with ‘gentem,’ by Vergil (Aen. 9, 137), 
whom Tacitus appears here, and perhaps 
in H. 5. 16, 2, to follow: cp. also 12. 
39, 4. The language is that of Roman 

exaggeration, and need not be softened - 

(as by some) into * destroys the property 
of.’ 

4. restiterat : cp. 1. 61, 3. 

I4. adiceretur, sc. ‘ bello’  *adsume- 
retur’: cp. ‘noctes quoque dedecori ad- 
iectas’ 14. 20, 8 

15. patrari: cp. 3. 47,1; H. 3. 64, 3; 
an archaism (acc. to Quint. 8. 3, 44), but 
used also by Sall. and Vell. The pos- 
sibility alleged is not borne out by facts; 
for we have no trace of any ground per- 
manently secured, or tribes permanently 
crushed. 

16. triumphum: see I. 55, I. 

eventuum ...casuum. These words 

come together in H. 1. 4, 1; 5. 10, 3; 
and the former is used specially of success 
in Agr. 8, 2; 22, 3; 27,2, &c. The latter 
would here ostensibly refer to the storms, 
&c.; but the words of Tiberius probably 
suggest the censure which they disclaim ; 
as in 4. 40, 7, &c. 

18. gravia ... damna, best taken with 
Nipp. as in opposition to ‘ quae.’ 

I9. noviens. Seven campaigns appear 
to be made out ; those of 745, 746, 757, 
758, 762, 763, 764 (B.C. 9, 8; A.D. 4, 5, 
9, Io, 11). To these Nipp. adds an in- 
significant mission in 747, B.C. 7 (Dio, 55. 
8, 3), and the projected campaign against 
the Suebi in 759, A. D. 6, frustrated by the 
revolt of Pannonia. 

20. Sugambros. These were partly 
destroyed, partly settled on the Gallic 
bank (12. 39, 4; Suet. Aug. 21), ap- 
parently by Tiberius (Id. Tib. 9), and 
poe in 746, B.c. 8 (Dio, 55. 6, 2). 

ee Hor. Od. 4. 2, 343 14, 51 ; Strab. 7. 
1, 4, 291. The name is found among the 
auxiliaries (4. 47, 5) ; but those within the 
Rhine seem later to be absorbed into the 
Cugerni (Momms. Hist. v. 113, E. T. i. 

124). 

1o 

316 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 769. 

acceptos, sic Suebos regemque Maroboduum pace obstrictum. 

posse et Cheruscos ceterasque rebellium gentes, quoniam Ro- 
manae ultioni consultum esset, internis discordiis relinqui. 

pre- 

cante Germanico annum efficiendis coeptis, acrius modestiam 
5 eius adgreditur alterum consulatum offerendo, cuius munia prae- 

sens obiret. 

linqueret materiem Drusi fratris gloriae, qui nullo tum alio 
hoste non nisi apud Germanias adsequi nomen imperatorium et 
deportare lauream posset. haud cunctatus est ultra Ge:manicus, 6 
quamquam fingi ea seque per invidiam parto iam decori abstrahi 

intellegeret. 

27. Sub idem tempus e familia Scriboniorum Libo. Drusus 

defertur moliri res novas. 

eius negotii initium, ordinem, finem 

3. est: esset Mur., sit Otto. 

I. Suebos. On this people see 1. 44, 
6 ; and on Maroboduus, c. 44, 3, &c. For 
the sing. predicate cp. 1. 70, 8; 12. 12,3, 
&c. 

3. consultum esset. Jt.is perhaps 
possible, with Pfitzner, to retain ‘est’ 
as giving a remark of the historian, but 
* esset ' or *sit' are generally read. 

internis discordiis. As an illus- 
tration of this, may be quoted the hos- 
tilities between the Cherusci and Suebi in 
the very next year (c. 44, 2^, the plot of 
the prince of the Chatti against the life of 
Arminius (c. 83, 1), the massacre of the 
Chatti by the Hermunduri in 811, A. D. 
58 (13. 57), the almost complete de- 
struction of the Bructeri by their neigh- 
bours, and subjection of the Cherusci by 
the Chatti, at the date of the * Germania ' 
(G. 33, 1; 36, 1). 

4. modestiam, ‘his deference.  Ti- 
berius is throughout not recalling him 
peremptorily, but persuading him to retire 
from the command; and the offer of a 
consulship is another motive for him to 
give way. 

5. praesens, i.e. at Rome. He be- 

came consul, but in absence (c. 53, 1). 

6. adnectebat. This verb here, and 
in 4. 28, 2, has the construction of 
* addere.’ 

8. nomenimperatorium: see on I. 3, 
I, &c. Drusus never received this title. 

9. deportare lauream, ‘to earn the 
laurel wreath’; so *deportare triumphum" 
Cic. Off. 1. 26; and other phrases. The 
deposition of the laurel branch in the lap 

. of the god was part of the ceremony ; and 

in Suet. Dom. 6 *lauream modo Capi- 
tolino Iovi rettulit' is contrasted with a 
regular triumph ; here no such difference 
is implied. 

Io. abstrahi : cp. c. 5, I. 

12. 8ub idem tempus. The alleged 
offences are said to have begun from or 
before the accession of Tiberius (Suet. Tib. 
23). Velleius (2. 129, 130) and Suetonius 
(1. 1.) appear to view him as a more formid- 
able conspirator. The kalendar of Amiter- 
num (C. I. L. ix. 4197 ; Orelli, ii. p. 395) 
charges him with *nefaria consilia de 
salute Ti. Caes. liberorumque eius et 
aliorum principum civitatis inita. Seneca 
(Ep. 70, 10) describes him as *adoles- 
cens tam stolidus quam nobilis, maiora 
sperans quam illo seculo quisquam sperare 
poterat aut ipse ullo. Dio (57. 15, 4) 
speaks of him only ‘ as ddfavta Ti vevre- 
pi$ev ' ; and itis in Tacitus alone that any 
detailed charges are specified, and the 
whole shown to shrink into mere ques- 
tions of astrology and magic. 

Libo Drusus. The kalendar cited 
above calls him * M. Libo ' ; Suet. (1. 1.) 
calls him * L. Scribonius Libo, confus- 
ing him apparently with the consul (c. I, 
I, supposed to be his brother (c. 29, 2). 

I3. defertur moliri. "The infin. with 
this verb (as 3. 22, 1 ; 6.19, 15 13. 23, I) 
and other verbs of accusing is especially 
common in the Annals: see Introd. v. 
§ 45. Drager notes its use with ‘ convin- 
cor ' by Liv. (45. 10, 14),and with ‘arguor’ 
and ‘insimulor’ by Cic. (Rosc. Am. 13, 
37; Verr. 2. 2, 24, 59, &c.); but Cic. 
does not say ' deferre aliquem’ (as in 13: 

4 

simul adnectebat, si foret adhuc bellandum, re- 5 

A. D. 16.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 26, 27. 

317 

curatius disseram. quia tum primum reperta sunt quae per tot 

2 annos rem publicam exedere. 

Firmius Catus senator, ex intima 

Libonis amicitia, iuvenem inprovidum et facilem inanibus ad 
Chaldaeorum promissa, magorum sacra, somniorum etiam in- 
terpretes impulit, dum proavum Pompeium, amitam Scriboniam 5 
quae quondam Augusti coniunx fuerat, consobrinos Caesares, 
plenam imaginibus domum ostentat, hortaturque ad luxum et 
aes alienum, socius libidinum et necessitatum, quo pluribus in- 

diciis inligaret. 

6. consobrinus Caesaris: text L. 

33. 3, &c.), but *alicuius nomen,’ using 
the verb with a personal object only in 
the sense of ‘recommending’ (as Arch. 
5, II). 

res novas: cp. c. 78, 15 3. 13, 3 
&c. This charge is distinct from, and more 
specific than that of * maiestas." 

I. euratius: cp. I. I5, 7. 

reperta sunt.  Delation has already 
appeared (see on I. 72; 74); but we here 
first find persons entrapped by intimate 
friends, who keep up private communica- 
tions with Caesar. ‘Per tot annos’ pro- 
bably dates to the death of Domitian. 

2. Firmius Catus : see 4. 31,7: ‘ex 
intima amicitia' for the concrete *ex in- 
timis amicis’: cp. c. 77, 1; Suet. Tib. 51. 

3. facilem inanibus, ‘easily led to 
empty projects ' : cp. 5. 11, I; also ‘ fa- 
ciles occupantibus" H. 2. 17, 1; and 
similar uses in Verg. and Liv. - 

4. Chaldaeorum, the  astrologers, 
known also as ' mathematici" (c. 32, 5; 
H. 1. 22, 1, &c.), ‘ periti caelestium" (4. 
58, .2), and by other names; who pro- 
fessed to predict a person's destiny from 
the position of the heavens at his birth. 
Though sufficiently important as early as 
625, 8. C. 139, to be expelled by a praetor's 
edict (Val. Max. 1. 3, 3), their great 
ascendency belongs to this age; those 
who dealt severely by some being them- 
selves the patrons of others, as Augustus 
(Suet. Aug. 94), Tiberius :6. 21, 5 ; Suet. 
Tib. 14), and many following emperors. 
The prevalence of astrology in the time 
of Augustus is seen in the allusions in 
Hor. Od. 1. ur; 2. 17, &c ; its subse- 
quent importance is illustrated by the 
collection of passages from ancient authors 
given by Mayor on Juv. 14. 248; also 
Marquardt, iii. 92794. That Tacitus him- 
self believed some astrological predictions 
to be genuine, is seen from 4. 58, 2; 6. 
‘22, 5, &c.; his contempt for the common 

herd of impostors is shown in H. 1. 22, 
1, &c. 

magorum sacra, ‘the rites of ma- 
gicians. These ‘magi’ also profess an 
Oriental title, and are sometimes con- 
founded with the * Chaldaei'; but the 
name properly belongs to the dealers in 
philtres and other drugs, spells, and in- 
cantations (see c. 28, 3; 69, 5, &c.'. The 
art in some form is so old in Italy as to 
have fallen under the ban of the Laws of 
the Twelve Tables (Sen. Q. Nat. 4. 7, 3); 
and * venefica’ is a term of abuse as early 
as Plautus and Terence: the witchcraft of 
the Augustan age may be illustrated from 
Verg. Ecl. 8; Hor. Od. 1. 27, a1 ; Epod. 

5; Sat. I. 8; Ov. Am. 1. 8, &c. See 
Marquardt, iii. pp. 108-114. 
somniorum interpretes. This art 

belonged of old to the Eastern ‘magi’ 
proper (Hdt. 1. 107, &c.) ; and its pro- 
fessors, known in Italy as early as the 
time of Ennius (Cic. de Div. 1. 58, 132), 
are generally called * coniectores ' (Plaut. 
Curc. 2. I, 34; Cic. de Div. 1. 22, 45; 
Quint. 3. 6, 3o, &c.). See Marquardt, 
iii. p. 100; and the account of the Roman 
belief in dreams in Fried). iii. p. 532, foll. 

5. proavum Pompeium. A full pedi- 
gree is given by Nipp. from Borghesi 
(v. 301), showing that his mother Pompeia 
was daughter of Sex. Pompeius and of 
Scribonia, niece of the wife of Augustus, 
who was thus his great-great-aunt, and 
whose descendants through Julia were 
distant cousins. Also the adoption of his 
father, M. Drusus Libo, by M. Drusus 
Claudianus, the father of Livia Augusta, 
connected him with her issue. 

7. plenam imaginibus. The ‘ius 
imaginum ' was now liberally interpreted, 
as appears from 3. 5, 2; 76, 4, &c. 

8. necessitatum. This word, used 
in a somewhat different sense in I. II, 
6, appears here, as in Suet. Tib. 47, to 

5 abnuit: 

10 

d 
eye 

318 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 769. 

28. Ut satis testium et qui servi eadem noscerent repperit, 
aditum ad principem postulat, demonstrato crimine et reo per 
Flaccum Vescularium equitem Romanum, cui propior cum Ti- 
berio usus erat. Caesar indicium haud aspernatus congressus 2 
posse enim eodem Flacco internuntio sermones com- 
meare. atque interim Libonem ornat praetura, convictibus ad- 
hibet, non vultu alienatus, non verbis commotior (adeo iram con- 
diderat); cunctaque eius dicta factaque, cum prohibere posset, 
scire malebat, donec Iunius quidam, temptatus ut infernas 
umbras carminibus eliceret, ad Fulcinium Trionem indicium de- 
tulit. celebre inter accusatores Trionis ingenium erat avidumque 4 
famae malae. statim corripit reum, adit consules, cognitionem 
senatus poscit. et vocantur patres, addito consultandum super 5 
re magna et atroci. 

29. Libo interim veste mutata cum primoribus feminis cir- 
cumire domos, orare adfines, vocem adversum pericula poscere, 
abnuentibus cunctis, cum diversa praetenderent, eadem formi- 
dine. die senatus metu et aegritudine fessus, sive, ut tradidere 2 
quidam, simulato morbo, lectica delatus ad fores curiae innisus- 

3 

5. sermone (perhaps for sermone): text R, sermonem Ritt. 

denote any pecuniary obligations or diffi- 

9. u£...umbras...eliceret. Such 
culties. It thus answers to * aes alienum,’ 

evocation, known in some form among 

as *libidinum' does to * luxum." 

I. noscerent, for ‘ ‘adgnoscerent, "would 
acknowledge’; cp. “adgnoscentes servos ' 
C. 30, 3: thus *an . . . nosceret’ 15. 60, 
6. The subjunctive here is potential. 

3. Flaccum Vescularium: on his 
death see 6. 10, 2. He was perhaps one 
of the ‘ consiliarii’ of Tiberius (Suet. Tib. 
55). 

4. congressus, personal communica- 
tion with Catus. 

5. sermones; probably here *mes- 
sages,' as in H. 2. 76, 1, and ‘ ministro 
sermonum ' H. 2. 99; 4. * Commeare' is 
thus used of letters in 4. 41, 3, &c. 

6. interim : on the interval of time 
see c. 27, I, and Suet. Tib. 25; where it 
is stated that Libo was also * pontifex," 
and the precautions taken by Tiberius are 
described. 

convictibus adhibet. This honour 
was so prized that Vespasian is said (Suet. 
Vesp. 2) to have thanked Gaius in the 
senate for an invitation: cp. a fulsome 
epigram of Martial (9, 92), and other 
passages cited by Friedlander (i. 147). 

7. vultu . . . verbis : cp. 12. 36, 6. 

Greeks as early as the Odyssey, was at this 
date a recognized branch of magic. Cp. 
Verg. Ecl. 8, 98; Aen. 4, 490; Hor. Sat. 
1. 8, 29; Tibull. I. 2, 45, &c. 

Io. Fulcinium Trionem. On this 
famous delator, subsequently consul at the 
time of the fall of Seianus, and afterwards 
forced to suicide, see 3. 10, 1; 19, 13 5. 
11, 15 6. 4,33 38, 2. 

II. Trionis: on the repetition of the 
cognomen alone see Introd. v. $ 86. 

12. corripit, constantly used of ac- 
cusers; cp. 3. 28, 5; 49, 1 ; 66, 2, &c. 

adit consules : see on I. 731 3. 

cognitionem : cp. I. 75, I 

16. domos, the palaces of the nobility : 
see I. 73, 2. 

vocem ... poscere, an equivalent 
expression to * patronos petenti (3. II, 
2); so *vocem praeparare, *to study a 
Speech,' Pl. Epp. 2. 1, 5. 

18. aegritudine. Dio (57.15, 4) says 
that he had a mortal disease, and was 
purposely brought to trial in his illness. 

19. lectica delatus. Even the princeps 
did not usually thus come to the senate, 
except in case of illness (Suet. Tib. 30). 

A. D. 16.] LIBER Il. CAP. 28-30. 319 

que fratri et manus ac supplices voces ad Tiberium tendens im- 
moto eius vultu excipitur. mox libellos et auctores recitat Caesar 
ita moderans, ne lenire neve asperare crimina videretur. 

30. Accesserant praeter Trionem et Catum accusatores Fon- 
teius Agrippa et C. Vibius, certabantque cui ius perorandi in 
reum daretur, donec Vibius, quia nec ipsi inter se concederent et 
Libo sine patrono introisset, singillatim se crimina obiecturum 
professus, protulit libellos vaecordes adeo, ut consultaverit Libo, 
an habiturus foret opes quis viam Appiam Brundisium usque 

2 pecunia operiret. inerant et alia huiusce modi stolida vana, si 
mollius acciperes, miseranda. uni tamen libello manu Libonis 
nominibus Caesarum aut senatorum additas atroces vel occultas 

8 notas accusator arguebat. negante reo adgnoscentes servos per 

5 and 6. liuius: text Gruter. Ir. uno Kritz, Halm, Nipp. 

8. libellos, papers belonging to Libo. 

consultaverit = ‘consultavisse mon- 
straretur.' 

11. uni... libello. ‘Nominibus’ 
must be taken as a dative depending on 
‘additas’; and it is possible to extend 
the same construction or to supply 
*jnesse" (from ‘inerant’) for ‘libello.’ 
The correction * uno' still leaves no less 
awkwardness in the juxtaposition of two 
different ablatives, ‘libello’ and ‘ manu.’ 
It seems therefore necessary to suppose 
some negligence in the original compo- 
sition. 

I2. Caesarum aut senatorum, i.e. 
some to the one set of names, others to 
the other: see on 1. 55, 2, and Nipp.'s 
note here. | 

atroces vel occultas notas, ‘deadly, 
or at least mysterious symbols.’ It is 
meant that, if no meaning could be made 
out of them, the mystery was itself sus- 
picious. We are to suppose that caba- 
listic characters were attached to the 
names, and that it was suggested that 
these might be a magical ‘devotio’ (see 
on c. 69, 5). It is implied by ‘tamen’ 
that this document was the only relevant 
evidence ; so that the whole charge turned 
on these unintelligible marks. 

I. fratri, supposed to be the consul of 
this year (c. 1, t) ; not now noted as such, 
because succeeded by a ' suffectus." 

manus ac... voces... tendens. 
*'Tendere' is thus used with ‘voces’ b 
zeugma in Verg. Aen. 2, 688; 3, 176. 
Tacitus has ‘voces. . . manus intentare" 
3. 36, 1 (in a different sense), and ‘ placa- 
menta... tendebantur' H. 1. 63, 2. 

2. libellos et auctores, *the informa- 
tions and names of the informers.’ 

3. moderans, ‘restraining himself’ ; 
so ‘moderante’ 1. 15, 3: usually a dative 
is expressed, as c. 70, 4; 6. 2, 6, &c. 

4. Fonteius Agrippa; mentioned 
again in c. 86,1. Another, probably his 

. son, is mentioned in H. 3. 46, 5. 

5. O. Vibius: from 4. 29, 4, it ap- 
pears that the elder Vibius Serenus (4. 13, 
2; 28, 1) is the person meant. 

jus perorandi, ‘the privilege (cp. Gud. 
on Dial. 40, 1) of making the formal 
oration.’ The verb often means no more 
than this (cp. 3. 17, 7; Dial. 38, 1 ; and 
‘ perorare causam" in Cic, &c.). The 
proper place of such oration was at the 
close of the evidence. 

7. singillatim, ‘one by one’; so that 
they might be argued separately without 
& continuous oration on either side; a 

en 

rule enforced by Nero in trials before 
himself: ‘cognoscendi morem eum tenuit, 
ut continuis actionibus omissis, singillatim 
quaeque per vices ageret ’ (Suet. Ner. 15). 
Cicero, by a similar course, expedited the 
trial of Verres. 

I3. negante, denying the handwriting. 

&dgnoscentes : cp. * noscerent’ c. 28, 
I. Nipp. notes that slaves were forced 
to confirm, under torture, even what they 
were willing to state without it; their 
evidence being not otherwise legal. 

320 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

J 

[A. U.C. 769. 

tormenta interrogari placuit. et quia vetere senatus consulto 
quaestio in caput domini prohibebatur, callidus et novi iuris 
repertor Tiberius mancipari singulos actori publico iubet, scilicet 
ut in Libonem ex servis salvo senatus consulto quaereretur. ob 

5 quae posterum diem reus petivit domumque digressus extremas 

IO 

preces P. Quirinio propinquo suo ad principem mandavit. 

31. Responsum est ut senatum rogaret. cingebatur interim 
milite domus, strepebant etiam in vestibulo, ut audiri, ut aspici 
possent, cum Libo ipsis quas in novissimam voluptatem adhi- 
buerat epulis excruciatus vocare percussorem, prensare servorum 
dextras, inserere gladium. atque illis, dum trepidant, dum re- 
fugiunt, evertentibus adpositum zz mensa lumen, feralibus iam 

I. interrogare: text L. 9. possint: text R. . 12. in ins. Groslot, cum Ritt. 

(1848), Nipp. ; adposita in mensa Ritt. (1864). 

I. vetere senatus consulto. This 
rule, called *mos maiorum' by Cicero 
(pro Deiot. 1, 3), had even in his time 
exceptions in cases of incest and conspi- 
racy (Mil. 22, 59; Partt. Oratt. 34, 118). 
Lips. states that the later jurists also 
make exception in charges of ‘ maiestas’ 
(without the fiction here introduced), 
adultery, and * fraudatio census.’ 

2. novi iuris. Dio (55. 5, 4, repre- 
sents this as a contrivance of Augustus 
as early as 746, B.C.8. In later times 
he represents Tiberius (57. 19, 2) as de- 
parting much further, in such trials, from 
the old custom: éBacavíovro obxi olkérai 
póvov xara TOv idiev Deamordv, áAAd Kai 
éAcvOepor kai TroAtrai. 

3. repertor, 4. II, 3, &c.: chiefly a 
poetical word, but in prose from Sall. 

actori publico : cp. 3. 67, 3; ‘the 
agent of the treasury ' (cp. * publicari," 

*pecunia publica,’ &c.), a peison gene- 
ral a slave or at most a freedman. 
* Actores" of private persons, apparently 
much the same as ‘villici,’ are often 
mentioned in inscriptions (see Henzen, 
Ind. p. 181 ; Wilmanns, Ind. p. 645) ; also 
those of municipal towns. Of the latter, 
one such at least, M. Paquius Aulanus 
(Henzen 6432), is cited by Nipp. as 
evidently not a slave. Property given to 

‘the community was in form made over to 

its ‘actor publicus' (Pl. Epp. 7. 18, 2). 
5. domum digressus. Seneca (Ep. 

70, 10) describes at some length his de- 

sertion by his friends, his hesitation, and 

the recommendation of suicide by his — 

aunt Scribonia. 

6. P. Quirinio: cp. 3. 22, 1; 23, I 

and esp. 3. 48; wherethe chief account of 
him is given. That the correction by old 
editors to ‘ Quirino’ is wrong, is shown 
by its Greek form Kupinos (Strab. 12. 6, 
5, 569), and Kupnuos (St. Luke 2, 2; 
Jos. Ant. 18. 1, 1), as also by Latin 
inscriptions (Orell. 3693, &c.) Nipp. 
notes it as one of the earliest instances of 
a person bearing two gentile names. He 
was not one of the noble Sulpicii (3. 48, 
2), and his only connexion with Libo was 
probably by his marriage with Aemilia 
nw descendant from Pompeius (see 
3. 22, I). 

8. milite He appcars to have been 
in his own house in their custody, as was 
Cn. Piso in the custody of a tribune (3. 
I4, 7); but they had received or were 
supposed by him to have received in- 
structions to hasten his end. He would 
be still treated as free, by another such 
fiction as that adopted towards the Catili- 
narian conspirators. 

ut audiri, ut aspici, rhetorical em- 
phasis, like ‘dum’... ‘dum’ below. 

9. cum...vocare. On the historical 
inf. with a temporal conjunction see In- 
trod. v. § 46 b. 

ipsis ... epulis, ‘during the very 
feast" (see Introd. v. § 26). It is better 
to, take the words thus, and to. suppose 
the cause of torment to have been the 
sight of the soldiers, , than (with Nipp.) 
to ascribe it to indigestion consequent 
upon excitement. Andresen suggests 
* excitatus. | ) 

II. inserere, sc. ' dextris ': cp. 
ruerunt digitos" 1. 34, 3. 

I2. in mensa. The MS. text can 

* inse- 

4 

A. D. 16.) LIBER Il. CAP. 30-32. 321 

ad gemitum conla- 
accusatio 

8 sibi tenebris:duos ictus in viscera derexit. 
4 bentis adcurrere liberti, et caede visa miles abstitit. 

tamen apud patres adseveratione eadem peracta, iuravitque Ti- 
berius petiturum se vitam quamvis nocenti, nisi voluntariam 

mortem properavisset. 

32. Bona inter accusatores dividuntur, et praeturae extra or- 

2 dinem datae iis qui senatorii ordinis erant. 

tunc Cotta Messa- 

linus, ne imago Libonis exsequias posterorum comitaretur, cen- 
suit, Cn. Lentulus, ne quis Scribonius cognomentum Drusi 

2. adstitit: text L. 

hardly stand as an abl. of place (cp. 
Introd. v. $ 25). 

feralibus: cp. ‘funestas tenebras’ 
I. 65, 10. In Libo’s case the darkness 
was more strictly that of the grave, as he 
never saw light again. 

1, derexit. Prof. Munro (on Lucr. 6, 
823), on the authority of the best MSS. 
of several great authors, considers this to 
be probably the only ancient form of this 
verb. The MSS. of Tacitus are uncer- 
tain, giving ‘ di-’ in 6. 34,5; H. 2. 34,3; 
Dial. 5, 3; 19, 1; and ‘de-’ here and in 
C. 45, 33 4. 40,1; H. 2. 35, 2 ; 4. 16, 3; 
25, 1; 58, 7; 5. 23, 3. The editors in 
most instances have followed the MSS. 

2. abstitit. This is generally read; 
the death being more a reason why the 
soldiers should go away than come up. 
Whether as guards or executioners, they 
had nothing left to do. 

3. adseveratione,‘ seriousness, whether 
assumed (as here and 4. 19, 3; 6. 2, 2) 
or real (as 3. 35, 3; 4. 42, 2). Some- 
times used of a solemn assertion, as 4. 15, 
385 52, 7. 

iuravit. On this practice cp. 1. 74, 5. 

7. his: iis Bekk. 

privilege. The regular number of praetors 
(1. 14, 6) is stated to have been exceeded, 
in at least the later years of Tiberius 
(Dio, 58. 20, 5) ; so that these may have 
been added as supernumeraries to those 
already designated for next year. Nipp. 
thinks they were allowed to anticipate, 
each by a similar period, their proper time 
of becoming candidates; but the words 
hardly bear this meaning. 

7. Cotta Messalinus. This person, 
who has an evil name in Tacitus (4. 20, 
6; 5.3. 45; 6. 5, 1), is the ‘magni Mes- 
sallae lippa propago ' of Pers. 2, 72; and 
is noted as a gourmand by Plin. (N. H. 
IO. 22, 27, 52). Ovid, on the other hand, 
who often addresses him (Epp. ex P.), 
gives him a very different character; and 
his pyincely munificence to his dependents 
is celebrated : see Introd. vii. p. 102. He 
was originally named, from his mother's 
family, *M. Aurelius Cotta Maximus? 
(cp. 3. 2, 4), and the cognomen ‘ Mes- 
salinus,’ here anticipated, was inherited 
later from his brother (Vell. 2. 112, 2), 
on whom see I. 8, 5. 

8. ne imago, &c. Thus those of 

4. petiturum, sc. ‘fuisse’: cp. Introd. Brutus and Cassius were not borne (3. 
v. 39 C. 76, 5). Other such forms of * damnatio 
6. Bona... dividuntur. By the  memoriae' are the prohibition of the 

general rule at this time, the property of 
those who anticipated condemnation by 
suicide was not confiscated (6. 29, 2) ; but 
their accusers were entitled to a share (4. 
30, 3), amounting as a legal minimum to 
one-fourth, but capable of increase by 
decree (4. 20, 2). If therefore, as seems 
here to be implied, the whole was divided 
among them, the law was strained. 
praeturae extra ordinem. One prae- 
torship was vacant, if that of Libo be- 
longs to this year do 38, 3) ; and the 
accusers of senatorial rank appear to be 
four (c. 30, 1), of whom Vibius (see on 4. 
29, 4) seems not to have shared this 

VOL. I. 

Y 

praenomen (cp. 3. 17, 8) or * cognomen? 
(as here) of the: condemned to his pos- 
terity, or the erasion of his name from 
the Fasti (3. 17, 8). 

9. Cn. Lentulus: see on I. 27, I. 
Ritt. thinks that the change of expression 
below to ‘constituti’ and * decrevere;,' as 
well as the silence of Dio (57. 15, 5), 
imply that the proposals of Cotta and 
Lentulus were not carried. As a consular, 
Lentulus would have spoken before Cotta ; 
but Tacitus often departs from the actual 
order in his narrative (see Staatsr. iii. 

975; 2)- 

322 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 769. 

adsumeret. supplicationum dies Pomponii Flacci sententia con- 3 
stituti. dona Iovi, Marti, Concordiae, utque iduum Septembrium 4 
dies, quo se Libo interfecerat, dies festus haberetur, L. Pzso et 
Gallus Asinius et Papius Mutilus et L. Apronius decrevere ; 
5 quorum auctoritates adulationesque rettuli, ut sciretur vetus id 
in re publica malum. facta et de mathematicis Italia pellendis 5 
senatus consulta; quorum e numero L. Pituanius saxo deiectus 
est, in P. Marcium consules extra portam Esquilinam, cum classi- 

. servile. 

cum canere iussissent, more prisco advertere. 

I. constituti ut; at, et, al., text Freinsh. 

I. supplicationum. According to 
Dio (1. 1.) this was held by Tiberius obx 
éavrod póvov évexa àAAd Kai ToU Abyoucrou 
TOU T€ trarpós abToU ToU "lovXíov. 

Pomponii Flacci, now cos. design. 
(c. 741, 2), afterwards legatus of Moesia 
(c.:66, 3), and subsequently of Syria, 
where he died (6. 27, 3). On his alleged 
drinking bout with Tiberius see Introd. 
iv. p. 33. His brother Pomponius Grae- 
cinus, a friend of Ovid (ex P. 4. 9), was 
cos. suff. this year (Klein, Fast. Cons.). 

2. dona: cp. 3. 71,1, &c. Some in- 
scriptions (C. I. L. vi. 1, 91-94) record 
such votive offerings to Concordia for the 
‘incolumitas’ or ‘salus’ * Tiberii, but 
not as a public act, and perhaps not on 
this occasion. 

iduum, Sept. 13. These 'feriae' are 
recorded in the Kal. Amitern. cited on c. 
27, 1: such *feriae ex senatus consulto' 
are often noted in Kalendars (see Staatsr. 
iii. 1053). 

3. L. Piso. The lost name is thus 
generally supplied. Four persons of that 
name are mentioned (cp. 4. 21, 1; 45, 1; 
62, 1; 6. 10, 3), and their character 
(except in 3. 68, 2) is the reverse of 
The one who was praef. urbi 
appears (6. 10, 3) to have been sometimes 
obliged to stoop to servility, and may 
have done so here. Nipp. thinks that the 
one mentioned in c. 34, I was here sub- 
jected to some such pressure, and that 
Tacitus notices it the more for his general 
independence. 

4. Gallus Asinius: cp. I. 8, 4, &c. 

Papius Mutilus. M. Papius M. f. 
M. n. Mutilus (Fast. Cap.) was cos. suff. in 
762, A. D. 9, and, with his colleague, gave 
his name to the * Lex Papia Poppaea. 

L. Apronius: cp. I. 56, 1, &c. 

5. auctoritates. This term, used pro- 
perly of resolutions or inforraal decrees of 
the senate as a body (cp. Cic. ad Fam. 1. 

" against citizens and non-citizens. 

ceteris qui similem artem (v. 1. 

3. L. P.: L. Piso J. F. Gron. 

2, 4, &c.), is perhaps used here of the 
* sententia ' of which an individual senator 
was ‘auctor’: see Staatsr. iii. 978,2. Nipp. 
takes it to mean * weighty names,' as ap- 
parently in Cic. pro Sull. 13, 37 (‘auctori- 
tates principum coniurationis). All 
those here mentioned are persons of the 
highest rank. 

7. Senatus consulta. Dio (57. 15, 7) 
describes stringent measures taken both 
À frag- 
ment of Ulpian (see Lips. Exc. vii. and 
Nipp.) speaks of an enactment of the fol- 
lowing year (*Pomponio et Rufo coss.) 
*ut mathematicis Chaldaeis ariolis et 
* quae- 
stum ') fecerunt aqua et igni interdicatur,' 
&c.; which Tacitus has perhaps related 
out of its place to connect it with Libo's 
trial, or may have confused with some 
decree of this year. Subsequent, and 
equally futile, decrees are mentioned in 
12. 52, 3; H. 2. 62, 3. Cp. H. 1. 22, 1. 

S&XO : Cp. 4. 29, 2, and the full expres- 
sion ‘saxo Tarpeio’ 6. 19, 1. Tribunes as 
well as consuls could inflict this sentence 
(Dio, 58. 15, 3). 

8. extra portam Esquilinam, i.e. in 
the * campus Esguilinus,’ the usual place 
of execution (Suet. Cl. 25, &c.), within 
the present Porta Maggiore. 

classicum canere. By old custom, in 
summoning a citizen to trial on a capital 
charge (Plut. C. Gracch. 3, 836; Sen. de 
Ira 1. 16, 5), the trumpet was sounded on - 
the day of the comitia centuriata, in 
various public places and before the house 
of the accused (Varr. L. L. 6,92). Here - 
the summons could be only to witness the 
execution. From the difference of pro- 
cedure Ritter concludes that Pituanius 
was not a citizen and that Marcius was; 
but Dio (57. 15, 7) Says TOUS piv £&vovs 
éGavarwoe, rovs 5? moras . . brepapice. 

9. more prisco: cp. ‘more maiorfim’ 

24 

A. D. 16.) 

LIBER Il. CAP. 32, 33. 

323 

33. Proximo senatus die multa in luxum civitatis dicta a 
Q. Haterio consulari, Octavio Frontone praetura functo; decre- 
tumque ne vasa auro solida ministrandis cibis fierent, ne vestis 

2 serica viros foedaret. 

excessit Fronto ac postulavit modum 

argento, supellectili, familiae: erat quippe adhuc frequens sena- 
toribus, si quid e re publica crederent, loco sententiae promere. 

3 contra Gallus Asinius disseruit : 

auctu imperii adolevisse etiam 

privatas opes, idque non novum, sed e vetustissimis moribus: 
aliam apud Fabricios, aliam apud Scipiones pecuniam; et 

4. sirica: text R. 

(4. 30,1; I4. 48, 4). Such a sentence 
was passed on Nero, who is described 
(Suet Ner. 49) as ignorant of its meaning, 
and as having been informed * nudi 
hominis cervicem inseri furcae, corpus 
virgis ad necem caedi.' 

advertere; so used with the accus. ‘ in 
aliquem ' (=‘to punish’) only here and 
5.9, 1. In 3.52, 2; 4. 35, 1 ; 13. 28, 3, 
it has a sense more approaching that of 
‘noticing’ (as 4. 54, 2, &c.); which is 
common in Tacitus and Pl. Mai. 

I. multa in luxum. On this subject, 
see 3. 52-55 ; Suet. Tib. 34, &c. 

2. Q. Haterio: see on I. 13, 4. 

praetura functo. Tacitus often uses | 

this expression (e.g. c. 67, 43,3. 31, 43 
65, 2, &c.): * praetorius' (c. 47; 5 ; 3. 28, 
6; 6. 3, 4, &c.) is a wider term, and 
would include those who had only re- 
ceived the insignia, or who had been ‘ad- 
lecti inter praetorios': cp. ‘ consulatu 
functus I. 39, 4, &c. 

3. auro solida. This form of expres- 
sion, here and in 13. 10, 1, is taken from 
Verg. Aen. 2, 765. Nipp. notes a similar 
abl. of material in 12. 16, 3 * moenia non 
saxo, sed cratibus' &c. 

ministrandis cibis, i.e. that they 
should be used only in sacrifice. Dio (57. 
15, 1), who assigns these decrees to Tibe- 
rius himself, says ámetre . . . xpvo@ oxevet 
pndéva Adv npós rà iepà vopi(ew. This 
prohibition would appear to have re- 
stricted the use of gold plate at table to 
the princeps (see Friedl. i. p. 150); but 
golden drinking cups were in use later 
among rich private persons (Juv. 5, 39). 

4. viros, ‘the male sex.’ Silk was 
worn by women in the Augustan age, 
when the same transparent garments called 
* sericae ' by Seneca (de Ben. 7. 9, 5; Ep. 
9°; 20) were known as ‘ Coae’ to Horace, 

ropertius, Tibullus, and Ovid. Such 

5. [erat . . . promere] Nipp. 

dresses, unusual amongst modest women, 
were worn for summer lightness, even 
after this decree (cp. 3. 53, 5), by effe- 
minate men (Sen. Ep. 114, 20; Plin. N. 
H. 11. 23, 27, 78), and formed one of 
the notable extravagances of Gaius (Suet. 
Cal. 52; Dio, 59. 12, 2). On the ‘ Seres,' 
see Mr. Dyer, in Dict. of Gecg. 

excessit, * went further': cp. c. 24, 1. 
This interpretation is rather against the 
genuineness of the words below; but in 
any case such a word as *ceteros,' instead 
of * relationem, can be supplied. 

postulavit modum, ‘demanded that 
limit be set’: cp. H. 4. 9, 1. 

5. erat... promere. Nipp. con- 
siders these words an interpolation, as 
they describe a practice of introducing 
matter wholly outside the question (see 
on c. 38, 3), whereas Fronto's proposal 
was not irrelevant. It was, however, at 
least, a great extension of the motion, 
from a restriction dealing with two definite 
points, to a general attack on ostentation 
in domestic life. Ifthe passage is genuine, 
we gather that this privilege of digression 
was rarely used in the writer's own time. 
That it was not extinct is to be gathered 
from Plin. Ep. 6. 19, 3; 9. 13, 9: see 
Staatsr. iii. 940, 4. 

6. e re publica, ‘ for the public good’; 
SO 3. 53, I, &c., and often in Cic. &c. 

loco sententiae, ‘when their turn to 
speak came’: see c. 37, 3; 38, 3. 

7. Asinius Gallus. ‘The fact that he, 
though a consular, speaks after Fronto, 
would show that the latter's suggestion 
had been afterwards put by the consuls as 
a ‘relatio’: cp. 13. 26,2; 49, 2; Staatsr. 
iii. 975, n. I. 

. 9. Fabricios, pl. for sing. : 
3, &c. 

pecuniam, ‘wealth,’ as in 3. 72, 3; 

I3. 20, 3, &c.; Cic., Liv. 

Cp. 1. 10, 

Y 2 

en 

324 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 769. 

cuncta ad rem publicam referri, qua tenui angustas civium 
domos, postquam eo magnificentiae venerit, gliscere singulos. 4 
neque in familia et argento quaeque ad usum parentur nimium 

aliquid aut modicum nisi ex fortuna possidentis. 

distinctos 5 

5senatus et equitum census, non quia diversi natura, sed, ut 
locis ordinibus dignationibus antistent, ita iis quae ad requiem 
animi aut salubritatem corporum parentur, nisi forte clarissimo 
cuique plures curas, maiora pericula subeunda, delenimentis 
curarum et periculorum carendum esse. facilem adsensum Gallo 8 
ro Sub nominibus honestis confessio vitiorum et similitudo audi- 
entium dedit. adiecerat et Tiberius non id tempus censurae nec, 
si quid in moribus labaret, defuturum corrigendi auctorem. 

5. ut sicut locis Urlichs, ut et locis Walther. 

. et aliis, ita aliis al. 

I.referri = ávaQépea0a:, ‘are relative to.’ 
-. . 2. gliscere ; used of increase in number 
(4-5, 55; 27, 3), but very rarely (16. 22, 9) 
of persons in any other sense. 
. nimium aliquid, &c.,‘ could this or 
that thing be called excessive or moderate.' 

4. ex, ‘in relation to’: cp. ‘ex... 
utilitatibus' 1. 58, 2, 8c. \ 

distinctos, sc. ‘a censu plebis’ (so 
Walth. and Nipp.): see below (‘ diversi 
natura’). On the senatorial census see I. 
75,5; on the equestrian, 4. 63, 2. 

5. diversi, sc. ‘senatores equitesque 
a plebe. This meaning seems required, 
as both are subject of ‘ antistent.’ 

sed, ut, &c. This passage has been 
very variously read and interpreted. It has 
generally been seen that a comparison is 
drawn, and that the best correction of 
* Talis' is * ita iis’ ; the dot marking the 
loss of a letter such as the first ‘i,’ and 
the second ‘i’ being corrupted into ‘1.’ 
As regards the first part of the sentence, 
recent editors mostly agree with Clemm 
(Rhein. Mus. xxxiii. 1878, 318) that no 
alteration is needed, and that ‘ut’ is not 
final, but answers to ‘ita,’ with which 
‘antistare’ is supplied from ‘ antistent.’ 
‘It is not because they are beings of 
another nature that senators and knights 
are marked off from others by a standard 
of property ; but as they have a superiority 
in place, rank, honours, so they have 
in whatever is devised for repose of mind 
or recreation of body:’ in other words 
their luxury goes naturally with their 
position. The use of an independent 
clause in antithesis to ‘ quia’ is paralleled 
by H. 1. 15, 3. If the ellipsis of *an- 

6. . Talis: ita iis Ruperti, et iis, 

tistare' appears unusually harsh, its in- 
sertion after ‘parentur’ would not be a 
more violent remedy than others pro- 

. 6. locis ordinibus dignationibus : 
the first refers to the theatre, the second 
to their position as orders of aristocracy, 
the third (dz, eip. in plural) perhaps to 
their qualifications for offices, or to social 
consideration (4. 52, 2). 

7. salubritatem ; so‘ salubris! is used of 

the body for ‘sanus’ or ‘ validus’ by Sall. 

and Liv.: see Gud. on Dial. 41, 11. 

nisi forte, &c. This Greek con- 
struction with accus. and infin. in oratio 
obliqua, though not without parallel in 
modal and causal clauses, is noted by 
Drager (Synt. und Stil, § 147) as without 
Latin precedent in hypothetical clauses. 
Cp. Thuc. 4. 98, 4 el uév éxt wAéov Suvn- 
05vat . . . xkparnoa «.7.A.; Hdt. 3. 105, 2 

el ye) mpodapBavew rods 'IvboUs Tfjs ó0oU, 

«.7.A. For other Graecisms in Tacitus 
see Introd. v. § 95. 

Io. sub nominibus honestis, taken 
closely with *confessio vitiorum and re- 
ferring to the speech; *his admissions 
veiled under euphemisms, and the fellow 
feeling of his audience.’ Cp. ‘honesta 
nomina,' I4. 21, I, and for ‘sub’ 16. 19, 
5, and note. 

II. adiecerat = 'addiderat'; so used 
of speakers, with accus. and inf., 4. 21, 3; 
70, 7; 14. 50, 2; 15. 16, 2; apparently not 
so used earlier than Vell. (2. 27, 1, &c.). 

I2. corrigendi auctorem. Tiberius, 
if not actually ‘corrector morum ! (Introd. 
vi. p. 85), could at least be *corrigendi . 
auctor' by initiating legislation, and may 

A.D. 16.] LIBER II. CAP. 33, 34- 325 

34. Inter quae L. Piso ambitum fori, corrupta. iudicia, sae- 
vitiam oratorum accusationes minitantium increpans, abire se et 
cedere urbe, victurum in aliquo abdito et longinquo rure testa- 

2 batur; simul curiam relinquebat. commotus est Tiberius, et 

quamquam mitibus verbis Pisonem permulsisset, propinquos 5 

quoque eius impulit ut abeuntem auctoritate vel precibus tene- 
3 rent. haud minus liberti doloris documentum idem Piso mox 
dedit vocata in ius Urgulania, quam supra leges amicitia Au- 
4gustae extulerat. nec aut Urgulania optemperavit, in domum 
Caesaris spreto Pisone vecta,aut ille abscessit,quamquam Augusta 
5 se violari et imminui quereretur. Tiberius hactenus indulgere 
matri civile ratus, ut se iturum ad praetoris tribunal, adfuturum 
Urgulaniae diceret, processit Palatio, procul sequi iussis mili- 
6 tibus. spectabatur occursante populo compositus ore et ser- 
monibus variis tempus atque iter ducens, donec propinquis 
Pisonem frustra coercentibus deferri Augusta pecuniam, quae 

7 petebatur, iuberet. 

I. L. ipso ambitum fore: text B and R. 

Aldus. 

have originated such measures as those in 
C. 32, 5; 85, 1. The apparently magis- 
terial * correctio morum" mentioned in 
Suet. Tib. 42, may have been exercised, 
like that of Augustus (Introd. 1. 1.), by an 
extension of tribunician power. 

I. Inter quae. This would be a dis- 
tinct ‘egressio relationis’: cp. 3. 33, I 

L. Piso. His accusation and death are 
mentioned in 4.21. He has been taken 
to be the same mentioned in c. 32, 4 (see 
note), in 3. II, 2, and perhaps in 3. 68, 
I; and also to have been brother of Cn. 
Piso, and consul in 753, B.C. I. 

ambitum, ‘the solicitation used.’ As 
there were no elections, ‘fori’ must refer 
to the law-courts; and the words may be 
distinguished from ‘ corrupta iudicia" as 
*ambitus' from * pecunia" in r. 2, 2. 
That these taints stil! clung to the courts 
would appear from 1. 75, I 
2. abire...cedere: the present ex- 
presses immediate intention. 

7. liberi doloris, ‘ out-spoken indig- 
nation ’: cp. * Jiberrima indignatio," 
* Jibera bilis Hor. Epod. 4, 10; 11, 16. 

8. Urgulania, grandmother of Plautius 
Silvanus (4. 22, 3), probably also of 
Plautia Urgulanilla, wife of Claudius 
(Suet. Cl. 26, 27). On her relations 
see Borghesi (v. 308), Nipp. on 4. 21, and 
pedigree in Lehmann, * Claudius,' p. 88. 

isque finis rei, ex qua neque Piso inglorius 

IO. abscissit; text Jac. Gron., abstitit 

9. nec... optemperavit. Piso, who 
claimed some sum of money, must have 
cited her publicly (* veni mecum in ius’), 
and, on her disregard, would have dragged 
her by force, after * antestatio.' from the 
house of Tiberius: cp. ‘trahere in ius 
Urgulaniam domoque principis excire 
ausus ' 4. 21, I. Tiberius offers to appear 
as her ‘ advocatus,’ and manages to gain 

- time, during which the money is paid into 

court by Augusta, All this ‘takes place 
in one day. 

Io. abscessit : cp. ‘ abscedebat ' (6. 36, 
I), and the full expression * abscedere in- 
cepto’ (Liv. 26. 7, 2). 

II. violari et imminui, ‘ was being 
affronted and lowered.’ The latter has 
acc. pers. only here and in 14. 57, I. 

hactenus ... ratus, ‘ considering that, 
on the footing of any other citizen (cp. 1. 
12, 6, &c.), he could so far gratify his 
mother, as to say,’ &c. 

13. processit Palatio. On the abl. 
cp. c. I9, 2, &c. 

militibus: see 1. 7, 7. 

15. tempus atque iter, hendiadys. 
On such in Tacitus see Introd. v. $ 76. 

17. neque . . . et=‘et Piso non in- 
glorius, et,’ &c. ‘Nec’ and ‘neque’ have, 
in and after the Augustan age, the force 
of ‘ne. . quidem,’ whether in the sense 
of * not either,’ as here and in c. 5h 3; 

wd 

5 

326 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 769. 

et Caesar maiore fama fuit. ceterum Urgulaniae potentia adeo 8 
nimia civitati erat, ut testis in causa quadam, quae apud sena- 
tum tractabatur, venire dedignaretur: missus est praetor qui 
domi interrogaret, cum virgines Vestales in foro et iudicio audiri, 

5 quotiens testimonium dicerent, vetus mos fuerit. 

35. Res eo anno prolatas haud referrem, ni pretium foret Ci 
Pisonis et Asinii Galli super eo negotio diversas sententias 
noscere. Piso, quamquam afuturum se dixerat Caesar, ob id 2 
magis agendas censebat, ut absente principe senatum et equites 

10 posse sua munia sustinere decorum rei publicae foret. Gallus, 3 
quia speciem libertatis Piso praeceperat, nihil satis inlustre aut 
ex dignitate populi Romani nisi coram et sub oculis Caesaris, 
eoque conventum [Italiae et adfluentis provincias praesentiae 
eius servanda dicebat. audiente haec Tiberio ac silente magnis 4 

15 utrimque contentionibus acta, sed res dilatae. 

36, Et certamen Gallo adversus Caesarem exortum est. nam 

9. ut... fore margin, et. 

82,5; 4. 26, a, &c.; or in that of * not 
even, as 4. 34, 3. For instances from 
other authors see Roby 2232: cp. also 
note on c. 40, 6; 3. 54, II. 

I. maiore fama, for his ‘civilitas.’ 
On his practice in causes between him- 
self and citizens see 4. 6,7 

3. missus, &c. This ‘practice seems 
to have been later more common: cp. 
‘ad personas egregias, eosque qui vale- 
tudine impediuntur, domum mitti oportet 
ad iurandum’ Paul. Dig. 12. 2, 1, 15. 

5. quotiens, with subjunctive, c. 2, 5. 

6. Res prolatas, the regular expres- 
sion for the vacation, during which the 
senate and courts were adjourned for the 
*villeggiatura' (‘ubi res prolatae sunt 
quum homines rus :eunt' Plaut. Capt 1. 
I, 10): ee Mur. 13, 28; Att. 14. 5, 
2, &c. The question here was whether 
this was to be arranged to suit the con- 
venience of Caesar, who had professed an 
intention to be absent at a time when 
important Italian and provincial business 
was to have been transacted. It would 
appear to have been still his frequent 
habit to be present in the law courts 
(cp. 1. 75, 1), as well as the senate. 

pretium: cp. I. 57, 4 

8. afuturum, &c. This would seem to 
have been a pretence (cp. 1. 47, 5; 4. 4, 4); 
if Suet. (Tib. 38) is to be believed : 
*biennio continuo post adeptum princi- 

. . fore Jac. Gron., quod . 

describes this as his 

. foret Weissenb. 

patum pedem porta non extulit; sequenti 
tempore, praeterquam in propinqua oppida 
et, cum longissime, Antio tenus, nusquam 
afuit, idque perraro et paucos dies.’ Suet. 
abit till the final 
withdrawal from Rome, ignoring the 
absence mentioned in 3. 31-64. 

9. agendas. The ellipse seems due to 
a desire to avoid the repetition of * Tes,’ 
and to vary the natural expression ‘non 
proferendas.’ 

equites, i.e. the ‘iudices.’ ‘ Decuriae 
equitum ’ and * iudicum are often used as 
synonymous terms: cp. 3. 30, 2; 14. 20, 
7 ; Suet. Tib. 41, &c. See Introd. vii. p. 
102, n. 8. 

Il. speciem libertatis praeceperat, 
‘had forestalled him in a show of in- 
dependence. This was the newest form 
of flattery: cp. 1. 8, 5. On ‘ praecipere ' 
Cp. I. 55, I, &c. 

13. conventum Italiae. * Conventus' 
has usually a provincial application, but 
is here used of the ‘concourse of Italians’ 
coming to Rome at stated times on such 
business as that arising out of ‘vecti- 
galia,’ ‘ scripturae,’ lawsuits, &c. 

adfluentis provincias, ‘the influx of 
the provinces’; i.e. of those provincials 
whose suits, &c. were carried by appeal to 
Rome. 

15. dilatae, a variation from the usual 
‘ prolatae.’ 

A.D. 16.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 34—36. 

327 

censuit in quinquennium magistratuum comitia habenda, utque 
legionum legati, qui ante praeturam ea militiá fungebantur, iam 
tum praetores destinarentur, princeps duodecim candidatos in 
2annos singulos nominaret. haud dubium erat eam sententiam 

altius penetrare et arcana imperii temptari. 

Tiberius tamen, 

quasi augeretur potestas eius, disseruit : grave moderationi suae 
3 tot eligere, tot differre. vix per singulos annos offensiones vitari, 
quamvis repulsam propinqua spes soletur: quantum odii fore 

ab iis qui ultra quinquennium proiciantur. 

undé prospici posse 

quae cuique tam longo temporis spatio mens, domus, fortuna? 
4 superbire homines etiam annua designatione: quid si honorem 
5 per quinquennium agitent? quinquiplicari prorsus magistratus, 

4. haudubium :- hau dubium Bait., Ritt., cp. c. 88, 3. 
II. honorum: text L. 

margin, text R. 

I. in quinquennium, ' for five years 
in advance.’ Julius Caesar had already 
thus arranged elections (Suet. Jul. 76) in 
view of his absence—ds ydp és xpóviov 
otpareiay eidw Eni mevraeres jpgro (App. 
B. C. 2. 128); and afterwards Vitellius 
* comitia in decem annos ordinavit, seque 
ferpens consulem ' (Suet. Vit. 11). The 
anguage of Tiberius below, implying that 
the list would always be full for five 
years, shows that the proposal was, not 
. for elections to be held once in five years 
only, but to designate at once magistrates 
for five years to come, and then, annually, 
those for the fifth year from date. 

utque legionum legati, &c. The 
former part of the motion applied to 
. magistracies generally, while this is a 
special rule affecting the praetorship. The 
use of the indicative * fungebantur ' shows 
that the twenty-five actual "legati legionum" 
alone (see Introd. vii. p. 124) are meant ; 
so that this part of the proposal would 
relate to the immediate election only, 
which provided for the next five years. 
As at other times (cp. H. 1. 48, 5; Agr. 
7, 4; Suet. Vesp. 2, 4), some of these 
‘legati’ would have been already prae- 
tors; the remainder would be from the 
date of this motion (‘iam tum ’) destined 
as such; with them the princeps would 
nominate others up to sixty, and distribute 
them in groups of twelve over the five 
years. The reason for some special pro- 
vision respecting these *'legati might be 
their necessary absence at the time of 
candidature. The *nominatio principis ' 
here, as in 1. 14, 6, would be tantamount 

6. auretur: auferretur 
12. quintuplicari L. 

to *commendatio, from its exact corre- 
spondence with the number of vacancies : 
see Introd. vi. p. 94. 
$8 destinarentur. This verb appears 
used less strictly than * designo,' so as to 
denote elections arranged but not yet 
formally promulgated: cp. 1. 3, 2; Agr. 
9, I, &c., and the inscription cited on 
1. 81, 2; also note on 3. 29, 5. 

5. arcana imperii, not, as in H. 1. 
4, 2, ‘secrets relating to the constitution,’ 
but ‘secret principles of autocracy’: cp. 
C. 59, 4; I. 6, 6. Such a scheme really 
bound the choice of the princeps five 
years in advance, precluding a change of 

purpose, and making those chosen more. 

independent and those not chosen more 
disaffected. | 

6. quasi augeretur. His power would 
nominally by five years outlast his life ; 

en 

but such posthumous choice was in fact : 

always liable to be set aside. 

moderationi: cp. ‘modestia’ I. 11, I, 

&c. 'Moderationi,' with an effigy, is in- 
scribed on some of his coins (Eckh. vi. 
187; Cohen, i. 190, 5). For ‘ grave’ cp. 
6. 26, 2. 

7. tot eligere, &c. This refers to the 
first election of sixty praetors, &c. 

Io. domus, family connexions, or pos- 
sibly number of children (oc. 51, 2). 

II. annua, ‘a year in advance. Prob- 
ably the usual period of designation was 
less (see 1. I4; 15) ; but the subject is one 
of some difficulty : see Nipp. here. 

I2. agitent, sc. ' animo," ‘assumed the 
airs of magistrates’; answering to ' super- 
bire, above: cp. 13. 14, I, and note. 

328 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  (A.U.C. 769. 

subverti leges, quae sua spatia exercendae candidatorum indus- 
triae quaerendisque aut potiundis honoribus statuerint. favorabili 
in speciem oratione vim imperii tenuit. | 
37. Censusque quorundam senatorum iuvit. quo magis 
5 mirum fuit, quod preces Marci Hortali, nobilis iuvenis, in pau- 
pertate manifesta superbius accepisset. nepos erat oratoris 2 
Hortensii, inlectus a divo Augusto liberalitate deciens sestertii 
ducere uxorem, suscipere liberos, ne clarissima familia extingue- 
retur. igitur quattuor filiis ante limen curiae adstantibus, loco 3 
ro sententiae, cum in Palatio senatus haberetur, modo Hortensii 
inter oratores sitam imaginem, modo Augusti intuens, ad hunc 
modum coepit: 'patres conscripti, hos, quorum numerum et 4 
pueritiam videtis, non sponte sustuli, sed quia princeps monebat ; 
simul maiores mei meruerant ut posteros haberent. nam ego, 5 
15 qui non pecuniam, non studia populi neque eloquentiam, gentile 
domus nostrae bonum, varietate temporum accipere vel parare 
4. quod : quo R: cp. 4. 31, 2. 

* Magistratus designati' had a quasi-official 7. inlectus, ‘induced.’ The word is 

position; and thus magistrates themselves 
might rhetorically be said to be multiplied 
fivefold. : 
quinquiplieari, ár. elp., coined on the 
analogy of * multiplicari, &c. 

2. favorabili, *popul:r'; so again 

I2. 6, 1: cp. H. 3. 97, 4; Dial. 7,1; first 
in Vell., also in Quint. and Pl. min. 
- 4. Censusque ... iuvit. Other such 
gifts are mentioned in I. 75, 5 ; and this 
practice is spoken of as frequent with him 
by Vell. (2. 129, 3) and Dio (57. 10, 3). 

5. Hortali. The orator is called 
Hortalus in Cic. Att. 4. 15, 4. 

in paupertate manifesta. The habits 
of the family seem to explain this. The 
extravagances of the great orator (see 
Dean Liddell, in Dict. of Biog. p. 527), 
and the low tastes and profligacy of his 
son (Cic. Att. 6. 3, 9; 10. 4, 6), are on 
record; and the remnant of the latter's 
property must have been lost by his pro- 
scription (Plut. Brut. 28, 996). This 
Hortalus seems to have got through the 
gift of Augustus; and Hortensius Corbio, 
probably his brother, has an infamous 
character in Val. Max. 3. 5, 4. For the 
use of ‘in’ (‘in a case of,’ ‘although his 
poverty: was evident’) cp. 3. 76, 2315.57, 
3; note on G. 19, 2; Gud. on Dial. 6, 12. 

6. accepisset. This mood and tense 
are used as giving the view of those whose 
wonder is mentioned. 

thus used without a bad sense in 13. 37, 4, 
Vell. 2. 89, 4. On its use with simple 

inf. see Introd. v. § 43. 

liberalitate, abst. for concr. (Introd. 
v. § 1); msed especially of imperial gifts 
to persons (4. 20, 1; H.1. 20, 2); as also 
by Suet. (Tib. 46, &c.). 

deciens sestertii:see on I. 75, 5. Suet. 
(Aug. 41), who seems wrong in stating 
that the senatorial census was fixed at 
1,200,000 H. S., says that Augustus ‘ sup- 
plevit non habentibus.' On the support 
given by him and Tiberius to aristocratic 
families, see Friedl. i. p. 233. 

9. loco sent2ntiae: see c. 33, 2. 

Io. in Palatio: cp. 13. 5, 1. Probably 
in the library of Apollo, where Augustus 
in old age often held the senate (Suet. 
Aug. 29), and where were the medallions 
(clipei! c. 83, 4) of orators, &c. For 
places in which the senate was held see 
Staatsr. iii. 926, foll. 

II. sitam: cp. c. 7, 33 1. 39, 4, &c. . 

15. gentile... bonum. Nipp. notes 
that the combination of * gentile’ and 
‘domus’ (‘the family gift of our house ’) 
strengthens the expression. According 
to Val. Max. (8. 3, 3), the oratory of Hors 
tensius passed on only to his daughter, 
who once pleaded before the triumvirs 
against a * tributum' laid on matrons. 

I6. accipere vel parare potuissem. 
His paternal inheritance was, no doubt, 

A.D. 16.] LIBER II. CAP. 36-38. 329 

potuissem, satis habebam, si tenues res meae nec mihi pudori 
nec cuiquam oneri forent. iussus ab imperatore uxorem duxi. 
6 en stirps et progenies tot consulum, tot dictatorum. nec ad 
7 invidiam ista, sed conciliandae misericordiae refero. adsequentur 
florente te, Caesar, quos dederis honores: interim Q. Hortensii 5 
pronepotes, divi Augusti alumnos ab inopia defende." 
38. Inclinatio senatus incitamentum Tiberio fuit quo promp- 
2 tius adversaretur, his ferme verbis usus: ‘si quantum pauperum 
est venire huc et liberis suis. petere pecunias coeperint, singuli 
3 numquam exsatiabuntur, res publica deficiet. nec sane ideo a 
maioribus concessum est egredi aliquando relationem et quod in 
commune conducat loco sententiae proferre, ut privata negotia 
et res familiares nostras hic augeamus, cum invidia senatus et 
4 principum, sive indulserint largitionem sive abnuerint. non enim 
preces sunt istud, sed efflagitatio, intempestiva quidem et in- 15 
provisa, cum aliis de rebus convenerint patres, consurgere et 
" numero atque aetate liberum suorum urguere modestiam senatus, 
eandem vim in me transmittere ac velut perfringere aerarium, 

5. florente aetate P. Voss. 

lost (see above); but the change of times 
interposed no such bar to his advance- 
ment as is here pleaded. The tenses of 
* potuissem! and * habebam" refer to the 
time before his marriage; * qui ' iscausal. 

I. satis habebam, si ; so 4. 38, 1. 

3. stirps. Tacitus seems to repeat 
Ovid, * stirps haec progeniesque mea est’ 
(Trist. 3. 14, 14): the word is used by 
poets of the scion or descendants (Verg. 
Aen. 6, 864, &c.) ; but perhaps, as Nipp. 
here takes it, with the distinction that 
the scion is viewed as the stem of yet 
further offspring. | 

tot. Among the Hortensii, one dic- 
tator, the author of the * Lex Hortensia! 
(468, B.C. 286), one consul, the orator 
(685, B. C. 69), and one cos. design. (646, 
B. C. 108), can alone be found. But this 
rhetorical flourish may have had further 
support from the honours of other families 
connected with them. . The orator had 
married a Lutatia and a Marcia. 

ad invidiam, &c. On the variation 
of construction cp. c. 6, 4. 

7. incitamentum, &c. Nipp. sees in 
this mere malignity ; but probably Wal- 
ther is right in laying the stress on 
* promptius. He had made up his mind, 

18. transme | rei: text margin, transferre Hiller. 

and. seeihg the sympathy of the senate, 
spoke before it had gone too far. 

II. egredi aliquando relationem, 
&c.: see c. 33, 24. As earlier insiances 
we have the famous ‘sententia’ of Cato 
(ceterum censeo delendam esse Kartha- 
ginem ’), and an extant speech of Cicero 
(Phil. 7), in which the ‘relationes,’ on 
wholly different matters, are noticed in 
a few words at the beginning and end. 
For later instances see 3. 33, 1 ; 4. 74, 3; 
11. 5, 33 13. 26, 1 ; Staatsr. iii. 939, foll. 
In 15. 20-22, a speech of this kind is 
suggested by some matter before the 
house. Such a speech might also be 
made at the beginning of a sitting, ‘ante 
relationem ’ (ibid. 948, foll.), and a *re- 
latio upon it demanded: cp. 12. 5, 4; 
13. 49, 2." 

13. augeamus, taken by zeugma with 
‘negotia,’ ‘ push our own business and 
increase our means.’ 

14. indulserint...8bnuerint. These 
are explained by Nipp. as fut. exact. 

15. istud : cp. I. 49, 4. 

17. modestiam. Orelli explains this 
as the delicacy which would make them 
unwilling to refuse a brother senator. 

330 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  (A.U.C. 769. 

quod si ambitione exhauserimus, per scelera supplendum erit. 
dedit tibi, Hortale, divus Augustus pecuniam, sed non conpel- 5 
latus nec ea lege, ut semper daretur. languescet alioqui industria, 6 
intendetur socordia, si nullus ex se metus aut spes, et securi 
5 omnes aliena subsidia exspectabunt, sibi ignavi, nobis graves.’ 
haec atque talia, quamquam cum adsensu audita ab iis, quibus 7 
omnia principum, honesta atque inhonesta, laudare mos est, 
plures per silentium aut occultum murmur excepere. sensitque 8 
Tiberius; et cum paulum reticuisset, Hortalo se respondisse ait : 
1o ceterum si patribus videretur; daturum liberis eius ducena ses- 
tertia singulis, qui sexus virilis essent. egere alii grates: siluit 9 
Hortalus, pavore an avitae nobilitatis etiam inter angustias for- 
tunae retinens. neque miseratus est posthac Tiberius, quamvis 10 

1$ 

20 

domus Hortensii pudendam ad inopiam delaberetur. 
39. Eodem anno mancipii unius audacia, ni mature sub- 
ventum foret, discordiis armisque civilibus rem publicam per- 

culisset. 

Postumi Agrippae servus, nomine Clemens, conperto 2 

fine Augusti pergere in insulam Planasiam et fraude aut vi 
raptum Agrippam ferre ad exercitus Germanicos non servili 
animo concepit. ausa eius inpedivit tarditas onerariae navis; 8 

e 
8. excipere. 

I. ambitione, ‘ by favouritism’: cp. 
I. 67, 4, &c. 

3. alioqui, ‘ otherwise,’ i.e. if help 
were always to be given: cp. 11. 6, 2; and 
note on 4. I1, 4. The use of * intendere" 
in the sense of ‘to magnify,’ as in c. 57, 
35; 4. 11, 4; 26, 2; 40, 4, &c., is almost 
wholly. Tacitean. 

4. ex se metus. Nipp. takes this to 
mean ‘self-respect’; but it appears to 
answer to ‘socordia,’ as ‘spes’ to * indus- 
tria, He also notes instances from Cic. 
&c., of a reference of ‘se’ and ‘suus’ to 
a subject implied in the context. 

6. quibus...est, a resemblance to 
Sallust: see Introd. v. § 97; also Cat. 
30, 4; Jug. 31, 12. 

8. excepere. Here, as in c. 2, 2, 
&c., the MS. text could stand as hist. inf. 

IO. ducena sestertia, the census of 
the fourth decury of * iudices' (Suet. Aug. 
32). Asthere were four sons (c. 37, 3), 
this gift amounts to four-fifths of that of 
Augustus. 

12. pavore an...retinens. On the 
use of ‘an,’ see 1. I3, 7. ' Retinens' has 

I3. post haec Wolfflin..- 

I4. dilabaretur: text Ern. 

a genitive in 5. II, 2; 6. 42, I, &c.: also 
in Cic. Cp. Introd. v. $ 33d. 

I5. Eodem anno. Dio (57. 16, 3) 
agrees with Tacitus in assigning this 
event to this year. The time of the 
year is not fixed in either author. Sue- 
tonius (Tib. 25) confuses the original 
with the subsequent design, and states 
that Clemens, at the death of Augustus, 
* non contemnendam manum in ultionem 
domini compararat.' 

16. perculisset : cp. H. 1. 53, 5; 80 of 
persons metaphorically ‘ struck,’ by accu- 
sation, &c., 4. 31, 7; 13. 32,233 14. 65, 

2, &c. 

19. Germanicos. He had no such per-’ 
sonal connexion with them as that which 
recommended this course to Agrippina 
(4. 67, 6); but this army was known to 
be ripe for revolt. 

20. concepit. This verb takes some- 
times a simple inf. or accus. and inf., as 
‘ut mens conciperet fieri oportere’ Cic. 
Off. 3. 29, 107; ‘concepit esse homines,’ 
&c., Vell. 2. 117, 3. 

ausa. This subst. appears first in 

A. D. 16.] LIBER II. CAP. 38-4o. 331 

atque interim patrata caede ad maiora et magis praecipitia con- 
versus furatur cineres vectusque Cosam Etruriae promunturium 
ignotis locis sese abdit, donec crinem barbamque promitteret : 
4 nam aetate et forma haud dissimili in dominum erat. tum per 
idoneos et secreti eius socios crebrescit vivere Agrippam, occultis 5 
primum sermonibus, ut vetita solent, mox vago rumore apud 
inperitissimi cuiusque promptas aures aut rursum apud turbidos 
eoque nova cupientes. atque ipse adire municipia obscuro diei, 
neque propalam aspici neque diutius isdem locis, sed quia veritas 
visu et mora, falsa festinatione et incertis valescunt, relinquebat 
famam aut praeveniebat. | 
40. Vulgabatur interim per Italiam servatum munere deum 
Agrippam, credebatur Romae ; iamque Ostiam invectum multi- 
tudo ingens, iam in urbe clandestini coetus celebrabant, cum Tibe- 

5 

~ 

I. parata: text R. 

Vergil, and in prose from Plin. Mai.: cp. 
9. 66, 4; 13. 47, 4- 

I. patrata caede: see 1. 6. 

praecipitia, used of desperate or 
dangerous courses in 15. 29, I ‘ omissis 
praecipitibus tuta . . . capessentem.' 

2. furatur cineres; to destroy the 
chief evidence of Agrippa's death. 

Cosam. Cosa or Cosae (Verg. Aen. 
IO, 167 ; Strab., &c.) is properly the name 
of the city, situate on a hill on the main- 
land (Strab. 5. 2, 8, 325); the peninsular 
promontory projecting in front of it bein 
known from the fifth century (Rutilius) 
to the present day by a distinct name as 
Mons Argentarius. 

promunturium. This form (cp. 6. 
50, 2 ; 15. 46, 3) is supported by C. I. L. 

iii. 567 (Or. 3671), of the time of Trajan, 

and x. 6430 (Henzen 5148): see 4. 67, 1. 

. $. crinem barbamque promitteret: - 

‘nam’ implies that this would increase 
the resemblance. Nipp. notes that such 
was not the normal Roman mode, but 
might represent the unkempt state of 
Agrippa in his banishment. 

4. dissimili in. The preposition has 
the force of mpós, and the expression is 
nearly equivalent to a simple dative: see 
on I. 76, 5. Nearly parallel to this are 
*similitudo ... rei... ad... rem' Cic. 
Inv. 1. 44, 82; ‘in deae . . . speciem 
similis’ Apul. Met. 10. 30, 738. 

tum, &c. These few lines describe 
his action for nearly two years. Tacitus 
would imply that he merely skulked 

2. coram (perhaps cosam, Andresen, p. 7): text L. 

about Italy and .spread rumours; Dio 
(57. 16, 3) gives a less probable version, 
making him collect a large body of fol- 
lowers in Gaul and Italy, and almost 
descend in force on Rome. 

5. secreti, ‘place of retreat’: cp. 4. 
54,43 57, 25 14. 53, 3. So used, in pl., 
by Vergil (G. 4, 403, &c.). 

crebrescit, ‘the story grows.’ The 
verb is first found in Verg., and is used 
by Tacitus in this sense in H. 2. 67, 1; 
here alone with acc. and inf. For the 
more usual sense see 3. 60, 2, &c. 

6. apud ....rursum: see note on I. 
31, 5; 80, 3. 

8. obscuro diei: cp. c. 21, 4; ‘ob- 
Scuro .. . coeptae lucis’ H. 4. 50, 2. 

IO. incertis; in contrast to ‘visu,’ as 
‘festinatione’ to ‘mora.’ On neuter 
plurals for abst. nouns see Introd. v. $ 4 c. 

valescunt: cp. 4. 61, 2; 6. 42, 2; 
H. 1. 32, 4. ‘The verb appears to be 
taken from Lucr. 1. 942, &c. 

relinquebat famam aut praeve- 
niebat; i.e. when he left a place, it was 
because he was becoming too well 
known; when he chose another to visit, 
it was one where the story had not spread. 
We should rather have expected * et.’ 

14. celebrabant = ‘colebant,’ as ‘ ob- 
sequio aliquem celebrare’ 16. 33, 1: cp. 
the similar use of * frequentabatur * of the 
pseudo-Drusus (5. ro, 3). It has pro- 
bably the same sense in both clauses, and 
it seems otherwise to be implied that he 
had reached Rome itself. 

332 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 770. 

rium anceps cura distrahere, vine militum servum suum coerceret 
an inanem credulitatem tempore ipso vanescere sineret: modo 2 
nihil spernendum, modo non omnia metuenda ambiguus pudoris 
ac metus reputabat. postremo dat negotium Sallustio Crispo. 

5 ille e clientibus duos (quidam milites fuisse tradunt) deligit atque 8 
hortatur, simulata conscientia adeant, offerant pecuniam, fidem 
atque pericula polliceantur. exsequuntur ut iussum erat. dein 4 
speculati noctem incustoditam, accepta idonea manu, vinctum 
clauso ore in Palatium traxere. percontanti Tiberio, quo modo 5 

ro Agrippa factus esset, respondisse fertur ‘quo modo tu Caesar.’ 
ut ederet socios subigi non potuit. nec Tiberius poenam eius 6 
palam ausus, in secreta Palatii parte interfici iussit corpusque 
clam auferri. et quamquam multi e domo principis equitesque 
ac senatores sustentasse opibus, iuvisse consiliis dicerentur, haud 

15 quaesitum. 

41. Fine anni arcus propter aedem Saturni ob recepta signa 
cum Varo amissa ductu Germanici, auspiciis Tiberii, et aedes 
Fortis Fortunae Tiberim iuxta in hortis, quos Caesar dictator 

e 
5. diligit (perhaps from dilégit). I6. edem saturnio praecepta : text B. 

Kaícap (Dio, 1. 1.), i.e. by fraud (as his 
enemies would say: cp. I. 7, Io). 

I. suum, emphatic, as libertum 
suum’ H. 2. 65, 3. The establishment 

of Agrippa, irrespectively of his banish- 
ment, vested strictly in Augustus as his 
adoptive father (see Suet. Tib. 15); and 
any slaves retained, when his property 
was made over to the ‘ aerarium militare’ 
(Dio, 55. 32, 2), would have passed to 
the heirs of Augustus. 

2. vanescere : cp. c. 82, 8; 4. 37, 5; 
5. 9, I, &c. The verb is poetical, but 
once in Quint., also in Pl. Ep. 

3. ambiguus: cp. c. 24, 6. 

4. Sallustio Crispo: see r. 6, 6. 

6. conscientia, ‘complicity’: cp. 
‘conscii’ 1. 48, 4, &c. Their pretence 
was not that they believed him to be 
Agrippa, but that they understood his 
plot, and would help it. 

7. pericula. This may possibly mean 
‘daring deeds,’ as perhaps ‘eviluissent 
pericula sua’ (H. 3. 53, 1); or the con- 
struction may be pregnant ( =‘ societatem 
periculorum ’), as others noted in Introd. 
v. § 84. 

9. quo modo Agrippa. Halm inclines 
to agree with Wolfflin (Philol. xxx. 744), 
ir probably * quonam modo’ should be 
read. 

10. quo modo tu, otrws ds kal od 

1I. subigi, usually with inf. (as I. 39, 
4), which would here be awkward. 

nec Tiberius . . . ausus, for ‘et Ti- 
berius non ausus. ‘Nec’ is thus used in 
I2. 7, 33 59, 33 14. 58, 2, &c. : see note 
on c. 34, 7, and Nipp. here. 

16. arcus. Fragments have been found 
in this locality, on which the words 
*RECIP, possibly ‘signis reciperatis,' 
can be made out. C. I. L. vi. 906. 

aedem Saturni, in the Forum, near 
the ‘ miliarium aureum’ (H. 1. 27, 3), at 
the foot of the Capitoline Hill. The 
prominent group of eight Ionic columns 
still standing there has been generally 
supposed to have formed part of it. It 
was also used as the aerarium. 

recepta signa: see I. 60, 4, and c. 25, 
2. A coin is extant, representing Ger- 
manicus in a triumphal chariot, holding 
in each hand an eagle, with the inscrip- 
tion, * Signis Recept. Devictis Germ. S, C.' 
Eckhel, vi. 209 ; Cohen, i. 225, 7. 

17. auspiciis : cp. c. 18, 2; 22, I. 

I8. Fortis Fortunae : cp. ‘O Fortuna, 
O Fors Fortuna’ Ter. Phorm. 5. 6, 1, 
where Donatus explains the latter ex- 
pression to mean ‘Fortunae adventus 

A. D. 17.) LIBER II. CAP. 40, 41. 333 

populo Romano legaverat, sacrarium genti Iuliae effigiesque divo 
Augusto apud Bovillas dicantur. 
2 C. Caelio L. Pomponio consulibus Germanicus Caesar a. d. 
VII. Kal. Iunias triumphavit de Cheruscis Chattisque et Angri- 
8 variis quaeque aliae nationes usque ad Albim colunt. 
spolia, captivi, simulacra montium, fluminum, proeliorum ; bel- 
lumque, quia conficere prohibitus erat, pro confecto accipiebatur. 
4 augebat intuentium visus eximia ipsius species currusque quinque 
5 liberis onustus. sed suberat occulta formido reputantibus haud 
prosperum in Druso patre eius favorem vulgi, avunculum eius- 

3. ad: a. d. L. 

bonus.’ The gardens bequeathed by the 
dictator Caesar (Suet. Jul. 83) were be- 
yond the Tiber (Hor. Sat. 1. 9, 18); so 
that this temple would be probably on 
or near the site of the older ones dedi- 
cated in that quarter by Servius Tullius 
(Varr. L. L. 6, 17) and, in 461, B.C. 
293. by Sp. Carvilius (Liv. 10. 46, 14) ; 
where the festival of the goddess was held 
on the 24th of June (Ov. Fast. 6, 771, 
&c.) See Marquardt. iii. 577. 

I. sacrarium, &c. At Bovillae, «bout 
ten *milia passuum from Rome onthe Via 
Appia, an altar had stood in the last cen- 
tury of the Republic inscribed * Vediovei 
Patrei Genteiles Iuliei. Aara Leege Albana 
dicata! (Inscr. Orell. 1287 - C. I. L. i. 
807. See also a drawing of it in Gell, 
Rome and Vicin. i. p. 218). The con- 
nexion of the Iulii with the place is ex- 

plained by its claim to have been a - 

daughter city of Alba Longa (cp. *Albani 
Longani Bovillenses' C. I. L. xiv. 2405, 
Orell. 119, &c.), and by the well-known 
claim of this gens to have sprung from 
Iulus the founder of Alba.  Circensian 
games were held there in their honour 
(15. 23, 3); and the sanctuary was in 
charge of the *sodales Augustales,' frag- 
ments of whose register have been found 
there. See Marquardt, iii. 470. 

3. O. Caelio. This name and Kar- 
widsos, that of Dio, 57. 17, 1, are both 
confirmed by old kalendars. For the first 
see C. I. L. x. 6639, Henzen 6442 ; and 
for the latter, C. I. L. xi. 1356, Henzen 
6444. The ‘Argumentum’ to Dio 57 
adds, Némos ?) '"Pobü$os; whence Nipp. 

thinks it probable that this consul (other- - 

wise unknown) hore by adoption or 
otherwise the names both of * Caecilius 
Metellus Nepos," and of ‘Caelius Rufus.’ 
On the other consul see c. 32, 3. 

and pl. for sing. as in H. 4. 83, 2. 

&. d. VII. Kal. Iunias, May 26. Stra- 
bo, who may have been an eyewitness, de- 
scribes this triumph (7. I, 4, p. 292), 
mentioning the principal persons led in 
it (see on I. 57, 3; 58, 9; 71, 1), and 
the conquered tribes represented in it by 
captives, some of whom, as.the Campsani, 
Chattuarii, Landi, also some persons, as 
Deudorix, a Sugambrian, and Libes, a 
Chattan priest, have not been mentioned 
by Tacitus. 

4. Angrivariis. He had certainly 
crossed their frontier (c. 19, 3; 20, 3) ; so 
that this does not depend upon the reading 
in c. 8, 4, &c. 

5. ad Albim: cp. c. 22, I. 

6. simulacra. Thus a plan of Sar- 
dinia was exhibited in 577, B. C. 177 (Liv. 
41. 28, 10), and many such models in the 
triumph of Titus (Jos. B. I. 7. 5, 5). 

7. pro confecto : cp. 3. 74, 6 

8. augebat intuentium visus. This 
is generally taken to mean, ‘made the 
sight offered to spectators more splendid ’ ; 
‘visus’ being taken as in 12. 13, 5, &c., 
But 
the addition of ‘intuentium’ seems to 
show that we are to take the words to 
mean that ‘their gaze was made more 
intense,’ riveted by his appearance. 

quinque. Of the six who survived 
him, one was yet unborn: see c. 54, I. 

9. reputantibus. Nipp. explains this 
as abl. abs. (see Introd. v. $ 31 c), and 
* suberat ' as absol. : cp. 3. 30, 5. 

Io. in Druso, ‘in the case of Drusus *: 
cp. Roby 1978; Madv. 230, Obs. 1. 
Tacitus has usually ‘favor in aliquem,’ 
as I. 33, 43 C. 73, 65; 13. 10, 3, &c. 

avunculum. Marcellus (see I. 3, 1) 
was half-brother to Antonia, the mother 
of Germanicus. He was twenty, Drusus 
thirty years old at his death. 

vecta 5 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 770. 

334 

dem Marcellum flagrantibus plebis studiis intra iuventam erep- 
tum, breves et infaustos populi Romani amores. 

42. Ceterum Tiberius nomine Germanici trecenos plebi ses- 
tertios viritim dedit seque collegam consulatui eius destinavit. 

5 nec ideo sincerae caritatis fidem adsecutus amoliri iuvenem specie 
honoris statuit struxitque causas aut forte oblatas arripuit. rex a 
Archelaus quinquagensimum annum Cappadocia potiebatur, in- 
visus Tiberio, quod eum Rhodi agentem nullo officio coluisset. 
nec id Archelaus per superbiam omiserat, sed ab intimis Augusti 3 

10 monitus, quia florente Gaio Caesare missoque ad res Orientis 
intuta Tiberii amicitia credebatur. ut versa Caesarum subole 4 
imperium adeptus est, elicit Archelaum matris litteris, quae non 
dissimulatis filii offensionibus clementiam offerebat, si ad pre- 
candum veniret. ille ignarus doli vel, si intellegere. crederetur, 5 

15 vim metuens in urbem properat; exceptusque immiti a principe 
et mox accusatus in senatu, non ob crimina quae fingebantur, 
set angore, simul fessus senio et quia regibus aequa, nedum 
infima insolita sunt, finem vitae sponte an fato implevit. regnum 6 

I3. ad deprecandum Haase. 

3. trecenos. The 'conyiaria' of Au- 
gustus, as enumerated by himself (Mon. 
Anc. iii. 7-21), are given in shares of from 
240 to 400 H. S. to a number usually not 
less than a quarter ofa million. Marquardt 
(ii. 138) estimates the recipients at this 
time at 200,000. 

4. collegam consulatui : see c. 53, I. 

5. amoliri, ‘to get rid of’; so ‘ Octa- 
viam amoliri' 14. 49, 4; H. 1. i5, 8. 

7. quinquagensimum. The narrative - 

is shown below to date back to the acces- 
sion of Tiberius, which was about fifty 
years after Antonius had set Archelaus on 
the throne, in 718, 5. C. 36 (Dio, 49. 32, 
3) He was descended from the famous 
general of Mithridates (Dio, 1.1.) Au- 
gustus had confirmed and added to his 
dominions (Id. 54. 9, 2), and Tiberius had 
once defended him against the complaint 
of his subjects (Id. 57. 17, 3). He bears 
on his coins the title Philopatris. 
Cappadocia. The inland country 
roperly so called is separated by Mts. 
aurus and Amanus from Cilicia and 
Commagene, by another mountain range 
from Pontus on the north, by the Eu- 
phrates from greater Armenia on the 
east; and borders west on Lycaonia and 
Galatia. Thechiefofits unimportanttowns 

14. gnarus: text R. 

(Strab. 12. 537) were Mazaca and Tyana, 
and the chief article of commerce appears 
to have been its slaves (Hor. Epp. 1. 6, 
39). See Strab. 12. 534, &c. ; and Mar- 
quardt, i. 366; Momms. Hist. v. 306, 
E. T. i. 322. Besides this country, 
Archelaus had Armenia Minor (on which 
see II. 9, 3; 13. 7, 2, and notes), and 
some districts on the Cilician coast (Dio, 
&4. 9, 2): see on 6. 41, 1. 

8. Rhodi agentem ; Introd. viii, 134. 

eoluisset: the subjunctive expresses 
the generally supposed cause. 

II. versa. The use of this verb for 
‘everto’ (as 3. 36, 3; 54, 1; 12. 45, 5, 
&c.) is mostly poetical. 

16. mox accusatus. This interval 
brings down the narrative to the date of 
the current year. - 

crimina, ws xai veorepí(ovrá T. Dio, 
57. 17, 4; Where it is added that he 
escaped condémnation (écd05) but died 
soon after. Philostratus (Vit. Apoll. Ty. 
I, 12) states that the governor, probably 
the procurator (Marquardt, i. 387), of 
Cilicia was involved in the charge. 

17. aequa, ‘ equality’: cp. * aequi in- 
patiens ' 6. 25, 3. 

18. finem vitae implevit, a new ex- 
pression : cp. Introd. v. $ 93. 

A.D. 17.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 41-43. 335 

in provinciam redactum est, fructibusque eius levari posse cen- 
tesimae vectigal professus Caesar ducentesimam in posterum 

7 statuit. 

per idem tempus Antiocho Commagenorum, Philopa- 

tore Cilicum regibus defunctis turbabantur nationes, plerisque 
Romanum,aliis regium imperium cupientibus ; et provinciae Suria 5 
atque Iudaea, fessae oneribus, deminutionem tributi orabant. 
43. Igitur haec et de Armenia quae supra memoravi apud 
patres disseruit, nec posse motum Orientem nisi Germanici sa- 
pientia conponi: nam suam aetatem vergere, Drusi nondum 

2 satis adolevisse. 

tunc decreto patrum permissae Germanico 

provinciae quae mari dividuntur, maiusque imperium, quoquo 

I. in provinciam The decree passed 
now was carried out next year (c. 56, 4). 

centesimae : see 1. 78, a. If Dio isto 
be trusted, the tax was again raised to its 
former amount after the fall of Seianus 
(58. 16, 2), and abolished by Gaius in 
79:1, A.D. 38 (59. 9, 7). But coins of 
792, A.D. 39, are inscribed R. C. C. 
* remissa ducentesima ' (Eckhel, vi. p. 224). 
Suetonius (Cal. 16 makes that remission 
only apply to one kind of sales (* ducen- 
tesima auctionum ’). 

3. Antiocho Commagenorum. Com- 
magene, a strip of land bounded N. by 
Mt. Amanus, E. by the Euphrates, S. and 
W. by the provinces of Syria and Cilicia, 
may be called the last vestige of the 
domain of the Seleucidae, with whom 
its kings still claimed affinity. In this 
dynasty, the Antiochus here mentioned 
was third of the name. On the establish- 
ment of the province, and subsequent 
restoration of royalty, cp. c. 56, 5. Its 
most noted city was Samosata, at an im- 
portant ford of the Euphrates. 

Philopatore Cilicum. This prince, 
the second of his name, held the petty 
kingdom -ruled by Tarcondimotus in 
Cicero's time (ad Fam. 15. I, 2). It 
lay on the slope of Amanus, adjoining 
Commagene, and appears to have shared 
from this time the fortune of that country: 
see Marquardt, i. 328, and Walther here. 

4. regibus. Nipp. gives instances 
of this use of the plural, as * pulsis’ 3. 62, 
I; ‘dominantibus’ 6. 28, 4; 14. 57, 1; 
H. 3. 83, 3: on the parallel use of the 
plural of verbs in such cases see Introd. v. 
$ 42 d. 

plerisque Romanum, &c. Asregards 
Commagene, Josephus (Ant. 18. 2, 5) 
states that the nobles were for Roman, 
the people for kingly rule. 

5. Suria. On this, the greatest and 
most important eastern province, see 
Introd. vii. p. 118; Marquardt, i. 392; 
Momms. Hist. v. ch. 10. Its legatus at 
this time also governed Cilicia (see c. 78, 
3; 80, 1), and was also the immediate 
superior of the procurators of Judaea. 

6. Iudaea. This country was then under 
the procurator Valerius Gratus (Jos. Ant. 
18. 2, 2). This petition for reduction of 
tribute appears to be not elsewhere men- 
tioned ; but we have full evidence of the 
feeling of the Jews as to tribute generally, 
and towards the publicans who collected 
the ‘ vectigalia, On their taxation see 
Momms. Hist. v. 511, E. T. ii. 186. 

7. Supra: see c. 4. 

9. vergere, ‘was declining. This 
verb is used of time (as 4. 8, 5; 11. 4, 4; 
12. 44, 5; 13. 38, 7), or inclination (Sen., 
&c.), by writers of this age only. Tibe- 
rius was fifty-nine, Germanicus thirty-one, 
Drusus about twenty-nine. See Introd. ix. 

II. quae mari dividuntur. In the 
parallel expression *quicquid armorum 
mari dirimitur ' (H. 1. 76, 5), the Asiatic 
and African provinces are meant. Mace- 
donia and Achaia would also fall within 
such a definition, and the latter, was visit- 
ed by Germanicus (c. 53), though prob- 
ably not officially. Egypt, though seem- 
ingly within the terms of the decree, was 
not meant to be included (c. 59, 3). 

 maiusque imperium. This appears, 
though not distinctly stated as such, to 
have been an extension to the East of the 
‘proconsulare imperium’ held by Ger- 
manicus in the West (see T. 14, 4). It would 
thus naturally be an *imperium maius,' 
not only to that of *legati propraetore,’ 
but also, as was that of Caesar (Introd. 
vi. p. 81), to that of ordinary proconsuls. 
Gaius Caesar, whose mission was the most 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 770. 

336 

adisset, quam iis qui sorte aut missu principis obtinerent. sed 3 
Tiberius demoverat Suria Creticum Silanum, per adfinitatem 
connexum Germanico, quia Silani filia Neroni vetustissimo libe- 
rorum eius pacta erat, praefeceratque Cn. Pisonem, ingenio 
5 violentum et obsequii ignarum, insita ferocia a patre Pisone, qui 
civili bello resurgentes in Africa partes acerrimo ministerio 
adversus Caesarem iuvit, mox Brutum et Cassium secutus, con- 
cesso reditu petitione honorum abstinuit, donec ultro ambiretur 
delatum ab Augusto consulatum accipere. sed praeter paternos 4 
I0 spiritus uxoris quoque -Plancinae nobilitate et opibus accende- 
batur; vix Tiberio concedere, liberos eius ut multum infra de- 
spectare. nec dubium habebat se delectum, qui Suriae impone- 
retur ad spes Germanici coercendas. credidere quidam data et 5 

a Tiberio occulta mandata; et 

natural precedent to have been followed, 
is stated to have held this rank (Zon. 10. 
36, 1539 c); and such may also be sup- 
posed to have been the position of Agrippa 
in the 8exaeris Scoixnors stated (Jos. Ant. 
16. 3, 3) to have been held by him in the 
East: also Corbulo subsequently had a 
power which is compared to that formerly 
given to Cn. Pompeius (cp. 15. 25, 6). 

I. sorte . . . obtinerent; a general 
designation of the proconsuls. of senato- 
rial provinces : see on 3. 32, 2, &c. 

3. Creticum Silanum. Q. Caecilius 
Q. f. M. n. Metellus Creticus Silanus had 
been consul in 760, A.D. 7, and legatus of 
- Syria certainly since 764, A.D. 11. For 
the evidence, and further particulars re- 
specting him, see Nipp. 

3. fllia. For the inscription recording 
this betrothal see Introd. ii. p. 9. She 
must have died in or before 773, A.D. 20 
(see 3. 29, 4). 

4. Cn. Pisonem. On probable mo- 
tives for selecting him see Introd. viii. 
p. 140, and the statement in 3. I2, 2. 

5. violentum : ‘cui placebat pro con- 
stantia rigor’ is the character given to 
him by Seneca (de Ira, 1. 18, 3-6), who 
illustrates it by his unjust end passionate 
execution of three soldiers as proconsul. 
Hence Nipp. argues that his proconsulate 
must have been that of Africa, where the 
proconsul had a legion under him. 

ferocia: cp. I. 12, 6, &c. 

6. in Africa, in 707, 708, B.C. 47, 46. 
Cn. Piso is mentioned as a leader of 
Numidian auxiliaries in Bell. Afr. $ I; 
18, I. 

Plancinam haud dubie Augusta 

8. ambiretur, ‘ was solicited.’ On the 
inf. with such verbs see Introd. v. § 43. 
Piso was cos. suff. June 15, 731, B.C. 23, 
the ‘year of the eleventh consulship of 
Augustus (see Klein). The Arg. to Dio 
55 confuses the father and son and implies 
this to have been the first consulship of 
the latter, by styling him cos. ii, in 747, 
B.C. . 

10. Plancinae. Her full name was 
Munatia Plancina (Dio, 58. 22, 5) ; sothat 
she was probably sister of the person 
mentioned in I. 39, 4, and daughter or 
granddaughter of the famous Plancus, 
whose honours are collected on his tomb- 
stone at Gaeta (C. I. L. x. 6087, Orell. 
£90), ‘L. Munatius, L. f., L. n., L. pron., 
Plancus, cos, cens, imp., iter, vii vir 
epulon.; triump. ex Raetis, aedem Saturni 
fecit de manibis, agros divisit in Italia 
Beneventi, in Gallia colonias deduxit 
Lugudunum et Rauricam.’ His censor- 
ship, in 732, B.C. 22, was, to this dete 
the last tenure of that office. 

1I. infra. Nipp. notes the use for * infra 
se’ as rare: cp. Plin. N. H. 28. 8, 28, 
108 ‘ multum infra magnitudine" ; the use 
of * super’ in 1. 68, 2, and the idea of óvras 
supplied 1. 27, 1 

despectare; so in H. 2. 30, 2; Sall. H. 
2. 32, D, 40 K, 93 G, and poets. Tacitus 
often uses, and sometimes (Introd. v. 
§ 69) coins such frequentatives. On the 
pride still retained by old families under 
the early principate, see Introd. vii. p. 101, 
and further illustrations in Friedl. i. 

P. 215. 

A.D. 17.] LIBER Il. 

monuit aemulatione muliebri Agrippinam insectandi. 

CAP. 43, 44. 337 

divisa 

namque et discors aula erat tacitis in Drusum aut Germanicum 

6 studiis. 

Tiberius ut proprium et sui sanguinis Drusum fovebat: 

Germanico alienatio patrui amorem apud ceteros auxerat, et 
quia claritudine materni generis anteibat, avum M. Antonium, 
7 avunculum Augustum ferens. contra Druso proavus eques Ro- 
manus Pomponius Atticus dedecere Claudiorum imagines vide- 
batur: et coniunx Germanici Agrippina fecunditate ac fama 

Liviam uxorem Drusi praecellebat. 

sed fratres egregie con- 

cordes et proximorum certaminibus inconcussi. 

44. Nec multo post Drusus in Illyricum missus est, ut sues- 
ceret militiae studiaque exercitus pararet ; simul iuvenem urbano 
luxu lascivientem melius in castris haberi Tiberius seque tuti- 

2 orem rebatur utroque filio legiones obtinente. 

sed Suebi prae- 

tendebantur auxilium adversus Cheruscos orantes; nam discessu 
Romanorum ac vacui externo metu gentis adsuetudine et tum 

I. insectans Madvig and Bezzenberger. 

I. insectandi. If *insectans be read, 
* monuit?! is unaccompanied by any ex- 
planation of the nature of the hints given, 
nor can it well be explained, like * man- 
data, by the context ‘ad spes... coer- 
cendas.’ Such explanation would naturally 
be put in as infinitive (whence Halm 
suggests ‘insectari’) ; but a gerundial gen., 
besides being consistent with the general 
usage of *admoneo,' is found with that 
verb in late Latin (‘admonitus abeundi' 
Donat. Praef. Ter. Ad.); and ‘moneo’ 
takes a gen. on the analogy of its com- 
pound in 1. 67, 1. It seems better thus to 
take the genitive, than to class it (with 
Roth, and Zumpt, $ 663) with such in- 
stances as those in I5. 5, 3; 2I, 3, Or 
(with Nipp.) as a defining genit. depend- 
ing on * aemulatione ' (cp. 3. 63, 5). 

2. namque. This explanation is to 
make it probable that such instructions 
were given. 

4. patrui. On the terms of relation- 
ship used see note on I. 42, 1, and on the 
relationshipshere mentioned see Introd. ix. 

6. avunculum, 'great uncle*: cp. c. 
53, 3, &c., and ‘amita’ c. 27, 2. 

Druso: cp. Introd. v. $ 19. 

". imagines, ‘the ancestry.’ 

9. praecellebat. The accus. with 
this verb is noted only in Dig. 2. 6, § 5 
(‘ceteros . . . praecellit’), and (acc. to 
Nipp.) in a doubtful reading in Sil. 9, 

VOL. I. 

5. mater: text R. 

478. Elsewhere Tacitus uses the verb 
absolutely; possibly with dat. in 12. 15, 2. 
For analogous uses see Drager, § 40 c. 
egregie concordes. On a Sardian 
coin, the brothers are styled véos 60«oi 
Q$«AdóeAoor (Eckh. vi. 211). *Inconcus- 
sus’ seems found first in Sen. and Luc. 

II. Illyricum. This must here be 
taken to include the frontier province of 
Pannonia (cp. 1. 16, 1 ; 46, 1, &c.), prob- 
ably also Rhaetia and Noricum (c. 63, 1). 
Drusus would appear to have been sent 
with ‘imperium maius," and therefore, like 
Germanicus. to have had ‘imperium pro- 
consulare': see note on 3. 19, 4. Moesia 
may also bave been within the terms, but 
must have been outside the practical 
scope of his commission. 

suesceret, with dat. as I. 31, 4, &c. 

I3. luxu. This trait in him is noted in 
3: 37> 3- 

seque tutiorem rebatur. This 
thought would qualify, without wholly 
removing, his suspicions of Germanicus. 
See Introd. viii. p. 140. 

14. Suebi. On this people see note on 
I. 44, 6. 

I6. ac vacui. The conj might be 
taken, with Nipp., as implying that not 
only were the Romans gone, but that the 
Germans were free from all fear of any 
foreigner; and ‘discessu’ might be, like 
* visu ' (3. 14, 3), an abl. of circumstance, 

10 

338 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 770. 

aemulatione gloriae arma in se verterant. vis nationum, virtus 3 
ducum in aequo; set Maroboduum regis nomen invisum apud 
populares, Arminium pro libertate bellantem favor habebat. 

45. Igitur non modo Cherusci sociique eorum, vetus Arminii 
5 miles, sumpsere bellum, sed e regno etiam Marobodui Suebae 
gentes, Semnones ac Langobardi, defecere ad eum. quibus ad- a 
ditis praepollebat, ni Inguiomerus cum manu clientium ad 
Maroboduum perfugisset, non aliam ob causam quam quia 
fratris filio iuveni patruus senex parere dedignabatur. deri- 3 
10 guntur acies, pari utrimque spe, nec, ut olim apud Germanos, 
vagis incursibus aut disiectas per catervas: quippe longa ad- 
versum nos militia insueverant sequi signa, subsidiis firmari, 

dicta imperatorum accipere. 

ac tunc- Arminius equo conlustrans 4 

cuncta, ut quosque advectus erat, reciperatam libertatem, truci- 

2. aequos et: text R. 

closely akin to an abl. absol. But per- 
haps Orelli is right in treating ‘ac’ as an 
error of repetition from the first syllable 
of * vacui.' 

externo =‘ externorum: 
I2. 51, 2, &c. 

gentis adsuetudine: see note onc. 26, 3. 

I. verterant. The subject is not so 
much the Cherusci as the Germans 
generally, implied in ‘ gentis.' 

2. Maroboduum. The position, power, 
. and character of this prince are noticed 
below (c. 63), and more fully described in 
Vell. 2. 108, 109; where he is shown to 
have consolidated under a royal title (cp. 
‘regis nomen’ here) in Bohemia, the most 
powerful combination that had yet been 
seen among the Germans, with a standing 
force of 70,000 foot and 4,000 horse, in 
alarming proximity to the Roman frontier. 
Müllenhoff derives the name from ‘ Marah- 
pato,' irmópaxos. 

3. habebat. Drager appears rightly 
to explain this harsh zeugma by resolving 
the verb in the first clause, into * reddebat, 
and in the last, into * sequebatur, Nipp. 
takes it, in the second clause, to mean 
* held him to be a champion of freedom,' 
supposing the historian to imply (see c. 
88, 3) that he was not really so. But the 
zeugma would be thus still barsher, and 
the word wholly ambiguous. 

5. sumpsere bellum. This expres- 
sion, frequent in Sall. and Liv., appears 
to be taken from Greek: cp. vóAeuor 

fjpavro Thuc. 3. 39, 3- 

cp. 3. 14, 1j 

- 6. Semnones. These lived beyond 
the Elbe (Vell. 2. 106, 2), between that 
river and the Oder; and were reached by 
Tiberius in 758,-A.D. 5, and made terms 
(Mon. Anc. v. 17; Vell. l. 1.). Strabo 
(7. I, 3, 290) notes them as Suebi, and 
subject to Maroboduus. In G. 39, they 
are stated to be the oldest, most famous, 
and most numerous Suebic tribe. 

Langobardi. This famous people, 
‘gens etiam Germana feritate ferocior’ 
(Vell. 1. 1), were attacked by Tiberius on 
the south side of the lower Elbe, next to 
the Chauci, and perhaps driven across it 
(Suet. Aug. 21). Strabo (1. 1) calls them 
Aa*kóBapÓoi, and places them beyond the 
Elbe. In the time of Tacitus they were 
distinguished, though not numerous: see - 
G. 40, 1 and note. 

7. Inguiornerus : see 1. 60, I, &c., and, 
on the ‘clientes’ of a German prince, 1. 
57> 4- 

g. iuveni: see c. 88, 4. 

deriguntur : see on c. 3I, 2. 

II.vagis incursibus, probably a modal 
abl. (Introd. v. $ 28), answering in the 
next clause to the accus. with ‘ per’ (ex- 
pressing formation, as in H. 4. 66, 1 ; 78, 
1; G. 6, 5), and denoting the mode of 
attack, so closely connected with the mode 
of arrangement as to be equivalent to it. 
It seems less well to take the words as 
abl. abs., with Orelli, or dative, with Doed. 

14. ut quosque advectus erat, ‘ a$ he 
rode up to each division’: the expression 
is repeated from H. 5. 16, 2, and similar 

2 tolerent. 

A.D. 17.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 44-46. 339 

datas legiones, spolia adhuc et tela Romanis derepta in manibus 
multorum ostentabat ; contra fugacem Maroboduum appellans, 
proeliorum expertem, Hercyniae latebris defensum ; ac mox 
per dona et legationes petivisse foedus, proditorem patriae, 

satellitem Caesaris, haud minus infensis animis exturbandum 5 

5 quam Varum Quintilium interfecerint. meminissent modo tot 
proeliorum, quorum eventu et ad postremum eiectis Romanis 
satis probatum, penes utros summa belli fuerit. 

46. Neque Maroboduus iactantia sui aut probris in hostem 
abstinebat, sed Inguiomerum tenens illo in corpore decus omne 
Cheruscorum illius consiliis gesta quae prospere ceciderint testa- 
batur: vaecordem Arminium et rerum nescium alienam gloriam 
in se trahere, quoniam tres vagas legiones et ducem fraudis 
ignarum perfidia deceperit, magna cum clade Germaniae et 
ignominia sua, cum coniunx, cum filius eius servitium adhuc 
at se duodecim legionibus petitum duce Tiberio in- 

13. uacuas: vagas Dráger. 

to ‘ut quosque accesserat! H. 3. 24, 2: 
cp. 14. 35, I. * Advehor' has acc. pers. 
elsewhere only in Vergil (Aen. 8. 136), 
&nd an accusative of place rarely except 
in poets (cp. 3. 1, 1). 

1. derepta, apparently from Hor. Od. 
3. 5, 19, or Verg. Aen. 11, 193. 

2. ostentabat, taken by zeugma with 
* libertatem ' and *legiones,' in some such 
sense as * memorabat.' 

fugacem. Under him the Marcomani 
are described as retreating before the 
Romans into the Hercynian forest (Vell. 
2. 108, 2). He might thus be called 
* proeliorum expers,' in spite of warfare 
(Vell. 1. 1.) against Germans. 

3. Hercyniae. This term is applied 
to a very wide tract: see G. 28, 2; 30, 
I,and notes. Bohemia is here specially 
intended. Cp. Strab. 7. I, 3, p. 290 
évravda & écriv 5 'Epkóvios Spupos kai rà 
TU» Xo)Boev vn, rà pev olkoUvra évTÓs 
TOU Spupov, kaÜdmep rà TOv. Koabotay: év 
ols éort kai TÓ Boviai poy, TÓ ToU MapoBddou 
BacíA«wv : also Vell. 2. 109, 3 * Boiohae- 
mum, id regioni quam incolebat Marobo- 
duus nomen est’ (cp. c. 62, 3). 

4. per dona, &c. According to Vel- 
leius, the general tone of his embassies 
ranged from that of a suppliant to that of 
an equal. His claim (c. 46, 2) to have 
made peace 'aequis condicionibus' is prob- 

ably true, as the Illyrian revolt forced the 
Romans to make terms with him. 

5. satellitem Caesaris. He had been 
in Rome as a young man and had received 
presents from Caesar: Strab. 7. 1, 3, 
290. 

8. penes utros summa belli fuerit, 
* who were masters in the war as a whole’: 
cp. ‘de summa belli iudicium’ Caes. B. G. 
I. 41, 3, &c.; ‘summa pacis’ 13. 38, I. 
‘Utros’ does not compare the Cherusci 
with the Suebi, but with the Romans; 
and this boast is confirmed by Tacitus 
himself, who speaks of Arminius (c. 88, 3) 
as ‘ proeliis ambiguus, bello non victus.' 

Io. illo in corpore, ‘in that person’: 
so ‘in illo corpore (Dario) posita est 
victoria nostra’ Curt. 5. 35, 4. The 
* consilia" of Inguiomerus are not re- 
presented as successful in 1. 68, 1. 

13. vagas, explained by Nipp. of their 
ignorance of the country, by Drager of 
their want of concentration. 
can hardly mean * duce destitutas,’ as ‘et 
ducem ' follows it, but might be taken to 
mean ‘ off their guard,’ as in Agz. 37, 1 ; 
Bell. Al. 2, 3: cp. ds 8a gidias diov 
(Dio, 56. 19, 4). 

I5. coniunx ... fllius: I. 57, 5; 

) 9. 

16. duodecim legionibus. This num- 
ber is given only here, and if not exag- 

Z2 

* Vacuas! - 

340 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 770. 

libatam Germanorum gloriam servavisse, mox condicionibus 
aequis discessum ; neque paenitere quod ipsorum in manu sit, 
integrum adversum Romanos bellum an pacem incruentam 

malint. 

5 stimulabant, cum a Cheruscis Langobardisque pro antiquo de- 
core aut recenti libertate et contra augendae deminationi cer- 

taretur. 

sperabaturque rursum 
id signum 

10 perculsi fuit; et transfugiis paulatim nudatus in Marcomanos 

concessit misitque legatos ad Tiberium oraturos auxilia. 

re- 

sponsum est non iure eum adversus Cheruscos arma Romana 
invocare, qui pugnantis in éundem hostem Romanos nulla ope 

iuvisset. 

missus tamen Drusus, ut rettulimus, paci firmator. 

47. Eodem anno duodecim celebres Asiae urbes conlapsae 

6. recente : text L. 

gerated, gives some means of estimating 
the strength of the standing army at that 
date (see Introd. vii. 121, n. 12). On the 
instrumental ablative of persons cp. Introd. 
v. $ 27. 

duce Tiberio: cp. Vell. 2. 109, 110. 
The Illyrian revolt is here wholly ignored. 

3. integrum...bellum. This expres- 
sion is used in 15. 18, 1; H. a. 57, 1, of 
a war still undecided. Here it is either 
war ‘ex integro" (cp. *pugna integra’ Liv. 
8. 9, 13), or * with unimpaired strength’ 
(cp. ‘integrum victorem’ Hor. Od. 4. ^ 
66). Cp.c. 5, 4; 15. 26, 1, &c. 

4. his vocibus instinctos, from Liv. 
: 40, 7. 

4 5. antiquo decore, referring to the 
Cherusci, as ‘recenti libertate’ to the 
Langobardi,. with whom the Semnones 
are understood (as the Andecavi with the 
Turoni 3. 46, 3); the new-won freedom 
being the revolt from Maroboduus. 

7. maiore mole, ‘with harder strug- 
gle’: cp. ‘haud parva mole certatum 
foret! H. 3. 77, 5: ‘plus molis! 13. 35, 1 
* tantae molis erat’ Verg. Aen. I, 33. 

10. perculsi, sc. Marobodui, ‘of his 
disheartenment '; so ‘fama occisi! 6. 35, 5. 

Marcomanos. The MS. has this form 
in c. 62, 3, as also have the MSS. in G. 
42, 1; cp. Mon. Anc. vi. 3. This power- 
ful tribe, which had invaded Gaul with 
Ariovistus (Caes. B. G. 1. 51, 2), retired 
before Domitius(Dio, 55. 108, 2) and other 

IO. marcomannos; see note. 

Roman invaders into Bohemia. Their 
een extension to the Danube made 
them formidable in the time of Domitian 
and Marcus Aurelius. The name, ‘dwellers 
on the Mark’ or borderland (see on G. 
1. 1.), may not always have been used of 
the same people. 

14. rettulimus: c. 44, I. 

paci: on the dative see Introd. v. 
§ 19. 

firmator, only here and in Pl. Epp. 
10. 38, 1. Nipp. points out that he was 
to secure peace, not between the parties, 

his vocibus instinctos exercitus propriae quoque causae 3 

non alias maiore mole concursum neque ambiguo magis 4 
eventu, fusis utrimque dextris cornibus ; 
pugna, ni Maroboduus castra in colles subduxisset. 

5 

6 

but on the Roman frontier. On his further : 

action see c. 62. 

15. duodecim. In giving thisnumber, 
Tacitus may have followed Pliny, who 
says (N. H. 2. 84, 86, 200) ‘maximus 
terrae memoria mortalium exstitit motus, 
Tiberii Caesaris principatu, duodecim 
urbibus Asiae una nocte prostratis! Also 
an inscription of A.D. 31 found in this 
part of Asia (Bull. de Corresp. Hell. 
1887, p. 96) calls Tiberius «riorgs évi 
Katp@ Bwdexa mOAeov. In Hieron. Chron. 
(Opera, vol. viii. p. 566, Migne) thirteen 
names are given, Ephesus being added to 
those here mentioned ; and a well-known 

pedestal preserved at N aples, copied from . 

that of the colossus erected to Tiberius/ 
at Rome by the cities, and dating from 
783, A. D. 30, has the names and symbo- 
lical effigies of fourteen; the additional 
one being that of Cibrya, which suffered 

4 remisit. 

A.D. 17.] LIBER II. 

nocturno motu terrae, quo inprovisior graviorque pestis fuit. 

CAP. 46, 47. 341 

2 neque solitum in tali casu effugium subveniebat, in aperta pro- 

rumpendi, quia diductis terris hauriebantur. 

sedisse inmensos 

montes, visa in arduo quae plana fuerint, effulsisse inter ruinam 

3 ignes memorant. 

asperrima in Sardianos lues plurimum in 

eosdem misericordiae traxit: nam centiens sestertium pollicitus 
Caesar, et quantum aerario aut fisco pendebant, in quinquennium 

Magnetes a Sipylo proximi damno ac remedio habiti- 

3. deductis : so Pfitzner, text D. 

at a later date (see 4. 13, 1) ; as may also 
have been the case with Ephesus. See 
C. I. L. x. 1624, Orelli 687: cp. Henzen, 
p. 66, Rushforth, pp. 123, 124. The 
mention of this earthquake by Strabo (12. 
8, 18, p. 576), is one of the latest events 
(see also on c. 67, 3) recorded in his work. 
On the frequent earthquakes in those parts 
see Friedl. iii. p. 178. 

I. quo, i.e. because at night. The 
comparative *inprovisior' is noted by 
Drager as elsewhere only in Apuleius. 

2. prorumpendi, genitive of definition: 
see Madv. 286; Roby 1302. : 

3. sedisse, from ‘sido’: cp. ‘sidebant 
campi ' Lucr. 5, 493, and the description 
of a similar scene in Sallust (H. 2a. 43 D, 
52 K, 77 G) ' rupti aliquot montes tumu- 
lique sedere." 

4. in arduo, ‘on an elevation’: ‘in 
plano’ would have been the natural anti- 
thesi sto this ; but such changes of express- 
sion are so habitual to Tacitus, that we 
need not, with Heins. and Nipp., intro- 
duce such a correction as ‘enisa in 
arduum." 

5. asperrima in Sardianos lues . . . 
traxit. ‘Belli lues ' is found in H. 3. 15, 
3; and the subject of ‘traxit’ is not 
really *lues, but the idea contained in 
the sentence (cp. 1. 19, 5; 3. 9, 3, &c.). 
With *in Sardianos' a participial notion 
like * cadens' is to be supplied, as perhaps 
also in 12. 6, 5; 25, 1; H. 2. 93, 2. 

Sardianos. The disaster of this city 
is described in an epigram of Bianor 
(Anth. Pal. 9, 423) dAa: 0vorgvov ésév kaxóv 
dpracÓOeicai, és BuOdv é£ áyavobs xda aros 
npiwere, This ancient capital of the 
Lydian kings and Persian satraps was still 
a considerable city, and seems to have 
rapidly recovered from this disaster (see 
4. 55, 6). Its site is still called Sart. 

6. centiens sestertium, &c. This 
whole passage is important, as showing a 

. considerateness to the provinces which is 

not found in the time of the Republic: 
see note on I. 2, 2. We have similar 
instances under Tiberius in 4. 13, I; 
under Claudius in 12. 58,2; 63, 3; under 
Nero in 16. 13, 5 ; the term of remission 
being so often for five years as to suggest 
that the provincial census was taken at 
quinquennial intervals. See Marquardt, 
ii. 243. 

7. aerario aut fisco. The distinct men- 
tion ofthe ‘fiscus’ belongs probablyto later 
date (see on c. 48, 1; 6. 2, 1; 19, 1); but 
it appears that the emperor's procurators 
in Asia (on whom see 4. 15, 3 and note) 
collected not only what belonged to him 
personally, but also public or quasi-public 
moneys. 
in other senatorial provinces also seems 
doubtful: see Staatsr. ii. 1005; Hirschf. 
Unters, p. 13, 1; Marquardt, ii. 307. 
The remission of tribute due to the sena- 
torial treasury, here described as granted 
by Caesar, was no doubt so granted by a 
* senatus-consultum ' originated by him, as 
is expressly stated in 4. 13, I. ‘Aut’ is 
to be taken as in 1. 64, 6; c. 30, 2; 43, 
5, &c. 

8. Magnetes & Sipylo. Thisadqition, 
given also in Livy (37. 44,/ 4) and on 
coins (dmó X:mvAov), appears, as Ritter 
suggests, to indicate the direction in which 
the town is usually approached. Strabo 
(13. 3, 5, p. 621) calls it óró XurvAg. It 

en 

Whether this was then the case © 

lay on the north-western slope of that 
mountain, on the south bank of the - 

Hermus, at Manisa, and needs to be 
distinguished from Magnesia on the 
Maeander (see 3. 62, 13 4. 55, 3). Ac- 
cording to Strabo (1. l.) aud others, it 
was a free city; but such might be liable 
to some payments : see Staatsr. iii. 683, 4. 
habiti, ‘ were considered to be next in 
suffering and treated as next in their 
relief? For the zeugma cp. c. 44, 3. 

5 

10 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 770. 

312 

Temnios, Philadelphenos, Aegeatas, Apollonidenses, quique Mos- 
teni aut Macedones Hyrcani vocantur, et Hierocaesariam, My- 
rinam, Cymen, Tmolum levari idem in tempus tributis mittique 
ex senatu placuit qui praesentia spectaret refoveretque. de- 
lectus est M. Ateius e praetoriis, ne consulari obtinente Asiam 
aemulatio inter pares et ex eo impedimentum oreretur. 

48. Magnificam in publicum largitionem auxit Caesar haud 
minus grata liberalitate, quod bona Aemiliae Musae, locupletis 
intestatae, petita in fiscum, Aemilio Lepido, cuius e domo vide- 
batur, et Patulei divitis equitis Romani hereditatem, quamquam 
ipse heres in parte legeretur, tradidit M. Servilio, quem priori- 
bus neque suspectis tabulis scriptum compererat, nobilitatem 

I. apollonienses: text Ern., Apollonidienses Or. 
5. aletus: Aletius Or., text Mommsen. 

Freinsh. 

I. Temnios, &c. These are mostly 
small cities. Temnos, Aegeae, Myrina, 
and Cyme, had formed part of the old 
Aeolic confederation (Hdt. 1. 149. 1): 
the others are in Lydia; of these Phila- 
delphia is well known, and stood on the 
site now occupied by Allascher. 

2. aut Macedones Hyrcani; so called 
also in Pl. N. H. 5. 29, 31, 120. This 
town, inhabited by an older race of Hyr- 
cano-Persians, who had given their name 
to the * Hyrcanian plain ' (Strab. 13. 4, 13, 

629). mixed with Macedonian settlers, is.*. 

not the same with, though near to, Mos- 
teni. Both are noted by Nipp. as among 
the military colonies planted by the 
Seleucidae to check the Gauls. The use 
of *aut' might no doubt be explained as 
in the sentence a few lines above, but the 
word is at least misleading. The change 
from names of pcople to those of places 
is for variety : cp. c. 60, 4. &c. 

4. refoveret; a word chiefly post- 
Augustan, frequent in Tacitus, as c. 54, 
2, &c. 

5. Ateius. ‘Aletus’ is no Roman 
name. We find from Dio (57. 17, 7) 
that he had the five fasces which would 

.mark his position as temporarily that of 

a * legatus Augusti propraetore.' On Asia 
and its proconsuls see Introd. vii. pp. 113, 
114. 

7. in publicum. This depends on 
‘magnificam,’ and is similarly used with 
‘exitiosi’ and ‘laetum’ (11. 17, 4; 12. 8, 
3): cp. *laeta in rempublicam" 11. 25, 
4; and note on 1. 76, 5; also ‘ petita in 
fiscum here. 

2. aut qui Müller, et qui 

auxit, ‘enhanced.’ ! 

8. liberalitate : see note on c. 37, 2. 

Aemiliae Musae. Doed. notes that 
she was probably a freed-woman (as 
Antonius Musa the physician of Augustus 
appears to have been a freedman), and 
that the family of her patronus was not 
clearly traceable; whence her property 
was claimed as an escheat, by the * pro- 
curatores hereditatum ' (see  Hirschf. 
Unters. 54, foll.). The use of * videbatur" 
below implies that the proof was not plain. 

9. petita in fiscum: formerly such 
* bona vacantia ' fell to the aerarium, and 
it is possible that Tacitus is here using 
the language of his own time rather than 
that of Tiberius (Hirsch. 57, 2). 

Aemilio Lepido, evidently the same 
M. Lepidus, who is called * inops’ (3. 32, 
2) and * pecuniae modicus (3. 72, 3). 

IO. Patulei. This name, or ‘ Pantu- 
leius,' is found with the cognomen ‘ Parra’ 
in Varr. R. R. 3, 5, and with that of * Grap- 
tiacus’ and * Anatellon' in later inscrip- 
tions (Grut. 126, 895 ; C. I. L. iii. 6121; 
xii. 4027). A praenomen may be lost, 
as Tacitus generally, in a single mention 
of persons of rank, gives two names. 

II. in parte, ‘to half.’ Later, such 
legacies to the princeps were frequently 
given to save the rest (cp. 14. 31, 1; 16. 
II, 2; Agr. 43, 4; Plin. Pan. 43), and 
even insisted on (cp. Suet. Cal. 38; 
Ner. 32). 

M. Servilio: cp. 3. 22, 4; consul in 
756, A. D. 3, and father of the historian, 
who was consul in 788, A. D. 35 (6. 31, 1). 

I2. Scriptum, sc. * heredem ex asse. 

A.D. 17.] 

LIBER II. CAP. 47-49. 

343 

2 utriusque pecunia iuvandam praefatus. neque hereditatem cuius- 
quam adiit nisi cum amicitia meruisset : ignotos et aliis infensos 
3 eoque principem nuncupantes procul arcebat. ceterum ut hones- 
tam innocentium paupertatem levavit, ita prodigos et ob flagitia 
egentes, Vibidium Virronem, Marium Nepotem, Appium Ap- 
pianum, Cornelium Sullam, Q. Vitellium movit senatu aut sponte 

cedere passus est. 

49. Isdem temporibus deum aedes vetustate aut igni abolitas 
coeptasque ab Augusto dedicavit, Libero Liberaeque et Cereri 
iuxta circum maximum, quam A. Postumius dictator voverat, 
codemque in loco aedem Florae ab Lucio et Marco Publiciis 
aedilibus constitutam, et Iano templum, quod apud forum holi- 
torium C. Duilius struxerat, qui primus rem Romanam prospere 

5. uarronem : text Nipp. 
quam L. 

2. meruisset, sc. ‘heres scribi. The 
subjunctive is that of cases of constant 
occurrence (Introd. v. $ 52). 

5. Virronem. This correction is sup- 
ported by two Greek inscriptions: see 
note on IT. 32, 5. 

Marium Nepotem. Seneca records 
(de Ben. 2. 7, 2), a previous payment of 
his debts on request: *''liberius Caesar 
rogatus a Nepote Mario praetorio, ut aeri 
alieno eius succurreret, edere illum sibi 
nomina creditorum iussit . ..: cum edita 
essent, scripsit Nepoti iussisse se pecuniam 
solvi.' 

Appianum. This cognomen suggests 
a relationship to M. Valerius Barbatus 
Appianus: see on 4. 52, I. 

^] Q. Vitellium, an uncle of the em- 
peror Vitellius (Suet. Vit. 2), and formerly 
quaestor of Augustus (Id. 1). On his 
brothers see 1. 70, 1; 6. 28, 1, &c. 

movit senatu: cp. ‘albo senatorio 
erasit' (4. 42, 3). On the exercise of this 
power by the emperor see Introd. vi. 
p. 85. The senate also could expel its 
own members by judicial sentence (cp. 3. 
17, 8; 6. 48, 7, &c.); and Suet. (1. 1.) 
speaks as if in this case Tiberius acted 
through it (*cum auctore Tiberio secerni 
minus idoneos senatores removerique 
placuisset ’). 

8. igni. A fire which destroyed atrov 
TOU tmmodpdpou xo^) TÓ T€ Anphrpoy kal 
érepoy vady 'EAmíóos had taken place in 
723, B.C. 31 (Dio, 50. 10, 3). It is 
alluded to by Strabo (8. 6, 23, 380). 

6. sullamque uitellium : text B. 
I3. dullius: Duillius vulgo, text Fast. Cap. 

IO. quas: 

9. Libero Liberaeque et QCereri. 
Dion. Hal. gives (6. 17) the tradition that 
this temple (Anynrp: kal Acovioy xai Kópy) 
was vowed by Postumius out of the spoils 
of the battle at the lake Regillus, A. U. C. 
258, B. C. 496; also (Id. 94) that it was 
dedicated by Sp. Cassius during his second 
consulship. in 261, B.C. 493.. On the 
worship of these associated dcities see 
Marquardt, iii. 361, foll. 

II. Publiciis. These brothers, sur- 
named Malleoli, are called curule aediles 
by Festus (s. v. * Publicius clivus ^), and 
plebeian by Varro (L. L. 5, 158) and Ovid 
(Fast. 5, 287). The latter states that 
they inflicted fines for illegal occupation 
of public land, and from the proceeds in- 
stituted the Floralia (Apl. 38-May 3), 
on which see Id. Fast. 5, 183, &c. The 
date of institution is either 514, B. C. 240 
(Vell. 1. 14, 7), or 516, B.c. 238 (Plin. 
N. H. 18. 29, 69, 286). The worship is 
of Sabine origin: see Marquardt, iii. 378. 

I2. forum holitorium. This was 
between the Capitol and the river, outside 
the porta Carmentalis. Much of its 
space had been taken by the theatre of 
Marcellus. This temple of Janus is dis- 
tinguished from the famous Janus ‘ad 
infimum Argiletum ' (Liv. 1. 19, 2). 

13. C. Duilius. His Baal itor in 
494, B. C. 260, was commemorated by 
the * columna rostrata,' to the inscription 
of which an existing fragment now in the 
Capitol purports to belong: cp. C. I. L. 
i. 195, and annotations there. 

on 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 770. 

344 

mari gessit triumphumque navalem de Poenis meruit. Spei 2 
aedes a Germanico sacratur: hanc A. Atilius voverat eodem bello. 
5O. Adolescebat interea lex maiestatis. et Appuleiam Varil- 
lam, sororis Augusti neptem, quia probrosis sermonibus divum 
5 Augustum ac Tiberium et matrem eius inlusisset Caesarique 
conexa adulterio teneretur, maiestatis delator arcessebat. de 2 
adulterio satis caveri lege Iulia visum: maiestatis crimen dis- 
tingui Caesar postulavit damnarique, si qua de Augusto in- 
religiose dixisset: in se iacta nolle ad cognitionem vocari. 
io interrogatus a consule, quid de iis censeret quae de matre eius 3 
locuta secus argueretur, reticuit ; dein proximo senatus die illius 
quoque nomine oravit, ne cui verba in eam quoquo modo habita 
crimini forent. liberavitque Appuleiam lege maiestatis: adul- 4 
terii graviorem poenam deprecatus, ut exemplo maiorum pro- 

2. in Germanico : a Germanico B, Germanico Or. 
uariliam: Varilliam B, text Borghesi and Fur- 

3. Apuleiam B (see on I. 7, 3). 
lanetto. 

. I. Spei ades, probably that in the 
‘forum holitorium ' : see Liv. 21. 62, 4. 

2. & Germanico. This would imply 
that Tiberius had dedicated the others 
personally, not * per alium. From the 
statement of Dio (57. 10, 1) Tad pev 
avTOs Kabtépov, rà 56 THY TovTiikow Tivi 
napooéragoe, we should gather that when 
he thus acted (cp. 4. 57, 1; 67, 1), it was 
as pontifex maximus, and Germanicus may 
have acted as augur. On the old custom 
of dedication by the chief magistrates, or 
by * duoviri,' see Staatsr. ii. 618. 

A. Atilius. The MS. text shows traces 
of a praenomen, and the passage in Cic. 
Legg. 2. 11, 28 (‘a Calatino Spes con- 
secrata est’), shows that the person is 
A. Atilius A. f. C. n. Calatinus, cos. 496 
and 500, B.C. 258, 254; dict. 505, B.C. 
249; who gained a triumph in his first 
consulship. 

3. et. This seems to instance a case, 
and to imply others not mentioned: cp. 
3. 38, 1. Nipp.'s reference to 11. 35, 6 
(‘et Titium Proculum ") is to a very cor- 
rupt and doubtful passage. 

Appuleiam Varillam. Her relation- 
ship to Augustus is best explained by 
supposing that her mother was a Mar- 
cella (see Introd. ix. note 18); or that, 
as Nipp. thinks, she may have descended 
from Octavia maior, who was only on 
the father's side sister to Augustus (Suet. 
Aug. 4). Sex. Appuleius, cos. 725, B. C. 

iatillius: Atilius B, text Nipp. 

29, may have been her father, and the 
consul of 767, A. D. 14 (see note on t. 7, 
3), her brother. | 

6. conexa, ‘being related’; so 4. 66, 
2, and (with * per adfinitatem’) c. 43, 3. 
Augustus strained the law in treating 
adultery among members of his family as 
treason : cp. 3. 24, 3. 

teneretur, *was implicated in'; so 
in 3. 13, 2; II. 6, 5; and (with ell. 

' gen.) 3. 67, 2: cp. *criminibus haerere’ 

4. I9, 5- 

arcessebat, ‘was summoning’; so, 
with gen. criminis, in 4. 39, 1; Cic. and 
Sall. 

7. lege Iulia, the law of Augustus, 
* de adulteriis et stupris passed in 737, 
B.C. 17. On its penalties see below (on 
$ 4). In referring the charge to this law; 
it is implied that it was not to be dealt 
with as one of * maiestas." 

distingui. The distinction to be drawn 
is implied in the context. | 

11. locuta secus argueretur. * Arguor' 
is used with an inf. clause in Cic., and 
* secus ' is also used by him in the sense of 
* otherwise than as should be’: cp. c. 80, 
I, &c. 

I4. graviorem : the full penalty of the 
lex Iulia imposed on both parties *re- 
legatio ' to different islands; the man to 
forfeit half his property, the woman one 
third of her property and half her dowry 
(Paul. Sent. Recept. 2. 26, 14). 

A. D. 17.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 49 52 

345 

pinquis suis ultra ducentesimum lapidem removeretur suasit. 
5 adultero Manlio Italia atque Africa interdictum est.. | 

51. De praetore in locum Vipstani Galli, quem mors abstu- 
2 lerat, subrogando certamen incessit. Germanicus atque Drusus 
(nam etiam tum Romae erant) Haterium Agrippam propinquum 
Germanici fovebant: contra plerique nitebantur, ut numerus 

3 liberorum in candidatis praepolleret, quod lex iubebat. 

Jaeta- 

batur Tiberius, cum inter filios eius et leges senatus disceptaret. 
victa est sine dubio lex, sed neque statim et paucis suffragiis, 
quo modo etiam cum valerent leges vincebantur. 

52. Eodem anno coeptum in Africa bellum, duce hostium 

2 Tacfarinate. 

is natione Numida, in castris Romanis auxiliaria 

stipendia meritus, mox desertor, vagos primum et latrociniis 
suetos ad praedam et raptus congregare, dein more militiae per 
vexilla et turmas componere, postremo non inconditae turbae 

3 sed Musulamiorum dux haberi. 

valida ea, gens et solitudinibus 

16. musula maiorum : Musulamorum B, text Bekk. 

exemplo maiorum: this refers not 

to the penalty, which in old times would 
have been more severe, but to its infliction 
through the relations. Such a trialof the 
wife before her husband and other rela- 
tives is mentioned in 13. 32, 4 ; also in 
the case of the Bacchanalia (A. U. C. 566, 
B.C. 186), by Livy (39. 18, 6). This 
jurisdiction would be a survival of primi- 
tive law (cp. G. 19, 2), and as such is 
ascribed to Romulus by Dion. Hal. (2. 
25) : cp. Gell. 1o. 23. 

propinquis. On this dative see In- 
trod. v. § 18. 

I. ducentesimum lapidem. On such 
limited banishment see 13. 26, 3, and 
other citations in Staatsr. ii. 1076, 4. 

3. Vipstani. This name is found with 
the'cognomen ‘Gallus’ in C. I. L. iii. r, 
4591, and is to be read for the MS. text 
in 11. 23, 1 ; 14. I, I. 

5. etiam tum. This must thus have 
taken place before Drusus went to Illyri- 
cum (c. 43; 44). On the departure of 
Germanicus cp. c. 53. 

Haterium Agrippam: see 1. 77, 3, 
&c. On his relationship see Introd. ix. 
note 19. His father was probably the 
Quintus Haterius of 1. 13, 4, &c. 

7. lex, the ‘lex Papia Poppaea,’ cap. 
vii: see Appendix to Book iii. The 
municipal ordinance of Malaca (Henzen 
7421, C. 56) contains a similar clause, to 

decide between candidates who had re- 
ceived equal votes: see also on 15. I9, I. 

laetabatur. This insinuation must 
mean that all such triumphs over law 
were in the interest of autocracy. 

9. sine dubio: this weakens the asser- 
tion, as in I. 6, 3, &c. ‘The law cer- 
tainly was defeated ; but (as laws used to 
be defeated when they had real force) not 
at once, or by many votes.’ On the force 
of ‘neque’ cp. c. 34, 7. 

II. Africa. On this province and its 
proconsuls see Introd. vii. pp. 113, 115. 

I2. Tacfarinate. On his subscquent 
incursions see 3, 20; 32; 73; 4, ?3. 
Mommsen points out (Hist. v. 633, E. T. 
li, 317) that such warfare with border 
tribes must have been permanent, though 
we have only record of this instance. 

Numida. Numidia was not then a 
distinct province: see Marquardt, i. 366. 

I5. vexilla. As applied to cavalry, 
this term would be synonymous with 
*turmae. The Numidians had been 
always a nation of horsemen, and this 
force must have been mainly such, but 
may have included some light-armed foot, 
organized like Roman auxiliaries. 

16. Musulamiorum. The name is 
restored from 4. 24, 2, and from a 
mention of them in the rising against 
Claudius (Aur. Vict. Caes. 4). In the 
account of their subjection in 753, B. C. I, 

IO 

[er] 
om 

346 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 771. 

Africae propinqua, nullo etiam tum urbium cultu, cepit arma 
Maurosque accolas in bellum traxit: dux et his, Mazippa. 
divisusque exercitus, ut Tacfarinas lectos viros et Romanum in 4 
modum armatos castris attineret, disciplinae et imperiis sues- 
5 ceret, Mazippa levi cum copia incendia et caedes et terrorem 

circumferret. 

conpulerantque Cinithios, haud spernendam na- 5 

tionem, in eadem, cum Furius Camillus pro consule Africae 
legionem et quod sub signis sociorum in unum conductos ad 
hostem duxit, modicam manum, si multitudinem Numidarum 
atque Maurorum spectares; sed nihil aeque cavebatur quam ne 
bellum metu eluderent: spe victoriae inducti sunt ut vinceren- 

4. disciplina: text Pichena. 

given by Florus (4. 12, 40), * Musulami ' 
and other forms (see Ritt.) are found, and 
Ptolemy (4. 3, 24) calls them MicovAapot. 
He describes them as living south of the 
Cirtenses-and Numidia under (south of) 
Mount Audos (Aurez), a sitüation fairly 
coinciding with that here given by Tacitus. 
Later inscriptions place them near The- 
veste: see Momms. Hist. v. 634, E. T. ii. 
318. 

2. Mauros aocolas, i.e. such of the 
Mauri as bordered on them. Some of 
the tribes dwelling in what was after- 
wards called * Mauretania Sitifensis, west 
of the Ampsagas, appear to be meant. 
‘Mauri’ and * Maurusii' are general names 
for the inhabitants of Mauretania, whose 
modern representatives are the Berbers. 

3. Romanum in modum armatos, 
those who are described above as or- 
ganized ‘ per vexilla et turmas,’ i.e. like 
similar forces under Roman standards. 

4. disciplinae . . . suesceret. The 
simple verb is nowhere else transitive, 
though such use is implied in that of 
*suetus, Nipp. retains ‘disciplina,’ 
noting the use of such an abl. with ‘ adsue- 
facio, and, occasionally. with ‘ adsuesco.’ 
Here however the ‘e’ would be easily 
lost before ‘et,’ and the dative is usual 
with the intrans. (c. 44, 1; I. 31, 4, &c.). 
Horace has (Sat. 1. 4, 105) ‘insuevit... 
hoc me'; which is apparently a double 
accusative. 

5. copia; so 4. 4,6; 27,2; 47,1; 56, 
I, &c. The singular, though far more 
rarely found in this sense than the plural, 
is so used in Cic., Caes., and Sall. 

6. Cinithios. This people, according 
to Ptolemy (4. 3, 22), lived near the Lesser 
Syrtis: bn’ abrivy Kwíi0iot, kal ávaroAuco- 
Tepot Mex pt ToU Kivíov morapov Neyiripor. 

6. cnitios : text B. 

The Cinyps is nearly equi-distant from the 
two Syrtes, and the Cinithii are placed 
eastward of lake Tritonis. 

7. Camillus, M. Furius P. f. P. n. 
Camillus, cos. 761, A.D. 8: cp. C.I.L. i. 
P. 548. Nipp. notes that he was one of 
the * Arvales, and probably died in 790, 
A.D. 37. His son was consul in 785, 
A. D. 32 (6. 1, 1). 

pro consule. This, and ‘ pro prae- 
tore,' are the regular forms used in Tacitus 
for ‘proconsul’ and * propraetor’ (e.g. c. 66, 
1; 3- 32, 1; 35, 1; 38,15; 66,2, &c ). 

8. legionem, the one legion (‘Tertia 
Augusta’), usually stationed here: see 
Introd. vii. p. 123. Its headquarters were 
probably at Theveste : Rushforth, p. 128. 

quod sub signis, i.e. the standing 
auxiliary force attached to the legion. 

conductos, ‘concentrated’; so ‘con- 
duceret" 4. 47, 1. The gender is adapted 
not only to ‘socios’ but tothe soldiers of 
the legion: cp. 14. 20, 7. 

9. Numidarum, the Musulamii as dis- 
tinct from the Mauri. 

10.aeque...quam. Tacitus often (e.g. 
C. 65, 1; 4. 49, 2; 71, 4; 14. 38, 3, &c.) 
adopts, from Plaut. and Liv., this con- 
struction with a negative, once only (H. 4. 
5, 4) the Ciceronian * aeque ac.' 

ne bellum ... eluderent; i.e. ifa 
larger force was brought against them. 
‘Metu’ is explained by 4. 24, 2, as their 
fear both of the Roman name, and of the 
attack of regular infantry. 

II. ut vincerentur, i e. to make a 
stand (and thus incur a defeat). The idea 
is repeated in ‘nec . . . detrectavit’ and 
*fusi Numidae'; but it is hardly likely 
that so Tacitean an antithesis is (as Nipp. 
thinks) a corruption of * iungerentur.' 

A. I). 18.] 

LIBER Il. CAP. s2, 53. 

347 

6tur. igitur legio medio, leves cohortes duacque alae in cornibus 

7 locantur. 

nec Tacfarinas pugnam detrectavit. 

fusi Numidae, 

8 multosque post annos Furio nomini partum decus militiae, nam 
post illum reciperatorem urbis filiumque eius Camillum penes 
alias familias imperatoria laus fuerat; atque hic quem memo- 
9 ramus bellorum expers habebatur. eo pronior Tiberius res gestas 
apud senatum celebravit; et decrevere patres triumphalia in- 
signia, quod Camillo ob modestiam vitae impune fuit. 

58. Sequens annus Tiberium tertio, Germanicum iterum con- 

sules habuit. 

sed eum honorem Germanicus iniit apud urbem 

Achaiae Nicopolim, quo venerat per Illvricam oram, viso fratre 
Druso in Delmatia agente, Hadriatici ac mox Ionii maris ad- 

2 versam navigationem perpessus. 

igitur paucos dies insumpsit 

reficiendae classi; simul sinus Actiaca victoria inclutos et sacra- 
tas ab Augusto manubias castraque Antonii cum recordatione 

3 maiorum suorum adiit. 

namque ei, ut memoravi, avunculus 

Augustus, avus Antonius erant, magnaque illic imago tristium 

I. medio. On this abl. of place sce 
Introd. v. $ 35. 

4. filiumque eius. The great man's 
son, L. Furius Camillus, though consul 
(405, B.C. 349) and twice dictator, and 
not without the reputation of victories 
(Liv. 7. 28) is of less note than the 
grandson of the same name, who gained 
a triumph in 4'6, B.C. 338, and was 
again consul in 429, B. C. 345 (Liv. 8. 13; 
29). Tacitus appears to confuse these. 

5. alias familias. The explanation of 
Orelli and others, that this means * other 
fami'ies of the Furian gens,’ can hardly 
stand, as Tacitus had implied above that 
the whole * Furium nomen" had been dur- 
ing this time without military renown: 
he may have overlooked the not very 
famous triumphs of P. Furius Philus in 
531, B.C. 323 (C. I. L. i. p. 458), and 
L. Furius Purpureo in 554, B.C. 200 (Liv. 
31. 49, 2). ‘Familia’ is used for ‘gens’ 
in I. 4, 3; 3. 48, 2; 76, 4; 12. 12, 2. 

6. pronior, ‘ more readily’: cp. ‘ita 
prono’ 4. 2, 4. 

7. triumphalia insignia: cp. I. 72, I. 

8. modestiam: cp. 1. 11, 15 4. 7, 43 
5. 1I, 2. 

impune: cp. I. 72, 3. 

9. tertio. Nipp. reads ‘tertium,’ on 
the authority of Varro (ap. Gell. 10. 1, 6), 
that ‘tertio praetor’ could only mean 
‘ praetor in the third place,’ i. e. with two 

elected above him. But there could be 
no such ambiguity in *tertio consul'; the 
same passage in\Gellius shows that Cicero 
considered the question between the two 
expressions an open one; *tertio consul’ 
is found in Vell. 3. 40, 5; Pl. Pan. 20; 
and a writer would naturally avoid the 
use of four consecutive words ending in 
*-um.' Tiberius was consul only for a few 
days (Suet. Tib. 26), and was succeeded 
by L. Seius Tubero (Insc. Orell. 1495 — 
Wilm. 1713; Henzen 6442), on whom see 
C. 20, 2. 

Later, 

II. Achaiae. See on 1.76, 4. 

perhaps from the time of Vespasian,. 

Epirus with Acarnania formed a separate 
province under a procurator. See Mar- 
quardt, i. 331. 

Nicopolim. This colony (5. 10, 4) 
was founded by Augustus, opposite to 
Actium, on the north side of the Am- 
bracian gulf, where his camp had .stood 
before the battle. Here were held the 
revived quinquennial games to the Actian 
Apollo. See Suet. Aug. 18; Dio, 50. 12, 
3; 5I. T, 3; Strab. 7. 7, 6, 325. 

12. in Delmatia : see c. 44, I. 

I4. reficiendae classi. This gerun- 
dive dat. (see Introd. v. § 32 b) is used with 
*insumo ' in 3. 1, 1; 16. 23, 1; Agr. 23, 
I; with *adsumo' in 16. 3, 2, and Pl. 
Mai. 

16. ut memoravi, c. 43, 6. 

be 

bond 

o 

on 

IO 

tem,’ 

348 

laetorumque. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 771. 

hinc ventum Athenas, foederique sociae et vetus- 
tae urbis datum ut uno lictore uteretur. 

excepere Graeci quae- 4 

sitissimis honoribus, vetera suorum facta dictaque praeferentes, 
quo plus dignationis adulatio haberet. 
54. Petita inde Euboea tramisit Lesbum, ubi Agrippina no- 

vissimo partu Iuliam edidit. 

tum extrema Asiae Perinthumque 2 

ac Byzantium, Thraecias urbes, mox Propontidis angustias et 
os Ponticum intrat, cupidine veteres locos et fama celebratos 
noscendi ; pariterque provincias internis certaminibus aut magis- 

tratuum iniuriis fessas refovebat. 

I. foederi. Athens and Sparta were 
* civitates liberae, and removed from the 
jurisdiction of the proconsul: see Mar- 
quardt, i. 329. Civitates foederatae’ 
were always more or less ‘ liberae' ; some 
independence, variable in different cases, 
being implied in the existence of a ‘ foe- 
dus’: see Staatsr. iii. 725. 

2. uno lictore. As holding ‘ pro- 
consulare imperium," or as consul, Ger- 
manicus would be attended by twelve 
lictors. A Roman magistrate, visiting a 
sovereign or confederate state, usually 
took none with him ; but the single lictor, 
such as priests or women might have, is, 
in the case of a magistrate, equivalent to 
none, and merely in the place of an 
* accensus ': see Staatsr. i. 373, 4; 378, 1. 
Antonius, out of compliment or from in- 
dolence, so acted at Athens: see Ap- 
pian, B. C. s. 76. 

Graeci. The general term may be used 
to speak of his reception at other cities 
besides Athens. 

3. vetera suorum facta dictaque. 
The Greeks are called ‘laetum antiqui- 
tatibus genus’ in H. 2. 4, 1; and Sulla, 
during the siege of Athens, was incensed 
by a deputation which talked to him * of 
Theseus, Eumolpus, and the Persian war’ 
(Plut. Sull. 13, 460). See Momms. Hist. 
v. 257, E. T. i. 280. The expression 
* facta dictaque' is used as a formula in 
c. 28, 35 3. 65, 1; 4. 37, 45 6. 24, 1, &c. 

praeferentes, ‘making a display of’; 
so ‘modestiam,’ *imitamenta, ‘ liberta- 
‘auctoritatem praeferre ' (13. 45, 2 ; 
14. 57, 55; 16. 22, 8; 32, 3) ; also * avun- 
culum praeferebat ' 4. 75, 2. 

4 quo plus dignationis, &c., ‘ to add 
to the honour of their obsequiousness,' by 
dignifying those from whom it came. Ta- 
citus gives much the same estimate of the 
Greek character as Juvenal (3, 74-108). 

* Dignatio' is used by Tacitus elsewhere 

atque illum in regressu sacra 8 

in this sense (cp. 4. 52, 2; 6. 27, 2 ; 13. 
42, 8; H. 3. 80, 3); oftener in that of 
political dignity or rank (3- 75, 23 4. 16, 
6, &c.: see on G. 13, 2). The word is 
rare in earlier writers. 

5. tramisit Lesbum, an unusual con- 
struction with this verb in this sense, but 
Livy has‘ Uticam...transmisit’ (25. 31, 12). 

6. Iuliam: see Introd. ix. note 16. 
Eckhel (vi. 214) mentions Mytilenaean 
coins inscribed @EAN AIOAIN ALPPIII- 
HINAN. There is also an inscription 
(see Orelli s note) to young Nero, as son 
coU véov Teppavixou kaicapos kai Oeas 
AloAí£Sos kapmodoópas 'A*ypermeivas. Agrippa 
had received similar titles there (C. I. G. 
2176). 

Perinthum ; on a promontory pro- 
jecting into the Propontis ; an old and 
famous city, which in or after the fourth 
century took the name of Heraclea, whence 
the modern name ‘ Eregli’ or ‘ Erekli.’ 

7. Byzantium. On the relations of 
this city to Rome to this date see 12. 62, I. 

Thraecias; so Halm, wherever ‘the 
word occurs; this being the prevalent 
reading in this MS., which has also the 
form in ‘a’ and ‘ e'; of which the latter 
(3. 38, 33 4. 48, 5) is rejected by Ritter 
(1804), who otherwise follows the MS. in 
its variations. On Thrace at this time 
see c. 64, 3, &c. 

angustias, the Bosporus. 

9. magistratuum. Bithynia had cer- 
tainly recently suffered from its governor (I. 
74,1); but probably the local magistrates . 
who had pillaged their own treasuries (cp. 
4.45, 5) are chiefly meant. Thus Cicero 
speaks of communities in Cilicia ‘ perditas 

. per magistratus suos’ (ad Fam. 3. 8, 
5; cp. ad Att. 6. 2, 5), and Pliny found a 

‘similar state of things in Bithynia (Epp. 

ad Trai. 17, 3). 
IO. sacra Samothracum, the worship 
of the * Kabeiri' : see Hdt. 2. 51, 3; 3- 

A. D. 18.] LIBER Il. CAP. 53-55. 

349 

Samothracum visere nitentem obvii aquilones depulere. igitur 
adito Ilio quaeque ibi varietate fortunae et nostri origine vene- 
randa, relegit Asiam adpellitque Colophona, ut Clarii Apollinis 
4 oraculo uteretur. non femina illic, ut apud Delphos, sed certis 
e familiis et ferme Mileto accitus sacerdos numerum modo con- 5 
sultantium et nomina audit; tum in specum degressus, hausta 
fontis arcani aqua, ignarus plerumque litterarum et carminum 
edit responsa versibus, compositis super rebus quas quis mente 
5 concepit. et ferebatur Germanico per ambages, ut mos oraculis, 
matürum exitium cecinisse. 
55. At Cn. Piso, quo properantius destinata inciperet, civi- 
tatem Atheniensium turbido incessu exterritam oratione saeva 
increpat, oblique Germanicum perstringens, quod contra decus 

I. igitur alio: ab Ilio Heins., text J. Sev. Vater, 1796 (see Ritt.). IO. exitum 

IO 

Heraeus and Nipp. ; cp. c. 71, 2. 

37, 3; Ar. Pax 278; Juv. 3, 144, &c. Its 
nature has been discussed by Lobeck, 
Aglaoph. B. iii. ch. 5, p. 1202-1295. The 
turn of mind of Germanicus is illustrated 
by the places he visited (cp. c. 59) : the 
Greek oracles had however a special 
attraction for a Roman, as is shown by 
the tour of Aemilius Paullus (Liv. 45. 27). 
Samothrace belonged to the Thracian 
kingdom, and was a free state in the sub- 
sequent province (Marquardt, i. 315). 

2. adito Ilio. The correction is evi- 
dent from the context. The llium here 
spoken of, to which the most recent re- 
mains at Hissarlik belong, dates only 
from the restoration of Sulla, consequent 
on an almost complete destruction by 
Fimbria in 699, B.c. 85 (App. Mithr. 53). 
But that it was on the site of, and repre- 
sented, Homeric Troy, was an article of 
national faith with Romans; though the 
theory of Demetrius of Skepsis (see Grote, 
i. ch. 15, p. 444) must have been known 
through its adoption by Strabo (13. 1, 35, 
598). Lucan indeed (9, 961—979), pos- 
sibly also Horace (Od. 3. 3, 40-60), speak 
as if the site of Troy was a wilderness ; 
but such rhetorical language may be ex- 
plained by supposing that the last restora- 
tion was partial, and that the ancient sites 
were supposed to cover a larger space 
(see Friedl. ii. p. 121). Ilium, though a 
favoured city, and subsequently freed from 
all tribute (12. 58, 1; Pl. N. H. 5. 30, 33, 
124), was in itself insignificant: cp. 4. 55, 4. 

nostri. On this genitive see Introd. 
v. § 33 a. 

3. relegit, ‘again coasted along.’ This 
sense is rare, and the word mostly poetical : 
Vergil so uses ‘lego’ (G. 2, 44, &c.). 

Colophona, one of the lonian cities. 
Its oracle of Clarian Apollo is spoken of 
by Strabo (14. 1, 27, 642) as a thing of 
the past; but it was again in repute in 
Pliny’s time (N. H. 2. 103, 106, 232): 
see also note on 12. 32, I. Several later 
notices of the oracle are referred to by 
Marquardt (iii. 98, 1). Considerable re- 
mains are found in the locality, but the 
sites of Colophon, Claros and Notium 
seem to be close together and confused. 
A cave, containing a spring as here de- 
scribed, is to be seen at Ghaiour-keui : 
see Texier and Pullan, Asia Minor, p. 32. 
: B5. Mileto. The oracle was probably 
an offshoot from that of Apollo Didy- 
maeus (on which see on 3. 63, 5). 

7. litterarum et carminum, ‘ of writ- 
ing and metre.’ 

II. properantius: cp. 3. 74, 5, &c.; 
Sall. Jug 8,2; 96, 2. Tacitus has the 
positive in 16. 24, 2; elsewhere both 
forms are poetical. ‘ Destinata,’ his pur- 
pose of opposing Germanicus. 

12. incessu. The use of this word to 
denote an entrance upon a place or 
country, especially by way of hostile in- 
vasion (cp. 3. 33, 2; 4. 24, 2 ; 12. 50, 2), 
appears tu be wholly Tacitean: in 6. 33, 
5. probably also in 4. 74, 1, it is used of 
approaches or means of access. 

13. oblique... perstringens: cp. 5. 
2, 2; II, I; probably making allusion 
without mentioning his name. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

350 [A. U. C. 771. 

Romani nominis non Athenienses tot cladibus exstinctos, sed 
conluviem illam nationum comitate nimia coluisset: hos enim 
esse Mithridatis adversus Sullam, Antonii adversus divum Au- 
gustum socios. etiam vetera obiectabat, quae in Macedones 2 
5 inprospere, violenter in suos fecissent, offensus urbi propria 
quoque ira, quia Theophilum quendam Areo iudicio falsi dam- 
natum precibus suis non concederent. exim navigatione celeri 8 
per Cycladas et compendia maris adsequitur Germanicum apud 
insulam Rhodum, haud nescium quibus insectationibus petitus 
1o foret: sed tanta mansuetudine agebat, ut, cum orta tempestas 
raperet in abrupta possetque interitus inimici ad casum referri, 
miserit triremis quarum subsidio discrimini eximeretur. neque 4 
tamen mitigatus Piso, et vix diei moram perpessus linquit Ger- 
manicum praevenitque. et postquam Suriam ac legiones attigit, 
15 largitione, amibitu, infimos manipularium iuvando, cum veteres 
centuriones, severos tribunos demoveret locaque eorum clienti- 
bus suis vel deterrimo cuique attribueret, desidiam in castris, 
licentiam in urbibus, vagum ac lascivientem per agros militem 
sineret, eo usque corruptionis provectus est, ut sermone vulgi 
20 parens legionum haberetur. nec Plancina se intra decora feminis 5 

I. tot cladibus. Attica had suffered and do not give ' Areopagus' as one word. 

severely from the last Philip of Macedon 
in B.C. 200 (Liv. 31. 26), and Athens it- 
self still more from its siege and storm 
by Sulla in 668, B.c. 86 (App. Mithr. 
30-40), after which its long walls and 
fortifications had never been restored : its 
last fleet was lost at Actium. 

2. conluviem ... nationum: cp. 
I4. 15, 4 and note. The easy Wy irse 
of its citizenship by purchase, formerly 
denounced perhaps by Demosthenes (epi 
cvvTá£ eos, $ 24), had been forbidden by 
Augustus in 733, B.C. 21 (dmp'yópevae 
cic: pndéva woditny dpyupiou moietaÓ0at 
Dio, 54 7, 2) 

hos enim. Velleius (2. 23, 4) excuses 
the Athenians as having been forced, in 
the Mithridatic war, to act against their 
sympathies. 

5. violenter in suos, their many in- 
stances of ingratitude to their own public 
men, throughout their history. 

6. Areo iudicio, aw. «lp. for ‘ Arei 
pagi iudicio. Nipp. shows, by several 
references, that in Roman writers, though 
the orthography of * Areus' varies, the 
best MSS. always follow the Greek usage, 

Athens, a free state, had its own courts. 

falsi damnatum, ‘convicted of for- 
gery’; so also H. 2. 86, 2: cp. Prof. 
Mayor on Juv. I, 67. 

7. concederent = ‘condonarent’: cp. 
4. 31,13 16. 33, 3; Cic. pro Marc. I, 3. 

8. compendia maris: cp. ‘compen- 
diis viarum" 1. 63, 6. 

9. petitus foret. The tense refers to 
the past speech at Athens. 

II. raperet in abrupta, ‘ was driving 
him on a reef’: cp. *insulae saxis 
abruptis! c. 23, 3; also I5, 42, 3; and 
the metaphorical uses in 4: 20, 5; H. 1. 
48, 7; Agr. 42,5. The object of ‘raperet’ 
is supplied from ‘inimici’ below. On the 
dat. with *eximere' cp. I. 48, 2, &c.: 
* eximere discrimini’ is repeated in 6. 9, 6. 

16. centuriones .. . tribunos demo- 
veret. This passage illustrates the dis- 
cretion of appointment left by Caesar to 
his legati. See also that left to the 

* praefectus praetorio' (which seems ex- 
ceptional), 4. 2, 3. 

20. haberetur, here, as ,Nipp. notes, 
used for ‘ perhibetur ’ ; cp. ‘qui nunc Al- 
banus habetur’ Verg. Aen. 12, 134. 

A. D. 18.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 55, 56. 

35! 

tenebat, sed exercitio equitum, decursibus cohortium interesse, 
in Agrippinam, in Germanicum contumelias iacere, quibusdam 
etiam bonorum militum ad mala obsequia promptis, quod haud 

6 invito imperatore ea fieri occultus rumor incedebat. 

nota haec 

Germanico, sed praeverti ad Armenios instantior cura fuit. 

56. Ambigua gens ea antiquitus hominum ingeniis et situ 
terrarum, quoniam nostris provinciis late praetenta penitus ad 
Medos porrigitur; maximisque imperiis interiecti et saepius dis- 
cordes sunt, adversus Romanos odio et in Parthum invidia. 
2 regem illa tempestate non habebant, amoto Vonone: sed favor 
nationis inclinabat in Zenonem, Polemonis regis Pontici filium, 
quod is prima ab infantia instituta et cultum Armeniorum aemu- 
latus, venatu epulis et quae alia barbari celebrant, proceres 

3 plebemque iuxta devinxerat. 

4. incidebat (cp. 3. 26, 3) : text L. 
quo E. Jacob. 

I. exercitio equitum, decursibus 
cohortium. Nipp. shows from the 
parallel passage (3. 33, 3) that ‘exerci- 
tium’ and ‘decursus’ are used indifferently 
for ‘manoeuvres’; ‘cohortes’ being here 
foot as opposed to horse, there auxiliaries 
as opposed to legions. 

5. praeverti ad; so ‘ praevertere ad’ 
4. 32, à. As a deponent, the verb has 
often this sense, more usually with dat. 

instantior, ‘more urgent’: cp. ‘ species 
instantior’ H. 4. 83, 4. The participle 
is used in this sense by Nep. and Quint. 

cura fuit. Drager notes this construc- 
tion in Vergil, also * erit mihi curae explo- 
rare provinciae voluutatem ' Plin. Epp. 7. 
10, 2, and the inf. with * cupido erat’ (14. 
14, 1), ‘ratio fuit' (H. 3. 22, 1), &c.: see 
Introd. v. $ 43. 

6. Ambigua, ‘fickle’: cp. c. 67, 1. 
On the circumstances of Parthia and 
Armenia at this time see c. 1-4. 

7. late praetenta, ‘bordering far 
along. The expression is Veryilian 
(Aen. 3, 692; 6, 60), and hardly suits 
the time of Tiberius, when Armenia 
touched only the new provincial frontier 
of Cappadocia and Commagene on the 
Euphrates. Its other limits are at this 
time given by Strabo (11. 14, I, 527) : for 

its general geography see vol. ii. Introd. © 

p. 110 and map. It mainly coincides 
with the Transcaucasian dominion of 
Russia and the Turkish province of Er- 
zeroum. 

6. sed : et Pichena. 

igitur Germanicus in urbc Ar- 

7. quo (quoniam) : 

ad Medos. The independent Media 
Atropatene (see c. 4, 2, &c.) is meant, 
described by Strabo (11. 13, 2, 523) as 
east of Armenia and Matiene, and west 
(or rather north-west) of Greater Media: 
see map in vol. ii. and Nipp. on 12. 14. 
It mainly answers to the present Persian 
province of Azerbaijan. 

8. discordes, * hostile to them.’ The 
word in this sense is used with a dative in 

5 

3. 42, 3; 11. 6, 1; 14. 38, 4, and in Ovid © 

and Velleius. 

10. &moto Vonone : see c. 4, 4. 

II. Zenonem, Polemonis .. . filium. 
Polemo I., who had received Pontus and 
Lesser Armenia from Antonius, and Bos- 
porus from Augustus, had lost his life cir. 
B.C. 1; but Pontus was still governed by 
his widow Pythodoris (who had after- 
wards married Archelaus of Cappadocia) 
assisted by her son and successor Polemo II. 
(Suab. 12. 3, 29, 555, 556). This other 
son Zeno is mentioned by Strabo (1.1.) ; 
and an inscription in his honour has been 
found at Smyrna, which states that his 
maternal grandmother was Antonia, appa- 
rently a daughter of M. Antonius by 
Fadia: see Mommsen in Eph. Epig. i. 
270. 

I3. celebrant, ‘use constantly’; so in 
15. 44, 4; H. 2. 49. 7; Dial. 24, 2. 

I4. Artaxata. Here, and in 6. 33, 2, 
this appears not to be indecl, but to be 
abl. sing. in apposition with *urbe'; 
elsewhere it is a plural (as in 14. 23, 1). 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM [A-U. C. 571. 

352 

taxata, adprobantibus nobilibus, circumfusa multitudine, insigne 
regium capiti eius imposuit. ceteri venerantes regem Artaxiam 
consalutavere, quod illi vocabulum indiderant ex nomine urbis. 
at Cappadoces in formam provinciae redacti Q. Veranium lega- 4 
5tum accepere; et quaedam ex regiis tributis deminuta, quo 
mitius Romanum imperium speraretur. Commagenis Q. Ser- 5 
vaeus praeponitur, tum primum ad ius praetoris translatis. 
57. Cunctaque socialia prospere composita non ideo laetum 
Germanicum habebant ob superbiam Pisonis, qui iussus partem 
ro legionum ipse aut per fiium. in Armeniam ducere utrumque 
neglexerat.  Cyrri demum apud hiberna decumae legionis 2 
convenere, firmato vultu, Piso adversus metum, Germanicus, ne 

2. Artaxiam here: Artaxian c. 64, I. 
text R. 

Similar variations in the form of words 
are noted in Introd. v. § 85. The city, 
afterwards burnt by Corbulo (13. 41, 3), 
was on the Araxes, near Erivan. 

I. insigne regium, the tiara and dia- 
dem. A coin, struck apparently in the 
East, bearing on one side the head of 
Germanicus and the title * Germanicus 
Caesar Ti. Aug. f.' and on the reverse 
the coronation of Artaxias and the inscrip- 
tion * Germanic. Artaxias’ (Cohen, i. 325, 
6), is noted by Mommsen (Staatsr. ii. 
831) as probably struck without authority, 
and not in accordance with the usual 
limits of right of representation on coins 
at this time. 

3. ex nomine urbis: his name was 
really, no doubt, taken from that of two 
of his predecessors; the city itself having 
been named after Artaxias I., who founded 
it under the advice of Hannibal (Strab. 11. 
- 14, 6, 528; Plut. Luc. 31, 513). 

4. Cappadoces: cp. c. 42, 6. Steup 
would add ‘et Cilices. 

Q. Veranium. He was legatus of 
Germanicus and one of the accusers of 
Piso (3. 10, 3; 13, 3; 19, 1). Some 
identify him with the consul of 802, A. D. 
49 (12. 5, 1), afterwards legatus of 
Britain (14. 29, 1; Agr. 14, 3), who may 
more probably have been his son. 

legatum accepere. He appears only 
to have organized the province and re- 
turned (c. 74, 2). Cappadocia became a 
Caesarian province under a procurator or 
praefectus (imme? érerpámp), Dio, 57. 17, 
7: cp. 12. 49, 1; Suet. Vesp. 8. 

6. speraretur, sc. ‘fore’: cp. 3. 8, 1 ; 
6. 41, 2, where Nipp. cites ‘superos 

6. serva eius: text L, II. conuenire : 

sperare secundos' (Luc. 7, 349) ; *quem 
. . . adiutorem speraverat’ (Suet. Aug. 
10). 

Commagenis: see on c. 43, 7: viv 3 
éwapxia yéyove (Strab. 16. 2, 3, p. 749). 

Q. Servaeus. This name is restored 
from 3. 13, 3; 6. 7, a. The first of these 
passages shows that he also was not a 
permanent governor. 

7. ad ius praetoris, i.e. to the juris- 
diction of the * legatus Augusti proprae- 
tore’ of Syria. In 791, A.D. 38, Gaius 
again set up a king of Commagene, An- 
tiochus III. (Dio, 59. 8, 2); and it was 
again taken under Roman government, 
apparently united with Syria, by Ves- 
pasian (Suet. Vesp. 8): see Marquardt, 
i. 399. The dominion of Philopator of 
Cilicia (cp. c. 42, 7), not here mentioned, 
was also probably annexed to Syria. 

8. socialia. This neuter appears to 
be here alone used for ‘res sociales." 
The idea contained in the whole sentence 
is subject of *habebant': cp. Introd. v. 
$ 65 b, 2. 

laetum ... habebant, ‘did not keep 
him pleased’: cp. c. 65, 1 ; also * sollici- 
tum habere aliquem ' Plaut. Men. 4. 2, 21; 
i aie 7. 3, 1, &c. For ‘ideo’ cp. 1. 
12, 6. 3 

IO. filium, M. Piso: see c. 76, 2, &c. 

utrumque, i.e. he. had sent only a 
legatus of lower rank in charge of them. . 

II. Cyrri. .Cyrrus, now Choros, gave 
its name to Cyrrestica, the northern di- 
vision of Syria. It lay.on the chief road 
connecting Antioch with the place of 
crossing the Euphrates at Zeugma. 

decumae legionis; Introd. vii. p. 123. 

A.D. 18.] LIBER II. 

98 minari crederetur ; 

et erat, ut rettuli, 

CAP. 56-58. 353 

clementior. sed amici 

accendendis offensionibus callidi intendere vera, adgerere falsa 

4 ipsumque et Plancinam et filios variis modis criminari. 

post- 

remo paucis familiarium adhibitis sermo coeptus a Caesare, 
qualem ira et dissimulatio- gignit, responsum a Pisone precibus 5 

contumacibus; discesseruntque apertis odiis. 

post quae rarus 

in tribunali Caesaris Piso, et si quando adsideret, atrox ac dis- 

5 sentire manifestus. 

vox quoque eius audita est in convivio, cum 

apud regem Nabataeorum coronae aureae magno pondere Cae- 
sari et Agrippinae, leves Pisoni et ceteris offerrentur, principis 
Romani, non Parthi regis filio eas epulas dari ; abiecitque simul 
coronam et multa in luxum addidit, quae Gormauico quamquam 

acerba tolerabantur tamen. 

58. Inter quae ab rege Parthorum Artabano legati. venere. 

6. discesserantque : text Pich. 

I. ut rettuli: cp. c. 55, 3. 

2. accendendis offensionibus. The 
case of such gerundives with adjectives is 
clearly dative in 3. 15, 5, abl. in 13. 57, 1; 
in most other cases doubtful but generally 
taken as dat. : cp. Nipp. on 6. 24. 

intendere: cp. c. 38, 6. 

3. filios. One of the sons had re- 
mained in Rome (3. 16, 5), but may have 
been accused of intriguing there. 
the proceedings of Germanicus were 
watched and reported at home, would 
appear from c. 59. 

4. paucis familiarium adhibitis. 
The same expression is repeated in 3. 10, 
6, of an informal board of assessors. Here 
they are only witnesses. 

5. ira et dissimülatio, ‘resentment 
struggling against disguise,’ i.e. partially, 
but not wholly dissembled: cp. ‘amore 
et ira’ 13. 44, 6 

6. contumacibus, 
‘ironical entreaties.’ 

discesserunt. The MS. text could 
stand, if the event was regarded from 
a subsequent time; but it seems more 
probable that the same tense is carried 
through. 

apertis odiis. ‘Opertis’ has found 
defenders, who would explain it by laying 
the stress on ‘ odiis,' and by pointing out 
that outward courtesies of dining with 
each other, &c. (cp. 3. 14, 2), were still 
maintained. But there was certainly little 
concealment in the language or conduct 
of Piso (cp. below, and c. 69), and *un- 

VOL. I. 

‘insolent,’ i.e. 

'That 

opertis (so Pfitzn.): text L. postque: text Mur. 

disguised enmity’ is distinct from formal 
* renuntiatio amicitiae ' (e. 79; 3). 

post quae. ‘Postque’ is retained by 
some. Madvig's rule ($ 435a, Obs. D that, 
except in double relative clauses, ‘que’ 

*que ' would in prose be used “only to 
connect two words, of which the former i is 
a pronoun (e.g. ‘seque regnumque ' c..3, 
3), appears certainly to find wen 
in Tacitus, who has : jevaviiqe ...mul- 
taque usurpavit' (c. 59, 2), and ‘ ‘ meque 

. cepisset aliorumque . . . expectarem’ 
(16. I6, 1). But here the sentences are 
less closely joined, and * post quae! is a 
common form of expression with Tacitus, 
asinc.86, 1; 1.13, 1; 3. 11, 2; 17, I, &c. 

8. manifestus, with inf., only here 
and Dial. 16, 2; Stat. Theb. 10, 759; and 
the Digests. Cp. Introd. $ 47, Gudeman 
on Dial. 1. 1. 

9. Nabataeorum. This people held the 
greater part of north-west Arabia, and had 
displaced the Idumaeans from their ancient 
capital, Petra. They were at this time 
a, vassal kingdom, and became a province 
under Trajan: see Momms. Hist. v. 476, 
E. T. ii. 148, foll. 

coronae. Such gifts are mentioned in 
I4. 24, 6, and Just. 18, 2. 

IO. principis. ..regis. These are 
emphatically opposed, and show the dif- 
ference of the idea of the principate from 
that of a sultanate. On the. combination 
* Parthus rex’ see Introd. v. § 3. 

12. luxum. He charges Germanicus 
with this (c. 78, 1). 

Aa 

ut 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

354 [A. U. C. 772. 

miserat amicitiam ac foedus memoraturos, et cupere renovari 
dextras, daturumque honori Germanici ut ripam Euphratis 
accederet: petere interim ne Vonones in Suria haberetur neu 
proceres gentium propinquis nuntiis ad discordias traheret. ad 2 
ea Germanicus de societate Romanorum Parthorumque magni- 
fice, de adventu regis et cultu sui cum decore ac modestia re- 
spondit. Vonones Pompeiopolim Ciliciae maritimam urbem 3 
amotus est. datum id non modo precibus Artabani sed con- 
tumeliae Pisonis, cui gratissimus erat ob plurima officia et dona, 
quibus Plancinam devinxerat. 

59. M. Silano L. Norbano consulibus Germanicus Aegyptum 
proficiscitur cognoscendae antiquitatis. sed cura provinciae 2 
praetendebatur, levavitque apertis horreis pretia frugum multaque 
in vulgus grata usurpavit: sine milite incedere, pedibus intectis 

I. cuperere novari : text DB, cupere novari Nipp. 

1. memoraturos, ‘to call to mind’; 
so in 4. 46, 4. The friendship is that 
between Augustus and Phraates (c. I). 

renovari dextras. In H. 1. 54, 1, 
* mittere dextras ' is used of sending actual 
figures of hands as a symbol of friend- 
ship. Here the expression is probably 
only a bold figure to avoid repeating 
‘amicitiam’ or ‘foedus’: cp. ‘fallere 
dextras’ Verg. Aen. 6, 613. 

2. daturum: cp. ‘datum id’ below, 
and I. 7, 10, &c. 

3. accederet; so used with simple 
acc. I2. 31, 3; H. 2. 27, 3, &c.; also in 
poets, and Nepos, Varro and Sallust. 

Vonones: see c. 4, 4. 

haberetur, ‘be kept in custody’; so 
c. 63, 5; 11. 16, 1, &c. 

neu... traheret: sce note on 1. 79, 
1, 
6. cultu sui. The compliment offered 
above. 

cum decore, ‘ gracefully,’ from ‘ decor.’ 

7. Pompeiopolim. This town, for- 
merly X(Ao, took its name from Cn. 
Pompeius its restorer: it is now Mezetlu. 
On the end of Vonones cp. c. 68. 

8. datum; by zeugma with *contu- 
meliae.' 

11. M. Silano L. Norbano coss. : on 
the order of events here see note on c. 62. 
The full names of these consuls (C. I. L. 
vi. 1437, x. 1964) are M. Iunius, M. f. 
Silanus, L. Norbanus Balbus: see Klein. 
The former, not identical with the better 
known M. Silanus, C. f. (cp. 3. 24, 5), is 

identified by Henzen with the Arvalis of 
193-507, A. D. 40-54 (C. I. L. vi. 2030, 
2032, 2035), and the procos. of Africa 
(Introd. vii. p. 114), and is also thought 
to be the Silanus who married Aemilia 
Lepida (Introd ix. note 10); but the 
relationships of this family are extremely ' 
perplexing: seethe pedigree in Lehmann's 
Claudius. These consuls give their names 
to the Lex Iunia Norbana, on which see 
note on 13. 27, 4. 

Aegyptum  profleiscitur: on the 
whole subject of Roman travel in Egypt, 
see Friedl. ii. pp. 123-152. 

12. cognoscendae antiquitatis: on 
this gen. see Introd. v. $ 37 d. 

cura provinciae praetondebatur. 
Tacitus appears to consider the famine 
there not so pressing as Suetonius makes 
it, who speaks (Tib. 52) of ‘immensa et 
repentina fames.’ Josephus (c. Ap. 2, 5) 
mentions a distribution of corn by Ger- 
manicus at Alexandria, which is implied 
to have been necessarily meagre in amount. 
Egypt (see below) is hardly in strictness 

a ‘provincia’ (Staatsr. ii. 859). 

13. horreis. Such public granaries, 
though especially important here, appear 
to have existed in all provinces, to assist 
the local, and, if possible, the Roman 
corn-market : see Marquardt, ii. 135. It is 
possible that the action of Germanicus 
seriously affected the supply of Rome for 
this year: see c. 87, t. 

I4. in vulgus: cp. I. 76, 5. 

intectis, i.e. *with only sandals on 

A.D. 19.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 58-60. 355 

et pari cum Graecis amictu, P. Scipionis aemulatione, quem 
eadem factitavisse apud Siciliam, quamvis flagrante adhuc Poe- 

3 norum bello, accepimus. 

Tiberius cultu habituque eius lenibus 

verbis perstricto, acerrime increpuit quod contra instituta Augusti 

4non sponte principis Alexandriam introisset. 

nam Augustus 

inter alia dominationis arcana, vetitis nisi permissu ingredi sena- 
toribus aut equitibus Romanis inlustribus, seposuit Aegyptum, 
ne fame urgueret Italiam, quisquis eam provinciam claustraque 
terrae ac maris quamvis levi praesidio adversum ingentes exer- 

citus insedisset. 

60. Sed Germanicus nondum comperto profectionem eam 

2 incusari Nilo subvehebatur, orsus oppido a Canopo. 

condidere 

id Spartani ob sepultum illic rectorem navis Canopum, qua 
tempestate Menelaus Graeciam repetens diversum ad mare 

6. permissu.suo E. Wurm. 

them.’ The word is first found in Sall. 
and common in Tacitus: cp. 3. 41, 4; 4. 
1, 3, &c. 

I. P. Scipionis. Africanus is described 
by Livy (29. 19, 11) as going about at 
Syracuse ‘cum pallio crepidisque, the 
Greek ipanioy and brobíjuara, as distinct 
from the Roman ‘toga’ and ' calcei" 
see also Suet. Tib. 13, and other' instances 
in Staatsr. iii. 220, 1. 

3. cultu habituque : see on I. 10, 7. 

4. increpuit. According to Suet. 
Tib. 52, this complaint was made pub- 
licly in the senate. 

5. non sponte, ‘without leave of.’ 
The word is used with gen. some ten or 
more times in the Hist. and Ann. (e. g. 4. 
7; 33 51, 5; 6. 31, M &c.), also in Varro, 
Lucan, and Pl. Mai 

6. arcana: see on c. 36, 2. 

7. equitibus . . . inlustribus: cp. 4. 
58, 1; 6. 18, 4, &c. They are also called 
‘ insignes ' (ur. 5,.2), ' primores" (H. I. 
4» 3), ' equites dignitate senatoria' (16. 
17, 1), * splendidi' (Pl. Epp. 6. 15, 1; 25, 
I). The difference between these and 
* equites modici ' (see 1. 73, 1 ; Introd. vii. 
p. 102; Staatsr. iii. 563, 1; Prof. Wilkins 
in D. of Ant. i. 757) is not a constitutional 
distinction. 

seposuit, REDE to himself’; so (with 
*sibi") 6. 19, 1; 13. 19, 2. Elsewhere 
(H. 1. 11, 1) Egypt is said * domi retineri," 
i. e. to be reserved to the ‘ house,’ or  per- 
sonal government’ of the ‘ princeps ’ ; who 
here in reality represented its ancient 

kings, and appointed no legatus, but 
governed it through an equestrian ‘ prae- 
fectus’ as viceroy S equites genes 2e: 
tinent vice regum’ H. r. 1): 
Strab. 16. I, 12, 797; aad further PH 
Introd. vii. p. 117; Staatsr. ii. 749, 1; 
764,1; 859, 2; 953, 1; Marquardt, i. 
441, foll. 

8. fame urgueret Italiam. Vespasian 
occupied Alexandria with this object 
(H. 3. 48, 4). On the inability of Italy 
to feed itself see 3. 54, 6, &c. 

claustra. According to Hirtius (B. 
Alex. c. 26) ‘tota Aegyptos maritumo 
accessu Pharo, pedestri Pelusio velut 
claustris munita existimatur ' : cp. H. 2. 
82, 4, and * claustrum pelagi Pharon' Luc. 
10, 509. 

5 

9. quamvis, &c., i.e. even if he.had | 

“but a small garrison and was opposed by 

great armies, 

12. oppido & Canopo: on the position 
of the prep. see Introd. v. § 77, 5. Cano- 
pus, or Canobus, gave its name to the 
western branch of the Nile (Hdt. 2. 17, 
&c.), and was an important city until 
the foundation of Alexandria. Its ruins 

are traced about three miles west of 

Abukir. 

13. ob sepultum ...reotorem. This 
tradition is not in the old story of the 
voyage of Menelaus (see Hdt. 2. 113), but 
was known to Strabo (17. t, 17, 801), 
and Pliny (N. H. 5. 31, 34, 128). 

I4. diversum : cp. I. 17, 5, &c. 

Aa2 

£A 

IO 

356 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 772. 

terramque Libyam deiectus est. inde proximum amnis os di- 3 
catum Herculi, quem indigenae ortum apud se et antiquissimum 
perhibent eosque qui postea pari virtute fuerint in cognomentum 

eius adscitos; mox visit veterum Thebarum magna vestigia. 

manebant structis molibus litterae Aegyptiae, priorem opulen- 
tiam complexae ; iussusque e senioribus sacerdotum patrium 
sermonem interpretari, referebat habitasse quondam septingenta 
milia aetate militari, atque eo cum exercitu regem Rhamsen 
Libya Aethiopia Medisque et Persis et Bactriano ac Scytha 
potitum quasque terras Suri Armeniique et contigui Cappadoces 

I. Libycam conj. Ritt. delectus: text Jac. Gron. est add. Pichena. 

1. deiectus est. The error ' delectus ' 
is noted again in 4. 25. 6, and a similar 
one (* prolectae?) in 3. 65, 4. The inser- 
tion of *est' is questioned (cp. Walther 
and Dráger, Synt. und Stil, $ 36), but de- 
fended by Nipp., who maintains that 
Tacitus would not omit the verb in such 
a position with a masc. or fem. subject. 

inde: supply ‘visit’ from below. 

proximum ... 0s. The mouth itself 
is called the * Kanobic' by Hdt. (2. 17, 
4) and Strabo (17. 1, 18, 802). 

2. Herculi: on thetemple near Canopus 
see Hdt.2. 113. 3; and on the deity (ap- 
parently one of the forms of the sun-god) 
so called by the Egyptian Greeks, Id. 
C. 43-45, and the commentators there. 
Strabo (1. 1.) also mentions the temple. 

4. mox. Tacitus omits a story given 
by Pliny (N. H. 8. 46, 71, 185), that 
Germanicus visited Memphis, where the 
bull Apis refused food at his hand, a pre- 
sage of his death. 

veterum "Thebarum. The epithet 
appears to be used to mark it as the oldest 
city of that name. It was known to 
Greeks in Homeric times (Il. 9, 383), 
apparently as the richest and most popu- 
lous in the world. ‘ Vestigia,’ ‘ruins’; cp. 
H. 3. 54, 5, &c. 

5. structis molibus, ‘on piles of 
masonry,’ i. e. those of Karnak and Luxor. 

litterae, the hieroglyphics, more ac- 
curately described in 11. 14, I. 

opulentiam complexae, ‘giving a 
summary of its ancient might’; so ‘com- 
plecti oratione, &c. (Cic.). 
tia,’ like *opes, is sometimes used of 
resources in general: cp. 4. 55. 7; Sall. 
Cat. 6, 3; so perhaps * opulentior' 3. 43, I. 

7. septingenta. We can hardly sup- 

. pose this sentence to mean that such was 

* Opulen- . 

the number in Thebes aloné or its district. 
If it be taken to mean those of that age 
in all Egypt, it may be compared with 
other estimates of the population, on 
which see Mr. Donne, in Dict. of Geog. 
pP. 38. Hdt. (2. 165. 166) reckons the 
Egytian force (i.e. that of its military 
caste) at a maximum of about 400,000. 

8. Rhamsen, Ramses II. or Ramses 
Miamun, the great king of the nineteenth 
dynasty, in the fourteenth century B.c. 
His popular name Sestüra is the origin 
of that of Sesostris (Hdt., Strabo, &c.). 
He is the king represented in the great 
colossi at Abu- Simbel. 

9. Libya. This, as in dt. and elsewhere, 
denotes the north coast of Africa; and 
* Aethiopia’ especially Nubia and Abys- 
sinia. The monuments and national 
poems, as interpreted by recent authority, 
reduce the legends of these conquests to 
more moderate limits. He is credited 
with the subjugation of some minor tribes 
in Nubia and Libya (Brugsch Bey, ii.81) ; 
and for the rest we have record of his long 
and arduous war with the Hittite con- 
federacy, of which the centre was in Syria .. 
and Palestine, but which extended east- . 
ward, and also westward into Asia Minor. 
This war, in which signal victories and 
captures were claimed for him, was how- 
ever ended not by conquest but by treaty 
of alliance; and Scythia and Thrace (Hdt. 
2. 103) must have been wholly outside its 
sphere. 

Medisque ... et Bactriano. The 
expressions are changed from names of 
countries to names of people, plural to 
singular, and again to plur4l, to avoid the 
monotony of a long list; so *Samnis 
Pelignus et Marsi’ H. 3. 59, 2: cp. Introd. 
v. $ 2; Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 5. 

et 4 

A.D. 19.] LIBER Il. CAP. 6o, 61. 

357 
colunt, inde Bithynum, hinc Lycium ad mare imperio tenuisse. 
5 legebantur et indicta gentibus tributa, pondus argenti et auri, 
numerus armorum equorumque et dona templis ebur atque 
odores, quasque copias frumenti et omnium utensilium quaeque 
natio penderet, haud minus magnifica quam nunc vi Parthorum 
aut potentia Romana iubentur. 

61. Ceterum Germanicus aliis quoque miraculis intendit ani- 
mum, quorum praecipua fuere Memnonis saxea effigies, ubi 
radiis solis icta est, vocalem sonum reddens, disiectasque inter 
et vix pervias arenas instar montium eductae pyramides certa- 
mine et opibus regum, lacusque effossa humo, superfluentis Nili 

receptacula; atque alibi angustiae et profunda altitudo, nullis. 

inquirentium spatiis penetrabilis. 

I. lycum : text L. 
text L. 

I. Bithynum...Lycium mare. The 
former of these would appear to be taken 
to mean the Euxine and Propontis, the 
latter the northern part of the Levant. 
The whole expression would include Asia 
Minor, but not Thrace. 

4. utensilium : cp. I. 7o, 6. Corn is 
not here excepted from the term, but 
mentioned for prominence. 

5. vi Parthorum. This appears here 
invidiously contrasted with * potentia Ro- 
mana, though ‘vis Romana’ is used of 
the Roman government in 3. 60, 6. 

8. Memnonis saxea effigies. One 
of two sitting colossi of Amunoph III. 
(eighteenth dynasty), still remaining 
among the ruins of Thebes, had been 
partially overthrown by an earthquake 
(probably in 728, B.C. 26) ; and the sound 
proceeding at sunrise from its remaining 
part is first mentioned by Strabo (17. 1, 
46, p. 816^, and described as Jó$os ds àv 
wAnyfjs ov peydAns. Pausanias (I. 42, 3) 
describes it as like the breaking of a harp- 
string. The word ‘vocalem’ probably 
suggests that Tacitus thought it a more 
articulate sound. The Greek belief, that 
the statue was that af Memnon, appears 
to have arisen between the time of Strabo 
and that of Pliny (N. H. 36. 7, 11, 58). 
A number of inscriptions, , dating A.D. 
65-196, are written on the legs and base, 
by persons who heard the sound; among 
them by Hadrian and Sabina. See C. I. G. 
4719-4761; and Add. iii. p. 1200, foll.; 
C. I. L. iii. 1, 30-66 : specimens of these 
are given in Wilmanns 2731-2733 ; Orelli 

13. spartis (i. e. funibus spartiis) conj. Müller. 

exim ventum Elephantinen 

penetrabiles : 

517—524; Henzen 5304-5306,6864. From 
a comparison of similar sounds heard now 
in the buildings of Thebes and elsewhere, 
it is suggested that these may have been 
due to the effect of a sudden increase 
of heat on the chilled air in crevices. The 
cessation of the sounds since the restora- 
tion of the statue (probably by Septimius 
Severus), and consequent alteration of its 
structure, confirmsthis. For the literature 
of the subject see Mommsen on C. I. L. 
l. 1., and Prof. Mayor on Juv. 15, 5. 

9. disiectas, ‘drifted.’ The general 
idea of the verb is that of dispersion (1. 
32, 7; 61, 35 €. 23, 3, &c.); though the 

result in some cascs, as here, may be the 

formation of almost impassable drifts in 
places. Attention seems intended to be 
drawn to the difficulty of building pyra- 
mids on such foundation. They stand in 
reality on a plateau of rock. 

IO. eductae: cp. 12. 16, 3, &c. This 
sense of the word is Vergilian, and appar- 
ently not found in earlier prose. 

II. lacus, the lake Moeris of Hat. (2. 
14, 9), near Memphis. Tacitus appears to 
have thought that this and the pyramids 
lay above ‘Thebes. 

12. altitudo, sc. ‘ Nili.’ 

13. inquirentium spatiis, ‘lengths of 
line used by those who would sound it.’ 
Hdt. (2. 28, 6) mentions such a story, 
himself believing that the lines were 
carried away by the current; as appears 
to be the case near the cataract of Syene. 

penetrabilis, here alone in Tacitus, 
from poets and Seneca. 

in 

IO 

358 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 772. 

ac Syenen, claustra olim Romani imperii, quod nunc rubrum ad 

mare patescit. 

62. Dum ea aestas Germanico plures per provincias transigitur, 
haud leve decus Drusus quaesivit inliciens Germanos ad discordias 
5 utque fracto iam Maroboduo usque in exitium insisteretur. . erat 2 
inter Gotones nobilis iuvenis nomine Catualda, profugus olim vi 

Marobodui et tunc dubiis rebus eius ultionem ausus. 

is valida. 3 

manu fines Marcomanorum ingreditur corruptisque primoribus ad 

societatem inrumpit regiam castellumque iuxta situm. 

illic Sueborum praedae et nostris e provinciis lixae ac negotia- 
' tores reperti, quos ius commercii, dein cupido augendi pecuniam, 

Elephantinen ac Syenen. The 
former is an island opposite the latter 
(Essouan) ; and these still form the boun- 
dary between Egypt and Nubia. Neither 
Hat. (2. 28-29), nor Pliny (N. H. 5. 9, 
10, 59), appear aware of the close proxi- 
mity of the two places. There is some 
evidence that the empire extended further 
at this date: cp. Momms. Hist. v. 594, 
E. T. ii. 276. — 

I. claustra, not used as in c. $9, 4, 
but =‘ fines’; so * claustra imperii ' (Cic. 
Flacc. 13, 30); * Etruriae (Liv. 9. 32, 1). 

According to Strabo (17. I, 12, 797),. 

three Roman cohorts were stationed 
here. 

nune, at the height of the conquests 
of Trajan in £68, A.D. 115: see on 4. 4, 

. 6, and Introd. i. p. 5.  Asbach less well 

refers it to the conquest of Nabataea in 
A. D. IIO. 

rubrum...mare. Here, asin 14. 25, 
3; Plin. N. H. 6. 34, 28, 107, the Persian 
gulf seems meant (the 'Epv0pi) 0aXacca 
of Hdt. 1. 180, 2, &c.); where Trajan 
e ad a fleet to attack India (Eutr. 
8,3). 

3. Dum ea aestas, &c. Though I 
have not followed Nipp. in the actual 

. transposition, it must be admitted that 

there is great force in the arguments cited 
from Steup (Rhein. Mus. xxiv.72) to show 
that ch. 62-67 belong to the narrative of 
the precedjng year, and should be placed 
before ch. 59-61. That year, rather than 
this, is recorded as * spent by Germanicus 
in many provinces'; Drusus had left for 
Illyricum before the end of 770, A. D. 17 
(cp. c. 44, 1; 53, 1), and is hardly likely 
to have done nothing all the next year; 
and the news of his success (c. 64, 1) 
reached Rome simultaneously with that 

of the coronation of Artaxias (c. 56, 3). 
The narrative is taken up from c. 46. 

4 inliciens. This should be repeated 
with ‘ut... insisteretur’; such a con- 
struction with ‘inlicere’ being in the 
manner of Livy (10. 17, 6, &c.) and 
others. . 

6. Gotones, the ‘ Gothi’ of later his- 
tory. The earliest notices of this people, 
from Pytheas of Massilia, cir. B. C. 300 
(cited in Pl. N. H. 37. 2, 11, 35), to 
Tacitus (G. 44, 1) and Ptolemy (3. 5, 
§ 20), place them at the furthest limit 
of Germany on the coast east of the Vis- 

tulá. A tribe called in the MSS. of Strabo 

(7. 1, 2, 290) Bovrwyves, possibly a cor- 
ruption of T'órewes, is specified by him 
as subject to Maroboduus. The Celtic 
* Gotini ' of Silesia, supposed by some to 
be here meant, are more generally read as 
* Cotini' (G. 43, 1). 

8. Marcomanorum : see c. 45, 5. 

ad societatem, sc. ‘ineundam’: so 
* corrupta ad scelus (4. 10, 2), and similar 
constructions, with gerund or gerundive, 
after ‘ exterritus’ (3. 49, 3; 16. 8, 1). 
Walther notes the similar Greek constr. 
with eis, as xareoTpáqaro és $ópov anayu- 
yv (Hdt. 1. 27, 1). 

9. regiam, the BacíAtorv of Strabo (see 
on C. 45, 4) in Bohemia ; where Ptolemy 
(a. 11, $ 29) mentions a place called 
MapóBov?^ov, probably at or near Bud- 
weis. 

II. iuscommesroii. This was probably 
given in the treaty between him and the 
Romans(c. 45,.4). On the commerce on 
the German frontier cp. H. 4. 65, 4 &c. 

augendi pecuniam, sc. fenore. Such 
dealings carried on by the ‘ negotiatores ' 
often made them liable to sudden attack : 
Cp. 3. 42, 1; Vell. 2. 110; 6. | 

veteres 4 

A.D. 19.] LIBER Il. CAP. 61-63. 

359 
postremum oblivio patriae suis quemque ab sedibus hostilem in 
agrum transtulerat. 

63. Maroboduo undique deserto non aliud subsidium quam 

misericordia Caesaris fuit. transgressus Danuvium, qua Noricam 
provinciam praefluit, scripsit Tiberio non ut profugus aut sup- 
plex, sed ex memoria prioris fortunae: nam multis nationibus 
clarissimum quondam regem ad se vocantibus Romanam ami- 
2 citiam praetulisse. responsum a Caesare tutam ei honoratamque 
sedem in Italia fore, si maneret: sin rebus eius aliud conduceret, 
3 abiturum fide qua venisset. ceterum apud senatum disseruit 
non Philippum Atheniensibus, non Pyrrhum aut Antiochum 
4 populo Romano perinde metuendos fuisse. extat oratio, qua 
magnitudinem viri, violentiam subiectarum ei gentium et quam 

propinquus Italiae hostis, suaque in destruendo eo consilia ex- 

5 tulit. et Maroboduus quidem Ravennae habitus, si quando in- 
solescerent Suebi, quasi rediturus in regnum ostentabatur: sed 
non excessit Italia per duodeviginti annos consenuitque multum 

6 imminuta claritate ob nimiam vivendi cupidinem. 

i 
2. transtulat: text Ern. 

15. nesi quando : ne siquando B, text R, inde si, unde si al. 

I. postremum. Wolfflin, as elsewhere 
(see on r1. 2, 1), would read ‘ postremo ' ; 
but here Tacitus may have purposely 
avoided a similar ending to that of the 
next word. 

oblivio patriae: on the tendencies 
operating to break down the barriers of 
nationality, see Introd. vii. p. 129. 

4. Danuvium, the correct classical 
form, now read uniformly in Tacitus 
(see on G. I, 1), and in inscriptions (Or. 
648, &c.) ; ‘ Danubius ' being a later cor- 
ruption. 

Noricam. The province of Noricum, 
formed soon after 738, B. C. 16, extended 
along the Danube from the junction of 
the Inn to a little above Vienna, and 
thus intervened between Khaetia and Pan- 
nonia (see notes on I 15,1; 44, 6), and 
would correspond mainly ‘vith the ee 
Austria, Styria, and Cz inthia. It was 
under a ‘procurator’: see H. 1. 11. 3; 
Marquardt, i. 290. 

5. praefluit =‘ praeterfluit'; so in I5. 
15, 1, &c. ; Liv. 1. 45,6; Hor. ; Pl. Mai, 
&c.: see note on c. 6, 5. 

6. nam, explaining ‘ex memoria.’ 
Such elliptical uses (cp. 15. 1, 5; 16. 18, 
1, &c.) follow a very common use of yáp. 

idem Ca- 

II. pyrrhum here, pyrrum c. 88, 2 (and Halm in both). 

I6. reditus: text R. 

Io. fide qua. The full expression, 
‘eadem fide, qua,’ occurs in c. 78, I: 
such an ellipse (as in c. 67, 4; 12. 34, 43 
16 17, 3) is noted by Drager as not found 
earlier than in the Annals. 

12. oratio, perhaps cited from the 
‘acta senatus ': see Introd. iii. p. 18. 

I3. magnitudinem...et quam, &c.: 
see Introd. v. $ 91, 8. On the power of 
Maroboduus see note on c. 44, 3. 

I4. destruendo eo. Drager notes 

that the use of this verb with a personal 

object (as here and in H. r. 6, 1) is con- 
fined to Tacitus and Pl. Min. 

I5. si quando. The MS. text seems 
incapable of satisfactory explanation: see 
the attempts of Walther, Duebner, and 
Doederlein. 

insolescerent: cp. c. 75, 3; H. 2. 7, 
2a. The verb is rare, but in Sall. Cat. 
6, 7. 

17. duodeviginti. This would show 
him to have died in 789, A.D. 36. Vel- 
leius (2. 129, 4) alludes to him as detained 
* honorate nec secure, in an honourable 
condition, yet not carelessly. 

18. vivendi cupidinem : cp. the sen- 
timents in Juv. 8, 84; 15, 107; quoted as 
part of the Stoic morality. 

[md 

ome 

o 

en 

10 

360 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 772. 

tualdae casus neque aliud perfugium. pulsus haud multo post 
Hermundurorum opibus et Vibilio duce receptusque, Forum Iu- 
lium, Narbonensis Galliae coloniam, mittitur. barbari utrumque 7 
comitati ne quietas provincias immixti turbarent, Danuvium 
ultra inter flumina Marum et Cusum locantur, dato rege Vannio 

gentis Quadorum. 

64. Simul nuntiato regem Artaxian Armeniis a Germanico 
datum, decrevere patres ut Germanicus atque Drusus ovantes 

urbem introirent. 

Ultoris cum effigie Caesarum, laetiore Tiberio, quia pacem 
sapientia firmaverat, quam si bellum per acies confecisset. igitur 
Rhescuporim quoque, Thraeciae regem, astu adgreditur. omnem 

2. uibilio here: uibillius Med. ii. in 12. 29, 2. 

2. Hermundurorum. These are de- 
scribed as a friendly and privileged 
people bordering on Rhaetia (G. 41, 1), 
between the Marcomani and Chatti (Id. 
42, 1 ; Ann. I3. 57, 1), and thus occupy- 
ing part of Franconia and north-eastern 
Bavaria: sec note on G. 1. 1. 

Vibilio. He was still their leader 
thirty-two years later (12. 29, 2), unless 
Ruperti is right in thinking that the word 
may be a general name, ‘ Weibel,’ = 
*dux. The abl. is instrumental, corre- 
sponding to ‘opibus’ (cp. Introd. v. 
$ 27). 

Forum Iulium, Frejus, a colony of^ 

Augustus, and naval station (4. 5, 1). 

3. barbari...comitati, the ‘ clien- 
tela’: cp. 1. 57, 4, &c. The precaution 
here taken shows their numbers. 

5. Marum et Cusum. The first of 
these, separating the Suebi from the 
Daci (Pl. N. H. 4. 12, 25, 81), is the 
March or Morava, joining the Danube at 
Pressburg ; the latter probably the Waag, 
joining it at Komorn; but possibly the 
Gran, or, as Mommsen thinks, the Gusen. 

Vannio: see 12. 29-30 and notes, 
and Momms. Hist. v. 196, E. T. i. 215, 
where it is shown that the ‘regnum 
Vannianum' (Pl. N. H. 4. 12, 25, 81) 
must have latterly included the whole 
territory of the Marcomani and Quadi. 
Within the memory of Tacitus the Mar- 
comani had still kings of the race of 
Maroboduus, but supported by Rome: 
see G. 42. 2. 

6. gentis. This kind of genit. is used 
with similar brachylogy to that observed 
in the genit. of quality (Introd. v. $ 34). 

Nipp. compares * Piraeum Atticae orae' 
(5. 10, 4); ‘ Albigaunum... Liguriae’ 
(H. 2. 15, 4); ‘fines Vocontiorum ulte- 
rioris provinciae ' (Caes. B. G. 1. 10, 5). 

Quadorum. This powerful people 
adjoining the Marcomani (G. 42, 1) in- 
habited the present Moravia and part of 
Hungary, and were formidable enemies 
in the time of Marcus Aurelius. 

7. regem Artaxian: cp. c. 56, 3, 
and note on c. 62,1. 

8. ovantes. The ovation, like the full 
triumph (cp. c. 41, 2), was at that time 
reserved to the imperial family. As the 
general celebrating it then rode on horse- 
back instead of, as formerly, marching 
on foot, it is distinguished by Dio as the 
triumph émi xéAnros (54. 33, 5, &c.). 

9. Martis Ultoris. This temple, in 
the centre of the. Forum of Augustus, 
was built by him to commemorate his 
vengeance on his father’s murderers, 
and appropriated as the place where in- 
signia of victories, &c., should be de- 
posited. Some remains of it still exist : 
see Middleton, ii. 6-8, 11-13. 

Io. Caesarum, ‘ Germanici et Drusi. 

I2. Rhescuporim. The orthography 
of this name varies even on coins, and 
still more so in the MSS. of various 
authors: see Lips. and Walther. 

Thraeciae. The Nestus (Karasu) was 
in Roman times the boundary between 
this country and Macedonia, but the south 
coast of Thrace and the Chersonese be- 
longed to that province (Marquardt, i. 
312). Thrace had been dependent on 
kome for some time, the last rising 
having been crushed in 743, B.C. II (see 

structi et arcus circum latera templi Martis 2 

3 

A.D. 19.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 63-65. 

361 

eam nationem Rhoemetalces tenuerat; quo defuncto Augustus 
partem Thraecum Khescuporidi fratri eius, partem filio Cotyi 

4 permisit. 

in ea divisione arva et urbes et vicina Graecis Cotyi, 

quod incultum, ferox, adnexum hostibus, Rhescuporidi cessit: 
ipsorumque regum ingenia, illi mite et amoenum, huic atrox, 

5 avidum et societatis inpatiens erat. 

sed primo subdola con- 

cordia egere: mox Rhescuporis egredi fines, vertere in se Cotyi 
data et resistenti vim facere, cunctanter sub Augusto, quem 
auctorem utriusque regni, si sperneretur, vindicem metuebat. 
8e enimvero audita mutatione principis inmittere latronum globos, 

excindere castella, causas bello. 

65. Nihil aeque Tiberium anxium habebat quam ne conposita 
turbarentur. deligit centurionem,qui nuntiaret regibus ne armis 
disceptarent; statimque a Cotye dimissa sunt quae paraverat 
2 auxilia. Rhescuporis ficta modestia postulat eundem in locum 

3 coiretur: posse de controversiis conloquio transigi. 

nec diu 

dubitatum de tempore, loco, dein condicionibus, cum alter facili- 

8. resistentium facere: text R. 

note on 6. 10, 4), but remained under 
native princes until Claudius made it a 
province in 799, A.D. 46: see an account 
of this dyndsty by Mommsen (Eph. Epig. 
ii. pp. 250-263 and Hist. v. 191, E. T. 
i. 209, foll.) and in Marquardt, l. 1. 

1. Rhoemetalces, the first of that 
name, son of Sadala and Polemocratia 
(Momms.) He bears the head of Au- 
gustus on the obverse of his coins, in 
" token of suzerainty, and his own on the 
reverse only, a practice followed by others 
of this dynasty: see Mr. Donne, in Dict. 
of Biog. Mommsen (Eph. Ep. 254) dates 
his death about 765, A.D. 12, before the 
composition of Ov. ex P. 2. 9. 

3. arva et urbes, i. e. the south-eastern 
part. | 

4. adnexum, a variation for * vicinum" 
and nowhere else used for it (Drager). 
The * hostes ' are the unsubdued tribes of 
the Balkan : see 3. 38, 5; 4. 46, I. 

5. ingenia . . . erat. The sentence 
is so condensed as to have no construc- 
tion; the sense being that their tem- 
perament answered to the nature of the 
country under their rule; the one being 
gentle, the other fierce: see on I. 8, 4; 
6. 48, 6; Caes. B. G. 1. 53, 4. 

mite et &moenum; so ‘ingenium 
amoenum" (‘attractive’), used of Seneca 
(13. 3, 2). Ovid, who addresses Cotys as 

a brother poet (ex DP. 2. 9), calls him 
* juvenum mitissime ' (1. 19). 

6. societatis, ‘of partnership in 
power.’ 

7. vertere in se, ‘appropriates’; so 
* occasio in se vertendae gloriae ' (Liv. 21. 
53, 6): cp. * trahere in se’ (I. 2, 1). 

Io. enimvero. Hildebrand (on Apul. 
Met. 4. 12, 263) cites this as an adversa- 
tive use of the word, and Dráger here 
notes that such use is confined to^ Tacitus, 
Florus (2. 7, 10), and Apuleius. Among 
the twelve instances of this word in 
Tacitus (see Gerber and Greef, Lex.), this 

"does perhaps approach nearest to an ad- 

versative use; but really here, as else- 
where (e. g. 1. 17, 6; 4. 60, 3; 6. 25, 2; 
35, 1; 12. 64, 6), it marks the transition 
from the less to the more important: 
Rhescuporis, who had been timidly ag- 
gressive in the lifetime of Augustus, now 
becomes boldly and openly so: see 
Zumpt, Gr. 348, note; Hand, Turs. ii. 
o 

inmittere latronum globos, repeated 
in 12. 54, 4. 

II. causas bello. On the apposition 
Cp. I. 27, I, &c.; Introd. v. $ 12a. 

12. anxium habebat : cp. c. 57, I. 

conposita, ‘a settlement,’ such as that 
made by Augustus : cp. c. 57, I. 

I6. transigi: cp. 12. 19, 3. 

et 

o 

362 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 772. 

tate, alter fraude cuncta inter se concederent acciperentque. 
Rhescuporis, sanciendo, ut dictitabat, foederi, convivium adicit, 4 
tractaque in multam noctem laetitia per epulas ac vinolentiam 
incautum. Cotyn,et, postquam dolum intellexerat, sacra regni, 

5 eiusdem familiae deos et hospitalis mensas obtestantem, catenis 
onerat. Thraeciaque omni potitus scripsit ad Tiberium structas 5 
sibi insidias, praeventum insidiatorem ; simul bellum adversus 
Bastarnas Scythasque practendens novis peditum et equitum 

. copiis sese firmabat. molliter rescriptum, si fraus abesset, posse 6 
ro eum innocentiae fidere; ceterum neque se neque senatum nisi 
cognita causa ius et iniuriam discreturos: proinde tradito Cotye 
veniret transferretque invidiam criminis. 
66, Easlitteras Latinius Pandusa pro praetore Moesiae cum 
militibus, quis Cotys traderetur, in Thraeciam misit. Rhescu- 2 

15 poris inter metum et iram cunctatus maluit patrati quam incepti 
facinoris reus esse: occidi Cotyn iubet mortemque sponte 
sumptam ementitur. nec tamen Caesar placitas semel artes 3 

8. basternas: text R. — 13. pandusand below padusa: text Nipp. . 14. thraciam 

here and c. 67, 1: see note on c. 54, 2. 

2. dictitabat. ‘Ihe verb is rare in 
Tacitus (3. 16, 1; 15. 20, 1), the par- 
ticiple frequent. 

4. sacra regni, ‘ the sanctity of royalty,’ 

oftener called ' sanctitas regum" (as Suet. : 

Jul. 6). The expression is analogous to 
‘sacra legationis ' (1. 42, 4); ‘studiorum’ 
(Dial. 11, 2) and perhaps * mensae" (13. 
17, 3; I5. 52, 2). 

5. hospitalis mensas. In a similar 
thought (15. 52, 2), the ‘di hospitales" 
are mentioned : thus the Greeks appeal 
to Zeis Eévios and dos. 

8. Bastarnas; so in G. 46, 1, Mon. 
Anc. v. 52, and Inscr. Or. 750, ‘ Basternae' 
in MSS. of Ov. and Pl. Mai. This people 
aré regarded as German (G. 1. l., and 
were known to the Romans as early as 
the Macedonian wars (Liv. 40. 57, 2). A 
section of them called Peucini (G. 1. 1.) 
inhabited the Delta of the Danube; and 
Ovid looks on these frontier races as the 
dangerous neighbours of his place of 
exile, * Proxima Basternae Sauromataeque 
tenent? (Trist. 2. 198'. It is hardly 
likely that, as Nipp. thinks, the actual 
Thracian kingdom now extended along 
the Euxine to the Danube ; for Ovid (see 
Trist. 2. 197-200) seems clearly to regard 
himself at Tomi as living on Roman soil : 

16. coty (Cotym) : corr. from c. 65, 4. 

but the right bank of the Lower Danube 
was called Thracian, and peopled by that 
race (Pl. N. H. 3. 26, 29, 149), and no 
Roman legions were then stationed in 
Lower Moesia (Momms. Hist. v. 194, 
E. T. i. 213, 1); so that the Thracian 
king was probably charged with the de- 
fence of that part of the frontier. 

Io. se, used as if ‘ Tiberius rescripsit" 
had been written: cp. ‘a Caesare . . . in- 
vitor sibi ut sim legatus" Cic. Att. 2. 18, 
2; Madv. 490 c, Obs. 1. 

12. transferret, sc. ‘in Cotyn. It is 
implied that he was himself * prima facie’ 
the aggressor, and had to prove his 
countercharge. 

13. Pandusa. An inscription (C. I. L. 
xiv. 2166) gives ‘Ti. Latinius, Ti. f. 
Pandusa’ (who Nipp. thinks might be 
this person), and two or three other 
instances of the name are there noted. 

pro praetore Moesiae. On the ques- 
tion as to the tenure of this province by 
Poppaeus Sabinus, see on I. 80, I. 

15. inter metum et iram cunctatus, 
‘after a struggle between,’ &c. ; repeated 
(with * pudorem’ for * metum’) 14. 49, 3. 

17. placitas, adjectively, as 3. 69, 6; 
4. 37, 4; Sall. Jug. 81, 1. The use is 
mostly poetical. 

A.D. 19.] LIBER II. CAP. 65-67. 363 

mutavit, sed defuncto Pandusa, quem sibi infensum Rhescuporis 
arguebat, Pomponium Flaccum, veterem stipendiis et artà cum 
rege amicitia eoque accommodatiorem ad fallendum, ob id 
maxime Moesiae praefecit. 
67. Flaccus in Thraeciam transgressus per ingentia promissa, 5 
quamvis ambiguum et scelera sua reputantem,perpulit ut prae- 
2sidia Romana intraret. circumdata hinc regi specie honoris 
valida manus, tribunique et centuriones monendo, suadendo, et 
quanto longius abscedebatur, apertiore custodia, postremo gna- 
3rum necessitatis, in urbem traxere. accusatus in senatu ab ro 
4 uxore Cotyis,damnatur, ut procul regno teneretur. Thraecia in 
Rhoemetalcen filium, quem paternis consiliis adversatum con- 
stabat, inque liberos Cotyis dividitur; iisque nondum adultis, 
Trebellenus Rufus praetura functus datur, qui regnum interim 
tractaret, exemplo quo maiores M. Lepidum Ptolemaei liberis :5 

II and 13. cotys : text D. 
times trebellienus. 

2. Pomponium Flaccum: see on c. 
32,3. That he had already held a com- 
mand in Moesia appears from an allusion 
in Ovid (ex P. 4. 9, 75), ' praefuit his, 
Graecine, locis modo Flaccus' Ovid 
probably, died in this or the preceding 
ycar. ; 

veterem stipendiis. This must be 
distinguished from the use of *vetus' 
with the genitive (1. 20, 2, &c.), with the 
force of * experienced in.' 

6. ambiguum, used of persons, as in 
1. 7, 45 €. 40, 2; 56, 1, &c. 

praesidia, ‘outposts’: cp. I. 56, 1; 
3. 21, 25; 4. 49, 2, &c. The caution used 
in dealing with him is explained by his 
warlike power (c. 65, 5). 

II. uxore Cotyis. According to Strabo 

(12. 3, 29, 556) she was the daughter of © 

Polemo and Pythodoris (see on c. 56, 2). 
An inscription (Momms. Eph. Ep. ii. 255) 
gives her name as Antonia Tryphaena. 

12. Rhoemetalcen. This prince has 
been confused with the son ot Cotys of 
the same name (see next note), but is evi- 
dently the one mentioned in 3. 38, 4; 4. 
5; 55; 47, 1 (where see note). 

13. liberos Cotyis. These were named 
Rhoemetalces, Cotys, and Polemo. 
Mommsen shows (I. l. p. 257) that till the 
death of Tiberius they were kept at Rome 
and brought up with Gaius ; the * tutela ' 
here mentioned being in fact an occupa- 

I4. trebellenus here : in 3. 38, 4;,6. 39, 1 four 

tion of the country; and that it was to 
this Rhoemetalccs that Gaius gave the 
kingdom of Thrace, when .he gave Cotys 
that of Lesser Armenia (Dio, 59. 12, 2, 
where Cotys the father and the son appear 
to be confused); whence Rhoemetalces 
places the head of Gaius on the obverse 
of his coins (see Dict. of Biog.). 

dividitur, with ‘in’: see on I. 5&5, 2. 

I4. Trebellenus. In the variation of 
the MS. it is best to read, as here, the 
form shown to be correct by an inscription 
found at Concordia: * T. Trebelleno L. 
f. Cla(udia sc. tribu;, Rufo, q. tr. pl. 
legato Caesaris Aug. plebs' (C. I. L. v. 
1878, where Mommsen maintains that 
the name should be also thus read here). 
On another inscription at Samothrace, 
probably belonging to him, see Friedl. ii. 
P. 78, n. 7. 

: 15. exemplo quo: cp. *fide qua' c. 
3, 2. 

M. Lepidum. This Lepidus, cos. 567, 
579, B.C. 187, 175, and pont. max., was 
sent on the death of Ptolemaeus Epiphanes 
(573, B.C. 181) as guardian of his sons, 
Philometor and Physcon: a coin (Eckh. v. 
123) having on the obverse a female head 
inscribed * Alexandria,' represents him on 
the reverse crowning a youth, with the 
legend M. Lepidus, Pont. Max., Tut. 
Reg., S. C. It is engraved in Dict. of Biog. 

ii. p. 763. 

364 

tutorem in Aegyptum miserant. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 772. 

Rhescuporis Alexandriam de- 5 

vectus atque illic fugam temptans an ficto crimine interficitur. 

. 68. Per idem tempus Vonones, quem amotum in Ciliciam 
memoravi, corruptis custodibus effugere ad Armenios, inde 
5 Albanos Heniochosque et consanguineum sibi regem Scytharum 

conatus est. 

specie venandi omissis maritimis locis avia sal- 2 

tuum petiit, mox pernicitate equi ad amnem Pyramum con- 
tendit, cuius pontes accolae ruperant audita regis fuga; neque 

vado penetrari poterat. 

igitur in ripa fluminis a Vibio Frontone 8 

10 praefecto equitum vincitur, mox Remmius evocatus, priori cus- 
todiae regis adpositus, quasi per iram gladio eum transigit. 
unde maior fides conscientia sceleris et metu indicii mortem 4 

Vononi inlatam. 

69. At Germanicus Aegypto remeans cuncta, quae apud le- 

4. inde in: dein Haase, inde Wopkens. 

4. memoravi, c. 58, 3. 

inde. The ‘in’ of the MS. could net 
go with * regem,' and ‘dein’ is generally 
* deinde! before a vowel ( Woólfflin, Philol. 
xxv. Io6). Such an extension of the 
force of a single preposition over more 
than one clause is shown in many in- 
stances given by Nipp.,-in the case of 
‘per’ (3. 9, 1), ‘de’ (4. 16, 1), Sin’ (6. 
51, I, &c.), ‘ad’ (12. 24, 3), and others. 

5. Albanos: cp. 6. 34, 2; 12. 45, 2, 
&c. ‘This people occupied a tract sepa- 
rated on the south by the Cyrus from 
Armenia maior, bordering west on the 
Iberians, and extending to the Caspian on 
both sides, but chiefly on the south, of 
the Caucasus, (Strab. 11. 4, 501; Pl. N. 
H. 6. 13, 15, 38) The tract would 
answer mainly to Daghestan and the 
eastern part of Georgia. Being dependent 
on Rome (4. 5, 4) they could hardly have 
protected him ; so that we should perhaps 
suppose, with Mommsen (Hist. v. 394, 
E. T. ii. 62, 1), that the Alani beyond 
the Caucasus are meant. 

Heniochos. These were one of the 
Colchian tribes, and appear to have occu- 
pied a narrow strip between Caucasus and 
the Euxine (Strab. 11. 2, 12, &c. 496 ; PI. 
N. H. 6. 4, 4, 12,14). The country would 
answer to part of Mingrelia and Abbasia. 

Scytharum, some Scythic people north 
of the Caucasus. The Scythic Dahae, to 
whom Artabanus was related (c. 3, 1), are 
east of the Caspian. 

6. avia saltuum; so *avia Oceani' 
(c. 15, 3), * Armeniae' (13. 37, 4), &c. 

7. Pyramum. This river, mentioned 
by Xen., Strab., Plin., &c., is the most 
easterly river of Cilicia, and flows from 
Cappadocia, entering the sea at Mallus. 
The modern name appears to be Jukoon 
or Jechun. As the Sarus, an equally con- 
siderable stream, would have to be crossed 
first in this route, it is possible that the 
two rivers may be confused. 

9. penetrari: cp. I5. 27, I. 

1o. praefecto equitum, a less usual 
term for * praefectus alae.' 

evocatus. These were formerly veterans 
cited * nominatim ’ for special service (cp. 
Caes. B. G. 3. 20, 2; B.C. 1. 39, 2, &c.). 
At this time there was a special class, 
termed *evocati Augusti, the dvaxAnros 
of Dio, who (45. 12, 3) supposes them to 
have originated with the veterans ‘ called 
out' in 710, B.C. 44. They had the 
position and insignia of centurions (Dio, 
55. 24, 8), and appear at this time to have 
been chosen chiefly out of the praetorians : 
see Purser, D. of Ant. i. 792. 

custodiae ... &dpositus: see note on 
1. 6, 2. 

I2. unde maior fides, ' this increased 
the belief.’ The expression is repeated 
from H. 4. 34, 3; G. 10, 5. 

conscientia sceleris, i.e. that the 
officer had connived at his escape and 
feared betrayal. Asshowing the difference 
between Tacitus and Suetonius, note that 
the latter makes this murder a charge 
against Tiberius (Suet. Tib. 49). 

I4. Aegypto remeans. Quintilian 
(1. 5, 38) ranks * Aegypto venio' among 

A.D. 1$.] LIBER Il. CAP. 67-69. 365 

giones aut urbes iusserat, abolita vel in contrarium versa cog- 
2 noscit. hinc graves in Pisonem contumeliae, nec minus acerba 
3 quae ab illo in Caesarem intentabantur. dein Piso abire Suria 
statuit. mox adversa Germanici valetudine detentus, ubi re- 
creatum accepit votaque pro incolumitate solvebantur, admotas 5 
hostias, sacrificalem apparatum, festam Antiochensium plebem 
4 per lictores proturbat. tum Seleuciam degreditur, opperiens 
5 aegritudinem, quae rursum Germanico acciderat. saevam vim 
morbi augebat persuasio veneni a Pisone accepti; et reperie- 
bantur solo ac parietibus erutae humanorum corporum reliquiae, 
carmina et devotiones et nomen Germanici plumbeis tabulis in- 

Lnd 

3. temptabantur: text Wurm. 

solecisms; but it is admitted that in 
good prose the Latinized Greek names of 
countries in * - us’ may be used, like names 
of towns, in the corresponding accusative 
without a prep. (cp. c. 59, 1 ; and Madv. 
233, Obs. 4); and' the usage of Tacitus, 
in respect of names of places to which and 
from which motion takes place, is marked 
by peculiar freedom : see Introd. v. $ 24, 
and the instances cited here by Nipp. 

3. intentabantur: the MS. text is 
retained by Orelli and Ritt.; but the cor- 
rection is supported by many analogous 
passagés (e.g. 1. 27, 1; 3. 28, 6; 36, 1; 
I2. 47, 5, &c.); and 'temptare contu- 
melias in aliquem' appears to give no 
satisfactory meaning here. 

abire Suria: cp. c. 19, 2, and Nipp. 
here. 

5. admotas, sc. ‘altaribus.’ The full 
expression is given in Suet. Cal. 32. | 

6. sacrificalem, a new word in Tacitus: 
see Introd. v. § 69. For ‘apparatus’ (cp. 
H. 3. 56, 1, &c), elsewhere in the 
Annals ‘ paratus ' is used. 

festam. The use of this word, other- 
wise than with expressions of time, is 
chiefly poetical: cp. 3. 9, 3; 14. 13, 2, &c. 

Antiochensium. Germanicus was 
lying ill at its suburb called by Tacitus 
Epidaphna (c. 83, 3). On this great and 
magnificent city see Introd. vii. p. 118, 
Momms. Hist. v. 456, E. T. ii. 126, foll. 

". per lictores proturbat. Possibly 
such ‘vota’ for a male member of the 
Imperial house were not permitted: cp. 4. 
17, 1; Staatsr. ii. 825. 

Seleuciam, Seleucia Pieria, a well- 
known coast city near the mouth of the 
Orontes, described by Polybius (2. 59, 3, 
&c.), Strabo (14. 5, 20, 676), and others. 

7. digreditur L. 

It was the usual port of embarkation from 
Antioch: cp. Acts 13, 4. 

degreditur. Many prefer ‘ digreditur.' 
The two formsseem to be confused in both 
Med. MSS., and have often been altered 
by editors (see Gerber and Greef, Lex.). 
But ‘degredior’ seems to be naturally 
used of a person (as here) going down to 
the coast, or (as perhaps in 4. 74, 4; 
6. 1, 2) landing from sea. It may also 
mean ‘ to set forth’; and Nipp. so renders 
it here. 

opperiens, ‘ awaiting the issue of’; so 
* opperiri senectam ' I1. 26, 2: cp. also 3. 
45, 2, and the reading in 4. 71, §. 

9. persuasio veneni. Tacitus, as 
elsewhere, does not affirm this charge of 
poronng (cp. c. 73, 55; 3. 14, 2), but 

ere says only that the belief aggravated 
the illness. 

et reperiebantur; i.e. these were not 
merely imagined, but actually found. 

IO. erutae. The simple abl. with this 
verb seems elsewhere confined to poets. 

humanorum corporum reliquiae. 
Of the use of these in magic we have fre- 
quent evidence (e.g. Hor. Epod. 17, 47; 
Sat. 1. 8, 22; Lucan, 6, 533, &c.). On 
the magic of the age see notes on c. 27, 
2; 30, 2. 

1I. carmina et devotiones, hendiadys, 
= ‘incantations, ‘devotiones carminibus 
scriptae. The following words describe 
them more particularly. | 

nomen Germanici, &c. The ‘ defixio 
magica ' (a rite in some form prehistoric 
and almost universal) consisted properly 
in transfixing the name or effigy with a 
needle (Ov. Her. 6, 91; Am. 3. 7, 29). 
Otherwise the name was written on a 
tablet, with solemn imprecations to the 

366 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C: 772. 

sculptum, semusti cineres ac tabo obliti aliaque malefica, quis 

creditur animas numinibus infernis sacrari. 

simul missi a Pisone 

incusabantur ut valetudinis adversa rimantes. 

70. Ea Germanico haud minus ira quam per metum accepta. 
5 si limen obsideretur, si effundendus spiritus sub oculis inimi- 2 
corum foret, quid deinde miserrimae coniugi, quid infantibus 
liberis eventurum? lenta videri veneficia: festinare et urguere, 

ut provinciam, ut legiones solus habeat. 

sed non usque eo de- 8 

fectum Germanicum, neque praemia caedis apud interfectorem 

mansura. 

componit epistulas, quis amicitiam ei renuntiabat: 

addunt plerique iussum provincia decedere. nec Piso moratus 4 

I. tabe: tabo L. maleficia B. 

infernal deities. Several such leaden or 
bronze tablets have been found, especially 
a number, with Greek inscriptions, in 
the ‘temenos’ of Demeter and other 
deities at Cnidus (see Newton, * Halicar- 
nassus, Cnidus, and Branchidae,’ ii. pt. 2, 
pp. 719-745). Full references are given 
in Marquardt, iii. 111: for specimens in 
Latin see Henzen, p. 219; Wilmanns 
2747-2750. Among the formulae are 
*Dite pater tibei commendo'; ‘hanc 
hostiam acceptam habeas et consumas’ ; 
* hunc ego aput vostrum numen demando 
devoveo desacrificio.’ 

I. semusti, i.e. human remains 
snatched from the pile (cp. Luc. 1. 1.). 
This would explain their being *tabo 
obliti. Doed. less probably takes it to 
mean ashes of the cypress or fig-tree, burnt 
in spells (Hor. Sat. 1. 8, 24). 

tabo : Orelli retains *tabe,' and gives 
instances of its use in this sense in other 
writers; but Tacitus appears to be else- 
where careful to distinguish the words, 
and to use ‘tabes’ only of disease or 
decay (I. 53, 3; 11. 6, 3; 12. 50, 3; 
H. 1. 26, 1; 4. 81, 23 5. 3, 1), ‘tabum’ 
of putrifed animal matter (H. 2. 70, 2; 
3. 35. 1). 

malefica =‘res maleficae. The word 
does not scem to be elsewhere used sub- 
stantively for ‘charms,’ and * maleficia! 
has that sense in Apul. (de Mag. c. 42, 
495, &c.); but the adjective is so used 
of magical arts and magicians as to make 
the correction (adopted by Nipp.) need- 
less. 

3. creditur. The acc. with inf. after 
this passive (I4. 48, 5, &c.) is frequently 
used in Livy (see Nipp.); but Tacitus 
generally prefers the construction with 

II. nec ipso : text B. 

nom. and infin. (e.g. c. 72, 2 ; I. 52, 2, 
&c.): cp. Introd. v. $ 45. “lhe expression 
appears to imply that Tacitus himself 
was not a sharer in this belief. 

missi = oí weupOévres : cp. ' transgressi ' 
H. 5. 5, 4; a rare use, but in Caesar and 
Livy. 

3. valetudinis adversa rimantes, 
‘prying into the bad symptoms of the 
disease.' The expression is somewhat 
varied from ‘ valetudine adversa ' above ;: 
and ‘ valetudo,' as often (cp. c. 82, 1), here 
means sickness. Such suspicious visits 
(‘sive cura illud sive inquisitio erat") were 
paid by emissaries of Domitian in the last 
illness of Agricola (Agr. 43, 2). 

4. irà quam per metum. On this 
change of construction cp. Introd. v. $ 62. 

5. effundendus: cp. ‘animam...effun- 
dere’ Verg. Aen. 1, 98. 

7. liberis. The two with him (3. t, 
5) were Gaius (Suet. Cal. 10) and the 
infant Julia (c. 54, 1). 

8. defectum, * enfeebled’; so * defecto 
corpore ' (4. 29, 1). The participle is not 

_ante-Augustan, and chiefly poetical: cp. 

Ov. Met. 10, 194; Tibull. 2. 5, 75. 

IO. amicitiam...renuntiabat. This 
was a formal act, part of ancient custom, . 
not only between individuals (cp. 6. 29, 3; 
Suet. Cal. 3), but as one of the formalities 
of declaring war against states which had 
been friendly (Liv. 36. 3, 8; 42. 25, 1). 
When the princeps thus acted, some form 
of sentence of banishment generally ac- 
companied the renunciation (cp. ‘domo 
et provinciis suis interdixit’ Suet. Aug. 
66), or was sometimes taken as tacitly 
implied (3. 24, 5): see Lips. Excursus xi. 

1I. iussum. It is the contention of 
Piso and his friends (cp. c. 76, 1; 77, 1; 

A. D. 19.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 69- 71. 

367 

ultra navis solvit, moderabaturque cursui, quo propius regre- 
deretur, si mors Germanici Suriam aperuisset. 

71. Caesar paulisper ad spem erectus, dein fesso corpore, ubi 
2 finis aderat, adsistentes amicos in hunc modum adloquitur: ‘si 
fato concederem, iustus mihi dolor etiam adversus deos esset, 
quod me parentibus liberis patriae intra iuventam praematuro 

3 exitu raperent: 

nunc scelere Pisonis et Plancinae interceptus 

ultimas preces pectoribus vestris relinquo: referatis patri ac 
fratri, quibus acerbitatibus dilaceratus, quibus insidiis circum- 

4 ventus miserrimam vitam pessima morte finierim. 

si quos spes 

meae, si quos propinquus sanguis, etiam quos invidia erga vi- 
ventem movebat, inlacrimabunt quondam florentem et tot bel- 

lorum superstitem muliebri fraude cecidisse. 
5 querendi apud senatum, invocandi leges. 

erit vobis locus 
non hoc praecipuum 

amicorum munus est, prosequi defunctum ignavo questu, sed 

6 quae voluerit meminisse, quae mandaverit exsequi. 

flebunt 

Germanicum etiam ignoti: vindicabitis vos, si me potius quam 

fortunam meam fovebatis. 

ostendite populo Romano divi Au- 

gusti neptem eandemque coniugem meam, numerate sex liberos. 

1. qui: quo L. 
80, 3), that Tiberius alone could supersede 
his own legatus. But the subsequent 
position of Piso seems to show that he 
was no longer ‘de iure' legatus of Syria 
(CP. C. 34, 1, &c.), and therefore that 
ermanicus by his ‘imperium maius’ 
(c. 43, 2) could depose him. In 3. 12, 4, 
he is called his ‘imperator.’ 

I. propius, 'from a shorter distance,' 
paiddoy ey vier ; so in 6. 26, 3; 13.57, 1; 
and ‘ procul’ (= ‘from a distance") in 4. 5, 
5; also in Caes., Cic., Sall.. and Livy. 

4. in hunc modum. This speech is - 

evidently a rhetorical composition ; but 
Tacitus may probably have followed some 
traditional version. 

5. fato concederem. It would be 
simplest to take 'fato' as a dative; but 
as ‘concedo,’ apparently shortened from 

‘vita concedo’ (1. 3, 3, &c. ds, stands by 
itself in the sense of ‘morior’ (4. 38, 3, 
&c.), the case seems best taken with Nipp., 
as abl., answering to ' scelere." 

6. parentibus: cp. ‘nos parentes' 
(3. 12, 5). The term seems to include 
Antonia, Tiberius, and Augusta. 

7. interceptus, used especially by post- 
Augustan writers of persons whose years 

11. propinquos: text B. 

are cut short by a treacherous or violent 
death: cp. c. 82, 3; 3. 12, 7 ; Agr. 43, a 

. fratri: asin 3. 5, 5, Drusus is meant, 
and Claudius (cp. 3. 18, 4) ignored. | 

Io. spes meae, ‘my prospects.’ Those 
of heirship to the principate are meant : 
cp. ‘in spem secundam ' 1. 8, 2. 

1I. propinquus sanguis, repeated in 
3.12,9; 4. 75, 2. The expression is too 
weak to be used of near relations; but 
Germanicus had more distant relatives on 
his mother's side: see Introd. ix. 

quos invidia ... movebat ; i.e. even 
these would now experience a reaction of 
feeling. 

I2. bellorum superstitem, repeated 
from G. 6, 6. The genit. with * superstes,' 
though rare, occurs ‘in Cic. and Liv. 

I3. muliebri fraude, repeated 11. 3, 2, 
in similar antithesis to more manly modes 
of attack. 

17. ignoti, active, for ‘ignari’: cp. 3. 
I, 2; A. 43, 1 ; rare, but in Cic., &c. 

18. fortunam, ‘my rank’: cp. c. 72, 
3; 4. 13, 4; 18, 2; 6. 6, 3, &c. (see 
Nipp. on 4. 18). 

fovebatis: cp. c. 43, 6, &c. 

19. sex liberos: sce Introd. ix. 

Qa 

5 

Io 

368 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 772. 

misericordia cum accusantibus erit, fingentibusque scelesta man- 
data aut non credent homines aut non ignoscent. iuravere 
amici, dextram morientis contingentes, spiritum ante quam 
ultionem amissuros. 

72. Tum ad uxorem versus per memoriam sui, per communes 
liberos oravit, exueret ferociam, saevienti fortunae submitteret 
animum, neu regressa in urbem aemulatione potentiae validiores 
inritaret. haec palam et alia secreto, per quae ostendere crede- 
batur metum ex Tiberio. neque multo post extinguitur, ingenti 
luctu provinciae et circumiacentium populorum. indoluere ex- 
terae nationes regesque: tanta illi comitas in socios, mansuetudo 
in hostis; visuque et auditu iuxta venerabilis, cum magnitudinem 
et gravitatem summae fortunae retineret, invidiam et adrogan- 
tiam effugerat. 

8. ostendisse (?) : see Andresen, codd. Med. p. 7; cp. 2. 54, 5. 

I. cum accusantibus; not, as usual, II. reges, Suetonius (Cal 5) states 

with the accused. 

mandata, such as are alluded to in 
C. 43; 5- 

2. non ignoscent, 
their obedience to such.’ 

4. amissuros, ‘ would.part with.’ The 
verb is nearly equivalent to * omittere,' as 
in 4. 3, 3; 13. 46, 3; 14. 26, r. On the 
omission of ‘ se’ see Introd. v. $ 8. 

* will not excuse 

6. ferociam : cp. 1. 12, 6; and on the . 

character of Agrippina see I. 33, 6, &c. 
The next words are a close reminiscence 
of Sen. de Ben. 5. 3, 2: ‘ saevientis for- 
tunae vi oppressus non submittit animum." 

7. neu regressa, ‘nor after her return.’ 
That she should retum to Rome was 
natural and necessary, but when there she 
should not seek political influence. 

8. eredebatur. The tense expresses 
the surmise of friends at the time. 

g. metum, ‘cause for fear:’ cp. I. 
40, I. 

extinguitur. The date of his death 
appears to be Oct. 10, from a notice 
‘Infer. Germanic.’ (* inferiae Germanico ?), 
added to that day in the Antian Kalendar 
(C. I. L. i. p. 329; Henzen 6445). 

10, luctu provinciae. ' Probably at 
Antioch took place the scene described in 
Suet. Cal. 5: ‘quo defunctus est die, lapi- 
data sunt templa, subversae deum arae, 
Lares a quibusdam familiares in publicum 
abiecti, partus coniugum expositi." 

indoluere : cp. 4. 17, 2; chiefly in Ovid 
and post-Augustan prose. 

"241. 

that the Parthian king suspended his 
hunting and banquets, *quod apud Par- 

. thos iustitii instar est,’ and adds marks of 

respect paid by other kings. 

mansuetudo. The term can be ap- 
plied only from a Roman point of view 
to his conduct of war (cp. I. 51, 2, &c.), 
but may perhaps be intended rather to 
refer to his treatment of captives (1. 58, 8; 
71, 2, &c.). | 

12. visuque et auditu, &c., ‘to see 
him and to hear him alike inspired re- 
verence. He is called #4AAcoros TÓ o@pa 
by Dio (57. 18, 6), but Suet. (Cal. 3) in- 
stances as a defect his ‘ gracilitas crurum.’ 
The extant supposed representations of 
him are examined in J. J. Bernoulli, 
‘Romische Iconographie,’ ii. i. pp. 232- 

56, 3) are mostly posthumous or struck 
abroad, and the statues and busts are 
mostly doubtful; that from Gabii in the 
Louvre (see Visconti, Ic. Rom. Pl. xxiv, 
Bernoulli, Pl. x) being probably the most 
authentic. On his reputation as a speaker 
seeon c. 83,4. — 

venerabilis. The construction changes, 
and this is the subj. of ‘effugerat’; ‘cum 
( » quamvis?) retineret being interposed. 

magnitudinem, ‘dignity’: cp. c. 79, 
5; 14. 54, 2; 16. 23, 3. This sense 
seems not to be found earlier, and from 
it the word passes later into a title of 
honour. | 

13. invidiam. This should be taken 

7 
8 

2 

3 

Those on coins (see on c. 41, 13. 

A. D. 19.] LIBER II. CAP. 71-73. 369 

783. Funus sine imaginibus et pompa per laudes ac memoriam 
2 virtutum eius celebre fuit. et erant qui formam, aetatem, genus 
mortis, ob propinquitatem etiam locorum, in quibus interiit, 
8 magni Alexandri fatis adaequarent. nam utrumque corpore 
decoro, genere insigni, haud multum triginta annos egressum 5 
suorum insidiis externds inter gentes occidisse: sed hunc mitem 
erga amicos, modicum voluptatum, uno matrimonio, certis liberis 
egisse, neque minus proeliatorem, etiam si temeritas afuerit 
praepeditusque sit perculsas tot victoriis Germanias servitio 
4 premere. quod si solus arbiter rerum, si iure et nomine regio 10 

5. [genere insigni] Nipp. 

actively, to suit * adrogantiam ': * he was 
wholly free from jealousy and pride': 
cp. obre mpds Tov ApoUcov éxipOovov ... 
éxparrev (Dio, 1. 1.). 

effugerat; so ‘cupiditates . . . effu- 
gerit'^ H. 1. 15, 4, &c. This pane- 

ric is apparently followed by Suet. 
(Cal. 3) and Dio (1. 1.), and may be taken 
from a ‘ laudatio ' of the time.: 

1. imaginibus et pompa, hendiadys 
for ‘imaginum pompa. "These were of 
course left behind at Rome. 

3. celebre, ‘honoured’: cp. ‘vatum 
laudibus celebre’ 14. 14, I. 

3. ob propinquitatem, &c., thrown 
in as an additional circumstance suggest- 
ing the comparison. With ‘ interiit,’ 
* uterque' must be supplied from the 
sense. That, to a Roman, Antioch and 
Babylon should seem near each other, is 
probable enough to make it needless to 
take * propinquitas,' with Pfitzner, to mean 
the resemblance of the places of death 
to each other, as being both *externas 
inter gentes! Tacitus would surely 
have expressed this by a less misleading 
word. 

4. fatis, here used of the circumstances 
or ‘sors vitae’ in general. 

adaequarent, ‘compared.’ The verb 
appears to be nowhere else used exactly 
in this sense; but we have ‘aequare et 
conferre scelera’ (Cic. Verr. ii. 1. 8, 21), 
and other similar instances. 

5. genere insigni. Nipp. thinks these 
words a marginal note of some one who 
overlooked *mortis' following ‘genus’ 
above. Certainly the words are in them- 
selves a weak expression for persons so 
exalted, and destroy the symmetry of the 
passage, the rest of which answers to 
* formam, aetatem, genus mortis, above. 

triginta. Germanicus died in his 

VOL. I. 

thirty-fourth year (Suet. Cal. r), Alex- 
ander in his thirty-third. 

6. suorum insidiis. ‘Suorum’ might 
be understood of professed friends, as 
Piso, or the speakers may be supposed 
to assume the guilt of Tiberius and Au- 
gusta. The story that Alexander died of, 
poison concocted by Aristotle, sent by 
Antipater, and administered by his son, 
appears to rest on equally slender evi- 
dence : see Grote, vol. xii. p. 346. note. 

sed hune, &c. It is assumed as noto- 
rious that Alexander was the opposite to 
him in all these points. The comparison 
of characters is suggested by the resem- 
blance of circumstances. 

7. voluptatum. ‘ Modicus’ takes such 
a genit. (cp. Introd. v. § 33 e y) in 3. 72, 
3: 4. 52, 2, &c.; earlier perhaps only in 
Vell. 1. 12, 3. Cp. 15. 23, 5. 

certis, ‘ legitimate.’ 

8. proeliatorem, a very rare word, 
found in Dial. 37; Val. Max. 3. 2, 24, 
and later: cp. Gud. on Dial. 37, 33. 

etiam si temeritas afuerit, ‘though 
without rashuess’; an invidious word, 
used to depreciate the daring of Alexan- 
der, whose military genius Romans are 
not magnanimous enough to acknowledge 
freely. See the brilliant, but partial cri- 
ticism. of Livy (9. 17-19), who however 
owns that the enterprise of Alexander in- 
volved no rashness: ‘nihil aliud quam 
bene ausus vana contemnere’ (c. 17, 16). 

9. praepeditus, used of a tethered 
horse, 4. 25, 2: cp. also 3. 3, 2; 15. 66, 
3. On the use of the inf. cp. Introd. v. 
$ 43. That the Germans were on the 
point of yielding is stated in c. 26, 2; 
41, 3: elsewhere (G. 37) more justice is 
done to their power of resistance. | 

Germanias. On the plural here cp. 

I. 57, 2. 

Bb 

en 

10 

379 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 772. 

fuisset, tanto promptius adsecuturum gloriam militiae quantum 

clementia, temperantia, ceteris bonis artibus praestitisset. corpus 5 

antequam cremaretur nudatum in foro Antiochensium, qui locus 
sepulturae destinabatur, praetuleritne veneficii signa, parum con- 

stitit; nam ut quis misericordia in Germanicum et praesumpta 6 

suspicione aut favore in Pisonem pronior, diversi interpretabantur. 
74. Consultatum inde inter legatos quique alii senatorum 

aderant, quisnam Suriae praeficeretur. 

et ceteris modice nisis, 

inter Vibium Marsum et Cn. Sentium diu quaesitum: dein 
Marsus seniori et acrius tendenti Sentio concessit. isque in- 

6. suspitione: so in five other places in this MS. and in Ritt. always. interprae- 

tantur: text B. 

I. &dsecuturum, sc. ‘ fuisse' : see In- 
trod. v. § 39. 

quantum, answering to ‘ tanto’: 
Drager compares H. 2. 99, 2; Liv. 5. 19, 5. 

2. corpus, &c. Two distinct facts 
are stated‘in one sentence: (1) that the 
body was stripped in the forum at An- 
tioch (cp. 3. 12, 7): (2) that the presence 
of signs of poison was not clearly proved. 

4. sepulturae =‘ cremationi’: cp. c. 
83, 3, and ' sepultum? Liv. 8. 24, 16. 

veneficii signa According to Suet. 
(Cal. 1) there were dark spots on the body 
and foam at the mouth, and the heart 
would not burn. ‘The latter point, ac- 
cording to Pliny (N. H. 11. 57, 71, 187), 
was insisted on by Vitellius at the trial, 
and met by the defence that it might be 
the result of a heart disease. 

6. interpretabantur. The present 
could be taken either as referring to the 
opinions of historians (Walther), or to a 
still existing controversy (Pfitzner, cp. 
* secutis temporibus' 3. 19, 2); but with 
that tense we should have also expected 
' constat" for * constitit, The omission 
of a syllable in this MS. is very common. 

7. Consultatum, &c. \ It would ap- 
pear from this passage that the arrange- 
ment by which, in case of sudden vacancy, 
as under the Republic a quaestor could re- 
present his proconsul (Marquardt, i. 530), 
so the *legati legionum’ in common (H. 
I. 60, 3; 2. 97, 2), or the * procurator ' 
(Marquardt, i. 556) could represent the 
*legatus Augusti, was not in force; but 
that the chief authority devolved on the 
senators present; who, as no one could 
represent the princeps, could in some sort 
represent the senate, and, by a kind of 
interregal authority, appoint a legatus ‘ad 
interim.’ Sentius evidently becomes right- 

ful legatus, and has command of the 
troops ; and Piso, in resisting him, commits 
civil war. 

quique alii, All legati, including the 
* jegati legionum ' (cp. c. 36, 1), were ne- 
cessarily senators; and possibly some 
other senators were among the ‘ cohors 
amicorum ' of Germanicus. 

9. Marsum. C. Vibius Marsus was cos. - 

suff. in 770, A.D. 17, as is shown by the 
Antian Kalendar (Henzen 6442; C. I. L. 
x. 6639). ‘He is mentioned again in c. 79, 
1; 4. 56, 3; and, as narrowly escaping 
death, 6. 48,1. On his proconsulate of 
Africa see Introd. vii. p. 114. He was 
afterwards Jegatus of Syria (11. 10, I), 
is known as a man of letters, ‘ inlustris 
studiis’ (6. 47, 3), and may have been 
one of those to whom we owe our details 
of the death of Germanicus. 

Cn. Sentium. By combining the frag- 
meut of a Gabine Kalendar (Or. 644; 
C. I. L. i. p. 473) with another inscrip- 
tion (Orelli 3260; cp. Henzen, p. 316), 
he can be shown to have been cos. suff. 
in 757, A.D. 4, and to have had the cog- 
nomen ‘Saturninus.’ Heis not heard of 
after these events (c. 79, 4; 81,2; 3 7, 
2); but a mutilated inscription found in 

the province (Eph. Ep. v. 1336), describ- . 

ing Tiberius as *cos. iiii' (A.D. 21-30), 
preserves ‘Saturninus Leg. Caes.,’ showing 
apparently that this appointment was con- 
firmed by Tiberius, and lasted at least 
two years. 

quaesitum, ‘the question lay’; so 
* de principatu quaesitum ’ H. 2. 38, 4. 

IO. concessit; so ‘Varro... Silio 
concessit! 3. 43, 4: cp. 'vix Tiberio 
concedere ' (c. 43, 4): the full expression 
with ablative of the thing occurs in 1I. 

24, 4i 15. 2, I. 

A.D. 19] LIBER Il. CAP. 73-76. 

371 

famem veneficiis ea in provincia et Plancinae percaram, nomine 
Martinam, in urbem misit, postulantibus Vitellio ac Veranio 
ceterisque qui crimina et accusationem tamquam adversus re- 
ceptos iam reos instruebant. 

75. At Agrippina, quamquam defessa luces et corpore aegro, 
omnium tamen quae ultionem morarentur intolerans, ascendit 
classem cum cineribus Germanici et liberis, miserantibus cunctis, 
quod femina nobilitate princeps, pulcherrimo modo matrimonio 
inter venerantis gratantisque aspici solita, tunc feralis reliquias 
sinu ferret, incerta ultionis, anxia sui et infelici fecunditate 
2 fortunae totiens obnoxia. Pisonem interim apud Coum insulam 
3 nuntius adsequitur excessisse Germanicum. quo intemperanter 
accepto caedit victimas, adit templa, neque ipse gaudium mode- 
rans et magis insolescente Plancina, quae luctum amissae sororis 
tum primum laeto cultu mutavit. 

76. Adfluebant centuriones monebantque prompta illi legio- 
9. uenerantes: text Halm. 

i. nomine. Nipp. notes that Tacitus from Livy (7. 13, 10. &c.), and preferred 

uses this mode of introducing foreign 
names, as Locusta (13. 15, 4), Boiocalus 
(13. 55, 2), Basilides (H. 4. 82, 2), Cal- 
gacus (Agr. 29, 4). The name Martina’? 
seems Syrian, and akin to ‘ Martha.’ 

2. Vitellio: see 1. 70, 1. He is 
shown to have recently been proconsul of 
Bithynia by a medal of Germanicus struck 
at Nicomedeia in his proconsulate (Eckh. 
ii. 400). 

Veranio : cp. c. 56, 4. 

3. crimina et accusationem, ‘charges 
and an indictment.' The latter term com- 
prehends the former. 

receptos; so 4. 21, 4: 
inter reos' 3. 70, 2. 'The accuser is said 
* deferre, the praetor recipere nomen.’ 
That this action of the accusers, before 
any formal charge was laid, was irregular, 
is here admitted by the historian, and is 
implied in the retort of Piso (c. 79, 2). 

4. instruebant. 'Instruere causam ’ is 
the regular legal term, and the evidence 
and other documents are termed ‘ instru- 
menta ' (Paul. Dig. 22. 4, 1). 

8. pulcherrimo modo matrimonio. 
Nipp. takes this as a causal abl. (cp. 
Introd. v. $ 30), but it would seem 
simpler to take it as a brachyjlogical abl. 
of quality (ibid. $ 29). 

9. gratantis.  'lhis poetical verb is 
adopted (6. 21,.5; 12. 7, 3; 14. 8, a, &c.) 

cp. ‘recipi 

by Tacitus to *gratulor.' 

IO. incerta ultionis, anxia sui. On 
these genitives see Introd. v. 33 e y. ‘In- 
certus ’ has this construction (ep. 6. 46, 5) 
in Livy, ‘ anxius’ (cp. 4. 12, 6; 59. 4, &c.) 
in Pl. mai., and both in poets. 

II. fortunae totiens obnoxia, 'had 
given so many hostages to fortune’; i.e. 
she could be attacked through each one 
of her children: cp. * dedimus tot pignora 
fatis’ Luc. 7, 661. ‘Obnoxius” often 
means ‘liable to attack, e.g. 3. 58, 4; 
14. 40, 1; I5. 38, 4, &c. 

Coum, Kos, north of Rhodes, with 
a chief town of the same name, often 
now called ‘Stanko’ (és rv Kw). Piso 
had left Syria (c. 70, 4); these islands 
being part of the province of Asia. 

I2. excessisse: cp. I. 5, 6, &c. 

I3. neque... moderans. These words, 
which seem superfluous, are taken by 
Nipp. to refer to his subsequent conduct, 
and to distinguish it from the still more 
demonstrative behaviour of Plancina. 

14. insolescente: cp. c. 63, 5. 

luctum, used of mourning dress in Cic. 
Sest. 14, 32, &c. 

15. laeto cultu, i.e. resuming gay 
colours, jewels, &c.: cp. the opposite 
term cultu lugubri ' (13. 32, 5). 

I6. centuriones, i.e. those of Syria, 
mostly his creatures : cp. c. 55, 4. 

Bba 

Ae 

[ d 

Oo 

I5 

[A. U. C. 772. 

372 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

num studia: repeteret provinciam non iure ablatam et vacuam. 
igitur quid agendum consultanti M. Piso filius properandum in 2 
urbem censebat: nihil adhuc inexpiabile admissum, neque sus- 
piciones inbecillas aut inania famae pertimescenda. discordiam 3 

5 erga .Germanicum odio fortasse dignam, non poena ; et ademp- 
tione provinciae satis factum inimicis. quod si regrederetur, 4 
obsistente Sentio civile bellum incipi; nec duraturos in partibus 
centuriones militesque, apud quos recens imperatoris sui memoria 
et penitus infixus in Caesares amor praevaleret. 

10 777. Contra Domitius Celer, ex intima eius amicitia, disseruit 
utendum eventu: Pisonem, non Sentium Suriae praepositum ; 
huic fasces et ius praetoris, huic legiones datas. si quid hostile 2 
ingruat, quem iustius arma oppositurum gvam qui legati auctori- 
tatem et propria mandata acceperit? relinquendum etiam ru- 8 

15 moribus tempus quo senescant: plerumque innocentes recenti 
invidiae inpares. at si teneat exercitum, augeat vires, multa, 4 
quae provideri non possint, fortuito in melius casura. ‘an festi- 5 
namus cum Germanici cineribus adpellere, ut te inauditum et 

I3. quam ins. L, quam iustius Pichena. 

prompta, ‘ready to serve him’; with 
dat., as c. 78, 1; 4. 60, 5. 

I. non iure: see c. 77, 1, and notes 
on 70, 3; 74, I. 

2. consultanti. It seems best to 
suppose that *censeo' has here the force 

and construction of ‘suadeo,’ as in Cic. - 

Fam. 9. 2, 4 ('tibi igitur hoc censeo ?). 
Thus in 11. 3, 1 (‘ consultanti super abso- 
lutione Asiatici . . . permisit"), ‘ permisit ' 
is equivalent to * permittendum suasit.' 

5. erga: cp. C. 2, 5; 71, 4. | 

ademptione provincive. This seems 
to admit, what was denied above, that he 
was lawfully deposed. 

8. imperatoris, used of Germanicus, 
as in 3. 12, 4. | 

10. ex intima...amicitia: cp. c. 27,2. 

II. utendum eventu, ‘he should profit 
by the occurrence, i.e. by the opening 
caused by the death of Germanicus, 
leaving him the only rightful governor of 
Syria. 

12. huic, referred to Piso, as the nearest 
in thought, though not last mentioned : 
cp. c. 82, 7; H. 4. 27, 3; Madv. 485a: 
see note on I. 42, 6. 

ius praetoris : cp. c. 56, 5. 

13. quam qui.  Ruperti' retains the 
MS. text, making ‘ qui . . . acceperit ' the 

answer to the question ‘quem . . . oppo- 
siturum,’ which is hardly suitable to 
' oratio obliqua.’ Nor can ‘eo’ be well 
supplied, and its insertion after ‘arma’ 
(Bezzenb.) is less felicitous than that of. 
‘quam,’ which could here have dropped 
out by a somewhat similar error to that 
of the omission of one of the syllables of 
* quamquam or * tamquam" (I. 13, 1; 
6. 2, 1). So 4 

14. propria, ‘ personal’; i. e. instruc- 
tions at first hand from Tiberius himself, 
in contrast with the second-hand authority 

_ of Sentius. The context shows that direc- 

tions for the administration of the province 
are meant, not such ‘ occulta mandata’ as 
are hinted at in c. 43, 5. 

rumoribus. Nipp. notes that this 
expression, as well as ‘suspicionés in- 
becillas’ (c. 76, 2), should be taken as 
real or assumed expressions of disbelief 
on the speaker’s part, not as indicating 
the historian's opinion of the charge of 
poisoning, which is rather that it was ‘not 
proven’ (c. 73,53 3-14, 25 19,2). 

17. an festinamus? ‘are we to hasten?’ 
On such future force of the present cp, - 
Madv. 339, Obs. 2a. On the change to 
* oratio recta’ see Introd. v. § 94. 

18. inauditum et indefensum. The 

A.D. 19.] LIBER II. 

CAP. 76-79. 373 

indefensum planctus Agrippinae ac vulgus imperitum primo 
6 rumore rapiant? est tibi Augustae conscientia, est Caesaris 
favor, sed in occulto; et perisse Germanicum nulli iactantius 
maerent quam qui maxime laetantur. 

78, Haud magna mole Piso, promptus ferocibus, in sententiam 
trahitur missisque ad Tiberium epistulis incusat Germanicum 

luxus et superbiae ; 

seque pulsum, ut locus rebus novis pate- 

2 fieret, curam exercitus eadem fide qua tenuerit repetivisse. simul 
Domitium inpositum triremi vitare litorum oram praeterque in- 

3sulas lato mari pergere in Suriam iubet. 

concurrentes deser- 

tores per manipulos conponit, armat lixas traiectisque in con- 
tinentem navibus vexillum tironum in Suriam euntium intercipit, 
regulis Cilicum ut se auxiliis iuvarent scribit, haud ignavo ad 
ministeria belli iuvene Pisone, quamquam suscipiendum bellum 

abnuisset. 

79. Igitur oram Lyciae ac Pamphyliae praelegentes, obviis 

IO. alto L. 

same words are thus coupled in H. 1. 6, 
2 ; Dial. 16, 3; and, inversely, H. 2. 10, 
4. The former is not found, in this sense, 
before Tacitus (cp. also 4. 11,2; 12. 22, 
2) ; the latter is used by Livy. 

2. rapiant, sc. *ad mortem.’ For the 
popular feeling see 3. 14, 5. 

conscientia, i.e. her knowledge that 
her instructions (c. 43, 5) were followed. 

3. nulli. This substantive use of the 
plural is rare, but has examples in good 
authors (e.g. Cic. Tusc. I. 39, 93). 
Tacitus has it again in H. 2. 20, a. 
Several instances are collected by Nipp., 
in most of which there are special reasons 
making ‘nemo’ less ap see ee 

6. epistulis, used of a single letter, as 
in I. 30, 4, &c. 

7. luxus et superbiae. The evidence 
alleged for the former charge is to be 
inferred from c. 57, 5. The latter may be 
supposed to have consisted in contemp- 
tuous treatment of Piso himself. 

seque pulsum, sc. dicit, latent in 
'incusat! His dismissal was the act of 
Germanicus, whom he may have meant 
to accuse of a disloyal seeking after 
popularity (cp. c. ,55: 15 59, 2), amount- 
ing to ‘res novae, to shift a charge made 
againa himself (cp. 3. 13, 3). He may 

also imply that the appointment of Sen- 
tius was the unlawful act of a knot of 
private conspirators. 

detached force, see on I. 

9. litorum oram, a combination 
suggested by *litoris oram ' (Verg. G. 2, 
44)- Livy has *ora litoris" and *orae 
litora’ (7. 25, 4; 38. 18, 12). 

10. lato mari. Nipp. and others adopt 

‘alto,’ but ‘lato’ may be explained by 
its connexion with ‘praeter insulas.' 
Several] islands lay in his course from Cos 
to Rhodes; and he was: to pass outside 
these, probably also south of Rhodes and 
Cyprus, or at least not to take the usual 
course along the coast of Lycia and 
Pamphylia. He would thus avoid the 
chance of collision with Agrippina (cp. c. 
79, 1), and reach Syria before his move- 
ments were known. 

desertores, from the Syrian legions. 

12. vexillum. On the use of this and 
its cognate words of any kind of legionary 
38, I, &c. 
These are a body of recruits to be drafted 
into the Syrian legions. A number of 
wounded men from several legions are 
thus united ‘sub vexillo’ in Caes. B. G. 
6. 36, 3. 

13. Cilicum, i.e. those of Trachea (see 
6. 41, 1), and Olbe (Marquardt, i. 385). 
A third principality had lately come 
to an end (cp. c. 42, 7). His action 
here and in c. 80 shows that Cilicia 
belonged then to Syria. See Marquardt, 
i. 387. 

16. praelegentes, ‘coasting along’; 

Coe 

1O 

374 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 772. 

navibus quae Agrippinam vehebant, utrimque infensi arma primo 
expediere: dein mutua formidine non ultra iurgium processum 
est, Marsusque Vibius nuntiavit Pisoni Romam ad dicendam 
causam veniret. ille eludens respondit adfuturum, nbi praetor, 2 
5qui de veneficiis quaereret, reo atque accusatoribus diem pro- 
dixisset. interim Domitius Laodiciam urbem Suriae adpulsus, 8 
cum hiberna sextae legionis peteret, quod eam maxime novis 

consiliis idoneam rebatur, a Pacuvio legato praevenitur. 

Sentius Pisoni per litteras aperit monetque ne castra corruptori- 
bus, ne provinciam bello temptet. quosque Germanici memores 5 
aut inimicis eius adversos cognoverat, contrahit, magnitudinem 

3. uibimus: text R. 

a Tacitean sense of the word: cp. 6. 1, 1, 
and analogous uses noted on c. 6, 5. 

1. utrimque, i.e. they did so, and the 
others did also. 

3. Marsusque Vibius: cp. c. 74, I. 
A repetition of the latter name seems 
here intended in the MS., though Tacitus 
usually repeats one name only of a per- 
son recently mentioned. Nipp. shows 
several exceptions to this rule, such as the 
ne ee a * Junio Othoni ' 3. 66, 4; ‘C. 
Si 
2, &c. 

nuntiavit. The proper word would 
be * denuntiavit' ; but * nuntiare' has in 
Tacitus the meaning of *to command by 
message,’ as in c. 65, 1; 11. 37, 2. 

4. eludens, ' turning it into jest': cp. 
5. 5, 15 6. 46, 9, &c. The sense of the 
word found in 3. 67, 2, &c., seems less 
suitable here. 

praetor, qui . . . quaereret, i.e. the 
praetor to whom the ‘ Quaestio per- 

etua,’ ‘de sicariis et veneficis,’ fell by 
ot. The taunt of Piso contains two as- 
sumptions, in both of which he is tech- 
nically correct: (1) that the citation of 
Marsus was premature (see on c. 74, 2) : 
(2) that the trial would be by ordinary 
process of law. "The words of Tiberius 
at the trial (3. 12, 10) contain a full ad- 
mission that such would have been the 
regular course (cp. Staatsr. ii.119); though 
from the rank of the parties concerned 
it might bave been taken for granted that 
the case would be brought before the 
senate or the princeps. See Introd. vi. 
P- 93- 
§ diem prodixisset, i.e. after for- 
mally receiving the charge (see on c. 

ani’ 3. 69, 1; ‘ Largus Caecina’ 11. 34; 

5. praedixisset D. 

74, 2), had named a later day on which 
both parties should appear. * Prodico’ is 
very rare, and usually means to adjourn a 
trial already begun (Liv. 2. 61, 7 ; 6. ao, 
I1; 38. 51, 5); and the only reference 
relevant to this place, *ne nisi prodicta 
(v. l. ‘ne improdicta ") die quis accuse- 
tur, is to a most obscure and confused 
passage (Cic. Dom. 17, 45); so that pos- 
sibly the old editors were right in reading 
here * praedixisset.' 

6. urbem Suriae. Even in Syria 
there were two cities of the name; but 
plainly the maritime Laodiceia is meant 
(Strab. 16. 2, 9, 751), opposite Cyprus; 
which preserves its name in the modern 
* Ladikieh,’ better known as * Latakia.’ 

7. sextae: see Introd. vii. p. 133. 

8. legato, i.e. of that legion. The 
specification of his rank makes it suffice 
to mention him by one name; as ‘augur 
Lentulus' (3. 59, 1); *Iunii senatoris ' 
(4. 64, 3), &c.: see several instances col- 
lected by Nipp. on 5. 8. This Pacuvius 
is described by Seneca (Ep. 12, 8), as 
‘qui Syriam usu suam fecit' (probably as 
virtual governor under the absent Lamia, 
6. 27, 2), and as having daily rehearsed 
his own funeral obscquies. 

9. corruptoribus, extension of in- 
strumental ablative : cp. c. 46, 2. 

11. magnitudinem, ‘the majesty.’ The 
word is used of Germanicus in c. 72, 3, 
and he is also called * imperator ' (3. 12, 
4; 14, 1) ; but Orelli can hardly be right 
in referring this expression to him, as the 
association of ‘res publica’ points clearly | 
to the living ‘imperator,’ Tiberius, whom 
Sentius claims to represent. 

id 4 

A. D. 19.] LIBER II. CAP. 39, 8o. 375 

imperatoris identidem ingerens et rem publicam armis peti ; du- 
citque validam manum et proelio paratam. 
80. Nec Piso, quamquam coepta secus cadebant, omisit tu- 
tissima e praesentibus, sed castellum Ciliciae munitum admodum, 
2 cui nomen Celenderis, occupat; nam admixtis desertoribus et 5 
tirone nuper intercepto suisque et Plancinae servitiis auxilia 
Cilicum, quae reguli miserant, in numerum legionis composuerat. 
3 Caesarisque se legatum testabatur provincia, quam is dedisset, 
arceri, non a legionibus (earum quippe accitu venire), sed a 
4 Sentio privatum odium falsis criminibus tegente. consisterent in 
acie, non pugnaturis militibus, ubi Pisonem ab ipsis parentem 
quondam appellatum, si iure ageretur, potiorem, si armis, non 
5 invalidum vidissent. tum pro munimentis castelli manipulos 
explicat, colle arduo et derupto; nam cetera mari cinguntur. 
6 contra veterani ordinibus ac subsidiis instructi: hinc militum. 

To 

- 

5 

5. celendris : text B. 
militum Ritt. 

I. ingerens, ‘repeatedly  proclaim- 
ing ': cp. H. 4. 78, 1; Cic. Att. 11. 6, 3. 

rem publicam armis peti: cp. the 
expression of M. Piso: * civile bellum in- 
cipi ' (c. 76, 4). 

3. secus cadebant: cp. 6. 22, 5; 
also for ‘secus’ cp. c. 50, 3, &c ; for 
* cado' c. 77, 4; 6. 8, 2, &c. 

4. praesentibus: cp. I. 30, 5, &c. 

5. Celenderis. Orelli retains * Ce- 
lendris, which appears also to be the 
MS. text in Mela 1. 13, 77. Whatever 
Tacitus may have written, the form of 
the name here given is correct according 
to the evidence of coins (Eckh. iii. 51, 
&c.), and is that used by Strabo (14. 5, 
3, 670), Pliny (N. H. 5. 27, 22, 92), &c. 
The town belonged to Cilicia Trachea 
(see on c. 78, 3), and had a harbour 
(Strab. 1. 1.), and preserves its name as 
Chelendreh or Kilindri. 

6. tirone, sing. for pl. as frequently 
‘miles,’ ‘eques,’ &c. On the forces here 
spoken of see above, c. 78, 3. 

7. in numerum legionis composu- 
erat, ‘he had formed iuto a body nume- 
rically equal to a legion.’ A similar ex- 
pression is used of Catiline in Sall. Cat. 
56, 2 ‘legiones (duas) numero expleve- 
rat’; but ‘in numeros legionis composu- 
erat’ (H. 1. 87, 1) has a different meaning, 
akin to that of ‘numeri’ elsewhere. On 
this force of ‘in’ cp. Introd. v. § 60 b. 

8. provincia. We cannot say ‘ arceor 

8. prouinciam : text R. 

15. militum vis Mur,, virtus 

provinciam ’ ; nor can we take the words 
to mean that the province (i.e. its popu- 
lation) was debarred from joining him ; 
for * arceri ' must have the same subject as 
* venire." 

9. accitu, only used in abl. sing., and 
apparently only here and in Cic. Verr. ii. 
3. 28, 68; Verg. Aen. 1, 677. 

Io. consisterent, i. e. they had only to 
stand in line, there would be no battle. 

1I. pugnaturis, concise abl. abs., as 
* daturis' 15. 52, 3, &c.: cp. Introd. v. 
$ 54d. 

parentem, c. 55, 4. 

12. siiure ageretur. On the remini- 
scence of Livy see Introd. v. $ 97, 2. 

I3. pro munimentis. This, like * pro 
castris" 3. 20, 2; ‘pro muris' I4. 25, 1, 
appears clearly from the rest of the pas- 
sage to mean *outside the fortifications.' 
On the more usual meaning cp. c. 13, 4. 

14. derupto, ‘ precipitous": cp. 4. 45, 
1; 6. 21, 2; Lucr, Liv., &c. . 

15. veterani. This word is not here 
strictly used, but only of trained legion- 
aries, as opposed to *tirones ' (cp. 1. 28, 8), 
or to mixed troops. 

ordinibus ac subsidiis, ‘in centuries 
and reserves. On the abl. see Introd. v. 
$ 28. Nipp.explains it to mean that the 
steep ascent was made in separate cen- 
turies supported by reserves; the raw 
troops of Piso being drawn up in close 
order in maniples. 

@ 

376 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 772. 

inde locorum asperitas, sed non animus, non spes, ne tela qui- 

dem nisi agrestia aut subitum zz usum properata. 

ut venere in 

manus, non ultra dubitatum, quam dum Romanae cohortes 
in aequum eniterentur: vertunt terga Cilices seque castello 

5 claudunt. 

81. Interim Piso classem haud procul opperientem adpugnare 
frustra temptavit; regressusque et pro muris, modo semet ad- 
flictando, modo singulos nomine ciens, praemiis vocans, seditio- 
nem coeptabat, adeoque commoverat, ut signifer legionis sextae 

10 signum ad eum transtulerit. 

tum Sentius occanere cornua tu- 

basque et peti aggerem, erigi scalas iussit, ac promptissimum 

quemque succedere, alios tormentis hastas saxa et faces ingerere. 

tandem victa pertinacia Piso oravit ut traditis armis maneret in 

2. aut subitum usum : ad subitum B, aut ad Weissenb., text Doed. 

Pfitzner, text R. 
text Nipp. 

hinc . . . inde, opposed, like * hinc' 
. .. ‘illinc’: cp. 13. 38, 3. 

1. asperitas. The strong difference in 
the senses of this word as applied to 

soldiers and places makes the syllepsis: 

harsh ; but the alterations proposed seem 
needless. * Asperitas’ is used, of persons, 
generally in a bad sense; but.'asper ' is 
a Vergilian general epithet uf battle, and 
of warlike nations (Aen. I, 14) or persons 
(ibid. 11, 664). 

2. agrestia. Nipp. compares the de. 
scription in 3. 43, 2; also ‘ agrestibus 
telis, falcibus gaesisque ' (Liv. 9. 36, 6), 
and the description of the Catilinarian 
army in Sall. Cat. 56, 3. 

&ut, &c. The reading of the old 
editions would make the sentence further 
describe the rustic weapons: it is perhaps 
better thus to make it describe other 
weapons, more distinctly warlike, but ex- 
temporized. 

in manus, ‘to close quarters’ (els 
xetpas). In this sense Tacitus seems to 
prefer to use this form (as H. 4. 71,6 ; 
76, 5), with Sall. (Jug. 89, 2) and Liv. 
(2. 46, 3), rather than * ad manus.' 

4. eniterentur : cp. ‘enisus’ I. 70, 6. 

6..classem. A ‘classis Syriaca" is 
mentioned in inscriptions (Orelli 3604; 
Henzen 6924 ; Wilmanns 1637; C. I. G. 
2346 e, 3125, &c.). 

adpugnare; a Tacitean word, only 
here and in 4. 48, 4; 15.13, 1 ; in each 
instance denoting a feint attack. 

7. pro muris; not in the sense of 

9. legionis uocans sextae: text B. 

uenire: so 

t 
I3. uti raditis, uti traditis B, 

*pro munimentis' (c. 80, 5), but as in 
C. 13, 4, &c. 

adflictando, ‘buffeting himself’: cp. 
6. 35, 3; ‘mulieres adflictare se’ Sall. 

. Cat. 31, 3. 

.8. seditionem coeptabat: cp. 1. 38, 
I, &c. . : 
9. signifer: see on 1. 48, 2. The 
Sixth legion was supposed to be most 
inclined to favour Piso (c. 79, 3). 

10. occanere. Tacitus appears to fol- 
low Sallust (see Introd. v. $ 97, 1) in the 
use of a verb not found elsewhere. The 
form * occino' is used only of the note of 
birds. 

1I. peti aggerem. This is best ex- 
plained like * petendus agger' 1. 65, 10 
(where see note). Material was to be 
collected to fill the ditch or make the 
wall easier to scale: hence the addition 
*erigi scalas Cp. Caes. B. G. 5. 9, 6 
*aggere ad munitiones adiecto locum 
ceperunt. Vegetius (4, 15) also de- 
scribes a mound raised against a wall 
‘de quo tela iactantur.? Some take the 
words to mean *that the wall be as- 
saulted'; but Tacitus would hardly use 
*agger' of the wall of a strong fort ; 
though Vergil (Aen. 10, 23) has ‘ag- 
geribus murorum," and Servius (ad loc.) 
says that all fortifications are loosely 
called ‘ aggeres.' 

I2. et faces, On the conj. after asyn- 
deta see Introd. v. § 90, and instances 
collected here by Nipp. 

7 

3 

A.D. 19.) LIBER II. CAP. 80-82. 

377 

4 castello, dum Caesar, cui Suriam permffteret, consulitur. non 
receptae condiciones, nec aliud quam naves et tutum in urbem 
iter concessum est. 

82. At Romae, postquam Germanici valetudo percrebuit 

cunctaque ut ex longinquo aucta in deterius adferebantur, dolor 5 

2ira: et erumpebant questus. ideo nimirum in extremas terras 
relegatum, ideo Pisoni permissam provinciam ; hoc egisse se- 
3 cretos Augustae cum Plancina sermones. vera prorsus de Druso 
seniores locutos: displicere regnantibus civilia filiorum ingenia, 
neque ob aliud interceptos, quam quia populum Romanum 
4 aequo iure complecti reddita libertate agitaverint. hos vulgi 
sermones audita mors adeo incendit, ut ante edictum magistra- 
tuum, ante senatus consultum sumpto iustitio desererentur fora, 
5 clauderentur domus. passim silentia et gemitus, nihil composi- 
tum in ostentationem ; et quamquam neque insignibus lugen- 

4. percrebruit B. 5. eunctique: text B. adferaebantur: text D. 
I. dum...consulitur. Pfitzner notes 
the .indic. after ‘dum’ in or. obl. as 

common in ts, and in prose in and 

lican leanings of Drusus see I. 33, 4 
Even Suetonius, who nentions' the Story 
that he was poisoned, wholly disbelieves 

after Livy: cp. 14. 58, 4, &c.; see also 
Introd. v. § 49. 

4. At Romae; a favourite form of 
transition: cp. I. 7, 15; 46,1; 3. 32, 1j 
6. 29, 1, &c. 

valetudo, sc. * adversa ' 
58, 2; 6. 7, 4, &c. 

percrebuit. This form eccurs three 
times in the two MSS. (cp. 13. 6, 5 ; 15. 19, 
1), ‘ percrebrui’ twice (6. 20, 2 ; and prcb- 
ably H. 2. 26, 3), and it is perhaps best 
to follow the variations. Halm with 
Sirker reads the latter throughout. See 
Introd. v. § 85. 

5. ut =‘ ut fierisolet’: cp. 1. 65, 4, &c. 

aucta in deterius, ‘exaggerated for 
the worse On the force of in’ in such 
constructions see Introd. v. § 60 b. 

dolor ira. It seems best so to punc- 
tuate as to suppose ‘erant’ to be sup- 
plied with these words, as in H. 2. 29, 
& (‘gaudium miseratio favor’): thus 
* erumpebant questus ' is more emphatic 
than it * erumpebat " were to be supplied 
from it in the former place. 

6. extremas terras. Syria was one 
of the * imperii extrema" (cp. 4. 74, 2) ; 
but the use of * relegatum ’ shows tnat the 
whole is rhetorical. 

7. hoo egisse, ' this was the result of.’ 
For the ‘sermones’ cp. c. 43, 5. 

8. de Druso. On the supposed repub- 

*6p.3.3,2j 

it (Cl. 1); and the weighty’ contemporary 
evidence of Livy (Epit. 140) assigns his 
death to an accident : *ex fractura, equo 
super crus eius collapso, tricesimo die, 
quam id acciderat, mortuus est.' 

9. regnantibus. This term is invidi- 
ously used by the people of the princeps ; 
also ' filiorum ' is used loosely, as Drusus 
was not even an adopted son of Augustus. 

IO. interceptos: cp. c. 71, 3. 

II. &equo iure complecti, ‘to com- 
prehend under equal rights,’ i.e. to bring 
into unity on a footing of equality : cp. 
* multas insignesque familias paterna no- 
bilitate complexus ' 15. 48, 2. 

I2. incendit: cp. I. 23, I. 

13. sumpto. sc. ‘sponte.’ 
seribes such a spontaneous 'iustitium ' 
after the Caudine disaster (9. 7, 8). Cp. 
‘ferale per urbem iustitium ' Luc. 2, 17; 
and the * Epicedion Drusi’ (185) * Iura 
silent mutaeque tacent sine vindice leges." 

I4. domus, ‘great houses’: cp. 1. 73, 
2, &C. 

silentia; not opposed to *'gemitus,' 
but to the hum of business. The plural is 
elsewhere wholly confined to poets. 

I5. neque... abstinerent: see note 
on C. 24, 7. 

insignibus; as change of dress : cp. 

‘ atrata plebes’ 3. 2, 2 ; ‘ pullati proceres’ 
Juv. 3, 213, where see Mayor. 

Livy de- 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

378 [A. U. C. 772. 

tiurn abstinerent, altius animis maerebant. forte negotiatores, 6 
vivente adhuc Germanico Suria egressi, laetiora de valetudine eius 
attulere. statim credita, statim vulgata sunt: ut quisque obvius, 7 
quamvis leviter audita in alios atque illi in plures cumulata 
5 gaudio trànsferunt. cursant per urbem, moliuntur templorum 8 
fores; iuvat credulitatem nox et promptior inter tenebras ad- 
firmatio. nec obstitit falsis Tiberius, donec tempore ac spatio 
vanescerent: et populus quasi rursum ereptum acrius doluit. 
Mer cio 88. Honores, ut quis amore in Germanicum aut ingenio vali- 
c+; 1'«5- 10 dus, reperti decretique: ut nomen eius Saliari carmine caneretur ; 2 
^5, sedes cüru!'es sacerdotum Augustalium locis superque eas quer- 

ree” 
6. iuvit L, iuverat Ritt. (1848). 

1. altius...maerebant: cp. I. 32, 7. 

4. leviter, ‘uncritically,’ i.e. with- 
out waiting for authentication. 

illi, the last-mentioned, as here more 
remote in thought: cp. c. 77, I. 

5. moliuntur...fores: cp. I. 39, 

The scene is graphically described by 
Suet. (Cal. 6), who says * paene revolsae 
templi (sc. * Capitolii ") fores.' 

6. iuvat., The present should not 
be altered. The sentence ‘nec obstitit,’ 
&c. is no part of the descriptive narrative, 
in which the historical present is natural. 
On the sentence as subject of the verb 
cp. 1.19, 5, &c. 

7; tempore ac spatio. This hen- 

diadys (cp. Introd. v. § 76) appears to be . 

a common expression, being found in 
Cic. pro Quint. 1, 4; Hirt. B. G. 8. 31, 2. 

8. acrius doluit. Suet. (Cal. 6) savs 
that the mourning lasted even through 
the feast of December, i. e. the Saturnalia 
(Dec. 17); which would be more than 
two months after the death (see note on 
c. 72, 2), and probably some time after 
the news had reached Rome. 

9. Honores...reperti.  Mutilated 
fragments are preserved, both of the 
decree relating to Germanicus (C. I. L. 
vi. 911; Henzen 5382), and of that re- 
lating to Drusus (C. I. L. vi. 912 ; Henzen 
5381); which, as having been mainly 
similar (cp. 4. 9, 2), will in some places 
confirm what is stated here. An inscrip- 
tion from the plebs urbana of the thirty- 
five tribes is also extant (C. I. L. vi. 909 ; 
Or. 3064; Wilm. 679), but its date is not 
fixed. . 

ingenio, ‘inventiveness’: cp. 12. 66, 
5, &c. 

10. Saliari carmine. See the collec- 

. Staatsr. i. 452. 

tion and explanation of fragments of this 
hymn in Bp. J. Wordsworth's Fragments 
and Specimens of Early Latin, p. 564, foll., 
also Marquardt, iii. 437. The old portions 
(‘axamenta’), unintelligible to Horace 
(Epp. 2. 1, 86), and, according to Quintilian 
(1.6, 40), even to the priests themselves, are 
to be distinguished from the * carmina in 
universos homines composita, in which 
modern names could be inserted. The 
name of Augustus had been inserted in 
his lifetime (Mon. Anc. ii. 21), apparently 
as early as 725, B. C. 29 (Dio, 51.20, 1); 
but whether the precedent was followed 
in the case of succeeding principes, is un- 
known. In the decree respecting Ger- 
manicus [‘ canit]ur in Palatio ' is thought 
to be traceable, and a less successiul 
attempt has been made to trace words to 
a similar effect in that of Drusus (see 
Marquardt, 1. 1.). The only other name 
recorded as inserted is that of Verus, son 
of Marcus Aurelius ‘Vita M. Ant. 21, 5). 

11. sedes curules. The curule chair 
crowned was placed in the theatre at 
feasts. Such an honour was paid to 
Julius Caesar in his lifetime (Dio, 44. 6, 
3), &€ faov rois TOv 0càv, and to Marcellus 
at his death (Dio, 53. 30, 6): see also 
A place is here assigned 
among those reserved for the ‘ Augus- 
tales,’ because Germanicus had been one 
of them (1. 54, 2). Words apparently 
referring to a similar honour are found in 
the decree to Drusus. The crown de- 
scribed is in the form of the civic crown, 
but made of precious materials (:dA:6ov 
kai Diáxpvsov Dio, 44. 6, 3); such as 
that which had been decreed to Augustus, 
as saviour of the citizens, in 727, B C. 27 
(Dio, 53. 16, 4), and which formed a 

A. D. 19] LIBER II. 

CAP. 82, 83. 379 

ceae coronae statuerentur; ludos circenses eburna effigies prae- 
iret, neve quis flamen aut augur in locum Germanici nisi gentis 

8 Iuliae crearetur. 

arcus additi Romae et apud ripam Rheni et 

in monte Suriae Amano, cum inscriptione rerum gestarum ac 
mortem ob rem publicam obisse, sepulchrum Antiochiae, ubi 5 
crematus, tribunal Epidaphnae, quo in loco vitam finierat. statu- 
arum locorumve in quis coleretur haud facile quis numerum 

inierit. 

cum censeretur clipeus auro et magnitudine insignis 

inter auctores eloquentiae, adseveravit Tiberius solitum parcm- 
\ 

6. epidaphene: text L. 
text Jac. Gron. 

permanent decoration of the palace ‘qua 
postes augustae domus sempiterna gloria 
triumphant’ (Val. Max. 2. 8, 7). 

I. ludos... effigies praeiret. The 
words ‘imagines ponerentur ' are found in 
the inscription, and *Circienses' in that 
of Drusus. Dion. Hal. (7. 72) describes 
at these games processions of images of 
the gods, borne by men on their shoul- 
. ders. An ivory figure of Julius Caesar 
was so borne in a *tensa' in his lifetime 
(Suet. Jul. 76; Dio, 43. 45, 2); and 
such a posthumous honour was decreed 
to several of the imperial family (sce 
Marquardt, iii. 510).  *Praeeo' takes 
such an accus, in 6. 21, 2; 15. 4, 13 
otherwise only in such a phrase as ‘ prae- 
ire verba,’ &c. 

2. flamen, sc. * Augustalis.’ His tenure 
of this priesthood (on which see Mar- 
quardt, iii. p. 473), and his augurship are 
recorded in many inscriptions (e. g. Orell. 
661, 3064); and the former is distinct 
from his membership in the ‘sodales 
Augustales ' (see on I. 54, 2). Germanicus 
appears to have been succeeded as augur 
and flamen by Drusus, and afterwards 
in the latter office by his son Nero: see 
Introd. ix. notes 31 and 11. 

3.arcus. The inscription has the words 
‘alter Ianus fieret, and ‘tertius Janus.’ 
After the latter, the words ‘ Ger?manis' 
and ['tumu]lum Drusi’ are traceable, 
apparently referring to the arch near the 
Rhine. 

4. monte...Amano. This term is used 
by Strabo (12. 2, 2, §35) to include all 
the mountains encircling the gulf of Issus, 
and the passes from Syria to Cilicia, on 
one of which the arch probably stood. 

5. mortem ...obisse: cp. 3. 6, 1. 
Similar words were used of the elder 
Drusus (‘cui fuit heu mortis publica 
causa ^), Epic. Diusi, 458. 

7. colerentur: text B. 

9. adserauit : adseruit B, 

sepulchrum, a cenotaph. The place 
would be in the forum of Antioch 
(c. 23. 5). 

6. tribunal. Probably, as Nipp. thinks, 
this took the form of a scaffold or bier, to 
represent that on which the body was laid 
out; such an erection being sometimes 
part of an important funeral (C. I. L. 
ix. 1783), or afterwards set up as a monu- 
ment (ibid. 1729, Or. 4548). It need not 
therefore (as Walther thinks) be com- 
memorative of his imperium. 

Epidaphnae. The name is an error 
of Tacitus; for this famous grove and 
sanctuary of Apollo, described by Gibbon 
(c. 23), was really called Aagrn, and gave 
to this Antioch its distinguishing title, 
éxi Adgyy, or * Antiochia Epidaphnes' 

Pl. N. H. 5. 21, 18, 79). It was really 
ve miles from Antioch, but considered 
a suburb of it: see Momms. Hist. v. 457, 
E. T. ii. 128. 

7. coleretur. Halm and Nipp. adhere 
to this old correction, on the ground that 
* colerentur' would appear to imply that 
the places where statues were honoured 
might be other than those in which they 
stood. The ‘cultus’ was probably that 
of his * Dii Manes’ (see on c. 7, 3). 

numerum inierit, ' could enumerate' : 
Cp. 15. 41, I. The phrase is in Caes. 
and Liv.: for the tense cp. Introd. v. 

51. 
8. clipeus, ‘a medallion bust. Pliny 
(N. H. 35. 3, 3, 12) says that such had 
been set up at Rome from the consulship 
of Appius Claudius in 259, B.C. 495. An 
* imago clipeata, perhaps of Cicero, not 
apparently in bronze, but marble, is en- 
graved in Visconti, Ic. Rom. pl. xii. 

9. inter auctores eloquentiae, among 
those set up in the Palatine library: cp. 
C. 37, 3. Germanicus is recorded to have 
pleaded causes from a date before the 

5 rentur.. 

- 

380 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 772. 

que ceteris dicaturum: neque enim eloquentiam fortuna dis- 
cerni, et satis inlustre, si veteres inter scriptores haberetur. 
equester ordo cuneum Germanici appellavit qui iuniorum dice- 5 
batur, instituitque uti turmae idibus Iuliis imaginem eius seque- 

vetustas oblitteravit. 

pleraque manent: quaedam statim omissa sunt aut 

84. Ceterum recenti adhuc maestitia soror Germanici Livia, 
nupta Druso, duos virilis sexus simul enixa est. quod rarum 2 

i 
8. uiriles: text B, virile secus Jac. Gron. 

exile of Ovid (Fasti 1, 21), until after his 
triumph (Suet. Cal. 3); and the above 
authors, as well as Pliny (N. H. 8. 42, 64, 
155), speak of him also as a poet; but 
the authorship of the translation of Aratus 
and other remains ascribed to him is 
matter of question. 

solitum paremque, ‘of the usual 
material” (bronze) ‘ and size’ ; as opposed 
to one ‘auro et magnitudine insignis.’ 

I. dicaturum, sc. ‘se’: cp. Introd. v. 
$ 8. 

fortuna: cp. c. 71, 6. 

3. equester ordo. For other in- 
stances of the corporate action of this 
body see 3. 71, 1; Staatsr. iii. 525, foll. 

cuneum. The military sense of this 
word (I. 5r, 1) is not applicable to 
' equites ' : we must therefore suppose one 
of the Wedge-shaped divisions of the 
* quatuordecim ordines? in the theatre to 
be here meant (cp. Suet. Dom. 4). These 
fourteen rows were apparently divided 
into cunei ‘seniorum’ and ‘iuniorum’ 
(Marquardt, Hist. Eq. Rom. p. 71). This 
honour was paid to Germanicus as having 
been ‘ princeps iuventutis' (Ov. ex P. 2. 
5, 41); on which title see I. 3, 2, &c. 

4. turmae. The centuries of * equites 
Romani equo publico' (on whom see 
Introd. vii. p. 102; Staatsr. iii. 482, foll.; 
Seeley, Hist. Exam. of Livy, B. I. pp. 73, 
79 foll.) were arranged at their.‘ trans- 
vectio’ (see below) into six ‘turmae,’ 
each commanded by a ‘sevir’: see 
Staatsr. iii. 522. 

idibus Iuliis. On July 15 took place 
the review or ‘ transvectio equitum," when 
Dion. Hal. (6. 13, 1069) describes them 
as riding in a procession of about 5,000, 
dressed in the ‘ trabea’ and crowned with 
olive, in commemoration of the supposed 
appearance of the Dioscuri at the battle 
of lake Regillus. The institution is said 
to date from 450, B. C. 304 (Liv. 9. 46, 

15), and to have been revived by Augustus 
after long disuse (Suet. Aug. 38): see 
Staatsr. iii. 493. 

imaginem .. . sequerentur. This 
again would be in recognition of his 
having led the procession as ' princeps 
iuventutis. Cp. the figure of speech in 
5. 4, 5 ‘quorum imagines pro vexillis 
secuti forent! The decree respecting 
Drusus contains words apparently ordain-- 
ing a similar honour to him. 

7. recenti... maestitia. Hirschfeld 
argues (Herm. xxv, 1890, pp. 363-373) 
that this event is inserted here for pathctic 
contrast, and must have taken place at 
least a year later, as Tiberius Gemellus, 
who would thus have been eighteen at the 
death of Tiberius, was then still * prae- 
textatus' (see on 6. 46, 1), and is even 
rhetorically called by Gaius waid:or (Dio, 
59. I, 2) and vfjymos (Philo, Leg. 4). Ad- 
mitting that Gaius himself did not take 
the *toga virilis' till his nineteenth year 
(Suet. Cal. 10), it is argued that Tiberius, 
while perhaps desiring to retard his career, 
would rather have accelerated that of his 
own grandson, whom he made co-heir 
with him. Butas the *toga virilis' might 
be, and often was taken on completion of 
the fourteenth year (Marquardt, Privatl. 

129), this youth, if born in A.D. 20, or 

even A. D. 21, could well have taken it 
in the lifetime of Tiberius, even without 
such anticipation as that in Nero's case 
(12. 41, 1 and note); so that some delay 
must anyhow be allowed, and we can- 
not say how much, due to the general 
decay of faculties and vigour of Tiberius 
in those years (Introd. viii. p. 154). 
Livia. On her, and on Tiberius Ge- 
mellus, see Introd. ix. notes 32, 35. The 
other twin, whose death is mentioned four 
years later (4. 75, 1), appears to have 
been called Germanicus: see C. I. G. 
2630, and coins here referred to by Nipp. 

A.D 19.] LIBER II. CAP. 83-85. 381 

laetumque etiam modicis penatibus tanto gaudio principem ad- 
fecit, ut non temperaverit quin iactaret apud patres, nulli ante 
Romanorum eiusdem fastigii viro geminam stirpem editam ; 
8 nam cuncta, etiam fortuita, ad gloriam vertebat. sed populo 
tali in tempore id quoque dolorem tulit, tamquam auctus liberis 
Drusus domum Germanici magis urgueret. 
85. Eodem anno gravibus senatus decretis libido feminarum 
coercita, cautumque, ne quaestum corpore faceret cui avus aut 
2 pater aut maritus eques Romanus fuisset. nam Vistilia prae- 
toria familia genita licentiam stupri apud aediles vulgaverat, 
more inter veteres recepto, qui satis poenarum adversum in- 
3 pudicas in ipsa professione flagitii credebant. exactum et a 
Titidio Labeone Vistiliae marito, cur in uxore delicti manifesta 
4 ultionem legis omisisset. atque illo praetendente sexaginta dies 

I2. exacta: text Vertran. 

I. modicis penatibus, * in a house of 
moderate rank.’ Ritter's insertion of ‘in’ 
is needless, as the construction may be 
abl. abs. *Penates' is used of the house- 
hold in 13. 4, 2, &c., and, in 3. 34, 3, 
even of family circumstances. 

2. temperaverit,. ‘refrained from’: 
cp. 3. 67, 2, &c. 

5. auctus liberis. Apparently the 
expression is usual: cp. Agr. 6, 3; Cic. 
Att. 1. 2, 1 * filiolo me auctum scito. As 
Drusus had already a daughter, he thus 
acquired the ‘ius trium liberorum.' 

6. urgueret, ‘depressed.’ The house 
of Germanicus had more children, but 
was without a head ; so that its forlorn 
condition was set off by this increased 
consequence of the head of the rival 
house. 

7. libido feminarum coercita. Sue- 
tonius (Tib. 35) speaks of other cases, or 
generalizes ‘suo more’ from this. 

g. eques Romanus. The same pro- 

hibition extended ‘ a fortiori ' to senatcrial 
families. 
_ praetoris familia. Sex. Vistilius, of 
this rank, mentioned as an old man in 
6. 9, 2, was probably her father. ‘ Familia 
consulaii! is thus used of the son of a 
consular in 13. 12, I. 

IO. licentiam ... vulgaverat, ‘had 
made open profession of: prostitution.’ 
Suetonius says *lenocinium profiteri coe- 
perant,’ and adds that women could thus 
be exempt from penalties for adultery, as 
no longer legally *matronae'; but the 

jurists affirm that such could still be dealt 
with by the senate (Pap. Dig. 48. 5, 10). 

apud aediles. On the supervision 
exercised by these magistrates over * bal- 
nea, ‘lupanaria,’ and other places of 
public resort, as part of their * cura urbis," 
see Introd. vi. p. 90; Staatsr. ii. 511. 

I2. exactum = quaesitum. Most edi- 
tors have preferred this to ‘exacta,’ which 
might possibly be defended as taken from 
Vergil (Aen. 1, 309). The verb has this 
sense in Ov. A. A. a3, 130 (‘Calypso 
exigit Odrysii fata cruenta ducis "). 

I3. Titidio Labeone, mentioned in Pl. 
N. H. 35. 4, 7, 20, as of praetorian rank, 
and procos. of Gallia Narbonensis, and 
as a bad amateur artist. 

manifesta. Such a genit. (cp. Introd. 
v. 33 e y) is used with this word in the 
Annals (e.g. 4. 53, 23 12. 51, 5, &c.), 
also in Plaut. and Sall. So Dryden has 
*manifest of crimes' (Abs. and Achit. 204). 

14. ultionem legis, ‘enforcement of the 
legal penalty,'i.e. that of *lex Iulia de 
adulteriis! (cp. c. 50, 2). By this law he 
was bound at once (under penalty of being 
charged with connivance) to separate 
from his wife (Dig. 48, 5, 2, § 6), and 
having done so, had during the next sixty 

her (ibid. 11, § 6). Nipp. adds that he 
was not usually liable to be called to 
account for not having exercised this 
prerogative, even after the sixty days had 
expired, but that this whole case was re- 
garded as exceptionally flagrant. 

ar 

Led 

days exclusive right of proceeding against ' 

o 

382 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 772. 

ad consultandum datos necdum praeterisse, satis visum de Vis- 

tilia statuere; eaque in insulam Seriphon abdita est. 

actum et 5 

de sacris Aegyptiis Iudaicisque pellendis factumque patrum 
consultum, ut quattuor milia libertini generis ea superstitione 
5 infecta, quis idonea aetas, in insulam Sardiniam veherentur, 
coercendis illic latrociniis et, si ob gravitatem caeli interissent, 
vile damnum ; ceteri cederent Italia, nisi certam ante diem pro- 

fanos ritus exuissent. 

86. Post quae rettulit Caesar capiendam virginem in locum 
10 Occiae, quae septem et quinquaginta per annos summa sancti- 

I. necdum = *nondum, a post-Aug. 
use; as in H. 1. 31, 5; Plin. Pan. 14. 

satis visum, repeated from H. 4. 59, 
2; Liv. 7. 11, 9, &c. 

de Vistilia statuere, ‘to deal with 
Vistilia': cp. 6. 29, 2; 12. 54, 6, &c. 

2. in insulam Seriphon. Such rele- 
gation was part of the penalty of the *lex 
Iulia’ (see on c. 5o, 4). This island, one 
of the Cyclades, now Serpho, was the 
place of exile of Cassius Severus (4. 21, 5), 
and, like Gyaros, is with Juvenal (10, 170) 

typical of such places. 
3. de sacris Aegyptiis Iudaicisque 
pellendis. Tacitus dismisses briefly a 
subject of small interest to himself and 
his readers, but Josephus (Ant. 18. 3, 4, 
5) gives a full account of the circumstances 
which appear to have led to these decrees. 
A scandalous outrage had been committed 
by a knight named Decius Mundus, on a 
noble Roman lady named Paulina, in the 
temple of Isis and with the connivance of 
the priests; and Tiberius had crucified the 
priests, demolished the temple, and caused 
the statue of Isis to be thrown into the 
Tiber. At the same time a vagabond 
Jew, with three accomplices, had per- 
suaded a noble proselyte named Fulvia to 
send costly gifts to the temple at Jeru- 
salem, which they had embezzled. On the 
Isiac worship at Rome, introduced prob- 
ably soon after the second Punic war, 
prevalent in spite of many attempts to 
suppress it, and reluctantly tolerated by 
Augustus outside the pomerium (Dio, §3. 
2, 4), see Marquardt, iii. 77, &c. The 
Jews in Rome, their only important settle- 
ment in the West (Momms. Hist. v. 499, 
E. T. ii. 173), probably date from the 
conquest of Pompeius; they were cer- 
tainly numerous in the time of Cicero 
(pro Flacc. 28, 67), and are noticed by 
Horace, Ovid, &c. See references in Mar- 

quardt, iii. 82; Mayor, on Juv. 14, 96-106. 
4. ea superstitione. Josephus repre- 
sents this enlistment and expulsion as re- 
lating not to both these bodies but to 
Jews only. The large number of Jewish 
freedmen, and the large Jewish settlement 
in the trans- Tiberine district, are attested 
by Philo, who also speaks of a persecu- 
tion, but ascribes it to the influence of 
Seianus: Leg. ad Gaium, 23, 24. 

5. Sardiniam. Thisisland, with Corsica, 
had originally formed a senatorial province 
of the second rank, but, owing to the pre- 
valence of brigandage, alluded to also by 
Varro (R. R. 1. 16, 2), was handed over 
to a praefect or procurator with a military 
force, from 759, A. D. 6 (Dio, 55. 28, 1), 
until the time of Nero (Introd. vii. p. 112). 
Its * gravitas caeli' had been already men- 
tioned by Livy (23. 34, 11) ; Mela (2. 7, 
123) calls it * ut fecunda, ita paene pesti- 
lens’; and Pausanias (10. 17, t1) speaks 
of its dip 00A «pós xal voowsns. 

7. vile damnum: cp. ‘facili damno" 
H. 4. 28, 5; ‘utile damnum’ Vell. 2. 
46, 3; * iactura vilior' Stat. Theb 1.649. 
The sentiment resembles that on the blood 
of gladiators (1. 76, &). 

g. capiendam virginem. The quali- 
fications and the mode of selection for this 
office are given fully in Gell. 1. 12, where 
it is shown that ‘capere’ (cp. Ann. 4. 16, 
6; 15. 22, 4), is Strictly used; as the 
pontifex maximus took her by the hand 
from her father, as if captive in war, with 
the words ‘ te, Amata, capio, whereby she 
passed out of the * potestas patria.’ The 

.law had prescribed a ‘sortitio’ out of 

twenty candidates selected by the comitia, 
but this custom seems to have been already 
departed from, and, when Gellius wrote, 
was obsolete; the practice being for per- 
sons thus to offer their daughters. 

10. Occiac. Nipp. notes the name of 

A. D. 19.] LIBER Il. 

monia Vestalibus sacris praesederat ; 

CAP. 85 87. 383 

egitque grates Fonteio 

Agrippae et Domitio Pollioni, quod offerendo filias de officio in 

2rem publicam certarent. 

praelata est Pollionis filia, non ob 

aliud quam quod mater eius in eodem coniugio manebat ; nam 

Agrippa discidio domum imminuerat. 

et Caesar quamvis post- 

habitam deciens sestertii dote solatus est. 
87. Saevitiam annonae incusante plebe statuit frumento pre- 
tium, quod emptor penderet, binosque nummos se additurum 

2 negotiatoribus in singulos modios. 

neque tamen ob ea parentis 

patriae delatum et antea vocabulum adsumsit, acerbeque in- 
crepuit eos, qui divinas occupationes ipsumque dominum dix- 

erant. 

unde angusta et lubrica oratio sub principe, qui liberta- 

tem metuebat, adulationem oderat. 

2. comicio: Domitio L. 

Occius Flamma, procos. of Crete at about 
this time (M. Sen. Controv. 27, 19). 
septem et quinquaginta. They were 
chosen at from six to ten years old 
(Gell. l. 1), and were legally bound for 
thirty years ; after which time they might 
retire and marry, but usually continued in 

office for life: see Marquardt, iii. 339. 

I. praesederat. Any Vestal might be 
said ‘praesidere Vestalibus sacris': the 
head of the college was the eldest virgin 
(cp. 11. 32, 5; Ov. Fast. 4, 639), the 
‘virgo Vestalis maxima’ of inscriptions. 

Fonteio Agrippae: cp. c. 30, I. 

5. discidio =‘ divortio,’ as 3. 34,10,&c. 

imminuerat, ‘had lowered in dig- 

nity’: cp. c. 34, 4. 

6. deciens sestertii: cp. c. 37, 2; 
"5,5. This appears to be not an odd 
eee among wealthy people: see Prof. 
Mayor on Juv. 10, 335. 

7. Baevitiam annonae. Drager notes 
this as a novel metaphor, analogous to 

* saevitia hiemis, * maris,' &c. Tacitus 
has also ‘ gravitas annonae ' (6. 13s I), 

' acris annona ' (4. 6, 6). 

incusante plebe. Probably, as at 

other times (cp. 6. 13, 1), these com- 
plaints found utterance at the theatre 
and other public gatherings. 

statuit ...pretium; i.e. it was to be 
sold at less than the current price, and 
the difference made up to the dealers. 
This has nothing to do with the usual 
‘monthly corn-dole, but corresponds rather 

to the occasional *frumentationes,' such 

as are mentioned in Mon. Anc. iii. 10, 40; 
Suet. Aug. 4I, &c.: cp. I5. 39, a ‘ pre- 

11. occupationes eius Ritt. 

tium frumenti minutum usque ad ternos 
nummos.' On the regulation of the corn- 
market at Rome by the government see 
Marquardt, ii. 126, foll. and Prof. Wilkins 
in D. of Ant. i. p. 879. 

9. negotiatoribus: cp. c. 62, 4; 3. 
42, 1, &c.; here specially used of corn- 
dealers. 

1o. antea: cp. I. 72, 2. 

increpuit. Suetonius (Tib. 27) speaks 
with more detail: * Dominus appellatus 
a quodam, denuntiavit ne se amplius 
contumeliae causa nominaret. Alium 
dicentem sacras eius occupationes et rur- 
sus alium, auctore eo senatum se adisse, 
verba mutare et pro auctore suasorem, 
pro sacris laboriosas dicere coegit' (cp. 
the speech in 4. 38). He considcred 
that he could properly be addressed as 
‘dominus’ only by his slaves (see his 
saying quoted in Introd. vi. p. 78, n. 10); 
and, though the example set by him and 
Augustus (Suet. Aug. 53) gradually found 
exceptions (among which may be noted 
the regular use of ‘domine’ as the address 
of Pliny to Trajan), the title does not 
become established as that of the princeps 
till the time of Diocletian. See Staatsr. 
ii. 760, and a complete history of the use 
of the term in daily life, in Friedlander, 
i. 395, foll. 

I2, angusta et lubrica, ‘ cousiraiued 
by narrow limits and perilous.” The 
words are joined together (but not in a 
metaphorical sense) in H. 3. 82, 4: 
* angustae sententiae’ is used in Dial. 32, 
3; and * lubricus" has often this meaning, 
as 6. 49, 35 51, 3; H. 1. 10, 2. 

Ot 

-— 

Oo 

384 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 772. 

88. Reperio apud scriptores senatoresque eorundem tempo- 
rum Adgandestrii principis Chattorum lectas in senatu litteras, 
quibus mortem Arminii promittebat, si patrandae neci venenum 
mitteretur; responsumque esse non fraude neque occultis, sed 

5 palam et armatum populum Romanum hostes suos ulcisci. qua 2 
gloria aequabat se Tiberius priscis imperatoribus, qui venenum 
in Pyrrhum regem vetuerant prodiderantque. ceterum Arminius 8 
abscedentibus Romanis et pulso Maroboduo regnum adfectans 
libertatem popularium adversam habuit, petitusque armis cum 

1o varia fortuna certaret, dolo propinquorum cecidit: liberator haud 

dubie Germaniae et qui non primordia populi Romani, sicut alii 
reges ducesque, sed florentissimum imperium lacessierit, proeliis 

ambiguus, bello non victus. septem et triginta annos vitae, duo- 4 

2. ad Gandestrii...responsum esse Grimm, senatoriisque . . . actis Gandestrii 
Momms., 3 and 7. armenii . . . armenius: cp. I. 55, 4. 7. pyrium : see on 
c. 63, 3. 10. haudubie: hau dubie Bait. and Ritt.; cp. c. 36, 3. 

I. scriptores senatoresque eorun- 
dem temporum, ‘contemporary writers 
who were senators’: cp. *liberto et ac- 
cusatori’ (16. 12, 2), where only one per- 
son is meant. The fact that they were 
senators is mentioned to show their means 
of information ; but it is remarkable that 
Tacitus does not cite the ‘acta senatus’ 
themselves: see Introd. iii. 18. 

2. Adgandestrii. The impossibility 
of finding any German name of which 
this might be reasonably supposed to be 
a rendering has suggested the probability 
of a corruption. Jac. Grimm thought the 
name might be * Gandestrius' (‘Ganter’ 
=‘Mannchen der Gans’), but the sen- 
tence as read by him gives a construction 
very unlike the style of Tacitus, and 
Mommsen's reading is open to the objec- 
tion (see Nipp. Pref. p. 24) that as the 
‘acta senatus must be contemporary, 
*eorundem temporum" would be sur- 
plusage. 

principis: cp. c. 7, 2. 

4. non fraude: cp. the sentiment of 
Livy (1. 53, 4) * minime arte Romana, 
fraude et dolo. "Tacitus elsewhere (11. 
19, 4) approves of such an act, in a case 
not very dissimilar, and perhaps here 
thinks Tiberius Quixotic. 

6. priscis imperatoribus. The gene- 
ral authorities (e.g. Liv. Epit. 13, &c.) tell 
this story only of C. Fabricius Luscinus in 
his second consulship, A. U. C. 476, B.C. 
278; but Claudius Quadrigarius (ap. Gell. 

3. 8) makes the letter run in the names of 
both consuls, the other being Q. Aemilius 
Papus. Probably Tacitus does not mean 
the plural to be taken strictly. 

venenum, i.e. the preparation of 
poison. On such pregnant uses of words 
cp. Introd. v. $ 84. 

8. &bscedentibus, perhaps used aoris- 
tically (cp. Introd. v. $ 54 a). Nipp. 
thinks the retreat is represented as gradual 
because the abandonment of Germany 
became gradually apparent. - 

-‘Tegnum adfectans. He was of the 
royal race (cp. 11. 16, 1), but had hitherto 
formed a contrast to Maroboduus (c. 44, 
3). Possibly his motive may not have 
been personal ambition, but a desire to 
unite Germany more firmlv against Rome. 

Io. liberator. Here, as below (* bello 
non victus"), Tacitus admits the plain 
fact, however qualified by the Roman 
belief (c. 26, 2; 73, 3) that another cam- 
peign would have compelled submission. 

I3. reges ducesque, such as Pyrrhus 
and Hannibal. In many elements of 
military strength, Rome had been really 

‘then more powerful than at this time. 

I3. ambiguus. Elsewhere (e.g. c. 67, 
I, &c.) the word, as applied to persons, 
has a different meaning. In this sense, we 
should rather expect it to be used of the 
battles themselves, as in c. 21, 4, &c. 

bello. The antithesis is common: cp. 
12. 39, ^; G. 30, 3, &c. 

duodecim. This would date from the 

A. D. 19.] 

LIBER II. CAP. 88. 

385 

decim potentiae explevit, caniturque adhuc barbaras apud gentes, 
Graecorum annalibus ignotus, qui sua tantum mirantur, Romanis 
haud perinde celebris, dum vetera extollimus recentium incuriosi. 

3. Finit LisER .II. P CoRNELY INciPIT LiBER III. FELICITER. 

defeat of Varus; so that his death must 
have taken place in 774, A. D. 21, though 
mentioned here, as on the last occasion of 
noticing him. Maroboduus was thus 
dismissed from notice (c. 63, 5). 

I. caniturque. It is possible, as 
Grimm suggests (Mythol. E. T. p. 362), 
that Tacitus here confounds him with the 
German hero Irmin (see Introd. to G. 

. 28). 
; 2. Graecorum. We should suppose 
these Greek writers to be such as wrote of 

subjects or periods in which Arminius. 

ought to have been mentioned. This may 
suggest a question whether Plutarch's lost 
Lives of Augustus and Tiberius may have 
been known to Tacitus at this date, and 
. may possibly be here alluded to. The 

spirit of such Greek writers, whoever they . 

were, seems represented in the subsequent 
narrative of Dio, who only once (56. 19, 2) 
mentions Arminius. | 

3. haud perinde, i.e. ‘not as he should 

VOL. I. 

have been.’ Nipp. gives several instances 
(H. 2. 84, 2; 4. 62, 4; G. 5,31 34 1; 
Agr. 10, 6) in which the implied compari- 
son is thus dropped out of sight. Others 
may be found in Suet. and later authors. 
celebris. Tacitus has this masc. form 
(never ‘celeber’) in 13. 47, 23 14. 19; 
and perhaps ‘alacris’ in H. 5. 16, 5: 
earlier prose writers have * acris,' * eques- 
tris, *salubris, ‘silvestris’: cp. Zumpt, 
Gr. 100, note I. 
vetera extollimus. A similar pro- 
test against indiscriminate admiration. of 
antiquity is found in 3. 55, 6. The senti- 
ment of Velleius (2. 92, 4), * praesentia 
invidia praeterita veneratione prosequimur, 
et his nos obrui illis instrui credimus, is - 
transferred by Hobbes (Leviathan, con- . 
clusion) from the judgement of actions to 
that of literature: * The praise of ancient 
authors, proceeds not from the reverence 
of the dead, but from the competition and 
mutual envy of the living? : cp. Dial. 18. 

APPENDIX I. 

ON BOOK II, CC. 23, 24. 

Tue following fragment of a contemporary account of the disaster of 
Germanicus by.Pedo Albinovanus, probably one of his officers (see on 
1. 60, 2), which has been preserved by M. Seneca (Suas. x. 14), is here 
subjoined, as a specimen of some of the material from which Tacitus 
may have had to draw up his narrative :— 

Iam pridem post terga diem solemque relinquunt, 
Iam pridem notis extorres finibus orbis 
Per non concessas audaces ire tenebras 
Ad rerum metas extremaque litora mundi; 
Nunc illum pigris immania monstra sub undis 5 
Qui ferat Oceanum, qui saevas undique pristis 
Aequoreosque canes, ratibus consurgere prensis. 
Accumulat fragor ipse metus. lam sidere limo 
Navigia et rapido desertam flamine classem 
Seque feris credunt per inertia fata marinis 10 
Tam non felici laniandos sorte relinqui. 
Atque aliquis prora caecum sublimis in alta 
Aéra pugnaci luctatus rumpere visu, 
Ut nihil erepto valuit dinoscere mundo, 
Obstructa in tales effundit pectora voces: 15 
Quo ferimur? fugit ipse dies orbemque relictum 
Ultima perpetuis claudit natura tenebris. 
Anne alio positas ultra sub cardine gentes 
Atque alium flabris intactum quaerimus orbem? 
: Di revocant rerumque vetant cognoscere finem — 20 
Mortales oculos: aliena quid aequora remis 
Et sacras violamus aquas divumque quietas 
Turbamus sedes? 

APPENDIX II. 

ON THE CAMPAIGNS OF GERMANICUS. 

THE geography and details of these operations have been explained in 
the notes, so far as they seem to rest on trustworthy evidence; and it is 
here intended to give only a brief sketch of the general plan of campaign 
and its results '. 

The disaster of Varus, if really decisive as to a policy of conquest, 
could not be at once accepted as such without provoking German 
aggression ; and even a ‘bellum abolendae infamiae ?' would be popularly 
understood to require some recovery of lost ground. The army was 
consequently at once made up to eight legions, and placed for three - 
years (763-765, A.D. 10-12) under the supreme command of Tiberius, 
and for four more under that of Germanicus, who had previously served 
one year (764, A.D. 11) under his uncle. 

Beyond the Rhine all was lost, except in its lowest course, where the 
Batavi and Frisii remained ‘subject, and at least an outpost was held 
among the Chauci*. The camps at Moguntiacum and Vetera formed 
the base of operation against the chief hostile tribes, the former against 
.the Chatti of Hessen, the latter against the Cheruscan confederacy, 
which, though extending to the Rhine, had its heart far away beyond 
the Weser. ' 

Of these the Chatti, though before and afterwards by far the most 
formidable enemies of Rome in Western Germany‘, and highest in 
military organization 5, seem at this date kept by their standing jealousy 
of the Cherusci* from giving effectual aid to the national cause. They 
have to be reckoned with as hostile, but it is sufficient to remind them 
by occasional raids" that they are vulnerable at home, and thus to make 

! On the whole subject see especially 

Mommsen, Hist. v. 44 foll., E. T. i. 48 foll. 
I. 3, 6. 

3 1, 38, 1. 

* They had at first held aloof from the 
confederacy against Drusus ( Dio, 54. 33, 2), 
but afterwards joined it (Id. 36, 3; 55. 
1, 2), and had probably risen against 

Varus, as they are said to have had one 
of his eagles (see on 2. 25, 2). 

5 See the account of them in G. 30-31. 

* 12. 28, 2. 

7 One such precedes each of the great 
attacks on the Cheruscan league (1. 55,1; 
2. 7, 1), another comes after the ship- 
wreck (2. 25, 2). 

Cc2 

388 APPENDIX Il. 

them stand on the defensive, and give no aid to those who give none to 
them?, With this exception, they are left out of count, and the Upper 
army is thus set free to join the other in the general attack. 

Against the Cherusci and their confederacy Tiberius conducted at 
least one campaign (764, A.D. 11), in which he is stated to have spent 
some time across, but not far from the Rhine *, and is credited with much 
the same acts of general devastation? as are recorded of Germanicus. 
One expression (‘aperit limites") would point to some more permanent 
result, probably to the reoccupation of the outpost of Aliso*, and the 
restoration of its communications with Vetera by a barricaded road along 
the Lippe 5. | 

Germanicus, on succeeding to the command, took no offensive action 
during his first year, and seems to have planned none for his second; 
the rapid expedition against the Marsi late in the autumn of 767, A.D. 14, 
being represented as intended only to restore the morale of the troops 
after the mutiny*. Possibly he was encouraged by its success, and 
Roman opinion generally by an exaggerated report of it’, to look upon 
reconquest as feasible; possibly Tiberius himself was inclined to a more 
vigorous effort to recover ground that he had done so much to win, than 
the old age and infirmity of Augustus had been willing to sanction: 
anyhow, the next two years show a really energetic attempt to regain the 
frontier of the Elbe. Tacitus helps us little to conceive the plan’ of 
campaign; but here, as elsewhere *, some detail casually mentioned often 
helps us to see a meaning in what seemed purposeléss; and we shall 
hardly be wrong in thinking that the first object was to weaken the 
confederacy in detail by bringing an overwhelming force to bear on its 
chief outlying members before the centre was assailed. From this view 
the already mentioned onslaught on the Marsi, who had been so 
prominent as to have captured an eagle *, may be part of a scheme. 

The chief campaign of 768, A.D. r5, is, as we read it, an enigma. 
Half the army sails round by sea to the mouth of the Ems, to be met at 
: some point on that river by the other forces’, and thence to find its way 

1 The Cherusci, in spite of jealousies, on which such honours in such cases were 
were inclined to do so, but checked bya generally given is seen in the ovation of 
counter demonstration (1. 56, 7). Drusus (3. 11, 1), and that offered to, 

* Dio, 56. 25, 3. Velleius (2. 121, 3) though disdained by, Tiberius himself 
seems to speak of more than one campaign. (3. 47. 4). 

3 Vell. 2. 121, 2. * Instances are often seen in the narra- 

* See 2. 7, £, and note. tive of the campaigns of Corbulo (vol. ii. 

* This may possibly be the ‘limes’ of 
Tiberius (1. 50, 2). 

sr 51. 
7 This seems implied in the award of 
a triumph (1. 55, 1); but the slight ground 

Introd. ch. iv) and others. 
3.3; .25, 2. E 
1 rj. 60, a-3. The meeting-point on 
the Ems is not specified, but probably 
low down the stream. ' 

ON THE CAMPAIGNS OF GERMANICUS. 389 

back to the sources of the Ems and Lippe’, in other words, to a point 
that could have been easily reached in a few days by the Lippe and 
Aliso. We may find a key to this in the brief record of the submission 
of the Chauci? (possibly coupled with that of the western part of the 
Angrivarii?), and may suppose that to secure the whole lower country to - 
the Weser by the enrolment of this widespread people* in the Roman 
ranks was a worthy object for this circuit. Thence the whole united 
army is flung upon the Bructeri, another eagle recovered, and this 
powerful tribe lopped off from the resources of Arminius®, Passing over 
the burial of the remains of the army of Varus* as a mere episode 
suggested by nearness to the spot, and unduly amplified by reason of its 
capabilities for picturesque description, we can see that the remaining 
object of the campaign would be to bring the main body of the enemy to 
battle, and inflict such.a defeat as should crush all remaining resistance 
to the Weser. Somewhere between the Ems and that river a battle is 
delivered, but its result is unsatisfactory, and it is therefore briefly 
described ", and followed by an immediate retreat, turned into a ‘clades *' 
by the. straits and narrow escape of tlíe army of Caecina, and the almost 
total loss of the baggage and supplies both of this force? and of the two 
legions nearly drowned through their inexperience of equinoctial tides '*. 
The magnitude of the loss is shown by the contributions not only from 
Gaul but from Spain and even Italy !!, and by the emboldenment of the 
Germans in the following spring to attempt an attack on Aliso™. It is 
notable that in repelling this, Germanicus is carried almost to the Weser, 
the point to be afterwards reached by. the whole army in so wide 
a circuit P, 

In the great campaign of 769, A.D. 16, we are again perplexed by the 
disproportion between the preparations and the end effected, which was 
no more apparently than the transport by ship of the whole army to the 
point similarly reached in the previous year by half of it’. The 
description of the ships built!* shows that they were not all intended 
for the same kind of service ; and we should hardly be wrong in thinking 
that, while the larger and more sea-going fleet was left at the mouth of 

! I. 66, 5. ? 1. 60, 4. triumph as vanquished : see on 2. uh i 

* Their * defectio! (2. 8, 4) implies a * 1, 61-62. 7 1.635, 1- 
submission at some previous time. 5 I. 71, 5. ; E 6 2.684 

* See the description of them in G. 35. 19: £70. U- 4 51/8. 
Another division of them extended from 13 5, 7, 1, and note. 
the Weser to the Elbe, but are probably 13 3, 7, 3-4, and notes. The force is 
here left out of view. a very large one, six legions, but in this 

5 1. 60, 4-5. Other tribes, never men- . attempt to deal a rapid blow, it is not 
tioned by Tacitus, and apparently belong- encumbered by the baggage and supplies 
ing to this region, as the Campsani, needed for a prolonged emp: 
Chattuarii, Landi, were claimed at the Ht 3.8, 2. v2. 

390 APPENDIX II. 

the Ems, the army marched along the right bank of the Hase, süpported 
by a light flotilla conveying supplies!, to a point whence the valley of 
the Werra and the Weser could be easily reached. The absence of any 
resistance need not show that all this district was reduced to submission, 
but rather that Arminius had thought fit to collect all his strength behind 
the Weser, where his own advantages and the difficulties of the Romans 
would be augmented. We have two battles?, in which great victories 
are claimed, but the first does not prevent the speedy reassemblage of the 
enemy, and the sequel of the second is a retreat, not as in the previous 
year, at the equinox, but in the height of summer, ending in a still 
greater disaster, and followed by short incursions *, apparently intended, 
like that of two years previously, to restore the morale of the troops. 
This premature retreat may have been due to unmentioned reverses, to 
the increasing difficulty of feeding an isolated army, or to other causes, 
but all explanation is mere conjecture. 

The one more campaign, still longed for by the sanguine leader 5, if it 
had gone on the lines of those before it, might probably have been 
planned on the supposition that the army should be conveyed or attended 
by the fleet up the Weser and Aller to the neighbourhood of the Elbe. 
But for this a new fleet was needed; the dangers of sea transport had 
proved to be even greater than those of a land march; the Romans had 
secured no ground beyond the Weser; and an advance to the Elbe 
would have brought them: dangerously near to the great organization of 
tre hitherto neutral Maroboduus *. | 

All this Tiberius must have known, also that German warfare had 
entered on a new stage since his own day, by the growth of military 
discipline’, and the rise of a leader of genius. So-called victories might 
still be won; but the Germans had always an easy refuge in the forests, 
and could soon collect again to harass a retreating enemy. To hold the 
country, roads would have to be restored? or created in every direction, 
strong winter camps formed in several places, the chief rivers permanently 
" occupied by a fleet. Even thus the result might yet be doubtful owing 
to the absence of towns among the Germans, their unsettled homes and 

! We may, perhaps, thus explain the 
absence of any mention of the route. 
Tacitus may have found in his authorities 
that the troops disembarked at the mouth 

* 2. 25. 

* See 2. 44, 3, &c. 
7 See 2. 45, 3. 

* Between the Rhine and the Weser, 

5 2. 26, 4. 

of the Ems, also that ships went on nearly 
to the Weser, and may have confused the 
statements. The route back, for whatever 
reason, is similarly ignored. 

* 2. 16-18; 19-21. 

5 * aestate adulta 2. 23, r. 

Dünzelmann (Jahrb. für Class. Phil. xx. 
Supp.) and Nordhoff and Westhoff ( Bonn. 
Jahrb. xcvi) trace several roads, con- 
sidered, but perhaps hardly proved, to be 
Roman; which, if so, would date before 
the disaster of Varus. 

N- 

391 

roving habits, and the difficulty of keeping up a commissariat in that land 
of poverty and depredation!. In any case, if the defences on the Rhine 
were not to be dangerously weakened?, a considerable permanent addition 
was required to the legionary forces. 

We cannot be surprised that the mind of a cautious ruler was made 
up, and that the recovery of eagles and stately pageant of the triumph 
formed a welcome occasion for the abandonment of an untenable position. 
‘Rome was sufficiently avenged ; the Germans might well be left to wear 
themselves out with internal discord *.! Under cover of such phrases, the 
Chauci and such outposts as Aliso were abandoned‘; the two armies, 
not again united under one commander, become a local and defensive 
force; the frontier as left at the fall of Varus* is accepted ; and Arminius 
becomes 'the liberator of Germany, and, if not always successful in 
battles, in the whole result of the war unconquered *.' 

ON THE CAMPAIGNS OF GERMANICUS. 

! Such difficulties are strongly dir 
Tacitus in the ‘Germania’; see Introd. 

2 These armies were ‘commune in Ger- 

: manos Gallosque subsidium? (4. 5, 2); 
and such a rising in the latter country as 
actually took place a few years later 
(3. 40 foll) must have been always 
looked upon as possible. 

1. 55. 

* 3. 26, 3. 

* This is not distinctly stated, but must 
be implied : see Momms. Hist. v. 5o, E. T. 
The ‘ discessio’ of the Romans is 
spoken of (2. 44, 2), and Arminius is 
made (2. 45, 6) to speak of them as 
* eiecti." 

* See above, p. 387. 

© 3. 88, 3. 

BOOK III. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U. C. 778, A.D. 20. M. Valerius Messalla, M. Aurelius Cotta, coss. 

Ch. 1-18. Further honours to Germanicus, and trial of Cn. Piso. 

1, 2. Reception of Agrippina at Brundusium ; transportation of the remains to Rome. 
8. Tiberius, Augusta, and Antonia absent from the demonstration. 4, 5. Feeling at 
Rome on the day of the funeral. 6. Edict of Tiberius. 7. Drusus departs to 
Illyricum. 8, 9. Piso, after visiting him there, returns ostentatiously to Rome. 10, 
: 11. Indictment sent back to the senate, after a hearing before Tiberius; return of 
Drusus. 12. Speech of Tiberius at the opening of the case. 18, 14. Progress of the 
trial 15. Plancina secures her safety through Augusta; suicide of Piso. 16. His 
last letter read. 17, 18. End of the trial; modifications of the sentence by Tiberius. 

Ch. 19-30. Other events of the year. 

19. Priesthoods given to the accusers; ovation of Drusus; death of his mother 
Vipsania. 20, 21. Tacfarinas again defeated in Africa by Apronius. 22,23. Trial 
of Lepida. 24. Return of D. Silanus from voluntary exile. 25. Complaints of the 
working of the ‘lex Papia Poppaea.’ 26-28. Digression on the origin of law, and 
the history of Roman legislation. 29. Entry of Nero Caesar into public life; his 
marriage. 30. Death of L. Volusius and Sallustius Crispus. 

A. U. 0C. 774, A. D. 21. Tiberius Caesar Augustus IV, Drusus 
Caesar II, coss. 

91. Tiberius absent during the year; complaint brought by Domitius Corbulo 
against P, Sulla; his attacks on persons charged with the maintenance of roads. 
82. News of renewed hostilities in Africa; M. Lepidus proconsul by lot of Asia. 
88, 34. Speeches of Caecina Severus and Valerius Messalinus on the proposal to 
forbid governors of provinces to take their wives with them. 35. Blaesus, uncle of 
Seianus, made proconsul of Africa ‘extra sortem. 36, 37. Drusus checks an abuse 
in respect of the statues of the princeps, and is credited with the punishment of 
accusers; his popularity. 38. Tiberius causes Antistius Vetus to be condemned for 
complicity with Rhescuporis 39. Renewed disturbance in Thrace suppressed. 

Ch. 40-47. Serious rebellion promoted by Julius Florus and Julius Sacrovir in Gaul. 

40. Seditious meetings held. 41. Outbreak of the Andecavi and Turoni put down 
by Acilius Aviola. 42. Rising of the Treveri suppressed by a force of cavalry; 
death of Florus. 48-46. A large force raised by the Aedui defeated and dispersed 
by C. Silius near Augustodunum; death of Sacrovir. 47. Tiberius reports to the 
senate, and talks of going to Gaul ; honours decreed to him. 

—48. Death of Sulpicius Quirinius. 49-51. Clutórius Priscus put to death by 
sentence of the senate for a poem in anticipation of the death of Drusus; speech 
of M'. Lepidus; Tiberius blames the haste shown. 

394 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U. 0. 775, &. D. 22. C. Sulpicius Galba, D. Haterius Agrippa, coss. 

52-55. The aediles complain of the defiance of sumptuary laws, especially in 
luxuries of the table; letter of Tiberius. The subject allowed to drop; but, after 
many. years’ licence, luxury abated in the time of Vespasian. 56, 57. Drusus 
associated in the tribunician power; extravagant compliments decreed. 58. Servius 
Maluginensis, flamen Dialis, claims his lot for the proconsulate of Asia. 59. Drusus 
thought to have shown pride in only writing to the senate. 60-63. Embassies to 
the senate from Greek cities in Asia touching the right of asylum claimed for their 
temples. 64. Return of Tiberius in consequence of the illness of Augusta; vows 
offered for her recovery. 65. Prevalence of servility in the senate. 66-69. Trial 
and condemnation of C. Silanus for extortion and treasonable conduct in Asia; 
Tiberius declines the responsibility which the proposal of Dolabella would cast on 
him. 70. Condemnation of Caesius Cordus; dismissal of the charge against L. 
Ennius; pretended indignation of Ateius Capito. 71. Offering to Fortuna Equestris 
for recovery of Augusta; the claim of the flamen Dialis to a province disallowed. 
72. Restoration of the * Basilica Pauli’ by Lepidus; that of the theatre of Pompeius 
undertaken by Caesar. 73, 74. Successes of Blaesus against Tacfarinas, and honours 
awarded to him. 75. Deaths of Asinius Saloninus and Ateius Capito. 76. Death 
of Junia, wife of Cassius and sister of Brutus; her will and funeral. 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER III. 

]. NiHIL intermissa navigatione hiberni maris Agrippina Cor- 

cyram insulam advehitur, litora Calabriae contra sitam. 

illic 5- 

paucos dies conponendo animo insumit, violenta luctu et nescia 

2 tolerandi. 

interim adventu eius audito intimus quisque ami- 

corum et plerique militares, ut quique sub Germanico stipendia 
fecerant, multique etiam ignoti vicinis e municipiis, pars officium 
in principem rati, plures illos secuti, ruere ad oppidum Brundi- 10 
sium, quod naviganti celerrimum fidissimumque adpulsu erat. 
8 atque ubi primum ex alto visa classis, complentur non modo 

4. ab excessu diui Augusti. Nihil, &c. 
Wurm. 

4. Nihil intermissa, &c. Her jour- 
ney (see 2. 75, 1; 79, 1) falls chiefly into 
the former year. Hence the beginning of 
this year and names of the new consuls 
are noticed incidentally (c 2, 5). 

5. advehitur: cp. ‘Uticam advehitur’ 
(Sall. Jug. 86, 4); ‘advehor Ortygiam' 
(Ov. Met. 5, 499, 640); and the similar 
accus. with *adferor' (H. 3. 43, 3). The 
verb takes accus. pers. in 2. 45, 4, &c. 

contra. On the anastrophe cp. Introd. 
v. 77, I. 

6. insumit: see note on 2. 53, 2. 

nescia tolerandi, *unskilled in en- 
durance.’ ‘Nescius,’ in this sense, takes 
a gerundial gen. (acc. to Dr.) only here 
and in c. 67, 2; an inf. often in poets. 
Cp. *simulationum nescia’ 4. 54, 2. 

8. plerique — * permulti the usual, 
but hardly (as Nipp. makes it) the in- 
variable meaning in Tacitus of this word 
and ‘ plerumque' : see G. G. Lex. 

militares, used substantively, as in 

8. cuique: text B, ut cuique. . . fuerant 

II. ad pulsü: text B, ad adpulsum Doederlein. 

I4. 33, 4; Hor. Od. 1.8, 5; Curt. 8. 5, 4; 
Quint. 11. 1, 33. The word seems here 
analogous to ‘primipilaris,’ ‘ consularis," 
&c., as denoting persons who have been 
soldiers: cp. ‘vir militaris’ (4. 42, 2, 
&c.). 

9. officium: cp. I. 24, 4; 2. 42, 2, 
&c. The ‘pars’ and ‘plures’ are sub- 
divisions of the ‘multi ignoti’ only, and 
‘illos’ refers to ‘ pars.’ 

II. celerrimum, ‘most quickly reach- 
ed. Drager notes this use of the word 
as unexampled. 

fidissimum, ‘safest.’ 
first found in Vergil (cp. Aen. 2, 23, 400); 
so Tacitus has * pons fidus' in 15. 15, 6: 
cp. H. 5. 6, 4. *Adpulsu' is generally 
taken as a supine, but might also be a 
contracted dative, as *luxu' (c. 30, 4), 
&c.: cp. 'utrinque prora peg" sem- 
per adpulsui frontem agit' G. 44, 2. 

I2. ex alto, ‘in the offing’ : 
G. 3, 238. 

cp. Verg. 

This sense is . 

396 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 773. 

portus et proxima maris, sed moenia ac tecta, quaque longissime 
prospectari poterat, maerentium turba et rogitantium inter se, 

silentione an voce aliqua egredientem exciperent. 

neque satis 

constabat quid pro tempore foret, cum classis paulatim successit, 
&non alacri, ut adsolet, remigio, sed cunctis ad tristitiam com- 

positis. 

postquam duobus cum liberis, feralem urnam tenens, 

egressa navi defixit oculos, idem omnium gemitus; neque dis- 
cerneres proximos alienos, virorum feminarumve planctus, nisi 
quod comitatum Agrippinae longo maerore fessum obvii et 

1o recentes in dolore anteibant. 

2. Miserat duas praetorias cohortes Caesar, addito ut magis- 
tratus Calabriae Apulique et Campani suprema erga memoriam 

filii sui munia fungerentur. 

umeris cineres portabantur ; praecedebant incompta signa, versi 
15 fasces; atque ubi colonias transgrederentur, atrata plebes, tra- 

I. mari Mur. 

I. proxima maris, 'the sea just out- 
side, which, as well as the harbour it- 
self, was crowded with boats: cp. ‘ prox- 
ima litorum’ H. 3. 42, 1. The instances 
cited by Walther and Orelli do not war- 
rant our explaining this text otherwise 
(see Ritter); and the emendation * mari' 
is not generally accepted. 

quaque, &c., ‘ places commanding the 
furthest sea-view.’ It is better to take 
‘qua’ thus, with the force of ‘unde,’ 
than to suppose the words to mean the 
furthest points within view from the 
ships. 

4. quid pro tempore foret, ‘which 
course was suitable to the occasion’: cp. 
‘pro opibus' (c. 2, 2); ‘consilium pro 
tempore et pro re’ (Caes. B. G. 5. 8, 1), 
&c. On the use of * quid ' cp. 1. 47, 2. 

successit, ‘approached’; not appa- 
rently elsewhere used in this sense abso- 
lutely, but with *ad,' or with dat. 

6. duobus: see on 2. 70, 2. 

7. defixit, sc. ‘in terram, a common 
meaning of the passive participle of- this 
verb (cp. 1.68, 3; 13.5, 3, &c.); whereas 
the simple verb requires an addition, as 
H. 4. 72, 4; Verg. Aen. 6, 469. This 
attitude of sorrow here gives the signal 
for the outburst of sympathy. 

9. Qbvii et recentes in dolore. 
‘Obvii’ is opposed to the ‘comitatus.’ 
* Recentes in dolore,’ ‘those whose grief 
was fresh, a phrase found in Auct. ad 

13. munera : so Or., Pfitzn., Allen; text Ritt. 

Herenn. 2, 7, but distinct from *recens 
dolore’ (1. 41, 5). ‘Et’ is explanatory, 

as the persons coupled are the same. 

10. anteibant; referring to the ‘ gemi- 
tus’ and * planctus' mentioned above. 

1I. magistrátus, sc. municipales! On 
the variation from the genitive *Cala- 
briae’ to adjectives, cp. 2. 3, 2. 

I2. erga: see on 2. 2, 5. 

13. munia. In defence of this cor- 
rection (made also in H. 3. 13, 1), Ritter 
shows by.a large collection of instances, 
that in the nom. and acc. plural, where 
Tacitus has the choice between * munera’ 
and ' munia, he uses the former for gifts, 

.&c. (e. g. 4- 26, 4; 14. 50, 2; 55, 5; 

Agr. 13, 1), the latter for duties or 
functions (e.g. I. 2, 1; 11, 3; 16, 2; 
31, 3; 69, 2, &c.). | 

fungerentur: cp. 4.38, I. Elsewhere 
the accus. with this verb is chiefly anti- 
quated, except as implied in gerundive 
constructions. In these two places, it is 
perhaps preserved as an archaic purism of 
Tiberius, on which ground also some 
retain * munera. 

I4. incómpta, ‘unadorned’: cp. *in- 
honora signa' (H. 4. 62, 4), and note on 
I. 24, 4. Pliny (N. H. 13. 3, 4, 23) notes 
that the standards were anointed with 
perfume on festal occasions. 

I5. fasces, the twelve: denoting the 
rank of Germanicus (see on 2. 53, 3). 
On this sign of mourning cp. Epiced. 

4 

5 

igitur tribunorum centurionumque 2 

A. D. 20.] 

LIBER III. 

CAP. 1-3 397 

beati equites pro opibus loci vestem odores aliaque funerum 

3 sollemnia cremabant. 

etiam quorum diversa oppida, tamen 

Obvii et victimas atque aras dis manibus statuentes lacrimis et 

4 conclamationibus dolorem testabantur. 

Drusus Tarracinam pro- 

gressus est cum Claudio fratre liberisque Germanici, qui in urbe 5 

5 fuerant. 

consules M. Valerius et M. Aurelius (iam enim magis- 

tratum occeperant) et senatus ac magna pars populi viam con- 

plevere, disiecti 
adulatio, gnaris 
male dissimulari. 

et ut cuique libitum flentes ; 
omnibus laetam Tiberio Germanici mortem 

aberat quippe 

3. Tiberius atque Augusta publico abstinuere, inferius maies- 
tate sua rati, si palam lamentarentur, an ne omnium oculis vul- 

2 tum eorum scrutantibus falsi intellegerentur. 

matrem Antoniam 

non apud auctores rerum, non diurna actorum scriptura reperio 

6. c. aurelius : text Panvini. 

Drusi 142 ‘quos primum vidi fasces, in 
funere vidi, et vidi versos indiciumque 
mali.’ The reversal of arms in mourning 
is described in Verg. Aen. i1, 93. 

ubi.,. transgrederentur. On the 
subjunctive cp. Iutrod. v. $ 52. 

colonias. Nipp. thinks that as the 
distinction between ‘coloniae’ and ‘mnu- 
nicipia ' in Italy was now nominal, this 
term is used concisely for both (see note 
on I. 79, I). Asa fact, however, most of 
the principal towns on the Appian Way 
between Brundusium and Tarracina were 
colonies; e.g. Tarentum, Venusia, Bene- 
ventum, Capua, Minturnae, Formiae, &c. 

trabeati. The ‘trabea’ was not worn 
as mourning, but was their dress of state: 
cp. Staatsr. iii. 513, 2. 

I. vestem. &c. These in an actual 
funeral would have been cast on the pile: 
cp. Verg. Aen. 6, 221; Sil. 10, 569, and 
the contrast of German funerals, G. 27, 1. 

odores. The burning of spices at 

funerals is described by Statius (Silv. 2. .. 

6, 86). These were probably burnt on 
piles constructed as if for an actual funeral. 
Such piles are described as burnt all over 
Italy at the obsequies of Drusus, father 
of Germanicus (Sen. Cons. ad Marc. 3, 2). 

2. diversa, *off the route. The sense 
is akin to that in r. 17. 5, &c. ; 

5. liberis, Nero, Drusus, Agrippina, 
and Drusilla: see c. [5 &. 

6. consules. The first of these is son 
of the person mentioned in 1. 8, 5, and, 
like his father, has the cognomen ‘ Mes- 

8. in diurna Wurm. 

salla’ (Dio, Arg. to B. 57), or ‘Messalinus.’ 
The other is styled by Dio (1. 1.) * M. Au- 
relius M. f. Cotta,’ and is generally taken 
to be the Cotta Messalinus of 2. 32, 2, &c. 
The first consul would thus be nephew 
of the second, for whose praenomen see 
also C. I. L. vi. 10051. 

7. occeperant; so used in 6. 45, 5, and 
often in Livy, as 3. 19, 2; 55, 1, &c. 

8. disiecti, ‘in scattered groups’: cp. I. 
32,7; 2.61,1. This applies only to the 
people, not then grouped in any regular 
form, as * per tribus' (c. 4, 3). 

II. publico abstinuere, *kept at 
home. The expression appears to be in 
general use, from its repetition in Suet. 
Cl. 36. 

inferius maiestate, repeated c. 64, 2. 

12. rati...an ne; so ‘gnarus, ac ne 
"T ingrueret ' H. 3. 46, 3:- cp. also 
Introd. v. $ 91,9 

I3. falsi: cp. a 2,4. 

Antoniam: see c. 18, 4; ILI. 3, 1; 
Jos. Ant. 18. 6, 6; and Introd. ix. note 
21. Her profile is well represented on 
coins (Cohen, i. p. 323; Bernoulli, II.i. pl. 
xxxiii), and a few busts are assigned to 
her, among which some reckon the 
famous * Clytie' of the British Museum 
(Bernoulli, p. 324). 

I4. auctores rerum, historians. Sal- 
lust is thus styled in c. 30, 3: usually 
they are called simply ‘auctores,’ as in 
4. 10, 15; 5. 9, 3, &c., and in Livy. 
"e these authors see Introd. iii. p. 13 
0 

10 

398 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

ullo insigni officio functam, cum super Agrippinam et Drusum 
et Claudium ceteri quoque consanguinei nominatim perscripti 
sint, seu valetudine praepediebatur, seu victus luctu animus 

magnitudinem mali perferre visu non toleravit. 

facilius credi- 8 

5 derim Tiberio et Augusta, qui domo non excedebant, cohibitam, 
ut par maeror et matris exemplo avia quoque et patruus attineri 

viderentur. 

4. Dies, quo reliquiae tumulo Augusti inferebantur, modo 
per silentium vastus, modo ploratibus inquies ; plena urbis iti- 

10 Nera, conlucentes per campum Martis faces. 

illic miles cum 2 

armis, sine insignibus magistratus, populus per tribus concidisse 
rem publicam, nihil spei reliquum clamitabant, promptius aper- 
tiusque quam ut meminisse imperitantium crederes. nihil tamen 8 
Tiberium magis penetravit quam studia hominum accensa in 
15 Agrippinam, cum decus patriae, solum Augusti sanguinem, 

5. Augustae Kritz and Doed. 

diurna actorum scriptura. On these 
journals see Introd. iii. p. 19. The con- 
struction is varied to the ablative to avoid 
the repetition of *apud,' and is a slight 
extension of the general usage in referring 
to a book (cp. 11. 11, 3; Madv. 273, Obs. 
1). ‘Scriptura’ is used for ‘ writings’ in 
4. 32, 1; where also * veteres res is a 
similar hypallage (cp. Gud. on Dial. 2, 3) 
to *diurna' for *diurnorum' here. 

4. perferre visu non toleravit, * had 
not resolution to realize by sight the 
greatness of her affliction’; *perferre 
visu’ is thus a more forcible expression 
than ‘videre.’ ‘Tolerare... perpeti ' is 
found in Plin. N. H. 26. 1, 3, 3; -‘sustinere 
pati’ in Ov. ex P. 1. 5, 18; and such ex- 
pressions appear taken from the Greek 
$épev ods éTÀ. 

facilius crediderim. The abrupt 
transition implies the thought that these 
suppositions are improbable. 

5. Augusta. The reading * Augustae" 
(Or, Nipp. &c.)^gives a construction 
such as in 2. 50, 4, &c. The MS. text 
must be taken as an extension or free use 
of the instrumental abl. (see Introd. v. 
$ 27), and as equivalent to *' Tiberii et 
Augustae exemplo. It follows that the 
next sentence ‘ut par maeror, &c. must 
be taken to express, not their motives 
for restraining her, but her own reasons 
for thinking fit to follow their example. 

6. par maeror, sc. ‘videretur,’ supplied 
from ‘ viderentur." 

6. pari maerore et Heins. 

attineri: cp. I. 35, 5; 2. 10, 2, &c. 
8. tumulo Augusti: see note on 1. 

8, 6. 

9. per silentium vastus. Tacitus has 
* vastum silentium" in 4. 50, 6; H. 3. 13, 
4; Agr. 38,2 ; and the epithet is here 
transferred to the day. 

IO. faces. The custom of carrying 
terches at funerals is noted as of imme- 

 morial antiquity: cp. Vergil's account of 

the obsequies of Pallas, Aen. 11, 142 ‘de 
more vetusto funereas rapuere faces; lucet 
via longo ordine flammarum et late dis- 

. Criminat agros'; also ‘inter utramque 

facem’ (i.e. the torch of marriage and 
burial) Prop. 4. 11, 46. 

cum armis: cp. Epiced. Drusi 217 
*armataeque rogum celebrant de more 
cohortes. This, like the *trabea' of the 
equites (c. 2, 2), was a parade in full 
equipment (cp. 12. 36, 4). Usually in the 
city the soldiers, even on duty, were 
* togati' (cp. H. 1. 38, 5). E 
. I1. sine insignibus, i. e. without their 
fasces, praetexta, &c.: cp. Epiced. Drusi 
I86 ‘adspicitur toto purpura nulla 
foro.' 

populus per tribus, sc. 'dispositus,' 
‘marshalled in their tribes,’ perhaps at or 
near the ‘septa’ in the Campus. The 
people were thus formed to meet Nero 
(14. 13, 2). 
. 15. solum Augusti sanguinem. The 
younger Julia and her children (see In- 
trod. ix. notes 7, 10) are ignored; the 

A. D. 20.] LIBER 11]. 

CAP. 3-5. 399 

unicum antiquitatis specimen appellarent versique ad caelum ac 
deos integram illi subolem ac superstitem iniquorum precarentur. 

5. Fuere qui publici funeris pompam requirerent compara- 
rentque quae in Drusum patrem Germanici honora et magnifica 

2 Augustus fecisset. 

ipsum quippe asperrimo hiemis Ticinum 

usque progressum neque abscedentem a corpore simul urbem 
intravisse ; circumfusas lecto Claudiorum Iuliorumque imagines ; 
defletum in foro, laudatum pro rostris, cuncta a maioribus re- 
8 perta -aut quae posteri invenerint cumulata: at Germanico ne 
solitos quidem .et cuicumque nobili debitos honores contigisse. 
4 sane corpus ob longinquitatem itinerum externis terris quoquo 
modo crematum: sed tanto plura decora mox tribui par fuisse, 

5 quanto -prima fors negavisset. 
7. Liviorumque L. 

only point being the invidious contrast to 
Tiberius. 

unicum antiquitatis specimen, ‘a 
peerless model of old-fashioned morals.’ 
‘Unicus’ is frequently thus used in Livy, 
&c.; 'antiquitas' thus in Cic., as * docu- 
mentum virtutis, antiquitatis, prudentiae' 
(pro Rab. Post. to, 27); ‘his gravissimae 
antiquitatis viris" (pro Sest. 3, 6). The 
use of ‘specimen’ is also Ciceronian. 

2. superstitem iniquorum: a dative 
would be more classical ; but both this 
construction (cp. 2. 71, 4) and also the 
use of * iniquus" for *inimicus' (cp. 4. 68, 
1; 16. 21, 3) are Ciceronian. The whole 
description is intended no doubt as an 
artistic preparation for the narrative of 
intrigues against this family. 

3. requirerent = 'desiderarent,' as 
often in Cic, &c. ‘In Drusum, best 
taken, with Nipp., as depending on * ho- 
nora,' &c. The conveyance of the cinerary 

urn to the mausoleum, though a public: 

act, lacked many of the solemnities of 
a funeral, still more of a state-funeral (on 
which see c. 48, 1, &c.). We gather 
. from the context that there was no ‘pro- 
cession of ancestors, and no ‘ laudatio.’ 

5. Ticinum, now Pavia. Augustus 
was in Gaul, and on hearing of the illness 
of Drusus had sent off Tiberius, who 
arrived before his brother's death, and 
marched at the head of the procession 
all the way (Suet. Tib. 7; Dio, 55. 2). 
Augustus met it here on his way back to 
Rome. 

6. neque abscedentem, &c.: cp. I. 

Tn» 6. 

10, deditos: text B. 

non fratrem, nisi unius diei via, 

I3. quando Mur. 

7. Olaudiorum Iuliorumque. Drusus 
was never adopted into the latter gens; 
but the old rule as to the ‘ius imaginum" 
appears to have become less strict (see 
Staatsr. i. 443, 1); and the natural gra- 
dation in the order of mention requires 
the noblest house to be put last (cp. 
* Claudiae et Iuliae domus partem ' 6. 8, 
6); the more so as the stress is laid on 
what no doubt was one of the special 
honours accorded by Augustus to his step- 
son. Effigies, no doubt, of the Livii and 
other less noble houses were borne (see 
c. 76, 4), but so eclipsed by these as not 
to need mention. Some of these Claudian 

and Julian ancestors are specified in 4. - 

9, 3- 
'&. in foro... pro rostris. The 

_ places seem mentioned emphatically ; but 

Cicero (de Or. 2. 84, 341) speaks of 

* Jaudationes" as commonly delivered ‘in | 

foro.’ See the description of a Roman 
funeral in Mommsen, Rom. Hist. vol. ii. 
ch. 13. At that of Drusus, according to 
Dio (1. 1.), the speech in the Forum was 
spoken by Tiberius, and another in the 
Flaminian Circus by Augustus. 

g. ne solitos quidem. This is ex- 
plained by what follows. 

II. sane, concessive, as I. 3, 4, &c. 

quoquo modo = ‘sine imaginibus et 
pompa’ (2. 73, I). The distance is men- 
tioned to explain its not having been 
brought home for burning. 

12. decora. Nipp. takes this as from 
* decorus ' ; BET 3. 

13. quanto : cp. Introd. v. $ 64, a. 

fratrem. Drusus and Claudius had 

400 

non patruum saltem porta tenus obvium. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM. 

(A. U. C. 773. 

tuta, propositam toro effigiem, meditata ad memoriam vir- 
tutis carmina. et laudationes, et lacrimas vel doloris imita- 

menta ? 

6. Gnarum id Tiberio fuit ; utque premeret vulgi sermones, 
monuit edicto multos inlustrium Romanorum ob rem publicam 
obisse, neminem tam flagranti desiderio celebratum. idque et 

sibi et cunctis egregium, si modus adiceretur. 

non enim eadem 

decora principibus viris et imperatori populo, quae modicis do- 

10 mibus aut civitatibus. convenisse recenti dolori luctum et ex 

maerore solacia ; sed referendum iam animum ad firmitudinem, 
ut quondam divus Iulius amissa unica filia, ut divus Augustus 

2. praepositam : text Mur. 

both gone to Tarracina (c. 2, 4). Possibly 
the latter is ignored, as in 2. 71, 3: as 
however, in the corresponding term 
‘patruus,’ adoptive relationship is not 
considered (cp. note on I. 33, 3), it is 
possible that *fratrem' refers only to 
Claudius. *Unius diei! is probably an 
exaggeration, as ‘Appii Forum’ seems to 
be reckoned a fair day's journey from 
Rome (Hor. Sat. t. 5, 5). 

I. non...saltem. This use for ‘ne 
. .. quidem,’ not found elsewhere in 
Tacitus, occurs in a few places in Livy 
and in later prose. 

2. propositam: this is the ordinary 
equivalent of the Greek sporiófva:, and 
* prae' and ‘ pro’ are often confounded in 
MSS. The MS. text (retained by Or., 
Pfitzn., Allen) would rather describe such 
an arrangement as that at the funeral 
of Augustus (Dio, 56. 34, 1), where the 
pounon of a waxen effigy on the couch 

as to be contrasted with that of the real 
body below; whereas in such a case as 
this no real body could have been present. 
. toro. Unless ‘ praepositam’ be read, 
this must be taken as a free use of the 
abl. of place; as also ‘externis terris’ 
above : see Introd. v. § 25. 

meditata, ‘prepared’; so used pas- 
sively 4. 57, 1; 70, 6, &c., and in Cic. 

3. carmina, verses to be sung by a 
choir. Such a poem was composed by 
Clutorius Priscus, but probably not till 
afterwards (c. 49, 1). 

et lagrimas. Nipp. notes that these 
are not, like the former words, in apposi- 
tion to * veterum instituta, but refer to 
the coriduct of Tiberius and others. 

vel, ‘or even.’ 

imitamenta: cp. 13. 4,1; 14.57, 5; 
found (according to Drager) only once 
before Tacitus (M. Sen. Cont. 2. I, 9, 
3), and very rarely later. 

5. Gnarum: cp. 1. 5, 4, &c. 

utque premeret, ‘to repress.’ The 
sense is mostly poetical, and oftener used 
of self-control (e. g. c. 11, 2 ; 6. 50, 5). 

6. ob rem publicam obisse, refer- 
ring to the inscriptions mentioned in 2. 
83, 3. 

8. egregium, ‘honourable’: cp. ‘ mihi 
egregium erat’ (H. 1. 15, 1), and the 
subst. c. 70, 4; 6. 34, 3, &c. ; apparently 
a Tacitean sense of the word. 

adiceretur. Drager notes that this 

‘verb is nowhere else used in this phrase 

for * adhibere.' 

.9. principibus viris.  Nipp. notes 
that while this is thrown in to explain his 
own apparent apathy, the addition of 
* imperatori populo' removes the appa- 
rent self-exaltation by raising the nation 
to his level. On the adjectival *impe- 
rator! (dw, elp) cp. Introd. v. § 3; also 
‘liberator populus' (Liv. 35. 17, 8). 

IO. ex maerore solacia. On the con- 
struction see on I. 29, 3. The sentiment 
is that of Ovid (Trist. 4. 3, 38), * expletur 
lacrimis egeriturque dolor.' 

I2. divus Iulius...divus Augustus. 
Seneca dwells on their firmness in these 
trials (Cons. ad Marc. 14; 3; 15, 2); also 
Suetonius says of the latter (Aug. 65), 
* aliquanto patientius. mortem quam de- 
decora suorum tulit.' Julia, only daughter 
of Caesar and wife of Cn. Pompeius, died 
while her father was in Britain, in 700, 
B.C. 54. On the death of the grandsons 
of Augustus see 1. 3, 3. 

ubi illa veterum insti- 6 

A. D. ao.] 

4 ereptis nepotibus abstruserint tristitiam. 

LIBER II. 

CAP. 5-7. 401 

nil opus vetustioribus 

exemplis, quotiens populus Romanus clades exercituum, interi- 
tum ducum, funditus amissas nobiles familias constanter tulerit. 

5 principes mortales, rem publicam aeternam esse. 

proin repe- 

terent sollemnia, et quia ludorum Megalesium spectaculum sub- 
erat, etiam voluptates resumerent. 

7. Tum exuto iustitio reditum ad munia, et Drusus Illyricos 
ad exercitus profectus est, erectis omnium animis sfe petendae 
e Pisone ultionis et crebro questu,; quod vagus interim per 
amoena Asiae atque Achaiae adroganti et subdola mora sce- 

2 lerum probationes subverteret. 

nam vulgatum erat missam, ut 

dixi, a Cn. Sentio famosam veneficiis Martinam subita morte 
Brundisii extinctam, venenumque nodo crinium eius occultatum, 
nec ulla in corpore signa sumpti exitii reperta. 

8. spe ins. Freinsh., petendae . . . ultioni Bach. 

3. amissas nobiles familias, re- 
ferring apparently to the story of the 
Fabii at the Cremera (Liv. 2. 50). 

4. principes; not here in a special 
sense, but =‘ great men.’ 

proin. Tacitus has this form in 12. 
22,2 ; always‘ exim’ or * exin,' and ‘ dein’ 
much oftener than ‘ deinde." 

5. sollemnia, ‘their usual employ- 
ments.’ 

Megalesium. These began on the 
4th of April (Ov. Fast. 4, 179 sqq.); but 
we can hardly suppose that the mourning 
had lasted continuously till then (see on 
3. 82, 8). Ovid (l. 1.) describes the pro- 
cession at these games, and speaks of 
scenic and Circensian entertainments: see 
Marquardt, iii. 367, foll. 

suberat, ‘was at hand'; so used by 
Cic. (Mil. 16, 42) and Caesar (B. G. 3. 
37,2; B. C. 3. 97, 4). The indicative is 
used because these words are a note by 
the writer, not a part of the edict. 

7. Illyricos ad exercitus. 
mission see 2. 44, &c. He returned for 
the trial (c. 11, 1). On the plural ‘ exer- 
citus ' cp. c. 12, 6; 1. 52, 3, &c. 

8. ereotis, ‘roused to energy’: cp. 2. 
25, 1; ‘erectus Samnis' H. 3. 59, 2; 
‘non fregit... sed erexit" Nep. Them. 1. 

spe petendae...ultionis.  Nipp. 
and others retain the MS. text, as a strong 
instance of a gerundive genitive denoting 

purpose and qualifying the whole sen-. 

‘tence (Introd. v. $ 37 d); but the sense 
VOL. I. 

On his. 

Dd 

seems here to require an expression of 
the instrumental cause of excitement; 
and ‘spe’ could most easily have been 
absorbed between ‘animis’ and * peten- 
dae) The more common expression is 
‘erectus in (or ‘ad’) spem,’ as 2. 71, 1; 
H. 3. 74, 4. 

11. probationes, ‘ proofs,’ or ‘evi- 
dence’; ‘so first in Quint. (5. 10, 102, 
&c.). 

subverteret, ‘was destroying.” The 
next sentence explains the word, by sup- 

osing that he had caused the death of 
artina; but of this there appears to be 
no evidence beyond common talk. 

ut diri, 23. 74, 2. 

I3. nodo crinium = xopíuBo, possibly 
in a hollow in the BeAóvy. It was thus, 
according to one version (Dio, 51. 14, 2), 
that Cleopatra secreted poison about her. 

14. nec...reperta. The inference 
would seem to be that she had not com- 
mitted suicide, but had been murdered 
in some subtle manncr.  Nipp., on the 
other hand, thinks it to be assumed that 
she had poisoned herself; and that the 
important admission, that no signs of 
poison were found in her body, is turned 
into an argument that she must have used 

n 

drugs that left no trace, which would 

explain the absence of conclusive evidence 
in the case of Germanicus (2. 73, 5). 
* Sumere mortem’ is used of suicide in 13. 
30, 3; usually ‘sponte’ is added, as in 
2. 66, 2; 6. 25, 1, &c. 

. 402 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 773. 

8. At Piso praemisso in urbem filio datisque mandatis per 
quae principem molliret, ad Drusum pergit, quem haud fratris 
interitu trucem quam remoto aemulo aequiorem sibi sperabat. 
Tiberius quo integrum iudicium ostentaret, exceptum comiter 2 

5 iuvenem sueta erga filios familiarum nobiles liberalitate auget. 
Drusus Pisoni, si vera forent quae iacerentur, praecipuum in 3 
dolore suum locum respondit: sed malle falsa et inania nec 
cuiquam mortem Germanici exitiosam esse. haec palam et 4 
vitato omni-secreto; neque dubitabantur praescripta ei a Ti- 

19 berio, cum incallidus alioqui et facilis iuventa senilibus tum 
artibus uteretur. 

9. Piso Delmatico mari tramisso relictisque apud Anconam 
navibus per Picenum ac mox Flaminiam viam 'adsequitur legio- 
nem, quae e Pannonia in urbem, dein praesidio Africae duce- 

15 batur: eaque res agitata rumoribus, ut in agmine atque itinere 

9. et: ei L. 14. inde Wurm (2. 68, 1). 

I. fllio: see 2. 76, 3, &c. 

2. haud . .. quam. On the abbre- 
viation of comparative clauses see Introd. 
v. $ 64. Nipp. notes here that the con- 
structions *haud tam... quam,’ and 
* haud ... sed,’ are mingled—the second 
clause softening the negation in the first — 
and compares :non...quam' in Plaut. 
Rud. 4. 3, 9; Liv. 2. 56, 9; 25. 15, 9. 

. 8. sperabat : cp. 2. 506, 4. 

4. integrum, *unprejudiced ' : cp. ‘in- 
tegris . . . animis' c. 12, 3. 

5. liberalitate: cp. 2. 37, 2, &c. 
Nipp. notes that young men of rank in 
the retinue of provincial magistrates often 
received a present for their voluntary 
service to the state. 

6. quae iacerentur, 'the stories flying 
about'; used of casual expressions in 
I. 10, 7 ; 2. 55, 5, &c. 

9. secreto, ‘private interview’: cp. 

* frequens secretis 4. 3, 5, &c. 
dubitabantur: cp. *ne auctor dubi- 
taretur’ 14. 7, 1, and the similar usage 
with other verbs (Introd. v. $ 45). 
Io. incallidus, a rare word, only here 
in Tacitus; used by Cic. in negative sen- 
tences . 
facilis, ‘affable’: cp. sermone fa- 
cilis’ Agr. 40, 4. In 4. 2, 45 5.1, 5, it 
means ‘compliant,’ in rather a bad sense: 
cp. ‘ facilitas’ (6. 15, 3). D 
12. Delmatico mari. The Adriatic is 
also called by Tacitus *Illyricum mare’ 

(H.3. 2, 4). The point from which Piso 
crossed was probably Salonae, then a 
colony and the residence of the governor 
(cp. Marquardt, i. 300). 

13. Flaminiam viam. This old and 
celebrated road left Rome by way of the 
Campus Martius, on or close to the line 

_of the present Corso, and took a north- 

easterly course through Umbria to Ari- 
minum. It had been restored under the 
personal direction of Augustus, whose 
splendid bridge over the Nar at Narnia 
is still well known by its ruins. The 
road from Ancona passing through north 
Picenum joined it at Nuceria (Nocera), 
near Assisi. From Narnia the Nar is. 
navigable for small vessels.’ 

legionem, the Ninth (4. 23, 2), pro- 
perly belonging to the Pannonian army 
(1. 23, 6, &c.) : see note on 4. 5, 4. 

I5. ut, ‘how.’ This use of ‘ ut’ in in- 
direct or dependent questions, restricted 
by Cicero to those following ‘ video’ and 
* audio, is found in Tacitus, where a 
verb of telling, hearing, or thinking;' is 
expressed or implied; as with ‘refero’ 
(1. 61, 9), ‘reddo’ (2. 4, 5), * mirum 
dictu? (H. 1. 79, 4), * admoneo' (H. 3. 
24, 2). In Livy (23. 5, 8) it follows 
* veniat in mentem." | 

in agmine atque itinere, ‘as they 
were marching and on the route) The 
latter is a wider term, and would include 
also their times of halting. This expla-: 

A. D. 20.] LIBER III. 

2 crebro se militibus ostentavisset. 

CAP. 8—10. 403 

ab Narnia, vitandae suspicionis 

an quia pavidis consilia in incerto sunt, Nare ac mox Tiberi 
devectus auxit vulgi iras, quia navem tumulo Caesarum adpul- 
erat dieque et ripa frequenti, magno clientium agmine ipse, 

3 feminarum comitatu Plancina et vultu alacres incessere, 

inter inritamenta invidiae domus foro inminens festa ornatu 
conviviumque et epulae et celebritate loci nihil occultum. 
10. Postera die Fulcinius Trio Pisonem apud consules postu- 

2 lavit. 

contra Vitellius ac Veranius ceterique Germanicum comi- 
tati tendebant, nullas esse partis Trioni; neque se accusatores, 1 
8 sed rerum indices et testes mandata Germanici perlaturos. 

dimissa eius causae delatione, ut priorem vitam accusaret ob- 
4 tinuit, petitumque est a principe cognitionem exciperet. quod 
ne reus quidem abnuebat, studia populi et patrum metuens: 
contra Tiberium spernendis rumoribus validum et conscientiae 

I. suspicioni Pichena. 

nation is supported by the similar pas- 
sage ‘ in itinere, in agmine, in stationibus" 
(H. 1. 23, 1), where the two latter terms 
appear to be an expansion of the first. 
For this use of ‘in agmine' cp. 13. 35, 
7; H. 2. 40, 2; Agr. 33, 4, &c. 

I. vitandae suspicionis. On the 
genitive see Introd. v. $ 37d. "The sus- 

icion is that of tampering with the 

egion, which he ceases to accompany. 

3. tumulo Caesarum. The dat. (cp. 
6. 19, 4; H. 4. 84, 4) is Vergilian. The 
mausoleum itself did not touch the river, 
but the pleasure grounds surrounding it 
(Suet. Aug. 100) must have done so: 
cp. Verg. Aen. 6, 875. 

4. frequenti. 
with ‘die’ and ‘ripa.’ It was at a busy 
time of day (cp. ‘ celeberrimo fori’ 4. 67, 
6 ; ‘medio ac frequenti die ’ Suet. Cal. 15), 
and at a place where the bank was 
usually crowded; probably at a much 
used landing-place, at or near the modern 
Ripetta. Agricola avoided. suspicion by 
returning at night (Agr. 49, 3). 

5. alacres, i.e. not with the de- 
meanour of persons accused; also *in- 
cessere ’ appears to imply ostentation. 

6. festa: cp. 2.69, 3. Such adornment 
of a house is described by Juvenal (6, 79), 
‘ornentur postes et grandi ianua lauro,’ and 
would be natural at the return of its master. 

7. convivium, ‘an assemblage of 
guests’: cp. 'familias.. .et tota con- 
vivia’ Pl. N. H. 22. 23, 47, 96. 

This is taken both - 

,6. festo L. 

celebritate loci nihil occultum, ‘the 
fact that the publicity of the spot pre- 
cluded all concealment.’ On the con- 
struction: see Introd. v. $ 55 b, 2, and 
many other instances here cited by Nipp. 

8. Fulcinius Trio: see 2. 28, 3, &c. 

&pud consules; to bring the matter 
before the senate (cp. 2. 28, 5). See 
Introd. vi. p. 92. 

9. contra ... tendebant, ‘were op- 
posing him’ (Verg. Liv. &c.): a verb of 
speaking is implied in the expression. 

II. indices et testes: cp.‘ index idem 
et testis’ 4. 38, 2. Usually ‘ index ' means 
an informer, i. e. one who discloses a crime 
to which he was privy; here it appears 
to mean that they were collectors of 
evidence (cp. 2. 74, 2), as well as actual 
witnesses of what they knew. 

perlaturos : cp. I. 26, I. 

12. priorem vitam, i.e. his administra- 
tion of Spain (c. 13, 2). This, like the 
attack of Cicero on the * praetura urbana’ 
of Verres, could only bear on the case by 
showing the general character of the 

accused. 

13. cognitionem exciperet, ‘to take 
up the case.’ Thus Nero is said (14. 50, 
3), by a similar interposition, * suscipere 
iudicium.’ On the force of * cognitio, 
cp. 2. 28, 4; on the personal jurisdiction 
of the princeps see Introd. vi. p. 88. 

15. contra, sc. *ratus, supplied from 
* metuens. 

Dd2 

fuit 5 

ille - 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 773. 

404. 

matris innexum esse ; veraque aut in deterius credita iudice ab 
uno facilius discerni, odium et invidiam apud multos valere. 
haud fallebat Tiberium moles cognitionis quaque ipse fama 5 
distraheretur. igitur paucis familiarium adhibitis minas accu- 6 
5santium et hinc preces audit integramque causam ad senatum 
remittit. | 
11. Atque interim Drusus rediens Illyrico, quamquam patres 
censuissent ob receptum Maroboduum et res priore aestate ges- 
tas ut ovans iniret, prolato honore urbem intravit. post quae 2 
10 reo L. Arruntium, P. Vinicium, Asinium Gallum, Aeserninum 
Marcellum, Sex. Pompeium patronos petenti iisque diversa ex- 

IO. T. Arruntium : text N. Faber. fulnicium: Fulcinium B, text Borghesi. 

validum : cp. * validus . . . spernendis 
honoribus " 4. 37, 2. 

conscientiae, ‘complicity’: cp. ‘est 
tibi Augustae conscientia" 2. 77, 6. 

I. innexum, ‘implicated in.’ The 
word is frequent in Vergil and other 
poets, and used in prose by Val. Max. 
(1. 5,1, &c.), and Col. ; also elsewhere 
hy Tacitus (6. 36, 5; 16. 14, 1, &c.). 

in deterius: cp. 2. 82, I, &c. 

iudice ab uno. The princeps would 
associate assessors with himself, but was 
not bound by their decision, as the con- 
suls or praetor by that of the senate or 
iudices. See Staatsr. ii. 965. This form 
of anastrophe (Introd. v. § 77, 3) is here 
fully illustrated by Nipp. from Tacitus, 
and from Livy and poets. 

3. qua... fama distraheretur, ‘the 
reports by which his character was being 
torn to pieces.’ This appears here to be 
the meaning of the word, elsewhere used 

rather of a struggle or doubt within the 

mind, as in 2. 40, 1; 4. 40, 8; 6. 44, 3, 
&c. A perhaps similar metaphor is 
‘differre aliquem rumoribus’: see on I. 
4, 3- 

4. paucis familiarium adhibitis. On 
the informal, and subsequent formal em- 
ployment of assessors, see Introd. vi. 88. 

5. hino, ‘from the other side’: cp. 
‘illic’ 1. 7o, 6, &c. 

ad senatum remittit, a technical ex- 
pd (see Introd. 1.1. ; Staatsr. ii. goo). 

the princeps did not himself take up 
the case or 'remit' it, it seems that it 
would naturally fall through: cp. * rela- 
tionem de eo Caesar ad senatum non 
remisit’ Pl. Epp. 9. 13, 22. 

7. Illyrico. On the abl. cp. a. 69, 1, 

&c.; Introd. v. $ 24: on the departure 
of Drusus cp. c. 7, I. 

8. censuissent: cp. 2. 64, 1. If the 
view given on 2. 62, 1 of the chronology 

- of these events is correct, ‘ priore aestate ' 

must either be an interpolation (see note 
on c. 20, I), or must be referred to the 
summer preceding the decree itself. 

10. P. Vinicium. It appears plain that 
the latter part of the Med. text is a cor- 
ruption of * Vinicium,' but there has been 
much question as to the proper prae- 
nomen. The above is on the whole 
nearest to the MS., and the name of the 
consul of 755, A. D. 2 (C. I. L. x. 884), 
who is mentioned by M. Seneca (Contr. 
vii. 11, &c.) and L. Seneca (Ep. 40, 9) 
as an orator. He was father of the 
consul of 783, A. D. 30 (Vell. 2. foa, 1). 
For further particulars respecting the 
family see Nipp.'s note. 

Aeserninum Marcellum, son of the 
consul of 732, B.C. 22, and, through his 
mother Asinia, a grandson of Pollio; 
who is said to have regarded him, even 
in his boyhood, as the chief heir of his 
own eloquence (M. Sen. Contr. 4 praef. 
3). He was curator riparum et alvei 
Tiberis, praetor peregrinus (probably in 
772, A.D. 19), and cos. suff. in some un- 
known year (see Nipp.). In rr. 6, 4, he 
is coupled as an orator with Arruntius, 
and compared with Pollio and Messalla. 

11. Sex. Pompeium: see on I. 7, 3, 
and below, c. 32, 2, and note on c. 72, 4. 
On his proconsulate of Asia see Introd. 
vii. p. 113. His ‘ facundissimus sermo' 
is mentioned by Val. Max. (2. 6, 8). 

iisque. Nipp. notes that such a break 

-of construction as the interposition of this 

2 mento. 

A. D. 20.] LIBER Ill. 

CAP. 10—12. 

405 

cusantibus M’. Lepidus et L. Piso et Livineius Regulus adfuere, 
adrecta omni civitate, quanta fides amicis Germanici, quae fiducia 

8 reo; satin cohiberet ac premeret sensus suos Tiberius. 

haud 

alias intentior populus plus sibi in principem occultae vocis aut 

suspícacis silentii permisit. 

12, Die senatus Caesar orationem habuit meditato tempera- 

patris sui legatum atque amicum Pisonem fuisse adiu- 

toremque Germanico datum a se auctore senatu rebus apud 
3 Orientem administrandis. illic contumacia et certaminibus as- 
perasset iuvenem exituque eius laetatus esset, an scelere extinx- 

4 isset, integris animis diiudicandum. 

1. M: M? L. 

abl abs, bringing in another circum- 
stance, has parallels in earlier Latinity, as 
in Sallust, ‘dispersos . . . neque minus 
hostibus conturbatis . . . contrahit" (Jug. 

98, 4), and Livy, * honorem huic petenti, 

meisque .. . adiectis precibus, mandetis ' 
(5. 18, 5); * inter exercitus. . . imperatore 
tanto .. . deleto, et...exspectantes' (25. 
35, 2); and is-frequent in Greek, as in 
Thuc. 4. 29, 1; 8. 106, 5. 

excusantibus, ‘ pleading in excuse’ : 
cp. 5. 2, 1 5; 15. 61, 1; also in Cic. &c. 

I. M'. Lepidus: see on c. 32, 2; I. 
I3, 2, &c. 

L. Piso: see on 2. 32, 4; 34. 1. From © 

his being called I'vaiov vids by Dio (Arg. 

B. 55), Nipp. infers him to have been a 

brother of the accused: cp. c. 12, 9.- 
Livineius Eegulus, also a consular, 

probably father of the one alluded to in 

14.17. I. One of the name is mentioned 
in Bell. Afr. 89, 3. 

2. &drecta, ‘ excited to see.” The con- 
struction is such as would follow a verb 
expressing expectation or wonder. -‘ Ad- 
rigo' is found here alone in Tacitus; 
also in poets, Sallust, and Livy. 

quanta fides ... quae fiducia. These 
should not be táken to be mere synony- 
mous expressions. The ‘fides’ of the 
friends. of Germanicus is their fidelity to 
their promise (2. 71, 8); while *quae 
fiducia ^ means ‘on what the. accused 

relied, and seems taken from the Ver-. 

gilian ‘quae sit fiducia capto' (Aen. 2, 

.3. cohiberet ac premeret, ‘ restrain 
and suppress’; a rhetorical use of words 
virtually synonymous, as in Pl. Pan. 4 
* cohibet et comprimit.’ 

haud alias. The repetition of ‘ac 

3. Tiberius ac premeret : an promeret B. 

‘nam si legatus officii 
is haud : text Acid. 

premeret? is plainly an error; but ‘is,’ 
retained by Ritter, Drager, and formerly 
by Halm, might well stand; * fuit' being 
supplied after *intentior, and the sense 
being completed (as it is with the reading 
here adopted) by supplying * haud alias’ 
again with ‘plus permisit. But the ordi- 
nary sense of * intentus? (* on the alert?) is 
far more suitable to the mental attitude of 
the people than to that of Tiberius. The 
repetition in sense of ‘haud alias,’ noted 
above, is compared by Nipp. to the way 
in which, in Agr. 18, 7, ‘nec’ extends its 
force both to * usus ' and to ‘ vocabat.' 

6. meditato temperamento, ‘ of stu- 
died discretion ' : cp. * meditata oratio ' 14. 
55, 1, &c., and ‘temperamentum forti- 

 tudinis' H. 1. 83, 2; ‘salubri tempera- 

mento’ H. 4. 86, a. This word is simi- 
larly used to describe the character of 
M’. Lepidus (4. 20, 4), also in the ‘sense 
of ‘compromise’ (11. 4, 7). 

7. legatum; in the Caesarian pro- 
vince of Hispania citerior or Tarraconen- 
Sis (c. 13, 2). 

adiutorem. 
called *adiutor imperii’; and Suetonius 
(Cal. 26) so calls Macro and even Ennia 
(cp. also Suet. Aug. 39; Tib. 62). In 
assistants of lower rank, it is often almost 
a technical term ; as Inscr. Orell. 3200, 

5 

In 4. 7, 2, Seianus is. 

3462. Sucha coadjutor to a younger man | 

is termed ‘rector’ (c. 48, 2; I. 24, 3). 

8. auctore senatu, a very remarkable 

instance of his habit of making the senate 
share responsibilities even in his own de- 
partment: cp. 1. 25, 3; 4. 15, 3, &c. 
9. contumacia, &c.; ie. whether he 
had done this and no more. 
I1. integris, 'unbiassed' : cp. c. 7, 2, 
&c. 

. 406 

5 liberos Germanici et nos parentes iustis solaciis adficite. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

terminos, obsequium erga imperatorem exuit eiusdemque morte 
et luctu meo laetatus est, odero seponamque a domo mea et 
privatas inimicitias non vi principis ulciscar: sin facinus in cu- 5 
iuscumque mortalium nece vindicandum detegitur, vos vero et 

que illud reputate, turbide et seditiose tractaverit exercitus Piso, 
quaesita sint per ambitionem studia militum, armis repetita 
provincia, an falsa haec in maius vulgaverint accusatores, quorum 

ego nimiis studiis iure suscenseo. 

ro Corpus et contrectandum vulgi oculis permittere differrique etiam 
per externos tamquam veneno interceptus esset, si incerta adhuc 

deflebo: sed neque reum prohibeo quo minus cuncta proferat, 
quibus innocentia eius sublevari aut, si qua fuit iniquitas Ger- 
manici, coargui possit, vosque oro ne, quia dolori meo causa 

conexa est, obiecta crimina pro adprobatis accipiatis. 

Si quos 

propinquus sanguis aut fides sua patronos dedit, quantum quis- 
que eloquentia et cura valet, iuvate periclitantem : ad eundem 

laborem, eandem constantiam accusatores hortor. 

2. set privatas Pluygers. 

nam si. 
oratio recta’ cp. Introd. v. $ 94. 

officii, ‘his position’: cp. * fama aucti 
officii! Agr. 14, 3. This sense is post- 
Augustan, and especially found in Suet. 

I. imperatorem, used here, as in c. 
I4, 1; 2. 76, 4, &c., of Germanicus: see 
note on I. 14, 4 

exuit, used by zeugma with ' terminos. 

2. seponam, i.e. by *renuntiatio ami- 
citiae' : cp. 2. 70, 3, and note there. 

3. vi principis =‘ potestate principis," 
as 5. 5, 2. He would punish, but in his 
private pon only. 

facinus ... vindicandum, ‘an atro- 
city, such as in the murder of any human 
being would demand punishment’ ; i.e. 
irrespectively of the rank and position of 
the person killed: cp. *quisnam morta- 
lium esset’ H. 2. 72, 2 

6. turbide, “in a spirit of mutiny ': 
*turbidus' in Tacitus is nearly ‘ sedi- 
tiosus': cp. c. 27. 4; I. 38, 4, &c. 
* Exercitus, ' the legions: cp. I. 52, 3. 

8. falsa... vulgaverint, i. e. whether 
the accusers took up a false tale and 
spread it with further additions. Cp. ‘in 
maius innotuere' (H. 4. 50, 1 and Sall.), 

On the abrupt change to, 

‘Cicero (Tusc. 3. 15, 33), ‘ad. 

id solum Ger- 

3. noui: non vi Mur. 

and other expressions in Introd. v. § 60b. 

9, nudare corpus: see 2. 73, 5. 

'IO. contrectandum. .. oculis. The 
same metaphor is used by Lactantius (de 
Opif. Dei, 1), and a still bolder one by 
. tota 
mente contrectandas . . Voluptates." 

. differri, ‘that report should be spread ': 
cp. ' differtur? (4- 25, 5), and note on r. 
4; 3. Drager notes the change from an 
active to a passive inf. as a solitary in- 
stance in Tacitus, but found in good 
authors, as in Caes. (B. C. t. + 33,53 I, 4) 
and often in Livy. 

11. interceptus : cp. 2. 71, 3, and note. . 

14. sublevari: cp. * defendendis homi- 
nibus sublevandisque ' Cic. Div. in Caec. 
2, 5. 

iniquitas, such as formed part of the 
charges brought by Piso against Germa- 
nicus (2. 78, 1). 

17. propinquus sanguis, alluding to 
his brother L. Piso (c. 11, 2). 

fides, ‘loyalty,’ as to a friend; apply- 
ing to Lepidus and Livineius Regulus 
(c. 11, 2). The sense is similar to that 
in which it is used (1. L) of the friends 
of Germanicus. 

simul- 6 

nam quo pertinuit nudare 7 

ista et scrutanda sunt? defleo equidem filium meum semperque 8 

9 

A. D. 20.] 

LIBER III. CAP. 12, 13. 

407 

manico super leges praestiterimus, quod in curia potius quam in 
foro, apud senatum quam apud iudices de morte eius anquiritur: 

llcetera pari modestia tractentur. 

nemo Drusi lacrimas, nemo 

maestitiam meam spectet, nec si qua in nos adversa finguntur.' 

13. Exim biduum criminibus obiciendis statuitur utque sex 5 
2 dierum spatio interiecto reus per triduum defenderetur. 

tum 

Fulcinius vetera et inania orditur, ambitiose avareque habitam 
Hispaniam ; quod neque convictum noxae reo, si recentia pur- 
garet, neque defensum absolutioni erat, si teneretur maioribus 

3 flagitiis. 

post quem Servaeus et Veranius et Vitellius consimili 

studio, et multa eloquentia Vitellius, obiecere odio Germanici 
et rerum novarum studio Pisonem vulgus militum per licentiam 
et sociorum iniurias eo usque conrupisse, ut parens legionum a 
deterrimis appellaretur ; contra in optimum quemque, maxime 
in comites et amicos Germanici saevisse ; postremo ipsum devo- 
tionibus et veneno peremisse ; sacra hinc et immolationes nefan- 

10. postq; (postque) : text R, post quae Baiter. 

I. super leges, ‘ beyond ordinary course 
oflaw’: see on 2. 79, 2; c. 10, 3; Introd. 
vi. 93, n. 3: * praestiterimus,' fut. exact. 

3. cetera, ‘the other charges,’ as dis- 
tinct from that *de morte eius'; better 
taken thus, thanin contrast to ‘id solum. 

pari modestia, ‘with equal modera- 
tion’: cp. ‘pari secreto' (4. 57, 2), &c. 
‘Modestia’ is used, as in I. 11, I, &c., of 
a demeanour the opposite to overbearing. 

4. adversa finguntur, ‘fictions to our 
discredit’; alluding to the tales of his 
joy at, or even complicity in, the death 
(c. 2, 5, &c.) : cp. * adverso rumore esse’ 
14. 11, 4; H. a. 26, 4. 

5. biduum ... statuitur. On the 
change of construction to ‘utque’ see 
Introd. v, § 91, 8. The time fixed was 
longer than what was usually allowed by 
such rules as those of the ‘lex Pompeia: 
cp. Dial. 38, 2; Pl. Epp. 4. 9, 9. 

7. Fulcinius: see c. IO, I. 

ambitiose avareque habitam, ‘ad- 
ministered with intrigue and extortion.’ 
‘Provincia avare habita’ is repeated in 
I3. 30, I. Here ‘ambitiose’ might be 
taken to express his behaviour to his sol- 
diers (cp. ‘ambitionem militarem c. 14, 
1); or more probably the two words ex- 
press Lis conduct to different classes of 
provincials, as in Agr. 30, 5 ‘si locuples 
hostis est, avari, si pauper, ambitiosi.’ 

8. convictum, ‘if proved’: cp. 14. 5, 
I; 40, 5; also Cic. Caes., &c. 

9. defensum, ‘ if refuted’: cp. ‘ miscen- 
do quae defendere nequibat! H. 4. 41, 4. 
This-application of the word is rare, but 
analogous to the sense of repelling or 
warding off. On the concise use of these 
participles cp. Introd. v. $ 54. 

1o. post quem. The reading ‘ post 
quae’ follows that generally received in 
2. 57, 4. In c. 33, 1 two similar abbrevia- 
tions *interq;' and *neq;' occur in the 
same sentence, and the general consensus 
of editors reads for the first ‘inter quae,’ 
for the second ‘ne quem.’ ‘ Post quae’ 
is found in 1. 13, 1 ; 2. 86, 1, &c.; ‘post 
quos’ in 6. 19, 1; H. 2. 38, 4. 

Servaeus: see 2. 56, 5. Though ap- 
parently less prominent than the two 
others, he is coupled with them again in 
c. I9, I. The speech of Vitellius was 
extant ih. the time of Pl. Mai.: see note 
on 2. 73, 5. 

I3. parens legionum : see 2. 55, 4. 

15. devotionibus et veneno: see 2. 
69, 5- | 
re. sacra et immolationes, referring 
to his thank-offerings (2. 75, 3), called 
* nefandae,' as an outrage on public feel- 
ing, as well as an impiety to the house of 
Caesar (cp. * vox nefaria ' c. 50, I). 

-— 

"9t 

Lp i 

IO 

408 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM | [A.U.C. 773. 

das ipsius atque Plancinae, petitam armis rem publicam, utque 
reus agi posset, acie victum. 

14. Defensio in ceteris trepidavit ; nam neque ambitionem 
militarem neque provinciam pessimo cuique obnoxiam, ne con- 
tumelias quidem adversum imperatorem infitiari poterat : solum 
veneni crimen visus est diluisse, quod ne accusatores quidem 
satis firmabant, in convivio Germanici, cum super eum Piso 
discumberet, infectos. manibus eius cibos arguentes. quippe 
absurdum videbatur inter aliena servitia et tot adstantium visu, 
ipso Germanico coram, id ausum ; offerebatque familiam reus et 
ministros in tormenta flagitabat. sed iudices per diversa inpla- 
cabiles erant, Caesar ob bellum provinciae inlatum, senatus num- 
quam satis credito sine fraude Germanicum interisse. . . . scrip- 
sissent expostulantes, quod haud minus Tiberius quam Piso 

abnuere. 

4. cui: text R. 

I. petitam armis rem publicam: 
see 2. 80; 81. 

2. reus agi: cp. I4. 18, 2; 15. 20,1; 
and * tamquam reos ageret ' (Liv. 24. 25, 
1). Ritt. notes this use of ‘ agere’ ag an 

" equivalent of bubkev. 

4. in ceteris, opposed to ' veneni cri- 
men’ below. | 

trepidavit, ‘faltered.’ The nearest 
parallel appears to be *trepidanti inter 
scelus metumque" (H. 3. 39, 1). 

ambitionem militarem: cp. ‘sena- 
torio ambitu 4. 2, 3, and Introd. v. § 6. 

4. obnoxiam, ‘placed at the mercy 
of’: cp. 2. 75, 1. It is meant that his 
mode of courting the soldiers was to let 
them plunder the subjects: cp. * per licen- 
tiam et sociorum iniurias ' c. 13, 3. 

6. visus est, sc. 'defensor, supplied 
from * defensio." 

7. firmabant. The simple verb is 
here used for * confirmare," as in c. 60, 1; 
4. 14, I, &c.; more frequently for * ad- 
firmare, as in 1. 81, 1, &c. 

super eum, The usual arrangement 
(see Hor. Sat. 2. 8, 20, sqq.) appears to 
have been departed from, probably on 
account of the rank of the host. Orelli 
thinks that Germanicus probably himself 
occupied the * locus consularis.' 

8. discumberet. 
by post-Augustan writers of a single per- 
son, but only where the presence of others 
is implied: cp. 4. 54, 2; 6. 5o, 5. 

This verb is used . 

simul populi ante curiam voces audiebantur: non 

9. visus Pichena. 

9. visu. This appears to be an exten- 
sion of the modal ablative (see Introd. v. 
§ 28) to denote an attendant circumstance, 
such as would usually be expressed by an 
abl. abs. ‘tot adstantibus et videntibus : 
see Nipp. on 4. 5I. 

IO. offerebat. sc. 
own slaves could be questioned as to the 
procuring and preparing of the poison; 
and the * ministri' who waited at table, 
and who would be servants of Germani- 
cus, could be examined on what had 
taken place at the meal. 

12. Caesat. That Tiberius presided at 
this trial, is shown by his putting the 
question to the consul (c. 17, 8). 

13. scripsissent expostulantes. There 
is here no lacuna in the MS., but Nipp. 
appears rightly to argue that the gap 
is considerable. So far the accusation 
and defence appear to have been conducted 
according to the programme laid down in 
c. 13, I. Now we hear that the accusa- 
tion was renewed and the defence abandon- 
ed (c. 15, 4), and the trial still prolonged 
after Piso’s death (c. 17, 6). It is inferred 
that a ‘ comperendinatio’ had ensued, with 
introduction of new matter, possibly some 
charge made by Piso against Germanicus, 
which had led to a counter-demand for 
the production of some letters. ‘ Expos- 
tulantes’ is used as in 1. 19, 3; 12. 46, 3; 

I5. 17, 5. 

‘in tormenta.’ His 

3 

4 

5 

. A.D. 20] LIBER III. 

6 temperaturos manibus, si patrum sententias evasisset. 

CAP. 13-15. 

409 

effigies- 

que Pisonis traxerant in Gemonias ac divellebant, ni iussu prin- 

7 cipis protectae repositaeque forent. 

igitur inditus lecticae et a 

tribuno praetoriae cohortis deductus est, vario rumore, custos 
saluti an mortis exactor sequeretur. | 
15. Eadem Plancinae invidia, maior gratia; eoque ambiguum 

2 habebatur quantum Caesari in eam liceret. 

atque ipsa, donec 

mediae Pisoni spes, sociam se cuiuscumque fortunae et, si ita 
8 ferret, comitem exitii promittebat: ut secretis Augustae preci- 
bus veniam obtinuit, paulatim segregari a marito, dividere defen- 

4 sionem coepit. 

quod reus postquam sibi exitiabile intellegit, 

an adhuc experiretur dubitans, hortantibus filiis durat mentem 
senatumque rursum ingreditur; redintegratamque accusationem, 
infensas patrum voces, adversa et saeva cuncta perpessus, nullo 
magis exterritus est quam quod Tiberium sine miseratione, sine 
ira, obstinatum clausumque vidit, ne quo adfectu perrumperetur. 
5 relatus domum, tamquam defensionem in posterum meditaretur, 
pauca conscribit obsignatque et liberto tradit; tum solita cu- 

6 rando corpori exsequitur. 

dein multam post noctem, egressa 

cubiculo uxore, operiri fores iussit; et coepta luce perfosso iu- 
gulo, iacente humi gladio, repertus est. 

. I. temperaturos manibus : cp. ‘risui 
temperare (13. 3, 2’, &c. 

2. Gemonias, usually thus abbre- 
viated, as in 5. 9, 3; 6. 25, 4, &c., but in 
full, * Gemoniae scalae,' in Val. Max. 6. 3, 
3, &c. These stairs, on which the bodies 
of criminals were exposed, led from the 
Capitol to the Forum, near the Mamertine 
prison. For such destruction of statues 
compare ‘the description of the fall of 
Seianus (Juv. 10, 58), and of Domitian 
(Plin. Pan. 52). 

4. deductus, * he was escorted home.’ 

custos saluti: see Introd, v. $ 19. 

5. mortis exactor: ‘exactor,’ by itself, 
is thus used in 11. 37, 4. The sense ap- 
pears to originate with Livy, who has 
* exactor supplicii ' in 2. 5, 5. 

7. quantum... liceret, ‘how far 
Caesar could venture against her’ (cp. 
Verg. Aen. 6, 503); a bitter allusion to 

his mother's ascendency over him (see 4. 

57, 4). | 
8. mediae, * hung in the balance. 

si ita ferret, a phrase repeated from 
H. 2. 44, 5, and elsewhere found only in 
Sen. N. Q. 6. 32, 12. It is an abbre- 

viation of such forms as *fors tulit" 
(Sall. Jug. 78, 2), or ‘res tulit! (Liv. 3. 
27, 6). 

s dividere, ‘to separate her defence 
from his’: cp. ‘ dividite turbidos’ 1. 43, 5. 

I2. experiretur ; soin Cic. Cael. 8, 20, 
&c. For the full expression ‘ius experiri ' 
cp. c. 36, 3. 

durat mentem: see note on I. 6, 5: 
cp. *cor dura' Plaut. Pseud. 1. 3, 6. 

I3. redintegratam accusationem : 
see note on c. 14, 4. 

14. nullo, for ‘nulla re Nipp. cites 
several instances of this use fróm M. and 
L. Seneca and Quint., and compares Liv. 
2. 59; 8 ‘nemo ullius nisi fugae memor. 

16. perrumperetur, perhaps here best 
taken, with Louandre, of the force of 
emotion from within, not suffered to es- 
cape him by unguarded expressions. We 
can also take the word in its. more usual 
sense, and understand it to be meant that 
he was steeled against any impression of 
feeling from without. 

18. solita . . . exsequitur, i.e. he 
bathed and supped. 

30. operiri, here alone in Tacitus in 

d 

Ld 

5 

Oo 

20 dehortatus est. 

410 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

16. Audire me memini ex senioribus visum saepius inter 
manus Pisonis libellum, quem ipse non vulgaverit ; sed amicos 
eius dictitavisse, litteras Tiberii et mandata in Germanicum con- 
tineri, ac destinatum promere apud patres principemque arguere, 
5ni elusus a Seiano per vana promissa foret; nec illum sponte 
extinctum, verum inmisso percussore. quorum neutrum adse- 2 
veraverim: neque tamen occulere debui narratum ab iis qui 

nostram ad iuventam duraverunt. 

ore suam invidiam tali morte quaesitam apud senatum conquestus 
10M. Pisonem vecari iubet crebrisque interrogationibus exquirit, 

qualem Piso diem supremum noctemque exegisset. 

pleraque sapienter, quaedam inconsultius respondente, recitat 
codicillos a Pisone in hunc ferme modum compositos : ‘ conspi- 5 
ratione inimicorum et invidia falsi criminis oppressus, quatenus 
15 veritati et innocentiae meae nusquam locus est, deos inmortales 
testor vixisse me, Caesar, cum fide adversum te, neque alia in 
matrem tuam pietate; vosque oro liberis meis consulatis, ex 
quibus Cn. Piso qualicumque fortunae meae non est adiunctus, 
cum omne hoc tempus in urbe egerit, M. Piso repetere Suriam 

patri seni cessisset. 
nas innoxius luat. 

9. lacuna noted by Boxhorn, thus supplied by Weissenborn. 

the sense of ‘claudi’; so in Plaut., Ter., 
&c. 

I. Audire me memini. On other 

allusions to such floating stories see. 

Introd. iii. p. 20. Suetonius also alludes 
to this tradition; but the mutilation of the 
passage (Tib. 52) prevents us from know- 
ing whether he is following Tacitus or 
another authority. 

4. destinatum, sc. 'fuisse, ‘it was 
his purpose ' : see Introd. v. $ 39 c. 

8. duraverunt, ‘lived on. ‘The ap- 
plication of the word in this sense to 
persons appears to be peculiar to Taci- 
tus: cp. Agr. 44, 5; Dial. 17, 4. 

9. apud senatum. Some verb ex- 
pressing regret is here lost, as also the 
name of the person questioned; who 
would appear to be one of the sons, 
whose presence is implied in c. 17, 6. 
Hence the restoration in the text is suit- 
able to the sense. 

. 12. inconsultius, apparently repeat- 
ing some words which would have been 

more discreetly suppressed. 

13. codicillos, those written by Piso 
just before his death (c. 15, 5). 

I4. quatenus, for ‘quoniam,’ as in Dial. 
5, 2 (where see Gud.) ; Vell. 2. 68, 3; Plin. 
Epp. 3. 7, 74, &c. 
and poetical (Lucr., Hor., Ov.). 

I5. veritati, ' uprightness' : cp. I. 75, 2. 

16. neque alia, ‘no less’: cp. ‘non in 
alia vilitate’ G. 5, 4. 

17. consulatis. From the ordinary 
sense of ‘consulere alicui,’ the verb is 
often used by Tacitus as equivalent to 
‘parcere,’ as in c. 46, 4; 11. 36, 3; 12. 
47,7; H. 3. 82, 1. 

18, qualicumque, i.e. ‘whether de- 
served or not.’ 

19. M. Piso: see 2. 76, 2. 

20. dehortatus est. This verb, not 
uséd elsewhere by Tacitus, takes an inf, 

also in Cato (ap. Gell. 13, 24) and Sall. 

(Jug. 34, 4). The inf. with * hortor' and 
* moneo ' is more common. 

22. quinque et quadraginta. Ile 

The use is archaic 

Caesar flexo in maestitiam 3 

atque illo 4 

atque utinam ego potius filio iuveni quam ille 6 
eo inpensius precor ne meae pravitatis poe- 
per quinque et quadraginta annorum obse- 

7 

A. D. 20.] LIBER Ill. 

CAP. 16, 17. All 

quium, per collegium consulatus quondam divo Augusto parenti 
tuo probatus et tibi amicus nec quicquam post haec rogaturus 

salutem infelicis filii rogo.' 

de Plancina nihil addidit. 

17. Post quae Tiberius adulescentem crimine civilis belli pur- 
gavit, patris quippe iussa, nec potuisse filium detrectare ; simul 
nobilitatem domus, etiam ipsius quoquo modo meriti gravem 
2 casum miseratus. pro Plancina cum pudore et flagitio disseruit, 
matris preces obtendens; in quam optimi cuiusque secreti questus 

3 magis ardescebant. 

id ergo fas aviae, interfectricem nepotis 

adspicere, adloqui, eripere senatui. quod pro omnibus civibus 
4 leges obtineant, uni Germanico non contigisse. Vitellii et Veranii 
voce defletum Caesarem, ab imperatore et Augusta defensam 
5 Plancinam. proinde venena et artes tam feliciter expertas ver- 
teret in Agrippinam, in liberos eius, egregiamque aviam ac 
6 patruum sanguine miserrimae domus exsatiaret. biduum super 
hac imagine cognitionis absumptum, urguente Tiberio liberos 

7 Pisonis matrem uti tuerentur. 

et cum accusatores ac testes 

certatim perorarent respondente nullo, miseratio quam invidia 
8 augebatur. primus sententiam rogatus Aurelius Cotta consul 
(nam referente Caesare magistratus eo etiam munere fungeban- 

I3. perinde: text R. 

appears to date from his entry into pub- 
lic life, which would thus have taken 
_ place in 728, B.c. 26. . : 

I. collegium consulatus. These 
words can be satisfactorily explained as 
referring to his consulship in 747, B.C. 7 
(C. I. L. ix. 5308, x. 924); which was 
a mark of approval from Augustus, who 
conferred it, and a tie of friendship with 
Tiberius, his colleague in it. The Cn. 
Piso who was consul with Augustus him- 
self in 731, B.C. 23, must have been his 
father (see on 2. 43, 3). This abstract 
use of * collegium ! (cp. c. 31, 1; H. 1. 52, 
8) is rare, but is found in Livy (4. 17, 9, 
&c.). 

3. iussa, sc. ' fuisse,' as in c. 16, 1, &c. 
Orelli takes it less well as depending on 
* detrectare, explaining ‘neque’ as equi- 
valent to ‘ne... quidem.’ 

7. pudore et flagitio. 
jective’ and objective, e.g. the shame 
which a person feels and the infamy which 
he incurs, are elsewhere thus concisely 
coupled; as ‘rubore et infamia"; * pudor 
ac dedecus! H. 4. 62, 2; 72, 5. See 
other instances noted by Nipp. on 1. 43. 

The sub- 

13. proinde. This correction is clearly 
required in a hortatory passage, where an 
inference is drawn from facts (as in I. 11, 
3; 2. 65, 6, &c.). The two words are 
constantly confused by copyists, from the 
close resemblance of their abbreviated 
forms; and ' proinde' is generally restored 
for ‘perinde’ in 15. 27, a: the opposite 
alteration has been oftener made, and 
sometimes questionably; see note on 4. 
20,6; 13. 21, 3. 

16. hac imagine cognitionis: thesham 
(cp. H. 4. 8, 4) was the trial of Plancina, 
whose acquittal was already secured. The 
sentence of Cotta, given below, shows 
however that no decision had yet been 
taken respecting the property of Piso or 
respecting his sons. 

18. perorarent: cp. 2. 30, I. 

miseratio quam invidia. On the 
omission of * potius" see Introd. v. $ 64, 
1: cp.also c. 33, 25 4. 61, 15 13- 6, 6, 
and Ritter there. 

I9. Aurelius Cotta: sce c. 2, 5. 

30. eo etiam munere, the duty of 
giving their ‘sententia’ on the question 
being put to them, According to rule, 

qa 

412 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 773. 

tur) nomen Pisonis eradendum fastis censuit, partem bonorum 

publicandam, pars ut Cn. Pisoni filio concederetur isque praeno- 

men mutaret ; M. Piso exuta dighitate et accepto quinquagiens 

sestertio in decem annos relegaretur, concessa Plancinae incolu- 
5 mitate ob preces Augustae. 

18. Multa ex ea sententia mitigata sunt a principe: ne nomen 
Pisonis fastis eximeretur, quando M. Antonii, qui bellum patriae 
fecisset, Iulli Antonii, qui domum Augusti violasset, manerent. 
et M. Pisonem ignominiae exemit concessitque ei paterna bona, 2 

io Satis firmus, ut.saepe memoravi, adversum pecuniam et tum 
pudore absolutae Plancinae placabilior. atque idem, cum Va- 3 
lerius Messalinus signum aureum in aede Martis Ultoris, Cae-- 
cina Severus aram ultionis statuendam censuissent, prohibuit, 

€ 
I. radendum: text Bait. 4. religatur: text L. 

13. ultioni: text Halm. 

the magistrate who made the 'relatio' put 
the question first to the consuls designate 
(cp. c. 22, 6, &c.), then to consulars, &c., 
and could himself speak as often as he 
pleased. Other magistrates were not 
asked their 'sententia! and apparently 

‘did not vote, but could interpose in the 

debate at any ttme unasked. 
ilustrates this order of 
reference to Cic. ad Q. 2. 1, 4 
41, I: see also Staatsr. iii. 942-940. 
‘Tacitus uses the past tense (‘fungebantur’), 
because in his time the princeps, unless 
he happened to be consul (cp. Pl. Epp. 
2. I1, IO), did not preside in person over 
the senate, but consulted it in writing 
(see note on c. 32, I). 

I. eradendum fastis, sc. ' consulari- 
bus. The simple verb appears to be 
thus used only in Ov. Am. I. 11, 22 
(littera rasa’). The MS. text might 
however be defended by the general 
frequency of such uses of simple for 

Nipp. 
rocedure by 

compound verbs in Tacitus (Introd. v. 

§ 40). On such ‘damnatio memoriae" 
see Staatsr. iii. 1191. 

partem, ‘half’ (cp. 4. 20, 2, &c.). 
This would be the share of M. Piso (cp. 
* paterna bona’ c. 18, 2), who was to 
have a sum given back out of it. 

2. praenomen mutaret. Thus the 

. praenomen ‘Marcus’ was forbidden to 

the Manlii (Liv. 6. 20, 14). This Piso 
probably took the praenomen ‘ Lucius’: 
see on 4. 62, 1. 

3. exuta dignitate, sc. ‘senatoria.’ 

* Exuere ordinem" is thus used of sena- 
tors (I1. 25, 5, &c.) The large sum 
(five times the senatorial census) given to 
him illustrates the remark of Seneca (ad 
Helv. 12, 4) ‘maius viaticum exulum 
quam olim patrimonium principum fuerat.’ 

4. relegaretur. This mildest form 
of banishment (cp. Ov. Trist. 2, 137) in- 
volved no ‘deminutio capitis,’ or other 
penalty beyond itself. 

6. ne...eximeretur. On the repeti- 
tion of ‘ exemit,' see note on 1. 81, a. 

7. M. Antonii. . The Fasti Capitolini 
show marks of erasure and subsequent 
restoration of his name (C. I. L. i. p. 440, 
466); which was erased in 710 (cp. Cic. 
Phil. 13. 12, 26), and again apparently 
at the Actian war, but restored, first at 
the beginning of the triumvirate, and 
afterwards by Augustus. On his son 
Iullus Antonius see on 1. 10, 3. 

9. et ... exemit. Nipp. compares 
with this change of construction that 
in 13. 26, 2 * quibusdam frementibus... 
disserebatur contra.” 

ignominias, i.e. from loss of rank 
and from relegation. 

10. saepe : cp. I. 75, 4, and note there; 
also on c. 23, 3. E 
II. Valerius Messalinus. This may 
be the other consul of this year (see on 
C. 2, 5), but is generally taken to be his 
father (cp. 1. 8, 5), the speaker in c. 34. 
13. Martis Ultoris: see on 2. 64, 2. 
Caecina Severus: see I. 31, 2, &c. 

13. aram ultionis statuendam. On 

A. D. 20.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 17—19. 

413 

ob externas ea victorias sacrari dictitans, domestica mala tristitia 
4 operienda. addiderat Messalinus Tiberio et Augustae et An- 
toniae et Agrippinae Drusoque ob vindictam Germanici grates 

& agendas omiseratque Claudii mentionem. 

et Messalinum qui- 

dem L. Asprenas senatu coram percontatus est an prudens prae- 

6 terisset ; ac tum demum nomen Claudii adscriptum est. 

mihi, 

quanto plura recentium seu veterum revolvo, tanto magis ludi- 

7 bria rerum mortallum cunctis in negotiis obversantur. 

quippe 

fama spe veneratione potius omnes destinabantur imperio quam 
quem futurum principem fortuna in occulto tenebat. 
19. Paucis post diebus Caesar auctor senatui fuit Vitellio 

atque Veranio et Servaeo sacerdotia tribuendi : 

Fulcinio suffra- 

gium ad honores pollicitus monuit ne facundiam violentia prae- 

2 cipitaret. 

is finis fuit ulciscenda Germanici morte, non modo 

apud illos homines qui tum agebant, etiam secutis temporibus 

I4. in ulciscenda Halm. . 

such commemorative altars see note cn 
I. 14, 3. The MS. text is retained by 
many and need not be altered; but the 
genitive is more usual except in cases of 
personification. 

I. tristitia. This abl. can hardly be 
instrumental like c. 69, r, or *malis 
operire! in H. 1. 53, 3, and appears 
rather to be causal, as equivalent to * ob 
tristitiam' : see Introd. v. $ 30. 

4. omiserat Claudii mentionem: 
see note on 2. 7I, 3, and c. 5, 5. 

5. L. Asprenas: see I. 53, 9. 

. plura recentium seu veterum. 
On ‘the fondness of Tacitus for such 
genitives see Introd. v. $ 32.  Nipp. notes 
here the frequency with which he uses 
neuter plural adjectives in the genit. (as 
2. 53, 2, &c.), dat. (as 4. 31, 1; 59, 4, 
&c.), and abl. (as 4. 3, 4; 88, 3, &c.). 

revolvo, sc. animo: cp. 4. 2I, 2; 
Agr. 46, 3. This use appears to be 
adopted from Vergil (Aen. 2, 101) and 
Ovid (Fast. 4, 667). 

ludibria rerum mortalium. ‘ The 
mockery pervading human affairs': cp. 
* Fortunae ludibria" (Cic. Parad. 1. 1, 9); 
*ludibria casus' (Liv. 30. 30, 5). On 
the fatalism of Tacitus see Introd. iv. 
P- 29. 

9. spe, ‘expectation.’ 

I1. auctor senatui fuit. Most of the 
priestly colleges were filled up formerly 
by popular election out of a list furnished 
by the *collegium. These elections had 

now, like those of the magistrates, passed 
to the senate; and we gather from this 
passage that the princeps, besides, of 
course, having his right of nomination as 
a member of the college, had also the 
right of ‘commendatio’ (Introd. vi. p. 94). 
See the speech of Claudius, ii. 13 (in 
App. to Book xi.); Plin. Epp. 4. 8, 3; 

.10. 13; and other authorities cited by 

Mommsen (Staatsr. ii. 1110). These 
persons (on whom see c. 13, 3) were 
probably elected ‘supra numtrum’ (cp. 
I. 54, 2) ; and itis stated by Dio (51. 20, 
3), that such elections had become so 
frequent that the colleges consisted practi; 
cally of no fixed number. 

12. suffragium ad honores, i.e. that 
he would ‘commend’ him. Fulcinius be- 
came consul in 784, A.D. 31 (5. 11, 1). 

I4. uloiscenda . . . morte. Halm's 
insertion of ‘in’. has not been generally 
followed, though that construction or a 
dative would certainly be expected. "The 
case may perhaps be taken as an un- 
usual extension of the abl. abs. See also 
notes on 6. 32, 6; 14. 4, 8. 

non modo ... etiam: in 4 35, 1 
‘sed’ is similarly ‘omitted, as is ‘etiam’ 
in I, 60, 1, &c., and perhaps both in 
G. 10, 5 ‘non solum apud plebem, apud 
proceres, apud sacerdotes’ (but see notes 
there), The contrast is rhetorically 
strengthened by these ellipses. ~ | 

I5. agebant: cp.1.4,4; 68,1. The 
use of this verb absolutely, for *vivere' 

eon 

10 

414 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 773. 

| vario rumore iactata. adeo maxima quaeque ambigua sunt, 8 
dum alii quoquo modo audita pro conpertis habent, alii vera in 

contrarium vertunt, et gliscit utrumque posteritate. 
urbe egressus repetendis auspiciis, mox ovans introiit. 

paucos- 

5 que post dies Vipsania mater eius excessit, una omnium Agrip- 

ved 
en 

pae liberorum miti obitu. 

creditum est veneno aut fame extinctos. 

20. Eodem anno Tacfarinas, quem priore aestate pulsum 
a Camillo memoravi, bellum in Africa renovat, vagis primum 
10 populationibus et ob pernicitatem inultis, dein vicos exscindere, 
trahere graves praedas ; postremo haud procul Pagyda flumine 
praeerat castello Decrius im- 2 
piger manu, exercitus militia et illam obsidionem flagitii ratus. 
is cohortatus milites ut copiam pugnae in aperto facerent, aciem 

cohortem Romanam circumsedit. 

pro castris instruit. 

inter tela occursat fugientibus, increpat signiferos quod inconditis 

Probst. 

or *degere, is very common in Tacitus 
(e. g. 4. 28, 35 13- 45:45 15. 74, 4 &C.), 
but otherwise apparently confined to 
Sallust (Jug. 55, 2; 89, 7, &c.). 

1. iactata, ‘discussed’; so in H. 4. 8, © 

6, &c.; also Caes. B. G. 1. 18, 1; 
50, 2; 10. 46, 16, &c.. 

2. dum, ‘inasmuch as’: cp. 2. 88, 4, 
&c. . 

Liv. I. 

tion, the habit of mind of the two classes 
of persons compared. 

posteritate. The construction ap- 

ars to be that of an ablative of time, 
ike ‘secutis temporibus' above. Jacob 
compares Prop. 3. I, 34 ‘ posteritate suum 
crescere sentit opus.' 

'4. repetendis auspiciis. If he had 

* proconsulare imperium’ (see on 1. 14, . 

5), it must have been only ‘extra urbem’ 
(cp. 12. 41, 2), as distinct from that of 
the princeps, which did not cease within 
the pomerium. More properly, the 
general is said ‘repetere auspicia’ at 
Rome itself (cp. Liv. 8. 30, 2; Staatsr. 
i. 99). 
ovans introiit. An inscription (C. I. L. 
xiv. 244, Henzen 6443) gives the date as 
v. k. Jun. (May 28). | 
. Vipsania: see on I. I2, 6. In what 
follows, the children of Agrippa by Mar- 
cella (Introd. ix. note 19) appear to be 

2. audire: text margin and L, quae quoquo modo audiere Weissenb. 

3. utrumque, credulity and falsifica- extended beyond a year after that 

14. faceret 

ignored ; and, of the others, Julia. though 
dying in exile, and thus hardly * miti 
obitu, is not stated (4. 71, 6) to have 
died by violence. 

8. priore aestate. These words are 
bracketed by Nipp. as an interpolation, 
and are certainly an error; as the cam- 
paign of Camillus is given under 770, 
A.D. 17 (2.,52), and cannot well have 
see 
on €. 31, I) Ritter’s suggestion, that 
the words may mean ‘in a former sum- 
mer, makes Tacitus give too vague a 
reference. | 

II. Pagyda. This river is nowhere 
else mentioned, and cannot be identified ; 
but the mention of Thala (c. 21, 2) 
perhaps gives some clue to the locality 

‘of the campaign. 

— I2. cohortem Romanam, apparently 
a legionary cohort: cp: 1. Co, 3. 

I3. flagitii : see Introd. v. $ 35. 

14. copiam pugnae...facerent. Such 
a phrase is elsewhere used of the general 
rather than the soldiers; hence Wolfflin 
(Jahresb. iii. 786) and Nipp. approve of 

- the conjecture ‘ faceret." 

15. pro castris: see on 2. 8o, 5, 

16. inconditis aut desertoribus. The 
troops of Tacfarinas are stated (2. 52, 2) 
to have undergone some discipline, but 
might still be called *inconditi' as com- 

at Drusus 4 

nam ceteros manifestum ferro vel 5 

primoque impetu pulsa cohorte promptus 8 

| 

A. D. 20.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 19-21. 

415 

aut desertoribus miles Romanus terga daret; simul exceptat 
vulnera et quamquam transfosso oculo adversum os in hostem 
intendit, neque proelium omisit, donec desertus suis caderet. 

21. Quae postquam L. Apronio (nam Camillo successerat) 
comperta, magis dedecore suorum quam gloria hostis anxius, 5 
raro ea tempestate et e vetere memoria facinore decumum quem- 

2 que ignominiosae cohortis sorte ductos fusti necat. 

tantumque 

severitate profectum, ut vexillum veteranorum, non amplius 
quam quingenti numero, easdem Tacfarinatis copias praesidium 

3 cui Thala nomen adgressas fuderint. 

quo proelio Rufus Helvius 

gregarius miles servati civis decus rettulit donatusque est ab 

4 Apronio torquibus et hasta. 

I. excepta : text Jul. Held. 

pared with Roman legionaries.- Tac- 
farinas was himself a deserter (1. 1.) from 
Roman service. For ‘aut’ cp. 1. 55, 2. 

I. exceptat vulnera. The MS. teat 
is retained by Halm and most other 
editors, and defended by Nipp. and 
by Joh. Müller (Beitr. 3. 25-28), me 
explained either by supplying ‘sunt,’ 
by taking the words as an aUe 
depending on *intendit.' Against the first 
it may be said that, though the change 
from an active to a passive construction 
and vice versa is not unusual (e. g. 'quod 

. . acceptum, neque prohibuit" c. 76, 3: 
cp. Introd. v. $ 83, 2), the interpolation 
of a passive clause in the midst of actives 
is here very awkward. As to the second, 
the zeugma in ‘intendit,’ though harsh, 
could no doubt be paralleled ; but *ex- 
cepta vulnera . . . intendit (or ‘ ostendit") 
would be weak, with the definite and 
more forcible ‘transfosso oculo adversum 
os’ coupled to it. It is therefore perhaps 
easier to suppose that Tacitus wrote *ex- 
ceptat, a verb which, though not else- 
where found in his writings, and other- 
wise rare, occurs in Caes., Cic., and Verg., 
and is used by Silius (9, 367) in a sense 
resembling that here required ( per pec- 
tora saevas exceptat mortes '). 

3. suis, to be taken as a dative (cp. 2. 
50, 4); unless, as is not improbable, the 
preposition may have dropped out. 

4. L. Apronio: see on 1. 56, 1. Afri. 
can coins have been found inscribed ‘ per- 
missu L. Aproni procos. iii.’ (Eckhel, iv. 
148, &c.), showing that his proconsulship 
lasted at least beyond two years He 
had probably succeeded Camillus in 771, 

Caesar addidit civicam coronam, 

9. quam | genti: quingenti B, text Weissenb. 

A. D. 18, and was succeeded by Blaesus in 
74 A. D. 2I (C. 35). 
. decumum quemque. Such deci- 
et is mentioned as early as 283, 
B.C. 471 (Liv. 2. 59, 11): see 14. 44, 6. 
7. sorte ductos fusti necat. The 
words are taken verbatim from Sallust 
(H. 4. 5 D, 27 K, inc. 96 G). The 
‘fustuarium’ is described by Polybius (6. 
37) as inflicted by the fellow-soldiers at 
a signal from the tribune. 

8. vexillum veteranorum: see on 
I. 17, 4; Introd. vii. 125. 
amplius quam quingenti. This 

reading seems nearest to the MS., though 
such a construction as ' amplius quin- 
genti! is sufficiently common. The 
strength mentioned would be about the 
same as that of a legionary cohort. 

10. Thala, probably not the wealthy 
city of the Jugurthine war (Sall. Jug. 
75) buta place further to the north, still 
bearing the name, on the borders of 
Africa and Numidia, about Lat. 35°, 40; 
where inscriptions showing it to have been 
a military station about this time have 
been found : see C. I. L. viii. p. 69. 

12. torquibus et hasta. Onthe usual 
‘dona militaria’ see on I. 44, 7; also 
Marquardt, ii. 574, foll. 

civicam coronam: cp. 2. 83, 2; 15. 
I2, 5; 16. 15,2. Pliny (N. H. 16. 4, 5, 
11) records the honours and privileges 
attending this decoration. Borghesi notes 
that Helvius appears to have taken hence 
the cognomen Civica, and to have lived 
at Vicovaro (Varium), where an inscrip- 
tion (C. I. L. xiv. 3472) has been found— 
*M. Helvius, M. f, Cam (ilia tribu), 

n 

416 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

quod non eam quoque Apronius iure proconsulis tribuisset, 

questus magis quam offensus. 

sed Tacfarinas perculsis Numidis 5. 

et obsidia aspernantibus spargit bellum, ubi instaretur, cedens 

ac rursum in terga remeans. 

et dum ea ratio barbaro fuit, in- 6 

ritum fessumque Romanum impune ludificabatur: postquam 
deflexit ad maritimos locos ef inligatus praeda stativis castris 
adhaerebat, missu patris Apronius Caesianus cum equite et co- 
hortibus auxiliariis, quis velocissimos legionum addiderat, pros- 
peram adversum Numidas pugnam facit pellitque in deserta. 
22. At Romae Lepida, cui super Aemiliorum decus L. Sulla 
et Cn. Pompeius proavi erant, defertur simulavisse partum ex 

6. et ins. Haase, inligatusque Walther. 

Rufus Civica, prim. pil, balneum muni- 
cipibus et incolis dedit.' 

2. questus, i. e. affecting to complain, 
but really well pleased. The proconsul 
of Africa still at this date (see Introd. 
vii. 115) commanded soldiers with * pro- 
consulare imperium,’ and could punish 
(as above) or grant decorations: other 
proconsuls had no soldiers, and in Cae- 
sarian provinces the power to confer such 
‘dona’ rested in the supreme imperium 
of the princeps (15. 12,5). Suetonius, in 
generalising ‘ more suo’ from this instance 
(Tib. 32), is therefore inaccurate. 

3. spargit bellum, 'spreads the area 
of war’; so in Agr. 38, 3. The expres-. 
sion seems taken from Lucan (23, 682; 
3, 64), who may have followed Vergil's 
* spargam arma per agros' (Aen. 7, 551). 

4. rursum, like a?, expressing contrast : 
Cp. 2. 39, 4; 12. 69, 4, &c. 

in 

sons in I. 59, 7, &c. 

6. et inligatus.  Nipp. retains the 
MS. text without *et' or *que,' thinking 
the beginning of the apodosis at ‘ missu 
patris" sufficiently indicated by the sense, 
as in another somewhat ambiguous pas- 
sage in H. 3. 13, 4. Joh. Müller, who also 
defends the MS. text (Beitr. 3. p. 28-30), 
thinks that in many such passages, oral 
recitation, in which the emphasis of 
the reader removes such ambiguity, is 
presupposed. 

7. Apronius Caesianus, cos. in 792, 
A. D. 39 (Fast. Ant. C. I. L. x. 6638, 
Henzen 6445). An inscription on-Mount 
Eryx (C. I. L. x. 7257) contains verses 
showing that at the time of this campaign 
he was still a youth in praetexta, and was 
rewarded for his service by a place among 

ritum, ‘baffled’; thus used of per- 

the ‘septemviri epulones' This would 
show that he cannot bethe person thought 
to be mentioned in 1. 29, 2. 

8. legionum. A second legion was 
now in Africa (c. 9, r). With ‘velocis- 
simos! we should rather have expected 
*e legionibus'; but the legion is often 
used for the soldiers composing it. 

Io. Aemiliorum decus. This was now 
by far the greatest remaining patrician 
gens (cp. 6. 27, 5; 29, 7), next to the 
Iulii and Claudii, and a mere refer- 
ence to its chief families, the Lepidi, 
Paulli, Scauri, &c., will alone serve to 
indicate its nobility. Mr. Dallin notes 
that thirty of its members had been 
consuls, many of them more than once, 
besides many dictators, censors, *trium- 
phales,’ &c. Among its famous men were 
the consul who fell at Cannae, the con- 
queror of Macedon, and (by birth) the 
younger Scipio Africanus, also Scaurus 
the last republican *princeps senatus,' and 
the triumvir Lepidus. Two great Roman 
roads perpetuated the name; and even in 
the fifth century St. Jerome speaks of 
the devout Paulla as * Gracchorum stirps, 
suboles Scipionum, Paulli heres’ (see 
Gibbon, c. 31, note Ir). 

L. Sulla et Cn. Pompeius proavi. 
Faustus Cornelius Sulla, son of the dic- 
tator, had married the daughter of Cn. 
Pompeius Magnus (cp. Bell. Afr. 95, 2). 
Their daughter Cornelia was mother of 
Lepida by Q. Aemilius Lepidus, cos. 733, 
B.C. 21 (Dio. 54. 6, 3; Hor. Ep. 1. 20, 
28), whose relationship to the main stem 
of the Lepidi is uncertain. 

II. defertur. On the inf. with this 
verb cp. 2. 27. 1. The specification of. 
charges shows the inaccuracy of Suetonius, 

A. D. 20.] LIBER Ill. 

2 P. Quirinio divite atque orbo. 

CAP. 21, 22. 417 

adiciebantur adulteria, venena 

quaesitumque per Chaldaeos in domum Caesaris, defendente 

8ream Manio Lepido fratre. 

Quirinius post dictum repudium 

adhuc infensus quamvis infami ac nocenti miserationem addi- 
derat. haud facile quis dispexerit illa in cognitione mentem 
4 principis: adeo vertit ac miscuit irae et clementiae signa. de- 
precatus primo senatum ne maiestatis crimina tractarentur, mox 
M. Servilium e consularibus aliosque testes inlexit ad proferenda 

5 quae velut reicere voluerat. 

idemque servos Lepidae, cum 

militari custodia haberentur, transtulit ad consules neque per 
tormenta interrogari passus est de iis quae ad domum suam 

6 pertinerent. 

who speaks (Tib. 49) of Lepida as con- 
demned ‘in gratiam Quirini consularis 
praedivitis et orbi, qui dimissam eam 
a matrimonio post vicensimum annum 
veneni olim in se comparati (cp. c. 23, 4) 
arguebat." 

I. P. Quirinio: see c. 48; 2. 30, 4. 

2. quaesitum, 'the fact of inquiry' 
(Introd. v. 55 b 2). On the Chaldaean 
astrologers see 2. 27, 2. To consult 
them against (or conceming) the imperial 
family.or on the future of the state was 
made a capital offence, as ‘any sinister 
prediction was an encouragement to con- 
spiracies. For similar charges cp. 1a. 
22, 1; 52, 1; 16. 14, 4; 30, 2. It was 
still a capital offence at the time of the 
jurists, as was also, for similar reasons, 
the inquiry by a slave touching the horo- 
scope of his master: see Marquardt, iii. 
94. n. 6. 

3. Manio Lepido: see note on c. 32, 
3; 1.13, 2. 

post dictum repudium, ‘after de- 
claration of divorce’; the usual phrase is 
* mittere repudium.’ The vindictiveness 
of Quirinius appears to be shown not so 
much by the prosecution being merely 
after a divorce, as by its being many 
ears after it. The statement of Suetonius 
(1. 1.) that twenty years had intervened, 
seems exaggerated; as Quirinius can 
hardly have married her till after the 
death of L. Caesar in 755, A.D. 2 (cp. c. 
23, 1) ; but Nipp. thinks that the interval 
may have been fifteen years. She had 
since married Scaurus: see c. 23, 3. 

£f. dispexerit, potential subjunct. (In- 
trod. v. $ 51). The verb is used (cp. 
Agr. 10, 6) of what is seen, as it were, 
through a mist or veil. 

VOL. I. 

exemit etiam Drusum consulem designatum di- 

6. vertit, sc. ‘inter se,’ ‘showed by 
turns.’ 

7, maiestatis crimina, i.e. the charge 
of consulting astrologers respecting his 
house. Her juvenile betrothal to Lucius 
Caesar might possibly have strained the 
charge of adultery into one of treason 

- (cp. 2. 50, 1). 

8. M. Servilium: see 2. 48, I. 

quae velut reicere voluerat, 
*what he had apparently desired to ex- 
clude from the case.’ *Reicere, which 
had been corrected to ‘reticere’ and 
*reticeri, has got back into most texts. 
We should certainly have rather expected 
* velut reiecerat or * velut reici voluerat! ; 
but no alteration appears to be really 
necessary (for further discussion see Joh. 
Müller, Beit. 3. p. 31). On the use of 
‘velut’ see 1. 8, 7. Tiberius had not 
prohibited, nor, as it seemed, sincerely 
deprecated the charge. 
' 10. militari custodia: cp. 14. 60, 5; 
H. 4. 11, 4. This custody would be that 
of the praetorians, who, though not yet 

collected into their camp (4. 2, 1), must 

have had some barrack prison (cp. 1. 21, 2) 
in Rome. The change from this to the 
custody of the consuls, who were now 
civil magistrates only, would hardly, in 
the case of slaves detained for torture, 
arise from a desire to be lenient to them, 
but would be significant of Caesar's wish 
to exercise no influence in the trial. 

I2. exemit .. . dicendae primo loco 
sententiae: the dative with this verb 
(cp. 1. 48, 2) is nowhere else gerundive. 
A famous instance of the old custom 
alluded to is the ‘sententia’ of Silanus 
as cos. design. on the Catilinarians (Sall. 
Cat. 50; App. B. C. 3. 5). Appian there 

Ee 

5 

418 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 773. 

cendae primo loco sententiae ; quod alii civile rebantur, ne ceteris 
adsentiendi necessitas fieret, quidam ad saevitiam trahebant : 
neque enim cessurum nisi damnandi officio. 

23. Lepida ludorum diebus, qui cognitionem iritervenerant, 
5theatrum cum claris feminis ingressa, lamentatione flebili ma- 
iores suos ciens ipsumque Pompeium, cuius ea monimenta et 
adstantes imagines visebantur, tantum misericordiae permovit, 
ut effusi in lacrimas saeva et detestanda Quirinio clamitarent, 
cuius senectae atque orbitati et obscurissimae domui destinata 

. 7. misericordia: text L. 

explains the practice as grounded on the 
probability that the responsibility of exe- 
cuting the decree might often devolve on 
the consuls designate; but it is really a 
recognition of their position, which, while 
not that of magistrates (cp. c. 17, 8), was 
yet quasi-magisterial. Thus Cicero (ad 
Q. F. 2. 1, 3), when the tribune had 
already asked the consul-designate, says 
* de privatis me primum sententiam roga- 
vit.’ For other instances cp. C. 49, 4; 4- 
42, 3i II. 5, 3; 12. 9, 1; 14. 48, 4; 
. Staatsr. iii. 973, n. 2. 

2. trahebant: cp. 1. 62, 3. They 
took it as indicating that he desired the 
verdict to be adverse and the sentence 
severe, and that Drusus understood his 
wishes. 

3. neque enim cessurum, sc. ‘ fuisse’ 
(Introd. v. $ 39 c). *Drusum' is prob- 
ably to be supplied as subject, and * officio’ 
taken as abl.; the construction being like 
that of ‘possessione cedere, &c. The 
full expression would thus be * neque enim 
Drusum cuiquam cessurum fuissequoquam 
officio nisi officio damnandi' ; * he would 
not have given way to others in respect of 
any duty but that of condemning ' ( would 
gladly have put himself forward to give 
the initiatory vote, if he had thought that 
his father desired it to be one of acquittal). 
Drusus voted at a later stage for the 
severer sentence, initiated by Rubellius 
Blandus (c. 23, 2). 

4. ludorum diebus. In the absence 
of any specification, it is probable that 
the *Ludi Magni Romani' are meant; 
which began Sept. 4, and lasted, under 
one or another name, to the 19th. For 
four days (cp. Liv. 24. 43, 7) they were 
scenic, during most of the others Circen- 
sian. See Marquardt, iii. 498. 

cognitionem intervenerant. 
accusative, not elsewhere found with this 

Romans (see 14. 20, 2). 

The | 

verb, is analogous to that with *inter- 
fluere’ (2. 9, 1) and other such verbs 
(Introd. v. 12 c'. The interruption of 
judicial proceedings by these games may 
be gathered from Cicero (Verr. 1. 10, 31), 
who deducts forty days, chiefly for the 
games vowed by Pompeius and for the 
Ludi Romani. 

6. ea monimenta...visebantur, i.e. 
*cuius erant ea... quae visebantur.’ A 
single building might be called * moni- 
menta! (c. 72, 13 4. 7, 3); but other 
buildings, the Curia and Porticus Pompeii, 
were close by. This theatre, the greatest 
in Rome, was also the first permanent 

. structure of the kind in the city, and 

considered a great innovation by severe 
It dates from 
the second consulship of Pompeius, 699, 
B. C. 55, and was in the Campus Martius : 
see Dyer (in Dict. of Geog.) pp. 834, 844; 
Burn, Rome and the Campagna, p. 318; 
Middleton, ii. p. 65. 

7. permovit. On the accus. cp. I. 
21, 4. 

8. detestanda = ‘detestabilia,’ as in 
4. 69, 3; 16. 28, 2, &c. 

9. obscurissimae domui: see c. 48, 
2. Quirinius is, however, there shown to 
have been a man of distinguished public 
career, and no imputation is cast on his 
general character. Nor does the popu- 
lar sympathy with Lepida appear really 
to rest on anything but her rank, and 
on the long interval of time, perhaps 
capable of explanation, between some, at 
least, of her crimes and her trial. Tacitus 

admits her guilt (c. 22, 3), and yet seems 

to lean towards this sympathy. The 
whole narrative thus aptly illustrates the 
popular respect for noble birth still pre- 
valent under the Empire, as shown by 
Horace (Sat. 1. 6, 7 foll), and, much 
later, by the energy with which Juvenal 

LIBER Ill. CAP. 22-24. 

A. D. 20.] 419 

quondam uxor L. Caesari ac divo Augusto nurus dederetur. 
2 dein tormentis servorum patefacta sunt flagitia itumque in sen- 

8 tentiam Rubelli Blandi, a quo aqua atque igni arcebatur. huic 
Drusus adsensit, quamquam alii mitius censuissent. mox Scauro, 
4 qui filiam ex ea genuerat, datum ne bona publicarentur. tum 3 

demum aperuit Tiberius conpertum sibi etiam ex P. Quirinii 
servis veneno eum a Lepida petitum. 
24. Inlustrium domuum adversa (etenim haud multum distanti 
tempore Calpurnii Pisonem, Aemilii Lepidam amiserant) solacio 
2 adfecit D. Silanus Iuniae familiae redditus. casum eius paucis 
repetam. ut valida divo Augusto in rem publicam fortuna, ita 
domi inprospera fuit ob inpudicitiam filiae ac neptis, quas urbe 
3 depulit adulterosque earum morte aut fuga punivit. nam cul- 
pam inter viros ac feminas vulgatam gravi nomine laesarum 
religionum ac violatae maiestatis appellando clementiam ma- 
4iorum suasque ipse leges egrediebatur. sed aliorum exitus, 

t 
8. adenim: text Mercer. 

(Sat. 8) protests against it. See Introd. 5. datum ne bona publicarentur. 

vii. p. Ior ; Friedl. i. p. 213. 

destinata : in Greek the article would 
stand with the participle thus used (4 
pvgarevOeica, x.T.A.). Vergil has ‘divae 
Veneris nurus' (Aen. 2, 787). 

2. itum in sententiam. That this 
did not always eed mara appears 
here and in 14. 49, I. 

3. Rubelli Blandi: see on 6. 37, I. 
He is called a consular in c. 51, 1, and, 
as he voted before Drusus, must have been 
already such ; but if, as Borghesi thought 
(see Henzen, Inscr. p. 496), he was con- 
sul with Annius Pollio (6. 9, 5) in the 
last six months of this year, he would 
have been consul at this trial (cp. $ 1), 
which would have been stated. It appears 
also that there were no ‘suffecti’ this 

year (Klein, Fasti ; Staatsr. ii. 83, n. 3). 

&qua atque igni arcebatur. Although 
the confiscation of property usually in- 
volved in such a sentence was here re- 
mitted, the penalty was otherwise more 
severe than that of the ‘lex Iulia de 

adulteriis! (see on 2. 50, 4), and equiva-- 

lent to that usually inflicted for * maiestas' 
(c. 50,6). <A similar severe sentence for 
adultery is noted in 4. 42, 3. 

4. Beauro. As no other name is men- 
tioned, he must be the same spoken of in 
I. 13, 4, &c. He must have married her 
after her divorce from Quirinius. 

This act would again show that Tiberius 
was 'firmus adversum pecuniam, and 
makes against the imputation of Sue- 
tonius (see on c. 22, I). 

tum demum, &c. It would appear 
that the slaves of Quirinins had been 
examined privately by Tiberius; but only 
those of Lepida at the public trial. It 
does not necessarily follow that the evi- 
dence of the latter had not already 
established the charge of poisoning. Stahr 
strangely here refers ‘eum’ to Tiberius 
himself, and draws inferences from it as 
to his clemency. 

9. solacio adfecit. Nipp. notes that 
* solari' or * consolari' often take an ac- 
cusative of that for which consolation is 
given, as in 2. 36, 3; 16. 13, 6; also in 
Cic., as * consolatur honestas egestatem * 
pro Quint. 15, 49. 

1I. repetam. This verb is used of a 
narrative going back over the past, as in 
C. 33, 1 ; 12. 62, 1. 

in rem publicam : cp. 1. 8, 7. 

12. filiae ac neptis, the two : Iuliae" : 
see on I. 53, 1 ; 4. 71, 6. By ‘morte’ he 
refers to lullus Rotonius (1. 10, 3), by 
* fuga ' (* banishment,’ as in 14. 64, 5, &c.), 
to Silanus and Gracchus (1. 53, 6). 

15. violatae maiestatis : cp. 2. 50, I. 

16. egrediebatur. His own law, the 
‘lex Iulia de adulteriis, prescribed milder 

Ee2 

420 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

simul cetera illius aetatis memorabo, si effectis in quae tetendi 

plures ad curas vitam produxero. 

D. Silanus in nepti Augusti 5 

adulter, quamquam non ultra foret saevitum quam ut amicitia 
Caesaris prohiberetur, exilium sibi demonstrari intellexit, nec 
5 nisi Tiberio imperitante deprecari senatum ac principem ausus 
est M. Silani fratris potentia, qui per insignem nobilitatem et 

-eloquentiam praecellebat. 

sed Tiberius gratis agenti Silano 6 

patribus coram respondit se quoque laetari, quod frater eius e 
peregrinatione longinqua revertisset; idque iure licitum, quia 
10 non senatus consulto, non lege pulsus foret: sibi tamen adversus 7 
eum integras parentis sui offensiones, neque reditu Silani dis- 

soluta quae Augustus voluisset. 

honores adeptus est. 

fuit posthac in urbe neque 

25. Relatum dein de moderanda Papia Poppaea, quam senior. 
15 Augustus post Iulias rogationes incitandis caelibum poenis et 

I. tendi: text Ern., intendi IIeins. 

penalties than those which he arbitrarily 
inflicted. On the accus. cp. I. 30, 2. 

sed ...memorabo. Neither this 
promise, nor the earlier one given in H. 
1. 1, 5, to write the history of Nerva and 
Trajan, appears to have been fulfilled. 
I. in quae tetendi, ‘my present ob- 
ject.' : | 
| 2. curas. This word is used for lite- 
rary work in 4. I1, 5; Dial. 3, 3; 6,5; 
and, apparently, so elsewhere only in Ov. 
ex P. 4. 16, 39; Mart. 1. 107, 5. 

3. amicitia .. , prohiberetur : see c. 
I2, 4; 2. 70, 3. 

4. demonstrari, ‘ was indicated by it.’ 

6. fratris potentia. In 4. 43, 4 'po- 
tentia! is a causal abl. It might be so 
taken here, with * ausus,’ as meaning that 
the influence of his brother emboldened 
him to entreat. It would appear, how- 
ever, that he entreated, not in person, but 
through his powerful brother. ‘ Potentia’ 
would thus mean ‘per potentiam,’ and 
would be a quasi-instrumental abl. 
Neither view seems wholly satisfactory, 

and the suggestion that * fretus ' has been 

lost or corrupted is tempting, though such 
a juxtaposition as ' fratris fretus' (Bezzen- 
berger) is hardly probable. The M. 
Silanus here meant is probably not the 
consul of the preceding year (2. 59, I), 
but the father-in-law of Gaius (see on 6. 
20, 1), whose full name is M. Iunius, C. f., 

I4. deinde de: text Wolfflin. . 

Silanus (C. I. L. vi. 2028 c), and who is 
taken to be the cos. suff. in 768, A.D. 15 
(C. I. L. x. 6639, Henzen 6442, Klein, 
Fasti). . 

9. peregrinatione, emphatic, as his 
absence was voluntary; *longinqua' is 
used of time: cp. Caes. B. G. 1. 47, 4, 
and note on I. 53, 3. 

IO. non senatus consulto, non lege, 
* neither by decree of the senate, nor by 
sentence of the law court. See 1. 6, 3, 
and note there. 

sibi tamen, &c., *for himself, his fa- 

. ther's resentment towards him survived in 

its fulness; and the return of (Silanus 
implied no relaxation of any intention of 
Augustus’, i.e. the renouncement of friend- 
ship would be maintained. This ban was 
of itself sufficient to exclude him from all 
the magistracies of the state. 

I4. Papia Poppaea. On this and the . 
previous *Iuliae rogationes’ see the Ex- 
cursus appended to this Book. The 
in used here of the latter appears 

ardly to be such a rhetorical plural as 
‘Oppiis ... legibus' (c. 33, 4), but may 
denote that Augustus had passed more 
than one marriage law in his own name. 

I5. incitandis...poenis, ‘to encou- 
rage the enforcement of penalties on 
celibacy.'. Penalties already existed, but 
fresh vitality was given to them by the. 
reward held out to informers. 

A. D. 20.] 

2augendo aerario sanxerat. 

LIBER III. CAP. 24-26. 

421 

nec ideo coniugia et educationes 

liberum frequentabantur, praevalida orbitate: ceterum multitudo 
periclitantium gliscebat, cum omnis domus delatorum interpre- 
tationibus subverteretur, utque antehac flagitiis, ita tunc legibus 

3 laborabatur. 

ea res admonet ut de principiis iuris, et quibus 

modis ad hanc multitudinem infinitam ac varietatem legum per- 

ventum sit, altius disseram. 

26. Vetustissimi mortalium, nulla adhue. mala libidine, sine 
probro, scelere, eoque sine poena aut coercitionibus agebant. 

2 neque praemiis opus erat, cum honesta suopte ingenio peteren- 

3. omnes.. 

I. educationes, a plural only found 
in Tacitus: see Gud. on Dial. 38, 23. 

2. praevalida. This is commonly 
taken to mean 'continued to prevail'; 
but the analogy . of ‘ praevalida vitia ' (c. 
53, 3), ' nomina a 60, 6), ‘pars’ (H. 
2. 52, 2), and of * praevalere' (i. 58, 7, 
&c.), suggests a better interpretation, 
that childlessness gave such. a power in 
society as to frustrate the law. That 
such was the fact, is abundantly shown 
in literature.. * A rich, childless old man 
was a domestic tyrant, 'and his power in- 
creased with his years and infirmities ' 
(Gibbon, c. 6). See 13. 52, 3; 15. 19, 
3; H. 1. 73, 2; Hor. Sat. 2. 5, 28; 
ad Marc. 19; Petron. Sat. 116; Juv. p 
I9; 12, 99 (where see Mayor's note). 
Many other illustrations are given by 
Friedlander, Sitteng. i. p. 367, foll. 

3. periclitantium, ‘ exposed to prose- 
cution’: cp. 5. 8, 2; 6. 16, 5. Drager 
notes the particular application of * peri- 
culum" to a lawsuit in Cic. (de Imp. 
Pomp. 1, 2, &c.). 

interpretationibus, ‘constructions,’ 
i.e. by straining the technicalities of the 
law, to bring all possible cases under it. 

4. legibus laborabatur, *we were 
overburdened with laws.’ With this senti- 
ment may be compared that vof Livy 
(Praef. 9) * haec tempora, quibus nec vitia 
nostra nec remedia pati possumus." 

5. ea res, ‘this fact (i.e. the oppres- 
sive working of this law) suggests a deeper 
discussion on the origin of civil law’ 
‘ius,’ as the whole body of law, is here 
distinguished from the several enactments 
("leges"). ‘Altius disserere, a new 
phrase, but analogous to others: cp. 
C. 62, 4, and note on I. 32, 7. 

8. Vetustissimi mortalium, &c. The 

. subverterentur L. 

10. peterent Orsini. 

view here given by Tacitus appears to 

- be not so much drawn from older poets 

(as Ov. Met. 1, 89, &c.), as to be an echo 
of the Stoicism of his day. A similar 
picture is drawn by Seneca (Ep. 90), who 
explains and comments on Posidonius: 
‘Primi mortalium quique ex his geniti 
naturam incorruptam sequebantur, eun- 
dem habebant et ducem et legem, com- 
missi melioris arbitrio’: see also Sall. 
Cat.2. With this may be contrasted the 
Epicurean view, as set forth in Lucr. 5, 
1105-1160, and humorously touched in 
a few lines by Horace, * Quum prorepse- 
runt, &c. (Sat. 1. 3, 99, foll) On the 
whole subject of the supposed Law of 
Nature, only a reference-can be given to 
Maine, Ancient Law, ch. iii, &c. 

adhuo, ‘up to that time’; so used, 
without any reference to the present, in 
C. 42, 3; 4. 23, I, &c., also in Livy. 

Ico. neque. This answers.to ‘et... 
nihil (equivalent to * neque... quidquam ’) 

.. Vvetabantur': reward and punishment, 
laws to encourage or intimidate, were 
equally needless. | 

suopte ingenio. This is generally 
rendered ‘virtue was sought from (i.e. 
from a love for) its own qualities’: cp. 

*camporum suopte ingenio umentium’ 

. CH. 5. 

14, 3); also the general use of 
51 ingenium ' of inanimate things (6. 41, 1, 
&c.) and the verbal resemblance to 
Sallust (Introd. v. $ 97, 1). The diff- 
culty of the ablative has led Nipp. to 
adopt the other interpretation, * by men's 
owninstinct'; sucha personal subject bein g 
implied in * peterentur' (cp. ‘ ex se metus’ 

3. 38, 6). But such an abl. of the objec- 
tive cause may be justified by examples 
(cp. Introd. v. $ 30). 

“Je 

o 

422. P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM [A.U.C. 773. 

tur; et ubi nihil contra morem cuperent, nihil per metum veta- 
bantur. at postquam exui aequalitas et pro modestia ac pudore 3 
ambitio et vis incedebat, provenere dominationes multosque 
apud populos aeternum mansere. quidam statim, aut postquam 
5 regum pertaesum, leges maluerunt. hae primo rudibus hominum 4 
animis simplices erant; maximeque fama celebravit Cretensium, 
quas Minos, Spartanorum, quas Lycurgus, ac mox Atheniensi- 
bus quaesitiores iam et plures Solo perscripsit. nobis Romulus, 5 
ut libitum, imperitaverat: dein Numa religionibus et divino iure 
populum devinxit, repertaque quaedam a Tullo et Anco. sed 6 
praecipuus Servius Tullius sanctor legum fuit, quis etiam reges 

IO 

ch. 6. 

obtemperarent. 

27. Pulso Tarquinio adversum patrum factiones multa popu- 

3. incidebat prouenire: text L. 

2. exui &equalitas: cp. 1. 4, I, and, 
on the historical inf. here, Introd. v. $ 45 c. 
The sense is here no doubt that of the 
juridical maxim *omnes homines natura 
aequales sunt’ (on which see Maine, Anc. 
Law, ch. iv. p. 92, &c.). Mr. Dallin notes 
that there is probably a special reference 
to the community of goods which philoso- 
phers (as Sen. Ep. go, 38-40), no less 
than poets (as Verg. G. 1, 125, &c.), 
imagined in the golden age. J 

modestia, the opposite to ‘ ambitio," 
as ‘pudor’ to ‘vis’: cp. I. 11, I. 

3. dominationes, 'despotisms. The 
absolute monarchies of the old world 
are meant, rather than the ‘tyrannies’ 
proper of later Greek history. Some of 
them, as he says, survived; the Parthian 
of his own day being the representative 
of the old Eastern despotisms. He goes 
on to say that the first codes of law grew 
up either ‘at once’ (i. e. during the regal 
period, as he shows to have been the 
case at Rome), or after the expulsion of 
kings (as he appears to think was mostly 
the case with the early Greek codes). © 

4. &eternum : cp. I2. 28, 2; Introd. 
v. $ 5. 

6. Cretensium. These are placed first 
as supposed to be the earliest. For an 
account of them see Arist. Pol. 2. 10; 
Polyb. 6, 45-48. On the institutions of 
Lycurgus see especially Grote, Hist. 

7. 80 mox, &c. ‘Quas’ is again to 
be supplied in sense. Nipp. notes that 
a new turn is thus given to the sentence 

5. ae: hae B, ac Sirker, perhaps eae Halm. 

(cp. Introd. v. $ 91, 1) without ambiguity. 

In giving these instances, Tacitus appears 
still to follow Seneca (1.1. 6), who makes 
the need of law arise in all cases from 
degeneration of kingship into tyranny. 
Lucretius (1. |.) traces it to anarchy con- 
sequent on the mob-rule which had over- 
thrown the monarchies. 

8. Romulus. Other traditions (as 
Liv. 1. 8) and jurists (Pomp. Dig. 1. 2, 1) 
have imagined Romulus also as a law- 
giver. A collection of * leges regiae' was 
made, under the title of ‘ius Papirianum,’ 
at an uncertain date (Dion. Hal. 3. 36), 
on which Granius Flaccus wrote a com- 
mentary at the time of Julius Caesar (Dig. 
50. 16, 144). Both are lost. 

IO. & Tullo et Anco. A law of the 
former is referred to in 12. 8, 2; the 
latter is credited with democratic ten- 
dencies by Vergil (Aen. 6, 816), which 
may represent a tradition of popular laws 
ascribed to him, n" 

II. praecipuus ... sanctor: cp. ‘ prae- 
cipuus... auctor’ c. 55, 5. *Sanctor' 
(cp. Introd. v. § 69) is ám. elp. Servius is 
more properly the author of a constitution 
(cp. Liv. 1. 42, 4) than of laws. 

13. multa populus paravit. By 
* populus, Tacitus appears here to mean 
the modtra, or body politic in general, 
without distinguishing * populus' and 
*plebs, He would refer no doubt to 

. such enactments as those which estab- 

lished the republican constitution. and 
enlarged the senate (Liv. 2. 1), and to the 
‘leges Valeriae" of 245, B.C. 509 (Id. c. 

cepa tp€ECITS DM Eve Cn 

A. D. 20.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 26, 27. 423 

lus paravit tuendae libertatis et firmandae concordiae ; creatique 
decemviri et accitis quae usquam egregia compositae duodecim 

2 tabulae, finis aequi iuris. 

nam secutae leges etsi aliquando in 

maleficos ex delicto, saepius tamen dissensione ordinum et 
apiscendi inlicitos honores aut pellendi claros viros aliaque ob 5 

8), passed against such * patrum factiones" 
as desired to restore the kings. Perhaps 
he would not speak in the same unqualified 
p of the ‘lex sacrata’ instituting the tri- 
unate (Id. c. 33), or the ‘lex Publilia’ 
giving the election of plebeian magistrates 
to the tribes (Id. c. 57); though these 
may be regatded as carried against * pa- 
trum factiones, i.e. against an extreme 
section of the patricians.’ 
1. tuendae libertatis: cp. Int. v. 37 b. 
creati .. . decemviri: see Liv. 3. 
33- 57: cp. also Mommsen (Hist. B. ii. 
h. 2, who shows that the apparent 
dederis in this movement was to substitute 
for tribunician intercession a limitation of 
the consular powers by written law. A 
good general sketch of what is known to 
us of the contents of the Twelve Tables 
will be found in Arnold, Hist. vol. i. c. 14. 
In its general character, this, like the 
early codes of other nations, was probably 
a natural consequence of the diffusion of 
the art of writing, leading to a demand for 

such engraved tablets, published and ac- - 

cessible to all, in place of customary law, 
known only to privileged exponents. It 
was thus more probably grounded on 
existing usages than an eclectic code 
(‘accitis quae usquam egregia"); but 
some evidence for the tradition that its 
framers had studied contemporary Greek 
models may be found in its arrangement, 
apparently more systematic than that of 
other early codes: see Maine, Anc. Law, 
ch. i. 

3. finis aequi iuris, ‘the close of 
impartial law.’ That such is the meaning 
of Tacitus would appear from the follow- 

ing sentence, stating that the subsequent - 

course of legislation, except such as was 
directed to the repression of crime, aimed 
at personal or party objects, rather than 
the welfare of the whole state. It is easy 
to point to laws which cannot be justly 
So described; and "Tacitus may have 
really meant no more than that the 
enactment of this code was the last 
occasion on which all orders had united 
in a comprehensive attempt at legislation. 
He appears to know nothing of the dis- 
tinction implied in the narrative of Livy 

and asserted by Cicero (de Rep. 2. 37; 
63) ), that the two last Tables were ‘ ini- 
quissimae.’ The general Roman reve- 
rence for the code.is expressed by Cicero, 
and also by Livy, who calls the first ten 
Tables ‘fons omnis publici privatique 
iuris ’ (3. 34, 7). The division of periods 
is here obscure; for the conflict of pa- 
tricians and plebeians (cp. ‘ dissensione 
ordinum et apiscendi illicitos honores ') 
belongs to the century succeeding the 
decemvirate, while some of the remarks 
on the *secutae leges' appear to refer to 
later dates than that of the Gracchi, and 
* alia prava ’ is wholly indefinite. 

in maleficos. This might refer to 
old laws ‘de ambitu,’ to the ‘lex Fabia 
de plagiariis’ in 571, B.C. 183, the ‘lex 
Calpurnia de repetundis' in 605, B.C. 
149 (omitting later laws). 

4. ex delioto, *according as crimes 
arose’: cp. ‘ex re’ (1. 24, 1), &c. 

dissensione ordinum, causal abl.: 
cp. C. 26, 2, and references there. The 

* lex Canuleia de connubio ordinum' 

would be an instance, as also those 
opening the magistracies; the words ‘et 
apiscendi, &c. being best taken as ex- 
planatory of * dissensione ordinum." 

5. apiscendi inlicitos honores. This 
construction, so frequent with the gerun- 
dive (Introd. v. $ 37 d), is rare with the 
gerund. The laws referred to are those 
opening magistracies to plebeians, as the 
Licinian rogations (Liv. 6. 35-42),. ‘lex 
Publilia’ (1d. 8. 12), and * Ogulnia’ (Id. 
10. 6-9). The admiration of Tacitus for 
the later aristocracy leads him even to 
sympathize with the patriciate against the 
plebeian houses. Livy also at times 
speaks of the old plebeians as if they were 
a rabble (e. g. 3. 35, 5, &c.). 

. pellendi claros viros. The known 
instances of banishment by special decree 
or * privilegium’ belong to later date, and 
are more distinctly alluded to below; 
but there may be a loose and inaccurate 
reference to such cases as the banishment 
of Camillus, the retirement of Scipio 
Africanus, the ‘repulsa’ .of Aemilius 
Paullus, the popular attacks on Scipio 
Aemilianus, and to more appropriate 

Ot 

424 

prava per vim latae sunt. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C 773. 

plebis, nec minor largitor nomine senatus Drusus ; corrupti spe 

aut inlusi per intercessionem socii. 

mox civili omissum, quin multa et diversa sciscerentur, donec 
L. Sulla dictator abolitis vel conversis prioribus, cum plura 
addidisset, otium eius rei haud in longum paravit, statim turbidis 
Lepidi rogationibus, neque multo post tribunis reddita licentia 

quoquo vellent populum agitandi. 

instances, such as the exile of Metellus. 
Numidicus, nearer to the time of Sulla. 

I. hine, ‘hence ensued.’ This marks 
a new period, but one which was the out- 
come of previous party conflicts. In 
reality a long lull had succeeded the 
equalization of the orders, until the rise 
of new grievances demanding redress, 
which are here persistently ignored. 

Gracchi et Saturnini. It is natural 
to suppose both the Gracchi to be spoken 
of, but the rhetorical plural ‘Saturnini’ 
(cp. 1.10, 3) would suggest that ‘Gracchi’ 
also is to be similarly taken, and Gaius 
Gracchus alone intended. On the per- 
sons and their policy see Mommsen, 
Hist. B. iv. c. 2, 3,6. The injustice to 

Gracchus of thus ranking him on an. 

equality with one morally and intellect- 
ually so inferior to him as Saturninus has 
often been noted. Caesar indeed couples 
their names (B. C. 1. 7, 4), but only to 
speak of their violent deaths. 

2. Drusus. The description would 
suit either the rival of Gaius Gracchus or 
his more famous son. From the position 
of the name between that of Saturninus 
and the Italian war, the son would seem 
to be meant, but it is possible that Taci- 
tus has confused them. In either case, 
‘nec minor largitor? is an understate- 
ment: see Mommsen, Hist. B. iv. c. 3, 6. 

3. socii, the Italians, who * were bribed 
by hope of the franchise, and cheated by 
a veto.” The elder Drusus vetoed in 632, 
B.C. 122, the proposals of his colleague 
Gracchus. Those of the son were cut 
short by his death in 663, B.C. 91. 

bello...Italico...civili. The former 
Jasted from 663-666, B.c. 91-88, the 
latter, that of Marius and his successors 
against Sulla, from 666-672, B. c. 88-82. 

4. multa et diversa. The ‘ many and 

conflicting enactments’ of this period 

seem to be a vague description, both of 
the laws passed to meet the Italian out- 
break (‘lex Iulia, and ‘lex Plautia or 
Papiria de civitate,' 664, 665, B.C. go, 89), 

iamque non modo in com- 

and of the * leges Sulpiciae of 666, B.c. 
88, repealed by Sulla. Other laws, now 
forgotten, may have been passed by the 
Marian party during their rule. 

5. L. Sulla. On his dictatorship from 
672—675, B.C. 82-79, and his * leges Cor- 
neliae,’ see Mommsen (Hist. B. iv. ch. 10), 
who describes his ordinances as to the 
Quaestiones as ‘the first Roman code 
after the Twelve Tables, and the fist 
criminal code specially issued at all' 
(E. T. iv. p. 130). | 

(6. eius rei, i.e. a repose from fresh 
legislation. 

statim turbidis . . . rogationibus. 
Nipp. and Pfitzner seem rightly to take 

the abl. abs. as subject, with * statim '' (sc. 
‘secutis’) as predicate, explanatory of 

*non in longum': *the revolutionary 
proposals of Lepidus immediately ensu- 
ing, M. Lepidus, father of the triumvir, 
proposed, as consul in 676, B.C. 78, to 
rescind various laws of Sulla. His speech 
and the reply of Philippus to him are 
among the extant fragments of Sallust. 
On his insurrection and death see Momm- 
sen, Hist. B. v. c.1. 

7. neque multo post. In 684, B.C. 70, 
* M. Crassus et Cn. Pompeius consules 
tribuniciam potestatem restituerunt * (Liv. 
Epit. 97); i.e. they restored what Sulla 
had taken away. Cicero (de Legg. 3. 9) 
describes Sulla with approval, ‘qui tri- 
bunis plebis... iniuriae faciendae potes- 
tatem ademerit, auxilii ferendi reliquerit.' 
The speech of Lepidus in Sallust de- 
scribes the people as *agitandi inops’ 
(H. 1. 41, 11 D, 45 K, p. 141 G): cp. 
also Caes. B. C. 1. 5, 1; Vell. 2. 30. 
Mommsen shows, especially from the 
* plebiscitum de Thermensibus,’ passed in 
683, B.C. 71 (Inscr. Orell. 3673 ; C. I. L. 
i. 204), that the tribunes could consult 
the people, but only with consent of the 
senate, as the formula ‘de senatus senten- 
tia’ is added (B. iv. c. 10). 

8. in commune, ‘with general ap- 
plication.' 

hinc Gracchi et Saturnini turbatores 3 

ac ne bello quidem Italico, 4 

5 

A. D. 20.] LIBER III. CAP. 27, 28. 

425 

mune, sed in singulos homines latae quaestiones, et corruptissima 
re publica plurimae leges. 

28. Tum Cn. Pompeius tertium consul corrigendis moribus 
delectus, set gravior remediis quam delicta eranf suarumque 
legum auctor idem ac subversor, quae armis tuebatur, armis 5 

2amisit. exim continua per viginti annos discordia, non mos, 
non ius; deterrima quaeque inpune ac multa honesta exitio 
3 fuere. sexto demum consulatu Caesar Augustus, potentiae se- 

_ 4. et: so Bait, Nipp., Ritt., set Playgers. 

I. in singulos, i.e. * privilegia, The 
laws of the Twelve Tables *in privatos 
homines leges ferri noluerunt ' (Cic. Legg. 
3. 19, 44) ;. and the banishment of Cicero 
by the bill of Clodius in 696, B.C. 58, 
appears here to be especially alluded to. 

quaestiones, ‘ impeachments’ or ‘at- 
tainders. Ritter seems right in taking 
the expression as shortened for ‘leges 
latae, ut . . . quaestiones haberentur." 

corruptissima re publica, abl. abs., 
‘in the greatest decay of the republic 
most laws were made.' 

3. tertium consul. In 702, B.C. 52, 

Pompeius was created consul 'absens et - 

solus, quod nulli alii umquam contigit ' 
(Liv. Epit. B. 107). He was appointed 
*corrigendis moribus, i.e. to stop the 
violence prevalent at recent elections. 
He retained the proconsulate of Spain 
with this virtual dictatorship, which from 
the first of August became an ordinary 
consulship, by being shared with Q. Me- 
tellus Scipio. On the history of the year 
see Mommsen, Hist. B. v. ch. 8; Watson, 
Letters of Cicero, Introd. to Part ii. 1, and 
authorities there cited. 

4. gravior remediis, &c.; by his se- 
vere and retrospective laws ‘de vi’ and 
‘de ambitu'; by the trials held under 
them; by his military rule in Rome; by 
overawing the court on the trial of Milo 
by presence of a guard (see references 
above). Tacitus, who elsewhere (H. 2. 
38, 4) calls Pompeius ‘ occultior, non 
melior’ (sc. ‘ Mario et Sulla’), had formed 
a very different estimate of him from 
Livy (see below, 4. 34, 4), but appears to 
show no real perception of the magnitude 
of the evils which had then to be dealt 
with: see Merivale, ch. xiii. p. 46. 
Seneca (de Ben. 5. 16, 3) had said of 
Sulla; * patriam durioribus remediis quam 
pericula erant sanavit." 

5. auctor...subversor. In viola- 
tion of his own laws against riot and cor- 

ruption, he sent into court a written com- 
mendation in favour of Plancus Bursa, 
and prevented the conviction of his 
father-in-law Scipio. Also, in violation 
of his law * de iure magistratuum," which 
provided that candidates should canvass 
in person, and that five years should in- 
tervene between the tenure of office at 
Rome and the government of a province, 
he secured for himself for another five 
years the government of Spain, and was 
a party to the dispensation from personal 
canvass given'to Caesar. See the autho- 
rities referred to in Watson, 1.1. 

quae armis tuebatur. This refers 
not only to his military rule during his 
consulship (see above), but also to his 
position afterwards with * proconsulare 
imperium’ outside the gates of Rome 
(Caes. B. G. 6.1, 2), and to the troops 
held in his name by his legati in Spain 
(Id. B. C. 1. 85, 8; Vell. 2. 48, 1). 

6. per viginti annos, from Phar- 
salus to the'sixth consulship of Augustus, 
700-726, B.C. 48-28. It is indeed as- 
tonishing, that Tacitus should regard the 
dictatorship of Caesar as merely part of 
this general anarchy, and that in a revicw 
of Roman legislation his ‘ Leges Iuliae 
should be altogether ignored. For an 
account of them see Watson, Part iv. 
Appendix ix. That the triumvirate should 
be also thus dealt. with is not remarkable, 
owing to the general cancelling of its 
enactments by Augustus, as here men- 
tioned. On some of its usurpations, es- 
pecially that of the appointment of ma- 
gistrates, see Staatsr. ii. 732. 

non mos, non ius, sc. 'fuit, ‘there 
was neither morality (c. 26, 2) nor law.’ © 

7. inpune, sc. ‘ fuere : cp. I. 72, 3. 

8. sexto demum consulatu. It was 
in this year that the acts of the triumvi- 
rate were cancelled at a stroke (Dio, 53. 
2, 5), and the foundations laid of the 
principate, which formally begins with 

426 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 773. 

curus, quae triümviratu iusserat abolevit deditque iura, quis pace 

et principe uteremur. 

acriora ex eo vincla, inditi custodes et 4 

lege Papia Poppaea praemiis inducti, ut, si a privilegiis paren- 
tum cessaretur, velut parens omnium populus vacantia teneret. 
. sed altius penetrabant urbemque et Italiam et quod usquam 5 
civium corripuerant, multorumque excisi status. et terroromni- 6 
bus intentabatur, ni Tiberius statuendo remedio quinque con- 

3. uisi : ut si L. 

the following year (sée Introd. vi. p. 75); 
but the laws of which Tacitus speaks 
were mostly of later date. 

potentiae securus. The genitive with 
* securus! is poetical and post-Augustan, 
and usually denotes the evil or danger 
against which precaution is not taken. 
As an instance apposite to the use here, 
Mr. Dallin notes ' securus veniae ' in Luc. 
8, 7845 so here, * sure of his ascendency.' 

I. triumviratu, abl. of time during 
which (Introd. v. 26; Her. on H. r. 89). 

dedit iura, ‘established principles of 
law, or ‘imposed a constitution. The 
authority ‘dare leges! belonged regu- 
larly, in respect of *socii, to Romans 
possessed of ‘imperium’. (see Introd. vi. 
p. 87 ; Staatsr. ii. 888, &c.). *Iura dare’ 
is more strictly used of the magistrate 
administering the law by jurisdiction (cp. 
Verg. Aen. 8, 670); but, in the sense 
given above, Romulus is said * iura dare’ 
in Liv. r. 8, 1; and to do so is often 
spoken of by Vergil (e.g. Aen. 1, 293; 
3; 137; 5, 758) as a kingly function. It 
is perhaps here implied that Augustus 
enacted these laws, without senate or 
comitia, by a survival of his power * rei- 
publicae constituendae.' See Staatsr. ii. 745. 

quis pace et principe uteremur. 
The simplest explanation of these words 
would be to take ‘ quis’ as instrumental 
abl., and ‘ pace et principe’ as depending 
on *uteremur. But for ‘quis’ we should 
rather expect * per quas’; and ‘ legibus 
uti’ is a known phrase (e.g. Lucr. 5, 
1143). This would favour the interpre- 
tation of Nipp. and others, by which 
* quis’ depends on ‘ uteremur' and; pace et 
principe’ is an abl. abs., ‘ for us to enjoy 
in peace and under a prince.’ Such a 
construction, though usual for ‘ pace,’ is 
harsh for ‘ principe’; but this word, on 
either interpretation, is taken as thrown 
in bitterly and rapa mpogdoxiay, 

2. acriora ex eo vincla, ‘ thencefor- 
ward restraints were stricter’: cp. ‘ acria 
iudicia ' Cic. Rosc. Am. 5, 11. Allusion is 

probably intended generally to the stretch 
of arbitrary power (cp. ée rovrov povap- 
x«ta0a. avOis axpB&s fjptavro Dio, 52. I, 
1), and specially to the ‘lex Iulia de 
maritandis ordinibus" and any similar 
enactments before it, or to any edicts or 
decrees interfering with private life. 
inditi custodes, * watch was set over 
us’: cp. *castella rupibus indita" 4. 46, 
5; and ‘additus’ in 4. 67, 6; 6. 14, 3, 
&c. The delators are called * custodes 
legum by Tiberius (4. 30, 4), and were 
evidently already active before this lex 
assigned definite rewards to them. 

3. praemiis. Their amount may be 
estimated from the fact that Nero reduced 
them to one fourth (Suet. Ner. 10) ; which 
was also the informer's minimum under 
the law of * maiestas' (cp. 4. 20, 3). 

ut...teneret, in order that, if men 
neglected to‘earn the rewards of pater- 
nity, the state as the common parent 
might possess the unowned properties’: 
* vacantia' refers to some such word as 
‘bona,’ and=‘caduca.’ On these penal- 
ties and forfeitures see the Excursus at 
the end of this Book. 

5. altius penetrabant: cp. 2. 36, 2. 
Here it appears to mean that they forced 
their way further into private life than 
the law had contemplated, laying infor- 
mation (cp. ‘ corripio ' c. 49, 1; 2. 28, 4, 
&c.) against all citizens (to whom alone 
the law applied) throughout the empire. 

6. multorum . . excisi status, 
‘many had their position undermined.’ 
In some cases the possession of a sena- 
torial or equestrian census, in others the 
‘status’ of a freedman, &c., might de- 
pend on bequests that could be invali- 
dated. Cp. H.1. to, 2 ‘attritis opibus, 
lubrico statu,’ and the similar words 
above (c..26, 2) ‘cum omnis domus... 
subverteretur'; also Plin. Pan. 48 * nulla 
iam testamenta secura, nullius status 
certus." 

terror, &c., ‘dread was hanging over 
all’; cp. * metum intentabat ' I5. 54, 6. 

A.D. 20.] LIBER Ill. 

CAP. 28, 29. 

427 

sularium, quinque e praetoriis, totidem e cetero senatu sorte 
duxisset, apud quos exsoluti plerique legis nexus modicum in 

praesens levamentum fuere. 

29. Per idem tempus Neronem e liberis Germanici, iam in- 
gressum iuventam, commendavit patribus, utque munere capes- 
sendi vigintiviratus solveretur et quinquennio maturius quam 
per leges quaesturam peteret, non sine inrisu audientium postu- 

2 lavit. 
Augusto, 
preces occulti inluderent : 

praetendebat sibi atque fratri decreta eadem petente 
sed neque tum fuisse dubitaverim, qui eius modi 
ac tamen initia fastigii Caesaribus 

erant magisque in oculis vetus mos, et privignis cum vitrico 

8 levior necessitudo quam avo adversum nepotem. 

additur ponti- 

ficatus et quo primum die forum ingressus est congiarium plebi 

IO. fastidii : 

2. exsoluti...nexus: cp. 'vinclis 
exsolutis ' (c. 33, 4); ‘enodandos... 
iuris laqueos’ (Gell. 13. IO, I); ‘qui 
iuris nodos . . . solvat' (Juv. 8, 50); 
*jurisdictionis retia et... nodos resol- 
ventes" (Cod. 4. 29, 23, pr). Walther 
and Mr. Dallin take ‘nexus’ in the strict 
legal sense (==‘ obligations’); but these 
commissioners appear not so much to 
have released men from obligations con- 
tracted, as to have ‘loosed many snares’ 
woven out of the law by the subtlety of 
informers; declaring such cases not to 
come within its intention. This would 
be, as is here stated, a partial and tem- 
porary relief, not amounting to any 
alteration of the law itself. 

4. Neronem. On .his age, &c., see 
Introd. ix. note 11. 

6. vigintiviratus. On the separate 
magistracies thus collectively designated 
see Introd. vi. p. 91; on the qualifica- 
tions for the candidates for the quaestor- 
ship, Id..p. 95; Staatsr. i. 544. 

7. per leges. The old ‘lex Villia 
Annalis’ of 574, B.c. 180 (Liv. 40. 44, 
1), had been modified, probably by Au- 
gustus. Tiberius, who is here stated to 
have had only the same privilege as that 
which he requests, was quaestor in his 
nineteenth year (Vell. 2. 94, 1). This 
confirnis the view that the ‘twenty-fourth 
or twenty-fifth year was at this time the 
earliest legal or customary age for the 
quacstorship. 

non sine inrisu; a request which 
could not be refused was a mockery. 

text B. 

8. praetendebat ; so, with inf., 6. 18, 
4: cp. 59, 6. The dispensing decrees 
passed for Tiberius and Drusus in 730, 
735, B.C. 24, 19, aré mentioned in Dio, 
53. 28, 3; 54. 10, 4. Germanicus ap- 
pears to have had a similar privilege, and 
to have held the consulship immediately 
after the quaestorship (Suet. Cal. 1). 

Io. ac tamen, i.e. yet such a request 
was not then so ludicrous, for a refusal 
was not so out of the question. "Three 
reasons are given for this difference. 

initia fastigii Caesaribus erant, 
‘the supremacy of the Caesars was but 
beginning ’: cp. e impera- 
toris fastigio! 14. 47, 1; also c. 56,2; 
73,3; 6. 32, 1, &c. 

12. levior necessitudo, ‘ the tie of con- 
nexion was slighter.' Thence it might be 
supposed that Augustus cared less about 
the request than Tiberius. For * adver- 
sus, ‘in relation to,’ cp. 15. 48, 8, &c. 

pontificatus. Inscriptions show that 
Tacitus confuses the priestly offices givea 
to Nero, with those of his brother Drusus. 
See Introd. ix. notes I1, 12. 

13. quo primum die, &c. This ‘ dies 
tirocinii’ (Suet. Tib. 54) is shown by a 
fragmentary kalendar to have been June 
7: ‘vii Idus Iun. Nero to[gam virilem] 
sumpsit cong. d. (C. I. L. xiv. 244, 
Henzen 6443). These *congiaria, for- 
merly gifts of oil, wine, &c. (Liv. 25. 2, 
8; Pl. N. H. 14. 14, 17, 96) were now 
given in money: see Mon. Anc. iii. 7-21; 
also 2. 42, 1; I2. 41, 3; Suet. Ner. 7; 
and a full account in Marquardt, ii. 136. 

5 

IO 

428 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

admodum laetae, quod Germanici stirpem iam puberem aspicie- 
bat. auctum dehinc gaudium nuptiis Neronis et Iuliae Drusi 4 
filiae. utque haec secundo rumore, ita adversis animis accep- 5 
tum, quod filio Claudii socer Seianus destinaretur.  polluisse 6 
nobilitatem familiae videbatur suspectumque iam nimiae spei 
Seianum ultra extulisse. 

30. Fine anni concessere vita insignes viri L. Volusius et 
Sallustius Crispus. Volusio vetus familia neque tamen prae- 2 
turam egressa: ipse consulatum intulit, censoria etiam potestate 
legendis equitum decuriis functus, opumque, quis domus illa 
inmensum viguit, primus adcumulator. Crispum equestri ortum 3 
loco C. Sallustius, rerum Romanarum florentissimus auctor, 

[A. U. C. 773. 

5. uidebantur: so Pfitzn., text J. F. Gron. 6. ultro Alciatus. 

2. Iulias Drusi filiae: see Introd. 
ix. note 34. On an earlier betrothal of 
Nero to the daughter of Creticus Silanus 
see 2. 43, 3- | 

3. haeo, sc. * accepta ' : for such ellipses 
cp. Gudeman on Dial. 7, 4. 

secundo rumore, ‘with approba- 
tion.’ The expression had been used of 
cheering by Vergil (Aen. 8, 90), who, as 
also Horace (Epp. 1. 10, 9), appears to 
have followed an old formula, ‘ populi 
rumore secundo, appearing in Ennius 
(Ann. 260, Vahl.): cp. * adverso rumore" 
14. 11, 4, &c. 

4. fllio Claudii. Suetonius, speaking 
of the family of Claudius (Cl. 27), says, 
* Drusum ...impuberem amisit...cui 
et ante paucos dies filiam Seiani despon- 
disset. It is implied in 4. 7, 3, perhaps 
in 4. 39, 4, that the boy was still at that 
time alive; also the only known daughter 
of Seianus is called a mere child eleven 
years later (5. 9, 2), and must at this 
time have been only just born. Probably 
* destinare' here means only an expression 
of intention; and the actual betrothal 
was some years later. 

5. suspectum ; so with genit. in c. 60, 
2, &c., and Liv. 24. 9, Io. 

6. ultra extulisse, *to have raised 

even beyond his hopes.’ Nipp. thinks 

this improbable and ‘ultra,’ taken in any 
other way, pleonastic, and reads ‘ ultro.’ 

9. consulatum. The Fasti (see Klein; 
C. I. L. i, p. 546) appear to make him 
one of the coss. suff. of 742, B.C. 12. 
Nipp. cites Borghesi and other authori- 
ties, who show from coins and inscrip- 
tions that he was proconsul of Africa in 

748, B.C. 6, legatus of Syria in 758, 
A.D. 5, and one of the 'septemviri -epu- 
lones.' On his son and grandson, also con-" 
sulars, cp. I2. 22, 2, &c.; 13. 25, I, &c. 
censoria etiam potestate. Momm- 
sen (Staatsr. i. 359, 3) notes that inscrip- 
tions of freedmen (C. I. L. vi. 1883 a) 
flatter Volusius by styling him censor. 

Io. legendis equitum decuriis. The 
* decuriae' of persons ofequestrian census, 
selected for judicial purposes (see Introd. 
vii. p. 102) are to be distinguished from 
the ‘centuriae’ and * turmae" (see on 2. 
83, 5) of ‘equites equo publico, the 
*equites Romani' properly. Suetonius 
(Aug. 37) ascribes to Augustus tbe in- 
stitution of a * triumviratus recognoscendi 
turmas equitum,' which is apparently the 
censorial function exercised by Volusius, 
and more than once speaks of the re- 
vision of ‘decuriae’ as a function dis- 
charged by the princeps personally (Aug. 
32; Tib. 41; cp. Pl. N. H. 33. 1, 30). 
If, as Mommsen argues (Staatsr. iii. 536), 
the *decuriae' were selected from the 
*equites equo publico, a confusion of 
* turmae! and ‘ decuriae’ is very probable. 

II. inmensum, adv., asc. 52, I ; 4. 27, 
3, &c. (in Ann. from Sall. and poets). 
The wealth of his son Volusius is men- 
tioned in 14. 56, à, as the result of par- 
simony. : 

adcumulator, &r. cip. 

Crispum. Horace (Od. 2. 2, 2) ad- 
dresses him as *inimice lamnae.. . nisi 
temperato splendeat usu.’ Nipp. notes an 
epigram of Krinagoras addressed to him. 

12. C. Ballustius. The historian died 
in 720, B.C. 34. Though Tacitus men- 

A. D. 20.] LIBER Ill. 

4sororis nepotem in nomen adscivit. 

CAP. 29-31. 429 

atque ille, quamquam 

prompto ad capessendos honores aditu, Maecenatem aemulatus 
sine dignitate senatoria multos triumphalium consulariumque 
potentia anteiit, diversus a veterum instituto per cultum et mun- 

5 ditias copiaque et affluentia luxu propior. 

animi ingentibus negotiis par, eo acrior, quo somnum et inertiam 

6 magis ostentabat. 

igitur incolumi Maecenate proximu$, mox 

praecipuus cui secreta imperatorum inniterentur et interficiendi 
Postumi Agrippae conscius, aetate provecta speciem magis in 

7 amicitia principis quam vim tenuit. 

idque et Maecenati acci- 

derat, fato potentiae raro sempiternae, an satias capit aut illos, 
cum omnia tribuerunt, aut hos, cum iam nihil reliquum est 

quod cupiant. 

31. Sequitur Tiberi quartus, Drusi secundus consulatus, 

5. afluentia: so Halm, text B, and Med. ii. in 16. 18, 4. The verb is almost always 

adfluo. © 
tions him here only, he has throughout 
shown his appreciation of him by frequent 
imitation : see Introd. v. § 97, I. 
florentissimus. This term is con- 
stantly used by Tacitus of famous and 
distinguished persons, e. g. 4. 68, 4; 71, 
7; 11. 37,4; 16. 33, 1, &c. 
I. &dscivit, ‘adopted’: 
2. 60, 3, &c. 
4. diversus :. cp. ‘diversus a maiorum 
institutis 2. 2, 5. 
cultum et munditias; nearly syno- 

cp. I. 37, 5; 

nyms, as are also ‘copia et affluentia '. 

(16. 18, 4), * somnum et inertiam.' 

5. luxu propior, ' inclined to luxury’: 
cp. ‘ famae propior’ (Agr. 6, 4). Tacitus 
uses this form of the dative in c. 33, 3; 
34, 95; 1. fo, 1; 6. 33, 6; 12. 62, 2; r5. 
48, 4; H. 2. 71, 2; but does not seem 
to be constant to it in any word (e. g. 
* ]uxui 14. 15, 3). Gellius (4. 16) treats 
the question between the forms in -‘u’ 
and -' ui ' as open, giving instances of the 
former not only from Lucilius and Vergil, 
but from Caesar; but, on the strength of 
Priscian s dictum (7, § 88), that such 
forms are poetical, some editors (as Ritter 
1864) correct those in prose. 

suberat tamen vigor, &c. The same 
contrast of outward effeminacy and latent 
energy is noted in Maecenas : cp. Vell. 2. 
88, 2 * ubi res vigiliam exigeret, sane ex- 
somnis, providens atque agendi sciens; 
simul vero aliquid ex negotiis remitti 
posset, otio et mollitiis paene ultra femi- 
nam fluens. 

". mox. The death of Maecenas took 
placé in 746, B. c. 8 (Dio, 55. 7, 1). His 
retirement from public affairs, alluded to 

‘below and in 14. 53, 3 (cp. Suet. Aug. 

66; Dio, 54. 19, 6), had taken’ place 
eight years earlier. 

8. interficiendi . 
I. 6,6; 23. 40, 3 
' 11. fato, apparently a causal ablative ; 
another alternative cause being suggested 
by ‘an satias capit! (cp. *pavore an... 
retinens" 2. 38, 9): ‘ from the fatality by 
which influence is rarely permanent, or 
because, &c. ‘Fatum’ is often with 
Tacitus assumed as a cause of what he 
cannot explain (see Introd. iv. p. 31): 
here, as in t3. 12, 2, the alternative of 
some traceable cause is added. 

satias : cp. c. 54, 9; 6. 38, 1; 16. 16, 1; 
chiefly archaic and post-classical, and not 
in other works of Tacitus. 

illos... hos, the one... the other’; 
i.e. the giver and the receiver, implied in 
the sense: cp. the sentiment in I4. 54, t. 

. . Agrippae: cp. 

"The mere gradual decay of friendship and 
influence here noted is widely different 

from the daily peril of imminent ruin, 
causing the ' miserae magnaeque pallor 
amicitiae ' of Domitian's courtiers (Juv. 

4, 74) 

see 2. 53, I; I. 55, I. Dio (57. 20, 1) 
represents people as already saying that 

it was ominous to be consul with Tibe-: 

rius, a foreboding which the sequel of 
this and of his fifth consulship in 784, 

suberat tamen vigor 5 

14. Tiberi quartus Drusi secundus: 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 774. 

430 

patris atque filii collegio insignis. nam triennio ante Germanici 
cum Tiberio idem honor neque patruo laetus neque natura tam 
conexus fuerat. eius anni principio Tiberius quasi firmandae 2 
valetudini in Campaniam concessit, longam et continuam ab- 
5 sentiam paulatim meditans, sive ut amoto patre Drusus munia 
consulatus solus impleret. ac forte parva res magnum ad cer- 8 
tamen progressa praebuit iuveni materiem apiscendi favoris. 
Domitius Corbulo praetura functus de L. Sulla nobili iuvene 4 
questus est apud senatum, quod sibi inter spectacula gladia- . 
10 torum loco non decessisset. pro Corbulone aetas, patrius mos, 5 
studia seniorum erant : contra Mamercus Scaurus et L. Arruntius 
aliique Sullae propinqui nitebantur. certabantque orationibus et 6 
memorabantur exempla maiorum, qui iuventutis inreverentiam 

I. biennio: so Baiter, text Nipp. 

A. D. 31, bore out; it being a strange co- 
incidence that, of all his colleagues, four 
(Quintilius Varus, Cn. Piso, Drusus, and 
Seianus) were known, and the fifth (Ger- 
manicus) popularly believed, to have died 
violent deaths. On the use of ‘colle- 
gium ' cp. c. 16, 7. 

I. triennio. The MS. *biennio' 
has been defended as possibly meant to 
express an interval of two clear years. A 
similar difficulty (or perhaps error of the 

writer) is noticed on 12. 25, 3. Ritter here : 

- thinks the whole sentence ‘nam .. . fuerat" 
an interpolation. ! 

|. 2. neque natura tam conexus, ‘nor 
so close an association in respect of birth.’ 
The expression is inexact through brevity ; 
.the meaning being that the association in 
distinction was not then that of persons 
of so near a natural relationship. For 
this sense of ‘natura,’ compare * natura 
pater’ (Ter. Ad. 1. 2, 46; 5. 7, 4). The 
word is here thrown in, because Ger- 
manicus also was a son, but by adop- 
tion. 

4. in Campaniam. He addresses 
the senate by letter during his absence 
(c. 32, 1; 47, 1; 52, 43 56, 1; 59, 2), 
which lasted till the next year (c. 64, 1). 
His final departure was four years after 
that time (4. 57, 1). 

5. meditans, ‘practising’ (= pedre- 
Trav); as in the expressions * meditari 
proelia, &c. (Verg. and Juv.). 

8. Domitius Corbulo. It is hardly 
possible, in spite of Wolffgram's argu- 
ments (Philol. xliv. 371-376), to suppose 
that this person, who had already been 

—À o —— 0 MÀ —Á— 

‘praetor,’ and would seem to have been 
somewhat elderly, can be the famous 
general (cp. 11, 18, &c.) who perished 
still in the vigour of life forty-six years 
later, but he may well have been his father. 
It has been thought (see Staatsr. i. 1078, 
n. 2) that. the two have been confused ; 
as Dio (59. 15, 3; 60. 17, 2) says that 
the attacks of Corbulo on the contractors 
continued till the time of Gaius, who 
eagerly employed his services, and re- 
warded him with the consulship in 792, 

A.D. 39; but that Claudius afterwards 

refunded, and forced him to refund, the 
sums extorted. The above consulship, 
the only one recorded in the family, must 
be that of the son, and probably the 
account in § 7 and in Dio, here appar- 
ently related out of place, really belongs 
to him also. 

L. Sulla. Nipp. follows Borghesi in 
making him great grandson of the P. 
Sulla, nephew of the dictator, whom 
Cicero defended, and doubts his identity 
with the consul of 786, a. D. 33 (6.15, 1). 

iuvene. We should infer that he was 
not a senator. It is- probable, as sug- 
gested by Lipsius, that the reservation 
of seats for senators at all ‘ spéctacula,’ 
enjoined by Augustus (Suet. ‘Aug. 47), 
may have applied only outside Rome. 
At the circus they had not reserved seats 
till the time of Claudius (Suet. Cl. 21). 

I2. orationibus, ‘in set speeches,’ 
above the mark for this * parva res, — 

13. exempla maiorum: cp. Cic. de 
Sen. 18, 63; and the rule (De Inv. 1. 30, 
48) * ut maioribus natu adsurgatur' ; also 

A. D. 21.] LIBER III. CAP. 31, 32. 431 

gravibus decretis notavissent, donec Drusus apta temperandis 
animis disseruit ; et satisfactum Corbuloni per Mamercum, qui 
patruus simul ac vitricus Sullae et oratorum ea aetate uberrimus 

7 erat. idem Corbulo plurima per Italiam itinera fraude mancipum 
et incuria magistratuum interrupta et inpervia clamitando, exsecu- 5 
tionem eius negotii libens suscepit ; quod haud perinde publice 
usui habitum quam exitiosum multis, quorum in pecuniam atque 
famam damnationibus et hasta saeviebat. 

32. Neque multo post missis ad senatum litteris Tiberius 
motam rursum Africam incursu Tacfarinatis docuit, iudicioque 
patrum deligendum pro consule gnarum militiae, corpore vali- 

2 dum et bello suffecturum. quod initium Sex. Pompeius agitandi 

3. ea ins. Ferretti. 

Juv. 13, 55, where several other illustra- . 

tions are collected by Prof. Mayor. 

inreverentiam, used absolutely only 
here and in 13. 26, 3; H. 3. 51, 1. Pliny 
(Epp. 6. 2, 5) has ' inreverentia studi- 
orum periculorumque.' 

3. patruus simul ac vitricus. Scau- 
rus would thus appear, after having 
divorced Lepida (cp. c. 23, 3), to have 
married the widow of L. Sulla (cos. 749, 
B.C. 5), who must have been his half- 
brother on the mother's side, and also 
father of this Sulla. This wife of Scaurus 
may probably be the Sextia of 6. 29. 7. 
He was a tragedian as well as an orator 
(6. 29. 4). 

4- mancipum, ‘ contractors,’ the ‘re- 
demptores ' of Hyginus, &c. : cp. * man- 
cipi viae Sue Inscr. Orell. 3221, 
C. I. L. vi. 8468 ; 

5. magistratuum, the ‘ curatores via- 
rum, to whom these contractors were 
responsible (Staatsr. ii. 107). These are 
distinct from the board of four forming 
part of the vigintivirate (Introd. vi. p. 91), 

whose sphere of duties lay within the © 

city. The chief Italian roads appear 
each to have had their own curator ; the 
office, in respect of the greater roads, 
being one of much dignity (Pl. Ep. 5. 14). 
It had existed under the Republic (Cic. 
Att. I. I, 2, &c.), but appears to have 
been so far reorganized by Augustus as 
to be looked upon as his institution 
(Suet. Aug. 37). 

inpervia; so 'iter inpervium ' Quint. 
12. II, 11; ' impervius amnis' Ov. Met. 
9, I 

exsecutionem, ‘judicial prosecution’: 

cp. ‘ exsecutio delicti’ Dig. 47. 1, 1, &c., 
and a frequent similar meaning of ' ex- 
sequi. Nipp. takes it to mean *juris- 
diction ' (see his note on 15. 25, 5); but 
Corbulo seems rather to have been the 
accuser than the judge. 

6. publice usui, ‘for the public ad- 
vantage.’ On the dative cf. Introd. v. 

§ 23. | 

7. habitum, Cp. 4- 
6, 1, &c 

multis, i.e. the ‘curatores’ and ‘ man- 
cipes." 

8. damnationibus et hasta, * convic- 
tions and auctions,'i e. of the property 
of those who did not make good their 
defalcations. 

9. missis...litteris. The princeps 
often consulted the senate in writing; the 
deliverer of such missives being usually 
one. of the * quaestores Caesaris ' (cp. 16. 
27, 2; Suet. Aug. 65; Ner. 15; Lit. 6, 
&c.). 

10. motam rursum Africam: see c. 
20, I. 

iudicio patrum, i. e. by selection, not 
bylot. The princeps sometimes directly 
prohibits a person from the lot for a pro- 
vince (as 6. 40, 3); usually the decision 
is left to the senate, or jointly arranged : 
cp. c. 35, 1, and Henzen 6450, recording 
a proconsul sent to Cyprus * extra sortem 
auctoritate Aug. Caesaris et S. C.’ 

12. bello suffecturum, ‘ who would be 

‘was managed’: 

competent for war’; so ‘ sufficere’ with — 

dat. c. 72,4; 16.5, 1; H. 4. 8,2; ps 
Caes., &c. 
Sextus Pompeius : c. 11,2; 1.7, 3 

tn 

IO 

«. 264, A.D. IF. 

432 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 774- 

adversus Marcum Lepidum odii nanctus, ut socordem, inopem 
et maioribus suis dedecorum eoque etiam Asiae sorte depellen- 
dum incusavit, adverso senatu, qui Lepidum mitem magis quam 
ignavum, paternas ei angustias, et nobilitatem sine probro actam 

honori quam ignominiae habendam ducebat. 

igitur missus in 8 

Asiam, et de Africa decretum ut Caesar legeret cui mandanda 

foret. 

33. Inter quae Severus Caecina censuit ne quem magistratum, 
cui provincia obvenisset, uxor comitaretur, multum ante repetito 
concordem sibi coniugem et sex partus enixam, seque quae in 
publicum statueret domi servavisse, cohibita intra Italiam, quam- 
quam ipse pluris per provincias quadraginta stipendia exple- 

I. Marcum Lepidum. The praeno- 
men of this person is here alone given in 
full, the praenomen * Manius! in full in 
c. 22, 2. The Fasti give M. Lepidus as 
consul in 759, A.D. 6; M'. Lepidus in 
Elsewhere in this MS. the 
praenomen of Lepidus is constantly read 
as M.; but two distinct persons are thus 
named. The one is sent this year to 
Asia, the other is one of the two selected 
for Africa (c. 35, 1), and becomes pro: 
consul of Asia five years later (4. 56, 3). 
One is of moderate ability and narrow 
means (as here and c. 72, 3; 2. 48, 1), 
the other one of the foremost men of the 
age (1. 13, 2, &c.). Asthe Fasti recog- 
nize as consulars of this time not two 
Marci Lepidi, but Marcus and Manius, 
the praenomen in the MS. must in some 
places be altered. It appears on the 
whole best to suppose the one mentioned 
here and in, c. 72, 3; 2. 48, 1, clearly 
also in 6. 40, 4, to be. Marcus; and that 
Manius Lepidus is the distinguished sena- 
tor (I. 13, 2), praised alike for his inde- 
pendence and discretion (4. 20, 4; 6. 27, 
4), the defender of Cn. Piso (c. 1r, 2) 
and his sister Lepida (c. 22, 2). who in- 
terposed on behalf of Clutorius Priscus 
(c. 50, 1), was considered capable of ser- 
vice in Africa (c. 35, 1), and subsequently 
governed Asia (4. 56, 3). Consequently 
in all these places M. is altered to M’. 

2. dedecorum, only here and in 12. 
47, 5; Plaut. Bacch. 5. 3, 74 (where the 
reading is questioned). ' 

etiam Asiae sorte, i. e. even from the 
lot for a peaceful province. Asia and 
Africa were given annually by lot to the 
two senior consulars who had not yet 
held either. As Africa was now to be 

' Caes. B. C. 1. 6, 5, &c. 

given ‘ extra sortem, there were really no 
lots to be drawn, and Lepidus would 
have Asia as a matter of course. Five 
consulars junior to M. Lepidus had 
already held Asia or Africa : see Introd. 
vii. pp. 113, 114, and the explanation there 
suggested. Nipp. notes a coin of Co- 
tiaeum recording his proconsulate. 

4. paternas... angustias: cp. 1. 75, 
5. where ‘esse,’ here supplied, is expressed. 
Borghesi notes that his father and grand- 
father (see on 72, 3) had been proscribed, 
and though their lives were spared, had 
probably suffered in property. 

5. honori quam ignominiae. On the 
omission of ' potius ' cp. c. 17, 7, and on 
the dative, Introd. v. § 23. 

habendam ducebat. From this * ha- 
bebat ’ is supplied with * Lepidum,' &c. 

8. Inter quae. It is shown, from c. 
34, I, that this was an ‘egressio rela- 
tionis' : see on 2. 33, 2; 37, 3; 38, 3. 

Severus Caecina : cp. c. 18, 3. 

9. obvenisset, sc. ‘sorte,’ as 4. 56, 3; 

The proposal is 
thus limited to senatorial provinces; it 
being no function of the senate to make 
rules for those of Caesar. 
. multum ante repetito, ‘recounting 
in a long preamble.” On the abl. see 
Introd. v. $ 31a; on the use of ‘ repetere, 
C. 24, 2. 

IO. concordem, not elsewhere with 
dat. ; but cp. * discors' c. 42, 3. 

in publicum, ‘for the community’; 
cp. the contrast to ‘domi’ in c. 70, 4. 

11, cohibita — cum cohibuisset ': cp. 
Introd. v. § 31c. 

I2. quadraginta, apparently a round 
number for 41: cp. I. 64, 6; a. 6, I. 

A. D. 21.] 

2 visset. 

LIBER III. CAP. 32-34. 

433 

haud enim frustra placitum olim ne feminae in socios 

aut gentes externas traherentur: inesse mulierum comitatui 
quae pacem luxu, bellum formidine morentur et Romanum 

8 agmen ad similitudinem barbari incessus convertant. 
becillum tantum et inparem laboribus sexum, sed si licentia 5 

non in- 

adsit, saevum, ambitiosum, potestatis avidum; incedere inter 
milites, habere ad manum centuriones ; praesedisse nuper femi- 

4 nam exercitio cohortium, decursu legionum. 

cogitarent ipsi, 

quotiens repetundarum aliqui arguerentur, plura uxoribus ob- 
lectari ; his statim adhaerescere deterrimum quemque provinci- 
alium, ab his negotia suscipi, transigi ; duorum egressus coli, 
duo esse praetoria, pervicacibus magis et inpotentibus mulierum 
iussis, quae Oppiis quondam aliisque legibus constrictae, nunc 
vinclis exsolutis domos, fora, iam et exercitus regerent. 

84. Paucorum haec adsensu audita: plures obturbabant, ne- 

I. frustra: cp. c. I. 30, 3. 

placitum olim. The old rule (cp. 
M. Sen. Controv. 9. 25, 251), though it 
had such signal exceptions as Livia, 
Agrippina, Plancina, &c., was still on 
the whole. prevalent (cp. Suet. Aug. 24). 
Ulpian (Dig. 1. 16, 4, 3), while stating 
that the wife might go with her husbaud 
to a province, thinks he would be better 
without her, and mentions the decree (see 
on 4. 20,6) making him responsible for her 
conduct. The wife of Pilate was with him 
(Matt. 27, 19), Drusilla with Felix (Acts 
24, 24), Calpurnia with Pliny (Epp. 10. 
120, 121). 

3. pacem, ‘peaceful duties’: cp. ‘ pa- 
cis impedimentum c. 34, 3. 

4. barbari incessus, ' the progress of 

a barbaric king,’ with his train of women, 
servants, &c. 

6. ambitiosum, 
* ambitiose' c. 13, 2, &c. | 

7. ad manum, ‘at their beck.’ 
| muper: cp. 2. 55, 5: ‘ praesedisse' is 
somewhat an exaggeration. Caecina, 
though here, as in c. 18, 3, speaking as 
an enemy of the enemies of Germanicus, 
and referring directly to Plancina, may 
have meant also to glance at Agrippina 
(1. 69, 3). On the dative ' decursu ' cp. 
C. 30, 4. 

9. plura uxoribus obiectari. Prior 
to this date, no other instance but that of 

Plancina seems to be known tous. After- | 

wards the case of Sosia (4. 19, 4) may be 
cited, also those of Paxaea (6. 39, 1; Dio, 

VOL. I. 

* intriguing': cp. 

Ff 

Lan] 

58. 24, 3), of Cornelia, wife of Calvisius . 

Sabinus /Dio, 59. 18, 4), and of the wife 
of Classicus (Pl. Epp. 3. 9. 19). Juvenal 
also (8, 128) pictures the governor's wife 
hovering as a harpy over provincial 
towns. 

I1.. negotia, especially (as Nipp. notes) 
such transactions as the prosecutor on a 
charge of ‘ repetundae ' would cite. 

duorum egressus, &c., ‘there were 
two to be escorted to public places, two 
centres of government.’ * Praetorium ' is 
the regular term for the governor's resi- 
dence (as in N. T. &c.), and hence used 

of other mansions: see Prof. Mayor on - 

Juv. 1, 75. Here it is explained by the 

* mulierum iussa, more persistent and : 

imperjous than those of their husbands. 

13. Oppiis: the plural, here and in c. 34, 
6, is probably to be taken as rhetorical 
(cp. r. 10, 3). The ‘lex Oppia,’ restrain- 
ing the ornaments, dress, and vehicles of 
women, was passed by a tribune ‘in 
medio ardore Punici belli’ in 539, B.C. 
215, and was repealed twenty years later, 
in spite of the vehement protest of Cato, 
represented in a speech by Livy (34. 1-8) : 
see also Val. Max. 9. 1, 3. 

alis; as for instance the ‘lex Vo- 
conia, limiting the right of women to 
inherit, a law which though unrepealed 
appears to have been very inoperative : 
see Mr. Roby, D. of Ant. s. v. 

15. obturbabant, ‘ were interrupting’ 
(cp. 6. 24, 4), with such remarks as follow. 
neque relatum : see e. 33, I. Without 

5 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 774. 

434 

que relatum de negotio neque Caecinam dignum tantae rei 
censorem. mox Valerius Messalinus, cui parens Messalla inerat- 3 
que imago paternae facundiae, respondit multa duritiae veterum 
tn melius et laetius mutata; neque enim, ut olim, obsideri 
$ urbem bellis aut provincias hostilis esse. et pauca feminarum 3 
necessitatibus concedi, quae ne coniugum quidem penates, adeo 
Socios non onerent; cetera promisca cum marito, nec ullum in 
eo pacis iapedimen tum: bella plane accinctis obeunda: sed 4 
revertentibus post laborem quod honestius quam uxorium leva- 
10 mentum ? at quasdam in ambitionem aut avaritiam prolapsas. 5 
quid? ipsorum magistratuum nonne plerosque variis libidinibus 

3. a duritie Mur., e duritie Ern. 
adsidere Haase. 

‘relatio’ no vote could be taken: cp. 
15. 22, 1 

2. censorem, used invidiously; the 
only censorial functions being now vested 
in Caesar. Tiberius himself says (2. 33, 
6) ‘non id tempus censurae.’ 

Valerius Messalinus: see on I. 8, 5. 

Messalla. M. Valerius M. f. M. n. Mes- 
salla Corvinus, the celebrated orator and 
friend of Horace, Ovid, and Tibullus, 
was born in 695, B.C. 59, was consul with 

Caesar in the year of Actium, and died . 

about 761, A. D. 8. On his ‘ praefectura 
urbis ’ see 6. 11, 5. 

3. multe duritiae, partitive gen. like 
* multa laudis et artium' (c. 55,6). Be- 
roald. had printed 'duritie whence the 
attempts to emend by insertion of a prepo- 
sition. We have a genitive depending on 
a genitive, as * veterum ' here, in 11. 33, 
2, &c. 

4. in melius... mutata. Here and 
in 14. 43, I (* deterius mutari") ‘in’ has 
been generally inserted by editors, but 
*peius mutata res est’ stands in Liv. r. 
47, 3, and some, as Pfitzner, would retain 
here the MS. text, as analogous to * bene 
mutari! in c. 44, 3. Here, however, the 
result of the change seems to be distinctly 
expressed, and the preposition to be re- 
quired, as in c. 54, 9, &c. 

obsideri...bellis, ‘had war atitsgates.' 
The alternative corrections derive support 
from the frequent confusion of ‘ab’ and 
iu in the MS. (1. 10, 43 2. 4 33 35 73 

4. 35. 3; 6. 3, 4), and ‘adsideri’ further 
from Sall. H. 4.42 D, 1 K, 44 G* Amisum 
adsideri . . . audiebat,' and from the tran- 

4. in add. Mur. 

24, 8, &c., * at enim' 4. 40, 8, &c. 
reasoning here must be taken as addressed 

o i 
absidere : adsideri Bait., 

sitive use of the active by Tacitus in 4. 58, 
4; 6. 43, 1. All these readings would 
alike express the condition of Rome when. 
the Oppian law was passed (cp. c. 33; 4), 

and ' provincias hostiles" a later period 
before the empire was permanently con- 

'solidated. 

6. necessitatibus, ‘requirements.’ The 
‘luxus’ alleged in c. 33, 2 is alluded to. 

penates =‘ rem familiarem.’ It is used 
of the house and its position in 2. 84, I 
(where see note). 

adeo...non, ‘much less ' ; soin H. 3. 
39, 4: ep. * adeo numquam ' 6. 15, 6, and 
* adeo ' (=‘ much more’) in H. 1. 9, 15 
4- 39, 4; 80, 1 (see Gerber and Greef, 
Lex. s.v.) The usage is found also in 
Vell., Curt., Pl. Mai., and Quint. 

7. cetera promisca, ' all else is shared 
with her husband,' i.e. would be given 
to her husband, were he alone, in con- 
trast with the few special indulgences 
(‘pauca ’) above: cp. *actiones promiscas ' 

. I3. 26, 3. 

8. pacis : cp. pacem? c. 33» 2. 

plane, concessive, like ‘sane’ (c. 5, 4, 
&c.) or ‘sine dubio ' (1. 10, 3, &c.). 

accinctis, ‘in marching order, i.e. 
without superfluities. 

9. uxorium levamentum, *the re- 
laxation of a wife's society": cp. the simi- 
lar sentiment in I2. 5, 5, and the use of 
* levaretur' in 4. 58, 1: *levamentum ’ is 
supplied again with * quod.' 

IO. at, meeting an objection, as in I1. 
The 

to a very favourable audience. 

A. D. a1.] LIBER IIl. 

CAP. 34 35. 435 

6 obnoxios? non tamen ideo neminem, in provinciam mitti. cor- 
ruptos saepe pravitatibus uxorum maritos: num ergo omnis 
caelibes integros? placuisse quondam Oppias leges, sic tempori- 
bus rei publicae postulantibus : remissum aliquid postea et miti- 

7 gatum, quia expedierit. frustra nostram ignaviam alia ad vo- 
cabula transferri: nam viri in eo culpam, si femina modum 

8 excedat. porro ob unius aut alterius inbecillum animum male 

9 eripi maritis consortia rerum secundarum adversarumque. simul 
sexum natura invalidum deseri et exponi suo luxu, cupidinibus 

lOalienis. vix praesenti custodia manere inlaesa coniugia: quid 
fore, si per plures annos in modum discidii oblitterentur? sic 
obviam irent iis quae alibi peccarentur, ut flagitiorum urbis 

11 meminissent. addidit pauca Drusus de matrimonio suo; nam 

12 principibus adeunda saepius longinqua imperii. quotiens divum 
Augustum in Occidentem atque Orientem meavisse comite Livia! 

13 se quoque in Illyricum profectum et, si ita conducat, alias ad 
gentes iturum, haud semper aequo animo, si ab uxore carissima 
et tot communium liberorum parente divelleretur. sic Caecinae 
sententia elusa est. 

35. Proximo senatus die Tiberius per litteras, castigatis obli- 

Ig. elusa . et: text Freinsheim. 

I. obnoxios, 'liable ': 
obnoxius ' Sall. C. 52, 21. 

5. frustra ... transferri, ‘it is use- 
less to put other names ón our own in- 
dolence'; a novelty of expression, as 
Nipp. notes, for * alia vocabula ad nostram 
ignaviam transferri," or * nostrae ignaviae 
imponi.' | 

7. porro, ‘ besides’: cp. Agr. 15, 6; 
31, 4; Juv. 3, 126, &c. 

unius aut alterius, * one or two’; so 
Agr. 15, 5; 40, 4, &c., and * unus alterve' 
inc. 47, 2, &c. Nipp. notes that where 
a copulative particle is used, as ‘ unus 
alterque’ (13. 46, 3), * unus atque alter’ 
(H. 5. 6, 4), * unus et alter’ (Dial. a1, 1), 
the meaning is distinctly *more than 
one.’ 

8. consortia, abstract for concrete, 
* partners.’ 

9. luxu, dative: cp. c. 30, 4. 

10. praesenti custodia, ‘with the 
guardian on the spot’: cp. ‘ praesentia ’ 
I. 30, 5, &c., * praesenti opera’ 14. 57, 2 
(Lips., Halm). 

. 11. in modum disoidii, * by a virtual 

divorce’: cp. 2. 86, 2. 

cp. 'lubidini 

20. proximi : text Freinsh. 

oblitterentur, ‘become forgotten’: 
cp. 2. 83, 5, &c. 

sic . . . ut, ‘let them so deal with 
faults abroad as not to forget enormities 
at home.’ ‘ Meminissent’ answers to an 
imperfect, as * memini' to a present. 

I4. principibus, * members of the im- 
perial family’: cp. c. 6, 5, &c. 

16. Illyricum : cp. 1. 24, 15; 2. 44,1; 

3.5 I. 

1a. tot. His three children (cp. 2. 34, 
I, &c.) were a family beyond that of Au- 
gustus or Tiberius, or of other members 
of the house, except Germanicus. 

I9. elusa est, ‘was parried' : cp. ‘ re- 
fellere aut eludere’ (c. 67, 2) and other 
similar uses, as I4. 41, 2; H. 1. 26, 3. 
The MS. text is retained by Orelli and 
Nipp., ‘et’ being placed at the beginning 
of the next chapter. The reading ‘ inter- 
fectusque . et,’ in 6. 18, 1, has been simi- 
larly corrected; it being supposed that the 
insertion of such a dot is intended by an 
old reviser of the MS. to indicate an error. 

20. Proximo; so read from comparison 
of 2. 33, 1; 50, 3. liberius here gives 
an answer to the recent decree (c. 32, 3). 

Ff2 

qn 

ww 

Oo 

“ze 

o 

IO 

436 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 774. 

que patribus quod-cuncta curarum ad principem reicerent, M’. 
Lepidum et Iunium Blaesum nominavit, ex quis pro consule 

Africae legeretur. 

cusante se Lepido, cum valetudinem corporis, aetatem liberum, 
5 nubilem filiam obtenderet, intellegereturque etiam quod silebat, 
avunculum esse Seiani Blaesum atque eo praevalidum. respondit 3 
Blaesus specie recusantis, sed neque eadem adseveratione, et con- 
sensu adulantium haud adiutus est. 

36. Exim promptum quod multorum intimis questibus tege- 

batur, 

incedebat enim deterrimo cuique licentia impune probra 

et invidiam in bonos excitandi arrepta imagine Caesaris ; liber- 
tique etiam ac servi patrono vel domino, cum voces, cum manus | 
intentarent, ultro metuebantur. igitur C. Cestius senator dis- 

8. haut iustus: auditus margin and B, adiutus J. F. Gron., haut iutus Jac. Gron., 

text Halm. 

I. cuncta curarum. On the genitive 
see Introd. v. $ 32 b. 

M'. Lepidum: see on c. 32, 2. 

2. Iunium Blaesum : see I. 16, 2. 

3. intentius: cp. I. 52, 5, &c. 

4. aetatem, i.e. that their youth made 

'his presence still needful. 

5. nubilem filiam, that he had to 
arrange a marriage for her. Borghesi 
thinks that she was the Lepida afterwards 
married to Galba (Suet. Galb. 5). 

7. adseveratione : cp. 2. 31, 4. 

8. haud adiutus est. The reading 
* adiutus" would mean that the flatterers of 
Blaesus supported his candidature. That 
of Jac. Gron. is nearest to the MS., and 
this participle is generally read in 14. 4, t. 
With this or Halm's reading the meaning 
would be that the flatterers unanimously 
refrained from supporting, or rather over- 
ruled, his insincere objections. 

9. promptum -*prolatum est’: cp. 
* promere" in 1. 6, 8, &c., a rare use in 
gig before Tacitus (Her. on H. 2.90, 3); 

ere in contrast to ‘quod... tegebatur,’ 
‘a grievance stifled in the whispered 
murmurs of many.’ 

10. incedebat, ‘was spreading’: cp. 
C. 26, 3; 2. 55, 5, &c. 

deterrimo cuique. This dative is 
best taken with * incedebat,' such a con- 
struction being common in other authors, 

and analogous to many user of Tacitus; . 
3 

though he elsewhere (1. 16, 1, &c.) uses 
this verb with the accusative. 
1I. arrepta imagine Caesaris. Out 

of such general sanctity as attached to 

effigies of the ruling prince or ‘ divi 
Caesares (see I. 73, 2, and note there), 
appears to have grown a privilege of 
asylum (cp. c. 60, 2), such as was given 
to the temple of *divus Iulius' by the 
triumvirs (Dio, 47. 19, 2). Hence Agrip- 

pina is advised * celeberrimo fori effigiem. 

divi Augusti amplecti’ (4. 67. 6). The 
evidence on the subject is chiefly of later 
date (see Staatsr. ii. 760, n. 1); and stories 
such as that of Philostratus (Vit. Apoll. 1, 
15), that it was an offence to have beaten 
a slave who held a coin of Tiberius, seem 
incredible exaggerations; but that, as in 
the camp (t2. 17, 3) and the provinces 
(c. 63, 6), so at Rome, some form of this 
privilege existed, is indisputable, however 
it might be disregarded by those who (as 
here Drusus; see also Suet. Aug. 17) 
had no fear of a charge of * maiestas 
Probably many statues of gods or ‘ divi’ 
were excepted by inscriptions such as 
have been found, ‘a servo non tangi. See 
Lips. Exc. on this passage; Marquardt, 
iii. 463, Friedl. iii. 209 foll. The ex- 
planation of Nipp., making the expression 
a metaphor = ‘seizing the phantom of 
Caesar, i.e. ‘holding out an imaginary 
charge of maiestas,’ does not seem ade- 

quate to the language or the facts, though | | 

such threats no doubt were part of the 
insults here complained of. 

13. ultro metuebantur, i. e. not only 
had themselves nothing to fear, but even 

* caused fear, by the threats alluded to. 

C. Cestius, probably the * pater' of 6. 
7, 3, thought to be the consul of 6. 31, 1, 

tum audita amborum verba, intentius ex- 2 

A.D. a1.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 35-37. 437 

seruit principes quidem instar deorum esse, sed neque a dis nisi 
iustas supplicum preces audiri, neque quemquam in Capitolium 
aliave urbis templa perfugere, ut eo subsidio ad flagitia utatur. 
8 abolitas leges et funditus versas, ubi in foro, in limine curiae ab 
Annia Rufilla, quam fraudis sub iudice damnavisset, probra sibi 5 
et minae intendantur, neque ipse audeat ius experiri ob effigiem 
4 imperatoris oppositam. haud dissimilia alii et quidam atrociora 
circumstrepebant, precabanturque Drusum daret ultionis ex- 
emplum, donec accitam convictamque attineri publica custodia 

iussit. | 

37. Et Considius Aequus et Caelius Cursor equites Romani, 
quod fictis maiestatis criminibus Magium Caecilianum praetorem 

2 petivissent, auctore principe ac decreto senatus puniti. 

utrum- 

que in laudem Drusi trahebatur : ab eo in urbe, inter coetus et 

8 sermones hominum obversante, secreta patris mitigari. 

neque 

luxus in iuvene adeo displicebat: huc potius intenderet, diem 
aedificationibus, noctem conviviis traheret, quam solus et nullis 

17. editionibus L (see note). 

and father of the legatus of Syria under 
Nero (15. 25, 5; H. 5. 10,1). On the 
use of * senator’ see I. 75, 3. 

3. subsidio, ‘ refuge,’ as in c. 60, 2. 

4. Versas: cp. 2. 42, 4. 

5. damnavisset, ‘had caused to be 
convicted, Such terms are used of a 
prosecutor (cp. 4. 42, 3; 66, 1), as are 
* arcere ' (c. 23, 2), * concedere ' (4. 20, 3) 
of the proposer of a sentence; persons 
being said to do that which they cause or 
recommend to be done. 

6. ius experiri: cp. C. I5, 4, &c. 
Here it apparently means to prosecute the 
new charge arising from the * probra et 
minae: cp. below, *accitam convictam- 
que.’ a 

7. quidam, &c. ‘Some were clamour- 
ing round him of more outrageous cases’: 
this verb (cp. 11. 31, 3: H. 2. 44, 3) 
here takes a quasi-cognate acc., as ‘ fre- 
mere’ in 13. 13, I, and Livy and poets. 

9. &ttineri: cp. 1. 35, 5, &c. 

publica custodia, ‘thecommon prison, 
which was under charge of the consuls 
(c. 22, 8). 

13. auctore principe ac decreto 
senatus.  Ablatives of different kinds 
are thus coupled in I. 55, 1 (whence 
see Nipp.), and below, c. 39, 2. 

utrumque, i.e. both the punishment 

' trahere : text L. 

of Annia Rufilla (c. 36, 4) and the mis- 
sive from his father against these per- 
sens, Hee to have been procured by 
his influence. 

15. secreta patris mitigari, ‘the 
solitary plans of his father were made 
less cruel.’ Nipp. compares *secretum ' 
in Agr. 22, 5; 39, 3; Pl. Pan. 53. 

neque... adeo, ‘not so very much’: 
‘in iuvene’ is thrown in as the ground of 
excuse. 

16. huc... intenderet, ‘ he had better 
take this bent’: cp. 2, 6, 1. 

17. aediflcationibus. To explain this 
we must suppose that Drusus, in contrast 
to the parsimony of Tiberius (6. 45, 1°, 
had a passion for building, probably for 
the erection of such mansions as were a 
leading extravagance of the age (cp. c. 
52, 5; Hor. Od. 3. 1, 33-37 ; Vell. 2. 33, 
4, &c.), and spent his. days in planning 
them. Other accounts mention no such 
passion, but describe him as addicted to 
pantomimes (Dio, 57. 14, 10); whence it 
has been thought that Tacitus may have 
written *ludicris factionibus, or may 
have invented such a plural as ‘ ludifica- 
tionibus" or * laetificationibus.' * Editioni- 
bus' (referring to the propensity noted 
in 1. 76, 5) does not seem able to stand 
by itself for *gladiatorial exhibitions,’ 

10 

ome 
Pye 

438 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 774. 

voluptatibus avocatus maestam vigilantiam et malas curas 

exerceret. 

38. Non enim Tiberius, non accusatores fatiscebant. 

et An- 

charius Priscus Caesium Cordum pro consule Cretae postulaverat | 
5 repetundis, addito maiestatis crimine, quod tum omnium accusa- 

tionum complementum erat. 

Caesar Antistium Veterem e 2 

primoribus Macedoniae, absolutum adulterii, increpitis iudicibus 
ad dicendam maiestatis causam retraxit, ut turbidum et Rhescu- 
poridis consiliis permixtum, qua tempestate Cotye [fratre] inter- 

Io fecto bellum adversus nos volverat. 

igitur aqua et igni inter- 3 

dictum reo, adpositumque ut teneretur insula neque Macedoniae 
neque Thraeciae opportuna. nam Thraecia diviso imperio in 4 

9. [fratre] Ern. 

nor 'agitationibus' (Urlichs) by itself 
for ‘ driving.’ 

conviviis. 
«a rakopijs (Dio, 1.1.). 

traheret. The MS. text is retained by 
some, and might be taken as an explana- 
tory infinitive following on *huc.' 

I. malas, ' pernicious, illustrated by 
‘non enim, &c. following. 

3. fatiscebant, ‘were becoming ex. 
hausted '; so in 6. 7, 6; 14. 24, 1; 16. 5, 
1, &c. The sense is a metaphor from the 
literal meaning in Vergil (G. 1, 180, &c.), 
before whom it is deponent. ' 

et: see note on 2. 50; I. 

Ancharius Priscus. Borghesi (v. 307) 
thinks from the surname that he was of 
municipal origin, akin to a T. Ancharius 
T. f. Pal(atina) Priscus, recorded in an 
inscription at Pisaurum (Pesaro). The 
Ancharii at Rome have no cognomen. 

4. Creta». ‘This island had been con- 
stituted into a province by Q. Caecilius 
Metellus Creticus in 687, B.c. 67 (Vell. 
2. 34). It was now combined with Cyrene 
(see c. 70, 1) into a senatorial province, go- 
verned by proconsuls of praetorian rank. 

postulaverat. The result of this ac- 
cusation is given in c. 7o, 1. No abl. of 
this kind is used elsewhere with this verb 
except such a general term as ‘ crimine" 
(Apul. Met. 3. 6, 183; 7. 3, 450) ; and 
the nearest parallel is *dainnatus repe- 
tundis’ (Suet. Oth. 2). Elsewhere the 
verb is used by Tacitus with gen. (as 1. 
74, 1, &c.), and by Cicero with ‘ de.’ 

6. complementum, ‘the makeweight’ 
The same expression is cited from Cod. 
Th. 9. 24, 3. Elsewhere the word occurs 

He is described as péOy ‘ 

only in Cic. Or. 69, 230 v' inania . . . 
verba . . . quasi complementa numero- 
rum). On the frequent addition of this 
charge to others, cp. 2. 50, 1; c. 22, 2; 
67, 3, &c. Asimilar rhetorical exaggera- 
tion is seen in Pliny, who calls it (Pan. 
42) *unicum crimen eorum qui. crimine 
vacarent.’ See Introd. viii. p. 142. 

e primoribus Macedoniae. Itis very 
possible that he was a Macedonian who, 
through a patronus of that name, had 
received the.civitas, and had thus the 
privilege of trial before the praetor's court 
at Rome (cp. 'increpitis iudicibus"); but, 
as such persons more commonly take 
only the gentile name of their patronus, 
like Julius Sacrovir, Orelli may be right 
in supposing him to be a Roman resident 
in Macedonia. 

9. consiliis permixtum : cp. 'nego- 
tiis permixtos' 4. 40, 8, *moribus . . . 
nostris mixti' 11. 24, 10. 

(fratre], generally taken to be a 
blundering interpolation, as Tacitus would 
hardly have forgotten that he had made 
Cotys nephew of Rhescuporis (2. 64, 3). 

10. bellum . . . volverat, ‘had con- 
templated war’: cp. ‘animus... bellum 
volvebat ’ H. 1. 64, a, ‘volvens’ 1. 64, 7. 

aqua ét igni interdictum reo, the 
usual phrase (cp. c. 68, 2; 4. 21, 5; Cic. 
Phil. 6. 4, 10), varied by Tacitus to * ar- 
ceri’ (c. 23, 2; 50, 6) or ‘ prohiberi' (16. 
I2, 1). This was the ordinary and proper 
penalty for * maiestas’ (cp. c. 50, 6). 

1I. &dpositum, ‘ it was added.’ 

12. opportuna, ‘convenient,’ i.e. ‘near’: 
cp. * locorum opportuna! 4. 24, 2. 

diviso imperio, &c.: cp. 2. 67, 4. 

A. D. a1.) LIBER III. CAP. 37-39. 439 

Rhoemetalcen et liberos Cotyis, quis ob infantiam tutor erat 
Trebellenus Rufus, insolentia nostri discors agebat neque minus 
Rhoemetalcen quam Trebellenum incusans popularium iniurias 

5 inultas sinere. Coelaletae Odrusaeque et Dii, validae nationes, 
arma cepere, ducibus diversis et paribus inter se per ignobili- 5 

6 tatem ; quae causa fuit ne in bellum atrox coalescerent. pars 
turbant praesentia, alii montem Haemum . transgrediuntur, ut 
remotos populos concirent ;; plurimi ac maxime compositi regem 
urbemque Philippopolim, a Macedone Philippo sitam, circum- 
sidunt. — 

39. Quae ubi cognita P. Vellaeo (is proximum exercitum 
praesidebat), alarios equites ac levis cohortium mittit in eos qui 
praedabundi aut adsumendis auxiliis vagabantur, ipse robur 

2 peditum ad exsolvendum obsidium ducit. simulque cuncta 

a. trebellienus and trebellienum : see 2. 67, 4 

2. insolentia nostri. This genit. is 
here more distinctly objective than that of 
the personal pronoun in 2. 54, 3, &c., like 
* insolens contumeliae" 6. 34, 1, &c., and 
similar instances in Cic., Caes., '&c. "The 
Roman rule so new to them was that of 
Trebellenus, whose position was that of a 
governor; the princes in whose name he 

ruled being not only minors, but absent 

in Rome (see note on 2. 67, 4). 
discors, ‘ seditious’: cp. I. 38, 1, &c. 
3. popularium iniurias . . . sinere. 

The sentence is obscure from its brevity. 

Trebellenus is accused of oppressing the 
people, and Rhoemetalces of permitting 
it. For the construction with ‘incuso 
cp. 6. 3, 3 and note, and the inf. with 
' accuso ' in 4. 22, 4; 14. 18, t. 

4. Coelaletae, in Pl. N. H. 4 II, II, 
41, generally read ‘Celaletae’ ; Ryck. 
would here read ‘Coeletae,’ adapted to 
the KoiAgruce)) orparnyia of Ptol. 3. 11, 9. 
In Dio, 54. 34, 6, we have mention of Zia- 
Aérai, which some MSS. read in PI. 1.1. 

Dii, restored from Thuc. 2. 96, 2, where 
the Dii of Rhodope are joined with the 
irae the chief tribe évrds . . . Aipou 
kal . . . ‘Podomns. 

5. paribus . .. per ignobilitatem, 
* equally undistinguished,' so that none 
could assert a preeminence and combine 
all under him. 

7. praesentia, ‘ their neighbourhood, ] 
as opposed to *remotos, a sense nearly 
similar to that in c. 34, 10, &c. 

4. alii: Dii L. 

9 Philippopolim, Philippopoli, or 
Filibe, in the upper valley of the Hebrus 
(Maritza), still one of the most important 
towns of Roumelia. 

. Philippo, the father of Alexander the 
Great. 

sitam: cp. I. 39, 4. Tacitus nowhere 
else (cp. 2. 7, 33 4- 55, 6; 6. 41, 2, &c.) 
uses this participle with the prep. and 
abl.: whence some read ‘ positam, on the 
analogy of * posuere" in 12. 63, 1. 

1I. P. Vellaeo. He appears to have 
succeeded Flaccus in Moesia (see 2. 66, 
3; also note on I. 80,1). He has been 
thought to have been the brother of the 
historian, and to have been praetor with 
him in 767, A.D. 14 (Vell. 2. 124, 4). 
Nipp. thinks him probably brother to 
C. Vellaeus Tutor (cos. suff. in 781, A. b. 
28), who was one of the authors of the 
“lex Iunia Vellaea.’ 

exercitum  praesidebat. Tacitus 
uses the accus. with this verb in the An- 
nals (4. 5, 15 72, 6; 12. 14. 7; 29, 3), 
after Sall. (H. 2. 28 D, 34 K, 52 G), and 
analogously to his usage with many other 
verbs (Introd. v. $ 12 c). 

12. alarios equites ac levis cohor- 
tium, auxiliaries, as opposed to the legion 
mentioned below (' robur peditum ") : cp. 
I2. 31, 5. On the genit. cp. Introd. v. 
33€. - 

I3. praedabundi, those described (c. 
38, 6) as ‘ turbantes praesentia." 

$ 

440 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 774. 

prospere acta, caesis populatoribus et dissensione orta apud ob- 
sidentes regisque opportuna eruptione et adventu legionis. neque 3 
aciem aut proelium dici decuerit, in quo semermi ac palantes 
trucidati sunt sine nostro sanguine. 

. 40. Eodem anno Galliarum civitates ob iaenitudinen aeris 
alieni rebellionem coeptavere, cuius exstimulator acerrimus inter 

Treveros Iulius Florus, apud Aeduos Iulius Sacrovir. 

3. semerme ; 

2. regis . . . eruptione. Mommsen 
cites (Eph. Epig. ii. p. 256) an inscrip- 
tion commemorating the preservation of 
Rhoemetalces, and of Pythodoris (see on 
2. 56 ; 67), who had been besieged with 
him. ‘Eruptione’ and ‘adventu’ 
instrumental ablatives, but are coupled to 
the abl. abs. preceding (cp. c. 37, 1). 

3. aciem aut proelium, ‘pitched battle 
or even conflict.’ 

dici. The inf. pass. after ‘decet’ is 
rare, but in Cic. Tusc. 1. 14, 32; Verg. 
Aen. 12, 797. 

5. Galliarum. Ofthe four Gallic pro- - 

vinces, two are wholly unaffected by this 

rising, namely, the senatorial Gallia Nar- . 

bonensis, and the Caesarian province of 

Aquitania in the south west; but the re- . 

bellion embraced, or was intended to em- 
brace, considerable part of the other two ; 
of which Gallia Lugdunensis included the 
country between the Loire, Seine, and 
Saone ; and Belgica all between the Seine 
and Rhine, except what was placed under 
"i legati of the '* Germaniae" (see on I. 
I, 2). To the former province belong 
the Aedui, also the Andecavi and Turoni 
(c. 41, 1); to the latter the Treveri. The 
special hostility of the Gaulish nobility of 
date to Roman rule is noteworthy: 
see Momms. Hist. v. 73, E. T. i. 81. 
&eris alieni. Such indebtedness was 
not uncommon among provincial states 
and individuals. Thus the Allobroges 

in Catiline's time were ‘ publice priva- © 

timque aere alieno obpressi* (Sall. Cat. 
40). .Besides the general causes men- 
tioned by Nipp. and E. Jacob, such as 
financial mismanagement, official extor- 
tion, heavy tribute, and usurious interest, 
may here be added a special cause arising 
from the requisitions of Germanicus (cp. 
2. 5, 3). The claims, however usurious, 
‘of Roman creditors: against provincials, 
were backed by the whole force of govern- 
ment (e.g. the claim .of Brutus on the 
Salaminians of Cyprus, Cic. Att. 5. 21; 

semermes B, text Jac. Gron. : 

are © 

nobilitas 2 

cp. C. 45, 3; 1. 68, 5. 

. 6. 2); so that rebellion was the only 

refuge. Dio (62.2, 1) makes the usury of 
Seneca a cause of the British rebellion 
of 814, A. D. 61. 

6. exstimulator, only here and in H. 
2. 71, 4. 

7. revere This people were among 
the chief Gallic tribes in Caesar’s time 
and extended then from the upper Meuse 
on both sides of the Mosel probably to 
the Rhine, but subsequently lost territory 
in that direction by German settlements. 
Their chief town was the ‘ Colonia,’ or 
‘Augusta Treverorum’ (H. 4. 62, &c.; 
Mela 3. 2), now Trier or Treyes. Their 
country was chosen as the refuge of 
‘Agrippina (1. 41, 2), and they must have 
been then thought trustworthy. After- ~ 
wards they are frequently mentioned in 
the rebellion of Civilis. By the time of 
Tacitus (G. 28, 4) they counted them- 
selves to be of German origin, which 
would show that they had become much 
mixed with German blood. 

Iulius Florus. Florus is a family 
name at Rome, but no Iulius Florus is 
known before the one addressed by Horace 
(Ep. I. 3, 1; 2. 2, 1) as a companion of 
Tiberius in the East in 734, B.C. 20. 
M. Seneca (Controv. 9. 25, 258) mentions 
one of the name as a pupil of Porcius 
Latro; and Quintilian (10. 3, 13) one 
who practised oratory in Gaul and be- 
came its foremost rhetorician. The two 
last, or perhaps all three, may be the 
same person, who may have been son of 
some Gaul who had received citizenship 
from Julius Caesar; and this rebel chief 
may represent a third generation. 

Aeduos. This people, also called 
Haedui, and so prominent in the time of 
Julius Caesar, extended from the Loire to 
the Saone, having for their chief city Au- 

ustodunum (c. 43, 1), the modern Autun, 
Identifed with the Bibracte of Caesar 
(B. G. 1. 33, &c.). In spite of the na- 
tional load of debt complained of, they 

A. D. 21.] LIBER IIl. 

CAP. 39—41. 44I 

ambobus et maiorum bona facta, eoque Romana civitas olim 

3 data, cum id rarum nec nisi virtuti pretium esset. 

ii secretis 

conloquiis, ferocissimo quoque adsumpto aut quibus ob eges- 
tatem ac metum ex flagitiis maxima peccandi necessitudo, com- 
4 ponunt Florus Belgas, Sacrovir propiores Gallos concire. igitur 5 
per conciliabula et coetus seditiosa disserebant de continuatione 
tributorum, gravitate faenoris, saevitia ac superbia .praesiden- 

B5 tium ; et discordare militem audito Germanici exitio. 

egregium 

resumendae libertati tempus, si ipsi florentes, quam inops Italia, 
quam inbellis urbana plebes, nihil validum in exercitibus nisi 

quod externum, cogitarent. 

41. Haud ferme ulla civitas intacta seminibus eius motus 
2 fuit: sed erupere primi Andecavi ac Turoni. quorum Andecavos 
Acilius Aviola legatus, excita cohorte quae Lugduni praesidium 

7. faenus always in this MS., in Med. ii. mostly fenus. 

are still called rich (c. 43, 1; 46, 4), aud 
their nobles were subsequently the first of 
. *Gallia comata’ to become senators of 
Rome (11. 235, 1): 

Iulius Sacrovir. This name again, 
as also that of Iulius Indus (c. 42, 3), sug- 
gests a gift of citizenship by Julius or 
perhaps Augustus: the cognomen here 
may indicate that the first who bore it 
was a priest. 

I. bona faota, i. e. services to Rome: 
cp. * bona societas ’ (1. 57, 7). 

2. cum id rarum. Citizenship had 
certainly been freely bestowed by the dic- 
tator Caesar, and after his death lavished 
(Cic. Phil. 1. 10, 23; 2. 36, 92) or sold 
(Id. 5. 4, 11) by Antonius in his.name. 
Augustus however, according to Sueto- 
nius (Aug. 40), ‘civitatem  parcissime 
dedit, and Tiberius probably followed 
his example; but in the time of Claudius, 
according to Dio (60. 17, 5), citizenship 
was purchased wholesale through Messa- 
lina and the freedmen, at first peydrAov 
xpnudrow (cp. Acts 22, 28), afterwards 
for a trifle (Vol. ii. Introd. p. 39). . 

4. metum ex flagitiis: cp. ‘ex duce 
metus’ (1. 29, 3), &c. 

componunt, ‘they agree’; so ovrti- 
0co0a. in Xen., &c. Nipp. notes the use 
of ‘compositum’ (4. 10, 2; 68, 3, &c.), 
and ‘composito (or ‘ex composito") facere 
aliquid ' (H. 4. 66, 2). These phrases are 
frequent in Sallust and Livy. For the 
infin, see Introd. v. § 43. 

5. propiores, nearer to Italy. 

6. conciliabula et coetus.  Nipp. 

appears rightly to distinguish these, the 
former as public gatherings, markets, &c., 
utilized by the conspirators, the latter as 
meetings specially convened. . 
continuatione, ‘perpetuity,’ when 
relaxation mi, ht have bee expected. 

8. discordare, * was mutinous’: cp. I. 
16, 3; also ' discors" 1. 38, 1, &c. 

1o. nihil validum, Wc. : see 'Introd. 
vii. p. 127. The auxiliaries were of 
course all * peregrini'; but as regards the 
legionaries, eitherthe speaker is designedly 
made to exaggerate, or Tacitus uses lan- 
guage more suited to his own day. Seeck 
(Rh. Mus. xlviii. pp. 602-621) shows from 
many inscriptions that under the Iulian 
emperors, at least the western legions 
were in very great proportion (he would 
say almost exclusively, but see on 4. 4, 4) 
recruited from Italy. Stages of change 
are noticed under the Claudian and 

. Flavian Caesars, and by the time of 

Trajan and Hadrian the Italian element 
is very scanty. The * urbana plebes" had 
been enlisted by Augustus on emergency : 
Cp. 1. 31, 4. 

13. Andecavi ac Turoni. The former 
are the Andes of Caesar, and the two 
answer to the provinces of Anjou, on the 
right. of the lower Loire, and Touraine, 
on both sides of that river, above it. Their 
capitals, Angers and Tours, are known 
from the time of Ptolemy (2. 8, 8, 14) as 
Juliomagus and Caesarodunum. 

14. Acilius Aviola, then legatus of 
Gallia Lugdunensis, and afterwards cos. 
suff. (Marquardt, i. 274). He is thought 

442 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 714. 

agitabat, coercuit. Turoni legionario milite, quem Visellius Varro 3 
inferioris Germaniae legatus miserat, oppressi eodem Aviola 
duce et quibusdam Galliarum primoribus, qui tulere auxilium, 
quo dissimularent defectionem magisque in tempore efferrent. 
5 spectatus et Sacrovir intecto capite pugnam pro Romanis ciens, 4 

ostentandae, ut ferebat, virtutis: 

sed captivi, ne incesseretur 

telis, adgnoscendum se praebuisse arguebant. consultus super eo 
Tiberius aspernatus est indicium aluitque dubitatione bellum. 
42. Interim Florus insistere destinatis, pellicere alam equi- 
i0 tum, quae conscripta e Treveris militia disciplinaque nostra 
habebatur, ut caesis negotiatoribus Romanis bellum inciperet ; 

paucique equitum corrupti, plures in officio mansere. 
vulgus obaeratorum aut clientium arma cepit ;: 

aliud 2 
petebantque 

10, conscriptae : conscripta B, text Bekk. 

by Nipp. not to be the consular of that 
name, mentioned by Val. Max. (1. 8, 12) 
and Pl. Mai. as a signal instance of sus- 
pended animation, but the father of the 
consul of 807, A. D. 54 (12. 64, 1) 
cohorte. The 'cohors xiii. urbana ! 

(see on 4. 5, 5) is mentioned in inscrip- 
tions (e. g. Henzen 6808) as at Lagduuum 
(Lyons), the capital and chief centre of 
the *tres Galliae' (Introd. vii. p. 111). 
The mention of a * cohors xviii.' there in 
H. 1. 64, 6, may be an error; but the 
urban cohorts had been then increased 
(Vol. ii. Introd. p. 36). 

I. legionario milite. This force 
would appear from c. 46, 3 to have been a 
single legionary cohort ; but see note there. 

Visellius Varro, C. Visellius C. 
f. C. n. Varro, cos. 765, A. D. 13, with 
Germanicus (Orell. Insc. 4717, &c.), 
father of the consul of 777, A.D. 24 
(4. 19, 1). He must have succeeded to 
Caecina Severus (I. 31, 2, &c.). 

- 4. in tempore, ‘ opportunely ' : cp. I. 
19, 2 

efferrent, ‘proclaim it’: ep. 6. 9. 1j 
also ‘id quidem minime est opus... 
efferri’ Ter. Ad. 4. 4, 17, *effert animi 
motus! Hor. A. P. 111, and a similar 
use of éxpépew. 

6. ostentandae . . 
Introd. v. $ 37 d. 

8. dubitatione, ' indecision.” He al- 
lowed the insurrection to gather strength 
while he could not make up his mind how 
to deal with it. 

9. insistere : cp. 2. 21, 3. 

alam ar Tne ‘ala Treve- 

. -to the ‘ valgus’; 
. virtutis: see | 

rorum’ is mentioned in 822, A. D. 69 (H. 
3. 14, 25 4. 55, 1), * ala equitum Treviro- 
rym’ in a Rhenish inscription (see Orelli 
and Nipp.). The words here, ‘quae . 
habebatur,' imply | that. it was, like so 
many other ‘alae’ and ‘cohortes’ men- 
tioned in inscriptions, no less a standing 
force than the legions. 

11. negotiatoribus: cp. 2. 62, 4» &c. 
These Roman capitalists in the provinces 
are constantly mentioned by Cicero (see 
Ernesti, clavis) and others. They would 
usually be of the equestrian order, and are 
generally distinguished both from ‘ pub- 
licani' and ‘ mercatores, though they may 
have practised such professions in addition 
to their own, which was that of bankers 
or money lenders. Their activity in the 
old * provincia N arbonensis " about 685, 
B.C. 69, is described by Cicero (pro 
Fonteio 1, 1) * referta Gallia negotiatorum 
est, plena civium Romanorum. Nemo 
Gallorum sine cive Romano quidquam 
negotii gerit ;; nummus in Gallia nullus 
sine civium Romanorum tabulis commo- 
vetur, See Marquardt, i. 539. 

.12.8liud vulgus, &c., ‘the rest, the com- 
mon herd,’ &c. The use of ‘ aliud’ does 
not imply that the ‘equites’ also belonged 
several other instances 
being noted by Nipp. ,, in which ‘alius’ 
stands thus, in apposition, with one only 
of the parties mentioned, as ‘ primores 

populorum . .. vulgus aliud armatorum ' 
(Liv. i 8, 1), Such use of dAAos, as p7- 
™p... o5, dAAa 3uwai (Hom. Od. a, 

412), is more common. 
13. obaeratorum aut olientium. The 

3 arcuerunt. 

A. D. a1.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 41—43. 443 

saltus quibus nomen Arduenna, cum legiones utroque ab exer- 
citu, quas Visellius et C. Silius adversis itineribus obiecerant, 

praemissusque cum delecta manu Iulius Indus e 

civitate eadem, discors Floro et ob id navandae operae avidior, 

4 inconditam multitudinem adhuc disiecit. 

Florus incertis latebris 

victores frustratus, postremo visis militibus qui effugia insederant, 

sua manu cecidit. 

isque Treverici tumultus finis. 

43. Apud Aeduos maior moles exorta, quanto civitas opu- 
lentior et comprimendi procul praesidium. Augustodunum caput 
gentis armatis cohortibus Sacrovir occupaverat, 47 nobilissimam 

IO. ut ins. Bezzenb. 

nobilissimarum : et nobilissimam L, nobilissimamque Pich., 

nobilissima (or nobilissima cum Iob. Müller)... subole . . . operata Haase. 

debtors (who were virtual bondsmen) and 
clients of a Gallic noble are spoken of by 
Caesar, B. G. 6. 13, 23 19, 43 7. 40, 7, 
&c. Orgetorix collected a similar band 
to that here mentioned (Id. r. 4, 2). 

1. Arduenna, Ardennes (from a Celtic 
word =‘ forest’), the name of a much 
larger district then than now, as Caesar 
(B. G. 5. 3, 4; 6. 29, 4) describes this 
forest as extending thronghout the country 
of the Treveri, from the Rhine to the 
Remi and Nervii (the neighbourhood of 
Rheims and Bavay). 

2. C. Bilius: see I. 31, 2, &c. He was 
still legatus of Upper Germany. 

3. delecta manu, called ‘una ala’ (c. 
46, 3). Several inscriptions (see Introd. 
ii. p. 11) speak of an ‘ala Indiana,’ evi- 
dently raised by and called after this per- 
son; probably the force here meant. 

4. discors Floro. For the dative cp. 
2. 56, 1. The gerundive is genit.: cp. c. 
33,33 54, 11, &c. 

5. inconditam multitudinem adhuc. 
The * incondita multitudo' may have been 
conceived as a single idea, such as might 
have been represented by one word (‘a 
rabble’); or the position of ‘adhuc’ may 
be a mere affectation of style, as in 1. 
67, I. On the sense of the word, cp. 
c. 26, 1. 

incertis latebris, repeated from H. 
I. 81, 4, where it appears not to mean 
(as Ern. takes it here) ‘often changed,’ 
but * untraceable hiding places.' 

6. visis militibus: cp. ‘visa caede’ 
2.31, 3; H. 3.62, 3. This passive use 
is chiefly poetical (as in Verg. Aen. I, 
326, &c.) and post-Augustan. 

7. tumultus, used strictly of a Gallic, 

as also of an Italian rising: see Cic. Phil. 
8. 1, 2. 

8. quanto. ‘On the abbreviated com- 
parative sentence see Introd. v. $ 64. 

opulentior. Nipp. takes this to mean 
* more powerful’ (cp.,*opulentia' 2. 60, 
4); but their wealth ls distinctly men- 
tioned in c. 46, 4, and would be shown 

jn 

by their having raised so large a force . 

and armed part of it so completely. Caesar 
(B. G. 6. 12, 9) describes them as being 
in his time *longe principes" of all the 
Gauls, the Remi standing next to them. 

9. comprimendi, probably to be taken 
like the gerundive genit. (Introd. v. $ 37): 
cp. ‘apiscendi’ 3. 27, 2. 

procul, i.e. in the armies of the 
‘Germaniae.’ The small forces employed 
against the Andecavi and Turoni (c. 41, 
2) are here treated as of no account. 

Augustodunum : see on c. 40, I. 

IO. ut nobilissimam, &c. The emen- 
dations proposed for ‘nobilissimarum,’ 
evidently an error of assimilation, are 
numerous. For a discussion of them see 
Pfitzner, p. 19; Joh. Müller, Beitr. sect. 3. 
P. 33. Most editors have followed L. or 
Pich. taking ‘occupaverat’ by zeugma 
with *subolem' in some such sense as 
that of *copias occupavisse' (I. IO, I). 
But it appears awkward to introduce a 
new object after an apparently completed 
sentence. This would be in favour of 
some such text as that given above. In 
any case some form of words must have 
been used which would imply the ac- 
quisition of the parents and relations, 
rather than of the youths, to be the 
primary object. 

444 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 774. 

Galliarum subolem liberalibus studiis ibi operatam, et eo pignore 
parentes propinquosque eorum adiungeret ; simul arma occulte 
fabricata iuventuti dispertit. quadraginta milia fuere, quinta sui 2 
parte legionariis armis, ceteri cum venabulis et cultris quaeque 
5 alia venantibus tela sunt. adduntur e servitiis gladiaturae desti- 8 
nati, quibus more gentico continuum ferri tegimen: cruppel- 
larios vocant, inferendis ictibus inhabiles, accipiendis inpenetra- 
biles. augebantur eae copiae vicinarum civitatum ut nondum 4 
aperta consensione, ita viritim promptis studiis, et certamine 
19 ducum Romanorum, quos inter ambigebatur utroque bellum 

sibi poscente. 
cessit. 

mox Varro, invalidus senecta, vigenti Silio con- 

44. At Romae non Treveros modo et Aeduos, sed quattuor 

I. ut eo: et eo Bezzenberger. 

I. liberalibus studiis, &c. This 
school, which must have been founded by 
Augustus, made Augustodunum the great 
Roman seminary in Gaul; as Massilia 
(Strab. 4. 1, 5, 181) was the centre of 
^ Greek culture. Such institutions, taking 
the place of the suppressed schools of 
Druidism, laid the foundation of the 
Romano-Hellenic culture, which took 
such strong root in this country: see 
Momms. Hist. v. 102, E. T. i. 113. That 
this school still flourished till the end 
of the third century is attested by an 
oration of Eumenius, delivered when he 
was appointed by Constantius to preside 
over it, on its restoration after the sack of 
Augustodunum by barbarians (Panegyrici 
veteres, iii: see also Lips. Exc. on this 
passage). 

. operatam, aoristic ; so ‘ conubiis arvis- 
que novis operata iuventus (Verg. Aen. 
3, 136; cp. Hor. Ep. 1. 2, 29). 

3. quadraginta milia. This must 
be taken as the sum of all the Aeduan 
forces. At the rising of Vercingetorix 
their first contingent, with that of those 
subordinate to them, was fixed at 10,000 
foot and 800 horse, to which was added 
a further levy of 35,000 for the final crisis 
(Caes. B. .G. 7. 64; 75). 

. quinta sui parte legionariis armis, 
*to the extent of one fifth, armed as 
legionaries.’ * Legionariis armis" appears 
to be rightly explained by Joh. Müller 
and Nipp. as an abl. of quality, similar 
to * ingentibus gladiis et brevibus cetris ' 
Agr. 36, I, &c. (cp. Introd. v. $ 29); 
but there is an unusual harshness in its 

immediate proximity to another abl., that 
of the part referred to. 

&. gladiaturae, found nowhere else in 
any author of repute. *Lanistatura' oc- 
curs in the * Tabulae Heraclaeenses, and 
Drager notes that several such forms are 
introduced in later Latin. 

6. gentico, only found in 6. 33, 3; 
Tert. de An. 39. 

cruppellarios. This Celtic word occurs 
nowhere else. The same men are called 
‘ferrati’ in c. 45, 3, and such a kind of 
unwieldy plate armour (‘ cataphracta’) 
is described as worn by Sarmatian chiefs 
in H. 1. 79, 5. The gladiators called 
*mirmillones' were supposed to repre- 
sent the usual Gaulish military equip- 
ment. 

7. accipiendis inpenetrabiles. No 
other instance of this construction appears 
to be found, but an ordinary dative (‘in- 
penetrabilis irae’) in Sil. 7, 561. 

8. ut... ita: cp. I. 12, I, &c. 

9. viritim, ‘of individuals.’ Nipp. 
notes that in II. 24, 2 ‘singuli viritim’ 
stand in opposition to ‘terrae, gentes’; 
in Bell. Al. 65, 4 ‘et viritim et publice’ 
are contrasted: cp. ‘ipsam viritim’ (‘him- 
self individually’) Vell. 2. 16, 3. 

I3. quattuor et sexaginta. ‘ the sixty- 
four, i.e. all the Gallic tribes. This 
number agrees with that of Ptolemy (2. 
7-9), who makes seventeen @0vn in Aqui- 
tania, twenty-five in Lugdunensis, and 
twenty-two in Belgica; the old * Provin- 
cia Narbonensis' forming no part of this 
reckoning. Strabo (4. 3, 2, 192) speaks 
of the altar at Lugdunum inscribed with 

4 bello bene mutari. 

A.D. a1.] LIBER lil. 

CAP. 43-45. 445 

et sexaginta Galliarum civitates descivisse, adsumptos in so- 
cietatem Germanos, dubias Hispanias, cuncta, ut mos famae, in 

2 maius credita. 

optumus quisque rei publicae cura maerebat : 

multi odio praesentium et cupidine mutationis suis quoque peri- 
culis laetabantur, increpabantque Tiberium, quod in tanto rerum 

3 motu libellis accusatorum insumeret operam. 

an Sacrovirum 

maiestatis crimine reum in senatu fore? extitisse tandem viros 

qui cruentas epistulas armis cohiberent. 
tanto inpensius in securitatem conpositus, 

miseram pacem vel 

neque loco neque vultu mutato, sed ut solitum per illos dies 
egit, altitudine animi, an conpererat modica esse et vulgatis 

leviora. 

45. Interim Silius cum legionibus duabus incedens, praemissa 
auxiliari manu vastat Sequanorum pagos, qui finium extremi et 
2 Aeduis contermini sociique in armis erant. mox Augustodunum 
petit propero agmine, certantibus inter se signiferis, fremente 
etiam gregario milite, ne suetam requiem, ne spatia noctium 

opperiretur : 
8ad victoriam. 

et 

viderent modo adversos et aspicerentur ; 
duodecimum apud lapidem Sacrovir copiaeque 

id satis 

6. an 7 sacrouirum: Iulium margin and B, text Nipp. 

the names of sixty €4vn, probably a round 
number. See Momms. Hist. v. 86, E. T. 
i. 95, Marquardt, i. p. 268. The greater 
only are reckoned, not the lesser tribes 
under their ‘ clientela." 

3. credita: from this is supplied ‘cre- 
ditum with * descivisse,' &c. 

6. libellis, ‘informations’: cp. 2. 29, 3 

an Sacrovirum. The sign in the 
text may note an omission, and the ‘et’ 
above and ‘Iulium’ of the margin are 
attempts by later hands to supply it. 
Orelli reads ‘et.’ 

8. cruentas epistulas. The only mis- 
sive mentioned that could answer to this 
description would be that against Antistius 
Vetus (c. 38, 2): the others from Tiberius 
during this absence had dealt with other 
matters, or had even punished informers 
(c. 37, 1); so that language suitable to 
his later years seems here inserted. 

9. inpensius in securitatem con- 
positus, ; with a more studied air of 
unconcern’; so ‘in dissimulationem sui 
compositas! I3. 25, 1: Cp. I. 75, 25 2.34, 
6;4.354,&c. —— 

11. altitudine animi. The applica- 

tion of this term to Domitian (H. 4. 86, 
3), and the explicit reference of ‘altitudo 
ingenii incredibilis’ to the dissimulation 
of Sulla (Sall. Jug. 95, 3), suggest that 
here also it means ‘ profound reserve.’ 

Baévrns, in Cic. Att. 4. 6, 3, &c., may 
also probably be thus explained. 

14. Sequanorum. This people, be- 
longing to Gallia Belgica, occupied a 
tract answering on the whole to the pro- 
vince of Franche Comté between the Jura 
and the Saone, their chief town being 
Vesontio (Besancon). They are constant- 
ly mentioned by Caesar, in whose day 
they reached to the Rhine (B. G. 1. 1, 4). 

pagos: cp. I. 56, 5. 

finium, sc. *Galliae Their country 

€ 

mt 

lay between the military district of Upper . 

Germany and the Aedui. 

17. spatia noctium, i.e. the nights 
that seemed so long to their impatience. 
Nipp. compares ‘ spatiis itinerum" 2. 5, 3; 
15. 17, 3. 

18. adversos, ‘face to face’: * videre 
et adspici' are joined in Agr. 45, 2. 

19. duodecimum, from Augustodu- 
num. 

o 

a 

446 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 774. 

patentibus locis apparuere. in fronte statuerat ferratos, in corni- 
bus cohortes, a tergo semermos. ipse inter primores equo in- 4 
signi adire, memorare veteres Gallorum glorias quaeque Romanis 
adversa intulissent ; quam decora victoribus libertas, quanto in- 
5 tolerantior servitus iterum victis. 
46. Non diu haec nec apud laetos: etenim propinquabat le- 

' gionum acies, inconditique ac militiae nescii oppidani neque oculis 
neque auribus satis conpetebant. contra Silius, etsi praesumpta 2 
spes hortandi causas exemerat, clamitabat tamen, pudendum 

10 ipsis quod Germaniarum victores adversum Gallos tamquam in 
hostem ducerentur. ‘una nuper cohors rebellem Turonum, una 3 
ala Treverum, paucae huius ipsius exercitus turmae profligavere 
Sequanos. quanto pecunia dites et voluptatibus opulentos, tanto 4 
magis inbelles Aeduos evincite et fugientibus consulite.’ ingens 5 

I. ferratos, the ‘cruppellarii’ (c. 43, 
3): cp. agmina . . . ferrata' Hor. Od. 4. 
14, 30. 

3. cohortes, those who had ‘ legionaria. 
arma’ (c. 43, 2). 

primores. In Liv. 1. 1, 7 (‘ processisse 
Latinum inter primores"), and Id. 3. 18, 
8 (‘inter primores pugnam ciens’), the 
word is best taken to mean ‘the front 
rank’; and such may probably be the 
meaning here; but Nipp. takes the ex- 
pression in each instance to mean ‘ sur- 
rounded by the princes.’ 

insigni, ‘adorned with trappings’: cp. 
H. 3. 89, 1. 

3. adire, sc. 'singulos': cp. the de- 
scription of Arminius (2. 45, 4). 

glorias. Nipp. notes that the glory 
of each success is separately thought of: 
cp. ‘infamias’ 4. 33, 4, * gloriae triumphi- 
que’ Sall. Jug. 41, 7. 

4. intolerantior: here and in 11. 10, 
5 (‘subiectis intolerantior"), this word is 
generally explained to mean * more into- 
lerable, Gellius also (19. 7, 10) thought 
that Laevius so used ‘curis intoleranti- 
bus,' and apparently (13. 8, 5) himself so 
used ‘nihil... intolerantius.’ Nipp. how- 
ever thinks that Gellius misunderstood 
Laevius, and that all good authors take 
the word actively. He would here ex- 
plain it to mean a slavery more intolerant, 
more arbitrary on the master's part. 

8. conpetebant, ‘were competent nei- 
ther as regards their eyes nor ears,’ i. e. 
could use neither rightly. The expression 
is closely repeated from H. 3. 73, 1, and 
appears taken from Sallust (see Introd. v. 

§ 97,1). Livy (22. 5, 3) has ‘ut vix... 
conpeteret animus, also (5. 42, 3) ‘ne 
auribus quidem atque oculis satis constare 
poterant. 

praesumpta spes. ‘This expression, 
found also in Sil. 7, 582, seems to con- 
tain a reminiscence of the Vergilian ‘spe 
praesumite bellum’ (Aen. 11, 18): cp. 
also ‘ praesumpta suspicio’ (2. 73, 6). 

Io. Germaniarum: see note on 2. 
73> 3 

II. un&...cohors. The ‘legionarius 
miles’ of c. 41, 3 may well have been a 
single cohort; but it is very probable 
that the Andecavi and Turoni are rhe- 
torically grouped under one name, and 
that the cohort employed against the 
former is here meant. 

una ala: cp. c. 42, 3. 

12. p&ucae...turmae, the ‘auxiliaris 
manus ' of c. 45, I. 

I3. dites... inbelles, words used of 
the Gauls in general in 11. 18, 1, to describe 
the effect of long peace on them. 

voluptatibus opulentos, ‘abounding 
in luxuries.' 

I4. evincite. The verb may have 
the force of * devinco'; the participle being 
often in Tacitus (e. g. 4. 57, 5, &c.), as in 
Verg., Ov., &c., equivalent to * victus" or 
‘devictus’: cp. *evicit omnia miles’ Liv. 
IO. 17, 10.  Nipp. takes.it to mean, 
*make them change their resolution,' 
others insert *esse' before *Aeduos' or 
*evincite, and translate * prove them td 
be’; as ‘ratio esse evincet' Hor. Sat. 
3. 3, 250. ~ 

consulite = ' parcite' (cp. c. 16, 5), i.e. 

A. D. 21.] LIBER Il. 

CAP. 45-47. 

447 

ad ea clamor, et circumfudit eques frontemque pedites invasere ; 

6 nec cunctatum apud latera. 

paulum morae attulere ferrati re- 

stantibus lamminis adversum pila et gladios; set miles correptis 
securibus et dolabris, ut si murum perrumperet, caedere tegmina 
et corpora; quidam trudibus aut furcis inertem molem proster- 
nere, iacentesque nullo ad resurgendum nisu quasi exanimes 

7 linquebantur. 

Sacrovir primo Augustodunum, dein metu de- 
ditionis in villam propinquam cum fidissimis pergit. 

illic sua 

manu, reliqui mutuis ictibus occidere: incensa super villa omnes 

cremavit. 

47. Tum demum Tiberius ortum patratumque bellum senatu 
scripsit; neque dempsit aut addidit vero, sed fide ac virtute 

2 legatos, se consiliis superfuisse. 

simul causas, cur non ipse, non 

Drusus profecti ad id bellum forent, adiunxit, magnitudinem 
imperii extollens, neque decorum principibus, si una alterave 
8 civitas turbet . . . omissa urbe, unde in omnia regimen. nunc quia 

c 
2. tunctatum : diu certatum Wolfflin. . 
9. ingressa : incensa R. 
here by Nipp., after regimen by Ritter. 

‘make them prisoners. The difference 
between such a command and that of 
Germanicus (2. 21, 3) may be due partly, 
as Nipp. thinks, to contempt for such 
an enemy, and to the absence of such 
vindictiveness as was felt towards the 
Germans; partly, perhaps, also to the 
covetousness by which Silius was held to 
have marred his victory (4. 19, 4). 

I. circumfudit, ‘spread round the 
flanks.’ Elsewhere, in this sense, the 
verb takes an accusative, as in 12 38, 3 
(where see note); but such verbs in Tacitus 
(Introd. v. § 41) are often intransitive. 

-. eques ... pedites. On the inter- 
change of sing. and pl. see Introd. v. $ 2. 

2. cunctatum, nowhere else passively 
used for ‘dubitatam’ (which stands thus 
in 2. 80, 7; 12. 69, 3). Nipp. justifies 
it by the passive use of many other de- 
ponent participles, and notes the archaic 
form * cuncto." 

restantibus = ‘resistentibus*; an ap- 
parently archaic use (Enn. and Lucr. 2, 
450), followed by Sall. (H. 1. 75 D, 74 
K, 100 G? and often by. Livy. ] 

5. trudibus, from Verg. (Aen. 5, 208); 

who, as Nipp. thinks, took the word from 
the language of common life. 

II. senatus: senatui B, text Halm. 

rerum’ I. 47, I. 

3. lamminis: so Med. ii. in H. 1. 79, 6. 
16. lacuna noted 

6. nullo ... nisu, ‘ without an effort.’ 
Their armour deprived them of all power 
to rise. 

9. super: cp. I. 68, a. Livy (a1. 14, 
4) has *domos super seipsos concrema- 
verunt, — 

II. patratum: cp. 2. 26, 2. 

senatu, dative: cp. c. 30. 4, &c. 

I2. dempsit, sc. ' ye ien 

I3. superfuisse, ‘had got the better’ 
zmepeyevéa0ai.. Nipp. notes that this verb 
expresses preeminence in Agr. 44, 2 
‘gratia oris supererat’; also in Cic. ap. 
Gell. 1. 22, 7 * maioribus... Tubero... 
doctrina etiam superfuit. The whole 
chapter in Gell. is a curious disquisition 
on this word. 

I5. principibus, here used to include 
Drusus: cp. c. 34, 11. 

una alterave: cp. c. 34, 8. 
absol. as 4. 1, J, Ter., &c. 

16. omissa urbe: cp. *omittere caput 

'* Turbet’ 

‘lacuna’; but the explanation of Pichena, 
by which ‘proficisci’ is supplied from 
above, is perhaps capable of justification 
by the nearness and prominence in the 
sentence of ‘ profecti forent.’ 

Most editors mark a. 

On 

1o 

448 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 774. 

non metu ducatur, iturum, ut praesentia spectaret componeret- 

que. 
alia decora. 

decrevere patres vota pro reditu eius supplicationesque et 
solus Dolabella Cornelius, dum anteire ceteros 4 

parat, absurdam in adulationem progressus, censuit ut ovans 

5e Campania urbem introiret. 

quibus se non tam vacuum gloria praedicabat, ut post ferocis- 
simas gentes perdomitas, tot receptos in iuventa aut spretos 
triumphos, iam senior peregrinationis suburbanae inane prae- 

mium peteret. 

48. Sub idem tempus, ut mors Sulpicii Quirini publicis exse- 

quiis frequentaretur, petivit a senatu. 

nihil ad veterem et patri- 

ciam Sulpiciorum familiam Quirinius pertinuit, ortus apud muni- 
cipium Lanuvium:. sed impiger militiae et acribus ministeriis 
consulatum sub divo Augusto, mox expugnatis per Ciliciam 

14. super Ciliciam M. Haupt. 

I. metu, ‘a state of panic’: cp. I. 
40, 1. 

praesentia: cp. I. 30, 5, &c. 

2. decrevere... decora: cp. ‘decora 
...tribui’ c. 5, 4. The word hardly 
seems used in contrast (as Doed. thinks) 
to the * indecora adulatio’ of Dolabella. 

3. Dolabella Cornelius. P. Cor- 
nelius P. f. P. n. Dolabella was cos. in 
763, A.D. 10 (C. I. L. i. p. 550): a 
Delmatian inscription (Orelli 2365) re- 
cords him as one of the ‘septemviri 
epulones’ and ‘sodales Titii, as well as 
legatus of Augustus and Tiberius (in 
767, 4. D. 14) in that province (cp. Vell. 
2.125, 5. He was proconsul of Africa 
in 777, A.D. 24 (4. 23, 2). Other in- 
scriptions referring to him are cited by 

Nipp., who thinks he was father of the 

friend of Galba (H. 1. 88, 1). Other 
_ extravagant ' sententiae" proposed by him 
are given in c. 69, 1; II. 22, 3: in 4. 66. 

2 he is mentioned as going out of his 

way to accuse a near relation. 

6. ferocissimas gentes perdomitas, 
&c. See Introd. viii. pp. 133, 134. Vel- 
leius (2. 722, 1) alleges, that although he 
was contented with three triumphs, he 
could have claimed seven. 

40. Bulpicii Quirini: see c. 32, 1 ; 2. 
30, 4- 
publicis exsequiis. It was the opinion 
of Lipsius that any ‘indictivum fanus’ 
(Festus, &c.), i. e. any to which all were 
summoned by public notice, might be 
called * publicum'; but the term is evi- 

dently restricted to the funerals of those 
who, for their services, were buried at 
the public cost. Thus Velleius (2.62, 4) 
says, ‘Pansae atque Hirti corpora pub- 
liga sepultura honorata’; and Valerius 

aximus (5. 2, 10), ‘praetore funus 
Hirtio et Pansae iussu senatus locante.’ 
For other instances see 6. 11,6; Dio 57. 
21, 3, &c., Staatsr. iii. 1188, and note on 
* censorium funus’ 4. 15, 3. 

II. frequentaretur, ‘should be cele- 
brated.’ Tacitus has * celebrare mortem’ 
(6. 27, 2); and ‘frequento’ has the 
general force of *celebro, and may be 
used of a single person (14. 4, 1, &c.); 
but either verb would he more properly 
used of the funeral than of the death. 

I2. familiam, for ‘gentem’: cp. 2. 52, 
8, &c. This gens, though chiefly patri- 
cian, had noble families of both orders, 
the * Camerini, Galbae, Rufi,' &c. 

I3. impiger. The relative genitive with 
this word, found also in H. 1. 87, 4, and 
in Florus (Dr.), is analogous to many 
others (Introd. v. $ 33, e y). Cp. ‘acer 
militiae! H. 2. 5, 1. 

‘acribus ministeriis. Certain suc- 
cesses over the Garamantes and Mar- 
maridae of Libya, ascribed: to Quirinius 
by Florus (2. 31 = 4: 41),.are assigned by 
Mommsen (Comm. on Mon. Anc. App. 
PP. 170, 171) to a time before his consul- 
ship, when he may have. been praetorian 
proconsul of Cyrene. 

14. consulatum, in 742, B. C. 12 (Dio, 
54. 28, 2). 

igitur secutae Caesaris litterae, 5 

A.D. 21.] LIBER Ill. 

CAP. 47-49. 449 

: Homonadensium castellis insignia triumphi adeptus, datusque 

3 rector Gaio Caesari Armeniam optinenti. 

Tiberium quoque 

Rhodi agentem coluerat : quod tunc patefecit in senatu, laudatis 
in se officiis et incusato M. Lollio, quem auctorem Gaio Caesari 

4 pravitatis et discordiarum arguebat. 

sed ceteris haud laeta 5 

memoria Quirini erat ob intenta, ut memoravi, Lepidae pericula 
sordidamque et praepotentem senectam. 
49. Fine anni Clutorium Priscum equitem Romanum, post 

1. onoma densium : text B. 

mox, &c. Cilicia belonged to Syria 
(cp. 2. 78, 3, &c.) ; so that these victories 
would have been gained by him during 
his tenure of that province, with which a 
vexed question of chronology (St. Luke 2. 
2, &c.) is involved. It has been most 
fully investigated by Mommsen (I. 1. 
pp. 161-178), who assigns to Quirinius an 
inscription, now nameless (C. I. L. xiv. 
3613; Henzen 5366), which would make 
him twice legatus of Syria. He is 
known from Josephus (Ant. 17. 13, 5; 
18. 1, 1; 2, 1) to have held this province 
in 759, A. D. 6. But these Cilician vic- 
tories appear from the order of mention 
to have preceded his service with Gaius 
Caesar in the East; and are thus to 
be assigned to his first tenure of Syria, 
which Mommsen places in 751, 752, 
| B.C. 3, 2. 
per Ciliciam: ‘super’ is adopted by 
Nipp. and supported by Mommsen (1. 1. 
p. 172).. The Homonadenses were not 
strictly within Cilicia, but in Pisidia or 
Isauia, though reckoned as a Cilician 
race (cp. Strab. 12. 6. 5, 569; Plin. N. H. 
'5. 27, 23, 94). The MS. text would im- 
ply, and Tacitus may have thought, that 
they were spread over parts of Cilicia 
itself Mommsen suggests, but appears 
rightly to disapprove of, another inter- 
. pretation, by which ‘per’ might mean 
‘passing through,’ as ‘per circum" I. 
I5; 4 

Strabo (I. 1., who says that Quirinius 
starved them into submission, and dis- 
tributed 4000 of them as colonists in the 
vicinity, leaving none behind in the prime 
of life. He describes them as mere cave 
dwellers; but Fliny (who calls them 
‘gens Omanaaum’ 1. 1.\ speaks of a town, 
Omana, and forty-four ‘ castella.’ 
datusque rector, as Seianus to Drusus 
(1. 24, 3). Mommsen (1. l. p. 123) dates 

VOL. I. 

4. folio: text L. 

I. Homonadensium, restored from 

8. C Lutorium IL. 

this appointment in 755, A.D. 2, after the 
death of Lollius, who is mentioned below. 
Gaius could then be strictly spoken of as 
* Armeniam optinens, being actually in 
military possession of that country: cp. 
* Armenios . . . optinebat ' 12. 44, 2. 

2. Tiberium quoque. I have fol- 
lowed Mommsen (l. l. p. 175) in the 
punctuation of this passage. The return 
of Tiberius to Rome belongs to the same 
year as the death of Lollius; so that. 
Quirinius, if not till that year sent to the 
East, is hardly likely to have found him 
still at Rhodes. The mutilated inscrip- 
tion already referred to: would make 
Quirinius to have been at some time pro- 
consul of Asia, probably between 747-751, 
B.C. 7-3; in which capacity he may have 
paid to Tiberius the respect here men- 
tioned. | 

4. M. Lollio. M. Lollius, M. f. was 
in 729, B.C. 25, the first governor of 
Galatia (Eutrop. 7, 10), consul in 733, 
B.C. 21, legatus in Germany in 738, B.C. 
16 (1. 10, 3). His antipathy to Tiberius 
is mentioned by Suetonius (Tib. 12); and 
his character is drawn in the blackest 
colours not only, as might be expected, 
by Velleius (2. 102, 1), but also by 
Pliny (N. H. 9. 35, 58, 118), who states 
that he committed suicide from poison 
after Gaius had renounced his friendship 
for his perfidy and corruption. Horace, 
on the other hand, praises him highly 
(Od. 4. 9, 34-44). 

5. pravitatis et discordiarum, ‘ per- 
verseness and animosity’; cr perhaps, as 
a hendiadys, ‘ perverse animosity.’ The 
same words are coupled in Liv. 4. 26, 6. 

6. ut memoravi : see c. 22, 3. 

7. praepotentem. His childlessness 
(1. 1.) increased his influence (cp. c. 
25. 2). NE 

8. Clutorium. The emendation of 
Lips. agrees with Did (57. 20, 3), who 

Gg 

5 que inlustribus feminis, per vaniloquentiam legerat. 

450 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

2 

[A. U. C. 774. 

celebre carmen, quo Germanici suprema defleverat, pecunia do- 
natum a Caesare, corripuit delator, obiectans aegro Druso com- 

posuisse quod, si extinctus foret, maiore praemio vulgaretur. 

Clutorius in domo P. Petronii, socru eius Vitellia coram multis- 

ut delator 3 

extitit, ceteris ad dicendum testimonium exterritis, sola Vitellia 

nihil se audivisse adseveravit. 

sed arguentibus ad perniciem 4 

plus fidei fuit, sententiaque Haterii Agrippae consulis designati 
indictum reo ultimum supplicium. 

50. Contra M'. Lepidus in hunc modum exorsus est: 

6 .? 
SI, 

5. iecerat Weissbrodt, Nipp., Ritt. 

gives the full name Gaius Lutorius Priscus. 
But it would be unusual for Tacitus, in 
speaking of a somewhat obscure person, to 
mention him in these two chapters twice 
by three and twice by two names. Ritter, 
who noted this, and in his former edition 
omitted * C' throughout, now follows the 
MS. form, which Nipp. supports by in- 
scriptions (Rhein. Mus. xvi. 291), show- 
ing that * Clutorius' is a Roman name. 
The name appears also to occur in Pl. 
N. H. - 39, 40, 129, where the MSS. 
have ‘ utorio ' and ' sutorio.' 

I. pecuni& donatum. These ‘ hono- 
raria' from the Caesars to men of lctters 
seem to have been common. New-fledged 
poets are bidden to weep for the sale 
of Claudius (Sen. Lud. 12, v. 56); 
such liberality was the sole hope ie 
struggling literature in Juvenal’s time 
(7, 1721). 

2. corripuit : cp. 2. 28, 4. 

composuisse, sc. ‘eum, ^ *that he had 
written another, which’ &c. 

3. maiore praemio vulgaretur, 
* might be published and more liberally 
rewarded.' The charge would imply that 
he had speculated on the death of Drusus, 
which would lead to an inference that he 
had desired it; as in the case of those 
who consulted astrologers *in domum 
Caesaris ' (c. 22, 2, &c.). 

4. P. Petronii, mentioned again in 6. 
45, 4, father of P. Petronius Turpilianus, 
distinguished under Nero (14. 29, 1, &c.), 
and of the first wife of Vitellius (H. 2. 
64, 1). Inscriptions (see Nipp.) show 
him to have been augur, cos. suff. in 772, 
A.D. 19, and proconsul of Asia for the 
unusual period of six years (Introd. vii. 
p. 113); after which he was legatus of 
Syria under Gaius (Jos. Ant. 18. 8, 2, 

&c.); in which capacity he is praised by 
Philo (Leg. ad Gai. 31, 1022, foll.) He 
was also a friend of Claudius, during whose 
rule he died (Sen. Lud. 14). 

Vitellia. Nipp. thinks her to have 
been great-aunt of the emperor Vitellius. 

5. legerat. * Vaniloquentia,' found once 
in Plaut. and once in Liv., is elsewhere 
used by Tacitus only in 6. 31, 2; from 
which passage ‘iecerat’ has been here 
read. Clutorius would more strictly have 
shown ‘ vaniloquentia’ in talking about 
his poem than in reading it; nor is it easy 
to see how Vitellia could have pretended 
not to have heard what had been formally 
recited in her presence: but a similar plea 
is advanced in respect of a poem read at a 
large banquet (14. 48, 4), and that he had 
at least recited or quoted bits of it seems 
implied in 'aures hominum polluerit ' 
(c. 50, I). 

6. ad dicendum. 
2. 62, 3. 

7. arguentibus ad perniciem, ‘ evi- 
dence supporting the charge to his de- 
struction. 

8. Haterii Agrippae: see on 1. 77, 
3. On the vote of the cos. design., see 
c. 22, 6. 

9. ultimum ; so ‘ summum suppli- 
cium’ (6. 3, 5), ¢ ultima poena’ (Liv. 3. 
58). This was beyond the proper sen- 
a even for ‘ maiestas ' (see c. 50, 6). 

. M'. Lepidus: see on c. 32, 2 
This speech illustrates the discretion 
E temperamentum) ascribed to him in 
4. 20, 4. Its tone somewhat resembles 
that of Thrasea (14. 48, 5), and in both 
Tacitus seems to have had some reminis- 
cence of Sallust's speech of Caesar (Cat. 

51, 8). 

. exterritis: ep 

id 2 

A. D. 21.] 

LIBER Ill CAP. 49-51. 

451 

patres conscripti, unum id spectamus, quam nefaria voce Clu- 
torius Priscus mentem suam et aures hominum polluerit, neque 
carcer neque laqueus, ne serviles quidem cruciatus in eum suffe- 

2 cerint. 

sin flagitia et facinora sine modo sunt, suppliciis ac 

remediis principis moderatio maiorumque et vestra exempla 5 
temperant, et vana a scelestis, dicta a maleficiis differunt, est 
locus sententiae, per quam neque huic delictum impune sit et 

3 nos clementiae simul ac severitatis non paeniteat. 

saepe audivi 

principem nostrum conquerentem, si quis sumpta morte miseri- 
4 cordiam eius praevenisset. vita Clutorii in integro est, qui neque 
servatus in periculum rei publicae neque interfectus in exemplum 

5 ibit. 

studia illi, ut plena vaecordiae, ita inania et fluxa sunt; 

nec quicquam grave ac serium ex eo metuas, qui suorum ipse 
flagitiorum proditor non virorum animis sed muliercularum ad- 

6 repit. 

cedat tamen urbe et bonis amissis aqua et igni arceatur : 

quod perinde censeo ac si lege maiestatis teneretur.' 
51. Solus Lepido Rubellius Blandus e consularibus adsensit : 

10. esto L, sit Madvig. 

I. nefaria. The poem must have 
been complimentary; but any language 
treating Drusus as already dead would be 
ominous, and therefore shocking. 

3. carcer . . . laqueus. These are 
p of the same punishment ; the prison 

ing the * Tullianum" or well-house’ 
(see Burn, p.81 ; Middleton, i. p. 151, foll.), 
in which criminals were strangled (cp. 4. 
29, 2; 5. 9, 2; 6. 40, 13 II. 2, 5; and the 
description in Sall. Cat. 55). It still exists 
as the lowest portion of the Mamertine 
prison near the Capitol. 

serviles... cruciatus, the rack and 
the cross. 

4. sin flagitia, &c. The apodosis 
does not begin till *est locus, and the 
protasis is to be taken as if it had been 
divided, as ‘sin flagitia quidem . . . sup- 
pliciis vero, &c. * If, though outrage 
and crime are unlimited, the prince's 
clemency and our precedents yet limit 
po and redress, and lines are drawn 

e 

tween folly and wickedness, between: 

word and deed. 
7. impune: cp. I. 72, 3. 
8. audivi: cp. c. 16. 3, 2; 2. 31, 4. 
Io. in integro, ‘yet untouched '; cp. 
15. 2,4; H. 3. 2,9. 
qui neque, &c., ‘ whose survival will 
not be in its issue dangerous to the state, 
nor his execution exemplary’; i.e. he is 

too insignificant for either result: cp. 
* voluptates ituras in dolorem’ Sen. Ep. 
121, 4; ‘in scelus it’ Luc. 10, 343. 
E 2. studia; so used of compositions in 
I6. 4, 2. 
fluxa, used of the honours decreed to 
Poppaea (15. 23, 4): cp. *fluxa mens’ 
(6. 38, 2). Here it is used of * fugitive 
pieces that would soon be forgotten. 
I4. animis... a&drepit:; cp. 1. 74, 2. 
16. quod perinde, &c., ‘this I pro- 
pose, as if he were guilty under the law 
of treason.’ He implies that the case 
was not strictly within the definition of 
‘maiestas’ (see on I. 72, 33 4. 34, 33 
Introd. viii. p. 141 and notes), and that if 
it were so, ‘exilium’ with loss of goods 
is the proper legal penalty. This had 
been fixed by the dictator Caesar (Cic. 
Phil. 1. 9, 23) and still remained so in the 
time of Nero (14. 48, 7), though that of 
death was often inflicted, especially in the 
later years of Tiberius and under Nero 
and Domitian, and is subsequently recog- 
nized as usual: cp. Paul. Sent. Rec. v. 
29, I ‘antea in perpetuum aqua et igni 
interdicebatur ; nunc vero humiliores 
bestiis obiciuntur vel vivi exuruntur, 
honestiores capite puniuntur." 
teneretur: cp. 2. 50, I. 
17. Rubellius Blandus: see c. 23, 2. 

Gg2 

IO 

IO 

od 
Qi 

452 

P.. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 775. 

ceteri sententiam Agrippae secuti, ductusque in carcerem Priscus . 

ac statim exanimatus. 

id Tiberius solitis sibi ambagibus apud 2 

senatum incusavit, cum extolleret pietatem quamvis modicas 
principis iniurias acriter ulciscentium, deprecaretur tam prae- 
5cipitis verborum poenas ; laudaret Lepidum, neque Agrippam 

argueret. 

igitur factum senatus consultum, ne decreta patrum 8 

ante diem decimum ad aerarium deferrentur idque vitae spatium 

damnatis prorogaretur. 

sed non senatui libertas ad paeniten- 4 

dum erat, neque Tiberius interiectu temporis mitigabatur. 

52. C. Sulpicius D. Haterius consules sequuntur, inturbidus 
externis rebus annus, domi suspecta severitate adversum luxum, 
qui inmensum proruperat ad cuncta quis pecunia prodigitur. 
sed alia sumptuum, quamvis graviora, dissimulatis plerumque 2 
pretiis occultabantur; ventris et ganeae paratus adsiduis ser- 
monibus vulgati fecerant curam, ne princeps antiquae parsimo- 

niae durius adverteret. 

nam incipiente C. Bibulo ceteri quoque 3 

7. decimum ins. L. 

2. ambagibus, *circumlocution.! Dio 
(57. 20, 4) assigns as the motive for his 
displeasure, that punishment of death had 
been inflicted without his leave: yet he 

' is generally d ipsius às only too ready 

and is copied once by Aur. 

to devolve such responsibilities. 
7. ante diem deoimum. That the 

latter word must have stood in the original : 

text appears from Suet. Tib. 75; Dio, 1.1. 
Pfitzner (p. 97) shows that, according to 
Quint. Decl. 313,the interval appears later 
to have been extended to thirty days. 

‘ad aerarium. The registration of a 

, 

decree of the senate in the ‘aerarium’ 

was essential to its validity: cp. 13. 28, 
3 ; Livy, 39. 4, 8; Suet. Jul. 28; Staatsr. 
ii. 489, 2; iii. IOII. 

8. non...libertas. On the power 
of pardon or ' revision see Introd. vi. p. 87. 
It is evident, here and elsewhere, that the 
senate had still liberty of choice in the 
original sentence. 

9. interiectu. The use of this word 
of an interval of time, in the abl., is espe- 
cially Tucttean (cp. 3. 67, 4; 6. 39, 2), 
Vict. 

Io. €. Bulpicius, the same person who 
is called * C. Galba' in 6. 40, 3, the elder 
brother of the emperor Galva (Suet. Galb. 

:3).. On the other consul see c. 49, 4- 

ainturbidus... annus, The construc- 
tion is here somewhat strained for con- 

ciseness of expression ; ; ‘annus’ stands in 
apposition to ‘consules,’ as * consules to 
‘annum’ in Liv. 4. 30, 12, and the abla- 
tivés follow as if the words had been 
‘turbidus non externis rebus sed sus- 
pecta severitate. * Inturbidus' is wholly 
a Tacitean word, used passively here and 
in 14. 22, 5, actively in H. 3. 39. 4. - 
. 1I. suspecta severitate, ' through an 
apprehension of strict measures’: cp. the 
use of ‘ suspectus ’ with * insidiae ' (4. 7o, 
7), *proditio" (12. 14, 3) ' iracundia ' 
(H. 1. 10, 2), &c.; also in Sallust and 
Quintilian. 

12. prodigitur: cp. H. 1. 20, 3: the 
verb had been used in this sense by 
Sallust (oratio Lepidi 17), and before 
him by Plautus. 

13. alia sumptuum. On the genitive 
cp. Introd. v. $ 32 b. 

14. raneae, strictly = ‘ popinae,’ but 
used generally of feasting in H. 2. 95, 4, 
&c. Orelli notes that coarse words are 
used to show contempt. 

paratus: cp. 'lauto cenare paratu’ 
Juv. 14, 13; also c. 55, 3, &c. 

I5. princeps antiquae parsimoniae : 
cp. ‘antiqua parsimonia" 12. 53, 5, and 

* antiquo. cultu. victuque’ c. 55, 5. On 
the example set by Tiberius in the ex- 
penses of the tables) see Suet. Tib. 34. 

16. adverteret: cp. 2. 32, 5. 

A. D. a2.] LIBER III. CAP. 51-53, 

453 
aediles disseruerant, Sperni sumptuariam legem vetitaque uten- 
silium pretia augeri in dies, nec mediocribus remediis sisti posse. 
et consulti patres integrum id negotium ad principem distulerant. 
4 sed Tiberius saepe apud se pensitato, an coerceri tam profusae 
cupidines possent, num coercitio plus damni in rem publicam 
ferret, quam indecorum adtrectare quod non obtineret vel reten- 

tum ignominiam et infamiam virorum inlustrium posceret, postre- 

mo litteras ad senatum composuit, quarum sententia in hunc 
modum fuit. | 

53. 'Ceteris forsitan in rebus, patres conscripti, magis expe- 
diat me coram interrogari et dicere quid e re publica censeam : 
in hac relatione subtrahi. oculos meos melius fuit, ne denotanti- 
bus vobis ora ac metum singulorum, qui pudendi luxus argue- 
2 rentur, ipse etiam viderem eos ac velut deprenderem. quod si 
mecum ante viri strenui, aediles, consilium habuissent, nescio an 
suasurus fuerim omittere potius praevalida et adulta vitia quam 

2. remedii isti : remediis resisti B, text Pich. 

I. &ediles. It was part of their duty 
to regulate the market: see Introd. vi. 
P. 90, Staatsr. ii. 497 foll. 

sumptuariam legem. Gellius (2. 24, 
14) mentions a ‘lex Iulia’ of Augustus 
and an edict by him or by Tiberius, both 
. of which limited the amount that might 
be spent on the dinner for common or 

festal days. This ‘lex,’ which is probably 

the one here referred to, was passed in 
732, B.C. 22 (Dio, 54. 2, 3; Suet. Aug. 
34). 

utensilium : cp. I. 70, 6. Suet. (Tib. 
34) speaks of three mullets having been 

at that time sold for 30,000 H. S. Seneca- 

tells another story (Ep. 95, 42) of one 
P. Octavius buying by auction for 5000 
H. S. a single mullet, presented to Ti- 
berius and sold by his order. : 

2. sisti posse, sc. ‘rem.’ Tacitus 
follows Livy, who has ‘ut consuetis re- 
mediis sisti posset ’ (3. 20, 8). 

3. consulti patres. Nipp. notes 
that as the aediles had not themselves 
the ‘ius relationis,’ they may be supposed 
to have mentioned the matter ‘ per egres- 
sionem,' and asked for a ‘relatio’ from 
the consuls (see on 2. 38, 3). 

distulerant : 
equivalent to ‘ reicere, but with reference 
to a place or time rather than a person, 
as ‘legationes . . . distulit ad Tarraco- 
nem’ ly 26. 51, 10, ‘legati... ad 

‘ differre’ is elsewhere - 

11. de ins. margin, e B. 

novos magistratus dilati erant’ Id. 41. 8, 
5. The construction seems here pregnant 

_ =‘distulerant et ad principem reiecerant.' 

4. pensitato: cp. Introd. v. § 31 a. 
This sense of the verb is found first in 
Livy, the abl. abs. of the part. only here 
and in 12. 17, 3. 

5. in rem publicam,. probably not 
used as in c. 24, 2, but with the force 
of a simple dat. (Introd. v. $.60 b). 

6. quam indecorum, sc. ' esset,’ ‘how 

undignified it was.’ 

obtineret, ‘maintain’: cp. ‘ad ob- 
tinendas iniquitates' H. 2. 84, 2, ‘ ob- 
tinendis quae percurrerat ' Agr. 23, 1, ‘ad 
obtinendam iniuriam ? Liv. 29. 1,17. The 
verb is varied to ‘retentum,” used con- 
cisely for * si retentum esset. 

8. in huno modum. Tacitus here 
professes to give the substance only. 

II. e re publica : cp. 2. 33, 2. 

12. subtrahi oculos: cp. ‘Nero... 
subtraxit oculos" (Agr. 45, 2). 

denotantibus, ‘marking,’ by looking 
at them and making them conspicuous : 
cp. ‘ denotandis tot hominum palloribus’ 
Agr. 45. 2. ‘Ora et metum ' are a hen- 
diadys for * metum in ore.' 

16. suasurus ... omittere. The inf. 
with this verb is rare in classical prose, 
and used by Tacitus in the Annals only 

(13. 37, 6 5 15. 63, 6; 16. 9, 3). 

5 

5 

IO 

[] 
Ut 

454. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 775. 

hoc adsequi, ut palam fieret quibus flagitiis impares essemus. 
sed illi quidem officio functi sunt, ut ceteros quoque magistratus 3 
sua munia implere velim: mihi autem neque honestum silere 
neque proloqui expeditum, quia non aedilis aut praetoris aut 

consulis partis sustineo. 

maius aliquid et excelsius a principe 4 

postulatur; et cum recte factorum sibi quisque gratiam trahant, 

unius invidia ab omnibus peccatur. 

quid enim primum prohi- 5 

bere et priscum ad morem recidere adgrediar?  villarumne in- 
finita spatia? familiarum numerum et nationes? argenti et auri 
pondus? aeris tabularumque miracula? promiscas viris et feminis 
vestes atque illa feminarum propria, quis lapidum causa pecu- 
niae nostrae ad externas aut hostilis gentes transferuntur ? 

54. Nec ignoro in conviviis et circulis incusari ista et modum 
posci: set si quis legem sanciat, poenas indicat, idem illi civita- 
tem verti, splendidissimo cuique exitium parari, neminem cri- 

minis expertem clamitabunt. 

atqui ne corporis quidem morbos 2 

veteres et diu auctos nisi per dura et aspera coerceas: corruptus 

I. flagitiis impares ; so ‘impar curis’ 
14. 54, 3; * dolori ' 15. 57, 1, &c. 

4. quia non, &c. ' These words are 
taken only with * neque proloqui expe- 
ditum." 

5. & principe. On the conception of 
this dignity as a magistracy see Introd. 
vi. p. 81. | 

6. sibi quisque ... trahant, ‘ each 
appropriates to himself'; so in H. 3. 33, 
3: cp. ‘in se trahere' 1, 2, 1 and ' tra- 
here ' Liv. 6. 40, 18, &c. 

7. unius invidia. The preposition 
‘cum’ might have been expected; but 
such quasi-absolute ablatives of attend- 
ant circumstances are found in Tacitus, as 
* pavore" 5. 3, 4; * pernicie! H. 4. 30, 1. 
It is meant that all social vices were 
ascribed to laxity in the princeps, who 
alone had power to check them. 

8. ad morem recidere, pregnant con- 
struction for * recidendo reducere." 

villarum ...spatia. Sallust speaks 
(Cat. 12,.3) of villas ‘in urbium modum 
exaedificatus, and similar language is 

.used by Horace (Od. 2. 15 and 17), by 

Seneca (de Ben. 7. 10, 5), and Juvenal 

(14, 86). See Friedl. iii. p. 89, foll. 

9. familiarum numerum et nationes, 
‘the host of slaves of all nations’: cp. 
‘nationes in familiis habemus ' 14. 44, 5. 
Pliny (N. H. 33. 10, 47; 135) mentions 
a person who, at his death in 746, B.c. 8, 

left 4116 slaves. For later instances see 
I4. 43, 4; Athenaeus, 6, p. 272d. They 
were of all nationalities, Greeks, Syrians, 
Phrygians, Cappadocians, Thracians, Ae- 
thiopians, &c. See Introd. vii. p. 106; 
Marquardt, ii. p. 122; Friedl. i. p. 53; 
Hirschf. Unters. 194, and Jacob's -note 
here. 

argenti et auri pondus, taken from 
Verg. Aen. I, 359. The quantity of plate 
is alluded to in 2. 33, 2. 

10. &eris: cp. Suet. Tib. 34 *Corinthio- 
rum vasorum pretia in inmensum exar- 
sisse graviter conquestus." 

II. vestes: cp. 2. 33, I. 

quis. Nipp. refers this to ‘illa... 
propria’; ‘the special extravagances of 
women, through which,’ &c. 

lapidum causa. Pliny (N. H. 9. 35, 
58, 117) speaks of having seen Lollia 
Paulina covered with jewels estimated to 
have cost forty million H. S. ; and else- 
where (12. 18, 41, 84) estimates the an- 
nual drain of money to the East for such 
extravagances at Ioo million H. S. 

I2. externas aut hostilis, ‘foreign to 
the empire, if not hostile.’ « 

I3. in conviviis et circulis, a form 
of expression, found in Cic. (Balb. 26, 57 ; 
ad Att. 2. 18, 2), and often in Livy. 

I5. verti : cp. 2. 42, 4, &c. 

I7. coerceas, potential subjunct. (In- 
trod. v. $ 51); so also ‘timeas’ below. 

A. D. 22.] LIBER LII. 

CAP. 53, 54. 455 

simul et corruptor, aeger et flagrans animus haud levioribus 

3 remediis restinguendus est quam libidinibus ardescit. 

tot a 

maioribus repertae leges, tot quas divus Augustus tulit, illae 
oblivione, hae, quod flagitiosius est, contemptu abolitae securio- 

4rem luxum fecere. 

nam si velis quod nondum vetitum est, 

timeas ne vetere: at si prohibita impune trafiscenderis, neque 
5 metus ultra neque pudor est. cur ergo olim parsimonia pollebat? 
quia sibi quisque moderabatur, quia unius urbis cives eramus ; 

ne inritamenta quidem eadem intra Italiam dominantibus. 

ex- 

ternis victoriis aliena, civilibus etiam nostra consumere didicimus. 
6 quantulum istud est de quo aediles admonent! quam, si cetera 
respicias, in levi habendum! at hercule nemo refert, quod Italia 

8. sibique moderabatur qua : text B. 

corruptus simul et corruptor. Taci- 
tus thus joins ‘corrumpere’ and *cor- 
rumpi’ in 14. 20, 5; G. 19, 3. Bentley 
has collected (on Hor. Od. 4.9, 39) many 
of the expressions in Latin poetry or rhe- 
toric in which the mind is personified, as 
* aestimator,' * carnifex,’ * censor,’ &c. 

1. aeger et flagrans, ‘enfeebled and 
feverish,’ i.e. full of passionate longings, 
but without healthy energy. 

2. restinguendus, ‘to be cooled’: 
the metaphor of a fever is carried through 
the sentence. 

libidinibus, attracted for *libidines 
quibus.' | 

tot & maioribus repertae. The 
earliest was the ‘lex Oppia' (c. 33, 4). 
Others, dating between the end of the 
second Punic war and the -death of 
Sulla, are the *leges' *Orchia,' * Fannia,’ 
* Didia,' * Licinia, * Cornelia,’ * Aemilia,' 
* Antia. On their provisions see Gell. 2. 
24; Macrob. 2. 13. A ‘lex Iulia’ was also 
passed by the dictator Caesar (Dio, 43. 
25, 2; Suet. Jul. 43), who complained 
of its neglect (Cic. Att. 13. 7, 1). 

3. tot quas divus Augustus tulit. 
No others are known but his * lex Iulia’ 
already mentioned (c. 52, 3) ; so that the 
language seems rhetorical. 

4. contemptu ; their recent date pre- 
cluding the excuse of oblivion. 

6. si prohibita . . . transcenderis, 
‘if you have passed the forbidden line.’ 
The phrase seems to be a pregnant con- 
struction for * transcendere leges et pro- 
hibita facere,’ and is sufficiently analogous 
to such expressions as ‘ vota transcendi 
mea ’ (Sen. Thyest. 912). 

8. unius urbis cives. In legal status 
they were still and always such ; but the 
reference is apparently to a time when 
Roman citizens, like those of the old 
Greek cities, were such by home and 
nationality, not merely in legal phraseo- 
logy, and were restrained from extrava- 
gance by civic ideas of equality or pro- 
portion. Nipp. applies the expression to 

- the whole time down to the Italian war ; 

but as the last century of that period is 
full of sumptuary legislation (see above), 
it can hardly be described as one of volun- 
tary self-restraint: it seems therefore better 
to suppose the time throughout referred 
toto be that before the Punic wars and 
other * externae victoriae,’ when men were 
simple citizens, not pampered conquerors. 
The sentence * ne. ..dominantibus’ would 
thus not distinguish another period, but 
add another reason: not only had men 
then more self-control, but also fewer 
temptations, as foreign luxuries were 
comparatively unknown. 

9. externis victoriis, &c. Pliny(N.H. 
37. 1,6, 12 shows the influence on luxury 
of the victories of L. Scipio, Mummius, 
and Pompcius. 

IO. civilibus... nostra, not only by 
pillaging each other as they had pillaged 
the foreigner, but also by the sense of 
insecurity, leading men to spend at once 
what might become the spoil of another. 

I2. in levi habendum; so ‘in levi 
habitum" II. 2. 21, 4; also ‘in benignitate ' 
(Sall. Jug. 103, 6), ‘in damno habere’ 
(Liv. 21. 13, 5). The abl is usually 
plural; but the singular is common in 
Greek, as ov« év éAagpy Theocr. 22. 213. 

bet 

o 

456 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 735. 

externae opis indiget, quod vita populi Romani per incerta maris 

et tempestatum cotidie volvitur. 

ac nisi provinciarum copiae et 7 

dominis et servitiis et agris subvenerint, nostra nos scilicet 

nemora nostraeque villae tuebuntur. 

hanc, patres conscripti, cu- 8 

5 ram sustinet princeps ; haec omissa funditus rem publicam trahet. 
reliquis intra animum medendum est: nos pudor, pauperes 9 

necessitas, divites satias in melius mutet. 

tratibus tantam industriam ac severitatem pollicetur, ut ire ob- 
viam queat, hunc ego et laudo et exonerari laborum meorum 

1o partem fateor : sin accusare vitia volunt, dein, cum gloriam eius 11 

rei adepti sunt, simultates faciunt ac mihi relinquunt, credite, 
patres conscripti, me quoque non esse offensionum avidum ; quas 
cum graves et plerumque iniquas pro re publica suscipiam, in- 
anes et inritas neque mihi aut vobis usui futuras iure deprecor.' 
55. Auditis Caesaris litteris remissa aedilibus talis cura ; lux- 

9. exonerare Doed. Io. parte Heins., parte me Wopkens. 

nemo refert. This might be said 
not only of those who had the *ius rela- 
tionis, but of all senators, who could do 
as the aediles in this case had done (see 
€. 52,3) _ 

quod Italia... indiget.  Respect- 
ing the dependence of Rome and Italy on 
foreign corn, cp. 2. 59, 4; 4. 6,6; 1a. 
43,5; H. 1.73, 2: 3.8, 35 48, 4. 

I. vita... volvitur: cp. the similar 
expression (12. 43, 5) * navibus et casibus 
‘vita populi Romani permissa est.’ Here 
' volvitur! =‘ agitatur. 

3. subvenerint, used in two senses, 
of supplying the deficiency of arable land, 
and the needs of the master and the slave. 

nos. He speaks as one of the sena- 
tors, though his own estates in Italy were 
moderate and well-managed (4. 6, 7). 

6. intra animum, i.e. by a change 
of disposition, instead of by the external 
pressure of law. 

nos pudor, &c. He here distinguishes 
the senators from the rich in general, as 
well as from the poor. He assumes that 
they could be, and thus implies that they 
should be, restrained by the self-respect 
due to their rank, and the sentiment 
of ‘noblesse’; whereas a rich knight 
or freedman would probably only leave 
off luxury through surfeit. 

7. aut si, &c. ‘On the other hand, if.’ 

g. hunc ego, &c. Nipp. notes that 
the natural order of the words is varied to 
emphasize ‘ hunc' in relation to : si quis.’ 

exonerari, ‘is being removed. The 
verb has this sense in H. 5. 2, 3 * multi- 
tudinem . . . . exoneratam,' and in several 

: other instances cited by Nipp. from Plau- 

tus, Livy, L. Seneca, and Lucan. 

II. simultates faciunt: cp. ‘saepe si- 
multates ira morata facit' Ov. Am. r. 8, 
82. *Dein' belongs to both verbs. 

I2. me quoque non, *that neither am 
I' * Quoque non,’ like ‘nec’ and ‘ne- 
que’ (see note on 2. 34, 7), has sometimes 
the force of ‘ne... quidem,’ whether in 
the sense of ‘not either’ (11. 13, 3; I5. 
66, 1), or ‘not even’ (14. 21; 2; 15. 57, 
4). ‘ Etiam non’ and ‘neque etiam’ are 
also thus used: see Nipp. here, Drager, 
Synt. und Stil, § 122. 

offensionum, ‘of provoking animo- 
sities’: cp. ‘accendendis offensionibus’ 
2. 57, 3- 

13. inanes et inritas, ‘ purposeless and 
fruitless,’ i.e. incurred without any com- . 
pensating result. These words, nearly 
synonymous, are explained by ‘nec mihi 
. . . futuras,’ and the whole stands in con- 
trast to * pro republica." 

15. remissa aedilibus talis cura, 'the 
aediles were excused from such a duty,’ 
i.e. from that of an energetic enforce- 
ment of the laws. The laws were left un- 
altered, and their violation tacitly ignored. 
On ‘ remissa cp. 1. 8,6. It is stated in 
Suet. Tib. 34 (cp. also Pl. N. H. 33. 2, 
8, 32), that Tiberius did at some time 
place the market under senatorial super- 

aut si quis ex magis- 10 

A. D. 22.] 

LIBER Ill. CAP. 54, 55. 

457 

usque mensae, a fine Actiaci belli ad ea arma, quis Servius 
Galba rerum adeptus est, per annos centum profusis sumptibus 

2exerciti paulatim exolevere. 
libet. 

causas eius mutationis quaerere 
dites olim familiae nobilium aut claritudine. insignes 
3 studio magnificentiae prolabebantur. 

nam etiam tum plebem 

socios regna colere et coli licitum ; ut quisque opibus domo 
paratu speciosus, per nomen et clientelas inlustrior habebatur. 
postquam caedibus saevitum et magnitudo famae exitio erat, 

4 ceteri ad sapientiora convertere. 

vision and enjoined on the aediles a strict 
control of ‘ popinae’ and ‘ ganeae.' 

I. arma -: * bellum,’ more strictly ‘the 
time when arms were taken up': cp. 
‘post arma... Vindicis' 15. 74, 2, ‘per 
civilia arma’ ( =‘ during civil war’) H. 
2. 11, 4. Instances approaching to this 
meaning are found in Cic., Liv., &c. 

2. rerum adeptus. The genitive with 
this verb (cp. 12. 30, 4) and with *apis- 
cor' (6. 45, 6) is peculiar to Tacitus. 
The construction, which is analogous to 
that of ‘ potior,’ is apparently taken from 
that of rvyxdavey. 

per annos centum. On this and 
other principal forms of the luxury of this 
whole period, the fullest information is 
' to be found in Friedl. Sitteng. iii. ch. 1. 

. 3. exerciti . . . exolevere, ‘ were 
practised, but have since gradually gone 
out of fashion.’ Two distinct statements 
.are here condensed for brevity: cp. ‘ per- 
empti ,.. retinent' 4. 35, 3, and several 
other instances given here by Nipp. 
causas. It will be seen that Taci- 
tus puts forward three traceable causes. 
(1) The ruin, or the gradually enforced 
moderation, of old rich families. (2) The 
introduction of new senators of simple 
habits from the Italian towns or from 
the provinces. (3) The example of Ves- 
pasian. After these he suggests a fourth 
explanation of a fatalist character, that 
there are cycles of moral changes, as of 
the seasons; in other words, that there 
are causes of which the action is not 
traceable (see Introd. iv. p. 31). 

5. prolabebantur. The metaphor (cp. 
I. 31, 3; 2. 10, 2; 4. 18, 3, &c.) is from 
persons slipping their footing and unable 
to recover themselves. Drager compares 
* cupiditate prolapsos’ Cic. Att. I. 17, 9; 
* cupiditate regni prolapsus’ Liv. 40. 23, 
8. 'Olim' is perhaps best taken with 
*prolabebantur'; so as to refer, like 

simul novi homines e munici- 

‘etiam ‘tum,’ to the earlier part of the 
century indicated. . 

plebem, especially in the time of 
Augustus, before the abolition of the 
comitia (I. I5, 1). 

6. socios, the provincial subjects. 

regna, the tributary kingdoms, and 
especially their kings, such as those of 
Judaea, Cappadocia, Mauretania, Thrace. 

et coli, sc. ‘ab iis.’ Temples were 
erected in the provinces to proconsuls 
under Augustus (Suet. Aug. 52), as under 
the Republic. Nipp. notes the games 
held at Mylasa in honour of C, Marcius 
Censorinus, proconsul of Asia, who is 
styled owrnp xai evepyérns. 

7. paratu: cp. c. 52, 2. 

per nomen. The sentence seems to 
involve the tautology of speaking of a 
person as being * reputed more illustrious 
through his reputation. We can, how- 
ever, explain ‘inlustrior habebatur" to 
mean ‘he was sustained in a more dis- 
tinguished position’: cp. 1. 73, 2. 

8. postquam caedibus saevitum. 
This applies especially to the reign of 
terror in the later years of Tiberius, and 
that under Gaius and Nero. 

magnitudo famae, referring to ‘no- 
men’ above. 

9. ceteri, ‘the survivors! On the 
danger of wealth in perilous times see 
Juv. 10, 15, &c. 

e municipiis et coloniis. The use 
of these terms by Tacitus to denote spe- 
cially the towns of Italy (see note on t. 
79, 1) makes the antithesis in * provinciis ' 
sufficiently plain, though the provinces 
also contained towns of colonial or muni- 
cipal rank. For the selection of senators 
by Julius Caesar see Suet. Jul. 76, 80. 
An inscription (C. I. L. ix. 3306) records 
in the time of Augustus the first Pae- 
lignian senator, and Tiberius admitted 
many from Italian towns (Or. Claud. 

458 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A.U. C. 775. 

piis et coloniis atque etiam provinciis in senatum crebro adsumpti 
domesticam parsimoniam intulerunt, et quamquam fortuna vel 
industria plerique pecuniosam ad senectam pervenirent, mansit 

tamen prior animus. 

5 pasianus fuit, antiquo ipse cultu victuque. 

sed praecipuus adstricti moris auctor Ves- 5 

obsequium inde in 

principem et aemulandi amor validior quam poena ex legibus et 

nietus. 

nisi forte rebus cunctis inest quidam velut orbis, ut 6 

quem ad modum temporum vices, ita morum vertantur; nec 
omnia apud priores meliora, sed nostra quoque aetas multa 

10 laudis et artium. imitanda posteris tulit. 

verum haec nobis zz 

maiores certamina ex honesto maneant. 
56, Tiberius fama moderationis parta, quod ingruentis accu- 
satores represserat, mittit litteras ad senatum, quis potestatem 

10. in add. L and Vertran., erga add. R, [maiores] Schneidewin. 

E 2). For the action of Claudius see 

25, I, for that of Vespasian Suet. 
Nun 9, and generally Staatsr. iii. 
876. In 822, A.D. 69, Otho (H. 1. 84, 
6) calls the senate *decora omnium pro- 
vinciarum.' 

2. domesticam parsimoniam. The 
‘provincialis parsimonia" of Massilia is 
mentioned in Agr. 4, 3: cp. also 16. 5, 1 

4. adstricti moris: cp. ‘ astrictus 
pater’ , Prop. 3. 17, 18, *astricta parsi- 
monia ' Just. 44, 2 

Vespasianus. He was a ‘novus 
homo' from Reate (Suet. Vesp. 1, 2), 
and his parsimony is proverbial. Other 
instances of the influence of the princeps 
on manners are given in Friedl. i. p. 68. 

7. nisi forte. The explanation thus 
suggested is probably that which com- 
mended itself most to Tacitus, and re- 
sembles that which Plato (Rep. 546, A) 
offers for the alternation of barren and 
fertile ages of human intellect. 

quidam velut, so joined in Dial. 5, 
3; 30, 35; 33,1, &c., to soften (as either 
word alone might) a figurative expres- 
sion: cp. . quasi. . . quandam ’ Cic. Lael. 
13, 48. So * orbis' in Sen. Ep. 108, 20. 

8. quem ad modum : cp. 6. 24, 3; 
Dial. 33, 2. In such clauses Tacitus 
much oftener uses ‘quomodo’: see on 
4. 35» 4- : 

9. nostra...8etas, i.e. that of Trajan. 

multa laudis et artium, ‘many 
examples of noble character and talent”: 
‘artes’ are here used for the * bonae artes’ 
of 2. 73, 4, &c, In H. 1. 3, 3, he similarly 

describes the age as not wholly * virtutum 
sterile.’ | 

IO. haec nobis in maiores certa- 
mina. Most editors read thus. The 
construction «certamen in aliquem' is 
nowhere found; the nearest parallel in 
Tacitus being *ambitio in posteros' (6. 
46, 4), and other uses of *in' with the 
sense of ‘in relation to’ (cp. 4. 11, 2; 
I2. 6, 5; Introd. v. $ 60 b); a meaning 
perhaps suitable to such a figure as that 
of a contest between those who are of 
different generations. Joh. Müller (Beitr. 
3. Pp. 34) suggests that ‘maiores’ may 
have been the corruption of * animorum '; 
‘certamen animorum' being, though 
hardly in the same sense, a frequent 
phrase in Livy (2.59, 1; 4: 56, 9, &c.). 
For other alterations see Walther and 
Baiter on Orelli. 

II. ex honesto, sc. ‘orta’; * honour- 
able rivalries.' 

I2. fama moderationis parta. It is 
of course insinuated that he utilized the 
credit thus obtained for moderation to 
push this request. By associating Drusus 
in the tribunician power, he would be 
seen to aim at making the succession to 
the principate hereditary. 

ingruentis, i.e. those who would have 
seized the opportunity, if strict enforce- 
ment of sumptuary laws had been enjoined. 

13. potestatem tribuniciam, i. e. to 
be associated in that power with himself: 
cp. I. 3, 33 Introd. vi. p. 98. On the 
coins attesting the possession of this 
power by Drusus, see Introd. ii. p. to. 

A.D. 22.] LIBER III. 

2 tribuniciam Druso petebat. 

CAP. 55, 56. 459 

id summi fastigii vocabulum Au- 

gustus repperit, ne regis aut dictatoris nomen adsumeret ac 
3 tamen appellatione aliqua cetera imperia praemineret. Marcum 
deinde Agrippam socium eius potestatis, quo defuncto Tiberium 

4 Neronem delegit, ne successor in incerto foret. 

sic cohiberi 

pravas aliorum spes rebatur; simul modestiae Neronis et suae 

5 magnitudini fidebat. 

quo tunc exemplo Tiberius Drusum sum- 

mae rei admovit, cum incolumi Germanico integrum inter duos 

6 iudicium tenuisset. 

consilia sua rei publicae prosperarent, modica de moribus adu- 

7 lescentis neque in falsum aucta rettulit. 

esse illi coniugem et 

tres liberos eamque aetatem, qua ipse quondam a divo Augusto 

8. admouet: text Halm. 

I. summi fastigii: cp. 13. 17, 5; 14. 
54, 5, &c. 

Augustus repperit. Julius Caesar, 
according to Dio (42. 20, 3), had tribu- 
nician power for life, às eimeiv, i. e. in sub- 
stance without a formal title (* vocabu- 
lum,’ cp. t. 2, 2, &c.). Nor did Augustus 
bear the title until 731, B.C. 23, though 
he had in some form held the power long 
previously : see Introd. vi. p. 76. 

2. ne regis; &c.: cp. I. 9, 6. Augus- 
tus states (Mon. Anc. Gr. iii. 2-9) that 
he refused a formal offer, both of the dic- 
tatorship, and of the consulship annually 
or for life, in 732, B. C. 22. 

3. praemineret. The verb is of post- 
Augustan use only, except in Sall. Fr. H. 
2. 85 D, 83 K, 50 G ; where it takes an 
accus. as in the Annals (12. 12, 1; 33, 
I; I5, 34, 3), analogously to ‘ praecello,' 
* praesideo,’ &c. 

Marcum Agrippam: see Introd. ix. 
note 4. He held the tribunician power 
from 736, B.C. 18 (Dio, 54. 12, 28), till 
his death six years later. The only titular 
recognition of it in his case appears to be 
found in a Greek and Latin inscription of 
Laconia (C. I. G. 1299; Henzen 5367). 

4. Tiberium Neronem. He did not 
succeed to this power immediately on the 
death of Agrippa, but six years later, in 
748, B.C. 6 (Dio, 55. 9, 4), and held it 
- for five years ; after which Augustus made 
no appointment, apparently reserving it 
for his grandson Gaius, till Tiberius was 
reappointed on his adoption (see Introd. 
viii. p. 134). Allthese years of his tenure 
of the power are reckoned in his inscrip- 
tions (see Introd. ix. note 28). 

&. delegit. For the position of the verb 
in the second instead of the first clause 
cp. ‘ labefecit’ 6. 29, 5, ‘iussit’ 13. 15, 3, 
* veni? H. 1. 83, 2. 

ne successor, &c. Tacitus appears 
here to attribute to the association in 
this power a significance which it did not 
at that early time possess, and which 
seems precluded by the limited time for 
which the power was commonly given. 
It is evident that Augustus could only 
have contemplated Agrippa or Tiberius 
as successors in the event of a sudden 
vacancy, his hopes during all this period 
being centred'on Gaius and Lucius (Introd. 
viii. p. 135). 

in incerto: cp. c. 69, 5; 6. 45, 5, 
&c.; Introd. v. $ 60 a. 

6. modestiae Neronis: cp. I. 11, I: 
i.e. he could not fear that Nero would 
aim at any dangerous rivalry with him- 
self. 

7. summae rei admovit, i.e. desig- 
nated him as successor : see above. With 
*tunc' we should expect a past tense, but 
many retain the present. 

8. integrum . . . iudicium: 
8, 2. 

IO. prosperarent, a word used espe- 
cially in prayer, as in H. 4. 53, 3; Liv. 
8. 9, 7; Hor. Carm. Saec. 18. 

I2. &etatem. From the known age of 
Tiberius at the date referred to, it may be 
inferred that Drusus was in his thirty-fifth 
year. His birthday was on the seventh 
of October (Henzen, Inscr. 5359), and the 
year of his birth would appear to have 
been 740 or 741, B.C. 14 OI 13. 

cp. c. 

5 

sed principio litterarum veneratus deos, ut 

5 

15 

460 

ad capessendum hoc munus vocatus sit. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 775 

sed per octo annos capto experimento, compressis seditionibus, 
compositis bellis, triumphalem et bis consulem noti laboris 

participem sumi. 

57. Praeceperant animis orationem patron quo quaesitior 

adulatio fuit. 

nec tamen repertum nisi ut effigies principum, a 

aras deum, templa et arcus aliaque solita censerent, nisi quod 
M. Silanus ex contumelia consulatus honorem principibus petivit 
dixitque pro sententia, ut publicis privatisve monimentis ad me- 

ro moriam temporum noh consulum nomina praescriberentur, sed 

eorum qui tribuniciam potestatem gererent. at Q. Haterius cum 3 
eius diei senatus consulta. aureis litteris figenda in curia censuis- 
set, deridiculo fuit senex foedissimae adulationis tantum infamia 

usurus. 

58. Inter quae provincia Africa Iunio Blaeso proroduts Ser- 
vius Maluginensis flamen Dialis ut Asiam sorte haberet postu- 
lavit, frustra vulgatum dictitans non licere Dialibus egredi Italia, 

1I. atque haterius : 

2. per octo annos, i.e. since his ser- 
vice in 767, A. D. 14. 

seditionibus: cp. I. 24, &c. 

3. bellis: cp. 2. 44 ; 62. 

triumphalem: cp. c. 19, I 

bis consulem : cp. I. 55, 1; C. 31, I. 

5. Praeceperant, ‘had anticipated’: 
cp. I. 55, 15 2. 35» 3- 
plained by *animis' The purport of his 

. letter had got wind, and | they had studied 

their compliments: cp. ‘ pugnam... . fu- 
turam praeceperat animo" Liv. 38. 20, Lh 

orationem. Mommsen (Staatsr. ii. 
P. 899) notes that the use of this term of 
a written communication (cp. ‘litteras’ 
C. 56, 1, ‘missa... oratione' 16. 7, 3) 
shows that Caesar was treated as present, 
when he thus made a ‘ relatio.' 

quaesitior adulatio, ‘more studied’ ; 
repeated 12. 26, 1: cp. c. 26, 43 5. 3, 3, 
&c. 

7. nisi quod. Drager notes as a rare 
negligence (cp. Dial. 21, 6) the sequence 
of this clause on another with ‘nisi ut.’ 

8. M. Silanus: see on c. 24, B. 

9. publicis privatisve, ‘on all re- 
cords, whether public or private. This 
use of ‘ve’ is noticed by Walther as fre- 
quent in laws, decrees, &c. This 'sen- 
tentia" must have dropped unheeded, as 
the year continues to be designated by its 

Here it is ex- - 

text L. 

consuls. On the use of the years of an 
emperor's tribunician power as a reckon- 
ing of those of his rule, see Staatsr. ii. 796. 

lr. at Q. Haterius. The praenomen 
is required to distinguish this Haterius 
(cp. I. 13, 4; 2. 33, 1; 4. 61. 1) from 
D. Haterius Agrippa (c. 52, 1, &c.). 

12. &ureis litteris, i.e. on a golden 
tablet. By an approach to this extrava- 
gance, Nero's opening speech was en- 
graved és dpyupay orhlyy (Dio, 61. 3). 

13. deridiculo: cp. ‘ per deridiculum’ 
6. 2, 2; uscd differently in 12. 49, 1, else- 
where mostly adjectively. Here it is ex- 
plained by ‘senex’: he was so old that 
he could have nothing to get by his ser- 
vility but the disgrace of it. 

' 14. usurus: cp. 4. 39, &, and other 
such uses of participles (Introd. v. $ 54 d). 

I5. Blaeso: cp. c. 35, 1 ; 72, 6. 

Servius Maluginensis. His full 
name is given in the Fasti (C. I. L. i. 
P- 530) as Ser. Cornelius, Cn. f., Cn. n., 
Lentulus Maluginensis, consul with Blae- 
sus in 763, A. D. 10. His death is men- 
tioned in 4. 16, r. 

16. sorte, used as in c. 32, 2; there 
being really no lot to be cast, as Africa 
was disposed of. 

17. frustra: cp. I. 30, 3. ‘ The general 
opinion was groundless.' 

neque nunc propere, 8 

A. D. 22.] LIBER III. CAP. 56-59. 461 

neque aliud ius suum quam Martialium Quirinaliumque flami- 
num : porro, si hi duxissent provincias, cur Dialibus id vetitum? 
nulla de eo populi scita, non in libris caerimoniarum reperiri. 
2saepe pontifices Dialia sacra fecisse, si flamen valetudine aut 
munere publico impediretur. quinque et septuaginta annis post 5 
Cornelii Merulae caedem neminem suffectum, neque tamen ces- 
3 savisse religiones. quod si per tot annos possit non creari nullo 
sacrorum damno, quanto facilius afuturum ad unius anni procon- 
4 sulare imperium? privatis olim simultatibus ,effectum, ut a pon- 
tificibus maximis ire in provincias prohiberentur: nunc deum 
munere summum pontificum etiam summum hominum esse, non 
aemulationi, non odio aut privatis adfectionibus obnoxium. 
59. Adversus quae cum augur Lentulus aliique varie dissere- 

2. sibi: si hi B. 
and Faern. 

2. si hi duxissent provinoias, sc. 
*sorte. Marquardt (Staatsv. iii. p. 332) 
notes that these flamines also were by old 
custom (Liv. 24. 8, 10) confined to Rome, 
and were often inhibited by the chief 
pontiff from expeditions (Liv. Epit. 19; 
37. 51, 1 ; Cic. Phil. 11. 8, 18); but the 
rule was now more lax (see note on c. 
66, 3). The pontifex maximus had never 
left Italy before 623, B. C. 131 (Liv. Epit. 

9). 
: 3. populi scita. Such would be 
strictly * leges, as shown by the formula 

* populus iure scivit' Cic. Phil. 1. 10, 26; 

elsewhere (Cic. de Opt. Gen. Or. 7, 19; 
Nep. Ar. 1, 5; Alc. 5, 4) this éxpression 
is a special term for the Athenian -y¥n¢ie- 
pura, Tacitus may have used it here as 
a wide term to include both ‘ leges' and 
* plebiscita,’ the former especially, as this 
old pattician office (cp. 4. 16, 2 had re- 
ceived its regulations before plebiscites 
were known. The reason for the absence 
of express enactment would be that the 
flamen was kept in Rome by the nature 
and duties of his office. 

_ reperiri. A point placed after this word 
in the MS. is thought by Pfitzner (p. 21) 
to indicate the loss of one or more words ; 
but none are needed to complete the 
sense, as ‘id’ can be supplied from ‘de 
eo, and explained from ‘id vetitum ' 
above. Joh. Müller (Beitr. 3. p. 36) 
notices other omissions of subject or ob- 
ject for conciseness, as with * audiverat" 
4.54, 2, ' additae sunt’ 11. 14, 4, * accitos’ 
11. 24, 2, ‘miserat’ 12. II, I. 

5. duobus: text Lachmann. 

12. aemulatione: text Mur. 

5. quinque et septuaginta. From 
the suicide of Merula at the return of 
Marius and Cinna, in 667, B.c. 87,seventy- 
five complete years intervened before the 
creation of another flamen by Augustus 
in 743, B. C. 11 (Dio, 54. 36, 1). Somere- 
tain the Med. text as an error of Tacitus ; 
but.that it is more iikely to be due to 
the copyist would appear from the case 
with which ‘ii’ and‘ v' or ‘u’ might be 

‘confused. - 

II. summum pontificum, &c. From 
the time when Augustus had assumed 
that office in 742, B.C. 12, it continued 
to be held by the princeps till tbe latter 
part of the fourth century, being found 
in inscriptions of even Christian emperors 
as late as Valentinian I. and Gratian 
(Inscr. Orell. 1117, 1118); soon after 
which time the title was assumed by the 
bishops of Rome. See Staatsr. ii. 1106- 
1108. The election of Tiberius did not 
take place till March to, 768, A.D. 15 
(Kal. Praen. see Orell. ii. p. 386). 

I2. obnoxium: cp. c. 34, 5. - 

13. augur Lentulus. This person is 
constantly thus designated in the Fasti 
and elsewhere (cp. Mon. Anc. iii. 23), to 
distinguish him from other Lentuli, such 

“as the one mentioned in 1. 27, I, &c. His 

full name is Cn. Cornelius Cn. f. Lentulus. 
He was consul in 740, B.C. 14, proconsul 
cf Asia in 753, B.C. 1 (C. I. G. 2943), 
magister Arvalium in 767, A. D. 14 (C. I. 
L. vi. 1, 2023 a, 1). Jt appears from 
Seneca (de Ben. 3. 27, 1) that he was 
extremely rich (see Introd. vii. p. 101), 

462 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 775. 

rent, eo decursum est ut pontificis maximi sententiam opperi- 
rentur. Tiberius dilata notione de iure flaminis, decretas ob 2 
tribuniciam Drusi potestatem caerimonias temperavit, nominatim 
arguens insolentiam sententiae aureasque litteras contra patrium 

5 morem. recitatae et Drusi epistulae quamquam ad modestiam 3 
flexae pro superbissimis accipiuntur. huc decidisse cuncta, ut ne 
iuvenis quidem tanto honore accepto adiret urbis deos, ingre- 
deretur senatum, auspicia saltem gentile apud solum inciperet. 
bellum scilicet aut diverso terrarum distineri, litora et lacus Cam- 4 

'0 paniae cum maxime peragrantem. sic imbui rectorem generis 5 
humani, id primum e paternis consiliis discere. sane gravaretur 6 
aspectum civium senex imperator fessamque aetatem et actos 

i 
2. delata. 

miserly, and stupid; and from Suetonius 
(Tib. 49) that he committed suicide from 
weariness of life, making Tiberius his 
heir. 

I. decursum ; so often in Livy (e. g. 
22. 31, 10; 26. 18, 4), as also * decurritur' 
(Id. and Caes.). | | 

2. dilata notione. The answer is 
given in c. 71, 3. *Notio' is used for 
* cognitio! by Cicero (ad Att. 11. 20, 2; 
de Leg. Agr. 2. 21, 57; pro Dom. 13, 
54): cp. * noscere' for * cognoscere' (12. 
60, 3). 

3. caerimonias, apparently applied 
here to the altars and temples mentioned 

inc. 57, 2, the vote of which was prob- 

ably cancelled, as well as that part of the 
decree more specifically censured. 

4. insolentiam . . . aureasque litte- 
ras. The latter clause explains the *in- 
solentia, and the whole forms thus a 
hendiadys (Introd. v. § 76): cp. ‘car- 
mina et devotiones' 2. 69, 5. Müller 
(Beitr. p. 37) thinks that *Silanianae' 
may have dropped out before *senten- 
tiam,' but no such addition is needed. 

5. ad .modestiam  flexae, ‘with 
studied expressions of deference’: cp. 
* flexo in maestitiam ore’ c. 16, 3. 

6. pro superbissimis. This offence 
was taken at his addressing them by 
letter at all, instead of in person. 

huc decidisse cuncta, ‘things have 
come to such a pass': cp. *eo decidit ut 
exsul.. fieret" Pl. Epp. 4. 11, 1, &c. 

8. auspicia ... inciperet. Compare 
the description in Livy (21. 63, 7 ;. 22. 1, 
6) of the feeling roused by the conduct of 

9. bello L, bello eum Pichena. 

C. Flaminius on assuming the consulship. 
It might appear hence that the tribunician 
power was assumed ‘auspicato,’ but. 
Mommsen (Staatsr. ii. 792, n. 3) con- 
siders the expression here a figure of 
speech. 

gentile solum, ‘his fatherland’: cp. 
*gentiles nationes (= ‘the people of 
his birthplace") 11. 1, 2, and note on 6. 

> 5 

9. bellum scilicet: ‘esse’ is to be 
supplied, as in * parum subsidii' 2. 4, 4, 
‘neque enim societatem’ H. 4. 14, 4. Prob- 
ably here the construction is designedly 

 exclamatory. 

diverso terrarum. On ‘diversus’ cp. 
I. 17, 5, &c.; on the genit, Introd. v. 
§ 32 a. 

IO. cum maxime, ‘just now’ (vuv ye 
páXcTa) This phrase is used in 4. 27, 
2, and in several places in the Histories, 
&c., also in Cic. (Off. 2. 7, 23, &c.), Liv. 
(40. 32, 1, &c.), and others. A fuller 
form is ‘nunc cum maxime, and the 
phrase is a modification of *nunc ut cum 
maxime" (cp. Ter. Hec. 1. 2, 40), which 
means ‘now especially.’ For a full 
discussion see Hand, Turs. iii. p. 599, 
foll. 

imbui, ‘was being instructed’: cp. 
12. 32, 5; H. 5. 5, 4, &c. 

II. gravaretur, with accus. as in 5. 
8, 3; H. 2. 20, 2: the usage appears 
first in Hor. (Od. 4. 11, 27), thence 
in Sen., &c.: ‘sane,’ concessively, as in 
C. 5, 4, &c. 

12. fessam aetatem : cp. I. 46, 3, &c. 

A.D. 22.] LIBER III. 

labores praetenderet: 
mentum ? 

CAP. 59, 6o. 463 

Druso quod nisi ex adrogantia impedi- 

60. Sed Tiberius, vim principatus sibi firmans, imaginem 
antiquitatis senatui praebebat, postulata provinciarum ad disqui- 

2sitionem patrum mittendo. 

urbes licentia atque impunitas asyla statuendi; conplebantur 
templa pessimis servitiorum ; eodem subsidio obaerati adversum 

8 creditores suspectique capitalium criminum receptabantur. 

nec 

ullum satis validum imperium erat coercendis seditionibus populi, 

4 flagitia hominum ut caerimonias deum protegentis. 
5 citum ut mitterent civitates iura atque legatos. 

igitur pla- 
et quaedam 

quod falso usurpaverant sponte omisere ; multae vetustis super- 

6 stitionibus aut meritis in populum Romanum fidebant. 

magna- 

que eius diei species fuit, quo senatus maiorum beneficia, soci- 
orum pacta, regum etiam qui ante vim Romanam valuerant 
decreta ipsorumque numinum religiones introspexit, libero, ut 
quondam, quid firmaret mutaretve. 

Io. protegentes: text R. 

3. vim...sibi firmans. Ritter un- 
derstands this of the association of Drusus 
in the tribunician power, but it may 
equally refer to the stability given to the 
constitution by this show of power left 
to the senate. See Introd. vi. p. 92. 

imaginem: cp. ‘imago reipublicae! 
13. 28, 1, &c. 

4. postulata provinciarum. The old 
function of the senate in this respect is 
described. by Polybius (6. 13, 7). ‘That 
here left to them concerns their own pro- 
vinces only; the deputations mentioned 
in the three next chapters, and in 4. 14, 

1-3, being from Asia, Cyprus, and Crete: 
see also 13. 4, 3. 

6. licentia atque impunitas, robably 

hendiadys, ‘unchecked licence. Ni IPP. 

takes * impunitas ' here and in H. 2. 69, 1,. 

to mean ‘ insolence.' 

asyla statuendi. On the lige Goa 
ing practice at Rome cp. c. 36, 1 

conplebantur, &c. Three classes 
are mentioned as using these *asyla, 
(1) runaway slaves; (2) debtors; (3) 
criminals. 2 

7. Subsidio, ‘place of refuge’; so 
c. 36, 2; 4.67, 2; 5. 8, 1. 

8. receptabantur, used in prose only 
here and Liv. 5. 8, 2. 

9. validum, with gerundive dat., as 

in c. 10, 4. The ‘seditiones’ spoken of 
would be those raised by any attempt to 
restrain the abuse of sanctuary. 

IO. flagiti& ... protegentis, ‘ protect- 
ing human outrage no less than religious 
observances. The antithesis is hardly 
as pointed as it seems, for *hominum' is 
a subjective and ‘deum’ an objective 
genitive. The pl. ‘caerimoniae’ appears 
to be sometimes equivalent to ‘res sacrae," 
as in the phrase ‘habere aliquid in caeri- 
moniis’ (Pl. N. H. 37. 7» 28, 100), and i is 
by some so explained in H. 1. 43, 2, ‘in 
contubernio (aedis Vestae) abditus non 
religione nec caerimoniis sed latebra im- 
minens exitium differebat. Such may 
possibly be its meaning here, but that 
given above is more in accordance with 
its general use: see 1. 54, 1 ; 62, 3, &c.; 
Gerber und Greef, Lex. s. v. 

II. iura, ‘ charters’ or ‘ documents,’ to 
prove their right to these asyla. The 

. word appears to be here alone thus 

used. 

14. beneficia, ‘ privileges granted.’ 

15. pacta =‘ foedera.' 

16. libero, here alone thus used in abl. 
abs.: cp. Introd. v. $ 31, b. For the 
sense cp. 'libera coniectura! (Liv. 4. 
us and *liberum est’ (Quint. 6. 3, 
112). 

crebrescebat enim Graecas per 5 

464 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 775. 

61. Primi omnium Ephesii adiere, memorantes non, ut vulgus 
crederet, Dianam atque Apollinem Delo genitos: esse apud se 
Cenchreum atmnem, lucum Ortygiam, ubi Latonam partu gra- 
vidam et oleae, quae tum etiam maneat, adnisam edidisse ea 

5 numina, deorumque monitu sacratum nemus. 
Apollinem post interfectos Cyclopas Iovis iram vitavisse. 

atque ipsum illic 3 
mox 

Liberum patrem, bello victorem, supplicibus Amazonum, quae 
aram insederant, ignovisse. auctam hinc concessu Herculis, cum 3 
Lydia poteretur, caerimoniam templo, neque Persarum dicione 
10 deminutum ius; post Macedonas, dein nos servavisse. 

62. Proximi hos Magnetes L. Scipionis et L. Sullae consti- 

2. in Delo Bezzenb. 

3. Cenchrium B. 

locum : text L. 8. insiderant: text 

B. 1I. proximo snagnetes: proximo Magnetes B, proximi M. Freinsh., text Wurm. 

I. Ephesii. Their asylum is described 
by Strabo (14. 1, 23, 641) as having al- 
"ways existed, but with various changes 
of boundary : see below, $ 3. 

2. Delo. Such ablatives of place 
are ased with much freedom by Tacitus: 
cp. ‘saxo Seripho' 4. 21, 5, and other 
instances in Introd. v. § 25, and many 
collected here by Nipp. 

3. Cenchre amnem, lucum Orty- 
giam. Strabo (ly. 1, 20, 639) describes 
the situation of this grove, with this 
stream running through it, as just above 
the sea, and gives the legend as here 
stated. ‘Cenchrium’ is adapted to the 
form in Strabo and in Pausanias (7. 5, 
10), but an epigram (see Baiter) gives the 
form Keyxpeios, for which é (cp. ‘ Dareo ' 
c. 63, 5) would be equivalent. 

Ortygiam, i.e. ‘the’ quail-land,’ 
well known as a name of Delos (Verg. 

Aen. 3, 72, &c.), also as that of the island - 

forming the acropolis of Syracuse. 

4. tum etiam, at the day on which 
they were speaking ; ; answering to * nunc' 
in * oratio recta’: cp. 6. 21,3, and *tunc' 
14- 35 15 16. 3, 2. 

adnisam : * adnixus,' with dat. has 
often this sense in Vergil, as Aen. 4,690; 
9, 229; I2, 92. 

6. post interfectos Cyclopas. For 
the general form of this legend see Eur. 
Alcestis, 3 8, &c. 

2. Liberum patrem, &c. Dionysus, 

according to one legend (Plut. Quaest.. 

Gr. 56), pursued the Amazons from Ephe- 
sus to Samos and there slew them ; ac- 
cording to another (Diod. 3. 71, &c. )» 
united with them against the Titans. The 
legend of Amazons in Western Asia is 

- & bowshot ; 

found in Homer (Il. 3, 189; 6, 186). 
Pindar, according to Pausanias (7. 2, 7), 
ascribed to them the foundation of the 
Ephesian temple; another legend (see 4. 
56, t) makes an Amazon foundress of 
Smyrna, The Attic legend respecting 
them ( Hdt. 9. 27, 5, &c.) is famous from 
its representations in art. 

8. aram insederant, here equivalent 
to the Greek xa60í(ea0a. éri rovs Bopovs 
Thuc. 3. 28, 3. &c. Halm is inconsistent 
in retaining the ‘i’ form of this perfect 
here and not in 16. 37, 1. Elsewhere the 
MSS. have always the * e' form : cp. I. 30, 
5. On the indic. see Introd. v. $ 49. 

cum Lydia poteretur. Most legends 
represent Heracles in Lydia as the slave 
of Omphale: cp. Soph. Trach. ,248, &c. 

9. caerimoniam, ‘sanctity’; so in 4. 
64, 5; 14. 22, 6. This sense, restricted 
to the singular, is also found in ‘caeri- 
monia deorum" (Caes. ap. Suet. Jul. 6), 
‘legationis’ (Cic. Rosc. Amer. 39, 113), 

and is akin to that of the pl. noted on 

c. 60, 3. 

dicione, abl. of time: cp. Introd. v. $ 26. 

Io. post Macedonas, dein nos. Strabo 
states (14. 1, 23, 641) that Alexander had 
made the asylum extend for a stadium 
ronnd the temple; that Mithridates had 
somewhat enlarged it by making the limit 
that Antonius had so ex- 
tended it as to.include part of the city; 
and that Augustus, in consequence of 
increased abuses, had cyrtailed it. The 
mepiBodos as fixed by him, and dated by 
inscriptions styling him cos. xii. trib. pot. 
xviii. (749, B. C. 5), has been discovered 
(see Wood, Ephesus, Append. p. 2). 

11. Proximi hos. The construction is 

A. D. 22.] LIBER III. CAP. 61, 62. 

465 

tutis nitebantur, quorum ille Antiocho, hic Mithridate pulsis 
fidem atque virtutem Magnetum decoravere, uti Dianae Leuco- 
2 phrynae perfugium inviolabile foret. Aphrodisienses posthac et 
Stratonicenses dictatoris Caesaris ob vetusta in partis merita et 
recens divi Augusti decretum adtulere, laudati quod Parthorum 5 
inruptionem nihil mutata in populum Romanum constantia per- 
3 tulissent. sed Aphrodisiensium civitas Veneris, Stratonicensium 
4 Iovis et Triviae religionem tuebantur. altius Hierocaesarienses 

2. leucophine: Leucophryenae B, text L. 

that found in 15. 15, 6, and in Plaut., 
Caes., and Liv. 
Magnetes. Magnesia near the 
Maeander is meant, as distinct from 
Magnesia ‘a Sipylo’ (2. 47, 4); with 
which Pausanias (I. 20, 5) appears to 
confound it. It lay a little north of the 
Maeander on a tributary stream, on the 
site of Inekbazar. It appears from 4. 55, 
3 to have become an insignificant town. 
I. Antiocho ... Mithridate. This 
city, with Tralles and Ephesus, took the 
lead in joining the Romans after the 
defeat of Antiochus in 564, B.C. 190 
(Liv. 37. 45, 1), and alone in Asia held 

out for Rome against Mithridates in 666, 

B. C. 88 (Id. Epit. 81). 

pulsis. .For the use of the plural 
here and in ‘decoravere’ Drager com- 
pares ‘ verterent' 6. 46, 3; *travecti sunt" 
I2. 4I, 3; ‘acceperant’ 14. 53, 3, &c. 

2. decoravere, ‘honoured by the 
. grant.’ 

Leucophrynae. Theformhereadopted 
is supported by coins (Mionnet, iii. 146, 
&c.) The form ‘Leucophryenae’ ap- 
pears to have equal support from inscrip- 
tions (C. I. G. 2914 a, &c.), and from 
Strabo (14. 1, 40, 647) and Pausanias 
(3. 18, 9). The temple was named from 
Leucophrys, an older town on the site of 
Magnesia, and is described by Strabo 
(1.1.) as remarkable among all temples in 
Asia for its symmetry and beauty, and as 
in size surpassed only by those at Ephesus 
and Didymi. Remains of it still exist: 
see Texier and Pullan, Asia Minor, 
p- 27. 

3. Aphrodisienses, Aphrodisias, in 
Caria (Pl. N. H. 5. 28, 29, 104), or Phrygia 
(Strab. 12. 8, 13, 576), at the present 
Gheira, a little S. W. of Laodiceia. Fifteen 
columns of its beautiful Ionic temple are 
still standing: see Fellows, Lycia, p. 33; 
Texier and Pullan, Pl. xxvi-xxxii. 

VOL. I. 

4. Stratonicenses, Stratoniceia in 
Caria, called after the wife of Antiochus 
Soter (Strab. 14. 2, 25,660). It was situ- 
ated at Eskihissar near Mylasa, where 
considerable remains of it exist. The con- 
struction is here concise even to ambiguity, - 
as the decree of the dictator relates to 
Aphrodisias, and that of Augustus to 
Stratoniceia. 

dictatoris ^ Caesaris. An extant 
inscription (C. I. G. 2737 a) records the 

confirmation of this decree (émíxpipa) by 

the senate and by Antonius, cir. 715-719, 
B.C. 39-35. Orelli quotes it in part here. 
5. divi Augusti decretum; also men- 
tioned in an inscription (C. I. G. 2715). 
The following words give its purport. 

Parthorum inruptionem. The oc- 
casion mentioned is that of the joint 
invasion of Q. Labienus and Pacorus in 
714, B.C. 40. The latter remained in 
Syria, but the former pushed on through 
Cilicia and carried all before him, and 
encountered no successful resistance in 
Asia except from this city (Dio, 48. 26, 3). 
Stratoniceia appears to have been a free 
city (Plin. N. H. 5. 29, 109), probably as 
a reward for this fidelity. 

7. sed. The return from a digression 
is often thus marked: cp. 1. 74, 3, &c. 

8. Iovis et Triviae. The inscription 
above mentioned (cp. also C. I. G. 2720) 
associatesthenames| A«ós rod II Javrue| piov 
kal ‘Ex]ja7ns. Strabo (1.1.) mentions as 
the two temples of Stratoniceia that of 
Hecate (év Aayivos) and a temple to 
Zeus Chrysaoreus, outside the city, com- 
mon to all the Carians. "This, as Nipp. 
shows, must be distinct from the one here 

. mentioned, which, as being not locally 

separate from that of Hecate, is not dis- 
tinctly noticed by Strabo. 

altius . . . exposuere, ‘showed a 
claim of more remote date. For an 
analogous phrase cp. c. 25, 3. 

Hh 

1 

466 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 775. 

exposuere, Persicam apud se Dianam, delubrum rege Cyro 
dicatum; et memorabantur Perpennae, Isaurici multaque alia 
imperatorum nomina, qui non modo templo sed duobus milibus 

passuum eandem sanctitatem tribuerant. 

exim Cyprii tribus de 5 

5 delubris, quorum vetustissimum Paphiae Veneri auctor Aérias. 
post filius eius Amathus Veneri Amathusiae et Iovi Salaminio 
Teucer, Telamonis patris ira profugus, posuissent. 

Oo 

63. Auditae aliarum quoque civitatium legationes. 

quorum 2 

copia fessi patres, et quia studiis certabatur, consulibus permisere, 
ut perspectó iure, et si qua iniquitas involveretur, rem integram 

4. de ins. Bezzenberger. 

Hierocaesarienses, Hierocaesarea in 
Lydia between Sardis and Smyrna. 

I. Persicam . . . Dianam, the Ar- 
temis Anaitis of Pausanias (3. 16, 8); 
who also describes (5. 27, 5)a Persian or 
Magian ritual kept up in his time at this 
city and Hypaepa. This Lydian goddess 
claimed affinity with the Tauric Artemis, 
and had probably the same attributes as 

the Ephesian Artemis, whether of Arian - 

or Semitic origin: see Nipp. 

rege Cyro = ' regnante Cyro! : cp. 
‘principe Augusto’ c. 71, 3. 

2. Perpennae. M. Perpenna or Per- 
perna, consul in 624, B.C. 130, was the 
conqueror and captor of Aristonicus of 
Pergamum : see 4. 55, 2. 

Isaurici. We should suppose the 
first and best known of the name to be 
intended: but Borghesi (v. 306) points 
out that the proconsulate of Asia was 
never held by him, but by his son P. 
Servilius Isauricus, cos. 706, B. C. 48, who 
had that province in 708, B.C. 46 (Cic. ad 
Fam. 13. 68, &c.). 

3. duobus milibus passuum. a space 

of two Roman miles in each direction - 

from it. 

4. Cyprii. Cyprus, annexed in 696, 
B.C. 58, and for some time held with 
Cilicia, wasamongthe provinces originally 
taken in hand by Augustus (Dio, 53. 12, 
7), but was made over to the senate in 
732, B. C. 22, and governed by proconsuls 
of praetorium rank, residing at new Paphos 
(Acts 13. 6, 7), now Baffa: see Marquardt, 
i. 392. 

tribus de delubris. The prep. can 
easily have drop pped out before ‘ delubris,' 
and * exposuere can be supplied. T he 
reference in ‘exim’ would seem to lie 
rather to the sentences marked by ‘ primi,’ 

8. civitatium : 

SO 4. 14, I and three times in Med. ii. 

* proximi, and ‘posthac’; but the con- 
struction thus suggested, that of supplying 
*adiere, and taking ‘tribus delubris' as 
abl. abs. or dat., seems impossible. 

5. quorum, &c. This sentence again 
is somewhat obscure from the attempt to 
combine concisely the mention of the 
locality of the three temples, the worship 
to which they were dedicated, and the 
names of their founders. It is implied 
that the first was situated at old Paphos 
(Kukla), the second at Amathus (old 
Limasol), the third at Salamis (Costanza, 
near Famagousta). 

Paphise Veneri. On this temple, 
and on Aérias, cp. H. 2, 2-3; where it 
is mentioned that the goddess was repre- 
sented by a mere stone. 'The Aphrodite 
of Paphos and Amathus appears to be 
a form of Astarte. 

auctor, ‘founder’; as in H. 4. 84, 
6, &c. 

7. Teucer: cp. Hor. Od. 1. 7, 21 » sqq. 

posuissent, ‘ had founded’: cp. * By- 
zantium .. . posuere’ (12. 63, 1), &c. The 
subjunct. appears to be used because the 
record of foundation is part of their 
statement. 

8. quorum, ‘such things’: the word 
refers to the whole matter. Nipp. com- 
pares Cic. ad Fam. 2. 8, 2 ‘sermonibus 
versatus sum, quae nec possunt scribi nec 
scribenda sunt. 

9. studiis, the partialities of certain 
senators to particular cities. 

consulibus. For another such refer- 
ence of a matter to the consuls by the 
senate see 14. 17, 3. 

IO. si. This is best taken with Nipp. 
as depending on *perspecto, with the 
sense of ‘ whether’ : cp. 1. 48, 1. ‘ Cir- 
cumspecta' has an analogous double 

A.D. 22.] LIBER III. 

8 rursum ad senatum referrent. 

CAP. 62, 63. 467 

consules super eas civitates, quas 

memoravi, apud Pergamum Aesculapii conpertum asylum rettu- 

4 lerunt: ceteros obscuris ob vetustatem initiis niti. 
naeos oraculum Apollinis, cuius imperio Stratonicidi Veneri 

nam Zmyr- 

templum dicaverint, Tenios eiusdem carmen referre, quo sacrare 

5 Neptuni effigiem aedemque iussi sint. 

propiora Sardianos : 

6 Alexandri victoris id donum. neque minus Milesios Dareo rege 

3. Zmyrnetis : Smyrnaeos B, text from 4. 43, 7; 55-56. 

text R. 

construction in 14. 33, 2 : see Introd. v. 91, 

8; and note on I. I5, 4. : 
involveretur, ‘should be fraudu- 
lently concealed in the claim.’ 

2. Pergamum. This city, the site of 
which still retains the name of Pergamo 
or Bergamah, situated in Mysia near the 
junction of two other streams with the 
Caicus, became very important from the 
time of Lysimachus under its own princes ; 
whose kingdom, bequeathed to Rome, 
formed the original province of Asia. It 
still remained a famous city, being esti- 
mated to consist of 40,000 citizens and 
120,000 inhabitants, able to vie with 
Smyrnaand Ephesus, and, in the judgement 
of Pliny (N. H. 5. 30, 33, 126), *longe 
clarissimum Asiae’: see Marquardt, 
i. 341, n. 5, &c. For a short summary 
of the very important recent discoveries 
made on its site see Perry, Greek and 
Roman Sculpture, ch. xlvi. 

Aesculapii. The worship of this 
god was brought there from Epidaurus 
(Paus. 3..26, 8); and the temple was 
situate outside the city (Id. 5. 13, 2). 

3. Zmyrnaeos. The city then, as 
now, known under this name, dated from 
the Alexandrian epoch; the old city 
north of it having been ruined by Alyattes 
(Hdt. 1. 16, 2), though still inhabited 
Kopndov (Strab. 14. I, 37, 646). Its im- 
portance has been mentioned in the 
note above. It is the most considerable 
city of modern Asia Minor, having still 
a population of over 150,000. 

4. Btratonicidi Veneri. Nipp. rightly 
notes that this worship, being instanced as 
one obscure from its antiquity, can have 
no connexion with Stratonice (see on c. 
62, 2) in its origin, though no doubt after- 
wards associated with her honour; as the 
names seem to have some relation to each 
other in an inscription of Seleucus Cal- 
linicus confirming the asylum (C. I. G. 

e 
7. regi utis et: text L and Mur. 

"ber of worshippers frequenting it. 

4. strato nicidiuae: 

3137). 'A$poBirg Erparovels (Inscr. 1. 1. 

and 3156) must therefore be identical with 

"Adpodirn Erparela or Nixndédpos, the ori- 
ginal of the Roman ‘ Venus Victrix.’ This 
temple is mentioned as the Stratoniceum 
by Vitruvius (5, 9). 

5. Tenios. Tenos, like the other Cy- 
clades, belonged to the province of Asia. 
In Strabo’s time (10. 5, 11, p. 487) its 
town was small, but its temple of Poseidon 
outside the walls large and celebrated, 
attesting by its large éor:aropia the pu 

n 
coins of Tenos the attributes of this god 
are found. 

6. propiora, sc. referre, ‘they made 
a claim of more modern date’: cp. ‘ altius 
exposuere ’ c. 62, 4. 

Sardianos. On Sardes see 2. 47, 3. 
Strabo (13. 4, 5, 626) mentions its temple 
of Artemis Coloéne (called after a neigh- 
bouring lake) as peyaAnv dyoreiav 
éxor. 

7. id, i.e. ‘ius asyli': 
is to be supplied * esse.' 

Milesios. Miletus, though no longer 
a great city, was still a LyrpómoAs rhs 
"Iovias (Marquardt, i. 345, 5). Within 
its territory lay the temple of Apollo 
Didymaeus, at Didymi or Branchidae, 
one of immemorial antiquity (Paus. 7. 2, 
4), and famous in early Greek history 
(Hdt. 1r. 46, &c.). It had been ruined by 
the Persians, but rebuilt on an enormous 
scale, containing a village within its 
precincts (Strab. 14. 1, 5, 634). For an 
account of the locality see Newton, Trav. 
and Disc. in the Levant, ii. 147, foll. ; 
Texier and Pullan, pl. iii. foll, 

Dareo rege niti; so most edd. ; ‘uti’ 
is retained by some. According to some 
accounts Darius was the destroyer; but 
this was more probably the act of Xerxes 
(cp. Strab. 1. 1.). 

with *donum' 

Hh2 

"1 

10 

468 

niti ; 
randi. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 775. 

set cultus numinum utrisque Dianam aut Apollinem vene- 
petere et Cretenses simulacro divi Augusti. 

senatus consulta, quis multo cum honore modus tamen prae- 
scribebatur, iussique ipsis in templis figere aera sacrandam ad 
5 memoriam, neu specie religionis in ambitionem delaberentur. 
64. Sub idem tempus Iuliae Augustae valetudo atrox neces- 
situdinem principi fecit festinati in urbem reditus, sincera adhuc 

inter matrem filiumque concordia sive occultis odiis. 

neque 2 

enim multo ante, cum haud procul theatro Marcelli effigiem divo 
Augusto Iulia dicaret, Tiberi nomen suo postscripserat, idque 
ille credebatur ut inferius maiestate principis gravi et dissimulata 

offensione abdidisse. 

set tum supplicia dis ludique magni ab 8 

senatu decernuntur, quos pontifices et augures et quindecimviri 

4. fiere: facere B, text Pichena. 

I. set: cp. c. 62, 3. 

cultus .. . venerandi, ‘ their worship 
consisted in the honouring'; the gerund 
being used as a defming genitive. Cp. 
* effugium . . prorumpendi ’ 3. 47, 2 
*ambitu. - orandi" * 2, 4, 'patroci- 
nium defendendae . .. poeticae ' Dial. 
4,1 

Dianam aut Apollinem ; i.e. the one 
worshipped Diana, the other Apollo: 
cp. * perfidia... aut fide’ (I. 85; 2), &c. 

2. petere, sc. ‘ius asyli.’ 

simulacro divi Augusti On the 
‘imago principis ' cp. c. 36, I. 

3. honore, ' expressions of respect’: ee 
cp. 6. 15, 4; * honora oratio’ I. to, 7. 

modus. This appears to mean that 
new ‘asyla’ were not to be set up, and 
the limits of those existing were to be 
strictly defined. Suetonius (Tib. 37) ex- 
aggerates this into an abolition of all 
asyla. 

4. aera, &c., ‘ tablets to consecrate the 
recard.' 

5 neu=‘et ne.’ Nipp. couples this 
to ‘sacrandum ad memoriam,’ as adding 
a second reason for erecting "tablets ; to 
prevent future extensions of sanctuary by 
cities in rivalry with each other. 

6. valetudo atrox. Nipp. notes that 

: an altar to *Pietas Augusta’ was ordered 

on the occasion of this illness but not 
erected until 796, A.D. 43 (C. I. L. 
vi. 562). 

7. reditus : cp. c. 31, I The Prae 
nestine Kalendar (see below) would show 
that he returned after April, and had 
therefore been absent more than a year. 

8. sive. Tacitus intimates a prefer- 
ence for this alternative by inserting the 
clause * neque enim, &c., to show a prob- 
able reason for it. 

neque ... multo ante. The date, 
viii. Kal. Mai (April 23), is given in Kal 
Praen. (Inscr. Orell. ii. p. 388). 

9. theatro Marcelli. This was dedi- 
cated by Augustus in 743, B.C. 1I (cp. 
Momms. on Mon. Anc. iv. 22). It stood 
in the ‘forum holitorium ' (cp. 2. 49, 2), 
between the Capitol and the Tiber, and 
considerable remains of it still exist. See 
Burn, p. 302, foll.; Dyer, Dict. of Geog. 
p. 845; Middleton, i ii. 71-73. 

Io. postscripserat. This verb is no- 
where else found. The kalendar quoted 
above appears to follow the original in- 
scription in giving the names in this order. 
*Sig. Divo Augusto Patri ad Theatrum 
Mar(celli] Iulia Augusta et Ti. Augustus 
dedicarunt.’ 

12. abdidisse, ‘stored in memory.’ 

On this trait in his character cp. 1. 7, 
I1; 69, 7, &c. 
' supplicia = supplicationes, an old 
sense of the word (Festus), retained by 
Plautus (Rud. Prol. 25), Sallust (Cat. 9, 
2, &c.), and Livy (22. 57, 5). 

ludi magni, ‘ votivi circenses." 

I3. quindecimviri septemviris si- 
mul. The former had charge of the 
Sibylline Books (cp. 6. 12, 1, &c.) and 
special charge of *ludi saeculares? (11. 
11, 4). The collegium, at first of two, 
was raised to ten when opened to ple- 
beians, and to fifteen by Su Ds: : see Mar- 
quardt. iii, 380. ‘ Triumviri epulones’ 

factaque 7 

A. D. 22.] LIBER II. 

4 septemviris simul et sodalibus Augustalibus ederent. 
L. Apronius ut fetiales quoque iis ludis praesiderent. 

CAP. 63—65. 469 

censuerat 
contra 

dixit Caesar, distincto sacerdotiorum iure et repetitis exemplis : 

5 neque enim umquam fetialibus hoc maiestatis fuisse. 

ideo Au- 

gustales adiectos, quia proprium eius domus sacerdotium esset, 5 

pro qua vota persolverentur. 

65. Exsequi sententias haud institui nisi insignes per hones- 
tum.aut notabili dedecore, quod praecipuum munus annalium 
reor, ne virtutes sileantur, utque pravis dictis factisque ex pos- 

2 teritate et infamia metus sit. 

ceterum tempora illa adeo infecta 

et adulatione sordida fuere, ut non modo primores civitatis, qui- 
bus claritudo sua obsequiis protegenda erat, sed omnes consu- 
lares, magna pars eorum qui praetura functi multique etiam 
pedarii senatores certatim exsurgerent foedaque et nimia cen- 

to preside at the *epulum Iovis' were 
instituted in 558, B.C. 196 (Liv. 33. 42), 
and the number was subsequently in- 
creased to seven, and by Julius Caesar to 
ten (Dio, 43; 51; 9), though the name of 
! septemviri ' continued : Marquardt, 347. 
These two, with the pontiffs and augurs, 
formed the four preat priestly colleges. 

I. simul. On this prepositional use 
cp. Introd. v. § 63. 

Augustalibus : cp. 1. 54, I. 

2. L. Apronius: cp. I. 56, 1, &c. His 
motion was perhaps grounded on the fact 
that Augustus had been a *fetialis'; a 
reason equally valid to include the *so- 
dales Titii" (see Mon. Anc. Gr. iv. 7). 

3. distincto, &c., ‘distinguishing the 
legitimate functions of the priesthoods 
and going back for precedents.’ These 
are explained by ‘neque enim,’ &c., as 
showing that the fetialés had never had 
* hoc maiestatis,’ i. e. had never ranked in 
dignity with the four great colleges. On 
the functions of the fetiales in connexion 

with the ceremonies of war and treaties, _ 

see Marquardt, iii. 416, foll. 
' 4. ideo Augustales, &c., anticipating 
the objection that neither were they 
among the old great 'collegia.' They 
were again associated with them in the 
thanksgivings on the fal] of Seianus (Dio, 
58. 12, 5), probably for a similar reason. 

7. Exsequi, ‘to set forth in detail’: 
cp. 4. 4, 6; 11. 31,1; 12. 58, 1; Dial. 
16, 2; also in Liv. Pl. Mai., Quint., &c. 
Cic. has ‘verbis exsequi' (ad Fam. 11. 
37, 6). This chapter, though it does not 
appear to relate to those immediately 

| preceding, leads from such motions as 

those mentioned in c. 57, to what follows 
in c. 66. 

8. notabili dedecore, probably best 
taken, with Nipp.; as an abl. of quality; 
as ‘ notabili,' while corresponding well to 
'insignes, would be tautologous, if taken 
as depending on it. 

munus annalium, ‘the office of 
history.’ On the use of ‘ annales' in this 
general sense cp. Introd. i. p. 6 ; and, on 
this conception of the office of history, 
Id. iv. p. 27. ‘Quod’ is explained by the 
following clause, as in 4. 4, 6. 

9. posteritate et um hendiadys. 
On * metus ex’ cp. I. 29, 3 

IO. infecta, usually with ablative in 
Tacitus, as 2. 85, 5; 6. 7, 4, &c., but 
thus used absolutely in the sense of é poi- 
soned ’ or * tainted by ie (Ep. 59, 9) 
and Plin. (H. N. 9. 7, 6, 18), who also 
thus uses * inficimus ' (Id. 18. 1, 1, 3). 

1I. primores civitatis, the more fa- 
mous consulars, such as Asinius Gallus, 
Ateius Capito, &c. 

I4. pedarii senatores. The investiga- 
tion of this term by Gellius (3. 18) shows 

[d 

o 

that in bis time it bad become obscure, | 

and was even corrupted into ‘ pedanii.’ 

The use of the word here in opposition 
to ‘consulares ' and ' praetura functi,’ an- 
swers to that in Frontinus (de Aq. 99), 
* Augustus . . . curatorem fecit Messallam 
Corvinum, cui adiutores dati Postumius 
Sulpicius praetorius et L. Cominius pe- 
darius! This is reconcileable with the 
view that the term denoted those who 
had not held a curule office, as the small 

| 

“st 

Oo 

470 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 775. 

serent. memoriae proditur Tiberium, quotiens curia egrederetur, 3 
Graecis verbis in hunc modum eloqui solitum * o homines ad 
servitutem paratos ! ' scilicet etiam illum, qui libertatem publicam 4 
nollet, tam proiectae servientium patientiae taedebat. 

66. Paulatim dehinc ab indecoris ad infesta transgrediebantur. 
C. Silanum pro consule Asiae, repetundarum a sociis postulatum, 2 
Mamercus Scaurus e consularibus, Iunius Otho praetor, Brutte- 
dius Niger aedilis simul corripiunt obiectantque violatum Augusti 
numen, spretam Tiberii maiestatem, Mamercus antiqua exempla 
iaciens, L. Cottam a Scipione Africano, Servium Galbam a 

Catone censorio, P. Rutilium a M. Scauro accusatos. 

videlicet 3 

Scipio et Cato talia ulciscebantur, aut ille Scaurus, quem pro- 
avum suum obprobrium maiorum Mamercus infami opera de- 

7. Bruttidius B, Brutidius R. 

and not particularly important class of 
senators who bad attained, but not got 
beyond, the curule aedileship (cp. 6. 30, 
2), may be here ignored. "The question 
of the position of * pedarii’ in debate (cp. 
Cic. ad Att. I. 19, 9; 20, 4) is discussed 
in Staatsr. iii. 962, 2 and 982, 1, and by 
Mr. D. B. Monro (Journal of Philology, 
vol. iv. pp. 113, foll). The evidence of 
Tacitus goes to show that they were not 

precluded from speaking; especially if 
‘senator’ in c. 36, 1; I. 75, 3, &c., is 

taken to mean ‘ senator pedarius.' 

3. qui... nollet. Drager (Synt. und 
Stil. $ 160) notes this concessive relative 
as rare: cp. ‘qui deos... contemneret" 
Suet. Cal. 51, ‘qui luxuriae immodicae 
esset ' Id. Ner. 51. 

4. proiectae, ‘abject’: cp. H. 3.65, 

4, and note on Ann. 1. 42, 4. 

5. ab indecoris ad infesta, ‘from 
servility to persecution,’ i. e. to delations ; 
by fastening an imaginary charge of 
* maiestas ' on a person indicted by pro- 
vincials on other grounds. 

6. C. Bilanum, in the Fasti C. Junius, 
C. f. M. n., Silanus, cos. 763, A. D. Io. 
He had apparently preceded M. Lepidus 
(c. 32, 2) in the proconsulate (see Introd. 
vii. p. 113). He was also, according to 
the Fast. Cap., *flamen Martialis' (cp. 
noteonc.58,1). 

7. Mamercus Scaurus: see I. 13, 4: 
further account of Otho and Niger is 
given below. 

8. violatum Augusti numen : see I. 

2. 

10, iaciens: see on c. 49, 2. 

I3. malorum: text R. 

L. Cottam. The accusation of L. 
Aurelius Cotta (cos. 610, B. C. 144) by 
the younger Africanus, on a charge of 
* repetundae,' took place about 624, B. C. 
130. He was acquitted, a result which, 
according to Cicero (pro Mur. 28, 58), 
was ascribed to a desire on the part of 
the judges to escape the suspicion of being 
awed by so great an accuser. 

Servium . Galbam. Ser. Sulpicius 
Galba, often mentioned by Cicero as a 
great orator, was indicted in 605, B.C. 
149, for atrocious cruelty and treachery 
to the Lusitanians. The charge was 
supported by Cato, then in the extremity 
of old age; but Galba procured an ac- 
quittal by his eloquence and by parading 
his sons and nephew as suppliants (Cic. 
Brut. 23, 89), and also, as is said, by 
bribery (App. Hisp. 60). 

11, P. Rutilium. P. Rutilius Rufus, 
who was exiled at a later date (see on 4. 
43, 7), had been a candidate for the con- 
sulship in 638, 5. C. 116, against Scaurus, 
the famous ‘ princeps senatus,' &c. After 
the election, each accused the other of 
* ambitus ' (Cic. Brut. 30, 113). 

videlicet, ironical; as in Cic., &c. 

12. ille Scaurus. It should be remem- 
bered that this hero of the optimates is 
represented by Sallust (Jug. 15, 3) as 
‘factiosus, avidus potentiae honoris di- 
vitiarum, ceterum vitia sua callide occul- 
tans'; and that he appears undoubtedly 
to have taken bribes from Jugurtha. 

I3. dehonestabat. The verb is first 
found in Liv. 41. 6, 10. Tacitus uses it 
only in the Annals, e. g. c. 70, 4, &c. 

A. D. 22.] LIBER Ill. 

CAP. 65-67. 471 

4 honestabat. Iunio Othoni litterarium ludum exercere vetus ars 
fuit: mox Seiani potentia senator obscura initia impudentibus 
5 ausis propolluebat. Bruttedium artibus honestis copiosum et, 
si rectum iter pergeret, ad clarissima quaeque iturum, festinatio 
extimulabat, dum aequalis, dein superiores, postremo suasmet 5 
6 ipse spes antire parat : quod multos etiam bonos pessum dedit, 
qui spretis quae tarda cum securitate, praematura vel cum exitio 

properant. 

67. Auxere numerum accusatorum Gellius Publicola et M. 

2 Paconius, ille quaestor Silani, hic legatus. 

nec dubium habeba- 

tur saevitiae captarumque pecuniarum teneri reum: sed multa 
adgerebantur etiam insontibus periculosa, cum super tot sena- 
tores adversos facundissimis totius Asiae eoque ad accusandum 

3. pro polluebat : porro polluebat L, provolvebat Jac. Gron., polluebat Orelli, ultro 

polluebat Ritt. 4. perageret : text R. 

I. litterarium ludum, ‘an element- 
ary school’; so in Plin. (N. H. 9. 8, 8, 
25), &c. He seems to have had more 
talent than is here implied ; as M. Seneca 
speaks of him in several age as an 
accomplished though artificial speaker, 
and as an author of rhetorical works 
(Controv. 9. 33, 37). Similar instances 
of men of low birth rising to wealth and 
rank by the profession of rhetoric and 
practice of delation are found in Eprius 
Marcellus and Vibius Crispus (see Dial. 

83. . 
3. ausis : cp. 2. 39, 3. 
propolluebat. If the text is sound, 

we must suppose that Tacitus, who. has 

elsewhere (6. 25, 1) coined * provixisse,’ - 

in the sense of * lived on,’ has here treated 
* polluo' as a simple verb, and formed 
this compound of it, in the sense of * was 
yet further defiling.’ The simplest emen- 
dation ‘polluebat’ is perhaps the most 
satisfactory, and not tautologous, as his 
* obscura initia' are not to be presumed 
to be therefore already * polluta. 

Bruttedium. This person also is 
cited by M. Seneca as an orator (Contr. 
9. 35) and historical writer (Suas. 6. 20, 
21). It would appear from Juvenal (10, 
82, where see Mayor) that he was in- 
volved in the fall of Seianus. Of the 
various forms of the name (see crit. note’, 
this seems to be the oldest ( Bücheler, in 
Rh. Mus. xi. 295). 

copiosum, ‘richly endowed’: 
‘copiosa vita’ 13. 43, 7. 

cp. 

23 4. 20, 5, &c. 

6. antereparat: anteire parat R, text Bach. 

4. pergeret, with accus., as in I. 28, 
* Perageret' would im- 
ply a course completed at the close of 
life (cp. Verg. Aen. 4, 653), a sense in- 
consistent with * iturum." - 

5. suasmet, i.e. all that he had for- 
merly hoped for. 

6. antire, often thus syncopated in the 
Annals: cp. c. 69, 5; 4. 40, 7 ; 71, I, 
&c. 

9. Gellius Publicola. Borghesi con- 
siders this person, who was cos. suff. in 
793, A.D. 40 (see Klein), to have been 
descended from L. Gellius Publicola, 
brother of Messalla (Liv. Epit. 122), who 
was consul in 718, B.c. 36, and had been 
a prisoner in the power of Brutus and 
Cassius (Dio, 47. 24, 3). 

M. Paconius. Suetonius (Tib. 61) 
states, on contemporary authority, that 
Tiberius afterwards imprisoned Paconius, 
and on being reminded of his existence by 
a jester, ordered his execution. Tacitus 
calls him an: innocent victim (16. 29, 3) 
in speaking of the charge against his son 
Paconius Agrippinus. 

II. teneri, with gen. 11. 7, 8, on the 
analogy of *arguere,' &c. ; also with abl. 
as c. 13, 2, &c. On the inf. with accus. 
after * nec dubium, cp. Introd. v. § 44. 

multa, the circumstances mentioned in 
the whole passage down to ' silendi.' 

13. facundissimis, &c., rhetoricians 
of Ephesus and other Greek cities, dele- 
gated by the ‘concilium’ as accusers: 
cp. 16. 21, 3, &c. 

(A.U. C. 775. 

472 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

delectis responderet solus et orandi nescius, proprio in metu, qui 
exercitam quoque eloquentiam debilitat, non temperante Tiberio 
quin premeret voce vultu, eo quod ipse creberrime interrogabat, 

neque refellere aut eludere dabatur, ac saepe etiam confitendum 
5 erat, ne frustra quaesivisset. 

Servos quoque Silani, ut tormentis 3 
interrogarentur, actor publicus mancipio acceperat. et ne quis 
necessariorum iuvaret periclitantem, maiestatis crimina subde- 
bantur, vinclum et necessitas silendi. igitur petito paucorum 4 
dierum interiectu defensionem sui deseruit, ausis ad Caesarem 

1o codicillis, quibus invidiam et preces miscuerat. 

mt 
CQ 

68. Tiberius quae in Silanum parabat, quo excusatius sub 
exemplo acciperentur, libellos divi Augusti de Voleso Messalla 
eiusdem Asiae pro consule factumque in eum senatus consultum 
recitari iubet. tum L. Pisonem sententiam rogat. ille multum 2 
de clementia principis praefatus aqua atque igni Silano interdi- 
cendum censuit ipsumque in insulam Gyarum relegandum. ea- 3 
dem ceteri, nisi quod Cn. Lentulus separanda Silani materna 

2. eloquende belitat : text B. 3. eoque quod Acid. 

6. interrogentur: text L. 
9. missis Faern, ausus . . . codicillos Mee 

2. exercitam, ‘trained’: cp. c. 20, 3; 

sub exemplo, ‘by putting forward an. 
4.11, 2; 14. 2, 45 56, 5, &c. This use, 

example’: cp. 4. 11, 5; ‘sub nominibus' 

in the sense of * exercitatus,' appears espe- 16. 9, 5. 

cially Tacitean ; another use is noted in 
I. 17,7 ; 35; 2. 

4- dabatur, often with inf. in this 
sense in Tacitus (4. 6, 2; 60, 1; 6. 1 
4, &c.), after poets (Verg., Ov., &c3, 
Quint., and Plin. (Pan. 50). 

5. ne frustra quaesivisset, i e. lest 
Tiberius should be irritated if his ques- 
tions failed to elicit anything. 

.6. actor publicus : cp. 2. 30, 3. 

7. iuvaret periclitantem, repeated 
from c. 12, 9. 

subdebantur : cp. 1. 6, 6. 

9. interiectu : cp. c. 51, 4. 

ausis, here alone used as a passive 
participle ; but such use appears in the 
subst. * ausum" (c. 66, 4, &c.); and the 
verb is used in the passive in Liv., Vell., 

. &c. ; and poets (Verg. Aen. 9, 320, &c.). 

IO. invidiam et preces. These are 

coupled in 4..53, 13 16. 10, 5; and * in- 

vidia' has the sense of reproach in 4. 52, 
3; 11. 34, 55 15. 19; *: 

11. excusatius, ‘with more justifica- 
tion’; so in Pl. E 9. 21, 3; Just. 32. 
2; and ‘excusate’ bns 2. I, 13. 

12. libellos, generally so: used of the 
accusers’ indictment (2. 29, 3); here of 
the letter from the prince sent to the 
senate, the ‘ epistulae" of c. 44, 3, &c. 

Voleso Messalla. On the date of his 
consulship and proconsulate see Introd. 
vii p. 113; on his atrocious cruelty 
see Id. p. 120, n. 1. 

14. L. Pisonem. Here, as in 2. 32, 4, 
there is an uncertainty between two per- 
sons; but Mommsen points out (Staatsr. 
iii. 975, 2) that, as he is asked before 
Cn. Lentulus, it is probably the consul of 
739, B. C. 15 (see on 6. 10, 3), not of 753, 
B. C. I (see on 2. 34, 1) that is meant. 

16. Gyarum, one of the Cyclades, now 
va Tvovpa or Jura, apparently a common 
and typical place. of exile (Juv. 1, 73;- 
Io, 70, &c.). See note on c. 69, 8. 

17. Cn. Lentulus: probably the 
augur (see on c. 59, I) is meant, as the 
Cn. Lentulus of 1. 27, 1 would have pre- 
ceded either of the above Pisones. 

separanda, i.e. from the *publica- 
tio’ implied in this sentence. 

2 caret. 

A.D. 22.] LIBER III. 

CAP. 67-69. 

473 

bona, quippe Atia parente geniti, reddendaque filio dixit, ad- 

nuente Tiberio. 

69. At Cornelius Dolabella dum adulationem longius sequi- 
tur, increpitis C. Silani moribus addidit, ne quis vita probrosus 
et opertus infamia provinciam sortiretur, idque princeps diiudi- 5 

nam a legibus delicta puniri: quanto fore mitius in ipsos, 

3 melius in socios, provideri ne peccaretur? adversum quae disse- 
ruit Caesar: non quidem sibi ignara quae de Silano vulgabantur, 

sed non ex rumore statuendum. 

multos. in provinciis contra 

quam spes aut metus de illis fuerit egisse: excitari quosdam ad 

4 meliora magnitudine rerum, hebescere alios. 

neque posse prin- 

cipem sua scientia cuncta complecti, neque expedire ut ambitione 

aliena trahatur. 
b certo sint. 

ideo leges in facta constitui, quia futura in in- 
sic a maioribus institutum, ut, si antissent delicta, 

6 poenae sequerentur. ne verterent sapienter reperta et semper 

placita; satis onerum principibus, satis etiam potentiae. 

minui 

iura, quotiens gliscat potestas, nec utendum imperio, ubi legibus 

7agi possit. 
I. alia: text Madvig. 

I. Atia. . Madvig argues (Adv. Crit. 
i. 148) that the name must have been one 
easily mistaken for ‘alia,’ and that of a 
family entitled to the utmost considera- 
tion; and that these requirements would 
be satisfied by supposing his mother to 
have been an Atia, of the same family 
with the mother of Augustus. Other 
suggestions are ‘Manlia’ or ‘ Mallia,’ 
from comparison of the name of his sister 
(c. 69, 9); or that ‘alia’ might possibly 
mean ‘of far other character’ (cp. 1. 43, 
5); or that * quippe. ..geniti' is a gloss. 
* filio, probably the consul of 781, 
A.D. 28 (4. 68, 8). 

3. Cornelius Dolabella: cp. his *ab- 
surda adulatio" in c. 47, 4. 

sequitur: cp. *sequitur ardorem mili- 
tum’ 1. 49, 6. The sense in both cases 
is that of falling in with a prevalent 
feeling and stimulating it. 

5. idque princeps diiudicaret. On 
the interference of the princeps with the 
‘sortitio provinciarum ' cp. 6. 40, 3. 

6. a legibus. The use of the prep. is 
suited to the personification... Nipp. com- 
pares Cic. Part. Or. 3%, 134; M. Sen. 
Contr. 24, 1, in both of which ‘a lege’ is 
used with a personifying expression. 

quanto rarior apud Tiberium popularitas, tanto 

16. minutura: text L. 

8. vulgabantur. On the indicative 
cp. Introd. v. § 49. 

9. contra quam ; so used of acts con- 
trary to rule or principle, in Cic. (e.g. 
pro Cl. 5, 12, &c.), and Liv. (30. 19, 9) ; 
not elsewhere in Tacitus, who has * secus 
quam’ (4. 8, 6; 6. 22, 5). 

II. hebescere; so used of persons in 
H. 3. 77, 4: cp. * hebent' G. 15, 1, and 
the adj. * hebes " 14. 11, 3. 

I2. expedire ut. This construction is 
rare, and probably here, as in Just. 34. I, 
” (‘expedire...ut...leges habeant"), 
adopted to avoid the dependence of an 
inf. on another inf. Drager points out 
the similar reason for * intelligebant opus 
esse . . . ut,’ ‘respondeat sufficere ut’ 
(Dial. 31, 1; 32, 1, where see Gudeman). 

ambitione aliena, i.e. the intrigues 
of those who wished to supplant a rival 
candidate for a province. 

I6. placita: cp. a. 66, 3. 

18. popularitas, ‘ the effort to please ’: 
so in Suet. Cal. 15; Ner. 53; Tit. 8: 
cp. ‘gratum popularitate Magnum’ Stat. 
Sylv. 2. 7, 69. See the remarks on an- 
other act of magnanimity in Tiberius 
(4- 31, 1). 

Lad 

o 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

474 [A. U.C. 775. 

laetioribus animis accepta. atque ille prudens moderandi, si 8 
propria ira non impelleretur, addidit insulam Gyarum inmitem 
et sine cultu hominum esse : darent Iuniae familiae et viro quon- 
dam ordinis eiusdem, ut Cythnum potius concederet. id sororem 8 

s quoque Silani Torquatam, priscae sanctimoniae virginem, expe- 
tere. in hanc sententiam facta discessio. 

70; Post auditi Cyrenenses, et accusante Anchario Prisco 
Caesius Cordus repetundarum damnatur. L. Ennium equitem 2 
Romanum, maiestatis postulatum, quod effigiem principis pro- 

ro miscum ad usum argenti vertisset, recipi Caesar inter reos vetuit, 
palam aspernante Ateio Capitone quasi per libertatem. non 3 
enim debere eripi patribus vim statuendi neque tantum male- 

ficium impune habendum. 

4. cythenum : Cytheram B, text L. 

I. prudens moderandi, ‘ thoughtful 
to enforce moderation.' Several instances 
of such action can be given, as in 2. 50, 
4; 3. 18, 1, &c. 

3. sinecultuhominum. Pliny (N. H. 
8. 29, 43, 104) gives a story from Varro, 
who apparently had it from Theophrastus 
(Id. 57, 82, 222), of its desertion through 
a plague of mice. In 4. 30, 2 it is called 
destitute of water. Strabo, however, re- 
cords (10. §, 3, 485) that at the time of 
Actium he found there a village of fisher- 
men, who complained of inability to pay 
their tribute (600 H. S.). 

quondam ordinis eiusdem. His 
senatorial rank was a thing of the past, 

lost * ipso facto’ on sentence of exile. 
|. 4. Oythnum, Thermia, near Gyaros, 
but considerably larger and' having a 
town once capable of defence (Liv. 31. 
45, 9), afterwards occupied by a pseudo- 
Nero (H. 2. 8, 2). 

5. Torquatam. The surname is ex- 
plained by the connexion of the Iunii 
with the Manlii (c. 76, 4. Torquata is 
mentioned as a vestal, with the full name 
* Iunia C. Silani f. Torquata,’ in two in- 
scriptions (see on Introd. ii. p. 10), the 
former of which describes her as ‘ virgo 
Vestalis maxima’ (see on a. 86,1); also 
as * Iunia C. Silani f.,' on two bases in the 
* atrium Vestae' (H. Jordan * Der Tempel 
der Vesta,’ 1886, p. 45). 

6. in hano sententiam facta disces- 
sio, i.e..'this was assented to without 
discussion’ : cp. 6. 12, 1, and Nipp. there. 
That the * consensus ’ in such a case (see 

sane lentus in suo dolore esset : rei 

8&. lennium: text B. 

Gell. 14, 7) was not always unanimous or 
final is evident : see note on c. 23, 2, and 
Staatsr. iii. 983, 991; also the paper by 
Mr. D. B. Monro referred to on c. 65, 2. 

7. Cyrenenses. The Cyrenaica had 
certainly been joined to the province of 
Crete ever since the arrangement of 727, 
B.C. 27 (Dio, 53. 12, 4), and was usually 
held with it before that date: see Mar- 
quardt, i. 461. On its original cession 
to Rome by bequest see on 14. 18, 2. 
The country extended from the eastern 
boundary of Africa at * Philaenorum arae" 
(Introd. vii. p. 118) to the frontier of 
Egypt, coinciding with the eastern half of 
modern Tripoli. Josephus (Ant. 14. 7, 2) 
gives, on the authority of Strabo, a four- 
fold division of the population : 1. roAtra: 
(Greeks); 2. yewpyot (Libyans); 3. pé- 
Toot; 4. "lovbato.. These latter were 
a large body (cp. Acts 2, 10). 

8. Caesius Cordus. On him and An- 
charius Priscus cp. c. 38, 1. The accusers 
had probably demanded a year for col- 
lecting evidence (cp. 13. 43, 2). 

9. promiscum ad usum... vertis- 
set, i.e. had melted it down into plate. 
For other charges implying desecration of 
such images, cp. I. 73, 2; 74, 4- 

II, aspernante, ‘protesting’: cp. 4. 
JO, 25; 14. 42, 2, &c. 

Ateio Capitone : see on C. 75, I. 

12. enim. This marks the transition 
to *oratio obliqua,' as in 2. 28, 2; 4. 70, 
5; 15. 27, 1, &c. 

13. impune: cp. I. 72, 3. 

A.D. 22.] LIBER III. 

4 publicae iniurias ne largiretur. 

CAP. 69—71. 475 

intellexit haec Tiberius, ut erant 
magis quam ut dicebantur, perstititque intercedere. 

Capito in- 

signitior infamia fuit, quod humani divinique iuris sciens egre- 
gium publicum et bonas domi artes dehonestavisset. 

71. Incessit dein religio, quonam in templo locandum foret 5 
donum, quod pro valetudine Augustae equites Romani voverant 
equestri Fortunae: nam etsi delubra eius deae multa in urbe, 

2 nullum tamen tali cognomento erat. 

repertum est aedem esse 

apud Antium, quae sic nuncuparetur, cunctasque caerimonias 

I. ne largiretur, ‘he should not show 
his generosity in forgiving wrongs against 
the state No other instance is given of 
this sense of *largior.' 

ut erant, &c., ‘his real thought 
rather than his expression.' 

2. insignitior. This comparative 
form appears to be more used in a bad 
sense than * insignior': cp. 4. 51, 2; Liv. 
7. I5, 10; 8. 13, I. On rare forms of 
comparison in Tacitus see Introd. v. 
$ 7- 

3. humani divinique iuris sciens. 
Nerva is similarly described in 6. 26, 1; 
and, as jurisprudence is defined to be 
' divinarum atque humanarum rerum no- 
titia’ (Ulp.. Dig. 1. 1, 10), a great jurist 
would be versed in both branches. Ma- 
crobius (7. 13, 11) credits Capito with 
special proficiency in pontifical, or divine, 
law. See Marquardt, iii. 317, n. 4. 

egregium publicum. It is generally 
thought that ‘egregium,’ used substan- 
tively in 6. 24, 3; 14. 60, 1, may here 
form the substantive in a phrase analogous 
to * bonum,' * malum publicum,' and the 
rare ‘optimum’ (Gell. 7. 3, 17), ‘ pessi- 
mum publicum' (Varr. R.:R. 1. 13, 7; 
Liv. 2. 1, 3). It should thus mean ‘the 
glory, or *honour of the state'; and 
Nipp. takes it of the glory of the imperial 
clemency; which Capito could hardly be 
said ‘dehonestare’; but he might be said 
to cast a stain on the renown which as 
a great jurist he had conferred on his 
country. A far more satisfactory mean- 
ing would be *his distinguished public 
rank ' (asa consular and leading senator) ; 
but it is very questionable whether * pub- 
licum" could possibly bear such a sub- 
stantival meaning. Prof. C. L. Smith, in 
a carefully reasoned paper on the passage 
(Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 
i. pp. 107-110), is perhaps right in think- 
ing the text unsound, and suggests ‘ egre- 
gium publice locum,’ 

. 4. bonas domi artes. The contrast 
drawn by these words is hardly the same 
as that between ‘inlustres domi aites' 
and ‘claritudo ,militiae’ (4. 6, 2); and 
‘domi partam dignationem ' in 13. 42, 8 
(if rightly read), is probably to be other- 
wise understood (see note there) ; but his 
juristic learning might be viewed as an 
accomplishment of private life, apart 
from the glory shed by it on the state, or 
his own position as a public man: cp. 
* artibus egregiis et pari fama publice' 
(1. 13, 1). Mr. Smith thinks *' bonae 
artes’ a weak expression for his great 
accomplishments, amd would take it 
(as Nipp.) of his qualities of personal 
character (cp. H. 1. 10, 3, &c.); but to 
these Tacitus would hardly give even that. 
much praise. 

5. religio, here ‘a religious question’ : 
cp. below, ‘de religionibus.' 

6. valetudine Augustae : cp. c. 64, 1. 

8. nullum... erat. A difficulty arises 
from the fact that a temple thus entitled 
was dedicated at Rome in 581, B.C. 173 
(Liv. 40. 40; 42. 3, 10), was evidently in 
existence in 662, B.C. 92 (Jul. Obsequens, 
$ 113, citing, probably from Livy, a 
prodigy belonging to that year), and ap- 
pears to be alluded to, as still standing, 
even by Vitruvius (3. 3, 2). It may, how- 
ever, have perished after that date, and 
the only inscriptions to * Fortuna’ with 
this title appear to be spurious: see Orelli 
here and on Inscr. 1746. 
. 9. apud Antium. This town being 
especially the seat of the worship of For- 
tune (Hor. Od. 1. 35, 1), another temple 
to that goddess may well have existed 
there, besides the famous one of the 
* Fortunae Antiates' (cp. 15. 23, 3; Insc. 
Orell. 1738, 1740), but so obscured by it 
as to be forgotten. - 

caerimonias, ‘worship’: cp. c. 6o, 
3, &c. 

476 

.P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 775. 

Italicis in oppidis templaque et numinum effigies iuris atque 

imperii Romani esse. 

ita donum apud Antium statuitur. 

quoniam de religionibus tractabatur, dilatum nuper responsum 
adversus Servium Maluginensem flaminem Dialem prompsit 
5 Caesar recitavitque decretum pontificum, quotiens valetudo ad- 
versa flaminem Dialem incessisset, ut pontificis maximi arbitrio 
plus quam binoctium abesset, dum ne diebus publici sacrificii 
neu saepius quam bis eundem in annum ; quae principe Augusto 
constituta satis ostendebant annuam absentiam et provinciarum 

IO administrationem Dialibus non concedi. 

memorabaturque L.4 

Metelli pontificis maximi exemplum, qui Aulum Postumium 

flaminem attinuisset. 

ita sors Asiae in eum qui consularium 

Maluginensi proximus erat conlata. 
72. Isdem diebus Lepidus ab senatu petivit ut basilicam 

4. promisit: text L. 
Lepidus Nipp. 

I. juris... Romani esse. This is 
inserted to show that such an offering 

could be dedicated as lawfully at Antium - 

as at Rome. When the Italians became 
Roman citizens, it appears to have rested 
with the pontiffs to decide what * muni- 
cipalia sacra’ should be kept up: see 
Marquardt, iii. 320. 

3. dilatum nuper: cp. c. 59,1. The 
*pontifex maximus’ was ‘iudex atque 
arbiter rerum divinarum humanarumque ' 
(Festus): cp. Marquardt, iii. 317. The 
present question was one of ‘ius divinum." 

5. quotiens valetudo adversa, &c. 
The MS. text must be taken to mean that 
the flamen could be absent for one or two 
nights at his discretion; but that any 
further absence required the permission 
of the chief pontiff, who could allow it 
only on the plea of illness, and not even 
on that plea at all times or more than 
twice a year. It is so difficult to believe 
that so stringent a rule could have still 
existed, that some corruption has been 
thought probable. Yet an ordinance of 
Augustus of even such severity would 
imply some relaxation of the old rule, 
given by Livy (5. 52, 13) as referred 
to by Camillus, *flamini Diali noctem 
unam manere extra urbem nefas est.’ For 
various other restrictions laid upon him 
see Marquardt, iii. 328. 

6. incessisset, ‘had attacked.’ The 
word is often so used with accus. of per- 
son in Livy. 

5. quotiens non Haase, Dialem non Ritt. 

14. M. 

8. in annum. The construction re- 
sembles that of els in such expressions as 
els piay ?)uépay Thuc. 6. 16, 6. 

principe Augusto, abl. absol: cp. 
‘rege Cyro’ c. 62, 4. : 

11, Postumium. He was 'flamen 
Martialis! not *Dialis' (Liv. Epit. 19), 
and cos. B.C. 242. | 

I2. attinuisset: cp. c. 36, 4, &c. 

sors Asiae: see c. 32, 2; 58,1. The 
province probably.fell to Fonteius Capito 
(cp. 4- 36, 4). 

14. Lepidus. Tacitus usually gives the 

praenomen where either Lepidus is men- 

tioned. What is said of his moderate 
means would identify him with the one 
mentioned in 2. 48, 1, and would be more 
likely to be true of Marcus (c. 32, 2) than 
of Manius Lepidus; also the parentage 
here given appears not to agree with that 
of the latter (see note on c. 22, I). 
basilicam Pauli. From what is said 
below, Lepidus appears to have been 
grandson of L. Aemilius Paulus, cos. 704, - 
B.C. 50, who was at once the restorer of 
the old Basilica Aemilia. or Fulvia ad- 
joining the Forum, and the founder of 
the new and magnificent Basilica Pauli 
(Cic. Att. 4. 16, 14; Plut. Caes. 29; App. 
B. C. 23. 26), which was completed and 
dedicated by his son Paulus Aemilius 
Lepidus, the husband of Cornelia, in his 
consulship (as cos. suff.), in 720, B.C. 34 
(Dio, 49. 42, 2), and was again restored 
in his name by Augustus and others after 

et 3 

A. D. 22.] LIBER Ill. CAP. 71, 72. 477 

Pauli, Aemilia monumenta, propria pecunia firmaret ornaretque. 
2erat etiam tum in more publica munificentia; nec Augustus 
arcuerat Taurum, Philippum, Balbum hostiles exuvias aut exun- 
3 dantis opes ornatum ad urbis et posterum gloriam conferre. quo 
tum exemplo Lepidus, quamquam pecuniae modicus, avitum 5 
4decus recoluit. at Pompei theatrum igne fortuito haustum 
Caesar extructurum pollicitus est, eo quod nemo e familia 

3. arguerat; text L. 

a fire in 740, B.C. 14 (Dio, 54. 24, 3). 
Its columns of Phrygian marble are noted 
by Pliny (N. H. 36. 15, 24, 102). Pro- 
bably the new basilica adjoined the old 
one and eclipsed or absorbed it, as one 
only, the * belligeri sublimis regia Pauli' 
(Stat. Sylv. 1. 1, 30), is mentioned by 
authors. See Middleton, ii. 247. 

I. monumenta : cp. c. 23, I. 

3. etiam tum. In the time of Tacitus 
himself all such acts were those of the 
princeps : cp. * adhuc' 2. 33, 2. 

publica, towards the state: cp. *com- 
paratio deterrima ' r. 1o, 6. 

nec Augustus arcuerat. He is re- 
deae by Velleius (2. 89, 4) and 

uetonius (Aug. 29) as even stimulating 
men to such acts ef munificence. Sue- 
tonius instances the same three persons 
who are here mentioned. | The use of 
‘arceo’ with imf, thcugh elsewhere ap- 
parently confined to poets, is analogous 
to those noted in Introd. v. § 43. 

3. Taurum. On Statilius Taurus cp. 
6. 11, 6. His amphitheatre, the first, and, 
till the Flavian era, the only one of stone, 
was in the Campus Martius, and was 
dedicated by him in 724, B.C. 30 (Dio, 
5I. 23, 1). It is stated by Dio (62. 18, 
2) to have perished in the fire of Nero, 
and*is not mentioned in later times: see 
Middleton, ii 77. 

Philippum.  L. Marcius Philippus, 
son of the stepfather of Augustus, was 
trib. pl. in 705, B.c. 49 (Caes: B. C. 1. 6, 
4), praetor in 710, B.C. 44 (Cic. Phil. 3. 
10,25). Borghesi also shows that he was 
cos. suff. in 716, B.C. 38, and gained a 
triumph from Spain. His ‘aedes Her- 
culis Musarum (Suet. l. 1), the ‘ clari 
monumenta Philippi’ of Ovid (Fast. 6, 
801), with an adjoining * porticus" (Mart. 
5. 49, 12), close to the *porticus Octa- 
. viae appears to have been a restora- 
tion of that erected in 567, B.C. 187, 
by Q. Fulvius Nobilior. Some slight 

remains are traceable: see Middleton, 
ii. 206. | | 

Balbum. L. Cornelius P. f. Balbus, 
a consular of the famous Spanish family, 
had gained a triumph (for successes as 
proconsul in Africa in 735, B.C. 19) and 
a pontificate (Vell. 2. 51, 2, &c). His 
theatre, less important than those of 
Pompeius and Marcellus, stood in the 
Campus Martius, near the river, and was 
dedicated by him in 741, B.C. 13 (Dio, 
54. 25, 2). Some remains exist: see 
Middleton, ii. 73, 74. 

hostiles exuvias; so 'bellorum ex- 
uviae’ Juv. 10, 133 ; here for the general's 
prize-money (*manubiae". | 

4. ornatum ad urbis. On the ana- 
strophe see Introd. v. $ 77. 4. | 

5. pecuniae modicus. On the gen. 
cp. 2. 73, 3; on the probable reason for 
the fact see c. 32, 2. 

&vitum decus: see note above, § I, 
and the full account of his lineage given 
by Nipp. from Borghesi. 

6. recoluit, ‘renewed’; so used of 
images replaced (H. 3. 7, 3), or of persons 
reinvested with dignities (H. 1. 77, 5). 

Pompei theatrum: see on c. 23, I. 
It would appear from 6. 45, 2 (where 
see note) that the *scaena' alone was 
destroyed, and that, if he completed 
restoration, he left the dedication to th 
Gaius. | 

haustum, thus metaphorically ap- 
plied to destruction by fire in 12.58, 2; 
H. 4. 60, 5; Liv. 5. 7. 3, &c. 

7. extructurum. On the omission of - 
* se ' cp. Introd. v. $ 8. 

nemo e familia, The only Pom- 
peius known at this time, and apparently 
the last of that house (see I. 7, 3, &c.), - 
must be supposed to have been poor: 
Nipp. notes that, in a passage cited as 
proving the opposite to this tSen. Tranq. 
An. r1. 8, 10), *Ptolemaeo' should be 
read for * Pompeio." 

478 

restaurando sufficeret, manente tamen nomine Pompei. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 775. 

simul 

laudibus Seianum extulit, tamquam labore vigilantiaque eius 

tanta vis unum intra damnum stetisset. 
effigiem Seiano, quae apud theatrum Pompei locaretur. 

5 multo post Caesar, cum Iunium Blaesum pro consule Africae 
triumphi insignibus attolleret, dare id se dixit honori Seiani, 

cuius ille avunculus erat. 
tali fuere. 

ac tamen res Blaesi dignae decore 

73. Nam Tacfarinas, quamquam saepius depulsus, reparatis 
I0 per intima Africae auxiliis huc adrogantiae venerat, ut legatos 
ad Tiberium mitteret sedemque ultro sibi atque exercitui suo 

postularet, aut bellum inexplicabile minitaretur. 

magis sua populique Romani contumelia indoluisse Caesarem 

ferunt, quam quod desertor et praedo hostium more ageret. 

15 Spartaco quidem post tot consularium exercituum clades inul- 
tam Italiam urenti, quamquam Sertorii atque Mithridatis in- 
gentibus bellis labaret res publica, datum ut pacto in fidem 
acciperetur; nedum pulcherrimo populi Romani fastigio latro 

Tacfarinas pace et concessione agrorum redimeretur. 

dat ne- 

20 gotium Blaeso, ceteros quidem ad spem proliceret arma sine 

I2. inexpiabile Pluygers. 

I. restaurando sufficeret.  'Suffi- 
cere’ is used with gerundial dat. (cp. 
Introd. v. $ 22 a) in Liv. 26, 36: for its 
use with gerundive cp. 4. 23, 1; 6. 4, 4; 
Agr. 45, 2. ‘ Restauro' is post-Augustan. 

2. tamquam, ‘on the ground (or plea) 
that.” The expression does not neces- 
sarily insinuate the falsehood of what is 
alleged; which certainly in some instances 
(cp. 4. 31, 7; 11. 4, 3; H. 1. 8, 5, &c.) 
seems implied to be true. See Introd. v. 
§ 67, and several passages cited here by 
Nipp. 

3. intra . . . stetisset, ‘had not gone 
beyond’: cp. c. 75, 4; 4. 7, 1, 'citra 
stetit" 12. 22, 3, ‘sistere intra’ 4. 40, 7, 
also *utinam...intra verba peccasset' 
Curt. 7. 1, 26. 

4. apud theatrum =‘ in theatro' (In- 
trod. v. $ 57). Seneca (Cons. ad Marc. 
22, 4) quotes an exclamation of Cremutius 
Cordus (see 4. 34, 1) on hearing of this 
decree, *tunc vere theatrum perire It 
would seem that the statue was at once 
erected : cp. 4. 7, 3. 

5. Blaesum : see c. 35, I, &c. 

681—683, B. C. 73-71. 

9. Nam Tacfarinas, &c. The account 
in these chapters is a condensed summary 
of events from c. 32. 

Io. huc, so with genit. in 6. 24, 4. 

et censuere patres 5 
neque 8 

non alias 2 

ne 3 

4 

12. inexplicabile, ‘endless,’ a meta- 

hor from an insoluble knot, used of 
impassable roads (Liv. 40. 33, 2), and an 
incurable disease (Pl. Ep. 5. 21, 3). *In- 
expiabile bellum’ (Liv., &c.) is a more 
common expression, but the word here 
aptly expresses a guerilla war leading to 
no issue. 

non alias. The frequent use of this 

phrase at the beginning of a sentence.(2. . 

46, 4 ; 4. 69, 6, &c.) seems a reminiscence 
of Verg. G. 1, 487. 7 

I4. desertor: cp. 2. 52, 2. 

hostium more, ‘as a belligerent.’ 

15. Spartaco. His rising lasted from 
He defeated both 
the consuls of 682, B. C. 72, besides a pro- 
consul and two praetors. The Sertorian 
war lasted through a year of this period, 
the Mithridatic war through all of it 
(cp. Liv. Epit. 96). 

.18. fastigio: cp. c. 29, 2. 

A. D. 22.] LIBER Ill. 

5 noxa ponendi, ipsius autem ducis quoquo modo poteretur. 
mox adversum artes Tacíarinatis 

recepti ea venia plerique. 

CAP. 72-74. 479 

et 

haud dissimili modo belligeratum. 
774. Nam quia ille robore exercitus inpar, furandi melior, 
pluris per globos incursaret eluderetque et insidias simul temp- 5 

2 taret, tres incessus, totidem agmina parantur. 

ex quis Cornelius 

Scipio legatus praefuit qua praedatio in Leptitanos et suffugia 
Garamantum ; alio latere, ne Cirtensium pagi impune trahe- 

3 rentur, propriam manum Blaesus filius duxit. 

medio cum de- 

lectis, castella et munitiones idoneis locis inponens, dux ipse 

i 
I. poteretur: the ‘e’ form is most common, cp. oreretur, 2. 47, 5, and Baiter there. 

t 
7. lepcinos: text Freinsh. (H. 4. 50, 5; Sall. Jug. 77, 2; 79, 1). 

I. noxa, 'punishment'; frequent in 
Livy and in jurists. 

et recepti, &c. Wilmanns, comment- 
ing (Eph. Zp. ii. 271-284) on an in- 
scription found on the borders of Algeria 
and Tunis, notes the mention of a * Musu- 
lamiorum civitas' in that locality, and 
thinks that those who. were at this time 
induced to surrender were settled there, 
and that the ‘defectio’ mentioned in 4. 
24, 2, relates to them. He also connects 
with them the mention of a * Musulamio- 
rum praefectus' in the time of Nerva, and 
of a * cohors Musulamiorum’ in another 
inscription. 

3. haud dissimili modo: cp. ‘suis 
... artibus peti’ Liv. 22. 16, 5. 

4. furandi melior. On the gen. cp. 
Introd. v. $ 33 e y. Drager notes that 
such a genitive is used with *melior' only 
here and in Silius. 

5. incursaret, &c. The subjunct. is 

probably that denoting frequent occur- 

rence (cp. below, § 3). Nipp. gives a 
different, but apparently less satisfactory 
explanation. For ‘eluderet’ cp. 2. 52, 6. 

6. tres incessus. The word would 
seem to be best taken here, as in 6. 33, 5, 
as ‘directions of advance’; ‘parantur’ 
being taken strictly with *agmina,' and 
by zeugma, in some such sense as ‘ deli- 
guntur, with * incessus. "The left column 
is directed towards Leptis and the Gara- 
mantes, the right covers the outlet from 
the Aures towards Cirta, while the main 
army advances by Theveste (Tebessa) 
into the territory of the Musulamii (see 2. 
52, 2), and occupies it ($ 5): see Momms. 
Hist. v. 633, E. T. ii. 318. 

Cornelius Scipio, probably the per- 
son mentioned in 11. 2, 5; 4, 7; 12. 53, 
3. An inscription (C. I. L. v. 4329) 
shows him to have been legatus of the 
Ninth legion, employed in this campaign 
(4. 23, 2), and afterwards consul (prob- 
ably suff. in 777 or 780, A.D. 24 or 27); 
and to have held other offices. His father 
(Insc. Orell. 644) and son (13. 25, 1) were 
also consulars, and one of the three pro- 
cos. of Asia (C. I. G. 3186). 

7. Leptitanos. Leptis minor (Lamta 
or Lamba), a free city between Thapsus 
and Adrumetum, is here meant; Leptis 
maior (Lebdah) being east of Tripoli, and 
beyond what can reasonably be suppose 
to be the field of operations. | 

suffugia Garamantum, *places of 
retreat among the Garamantes' (cp. 4. 
47, 2; G. 16, 4, &c.): the word is used 
in post-Augustan prose and in Ovid. The 
Garamantes are generally placed in Fez- 
zan, certainly far nearer Leptis ‘ maior’ 
than ‘minor,’ but they extended further 
westward, as would appear from the 
campaigns against them under Augustus 
(see Momms. Hist. v. 630, E. T. ii. 315). 

8. Cirtensium, Cirta, the chief town 
of Numidia or New Africa, restored by 
Constantine under his own name; which 
is still borne by the modem city, the 
capital of the French province. 

traherentur, ‘should be plundered’: 
cp. ‘ Aeduorum pagos trahebat ' H. 2. 61, 
2. The use appears taken from Sall. 
(letter of Mithridates) H. 4. 61, 17 D, 19 
K, p. 155 G. 

9. Blaesus fllius: see on I. I9, 4. 

480 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 775. 

arta et infensa hostibus cuncta fecerat, quia, quoquo inclinarent, 
pars aliqua militis Romani in ore in latere et saepe a tergo erat ; 

multique eo modo caesi aut circumventi. 

tunc tripertitum exer- 4 

citum pluris in manus dispergit praeponitque centuriones virtutis 

5 expertae. 

nec, ut mos fuerat, acta aestate retrahit copias aut in 5 

hibernaculis veteris provinciae componit, sed ut in limine belli 
dispositis castellis per expeditos et solitudinum gnaros mutantem 
mapalia Tacfarinatem proturbabat, donec fratre eius capto re- 
gressus est, properantius tamen quam ex utilitate sociorum, 
10 relictis per quos resurgeret bellum. sed Tiberius pro confecto 6 
interpretatus id quoque Blaeso tribuit ut imperator a legionibus 
salutaretur prisco erga duces honore, qui bene gesta re publica 
gaudio et impetu victoris exercitus conclamabantur ; erantque 
plures simul imperatores nec super ceterorum aequalitatem. 7 
15 concessit quibusdam et Augustus id vocabulum, ac tunc Tiberius 

Blaeso postremum. 

75. Obiere eo anno viri inlustres Asinius Saloninus, M. 

I. quoquo inclinarent, subjunct., ex- 
pressing frequency: cp. Introd. v. § 52. 
2. in ore =‘ in conspectu: cp. * in ore 
vulgi ' H. 3. 36, 1. 
6. veteris. The original Africa as 
distinct from Numidia: see on 2. 52, I. 
ut in limine belli, perhaps best taken, 
with Nipp., to mean ‘as if the war was 
but beginning, instead of the summer 
being over: cp.*in primo limine vitae’ 
Sen. Herc. F. 1132. 
7. mutantem mapalia; adapted, like 
: * positis mapalibus’ (4. 25, 1), from terms 
used of a camp. Such movable ' mapa- 
lia' are mentioned by Livy (29. 31) and 
described by Vergil (G. 3, 331-334), and, 
according to Shaw (Travels, i. p. 397), 
answer to the *hhymas' or ‘beet-el-shar’ 
(* houses of hair’), the goatskin tents, in 
shape like an inverted boat, of the Bedo- 
weens. Sallust, who thus describes their 
shape (Jug. 18, 8), calls them * aedificia,' 
apparently confounding them with such 
huts as are spoken of ('arundine texta 
storeaque . . . tecta") in Liv. 30. 3, 9; 
which according to Shaw (p. 400) answer 
to the * gurbies' (of hurdles daubed with 
mud‘or of sunbaked clay and thatch) used 
by the Kabyles; supposed by him to be the 
* magalia' of Vergil (Aen. 1, 421). Both 
words are used for the single tent or hut, 
and for collections of them (the * douwars' 
of the former, * dashkrahs ' of the latter). 

II. id quoque, i.e. besides the *trium- 
phalia,’ 

12. prisco...honore. Livy (27. 19, 
4) a Scipio Africanus as saying 
that he had this title from his soldiers; 
and it is found on inscriptions nearly 
approaching that time: see Staatsr. i. 
124. 

13. gaudio et impetu : cp. the similar 
Jendiiuys in H.1. 372, 5; a. 70, 5; 4. 
 onklasta bas bar apparently short- 
ened for such an expression as that of 
Caesar (B. C. 2. 26, 1) *universi exercitus 
conclamatione imperator appellatur." 

14. plures, ‘more than one,’ ‘ several.’ 

15. concessit quibusdam et Augus- 
tus. AJl the instances which Mommsen 
(1. l. 125) has collected are prior to the 
formal constitution of the principate in 
727, B.C. 27; after which (see also Id. ii. 
267) the title is confined to members of 
the imperial family. or probably to sharers 
in the ‘imperium proconsulare’ (Introd. 
vi. p. 98); in which respect the -position 
of the proconsul of Africa at this time was 
exceptional (Id. vii. p. 115). 

17. Obiere . . . viri inlustres. Dio 
(57. 21, 3) states that Tiberius in this 
year honoured the memory of some by 
public funerals and statues. 

Asinius Saloninus, one of the sons 
of Asinius Gallus and of Vipsania, former 

A. D. 22.] LIBER III. CAP. 74-76. | 481 

Agrippa et Pollione Asinio avis, fratre Druso insignis Caesari- 
que progener destinatus, et Capito Ateius, de quo memoravi, 
principem in civitate locum studiis civilibus adsecutus, sed avo 
2 centurione Sullano, patre praetorio. consulatum ei adcelera- 
verat Augustus, ut Labeonem Antistium isdem artibus praecel- 
3 lentem dignatione eius magistratus anteiret. namque illa aetas 
duo pacis decora simul tulit: sed Labeo incorrupta libertate, et 
ob id fama celebratior, Capitonis obsequium dominantibus magis 
4 probabatur. illi, quod praeturam intra stetit, commendatio ex 
iniuria, huic, quod consulatum adeptus est, odium ex invidia 
oriebatur. 
76. Et Iunia sexagensimo quarto post Philippensem aciem 
anno supremum diem explevit, Catone avunculo genita, C. 
Cassii uxor, M. Bruti soror. testamentum eius multo apud . 

6. magistratibus: text B. 

wife of Tiberius (cp. I. 12, 6, and note on tradition and precedent (Dig. I. 2, 2, 

6.23, 3). Asinius Gallus also bore the $ 47): see Gibbon, ch. 44. 

surname Saloninus, commemorating the incorrupta libertate, abl. of quality. 

capture of Salonae in Delmatia by his His rival Capito, quoted by Gellius (13. 

father Pollio in 715, B. C. 39. 12), says he had a ‘ libertas nimia atque 
2. progener, i.e. as husband to a vecors! An illustration is given by Dio 

daughter of Germanicus. . (54. 15, 7) and Suetonius (Aug. 54), 
de quo memoravi: cp.c. 70; 2; also that at the choice of senators in 736, B. C. 
I. 76, 3 ; 79; I. 38, *quum vir virum legeret, he chose 

3. principem in civitate locum, used M. Lepidus the ex-triumvir, though an 
in Dial. 34, 1 of the first orator of the enemy of Augustus, and exiled from Rome, 
age. Here the ‘civilia studia, which. and defended his choice with spirit. 
might include also oratory, are under- 8. obsequium : cp. c. 7o, 2. The 
stood of juristic knowledge only. story, that he said of a doubtful word 

4. consulatum. He was cos. suff.in used by Tiberius, that if it was not Latin, 
758, A.D. 5: cp. C. IL. i. p. 474; Eph. it would soon become so (Suet. de Gr. 
Epig. iii. p. 11; where his full name is — 22), is hardly to the point. 
given, ' C. Ateius L. f. L. n. Capito. It 9. intra stetit: cp. c. 72, 5. Accord- 
would thus appear that his father (the ing to a later account (Dig. 1. 1.), he re- 
*praetorius") is the L. Ateius, L. f., An. fused a consulship. 

Capito mentioned in a senatus consultum I2. Iunia. Servilia, half-sister of M. 
in Cic. ad Fam. 8. 8, 5. Another, C. Cato Uticensis, and, by her first marriage, 
Ateius Capito, was trib. pl. in B. C: 55 mother of M. Brutus the conspirator, after- 
(Dio, 39. 32, 3). wards married D. Iunius Silanus, cos. 

5. Labeonem Antistium, mentioned 692, B.C. 62, by whom she had this 
by Gellius (13. 10, &c.), and constantly daughter, known also as Tertia (Suet. 
in juridical writings. His father, who Iul. 50) or Teitulla (Cic. Att. 14. 20, 2; 
killed himself after Philippi (App. D. C. — r5. 11, 1), and another older Iunia, wife 

4. 135), was also a jurist. of M. "Lepidus the triumvir (Cic. Att. 6. 
". duo pacis decora. They areknown 2, 25; Phil. 13. 4, 8; Vell. 2. 88, 1, &c.). 
in.the history of jurisprudence as the 13. genita, used loosely of a niece by 

founders of the two schools called, from blood. The passage cited by Nipp. (12. 
the names of subsequent leaders, Sabinians 64, 4) is not fully parallel, as * avunculo 
and Proculians. "The decisions of Capito Augusto’ is there abl. abs, which can 
are described as strictly grounded on, hardly be the case here. ! 

those of Labeo as more independent of, — . 14. multo...rumore fuit, ‘was one 

VOL. I. Ii 

482 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM LIB. III. 

vulgum rumore fuit, quia in magnis opibus, cum ferme cunctos 
proceres cum honore nominavisset, Caesarem omisit. quod civi- 8 
liter acceptum, neque prohibuit quo minus laudatione pro rostris 
ceterisque sollemnibus funus cohonestaretur. viginti clarissima- 4 

5 rum familiarum imagines antelatae sunt, Manlii, Quinctii aliaque 
eiusdem nobilitatis nomina. sed praefulgebant Cassius atque 5 

Brutus eo ipso, quod effigies eorum non visebantur. 

1. operibus: text B. 

of much notoriety.’ 
ablatives of quality in 4. 52, 8; 58, 1; 6 
47» 35 51, 3- 

2. quod civiliter acceptum, ‘ which 
Tiberius took as a citizen should’; i.e. 
did not resent it * vi principis’ (c. 12, 4), 
Ly prohibiting her funeral honours: cp. 
* civiliter . .'. habuit" 4. 21, 2, ‘ comitia 

. » Civiliter celebrans’ H. 2. 9t, 2. 

4. cohonestaretur, ‘should receive 

general honour'; so *ad cohonestandas 
exequias ' Cic. Quint. 15, 50, *ad memo- 
riam puellae cohonestandam’ Inscr. Orell. 
5037- 
' viginti . . . familiarum. That ‘an- 
cestry ' was a wide term in such cases is 
shown by c. 5, 2 (where see note). The 
names given here are those not of families 
but of * gentes" (see note on 2. 52, 8). 

Nipp. notes such 

7. P. CoRNELI LIBER III FINIT. INCIPIT LIBER IIII. 

5. Manlii. The son of T. Manlius 
Torquatus, cos. 589, B. C. 165, was adopted 
by D. Iunius Silanus (Cic. de Fin. 1. 7, 
24). The relationship with the Quinctii 
is not traceable. 

". non visebantur. Their effigies 
were en preserved in households 
(4-35, 33 16. 7, 3; Dio, 53. 32, 4), and 
were objects of special reverence, even in 
Pliny's time; who says of Titinius Capito 
* mirum ... quo studio imagines Bruto- 
rum, Cassiorum, Catonum domi, ubi 
potest, habeat (Epp. 1. 17, 3). The last 
words imply that they were not shown 
publicly, whether by positive prohibition 
(cp. 2. 32, 2), or as a matter of prudence. 

* Viso' is thus used for the simple ‘ vided | 

in 13. 46, 4 ; 14. 1, 5, &c. 

APPENDIX III. 

EXCURSUS ON THE ‘LEX PAPIA POPPAEA' (see 3. 25-28). 

NorrE.—In the preparation of this Excursus, little more has been done 
than to condense and arrange the materials collected by Mr. T. F. Dallin; 
with some addition to the introductory and supplemental remarks. 

TnaT Tacitus makes the mention of this law an occasion for a disser- 
tation on the origin and development of law in general, and of Roman 
. law in particular, is an evidence that he considered it to form an era in 
legislation. Still stronger testimony to its importance is given by the 
constant references to it in the Digest ; and the numerous comments of 
the jurists on its provisions !, which have rendered possible such restora- 
tions of it as have been made. 

The laws of Rome, probably from a very early period, had encouraged 
marriage and the rearing of children, and discouraged celibacy?. The 
censor was himself probably required by old law to be a married man ?, 
and was entitled to question citizens as to their condition, and to levy a 
fine (‘uxorium ’) froni the unmarried *. 

The attention of the dictator Caesar had been called to the need of 
fresh legislation in this direction by the revelation in the census-lists 
of the ravages which the civil wars had made in the population®; which 
he endeavoured to meet by offering valuable rewards to the fathers of 
many children °, 

The years following his death must have aggravated the evil, which 
thus demanded a prominent place in the social and domestic legislation 
of Augustus. His earlier efforts, which began perhaps from his sixth 

1 Tt is often mentioned as ‘ Leges' «ar 
&oxfjv by Proculus, Pomponius, &c., and 
in the ancient Index to the Pandects 
(Heéinecc. pp. 13, 1 14). 

2 Some kind of ‘ius trium liberorum" 
has been thought to date from the regal 
period, but this is questioned by Heinec- 
cius (pp. 26, 27). 

' * Cicero(deLegg. 3. 4, 7) laysdown such 
a law, apparently from ancient precedent. 

* Cic. de Orat. 2. 64, 260; Val. Max. 
2. 9, 1; Plut. Camill. p. 129; Id. M. 
Cat. p. 345; Gell. 4. 20; Festus, s. v. 
* uxorium.’ 

* See App. B. C. 2. 102. 

* Dio, 43. 25, 2 moAÀvraibkas dÓAa 
éréünkev. He had already given privileges 
to parents of three or more children in the 
distribution of the Campanian lands (Suet. 
Jul. 20; App. B. C. 2. ao} 

Ii 2 

484 APPENDIX IIl. EXCURSUS 

consulship in 726, B. c. 28 !, had endeavoured to deal with the subject in 

the most energetic and stringent manner; but met with such a storm of 

opposition as to compel him to withdraw and modify his proposals?. In 
some milder form, the ‘lex Iulia de maritandis ordinibus' was passed in 

736, B. c. 18? ; but an interval of three years was given before it should 

be enforced *. 

Towards the close of his life, in 762, A. p. 9, he took the further step 
of procuring the enactment of a great and comprehensive measure, 
designed apparently to absorb and codify much if not all of the ‘ius 
civile ’ on the subjects of marriages and wills. This law, fully sanctioned 
by senate and comitia " is generally named after the consuls its actual 
proposers, but often called in full ‘lex Iulia et Papia Poppaea de 
maritandis ordinibus.' 

The following account of its several chapters is taken mainly from the 
treatise of Heineccius?: who has collected such fragments of the text as 
have been preserved, and has restored the rest from what is known 
respecting its substarice. | 

Lex Maritalis. 

Cap. r. De senatorum eorumque liberorum nuptiis. ‘ Qui senator est 
quive filius neposve ex filio proneposve ex filio nato, cuius eorum 
est, erit: ne quis eorum sponsam uxoremve sciens dolo malo habeto 
libertinam, aut eam quae ipsa cuiusve pater materve artem ludicram 
facit, fecerit. Neve senatoris filia neptisve ex filio proneptisve ex 
nepote filio nato nata libertino eive qui ipse cuiusve pater materve 
artem ludicram facit, fecerit sponsa nuptave sciens dolo malo esto: 
neve quis eorum dolo malo sciens sponsam uxoremve eam habeto ?.' 

Cap.1. De ingenuorum nuptiis. ‘Omnibus reliquis ingenuis praeter 
senatores eorumque liberos libertinam uxorem habere liceto ; . . .* 
at ne quis ingenuus eam quae palam quaestum corpore facit, fecerit ; 
lenam, a lenone manumissam, aut iudicio publico damnatam, aut in 
adulterio deprehensam quaeve artem ludicram facit fecerit sponsam 
uxoremve sciens dolo malo habeto.’ 

Cap. rr. De sexagenariis, quinquagenariis, spadonibus *. 

! See Ann. 3. 28, 3, 4. 

? Suet. Aug. 34. Propertius, in an elegy 
(2. 7) written probably between 726-730, 
B.C. 28-24, expresses his own and Cyn- 
thia's joy at the withdrawal of this law. 

. 3 Dio, 54.16. Horace alludes to it as 
a new law in 737, B. C. 17 (Carm. Saec. 
17-20). * Suet. l.l. — 

* See Heineccius, pp. 50, 51. 

* In vol iii. of his collected works, - 

part 3, pp. 1-446. The Geneva edition 
of 1767 is referred to. Several later authori- 
ties are cited by Marquardt, Staatsv. ii. 291, 
n.8. See also Dr. Moyle's summary of 
the whole law in Dict. of Ant. ii. 44. 

7 Preserved by Paullus. | 

* Preserved by Celsus: cp. Dio, 54. 16, 
2; 56. 7.2. 

* This chapter dealt with exemptions : 
men above sixty and women above fifty 

ON THE ‘LEX PAPIA POPPAEA.’ 

Cap. 1v. De concubinatu !. 

Cap. v. De sponsalibus *. 

Cap. vr. De poenis iniustarum nuptiarum *. 

Cap. vir... De privilegiis maritorum et parentum in gerendis honoribus *. 
Cap. vui. De eorundem privilegiis in petendis honoribus 5. 

Cap. ix. De immunitate ob liberorum numerum *. 

Cap. x. De iure Quiritium ob liberos consequendo *. 

Cap. xr. De liberatione liberti ab operis ob liberos. 

Cap. xu. De mulierum liberatione a tutela ob numerum liberorum °. 
Cap. xix. De divortio libertae prohibito. 

* Ne divortii faciundi potestas 

libertae quae nupta est patrono, quamdiu is eam uxorem esse, volet ; 
neve invito illo alii nubendi potestas esto !^.' 

Cap. 
Cap. 
Cap. 
Cap. 

XIV. 
XV.—XIX. 

XX.—XXVIII. 
XXIX. 

were under the penalties of the law for 
life, unless they had married before attain- 
ing those respective ages. By a senatus 
consultum. passed under the rule of 
Claudius, an exemption extended to men 
who were sixty years old at the time of 

marriage, if the wife was under fifty (Suet. — 

Cl. 23 ; Ulp. Fr. Tit. xvi. 3). 

! That a chapter existed on this subject 
is inferred by Hein. from the statements 
of jurists. 
somewhat as follows: * Quas personas 
per hanc legem uxores habere non licet, 
eas concubinas habere ius esto: ingenuam 
honestam in concubinatu habere ius ne 
esto. These details are doubtful. 

? Enacting that a girl should not be 
betrothed under ten years old; that 
marriage should follow within two years 
of betrotlial; that women should be 

allowed two years from widowhood, or. 

six months from divorce, before remar- 
rage (Suet. Aug. 34; Dio, 54. 16, 7; 
Ulp. Fragm. Tit. xiv. 1). 

* Those who married unlawfully were 
to be treated as unmarried (Ulp. Fragm. 
Tit. xvi. 2). 

* A consul who had more Children 
ranked as senior, a married consul took 
precedence of an unmarried (Gell. 2, 15). 

* 'The same principle applied to can- 
didates (cp. Pl. Epp..7. 16, a). Tacitus 
records a breach of this provision (Ann. 
2. 51, 2), and its evasion by fraudulent 
adoptions (15. 19, 1). 

He imagines it to have run. 

De tutore muliere dotis causa dando !!. 
* Leges decimariae ??." 
De solidi capacitate ?*. 
De legato sub conditione caelibatus relicto !*. 

* A father of three children was ex- 
empted from personal duties (as ‘ tutela, 
&c.) at Rome. 

' A Latin father or mother of three 
children was to be a Roman. 

* The full text of this chapter is pre- 
served by Paullus. It exempts a freed- 
man who had two or more children ‘ in 
sua potestate ' from such * operae’ as he 
was bound to furnish to his patron. 

® This exemption was given for three 
children to a ‘Romana,’ for four to a 
‘ libertina.’ 

10 Preserved by Ulpian. 

!! A ‘tutor ad dotem dandam’ to be 
assigned in certain cases by the praetor 
urbanus (Ulp. Fragm. Tit. xi. 20). 

12 The titles and contents of these 
chapters need not here be given. They 
entitle husband and wife, as such, to suc- 
ceed to one tenth of each other's property, 
and to further tenths, in right of children 
by another marriage, and on other grounds 
(Ulp. Fragm. Tit. xv.: see Heinecc. pp. 
87-89, and Comm. pp. 257-273). 

13 These chapters treat of the causes 
entitling husband and wife to succeed to 
the whole of each other's property, and 

to legacies or inheritances from the wills 
of others (Ulp. Fragm. Tit. xvi. For 
full explanation see Heinecc. Comm. 
PP. 273-293). 

^* The legatee was discharged from the 
condition. 

486 APPENDIX III. EXCURSUS 

Cap. xxx. De iureiurando libertis remittendo !. 

Cap. xxxr. De iure adfinitatis inter vitricum, etc.? 

Cap. xxxi. De privilegiis absentium reip. causa 5. 

Cap. xxxmr. De indulgentia senatus *. 

Cap. xxxiv. De divortii modo et poena *. 

Cap. xxxv. De cogendis parentibus ut liberos elocent. * Qui liberos 

quos habent in potestate, iniuria prohibebunt ducere uxores vel nubere, 
in matrimonium eos collocare per praetorem urbanum coguntor °,’ 

Cap. xxxvi. De poenis caelibatus. ‘Caelibes, nisi intra centum dies 
huic legi paruerint, neque haereditatem, neque legatum ex testamento, 
nisi proximorum genere capiunto 7! 

Cap. xxxvi. De poenis orbitatis. ‘Si qui coniugum masculus (ultra 
vicesimum quintum annum) femina (ultra vicesimum) orbi erunt, 
semissem relictorum tantum capiunto *.' 

Capp. xxxvirm-xLrv. De iure patronatus *. 

Lex Caducaria. 

The second half of this law is thus entitled by Heineccius; who makes 
it consist of fifteen chapters. No fragments of them are preserved, and the 
restoration of this part of the law is much less certain in its details; but. 
it is known generally to have dealt with the subject of lapsed inheritances, 
and the proportions and conditions under which they became public pro- 

perty. All that is known of their 
by Heineccius (pp. 357, foll.). 

provisions is fully givén and explained 

Such inheritances or legacies as could not be taken by the persons to 
whom they were devised accrued firstly to conjoint legatees of the same 

! An oath not to marry, exacted by a 
patron, was not to be binding. 

* Affinities, except between father-in- 
law and son-in-law, to be annulled by 
death or divorce. 

3 Those absent on the public service to 
be exempt from the penalties of the law. 

* The senate might legalize an otherwise 
illegal marriage, as between a senator and 
freedwoman. zs 

5 This law fixed the share of dower to 
be returned to the wife on divorce, and 
was intended to discourage divorce by 
making it entail loss. 

5 Preserved by Marcianus. 

7 The text of this section is given as 
conceived by Heineccius from Ulp. Fr. Tit. 
xvii. I, and other sources. * Caelebs' is 
. defined to be an unmarried man between 

twenty and sixty, or an unmarried woman 
between twenty and fifty (see above, cap. 
iii, and Poste, Gaius, p. 252). The ex- 
ception, within which inheritances or 
legacies were allowed to accrue, extended 
to ascendants and descendants as far as 
the third degree. 

® The text of this chapter is a restoration 

_like the former. The pains and penalties 

of celibacy and childlessness were abol- 
ished by Constantine in A.D. 320 (see 
Poste on Gaius, p. 252). 

* Cp. cap. xi. The general object of 
these seven chapters was to define the 
rights of the patronus over the person or 

roperty of his married freedman and 
reedwoman. Their provisions are ex- 
plained by Heineccius (Comm. pp. 344- 
356) : see also Poste, Gaius, p. 307, foll. 

ON THE ‘LEX PAPIA POPPAEA.’ 487 

specific thing with children, in the second place to heirs with children, in 
the third to other legatees with children’, failing all these, to the aera- 
rium *, or, in later times, to the fiscus. | 

This law, though having for its apparent object *to add force to the 
penalties on celibacy and to enrich the treasury °,’ encountered no such 
vigorous opposition as that which had blunted the edge of the ‘lex 
Iulia* The senate had been schooled by twenty-five years of submission, 
and people had perhaps found out that it was easier to evade laws than 
to resist their enactment. The consuls from whom this law is named 
were both unmarried 5; nor, according to Tacitus 5 did marriage or the 
rearing of children become more frequent. 

In one respect the law was indeed most fruitful. By it was given the 
first general encouragement, on a large scale, and in a matter affecting 
private life, to systematic delation", and the first brood of professional 
informers was called into being ; whose activity in respect to other laws, 
and especially that of * maiestas, forms so large a part of the domestic 
history of the age. When this activity was let loose upon a law whose 
vast and complicated network was such as to entangle every family in 
some or other of its meshes*, we can easily see that its working must 
have caused intolerable annoyances unforeseen at its enactment, and can 
understand the outcry which in ten years was already demanding relaxa- 
tion. The law itself thus marks the extreme limit of legislative interfer- 
ence with private life in this respect, and its subsequent history as known 
to us is that of its mitigation. ‘ Many of its entanglements were 
resolved' by the commission under Tiberius?, another important pro- 
vision was relaxed by Claudius”, the rewards of informers were cut down 
by Nero !!, and princes often gave the ‘ius liberorum" to those who had it 
not", Thus the severity of many of its penalties became so far obsolete 

! Hence Juvenal says (9, 87) to one 
who had attained the ‘iura parentis,' 
‘scriberis heres, legatum omne capis 
necnon et dulce caducum. 

? Compare the language of. Tacitus 
(3. 28, 4) ‘ velut parens omnium populus 
vacantia teneret. The ‘leges caducariae’ 
were made more stringent by Caracalla, 
but practically abolished by Constantine, 
and formally: by Justinian (see Poste, 
Gaius, p. 252; Marquardt, ii. pp. 291-293). 

* Ann. 3. 25, I ‘incitandis caelibum 
poenis et augendo aerario." 

* Dio (56. t, 2) mentions a complaint 

of the knights, apparently in anticipation 

of this law, and gives at length what 
purports to be the reply of Augustus in 
support of its principles. 

5 Dio, 56. to, 3. 

* L.1. ‘nec ideo coniugia et educationcs 
liberum frequentabantur.' 

7 3. 28, 4 ‘inditi custodes et lege Papia 
Poppaea praemiis inducti.' 

5 L. |. * altius penetrabant urbemque et 
Italiam et quod usquam civium corripuer- 
ant, multorumque excisi status.' 

* L. 1. *exsoluti plerique legis nexus.’ 

10 See above, cap. iii. and Suet. Cl. 23. 
The statement there by Suetonius, that 
Tiberius had added the provision which 
Claudius repealed, appears improbable. 

! * Praemia delatorum Papiae legis ad 
quartas redegit ' Suet. Ner. 10. 

12 P]. Epp. 2. 13, 8; 10. 2, I, &c.: cp. 
Momms. Staatsr. ii, 888. 

488 | EXCURSUS ON THE ‘LEX PAPIA POPPAEA.’ 

that Tertullian, writing under Septimius Severus, speaks of ‘ vanissimas 
Papias leges and Ammianus Marcellinus notes still the social tyranny 
of the bachelor and the childless ?. 

But that the law as a whole was still active, is shown by its being 
repeated, cited, explained, or illustrated by Ulpian, Ter. Clemens, Gaius, 
Paullus, Marcellus, &c.; and by notices in the Institutes of Justinian, 
which could scarcely have been made to an obsolete law. 

! Apol. 4. ? 14, 19. 

( 

BOOK IV. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U.C. 776, A.D. 23. C. Asinius Pollio, C. Antistius Vetus, coss. 

Ch. 1l. Ascendency of Seianus; his origin and character. 2. Concentration of the 

praetorian guards in a camp; influence of Seianus with the soldiers and the senate. 
9. His schemes against Drusus. 4. Drusus, son of Germanicus, enters public life ; 
professed intention of Tiberius to visit the provinces. 5, 6. Review of the military 
and civil organization of the empire. 7-9. Hostility of Drusus and Seianus; the 
former poisoned ; behaviour of Tiberius on his son's death ; honours to his memory. 
10, 11. A story, that Tiberius had himself caused the death of Drusus, rejected. 
12. Designs of Seianus against the family of Germanicus. 13. Provincial] grievances 
dealt with by Tiberius. 14. Further deputations on right of asylum ; pantomime 
actors expelled from Italy. 15. Death of Lucilius Longus and of a son of Drusus; 
condemnation of Lucilius Capito; the Asiatic cities permitted to erect a temple to 
Tiberius, Augusta, and the senate. 16. Regulations respecting the flamen Dialis, 
and the Vestals. 

A.U.C. 777, A.D. 24. Ser. Cornelius Cethegus, L. Visellius Varro, coss. 

! Ch. 17. Jealousy of Tiberius at mention of Nero and Drusus in the * vota solemnia." 

18-20. Trial and death of C. Silius, and banishment of his wife Sosia ; independence 
of character shown by M'. Lepidus.| 21. L. Piso is accused, and dies before trial; 
Cassius Severus banished to Seriphos. 22. Plautius Silvanus convicted of the 
murder of his wife. 23-26. Tacfarinas finally defeated and killed by Dolabella ; 
presents sent.from the senate to Ptolemaeus, king of Mauretania. 27. An incipient 
servile insurrection crushed near Brundisium. 28-80. Vibius Serenus accused by his 
son; the extreme penalty modified. 31. Cominius pardoned for a libel; Suillius 
condemned for selling justice; Firmius Catus for false accusation. 32,33. Apology 
of Tacitus for the monotony of his subject. 

A. U.C. 778, A.D. 25. Cossus Cornelius Lentulus, M. Asinius Agrippa, coss. 

Ch. 34, 85. Trial of Cremutius Cordus for praise of Brutus and Cassius; his defence 

and suicide, 36. Charges brought before young Drusus, praef. urbis; Cyzicus 
deprived of its freedom. / $7, 38. Tiberius rejects the petition to allow a temple to 
himself in Spain. 39, 40. Seianus asks Livia in marriage; reply of Tiberius. 41. 
Seianus urges him to retire from Rome.! 42. The trial of Votienus influences 
Tiberius in this direction; others severely sentenced. 43. Decision on a question of 
boundary between Messenia and Laconia, and on other provincial matters. 44. 
Deaths of Cn. Lentulus and L. Domitius at Rome, and of L. Antonius at Massilia. 
45. Murder of L. Piso in Spain. 

490 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U. C. 779, A. D. 26. Cn. Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus, C. Calvisius 
Sabinus, coss. 

Ch. 46-51. Triumphalia awarded to Poppaeus Sabinus, for the suppression of an 
insurrection in Thrace. [ 52-54. Agrippina, alarmed at the condemnation of her 
cousin Claudia Pulchra, remonstrates with Tiberius, and afterwards requests him to 
give her a husband; Seianus increases the enmity between them. / 55, 56. Eleven 
Asiatic cities contend for the honour of possessing the temple to be erected to 
Tiberius; Sardes and Smyrna preferred and the latter selected. (57, 58. Tiberius 
permanently quits Rome; his reasons suggested, and predictions respecting him 
discussed. 59. His'life saved by Seianus on the falling of a cave. 60. Schemes of 
Seianus against Nero.) 61. Deaths of Asinius Agrippa and Q. Haterius. 

A. U. C. 780, A. D. 27. M. Licinius Crassus Frugi, L. Calpurnius Piso, coss. 

Ch. 62, 63. Disastrous loss of life from the fall of an amphitheatre at Fidenae. 64, 
65. Destructive fire on the Mons Caelius; liberality of Tiberius, and compliment 
paid to him; origin of the name. 66. Quintilius Varus accused by Domitius Afer 
and P. Dolabella. 67. Retirement of Tiberius to Capreae; description of the 
island. 

A.U.C. 781, A. D. 28. App. Junius Silanus, P. Silius Nerva, coss. 

Ch. 68-70. "Titius Sabinus,a friend of the family of Germanicus, who had been en- 
trapped by disgraceful means, denounced and executed on the opening day of the 
year. 71. Hints of Tiberius against Agrippina and Nero; death of Julia, grand- 
daughter of Augustus. 72, 73. Rising of the Frisii; want of energy shown by L. 
Apronius in dealing with it. 74. Visit of Tiberius and Seianus to Campania; con- 
course and servility of the senate and people. 75. Marriage of Agrippina, daughter 
of Germanicus, to Cn. Domitius. 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER IV. 

l. C. ASINIO C. Antistio consulibus nonus Tiberio annus erat 

compositae rei publicae, florentis domus (nam Germanici mortem 5 

inter prospera ducebat), cum repente turbare fortuna coepit, sae- 

2 vire ipse aut saevientibus vires praebere. 

initium et causa penes 

Aelium Seianum cohortibus praetoriis praefectum, cuius de po- 
tentia supra memoravi: nunc originem, mores, et quo facinore 

3 dominationem raptum ierit, expediam. 

genitus Vulsiniis patre 

Seio Strabone equite Romano, et prima iuventa Gaium Caesarem 

2. AB EXCESSU DIUI AUGUSTI. 
text Pichena. 

4. C. Asinio C. Antistio. Their full 
names given from Dio (Arg. B. 57) and 
Pliny (N. H. 33. 2, 8, 32) are C. Asi- 
nius C. f. Pollio and C. Antistius C. f. 
Vetus. Nipp. notes that the latter had 
been urban, the former peregrine, praetor, 
in 773, A. D. 20. Asinius is another son 
of Asinius Gallus (cp. 3. 75, 1, &c.), and 
was procos. of Asia, probably under Gaius 
(see Introd. vii. p. 113). Antistius is one 
of the ‘consulares filii’ of the Antistius 
(cos. 748, B.C. 6) of Vell. 2. 43, 3. On 
his son and nephew see I2. 25, 1; 13- 
11, I. 

nonus. He bad entered on his ninth 
year in the preceding August, but Tacitus 
seems to reckon from Jan. 1, 768, A. D. 
I5 : see Staatsr. ii. 802. 

6. turbare: cp. 3. 47, 2. 

7. penes, of cause, as c. t6, 3. 

8. Aelium Seianum. The form of the 
name suggests that he had been adopted 
by an Aelius, probably Aelius Gallus, 

Io. raptum perit: captaverit margin and B, 

praefect of Egypt in 730, B. C. 24 (see on 
5.8, 1). The praenomen, ‘L.’ is given 
by Dio (57. 19, 5) and in a Spanish 
coin dated in his consulship (see Orelli. 

cohortibus... praefectum. He had 
been sole praefect since the appoint- 
ment of his father, whose colleague he 
had previously been (1. 24, 3), to the prae- 
fecture of Egypt (Dio, 57. 19, 6). 

9. supra: sce I. 24, 3; 69, 7 ; 3. 29, 
53 3525 72, 5- 
. facinore, the murder of Drusus. 

10. raptum ierit. This correction is 
suggested by H. 2. 6, 4; Sall. Jug. 85, 
42, and many similar uses of ‘ire’ with 

a supine, as c. 66, 2; 73, 6, &c. 

expediam; so used by Sallust and 
Vergil. 

Vulsiniis, Bolsena. Juvenal (10, 74) 
hence calls him ‘ Tuscus." 

II. Seio Strabone: cp. 1.7, 3; 24. 3. 
Velleius (2. 127, 3) calls him * princeps 
equestris ordinis; an expression justified 

- 

Oo 

492 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 776. 

divi Augusti nepotem sectatus, non sine rumore Apicio diviti et 
prodigo stuprum veno dedisse, mox Tiberium variis artibus de- 
vinxit, adeo ut obscurum adversum alios sibi uni incautum intec- 
tumque efficeret, non tam sollertia (quippe isdem artibus victus 
5 est) quam deum ira in rem Romanam, cuius pari exitio viguit 
ceciditque. corpus illi laborum tolerans, animus audax; sui 
obtegens, in alios criminator; iuxta adulatio et superbia ; palam 
compositus pudor, intus summa apiscendi libido, eiusque causa 
modo largitio et luxus, saepius industria ac vigilantia, haud minus 
10 noxiae, quotiens parando regno finguntur. 
2. Vim praefecturae, modicam antea, intendit, dispersas per 
urbem cohortes una in castra conducendo, ut simul imperia ac- 

‘by the ‘praefecturae’ which he held. 
Also he speaks of Seianus as related to 
noble families through his mother (who, 

as sister of Blaesus, must have been a. 

Junia), and adds that he had brothers 
(see on 2. 20, 2), cousins, and an uncle 
(3. 35, 2), of consular rank. 

Gaium Caesarem: cp. I. 3, 2; &c. 

I. Apicio. Dio (57. I9, 5) gives the 
name as Mdpxos lafios '"Amíkios. He is 
repeatedly mentioned in literature as the 
great epicure of his age; but as Athenaeus 
(1. 7, d; 4. 168, d) mentions two other 
gourmands of the name, of much earlier 
and later date respectively, it would seem 
that the name had passed on as a ‘so- 
briquet’ from the first of them. See 
Prof. Ramsay in Dict. of Biog. 

2. veno dedisse. This construction, 
only found here, is analogous to ‘dono 
dare. The dative ‘veno’ appears to be 
peculiar to Tacitus (cp. 13. 51,1; I4. I5, 
3),.as * venui' to Apuleius. 

3. obscurum, ‘ reserved’: cp. Cic. Off. 
3. 15, 5; Hor. Ep. 1. 18, 94, &c. 

intectum: cp. 2. 59, 2: in this sense 
dr, eip., but answering to a common use 
of ‘ tectus.' 

4. isdem artibus, i.e. ‘sollertia.’ This 
shows that he could not have been more 

crafty than Tiberius; therefore his as- . 

cendency over him was due to a divine 
judgement against the state; in other 
words, was inexplicable (see on 3. 30, 7). 
5. pari exitio (probably modal abl.), 
by the crimes which he prompted during 
his ascendency, and by the reign of terror, 
and utter shamelessness of Tiberius (6. 
51; 6), following on his fall. . 
6. corpus: cp. the description of his 
‘physique’ in Vell. 2. 127, 3 ‘sufficienti 

etiam vigori animi compage corporis.’ 
tolerans, with gen. only. here and 
in Colum.; but the usage is analogous © 
to many others (Introd. v. $ 34 c). In 
the whole passage, Tacitus has in view 
Sallust's description of Catiline (Cat. 5). 

7. obtegens: cp. I. 76, 2; used with | 
gen. here only, but analogously to the 
usage with other participles (Introd. v. $ 
33 d). Seianus himself is here supplied 
as subject. 

criminator, a very rare word: cp. 
c. 12, 6, Plaut. Bacch. 4. 7, 28. 

iuxta, ‘were side by side’; so used 
of a plurality of objects, in Pl. N. H. 36. 
15, 24, 117 ‘theatra duo iuxta fecit. 

8. compositus. Nipp. appears rightly 
to take this to mean ‘tranquil,’ noting 
that the sense of artificial assumption (cp. 
C. 31, 4, &c.) is here already given by the 
contrast *palam' . . . ‘intus.’ | 

summa, probably neut. pl. as shown 
by 11. 26, 5 ‘summa adeptus.' 

9. industria ac vigilantia. The glow- 
ing eulogy of Velleius (1. 1.) is here con- 
firmed in this respect. | 

II. modicam antea. The importance 
which Dio (52. 24) makes Maecenas as- 
cribe to the office, belongs to a later date. 
On its subsequent history and conversion 
into a civil office see Gibbon, ch. 5, and 
17 ; Staatsr. ii. 1058, foll. 

dispersas per urbem. Augustus, 
according to Suetonius (Aug. 49), kept 
most of them in neighbouring towns, re- 
taining only three in Rome, and those not 
concentrated. One *cohors togata' (see 
On 3. 4, 2) was always on guard at the 
Palatium or in attendance on the emperor 
elsewhere (cp. 12. 69, 1, &c.). 

12. una in castra. ‘the site, clearly 

2 ceteros metus oreretur. 

A. D. 23.] 

LIBER IV. 

CAP. 1-3. 493 

ciperent, numeroque et robore et visu inter se fiducia ipsis, in 

praetendebat lascivire militem diduc- 

tum; si quid subitum ingruat, maiore auxilio pariter subveuiri ; 
et severius acturos, si vallum statuatur procul urbis inlecebris. 
Sut perfecta sunt castra, inrepere paulatim militares animos 5 
adeundo, appellando ; : simul centuriones ac tribunos ipse de- 

4 ligere. 

neque senatorio ambitu abstinebat clientes suos honori- 

bus aut provinciis ornandi, facili Tiberio atque ita prono, ut 
socium laborum non modo in sermonibus, sed apud patres et 
populum celebraret,colique per theatra et fora effigies eius inter- 

que principia legionum sineret. 

3. Ceterum plena Caesarum domus, iuvenis filius, nepotes 
adulti moram cupitis adferebant; et quia vi tot simul corripere 

2. credetur : crederetur B, oriretur Faern., text Haase. 

marked by the prominent square excre- 
scence in the present walls, was outside 
the Servian agger, between the Viminal 
and Colline gates. 

I. inter se, taken with * visu.’ 

in ceteros metus: cp. c. 59, 3; 6. 
50, 8; 11. 8, 3. The prep. and accus. 
have nearly the force of a simple dat.: see 
Introd. v. $ 60 b. 

2. oreretur : the liability to confusion 
between ‘or’ and ‘cr’ is illustrated by 
the corruption of * cremari ' to * ore mari’ 
in I. 49, 4. Another proposed correction, 
* adderétur' (Anquetil), is supported by 
H. 2. 31, 2 

3. maiore auxilio pariter subveniri, 
* their support in one body would give 
greater help': equivalent to * maius aux- 
ilium foret si pariter subvenissent.’ Cp. 
* maiore praemio vulgaretur* (3. 49, 1), 
and other such condensed expressions, 
On this use of * pariter cp. 1. 32, 7, &c- 

4. procul. The camp, as has been 
seen, was close outside the walls and 
within the inhabited area of the city; 
but * procul' is used of any interval (cp. 
Verg. Ecl. 6, 16; Hor. Sat. 2. 6, 105; 
Ov. Met. 5, 114) ; and to live in camp at 
all was a separation. 

5. inrepere, apparently not earlier 
used with accus. On other such usages of 
compound verbs see Introd. v. $ 12 c. 

6. ipse deligere. It is here implied, 
and on other grounds evident, that in this 
he went beyond his legitimate power: cp. 
Staatsr. ii. 869, 1119. 

7. senatorio ambitu, i.e. he courted 
senators as well as soldiers. 

8. ornandi, defining genitive (like ‘ cul- 
tus... venerandi' 3.63, 65, showing where- 
in the ‘ambitus’ consisted, namely, in ob- 
taining magistracies and provinces through 
his influence with Tiberius. 

9. socium laborum : cp. Dio, 58. 4, 3 
koivamÓv TOV $povrióov dvópa(e, * Xmavós 
T€ Ó éuós' wodAams éwavadapBavey ÉAeve. 

apud patres et populum: cp. ‘in 
senatu aut. concione' (c. 40, 12); also 
H. 1. 9o, 3. The people were usually 
addressed^by da pps edicts. 

10. colique . . effigies ; so Dio (1. 1.) 
kal rédos xal rais eledow abroü dorep ma 
rais ToU TiBepiov &Ovov. 

per theatra: cp. 3. 72, 5.- 

interque principia legionum. Nipp. 
notes that this is added emphatically. On 
the * principia ' cp. 1. 61, 3, &c.; on the 
sanctity of the place see 1. 39, 7; also 
Staatsr. ii. 814. Suetonius (Tib. 48) 
states that all the legions but those of 
Syria thus honoured Seianus. 

I2. filius, Drusus. 
nepotes adulti: 
I. There were three younger boys, 
Gaius, and the twin sons of Drusus 

(2. 84). 

I3. et quia, &c. This would mean 
that the realization of his aims was de- 
layed by the number and position of the 
sons and grandsons, and by the fact that 
they could only gradually be got rid of 
with safety. In this sentence the oppo- 
sition would be between ‘simul corripere" 
and ‘intervalla scelerum,’ not between 
‘vis’ and ‘dolus’; ‘vi corripere’ being 
simply ‘to assassinate,’ or pring to a 

Cp. €. 4, I5; 3. 29) 

NU 

494 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 776. 

intutum, dolus intervalla scelerum poscebat. placuit tamen oc- 
cultior via et a Druso incipere, in quem recenti ira ferebatur. nam 2 
Drusus, inpatiens aemuli et animo commotior, orto forte iurgio 
intenderat Seiano manus et contra tendentis os verberaverat. 

Liviam convertere, quae soror Germanici, formae initio aetatis 

indecorae, mox pulchritudine praecellebat. 

hanc ut amore in- 

census adulterio pellexit, et postquam primi flagitii potitus est 
(neque femina amissa pudicitia alia abnuerit), ad coniugii spem, 

I0 consortium regni et necem mariti impulit. 

atque illa, cui avun- 

culus Augustus, socer Tibérius, ex Druso liberi, seque ac maiores 
et posteros municipali adultero foedabat, ut pro honestis et prae- 

sentibus flagitiosa et incerta exspectaret. 

sumitur in conscien- 

tiam Eudemus, amicus ac medicus Liviae, specie artis frequens 

Io. consortio (dative) Momms. Staatsr. ii. 788, n. a. 

violent end, whether by poison or any 
other means.  Nipp. who omits ‘et,’ 
makes the antithesis of ‘ vis’ and ‘dolus’ 
prominent, but owns that in any case 
the crimes would require some * vis 
dolosa.’ 

I, tamen, i.e. although it involved 
delay. He elected to proceed by degrees 
and to make Drusus the first victim. The 
variation from a noun to an infinitive re- 
sembles those noted in Introd. v. § 91; 
and there appears to be no reason for 
reading ‘ occultiore' with Ritter. 

3. animo commotior: cp. I. 33, 6, &c. 

‘On the character of Drusus cp. 1. 29, 4; 

6, 5. 
: 4. contra tendentis, ‘ when he offered 
resistance.” Dio (57. 22, 1) represents 
Seianus as having struck Drusus, not in 
self-defence, but out of wanton insolence. 

5. igitur. This appears to explain, 
not the choice of Drusus as first victim, 
but the ‘longior via’ pursued. 

promptissimum : cp. 2. 2, 6; 5, 4. 

6. Liviam : cp. 2. 43, 7, &c. 

7. ut, ‘as if. 

8. adulterio. It seems on the whole 
best to explain this, with Walther and 
Nipp., asabl. instr., and to take * pellexit’ 
as=‘sibi devinxit, as in 1. 2, 1; H. 4. 
I5, I. Others take it as a dative like 
* morti deposcit" (1. 23, 6). 

9. abnuerit, aoristic perf. of potential 
subj.: cp. c. 32, 1; 67, a, &c., Dráger, 
Synt. und Stil, $ 28, Madv. $ 350. 

Io. consortium regni. Apparently to 

avoid a double genitive, the mention of 
the hope is implied in that of the thing 
hoped for; as is elsewhere the thought in 
the mention of its object (see note on 1. 
41, 3). Agrippina is thus said * consor- 
tium imperii speravisse’ (14. 11, 1), for 
which ‘regni’ is here rhetorically used: 
cp. ‘domus regnatrix’ 1. 4, 4. 

avunculus: cp. 2. 43, 6. 

II, seque ac...et. On such forms 
of coordination cp. Introd. v. § 89. 

12. municipali, of ‘Vulsinii (c. 1, 3). 
The term implied now no inferiority of 
civic status, but that a person had not 
senatorial ancestors, who would have had 
to live in Rome. Thus Juvenal (8, 38) 
calls Cicero * municipalis eques, and An- 
tonius sneers at the * Aricina mater of 
Octavius (Cic. Phil. 3. 6, 15). Tacitus 
thinks this almost as great an aggrava- 

tion of the guilt of Livilla, as if it had 

been committed with a non-citizen or a 

. Slave. 

praesentibus, ‘already assured,’ by 

the position of Drusus as heir. 

I3. sumitur. Nipp. reads ‘ assumitur, 
from the similar passage in I3. 12, t. 

I4. Budemus. Probably, like most 
physicians at that time, he was a freed- 
man. Pliny (N. H. 29. r, 8, 20) repre- 
sents him also as her adulterer. 

" frequens secretis: cp. ‘ frequens 
contionibus' (H. 4.69, 4). Drager takes 
these as datives, ‘ frequens' being equiva- 
lent to * qui saepe aderat'; Nipp. as abl. 
of place, comparing 'frequens ubique' 

5igitur cuncta temptanti, promptissimum visum ad uxorem eius 8 

5 

A. D. 23.] LIBER IV. CAP. 3 4. 

495 

secretis. pellit domo Seianus uxorem Apicatam, ex qua tres 
6 liberos genuerat, ne paelici suspectaretur. sed magnitudo faci- 
noris metum, prolationes, diversa interdum consilia adferebat. 
4. Interim anni principio Drusus ex Germanici liberis togam 
virilem sumpsit, quaeque fratri eius Neroni decreverat senatus 5 
2 repetita. addidit orationem Caesar, multa cum laude filii sui, 
3 quod patria benevolentia in fratris liberos foret. nam Drusus, 
quamquam arduum sit eodem loci potentiam et concordiam esse," 
4 aequus adulescentibus aut certe non adversus habebatur. exim 
vetus et saepe simulatum proficiscendi in provincias consilium !o 
refertur. multitudinem veteranorum praetexebat imperator et 
dilectibus supplendos exercitus: nam voluntarium militem de- 

2. paelici: so 6. 43, 1; 12. 46, 3; 14. 60, 2; pel- five times in Med. ii. 

(i.e. ‘omnibus locis") Agr. 37, 4. On the 
meaning of * secreta ' cp. 3. 8, 4. 

I. Apicatam. The name can be 
shown to be Roman (C. I. L. vi. 12126), 
and need not be altered, with Borghesi, 
to ‘ E Cp. c. 11, 4, and Dio, 58. 
II, 

tres liberos: see on 5. 8, 1; 3. 1. 

2. suspectaretur =‘ suspectus habere- 
tur.’ The passive is found only here and 
in Apuleius: on the active cp. I. 5, I. 

4. Drusus : see Introd. ix. note 12. 

5. quaeque... repetita : see 3. 29, I. 
The inscriptions cited (Introd. 1. 1.) show 
some difference in his priesthoods. 

6. filii sui. This distinguishes the Dru- 
sus below from the one above mentioned. 

8. eodem loci: cp. Cic. Att. 1. 13, 5: 
so ‘eo loci’ (14. 61, 3; 15. 74, 1 ; Cic. 
pro Sest. 31, 68, &c.), ‘quo locorum' 
(Hor. Od. r. 38, 3), and (rarely in this 
sense) ; eo’ alone, (as Cic. Ep. ad Brut. 
I. 2, 1). : 

10. saepe simulatum. Two occasions 
have been mentioned (1. 47, 5; 3. 47. 3)- 

in provincias. It appears from the 
context (esp. $ 5) that the recruiting for 
the legions, rather than for the auxiliaries, 
is spoken of; and this passage thus 
tends to modify Seeck's view (see on 3. 
40, 5), that the legionaries were at this 
time almost all Italians. The only pro- 
vince at all prominent in early western 
legionary inscriptions is the thoroughly 
Romanized Gallia Narbonensis, which he 
perhaps professed to intend to visit, and 

ossibly others from which the Eastern 
egions were recruited. 

1I. refertur, ‘is repeated’: cp. r. 26, 4. 

TA E qu 

K E 

multitudinem veteranorum, i.e. of 
those who had a right to expect dis- 
missal: see on 1. 36, 4; 78, 2; also 
Introd. vii. pp. 125, 127. He means that 
his presence was required to induce the 
veterans to be content with their reward 
on dismissal, and to enforce the conscrip- 
tion, which might be unpopular. 

I2. dilectibus. In Rome and Italy 
conscription was only resorted to in ex- 
treme emergencies (cp. I. 31, 4; H. 3. 
38, 3; Marquardt, ii. 539, n. 4), but it 

. was frequent in the provinces. The pre- 

siding officers, ‘ dilectatores,' are of eques- 

trian rank (Marquardt, 1. 1. 542). In the 

time of Trajan an ‘inquisitio’ was held 
for the conscriptions, and substitutes, if 
properly qualified, were allowed (Pl. Ep. 
ad Trai. 29, 30). 

voluntarium militem deesse. Vel- 
leius (2. 130, 2) says in praise of Tiberius 
‘quanta cum quiete hominum . . . supple- 
mentum sine trepidatione delectus pro- 
videt, That voluntary enlistment con- 
tinued generally to suffice is attested by 
Dig. 49. 16, 4, $ 10 ‘ plerumque volun- 
tario milite numeri supplentur.’ Seeck 
(1. 1.) notes that an annual enlistment of 
about 7,000 would probably suffice to 
keep up the guards and legions, and that 
such a number should have been easily 
supplied by volunteers from Italy alone; 
but that, besides the depopulation of rural 
districts (Introd. vii. p. 108), the people 
were growing more and more unwarlike, 
and the old soldiers, whose children might 
have inherited a military spirit, were 
mostly childless (cp. 14. 27, 3). 

" 
A——- ae a ae exa v 

— — ee — — —— —-- : » 

496 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 776. 

esse, ac si suppeditet, non eadem virtute ac modestia agere, quia 

plerumque inopes ac vagi sponte militiam sumant.  percensuit- 5 

que cursim numerum legionum et quas provincias tutarentur. 

quod mihi quoque exsequendum reor, quae tunc Romana copia 6 
5 in armis, qui socii reges, quanto sit angustius imperitatum. 

5. Italiam utroque mari duae classes, Misenum apud et Ra- 
vennam, proximumque Galliae litus rostratae naves praesidebant, 
quas Actiaca victoria captas Augustus. in oppidum Foroiuliense 
miserat valido cum remige. sed praecipuum robur Rhenum 2 

10 iuxta, commune in Germanos Gallosque subsidium, octo legiones 
erant. Hispaniae recens perdomitae tribus habebantur. Mauros 3 
Iuba rex acceperat donum populi Romani. cetera Africae per 4 

I. modestia : cp. t. 35, I. 

4. quod, explained by *quae,' &c. 

exsequendum: cp. 'exsequi senten- 
tias " 3. 65, I. 

copia, sing., as 2. 52, 4, &c. 

5. angustius, as compared with the 
time of Trajan: see 2. 61, 2, and note. 

6. On the whole subject of this chap- 
ter cp. Introd. vii. p. 121, foll.; Mar- 
quardt, ii. 443, foll. 

7. rostratae naves, 'a fleet of war- 
ships’ (cp. Hor. Epod. 4, 18). Nipp. 
thinks this not a sufficiently distinguishing 
epithet, and reads *constratae' (‘decked’) ; 
which might possibly not apply to all of 
them, as these fleets consisted of ships 
of various classes. "Their real distinction 

from the provincial fleets consists in their. 

(probably later) title *classis praetoria  ; 
and in their being, like the guard, under 
special command of Caesar and his ‘prae- 
fecti" (Introd. vii. p. 127). The insti- 
tution of a permanent naval force dates 
from the fleet organized by Agrippa 
against Sex. Pompeius and afterwards for 
Actium : see Marquardt, 1. 1. 501 ; Staatsr. 
ii. 862. 

praesidebant, with accus.: cp. 3. 
39, 1. 

8. Foroiuliense, Frejus (cp. 2. 63, 6), 
called * claustra maris’ in H. 3. 43, 1. 

Io. octo: cp. I. 31 ; 37, &c. 

11. Hispaniae. The two Caesarian 
provinces are here meant, that of His- 
pania Tarraconensis or Citerior (cp. c. 
45, 1), comprising all the eastern and 
northern portion, and having its seat of 
governnient at Colonia Tarraconensis (cp. 
I. 78, 1), and Lusitania, extending from 
the Douro to the Guadiana (Anas), and 

including nearly all Portugal, with a part 
of Spain mainly answering to Salamanca 
and northern Estremadura, and having its 
seat of government at the Augustan colony 
of Emerita (Merida): see Marquardt, i. 
252, foll. These two provinces had legati 
of the first and second rank respectively 
(Introd. vii. p. 116). On the third 
Spanish province see c. 13, 2. 

recens perdomitae. Livy (28. 12,12) 
speaks of Spain as the first transmarine 
province entered by the Romans and the 
last to be completely subjugated. Two 
centuries had passed from the first Roman 
occupation to the submission of the As- 
turians and Cantabrians to Agrippa in 
735, B.C. 19 (Hor. Od. 3. 8, a1; Dio, 54. 

11, 2). 

Mauros. The kingdom of Maure- 
tania appears at this time to have ex- 
tended eastward to Saldae (see Introd. vii. 
p. 115), and thus to have included more 
than half of Algeria, besides Marocco. 
On its subsequent provincial organization 
see vol. ii. Introd. 30. 

.12. Iuba rex, the son of the king 
defeated at Thapsus in 708, B.C. 46, He 
had been restored after the Actian-war to 
Numidia, and had, received in marriage 
Selene daughtér of Antonius and Cleo- 
patra: in 729, B.C. 25, he.was transferred 
by Augustus to Mauretania, here called 
* the gift of the Roman people': see Dio, 
53. 26, 3. He had lately been succeeded 
by his son Ptolemaeus (c. 33, 1). On the 
dates of their reigns see Marquardt, i. 
483. Pliny (N. B. 5. I, I, 16, &c.) 
speaks of Juba as a man of letters and 
an author. 

A. D. 23.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 4, 5. 

duas legiones parique numero Aegyptus, dehinc initio ab Suriae 
usque ad flumen Euphraten, quantum ingenti terrarum sinu 
ambitur, quattuor legionibus coercita, accolis Hibero Albanoque 
et aliis regibus, qui magnitudine nostra proteguntur adversum 
b externa imperia. et Thraeciam Rhoemetalces ac liberi Cotyis, 
ripamque Danuvii legionum duae in Pannonia, duae in Moesia 
attinebant, totidem apud Delmatiam locatis, quae positu regionis 
a tergo illis, ac si repentinum auxilium Italia posceret, haud pro- 
cul accirentur, quamquam insideret urbem proprius miles, tres 

urbanae, novem praetoriae cohortes, Etruria ferme Umbriaque 
6 delectae aut vetere Latio et coloniis antiquitus Romanis. 

I. suria: text Muretus. 

1. duas. The second legion was only 
here for a time: cp. c. 23, 2. 

parique numero. In Strabo's time 
(17. 1, 12, 797) Egypt had three legions 
and nine cohorts. — 

initio ab. On the anastrophe see 
Introd. v. $ 77, 4. 

2. ingenti ...sinu, ‘the vast sweep of 
country.’ ‘Sinus’ is used by Tacitus of 
a tract of land, sometimes without any 
reference to sea-coast (as G. 29, 4); so 
also Pliny (N. H. 6.8, 8, 23) speaks ofthe 
* ingens sinus ' of interior Asia. The tract 
mentioned is the eastern frontier of the 
empire, on which see Introd. vii. p. 111. 

3. Hibero. This people, connecting 
their origin with the Jasonian legend (6. 
34, 3), lay south of the Caucasus and 
north of Armenia, between Albania and 
Colchis, in the upper part of the basin of 
the Kour (Cyrus), answering to the west- 
ern part of Georgia: cp. Strab. 11. 2, 9, 
499, 500. Its dynasty appears to be still 
traceable in the third century (see Orelli). 

Albano : cp. 2. 68, 1. 

4. aliis, such as those in Cilicia (2. 78, 
3), Lesser Armenia (11.9, 3), and Pontus 
Polemoniacus (Suet. Ner. 18). Romans 
might even speak of Armenia maior as 
protected against Parthia. 

5. Rhoemetalces: cp. c. 47, 1; 2. 67, 
43 3. 38, 4. | 

6. duae in Pannonia, usually three 
(cp. 1. 16, 2), the third being here reck- 
oned in Africa: see above. | 

.7. Delmatiam. The name is perhaps 
antedated, the province being called at 
that time ‘superior provincia Illyricum" 
(C. I. L. iii. 1741) or * maritima pars 
Illyrici' (Vell. 2. 125, 5) : see Marquardt, 
i. 299, n. 4. Its northern boundary to- 

VOL. I. 

at 

It. colonis : text L. 

wards Pannonia is not clearly marked 
(cp. 1. 16, 1); in other directions it 
extended to Moesia (see on 1. 80, 1) and 
Epirus (2. 53, 1), and thus included 
modern Dalmatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, 
and Montenegro, its chief town being 
Salonae. The name 'Illyricum in the 
widest sense (see on 1. 46, 1), included 
Pannonia and even Moesia (Suet. Tib. 16: 
see Marquardt, i. 295). 

positu, in Tacitus only here and in 6. 
21, 4; once in Sall. (Fr. H. 2. 1 D, 1 K, 
8 G), and in several places in Ovid. 

9. tres urbanae, novem praetoriae. 
On the variations in the number of these 
cohorts see Introd. vii. p. 126. On the 
fourth urban cohort at Lugdunum see 3. 
41, 2. It is to be observed that in this 
survey Tacitus omits the ' cohortes civium 
Romanorum' (cp. 1. 8, 3), and the 
'vigiles at Rome, who were hardly re- 
gular soldiers and mostly freedmen. 

10. Etruria, &c., abl. of place: cp. 
Introd. v. § 26. 

II. aut vetere Latio, the towns which 
had the ‘ius Latii’ before 664, B. C. go, 
when the ‘lex Iulia’ gave them the 
‘civitas’: cp. Nipp. and Marquardt, i. 
60. By ‘aut,’ these and the colonies are 
distinguished, as scattered towns, from 
the geographical districts above. 

coloniis antiquitus Romanis, those 
in Italy, as distinct from the later trans- 
marine colonies. Nipp. notes that the 
districts thus described as the recruiting 
ground of these .corps would exclude the 
Transpadana, and the Greek cities of 
south Italy. All Italians became eligible 
in the time of Claudius; the corps bein 
thus still called by Otho * Italiae alumnt 
et Romana vere iuventus' (H. 1. 84, 7): 

K k 

497 

5 

498 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 776. 

apud idonea provinciarum sociae triremes alaeque et auxilia 

cohortium, neque multo secus in iis virium : 

sed persequi incer- 

tum fuit, cum ex usu temporis huc illuc mearent, gliscerent 
numero et aliquando minuerentur. 

6. Congruens crediderim recensere ceteras quoque rei publicae 
partes, quibus modis ad eam diem habitae sint, quoniam Tiberio 

mutati in deterius principatus initium ille annus attulit. 

iam 

primum publica negotia et privatorum maxima apud patres trac- 
tabantur, dabaturque primoribus disserere etin adulationem 
lapsos, cohibebat ipse; mandabatque honores, nobilitatem ma- 
iorum, claritudinem militiae, inlustres domi artes spectando, ut 

satis constaret non alios potiores fuisse. 

3. fuerit L. 

before the time of Septimius Severus even 
provincials have access to it: see Staatsr. 

. i. 865; Marquardt, li. 478. 

I. sociae triremes: cp. Introd. vii. 

p. 128, n. 8. 

alae .. . auxilia cohortium : cp. 
Introd. 1. 1. p. 125. 

2. secus, sc. ‘quam in legionibus." 

The genit. seems unprecedented, and is 
perhaps best explained, with Forcell., by 
giving * secus ' a substantival force (* neque 
multa disparitas ') : see Jacob’s note. For 
an estimate of the whole force under 
arms see Introd. ]. 1. p. 128. 

persequi, ‘to trace them.’ 

incertum fuit. Nipp. explains the 
tenses as referring to this sketch as 
finished. ‘It was uncertain, therefore I 
did not attempt it. ‘ Fuerit' is adopted 
by Orelli and supported by the parallel 
passage in 15. 41, I. 

3. ex usu temporis, ‘in accordance 
with temporary requirements’: cp. 6. 42, 
3; also ‘ ex usu praesenti’ 11. 8, 5, ‘ex 
rerum usu’ 15. 6, 5. 

5. Congruens, ‘ apposite ' ; so in the 
very similar passage * congruens videtur ' 
H. 5. 2, I. 

6. partes, “ departments.’ 

habitae, ‘were administered’: 
‘opes... modeste habitae ’ c. 44,1 

7. ille annus. Dio, who gives at con- 
siderable length a somewhat similar sketch 
of the best period of this principate (57. 
7-13), dates a change from the death of 
Germanicus, and a further deterioration 
from the retirement to Capreae. 

iam primum, ‘to begin’; so 12. 68, 
2; 14. 31,2; Verg. Aen. 8, 199, &c. 

cp. 

sua consulibus, sua 8 

6. quó (= quoniam): quando B. 

8. publica negotia. On the senate at 
this time see Dio, 57. 7; Suet. Tib. 30; 
Introd. vi. pp. 92, foll. 

privatorum, questions concerning in- 
dividuals. The reference is especially to 
the trials, as still conducted before the 
senate, rather than ‘ apud principem.’ 

9. primoribus, i used more 
widely than in 3. 65, 2 : 

IO. cohibebat ipse: see 3. 47, 5; 
59, 2, &c. 

mandabatque honores. On the rights 
of * commendatio' and * nominatio ' exer- 
cised by him, see Introd. vi. p. 94. 

II. inlustres domi artes : see 3. 70, 
4, and cp. 'studiis civilibus" 3. 75, I. 
Here oratorical or literary, as well as 
juristic accomplishments, would be in- 
cluded in the expression. 

I2. potiores fuisse. This may be equi- 
valent to ‘plus potuisse, ‘that no other 
persons had more influence with him’ 
(cp. 1. 69, 6), i.e. that the best qualified 
prevailed ; but it is better totake * potior 
as equivalent to * melior! =‘ preferable’ 
(cp. * potiora instituta' 16. 22, 7); the 
meaning being that those chosen were 
plainly the most choiceworthy. 

sua ... species, ‘retained their pres- 
tige': cp. Cic. in Pis. t1, 24 ‘magnum 
nomen est, magna species, magna dig- 
nitas, magna maiestas consulis. On the 
position and functions of all magistrates 
of the state at this time, see Introd. vi. 
pP. 90, foll. Dio and Suetonius (1. 1.) 
give several particulars of the outward 
respect shown by Tiberius to consuls and 
other magistrates, and to senators gene- 
rally and other persons of note. 

A.D. a3] LIBER IV. 

CAP. 5, 6. 499 

praetoribus species; minorum quoque magistratuum exercita 
potestas; legesque, si maiestatis quaestio eximeretur, bono in 
4 usu. at frumenta et pecuniae vectigales, cetera publicorum fruc- 

5 tuum, societatibus equitum Romanorum agitabantur. 

res suas 

Caesar spectatissimo cuique, quibusdam ignotis ex fama man- 
dabat, semelque adsumpti tenebantur prorsus sine modo, cum 
6 plerique isdem negotiis insenescerent. plebes acri quidem annona 
fatigabatur, sed nulla in eo culpa ex principe: quin infecunditati 
terrarum aut asperis maris obviam iit, quantum impendio diligen- 

7. agri: text R. 

I. exercita potestas, ‘had their office 
exercised’: on *exercitus' cp. 3. 67, 2. 

2. leges... bono in usu. ‘the en- 
forcement of laws was salutary, i.e. 
neither too lax nor too strict. Allusion 
seems intended to such discretion as had 
been shown in dealing with the lex Papia 
Poppaea (3. 28, 6), and with the sump- 
tuary laws (3. 35, 1). On the important 
exception in respect of the laws of 
* maiestas," see Introd. viii. pp. 141, foll. 

3. frumenta, ‘the corn tribute The 
fullest information on this subject is con- 
tained in Cic. Verr. A. 2. Lib. 3; where 
the requisitions relating to corn are 
treated under three heads, ‘ frumentum 
decumanum' (c. 6, sqq.) ‘emptum’ 
(c. 70, sqq.), and ‘aestimatum’ (c. 8r, 
sqq.). The first would be that here re- 
ferred to as managed by publicani ; the 
two latter kinds being rights of purchase 
at a fixed price for the soldiers or for 
Rome, and assessments for use of the 
governor. 

pecuniae vectigales, indirect taxes, 
* portoria,' *scriptura, &c. Cp. 13. 50. 

cetera publicorum fructuum. Nipp. 
understands this not of the ‘tributa,’ 
which were directly collected by the 
state, but of other sources of indirect re- 
venue, such as the dues from woodlands, 
saltworks, quarries, mines, &c. Momm- 
sen (Staatsr. ii. 1017, 1) and Marquardt 
(Staatsv. ii. 312) both consider that the 
practice of farming the revenue must 
have extended much further at this period 
than subsequently. *Publicorum ' denotes 
such as were paid to the aerarium, in con- 
trast with ‘ res suas’ below. 

4. societatibus equitum Romano- 
rum. These associations of ‘ publicani’ 
are called * vectigalium societates’ in 13. 
£6, 3; and apparently each province had 
one: thus the ‘societas Bithyniae' is 

spoken of by Cicero (ad Fam. 13. 9, 1). 
and those of provinces generally by Caesar 
(B. C. 3. 3, 2). Each was presided over 
by a* magister! (Cic. Pl. 13, 32). The 
* publicani" at this date, though not ne- 
cessarily *equites Romani" in the strict 
sense (see Introd. vii. p. 102), were per- 
sons of equestrian census; such limita. 
tion being not so much a legal privilege 
as a necessity arising from the exclusion 
of senators by their rank and the lower 
classes by their poverty: see Staatsr. ii. 
1019, iii. 509, foll Several abuses of 
the system were dealt with in Nero's 
time (I3. 50-51). 

agitabantur, ‘were managed’; so 
* agitare faenus’ 6. 16, 3; G. 26, 1, &c.: 
cp. also c. 41, 4; 12. 27, 5, &c. 

res suas, the expression at this date 
for what would later be called ‘res fisci 
(see vol. ii. Introd. p. 38, and works 
there referred to). Besides the more im- 
portant precuratorships in the Caesarian, 
and also in senatorial provinces (cp. c. 15, 
3, Introd vii. pp. 112, 116, 118), inscrip- 
tions attest the existence of lower offi- 
cers (* procuratores patrimonii"), usually 
freedmen, employed by the princeps, as 
by any private individual, to manage his 
private estates, whether in Italy or the, 
provinces. See Marquardt, ii. 257. 

6. tenebantur...sine modo. This 
was also the case with the *legati,' cp. 1. 
8o, 2, Introd. vii. p. 18, &c. 

7. insenescerent, in prose only here 
and in Quint., from Hor. and Ov. 

acri... annona. On the use of such 
metaphors with * annona,' sce on 2. 87, I. 

9. obviam iit. For his own refer- 
ences to his labour in this department. 
Cp. 3. 54, 8; 6. 13, a. ‘Annona’ was 
also a special care of Augustus (sce on 
1.4, 1). 

Kka 

500 

tiaque poterat. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 776. 

et ne provinciae novis oneribus turbarentur 7 
utque vetera sine avaritia aut crudelitate magistratuum tolerarent, 

providebat: corporum verbera, ademptiones bonorum aberant. 
rari per Italiam Caesaris agri, modesta servitia, intra paucos liber- 
5 tos domus: ac si quando cum privatis disceptaret, forum et ius. 
7. Quae cuncta non quidem comi via, sed horridus ac plerum- 
que formidatus, retinebat tamen, donec morte Drusi verterentur ; 

nam dum superfuit, mansere, quia Seianus incipiente adhuc 2 

potentia bonis consiliis notescere volebat, et ultor metuebatur 
10 non occultus odii, set crebro querens incolumi filio adiutorem 
imperii alium vocari. et quantum superesse ut collega dicatur ? 

10. odiis | et: odii et L, text Doed. 

2. sine avaritia ... magistratuum. 
Cp. the account of the republican pro- 
vincial rule (1. 2, 2); also Introd. vii. 
p. 119. 

3. verbera, ademptiones bonorum 
aberant. This can hardly mean more 
than that governors were generally brought 
to account for inflicting such punishments 
unjustly ; it being evident that such out- 
rages were committed (see Introd..1. 1.). 

4. rari. Lips. points out that a con- 
trast is suggested to the vast estates after- 
wards acquired by confiscations. — It 
appears to be also implied that he had 
larger estates in the provinces: cp. c. 15, 
3; Marquardt, ii. 257, foll. ; Hirschfeld, 
Untersuchungen, p. 23, foll. 

modesta. Notwithstanding the ap- 
parent correspondence of ‘ rari’ and ‘ pau- 
cos, it does not seem possible to take 
this, with Orelli, to mean *in moderate 
number. It must refer to their de- 
meanour, contrasted with the general 
insolence of such persons (e. g. c. 74, 6). 

intra paucos libertos domus, *his 
don estic staff limited to a few freedmen.’ 
On the use of ‘ intra’ cp. 3. 72, 5. The 
household of Caesar still so far resembied 
that of a private citizen that its posts of 
responsibility and confidence (‘a libellis, 
*a rationibus, &c.) were filled only by 
freedmen ; and these in the time of Tibe- 
rius were few. There is however evidence 
(sce Introd. vii. p 105, n. 7) that some 
of them were wealthy and influential. 
Vitellius had afterwards filled such posts 
with Roman knights (H. 1. 58, 1): some- 
times the freedmen had themselves re- 
ceived equestrian or even quasi-senatorial 
distinctions (11. 38, 5; 12. 53, 2; H. 2. 
57> 4)- 

5. si... disceptaret, i.e. all fiscal 
claims were prosecuted in the ordinary 
law-courts (cp. c. 15, 3 ; Dio, 57. 23, 5). 
In 2. 34, 5, his behaviour is described. in 
a case where he was interested, not per- 
sonally, but on behalf of a friend. 

forum et ius. The idea of a verb of 
action is supplied: cp. Introd. v. $ 38 b. 

6. via: cp. «morum via’ 1. 54, 3. 
The use of ‘via’ with the force of ‘ratio’ 
(cp. *alium alia via . . . demerebatur’ 
Suet. Oth. 4, &c.) answers to that of d8us 
for rpómos or pé005os. 

horridus, ‘rough,’ or ‘repulsive’: 
cp. ‘horrida antiquitas’ c. 16, 4, * horridi 
sermone H. 2. 74, 3. Compare the de- 
scription of his manner in 1. 75, 6. 

8. adhuc —* etiam tum’; so often in 
and after Livy, and esp. in Tacitus: cp. 
I5. 33, 1 ; 16. 32,1, &c. ; Gudeman on 
Dial. 25. 33. 

9. notescere: cp. I. 73, 3. Tacitus 
here meets the objection that the in- 
fluence of Seianus did not always appear 
to prompt pernicious counsels. 

Io. occultus, with genit. only here and 
in 6. 36, 3: cp. Introd. v. § 33 e y : so 
used of persons in H. 2. 38, 4, &c., and 
in Cicero and Livy. 

incolumi, ‘ while he lived’: cp. 3. 56, 
5, &c. 

adiutorem: cp. 3. 12, 2. It here ap- 
pears to denote some participation in the 
‘imperium proconsulare, but a lower 
rank than that of * collega : 
vi. p. 98. ? 

II. quantum superesse, *how slight 
a further step to be styled colleague!’ 

He had already got the first, the most . 

MW 

difficult step; at every further stage fresh 
support would gather round him. : 

cp. Introd. 

A. D. 23.] 

primas dominandi spes in arduo : ubi sis ingressus, adesse studia 
exstructa iam sponte praefecti castra, datos in 

3 et ministros. 

LIBER IV. CAP. 6-8. 

501 

manum milites ; cerni effigiem eius in monimentis Cn. Pompei ; 
communes illi cum familia Drusorum fore nepotes: precandam 

4 post haec modestiam, ut contentus esset. 

paucos talia iaciebat, et secreta quoque eius corrupta uxore pro- 

debantur. 

8. Igitur Seianus maturandum ratus deligit venenum, quo pau- 
latim inrepehte fortuitus morbus adsimularetur. Id Druso datum 
2 per Lygdum spadonem, ut octo post annos cognitum est. ceterum 
Tiberius per omnis valetudinis eius dies, nullo metu an ut firmi- 
tudinem animi ostentaret, etiam defuncto necdum sepulto, curiam 
8 ingressus est. consulesque sede vulgari per speciem maestitiae 
sedentes honoris locique admonuit, et effusum in lacrimas sena- 
tum victo gemitu simul oratione continua erexit: non quidem 
sibi ignarum posse argui, quod tam recenti dolore subierit oculos 
senatus: vix propinquorum adloquia tolerari, vix diem aspici a 

4 plerisque lugentium. 

neque illos inbecillitatis damnandos: se 

5 tamen fortiora solacia e complexu rei publicae petivisse. misera- 
tusque Augustae extremam senectam, rudem adhuc nepotum et 

I. in arduo: cp. I2. 15, 3. 

2. sponte, ‘at his own will alone’: 
cp. ‘nec sua sponte, sed eorum auxilio’ 
(Cic. Fam. 7. 2, 3), &c. Drusus may be 
supposed to exaggerate the facts. On the 
genit. cp. 2. 59, 3. | 

3. effigiém : cp. 3. 72, 5. 

4. communes... nepotes, referring 
to the projected marriage of his daughter 
to the son of Claudius: see on 3. 29, 5. 

precandam... modestiam, sc. ‘ei’: 
cp. C. 39, 3; 12. 65, 5; where, as here, 
the person on whose behalf prayer is to 
be made is indicated by the passage. The 
sense here is *we can no longer resist 
him, and can only pray that he may use 
his power forbearingly. Cp. 15. 17, 3; 
also Sen. Contr. 25, 2 * ut salva provincia 
sit, optemus meretrici bonam mentem." 

6. et... quoque, ‘and besides’: 
cp. 13. 55, 2; 56, 6, &c.; in Livy (30. 
Io, 15, &c.) and subsequent prose, but 
not common (Dráger, Synt. und Stil, 
§ 121). | 

secret&: cp. c.-3, 5. ; 

Io. Lygdum, one of his most trusted 
servants (c. 10, 2), and probably his 
* praegustator ' (cp. 12. 66, 5). 

octo post annos; on the information 

of Apicata (c. 11, 4), after the death of 

Seianus in 784, A. D. 31 (Dio, 58. 11, 6). 

It. nullo metu an, &c. The con- 
struction is thus varied in 2. 38, 9; 3. 
44, 4- 

I2. defuncto. He probably died on 
July 15 : see Henzen, Insc. 5381. 

I3. sede vulgari, among the mass of 
senators. Properly they sat in their curule 
chairs on a tribunal (cp. 16. 35, 4; Ov. 
ex P. 4. 5, 18; Luc. 5, 16, &c.). Inthe 
mourning for Augustus, Dio (56. 3) de- 
scribes them as sitting on the benches of 
lower magistrates. 

per speciem. It is implied that the 
mourning was insincere : cp. c. 12, I. 

16. posse argui. The clause ‘ quod... 
senatus' is the subject. ‘That he faced 
the eyes of the senate, &c, could be 
blamed.' | 

19. complexu rei publicae : Pa ‘am- 
plectitur rem publicam’ (15. 59, 6), used 
similarly of energetic public action. Cp. 
* negotia pro solaciis accipiens' c. 13, I. 

20. extremam senectam. She was 
eighty years old: see on 5. 1, I. 

rudem, ‘inexperienced.’ Two of them 

= 

to 

neque raro neque apud 5 

Oo 

eye 

10 

502 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 776. 

vergentem aetatem suam, ut Germanici liberi, unica praesentium 
malorum levamenta, inducerentur petivit. egressi consules firma- 
tos adloquio adulescentulos deductosque ante Caesarem statuunt. 
quibus adprensis * patres conscripti, hos’ inquit * orbatos parente 
tradidi patruo ipsorum precatusque sum, quamquam esset illi 
propria suboles, ne secus quam suum sanguinem foveret, attol- 
leret, sibique et posteris conformaret. erepto Druso preces ad 7 
vos converto disque et patria coram obtestor: Augusti pronepotes, 
clarissimis maioribus genitos, suscipite, regite, vestram meamque 
vicem explete. hi vobis, Nero et Druse, parentum loco. ita 
nati estis, ut bona malaque vestra ad rem publicam pertineant. 
9. Magno ea fletu et mox precationibus faustis audita ; ac si 
modum orationi posuisset, misericordia sui gloriaque animos 
audientium impleverat: ad vana et totiens inrisa revolutus, de 
reddenda re publica utque consules seu quis alius regimen susci- 

perent, vero quoque et honesto fidem dempsit. 

memoriae Drusi 

eadem quae in Germanicum decernuntur, plerisque additis, ut 

e 
4. parenti: 

were 'adulti' (c. 3, 1), but only about 
eighteen and fifteen years old respec- 
tively: Tiberius was himself sixty-five. 

I. Germanici liberi. The context 

shows that Nero and Drusus alone are — 

meant. In some Spanish coins belong- 
ing to this period their heads are repre- 
sented with that of Tiberius on the 
reversc : see Cohen, i. p. 234. 

3. deductos, ‘ escorted.’ 

6. ne = ‘ut non’: cp. the force of 
‘neque’ 2. 34, 7, &c. 

secus quam: cp. 6. 22, 5; frequent 
in Liv. e.g. 5. 36,11; 8. 8, 10, &c. 

attolleret, ‘exalt them in the state,’ 
i. e. in the career of honours; so * attol- 
lere triumphi insignibus" 3. 72, 6, *or- 
dinibus... praemiis’ H. 4. 59, 2. Tiberius 
delegates to Drusus what he could not 
himself expect to live long enough to do. 

". Sibique et posteris. Drager 
shows (Synt. und Stil, § 123, 2) that 
Tacitus often uses this formula for *et... 
et’ (e.g. 1.4, 1; H. 4. 2, 4, &c.) ; ‘que’ 
is to be taken closely with *et,' not as 
coupling ‘ attolleret to *conformaret.' 

conformaret, taken strictly with 
'sibi, and by zeugma with ' posteris" ; 
'train them on his own model and for 
the good of posterity.' 

6. ac tolleret B. 

7. confirmaret L. 

8. coram. On the anastrophe cp. 
Introd. v. $ 77, 6. 

IO. ita nati, &c., ‘you are born in 
such a position that any good and evil 
in you must affect the state, ‘ Bona’ 
and ‘mala’ seem used rather of quali- 
ties (as in 6. 51, 6) than of fortunes, and 
the thought of the extreme importance of 
their careful training is carried on. 

13. gloria, *pride' (cp. I. 43, 4), at 
the lofty picture drawn of their position 
towards the young princes. 

14. totiens inrisa. Tacitus has men- 
tioned no such offer since the original 
show of reluctance to assume power (1. 
12, foll.). 

de reddenda... utque: cp. Introd. 
v. § 91, 7. 

16. memoriae .. . decernuntur: cp. 
* honores memoriae eius decretos ' 5. 2, I. 
Fragments of this decree, as of that. in 
honour of Germanicus (see on 2. 83), 
are preserved (see Henzen, Insc. 5381; 
C. I. L. vi. 912), but not sufficient for 
comparison. Borghesi thinks that in the 
mention of a ‘clupeus argenteus,' one of 
the additions of later flattery may be de- 
tected (cp. 2. 83, 4). 

17. in Germanicum: cp. Introd. v. 
§ 60 b. 

A. D. 23.] LIBER IV. CAP, 8-10. 

593 

3 ferme amat posterior adulatio. funus imaginum pompa maxime 
inlustre fuit. cum origo Iuliae gentis Aeneas omnesque Albanorum 
reges et conditor urbis Romulus, post Sabina nobilitas, Attus 
Clausus ceteraeque Claudiorum effigies longo ordine specta- 
rentur. 5 

10. In tradenda morte Drusi quae plurimis maximaeque fidei 
auctoribus memorata sunt rettuli: set non omiserim eorundem 

2 temporum rumorem, validum adeo ut nondum exolescat. corrupta 
ad scelus Livia, Seianum Lygdi quoque spadonis animum stupro 
vinxisse, quod is aetate atque forma carus domino interque pri- 
mores ministros erat; deinde inter conscios ubi locus veneficii 
tempusque conposita sint, eo audaciae provectum, ut verteret et, 
occulto indicio Drusum veneni in patrem arguens, moneret 
Tiberium, vitandam potionem quae prima ei apud filium epulanti 

8 offerretur. ea fraude captum senem, postquam convivium inierat, 
exceptum poculum Druso tradidisse ; atque illo ignaro et iuveni- 

liter hauriente, auctam suspicionem, tamquam metu et pudore 

La] 

sibimet inrogaret mortem quam patri struxerat. 

6. maximeque fideis: maximeque fidis B, text Ritter. 
15. ci: tum B, text Mur., deceptum Heins., illectum Nipp. 

14. et: ei R. 

plerisque additis, *with many addi- 
tions ' (cp. 3. 1, 2). 

ut...amat...adulatio, sc. ‘ ple- 
raque addere. The use of ‘amare’ in 
the sense of quAeiy ( —* solere"), with this 
construction, is not uncommon in Horace 
(e.g. Od. 2. 3, 10; 3. 16, 10) and in 
post-Augustan prose. 

2. origo, *the founder': cp. G. 2, 3. 
The application of this word to persons 
appears first in Vergil (Aen. 12, 166). 

Albanorum reges: see Liv. I. 
Verg. Aen. 6, 760, sqq. 

3. Sabina nobilitas, opposed to ‘ Iu- 
liae gentis. Tradition had always given 
a Sabine origin to the Claudian gens and 
tribe; the most generally received version 
being that which makes Attus ;or Attius) 
Clausus and his followers migrate from 
Regillus to Rome, A. U. C. 249, B. C. 505 
(Liv. 2. 16: cp. below, 11. 24, 1, also 
Suet. Tib. 1). Vergil (Aen. 7, 706, sqq.) 
follows a version making. them part of 
the original * Quirites supposed to come 
from Cures. 

8. corrupta ad scelus: cp. 2. 62, 3. 
On the specific use of *scelus' see note 
on I. 5, I. 

IO. vinxisse ‘bound to his service’: 

33 

Io. is lygdus: is Ern. 

so in 6. 45, 6. Elsewhere the word so 

.used appears to be always ' devincire? (as 

c. I, 3, &c.). 

quod is. The repetition of * Lygdus' 
after ‘is’ is generally taken to be a gloss. 
For a similar but less certain case see 
I2. 49, 2. 

primores, adj: as in H. 1. 49, 1, &c. 

1I. ubi, put after its natural position, 
as is probably the case in I2. 51, 2. 

12. conposita: cp. componunt? 3. 
49, 3- or, 

eo audaciae provectum : cp. similar 
expressions in 2. 55, 43 H. 3. 17, 2. 

ut verteret, sc. ‘rem’: the nature of 
the change is shown by the context. 

I3. occulto indicio. Orelli and Joh. 
Müller appear rightly to render this as 
‘an obscurely hinted information’; that 
the message was secretly conveyed would 
not be worth mentioning. 

15. captum. Those who read ‘ tum’ 
take ‘ea fraude' as a causal abl. 

inierat. On the indicative here, and 
in ‘struxerat,’ see Introd. v. § 49. 

16. iuveniliter = veavudas, 
‘eagerly.’ 

18. inrogaret, ‘imposed’; so of penal- 
ties in 6. 7, 1, &c., Cicero and Livy. 

i.e. 

504 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 776. 

ll. Haec vulgo iactata, super id quod nullo auctore certo 

firmantur, prompte refutaveris. 

quis enim mediocri prudentia, 2 

nedum Tiberius tantis rebus exercitus, inaudito filio exitium 
offerret, idque sua manu et nullo ad paenitendum regressu? quin 
5 potius ministrum veneni excruciaret, auctorem exquireret, insita 
denique etiam in extraneos cunctatione et mora,adversum unicum 
et nullius ante flagitii conpertum uteretur? sed quia Seianus 8 
facinorum omnium repertor habebatur, ex nimia caritate in eum 
Caesaris et ceterorum in utrumque odio quamvis fabulosa et 
10 immania credebantur, atrociore semper fama erga dominantium 

exitus. 

ordo alioqui sceleris per Apicatam Seiani proditus, tor- 4 
mentis Eudemi ac Lygdi patefactus est. 

neque quisquam 

scriptor tam infensus extitit, ut Tiberio obiectaret, cum omnia 

alia conquirerent intenderentque. 

mihi tradendi arguendique 5 

.15 rumoris causa fuit, ut claro sub exemplo falsas auditiones depel- 

I. super id quod. Driger notes the 
use of this for * praeterquam quod’ as az. 
cip., but as suggested by such expressions 
in Livy as ‘ super quam quod ' (22. 3, 14, 
&c.), * insuper quam’ (23. 7, 3), &c. 

nullo auctore certo. He does not 
mean that the story was a mere oral tra- 
dition, like that noted in 3. 16, 1. Though 
in no professed historian (sce below), it 
must have had some root in literature, to 
be repeated without hesitation by Orosius 
(7,3). It was perhaps suggested by the 
similar story about Agrippina (c. 54). ° 

3. inaudito: cp. 2. 77, 5. 

exitium offerret. Cp. ‘mortem of- 
ferre' (Cic. Rosc. Am. 13, 37; 14, 40, 
&c.), and otHer similar expressions. 

4. nullo ad paenitendum regressu, 
‘leaving himself no means of retreat to 
a change of purpose.' So Livy has 
‘neque locus paenitendi aut regressus ab 
ira relictus" 24. 26, 15, ‘receptum ad 
paenitendum non haberent' 42. 13, 3. 

5. ministrum, the slave who handed 
him the cup: cp. 3. 14, 3. 

auctorem, ‘the instigator’; i.e. he 
would not assume Drusus to be so, but 
try to find who was, by examining the 
slave. 

6. unicum, sc. *filium,' which Nipp. 
thinks may have dropped out. 

: 7. flagitii conpertum : cp. I. 3,4 

8. omnium, ‘ of all kinds. 

repertor: cp. 2. 30, 3. 

caritate. The subjective gen. with 
this word, used here alone in Tacitus, is 

rare, but in Cic. and Liv.: 
tive cp. c. 17, 1 ; 19, L &c. 

10. atrociore, &c.,' report being always 
inclined to associate horrors with the 
death of princes.’ On the sense of ‘ erga’ 
cp. Introd. v. § 59. 

II. alioqui=‘ moreover. For other 
senses of the word cp. c. 37, 2; 2. 38, 6; 
3. 8, 4; 14. 61, The sense here is 
that, besides the absurdity of the story, 
there is direct evidence against it. 

Apicatam Seiani. ‘Uxor’ is not 
unfrequently omitted, especially in epis- 
tolary Latin (Cic. Att. 12. 20, 2; 21, 4; 

on the objec- 

. Plin. Epp. 2. 20,72), also in poets (Verg. - 

Aen. 3, 319; Luc. 2, 343), and constantly 
in inscriptions. "Tacitus similarly omits 
*filia' in 12. 1, 3. See Introd. v. § 80. 
For the facts see on c. 8, 1. 

13. scriptor, ‘ historian,’ as in 2. 88, I, 
&c. 

obiectaret, ‘to charge him with it.’ 
The object of the verb is gathered from 
the context. | 

14. intenderent, probably ‘were ex- 
aggerating, as in 2. 57, 3, &c. Nipp. 
understands it in the ordinary sense, 
‘were aiming at him.’ 

I5. sub exemplo: cp. 3- 68, 1. 

auditiones, ‘rumours’; 
concr. as in Cic. pro Planc. 23, 56; 
Caelius ap. Cic. ad Fam. 8. 1. 

depellerem. Jacob compares the 
judicial phrases * depellere crimen,’ ‘ sus- 
picionem,’ ‘ to rebut.’ 

abstr. for . 

A. D. 23.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. r1, 12. 

me divulgata atque incredibilia avide accepta veris neque in 
miraculum corruptis antehabeant. 

12. Ceterum laudante filium pro rostris Tiberio, senatus popu- 
lusque habitum ac voces dolentum simulatione magis quam libens 5 
induebat, domumque Germanici revirescere occulti laetabantur. 

2 quod principium favoris, et mater Agrippina spem male tegens, 
nam Seianus ubi videt mortem Drusi 

3 perniciem adceleravere. 

inultam interfectoribus, sine maerore publico esse, ferox scelerum, 
et quia prima provenerant, volutare secum, quonam modo Ger- 

4 manici liberos perverteret, quorum non dubia successio. 

neque 

spargi venenum in tres poterat, egregia custodum fide et pudicitia 

5 Agrippinae inpenetrabili. 

igitur contumaciam eius insectari, 

vetus Augustae odium, recentem Liviae conscientiam exagitare, 
ut superbam fecunditate, subnixam popularibus studiis inhiare 

Lg € i be T 

a . I ; 
2. ne ins. R. incredibili: neque incredibilia Haase; incredibilia atque Onken. 

I5. superbiam : text Muretus. 

I. Cura: CD. 3. 24, 4. 

venerit.' The change of tense here 
and in 'antehabeant' appears, as Nipp. 
and Dráger note, to be due to this, that 
the writer, although he looks upon what 
be has written and his reason at the time 
of writing it as a fact of the past (cp. 
* incertum fuit' c. 5, 6), regards his readers 
without any such relation. So Cicero 
(pro Balb. 27, 69), referring to a recom- 

mendation made the day before by Pom- 

peius, says, *erat aequa lex nobis atque 
omnibus... utilis, ut nostras inimicitias 
inter nos geramus’; the injunction being a 

past fact, but the utility for all time. On 
*antehabeo' cp. 1. 58, 6. 

2. incredibilia, such as would be so 
to reasonable people, tales unworthy of 
credit. He implies that this is but a 
sample of many such which he has re- 
jected. | 

in miraculum corruptis : cp. ‘nihil 
compositum miraculi causa’ 11. 27, 2. 

4. laudante filium. Seneca, who may 
have witnessed the scene as a young man, 
describes it graphically (Cons. ad Marc. 
15), ‘ stetit in conspectu posito corpore, 
interiecto tantummodo velamento quod 
pontificis oculos a funere arceret, et flente 
populo non flexit voltum : experiundum 
se dedit Seiano ad latus stanti, quam 
patienter posset suos perdere." 

objective genitive. 

. &. habitum, ‘the bearing’: cp. 1. 10,7. 

libens, ‘ voluntarily, Nipp. compares 
the use of the word in 4. 58, 3; 14. 61,6. 

7. mater...tegens, i.e. ‘the fact that 
she ill concealed her hope.’ This mode 
of expression, so common with the past 
participle,is rare with the present (Introd. 
v. $ 55a). 

9. ferox'scelerum: cp. I. 32, 5. 
This adj seems here alone to take an 
To express a similar 
idea, Sallust (Jug. 14, 21) uses ' sceleribus 
ferox' (* emboldened by crime"). 

Io. provenerant : cp. I. 19, 4. 

volutare secum: cp. I3. I5, I ; ap- 
parently from * mecum ipse yoluto’ ( Verg. 
Aen. 9, 37). Commonly ‘animo’ or * in 
animo is used. 

595 

lerem, peteremque ab iis, quorum in manus cura nostra venerit, 

I2. snargi venenum. The phrase 

appears to be taken from Cic. Cat. 2. 
IO, 23 ' spargere venena didicerant.' The 
verb has often the sense of *to distribute" 
or ‘extend’: cp. 3. 21, 5. 

¥4.. conscientiam: cp. I. 39, 3. Here 
the sense is as if the words had been 
* Liviam recentis sceleris eonsciam.' The 
old animosity of Augusta has been men- 
tioned in 1. 33, 6; 2. 43, 5, &c. 

exagitare, hete only in , Tacitus, 
but used of exciting passions, by Cic. 
(Att. 3. 7, 2), &c., and of irritating a per- 
son, by Sall. (Cat. 38, 1; Jug. 73, 5)- 

506 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 776. 

dominationi apud Caesarem arguerent. atque haec callidis 6 
criminatoribus, inter quos delegerat Iulium Postumum, per adul- 
terium Mutiliae Priscae inter intimos aviae,et consiliis suis per- 
idoneum, quia Prisca in animo Augustae valida, anum suapte 
5 natura potentiae anxiam insociabilem nurui efficiebat. Agrippinae 
quoque proximi inliciebantur pravis sermonibus tumidos spiritus 

perstimulare. 

13. At Tiberius nihil intermissa rerum cura, negotia pro 
| solaciis accipiens, ius civium, preces sociorum tractabat ; / factaque 
1o auctore eo senatus consulta, ut civitati Cibyraticae apud Asiam, 
Aegiensi apud Achaiam, motu terrae labefactis, subveniretur 

1. adque haec Acid., alitque haec Madvig, Halm. 

1. apud Caesarem, taken with 'argu- 
erent.' 

atque haec. From ‘arguerent’ it is 
not difficult to supply the idea of such 
a verb as ‘ faciebat 
- seems better to take * haec’ as the subject 
of *efficiebat, and to refer it to Livia, 
who is the last mentioned of the two 
subjects of ‘arguerent.’ Granting that 
‘aviae,’ below, might with some latitude 
designate the relationship of Augusta to 
Agrippina, as her husband's grandchild 
or as her grandson’s wife, it would be 
used in the strictest sense relatively to 
Livia, who was her granddaughter by 
natural descent. For another view of the 
passage see Allen’s note. 

callidis criminatoribus. On this 
extension of the instrumental abl. see 
Introd. v. $ 27. 

2. Iulium Postumum, possibly the 
same who was praefect of Egypt in 800, 
A. D. 47 (C. I. L. vi. 918). 

3. Mutiliae Priscae, probably the 
wife of Fufius Geminus: see on 5. 2, 3. 

inter intimos aviae et. Nipp. 
brackets these words as an interpolation, 
on the ground that the context implies 
that Iulius Postumus had access to Au- 
gusta only through Prisca. If they are 
genuine, it must be understood that he 
was both directly and indirectly service- 
able. 

4. in animo... valida. This phrase 
appears only to occur here and in 14. 51, 
6; 15. 50, 3: cp. also 6. 8, 4; 31, 3. 

5. potentiae anxiam: cp. 2. 75, I. 

nurui: cp. Dig. 23. 2, 14, 4 ‘nurus 
appellatione non tantum filii uxor, sed et 
nepotis et pronepotis continetur, licet qui- 
dem has pronurus appellant.’ 

(cp. c. 38, 5); but it 

6. inliciebantur, with simple inf. 
only here and in 2. 37, 2. 

pravis sermonibus: 
67, 6, &c. 

tumidos, in this sense chiefly poeti- 
cal, but in prose from Livy. 

4. perstimulare, am. elp. For similar 
forms cp. Introd. v. $ 69, 3. 

9. ius civium, the judicial proceed- 
ings mentioned below. * Preces sociorum" 
include the complaints against officials, 
and petitions for relief under calamity. 

10. auctore eo. The initiative of the 
princeps in such remissions from the 
aerarium is usual: see Introd. vi. p. 93, n. 
12. 

Cibyraticae. Cibyra was in the 
south-western extremity of Phrygia near 
the Indus; a branch or another name of 
the Calbis (Kengez); where its remains 
still exist, near a.village called Horzoum. 
It is noted by Horace (Ep. 1. 6, 33) asa 
centre of trade, and by Pliny (N. H. 5. 
28, 29, 105) as the * conventus' for twenty- 
five cities. It had been at times within 
the province of Cilicia, but is-reckoned in 
Asia from 705, B. C. 49: see Marquardt, 
i. 335. In the inscription mentioned in 
2. 47, I, it is joined with the cities which 
suffered earthquake at that date. 

11, Aegiensi, Aegium (Vostitza) on 
the Corinthian gulf, the chief city of the 
ancient Achaia, and the regular place of 
meeting of the Achaean league (Liv. 38. 
30, 12), which at a later date still went 
through the form of meeting there (Paus. 
7.24, 4). At this time it was probably 
overshadowed by the colonies of Patrae 
and Dyme (cp. Pl. N. H. 3. 4, 5, 11). 

subveniretur, &c.: see on 2. 47. 

cp. €. 54, 1; 

A.D. 23] LIBER IV. 

2 remissione tributi in triennium. 

CAP. 12, 13. 507 

et Vibius Serenus pro consule 

ulterioris Hispaniae, de vi publica damnatus, ob atrocitatem 

3 morum in insulam Amorgum deportatur. 

Carsidius Sacerdos. 

reus tamquam frumento hostem Tacfarinatem iuvisset, absolvitur, 

4 eiusdemque criminis C. Gracchus. 
infantem pater Sempronius in insulam Cercinam tulerat. 

hunc comitem exilii admodum 
illic 

adultus inter extorres et liberalium artium nescios, mox per 
Africam ac Siciliam mutando sordidas merces sustentabatur ; 
5 neque tamen effugit magnae fortunae pericula. ac ni Aelius Lamia 
et L. Apronius, qui Africam obtinuerant, insontem protexissent, 
claritudine infausti generis et paternis adversis foret abstractus. 

3. temporum: morum L. 
text B. 

I. Vibius Serenus, one of the A 
cusers of Libo Drusus (2. 30, 1): 

c. 28-30. 

2. ulterioris Hispaniae. This name 
formerly included Lusitania and Baetica, 
but since the division of those provinces 
by Augustus,or perhaps Tiberius (Momms. 
R. G. D. A. p. 120), is restricted to the 
latter, a senatorial province of the second 
rank, parted from Lusitania (see on c. 
5, 2) by the Ánas (Guadiana), and co- 
inciding generally with southern Estre- 
madura, Andalusia, and Granada. The 
seat of government was Corduba (Cor- 
dova) : see Marquardt, i. 256. 

de vi publica. This crime consisted 
in the execution, torture, scourging, or 
incarceration in a public prison of any 
Roman citizen who had appealed to Cae- 
sar: cp. Dig. 48. 6, 7; Paul. Sent. 5. 26, 
1. A ‘lex lulia? of 746, B.C. 8, made it 
punishable by ‘ interdictio aqua et igni.' 

ob atrocitatem morum. The MS. 
text apparently repeats the last syllable 
of the preceding word. ‘Deportatio’ 
(cp. Staatsr. iii. 140) to a particular 
island was an additional severity; those 
interdicted from fire and water being as 
a rule allowed to choose an island for 
their residence, if not less than four hun- 
dred stadia from the mainland (Dio, 56. 
27, 2). At a later time deportation be- 
came the usual penalty for ‘vis publica’ 
in case of criminals of rank; and those 
of lower position were punished capitally 
(Paul. 1. 1.). 

3. Amorgum, Amorgo, one of the 
Cyclades, S. E. of Naxos, contrasted as 
a place of residence with Gyaros or Do- 
nysa (c. 30, 2), and still a fertile island. 

carsius : text Reines; cp. 6. 48, 7. 

11. claritudini: 

4. tamquam iuvisset, ‘on the ground 
of having assisted’: cp. 3. 72, 5, and note 
there; also ‘laetis. . tamquam ducem 

. bellum absumpsisset.' 12. 39, &, ' pro- 
bro respersus est tamquam . . . furatus" 
H. 2 48, 5. 

. C. Gracchus. This person appears 
to js become an informer (6. 38, 4), 
and may have been the praetor of 786, 
A.D. 33 (6. 16, 5). Nipp. notes from 
Henzen (Scavi, p. 99) that a Gracchus 
was also praet. peregr. in 790, A. D. 37. 

6. pater Sempronius: see on I. 53, 
4. On the variation to avoid repeating 
the same name, see Introd. v. $ 86. 

8. sordidas merces. Cicero (de Off. 
I. 42, 150) applies this epithet to several 
kinds of trade, and to all ‘mercatura 
tenuis,’ as distinct. from that which is 
‘magna et copiosa >and ‘non admodum 
vituperanda. To a Roman of senatorial 
rank all trade was sordid, but the large 
dealings of knights, e.g. in ‘the corn trade, 
had a certain dignity. 

9. magnae fortunae, ‘belonging to 
high rank’: cp. H. 1. 12, 5, &c. 

Aelius Lamia: sce 6. 27, 2. He 
had been consul in 756, A. D. 3, but may 
have been preceded in the lot for pro- 

e 

= 

consulates of Asia and Africa by his. 

juniors Messala Volesus (cp. 3. 68, 1) and 
L. Asprenas (cp. 1. 53, 9), and may thus 
have been nearer to the actual war with 
Tacfarinas (cp. 2. 52, 2 On the pro- 
consulate of Apronius cp. 3. 2T, I. 

II. &bstractus; so used i in H. 44, 4. 
The full expression would probably be 
* abstractus in perniciem," a figure from 
such an expression as *abstrahi . . . ad 
capitale supplicium ' (Curt. 3. 2, 17). 

508 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 776. 

14. Is quoque annus legationes Graecarum civitatium habuit, 
Samiis Iunonis, Cois Aesculapii delubro vetustum asyli ius ut 
firmaretur petentibus. Samii decreto Amphictyonum nite- 2 
bantur, quis praecipuum fuit rerum omnium iudicium, qua tem- 

5 pestate Graeci conditis per Asiam urbibus ora maris potiebantur. 
neque dispar apud Coos antiquitas, et accedebat meritum ex 3 
loco: nam cives Romanos templo Aesculapii induxerant, cum 
iussu regis Mithridatis apud cunctas Asiae insulas et urbes truci- 
darentur. variis dehinc et saepius inritis praetorum questibus, 4 
postremo Caesar de inmodestia histrionum rettulit: multa ab 
iis in publicum 'seditiose, foeda per domos temptari; Oscum 
quondam ludicrum, levissimae apud vulgum oblectationis, eo 
flagitiorum et virium venisse, #¢ auctoritate patrum coercendum 
sit. pulsi tum histriones Italia. 

IO 

OQ 

15. Idem annus alio quoque luctu Caesarem adfecit, alterum 

4. ea qua: ea tempestate qua R, text L, ex qua Weissenb. 
15. adficit : so in 6. 45, 1 and Müller in both, text Ritter. 

I. Is quoque annus, this year, like 
that preceding : cp. 3. 60-63 : ‘habuit’ is 
so used in 13. 33, 1 ; 15. 32, 3. 

2. Samiis Iunonis. Samos, made a ’ 
free state by Augustus (Dio, 54. 9, 7), 

was included, like the other islands, in the 
province of Asia. Its Heraeum, spoken 
of by Herodotus (2. 148; 3. 60) as the 
greatest temple known to him, was de- 
stroyed by the Persians, and suffered in 
subsequent wars, but was still great and 

famous as late as the time of Pausanias 

(7.4. 4) The temple was on the coast 
near the city, and some ruins of it appear 
to bc found near the modern Chora. 

Cois Aesculapii. Cos was one of 
the great centres of this worship, and of 

the caste or medical school of Ascle- | 

piadae. Hippocrates himself was born 
and resided here. For the reasons as- 
signed by Claudius for conferring on it 
the privilege of immunity, see 12.-61, 1. 
' 4. qua tempestate. It is implied that 
the decree was of this early date. This 
expression for ‘quo tempore’ (cp. 2. 60, 
2; 6. 34, 3, &c.) is chiefly poetical, but 
found in Cicero, Sallust, and Livy. 

6. ex loco, ‘connected with the place.’ 

7. induxerant. This verb takes the 
dat. in 5. 1, 3, &c., also in Stat. and Suet. 

cum... trucidarentur, in 666, 
B.C. 88: cp. Vell. 2. 18, 1. Appian 
records (Mithr. 23) that many famous 
sanctuaries were then violated. 

i 

'to, the princeps. 

I3. ut ins. margin. 

9. variis... questibus. Riots had 
taken place in former years: cp. 1. 54, 
3; 77, 1. On the ‘ius ludorum’ of the 
praetors cp. 1. 15, 5, &c. 

II. in publicum: cp. 2. 48, I. 

seditiose, foeda: cp. Dio (57. 21, 
3), Tas T€ "4wvaikas ijoxvvov kal ordoas 
fyepov. There is also abundant evidence 
(cp. Suet. Tib. 45; Cal. 27; Ner. 39; 
Galb. 13) that the *exodia' often con- 
tained pasquinades on, or covert allusiohs. 

Oscum quondam ludicrum, i.e. 
the * Atellanae, which, though not origi- 
nally left to professional actors (Liv. 7. 
2, 12), had now been taken up by the 
* pantomimi’; for whom see on I. 54, 3, 
and Suet. as above. Strabo (5. 3, 6, 233) 
refers to the survival of the Oscan dialect 
in the popular mimes.  . 

I2. levissimae, &c., ‘ belonging to 
the most trivial amusement of the vulgar.’ 

14. pulsi tum histriones Italia. 
Suetonius ( Tib. 37) represents this punish- 
ment as falling only on some ‘capita 
factionum et histriones propter quos dis- 
sidebatur.’ Dio (1. 1.) speaks as if it was 
a more general measure. One of the first 
acts of Gaius was to bring them back 
(Dio, 59. 2, 5) ; and Mnester was notorious 
in the time of Claudius (11. 4, 2, &c.). 

_Another expulsion is recorded in the 

time of Nero (13. 25, 4). 
15. Idem annus... adfecit, repeated 

A. D. 23.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 14, 15. 

509 

ex geminis Drusi liberis extinguendo, neque minus morte amici. 
2 is fuit Lucilius Longus, omnium illi tristium laetorumque socius 

8 unusque e senatoribus Rhodii secessus comes. 

ita quamquam 

novo homini censorium funus, effigiem apud forum. Augusti 
publica pecunia patres decrevere, apud quos etiam tum cuncta 
tractabantur, adeo ut procurator Asiae Lucilius Capito accusante 
provincia causam dixerit, magna cum adseveratione principis, non 
se ius nisi in servitia et pecunias familiares dedisse : quod si vim 
praetoris usurpasset manibusque militum usus foret, spreta in eo 
4 mandata sua : audirentsocios. ita reus cognito negotio damnatur. 

in 6. 45, 1: cp. Introd. v. $ 75. The 
perfect is generally used in such places: 
Cp. C. 14, 1; 16, I. 

alterum ex geminis: see on 2. 84, I. 
The child was about four years old. 

2. Lucilius Longus. An incidental 
notice in Kal. Amitern. (Orell. Insc. ji. 
P- 397) gives him as cos. suff. with 
Creticus Silanus (cp. 2. 43, 3) in 760, 
A. D. 7. 

3. unusque e senatoribus, ‘ the only 
senator.” Two knights. who also ac- 
companied Tiberius to Rhodes, are men- 
tioned in 6, 10, 2. | | | 

4. censorium funus. The expression 
is repeated in 6. 27, 3; 13. 3,6; H. 4. 
47, 2. As public funerals were under- 
taken by contract (cp. on 3. 48, 1), and con- 
tracts in the name of the state were in re- 
publican times usually let by the censors, 
it has been thought that, though cen- 
sors had ceased to exist, ‘censorium 
funus" is still asynonym for ‘ funus publi- 

cum, the one expression (in 6. 1r, 7). 
being used under similar circumstances 

to the other (in 6. 27, 2). It seems better 

taken to mean a public funeral of the 

highest kind, such as would have been 
given to one who had filled the censor- 
ship, the highest magistracy: see Polyb. 
6. 53, 7, Staatsr. i. 460, n. 2, iii. 1187. 
In this sense, the term could be used pro- 
perly of the funeral of Claudius (13. 2, 6), 
who really had been censor. 

forum Augusti, one of the series 
of imperial Fora north-east of the old 
Forum, between the Capitol and Quirinal. 
In its centre was the Temple of Mars 
Ultor (cp. 2. 64, 2), and many statues of 
great men stood in its porticoes (Suet. 
Aug. 31). Considerable remains of its 
p wall exist: see Middleton ii, 

-I3. | 
5. etiam tum. A contrast is implied 
to the later prevalence of private trials 

(cp. 6. t0, 2; 11. 2, 1, &c.), and is illus- 
trated by the extreme case of bringing a 
charge against Caesar's own procurator 
before the senate. That such persons 
were usually tried before the princeps, 
would appear from 13. 33, 1; Dial. 7, 1. 

6. procurator: see note on c. 6, 5; 
2. 47, 3, &c. This passage would be 
evidence of the existence of such imperial 
officers, at least in Asia (see also note on 
2. 47, 3), before the time of Claudius, 
from which date they are fully attested 
by inscriptions in all senatorial provinces 
(see Marquardt, 1. 555, n. 5). On their 
limited powers at this time see next note. 
In 13. 1, 3, similar officers are described 
as ‘rei familiari principis in Asia inpositi.’ 
An inscription of A. D. 105 (C. I. L. v. 
875) shows a procurator of Asia appointed 
by the emperor (probably one of the 
Flavian Caesars) to.take the place of 
& deceased proconsul. 
7. o&usam dixerit, sc. 
supplied from * apud quos.' 

8. servitia. The force of * familiares’ 
extends also to this word; the * pecuniae" 
are the abroxparopexad xpfjuara of Dio (57. 
23, 5), who states that procurators could 
then only prosecute their claims before 
the ordinary courts. A distinct juris- 
diction is giveu to them under Claudius 
(see on 12. 60, 1), and they become quite 
independent of the proconsul: cp. Dig. t. 
16, 9 ‘si fiscalis pecuniaria causa sit, 
quae ad procuratorem principis respicit, 
melius fecerit (proconsul) si abstineat. - 

9. praetoris, ‘of a governor’; used 
here as a general term (cp. note on 1. 74, 
1\, though the proconsul of this province 
was always of consular rank. 

militum: a few soldiers were kept 
as police, in the ‘inermes provinciae? : 
see Mr. Purser, D. of Ant. i. 796. 

1o. damnatur. Dio (l.1.) says that he 

‘apud eos, 

was exiled. 

10 Caesar. 

510 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 776. 

ob quam ultionem, et quia priore anno in C. Silanum vindicatum 
erat, decrevere Asiae urbes templum Tiberio matrique eius ac 

senatui. 

patribus atque avo. laetas inter audientium adfectiones, qui recenti 
5 memoria Germanici illum aspici, illum audiri rebantur. aderant- 6 
que iuveni modestia ac forma principe viro digna, notis in eum 
Seiani odiis ob periculum gratiora. 

16. Sub idem tempus de flamine Diali in locum Servi Malu- 
ginensis defuncti legendo, simul roganda nova lege disseruit 

nominari, ex quis unus legeretur, vetusto more ; neque adesse, ut 
olim, eam copiam, omissa confarreandi adsuetudine aut inter 
paucos retenta : (pluresque eius rei causas adferebat, potissimam 
penes incuriam virorum feminarumque ; accedere ipsius caeri- 
15 moniae difficultates, quae consulto vitarentur) et quod exiret e 

I4. accederet: text B, accedere et Jac. Gron. 

quod R. 

I. in... vindicatum. This impers. 
pass. with * in? is found in Caes., Cic., and 
Sall, but is uncommon : cp. H. 4. 45, 2. 
For the case of Silanus see 3. 66, foll. 

2. decrevere...templum. On this 
important expression of provincial gra- 
titude see Introd. viii. p. 159: a rivalry 
between the cities may however have had 
its share in it (see Momms. Hist. v. 319, 
E. T. i. 346). The city in which the 
temple was to stand had yet to be de- 
termined (cp. c. 55-56). 

ac senatui. This appears to be a 
recognition of the formal dyarchy (cp. 
c. 37, 4), which on another óccasion (c. 
37, 1) was omitted. For similar formulae 
cp. Staatsr. iii. 1261, n. 2. 

3. statuere. The inf. is used with 
* permissum (est)' in c. 48, 2; G. 7,2, 
and in the best authors. Similar permis- 
sion was refused to Spain (c. 37). 

Nero. Youths of the imperial family 
often thus acted as * patroni’ of the pro- 
vinces: cp. 12. 58, I. 

6. principe viro: cp. 3. 6,5; 34, IT. 

8. Servi Maluginensis: see 3. 58; 

LA 

; 10. patricios. This restriction applied 
to the ‘rex sacrificulus’ and the three 
‘flamines maiores. The ‘ minores' were 
at this time mostly obsolete: cp. Mar- 
quardt, iii. 327, and, on ‘confarreatio,’ 
Id. Privatl. 33. Not only was the 
flamen required to be born of parents 
married by this form, but, as duties were 

I5. quó (= quoniam) : quando B, 

assigned to the *flaminica, he was re- 
quired to have a wife, and also to have 
been married to her by the same rite. 

tres...nominari, &c. It appears 
clear that the final choice rested with the 
chief pontiff, who was said *capere fla- 
minem’ (Liv. 27. 8, 5). The preliminary 
nomination of three may have been made 
by the senate (instead of the comitia) or 
by the college of the pontiffs. 

I3. pluresque, &c. Halm follows Mad- 
vig (Adv. Crit. ii. p. 446) in placing this 
sentence in a parenthesis, whereby the 
whole passage is to be taken as giving 
two reasons for the scarcity of candi- 
dates; the first being that few were born 
of * confarreati parentes,' the second, that 
the loss of ‘ patria potestas' was objected 
to. The parenthetical sentence gives two 
explanations of the first cause, namely, 

et permissum statuere; egitque Nero grates ea causa 5 

nam patricios confarreatis parentibus genitos tres simul 2 

3 

natural negligence of a cumbrous cere-. ... 

mony, and deliberate avoidance of its ac- 
companying impediments. , 

I4. penes incuriam. Nipp. compares 
this use of * penes? with Hor, A. P". 71 
(‘usus, quem penes, &c.) where, as in 
H. 1. 57, 4, some personification seems 
implied, while here a quality belonging 
to persons is spoken of. 

ipsius caerimoniae  diffücultates. 

Such a marriage could only be dissolved : 

by the equally cumbrous process of * dif- 
farreatio, and Romans now practised 
divorce with the utmost freedom. 

15. et quod. This reading is sup- 

A.D. 23.] LIBER IV. 

CAP. 15, 16. SII 

iure patrio qui id flamonium apisceretur quaeque in manum 

4 flaminis conveniret. 

ita medendum senatus decreto aut lege, 

sicut Augustus quaedam ex horrida illa antiquitate ad praesen- 
5 tem usum flexisset. igitur tractatis religionibus placitum instituto 
flaminum nihil demutari: sed lata lex, qua flaminica Dialis 
sacrorum causa in potestate viri, cetera promisco feminarum iure 

ported by ‘quo’ being written for ‘quod ’ in 
c. 39.4. Nipp., who had formerly indicated 
a lacuna, now considers that the causal sen- 
tence ‘quoniam’ (or ‘ quod^) &c. sufficiently 
answers to ‘omissa. It is to be sup- 
posed that parents would object to the 
loss of ‘ patria potestas,’ and also that the 
office must have been in itself undesirable, 
owing to the severe rules imposed on its 
occupant: cp. 3. 71, and the long list 
enumerated in Gell. 10, 15. The passage 
in Livy (27. 8) would show the office to 
have been rather a burden than a privi- 
lege, as a person is ‘taken’ for it against 
his will. 

I. qui... apisceretur. Gaius (1, 130) 
says, * exeunt liberi virilis sexus de patris 
potestate, si flamines Diales inaugurentur, 
et feminini sexus, si virgines Vestales 
capiantur. This was without ‘capitis 
diminutio, such as would have been in- 
volved in adoption into another family. 
The ceremony of ‘taking’ was a kind of 
* mancipatio, by which the person came 
under the * potestas" of the deity, repre- 
sented by the chief pontiff: see Mar- 
quardt, iii. 314. 

flamonium; so also in 13. 2, 6. 
Mommsen (Eph. Epig. i. 222) notes that 
the office of flamen is always in inscrip- 
tions ‘ flaminatus’ or *flamonium,' and 

that the latter form is preserved by the © 

MSS. of Tacitus, of Cic. (Phil. 13. 19, 41), 
and of Livy (26. 23, 8). 

quaeque ... . conveniret. ‘Con- 
ventio in manum,' whereby the husband 
acquired a power analogous to that of a 
father over his wife (Staatsr. iii. 35), 
though not essential to marriage as such, 
was involved in the ceremony of ‘con- 
farreatio’ or *coemptio, or the fact of 
a year’s unbroken *usus.' 
of the latter kind would thus always 
be ‘sine conventione' during the first 
year, and, even by old law, might 
thus continue indefinitely, by annual sus- 
pension of cohabitation for a * trinoctium.' 
In this and other ways marriages ‘sine 
conventione ' had come to be the rule; the 
woman thus becoming‘ uxor tantummodo,’ 
not ‘ mater familias’ (Cic. Top. 3, 14). By 

A marriage’ 

the old law she gained thereby no freedom, 
but remained in ‘potestate patris’; lat- 
terly, however, the ‘patria potestas’ had 
become much relaxed, and women were 
enabled, by legal fictions, to control their 
own property through a ‘ procurator,’ and 
acquire practical independence (see Mar- 
quardt, Privatleben 63, Maine, Anc. Law, 
p. 155). To this the marziage of the 
* flaminica' would be an exception, being 
necessarily by ‘ confarreatio,' and so ‘cum 
conventione.' 

2. senatus decreto aut lege. Nipp. 
notes that *leges' still continue to be 
distinctly mentioned (cp. 11. 13, 2; II. 3. 
37, 33 4-47, 2), and that several distinct 
‘leges’ of this and later date are specified 
by jurists (Staatsr. ii. 882, iii. 346, n. 1), 
but that their enactment by the comitia 
must have been a mere formality. It 
probably corresponded to the formal 
*renuntiatio' of elections, or the formal 
plebiscite by which the tribunician power 
of the princeps was ratified (Introd. vi. 
p. 84). Legislative enactments by ‘senatus 
consulta’ are mentioned in 12. 7, 3; 60, 
2413.5. T 

3. quaedam . . . flexisset: see note 
below ($ 5). It would also appear from 
3. 71, 3, that Augustus had relaxed the 
old rule precluding the flamen from a 
single night's absence: Gellius (1. 1.) also 
alludes to some relaxations without speci- 
fying their date or nature. 

5. demutari; apparently one of the 
words revived by Tacitus from Plautus. 

6. sacrorum causa, &c. A defective 
passage in Gaius (1, 136; see Marquardt, 
lii. 333, n. 1), alluding to this enactment, 
appears to show that Augustus had al. 
ready introduced this limitation of the 
legal effect of ‘confarreatio’ in respect of 
the * flaminica Dialis" on his restora ion 
of the ‘flamonium’ in 744, B.C. 1o. Mr. 
Poste considers (Gaius, p. 90) that the 
relaxation thus introduced by him in that 
particular instance, was now extended to 
all cases The fiction by which she 
was thus treated as in the power of her 
husband * sacrorum causa’ would involve 
her taking his domestic worship instead 

Cae 

512 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 777. 

ageret. et filius Maluginensis patri suffectus. utque glisceret 6 

dignatio sacerdotum atque ipsis promptior animus foret ad capes- 

sendas caerimonias, decretum Corneliae virgini, quae in locum 

Scantiae capiebatur, sestertium viciens, et quotiens Augusta 
5 theatrum introisset, ut sedes inter Vestalium consideret. 

17. Cornelio Cethego Visellio Varrone consulibus pontifices, 
eorumque exemplo ceteri sacerdotes, cum pro incolumitate 
principis vota susciperent, Neronem quoque et Drusum isdem 
dis commendavere, non tam caritate iuvenum quam adulatione, 

10 quae moribus corruptis perinde anceps, si nulla et ubi nimia est. 
nam Tiberius haud umquam domui Germanici mitis, tum vero 2 
aequari adulescentes senectae suae inpatienter indoluit ; accitos- 
que pontifices percontatus est, num id precibus Agrippinae aut 
minis tribuissent. et illi quidem, quamquam abnuerent, modice 8 

10. proinde: text R. 

of that of her paternal house (Poste, 1. 1.), 
and would enable her to perform her 
public sacred duties as priestess of Juno 
(Plut. Quaest. Rom. 86), but would not 
affect her status in other respects. | 

promisco, ‘open to all’: cp. 14. 14, 
4, &c. 

I. fllius. Nipp. notes that the son 
of a flamen would have already taken 

part in his duties as a ‘camillus’: see. 

Marquardt, iii. 227. 

3. caerimonias, ‘the duties of a re- 
ligious office’: cp. I. 54, t. 

4. capiebatur : cp. 2. 86, I. 

sestertium  viciens, twice the gift 
given on a former occasion to a rejected 
candidate (2. 86, 2). The special en- 
couragement lay in the amount of the 
gift ; for some payment had always been 
given to the Vestals (Liv. 1. 20, 3), and 
perhaps to the * flamines' (Marquardt, ii. 
80). As a set-off, the Vestal could inherit 
nothing except by will, and her own 
property, if she died intestate, escheated 
to the state (Gell. 1. 12). 

5. sedes inter Vestalium. Augustus 
(Suet. Aug. 44) ‘solis virginibus Vestali- 
bus locum in theatro, separatim et contra 
praetoris tribunal dedit.’. Such a place 
as is here given to Augusta was assigned 
by Gaius to Antonia and to his sisters 
(Dio, 59. 3, 4), and by Claudius to Mes- 
salina (Id. 60. 22, 2). It was perhaps 
through this association that the Vestals 
were afterwards charged with the cultus 
of Augusta (Id. 60. 5, 2). 

- 

6. Cornelio Cethego Visellio Var- 
rone. The praenomen of.the former was 
‘Servius,’ that of the latter ‘ Lucius’ 
(Henzen 7419 d 8). Varro was ‘curator 
riparum et alvei Tiberis! (C. I. L. vi. 
1237). On his father cp. 3. 41, 3. 

7. pro incolumitate principis vota. 
These were offered on a fixed day, shown 
by later authorities (Gaius, Dig. 50. 16, 
223; Plut. Cic. 2, &c.) to be Jan. 3, and 

are distinct from those offered for the 

state on Jan. 1 (c. 70, 1r). The present 
year was a special occasion, as the ‘ de- 
cennium ' of Tiberius (Dio, 57. 24, 1). 

8. Neronem...et Drusum. Tiberius 
allowed his mother's name to be included 
in * vota ' (see Act. Arv. A. U. C. 780, A.D. 
27), and we often find women nearly re- 
lated to the princeps thus associated with 
hím, but rarely, if ever, male relatives : 
see Staatsr. ii. 825. . — 

9. caritate . . . adulatione, causal 
abl.: cp. Introd. v. § 30. 

Io. anceps, ‘ perilous’: cp. c. 59, 15 73, 
43 1. 36, 3. | 

8i... ubi. On this interchange cp. 
8. The alliterative antithesis 
. nulla’ is found in Sen. Ep. 

I. 44, 
* nimia . 
89, 3- 2 2 ‘ 
12. inpatienter, ‘ uncontrollably’: cp. 
G. 8, 1. | 
14. quamquam abnuerent,i.e. though 
they took the whole blame on themselves, 
they were not severely rebuked. The 
mildness of the censure is explained: by 
the sentence *etenim. . . erant. 

A. D. a4.] LIBER IV. CAP. 16-19. 

9I3 
perstricti; etenim pars magna e propinquis ipsius aut primores 
civitatis erant: ceterum in senatu oratione monuit in posterum, 
ne quis mobiles adulescentium animos praematuris honoribus ad 
4superbiam extolleret. instabat quippe Seianus incusabatque 
diductam civitatem ut civili bello; esse qui se partium Agrip- 
pinae vocent, ac ni resistatur, fore pluris; neque aliud gliscentis 
discordiae remedium quam si unus alterve maxime prompti sub- 
verterentur. 

18. Qua causa C. Silium et Titium Sabinum adgreditur. 
amicitia Germanici perniciosa utrique, Silio et quod ingentis 
exercitus septem per annos moderator partisque apud Germaniam 

triumphalibus Sacroviriani belli victor, quanto maiore mole pro- 

2 cideret, plus formidinis in alios dispergebatur. credebant pleri- 

"A 

om 

o 

que auctam offensionem ipsius intemperantia, immodice iactantis . 

suum militem in obsequio duravisse, cum alii ad seditiones 
prolaberentur ; neque mansurum Tiberio imperium, si iis quoque 
legionibus cupido nóvandi fuisset. destrui per haec fortunam 
8 suam Caesar inparemque tanto merito rebatur. : nam beneficia 
eo usque laeta sunt, dum videntur exsolvi posse: ubi multum 
antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur. — 
19. Erat uxor Silio Sosia Galla, caritate Agrippinae invisa 
WT 
5. d:ductam. 

12. procederet: text R. 18. inparemque se Pichena. 

I. pars magna, &c. Young Drusus 16. mansurum, sc. 'fuisse': cp. Introd. 

was himself a pontiff (Introd. ix. note 12), 
as was also L. Piso the ‘ praefectus urbis ' 
(6. 10, 3). 

4. extolleret, ‘stimulate’; so ‘extollit 
ira promptum . . . animum ' 16. 22, Io. 

incusabat diductam. This verb has 
often this construction in Livy. 

7. subverterentur. The change of 
tense denotes a more remote contingency : 
see note on I. 29, I. 

Io. et quod, &c., ‘it was also fatal that,’ 
&c. "The construction is equivalent to 

‘quod plus formidinis dispergebatur, 
quanto maiore mole procideret ingentis 
exercitus moderator,’ &c. Nipp. notes a 
similar appositionin I1. 21, 2. The seven 
years are reckoned from the first mention 
of Silius as legatus in Upper Germany 
(1. 31, 2) to the time of his victory over 
Sacrovir (3. 42-46). His triumphal dis- 
‘tinction was mentioned in r. 72, 1 

15. suum militem... 

I. 31, 33 37, 4 i 40, I. 
VOL. I. 

duravisse: see . 

.V. $ 39c. 

17. destrui...fortunam suam, ‘ his 
position was lowered. On this sense of 
‘fortuna’ cp. 2. TU 6, &c. ‘ Destruere’ 
is thus used with * auctoritas in 14. 43, 2, 
and of persons in H. 1. 6, r. 

18. inparem (sc. * esse"), ‘unable to 
discharge such an obligation." 

19. exsolvi: 

ing’. belongs to this verb frequently in 
Tacitus, and occasionally in Cic., Liv., 
&c., but usually with an accus. of the 
debt or penalty which is paid. 

20. antevenere, absol. =‘ superavere. 
The word (cp. 1. 63, 6, &c.) secms not 
elsewhere so used. 

odium, &c. 
in Seneca (Ep. 19, 11), *quidam quo plus 
debent, magis oderunt : leve aes alienum 
debitorem facit, grave inimicum.' 

21. caritate Agrippinae. Almost ihe 
same words are repeated in 16. 14, 3 

Ll 

cp. * initium exsolvendae- 
culpae ' H. 4.62, 6. The sense of * pay- 

ror 

20 

The sentiment is found ' 

514 

principi. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 777. 

hos corripi, dilato ad tempus Sabino, placitum, inmis- 

susque Varro consul, qui paternas inimicitias obtendens, odiis 

Seiani per dedecus suum gratificabatur. 

precante reo brevem 

moram, dum accusator consulatu abiret, adversatus est Caesar: 
5solitum quippe magistratibus diem privatis dicere; nec infrin- - 
gendum consulis ius, cuius vigiliis niteretur ne quod res publica 

detrimentum caperet. 

reperta priscis verbis obtegere. igitur multa adseveratione, quasi 
aut legibus cum Silio ageretur aut Varro consul aut illud res 

1o publica esset, coguntur patres. 

silente reo, vel si defensionem 

coeptaret, non occultante cuius ira premeretur, conscientia belli 
Sacrovir diu dissimulatus, victoria per avaritiam foedata et uxor 
Sosia arguebantur. nec dubie repetundarum criminibus haere- 
bant, sed cuncta quaestione maiestatis exercita, et Silius immin- 
15 entem damnationem voluntario fine praevertit. 

7. quo prium: proprium B. 

‘caritate Agrippinae invisum Neroni. 
The genitive in each case is objective, as 
in c. 17, I, &c., and as generally in 
classical usage. 

I. dilato: cp. c. 68-70. 

ad tempus, *for-the- moment": cp. 
* perturbatio . . . brevis et ad tempus’ Cic. 
Off. 1. 8, 27. The sense in 1. 1, I is not 
.quite the same. | 

inmissus, ‘ was set on’; metaph. from 
‘inmittere equum": cp. c. 54, I; 1I. I, I. 

2. paternas inimicitias, explained 
by 3. 43. 4- 

8. priscis verbis. His answer alluded 
to the words of the old *ultimum senatus 
consultum ' (" darent operam consules ne 
quid respublica detrimenti caperet "), 
whereby, in a crisis, a kind of martial 
law was proclaimed: cp. Sall. Cat. 29, 
.2; Caes. B. C. 1. 5, 3. This is here 
assumed as tantamount to a standing 
order. *Vigilia consularis" may also be 
an old phrase (see Cic. Phil. 1. 1, 1). For 
other such phrases used by Tiberius cp. 
* exercendas leges esse’ (1. 72, 4), ‘ infen- 
sus reipublicae ' (c. 70, 7; 6. 24, 1). 

adseveratione: cp. 2. 3!, 4; here 
used with reference to the solemn expres- 
sions just mentioned. 

quasi . . . aut Varro consul, &c., 
*as if Varro were in any true sense a 
consul, or that state of things the Re- 
public' (see on 1. 3, 7). As far as mere 
‘vocabula’ went, both were formally such. 

S 
13. socia. 

On the neuter ‘illud’ cp. 1. 49, 4. 

II. non occultante, &c., showing that 
he knew who his real enemy was. The 
allusion is probably to the resentment of 
Tiberius on the grounds mentioned in c. 
18, 3. Also the * odia Seiani,’ mentioned 
above, were in the background. 

conscientia . . . dissimulatus, ‘that 
the doings of Sacrovir had been ignored 
through complicity in his rebellion’ : 
* conscientia rebellionis? 12. 31, 6, &c., 
* Acilia . . . dissimulata ' 15. 71, 12, ‘con- 
sulatus dissimulatus* H. 2. 71, 3; *dis- 
simulata . . . mentione’ Suet. Ner.. 37. 
In à. 41, 4 it is stated that the disaffection 
of Sacrovir was reported to Tiberius, who 
delayed to deal with it. Nipp. places 
a full stop before ‘ conscientia ' and only a 
comma before ‘ silente.' 

12. per avaritiam, apparently by ex- 
tortions from those who had not joined the 
rebellion : cp. also note on 3. 46, 4. 

uxor Sosia, sc. 'parum coercita.' 
For complaints on grounds of this kind 
see 3. 33. Pfitzner retains ‘ socia.’ 

13. haerebant, sc. ‘Silius et Sosia,' 
‘could not clear themselves ofthe charges.’ 
Or the abl. cp. 1. 65, 4. 

I4. cunct& .. . exercita, ‘the whole 
case was conducted on the charge of 
treason’: cp. * iudicium . . . exercuit" (1. 
44, 3), ‘ contentiones" (13. 28, 5), &c. 

I5. praevertit, ‘anticipated’; so ‘prae- 
vertit tristia leto’ Luc. 8, 30. - 

proprium id Tiberio fuit scelera nuper 3 

4 

cp. . 

A.D. 24.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 19, 20. 

315 

20. Saevitum tamen in bona, non ut stipendiariis pecuniae 
redderentur, quorum nemo repetebat, sed liberalitas Augusti 

2 avulsa, conputatis singillatim quae fisco petebantur. 
Tiberio erga pecuniam alienam diligentia fuit. 

ea prima 
Sosia in exilium 

pellitur Asinii Galli sententia, qui partem bonorum publicandam, 

3 pars ut liberis relinqueretur censuerat. 

contra M'. Lepidus 

quartam accusatoribus secundum necessitudinem legis, cetera 

4 liberis concessit. 

hunc ego Lepidum temporibus illis gravem et 

sapientem virum fuisse comperior: nam pleraque ab saevis 
adulationibus aliorum in melius flexit, neque tamen tempera- 
menti egebat, cum aequabili auctoritate et gratia apud Tiberium 

I. tamen, i. e. though contrary to the 
' custom where sentence was thus antici- 
pated (see 6. 29, 2 and note). Similar 
exceptional confiscation took place in the 
case of Libo (2. 32, 1), and was proposed 
in that of Piso (3. 17, 8); the senate hav- 
ing power to increase the penalties pre- 
- scribed by law, as even to substitute death 
for exile. We find also, from II. 35. 2, 
that it was made illegal to preserve the 
efigy of Silius. ‘Saevitum in bona, 
repeated from H. 2. 62, 1. 

stipendiariis, ‘the provincial tribute 
payers.’ Strictly the term is distinguished 
from ‘vectigales’ (those who paid in 
kind), as in Cic. Verr. 2. 4, 60, 134; 
but it is generally used in contrast to 
* civitates liberae, though the latter were 
not exempt from all payments (see 
Marquardt, i. 79). 

2. liberalitas: cp. 2. 37. 2. — 

3. singillatim, i.e. gifts made at 
various times. 

fisco : on the use of this term see note 
on 2. 47, 33 48, 1, Vol. ii. Introd. p. 28, 
n. 6, and references there. 

ea prima, &c.: cp. the character 
given to him in 3. 18, 2. ‘ Diligentia’ is 
here equivalent to ‘studium,’ but used 
with some irony. 

5. pellitur. This, and ‘ concessit  be- 
low, express the sentences advocated by 
these senators: cp. 3. 23, 2. &c. 

partem: cp. 3. 17, 8. Nipp. is prob- 
ablv right in thinking that the property 
of Sosia alone is meant, that of Silius 
having been already disposed of. 

6. liberis. One of them was the C. 
Silius of 11. 5, 3, &c. 

M’. Lepidus: cp note on 3. 32, 2. 

7. quartam. On such ellipses cp. In- 
trod. v. § 8o. ‘Quarta’ is thus used in 
Quint. 8. 5, 19; Dig. 5. 2, 85 5. 4, 3. 

legis. The law would be the ‘lex 
Tulia de maiestate, passed by Augustus. 
If the derivation most commonly assigned 
to quadruplator? is correct, one fourth 
would seem to be the usual reward of in- 
formers; but it is evidently her? a legal 
‘minimum,’ limiting the discretion (cp. 
6. 47, 1) of the senate ; and the‘ lex Papia 
Poppaea ' prescribed, till the time of Nero, 
a higher proportion (Suet. Ner. 10). The 
enormots sums sometimes given can be 
inferred from 16. 33. 4; H. 4. 42, 5. 

9. comperior. The sentence is taken 
from Sallust (see Introd. v. $ 97, 1), and 
the deponent form is elsewhere only found 
in Ter. And. 5. 5, 31; Sall. Jug. 108, 3, 
and in late prose. 

nam pleraque . . . . flexit. This 
seems best taken, with Freinsh., to mean 
* he modified many sentences in an oppo- 

. site direction to the cruel servility of 

others.’ Nipp. takes ‘ab’ to mean *re- 
gardless of,’ and compares ‘a fortuitis vel 
naturalibus causis ' (H. r. 86, 4). 

Io. neque tamen, &c., ‘noryet (though 
apt to take an independent course) was 
he wanting in respect of discretion (cp. 
the similar senses in 3. 12, 1; 1X. 4, 7),as 
is shown by his having uniformly enjoved 
the respect and favour of Tiberius.’ 
* Aequabilis' appears to have this force 
in H. 4. 5, 4 (* cunctis vitae officiis aequa- 

.bilis, as also the adv. in 15. 21, 5 

(* aequabilius atque constantius provinciae 
regentur?) : cp. Cic. N. D. a. 9, 23 ; Sall. 
Jug.53,1, &c. Nipp. would take ‘ egebat ' 
as in T3. 3, 3, &c., but the meaning given 
above appears more suitable to this pas- 

dal 

sage, and supported by 12. 66, 2 (* mini- — 

strorum egens’). Lepidus is similarly 
described in 6. 27, 4, and illustrations of 
his discretion will be found in 1. 13, 2; 

3- 35, 2; 5O. 

Lla2 

| 516 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 777. 

| viguerit. unde dubitare cogor, fato et sorte nascendi, ut cetera, 5 
| ita principum inclinatio in hos, offensio in illos, an sit aliquid in 
! nostris consiliis,liceatque inter abruptam contumaciam et deforme 
obsequium pergere iter ambitione ac periculis vacuum. at Mes- 8 
5 salinus Cotta haud minus claris maioribus, sed animo diversus, 
censuit cavendum senatus consulto, ut quamquam insontes 
magistratus et culpae alienae nescii provincialibus uxorum crimi- 
nibus proinde quam suis plecterentur. 
21. Actum dehinc de Calpurnio Pisone, nobili ac feroci viro. 
1o is namque, ut rettuli, cessurum se urbe ob factiones accusatorum 
in senatu clamitaverat et spreta potentia Augustae trahere in 
ius Urgulaniam domoque principis excire ausus erat. quae in 2 
praesens Tiberius civiliter habuit: sed in animo revolvente iras, 
etiam si impetus offensionis languerat, memoria valebat. Pisonem 8 
15 Q. Granius secreti sermonis incusavit adversum maiestatem 
habiti, adiecitque in domo eius venenum esse eumque gladio 

8. perinde B. 
Pisonemque . ... Granius Ritter. - 

I. unde dubitare cogor, &c., i.e. the 
success of such a man leads me to think 
that character, as well as destiny, has to 
do with the regard or aversion of princes. 
On the sentiment cp. Introd. iv. p. 2n 
A verb of some such sense as ‘fiat’ 
supplied from * sit.’ 

3. abruptam contumaciam, ‘perilous 
defiance. That this is the meaning of 

* abruptus,' seems suggested by * periculis’ 
below, and by ‘ in abruptum tractus '(H. 
I. 48, 7), ‘per abrupta ambitiosa morte 
inclaruerunt ' (Agr. 42, 5). The metaphor 
is suggested by such a sense as that in 2. 45, 
3. Onthesentiment cp. Introd. iv. p. 28. 

4. Messalinus Cotta: cp. 2. 32, 2, &c. 
This decree was still in force in the time 

of Ulpian, who dates it (Dig. 1. 16, 4,2) - 

in the year of Cotta's consulship (see 3. 
2, 5). Compare the debate bearing on 

this subject (3. 33-34). 

. 8 proinde quam. Most edd. read 
* perinde,' in accordance with the reading 

elsewhere y this MS. (2. 1, 25 5, 3; 19, 
1; 3. 31,73 6. 30, 4) ; but‘ proinde quam’ 

1s read in several places in Med. ii (see 

note on 13. 21, 3) and in Plautus (Truc. 
2. 3, 3), and such phrases as ‘ proinde ac’ 
(Lucr. 3, 1035, 1023) are aca It 
seems therefore possible that Tacitus has, 
used both forms. 

9. feroci, ina good sense, as in I. 2,1, &c. 

- word as ‘quidam’ (13 23, 2). 

14. pisonemque grauius: text L, Pisonemque Granius Baiter, 

IO. ut rettuli: see 2. 34. 

factiones, ' the intrigues.' 

I3. civiliter habuit; so ‘ civiliter ac- 
ceptum ' 3. 76, 3: cp. the use of ‘habere’ 

^ jn ra. 48, 2. where see note. 

revolvente : cp. 3. 18, 6. 

14. memoria valebat: see on 1. 7, I t. 

Pisonem Q. Granius. The name 
* Graniüs' would hardly stand alone (cp. 
I. 74, 1; 6. 38, 4), unless with such a 

junction, though rather near to another 
(‘ adiecitque’), might have been used to 
connect the new charge with the old 
grudge, so that Ritter may be right in 
retaining it, and in supposing a praenomen 
to have been lost after it. 

15. seoreti sermonis. The extension 
of * maiestas" not only from written to 
spoken words, but to words spoken in 
private life, attempted earlier (I. 74, 3), 

The con- . 

appears now to be an established prin-: 

ciple; we may. note also that the mere 
possession of poison in his house is 
strained into a charge. 

16. gladio accinctum: cp. I1. 22, I, 
and the precautions taken at one time 
by Augustus (Suet. Aug. 35). It was 
unlawful for civilians to carry arms 
anywhere within the city, and even the 
praetorian guard were not fully armed 
(see on 3. 4, 3) 

A. D. 24.] 

4 accinctum introire curiam. - 

LIBER IV. CAP. 

517 

quod ut atrocius vero tramissum ; 

ceterorum, quae multa cumulabantur, receptus est reus, neque 

5 peractus ob mortem opportunam. 

exule, qui sordidae originis, maleficae vitae, sed orandi validus, 
per immodicas inimicitias ut iudicio iurati senatus Cretam amo- 
veretur effecerat : atque illic eadem actitando recentia veteraque 
odia advertit, bonisque exutus, interdicto igni atque aqua, saxo - 

Seripho consenuit. 

22. Per idem tempus Plautius Silvanus praetor incertis causis 
Aproniam coniugem in praeceps iecit, tractusque ad Caesarem 
ab L. Apronio socero turbata mente respondit, tamquam ipse 
somno gravis atque eo ignarus, et uxor sponte mortem sump- 

I. atrocius vero, 'too atrocious to be 
true.” Nipp. notes from Müller that this 
use of the ; comparative, not strictly paral- 
leFto ‘minora’ and * maiora vero’ (H. 1. 
29, 1; 2. 70, 4), answers more to those 
in which it denotes a disproportion, as 
‘onus... animis et . . . corpore maius" 
(Hor. Ep. I. 17, 39), * curatio altior fas- 
tigio suo’ (Liv. 2. 27, 6),-or to those in 
which the comparative is followed by 

‘quam,’ with an ellipse of some such 
words as ‘esse solet' (cp. H. 1. 22, 13 3. 
7, 2). The expression here might thus 
be taken as an abbreviation for ‘ atrocius 
quam quod verum esse solet.' - 

2. neque peractus, ‘his trial was not 
carried out’; the strict sense of ‘reum 
peragere! (Liv. 4. 42, 6, &c.), which 
sometimes merely means ‘ accusare.’ 

3. opportunam : cp. Liv. 6. 1, 7 * iu- 
dicio eum mors adeo opportuna ut volun- 
tariam magna pars crederet, subtraxit.' 
This suggestion seems implied here. 

4. orandi validus. This genit, 
found first in Tacitus, resembles those 
in Introd. v. 33 e y. Severus is spoken 
of as the introducer of the new style of 
oratory (Dial. 19, 1, cp. Introd. v. p. 39), 
and as a speaker of ‘much genius and ele- 
gance, but apt to sacrifice weight to viru- 
lence (Dial. 26, 4; Quint. 10. 1, 116). 
M. Seneca (Exc. Contr. 3, praef. 1-8) gives 
a full description of his style. 

5. per immodicas inimicitias, ‘ by 
unrestrained aggressiveness’: cp. ‘ facilis 
capessendis inimicitiis! 5. 11, I. 

iurati senatus: see on I. 74, R. 
Probably many senators and their families 
had suffered from him (cp. 1. 72, 4). 

Cretam amoveretur. This was only 
a 'relegatio, as he was not deprived of 

his property, the present sentence being 
. one of full exile and deportation. 
7. advertit, ‘drew on himself’; an 

analogous use to the personal accus. with 
this verb (1. 41, 13 2. 17. 2j 6. 44, 1). 

interdicto igni atque aqua: cp. 
6.30, 1. Nipp. takes the latter ablatives 
as depending on interdicto, which is 
itself abl. abs. like ‘libero’ (3. 60, 6). 
But the simpler construction is possible 
and preferable : »d * interdicta voluptas ' 
Hor. Ep. 1. 6,6 

saxo Beribho. On the abl. cp. * Delo’ 
3. 61,1. On Seripho see 2. 85, 4: here 
it is contemptuously called a mere rock. 

8. consenuit. According to ‘Jerome 
on Eus. Chron. (Op. viii. p. 574, Migne), 
he died there in the utmost want in 787, 
A.D. 34. the twenty-fifth year of his exile. 
There is some doubt, however, of. the cor- 
rectness of the date (see on 1. 72, 4). 

9. praetor. According to an inscrip- 
tion cited by Nipp. (Bull. Arch. 1869, 
p. 123) he was ‘ praetor urbanus’; his 
successor being M. Licinius Grassus Frugi 
(cp. c. 62, 1). 

IO. in praeceps, i.e. from the upper 
story, by the window or stairs: cp. 6. 49, 
1. Quintilian (7. 2, 24) records a similar 
question in the trial of one N aevius, * prae- 
cipitata esset ab eo uxor, an se ipsa sua 
sponte iecisset.’ 

ad Caesarem. Caesar appears to take 
a similar course to that in Piso's case 
(3. 10, 6), by ‘remitting’ the case to the 
senate, after preliminary investigation. 

II. L. Apronio: cp. I. 56, 1, &c. 

tamquam ipse, sc. *fuisset': 
Inti»d. v. $ 39 b. 

12. sumpsisset: cp. 3. 7, 2. 

cp. 

relatum et de Cassio Severo 

en 

518 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 777. 

sisset. non cunctanter Tiberius pergit in domum, visit cubiculum, 2 
in quo reluctantis et impulsae vestigia cernebantur. refert ad 3 
senatum, datisque iudicibus Urgulania Silvani avia pugionem 
nepoti misit. quod perinde creditum quasi principis monitu ob 
amicitiam Augustae cum Urgulania. reus frustra temptato ferro 4 
venas praebuit exsolvendas. mox Numantina, prior uxor cius, 
accusata iniecisse carminibus et veneficiis vaecordiam marito, 
insons iudicatur. 

23. Is demum annus populum Romanum longo adversum 
Numidam Tacfarinatem bello absolvit. nam priores duces ubi 
impetrando triumphalium insigni sufficere res suas crediderant, 
hostem omittebant; iamque tres laureatae in urbe statuae, et 
adhuc raptabat Africam Tacfarinas, auctus Maurorum auxiliis, 
qui, Ptolemaeo Iubae filio iuventa incurioso, libertos regios et 

7. uecordiam : uecors c. 29, 2, and in five out of six instances in Med. ii, and so 
always Ritt. and Nipp.; uae- six times in this MS. IO. sub: ubi L. 

2. impulsae, ‘ thrown by violence.’ 

3. datis iudicibus. Nipp. (on 2. 79, 
2) takes this to mean that the senate ap- 
pointed a judicial committee from its own 
members. But it may mean that they 
referred the case to the ordinary law- 
courts, which, as implied in 2. 79, 2; 
3. 12, to, had jurisdiction in such cases. 
Later, we find ordinary criminal offences 

(13. 44, 9; H. 4. 44, 3). | 

Silvani avia. The relationship is 
fully discussed by Borghesi (CEuvres, v. 
308) and Nipp. This Silvanus was prob- 
ably eldest son of M. Plautius, M. f. A. n. 
Silvanus, cos. 752, B.C. 2, and subsequently 
‘triumphalis’ (Dio, 56. 12, 2; C. I. L. 
xiv. 3606, Wilm. 1121) ; who might have 
been son, or his wife Lartia daughter, of 
Urgulania (inferred from her friendship 
with Augusta to have been of considerable 
age). It is also probable that P. Plautius 
Pulcher, quaestor in 784, A.D. 31 (C. I. L. 
xiv. 3607, Or. 723), A. Plautius (13. 32, 
3), Q. Plautius (6. 40, 1), and Ti. Plautius 
Silvanus Aelianus (H. 4. 53, 3) were his 
brothers, and Plautia Urgulanilla (Suet. 
Cl. 26, 27) his sister. 

4. quasi principis monitu, sc. ‘ fac- 
tum.’ ‘Perinde quasi’ is probably here 
alone in Tacitus. In 13. 47, 4, Med. ii 
has ‘proinde.’ Poth are found else- 
where. 

6. Numantina. Borghesi (CEuvres, v. 
309) notes that she was daughter of Q. 

Fabius Numantinus, cos. 744, B.C. 10; 
and, after being divorced from Silvanus, 
had married Sex. Appuleius (1. 7, 1) ; as 
appears from the following inscription 
(Murat. 1133, 9), *(Sex.] Apuleio Sex. f. 
Gal(eria), Sex. n. Sex. pron., Fabia Nu- 
mantina nato ultimo gentis suae. The 
husband alluded to in the charge must, 

however, be Silvanus. 
of this kind tried before the full senate ' 

7. accusata iniecisse: cp. ‘ deferun- 
tur consensisse" 13. 23, 1, and see Introd. 
V. $ 45. ' 

9. longo. It had lasted on and off for 
seven years : Cp. 2. 52, I. 

II. impetrando... sufficere: cp. 3. 
73, 4- . 

res =‘ res gestas.’ 

12, tres... statuae. Express mention 
is made of an award of ‘triumphalia’ to 
Camillus (2. 52, 9) and Blaesus (3. 72, 6). 
Apronius, though not stated (3. 21) to 
have received them for this service, was 
already * triumphalis" (1. 72, 1). 

13. raptabat, ‘was ravaging’; so in 
12. 54, 4; elsewhere only in Stat. Th. 6, 
115. ‘Rapere’ is also so used (13.6, 1) 
after .Vergil, &c. ‘Et’ has the force of 
‘cum,’ as in H. 2. g5, 4, &c.: see on 
I. 65, 5. The construction is Vergilian 
(Aen. 2, 692, &c.) and gives liveliness 
to the narrative. 

14. Ptolemaeo Iubae filio : see on c. 
5,3. He was summoned to Rome and 
there put to death by Gaius in 793, A.D. 
40 (Dio, 59. 25, 1). 

A. D. 24.] LIBER IV. CAP. 22-24. 519 

2 servilia imperia bello mutaverant. erat illi praedarum receptor 
ac socius populandi rex Garamantum, non ut cum exercitu ince- 
deret, sed missis levibus copiis, quae ex longinquo in maius 
audiebantur ; ipsaque e provincia, ut quis fortuna inops, moribus 
turbidus, promptius ruebant, quia Caesar post res a Blaeso gestas. 5 
quasi nullis iam in Africa hostibus, reportari nonam legionem 
iusserat, nec pro consule eius anni P. Dolabella retinere ausus 
erat, iussa principis magis quam incerta belli metuens. 

24. Igitur Tacfarinas disperso rumore rem Romanam aliis 
quoque ab nationibus lacerari eoque paulatim Africa decedere, io 
ac posse reliquos circumveniri, si cuncti quibus libertas servitio 
potior incubuissent, auget vires positisque castris Thubuscum 

2 oppidum circumsidet. at Dolabella contracto quod erat militum, 
terrore nominis Romani et quia Numidae peditum aciem ferre 
nequeunt, primo sui incessu solvit obsidium locqrumque oppor- 13 
tuna permunivit; simul principes Musulamiorum defectionem 

4. fortune: fortunae B, text Halm, Nipp. 

incurioso, absol, as in 6. 17,5; H. ' 

I. 34, 2; more commonly with gen. as 
3.88, 4. The adj. is post- Augustan. 

libertos, &c., * hendiadys ' for ‘liber- 
torum regiorum servilia imperia. 

2. rex Garamantum : see 3. 74, 2 

non ut, &c., ‘not so far as to take 
the field.” The construction is changed 
in the next clause to abl. abs. 

3. in maius audiebantur, ‘which, 
as coming from afar, were magnified by 
rumour. Nipp. has collected many in- 
stances in which ‘audiri’ means ‘to be 
heard of’ (as 2. 68, 2; 82, 4; &c. ; and 
in Cic. and Liv 25 but ‘ in maius audiri ' 
appears to be az. eip. For similar phrases 
see Introd. v. $ 6o b. 

5. & Blaeso: see 3. 73-74. 

6. nonam legionem : see onc. 5, 4. 

7. P. Dolabella: see on 3. 47, 4: 
Nipp. notes that the ‘sors Asiae’ had 
already fallen to two of his juniors (see 
Introd. vii. p. 113). 

8. metuens, taken with ‘i jussa" by 
zeugma, in the sense of ‘ reverencing.’. 

9. Igitur Tacfarinas. For similar 
complicated periods see Introd. v. $ 92. 

disperso rumore: cp. H. 3. 42, 2; 
96, 3; and ‘dispergere,’ with accus. and 
inf. 14. 38, 4; H. 2. 1, 3. 

12. incubuissent, * made an effort’: 
cp. ‘si simul incubuissent c. 73, 3, &C.; 
more commonly with dative. 

Thubuscum. Wilmanns (C. I. L. 

viii. p. 754) takes this place to be Tupu- ° 

suctu (or Tubusuctu), the Tubusuptu of 
Pl. N. H. 5. 2, 1, 21 ce also Ptol. 4. 
2, 31, who gives a similar name near to 
Auzea) ; ; which appears to have been at 
Tiklat, a little S. W. of Saldae (see 
Kiepert's map, in C. I. L. viii. 2), on the 
border, at that time, of Mauretania 
(Introd.. vii. p. 115, n. 8). This would 
show the seat of war to have very con- 
siderably shifted since the last campaign 
(see note on 3. 74, I). 

I5. sui incessu. No. particular em- 

phasis (as in 2. 13, 1; 6. 7, 4, &c.) seems | 

to be here intended by the use of this 
form instead of the possessive pronoun: 
see Introd. v. $ 33a. 

16. simul, &c. The term ‘ defectio’ 
would imply that those who had made 
terms (3. 73, 5) are spoken of. It is 
possible (see note there) that they were 
settled in a different district from that of 

the tribe generally (see on 2. 52, 2), but 

in any case the locality is so far removed 
from that of Thubuscum, to which the 
narrative returps in c. 25, I. that the 
account can only be intelligible by sup- 
posing this chastisement to have been 
inflicted by a separate force. The ex- 
pressions ‘dein’ and ‘nec multo post’ 
suggest that the operations may have 

extended over some considerable time. 

on 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 777. 

 coeptantes securi percutit. dein quia pluribus adversum Tac- 8 
farinatem expeditionibus cognituin, non gravi nec uno incursu 
consectandum hostem vagum, excito cum popularibus rege 
Ptolemaeo quattuor agmina parat, quae legatis aut tribunis data ; 
5et praedatorias manus delecti Maurorum duxere: ipse consultor 

aderat omnibus. 

25. Nec multo post adfertur Numidas apud castellum semi- 

 rutum, ab ipsis quondam incensum, cui nomen Auzea, positis 
mapalibus consedisse, fisos loco, quia vastis circum saltibus clau- 

10 

20 

debatur. 

tum expeditae cohortes alaeque, quam in partem 
ducerentur ignarae, cito agmine rapiuntur. 

simulque coeptus 

dies et concentu tubarum ac truci clamore aderant semisomnos 
in barbaros, praepeditis Numidarum equis aut diversos pastus 
pererrantibus. ab Romanis confertus pedes, dispositae turmae, 
15 cuncta proelio provisa : hostibus contra omnium nesciis non arma, 

non ordo, non consilium, sed pecorum modo trahi, occidi, capi. 
infensus miles memoria laborum et adversum eludentis optatae 4 

totiens pugnae se quisque ultione et sanguine explebant. 

differ- 

tur per manipulos, Tacfarinatem omnes, notum tot proeliis, con- 
sectentur: non nisi duce interfecto: requiem belli fore. at ille 6 

3. recepto leameo (g traceable under c, Andresen p. 7): text B. 

2. non gravi nec uno, ‘not by a 
concentrated attack, nor one in heavy 
marching order.’ 

5. consultor; so used in 6. 10, a, 
and often in Sallust, but by other writers 
(as Cicero) usually of one who asks 
advice. 

7. semirutum, ‘half-levelled’: cp. I. 

No other place of this 
name is identified but the later * colonia 
Auziensis, of which some ruins and in- 
scriptions (cp. Insc. Orell. 529; C. I. L. 
viii. 2, p. 769) have been found at Sour- 
Guzlan or Hamza, at, the north side of 
Jebel Deira near the source of the Adous, 
the site of the’ modern Aumale (see 
Marquardt, i. 488). Such a locality 
is well suited to that of Thubuscum 
(c. 24,1). | 

positis mapalibus: cp. 3. 74, 5. 

1I. simulque... ef: cp. ‘simul haec, 
et" 1. 65, 5. 

12. aderant...in; so *adesse in sena- 
tum’ Cic. Phil. 5. 7, 19, &c. ; not else- 
where in Tacitus; who however has other 

analogous constructions (cp. c. 56, 2; 
Drager, Synt. und Stil, $ 80). 
13. praepeditis, ‘ shackled’ or * hob- 

bled,’ sesobapuévoc (Xen. Cyr. 3. 3, 27). 

14. ab Romanis, ‘on the side of’ (cp. 
11. 33, 1, and note): elsewhere, in this 
sense, Tacitus has ‘apud,’ as 1. 65, I, 
&c.; but the use is analogous to ‘a 
tergo, ‘a fronte,' &c. 

dispositae, ‘stationed at intervals.’ 

Is. provisa: cp. 2.14, 2. | 

16. trahi, occidi, capi, i. e. those who 
were dragged away were slain or made 
prisoners. Cp. a fuller similar description 
in Agr. 37, 2 ‘sequi, vulnerare, capere, 
atque eosdem oblatis aliis trucidare.' 

17. et adversum ... pugnae. This 
genitive is best taken, with Drager, as 
depending on ‘memoria’; the sense being 
that of * memor quotiens pugnam adver- 
sus eludentes optasset.' * Eludere ' is used, 
as in 3. 74, 1; 13. 37, 1, for the fuller 
expression * bellum eludere" (2. 52, 5). 

18. differtur, ‘the word is passed’: cp. 
3. 12, 7. This sense of ‘differre’ is not 
found in Caesar, Cicero, or Sallust. 

3 

5 

A. D. 24.) LIBER IV. CAP. 24-27. 521 

deiectis circum stipatoribus vinctoque iam filio et effusis undi- 
que Romanis, ruendo in tela captivitatem haud inulta morte 
effugit isque finis armis impositus. 
26. Dolabellae petenti abnuit triumphalia Tiberius, Seiano 
2 tribuens, ne Blaesi avunculi eius laus obsolesceret. sed neque 5 
Blaesus ideo inlustrior, et huic negatus honor gloriam intendit: 
quippe minore exercitu insignis captivos, caedem ducis bellique 
8 confecti famam deportarat. sequebantur et Garamantum legati, 
raro in urbe visi, quos Tacfarinate caeso perculsa gens, set culpae 
4 nescia, ad satis faciendum populo Romano miserat. cognitis 1o 
dehinc Ptolemaei per id bellum studiis repetitus ex vetusto more 
honos missusque e senatoribus qui scipidnem 'eburnum, togam 
pictam, antiqua patrum munera, daret regemque et socium atque 
amicum appellaret. | 
27. Eadem aestate mota per Italiam servilis belli semina fors 
oppressit. auctor tumultus T. Curtisius, quondam praetoriae 
cohortis miles, primo coetibus clandestinis apud Brundisium et 

Lal 

1. delectis (cp. 3. 60, 2; c. 51, 4): text J. F.Gron. 2. multa Atext B. «9. et 
culpae: text Halm, ut culpae Müller, non (or nec) culpae nescia, et culpae conscia 
others, 1I.'more omissusque: mos missusque L, text Doed. I5. moti Pluygers. 

16. Curtilius Reines. 

I. deiectis, 'struck down. That 
' deiectus" and * delectus are liable to be 
confused in the MS., is shown by .the 
former being written evidently for the 
latter in c. 44, 3; 48, 4: cp. ‘ prolectae’ 
for ‘ proiectae’ in 3. 65, 4. 

effusis, ‘opening out on all sides’: 
cp. 2. 1I, 3, &c. 

3. armis —* bello’: cp. 3. 55, 1, &c. 

5. tribuens, ‘paying Seianus the 
compliment that his uncle's glory should 
not be effaced’: cp. 3. 73-74. On this 
sense of ‘tribuere’ cp. c. 17, 2; 6. 50, 5, 
&c., and the use of ‘dare’ (1. 7, 10, &c.) 
and ‘ praestare ' (3. 12, 10, &c.). 

neque Blaesus ...et. On this con. 
struction cp. 2. 34, 7. 

7. insignis captivos. Among them 
was the son of Tacfarinas (c. 25, 6). 

8. deportarat, used by zeugma with 
* caedem ducis, in the sense. of * had 
achieved.’ 

9. set culpae nescia. oth this and 
the MS. text (retained by Bait. and Ritt.) 
have been thought to give a statement 
contrary to fact (c. 23, 2) and have been 
altered accordingly. But the people, 

who are here stated to have sent the 
embassy, need not have been cognizant 
of the action of their king; and if they 
had been so, Halm rightly notes that 
* perculsa gens’ would have required no 
addition. 

11. repetitus, ‘ was revived.’ ^ 

ex vetusto more honos missusque. 
This reading is supported by Heraeus 

from c. 16, 2, and 'vetere. ex more’ 

(c. 27, 2), &c. 

12. togam pictam, i.e. ‘triumphalem ’ 
(Pl. N. H. 8. 48, 74, 195). 

13. antiqua...munera. According 
to Livy (30. 15, 11), Masinissa received 
through Scipio the same gifts and a curule 
chair; which was also probably sent to 
Ptolemaeus, as it is represented, with the 
sceptre, on his coins (see Dict. of Biog.). 
Similar gifts were sent to Porsena (Dion. 
Hal. 5. 35), and probably to Ariovistus 
(Caes. B. G. 1. 43, 4). 

I5. mota...semina, ‘the seeds al- 
ready scattered’: cp. 16. 7, 3. 

16. Curtisius; not otherwise known 
asa Roman name. For ‘Curtilius’ cp. 13. 
56, 5, &c. 

en 

522 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C 

circumiecta oppida, mox positis propalam libellis ad libertatem 
vocabat agrestia per longinquos saltus et ferocia servitia, cum 
velut munere deum tres biremes adpulere ad usus commeantium 

illo mari. 

ct erat isdem regionibus Cutius Lupus quaestor, cui 2 
provincia vetere ex more calles evenerant : 

is disposita classiari- 

orum copia coeptantem cum maxime coniurationem disiecit. 
missusque a Caesare propere Staius tribunus cum valida manu 8 
ducem ipsum et proximos audacia in urbem traxit, iam trepidam 
ob multitudinem familiarum, quae gliscebat i inmensum, minore in 

dies plebe ingenua. 

28. Isdem consulibus miseriarum ac saevitiae exemplum atrox, 
reus pater, accusator filius (nomen utrique Vibius Serenus) in 

r 
4. cutius. 

. positis, ‘ published’: cp. r. 7, 5. 

2. longinquos, probably best taken 
as 'remote'; referring to the Apennine 
forests as at some distance from any such 
town as Brundusium. The alternative 
translation ‘extensive’ may perhaps de- 
rive support from the meaning of ‘ lon- 
ginquitas’ in 3. 5, 4; 6. 44, 4. 

3. biremes, *Liburnae, as distinct 
from triremes (App. Ill. 3; Luc. Phars. 
3, 534), from the fleet of Ravenna : see 
Introd. vii. p. 128. These seem to have 
had a naval patrol in the Adriatic for 
the protection or assistance of traffic. 
For the use of * adpellere ' see on 2. 24, 3. 

4. Cutius, a name shown by inscrip- 
tions (Wilm. 1778) to be Roman. 

5. provincia... calles evenerant. 
The quaestorian ‘ provinciae’ in Italy are 
called by Dio (55. 4, 4) an institution of 
Augustus, but are probably connected 
with the institution of four ‘ quaestores 

' classici’ on the conquest of Italy: see on 

II. 22, 8; and Momms. Staatsr. ii. 571. 
One of these *provinciae' is the well- 
known ‘ Ostiensis, which had important 
duties connected with the corn supply of 
Rome (Cic. Mur. 8,18 ; Sest. 17, 39 ; Vell. 
2. 94, 1); another the ‘ Gallica,’ with its 
station perhaps at Ariminum, and extend- 
ing later over 7j wept IIá3ov T'aAaría (Plut. 
Sert. 4). A third was evidently placed in 
South Italy, probably for the supervision 
of the great public grazing lands (see 
Prof. Pelham, Class. Rev. x. 6), but its 
designation is uncertain. Cicero (Att. 2. 
9, I) speaks of a quaestor at Formiae, 
also (in Vatin. 5, 12) of assigning duties 
at Puteoli to one who had by lot an 

5. Cales L. 

euenerat: text Haase. 

‘aquaria provincia’ (see Momms. I. 1.). 
The conjecture of Lipsius, designating 
this province from Cales, is supported 
by Mommsen (1.1.), who thinks that this, 
the oldest Latin colony in Campania, 
may have been, at the time of the con- 
quest of Italy, sufficiently important to 
have been the headquarters of a district 
extending even to Brundisium. The MS. 
text has little to recommend ‘it; for the 
passage in Snet. Jul. 19 (* provinciae 
minimi negotii, hoc est silvae callesque’) 
has no reference to Italian quaestorial 

"districts, or to any one definite locality ; 

but no alternative reading is supported by 
positive evidence. Tacitus speaks of the 
institution as a thing of the past; the 
last remaining of these * provinces, the 
‘Ostiensis’ and ‘Gallica, having been 
abolished by Claudius (Suet. Cl. 24 ; Dio, 
60. 24, 3). 

classiariorum, the marines (émfara) 
from the three biremes. | 

6. iiic egd cum maxime, ' at its 
very outset ' : cp. 3. 59. 4. 

7. Staius. The name ‘M. Staius 
Flaccus! occurs in municipal Fasti of 
this date (Or. 4033). 

tribunus, i.e. of the praetorian guard. 

8. proximos audacia, ‘the next in 
daring’: ‘audaciae’ is read by error in 
old editions. 

9. multitudinem familiarum: cp. 
3- 53, 5- 

inmensum, adverbial: cp. 3. 30, 2, 
&c. 

I3. Vibius Serenus. On the father 
see 2. 30, 1 ; on his banishment, c. 13, 2 
The son is mentioned again in c. 36, 4. 

A. D..24.) LIBER IV. CAP. 27-29. 523 

2 senatum inducti sunt. ab exilio retractus inluvieque ac squalore 
obsitus et tum catena vinctus pater oranti filio comparatur, adu- 
lescens multis munditiis, alacri vultu, structas principi insidias, 
missos in Galliam concitores belli index idem et testis dicebat, 
adnectebatque Caecilium Cornutum praetorium ministravisse 5 
pecuniam ; qui taedio curarum, et quia periculum pro exitio 

3 habebatur, mortem in se festinavit. at contra reus nihil infracto 
animo obversus in filium quatere vincla, vocare ultores deos, ut 
sibi quidem redderent exilium, ubi procul tali more ageret, filium 

4 autem quandoque supplicia sequerentur. adseverabatque inno-. 
centem Cornutum et falso exterritum ; idque facile intellectu, si 
proderentur alii: non enim se caedem principis et res novas uno 

Socio cogitasse. 

29. Tum accusator Cn. Lentulum et Seium Tuberonem nomi- 
nat, magno pudore Caesaris, cum primores civitatis, intimi ipsius 
amici, Lentulus senectutis extremae, Tubero defecto corpore, 
tumultus hostilis et turbandae rei publicae accerserentur. ‘sed hi 
quidem statim exempti: in patrem ex servis quaesitum, et 

2. uinctus peroranti filio praeparatur: text Halm (partly Madvig), pater orante 

filio: praeparatus Baiter. 

1. inluvie ... obsitus: cp. 6. 43, 3; 
apparently suggested by the description 
in Liv. 29. 16, 6 *legati. .. obsiti squa- 
lore et sordibus.' *Inluvies' is rarely 
found in prose before Tacitus. 

2. pater oranti filio comparatur: 
see crit. note. * Comparatur' would be 
a figure from gladiators matched for a 
duel (Cic, Liv., &c.): *praeparatus' 
would be taken with * munditiis.' 

4. in Galliam. The elder Serenus was 
proconsul of Baetica about the time of 
the rebellion. of Sacrovir. 

5. adnectebat; absol, as in 2. 26, 5, 
where a jussive subjunct. follows. 

Caecilium Cornutum, identified by 
Borghesi (1. 463) with M. Caecilius Cor- 
nutus, one of a board *locorum publico- 
rum iudicandorum’ (C. I. L. vi. 1267 
a, b‘, apparently before his praetorship : 
Nipp. thinks him probably also the M. 
Cornutus, one of the ‘Arvales’ in 767 
and 774, A. D. 14 and 21 (Id. 2023 a, b). 

6. periculum pro exitio. This, like 
the expressions in c. 33, 3, is an exaggera- 
tion of the facts at this period. 

10. quandoque: cp. I. 4, 5. 

11. falsa: text Orsini. 

Ir. falso. This reading is supported 
by H. 2. 8, 1, and the analogy of other 
passages (3. 60, 5; 6. 8, 1; 11. 18, 5; 
G. 36, 1). 'Falsa' would be an accus. of 
the class noted in Introd. v. $ 1a d. 

si proderentur alii. Probably ‘ pro- 
derentur’ is ironical. If the names of 
others were ‘divulged,’ they would clear 
themselves, and thus discredit the whole 
charge. 

I2. non enim, &c. This anticipates 
the objection that there might have been 
none to name but Cornutus. 

14. Cn. Lentulum: c. 44,1; 1.27, I. 

Seium Tuberonem : see 2. 20, 2. 

17. accerserentur. The MS. has this 
form here, and ‘arcessebat’ with the same 
construction in 2. 5o, I. The evidence of 

both the Med. MSS. supports both forms : 

see Gerber and Greef, Lex., and Prof. 
Wilkins in Journ. of Philol. vi. 278, foll. 
For the expression cp. 6. 1o, 1. 

18. exempti, ‘were freed from the 
charge.’ Tacitus elsewhere uses this verb, 
in this sense, with a dative, as in 2. 55, 3, 
&c. According to Dio (57. 24, 8), Len- 
tulus laughed aloud at hearing the charge, 

15 Cui vita concederetur. 

524 

quaestio adversa accusatori fuit. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A.U C. 777. 

qui scelere vaecors, simul vulgi 2 

rumore territus, robur et saxum aut parricidarum poenas mini- 

tantium, cessit urbe. 

ac retractus Ravenna exsequi accusatio- 3 

nem adigitur, non occultante Tiberio vetus odium adversum 

5exulem Serenum. 

nàm post damnatum Libonem missis ad 4 

Caesarem litteris exprobraverat suum tantum studium sine fructu 
fuisse, addideratque quaedam contumacius quam tutum apud 
aures superbas et offensioni proniores. ea Caesar octo post annos 5 
rettulit, medium tempus varie arguens, ctiam si tormenta pervi- 

10 Cacia servorum contra evenissent. 

80. Dictis dein sententiis ut Serenus more maiorum puniretur, 

quo molliret invidiam, intercessit. 

Gallus Asinius cu; Gyaro 2 

aut Donusa claudendum censeret, id quoque aspernatus est, 
egenam aquae utramque insulam referens dandosque vitae usus 

12. cum Nipp. ins. here, others before Gallus or censeret. 

Amorcum B, text R. 

and Tiberius said, *I deserve to live no 
longer, if even Lentulus hates me. Dio 
places this case a year later. 

ex servis, probably by the fiction 
mentioned in 2. 30, 3. 

2. rumore : cp. 3. 29, 5, &c. 

robur, the ‘ Tullianum (cp. 3. 50, 1), 
called by this name in Lucr. (3, 1017), 
Hor. (Od. 2. 13, 19), Liv. 138. 59, 10), 
&c. The usual éxplanation given is that 
cited from Paullus (see Orelli and Nipp.), 
*robus quoque in carcere dicitur is locus 

quo praecipitatur maleficorum genus, quod : 

ante arcis robusteis includebatur.' Prof. 
Munro (on Lucr. 1. 1.) notes that some 
. take it to be there the * eculeus.' 

saxum : Cp. 2. 32, 5 

parricidarum poenas. These are 
partly described in a well-known passage 
of Cicero (pro Rosc. Amer. 25, 70), and 
more fully in Dig. 48 .9, 9 ‘ poena parri- 
cidii more maiorum haec instituta est, 
ut parricida virgis sanguineis verberatus, 
deinde culleo insuatur cum cane, gallo 
gallinaceo et vipera et simia : deinde in 
mare profundum culleus iactatur.’ See 
also Juv. 8, 214, and Mayor's note there, 

3. ac, often used at the beginning of 
a sentence, and sometimes where an 
adversative particle might have been ex- 
pected: cp. 14. 64, 1, &c. 

4. adigitur. Tacitus uses this verb 
with inf. only in Ann. (as c. 45, 3; 6. 27, 

ita Serenus Amorgum reportatur.: 

15. amor cum: 

3: 41,1, &c.), after poets: cp. Verg. Aen. 
6, 696, &c. 

6. suum tantum studium, ‘that 
only his own zeal was unrewarded. On 
the rewards then given see 2. 32, 1. That 
Vibius was praetor not later than 770, 
A. D. 17, would follow from his having 
been proconsul of Spain five years after 
that date; whence Nipp. suggests that 
he may have had nothing to gain by the 

_ decree made in favour ofthe other accusers. 

7. &pud aures: see note on I. 31, 5. 

9. varie arguens, ' bringing various 
charges respecting the interval.' 

etiam si, &c., ‘though, through the 
obstinacy of the slaves, the torture had 
ended in failure.' 

II. more maiorum : cp. ‘more prisco ' 
2. 32, 5. 

12. Gyaro aut Donusa. On the 
former see 3. 68, 2.  Donysa, either the 
modern Stenosa, east of Naxos, or He- 
raclia. between Naxos and Ios, is no 
larger than Gyaros, and is not apparently 
known as even inhabited, but is called 
‘viridis’ by Vergil (Aen. 3, 125). 

14. vitae usus, not here parallel to 
* mortis usus? (1. 7o, 6), but apparently 
for the concrete ‘ utensilia.' 

I5. Amorgum reportatur. He was 
evidently that enemy of Seianus who was 
pardoned and released just before the fall 
of the latter: see Dio, 58. 8, 3. 

et 3 

A. D. 24.] LIBER IV. 

CAP. 29-31. 

525 

quia Cornutus sua manu ceciderat, actum de praemiis accusa- 
torum abolendis, si quis maiestatis postulatus ante perfectum 

4 iudicium se ipse vita privavisset. 

ibaturque in eam sententiam, 

ni durius contraque morem suum palam pro accusatoribus Caesar 
inritas leges, rem publicam in praecipiti conquestus esset: sub- 
5 verterent potius iura quam custodes eorum amoverent. sic dela- 
tores, genus hominum publico exitio repertum et ze poenis qui- 
dem umquam satis coercitum, per praemia eliciebantur. 

31, His tam adsiduis tamque maestis modica laetitia inter- 
icitur, quod C. Cominium equitem Romanum, probrosi in se 
carminis convictum, Caesar precibus fratris, qui senator erat, 
2 concessit quo magis mirum habebatur gnarum meliorum, et 

8 quae fama clementiam sequeretur, tristiora malle. 

neque enim 

socordia peccabat ; nec occultum est, quando ex veritate, quando 

4 adumbrata laetitia facta imperatorum celebrentur. 

quin ipse, 

conpositus alias et velut eluctantium verborum, solutius promp- 
5 tiusque eloquebatur, quotiens subveniret. at P. Suillium quaes- 

7. ne ins. Bekker, poenis quidem numquam margin and B. 

I. de praem'!is.... abolendis. We 
gather that these were paid, though the 
whole property was usually in such cases 
not confiscated: cp. c. 20, 3; 6. 29, 2. 

3. ibatur: cp. ‘itum in sententiam *. 
3. 33, 2. The imperf. expresses what was 
on the point of happening. 

. 4. contraque . . . palam, ‘with un- 
usual openness.' 

5. inritas, sc. fore, — . 

in praecipiti, *at the brink of a 
precipice’: cp. * praecipitia’ 2. 39, 3. 

6. custodes. 'l'he informers are called 
* custodes ' in 3. 28, 4, in a somewhat dif- 
ferent sense. s | 

7. exitio, generally taken as dat, 
but by Nipp. as modal abl. : cp. c. 1, 3. 

ne poenis quidem. The sentiment 
is that of Domitian in his best period, 
* princeps, qui delatores non castigat, 
irritat' (Suet. Dom. 9). 

10. probrosi...carminis: cp. I4. 48, 
I; I5. 49, 5; 16. 14, I. 
Tiberius are mentioned in 1. 72, 5: 

1I. fratris, qui senator erat. Borghesi 
(ii. 153) shows that this is probably the 
T. Cominius, T. f, Po(llia), Proculus, 
who was under Claüdius proconsul of 
Cyprus, where his name is recorded on 
coins (Mionn. iii. 671). 

Such attacks on - 

12. concessit: cp. 2. 53, 3. Prob- 
ably he vetoed the sentence of condem- 
nation. 

narum, here constructed with a 
genitive and afterwards with a relative 
clause: cp. Introd. v. § 91, 8. 

I4. socordia, ‘from thoughtlessness ': 
cp. ‘socors’ c. 39, 1. The abl. is causal. 

16. conpositus, ‘ artificial.’ When used 
of persons and not, as more usually, of 
their look or manner (1. 7, 2, &c.), this 
word has generally an abl. of respect 
(as 2. 34, 6) or accus. with ‘in’ or ‘ad’ (as 
3- 44, 4) to explain it. 

velut eluctantium verborum, ‘ with 
words seeming to struggle for utter- 
ance’; genit. of quality. 

_ solutius, ‘with less restraint’: cp. 
* dicta factaque . . . solutiora’ 16. 18, 2. 

17. P. Suillium, surnamed Rufus. His 
mother Vistilia was also, by other hus- 
bands, mother of Corbulo and of Cae- 
sonia, wife of Gaius (Pl. N. H. 7. 5, 4, 
39). Ovid addresses an Epistle (ex P. 4. 
8) to Suillius, who had married his 
step-daughter (I. l. v. 11, 90). He may 
have been ‘quaestor consulis! (see on 
16. 34, 1) to Germanicus, or have ac- 
companied him in his *proconsulaie 
imperium’ (Staatsr. ii. 568, n. 3). 

en 

10 

15 populi Romani res conposuere. 

526 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A.U. C. 777. 

torem quondam Germanici, cum Italia arceretur convictus pecu- 
niam ob rem iudicandam cepisse, amovendum in insulam censuit, 
tanta contentione animi, ut iure iurando obstringeret e re publica 
id esse. quod aspere acceptum ad praesens mox in laudem 

vertit regresso Suillio; quem vidit sequens aetas praepotentem, 
venalem et Claudii principis amicitia diu prospere, numquam bene 
eadem poena in Catum Firmium senatorem statuitur, 

usum. 

tamquam falsis maiestatis criminibus sororem petivisset. 

Catus, 

ut rettuli, Libonem inlexerat insidiis, deinde indicio perculerat. 
eius operae memor Tiberius, sed alia praetendens, exilium depre- 
catus est: quo minus senatu pelleretur non obstitit. 

32. Pleraque eorum, quae rettuli quaeque referam, parva for- 

sitan et levia memoratu videri non nescius sum: 

sed nemo 

annales nostros cum scriptura eorum contenderit, qui veteres 

ingentia illi bella, expugna- 

tiones urbium, fusos captosque reges, aut si quando ad interna 
praeverterent, discordias consulum adversum tribunos, agrarias 

3. uteiurando: ut et inrando margin and B, text Ritt., perhaps ut et iureiurando 

Halm. 
text B. 

9. iudicio: text Vertran. 

I. &rceretur =‘arcendus censeretur': 
cp. c. 20,2; 3.23,2, &c. This would 
be far less severe than the * deportatio in 
insulam." 

convietus...cepisse. This constr. 
is found in 13. 44, 7; Sall. Cat. 52, 36; 
Liv. 45, 10, 14, &c. (cp. Introd. v. § 45). 
* Capere ' is the regular term for receiving 
money as a bribe: cp. 3. 67, 3; 6. 30, 
1; Cic., &c. 

2. ob rem iudicandam. Cic. uses the 
same formula in describing this offence 
(Verr. 2. 2, 32, 78). 

amovendum in insulam : cp. c. 13, 2. 

3. ut iure iurando obstringeret: on 
the construction cp. I. 14, 6; and on the 
practice of voting on oath, c. 21, 5; 
1. 74, 5. lt appears from Pl. Epp. 5. 13 
(14), 4, that one senator could require 
another to swear ‘e republica esse quod 
censuisset.' 

4. aspere acceptum, ‘received with 
indignation’; so H. 56, 5, also 
*accipere aliquid mollius? (2. 30, 2), 
* excusatius (3. 68, 1), ‘Jaetius’ (6. 10, 2), 
* sinistre" (H. 1. 7, 3), ‘atrocius’ (H. 1. 
23, 2), ‘grate’ (H. 1. 85, 1), &c. 

5. sequens aetas. He was cos. suff. 
in or before 799, A. D. 46, and is further 

14. veteris Freinsh. 
17. perhaps praeverterentur Nipp. 

I5. cópossiuere : 

mentioned I1. 1; 4; 5; I3. 42-43. 

8. tamquam : cp. c. 13, 3. 

9. ut rettuli: 2. 27, 2. | 

II. quo minus senatu pelleretur. On 
the power of the senate, when acting judi- 
cially, to expel its own members, cp. 12. 
59, 45 13. 11, 2; 14. 59, 6; Staatsr. ii. 
946. On expulsion by the princeps see 
2. 48, 3, &c. 

13. levia memoratu ; so ‘ vix credibile 
memoratu! H. 2. 73, 1: cp. ‘dignum 
memoratu" Liv. 4. 43, I. 

14. annales nostros: cp. 3. 65, 1. On 
the application of this title to this work 
of Tacitus, see Introd. i. p. 6. ü 

scriptura: cp. 3. 3, 2. 

contenderit — * comparaverit'; so in 

12. I, 2; I3. 3, 3; and in Cic., &c. On 
the tense cp. Introd. v. § 51 c. 
veteres p. RH. res: cp. rx. I, 4; 

from which it would appear that such 
an expression includes the whole period 
down to the time of Actium. 

I5. conposuere: cp. ‘res... compo- 
sitae' 1. 1, 5. The MS. seems to show 
trace of an archaic form * conposivere.’ 

I7. praeverterent. The deponent 
appears elsewhere to be always used in 
this phrase: cp. 2. 55, 6. 

6 

7 

A.D. 24.] LIBER IV. 

CAP. 31-33. 527 

frumentariasque leges, plebis et optimatium certamina libero 
3 egressu memorabant: nobis in arto et inglorius labor; immota 
quippe aut modice lacessita pax, maestae urbis res et princeps 

4 proferendi imperi incuriosus crat. 

non tamen sine usu fuerit 

introspicere illa primo aspectu levia, ex quis magnarum saepe 

rerum motus oriuntur. 

33. Nam cunctas nationes et urbes populus aut primores aut 
singuli regunt: delecta ex iis et consociata rei publicae forma 
laudari facilius quam evenire, vel si evenit, haud diuturna esse 

2 potest. 

igitur ut olim plebe valida, vel cum patres pollerent, 

noscenda vulgi natura et quibus modis temperanter habere- 
tur, senatusque et optimatium ingenia qui maxime  perdi- 
dicerant, callidi temporum et sapientes credebantur, sic converso 

8. consciata: constituta B, text Em. 

I. libero egressu, evidently in contrast 

to * in arto,' and generally taken to mean 
‘with room to expatiate’; great events 

giving scope for grandeur of style. In 
Quint. 4. 3, 12, ‘egressus’ means ‘ di- 
gression, and might have this meaning 
here, but perhaps the words are better 
taken in the sense of ‘with freedom to 
escape. Their main theme was the 
foreign history; to treat of domestic 
affairs occasionally was matter of choice ; 
they were not tied to them, from having 
no other subject, like Tacitus. 

2. in arto, ‘in a restricted field.’ 
In the similar expression ‘in tenui 
labor’ (Verg. G. 4, 6), the thought is 
rather of the thing on which the toil is 
spent. The sense in H. 3. 13, 2 
different. . 

4. incuriosus, with gen. in 2. 88, 4, 
and Gell. On the point of view from 
which this foreign policy is regarded, see 
Introd. viii. p. 138. 

5. Magnarum...rerum motus ori- 
untur, ‘ great events are set in motion.’ 
Compare the sentiment of Livy (27. 9, 1), 
‘ex parvis rebus saepe magnarum mo- 
menta pendent’; and that of Aristotle 
(Pol. 5. 4 1), yaoovrot di oraces 
ov mepi pukpüv GX éx puepüv. The ex- 
pression used by Tacitus shows that this 
distinction had not escaped him. 

7. Nam, &c. The thought is that, 
under whichever of the possible forms of 
government you live, political sagacity 
implies a study of the character of the 
sovereign power. 

8. delecta, &c. Such a government 
was the ideal of Polybius (6. 3, 7), 
and of Cicero, who says ‘ quartum quod- 
dam genus maxime probandum censeo 
quod ex his quae prima dixi moderatum 

et permixtum tribus' (de Rep. 1. 29, 
45: Cp. 35, 54i 45. 69; 2. 23, 41). 
Polybius further (6. 11, 6) finds the 

nearest realization of such an ideal in the 
Roman constitution at his time. Tacitus 
need not be supposed to de..y that most 
stable constitutions have been more or 
less mixed; but only to assert that an 
ideal equilibrium is impossible. He 
would consider the Roman government 

to have been not so much at any one. 

time a combination of all three forms, as at 
different times an exemplification of each. 

9. laudari, sc. * potest,’ supplied from 
* haud potest.’ 

II. noscenda vulgi natura. This is 
best taken as nom., with ‘erat’ supplied, 
and ‘noscendum’ again supplied with 
* quibus ... haberetur ' 
cunia ... utque" I, rs, 4. 

teinperanter haberetur, ‘might be 
discreetly controlled On the adverb 
see on 15. 29, 2; on * haberi ' I. 54, 4 

12. senatusque, &c. This sentence 
answers to * cum patres pollerent, as the 
one before it to * plebe valida'; the form 
of expression being as if the former sen- 
tence had run ‘qui. . . cognoverant, &c. 

I3. callidi temporum: such a con- 
struction, analogous to that of ‘ peritus," 
occurs in H. 2. 32, 1; also in Colum. 
2. 2, 1, &c.: cp. Introd. v. $ 33e, a 

: cp. * decreta pe- . 

528 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 778. 

statu neque alia re Romana quam si unus imperitet, haec con- 
quiri tradique in rem fuerit, quia pauci prudentia honesta ab 
deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis discernunt, plures aliorum eventis 

docentur. 
5 adferunt. 

exitus retinent ac redintegrant legentium animum: nos saeva 
iussa, continuas accusationes, fallaces amicitias, perniciem inno- 
centium et casdem exitu causas coniungimus, obvia rerum simili- 

tudine et satietate. 

tum quod antiquis scriptoribus rarus obtrec- 

tator, neque refert cuiusquam Punicas Romanasne acies laetius 
extuleris: at multorum, qui Tiberio regente poenam vel infamias 

1. rerum: text L. 8. exitii Pich. 

so Halm, text Nipp. 

I. neque alia, &c., ‘being a virtual 
monarchy.’ The constitution under the 

principate was not formally monarchical: 

see Introd. vi. pp. 95-98. 

haec, i.e. ‘quae rettuli quaeque re- 
feram’; such small occurrences, illus- 
‘trating the character of the princeps and 
the senate. | 

3. in rem fuerit, ‘may have been 
useful.” ‘In rem’ is thus used in H. 3. 
8, 1, and often in Plaut , Sall, Liv., &c. 
The utility of history as a political guide 
is similarly described in Thuc. 1. 22, 4. 

3. eventis, ‘the experiences.’ The 
word occurs here alone in Tacitus; lut 
Cic. thus uses * eventa nostra’ (Fam. 1. 7, 
9: 5.12, 6) and ‘alterius’ (Tusc. 5. 12, 
36): cp. ‘ex aliorum eventis . . . pro- 
videre* (Auct. ad Her. 4. 9, 13). 

4. ut... ita: cp. I. 12, 1 and note. 

5. situs, the geography: cp. ‘ Britan- 
niae situm" Agr. Io, I. 

varietates, ‘vicissitudes’; so ‘varie- 
tates annonae’ (Liv. 7. 31, 1). 

6. exitus, ‘deaths’; asin I. Io, 2, &c. 

redintegrant, ‘refresh’: cp. ‘co- 
lumbae . . . aére redintegrentur' (Varr. 
R. R. 3. 7, 6). . 

_ 8. easdem exitu causas. This text 
must be taken to mean ‘causas eundeni 
exitum habentes,' i.e. ‘always resulting 
in condenination.' The statement, though 
an exaggeration of the facts, would agree 
with that in c. 28, 3; but the construction 
is harsh, and there is much to be said for 
the emendation 'easdem exitii causas.' 
The expression would be Tacitean (cp. 
€. 52, 5; 58, 2, &c.), and the sameness 
here referred 10 would be the constant 
jealousy, fear, or avarice of princes. 

9. tumque Ritt. . 10. Romanasue: 

coniungimus, 'string together. The 
verb is somewhat similarly used of 
narrating events continuously in 6. 38, 1; 
12. 40, 8; 13. 9, 6. 

ceterum ut profutura, ita minimum oblectationis 3 
nam situs gentium, varietates proeliorum, clari ducum 

4 

obvia, ‘forcing itself upon notice.’ . 

Nipp. compares *obvia ostentatione" 
(Pl. Epp. 1. 8, 17). 
9. tum quod. The explanation of this 

passage by Joh. Müller (Beitr. sect. 3, 

pp. 46-51) is now adopted by Nipp.;. 

namely, that this clause must be referred 
back to the beginning of the digression 
in c. 32: one of the causes why this work 
is not to be compared to those of the 
old historians having there been given 

(* ingentia illi bella . . . incuriosus erat’); - 

the second being here introduced, but 
with ‘dn anacoluthon, as if the former 
passage had begun ‘primum quod in- 
gentia, &c. But it seems on the whole 

less difficult to understand * tum. quod” . 

(=‘huc accedit quod’) with Doed. as 
giving another reason for ‘minimum 
oblectationis adferunt, His book will 
not please; firstly, owing to the weari- 
some monotony of its subjects, secondly, 
because many readers will take personal 
offence at the mention of individuals, or 
of particular qualities. 

10. Romanasne. This correction seems 
required, as it is a question between 
alternatives (in Hor. Sat. 1. 2, 63, 76, 
*-ne' appears to be now generally read). 
See note on 6. 23, 1; Drager, Synt. u. Stil, 
$ 131. 

II. regente, used thus of a princeps 
in 13. 3, 1. 

poenam velinfamias. Nipp. draws 
a distinction here between the singular 

‘and plural; but they are often inter- 

2 ultimum dixisset. 

A. D. a5.] LIBER IV. 

5 subiere, posteri manent. 

CAP. 33, 34- 529 

utque familiae ipsae iam extinctae sint, 

reperies qui ob similitudinem morum aliena malefacta sibi obiec- 

6 tari putent. 
propinquo diversa arguens. 

etiam gloria ac virtus infensos habet, ut nimis ex 
sed ad inceptum redeo. 

| 84. Cornelio Cosso Asinio Agrippa consulibus Cremutius 5 
Cordus postulatur, novo ac tunc primum audito crimine, quod 
editis annalibus laudatoque M. Bruto C. Cassium Romanorum 

accusabant 

2. reperias Madv. : cp. 6. 22, 2. 3. 

incepta B, text Halm. 

changed in Tacitus without apparent dif- 
ference (cp. Introd. v. § 2; also * visum 
. auditus’ 13. 5, 2). The plural *in- 
famiae' occurs in Plaut. Pers. 3. I, 19, 
and is used by Tacitus analogously to 
* audaciae (1. 74, 1), * iracundias ' (14. 4, 
2), &c. A full list of his abstract plurals 
is given by Drager (Synt. und Stil, § 2). 

I. utque, ‘and though’: cp. 3. 40, 
6, Gudeman on Dial. 9, 19. 

2. sibi obiectari, i.e. will think the men- 
tion of another's crimes pointed at them. 

3. ut... arguens, *asconvicting from 
too close a contrast the opposite qualities.’ 
The same sense of shame is not felt at 
a picture of ‘ prisca virtus.' 

4. ad inceptum. *Inceptum' is thus 
used elsewhere by Tacitus (6. 22, 6), and 
in Sall. Cat. 7, 7; Jug. 4, 9; 42, 5. The 
two latter places have the same expression 
as that read here. 

5. Cornelio Cosso, &c. The full names 
can be supplied from Dio (Argum. to B. 
57) as 'Cossus Cornelius Cossi f. Lentu- 
lus? and * M. Asinius M. f. (should be 
C. f) Agrippa. The former is an elder 
brother of Lentulus Gaetulicus (see on c. 
42, 3), the latter (see on c. 61, 1) one of 
the sons of Asinius Gallus and Vipsania. 

Cremutius Cordus. Dio (57. 24. 
2) states that he was an old man and had 
lived a blameless life. The treatise (* de 
consolatione^) addressed to his daughter 
Marcia by L. Seneca adds more paiticu- 
lars, and ascribes this prosecution to the 
offence of Seianus at his sharp sayings; 
for one of which see on 3. 72, 5. 

6. tunc primum audito, He glances 
at similar charges entertained by Do- 
mitian, who put to death Aruienus 
Rusticus and Herennius Senecio for praise 
of Thrasea and Helvidius Priscus: see 
Agr. 2, 2. 

7. editis annalibus: ‘editis’ and 

VOL. I. 

Satrius Secundus et Pinarius 

animis : nimis Mur. 4. ancepto : ad 

* Jaudato' are aorists. Cordus had written 

‘the history of his own generation only, 

‘unius saeculi facta’ (Sen. Cons. ad 
Marc. 26, 5), and had probably not car- 
ried it beyond the death of Augustus. 
It seems implied that it was only now 
published; whereas Dio (1.1) and Sue. 
tonius (Tib. 61) assert that the work 
was read by or to Augustus without 
disapproval. Tacitus is not likely to 
have been ignorant of this statement, or 
to have omitted it, had he believed it; 
nor is it probable that such a passage as 
that referred to in Suet. Aug. 35 was read 
to Augustus; and to say that selections 
had been read to him would prove no- 
thing. <A few sentences are given by M. 
Seneca (Suas. 6, 19) from his laudatión of 
Cicero, which is hardly considered worthy 
of him (Id. 28). 

Romanorum ultimum. Cordus had 
doubtless quoted with approval the words 
used by Brutus himself upon the death of 
Cassius (Plut. Brut. 44, 1005; App. B. C. 
4. 114). Ifhe had spoken in his own per- 
son he would doubtless have also included 
Brutus himself in the expression, which 

_ Suetonius (1. 1.) represents him as doing. 

Philopoemen has been thus called *the 
last of the Greeks’ (Plut. Philop. 1). 

. 8. Batrius Secundus: cp. 6. 8, 10; 
47, 2. Seneca says to Marcia (1.1. 22, 4) 
* Seianus patrem tuum clienti suo Satrio 
Secundo congiarium dedit. 

Pinarius Natta, mentioned in Sen. 
Ep. 122, 11r. The family was old and 
noble (Cic. de Div. 2. 21, 47, &c.), and 
several references to them are collected 
by Borghesi (v. 311: see Nipp. here). 
An inscription (C. I. L. x. 1129) mentions 
one L. Pinarius L. f. Natta, who had 
filled various offices and magistracies up 
to that of aedile, and who may be the 
person here mentioned. 

M m 

539 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 778. 

Natta, Seiani clientes. id perniciabile reo, et Caesar truci vultu 
defensionem accipiens, quam Cremutius, relinquendae vitae certus, 
in hunc modum exorsus est : ‘ verba mea, patres conscripti, argu- 

untur: adeo factorum innocens sum. 

sed neque haec in princi- 8 

5 pem aut principis parentem, quos lex maiestatis amplectitur : 
Brutum et Cassium laudavisse dicor, quorum res gestas cum 

plurimi composuerint, nemo sine honore memoravit. 

Livius, eloquentiae ac fidei praeclarus in primis, Cn. Pompeium 
tantis laudibus tulit, ut Pompeianum eum Augustus appellaret ; 

neque id amicitiae eorum offecit. 

Scipionem, Afranium, hunc 5 

ipsum Cassium, hunc Brutum nusquam latrones et parricidas, 
quae nunc vocabula inponuntur, saepe ut insignis viros nominat. 
Asinii Pollionis scripta egregiam eorundem memoriam tradunt ; 
Messalla Corvinus imperatorem suum Cassium praedicabat: et 

2. accipiens: cp. the use of ‘tegens’ 
(c. 12, 2). 

certus, ‘resolved upon.’ Such an ap- 
plication of this word to persons, whether 
used (as here and in 12. 66, 2; H. 4. 14, 
I) with the genit. or (as in c. 57, 1) with 
the inf., appears first in Vergil (e. g. Aen. 
4, 554, 504). 

4. neque haeo: cp. c. 26, 2; 2. 
in principem, &c., sc. ‘dicta argu- 
untur| ‘Parentem’ may mean Augustus, 
as would appear from 2. 50, 3; but that 
passage would also suggest that a libel 
on Augusta fell within the law, which 
probably extended to the family gene- 
rally (see 6. 5, I; 9, 3; &c.), the other 
members of which are perhaps here 
omitted from mention on account of their 
youth. | 

7. composuerint: cp. I. I, 5. 

nemo....memoravit. The object 
has to be supplied from ‘quorum,’ as if 
the sentence had run * quos, quum eorum, 
&c. It is noticed that even Velleius 
(2. 72, &c.) speaks of them with consider- 
able respect. 

8. fidei. Nipp. takes this here to mean 
‘impartiality’ or *candour, M. Seneca 
(Suas. 6, 22) speaks of Livy as ‘candi- 
dissimus omnium magnorum ingeniorum 
aestimator. The genitive with ‘prae- 
clarus, though not elsewhere found, is 
analogous to many others (Introd. v. 
$ 34 e y). 

9. Pompeianum. On this name see 
I. IO, I, &c. 

IO. Scipionem, Afranium. Q. Caeci- 

lius Metellus Pius Scipio was father-in- 
law to Pompeius and his colleague in 
part of his third consulship in 702, B.C. 
&2. L. Afranius was cos. in 694, B.C. 
60, and legatus of Pompeius in Spain. 
Scipio committed suicide and Afranius 
was killed, shortly after their defeat at 
Thapsus in 708, B.C. 46. | 

II. parricidas. Valerius Maximus 
uses this term of Brutus (1. 5, 7, &c), of 
Cassius (1. 8, 8), and of the conspirators 
in general (r. 6, 13, &c.): cp. Florus, 
4-7, I. 

12. ut insignis viros, ‘as one would 
speak of distinguished men.’ 

13. Pollionis scripta. According to 
Suidas (s. v. 'Acívios IlwAAiwv) the history 
of Pollio consisted of seventeen books. It 
began from 694, B.C. 60 (Hor. Od. 2. 1, 
1), and is cited by Priscian (see Nipp.) as 
mentioning an event as late as 742, B.C. 
I2, but the regular narrative is thought 
not to have gone down so far. A passage 
on the character of Cicero is preserved in 
M. Sen. Suas. 6, 24. See Suet. Caes. 
30, 55, 56; de Gramm. 10; Val. Max. 
8. 13, ext. 4; App. B. C. 2. 82; Plut. 
Caes. 46. | 

14. Messalla Corvinus. His history 
of the wars after Julius Caesar's death is 
cited by Plutarch (Brut. 40, 1004; 45, 
1oos, &c.) and by Suetonius (Aug. 74); _ 
but the tense of ‘praedicabat’ points 
rather to habitual expressions in conver- 
sation. He was next in command under 
Brutus and Cassius in the campaign of 
Philippi (Vell. 2. 71, 1). 

Titus 4 

A. D. 25.] 

7 uterque opibus atque honoribus perviguere. 

LIBER IV. CAP. 34, 35. 

531 

libro, quo Catonem caelo aequavit, quid aliud dictator Caesar 
8 quam rescripta oratione, velut apud iudices, respondit? Antonii 
epistulae, Bruti contiones falsa quidem in Augustum probra, set 

multa cum acerbitate habent ; carmina Bibaculi et Catulli referta 5 

contumeliis Caesarum leguntur: sed ipse divus Iulius, ipse divus 
Augustus et tulere ista et reliquere, haud facile dixerim, modera- 
tione magis an sapientia. namque spreta exolescunt: si irascare, 

adgnita videntur. 

35. ‘Non attingo Graecos, quorum non modo libertas, etiam 

2 libido impunita; aut si quis advertit, dictis dicta ultus est. 

sed 

maxime solutum et sine obtrectatore fuit prodere de iis, quos 

3 mors odio aut gratiae exemisset. 

num enim armatis Cassio. et 

Bruto ac Philippenses campos optinentibus belli civilis causa 

1. opibusque atque: text Acid. , opibus aeque atque Doed. 

13. eum: cum B, enim Halm. 

I. opibus atque. Nipp. with some 
hesitation retains the MS. text. Such a 
combination of conjunctions is elsewhere 
found (cp. c. 3, 4); but the juxtaposition 
of three words ending in ‘que,’ with 
vowels following, would be most inhar- 
monious. 

perviguere, ‘ prospered to the end of 
life’ (dz. elp.). 

Ciceronis libro. To this treatise, 
entitled ‘Cato’ (Cic. Att. 13. 46, 2; Gell. 
13. 19), Caesar replied in ‘an * Anticato 
(Plut. Caes. 54, 733; Gell. 4. 16), con- 
sisting of two books (Suet. Jul. 56; Juv. 
6, 338) ; which we here gather to have 
been in the form of speeches. 

2. quid aliud. - quam. Nipp. notes 
that * nihil aliud quam ' and similar ex- 
. pressions are used brachylogically, with 
such a meaning as ‘ only,’ as in 13. 40, 6; 
H. 2. 91, 4 : cp. also ‘ nihil amplius quam 
vendidit! M. Sen. Contr. 34, 4, ‘nihil 
amplius quam monuit’ Suet. Claud. 16. 

dictator Caesar. Nipp. thinks this 
expression is chosen, rather than the more 
usual ‘Divus Iulius, to lay stress on 
Caesar’s power at the time. 

3. Antonii epistulae. Suetonius re- 

fers to these (Aug. 7,63) and quotes from: 

them (Id. 16, 69). A more public letter 
is preserved in Cic. Phil. 13. 10, 22, sqq. 
4. Bruti contiones. It is implied 
that these were still before the public. 
5. habent, ‘contain’: see Gudeman 
on Dial. 30, 13. 

7. relinquere: text B. 

Bibaculi, M. Furius Bibaculus, born, 
according to Jerome, in 655, B.C. 99, 
but probably later, at Cremona.  Quinti- 
lian (10. 1, 96) and Diomedes (see Nipp.) 
name him with such iambographers as 
Lucilius, Catullus, and Horace; but this 
estimate is hardly borne out by the few 
fragments preserved (Suet. de Gramm. 9, 
11); and his heroics appear to have been 
turgid (Hor. Sat. 1. 10, 36; 2. 5, 41). 

Catulli. The poems referred to are 
29, 54, 57, 95. On the treatment of him 

y Caesar see Suet. Jul. 73. 

6. Caesarum, 'Iulii et Augusti, Ca- 
tullus alludes only to the former, and 
probably died soon after 707, B.C. 47; 
Bibaculus may have libelled Augustus. 

7. reliquere, 'left them alone.' 

9. &dgnita, ‘admitted to be true’: 
so *adgnoscere crimen! 6. 8, 2; H. 3. 
75» 4- 

Io. Non attingo, ‘I do not mention’: 
cp. ' seditionem attigit" I. 35, I. 

etiam, without *sed': cp. 3. 19, 2, 
and note on I. 77, I 

II. advertit, absol. ; as in 3. 52, 2, &c. 

I2. solutum. The full expression *so- 
lutum poena’ is found in 14. 28, 3. The 
meaning resembles that in c. 31, 4. 

I3. num ... an. The first alternative 
is assumed to be negatived and the latter 
affirmed: cp. ‘numquid duas habetis pa- 
trias? an est una illa patria communis?’ 
(Cic. Legg. 2, 2). 

M m 2 

bed 

Marci Ciceronis , 

9 

532 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM | (A.U.C. 778. 

populum per contiones incendo? an illi quidem septuagensimum 
ante annum peremti, quo modo imaginibus suis noscuntur, quas 
.ne victor quidem abolevit, sic partem memoriae apud scriptores 
retinent? suum cuique decus posteritas rependit; nec deerunt, 4 
5 si damnatio ingruit, qui non modo Cassii et Bruti set etiam mei 
meminerint. egressus dein senatu vitam abstinentia finivit. 5 
libros per aediles. cremandos censuere patres: set manserunt, 
occultati et editi. quo magis socordiam eorum inridere libet, 8 
qui praesenti potentia credunt extingui posse etiam sequentis 
19 aevi memoriam. nam contra punitis ingeniis gliscit auctoritas, 7 
neque aliud externi reges aut qui eadem saevitia usi sunt, nisi 

dedecus sibi atque illis gloriam peperere. 
36. Ceterum postulandis reis tam continuus annus fuit, ut 
feriarum Latinarum diebus praefectum urbis Drusum, auspicandi 

3. nec : ne J. F. Gron. 
[etiam] Ritt. — 7. et: sed L. 

I. septuagensimum, a round number 
for the sixty-sixth year. 

2. quo modo, used by Tacitus in such 
clauses oftener than ‘quem ad modum’ 

(3. 54, 6) :.cp. c. 70,6; 14. 54, 3, &c.,- 

Gudeman on Dial. 36, 32, Heráus on H. 
3. 77» 22. 

imaginibus suis. Besides their pre- 
servation in families (see on 3. 76, 5), 
we hear of a bronze statue of Brutus pre- 
served at Mediolanum by order of Augus- 
tus (Plut. comp. Dionis cum Bruto, 5). 
A few busts, and several of his coins exist, 
some of which bear his head; others, as 
also those of Cassius, have such inscrip- 
tions as ‘ Libertas,’ * Eid. Mart,’ and ap- 
propriate symbols: see Dio, 47. 25, 3; 

Cohen, i. pp. 26-29; Bernoulli, i. pl. xix, - 

and Coins, pl. iii. 

noscuntur = ‘adgnoscuntur’; so 
* nosco crines,’ &c. (Verg. Aen. 6, 810): 
cp. 2. 28, I. 

3. ne , -. quidem. * Nec. ..quidem' 
is generally rejected here and in 14. 35, 
2; also, though with less certainty, in 
H. 4. 38; 2. 

4. rependit. ‘Rependunt’ is prob- 
ably an assimilation to * deerunt? ; * pos- 
teritas, however equivalent to * posteri’ 
(cp. 3. 19, 3; H. r. 1, 2; Agr. 46, 4) 
not appearing to be anywhere used with 
a plural verb. | 

6. vitam abstinentia finivit. Seneca 
(Cons. ad Marc. 22, 6) gives a touching 

it 
4. rependunt. 

5. sedet etiam: sed etiam B, sed et 

account of his concealment of his purpose 
from his daughter Marcia till the fourth 
day, and describes the disappointment of 
the accusers at finding their prey had 
escaped them. 

7. libros, &c. M. Seneca (Praef. Con- 
trov. Lib. 10, 5) speaks of this penalty as 
first devised against T. Labienus, probably 
in 765, A.D. 12 (Dio, 56. 37, 1). This 
duty appears to have been considered to 
belong to the aediles in virtue of their 
‘cura urbis’ (Introd. vi. p. 90), but to 
have been delegated by them to the ‘tres- 
viri capitales" (Agr. 2, I). 

8. occultati, &c. Their preservation 
was due to Marcia (Sen. 1. 1. 1, 3), and 
their publication, as also that. of the works 
of T. Labienus and Cassius Severus (c. . 
21), permitted by Gaius (Suet. Cal. 16). 

socordiam . . . inridere libet: the 
action of Nero (14. 50, 2) and of Domi- 
tian (Agr. 2, 1) is especially alluded to. 

9. qui =‘ qui alii,' especially Romans. 

I3. postulandis reis... continuus, 
‘incessantly occupied with accusations.’ 

- This expression is used of a person in 11. 

5, I, as here of a personification. The 
construction is not elsewhere found, but 
appears to be an abl. of respect, analogous 
to *equis assignandis . . . diligentes" (Cic. 
Rep. 2. 20, 32), &c. | 

I4. feriarum Latinarum. This feast 
was held for four days ; the time ofthe year 
is variable: see Marquardt, iii. 296-298. 

3 manos. 

A. D. 25.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 35, 36. 

533 

gratia tribunal ingressum, adierit Calpurnius Salvianus in Sex- 
tum Marium: quod a Caesare palam increpitum causa exilii 

2 Salviano fuit. 

obiecta publice Cyzicenis incuria caerimoniarum 

divi Augusti, additis violentiae criminibus adversum cives Ro- | 

et amisere libertatem, quam bello Mithridatis meru- 

erant, circumsessi nec minus sua constantia quam praesidio 

4 Luculli pulso rege. 

at Fonteius Capito, qui pro consule Asiam 

curaverat, absolvitur, conperto ficta in eum crimina per Vibium 

& Serenum. 
publicum tutiorem faciebat. 

neque tamen id Sereno noxae fuit, quem odium 
nam ut quis destrictior accusator, 

velut sacrosanctus erat : leves, ignobiles poenis adficiebantur. 

i 
10, destrictior: distrietior B, cp. 1. 32,2 

praefectum urbis. This survival of 

the old representative of the magistrates 
during their absence (‘ praefectura urbis 
ob ferias Latinas ') coexisted with the new 
and permanent office instituted by Augus- 
tus (see 6. 11), and probably existed 
till the *feriae' themselves ceased to be 
held. It had been long the practice to 
give it by way of compliment to young 
men of rank ; hence Gellius (14. 8) men- 
tions the juristic question whether this 
praefectus urbis, not being a senator, 
could convene the senate. Claudius 
would have had it but for his unfitness 
(Suet. Cl. 4); and Nero held it (Id. Ner. 
7). This tenure of it by young Drusus 
is attested by an inscription (Introd. ii. 
P. 19). 

auapicandi gratia, ' to inaugurate his 
office.' 

1. Calpurnius Salvianus. Borghesi 
(v. 311) and Nipp. show that he was 
probably of Spanish origin; an earlier 
person of the name being mentioned at 
Corduba (Bell. Alex. 53, 55; Val. Max. 
9. 4, 2), and the name being found in an 
inscription there (C. I. L. ii. 2265). Sex. 
Marius also was of Spain (6. 19, r). 

2. increpitum. It was contrary to 
the usual practice tó bring before this 
praefectus other than ‘ tralaticiae et breves 
postulationes’ (Suet. Ner. 7), and the 
introduction of a criminal cbarge would 
especially be ‘ mali ominis." 

causa exilii, i.e. 
" of the senate to banish him. 

3. publice Oysicenis, r$ koi TOY 
Ku(uenyay. This use of * publice’ is found 
in c. 43, 5; 3. 31, 73 H. 1. 51, 6; 66, 3, 

&c., and occasionally in other authors ; 

‘ prompted a decree ^ 

the word , being used, in opposition to 

‘ privatim ’ or ‘ viritim,’ to contrast com- 
munities with individuals, in Cic. Verr. 
2. 3, 27, 66; Caes. B. C. 2. 21, 5; Bell. 
Alex. 65, 4: for other instances see Nipp. 

incuria, &c. According to Dio (57. 
24, 6) they had begun a ende to Au- 
gustus and not finished it. It is noted 
( Momms. Hist. v. 321, E. T. i. 348) that 
at least all the chief places of judicial 
circuit in Asia had their Caesareum and 
emperor's festival. 

4. additis violentiae criminibus. 
For a similar offence, Augustus had al- 
ready deprived them of autonomy in 734, 
B. C. 20 (Dio, 54. 7, 6), but had réstored 
it five years later (Id. 33, 7). For other 
cases of such violence see Momms. Hist. 
v. 256, E. T. i. 379). 

5. et amisere, &c.: cp. Suet. Tib. 37 
* libertatem ademit quam Mitliridatico 
bello meruerant.' 

6. ciroumsessi, &c., in 680, 681, B.C. 
74, 73: see App. Mithr. 73-76. 

sua. The Cyziceni are in thongnt the 
subject of the sentence. 

7. Fonteius Capito, C. Fouielos C. 
f. C. n. Capito, cos. 765, A. D. 12 (Fast. 
Cap.: see C. I. L. i. p. 550). His father 
was a follower of Antonius (Hor. Sat. 1. 
5, 32) and cos. suff. in 721, B. C. 33 (C. 
I. L. i. p. 544); his son cos. in 812, A.D. 
59 (14. I, 1). On the date of this Capito' s 
proconsulate of Asia see Introd. vii. p. 113. 

8. Vibium Serenum, the son men- 
tioned in c. 28, 1. 

‘Io, destrictior. The metaphor is taken 
from a sword ever drawn. We should 
rather speak figuratively of a person whose 
sword was always out, or who ‘had 

a 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 778. 

934 

37. Per idem tempus Hispania ulterior missis ad senatum 
legatis oravit, ut exemplo Asiae delubrum Tiberio matrique 
eius exstrueret. qua occasione Caesar, validus alioqui sper- 2 
nendis honoribus et respondendum ratus iis quorum rumore 

s arguebatur in ambitionem flexisse, huiusce modi orationem 
coepit: *scio, patres conscripti, constantiam meam a plerisque 3 
desideratam, quod Asiae civitatibus nuper idem istud petentibus 
non sim adversatus. ergo et prioris silentii defensionem, et 
quid in futurum statuerim, simul aperiam. cum divus Augustus 4 

10 sibi atque urbi Romae templum apud Pergamum sisti non 
prohibuisset, qui omnia facta dictaque eius vice legis observem, 
placitum iam exemplum promptius secutus sum, quia cultui meo 
veneratio senatus adiungebatur. ceterum ut semel recepisse 5 
veniam habuerit, ita per omnes provincias effigie numinum 

15 sacrari ambitiosum, superbum; et vanescet Augusti honor, si 
promiscis adulationibus vulgatur. 

38. Ego me, patres conscripti, mortalem esse et hominum 
officia fungi, satisque habere,si locum principem impleam, et vos 

14. p oris b: per omnes B, see note. 

thrown away the scabbard.' Nipp. gives 
instances of the word from Val. Max., 
who has *destricta censura (2. 9, 6), 
* vindicta? (6. 3, 1), * feneratrix ' (8. 2, 2): 
cp. also ‘destricte minatus’ (Pl. Epp. 9. 
21, 4). 

leves, probably ‘ unstable,’ as opposed 
to *destrictus' : cp. II. 33, I. 

I. Hispania ulterior: see on c. I3, 
2. "This desire appears to arise from a 
similar motive to that of Asia (c. 15, 4), 
namely, their gratitude for the punish- 
ment of Serenus. 

3. validus...spernendis honoribus. 
On the construction cp. 3. 10, 4; on the 
fact, 3. 47, 5, &c. 

alioqui, ‘ besides,’ i.e. ‘without such 
special ground’: cp. H. 2. 27, 2; 3. 32, 
4, and the nearly similar sense in c. 11, 4. 

5. flexisse: cp. €. 41, 2; I. 34, 5. 

huiusce modi. Similar terms are 
used in giving his speech in 3. 52, 4. 

6. constantiam, &c., ‘that many re- 
gretted my want of firmness’; i.e. that 
he had departed (*in ambitionem flexisse") 
from his general principle (‘ validum sper- 
nendis honoribus ") on that occasion. | 

8. silentii. It is implied that he had 
only tacitly assented to the permissive 
decree (c. 15, 5). 

I5. sacra | : text L. 

Io. templum apud Pergamum: cp. 
€. 55, 6, and note on I. Io, 5. This 
temple dates from 725, B.C. 29 (Dio, 51. 
20, 7), and is represented on coins (Eckh. 
vi. 100, IOI). 

sisti: cp. 2. 7, 3. On this constr. 
with * prohibere" cp. 1. 69, I. 

It. qui... observem : see I. 77, 4. 

I2. placitum: cp. 2. 66, 3. 

13. senatus: see c. I5, 4. This was 
to Tiberius what the conjunction of Rome 
was to Augustus; yet even with this 
association such a precedent was not to 
be commonly followed. 

ut, concessive. 

I4. per omnes. Andresen (de codd. 
Med. p. 13) shows by instances (1. 73, 2; 
6. 25, 55; 11. 22, 3; 14, 64, 3, &c.) that 
Tacitus prefers this order to ‘omnes per’ 
(Halm, and formerly Nipp.). 

effigie numinum : cp. 1. IO, 5. 

I5. vanescet: cp. 2. 40, I. 

16. promiscis, ‘shared with others’: 
Cp. c. 16, 5; 13. 26, 3, &c. 

17. mortalem esse. Pliny (Pan. 2) 
praises Trajan for so rejecting the extra- 
vagances of servility, *nec minus homi- 
nem sequam hominibus praeesse meminit.' 

18. fungi: on the constr. cp. 3. 2, I. 

satis habere, si : cp. 2. 37, 5. 

A.D. 25.] LIBER IV. CAP. 37, 38. 

535 

testor et meminisse posteros volo ; qui satis superque memoriae 

meae tribuent, ut maioribus me& dignum, rerum vestrarum pro- 

vidum, constantem in periculis, offensionum pro utilitate publica 
2 non pavidum credant. haec mihi in animis vestris templa, hae 

pulcherrimae effigies, et mansurae; nam quae saxo struuntur, si 5 

iudicium posterorum in odium vertit, pro sepulchris spernuntur. 
3 proinde socios cives et deos ipsos precor, hos ut mihi ad finem 
usque vitae quietam et intellegentem humani divinique iuris 
mentem duint, illos ut, quandoque concessero, cum laude et 
. bonis recordationibus facta atque famam nominis mei prose- 
4quantur. perstititque posthac secretis etiam sermonibus asper- 

nari talem sui cultum. 
6. posteriorum : text R. 

3. ut...credant, 'supposing (or * on 
condition ’) that they believe? With ‘ut,’ 
in this sense, the addition of *ita is gene- 
rally required, as in Cic. de Off. 1. 25, 88 
(‘ita probanda est mansuetudo . . . ut 

adhibeatur . .. severitas"), but is some- | 

times omitted, as in Cic. de Am. 15, 52 
(‘quis est qui velit, ut neque diligat... 
nec...diligatur, circumfluere omnibus 
copiis"), and Liv. 28. 13, 1. The nearest 
approach to it elsewhere in Tacitus is 
the use of *ut' in the protasis, with the 
force of ‘although,’ followed by a nega- 
tion (cp. c. 40, 6): cp. Drager, Synt. und 
Stil, $ 183, and Nipp. here. 

3. offensionum : cp. 3. 54, 11. Such 
a genitive with * pavidus" is found in H. 
3. 4I, 3; 5. 14, 4; Seneca (Trag.), and 
Lucan. | 

5. mansurae, ‘permanent’: cp. 14. 
20, 2, &c., Gudeman on Dial. 9, 22. For 
the use of the participle cp. Introd. v. 
$ 54d. | | 

6. pro sepulchris spernuntur, i.e. 
* pro sepulchris accipiuntur et spernun- 
tur’: cp. 11. 24, 5, also * pro. nullo pon- 
dere verba cadunt! Ov. Her. 3. 98, ‘pro 
vano verba benigna cadunt Propert. 1. 
Io, 24. Thé comparison modifies the 
sense of ‘spernuntur.’ The temple of an 
unpopular prince has no more sanctity 

. than a tomb; it i 

- and -unvisited --by-the--public. 

For the sentiment cp. ds 8à ráQov viv ce 
- mapepxopeba Anth. Pal. 5. 21, 6. 

7. et deos. It is possible that ‘ deos 
et deas,’ though weakening the rhetorical 
climax, may be a formula used by Tibe- 

quod alii modestiam, multi, quia diffi- 

a a 
7. et deos et deos ipsos: text Pichena. 

rius (cp. 6. 6, 1). . An ‘et’ in the third 
place after asyndeta is common in Tacitus 
and Livy (Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 106); 
and here * socii? and * cives' are referred 
to as one class ( =‘ homines ") by * illos? 

8. humani divinique iuris: cp. 3. 
79, 4- 

9. duint. The archaic form is suitable 
to the language of prayer, as in Cic. Cat. 
I. 9, 32; Liv. 10. 19, 17, &c. 

quandoque: cp. I. 6, 2, &c. 

concessero : see note on 2. 7I, 2. 

II. perstitit ... aspernari: cp. ‘si 
perstiteris . . . referre Cic. Fin. 2. 33, 107. 
That his refusal was not so persistent as 
Tacitus supposed, would appear from an 
inscription recording the erection, in 782, 
A.D. 29, of a temple to Tiberius (ap- 
parently without the addition of Rome or 
the senate) in Cyprus (see Leutsch, in 
Philol. xxiii..750) ; also from an inscrip- 
tion, whether of temple or altar, «Romae 
et Imp. Ti. Caesari Augusto sacrum,’ at 
Mograwa in Africa Byzacena (C. I. L. 
viii. 685). In Italy *flamines Tiberii" 
are found in one or two places (Staatsr. 
li. 758, n. 1). 

12. alii...interpretabantur, ‘some 
explained this as modesty, many, as caused 
by self-distrust, some, as a sign of mean- 
spiritedness.” The construction is varied 
in each clause, and is in each abbreviated. 
With ‘modestiam’ we should expect 
* tamquam, with ‘ degeneris animi, *sig- 
num’; in the second, ‘ quod ’ is lost sight 
of, and ‘aspernari talem cultum" sup- 
plied, and ‘ diffideret? used absolutely, as 
in 13. 21,9. The first view assumes the 

(mt. 

o 

f£ 

^ 

bu 

i 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

536 [A. U. C. 7;8 

deret, quidam ut degeneris animi interpretabantur. optumos 5 
quippe mortalium altissima cupere: sic Herculem et Liberum 
apud Graecos, Quirinum apud nos deum numero additos: melius 
Augustum, qui speraverit. cetera principibus statim adesse: 6 
5 unum insatiabiliter parandum, prosperam sui memoriam; nam 
contemptu famae contemni virtutes. cp. e. P yr Che, J. q.v 2084 
39. At Seianus nimia fortuna socors et inuliebri insuper cupi- 
^—. dine incensus, promissum matrimonium flagitante Livia, com- 
^ ponit ad Caesarem codicillos: moris quippe tum erat quamquam 
io praesentem scripto adire. eius talis forma fuit: benevolentia 2 
patris Augusti et mox plurimis Tiberii iudiciis ita insuevisse, ut 
spes votaque sua non prius ad deos quam ad principum aures 
conferret. neque fulgorem honorum umquam precatum: ex- 8 
cubias ac labores, ut unum e militibus, pro incolumitate impera- 
15 toris malle. ac tamen quod pulcherrimum adeptum, ut con- 4 
iunctione Caesaris dignus crederetur: hinc initium spei. et 5 
quoniam audiverit Augustum in conlocanda filia non nihil etiam 

15. actamen quo: 

sincerity of the reasons assigned by Tibe- 
rius himself; which, while declining the 
honour, are consistent with a belief that 
he has deserved well of posterity. The 
second view asserts that he had no such 
faith in the judgement of the future, 
and assigns as the motive not true mo- 
desty, but mere self-depreciation. The 
third affirms that he did not even care 
for fame, simply because he had no lofti- 
ness of soul ; whereas the highest natures, 
whatever their confidence in themselves 

might be, have always aimed at the 

highest honours, and the highest that 
an autocrat can desire is posthumous 
renown. 

1. degeneris animi, The expression 
is used in H. 3.85, 2. The word is used 
of * preces ' and ‘ vultus" (12. 19, 1; H. 
3. 65, | 4): cp. ‘degeneres animos timor 
arguit ' Verg. Aen. 4, 13. ‘Ut’=‘ita 
ut : cp. Gudeman on Dial. 33, 19. 

: melius, sc. * egisse": cp. I. 43, I. 

. qui speraverit. He expresses this 
belief in a letter to Tiberius (Suet. Aug. 
71) ‘ benignitas enim mea me ad caeles- 
tem gloriam efferet, but the passage 
seems not seriously meant. 

statim, i. e. ‘simul cum principatu." 

5. insatiabiliter; in Lucr. 3, 907; 
Pl. Epp. 9. 6, 3. 

6. contemptu, 'through despising.' 

at tamen quod B. 

Such an ablative appears to be inter- 
mediate between instrumental and causal : 
cp. 3.54, 35 6. 45, 3; H. 1. 6, 1 

7. socors, His success up to this point 
made him take a bold step too rashly. 

8. promissum : see on c. 3, 3. 

9. moris... tum erat. The custom 
had been introduced by Julius (Plut. 
Caes. 17, 716), and was adopted by 
Augustus for all important communica- 
tions, even towards Livia (Suet. Aug. 84). 
Tacitus appears to imply that it no longer 
obtained in his time. 

IO. eius, substituted in 
thought for the vM E ‘codicilli.’ It 
is difficult to see what authentic record 
could have been known to Tacitus of this 
letter or the reply. 

II. iudiciis. The special use of this 
word to denote tokens of favourable 
opinion is illustrated by Nipp. from Agr. 
43, 4. also from Cic. ad Fam. Io. 1, 4 
(* quidquid in eum iudicii officiique con- 
tuleris), and 13, 46 (* patroni iudicio or- 
natus?); Plin. Epp. ad Trai. 4 6 (*ut 

. gloriari iudiciis tuis possim ’). 

d 5. coniunctione Caesaris : see on c. 
7,2; 8.29, 5. The expression here used 
could be justified, even if the intention 
could no longer be carried out. 

17. in conlocanda filia. Suetonius 
(Aug. 63) states that, after the death. of 

es — 

usurum. 

_ 

A.D. 25.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 38-40. 

9537 

de equitibus Romanis consultavisse, ita, si maritus Liviae quae- 
reretur, haberet in animo amicum sola necessitudinis gloria 

non enim exuere inposita munia: satis aestimare fir- 

mari domum adversum iniquas Agrippinae offensiones, idque 
liberorum causa; nam sibi multum superque vitae fore, quod tali 

cum principe explevisset. 

- 

40. Ad ea Tiberius, laudata pietate Seiani suisque in eum 
beneficiis modice percursis, cum tempus tamquam ad integram 
consultationem petivisset, adiunxit: ceteris mortalibus in eo 
stare consilia, quid sibi conducere putent; principum diversam 
2 esse sorteni, quibus praecipua rerum ad famam derigenda. ideo 
se non illuc decurrere quod promptum rescriptu,: posse ipsam 
Liviam statuere, nubendum post Drusum an in penatibus isdem 
tolerandum haberet ; esse illi matrem et' aviam, propiora con- 

Agrippa, several persons, including some 
knights, were thought of in choosing a 
husband for Julia. In c. 40, 8 C. Procu- 
leius is instanced. 

I. ita, ‘after this example.’ 

2. sola necessitudinis gloria usu- 
rum, ‘who would gain only honour by 
such an alliance’: cp. ‘tantum infamia 
usurus' 3. 57, 3. He would seek no po- 
litical advancement, for he had no wish 
to give up his ‘ praefectura’ (held only 
by knights) and to become a senator. 
He must have retained his command with 
senatorial rank when he became consul 
in 784, A. D. 31, and the office was after- 
wards sometimes held by senators (cp. 
H. 4. 68, 3; Suet. Tit. 6). | 

3. satis aestimare. Nipp. renders 

this *he sufficiently appreciated (knew 
how to value rightly, and would therefore 
desire no more than) the protection 
afforded to his house,’ &c., contending 
that *aestimare' has never the force of 
'existimare. But the frequent use of 
simple verbs for compounds in Tacitus 
(Introd. v. $ 40) must be borne in mind, 
and the meaning of ‘existimare,’ appa- 
rently most suitable here, is not impos- 
sible in 13. 42, 5 ('gravius aestiman- 
dum’). 
. 5. liberorum causa, i.e. to protect 
them after his death ; for he himself could 
not be harmed while Tiberius lived, and 
had no wish to survive him. 

multum superque, dw. «lp. for ‘sa- 
tis superque ' (Dtáger). 

7. Ad ea, &c. Tacitus has condensed 
the substance of two answers ; the first, 

given at once, is briefly dismissed (‘ lau- 
data pietate, &c.); the second, delivered 
after an interval, begins with ' adiunxit.' 
8. tamquam .ad integram consulta- 
tionem, *as though to reflect upon it as 
an open question. This motive may 
perhaps not have been stated, but left to 
be inferred... On *tamqüuam' cp. Introd. v. 

$ 67. For the sense of * integram' cp. 3." 

8, 2 (* integrum iudicium '"), and Cic. Att. 
I6. 2, 4 (' integrum consilium "). 

9. in eo stare, 'took their stand on 
the question,’ confined themselves to it. 

II. praecipua rerum, ‘the more im- 
portant business’: cp. c. 41, 4; “prima 
rerum’ H. 3. 46, 2. 

ad famam derigenda, ‘must be 
guided with a view to public opinion,’ not 
by simple consideration of personal or 
family interest: cp. ‘ad utilitatem... 
derigenda’ Dial. 5, 3, and for the senti- 

. ment Sen. de Cl. 1. 15, 5 ‘ principes multa 

debent famae dare.’ On the form ‘deri- 
gere' see note on. 2. 3t, 2. 
ideo, &c., ‘therefore he did not have 
recourse to that answer so ready to hand’: 
namely, that Livia could decide for her- 
self, or consult her more ngtural advisers, 
He felt that, for the reasons given above, 
he could not thus shift the responsibility. 
12. rescriptu. Drager notes this supine 
as dw. elp.: cp. ‘ promptum effectu’ H. 2. 
6, 2. 
/ 13. post Drusum : cp. 1, 68, 6. 

I4. tolerandum, ‘that she should con- . 

tinue’; so ‘longius tolerare posse’ (of hold- 
ing out in a siege) in Caes. B. G. 7. 71, 
4. 'Habere' with gerund or gerundive is 

IO 

538 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 778. 

silia. simplicius acturum,: de inimicitiis primum Agrippinae, 3 
quas longe acrius arsuras, si matrimonium Liviae velut in partes 

domum Caesarum distraxisset. 

sic quoque erumpere aemula- 4 

tionem feminarum, eaque discordia nepotes suos convelli: quid 
5si intendatur certamen tali coniugio? *falleris enim, Seiane, si 5 
te mansurum in eodem ordine putas, et Liviam, quae Gaio 
Caesari, mox Druso nupta fuerit, ea mente acturam, ut cum 

equite Romano senescat. 

ego ut sinam, credisne passuros qui 8 

fratrem eius, qui patrem maioresque nostros in summis imperiis 
videre? vis tu quidem istum intra locum sistere: sed illi magis- 7 
tratus et primores, qui te invitum perrumpunt omnibusque de 
rebus consulunt, excessisse iam pridem equestre fastigium longe- 

II. inuitu (see Andresen, p. 7): invito B, text Heins. 

frequent in Tacitus: cp. I4. 44, 1, Gude- 
man on Dial. 8, 11. 

matrem et aviam, 
Augusta. 

I. simplicius &cturum, ‘he would 
deal more frankly' (see on 1. 69, 4), i. e. 
he would not leave his disapprobation to 
be inferred from an evasive answer. 

2. longe = ‘multo’: cp. ‘longe an- 
tisse' ($ 7), &c., a sense chiefly poetical 
and in post-Augustan prose. 

si matrimonium . . . distraxisset. 
Nipp. explains this to mean that, while 
Agrippina and Livia were widows, both 
were members of the *domus Caesarum, 
of which Tiberius was sole head. The 
marriage of either, besides giving her an 
advantage over her rival, would create 
another house within a house. 

3. sic quoque, ‘even as things were at 
present’: cp. 15. 17, 3, and ‘sic melius’ 
I. 34, 4- : 

4. nepotes suos convelli. This verb 
is used of a house or family (6. 40, 3; 
I2. I, I ; 65, 3) in the sense of being 

Antonia and 

shaken to its foundations by an attack or 

crisis ; here it is used of several persons, 
probably in the sense of being *torn 
asunder ' (cp. c. 62, 3), no longer united 
as a family. Nipp. takes it in the sense 
in which it is used of Tiberius himself in 
6. 48, 4 (where see note). It seems for- 
gotten that the son of Drusus was but six 
years old, and that the others, though 
not without individual jealousies, were all 
of one house. 

5. intendatur: cp. 2. 57, 3, &c. 

falleris enim. On the sudden change 
to * oratio recta' see Introd. v. $ 94. The 

12. legeque: longeque R. 

connexion of thought is, ‘you. cannot 
remain as you are; such a wife must force 
you into an ambitions Position. The 
whole passage to ‘permixtos,’ especially 
the portion ‘ vis tu . . . incusant,’ contains 
a covert irony, in allusion to the assumed 
humility of c. 39. 5, 6. 

6.in eodem ordine, explained by 
‘equite Romano’ below. 

Gaio Caesari...nupta. This mar- 
riage must have taken place before he 
was sent to the East in 753, B. C. t, when 
she could hardly have been more than 
twelve years old. The date of her mar- 
riage with Drusus cannot be fixed. 

8. ego ut sinam, ‘though I were to 
permit it’: see note on c. 33, I. 

9. fratrem, &c. Germanicus, the elder 
Drusus, and the Claudii and Drusi of 
former times. 

IO. vis tu quidem: see c. 39, 6. 

sistere = ‘stare’: cp. H. 3. 21, 2: 
with the exception of Varr. L. L. 5, 53, 
this sense is previously wholly poetical 
(e.g. Verg. G. 1, 479; Aen. 3, 7, &c.). 

magistratus, &c. és Tiv clkíav av- 
Tov... ol édAAdytpot kal of Üraroc abrol 
jm) àv ópÜpov avvexós époirow Dio, 57. 
21, 4. 

II. te invitum perrumpunt, * break 
through your reserve against your will.' 
The sense, as perhaps in 3. 15, 4, is a 
metaphor from breaking into a fortress, and 
much the same as that of * quietem inrum- 
pere" (e. 67,1). With the reading ‘in- 
vito, ‘ perrumpunt' would mean ‘break 
through this barrier,’ i.e. that interposed 
by the difference of rank between you 
and them. 

A. D. 25.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 4o, 41. 

539 

que antisse patris mei amicitias non occulti ferunt perque in- 

8 vidiam tui me quoque incusant. 
equiti Romano tradere meditatus est. 

at enim Augustus filiam suam 
mirum hercule, si cum 

in omnis curas distraheretur, immensumque attolli provideret 

quem coniunctione tali super alios extulisset, C. Proculeium 

et quosdam in sermonibus habuit insigni tranquillitate vitae, 

9 nullis rei publicae negotiis permixtos. 

sed si dubitatione Au- 

gusti movemur, quanto validius est quod Marco Agrippae, mox 

10 mihi conlocavit? atque ego haec pro amicitia non occultavi: 
llceterum neque tuis neque Liviae destinatis adversabor. 

ipse 

quid intra animum volutaverim, quibus adhuc necessitudinibus 

12 inmiscere te mihi parem, omittam ad praesens referre: id tan- 

tum aperiam, nihil esse tam excelsum, quod non virtutes istae 
tuusque in me animus mereantur, datoque tempore vel in senatu 

vel in contione non reticebo.’ 

41. Rursum Seianus, non iam de matrimonio, sed altius 

16. tam : iam Muretus. 

I. antisse...amicitias. Theacc. with 
this verb is generally personal (cp. 3. 47, 4 ; 
66, 5; 15. 50, 3; H. 1. 87, 4, &c.); so that 
probably * amicitias ' is best taken for the 
concrete * amicos, as in 2. 27,2; 5. 2, 2, 
&c. The comparison intended is chiefly 
with the friends of Augustus of equestrian 
rank, as Maecenas, Crispus Sallustius, 
Proculeius, &c. 

non occulti ferunt, ‘openly main- 
tain’: cp. * occulti* 3. 29, 2, and the use 
of * ferre ' in 6. 26, 3; 49, 3, &c. 

2. at enim = dAAd yap, anticipating 
an objection, and referring to c. 39, 5. 

4. in omnis curas distraheretur, 
* had his attention distracted between all 
kinds of cares,’ i.e. had to look at diffi- 
culties on every side. *In' has the force 
of ‘inter’ in 2. 67, 4, &c. 

immensum, adv. as in c. 27, 3, &c. 
He foresaw that his son-in-law would at- 
tain an enormous elevation, and might 
hence think that he had better not be 
already too great. 

5. C. Proculeium: see Hor. Od. 
2.2, 5. Dio (54. 3, 5) states that he was 
brother of Varro Muraena (see on 1. 
Io, 3), and of Terentia, wife of Mae- 
cenas, but the relationship is not clear. 

6. quosdam, sc. ‘alios ’: Nipp. com- 
pares ‘tecum et cum quibusdam" Cic. 
Fam. 4. 6, 2, also Caes. B. G. 6. 24, 2. 

7. negotiis permixtos : cp. ' consiliis 
permixtum ! 3. 38, 2. 

8. quanto validius, &c., i.e. his 
ultimate decision is far more important 
than his previous thought. On these 
marriages cp. I. 3, 1; 53, 2; Introd. 
viii. p. 133. 

IO. ceterum : he seems here to fall back : 
on the evasive reply which he had taken. 
credit for notmaking, ‘ posse ipsam Liviam 
statuere, &c. 

1I. quibus, &c., * by what ties I con- 
template connecting you with me. He 
is called ‘gener’ in 5. 6, 2; 6. 8,6; and 
some member of the imperial house is 
called his pedAdvupdos (Dio, 58. 7, 5). 
Zonaras, who otherwise closely follows 
Dio, states (11. 2) that it was Julia, the 
daughter of Drusus and Livia; others 
have thought that it was Livia herself 
who was ultimately betrothed to him. 
Neither can well be alluded to here, for 
the alliance with Livia is here to be 
understood as refused, and Julia was still 
the wife of Nero. Unless, therefore, Taci- 
tus or his authority has here inserted 
these words by error, we must suppose 
that only some vague promise is held 
out in them. See note on 6. 27, 1. 

15. in contione, i.e. in edict. 

I6. altius metuens : cp. ' altior pavor ' 
(16. 29, 1), and note on I. 33, 7. His 

= 

an 

o 

540 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 778. 

metuens, tacita suspicionum, vulgi rumorem, ingruentem invidiam 
deprecatur. ac ne adsiduos in domum coetus arcendo infrin- 2 
geret potentiam aut receptando facultatem criminantibus prae- 
beret, huc flexit, ut Tiberium ad vitam procul Roma amoenis 
5 locis degendam "impellenet multa quippe providebat: sua in 3 
manu aditus litterarumque magna ex parte se arbitrum fore, cum 
per milites commearent; mox Caesarem, vergente iam senecta 
secretoque loci mollitum, munia imperii facilius tramissurum ; et. 
minui sibi invidiam adempta salutantum turba, sublatisque in- 
10 anibus veram potentiam augeri. igitur paulatim negotia urbis, 4 
populi adcursus, multitudinem adfluentium increpat, extollens 
laudibus quietem et solitudinem, quis abesse taedia et offen- 
siones ac praecipua rerum maxime agitari. 
42. Ac forte habita per illos dies de Votieno Montano, 
15 celebris ingenii viro, cognitio cunctantem iam Tiberium perpulit 
ut vitandos ereaeret patrum coetus vocesque, quae plerumque 

IO. uera potentia augere: vera potentia augeri R, veram potentiam augere Mur., 

text Marcilius. 

reply shows that he understood the irony 
of c. 40, 7, &c. ; and he beseeches Tibe- 
rius not to harbour suspicion against him, 
or listen to idle tales and malignant at- 

tacks on him. On * tacita suspicionum ' . 

see Introd. v. $ 3a b. 

2. in domum. Nipp. rightly takes 
this closely with *adsiduos, ‘ streaming 
into his house.’ Seneca, under similar 
circumstances, discontinued such recep- 
tions: see I4. 56, 6. * 
. 4. per milites. The 'speculatores,' 
among other duties, a appear to have been 
the ‘tabellarii’ of the princeps (Suet. 
Cal. 44, Plut. Galb. 8). 

commearent, sc. ‘litterae.. The 
verb is generally used of persons, but also 
of ‘sermones’ (2. 28, 2), ‘navis’ (Cic. 
Verr. 2. 5, 18, 46), &c. 

vergente ... senecta. Nipp. shows 
that this is abl. abs. and not depending 
on 'mollitum. The retirement would 
cooperate with the consciousness of fail- 
ing power by enervating him. ‘ Vergens 
senecta’ seems rightly taken like 'pro- 
vecta senectus’ (I. 4, 2), and as a stronger 
term than ' vergens aetas, used by Tiberius 
of himself two years (c. 9, 5), and even 
eight years earlier (2. 43, D 

8. secreto, ‘ seclusion’; as C aecretumi 
Asiae' H. 1. 10, 2, &c. This substantive 

.the most weighty affairs (c 

sense appears first in Vergil (e. g..G. 4, 
403, &c.). 

IO. veram potentiam augeri. 'The 
intransitive use of *augere' could be 
defended CP Cato, ap. Gell. 18. 12, 7; 
Sall. Fr. I. 48 D, 51 K, G. P. 144. 
§ 6); but it is awkward to supply ‘se’ as 
its subject, and Tacitus has elsewhere 
' augere potentiam." 
answers best to * minui. . . invidiam." 

I3. ac praecipua rerum maxime agi- 
tari (sc. ‘ac in quibus," &c.), ‘and where 
. C. 40, I) 
come in for the chief attention,' without 
the interruptions of smaller matters. 

15. celebris ingenii viro. He is fre- 
quently mentioned as an orator and de- 
claimer, by M. Seneca (see Controv: 20, 
12; 28. 15, 17 ; Praef. Lib. 9), who states 
that he had before sustained an accusation 
at the hands of P. Vinicius (see 3. II, 2), 
and that Scaurus (see I. 13, 4, &c.) used 
to call him the Ovid of orators, for his 
tendency to repeat himself, and for other 
qualities. "Julius Montants, a poet (Ov. 
ex P. 4. 16, 11; M. Sen. Contr. 16, 27; 
L. Sen. Ep. 122, 11) is not, as Lips. had 
thought, the same person. 

' eunotantem iam, i.e. ‘already be- 
ginning to think of it’ ;-thus * dubitaverat ' 
(* had thought of’) c. 57, 5. 

The text above 

A D. 25.] LIBER IV. CAP. 41—43. S4I 

2 verae et graves coram ingerebantur. nam postulato Votieno ob 
contumelias in Caesarem dictas, testis Aemilius e militaribus 
viris dum studio probandi cuncta refert et quamquam inter 
obstrepentes magna adseveratione nititur, audivit Tiberius probra 
quis per occultum lacerabatur, adeoque perculsus est, ut se vel 
statim vel in cognitione purgaturum clamitaret precibusque 
3 proximorum, adulatione omnium aegre componeret animum. et 
Votienus quidem maiestatis poenis adfectus est: Caesar ob- 
iectam sibi adversus reos inclementiam eo pervicacius amplexus, 
Aquiliam adulterii delatam cum Vario Ligure, quamquam Len- 
tulus Gaetulicus consul designatus lege Iulia damnasset, exilio 
punivit, Apidiumque Merulam, quod in acta divi Augusti non 

iuraverat, albo senatorio erasit. 

43. Auditae dehinc Lacedaemoniorum et Messeniorum le- 
gationes de iure templi Dianae Limnatidis, quod suis a maiori- 

I5. liminatidis: text L. 

I. coram (sc. * ipso’) : what had been 
said of him behind his back was now re- 
peated as evidence before his face. For 
* ingerebantur ' cp. 1. 72, 2. 

postulato. This process is distinguish- 
ed below from the actual *cognitio.' That 

a preliminary examination took place at - 

this stage is seen from c. 21, 4, &c. 

2. Aemilius: see on 2. 11, 2. ‘Vir 
. militaris,' a frequent expression in Tacitus 
(15. 10, 2, &c.) and Livy. — 

4. obstrepentes : cp.*obturbabant ... 
patres specie detestandi’ 6. 24, 4. 

6. purgaturum.  Nipp. shows that 
*probra' is to be supplied: cp. 3. 13, 2; 
16. 24, 1; and ‘purgare crimina" Cic. 
Clu. 1, 3, &c. 

8. maiestatis poenis. Jerome on 
Eus. Chron. (Op. viii. 568, Migne) records, 
on 782, A.D. 39, ‘ Votienus Montanus, 
Narbonensis orator, in Balearibus insulis 
moritur, illuc a Tiberio relegatus.' 

9. amplexus, ‘ accepting the imputa- 
tion ' : cp. 6. 8, 1, &c. 

Io. delatam. For the genit. with this 
word cp. 6. 47, 2; 14. 48, 2, and ' furti 
delatus ' in Cic.: see Introd. v. $ 33 c. 

. Vario Ligure, mentioned again 6. 

30, I. The name *P. Varius P. f. Aem. 
Ligus filius" is found on an inscription at 
Alba Pompeia in honour of young Tibe- 
rius Gemellus (C. I. L. v. 7598). 

Lentulus Gaetulicus. Cn. Corne- 
lius Lentulus Gaetulicus had been praet. 

peregr. in 776, A.D. 23 (see Nipp.), and 
is known as an epigrammatist (Mart. 1. 
praef. Pl. Epp. 5. 3, 5), and has been 
thought (Introd. iii. p. 17) to have written 
history. On his subsequent life see 6. 
30; on his brother, c. 34, 1. The cog- 
nomen was acquired by his father Cn. 
Cornelius Lentulus Cossus (cos. 753, 
B.C. 1) for victories in Africa (Vell. a. 

116, 2). On ‘damnasset’ see on 3. 
36, 3. " 
II. exilio. This involved loss of citi- 

zenship and property; the ‘lex Iulia’ 
(see on 2. 50, 2) partial loss of the latter 
only. 

I2. in acta... iuraverat: see on I. 

2, 2. 
/ 13. albo senatorio: cp. ‘album iudi- 
cum’ (Suet. CL 16, &c. This Aevewpya 
was first posted up by Augustus in 745, 
B.C. 9 (Dio, 55. 3, 3). On the expulsion 
of senators by the princeps cp. 2. 48, 3. 

14. Lacedaemoniorum, &c. Achaia, 
though under Caesar (1. 76, 4), seems 
here to be still treated as a senatorial 
province. Sparta was a free state within 
it, like Athens. On such boundary 
questions and the means taken to settle 
them see Staatsr. iii. 1200. 

15. iure, ‘the right over’; so ‘iura 
libertorum* H. 2. 92, 4. 

Limnatidis, situate in the place 
called Aiuva: (Paus. 4. 31, 3). Strabo 
says (8. 4, 9, 362) ro 8 év Aipvass rijs 

Ce 

bnt 
3 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 778. 

542 

bus suaque in terra dicatum Lacedaemonii firmabant annalium 
memoria vatumque carminibus, sed Macedonis Philippi, cum quo 
bellassent, armis ademptum ac post C. Caesaris et M. Antonii 
sententia redditum. contra Messenii veterem inter Herculis 2 
5 posteros divisionem Peloponnesi protulere, suoque regi Dentha- 
liatem agrum, in quo id delubrum, cessisse; monimentaque eius 
rei sculpta saxis et aere prisco manere. quod si vatum, anna- 3 
lium ad testimonia vocentur, plures sibi ac locupletiores esse; 
neque Philippum potentia sed ex vero statuisse: idem regis 4 
10 Antigoni, idem imperatoris Mummii iudiciüm; sic Milesios 5 
permisso publice arbitrio, postremo Atidium Geminum prae- 

a 
5. recident heliatem : text L and Nipp. 

7. annaliumque Ern., aut annalium 
Heraeus. 

9. inpotentia Madvig, pro potentia Ritter. 

*Aprépudos lepóy év ue0opíows tori rijs T€ 
Aakavixns kai THs Meoonvias: He also 
states that an outrage committed there 
caused the first Messenian war. The site 
and remains of the temple are at Volim- 
nos on the western slope of Taygetus: 
see the map in Dict. of Geog. ii. p. 343; 
also Grote, Hist. vol. ii. ch. 7, p. 572. 

I. annalium, ‘history’: cp. 3. 65, 1. 

2. Philippi, the father of Alexander 
the Great. He invaded Laconia in B.c. 
337, after Chaeronea: see Strab. 8. 4, 8, 
361; Grote, Hist. ch. go (vol. xi. p. 704). 

3. C. Caesaris, the dictator. 

4. Herculis posteros, Temenus, Kres- 
phontes, and the sons of Aristodemus: 
see Grote, Bart i. ch. 18 (vol. ii. p. 6). 

5. regi Denthaliatem. Lipsius' read- 
ing ‘regi Dentheliatem’ is amended as 
above from the form in Steph. Byz. (p. 
225. Mein.) AevOaAcor (vv. 1l. AeA0ávvoi, 
AeA0áyio) wédts pla TOv wepimaynrov 
Megonvios xal. Aaxedapovios. For its 
situation see the map noted above. 

6. cessisse, sc. ‘dicebant’; supplied 
from ‘ protulere.' 

7. saxis et aere. On such extensions 
of the local abl. see Introd. v. § 25. 

vatum, annalium. The asyndeton 
suits the rhetorical character of the pas- 
sage, and might be used to emphasize 
“annalium’ (cp. Introd. v. § 65), or some- 
what contemptuously, to dismiss all such 
evidence as trivial (Pfitzner, p. 107). A 
long list of enumerative asyndeta from 
Tacitus is given here by Nrpp. 

8. vocentur, ‘are challenged to '; like 
* vocare in ius,’ &c. 

locupletiores, ‘more trustworthy’; 

a frequent sense in Cic. with ‘auctor’ or 
‘ testis.’ 

9. potentia, ‘arbitrarily’; i.e. ‘be- 
cause he was master’: cp. ‘qui vi et po- 
testate non iure et legibus cognoscunt" 
(Dial. 19, 5); where the abl. appears to 
partake both of instrumental and causal 
character. 

ex vero, ‘ from the truth of the case.’ 

Io. Antigoni. Antigonus Doson occu- 
pied Sparta after the victory of Sellasia 
In B.C. 222 (Polyb. 3. 70); Mummius had 
arranged the affairs of Achaia after the 
fall of Corinth in 608, B.C. 146. 

II. permisso publice arbitrio; rightly 
explained by Nipp. to mean *the arbitra- 
tion having been entrusted to their state? 
(cp. * publice! c 36, 2). Record of similar 
awards by an éxkArros wédus is often found; 
and this one was inscribed on the base of 
the statue of Niké by Paeonios at Olympia, 
and is given and explained by Mr. Hicks 
(Manual of Greek Inscriptions, No. 200}, 
to whom I am also indebted for its date as 
probably that of the consulship of Q. Cal- 
purnius Piso (A. U. C. 619, B.C. 135). The 
awarding body was à panel of 600 dikasts ; 
the majority (584 to 16) being suci as to 
justify Mr. Hicks' inference that the case 
was clear, and that the subsequent counter- 
decision (see § 1) was probably an in- 
stance in which Antonius had traded on 
supposed memoranda of Caesar. 

Atidium Geminum. Borghesi (v. 
311) shows that, as the gens Atidia 
has no republican nobility, this person 
was probably praetorian proconsul (see 
on I. 74, 1) at some time after 725, B.C. 
29: see more fully in Nipp.'s note. 

A.D. 25.] 

6 torem Achaiae decrevisse. 

LIBER IV. CAP. 43, 44- 

ita secundum Messenios datum. 

543 

et 

Segestani aedem Veneris montem apud Erycum, vetustate di- 
lapsam, restaurari postulavere, nota memorantes de origine eius 

7 et laeta Tiberio. 

suscepit curam libens ut consanguineus. 
tractatae Massiliensium preces probatumque P. Rutilii exem- 5 

tunc 

plum ; namque eum legibus pulsum civem sibi Zmyrnaei addi- 

8 derant. 

quo iure Vulcatius Moschus exul in Massilienses recep- 

tus bona sua rei publicae eorum ut patriae reliquerat. 
44. Obiere eo anno viri nobiles Cn. Lentulus et L. Domitius. 
Lentulo super consulatum et triumphalia de Getis gloriae fuerat 

2. delapsam : text Ern.; cp. 1. 16, 5. 

I. secundum Messenios datum, sc. 
‘judicium’ or ‘ius templi’; the question 
mooted at the beginning of the chapter: 
for the phrase cp. H. 3. 7,1, Suet. Cl. 15, 
Cic. and Liv. Boundary stones in accord- 
ance with this award, and .apparently 
belonging to this date, inscribed "Opos 
Aaxebatipovy. wpós Meoonvny, are still seen 
on the spot: see map above cited. 

2. Begestani...montem apud Ery- 
cum. Segesta (the Greek “Eyeora) and 
the mountain of Eryx were in the north- 
west corner of Sicily; the latter being iden- 
tified with Monte S. Giuliano near Tra- 
pani (Drepanum), and the ruins of the 
former traceable north-west of Calatafimi, 
west of Alcamo. The city of Eryx on the 
slope of the mountain had been deserted 
(Strab. 6. 2, 6, 272), probably ever since 
its destruction by Hamilcar Barca (Diod. 
23. 9; 24. 8), and we gather here that its 
territory had passed to the Segestans; but 
the temple on the summit had been of 
old (Thuc. 6. 46, 3), and continued to be, 
very famous; and the goddess had also 
under this title a temple in Rome. The 
form ‘Erycus’ is found in Cic. Verr. 2. 
2, 8, 22; 47, 115. : 

vetustate dilapsam. The expres. 
sion is used by Livy (4. 20, 7). The 
form ‘dilapsam’ is supported by H. 1. 
68, 2; 86, 3: cp. also * viam... . vetustate 
dilapsam' Insc. Henzen 5119. H. 4. 40, 
3, is slightly different. 

3. de origine. Both cities were in- 
habited by Elymi, who claimed a Tro- 
jan origin (Thuc. 6. 3, 3). Segesta (the 
Acesta of Verg. Aen. 5, 718) and the tem- 
ple (Id. 759) boasted Aeneas as founder; 
the eponymus of Eryx was also called 
a son of the goddess (Id. 24 and 412); 
whence both are connected with the an- 
cestry of the Iulii, 

Io. degetes: text margin and B. 

4. suscepit curam. According to 
Suetonius (Cl. 25) the actual work was 
carried out by Claudius, at the cost of the 
aerarium. 

5. preces, i.e. that the will of Volca- 
tius Moschus might be allowed. 

P. Rutilii: see 3. 66, 2. Exiled by 
a judicial sentence (‘legibus’), in 661 or 
662, B.C. 93 or 92, on what is said to have 
been an unjust charge (Liv. Epit. 70, 
Vell. 2. 13. 2) of ‘repetundae,’ he re- 
ceived in place of his Roman citizenship 
that of Smyrna (Cic. Balb. 11, 28). 
Usually this ‘ius exulandi’ obtained only 
in relation to provincial states connected 
with Rome by a *foedus, which Smyma 
was not but Massilia was (Staatsr. iii. 

.49, n. 2). 

". quo iure, taken with ‘receptus.’ 

9. Cn. Lentulus: see I. 27, I, and 
note there. The date there given of his 
consulship is consistent with his being 
' senectutis extremae" (c. 29, 1). 

10. de Getis. The same people ap- 
pear to have been known as Getae and 
Daci; Cotiso being called king of the 
former by Suetonius (Aug. 63), and of 
the latter by Horace (Od. 3. 8, 18), &c. 
Several petty wars against Dacians on 
the Danube are recorded in the time 
of Augustus (see Mon. Anc. v. 44, Gr. 
xvi. 11, and Mommsen there); and Florus 
(2, 28) mentions the name of a Lentulus 
in connexion with one of them, which 
Mommsen dates in 759, A.D. 6. The 
correction of Lips, ‘Gaetulis,’ would 
identify this Lentulus with the elder 
Gaetulicus (see on c. 42, 3); who is 
thought to have lived to a later date, 
and to have been the ‘Cossus’ who, 
according to Seneca (Ep. 83, 13), suc- 
ceeded L. Piso (6. 10, 3) as praefcctus 
urbis. 

Lon] 

Oo 

en 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 779. 

544 

bene tolerata paupertas, dein magnae opes innocenter partae et 
modeste habitae. Domitium decoravit pater civili bello maris 2 
potens, donec Antonii :partibus, mox Caesaris misceretur. avus 
Pharsalica acie pro optumatibus ceciderat. ipse delectus cui 8 
minor Antonia, Octavia genita, in matrimonium daretur, post 
exercitu flumen Albim transcendit, longius penetrata Germania 
quam quisquam priorum, easque ob res insignia triumphi adep- 
tus est. obiit et L. Antonius, multa claritudine generis, sed 4 
inprospera. nam patre eius Iullo Antonio ob adulterium Iuliae 5 
morte punito hunc admodum adulescentulum, sororis nepotem, 
seposuit Augustus in civitatem Massiliensem, ubi specie studi- 

orum nomen exilii tegeretur. 

habitus tamen supremis honor, 

ossaque tumulo Octaviorum inlata per decretum senatus. 

I. paratae: text L. 

I. partae, the usual word for ‘ac- 
uired’: cp. c. 51, 2; 66,1; 1.9, 23 
. 18, 2; &c. 

2. pater. On the family of the Do- 
mitii Ahenobarbi see Suet. Ner. 1-5. This 
one, who is there called the best of the 
race, delivered up to Antonius in 714, 
B.C. 40, the republican fleet under .his 
command, and thus procured the reversal 
ofthe condemnation which he had incurred 
by the ‘lex Pedia," and subsequently at- 
tained a consulship in 722, B.C. 32. He 
deserted to Caesar shortly before Actium, 
and died a few days afterwards. 

3. avus, L. Domitius, cos. 700, B.C. 
54, one of the most energetic and uncom- 
promising opponents of Caesar: see Suet. 
Ner. 3, &c. 
after Pharsalus (Caes. B. C. 3. 99, 4). 

4. ipse: see Suet. Ner. 4, 5. L. Do- 
mitius, Cn. f. L. n. Ahenobarbus, cos. 738, 
B. C. I6, was procos. of Africa in 742, B.C. 
12 (Insc. Or. 3693, Henzen 5369), one of 
the * Arvales' (C. I. L. vi. 2023 a). and 
was honoured by a statue in the Acropolis 
of Athens (C. I. Att. iii. I, 581). Suet. 
calls him haughty, cruel, and prodigal. 

5. minor Antonia. Here, and in 
12. 64, 4, Tacitus appears to confound 
the two sisters: see Introd. ix. note 20. 
Dio, in his mention of this marriage (48. 
54, 4), confounds this Dornitius with his 
father. 

6. Albim transcendit. This took 
place in some year previous to his com- 
mand in Lower Germany in 752, B.C. 2 
(Dio, 55. 10 a, 2). He was then in com- 
mand on the Danube, and probably started 

4. deiectus: electus B, text Pich. 

He was slain in the pursuit 

9. iulio. 

from Vindelicia (Momms. Hist. v. 38, 
E. T. 1. 31), and settled a horde of Her- 
munduri in the territory held afterwards 
by them (see on G. 41, 1), but which had 
belonged to the Marcomani. He crossed 
the Elbe without opposition, (Dio, 1. 1.) 
perhaps in or north of Bohemia (see 2. 
46, 5). Drager notes that this verb is 
nowhere else used of crossing a river. 

7. quàm quisquam priorum, sc. - 
* penetraverat.' The construction is ap- 
parently sacrificed to brevity of expression : 
cp. 13. 19, 3. For a full discussion of it 
see Joh. Müller, Beitr. sect. 3, pp. 51-53. 
Drusus had already reached, but not 
crossed, the Lower Elbe from the west 
(Dio, 55. 1, 2), and the fleet of Tiberius 
afterwards sailed up it (Vell. 2. 106); 
but in the time of Tacitus this * flumen 
inclutum et notum olim, nune tantum 
auditur ' (G. 41, 2). 

9. Iullo Antonio : see on 1. 10,3. He 
had married Marcella, daughter of Oc- 
tavia (Introd. ix. note 18). 

II. seposuit, often used of a mild or 
virtual exile by Tacitus (as H: r. 10, 2; 
I3, 9, &c.), and Suetonius (Oth. 3, &c.). 

Massiliensem. Strabo (4. 1, 6, 
181) describes Massilia as a school of 
Hellenic culture,- frequented by  pro- 
vincials, and also by Roman nobles, who 
often preferred it to Athens. Agricola, 
who was born near it, studied there (Agr. 
4, 3)- 

specie: cp. ‘specie secessus’ I. 4, 4. 

13. tumulo Octaviorum, i.e. that of 
his grandmother’s family; not the same 
as the tomb of the Caesars (1. 8, 6, &c.). 

A. D. 26.] LIBER IV. CAP. 44-46. 545 

-. 45, Isdem consulibus facinus atrox in citeriore Hispania ad- 
missum a quodam agresti nationis Termestinae. is praetorem 
provinciae L. Pisonem, pace incuriosum, ex inproviso in itinere 
adortus uno vulnere in mortem adfecit ; ac pernicitate equi pro- 

fugus, postquam saltuosos locos attigerat, dimisso equo per 5 

2 derupta et avia sequentis frustratus est. neque diu fefellit: nam 
prenso ductoque per proximos pagos equo, cuius foret cognitum. 
8 et repertus cum tormentis edere conscios adigeretur, voce magna 
sermone patrio frustra se interrogari clamitavit: adsisterent socii 
ac spectarent; nullam vim tantam doloris fore, ut veritatem 

4 eliceret. idemque cum postero ad quaestionem retraheretur, eo . 

nisu proripuit se custodibus saxoque caput adflixit, ut statim 
5 exanimaretur. sed Piso Termestinorum dolo caesus habetur; 
quippe pecunias e publico interceptas acrius quam ut tolerarent 

barbari cogebat. 

46. Lentulo Gaetulico C. Calvisio consulibus decreta triumphi 

ter 
2. ter maestina eis: text margin and B, below permestinorum. 
I4. qui : quia Pich., text Bezzenberger. 

text Ritt., so written always elsewhere. 

I. citeriore Hispania, Hispania Tar- 
raconensis: see on C. 5, 2., 

2. Termestinae. These people are 
mentioned in Liv. Epit. £4, and the name 
is found on coins, also Tépues in Ptol. 
2. 6, 56 (cp. Pl. N. H. 3. 3, 4, 27), 
Tepuavría in App. Hisp. 76. The name 
is still traced in a locality suitable to 
these notices, at the sources of the Douro 
near Osma, not far from the site of Nu- 
mantia. 

praetorem, properly *legatum  Au- 
gusti propraetore.’ 

3. L. Pisonem. Borghesi (v. 312) 
tHinks this Piso probably a son of the 
* praefectus urbis’ (6. 10, 3),and the ‘ maior 
. iuvenum' (cp. note on c. 62, 1) addressed 
by Horace (A. P. 366) some thirty-five 
years before this date; also that he may 
have been cos. suff. in 760, A.D. 7. Some, 
as Michaelis (see Nipp.), place. the 
Horatian Epistle and the persons ad- 
dressed in it earlier: see Dean Wickham, 
Horace, ii. p. 333. One of the name is 
also recorded as a ‘duumvir’ at Pola 
(C. I. L. v. 54). 

4. in mortem: see Introd. v. $ 60 b; 
also c. 62, 4. i 

5. saltuosos locos, repeated in 6. 34, 
a. On the plural ‘loci’ cp. 1. 61, a. 

VOL. I. 

11. quaesitionem ; 

6. derupta et avia: cp. ‘avia ac de- 
rupta’ 6. a1, 2. 

8. adigeretur, with inf.: cp. c. 29, 3. 

It. postero, sc. ‘die.’ In the similar 
passage in 15. 57, 3 and in Caes. B. G. 7. 
II, 5, ‘dies’ is in the context: cp. ‘in 
posterum " c. 73, 7, and on other such 
ellipses, Introd. v. $ 8o. 

12. proripuit. This verb appears only 
here to take the construction of ‘ eripere.' 

13. habetur.  Nipp. notes that this 

I5. 

verb in this sense is not often used with 

inf. or part.: cp. I2. 15, 2; also ' volen- 
tia plebi facturus habebatur," Sall. H. 4, 
31 D, 56 K, 33 G. 

I4. e publico, sc. * Termestinorum '; 
frauds of its citizens or magistrates on 
their own community : for intervention 
ot Koman magistrates in such cases see 
2. 54, 2. *Publicum' could hardly mean 
the Roman *aerarium, as the province 
was Caesarian. 

I6. Lentulo 
former see c. 42, 3. C. Calvisius Sabi- 
nus is mentioned again in 6. 9, 5 ; also as 
legatus of Pannonia under Gaius, when 
he was accused and committed suicide 
(Dio, 59. 18, 4; cp. H. 1. 48, 4). His 
father C. Calvisius C. f. Sabinus was con- 
sul in 750, B.C. 4 (C. I. L. i. p. 548). 

Nn 

...Calvisio. On the. 

546 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 779. 

insignia Poppaeo Sabino contusis Thraecum gentibus, qui mon- 

tium editis sine cultu atque eo ferocius agitabant. 

super hominum ingenium, quod pati dilectus et validissimum 
quemque militiae nostrae dare aspernabantur, ne regibus quidem 
5 parere nisi ex libidine soliti, aut si mitterent auxilia, suos duc- 

tores praeficere nec nisi adversum accolas belligerare. 

rumor incesserat fore ut disiecti aliisque nationibus permixti 

diversas in terras traherentur. 

sed antequam arma inciperent, 4 

misere legatos amicitiam obsequiumque memoraturos, et man- 
10 sura haec, si nullo novo onere temptarentur: sin ut victis ser- 
vitium indiceretur, esse sibi ferrum et iuventutem et promptum 

libertati aut ad mortem animum. 

simul castella rupibus indita 5 

conlatosque illuc parentes et coniuges ostentabant bellumque 
impeditum arduum cruentum minitabantur. 

4"7. At Sabinus, donec exercitus in unum conduceret, datis 
mitibus responsis, postquam Pomponius Labeo e Moesia cum 

2. incultu: inculti B, text Bezzenb. 

I. Poppaeo Sabino: see 1. 80, 1, and 
note there. 

contusis: cp. 12. 31, 3; H. 4. 28, 
4, &c.; a poctical expression (Verg., 
Hor., &c.), but used also by Cicero, 
Sallust, and Livy. 

montium editis. On the genit. cp. 
Introd. v. § 32 b. Haemus is specified 
in c. 51, 6. The tribes are piobably 
those which rose before (3. 38, 5). 

2. sine cultu: Nipp. retains ‘incultu’ 
as a modal abl., like * catervis' (c. 51, 1). 
The word is found in Sall. and Liv.; but 
so bare and harsh a construction as *in- 
cultu agitare" is hardly justified by such 
uses as * iniussu,' &c.; and *incultu' could 
easily have arisen from ‘sine cultu’ by 
the absorption of ‘s’ following ‘ editis, 
and alteration of ‘ine cultu' to * incultu.' 
‘Cultus’ is used of luxuries and refine- 
ments of life in 3. 30. 4; also in Caes. 
B. G. r. 1, 3, &c. Another very prob- 
able correction, * incultius,' is supported by 
the occurrence of ' incultius agitare" (or 
*agere^), in this sense, twice in Sallust 
(Jug. 19, 6; > 7): see Bursian, Jahres- 
berichte, iii. 786 

4. militiae nostrae. The context 
shows that this obligation had been 
hitherto only that incumbent on other 
vassal kingdoms (cp. c. 24, 3, &c.), to 
furnish troops under their own leaders 
(c. 47, 1) for occasional service; and 

I6. quam... uenire: text Jac. Gron. 

that it was or was thought to be intended 
to levy a standing force, such as the 
Thracian cohorts and ‘alae’ of many 
later inscriptions, liable to serve any- 
where, and under Roman officers. See 
on 6. 41, I. 

". Gisiecti. ‘broken up’: cp. 1. 32, 7; 
3. 2, 5. That the ordinary rule of em- 
ploying these forces in their own country 
(Introd. vii. p. 126) had many exceptions, 
is abundantly shown by inscriptions and 
other evidence. Thus a Sygambrian co- 
hort is employed here (c. 47, 5). 

8. diversas: cp. 1. 17, 5, &c. 

arma inciperent; a phrase formed 
on the analogy of § bellum incipere) .On 
this use of ‘arma’ cp. 3. 55, I, &c. 

E misere ...memoraturos: cp. 2. 
58, 1. 

12. libertati aut ad mortem: cp. 
Introd. v. $ 88; also * vim oppidanis ac 
in mercatores' 12. 55, I. 

eastella rupibus indita; so ‘indi- 
tam monti . . . urbem" (Flor. 1. 36): c 
*tecta imposita rupibus’ Liv. 21. 32, 7, 
*arces Alpibus impositas! Hor. Od. 4. 
14, I2. 

14. impeditum arduum cruentum. 
The asyndeta form a rhetorical climax: 
cp-c. 43, 3, &c. 

16. Pomponius Labeo: see 6. 29, 1. 
Dio (58. 24, 3) describes him as Mvoías 
ókrà éreor perd Thy orpatnyiay Spkas. 

causa motus 2 

ac tum 3 

A. D. 26.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 46-45. 

legione, rex Rhoemetalces cum auxiliis popularium, qui fidem 
non mutaverant, venere, addita praesenti copia ad hostem pergit 

2compositum iam per angustias saltuum. 

apertis in collibus visebantur, quos dux Romanus acie suggressus 
haud aegre pepulit, sanguine barbarorum modico ob propinqua 5 

8 suffugia. 

mox castris in loco communitis valida manu montem 

occupat, angustum et aequali dorso continuum usque ad proxi- 
mum castellum, quod magna vis armata aut incondita tuebatur. 
4 simul in ferocissimos, qui ante vallum more gentis cum carminibus 

5 et tripudiis persultabant, mittit delectos sagittariorum. 

ii dum 

547 

quidam audentius 

eminus grassabantur, crebra et inulta vulnera fecere: propius. 
incedentes, eruptione subita turbati sunt, receptique subsidio 
Sugambrae cohortis, quam Romanus promptam ad pericula, nec 
minus cantuum et armorum tumultu trucem, haud procul in- 

Struxerat. 

48. Translata dehinc castra hostem propter, relictis apud 
priora munimenta Thraecibus, quos nobis adfuisse memoravi. 
iisque permissum vastare, urere, trahere praedas, dum populatio 
lucem intra sisteretur noctemque in castris tutam et vigilem 

8. at R. 

The legati of Moesia were, as a rule, con- 
sulars; so that Labeo, though generally 
styled ordinary governor of Moesia, may 
have been subordinate to Sabinus: see note 
on 1. 80, 1; Marquardt, i. 302, n. 7. 

I. Rhoemetalces : see 3. 67, 4; 3. 38, 
4: 4 55 

2. praesenti copia. Macedonia, though 
usually a senatorial province (see on t. 76, 
4), was evidently not wholly * inermis. 

3. compositum, ‘concentrated’: cp. 
3. 74, 5, &c. 

audentius . . . visebantur, ‘ were 
more boldly showing themselves.’ - 

4. suggressus: cp. 2. 12, 2. 

6. suffugia: cp. 3. 74, 2. 

in loco, ‘ where he was’: cp. 1.63, 7. 

montem...angustum, &c., ‘a narrow 
summit, extending in an unbroken ridge’; 
so Caes. B. G. 7. 44, 3 ‘dorsum... prope 
aequum, sed. . . angustum. 

8. armata aut incondita. ‘Aut’ is 
apparently to be taken as in I. 55, 2, &c.; 
for, although there is no strict antithesis ; 
even the * inconditi? being defenders (not 
the same as the ‘inbelles’ of c. 49, 3), and 
even the * armati" being ‘inconditi’ (cp. 
2. 12, 2, &c.) ; an intelligible contrast can 

still be drawn between forces organized 
after their own fashion, and a mere rabble 
who could only throw stones, &c. 
9. more gentis. Thucydides (4. 126, 
5) makes Brasidas thus describe the war- 
fare of these or similar races: wAnOee 
Opews bewol kal Bofjs neyéOe dpópnro:, fj 
Te biÀ kevíjs émaváaeisis Trav Ümiowv exe 
riva SyAwow ádweAfs. So Livy (38. 17, 
4) makes Manlius speak of the *cantus 
ineuntium proelium, et ululatus et tri- 
pudia,’ &c., characteristic of the Gauls. 
Io..persultabant, in Lucr. 1. 14, and 

15 

in prose from Livy; often in Tacitus, as 

11.9,1; H. 5. 15, I, &c. 

I2. recepti, 're.cued, ‘enabled to 
withdraw.’ j 

13. Sugambrae : see on 2. 26, 3. Sy- 
gambrian cohorts are mentioned in in- 
scriptions (Henzen 6704, Wilm. 1270). 
Nipp. shows from another, that, in 887, 
A.D. 134, one was still in Moesia. 

16. hostem propter, ‘near the enemy’ : 
* propter ' is used with anastrophe in 14. 
9, 33 15. 47, 3 (Introd. v. § 77). 

17. Thraecibus, those under Rhoeme- 
talces (c. 47, 1). 

I9. lucem intra sisteretur, ‘ should 

Nn 2 

548 

capesserent. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

opulenti,omittere stationes, lascivia epularum aut somno et vino 

procumbere. igitur hostes,incuria eorum conperta,duo agmina 4 

parant, quorum altero opulacores invaderentur, alii castra 
5 Romana adpugnarent, non spe capiendi, sed ut clamore, telis, 
suo quisque periculo intentus, sonorem alterius proelii non acci- 

peret. 

qui vallum legionum temptabant, facile pelluntur; Thraecum 
auxilia repentino incursu territa, cum pars munitionibus adiace- 
1o rent, plures extra palarentur, tanto infensius caesi, quanto per- 
fugae ct proditores ferre arma ad suum patriaeque servitium 

incusabantur. 

49. Postera die Sabinus exercitum aequo loco ostendit, si 

barbari successu noctis alacres proelium auderent. 

, et postquam 

15 castello aut coniunctis tumulis non degrediebantur, obsidium 
coepit per praesidia, quae opportune iam muniebat ; dein fossam 
loricamque contexens quattuor milia passuum ambitu amplexus 
est; tum paulatim, ut aquam pabulumque eriperet, contrahere 
claustra artaque circumdare ; et struebatur agger, unde saxa 

20 

hastae ignes propinquum iam in hostem iacerentur. 

sed nihil 

aeque quam sitis fatigabat, cum ingens multitudo bellatorum inbel- 

be checked before nightfall’: cp. ‘quem 
sisti... posse speraverat ' H. 2. 11, 5, &c. 

noctemque xs capesserent ; a bre- 
vity of expression for * noctu in castris se 
tutarentur vigiliasque capesserent.’ * Capes- 
sere' is generally used of undertaking a 
duty, as in c. 16,63; 3. 29, 1, &c., but is 
read with * otium’ in 14. 3, I. 

2. somno et vino procumbere. The 
expression seems a reminiscence of ,Verg. 
Aen. 9, 236 * somno vinoque soluti? ; but 
the ablatives here appear to be those of 
manner (see Introd. v. $ 28), equivalent 
to ‘somnolenti et vinolenti, They may 
also be causal, an explanation perhaps 
best suited to * lascivia epularum." 

4. alii. This, following ‘altero,’ is 
explained by Nipp. to mean ‘others,’ not 
‘the others’; the passage being so far an 
anacoluthon that * altero? has strictly no 
correlative to it. 

5. adpugnarent: cp. 2. 81, r. 

clamore, telis. These may be taken as 
causal ablatives with * intentus ' (as in 16. 
8, 1) or with ‘non acciperet, and ‘suo 
periculo' may be a dative depending on 
* intentus (cp. 5. 10, 3; H. 1. 79, 1; a. 

41, 1); but, by making it a similar abla- 
tive, and bytaking them all with ‘intentus,’ 
the rhetorical climax of the asyndeta (cp. 
C. 46, 5) is rendered more forcible. 

6. sonorem : cp. 1. 65, t. 

9. &diacerent: cp. I. 65, r, ‘lying 
along,’ instead of standing on guard. 

Io. quanto ...incusasbantur: cp. In- 
trod. v. $ 64, 2 

13. si, ‘in case that’: cp. 1. 48, I.: 

I5. aut: cp. 2. 30, 2, &c. 

16. praesidia, ‘fortified outposts.’ 
These were ready to hand, and formed 
the supports of his circumvallation. 

17. loricam, {a breast-work' : cp. H. 

4- 37, 4; sometimes spoken of as a pro- 

tection added to the * vallum" (Caes. B. 

G. 7. 72, 4; Curt. 9, 18, &c.), at other 
times as a slighter protection instead of 
regular entrenchments, the meaning here. 
* Contexens' is used by zeugma with * fos- 
sam. 

I9. agger: see 2. 81, 2. 

21. aeque quam: cp. 2. 52, 5; H.5.3, 3. 

bellatorum inbellium, an asyndeton 
pointing a contrast such as is frequent 
in rhetorical passages (cp. Introd.. v. 

[A. U. C. 779. 

id primo servatum : mox versi in luxum et raptis 8 

tenebrae insuper delectae augendam ad formidinem. sed 5 

3 

A.D. 26.] LIBER IV. CAP. 48-50. 

949 

4 lium uno reliquo fonte uterentur; simul equi armenta, ut mos 
barbaris, iuxta clausa, egestate pabuli exanimari ; adiacere cor- 
pora hominum, quos vulnera, quos sitis peremerat ; pollui cuncta 
sanie, odore, contactu. 

50. Rebusque turbatis malum extremum discordia accessit, 
his deditionem, aliis mortem et mutuos inter se ictus parantibus ; 
et erant qui non inultum exitium, sed eruptionem suaderent. 

2 neque ignobiles tantum his diversi sententiis, verum e ducibus 
Dinis, provectus senecta et longo usu vim atque clementiam 
Romanam edoctus, ponenda arma, unum adflictis id remedium 
disserebat, primusque se cum coniuge et liberis victori permisit : 
secuti aetate aut sexu inbecilli et quibus maior vitae quam gloriae 

3cupido. at iuventus Tarsam inter et Turesim distrahebatur. 

4 utrique destinatum cum libertate occidere, sed Tarsa properum 
finem, abrumpendas pariter spes ac metus clamitans, dedit exem- 
plum demisso in pectus ferro; nec defuere qui eodem modo op- 

5 peterent. Turesis sua cum manu noctem opperitur, haud nescio 

6 duce nostro; igitur firmatae stationes densioribus globis. et 
ingruebat nox nimbo atrox, hostisque clamore turbido, modo per 

vastum silentium, incertos obsessores effecerat, cum Sabinus 
circumire, hortari ne ad ambigua sonitus aut simulationem quietis 

I. simuleque: simul aeque B, text L, simulque Orsini. 

Madvig, (neque . . . sententiis] Ritter. 
Haase, properus in Müller. 

§ 65). Some have thought the insertion 
of ‘que’. necessary; others, as Drager, 
take the words as an oxymoron. 

8. neque ignobiles, &c. * His sen- 
tentiis’ would refer to the two opinions 
held by the party of resistance, repre- 
sented below by 'l'arsa and Turesis, and 
the *'ignobiles" are contrasted with ‘e 
ducibus Dinis' None of the explana- 
tions of the MS. text appear satjsfactory, 
and those who retain it mostly bracket 
the words as a gloss. 

10. edoctus, with accus., as in'13. 47, 
2; H. 2. 99, 2. 

I4. properuin finem. The suggested 
corrections appear needless and injurious 
to the force of the passage. The sense 
of such a verb as * suadens ' can easily be 
supplied from the gerundive and * clami- 
tans,’ and such exclamatory sentences, 
expressive of the emotion of the speaker, 

8. quamuis: tantum his 
14. properandum Ricklefs, properum per 

are elsewhere used by Tacitus: see I. 35, 
2; 41, 2, &c., 

16. oppeterent: cp. 2. 24, 3. 

18. stationes: cp., 1. 28, 5; perhaps 
here ‘ out-posts,’ as in 6. 34, I. 

globis : cp: 2. II, 4. 

19. modo. Nipp. compares the similar 
omission of ‘modo’ in the first clause in 
6. 32, 2, and the parallel abbreviations 
‘his, rursus illis,’ ‘hos, rursus illos' (H. 
3. 22, 3; 83, 1), and notes 'vastum 
silentium ' (cp. H. 3. 13, Ü Agr. 38, 2) 
as taken from Liv. x. 34, 6. Cp. the ex- 
pression in 3. 4, I. 

20. cum...circumire: cp. 2. 3I, I. 

21. ad ambigua sonitus, sc. animum 
intendentes The expression resembles 
those in which ‘ad’ has the force of ‘in 
answer to,’ or a similar meaning, as ‘ad 
ea’ (1. 26, 2, &c.), ‘ad omnis nuntios’ 
(H. 3. 56, 2), &c. 

en 

[S] 

Oo 

bend 
eg 

550 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 779. 

casum insidiantibus aperirent, sed sua quisque munia servarent 
immoti telisque non in falsum iactis. 
51. Interea barbari catervis decurrentes nunc in vallum manu- 
alia saxa, praeustas sudes, decisa robora iacere, nunc virgultis et 
5cratibus et corporibus exanimis complere fossas, quidam pontis 
et scalas ante fabricati inferre propugnaculis, eaque prensare; 
detrahere et adversum resistentis comminus niti. miles contra 3 
deturbare telis, pellere umbonibus, muralia pila, congestas lapi- 
dum moles provolvere. his partae victoriae spes et, si cedant, 
10 insignitius flagitium, illis extrema iam salus et adsistentes pleris- 
que matres et coniuges earumque lamenta addunt animos. nox 3 
aliis in audaciam, aliis ad formidinem opportuna ; incerti ictus, 
vulnera inprovisa; suorum atque hostium ignoratio, et montis 
anfractu repercussae velut a tergo voces adeo cuncta miscuerant, 
15 ut quaedam munimenta Romani quasi perrupta omiserint. neque 4 
tamen pervasere hostes nisi admodum pauci: ceteros, deiecto 
promptissimo quoque aut saucio, adpetente iam luce trusere in 
summa castelli, ubi tandem coacta deditio. et proxima sponte § 
incolarum recepta: reliquis, quo minus vi aut obsidio subigeren- 
20 tur, praematura montis Haemi et saeva hiems subvenit. 

16. delecto : deleto B, text Orelli; cp. c. 25, 6.. 19. incorum: text B, oe 
Haase  -— 

I. casum ... aperirent, ‘give an op- | 9. partae victoriae spes, ‘the hope 
portunity, ie. of escape; like ‘locum that they had already won the victory.’ 
yd I3. 37, 4, &c. Nipp. prefers to take * partae victoriae" 

3. catervis. This modal abl. (see and 'flagitium' as nom., and ‘ spes' as 

Introd. v. $ 28) is much used in describ- 
ing military formations : cp. H. a. 42, 4: 
3- 29, 3; 5. 16, 1. In Caes. ‘cuneatim,’ and 
in Sall. and Liv. * catervatim,' are found. 

nunc...nunc, here alone in Tacitus, 
from poets and Livy. 

manuslia saxa; so ' manuales la- 
pides ' Sisenn. ap. Non. 449, 2 ; the xe«po- 
mwAnOeis Aido. of Xen. An. 3. 3, 17, and 
(according to common derivation) the 
Homeric xepuaábia. 

6. propugnaculis, *turrets In this 
description throughout, Tacitus seems to 
imagine Roman works of a more sub- 
stantial . character than such as appear 
implied in c. 49, a. 

. prensare : cp. the similar description 

ia 1. 68, 3. 

8, muralia pila: cp. Caes. B. G. 5. 
40, 6; 7. 82, 1; apparently longer than 
the ‘ pila’ used in line of battle. ‘ Pro- 

volvere is used here by zeugma. 

depending, like ‘animos,’ on ‘ addunt ; 
but with this interpretation ‘ flagitium ' 
would seem better taken as accus. 

IO. insignitius : cp. 3. 70, 4. 

II. matres et coniuges: cp. c. 46, 5; 
the ‘inbelles’ of c. 49, 3. 

I2. aliis... aliis. The first are the 
barbarians, the second the Romans. —_ 

in ... ad, interchanged, as in 1, 28, 7. 

incerti ictus, ‘the having to aim at 
random.’ 

14. velut & tergo, taken closely with 
* voces’; ‘cries seeming to come from 
the rear. owing to the echo.’ 

16. deiecto: ‘deleto’ is used rathet 
of bodies of men than individuals (H. 2. 
14, 6; 4. 18, 23 79, 4 

18. coacta, ‘ was enforced” cp. 13. 43i 
4; 16. 19, 4; ‘vis cogendae militiae 
Liv. 4. 26, 3. 

sponte, with genit. in 2. 59, 3, &c.; 
with * incolarum" again 13. 39, 7. 

A. D. 26.) 

LIBER IV. CAP. 50-52. 

951 

52. At Romae commota príncipis domo, ut series futuri in 
Agrippinam exitii inciperet, Claudia Pulchra sobrina eius postu- 

2]atur accusante Domitio Afro. 

is recens praetura, modicus 

dignationis et quoquo facinore properus clarescere, crimen inpudi- 
citiae, adulterum Furnium, veneficia in principem et devotiones 
3 obiectabat. Agrippina semper atrox, tum et periculo propinquae 
accensa, pergit ad Tiberium ac forte sacrificantem patri repperit. 
4 quo initio invidiae non eiusdem ait mactare divo Augusto victimas 
et posteros eius insectari. non in effigies mutas divinum spiritum 
transfusum : se imaginem veram, caelesti sanguine ortam, intelle- 

5 gere discrimen, suscipere sordes. 

frustra Pulchram praescribi, 

cui sola exitii causa sit quod Agrippinam stulte prorsus ad cultum 

6 delegerit, oblita Sosiae ob eadem adflictae. 

audita haec raram 

i 
IO. sed maginem: sed imaginem B, text Muretus. 

1. commota =‘ concussa.’ It had lost 
some of its stability bv the death of 
Drusus, also by the intrigues already set 
in motion (c. 12, &c.) against Agrippina 
and her sons. 

2. sobrina eius. On this relationship 
see Introd. ix. note 18, and Borghesi 
(i. 417). Her supposed father, adop- 
tively named M. Valerius Messalla Bar- 
batus Appianus, was cos. in 742, B. C. 12, 
and was son of App. Claudius Pulcher 
(cos. 716, BC. 38). From:the mention 
of her son (c. 66, 1) it would appear that 
she was wife of the unfortunate Quin- 
tilius Varus. 

3. Domitio Afro: see c. 66, 1; Dial. 
13. 33 15, 3; Dio, 59. 19; Pl. Epp. 2. 
14, Io, &c. Quintilian often refers to 

him, and considered him the best orator : 

he had ever heard (10. 1, 118). His death 
is noticed in 14. 19, I. 
recens praetura. On the abl. cp. 
1. 41, 5. He was consul in 792, A. D. 39 
(Dio, 59. 20, 1), and ‘curator aquarum' 
from 802, A. D. 49, till his death (Frontin. 
de Aq. dE . He appears to have had 
sons in high rank under Domitian (see 
Ins-. Orell. 773; Henzen, p. 75). 
modicus dignationis. On the gen. 
cp. a. 7à 3 As he had already been 
‘praetor,’ ‘dignatio’ is here to be taken of 
his personal consideration or reputation, 
as in 6. 27, 3; H. 3. 8o, 3, &c. It is 
seen from what follows that his fame as 
an orator had not yet been established. 
4. properus, here alone with inf.: cp. 
Introd. v. $ 47. For another Tacitean 

usage of this word cp. 11. 26, 4 &c. 

5. devotiones: cp. 23. 37, 2; 69. 5 

6. atrox, perhaps here, like ferox, 
in a good or neutral sense (cp. Hor. Od. 
2. 1, 24). Tacitus however uses it gene- 
rally in a bad sense, as in 12. 22, 1 ; 13. 
13, 4, &c. 

7. sacrificantem patri, as one of the 
* sodales Augustales ' (1. 54, 2). 

8. quo initio, abl. abs.: cp. *eo prin- 
cipio ' 1. 16, 3. 

invidiae: cp. c. 53, 1 ; 3. 67, 4. Many 
instances of a somewhat similar use of 
the word are collected by Mayor on Juv. 
15, 123. |l | 

9. effigies mutas. She is supposed 
to point to some statue before which 
sacrifice was being offered. 

IO. se imaginem. In MSS. ‘i’ 
and ‘t’ are constantly confused, hence 
* se imaginem "may have been corrupted 
into * setmaginem." 

intellegere, &c., ‘saw that the danger 
was her own, took to herself the sup- 
pliant's garb’: the latter expression is no 
doubt metaphorical. *Sordes' is used 
of the general condition of an accused 
person (6. 8, 4; 12. 59, 3). 

.11I. praescribi, ‘is male the pretext’; 
so used only here and in 11. 16, 7, but 
Caesar thus uses 'honesta praescriptio ' 
(B. C. 3. 32, 4)- 

12. a cultum delegerit, = 
delegerit.' 

.13. Sosiae: see c. T9, I. 

raram, taken closely with *occulti 
pectoris’: it was not his habit to speak out. 

* colendam 

Q3 

5 

IO 

ex matrimonio solacium ; esse in civitate gzz. .. Germanici con-. 
iugem ac liberos eius recipere dignarentur. 

15 

552 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 779. 

occulti pectoris vocem elicuere, correptamque Graeco versu 

admonuit non ideo laedi, quia non regnaret. 

Pulchra et Furnius 

damnantur. Afer primoribus oratorum additus, divulgato ingenio 
et secuta adseveratione Caesaris, qua suo iure disertum eum 

appellavit. 

mox capessendis accusationibus aut reos tutando. 

prosperiore eloquentiae quam morum fama fuit, nisi quod aetas 
extrema multum etiam eloquentiae dempsit, dum fessa mente 

retinet silentii inpatientiam. 

53. At Agrippina pervicax irae et morbo corporis inplicata, 
cum viseret eam Caesar, profusis diu ac per silentium lacrimis, 
mox invidiam et preces orditur: subveniret solitudini, daret 
maritum ; habilem adhuc iuventam sibi, neque aliud probis quam 

sed Caesar non 

ignarus, quantum ex republica peteretur, ne tamen offensionis 
aut metus manifestus foret, sine responso quamquam instantem 

reliquit. 

13. civitate: here Med. has a gap of about fourteen letters. 

ex se Wurm, ea re Madvig. 

I. correptam : this appears to express 
the action described by Suetonius, who 
says (Tib. 53) ‘manu apprehendit." 

Graeco versu. Suetonius (I. 1.) 
appears to translate the line, ‘si non 
dominaris, filiola, iniuriam te accipere 
existimas! ; whence some have exercised 
their ingenuity in an attempt to restore 
the Greek original. Its sentiment re- 
sembles the dictum of Jason of Pherae, 
mewhy óre pr rvpavvot (Ar. Pol. 3. 4, 9). 

3. primoribus oratorum : see on § I. 

4. suo iure disertum, ‘one who could 
claim the title of orator by right.’ So 
Cicero (Arch. 8, 18) appears to quote 
Ennius as calling poets ‘iure suo sancti.’ 

6. nisi quod. This qualifies the praise 
of his eloquence. He was less high- 
principled than eloquent, and even the 
latter gift at last forsook him. On ‘nisi 
quod’ cp. 1. 33, 6. Quintilian describes 
(12. 11, 3) this failing of Afer in old age, 
and records that it was said ‘malle eum 
deficere quam desinere.' 

9. pervicax, with genit. in H. 4. &, 
5; elsewhere, according to Drager, only 
in Apul.; so used after the analogy of 
* tenax! and many other words. 

inplicata ; so ‘implicitus morbo' Lucr. 
6, 1232; Caes. B. C. 3. 18, 1, &c. 

15. exre publica : 

II. invidiam et preces: cp. 3. 67, 4. 

I2. habilem, sc. ‘matrimonio.’ She 
must have been about thirty-nine or forty 
years old (Introd. ix. note 8). 

probis =‘ pudicis' ; so used of women 
in Ter. Ad. 5. 8, 7; Sall. Cat. 25, 2, &c. 

I3. esse in civitate. ‘ Qui’ and some 
other word or words have been lost. 

I5. ex republica peteretur, ‘how im- 
portant, viewed politically, was her request 
(cp.c. 31, 5, &c.). With this or other read- 

ings the substantial meaning is the same, . 

that to give a new husband to the grand- 
daughter of Augustus and mother of the 
natural heirs to the principate was a very 
grave matter. 

I6. manifestus, with gen. : cp. 3. 85, 3. 

17. scriptoribus annalium, i.e. pro- 
fessed historians, such as he usually fol- 
lows. Their works are here contrasted 
with a more private or family memoir. 

in commentariis Agrippinae filiae. 
The only other express mention of these 
is in Plin. N. H. 7. 8, 6, 46 * Neronem 
...pedibus genitum scribit parens eius 
Agrippina. On their probable indirect 
influence on the narrative of Tacitus, see 
Introd. iii. p. 14. That the elder Agrip- 
pina was also in some way a writer ap- 
pears from Suet. Aug. 86. 

7 

id ego, a scriptoribus annalium non traditum, repperi in 3 

A. D. 26.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 52-55. 553 

commentariis Agrippinae filiae, quae Neronis principis mater 
vitam suam et casus suorum posteris memoravit. 
54. Ceterum Seianus maerentem et inprovidam altius perculit, 
immissis qui per speciem amicitiae monerent paratum ei venenum, 
2 vitandas soceri epulas. atque illa simulationum nescia, cum 
propter discumberet, non vultu aut sermone flecti, nullos attin- 
gere cibos, donec advertit Tiberius, forte an quia audiverat; 
idque quo acrius experiretur, poma, ut erant adposita, laudans 
3 nürui sua manu tradidit. aucta ex eo suspicio Agrippinae, et 
intacta ore servis tramisit. nec tamen Tiberii vox coram secuta, 
sed obversus ad matrem non mirum ait, si quid severius in eam 
4 statuisset, a qua veneficii insimularetur. inde rumor parari 
exitium, neque id imperatorem palam audere, secretum ad per- 

petrandum quaeri. 

55. Sed Caesar quo famam averteret, adesse frequens senatui 
legatosque Asiae, ambigentes quanam in civitate templum 

9. suae: 

I. quae...memoravit. The addition 
of these words seems to imply that the 
book was no longer well known in the 
time of Tacitus. lt is not easy to see 
why Tacitus should have inserted * Ne- 
ronis principis mater, unless he meant 
thus to give the date, i. e. that she wrote 
them when she was mother of Nero, and 
when he was princeps. This would fix 
the date within five years, and make it 
probable that she wrote them during the 
retirement preceding her death (13. 19, 1). 

3. inprovidam, referring to her gene- 
ral character. 

4. immissis: cp. c. 19, I. 

5. soceri, used of Tiberius as the ad- 
optive father of her husband. 

nescia: cp. 3. I, I. 

6. propter, ‘next to him.’ The pro- 
nominal accusative is constantly omitted 
by Tacitus (Introd. v. § 8). On ‘ discum- 
bere ' as used of a single person cp. 3. 
I4, 2. 

non vultu aut sermone flecti, 
“never changed expression or spoke’; 
abl. of respect, as * sermone ac vultu in- 
tentus’ 6. 50, 1. Nipp. shows that these 
words are often coupled. ‘Flecti’ is 
used by zeugma with * sermone." 

7. advertit, ‘noticed it’: cp. 6. 40,1; 
12. 51, 5, &c. 

audiverat, had heard of her suspicion. 

8. quo acrius experiretur, ‘for a 

sua R. 

more testing experiment.’ The sense is 
analogous to the frequent one of activity 
in research, &c. 

ut erant adposita, ‘as soon as they 
had been placed on the table,’ i. e. before 
he or others tasted them ( Doed.). 

10. coram. Nipp. takes this to mean 
‘personally addressed to her, noting 
that *coram' acquires the sense of ‘ per- 
sonally’ in c. 75, !; 14. 13, I: cp. 
*testimonia'... coram et praesentes di- 
cere’ Dial. 36, 5, ‘si... coram potius, 
me praesente, dixissent ' Cic. Leg. Agr. 3. 
I, I. The sense of * openly’ (cp. 6. 8, 8; 
13. 25, 4) is also applicable in this, and 
in most of these passages. 

II. Obversus ad matrem: she is to 
be understood as placed on the other side 
of him. 

si quid severius...statuisset. Sue- 
tonius says (Tib. 53) that he never again 
invited Agrippina ; and his words at this 
time may have expressed no more than 
this intention. 

13. secretum: for the absence of any 

adversative particle cp. 5. 3, 3; Nipp. on 

C. 35- 

15. famam, the ‘rumor’ of c. 54, 4. 
He wished to seem wholly occupied in 
public business. 

16. ambigentes, ‘disputing’: cp. 3. 
43, 4, &c. 

templum : see c. 15, 5. 

15 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 779. 

554 

statueretur, pluris per dies audivit. undecim urbes certabant, 2 
pari ambitione, viribus diversae. neque multum distantia inter 
se memorabant de vetustate generis, studio in populum Roma- 
num per bella Persi et Aristonici aliorumque regum. verum 3 
5 Hypaepeni Trallianique Laodicenis ac Magnetibus simul tramissi 
ut parum validi; ne Ilienses quidem, cum parentem urbis Romae 4 
Troiam referrent, nisi antiquitatis gloria pollebant. paulum 5 
addubitatum, quod Halicarnasii mille et ducentos per annos nullo 
motu terrae nutavisse sedes suas vivoque in saxo fundamenta 
10 templi adseveraverant. Pergamenos (eo ipso nitebantur) aede 6 

5. hypae penitrali tanique : text B. 
Halicarnassii B; text Halm. 

4. bella : during the war with Perseus, 
583-586, B.C. 171-168, these cities form- 
ed part of the dominion of Eumenes 1I., 
king of Pergamum, who assisted the Ro- 
mans, though with some suspicion of 
duplicity. The gen. * Persi, formed from 
* Perses, like ‘ Achilli, &c., is found also 
in Sall. (H. 1, 6 D, 7? K, 8 G), but is an 
archaism (see on 12. 13, 3). The war 
with Aristonicus, who claimed the king- 
dom of Pergamum after the death of At- 
talus, was in 623-625, B. C. 131-129 (Liv. 
Epit. 59; Vell 2.4, &c.). By ‘aliorum 
regum ' are meant Mithridates, Pharna- 
ces, and the Parthians. 

5. Hypaepeni. Hypaepa (rà “Yxa:wa) 
was on the southern slope of Tmolus, 
whence its name (Steph. Byz). It ap- 
pears to have been still existing in the 
time of that author; its site and remains 
are identified by Leake (Asia Minor, p. 
256) with a place called Beréki or Birghe. 

Tralliani. Tralles, on the southern 
slope of Messogis, at the site of the pre- 
sent Aidin Guzelhissar, is very often men- 
tioned in ancient authors, and generally 
as an important and wealthy city; but 
at this time may bave been still affected 
by the consequences of an earthquake, 
after which it had received bounty from 
Augustus (Strab. 12. 8, 18, 579). 

Laodicenis. Laodiceia ad Lycum, 
on the borders of Phrygia and Caria, near 
the Lycus, a tributary of the Maeander, 
is also very often mentioned, and gene- 
rall as an important commercial city 
(14. 27, I, and ‘celeberrima’ in Pl. N. 
H. 5. 28, 29, 105): considerable ruins 
still exist at Eskihissar. It had suffered 
a similar disaster to that of Tralles 
(Strab. 1. 1.). 

IO, aede... 

6. nellienses: text B. 8. alicarnasii : 

sitam : text L. 

Magnetibus: probably, as in 3. 62, 1, 
Magnesia on the Maeander is meant. 

simul: cp. 3. 64, 3. 

6. parum validi, sc. ‘ opibus" ; not 
important enough to be selected for such 
prominence. 

Ilienses : see 2. 54, 3. Here, as there, 

. the name is restored trom the context. 

8. Halicarnasii; so read with MSS. 
of Cic. and Plin. N. H, This once famous 
Carian city, on the site of Budrum, ap- 
pears never to have completely recovered 
its destruction by Alexander (see. Grote, 
Hist. vol. xii. pp. 127-133), and in later 
times to have retained celebrity only 
through its Mausoleum. An inscription, 
however, has been found there, dating as 
late as the time of Diocletian (C. I. L. 
iii. 1, 449). 

mille et ducentos per annos, 1.e. 
during their. whole history : the number 
is a round one, reckoned from the sup- 
posed date of their foundation (see Nipp.'s 
note). "hey. were a colony irom Troezen 
(Hdt. 7. 99, 4), or, according to a later 
version (Mela, 1. 16, 85), from Argos. 

9. vivo in saxo, ‘ in natural rock’; so 
as to avoid the necessity of laying con- 
crete : this expression appears to be from 
Verg. Aen. 1, 167: cp. Ov. F. 5, 661. 
The chief buildings of the city were on 
a rocky hill (Newton, Travels and Dis- 
coveries, ii. 205). 

fundamenta templi, sc. *fore': cp. 
Introd. v. $ 39 c. 

‘4 IO. Pergamenos: cp. c. 37, 4; 3. 
3)» 3 

eo ipso nitebantur, i.e. the fact by 

which they supported their claim was 

considered even to make against it. It 

was not thought well that two temples to 

A. D. 26.] 555 

Augusto ibi sita satis adeptos creditum.  Ephesii Milesiique, hi 
Apollinis, illi Dianae caerimonia occupavisse civitates visi. ita 
7 Sardianos inter Zmyrnaeosque deliberatum. Sardiani decretum 
Etruriae recitavere ut consanguinei: nam Tyrrhenum Lydum- 
que Atye rege genitos ob multitudinem divisisse gentem ; Ly- 5 
dum patriis in terris resedisse, Tyrrheno datum novas ut conderet 
sedes; et ducum e nominibus indita vocabula illis per Asiam, 
his in Italia; auctamque adhuc Lydorum opulentiam missis in 
8 Graeciam populis, cui mox a Pelope nomen. simul litteras 
imperatorum et icta nobiscum foedera bello Macedonum uberta- 
temque fluminum suorum, temperiem caeli ac dites circum terras 
miemorabant. | | 
56. At Zmyrnaei repetita vetustate, seu Tantalus Iove ortus 
illos, sive Theseus divina et ipse stirpe, sive una Amazonum con- 

LIBER IV. CAP. 55, 56. 

IO. dicta: icta R, perhaps pacta Nipp. 

Caesars should be in the same city. On 
such parentheses see Introd. v. $ 82. 

aede Augusto ibi sita. The MS. 
text could' be taken as part of the 
parenthesis and explanatory of ‘eo ipso,’ 
which Haase further alters to ‘ quo ipso '; 
but most editors have followed Lipsius. 

I. Ephesii Milesiique : see 3. 61, 1: 
63, 5. The temple of Caesar was not to 
be placed in a city where any other and 
more popular worship would eclipse it. 

2. caerimonias, ‘the rites’ or *wor- 
ship’; so more commonly in plur. as 
‘incuria caerimoniarum . . . Augusti" c. 
36, 2. For a different use of the singular 
see 3. 61, 3, &c. 

3. Sardianos. It is to be inferred 
that they had recovered from the disaster 
caused by the earthquake (2. 47, 3). 

Zmyrnaeos : see 3. 63, 4. 

decretum Xitruriae, i.e. of the old 
league of the twelve cities (Liv. 5. 1, 8; 
33, 9, &c.) before the Roman conquest of 
Etruria. 

4. Tyrrhenum Lydumque. 
legend is found first in Hdt. 1. 94, and, 
with some differences, in Dion. Hal. 1, 
27 ; Strab. 5. 2, 2, 4, 219, 222. 

5. Atye, according to Hdt. (1. 1.) son 
of Manes: Strabo (l. 1.) gives another 
form of the pedigree, and: also a version 
making him son of Heracles and Om- 
phale. 

7. vocabula — ' nomina' : cp. I. 3, 7. 

per...in: see Introd. v. § 62. 

8. adhuo : cp. 1. 17, 5. 

This 

in Graeciam. It has been thought 
that Tacitus would have more correctly 
specified the part of Greece, and may 
have written ‘in insüjam' (so: Urlichs), 
for which ‘in Graeciam' was perhaps 
originally a marginal gloss. 

9. & Pelope. Pelops is a Phrygian in 
Hdt. (7. 8, 11, &c.) and others, a Lydian 
in Pindar (Ol. 1, 37, &c.) and Pausanias 
(5. 1, 6). 

litteras, .* documents,’ from former 
Roman generals. 

10. bello Macedonum, that with Per- 
seus mentioned above. 

ubertatem fluminum. Strictly, the 
river of Sardes is the Pactolus, which had 
lost its fame in the time of Strabo; but 
the Hermus, and its other tributaries, are 
probably here included in the descrip- 
tion. 

II. dites...terras. Strabo (13. 4, 5, 
626) speaks most strongly of the fertility 
of the Xapóuavóv wediov and of those ad- 
joining it, the districts watered by the 
Hermus and Cayster. 

13. repetita vetustate, ‘having re- 
traced their antiquity,’ or rather that of 
the old deserted city (see on 3. 63, 4). 
Nothing is here said of their Aeolic 
colonization (Hdt. 1. 149, 1). Both 
Smyrna and Sardes had an ancient wor- 
ship (3- 63, 4). 

I4. Theseus. An epigram (Anth. Pal. 
li. 442) refers to such a belief—elwep 
"A0gvato. Spvpvay ámqxicapev. ‘Theseus, 
according to some legends (Plut. Thes. 6 ; 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

556 [A. U.C. 779. 

didisset, transcendere ad ea quis maxime fidebant in populum 
Romanum officiis, missa navali copia non modo externa ad bella, 
sed quae in Italia tolerabantur; seque primos templum urbis 
Romae statuisse, M. Porcio consule, magnis quidem iam populi 

5 Romani rebus, nondum tamen ad summum elatis, stante adhuc 

10 nostrisque legionibus misisse. 

15 

. which their services are mentioned by: 

Punica urbe et validis per Asiam regibus. simul L. Sullam a 
testem adferebant, gravissimo in discrimine exercitus ob asperi- 
tatem hiemis et penuriam vestis, cum id Zmyrnam in contionem 
nuntiatum foret, omnes qui adstabant detraxisse corpori tegmina 
ita rogati sententiam patres 8 
Zmyrnaeos praetulere. censuitque Vibius Marsus, ut M’. Lepido, 
cui ea provincia obvenerat, super numerum legaretur, qui templi 
curam susciperet. . et quia Lepidus ipse deligere per modestiam 4 

abnuebat, Valerius Naso e praetoriis sorte missus est. 
57. Inter quae diu meditato prolatoque saepius consilio 

I1. marcus: text R. 

Diod. 4. $9; Paus. 1. 17, 3), was son not 
of Aegeus, but of Poseidon. 

et ipse —xal abTÓs, a common phrase 
in Tacitus (2. 2, 5 ; 12. 15, 2, &c.) and 
Livy: see Gudeman on Dial. 30, 1. 

una Amazonum, an eponymous 
Zpvpva, who, according to Strabo (14. I, 
4, 633), founded Smyrna, afterwards 
called Ephesus, from which Smyrna 
proper was a daughter city. Pliny (N. H. 
5. 29, 31, 118) makes an Amazon the 
direct foundress of Smyrna. The subjunct. 
* condidisset’ belongs to the or. obl. 

I. transcendere, ‘passed on'; so in 
Vell. 2. 130, 3, and Quintilian. 

ad ea quis... officiis. Nipp. gives 
several instances in which the substantive, 
belonging to the demonstrative, is attract- 
ed to the relative (cp. Madv. $ 319, obs.). 
It is here also to be noted that the sen- 
tence is not in meaning strictly equivalent 
to ‘ea, quis maxime fidebant, officia" 
(as if some services to Rome were relied 
on rather than others); but *officia' is 
rather to be understood as in apposition 
with ‘ea,’ ‘what they most relied on, 
namely, their services’: cp. ‘nec ulla... 
quam illa colluvies’ 14. 15, 4. 
. 3. externa ad bella, the war with 
Antiochus, 563-566, B C. 191-188; in 

Livy (37. 16, 1; 54, 1; 38. 39, 11) and 
Appian (Syr. 2, &c.). 

3. in Italia. The Social war of 664— 
667, B.C. 9o-87, must be meant. 

4. M. Porcio. Cato the Censor was 
consul in 559, B.C. 195. 

6. validis . . . regibus; e.g. before 
Antiochus had been weakened by the war 

above mentioned. 

7. gravissimo in discrimine; in the: 
first Mithridatic war, in 670, B.C. 84... 

8. in contionem nuntiatum, a Greek 
constr. like elonyyeAAoy els T)v BovAny 
(Isoc. de Big. 6, 348). 

9. qui adstabant: cp. Introd. v. $ 49. 

10. ita, ‘on these grounds’: cp. c. 
43, 6. | | 

11. Zmyrnaeos praetulere. A Smyr- 
naean coin is extant, bearing on the ob- 
verse the figure of Tiberius in the centre 
of a temple, and the inscription Zefa- 
ords TiBépios, on the reverse SeBaorn and 
ZvvkAmTos: see Eckh. ii. 547. 

Vibius Marsus: cp. 2. 74; I. 

M’ Lepido: cp. 3. 32, 2. His pro- 
consulate is attested by an inscription at 
Pergamum ‘ praef. fabr. M'. Lepidi pro- 
cos. (C. I. L. iii 398' That ‘ea 
provincia’ is Asia, is implied in *Zmyr- 
naeos.' 

12. super numerum legaretur, ‘a 
supernumerary legate should be ap- 
pointed’: cp. 2. 47, 5. According to 
Dio (53. 14, 7) the legati of a consular 
proconsul were three in number; but | 
Nipp. notes that his statement that they 
also were always consulars is not borne 
out by inscriptions. 

I5. meditato, passive, as in 3. 5, 6, 

A. D. 26.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 56, 57. 

997 

tandem Caesar in Campaniam adscessit, specie dedicandi templa 
apud Capuam Iovi, apud Nolam Augusto, sed certus procul urbe 

2 degere. 

causam abscessus quamquam secutus plurimos auc- 

torum ad Seiani artes rettuli, quia tamen caede eius patrata sex 
postea annos pari secreto coniunxit, plerumque permoveor, num 
ad ipsum referri verius sit, saevitiam ac libidinem cum factis 

3 promeret, locis occultantem. 

erant qui crederent in senectute 

corporis quoque habitum pudori fuisse: quippe illi praegracilis et 
incurva proceritas, nudus capillo vertex, ulcerosa facies ac ple- 
rumque medicaminibus interstincta; et Rhodi secreto vitare 

4 coetus, recondere voluptates insuerat. 

1. abscessit Halm, secessit Ritt., concessit Otto. E 

traditur etiam matris 

occultantis: text R. 

10. et... insuerat placed by H. Cron after occultantem. 

&c.; not here apparently in the same 
sense as ‘meditans’ in 3. 31, 2. 

I. &bscessit. Many retain the MS. 
text, supplying the idea of a verb of 
motion from the sense (see Introd. v. 
§ 38b The remedies are violent, but 
on the other hand the passages cited by 
Nipp. seem hardly parallel. Such omis- 
sions are suitable to epistolary style, or 
to rapid narrative, as in 14. 8,4; Liv. 41. 
3» 53 44. 24, 1 : in Cic. Acad. Pr. 1. 1 
the verb can be supplied from a sentence 
above: in Sall. Jug. 100, 1 the sound- 
ness of the text is not unquestioned: in 
none of these instances is the idea of the 
verb, as here, the. prominent thought of 
the whole passage; which is therefore 
more likely to have run here as in 3. 
31, 2.* 

2. apud Capuam Iovi. This temple, 
placed on a Capitol at Capua resembling 
that of Rome, is called * Capitolium in 
Suet. Tib. 40. 

&pud Nolam Augusto, on the spot 
where Augustus had died (cp. I. 9, 1). 
Dio says (56. 46, 3) ?) év TH NwAn oixia, 
iy j pernddAagev, éireuevícÓón. In per- 
sonally consecrating these, Tiberius prob- 
ably acted as ‘ pontifex maximus’: see 
note on 2. 49, 2. 

certus: this use with the inf. is poet- 
ical (Verg. Aen. 4, 564, &c.): see note 
on C. 34, 2. 

3. causam . . . rettuli, ‘I have re- 
ferred the cause’; so in 6. 49,2. The 
suggestions of Seianus have been men- 
tioned in c. 41, 2. On the reasoning of 
Tacitus see Introd. iv. p. 35; viii. p. 148. 
He here overlooks the probability that 
the original retirement may have been 

due to one cause, its continuance to an- 
other. | 

5. coniunxit. The expression is prob- 
ably equivalent to ‘sex annos continuos 
mansit in secreto? (Gerber and Greef, 
Lex.), and akin to 6. 26, 5, not to c. 33, 
3. 'Secreto ' could be taken as abl. of 
quality. 

plerumque permoveor, ‘I often hesi- 
tate’: cp. I4. 53, £f. Drager notes a 
similar brachylogy in Cic. Clu. 37, 104 
* adducti iudices sunt (‘ were induced to 
believe") non modo potuisse, &c.: cp. 
Att. 11. 16, 2. 

8. habitum: cp. on 1. 10, 7. His 
personal appearance is described by Sue- 
tonius ( Tib. 68* without reference to any 
particular time of life. His bearing is 
there recorded as stiff and erect; his 
countenance as liable to * crebri et subiti 

tumores,’ mentioned as a specific disease - 

by Galen (wept cuvOécews Qapp. 5, 12). 
That his features were otherwise hand- 
some and distinguished, is stated by Sue- 
tonius, and evidenced by his coins and 
other representations (see Bernoulli), espe- 
cially the two famous sitting statues in 
the Vatican: see Mus. Chiar. 400, 494. 
10.. medicaminibus  interstincta, 
* with patches of plaster’: cp. ‘candore 
interstincto . . . coloribus? Pl. N. H. 37. 

10, &4, 143. 

Rhodi; depending on 'secreto^ On: 

his retirement there cp. Introd. viii. 134. 
For * secreto' cp. 14. 53, 2; H. 1. 10, 2. 
II. recondere voluptates, ‘ to conceal 
his self-indulgence.’ On the assumption 
of fact here see on I. 4, 4. 
traditur. On the constr. cp. Introd. 

v. $ 48. 

558 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 779. 

inpotentia extrusum, quam dominationis sociam aspernabatur 
neque depellere poterat. cum dominationem. ipsam donum eius 
accepisset. nam dubitaverat Augustus Germanicum, sororis 8 
nepotem et cunctis laudatum, rei Romanae imponere, sed pre- 

5 cibus uxoris evictus Tiberio Germanicum, sibi Tiberium adscivit. 
idque Augusta exprobrabat, reposcebat. 

58. Profectio arto comitatu fuit: unus senator consulatu 
functus, Cocceius Nerva, cui legum peritia, eques Romanus prae- 
ter Seianum ex inlustribus Curtius Atticus, ceteri liberalibus 

ro studiis praediti, ferme Graeci, quorum. sermonibus levaretur. 
ferebant periti caelestium iis motibus siderum excessisse Roma a 
Tiberium, ut reditus illi negaretur. unde exitii causa multis fuit 
properum finem vitae coniectantibus vulgantibusque; neque 
enim tam incredibilem casum providebant, ut undecim per annos 

15 libens patria careret. mox patuit breve confinium artis et falsi, 3 

I. inpotentia: see 1. 4, 5. This See Friedlánder, i. pp. 119, 131. Lucilius 

reason for his retirement is also given by 
Suet. (Tib. 51) and Dio (57. 12), in both 
of whom stories of their quarrels may be 
found. The memoirs of Agrippina (see 
on c. 53, 3) were doubtless full of such 
material. " 

2. depellere, sc. ‘a dominationis SO- 
cietate.’ Dio (l. 1.) says wai, TéAos THY pev 
Snpociwy nayranacw abriv dwndAafeyv ; 
but Tacitus makes her influence pu 
mount to the end of her life: cp. 5. 3, 

3. dubitaverat, ‘had thought about"; 
so Cic. (Att. 12. 49, 0) * cum dubitet Cur- 
tius consulatum petere '; and Verg. irn 
9. 191) * percipe porro, quid dubitem ’ 
cp. ‘cunctantem ’ c. 42, I, &c. 

5. evictus ; often used in this sense by 
Tacitus (e.g. 12.25, 3; 49, 2; 68, a) ap- 
parently after Vergil (Aen. 4, 474, &c.). 

6. exprobrabat, ‘was taunting him 
with it’; so * exprobrare beneficium ' (13. 
21, 9, &c.), * officium ' (Cic. Lael. 20, 71). 

reposcebat, *was demanding its re- 
turn’; so used of demanding account for 
a thing, ‘reposcentibus prospera aut 
adversa' H. 3. 13. 

7. arto comitatu, abl. of uan 
This scanty retinue still exemplified the 
classes of which the *comitatus principis ' 
was usually composed ; namely, of ‘amici’ 
of the first and second grade, represented 
by the senator and the knights ; and of 
a third rank of ‘ grati’ (Suet. Tib. 46), 
convictores,’ or oupBrorral, who might 
be called ‘amici’ in a less strict sense. 

Longus (c. 15, 2), Vescularius Flaccus 
(2. 28, 1; 6. 10, 2), and Thrasyllus (6. 
20, 3) represent the same classes in the 
Rhodian retirement of Tiberius. 

8. Cocceius Nerva: cp. 6. 26, I. 
Borghesi (i. 434) shows him to have been 
cos. suff. in some year before 777, A.D. 
24. From that year to his death he was 
‘curator aquarum (Frontin. de Aq. 102). 
As a jurist he was the successor of Labeo, 
as was Masurius Sabinus of Capito (3. 
75, I). His grandson was the emperor 
Nerva. 

9. ex inlustribus : cp. 2. 59, 4. 

Curtius Atticus, afterwards put to 
death through Seianus (6. 10, 2), the 
Atticus addressed by Ovid (ex P. 2. 4; 
7), who speaks of his taste as a Merary 
critic. 

10. Graeci. Suetonius (Tib. 56, 70) 
mentions his fondness for the society of 
f convictores Graeculi,’ especially * gram- 
matici’; with whom he his ar 

. who was Hecuba’s mother,’ ue- 

tonius names Xeno and med both 
of whom afterwards fell under the dis- 
pleasuré of Tiberius. 

levaretur, *he might find relaxation ’: 
cp. * levamentum' 3. 34, 4. 

II, periti caelestium : see on 2. 27, 2 

iis motibus siderum, ‘under such 
planetary conjunctions’; abl. abs. 

15. libens, ‘ by choice’: cp. c. 12, I. 

breve confinium artis et falsi. The 
expression resembles that of Vell. 2. 124, 

A. D. 26.) LIBER IV. CAP. 57-59. 

959 

4 veraque quam obscuris tegerentur. nam in urbem non regres- 
surum haud forte dictum: ceterorum nescii egere, cum propinquo 
rure aut litore et saepe moenia urbis adsidens extremam senec- 
tam compleverit. 

59. Ac forte illis diebus oblatum Caesari anceps periculum 
auxit vana rumoris praebuitque ipsi materiem cur amicitiae con- 

2 stantiaeque Seiani magis fideret. vescebantur in villa cui voca- 
bulum Speluncae, mare Amunclanum inter e? Fundanos montes, 

3 nativo in specu. eius os lapsis repente saxis obruit quosdam 
ministros: hinc metus in omnes et fuga eorum qui convivium 

4 celebrabant. Seianus genu vultuque et manibus super Caesarem 
suspensus opposuit sese incidentibus, atque habitu tali repertus 
est a militibus qui subsidio venerant. maior ex eo, et quamquam 

8. Amuclanum B. et ins. Bezzenb., Fundanosque B. 

I (*in arto salutis exitique ... confinio ^; 
where the idea is not so much that of 
the frontier line between things (as in 
G. 3, 3, &c.) as of their proximity to 
each other: cp. also Pl. Pan. 4 ‘ virtutes 
nullo vitiorum confinio laederentur. Ta- 
citus says that the events showed how 
closely imposture borders upon science, 
and how truth is surrounded by mystery. 
That Tiberius would never return, was no 
mere guess (*haud forte dictum’), but a 
genuine prediction ; but the stars only so 
far revealed the mystery: that he would 
die soon was an impostor's inference from 
conjecture. On this sense of ‘breve’ cp. 
‘angustis et brevibus terminis cluditur’ 
Dial. 30, 5. On the astrological beliefs 
of Tacitus see Introd. iv. p. 3o. 

falsi =‘ fraudis,' as in 12. 26, 3. 

2. egere, ‘they lived .on' : cp. 2. 73, 
3: 3. 19, 2, &c. | 

3. adsidens. The accus. with this 
verb (as in 6. 43, 1) appears to be chiefly 
poetical (Verg. Aen. r1, 304; Val. Fl. ; 
Sil.); but is also found in Sall. H. 4. 42 
D, 1 K, 44 G (see note on 3. 34, 2). 
Stress is laid on his frequent proximity to 
the city as making the fulfilment of the 
genuine prediction more striking, and on 
his attainment of extreme age, as signally 
falsifying the impostor's inference. 

6. vana rumoris =‘ vanum rumorem.' 
The idea that he was soon to die, gained 
strength from ai been so near its 
fulfilment: cp. Suet. Tib. 39. 

7. cui vocabulum Speluncae. Here, 
as in 15. 37, 8, the case is doubtful ; but 

as the dative in this construction is else- 
where in Tacitus restricted to that of ad- 
jectives (cp. Introd. v. § 16), Nipp. rightly 
takes these as genitives; that case being 
certainly so used in 14. 50, 1; H. 4. 18, 
6. The place is mentioned in Plin. N. H. 
3. 5, 9, 59, and caves of great size by 
Strabo (5. 3, 6, 233); and the name is 
still preserved in the modern village Sper- 
longa, half-way between Terracina and 
Gaeta, where a cave showing traces of 
adaptation and decoration can still be 
seen (see Dict. of Geog.). 

8. Amunclanum. The same form (or 
* Amynclae?) is read in Plin. ‘1. |. &c.). 
In Pliny's time the town was deserted, 
having been, according to popular belief, 
‘a serpentibus deletae (cp. Serv. on Verg. 
Aen. 10, 564), but with him also gives 
its name to the bay (14. 6, 8, 61). Its 
site was at or close to Sperlonga. 

et Fundanos. The copula may have 
dropped out by resemblance to the end of 
the preceding word, and ‘ et’ thus follows 
‘inter’ in 6. 33, 5. 'Fundanosque' is 
supported by H. 2. 78, 5. : 

9. quosdam ministros. Suet. (Tib. 
39) seems to exaggerate the loss of life, 
and says nothing of the action of Seianus. 

10. metus in omnes: cp. c. 2, I.- 

II. gonu vultuque et manibus, i.e. 

| porco Tiberius with his body, on his 

ands and knees, and with his face to 
his. Nipp. thinks the use of ' vultu' in- 
stead of *ore' indicates that he had an 
expression of anxiety and devotion. 
I2. habitu, ‘ attitude’: cp. c. 57, 3, &c. 

qn 

560 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 779. 

exitiosa suaderet, ut non sui anxius, cum fide audiebatur. ad- 5 
simulabatque iudicis partes adversum Germanici stirpem, sub- 
ditis qui accusatorum nomina sustinerent maximeque insecta- 
rentur Neronem proximum successioni et, quamquam modesta 
5iuventa, plerumque tamen quid in praesentiarum conduceret 
oblitum, dum <a libertis et clientibus, apiscendae potentiae pro- 
peris, exstimulatur ut erectum et fidentem animi ostenderet : 
velle id populum Romanum, cupere exercitus, neque ausurum 
contra Seianum, qui nunc patientiam senis et segnitiam iuvenis 
10 iuxta insultet. | | 
60. Haec atque talia audienti nihil quidem pravae cogita- 
tionis, sed interdum voces procedebant contumaces et inconsultae, 
quas adpositi custodes exceptas auctasque cum deferrent neque 
Neroni defendere daretur, diversae insuper sollicitudinum formae 
15 oriebantur. nam alius occursum eius vitare, quidam salutatione 2 
reddita statim averti, plerique inceptum sermonem abrumpere, 
insistentibus contra inridentibusque qui Seiano fautores aderant. 

5. in presentia | rum. 
bant Haase. 

I. sui anxius: cp. 2. 75, I. 

adsimulabat iudicis partes, i.e. he 
was himself the real author of the charges, 
but set up nominal accusers, and himself 
affected a judicial or impartial attitude: 
cp. ‘speciem iudicis induere’ 15. 69, 1. 
* Adsimulo' is often thus used in poetry, 
as in Verg. Aen. 10, 639. — 

5. in praesentiarum. This form, 
though found as early as Cato, appears 
to have but slowly made its way from 
common language into literature, and is 
- most frequent in Apuleius. Petronius 
(c. 58, 70) has invented or taken up an- 
other form ' depraesentiarum,' Hand 
(Turs. iii. 235) doubts the genuineness 
of the word both in Cato and in Tacitus ; 
but it may in the latter be an instance of 
his fondness for unusual words. 

6. apiscendae potentiae properis. 
* Properus is used with ‘irae’ (11. 26, 4), 
* vindictae' (14. 7. 2), * oblatae occasionis’ 
(12. 66, 2). All seem best taken as 
genitives of relation (cp. those with 
* praecipuus ' and * primus’ in 6. 4, 1). 

7. ut... ostenderet. The sentence 
could be taken, with Jacob, to mean *ut 
virum erectum, &c., ageret; or the omis- 
sion of ‘se’ can be justified on the same 
ground as in 2. 71,8; 83, 4, &c., namely, 

7. animum Pich., Halm, animi se Ritt. 

debat"; 

12. procide- 

that the person intended cannot be mis- 
taken. For ‘fidens animi' cp. Verg. 
Aen. 2, 61. 

8. ausurum contra; so ‘audere ad- 
versus’ H. 2. 71, 4; ‘longius’ H. 5. 11, 
I. The idea of a verb in the inf. is 
implied in the expression. 

10. insultet; so with simple accus. 
probably in 11. 28,.1; also in Ter. 
Eun. 2. 2, 54; Sall. "Ine. 83 D, 50 K, 1, 

rd 

. nihil. . cogitationis, sc. * proce- 
*no treasonable thought was 
issuing from his lips,’ a sense of *pro- 
cedere' found only in the Vulgate. 
I3. adpositi custodes: cp. ‘ custodiae 
adpositus ' 1. 6, 2; 23. 68, 5, ‘inditi cus- 
todes' 3. 28, 4; and the similar use of 
* additus ' c. 67, 6, &«. 
I4. daretur, with inf. as in 3. 67, 2 
. 15. salutatione reddita. Two persons 

meeting are said * mutuam salutem red- 

dere? (Liv. 10. 18, 11): here the words 
may mean 'after returning Nero's saluta- 

tion,’ or ‘after formal salutation made’; 

which latter Nipp. prefers, thinking it 
unlikely that Nero spoke first. Men paid 
him a bare act of courtesy, without stop- 
ping to converse. 

17. insistentibus, &c., ‘while any 

A. D. 26.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 59-61. 

561 

3 enimvero Tiberius torvus aut falsum renidens vultu: seu loque- 

4retur seu taceret iuvenis, crimen ex silentio, ex voce. 

ne nox 

quidem secura, cum uxor vigilias somnos suspiria matri Liviae 
atque illa Seiano patefaceret ; qui fratrem quoque Neronis Dru- 
sum traxit in partes, spe obiecta principis loci, si priorem aetate 5 

5et iam labefactum demovisset. 

atrox Drusi ingenium super 

cupidinem potentiae et solita fratribus odia accendebatur invidia, 

6 quod mater Agrippina promptior Neroni erat. 

neque tamen 

Seianus ita Drusum fovebat, ut non in eum quoque semina futuri 
exitii meditaretur, gnarus praeferocem et insidiis magis oppor- 

tunum. 

61. Fine anni excessere insignes viri Asinius Agrippa, claris 
maioribus quam vetustis vitaque non degener, et Q. Haterius, 
familia senatoria, eloquentiae, quoad vixit, celebratae: moni- 

8. pronior Ern. 

partisans of Seianus who were there stood 
their ground and made jests'; i.e. scorn- 
fully called his attention to the behaviour 
of his friends. ‘Insistere’ has the sense 
of *standing still' or *halting' (cp. *ut 
non referat pedem insistet certe' Cic. Phil. 
12. 3, 8), and is here in contrast to 
' vitare' and ‘averti.’ ‘Seiano’ is taken 
closely with * fautores' : cp. 12. I, 3. 

1. enimvero: see on 2. 64, 6 

falsum renidens vultu, ‘wearing a 
false smile. ‘Renideo’ is thus used in 
15. 66,2; H. 4. 43, 2, and by Catullus 
and Livy: 'rideo' takes a similar ad- 
verbial adj. in Hor. Od. 1. 22, 23; 3. 
27, 67. 

loqueretur ....taceret, subjunct. of 
frequent action; so in Liv. 21. 36, 7 ‘seu 
manibus . . . seu genu se adiuvissent.' 

3. uxor, Julia (3. 29, 4). Nipp. notes 
that we are not given to suppose that 
her confidences to her mother Livia were 
otherwise than innocently made. 

vigilias somnos, i.e. 'verba vigi- 
lantis aut somniantis.' 
5. in partes, sc. ‘suas’; cp. ' habebat 

in partibus Pallantem ' 13. 2, 3. 

obiecta = ‘oblata’; so 'spes obiecta 
est’ Liv. 6. 14, 12. 

7. solita fratribus odia. Forms of 
this maxim reappear in 13. 17, 2; 15. 2, 
2; H. 4. 70, 3. . 

8. promptior, 'inclined to favour. 
The dat. with this word is generally that 
of the thing (cp. 1. 2, 1); the accus. with 

VOL. I. 

Oo 

o 
I4. qua ad: cp. 6. 51, 5. 

prep. (cp. 6. 48, 7 ; 13. 8, 3) being gene- 
rally used when persons are spoken of; 
but the expression here resembles that in 
3. 76, 15; 12. 1, 4. 

10. praeferocem : cp. I5. 27,3; H. 4. 
23; 4; 32, 3; also Liv. 5. 36, 1. 

opportunum, ‘liable’: cp. H. 3. 
30,2. The word is also so used in Liv. 
6. 24, 3, and the elder Pliny. 

I2. Asinius Agrippa: see onc. 34, I. 

elaris .... quam vetustis. His 
grandfathers, Agrippa and Pollio, were 
both famous *novi homines. The novel 
use of two positives here appears due to 
the desire to avoid the juxtaposition of 
*magis, or a comparative, with *maior- 
ibus’ (Wolfflin, Philol. xxv. 118). 

13. Q. Haterius: see on I1. I3, 4. 
According to Jerome on Eus. Chron. (Op. 
viii. p. 567, Migne), he had lived nearly 
to his ninetieth year. 

I4. familia senatoria. His family 
connexions are not known, but a jurist of 
the name is alluded to by Cicero (ad 
Fam. 9. 18, 5), and a Haterius was 
proscribed by the triumvirs (App. B. C. 
4- 29). 

eloquentiae . . . celebratae. M. 
Seneca (Exc. Contr. B. 4, Praef. § 7) 
describes him as the only orator known 
to him who had introduced Greek fluency 
into Latin rhetoric; adding that his 
rapidity amounted to a defect, so that 
Augustus used to say that he needed 
a drag-chain. L. Seneca (Ep. 40, 10) 

562 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 780. 

menta ingeni eius haud perinde retinentur. scilicet impetu magis 
quam cura vigebat; utque aliorum meditatio et labor in pos- 
terum valescit, sic Haterii canorum illud et profluens cum ipso 

simul extinctum est. 

62. M. Licinio L. Calpurnio consulibus ingentium bellorum 
cladem aequavit malum inprovisum: eius initium simul et finis 

exstitit. 

nam coepto apud Fidenam amphitheatro Atilius qui- 

dam libertini generis, quo spectaculum gladiatorum celebraret, 
neque fundamenta per solidum subdidit, neque firmis nexibus 
10 ligneam compagem superstruxit, ut qui non abundantia pecuniae 

contrasts his vicious fluency with the 
deliberation of P. Vinicius. 

quoad, in Tacitus only here and in 
6. 51, 5; in Loth of which places Baiter 
retains *quaad, which is not without 
recognition in Latin, and may have been 
adopted by Tacitus as more unusual (cp. 
Introd. v. $ 69). 

monimenta, the memorials, or spe- 
cimens preserved : cp. * monimenta inge- 
niorum" I5. 41, 2. 

I. haud perinde retinentur, ‘are 
not commensurately sustained in esti- 
mation.’ For the use of * perinde, cp. 
2. 88, 4, &c. 

3. valescit: cp. 2. 39, 5. 

canorum ... et profluens, * modula- 
tion and fluency.’ The words seem taken 
from Cicero's description (de Or. 3. 7, 28) 
of the oratory of C. Carbo. 

5. M. Licinio L. Calpurnio. From 
inscriptions (Orell. 156, 3056, see also 
Klein) the full names, M. Licinius M. f. 
Crassus Frugi, and I. Calpurnius Cn. f. 
Piso, can be supplied. The latter is 
supposed to be the Cn. Piso who had to 
take a new praenomen (see 3. 17, 8). 
Nipp. (on 1.1.) shows evidence that he 
was praef. urb. in the last year of Tiberius, 
and procos. of Africa under Gaius. 
The other consul also bears a cog- 
nomen of the Pisones, and is shown by 
Nipp. to have been praetor in 777, A. D. 
24, and probably to have been the younger 
of the sons of the * praefectus urbis,' ad- 
dressed by Horace in the Ars Poetica (see 
on C. 45, I), who retained his cognomen 
after adoption by M. Licinius Crassus, 
cos. 740, B.C. 14. He and his wife 
Scribonia were put to death by Claudius 
(Sen. Lud. 11, 5): on his sons, one of 
whom was the Piso Licinianus adopted 
by Galba, see 13. 28, 3; 15. 33, 1j 

H. 1. 14, 2; 48, 1. An Attic in- 
scription (C. I. Att. iii. 1, 601, 602) in 
honour of Cn. Calpurnius L. f. Piso Frugi 
and Cn. Calpurnius Piso, appears to pre- 
serve the earlier name of each (see Nipp.): 
see also Mommsen (Eph. Epig. i. pp. 
143-150). 

6. eius initium. ..exstitit, ‘it began 
and ended in a moment.’ Ritter thinks 
this a gloss inconsistent with the narra- 
tive, but it is obvious that the actual 
crash alone is spoken of. 

7. coepto, probably best taken as a 
dative depending on ' subdidit. 

Fidenam. The name is generally 
plural, as in H. 3. 79, 3, but the singular 
form is found in Vergil (Aen. 6, 773), Pl. 
N. H., and Sil., also 4$192v9 in Dion. Hal. 
(a. 53. &c.). It had become a mere vil- 
lage (Hor. Ep. 1. 1r, 8), but had still 
municipal rank (Juv. 1o, 100). It was 
five miles from Rome on the Via Salaria, 
on the site of the modern Castel Giu- 

bileo. 

8. libertini generis = 'libertinus, as . 

in 2. 85, 5. It has been thought from 
Suet. Cl. 28 that such persons could not 
exhibit shows at Rome without special 
permission. 

celebraret. Ern. and Orelli take 
this to mean ‘frequentiorem redderet,’ 
supposing that the structure was made 
slight so as to be larger in proportion to 
its cost; but the word has clearly the 
simple meaning of ‘edere’ in rr. 22, 3, 
‘censuit spectaculum .gladiatorum . . . 
celebrandum." 

9. per solidum, ‘through,’ i. e. ‘ rest- 

ing on firm ground’; apparently here a 

pregnant construction. 
10. abundantia, probably a causal abl. 
like ‘ ambitione.' 

A.D. 27.] LIBER IV. CAP. 61, 62. 

nec municipali ambitione, sed in sordidam mercedem id negotium 
3 quaesivisset. adfluxere avidi talium, imperitante Tiberio procul 
voluptatibus habiti, virile ac muliebre secus, omnis aetas, ob pro- 
pinquitatem loci effusius ; unde gravior pestis fuit, conferta mole, 

563. 

dein convulsa, dum ruit intus aut in exteriora effunditur inmen- 5 

samque vim mortalium, spectaculo intentos aut qui circum 
4 adstabant, praeceps trahit atque operit. et illi quidem, quos 
principium stragis in mortem adflixerat, ut tali sorte, cruciatum 
& effugere: miserandi magis quos abrupta parte corporis nondum 
vita deseruerat; qui per diem visu, per noctem ululatibus et 
6 gemitu coniuges aut liberos noscebant. iam ceteri fama ex- 

1. sordida mercede: text Pichena. 3. virilis ac muliebris sexus margin and B. 

4. effusus : text L. 

I. municipali ambitione, ‘from a 
desire to court his townsmen’: cp. ' sena- 
torio ambitu? c. 2, 4, *ambitio militaris 
3. 14, I. The advertisements of such 
shows found at Pompeii are generally of 
this character, being in the names of 
persons known as the principal inhabit- 
ants: see C. I. L. iv. pp. 70, foll. 

in sordidam mercedem, ‘with a 
view to paltry gain'; so read, on the 
analogy of 11. 6, 3; G. 24, 2; Agr. 
I9, 4. The MS. text might be taken, 
. with Ritter, to express the general con- 
dition of the man. Such persons often 
exhibited gladiators (Juv. 3, 35; Mart. 3. 
16, 59), and no doubt, in many cases, as 
a mere speculation. Marquardt (Staatsv. 
iii. p. 492) gives evidence (e. g. Henzen, 
Inscr. 7419 a) to show that even more 
bond fide donors often made profit by 
letting some of the seats. 

2, adfluxere: cp. 2. 35, 3; 76,1. It 
is implied in the context that they came 
chiefly from Rome. | 

imperitante Tiberio, &c.  Sue- 
tonius (Tib. 47) states that he never him- 
self gave * spectacula,' and was very rarely 
present at those given by others: see 
notes on I. 54, 3; 76,6; Sen. de Prov. 

)4 7 | 
: 3. virile ac muliebre secus. In H. 
5. I3, 3 this is clearly an acc. of descrip- 
tion, as also in all earlier instances: cp. 
* concurrentium undique virile et muliebre 
secus’ (Sall. H. a. 23, 1D, 29, 1K, 54 G), 
‘in muro virile ac muliebre secus . . . 
multitudine omni conlocata’ (Sisenn. ap. 
Non. p. 332 M), * liberorum capitum virile 
secus ad decem millia capta" (Liv. 26. 
47; 1): see Roby, 1104. It can also be 

IO. aut qui Pluygers. 

SO taken here, and the only instances of 

* secus! asa nominative appear much later | 

(e.g. Aus. Idyll. rr, 8): the difficulty 
may have led to the marginal correction. 

4. gravior pestis: cp. 2. 47, 1. 

conferta mole, ‘the building teing 
closely packed’: cp. *turba ... conferta 
...templa' Liv. 45. 2, 7. ‘Moles’ is 
thus used by itself of a building in Hor. 
Od. 3. 29, 10. 

5. convulsa, ‘bursting asunder,’ ex- 
plained by ‘dum... effunditur, i.e. partly 
falling inwards, partly outwards; ‘aut’ 
being used as in 1. 55, 2, &c. 

7. praeceps, adverbial, as in 6. 17, 4, 
and in Sen. Nat. Qu. 1. 18, 2 ‘ex his 
fulgoribus | quaedam praeceps eunt. 
Nipp. gives instances from later writers. 
Elsewhere *in praeceps' is used, as in 
C. 22, I. 

8. in mortem. On the constr. cp. c. 
45, 1, &c. 

ut tali sorte, *considering that their 
lot was such,’ i.e. ‘so far as might be in 
such a lot.’ ‘Ut’ is thus used with a 
qualifying clause in G. 30, 3; Dial. 1, 2, 
also in Cic. (Brut. 26, 102, &c.), Caes. 
(B. G. 4. 3, 3), and very often in Liv. (e. g. 
1. 3, 3). Ritt. inserts ‘in,’ but *tali sorte’ 
can be taken as abl. abs. 

II. noscebant, ‘ were recognizing’: on 
this sense of the word cp. 1. 39. 8. They 
were unable to move, but conscious of 
the presence of friends in similar condition 
near them. Compare the description of 
Pliny (Epp. 6. 20, 14) in the narrative 
of the great eruption, ‘alii parentes, alii 
liberos, alii coniuges vocibus requirebant, 
vocibus noscitabant.’ 

O02 

564 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

citi, hic fratrem, propinquum ille, alius parentes lamentari. etiam 
quorum diversa de causa amici aut necessarii aberant, pavere 
tamen; nequedum comperto quos illa vis perculisset, latior ex 

incerto: metus. 

63. Ut coepere dimoveri obruta, concursus ad exanimos com- 

plectentium, osculantium; et saepe certamen, si confusior facies, 
sed par forma aut aetas errorem adgnoscentibus fecerat. 

quin- 

quaginta hominum milia eo casu debilitata vel obtrita sunt; cau- 
tumque in posterum senatus consulto, ne quis gladiatorium 
10 munus ederet, cui minor quadringentorum milium res, neve amphi- 

theatrum imponeretur nisi solo firmitatis spectatae. 
ceterum sub recentem cladem patuere pro- 

exilium actus est. 

Atilius in 

cerum domus, fomenta et medici passim praebiti, fuitque urbs 
per illos dies quamquam maesta facie veterum institutis similis, 
15 qui magna post proelia saucios largitione et cura sustentabant. 

. 64. Nondum ea clades exoleverat, cum ignis violentia urbem 

ultra solitum adfecit, deusto monte Caelio; feralemque annum 

3. periculis sed : text D. 

2. diversa, unconnected with the 
games. 

3. vis ; so used of fire in 3. 72, 5. 

latior, ‘more widespread’; so used — 

of fear in 12. 43, 1; H. 4. 33, 4 ; of glory 
in Pl. Epp. 4. 12, 7, &c. 

5. obruta. This must evidently here 
mean ‘the fallen materials’ or ‘debris,’ 
but no other instance of such meaning 
appears to be given. 

6. confusior facies, sed par forma. 
With either reading the whole is taken 
together as subject of *fecerat': ‘if, 
in spite of a face which baffled recog- 
nition, likeness of shape or age had de- 
ceived those who sought to identify 
them. Nipp. notes *confuderat oris 
notas pallor’ in Curt. 8. 3, 13. 

8. debilitata vel obtrita, * maimed 
or crushed to pieces.’ Suet. (Tib. 40), 
who speaks of the killed alone, puts the 
number at 20,000. 

9. ne quis, &c. These rules would 
apply mainly to speculators, as those 
who gave such entertainments at their 
own expense could rarely have been men 
of less than equestrian means. 

Io. minor quadringentorum, &c. A. 

similar genitive is ‘maiores annorum 

7. et par B. 

S 
I4. instituti : text B. 

quinque et triginta’ (Suet. Aug. 38), and 
either would be abbreviations of such an 
expression as * minor quam viginti quin- 
que annorum natu’ (Dig. 4. 4, 1). Drager 
notes that later writers, as Apuleius, use 
the genitive of comparison just as in 
Greek, e.g. ‘deus deum magnorum po- 
tior ' Met. 11. 30, 816 (cp. Hildebrand on 
Met. 3. 11, 193). 

12. Sub, *just after.' 

13. medici. These were usually Greek 

slaves or freedmen, and thus belonged to. 

particular houses. 
. I4. veterum institutis. For the old 
custom see Liv. 2. 47, 12 ; for the practice 
on distant service see on I. 71, 5. 

16. Nondum. ..exoleverat; so ‘non- 
dum is dolor exoleverat’ 6. 25, 1. 

17. ultra solitum. The constant oc- 
currence of fires was the main cause for 
establishing the corps of vigiles in 759, 
A. D. 6 (Dio, 55. 26, 4). Another great 
fire is mentioned in 6. 45,1. For others 
see Friedlander, i. p. 25, foll. 
, deusto; so ‘deusta paite. Circi’ 6. 
43; I.. On these aoristic uses of parti- 
ciples see Introd. v. $ £4 b. 

feralem = ‘ funestum’; 
... ferale' H. 5. 25, 5. 

so ‘ bellum 

[A. U. C. 780. 

3 

A. D. 27.] LIBER IV. CAP. 62-65. 565 

ferebant et ominibus adversis susceptum principi consilium 
absentiae, qui mos vulgo, fortuita ad culpam trahentes, ni Caesar 
2 obviam isset tribuendo pecunias ex modo detrimenti. actaeque 
ei grates apud senatum ab inlustribus famaque apud populum, 
quia sine ambitione aut proximorum precibus ignotos etiam et 5 
3 ultro accitos munificentia iuverat. adduntur sententiae ut mons 
Caelius in posterum Augustus appellaretur, quando cunctis 
circum flagrantibus sola Tiberii effigies, sita in domo Iunii 
4 senatoris, inviolata mansisset. evenisse id olim Claudiae Quintae, 
eiusque statuam vim ignium bis elapsam maiores apud aedem 
5 matris deum consecravisse. sanctos acceptosque numinibus 
Claudios et augendam caerimoniam loco, in quo tantum in prin- 

L 

cipem honorem di ostenderint. 

65. Haud fuerit absurdum tradere montem eum antiquitus 
Querquetulanum cognomento fuisse, quod talis silvae frequens 
fecundusque erat, mox Caelium appellitatum a Caele Vibenna, 

I. omnibus: text B. 

3. trahentes: cp. 3. 32, 6; 37, 2, &c. 

ni Caesar, &c. This munificence 
is lauded by Velleius (2. 130, 2). Sue- 
tonius (Tib. 48), with much injustice, 
ignores the similar act in a later year (see 
6. 45, 1), and makes him ‘command’ that 
the hill be called * Augustus ' in future. 

4. fama. This appears contrasted to 
‘ab inlustribus, as *apud populum’ to 
* apud senatum.’ 

5. sine ambitione, &c., ‘without re- 
spect of persons (cp. ‘nulla ambitione" 
1. 67, 4), and without the intercession of 

relatives The following words specify | 

extreme cases of the above, 'eyen per- 
sons unknown and invited to apply. 
Nipp. notes a similar stress on the last 
clause in 6. 7, 4 *in foro, in convivio, 
quaqua de re locuti." 

7. Augustus appellaretur. There 
is no evidence that this was carried out. 

9. Claudiae Quintae. Her name 
would imply that she was a fifth daughter, 
but she seems:to belong to a later genera- 
tion than the five daughters of App. 
Claudius Caecus. Her statue was placed 
in the temple of the Mater ‘Deum to 
commemorate the story told of her draw- 
ing the ship off a sandbank, when the 
goddess was brought to Rome in 550, 
B.C. 204 (Ov. Fast. 4. 305, foll.). The 
n appears to have been called ‘Salvia,’ 
and the juxtaposition of the names ‘ Matri 

13. ostenderent : text L. 

Deum et Navi Salviae' (see C. I. L. 
vi. 492-4), which has been taken by 
some to imply a deification of Claudia 
under the title óf * Navisalvia,' may per- 
haps suggest an origin for the story. 

10. bis elapsam. The temple in which 
it stood, dedicated in 563, B. C. 191 (Liv. 

:36. 36, 3), on the Palatine, had been 

burned in 643 and 756, B. C. 111, A.D. 3, 
and the flames are said on each occasion 

to have stopped short-of the statue (Val. 

Max. 1.8, 11). The sentence would more 
naturally have run *statuam apud aedem 
. . . 'consecr-tam, vim ignium bis elap- 
sam. Borghesi (ii. 183) notes that the 
statue is represented upon coins. 

I2. c&erimoniam: cp. 3. 61, 3. The 
sanctity of the * Caelius mons’ would be 
increased by calling it * Augustus.' 

14. Haud fuerit absurdum. For simi- 
lar expressions of apology, introducing 
an antiquarian note or digression, see 12. 
24, 1, and note. 

15. cognomento = ' nomine": see note 
on I. 23, 6; 2. 6, 5, &c.; so also *vo- 
cabulo' below (cp. 1. 23, 4). No other 
mention appears of this old name of the 
Caelian. 

frequens, nowhere else with genitive, 
but here accommodated to the construc- 
tion of ‘fecundus’ (Drager). 

16. appellitatum. This verb is found 
here only in Tacitus who seems to take 

— 

5 

IO 

566 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

5 

qui dux gentis Etruscae cum auxilium portavisset, sedem eam 
acceperat a Tarquinio Prisco, seu quis alius regum dedit: nam 
scriptores in eo dissentiunt. cetera non ambigua sunt, magnas 
eas copias per plana etiam ac foro propinqua habitavisse, unde 
Tuscum vicum e vocabulo advenarum dictum. 

66. Sed ut studia procerum et largitio principis adversum 
casus solacium tulerant, ita accusatorum maior in dies et infestior 
vis sine levamento grassabatur: corripueratque Varum Quin- 
tilium, divitem et Caesari propinquum, Domitius Afer, Claudiae 
Pulchrae matris eius condemnator, nullo mirante quod diu egens 
et parto nuper praemio male usus plura ad flagitia accingeretur. 
P. Dolabellam socium delationis extitisse miraculo erat, quia 
claris maioribus et Varo conexus suam ipse nobilitatem, suum 

[A. U. C. 780. 

1. appellatum tauisset : 
". casum: text Heins. 

it from the speech of Claudius (col. 
i. 22), which his version of the story 

partly follows. 

Ca»le Vibenna. Varro (L. L. 5. 46) 
and Dion. Hal. (2. 36) represent this per- 
son (with some differences of orthography) 
as an ally of Romulus against Tatius. 
In the speech of Claudius (i. 17: .see 

" App.toB. xi.), Servius Tullius or Mastarna 

is spoken of as migrating from Etruria ' 

and settling on this hill, and naming it 
after Caelius Vivenna, his old captain in 
arms. Livy, who says nothing of this 
legend, states that the Caelian was as- 
signed by Tullus Hostilius to the people 
transported from Alba (1. 30, 1). 

I. portavisset. None of the cor- 
rections are wholly satisfactory, and per- 
haps Baiter is right in retaining the MS. 
text obelized. With the reading above, 

' appellatum" is supposed to be a mere 
repetition of the previous * appellitatum,' 
and the apparent tense ending taken to 
be that of ‘portavisset,’ from ‘ auxilia 
portabant" (Sall. Cat. 6, 5). 

3. scriptores dissentiunt. The king 
who first included the Caelian mount is 
also made to have been Romulus (Varro, 
l 1), Tullus Hostilius (Livy, 1. l, and 
Dion. Hal. 3. 1), and Ancus Marcius (Cic. 
Rep. 2. 18; Strab. 5. 3, 7, 234): these 
writers also differ as to the circumstances 
under which this hill was added. 

4. eas, i. e. * Tuscas.’ 

5. Tuscum vicum, a locality well 

— o —— A— no 

tulisset L, portavisset Doed., postulatum tulisset Ritt. 
13. conixius : text L. 

known in Roman topography as that of 
a street extending from the Forum to 
or through the Velabrum. The name is 
very variously explained. Livy (2. 14, 9) 
makes it occupied by fugitives from the 
army of Porsena, after his defeat at 
Aricia ; Varro (1. 1.) states that the Tus- 
cans were brought down from the Caelian 
to a less strong position. 

6. studia procerum, referring to c. 

63, 3. 
8. Varum Quintilium. M. Seneca 
(Contr. 3, 10) mentions apparently the 
same person as having been twitted by 
Cestius (cp. 6. 7, 3) in a declamation 
with being son of the Varus slain in Ger- 
many. He is there called * Germanici 
Euer et praetextatus'; but it is not 
:nown to what daughter of Germanicus 
he was betrothed. 

9. Caesari propinquum. The rela- 
tionship through his mother Claudia 
Pulchra (see c. 52, 1) would be bnt dis- 
tant ; yet no other appears to be known. 

Domitius Afer: see C. 52, 1. 

10. condemnator, i. e. who had prot 
cured her condemnation (cp. * damnasset" 
3. 36, 3). The word occurs only here ane 
in Tert..adv. Marc. 2, 9 

II. praemio, the accuser's usual re- 
ward : cp. c. 20, 3. 

12. Publium Dolabellam: see on 3. 
47,4. His relationship to Varus has not 
been traced. 

13. claris maioribus, abl. of quality. 

A.D. 27.] LIBER IV. 

. CAP. 65-67. 

567 

3 sanguinem perditum ibat. restitit tamen senatus et opperiendum 
imperatorem censuit, quod unum urguentium malorum suffugium 

in tempus erat. 

67. At Caesar dedicatis per Campaniam templis, quamquam 
edicto monuisset ne quis quietem eius inrumperet, concursusque 
oppidanorum disposito milite prohiberentur, perosus tamen muni- 
cipia et colonias omniaque in continenti sita, Capreas se in 
insulam abdidit, trium milium freto ab extremis Surrentini pro- 

2 munturii diiunctam. 

solitudinem eius placuisse maxime credi- 

derim, quoniam inportuosum circa mare et vix modicis navigiis 
pauca subsidia; neque adpulerit quisquam nisi gnaro custode. 
3 caeli temperies hieme mitis obiectu montis, quo saeva ventorum 

b 
8. addidit : text B. 
2. 39, 3. II, grano: text B. 

1. perditum ibat; a phrase taken 
from Plaut. (Aul. 4. 10, 10, &c.), Sall. 
(Cat. 36, 4, &c.), and others. Tacitus 
uses other similar constructions, as * rap- 
tum,’ * ultum ire’ (c. 1, 3; 73, 6, &c.). 

2. suffugium, as giving a pretext for 
delay. 

3. in tempus, ‘temporarily’: cp. 6. 
I1, I. For slightly different uses of the 
phrase cp. I. 1, 1, &c. 

4. dedicatis... templis: cp. c. 57, 
I. On the force of ‘ per’ see Introd. v. 
§ 62. 

5. eius. In classical usage ‘suam’ 

‘would. be expected (cp. * edicto vetuit ne . 

quis se praeter Apellem pingeret ' Hor. 
Ep. 2. 1, 239) : Nipp. compares * ut eum 
. ». Sisterent orabat" H. 2. 9, 2. 

inrumperet, ‘break in upon’: see 

note on 2. I1, 4. In H. 5. 22, 5 Tacitus 
has ‘ne quietem eius turbarent,’ and it 
has been thought that this or ‘ interrum- 

ret’ (Ritt., after Her.) should be read 
ere. It is not impossible, as Pfitzner 
(p. 64) suggests, that the words are 
quoted from the edict; nor, if they are 
those of Tacitus, are they unsupported by 
parallels (cp. H. 1. 83, 1; 4. 50, 2). 

6. municipia et colonias: see I. 
79, I. | 
D Capreas...in insulam: cp. ‘ Hi- 
beros ad patrium regnum" 12. 51, 4 
(where see note), ‘Geldubam in castra ' 
H. 4. 32, 2. Tacitus correctly gives the 
distance of Capri from the nearest point 
of land; Pliny states it at eight miles 
from Surrentum itself, and estimates the 
circumference of the island at eleven 

o 
promuntirii (promuntorium Med. ii. in 14. 4, 3) : cp. 

miles. Augustus had made it his pro- 
perty in 725, B.C. 29 (Strab. 5. 4, 5, 248; 
Dio, 52. 43, 2; Suet. Aug. 923), by giving 
to the community of Neapolis in ex- 
change the more important island Aenaria 
(Ischia), and had taken a fancy to it and 
erected a villa, where he spent some days 
shortly before his death (Suet. 98). The 
island is now well known to most travel- 
lers. A careful, but not critical investi- 
gation of its topography, with a good 
map, will be found in the * Ricerche" of 
Rosario Mangoni (Napoli, 1834), and a 
very graphic description of its present 

state in Mr. J. R. Green's * Stray Studies ' 

from England and Italy,' London, 1876. 
10. inportuosum ... mare, apparently 
from Sall. Jug. 17,.5; used also of * li- 
tora’ (Liv. 10. 2, 4), * litus' (Pl. Epp. 6. 
31, 17), ‘insula’ (Pl. N. H. 4. 12, 23, 

11. subsidia, ‘ places of refuge’: cp. 2. 
63.1; 3. 36, 2; 60, 2, &c. Two small 
coves exist on the north and south, on 
either side of the modern town of Capri, 
which lies in the depression between the 
eastern. and western precipices. The 
southern, or ‘piccola marina,’ shows 
traces of having been the ancient port. 

adpulerit, potential subjunctive. 

nisi gnaro custode, ‘without know- 
ledge of the sentinel.’ The point of out- 
look would probably be on the eastern 
precipice, facing the mainland, where 
the remains of the Pharos, mentioned by 
Suet. (Tib. 74) and Statius (Silv. 4. 3, 
100), still exist. 

12. obiectu montis: cp. H. 3. 9, 2, 

568 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 781. 

arcentur; aestas in favonium obversa et aperto circum pelago 
peramoena; prospectabatque pulcherrimum sinum, antequam 

Vesuvius mons ardescens faciem loci verteret. 
nuisse Capreasque Telebois habitatas fama tradit. 

Graecos ea te- 4 
sed tum 5 

5 Tiberius duodecim villarum nominibus et molibus insederat, 
quanto intentus olim publicas ad curas, tanto occultiores in luxus 

6. occultior : occultos J. F. Gron., text Weissenborn. 

&c., and * obiectu laterum? (Verg. Aen. 
1, 160). The mountains in the island 
can hardly be said to shelter it, as their 
principal elevation is at the west; so 
that the mainland range terminating in 
the promontory of Minerva appears to 
be meant, which keeps off the wind in 
the most inclement quarters. 

1. aestas in favonium obversa, &c. 
The meaning is clear, but the expression 
harsh from its brevity : *its summer cli- 
mate, as it faces the west and has open 
sea around, is lovely) Favonius denotes 
the westerly wind beginning to blow early 
in February (Plin. N. H. 2. 47, 119, 122, 
&c.). The high position of Ana Capri, 
towering abovethe depression in which the 
town lies, occupies the western portion, 
with.the highest point (Monte Solar) im- 
mediately above it. 

2. peramoena, ds. elp.: see Introd. Y. 

$ 69, 3. 

pulcherrimum sinum: cp. ‘beatos: 

Campaniae sinus’ H. 3. 66, 3. The dis- 
trict round Vesuvius was renowned before 

the eruption for fertility as well as beauty: © 

cp. Verg. G. 2, 224 ‘talem dives arat 
Capua et vicina Vesevo ora iugo.’ Strabo, 
however (5. 4, 8, 247), noticed traces of 
its former volcanic action. 

antequam Vesuvius... verteret, 
* before the fires of Vesuvius began to 
ruin the landscape.’ Mr. Dallin rightly 
points out that the tense appears to 
allude to continued volcanic activity after 
the great eruption of 832, A.D. 79. Such 
is distinctly attested by Statius (Silv. 4. 
4, 80) ‘aemula Trinacriis volvens in- 
cendia flammis,’ and (85) * necdum letale 
minari cessat apex’; though no great 
eruption is again recorded till 956, A.D. 
203 (Dio, 76. 2, 1).- 

3. Graecos ea tenuisse, * that Greeks 
had possessed those spots’: cp. ‘ Evan- 
drum qui... tenuerit loca’ Liv. 1. 5, 1, 
*tenuisse . . . Lirim’ Hor. Od. 3. 17, 8. 
Nipp., less well, takes it to mean *these 
. qualities (i.e. the situation and climate) 
captivated the Greeks.’ Tacitus is hardly 

here speaking of the Greek settlements in 
South Italy as a whole, which were too 
well known to need mention, but of the 
old dwellers in Capri and its immediate 
neighbourhood. 

4. Telebois, identified by Strabo (10. 
2. 20, 459) with the Homeric Taphians 
of the islands off the coast of Acarnania : 
cp. Plin. N. H. 4. 12, 19, 53. The name 
is found as early as Hes. (Sc. 19), also in 
Hdt. 5. 59, 2. Their tenure of Capri is 
alluded to by Vergil (Aen. 7, 735}, who 
perhaps mentions the island out of com- 
pliment to Augustus. 

sed tum ... insederat. This is 
generally taken to mean that Tiberius . 
* had settled upon (or wholly occupied) 
the island with the titles and buildings 
of twelve villas’: the verb takes an accus. 
in 2. 16, 4; H. 3. 69, 4;-4. 73, 4, &c. 
We know of one villa called * villa Iovis 

" (Suet. Tib. 65), apparently the stronghold — 

or *arx Tiberii’ of Plin. N. H. 3. 6, 12, 
82, near the Pharos on the eastern height. 
From its name Lips. infers that all the 
twelve were named after the greater 

. gods; but the great improbability, that 

& person described as *antiquae parsi- 
moniae’ (3. 52, 2) and * modicus privatis 
aedificationibus’ (6. 45, 2), should have 
erected or even occupied twelve distinct 
villas in one small island, lends some 
colour to Bótticher's ingenious interpreta- 
tion, that he * had taken up his position 
on the names and ruins of twelve villas,’ 
i. e. those of former owners, now absorbed 
into his own grounds. It must however 
be admitted that the existing remains, if^ 
there were evidence to assign them to 
this date, would go far to make up such 
a number of residences; the principal 

ruins, next to the *arx' above men- 

tioned, being those of a marine villa and 
baths near the usual landing-place. 

6. intentus . . . &d curas, repeated . 
from H. 2. 67, 3; 4. 2, 1. 

occultiores. The MS. text might be 
defended from c. 12,1, &c.: the read- 

ing of J. F. Gron. takes the compara- 

LIBER IV. CAP. 67, 68. 569 

et malum otium resolutus. manebat quippe suspicionum et 
credendi temeritas, quam Seianus augere etiam: in urbe suetus 
acrius turbabat non iam occultis adversum Agrippinam et 
Neronem insidiis. quis additus miles nuntios, introitus, aperta 
secreta velut in annales referebat, ultroque struebantur qui mone- 
rent perfugere ad Germaniae exercitus vel celeberrimo fori 
efhgiem divi Augusti amplecti populumque ac senatum auxilio 
vocare. eaque spreta ab illis, velut pararent, obiciebantur. 

68. Iunio Silano et Silio Nerva consulibus foedum anni prin- 
cipium incessit tracto in carcerem inlustri equite Romano, Titio 
Sabino, ob amicitiam Germanici : neque enim omiserat coniugem 
liberosque eius percolere, sectator domi, comes in publico, post 
tot clientes unus eoque apud bopós laudatus et gravis iniquis. 
2 hunc Latinius Latiaris, Porcius Cato, Petilius Rufus, M. Opsius 

14. petitius: text L. 

A. D. 38.] 

tive as an error arising out of ‘tanto,’ 
and supposes the common ellipse of 
*magis' *Solutus in luxum" occurs in 
H. 2. 99, 3 (cp. H. 3. 38, 3), and it is 
perhaps possible (see Wolfflin, Phil. xxvii. 
147) that.'resolutus" here points to the 
former demoralization of Rhodes. 

I. quippe, explaining * malum.' 

2. quam, to be taken only with 'au- 

gere'; ‘eum’ being rather supplied as . 

object of ‘turbabat.’ 

3. non iam occultis, in contrast with 
his conduct as described in c. 59, 5. 

4. &dditus : see on c. 60, 1; 6.14, 3; 
also * Teucris addita Iuno' (Verg. Aen. 
6, 90). 

introitus, ‘ visits paid to them.’ 

5. struebantur, ‘ people were instruct- 
ed.’ Such a verb is elsewhere used of 
persons rather in the form of zeugma, 
as ‘crimina et accusatores struere" (11. 
12, 1), like * moliri ' (12. 22, 1). 

6. celeberrimo fori: probably *tem- 
pore’ is to be supplied, and the expres- 
sion taken as equivalent to iv dyopg 
sAn6ov0p, i.e. the latter part of the fore- 
noon, 

7. effigiem . . . amplecti. On this 
mode of claiming privilege of sanctuary 
see note on 3. 36, I. 

8. velut pararent, obiciebantur, 
* such' measures, though rejected by them, 
were laid to their charge as if they were 
contemplating them.' Suet. states (Tib. 
53) that these charges were brought 
against Agrippina at her condemnation. 
He also calis them false. 

.9. Iunio Silano et Silio Nerva. 
The insertion of ‘et,’ not classically usual 
in this formula unless consuls are meu- 
tioned by one name only, may be in- 
tended here, and in 14. 29, 1, to separate 
names that begin with the same letter, 
but cannot always be so explained (cp. 
15. 23, 1). The full names are App. 
Iunius Silanus, and P. Silius Nerva (C. I. 
L. x. 1196 ; lienzen, 6135). The former 
(on whom see note on 3. 68, 3) had a 
narrow escape afterwards (6. 9, 5), and 
rished under Claudius (see on 11. 29, 1). 
He was flamen Arvalis (C. I. L. vi. 
2028 d) The other is perhaps son of the 
cos. of 760, A. D. 7, and probably the 
father of the cos. of 818, A. D. 65 (see 15. 
48, 1). 
10. inlustri equite: see on 2. 59, 4. 
Titio Sabino. His destruction is 
represented as resolved upon four years 
earlier, but postponed (see c. 18, 1; 19, 
1); so that the matters related in this 
ch. and in c. 69 may have spread over a 
considerable part of the intervening time. 
12. percolere: cp. H. 3. 82, 3 ; Agr. 
10, 1; apparently adopted by Tacitus in 
this sense from Plautus ( l'rim? 2. 2, 4). 
14. Porcius Cato; probably the same 
who, in 791, A. D. 38, was ‘curator aqua- 
rum’ for one month only (according to 
Nipp.’s reading of Frontin. Aq. 102), 
having been previously cos. sutf, also 
legatus of Achaia (C. I. Att. tii. 1, 651): 
see further particulars in Nipp. on c. 71. 
Petilius Rufus. ‘Petitius’ is not 
known as a Roman name. 

Borghesi (see, 

o 

oad 

° 

5 deinde accusationem inciperent. 

570 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 781. 

praetura functi adgrediuntur, cupidine consulatus, ad quem non 
nisi per Seianum aditus ; neque Seiani voluntas nisi scelere quae- 
rebatur. compositum inter ipsos ut Latiaris, qui modico usu 
Sabinum contingebat, strueret dolum, ceteri testes adessent, 
igitur Latiaris iacere fortuitos 
primum sermones, mox laudare constantiam. quod non, ut ceteri, 
florentis domus amicus adflictam deseruisset ; simul honora de 
Germanico, Agrippinam miserans, disserebat. et postquam Sabi- 
nus, ut sunt molles in calamitate mortalium animi, effudit lacri- 

ro mas, iunxit questus, audentius iam onerat Seianum, saevitiam, 

15 

20 

superbiam, spes eius. nein Tiberium quidem convicio abstinet ; 
iique sermones, tamquam vetita miscuissent, speciem artae 

amicitiae fecere. 

tare domum, dolores suos quasi ad fidissimum deferre. 
69. Consultant quos memoravi, quonam modo ea plurium 

auditu acciperentur. 

nam loco in quem coibatur servanda soli- 

3 

4 

5 

8 

ac iam ultro Sabinus quaerere Latiarem, venti- 7 

2 

tudinis facies; et si pone fores adsisterent, metus visus, sonitus 

aut forte ortae suspicionis erat. 

tectum inter et laquearia tres 

senatores, haud minus turpi latebra quam detestanda fraude, 

sese abstrudunt, foraminibus et rimis aurem admovent. 

interea 

Latiaris repertum in publico Sabinum, velut recens cognita narra- 
turus, domum et in cubiculum trahit; praeteritaque et instantia, 

13. facere: text Mur. and Faern. 
18. erant: erat K. 

Nipp.) thinks this person probably the 
father or grandfather of Q. Petilius ufus, 
cos. ii. in 836, A.D. 83 (C. L.'G. 3173), 
and perhaps also father of Petilius Ce- 
rialis (14. 32, 6, &c.). 

M. Opsius. Borghesi thinks him the 
M. Opsius Navius Annianus recorded in 
an inscription at Naples (C. I. G. 5793) 
to have been praetor, and to have filled 
various lower magistracies and offices. 

3. usu, ‘ acquaintance,’ as 2. 28, T. 

». florentis... adflictam. This con- 
trast is repeated in c. 71, 7, and appar- 
ently taken from Cic. pro Quint. 30, 93 
(‘ab adflicta amivitia transfugere atque 
ad florentem aliam devolare "). 

honora : cp. I. 10, 7. 

Io. onerat. This word seems to he 
only here thus used absolutely without 
such a word as ‘contumeliis.’ The return 
to the historical present marks the change 
of subject again to Latiaris. 

17. metu (metui) . 

. . suspiciones erant Ern. 

I2. vetita miscuissent, ‘had ex- 
cnanged confidences on forbidden sub- 
jects’; analogous to * miscere consilia ' 
(cp. H. 2. 7, 3, &c.). 

15. quos memoravi, c. 68, 2. 

16. acciperentur =‘ audirentur, as in 
I. 67, 1, &c. 

I7. metus...erat. With this read- 
ing ' visus' and *sonitus'are genitives; with 
* erant,' ‘metus’ could stand as nom. pl. 

I8. forte ortae, i. e. of suspicion arising 
even without sight or hearing. 

tectum inter et laquearia, * between 
roof and ceiling. Thus we hear of a 
person hidden ‘inter cameram et tectum’ 
(Val. Max. 6. 7, 2), éni Dur js dpopis 
perafy (App. B. C. 4. 44). The open 
work of the ceiling gives the ‘ foramina’ 
mentioned below. 

Ig. latebra... fraude, abl. abs. 

22. instantia, ‘present’: cp. 'prae- 
terita instantia futura! H. 3. 36, 1, and 

3 

4 

A. D. 28.] 

quorum adfatim copia, ac novos terrores cumulat. 

LIBER IV. CAP. 68-70. 

57I 

eadem ille et 

diutius, quanto maesta, ubi semel prorupere, difficilius reticentur. 
5 próperata inde accusatio, missisque ad Caesarem litteris ordinem 
6 fraudis suumque ipsi dedecus narravere. non alias magis anxia 
et pavens civitas, reticens adversum proximos; congressus, con- 
loquia, notae ignotaeque aures vitari; etiam muta atque inanima, 
tectum et parietes circumspectabantur. 

70. Sed Caesar sollemnia incipientis anni kalendis Ianuariis 
epistula precatus, vertit in Sabinum, corruptos quosdam liber- 
torum et petitum se arguens, ultionemque haud obscure poscebat. 
2 nec mora quin decerneretur ; et trahebatur damnatus, quantum 
obducta veste et adstrictis faucibus niti poterat, clamitans sic 

38 inchoari annum, has Seiano victimas cadere. 

quo intendisset 

oculos, quo verba acciderent, fuga vastitas, deseri itinera fora. 
4 et quidam regrediebantur ostentabantque se rursum, id ipsum 

5. egens: tegens L, se tegens Vertran., sui tegens Müll, reticens Weissenb. 

14. acciperent : text R. 

a similar distinction in Auct. ad Her. 
" 5, 8; Cic. de Or. 2. 35, 106; Tusc. 4. 
, 1I. . 

I. adfatim, only here in Tacitus. It 
is used as an adj. in Plaut. Trin. 5. 3, 10 
(‘ miseria una uni . . . est adfatim 

2. diutius, ‘more fully’: cp. 6. 27, 5; 
H. 1. 16, 9, and ‘diu’ in 6. 49, 2; 12. 
6, 2, &c., a rare use, but in Cic. : see 
Gudeman on Dial. 11, 3. 

5. reticens: none of the corrections 
are quite satisfactory, and perhaps one or 
more words depending on ‘egens’ are 
lost. * Tegens, with or without ‘se,’ 
would mean ‘ guarding itself,’ ‘sui tegens' 
would be analogous to c. 1, 4. 

8. sollemnia ... precatus. On this 
day the new xs elie entered office, 
and vows were offered ‘ pro incolumitate 
reipublicae, according to old republican 
custom : see Liv. a1. 63, 7 ; Ov. Fast. 1, 
79, sqq ; also Marquardt, iii. 266: cp. 
note on c. 17, I. 

9. corruptos, &c. We should natu- 
rally infer from the last two chapters that 
Sabinus was charged merely with lan- 
guage abusive of Tiberius. But these 
words imply some further charge, amount- 
ing to one of alleged treasonable design. 
Also, we should here gather that he was 
at once condemned without trial, as is 
also stated by Dio (58. 1, 3*; but it would 
appear from Pliny (N. H. 8. 40, 61, 145) 

that an execution, and probably some 
examination, of his slaves took place. 
The words of Pliny, *cum animadver- 
teretur ex causa Neronis Germanici fili 
in Titium Sabinum et servitia eius, show 
that these proceedings, though correctly 
dated by him, are mixed up in his mind 
with the charges against Nero in the 
following year (cp. 5. 3, 2). Possibly 
Nero may have been now implicated by 
name (see below, $ 7), or the treason of 
Sabinus may have been brought up again 
next year and laid to his charge. 

IIl. quantum... poterat, qualifying 
‘ clamitans." 

I3. obducta veste, &c. He is dragged 
off to the dungeon, his face muffied in his 
toga, with the noose already round his 
neck, and bound hand and foot: cp. be- 
low, *vincla et laqueus. The story in 
Dio (1. 1.) of the dog of Sabinus clinging 
to his master's corpse, appears to be an 
inaccurate version of that of Pliny (1. 1.). 

13. Beiano victimas, alluding to the 
offerings on the new year: 'Seianus is 
our god, and this is the sacrifice to him.' 

quo intendisset. Onthe subjunct. see 
Introd. v. $ 52. 

I4. acciderent, ‘reached the ear’; so 
* unde clamor acciderat ’ H. 4. 29, 2. 

15. id ipsum, &c., ‘ trembling at their 
very betrayal of fear.' 

IO 

ud 
ese 

572 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 781. 

paventes, quod timuissent. quem enim diem vacuum poena, ubi 5 
inter sacra et vota, quo tempore verbis etiam profanis abstineri 
mos esset, vincla et laqueus inducantur? non inprudentem 6 
Tiberium tantam invidiam adisse, set quaesitum meditatumque, 
ne quid impedire credatur quo minus novi magistratus, quó 
modo delubra et altaria, sic carcerem recludant. secutae insuper 7 
litterae grates agentis, quod hominem infensum rei publicae puni- 
vissent, adiecto trepidam sibi vitam, suspectas inimicorum insidias, 
nullo nominatim conpellato; neque tamen dubitabatur in Ne- 

ronem et Agrippinam intendi. 

71. Ni mihi destinatum foret suum quaeque in annum referre, 
avebat animus antire statimque memorare exitus, quod Latinius 
atque Opsius ceterique flagitii eius repertores habuere, non modo 
. postquam Gaius Caesar rerum potitus est, sed. incolumi Tiberio, 
qui scelerum ministros ut perverti ab aliis nolebat, ita plerumque 

3. prudentem : text R. 

I. quem enim, supplying the thought 
that had led to the panic. 

2. verbis etiam. The formula ' favete 
linguis'.is well known: see the many 
passages illustrating this custom collected 
in Marquardt, iii. 176, n. 2. The action 
of Marius in having caused a man to be 
thrown from the rock on the first day of 
the e is noted by Plutarch (Mar. 45, 
432) 

3. inducantur. Perhaps ‘ in senatum" 
is supplied, as in 6. 7, 2; 16. 8, 2, &c. 
Nipp. takes it, as in H. 5. 5, 1, to mean 
‘introduced as noveltics.’ | 

non inprudentem. The MS. text 
could be taken ‘as by Walther) as a 
question (with * adisse’), to which * quae- 
situm, &c. (without *set") is the an- 
swer: the correction however is generally 
adopted. | 

5. ne quid, &c. Nipp. takes these 
words as the subject to ‘quaesitum medi- 
tatumque ' : ‘prearranged and studied was 
the demonstration that no scruple was to 
prevent the new magistrates from open- 
ing the prisons as solemnly as the temples 
and altars.’ It is, however, perhaps 
better to supply from the sense some such 

_ words as ‘ facinus fuisse' (cp. * meditatum 

scelus’ 14. 1, 1): the prison is imagined 
as opened or inaugurated by the death 
of the first criminal, as by an act of 
sacrifice. It is to be noted that Suetonius 

4. adisset : adisse B, adisse set Wurm. 

(Tib. 61) generalizes ‘more suo’ from 
this instance, ‘ animadversum in quosdam 
ineunte anno novo.' ; 

7. infensum rei publicae. The, ex- 
pression, repeated in 6. 24, I, appears 
to be one of the phrases of Tiberius 
(cp. C. 19, 3, and to resemble the * hostis 
puolicus' of old phraseology (cp. Introd. 
vi. p. 99). 

8. trepidam, ‘full of anxiety’; so 
again in 14. 59, 2, and in such phrases as 
in ‘re trepida," Xc. | 

suspectas : cp. 3. 52, I. 

Io. intendi. On this use of the accus. 
and int. cp. Introd. v. $ 44. It has been 
noted (see above) that Nero's name ma 
have been mentioned in the trial. | 

11. Ni...foret, &c. For the chief in- 
stances of departure from the annalistic 
method see Introd. iv. p. 27, n. 1. 

I2. avebat animus. Drager compares- 
a similar use of the imperf. ind. in Cic. 
de Off. 3. 19,67 ‘admonebat me res ut... 
deplorarem, ni vererer'; where, as here, 
what is spoken of was not merely on the 

point of occurring, but did and still does 

occur to the mind: cp. Madv. $ 348 b., 

14. postquam Gaius Caesar, &c. 
Latiaris alone suffered under Tiberius (6. ^ 
4,1). The date of Cato's condemnation 
may be inferred from the speedy end of 
his curatorship (see on c. 68, 2) ; respect- 
ing the others, all information is lost, 

A. D. 38.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 30, 71. 

573 

satiatus et oblatis in eandem operam recentibus veteres et prae- 
2 graves adflixit: verum has atque alias sontium poenas in tem- 

8 pore trademus. 

tum censuit Asinius Gallus, cuius liberorum 

Agrippina matertera erat, petendum a principe ut metus suos 

4 senatui fateretur amoverique sineret. 

rebatur, ex virtutibus suis quam dissimulationem diligebat: eo 

b aegrius accepit recludi quae premeret. 

sed mitigavit Seianus, 

non Galli amore, verum ut cunctationes principis opperiretur, 
gnarus lentum in meditando, ubi prorupisset, tristibus dictis 

atrocia facta coniungere. 

Per idem tempus Iulia mortem obiit, quam neptem Augustus 
convictam adulterii damnaverat, proieceratque in insulam Tri- 

7 merum, haud procul Apulis litoribus. 

illic viginti annis exilium 

toleravit Augustae ope sustentata, quae florentes privignos cum 
per occultum subvertisset, misericordiam erga adflictos palam 

ostentabat. 

8. aperirentur: opperirentur Mur., text J. F. Gron. 

I. praegraves, ‘burdensome (as having 
too many claims on him)’; so II. 19, 
6; 14. 3, 2; H. 1. 21, 2; 3. 66, 4; 
generally with a dative added. This 
sense of the word, as applied to persons, 
appears to be.peculiar to Tacitus. 

2. adflixit. 

aris, others are mentioned in 6. 10, 2; 29, 
4; 30, 15:38. 2. 
in tempore: cp. 1. 58. 9; 6.22, 6 

4. matertera, i e. as half-sister of their 
mother Vipsania (Introd. ix. note 27). 
The relationship is added to aggravate 
the baseness of his conduct. 

5. ut rebatur, taken closely with 
* virtutibus'; *his good qualities, as he 
considered them.’ | 

8. opperiretur. This verb would be 
used as in 2. 69, 4; 3. 45, 2, &c. Seianus 
desired to bide the time of the prince's 
hesitation, knowing that the result would 
be the more complete for the delay. 
Those who (as Halm and Allen) retain 
‘aperirentur’ extract a somewhat similar 
meaning from a rather forced inter- 
pretation, ‘that the prince’s hesitation 
should be left to disclose itself,’ i.e. to 
take its natural course in due time; or 
‘that his hesitation should show itself to 
be hesitation only’; on the supposition 
that a peremptory rebuke of Gallus 
would have blinded the eyes of the 

Besides the case of Lati- . 

senate as to the real mind of Tiberius re- 
specting Agrippina and Nero. But this 
appears to make the following sentence 
less apposite. 

9. gnarus, &c. On this trait in Tibe- 
rius see I. 7, 11, &c. 

IO. coniungere, i.e. made the act fol- 
low closely on the word. 

II. Iulia: see Introd. ix. note 7. 

12. Trimerum, one of the Diomedean 
group, off Apulia, north of Garganus. 
Strabo speaks of only one as inhabited 
(6. 3, 9, 284), which must be the Dio- 

" media of Pliny (3. 26, 30, 151, &c.), the 

modern S. Domenico, i in which the sup- 
posed tomb of Diomed was shown. * Tri- 

 merum' may be a vernacular name, and 

should perhaps be written * Tremetum' 
or * Tremitum,' the modern name of the 
group being * Isole di Tremiti.' 

I3. viginti annis. On the abl. see 
Introd. v. $ 26. The date thus furnished 
makes her exile coincident with that of 
Ovid, which has been thought to be 
connected with it. 

I4. Augustae ope. On this view of 
her character see Introd. viii. p. 149. 

privignos; used by syllepsis of both 
sexes: cp. Introd. v. § 83. 

I5. per occultum: cp. 5. 4, 43 6. n4: 
Introd. v. § 62. ‘Subvertisset’ is prob- 
ably subjunct. of peated action. 

nullam aeque Tiberius, ut 5 

I 

fun 
en 

Oo 

gi 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . ([A.U.C. 781. 

574 

72. Eodem anno Frisii, transrhenanus populus, pacem exuere, 
nostra magis avaritia quam obsequii inpatientes. tributum iis 2 
Drusus iusserat modicum pro angustia rerum, ut in usus militares 
coria boum penderent, non intenta cuiusquam cura quae firmi- 
tudo, quae mensura, donec Olennius e primipilaribus regendis 
Frisiis inpositus terga urorum delegit, quorum ad formam acci- 
perentur. id aliis quoque nationibus arduum apud Germanos 8 
difficilius tolerabatur, quis ingentium beluarum feraces saltus, 
modica domi armenta sunt. ac primo boves ipsos, mox agros, 4 
postremo corpora coniugum aut liberorum servitio tradebant. 
hinc ira et questus, et postquam non subveniebatur, remedium 5 
ex bello. rapti qui tributo aderant milites et patibulo adfixi : 

II. subueniebat: text R. 

1. Frisii: see on 1. 60, 3. 

pacem exuere. On the metaphorical 
uses of this verb in Tacitus see on 
1. 69, 2. 

2. tributum iis...iusserat. Such 

a constr. of * iubeo" with dat. pers., and 
accus., or subjunct., or infin., of the thing 
or act, is found in 13. 15, 3; 40, 3, also 
in Statius, Theb. 7, 32 (* pacemque iubebo 
omnibus’), &c.; Curt. 5. 6, 8, &c.: see 
other instances in Nipp. The construc- 
tion is analogous to that of * impero,' and 
akin to the earlier usage of *iubeo' with 
the sense of ‘appointing’ or ‘assigning,’ 
as ‘iubere aliquem regem, &c. (Liv. 1. 
22, 1, &c.), ‘ei provinciam Numidiam... 
iussit? (Sall. Jug. 84, 1). 
. 3. Drusus, the brother of Tiberius, 
who, in 742, B. C. 12, rods Spiaious geet- 
&caro, and was saved by them from a 
disaster (Dio, 54. 32, 2). On his sub- 
jection of this people see Momms. Hist. 
v. 25, E. T. i. 37. 

angustia. The sing. is found in 
Cic. N. D. 2. 7, 20 (‘ angustia orationis ’); 
also in Sall, Pl. N. H., Apul., and in the 
Vulgate. Gudeman reads *'angustia re- 
rum’ in Dial. 8, 12. 

ut...penderent. For other cases 
of tribute paid in kind, besides the well- 
known instance of corn, see Marquardt, 
ii. 232. The hides would be for tents, 
shields, &c. That they also had to fur- 
nish troops is implied in c. 73, 7. 

5. © primipilaribus: see on 2. II, 2. 
Olennius may ‘have had the equestrian 
position of a ‘procurator fisci’; but 
such subordinate governors of minor dis- 
tricts are generally styled ‘ praefecti’ (cp. 
H. 4. 14, 43 55, 2). Several such are 

mentioned in Inscr.: see Henzen, Ind. 
P. 108, and especially two such recorded 
as ‘primi pili, 6938 (C. I. L. v. 1838), 
6939. The construction here taken by 
‘impositus’ would be more usual with 
* praefectus." 

6. terga, ‘hides’; as in 15. 44,6; H. 
3. 88, 5; after Vergil (Aen. 1, 368) and 
Ovid; used also of anything made of 
leather, by Sall. (H. inc. 48 D, 14 K, 32 
G), and poets. 

urorum. Caesar, in a passage evi- 
dently founded on hearsay and mixed with 
fable (B. G. 6. 28), speaks of the *urus' 
of the Hercynian forest as almost of the 
size of an elephant. Pliny also (N. H. 8. 
15, 38) mentions the wild cattle of Ger- 
many ‘iubatos bisontes, excellentique et 
vi et velocitate uros,’ Vergil uses ‘uri’ 
of the Italian buffaloes (G. 2, 374; 3, 
532), whose hides were perhaps taken 
as the standard. In the context, ‘in- 
gentium beluarum feraces saltus’ is 
thrown in by way of contrast, as if pre- 
ceded by *quamquam'; the real stress 
being laid on ‘modica domi armenta.’ 
The Frisii were far from the great forests, 
and domestic herds must in: any case 
mainly supply a tribute; Germany being 
‘pecorum fecunda sed plerumque impro- 
cera’ (G. 5, 1). : 

IO. corpor&...tradebant. On this 
German custom, see G. 24, 4. The 
periphrasis ‘ corpora’ i$ so used in speak- 
ing of slaves in Verg. Aen. 9, 273: cp. 
* liberis corporibus? 12. 17, t. 

II. subveniebatur: ‘ subveniebat’ 
can have no subject but Olennius, who 
has not been recently mentioned. 

12. qui tributo aderant: cp. 'cohor- 

A. D. 28] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 72, 73. 

515 

6 Olennius infensos fuga praevenit, receptus castello, cui nomen 
Flevum; et haud spernenda illic civium sociorumque manus 

litora Oceani praesidebat. 

73. Quod ubi L. Apronio inferioris Germaniae pro praetore 
cognitum, vexilla legionum e superiore provincia peditumque et 5 
equitum auxiliarium delectos accivit ac simul utrumque exer- 
citum Rheno devectum Frisiis intulit, soluto iam castelli obsidio 

2 et ad sua tutanda degressis rebellibus. 

igitur proxima aestuaria 

aggeribus et pontibus traducendo graviori agmini firmat. atque 
interim repertis vadis alam Canninefatem et quod peditum 
Germanorum inter nostros merebat circumgredi terga hostium 
iubet, qui iam acie compositi pellunt turmas sociales equitesque 

3 legionum subsidio missos. 

tum tres leves cohortes ac rursum 

duae, dein tempore interiecto alarius eques inmissus : satis validi, 
si simul incubuissent, per intervallum adventantes neque con- 
stantiam addiderant turbatis et pavore fugientium auferebantur. 

8. digressis B. 
text R. 14. acrius: alarius Freinsh. 

tem quae ...excubiis adest' 12. 69, 1. 
This dative expresses purpose, and ap- 
pears to be shortened from the gerundive 
(i.e. ‘tributo exigendo’), and to follow 
its construction. Cp. Introd. v. § 22 b. 

patibulo: cp. 1. 61, 6. 

3. Flevüm, also the name of a lake 
and island (Mela, 3. 2, 24), and of a 
mouth of the Rhine (Plin. N. H. 4. 15, 
29, 101), apparently confounded with the 
canal of Drusus (2. 8, 1). The name 
appears in the modern Vlieland, but the 
geography is much altered by. the present 
Zuydersee : cp. 1. 60, 3, &c. 

3. praesidebat, with accus.: cp. 3. 
39, I. 

n L. Apronio, already mentioned as 
legatus of Germanicus (1. 56, 1, &c.), 
and as proconsul of Africa (3. 21, 1). 
He would appear to have succeeded C. 
Visellius Varro (3. 41, 3). 

pro praetore, i.e. 'legato Augusti 
propraetore,’ as in 2. 66, 1. 

5. vexill&, probably ‘detachments’; 
not specially * veterani sub vexillo (see 
on I. 17, 4). : 

6. utrumque, i.e. his own force of 
Lower Germany, as well as the troops 
from the Upper army. To the former 
belong the ‘ legiones' mentioned, especi- 
ally the Fifth legion (cp. 1. 31, 3). 

7. castelli, i.e. * Flevi' (c. 72, 6). 

10. Canninefatium Asbach (see Halm). 

12. pelluntur: 

8. ad sua tutanda. On the error into 
which Ptolemy appears to have been led 
by this expression, see Introd. ii. p. 11. 

degressis. The reading is here still 
in dispute: tbe passages in c. 74, 4, and 
2. 69, 4, are hardly parallel; but in 
several instances the two verbs approach 
each other in meaning, and it is difficult 
to determine which should be read; see 
Gerber and Greef, Lex. s. v. 

aestuaria: cp. 2. 8, 3. 

9. aggeribus, ‘causeways’; 
coupled with ‘ pontes’ in 1. 61, 2. 

Io. Canninefatem. This people lived 

thus 

Batavi, and are often mentioned during 
the rising of Civilis (H. 4. 15, 1, &c.). 
The orthography of the name varies much 
in MSS. and Inscrr.: see Baiter here. 

132. turmas sociales, the ‘ala’ men- 
tioned above. 

equites legionum: cp. H. r. 57, 
2: Introd. vii. p. 123. Those of the four 
legions of the Lower army appear to be 
meant, who would be in all but sixteen 
* turmae," or 480 men. : 

13. leves cohortes; part of the aux- 
iliary foot. 

I4. alarius eques; the main body of 
auxiliary horse, as distinct from the single 
‘ala’ mentioned above. 

in the ‘insula’ of the Rhine adjoining the . 

576 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U.C. 781. 

Cethego Labeoni legato quintae legionis quod reliquum auxi- 4 

liorum tradit. 

missis nuntiis vim legionum inplorabat. 

atque ille dubia suorum re in anceps tractus 

prorumpunt quintani 5 

ante alios et acri pugna hoste pulso recipiunt cohortis alasque 

5 fessas vulneribus. 

neque dux Romanus ultum iit aut corpora 6 

humavit, quamquam multi tribunorum praefectorumque et insig- 

nes centuriones cecidissent. 

mox compertum a transfugis non- 7 

gentos Romanorum apud lucum quem Baduhennae vocant 
pugna in posterum extracta confectos, et aliam quadringentorum 
10 manum occupata Cruptorigis quondam stipendiarii villa, postquam 
proditio metuebatur, mutuis ictibus procubuisse. 

14. Clarum inde inter Germanos Frisium nomen, dissimulante 

Tiberio damna, ne cui bellum permitteret. 

neque senatus in eo 2 

cura, an imperii extrema dehonestarentur: pavor internus occu- 

15 paverat animos, cui remedium adulatione quaerebatur. 

quamquam diversis super, rebus consulerentur, aram clementiae, 

— I. cethecio: text L. 

I. legato .. 
3, &c. 

5. dux Romanus. The words appa- 
rently emphasize his unworthy negli- 
gence. 

ultum iit: cp. 6. 36, I; I2. 45, 23 
I5. 1, I; 49, 6, &c.; with accus. of 
the wrong avenged in Sall. Jug. 68, 1, 

. legionis: cp. I. 44, 

^ &c. 

6. praefectorum, commanders of aux- 
iliary cohorts and ‘alee.’ 

insignes, ‘of high rank.’ On the 
gradations of rank among centurions see 
on I. 29, 2, also Introd. vii. p. 123. 

8. Baduhennse. The name appears 
to be that of a goddess (cp. ‘ Tamfana’ 
J. 51, 2) of whom nothing is known 
except that philologists, as Miillenhoff 
(Zeitsch. f. deutsch. Alt. ix. 1853, p. 240), 
take the two first syllables to mean war 
or: battle, and the name has been ex- 
plained as ‘kampfwiitige.’ 

9. in posterum, sc. ‘diem’: cp. c. 

» 4. 

IO. stipendiarii ; not here in the usual 
sense (c. 20, 1), but —'qui stipendia me- 
ruerat': cp. ‘ (Romani) postquam stipen- 
diarii facti sunt’ Liv. 8. 8, 3, *cohortes 
stipendiariae’ Bell. Afr. 43, 1. A ‘cohors 
i. Frisiavonum' (see note on 13. 54, 2) 
was serving in Britain in the time of 
Trajan and Hadrian (C. I. L. vii. 1194, 

1195). 

IO. cruptoricis : text Otto. 

14. internos: text R. 

villa. For this term in relation to 
Germans cp. H. 4. 34, 4; 5. 23, 4, and 
the distinction * villas arva vicos' in Ann. 
13. 57, 5. Here it probably means the 
mansion of a proprietor surrounded by 
outbuildings and cottages of serís (see 
note on G. 25, 1); the whole being shown 
to be of considerable extent by the number 
here occupying it. 

12. Clarum inde, &c.: see II. I9, 2, 
where Corbulo is said in 800, A D. 47, to 
have first brought them to terms after 
the ‘clades Apronii.’ Their submission 
was still imperfect (see 13. 54, 2). 

I3. ne... permitteret, i.e. lest any 
one entrusted with power to make war on 
a larger scale should be dangerous. It 
is at least equally probable that Tiberius 
did not think the territory worth the 
pains of such reconquest; still more so 
that this is merely an instance of the 
disinclination to effort which marks his 
later years (see Introd. viii. p. 154). It 
would appear from 6: 30, 3, that Apronius, - 
in spite of his incompetence, was still 
*legatus, but that the general condition 
of the * Germaniae? was peaceful. 

I4. an, depending on ‘ in eo.’ 

16. quamquam ... consulerentur: 
see on 2. 33, 2. 

aram clementiae . .. . amicitiae. 
On such commemorative altars cp. 1. 14, 
3; 3. 18, 3. Eckhel (vi. p. 187) mentions 

ita 3 

‘7 donec id quoque vetitum: 

A. D. 28.] 

LIBER IV. CAP. 73-75. 

aram amicitiae effigiesque circum Caesaris ac Seiani censuere, 
crebrisque precibus efflagitabant visendi sui copiam facerent. 
4 non illi tamen in urbem aut propinqua urbi degressi sunt: satis 
5 visum omittere insulam et in proximo Campaniae aspici. eo 
venire patres, eques, magna pars plebis, anxii erga Seianum, 
cuius durior congressus, atque eo per ambitum et societate con- 

6 siliorum parabatur. 

satis constabat auctam ei adrogantiam 

foedum illud in propatulo servitium spectanti; quippe Romae 
sueti discursus, et magnitudine urbis incertum quod quisque ad 
negotium pergat: ibi campo aut litore iacentes nullo discrimine 
noctem ac diem iuxta gratiam aut fastus ianitorum perpetiebantur, 

et revenere in urbem trepidi, quos 

non sermone, non visu dignatus erat, quidam male alacres, quM 
infaustae amicitiae gravis exitus inminebat. 
75. Ceterum Tiberius neptem Agrippinam Germanico ortam 

9. magnitudini: text R. 

a medal of Tiberius, struck in or before 
771, A.D. 18, bearing on the reverse 
‘Clementiae’ S. C. 

1. circum, ‘on either side’ (i.e. of the 
altar of * amicitia". The word has this 
force in 14. 34, 3; H. a. 89, 2. 

3. degressi. Here the MS. text has 
been generally retained, as also in 11. 
21, 3 ('degressusque in urbem ?), where 
*ex Africa is implied. Here it probably 
signifies taking a course from Capreae; 
rather than, as in 6. 1, 2, disembarkation 
from shipboard: see note on 2. 69, 4 

4. omittere; so ‘omissa Armenia’ 6. 
36, 2; ‘Achaia’ 15. 36, 1, &c. 

in proximo Campaniae: cp. ‘in 
prominenti litoris’ 1. 53, 7; Introd. v. 
$ 32a. 

5. patres, eques: cp. I. 7, I 

magna pars plebis, probably the 
better sort, who could afford the journey, 
and had hope of a rise in rank. The 
attachment of the *plebs sordida! to 
Caesar (see H. 1. 4, 3) § seems of later 
date. 

6. durior =‘ difficilior' ; so *durum et 
arduum opus’ H. 2. 4, 5, "* duris sub- 
vectionibus? Caes. B. G. 7. 10, 1. Nipp. 
takes itto mean that Seianus was more un- 
approachable than Tiberius; but it seems 
more probable that the contrast was with 
his former habit (cp. c. 40, 7); he had 
grown harder of access, and only those 
who made interest to get at him and 
shared his plans could see him. The 

VOL. I. 

I2. idque: text Mur. 

‘ambitus’ would be exercised on the 
* janitores,' &c. (§ 6). Nipp. understands 
by * societate consiliorum, that men took 
each other into council and helped each 
other to get audience; but we should 
rather find in Tacitus ‘ sociare consilia 
cum aliquo,’ than ‘inter se’ (cp. H. 2. 
74,23 4. 15, 1). 

9. sueti discursus, ‘to see people 
running to and fro was usual’; so ‘in 
discursu' H. 1. 84, 1: cp. Hirt. B. G. 8. 
29, 2; Liv. 25. 25, 9, &c. 

10. campo aut litore. On the abl. 
cp. Introd. v. $ 23. 

I1. noctem ac diem iuxta, ‘alike by 
night and by day’: ‘iuxta,’ in the sense 
of ‘aeque,’ generally follows the words 

coupled by it (1. 48, 2; 2. 72, 3; 12. 

IO, 1, &c.). 

perpetiebantur: the condescension 
of such persons was as odious as their 
insolence. On the court paid to them 
cp. 6. 8, Io. 

12. id quoque. Ritter notes (on c. 21) 
that in all cases where ‘que’ (as. read 
here in the MS.) has the:force of * quo- 
que’ (asin I. 65, 2; 2. 37,13 57,1, &c.), 
it follows the first word in a sentence. 

13. male, ‘with bad reason’; explained 
by the following words. 

14. gravis exitus: cp. Verg. Aen. 10, 
630 ‘ manet insontem gravis exitus.’ 

15. Agrippinam: see Introd. ix. note 
I4. She would appear to have been now 
barely thirteen years old. From this 

Pp 

577 

o 

578 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM LIBER IV. 

e. . . . e. e e e. 
cum coram Cn. Domitio tradidisset, in urbe celebrari nuptias 

iussit. 

in Domitio super vetustatem generis propinquum Caesar- 2 

ibus sanguinem delegerat ; nam is aviam Octaviam et per eam 
Augustum avunculum praeferebat. 

4. Finit LiBER IIII. INciriT LiBER V. 

marriage L. Domitius, afterwards the 
emperor Nero, was born nine years later, 
and her husband died about three years 
after that date (Suet. Ner. 6). Many 
representations of her on coins exist (see 
Cohen, i. pp. 271-276, Bernoulli ii. coins, 
pl. xxxv), and'several statues are ascribed 
to her; but the difficulties of identification 
(see Bernoulli) are great. 

I. coram: cp. C. 54, 3; probably 
during this visit to Campania. 

Domitio, Cn. Domitius Ahenobar- 
bus, cos. 785, A.D. 32 (6. 1, 1). Sue- 
tonius (Ner. 5) speaks of him as ‘omni 

parte vitae detestabilis, For further 
mention of him in Tacitus see 6. 45, 4; 
47, 2; 12. 3, 2; 13. 10, I. He is also 
often mentioned as one of the ‘ Arvales' 
from 780 to 792, A.D. 27-39 (C. I. L. vi. 
1, 2024-2029). Nipp. also refers to him 
the inscr. C. I. Att. iii. 1, 604. On 
his father, and on the relationship to 
Augustus, sée c. 44, 2, 3. 

4. avunculum, ‘ great-uncle’; as in 2. 
43, 6, &c. 

praeferebat, * had to show’; so*longa 
decora praeferentes’ 14. 53, 5. Thesense 
is almost the same as in 2. 53, 4, &c. 

BOOK V. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U.C. 782, A. D. 29. C. Fufius Geminus, L. Rubellius Geminus, coss. 

Ch. 1-5. Death of Julia Augusta, and immediate attack on Agrippina and Nero. 
1. Death and character of Augusta. 2. Behaviour of Tiberius; his animosity 
towards Fufius the consul. 3. Letters of indictment against Agrippina and Nero 
sent to the senate. 4. Junius Rusticus advises delay ; manifestations of popular 
feeling. 5. Second letter of Tiberius, who still reserves the sentence in his own 
hands. 

Pp2 

P. CORNELII TACITI. 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER V. FRAGMENTUM. 

1. RUBELLIO et Fufio consulibus, quorum utrique Geminus 
cognomentum erat, Iulia Augusta mortem obiit, aetate extrema, 5 
nobilitatis per Claudiam familiam et adoptione Liviorum Iulio- 
2 rumque clarissimae. primum ei matrimonium et liberi fuere cum 
Tiberio Nerone, qui bello Perusino profugus, pace inter Sex. 

8 Pompeium ac triumviros pacta in urbem rediit. 

exim Caesar 

cupidine formae aufert marito, incertum an invitam, adeo pro- 
perus ut ne spatio quidem ad enitendum dato penatibus suis 

2. ab excessu diui Augusti. 

4. Rubellio et Fuflo, C. Fufius Ge- 
minus and L. Rubellius Geminus (Insc. 
Henz. 6854, and others cited by Nipp.). 
On Fufius see c. 2, 2: his father was a 
legatus of Caesar in Pannonia in 720, 
B.C. 34 (Dio, 49. 38, 1); his mother's 
name is given as Vitia (6. 10, 1). 

5. &etate extrema. As her son was 
in his seventieth year, her age can hardly 
be less than eighty-six, as given by Dio 
(58. 2, 1) ; and that she was but eighty- 
two (Plin. N. H. 14. 6, 8, 60), must be 
impossible. 

. nobilitatis . . . clarissimae: see 
Introd. ix. note 26. Borghesi (v. 314) 
shows that her father, M. Livius Drusus 
Claudianus, must have been son either of 
App. Claudius, trib. mil. in 667, B. c. 87 
(App. B. C. 1. 68), killed in repelling 
Telesinus from the Colline gate in 672, 
B. C. 82 (Plut. Sull. 29, 470), or of Clau- 

dius Pulcher, legatus (Liv. Epit. 95) or. 

puer (Plut. Crass. 9) in 681, B.C. 73; 

oth of whom were probably sons of C. 

Claudius, cos. in 624, B. C. 130: also that 
the adoptive father of Drusus Claudianus 
must have been Livius Drusus, the famous 

8. perusinio (or pusinio): text B. 

tribune of 663, B.c. 9r. Claudianus 
was proscribed, and killed himself after 
Philippi (Dio, 48. 44, 1). e 

8. Tiberio Nerone: s e Introd. (1.1.); 
also 6. 51, 2; Suet. Tib. 4. His service 
as quaestor is also recorded in Bell. Al. 
25, 3. His praetorship would appear from 
Suetonius to have been in 713, B. C. 41, 
but may have been a year earlier. In 
714, B. C. 40, on the surrender of Perusia, 
he escaped thence to Praeneste and Nea- 
polis, tried to organize a slave-rising, and 
took refuge in Sicily with Pompeius, 
oe whom he passed to Antonius (Suet, 
1. 1. 

pace, at Misenum in 715, B. C. 39. 

IO. cupidine, causal abl. Her beauty 
is shown by many representations of her 
in coins, gems, and sculpture: see Ber- 
noulli. | 

aufert marito: see I. IO, 4. 

incertum an, here apparently ‘ per- 
haps not,’ as in H. 1. 23, 1. The oppo- 
site meaning (see on 15. 64, 1) is more 
usual. 

II. enitendum, absol. as Verg. Aen. 
3, 327 ; Quint. 5. 13, 9; Suet. Cal. 35. 

582 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 782. 

gravidam induxerit. nullam posthac subolem edidit, sed sanguini 4 
Augusti per coniunctionem Agrippinae et Germanici adnexa 
communes pronepotes habuit. sanctitate domus priscum ad 5 
morem, comis ultra quam antiquis feminis: probatum, mater 
5 inpotens, uxor facilis et cum artibus mariti, simulatione filii bene 
composita. funus eius modicum, testamentum diu inritum fuit. 6 
laudata est pro rostris a Gaio Caesare pronepote, qui mox rerum 
potitus est. 
2. At Tiberius, quod supremis in matrem officiis defuisset, 
10 nihil mutata amoenitate vitae, magnitudinem negotiorum per 
litteras excusavit, honoresque memoriae eius ab senatu large 
decretos quasi per modestiam imminuit, paucis admodum receptis. 
et addito ne caelestis religio decerneretur: sic ipsam maluisse. 
quin et parte eiusdem epistulae increpuit amicitias muliebres, a 
3. pronepotes: cp. 

*privignos' 4. 6. diu; until the accession of Gaius, 

?1, 7. 

priscum &d morem. The notion of 
a verb denoting approximation is sup- 
plied from the sense. 

4. comis, ‘ affable.’ 
mater inpotens, ‘as a mother, im- 

perious’: cp. I. 4, 5; 4- 57, 4; also the 
use of ‘inpotentia’ in 12. 57, 5; 14. 31, 
55; G. 35, 3; and of * inpotens' in G. 36, 
I. From denoting absence of self-control, 
the word in such places takes the more 
special sense of violent assertion of self- 
will. Others, after J. F. Gron., take it 
less well to denote her extravagant fur- 
therance of her son's interests. 

5. uxor facilis, ‘as a wife, compliant.’ 
Special allusion seems intended to her 
connivance at her husband's laxity in 
private life (Suet. Aug. 71; Dio, 58. 2, 
5): cp. 4. 2, 4 ; and 'facilitas' 2. 65, 3; 
6. 15, 3, &c. 

artibus, ‘subtilty.” His many-sided 
genius for intrigue and diplomacy is con- 
trasted with the mere reserve and hypo- 
crisy attributed to Tiberius. 

bene composita, ‘well matched,’ a 
metaphor from the arena: cp. 15. 51, 7; 
16. 10, 3, and notes, also * vir fortis cum 
mala fortuna compositus’ (Sen. Prov. 2, 
9); 'uti non compositum melius cum 
Bitho Bacchius' (Hor. Sat. 1. 7, 19); 
also the use of * comparatur in 4. 28, 2. 
* Ulixes stolatus' is the name given to her 
by her great-grandson Gaius (Suet. Cal. 33). 
On the estimate of her character by Tacitus 
see Introd. viii, p. 149. 

who paid all legacies under her will, 
‘quod Tiberius suppresserat ' (Suet. Cal. 
16). 

10. amoenitate. Tacitus elsewhere uses 
this word only of places (as 14. 31, 7; 
52, 2, &c.), but has ‘amoena vita’ (15. 
55, 5) to denote a lax, self-indulgent life. 

II. excusavit, ‘ pleaded in excuse’; as 
in 3. 11, 2, &c. It is stated by Suetonius 
(Tib. 51) that he had only seen her once 
for a few hours during the last three years, 
and never during her last illness ; and that 
her funeral was improperly delayed in ex- 
pectation of his coming. 

honores...imminuit. He had acted 
similarly towards her after the death of 
Augustus (I. 14, I). 

I2. p&ucis...receptis. Dio states 
(58. 2, 1) that he accepted no more than 
a public funeral, and the erection of a few 
statues and other trifling memorials; but 
that the senate, out of genuine gratitude 
for her protection and liberality, went 
further, and prescribed a year's mourning 
and other honours. Her birthday con- 
tinued to be honoured (6. 5, 1). 

I3. ne... decerneretur. On her sub- 
sequent deification see Introd. ix. note 
26. The inscription *Liviae Augusti 
Deae? (Orell. 614) belongs to the lifetime 
of Augustus and to Sicily. 

I4. amicitias: cp. 4. 40, 7. Suetonius 
states (Tib. 51) that he soon struck down 
all her friends, even those to whom she 
had given charge of her funeral. 

A.D. 29.] | LIBER V. FRAGMENTUM. CAP. 1-4. 

3 Fufium consulem oblique perstringens. is gratia Augustae floru- 
erat, aptus adliciendis feminarum animis, dicax idem et Tiberium 
acerbis facetiis inridere solitus, quarum apud praepotentes in 
longum memoria est. 

3. Ceterum ex eo praerupta iam et urguens dominatio ]. nam 
incolumi Augusta erat adhuc perfugium, quia Tiberio inveteratum 
erga matrem obsequium, neque Seianus audebat auctoritati par- 

2 entis antire: tunc velut frenis exsoluti proruperunt, missaeque 
in Agrippinam ac Neronem litterae, quas pridem adlatas et cohi- 
bitas ab Augusta credidit vulgus; haud enim multo post mortem 

3 eius recitatae sunt. verba inerant quaesita asperitate; sed non 
arma, non rerum novarum studium, amores iuvenum et inpudici- 

4 tiam nepoti obiectabat. in nurum ne id quidem confingere ausus, 
adrogantiam oris et contumacem animum  incusavit, magno 
senatus pavore ac silentio, donec pauci, quis nulla ex honesto 
spes (et publica mala singulis in occasionem gratiae trahuntur), 
ut referretur postulavere, promptissimo Cotta Messalino cum 

5 atroci sententia. sed aliis a primoribus maximeque a magistra- 
tibus trepidabatur: quippe Tiberius etsi infense invectus cetera 
ambigua reliquerat. | 

4. Fuit in senatu Iunius Rusticus, conponendis patrum actis 

10. multum: text Heins. 

I. Fufilum: see c. I, I. 
appears to be that recorded in Dio, 58. 
4^ 53 where the name is read as Taíos 
‘Povpos Tepinos.  Nipp. considers that 
his wife, who is there called IlovmAí(a 
IIpicxa, is the Mutilia Prisca of 4. 12. 6. 

3. in longum: cp. 1. 69, 7. The 
general sentiment is nearly repeated in 
15. 68, 4. 

5. praerupta, ‘stern’: the metaphor 
is taken from an inaccessible rock: cp. 
16. 7, 4; and ‘ praerupta audacia ' (Cic. 
po: Rosc. Amer. 24, 68), * praeruptum 

. periculum ' (Vell. 2. 2, 2 

“urguens, ‘crushing ’ ; so used of press- 
ing evils in 4. 66, 3; Cic. Tusc. 3. 25, 61. 

8. antire, here alone in Tacitus with 
dat.; so in Cicero, &c. 

9. adlatas, sc. ‘ ad consules.' 

IO. multo. 
Halm adopts this correction in accord- 
ance with the usage of Tacitus (shown 
in some forty instances: see Gerber 
and Greef) and of other authors. Nipp. 

His death 

Here and in I2. 4, I, 

13. confringere: text B. 

retains the MS. text with an expression 
of doubt. 

I1. quaesita: cp. 3. 57, I. 

I4. oris, *of speech': cp. *ora sono 
discordia signant ' (Verg. Aen. 2, 423). 

16. et publica, &c.: for similar paren- 
theses with ‘et’ cp. H. 4. 14, 2; 5. 8, 3. 

occasionem gratiae. A gerundive 
notion, ‘such as that of ‘ captandae,’ is 
implied, as in * occasio odii’ 15. 73, 4, &c. 

17. ut referretur postulavere, ‘de- 
manded that the question be put’: cp. 

promptissimo, sc. ‘ad postulandum. 

cum atroci sententia, ‘prepared with 
a severe proposal’ (cp. 6. a, 1; H. 3. 
37. 1; Liv. 2. 35, 1), when it should come 
to his turn. On this argued of Cotta 
Messalinus cp. 2. 32, 2; 6. 5; 

18. magistratibus. The responsibility 
of the ‘ relatio’ rested with them. 

19. cetera, i.e. what he wanted to 
have done. 

21, Iunius Rusticus; probably father 

.13. 49, 2 ; and note on 2. 38$, 3. 

583 

an 

20 

584 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 783. 

delectus a Caesare, eoque meditationes eius introspicere creditus. 
is fatali quodam motu (neque enim ante specimen constantiae 3 
dederat) seu prava sollertia, dum imminentium oblitus incerta 
pavet, inserere se dubitantibus ac monere consules ne relationem 
5 inciperent ; disserebatque brevibus momentis summa verti ; posse 
quandoque domus Germanici exitium paenitentiae esse seni. 
simul populus effigies Agrippinae ac Neronis gerens circumsistit 3 
curiam faustisque in Caesarém ominibus falsas litteras et principe 

invito exitium domui eius intendi clamitat. 

I. meditationis: text R. 

omnibus: text B. 

of the well-known Arulenus Rusticus 
(16. 26, 6, &c.), who is called ‘Iunius 
Rusticus! in Suet. Dom. 1o. 
conponendis patrum actis. On the 
‘acta senatus’ see Introd. iii. p. 18. We 
have no earlier record of the office here 
mentionéd, which is taken to be the same 
as that of ‘curator actorum senatus! 
(Inscr. Henzen 5447 - C. I. L. ix. 2456), 
or ‘ab actis senatus’ (Henzen 5478= 
Wilmanns 636, &c.). It is not certain 
- that at this date the officer was himself 

a member of the senate; later, the post 

was a stepping-stone to the aedileship ; 
- see Staatsr. ii. p. gol. | 

I, eoque ... creditus. These minutes 
were sent to Caesar in his absence (Suet. 
Tib. 73), and their compiler must have 
been so far in his confidence as to receive 
instructions to suppress record of anything 
obnoxious. On the construction of * cre- 
ditus’ see Introd. v. § 45. 

2. fatali quodam motu, ‘impelled 
somehow by his destiny’; i.e. by some 
inexplicable motive : see on 3. 30, 7. 

. constantiae, ‘courage,’ as I. 32, 1j 
15. 55, 7, &c. 

3. prava, ‘misguided’; i.e. mistaking’ 

his true interest. It is explained by the 
following words: he overlooked the pre- 
sent danger of thwarting Caesar, on the 
uncertain chance that he might change 
his mind and punish their zeal. 

4. pavet. The accus. with this verb 
is poetical, but found in Sall. Cat. 31, 3, 
Liv. and Pl. Mai.: cp. 15. 11, 2; H. 3. 
56, 3, and the use of ‘ pereo n 4, 2, 
&c.), and ‘ expavescere’ (H. 2. 76, 3). 

inserere se; so in H. 2. 19, 3: cp. 
6. 2, 1; Ovid, &c. 

relationem inciperent. The same 

ee a 0700 

6. germanicis titium paenitentiae senis: Germanici 
exitium paenitentiae esse seni Rup., domus ins. Halm. 

8. festisque: text Mur. 

phrase is used in 13. 26, 2, where see note. 

5. brevibus momentis summa verti, 
*small things turn the scale in great 
events?; i.e. some influence too slight 
now to be foreseen may change Caesar's 
whole purpose. The sentiment is that of 
Cicero (Phil. 5. 10, 26‘, ‘minimis mo- 
mentis maximae inclinationes temporum 
fiunt': cp. ‘momenta deficientis" Agr. 
43, 3,  momentumque fuit mutatus Curio 
rerum’ Luc. 4, 819; and note on 4. 32, 4. 
For this sense of * brevis,’ Orelli compares 
* breve pondus Hor. Sat. 2. 2, 37. 

posse ...seni. The corrupt MS. text 
has exercised the ingenuity of all com- 
mentators. Walther has collected some 
fourteen suggestions which had found 
more or less favour down to his own 
time. For others see Halm (Comm. 
Crit.); Pfitzner (p. 100); Ritter (Rhein. 
Mus. xvii. p. 130). The above reading 
would express what must have been the 
sense of the original text; and the ab- 
sorption of ‘esse,’ between ‘ae’ and ‘s, 
as well as the addition of ‘s’ to ‘seni,’ 
from *simul, can be supposed without 
difficulty; but *domus,' though required 
by the sense, cannot have dropped out so 
easily ; and possibly some words amount- 
ing to a whole line in an original MS. 
may have been lost. ) 

7. effigies... gerens: compare the 
similar mode of showing attachment to 
Octavia (14. 61, 1). 

8. faustis... ominibus: cp. I. 35, 3- 
Walther's defence of ‘ festis’ by reference 
to 12. 69, 1, &c, is insufficient : any 
festal expressions would have been wholly 
out of place; yet men desired to profess 
due loyalty to Caesar, and to regard him 
as the dupe of Seianus. 

2. ae 

ita nihil triste illo 4 

A.D.29.] LIBER V. FRAGMENTUM. CAP. 4, 5. 585 

die patratum. ferebantur etiam sub nominibus consularium fictae 
in Seianum sententiae, exercentibus plerisque per occultum atque 
5 eo procacius libidinem ingeniorum. unde illi ira violentior et 
materies criminandi: spretum dolorem principis ab senatu, de- 
scivisse populum ; audiri iam et legi novas contiones, nova patrum 
consulta: quid reliquum nisi ut caperent ferrum et, quorum 
imagines pro vexillis secuti forent, duces imperatoresque deli- 
gerent ? 

b. Igitur Caesar repetitis adversum nepotem et nurum probris 
increpitaque per edictum plebe, questus apud patres quod fraude 
unius senatoris imperatoria maiestas elusa publice foret, integra 
2 tamen sibi cuncta postulavit. nec ultra deliberatum quo minus 
non quidem extrema decernerent (id enim vetitum), sed paratos 

ad ultionem vi principis impediri testarentur. 

1. ferebantur, ‘ were reported outside 
the senate house.’ 

3. libidinem ingeniorum, ‘their 
licence of imagination’; i.e. as to the 
author to whom they assigned this or 
that ‘ sententia.’ 

5. novas, *seditions, a similar mean- 
ing to that of ‘ novae res.” The addition 
of ‘legi’ would appear to imply that 
these imaginary ‘sententiae,’ and the 
speeches assigned to their proposers, had 
found place in the ‘ acta populi.’ 

II. imperatoria maiestas. This ex- 
pression is used with reference to soldiers 
in I. 46, 2; but here more arrogantly in 
relation to the senate. Tiberius was 
generally particular in his use of the title 
* imperator: cp. Dio, 57. 8, I. 

elusa, 'turned into ridicule': cp. 6. 
46, 9; 16. 3, 2, &c. 

integra; i.e. that all should be left 
to his decision: cp. ‘integra causa’ 3. 10, 
6, &c. 

12. quo minus —*quin' : cp. I. 21, 4. 

I3. paratos, sc. se: cp. 4. 59, 5, &c. ; 
Introd. v. $ 8. - 

9. testarentur. The MS. here shows 
only a vacant place of three or four 
letters, beginning another line with ‘ quat- 
tudor’; so that the great gap at this point 
must have existed in the MS. from which 
it was copied.. A summary of the chief 

wm 

events of this lost period, as recorded in - 

Dia, Suetonius, and other authors, is 
given in Appendix IV. below. 

APPENDIX IV. 

SUMMARY OF EVENTS DURING THE INTERVAL FOR WHICH 
THE HISTORY OF TACITUS IS HERE LOST. 

SENTENCE soon followed against Agrippina and Nero '. The latter was 
then or afterwards declared by the senate a public enemy?, and both 
were hurried into banishment, chained and in closed litters, with strict 
orders to the escort to allow none whom they met so much as to stand 
and look back at them?. Nero was sent to Pontia (Ponza), Agrippina 
to Pandateria, the old prison-house of Julia‘; where she is said to have 
been treated with such violence as to have lost an eye by a blow from 
the centurion, and to have had food forced into her mouth when she 
attempted to starve herself*. Drusus, who had been used as a tool by 
Seianus against his brother*, was for the present left unattacked, and 
probably during this year received Aemilia Lepida in marriage’. 

A. U. C. 783, A.D. 30. M. Vinicius, L. Cassius Longinus, coss.*. 
Asinius Gallus, while on a visit to Tiberius at Capreae, was denounced 
by a secret missive, and condemned in absence by the senate, yet not 
put to death or permitted to despatch himself, but sent to Rome and 
detained there in custody in the house of a magistrate, with just food 
enough forced upon him to support life?. His friend Vallius Syriacus 
the rhetorician was put to death for no other cause than his friendship °°. 
Seianus had now prepared his attack on Drusus by the seduction of his 
wife, and made some representation to Tiberius, who sent the young 

1 That sonie trial took place would 3 Suet. Tib. 64. 

appear from Pliny's inaccurate reference * Cp. 1. 53, 1. 
to the ‘causa Neronis" (see on 4. 70, 1), 5 Suet. Tib. 53- 
also from Suet. Tib. 53 (see on 4. 67, 6), 6 

and from Philo’s statement (in Flacc. 3, u See one. 40, 4. 

966) that the notorious praefect of Egypt, ® Insc, Orell. 4033. 

Avillius Flaccus, was one of Agrip- * Dio, 58. 3. In another instance, Ti- 

pina's accusers: trav Guvemüeuévov Tí  berius is said to have answered, to those 

laíov pnrép, ad’ bv xpóvov efye rds who pressed for speedy execution of a 

alrías ép' als dvnpé0n, yeyovuws. It would condemned person, obdénw abr@ dinAAa+y- 

seem as if this great praefecture was his ac (Dio, 1. 1). The death of Gallus is 

reward for this service. He is stated to mentioned three years later (6. 23, 1). 

have governed well while Tiberius lived. 10 Dio, 1. 1. Seneca (Ep. 55, 3) seems 
3 Suet. Tib. 54; Cal. 7. to allude to others also. 

SUMMARY OF INTERVAL OF LOST HISTORY. 587 

man back from Capreae to Rome!, where a more formal charge, pre- 
ferred through the agency of Cassius Severus ?, caused him also to be 
pronounced a public enemy? and imprisoned in a chamber in the 
Palatium *. 

Seianus had apparently reached the height of influence. Every order 
in Rome eagerly set up his statues and sent deputations to him, and paid 
to his name almost the same honour as to that of the prince; while 
Tiberius constantly called him ‘Seianus meus’ and spoke of him as 
his * particeps consiliorum 5 and had apparently affianced him to his 
house by a betrothal*; but was perhaps already secretly meditating his 
destruction. | 

A. U. C. 784, A.D. 31. Ti. Caesar Augustus v, L. Aelius Seianus coss. 

: Suff. May 9, Faustus Cornelius Sulla, Sex. Teidius Catullus. 

: Suff. July 1, L. Fulcinius Trio. 

: Suff. Oct. 1, P. Memmius Regulus’. 
The consulship removed Seianus to Rome, and it does not appear that 
he ever again saw his master, who declined his visits on various pretexts*. 
Outwardly he appears to have allowed him to receive more marks of 
honour than ever, to have admitted him to a priesthood and to a share of 
the * proconsulare imperium */ and even to have permitted the passing 
of a futile decree, appointing him with himself to be joint consuls for five 
years !?, Curtius Atticus, one of the * cohors amicorum' at Capreae”, 
was struck down at the favourite’s instigation?; while other men of rank, 
among them Fufius Geminus the friend of Augusta, met a similar fate”. 
Though he was not himself permitted to retain the consulship, his 
position seemed further secured by the substitution soon afterwards of 
Fulcinius Trio, one of his creatures; and, later on, the death of Nero !* 
seemed to show that the hesitation of Tiberius in dealing with this family 
was at length overcome. 

But the position of Gaius, who had been raised with Seianus to the 
pontificate, and was generally looked on as the heir, still seemed un- 
assailable 5^; and several small indications of coldness or displeasure 

* Dio, 58. 7, 5. 
? Id. 58. 7, 4: see note on 4. 7, 2. 
» moe 58. 4, 4- 

! Suetonius may be taken to imply 
that he was removed in strict custody like 
his mother and brother (Tib. 64). 

? Dio, 58. 3, 8. M oq. 58, I. 12 6. 10, 2. 
* Suet. Tib. 54; Cal. 7. 5 See 5. 2, 3; Dio, 58. 4, 5. 
* See 6. 23, 5. 5 Dio, 58. 4, 3. 4 Dio (58. 8, 4) seems to bear out the 

* See note on 4. 40, 11. 

7 These * suffecti" and their dates are 
given in a kalendar (C. I. L. x. 1233). 
The name ' L. Aelius Seianus' is erased 
on all records, but Eckhel (i. 36) notes 
its preservation on a Spanish coin. 

statement of Suet, (Tib. 61) that this 
death took place when Seianus was al- 
ready suspected. On the circumstances 
see Suet. Tib. 54. 

15 Dio, 58. 8, 1 

588 APPENDIX IV. 

caused additional alarm'. Becoming desperate, Seianus formed a con- 
spiracy ?, in which many of all ranks joined, to assassinate Tiberius on 
his return to Rome, and to contrive a similar fate for Gaius?. This 
appears to have been revealed by Satrius Secundus to Antonia, and by 
her, through the agency of her freedman, Pallas, to Tiberius*; who was 
nevertheless obliged to proceed with the utmost caution, as he was 
unable to reckon on the fidelity of the praetorians. A man of determined 
loyalty was secured for the consulship in the person of Memmius 
Regulus *, and almost immediately afterwards the blow was struck. 

The 18th of October? is marked as the day on which the famous 
meeting of the senate took place in the Palatine Temple, at which the 
‘long wordy letter from Capreae' was read. Naevius Sertorius Macro 
had brought with him, together with this missive, his own appointment 
to the command of the praetorians, in which the soldiers were induced 
by a liberal bribe, to acquiesce. The ‘ vigiles, over whom Seianus had 
no influence; guarded the senate under their praefect Graecinus Laco, 
and led Seianus to the dungeon where he was on the same day exe- 
cuted’. By subsequent sentences perished his eldest son?, his uncle 
Junius Blaesus?*, and others; while many more were muon into 
prison to await trial. | 

Tiberius, who had awaited news of these proceedings in extreme 
anxiety", was soon afterwards filled with horror and indignation, on 
a statement being made by Apicata, the divorced wife of Seianus, re- 
specting the murder of Drusus, with the connivance of his adulterous 
. wife, eight years previously’.  Livilla was put to death, or more probably 
compelled to commit suicide’*; and further investigations, conducted with 
the utmost atrocities of torture, took place before Tiberius himself'*. 

! Dio, 58. 6,4; 8, 5, &c. 

2 See Jos. Ant. 18. 6,6. On the doubts 
resting on this conspiracy see Introd. 
viii, p. 151. The general invective of 
‘Val. Max. 9. 11, ext. 4, proves nothing ; 
. but some definite treasonable act seems 
alleged in an obscure inscription (C. I. L. 
vi. 10213) addressed some years later to 
his tribesmen by a person who seems to 
have been implicated: * Seiani sce[lerati 
inci|tatio et inprobae comitiae [ill'ae 
fuerunt in Aventino ubi [Sei anus cos. 
factus est’: see Staatsr. iii. 348, n. 2. 

* 6. 3, 4- 

* We can thus reconcile 6. 47, 2 with 
Josephus (I. 1.). 

* On the date of his appointment see 
above: the whole action in the senate 
was conducted by him (see Dio, 58. 9). 

* See 6. 25, 5. 

7 For the whole scene see Dio, 58. 9— 
I3; Juv. 10. 56-89. 

* See on 5. 8, I. 

? See 5. 7, 2. 

10 Among them was probably Brutte- 
dius Niger (see on 3. 66, 5), perhaps also 
T. Ollius the father of Poppaea (13. 
45, 1), Carnulus and Paconius (Suet. Tib. 

1). 

1 Suet, Tib. 6 95. 

12 The circumstances are- given in 4. 8, 
1, &c. Dio (58. 11, 6) represents the 
statement of Apicata as made after the 
execution of her children, which Tacitus 
places later (5. 9, 1). 

13 Dio, 58. 11, 7. 

H Suet. "Tib. 62. 

BOOK VI. 

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

A. U.C. 784, A. D. 81 (Nov. and Dec). L. Fulcinus Trio, P. Memmius 
Regulus, coss. suff. 

B. V. Ch. 6-9. Punishment of persons connected with Seianus. 6. Address of 
a friend of Seianus to his friends. 7. His suicide before condemnation. 8. Death 
of P. Vitellius; peril of Pomponius Secundus. 9. Execution of the two younger 
children of Seianus. 

Ch. 10. Appearance of a false Drusus in Asia and Achaia. 11. Charges brought 
against each other by the two consuls. 

A. U.C.785, A. D. 32. Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, M. Furius Camillus 
Arruntius Scribonianus, coss. 

B. VI. l. Tiberius visits the suburbs of Rome, and abandons himself to profligacy at 
Capreae. 2. His reply to the absurd proposal of Togonius Gallus. 3. His resent- 
ment at'a proposal by Junius Gallio respecting the praetorians. 4. Latinius Latiaris 
punished on the information of Paconianus; the quarrel between Trio and Regulus 
suppressed. 5. Cotta Messalinus acquitted at the request of Tiberius. 6. Mental 
agony betrayed in his letter on the subject. 7. Several persons condemned. 8, 9. 
Spirited speech and acquittal of M. Terentius ; several of the highest rank attacked. 
10. Others put to death at Capreae; L. Piso the praefectus urbis dies a natural death. 
11. Origin and history of this * praefectura. 12. Question respecting an alleged 
Sibylline book. 18. Dangerous discontent at the high price of corn. 14. Certain 
Roman knights condemned for conspiracy; Fabatus put in custody for leaving Italy. 

A.U.C. 786, A. D. 33. Ser. Sulpicius Galba, L. Cornelius Sulla 
Felix, coss. 

Ch. 15. Marriage of two daughters of Germanicus to L. Cassius and M. Vinicius, 
16, 17. Financial crisis arising out of an attempt to enforce strictly the laws of 
usury; history of the subject. 18. Several persons condemned, especially the 
descendants of Theophanes of Mitylene. 19. Sex. Marius put to death; general 
execution of.all those detained in prison on the charge of conspiracy. 20. Gaius 
Caesar married to the daughter of M. Silanus; his servile demeanour ; prediction of 
Tiberius respecting Galba. 21. Instruction received by him in astrology from 
Thrasyllus at Rhodes. 22. Exposition of the prevalent theories respecting chance 
and fate. 28, 24. Deaths of Asinius Gallus, and of Drusus son of Germanicus; in- 
sincere statement of Tiberius respecting the former, and brutality shown towards the 

590 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. 

latter. 25. Death of Agrippina, and imputations cast upon her by Tiberius. 26. 
Suicide of Cocceius Nerva, and of Plancina, widow of Cn. Piso. 27. Julia, daughter 
of Drusus, married to Rubellius Blandus; death of Aelius Lamia, Pomponius Flaccus, 
M'. Lepidus. 

A.U.0.787, A.D. 34. Paullus Fabius Persicus, L. Vitellius, coss. 

Ch. 28. Alleged appearance of the phoenix in Egypt ; narrative of legends respecting 
it. 29. Suicide of Pomponius Labeo and Mamercus Scaurus, and of their wives 
Paxaea and Sextia. 30. Some accusers punished; bold line taken by Lentulus 
Gaetulicus. 

A.U.C. 788, A. D. 35. C. Cestius Gallus, M. Servilius Nonianus, coss. 

Ch. 31-37. Disturbances in the East. 
81. Parthian embassy to Rome to complain of Artabanus, who had set his son on 
the throne of Armenia. 32. Tiberius sends out Phraates, brother of Vonones, and, 
after his death, Tiridates, as a claimant to the throne of Parthia, and instigates 
Mithridates to occupy that of Armenia; Vitellius made legatus of Syria. 38. 
Mithridates seizes Armenia; Orodes son of Artabanus sent against him. 34, 35. 
Battle, and defeat of Orodes. 36. Artabanus fails to recover Armenia and is himself 
driven out of Parthia, and forced to take refuge with the Scythians. 37. Advance 
of Tiridates, supported by Vitellius, into Mesopotamia. . 

Ch. 38. Death of Fulcinius Trio and other persons. 39. Tiberius near Rome; death 
and character of Poppaeus Sabinus. 

A. U.C. 789, A.D. 36. Q. Plautius, Sex. Papinius Allenius, coss. 

40. Death of Tigranes, once king of Armenia, Aemilia Lepida, wife of Drusus, and 
others. 41. Suppression of a rising of the Cietae in Cappadocia. 

Ch. 42-44. Further account of affairs in the East. 
42. Tiridates received at Seleuceia, and crowned king at Ctesiphon by the Surena. 
43. Some of the nobles form a new plot to restore Artabanus. 44. Artabanus 
collects troops and advances rapidly; retreat of Tiridates, who is deserted by all, 
and takes refuge in Syria. 
45. Great loss by fire in Rome; munificence of Tiberius. 

A. U.C. 790, A.D. 37. Cn. Acerronius Proculus, C. Petronius Pontius 
Nigrinus, coss. 

Ch. 46. Tiberius aware of the court paid by Macro to Gaius; his hesitation to name 
an heir, and prediction to Gaius. 47. Albucilla charged with crimes in which 
Domitius, Vibius Marsus, and Arruntius are involved. 48. Suicide of Arruntius; 
Albucilla imprisoned. 49. Suicide of Sex. Papinius. 

Ch. 50, 51. Last moments and death of Tiberius. 

50. His failing health and last journey to Misenum; advice of Charicles, and 
measures taken by Gaius and Macro; circumstances of his death (March 16) in the 
seventy-eighth year of his age. 51. Vicissitudes of his life; his character at various 
periods. 

3 tantur. 

P. CORNELII TACITI 

ANNALIUM AB EXCESSU DIVI AUGUSTI 

LIBER VI. 

V. G6 (VI. 1)....... Quattuor et quadraginta orationes super 
ea re habitae, ex quis ob metum paucae, plures adsuetudine . . . 5 
2 ‘mihi pudorem aut Seiano invidiam adlaturum censui. versa est 
fortuna, et ille quidem, qui collegam et generum adsciverat, sibi 
ignoscit: ceteri, quem per dedecora fovere, cum scelere insec- 

miserius sit ob amicitiam accusari an amicum accusare, 

5. adsuetudine. mihi (without lacuna;. 

3. The MS. indicates the beginning of 
no fresh Book, and until Lipsius, editors 
had printed the wholeas Book V. Hesaw 
that the whole period must have taken 
two Books and placed the division at the 
beginning of 785, A.D. 32. The absence 
of any division In the MS. has led most 
editors to follow Haase in considering 
that the beginning of the Sixth, as well 
as the end of the Fiíth Book are lost, and 
that the latter ended with the death of 
Seianus, The old numbering of the chap- 
ters is, however, generally retained for 
convenience of reference. 

4. super ea re. The subject is sup- 

sed to be that of the punishment of 

ivia for the murder of Drusus (see 4. 3, 
3,foll.). Very few senators could have 
had to fear any charge of complicity; so 
that most of these denunciatory speeches 
are spoken of as prompted by the mere 
habit of servility. 

6. mihi pudorem, &c. We have here 
another fragment, from an address made 
to his friends by an attacked, but uncon- 
demned friend of Seianus. No light has 
been thrown on the speaker's identity. 
The sentiments are much the same as 
those of M. Terentius (6. 8). 

7. collegam. This may refer only to 

his association in the consulship; but as 
Seianus is styled *adiutor imperii ' some 
ran earlier, it is thought that he may 

ave been latterly ‘collega imperii,’ filling 
almost if not quite such a position as that 
of Tiberius under Augustus : see on I. 3, 
35 4. 7, 2; 6. 8, 6; Introd. vi. p. 98; 
Staatsr. ii. 1152, n, I. Some more 
definite title seems implied than that of 
*socius laborum (4. 2, 4) or xowevós 
Tüv ppovrisew (Dio, 58. 4, 3); and Dio 
(58. 7, 4) affirms that he had d»6vsraruc) 
éfovola in some form. 

generum: cp. 6. 8, 6. Suetonius also 
(Tib. 65) speaks of Seianus as ‘spe ad- 
finitatis deceptus For possible expla- 
nations see note on 4. 40,11. Such a 
term as ‘ gener’ can well be used of con- 
nexion through mere betrothal, and many 
analogies would justify its use for * pro- 
gener? (e.g. 4. 12, 6, &c.). 

sibi ignoscit, ‘pardons his own error’: 
cp. Hor. Sat. 1. 3, 23. 

8. cum scelere, i.e. by now fastening 
charges of complicity on the innocent. 

9. amicum acousare; perhaps allud- 
ing to Satrius Secundus, the follower 
(4. 34, 2; 6. 8, 10) and subsequent accuser 
(6. 47, a) of Seianus. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 784. 

992 

haud discreverim. non crudelitatem, non clementiam cuiusquam 4 
experiar, sed liber et mihi ipsi probatus antibo periculum. vos 5 
obtestor ne memoriam nostri per maerorem quam laeti reti- 
neatis, adiciendo me quoque iis qui fine egregio publica mala 
5 effugerunt. | 
'V."] (VI. 2). Tunc singulos, ut cuique adsistere, adloqui animus 
crat, retinens aut dimittens partem diei absumpsit, multoque 
adhuc coetu et cunctis intrepidum vultum eius spectantibus, cum 
superesse tempus novissimis crederent, gladio quem sinu ab- 
10 diderat incubuit. neque Caesar ullis criminibus aut probris 2 
defunctum insectatus est, cum in Blaesum multa foedaque 
incusavisset. | 
V.8(VI.3). Relatum inde de P. Vitellio et Pomponio Secundo. 
illum indices arguebant claustra aerarii, cui praefectus erat, et 
militarem pecuniam rebus novis obtulisse; huic a Considio 
praetura functo obiectabatur Aelii Galli amicitia, qui punito 
Seiano in hortos Pomponii quasi fidissimum ad subsidium per- 

15 

I. dementiam (by junction of cl): text B. 7. adsumpsit: text B. — i5. C. Con- 

sidio Wurm. 16. uelii: text L. 

I. haud discreverim, repeated from 
H. 3. 28, 1: cp. Introd. v. $ 51 c. 

2. antibo, ‘will anticipate’; so ‘dam- 
nationem anteiit ’ 6. 29, 7; 13. 30, 2. 

.9. per maerorem: see Introd. v. $ 62; 
for the ellipse of potius, Id. $ 64. 

6. ut cuique &dsistere, &c. It is 
perhaps best, with Walther, to make this 
answer to ‘ retinens aut dimittens, by un- 
derstanding ‘aut non erat’ after ‘animus 
erat.’ Pfitzner and Drager think that ‘ ad- 
sistere’ is an error for ‘ absistere,’ as in 
the next line * adsumpsit? for * absumpsit,' 
and probably ‘adstitit’ for ‘abstitit’ in 
2; 31; 3: | 

9. superesse tempus novissimis, 
‘that there was time yet to spare for the 
last extremity’; i.e. ‘that his end would 
not come just yet.’ ‘Novissima’ is used of 
death, as the extreme penalty, in 6. 50, 8, &c. 

II. Blaesum, the well-known uncle of 
Seianus (3. 35, 2, &c.) and ‘imperator’ 
(3- 74, 6), who must have fallen amongst 
the first victims. The fate of his two 
sons is mentioned in 6. 40, 3. 

12. incusavisset. This verb has no- 
where else this construction; but Drager 
notes from Livy the analogies * increpare 
in’ (1. 51, 1), *exsecrari in’ (30. 20, 7), 
* detestari in' (39. 10, 2). 

13. P. Vitellio, &c. On Vitellius see: 

on I. 70, I. P. Pomponius Secundus is 
further described below ($ 4). 

14. indices. Many accomplices in the 
conspiracy of: Seianus had saved them- 
selves by turning informers : see 6. 3, 5 ; 
7:53 9,6; 47, 2. 

aerarii. The context, and the men- 
tion of ' praefecti, show that the *aera- 
rium militare? is meant, on which see 1. 
78, 2. The ‘aerarium populi’ was in 
charge of praetors (1. 75, 4). 

15. obtulisse, taken figuratively with 

.* claustra: ‘had offered the keys of the 

treasury and its funds.’ 

Considio. Nipp. gives here several 
instances to show that even persons of 
rank are frequently mentioned by one 
name, when a title of dignity is added, as 
‘ augur Lentulus’ (3. 59, 1), &c. 

16. Aelii Galli. This is believed to 
be the name of the eldest son of Seianus. 
Borghesi (iv. 444) suggests that the adop- 
tive father from whom Seianus derived 
his gentile name was probably the knight 
Aelius Gallus (see on 4. 1, 2); as Velleius 
(2. 127, 3) assigns to him no nobility: 
through this source, and the other families 
of the Aelii were consular. 

17. fidissimum ad subsidium. The 
metaphor is from a harbour: cp. 3. 1, 2; 

4. 67, 2. 

A.D.31] LIBER VI. CAP. v. 6 (Vr. 1)-v. 9 (VI. 4). 

593 

2 fugisset. neque aliud periclitantibus auxilii quam in fratrum 
3 constantia fuit, qui vades exstitere. mox crebris prolationibus 
spem ac metum iuxta gravatus Vitellius petito per speciem 
studiorum scalpro levem ictum venis intulit vitamque aegritudine 
4 animi finivit. at Pomponius multa morum elegantia et ingenio 5 
inlustri, dum adversam fortunam aequus tolerat, Tiberio super- 

stes fuit. 

V. 9 (VI. 4). Placitum posthac ut in reliquos Seiani liberos 
adverteretur, vanescente quamquam plebis ira ac plerisque per 
2 priora supplicia lenitis. igitur portantur in carcerem, filius immi- 
nentium intellegens, puella adeo nescia, ut crebro interrogaret, 
quod ob delictum et quo traheretur; neque facturam ultra, et 

3 posse se puerili verbere moneri. 

tradunt temporis eius auctores, 

13. puerilimo | (Baiter suggests puerili modo) : text B. 

I. fratrum. On Quintus, brother of 
this Pomponius, see 6. 18, 2. Vitellius 

had three brothers, of whom the best: 

known is Lucius (6. 28, 1, &c.); another, 
Quintus, had been expelled from the senate 
(2. 48, 3); a third, Aulus, probably the 
óne here meant, was cos. suff. in the year 
after this (C. I. L. x. 1233 - Orelli 4033), 
and died in office (Suet. Vit. 2). 

2. vades exstitere. These brothers 
undertook their custody, till their appeal 
should be heard by Caesar. Delivery 
into the charge of ‘ fideiussores’ or ‘vades’ 
is one of the recognized kinds of ‘ custodia’ 
(see on 6. 3, 3). 

3. gravatus, with accus., as 3. 549, 6. 

per speciem studiorum. He is 
thought to have been the author of cer- 
tain ‘ Vitellii commentarii,' cited by Tert. 
de An. c. 46. According to Suetonius 
(Vit, 2) he allowed his self-inflicted 
wounds to be bound up, and afterwards 
died of disease, while still in custody. 
The words of Tacitus are not inconsistent 
with this account. 

5. morum elegantia, 'refinement of 
character’: cp. H. 3. 39, 3, and ‘ elegan- 
tia vitae’ (14. 19). 

ingenio inlustri. He is frequently 
mentioned as a poet antl especially as a 
tragedian (11. 13, 1 ; 12. 28, 2; Dial. 13, 
3; Pl. Epp. 7. 17, 11), and his excellence 
in this line is fully attested by Quintilian 
(10. 1, 98), *eorum, quos viderim, longe 
princeps Pomponius Secundus, quem senes 
parum tragicum putabant, eruditione ac 
nitore praestare confitebantur.” The elder 
Pliny, who speaks of him as 'vatem 

VOL. I. 

civemque clarissimum ' (N. H. 13. 12, 26, 
83), was also his personal friend and 
biographer (Pl. Epp. 3. 5, 3). 

6. Tiberio superstes fuit. Dio (59. 
6, 2), who confuses him with his brother, 
states that Gaius released him from. a 
custody which had lasted seven years. 
His consulship, also placed wrongly by 
Dio (1. 1.), appears to belong to 797, A.D. 
44 (Kal. Ant, C. I. L. x. 6638, Henzen 
6445). In 803, A.D. 50, he gained ' tri- 
umphalia' as legatus of the army of 
Upper Germany (12. 28, 2), | 

8. placitum. The expression shows the 
sentence to have been passed by the senate. 

reliquos. There were three (4. 3, 5), 
of whom the eldest (c. 8, 1) appears to 
have perished with his father. 

9. adverteretur : cp. 2. 32, 5. 

quamquam, in anastrophe, as in 6. 30, 
7; 14. 21, 7; also in Cicero, Vergil, 
and the elder Pliny. 

plebis ira. The populace at the fall 
of Seianus massacred any of his creatures 
whom, they saw in the streets (Dio, 58. 
12, 1). Compare the description of their 
temper in Juv. 10, 73. 

II. intellegens, with genit., 12. 26, 3; 
Cic. Fin. 2. 20, 65. 

puella, &c. She can hardly have 
been less than eleven or twelve years old 
(see note on 3. 29, 5): possibly her tender 
age may have been exaggerated by writers 
to add to the pathos of her fate. 

I2. neque facturam ultra, ‘she would 
not do so any more.’ 

13. verbere. Tacitus has this poetical 
singular only here and in 6. 24, 4; G. 19, 

Qq 

om 

Oo 

594 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 784. 

quia triumvirali supplicio adfici virginem inauditum habebatur, a 
carnifice laqueum iuxta conpressam; exim oblisis faucibus id 
aetatis corpora in Gemonias abiecta. 
V.10 (VI. 5). Per idem tempus Asia atque Achaia exterrita 
§ sunt acri magis quam diuturno rumore, Drusum Germanici filium 
apud Cycladas insulas, mox in continenti visum. et erat iuvenis 2 
haud dispari aetate, quibusdam Caesaris libertis velut adgnitus ; 
per dolumque comitantibus adliciebantur ignari fama nominis et 

promptis Graecorum animis ad nova et mira. 

quippe elapsum 

ro custodiae pergere ad paternos exercitus, Aegyptum aut Suriam 

— ——— 

invasurum, fingebant simul credebantque. 

e 
8. dolum qui: agnitus per dolum, quis Haase. 

2: the only other instance in prose ap- 
pears to be Pl. N. H. a. 8, 6, 33. 

moneri, ‘ chastised.’ The word ap- 
pears nowhere else to bear quite this 
meaning. Orelli cites * fustium admonitio’ 
(Ulp. Fr. 7 ; de Poen. 48, 19). 

temporis eius auctores, apparently 
thrown in, as in 13. 17, 3, to show that 
this additional horror is at least no sub- 
sequent invention. 

I. triumvirali supplicio, ‘capital 
punishment,’ inflicted under the superin- 
tendence of the * triumviri capitales, who 
now formed part of the collective ‘ viginti- 
virate' (3. 29, 1) : cp. ‘ flagellis triumvira- 
libus ' (Hor. Epod. 4, 11). 

2. conpressam =‘ violatam.’ Sueto- 
nius (Tib. 61), as in other cases, exagge- 
rates this single instance into a general 

ractice. Dio (47. 6, 6) gives an instance 
in which a youth was made to assume the 
toga virilis before being executed. 
oblisis; so ‘obliso gutture' Apul. 
Mct. 4. 12, 263. Cicero has ‘ collum 
digitulis oblideret’ (p. Scaur. 6, 10). 

id aetatis, a classical use (Madv. 238) 
extended by Tacitus to analogous phrases: 
cp. 12. 18, 1 ; 13. 16, 1. | 

3. in Gemonias: cp. 3. 14,6, &c. Ac- 
cording to the order of events followed 
by Dio (58. 11, 6), this execution is made 
to precede the revelation made by Api- 
cata respecting the murder of Drusus aud 
guilt of Livia. 

5. acri, ‘active’; so used of * causae" 
(1. 33, 3), ‘initia’ (6. 17, 5, &c.), * gloria’ 
and ‘ paenitentia! (H. 3. 51, 4), &c. 

Drusum. ‘The true lusus was a 
prisoner in the Palatium : see 6. 23, 5. 

iam iuventutis con- 
9. lapsum: text R. 

7. velut adgnitus, &c. With Haase’s 
reading * per dolum ' would be surplu:age, 
as ‘velut’ of itself implies that the re- 
cognition was only pretended. For the 
position of ‘que’ Nipp. compares ‘ ab 
oratoribusque’ (16. 2, 3), and cites also 

3 

many instances in which, as here, a pro- . 

nominal ablative is supplied from a fore- 
going noun, with the abl. abs. following 
(see Introd. v. $ 31 c, and note on 6. 47, 
4). The freedmen pretended to recognize 
him, and as they dishonestly followed 

him those who knew nothing were at- 

tracted. 

9. promptis .. . animis, another abl. 
abs. assigning a ground for their readi- 
ness to receive him. This characteristic 
of the Greek mind is noted in the Athe- 
nians of that time (Acts 17, 21). On the 
estimate generally formed of Greeks by 
Romans see Friedl. i. p. 74: cp. 2. 53, 
4; 55, 1; 6. 18, 5. 

elapsum . custodiae. Elsewhere 
Tacitus has the accus. with ‘elabi’ (as 
I. 61, 6, &c.); but Seneca has ‘vitae 
elapsus ' (Ep. 77, 10), and what are taken 
to be simple ablatives in other authors 
might often be datives, as *telis' (Verg. 
Aen. 2, 318), &c. * Custodia" is read by 
some, after Lips.; *custodias' might be 
suggested by the example of H. 3. 59, 4. 

IO. paternos, the armies of the East, 
commanded by Germanicus in his last 
years. 

11, fingebant...credebantque. This, 
as well as other expressions here, appear 
to be repeated from the similar account 
of the false Nero (H. 2. 8, 1). 

A. D. 31.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. v. 9 (VI. 4)-v. 11 (VI. 6). 

"595 

cursu, iam publicis studiis frequentabatur, laetus praesentibus et 
inanium spe, cum auditum id Poppaeo Sabino: is Macedoniae 

4 tum intentus Achaiam quoque curabat. 

igitur quo vera seu falsa 

antiret, Toronaeum Thermaeumque sinum praefestinans, mox 
Euboeam Aegaei maris insulam et Piraeum Atticae orae, dein 5 

Corinthiense litus angustiasque Isthmi evadit ; 

marique Ionio 

Nicopolim Romanam coloniam ingressus, ibi demum cognoscit 
sollertius interrogatum, quisnam foret, dixisse M. Silano genitum, 
et multis sectatorum dilapsis ascendisse navem tamquam Italiam 

5 peteret. 
eius rei ultra comperimus. 

scripsitque haec Tiberio, neque nos originem finemve 

V.11 (VI. 6). Exitu anni diu aucta discordia consulum erupit. 

2. pompeio: text R. 

I. publicis, i.e. of provincial com- 
munities: cp. the use of * publice’ (4. 36, 
2), &c. 

frequentabatur, ‘was thronged'; so 
* celebrabant, in speaking of the false 
Agri (2. 40, 1). 

D. duaidum spe. Nipp. thinks the 
correction * inani' necessary, as it was his 
hope, not its objects, that was visionary ; 
but * inania! appears to be naturallv con-. 
trasted with ‘praesentia’: cp. ‘inania 
famae! (2. 76, 2). Joh. Miiller (Beitr. 
sect. 3. p. 54) prefers ‘inani in spe,’ 
noting the frequent use of ‘in spe esse’ 
. in Cic. and Liv. Heins. reads ‘ inanium 
specie.’ 

Poppaeo Sabino: 
4. 46, 1. 

3. tum, &c., explain where he was 
when the news "reached him, and the fact 
that Achaia, the headquarters of the plot, 
was within his jurisdiction. 

quo... antiret: cp. c. 6, 4: here it 
means ‘to get. before the story whether 
true or false,’ i.e. to nip the plot in the 
bud, before it spread further. 

4. Toronaeum Thermaeumque, the 
gulfs of Kassandra and Saloniki. He 
may probably have set out from Philippi, 
the chief colony in the province. 

praefestinans, ‘ hastening past’: in 
this sense, the verb is ám. eip. For similar 
uses of verbs compounded with ‘ prae’ see 
on 2. 6, 5. It is apparently best to take 
this participle also with * Euboeam' and 
* Piraeum,' rather than to supply a verb 
for them from ‘ evadit.' 

5. Aegaei maris insulam. This de- 
scription, as also * Atticae orae' below, 

see on I. 80, 1; 

6. alio : text Barthold (Rh. Mus. xxii. 644) ; cp. 2. 53, I. 

cannot be supposed to be inserted to in- 
form his readers of the situation of these 
places. It is only a concise mode of say- 
ing that he passed through the Aegean, 
touching at Euboea, and along Attica, 
touching at Piraeus. A similar explana- 
tion may be given of * Corinthi, Achaiae 
urbe,’ in H. 2. 1, 5. 

6. evadit; so used of passing out of 

a forest (1. 51, 8) or river (12. 35, 3). 

marique Ionio. On such ablatives of 
direction see Introd. v. $ 25. This sea is 
so named in 2. 53, 1 ; and ‘alio’ seems 
too vague where the other names are all 
definite. 

7. Nicopolim: see 2. 53, 1. It was 
not really a colony, but founded as a 
Greek city on a large scale, autonomous 
like Athens and Sparta: see Momms. 
Ilist. v. 271; E. T. 1. 295, foll. 

8. sollertius interrogatum, ‘on being 
more shrewdly questioned.’ 

M. Silano, probably the one mentioned 
in 3. 24, 5 (Nipp.). 

10. neque nos, &c. Dio (58. 25, 1) 
preserves a version of the story, stating 
that the impostor was arrested and sent 
to Tiberius. He places the event at the 
close of 787, A.D. 34. 

12. consulum. On the succession of 
consuls during this year see above, Ap- 
pendix iv. p. 587. Of those now in office, 
Fulcinius Trio is known from 2. 28, 3, &c. 
The other, P. Memmius Regulus, suc- 
ceeded in 788, A.D. 35, to the govern- 
ments held by Poppaeus Sabinus (see on 
6. 39, 3), and died in 814, A. D. 61, with 
the highest reputation of his time. For 
his character, and for further particulars, 

Qq2 

5 

10 

596 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 785. 

nam Trio, facilis capessendis inimicitiis et foro exercitus, ut 
segnem Regulum ad opprimendos Seiani ministros oblique per- 
strinxerat: ille, nisi lacesseretur, modestiae retinens, non modo 2 
rettudit collegam, sed ut noxium coniurationis-ad disquisitionem 

trahebat. 

multisque patrum orantibus ponerent odia in perni- 3 

ciem itura. mansere infensi ac minitantes, donec magistratu abirent. 

VI. 1 (7). Cn. Domitius et Camillus Scribonianus consulatum 
inierant. cum Caesar tramisso quod Capreas et Surrentum interluit 
freto Campaniam praelegebat, ambiguus an urbem intraret, seu, 

quia contra destinaverat, speciem venturi simulans. 

et saepe in 2 

propinqua degressus, aditis iuxta Tiberim hortis, saxa rursum et 
solitudinem maris repetiit, pudore scelerum et libidinum, quibus 
adeo indomitis exarserat, ut more. regio pubem ingenuam stupris 

see I4. 47, and Nipp. here; on his per- 
sonal agency in the condemnation of 
Seianus, see Appendix iv. p. 588. 

1. facilis capessendis inimicitiis, 
* ready to take up hostilities.’ * Capessere’ 
appears to be used in a sense akin both to 
* capessere accusationes (4. 52, 8), and to 
* capessere justitiam," * clementiam" (12. 
11, 2), &c. On the dative cp. 2. 27, a. 

3. nisi lacesseretur, subjunctive of 
action frequently occurring. 

modestiae, ‘self-control’ (Allen): for 
the genit. with ‘retinens’ cp. 2. 38, 9. 

4. rettudit; so used of a person by 
Atticus (Cic. Att. 16. 15, 3) * belle iste 
puer retundit Antonium. The metaphor 
is from blunting the edge of a weapon. 

noxium coniurationis. ‘Noxius fa- 
cinoris’ (Dig. 29. 5, 3, § 12) is the only 
other known instance of this construction. 
The conspiracy meant is that of Seianus, 
as in 6. 47, 2, &c. That Trio was in a 
general way a partisan of Seianus, is stated 

: by Dio (58. 9, 3). 

6. mansere infensi. Their mutual 
charges are further mentioned in 6. 4, 2. 

7. On the conjectural division of these 
Books see note on 5. 6, I. ! 

Cn. Domitius, &c. On Domitius see 
4. 75, I. The other, M. Furius M. f. 
P. n. Camillus, has in the Fasti the ad- 
ditional name Arruntius (C. I. L. x. 899), 

: being a son of the Camillus of 2. 52, 5, 

adopted apparently by L. Arruntius (1. 13, 
1) Thename Scribonianus, subsequently 

: acquired, is here given as that by which 

he is best known through his subsequent 
rebellion (see on 12. 52, 2). Domitius, 
as Caesar's son-in-law, retained office 
through the year (Dio, 58. 20, 1); Ca- 

mills was succeeded on June Ist by 
A. Vitellius (see on 5. 8, 2). 

9. praelegebat : cp. 2. 79, 1 ; and note 
on 2. 6, 5. If this voyage took place thus 
early in the year, the statement of Suet. 
(Tib. 65), that for nine months after the 
fall of Seianus Tiberius never left the 
* villa Iovis' at Capreae, must be false. 

II. degressus: see notes on 2. 69, 4; 
4. 74; 4- : 

hortis; according to Suet. (Tib. 72), 
those near the ‘naumachia.’ By com- 
paring the locality described by Augustus 
(Mon. Anc. iv. 43) as that of his. naval 
amphitheatre, ‘trjans Tiberim, in quo 
loco nunc nemus est Caesarum, it is in- 
ferred that the gardens here are those 

 bequeathed to the people by Julius Caesar 

(see 2. 41, 1). Suet. (1.1.) says that soldiers 
were posted along the bank to keep off the 
concourse. 

saxa. Nipp. takes these to be the 
cliffs of Terracina (cp. 4. 59, 2); but the 
addition of *solitudinem maris' seems to 
show that Capreae is meant. | 

rursum...repetiit. Drager well re-. 

marks (Synt. und Stil, § 341) that here, as 

in 3. 21, 55 11. 17, 5; 12. 60, 43 15. 40, 2, 
* rursus ' is not really pleonastic, but, con- 
trasts one action with another. In ‘redeo 
rursus eodem" (Cic. Att. 13. 20, 4) no such 
contrast is apparent. 

13. more regio. This and other such 
allusions to * royal' outrages or vices, e. g. 
C. 42, 35 16. 23,3; H. 4. 83, 43; 5. 8 3; 
and the exclamation ‘o rem regiam ' (see 
Introd. vii. p. 120, n. 1), are drawn from : 
the barbarian or Macedonian despotisms 
of the East. 

A. D. 32.] 

8 pollueret. 

LIBER VI. CAP. V. 11 (vi. 6)-vr. 2 (8). 

597 

nec formam tantum et decora corpora, set in his 

modestam pueritiam, in aliis imagines maiorum incitamentum 

4 cupidinis habebat. 

tuncque primum ignota antea vocabula 

reperta sunt sellariorum et spintriarum ex foeditate loci ac multi- 
5 plici patientia : praepositique servi, qui conquirerent pertraherent, 
dona in promptos, minas adversum abnuentes, et si retinerent 
propinquus aut parens, vim raptus suaque ipsi libita velut in 

captos exercebant. 

2 (8) At Romae principio anni, quasi recens cognitis Liviae 
flagitiis ac non pridem etiam punitis, atroces sententiae dicebantur, 
in effigies quoque ac memoriam eius, et bona Seiani ablata 

2 aerario ut in fiscum cogerentur, tamquam referret. 

Scipiones 

haec et Silani et Cassii isdem ferme aut paulum inmutatis verbis, 
adseveratione multa censebant, cum repente Togonius Gallus, 
dum ignobilitatem suam magnis nominibus inserit, per deridi- 

8 culum auditur. 

nam principem orabat deligere senatores, ex 

4. p. sintriarum : text B (with Suet. Tib. 43), psintriarum Doed.; for the variations 

in Suct. see Baiter. 
cp. t. 30,1; H. 4. 46, a. 
text L. 

3. ignota antea vocabula: see Suet. 
Tib. 43; Cal. 16; Vit. 3. It is to be 
noted, that these vile word’ not only 

originate at this time but appear to be - 

confined to it. 

7. libita. This substantival use seems 
found only in this passage and in 12. 6, 3; 
14. 2, 4: cp. ‘cupitis’ 4. 3, 1. 

8. exercebant, taken by zeugma with 
* dona.’ 

Io. pridem ... punitis: see Dio, 58. 
II, 7. The interval could not have been 
very long, as less than three months had 
passed from the fall of Seianus (see Ap- 
pendix iv. p. 588^. 

11. in effigies . . . ac memoriam. 
Similar decrees were passed after the 
death of Messalina (11. 38, 4): cp. 2. 32, 
2, &c.; Staatsr. iii, 1190. 

12. inflscum. The use of this term is 
perhaps antedated (cp. c. 19, 1 ; 2. 48, I, 
&c.); and the ground for making over 

the property to Caesar may have been that | 

it had arisen from his gifts (cp. 4. ao, 1). 
All *publicata bona’ went properly to the 
‘aerarium,’ but Caesar could alter . the 
disposition (c. 19, 1) ; and both treasuries 
contained such (c. 17, 1). Later, all such 
property goes to the ‘fiscus,’ and * publi- 
care’ and 'confiscare" are synonymous: 

5. serviquirerent (Andresen, p. 5) : qui quaererent B, text Doed. ; 
6. retinuerent: text B, retinuerant Ritt. 

12. tam: 

see Hirschfeld, Unters. 47, n. 1. 

tamquam referret, *as if it made any 
difference’; i.e. as if Caesar was not as 
much master of the * aerarium' as of his 
‘fiscus.” His control of the former would 
be indirect, by originating senatus con- 
sulta’ to deal with its funds: cp. 3. 47, 3; 
4. 13, I, &c. ; Staatsr. ii. IOT3. n. I. 

Scipiones, &c.: a ‘Scipio’ is men- 
tioned in 3. 74, 2; *Silani' in 2. 59, 13 
3. 24, 5, &c. ; * Cassii' in c. 15, 1; 12.11, 
4. The plurals here are probably used of 
single persons, as in I. 10, 3, &c. 

I4. &dseveratione: cp. 2. 31, 4; here 
opposed to ‘deridiculum.’ 

Togonius Gallus, otherwise unknown. 
Dio, who mentions this * sententia" (58. 
17, 4), omits his name. 

I5. inserit, a similar figure to * inserere 
sese fortunae ' (H. 2. 61, 1) and ‘nomen 
inserere famae" Dial. 10, 3. | 

per deridiculum: cp. 3. 57, 3. The 
absurdity is pointed out by Dio (1. 1.), as 
lying in the fact that they were really 
asking him to let them protect him against 
themselves. His own later request (c. 15, 
5) is different. 

16. orabat, with inf., as in 11. 32, 5; 
I2. 9,.1; 13. 13, 4; Plaut. and Verg.: see 
Introd. v. § 43. 

an 

o 

598 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 785. 

quis viginti sorte ducti et ferro accincti, quotiens curiam inisset, 
salutem eius defenderent. crediderat nimirum epistulae subsidio 4 
sibi alterum ex consulibus poscentis, ut tutus a Capreis urberh 

peteret. 

Tiberius tamen, ludibria seriis permiscere solitus, egit 5 

5 gratis benevolentiae patrum : sed quos omitti posse, quos deligi ? 
semperne eosdem an subinde alios? et honoribus perfunctos an 
iuvenes, privatos an e magistratibus? quam deinde speciem fore 
sumentium in limine curiae gladios? neque sibi vitam tanti, si 
armis tegenda foret. haec, adversus Togonium verbis moderans, 
yo neque z7 ultra abolitionem sententiae suaderet. ) 
3 (9). At Iunium Gallionem, qui censuerat ut praetoriani actis 
stipendiis ius apiscerentur in quattuordecim ordinibus sedendi, 
violenter increpuit, velut coram rogitans, quid illi cum militibus, 
quos neque dicta [imperatoris] neque praemia nisi ab imperatore 

9. urbis: text B. 

IO. neque. 

. . suadere B, ut ins. Doed., ne quid Jacob. 

14. [imperatoris) L, nisi imperatoris K, imperiti oratoris Ritter. 

2. epistulae; the same ‘verbosa et 
grandis epistula in which he had de- 
nounced Seianus. The consul Regulus 
had in accordance with it presented him- 
self at Capreae, but had been refused an 
audience (Dio, 58. 10, 2; 13, 3; Suet. 
Tib. 65). Hence the absurdity of any one 
still pretending to believe that. Tiberius 
had meant what he said. vr d 

5. sed quos, &c.; giving the sense of 
the letter. | | 

6. perfunctos. The use of a stronger 
word than ‘functos’ would appear to 
mean those who had completed their 
career, i. e. ‘ consulares ' ; but in opposition 
to ‘iuvenes’ it may possibly be taken, 
with Frost, to mean those who had com- 
pleted any magistracy, or perhaps any 
one of the higher magistracies; as per- 
sons already senators are said * honoribus 
ornari ' (4. 2, 4). 

7". iuvenes. The only senators who 
had gone through no magistracy would 
be those actually holding the office of 
quaestor; who would be twenty-five years 
old or more. Such young men of sena- 
torial rank as were allowed to be present 
' at the debates before becoming actual 
senators (Suet, Aug. 38), can hardly here 
be meant. The term may have a wide 
meaning: see on c. 15, 4. 

9. verbis moderans, ‘reining in his 
words,’  'Verbis' may probably be a 
dative, like ‘cursui’ in 2. 70, 4: ‘mode- 

rans’ is also used absolutely (c. 10, 3), 
and with ‘ne’ (1. 15, 2, &c.). 

Io. neque ut... suaderet, ' nor so as 
to advise anything beyond the cancelling 
of the proposal, i.e. its omission from 
the ‘acta’ (cp. 5. 4, 1 ; Staatsr. iii. 1014), 
without any penalty to the proposer. 

11, Iunium Gallionem. M. Seneca, 
one of whose sons was adopted by this 
Gallio (see on 15. 73, 4), names him as 
forming, with Latro, Fuscus, and Albu- 
cius, a quartet of the foremost declaimers 
of his time (Contr. 10, pr. 13). Posterity 
rated him lower, as would appear from 
such expressions as ‘tinnitus Gallionis' 
(Dial. 26, 1), *remissius et pro suo inge- 
nio... Gallio’ (Quint. 9. 2, 91). Ovid 
addresses to him a condolence on the 
death of his wife (ex P. 4. 11). 

actis stipendiis. They served sixteen 
years (1. 17, 9). 

12. in quattuordecim ordinibus. This 
would give them an equestrian dignity, 
such as was usually the reward of a * pri- 
mipilaris?: see Marquardt, ii. 376. 

13. velut coram ; i.e. turning upón him 
in the letter as if face to face. 

14. [imperatoris]. The MS. text could 
no doubt be understood (as by Pfitzner) as 
‘the word of command’ (cp. 2. 45, 3), and 
the whole sentence taken to mean that 
none could come between them and their 
general as regarded word or deed; but 
the close recurrence of * imperator' in two 

A.D. 32.] 

2 accipere par esset. 

LIBER VI. CAP.2 (8)-4 (10). 

repperisse prorsus quod divus Augustus non 

_ providerit: an potius discordiam et seditionem a satellite Seiani 

quaesitam, qua rudes animos nomine honoris ad. corrumpendum 
3 militiae morem propelleret? hoc pretium Gallio meditatae adula- 
tionis tulit, statim curia, deinde Italia exactus; et quia incusa- 
batur facile toleraturus exilium delecta Lesbo, insula nobili et 
amoena, retrahitur in urbem custoditurque domibus magistratuum. 
4 isdem litteris Caesar Sextium Paconianum praetorium perculit 
magno patrum gaudio, audacem, maleficum, omnium secreta 
rimantem delectumque ab Seiano cuius ope dolus Gaio Caesari 

5 pararetur. 

quod postquam patefactum, prorupere concepta 

pridem odia, et summum supplicium decernebatur, ni professus 

indicium foret. 

4 (10). Ut vero Latinium Latiarem ingressus est, accusator ac 
reus iuxta invisi gratissimum spectaculum praebebant. Latiaris, 

8. extium pagonianum : text L. 
text B, from 4. 68. | aggressus L. 
batur B, text Orsini and Muretus. 

distinct senses is awkward. In any case 
* praemia? is emphatic, and ‘dicta’ thrown 
in to complete the statement. The re- 
sentment here expressed by Tiberius at 
senatorial interference with any matter 
relating to the army is strongly contrasted, 
if not wholly inconsistent, with his un- 
usual reference of such questions to if at 
an earlier date (1. 26, 5, &c.) : see Staatsr. 
ii: 956, n. 3. | 

I. prorsus, used bitterly, as in 4. 52, 5. 

3. ad corrumpendum militiae mo- 
rem, ‘to breach of discipline, by, as 
Dio (58. 18, 4) expresses it, leading them 
to look to the state rather than their * im- 
perator. | 

5. exactus, aoristic : cp. Introd. v. $ 54b. 
. incusabatur, &c. This verb, which 
has an accus. and inf. in 3. 38, 4, and in 
Livy, appears to have the nom. and inf. 

only here and in Amm, 14. II, 24 ‘cum 

altius niti incusaretur.’ The construction 
is analogous to that of many other verbs 
of accusing (Introd. v. § 45). 

7. domibus magistratuum. For 
similar ablatives see Introd. v. § 24. Four 
kinds of custody are mentioned by Ulpian 
(Dig. 48. 3, 1) as within the discretion of 
the consul, *utrum in carcerem recipienda 
sit persona (see on 3. 22, 5), an militi 
tradenda (Acts 28, 16), an fideiussoribus 
(cp. 5. 8, 2), vel etiam sibi. This ‘libera 

10. ad: a B, ab Weissenb. 
acrius: ac reus L. 

14. lucanium : 
15. praebebantur: praebe- 

custodia? might devolve on other magis- 
trates besides the consuls (Sall. Cat. 47, 3). 
Asinius Gallus was thus held for three 
years, usually by the consuls, but by 
praetors when Tiberius himself was consul 
(Dio, 58. 3,5). Nothing further is known 
of the fate of Gallio. 

8. Sextium Paconianum, restored 
from c. 39,1. The person speaking in an 
inscription cited above (App. iv. p. 588, 
n. 2) calls himself at this time * comes 
Baculi,’ giving perhaps another name of 
this person, as & Sextius Baculus appears 
in Caes. B. G. 2. 25, 1, &c. 

perculit; cp. *indicio perculerat’ 4. 
31, 7- 

12. professus indicium, ‘offered to 
turn .informer' (see on 5. 8, 1). He was 
kept in prison, and afterwards put to 
death there (c. 39, 1). | 

I4. ingressus. This verb has been 
taken to have here alone the force of 
* aggredior, and has been treated as ana- 

logous to the use of *invasit' below. It 

appears better to take it, with Walther 

and Nipp. to mean *began upon, or 

*entered upon Latinius Latiaris'; like 

* ingredi defensionem ' (11. 2, 3), * crimina ' 

(Pl. Epp. 3. 9, 14), or the use of ‘loqui’ 

with a personal accusative, as 'etiam 

aa . » . loquebantur ’ (Cic. Mil. 23, 
3) 

an 

599 . 

5 

600 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 785. 

ut rettuli, praecipuus olim circumveniendi Titii Sabini et tunc 
luendae poenae primus fuit. inter quae Haterius Agrippa con- 2 
sules anni prioris invasit, cur mutua accusatione intenta nunc 
silerent: metum prorsus et noxae conscientiam pro foedere 

5 haberi; at non patribus reticenda quae audivissent. 

Regulus 8 

manere tempus ultionis, seque coram principe exsecuturum ; 
Trio aemulationem inter collegas et si qua discordes iecissent 
melius oblitterari respondit. urguente Agrippa Sanquinius Maxi- 4 
mus e consularibus oravit senatum, ne curas imperatoris con- 
10 quisitis insuper acerbitatibus augerent : sufficere ipsum statuendis 

remediis. 

sic Regulo salus et Trioni dilatio exitii quaesita. 

Haterius invisior fuit, quia somno aut libidinosis vigiliis marcidus 5 
et ob segnitiam quamvis crudelem principem non metuens 
inlustribus viris perniciem inter ganeam ac stupra meditabatur. 
§ (11). Exim Cotta Messalinus, saevissimae cuiusque sententiae 
auctor eoque inveterata invidia, ubi primum facultas data, 
arguitur pleraque zz C. Caesarem quasi incertae virilitatis, et cum 

4. noxiam gonscientiae : noxiam conscientiam Pich., text Groslot. 
Mur., pleraque; Gaiam Caesarem (Gaiam C. Caes. Ritt.) Freinsh. . 

17. in ins. 
incerta : text 

Freinsh., incestae R, perhaps incerta virilitate eius Halm. 

I. ut rettuli: see 4. 68, 3; 71,1. It 
appears to be implied here that he suffered 
the extreme penalty. 

praecipuus. The gerundive genitive, 
here alone (acc. to Drager) found with 
this word or with ‘ primus,’ is taken simi- 
larly to the relative genitives noted in 
Introd. v. $ 34 e v. 

2. Haterius Agrippa: see 1. 77,3, &c. 
On the countercharges here alluded to see 

. 1I, I. 
: 3. intenta: cp. I. 39, 4, &c. 

4. noxae conscientiam, 'complicity 
in guilt'; so read on the supposition that 
the MS. text has arisen from a confusion 
of endings. ‘Noxa’ is so used in H. 2. 
49, 6, and Livy; * noxia is not found as 
a substantive in Tacitus. Those who re- 
tain the MS. text give it much the same 
meaning by supposing an inversion of 
expression : *conscientiae' could also be 
taken as depending on ‘ foedere." 

8. Sanquinius Maximus. Borghesi 
(i. 244) thinks him probably grandson of 
a Q. Sanquinius Q. f., mentioned as quae- 
stor, trib. pl., praetor, and procos. (C. I. L. 
i. 640), and son of one M. Sanquinius, 
Q. f. triumvir monetalis in 737, B.C. 17 
(Eckh. v. 299). He had been cos. suff. 

(C. I. L. x. 905) probably, as Nipp. thinks, 
in 776, A.D. 23; was praefectus urbis and 
again cos. suff. in 792, A. D. 39 (Dio, 59. 
13, 2), and died legatus of Lower Ger- 
many in 800, A. D. 47 (11. 18, 1). 

1o. acerbitatibus, ‘troubles’: cp. 2. 
71, 35 13. 50, 4; Cic. p. Planc. 42, 101, 
&c. 

sufficere, &c. On the construction 
cp. 3. 72, 4, and note. | 
II. dilatio exitii. He perished three 

, years later (c. 38, 2). 

12. invisior: cp. H. 1. 12, 4; a rare 
comparative, but in Cicero. 

maroidus. Tacitus uses this word 
only here, but has * marcens’ in the same 
sense in H. 3. 36, 3; G. 36, 1: both woids 
are originally poetical. 

* 14. ganeam : cp. 3. 52, 2. 

15. Cotta Messalinus: see 2. 32, 2; 
and other of his proposals noted in 4. 20, 
6; 5. 3, 4. | 

17. pleraque in C. Caesarem, &c. 
Halm and Nipp..read as above; Orelli 
and some others follow Freinsh., taking 
* pleraque' as accus. after ‘arguitur,’ and 
supposing the sarcasm to be the same as 
that by which one Egilius was called 
* Egilia' (Cic. de Or. 2. 68, 277). 

2 scio.' 

A. D. 32.] LIBER VI. CAP. 4 (10)-6 (12). 601 

die natali Augustae inter sacerdotes epularetur, novendialem 
eam cenam dixisse; querensque de potentia M'. Lepidi ac L. 
Arruntii, cum quibus ob rem pecuniariam disceptabat, addidisse : 
2 * illos quidem senatus, me autem tuebitur Tiberiolus meus.’ quae 
cuncta a primoribus civitatis revincebatur, iisque instantibus ad 
imperatorem provocavit. nec multo post litterae adferuntur, 
quibus in modum defensionis, repetito inter se atque Cottam 
amicitiae principio crebrisque eius officiis commemoratis, ne 
verba prave detorta neu convivalium fabularum simplicitas in 
crimen duceretur postulavit. 

6 (12). Insigne visum est earum Caesaris litterarum initium ; 
nam his verbis exorsus est : ‘ quid scribam vobis; patres conscripti, 
aut quo modo scribam aut quid omnino non scribam hoc tempore, 
di me deaeque peius perdant quam perire me cotidie sentio, si 
adeo facinora atque flagitia sua ipsi quoque in suppli- 

4. neque: eaque Pich., quae Jac. Gron. 

I. die natali Augustae. The ‘ Acta 
Arvalium" for 780, 791, A.D. 27, 38 
(C. I. L. vi. 2024 f, 2028 c), show this to 
be Jan. 3o. 

novendialem. This name was given 
to a feast for the dead, held on the ninth 
day after a funeral (Porphyr. on Hor. 
Epod. 17, 48); and the point of the jest 
may be that a feast on the birthday of 
a dead person who had never been deified 
(cp. 5. 2, 1) was only a funeral feast under 
another name. 

2. M'. Lepidi ac L. Arruntii: see 
I. 13, 2; 3. 33, 2. 

4. quae cuncta. The MS. text has 
not been satisfactorily explained, or recon- 
ciled with *iisque instantibus. The ac- 
cusative *quae cuncta' at the beginning 
of a sentence is a form of expression 
chosen by Tacitus (1. 11, 7; 4. 7,1; H. 
2. 35, 4; and nom. Agr. 5, 4). On the 
use of such an accus. after a passive verb 
see Introd. v. $ 12 d, and Freinsheim’s 
mode of taking ‘ arguitur pleraque ' above, 
and ‘ nec quicquam imbuuntur’ H. 5. 5, 4. 

5. revincebatur; so 'revicta coniu- 
ratio’ 15. 73, 3; ‘in... maleficio revicti’ 
Gell. 6. 3, ‘in mendacio revincatar’ Dig. 
26. 10, 3, $8 15. The verb oftener means 
* to refute.' 

9. simplicitas, ‘frankness’; i.e. ‘mere 
table-talk with no deeper meaning’: see 
note on 1. 69, 4. 

in crimen duceretur: cp. 11. 34, 6; 

I3. quando: text B, from Suet. 

and ‘ne quis modestiam in conscientiam 
duceret" Sall. Jug. 85, 26. The more 
usual verb would be * trahere." 

12. his verbis. The letter was no 
doubt extant in the ‘acta senatus, but it 
does not follow that Tacitus cites it di- 
rectly from that source. Suetonius (Tib. 
67) gives, with a slight variation noted 
below, precisely the same words, neither 
more nor less. Unless, therefore, he is 

"quoting from Tacitus, it would appear 

that both must have followed some ear- 
lier historian, who had quoted thus much 
and no more. For the few and short 
passages in which Tacitus gives ‘ipsissima 
verba, see C. 5, 1; I4. 59, 43 15. 67, 4. 
His usual method of modifying the sub- 
stance into a form suited to his own style 
is illustrated in Introd. iv. p. 32. 

14. di...deaeque : see note on 4. 38, 3. 

quam .. . sentio. Suetonius has, 
perhaps in error, the words ‘quam coti- 

' die perire sentio." 
15. &deo, &c. Tacitus makes the words. 

express the torment of an avenging con- 

en 

IO 

- 

science ; Suetonius explains them by his 

sensitiveness to libels cited in evidence 
(cp. 4. 42, 2), or as a presage of the 
execration of posterity of which he had 
always had misgivings. Some of his apo- 

logists (as Karsten, p. 50) explain them . 

as self-reproach for having allowed him- 
self to be so misled by Seianus ; others as 
expressing mere weariness of the burden 

5 

602 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 785. 

cium verterant. neque frustra praestantissimus sapientiae firmare 
' - solitus est, si recludantur tyrannorum mentes, posse aspici laniatus 
. et ictus, quando ut corpora verberibus, ita saevitia, libidine, malis 
consultis animus dilaceretur. quippe Tiberium non fortuna, non 3 
s solitudines protegebant quin tormenta pectoris suasque ipse 
poenas fateretur. 

'] (13). Tum facta patribus potestate statuendi de C. Caeciliano 
senatore, qui plurima adversum Cottam prompserat, placitum 
eandem poenam inrogari quam in Aruseium et Sanquinium, 

10 accusatores L. Arruntii: quo non aliud honorificentius Cottae 
evenit, qui nobilis. quidem, set egens ob luxum, per flagitia in- 
famis, sanctissimis Arruntii artibus dignitate ultionis aequabatur. 

Q. Servaeus posthac et Minucius Thermus inducti, Servaeus 2 

. praetura functus et quondam Germanici comes, Minucius equestri 
15 loco, modeste habita Seiani amicitia ; unde illis maior miseratio. 
contra Tiberius praecipuos ad scelera increpans admonuit C. 8 

qui 
7. Caesiliano: text Land Wurm. — 9. Sangunnium: text B. 

batur: text B. 

of life and cares of empire, or of the 
terrors of this crisis. 

ipsi quoque, i.e. * ut et aliis tyrannis.' 

I. frustra: cp. I. 30, 3. 

praestantissimus sapientiae. The 
expression seems taken from * praestans 
animi (Verg. Aen. 12, 19), and is ana- 
logous to many others (Introd. v. $ 32 
e y). Socrates is so styled, probably in 

allusion to his having been pronounced . 

wisest of men by the Delphic oracle. The 

uotation is made with considerable free- 

om from Plat. Gorg. 524 E; with some 
apparent reminiscence also of Repub. 9. 
579 D ; the expression ‘solitus est’ ap- 
parently implying that more than one 
place is referred to. Seneca has expressed 
a similar thought (Ep. 97, 15). 

firmare -:'adfirmare': cp. 1. 81, 1, &c. 

3. malis consultis, ‘evil designs’: cp. 
* mollibus consultis! I. 40, 2, ‘magnis’ 
H. a. 4, 3. 

4. fortuna : cp. 4. 18, 2. 

7. ©. Caeciliano. This praenomen 
can easily have dropped ont, but its 
absence is not without example, where 
a title is added: see Nipp. on 5. 8, 1. 
- The person mentioned in 3. 37, 1 would 
be styled * praetura functus’ rather than 
simply ‘ senator.’ 

9. Aruseium et Banquinium. These 

I2. ultioni seque- 

persons, and their accusation of Arruntius, 
must have been mentioned in the lost 
part: hence their brief designation here 
by one name. This Aruseius may be the 
one mentioned in c. 40, 1 ; and the other 
name should perhaps, as Nipp. thinks, be 
* Sangurium,' a name found in C. I. L. i. 
1419. In any case he cannot be the per- 
son mentioned in c. 4, 4. 

11. nobilis. On his family connexions 
see I. 8, 5. 

egens ob luxum. For his gifts to 

' retainers see Introd. vii. p. 103, n. 1. 

12. sanctissimis . . . artibus, ‘the 
stainless accomplishments. On this use 
of ‘artes’ cp. 4. 6, 2. 

dignitate ultionis, *by being as 
worthily avenged.’ We should infer that 
the penalty was exile. 

13. Q. Servaeus : see 2. 56, 5; 3.13, 
3; 19, I. Minucius. Thermus may have 
been the father of the person mentioned 
in 16. 20, 2. 

inducti, were brought into court: 
cp. * reus capitis inducor’ Apul. Met. 3. 
7, 185. 

15. modeste habita : cp. 4. 44, 1. The 
words apply to both the persons. 

16. praecipuos . . . increpans, ‘ de- 
nouncing them as foremost in crime’: cp. 
‘praecipuum ad pericula’ 14. 58, 1; 

A. D. 32.) 

LIBER VI. CAP.6 (12), 7 (13). 

603 

Cestium patrem dicere senatui quae sibi scripsisset, suscep'tque 

4 Cestius accusationem. 

quod maxime exitiabile tulere illa tem- 

pora, cum primores senatus infimas etiam delationes exercerent, 
alii propalam, multi per occultum ; neque discerneres alienos 
a coniunctis, amicos ab ignotis, quid repens aut vetustate ob- 
scurum: perinde in foro, in convivio, quaqua de. re locuti incu- 
sabantur, ut quis praevenire et reum destinare properat, pars ad 

5 subsidium sui, plures infecti quasi valetudine et contactu. 
Minucius et Servaeus damnati indicibus accessere. 

sed 
tractique 

sunt in casum eundem Iulius Africanus e Santonis Gallica 
6 civitate, Seius Quadratus: originem non repperi. neque sum 

'6. proinde: text R. 

* desertorem  proditoremque increpant’ 
H. 2. 44, 3.. 

admonuit. This verb takes an inf. in 
Agr. 35, 3; also in Augustan poets and 
Liv. ; so * monere? 11. 1, 2, &c. 

C. Cestium patrem: see on 3. 36, 
2; here so called to distinguish him from 
a son (see on I5. 25, 5), who may have 
been mentioned in the lost part. Possibly, 
with Lips. and Urlichs (Rh. Mus. xxxi. 
500), ‘ praetorem’ should be read, as a 
probable rank for one who was cos. three 
years later (c. 31, 1), and a word likely 
in an abbreviation to be confused with 
* patrem." The professional rhetor Cestius, 
often cited by M. Seneca, was probably of 
lower rank. The well-known pyramid of 
C. Cestius at Rome records some member 
of this family who was trib. pl., praetor, 
and ‘septemvir epulonum,’ about the 
middle of the principate of Augustus 
(Burn, p. 209) ; another gave his name to 
the original * pons Cestius." : 

2. exitiabile; so used in c. 24, 1; 
I5. 44, 4, &c.; and *exitiosus' more 
frequently. Both words are rare, but 
classical. . 

4. per occultum, by private letters to 
the emperor: cp. *quae sibi scripsisset,' 
also 2. 28, 2; 4. 69, 5. 

neque discerneres, &c., men knew 
nothing of their accuser or the charge ti]l 
they were brought to trial, 

5. repens, used in the sense of ‘recens’ 
often by Tacitus (11. 24, 7 ; 15. 68, 5; 
H. 1. 23, 1 ; 4. 25, 1), but by no other 
author. 

6. in foro, &c.: *locuti' is supplied 
with ‘in foro’ and ‘in convivio' ; and 
‘quaqua de re’ applies to speech at both 

9. tractatique : text D. 

these or any other places: see note on 4. 
64, 2 (Nipp.). 

7. praevenire, ‘to be first in the 

field’: cp. c. 35, 1; 15. 54, 6. 

destinare, ‘to mark out’; so in 14. 
60, 3; also ‘destinare excidio’ (1. 36, 1), 
‘ praedae’ (2. 13, 3), ‘ad ictum’ (H. 4. 
29, 1). 

8. valetudine et contactu; hen- 
diadys. 

9. indicibus accessere: cp. C. 3, 5. 
This escape from penalty, even after con- 
viction, had been allowed by the law of 
Pompeius de ambitu (App. B. C. 2. 24). 

10. Iulius Africanus, probably 
father of the famous orator who in the 
next generation divided the palm with 
Domitius Afer: see Dial. 15, 3; Quint. 
10. 1, 118, &c. 

Santonis, the people of Saintonge, 
to the north of the lower Garonne. Their 
chief city, Mediolanium (Strab. 4. 2, 1, 
190), is the modern Saintes, on the 
Charente. 

II. originem non repperi. The 
abruptness of this clause would indicate 
that Quadratus also was an obscure, prob- 
ably a provincial citizen. Some member 
of the family is shown by a Praenestine 
inscription (C. I. L. xiv. 3831) to have 
become praetor, and proconsul of Nar- 
bonensis. Asyndeta in the enumeration 
of names are not uncommon even in the 
case of persons of rank: cp. 2. 33, 1 ; 3. 
18,1; and many other instances collected 
here by Nipp. | 

neque sum ignarus. The mention 
of obscure persons suggests that he might 
have followed other historians in omitting 
them ; but such cases, as illustrating the 

= 

o 

604. P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 785. 

ignarus a plerisque scriptoribus omissa multorum pericula et 
poenas, dum copia fatiscunt aut, quae ipsis nimia et maesta 
fuerant, ne pari taedio lecturos adficerent verentur: nobis plera- 
que digna cognitu obvenere, quamquam ab aliis incelebrata. 

5  8(14). Nam ea tempestate, qua Seiani amicitiam ceteri falso 
exuerant, ausus est eques Romanus M. Terentius, ob id reus, 
amplecti, ad hunc modum apud senatum ordiendo: ‘fortunae 2 
quidem meae fortasse minus expediat adgnoscere crimen quam 
abnuere: sed utcumque casura res est, fatebor et fuisse me 

10 Seiano amicum, et ut essem expetisse, et postquam adeptus 
eram laetatum. videram collegam patris regendis praetoriis 3 
cohortibus, mox urbis et militiae munia simul obeuntem. illius 4 
propinqui et adfines honoribus augebantur; ut quisque Seiano 
intimus, ita ad Caesaris amicitiam validus : contra quibus infensus 

15 esset, metu ac sordibus conflictabantur. nec quemquam ex- 5 
emplo adsumo: cunctos, qui novissimi consilii expertes fuimus, 
meo unius discrimine defendam. non enim Seianum Vulsinien- 6. 
sem, set Claudiae et Iuliae domus partem, quas adfinitate oc- 
cupaverat, tuum, Caesar, generum, tui consulatus socium, tua 

18. et: 

character of the times, or that of Teren- 
tius below, as an example of courage, 
would be in his view fruitful matter of 
history: see Introd. iv. pp. 28, 29. 

2. fatiscunt: cp. 3. 38, 1. 

4. obvenere, ‘have come to my notice.’ 
The expression would imply research 
among less known sources of history, 
such as private memoirs. See Introd. iii. 

. 18. 

incelebrata, dv. eip., unless read, with 
Jac. Gron., in Sall. H. 1. 55 D, 62 K, 
80 G. 

5. Nam, &c.; introducing one of these 
cases omitted by others. Dio gives the 
story (58. 19, 3), taking. it apparently 
from Tacitus (but see Introd. iv. 26). 

7. amplecti: cp. 4. 42, 3. Lips. has 
well pointed out the resemblance, which 
can hardly be accidental, between this 
speech and that attributed’ by Curtius 
(7. 1, 26, sqq.) to Amyntas, accused of 
friendship with Philotas. According to 
most opinions Curtius is the earlier writer. 

II. collegam patris, &c.: sce 1. 34, 3; 

«1,44. 
T 12. urbis et militiae. These words 
can hardly be taken to refer to any 

set R. 

combination of definite offices; and 
Nipp. no doubt rightly explains them 
as referring to his virtual control of all 
departments, civil or military, through 
his influence with the princeps. 

13. propinqui; as Blaesus (3. 35, 2, 
&c.). 

ut quisque ...intimus; as the ac- 
cusers of Sabinus (4. 68, 2). 

14. quibus infensus; as Cremutius 
Cordus (4. 34, 3). 

15. metu ac sordibus, ‘danger and the 
suppliants’ garb.’ On ‘metus’ cp. I. 40, 
I; on ‘sordes,’ 4. 52, 4; Dial. 12, I, &c. 

16. novissimi consilii; the ‘coniu- 
ratio’ (5. 1I, 2, &c.). Its objects are 
further specified below ($ 11). 

17. Vulsiniensem: see 4. I, 3. = 

18. Claudiae et Iuliae. He would 
appear to have been connected with the 
Claudian house through the betrothal of 
his daughter (see on 3. 29, 5),and with 
the Julian through his own (see on 4. 40, 
11; 5. 6,2). m 

I9. tuum: Caesar is addressed as if 
present. ; 

consulatus: see App. iv. p. 587. 

A.D. 31] LIBER VI. CAP. 7 (13)-9 (15). 605 

7 officia in re publica capessentem colebamus. non est nostrum 
aestimare quem supra ceteros et quibus de causis extollas : tibi 
summum rerum iudicium di dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta 

8 est. spectamus porro quae coram habentur, cui ex te opes 
honores, quis plurima iuvandi nocendive potentia, quae Seiano 5 

9 fuisse nemo negaverit. abditos principis sensus, et si quid oc- 
cultius parat, exquirere inlicitum, anceps: nec ideo adsequare. 

10 ne, patres conscripti, ultimum Seiani diem, sed sedecim annos 
cogitaveritis. etiam Satrium atque Pomponium venerabamur ; 
libertis quoque ac ianitoribus eius notescere pro magnifico acci- 

ll piebatur. quid ergo?  indistincta haec defensio et promisca 

dabitur? immo iustis terminis dividatur. 

insidiae in rem pub- 

licam, consilia caedis adversum imperatorem puniantur: de ami- 
citia et officiis idem finis et te, Caesar, et nos absolverit.’ 

9 (15). Constantia orationis, et quia repertus erat qui efferret 
quae omnes animo agitabant, eo usque potuere, ut accusatores 
eius, additis quae ante deliquerant, exilio aut morte. multarentur. 

Secutae dehinc Tiberii litterae in Sex.'Vistilium praetorium, 

18. uestilium: text Nipp. 

1. officia... capessentem, as ‘adiutor’ 
(4. 7, 2), and perhaps ultimately ‘colleya 
imperii" (5. 6, 2). Mommsen refers it 
/Staatsr. ii. 1118, n. 2) to his authority 
as praefectus praetorio. 

4. quae coram habentur, ‘what exist 
openly’: *coram' is opposed to ‘occul- 
tus’ (as here to *abditos' and ‘occultius’) 
in I3. 25, 4; and to 'secreti sermones in 
H. 2. 76,1. For *habentur' cp. ‘non in 
obscuro habentur" 15. 16, 3, ‘procul an 
coram atrocior haberetur' 15. 36, 7, and 
other instances in Nipp. on 1. 73, 2. 

5. quis. Nipp. takes this as nom., 
followed by * plurima .. . potentia as abl. 
of quality; but the construction of the 
corresponding clause is in favour of taking 
it as dative plural. 

7. anceps: cp. 4. 17, I, &c. 

ideo = ‘si exquiras'; ‘nor does it 
follow that you will arrive at them’: 
cp. ‘nec ideo... lenivit’? 1. 12, 6. The 
contrast between the sentiment of this 
whole passage, and the republican ideas 
presupposed in the constitution of the 
principate, is worthy of note. 

8. sedecim, from the accession of 
Tiberius to the fall of Seianus; without 
counting the year in which each of these 
events happened. 

9. Batrium: seé 4. 34, 2. 

Pomponium; probably some one 
mentioned in the lost part, and another 
such person as Satrius. None of the 
distinguished Pomponii (2. 32, 3; 4. 
47,1; 5. 8, 1) could be thus spoken of. 
Ritter thinks the copyist may have substi- 
tuted a well known for a less known name, 
such as that of Pinarius (4. 34. 2). 

Io. ianitoribus: cp. 4. 74, 6. 

11. indistincta...et promisca, ‘ with- 
out discrimination or reserve’: ‘ indis- 
tinctus’ is found here alone in Tacitus; 
also in Catull 64, 283; Quint. and Gell. 

I4. finis, i.e. ‘amicitiae et officiorum’: 

‘our friendship and attentions must be 

excused by their having lasted as long as 
he was your friend and no longer." 

I5. Constantia: cp. 5. 4, 2. 

qui: efferret, ‘to utter’; used in a 
similar sense in 3. 63, 4; 3. 41, 3; more 
commonly with an abl., as * verbis’ (Cic. 
Or. 44, 150), ‘lingua’ (Hor. A. P. 111). 

16. eo usque potuere; so 'largiter 
posse’ (Caes. B. G 1. 18, 3), in accord- 
ance with the construction of óvracóa:. 

17. quae ante deliquerant, 'their 
former misdeeds.” The verb takes a 
similar acc. in 12.54, 73 13. 31,53 14. 3 7. 

18. Sex. Vistilium.  Vistilia, who is 

606 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 78s. 

quem Druso fratri percarum in cohortem suam transtulerat. 
causa offensionis Vistilio fuit, seu. composuerat quaedam in 3 
Gaium Caesarem ut impudicum, sive ficto habita fides. atque 4 
ob id convictu principis prohibitus cum senili manu ferrum 

5 temptavisset, obligat venas; precatusque per codicillos, immiti 
rescripto venas resolvit. acervatim ex eo Annius Pollio, Appius 5 
Silanus Scauro Mamerco simul ac Sabino Calvisio maiestatis 
postulantur, et Vinicianus Pollioni patri adiciebatur, clari genus 
et quidam summis honoribus. contremuerantque patres (nam 6 

10 quotus quisque adfinitatis aut amicitiae tot inlustrium virorum 
expers erat?) ni Celsus urbanae cohortis tribunus, tum inter 
indices, Appium et Calvisium discrimini exemisset. Caesar 7 
Pollionis ac Viniciani Scaurique causam, ut ipse cum senatu nos- 
ceret, distulit, datis quibusdam in Scaurum tristibus notis. 

15 10 (16) Ne feminae quidem exsortes periculi. quia occu- 
pandae rei publicae argui non poterant, ob lacrimas incusabantur ; 

5. ob legatu: obligavit B, text Baiter. 
text B. 

stated to peine to a praetorian family 
(2. 85, 2), may have been his daughter. 

I. cohortem : see on I. 29, 2. 

2. seu... sive = eire... eire. The 
cause of displeasure was the allegation 
(whether true or false) that he had com- 
posed, &c. 

4. convictu . . . prohibitus.  Ves- 

asian, when under the displeasure of 

ero, was ‘ prohibitus non contubernio 
modo, sed etiam publica salutatione' 
(Suet. Vesp. 4). Such marks of displea- 
sure (see Friedl. i. p. 128) are probably 
somewhat less severe than complete ‘ re- 
nuntiatio amicitiae ' (see on c. 39, 3; 2. 
70, 35 3- 12, 45; 24, 5). Some similar 
cause is implied for the supposed suicide 
of Fabius Maximus (1. 5, 4). 

&. venas. The repetition of this word 
has been thought an error of the tran- 
scriber (see Pfitzner, p. 75). Nipp. (on I. 
81, 2) gives several instances of such re- 
petitions for vivid description or rhetori- 
cal emphasis, as well as others where it 

may be due to oversight. 
: 6 Annius Pollio, cos. suff. with 
Rubellius Blandus (see on 3. 23, 2). 
Borghesi (iv. 477) considers him son of 
C. Annius C. f. Cor(nelia) Pollio, * trium- 
vir monetalis’ under Augustus (Eckh. v. 
135). The Annius Pollio of 15. 56, 4, 

9. contremuerant quae (see Andresen; : 

45. qua: quia Mur., quando Kiessling. 

&c., may have been his grandson. The 
son here mentioned, L. Annius Vinicianus, 
probably nephew of M. Vinicius (c. 15, 1), 
occurs among the Arvales in 791, A.D. 38 
(C. I. L. vi. 2028 c 34), and is men- 
tioned by Dio (60. 15, 1) as having been 
contemplated as a successor to Gaius 
(Caligula), and as having joined the re- 
bellion of Camillus Scribonianus (see on 
I2. 52, 2). Several inscriptions relating 

‘to the family are given in C. I. L. vi. 

7295-7429. Appius Silanus has been 
mentioned in 4. 68, 1; Mamercus Scaurus 
in 1. 13, 4, &c., Calvisius Sabinus in 4. 
46, 1. On the use of ‘simul’ see Introd. 
v. $63. 

9. et quidam. All except Vinicianus 

were certainly consulars. Nipp. thinks 
that he probably was also such, and that 
* atque idem’ should be read. 
. 1I. Celsus. Ritter would insert Iulius ' 
from c. 14, 2, but the addition of his office 
would make one name suffice, as in inany 
instances (see Nipp. on 5. 8). 

I2. discrimini exemisset: cp. 3. 55,3. 

I3: nosceret: cp. 12. 60, 3; so ‘notio’ 
for * cognitio' €. 12, 5; 3. 59, 2. 

14. tristibus notis, ‘harsh written 
expressions.’ On the fate of Scaurus see 
C. 29, 4. 

16. argui, often used with an ordinary 

A.D. 32.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 9 (15), 1o (16). 

607 

necataque est anus Vitia, Fufii Gemini mater, quod filii necem 

9 flevisset. 

haec apud senatum: nec secus apud principem Ves- 

cularius Flaccus ac Iulius Marinus ad mortem aguntur, e vetus- 
tissimis familiarium, Rhodum secuti et apud Capreas individui, 
Vescularius insidiarum in Libonem internuntius ; Marino parti- 
cipe Seianus Curtium Atticum oppresserat. quo laetius acceptum 
sua exempla in consultores recidisse. 

8 Per idem tempus L. Piso pontifex, rarum in tanta claritudine, 
fato obiit, nullius servilis sententiae sponte auctor, et quotiens 
4 necessitas ingrueret, sapienter moderans. patrem ei censorium 
fuisse memoravi; aetas ad octogensimum annum processit ; 

5 decus triumphale in Thraecia meruerat. 

s 
I. fugii: text L. 

genitive, but, acc. to Dráger, here alone 
with that of the gerundive. By *occu- 
pandae reipublicae" is meant such a con- 
spiracy as that of Seianus. Women could 
be charged with treasonable words, or 
acts, such as consulting astrologers: see 
2. 50, 1; 3. 22, 2, &c. 

I. Vitia. No such Roman name is 
known; hence the conjectures ‘ Vibia’ 
(Nipp.), * Vittia? (Bait.), * Fufia' (Ritt.). 
On Fufius Geminus see 5. I, 1; 2, 2. 

2. haec apud senatum, sc. ‘ acta.’ 
On the omission of such verbs see In- 
trod. v. $ 38 b. The expression here 
includes all the cases mentioned from c. 2. 

apud principem. On the personal 
jurisdiction of the * princeps' see Introd. 
vi. p. 88; Staatsr. ii. 958, foll. Some 
further traces of such trials before Tiberius 
can be gathered from Suet. Tib. 62 ; but 
it is his usual practice to devolve the 
responsibility of condemnation on the 
senate: see 3. Io, 6; and below, c. 47, 4. 

4. individui, * inseparable from him.' 
The word appears to be almost aw. elp. 
in this sense; in Cicero it means ‘in- 
divisible.’ 

5. insidiarum . . . internuntius : see 
2. 28, 1 ; whence *' Flaccus? is restored ; 
* Atticus" being apparently repeated by 
error from * Atticum' below. | 

6. Curtium Atticum : see 4. 58, 1. 
His overthrow must have been men- 
tioned in the lost part. Marinus is other- 
wise unknown. 

7. sua exempla: the expression seems 
a reminiscence of * mala exempla recidunt 
in auctores’ (Sen. Ep. 81, 19) : cp. ‘sua 

3. atticus : Flaccus L. 

sed praecipua ex eo 

4. familiarum : text B. 

quisque exempla debet... pati’ Phaedr. 
I, 26. 

consultores, ‘the devisers'; so ‘ prava 
incepta consultoribus noxae esse' Sall. H. 
I. 48, 1D, 5s K, p. 144 G. The use in 4. 
24, 3 is also from Sallust. 

8. L. Piso pontifex. This title, con- 
firmed by the * Acta Arvalium" of 767, 
A.D. 14 (C. I. L. vi. 2023 a), and other 
inscriptions, distinguishes this L. Piso 
from others of the same name (cp. 2. 34, 
I; 4.45, 1; 62, 1). He was consul in 
739, B.C. £5, and probably father of the 
‘iuvenes’ addressed by Horace: see on 
4- 45, 1 ; 62, 1; Porphyr. on Hor. A. P. 
On the story respecting his appointment 
to the * praefectura urbis' see Introd. iv. 

. 33- 
: rarum, &c. On such parentheses see 
Introd. v. $ 82. 

9. fato: cp. 2. 71, 2, &c. 

nullius servilis sententiae, &c. He 
is perhaps the person spoken of in 2. 32, 
4; 3. 68, 1. 

II. memoravi. This mention is lost. 
The father is otherwise known as L. 

. Calpurnius C. f. L. n. Piso Caesoninus, 

dii 

cos. 696, B. C. 58, and censor 704, B.C. 50, - 

the supporter of Clodius and enemy of 
Cicero, who attacks him in two speeches 
(de Prov. Cons., and in Pis). He was 
also father of Calpurnia, wife of Julius 
Caesar. 

I2. decus triumphale, i.e. the 'tri- 
umphalia ornamenta. This was in 743, 
B.C. II (Dio, 54. 34, 6), after a three 
years’ war (Vell. 2: 98, 1). 

608 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 785. 

gloria, quod praefectus urbi recens continuam potestatem et in- 
solentia parendi graviorem mire temperavit. 

11 (17). Namque antea, profectis domo regibus ac mox magis- 
tratibus, ne urbs sine imperio foret, in tempus deligebatur qui ius 
5 redderet ac subitis mederetur; feruntque ab Romulo Dentrem 
Romulium, post ab Tullo Hostilio Numam Marcium et ab Tar- 

quinio Superbo Spurium Lucretium inpositos. 

mandabant; duratque simulacrum, quotiens ob ferias Latinas 

praeficitur qui consulare munus usurpet. 

ceterum Augustus 3 

10 bellis civilibus Cilnium Maecenatem equestris ordinis cunctis 

3. praefectis demum: text R. 

I. recens, adv., as in 2. 21, 1. It is 
noted (Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 22) that 
this use of * recens' with adjectives occurs 
first in the Annals, and only with adjectives 
having a participial meaning. 

continuam, ‘made permanent.’ On 
the continuity of the * praefectura urbis ' 
under the early Empire the evidence is 
doubtful, and possibly the account of 
Tacitus is confused. A wide power, 
analogous to that of Maecenas (c. 11, 3), 
would naturally be held only during the 
absence of Augustus, and it was during 
part of the absence lasting 727-730, B.C. 
27-24, that Corvinus held a power whic 
seemed to himself *incivilis, and on 
anothér such departure in 738, B.C. 16, 
that the appointment of Taurus is men- 
tioned (see on c. 1I, 4-5), and the 'recens 
continua potestas" of Piso seems to refer 
to the permanent departure of Tiberius in 
779, A.D. 26 (cp. Sen. Ep. 83, 14). On 
the other hand, as Klebs argues (Rh. Mus. 
xlii. 1887, 164—178), the original duties 
assigned to the office, those of routine 
summary police (‘qui coerceret,’ &c.), are 
such as Augustus would hardly care to 
discharge himself, and might well have 
wished to delegate to some permanent 
officer of good position; and the urban 
cohorts, if perhaps at first placed under 
the * praefecti praetorio" (Staatsr. ii. 1067, 
n. 4), must soon have become his ‘ proprius 
miles’ (H. 3. 64, 1). Possibly therefore 
the oflice was in some sense permanent 
even from the appointment of Corvinus, 
but many of its most important functions 
were in abeyance when the emperor was 
pent At any rate, from and after 

iso a continuous series is reckoned: see 
Staatsr. ii. 1c60, n. 3. 

insolenti& parendi, 'for want of 

habits of submission.’ The expression 

10. cillinium: text L. 

seems strange in reference to the time of 
Tiberius, but should be understood in 
contrast to the more fully established 
authority of the praefect when Tacitus 
wrote. . 

2. mire temperavit: see the character 
given to him in Vell. 2. 98. 

3. Namque, &c. This history of the 
office is suggested by * recens continuam." 

4. in tempus: cp. 4. 66, 3. 

5. subitis mederetur, 'to meet emer- 
gencies' : ‘subita’ is often substantival, 
as in 15. 59, 3; H. 1. 7, 4; 5. 13, 4. 

Dentrem Romulium. This person 
and the name ‘ Romulius' are otherwise 
unknown. Denter is a cognomen of C. 
Livius, magister equitum 406, B.C. 348, 
and M. Livius, consul 452, B.C. 302 (Liv. 
10. 1, 9, &c., C. I. L. i. p. 516). 

6. Numam Marcium; according to 
Livy (1. 20, 5), created first pontiff by 
king Numa; according to other traditions, 
husband of Numa's daughter Pompilia, 
and, by her, father of Ancus Marcius 
(Plut. Num. 21). 

7 8p. Lucretium: see Liv. 1. 59, 12. 
Among early instances under the Republic 
are Sempronius Atratinus (Dion. H. 6. 2), 
and others (Liv. 3. 3, 6; 3. 24, 2) 

8. duratque simulacrum. On this 
‘shadow’ see 4. 36, 1; Staatsr. i. 666. 
The necessity for the praelecture as a 
substantial office appears to have ceased 
with the institution of the * praetura ur- 
bana’ in 387, B.C. 367. 

Ic. bellis civilibus, abl. of time 
throughout which (see Introd. v. § 26). 
Maecenas was first thus left in charge 
during the Sicilian war in 718, B.C. 36, 
kal róre xal éxeacra tai woAdv (Dio, 49. 
16, 2); also during the final struggle in 
723, B.C. 31 (Id. 51. 3, 5). 

Cilnium Maecenatem. It has been 

dein consules 2 

A. D. 32.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. xo (16)—12 (18). 

609 

apud Romam atque Italiam praeposuit: mox rerum potitus ob 
magnitudinem populi ac tarda legum auxilia sumpsit e consu- 
laribus qui coerceret servitia et quod civium audacia turbidum, 

4 nisi vim metuat. 

primusque Messalla Corvinus eam potestatem 

5 et paucos intra dies finem accepit, quasi nescius exercendi ; tum 5 
Taurus Statilius, quamquam provecta aetate, egregie toleravit ; 
6 dein Piso viginti per annos pariter probatus, publico funere ex 

decreto senatus celebratus est. 

12 (18). Relatum inde ad patres a Quintiliano tribuno plebei de 
libro Sibullae, quem Caninius Gallus quindecimvirum recipi inter 

Io. quindecimvir B. 

generally thought that the former name, 
rom a noble race of Arretium (Liv. Io. à, 
2), is his paternal or gentile name, and 
Maecenas that derived from his mother 
(see on 1. 14, 2); but Nipp. notes that in 
an inscription (Gruter, p. 945, 10) he is 
called * C. Maecenas, L. f. Pom(ptina),’ 
and that the name ' Cilnius,’ given to him 
only hereand in a quotation from Augustus 
(^ Cilniorum smaragde’) in Macr. Sat. 2. 
4; 12; and borne by none of his slaves, 
must be the matronymic. 

cunctis . . . praeposuit. Maecenas 
was not titular praefectus urbis, but his 
vicegerency is here mentioned as including 
the functions of that office, and much more, 
and probably suggesting the idea of it. 
His duties are spoken of by Horace (Od. 
3. 29, 27 ; Sat. 2. 6, 38) and others: sce 
Staatsr. ii. 729. Agrippa shared his duties 
for a time (Dio, 51. 3, 10), and afterwards 
had a similar rfjs méA «as biaxeipuois in 733, 
B.C. 21, apparently without a formal prae- 
' fecture (Id. 54. 6, 5), being then a sharer 
in the proconsular imperium (Staatsr. ii. 
1060, n. 2). 

3. qui coerceret, &c. This very 
limited original jurisdiction seems little 

more than such as had been exercised at - 

the Maenian column (Cic. Div. in Caec, 

16, 5o, &c.) by the ‘tresviri capitales" 

(Introd. vi. p. 91), who must now have 
been young and inexperienced men. This 
jurisdiction was evidently soon extended, 
and in the time of Nero apparently clashed 
with that of the praetor (14. 41, 2) ; and 
in later times the office became far more 
important : see Staatsr. ii. 1063, foll. 

4. Messala Corvinus. According 
to Jerome in Eus. Chron. (vol. viii. p. 551, 
Migne), he received this power probably 
in 728, B. C. 26, and resigned it on the sixth 
day, ‘incivilem potestatem esse contestans.' 

VOL. I. 

5. quasi: cp. Introd. v. $ 67, and 

other instances collected by Nipp. It 
appears in this place to denote the osten- 
sible or prevalent explanation of his resig- 
nation, as distinct from that which (see 
last note) he may have given in private. 

6. Taurus Statilius. Dio (54. 19, 6) - 

sae of him as appointed in 738, B.C. 16, 
TO dcTV pera Tis GAAns 'IraMas Óvouweiy ; 
but this vicegerency, resembling that of 

Maecenas and Agrippa, may, as Borghesi 

thinks (v. 317), have been an extension of 

the praefecture, which he may have held 

from the resignation of Corvinus. 
provecta aetate: having been cos, suff. 

"under the triunivirate in 717, B.C. 37, he 

was no doubt older than Augustus, and it 
is hardly likely, though not: impossible, 
that he lived on till the appointment of 
Piso. On his descendants see 2. I, 1; 
12. 59, 1 ; 15. 68, 5. 

toleravit, ‘sustained its duties’; so 
with * munia ' 13. 35, 2. 

7. viginti per annos. I have not 
followed-Halm and Nipp. here in altering 
the MS. text to ‘quindecim,’ to bring 
"Tacitus into agreement with the untrust- 
worthy story in Suet. Tib. 42 (see Introd. 
iv. p- 33), and with the assumption that 
the office was vacant at the death of 
Augustus (see on I. 7, 3). Another view 
would read * sex’ (on the supposition that 
‘vi’ had been altered to ‘viginti’), to 
bring the passage into agreement with the 

opinion dating the appointment from. 

the departure of Tiberius to Campania 
(4.57, 1). Seeon c. 10, 5. 

publico funere : see 3. 48, I. 

9. Quintiliano. Nipp. notes the pos- 
sibility of his ideritity with one Nonius 
Quintilianus, cos. suff. in 792, A.D. 39. 

de libro Sibullae: see on 1. 76, 2. 

.10. Caninius Gallus, mentioned in 

Rr 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 785. 

610 

ceteros eiusdem vatis et ea de re senatus consultum postulaverat. 
quo per discessionem facto misit litteras Caesar, modice tribunum 
increpans ignarum antiqui moris ob iuventam. Gallo expro- 2 
brabat, quod scientiae caerimoniarumque vetus incerto auctore, 
5ante sententiam collegii, non, ut adsolet, lecto per magistros 
aestimatoque carmine, apud infrequentem senatum egisset. simul 8 
commonefecit, quia multa vana sub nomine celebri vulgabantur, 
sanxisse Augustum, quem intra diem ad praetorem urbanum 
deferrentur neque habere privatim liceret. quod a maioribus 4 
10 quoque decretum erat post exustum sociali bello Capitolium, 

9. neve Ern. 

several Arval Tables dating 780-790, 
A.D. 27-37 (C. I. L. vi. 2024, 2025, 
2027), as one of the college and as their 
* magister. As such, and also as *quin- 
decimvir, he is called below ‘ scientiae 
caerimoniarumque vetus' (see Introd. ii. 
p. 11). Nipp. identifes him with the 
*triumvir monetalis’ of 736, B.C. 18 
(Eckh. v. 162), and with L. Caninius, cos. 
suff. in 752, B.C. 2 (Mon. Anc. iii. 31); 
his father with L. Caninius L. f. Gallus, 
cos. in 717, B.C. 37 (Dio, Arg. B. 48); 
and his grandfather with the friend of 
Cicero who was trib. pl. in 698, B.C. 56. 

quindecimvirum, partitive gen., used 
where the abl. with ‘e’ would be more 
common (as C. 4, 4; 10, 2, &c.) : cp. ‘quod 
decimvirum sine provocatione esset" (Cic. 
de Rep. 2. 36, 61). On the office of this 
priesthood and their charge of these books 
see on 3. 64, 3. 
. recipi. An infinitive is thus coordi- 

nated with a noun in 4. 3, I. . 

I. senatus consultum postulaverat. 
He himself would not have had *ius re- 
lationis, and could only draw attention 
to the subject ‘per egressionem' (see on 
2.38, 3). Such a decree was required for 
the promulgation of a Sibylline prophecy 
(Dio, 39. 15, 3), and no doubt also for its 
reception into the canon. 

2. per discessionem: see on 3. 69, 9. 

4. scientiae caerimoniarumque, hen- 
diadys. On the gen. after * vetus" cp. c. 
44; 1; I. 20, 2; H. 4. 20, 8: elsewhere it 
occurs only in Sil. 4, 532; 17, 297. 

incerto auotore, 'on untrustworthy 
information'; without having obtained 
it from any one of reputation. 

5. magistros. That the quindecimviri 
in the time of Augustus had five ‘ magistri ' 
is shown by Mommsen (Comm. on Mon. 

10. civili bello L, Sullano Heraus. 

Anc. p. 92) from the record of the Ludi 
Saeculares of 737, B.C. 17, in the Fasti 
Cap. (C. I. L. i. p. 442). Augustus him- 
self (Mon. Anc. iv. 36) and no doubt his 
successors, were among these * magistri ' ; 
and it was in that capacity, latterly as sole 
* magistri" (Staatsr. ii. 1106), that they 
held ‘ Ludi Saeculares.’ | 

6. infrequentem. Augustus (Dio, 54. 
35, 1) had relaxed the rule by which no 
decree could be passed without the pre- 
sence of four hundred senators. 

7. vulgabantur: the indic. is inter- 
posed as in 1. 10, 1, &c. 

9. deferrentur. The subject of this 
is the many current prophecies mentioned 
above. Suet. (Aug. 31) says that Augustus, 
on assuming the office of. pontifex maxi- 
mus, after search made, burnt above two 
thousand of the collected prophetic books, 
retaining only the Sibylline and making 
mieu. also among them: see note on 
I. 76, a. | 

neque, &c. There is much force in 
Nipp.'s objection that in such a dependent 
sentence this could only stand for * et ne" 
when preceded by ‘a clause with ‘ ut’ or 
‘ne, as in II. 18, 2; 15. 43, 4. If the 
text is sound we must suppose that in the 
preceding sentence ‘quem intra diem’ is 
concisely but inaccurately used for *ut 
intra dictum diem.' 

IO. sociali bello. In H. 3. 72, 2, the 
date is correctly given, *arserat et ante 

. Capitolium civili bello,’ i.e. in the "ug 
71 

between Sulla and the Marians in 

B.C. 83. "Some have vainly justified the 
words here by the common interest which 

the Italians had with the Marians. Pos- 
sibly Tacitus gave no date, and *bello 
sociali! is the gloss of some historical 
blunderer. The similar discrepancy noted | 

A. D. 32.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 12 (18), 13 (19). 

611 

quaesitis Samo, Ilio, Erythris, per Africam etiam ac Siciliam et 
Italicas colonias, carminibus Sibullae, una seu plures fuere, da- 
toque sacerdotibus negotio, quantum humana ope potuissent, 

5 vera discernere. 
liber subicitur. 

igitur tunc quoque notioni quindecimvirum is 

13 (19). Isdem consulibus gravitate annonae iuxta seditionem 
ventum, multaque et plures per dies in theatro licentius effla- - 

2gitata quam solitum adversum imperatorem. 

quis commotus 

incusavit magistratus patresque, quod non publica auctoritate 
populum coercuissent, addiditque quibus ex provinciis et quanto 
maiorem quam Augustus rei frumentariae copiam advectaret. 
8 ita castigandae plebi compositum senatus consultum prisca seve- 

4ritate, neque segnius consules edixere. 

silentium ipsius non 

civile, ut crediderat, sed in superbiam accipiebatur. 

IO. et: e B, ex Ritter. 

in 1. 54, 1, relates to a legend of which 
there may have been two versions; the 
error here is one which it is difficult to 
suppose that Tacitus or any persons to 
whom he read his work would have over- 
looked. Until this fire the Sibylline book 
or books had been kept in the ‘cella 
Tovis.’ is 

1. Samo, &c., ablatives of place whence, 
with the construction afterwards varied. 
Erythrae, one of the Ionian cities opposite 
Chios, now Ritri, where many remains of 
it exist: by ‘Italicae coloniae’ the cities 
of Magna Graecia are meant. A lost work 
of Varro, cited by Dion. Hal. (4. 62) and 
Lactant. (de fals. rel. c. 6), recognized (ac- 
cording to the latter) ten distinct Sibyls, 
the Persian, Libyan, Delphian, Cimmerian, 
Erythraean, Samian, Cumaean, Hellespon- 
tian, Phrygian, and Tiburtine; of whom 
the Cumaean was most famous : for further 
particulars see Marquardt, iii. 351. 

3. potuissent, perhaps, as Jacob notes, 
used instead of ' possent, because ‘vera 
discernere * implies previous research and 
subsequent publication of its results. 

4. discernere. This simple inf. after 
* negotium dare’ is noted by Drager as 
Gr. «lp. It is used with ‘datum’ in 12. 
IT, 4. 

notioni: cp. 3. 59, 2, and the use of 
' noscere ' (c. 9, 7). 

6. gravitate annonae. On other such 
expressions cp. 2. 87, I. 

iuxta seditionem ventum: cp.' usque 
ad seditionem ventum est' 14. 42, 2. The 
expression is founded on ‘ iuxta seditionem 

esse’ (Sall. H. iii. 67 D, 77 K, 76 G), and 
on ‘prope seditionem venire’ (H. 3. 21, 
I; Liv. 96. 48, 8). On the use of ‘ iuxta’ 
see Introd. v. § 61. 

7. et plures per dies. For the 
parenthetical and abbreviated insertion of 
this clause, instead of a full expression of 
it in its proper place, Nipp. compares 
‘neque ita multo post’ in Cic. p. Rosc. 
Am. 28, 78; Nep. Pelop. 3, 4, &c. 

in theatro. such gatherings were now 
the chief occasions on which popular 
demands or other grievances found ex- 
pression. Sidonius Apollinaris in the 
fifth century writes (Ep. 1. 10). ‘ vereor, 
ne famem populi Romani theatralis fra- 
gor insonet et infortunio meo publica 

eputetur esuries.’ On the occasion of 
another such dearth, Claudius was mobbed 
in the forum (12. 43, 2). 

Io. quantó maiorem. Augustus is 
said (Aur. Vict. Epit. 1, 6) to have im- 
ported twenty million * modii" annually 
from Egypt alone. Tiberius reckons the 
corn supply as his special function (3. 54, 
8 

II. advectaret, a verb only found elsc- 
where in Val. Fl. 4, 106 : for such rare or 
poetical frequentatives see Introd. v. $ 69 
(4), 70. 

I3. neque segnius, &c., ‘the consuls 
issued a not less energetic edict.’ As 
edicts ran usually in the name of the 
* princeps,' his silence is noted as excep- 
tional. 

14. insuperbiam. For this use of ‘in’ 
see note on t1. 14, 3. 

Rr2 

612 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. ;86. 

14 (20). Fine anni Geminius, Celsus, Pompeius, equites Ro- 
mani, cecidere coniurationis crimine; ex quis Geminius prodi- 
gciritia opum ac mollitia vitae amicus Seiano, nihil ad serium. et 2 
Iulius Celsus tribunus in vinclis laxatam catenam et circumdatam 

5in diversum tendens suam ipse cervicem perfregit. 

Fabato, tamquam desperatis rebus Romanis Parthorum ad mise- 
ricordiam fugeret, custodes additi. sane is repertus apud fretum 4 
Siciliae retractusque per centurionem nullas probabiles causas 

longinquae peregrinationis adferebat : 

mansit tamen incolumis, 

16 oblivione magis quam clementia. 

. 15 (21). Ser. Galba L. Sulla consulibus diu quaesito quos nep- 
tibus suis maritos destinaret Caesar, postquam instabat virginum 
aetas, L. Cassium, M. Vinicium legit. Vinicio oppidanum genus: 2 

7. sanus : sane is Faern. ° 

1. Geminius, Celsus, Pompeius. 
Here, as in 2. 48, 1, the mention of Ro- 
man knights by one name has led some 
to think that praenomina have dropped 
out. These persons are unknown, for the 
'*PoUQos l'eutvios of Dio, 58. 4, 5, is now 
taken to be Fufius Geminus. Ls 

2. coniurationis: see 5. 11, 2, &c. 

 prodigentia, found only here and in 
13. I, 4; 15. 37, 2: cp. the verb ‘ pro- 
digere' 3. 52, 1. The ablatives here are 
those of respect. 

3. nihil ad serium, ‘in nothing tend- 
ing to grave purpose’: cp. ‘ad externa 
rumoribus’ (16. 23, 3); where the idea 
of ‘ spectare ' is supplied, as with pus. 

4. Iulius Celsus tribunus: see c. 9, 
6 His full name is given to distinguish 
him from the Celsus just above; and the 
recent specification » his tribunate (l. 1.) 
enables it to be here left undescribed. 

circumdatam, &c., i.e. ‘putting it 
round his neck and straining at the ends.’ 
The chain probably connected the mana- 
cles on his wrists. and may be supposed 
to have been usually locked in some way 
together, but then by some means sct free 
to its full length. 

5. Rubrio Fabato, probably not the 
one mentioned as a knight in 1. 73, I. 
It is implied that this Kulrius was a 
senator; as only that rank was debarred 
from travelling without permission to any 
place beyond ltaly, except Sicily, and 
(after 802, A.D. 49) Gallia Narbonensis: 
see 12. 23, 1 ; Dio, 52. 42, 6. 

7. additi; cp. 4. 67, 6, and similar 

‘of the dictator. 

expressions in 3. 28, 4; 4. 60, 1, &c. 
The expression here seems to be a remi- 
niscence of Hor. Od. 3. 4, 78. 

9 longinquae. Nipp. rightly shows 
that this cannot be understood of the 
place where he was found, which was 
within the permissible limits above men- 
tioned ; but of the long voyage which he 
was evidently contemplating. The same 
expression in 3. 24, 6 is generally taken 
of time rather than distance. 

11. Ser. Galba, the future princeps 
(see c. 20, 3). Suet. (Galb. 4) states that 
his praenomen at this time was Lucius; 
which Nipp. confirms from a gladiatorial 
‘tessera’ dated ‘L. Sull. L. Sulp.’; but 
Tacitus gives that by which he is best 
known, as do also the Fasti of Nola, ‘ Ser. 
Sulpicius Galba, L. Sulla Felix, cos.’ 
(C. I. L. x. 1233; Orell. 4033)... 

L. Sulla. The cognomen ‘Felix’ (see 
note above) shows him to be a descendant 
He was * praetor pere- 
grinus’ four years earlier (see Nipp.), and 
is by some identified with the *nobilis 
iuvenis ' of 3. 31, 4. 

I3. &etas, sc. ‘nubilis.’ Drusilla was 
sixteen, Julia fifteen years old (see 2. 54, 
1; Introd: ix. notes 15. 16). Agrippina 
was already married (see 4. 75, 1). On 
the *aetas nubilis ' see Appendix iii. p. 485, 
n. 2; also Friedl. i. pp. 504, foll. 

Cassium. L. Cassius Louginus was 
consul in 783, A.D. 30 (C. I. L. x. 1233; 
Orell. 4033). He was proconsul of Asia 
in 794, A. D. 41, when he was put to death 
by Gaius (Dio, 59. 29, 3; Suet. Cal. 57>. 

at Rubrio 3 

4 batur. 

A. D. 33.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 14 (20), 15 (21*. 

613 

Calibus ortus, patre atque avo consularibus, cetera equestri 
3 familia erat, mitis ingenio et comptae facundiae. Cassius ple- 
beii Romae generis, verum antiqui honoratique, et severa patris 
disciplina eductus facilitate saepius quam industria commenda- 

huic Drusillam, Vinicio Iuliam Germanico genitas con- 

iungit superque ea re senatui scribit, levi cum honore iuvenum. 
5 dein redditis absentiae causis admodum vagis flexit ad graviora 
et offensiones ob rem publicam coeptas, utque Macro praefectus 
tribunorumque et centurionum pauci secum introirent, quotiens 
6 curiam ingrederetur, petivit, factoque large et sine praescrip- 
tione generis aut numeri senatus consulto ne tecta quidem 
urbis, adeo publicum consilium numquam adiit, deviis plerumque 
itineribus ambiens patriam et declinans. 

8. susceptas Muretus. 

On his parentage see below ($ 3). He 
was brother to C. Cassius, the famous 
‘jurist of 12. 12, 1, &c. 

M. Vinicium ; cos. with Cassius in 
the year above, when Velleius dedicated 
his history to him. He was again cos. in 
798, A.D. 45, and was poisoned by Mes- 
salina in the following year (Dio, 60. 25, 
1; 27, 4). 

oppidanum, used of the people of 
Italian municipalities (4. 67, 1): cp. 14. 
17, 2; and ‘oppidanum genus dicendi ' 
(Cic. Brut. 69, 242). 

I. patre atque avo. On his father 
P. Vinicius see 3. 11, 3; Vell. 3. 103, 1: 
his grand.ather M. Vinicius (Vell. 2. 96, 
2; 104, 2) was cos. suff. in 735, B.C. 19 
(C. I. L. i. p. 466) : a full account of the 
family is given by Nipp. on 3. 11, a pedi- 
gree in Lehmann, * Claudius.' 

_ 3. Comptae, ‘ ornatae’: cp. ‘ comptior 
oratio’ H. 1. 19, I. 

plebeii Homae generis. ‘Romae’ 
is opposed to 'oppidanum. The gens 
‘Cassia,’ originally patrician, appears as 
early as the famous Spurius Cassius (Liv. 
2. 17, 1, &c.), and the Cassii Longini are 
among the distinguished plebeian houses 
from the second Punic war. 

3. patris, L. Cassius L. f. Longinus, 
cos. suff. 764, A.D. 11 (C. I. L. i. p. 443; 
xii. 4333). His relationship to the * per- 
cussor Caesaris ' appears to be uncertain. 

4. facilitate, ‘complaisance’ or ‘pli- 
ancy’: cp. 2. 65, 3, &c., and ‘.acilis’ 4. 
2, 4; 5. I, 5, &c. 

commendabatur. If ' saepius' (which 

13. ambigens: text R. 

"Nipp. would omit or alter to * plus" or 
* Caesari plus’) is right, this verb must 
refer to the general opinion formed of him 
throughout his life. E" 

6. iuvenum: both were consulars, 
but their fathers may have been still 
living. Similar words are used in 11. 13, 
3 of C. Silius, who was cos. design., but 
perhaps below the usual age: cp. also the 
* juventa! of L. Vitellius (c. 32, 7). 

7. vagis, ‘indefinite.’ 
pares the opposition of *errans et vaga" 

.to ‘stabilis et certà sententia' in Cic. 
N. D. 2. 1, 2. 

8. offensiones ... coeptas. From 
3. 54, 1I, we should rather expect 'sus- 
ceptas’; but we have ‘adfinitas,’ * amicitia 
coepta! (c. 30, 4; 12. Io, 3), and other 
like phrases. 

Macro, Naevius Sertorius Macro, here 
first mentioned in the extant Books. On 
his agency in the fall of Seianus see Dio, 
58. 9; on his suicide in 79r, A.D. 38, at 
the command of Gaius, Id. 59. 10, 6 

10. large, ‘in comprehensive terms,’ i. e. 
as explained in the context, without the 
limits expressed in his request. Dio (58. 
18, 6) adds that it was also decrecd that 
the senators should themselves be searched 
for hidden arms. Such a guard in the 
senate is mentioned in the ume of Gaius 
and Claudius, and later: sce Staatsr. iii, 
9o9,n.6. . 

I2. adeo .. 
non ” 3. 43, 3. 

publicum consilium: for the use of 
this and similar expressions for the senate 

. numquam : cp. ‘ adeo 

ost 

Jacob com- 

eg 

614 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C.;86. 

16 (22). Interea magna vis accusatorum in eos inrupit, qui pe- 
cunias faenore auctitabant adversum legem dictatoris Caesaris, qua 
de modo credendi possidendique intra Italiam cavetur, omissam 
olim, quia privato usui bonum publicum postponitur. sane vetus 2 
urbi faenebre malum et seditionum discordiarumque creberrima _ 
causa, eoque cohibebatur antiquis quoque et minus corruptis 
moribus. nam primo duodecim tabulis sanctum, ne quis unciario 8 

3. omissa: text L. 

by Cicero and other writers, see Staatsr. 
ii. 1028, n. I. 

deviis... itineribus, &c. This may 
probably answer to the second (cp. c. 1, 2) 
of the two occasions on which Suetonius 
(Tib. 72) speaks of him as approaching 
Rome (‘ iterum Appia usque ad septimum 
lapidem"). Dio (58. 21, t) shortens the 
distance to thirty stadia. We should 
gather from Tacitus (cp. c. 39, 2) that he 
approached Rome more frequently. 

ambiens: *ambigens' can hardly 
be explained either as *ambagibus cir- 
cumiens’ (Ern.), or sepui*yo» ( Walth.), or 
like *ambiguus an intraret, in c. 1, I 
(Pfitzner) ‘ Ambio' is used in this sense 
by Cicero, Ovid, and Lucan. 

deolinans, probably transitive, as in 

c. 51, 3; H. 3. 84, 5, &c.; but it might 
be intrans., as in 14. 56, a. 

1. Interea, &c. Tacitus does not bring © 

in the agency of ‘Tiberius till a later stage 
(§ 5); but Dio (58. 21, 4) makes him, 
against the advice of Nerva (see on c. 26, 

.2) originate the attack. That he was 

keenly interested in the future of Italian 
land appears from 3. 54, 6. For a full 

" and recent discussion of the whole subject, 

see Prof. Allen's essay in Trans. Amer. 
Philol. Assoc. xviii. (1887) pp. 5-18. 

in eos inrupit: see note on 2. I1, 4. 

2. auctitabant. This may be called 
aw, elp., though the verb is found in a 
different sense in a late writer. | 

legem dictatoris Caesaris. By an 
ordinance by Caesar as dictator in 
705 or 706, B.C. 49 or 48 (Caes. B. C. 3. 
1, 2; Suet. Caes. 42; App. B. C. 2. 48; 
Dio, 41. 37; 3), the interest paid or in 
arrear was struck off from the principal, 
And creditors had to take in lieu of pay- 
ment the real and personal property of 
the debtor, estimated at what it had Den 

. worth before the civil wars. This, which 

was perhaps the law which Matius had 
supported, though a loser by it (Cic. ad 
Fam. xi. 27, 7; 28, 2), was evidently a 

temporary measure; and it would seem 
that the permanent law ‘de modo credendi 
possidendique intra Italiam’ is but im- 

rfectly known tous. In part it is doubt- 
ess that which Dio (41. 38, 1) notices at 
that date as an old law revived, limiting 
to 60,0900 H.S. the amount of coinage 
which any capitalist might possess in store. : 
This would force them to place out on 
loan or invest the remainder ; and a further 
provision appears to have enforced a pro- 
portion between these modes of disposal, 
perhaps enacting that not less than half 
the capital should be invested in Italian 
land; not only with a view to encourage 
the expenditure of capital on the better 
tillage of the soil, but also, as intended by 
analogous enactments of Trajan (Pl. Epp. 

. 6. 19, 4) and M. Aurelius (Vit. 11, 8), to 

give the capitalists a stake in the country, 
and to cause the mere money-lenders, who 
were nothing more, to disappear from 
Italy, See Mommsen, Rom. Hist. b. v. 
ch. 11, pp. 401, foll. Possibly Horace, 
writing when the law was falling into 
abeyance, may have humorously glanced 
at its futility in his picture of the usurer 
turning farmer (Epod. 3, 67). It would 
be evident from Cicero (Att. 5. 21, 11, 
&c.), that * centesimae usurae (1 per cent. 

r month, or 12 per cent. per annum) was 
in his tíme legal interest, and from Horace 
(Sat. 1. 2, 14), that five times that amount 
was sometimes exacted; but such rates 
may be taken (see Momms. Rom. Hist. 
b. ii. c; 3, p. 389) as corresponding to 
about half that amount in modern value. 

3. omissam, ‘neglected’: cp. 3. 53, 
2, &c. 

4. vetus . . . malum; in the whole 
period from 259, B.C. 495 (Liv. 2. 33, 1), 
to the Lex Hortensia, cir. 468, B.C. 286 
(Id. Epit. 11). These old laws are cited, 
not as directly bearing on the question, 
but as uds i the constant prominence 
of monetary difficulties. 

». duodecim tabulis. Tacitus is our 

5 bantur. 

A. D. 33.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 16 (22). 

615 

faenore amplius exerceret, cum antea ex libidine locupletium 
agitaretur; dein rogatione tribunicia ad semuncias redactum, 

4 postremo vetita versura. 

multisque plebi scitis obviam itum 

fraudibus, quae totiens repressae miras per artes rursum orie- 

sed tum Gracchus praetor, cui ea quaestio evenerat, 5 

multitudine periclitantium subactus rettulit ad senatum, trepi- 
dique patres (neque enim quisquam tali culpa vacuus) veniam 
a principe petivere; et concedente annus in posterum sexque 

2. redactu: redacta B, text Halm. 

only authority for assigning the law to 
this code, Livy, without in any way 
repr ing it as the re-enactment of an 
older law, ascribes it to the tribunes 
M. Duilius and L. Maenius in 397, B.c. 

357 (7. 16, 16). 

unoiario faenore. The different views . 

taken of the meaning of this term derive 
support from the different statements as 
to the origin of the enactment. The 
Twelve Tables are supposed to have 
codified, with some modifications, the 
customary law (see note on 3. 27, 1); 
and it is evident that a high rate of 
interest was then customary: hence the 
explanation of Niebuhr, accepted by 
Mommsen (Hist. Rom. b. ii. ch. 2, p. 364), 
that the term *unciarium faenus' denotes 
interest at the rate of 8} per cent. for the 
year of ten months, or 10 per cent. for 
twelve months, becomes from this view 
highly probable; and may be regarded, 
with Mommsen, as a moderate rate. If, 
on the other hand, we view the enact- 
ment, with Livy, as the first of a series of 
revolutionary measures, extorted from the 
capitalist in the interest of the debtor, it 
is no more incredible that it should have 
attempted to fix interest at y per cent. 
per month, or I per cent. per year, than 
that the culminating enactment should 
have attempted to abolish interest alto- 
gether. Also a monthly reckoning ac- 
cords with what is otherwise known of 
Roman interest: see Nipp. 

I. exerceret, with this, and ‘agita- 
retur,' ‘faenus’ is to be supplied; so we 
have *exercere sectiones' (13. 23, 2), 
‘aleam’ (G. 24, 3), 'luxus.. . exerciti’ 
(3- 55, 1): 'faenus agitare" occurs in 
G. 26, 1: cp. the use of the verb in 4. 
6, 4. 

2. ad semuncias; in 407, B.C. 347, 
when Livy (7. 27, 3) mentions a further 
clause pos for payment of the 
principal by instalments. 

3. plebis: text Nipp. 

3. vetita versura. We know of no 
law which can be here referred to other 
than that cited by Livy from some 
chroniclers as a ‘lex Genucia' of 412, 
B.C. 342, ‘ne faenerare liceret, which 
must be taken as forbidding not payment 
by fresh loan (the strict sense of * versura ^), 
which would frequently involve paying 
compound interest, but all loans on interest 
whatsoever: also Appian (B. C. 1. 54) 
alludes to an old law pa 9Savei(ew dvi 
TÓko:s, apparently never formally repealed; 
and the old penalty is mentioned by Cato 
(Prooem. de R. R.), *furem dupli con- 
demnari, faeneratorem quadrupli.’ On 
the sentiment in ancient times against 
usury, leading to such futile legislation, 
see the valuable remarks of Grote (Hist. 

"Gr. vol. iii, ch. 11), and Prof. Allen’s 

essay, p. 9, foll. 

obviam itum fraudibus. Besides 
perhaps referring to the lex Poetelia of 
428, B.C. 326, affecting the ‘nexum’ 
(Liv. 8. 28, 1), which, however, was not 
a plebiscite, Tacitus probably alludes to 
a signal evasion consisting in making a 
* socius, who was not bound by Roman 
laws, the nominal creditor; against which 
a plebiscite was enacted by M. Sem- 
pronius in 559, B.C. 195, placing 'socii' 
and ‘Latini’ on the same footing as 
citizens: in this respect (Liv. 35. 7, 4). 
The object of the ‘lex Gabinia’ for- 

bidding loans at Rome to provincials 

(see Cic. Att. 5. 21, I2; 6. 2, 7), appears 
to have been different. E 

5. Gracchus, probably the person 
mentioned in c. 38, 4; 4. 13, 3. 

. 7. tali culpa, i.e. breach of the lex 
Iulia above referred to. Senators, notably 
Seneca and others, were themselves the 
great money-lenders (14. 53, 6, &c.): see 
Introd. vii. p. 101; Friedl. i. p. 227. 

8. concedente: cp. ‘orantibus’ 1. 29, 
2, &c.; Introd. v. $ 31 c. 

616 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM (A U.C. 786. 

nienses dati, quis secundum iussa legis rationes familiares quis- 
que componerent. 

17 (23). Hinc inopia rei nummariae, commoto simul omnium 
aere alieno, et quia tot damnatis bonisque eorum divenditis signa- 

5 tum argentum fisco vel aerario attinebatur. ad hoc senatus prae- 2 
scripserat, duas quisque faenoris partes in agris per Italiam 
conlocaret. sed creditores in solidum appellabant, nec decorum 
appellatis minuere fidem. ita primo concursatio et preces, dein 3 
strepere praetoris tribunal, eaque quae remedio quaesita, ven- 

ro ditio et emptio, in contrarium mutari, quia faeneratores omnem 
pecuniam mefcandis agris condiderant. copiam vendendi secuta 4 

I. rationes familiares; so pecuniae, 
* curae, *angustiae familiares’ (4. 15, 3 ; 
1I. 7, 3; 12. 52, 4). 

3. commoto, &c. The capitalists had 
all broken the law, and bad to bring 
their affairs into harmony with it in 
eighteen months. All illegal loans, in 
other words, a large proportion of all 
Joans, were thus called in. 

4. et quia. Another independent 
cause of the scarcity of money is added. 
The events of the last year had led to so 
many condemnations and confiscations for 
conspiracy or treason, that the treasuries 

were gorged, and the money in circulation 

proportionately dimin shed. On the men- 
tion of the *fiscus' in respect of such 
sums see c. 2, I and note. 

divenditis, used of. sales by auction, 
Cic. Leg. Agr. 1. 3, 7; Liv. 1. 53, 3; 3. 
13. 10. 

5. attinebatur: cp. 2. 52, 4; 3. 3» 
3, &c. 

ad hoc, ‘ for this,’ i.e. ‘to meet this 
scarcity ' : cp. below (§ 3) ‘quae remedio 
quaesita, venditio et emptio. The usual 
meaning is * besides this'; but * ad hoc 
praelatus est ' (H. 1. 48, 2) is somewhat 
similar. Suetonius makes this decree also 
originated by Tiberius. 

6. duas quisque . . . conlocaret. 
* Faenus' here means ‘capital,’ as in 
14. 53, 6; 55, 5; H. 1. 20, 3; also in 
Plaut. Most. 3. 1, 101 ('faenus creditum"), 
&c. A more full statement ot this decree 
is given in Suet. Tib. 48, * ut faeneratores 
duas patrimonii partes in solo collocarent, 
debitores totidem aeris alieni statim sol- 
verent'; which last words Nipp. inserts 
in the text here, to make the opposition 
in ‘sed creditores, &c., intelligible. 
Tacitus may perhaps have considered 
such a clause to be implied in what he 

has stated. Such a decree, besides being, 
no doubt, based upon the ‘lex’ itself 
(see c. 16, 1), would also be intended to 
increase the demand for land, to the 
advantage of debtors who had estates 
to sell; and to remedy the scarcity of 
money, partly through lands being taken 
over in lieu of cash, partly by the sup- 
position that the remaining one-third of © 
capital would be left at interest undis- 
turbed. 

7. sed creditores, &c. The decree of 
the senate did not preclude the ordinary 
right of a creditor to call in his debts as 
and when he pleased. This they exercised 
by calling in, not only two-thirds, but 
all debts at once in full; and it was 
a point of honour for the debtor to main- 
tain his credit. On the other hand, the 
obligation of the capitalist, to bring his 
affairs into conformity with the law, had 
eighteen months to ran. ‘They could 
thus force the debtor to realize at once, 
with all the disadvantages of scarcity of 
money, and of flooding the market with 
estates and property for sale; and could 
themselves bide their time for bargains, 
to purchase land at leisure in accordance 
with the law or decree. 

8. concursatio, &c.; first men ran 
from one money-lender to another with 
entreaties for money or time; then the 
praetor's court rang with notices of suits 
for debt. 

10. omnem...condiderant. ‘Con- 
diderant’ is equivalent to ‘ conditam ser- 
vabant': as they got in their money, they 
reserved it for bargains in land. 

It. copiam vendendi, &c. With the 
gerund, ‘copia’ generally means * oppor- 
tunity,’ as ‘ mutuandi copia’ below: here 
it appears to mean ‘ abundance’ of sales ; 
as, with simplé gen., in 3. 63, 2; 4. 69, 

A. D. 33.] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 16 (22)—18 (24). 

617 

vilitate, quanto quis obaeratior, aegrius distrahebant, multique 
fortunis provolvebantur; eversio rei familiaris dignitatem ac 
famam praeceps dabat, donec tulit opem Caesar disposito per 
mensas miliens sestertio factaque mutuandi copia sine usuris per 

5 triennium, si debitor populo in duplum praediis cavisset. 

SIC 5 

refecta fides, et paulatim privati quoque creditores reperti. neque 
emptio agrorum exercita ad formam senatus consulti, acribus, 
ut ferme talia, initiis. incurioso fine. 

18 (24). Dein redeunt priores metus postulato maiestatis Con- 
sidio. Proculo, qui nullo pavore diem natalem celebrans raptus in 10 

2curiam pariterque damnatus interfectusque est. 

sorori eius 

Sanciae aqua atque igni interdictum accusante Q. Pomponio. 

I1. et: est Bezzenberger, est ; et Ritter. 

4; &c. On the accus. after abl. abs. of a 
deponent participle see Introd. v. $ 31 d. 

I. aegrius distrahebant, ‘they had 
the more difficulty in selling': men saw 
the seller's necessity and held out for a 
lower price than would pay his debts: cp. 
*coemendo .. . ut pluris. . . distraheret' 
(Suet. Vesp. 16). The verb is strictly 
used of selling in small parcels, and Allen 
so takes it here; but the general sense 
given above is also supported and seems 
more apposite. 

2. provolvebantur, ‘were being 
.ejected. No other instance of the verb 
in this sense seems to be found, but 
‘evolutus’ is so used in 13. 15, 3. Allen 
extends the force of ‘quia’ to this word, 
placing a full stop here and a semicolon 
at ‘ condiderant.' 

dignitatem. The rank of senator 
or knight depended on census. On the 
adverbial use of * praeceps ' cp. 4. 62, 3. 

3. tulit opem Caesar. The currency 
locked up in the treasury (see above) is 
thus brought into circulation, and’ the 
debtor, instead of parting with his land, 
is enabled to mortgage it to the treasury 
without interest for a sum not exceeding 
half its value. This arrangement is to be 
in force three years, so as to outlast the 
indulgence allowed to the capitalists, and 
to enable debtors to make easier terms of 
final settlement with them. 

per mensas. Jio (58. 21, 5) states 
that this public loan was administered 
through commissioners of senatorial rank 
(Um dvipwy BovXevrüw) ; who would thus 
answer to the * quinqueviri ' or * triumviri 
mensarii' employed on special emergencies 

requiring a public loan, as in the crisis of 
403, B € 351 (Liv. 7. 21, 5): the * mensae' 
here would be special public banks: see 
Staatsr. ii. p. 640; Momms. Eph. Epig. 
V. p. 113. 

.5. populo...cavisset; so ‘ut populo 
prius caveretur’ Liv. 7. 21, 8: cp. 22. 60, 
4. If, as appears to be implied, the loan 
was wholly trom the ‘aerarium,’ the ac- 
tion of Tiberius would be no more than 
the origination of a senatus consultum. 
Suetonius (Tib. 48), who makes it one 
of his only two acts of public munifi- 
cence, must have considered that he ad- 
vanced the loan from the ‘ fiscus." 

6. neque emptio; i.e. many capitalists 
who had held back for bargains in land 
ultimately purchased none at all. 

‘8. incurioso; so ‘incuriosa historia’ 
Suet. Galb. 3; elsewhere of persons, as 
2. 88, 4, &c. : ‘acribus’ is similarly trans- 
ferred from persons to things: cp. H. 2. 
12, I: 

9. Considio Proculo. Nipp. considers 
this person not to be the Considius of 
5. 8, 1; as Tacitus would probably have 
noticed his indictment as an act of re- 
tribution for his attack on Pomponius 
Secundus there mentioned. 

II. pariter =‘ simul,’ * there and then’ 
(cp. *haec dicta pariter probataque' H. 
4- 56, 1), against the rule in 3. 51, 3. 

est. Nipp. and others retain ‘et,’ taken 
with the following words, 

I2. Q. Pomponio, cos. suff. 794, 
A. D. 41 (C. I. L. vi. 30141), afterwards 
involved in the rising. of Camillus 
Scribonianus against Claudius: see on 

I3. 43, 3. 

618 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 786. 

is moribus inquies haec et huiusce modi a se factitari praeten- 
debat, ut parta apud principem gratia periculis Pomponii Secundi 

fratris mederetur. 

etiam in Pompeiam Macrinam exilium sta- 8 

tuitur, cuius maritum Argolicum, socerum Laconem e primoribus 

5 Achaeorum Caesar adflixerat. 

pater quoque inlustris eques 4 

Romanus ac frater praetorius, cum damnatio instaret, se ipsi 
interfecere. datum erat crimini, quod Theophanen Mytilenaeum 5 
proavum eorum Cn. Magnus inter intimos habuisset, quodque de- 
functo Theophani caelestes honores Graeca adulatio tribuerat. 

10 19 (25). Post quos Sex. Marius Hispaniarum ditissimus defertur 

incestasse filiam et saxo Tarpeio deicitur. 

ac ne dubium habe- 

retur magnitudinem pecuniae malo vertisse, aerarzas aurariasque 

7. interficere: text B. 
Weissenb., text Ritter. 

I. inquies : cp. 1. 65, 1, &c. 

3. Pompeiam Macrinam, &c. We 
have here the ruin of a whole family; 
' herself, husband, father-in-law, father, 
brother. The connexion with Theophanes 
could not apply to all; but no other charge 
is specified. ‘ Argolicus’ and * Laco' are 
personal cognomina. 
|.  &. inlustris eques: see on 2. 59, 4. 

6. frater praetorius, Pompeius Macer, 
praetor in 768, A. D. 15 (1. 72, 4). 

7. Theophanen Mytilengeum. This 
person took the name of Cn. Pompeius 
Theophanes, and had received the ‘ civi- 
tas’ publicly from Pompeius in the pre- 
sence of his army (Cic. Arch. 10, 24", and 
also won from him for Mitylene the privi- 
leges of a free city (Plut. Pomp. 423, 641). 
His history of his patron's campaigns is 
mentioned by Cic. (J. 1.) and Plutarch 
(Pomp. 37, 639); and he is called by 
Strabo (13. 2, 3, 617) 6 ouvyypadevs, and 
the most distinguished Greek of his time. 
His influence with Pompeius is mentioned 
in strong terms by Cicero (Att. 5. 11, 3, 
&c.), who speaks of him as still alive in 
710, B.C. 44 (Id. 15. 19, 1). 

8. proavum eorum, i.e. of Pompeia 

and her brother. Strabo (1. 1.) states that. 

Theophanes left a son Macer (in the MS. 
* Marcus’) Pompeius, who had been made 
procurator in Asia by Augustus, and, 
when he wrote (cir. 771, A. D. 18), was 
still alive and an intimate friend of Tibe- 
rius. He. is also, no doubt, the * Pom- 
peius Macer mentioned in Suet. Jul. 56, 
as librarian of Augustus. As Theophanes 
.was probably of much the same age as 
Pompeius or Cicero, his son may well 

12. aurariasque: aurarias Mur., aurarias argentariasque 

have been a very old man when Strabo 
wrote, and thus father of the ‘ inlustris 
ori here mentioned, and grandfather 
of the praetor, who might have been only 
thirty years old in 768, A.D. 15. For 
some descendants at a later date see 
Eph. Epig. ii. 19, foll. 

habuisset... tribuerat. Both verbs 
appear equally to assert a matter of simple 
fact. Nipp. thinks that the former is 
rather to be taken as the speech of the 
accuser; but it would seem that only the 
deification of Theopbanes could by any 
ingenuity be twisted into a charge against 
his posterity, who might possibly plume 
themselves on it. The change of mood 
may be arbitrary, as perhaps in 1. 44, 8. 

9. caelestes honores. Greek coins 
exist inscribed @eds 6«o$avgs or Geopayns 
@eds Mur(tAnvaiew): see Eckh. ii. 504. 
This was probably an expression of grati- 
tude for the privilege granted for his sake 
to the city (see above), as is also an 
inscription (Brit. Mus. Gr. Insc. ii, 211) 
to him as owrfp: xal ebepyérg xai xríaTq 
Sevrépy Ths nar pidos. 

1o. Sex. Marius: see 4. 36,1. Dio 
states (58. 22, 2) that he had hitherto 
been intimate with Tiberius, and illus- 
trates his wealth by an anecdote. 

defertur incestasse. On the constr. 
cp. 2. 27, 1. The statement of Dio (1. 1.) 
that Marius had only secluded his daughter 
to protect her from the !ust of Tiberius 
himself, was perhaps unknown to or dis- 
believed by Tacitus, who however thinks 
he was unjustly condemned. 

II. s&xo...deicitur: see 2. 32, 5, &c. 

12. aerarias aurariasque. The MS. 

A. D. 33.] LIBER VI. 

2 eius, quamquam publicarentur, sibimet Tiberius seposuit. 

CAP. 18 (24)-20 (26). 

619 

ritatusque suppliciis cunctos, qui carcere attinebantur accusati 

3 societatis cum Seiano, necari iubet. 

iacuit inmensa .strages, 

omnis sexus, omnis aetas, inlustres ignobiles, dispersi aut aggerati. 
4neque propinquis aut amicis adsistere, inlacrimare, ne visere 5 
quidem diutius dabatur, sed circumiecti custodes et in maerorem 
cuiusque intenti corpora putrefacta adsectabantur, dum in Tiberim 
traherentur, ubi fluitantia aut ripis adpulsa non cremare quis- 

5 quam, non contingere. 

interciderat sortis humanae commercium 

vi metus, quantumque saevitia glisceret, miseratio arcebatur. 
20 (26). Sub idem tempus Gaius Caesar, discedenti Capreas 
avo comes, Claudiam, M. Silani filiam, coniugio accepit, immanem 

text cannot be satisfactorily explained 
except on the supposition of a word lost. 
Ritter's suggestion has a special recom- 
meadation in the mention by Pliny (N. H. 
34. 3, 4) of ‘aes Marianum, quod et 
Cordubense dicitur. Weissenborn’s is 

supported by the general celebrity of the 

silver rugis of Southern Spain (see Polyb. 
34. 9, 8; Strab. 3. 2, 10, 147). ‘Auraria’ 
has here aloné the sense of ‘ aurifodina,’ 
but ‘ aeraria’ and ‘argentaria’ are else- 
where so used. 

I. sibimet, probably a more correct. 
expression at that date than ‘fisco se- 

uit’: see on c. 2, 1; vol. ii, Introd. 
" = n.6. That mines were generally 
psa tage ion of by the emperors is 
y Hirschfeld (Unters. p. 79). 
geen supplioiis. Nipp. notes 
that the idea is that of a wild beast who 
has tasted blood. 

3. cunctos: apparently Paconianus 
was still left: cp. c. 3, 4; 39, ! 

caroere, ‘in public custody.’ The 
Tullianum is a mere vault and cannot 
here be meant. 

3. iacuit. This is probably the occasion 
on which Suetonius says (Tib. 61), 
‘nemo punitorum non et in Gemonias 
abiectus uncoque tractus.’ 

inmensa strages. Suetonius (l. 1.) 
here for once is more exact, ‘ viginti 
uno die abiecti tractique sunt; inter eos 
feminae et pueri. He gives this evidently 
as a maximum number, and the executions 
due to a single order were probably over 
in a day. It should also be remembered 
that conspirators are not usually reckoned 

hundreds, and that many had been 

b 
slreidy executed. The horror of even 
twenty political executions in a day may 

palliate, but does not justify, the exagger- 
ated expressions of Tacitus, which would 
almost describe:a field of battle, 

4. dispersi aut aggerati : cp. 1. 61, 3. 

6. dabatur, with inf.: cp. 3. 67, 3, &c. 

8. ubi ...cremare. For the use of 
the historical T" with such particles see 
Introd. v. $ 46 b 

9. sortis humanae commeroium, 
* human sympathy,’ the ‘ miseratio ob sor- 
tem hominum ' of 1. 61, 1. 

30. quantum.. . glisceret. The subj. 
with ‘quantum,’ found also in c. 21, 4; 
13. 42, 1, is 'probably analogous to that 
with words implying frequent occurrence 
(Introd. v. $ 52). 

1I. discedenti Capreas ; probably on 
the return to Capreae mentioned in c. 1, 2. 
This would nearly agree with the account 
in Suet. Cal. 10, that Gaius was taken 
from the tutelage of his grandmother 
Antonia to Capreae in his nineteenth 
year, when he assumed the toga virilis, 
without the distinctions granted to his 
brothers (see 3. 29, 1; 4. 4, 1). He had 
however been created poutifex in 784, 
A.D. 31 (Dio, 58. 8, 1), and was quaestor 
in the present year (s 58. 23, 1). 

12. Olaudiam, lunia Claudilla (Suet. 
Cal. 12), daughter of the M. Silanus men- 
tioned in 3. 34, 5; 57, 2; 5. 10, 4; also 
as forced to suicide by Gaius in 799, 
A.D. 37 (Agr. 4, 1 ; Dio, 59. 8, 4; Suet. 
Cal. 23). he death of Claudia is men- 

' tioned in c. 45, 6, and by Suetonius (Cal. 

12), whose chronology and that of Dio 
(58. 25, 2) appear to differ from that of 
Tacitus (see c. 39, 2), which is vaguely 
worded. 

immanem animum, &c. It is from 
this passage, coupled with c. 45, 46, that 

in- ' 

10 

620 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 786. 

animum subdola modestia tegens, non damnatione matris, non 
exitio fratrum rupta voce; qualem diem Tiberius induisset, pari 

habitu, haud multum distantibus verbis. 

unde mox scitum Pas- 

sieni oratoris dictum percrebruit neque meliorem umquam servum 
5 neque deteriorem dominum fuisse. 

Non omiserim praesagium Tiberii de Servio Galba tum consule ; 
quem accitum et diversis sermonibus pertemptatum postremo 
Graecis verbis in hanc sententiam adlocutus es/ ‘et tu, Galba, 
quandoque degustabis imperium, seram ac brevem potentiam 
significans, scientia Chaldaeorum artis, cuius apiscendae otium 
apud Rhodum, magistrum Thrasullum habuit, peritiam eius hoc 

modo expertus. 

2. exilio: text Nipp. 

the judgement of Tacitus on Gaius is to 
be mainly gathered. 

2. exitio: ‘exilio’ could only be 
applied to Nero. Drusus was not yet 
dead, but Tacitus intends to des.ribe the 
demeanour of Gaius through this whole 
period. The abl. is causal. 

rupta voce, adopted from Vergil 
(Aen. 2, 129, &c.), who follows the Greek 
pnyviva Qovív. 

qualem diem...induisset, ‘ what- 
ever the mood assumed for the day.' 
From such metaphors as‘ animum induere" 
(II. 7. 5), and *qualem diem haberet" 
(c. 31, 3), it is but a fuither step to 
‘diem induere, Burnouf notes such ex- 

ressions as ‘c’est son mauvais jour, son 
jour d'orage,' &c., derived from observa- 
tion of a person's outward demeanour. 

pari habitu, &c.: the ablatives seem 
best taken as absolute, answering to 
‘rupta voce. Nipp. takes them as ab- 

. latives of quality, similar to that in 3. 43, 

his property (Suet. Ner. 6). 

2. On ‘habitus’ cp. I. 10, 7. 

3. mox, i.e. after he became princeps. 
The word is used of considerable intervals 
of time in I. 13, 3; 32, 5; 14. 9, 3, &c. 

Passieni. C. Passienus Crispus, twice 
consul (Pl. N. H. 16. 44, 91, 242), 
the second time being in 797, A.D. 44 
(Inscr. Henzen 5214), married first Domi- 
tia, sister of Agrippina's first husband (see 
on 13. 19, 4), and, after divorcing her, 
was married to Agrippina herself, who is 
said to have poisoned him. Nero inherited 
His oratory 
is highly praised by L. Seneca (Qu. Nat. 
4, pr. 6), as is that of his father L. Passi- 
enus Rufus (Vell. 2. 116, 2) by M. Seneca, 
who places him next to Pollio and Cor- 

8. est ins. Ern. 

vinus (Contr. 13, 17; Exc. Contr. 3. pr. 
10, 14), and appears also to mention the 
grandfather (Contr. 10. pr. r1). Further 
particulars are here collected by Nipp. 

4. percrebruit : cp. 2. 82, I. 

neque meliorem, &c. Suetonius (Cal. 
IO) gives almost the same words. 

6. Non omiserim. Probably he did 
not take this story from his usual sources, 
as it would not be likely to be found in 
any author who wrote before A. D. 68. 

Servio Galba tum consule: see on 
C. 15, I. The story of this prediction 
is given with considerable variations of 
circumstance. Josephus (Ant. 18. 6, 9) 
makes it a remark by Tiberius to his 
friends on seeing Galba come in; Dio 

relates it under the year 773, A.D. 20. 

(57. 19, 4), as addressed to Galba on his 
betrothal; Suetonius (Galb. 4) makes it 
a prediction by Augustus in Galba's boy- 
hood. - 

8. Graecis verbis: these are given, 
with some variation, by Suet. and Dio. 

9. quandoque: cp. 1. 4, 5. This word 
indicates a distant, as *degustabis' a short 
time of rule. Dio and Suetonius explain 
the equanimity ot Tiberius by his know- 
ledge that the event was distant. 

Io. Chaldaeorum: see on 2. 27, 2. 

11. Thrasullum. That he had received 
freedom or civitas from Tiberius in those 
times is shown by his name Ti. Claudius 
Thrasyllus (Eph. Ep. v. 147'. Further 
particulars of him at Rhodes are given 
by Dio (55. 11. 1). He returned to, Rome 
with Tiberius (Suet. Aug. 98), lived con- 
stantly with him (Dio, 57. 15, 7), and 
died a year before him (Id. 58. 27, 1). 
It is said that he sometimes mitigated the 

3 

A.D. 33] LIBER VI. CAP. 20 (26)- 22 (28). 621 

21 (27). Quotiens super tali negotio consultaret, cdita domus 

2 parte ac liberti unius conscientia utebatur. is litterarum ignarus, 
corpore valido, per avia ac derupta (nam saxis domus imminet) 
praeibat eum, cuius artem experiri Tiberius statuisset, et regre- 
dientem,si vanitatis aut fraudum suspicio incesserat, in subiectum 
3 mare praecipitabat, ne index arcani exsisteret. igitur Thrasullus 
isdem rupibus iaductus postquam percontantem commoverat, 
imperium ipsi et futura sollerter patefaciens, interrogatur an 
suam quoque genitalem horam comperisset, quem tum annum, 
4 qualem diem haberet. ille positus siderum ac spatia dimensus 

5 

10 

haerere primo, dein pavescere, et quantum introspiceret, magis - 

ac magis trepidus admirationis et metus,' postremo exclamat 
5 ambiguum sibi ac prope ultimum discrimen instare. 
complexus eum Tiberius praescium periculorum et incolumem 
fore gratatur, quaeque dixerat oracli vice accipiens inter intimos 
amicorum tenet. 
22 (28). Sed mihi haec ac talia audienti in incerto iudicium est, 
fatone res mortalium et necessitate immutabili an forte volvantur. ', 

tum. 

I. superta : text Pichena. 
15. uici: text B. 

cruelty of Tiberius by making him believe 
that he had yet time to live and need not 
hasten sentences (Suet. Tib. 62; Dio, l. 1.). 
He must be distinguished from his con- 
temporary and namesake, the Alexandrian 
rhetor and editor of Plato (see Grote, 
Plato, i. P 158); with whom the scholiast 
on Juv. 6, 575 appears to confound him. 

2. litterarum ignarus: cp. 2. 54, 4; 
‘one who could the less betray anything of 
astrological craft. 

3. avia ac derupta: cp. 4. 45, I. 

7. isdem rupibus, ‘by way of the 
same rocks’: cp. Introd. v. § 25. 

8. interrogatur an: cp. II. 30, 2; 
31,3, &c. *An'is thus used with many 
verbs expressing inquiry or deliberation : 
see Gerber and Greef, p. 76. 

9. genitalem horam, ' his horoscope ’; 
the position of the heavenly bodies at his 
birth, from which his destiny was to be 
calculated ; so ‘dies genitalis’ 16. it 4) 
‘natalis hora’ Hor. Od. 2. 17, 1 

quem, explained by * qualem! : € pm 
was the aspect of the year, of the day, 
which he was now passing.' 

10. positus: cp. 4. 5, 4. 

1I. quantum, with subjunctive; as in 

€. 19, 5. 

1I, pauesceni te : 

text B, pavescens Jac. Gron. 

I2. trepidus admirationis et metus. 
The expression appears to resemble * am- 
biguus pudoris ac metus’ (2. 40, 2) and 
the constráction to be that noted in Introd. 
v. $ 33 e y. Elsewhere ‘trepidus’ has 
sometimes a genitive of that for which 
anxiety is felt; as ‘rerum’ (Verg. Aen. 
12, 589; Liv. 5. 11, 4), &c. 

14. praescium (see Introd. v. $ 70): 

‘esse is supplied from .*fore' below. 
‘Gratari’ has here the construction of a 
verb of speaking, as ‘miserari’ I. 39, 8, 
* defendere 13..43, 4, &c. 

17. Sed mihi, &c. ‘Tacitus introduces 
digressions especially in this part of his 
work (see c. 16; 28) to vary the tale of 

. horrors which lié laments to have as 

his constant subject (c. 38, 1). Here the 
relation of an apparently remarkable 
prediction and of the astrological skill of 
Tiberius suggests the question whether 
there was anything in the matter more 
than chance coinridende. On the general 
subject of this chapter see Introd. iv 
pp. 29, 30; and compare the reflections 
ot Pliny (N. H. 2. 7, 5. 22-27). 

18. fatone . .. et necessitate. These 
are here synonyms (Moipa and dva-y«n). 

'*Fatum' is sometimes personified in 

. and Ritter. 

622 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 786. 

quippe sapientissimos veterum quique sectam eorum aemulantur 2 
diversos reperies, ac multis insitam opinionem non initia nostri, 
non finem, non denique homines dis curae ; ideo creberrime tristia 

in bonos, laeta apud deteriores esse. 

contra alii fatum quidem 3 

5 congruere rebus putant, sed non e vagis stellis, verum apud prin- 
cipia et nexus naturalium causarum ; ac tamen electionem vitae 
nobis relinquunt,quam ubi elegeris,certum imminentium ordinem. 

I. sectas Wurm. 
creberrime et Ern., text Freinsh. 

Tacitus (H. 2. 69, 2; G. 33,2; Agr. 13,5), 
sometimes associated with special divine 
intervention (H. 4. 26, 2), and has various 
other shades of meaning (see Introd. 1. 1.). 

forte -TvVxp. This word and ‘for- 
tuitus’ have also their variations of mean- 
ing. Here it is *chance' as opposed to 
fate or law; that which has no calculable 
causes, and which no skill could predict : 
in H. 4 26, 2 it is another term for the 
ordinary course of nature; and natural 
deaths are * fortuitae* as opposed to vio- 
lent (12. 52, 3; 16. 19, 4): ‘fortuna,’ 
again, though in this passage opposed to 
divine agency, is often personified as a 
deity (H. 4. 47, 2, &c.). 

1. sapientissimos . . . quique . . . 
aemulantur, i.e. the founders of philo- 
sophical systems, and their schools: cp. 
H. 3. 81, 1. 

2. reperies. Andresen shows the MS. 

text to have been wrongly read by Baiter 

It is corrected in agreement 

with that of 4. 33, 5; Dial. 12, 5. 
multis, the Epicureans. 

4. in bonos. On this use of ‘ in’ see 
Introd. v. $ 60 b. ‘In’ and ‘apud’ are 
interchanged for variety in 14. 14, 2; ‘in’ 
and ‘ad’ more frequently. | 

contra alii, the Stoics: thus Seneca 
(Nat. Qu. 2. 36) defines * fatum ' as * ne- 
cessitas rerum omnium actionumque quam 
nulla vis rumpat' ; holding that wise men, 
and ‘a fortiori’ gods, do not change their 
will for entreaties: * prima lex est, stare 
decreto (Id. 35, 2). In another place 
(de Ben. 4. 7, 2) he still more clearly 
identifies fate or *natura' with God: 
* hunc eundem (Deum) et fatum si dixeris 
non mentieriss Nam cum fatum nihil 
aliud sit quam series implexa causarum, 
ille est prima omnium causa unde ceterae 
pendent.’ a 

fatum ... congruere rebus, ‘that 
fate is in accord with things’; i.e. that 
things go in accordance with fate; an 

2. reperias (see Andr. p. 6): text B. 

3. creberrima et : 

inversion similar to that in *ignaviam .. . 

. transferri! (3. 34, 7). * Congruere’ is thus 

used of harmony between things in r2. 6, 
2; 13. 50, 3, &c.  Nipp. here reads ‘in- 
gruere,' comparing * necessitas ingrueret' 
(c. 10, 3), * ingruente fato ' (Liv. 5. 32, 7), 
'vim, quae de fato extrinsecus ingruit' 
(Chrysipp. ap. Gell. 7 (6), 3, 8); but such 
an expression seems here to be harsher 
than the MS. text. 

5. sed non, &c., equivalent to ‘sed 
fatum non e stellis pendere, verum esse 
eius regimen apud principia, &c. ‘ Prin- 
cipia et nexus’ =‘ the foundations and se- 
quences of natural causation.’ With this 
may be. compared the definitions given 
above from Seneca; also Diog. Laert. 
(7. 74, 149) *a0' eipappévny 56 gat ra 
wavra yiyvecOar gore 00 eipappévn alria 
Tay vray elponévn, 1) Adyos Kad’ dv b xoa- 
pos Sefayera:, and the doctrine of Chry- 
sippus, as stated in his own words, and 
explained in Gell. 7 (6), 3. It would 
appear, however, that some Stoics, as 
Diogenes (Cic. Div. 2. 43, 90), recognized 
plaretary influences as a factor in causa- 
tion; and that most others, except Pan- 
aetius (Id. 42, 88), admitted astrology 
in some form as a branch of divina- 
tion, whereby indications of the will of 
heaven might be ascertained. See Zeller, 
: tole &c. (transl. by Reichel) p. 349; 
oll. 

6. ac t&men, &c., i.e. yet they leave 
us free to choose a course of life, which 
choice, once made, carries with it a fixed 
train of consequences. A form of this 
doctrine is suggested by the myth in Plat. 
Rep. 10. 617 E,sqq. It is doubtful whether 
the saving clause here mentioned was really 
a Stoic tenet; but various attempts to 
reconcile free will and fate were generally 
made by them: see Gell.1.1., Plut. Repugn. 
Stoic. 47 ; and other authorities collected 
by Zeller (Reichel, pp. 168 foll, 204, 
205). 

A. D. 33.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 22 (28), 23 (29). 

623 

4 neque mala vel bona quae vulgus putet: multos, qui conflictari 
adversis videantur, beatos, at plerosque quamquam magnas per 
opes miserrimos, si illi gravem fortunam constanter tolerent, hi 

5 prospera inconsulte utantur. 

ceterum plurimis mortalium non 

eximitur quin primo cuiusque ortu ventura destinentur, sed quac- 
dam secus quam dicta sint cadere, fallaciis ignara dicentium : 
ita corrumpi fidem artis, cuius clara documenta et antiqua aetas 
6 et nostra tulerit. quippe a filio eiusdem Thrasulli praedictum 
Neronis imperium in tempore memorabitur, ne nunc incepto 

longius abierim. 

23 (29). Isdem consulibus Asinii Galli mors vulgatur, quem 
egestate cibi peremptum haud dubium, sponte vel necessitate, 

2 incertum habebatur. 

consultusque Caesar an sepeliri sineret, 

non erubuit permittere ultroque incusare casus, qui reum abstu- 
8 lissent, antequam coram convinceretur: scilicet medio triennio 

10, aberrem Heinsius. 

I. neque mala, &c., i. e. that though 
the occurrences of life are determined, it 
rests with ourselves to make them good 
or evil to us: cp. dperi) dbécnoror (Plat. 
.Rep. 1. 1.). 

2. per opes, 'during continuance of 
wealth,’ i. e. ‘in wealth.’ On this use of 
* per ' see Introd. v. $ 62. 

4. ceterum plurimis, &c. The popular 
belief is here contrasted with that of the 
two leading schools. This statement is 
carried down to ‘tulerit.’ 

5. quin. ..destinentur. This sen- 
tence supplies the subject of * non eximi- 
tur': *great part of mankind cannot get 
rid of the belief that,! &c. 

primo cuiusque ortu, from the ‘ geni- 
talis hora’ or horoscope (c. 21, 3). 

sed, sc. *opinantur, supplied from the . 

sense. 

6. fallaciis ignara dicentium, 
‘through the frauds of those who speak 
without knowledge’; * ignara" for * igno- 
ta,' as in 2. 13, 1, &c. On the true and 
false prophets see 4. 58, 3; on the latter 
also H. 1. 22, 1; and the use of ‘talis 
superstitio" for astrology (H. 2. 78, 2°. 

8. quippe, instancing one of: these 
‘documenta.’ ' 
ably that given in 14. 9, 5, without any 
mention of the son of Thrasyllus. 

9. ne... 8bierim. Among the ver 
rare instances of the perf. subj. wit 
present force in dependent clauses (see 

This prediction is prob- 

I2. sponte an Orsini. 

Introd. v. $ 51 c), Nipp. notes ‘ne... 
abrogaverim' (Liv. 8. 18, 3), *hostile 
potius an civile dixerim, nescio ' (Flor. 3. 
22, 1) : ‘abire’ has a simple abl. in 2. 69, 
2, &c. | 

II. Asinii Galli. On his arrest and 
detention see above, App. iv. p. 586. 

12. sponte vel necessitate. Nipp. and 
Ritt. may be right in adopting *an' (cp. 
4- 33» 43 14. 51, I) ; but the use of ‘vel’ 
in cases where two alternatives are opposed 
to a third, as in 14. 3, 2, and ‘insidias an 
proditionem vel aliquod honestum con- 
silium' (H. 2. 41, 2), has been taken to 
justify it here, where the two alternatives 
embraced by * incertum are opposed, on 
the ground of common uncertainty, to 
* haud dubium." 

I4. non erubuit permittere. As 
Gallus was not formally executed, the 
right of burial would seem to be matter 
of course (see c. 29, 3). If however this 
case was so far doubtful that permission 
had to be asked, it might have been 
granted without shame; so that perhaps 
there is a zeugma in the sentence, and 
‘non erubuit" belongs properly to *ultro 
incusare,' &c., i.e. to his complaint of the 
delay which he himself had caused. 

I5. coram convinoeretur. Gallus, 
according to Dio, had been condemned 
by the senate (xareynoíc0n) at the time 
of his arrest, but had been reserved, as if 
on appeal, till Caesar's return to Rome. 

en 

lo 

Ln] 

5 

624 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 786. 

defuerat tempus subeundi iudicium consulari seni, tot consularium 

. parenti. Drusus deinde extinguitur, cum se miserandis alimentis, 4 

mandendo e cubili tomento, nonum ad diem detinuisset. . tradi- 6 
dere quidam praescriptum fuisse Macroni, si arma ab Seiano 
5 temptarentur, extractum custodiae iuvenem (nam in Palatio 
attinebatur)ducem populo imponere. mox, quia rumor incedebat 6 
fore ut nuru ac nepoti conciliaretur Caesar, saevitiam quam 

paenitentiam maluit. 

24 (30). Quin et invectus in defunctum probra corporis, exitia- 
10 bilem in suos, infensum rei publicae animum obiecit recitarique 
factorum dictorumque eius descripta per dies iussit,quo non aliud 
atrocius visum : adstitisse tot per annos qui vultum, gemitus,occul- 
tum etiam murmur exciperent, et potuisse avum audire, legere, 

in publicum promere vix fides, 

I. consulari seni, &c.; i.e. his rank 
made it absurd to suppose that his case 
was by any natural arrangement post- 
poned to others. 

tot consularium. Five of his sons 
are known to us; Asinius Saloninus (3. 
75. 1), C. Asinius (4. 1, 1), M. Asinius 
Agrippa (4. 34, 1), Asinius Gallus, ban- 
ished for a conspiracy against Claudius in 
799, A.D. 46 (Dio, 60. 27, 5), and Asinius 
Celer, noted as a gourmand (Pl. N. H. 9. 
17, 31, 67), and put to death by Claudius 
(Sen. lud. 13, 4). Of these the second, 
third, and fifth were certainly consulars : 
see further particulars given here by Nipp. 
An inscription (C. I. L. x. 1682), ‘Cn. 
Asinio, Pollionis et Agrippae nepoti,' may 
show the existence of a sixth son, or may 
refer to either the first or fourth here 
mentioned. All these, being the children 
of Gallus by Vipsania (see 1. 12, 6), were 
half-brothers of Drusus Caesar. 

2. Drusus . . . extinguitur. The 
date of his arrest and imprisonment can 
. only be fixed as subsequent to the publi- 
cation of the work of Velleius in 783, 
A.D. 30: see Appendix iv. p. 586. 

3. mandendo ... tomento. Orelli 
thinks these words, like ‘ boleto ' in 12. 67, 
1, a gloss (from Suet. Tib. 54), where 
Tacitus would have thought a general 
expression without detail (like * veneficii 
signa ' 2. 73, 5), more suitable to the dig- 
nity of history. Ritter thinks ‘tomentum’ 
should be read; but Nipp. shows that 

though, in an abl. of instrument or respect, : 

with a singular masc. or neut noun, the 
gerund is more usual (cp. c. 45, 6, &c.), 

nisi quod Attii centurionis et 

the gerundive is found in 12. 34, 1 ; 13. 
13, 3; , 57, 1: while with feminine or 
plural nouns it is common :, *tomentum ' 
is used by Varro, the elder Pliny, &c. for 
‘stuffing,’ which would here probably be 
of hay orstraw. ~ uu 

4. praescriptum, &c. Suet: (Tib. 65) 
and Dio (58. 13, 1) repeat the. -ame be- 
lief. The infinitive follows the analogy 
of * imperare," &c.: see Introd. v. § 42. 

5. extractum custodiae ; so *extrac- 
tum sibi' Suet. Tib. 73; *extrahere cor- 
pori’ Pl. N. H. 7. 2, 13: see on In 39, 43 
Introd. v. $ 15. 

6. populo imponere: cp. 'legionibus 
inposuit! 1. 3, 5. 

8. maluit. Nipp. thinks this was to 
show his independence of public opinion 
(see 2. 38, 1). Probably Drusus was killed 
to prevent another such plot as that men- 
tioned in 8. 1o, I. | 

9. invectus, &c. The first charge is 
similar to one brought against Nero (5. 
3, 3) and Gaius (c. 9, 3), the second 
receives illustration from 4. 60, 4, the 

third, repeating an expression used of 

Sabinus (4. 70, 7), would relate to what- 
ever grounds were alleged for calling him 

. *hostis publicus* (Suet. Tib. 54; Cal. 7). 

11. descripta per dies, ‘the journal 
kept': this participle is only here used 
substantively. Such a journal of informers 
is mentioned in 4. 67, 6, and the feeling 

of persons living under such a system of 

espionage is described in 4. 69, 6. 

14. nisi quod: see note on I. 33, 6. 
Here the expression qualifies * vix. credi- 
bile’: all this was hardly credible, were 

A. D. 33.] LIBER VI. CAP. 23 (29)-25 (31°. 625 

Didymi liberti epistulae servorum nomina praeferebant, ut quis 
8 egredientem cubiculo Drusum pulsaverat, exterruerat. etiam sua 
verba centurio saevitiae plena, tamquam egregium, vocesque 
deficientis adiecerat, quis primo [alienationem mentis simulans] 
quasi per dementiam funesta Tiberio, mox, ubi exspes vitae fuit, 
meditatas compositasque diras inprecabatur, ut quem ad modum 
nurum filiumque fratris et nepotes domumque omnem caedibus 
complevisset, ita poenas nomini generique maiorum et posteris 
4 exsolveret. obturbabant quidem patres specie detestandi: sed 
penetrabat pavor et admiratio, callidum olim et tegendis scele- 
ribus obscurum huc confidentiae venisse, ut tamquam dimotis 
parietibus ostenderet nepotem sub verbere centurionis, inter ser- 

vorum ictus, extrema vitae alimenta frustra orantem. 

25 (31). Nondum is dolor exoleverat, cum de Agrippina audi- 
tum, quam interfecto Seiano spe sustentatam provixisse reor, et 
postquam nihil de saevitia remittebatur, voluntate exstinctam, nisi 

4. [alienationem . . . simulans] Bahrdt. 

it not that still worse was positively at- 
tested. In H. 3. 28, 1, the use is some- 
what different. 

I. epistulae, their letters to Tiberius, 
read before the senate. 

3. egregium, substantively: cp. ‘egre- 
gium publicum’ 3. 70, 4, ‘dignum’ 15. 
41, I ; and other instances given in In- 
trod. v. $ 4 b, and by Nipp. here. 

4. alienationem mentis simulans. 
The difficulty of seeing what Drusus had 
to gain by feigning madness has led Halm, 
Orelli, and Nipp. to treat these words as 
a gloss, and to take *quasi per dementiam ' 
to express, not the intention of Drusus, 
but the impression left on a hearer. 
Others, with less reason, bracket the latter 
words. If the text is sound, we must 
take ‘primo’ as answering to ‘ mox, 
* alienationem . . . simulans’ to ‘exspes 
vitae,’ ‘quasi per dementiam" to * medi- 
tatas...diras’; and must suppose that 
some vague instinct of self-preservation, 
insufficient to check his utterances, led 
Drusus at first to assume a disguise which 
he cast aside at the end. 

5. exspes, here alone in extant prose. 
It has a genitive *liberum' in a fiagment 
of Accius, and is absol. in Hor. and Ov. 

6. meditatas compositasque diras, 
‘studied and elaborate curses’: cp. ‘ diris 
agam vos’ (Hor. Epod. 5, 89), &c. Such 
curses, even if lacking the magical force 

VOL. I. 

E propolluebat’ (3. 66, 4). 
compounded with''pro' date from this 

of a devotio' (see 2. 69, 5), would at 
least be taken as ominous. 

7. nurum, &c. Some such word as 
‘necasset’ is supplied from caedibus 
complevisset’ by zeugma.  Agrippina's 
death may be spoken of by anticipation, 
or Drusus may be supposed in ignorance 
to have taken the worst for granted.. 

9. obturbabant, ‘ were interrupting’; 
so * obturbatur,' ‘ obstrepitur,’ Pl. Epp. 9. 
13, 19. 

10. tegendis sceleribus obscurum. 
Many such constructions are found (e. g. 
C. 51, 53 2- 57, 33 3: 10, 45 4. 37, 2). 
The case might in all be an abl. of 
respect, but'probably Nipp. is right in 
taking it as dat. of object contemplated 
(Introd. v. § 22 b). ‘Obscurus’ as in I. 
33, 5. 

12. verbere: cp. 5. 9, 2. 

I3. extrema... alimenta, the barest 
necessaries. 

I4. de Agrippina, i.e. of her death. 
On her banishment see App. iv. p. 536. 

IS. provixisse, dm. elp.: see note on 
Several verbs 

age, as * progerere' and ‘prolibare’ (PI. 
N.H.),‘proserere’ (Sil. ),' protonare ' (Val. 
Fl), *provulgare' (Suet.): see others 
noted here by Drager. 

16. nisi si, used, with the force of 
‘nisi forte,’ in 15. 53, 5; G. a, 2; Agr. 

SS 

626 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 786. 

si negatis alimentis adsimulatus est finis, qui videretur sponte 

sumptus. 

impudicitiam arguens et Asinium Gallum adulterum, eiusque 

morte ad taedium vitae conpulsam. 

5 tiens, dominandi avida, virilibus curis feminarum vitia exuerat. 
eodem die defunctam, quo biennio ante Seianus poenas luisset, 4 
memoriaeque id prodendum addidit Caesar, iactavitque quod non 

laqueo strangulata neque in Gemonias proiecta foret. 

actae ob 

id grates decretumque ut quintum decumum kal. Novembris, 
10 utriusque necis die, per omnis annos donum Iovi sacraretur. 

28 (92). Haud multo post Cocceius Nerva, continuus principi, 
omnis divini humanique iuris sciens, integro statu, corpore inlaeso, 

moriendi consilium cepit. 

quod ut Tiberio cognitum, adsidere, 

causas requirere, addere preces, fateri postremo grave conscien- 
15 tiae, grave famae suae, si proximus amicorum nullis moriendi 
rationibus vitam fugeret. aversatus sermonem Nerva abstinentiam 3 
cibi coniunxit. ferebant gnari cogitationum eius, quanto propius 

9. quinto decimo L, but cp. 12. 69, 1; 
perhaps principi comes Nipp. 

32, 2; ‘nisi si quis’ in Cic. Fam. 14. 3, 1; 
Cat. 2. 4, 6; Quint. 4. 1, 70. 

I. adsimulatus: cp. 4. 8,. 1. Nipp. 
notes the pleonasm in * qui videretur.' 

2. enimvero Tiberius, repeated from 
4. 60, 3: see note on 2. 64, 6 

3. impndicitiam. It is expressly 
stated (5. 2, 4) that no such charge was 
brought against her at her arrest; and 
Gallus, who must have been old enough 
to be her father, never appears as her 
partisan, and once at least tried to hasten ^ 
her overthrow (4. 71, 3). The charge 
seems to be rightly treated as a fabrica- 
tion. 

4. aequi inpatiens, apparently from 
Statius (Theb. 3, 602) "superum con- 
temptor et aequi impatiens ' : cp. * aequa ' 
(*a position of equality ") 2. 42, 5. 

5. exuerat. It is not implied that 
she had ever had them: cp. ‘avaritiam 
exuerat' Agr. 9, 4. Some of the chief 
metaphorical uses of this verb are referred 
to on I. 69, 2 

7. iactavit, ‘took credit fcr his cle- 
mency ' ; *imputavit' (Suet. Tib. 53). 

9. quintum decumum kalendas 
Novembris, October 18. Tacitus omits 
*ante' in c. 50,6; 15. 41, 3; H. 1. 18,1; 
27, 1, but inserts it in 12. 69, 1. 

H. 1. 57, 3- 

1I. principis: text Heins., 

10. donum: cp. 2. 32, 4, &c.: Suet. 
(1. 1.) here specifies it as * donum ex auro.' 

It. Cocceius Nerva: see on 4. 58, 1. 

continuus principi. For the dat. 
Cp. 4. 36, 1; 11. 5, 1. The MS. text is 
retained by some, and might perhaps be 
supported from such analogous usages as 
‘Seiani . . . notos' (Suet. Tib. 61), ‘tui 
fidissima" (Verg. Aen. 12, 659), &«. 

I2. divini humanique iuris sciens: 
SP» 3. 70, 43 4- 38, 3- 

statu, ‘his position’: cp. 3. 28, 5. 

13. quod ut, ‘as soon as this’; noted 
by Wolfflin (Philol. xxv. 119) as a solitary 
instance : elsewhere ‘quod (or ‘ quae’) 
am’ (1. 6, 6, &c.), or *postquam 

aec’ (12. 6, 1), are found. He suggests 

‘quod ubi.’ 

14. conscientiae, here apparently 
‘sense of shame’: cp. 'spreta conscientia ' 
I5. 18, 1. His ‘personal feeling is dis- 
tinguished from his reputation with others 
(‘fama’). 

I5. nullis...rationibus. Dio (58. 
21, 4) probably places the suicide of 
Nerva earlier in the year, connecting it 
witlr the troubles which he foresaw from 
the attempt to enforce the usury laws 
(c. 16, 17). 

17. coniunxit: cp. 4. 57, 2 

enimvero Tiberius foedissimis criminationibus exarsit, 2 

sed Agrippina aequi inpa- 3 

5 

2 meminerant. 

A.D. 33.] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 25 (31)-27 (33). 

mala rei publicae viseret, ira et metu, dum integer, dum intemp- 

tatus, honestum finem voluisse. 

4 Ceterum Agrippinae pernicies, quod vix credibile, Plancinam 

traxit. 

nupta olim Cn. Pisoni et palam laeta morte Germanici, 

627 

cum Piso caderet, precibus Augustae nec minus inimicitiis Agrip- 5 

5 pinae defensa erat. 

ut odium et gratia desiere, ius valuit ; peti- 

taque criminibus haud ignotis, sua manu sera magis quam 

inmerita supplicia persolvit. 

27 (33). Tot luctibus funesta civitate pars maeroris fuit, quod 
Iulia Drusi filia, quondam Neronis uxor, denupsit in domum Ru- 
bellii Blandi, cuius avum Tiburtem equitem Romanum plerique 

extremo anni mors Aelii Lamiae funere censorio 

celebrata, qui administrandae Suriae imagine tandem exsolutus 
urbi praefuerat. genus illi decorum, vivida senectus ; et non per- 

propius; as being behind the scenes 
at Capreae. 

I. dum integer, &c.: compare the 
sentiment in c. 48, 5; 5. 6, 4. 

3. Plancinam: see on 2. 43, 4, &c. 

4. traxit, * drew after it': cp. 3. 54, 8; 
12. 57, 3, and 'abstractus' 4. 13, 5, &c. 
The fuller expression *ruina traxit' is 
found in H. 3. 29, 2; G. 36, a. 

5. precibus Augustae: see 3. 17, 2. 

6. ut... desiere, i.e. after the death 
of both protectress and hater. 

10, Iulia: see on 3. 29, 4. The absence 
of any allusion here tq her betrothal to 
Seianus, seems: to show that Tacitus had 
not accepted that story: see on 4. 40, II. 

denupsit. The word does not appear 
to denote a * mésalliance'; being always 
elsewhere used in the sense of the simple 
verb: cp. I5. 37, 8; Suet. Ner. 29; and 
“nec Caenis in ullos denupsit thalamos ' 
(Ov. Met. 12, 195). Nipp. takes the 
preposition to denote the firm tie of 
marriage, as in ‘devincire,’ &c.; o.hers, 
as Drager, seem to explain it better as 
expressing the leaving the paternal home 
by marriage: cp. *enubere,' * innubere.' 

Rubellii Blandi. An inscription of 
the time of Gaius (C. I. L. xiv. 3576) 
records him as * C. Rubellius C. f. Blandus, 
quaestor divi Aug. tr. pl. pr. cos. procos. 
pontif On the date of his consulship 
see on 3. 23, 3. Two sons born of this 
marriage are known; Rubellius Plautus 
(13. 19, 3), and Rubellius Drusus (C. I. L. 
vi. 16057), and a daughter Rubellia (C. I. L. 
xiv. 2610). A son of Rubellius Plautus is 
the person addressed in Juv. 8, 39. 

11. avum. M. Seneca (Contr. 11. pr. 5) 
mentions this Blandus as the first knight 
who taught rhetoric; the profession having 
been till then confined to freedmen. His 
son, the father of the person here men- 
tioned, is supposed to have been a C. Ru- 
bellius Blandus, triumvir monetalis under 
Augustus (Eckh. v. 295). On the in- 
feriority supposed to attach to families 
belonging to municipal towns cp. 4. 3, 4. 

12. Aelii Lamiae ; generally taken to 
be the same who is mentioned by Horace 
(Od. 1. 26, 8; 36,7; 3. 17, 1; Ep. 1. 14, 
6). Velleius speaks (2. 116, 3) of his ser- 
vices in Germany, Illyricum, and Africa. 
On his proconsulate of the latter province 
see 4. 13, 5. e 

funere censorio: see on 4. I5, 3. 

13. àd ministrandae Suriae imagine. 
His case was similar to that of Arruntius 
mentioned below. The word ‘tandem’ 
implies that his fictitious government had 
lasted several years, and no other legate 
of Syria is knewn between Sentius (2. 74, 
I) and this time. The province was 
probably in charge of Pacuvius (see on 
2. 17, 3). 

I4. urbi praefuerat, as successor to 
L. Piso (c. 10, 3). 

genus... decorum. His father was 
probably Lucius Lamia mentioned by 
‘Val. Max. (1. 8, 12) as ‘ praetorius vir’; 
the family was up to that time equestrian, 
apparently of Formiae, tracing a mythical 
pedigree to its founder, Lamus (Hor. Od. 
3. 17, 1); in doing which they followed a 
fashion prevalent then among many newly 
ennobled houses; see Friedl. Sitteng. i. 

Ss2 

628 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM  [A.U.C. 787. 

missa provincia dignationem addiderat. exim Flacco Pomponio 3 
Suriae pro praetore defuncto recitantur Caesaris litterae, quis 
incusabat egregium quemque et regendis exercitibus idoneum 
abnuere id munus, seque ea necessitudine ad preces cogi, per 
5 quas consularium aliqui capessere provincias adigerentur, oblitus 
Arruntium, ne in Hispaniam pergeret, decumum iam annum 
attineri. obiit eodem anno et M'. Lepidus, de cuius modera- 4 
tione atque sapientia in prioribus libris satis conlocavi. neque 5 
nobilitas diutius demonstranda est: quippe Aemilium genus 

10 

fecundum bonorum civium, et qui eadem familia corruptis moribus, 
inlustri tamen fortuna egere. 

28 (34). Paulo Fabio L. Vitellio consulibus post longum saecu- 
lorum ambitum avis phoenix in Aegyptum venit praebuitque 
materiem doctissimis indigenarum et Graecorum multa super eo 

p. 215. The Lamiae are certainly regarded 
as a noble house by Juvenal (4, 154, &c.). 

I. dignationem addiderat : compare 
the sentiment in 4. 26, 2. 

Flacco Pomponio: see on 2. 32, 3. 
He can only have become ‘legatus pro 
praetore' of Syria when Lamia was trans- 
ferred to the * praefectura urbis." 

3. egregium, used with ‘ quemque,’ 
like *eximium ' in Liv. I. 7, 5, with the 
force of a superlative. 

4. &bnuere id munus. This fact 
may not be unconnected with the stern 
repression of extortion and misgovern- 
ment. But it would also appear that any 
responsible position made its holder more 
liable to be accused of * maiestas." 

5. oblitus Arruntium, &c. This and 
the case of Lamia above are the only re- 
corded instances ofthe practice of Tiberius 
mentioned in 1. 80, 4; Suet. Tib. 63. This 
case also formed a precedent for that of 
Cluvius Rufus (H. 2. 65, 4), as the other 
for that of P. Anteius (13. 22, 2). The 
Caesarian province of Hispania Citerior 
must be meant, and * decimum" must be 
a round number, reckoning from thc death 
of L. Piso in 778, A. D. 25 (4. 45, I). 

7. M'. Lepidus: see on I. 13, 2, &c., 
and his character in 4. 20, 4. ) 

*. conlocavi = 'scripsi. The word is 
here alone thus used, but has elsewhere 
a somewhat kindred sense of * arrange- 
ment’ of words and sentences. Nipp. 
notes the similar use of * ponere’ in Cic. 
ad Fam. 1. 9, 21 ; de N. D. 1. 23, 63. 

9. diutius: cp. 4. 69, 4. 

Aemilium genus: see on 3. 22, I. 

10. corruptis moribus, abl. of quality : 
'fuere' may be supplied, or, as Nipp. 
notes, ^egere ' may be used twice. Such 
persons as the triumvir and his father 
may be here referred to. 

12. Paulo Fabio L. Vitellio. The 
former, in full Paullus Fabius Persicus, 
is probably son of the person mentioned 
in I. 5, 1: he is recorded as * pontifex, 
sodalis Augustalis, frater Arvalis, in 
an inscription at Ephesus (C. I. L. iii. 
6073), and appears in the Arval Tables 
from 774 to 807, A.D. 21-54 (C. I. L. vi. 
2023 b-2035), and is also noticed as a 
profligate friend of Claudius (Sen. de Ben. 
4. 30, 2; cp. ‘Or. Claudii," ii. 24), in 
whose time he appears to have been 
procos. Asiae (C. I. L. iii. Supp. 7129); 
possibly is also the person intended by 
Juvenal in 8, 14, sqq. L. Vitellius, here 
first mentioned, is the proconsul of Syria 
in c. 32, 5, sqq., and the well-known 
courtier of Claudius (11. 3, 1. &c.), under 
whom he obtained a second and third 
consulship and a censorship. He also 
appears among the Arvales from 781 to 
807, A. D. 28-54 (C. I. L. vi. 2026-2035); 
and was father of the emperor A. Vitellius 
(H. 1. 9, 2, &c.). 

13. avis phoenix...venit. Dio (58. 
27, 1) and Pliny (N. H. Io. .2. 5), who 
cites Cornelius Valerianus, date this event 
in the consulship of Plautius and Papinius 
(see c. 40, 1). Tacitus would hardly have 
intentionally introduced it out of its place 
without saying so (as in c. 38, 1). 

—s 

4 duntur. 

A. D. 34.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 27 (33) 28 (34). 

629 

2 miraculo disserendi. de quibus congruunt, et plura ambigua 

3 sed cognitu non absurda, promere libet. 

sacrum Soli id animal 

et ore ac distinctu pinnarum a ceteris avibus diversum consen- 
tiunt qui formam eius effinxere: de numero annorum varia tra- 

adseverent mille quadringentos sexaginta unum interici, priores- 
que alios tres Sesoside primum, post Amaside dominantibus, dein 
Ptolemaeo, qui ex Macedonibus tertius regnavit, in civitatem cui 
Heliopolis nomen advolavisse, multo ceterarum volucrum comi- 

5 tatu novam faciem mirantium. 

sed antiquitas quidem obscura : 

inter Ptolemaeum ac Tiberium minus ducenti quinquaginta anni 
6 fuerunt. unde non nulli falsum hunc phoenicem neque Arabum e 
terris credidere, nihilque usurpavisse ex his, quae vetus memoria 

4. effiniere: definiere B, text Pich. 
Halm. 

3. ore, probably the front of the head 
is meant. The beak is especially de- 
scribed in Lact. (135), *albicat insignis 
mixto viridante smaragdo et puro cornu 
gemmea cuspis hiat." 

distinctu, only here and in Stat. Theb. 
I. 5, 41. 

4. qui formam . . . effinxere: cp. 
*effingebant, of representation in art 
(11. 14, 1). Hdt., who had seen it, dcov 
pad, describes it (2. 73) as' in form an 
eagle, but with golden and red feathers. 
Pliny (1. 1.) goes more into detail; and a 
poem on the bird, attributed to Lactantius, 
describes it still more fully (125-150) as 
partaking of the plumage of the peacock 
and pheasant, with a rayed crest. On 
monuments it has the form of a heron, 
. and is connected with symbols of Osiris, 

de numero annorum. The phoenix 
was seen to be the symbol of a cycle of 
time, but its period was very differently 
given. That of 1461 years is the Egyp- 
tian *annus magnus, also called the 
Sothiac, or Canicular period, being that 
_in which the year of 365 days agrees with 

that of 3657; 1461 of the one being equal 
to 1460 of the other. The year A.D. 139 
was reckoned by the Egyptians as the end 
of one such period (see Sir G. C. Lewis, 
Astronomy of the Ancients, p. 284). 
Those who reckon the phoenix cycle at 
500 years (Hdt. 1. 1.; Ov. Met. 15, 395; 
Sen, Ep. 42, 1 ; Mela, 3. 8, 10) possibly 
take it as a round number for one-third 
of the above cycle (487 years), or as itself 

esse soside: Sesostride R, text Jac. Gron. 

7. aliter : alites R, alios ter Spengel, text 
13. iis Ritter. 

a period of correction of the calendar (see 
Nipp.). Pliny (1. 1.) gives, on the authority 
of Manilius, a phoenix cycle of 540 years, 
and elsewhere (29. 1, 9, 29) speaks of it 
loosely as 1000 years, in which Lactantius 
(v. 59) follows him. For other periods 
see lewis, p. 283, n. 153. 

7. Sesoside... Amaside. The reign 
of Amasis (Hdt. 2. 172, sqq.) is dated 
B.C. cir. 570-526. ‘Sesosis’ is the form 
in Diod. I. 53, of the name given by 
Herodotus as Sesostris, that of the king 
to whom both these assign the conquests 
of Rameses (see on 2. 60, 4). Sethos, a 
name found later in Herodotus (2. 141), 
is given by Manetho (Ios. c. Ap. 1. 15) 
as Sethosis, father or brother of a Rameses ; 
and an earlier Sesortosis, or some similar 
name, in the monuments. 

8. Ptolemaoo, Ptolemaeus Euergetes, 
who died in B.C. 222, 235 years before 
the principate of Tiberius began. Nipp. 

notes that .some have attempted, by. 

counting Alexander as the first Mace- 
donian. ruler, to make Tacitus refer to the 
reign of Ptolemaeus II. -Philadelphus, 
B C. 284-247, in which the year B.C. 275 
was, according to some computations, 
a real epoch of the cycle. 

Io. antiquitas, i.e. the date of Sesosis 
and Amasis. 

12. non nulli, here alone substantively 
in Tacitus; adj. in r1. 12, 3; 37, I. 

falsum hunc. Pliny (l. 1.) records the 
imposture of bringing a phoenix to Rome 
in 800, A. D. 47. 

maxime vulgatum quingentorum spatium: sunt quis 

630 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 787. 

firmavit. confecto quippe annorum numero, ubi mors propinquet, 7 
suis in terris struere nidum eique vim genitalem adfundere, ex 
qua fetum oriri ; et primam adulto curam sepeliendi patris, neque 
id temere, sed sublato murrae pondere temptatoque per longum 
5 iter, ubi par oneri, par meatui sit, subire patrium corpus inque 

Solis aram perferre atque adolere. 

haec incerta et fabulosis 8 

aucta: ceterum aspici aliquando in Aegypto eam volucrem non 

ambigitur. 

29 (35). At Romae caede continua Pomponius Labeo, quem 
1o praefuisse Moesiae rettuli, per abruptas venas sanguinem effudit : 

aemulataque est coniunx Paxaea. 

nam promptas eius modi 2 

mortes metus carnificis faciebat, et quia damnati publicatis bonis 
sepultura prohibebantur, eorum qui de se statuebant humabantur 

corpora, manebant testamenta, pretium festinandi. 

sed Caesar 3 

15 missis ad senatum litteris disseruit morem fuisse maioribus, quo- 
tiens dirimerent amicitias, interdicere domo eumque finem gratiae 
ponere: id se repetivisse in Labeone, atque illum, quia male 
administratae provinciae aliorumque criminum — arguebatur, 

. I. annorum M (mille) numero Heins. 

I. annorum numero, its period. 

2. suis in terris, in Arabia. 

struere nidum, &c. Herodotus (1. 1.) 
gives much the same version as Tacitus. 
Pliny (1. 1.) describes more fully the con- 
struction of the nest of spices, and the 
growth of the offspring from a worm 
generated from the remains of the parent, 
and makes the nest itself the vehicle 
in which the remains are borne. The 
essential idea is the allegory describing 
the beginning of one period at the close 
of another. Pliny speaks (N. H. 13. 4, 
9, 43) of a palm shown near Alexandria, 
which was represented as renewing itself 
at periods coincident with those of the 
reappearance of the bird. — — 

5. meatui; used of the flight of a 
bird in H. 1. 62, 5; of the motions of 
heavenly bodies in Lucr. and Verg. 

subire patrium corpus; a remi- 
niscence of Verg. Aen. 2, 708 ; 4, 599. 
That the phoenix was represented as 
bearing its burden on its back, not in 
its claws, would appear from Artemidorus, 
Oneirocritica, 4. 49 (see Orelli). 

6. Solis aram, the famous altar men- 
‘tioned by Strabo at Heliopolis, Matarieh, 
about six miles N. E. of Cairo. 

18. urgebatur : text Ern. 

adolere, ‘ burns it’; so in Ov. Col. &c. 

haec incerta. Tacitus rejects the . 
fables, but believes in the appearance 
at times of such a bird. The idea of 
symbolizing a cycle by a bird is probably 
traceable to the reappearance of particular 
birds at certain seasons of the year. 

8. ambigitur, with acc. and inf. in 
11. 4, 5; H. 4. 49, 2. 

IO. rettuli: cp. 4. 47, I. 

12. damnati, &c. Incapacity formaking 
a will attached not only to those sen- 
tenced to death, but also to those inter- 
dicted from fire and water (Dio, 57. 22, 

. 55; Gaius, Dig. 28. 1, 8); nor did suicide 

before condemnation always save the 
property (see 4. 20, 1; 30, 3, and notes; 
Dio, 58. 15, 4). 

I5. norem... maioribus: see on 2. 
70, 3; 3. 24, 5. Tiberius is noted as 
fond of appealing to old rules (4. 19, 3). 

17. male administratae provinciae, 
Swpwv pera THs ^vvawós ^paoeís (Dio, 

8.243). - 
: 18. arguebatur. Many retain the 
MS. text, which may be a solitary use of 
‘urgere’ analogously to ‘accusare. The 
indicative is used as in I. 10, 1, &c. 

A.D. 34.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 28 (34)-30 (36). 

631 

culpam invidia velavisse, frustra conterrita uxore, quam etsi 

4 nocentem periculi tamen expertem fuisse. 

Mamercus dein 

Scaurus rursum postulatur, insignis nobilitate et orandis causis, 

5 vita probrosus. 

nihil hunc amicitia Seiani, sed labefecit haud 

minus validum ad exitia Macronis odium, qui easdem artes 5 

occultius exercebat ; 

detuleratque argumentum tragoediae a 

Scauro scriptae, additis versibus qui in Tiberium flecterentur : 
6 verum ab Servilio et Cornelio accusatoribus adulterium Liviae, 

7 magorum sacra obiectabantur. 

Scaurus, ut dignum veteribus 

Aemiliis, damnationem anteiit, hortante Sextia uxore, quae 
incitamentum mortis et particeps fuit. 

30 (36). Ac tamen accusatores, si facultas incideret, poenis 
adficiebantur, ut Servilius Corneliusque perdito Scauro famosi, 
quia pecuniam a Vario Ligure omittendae delationis ceperant, in 

2 insulas interdicto .igni atque aqua demoti sunt. 

et Abudius 

Ruso functus aedilitate, dum Lentulo Gaetulico, sub quo legioni 

Io. ante it (Andr. p. 7): 
hortantes exitia: text L. 

I. invidia, i.e. by letting it be sup- 
posed that Tiberius forced him to self- 
destruction: cp. 'suam invidiam tali 
morte quaesitam" 3. 16, 3; also ‘ capt: 
dines adolescentis velaverat ' I3. 13, I 

2. periculi. ..expertem, i.e. whom 
he had made up his mind to pardon. 

3. rursum : see c. 9, 5. 

4. Vita probrosus: see 3. 66,3. His 
character is represented as infamous by 
Seneca and by Tertullian (de Pall. 5). 

labefecit. oe the position of this 
verb cp. t1. 35, 

6. detulerat, *had made matter of 
information.’ 

argumentum, ‘the subject’; so in 
Dial. 2, 1; and often in Plaut., Ter., &c. 
According to Dio (58. 24, 4), the tragedy 
was entitled ‘ Atreus,’ and contained a 
line imitated from Eur. Phoen. 394 (Tas 
Tüv kparo)vrov dpabias dépew xpewr). 
Tiberius took the allusion to himself, 
and said, Alayra atrdy mojo, and ac- 
cordingly forced him to suicide. Suet. 
(Tib. 61) appears to follow an ac- 
count making Agamemnon the subject. 
* Atrides' was later (Juv. 4, 65), and 
perhaps already, a nickname of Caesar. 

7. flecterentur, ‘might be applied.’ 
This meaning, which appears to be 
found nowhere else, is somewhat akin to 
that in 4. 16, 4; 20, 4. 

text Halm (13. 30, 2; 15. 38, 4); see on t. 25, I. 

8. Servilio et Cornelio. "These ac- 
cusers, mentioned by one name only, may 
have been already mentioned in the lost 
portion. M. Seneca (Suas. 2, 22) speaks 
of the accuser of Scaurus as a ‘ historicus 
fatuus ' named Tuscus (pos. ibly a cogno- 
men of one of these). Ou. their fate see 
C. 30, I. 

Liviae, Livilla: see on 4. 3, 3, C. 2, I. 

9. magorum sacra: see 2. 27, 2 

veteribus Aemiliis: see on 3. 22, 
I, &c. M. Seneca (l. 1) says that the 
family of Scauri became extinct in this 
person; also (Contr. B. 1. praef) that 
seven of his orations were burned by 
decree. 

10. anteiit: cp. 5. 6, 4. 

hortante Sextia. ' Sexitia' does not 
appear to be a Roman name. 

11. incitamentum, only used of per- 
sons here and in H. 2. 23, 7. 

14. Vario Ligure: see on 4. 42, 3. 

ceperant: cp. 4. 31, 5. 

15. Abudius Ruso, an unknown person. 
The name ‘ Abudius’ is found, according 
to Orelli, only i in a few inscriptions; that 
of * Ruso ' in Sall. Jug. 104, 3; where, as 
here, many editors substitute the better 
known name ‘ Rufus.’ 

16. Lentulo Gaetulico: sce on 4. 42, 
33 46, I. 

legioni praefuerat, ‘ Legati legionum’ 

632 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 788. 

praefuerat, periculum facessit, quod is Seiani filium generum 
destinasset, ultro damnatur atque urbe exigitur. Gaetulicus ea 3 
tempestate superioris Germaniae legiones curabat mirumque 
amorem adsecutus erat, effusae clementiae, modicus severitate et 
5 proximo quoque exercitui per L. Apronium socerum non ingra- 
tus. unde fama constans ausum mittere ad Caesarem litteras, 4 
adfinitatem sibi cum Seiano haud sponte sed consilio Tiberii 
coeptam ; perinde se quam Tiberium falli potuisse, neque erro- 
rem eundem,illi sine fraude, aliis exitio habendum. sibi fidem 5 
10 integram et, si nullis insidiis peteretur, mansuram ; successorem 
non aliter quam indicium mortis accepturum. firmarent velut g 
foedus, quo princeps ceterarum rerum poteretur, ipse provinciam 
retineret. haec, mira quamquam, fidem ex eo trahebant, quod 7 
unus omnium Seiani adfinium incolumis multaque gratia mansit, 
15 reputante Tiberio publicum sibi odium, extremam aetatem, magis- 
. que fama quam vi stare res suas. 
31 (37). C. Cestio M. Servilio consulibus. nobiles Parthi in 
urbem venere, ignaro rege Artabano. is metu Germanici fidus 2 

not of praetorian rank (see on a. $6 1) 
are found in 14. 28, 1; H. r. 79, 8, and 
3. 52, 3 (compared with 4. 39, 1). Titus 
filled that post after the quaestorship 
(Suet. Tit. 4), the son of Corbulo when 
below senatorial age (15. 28, 4). 

I. Seiani um probably the boy 
mentioned in 5. 9, 2 

2. ultro, i.e. besides failing in the 
prosecution. 

4. modicus severitate. ‘ Modicus’ 
takes the abl. in c. 45, 1; Agr. 40, 4; as 
also ‘immodicus’ in H. 1. 69, 3; 3. 53, 
1 ; oftener the genitive, as in 2. 73, 3 
. 5. L. Apronium: see 4. 73, 1. He 
appears still to have retained his com- 
mand in Lower Germany notwithstanding 
his failure against the Frisii. 

8. perinde . . . quam: cp. 2. I, 2. 
The thought is the same as that in 5. 6, 2. 
' 9. sine fraude, ‘harmless’: cp. Hor. 
Od. 2. 19, 20. 

II. indicium mortis; so ‘signum 
mortis ’ (c. 40, 3), ‘ warning that he was 
to die.’ 

14. unus... adfinium, used here loosely 
of one connected merely by a betrothal, 
or even a less formal ‘destinatio’ (see on 
3. 29, 5). There is reason to think that, 
even among those more nearly related, 
the destruction was not so complete; for 

L. Seianus, of praetorian rank, noticed 
by Dio (58. I9, I) as spared at the same 
time with M. Terentius (c. 8, 9), is not 
mentioned as subsequently put to death. 

. incolumis . . . . mansit. In 792, 
A.D. 39, he was accused of conspiracy. 
against Gaius, and put to death (Dio, 59. 
22, 5; Suet. Claud. 9). The * Acta Ar- 
valium' (C. I. L. vi. 2029) record an 
offering on Oct. 27, in that year, *ob 
detecta nefaria con[silia] Cn. Lentuli 
Gae[tulici].’ 

15. magis...stare res suas, ‘that 
his power st ood more by prestige than by 
its own weight’: cp. ‘ stat vi terra sua, 
vi stando Vesta vocatur’ Ov. Fast. 6, 
299; ' virtute quam pecunia res Romana 
me.ius stetit H. 2. 69, 5. 

17. C. Cestio M. Servilio. On the 
former, here called by Dio (58. 25, 2) 
T'aíos T'éAAos, see on 3. 36, 2; and c. 7, 
3. The latter is the historian M. Servilius 
Nonianus (see Introd. iii. p. 15), whose 
father was mentioned in 2. 48, 1; 3. 22, 4 

nobiles Parthi, i.e. NAME. 
see on 2. 2, 1, &c. This narrative of 
Eastern events (c^31-37; 41-44), treated 
very briefly by Dio (58. 26), is given 
more fully by Tacitus as a relief to the 
tale of trials and executions (see c. 38, 1). 

18. Artabano: see 2. 3, 1, &c. He 

LIBER VI. CAP. 39 (36), 31 (37). 633 

Romanis, aequabilis in suos, mox superbiam in nos, saevitiam in 
populares sumpsit, fretus bellis, quae secunda adversum circum- 
iectas nationes exercuerat, et senectutem Tiberii ut inermem 
despiciens avidusque Armeniae, cui defuncto rege Artaxia Arsa- 
cen liberorum suorum veterrimum inposuit, addita contumelia et 5 
missis qui gazam a Vonone relictam in Suria Ciliciaque repos- 
cerent ; simul veteres Persarum ac Macedonum terminos, seque 
invasurum possessa primum Cyro et post Alexandro per vanilo- 
3 quentiam ac minas iaciebat. sed Parthis mittendi secretos nun- 
tios validissimus auctor fuit Sinnaces, insigni familia ac perinde 
opibus, et. proximus huic Abdus ademptae virilitatis. non de- 
4 spectum id apud barbaros ultroque.potentiam habet. 11 adscitis 
et aliis primoribus, quia neminem gentis Arsacidarum summae 
rei inponere poterant, interfectis ab Artabano plerisque aut 

A. D. 35-] 

ond 

nondum adultis, Phraaten regis Phraatis filium Roma poscebant : 

3. inertem Heins. 

had not only paid court to Germanicus 
(2. 58, 1), but also shown respect at his 
death: see on 2. 72, 3. 

I. aequabilis, ‘without caprice’: cp. 
* cunctis vitae offictis aequabilis’ H. 4. 5, 
4, *aequabilius . . . provinciae regentur ' 
15. 21, 5: see also 4. 20, 4. 

3. inermem, ‘without warlike energy’: 
cp. the account of his policy in c. 32, 1. 

4. Artaxia: see 2. 56,3. His death 
may probably have taken place in the 
preceding year. 

Arsacen. This is hardly a personal 
name, but no other is known. Orelli 
notes a tetradrachm inscribed BAZIAENS 
APZAKOT AIKAIOT EIIIANOTZ as 
apparently belonging to his coinage. 

5. veterrimum : elsewhere ‘ vetustissi- 
mum’ is thus used, e.g. 2. 43, 3. Ritter 
would so read here; but Nipp. points out 
that the MS. text receives some support 
from ‘ veterrimos populos" (Liv. 5. 54, 5). 

contumelia. Nipp. considers this to 
have consisted in the demand itself. But 
it was also distinctly expressed in the 
letter, as described by Suet. (Tib. 66), 
* parricidia et caedes et ignaviam et lux- 
uriam obicientis, monentisque ut volun- 
taria morte maximo iustissimoque civium 
odio quam primum satis faceret." 

6. Vonone: see 2. 1-4; 58; 68. 

8. primum Cyro. The dot under 
the *i' denotes an old critic's judgement 
that it is to be expunged, but the difficulty 
of accounting for its presence favours the 

8. icyro: Cyro B, text Halm, a Cyro Ritt. 

suggestion of Baiter, adopted by Halm. 
On such a dat. as ‘Cyro’ cp. Introd. v. 
$ 18. 

per vaniloquentiam : cp. 3. 49, 2. 

9. iaciebat, taken with *terminos' in 

.the sense of ‘non sine iactatione referebat." 

He bragged of these old boundaries, as 
if he would make good his right to all 
included in them. Supposing only the 
Asiatic dominions of these kings to be 
meant, all Syria and Asia Minor would 
be comprehended. Dio 1.1.) adds that 
he actually attacked Cappadocia. 

10. perinde. Nipp. and Drager explain 
this word as here used adjectively for 
‘paribus.’ But ‘insignibus’ can easily be 
supplied, as ‘atrocia’ in *atrox caelum, 
perinde ingenia ' (Flor. 3. 2, 2). In the 
example noted by Quint. (8. 3, 82) of the 
brilliant conciseness of Sallust (* Mithii- 
dates corpore ingenti, 
the usage more resembles 12. 41, 4. 

II. Abdus. The first part of this name 
and of ‘ Abdageses’ (c. 36, 3, &c.) ap- 
pears to be a Semitic root. On the mix- 

ture of races indicated by Parthian names. 

see Rawlinson, p. 21. 

12. id; sc. ‘ademptae virilitatis esse’: 
*this is not only not matter of contempt, 
but even a source of influence,' by placing 
men in confidential positions. 

14. aut=‘et aliis': cp. 1. 55, 2, &c. 

15. regis Phraatis fllium. On this 
family see on 2. I, 2; 2, I. 

[er 

5 

rinde armatus"), . 

10 negotia moraretur. 

634 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 788. 

nomine tantum et auctore opus, [ut] sponte Caesaris ut genus 
Arsacis ripam apud Euphratis cerneretur. 

32 (38). Cupitum id Tiberio: ornat Phraaten accingitque pa- 
ternum ad fastigium, destinata retinens, consiliis et astu res exter- 
5 nas moliri, arma procul habere. interea cognitis insidiis Artabanus 2 

tardari metu, modo cupidine vindictae inardescere. 

cunctatio servilis, statim exsequi regium videtur: valuit tamen 
utilitas, ut Abdum specie amicitiae vocatum ad epulas lento 
veneno inligaret, Sinnacen dissimulatione ac donis, simul per 

et Phraates apud Suriam dum omisso cultu 4 

Romano, cui per tot annos insueverat, instituta Parthorum sumit, 

patriis moribus impar morbo absumptus est. 

sed non Tiberius 5 

omisit incepta: Tiridatem sanguinis eiusdem aemulum Artabano, 
reciperandaeque Armeniae Hiberum Mithridaten deligit con- 
15 ciliatque fratri Pharasmani, qui gentile imperium obtinebat ; et 
cunctis quae apud Orientem parabantur L. Vitellium praefecit. 

I. [ut] Halm, others omit the second ut or alter the first to et; see note. 

e 
1I. insumit : text L. 14. diligit. 

I. nomine... auctore, explained by 
the following sentence; the name of an 
Arsacid, and the support of Caesar. 

[ut]... ut. Both these are retained 
by most editors; but to supply ' aliquis' 
with ‘sponte Caesaris’ (Doed.), seems 
unsatisfactory. Nipp. inverts the clauses, 
and explains the second ‘ ut’ by supposing 
‘genus Arsacis’ to be again repeated in 
thought for rhetorical emphasis: ‘that an 
Arsacid should show himself on the Eu- 
phrates' frontier, and that he should do so 
with the approval of Caesar.’ Such an 
inversion, or the omission of one ‘ut,’ 
seem to be the necessary alternatives. 

3. ornat...accingitque, i.e. gives him 
the insignia of royalty, and means of en- 
forcing his claim by arms: cp. the similar 
passage (‘auctum pecunia additis stipa- 
toribus "), 11. 16, 3. | 

paternum ad fastigium, repeated in 
II. IO, 8. 

4. destinata, ‘his purpose. On this 
settled policy see 2. 26, 3; 64, 2; 66, 3. 

6. tardari metu, modo: see on 4. 50, 
6: probably in both places the first clause 
denotes the prevalent state, the second 
the occasional. Ritter somewhat incon- 
sistently inserts another * modo’ here, but 
. not in the former place. 
inardescere, here alone in Tacitus, 

1 
2. Arsaces. 

from poets, Plin. N. H., and Quintilian. 

et barbaris, &c., i.e. many reasons 
prompted him to the bolder course, yet 
the more politic was adopted : cp. * placuit 
tamen occultior via’ 4. 3, I. 

9. inligaret : cp. * morbo implicata’ 
4. 53, I- The metaphor is taken from 
ensnaring or entangling; and ‘inligare’ 
is thus used with * conscientia ' (15. 51, 1), 
* stupro' (I2. 25, 1). &c. 

IO. cultu, coupled with *instituta ' in 
2. 56, 2, and here apparently answering 
to it. 

1I. sumit: 'insumpsisse, in I4. 44, I 
(where see note), has also generally been 
altered ; but Orelli and others defend both, 
in the sense of ‘in se sumere,’ from Stat. 
Theb. 12, 643 *dignas insumite mentes 
coeptibus.' 

I2. patriis moribus: see the contrast 
of Roman and Parthian modes of life in 
2. 2, 5. 

13. sanguinis eiusdem, a grandson of 
the elder Phraates (c. 37, 6), probably 
one of the four sent by him to Rome: 
see on 2. I, 3. 

I4. Hiberum: see on 4. 5, 4. 

I5. gentile, of his own nation; so 
‘gentile decus 11. 16, 3: cp. 3. 59, 3; 12. 
14,2; 17, 33 34, 4- 

16. L. Vitellium: sce on c. a8, I. As 

et barbaris 3 

A. D. 35.] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 31 (37)-33 (39). 

6 eo de homine haud sum ignarus sinistram in urbe famam, plera- 
que foeda memorari, ceterum 27 regendis provinciis prisca virtute 

7 egit. 

unde regressus et formidine Gai Caesaris, familiaritate 

Claudii turpe in servitium mutatus exemplar apud posterós adu- 
latorii dedecoris habetur, cesseruntque prima postremis, et bona 
iuventae senectus flagitiosa oblitteravit. 

33 (39). At ex regulis prior Mithridates Pharasmanem perpulit 
dolo et vi conatus suos iuvare, repertique corruptores ministros 
2 Arsacis multo auro ad scelus cogunt ; simul Hiberi magnis copiis 

Armeniam inrumpunt et urbe Artaxata potiuntur. 

quae post- 

quam Artabano cognita, filium Oroden ultorem.parat; dat Par- 
3thorum copias, mittit qui auxilia mercede facerent: contra 
Pharasmanes adiungere Albanos, accire Sarmatas, quorum scep- 

I. pluraque C. G. Hermann. 

C. 34, 1). 
text J. F. Gron. 

Syria had been vacated in 786, A.D. 33 
(c. 27, 3), it is probable that Vitellius 
may have been sent out earlier as legate 
of that province, and may now have re- 
ceived some extension of power similar 
to that of Germanicus (2. 43,2). A fuller 
account of his actions in Syria and Pales- 
tine, including his recall of Pilate just 
before the death of Tiberius, is given in 
Joseph. Ant. 18. 4-5. See also Prof. 
Rawlinson, p. 228, foll. 

2..jn regendis: see on 3. 19, 2, where 
Halm also inserts ‘in,’ but with less 
reason. Nipp. here defends the MS. text 
by many instances from Tacitus and other 
authors, which seem hardly parallel, as 
the immediate proximity here of another 
abl. makes it the less probable that this 
one stood without a preposition. Nor 
can the case be well taken (with Pfitzner) 
as dat. commodi. 

3. regressus, &c. He was recalled by 
Gaius in 793, A. D. 40, to answer a charge, 
and escaped by abject servility (Dio, 59. 
27,4:. On his conduct towards Claudius, 
Messalina, and Agrippina, see II. 2, 4; 
3,13 12. 4, 15; 42, 4, &c.: other anec- 
dotes of his servility are related in 
Suet. Vit. 2. Dio (1. 1.) follows Tacitus 
here in recording both sides of his char- 
acter. 

4. adulatorii: the adj. is apparently 
&r. elp. ; the adv. is in August. Ep. 148. 

7. perpulit. The inf. with this verb 
appears to be found only in Tacitus (11. 

2. in ins. Otto. 
parthorum que: datque Parthorum B, text Duebner. 

IT. orodem (but oroden 
I3. accipere : 

29, 2; 12. 50, 35 13: 54, 3 H. 5. 2, 3): 
cp. Introd. v. § 42. 

8. ministros, those who waited on 
him: cp. 3. 14, 3. 

g. ad scelus, ‘to poison him’: cp. 1. 
5, I, &c. This was the *dolus' ; the in- 
vasion of Armenia the ‘vis’ mentioned 
above. 

10. Artaxata: see 2. 56, 3. 

1I. Parthorum. Many have thought 
that a word has dropped out: Bezzenb. 
suggests * Ariorum’ (cp. 11. 10, 3), Heráus 
* Medorum" (c. 34, 6, where, however, it 
seems to be another name for the Par- 

thians), Ritter * pecuniam, Müller ‘ Par- 

thorum equestres." 

I2. auxilia ...facerent, not used like 
*stipendia facere, but as equivalent to 
* auxiliares compararent'; so ‘exercitum 
facere (Vell. 2. 109, 1), * manum facere’ 
(Cic. Caec. 12, 33), &c. 

I3. Albanos: see 2. 68, 1. 

accire: cp. * accitis Frisiis’ H. 4. 15, 4. 

Sarmatas.  'Sarmatae' or ‘Sauro- 
matae’ are spoken of in several places in 
Strabo, Pl. N. H.; and Tacitus, but are 
little more than a general name for many 
tribes north of the Caucasus, in Europe 
and Asia: cp. G. 1, 1; 46, 1, and notes. 
In the time of Ptolemy the name becomes 
more definite. 

quorum, referring to the Sarmatae only. 

sceptuchi, only here as a Latin word. 
Greek writers, as Xen. (Anab. I. 6, 11; 
Cyr. 8. 1, 38), generally designate thus, as 

635 

636 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . [A.U.C. 788. 

tuchi utrimque donis acceptis more gentico diversa induere. sed 4 
Hiberi locorum potentes Caspia via Sarmatam in Armenios 
raptim effundunt. at qui Parthis adventabant, facile arcebantur, 5 
cum alios incessus hostis clausisset, unum reliquum mare inter et 
5 extremos Albanorum montes aestas impediret, quia flatibus 
etesiarum implentur vada : hibernus auster revolvit fluctus pulso- 
que introrsus freto brevia litorum nudantur. 
34 (40). Interim Oroden sociorum inopem auctus auxilio Pha- 
rasmanes vocare ad pugnam et detrectantem incessere, adequitare 
10 castris, infensare pabula; ac saepe zz modum obsidii stationibus 
cingebat, donec Parthi contumeliarum insolentes circumsister- 
ent regem, poscerent proelium. atque illis sola in equite vis: 3 
Pharasmanes et pedite valebat. nam Hiberi Albanique saltuosos 
locos incolentes duritiae patientiaeque magis insuevere ; ferunt- 8 

3. effunt: text B. 

* wand-bearers,' the chief officers, usually 
eunuchs, in personal attendance on the 
Persian king. The term is probably used 
here as by Strabo, who applies it (11. 2, 
13, 496) to chiefs or satraps, ruling the 
Heniochi under their kings. 

I. gentico: cp. 3. 43, 3- 

diversa induere, entered into opposite 
alliances: see the senses of this verb noted 
on I. 69, 2. 

2. Caspia via: cp. 'claustra Caspia- 
. rum’ H. 1. 6, 5, * Caspiae portae’ Suet. 
Ner. 19. The pass here meant is that 
which Pliny (N. H. 6. 11, 30; 13, 40) 
speaks of as erroneously called ‘ Caspiae,’ 
and properly *Caucasiae portae, the 
modern pass of Dariel, in the centre of 
the chain, connecting the Iberian town of 
Hermasta (Plin. 1. 1.), the modern Tiflis, 
with the upper valley of the Terek. This 
is still the great road over the chain, and 
would be the natural route for Sarmatians 

into Iberia, the Sapparixal wvAac of Ptol. | 

5. 9, II, 15. The true * Caspiae Pylae’ 
of Arrian. &c., have no connexion with 
this locility, but lead from the south of 
the Caspian towards Teheran. 

3. qui, i.e. the Sarmatians who had 
taken this side. 

4. alios incessus. The 'AABária: m)- 
Aa of Ptol. (1.1.) appear to be inter- 
mediate between the two chief roads here 
mentioned, and to answer to or lie west- 
ward of the pass by way of Kouba: see 
Mr. Dyer, in Dict. of Geog. ii. 920. On 
* incessus ' cp. 3. 74, I. 

10, in ins. Muretus. 

unum reliquum, the second great 
route, along the western shore of tre 
Caspian, between Derbend and Bakou. 

5. flatibus etesiarum, the érncia 
Bopéa of Hdt. 2. 20 (cp. also Plin. N. H. 
2. 47, 124, 127), blowing for thirty days 
from July 20: cp. H. 2.98, 3. The force 
with which the sea is driven at times upon 
this shore from the north is spoken of in 
Curtius 6. 4, 19. 

6. hibernus auster, &c., thrown in 
to show why this route is obstructed in 
summer only. 

pulso introrsus freto, ‘the sea 
being driven back upon itself': the ex- 
pression seems taken from Sen. de prov. 
I, 4 *nudari litora . . . undas et introrsum 
agi. ‘Fretum’ is used, as by poets, of 
tne sea in general. 

7. brevia: cp. I. 70, 3,.&c. 

10. infensare, ‘ravages the foraging 
ground’; so 'infensare Armeniam’ : 13. 
37, 1. The verb is Tacitean, and used 
also in 13. 41, 4. * Pabulum" is perhaps 
thus used in 15. 16, 1 (* pabulo attrito’). 

stationibus, ‘outposts’: cp. 4. 50, 5. 

II. contumeliarum insolentes: this 
genitive (cp. 15. 67, 5; H. r. 87, 4) ap- 
pears also in Cicero, Caesar, and Sallust. 

12. regem, ‘the prince': probably 
Orodes assumed also the title of king of 
Armenia. 

14. feruntque, &c. This legend is given 
more fully, with some variation, in Just. 
42. 2, 12. Jason is there said’ in after 

. life to have been driven from Thessaly 

A. D. 35.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 33 (39)-35 (41). 

637 

que se Thessalis ortos,qua tempestate Iaso post avectam Medeam 
genitosque ex ea liberos inanem mox regiam Aeetae vacuosque 
4 Colchos repetivit. multaque de nomine eius et oraclum Phrixi 
celebrant; nec quisquam ariete sacrificaverit, credito vexisse 
5 Phrixum, sive id animal seu navis insigne fuit. ceterum derecta 5 
utrimque acie Parthus imperium Orientis, claritudinem Arsaci- 
darum, contraque ignobilem Hiberum mercennario milite dissere- 
bat: Pharasmanes integros semet a Parthico dominatu, quanto 
maiora peterent, plus decoris victores aut, si terga darent, flagitii 
6 atque periculi laturos ; simul horridam suorum aciem, picta auro 
Medorum agmina, hinc viros, inde praedam ostendere. 

35 (41) Enimvero apud Sarmatas non una vox ducis: se 
quisque stimulant ne pugnam per sagittas sinerent: impetu et 

2 comminus praeveniendum, 

variae hinc bellantium species, cum 

Parthus sequi vel fugere pari arte suetus distraheret turmas, spa- 

2. aetae: text B. 

by the daughters of Pelias, to have been 
reconciled to Medea, to have reinstated 
Aeetes, whom he found in exile, to have 
gained great victories, and assigned à 
territory from his conquests to his fol- 
lowers rs Greece. The Albani, ac- 
cording to Justin, gave to Cn. Pompeius 
a different account of themselves, and 
claimed the favour of Rome as having 
had their home on the Alban Mount, and 
having followed Heracles from Italy to 
the East. The real oripin of both nations 
appears to be Scythic, and the Albani are 
probably akin to, and sometimes (see on 
2. 68, 1). confused with the Alauni or 
Alani. — 

I. qua tempestate: cp. 2. 60, 2; 4. 
14, 2. 

2. vacuos: cp. C. 57, 4; 2. 3, 2, &c. 
It would seem that Tacitus took the legend 
as asserting that Aeetes was dead. 

3. de nomine, ‘named after him’: cp... 

1.45,3. The Jasonian legend was widely 
spread in those regions. Strabo speaks 
(11. 4, 8, 503) of temples ('Iacóvia) and 
other bmouv52uara, not only in Albania 
and Hiberia, but also in Mecia and Ar- 
menia. Justin adds (42. 3) ‘ Iasoni totus 
ferme Oriens ut conditori divinos honores 
. templaque constituit, See also Grote 
(vol. i. ch. 13, p. 328, foll.), who points 
out the stimulus given to these legends 
by the Thessalians who had followed 
Alexander. 

oraculum Phrixi. Strabo mentions 

7. mercennariuni militem Acid. 

I3. inirent B. 

(11. 2, 17, 498), in Moschica above. the 
Glaucus and Hippus (tributaries of the 
Phasis), 7d rhs Aevxo0éas iepóv, Spifou 
pupa, xal pavreiey éxelvov; Sov xpos ov 
Overa. | 

4. credito, probably agreeing with 
* ariete' : cp. c. 50; 7, &c. 

5. seu navis insigne. This rational- 
ized version of the legend is found in Diod. 
4-47) 4 E 

7. mercennario milite, ‘ with his 
mercenaries ' : the abl. might be absolute, 
but in Nep. Eum. 3, 6 a similar case is 
fully expressed as abl. of quality (* pedi- 
tatu, quo erat deteriore"). Several other 
such uses of this abl. are given in Nipp.'s 
note on 3. 43. 2 : cp. Intiod. v. $ 29. 

ro. horridam, ‘ unkempt’: cp. *horri- 
dus miles’ Liv. 9. 40, 4. 

II. Medorum. The whole army is 
meant. Horace often interchanges the 
names ‘ Mede,' * Persian,’ and ‘ Parthian’; 
and the name here is the more appropriate, 
as the Parthians had adopted the * per- 
lucida ac fuida vestis' of the Medes (Just. 
41. 2, 4). 

I2. non una vox ducis, ‘the com- 
mander was not the only speaker.’ . - 

I3. ne... sinerent, ‘not to permit 
an archer's battle’; i.e. to close at once: 
*sinere' is used with the accus. in 2. 55, 
4; 13. 23, 3, &c., in Plin. N. H. 6. 14, 17, 
43 ; and in poets. | 

15. sequi vel fugere...suetus. This 
Parthian tactic is well known from Vergil 

638 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM [A. U. C. 788. 

tium ictibus quaereret, Sarmatae omisso arcu, quo brevius valent, 
contis gladiisque ruerent; modo equestris proelii more frontis 
et tergi vices, aliquando ut conserta acie corporibus et pulsu 
armorum pellerent pellerentur. iamque et Albani Hiberique 3 
5 prensare, detrudere, ancipitem pugnam hostibus facere, quos 
super eques et propioribus vulneribus pedites adflictabant. inter 4 
quae Pharasmanes Orodesque, dum strenuis adsunt aut dubi- 
tantibus subveniunt, conspicui eoque gnari, clamore telis equis 
concurrunt, instantius Pharasmanes; nam vulnus per galeam 
10 adegit. nec iterare valuit, praelatus equo et fortissimis satel- 5 
litum protegentibus saucium: fama tamen occisi falso credita 

exterruit Parthos victoriamque concessere. 
36 (42). Mox Artabanus tota mole regni ultum iit. peritia 
locorum ab Hiberis melius pugnatum ; nec ideo abscedebat, ni 

2. equites tres: text R. 

(G. 3, 31), Horace (Od. 1. 19, 11; 2. 13, 
17), &c. 

distraheret turmas, sc.'suas' ; ‘would 
spread out his squadrons.' 

I. ictibus, ‘ flights of arrows.’ 

quo brevius valent, ‘with which their 
range is shorter’: the phrase does not 
appear to be found elsewhere. "The long 
range of the Parthian archery is spoken of 
by Plutarch (Crass. 24, 558). 

2. contis gladiisque. On the long 
pikes and swords of the Sarmatians, and 
their mode of warfare, see H. 1. 79, 4-6. 
For the abl. Nipp. compares ‘exercitu’ 
4. 44, 3. 

equestris proelii more. Nipp. notes 
that stress is laid on the last word. Both 
the Parthians and Sarmatians were fighting 
on horseback ; sometimes with true cavalry 
tactics ; at other times closing like a line 
of infantry. The Parthians would try to 
use the former mode of attack, the Sar- 
matians the latter. 

frontis et tergi vices, sc. 'essent'; 
‘they would face about and retreat by 
turns’: cp. 'scelerum ac suppliciorum 
vices' H. 4. 27, 4. The whole sentence 
is evidently imitated from Sallust: see 
Introd. v. $ 97, 1. The force of ‘cum’ 
extends to * pellerentur.’ 

3. ut conserta acie » Orelli and Drager 
retain the MS. text. Ern. had read ‘con- 
ferta?; Ritt. brackets the words as a gloss 
on the following: they stand, however, in 
natural contrast to * equestris proelii more,’ 

3. acies: text Heins, 

13. ultioni id: text L. 

and express-the appearance as if the whole 
line were locked together :. cp. Curt. 3. 11, 
4 * conserti et quasi cohaerentes ' ; and the 
description of the phalanx, ‘ vir viro, armis 
arma conserta sunt’ (Id. 3. 4, 13). With 
* conferta,' * ut’ would be superfluous. 

4. iamque et, &c. Now that it became 
& standing fight, these, who were in great 
part foot-soldiers (c. 34, 2), came into 
action, probably attacking the Parthians 
in flank, while the Sarmatians held them 
in front. 

5. detrudere, sc. * ex equis. 

ancipitem : cp. ‘anceps cura’ 2. 40, I, 
‘anceps malum’ Agr. 26, 3. Here it is 
explained by the following words. 

6. super, ‘from above’: cp. * implen- 
turque super puppes’ Verg. Aen. 5, 697, 
‘ super e totis emisit collibus agmen’ Luc. 
6, 291. 

8. gnari: cp. 1. 5, 4, &c. 

clamore telis equis. The asyndeta 
form a climax, as in 2. 17, 5, &c. 

Io. praelatus, for ‘ praeterlatus,' as .in 

Liv. 3. 14, 7; 7. 24, 8, &c.: see note on 

» 5 ! 
I3. Mox; probably in the following 
year: see c. 38, I. : 
tota mole regni: cp. ‘tota mole belli’ 
H. 1. 61, 3; *toto certatum est corpore 
regni Verg. Aen. 11, 313. 
ultum iit: cp. 4. 73, 6. 

peritia locorum : causal abl. They 

had been a year in Armenia. 

A. D. 35.] 

LIBER VI. CAP. 35 (41)-37 (43). 

639 

contractis legionibus Vitellius et subdito rumore, tamquam Meso- 

2 potamiam invasurus, metum Romani belli fecisset. 

tum omissa 

Armenia versaeque Artabani res, inliciente Vitellio desererent 

3 regem saevum in pace et adversis proeliorum exitiosum. 
Sinnaces, quem antea infensum memoravi, patrem Abdagaesen 5 

igitur 

aliosque occultos consilii et tunc continuis cladibus promptiores 
ad defectionem trahit, adfluentibus paulatim qui metu magis 
quam benevolentia subiecti repertis auctoribus sustulerant ani- 
4 mum. nec iam aliud Artabano reliquum quam si qui externorum 
corpori custodes aderant, suis quisque sedibus extorres, quis 
neque boni intellectus neque mali cura, sed mercede aluntur 

5 ministri sceleribus. 

his adsumptis in longinqua et contermina 

Scythiae fugam maturavit, spe auxilii, quia Hyrcanis Carma- 
niisque per adfinitatem innexus erat : atque interim posse Parthos 
absentium aequos, praesentibus mobiles, ad paenitentiam mutari. 

37 (43). At Vitellius profugo Artabano et flexis ad novum re- 
gem popularium animis, hortatus Tiridaten parata capessere, robur 
2 legionum sociorumque ripam ad Euphratis ducit. sacrificantibus, 

6. consilit: consulit Pich., text Faern. 

I. tamquam, used, like às, with a fut. 
participle in 12. 49, 2; H. 4. 19, 3; Dial. 
2, 2; also with other participles: Introd. 

v. $ 67; Drager, Synt. und Stil, $ 215. 

3. inliciente. Josephus states (Ant. 
18. 4, 4) that Vitellius won them by bribes. 

5. memoravi, c. 31, 3 

6. occultos consilii: ‘ occultus! takes 
such a gen. of reference in 4. 7, I; cp. 
“ambiguus consilii H. 2. 83, 2; 4. 31, 1. 
These men had meditated revolt, but had 
kept their plans secret. 

8. sustulerant animum, ‘had plucked 
up courage’: cp. H. 3. 45» 15 4. 54 2. 

IO. corpori custodes, ' bodyguards ' : 

* custos ' is used with a similar dative in 
I. 24, 35; 3. 14, 7. 'Ministri, below, 
takes a similar dative, as in 15. 28, 4: 
H. 1. 88, 2, &c. 

11, intellectus: cp. *dissimulato in- 
tellectu ' 13. 38, 4; * intellectum Spine 
rei... amisit' Sen. de Ben. 3. 17, 2 

I 3. ‘Soythiae. The Scythians east of 
the Caspian are meant. Th. Hyrcanians 
at the south-east angle of that sea were 
probably a Scythian race, and next to 
them were the Dahae, among whom 
Artabanus had grown up (2. 3, I). . 

». Carmaniis. This people lay on the 

south-east of the empire, between the 
desert of Kirman and the entrance of the 
Persian Gulf. Strabo (15. 2, 14, 727) 
quotes Nearchus as saying that they 
resembled the Medes and Persians in 
customs and language. 

14. per adfinitatem innexus. The 
same phrase is found in H. 4. 68, a. 
Artabanus was himself of mixed blood 
(c. 42, 4), and had probably taken wives 
from these races. 

posse, depending on ' spe.’ 

I5. absentium aequos, ‘ fair-minded 
in relation to the absent.’ No such geni- 
tive appears to be elsewhere found with 
* aequus '; nor.are those noted in Introd. 
v. 33 e, strictly parallel to it. It may 
possibly be an imitation of the Greek 
genitive with a word expressing desire or 
affection. 

praesentibus mobiles. Such a dative 
is used with * mitis (12. ao, 1), * arrogans! 
(11. 21, 4), * incuriosus' (14. 38, 3), &c.: 
see Drager, Synt. und Stil, § 55. 

17. hortatus, with inf. five times in 
the Annals, elsewhere rarely and almost 
wholly in poets. 

18. ripam ad. On the anastrophe cp. 
3. 72, 2, &c. 

La] 

5 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 788. 

640 

cum hic more Romano suovetaurilia daret, ille equum placando 
amni adornasset, nuntiavere accolae Euphraten nulla imbrium vi 
sponte et inmensum attolli, simul albentibus spumis in modum 
diadematis sinuare orbes, auspicium prosperi transgressus. qui- 8 
5 dam callidius interpretabantur, initia conatus secunda neque 
diuturna, quia eorum, quae terra caelove portenderentur, certior 
fides, fluminum instabilis natura simul ostenderet omina raperet- 
que. sed ponte navibus effecto tramissoque exercitu primus 4 
Ornospades multis equitum milibus in castra venit, exul quon- 
10 dam et Tiberio, cum Delmaticum bellum conficeret, haud 
inglorius auxiliator eoque civitate Romana donatus, mox repetita 
amicitia regis multo apud eum honore, praefectus campis qui 
Euphrate et Tigre inclutis amnibus circumflui Mesopotamiae 
nomen acceperunt. neque multo post Sinnaces auget copias, et 5 
15 columen partium Abdagaeses gazam et paratus regios adicit. 
Vitellius ostentasse Romana arma satis ratus monet Tiridaten 6 
primoresque, hunc, Phraatis avi et altoris Caesaris quaeque utro- 

17. ut: et R, ut Phra-.. ut altoris Ritt. — quae: quaeque Neue. — utrubique: 

text B. 

I. suovetaurilia; as the 'piaculum 
Marti’ (Liv. 8. 10, 14; Cato. R. R. 141). 

placando amni. This applies only 
to ‘ille...adornasset’; though a Roman 
offering of 3afSarnpa to the Euphrates 
is mentioned in Plut. Lucull. 24, 507. 
The horse was the chief Persian sacrifice, 
and was offered to the Sun (Xen. Anab. 
4. 5, 35; Just. 1. 10). The reverence 
paid by this people to rivers is mentioned 
by Hdt. (1. 138) and Justin (41. 3, 6). 
| 8. in modum diadematis. The ori- 
ginal form of the diadem is that of a 
white band tied in a bow behind, as 
represented on the heads of Dionysus and 
other deities. By Eastern kings, it would 
be worn as an addition to the ‘tiara’: 
see on 3. 56, 3. 

5. neque, ‘yet not’: cp. 4. 21, 4j 
Agr. 8, 3; Liv. 3. 55, 1, &c. 

6. terra caelove: cp. H. 1. 3, 2 ‘caelo 
terraque prodigia, The same ablatives 
are found in Curt. 4. 7, 6, and seem taken 
from Sall. Jug. 17, 5; the usage being 
an extension of the expression *terra 
marique': see Introd. v. $ 25. . 

8. ponte navibus effecto. The 
Romans appear not to have kept up at 
this time a permanent bridge over the 
Euphrates, but to have had means at 

hand to construct one (see I5. 9, 1, and 
note). The place was no doubt that most 

usugl, at Zeugma, opposite to Apamea 

(12. 12, 3; Plin. N. H. 5. 24, 21, 86, 
&c.). : 

9. multis... milibus. a bold use of 
the abl. of manner, or perhaps of quality: 
see 15. 29, 4; Introd. v. §§ 28, 29. 

10. Delmaticum bellum, 759-762, 
A.D. 6-9: see Introd. viii. p. 134. 

I1. auxiliator, here alone in Tacitus; 
a rare form found in Petron. 89; Quin- 
tilian, Statius, and the Vulgate. 

I3. Tigre: the more usual abl. is 
* Tigri, as in 12. 13, 1 ; Verg. Aen. Io, 
166, &c. 

ciroumflui, here alone in Tacitus; 
a poetical word, used also, more rarely, 
in an active sense. 

I5. columen, taken by Nipp. as a 
metaphor from the ‘crown’ of an edifice: 
cp. ‘ victoriae columen’ H. 2. 28, 3, ‘Mem- 
phim ... Aegypti columen’ Id. 4. 84, 6, 
* columen amicorum Antonii' Cic. Phil. 
I3. 12, 36: others take the figure to mean 
‘the pillar of the cause. Cp. ‘specimen 
partium ' H. 3. 66. 4. 

I7. Phraatis avi: see on c. 32, 5. 

quaequos utrobique pulchra, ‘to 
remember all the noble qualities in 

A.D. 35.] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 37 (43), 38 (44). 

bique pulchra meminerit, illos, obsequium in regem, reverentiam 
in nos, decus quisque suum et fidem retinerent. exim cum 
legionibus in Suriam remeavit. 

38 (44). Quae duabus aestatibus gesta coniunxi, quo requie- 
sceret animus a domesticis malis ; non enim Tiberium, quamquam 
triennio post caedem Seiani, quae ceteros mollire solent, tempus 
preces satias mitigabant, quin incerta vel abolita pro gravissimis 

2 et recentibus puniret. eo metu Fulcinius Trio, ingruentis accusa- 
tores haud perpessus, supremis tabulis multa et atrocia in Macro- 
nem ac praecipuos libertorum Caesaris conposuit, ipsi fluxam senio 

8 mentem et continuo abscessu velut exilium obiectando. quae 
ab heredibus occultata recitari Tiberius iussit, patientiam liber- 
tatis alienae ostentans et contemptor suae infamiae, an scelerum 
Seiani diu nescius mox quoquo modo dicta vulgari malebat 
veritatisque, cui adulatio officit, per probra saltem gnarus fieri. 

4 isdem diebus Granius Marcianus senator, a C. Graccho maiestatis 
postulatus, vim vitae suae attulit, Tariusque Gratianus praetura 
functus lege eadem extremum ad supplicium dainnatus. 

641 

18, est ins. Ritt., damnatur Sirker. 

* 

either.” The loss of ‘que’ after ‘quae’ 
is rendered probable by the similar ending 
of the next word; but some retain the 
MS. text. 

4. duabus aestatibus: see on c. 36, I. 

The account of the events of the second. 

year, broken off here at the point where 
Roman intervention ceased, is resumed in 
C. 4I. 

quo requiesceret, &c. The digres- 
sions in c. 16; 22; 28, appear to be intro- 
duced with a similar object. For other 
instances see Introd. iv. p. 27, notes 1, 3. 

6. triennio. The real interval was 
rather more; Seianus having been exe- 
cuted on Oct. 18 (c. 25, 5), 784, A.D. 31. 

7. satias : 
here form a climax (see Introd. v. § 65). 

8. eo metu, &c. This sentence con- 
tains.a zeugma, by which the idea of com- 
mitting suicide is supplied from * haud 
perpessus ' (cp. 4. 50, 4) ; to which ‘con- 
posuit,’ though grammatically the prin- 
cipal verb in the sentence. is subordinate 
in sense, like a clause in abl. abs. 

Fulcinius Trio: see on c. 4, 2 

9. supremis tabulis. This ‘testa- 
mentorum licentia' had been indulged 
under Augustus, who prohibited any en- 
actment against it (Suet. Aug. 56). 

VOL. I. 

cp. 3. 30, 7. The asyndeta - 

10. praecipuos libertorum. Some of 
the freedmen of Tiberius are known to 
have been rich and prosperous; but it 
seems to be only at the close of his life 
that we hear of them as influential : see 

| 4. 6, 7; Introd. vii. p. 105, n 

fluxam: cp. 3. 50, 5; m * de- 
cayed,’ as ‘ fluxa auctoritas" H. I. 21, 43 
* fides ' Id. 2. 75, 2, &c. 

11. continuo abscessu. The abl. 
appears to be causal, similar to ‘potentia’ 
(4. 43, 4), &c., here explanatory of ‘ velut 
exilium, The use of ‘abscessus’. for. 
* absentia," noted by Drager as found here 
only, appears perhaps also in 4. 57, 2 

12. recitari iussit. Besides the famous 
publication of the last words of Drusus 
(c. 24, 17, Dio (58. 25, 3) alludes to other 
cases in which Tiberius thus acted. Suet. 
(Tib. 61) represents his practice in this 
respect as variable. 

I6. senator: see on I. 75, 3. 

C. Graccho: see on c. 16, 5; 

17. Tarius Gratianus. 
him son of L. Tarius Rufus, cos. suff. in 
738, B.C. 16 (C. I. L. i. pp. 466, 467), and 
‘curator aquarum’ in 776, 777, A. D. 23, 
24 (Frontin. de Aq. 102), noted by Plin. 
(N. H. 18. 6; 7, 37) as having risen from 

4.13, 3. 

. low origin by military service to rank and 
Tt 

Nipp. thinks. 

642 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 789. 

39 (45). Nec dispares Trebelleni Rufi et Sextii Paconiani 
exitus: nam Trebellenus sua manu cecidit, Paconianus in carcere 

ob carmina illic in principem factitata strangulatus est. 

haec 2 

Tiberius non mari, ut olim, divisus neque per longinquos nuntios 
5 accipiebat, sed urbem iuxta, eodem ut die vel noctis interiectu 
litteris consulum rescriberet, quasi aspiciens undantem per domos 
sanguinem aut manus carnificum. fine anni Poppaeus Sabinus 8- 
concessit vita, modicus originis, principum amicitia consulatum 
ac triumphale decus adeptus maximisque provinciis per quattuor 
10 et viginti annos inpositus, nullam ob eximiam artem, sed quod 

par negotiis neque supra erat. 

40 (46). Q. Plautius Sex. Papinius consules sequuntur. eo 
anno neque quod L. Aruseius ... morte adfecti forent, adsuetu- 
dine malorum ut atrox advertebatur, sed exterruit quod Vibulenus 
15 Agrippa eques Romanus, cum perorassent accusatores, in ipsa 
curia depromptum sinu venenum hausit, prolapsusque ac mori- 

I. trebellieni and trebellienus: see on 2. 67, 4. 

13. no lacuna in MS. 

wealth, and by Sen. (de Cl. 1. 15, 2), as 
having exiled a son by * patria potestas ' 
for attempted parricide. 

damnatus. The ellipse of ‘est’ is 
: somewhat harsh, as the natural meaning 
would be that ‘vim vitae suae attulit " is 
to be again supplied, which is evidently 
not intended (cp. c. 39, 1). For the 
expression cp. ‘damnari ad mortem’ 
16. 21, 2; ‘ad metalla, ad munitiones 
viarum, ad bestias" Suet. Cal. 27; ‘ad 
opus’ Id. Ner. 31; also *summum sup- 
plicium’ c. 3, 5. 

I. Nec dispares: their deaths corre- 
sponded to the two just mentioned : cp. 
4. 14, 3, &c. On Trebellenus Rufus see 
2. 67, 4; on Sextius Paconianus, c. 3, 4. 

3. carmina. It is thought (see Nipp.) 
that some of his verses are preserved in 
Diomedes 498. 

4. longinquos, ‘from afar’: cp. 
*longinqua vulnera, Luc. 3, 568. 

5. urbem iuxta. Dio (58. 25, 2) 
states that he was at this time celebrating 
the marriage of Gaius at Antium : see on 
C. 20, I. 

interiectu: cp. 3. 51, 4; 67, 4. 

6. undantem ... sanguinem. The 
rhetorical extravagance of the expression 
may be compared with that in c. 19, 3. 
* Per domos" distinguishes the suicides at 
home from the executions in prison. 

12. quintius: Quintus R. 

". manus, ‘the work’: cp. 1. 61, 3. 

Poppaeus Sabinus: see on 1. 80, 1; 
where it is noted that he must have been 
appointed to Moesia in 764, A.D. 11; 
and the question of his continued tenure 
of this province, as well as of Macedonia 
and Achaia, is discussed. 

II. neque supra; without the ‘ emi- 
nentes virtutes’ which could be dangerous 
(1. 80, 3). 

12. Q. Plautius Sex. Papinius. On 
the family connexions of the former see 
note on 4. 22, 3. The full name of the 
latter is given as *Sex. Papinius, Q. f. 
Allenius, in an inscription (C. I. L. v. 
2823) which shows him to have filled the 
usual magistracies in succession, and to 
have been * quindecimvir sacris faciundis.' 
Another inscr. (see Nipp.) shows him to 
hàve been praet. peregr. in 780, A.D. 27. 

13. neque quod, &c. The lacuna here 
is noted by Doed. If Aruseius is the 
person mentioned in c. 7, I, we may 
suppose that what seemed nothing un- 
usual was that some favour, perhaps 
restoration from exile, was granted to 
him, and that some others were put to 
death: ‘neque quod’ would have been 
again repeated with their names, 

14. &dvertebatur: cp. 4. 54, 2. 

16. depromptum ; so used with simple 
abl. in H. 4. 22, 4; as is also ‘ promptus' 

A. D. 36.) LIBER VI. CAP. 39 (45)-41 (47). 

643 

bundus festinatis lictorum manibus in carcerem raptus est, fau- 
23 cesque iam exanimis laqueo vexatae. ne Tigranes quidem, 
Armenia quondam potitus ac tunc reus, nomine regio supplicia 
3 civium effugit. at C. Galba consularis et duo Blaesi voluntario 
exitu cecidere, Galba tristibus Caesaris litteris provinciam sortiri 
prohibitus: Blaesis sacerdotia, integra eorum domo destinata, 
convulsa distulerat, tunc ut vacua contulit in alios, quod signum 
4 mortis intellexere et exsecuti sunt. et Aemilia Lepida, quam 
iuveni Druso nuptam rettuli, crebris criminibus maritum insectata, 
quamquam intestabilis, tamen impunita agebat, dum superfuit 
pater Lepidus : post a delatoribus corripitur ob servum adulterum, 
nec dubitabatur de flagitio: ergo omissa defensione finem vitae 

sibi posuit. 
41 (47). Per idem tempus Cietarum natio Cappadoci Archelao 

3. positus: text B. 4. blaesii: text Aurelius and Freinsh. 14. Citarum 

Lond 

margin and B, Clitarum L and all edd. since. 

in 15. 54, 1, and both in Verg., Hor., &c. 
Dio (58. 21, 4), who places this incident 
three years earlier, states that he took the 
poison from a ring, and omits mention of 
the subsequent strangulation. 

I. festinatis: cp. 1. 52, I, &c. 

2. laqueo vexatae: he was' strangled 
in the * Tullianum’; so as, by the form 
of judicial execution, to do away with 
the ‘ pretium festinandi’ (c. 29, 2). 

Tigranes: see note on 2. 4, 3; Momms. 
R. G. D. A. p. 116. Josephus (Ant. 18. 
&, 4), after mentioning his descent from 
Herod, says inaccurately, Tuypávgs piv 
BaciAeUor 'Apuevías xarnyopiav abToU evi 
'Pápgs *vyevouévov amas éreAe?ra. Even 
the ‘quondam potitus’ of Tacitus is 
perhaps an overstatement, as it is doubt- 
ful whether he was ever received as king 
by his subjects. 

4. C. Galba: see on 3. 52, 1. He was 
already living in poverty and retirement, 
apparently the result of extravagance : 
*attritis facultatibus urbe cessit' (Suet. 
Galb. 3); so that there may have been good 
reason for his exclusion. The province 
would be Asia or Africa (see on 3. 32, 2). 

duo Blaesi. These appear to be sons 
of the well-known Blaesus (see 3. 35. 2, 
&c.), and the *consobrini consulares! 
(Vell. 2. 127, 3) of Seianus. An insctip- 
tion (C. I. L. vi. 10293) records Q. Iunius 
Blaesus as cos. suff. with L. Antistius 
Vetus probably in 781, A.D. 28. One of 
them is probably mentioned in I. 19, 4; 

and the son of one of them in H. 1. 59, 4. 

6. integra...domo, used in 1. 3, 1, of 
a house that had heirs, here of one that 
had a head. The house had been ‘con- 
vulsa’ (‘shaken to its foundations’: see 
note on 4. 40, 4) by the father’s death 
(see on 5. 7, 2). 

7. distulerat, ‘had held vacant.’ 

signum: cp. 'indicium mortis’ (c. 
30, 5): with ‘exsecuti sunt’ Ruperti 
and others supply ‘mortem’ (cp. * exse- 
qui caedem" 11. 37, 3); but it is perhaps 
better to take it to mean ‘obeyed’; the 
* signum ' being an implied command; so 
* exsequi sententiam ' H. 4. 76, 6. 

9. rettuli, in the lost portion. The 
intrigue of Seianus with her against her 
husband is mentioned by Dio (58. 3, 8*. 

10. intestabilis, ‘detestable’: cp. c. 51, 
6, &c.: so in Sall. Jug. 67, 3; Hor. Sat. 
2. 3, 181 ; Liv. 37. 57, 15. 

Ir. pater Lepidus. An inscription 
(Orell. 639; wheie it is wrongly referred 
to the Lepida of 3. 22: cp. C. I. L. v. 
592) runs as follows: * Pudens M. Lepidi 
l(übertus) grammaticus. Procurator eram 
Lepidae moresque regebam : dum vixi, 
mansit Caesaris illa nurus' (for * pronu- 
rus’ as in 4. 12, 6). This appears to 
show that her father was Marcus Lepidus 
(see on 3. 32, 2), who may be supposed 
to have died at this time; Manius Lepidus 
having died jhree years before (see c. 
27, 4). 

a Cietarum. There can be no doubt 

Tt2 

644 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 789. 

subiecta, quia nostrum in modum deferre census, pati tributa 
adigebatur, in iuga Tauri montis abscessit locorumque ingenio 
sese contra imbelles regis copias tutabatur, donec M. Trebellius 
legatus, a Vitellio praeside Suriae cum quattuor milibus legio- 
s5nariorum et delectis auxiliis missus, duos collis, quos barbari 
insederant (minori Cadra, alteri Davara nomen est), operibus 
circumdedit et erumpere ausos ferro, ceteros siti ad deditionem 

. coegit. 

At Tiridates volentibus Parthis Nicephorium et Anthemusiada 2 
10 ceterasque urbes, quae Macedonibus sitae Graeca vocabula 
usurpant, Halumque et Artemitam Parthica oppida recepit, 

Io. a Macedonibus Faern ; cp. 3. 38, 6. 

that these are the *agrestium Cilicum 
nationes, quibus Clitarum cognomentum ' 
of 12. 55, 1; but it has been unfortunately 
assumed ever since Lipsius that the name 
is there correctly given, and this MS. text 
* cietarum ' has been altered accordingly. 
But no people called ‘Clitae’ are other- 
wise known; whereas the name KIHTON 
is found on coins of the Antiochus of 12. 
55, 3, and on the base of a statue of 
Hadrian at Athens (see Ad. Wilhelm, in 
Archaeol.-Epig. Mittheil. xvii. 1894, pp. 
1-6); and such a local name as Karis 
would be only another form of the Kyris 
of Ptol. 5. 8, 3, comprising considerable 
part of western Cilicia (see Ramsay, Hist. 
‘Geog. of Asia Minor, p. 363). This part 
of the dominion of the old king Archelaus 
(see on 2. 42, 2) was allowed to remain to 
. his son, the king here mentioned, when 
Cappadocia became a province. Gaius 
transferred this district to Antiochus IV. 
king of Commagene (Dio, 59. 8, 2), in 
whose family it continued till the time 
of Vespasian: see on 12. 55, 3; also 
Marquardt, i. p. 386. 

I. nostrum in modum, ‘after Roman 
fashion.’ Provincial subjects had to give 
returns of their property (* deferre census’) 
probably every five years (see Marquardt, 
li. p. 244) and paid ‘tributum’ by various 
modes of assessment (Id. p. 197, foll.). 
The expression here seems to show, as 
Schürer points.out (Gesch. des Iud. Volkes, 
i. p. 439), that this was not an imposition 
by the Romans of a census and tribute on 
the kingdom of a ‘rex socius, but an 
attempt by the king to organize his system 
of taxation on the Roman model. The 
rebellion is against him; his Roman pro- 
' tectors only intervening by reason of bis 

weakness. Marquardt's view (ii. 213), 
that this people now formed part of the 
province of Cappadocia, seems contrary 
to the general sense of this passage; and 
the coins above cited would show that 
they belonged to the client kingdom at 

-a later date. 

2. ingenio=‘ natura’; so used of the 
qualities of things in 12. 30, 4; 16. ao, 1, 
&c. (see note on 3. 26, 2) ; also in Sall. 
(H. 3. 18 D, 17 K, 87 G) ; Liv. (2. 30, 4; 
28. 12, 11, &c.), &c. 

3. M. Trebellius. Nipp. notes that 
he may have been father of the person 
mentioned in 14. 46, 2; also that a P. 
Trebellius was praet. urb. in 783, A.D. 
30 (Bull. Arch. 1869, p. 123). 

4. praeside Suriae. On the use of 
this term for a góvernor see on 12. 45, 6. 
Cilicia belonged to the province of Syria 
(see on 2. 78, 5, &c.). 

7. ferro, ‘by force of arms’; con- 
trasted with *fames' in H. 4. 323, 6; 
59) 5. 

9. At Tiridates. 
resumed from the end of c. 37. It will 
be seen, from the order in which places 
are mentioned, that the geography of 
his route has not been clearly conceived. 

Nicephorium et Anthemusiada, 
If the crossing was effected at Zeugma 
(see on c. 37, 4), Anthemusias, situate 
near Edessa, would come first on the 
route. Nicephorium lies further south, 
close to the other principal place of cross- 
ing the Euphrates at Thapsacus. These 
and several other Greek cities in Meso- 
potamia are mentioned in Pl. N. H. 5. 
24, 86; 6. 26, 117. On the dative * Ma- 
cedonibus ' see Introd. v. § 18. 

1I. Halum et Artemitam.  Halus is 

This narrative is 

A. D. 36.) 

LIBER VI. CAP. 4x (47), 42 (48). 

645 

certantibus gaudio qui Artabanum Scythas inter eductum ob 
saevitiam exsecrati come Tiridatis ingenium Romanas per artes 

sperabant. 

42 (48) Plurimum adulationis Seleucenses induere, civitas 
potens, saepta muris neque in barbarum corrupta, sed conditoris 5 
Seleuci retinens. trecenti opibus aut sapientia delecti ut senatus, 

2 sua populo vis. 

et quotiens concordes agunt, spernitur Parthus: 

ubi dissensere, dum sibi quisque contra aemulos subsidium 
3 vocant, accitus in partem adversum omnes valescit. .id nuper 
acciderat Artabano regnante, qui plebem primoribus tradidit ex 
suo usu: nam populi imperium iuxta libertatem, paucorum 
4 dominatio regiae libidini propior est. tum adventantem Tirida- 
ten extollunt veterum regum honoribus et quos recens aetas 
largius invenit; simul probra in Artabanum fundebant, materna 
5 origine Arsaciden, cetera degenerem. Tiridates rem Seleucensem 

7. spernuntur: text R, spernuntur Parthi sed Weissenb., spernunt Parthum Ritt. 

otherwise unknown, but was probably 
near Artemita, which Pliny (1. 1.) wrongly 
places in Mesopotamia, but which was 
really beyond the Tigris, five hundred 
stadia east (or rather north-east) of Se- 
leuceia (Strab. 16. 1, 17, 744). 

I. Scythas, the Dahae (2. 3, 1). 

3. sperabant: cp. 2. 56,4. 

4. Beleucenses. Seleuceia on the Ti- 
gris, thus distinguished from other cities 
of the name, was situate three hundred 
stadia N. E. of Babylon (Strab. 16. 1, 5, 
738), a little below the modern Bagdad. 
Strabo speaks of it (16. 2, 5, 750) as even 
larger than Antioch in Syria, and Pliny 
(N. H. 6. 26, 30, 122) estimates its 
population at 600,000. 

5. in barbarum corrupta = els 7d 
BapBapuóv S:epOappévyn. Isoc. (Evag. 20, 
198 c) has wéAts ixBeBapBapouéyn: ‘in 
barbarum ' is thus substantively used in 
H. 5. 2, 1. 

6. Seleuci, Seleucus Nicator, who 

founded it a little before B.C. 300. It. 

was the capital of the empire for a short 
time, until it was superseded by Antioch. 
retinens, with genitive, as in 2. 38, 
9; 5. II, 2. . 
opibus aut sapientia. Nipp. com- 
pares Cic. de Fin. 1. 13, 42 ‘ gubernatoris 
ars utilitate non arte laudatur, and Id. 
2. 26, 83 ‘si fructibus et emolumentis 
et utilitatibus amicitias colemus, and 

classes such ablatives with those used 
after verbs of valuing, &c., to express the 
standard; as ‘non numero iudicantur, sed 
pondere' (Madv. 254, obs. 5). It is per- 
haps better to take them as causal, equi- 
valent to accusatives with * propter.' 

7. su& populo vis: the senate may 
have been chosen by popular election. 

9. valescit: cp. 2. 39, 5. 

IO. ex suo usu: see 4. 5, 6, and note. 

1I. iuxta libertatem =‘ prope abest a 
libertate ': * iuxta' thus answers to ‘ pro- 
pior' in G. 30, 3 ‘velocitas iuxta for- 
midinem, cunctatio propior constantiae ’: 
cp. Introd. v. $ 61. In saying that demo- 
cracy is next door to freedom, he means 
that it is the government under which the 
individual.is subject to the least coercion 
at home, and thus least likely to submit 
to the interference of a foreign despot. 

12. regiae libidini propior. Thucy- 
dides (3. 62, 4) makes the Thebans ex- 
cuse their submission to the Persians 
by saying that they were then under a 
duvagreia dAlyov dvipwy, a government 
éyyurdarw tupavvov. On the idea of ‘ regia 
libido’ see c. 1, 2. - 

15. cetera degenerem: see note on 2. 
3. I. * Degener' is thus used of low birth 
in 12. 51, 5; 62, 1; Liv. 38. 17,9; Pl. 
N. H., &c. The word appears first in 
Vergil, but has more commonly a moral 
significance. 

o 

ond 
ay 

646 

populo permittit. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 789. 

. mox consultans, quonam die sollemnia regni 

capesseret, litteras Phraatis et Hieronis, qui validissimas prae- 
fecturas optinebant, accipit, brevem moram precantium.  placi- 6 
tumque opperiri viros praepollentis, atque interim Ctesiphon 
5sedes imperii petita: sed ubi diem ex die prolatabant, multis 
coram et adprobantibus Surena patrio more Tiridaten insigni 

regio evinxit. 

43 (49). Ac si statim interiora ceterasque nationes petivisset, 
oppressa cunctantium dubitatio et omnes in unum cedebant : 
10 adsidendo castellum, in quod pecuniam et paelices Artabanus 

contulerat, dedit spatium exuendi pacta. 

nam Phraates et 2 

Hiero et si qui alii delectum capiendo diademati diem haut 
concelebraverant, pars metu, quidam invidia in Abdagaesen, qui 
tum aula et novo rege potiebatur, ad Artabanum vertere; isque 3 
in Hyrcanis repertus est, inluvie obsitus et alimenta arcu ex- 

pediens. 

6. tiridan : text B. 

I. sollemnia regni: cp. 'sollemnia 
pietatis" Agr. 7, 2. | 

2. praefecturas. On these provinces 
of the Parthian empire, answering to the 
old Persian satrapies, see on 1t. 8, 4. 

4. Ctesiphon. 
Seleuceia on the opposite bank of the 
Tigris, on the site now called Al Madain, 

was in existence at least as early as B.C... 
220 (Polyb. 5. 45, 4), and gradually in- | 

creased in importance under the Parthian 
and Sassanian empires. In Strabo's time 
(16. 1, 16, 743) it is called «dm peyáA, 
and is only the winter residence of the 
kings In the time of Pliny (N. H. 6. 26, 
30, 122) it had not succeeded in drawing 
away the population from Seleuceia, with 
which object he believes it to have been 
founded, and wbich appears to have been 
attained in the second century A.D. 

5. diem ex die prolatabant. Nipp. 
compares ‘diem ex die ducere Haedui" 
(Caes. B. G. 1. 16, 3), and ‘dies prola- 
tando ' (Sall. Cat. 43, 3). 

6. coram. This and ‘adprobantibus ° 
are best taken as praedicates, as ‘ palam" 
(1r. 22, 1), ‘contra’ (Agr. 1o, 2), &c. 

. Surena, the official title of the com- 
mander-in chief of the armies, the next 
‘personage to the king. It appears that 
the office was hereditary and the name 
that of a family, borne in addition to a 

9. dubitatione omnes Freinsh. 

This city, fronting 

ac primo tamquam dolus pararetur territus, ubi data 

12. haci: haut Pich. 

personal name, like that of Arsaces by 
the kings. 

insigni regio: cp. c. 37,2; 2. 56, 3, &c. 

7. evinxit, used in a similar passage 
(15. 2, 5), and, in the participle, in 11. 4, 
3; H. 4. 53, 2; otherwise only in poets 
(Verg., &c.). 

8. interiora, the provinces east of the 
Tigris: see note on 2. 24, 5. 

9. oppressa, sc. ‘erat.’ Nipp. notes 
that here, a$ in 13. 15, 4, the omission of 
the imperfect is made less harsh by the 
similarly related imperfect following. For 
other omissions of the verb * esse ' see In- 
trod. v. $ 39. On the use of the indic. to 
express probability see Id. $ 50 b. For 
the phrase *cedere in aliquem" cp. 1. I, 
15 2.23. 3. 

10. adsidendo, * by blockading,' with- 
out a vigorous assault. For the accus. 
with this verb cp. 4. 58, 4. 

II. Phraates et Hiero, c. 42, 5. 

12. haut concelebraverant, ‘had not 
joined in celebrating’: cp. Plaut. Pseud. 
I. 2, 33 ‘decet eum (diem) omnes vos 
concelebrare. No other instance of.the 
word is found in Tacitus. 

13. Abdagaesen : see c. 36, 3; 37, 5- 

15. in Hyrcanis: see c. 36, 5. 

inluvie obsitus: cp. 4. 28, 2. 

expediens, ' supplying: cp. ‘ consilia 
expedire' H. 2. 52, 2; 3. 73, 1, &c. 

A. D. 36.] LIBER VI. CAP. 42 (48)-44 (50). 647 

fides reddendae dominationi venisse, adlevatur animum et quae 

4 repentina mutatio exquirit. tum Hiero pueritiam Tiridatis in- 
crepat, neque penes Arsaciden imperium, sed inane nomen apud 
inbellem externa mollitia, vim in Abdagaesis domo. 

44 (50). Sensit vetus regnandi falsos in amore odia non fingere. 
nec ultra moratus, quam dum Scytharum auxilia conciret, pergit 
properus et praeveniens inimicorum astus, amicorum paeniten- 
tiam; neque exuerat paedorem, ut vulgum miseratione adver- 

2 teret. non fraus, non preces, nihil omissum quo ambiguos 
3 inliceret, prompti firmarentur. iamque multa manu propinqua 
Seleuciae adventabat, cum Tiridates simul fama atque ipso 
Artabano perculsus distrahi consiliis, iret contra an bellum cunc- 
4 tatione tractaret. quibus proelium et festinati casus placebant, 
disiectos et longinquitate itineris fessos ne animo quidem satis 
ad obsequium coaluisse disserunt, proditores nuper hostesque 
5 eius, quem rursum foveant. verum Abdagaeses regrediendum 
in Mesopotamiam censebat, ut amne obiecto, Armeniis interim 
Elymaeisque et ceteris a tergo excitis, aucti copiis socialibus et 

4. inbellum (corr. in old hand inbellem) : 
Io. propinquans Madvig, propinquus Ritt. 

cussus: text R 

I. reddendae dominationi venisse: 
see Introd. v. § 22 b. 

4. inbellem. This old correction is 
best suited to * externa mollitia, the soft- 
ness of his Roman training (cp. 2. 2, 5), 
and is supported by ' inbellis aetas" (13. 
54, 2, &c.), ‘sexus’ (14. 33, 4), &c. 

5. vetus regnandi: cp. c. 12, 2 

falsos in amore, &c., i.e. that their 
hatred of Tiridates and Abdagaeses was 
sincere if their affection for himself was 
feigned. 

. Scytharum, of Dahae and Sacae, 
according to Josephus (Ant. 18. 4, 4). 

7. paenitentiam, any inclination to 
a new defection from him. 

8. paedorem, referring to his condition 
as * inluvie obsitus ' (c. 43, 3) The word, 
used only here by Tacitus, is previously 
rare, and (except in Cic. Tusc. 3. 26, 62) 

poetical. 
adverteret: cp. I. 4t, I. 
10. inliceret ... firmarentur. The 

change from active to passive is merely 
for variety (see Introd v. $ 91). 
propinqua; so generally read. ‘ Ro- 
mam adventabant’ is used by Sall. (Jug. 
28, 2), * pagos adventans' by Amm. (14. 

inbecillum Ritt. 6. tum : dum R. 
I1. aduentabant: text B. I2. per- 

Io, 11), and such an accus. agrees with 
the general usage of Tacitus (Introd. v. 
$ 12 c): on the other hand he always 
elsewhere uses this verb absolutely (as in 
C. 42, 4, &c.) or with dat. (c. 33, 5); and 
we should rather have expected such an 
expression as *Seleuciam propinquabat ’ 
(cp. 12. 13, 1) than the text. 

II. fama atque ipso,. ‘the news and 
the presence’; so ‘ praemisso . . legato 
atque ipse . . . subegit ' (14. 26, 1). Nipp. 
notes instances in which such an abl. is 
used without a preposition, where not 
strictly a person, but the fact of the pre- 
sence of a person, is meant ; as * repentinis 

hostibus circumventi ' (15. 4, 4). 

I2. distrahi. On the historic inf. with 
a temporal conjunction see Introd. v. 
§ 46 b. 

bellum... tractaret: cp. 1t. 59, 4 

13. festinati casus, ‘a speedy crisis.’ 

14. disieotos: cp. I. 32, 7. 

ne ánimo quidem, ‘not even in will’; 
still less in readiness to act. 

17. amne, the. Tigris, which he had 
crossed to Ctesiphon (c. 42, 6). 

I8. Elymaeis. The best known people 
of this name lived on the coast at the 

om 

o 

CQ 

648 

quas dux Romanus misisset fortunam temptarent. 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[A. U. C. 790. 

valuit, quia plurima auctoritas penes Abdagaesen et Tiridates 

ignavus ad pericula erat. 

sed fugae specie discessum ; ac prin- 7 

cipio a gente Arabum facto ceteri domos abeunt vel in castra 
Artabani, donec Tiridates cum paucis in Suriam revectus pudore 

proditionis omnes exsolvit. 

45 (51). Idem annus gravi igne urbem adfecit, deusta parte 
circi, quae Aventino contigua, ipsoque Aventino; quod damnum 
Caesar ad gloriam. vertit exsolutis domuum et insularum pretiis. 
miliens sestertium in munificentia ea conlocatum, tanto acceptius 2 
in vulgum, quanto modicus privatis aedificationibus ne publice 
quidem nisi: duo opera struxit, templum Augusto et scaenam 

4. agenti: text B. 
in ea, ea in al., text Otto. 

head of the Persian Gulf: Polybius (5. 
44, 9) and Ptolemy (6. 2, 6) also give the 
name to a district or people of Media ; 
neither of which positions could be ‘a 
tergo,’ in the same sense as Armenia. It is 
perhaps possible to take ‘a tergo’ of the 
Elymaeans and other eastern tribes only, 
and to understand that they were to be 
got to harass the rear of Artabanus when 
he should advance against Tiridates ; but 
most probably the geographical position 
of the Elymaei has been misunderstood by 
Tacitus or those whom he followed. 

4. & gente Arabum. Cp. ‘rex Ara- 
bum Acbarus, in 12. 12, 3, where it is 
shown that the * Arabes Orrhoei,’ living 
in and round Edessa in north-western 
Mesopotamia, are meant. 

5. pudore... exsolvit, ‘ deprived 
their des^rtion of its disgrace The words 
are repeated from H. 3.61, 4. The subject 
of the Roman relations with Parthia and 
Armenia is renewed by Tacitus in 11. 8, 1. 
Of the intermediate period it is sufficient 
here to note that Mithridates secured for 
himself the kingdom of Armenia; that 
Artabanus reestablished his authority in 
Parthia and made peace with Vitellius, 
and after experiencing some further vicissi- 
tudes died in possession in 793, A.D. 40 
(see Prof. Gardner, as cited on a. 
from which year some date the revolt of 
Seleuceia, which others take to have begun 
at this time: see II. 9, 6, and note. 

7. Idem annus... adfecit : cp. 4. 
15, I 

deusta parte circi: cp.'deusto monte - 

Caelio" 4. 64, 1. The Circus Maximus 

7. adficit: text Wurm. 

1, 1); 

Io. ea margin and (for in) B, 

lay in the valley between the Palatine and 
Aventine. ‘The great fire of Nero also. 
broke out in it (15. 38, 2); but its chief 
force took the opposite direction, though 
the Aventine quarter was again partially 
destroyed. 

9. domuum et insularum, ‘ mansions 
and blocks of houses’ (cp. 15. 41,13 43, 
3): the former are the palaces of the rich, 
the latter the masses of building let out 
in separate tenements to the poor (Introd. 
vii. p. 103). 

Io. miliens sestertium, the same sum 
as that of the loan (c. 17, 4). This act 
of munificence is ignored by Suetonius: 
see note on 4. 64, 2 

conlocatum, ‘ was bestowed’ ; ; strictly 
used of investments in land, houses, &c. 
(cp. c. 17, 2); but Cic. so says (Phil. 3. 
2, 4) * patrimonium . . . in reipublicae sa- 
lute conlocavit' (correcting himself for - 

* effudit '), 

II. quanto modicus, &c. Nipp. points 
out that * quanto’ is to be taken only with 
*modicus. The bounty was so much the 
more popular, as Tiberius was moderate 
in building for himself, nor had erected 
more than two public buildings. 

publice, not ‘at public cost’ (as H. 4. 
9, 3), but * on behalf of the state,’ as 12. 
10, 3; 53, 3, &c. 

13. duo. Dio (57. 10, 2) speaks cor- 
rectly of the former of these as his only 
new erection, omitting mention of the 
theatre,-as having been only restored (see 
3. 72, 4). Velleids (2. 130, 1) and Suetonius 
(Tib. 47) mention both works. Dio adds 
(1. 1.) that he completed buildings begun 

ea sententia 6 

A. D. 37.] LIBER VI. CAP. 44 (50), 45 (51). 649 

Pompeiani theatri; eaque perfecta, contemptu ambitionis an 
3 per senectutem, haud dedicavit. sed aestimando cuiusque de- 
trimento quattuor progeneri Caesaris, Cn. Domitius, Cassius 
Longinus, M.Vinicius Rubellius Blandus delecti additusque nomi- 
4 natione consulum P. Petronius. et pro ingenio cuiusque quaesiti 5 
decretique in principem honores. quos omiserit receperitve, in 
5 incerto fuit ob propinquum vitae finem. neque enim multo post 
supremi Tiberio consules, Cn. Acerronius C. Pontius, magis- 
tratum occepere, nimia iam potentia Macronis, qui gratiam Gai 
Caesaris numquam sibi neglectam acrius in dies fovebat impu- 
leratque post mortem Claudiae, quam nuptam ei rettuli, uxorem 
suam Enniam imitando amorem iuvenem inlicere pactoque 
matrimonii vincire, nihil abnuentem, dum dominationis apisce- 
retur; nam etsi commotus ingenio simulationum tamen falsa in 

bt 

sinu avi perdidicerat. 

2. cuius: text B. 
monii: text B. 

by Augustus, and restored many older 
ones, but never inscribed his name on 
them. For this temple to Augustus see 
on I. Io, 8. 
|. I. perfecta ... haud dedicavit. Suet. 
(Tib. 47; Cal. 21) says that he left both 
unfinished; but, as rezards the temple, 
Tacitus is confirmed by a coin belonging 
to the year 787, A. D. 34, in which it is 
represented ; which would seem to show 
that it was completed in that year (Cohen, 
i. p. 195, 68). The dedication by Gaius, 
described by Dio (59. 7, 1) under 79o, 
A. D. 37, is also commemorated by a coin 
(see engraving, Cohen, p. 238, 8). 

3. quattuor progeneri: see c. 15, 1; 
27,1; 4. 75, I. 

5. P. Petronius : see 3. 49, 2. 

6. omiserit receperitve: for the 
tense see on I. 61, 6. 

8. Cn. Acerronius C. Pontius. A 
Lusitanian inscription (Orelli 3665) gives 
their full names as Cn. Acerronius Procu- 
lus, C. Petronius Pontius Nigrinus. Nipp. 
notes that the former received a statue at 
Athens as proconsul of Achaia (C. I. Att. 
iii. 1, 611) ; and that the latter, an adopted 
son of C. Petronius Umbrinus (cos. suff. 
with M. Asinius in 778, A. D. 25), is thought 
by Borghesi to have been father of Pontia, 
the infamous poisoner of her sons (Juv. 6, 
637), who is called by the old Scholiast 
daughter of P. Petronius. 

12. immittendo margin: amore old edd. pactoque M. patri 

Io. impulerat, with inf. 13. 19, 4; 
14. 60, 2; H. 3. 4, 3, after poets and 
Livy. 

11. rettuli, c. 20, 1. Her speedy death 
is also mentioned by Philo (Leg. ad Gai. 
9). Suet. (Cal. 12) says that she died in 
childbirth ; Dio (59. 8, 7), apparently in 
error, that Gaius divorced her to marry 
Cornelia Orestilla. 

12.imitando amorem: cp. ‘quamquam 
maestitiam imitarentur' 1. 24, 4. The 
old alterations are needless. 

paetoque ... vincire: cp. ‘animum 

. vinxisse’ 4. 10, 2. This intrigue is 
also represented by Dio (58. 28, 4) as 
contrived by Macro;. by Philo (Leg. ad 
Gai. 6) as the work of Ennia alone; by 
Suet. (Cal. 10) as originated by Gaius 
himself. Ennia and Macro were.-both 
forced to commit suicide in 791, A.D. 38 
(Dio, 59. 1o, 6). 

13. dominationis apisceretur. This 
verb is nowhere else used with genit.: 
cp. the use of * adipisci’ 3. 55, 1. 

I4. commotus, ‘ passionate’ (see on I. 
33,6). It does not, like ‘turbidus animi" 
(H. 4. 48, 2), or ‘ Gai turbata mens’ (13. 
3, 6), denote his insanity, which was a 
later development. ; 

simulationum .», . falsa, a strong 
instance of such a genit. without any 
partitive meaning (Introd. v. $ 32). 

15 

650 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U. C. 750. 

46 (52). Gnarum hoc principi, eoque dubitavit de tradenda re 
publica, primum inter nepotes, quorum Druso genitus sanguine 
et caritate propior, sed nondum pubertatem ingressus, Germanici 
filio robur iuventae, vulgi studia, eaque apud avum odii causa. 
5etiam de Claudio agitanti, quod is conposita aetate bonarum 2 

artium cupiens erat, inminuta mens eius obstitit. 

sin extra 3 

domum successor quaereretur, ne memoria Augusti, ne nomen 
Caesarum in ludibria et contumelias verterent metuebat: quippe 4 
illi non perinde curae gratia praesentium quam in posteros 
10 ambitio. mox incertus animi, fesso corpore, consilium, cui impar 5 
erat, fato permisit, iactis tamen vocibus per quas intellegeretur 
providus futurorum ; namque Macroni non abdita ambage occi- g 

1. hoc, the whole state of things men- 
tioned above. 

dubitavit, &c., ‘he hesitated whom to 
designate as successor.' On the means of 
indirect nomination in this respect open 
to the princeps see Introd. vi. p. 97; 
Staatsr. ii. 1736, foll. — 

2. nepotes. Tiberius Gemellus, the 
son of Drusus, was in his eighteenth year 
(2. 84, 1 and note), but had not taken 
the * toga virilis" (Suet. Cal. 13). Gaius 
was in his twenty-fifth year (Suet. Cal. 8). 

4. vulgi studia: see I. 41, 3: on the 
popularity of the house of Germanicus in 
general see 3. 29, 3; 5. 4, 3, &c. 

5. agitanti; so 'agitare de aliqua re’ 
11. 23,1; 15. 50, 4, &c. In earlier writers 
* agitare,' in this sense, has usually a word 
such as * animo' added. 

conposita aetate; so again in I3. 1, 2. 
The expression answers to the xa0eorrkvia 
HAccia of Thuc. 2. 36, 4; and to the * con- 
stans aetas quae media dicitur ' of Cic. de 
Sen. 20, 76. Claudius was now in his 
forty-sixth year (Suet. Cl. 2). 

bonarum artium cupiens. For the 
gen. with ‘ cupiens ' Cp. I. 75, 4; for this 
use of ‘artes’ cp. c. 7, 1; 4. 6, a, &c. 
This taste of Claudius for literary culture 
is spoken of in 13. 3, I, &c. Suet. (Cl. 
3) says *' disciplinis liberalibus ab aetate 
prima non mediocrem operam dedit,' and 
gives further account (c. 41, 42) of his 
historical and other compositions. 

6. inminuta mens, ‘imbecility’; so 
used of a mind enfeebled by disease in 
Sall. Jug. 65, 1 : compare the expressions 
cited on c. 45,6, for the insanity of Gaius, 

On the mental weakness. of Claudius see. 

3.18, 72; 11. 28,2; 12.3, 3; 67. 1; Suet. 
Cl. 2-5, vol. ii. Introd. p. 45, &c. 

9. praesentium.  Nipp.takes this as 
a neuter, such neuters being often used-by 
Tacitus in other cases besides the nom. 
and acc. (see his note on 3. 18, 6). It 
seems however here to be better taken as 
masc. answering to ‘in posteros." 

in posteros ambitio: cp. 'gloria ad 
posteros", 1. 8, 2, ‘fama in Sabinos' Liv. 
I. I8, 3. This remark of Tacitus is 
strangely inconsistent with the reproach 
of notcaring for the judgement of posterity, 
with which he appears, in 4. 38, 4, to think 
Tiberius justly charged. 

10. incertus animi; so in H. 3.55, 4; 
Sall. and Liv.: see Introd. v. 33 e, y. 

1I. fato permisit, ‘left to take its 
course. In this expression, fate and 
chance are almost identified (see on c. 22, 
1). The story given in Jos. Ant. 18. 6, 
8- 10, of his having designated Gaius as 
successor, in obediénce to an omen, is 
unknown to, or disbelieved by, Tacitus. 

vocibus. Besides those given here, 
Suet. (Cal. 11) represents him as saying 
*exitio suo omniumque Gaium vivere, et 
se natricem (serpentis id genus) P. R., 
Phaethontem orbi terrarum educare.' 

12. non &bdita ambage, ‘in a riddle 
plain to read': *ambages' is used of 
oracular and other mysterious sayings (2. 
54,53 12. 63, 2; H. 5. 13, 3, &c.). 

. occidentem. Ritter thinks it necessary 
to insert ‘solem’ after ‘orientem’; but 
Dio (58. 28, 4), who here agrees very 
closely with Tacitus, omits it (ebye Toy 
Sudpevor éyxaradkimav mpds Tov dvaréA- 
Aovra émwei^p). This famous saying .ap- 
pears to be first given as said to Sulla by 
Pompeius, róv fAov ávaréAXovra nAcioves 
4 9vónevov $poakvvobciw (Plut. Pomp. 14. 
p. 625). The metaphor is furnished by 

A.D. 37.] 

‘7 dentem ab eo deseri, orientem spectari exprobravit. 

LIBER VI. CAP. 46 (s2), 47 (53). 

651 

et Gaio 

Caesari, forte orto sermone L. Sullam inridenti, omnia Sullae 
8 vitia et nullam eiusdem virtutem habiturum praedixit. . simul 
crebris cum lacrimis minorem ex nepotibus conplexus, truci 

9 alterius vultu, * occides hunc tu’ inquit ‘et te alius.’ 

sed gra- 

vescente valetudine nihil e libidinibus omittebat, in patientia 
firmitudinem simulans solitusque eludere medicorum artes atque 
eos, qui post tricesimum aetatis annum ad internoscenda corpori 
suo utilia vel noxia alieni consilii indigerent. 

47 (53). Interim Romae futuris etiam post Tiberium caedibus 
semina iaciebantur. Laelius Balbus Acutiam, P. Vitellii quon- 
dam uxorem, maiestatis postulaverat; qua damnata cum prae- 
mium accusatori decerneretur, Iunius Otho tribunus plebei inter- 
2cessit, unde illis odia, mox Othoni exitium. dein multorum 
amoribus famosa Albucilla, cui matrimonium cum Satrio Secundo 

1I. laetius: text B. 

the well-known oriental worship of the 
rising sun. 
4. truci alterius vultu. Suetonius 

says of Gaius (c. 50) ‘vultum natura 

horridum ac tetrum etiam ex industria 
efferavit': see also Sen. de Const. Sap. 
18, 1; Pl. N. H. 11. 37, 54, 144. This 
forbidding expression is evident from his 
effigies, such as that in the Louvre 
(Bernoulli, ii. pl. xvi) or the statue at 
Naples. 

5. occides, &c. Young Tibenus was 
put to death by Gaius without trial or 
warning (Suet. Cal. 23) within that same 

ear, according to Dio (49. 8, 1), ora little 
ater, as would appear from the election 
of an Arval in his room on May 24, 
A.D. 38 (C. I. L. vi. 2028 c). Gaius was 
assassinated by Chaerea and others Jan. 24, 
794, A.D. 4I. 

gravescente valetudine : cp. 1. 5, I. 

6. libidinibus : see c. I, 2. 

in patientia. This is perhaps best 
taken, with Walther and Doed., as =‘ me- 
diis in doloribus"; such a sense of ‘ pa- 
tientia’ being capable of being sustained 
by Sen. Ep. 78, 12 ‘tolerabilis est morbi 
patientia, si contempseris id quod extre- 
mum minatur, and 82, 18 ‘devorata 
unius mali patientia. The alternative 
interpretation, taking it to mean ‘in (or 
* by ') his * endurance,’ seems more suitable 
to a simple ablative. 

7. eludere: cp. 5. 5, r, &c. 

I4. exilium : text Nipp. 

8. post tricesimum, &c. Plutarch 

(iypeva wapayyéApara 24, 136) quotes 
Tiberius, on hearsay, as saying ds dvj)p 

bwtp étf)kovra yeyovas érg kal wporeivow 

larp@ xeipa wara*éAocrós torw. Suet. 
(Tib. 68), without quoting any such 
maxim, says that Tiberius had never 
consulted:a physician after the age of 
thirty, and retained his health unimpaired 
almost throughout his principate. 

II. Laelius Balbus, mentioned by 
Quint., (10. I, 24) under the name of 
Decimus Laelius, as a famous orator of 
the day, classed with Afer and Passienus 
(see 4. 52, 7; ¢ 20, 2). Nipp. thinks 
bim probably son of D. Laelius Balbus, 
cos. 748, B.C. 6, and * quindecimvir sacris 
faciendis' in 737, B.C. 17; and that the 
vestal Laelia (15. 22, 4) was probably his 
daughter. His further fate is mentioned 
in c. 48, 6. | 

P. Vitellii: see on 5. 8, 1. 

I2. praemium : see on 4. 20, 2, &c. 

I3. Iunius Otho, apparently son of the 
praetor of 775, A.D. 22 (3. 66, 3). The 
veto of the tribune is still occasionally 
exercised (see Introd. vi. p. gt, n. 1). 

14. unde illis, &c., ‘whence ensued 
enmity between’ Balbus and Otho, and 
subsequently (probably under Gaius) 
death to Otho.’ The reading ‘exitium’ 
seems required to explain ‘ futuris caedi- 
bus’ above. 

15. Albucilla: see c. 48, 6. Probably 

oye 

652 P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM . (A.U.C. 790. 

coniurationis indice fuerat, defertur inpietatis in principem ; co- 

nectebantur ut conscii et adulteri eius Cn. Domitius, Vibius 
de claritudine Domitii supra memoravi ; 3 
Marsus quoque vetustis honoribus et inlustris studiis erat. 

Marsus, L. Arruntius. 

sed 

5testium interrogationi, tormentis servorum Macronem praese- 
disse commentarii ad senatum missi ferebant, nullaeque in eos 
imperatoris litterae suspicionem dabant,invalido ac fortasse ignaro 
ficta pleraque ob inimicitias Macronis notas in Arruntium. 

48 (54). Igitur Domitius defensionem meditans, Marsus tam- 
ro quam inediam destinavisset, produxere vitam: Arruntius cuncta- 
tionem et moras suadentibus amicis, non eadem omnibus decora 

respondit: 

'sibi satis aétatis, neque aliud paenitendum quam 

quod inter ludibria et pericula anxiam senectam toleravisset, diu 
Seiano, nunc Macroni, semper alicui potentium invisus, non 

15 Culpa, sed ut flagitiorum inpatiens. 

5. praesidiis se: 
I. 44, 7): text B. 

she also may have been put to death by 

Gaius. 

Satrio Secundo: see 4. 34, 2. He 
is mentioned more prominently than as if 
he were only one of the many informers 
respecting the conspiracy of Seianus (see 
5. 8, 1, &c.), and may therefore have been 
the person who betrayed it to Antonia 
(see Appendix iv. p. 588). The past 
tense used in speaking of him here and in 
c. 8, 10 suggests that he was probably dead. 

I. inpietatis, ' disloyalty ' : cp. the use 
of pietas! in 3. 51, 2. Nothing can be 
gathered as to the ground of this charge. 

2. Cn. Domitius, the husband of 
Agrippina: see 4. 75, I. 

Vibius Marsus: see on 2. 74, t. Nipp. 
thinks he may be the poet spoken of 
slightingly in Mart. 4. 29, 7 (*quam levis 
in tota Marsus Amazonide’); most allu- 
sions to a poet of the name being, no 
doubt, to the more famous Domitius 
Marsus. 

3. L. Arruntius: see I. I3, I, &c. 

6. commentarii, ‘the record '* the 
word is used of any written record, as of 
the *acta senatus' (I5. 74, 2) and the 
register of the princeps (H. 4. 40, 6, &c.). 
Dio (58. 24, 2) represents such a case as 
common ($AÍoicovTo ol pev wAcious éx Tov 
ToU TiBepiov ypappatray kal é« Tüv TOU 
Maxpovos Bacávov); the senate having 
apparently to pass sentence on such a 
communication without further trial. In 

text B, praesidisse Doed. ; cp. 1. 76. 5. 
I5. et suprema: et supremos R, text Madvig. 

sane paucos ad suprema 

13. pericularia (cp. 

this case it would seem probable that the 
absence of the usual letter from Tiberius 
enabled them to suspend proceedings. 
ferzbant, ‘were showing’: the sense 
is rather that of ‘avunculum diee 

ferens! (2. 43, 6), than of ‘fama... tulit" 
(1. 5, 6). 
nullae... litteras, * the fact that there 

was no letter’: cp. * multa me dehortantur 

. . Opes factionis . . . ius nullum,’ &c. 
(Sall. Jug. 31,1), also Introd. v. 6 55 b, 25 
Nipp. here and on 3. 9, 3. 

7. invalido. Ritt. thinks the insertion 
of *eo' necessary; but the pronoun can 
be supplied from ' imperatoris, and the 
construction would resemble those noted 
in Introd. v. $ 31 c, and by Nipp. on 5. 
IO, 2. 

IO. produxere vitam. Domitius died 
in 793, A. D. 40, when his son Nero, born 
in this year, was three years old (Suet. 
Ner. 6). Marsus was still alive and le- 
gatus of Syria about 795-797, A. D. 44-44 
(see 11. 10, 1). 

13. ludibria. All senators were sub- 
ject to the insult of having to ratify and 
register decrees without discretion (see 
C. 47, 4). Arruntius had 'also had the 
special yon of a province to which 
he was not allowed to go (c. 27, 3), and 
the peril of a former accusation (c. 7, 1). 

I5. sane, concessive, as in I. 10, 2, &c. 

ad suprema. This correction is sup- 
ported by c. 50, 3, &c.: see on 1. 8, 1. 

4 

3 

A.D. 37.] LIBER VI. CAP. 47 (53), 48 (54). 

653 

principis dies posse vitari: quem ad modum evasurum immi- 
4nentis iuventam? an, cum Tiberius post tantam rerum expe- 
rientiam vi dominationis convulsus et mutatus sit, Gaium 

Caesarem vix finita pueritia, ignarum omnium aut pessimis 

innutritum, meliora capessiturum Macrone duce, qui ut deterior 5 

ad opprimendum Seianum delectus plura per scelera rem pub- 
b licam conflictavisset? prospectare iam se acrius servitium, eoque 

fugere simul acta et instantia. haec vatis in modum dictitans 
venas resolvit. documento sequentia erunt bene Arruntium morte 
6 usum. Albucilla inrito ictu ab semet vulnerata iussu senatus 
in carcerem fertur. stuprorum eius ministri, Carsidius Sacerdos 
praetorius ut in insulam deportaretur, Pontius Fregellanus amit- 
teret ordinem senatorium, et eaedem poenae in Laelium Balbum 
decernuntur, id quidem a laetantibus, quia Balbus truci elo- 

quentia habebatur, promptus adversum insontes. 

10. ac: a R, ab Otto. 
tatur: text R. 

2. experientiam : cp. I. 4, 3. 

3. convulsus. The metaphor may 
here be that of the ‘ruin’ of a character 
(see note on‘ 4. 40, 4), or may denote a 
person shaken from his equilibrium or 
steady footing : a somewhat similar idea, 
differently conveyed, is the * mente quatit 
solida' of Hor. Od. 3. 3, 4. In the view 
here assigned to Arruntius, Tacitus gives 
a juster and more probable explanation of 
the deterioration of Tiberius, than in his 
own hypothesis (c. 51, 5) of a radically 
vicious nature disclosing itself by degrees 
(see Introd. viii. p. 158). ! 

4. vix flnita pueritia, used rhetori- 
cally ofa youth of twenty-five (see c. 46, 1). 

5. capessiturum. This participle 
(cp. 12. 25, 3), perhaps also a perfect 

form *capessii! (see 12. 30, 2), are ap- 

parently confined to Tacitus. 

7. conflictavisset. The active of this 
verb appears elsewhere to be only once 
used transitively (feram . . . sese con- 
flictantém maerore’ Pl. N. H. 8. 17, 21, 
59), and once intransitively (‘ut conflic- 

tares malo’ Ter. Phorm. 3. 2, 20) : the. 

passive is especially common .in Tacitus 
(cp. 1. 58, 9, &c.). q.d : 

. 8. acta et instantia, i.e. the memory 
of the past, and danger of the imminent : 
in H. 3. 36, 1. * instantia! is used of the 
present, as contrasted with the past and 
future, 

II. grasidius: text Reines, from 4. 13, 3. 

I2. depor- 

9. bene... morte usum, ‘did well 
to die! To commit suicide is called *uti 

necessitate" (16. 11, I): cp. 'honestae 

mortis usus ' I. 70, 6. 

10, Albucilla, &c. Dio (58. 27, 4) 
tells this story as of -yuvn Tis, adding that 
she died in prison. As Tacitus does not 
here mention her death, it is probable that 
she outlived Tiberius: see on c. 47, 2. 

II. stuprorum eius ministri, &c. 
The construction is here sacrificed to 
conciseness of expression: from ‘ poenae 
decernuntur' is to be supplied *decernitur 
de stuprorum ministris, or *ministri .. . 
damnantur, decretumque. Nipp. com- 

ares the sentence in 2. 64, 4, also Caes. 
k G. 1. 53, 4 / duae filiae... altera occisa, 
altera capta est, and several instances 
from Livy, e.g. *consules, Marcellus... 
redit, Fabius . . . processit ' (24. 20, 3) ; 
and notes the double construction used 
with *decernere' in 1. 15, 4 (where see 
note). | 
. Carsidius Sacerdos: see 4. 13, 3. 
He appears to have teen praet. urb. in 
780, A D. 27 (see Nipp.). 

13. eaedem poenae, i.e. the ‘depor- 
tatio, involving necessarily the loss of 
senatorial rank. Nipp. notes that Tacitus 
separated this case from that of Carsidius, 
only to make a special remark on it. On 
Laelius Balbus see c. 47, 1. ! 

654 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

(A. U.C. 790. 

49 (55). Isdem diebus Sex. Papinius consulari familia repen- 
tinum et informem exitum delegit, iacto in praeceps corpore. 
causa ad matrem referebatur, quae pridem repudiata adsenta- 2 
tionibus atque luxu perpulisset iuvenem ad ea quorum effugium 

5non nisi morte inveniret. 

igitur accusata in senatu, quamquam 3 

genua patrum advolveretur luctumque communem et magis in- 
becillum tali super casu feminarum animum aliaque in eundem 
dolorem maesta et miseranda diu ferret, urbe tamen in decem 
annos prohibita est, donec minor filius lubricum iuventae exiret. 

10 
latio deserebat : 

50 (56). Iam Tiberium corpus, iam vires, nondum dissimu- 
idem animi rigor; sermone ac vultu intentus, 

quaesita interdum comitate, quamvis manifestam defectionem 

6. patris: text R. 

I. consulari familia. He must have 
been son of the consul of the preceding 
year (see c. 40, 1), no other consul of the 
name being found. "The same expression 
is used in a similar sense in I 3. 12, I. 

2. informem, ‘unseemly,’ i.e. igno- 
minious, as compared with the more 
dignified forms of suicide. So Vergil 
calls a noose for hanging ‘nodum in- 
formis leti ' (Aen. 12, 603). 

in praeceps, from an upper window: 
cp. 4. 22, 1. 

|. 8.repudiata. Nipp. takes this in its 
ordinary sense as ‘divorced from her 
husband.’ Others take it as ‘repelled’ 
by her son, which suits the context well ; 
but Tacitus would probably have ex- 
pressed this by a less ambiguous word. 

adsentationibus atque luxu. Roth 

appears rightly to take this as equivalent 
to * adsentando, iuvando ad luxum.' 

6. patrum. Pfitzner retains *'patris,' 
thinking that the father of her son, or 
possibly her own father, may be meant, 
and that * luctum communem" would thus 
be more strictly used. 

advolveretur: cp. I. 13, 7. 

luctumque communem, &c., the 
grief which men or women alike would 
feel at the loss of children, and the greater 
inability of her sex to bear up against it. 
The bearing of the appeal is to show that 
in the death of her son she had already 
suffered enough. 

| . 7. in eundem dolorem, * to the same 
piteous effect,’ i.e. ‘in the same pathetic 

strain’ Pe * verba in eandem clementiam" 
II. 3, 1; and the phrase ‘in eandem 
sententiam, The construction is a form 

of the ‘in consecutivum, so characteristic 
of Tacitus : see Introd. v. § 60 b. 

8. diu ferret, for ‘proferret’; so *ferre 
crimina 12. 4, I, &c. For the use of 
* diu ' see note on 4. 69, 4. 

9. minor fllius, probably the person 
mentioned by Seneca (de Ira, 3. 18, 3), as 
a victim to the ferocious caprice of Gaius : 
* C. Caesar Sextum Papinium, cui pater 
erat consularis, flagellis cecidit, torsit, non 
quaestionis sed animi causa.’ He may 
have taken his brother's praenomen. 

lubricum iuventae. Tacitus has 
other similar metaphors, as ‘lubricum 
adolescentiae' 14. 56, 2, *lubricam prin- 
cipis aetatem " 13. 2, 2, &c. 

exiret. The poetical accus. with this 
verb, found ,here alone in Tacitus (cp. 
‘limen exire’ Ter. Hec. 3. 3, 18, ‘valles’ 
Ov. Met. 10, 52), is analogous ‘to those 
noted in Introd. v. $ 12c. 

10. Iam...nondum. The contrast 
seems. a reminiscence of Liv. 1. 25, 6 
‘Romanas legiones iam spes tota. non- 
dum tamen cura desetuerat.' 

I1. idem animi rigor, ‘there was the 
same stern will.’ Pliny speaks (N. H. 
7. 19, 79) of ‘rigor quidam © torvitasque 
naturae dura et inflexibilis,’ answering to 
the Greek áraóeía. 

intentus, ‘ energetic in speech buds 
look’: cp. ‘intentior’ 1. 52, 3, ‘ 
dixisset . . . intento ore’ Dial. 11, p 

I 2.quaesita ... comitate, * with forced: 
gaiety. Suet. (Tib. 72) describes him as 
falling ill at Astura, and, after a rally, 
going to Circeii, where, ‘at some ‘ludi 
castrenses, he tried to cast a javelin at 
a boar, and caught a chill from the effort. 

A. D. 37.] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 49 (55), 50 (56). 655 

2tegebat. mutatisque saepius locis)tandem apud promunturium 
Miseni consedit in villa, cui L. Lucullus quondam dominus. 
8 illic eum adpropinquare supremis tali modo compertum. erat 
medicus arte insignis, nomine Charicles, non quidem regere 
valetudines principis solitus, consilii tamen copiam praebere. 5 
4is velut propria ad negotia digrediens et per speciem officii 
5 manum complexus, pulsum venarum attigit. neque fefellit: nam 
Tiberius, incertum an offensus tantoque magis iram premens, 
instaurari epulas iubet discumbitque ultra solitum, quasi honori 
abeuntis amici tribueret. Charicles tamen labi spiritum nec 
6 ultra biduum duraturum Macroni firmavit. inde cuncta conlo- 
quiis inter praesentes, nuntiis apud legatos et exercitus, festina- 
7 bantur. septimum decimum kal. Aprilis interclusa anima cre- 
ditus est mortalitatem explevisse; et multo gratantum concursu 

13. xvii: decimo septimo B, septimo decimo J. F. Gron., text Ritt. 

[5nd 

I. promunturium Miseni ; so in 15. 
46, 3. Such a genitive in geographical 
expressions is generally poetical (as * Bu- 
throti .. . urbem' Verg. Aen. 3, 293), but 
found in Liv. 24. 12, 1; 35, 3, &c. 

2. in villa. Phaedrus (2. 5,9) describes 
its situation (*quae monte summo posita 
Luculli mang prospectat Siculum et re- 
spicit Tuscum mare’). It appears to have 
once belonged to Marius, and to have 
been bought by Lucullus, who added 
enormously to it (Plut. Mar. 34, 424 ; Luc. 
39,518). It was still existing in the fifth 
century, and was assigned as a place of 
retirement by Odoacer to Augustulus: 
some ruins still remaining on the pro- 
montory may have belonged to it. 

4. Charicles. This story of him is also. 

told by Suet. (Tib. 72), and he is men- 
tioned as a medical authority by Galen 

(de Comp. Med. 2. 1, 2, &c.). Like most 

Roman physicians, he was probably a 
Greek freedman. 

5. consilii...copiam,' opportunity of 
consulting him.’ On the general contempt 
of Tiberius for physicians see c. 46, 9. 

6. per speciem officii, 'as if to pay 
respect’ (cp. I. 24, 4 ; 2. 42, 2, &c.). 
The action was that of taking the hand 
to kiss it (Suet. 1. 1): cp. ‘prensa manu 
eius per speciem exosculandi I. 34, 3. 

7. neque fefellit; so 'neque diu fe- 
fellit ' 4. 45, 2. 

9. instaurari, ‘to be served again’: 
cp. Suet. (1. 1.) *remanere ac recumbere 
hortatus est, cenamque protraxit. It is 
added, that he stood up as usual, with the 

lictor at his side, addressing each guest as 
he took leave. 

discumbit: cp. 3. 14, 2. 

10. tribueret, sc. ‘id’; so 'Seiano 
tribuens’ 4. 26, 1. "E 

labi spiritum, ‘that vitality was 
sinking: cp. *labenti animae" 16. 11, 4. 

11. inde cuncta, &c. Compare the 
similar measures taken to secure the suc- 
cession at the last moments of Augustus 
(1. 5, 6) and of Claudius (12. 68, 1). 

I3. Septimum decimum kalendas 
Aprilis, written as accus. in accordance 
with c. 25, 5. The same date (March 16) 
is given by Suet. (Tib. 73), and confirmed 
by the * Acta Arvalium" (C. I. L. vi. 1, 
2028 c), where the eighteenth is given 
as the date on which Gaius was called 
imperator by the senate. Dio, who puts 
the death ten days later (58. 28, 5), must 
therefore be in error. 

interclusa anima, 'the breath having 
ceased.’ No more than natural cessation 
of respiration seems to be meant; but 
the expression is apparently taken from 
Livy, who uses it (23. 7, 3), and ‘spiritum 
intercludere’ (40. 16, 1 ; 24, 7), of suffoca- 
tion or other constraint: cp. ‘impedito 
meatu animum finiebat ' 14. 51, 2. 

creditus est: cp. C. 34, 45; 5. 4. I, 
&c.; Introd. v. $ 45. Nipp. shows here 
that Cic. so uses * dictus est’ (ad Q. f. 1. 
2, 9; pro Scaur. 6, 11). 

14. mortalitatem explevisse, 'to have 
fulfilled the conditions of mortality.’ The 
expression appears to be new, and is ex- 
plained by Nipp. as analogous to ' vicem, 

656 

P. CORNELII TACITI ANNALIUM 

[ A. U. C. 799. 

ad capienda imperii primordia Gaius Cacsar egrediebatur, cum 
repente adfertur redire Tiberio vocem ac visus, vocarique qui 

recreandae defectioni cibum adferrent. 

pavor hinc ia omnes, 

et .ceteri passim dispergi, se quisque maestum aut nescium 
5 fingere; Caesar in silentium fixus a summa spe novissima ex- 

pectabat. 
iubet discedique ab limine. 
 tuagesimo aetatis anno. 

Macro intrepidus opprimi senem iniectu multae vestis 
sic Tiberius finivit, octavo et sep- 

51 (57) Pater ei Nero et utrimque origo gentis Claudiae, 
19 quamquam mater in Liviam et mox Iuliam familiam adoptio- 

nibus transierit. 

casus prima ab infantia ancipites; nam pro- 

1I. transierat Ern. 

munus explere" (4. 8, 7; Dial. 32, 5). It 
might also possibly be taken to mean 
‘completed the term of mortal life,’ like 
‘supremum diem explevisset’(1. 6, 2); but 
‘mortalitas’ generally means the liability 
to die, sometimes even = ‘ mors,' e.g. *mo:- 

. talitate interceptus’ Pl. Epp. ro. 41 (5054: 

I. ad capienda . . . primordia; so 
* capere initium 12. 6, 1, *finem' H. 4. 
3, 4, &c. 

. 4 maestum aut nescium, concerned 
for Tiberius or conscious of nothing un- 
usual.  Nipp. compares other similar 
descriptions of assumed unconsciousness 

, (11. 35, 15 13. 16, 5). 

5. in silentium fixus, ‘stupefied into 
silence’: cp. ‘defixus’ 1. 68, 2, &c. 

novissima, ‘the uttermost’; in full 
* novissima exempla' (12. 20, 4; I5. 44, 
8): cp. 5. & 7; 12. 33, 2. 

6. opprimi senem, &c. Dio (58. 28, 
2) makes Gaius the chief agent in with- 
holding food from Tiberius, as if it would 
hurt him, and piling on clothes, as if 
-to warm him. Suet. (Tib. 73) gives, 
besides this, a story of slow poison given 
by Gaius; also another account from 
‘Seneca,’ that Tiberius made as if he 
would give up his ring, and put it on 
again, and then, after calling for assist- 
ance, tried to rise and fell lifeless by the 
bed. This story, apparently from the con- 
temporary history of Marcus Seneca (see 
Introd. iii. p. 15), probably represents the 
version circulated at the time by Gaius. 

iniectu, only here in Tacitus; also 
in Lucr., Pl. N. H , and Statius. 

7. finivit. Elsewhere the expression is 
* inire vitam (1. 9, 1, &c.); but * finis' 
is thus used absolutely (2. 71, 1, &c.), 
and ‘qui morbo finiuntur! in Pl. Epp. 1. 
12, 2: cp. Cic Tusc. 1. 48, 115; so that 

Ritter's insertion of ‘ vitam' seems need-. 
less, though supported by many instances 
(1. 9, 1; 2. 83, 3, &c.). 

octavo et septuagesimo. The calcu- 
lation of Dio (1.1.), that he lived seventy- 
seven years, four months, and nine days, 
allowing for his error in the date of death 
(see above), agrees with the date of birth 
given by Suet. (Tib. 5), as Nov. 17, 712, 
B.C. 42. Suet. adds (c. 76) that his will, 
made two years before, left Gaius and 
young Tiberius joint heirs, with legacies 
to many persons, to the Vestals, the 
soldiers and people, and, separately, -to 
the * vicorum magistri. This will was 
set aside at the instance of Gaius, 
especially in respect of the heirship of 
young Tiberius, as the will of an insane 

person (mapappovycavros) ; but.Gaius paid: 

the other legacies as gifts from himself 
(Dio, 59. 1; Suet. Cal. 16). In spite of 
cries of ‘To the Tiber with Tiberius,’ 

and other expressions of popular hatred 

(Suet. Tib. 75), his remains received a 
public funeral at Rome, with a *laudatio' 
from Gaius (Dio, 58. 28, 5). His memory 
was hówever condemned ; for he received 
no divine honours, nor were his ‘ acta’ 
ever included in the annual oath of main- 
tenance (Dio, £9. 9, I). 

9. Pater ei Nero, &c. Onthe descent 
and life of the father Nero, and on the 
adoptive relationships of Livia, see notes 
on &. I, I: on the other persons mentioned 
in this chapter see Introd. ix. The periods 
into which the life and character of Tibe- 
rius are here marked out, are fully treated 
of in Introd. viii. 

10. familiam, used for * gentem," as in 
II. 25, 1; H. 2. 48, 5: the terms are 
often confused in Livy (cp. Staatsr. iii. 10, 
n. 2). See note on 2. 52, 8. 

9 

A.D. 37 ] LIBER VI. 

CAP. 50 (56), 51 (57). 

657 

scriptum patrem exul secutus, ubi domum Augusti privignus in- 
troiit, multis aemulis conflictatus est, dum Marcellus et Agrippa, 
mox Gaius Luciusque Caesares viguere; etiam frater eius 

3 Drusus prosperiore civium amore erat. 

sed maxime in lubrico 

egit accepta in matrimonium Iulia, inpudicitiam uxoris tolerans 

4 aut declinans. 

dein Rhodo regressus vacuos principis penates 

duodecim annis, mox rei Romanae arbitrium tribus ferme et 

5 viginti obtinuit. 

morum quoque tempora illi diversa: egregium 

vita famaque, quoad privatus vel in imperiis sub Augusto fuit ; 
occultum ac subdolum fingendis virtutibus, donec Germanicus ac 
6 Drusus superfuere; idem inter bona malaque mixtus, incolumi 
matre ; intestabilis saevitia, sed obtectis libidinibus, dum Seianum 
dilexit timuitve: postremo in scelera simul ac dedecora prorupit, 
postquam remoto pudore et metu suo tantum ingenio utebatur. 

9. qua ad (cp. 4. 61, 1) : quoad B. 

I. domum Augusti . . . introiit, at 
the death of his father, in 721, B.C. 33. 

2. multis aemulis : see on I, 3. 

conflictatus est : cp. c. 48, 4. 

4. prosperiore civium amore erat, 
‘was borné on a stronger tide of popu- 

. ^*^ larity’: cp. *prosperam memoriam ' 4. 

38, 6, ‘ prosperior fama’ 4. 52, 8. On the 
popularity. of Drusus see 1. 33, 4; 2.'41, 5. 
maxime in lubrico egit, ‘ his position 
was most perilous’: cp. I. 72, 2; and 
€ 49,3. © 
6. declinans, ‘avoiding’: cp. ‘ea... 
declinans ’ 13. 4, 2, * invidiam declinavit ’ 
H. 4. 41, 4. The allusion is to his flight 
from her to Rhodes (see on I. 53, 2). 
vacuos, ‘ without heirs’: cp. on ‘va- 
cuos Colchos ' c. 34, 3: and the opposite 
expressions *domus plena' 4. 3, I, ‘in- 
tegra ' I. 3, I, &c. 

7. duodecim annis; i.e. between his 
return from Rhodes and the death of 
Augustus, 755-767, A.D. 2-14. The house 
of Augustus, already so far ‘ vacua’ that 
its heirs had left home and never returned 
to it, did not really become so till the 
death of Gaius in 757, A. D. 4. 

tribus ferme et viginti: cp. Staatsr. 
ii. 802, n. 2. The computation of Dio 
(58. 38, 5), who reckons twenty-two years, 
seven months, and seven days from the 
death of Augustus (Aug. 19, 767, A.D. 14) 
to that of Tiberius, is exactly correct, 
with allowance for the error of ten days 
already mentioned (c. 50, 9). 

8. egregium: 'tempus' is supplied 

VOL. I. 

12. intestabili Heins. 

, obiectis: text B. 

with this, as also with * occultum ac sub- 
dolum'; the mode of expression being 
similar to that often used with ‘dies,’ 
‘annus,’ &c.: afterwards the expression 
is varied to ‘idem . . . mixtus,' &c. 

IO. occultum, &c. This period is that 
treated in the first three Books: to each 
of the following three periods, one Book 
is allotted. Dio marks the first turning 
point at the death of Germanicus (57. 
19, 1), and the second at the retirement 
to Capreae (58. 1, 1). On this use of 
* occultus" cp. 4. 7, 1, &c. 

fingendis virtutibus, probably to be 
taken as dative: cp. c. 24, 4, and note there. 

II. idem. It seems better, with Nipp., 
to take ‘ prorupit’.as the principal verb, 
and ‘ mixtus' and * intestabilis' as in ap- 
position, than to supply ‘ fuit." 

mixtus; so Mucianus is called ‘ malis 
bonisque artibus mixtus' ( H. 1. 10, 3). 

12. intestabilis : cp. c. 40, 4. 

13. scelera...ac dedecora,answering 
to ‘ saevitia ' and ' libidinibus. 

14. suo tantum ingenio utebatur, 
“he was following his own bent only.’ 
Nipp. thinks that not his original nature, 
but that which it had then become, is 
meant ; but the idea that histrue character 
was only at the last revealed seems 
evidently that of Tacitus throughout, as 
well as of Suetonius (c. 42), ‘secreti 
licentiam nanctus cuncta simul vitia male 
diu dissimulata tandem profudit ' (cp. Id. 
61). On the judgement of Dio see Introd. 

viii. p. 157. 

Uu 

se 

INDEX I 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

Abdagaeses, a Parthian noble, 6. 36, 
35 37,53 43 25 44, 5- 

Abdus, a Parthian officer, 6. 31, 3; 
32, 3. 

Abudius: see Ruso. 

Acerronius, Cn., consul, 6. 45, 5. 

Achaia, transferred from the senate 
to Caesar, 1. 76,4; given in charge 
to the legate of Moesia, 1. 80, 1 ; 
visited by the false Drusus, 5. 10, 
I: see also 2. 53, 15 3. 7, 13 4- 
13, I. 

Acilius, M’., consul: see a/so Aviola. 

acta populi, diurna, or publica, 3. 
3, 2. 

— principum, I. 72, 23 4. 42, 3. 

— senatus, 5. 4, I. 

Actium, battle of, alluded to, 1. 3, 7; 
42,53 2. 53,25 3. 55,15 4. 5,1 

actor publicus, the; 2. 30, 35 3. 67, 3. 

Acutia, wife of P. Vitellius, 6. 47, 1 

Adgandestrius, prince of the Chatti, 
offers to poison Arminius, 2. 88, 1I. 

pow (Eder), the, in Germany, I 
56, 4. 

aediles, powers and functions of, 2. 
85,23 3. 52,33 4. 35; 5. 

Aedui, rising of the, 3. 40, 1; 43, I- 
46, 7. 

Aeetes, king of Colchis, 6. 34, 3. 

Aegaeum mare, the, 5. Io, 4. 

Aegeae, in Asia, earthquake at, 2. 
47) 4- 

Aegeatae, 2. 47, 4. 

Aegiensis civitas, 4. 13, I. 

Aegium, in Achaia, afflicted by earth- 
quake, 4. 13, I 

Aegyptus, visited by Germanicus, 2. 
59-61 ; jealously secluded by Au- 
gustus, 2. 59, 4; held by two le- 
gions, 4. 5, 4; arrival of phoenix 
In, 6. 28, 1, 8: its records, 2. 60, 
4; its religious rights forbidden at 
Rome, 2. 85, 5; importation of corn 
from, 2. 59, 4 

Aelius: see Gallus, Lamia, Seianus. 

Aemilia: see Lepida, Musa, 

Aemilium genus, the, glory of, 6. 27, 
5; memorials of, 3. 72, I 

Aemilius, an officer, 2. 11,2; 4. 42, 
2: see also Lepidus, Scaurus. 

Aeneas, the ancestor of the Iulian 
gens, 4. 9, 3. 

Aequus, Considius, punished for false 
accusation, 3. 37, I. 

aerarium, the, management of, 1. 

75; 

ECC the, 1. 78, 2; 5. 8, I. 

Aérias, founder of a temple i in Cyprus, 
3. 62, 5. 

Aesculapius, temples of, 3. 63, 33 4. 
14, I. 

Aeserninus, Marcellus, an orator, 3. 
II, 2. 

Aethiopia, once conquered by Rham- 
ses, 2. 60, 4. 

Afer, Domitius,.orator and accuser, 
4. 52, 1 ; 66,1. 

Afranius, partisan of Pompeius, 4. 
34, 5. 

Africa, war in, see Tacfarinas ; mili- 
tary force in, 4. 5, 4 (where see 
note); proconsuls of, 1. 53, 9; 2. 
$2, 5; 3. 20, 1; 32, 15; 35,1; 58, 
I; 72, 6; 4. 13, 5; 23, 2; search 
for Sibylline hymns in, 6. 12, 4. 

Africanus, Iulius, a Gaul, 6. 7, 5. 

Africum mare, the, 1. 53, 6. 

Agrippa, Asinius, 4. 34, 1 ; 61, I. 

— Fonteius, 2. 30, 1 ; 86, I. 

— Haterius, D., trib. pl, t. 77, 3; 
praetor, 2. 51, 2; cos. des., 3. 49, 
4; COS., 3. 52, I; an accuser, 6. 4, 2. 

— M. (Vipsanius), son-in-law of 
Augustus, I. 3, 13 53; 43 4. 40,9; 
consulships of, I. 3, 1; share of 
tribunician power, 3. 56, 3; rivalry 
of, with Tiberius, 6. 51, 4; violent 
deaths of the children of, 3. 19, 4; ; 
a grandson of, 3. 75, I. 

Uu2 

660 

Agrippa, Postumus, character and 
banishment of, 1. 3, 4; 4.3; 5,2 
put to death, 1. 6; 53, 3; 3. 30, 
6 ; personated by a slave, 2. 39-40. 

— Vibulenus, a knight, 6. 40, I. 

Agrippina, granddaughter of Augus- 
tus and wife of Germanicus, I. 
33; 2; character of, t. 33, 6; 2. 
72,1; 3. I, I, &c. ; present during 
the German mutiny, I. 40, 2, foll. ; 
sent away to the Treveri, 1. 41, 2; 
42, 2; 44,2; preserves the bridge 
and tends the wounded, I. 69, I, 
foll.; at enmity with Augusta, more 
highly esteemed than Livia, 2. 43, 
5,7 ; gives birth to Iulia at Lesbos, 
2. $4, 1; with Germanicus at his 
death, 2. 72, 1; returns with his 
ashes, 2. 75, 1; 79, 15 3. 1, 13 
subject to the attacks of Seianus, 
4. I2, 2, foll.; 17, 4; 39,6; 40, 3; 
67, 5; expostulates with Tiberius, 
4. $2, 1 ; asks for another husband, 
4. 53, 1; openly shows her sus- 
picion of Tiberius, 4. 54, 1 ; is de- 
nounced by Tiberius to the senate, 
5. 3 2-5, 
tion, 6. 25, 1 ; charged falsely with 
adultery, 6. 25, 2-4. 

— daughter of Germanicus and 

mother of Nero; wrote memoirs 
of her family, 4. 53, 3; married to 
Cn. Domitius, 4. 75, I. 

Ahenobarbus : see Domitius. 

Alba, kings of, 4. 9, 3. 

ae Caucasian race of the, 2. 68, 

; 4. 5, 4; 6. 33, 3, 53 35 33 
alleged Thessalian origin of, 6. 
34, 3. 

Albanorum reges, 4. 9, 3. 

Albis (Elbe), the, 1. 59, 6; 2. 14, 6; 
19, 2; 22, 1 ; 41, 2; crossed by 
L. Domitius, 4. 44, 3. 

Albucilla, a profligate woman, 6. 47, 
2; 48, 6. 

album senatorium, the, 4. 42, 3. 

Alexander (the Great), comparison of, 
with Germanicus, 2. 73,2 ; charter 
of asylum granted by, 3. 63, 5. 

Alexandria, Germanicus blamed for 
visiting, 2. 59, 3; death of Rhescu- 

- poris at, 2. 67, 5. 

Aliso, a fort in Germany, 2. 7, 4 

Alliaria, wifeof Sempronius Gracchus, 

- 3, 53, 8. 
Amanus, Mt. (Amadagh), in Syria, 2 
83, 3. 

2; dies there of starva- 

INDEX I 

Amasis, king of Egypt, 6. 28, 4. 

Amathus, founder of temple to Ama- 
thusian Venus, 3. 62, 5 

Amazones, legends respecting the, 3. 
61,2; 4. 56, I. 

amicitia, formal renunciation of, 2. 
79, 55 3: 24; 5 

Amisia (Ems), the, I. 60,2; 63,5; 
2. 8, 1; 23, I 

Amorgus, island of, a place of exile, 
4. 13, 25; 30, 3. 

Amphictyones, decree of the, 4. 14, 2 

amphitheatrum, at Fidenae, 4. 62, 2 

Ampsivarii, the, in Germany, 2. 8, 4; 
22, 2 ; 24, 5. 

Amunclanum mare, the, 4. 59, 2. 

Ancharius : see Priscus. 

Ancona, Cn. Piso lands at, 3. 9, t 

nS: king, laws ascribed to, 3. 
26, 6. 

Andecavi, the, of Gaul, 3. 41, 1. 

Angrivarii, the, in Germany, 2. 8, 4 ; 
I9, 3; 22, 35; 24,5; 41, 2. 

Annia: see Rufilla. 

Annius : see Pollio, Vinicianus. 

annona, care of, 2.87, 15; 3. 54,6 ; 4. 
6, 6; 6. 13, I. 

Anteius, 2. 6, I. 

Anthemusias, a Parthian town, 6. 
41, 2. 

Antias ager, the: see Antium. 

Antigonus (Doson). decree of, 4. 43, 4. 

- Antiochia, in Syria, people of, 2. 69, 

3; cremation of Germanicus at, 2 
73, 55; 83, 3. 
Antiochus, of Commagene, 2. 42, 7. 
— agent); of Syria, 2. 63, 3; 3. 
3, 1. 
Antistius, C., consul, 4. I, 1: 
Labeo, Vetus. 

Antium (Porto d' Anzo), temple of 
Fortuna Equestris at, 3. 71, 2. 
Antius, C., set over the census of 

Gaul, 2. 6, 1. 
Antonia, mother of Germanicus and 
. Claudius, 3. 3, 2; 18, 4. 
— minor, wife of L. Domitius, 4. 

see also 

44, 3. | 
Antonius, Iullus, 1. 10,2 ; 3. 18, 1; 4. 

44, 5. 
— L., son of the above, 4. 44, 4. 
—M.1.17,3; 2, 15 9, 4; 10,15 3. 
18, 1; 4. 43, 1 ; grandfather of 
Germanicus, 2. 43, 6; 53, 3; actions 
of, in Parthia and Armenia, 2.2,43 
3, 2 ; letters of, abusing Augustus, 

4. 34, 8. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

Aphrodisias, asylum at, 3. 62, 2. 

Apicata, wife of Seianus, 4. 5, 5; 
II, 4. 

Apicius, 4. I, 5. 

Apidius: see Merula. 

Apollo, Clarian, 2. 54, 3; Pythian, 
legends respecting the birthplace 
of, 3. 61, 1. 

Apollonidenses, 2. 47, 4- 

Aponius, L., eques, 1. 29, 2 

Appia via, the, 2. 30, I. 

Appianus, Appius, 2. 48, 3. 

Appius: see Silanus. 

Appuleia: see Varilla. 

Appuleius, Sex., consul, 1. 7, 3. 

Apronia, wife of Plautius Silvanus, 
4. 22, I. . 

Apronius, L 4 1. 56,15 72, 15 2. 32, 
4; 3 64,4; 4. 22 =e : proconsul of 
Africa, 3. 21, 1, foll. ; lega*us of 
Lower Germany, 4. 73, I, foll. 

— L. (or Aponius), a knight, I. 20, 2. 

— Caesianus, 3. 21, 6 

Apulia, coast of, 4. 71, 6; magistrates 
of, 3. 2, I. 

Aquilia, exiled, 4. 42, 3. 

ara adoptionis, I. 14, 3; amicitiae et 
clementiae, 4. 74, 3; ultionis, 3. 
I8, 3; see also Drusus, Hercules, 
Sol, Ubii. 

Arabes, the, 6. 28, 6; 44, 7. 

Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, 2 

42, 2. 

Arduenna (Ardennes), forest of, 3. 
42, 2. 

Areum iudicium, court of Areopagus, 
the, 2. 55, 2. 

: Argolicus, an Archaean of rank, 6. 18, 

3. 

Ariobarzanes, king of Armenia, 2. 4, 
2. 

Aristonicus, war of the Romans with, 
4- 55, 2. 

Armenia (maior) and Armenii, situa- 
tion of, 2. 56, 1; formerly con- 
quered by Rhamses, 2. 60, 4; 
wavering, but on the whole inclined 
to Parthian alliance, 2. 3, 2; 56, 
1; relations of, with Augustus, 2 i 
3-4; settled by Germanicus, 2. 43, 
1; 56, 2-4 ; 64-1; seized by Arta- 
banus for his son, 6. 31, 2; gained 
possession of by Mithridates the 
Hiberian with Roman aid, 6. 32, 
5-36, 2. — 

Arminius, prince of the Cherusci, the 
organiser of the rising against 

661 

Varus, I. 55, 3; 58, 3-5; at en- 
mity with Segestes, I. §5, 2; wife 
and son of, 1. 57, 5; 58,9; ‘uncle 
of, 1. 60, 1; brother of, 2. 9, I1; 
leads the resistance against the 
Romans, I. 59, 2, foll. ; 63-68; 2. 
9-17; 21, 1; at war with Maro- 
boduus, 2. 44, 3, foll.; death and 
character of, 2. 88. 

Arnus (Arno) the, I. 79, I. 

Arpus, prince of the Chatti, 2. 7, 2 

Arruntius, L., a distinguished senator 
and pleader, 1. 8, 4; 13, 1; 3. 11, 
2; 6.5,1;a possible aspirant to 
empire, I. 13, 2 ; one of a board to 
deal with inundations of the Tiber, 
1. 76, 3; 79, 1; defends L, Sulla, 
3. 31, 5; repels an accusation, 6. 
7 ; not allowed to go to Spain, 6. 
27, 3; is afterwards accused and 
commits suicide, 6. 47, 2-48, 5. 

Arsaces, a Parthian prince, made 
king of Armenia, 6. 31,2; 33, I. 

Arsacidae, Parthian royal race of the, 
2. 1,15 2,23 3,33 6. 34, 5. 

Artabanus (111), king of Parthia, 2 
3,15; 4, 4; of mixed blood, 6. 42, 
4; renews treaty with Germanicus, 
2. 58, 1; obnoxious to his own 
subjects, 6. 31, I; contests Ar- 
menia with Mithridates, 6. 31-36 ; 
driven from his own kingdom into 
exile in Scythia, 6. 36, 4; recalled, 
6. 43-44; treatment of Seleucia 
by, 6. 42, 3. 

d erus. mines of Armenia named, 
2.359% 

Artaxata ( easel): capital of Ar- 
menia, 2. 56, 3; occupied by the 
Hiberi, 6. 33, 1 

Artaxias, kings of Armenia named, 
2.3, 3; 56, 3; 6. 31, 2. 

Artemita, a Parthian town, 6. 41, 2. 

Aruseius, L., an accuser, 6. 7 ; 40, I 

Asia, province of, 2. 54,23 3.7, 1; 
4. 14, 2; proconsuls of, 2. 47,5 ; 3. 
32, 3; 66, 2 ; 68, 1; 4. 36, 4; 56, 
3 ; procurator of, 4. 15, 3; massacre 
of Romans in, by Mithridates, 4. 
14, 3; earthquakes in, 2. 47, I ; 4. 
13, 1 ; asyla in, 3. 61, 1, foll. ; 
temple erected to Tiberius by, 4 
I5, 5; 37, 15 55, I. 

Asinius, C., consul, 4. 1, I. 

— see Agrippa, Gallus, Pollio, Salo- 
ninus. 

 Asprenas, L., 1. 55,9; 3. 18, 5. 

662 

asyla, üenuttions respecting, 3. 60- 
63; 4. 14. 

Ateius, M., 2. 47, 5 : see a/so Capito. 

Athenae and Athenienses, 2. 63, 3; 
honours paid to Germanicus by, 
2. $3, 3; conduct of Piso towards, 
2.55, 1; laws framed by Solon for, 
3. 26, 5. 

Atia, 3. 68, 3. 

Atidius : see Geminus. 

Atilius, A., temple vowed by, in Punic 
wars, 2. 49, 2. 

— a freedman, 4. 62, 2; 63, 3. 

Atticus, Curtius, a knight, friend of 
Tiberius, 4. 58, 1; put to death 
through Seianus, 6. to, 2. 

— Pomponius, great-grandfather of 
Drusus Caesar, 2. 43, 7. 

Attius, a centurion, 6. 24, 2. 

Attus: see Clausus. - 

Atys, mythical king of Lydia, 4.55, 7. 

Aufidienus : see Rufus. 

augur, the, pollution liable to attach 

to, I. 62, 3. 

augurale, the, in camp, 2. 13, I 

Augusta, Iulia, formerly Livia, ‘wife 
of Augustus, circumstances of the 
marriage of, I. 10, 4; 5. I, 3; 
companion of Augustus i in travel, 
. 34, 12; suspected of causing 
the deaths of Gaius and Lucius, 1. 
3, 3; and of Augustus, I. 5, 1; 
secures the succession to Tiberius, 
1. 5,6; 4. 57, 4; adopted by will, 

1. 8, 2; saves Haterius, I. 13, 
7; receives honours from the 
senate, I. 14, 1; 4. 16, 6; popular 
opinion respecting, I. IO, 4; be- 
lieved to have intrigued against 

". Germanicus in the East, 2. 43, 5 ; 
77,6; 82,2; abstains from his 
obsequies, 3. 3, 1; constant in en- 
mity to Agrippina, I. 33, 5; 2. 43, 
5; 4. 12, 6; yet protects her 
against Tiberius and Seianus, 5. 3, 
1; upholds Urgulania, 2. 34, 3; 
4. 22, 3; protects Plancina, 3. 15, 
3; 17,2; 6. 26,43; supports the 
younger Iulia in exile, 4. 71, 7; 
honoured by provincial worship, 
4.15, 4; 37,1; at variance with 
her son, 1. 72, 5; 3.64,1; 4. 57, 
4; suffers from a serious illness 
and recovers, 3. 64, 1; 71, 1; 
death, character, and funeral of, 
5. 1; divine honours declined for, 
5. 2, I. 

INDEX I 

— see Agrippina (junior). 
Augustales ludi, the, 1. 15, 3; 54, 3 
— sodales, the, 1. 54, 1; 2. 83, 2 ; 3. 
64, 3. . 
Augusti cultores,the,in Rome, 1.73, 2. 
— forum, the, in Rome, 4. 15, 3. 
Augustodunum (Autun), the chief 
town of the Aedui, 3. 43, 1 ; 45,2 ; 
46, 7. 
Augustus, gradually prevails over 
all rivals, 1. 1, 3; 2, 1; 9,13 IO, 
I; married to Livia, I. 10, 4; 
quelled a mutiny, 1. 42, 5; con- 
secrated the spoils at Actium, 
2. 53, 2; stations the captured 
fleet at Forum Iulii, 4. 5, 1; 
frames a constitution in his sixth 
consulship, 3. 28, 3; secures as- 
cendancy by his tribunician power, 
I.2, 1; 3. 56, 2; gradually grasps 
more functions, I. 2, 1; takes 
measures to secure the succession, 
I. 5, 1, foll.; visits provinces, I. 46, 
33 3. 34, 12 ; carries out a policy 
in the East, 2. 1-4; sets apart 
Egypt, 2. 59, 4; legislates to pro- 
mote marriage, 3. 25, 2; 28,5; 
also against adultery, 2. 50, 2; 
and luxury, * 54, 3; extends law 
of maiestas, 72, 4; institutes 
office of pelea urbis, 6. 11,5; 
modified ancient rules, 4. 16, 45 
restores temples, 2. 49, I ; adorns 
— the city, I. 9, 6; permits others to 
do so, 3. 72, 2; favours amuse- 
ments,.I. 54, 3; 76, 65; 77, 43 
forms plans for the marriage of his 
daughter, 4. 39, 5; 40,8; punishes 
her and his granddaughter, 1.53, 1; 
3.24,2; 4. 71, 6; self-control of, 
at the death of grandsons, 3. 6, 5; 
pays funeral honours to Drusus, 3. 
5, 2; behaviour of, to Tiberius, I. 
3,3; 10.6; 4. 57,6; to Agrippa 
Postumus, 1.3, 4: 5,1; 6,5; to 
Germanicus, 1. 3, 5; 4. 57, 6; to 
Hortalus, 2. 37, 2; mentions citi- 
zens who might be dangerous, I. 
13,2; aspired to divine honours, 
4. 38,5; was worshipped during 
life, 1. 10, 5; 4. 37, 4; last days 
and death of, 1. 4,2; 5, 1, foll. ; 
will of, r. 1, 8; other documents, 
I. 11,6; posthumous warning of, 
against extension of the empire, 
I. 11, 7; funeral honours, 1. 8, 4 ; 
deification, I. 10, 8; priesthood to, 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

I. 54, 15 2. 83,2 ; 3.64, 3: games 
to, I. 15,3; 54, 3; sacrifices, 4. 
52, 3; cultores of, 1. 75, 2 ; tem- 
pies, 1. 10, 8 ; 78, 15 4.57, 15 6. 45, 
2; statues, I. 73, 23 3. 63, 53 4. 
67, 6; generalreview of conflicting 
judgements respecting, I. 9-10; 
boast of descent from or relation- 
ship to, 3. 4, 33 4- 52, 4 ; 75, 2 

Aurelius: see Cotta, Pius. 

Auzea, in Africa, 4. 25, I 

Aventinus, mons, fire upon, 6. 45, 1 

A viola, Acilius, an officer, 3. 41, 2. 

Bactriani, the, once conquered by 
Rhamses,2.60,4. 
Baduhenna, grove of, in Germany, 

4. 73 7- 

Balbus, works of, 3. 72, 2 

— Laelius, an accuser, 6. 47, 1 ; 48,7. 

Bastarnae, the, 2. 65, 5. 

Batavi, the, auxiliaries, 2. 8, 3; 11, 
25 island of the, 2. 6, 3. 

Bathyllus, a pantomimist, I. 54, 3 

Belgae, the, 1. 34, 1; 43, 33 3- 40, 3. 

bellum civile, the, 2. 43, 3; 3. 27, 4; 
6. 11, 3 (see also ltalicum, Peru- 
sinum). 

Bibaculus, poems of, 4. 34, 8. 

Bibulus, C., aedile, 3. 52, 3. 

Bithynia, proconsul of, accused, | 
74, Y. 

Bithynum mare, the, 2. 60, 4. 

Blaesus, Iunius, legatus of Pannonia, 
I. 16-23; 29, 2; uncle of Seianus, 
3. 35 3; proconsul of Africa by 
special appointment, zd@.;° con- 
tinued in office, 3. 58, 1; receives 
triumphalia, 3. 72, 6; saluted as 
imperator, 3. 74, 6; alluded to as 
dead, 5. 7, 2. 

— Iunius, son of the above, 1. 19, 4; 
29,2; with his father in Africa, 3. 
74,2; commits suicide with his 
brother, 6. 40, 3. 

Blandus, Rubellius, votes given by, 3. 
23,2; 51,1; marriesIulia, daughter 
of Drusus, 6. 27,1; appointed on 
a commission, 6. 45, 3. 

Bovillae, shrine of the Iulii at, 2. 41, 1. 

Britanni, the, and Brittannia, restore 
shipwrecked soldiers, 2. 24, 5. 

Bructeri, the, in Germany, I. 51, 4; 
60, 2. 

Brundisium, 2. 30, 1; 3. 1, 23 7,23 
4. 27, 1; treaty of, I. Lo, 2. 

663 

Bruttedius Niger, an accuser, 3. 66, 2. 

Brutus, L. (Iunius), 1. 1, 1. 

— M. (Iunius), 1. 2, 1; praised by 
Cordus, 4. 34, 1; speeches of, 4. 
34, 8; effigies of, 3. 76, 5; 4. 35, 
3; lunia, sister of, 3.76, I. 

Byzantium, a Thracian city, 2. 54,2 

Cadra, a hill in Cilicia, 6. 41, 1 
Caecilianus, C., an accuser, 6. 7, 1. 
— Magius, praetor, 3. 37, 1. 
Caecilius : see Cornutus. 

Caecina, A. Severus, legatus of Lower 
Germany, I. 31, 2; 37, 3; 48, 1 ; 
56, 1; 60,2; 61, 2; 63, 55; 64,6; 
65, 8; 66,3: 72, 13 2. 6, 1; 
3. 34, 1; speaks in the senate, 3. 
18, 3 ; 33, I. . 

pour Vibenna, an Etruscan prince, 
4. 05, I. 

caelestes, honores, decreed, I. 10, 8; 
refused, 5. 2, I. 

Caelius, C., consul, 2. 41, 2: see also 
Cursor. 

— Mons, at Rome, 4. 64, 1, foll. 

Caepio : see Crispinus. 

Caesar: see Augustus, Claudius, 
Gaius, Germanicus, Nero, Tiberius. 

— Gaius Iulius, the dictator, 1. 1, 5; 
8,6; 4. 43, 1; gardens bequeathed 
by, 2. 41, 1 ; bore the loss of his 
daughter, 3. 6, 3; quelled a mutiny 
by a word, 1. 42, 5 ; replied to a 
treatise of Cicero, 4. 34, 7 ; legis- 
lates respecting usury, 6. 16, 1. 

— Gaius, grandson and adopted son 
of Augustus, I. 3,2; 53,2; 4. 3; 
6. 51, 2; sent to the East, 2. 4, 2; 
42, 3; 3. 48, 2; married to Livia, 
4.40,5; death of, 1. 3, 3. * 

— ese brother of the above, I. 3, 

; 53, 25 6. 51, 2; betrothed to 
Lipide, 3. 23, 1; death of, 1. 

3» 3. 
Caesellius : see Bassus. 
Caesia silva, the, I. 50, 2 
Caesianus : see Apronius. 
Caesius: see Cordus. 
Caetronius, C., legatus legionis, I. 
44, 3. 
Calabria, 3. 1, 1; 2, 1. 
Cales, 6. 15, 2 
Caligula: see Gaius. 
Calpurnium genus, the, 3. 24, 1 
Calpurnius, an officer, 1. 39, 7. 
— L., cos., 4. 62, I. 
— see also Salvianus, Piso. 

664 INDEX I 

Calusidius, a soldier, 1. 35, 6. 

Calvisius, C., consul, 4. 46, 1: see a/so 
Sabinus.: 

Canillus (M. Furius), the ‘reciperator 
urbis, 2. 52, 8. . 

-- Furius, defeats Tacfarinas, 2. 52, 
5, 9: 3. 20, I. 

-— Furius Scribonianus, consul, 6. 1, I. 

Campania, stay of Tiberius in, 3. 31, 
2; 47,4: dedication of templesin, 4. 
57,1; 67,1; magistrates of, 3. 2, 1. 

Campus Martis, the, r. 15, 1; place 
of funeral of Augustus, 1. 8, 6 ; of 
Germanicus, 3. 4, 2. 

Caninius: see Gallus. 

Canninefates, the, ala of, 4. 73, 2. 

Canopus (Aboukir), 2. 60, 1. 

Capito, Ateius, 1. 76,3; 79. 1; char- 
acter, and juristic knowledge of, 3. 
70, 2: death of, 3. 75, I. 

Capito, Fonteius, proconsul of Asia, 
4. 36, 4. 

-— Lucilius, a procurator, 4. 15, 3. 

Capitolium, and Mons Capitolinus, 
the, burning of, 6. 12, 4; refuge in, 
3. 36, 2. 

Cappadocia, once subject to Rhamses, 
2. 60,4 ; kingdom of Archelaus, 2. 
42, 2; becomes a province, 2. 42, 
6; 56, 4. 

Capreae (Capri), island of, described, 
4. 67, 1, foll. ; occupied by Tiberius, 
4.67,5; 6.1,1; 2,4 ; 10,2 ; 20, I. 

Capua, temple of Juppiter at, 4. 57, 1 ; 
67, 1. 

Carmanii, the, relations of Artabanus 
with, 6. 36, 5. 

carmina (incantations), use of, 2. 28, 
35,69, 5; 4. 22, 4. 

Carsidius: see Sacerdos. 

Caspia via, the, 6. 33, 4. 

Cassia familia, the, 6. 15, 3. 

Cassius: see Asclepiodotus, Chaerea, 

Severus. 

— C.,the assassin of Caesar, 1. 2, 1 ; 
10,2; 2.43, 3; 4.34, 1, foll. ; Iunia, 
wife of, 3. 76,1; effigies of, 4. 34, 3. 

— L.,marriedto Drusilla,6.15,1; 45, 3. 

— an actor, I. 73, 2, 4. 

Cato, the censor, 3. 66, 2; 4. 56, 1. 

— M. (the younger), 4. 34, 7. 

— Porcius, an accuser, 4. 68, 2. 

Catcnius: see Iustus. 

Catualda, a Goth, 2. 62, 2, 6; 63, 6. 

Catullus, abuse of Caesar by, 4. 34, 8. 

Catus, Firmius, a senator, 2. 27, 2; 

39,15 4. 31, 7. 

Celenderis (Chelendreh), in Cilicia, 
2. 80, I. 

Celer, Domitius, a friend of Cn. Piso, 
2. 77, 15; 78, 2; 79, 3. 

— Propertius, 1. 75, 5. 

Celsus, a knight, 6. 14, 1. 

— Iulius, an officer, 6. 9, 6; 14, 2. 

d a stream near Ephesus, 
3. 61, 1. 

censoria potestas, exercised by Volu- 
sius, 3. 30, 2. 

centesima rerum venalium, the, 1. 75, 
25 2.42, 6. 

Cercina (Kerkena), an island, 1. 53, 
6; 4. 13, 4. 

Ceres, temple of, 2. 49, 1. 

Cestius, C., a senator, 3. 36, 2; 6. 7, 
35 31; I. 

Cethegus, Cornelius, consul, 4. 17, 1. 

— Labeo, legatus legionis, 4. 73, 4. 

Chaerea, Cassius, afterwards the 
assassin of Gaius, I. 32, 5. 

Chaldaei, astrologers, 2. 27, 2; 3. 22, 
2; 6.20, 3. 

Charicles, a physician of Tiberius, 6. 
50, 3. 

Chariovalda, a Batavian, 2. 11, 3. 

Chatti, the, I. 55, 15; 56, 1, 3, 7; 2. 
7,15; 25,2 ; 41, 2; princes of the, 
2. 7,2; 88, I. 
Chauci, the, 1. 38, 1 ; 2. 24, 3; auxi- 
liaries of Rome, 1. 60, 2; 2. 17, 7. 
Cherusci, the, 1. 56, 7; 59, 2; 1. 60, 
1; 64,3; 2.19, 3; 26,5; defeated 
in battle, 2. 16, 4, foll.; 41, 2; 
at war with the Suebi, 2. 44, 2, 
foll. 

Cibrya, in Asia, injured by earth- 
quake, 4. 13, I. 

Cicero, M., praise of Cato by, 4. 34, 7. 

Cilicia, 2. 58, 2; 3. 48, 2; 6. 31, 2; 
resistance of Cn. Piso in, 2. 8o, 1, 
foll; petty kings of, 2. 42, 7; 
78, 3: see also Clitae. 

Cinithii, the, in Africa,.2. 52, 5. 

Cinna, despotism of, 1. 1, 2. 

circenses ludi, regular, 2. 83, 2. 

Circus Maximus, the, 2. 49, 1; fires 
in, 6. 45, I. 

Cirtenses, the, ih Africa, 3. 74, 2. 

civis servati decus, 3. 2I, 3. 

civitas, gifts of, 3. 40, 2. 

civitates liberae; cp. 4. 36, 3. 

Clanis (Chiana), the, 1. 79, 1. 

Clarius: see Apollo. 

classicum, proclamation of executions 
by, 2. 32; 5. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

classis: see Misenum, Ravenna. 
Claudia familia, and Claudii, the, 1 
43i 2:457; 3- $2 ; 4-9; 3; 64, 

5; 5.I, I5 6. 
— (Silana), wife of Gaius, 6. 20, 1; 

; 5. 

— see Pulchra, Quinta. 

Claudius (Ti.), made sodalis Augus- 
talis, I. 54, 2; meets the remains 
of Germanicus, 3. 2,4; 3. 3 1-3; 
omitted in the vote of thanks, and 

looked on by none as a possible. 

emperor, 3. 18,4 ; son of, betrothed 
? the daughter of Seianus, 3. 29, 
; thought of by Tiberius as a suc- 

diae but set aside as imbecile, 
6. 46, 2; had literary tastes, 6. 46, 
25 history of his rule falsified by 
servility and spite, I. I, 5. 

Claudius: see Drusus, Marcellus, 
Nero. | 

Clausus, Attus, ancestor of the Claudii, 
4. 9, 3. 

Clemens, personates Agrippa Postu- 
mus, 2. 39-40. 

— lulius, a centurion, I. 23, 4; 26, 
I ; 28, 5. 

Clementia, altar to, 4. 74, 3. 

Clitae, the, in Cilicia, 6. 41, I. 

Clutorius : see Priscus. 

Cocceius: see Nerva. 

Coelaletae, the, in Thrace, 3. 38, 5.. 

Colchi, the, 6. 34, 3. 

Colophon, oracle at, 2. 54, 3 

Cominius, C., pardoned for a libel, 4. 

31,2. 

Commagene, kingdom of, 2. 42, 7; 
placed under a legatus, 2. 56, S 

commentarii Agrippinae, 4. 53 3 

Concordia, offering to, 2. 32, 3. 

confarreatio, disuse of, 4. 16, 2-3. 

congiaria, gift of, 2. 42, 1; 3. 29, 3. 

Considius: see Aequus, Proculus. 

cera question put to by Caesar, 
3. 17, 6. 

— designati, asked first, 3. 22,6 ; 49, 
4; 4. 42, 3. 

Corbulo, Domitius, complains of L. 
Sulla, 3. 31, 4; prosecutes those 
responsible for the roads, 3. 31, 7. 

Corcyra (Corfu), Agrippina at, 3. 
I, I. 

Cordus, Caesius, proconsul of Crete, 
3.38,1; 70,1. - 

— Cremutius, trial and defence of, 
4. 34-35. — 

Corinthiense littus, the, 5. 10, 4. 

665 

Cornelia, a vestal virgin, 4. 16, 6. 

Cornelius, an accuser, 6. 29, 7; 
30, I. 

— see Balbus, Cethegus, Cossus, 
Dolabella, Lupus, Maluginensis, 
Merula, Scipio, Sulla. 

Cornutus, Caecilius, 4. 28, 2; 50, 3. 

coronae aureae, presented, 2. $7; 5. 

Corvinus, Messalla, praef. urbis, 6. 
II. 4; a noted orator, 3. 34, 2; 
spoke of Cassius as his general, 4. 
34, 6; son of, 3. 34, 2. 

Corvus, Valerius, consulships of, 1. 
9, 2. 

Cosa, in Etruria, 2. 39, 3. 

Cossus, Cornelius, consul, 4. 34, I. 

Cotta, Lucius, 3. 66, 2. 

Cotta Messalinus, M. Aurelius, 2 
32, 2; 3. 2, 5; 17, 8; 4.20, 6; 5. 
3, 4; 6. 5,1. 

Cotys, king of Thrace, seized and 
killed by his uncle Rhescuporis, 
2. 64-66; wife and children of, 
2. 67; 33 3. 35,45 4. 5, 5. 

Cous, island of, 2. 75, 2; asylum of 
Aesculapius at, 4. 14, I. 

Crassus, influence of, 1. 1, 3: see also 
Licinius. 

^ Cremutius : see Cordüs; 

Creta, island of, 4. 21, 5; proconsul 
of, 3. 38, I: deputation from, 3. 
63, 6; laws of Minos for, 3. 26, 4. 

Creticus : see Silanus. 

Crispinus, Caepio, an accuser, I. 

74, I. 
Crispus: see Sallustius. 

cruppellarii, Gallic gladiators called, 
3. 43, 3- - 

Cruptorix, a Frisian, 4. 73, 7. 

Seren: the Parthian capital, 6. 
42, 

cuneus iuniorum, the, 2. 83, 5. . 

Cursor, Caelius, 3. 37, I. 

Curtisius, T., leader of a slave band, 
4. 27, 1. 

Curtius: see Atticus. 

custodia militaris, 3. 22, 5 ; publica, 
3. 36, 4; domibus magistratuum, 

35) 3. 

Cusus (Waag), the, 2. 63, 7. 
Cutius : see Lupus. | 
Cyclades, the, 2. 55, 3; 5. 10, I. 
Cyclopes, legend of the, 3. 61, 2 
Cyme, in Asia, 2. 47, 4. 
Cyprus, asyla at, 3. 62, 4. 
Cyrenenses, the, governors’ accused 

by, 3. 70, I. 

666 

Cyrrus, in Syria, 2. 57, 2. 
Cyrus, king of Persia, 3. 62, 4; 6. 
I, 2. 
E island of, chosen for exile, 
| 3. 69, 8. 
Cyziceni, the, deprived of freedom, 
4. 36, 2. 

Dahae, the, in Scythia, 2. 3, 1. 

damnati, not allowed burial or testa- 
mentary disposition, 6. 29, 2; 
erased from records, 3. 17, 8; 
6. 2, 1. 

Danuvius, the, 2. 65, 1 ; 4. 5, 5. 

Dareus, king of Persia, 3. 63, 5. 

Davara, in Cilicia, 6. 41, 1. 

decimatio, punishment of, 3. 21, t. 

Decrius, an officer, 3. 20, 2. 

decuriae, the, of judges, 3. 30, 2. 

Delmatia, 2. 53, 1; 4. 5, 5; sea of, 
3. 9. I. : 

Delmaticum bellum, the, 6. 37, 4. 

Delphi, 2. 54, 4. 

Delus, 3. 61, r. 

Denter, Romulius, 
Romulus, 6. 11, I. 

Dentheliates ager, dispute respecting 
the, 4. 43, 2. 

devotiones, 2. 69, 5 ; 3. 13, 3; 4. 52, 
2 (see also carmina). 

di hospitales, penetrales Germaniae, 
2. 10,1 ; ultores, 4. 28, 3. 

Dialis: see flamines. 

Diana, birthplace of, 3. 61, 1; of 
Ephesus, 3. 61,1; 4.55,6; Leuco- 
phryna, 3. 62, 1; Limnatis, 4. 43, 
I; Persica, 3. 62, 4. 

Didymus, a freedman of Tiberius, 6. 
24, 2. 

Dii, the, in Thrace, 3. 38, 5. 

dilectus, held at Rome, 1. 31, 4 ; in 
provinces, 4. 4, 4 ; 46, 2. 

Dinis, a Thracian, 4. 50, 2. 

Dolabella, P. Cornelius, a servile 
senator, 3. 47, 4; 69, I; an ac- 
cuser, 4. 66,2 ; proconsul of Africa, 
4. 23,2; defeatsand kills Tacfarinas, 
4. 24-6. 

Domitius: see Afer, Celer, Corbulo, 
Pollio. 

— Cn. (Ahenobarbus), commander of 
a fleet in the civil wars, 4. 44, 2. 
— Cn. Ahenobarbus, husband of 
Agrippina and father of Nero, 
4. 75, 15 6.45, 3; 6. 48, 1 : consul, 
6. 1, 1; accused under Tiberius, 

6. 47, 2. 

vicegerent of 

INDEX I 

— L. (Ahenobarbus), killed after 
Pharsalia, 4. 44, 2. 

— L. (Ahenobarbus), husband of 
Antonia, 4. 44, 3; commanded in 
Germany, 1. 63, 6; crossed the 
Elbe, 4. 44, 3. 

dona, vows of, 3. 71, 1 ; 6. 25, 5. 

donativum, to soldiers (cp. 1. 2, 1). 

Donusa, island of, 4. 3o, 2. 

Drusi, family of the, 1. 28, 6; 2. 32, 
25 4. 7 3- 

Drusiana fossa, the, 2. 8, r. 

Drusilla, daughter of Germanicus, 
6. 15, 4. 

Drusus (Livius), the tribune, 3. 27, 3. 

— (Nero Claudius), brother of Ti- 
berius, imperator, I. 3, 1 ; works 
of, in Germany, I. 56, 1; 2.8, 1; 
altar there to, 2. 7, 3; imposes 
tribute on the Frisii, 4. 72, 2; 
funeral honours of, 3. 5, 13 re- 
membered with affection, I. 33, 4 ; 
41, 3 ; 2. 41, 5; 82, 5; 6. 51, 2. 

— Caesar, son of Tiberius, maternal 
lineage of, 2. 43, 7; 3. 19, 4; 
character of, I. 29, 4; 76, 5; 3. 8, 
4; 4. 3, 2; wife and children of, 
2.43.73 94,1; 4.3, 4; 15, 1 ; 6. 
27, 1; friendly to Germanicus 
and his sons, 2. 43,7: 4. 4,2 ; sent 
to quell the Pannonian mutiny, I. 
24-30; also to watch the war 
between Maroboduus and Armi- 
nius, 2. 44-46; 62-64; visited in 
Delmatia by Germanicus, 2. 53, 
I; and by Cn. Piso, 3. 8, 1; in 
Rome at the funeral honours of 
the former, 3: 2, 4; and during the 
trial of the latter, 3. 11, 1 ; receives 
an ovation, 2. 64, 1; 3. II, 13 I9, 
4 ; consulships of, 1. 55, 1 5; 3. 31, 1 ; 
tribunician power of, 3. 56, 1; gains 
popularity in Rome, 3. 31, 3; 36, 
4; 37, 25; poisoned by contrivance 
of his wife Livia, who had been 
corrupted by Seianus, 4.3, 2 ; 8, 1 ; 
I1, 4; funeral honours of, 4. 9, 2; 
conduct of Tiberius at the death 
of, 4. 8, 2; false report that Ti- 
berius had caused the death of, 4. 
IO-1I. | 

Drusus Caesar, son of  Germa- 
nicus, assumes the toga virilis, 
4. 4, 1; introduced to the senate, 
4. 8, 5; included in the annual 
* vota, 4. 17, 1 ; praefectus urbis 
at the feriae Latinae, 4. 36, 1; 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

a partisan of Seianus against his 
brother Nero, 4. 60, 4 ; married 
to Aemilia Lepida, 6. 40, 4; 
orders given to Macro respecting, 
6. 23, 53 personated by an im- 
postor, 5. 10, I, foll; dies of 
starvation in prison in the Pala- 
tium, 6. 23, 4; account of last 
hours of, published, 6. 24. 

— see Libo. 

Duilius, C., temple built by, 2. 49, 1 

duodecim tabulae, the, 3. 27, 1; 6. 
16, 3. 

edicta : see plebes. 

effigies : see statuae. 

Egnatius (Rufus), put to death by 
Augustus, I. 10, 3. 

Elephantine, a boundary of the 
Roman empire, 2. 61, 2. 

Elymaei, the, in the East, 6. 44, 5. 

Ennia, wife of Macro, 6. 45, 5. 

Ennius, L., a knight, 3. 70, 2. 

— M'., an officer, 1. 38, 2. 

Ephesus, temple and P a of 
Diana at, 3. 61, 1 ; 4. 55, 6. 

Epidaphna, near ' Antioch, the place 
of death of Germanicus, 2. 83, 3. 

Erato, queen of Armenia, 2. 4, 3. 

ss temple at, in Sicily, 4. 43, 

E re 6. 12, 4. 
Esquilina porta, the, 2. 32, 5. 
etesiae, the winds called, 6. 33, 5. 
I:truria, and Etrusci, 2. 39, 3; 4. 5, 5. 
Euboea, 2. 54, 1; 5. 10, 4. 
Eudemus, a physician, agent in the 
death of Drusus, 4. 3, 5 ; I1, 4. 
evocatus, military rank of, 2. 68, 3. 
Euphrates, the, a frontier between 
Rome and Parthia, 2. 58, 1 ; 4. 5,4 ; 

6. 31,45 37, I. 

Fabatus, Rubrius, 6. 14, 3. 

Fabius: see Maximus, Paulus. 

Fabricius, alluded to, 2. 33, 3 ; 88, 2. 

faeneratores, attack on, 6. 16-17. 

Falanius, a knight, 1. 73, I 

familiae (servorum), magnitude of, 3. 
53.55; 4. 25 3- 

feminae, special laws respecting, 2 
85, 1; 3. 33-34. 

feriae Latinae, 4. 36, 1 ; 6. 11,2. 

fetiales, motion respecting the, 3. 

64, 4. 
Fidena, fall of amphitheatre at, 4. 
62, 2. 

667 

Firmius : see Catus. 

Flaccus, L. Pomponius, 2. 32, 2 ; 41, 
2 ; legatus of Moesia, 2. 66, 3 ; 67, 
I ; dies as legatus of Syria, 6. 27, 3. 

— Vescularius, a knight, 2. 28, 1; 
put to death, 6. 10, 2. 

flamines, rules respecting, 3. 58 ; 71, 
3; 4. 16. 

Flaminia via, the, 3. 9, I 

Flavius: see Vespasianus. 

Flavus, brother of Arminius, 2. 9, 2 
IO, 2. 

Flevum, a fort among the Frisii, 4. 
72, 6. 

Flora, temple of, 2. 49, I. 

Florentini, petition from the, I. 79, 1. 

Florus, Iulius, heads the rebellion of 
the Treveri, 3. 40-42. 

Fonteius: see Agrippa, Capito. 

Fortuna, temples of, 2. 41, 1; 3. 71, t. 

Forum holitorium, the, 2. 49, 1. 

— Iulium (Fréjus), colony and naval 
station of, 2. 63, 7; 4. 5, I 

fossae (canals), constructed, 2. B, 1. 

Fregellanus, Pontius, 6. 48, 7. 

Frisii, the, 1. 60, 2; revolt from 
Rome, 4. 72-74. 

Fronto, Octavius, speaks against 
luxury, 2. 33, I. 

— Vibius, an officer, 2. 68, 3. 

frumentum, priceof, regulated, 2. 87,1. 

Fufius: see Geminus. 

Fulcirius : see Trio. 

Fundani montes, the, 4. 59, 2 

funus censorium, 4. 15, 3; 6.27,2; 
publicum, 3. 5, 1 ; 48, 1; 6. 11, 6. 

Furius: see Camillus. 

Furnius, condemned, 4. 52, 2, 6. 

Gaetulicus: see Lentulus. 

Gaius Caesar (the emperor), as a 
child in the camp, called ‘ Cali- 
gula,' I. 41, 3; 69, 5; delivers the 
‘laudatio’ on Augusta, 5. 1, 6; 
plotted against by Seianus, 6. 5, 4; 
profligacy imputed to, 6. 5, 1; 9,5; 
45, 5; married to Claudia, daughter 
of M. Silanus, 6. 20, 1; promises 
marriage to Ennia, 6. 45, 5; de- 
meanour of, when living with 
Tiberius at Capreae, 6. 20, 1; 45, 
5; remark of Passienus respect- 
ing, 6. 20, 2; court paid by Macro 
to, 6. 45, 5; 46, 6; judgement of 
Tiberius respecting, 6. 46, 1, 7, 
8; and of Arruntius, 6. 48, 4; con- 
duct of, during the last hours of 

668 

Tiberius, 6. e? 7, 8; passionate 
temper of, 6. 45, 5; servility of 
Vitellius to, 6 32, 7 ; assassinated 
by C. Chaerea, 1. 32, 5. 

Galba, C. Sulpicius, consul, 3. 52, 1 ; 
commits suicide, 6. 40, 3. 

— Ser. (Sulpicius), accused by Cato 
the censor, 3. 66, 2. 

— Ser. (Sulpicius), afterwards em- 
peror, consul, 6. 15, 1 ; prediction 
of Tiberius respecting, 6. 20, 5; 
luxury rampant till the rule of, 
3. 55, 1. 

Galla, Sosia, wife of C. Silius and 
friend of Agrippina, 4. 19, I, 4; 20, 

2; 52, 5. 

Galli, the, regarded as wealthy and 
unwarlike, 3. 46, 2. 

Callia, fidelity of, 1. 34, 6 ; sixty-four 
states of, 3. 44, 1 ; census of, I. 51, 
2; 33, 15 2. 6, 1; supplies and 
troops from, for the German war, 
I. 47, 2 71, 35 2 5, 3; 17, 63 
rebellion of certain states of, 3. 
40-46 ; fleet on the coast of, 4. 5, 
1; Narbonensis, 2. 63, 6. 

Gallio Iunius, 6. 3, 1. 

Gallus, Aelius, 5. 8, I. 

—- Asinius, son of Pollio, r. 12, 6; 
opinion of Augustus respecting, I 
13, 2; obnoxious to Tiberius, I. 
12, 6; refused to plead for Cn. 
Piso, 3. 11, 2 ; constantly promi- 
nent in the senate, I. 8, 4; 13,2; 
76,2; 77, 33 2 32,43 33,33 35, 
1; 36, 15 4. 20, 2} 30, 2; 71,3; 
dies of starvation while awaiting 
trial, 6. 23, 1, foll; charged by 
Tiberius with adultery with Agrip- 
pina, 6. 25, 2. 

Gallus, Caninius, one of the quinde- 
cimviri, 6. 12, 1. 

— Togonius, an obscure senator, 6. 
2,2. 

— Vipstanus, praetor, 2. 51, I. 
Garamantes, the, in Libya, aid Tac- 
farinas, 3. 74, 2; 4. 23, 2; 26, 3. 

Gellius: see Publicola. 

Geminius, a knight, friend of Seia- 
nus, 6. 14, I 

Geminus, Atidius, proconsul of Ach- 
ala, 4. 43, 5. 

— Fufius, consul, 5. I, 1; witticisms 
of, 5. 2, 3; death of, 6. 1o, 1. 

— Rubellius, consul, 5. 1, 1. 

Gemoniae (scalae), the, in Rome, 3. 
14, 6; ,. 9, 35 6. 25, 4. 

INDEX I 

Germani, the, auxiliaries from, I. 
56, 1; military qualities of, 2. 5, 
35 14, 3, foll.; banquets of, I. 50, 
4; 55,33 bodyguard of, at Rome, 
I. 24, 3. 

Germania, soil and climate of, 2. 23, 

3; 24, 1 ; campaigns of Tiberius 
in, I. 34, 5; 42,6; 2. 26, 3; 46,2; 
Arminius the liberator of, 2. 88, 5: 
Cp. I. 57, 25 2. 45, 5. 
— inferior and Superior, provinces 
and armies of, 1. 31, 2, 3; 37, 43 
40,1; 2. 39, 2; 3. 41, 3; foll. ; 4. 
$, 25; 73, 1; 6. 30, 3. 

Germanicus, Caesar, son of Drusus 
Nero, maternal ancestry ‘of, 2. 43, 
6; personal appearance and po- 
pularity of, I. 33, 55; 2. 13, 13 
41, 45; 72, 3; eloquence of, 2. 
55 4; marriage and children of, 

- 33, 25; 41, 35 2. 41, 45 54; I 
d also Agrippina, Drusilla, Dru- 
sus, Gaius, lulia, Nero) ; contem- 
plated as successor by Augustus, 4. 
57, 5; who compels. Tiberius to 
adopt him, and places him in chief 
command in Germany, I. 3, 5; 
jealousy and dislike of Tiberius 
towards, 1.7, 1; 52, 15; 65, 3; 2. 
5,1; 26,6; 42, 15 43 5; 59, 35 3. 
2, 53 4. 1, I; receives a second 
consulship, 2. 53, 1; proconsular 
power, I. 14, 4 ; the title of i Pas 
rator, I. 58,9; atriumph, I. 55, I 
2. 41, 2; and the award of an ova- 
tion, 2. 64, 1 ; quells with much 
difficulty and danger the German 
mutiny, I. 34-49; first campaign 
of, against the Germans, I. 49-51 ; 
second campaign and burial of the 
remains of the army of Varus, I. 
56-71; third campaign, 2. 6-26; 
1S sent to the East, 2. 43, 1; visits 
various localities there, 2. 53-54 ; 
settles Armenia, 2. 56; receives 
offer of friendship from Parthia, 2 
58 ; isthwarted by Cn. Piso, 2. 55 ; 
57; 69, 1; visits Egypt, 2. 59-61 ; 
returns to Syria and falls into an 
illness suspected to have been 
caused by Piso, 2. 69; dies and is 
burnt at Antioch, 2. 71-72; com- 
pared with Alexander, 2. 73, 3; 
public feeling and award of honours 
at Rome on news of the death of, 
2. 82-83; renewed feeling on ar- 
rival of the remains, 3. 1-6 ; inves- 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

tigation respecting the death of, 3. 
12-19; popularity of extended to 
family of, 3. 29,3; 4. 12,1; 15, 5; 
6. 46, 1 

Getae, hc 4. 44, I. 

gladiatores, shows of, I. 
62, 2. 

Gotones, the, in Germany, 2. 62, 2. 

Gracchi, the, alluded to, 3. 27, 3. 

Gracchus, Sempronius, put to death 
in exile, I. 53, 45 4. 13, 4. 

— (Sempronius), C., son of the above, 
4. 13, 3, foll. ; praetor, 6. 16, 5; an 
accuser, 6. 38, 4. 

Graeci, the, traits of, 2. 53, 4; 88, 4; 
5. 10, 2; courtiers, 2. 2, 6; 4. 58, 
I; their abuse of asylum, 3. 60, 
2; dress of, used by Romans, 2. 

76, 6 ; 4. 

59, 2. 

Granius, Q., 4. 21, 3: see Marcellus, 
Marcianus. 

Gratianus, Tarius, 6. 38, 4. 

Gyarus, island of, 3. 68, 2; 69, 8; 4. 
30, 2. 

Hadria, or Hadriaticum mare, 2. 53, 1. 

Haemus (Balkan), Mt., 3. 38, 6; 4. 
51, 4. 

Halicarnasii, the, 4. 55, 5. 

. Halus, a Parthian town, 6. 41, 2. 
Haterius, Q., an orator and leading 
senator, P 135, 43 2. 33, 15 3- 57, 
2; 4. 61, 1: see also Agrippa. 

Heliopolis, i U Egypt, 6. 28, 4. 

Helvius: see Rufus, 

Heniochi, the, 2. 68, 2. 

Hercules, 4. 38, 5; posterity of, 4. 
43, 2; Lydian legend of, 3. 61, 3; 
the Egyptian, 2. 60,3; the German, 
2. 12, 

Hereyni. silva, the, 2. 45, 4. 

Hermunduri, the, in Germany, 2 

3, 9. 

Hiberi, the, near Armenia, 4. 5, 4; 
habits, and alleged Thessalian ori- 
gin of, 6. 34, 3; invade Armenia, 
6. 33-36. .. 

Hiero, a Parthian noble, 6. 42, 5; 
43, 2. 

a ela in Asia, 2. 47, 4; 3. 

62, 
Hirtlus (A.), suspicion respecting the 
death of, 1. 10, I. 
Hispaniae, the, 1.71, 3; garrison of, 
4- 5, 3; the three provinces, 1. 78, 
;4.13,25; 45, 1j ; gold mines, 6. 
2 I. 

669 

Hispo: see Romanus. 
histriones (and pantomimi), introduc- 
tion of, in early times, 4. 14, 4; 
disorderly conduct of, 1. 54, 3; 77, 
; 4. 14, 4 ; senators and knights 
coca from paying court to, I 

» 5. 
Homonadenses, the, in Cilicia, 3. 

49, 2. 
hora genitalis, the, 6. 21, 3. 
Hortalus, M., 2. 37, 1 5" 58, 5, 8. 
Hortensius, the orator, 2. 37,2; 38, 10. 
Hostilius: see Tullus. 
horti: see Caesar (Iulius). 
Hypaepeni, the, in Asia, 4. 55, 

3. 
. Hyrcani, the, in the East, flight of 

Artabanus to, 6. 36, 55 432 
— Macedones, the, in ‘sia, 2. 47, 4 

Ianus, temple of, 2. 49, 1. 

Iaso, legendary descent of the Albani 
and Hibeti from, 6. 34, 3. 

Idisiaviso, plain of, 2. 16, I. 

Ilium and Ilienses, 2. 54,33 4-55, 43 
2 n verses pathered from, 6. 

2, 4. ; 

Illyricum, I. $5, 5; 46, 15 52, 3; 2. 
44; 1; 53, I. 

imago, of Caesar, used as sanctuary, | 
3. 36, 1 (see statuae). 

imperator, title of, as formerly given, 
3. 74,6; as given to the imperial 
family, I. 3, 15; 9, 2; 58, 8; 2. 18, 
2; 26, 

Indus, Iulius, a Treveran, 3. 42, 3. 

Inguiomerus, uncle of Arminius, 1. 
60,1; 68,1; 2.17, 8; 21, Aa joins 
Maroboduus, 2. 45, 2; 46, 1. 

insignia : see triumphalia. 

insulae, in Rome, 6. 45, 1. 

interamnates, deputation from the, 1. 
79, 2. 

intestati, property of, claimed for 
fiscus, 2. 48, I. 

Ionium mare, the, 2. 53, I. 

Isauricus (P. Servilius), 3. 62, 4 

deve I. 34, 6; 47, 2; 71, 33 2. 40, 

; 63, 5; 3. 28, 55; 31,75 54, 5; 

" '$5. 75 ‘banishment from, 2. 32. 

5; 50,45; 85, 5; 6. 3, 3; decay of 
produce and een in, 2. 59, 
4; 3: 40,5; 54, 

luba, king of Murendis: 4. 5,37 
son of, 4. 23, I. 

Iudaea, petitions for reduction of tri- 
bute, 2. 42, 7 ; Jewish religion ban- 
ished from Italy, 2. 85, 5. 

670 

Iulia gens, the, 1. 8, 2; 2. 83, 2; 6. 
51, 1; ancestry of, 4. 9, 5; shrine 
to, 2. 41, I. 

Iuliae leges, on adultery, 2. 50, 2; 
4. 42, 3; on marriage, 3. 25, I ; of 
Julius Caesar, on usury, 6. 16, 1. 

Iulia, Augusta: see Augusta. 

— daughter of Augustus, I. 53, 1; 
3. 24, 5; 4- 44 5 ; 6. 51, 3. 

— granddaughter of Augustus, 3. 24, 
5; 4. 71, 6. 

— daughter of Drusus Caesar, mar- 
ried to Nero Caesar, 3. 29, 4 ; 4. 60, 
4; to Rubellius Blandus, 6. 27, 1 

— daughter of Germanicus, birth of, 
2. 54, 1 ; marriage of, 6. 15, 4 

Iulianae partes, the, 1. 2, 1 

Iulius: see Africanus, Caesar, Celsus, 
Clemens, Florus, Indus, Marinus, 
Postumus, Sacrovir. 

Iullus : see Antonius. 

Iunia, familia, the, 3. 24, 1; 69, 8. 

— sister of Brutus and wife of Cas- 
sius, death of, 3. 76, 1. 

— see Torquata. 

Iunius, a senator; 4.64, 3; asorcerer, 
2. 28, 3. 

— D., see Silanus. 

— see Blaesus, Otho, Rusticus, Sila- 
nus. 

Iuno, worshipped at Samos, 4. 14, I 

Iuppiter, offerings to, 2. 22, 1; 32, 3; 
Salaminius (in Cyprus), 3. 62, 5; 
temple to, at Stratonicea, 3. 62, 3. 

ius, origin and growth of, 3. 25-28 ; 
humanum divinumque, 3. 70, 4; 
patrium, 4. 16, 3; virgarum, I. 77,2. 

Iustus, Catonius, a centurion, I. 29, 2. 

Kalendae Ianuariae, solemnities of 
the, 4. 70, I 

Labeo, Antistius, a great jurist, 3. 
75, 2. 

— Pomponius, legatus of Moesia, 4. 
47, 1; 6. 29, I. 

— see Cethegus. 

— Titidius, 2. 85, 3. 

Lacedaemonii, deputation from the, 
4. 43, 1: see Spartani. 

Laco, an Achaean, 6. 18, 3. 

Laelius: see Balbus. 

Lamia, Aelius, 4. 13, 5; death of, 6. 
27, 2. 

Langobardi, the, in Germany, 2. 45, 
1; 46, 3. 

Lanuvium, 3. 48, 2. 

INDEX I 

Laodicea, in Asia, 4. 55, 3. 

— (Ladikieh), in Syria, 2. 79, 3. 

Latiaris, Latinius, an accuser, 4. 68, 
2; 69,4; 71,1; 6. 4, 1. 

Latinius: see Latiaris. 

Latium, vetus, 4. 5, 5. 

Latona, legend of, 3. 61, r. 

legati legionum, proposal respecting, 
2. 36, 1. 

leges, the, of Crete, Sparta, Athens, 
and early Rome, 3. 26, 5, foll. 

Legio Prima (Germanica), the, in 
Lower Germany, I. 31, 3; 5 35 
39, 2; 42, 6; 44, 3; 51, 5; 64, 8. 

— Secunda (Augusta), the, in Upper 
Germany, I. 37, 4; 70, I. 

Legio (Tertia Augusta), 
Africa, 2. 52, 5. 

— Quinta (Alaudae), the, in Lower 
Germany, 1. 31,3; 45, 1; 51,5; 
64, 85 4. 73, 4- 

— Sexta (Ferrata), the, in the East, 
2. 79, 3; 81, 1. . 

— Octava (Augusta), the, in Pan- 
nonia, I. 23, 6 ; 30, 4. 

— Nona (Hispana), the, in Pan- 
nonia, I. 25, 6; 30 4 ; in Africa, 
4. 23, 2: Cp. 3. 9,1 

— Decima (Fretensis), the, in Syria, 
2. 57, 2. 

— Tertiadecima (Gemina), the, in 
Upper Germany, 1. 37, 4. 
— Quartadecima (Gemina Martia 
Victrix), the, us Upper Germany, 

I. 37; 5 ; 79, I. 

—  Quintadecima (Apollinaris), the, 

in Pannonia, I. 23, 6; 30, 4. 

the, in 

— Sextadecima (Gallica), the, in 
Upper Germany, 1. 37, 4. 
— Undevicensima,: the, lost with 

Varus, I. 60, 4. 

— Vicensima (Valeria Victrix), the, 
in Lower Germany, I. 31, 3; 37, 
33 39,23 42, 31 51,5; 64,8. 

— Una et vicensima (Rapax), the, in 
Lower Germany, I. 31, 35 37, 23 

45, I; Lj 51, 5; P 64, 8. 
Lentulus (Cn. Coraelilis), an augur, 

3. 59, I. 
— (Cn.),adistinguished senator, 1.27, : 
I; 2. 32, 2; 3. 68, 3; 4.29, 1; 44, I. 
— (Cn.) Gaetulicus, 4. 42, 3; 46, 1 ; 
legatus of Upper Germany, 6. 30, 
2, foll. 
Lepida, Aemilia, accused, 3. 22-24. 
Lepida, Aemilia, wife of Drusus, son 
of Germanicus, 6. 40, 4. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

Lepidus, M. (Aemilius), guardian of 
princes in Egypt, 2.67, 4. . 

— (M.), opponent of Sulla, rogationes 
of, 3.27, 4. — 

— (M.), the triumvir, I. I, 33 2, 1 j 
9, 4; 10, 2. 

— M. Aemilius, 2. 48, 1; proconsul 
of Asia, 3. 32, 2 (where see note) ; 
restores the basilica of Paulus, 3. 
72, 3 ; father of Aemilia Lepida, 6. 
40, 4. 

— M’., character of, I. 13, 23 4. 20, 
4; defends his sister, 3. 22, 2 ; and 
Cn. Piso, 3. 11, 2; speaks against 
severe decrees, 3. 50, foll.; 4. 20, 
3; declines Africa, 3. 35, 2; pro- 
consul of Asia, 4. 56, 3; influence 
of, 6. 5, 1; death of, 6. 27, 4 

Leptitani, the, in Africa, 3. 74, 2. 

Lesbos, 2. 54,1; 6. 3, 3. 

Leucophryna: see Diana. 

Lex: see Caesar (Iulius), Iulia, Op- 
pia, Papia Poppaea, Tullus. 

Liber, temple of, at Rome, 2. 49, 1 ; 
identified with the Eastern Diony- 
‘sus, 3. 61,2; 4. 38, 5. 

Libera, 2. 49, I. 

Libo, L. (Scribonius), 2. I, 1; 
29, 2. | 

— (M.) Scribonius Drusus, accusation 
and trial of, 2. 27-32; cp. 4. 29, 4 

libritores, in the army, 2. 20, 4. 

Libya, conquered by Rhamses, 2. 
60, 4. 

Licinius, M., consul, 4. 62, 1 

lictores, honorary use of, 1. 14, 3; 2 
53; 3. 

Ligur, Varius, 4. 42, 3; bribes his 
accusers, 6. 30, I 

limes, the, of Tiberius in Germany, 
I. 50, 2. 

Limnatis: see Diana. 

Livia familia, the, 6. 51, 1. 

— see Augusta. 

— sister of Germanicus, and wife of 
Drusus, 2. 43, 7; 84, 15 4. 5 3; 
corrupted by Seianus, and induced 
to poison her husband, 4. 3, 4; 
not permitted by Tiberius to marry 
Seianus, 4. 39-40; posthumous 
condemnation of, 6. 2, I. 

Livineius: see Regulus. 

Livius, T., the historian, praise of 
Pompeius by, 4. 34, 4. 

pias. M., defeated by the Germans, 

I. IO, 3; with C. Caesar in the 
East, 3. 48, 3. 

cp. 2. 

671 

Longinus: see Cassius, L. 

Longus, Lucilius, 4. 15, 2. 

Lucilius, a centurion, I. 23, 4. 

— see Capito, Longus. 

Lucretius, Sp, left in charge of 
Rome by Tarquinius Superbus, 6. 
II, I. 

Lucullus, L., military achievements 
of, 4. 36, 3; villa of, 6. 50, 2. 

ludi, held by Livia to Augustus, I. 
73, 4: see Augustales, circenses, 
Megaleses. 

Lugdunum (Lyons), 3. 41, 2. 

Lupia (Lippe), the, in Germany, 1 
60, 5; 2. 7, 1. 

Lupus, Cutius, quaestor, 4. 27, 2. 

Lutorius: see Clutorius. 

luxus, in feasting, increase and sub- 
sequent diminution of, 3. 55. 

Lycia, sea of, 2. 60, 4; coast of, 2. 
79, I. 

Lycurgus, laws of, 3. 26, 4. 

Lydia, and Lydi, legends of, 3. 61, 3 ; 
4. 55, 7. 

Lygdus, the poisoner of Drusus 
Caesar, 4. 8, 1; 10, 2; I1, 4. 

Macedonia and Macedones, refer- 
ences to former history of, 2. 55, 2; 
3. 61, 3; 4. 55, 8; 6. 31,2 (see also 
Philippus) ; province of, 3. 38, 2; 
5. 10, 5; transferred to Caesar, I. 
76,43 held with Moesia, I. 80, 1; 
see also Hyrcani. 

Macer, Pompeius, praetor, I. 72, 4. 

Macrina, Pompeia, exiled, 6. 18, 3. 

Macro (Naevius Sertorius), praefect 
of praetorians, 6. 15, 5; 23, 5; the 
tool of Tiberius against Seianus, 
6. 48, 4 ; successor to his pernicious 
influence, 6. 29, 5; 48, 3; an enemy 
of Arruntius, 6. 47, 4; attacked in 
will by Trio, 6. 38, 2; pays court 
to Gaius, 6. 45, 5; 46, 6; 48, 4; 
makes arrangements in view of the 
death of Tiberius, 6. 50, 6 ; orders 
him to be smothered, 6. 50, 9. 

Maecenas, Cilnius, patron of Bathyl- 
lus, I. 54, 3; position of, 3. 30, 4; 
vicegerent 2 Augustus, 6. II, 3; 
lost influence with him, 3. 30, 7. 

magi, prevalence of, and measures 
taken against, 2. 27, 2; 32, 5; 6. 
29, 6. 

Magius: see Caecilianus. 

Magnetes (ad Maeandrum), the, 3. 
62,1; 4. 55, 3. 

672 

Magnetes a Sipylo, the, relieved after 
earthquake, 2. 47, 4. 

maiestas, charge of, innovation made 
by Augustus respecting, I. 72, 3, 4 ; 
3. 24, 3; limitation of, 4. 34, 3; 
‘penalty for, 3. 50, 6; very pre- 
valent under Tiberius, I. 72-74 ; 
2. 50; 3. 22, 45 37, 15 38, 1, 23 
49-50 ; 67, 3; 70, 2; 4. 6, 3; 19, 
5321,35; 36,2; 31, 1, 75 34, 35 
42, 3; 6. 9, 5; 18, 1; 38, 4. 

maiorum more, capital punishment, 

. 2. 32,5: 4. 30,1. 

Mallovendus, chief of the Marsi, 2. 
25, 2. 

Maluginensis, Servius (Cornelius), 
flamen Dialis, 3. 58, 1; disqualified 
for a province, 3. 71, 4; death of, 
4. 16, 1 ; son of, 4. 16, 5. 

Mamercus: see Scaurus. 

mancipes, frauds of the, 3, 31, 7. 

Manlii, family of the, 3. 76, 4. 

Manlius, banished, 2. 50, 5. 

-mapalia, the, of Africans, 3. 74, 5; 
4. 25, I. 

Marcellus: see Aeserninus. 

— (M.), Claudius, nephew of Au- 
gustus, 1. 3, 15 2. 41, 5; 6. 51,2; 
statue of, 1. 74, 4: theatre of, 3. 
64, 2. 

' — Granius, praetor of Bithynia, I. 
74, 1, foll. 

Marcia, wife of Fabius Maximus, I. 
54. 

Marcianus, Granius, a senator, 6. 
38, 4. | 

Marcius: see Numa. 

Marcius, P., an astrologer, 2. 32, 5. 

Marcomani, the, in Germany, 2. 46, . 

5; 62, 3. | | 

mare: see Aegaeum, Amunclanum, 
Bithynum, Delmaticum, Hadriati- 

. cum, Ionium, Lycium, Ponticum. 

Marinus, Iulius, a partisan of Seianus, 
6. 10, 2. 

Marius, C., consulships of, I. 9, 2. 

— Sextus, 4. 36, 1;.a rich Spaniard, 
6. 19, I. 

— see Nepos. 

Maroboduus, king of the Suebi, 2. 
26, 3; power of, 2. 46, 2; 63, 5; 

at war with Arminius, 2. 44-46; 
obliged to seek Roman protection, : 

2. 62-63; 88, 3; 3. I1, 13 kept 
eighteen years at Ravenna, 2. 
63, 5. 

Mars, Ultor, temple of, 2. 64, 2; 3. 

INDEX I 

18, 3; Martis Campus, the, in 
Rome, I. 8, 6; 3. 4, I. 

Marsi, the, in Germany, I. 50,6; 56, 
75:2:25,2. 

Marsus, Vibius, a friend of Germani- 
cus, 2. 74, 1; 79, 1; 4. 56, 3; 
DERE escapes death, 6. 47, 2; 
46, I. 

Martiales flamines, 3. 58, 1. 

Martina, a poisoner, 2.74, 2; 3. 7, 2. 

Marus (Morava), the, 2. 65, 7. 

Massilia, school of study at, 4. 44, 5 ; 
bequest to the people of, 4. 43, 8. 

Mater Deum, temple of the, in Rome, 

- 4. 64, 4. 

mathematici : see Chaldaei. 

m (Maden), in Germany, I. 
56, 6. 

Mauri, the, 2. 52, 3; 4. 5, 35 23 1; 

4, 3- 
Maximus, Fabius (Paulus) story 
about the death of, 1. 5, 2-4. 
— Sanquinius, 6. 4, 4. 
Mazippa, a Moor, 2. 52, 3. 
Medea, legend of, 6. 34, 3. 
Medi, the, conquered by Rhamses, 

2. 60, 4. 

Medi, the (of Media Atropatene), 2. 
4,2; 56, 1; 6. 34, 6. 

medici, the, of families, 4. 63, 3. 

Megaleses.ludi, the, 3. 6, 5. 

Memmius: see Regulus. 

Memnon, vocal statue of, 2. Ó1, 1. 

Menelaus, legend of, in Egypt, 2. 
60, 2. 

mensae, the, of bankers, 6. 17, 4. 

Merula, Apidius, 4. 42, 3. 

— Cornelius, a former flamen Dialis, 
3.58,2. | 

Mesopotamia, 6. 36, 1; 37, 45; 44, 5. 

Messalinus: see Cotta, Messalla. 

Messala, Corvinus, praefectus urbis 
for a few days, 6. 11, 4; character 
and eloquence of, 5. 34,.2 ; used to 
speak of Cassius as his imperator, 
4. 34, 6. , : 

— or Messalinus, Valerius, son of the 
above, 1. 8, 5; 3. 18, 3; speech of, 
3.34,2,foll. 

— Volesus, proconsul of Asia under 
Augustus, 3. 68, I. 

Messenii, the, dispute of, with the 
Lacedaemonians, 4. 43, 1-6. 

Metellus, L., pont. max., 3. 71, 4. 

Miletus and Milesii, 2. 54, 4; 3. 63, 
53. 4.43, 5; worship of Apollo by, 
4. 55, 6. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

milites, grievances of, 1. 17; 26; 31; 
35; missio given to, I. 36, 4; 37, 
1; 44; 7-8. 

Minos, laws of, 3. 26, 4. 

Minucius: see Thermus. 

Misenum, promontory of, 6. 50, 2; 
fleet at, 4. 5, I. 

Mithridates, wars of Rome with, 2. 
55,1; 3.62, 15 73, 15 4.14, 3; 36, 3. 

— the Hiberian, king of Armenia, 6. 
32, 53 33,1. 

Moesia, province of, I. 80, 1; 2. 66, 
1; 6. 29, 13 legions of, 4. 5, 5; 
47; I. 

Montanus, Votienus, exiled, 4. 42, I. 

Mosa (Maas), the, 2. 6, 5 

Moschus, Vulcatius, an exile at Mas- 
silia, 4. 43, 8. 

Mosteni, the, in Asia, 2. 47, 4. 

Mummius, L., the imperator in 
Achaia, 4. 43, 4. 

Munatius: see Plancus. 

Musa, Aemilia, a rich lady, 2. 48, 1. 

Musulamii, the, in Africa, 2. 52, 2; 
4. 24, 2. 

Mutilia: see Prisca. 

Mutilus, Papius, a servile senator, 
2.32,4. 

Myrina, in Asia, 2. 47, 4. 

Mytilene: see Theophanes. 

Nabataei, king of the, 2. 57, 5. 

Nar (Nera), the, 1. 79, 2; 3. 9,2. 

Narbonensis : see Gallia. 

Narnia, 3. 9, 2. 

Naso, Valerius, 4. 56, 3. 

Natta, Pinarius, client of Seianus, 4. 
34, 2. 

Nauportus, in Pannonia, 1. 20, 1. 

negotiatores, traffic by, 2. 62, 4 ; 82, 
6; 87, I. 

Nepos, Marius, a senator, 2. 48, 3. 

Neptunus, temple of, at Tenos, 3. 

.. 63, 4. 

Nero, Tiberius (Claudius), father of 
the emperor Tiberius, I. 10, 4; 5. 
1,2; 6. 51, I. 

— see Tiberius. 

— Caesar, son of Germanicus, af- 
fianced in childhood, 2. 43, 3; 
enters into public life, 3. 29, 1; 
marries Julia, daughter of Drusus, 
3. 29, 4; introduced to the senate 
by Tiberius, 4. 8, 5; returns thanks 
for the cities of Asia, 4. 15, 4; in- 
cluded in the prayer of the pontiffs, 
4. 17, 1; assailed by the craft of 

t VOL. I. 

673 

Seian"s, 4. 59, 5; 60, I, foll. ; 67, 
5; accused after the death of Au- 
gusta, 5. 3, 2; popular sympathy 
with, 5. 4, 3; second marriage of 
the widow of, 6. 27, 1. 

Nerva, Cocceius, a learned jurist, 4. 
58, 1 ; death of, 6. 26, 1. 

— Silius, consul, 4. 68, 1. 

Nicephorium, a Parthian town, 6. 
41, 2. 

Nicopolis, in Achaia, 2. 53, 1; 5. 

10, 4. 

Niger: see Bruttedius. 

Nilus, the, 2. 60; 1 ; 61, I. 

Nola, death of Augustus at, 1. 5, 5; 
9,1; temple to Augustus at, 4. 57, t. 

Norbanus, C., consul, 1. 55, 1. 

— L., consul, 2. 59, 1. 

Noricum, province of, 2. 63, 1. 

novendialis cena, 6. 5, 1. 

Numa, institutions of, 3. 26, §. 

— Marcius, vicegerent of Tullus 
Hostilius, 6. 11, I. 

Numantina, 4. 22, 4. 

Numidae, the, 2. 52, 2, foll. ; 3. 21, 
5, foll. ; 4.24,2 ; 25, I. 

Occia, a Vestal virgin, 2. 86, I. 

Oceanus (North Sea), the, 1. 70, 2; 
2.23,1j 24, I. 

Octavia, sister of Augustus, I. 3, 1; 
4. 44,53 75, 2. 

Octavii, tomb of the, 4. 44, 5. 

Octavius, father of Augustus, I. 9, I. 

— see Fronto. 

odores, use of, in funerals, 3. 2, 2. 

Odrusae, the, of Thrace, 3. 38, 5. 

Olennius, an officer set over the Frisii, 
4. 72, 2. 

omina, I. 28, 2; 4. 64, I: 
prodigia. 

Oppia lex, the, 3. 33, 4; 34, 6... 

Opsius,; M., an accuser, 4. 68, 2; 
71, I. 

oracula, 2. 54, 3; 3. 63, 4; 6. 34) 4. 

orbitas, influence of, 3. 25, 2. 

Oriens, the, 2. 1, 1; 43, 1; 6. 34, 5. 

Ornospades, a Parthian noble, 6. 

see also 

37, 4- 

Orodes, son of Artabanas, 6. 33, 2; 
34 1; 35, 4. 

Ortygia, near Ephesus, 3. 61, 1. 

Osci, the, pantomimes invented by, 
4. 14, 4. 

Ostia, 2. 40, I. 

Otho, Iunius, a low-born senator, 3. 
66, 2-4; another, 6. 47, 1. 

XX 

674 

ovatio, instances of, 2. 64, 1; 3. II, 
Ij 19, 4. 

Paconianus,. Sextius, condemned, 6. 
3,43 39; I. 

Paconius, M., an accuser, 3. 67, 1. 

Pacuvius, a legatus legionis, 2. 
79; 3: : 

Pagyda, the, in Africa, 3. 20, 1. 

Palatium, the, I. 13, 7; 2. 34, 55; 37, 
33 40, 4- 

Pamphylia, the coast of, 2. 79, I. 

Pandateria (Vandotena), a place of 
exile, I. 53, I. 

Pandusa, Latinius, legatus of Moesia, 
2. 66, 1. 

Pannonia, the province of, 1. 16, I, 
foll.; 47, 25 3 9 13 4. 5,5: see 
also Illyricum. 

Pansa (Vibius), suspicion respecting 
the death of, 1. Io, I. 

pantomimi, measures taken against, 
I. 77, 5: see also histriones. 

Pantuleius, eques, 2. 48, I. 

Paphia: see Venus. 

Papia Poppaea lex, the, 3. 25, 1; 
28, 4. 

Papinius, Sex., consul, 6. 40, 1 ; son 
of, 6. 49, 1. 

Papius: see Mutilus. 

Parthi, the, relations of Rome with, 
2. 1-4; 56, 1; 58, 1, foll. ; 6. 31- 
37 ; 41-44: see also Armenia, Arta- 
banus ; an army of horsemen, 6. 34, 
1; tactics of, 6. 35, 2. 

Passienus (Crispus), saying of, 6. 
20, 2. 

pater patriae, title of, refused by Ti- 
berius, I. 72, 2; 2. 87, 2; analo- 
gous titles to, suggested for Au- 
gusta, I. 14, 2. 

patres: see senatus. 

patricii, flamines chosen from, 4. 

. 16, 2. 

Patuleius, a knight, 2. 48, 1. 

Pauli basilica, the, 3. 72, I. 

Paulus, Fabius, consul, 6. 28, 1. 

Paxaea, wife of Pomponius Labeo, 6. 
29, I. 

pedarii senatores, 3. 65, 2. 

Pedo (Albinovanus), an officer, 1. 
60, 2. 

Peloponnesus, the, division of, be- 
tween the Heraclidae, 4. 43, 2; 
Lydian settlement in, 4. 55, 7. 

Penates, the: cp. penetrales di, 2. 
16. I. 

INDEX 1 

Percennius, a mutinous soldier, I. 16, 
4; 17, 1, foll.; 28, 6 ; 29, 4. 
Pergamum, temple of Aesculapius at, 

3. 63, 3; temple to Augustus at, 4. 

37,45 55,6 

Perinthus (Erekli), in Thrace, 2. 54, 2. 

Perpenna (M.), 3. 62, 4. 

Persae, the, conquered by Rhamses, 
2. 60, 4; empire of the, 3. 61, 3; 
6. 31, 2. 

Perses, king of Macedon, 4. 55, 2. 

Perusinum bellum, the, 5. I, 2. 

Petilius: see Rufus. 

Petronius, P., 3. 49, 2; 6. 45, 3. 

Pharasmanes, king of the Hiberi, 6. 
32, 5; supports his brother Mithri-. 
dates in occupying Armenia, 6. 33, 
I-33 34-35- | 

Pharsalia, allusion to battle of, 4. 

Do ee 
Philadelphia, in Asia, people of, 2. 

47; 4- : 

Philippi, allusion to battle of, 3. 76, 
I; 4. 35, 3- 

Philippopolis, 3. 38, 6. 

Philippus, father of Alexander the 
Great, 2. 63, 35; 3. 38,6 ; 4. 43, 1. 

— (L. Marcius), 3. 72, 3. 

Philopator, a Cilician king, 2. 42, 7. 

phoenix, the, seen in Egypt, 6. 28. 

Phraates, king of Parthia, 2. 1, 2; 2. 
8; 6. 37, 6; another, his son, 6. 
31,43 32, 1-4. 

— a Parthian noble, 6. 42, 5 ;. 43, 2. 

Phrixus, oracle of, 6. 34, 4. 

Picenum, 3. 9, 1. 

Pinarius: see Natta. 

Piraeus, the, 5. 10, 4. 

Piso (Cn. Calpurnius), an aristocrat 
in the civil wars, 2. 43, 3. 

/— Cn, son of the above, 1. 13, 3; 

74, 6; 79, 5 ; husband of Plancina, 
2. 43, 4 ; sent to Syria as legatus, 
2. 43, 3; opposes Germanicus, 2. 
55, I, foll.; neglects his orders and 
insults him personally, 2. 57, !, 
foll.; suspected of attempting poi- 
son and witchcraft, 2. 69, 5; in- 
tends to leave Syria, but delays 
his departure, 2. 69, 3; offers 
thank-offerings on hearing of the 
death of Germanicus, 2. 75, 23 
determines to recover Syria by 
force, 2. 76-80; is forced to sub- 
mit and allowed to return to Rome, 
2. 81; reaches Rome after con- 
siderable delay and circuit, 3. 8-9; 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

is brought to trial and commits 
suicide, 3. 10-18. 

— Cn., son of the above, 3. 16, 5; 
ordered to change his praenomen, 
3. 17, 8; probablyafterwards called 
L. Calpurnius, 4. 62, I. 

— L., complains of accusers, and 
summons Urgulania into court, 2. 
34, I, foll. ; defends Cn. Piso, 3. 11, 
2; is accused, and dies before trial, 
4. 21: see also notes on 2. 32, 4; 
3. 68, 2. 

— L., murdered in Spain, 4. 45, 1. 

— L., pontifex and praefectus urbis, 
death of, 6. Io, 3-5; 11, 6. 

. — M., son of Cn. Piso, 2. 76,2 ; 78, 
3; 3. 16, 5; excused by Tiberius, 
3. 17, 1 ; 18, 2. 

Pisones, nobility of the, 3. 17, 1. 

Pituanius, L., a magician, 2. 32, 5. 

Pius, Aurelius, a senator, I. 75, 3. 

Planasia (Pianosa), the island of, 1. 
$54:51,;2.392. ; 

Plancina, wife of Cn. Piso, lineage 
and character of, 2. 43, 4; intrigues 
with the soldiers, 2. 55, 5; shows 
joy at the death of Germanicus, 2. 
75, 3; returns to Rome, 3. 9, 2; 
obtains pardon through Augusta, 
3. 15, I ; is accused long after- 
wards and commits suicide, 6. 26, 4. 

Plancus, Munatius, 1. 39, 4, foll. 

Plautius, Q., consul, 6. 40, I. 

— Silvanus, murders his wife and is 
forced to commit suicide, 4. 22. 
plebes, the, also populus, vulgus, un- 
warlike, 3. 40, 5; only a minority 
freeborn, 4. 27, 3; won over by 
Augustus, I. 2, 1 ; takes the oath 
of allegiance to Tiberius, 1. 7, 5; 
but is less indulged by him, I. 54, 
4; 4. 62, 3; deprived of its power 
to elect magistrates, I. 15, 1 ; shows 
affection for Marcellus, 2. 41, 5; 
for Drusus, 1. 33, 35 2. 41, 5 ; for 
Germanicus, I. 33, 3; 2. 82, 1, 
foll.; 3. 2, 5; 4, 2; 6, 1; 11, 3; 
for Agrippina and her family, 3. 6, 
1; 4. 67, 6; 5. 4, 3; 6. 46, 1; 
often harassed by dearth, 2. 87, 1; 
4. 6,6; 6. 13, 1 ; complains of the 
centesima, I. 78, 2; is riotous in 
the theatre, 1. 77, I ; receives con- 
giaria, 3. 29, 3; addressed by edict, 
1. 8, 6; 78, 2; 3. 6, 15; 4. 67, 1; 
$. 5, 13; 6. 13, 3; arranged in 

tribes at ceremonies, 3. 6, 2. 

675 

plebiscita, against usury, 6. 16, 3. 

Plinius, C., historical writings of, re- 
ferred to, 1. 69, 3. 

Poeni, wars with the, 2. 49, 1; 52, 2: 
Cp. 4. 33, 4; 56, I. 

Polemo, king of Pontus, 2. 56, 2. 

Pollio, Annius, accused, 6. 9, 5. 

— C. Asinius, boldness of, 1. 12, 6; 
writings of, 4. 34, 6; death of, 3. 

75,1. | 

— Domitius, 2. 86, 1. 

— Vedius, luxury of, 1. 10, 4. 

— Vinicianus, 6. 9, 7. 

Pompeia: see Macrina. 

Pompeiopolis, in Cilicia, 2. 58, 3. 

Pompeius, Cn. (Magnus), 1. 1, 5; 6. 
18, 4; inconsistent conduct of, 3. 
28, 1; praise of, by Livy, 4. 34, 4 ; 
an ancestor of Libo, 2. 27, 2 ; and 
of Lepida, 3. 22, 1; theatre of, 5. 
23, 1; 72, 4; 6. 45, 2. 

— Sex. (Cn. f.), 1. 2, 1; 10,2; 5. 1,2. 

— Sex., consul, 1. 7, 2; 3. 11, 2; 
32, 2. 

— see Macer. 

— a knight, 6. 14, 1. 

Pomponius, 2. 41, 2; 6. 8, 10: see 
also Atticus, Flaccus, Labeo, Se- 
cundus. 

— Q., an accuser, 6. 18, 2. 

Pontes longi, the, 1. 63, 5. 

Ponticum mare or Pontus (Euxine), 
the, mouth of, 2. 54, 2. 

pontifices, the, blamed for including 
Nero and Drusus in the vota, 4. 
17, 1; sacra Dialia at times per- 
formed by, 3. 58, 2. 

Pontius, C., consul, 6. 45, 5. 

— see Fregellanus. 

Poppaeus, grandfather of the above: 
see Sabinus. 

populus: see plebes. 

Porcius : see Cato. 

porta: see Esquilina, triumphalis. 

portoria: see vectigalia. 

Postumius, A., temple vowed by, 2. 
49, 1 ; another, 3. 71, 4. 

Postumus : see Agrippa. 

— [ulius, 4. 12, 6. 

praefectus annonae, I. 7, 3. 

— castrorum, I. 20, 1; 32, 6; 38,2. 

praefectus praetorii, sometimes one, 
sometimes two, I. 7, 3; 24, 3 ; first 
becomes an important office under 
Seianus, 4. 2, I. 

—- urbis, 6. 10, 5-11, 6; also (ob ferias 
Latinas), 4. 36, 1. 

Xx2 

676 

praetores, number of, 1. 14, 6; four 
‘commended’ by Tiberius, 1. 15. 
2; proposal of Gallus respecting, 
2. 36, 1; presiding at entertain- 
ments, 1. 77, 2; management of 
aerarium by, I. 75, 4. 

primipilaris, a, sometimes governor 
of part of a province, 4. 72, 2 

princeps, title of, assumed by Augus- 
tus, I. 1, 3; 9, 6; friends of, sum- 
moned into council (principis con- 
silium), 3. 10, 6 
- juventutis, title of, 1. 3, 2 

principia legionum, effigies of Seianus 
set up in the, 4. 2, 4. 

Prisca, Mutilia, influential with Au- 
gusta, 4. 12, 6. 

ees Ancharius, an accuser, 3. 38, 

+90}. 1s 

- ‘Claterius, condemned to death, 2. 
49-51. 

proconsulare imperium, given to Ger- 
manicus, I. 14, 4. 

Proculeius, C., contemplated as son- 
in-law by Augustus, 4. 40, 8. 

Proculus, Considius, executed, 6.18, 1. 

procuratores, functions of, 4. 15, 3 
Cp. 4. 6, 5; in Asia, 4. 15, 3. 

Propertius: see Celer. 

Propontis, the, 2. 54, 2 

proscriptio, the, by the triumvirs, I. 
2, 1 ; IO, I. 

provinciae, of quaestors in Italy, 4. ° 

27, 2. 

— the, preferred the Empire to the 
Republic, I. 2, 2; protected from 
oppression by Tiberius, 4. 6, 7; 
the senatorial assigned by lot, 3. 
32,2; 58,1; 71, 45; 6. 40, 5; the 
Caesarian, held for long periods, I 
€o, 2; governors of, sometimes 
detained in Rome, I. 80, 4; 6. 27, 
2-3. 

Ptolemaeus (Epiphanes), of Egypt, 
guardianship of children of, 2. 
67, 4. 

. (Euergetes), of Egypt, 6. 28, 4. 

— king of Mauretania, 4. 23, 1 ; 24, 
3 ; 26, 4. 

publicani, societates of, 4. 6, 4. 

Publicii, the brothers, temple built 

by, 2. 49, I 

Publicola, Gellius, 3. 67, 1. 

Pulchra, Claudia, cousin of Agrip- 

| pina, condemned, 4. 52, I, foll. 

pyramides, the, 2. 61, 1. 

Pyramus (Jukoon), the, 2. 68, 2. 

INDEX I 

Pyrrus, reference to wars with, 2. 63, 
3; 88,2. 
Pythius : see Apollo. 

Quadi, the, in Germany, 2. 63, 7. 

Quadratus, Seius, 6. 7, 6. 

quattuordecim ordines, the, 6. 3, 1 

querceae coronae, decreed, 2. 83, 2 

Querquetulanus, old name of Mons 
Caelius, 4. 65, 1. 

Quinctii, the gens of, 3. 76, 4. 

quindecimviri, the, 3. 64, 3; alleged 
Sibylline book submitted to, 6. 12, 5. 

Quinta, Claudia, statue of, preserved 
from fire, 4. 64, 4. 

Quintilianus, trib. pl., 6. 12, 1 

Quintilius : see Varus. 

Quirinales flamines, 3. 58, 1. 

Quirinius, P. Sulpicius, origin and 
actions of, 3. 48, 1, foll.; related 
to Libo Drusus, 2. 30, 4; husband 
of Lepida, 3. 22, 1; honoured by a 
public funeral, 3. 48, 1; unpopular, 
3. 23, 1 ; 48, 4. 

Quirinus, deification of, 4. 38, 5. 

Quirites, mutinous soldiers addressed 
by Iulius Caesar as, I. 42, 5. 

. Raetia, 1. 44, 6; cohorts from, 2. 

17, 6. 

Ravenna, 4. 29, 3; fleet stationed at, 
4. 5, 1; prisoners of rank kept at, 
1. 58, 9; 2. 63, 5. | 

Reatini, deputation from the, 1. 
79, 3. 

reciperatores, I. 74, 7. 

Reginorum oppidum (Reggio), 1. 
53, 1. 

Regulus, Livineius, 3. 11, 2 

— Memmius, consul, accuses his 
colleague, 5. I1, 1; drops the ac- 
cusation, 6. 4, 2-4. 

Remmius, an ‘ evocatus," 2. 68, 3. 

repetundae, charges of, I. 74, 7; 3. 
33, 45; 38, 1; 66, 1; 70, 15; 4. 

19, 5. 

Rhamses, king of Egypt, conquests 
of, 2. 60, 4. 

Rhenus, the, legions stationed on, 1 
31,2; 4. 5, 2; bridgethrown over, 
I. 49, 6; 69, 1 ; description of the 
lower course of, 2. 6, 5. 

Rhescuporis, king of Thrace, seizes 
and kills his brother Cotys, and is 
brought a prisoner to Rome, and 
thence to Alexandria, 2. 64-67 : cp. 

3. 38, 2. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

Rhodus, 2. 55, 3; 3. 48, 35 4- 55, 33 
retirement of Tiberius to, 1. 4, 4; 
53,25 2. 42, 2; 4. 15, 2. 

Rhoemetalces, king of Thrace under 
Augustus, 2. 64, 3. 

— his nephew, son of Rhescuporis, 
2. 67,4; 3. 38, 45 4. 5, 5 5 47, I. 

robur (the * Tullianum ?), 4. 29, 2. 

rogationes: see Lepidus; aso lex. 

Roma (the city), fires in, under 
Tiberius, 4. 64, 1; 6.45, 1; temple 
to, in provinces, 4. 38, 4; 56, 1. 

Romanus, Hispo, an accuser, I. 74, I. 

Romulius: see Denter. 

Romulus, allusions to, 4. 38, 5; 6. 
II, I ; an ancestor of the Iulii, 4. 9, 
3; ruled without law, 3. 26, 5. 

rostra, the, at Rome, laudations 
poe at, 3. 5, 2; 4. I2, 13 5. 
I, 6. 

Rubellius: see Blandus, Geminus. - 

Rubrius, a knight, 1. 73, 1: see also 
Fabatus. 

Rufilla, Annia, 3. 36, 3. 

Rufus, Aufidienus, praefectus  castro- 
rum, I. 20, I. 

— Helvius, a soldier, 3. 21, 3. 

— Petilius, an accuser, 4. 68. 2. 

— see Trebellenus. 

Ruso, Abudius, an accuser, 6. 30, 2. 

Rusticus, Iunius, registrar of the 
senate, 5. 4, I. 

Rutilius, P., accused by M. Scaurus, 
3. 66, 2; naturalized at Zmyrna, 

4. 43, 7- 

Sabini, the, sacred rites of, I. 54, 1; 
noble families of, 4. 9, 3. 

Sabinus, Calvisius, consul, 4. 46, 1; 
accused of treason, 6. 9, 5. 

— Poppaeus, governor of Moesia, 
also of Achaia and Macedonia, 1. 
80, 1; 5. 10, 3; actions of, in 
Thrace, 4. 46-51; holds provinces 
for twenty-four years until his 
death, 6. 39, 3. 

Sabinus, Titius, a friend of Germani- 
cus and his house, 4. 18, 1; 19, 1; 
entrapped and put to death, 4. 68- 

70. 

Sacerdos, Carsidius, accused, 4. 13, 
3; exiled, 6. 48, 7. 

Sacrovir, Iulius, leader of the Aeduan 
rising, 3. 40, 1; 41, 45; 43,1; 44. 
33 45,33 46, 7. 

sagittarii, mounted, 2. 16, 5; un- | 

mounted, zd. 

677 

Salaminius: see Iuppiter. 

saliare carmen, the, 2. 83, 2. 

Sallustius, C., the historian, 3. 30, 8. 

— Crispus, adopted by the above, 3. 
30, 3; the confidant of Augustus 
and Tiberius, 1. 6, 6; 2. 40,2; 3. 
30, I, foll. 

Saloninus, Asinius, death and dis- 
tinction of, 3. 75, I. 

Salvianus, Calpurnius, an accuser, 4. 

36, 1. 

Samos, Sibylline poems at, 6. 12, 4; 
asylum claimed for temple of Juno 
at, 4. 14, I. 

Samothraces, the, religion of, 2. 54, 3. 

Sancia, exiled at her brother's death, 
6. 18, 2. | 

Sanquinius, an accuser, 6. 7, 1: see 
also Maximus. 

Santoni, the, in Gaul, 6. 7, 5. 

Sardes, the people of, relieved after 
an earthquake, 2. 47, 3; claim an 
asylum, 3. 63, 5 ; desire to erect a 
temple to Tiberius, 4. 55, 7. 

Sardinia, Jewish and Egyptian freed- 
men deported to, 2. 85, 5. 

Sarmatae, the, allied with the Hiberi, 
6. 33 33 35 I. 

Satrius: see Secundus. 

Saturninus, mentioned as a dema- 
gogue, 8. 27, 3. 

Saturnus, temple of, at Rome, 2. 

I, I. 
Scantia, a Vestal virgin, 4. 16, 6. 
Scaurus, Mamercus Aemilius, a lead- 
ing senator and orator, I. 13, 4; 
3. 23, 33 31, 5: 66, 2; is accused, 
6. 9, 5 ; commits suicide, 6. 29, 7. 
— M, the accuser of Rutilius, 3. 

66,3. 
sceptuchi, the, of the Sarmatians, 6. 

33, 3- 

Scipio, L. (Cornelius, Asiaticus), de- 
cree of, 3. 62, I. 

— P. (the elder Africanus), imitated 
by Germanicus, 2. 59, 2; times of, 
2. 33,3. 

— (P. Africanus the younger), accu- 
ser of L. Cotta, 3. 66, 2. 

Scipio (P.), Cornelius, 3. 74, 2. 

— (Q. Caecilius), mentioned with 
honour, 4. 34, 5. 

Scribonia, wife of Augustus, related 
to Libo, 2. 27, 2. 

Scribonianus : see Camillus. 

Scribonii, family of the, 2. 2, 1; 32, 
2: see Libo.. 

678 

Scythae, the, and Scythia, 2. 65, 5 ; 
68, 1; conquered by Rhamses, 2. 
60, 4; Artabanus takes refuge with, 
6. 36,5; 41,25 44, I. 

Secundus, Pomponius, P., accused 
and narrowly escapes death, 5. 8, 
I, 4; 6. 18, 2. 

— Satrius, a client of Seianus, 4. 34, 
2; 6.8, 10; the betrayer of his 
conspiracy, 6. 47, 2. 

Segestani, deputation from the, 4. 43,6. 

Segestes, brother of Arminius, and 
friendly to the Romans, I. 55,2; 
57, I, foll. ; 58, 1, foll. ; 59, 1. 

Segimerus, brother of the above, r. 
71, I. 

Segimundus, son of Segestes, 1. 57,2. 

Seianus (L.) Aelius, origin and early 
history of, 4. 1, 2, foll.; colleague 
of his father as praef. praet. and 
sent with Drusus to Pannonia, I. 
24, 3; sole praefect, 4. 2, 1; his 
policy, 4. 7, 2 ; prejudices Tiberius 
against the family of Germanicus, 
I. 69, 75 4. 12, 33 17, 43 54, 13 
67, 5; manages the concentration 
of the praetorian guard, 4. 2, 1; 
contrives the murder of Drusus, 

son of Tiberius, 4. 3, 1, foll.; obtains. 

the betrothal of his. daughter to the 
. son of Claudius, 3. 29, 5.; asks 
permission to marry Livia, widow 

of Drusus, 4. 39, 1 ; urges Tiberius 

to leave Rome, 4. 41, 2; 57, 2; 
saves his life in a cave, 4. 59, 4; 
extravagantly honoured by the 
senate, armies, and people, 3. 72, 
5; 4.2, 4; 74, 35 4; held in check 
by Augusta, 5. 3, 1 ; conspiracy of, 
alluded to, 5. 8, 1; 6.3, 4; 14,1; 
19, 25; 23, 5; 25, 4; 47, 2 ; con- 
fiscation of property of, 6. 2, 1; 

fate of children of, 5. 8, 1; 9, 13 

punishment of friends of, 5.6,2; 11, 
1; 6. 3,23 75,2; 14, 1; 19,2 ; 30, 7. 

Seiis: see Quadratus, Strabo, Tu- 
lero. 

Seleucia, near Antioch, 2. 69, 4. 

— on the Tigris, 6. 42, 1; 44, 3. 

Seleucus (Nicator), 6. 42, I. 

Semnones, the, a Suebic tribe, 2. 

| 45, 1. 

Sempronius: see Gracchus. 

senatores, gifts to, in cases of poverty, 
I. 75, 55 2. 37, 2; 48, 1; compul- 
sory retirement of, 2. 48, 3; pedarii, 
3. 65, 2; prohibited from visiting 

INDEX I 

Egypt, 2. 59, 4; forbidden to visit 
pantomimi, I. 77, 5; consilium of, 
in provinces, 2. 74, I. 

senatus, the, takes the oath of allegi- 
ance to Tiberius, I. 7, 3; summoned 
to consider the funeral honours 
to Augustus, I. 8, 1, foll.; urges 
Tiberius to accept the empire, I. 
11-13; election of magistrates 
transferred to, 1. 15, 1 ; constantly 
consulted by Tiberius, 4. 6, 2; re- 
ferred to even on military matters, 
1.25, 3 ; 26,5; $2, 2; presents an 
imposing show of independence in 
dealing with asyla, 3. 60,6; 4. 14, 
I; associated with the emperor in 
provincial worship, 4. 15,4; 37,4; 
sometimes convened in the Pala- 
tium, 2. 37, 3; acta of, 5. 4, 1; 
extreme cases of servility of, 3. 65, 
I, foll. ; goes to meet the funeral 
procession of Germanicus, 3. 2, 5 ; 
and Tiberius on his landing from 
Capreae, 4. 74, 5$; various pro- 
ceedings in, 1. 76-79; 2. 33-38 ; 
51; 85-88; 3. 25, 1; 31-37; 52, 
3-55, 13 58-59; 69; 71-72; 4. 8, 
2, foll.; 14, 4; 16, 1, foll. ; 37-38 ; 
435 55-56; 6. 2-3; 12; 15, 4-6; 
16, 5; various criminal charges 
‘brought before, 1. 73-74 ; 2.27-531; 
50; 3. 10-18; 22-23; 38, 1-3; 
49-51; 66-70; 4. 13, 2-53 15, 3; 
18-22; 28-31; 34-36; 42; 52; 
66; 68-71; 5.3-5; 8-9; 6.3-10; 
14; 18-19 ; 29-30; 38-40; 47-49; 
decision sometimes given on oath, 
I. 74, 5; 4. 21, 5; sentence not 
registered till ten days afterwards, 
3.51, 3. 

senatus-consulta, registered in the 
aerarium, 3. 51, 3; orin gold letters, 
3. 57, 3; for deification of Augustus, 
1. 10, 8; for awarding honours to 
the emperor, 3. 47, 3; 57, 13 4. 
64, 2, foll.; 74, 35 6. 25,5; 45, 43 
to members of the imperial family, 
I. 14, 1, foll.; 2. 43, 2; 83, 1, foll. ; 
3. 56-57; 4. 9, 2, foll. ; 5.2, 1; to 
other persons, 3. 72, 5 (see also 
funus publicum, triumphalia, ovatio, 
 supplicationes,triumphus); against 
vice, 2. 85, 1; unlawful religions, 
2. 85, 5 (see also magi, mathe- — 
matici); against disorder, I. 77, 
5; 4. 14, 4; 6. 13, 3; on asyla, 3. 
63, 6; for remission of tribute, 2. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

47, 4-55; 4. I3, 1 ; on various other 
‘matters, 3. 63, 2 ; 4. 44, 6. 
Sentius, Cn. (Saturninus), temporary 
legatus of Syria, 2. 74, 1; 79, 4; 
81,2; 3. 7, 2 EE 
septemviri (epulones), supplication 
for Augusta by, 3. 64, 3. 
Septentrio, the north of Europe, 2. 
23, 3. 
Septimius, a centurion, I. 32, 4. 
sepultura, allowed to those who an- 
ticipated execution by suicide, 6. 
29, 2. 
Sequani, the, swear allegiance, I. 34, 
I ; join the Gallic rising, 3. 45, I. 
Serenus, C. Vibius, accuser of Libo, 
2. 30, 1; banished for misconduct 
in Spain, 4. 13, 2; brought back 
to answer a further charge, 4. 28, 
I; disliked by Tiberius, 4. 29, 3; 
sent back to Amorgus, 4. 30, 2. 
— Vibius, son of the above, accuses 

his father, 4. 28, 1; and others, 4. | 

29,1; 36,4. .— 
serica vestis, forbidden to men, 2. 

33, I. 

Seriphos, island of, 2. 85, 4; 4. 21, 5. 

Sertorius, reference to the war with, 
3- 73 3- 

Servaeus, Q., governs Commagene, 
2. 56, 5; accuses Cn. Piso, 3. 13, 
3; priesthood awarded to, 3. 19, 
I; accused and turns informer, 6. 
7) 25 5. 

servi, put to the question against their 
master by a legal fiction, 2. 30, 3; 
3. 67, 3; vast numbers of, in Rome, 
3. 53, 5 ; 4 27, 3; rising of, near 
Brundisium, 4. 27, 1, foll. - 

Servilius, an accuser, 6. 29, 6; 
banished, 6. 30, 1. 

— M., a consular, 2. 48, 1; 3. 22, 4. 

—'M. (Nonianus), son of the above, 
consul, 6. 31, I. 

Servius Tullius, laws of, 3. 26, 6. 

Sesosis, king of Egypt, 6. 28, 4. 

Severus: see Caecina. 

— Cassius, banished for libel by 
Augustus, I.72,4; further punished 
by Tiberius, 4. 21, 5.- 

Sextia, wife of Mam. Scaurus, shares 
his death, 6. 29, 7. 

Sextius: see Paconianus. 

Sibulla, books of the prophecies of 
the, 1. 76. 2 ; 6. 12. 

Sicilia, 4. 13, 4; 6. 12, 4; strait of, 
1. 53, I. 

679 

siderum motus, astrological science 
of the, 4. 58, 2 ; 6. 21, 4. 

signum (tessera), the, given by the 
princeps to the praetorians, I. 7, 7. 

Silanus, Creticus, legatus of Syria, 2. 
4,4; 43, 3- 

— App. Iunius, consul, 4. 68, 1; ac- 
cused, 6. 9, 5. 

— C, tried, 3. 66-69; 4. 15, 4. 

-— D. Iunius, returns from voluntary 
exile, 3. 24, I. 

— M. (Iunius), consul, 2. 59, 1 ; (by 
some identified with the next). 

— M. (Iunius), a powerful senator, 
3. 24, 5; makes a proposal in 
compliment to the princeps, 3. 57, 
2; father-in-law of Gaius Caesar, 
6. 20, 1; an alleged son of, per- 
sonates Drusus, 5. 10, 4. 

Silius, C., legatus of Upper Germany, 
I. 31, 2; 2. 6, 1; 7, 1; 25, 2; 
receives triumphalia, 1I. 72, 1; 
employed against the Treveri and 
Aedui, 3. 42, 2; 43, 45 45,1346, _ 
2; husband of Sosia Galla, 4. 19, 
I; charged with treason and 
forced to suicide, 4. 18-20. 

— see Neroa. 

Silvanus : see Plautius. 

. simulacra, of Augustus, 3. 63, 6; see 

statuae. | 

Sinnaces, a Parthian noble, 6. 31, 3; 
32,35 36,33 37, 5- 

Sipylus, 2. 47, 4: see Magnetes. 

Sirpicus, a centurion, 1. 23, 6. 

Sisenna: see Taurus. 

Smyrna: see Zmyrna. . 

sociale bellum, allusion to the, 6. 12, 4. 

societates: see publicani. 

sodales : see Augustales, Titii. 

Sol, altar of, at Heliopolis, Q. 28, 7. 

Solon, laws of, 3. 26, 4. 

somnia, record of, 1.65, 2; 2. 14, 1 ; 
interpreters of, 2. 27, 2. 

sors, the, used in assigning senatorial 
provinces, 3. 32, 2; 58, 1; 71, 4; 
'6. 40, 3: in’ other matters, I. 54; 
1225:6.3, 3. 

Sosia: see Gall. . 

spadones, at the imperial court, 4. 

jl. 
Spartacus, alluded to, 3. 73, 3. | 
Spartani, the, found Canopus, 2.60, 2; 
laws of, 3. 26, 5: see Lacedaemonii. 
Spelunca, villa at, 4. 59, 2. 
Spes, temple of, at Rome, 2. 49, 2. 
Staius, an officer, 4. 27, 3. 

680 

Statilia: see Messalina. 

Statilius : see Taurus. 

statuae (or effigies), of Augustus, 
I. 73, 23 74, 43 3. 63, 6; of 
the Caesars, I1. 74, 4; of Ti- 
berius, 4. 64, 3; 74, 3; of Germa- 
nicus, 2. 83, 2, 3; of Agrippina, 
5. 4, 3; of Seianus, 4. 74, 3; of 
Claudia Quinta, 4. 64, 45; laurea- 
tae, 4. 23, 1 ; eburnae, 2. 83, 2; 
prohibition or destruction of those 
of persons condemned, 2. 32, 2; 3. 
14, 6; 76, 5. 

Stertinius, L., an officer of Germani- 
cus, I. 60,4; 71, 15 2. 8,4; 10,2; 
II, 45; 17,1; 22, 3. 

Strabo, Seius, praef. praet. and father 
of Seianus, 1. 7,33 24,33 4-1, 3; 
6. 8, 3. 

Stratoniceia, asylum at, 3. 62, 2. 

Stratonicis: see Venus. 

stupri licentia, claimed before the 
aediles, 2. 85, 2. 

Suebi, the, of Germany, I. 44, 6 ; 2. 
26,3; 44,25; 45,15; 62, 4. - 

Sugambri, the, of Germany, 2. 26, 3 ; 
auxiliary troops from, 4. 47, 5. 

Suillius, P. (Rufus), banished by Ti- 
berius, 4. 31, 5,6. 

Sulla, L. (Cornelius), the dictator, I. 
I; 33 2. 55, 13 3. 62, 1; assisted 
the Zmyrnaeans, 4. 56,2 ; legisla- 
tion of, 3. 27, 4; spoken con- 
temptuously of by Gaius, 6. 46, 7. 

— L., a young noble, 3. 31, 4; con- 
sul, 6. 15, I. 

Sulpicii, the patrician family of the, 
3. 48, 2. E T. 

Sulpicius : see Galba, Quirinius. 

sumptuaria lex, the, 3. 52, 3. 

suovetaurilia, 6. 37, 2: see lustratio. 

supplicationes, for punishment of 

alleged treason, 2. 32, 2 ; for other . 

events, 3. 64, 3. 

Surena, the, of Parthia, 6. 42, 6. 

Suria, once conquered by Rhamses, 
2. 60, 4 ; province of, I. 42, 5 ; 2. 
55,43 58, 15; 69, 3; 78, 2; 5. Io, 
25;6.31,25 32,4 ; 37,6, governors 
of, 2. 4, 45 43 3; 74 1; 81, 3; 6, 
225;-2,.35 9% 65-41, I5 gmulitary 
force of, 4. 5, 4; petition from, for 
reduction of tribute, 2. 42, 7. 

Surrentum (Sorrento), promontory 
Of A. OF; t: 

Syene (Assouan), in Egypt, a bound- 
ary of the empire, 2. 61, 2. 

INDEX I 

tabulae plumbeae: see devotiones. 

Tacfarinas, routed by Camillus in 
Africa, 2. 52, 1, foll.; rises again, 
and is driven by Apronius into the 
desert, 3. 20-21 ; again in arms, 3. 
31, 1 ; successes of Blaesus against, 
3. 73-74; finally defeated and 
killed by Dolabella, 4. 23-26. 

Tamfana, a German goddess, I. 51, 
2. 

Tantalus, said to have founded 
Zmyrna, 4. 56, I. 

Tarentum, treaty of, I. Io, 2. 

Tarius : see Gratianus. 

Tarpeium saxum, the, 6. 19, 1: 
2. 32, 5; 4. 29, 2. 

Tarquinius Priscus, 4. 65, 1. 

— Superbus, record of a praef. urb. 
under, 6. 11, 1 ; institutions on the 
expulsion of, 3. 27, 1. 

Tarracina, remains of Germanicus 
met at, 3. 2, 4. 
Tarraconensis colonia (Tarragona), 
temple to Augustus at, I. 78, 1. 

Tarsa, a Thracian, 4. 50, 3. 

Tatius, T., king of the Sabines, 1. 

cp. 

54, I. 

TER the hilly tract of, in Germany, 
I. 56, I. 

Taurus, Mt., 6. 41, I. 

— Statilius, praef. urb., 6. 11, 5; 
buildings of, 3. 72, 2. 

— Statilius Sisenna, son of the above, 
consul, 2. I, I. - 

Tedius, Q., luxury of, I, 1o, 4. 

Telamon, father of Teucer, 3. 62, 5. 

Teleboae, the, early inhabitants of 
Capreae, 4. 67, 4. 

Temnos, people of, in Asia, 2. 47, 4. 

templum: see Aesculapius, Apollo, 
Augustus, Ceres, Diana, Flora, 
Fortuna, Ianus, Iuppiter, Mars, 
Neptunus, Roma, Saturnus, Spes, 
Tamfana, Tiberius, Venus. 

Te temple of Neptune at, 3. 

3: 4- | 

Terentius, M., a friend of Seianus, 6. 
8, 1, foll. 

Termestini, the, in Spain, 4. 45, I. 

terrae motus, mention of, in Achaia, 
4. I3, 1; in Asia, 2. 47, 15 4. 
I3, I. 

Teucer, said to have founded a temple 
in Cyprus, 3. 62, 5. 

Teutoburgiensis saltus, the, in Ger- 
many, I. 60, 5. 

Thala, in Africa, 3. 2I, 2. 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 681: 

theatrum, the, disturbances in, I. 54, 
35; 77, 1: see Marcellus, Pompeius. 

Thebae, in Egypt, 2. 6o, 3. 

Theophanes, of Mytilene, a friend of 
Pompeius, 6. 18, 5. 

Theophilus, an Athenian, 2. 55, 2. 

Thermaeus sinus (Gulf of Salonica), 
the, 5. 10, 4. 

Thermus, Minucius, 6.7,2 

Theseus, said to have founded Zmyr- 
na, 4. 56, I. 

Thessali, alleged descent of Cau- 
casian races from, 6. 34, 3 

Thraecia, 2. 54, 2; settlement of by 
Augustus, 2. 64, 3; resettled by 
Tiberius after the death of Cotys 
and deposition of Rhescuporis, 2. 
67,4; 4- 5, 5; still disturbed, 3. 38, 
4, foll. subsequent insurrection in, 
4. 46-51; ; service of L. Piso in, 6. 
10, 4. 

Thrasyllus, the astrologer of Tiberius, 
6. 20-21; son of, 6. 22, 6. 

Thubuscum, in Africa, 4. 24, I. 

Tiberis, the, 6. 19, 4; floods of, 1. 
76, 1; 79, 1. 

Tiberius, Claudius Nero, afterwards 
Tiberius Caesar, undergoes vicis- 
situdes in childhood, 6. 51, 2; be- 
comes stepson of Augustus and is 
loaded with honours, I. 4, 4; but 
has many rivals in the imperial 
house, 6. 51, 2; sent to the East, 
2. 3,4; and ninetimes to Germany, 

2. 26, 3; receives the title of im-- 

perator, I. 3, 1; and tribunician 
power, I. 3, 3; 10, 75; 3. 56, 5; 
married to Vipsania, I. 12, 6; 
afterwards to Julia, 1. 53,2; retires 
to Rhodes, I. 4, 43-53, 25; 2. 42, 
2; 3. 48, 3; 4. 57, 33 6. 51, 3j 
adopted. by Augustus and shown 
as his 'collega imperii? through 
the influence of Livia, I. 3, 3; 4. 
57, 45 reputed capable, but proud 

and cruel, I. 4, 3; summoned at 

the death of Augustus, 1. 5, 5; 
pretends ignorance respecting the 
murder of Agrippa Postumus, 1. 6, 
5; assumes the principate virtually 
but makes formal show of reluct- 
ance to accept it, I. 7, 1-8, 1; 
11-13; observes moderation in 
accepting titles for himself and 
his mother, I. I4, 3; 72, 25; 2. 87, 
2; holds consulships, 2. 53, 1; 3. 
31, 1; is saluted as imperator, 2. 

18, 2; accepts a temple in Asia, 4. 
15, 4; but refuses one in Spain, 4. 
37, 2; 38, 4; is averse to war and 
conquest, 4. 32, 3; 6. 32, 1; leaves 
Germany to internal conflict, 2. 26, 
3; but secures by craft Marobo- 
duus; 2. 65, 5 ; Rhescuporis, 2. 64, 
2; and Achelaus, 2. 42,45; governs 
generally with justice during the 
first eight years, 4. 6, 1; 7, 1; 
shows great reverence for the 
policy of Augustus, 1.775,45 4. 375 
4; liberal to provinces, 2. 47, 5; 
4. 6,7; 13, 1 ; keeps his officers 
long at their posts, 1. 80, 2; 4. 6, 
$5; 6. 39, 3; awards honours well, 
4. 6, 2; not at first covetous of 
money, 2. 48, 1; 3. 18, 2; bounti- 
ful in gifts to some, I. 75, 43 2. 
37, 1; 86, 2; 4. 64, 15; 6. 45, 1; 
but harsh to others, 1. 75,6; 2. 38, 
1; 48, 3; checks the servility of 
senators, 3. 47, 4 ; 59, 2; 4.6, 2; sets 
example of frugality, 3. 52,25 4.6,7; - 
but declines to enforce sumptuary 
laws, 2. 33, 6; 3. 53, 1, foll. ; and 
allows relaxation in other laws, 
3. 28, 6 ; 4. 16, 1 ; causes distrust 
by reviving the law of maiestas, 
I. 72, 2; 4. 6, 3; and putting 
pressure on the praetor's court, 
I. 75, 1 ; though at first observing 
moderation in respect of charges 
and sentences, I. 73, 3; 74, 73 2 
50, 45 3. 22, 3; 51, 25; 70, 23 
pretends intention of visiting pro- 
vinces, I. 47, 53 3 45 35 4- 4; 
shows ill-will to Germanicus and 
his house (see Agrippina, Germa- 
nicus, Nero, Drusus) ; at variance 
with his mother (see Augusta) ; 

‘little affected by, but falsely alleged 

to have caused, the death of his 
son (see Drusus Caesar); then 
becomes worse under influence of 
Seianus, 4. I, 2; 6. 51, 5 (see Se- 
lanus, 4. I9, 2; 22, 2; 29, 3; 31, 
5; 34, 2; 42, 3; 70, 1; becomes 
keen for confiscation, 4. 20, 2 ; 6. 
19, I; protects informers, 4. 30, 
4; 31, 8; 36, 5; but sometimes 
destroys them, 4. 71, 1; pardons 
some persons, 4. 31, 15 6. 5, 2; 
declines to give a husband to the 
elder Agrippina, 4. 53, 1, foll. ; or 
to permit Seianus tó marry Livia, 
4. 40, I, foll; gives his grand- 

682 

daughters in marriage (see Agrip- 
pina, Drusilla, Iulia) ; absent for 
a year in Campania, 3. 31, 2; 64, 
I; leaves Rome permanently, 4. 
57, 1 ; takes up his residence in 
Capreae, 4. 67, 1 ; never returns to 
Rome, but sometimes approaches 
it, 4. 74 4 ; 6. I,I; 15,6; 39) 23 
50, 2; appears afraid to send an 
army against the Frisii, 4. 74, 15 
but promptly takes up the chal- 
lenge of Artabanus, 6. 32, 1, 5; 
forbids deification of his mother, 
5. 2, 1 ; after her death falls wholly 
under the influence of Seianus, 
6. 51, 6; and breaks out against 
Agrippina and Nero, 5. 3-5; after 

. the fall of Seianus breaks out into 
utter profligacy, 6. 1, 2-5; 6, 2; 
46, 9; 51,6; denounces many by 
letters, 6. 3, 45 4, 1: 7, 1-43 9, 
2, foll. ; 10, 2.3 19, 1; 39, 2; orders 
a general execution of those kept 
in prison, 6. 19, 2; writes to the 
senate on the death of Asinius 
Gallus, 6. 23, 2 ; of Drusus, 6. 24, 
1; of Agrippina, 6. 26, 2-4; of 
Pomponius Labeo, 6. 29, 3 ; reveals 
his state of mind in a letter, 6. 6, 
1; after declining one proposed 
guard, 6. 3, 5 ; asks for another, 6. 
15, 5 ; orders a libel to be read, 6. 
38, 3; denounces interference with 
the praetorians, 6. 3, 1; writes re- 
specting a Sibylline book, 6. 12, 
1; and a bread riot, 6. 13, 3; also 
on general reluctance to govern 
provinces, 6. 27, 3; intervenes in 
a financial crisis, 6. 17, 4; studies 
astrology under Thrasyllus and 
predicts rule of Galba, 6. 20-21 ; 
unable to name a successor, 6. 46; 
death and character of, 6. 50-51. 

(Tiberius Gemellus), son of Drusus, 
and grandson of Tiberius, 6. 46, 1 
(cp. 2. 84, " 

Tibur (Tivoli), family of Rubellius 
Blandus from, 6. 27, 1. 

Ticinum, 3. 5, 2. 

Tigranes (II), king of Armenia under 
Augustus, 2. 3, 4. 

— (IV), king of Armenia, afterwards 
put to death, 6. 40, 2. 

Tigris, the, 6. 37, 4. 

Tiridates, set up by Tiberius as king 
of Parthia, 6. 32, 5; gains con- 
siderable success and is crowned, 

INDEX I 

6. 37, 1, 6; 41, 2; 42, 4-6; but 
becomes inactive and is put to 
flight, 6. 43-44. 

Titidius: see Labeo. 

Titii sodales, the, I. 54, I. 

Titius: see Sabinus. 

Tmolus, in Asia, 2. 47, 4. 

toga picta, given to Ptolemaeus, 4. 
26, 4. 

Togonius : see Gallus. 

Toronaeus sinus (Gulf of Kassandra), 
the, 5. 10, 4. 

Torquata, a Vestal virgin, sister of 
C. Silanus, 3. 69, 9. 

torques, given to soldiers by the 
general, 2. 9, 5; 3. 21, 3. 

trabea, the, full dress of knights, 3. 

2:2. 
Tralles, in Asia, 4. 55, 3. 
Trebellenus Rufus, guardian to the 
sons of Cotys in Thrace, 2. 67, 4; 
3. 38, 4; commits suicide, 6. 39, I. 
Trebellius, M., an officer, 6. 41, 1... 
Treveri, the, of Gaul, I. 41, 2; rise 
under Julius Florus, 3. 40, 1; 42, 
1,43 44, 15 46, 3- 
tribuni militum, consular power of, I. 

1,2: 

— plebei, games held by, 1. 15, 5; 
intercession of, 1. 77, 3; 6. 47, 1; 
relatio by, 6. 12, I. 

tribunicia potestas, the, of Caesar, I. 
2, 13 3» 35 755 55 9925; 13, 45 3- 
.56, 175; 57,2... PE 

tribus, the people arranged in, 3. 

4, 2. 
tributa, I. 11, 6; 59,75 2. 42,75 3- 
4954. . 
Trimerus, island of, 4. 71, 6. 
Trio, Fulcinus, accuser of Libo, 2. 
28, 43 .30, 1; and of Cn. Piso; 3. 
-10, 1-33 13, 1; 19, I; consul, 5. 
II, 1; 6. 4, 2-4; commits suicide, 
6. 38, 2. 
triumphalia insignia, award of, t. 72, 
1; 2. 52, 9; 3. 48, 2; 72,6 ; 4. 23, 
1; 26,1; 44, 15; 46, 1 ; 6. 10, 4. 
triumphalis porta, the, 1. 8, 4. 
triumphus, decreed to Germanicus, I. 
55, 1 ; held by him, 2. 41, 2; held 
and refused in past times by Ti- 
berius, I. 4, 45 3. 47, 5- 
triumviri, rule of the, I. 1, 35 2. 1; 
3. 28, 3 ; 5. 1, 2. 
ue worship of, at Stratoniceia, 3. 
2, 3 

Troia, 4. 5 5, 4- 

HISTORICAL INDEX TO THE TEXT 

tropaeum, erected, 2. 18, 2; 22, I. 

Tubantes, the, in Germany, I. 51, 4. 

Tubero, Seius, legatus, 2. 20, 2; 
falsely accused, 4. 29, 1. 

Tullius : see Servius. 

Tullus Hostilius, some laws ascribed 
to, 3. 26, 5 ; praef. urb. appointed 
by, 6. 11, I. 

tumulus, the, of the Caesars (mauso- 
leum of Augustus), 3. 4, 15; 9, 2; 
of the Octavii, 4. 44, 5. 

Turesis, a Thracian, 4. 50, 3, 5. 

‘Turoni, the, of Gaul, 3. 41, 1 ; 46, 3. 

Turranius, C. , praefectus annonae, I. 

7; 3- 
| Tuscus vicus, the, in Rome, 4. 65, 2. 
Tyrrhenus, supposed brother of Ly- 
dus, and ancestor of the Tyrrheni, 

4. 55; 7- 

Ubii, the, in Germany, I. 31, 3; 
district of, 1. 37, 3; 71, 1; oppidum 
of, 1. 36,1; ara of, I. 39, 1; 57, 2. 

Umbria, 4- 5, 5. 

unciarium faenus, enacted in the. 

Twelve Tables, 6. 16, 3; reduced 
to one-half, zd. 
Urgulania, a friend of Augusta, 2. 

34, 3-8; 4. 21, 13 22, 3. 
Usipetes, the, i in "Germany, I. 5I, 4. 
erae dein by soldiers, 1 

17, 65; 35, 
Vahalis (Waal), the, 2. 6, 5. 

Valerius: see Corvus, Messala, 
Naso. 
— M., 3. 2, 5. 

Vannius, a Quadian, set over the 
Suebi, 2. 63, 7. 

Vanilla, Appuleia, accused, 2. 50, 
I, foll. 

Varius : see Ligur. 

Varro (Terentius Muraena), allusion 
to the death of, 1. 10, 3- 

— Vibidius, 2. 48, 3. 

— Visellius, legatus of Lower Ger- 
many, 3. 41,33 42,21 43, 4-. 

— Visellius, son of the above, con- 
sul, 4. 17, 1 ; accuser of C. Silius, 
419,1 

Varus, Quintilius, allusions to the 
defeat of, 1. 3, 6; 43, 23 55, 33 
57, 65; 58,3; 6o, 4, foll.; 61, 3, 
foll. ; 65, 4; 71, 2; 2. 15, 2; 25, 
25 41, 15 45, 4. 

— Quintilius (a of the above), ac- 
cused, 4. 66, I. 

683 

vectigalia, the, 1. 11,6; 2. 42,6 ; 4.6, 4. 

Vedius: see Pollio. 

Velinus, lake of the, I. 79, 3. 

Vellaeus, P., 3. 39, t. 

Venus, temples of, Amathusia, 3. 62, 
5; Erycina, 4. 43, 6; Paphia, 3. 
62, 5 ; Stratonicis, 3. 62, 3. 

Veranius, Q., governor of Cappa- 
docia, 2. 56, 4; an accuser of Cn. 
Piso, 2. 74,25; 3. 10,2; 13, 3; 17 4; 

I9, I. 
versura, forbidden, 6. 16, 3. 
Vescularius: see Flaccus. 
Vespasianus, an example of frugality, 

3. 55, 5. 

Vestales, the, 1. 8, 1; 2. 34, 8; 86, 
1; 3. 69, 9; 4. 16, 6. 

Vesuvius, allusion to the eruption of, 
4. 67, 3. 

Vetera, camp at, I. 45, I. 

veterani sub vexillo, I. 39, 2; 44,4; 
3. 21, 2. 

Vetus, Antistius, a Macedonian, 3. 
38, 2. 

via: see Appia, Caspia, Flaminia. 

Vibenna : see Caeles. 

Vibidius: see Virro. 

Vibilius, king of Hermunduri, 2. 63, 6. 

Vibius: see Fronto, Marsus, Sere- 
Rus. 

Vibulenus, a mutinous soldier, 1. 22, 
I ; 28,6 ; 29, 4. 

— see Agrippa. 

vigintiviratus, the, 3. 29, I. 

villae, number and extent of, 3. 53, 5. 

Vindelici, auxiliary troops from the, 
2. 17, 6. 

Vinicianus, Annius, 6. 9, 5. 

Vinicius, P., an orator, 3. 11, 2. 

— M., husband of Iulia, daughter of 
Germanicus, 6. 15, 15; 45, 3. 

Vipsania, wife of Tiberius, after- 
wards of Asinius Gallus, I. 12, 6; 
death of, 3. 19, 4 

Vipsanius: see Agrippa. 

Vipstanus : see Gallus. 

virgines, not subjected to ‘triumvirale 
supplicium, 5. 9, 3. 

Virro, Vibidius, 2. 48, 3. 

Visellius : see Varro. 

Vistilia, a profligate woman of high 
rank, 2. 85,2. 

Vistilius, Sex., commits suicide, 6. 9, 
2-4. 

Visurgis (Weser), the, 2. 9, 13 Js 
I; I2, 1; 16, 2; 17, 8 (cp. M 
text of, I. 70, 7). 

684. 

Vitellia, 3. 49, 2. 

Vittellius, L., father of theabove, three 
times consul, 6. 28, I; sent by 
Tiberius to the East, 6. 32,5; 36,1; 
37, 1, 6; 41, 1; became servile 
under Gaius and Claudius, 6. 32, 7. 

— P., legatus under Germanicus, 1. 
70, I, foll.; 2. 6, 1 ; accuses Cn. 
Piso, 2. 74,25 3.106,25 13, 3; 17, 
4; 19, 1 ; is accused, and commits 
PuccuN 8, 1-3; wife of, accused, 

6. 47, 1. 

— Q. ., expelled the senate, 2. 48, 3. 

Vitia, put to death, 6. 1o, 1. 

Volesus : see Messala. 

Volusius, L., death of, 5. 30, 1 

INDEX I 

Vonones (I), king of Parthia, after- 
wards of Armenia, 2. I, 1; 2, 1; 
3, 1 ; in Roman custody, 2. 4, 4 ; 
58, 3; put to death, 2. 68, 3. 

vota, the annual, 4. I7, I 

Votienus : see Montanus. 

Vulcatius or Volcatius : see Moschus. 

Vulsinii, 4. I, 3. 

Zeno, made king of Armenia, and 
called Artaxias, 2. 56, 2. 

Zmyma, temple of Venus at, 3. 63, 
4; Rutilius made a citizen of, 4. 
43, 7; allowed to build the temple 
to Tiberius for Asia, 4. 56, 1, foll. 

INDEX II 

INDEX TO THE INTRODUCTION, APPENDICES, AND NOTES 

— 

In this Index the references are to the pages 

Abstract nouns, use of, 42. 

acta populi, 19. 

— principum, annual oath to main- 
tain, 274. 

— senatus, 18, 384, 584. 

adjectives, various uses of, 42-3. 

adultery, penalties of, 344, 381, 541. 

adverbs, various usages of, 61-3. 

aediles, functions of, 9o, 455. 

Aedui, in Gaul, importance of the, 440. 

Aelius Gallus, probably the eldest 
son of Seianus, 592. 

Aemilia gens, eminence of the, 101, 

416. 
aerarium militare, the, 283. 

— populi, regulations respecting the, . 

CO, 279; gifts to, 191. 

Agrippina, the elder, obnoxious to 
Tiberius, 140, 148 ; imprisonment 
of, 149-50, 586. 

. Agrippina, mother of Nero, probable 
use made of the memoirs of, 14; 
antecedents of, before her marriage 
with Claudius, 169. 

aaa depreciated by Romans, 

369. 

Amazons, legends of the, 464. 

anastrophe, use of, 67. 

Angrivarii and Ampsivarii, probable 
confusion of, 299-300. 

Annals, not an original title of this 
work, 6. 

Antioch, in Syria, greatness of, 365. 

antiquity, remarks of Tacitus on the 
overpraise of, 385. 

Apicius, confusion between different - 

persons named, 492 

apposition, peculiar kinds of, in Taci- 
tus, 44, 68. 

archaisms, use of, in Tacitus, 72. 

aristocratic families, survival of old 
and addition of new, under the 
EUIS 100-1. 

Armenia maior, geography of, 351 ; 
chronology of the kings of, 294. 

Arminius, some Roman name pro- 
bably borne by, 253. 

Artabanus, - probable duration of 
reign of, 293, 648. 

Asinius Gallus, sons of, by Vipsania, 
former wife of Tiberius, 623. 

astrology, prevalence of, and reasons 

for repressing, 131, 317, 417; not 
altogether rejected by Tacitus, 
559, 623. 

asyndeta, use of, 62. 

Augusta, title of, 97, 191. 

Augustodunum, Roman school at, 

444- 

Augustus, gradual growth of power 
of, 75-86; adornment and regu- 
lation of the city of Rome by, 105-6, 
129-30, 195 ; institutions of, for 
Italy, 107-9; for the provinces, 
109-11, 114, 128 ; military regula- 
tions of, 121-8 ; conspiracies 
against, 196; worship of, in life, 
197, 275, 534 ; date of deification 
of, 198 ; priesthoods and festivals 
in honour of, 198, 204, 250, 379; 
will of, 184; other documents left 
by, 199; on the whole judged 
unfavourably by Tacitus, 195, 582. 

‘Augustus,’ a title distinctive of the 

princeps, 79. 

Balbus, theatre of, 477. 

banishment, modes of sentencing to, 
187 ; degrees of severity of, 412, 
507. 

Bassus, Aufidius, historical writer, 
I$. . | 

Bohemia, stronghold of Maroboduus 
in, 338, 339, 358. 

Bovillae, commemoration of gens 
Iulia at, 333. 

686 

Bracciolini, theory that the Annals 
were forged by, 8-9. 

Branchidae, temple at, 467. 

Brutus, statues of, in existence after- 
wards, 531. 

Caelés Vibenna, forms of the legend 
respecting, 566. 

candidati Caesaris, 94, 204. 

capitalists, in provinces, 442; in 
Rome and Italy, legislation re- 
specting, 614-16. 

cases of the noun, syntax of, 44-53. 

Caucasus, passes over the, 636. 

censorship, general powers of, exer- 
cised by the princeps, 8o, 85; re- 
vival of actual office of, by Domi- 
tian, 85. 

census in provinces, 222. 

centurions,  gradations of 
among, 123, 128. 

chance, doctrine respecting, 29, 621: 
see fate. 

childlessness and celibacy, penalties 
on 486; social influence of, 421, 

. 488. 

Cilicia, part of the province of Syria, 
335; petty kingdoms remaining 
in, 335 

civic crown, given by the princeps, 
415. 

civitas, the, given by the princeps, 
87, 129; gained by service in 
auxiliary forces, 127. | 

Claudii, the, different views of the 

- Sabine origin of, 503. 

clientela, character of, under the 
principate, 105. 

comitatus principis, the, 558. 

Commagene, history of the kingdom 
of, 335, 352. 

‘commendation’ of candidates by 
the princeps, 94, 204. 

commentarii principum, the, 19. 

concilium principis, the, 89. 

conjunctions, peculiar uses of, 61-3. 

conspiracies, prolonged  severities 
consequent on the suppression of, 
150-3. 

constitutional forms, respect 
under the early Empire, 99. 

consul-designate, position of the, in 
the senate, 417-18. 

consuls, functions of, under the prin- 
cipate, 90 ; mode of electing, 286. 

Corbulo, father and son apparently 
confused, 430. 

rank 

for, 

INDEX II 

corn dole, recipients of, 104, 105, 181. 

corn supply, condition of, under 
Tiberius, 383 ; specially managed 
by the princeps, 499. 

corn, tribute in, 499. 

courtiers, growth of a class of, 96. 

Ctesiphon, foundation and growth 
of, 646. 

cunei, in theatres, 380. 

cum maxime, origin and use of the 
phrase, 462. 

custodia, different kinds of, 599. 

cycle, a, theory of, in human affairs, 
457. 

Cyrene, part of the province of Crete, 

438, 474. 

Danube, the, a great frontier of the 
empire, 110. 

death, variety of expressions for, 71. 

debt, pressure of, in provinces, 440. 

decuriae equitum or iudicum, 102, 
428. 

decursio funebris, 298. 

. defixio magica, or devotio, 365. 

delatores, encouragement of, by Ti- 
berius, 143, 146, 426, 487 ; great 
rewards of, 426, 515. 

Dio Cassius, complaints of, concern- 
ing defective historical information, 
20; leading differences between 
Tacitus and, #d@.; judgement of, 
respecting Tiberius, 157. 

Diomedean islands, the, 573. 

on mode of taking opinions 

y, 4 

dominus, title of, 383. 

Domitii, the, related to Augustus, 164. 

domus, distinguished from insulae, 
103-4. 

dreams, interpretation of, 317. 

Drusus, son of Tiberius, character 
of, as conceived by Tacitus, 158, 
220, 281, 437. 

ducentesima, remission of, by Gaius, 

335. 

eagles of the legions, sanctity of the, 
232. 

eclipse, prevalent ignorance of the 
true theory of an, 218. 

egressio relationis, instances of; 329. 

Egypt, peculiar position of, in the 
empire, 117, 119, 355. 

Egyptian hieroglyphic and other 
writing, 356 ; calendar, 629. 

Elbe, the, probable advance of Ger- 

INTRODUCTION, 

manicus towards, 309; Roman 
knowledge of, 544. 

ellipsis, prevalent forms of, in Tacitus, 
68. 

empire, the, frontiers of, at the death 
of Augustus, 109-12; general con- 
solidation of, at that date, 129-31. 

Epicureanism, allusion to leading 
doctrines of, 30, 622. 

Epidaphna (properly Daphne), near 
Antioch, grove of, 379. 

equestrian order, the, position of, 
under the  principate, 102-3; 

ractically furnished nearly all the 

iudices selecti, 102 ; aristocracy of 
(equites inlustres), 102-3. 

equites equo publico, turmae of, 
380, 428; transvectio of, 380. 

Euphrates, ‘the, how far a frontier of 
the empire, 111; points of cross- 
ing, 640, 644. 

executions. and suicides, in the last 
years of Tiberius, 152. 

fate, opinions of Tacitus respecting, 
29-31, 429, 622. 

filius-familias, a, legal disabilities of, 
.216. 

financial crisis, causes of the, in the 
time of Tiberius, 616. 

fire, in Rome, frequent occurrence 
of, 564. 

fiscus, the, 97, 597, 619. 

flamen Dialis, the, regulations affect- 
ing, 476, 511. 

flaminica Dialis, the, conjugal status 
of, 511. 

Fortuna, temples of, 475; special 
worship of, at Antium, id. 

freedmen, importance of, under Au- 
gustas and Tiberius, 105, 499. 

friendship, significance o ‘renuncia- 
tion of, 366. 

Gaetulicus, Lentulus, conspiracy of, 
632. 

Galba, versions of the presage re- 
specting, 620. 

Gallic tribes, number of, 444; can- 
tons of, 255. 

German bodyguard of the princeps, 
214. 

Germanicus, representations of the 
personal appearance of, 368; not 
treated unjustly by Tiberius, 140 ; 

inscription recording posthumous ' 

honours to, 378; 
387-91. 

campaigns of, 

APPENDICES, NOTES 

687 

Germans, cantons of, 255; arms of, 
304; campaigns of Tiberius against, 
134-5, 315; ill-success of Germani- 
cus against, 138; internal dissen- 
sions of, 316; sacred groves of, 
246 ; sacrifices of, 261. 

gerund and gerundive, uses of, 46, 52. 

gladiators, kept by provincial go- 
vernors, 212. 

Gracchus, view taken of, by Tacitus, 
424. 

Graecisms, use of, in Tacitus, 39, 72. 

Greek character, ‘the, as viewed by 
Romans, 348. 

Greek dress, use of, by Romans, 348. 

Greek language, prevalence of, in the 
East, 129. 

Gyarus, description of the poverty of, 

474. 

hendiadys, use of, 67. 

Hercules, various worships identified 
with that of, 302, 356. 

Hiberia, kingdom of, 497. 

historians of this period prior to 
Tacitus, 13-17. 

historical criticism, generally weak 
in Roman writers, 34. 

historical information, defective un- 
der the principate, 21. 

history, office of, as conceived by 
Tacitus, 27-8. 

Horace, reminiscences of, in Tacitus, 

73. 
Hortensii, the, family honours of, 
329; impoverishment of, 328. 
houses, height of, 104.’ 

Ilium, generaliy assumed by Romans 
to be on the site of Troy, 349. 

imagines of ancestors, used at fu- 
nerals with some laxity at this 
time, 399, 482; those of persons 
condemned, how far proscribed or 

' tolerated, 321, 532. 

imago Caesaris, the, quasi-privilege 
of asylum conferred by, 436. 

imperator, praenomen of, 76, 83; 
title of, 76, 257, 480. 

in praesentiarum, use of, 560. 

inscriptions, sometimes cited by Ta- 
citus, 20; often confirm facts men- 
tioned in ‘the Annals alone, 9-12. 

insulae, distinguished from domus, 
104. 

Isis, suppression of the worship of, at 
Rome, 131, 382. 

688 

Italy, general condition and popula- 
tion of, 108; simplicity of life and 
morals in, as compared with Rome, 
108-9. 

Jason, legends of, in the East, 637. 

Jews, treatment of, under Tiberius, 
131, 382. 

Josephus, judgement of, on Tiberius, 
155,157- 

iudices selecti, lists of, framed by the 
princeps, 102, 428. 

judicial functions of the princeps, 88, 
403, 610. 

judicial functions of the senate: see 
senate. 

Julius Caesar, ignored as a legislator 
by Tacitus, 425. — 

jurisprudence, schools of, 481. 

Kabeiri, worship of the, 348. 
kingdoms, position of the vassal, 
I20-I. 

Latin language, spread of, in the 
provinces, 129. | 

Latinitas, the, extension of, before 
lex Iulia, 497. 

law, theories of the origin of, 421. 

legati Augusti pro praetore, 116. 

— legionum, 124. 

-— propraetore, 112. 

legion, the, numerical strength and 
organization of, 122-4. 

legions, the, number and distribution 
of, 121-2; additions to, 123; 
recruited chiefly in the provinces, 
I27, 441; separate winter-quarters 
of, 232. 

legislation, history of, at Rome, 423. 

Lepidus, Marcus and Manius con- 
fused, 432. 

lex, Iulia maritalis, 484; Iunia Nor- 
bana, 105; Papia Poppaea, 483, 
foll. 

lictors, assignment of, 193, 348. 

limes Romanus, the, 110. 

literature, state of, in later time of 
Augustus, and under Tiberius, 160. 

Livia Augusta, age of, 581; family 
connexions of, 77.; permanent, but 
informal power of, 149, 558; judge- 
ment of Tacitus on the character 
of, 149. 

Livy, imitations or reminiscences of, 
by Tacitus, 73. 

luxury, especially in feasting, great 

INDEX II 

increase of, during this period, and 
abatement of, by the time of Taci- 
tus, 457. 

Maecenas, informal vicegerency of, 
609 retirement of, 429; character 
of, zd. 

magic, prevalence and repression of, 
131, 317, 365. 

magistrates, election of, how arranged 
between the princeps and the 
senate, 94-5, 286; qualification 
of age for, 427; functions of, 
gradually encroached upon by 
officers of the emperor, 9o-I. 

maiestas, original conception of the 
crime of, 141, foll.; legal limitation 
of, and legal penalty for, 451; trials 
for, during first eight years, 141-4, 
and during subsequent years of 
Tiberius, 145, foll. 

manuscripts, first Medicean, 6-8. 

mapalia and magalia, modern struc- 
tures apparently answering to, 480. 

marriage, might be with or without 
‘conventio in manum, 511. 

Massilia, school of Greek at, 544. 

Mauretania, kingdom of, under: Ti- 
berius, 496. | 

Media Atropatene, kingdom of, 351. 

Memnon, statue of, evidence as to 
sounds heard from, 357. 

mensarii, appointment of, 617. 

Messala Corvinus, writings of, 530. 

military forces, other than the legions, 
124-6. 

— service, grievances and rewards 
of, 127-8, 206, 207, 229, 230, 232; 
modes of discharge from, 229, 232, 
240: see also soldiers. 

mixed government, ideal of, regarded 
by Tacitus as impracticable, 527. 

municipia and coloniae, the towns of 
Italy generally designated as, 283. 

Nature, Law of, 421. 

naval forces of the empire, 127-8. 

Navisalvia,inscription respecting, 565. 

necromancy, 318. 

noble families, respect still paid to, 
under Augustus and Tiberius, 100-1, 
418 ; constant decay of, 101: see 
patricians, . 

‘nomination,’ of candidates for magis- 
tracies, 94-5, 203. 

Nonianus, Servilius, historian, 15. 

Nouns, cases of, syntax of, 44-53. 

INTRODUCTION, APPENDICES, NOTES 

opposition, the, weakness of, in the 
time of Tiberius, 143. 

oratory, characteristics of, at the time 
of Tacitus, 39-40. 

Ovid, reminiscence of, in Tacitus, 

74. 

pagi of Germany and Gaul, 254. 

pantomime actors, character and 
position of, 251, 282; action taken 
respecting, 508. 

pardon, power of, vested in the 
princeps, 87, 

parentheses, use of, in Tacitus, 68. 

parricide, punishment of, 524. 

Parthian empire, the, extent of, 291 ; 
chronology of the kings of, 292. 

participles, use of, 58-9. 

pater patriae, title of, 80, 273. 

patria potestas, relaxation of, 511; 
family jurisdiction grounded on, 

344- 
patricians, offices still restricted to, 

510. 

Paulus, basilica of, 476. 

pedarii senatores, position of, in de- 
bate, 469-70. 

Pedo Albinovanus, description of 
storm by, 386. 

perinde and proinde, frequently con- 
fused, 516. 

perjury, not punished by Roman law, 
2 

76. 
Philippus, buildings erected by, 477. 
Philo, accounts of Tiberius and Gaius 
given by, 16, 153, 156-7. 

phoenix, the, cycle of time symbolized 
by, 629. 

Phraataces, reign of, 292. 

Phraates, family of, 292. 

Piso, L., story as to the praefectura 
urbis of, 33, 609. 

Pisones, great family pride and posi- 
tion of the, Ior. 

Plancus, honours of, 336. 

plebs, the (see a/so clientela), various 
classes and occupations of, 104-5 ; 
condition of, 106-7; the lower 
orders of, disregarded by Tiberius, 
id.; opportunities for expression 
of opinion open to, 611. 

Pliny, the elder, historical works of, 

I5. 
— the younger, frequent mention of 
Tacitus by, I. 
police regulations of Augustus, 106. 
Pollio, historical works of, 530. 

+ VOL. I. 

689 

Pompeius, judgement of Tacitus 
respecting, 425. 

Pomponius Secundus, literary repu- 
tation of, 593. 

pontifex maximus, office of, 80, 461, 
476, 557; some functions of the 
emperor as, 344 

population, the, of Rome, 103, 105-6; 
of Italy, 483. 

praefectura Aegypti, 117, 356. 

— annonae, 86, 189. : 

— praetorii, usually shared by two, 
214 ; subsequent changes in, 492. 

— urbis, jurisdiction of, 609. 

— urbis ob ferias Latinas, held by 
young men of rank, 533. 

praetorian cohorts, number of, at 
various times, 125-6; pay and ra- 
tions of, 207 ; gradual extension of 
recruiting ground of, 497. | 

praetors, functions of, under the 
principate, 91; courts presided 
over by, 374. 

pregnant constructions, 69. 

prepositions, peculiar uses of, 59-61. 

priesthoods, mode of election to, 413 ; 
rules of, respecting pollution, 262 ; 
provincial, 255. 

primitive man, Stoic and Epicurean 
views of, 421. 

princeps, title of, to be distinguished 
from that of princeps senatus, 78 ; 
office of, not conceived as a mon- 
archy, 95-9; not strictly as a 
magistracy, 81; but as a com- 
bination of magisterial functions, 
or powers derived from such, 81- 
90; legislation and jurisdiction by, 
86-9 (see also judicial functions) ; 
succession to, 97, 459; divine 
honours paid ‘to, in lifetime, 197, 
275, 283, 535; annual vows on 
behalf of, 512. 

proconsulare imperium, the, of the 
princeps, 81-3; as given in various 
degrees of extent to others, 98, 203, 
335, 336, 414, 591. 

proconsuls of senatorial provinces, 
112-14. | 

procurators, as governors of pro- 
vinces, 116-17; as subordinate 
officers, 112, 118, 499, 509; as 
managers of the emperor's property, 
499; increased employment and 
importance of, from the time of 
Claudius, 509. 

prodigies, not noted in the earlier 

Y y 

690 

Books, 16 ; ambiguous view of Ta- 
citus respecting, 30-1. ; 
pronouns, freely omitted by Tacitus, 

43. 

province of Achaia, 280; Africa, 113- 
14, 115; Asia, 113, 114; Bithynia, 
276; Britannia, 116; Cappadocia, 
334, 352; Crete and Cyrene, 474 ; 
Delmatia, 497 ; Gallia Belgica and 
Lugdunensis, 440; Germania 
Inferior and Superior, 116, 222; 
Hispania Citerior, 496; Ulterior, 
507; Lusitania, 496; Macedonia, 
280; Moesia, 285; Noricum, 359; 
Pannonia, 205; Raetia and Vinde- 
licia, 239; Sardinia, 382; Syria, 
117-18 (see also Mauretania, 
Thrace). 

provinces, division of, between Caesar 
and the senate, 112-17; those of 
the former more economically gov- 
erned, 119; generally better treated 
than under the Republic, but still 
liable to much misgovernment, zd.; 
tenure of, under Tiberius, 285. 

publicani, associations of, 499. 

quaestors, functions of, under the 
principate, 90; age required for, 
427; provinces in Italy formerly 
allotted to, 522. 

relatio: see egressio relationis. 

religion, endeavours of Augustus for 
the restoration of, 130; effect of 
the cult of the emperors upon, 
id.; foreign, how far tolerated or 
suppressed in Rome, 130-1, 382: 
see also Isis, Jews. 

repetundae, cases of, under Tiberius, 
139. 

Rhamses, or Rameses, testimony of: 

monuments tothe conquestsof, 356. 

Rhine, the, how far a frontier of the 
empire, IIO. 

rivers, sanctity attached to, 284. 

roads, officers superintending the, 
431. 

romance, vein of, in narrative of 
campaign of Germanicus, 299, 307, 
$63. 

Rome, city of, notices of inundation 
and pestilence in, 279; condition 
and population of, under Augustus, 
103-6; police of, 106: see a/so 
fire, houses. 

INDEX II 

sacramentum in nomen principis, 
taken by senate, people, and pro- 
vinces, 83, 189, 226. 

Salian hymn, the, insertion of names 
in, 378. 

Sallust, imitation of, by Tacitus, 
40, 72-3. 

Samos, Heraeum at, 508. i 

satire, prevalence of, in the age of 
Tacitus, 36-7. 

Seianus, affinity of, to the Claudian 
and Julian house, 539, 604 ; family 
connexions of, 491; powers ac- 
quired by, 493, 591, 605; circum- 
stances of the fall of, 586-8; 
weakness in the evidence relating 
to, 150-1. 

senate, the, places of meeting of, 328 ; 
functions of, under the principate, 
92-4; powers of, in choosing or 
deposing a princeps, 98; apparent 
deference shown to, at beginning 
of rule, by Tiberius, 95, 248; 
weakened by the terrorism of the 
later rule of Tiberius and that of 
Gaius, 160; trials before, 92-3, &c. 

senators, direct and indirect choice 
of, by the princeps, 94; expulsion 
of, by the princeps, 85, 343; or by 
the senate itself, 343 ; great general 
wealth and occasional poverty of, 
101-2. 

senatus consultum, legislation by, 
511 ; empire conferred by, 99. 

Seneca, L., remarks of, on Tiberius, 
157. 

Seneca, M., historical work of, 15. 

Sibyls, the number of, 610; books 
of, 280, 610. 

silver age, the, general character- 
istics of the Latinity of, 39. 

slaves, number of, in Rome, 1c6; 
various nationalities of, 454; free- 
dom often acquired by, 130. _ 

soldiers, conscription and voluntary 
enlistment of, 495; full dress of, 
214, 398 : see also military service. 

Stoics, the, opinions of, 421, 622. 

Suetonius, leading differences be- 
tween Tacitus and, 20, 29, 33, 
157; tendency of, to generalize 
from single instances, 416, 572, 
594 ; and otherwise to exaggerate, 
153, 416-17; or to speak inac- 
curately, 559; or to follow versions 
which Tacitus declines to notice, 
529; is sometimes more exact 

INTRODUCTION, APPENDICES, NOTES 

than Tacitus, 170, 619 ; or supple- 
ments him, 616. 

suicide, variety of expressions for, 71. 

Sulpicius Quirinius, chronological 
question connected with the tenure 
of Syria by, 448. 

sumptuary laws, record of, 455, 455. 

Tacitus, dates in the life of, 1-5; 
dates of the several works of, 5; 
circumstances helping to form the 
style of, 39-41; adaptation of 
speeches by, 32 ; very defective as 
a geographer, 31; and as a de- 
scriber of military movements, 32 ; 
purpose of, as a historian, 27-30; 
opinions of, on human affairs (see 
chance and fate); political sym- 
pathies and antipathies of, 35, 
423-6, 494 ; shows special preju- 
dice against the early Caesars, 35; 
and against Tiberius in particular, 
157 ; some apparent errors of fact 
in, 31-2; unfair imputation of 
motives in, 157 : see also Augustus 
and Tiberius. 

Taurus, Statilius, amphitheatre of, 
477; general vicegerency of, 609. 
theatres, regulation of applause in, 

205-6. 

Thrace, kingdom of, 360. 

Tiberius, division of the life and 
character of, into periods, 131, 
foll.; foreign policy of, despised in 
the age of Trajan, 138; imputa- 
tions respecting the later years of, 
153; increasing sensitiveness and 
vindictiveness of, 146-7; indeci- 
sion of character of, 137, 140, 157, 
158, 442, 576 ; judgement of other 
historians respecting, 155-8 ; that 
of Tacitus partially corrected by 
his own admissions, 157 ; ‘ modes- 
tia’ of, variously explained, 198, 
535-6; parsimony of, not without 
munificence, 139, 147, 154; 
personal appearance of, 557; re- 
spect shown by the provinces to, 
159, 535; Stagnation of literature 
under, 160; suppression of pro- 
phecy by, 280; suspicious tempera- 
ment of, leading him to the con- 
stant encouragement of delation, 
143; traces of apparent insanity 
in the last years of, 155; various 
accounts of the death of, will of, 
treatment of the memory of, 656. 

691 

tradition, oral, cited by Tacitus, 20. 
tribuni militum, office of, a preli- 
minary to the quaestorship, 124. 
— plebis, functions of, under the 
principate, 9o. 

tribunician power of the princeps, 76, 
83-4, 181, 458; association in, 97, 
458. : 

triumph, restriction of, to the imperial 
family, 273. 

triumviri capitales, summary juris- 
diction of, probably extinct, 91. 

Tullianum, the dungeon called, 451. 

Twelve Tables, laws of the, view of 
Tacitus respecting, 423; some 
enactments of, 317. 

urban cohorts, number of, at various 
times, 127; recruiting ground of 
497- 

usury, account of the laws respecting, 

variety in expression, study of, in 
Tacitus, 41, 69-72. 

Velleius, brief sketch of part of the 
rule of Tiberius by, 156. 

verbs, syntax of, in Tacitus, 53-8. 

Vergil, influence of, on the style of 
Tacitus, 40, 74. 

verses occurring in Tacitus, 67-8. 

Vestals, choice and seniority of, 383; 
regulations respecting, 512; cus- 
tody of wills by, 190-1. 

veterani sub vexillo, 124-5, 206, 229, 
283. 

vigiles, corps of, 106; used against 
Seianus, 588. 

villas of the nobility, 101, 454; of 
Tiberius, 568, 655. 

vis publica, crime of, 507. 

vota pro incolumitate reipublicae, 
distinct from those for the princeps, 

512, 571. 

wills, expression of sentiment allowed 
in, 641. 

wives of governors in provinces, 433. 

women, practical independence ac- 
quired by, 511; special extrava- 
gances of, 454. 

‘worships, foreign at Rome, and 

Roman in the provinces, 130-1; 
repression of unlawful, 382. 

zeugma, frequent use of, 69.
