oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
ORIENTAL  INSTITUTE  PUBLICATIONS 

Edited  by 

JAMES  HENRY  BREASTED 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

« 

Internet  publication  of  this  work  was  made  possible  with  the 
generous  support  of  Misty  and  Lewis  Gruber 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
ORIENTAL  INSTITUTE  PUBLICATIONS 
VOLUME  III 

THE  EDWIN  SMITH 
SURGICAL  PAPYRUS 

PUBLISHED  IN  FACSIMILE  AND  HIERO¬ 
GLYPHIC  TRANSLITERATION  WITH  TRANS¬ 
LATION  AND  COMMENTARY  IN 
TWO  VOLUMES 

Br 

JAMES  HENRY  BREASTED  . 

VOLUME  ONE 

HIEROGLYPHIC  TRANSLITERATION 
TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

WITH  EIGHT  PLATES 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  PRESS 
CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS 
1930 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  OXFORD 
BY  JOHN  JOHNSON,  PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 

WILLIAM  HARVEY 

DISCOVERER  OF  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 

AT  THE  THREE  HUNDREDTH  ANNIVERSARY 
OF  HIS  GREAT  DISCOVERY  THIS 
PUBLICATION  OF  THE  EARLIEST  KNOWN 
SURGICAL  TREATISE 
IS 

DEDICATED 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

FOREWORD . xiii 

GENERAL  EXPLANATORY  NOTES  FOR  PHYSICIANS  AND  OTHER 

NON-EGYPTOLOGICAL  READERS . xxi 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION . 1-29 

PART  I.  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  (THE  RECTO)  .  .  .  31-466 

Special  Introduction . 33-77 

Translation  and  Commentary .  78-428 

Case  1.  A  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  (incomplete)  .  78 

Case  2.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  .  118 

Case  3.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and 

Perforating  the  Skull  . . 126 

Case  4.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and 

Splitting  the  Skull  ........  139 

Case  5.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  with  Compound  Comminuted 

Fracture  of  the  Skull . 166 

Case  6.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  with  Compound  Comminuted 

Fracture  of  the  Skull  and  Rupture  of  the  Meningeal  Membranes  164 

Case  7.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and 

Perforating  the  Sutures  .......  176 

Case  8.  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Skull  Displaying  no 

Visible  External  Injury . 201 

Case  9.  Wound  in  the  Forehead  Producing  a  Compound  Comminuted 

Fracture  of  the  Skull . 217 

Case  10.  A  Gaping  Wound  at  the  Top  of  the  Eyebrow,  Penetrating  to 

the  Bone . 226 

Case  11.  A  Broken  Nose . 234 

Case  12.  A  Break  in  the  Nasal  Bone . 244 

Case  13.  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  in  the  Side  of  the  Nose  .  262 

Case  14.  Flesh  Wound  in  One  Side  of  the  Nose  Penetrating  to  the  Nostril  266 

Case  15.  Perforation  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla  and  Zygoma  262 

oi.uchicago.edu 

x  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

Translation 

and  Commentary  ( continued ) 

PAGE 

Case  16. 

Split  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla  and  the  Zygoma 

265 

Case  17. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of 

the  Maxilla  and  the  Zygoma  ..... 

• 

267 

Case  18. 

A  Wound  in  the  Soft  Tissue  of  the  Temple,  the  Bone  being 

Uninjured ......... 

270 

Case  19. 

A  Perforation  in  the  Temple  ..... 

278 

Case  20, 

A  Wound  in  the  Temple  Perforating  the  Bone 

283 

Case  21. 

A  Split  in  the  Temporal  Bone  ..... 

287 

Case  22. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Temporal  Bone 

289 

Case  23. 

A  Slit  in  the  Outer  Ear  ...... 

297 

Case  24. 

A  Fracture  of  the  Mandible ...... 

301 

Case  26. 

A  Dislocation  of  the  Mandible  ..... 

303 

Case  26. 

A  Wound  in  the  Upper  Lip ...... 

306 

Case  27. 

A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Chin  ..... 

309 

Case  28. 

A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Throat  Penetrating  to  the  Gullet 

312 

Case  29. 

A  Gaping  Wound  in  a  Cervical  Vertebra 

316 

Case  30. 

Sprain  in  Cervical  Vertebrae . 

319 

Case  31. 

Dislocation  of  a  Cervical  Vertebra  .... 

323 

Case  32. 

Displacement  of  a  Cervical  Vertebra  .... 

333 

Case  33. 

A  Crushed  Cervical  Vertebra  ..... 

337 

Case  34. 

Dislocation  of  the  Two  Clavicles  ..... 

342 

Case  36. 

A  Fracture  of  the  Clavicle  ...... 

360 

Case  36. 

A  Fracture  of  the  Humerus  ..... 

364 

Case  37. 

A  Fracture  of  the  Humerus  with  Rupture  of  Overlying  Soft  Tissue 

367 

Case  38. 

A  Split  in  the  Humerus  ...... 

• 

361 

Case  39. 

Tumors  or  Ulcers  in  the  Breast,  perhaps  Resulting  from  Injury 

363 

Case  40. 

A  Wound  in  the  Breast  ...... 

. 

369 

Case  41. 

An  Infected  or  possibly  Necrotic  Wound  in  the  Breast  . 

. 

374 

Case  42. 

A  Sprain  of  the  Stemo-Costal  Articulations  . 

• 

391 

Case  43. 

A  Dislocation  in  the  Stemo-Costal  Articulations  . 

• 

396 

Case  44. 

Fraotured  Ribs . 

# 

401 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

xi 

Translation  and  Commentary  (continued) 

PAGE 

Case  45.  Bulging  Tumors  on  the  Breast 

. 

403 

Case  46.  Abscess  with  Prominent  Head  on  the  Breast . 

407 

Case  47.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Shoulder 

415 

Case  48.  A  Sprain  in  a  Spinal  Vertebra  (incomplete) 

425 

Consecutive  Translation . 

.  429-466 

PART  II.  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

.  467-507 

Special  Introduction . 

.  469-471 

Translation  and  Commentary  .... 

.  472-500 

Consecutive  Translation . 

.  501-507 

PART  III.  THE  INDICES . 

.  509-592 

Egyptian  Glossary . 

.  511-576 

General  Index . 

.  577-591 

List  op  Abbreviated  Book  Titles 

592 

ADDENDA.  1.  The  Date  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus 

693 

2.  Additional  Textual  Notes 

. 

595 

3.  Discovery  of  a  Single  Example  of 

Ancient 

Egyptian 

Trepanning  .... 

• 

• 

• 

596 

CORRIGENDA 

596 

oi.uchicago.edu 

LIST  OF  PLATES 

Plate  I,  Pig.  1.  Egyptian  Mandible  op  the  Old  Kingdom 

(about  8000-2500  b.  c.) . At  end  of  Volume 

Fig.  2.  Middle  Kingdom  Egyptian  Battle  Axes 

(about  2000  b.  c.) . ,  „  „  „ 

Plate  II,  Figs.  8  and  4.  Sword  Cuts  in  Egyptian  Skulls  of 

a  Century  or  two  before  the  Christian  Era  .  „  „  „  „ 

Fig.  6.  Wounded  Skull  of  the  Pharaoh  Sekenenre 

(Early  Sixteenth  Century  b.  c.)  ...  „  „  „  „ 

Plate  III,  Figs.  6  and  7.  Elaborate  Mummy  Bandages  of 

Homan  Age . .  „  „ 

Plate  IV,  Figs.  8  to  10.  Embalming  Wounds  of  Twenty- 
first  Dynasty  Mummies  Sewn  up  with  String 
(Eleventh  Century  b.  o.)  .  .  .  .  „  „  „  „ 

Plate  V,  Fig.  11.  Ancient  Egyptian  Skull  probably  of  the 

Middle  Kingdom  (about  2000  b.  c.)  .  .  „  „  „ 

Plate  VI,  Fig.  12.  Reduction  of  a  Dislocated  Mandible  by 
a  Greek  Surgeon  as  shown  in  an  Illustrated 
Commentary  on  Hippocrates  .  .  .  „  „  „  „ 

Plate  VII,  Fig.  18.  Wounded  Skull  of  the  Assassinated 
High  Priest  of  Amon,  Harsiese  (Ninth  Cen¬ 
tury  b.  c.) . .  „ 

Figs.  14  to  16.  Skull  Wounds  of  Eleventh  Dyn¬ 
asty  Soldiers  (Twenty-first  Century  b.  c.)  .  „  „  „  „ 

Plate  VIII,  Figs.  17  and  18.  Arrow  Wounds  of  Eleventh  Dyn¬ 
asty  Soldiers  (Twenty-first  Century  b.  c.)  with 
the  Arrows  still  sticking  in  the  Wounds . .  „ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

FOREWORD 

The  science  of  surgery  has  made  such  revolutionary  progress  during  the  last  two 
generations  that  there  might  seem  to  be  a  greater  gulf  between  the  surgeons  of  the 
American  Civil  War  and  those  of  the  present  than  there  ever  was  between  the  surgery 
of  the  ancient  world  and  that  of  the  American  Civil  War.  Nevertheless,  the  funda¬ 
mental  transformation  in  the  field  of  surgery,  as  in  medicine,  resulting  from  the  earliest 
recognition  of  natural  causes  as  distinguished  from  demoniacal  possession,  occurred  in 
ancient  times.  A  superstitious  view  of  the  universe,  involving  belief  in  demoniacal 
possession,  especially  among  the  ignorant,  has  persisted  into  modern  times,  as  illus¬ 
trated  in  the  Salem  witchcraft,  or  even  in  the  case  of  an  educated  man  like  Increase 
Mather,  once  president  of  Harvard  University  (see  infra,  p.  15).  It  is  strikingly  illus¬ 
trated  in  the  conditions  among  which  Mormonism  arose  only  a  century  ago  in  western 
Pennsylvania  and  New  York  State.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  transition  from 
superstition  to  a  scientific  point  of  view  cannot  be  placed  at  a  fixed  date. 

In  this  document,  therefore,  we  have  disclosed  to  us  for  the  first  time  the  human 
mind  peering  into  the  mysteries  of  the  human  body,  and  recognizing  conditions  and 
processes  there  as  due  to  intelligible  physical  causes.  The  facts  in  each  given  case  of 
injury  are  observed,  listed,  and  marshaled  before  the  mind  of  the  observer,  who  then 
makes  rational  conclusions  based  on  the  observed  facts.  Here  then  we  find  the  first 
scientific  observer  known  to  us,  and  in  this  papyrus  we  have  the  earliest  known 
scientific  document. 

While  the  copy  of  the  document  which  has  come  down  to  us  dates  from  the  Seven¬ 
teenth  Century  b.c.,  the  original  author’s  first  manuscript  was  produced  at  least 
a  thousand  years  earlier,  and  was  written  some  time  in  the  Pyramid  Age  (about  8000 
to  2500  b.c.).  As  preserved  to  us  in  a  copy  made  when  the  Surgical  Treatise  was 
a  thousand  years  old  or  more,  a  copy  in  which  both  beginning  and  end  have  been 
lost,  the  manuscript  nowhere  discloses  the  name  of  the  unknown  author.  We  may 
be  permitted  the  conjecture,  and  it  is  pure  conjecture,  that  a  surgical  treatise  of  such 
importance,  appearing  in  the  Pyramid  Age,  may  possibly  have  been  written  by  the 
earliest  known  physician,  Imhotep,  the  great  architect-physician  who  flourished  in  the 
Thirtieth  Century  b.o.  In  that  case  the  original  treatise  would  have  been  written 
over  thirteen  hundred  years  before  our  copy  of  the  Seventeenth  Century  b.o.  was  made. 

We  should  mention  in  this  connection  the  recent  discovery  of  an  Old  Kingdom 
palace  physician’s  tombstone  at  Gizeh  by  H.  Junker.1  This  court  physician,  who  bore 
the  name  of  Iry,  lived  and  died  some  eight  hundred  years  before  the  surviving  copy 
of  our  treatise  was  made,  in  an  age  when  our  unknown  surgeon’s  autograph  manuscript 
may  possibly  have  been  still  in  existence.  Iry  was  not  only  the  Pharaoh’s  palace 
1  See  H.  Junker,  “Die  Stele  des  Hofarztes  Irj,”  ZeUschr.filr  aegyptische  8prache,63  (1 927 ),pp.  63-70. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xiv  FOREWORD 

physician,  but  he  was  also  chief  of  the  medical  corps  in  which  the  court  physicians 
were  organized.  He  was  furthermore  an  important  specialist,  for  he  served  also  as 
“  palace  eye-physician,”  and  “  palace  stomaeh-bowel-physieian,”  literally  “  palace 
physician  of  the  belly,”  in  which  capacity  he  bore  the  titles:  “  one  understanding  the 
internal  fluids,”  and  “  guardian  of  the  anus,”  showing  that  he  was  particularly  versed 
in  internal  medicine,  and  that  he  specialized  in  diseases  of  the  digestive  organs.  This 
specialization  in  the  Old  Kingdom  is  further  illustrated  by  the  existence  of  the  “  palace 
dentist,”  who  might  at  the  same  time  serve  as  “  chief  palace  physician.”  The  reader 
will  find  an  example  of  the  remarkable  work  of  the  dental  surgeon  as  far  back  as  the 
Fourth  Dynasty  (about  2900-2750  b.c.)  in  the  extraordinary  mandible  showing  the 
alveolar  process  pierced  to  drain  an  abscess  under  the  first  molar  (PI.  I,  Fig.  1).  These 
facts  demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  body  of  medical  knowledge  in  the  Old  Kingdom 
already  so  large  and  detailed  as  to  require  specialization. 

Very  few  visible  and  unmistakable  evidences  of  the  surgeon’s  work,  like  this  Fourth 
Dynasty  dental  operation,  however,  have  thus  far  been  found  in  the  large  number  of 
Egyptian  bodies  recovered  from  the  ancient  cemeteries.  Since  this  volume  went  to 
press  the  Metropolitan  Museum  has  published  in  photographs  an  extraordinary  series 
of  wounds  found  in  the  bodies  of  a  group  of  sixty  Eleventh  Dynasty  soldiers,  slain 
in  battle  a  generation  or  two  before  2000  b.c.,  and  buried  together  in  one  tomb  dis¬ 
covered  by  the  Metropolitan  Museum  Expedition  at  Thebes.1  A  series  of  five  of  these 
interesting  examples  of  injuries  inflicted  in  ancient  oriental  warfare  will  be  found  on 
Plates  VII  and  VIII  (Figs.  14-18)  at  the  end  of  this  volume.2  They  arrived  too  late 
to  be  mentioned  in  the  text  of  the  present  volume  or  included  in  the  references,  but 
besides  two  extraordinary  arrow  wounds  (Plate  VIII)  they  display  especially  injuries 
to  the  skull  fully  described  by  our  ancient  surgeon  in  his  discussion  of  head  wounds. 
These  wounds  convincingly  justify  the  editor’s  surmise,  in  print  before  the  photographs 
were  available,  that  our  surgeon  had  followed  an  army  in  time  of  war  (infra,  p.  11). 

Another  interesting,  although  much  later,  wound  in  the  skull  was  discovered  at 
Thebes  last  season  by  the  Oriental  Institute  Expedition  of  the  University  of  Chicago. 
This  skull,  belonging  to  Harsiese,  High  Priest  of  Amon  at  Thebes  in  the  reign  of 
Osorkon  II  (Ninth  Century  b.c.),  reveals  for  the  first  time  the  fact  that  the  great  man 
was  assassinated  ;  for  he  had  received  a  mace  wound  in  the  forehead  (Plate  VII, 
Fig.  18),  which  perforated  the  skull.  Dr.  D.  E.  Derry,  who  has  kindly  examined  the 
wound,  concludes  that  it  did  not  cause  immediate  death,  but  that  some  absorption  of 
the  bone  around  the  wound  took  place  during  an  interval  before  the  High  Priest’s 

1  See  H.  E.  Winlock,  The  Egyptian  Expedition,  Bulletin  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art, 
New  York,  Section  II,  Feb.  1928,  pp.  11-17. 

*  The  author  is  greatly  indebted  to  Mr.  A.  M.  Lythgoe  and  the  Trustees  of  the  Metropolitan 
Museum  for  kind  permission  to  publish  these  photographs. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

FOREWORD  xv 

death.  Unfortunately  the  wound  discloses  no  indications  of  any  operation  by  the 
surgeon  before  death  ensued. 

Of  all  these  cases,  only  the  first  (Plate  I,  Fig.  1)  discloses  clear  evidence  of  the 
surgeon’s  operation.  This  one,  however,  is  the  earliest  in  the  series,  and,  as  already 
stated,  it  demonstrates  that  surgery  had  already  reached  an  advanced  stage  in  the 
Old  Kingdom.  A  very  interesting  mention  of  medical  treatises  in  an  Old  Kingdom 
inscription,  which  demonstrates  the  existence  of  books  on  medical  science  in  the  age 
between  8000  and  2500  b.c.,  will  be  found  in  the  present  editor’s  Ancient  Becords 
(I,  §§  242-246).1  There  is  therefore  no  inherent  impossibility  in  the  above  conjecture 
that  our  surgical  treatise  may  have  been  the  work  of  the  great  physician  Imhotep. 

That  our  Surgical  Treatise  was  a  book  already  ancient  in  the  Seventeenth 
Century  b.o.,  when  our  copy  was  made,  is  further  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  terms 
it  employed  were  no  longer  clear  to  the  ancient  Egyptian  reader  of  that  remote  day ; 
for  after  circulating  presumably  for  some  centuries,  it  was  supplied  with  a  com¬ 
mentary,  which  in  our  ancient  copy  has  already  been  incorporated  into  the  text. 
This  commentary  is  to  us  a  priceless  revelation  of  the  meaning  of  many  words  and 
terms  which  would  otherwise  have  remained  hopelessly  unintelligible,  coming  down 
to  us  as  they  have  done,  from  an  age  when  surgery  was  first  creating  its  technical 
terms  some  five  thousand  years  ago.  The  study  of  these  terms  is  a  fascinating 
revelation  of  the  human  mind  struggling  with  the  first  stages  of  science-building,  when 
even  the  terms  it  needed  did  not  yet  exist,  but  had  to  be  created,  and  we  watch  the 
process  of  their  creation  actually  going  on.  Here  we  see  the  word  “  brain  ”  occurring 
for  the  first  time  in  human  speech,  as  far  as  it  is  known  to  us  ;  and  in  discussing 
injuries  affecting  the  brain,  we  note  the  surgeon’s  effort  to  delimit  his  terms  as  he 
selects  for  specialization  a  series  of  common  and  current  words  to  designate  three 
degrees  of  injury  to  the  skull  indicated  in  modern  surgery  by  the  terms  “  fracture,” 
“  compound  fracture,”  and  “  compound  comminuted  fracture,”  all  of  which  the 
ancient  commentator  carefully  explains.  Like  the  modem  scientist,  he  clarifies  his 
terms  by  comparison  of  the  things  they  designate  with  more  familiar  objects  :  the 
convolutions  of  the  brain  he  likens  to  the  corrugations  on  metallic  slag,  and  the  fork 
at  the  head  of  the  ramus  in  the  human  mandible  he  describes  as  like  the  claw  of  a  two¬ 
toed  bird ;  a  puncture  of  the  cranium  is  like  a  hole  broken  in  the  side  of  a  pottery  jar,  and 
a  segment  of  the  skull  is  given  the  name  of  a  turtle’s  shell.  Here  are  the  earliest  known 
anatomical,  physiological,  and  pathological  descriptions.  The  observation  of  effects  on 
the  lower  limbs  of  injuries  to  the  skull  and  brain,  noted  by  the  ancient  surgeon  with 
constant  reference  to  that  side  of  the  head  which  has  been  injured,  shows  an  astonishingly 
early  discernment  of  localization  of  function  in  the  brain — an  observation  which  has 
been  more  fully  developed  by  modem  surgeons  only.within  the  present  generation. 

1  See  also  Quarterly  Bulletin,  New  York  Historical  Society,  Vol.  VI,  No.  1  (April,  1922),  p.  1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xvi  FOREWORD 

While  this  early  surgeon  undoubtedly  gained  much  of  his  knowledge  from  injuries 
incurred  in  civil  life,  it  is  highly  probable,  as  already  stated  above,  that  he  had 
followed  an  army  and  had  therefore  treated  wounds  received  in  battle.  It  is  in 
treating  such  injuries  that  he  makes  the  earliest  known  references  to  adhesive  tape 
and  surgical  stitching.  At  the  same  time  injuries  were  obviously  not  the  sole  source 
of  the  surgeon’s  knowledge.  He  practiced  also  dissection.  He  knew  of  a  cardiac 
system  and  was  surprisingly  near  recognition  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  for  he 
was  already  aware  that  the  heart  was  the  center  and  the  pumping  force  of  a  system 
of  distributing  vessels.  He  was  already  conscious  of  the  importance  of  the  pulse, 
and  had  probably  already  begun  to  count  the  pulse,  a  practice  heretofore  first  found 
among  the  Greek  physicians  of  the  Third  Century  b.c.  in  Alexandria.  He  had  begun 
an  acquaintance  with  a  muscular  system,  but  he  knew  little  more  of  the  nerves  than 
the  recognition  of  brain  and  spine  as  the  important  centers  of  nervous  control.  He 
had,  for  example,  made  the  remarkable  observation  that  a  dislocation  of  the  cervical 
vertebrae  was  accompanied  by  a  seminal  emission.  His  discussion  of  the  digestive 
system,  if  the  treatise  contained  one,  is  unhappily  not  included  in  the  preserved 
portion  of  our  document.  In  view  of  the  titles  of  the  court  physician  Iry,  noted 
above  as  a  specialist  in  diseases  of  the  digestive  organs,  it  is  probable  that  our 
treatise  did  contain  a  discussion  of  the  surgery  of  the  digestive  system,  if  not  also 
of  the  respiratory  organs. 

Such  a  loss  fills  us  with  the  keenest  regret.  The  present  editor  has  endeavored  to 
indicate  in  the  Introduction  (pp.  9-18)  the  significance  of  such  a  mind  as  that  of  the 
author  of  our  Surgical  Treatise  in  the  history  of  human  development,  and  to  that 
Introduction  the  reader  must  turn  for  fuller  discussion.  The  scribe  of  over  8,500 
years  ago,  to  whom  we  owe  our  present  manuscript,  could  have  had  little  conscious¬ 
ness  of  the  momentous  decision  he,  or  possibly  some  one  for  him,  was  making  when 
he  pushed  aside  the  ancient  Surgical  Treatise,  then  already  a  thousand  years  old, 
while  his  own  copy  was  still  incomplete.  He  had  copied  at  least  eighteen  columns 
of  the  venerable  treatise  and  had  reached  the  bottom  of  a  column  when,  pausing  in 
the  middle  of  a  line,  in  the  middle  of  a  sentenoe,  in  the  middle  of  a  word,  he  raised  his 
pen,  and  oeased  writing.  After  a  pause,  of  which  we  cannot  divine  the  cause,  but 
during  which  his  well-filled  reed  pen  nearly  dried,  he  again  applied  it  to  the  papyrus. 
He  made  two  more  very  faint  strokes  with  the  almost  exhausted  pen,  which  he 
thereupon  dipped  deep  into  his  ink  pot.  After  heavily  retracing  the  two  pale  strokes, 
but  so  carelessly  that  the  original  faint  lines  are  still  visible,  he  laid  down  his  pen 
and  pushed  aside  forever  the  great  Surgical  Treatise  he  had  been  copying,  leaving 
15J  inches  (89  cm.)  bare  and  unwritten  at  the  end  of  his  roll. 

When  I  reached  this  blank  space  in  my  first  study  of  the  document,  I  felt  as  if 
I  had  been  peering  through  a  newly  revealed  window,  opening  upon  the  once  impene- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

FOREWORD  xvii 

trable  gloom  enveloping  man’s  earliest  endeavors  to  understand  the  world  he  lived  in. 
It  was  as  if  I  had  watched  a  hand  slowly  raising  the  curtain  that  covered  this  window, 
and  then  suddenly  that  hand  had  refused  to  lift  the  curtain  further.  That  provincial 
scribe  sitting  over  his  roll,  three  thousand  five  hundred  years  ago,  little  dreamed  that 
every  word  he  added  would  one  day  be  hungrily  pondered  as  the  sole  surviving  copy 
of  the  ancient  treatise  he  was  transcribing.  He  had  reproduced  at  least  eighteen 
columns  of  the  older  original — something  over  four  hundred  lines. 

Beginning  at  the  top  of  the  head,  and  proceeding  systematically  downward,  the 
treatise  had  marched  on  through  carefully  arranged  discussions  forming  a  series  of 
forty-eight  cases.  He  had  been  none  too  careful  in  his  copying,  and  he  made  many 
errors.  In  two  places  he  inserted  on  the  margin  unintentional  omissions  and  indicated 
their  proper  position  in  the  text  by  a  cross,  the  earliest  known  asterisk  in  the  history 
of  books.  He  had  industriously  shifted  from  his  black  ink  to  his  red,  and  had  liberally 
distributed  his  rubrics.  He  was  much  more  interested  in  these  matters  than  in  the 
content  of  the  extraordinary  treatise  he  was  copying.  He  found  his  work  somewhat 
trying,  for  it  contained  unfamiliar  terms,  and  unaccustomed  signs  like  the  human 
mandible,  which  caused  him  difficulty  and  sometimes  resulted  in  awkward,  uncertain 
characters.  He  had  finished  the  cases  on  the  thorax  and  had  begun  the  first  case 
on  the  spinal  column  when  he  stopped.  One  can  imagine  him  yawning,  rising 
indifferently  and  going  home  to  his  dinner,  quite  unconcerned,  and  altogether  unaware 
of  the  fact  that  he  was  leaving  the  future  civilized  world  entirely  without  any  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  great  ancestor’s  cases  on  the  surgery  of  the  internal  organs,  which  in  all 
likelihood  followed  immediately  on  that  of  the  spine. 

When  our  scribe  returned  to  his  task,  he  left  blank  the  unwritten  space  following 
his  unfinished  copy  of  the  Surgical  Treatise  and  turned  it  face  down.  Upon  the 
unoccupied  back  he  began  copying  totally  different  material  which  he  or  his  master 
had  meantime  brought  forth.  On  resuming  his  copying  he  left  another  blank  space 
of  15|  inches  (89  cm.)  at  the  beginning  of  the  back,  and  hence  the  new  material  copied 
on  the  back  was  separated  from  the  Surgical  Treatise  not  only  by  being  placed  on  the 
other  Bide  of  the  papyrus,  but  also  by  81  inches  (78  cm.)  of  unwritten  space.  This 
was  a  wise  separation,  for  the  new  material  was  merely  a  hodge-podge  of  the  customary 
magical  recipes,  drawn  from  the  traditional  folk  medicine  inherited  from  the  super¬ 
stition  of  a  remote  past.  A  later  hand  added  some  recipes  for  a  youthful  complexion, 
including  especially  one  for  “  Transforming  an  Old  Man  into  a  Youth.” 

Of  the  subsequent  history  of  our  document  after  it  went  forth  from  the  hands  of 
the  professional  copyist  we  know  nothing.  For  discussion  of  its  character  and 
function,  whether  it  was  a  physician’s  handbook,  a  medical  professor’s  lecture  out¬ 
lines,  or  in  its  present  form  a  medical  student’s  notebook,  the  reader  must  be  referred 
to  the  Introduction  (infra,  pp.  72-78). 

b 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xviii  FOREWORD 

Its  more  recent  history  is  well  known ;  for  it  was  acquired  by  Mr.  Edwin  Smith 
nearly  two  generations  ago  at  Luxor  during  the  American  Civil  War.  It  is  of  no  little 
interest  to  Americans  to  know  that  its  discovery  goes  back  to  the  earliest  days  of  Oriental 
science  in  the  United  States,  and  indeed  to  the  first  generation  of  Egyptology  anywhere. 

Edwin  Smith,  after  whom  the  papyrus  is  named,  was  bom  in  Connecticut  in  1822, 
the  year  that  witnessed  the  first  decipherment  of  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  by  Cham- 
pollion.  Smith  was  one  of  the  earliest  students  of  Egyptian  in  any  country.  He 
studied  hieroglyphic  in  London  and  Paris  when  the  science  was  only  a  quarter  of  a 
century  old,  and  was  probably  the  first  American  to  learn  scientifically  the  little  then 
known  about  the  Egyptian  language.  He  then  removed  to  Egypt  and  by  1858  was 
living  in  Luxor,  where  he  remained  for  nearly  twenty  years.  He  acquired  the  papyrus, 
now  bearing  his  name,  at  Luxor  in  1862.1 

Smith  knew  enough  Egyptian  to  recognize  its  character  as  a  medical  treatise,  and 
must  have  devoted  much  time  to  its  study,  but  he  never  made  any  effort  to  publish 
it,  although  he  showed  it  to  several  European  scholars  who  visited  him  at  Luxor. 
Their  vague  references  to  it  in  their  published  notes  in  the  early  ’70’s  (see  infra, 
pp.  22-24)  gave  no  hint  of  its  extraordinary  character  and  importance.  Thereupon 
it  seems  to  have  been  totally  forgotten  by  the  scientific  world. 

When  we  consider  that  the  first  university  teaching  of  Egyptian  in  America  began 
in  1895,  and  that  it  was  not  until  after  this  that  the  first  professorship  in  Egyptology 
was  established  in  an  American  university,  we  can  easily  understand  that  Edwin 
Smith’s  studies  received  little  encouragement  from  his  own  country.  The  publication 
of  such  a  document,  moreover,  would  have  required  a  considerable  subvention.  On 
the  death  of  Edwin  Smith,  therefore,  the  papyrus  was  still  unpublished,  and  it  was 
thereupon  presented  to  the  New  York  Historical  Society  by  his  daughter  in  1906. 

When  in  1920  I  was  requested  by  the  New  York  Historical  Society  to  translate 
and  publish  the  papyrus,  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  refuse,  in  view  of  heavy  adminis¬ 
trative  responsibility  for  the  affairs  of  the  Oriental  Institute.  Imagine  my  surprise, 
however,  when  I  saw  the  splendid  folio  columns  of  this  magnificent  papyrus  manu¬ 
script  !  And  when  I  had  examined  its  content  even  summarily,  I  was  unable  to  refuse. 
In  palliation  for  the  delay  that  has  since  ensued,8  I  can  only  plead  long  absences 
from  America  in  the  Near  East,  and  other  responsibilities  on  behalf  of  the  Institute. 

1  Further  information  regarding  Edwin  Smith  will  be  found  infra,  pp.  20-24.  See  also  the 
literature  cited  there,  especially  Dr.  Caroline  Ransom  Williams,  “  The  Place  of  the  New  York  Historical 
Society  in  the  growth  of  American  Interest  in  Egyptology,”  in  New  York  Historical  Society  Quarterly 
Bulletin,  Vol.  IV,  No.  1  (April,  1920),  pp.  16-17  ;  and  the  present  editor’s  notes,  ibid.,  Vol.  VI, 
No.  1  (April,  1922),  pp.  6-9. 

8  Based  on  a  brief  initial  examination  of  the  document,  the  editor  published  a  preliminary  account 
of  it  in  the  spring  of  1922.  See  “The  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,”  New  York  Historical  Society  Quarterly 
Bulletin,  Vol.  VI,  No.  1  (April,  1922),  pp.  1-31.  This  was  followed  by  a  fuller  and  more  technical 
preliminary  report  for  Egyptologists.  See  “  The  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus :  Some  Preliminary 

oi.uchicago.edu 

FOREWORD  xix 

Moreover,  the  interpretation  of  the  papyrus  has  required  much  study  of  the 
medical  papyri  as  a  class,  and  such  an  effort  has  made  the  editor  painfully  aware  of 
the  lack  of  any  modern  comprehensive  treatment  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  medical 
documents.  Especially  troublesome  has  been  the  fact  that  no  one  has  ever  attempted 
an  inclusive  treatment  of  the  technical  terms  with  which  these  medical  papyri  are 
filled.  There  is  no  comprehensive  glossary  of  the  highly  specialized  words  employed 
by  the  ancient  Egyptian  in  pathology,  physiology,  anatomy,  surgery,  etc.  It  is  of 
course  needless  to  say  that  the  present  editor  possesses  no  competence  in  these  fields 
of  medical  science.  After  interpreting  the  document  as  best  I  could  with  my  limited 
knowledge  of  the  human  body,  I  handed  the  manuscript  to  my  medical  colleague, 
Dr.  Arno  B.  Luckhardt,  who  very  kindly  undertook  the  burdensome  task  of  looking 
it  through  and  appending  his  suggestions.  I  have  acknowledged  these  notes  in  their 
proper  places,  but  I  wish  to  express  here  my  sincere  appreciation  of  Dr.  Luckhardt’s 
valuable  assistance. 

The  editor  would  also  acknowledge  the  co-operation  of  several  other  colleagues. 
To  my  old  friends  Alan  H.  Gardiner  and  Kurt  Sethe,  I  am  indebted  for  valuable 
suggestions  on  several  difficult  passages.  In  1922,  with  the  consent  of  the  New  York 
Historical  Society,  I  handed  to  the  editors  of  the  Berlin  Worterbuch  der  aegyptischen 
Sprache  photographs  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  so  that  the  light  which  it  throws 
on  Egyptian  knowledge  of  the  human  body  might  be  incorporated  into  the  Worter¬ 
buch.  I  handed  my  transliteration  of  the  text  to  Professor  Grapow,  one  of  the  editors 
of  the  Worterbuch,  and  he  was  kind  enough  to  make  several  suggestions.  At  the  same 
time  the  editors  generously  permitted  me  to  make  full  use  of  the  Worterbuch  files, 
which  were  then  available  in  alphabetic  arrangement  as  far  as  the  end  of  p.  To 
all  of  these  colleagues  I  am  very  grateful,  and  additional  acknowledgements  will  be 
found  in  the  text  of  the  commentary. 

The  heavy  task  of  verifying  all  references,  and  checking  statistics,  has  been 
carried  out  by  Dr.  Edith  Williams  Ware,  Research  Associate  in  the  Oriental 
Institute.  She  has  been  of  constant  assistance  also  in  the  reading  of  proofs  through¬ 
out  the  work.  To  her  likewise  I  am  indebted  for  the  compilation  of  the  Egyptian 
glossary,  as  well  as  the  indices. 

Dr.  Caroline  Ransom  Williams,  who  first  called  my  attention  to  this  remarkable 
papyrus,  was  kind  enough  to  compare  my  set  of  large-scale  photographs  with  the 
original,  and  to  add  detailed  red  ink  indications  of  the  extent  of  the  rubrics,  thus 
making  the  photographs  a  sufficient  record  which  enabled  me  to  dispense  with  the 
original  during  most  of  the  work  on  the  text. 

Observations,”  by  James  Henry  Breasted,  in  Recueil  <T Etudes  Egyptdtogiquw  dedaw  a  la  Mimoirt 
de  Jean- Francis  Champollion.  Paris  1922,  pp.  386-429.  The  observations  reported,  and  the  views 
expressed  in  these  two  introductory  discussions,  based  as  they  were  on  a  brief  preliminary  study  of 
the  papyrus,  have  naturally  undergone  some  modification  in  the  present  final  publication. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xx  FOREWORD 

To  the  New  York  Historical  Society,  who  are  the  fortunate  possessors  of  the 
Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  I  wish  to  express  my  appreciation  of  their  invitation  to 
interpret  and  publish  this  extraordinary  document.  At  the  same  time  I  would  also 
thank  their  Executive  Committee  for  permission  to  include  these  volumes  in  our 
Oriental  Institute  Publications. 

The  cost  of  such  a  publication  is  very  heavy,  and  these  arrangements  have  been 
made  possible  by  the  action  of  the  General  Education  Board  in  voting  a  subvention 
for  carrying  on  the  publication  program  of  the  Oriental  Institute.  For  this  generous 
support  the  Institute  is  deeply  indebted  to  the  members  of  the  General  Education  Board. 

The  content  of  the  Surgical  Treatise  is  obviously  of  interest  and  importance  to 
many  outside  of  the  ranks  of  professional  orientalists,  especially  to  medical  men  and 
historians  of  science.  For  this  reason  I  hope  that  my  colleagues  in  Egyptology  will 
recognize  the  necessity  of  some  concessions  obviously  superfluous  to  us,  but  indispen¬ 
sable  to  the  outside  reader.  It  is  for  such  readers  that  practically  all  words  cited  in 
the  commentary  have  been  followed  by  a  transliteration  in  Italic  letters  ;  and  for 
such  readers  also  it  has  seemed  indispensable  to  add  a  few  hints  regarding  the  nature 
of  Egyptian  writing,  in  order  to  make  the  commentary  more  intelligible.  To  these 
“  Explanatory  Notes  ”  the  professional  orientalist  will  of  course  pay  no  attention,  but 
orientalists  should  read  the  introduction  in  Volume  II  before  proceeding  to  the  study 
of  the  papyrus  and  the  perusal  of  Volume  I. 

The  manuscript  of  this  work  was  already  being  put  into  type  when  Dr.  Alan  H. 
Gardiner’s  invaluable  Egyptian  Grammar  appeared.  I  regret,  therefore,  that  the 
commentary  does  not  contain  references  to  this  important  treatise  beyond  what 
it  was  possible  to  insert  in  the  proof.  Examples  from  this  papyrus  found  in 
Dr.  Gardiner’s  Grammar  were  not  drawn  from  these  volumes,  but  from  photographs  very 
gladly  loaned  to  Dr.  Gardiner  in  advance  of  the  present  publication  of  the  papyrus. 

Finally,  it  is  a  pleasant  duty  to  express  here  my  sense  of  obligation  to  the  University 
Printer  and  his  associates  of  the  Oxford  University  Press  for  their  constant  and 
invaluable  co-operation  in  the  production  of  these  typographically  difficult  volumes, 
and  to  Emery  Walker,  Ltd.,  for  their  admirable  series  of  plates  in  Volume  II. 

Chioaoo  House,  The  Colossi,  James  Henry  Breasted. 

Luxor,  Upper  Egypt. 

February,  1929. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  EXPLANATORY  NOTES 

FOR  PHYSICIANS  AND  OTHER  NON-EGYPTOLOGICAL  READERS 

Readers  who  are  not  professional  orientalists  will  find  much  in  this  book  which  is 
unintelligible  to  the  non-Egyptologist.  This  is  unavoidable.  The  editor  of  such  an 
ancient  document  must  bring  to  bear  upon  it  all  the  available  evidence  necessary  to 
justify  his  interpretation, — a  task  especially  complicated  and  laborious  in  the  case  of 
a  treatise  like  this,  containing  as  it  does  a  body  of  ancient  technical  terms  which  were 
growing  up  in  the  infancy  of  a  new  science.  Many  of  these  words,  like  the  term  for 
“  brain,”  are  totally  new  and  unknown,  or  are  old  words  with  entirely  unfamiliar 
technical  meanings.  They  have  required  much  discussion.  The  editor  hopes  that 
this  discussion  has  not  entirely  submerged  or  made  unintelligible  to  medical  readers 
the  interpretation  of  the  document  as  a  whole. 

The  question  may  be  raised  why  it  was  not  possible  to  publish  by  itself  a  translation 
of  this  document  for  medical  readers,  without  burdening  it  with  all  this  technical 
apparatus  of  interpretation.  A  consecutive  translation  of  the  papyrus  will  indeed  be 
found  at  the  end  of  the  commentary  in  this  volume  ;  but  the  editor  strongly  advises 
medical  readers  not  to  try  to  read  and  understand  it  without  first  having  read  the 
General  Introduction  (infra,  pp.  1-29)  and  the  Special  Introduction  (pp.  88-78), 
omitting  the  conclusion  (pp.  73  below,  to  77).  The  long  lists  in  the  Special  Introduc¬ 
tion  are  inserted  only  for  convenience  of  reference  and  therefore  need  not  be  carefully 
studied  until  later. 

In  using  the  commentary  and  the  discussions  of  Egyptian  words,  the  medical 
reader  will  find  some  questions  arising  regarding  the  writing  and  language  with  which 
we  are  dealing  in  this  document.  Egyptian  writing  was  originally  purely  pictographic, 
each  picture  signifying  the  thing  it  depicted  or  suggested.  These  pictures,  which  we 
call  hieroglyphs,  were  never  relinquished  by  the  Egyptians,  who  retained  them,  for  all 
monumental  records  inscribed  on  stone,  long  after  they  had  become  phonetic  signs, 
and  throughout  the  independent  history  of  Egypt.  Strictly  interpreted,  the  word 
“  inscription  ”  as  applied  to  an  Egyptian  record  always  indicates  one  written  in 
hieroglyphic.  These  hieroglyphic  pictures  were,  however,  slow  and  difficult  to  make. 
The  effort  to  make  them  rapidly  with  pen  and  ink  on  papyrus  paper  for  the  daily 
affairs  of  business  and  government,  resulted  in  a  more  rapid,  cursive  form  of  the 
signs, — a  hand  which  we  call  hieratic.  This  more  rapid  manuscript  hand  is,  in  origin 
and  character,  exactly  parallel  with  our  own  handwriting,  which  arose  in  the  same 
way  from  our  carefully  made  uncials  (capital  letters).  The  efforts  of  our  European 
ancestors  to  write  rapidly  on  papyrus  or  parchment  the  letters  which  we  still  print, 
gave  rise  to  our  own  handwriting.  The  origin  of  hand-written  letters  in  the  older 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xxii  GENERAL  EXPLANATORY  NOTES 

forms  which  we  still  preserve  as  capitals,  may  in  some  cases  still  be  observed.  For 
example,  our  letter  “  b  ”  as  we  write  it  with  the  pen  still  contains  the  upper  loop  of 
its  ancestor,  the  capital  B  ;  but  the  lower  loop  is  imperfect  because  the  hand  of  the 
writer,  running  rapidly  onward  to  the  next  letter  without  lifting  the  pen,  did  not  stop 
to  return  to  the  vertical  line  and  complete  the  lower  loop. 

Long  before  8000  b.c.  the  Egyptian  scribes  were  keeping  the  records  of  business, 
government,  and  society  in  their  rapid  hieratic  handwriting  on  papyrus,  and  vast 
quantities  of  manuscript  documents  were  produced.  Very  few  of  them  have  survived. 

Our  surgical  treatise,  and  the  other  material  on  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  were 
likewise  written  in  hieratic,  which  will  be  found  reproduced  in  facsimile  in  Volume  II 
(Plates  I  to  XXII).  At  the  present  day,  if  we  were  editing  the  manuscript  diary  of 
some  important  ancestor,  we  would  prepare  for  purposes  of  convenient  study  a  type¬ 
written  copy,  that  is  a  copy  in  the  letters  out  of  which  the  handwriting  used  in  the  diary 
originally  developed.  Similarly  it  is  found  practical  and  convenient  to  transliterate 
an  Egyptian  hieratic  writing  into  the  hieroglyphic  pictures  from  which  the  hieratic 
signs  originally  developed,  and  which  are  thus  seen  to  be  roughly  parallel  with  the 
letters  we  still  print.  This  hieroglyphic  “  transliteration,”  as  it  is  called,  will  also  be 
found  in  Volume  II  (Plates  I  A  to  XXII  A).  Each  column  of  hieroglyphic  (on  the 
right)  faces  the  corresponding  column  of  hieratic  (on  the  left).  The  two  columns 
correspond  line  for  line,  and  also  in  the  arrangement  of  the  signs  within  the  line.  All 
detailed  correspondences  may  therefore  be  easily  followed  sign  for  sign,  although  this 
arrangement  of  the  signs  is  not  characteristic  of  hieroglyphic.  The  words  printed  in 
red  in  the  hieroglyphic  transliteration  (Plates  I A  to  XXII  A)  are  those  originally 
written  in  red  ink  in  the  papyrus,  where  such  rubrics  are  easily  recognizable  on  the 
facsimile  plates  by  their  lighter  colour,  all  the  rest  being  in  black  ink. 

It  should  be  noted  that  like  the  hieratic  original,  the  hieroglyphic  version  is  written 
from  right  to  left,  and  the  beginning  of  the  lines  is  at  the  right.  Hieratic  was  always 
so  written,  but  hieroglyphic,  though  prevailingly  written  from  right  to  left,  might  be 
written  either  way.  For  convenience  in  type-setting,  hieroglyphic  print  reads  from 
left  to  right  and  does  so  in  the  text  of  the  commentary. 

For  convenience  of  reference,  the  entire  text  of  the  papyrus  is  printed  in  hiero¬ 
glyphic  in  Volume  I,  with  all  rubrics  indicated  by  underscoring ;  the  surgical  treatise 
is  divided  into  cases,  and  these  again  subdivided  into  convenient,  short  sections,  each 
followed  by  translation  and  commentary.  In  this  commentary,  the  Egyptian  words 
cited  and  explained  are  always  transliterated  into  our  own  alphabet  as  far  as  possible. 
The  reader  will  observe  that  these  transliterations  are  made  up  exclusively  of  con¬ 
sonants,  because  Egyptian  writing  was  a  system  of  consonantal  signs  and  possessed 
no  signs  for  the  vowels.  To  indicate  these  unfamiliar  consonants,  it  is  customary  to 
employ  (in  all  but  two  cases)  our  own  consonants,  with  distinguishing  marks  attached. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  EXPLANATORY  NOTES  xxiii 

In  this  way  are  indicated  the  consonants  for  which  our  alphabet  possesses  no  letters. 
These  consonants  were  not  all  identical  with  ours.  Otherwise  all  the  English  letters 
used  in  transliteration  indicate  sounds  approximating  their  sounds  in  English. 

The  other  signs  and  modified  letters  are  the  following  nine  : 

»  A  sound  closely  akin  to  the  Hebrew  K  (Alef),  a  smooth  breathing  for  which  we 
have  no  letter  in  our  alphabet.  It  is  like  the  initial  breathing  represented  by  the 
unpronounced  h  in  our  “  humble 

f  A  guttural  sound  entirely  foreign  to  English,  and  for  which  of  course  we  have 
no  sign.  It  corresponds  to  the  Semitic  consonant  < 'atjin. 

h  An  emphatic  or  explosive  h. 

h  A  deep  guttural  like  German  ch  in  “  Dach  ”  or  “  Bach 

h  A  deep  h  which  early  interchanged  easily  with  S ;  and  was  therefore  perhaps 
like  German  ch  in  “  ich 

£  Pronounced  sh. 

k  A  deep  palatal  k. 

t  Like  tsh,  or  th. 

d  Originally  dj,  but  becoming  an  emphatic  s  approaching  z. 

In  pronouncing  the  unvocalized  forms  of  the  transliterated  words,  it  is  customary 
to  insert  arbitrarily  as  many  e’s  as  may  be  necessary  to  pronounce  the  word.  Thus 
for  Egyptian  mt,  “  canal,  vessel  ”,  etc.,  we  say  “  met  ”  ;  for  hsb,  “  a  break,  fracture  ”, 
we  say  “ heseb for  mrh-t,  “grease”,  we  say  “ merhet ”.  For  the  two  difficult 
sounds:  >  (a  breathing)  and  r  (the  guttural  fayin),  we  usually  use  merely  a  vowel  a, 
e.g.,  fr,  “  penetrate,”  is  commonly  called  “  ar,”  and  p’kd,  “  shell,”  is  pronounced 
“  pafcet,"  with  Italian  a.  We  know  that  the  above  vocalizations  do  not  remotely 
resemble  the  actual  pronunciations  used  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  themselves  ;  but 
they  are  approximately  correct  as  to  the  consonants,  and  the  arbitrary  vowels  serve 
to  make  Egyptian  words  pronounceable.  It  is  unscientific  to  write  such  vowels 
however,  for  a  scientific  transliteration  must  include  only  the  sounds  indicated  by  the 
signs  in  the  original  text. 

While  individual  Egyptian  words  have  regularly  been  transliterated  in  the  com¬ 
mentary,  considerations  of  space  have  deterred  the  editor  from  including  translitera¬ 
tions  of  entire  passages  or  sentences  quoted  in  Egyptian  in  the  commentary  ;  but 
they  have  always  been  accompanied  by  translations,  in  which  the  significant  words 
are  followed  by  transliteration  in  parenthesis. 

The  following  additional  arbitrary  typographical  signs  employed  in  the  trans¬ 
lation  should  be  noted  : 

r  ■>,  or  half-brackets,  enclosing  a  word  or  words,  indicate  that  everything 
so  enclosed  is  of  uncertain  translation.  Thus  the  words  “  rshown  exhaustion-1  ” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

xxiv  GENERAL  EXPLANATORY  NOTES 

(p.  199)  are  a  rendering  of  two  Egyptian  words  of  which  the  meaning  is  not  entirely 
certain. 

[  ]  indicate  that  words  so  enclosed  are  restored  by  the  present  editor,  and  though 
not  found  in  the  original,  are  regarded  by  the  editor  as  a  probably  correct  restoration. 
When  only  part  of  a  word  is  so  enclosed,  it  means  that  the  word  is  mutilated,  but 
partially  preserved  ;  thus  “  [like  coujnting  ”  (p.  104)  means  that  the  latter  part  of 
the  second  word  is  visible  in  the  original. 

[r  ■*],  a  combination  of  brackets  and  half-brackets,  indicates  a  restoration  regarded 
by  the  editor  as  uncertain.  Thus  “[Hike  counting"1]  ”  (p.  104)  means  that  these  two 
words  are  not  found  in  the  original  and  are  regarded  by  the  editor  as  an  uncertain 
restoration. 

-  -  -,  three  or  more  short  dashes  mean  the  loss  of  words,  whose  possible  but  not 
certain  number  is  indicated  by  the  number  of  dashes.  See  examples  on  p.  104. 
When  enclosed  in  half-brackets,  such  dashes  indicate  fragmentary  or  uncertain  words. 

( ),  whenever  employed  in  the  translation,  indicate  that  a  word  or  words  so  enclosed 
are  editorial  interpretations,  not  the  restoration  of  a  loss  in  the  original  text. 

In  the  hieroglyphic  text  the  following  should  be  noted  : 

- ,  employed  as  underscoring  in  the  hieroglyphic  text  in  Volume  One, 

indicates  that  words  so  underscored  are  written  in  red  ink  in  the  original  manuscript. 
In  Volume  Two,  these  rubrics  will  be  found  actually  printed  in  red  in  the  hieroglyphic 
text  on  Plates  I  A  to  XXII  A. 

In  the  hieratic  text  (Volume  Two,  Plates  I  to  XXII),  the  rubrics,  although  not  in 
red,  are  distinguishable  by  being  slightly  lighter  in  color  than  the  text  in  black. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

It  has  long  been  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  for  many  centuries  before 
the  rise  of  Greek  medicine,  there  was  a  considerable  medical  literature  in  the  Ancient 
Near  East.  The  recognized  social  and  legal  position  attained  by  medicine  and  surgery 
in  Western  Asia  before  2000  b.  c.  was  revealed  by  the  presence  of  a  legally  established 
tariff  for  the  services  of  both  the  physician  and  the  surgeon  in  the  Code  of  Hammurapi 
(Twenty-first  Century  b.c.)  when  that  extraordinary  monument  was  discovered  a 
generation  ago.  These  legal  regulations  of  medical  and  surgical  practice  toward  the 
end  of  the  Third  Millennium  b.  o.  would  indicate  that  medicine  in  ancient  Babylon 
was  already  centuries  old  at  that  time,  and  that  the  beginning  of  medical  knowledge 
must  reach  back  well  toward  8000  b.c.  The  important  social  and  official  standing  of 
the  physician  in  Assyria  is  also  reflected  to  us  in  the  Seventh  Century  b.c.  in  the 
surviving  cuneiform  letters  of  the  Assyrian  Empire,  which  had  inherited,  seemingly 
without  much  change,  the  medical  lore  of  earlier  Babylon.  In  these  letters  we  find 
Arad-Nanai,  a  famous  medical  man  and  royal  court  physician  of  Esarhaddon,  the  son 
of  Sennacherib,  advising  the  king  regarding  an  uncertain  ailment,  perhapB  rheumatism, 
and  admonishing  him  besides  washings  to  employ  enchantments.  On  another 
occasion  Arad-Nanai  felicitates  the  royal  patient  on  his  recovery  from  toothache. 
He  also  sends  the  king  several  reports  on  the  health  of  the  monarch’s  younger  brother, 
a  young  prince  in  feeble  health.  Very  interesting  communications  in  the  form  of 
letters  report  to  the  king  the  sickness  of  his  mother.  Arad-Nanai  and  one  of  his 
medical  colleagues,  however,  succeeded  in  restoring  the  queen-mother  to  health,  so 
that  she  survived  her  royal  son.  Her  daughter-in-law,  however,  the  queen-wife,  was 
less  fortunate,  and  the  physicians  were  unable  to  save  her.  Such  letters,  of  which 
there  is  a  considerable  series,  make  quite  evident  a  recognized  medical  profession  and 
a  body  of  medical  knowledge  in  the  Assyrian  Empire. 

Unfortunately  the  actual  tablets  on  which  was  recorded  the  medical  literature  of 
ancient  Babylonia  and  which  obviously  must  have  existed  in  Hammurapi’s  day 
have  practically  all  perished,  and  the  treatises  which  have  survived  to  us  are  copies 
made  in  the  Assyrian  Empire,  chiefly  the  Seventh  Century  b.  o.  These  copies,  further¬ 
more,  are  themselves  in  a  very  incomplete  and  fragmentary  state.  We  may  derive 
from  them,  however,  an  impression  of  the  range  and  character  of  medical  treatises 
in  Western  Asia  for  probably  some  2,000  years  before  the  Christian  Era.1  They 
cover  a  considerable  series  of  ailments  arranged  roughly  according  to  the  part  of  the 
body  chiefly  affected.  The  leading  treatises  deal  with  ailments  of  the  head,  including 

1  For  the  best  account  of  this  literature  see  B.  Meissner,  Babylonitn  und  Ateyritn,  Vol.  II, 
Heidelberg,  1926  (in  Kulturgeechichtliche  Bibliothek,  edited  by  W.  Foy). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

2  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

mental  troubles,  infections,  baldness,  and  affections  of  the  eyes,  ears,  and  temples ; 
ailments  of  the  respiratory  and  digestive  organs,  and  of  the  muscles  and  ligaments, 
as  well  as  of  particular  parts  of  the  feet ;  affections  of  the  anus,  including  a  good 
description  of  haemorrhoids.  It  is  possible  that  these  and  some  related  treatises 
were  combined  in  a  general  work  on  therapeutics  but  this  is  uncertain.  There  were, 
besides,  specialized  tractates  on  pregnancy,  child-birth,  obstetrics,  and  diseases  of 
the  genital  organs.  The  materia  medica  employed  in  treatment  of  these  ailments 
included  a  long  list  of  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  substances,  most  of  which  it  is 
still  impossible  to  identify.  A  frequent  method  of  use,  after  especial  preparation, 
was  by  direct  application,  that  is  “  laying  ”  the  remedy  on  the  affected  part,  or  binding 
it  on  ;  but  the  commonest  method  of  administering  was  internally  through  the  mouth, 
and  occasionally  by  the  insertion  of  a  suppository  into  the  anus. 

There  is  slight  indication  that  the  physician  discovered  anything  of  the  real  nature 
of  the  ailment  or,  except  in  the  more  obvious  cases,  the  function  of  the  organs  affected. 
Among  the  long  list  of  available  remedies,  a  few,  like  oil  for  stiff  limbs,  or  milk  for 
stomach  troubles,  may  have  been  beneficial,  but  most  of  the  remedies  employed  were 
entirely  valueless,  as  is  shown  by  the  indifference  with  which  the  physician  moved 
through  a  long  list  of  medicines,  shifting  from  one  to  another  for  the  same  disease. 

We  see  then  that  these  fragmentary  treatises  surviving  from  ancient  Babylonia 
and  Assyria  reveal  a  wide  range  of  observation  of  disease  and  an  extensive  list  of 
herbs  and  minerals  in  the  physician’s  materia  medica.  There  is,  however,  no  systematic 
knowledge  or  discussion  of  the  human  body,  nor  any  rational  consideration  of  disease. 
The  causes  of  disease  and  the  operation  of  remedies,  as  conceived  by  the  physician,  are 
so  interfused  with  belief  in  supernatural  forces,  that  a  rational  understanding  of  the 
organs  and  functions  of  the  human  body,  sick  or  well,  or  of  the  operation  of  remedies 
when  applied,  was  impossible.  It  is  evident  that  primitive  folk  medicine,  with  all  its 
superstitions,  completely  dominated  the  medical  teaching  of  the  ancient  Babylonians, 
just  as  such  superstitions  also  suffused  their  general  outlook  on  the  natural  world, 
with  the  possible  exception  of  the  latest  developments  in  Babylonian  astronomy,  which 
contributed  much  to  the  riBe  of  astronomy  in  Greece. 

Ancient  Babylonian  knowledge  of  anatomy,  physiology,  and  pathology  was  there¬ 
fore  limited,  and  under  these  circumstances  the  contributions  of  Babylonian  medicine 
to  later  medical  science  are  not  likely  to  have  been  important.  Our  own  knowledge 
of  Babylonian  attainments,  however,  is  unhappily  limited  by  the  fact  that  not  a  single 
Babylonian  treatise  on  surgery  has  descended  to  us.  We  cannot  doubt  the  existence 
of  such  treatises  in  early  Babylonia  in  view  of  the  legally  recognized  and  regulated 
position  of  the  surgeon  in  Babylonian  society  in  the  Twenty -first  Century  b.c.  already 
mentioned.  One  of  the  most  important  discoveries  of  future  excavation,  to  which 
we  may  look  hopefully  forward,  may  sometime  restore  to  the  world  one  of  the  lost 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  3 

ancient  Babylonian  treatises  on  surgery.  It  is  not  impossible  that  such  a  discovery 
may  prove  to  be  as  unexpected  a  revelation  as  that  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Surgical 
Papyrus. 

As  we  turn  from  the  Assyro- Babylonian  world  to  Egypt  we  enter  both  an  earlier 
and  a  higher  civilization,  and  at  the  same  time  a  cultural  milieu  which  interfused  with 
that  of  the  mainland  and  the  islands  forming  the  south-east  extension  of  Europe. 
The  situation  was  one  of  intimate  interpenetration  between  the  Nile  valley  and 
nearest  Europe.  Obvious  geographical  considerations  demonstrate  the  truth  of 
these  statements,  and  if  any  confirmation  were  needed  it  is  amply  furnished  by  the 
history  of  civilization  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean.  In  the  history  of  medical 
science  in  particular,  it  is  no  accident  that  the  leading  patron  god  of  medicine  in  early 
classical  Europe — he  who  was  called  Asclepios  by  the  Greeks  and  Aesculapius  by 
the  Romans — was  originally  an  historical  personage,  an  ancient  Egyptian  wise  man 
and  physician  called  Imhotep  by  the  Egyptians,  grand  vizier,  chief  architect,  and  royal 
medical  advisor  of  the  Pharaoh  in  the  Thirtieth  Century  B.o.,  the  earliest  known 
physician  in  history.1 

In  harmony  with  the  high  position  of  this  venerable  Egyptian  physician  of  five 
thousand  years  ago  the  historical  documents  of  Egypt  reveal  to  us  the  existence  of 
medical  treatises  early  in  the  Third  Millennium  b.o.  in  the  age  which  we  call  the 
Old  Kingdom  (roughly  8000  to  2500  b.o.). 

In  the  middle  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Century  before  Christ  the  Pharaoh  Neferirkere 
was  one  day  inspecting  a  new  building  in  course  of  construction  under  the  superin¬ 
tendence  of  the  chief  architect  Weshptah.  The  king  and  his  court  were  all  admiring 
the  work  and  the  Pharaoh  was  turning  with  words  of  praise  to  his  faithful  minister, 
when  he  suddenly  noticed  that  Weshptah  was  unable  to  hear  the  words  of  royal  favor. 
The  king’s  exclamation  alarmed  the  courtiers.  The  stricken  minister  was  quickly 
carried  to  the  court  and  the  priests  and  the  chief  physicians  were  hurriedly  summoned. 
“  His  majesty  had  brought  for  him  a  case  of  writings. .  .  .  They  said  to  his  majesty 
that  he  was  unconscious.”  Such  are  the  words  of  the  ancient  inscription  in  which 
the  incident  is  recorded.  The  king,  smitten  with  sorrow  as  the  news  of  his  favorite’s 
death  reaches  him,  can  only  retire  to  his  chamber  in  prayer  and  order  sumptuous 
arrangements  for  the  great  man’s  interment.  The  mortuary  inscription  of  Weshptah 
which  thus  narrates  his  death  incidentally  furnishes  us,  therefore,  the  earliest  historical 
reference  to  medical  literature.  There  is  conclusive  evidence  that  in  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus  we  have  a  later  copy  of  one  of  the  medical  documents  already  in  existence 

1  See  K.  Sethe,  Imhotep,  der  Aaldepios  der  Aegypter  :  tin  vergotlerter  Menach  aua  der  Zeit  des 
Konigs  Doser.  Untersuchungen  zur  Oeachichte  und  Altertumsleunde  Aegyptena.  Hinrichs,  Leipeic,  1902, 
Vol.  II.  For  an  interesting  popular  account  of  this  earliest-known  physician  see  J.  B.  Hurry,  M.A., 
M.D.,  Imhotep,  the  Vizier  and  Physician  of  King  Zoeer.  Oxford,  1926.  On  his  place  in  history  see 
the  present  author’s  History  of  Egypt,  pp.  112-114. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

4 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

in  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  lay  with  the  others  in  the  “  case 
of  writings”  brought  in  by  the  Pharaoh’s  command  in  an  endeavour  to  save  a  court 
favorite’s  life  in  the  Twenty-eighth  Century  b.c. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  character  of  these  Egyptian  medical  treatises  haB  heretofore 
been  based  chiefly  on  few  papyri :  the  famous  Papyrus  Ebers  at  the  University  of 
Leipzig ;  the  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  in  the  State  Museum  at  Berlin  (No.  3088)  ; 
the  London  Medical  Papyrus  (British  Museum  No.  10059),  and  the  Papyrus  Hearst, 
now  at  the  University  of  California.1 

Besides  the  above  longer  documents  only  a  few  fragments  of  three  other  Egyptian 
medical  documents  have  survived.  These  are  perhaps  as  old  as  about  2000  b.c. 
They  include  the  scanty  remains  of  a  treatise  on  diseases  of  women,  and  fragments 
of  a  veterinary  manual  treating  diseases  of  cattle,  both  of  which  have  been  published 
by  Griffith,2  and  finally  29  lines  of  recipes  for  diseases  of  women  and  children,  but 
still  unpublished.3  They  will  be  edited  later  by  Dr.  Alan  H.  Gardiner. 

It  will  be  seen  that  all  three  of  these  earlier,  incomplete  documents  are  special 
treatises,  while  the  four  large,  post-Middle  Kingdom  papyri  fisted  above  are  each 
a  compilation  of  a  whole  series  of  special  treatises.  These  compilations  were  probably 
all  put  together  in  the  interval  between  the  Middle  Kingdom  and  the  Empire,  that  is 
in  the  period  from  the  early  Eighteenth  to  the  early  Sixteenth  Century  b.  c. 

In  one  important  particular  all  of  these  medical  rolls,  early  or  late,  are  alike,  in 
that  they  all  consist  of  recipes.  They  were  fists  of  prescriptions,  compiled  for  use  by 
the  practicing  physician,  or  possibly  in  one  case  for  the  instruction  of  medical  students. 
For  the  most  part  the  diseases  are  not  described,  but  each  receives  the  vaguest  designa¬ 
tion,  as  an  introduction  to  the  recipe.  In  Papyrus  Hearst  we  find  one  diagnosis,  and 
in  the  Berlin  Papyrus  (No.  8088)  two  ;  in  the  London  Papyrus  none.  Among  these 
recipe-papyri  only  the  Papyrus  Ebers  shows  any  attention  to  a  record  of  the  examina¬ 
tion  and  diagnosis  of  the  case,  and  this  almost  exclusively  in  the  concluding  section 
of  the  document.  Papyrus  Ebers  records  in  all  forty-seven  diagnoses. 

A  careful  study  of  these  treatises  has  still  to  be  made,  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  they 
treat  disease  as  entirely  due  to  demoniacal  intrusions.  They  make  constant  use  of 

1  The  sizes  and  dates  of  these  ancient  treatises  are  as  follows  : 

Document.  Columns.  Lines.  Recipes. 

Papyrus  Ebers  110  2,289  877 

Papyrus  Hearst  10  (and  frag-  273  (and  frag-  260 
ments)  ments) 

Dale. 

Early  Sixteenth  Cent.  b.  c. 
Sixteenth  Cent.  b.  c. 

Berlin  Papyrus  24  279  204  Sixteenth  Cent.  b.  c. 

London  Papyrus  19  (very  frag-  253  63  Eleventh  Cent.  b.  c. 

mentary) 

The  dates  given  are  those  of  the  manuscripts.  The  materials  themselves  are  obviously  older. 
*  F.  LI.  Griffith,  The  Kahun  Papyri,  London,  1898,  pis.  VI-VIH  and  pp.  6-14. 

3  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Gardiner  for  permission  to  make  a  copy  of  these  recipes. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  5 

spells  and  incantations  combined  with  the  remedies  and  are  evidently  the  product 
of  a  medical  practice  still  dominated  by  primitive  folk  medicine.  These  recipe¬ 
compiling  physicians  were  magicians  contending  with  a  demon-infested  world.  Their 
whole  outlook  on  the  world,  like  their  conception  of  disease,  was  that  of  spiritistic 
superstition,  incapable  of  discerning  the  causes  of  disease  as  arising  in  a  rationally 
conceived  world.  They  occupy  the  same  point  of  view  which  we  have  found  in 
Babylonian  medicine. 

This  attitude  of  the  physician's  mind  toward  disease  is  essentially  the  theological 
outlook  on  nature  which  characterized  the  early  Orient  as  a  whole,  and  was  never 
discarded  by  ancient  man  until  the  rise  of  Greek  thought.  It  is  illustrated  very  clearly 
by  the  conventional  account  of  the  divine  origin  of  their  medical  documents  commonly 
found  stated  somewhere  in  these  early  treatises.  Thus  the  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus 
already  mentioned  above  says  that  the  roll  was  “  found  in  ancient  writings  in  a  chest 
containing  documents  under  the  feet  of  Anubis  in  Letopolis  in  the  time  of  the  majesty 
of  King  Usephais,  deceased  ;  after  his  death  it  was  brought  to  the  majesty  of  King 
Sened,  deceased,  because  of  its  excellence.  ...  It  was  the  scribe  of  sacred  writing,  the 
chief  of  the  excellent  physicians,  Neterhotep,  [rwho  made"1]  the  book.”  1 

Similarly  the  London  Medical  Papyrus  states :  “  This  book  was  found  in  the 
night,  having  fallen  into  the  court  of  the  temple  in  rKhemmis"1,  as  secret  knowledge 
of  this  goddess,  by  the  hand  of  the  lector  of  this  temple.  Lo,  this  land  was  in  darkness, 
and  the  moon  shone  on  every  side  of  this  book.  It  was  brought  as  a  marvel  to  the 
majesty  of  King  Khufu.”  2 

In  the  Papyrus  Ebers  a  recipe  for  “  soothing  the  itch  ”  is  stated  to  have  been 
“  found  during  an  inspection  in  the  house  of  Wennofer  ”  (Osiris)  (Papyrus  Ebers, 
column  75,  lines  12-18)  ;  and  the  discussion  of  twenty-two  canals  of  the  body  is  said 
to  have  been  “  among  things  found  in  writing  under  the  feet  of  Anubis  in  Sekhem. 
It  was  brought  to  King  Usephais,  deceased.”  (Papyrus  Ebers,  column  108,  lines  1-2). 
Such  mythical  origins  not  only  attributed  these  documents  to  the  gods,  and  gave  them 
a  vast  antiquity  which  added  to  their  sacredness,  but  also  placed  medical  lore  outside 
of  human  observation,  as  something  of  supernatural  origin.  As  we  shall  now  proceed 
to  illustrate,  our  new  surgical  papyrus  must  be  placed  in  a  different  class. 

The  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  comprises  twenty-one  and  a  half  columns  of  writing, 
of  which  seventeen  columns  (877  lines)  are  on  the  front  (recto)  and  four  and  a  half 
columns  (92  lines)  are  on  the  back  (verso).  Owing  to  narrowing  of  the  column  width, 
resulting  in  shortening  of  the  lines,  the  writing  on  the  back  amounts  in  volume  to  less 
than  one-seventh  of  the  entire  document.  This  material  on  the  verso  consists  exclu¬ 
sively  of  recipes  and  incantations,  identical  in  character  with  those  of  the  other 
1  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  3038,  column  15,  lines  1  ff. 

*  London  Medical  Papyrus,  column  8,  lines  8-13. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

6  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

Egyptian  medical  documents,  the  recipe-papyri  which  we  have  just  discussed.  The 
first  three  and  a  half  columns  (65  lines)  on  the  verso  contain  chiefly  incantations 
against  pestilence,  and  the  remainder,  about  a  column  (27  lines),  in  a  different  hand,  is 
devoted  almost  entirely  to  a  long  recipe  for  restoring  youth  to  an  old  man.  These 
incantations  and  recipes  on  the  back  are  a  later  addition  having  no  relation  with  the 
front,  which  is  indeed  separated  from  all  connection  with  the  back  by  a  considerable 
blank  space  following  the  end  of  the  writing  on  the  front.  A  full  discussion  of  the 
recipe  material  on  the  back  will  be  found  introducing  Part  II,  The  Incantations  and 
Recipes. 

The  seventeen  columns  (877  lines)  on  the  recto,  that  is,  about  six-sevenths  of  the 
document,  are  part  of  a  treatise  which  is  fundamentally  different  from  any  of  the 
surviving  medical  documents  of  the  ancient  Orient  thus  far  discovered.  These 
differences  are  the  following  : 

1.  The  seventeen  columns  on  the  recto  comprise  part  of  a  surgical  treatise,  the  first 

thus  far  discovered  in  the  ancient  Orient,  whether  in  Egypt  or  Asia.  It  is 
therefore  the  oldest  known  surgical  treatise. 

2.  This  surgical  treatise  consists  exclusively  of  cases,  not  recipes. 

8.  The  treatise  is  systematically  organized  in  an  arrangement  of  cases,  which  begin 
with  injuries  of  the  head  and  proceed  downward  through  the  body,  like  a 
modern  treatise  on  anatomy. 

4.  The  treatment  of  these  injuries  is  rational  and  chiefly  surgical ;  there  is  resort 

to  magic  in  only  one  case  out  of  the  forty-eight  cases  preserved. 

5.  Each  case  is  classified  by  one  of  three  different  verdicts  :  (1)  favorable, 

(2)  uncertain,  or  (8)  unfavorable.  The  third  verdict,  expressed  in  the  words, 
“  an  ailment  not  to  be  treated,”  is  found  in  no  other  Egyptian  medical 
treatise. 

6.  This  unfavorable  verdict  occurring  fourteen  times  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus 

marks  a  group  of  cases  (besides  one  more  case)  which  the  surgeon  cannot  cure 
and  which  he  is  led  to  discuss  by  his  scientific  interest  in  the  phenomena 
disclosed  by  his  examination. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  above  six  points  mark  off  this  surgical  treatise  as  disclosing 
a  point  of  view  distinct  from  that  which  characterizes  the  other  medical  documents 
of  the  Ancient  East.  A  detailed  discussion  of  its  content  will  be  found  (pp.  33  ff.) 
introducing  the  translation  and  commentary. 

The  forty-eight  cases  preserved  in  this  treatise  begin  at  the  top  of  the  head  and 
proceed  downward  to  the  thorax  and  spine,  where  the  document  unfortunately 
breaks  off.  In  each  of  these  cases  we  see  the  surgeon  first  making  his  examination 
of  the  patient  and  determining  the  character  of  the  injury :  whether  the  wound  affects 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  7 

only  the  soft  tissue  or  whether  it  has  also  reached  the  bone,  or  even  penetrated  the 
bone  to  important  internal  organs;  what  are  the  physiological  effects,  etc.  The 
method  of  the  examination  sounds  rational  and  modern.  The  information  the  surgeon 
desires  may  be  elicited  by  questioning  the  patient  or  directing  him  to  attempt  certain 
movements  or  postures ;  further  it  may  be  obtained  by  the  surgeon’s  own  observa¬ 
tions,  ocular,  olfactory,  or  tactile.  The  last  frequently  include  probing  with  the 
fingers  (palpation)  or  manipulation  with  the  hand,  and  what  is  most  important  and 
significant,  observation  of  the  action  of  the  heart  by  means  of  the  pulse,  2,500  years 
before  the  pulse  appears  in  Greek  medical  treatises.  It  is  significant  also  to  observe 
that  the  surgeon’s  purely  mechanical  treatment  of  an  injury  is,  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  included  in  the  examination,  and  not  in  the  discussion  of  the  treatment  with 
medicaments.  We  have  here  evidently  an  ancient  distinction  between  surgery  and 
medicine  (see  p.  42). 

On  the  basis  of  the  examination  the  surgeon  then  pronounces  his  diagnosis,  the 
earliest  such  conclusions  that  have  survived.  The  development  of  a  full  diagnosis 
is  a  relatively  recent  matter.  Even  in  European  medicine  it  was  customary  to  describe 
only  the  conspicuous  symptoms  in  a  diagnosis  until  the  advances  made  by  Sydenham 
in  the  Seventeenth  Century.1  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  elaborate  diagnosis  of  the 
present  day  was  so  recently  preceded  by  a  simple  description  of  the  more  noticeable 
symptoms,  we  may  not  expect  the  surgeon  of  nearly  five  thousand  years  ago  to  have 
gone  very  far  in  this  direction.  The  most  important  thing  for  the  ancient  surgeon 
was  the  effect  of  the  examination  on  his  immediate  course  of  action  toward  the  patient. 
Hence  he  makes  a  diagnosis  which  always  includes  one  of  the  three  verdicts  to  which 
we  have  already  referred,  and  this  is  the  surgeon’s  declaration  that  he  (1)  can  treat 
and  cure  ;  (2)  can  treat  and  try  to  cure  ;  (8)  cannot  treat,  the  case  being  practically 
hopeless.  Three  diagnoses  consist  of  this  final  hopeless  verdict  and  nothing  more  ; 
but  in  forty-nine  diagnoses  in  our  treatise  the  three  verdicts  are  preceded  by  other 
observations  on  the  case.  In  thirty-six  of  these  forty-nine  diagnoses  the  other 
observations  are  nothing  more  than  a  repetition  of  the  title  of  the  case,  or  of 
observations  already  made  in  the  examination ;  but  in  the  remaining  thirteen,  the 
diagnosis  adds  one  or  more  conclusions  based  on  the  facts  determined  in  the  examina¬ 
tion.  These  are  the  earliest  surviving  examples  of  observation  and  conclusion,  the 
oldest  known  evidences  of  an  inductive  process  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind. 

In  taking  up  the  treatment  which  the  ancient  surgeon  applied,  it  is  important  to 
notice  that  in  sixteen  instances  out  of  fifty-eight  examinations  he  attempted  no  treat¬ 
ment.  These  untreated  cases  form  a  unique  body  of  discussions  to  which  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  return  (p.  52).  There  are  forty-two  examples  of  treatments  out  of  the 
forty-five  injuries  discussed.  We  find  that  in  three  instances  the  treatment  is 
1  See  Knud  Faber,  Nosoyraphy  in  Modem  Internal  Medicine,  Hoeber,  New  York,  1923. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

8  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

exclusively  mechanical  or  surgical,  while  in  twenty  purely  surgical  treatment  was 
combined  with  external  use  of  medicaments,  and  in  the  remaining  nineteen  the  exter¬ 
nal  applications  were  employed  alone. 

The  mechanical  appliances  or  processes  employed  by  our  ancient  surgeon,  as 
revealed  by  the  new  treatise,  were  not  numerous,  but  some  of  them  appear  for  the 
first  time  in  the  history  of  medicine.  He  makes  frequent  use  of  absorbent  lint,  and 
in  injuries  to  the  nose  or  outer  ear  he  employs  plugs,  swabs,  or  tampons  of  linen. 
Among  bandages,  it  is  interesting  to  find  that  one  variety  was  manufactured  for  the 
surgeons  by  the  most  skillful  bandagist  of  antiquity,  the  Egyptian  embalmer.  For 
drawing  together  a  gaping  wound  the  surgeon  might  employ  strips  of  adhesive  plaster, 
which  was  already  known.  More  serious  wounds,  however,  were  closed  by  surgical 
stitching  which  here  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  surgery  although  it 
is  known  to  have  been  used  much  later  in  sewing  up  the  abdominal  incision  made  for 
the  evisceration  of  a  mummy  1  in  the  Twenty-first  Dynasty  (Eleventh  Century  b.c.). 

Splints  of  three  different  types  were  already  in  use.  In  a  case  of  tetanus  the 
surgeon  makes  it  possible  to  administer  liquid  food  by  holding  the  mouth  open  with 
a  “  brace  of  wood  padded  with  linen.”  A  second  type  of  splint  said  to  be  “  of  linen  ” 
may  possibly  be  a  wooden  splint  wound  with  linen  such  as  was  found  by  Dr.  G.  Elliot 
Smith  on  two  Egyptian  bodies  of  the  Old  Kingdom  (8000-2500  b.  c.).  They  may  also 
be  composed  of  layers  of  linen  impregnated  with  glue  and  plaster  and  moulded  while 
soft  to  conform  to  the  limb.  This  material,  now  called  “  cartonnage,”  and  often 
found  shaped  to  the  limbs  of  the  mummy,  is  well  known  in  mummy  cases.  It  is 
essentially  identical  with  the  modern  surgical  cast  employed  for  the  support  of  frac¬ 
tured  limbs.  It  has  never  been  found  still  attached  to  a  broken  limb,  for  it  should  be 
romembered  that  such  an  appliance  would  be  buried  with  the  deceased  only  in  case 
the  sufferer  died  of  his  injuries,  and  the  embalmer  left  the  splints  in  place.  This  would 
be  unlikely  and  indeed,  as  Elliot  Smith  has  observed,  only  two  ancient  bodies  still 
wearing  splints  have  ever  been  found  in  Egypt.  This  surgical  use  of  the  embalmer’s 
cartonnage  becomes  the  more  probable  when  we  recall  the  fact  revealed  by  our  treatise 
that  the  surgeon  drew  his  supplies  of  a  certain  type  of  bandage  from  the  embalmer. 
A  third  type  of  splint  was  a  stiff  roll  of  linen,  used  apparently  where  a  softer  splint 
was  needed,  as  in  the  case  of  a  fractured  nasal  bone.  The  Egyptian  surgeon’s  treat¬ 
ment  of  fractures  was  effective.  Out  of  over  a  hundred  ancient  bodies  showing  healed 
fractures,  only  one  was  observed  to  show  any  signs  of  suppuration  by  Dr.  Elliot  Smith 
(see  infra,  p.  56).  When  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  made  it 
necessary,  the  patient  was  held  upright  by  supports  of  sun-dried  brick  or  adobe,  pre¬ 
sumably  moulded  to  fit  his  figure  on  each  side  under  his  arms. 

Of  instruments  the  treatise  mentions  only  the  “  fire-drill,”  employed  when  hot  for 

1  Q.  Elliot  Smith  and  W.  R.  Dawson,  Egyptian  Mummies,  London,  1924,  Fig.  36,  facing  p.  96. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  9 

cauterization.  A  mandible  of  the  Fourth  Dynasty  (2900-2750  b.c.)  disclosing  a  drill 
hole  in  the  mental  foramen  for  the  purpose  of  draining  an  abscess  under  a  molar  tooth 
(see  PI.  I,  Fig.  1)  makes  it  evident  that  specialized  surgical  instruments  of  metal,  pre¬ 
sumably  bronze,  already  existed  in  the  age  which  produced  our  surgical  treatise,  but 
they  are  taken  for  granted  by  the  ancient  author.  It  is  noticeable,  furthermore,  how 
often,  in  his  directions  to  the  practitioner,  the  probing  of  the  wound  is  to  be  done  with 
the  fingers.  An  instrument  is  never  designated  for  this  purpose.  Unfortunately  no 
systematic  study  of  the  surviving  Egyptian  surgical  instruments  has  ever  been  made 
(see  p.  58),  although  the  museums  of  Europe  and  America  contain  a  large  number. 

The  injuries  which  the  ancient  surgeon  is  instructed  to  treat  are  fully  discussed 
in  the  special  introduction  to  the  treatise  (pp.  43-45) ;  but  we  may  note  here  that  his 
therapeutic  was  primitive  and  simple,  showing  that  surgery  was  far  in  advance  of 
medicine.  After  purely  surgical  measures  the  surgeon’s  favorite  remedy  for  an  injury 
was  “  fresh  meat  ”  applied  on  the  first  day  only.  It  was  bound  on  and  was  usually 
followed  by  an  application  of  lint  saturated  with  ointment  composed  of  grease  and 
honey,  also  bound  on.  In  the  nineteen  cases  in  which  no  specific  surgical  treatment 
is  prescribed  we  find  the  surgeon  instructed  to  employ  only  medicaments  externally 
applied,  and  likewise  usually  bound  on.  In  symptoms  of  tetanus  following  serious 
injury  to  the  skull,  the  treatise  suggests  only  hot  applications  to  the  constricted  liga¬ 
ments  of  the  mandible.  Among  his  materia  medica  it  is  interesting  to  find  a  decoction 
of  willow  ( salix ),  essentially  salicin,  employed  as  a  disinfectant ;  an  ammoniacal  appli¬ 
cation  for  allaying  inflammation ;  and  for  astringent  purposes  a  solution  containing  salts 
of  copper  and  sodium. 

Apart  from  purely  surgical  procedure,  the  treatise  repeatedly  instructs  the  practi¬ 
tioner  to  let  nature  do  the  work,  an  attitude  which  reminds  us  of  Hippocratic  medicine. 
In  critical  cases  the  surgeon  is  admonished  to  adopt  a  waiting  attitude,  and  uses  a 
formula  “  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point,”  recognizing  that 
the  course  of  the  case  will  not  be  settled  until  a  point  is  reached  which  discloses  pro¬ 
gress  or  the  reverse.  This  point  reminds  us  strongly  of  the  Hippocratic  “crisis”  (*piW). 

There  is  good  evidence  that  this  surgical  treatise,  as  thus  far  discussed,  was  written 
in  the  Old  Kingdom  (3000-2500  b.  c.)  and  presumably,  as  we  shall  see,  in  the  early 
part  of  that  remote  age.  The  manuscript  nowhere  hints  at  the  name  or  station  of  the 
author.  We  are  free  to  wonder  whether  the  author  of  this  earliest  known  investigation 
of  human  anatomy  and  physiology  could  have  been  identical  with  our  oldest-known 
physician,  the  venerable  Imhotep  already  mentioned  above,  who  lived  in  the  Thirtieth 
Century  b.  c.  However  that  may  have  been,  it  will  probably  have  circulated  as  a  book 
on  surgery  when  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh  was  being  built.  There  may  be  a  hint  of 
its  title  heading  a  quotation  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers  ;  for  we  find  there  an  isolated 
passage  on  the  heart  which  is  said  to  be  quoted  from  another  ancient  medical  book 

oi.uchicago.edu 

10  .  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

entitled  “  Secret  Book  of  the  Physician.”  Now  this  passage  on  the  heart,  quoted 
in  Papyrus  Ebers,  is  also  found  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  and  has  every  appearance 
of  being  original  there.  If  so,  then  Papyrus  Ebers  is  quoting  from  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus  and  the  title  of  the  source  quoted  is  the  ancient  title  of  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus  (see  commentary,  p.  108).  It  is  not  improbable,  therefore,  that  our  surgical 
treatise  was  known  to  its  ancient  users  as  the  “  Secret  Book  of  the  Physician.” 

It  is  evident  from  his  treatise  that  our  ancient  surgeon,  whoever  he  may  have  been, 
was  a  man  of  observant  and  discerning  mind,  with  a  wide  outlook  upon  the  life  of 
his  time.  The  terms  which  he  uses,  to  be  sure,  may  have  been  already  current  in  the 
surgical  jargon  of  his  age,  but  to  the  present  editor  they  convey  the  impression 
of  a  man  actually  involved  in  the  process  of  building  up  a  terminology  in  a  field  of 
observation  not  yet  possessing  a  fund  of  current  terms.  He  seems  to  be  doing  for 
the  first  time  in  any  field  of  science  what  has  since  happened  in  one  area  of  scientific 
observation  after  another.  He  draws  his  descriptive  terms  from  nature,  from  the 
mechanical  arts,  from  architecture,  and  from  many  sides  of  daily  experience.  He  has 
observed  the  crucibles  of  the  copper  foundry  and  he  compares  the  convolutions  of 
the  brain  to  the  corrugations  on  metallic  slag.  In  describing  the  articulation  of  the 
human  mandible,  he  likens  the  fork  at  the  head  of  the  ramus  to  the  claw  of  a  two-toed 
bird  clasping  the  temporal  bone.  He  applies  the  name  of  a  certain  water  worm  to 
fibrous  strings  of  coagulated  blood  ;  the  region  of  the  frontal  sinus  is  “  the  secret 
chamber,”  as  of  a  sanctuary ;  the  bridge  of  the  nose  is  for  him  “  the  column  of  the 
nose  ;  ”  a  puncture  of  the  cranium  is  like  a  broken  hole  in  a  pottery  jar.  These  terms 
were,  as  we  shall  see,  not  always  familiar  to  later  readers  and  had  to  be  explained — 
a  fact  suggesting  that  they  originated  with  our  author. 

After  circulating  for  some  generations,  more  probably  for  several  centuries,  it  was 
found  that  the  book  was  antiquated  in  its  terms.  Not  a  few  words  and  expressions 
were  evidently  no  longer  wholly  intelligible.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  Old  Kingdom, 
probably  not  later  than  2500  b.c.,  some  “  modern”  surgeon,  as  unknown  to  us  as  the 
original  author,  equipped  the  document  with  a  commentary  in  the  form  of  brief  defini¬ 
tions  and  explanations,  which  we  term  glosses,  appended  to  each  case.  For  example 
when  the  original  treatise  directed  the  practitioner  to  “  moor  him  (the  patient)  at  his 
mooring  stakes,”  the  commentator  knows  that  this  curious  idiom  is  no  longer  intelli¬ 
gible  and  appends  the  explanation,  “  It  means  put  him  on  his  accustomed  diet  and 
do  not  administer  to  him  any  medicine.”  Thus  he  carefully  explains  all  the  terms 
describing  the  various  injuries,  or  designating  the  condition  of  the  patient  or  his 
symptoms.  Similarly,  the  commentator  added  many  descriptions  of  anatomical  terms 
and  other  designations  drawn  from  nature  or  the  arts :  the  corrugations,  the  water 
worm,  the  “  column  of  the  nose,”  the  “  secret  chamber,”  etc.  In  a  total  of  sixty-nine 
such  brief  discussions,  forming  a  little  dictionary  of  early  Egyptian  medical  terms. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  11 

this  unknown  ancient  commentator  has  given  us  invaluable  revelations  of  his  know¬ 
ledge  of  anatomy,  physiology,  pathology,  surgery,  and  therapeutics ;  while  at  the 
same  time  he  has  made  clear  many  terms  in  the  original  treatise  which  would  not  have 
been  intelligible  to  us  without  his  little  dictionary. 

This  surgical  treatise,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  is  therefore  a  composite  made 
up  of  the  original  author’s  text  and  the  ancient  commentary.1  It  is  an  original  source 
of  absorbing  interest  as  a  unique  document  in  the  early  history  of  civilization.  Socially 
considered  it  is  an  outgrowth  of  the  earliest  great  age  of  civilization,  the  age  that 
saw  the  first  civilized  society  of  some  millions  of  souls  organized  into  a  homogeneous 
nation.  It  was  only  in  such  a  situation  that  oriental  medicine  could  develop  and  in 
any  aspect  approximate  the  character  of  a  science.  We  learn  this  fact  when  we 
take  up  the  study  of  the  cemeteries  where  the  Egyptian  communities  buried  their 
dead.  A  single  campaign  of  excavation  which  exhumed  between  5,000  and  6,000 
bodies,  disclosed  one  person  with  a  fractured  bone  among  every  thirty-two  people, 
that  is  over  three  such  injuries  among  every  hundred  persons.  A  broken  neck  is 
stated  by  our  treatise  to  have  been  caused  by  a  fall  on  the  head — evidently  from  some 
elevation.  Among  the  mechanics  and  workmen  employed  on  the  vast  buildings  of 
Egypt,  such  as  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh,  there  must  have  been  many  such  accidents. 
We  can  easily  understand  why  there  are  thirty-three  cases  of  injured  bones  among  the 
forty-eight  cases  in  our  treatise  ;  many,  perhaps  most,  of  these  injuries  were  received 
while  the  injured  man  was  following  the  peaceful  routine  of  civil  life.  No  one  can 
read  this  treatise,  however,  without  concluding  that  some  of  the  wounds  in  the  skull, 
e.  g.,  the  “  perforations  ”  found  in  the  skull,  the  temporal  bone,  the  zygoma,  and  the 
sternum — not  to  mention  the  gashes  in  the  soft  tissue  of  the  nose,  lip,  chin,  outer  ear, 
neck,  and  shoulder — were  spear  and  sword  wounds  received  in  war  (compare  PI.  I, 
Figs.  3  and  4).  Some  of  the  experience  and  knowledge  of  the  human  body,  which 
the  ancient  author  discloses,  was  therefore  doubtless  gained  on  the  battlefield.  In 
harmony  with  this  observation  it  should  be  noted  that  the  patient  is  always  a  man. 
There  is  other  knowledge  of  organs  and  tissues  which  would  indicate  that  our 
ancient  surgeon  practiced  dissection  of  the  human  body.  In  this  earliest  known 
investigation  of  anatomy  and  physiology  the  surgeon  gained  knowledge  which  could 
not  have  been  acquired  in  the  mere  process  of  embalming. 

We  see  that  in  the  above  situation  the  surgeon  was  daily  called  upon  to  deal  with 
human  ills  which  were  the  obvious  result  of  observable  physical  causes,  having  no 
connection  with  the  maligant  demons  of  disease.  For  our  treatise  shows  us  the  surgeon 
examining  case  after  case  of  organs  and  tissues  injured  by  intelligible  physical  agencies 

1  We  Bhall  refer  to  these  two  parts  as  “  author’s  text  ”  or  merely  “  text  ”,  and  “  ancient  com¬ 
mentary  ”  or  “  glosses.”  In  order  not  to  confuse  the  latter  with  the  present  author’s  modem  com¬ 
mentary  the  ancient  commentary  will  usually  be  called  “  the  glosses.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

12  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

forming  a  realm  of  familiar  forces,  quite  uninvaded  by  magical  powers.  In  this  realm 
the  ancient  surgeon  was  able  to  gather  a  considerable  body  of  fact  regarding  human 
anatomy,  physiology,  and  pathology — the  earliest  known  recorded  group  of  rational 
observations  in  natural  science.  Indeed  these  two  men,  the  surgeon  who  was  the 
original  author  of  the  treatise,  and  his  later  successor,  who  wrote  the  glosses  forming 
the  ancient  commentary,  both  living  in  the  first  half  of  the  third  thousand  years  b.c., 
were  the  earliest  known  natural  scientists.  In  the  long  course  of  human  development 
they  are  the  first  men  whom  we  can  see  confronting  a  great  body  of  observable 
phenomena,  which  they  collected  and  stated,  sometimes  out  of  interest  in  the  rescue  of 
the  patient,  sometimes  out  of  pure  interest  in  scientific  truth,  as  inductive  conclusions 
which  they  drew  from  observed  fact. 

If  now  we  endeavor  to  summarize  the  knowledge  of  the  human  body  discernible 
in  tins  ancient  treatise,  we  discover  that  the  inevitable  and  even  childish  limitations 
to  be  expected  in  an  age  so  remote  are  found  side  by  side  with  observations  and  dis¬ 
cernment  penetrating  in  directions  which  we  could  hardly  have  anticipated.  For  the 
first  time  in  recorded  human  speech,  our  treatise  contains  the  word  “  brain,”  which 
is  unknown  in  any  other  language  in  this  age,  or  in  any  other  treatise  of  the  Third 
Millennium  b.  c.  The  earliest  discussions  of  the  brain  have  hitherto  been  found  in 
Greek  medical  documents  probably  over  two  thousand  years  later  than  our  Egyptian 
treatise,  which  describes  the  external  appearance  of  the  brain  as  like  the  corrugations 
arising  in  metallic  slag — an  apt  description  of  the  convolutions  of  the  brain.  In  a  case 
of  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull,  he  discusses  the  rupture  of  the  sack 
containing  the  brain,  an  obvious  reference  to  the  meningeal  membranes.  The  seat  of 
consciousness  and  intelligence  was  from  the  earliest  times  regarded  by  the  Egyptians 
as  both  the  heart  and  the  bowels  or  abdomen.  Our  surgeon,  however,  has  observed 
the  fact  that  injuries  to  the  brain  affect  other  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  his 
experience  the  lower  limbs.  He  notes  the  drag  or  shuffle  of  one  foot,  presumably  the 
partial  paralysis,  resulting  from  a  cranial  wound,  and  the  ancient  commentator  care¬ 
fully  explains  the  meaning  of  the  obsolete  word  used  for  “  shuffle.”  In  this  connection 
the  surgeon  has  already  made  the  extraordinary  observation  that  the  effects  on  the 
extremities  shift  from  side  to  side  according  to  the  side  of  the  head  which  has  received 
the  injury.  This  is  a  recognition  of  the  localization  of  function  in  the  brain,  although 
the  ancient  surgeon  was  apparently  misled  by  a  case  of  contre-coup  regarding  the  side 
of  the  lower  limbs  affected.  Here  then  is  discovery  of  the  fact  that  the  brain  is  the 
source  of  control  of  the  movements  of  the  body.  As  another  center  of  nervous  control, 
our  surgeon  had  also  recognized  the  spinal  column,  and  he  had  observed  the  interesting 
fact  that  after  a  dislocation  of  the  neck  the  injured  man  suffered  an  erection  and  a 
Beminal  emission,  a  phenomenon  which  has  been  observed  in  modem  times  in  men 
executed  by  hanging.  These  two  centers  of  nervous  control,  the  brain  and  the  spinal 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  13 

column,  are  not  correlated  in  our  treatise.  The  means  of  that  control  in  a  system  of 
ramifying  nerves  is  not  mentioned  and  was  evidently  unknown,  for  the  observation 
and  demonstration  of  the  distinction  between  nerves  and  vessels  was  apparently  the 
work  of  Erasistratos  at  Alexandria  in  the  Third  Century  b.  o.,  while  the  connection 
between  the  brain,  the  spinal  cord,  and  the  nervous  system  was  first  clearly  demon¬ 
strated  by  Herophilos,  also  in  the  Third  Century  b.  c. 

While  our  surgeon  had  made  only  preliminary  observations  which  might  eventually 
contribute  toward  the  recognition  of  a  nervous  system,  he  had,  on  the  other  hand, 
already  unmistakably  recognized  the  heart  as  the  center  of  a  system  of  distributing 
vessels.  The  importance  of  observing  the  action  of  the  heart  in  determining  the  con¬ 
dition  of  a  patient,  appears  here  for  the  first  time  in  medical  history.  The  passage 
containing  these  observations  unfortunately  falls  in  the  only  broken  and  fragmentary 
column  in  our  document,  resulting  in  some  uncertainty  on  the  following  important 
point.  In  spite  of  the  imperfect  condition  of  the  text  of  this  passage,  there  is  much 
probability  that  the  surgeon  counts  the  strokes  of  the  pulse,  and  it  is  doubtless  a 
significant  fact  that  the  first  physician  who  is  known  to  have  counted  the  pulse, 
Herophilos  of  Alexandria  (born  800  b.o.),  lived  in  Egypt.  It  will  probably  also  not 
have  been  wholly  an  accident  that  this  was  done  in  the  land  which  produced  the 
earliest  known  time-pieces,  for  Herophilos  used  an  Egyptian  water-clock  for  timing  his 
count  of  the  pulse.  Herophilos  is  well  known  to  have  been  an  investigator  of  much 
independence,  and  he  was  the  one  Greek  physician  who  so  nearly  approached  the 
discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  that  there  are  historians  of  medicine  who 
believe  that  he  actually  achieved  this  discovery.  Before  his  time  Greek  medicine  had 
been  long  misled  by  the  dogma  that  a  force  resident  in  the  arteries  caused  the  pulse. 
Our  treatise,  however,  already  knows  that  the  pulse  is  due  to  the  force  and  action 
of  the  heart.  Herophilos  was  the  first  Greek  physician  to  recognize  this  fact.  That  he 
should  have  lived  in  Egypt,  where  the  cardiac  system  disclosing  the  heart  as  the  central 
force  had  already  been  known  for  perhaps  2,500  years,  is  hardly  likely  to  have  been 
a  pure  coincidence.  It  should  be  made  quite  clear,  however,  that  our  treatise,  while  it 
shows  knowledge  that  the  action  of  the  heart  affects  and  supplies  all  extremities  and  all 
parts  of  the  body  with  blood,  does  not  indicate  a  recognition  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood. 

The  treatise  discloses  acquaintance,  furthermore,  with  a  system  of  muscles,  tendons, 
and  ligaments.  For  example,  it  discusses  in  some  detail  the  muscles  of  the  human 
mandible  and  their  anchorage  on  the  temporal  bone.  The  Egyptian  word  for  tendon, 
however,  in  our  treatise,  is  the  same  aB  that  for  11  blood-vessel,”  and  we  recall  the  fact 
already  mentioned  above,  that  the  distinction  between  nerves  and  vessels  was  not 
demonstrated  until  the  Third  Century  b.o.,  when  it  was  made  clear  by  Erasistratos. 
It  is  likely,  therefore,  that  the  three  systems  of  nerves,  muscles,  and  vessels,  were 
not  yet  clearly  disengaged  by  our  surgeon. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

14  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

If  the  treatise  had  anything  to  say  on  the  digestive  system,  the  discussion  has  been 
lost  owing  to  the  fact  that  our  ancient  copy  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  stops  in  its 
progress  downward  at  the  thorax  and  upper  part  of  the  spinal  column.  Whatever 
our  surgeon  has  to  say  regarding  any  parts  below  these  limits  is  suggested  by  symptoms, 
such  as  those  affecting  the  legs  or  the  genital  organ,  induced  by  injuries  of  the  brain 
or  a  cervical  vertebra,  that  is,  injuries  in  the  upper  regions  under  discussion.  It  i3 
noticeable  also  that  even  in  this  upper  region  our  ancient  surgeon  does  not  carry  bis 
observations  of  detail  far  toward  the  interior.  He  discerns  the  “  corrugations  ”  on 
the  exterior  of  the  brain,  he  discovers  the  meningeal  sack  containing  it  and  knows 
when  it  is  ruptured  ;  he  probes  with  his  fingers  to  the  interior  and  discovers  cardiac 
pulsations,  or  as  he  says  the  “  fluttering  and  throbbing  like  that  on  the  crown  of  an 
infant’s  head  before  it  has  grown  together ;  ”  but  he  goes  no  further  toward  the 
interior  of  the  head.  We  find  him  doing  some  investigation  of  the  ear,  but  he  gives 
no  attention  to  the  eye,  and  we  recall  that  the  first  detailed  description  of  the  eye, 
and  especially  the  connection  of  the  optic  nerve  with  the  brain,  was  given  by  Herophilos 
in  his  avarofUKa. 

Similarly,  in  the  discussion  of  the  shoulders  and  thorax,  our  treatise,  as  far  as 
preserved,  does  not  carry  its  observations  to  the  interior,  with  the  exception  of  a 
remark,  doubtless  intended  as  a  caution,  calling  attention  to  the  presence  of  two 
vessels  beneath  the  thorax,  one  leading  to  the  lungs,  and  the  other  to  the  heart.  This 
restriction  of  recorded  observations  to  external  matters  or  conditions  not  far  below 
the  surface,  is  obviously  due  to  the  fact  that  the  treatise  is  a  discussion  of  injuries, 
and  so  largely  injuries  rupturing  or  otherwise  affecting  external  tissue.  It  is  not 
a  systematic  treatise  on  the  human  body. 

The  most  significant  characteristic  of  the  treatise  is  the  ancient  surgeon’s  attitude 
in  studying  these  injuries.  He  evidently  is  filled  with  desire  to  heal  his  patient  when¬ 
ever  he  concludes  there  is  any  possibility  of  doing  so  ;  but  he  does  not  stop  there. 

One  of  the  most  important  observations  in  appraising  this  surgical  treatise  is  the 
fact  that  out  of  68  examinations  the  surgeon  recommends  treatment  in  42  instances, 
leaving  16  without  treatment.  This  latter  group  evinces  the  surgeon’s  interest  in  the 
human  body  quite  apart  from  any  thought  of  healing  or  treating  it,  and  reminds  us  of 
the  Hippocratic  treatises  on  epidemics  in  which,  among  42  case-records,  25  were  fatal 
cases.  This  group  of  16  injuries  described  but  not  treated  in  our  surgical  treatise  is 
without  parallel  in  Egyptian  medical  literature,  as  we  have  already  noticed  above. 

These  discussions  demonstrate  the  surgeon’s  scientific  interest  in  the  human  body 
as  a  field  of  observation,  and  disclose  him  to  us  as  the  earliest  scientific  mind  which 
we  can  discern  in  the  surviving  records  of  the  past. 

The  current  view,  that  in  all  cases  Egyptian  medical  practice  invariably  employed 
magio  devices,  a  view  in  which  I  formerly  also  shared,  is  quite  evidently  wrong.  There 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  15 

•was,  indeed,  surviving  from  primitive  times  a  large  body  of  traditional  practices  in 
medical  treatment  wholly  or  chiefly  magical  which  never  disappeared.  Such  practices, 
universally  and  implicitly  followed  by  the  common  people,  forming  what  we  may  call 
“  demoniacal  medicine,”  always  had  its  devotees,  the  descendants  of  the  old  “  medicine 
men,”  with  their  rolls  of  ancient  hocus-pocus,  like  the  medical  papyrus  of  the  British 
Museum,  or  the  “  Charms  for  Mother  and  Child  ”  in  the  other  well-known  roll  at 
Berlin.  Such  primitive  superstition  dies  hard.  It  lasted  far  down  into  the  history  of 
our  own  land.  Increase  Mather,  President  of  Harvard  University,  in  his  treatise  on 
Remarkable  Providences,  insists  that  the  smell  of  herbs  alarms  the  Devil  and  that 
medicine  expels  him.  Such  beliefs  have  probably  even  now  not  wholly  disappeared 
from  among  us.  We  cannot  wonder  that  this  was  the  almost  universal  point  of  view 
in  the  early  world  with  which  we  are  dealing. 

The  author  of  our  treatise  was  one  of  a  group  of  men  who  will  likewise  inevitably 
have  been  children  of  their  time.  We  cannot  conceive  that  they  ever  ceased  to  believe 
in  the  power  of  magic  ;  but  they  had  learned  that  in  surgery  and  medicine  they  were 
confronted  by  a  great  body  of  observable  phenomena,  which  they  systematically  and 
scientifically  collected,  sometimes  out  of  interest  in  the  salvation  of  the  patient, 
sometimes  out  of  pure  interest  in  the  scientific  truth.  The  class  of  men  thus  revealed 
to  us  are  the  earliest  natural  scientists  of  whom  we  know  anything,  who,  confronting 
a  world  of  objective  phenomena,  made  and  organized  their  observations  and  based 
inductive  conclusions  upon  bodies  of  observed  fact. 

The  current  conclusion  regarding  the  mind  of  the  ancient  Egyptian,  a  conclusion 
in  which  I  have  myself  heretofore  shared,  has  been  that  he  was  interested  in  scientific 
principles,  if  at  all,  solely  because  of  the  unavoidable  necessity  of  applying  them  in 
practical  life— that  if  he  discussed  the  superficial  content  of  a  many-sided  geometrical 
figure  or  the  cubical  content  of  a  hemisphere  it  was  because  he  was  obliged  to  measure 
fields  for  taxation  purposes  and  to  compute  the  content  of  granaries.  In  the  field  of 
Egyptian  mathematics  Professor  Karpinski  of  the  University  of  Michigan  has  long 
insisted  that  the  surviving  mathematical  papyri  clearly  demonstrate  the  Egyptians’ 
scientific  interest  in  pure  mathematics  for  its  own  sake.  I  have  now  no  doubt  that 
Professor  Karpinski  is  right,  for  the  evidence  of  interest  in  pure  science,  as  such,  is 
perfectly  conclusive  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Surgical  Papyrus. 

Astronomy  and  medicine  are  the  oldest  sciences.  Both  arose,  as  we  have  seen,  in 
remote  ages,  still  clouded  by  the  darkest  superstition,  and  in  the  closest  association 
with  magic,  religion,  and  theology,  of  which  it  may  be  said  both  astronomy  and 
medicine  at  first  really  formed  a  part.  The  complete  dissociation  of  medicine  from 
magic  and  religion  was  the  achievement  of  the  Greeks.  It  was  not  an  achievement 
which  they  completed  at  one  stroke,  but  a  slow  transition,  a  gradual  process.  The 
Hippocratic  School,  in  spite  of  notable  ability  in  observation,  and  a  spirit  admirably 

oi.uchicago.edu 

16  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

rational  in  the  main,  did  not  succeed  in  wholly  divesting  themselves  of  superstition. 
Even  the  vision  of  the  intellectual  colossus,  Aristotle,  was  now  and  then  obscured  by 
the  mists  of  ancient  superstition,  and  at  the  present  day,  one  may  still  be  surprised 
by  the  lurking  superstitions  which  persist  and  survive  in  out-of-the-way  comers  of  some 
modem  mind,  otherwise  thoroughly  emancipated  and  scientific  in  attitude  and  outlook. 

In  the  history  of  Greek  medicine  there  is  still  far  too  much  obscurity  to  permit 
a  rapid  survey  such  as  might  serve  to  furnish  the  connection  between  Greek  medical 
science  and  the  earlier  knowledge  of  medicine  which  arose  and  was  in  general  use  in 
the  ancient  Near  East  at  least  2,500years  before  the  age  of  Hippocrates.  Nor  is  a  brief 
introduction  like  this  the  place  for  such  a  comprehensive  presentation. 

Nevertheless  we  may  here  call  attention  to  a  few  salient  facts  observable  in  any 
consideration  of  the  possible  relation  between  early  Greek  medicine  and  that  of  Egypt. 
In  the  first  place  we  have  already  noticed  that  the  greatest  of  the  Greek  medical 
investigators,  at  the  climax  of  Greek  achievement  in  medical  science  in  the  Third 
Century  b.c.,  lived  in  Egypt,  as  so  many  of  the  intellectual  men  of  Greece  had  for 
centuries  before  that  time  traveled  and  studied  in  Egypt.  The  effect  of  this  intimate 
contact  is  visible  at  many  points  in  Greek  life  and  science,  which  cannot  even  be 
summarized  here.  The  contribution  of  Babylonian  astronomy  to  the  early  develop¬ 
ment  of  astronomy  among  the  Greeks  was  not  generally  recognized  until  even  the 
names  of  the  Babylonian  astronomical  observers,  whose  data  were  used  by  the  Greeks, 
were  recently  identified  in  the  Babylonian  astronomical  records  on  surviving  cuneiform 
tablets,  like  the  Greek  Kidenas,  Babylonian  Kidinnu  of  the  Fourth  Century  b.  c.,  or 
Greek  Naburianos,  Babylonian  Nabu-rimannu  of  the  Fifth  Century  b.c.1 

In  our  surgical  treatise  the  practitioner  is  instructed  how  to  treat  a  dislocated 
mandible.  He  is  directed  just  how  to  place  his  hands,  in  reducing  the  dislocation. 
The  instructions  are  as  follows  : 

“  Thou  shouldst  put  thy  thumbs  upon  the  ends  of  the  rami  of  the  mandible  in  the 
inside  of  his  mouth,  and  thy  two  claws  (=two  groups  of  four  fingers)  under  his  chin  and 
thou  shouldst  cause  them  to  fall  back  so  that  they  rest  in  their  places.” 

Now  it  happens  that  the  Greek  physician,  Apollonios,  who  lived  at  Kitium  in 
Cyprus  in  the  First  Century  b.  c.,  wrote  an  illustrated  commentary  on  the  Hippocratic 
treatise  nepl  dpdpatv  “  concerning  the  joints.”  This  commentary  has  survived  in 
a  late  manuscript  copy  of  the  Ninth  Century  of  our  era,  which  is  now  preserved 
at  Florence  as  Codex  Laurentius  LXXIV.2 

An  examination  of  the  illustration  of  Hippocratic  practice  in  the  case  of  a  dislocated 
mandible  shows  us  (PI.  VI)  the  patient  seated,  with  head  firmly  held  by  an  attendant 

1  See  Meissner,  Babylonien  und  Assyrien,  Vol.  II,  p.  416. 

*  See  H.  Seh6ne,  Apollonius  von  Kitium :  Illuttrierter  Kommentar  zu  dvr  Hippokrateischen 
Schrift  nEPI  AP6PQN,  Leipeio,  1896. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  17 

while  the  surgeon,  thrusting  his  thumbs  into  the  patient’s  mouth,  his  fingers  remaining 
outside  and  beneath,  grasps  the  mandible  to  restore  it  to  its  place.  The  text 1  also  refers 
to  the  position  of  the  surgeon’s  hands :  XPV  Y&P  T°v  ti*v  xarexeiv  rrjv  KejxtXrjv,  tov  8e 
nepiAafiovTa  tt)v  Kara)  yvddov  Kal  lau>6ev  Kal  e£w6fv  rots  8a/cn/Aots  Kara  to  yevtwv  k.t.A. 
These  directions,  prescribing  that  the  surgeon’s  fingers  shall  be  placed  both  inside  and 
outside,  show  much  agreement  with  the  above  cited  direction  in  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus.  When  clarified  by  the  illustration  (PI.  VI)  and  by  the  fact  that  the  Greek 
SaKTvXos,  though  commonly  meaning  “  finger,”  was  also  applied  to  the  thumb,  the 
Hippocratic  method  of  reducing  a  dislocated  mandible  is  seen  to  be  identical  with 
that  prescribed  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus. 

This  identity  of  the  Greek  surgeon’s  practice  in  the  third  century  b.  c.  with  that  of 
our  Egyptian  surgeon  of  some  2,500  years  earlier,  establishes  the  existence  of  a  certain 
amount  of  old  Egyptian  influence  on  Greek  medicine.  Our  treatise,  or  some  other  old 
Egyptian  book  of  surgery,  containing  our  surgeon’s  directions  for  reducing  a  dislocated 
mandible,  must  have  been  known  to  the  early  Hippocratic  practitioners.  In  view  of  this 
fact,  we  see  more  probability  in  the  recognition  of  the  Egyptian  influences,  suggested 
above,  as  having  had  some  effect  on  the  great  Greek  medical  investigators,Herophilos  and 
Erasistratos,  residing  as  they  did  in  Egypt  where  such  influences  were  obviously  possible. 

The  lapse  of  time  between  our  latest  Egyptian  medical  document  and  the  rise  of 
Greek  medical  science  at  Alexandria  was  one  of  many  centuries.  But  we  have  interest¬ 
ing  evidence  of  the  continuance,  during  this  interval,  of  Egyptian  medical  teaching 
in  the  Sixth  Century  b.c.  under  the  patronage  of  Darius  I  of  Persia,  the  greatest  and 
most  enlightened  administrator  of  the  early  world  before  the  rise  of  the  Romans. 
Darius  introduced  into  his  administration  the  Egyptian  calendar,  restored  the  ancient 
Egyptian  “  Suez  canal,”  built  a  great  Mediterranean  fleet  for  commerce  with 
Persia,  and  although  his  people  had  been  an  illiterate  and  semi-barbarous  group  of 
peasant  and  shepherd  tribes  only  a  generation  before  his  reign,  his  statesmanlike 
ability  to  discern  the  value  of  much  which  he  could  adopt  from  the  civilization  of  the 
conquered  was  perhaps  his  greatest  quality.  Among  his  foreign  functionaries  in  Persia 
was  one  Uzahor-resenet,  an  Egyptian  ecclesiastic,  who  was  High  Priest  of  the  goddess 
Neith  at  her  temple  in  the  Delta  city  of  Sais.  A  statue  of  this  priestly  aristocrat, 
now  in  the  Vatican  at  Rome,  carries  inscriptions  giving  some  autobiographical  details 
of  great  importance  in  the  history  of  medicine.  Uzahor-resenet  says  : 

“His  Majesty  King  Darius  commanded  me  to  come  to  Egypt,  while  His  Majesty  was 
in  Elam  as  Great  King  of  every  country  and  Chief  Prince  of  Egypt,  in  order  to  establish 
the  Hall  of  the  House  of  Life,2  the  house  . . .  after  their  decay.  The  barbarians  brought 

1  SchCne,  ibid.,  p.  13. 

*  The  term  “  House  of  Life  ”  was  an  old  one  applied  to  archive  chambers,  libraries,  and  the  like. 
It  probably  refers  here  to  such  a  place,  rather  than  to  a  hospital ;  and  the  following  break  in  the 
inscription  probably  contained  the  more  specific  name  of  the  school. 

O 

oi.uchicago.edu 

18  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

me  from  country  to  country,  and  conducted  me  to  Egypt  as  the  King  had  com¬ 
manded.” 

“  I  did  as  His  Majesty  had  commanded  me.  I  equipped  them  (the  two  houses  above) 
with  all  their  students  from  among  sons  of  men  of  consequence,  no  sons  of  the  poor  were 
among  them.  I  placed  them  under  the  hand  of  every  wise  man  ...  for  all  their  work.” 

“  His  Majesty  commanded  to  give  them  every  good  thing  in  order  that  they  might 
do  all  their  work.  I  equipped  them  with  all  their  needs,  with  all  their  instruments 
which  were  in  the  writings,  according  to  what  was  in  them  (the  houses)  aforetime.” 

“  His  Majesty  did  this  because  he  knew  the  value  of  this  art,  in  order  to  save  the  life 
of  every  one  having  sickness,  and  in  order  to  establish  the  names  of  all  the  gods,  their 
temples  and  their  revenues,  that  their  feasts  might  be  celebrated  forever.”  1 

In  this  remarkable  inscription  we  find  the  earliest  known  mention  of  a  medical 
school  as  a  royal  foundation.  It  is  important  to  note  that  this  Egyptian  medical  school 
at  Sais  was  not  being  founded  for  the  first  time,  but  was  being  restored  as  the  surviving 
old  writings  in  Uzahor-resonet’s  hands  showed  him  it  had  been  “  aforetime.”  We 
note  with  interest  that  the  medical  students  of  the  Sixth  Century  b.c.  in  Egypt  were 
selected  from  families  of  good  social  station,  and  that  as  the  last  lines  show,  these  young 
physicians  were  evidently  also  priests  in  the  temple  of  the  goddess.  Indeed  the  High 
Priest  himself,  Uzahor-resenet,  bore  the  title,  “  Chief  Physician.”  Among  the  branches 
of  instruction  the  reference  to  11  instruments  ”  shows  us  that  surgery  was  included. 

Among  these  highly  civilized  cities  of  the  Nile  Delta,  the  first  large  cities  the  Greeks 
had  ever  seen,  the  Macedonian  kings  of  Egypt  set  up  their  enlightened  scientific  founda¬ 
tions  at  Alexandria.  We  see  now  that  in  medicine  at  least  Darius  had  anticipated 
them.  The  important  point  to  note  is  the  fact  that  the  support  of  old  Egyptian 
medical  instruction  was  continued  by  the  Persians  after  their  conquest  of  Egypt 
(525  b.c.).  When,  two  centuries  later,  the  Alexandrian  physicians  began  to  enjoy 
the  princely  support  of  the  Ptolemies,  they  found  themselves  among  the  surviving 
native  Egyptian  medical  schools  and  medical  libraries  of  the  Delta,  where  such  contacts 
and  influences  as  we  have  suggested  could  hardly  have  been  escaped. 

The  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  has  revealed  to  us  an  ancient  Egyptian  surgeon  in 
contrast  with  the  physician,  as  a  man  with  the  ability  to  observe,  to  draw  conclusions 
from  his  observations,  and  thus,  within  the  limitations  of  his  age,  to  maintain  a  scien¬ 
tific  attitude  of  mind.  Such  men  will  not  have  been  numerous.  The  ancient  com¬ 
mentator  is  disclosed  as  another  man  of  the  same  type,  living  probably  some  centuries 
later.  Our  treatise  and  the  commentary  demonstrate  the  fact  that  such  men  produced 
discussions  of  the  human  body  which  represent  the  beginning  of  scientific  effort  to 
investigate  and  understand  its  innumerable  problems  and  mysteries.  The  literature 
which  these  men  created,  representing  the  earliest  known  chapter  in  science,  has 
perished,  and  there  is  small  likelihood  that  we  shall  ever  see  any  more  of  it. 

1  See  H.  Schaefer,  Zeitschrijt  fiir  Aegyptische  Spracke,  XXXVII  (1899),  pp.  72-74.  Schaefer 
was  the  first  scholar  to  recognize  the  real  meaning  of  this  inscription. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  19 

The  ancient  history  of  our  document  as  a  whole  illustrates  the  hazards  which 
beset  such  records  and  their  meager  prospects  of  survival.  It  is  now  without  doubt 
thousands  of  years  since  the  complete  disappearance  or  destruction  of  the  original 
copy  of  this  surgical  treatise,  as  penned  by  the  hand  of  the  nameless  author  himself, 
probably  nearly  5000  years  ago.  In  the  same  way,  the  copy  to  which  the  ancient 
commentator  appended  his  explanations,  long  ago  perished.  At  least  one  copy  of 
treatise  and  commentary  together,  however,  survived  the  fall  of  the  Old  Kingdom 
(3000-2500  b.c.)  and,  as  transmitted,  probably  through  successive  copies,  survived 
the  fall  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  (early  Eighteenth  Century  b.  c.)  and  the  advent  of  the 
Hyksos.  The  surviving  copy  of  the  great  mathematical  papyrus  made  under  a  Hyksos 
king  has  revealed  the  fact  that  literary  and  learned  activity  still  continued  under  these 
foreign  rulers  of  Egypt  whom  we  call  the  Hyksos.  It  was  at  this  time,  in  the  late 
Seventeenth  Century  b.  c.,  when  upper  Egypt  was  striving  to  throw  off  the  foreign 
yoke  of  the  Hyksos,  that  a  Theban  scribe  sat  down  to  copy  our  ancient  treatise  on 
surgery.  In  content  the  book  was  then  probably  over  a  thousand  years  old.  It  was  as 
if  a  man  sat  down  to-day  to  copy  a  manuscript  written  in  the  reign  of  Charlemagne. 
It  was  full  of  old  words,  and  archaic  turns  of  speech,  though  some  of  its  antique 
spelling  had  been  modernized.  The  scribe  was  master  of  a  stately  and  beautiful  book 
hand,  but  he  was  totally  ignorant  of  medicine  and  when  confronted  with  some  highly 
specialized  picture-sign,  like  that  of  the  human  mandible,  he  completely  lost  his  ready 
command  of  his  usual  graceful  and  running  forms,  and  awkwardly  smeared  together 
a  blotted  and  angular  picture.  He  was  excessively  inaccurate,  but  occasionally  noticed 
and  corrected  his  errors— in  one  case  placing  an  omitted  word  in  the  margin  and  calling 
attention  to  it  by  a  cross,  the  earliest  known  asterisk  in  the  history  of  book-making. 
He  may  have  been  an  employe  on  the  staff  of  some  ancient  copyist’s  office.  In  any 
case  when  he  had  copied  the  old  treatise  on  surgery  from  the  beginning  (the  human 
head)  down  to  the  thorax  and  the  spine  he  stopped  in  the  middle  of  a  case,  in  the 
middle  of  a  line,  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  and  leaving  the  end  of  the  long  roll  bare 
of  all  writing  for  some  space,  he  turned  it  over  and  copied  on  the  unwritten  back  a 
series  of  incantations  against  pestilence,  to  which  he  added  three  recipes,  one  for 
female  troubles  and  two  for  improving  the  complexion.  It  is  possible  that  the  first 
purchaser,  some  local  Theban  practitioner  who  saw  the  unfinished  treatise  on  surgery, 
ordered  the  scribe  to  stop  and  to  copy  for  him  this  unsavory  magical  hodge-podge 
on  the  back. 

Eventually  this  unknown  owner  probably  handed  on  the  roll  to  some  later  worthy 
in  the  same  craft.  The  last  owner  was  much  attracted  by  a  roll  containing  a  recipe 
for  “  transforming  an  old  man  into  a  youth,”  and  he,  or  some  scribe  for  him,  took  pains 
to  copy  this  at  the  end  of  the  older  material  collected  by  his  predecessors,  adding 
a  totally  unrelated  remedy  for  some  ailment  of  the  anus.  Meantime  much  handling 

c  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

20  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

and  daily  use  of  the  document  had  frayed  the  beginning  of  the  roll  and  at  least  one 
column  of  the  fine  old  Book  of  Surgery  containing  the  title  of  the  book  (with  perhaps 
the  name  of  the  author)  and  the  beginning  of  the  first  case  dropped  off  in  tatters. 
When  at  last  the  village  quack  himself  fell  sick  and  found  his  art  unable  to  exorcise  the 
demons  of  disease,  his  surviving  relatives  doubtless  carried  him  up  and  laid  him  away 
in  a  rock  tomb  in  the  great  Theban  cemetery.  Luckily  for  us,  they  seem  to  have  laid 
his  roll  in  his  coffin  with  him ;  for  it  is  hardly  likely  to  have  survived  in  any  other 
conceivable  place.  There  in  his  tomb  it  reposed  in  perfect  safety  throughout  a  vast 
sweep  of  human  history  for  some  three  and  a  half  millenniums,  from  the  migrations 
of  the  Hebrew  patriarchs  and  the  prehistoric  wanderings  of  the  Greek  barbarians  to 
the  American  Civil  "War.  The  modem  descendants  of  the  old  Egyptian  quack,  search¬ 
ing  the  tombs  for  salable  plunder,  probably  found  the  roll  beside  the  body  of  their 
Theban  ancestor  and  saw  in  it  prospects  of  gain.  Unfortunately,  however,  as  we  shall 
see,  our  information  on  this  point  is  not  conclusive.  The  modem  vandals  stripped  off 
the  tatters  of  papyrus  still  hanging  on  the  outside,  to  make  it  look  more  “  ship-shape.” 
After  selling  this  roll  to  Mr.  Edwin  Smith  in  January  1862,  they  patched  up  another 
out  of  indiscriminate  rubbish  and  gave  it  the  appearance  of  a  papyrus  roll  by  wrapping 
it  and  gluing  in  place  the  tattered  fragments  which  they  had  stripped  off  the  genuine 
roll.  Two  months  after  the  first  sale  they  put  this  dummy  roll  also  on  the  market 
and  sold  it,  likewise  to  Mr.  Smith.  Detecting  the  fraud,  Mr.  Smith  recognized  and 
rescued  the  new  fragments  of  the  precious  medical  book,  thus  recovering  for  science 
the  extraordinary,  even  though  fragmentary,  discussion  of  the  heart  and  its  system 
of  canals,  to  which  we  have  already  referred. 

The  above  discussion  may  serve  to  inform  the  non-Egyptological  reader  regarding 
the  place  of  our  new  document  in  the  history  of  science  ;  but  some  further  details  in 
the  modern  history  of  the  document  must  be  added,  besides  a  fuller  account  of  its 
physical  characteristics,  the  writing  and  age  of  the  roll. 

1.  History  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Surgical  Papyrus 

Mr.  Edwin  Smith,  after  whom  the  papyrus  is  named,  went  to  Egypt  about  the 
year  1858.  He  was  at  that  time  thirty-six  years  of  age  and  had  studied  Egyptian  in 
both  London  and  Paris  before  proceeding  to  Egypt.  Although  as  far  as  I  know  he 
never  published  anything,  it  is  quite  evident  from  his  papers  in  New  York  that  he 
had  become  very  fully  grounded  in  the  new  science,  which  was  then  only  a  generation 
old.  His  knowledge  of  hieratic  is  praised  by  the  sagacious  Goodwin,  who  says,  with 
reference  to  the  date  of  the  calendar  on  the  verso  of  the  Ebers  Papyrus :  “  The 
numeral  attached  to  the  name  of  the  king  is  neither  8  nor  80 — both  of  which  numbers 
have  been  suggested — but  9.  It  is  due  to  Mr.  Smith,  whose  acquaintance  uhth  hieratic 
texts  is  very  extensive  [italics  mine],  to  mention  that  he  pointed  this  out  to  me  as  long 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  21 

ago  as  1864,  when  he  communicated  to  me  a  copy  of  the  endorsement  upon  his 
papyrus.”  1  It  is  evident  from  these  remarks  of  Goodwin  that  Edwin  Smith  was  the 
first  scholar  to  read  correctly  the  date  in  this  famous  calendar. 

Among  Mr.  Smith’s  meager  papers  handed  to  me  by  the  New  York  Historical 
Society  I  find  a  manuscript  containing  a  remarkable  attempt  by  Mr.  Smith  at  a  com¬ 
plete  translation  of  the  papyrus  which  now  bears  his  name.  When  we  recall  how 
scanty  was  the  knowledge  of  hieratic  in  the  sixties  of  the  last  century,  when  this  effort 
at  a  translation  was  written  out,  not  to  mention  also  the  very  limited  knowledge  of 
the  Egyptian  language  itself  available  at  so  early  a  stage  of  Egyptian  studies,  it  is 
extraordinary  how  much  of  the  document  Mr.  Smith  has  understood.  It  should  be 
mentioned  here  also  that  of  the  eight  fragments  of  the  papyrus  which,  as  we  shall 
see,  Mr.  Smith  rescued,  he  was  able  to  place  three  with  exactness  and  two  more  at 
least  in  their  approximate  connection.  Even  as  early  as  1854  he  “  was  able  to  read 
correctly  a  name  hitherto  undeciphered  on  a  wooden  stamp  in  ”  2  the  Abbot  Collec¬ 
tion.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  published  nothing  it  is  evident  that  he  was  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Egyptian  science.  By  a  curious  coincidence  the  year  of  his  birth — 1822 — 
was  likewise  the  memorable  year  in  which  Champollion  deciphered  and  read  Egyptian 
hieroglyphic.  It  was  very  fitting,  therefore,  that  some  mention  of  this  little-known 
scholar  and  of  the  papyrus  which  bears  his  name  should  have  found  a  place  in  a  volume 
which  was  intended  to  commemorate  the  centenary  of  Champollion’s  great  achievement.3 

During  his  residence  in  Luxor,  from  1858  to  1876,  Mr.  Smith  met  a  number  of  the 
leading  Egyptologists  of  the  time  and  likewise  many  of  the  distinguished  English 
travelers  who  so  frequently  visited  the  Nile  in  those  days.  Dr.  Caroline  R.  Williams 
has  noticed  in  a  letter  written  by  Lady  Duff  Gordon  in  October  1864  a  reference  to 
him  as  “  an  American  Egyptologist  at  Luxor,  a  friend  of  mine,”  for  whom  Lady 
Gordon  was  securing  books  to  be  sent  out  by  her  husband.4  Birch  refers  to  him  as 
having  descended  with  the  British  Vice-Consul  into  a  tomb  shaft  ninety  feet  deep  to 
bring  up  “  thirty  mummies  and  their  coffins  ”  for  the  entertainment  of  the  Prince 
of  Wales  during  his  visit  to  Egypt  inl868.6  In  the  documents  still  surviving  Mr.  Smith’s 
habitual  intercourse  with  eminent  scholars  and  distinguished  visitors  in  Egypt,  as 
well  as  his  scientific  knowledge,  are  quite  evident.  The  reasons  for  mention  of  these 
matters  will  also  be  evident  as  we  proceed. 

In  January  1862,  during  his  stay  at  Thebes,  Mr.  Smith  purchased  the  document 
which  is  the  subject  of  this  book.  The  fragments  of  page  one,  which  he  put  together, 
are  accompanied  by  a  memorandum  in  his  own  handwriting  which  reads  as  follows  : 

1  Zeiischrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache,  Sept.-Oct.  1873,  p.  107. 

*  Dr.  Caroline  Ransom  Williams,  “  The  Place  of  The  New  York  Historical  Society  in  the  Growth 
of  American  Interest  in  Egyptology,”  in  The  New  York  Historical  Society  Quarterly  Bulletin,  April,  1920, 
p.  16.  *  See  Recueil  Champollion,  Paris,  1922,  pp.  385-429. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  16.  5  Ibid.,  pp.  16-17. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

22  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

“  These  fragments  were  recovered  from  a  factitious  papyrus  made  up  of  the  fragments 
from  8  others  March  17, 1862,  nearly  2  months  after  the  original  purchase,  Jan.  20,  both 
from  Mustapha  Aga,  and  the  fragments  A  and  C  were  saturated  with  glue  which  was  re¬ 
moved  by  maceration  and  carefully  scraping  the  glue  away  which  had  been  used  to  seal 
the  factitious  papyrus  composed  of  these  fragments.”  After  his  death  in  1906  Mr.  Smith’s 
daughter,  Miss  Leonora  Smith,  presented  the  document  to  the  New  York  Historical 
Society,  to  whose  courtesy  I  owe  the  permission  to  publish  the  great  papyrus. 

The  problem  of  the  provenience  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  unfortunately 
involves  us  in  some  reference  to  the  unjust  reflections  upon  the  character  of  Mr.  Smith 
contained  in  Ebers’  introduction  to  his  papyrus,  and  also  makes  it  necessary  to  take 
up  at  this  point  the  connection  between  Papyrus  Ebers  and  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus. 
I  trust  that  the  mention  of  the  following  facts  will  be  understood  only  as  an  unavoid¬ 
able  fulfillment  of  duty  in  defending  the  reputation  of  Mr.  Edwin  Smith,  and  in  no  sense 
as  a  reflection  or  an  attack  upon  the  memory  of  the  gracious  and  kindly  Ebers.  It  is 
obvious,  however,  that  Ebers  was  misled  in  allowing  to  escape  his  pen  the  reflections  on 
Mr.  Smith  which  we  find  in  his  accounts  of  his  purchase  of  Papyrus  Ebers.  He  states : 

“  Er  empfing  meinen  Namen  gemass  dem  Herkommen,  dass  wichtige  Papyrosrollen 
nach  denjenigen  Gelehrten  oder  Freunden  der  Wissenschaft  benannt  werden,  die  sie 
auf  eigene  Gefahr  in  Aegypten  erwerben.  Daher  die  Bezeichnung  Papyros  Salt,  Pap. 
Anastasi,  Pap.  d’Orbiney,  Pap.  Harris,  etc.”  1 

As  far  as  my  knowledge  of  the  early  history  of  Egyptology  goes  the  papyri  which 
Ebers  mentions  were  not  given  these  designations  by  the  original  first  purchasers 
themselves  but  by  others,  especially  by  scholars  who  later,  designating  them  by  the 
names  of  their  first  European  possessors,  found  it  convenient  to  identify  them  in  this 
way.  I  do  not  know  of  another  example  in  the  whole  range  of  Egyptological  studies 
in  which  a  scholar  has  deliberately  named  an  important  papyrus  after  himself.  In 
this  connection  one  may  refer  to  the  example  of  the  high-minded  Lepsius  in  naming 
the  Papyrus  Westcar  after  the  English  lady  who  presented  it  to  him.  The  evident 
eagerness  of  Ebers  to  attach  his  name  to  the  magnificent  papyrus  he  had  acquired, 
betrayed  him  into  unmistakable  resentment  toward  Mr.  Edwin  Smith,  whose  name 
had  already  become  connected  with  the  document.  The  source  of  this  resentment  is 
thus  obvious.  As  far  back  as  December  1870  Lepsius  had  published  some  remarks 
entitled  :  Einige  Bemerkungen  ueber  denselben  Papyrus  Smith,2  and  by  “  Papyrus 
Smith  ”  he  designated  the  great  papyrus  which  with  pardonable  pride  its  later  pur¬ 
chaser  wished  should  bear  the  name  of  Ebers.  Evidently  without  knowledge  of  Ebers’ 
purchase  Goodwin  as  late  as  the  summer  of  1878  calls  the  document  “  the  Smith 
Papyrus.”  3  It  is  quite  evident  that  the  great  roll  which  we  now  know  as  Papyrus 

1  See  Georg  Ebers,  Papyros  Ebers,  Leipzig,  1875,  p.  2. 

*  Ztitschrift  fiir  Atgyptische  Sprache,  Dec.  1870,  pp.  167  ff. 

Ibid.,  Sept.-Oct.  1873,  pp.  107-109. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  23 

Ebera  had  already  begun  to  be  known  in  the  early  seventies  as  Papyrus  Smith.  When, 
therefore,  in  the  spring  of  1878  Ebers  handed  Lepsius  a  manuscript  account  of  the 
new  and  splendid  hieratic  manuscript  which  he  had  so  recently  acquired,  it  was  very 
necessary  that  the  name  of  Edwin  Smith  be  completely  dissociated  from  it.  The 
document  which  had  been  discussed  by  the  editor  of  the  Zeitschrift  in  December  1870 
under  the  title  “  Papyrus  Smith  ”  was  now  announced  by  Ebers  in  an  article  entitled 
“  Papyrus  Ebers,”  which  appeared  in  the  same  Zeitschrift  in  May-June,  1878 — too 
late,  unfortunately,  to  prevent  Goodwin’s  reference  to  it  as  “  the  Smith  Papyrus  ” 
in  the  summer  or  autumn  of  the  same  year. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  why  the  otherwise  always  amiable  Ebers 
permitted  himself  to  accuse  Mr.  Edwin  Smith  of  having  endeavoured  to  masquerade 
as  the  owner  of  the  great  papyrus — an  ownership  which  Ebers  then  emphatically 
denies.  And  yet  Ebers  himself  characterizes  these  reflections  on  Mr.  Smith  as  merely 
a  “  suspicion  ”  (Vermuthung).1 

As  far  back  as  1864  Edwin  Smith  had  already  communicated  to  Goodwin  the  now 
famous  calendar  from  the  verso  of  Papyrus  Ebers  and  at  that  time,  as  we  have  shown 
above,  Smith  was  the  first  scholar  to  read  the  year  date  “  9  ”  correctly.  The  first 
mention  of  the  later  Papyrus  Ebers  in  scientific  literature  seems  to  have  been  in 
connection  with  a  hieroglyphic  transliteration  of  the  calendar  published  by  Brugsch 
in  the  summer  of  1 870  ( Zeitschrift  fur  A  egyptische  Sprache,  July- Aug.  1 870,  pp .  1 08-1 11). 
Brugsch  says  that  it  was  from  the  “  Riickseite  eines  Papyrus  ”  and  that  he  had 
secured  it  from  the  papers  of  an  Egyptological  friend  in  Egypt  during  the  winter  of 
1869-70.  This  friend  was  Eisenlohr  who  then  sent  in  the  hieratic  text  to  Lepsius, 
intimating  that  he  had  not  given  Brugsch  permission  to  publish  it.  Lepsius  published 
Eisenlohr's  note  in  December  1870  (Zeitschrift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache,  pp.  165-167). 
Eisenlohr  states  that  in  February  1870  he  visited  Edwin  Smith  in  Luxor  and  that 
Smith  showed  him  his  collection,  including  “  Zwei  von  ihm  erworbene  Papyrus- 
rollen  medicinischen  Inhaltes,  von  welchen  die  eine  fiber  100,  die  andere  19  Blatter 
enthalt.”  In  Eisenlohr’s  above  article  Lepsius  substituted  his  own  more  accurate 
tracing  (which  he  had  received  from  Naville)  in  place  of  Eisenlohr’s  facsimile.  Naville 
had  been  allowed  by  Smith  to  make  this  tracing  in  the  autumn  of  1868  with  permission 
to  publish,  a  permission  later  granted  orally  by  Smith  to  Lepsius  in  person  in  Luxor. 

Dr.  Haigh  next  published  a  “  note  on  the  Calendar  in  Mr.  Smith’s  Papyrus  ” 
(Zeitschrift,  May-June,  1871,  pp.  72-78)  which  adds  nothing  to  the  above  facts,  and 
Goodwin  also  wrote  “  Notes  on  the  Calendar  in  Mr.  Smith’s  Papyrus  ”  (Zeitschrift, 
Sept.-Oct.  1878,  pp.  107-109).  He  refers  to  the  document  (Papyrus  Ebers)  as  “  the 
medical  papyrus  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Edwin  Smith  of  Luxor.” 

The  outstanding  facts  discernible  after  a  careful  study  of  these  earlier  notices  show 

1  Ibid.,  1873,  p.  42,  foot-note. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

24  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

clearly  that  at  one  time  both  the  Papyrus  Ebers  and  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  were 
in  the  physical  possession  of  Mr.  Edwin  Smith,  and  they  were  seen  in  his  possession 
by  Eisenlohr,  who  refers  to  them  both  in  unmistakable  terms.  I  have  seen  no  evi¬ 
dence  in  the  contemporary  documents  that  Mr.  Edwin  Smith  anywhere  stated  that 
he  was  the  owner  of  Papyrus  Ebers,  except  in  the  accounts  given  by  Professor  Ebers, 
who,  as  we  have  already  seen,  had  very  personal  reasons  for  his  conclusions.  Under 
these  circumstances  we  can  quite  understand  how  Ebers  might  easily  fall  into  the 
error  which  led  him  to  the  unwarrantable  reflections  on  Mr.  Edwin  Smith.  Mr.  Smith, 
however,  did  own  a  large  and  important  medical  papyrus,  next  to  the  Papyrus  Ebers 
then  and  now  the  largest  ancient  Egyptian  medical  document  in  existence.  The 
casual  use  of  the  words  “  von  ihm  erworbene  Papyrusrollen  ”  by  Eisenlohr  are  very 
easily  understood  by  any  one  who  has  purchased  antiquities  on  the  Nile  and  who  may 
have  obvious  reasons  for  desiring  that  the  native  owners  of  a  valuable  monument  should 
not  become  too  well  known  to  Europeans  who  might  become  competitive  bidders.1 

It  would  be  quite  comprehensible  if  Mr.  Smith  had  made  no  reference  whatever 
to  the  ownership  of  the  Papyrus  Ebers,  but  the  mere  fact  of  its  being  in  his  physical 
possession  at  the  time  might  easily  create  the  impression  that  he  owned  it,  and  as  he 
did  own  the  smaller  of  the  two  papyri  which  he  showed  Eisenlohr  it  was  always  true 
after  January  1862  that  he  owned  a  large  and  important  medical  papyruB.  Any 
statements  anywhere  in  the  literature  that  he  was  the  owner  of  a  medical  papyrus  may, 
therefore,  be  quite  true  and  need  not  be  interpreted  as  false  statements  referring  to 
the  Papyrus  Ebers.2 

1  It  is  possible  that  the  earliest  reference  to  Papyrus  Ebers  in  print  was  in  a  sales  catalogue  of 
antiquities  which  I  have  never  seen,  but  which  is  reported  to  have  appeared  in  1869  :  “  In  1869  there 
appeared  in  a  catalogue  of  antiquities  an  advertisement  of  a  large  medical  papyrus  in  the  possession 
of  Edwin  Smith,  an  American  farmer  of  Luxor  near  Thebes.  This  papyrus  was  said  to  be  in  excellent 
preservation  and  dated  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  before  Christ.  The  advertisement 
contained  a  reproduction  of  the  calendar  which  was  on  the  back  of  the  papyrus.  This  calendar 
aroused  an  unusual  interest  among  Egyptologists.  The  first  mention  of  this  papyrus  in  the  Egyptian 
literature  was  by  Birch  of  London.  He  was  making  some  notes  on  the  appearance  of  the  name 
Cheops  in  the  London  Papyrus,  and  incidentally  mentioned  the  existence  of  the  medical  papyri  of 
Berlin  and  Turin  and  the  advertised  papyrus  of  Edwin  Smith.”  (Bayard  Holmes  and  P.  Gad  Kitter- 
man.  Medicine  in  Ancient  Egypt,  Cincinnati,  The  Lancet-Clinic  Press,  1914,  p.  14.)  The  authors  just 
quoted  seem  to  bo  under  a  misapprehension  as  to  the  reference  by  Birch  to  an  “  advertised  papyrus 
of  Edwin  Smith.”  Birch’s  article  appeared  in  the  Zeitsckrift,  May-June,  1871,  and  he  does  indeed 
refer  there  to  a  medical  papyrus  “  in  possession  of  Mr.  Edwin  Smith  of  Thebes  ”  but  he  makes  no 
reference  to  an  “advertised  papyrus.”  Nor  is  this  reference  of  Birch  the  first  mention  of  this  papyrus 
in  Egyptian  literature.  The  calendar  had  been  published  by  Brugsch  a  year  earlier,  as  we  have  seen. 
The  curious  reference  to  the  learned  Edwin  Smith  as  “  an  American  farmer  ”  is,  as  we  have  seen, 
decidedly  misleading  and  is  so  recognized  in  a  letter,  included  by  the  authors  (ibid.,  p.  17),  from  an 
American  tourist  who  learned  nothing  regarding  Mr.  Smith  except  some  vague  reminiscences  by  a 
person  whom  he  calls  the  “  German  Consul  at  Luxor  ...  a  Copt,”  who  was,  of  course,  Moharb 
Todrous. 

1  I  have  not  overlooked  Professor  Ebere’  very  specific  statement  as  to  his  “  Vermuthung :  ” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  25 

The  fact  that  the  Papyrus  Ebers  was  so  early  connected  with  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus  might  be  of  some  value  in  discussing  the  problem  of  the  source  and  date  of 
the  latter  document.  There  is,  unfortunately,  nothing  in  Mr.  Edwin  Smith’s  papers 
regarding  the  reports  of  the  natives  from  whom  he  purchased  his  papyrus,  nor  any 
conclusions  of  his  own  as  to  its  origin.  Ebers  says  that  the  native  from  whom  he 
secured  the  Papyrus  Ebers  affirmed  that  it  had  been  found  in  a  tomb  in  the  Assassif, 
between  the  legs  of  a  mummy.  The  discoverer,  however,  was  at  the  time  of  Eber’s 
purchase  already  dead  and  it  was  not  possible  to  identify  the  tomb.  Ebers  likewise 
refers  to  the  possibility  that  his  papyrus  belonged  to  the  considerable  group  purchased 
by  the  British  Consul  Harris  in  1857,  a  group  reported  to  have  been  found  in  a  “  grotte,” 
a  rough  shaft  in  the  rocks  some  twenty  feet  deep  by  Deir  el-Medineh.  As  to  the  date 
when  the  Papyrus  Ebers  was  discovered,  Ebers  says  it  was  found  “  vor  nunmehr 
vierzehn  Jahren.”  He  does  not  date  the  introduction  containing  this  remark,  however, 
and  therefore  he  does  not  indicate  clearly  the  terminus  ad  quern  from  which  we  should 
reckon  backward  his  fourteen  years.  If  he  means  fourteen  years  before  the  date  of 
the  publication  of  his  papyrus  (1875),  the  discovery  would  have  been  made  in  1861. 
This  would  bring  the  date  fairly  close  to  January  1862,  when  Edwin  Smith  purchased 
the  papyrus  now  bearing  his  name.  This  fact  does  not  make  it  certain,  however,  that 
the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  was  found  together  with  the  Papyrus  Ebers.  In  view  of 
the  fact  that  the  ancient  houses  and  other  buildings  of  Thebes  have  thus  far  yielded 
so  few  papyri,  there  nevertheless  is  every  probability  that  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus 
was  found  in  a  tomb,  and  in  my  preliminary  account  of  the  document  in  the  Bulletin 
of  the  New  York  Historical  Society  I  have  suggested  this  origin  of  the  document.  If 
it  was  indeed  found  together  with  the  Papyrus  Ebers,  the  native  story  communicated 
to  Ebers  might  be  regarded  as  external  evidence,  however  unsatisfactory,  that  the 
Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  originally  came  out  of  a  tomb. 

2.  Physical  Condition,  Writing  and  Date  of  the  Manuscript 

As  at  present  unrolled  and  mounted  between  glass  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  has 
a  length  of  about  4-68  meters  (about  15  ft.  8£  in.).  At  least  a  column  of  writing  has 
been  lost  at  the  beginning,  so  that  it  originally  had  a  minimum  length  of  five  meters 
(about  16  ft.  4  in.).  The  roll  has  a  height  of  82£  to  83  centimeters  (about  18  in.), 
corresponding  to  the  usual  full-height  roll  of  the  period  from  the  Middle  Kingdom 
through  the  Hyksos  Age  to  the  early  Empire.  It  is  put  together  out  of  twelve  sheets 
of  the  usual  size,  about  40  cm.  (about  15|  in.)  wide,  the  first  now  surviving  being 

“  Ich  darf  diese  Vennuthung  kiihnlich  aussprechen,  da  Mr.  Smith  meinem  verehrten  Collegen  und 
Freund  Prof.  Eisenlohr  und  mir  selbst  erzahlte,  neben  dem  grossen  einen  kleinen  medicinischen  Papyrus 
zu  besitzen.”  (Zeilschrift.,  May-June,  1873,  p.  42,  foot-note.)  Ebers,  of  course,  translates  “  besitzen” 
from  some  English  word  used  by  Smith,  which  may  have  been  nothing  more  than  the  innocent  word 
“  have,”  while  the  word  “  own,”  if  used  by  Smith,  may  have  applied  exclusively  to  the  smaller  papyrus. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

COMPARATIVE  TABLE  OF  PALAEOGRAPHIC  FORMS 
First  column  hieroglyphic  forms;  second  column  hieratic  forms  from  other  papyri  for  comparison;  third 
column  hieratic  forms  from  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

COMPARATIVE  TABLE  OF  PALAEOGRAPHIC  FORMS 

First  column  hieroglyphic  forms ;  second  column  hieratic  forms  from  other  papyri  for  comparison ;  third 
column  hieratic  forms  from  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

28  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

unfortunately  fragmentary.  The  eleven  joints  are  admirably  done,  and  in  its  crafts¬ 
manship  the  roll  is  an  excellent  piece  of  work.  It  now  bears  seventeen  columns  of 
writing  on  the  recto  and  five  on  the  verso,  all  in  horizontal  lines.  The  columns  are 
about  28  to  29  cm.  (about  11  in.  to  11|  in.)  in  height  and  they  vary  in  width  from 
18  to  27  cm.  (about  7  in.  to  10J  in.).  The  number  of  hues  in  a  column  varies  also,  from 
18  to  26  (in  the  fragmentary  first  column).  The  recto  contains  377  lines,  and  the  verso 
92.  The  entire  front,  17  columns,  and  the  first  3|  columns  of  the  verso  (XVIII — XXI 
1-8)  are  the  work  of  one  hand.1  The  concluding  section  (column  XXI  9-21  and  all  of 
XXII 1-14 :  making  27  lines)  is  by  a  totally  different  and  possibly  somewhat  later  hand. 

The  first  question  which  confronts  us  is  the  date  of  the  document,  and  in  taking 
up  first  the  palaeographic  data  I  shall  draw  examples  only  from  columns  I — XXI 1-8 
(omitting  the  concluding  section,  XXI  9-21  and  XXII).  The  general  resemblance 
of  our  scribe’s  hand  to  that  of  Papyri  Ebers  and  Westcar  is  noticeable  at  the  first 
glance.  This  superficially  probable,  general  date  is  confirmed  at  once  by  observing 
that  cj  is  written  both  *_a  and  —a,  a  confusion  characteristic  of  Middle  Kingdom 
and  Hyksos  documents,  which,  however,  disappears  after  Amenhotep  IV.2  Similarly 
the  ear  (j)  is  used  in  our  document  with  one  stroke  at  the  base  both  as  a  determinative 
and  for  yin,  whereas  in  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty  the  form  for  yin  has  two  strokes  and 
the  form  for  the  determinative  has  but  one.3  An  examination  of  the  accompanying 
comparative  tables  4  suggests  that  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  is  not  far  removed  in 
date  from  Papyrus  Ebers.  Nevertheless  our  document  uses  a  group  of  forms  distinctly 
older  than  those  of  Ebers.  Thus  Nos.  26  and  82  carry  us  back  to  the  Middle  Kingdom 
before  we  find  complete  parallels.  No.  79  occurs  very  frequently  in  our  document, 
and  the  usual  form  (given  second  in  the  table)  is  that  of  the  Hyksos  Age  (Mathematical 
Papyrus).  The  same  is  true  of  two  forms  of  No.  166,  and  a  third  form  of  the  same 
sign  is  that  of  the  Thirteenth  Dynasty.  No.  279,  without  the  oblique  cross  stroke 
below,  is  a  Middle  Kingdom  form.  The  same  is  true,  though  less  decisively,  of  No.  874. 
For  a  parallel  to  LI  we  must  go  back  to  the  Thirteenth  Dynasty,  and  LXIII  likewise 
is  a  Middle  Kingdom  form,  while  LXXIV  is  of  Hyksos  age.6 

1  In  the  Bulletin  article  (pp.  11-12)  above  referred  to  I  have  attributed  the  three  and  a  half  columns 
of  the  verso  (XVIII — XXI  1-8)  to  a  different  hand  from  that  of  the  recto.  Further  examination 
indicates  that  Recto  I — XVII  and  Verso  XVTII-XXI  1-8  are  by  the  same  hand. 

*  See  Moeller,  Zeitschrift,  Vol.  56,  p.  40.  3  Ibid. 

*  The  first  and  second  columns  are  drawn  from  Moeller’s  invaluable  tables  ( Palaeographic  I).  I  have 
also  retained  his  numbers  for  convenience  of  reference ;  but  note  correction  of  49  B.  The  examples  in 
column  3  are  traced  from  photographs  not  always  on  the  same  scale  and  here  reduced  in  size  (pp.  26-27). 

5  It  should  be  mentioned  in  this  connection  that  among  the  papyrus  fragments  in  the  Edwin 
Smith  collection  as  handed  to  the  New  York  Historical  Society  by  Miss  Leonora  Smith,  there  was  a  small 
fragment  bearing  but  a  word  or  two  from  each  of  six  lines.  Among  these  the  fifth  line  contains  the  name 
of  Thutmose  I.  Unfortunately  this  fragment  cannot  be  joined  up  with  our  document  and  is  clearly  in 
a  different  hand.  It  may  serve,  however,  further  to  confirm  the  period  of  the  early  Empire  as  the  one  to 
which  the  papyri  of  this  collection  are  to  be  closely  related. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  29 

These  Hyksos  and  Middle  Kingdom  forms  might  at  first  lead  one  to  consider  a  late 
Middle  Kingdom  or  early  Hyksos  date  for  the  document ;  but  the  large  number  of 
signs  identical  with  those  of  Ebers  and  Westcar  are  not  in  favor  of  such  a  date.  It 
cannot  be  doubted  that  our  manuscript  was  written  between  the  close  of  the  Twelfth 
Dynasty  and  the  age  of  Papyrus  Ebers.  It  shows  some  close  resemblances  to  the 
Mathematical  Papyrus  but  I  would  be  reluctant  to  decide  whether  it  belongs  before 
or  after  the  Mathematical  Papyrus.  It  seems  certainly  to  belong  in  the  Hyksos  Age. 
How  much  weight  in  terms  of  time  wTe  should  give  to  the  early  forms  might  possibly 
be  decided  by  a  more  adequate  comparison  with  all  the  closely  related  manuscripts. 
It  would  seem  that  the  early  forms,  not  found  in  Westcar  or  Ebers,  could  hardly  have 
been  lost  in  less  than  a  generation.  We  may  conclude  therefore  that  the  Edwin 
Smith  Papyrus  is  not  less  than  a  generation  older  than  the  Papyrus  Ebers,  with  the 
possibility  of  a  still  earlier  date  by  no  means  excluded.  Whether  we  must  push  it 
back  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Seventeenth  Century  b.  c.  is  a  question  then  for  further 
study.  It  is  quite  evident  that  in  content  the  document  is  older,  as  we  shall  see. 

Our  scribe,  as  already  stated  above,  was  master  of  a  beautiful  book  hand  (not 
excluding  some  cursive  forms),  but  shows  evidence  of  the  fact  that  he  was  not  himself 
a  medical  man.  Schaefer  1  has  called  attention  to  corrected  errors  of  omission  in 
Papyrus  Ebers.  The  scribe  of  the  Smith  Papyrus  has  likewise  made  and  sometimes, 
but  not  always,  corrected  similar  errors  of  omission.  He  was  guilty  of  a  surprisingly  large 
number  of  omissions,  which  he  failed  to  notice.  More  often  his  mistakes  require  cancella¬ 
tion  or  change.  In  almost  all  cases  he  has  detected  these  errors  and  has  made  his  correc¬ 
tions  in  red  ink  over  black,  and  in  black  ink  over  red.  See  Case  85  below.  Similar 
corrections,  though  not  so  frequently,  are  found  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (e.g.  60, 10  and  70, 8). 

The  scribe  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  employs  very  plentiful  rubrics,  so  plentiful 
indeed  that  his  discussion  of  a  case  may  conclude  with  a  remark  in  red,  obliging  the 
scribe  to  begin  the  next  case  in  black  in  order  to  secure  his  desired  contrast. 

In  taking  up  the  translation  and  detailed  discussion  the  reader  should  note  that 
the  materials  fall  into  the  following  parts  : 

PART  I 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  (THE  RECTO) : 

1.  Special  Introduction. 

2.  Translation  and  Commentary. 

PART  II 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES  (THE  VERSO) : 

1.  Special  Introduction. 

2.  Translation  and  Commentary. 

1  Zeitsehrift,  Vol.  31,  61-62  and  117. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PART  I 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

(THE  RECTO) 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 
SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION 

I.  Content  and  Character  of  the  Treatise 

The  seventeen  columns  (877  lines),  all  that  is  preserved  of  this  ancient  treatise, 
occupying  the  front  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  contain  forty-eight  cases,  all 
injuries,  or  induced  by  injuries  (with  two  possible  exceptions).  The  discussion  begins 
with  the  head  and  skull,  proceeding  thence  downward  by  way  of  the  nose,  face  and 
ears,  to  the  neck,  clavicle,  humerus,  thorax,  shoulders  and  spinal  column,  w'here  the 
text  is  discontinued,  leaving  the  document  incomplete.  Without  any  external  indica¬ 
tion  of  the  arrangement  of  the  text,  the  content  of  the  treatise  is  nevertheless  carefully 
disposed  in  groups  of  cases,  each  group  being  concerned  with  a  certain  region. 

These  groups  are  as  follows : 

A.  Head  (27  cases,  the  first  incomplete)  : 

Skull,  overlying  soft  tissue  and  brain,  Cases  1-10. 

Nose,  Cases  11-14. 

Maxillary  region,  Cases  15-17. 

Temporal  region,  Cases  18-22. 

Ears,  mandible,  lips  and  chin,  Cases  28-27. 

B.  Throat  and  Neck  (Cervical  Vertebrae),  Cases  28-88. 

C.  Clavicle,  Cases  84-85. 

D.  Humerus,  Cases  86-88. 

E.  Sternum,  Overlying  Soft  Tissue,  and  True  Ribs,  Cases  89-46. 

F.  Shoulders,  Case  47. 

G.  Spinal  Column,  Case  48  (incomplete). 

There  is  every  probability  that  the  complete  treatise  continued  the  discussion  to 
the  lower  parts  of  the  body  and  concluded  with  the  feet. 

The  complete  list  of  cases  by  groups  is  as  follows  : 

A.  Head 

Case  1.  A  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  (incomplete). 

„  2.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone. 

„  3.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and  Perforating 
the  Skull. 

„  4.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and  Splitting  the 
Skull. 

„  5.  A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  with  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of 
the  Skull. 

D 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  6. 

„  7. 

„  B. 

„  9. 

„  10. 
„  11. 
„  12. 
„  13. 
„  14. 
„  15. 
„  16. 
„  17. 

„  18. 
„  19. 
„  20. 
„  21. 
„  22. 
„  23. 
„  24. 
„  25. 
„  26. 
„  27. 

Case  28. 
„  29. 
„  80. 
„  31. 
„  82. 
„  33. 

Case  84. 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head  with  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of 
the  Skull  and  Rupture  of  the  Meningeal  Membranes. 

A  Gaping  Wound  in  the  Head,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone  and  Perforating 
the  Sutures. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Skull  Displaying  no  Visible 
External  Injury. 

Wound  in  the  Forehead  Producing  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of 
the  Skull. 

Gaping  Wound  at  the  Top  of  the  Eyebrow,  Penetrating  to  the  Bone. 

A  Broken  Nose. 

A  Break  in  the  Nasal  Bone. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  in  the  Side  of  the  Nose. 

Flesh  Wound  in  One  Side  of  the  Nose  Penetrating  to  the  Nostril. 
Perforation  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla  and  Zygoma. 

Split  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla  and  Zygoma. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla 
and  Zygoma. 

Wound  in  the  Soft  Tissue  of  the  Temple,  the  Bone  Being  Uninjured. 
Perforation  in  the  Temple. 

Wound  in  the  Temple  Perforating  the  Bone. 

A  Split  in  the  Temporal  Bone. 

Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Temporal  Bone. 

Slit  in  the  Outer  Ear. 

Fracture  of  the  Mandible. 

Dislocation  of  the  Mandible. 

Wound  in  the  Upper  Lip. 

Gaping  Wound  in  the  Chin. 

B.  Throat  and  Neck 

Gaping  Wound  in  the  Throat  Penetrating  to  the  Gullet. 

Gaping  Wound  in  a  Cervical  Vertebra. 

Sprain  in  Cervical  Vertebrae. 

Dislocation  of  a  Cervical  Vertebra. 

Displacement  of  a  Cervical  Vertebra. 

Crushed  Cervical  Vertebra. 

C.  Clavicle 

Dislocation  of  the  Two  Clavicles. 

Fracture  of  the  two  Clavicles. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION 

35 

Case 

36. 

JJ 

37. 

>> 

88. 

Case 

39. 

40. 

>> 

41. 

jj 

42. 

n 

43. 

a 

44. 

>> 

45. 

>> 

46. 

Case 

47. 

Case 

48. 

D.  Humerus 
Fracture  of  the  Humerus. 

Fracture  of  the  Humerus  with  Rupture  of  Overlying  Soft  Tissue. 
Split  in  the  Humerus. 

E.  Sternum,  Overlying  Soft  Tissue,  and  True  Ribs 
Tumors  or  Ulcers  in  the  Breast  Perhaps  Resulting  from  Injury. 
Wound  in  the  Breast. 

Infected  or  Possibly  Necrotic  Wound  in  the  Breast. 

Sprain  of  the  Sterno-Costal  Articulations. 

Dislocation  of  the  Sterno-Costal  Articulations. 

Fractured  Ribs. 

Bulging  Tumors  on  the  Breast. 

Abscess  with  Prominent  Head  on  the  Breast. 

F.  Shoulders 

Gaping  Wound  in  the  Shoulder. 

G.  Spinal  Column 
Sprain  in  a  Spinal  Vertebra  (incomplete). 

As  stated  above,  the  arrangement  of  these  groups  with  reference  to  each  other 
clearly  discloses  the  ancient  surgeon’s  organization  of  his  discussion,  beginning  with 
the  head  and  proceeding  downward  presumably  to  the  lower  limbs  and  feet.  References 
to  such  an  order  of  treatment  are  discernible  in  Papyrus  Ebers,  where  we  find  on  the 
first  page  (1 4-5)  that  the  ailments  to  be  treated  are  “  in  this  my  head,  in  this  my  neck, 
in  these  my  shoulders,  in  this  my  flesh,  in  these  my  members.”  This  list  is  referred 
to  again  in  the  Bame  page  (I  7),  but  it  has  here  fallen  into  confusion.  In  the  actual 
arrangement  of  his  materials  the  compiler  of  the  Papyrus  Ebers  followed  no  plan  or 
order  of  treatment,  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  worse  confusion  than  we  find  in  the 
magical  hodge-podge  of  recipes  (not  cases)  making  up  the  Papyrus  Ebers.  The  other 
medical  papyri  display  the  same  lack  of  any  principle  of  arrangement.  They  are 
simply  miscellaneous  lists  of  recipes.  In  the  organization  of  its  materials,  therefore, 
Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  is  unique.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  this  arrangement 
and  order  of  discussion  from  the  head  downward  has  survived  into  modern  times. 
Many  modem  surveys  of  human  anatomy  still  follow  this  order  of  treatment,  e.  g., 
W.  Spalteholz,  Handatlas  der  Anatomie  des  Menschen  (Leipzig,  1918). 

It  is  observable  also,  that  within  each  of  the  above  groups  there  is  likewise  a  definite 
principle  of  arrangement.  In  general  the  surgeon  obviously  intends  to  arrange  his 
materials  so  as  to  pass  from  trifling  to  more  serious  or  fatal  cases.  We  see  that  be 

oi.uchicago.edu 

36  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

begins,  in  his  treatment  of  each  region,  with  slight  superficial  injuries  involving  only 
the  overlying  soft  tissues,  and  then  proceeds  gradually  to  more  serious  injuries  affect¬ 
ing  the  underlying  bone.  Thus  in  the  first  section  in  the  treatise,  the  section  dealing 
with  the  head  (A),  the  first  case  in  the  ancient  book  is  a  superficial  scalp  wound, 
followed  by  a  more  gaping  cut  (Case  2).  Both  these  wounds,  while  penetrating  to 
the  bone,  leave  it  uninjured.  The  next  case,  however  (Case  3),  begins  a  series  of  deeper 
wounds  affecting  the  skull,  which  suffers  a  “  perforation  ”  (Case  3),  a  “  split  ”  (Case  4), 
a  compound  comminuted  fracture  (Case  5),  the  same  with  rupture  of  the  meningeal 
membranes  (Case  6),  and  these  are  followed  by  similar,  usually  fatal,  injuries  of  the 
skull  (Cases  7-9).  As  the  discussion  passes  by  way  of  the  frontal  bone  and  the  nose, 
to  the  maxillary  and  zygomatic  regions,  we  again  find  first  a  flesh  wound  in  the  side 
of  the  nose  (Case  14),  then  injuries  of  the  bone,  passing  from  “  perforation  ”  (Case  15) 
to  a  “  split  ”  (Case  16),  and  concluding  with  a  compound  comminuted  fracture 
(Case  17).  Then  five  cases  concerning  the  temple  (Cases  18-22)  proceed  from  an  injury 
of  the  soft  tissue  (Cases  18-19)  through  progressively  more  serious  injuries  of  the 
temporal  bone  (Cases  20-22).  This  arrangement  is  especially  apparent  in  the  group 
of  cases  concerning  the  throat  and  neck  (B),  in  which  the  surgeon  again  passes  from 
injuries  of  the  soft  tissue  to  a  “  sprain  ”  in  the  cervical  vertebrae  (Case  30),  a  “  dis¬ 
location  ”  (Case  31),  a  “  displacement  ”  (Case  32),  and  concludes  with  an  obviously 
fatal  case  of  a  crushed  cervical  vertebra  (Case  88).  The  large  group  (E)  of  eight  cases 
in  the  region  of  the  breast  (Cases  89-46)  quite  clearly  displays  a  similar  arrangement ; 
but  it  has  appended  two  cases  on  tumors  and  abscesses  on  the  breast  (Cases  45-46), 
perhaps  having  no  connection  with  injuries  and  presumably  for  this  reason  thrown 
to  the  end  of  the  section. 

The  discussion  of  each  case  mthin  itself  likewise  discloses  a  systematic  order  of 
materials  and  topics— an  arrangement  which,  with  the  exception  of  some  elaboration 
in  six  cases,  is  always  strictly  followed.  It  is  aB  follows  : 

1.  Title. 

2.  Examination. 

8.  Diagnosis. 

4.  Treatment  (unless  a  fatal  case,  considered  unbeatable). 

5.  Glosses  (a  little  dictionary  of  obscure  terms,  if  any,  employed  in  the  discussion 

of  the  case). 

The  elaboration  of  the  above  scheme,  found  in  six  cases  (7,  8,  28,  84,  87,  and  47), 
is  due  to  the  interesting  fact  that  the  surgeon’s  records  disclosed  an  alternative  group, 
or  even  more  than  one  alternative  group  of  symptoms,  requiring  in  each  case  a  different 
treatment,  or  demonstrating. the  certainty  of  a  fatal  outcome  and  hence  followed  by 
no  suggestions  for  treatment.  Thus  in  Case  8,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  37 

the  skull,  although  there  is  little  or  no  prospect  of  recovery,  we  first  find  all  the  above 
subdivisions  of  the  discussion,  including  treatment,  followed  by  a  description  of  a 
second  or  alternative  group  of  symptoms,  which  are  regarded  by  the  surgeon  as  cer¬ 
tainly  indicating  a  fatal  issue  of  the  case,  and  therefore  not  to  be  treated.  (See  same 
arrangement  in  Cases  84  and  87).  More  elaborate  is  Case  7,  the  longest  case  in  our 
treatise,  a  gaping  wound  in  the  skull  with  perforation  of  the  sutures.  This  case  is 
first  discussed  in  accordance  with  the  above  scheme.  An  alternative  group  of  unfavor¬ 
able  symptoms  is  then  enumerated,  with  indication  that  the  patient  cannot  recover 
and  hence  suggesting  no  treatment.  A  second  alternative  set  of  symptoms  (the  third 
set  in  the  discussion  of  the  case)  is  then  recounted  by  the  surgeon,  who  seems  to  imply 
the  possibility  of  recovery  and  therefore  suggests  a  treatment.  More  elaborate,  though 
not  so  long,  is  Case  47,  in  which  the  surgeon’s  record  of  experience  shows  him  that  he 
may  normally  expect  a  favorable  development  in  two  stages,  each  requiring  its  own 
special  treatment.  An  alternative  second  stage,  however,  may  be  unfavorable  and 
require  a  modification  in  treatment  (the  third  in  the  discussion),  followed  by  a  favor¬ 
able  final  (third)  stage,  with  simple  treatment  (the  fourth  in  the  discussion). 

The  modern  term  available  does  not  in  every  case  correspond  completely  or 
perfectly  with  the  ancient  Egyptian  idea,  and  the  designations  of  the  above  subdivi¬ 
sions  involve  some  accommodation — in  one  case,  as  we  shall  see,  more  than  we  should 
wish.  It  will  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  discuss  these  subdivisions  before  the  reader 
can  understand  their  application  in  the  present  work. 

1.  The  Title 

The  title  consists  of  the  word  Instructions,”  followed  by  the  identify¬ 

ing  designation  of  the  injury,  together  with  indication  of  the  region  or  organ  affected, 
and  sometimes  with  additional  details.  Thus  the  title  of  Case  4  reads  : 

“  Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
(and)  splitting  his  skull.” 

In  Case  6  the  title  is  even  fuller  : 

“  Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull.” 

These  titles  often  lack  specific  indications  of  the  exact  region  which  would  be  found 
in  a  modem  designation  of  such  an  injury.  More  specific  in  this  particular  is  the  title 
of  Case  9 : 

“  Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  forehead,  smashing  the  shell  of  his  skull.” 

Or  Case  10  : 

“  Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  the  top  of  his  eyebrow.” 

In  general  it  may  be  said  that  these  titles  are  more  accurate  and  specific  in  defining 

oi.uchicago.edu 

38  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

the  nature  of  the  injury  than  in  indicating  its  exact  position,  although  the  latter 
indications  are  sometimes  very  precise  and  specific.  Usually  the  title  indicates  roughly 
the  position  of  the  injury,  leaving  more  accurate  specification  to  the  discussion ; 
e.  g.  Case  31,  a  dislocation  of  a  cervical  vertebra  does  not  indicate  in  the  title  which 
one  is  meant,  but  later  discusses  certain  symptoms  accompanying  the  dislocation  of 
the  middle  one. 

2.  The  Examination 

The  examination  is  conceived  as  spoken  by  some  one  addressing  a  second  person, 
who  is  regularly  designated  by  a  pronoun  in  the  second  person  singular.  The  form  of 
the  examination  therefore  is  that  of  a  teacher  instructing  a  pupil  that  he  shall  do  so 
and  so.  This  fact  raises  the  question  whether  this  medical  roll  is  not  simply  an  in¬ 
struction  book.  The  indications  are  that  the  treatise  has  grown  up  as  the  product  of 
an  effort  to  record  the  instructions  of  a  master  in  the  very  words  which  he  used  in  the 
process  of  instruction,  even  including  the  person  and  number  of  the  verbs  addressed 
to  the  pupil.  The  same  question  applies  to  the  relatively  brief  portions  of  the  other 
ancient  Egyptian  medical  rolls,  which  disclose  the  same  form. 

Logically  the  examination  is  a  long  protasis,  of  which  the  diagnosis  forms  the 
apodosis ;  in  other  words,  the  examination  is  the  first  part  of  a  long  conditional 
sentence  comprising  a  recital  of  the  symptoms  which  it  is  assumed  the  surgeon  has 
observed  that  the  patient  displays,  and  which  form  the  basis  of  the  resulting  conclusions 
expressed  in  the  diagnosis.  The  examination  therefore  regularly  begins  thus : 

—  "  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  ...”  (see  commentary  in  Case  1, 1 8). 
This  formula  is  always  followed  by  the  name  of  the  injury  or  ailment  already  placed 
at  the  head  of  the  discussion  in  the  title  of  the  case.  It  is  probable  that  these  words 
designating  the  injury  or  ailment  and  following  the  introductory  formula  of  the  exami¬ 
nation  were  drawn  from  the  examination  for  the  purpose  of  serving  as  a  title  at  the 
head  of  the  discussion.  The  source  of  the  title  was,  therefore,  probably  the  examination. 

The  usual  form  and  characteristics  of  the  examination  are  most  clearly  observable 
in  the  following  frequently  recurring  clauses  : 

“  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having,  etc.  .  . ., 
thou  shouldst  place  thy  hand  upon  him,” 
or 

“  thou  shouldst  probe  his  wound,” 
or 

“  thou  shouldst  inspect  his  wound,” 
or 

“  thou  shouldst  examine  his  wound.” 

“  Shouldst  thou  find  ...” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  39 

These  assumed  conditions  then  are  followed  by  the  conclusions  of  the  diagnosis, 
introduced  by  the  words,  “  Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  ‘ . . .  ’  ”  (see  discussion 
of  diagnosis  below,  pp.  45  ff.). 

In  six  different  cases  (7, 8, 28, 84, 87  and  47)  the  surgeon’s  information  or  experience 
in  each  case  have  acquainted  him  with  one  or  more  alternative  groups  of  symptoms. 
These  maybe  drawn  from  (a)  two  cases  of  the  same  injury,  which  nevertheless  exhibited 
different  symptoms  ;  or  ( b )  they  may  refer  to  two  or  more  successive  stages  of  the 
same  case.  Thus  in  Case  84,  illustrating  (a),  the  dislocation  of  the  two  clavicles  is 
examined  and  described,  and  the  surgeon  is  instructed  to  reduce  the  dislocated  bones 
to  their  places.  The  treatise  then  adds  : 

<XI  «>• 

“  If,  however,  thou  shouldst  find  his  two  collar-bones  having  a  rupture  (of  the 
tissue)  over  it,  etc.”  This  second  examination  is  then  followed  by  a  second  diagnosis, 
originally  indicating  that  a  fatal  outcome  is  to  be  expected,1  and  hence  no  treatment 
is  prescribed.  In  the  parallel  case  (87)  the  surgeon  introduces  the  second  examination 
with  the  same  words  (XII  19).  That  a  second  examination  introduced  in  this  way 
really  discusses  a  second  case  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  the  two  cases  of  a 
fractured  humerus  (Case  86  and  87)  correspond  exactly  to  two  cases  of  a  dislocated 
clavicle  discussed  as  a  first  and  second  examination  in  Case  84. 

In  Case  8  illustrating  ( b )  the  second  examination  probably  discloses  merely  a  further 
orsecond  stage  of  the  same  case.  It  is  introduced  by  the  words,  w 

meaning,  “  Now  as  soon  as  thou  findest  that  smash  ”  (compound  comminuted  fracture, 
IV  10),  in  which  we  miss  the  adversative  particle  &wt,  “however,”  often  indicat¬ 
ing  an  alternative  development  of  the  case,  e.  g.,  the  second  examination  in  Case 
28  (X  2). 

In  one  case  (7)  we  find  after  the  first  examination,  a  second  and  a  third  disclosing 
two  alternative  groups  of  symptoms.  Both  are  introduced  by 

meaning  :  “  If  on  the  one  hand  thou  findest  that  man  . . .  ;  if  on  the  other  hand  thou 
findest  that  man  ...”  See  the  discussion  in  the  introduction  to  Case  7.  The 
second  examination  (III  8  ff.)  is  followed  by  a  diagnosis  with  the  unfavorable  verdict 
3,  after  which,  as  usual,  no  treatment  is  suggested ;  the  third  (III  18)  leads  to  no 
diagnosis,  but  is  followed  at  once  by  a  treatment,  suggesting  possible  recovery. 

In  Case  47  the  first  examination  is  even  followed  by  four  more,  a  second,  third, 
fourth,  and  fifth.  The  second  examination  simply  records  the  progress  of  the  case 
toward  recovery.  Hence  it  begins  (XVII  8),  “If  thou  findest 

that  wound,”  that  is  without  any  adversative  particle,  “  however.”  On  the  other 

1  Verdict  1,  actually  in  the  text,  is  an  evident  error  of  the  ancient  scribe  for  verdict  3.  See  Case  34, 
commentary  on  XI  22. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

40  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

hand  the  third  examination  begins  with  the  same  words,  but  including  the  adversative 
particle,  “  however  ”  (XVII  6),  and  proceeds  with  unfavorable  symptoms  indicating 
an  alternative  second  stage,  feverish  and  critical  and  hence  followed  by  a  diagnosis 
concluding  with  the  uncertain  verdict  2,  “  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 
The  surgeon’s  experience  has  taught  him  to  expect  either  of  two  different  developments 
following  the  stage  just  mentioned,  and  he  therefore  records  a  fourth  and  fifth  examina¬ 
tion.  The  first  of  these  two  final  alternatives  (the  fourth  examination)  begins  : 

“  If  on  the  one  hand  thou  shouldst  find  that  man  continuing  to  have  fever  ”  (XVII 12). 
The  treatment  which  follows  puts  the  man  on  normal  diet  without  any  medicine. 
The  second  of  the  two  final  alternatives,  that  is  the  fifth  examination,  begins  : 

“  If  on  the  other  hand  his  fever  abates  ”  (XVII 13-14).  It  is  followed  by  no  diagnosis 
but  merges  into  suggestions  for  very  simple  treatment  until  the  patient  recovers. 

Very  often  the  text  of  the  examination  does  not  disclose  the  method  by  which  the 
surgeon  makes  a  given  observation,  that  is,  the  method  is  frequently  taken  for  granted. 
The  following  methods  of  observation,  however,  are  either  expressly  stipulated  in  the 
text,  or  are  clearly  implied. 

(a)  Answers  elicited  from  the  patient  by  questions  which  the  surgeon  addresses 
to  him.  Regarding  a  man  with  a  wound  in  the  temple  the  surgeon  says,  “  If  thou 
ask  of  him  concerning  his  malady  ”  (Case  20).  Again  of  another  man  with  a  wound  in 
the  same  region  it  is  stated,  “  It  is  painful  when  he  hears  speech  ”  (or  noise,  Case  21), 
an  observation  perhaps  gained  by  questioning  the  sufferer. 

(b)  Ocular  observations.  In  a  case  of  a  perforated  temporal  bone  the  surgeon  is 
charged,  “  Thou  shouldst  inspect  his  wound  ”  (Case  19) ;  the  word  rendered  “  inspect  ” 
is  the  common  verb  “  to  see.”  Compare  with  this  the  injunction,  “  Thou  shouldst 
examine  his  wound  ”  (Case  26),  which  without  doubt  implies  more  than  visual  observa¬ 
tion.  In  a  case  of  serious  injury  to  the  skull  the  Burgeon  observes  facial  distortion  : 
“  both  his  eye-brows  are  drawn,  while  his  face  is  as  if  he  wept  ”  (Case  7,  III  11-12). 
The  color  of  the  patient’s  face,  or  of  a  wound  or  swelling,  is  frequently  mentioned  as 
a  datum  observed,  e.  g.,  ruddiness  of  the  face  (Case  7,  III  10) ;  paleness  of  the  face 
(Case  7,  IV  4).  In  order  to  aid  visual  observation  in  Case  22  we  find  the  following 
directions  regarding  an  ear  affected  by  an  injury  in  the  temple,  “  Cleanse  (the  ear)  for 
him  with  a  swab  of  linen  until  thou  seest  its  fragments  (of  bone).”  In  order  to  aid 
him  in  his  observations  the  surgeon  may  also  watch  the  effect  or  lack  of  effect  when 
he  addresses  a  remark  to  the  patient.  Thus  in  Case  22,  a  compound  comminuted 
fracture  of  the  temporal  bone,  the  surgeon  in  this  way  demonstrates  the  patient’s 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  41 

speechlessness.  In  the  case  of  an  injury  in  the  same  region  the  surgeon  discovers 
that  sound  is  painful  to  the  patient’s  ear  (Case  21),  perhaps  by  watching  some  expres¬ 
sion  of  pain  on  the  patient’s  face,  although  it  is  possible  that  the  patient  actually 
answers  the  surgeon’s  remark  ;  see  p.  40,  (a). 

( c )  Olfactory  observations.  In  a  case  of  perforated  sutures  of  the  skull  we  find 
that  the  surgeon  observes  that  “  the  odor  of  the  chest  (crown)  of  his  head  is  like  the 
urine  of  sheep  ”  (Case  7,  III  11). 

(d)  Tactile  observations.  Besides  directions  to  probe,  the  surgeon  is  very  often 
charged,  “  Thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it  ”  (the  wound,  Case  47).  Again  such  an 
application  of  the  hand  is  often  assumed,  when  a  given  condition  is  recorded  as  observable 
“  when  thy  hand  touches  him  ”  (Case  89) ;  “  when  thou  pressest . . .  with  thy  fingers  ” 
(Case  40) ;  “  if  thou  puttest  thy  hand  upon  his  breast  upon  these  tumors,  (and)  thou 
findest  them  very  cool,  there  being  no  fever  therein  when  thy  hand  touches  him, .  .  . 
and  they  are  bulging  to  thy  hand  ”  (Case  45).  Very  often  conditions  are  recorded  as 
observable  “  under  thy  fingers  ”  (Case  4,  II 4  ;  Case  6,  II 21  ;  Case  8,  IV  11,  etc.,  etc.). 
Among  such  observations  it  is  important  to  notice  that  the  pulsations  of  the  human 
heart  are  observed :  “  if . . .  any  physician  put  his  hands  (or)  his  fingerB  [upon  the  head, 
upon  the  back  of  the]  head,  upon  the  two  hands,  upon  the  pulse,  upon  the  two  feet  ” 
(Case  1,  I  6-7).  It  is  possible  that  this  application  of  the  hand  or  fingers  is  for  the 
purpose  of  enabling  the  surgeon  to  count  the  pulse.  See  commentary  on  Case  I, 
pp.  105-114.  In  the  case  of  a  dislocated  mandible  the  surgeon  is  particularly  in¬ 
structed  just  how  to  place  his  fingers  and  his  thumbs  in  order  to  force  the  bone  back 
into  its  place  (Case  25),  and  we  shall  see  that  he  was  inclined  to  include  this  kind  of 
manipulation  in  the  examination  rather  than  in  the  treatment. 

( e )  Movements  of  parts  of  his  body  by  the  patient  as  directed  by  the  surgeon.  In 
a  serious  injury  of  the  skull  the  surgeon  is  instructed  thus,  “  Thou  shouldst  cause  him 
(the  patient)  to  lift  his  face  ”  (Case  7,  III  8).  In  examining  injuries  to  the  skull  and 
the  cervical  vertebrae,  “  he  (the  surgeon)  says  to  him  (the  patient) :  ‘  Look  at  thy  two 
shoulders  ;  ’  should  his  doing  so  be  painful  (even  though)  his  neck  turns  around  (only) 
a  little,  etc.,  etc.”  (Case  19).  Similarly  in  treating  a  sprain  in  the  cervical  vertebrae 
we  find  the  surgeon  charged  thus,  “  Thou  shouldst  say  to  him  :  ‘  Look  at  thy  two 
shoulders  and  thy  breast ;  ’  when  he  does  so  the  seeing  possible  to  him  is  painful  ” 
(Case  80).  Again  in  a  displacement  of  a  cervical  vertebra  the  same  direction  by  the 
surgeon  to  the  patient  is  followed  by  the  observation,  “  He  is  unable  to  turn  his  face 
that  he  may  look  at  his  breast  and  his  two  shoulders”  (Case  82).  One  of  the  most 
interesting  of  these  tests  by  the  surgeon  is  in  the  last  case  in  the  treatise,  a  sprain  in 
the  spinal  vertebrae.  The  surgeon  is  directed  as  follows,  “  Thou  shouldst  say  to  him  : 

‘  Extend  now  thy  two  legs  (and)  contract  them  both  (again).’  When  he  extends  them 
both,  he  contracts  them  both  immediately  because  of  the  pain,  etc.”  (Case  48). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

42  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

We  find  that  our  ancient  Egyptian  practitioner  was  inclined  to  include  some 
things  in  the  examination  which  the  modem  surgeon  would  obviously  classify  with 
the  treatment.  It  is  quite  natural  that  the  cleansing  of  the  ear  to  secure  unobstructed 
observation  should  be  included  in  the  examination  (Case  22).  On  the  other  hand  we 
do  not  at  first  understand  why  our  surgeon  should  include  in  the  examination  the 
process  of  stitching  a  gaping  flesh  wound  in  six  cases  out  of  the  seven  in  which  this 
mechanical  process  is  prescribed  (Cases  10,  14,  23,  26,  28,  and  47).  Similarly  the 
application  of  adhesive  plaster  to  draw  together  a  wound  is  placed  by  our  treatise 
in  the  examination  (Case  47,  XVII  3—4).  We  have  already  noted  that  the  manipula¬ 
tion  of  a  dislocated  mandible  to  force  it  back  into  its  proper  place  is  included  in  the 
examination  (Case  25).  Over  against  these  examples,  however,  it  should  be  observed 
that  a  replacement  of  dislocated  clavicles  (Case  84),  the  setting  of  a  fractured  clavicle 
(Case  85),  and  the  setting  of  a  dislocated  humerus  (Case  36)  are  all  three  included  in 
the  treatment.  Nevertheless  it  must  be  regarded  as  significant  that  eight  out  of 
eleven  surgical  operations  are  classified  by  our  treatise  with  the  examination  rather 
than  with  the  treatment.  These  facts  suggest  at  least  that  what  our  ancient  practi¬ 
tioner  regarded  as  constituting  a  proper  treatment  must  include  the  use  or  application 
of  medicaments  and  recipes,  the  characteristic  agencies  of  the  physician,  while  the 
operations  of  the  surgeon,  so  often  consisting  exclusively  of  mechanical  processes, 
were  not  real  treatment.  He  therefore  placed  the  operation  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases  in  the  examination,  and  reserved  for  his  treatment  the  use  or  application  of 
alleviatory  and  curative  medicaments,  the  recipes  which  so  abound  in  all  the  other 
medical  documents  of  ancient  Egypt,  and  are  so  few  and  unimportant  in  our  surgical 
treatise.  There  is  here  an  intimation  of  a  Bharp  distinction  between  the  surgeon  on 
the  one  hand  and  the  physician  on  the  other. 

This  distinction  is  illustrated  by  Case  9,  the  only  case  in  our  treatise,  in  which  the 
method  is  obviously  that  of  the  recipe-vending  physician  as  distinguished  from  the 
operating  surgeon.  The  injury  is  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  frontal 
bone.  There  is  no  examination  at  all,  properly  speaking,  and  the  place  of  the  examina¬ 
tion  has  been  filled  up  by  the  words  :  ‘‘If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound 
in  his  forehead,  smashing  the  shell  of  his  head.”  The  introductory  formula  of  the 
examination  is  retained,  but  no  observations  of  any  kind  are  recorded,  and  even  the 
name  of  the  injury  is  confusingly  altered  by  the  substitituon  of  the  word  “  head  ”  for 
the  word  “  skull  ”  employed  in  the  title.  Immediately  following  the  above  alleged 
examination  is  an  absurd  recipe  for  external  application  accompanied  by  a  magical 
charm  to  be  repeated  over  it  when  it  is  applied.  It  is  obviously  not  an  accident  that 
the  only  typical  case  of  the  recipe-hawking  physician  in  our  treatise  should  contain 
no  other  examination  properly  speaking  than  an  inaccurately  worded  repetition  of  the 
title.  When  we  contrast  this  case  and  especially  its  lack  of  any  observations  in  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  43 

examination  with  the  surgeon’s  careful  observation  whether  a  wound  in  the  skull 
is  on  the  same  side  as  the  paralysis  in  the  lower  limbs  (Case  8,  IV  7),  we  cannot  doubt 
that  a  case  from  one  of  the  recipe  papyri  has  found  its  way  into  our  surgical  treatise. 

Disregarding  Case  9,  we  have  in  our  treatise  a  series  of  fifty-seven  examinations, 
almost  exclusively  of  injuries  of  the  human  body  forming  a  group  of  observations 
furnishing  us  with  the  earliest  known  nucleus  of  fact  regarding  the  anatomy, 
physiology,  and  pathology  of  the  human  body.  Crude  and  elementary  as  they 
are,  the  method  by  which  they  were  collected  was  scientific,  and  these  observa¬ 
tions,  together  with  the  diagnoses  and  the  explanatory  commentary  in  the  ancient 
glosses,  form  the  oldest  body  of  science  now  extant. 

Our  treatise,  then,  is  a  series  of  discussions  of  injuries,  not  of  diseases.  In  Case  39, 
which  discusses  certain  tumors  or  ulcers  on  the  breast,  we  find  that  these  may  have 
arisen  from  an  injury  ;  and  the  only  other  instances  of  possible  disease  are  two  cases 
of  tumors  or  boils  on  the  breast  (Cases  45  and  46).  The  remaining  forty-five  cases  are 
all  injuries.  They  range  from  slight  flesh  wounds  to  the  gravest  injuries  to  the  bony 
structure  of  the  body — injuries  from  which  the  patient  cannot  possibly  recover.  Many 
of  these  are  such  injuries  as  might  have  been  incurred  in  the  ordinary  round  of  daily 
civil  life  ;  others  were  evidently  the  result  of  murderous  attack,  presumably  in  battle. 
It  is  highly  probably,  if  not  certain,  that  our  treatise  is  in  part  a  record  of  surgical 
experience  in  war.  The  word  “  wound  ”  occurs  no  less  than  142  times  in  the  forty- 
eight  cases  preserved.  The  reader  should  consult  the  commentary  on  the  word 
“  wound  ”  in  Case  1  (pp.  81-84). 

Omitting  Cases  89,  45,  and  46,  a  general  list  of  the  injuries  described  in  the 
remaining  fifty-five  examinations,  arranged  progressively  from  the  less  to  the  moro 
serious,  is  as  follows  : 

Twelve  Flesh  Wounds  : 

Scalp  wound 
Gaping  scalp  wound 
Gaping  wound  in  the  eye-brow 
Wound  in  the  nostril 
Wound  in  the  temple 
Perforation  of  the  temple 
Slit  in  the  outer  ear 
Wound  piercing  the  upper  lip 
Gaping  wound  in  the  chin  . 

Wound  in  the  throat  piercing  to  the  gullet 
Gaping  wound  in  the  shoulder 
Infected  wound  in  the  breast 

Case  1 
„  2 
„  10 
„  14 
„  18 
„  19 
„  23 
„  26 
„  27 
„  28 
„  47 
„  41 

(two  examinations) 
(five  examinations) 

oi.uchicago.edu 

44 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Thirty-three  Injuries  to  the  Bones  and  Articulations  : 

Sprain  of  a  cervical  vertebra 

Case  30 

„  „  the  steroo-costal  articulations  . 

Si 

42 

„  „  a  spinal  vertebra 

Si 

48 

Displacement  of  a  cervical  vertebra 

ss 

32 

Dislocation  of  the  mandible 

Si 

25 

„  „  a  cervical  vertebra  . 

ss 

31 

„  „  both  clavicles 

Si 

34  (two  examinations) 

„  „  the  ribs  .... 

Si 

43 

Perforation  of  the  skull  .... 

Si 

3 

„  „  sutures  of  the  skull 

St 

7  (three  examinations) 

,,  of  bones  of  the  maxillary-zygomatic 

region  .... 

SS 

15 

,,  ,,  the  temporal  bone  . 

si 

20 

„  „  a  cervical  vertebra  . 

Si 

29 

„  ,,  the  sternum 

Si 

40 

Split  in  the  skull  ..... 

Si 

4 

„  „  maxilla  .... 

ss 

16 

„  „  temporal  bone 

a 

21 

„  „  humerus  .... 

a 

38 

Fracture  of  the  nose  .... 

a 

11 

„  „  nasal  bone 

a 

12 

„  „  mandible  .... 

tt 

24 

„  „  both  clavicles 

a 

35 

,,  „  humerus  .... 

ss 

36 

„  „  „  with  rupture  of  overlying 

soft  tissue 

St 

37  (two  examinations) 

„  „  ribs  .... 

a 

44 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull 

st 

5 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  with 

rupture  of  meningeal  membranes 

Si 

6 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  dis- 

playing  no  external  contusion  . 

ss 

8  (two  examinations) 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  frontal  bone 

,, 

9 

„  „  „  „  nasal  bone  . 

ts 

13 

„  „  „  „  temporal  bone 

ss 

22 

Impacted  fracture  of  a  cervical  vertebra  . 

St 

33 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  maxilla  . 

ss 

17 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  45 

Full  discussion  of  the  above  injuries  and  ailments  will  be  found  in  the  commentary 
accompanying  the  various  cases.  The  range  of  these  cases  from  the  skull  downward  to  the 
thorax  and  spinal  vertebrae  but  not  further  downward  is  of  course  due  to  the  loss  of  the 
continuation  of  the  manuscript,  which  stops  at  the  first  case  concerning  the  spinal  ver¬ 
tebrae.  This  is  the  more  regrettable  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  inclusion  of  injuries  of 
the  brain  (especially  Case  6)  would  suggest  that  we  might  have  expected  in  the  lost  portion 
the  consideration  of  injuries  of  the  internal  organs,  like  the  heart,  lungs,  stomach,  etc. 

The  most  noticeable  gap  in  the  type  of  injury  treated  is  the  lack  of  simple  and  less 
serious  fracture  of  the  skull.  Simple  fracture  of  a  bone  like  the  clavicle  or  the  humerus  is 
duly  included  (Cases  85  and  86),  but  in  discussing  injuries  of  the  head  the  surgeon  passes 
from  scalp  wounds  directly  to  a  perforation  or  split  of  the  calvaria,  and  thence  directly 
to  compound  comminuted  fractures  of  the  skull,  including  rupture  of  the  meningeal 
membranes.  It  is  possible  that  his  use  of  the  word  “  split  ”  may  have  been  loose  enough 
to  include  the  simple  fracture.  The  reader  should  consult  the  commentary  on  Case  4. 

Besides  the  injuries  listed  above,  there  is  of  course  a  considerable  list  of  accompany¬ 
ing  symptoms,  local  affections,  and  various  pathological  consequences  noticed  by  the 
ancient  surgeon  in  discussing  the  successive  cases.  For  these  the  reader  is  referred 
to  the  text  of  the  commentary  on  each  case.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  present 
editor  does  not  possess  the  competence  to  put  together  a  comprehensive  discussion  on 
the  pathological  knowledge  displayed  in  this  ancient  treatise.  It  is  highly  desirable 
that  this  should  be  done.  Probably  the  most  important  fact  disclosed  by  our  treatise 
is  the  surgeon’s  discovery  of  the  brain  as  the  seat  of  nervous  control  of  the  body,  and 
his  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  such  control  in  the  brain  was  localized. 

8.  The  Diagnosis 

The  diagnosis  is  always  introduced  by  the  words:  “  Thou  shouldst 

say  concerning  him  ”  (the  patient),  addressed  to  the  student  or  young  surgeon  by  some 
unknown  speaker,  presumably  the  unknown  lecturer,  or  author  of  the  treatise.  As 
wo  have  found  to  be  the  case  in  the  examination,  the  form  of  the  diagnosis  likewise 
is  that  of  the  instruction  of  a  master  addressed  to  a  pupil.  The  concluding  statement 
of  the  diagnosis,  however,  consists  of  an  utterance  very  often  in  the  first  person,  being 
a  statement  placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  student  or  young  surgeon  by  the  instructor. 
What  the  young  practitioner  or  student  is  thus  charged  to  say,  therefore,  consists  of  two 
parts :  first,  “  One  having . . .  (followed  by  the  description  of  the  ailment) ;  and  second, 
a  concluding  statement  by  the  young  surgeon  himself  in  the  first  person,  expressing  his 
coming  course  of  action  toward  the  case.  The  diagnosis  thus  has  the  following  form  : 

“  Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  ”  (the  patient) : 
a.  “  ‘  One  having  .  .  .  ’  ”  (followed  by  the  description  of  the  ailment). 
h.  “  ‘  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat 

oi.uchicago.edu 

46  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

The  second  part  ( b )  of  the  above  diagnosis  is  always  one  of  three  different  state¬ 
ments,  varying  according  to  the  degree  of  seriousness  disclosed  by  the  symptoms  in 
the  case.  These  three  statements  are  as  follows  : 

1.  “An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

2.  “  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

8.  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

It  will  be  seen  then,  that  on  the  basis  of  an  examination,  our  treatise  classifies  all 
cases  under  three  categories,  as  :  1.  Certainly  successfully  treatable ;  2.  possibly 
curable  ;  and  8.  untreatable.  These  three  verdicts  are  not  prognoses  ;  they  are  not 
so  much  statements  regarding  the  cases,  as  they  are  each  the  surgeon’s  declaration 
of  his  own  future  course  of  procedure.  Each  verdict  is  simply  a  practical  statement 
of  the  course  the  surgeon  proposes  to  follow  toward  a  case  disclosed  by  the  examination 
to  be  such  and  such. 

The  question  might  be  raised  as  to  whether  the  verdict  belongs  to  the  diagnosis 
or  to  the  treatment,  for  it  follows  the  former  and  precedes  the  latter,  and  might  be 
considered  as  belonging  to  either.  In  two  cases  we  have  the  verdict  connected  by 
a  preposition  directly  with  the  treatment.  In  Case  89  the  surgeon  says,  “  An  ailment 
which  I  will  treat  with  the  fire-drill ;  ”  and  in  Case  46  he  Bays,  “  An  ailment  which 
I  will  treat  with  cold  applications.”  The  same  connection  is  found  four  times  in 
Papyrus  Ebers,  when  the  surgeon  four  times  says,  “  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat  with 
the  lancet  "  (e.  g.  Pap.  Ebers  106,  20).  It  is  probable  that  these  six  occurrences  of  an 
inseparable  connection  between  verdict  and  treatment  are  simply  illustrations  of  the 
naturally  close  relation  between  the  two  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptian.  Grammatically 
we  cannot  doubt  that  the  verdict  is  part  of  the  diagnosis  ;  for  being  always  expressed 
in  the  first  person  it  is  obviously  a  part  of  the  utterance  of  the  surgeon  following  the 
injunction,  “  Thou  shouldst  say,”  as  already  demonstrated  in  the  above  discussion. 
In  the  cases  where  the  verdict  constitutes  the  entire  diagnosis,  the  words  “  Thou 
shouldst  say  concerning  him  ”  have  not  been  prefixed.  There  are  only  three  such 
cases  in  the  treatise.  Of  these,  two  (6  and  8,  second  diagnosis)  have  verdict  8,  and  in 
the  third  (the  second  diagnosis  of  Case  84)  it  is  obvious  that  verdict  1  is  an  error  of 
the  ancient  scribe  for  verdict  8.  Disregarding  the  purely  alleviatory  measures  in 
Case  6,  we  find  that  no  treatment  follows  any  of  these  three  verdicts,  and  we  might 
here  understand  that  verdict  8  more  or  less  fills  the  entire  blank  left  by  the  lack  of 
diagnosis  or  treatment. 

Logically  the  diagnosis  as  a  whole  is  a  conclusion  based  on  conditions  established 
by  the  examination  and  stated  there.  The  diagnosis  is  grammatically  an  apodosis, 
of  which  the  examination  is  the  protasis.  On  this  point  the  above  discussion  of  the 
examination  should  be  compared.  In  the  forty-eight  cases  discussed  in  our  treatise 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  47 

there  are  fifty-two  of  these  verdicts.  Five  oases  contain  two  verdicts,  according  as 
the  surgeon’s  findings  vary  (Cases  7,  8,  84,  87,  and  47).  As  we  have  already  noticed 
in  discussing  the  examination  (pp.  42-48),  Case  9  contains  no  such  verdict.  The  lack 
of  this  characteristic,  together  with  the  fact  that  the  case  contains  no  diagnosis  of  any 
kind,  relegates  this  case  to  the  class  of  magical  recipes  drawn  from  the  recipe  papyri 
employed  by  the  recipe-vending  physicians.  Its  presence  does  not  alter  the  unique 
character  of  our  treatise,  as  an  assemblage  of  over  fifty  groups  of  symptoms,  each 
group  the  result  of  an  examination  and  followed  by  the  surgeon’s  verdict  in  every 
case.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  word  unique  employed  in  the  preceding  statement 
is  applied  with  exactness.  None  of  the  other  surviving  medical  papyri  of  ancient 
Egypt  contains  such  a  body  of  case  discussions,  each  one  thus  assigned  to  one  of  three 
different  classes.  Indeed  verdict  No.  8,  “an  ailment  not  to  be  treated,”  is  unknown 
in  any  of  the  other  Egyptian  medical  papyri,  and  is  therefore  one  of  the  important 
evidences  of  the  unique  character  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Surgical  Papyrus  (see 
commentary,  Case  5,  II  15).  Verdict  No.  2,  “  an  ailment  which  I  will  contend 
with,”  is  found  twice  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (105,  12,  and  105,  19-20),  but  is  unknown 
otherwise  outside  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  (see  commentary,  Case  4,  II  6). 
As  might  be  expected,  verdict  No.  1  is  better  known.  It  is  found  twice  in  the 
Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  (No.  8038,  Nos.  154  and  161),  once  in  the  Hearst  Papyrus 
(No.  174  ;  12,  2)  and  sixteen  times  in  Papyrus  Ebers,  fourteen  of  which  are  in 
the  concluding  group  of  suppurating  sores  at  the  end  of  the  papyrus  (see  com. 
mentary  herein  on  Case  1,12).  In  referring  to  these  verdicts  or  statements  by  the 
surgeon,  it  will  be  found  convenient  to  designate  them  by  the  numbers  already  given 
them  above,  and  call  them  verdict  1 ,  verdict  2  or  verdict  8,  as  the  case  may  require. 

The  most  important  among  them,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  verdict  3.  Although 
unknown  in  any  of  the  other  ancient  Egyptian  medical  papyri,  it  occurs,  as  already 
stated  above,  no  less  than  fourteen  times  in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith.  In  one  of  these 
cases  (Case  17),  this  verdict  has  been  inserted  by  evident  error  of  the  scribe.  Of  the 
remaining  thirteen  all  but  three  are  left  without  any  suggestion  of  treatment,  and  in 
the  three  exceptions  the  treatise  suggests  only  slight  alleviatory  measures  not  expected 
to  cure.  The  inclusion  of  these  thirteen  hopeless  cases  (about  one  fourth  of  the  material 
in  the  treatise  as  preserved  to  us)  is  a  remarkable  evidence  of  the  surgeon’s  scientific 
interest  in  recording  and  discussing  the  observable  facts  in  a  group  of  cases  for  which 
he  could  suggest  no  treatment.  The  papyri  which  contain  nothing  else  but  recipes, 
that  is  treatments,  have  of  course  found  no  place  for  such  discussions,  and  this  fact 
emphasizes  the  significance  of  our  papyrus  as  consisting  of  a  group  of  observed  cases, 
quite  irrespective  of  the  possibility  of  treatment,  which  in  the  majority  of  the  cases 
that  he  declines  to  treat  is  not  even  mentioned. 

Parallel  with  the  systematic  use  of  these  three  verdicts  is  a  similar  series  of  temporal 

oi.uchicago.edu 

48  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

clauses  bearing  more  directly  on  the  condition  of  the  patient,  although  not  so  regularly 
employed,  and  placed  at  the  end  of  the  treatment.  These  read  : 

A.  “  Until  he  recovers.” 

B.  “  Until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by.” 

C.  “  Until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point.” 

Of  these  clauses  A  is  commonly  used  with  verdict  1,  B  is  found  with  all  three 
verdicts,  while  C  properly  belongs  to  doubtful  cases  with  verdict  2.  See  commentary 
on  these  three  clauses  in  Case  1  (18),  Case  8  (I  28)  and  Case  4,  Gloss  C.  They  do  not 
add  any  precision  to  the  verdict  itself,  except  possibly  in  the  case  of  A,  which  intimates 
certain  recovery. 

To  an  understanding  of  the  real  significance  of  the  ancient  surgeon’s  diagnosis, 
it  is  essential  to  observe  that  in  the  verdict,  b,  at  the  end  of  the  diagnosis,  we  have  a 
statement  invariably  present,  and  fairly  precise  in  its  practical  indications  for  the 
surgeon.  Indeed,  as  we  have  already  noted,  in  three  cases  (6,  8,  and  84),  the  verdict 
constitutes  the  entire  diagnosis.  This  is  the  more  intelligible,  when  we  note  that  in  the 
first  two  cases  (6  and  8)  it  is  verdict  8  which  thus  serves  as  the  entire  diagnosis.  In 
Case  84  likewise  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  verdict  8  also  served  as  the  entire  diagnosis, 
although  the  notoriously  inaccurate  scribe  has  written  verdict  1  (see  commentary  on 
Case  84,  second  diagnosis,  XI  22).1  The  verdict,  therefore,  which  might  sometimes 
stand  alone  as  a  sufficient  diagnosis,  might  very  naturally  be  accompanied,  if  at  all,  by 
only  a  very  brief  additional  description  of  the  case  in  a.  The  following  statistics 
are  instructive : 

A.  Diagnosis  consists  of  b,  that  is,  a  verdict  only  ....  8  cases 

B.  Diagnosis  consists  of  a  and  b,  thus  : 

1 .  a,  a  verbatim  repetition  of  the  title  only,  +  b  .  .  .  .  20  „ 

2.  a,  an  abbreviated  repetition  of  the  examination,  -f  b  .  .  .  15  „ 

8.  a,  including  conclusions  based  on  observations  stated  in  the 

examination,  +  b  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12  „ 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  only  indispensable  part  of  the  diagnosis  is  b,  the  verdict. 
We  observe  also  that  the  verdict  may  be  preceded  either,  first,  by  a  mere  mention  of 
the  name  of  the  case,  or  second,  by  a  repetition  of  some  of  the  observations  stated  in 
the  examination,  or  third  and  finally,  by  a  statement  of  conclusions  based  on  the 
observations  brought  out  by  the  examination.2  This  third  group,  consisting  of  thirteen 

1  The  lack  of  any  diagnosis  in  Case  9  has  been  discussed  above,  p.  47.  It  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  Case  9  is  not  a  case  discussion,  as  are  all  the  other  47  cases  in  our  treatise,  but  simply  a  recipe. 
In  view  of  this  fact  the  lack  of  a  verdict  has  no  significance. 

*  The  above  statistics  are,  by  cases,  as  follows  : 

1.  a  is  verbatim  repetition  of  title  only  in  Cases  2, 10, 11,  12, 13, 15, 16,  18,  25,  30,  32,  34,  35,  36, 
38,  42,  43,  45  (title  even  abbreviated  in  diagnosis),  46,  48  j  total  20  cases. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  49 

diagnoses  containing  conclusions  drawn  directly  from  observations  recorded  in  the 
examination,  forms  perhaps  the  most  important  body  of  materials  in  the  whole  treatise ; 
for  they  constitute  the  earliest  existent  evidences  of  an  inductive  process  in  the  history 
of  the  human  mind,  in  so  far  as  the  surviving  documents  have  revealed  it  to  us.  It 
is  interesting  to  note  that  such  conclusions  have  been  made  in  about  one  fourth  of  the 
cases  preserved  to  us  in  this  document.  It  will  be  worth  while,  therefore,  to  enumerate 
these  twelve  cases,  and  examine  briefly  the  conclusions  made  in  the  diagnoses. 

In  the  first  case  in  the  treatise,  although  its  fragmentary  condition  requires  much 
restoration,  a  superficial  wound  in  the  head  is  found  by  the  surgeon  in  the  examination 
to  be  a  rupture  of  the  overlying  soft  tissue,  “  not  having  a'gash  ;  ”  and  in  the  diagnosis 
he  concludes  that  “  his  wound  does  not  have  two  lips.” 

In  Case  7,  a  wound  in  the  head,  penetrating  the  skull,  the  surgeon’s  examination 
discloses  that  “  it  is  painful  for  him  to  open  his  mouth  ”  (III  8).  Thereupon  the 
surgeon  states  among  other  things  in  the  diagnosis :  “  the  cord  of  his  mandible  is 
contracted,”  perhaps  indicating  that  the  patient  is  suffering  from  tetanus.  Otherwise 
the  diagnosis  is  a  repetition  of  the  examination.  On  the  basis  of  alternative  Bymptoms 
(III  8-12)  the  surgeon  formulates  a  second  diagnosis  (III  12-18),  but  the  only  new 
conclusion  unfortunately  contains  an  unintelligible  term  (°  1}  ^  ■=>  hf) .  See  commentary. 

Case  8  contains  the  most  important  diagnosis  in  the  treatise.  The  examination 
has  disclosed  an  unusual  case  :  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  without 
any  visible  external  injury.  As  phrased  in  the  examination  the  injury  is  “  a  smash 
in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no  wound  at  all  upon  it.”  This 
is  explained  in  a  gloss  as  meaning,  “  a  smash  of  the  shell  of  his  skull,  the  flesh  of  his 
head  being  uninjured  ”  (IV  12-18).  It  is  obvious  that  the  lack  of  any  externally 
visible  trace  of  the  injury  might  easily  mislead  the  practitioner  to  conclude  that  tho 
patient’s  condition  of  partial  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs  on  the  same  side  as  the 
injury,  and  distortion  of  the  eye  likewise  on  the  same  side  as  the  injury,  might  be  due 
to  disease.  The  ancient  author  was  so  keenly  aware  of  the  real  nature  of  the  facts  in 
the  case  and  the  character  of  the  conclusion  to  be  set  forth  in  the  diagnosis,  that  he 
forgot  entirely  his  otherwise  invariable  formula  for  introducing  the  diagnosis  (“  Thou 
shouldst  say  concerning  him,”  etc.),  and  began  the  warning  diagnosis  at  once  with  the 
admonishing  words :  “  Thou  shouldst  account  him  one  whom  something  entering 
from  the  outside  has  smitten  ”  (IV  7-8).  This  immediate  insistence  on  the  external 
cause,  as  contrasted  with  some  internal  disease,  is  further  interestingly  explained  in 
a  gloss  which  states,  “  As  for  ‘  One  whom  something  entering  from  the  outside  has 
smitten,’  ...  it  means  one  whom  something  entering  from  the  outside  presses,  on 

2.  a  is  abbreviated  repetition  of  examination  in  Cases  3, 4,  5, 14,  21,  23, 26,  27,  28,  33, 37  (twice), 
40,  41,  44,  47  ;  total  15  cases. 

3.  a  includes  conclusions  based  on  observations  stated  in  the  examination  in  Cases  1,  7  (twice), 
8,  17,  19,  20,  22,  24,  29,  31,  39,  47  ;  total  12  cases. 

E 

oi.uchicago.edu 

50  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

the  side  of  him  having  this  injury  ”  {Gloss  C,  TV  15-16).  The  attention  given  to  the 
side  of  the  head  which  has  received  the  injury,  in  connection  with  a  specific  reference 
to  the  side  of  the  body  nervously  affected,  is  in  itself  evidence  that  in  this  case  the 
ancient  surgeon  was  already  beginning  observations  on  the  localization  of  functions 
in  the  brain.  We  have  here  the  earliest  known  observations  on  the  connection  between 
the  brain  and  the  nervous  system,  disclosing  to  us  man  for  the  first  time  dimly  aware 
of  the  mysteries  of  his  own  body  and  its  intelligent  control.  It  was  interest  in  this 
problem  which  led  our  ancient  surgeon  to  make  these  observations  ;  for  he  concludes 
his  diagnosis  with  verdict  8,  and  can  suggest  only  attention  to  the  sufferer’s  comfort, 
without  hope  of  his  recovery.  The  entire  extraordinary  diagnosis  is  due  to  the  surgeon’s 
scientific  interest  in  the  case.  Detailed  discussion  of  this  case  will  be  found  in  the 
commentary  on  Case  8  below. 

In  Case  17,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  maxilla,  the  surgeon  notes 
in  the  examination  :  “  it  is  painful  when  he  opens  his  mouth  because  of  it  ”  (the  injury). 
The  brief  diagnosis  is  made  up  chiefly  of  repetition  of  the  statements  in  the  examina¬ 
tion,  but  adds,  “  he  is  speechless.”  The  inclusion  of  this  observation  in  the  diagnosis, 
rather  than  in  the  examination,  suggests  that  the  surgeon  has  made  the  conclusion 
that  the  patient  is  speechless  from  the  observation  that  it  is  painful  for  him  to  open 
his  mouth.  In  Case  18  (VI  6),  the  observation,  “  he  is  speechless,”  is  included  in  the 
examination,  where  it  would  seem  more  properly  to  belong.  The  grammatical  con¬ 
struction  of  examination  as  a  group  of  observed  conditions,  and  of  diagnosis  as  a  group 
of  conclusions  based  on  the  observed  conditions,  is  obvious,  but  the  line  drawn  by 
the  surgeon  between  observation  and  conclusion  was  not  always  a  sharp  one,  as  this 
example  shows. 

In  this  respect  the  next  case  (19)  is  much  clearer.  The  patient  has  suffered  a  per¬ 
foration  of  the  temple,  possibly  affecting  the  bone.  In  the  examination  we  find  the 
following  :  “  Thou  shouldst  inspect  his  wound,  saying  to  him,  *  Look  at  thy  two 
shoulders.’  Should  his  doing  so  be  painful,  (even  though)  his  neck  turns  around 
(only)  a  little  for  him,”  etc.,  etc.  Thereupon  the  diagnosis  states  :  “  He  suffers  with 
stiffness  in  his  neck  ;  ”  but  otherwise  contains  only  a  repetition  of  the  title. 

In  the  next  case,  a  wound  in  the  temple  perforating  the  bone  (Case  20),  the  exami¬ 
nation  is  one  of  the  most  interesting,  and  certainly  the  most  picturesque  in  the  whole 
treatise.  The  diagnosis,  as  in  Case  19,  affirms  stiffness  in  the  neck,  although  the 
examination  does  not  refer  to  the  matter  at  all,  as  in  Case  19.  Speechlessness,  how¬ 
ever,  affirmed  in  the  diagnosis,  is  carefully  based  on  the  facts  of  the  examination,  as 
we  Bee  by  rendering  the  statements  concerned,  just  as  they  stand  in  examination  and 
diagnosis:  “ If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  temple, . . . ;  if  thou  ask 
of  him  concerning  his  malady  and  he  speak  not  to  thee  ;  . .  . ;  thou  shouldst  say  con¬ 
cerning  him,  ‘  One  having  a  wound  in  his  temple, .  .  .  (and)  he  is  speechless 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  51 

In  Case  22,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  temporal  bone,  we  find  in 
the  examination,  “  if  thou  callest  to  him  (and)  he  is  speechless  and  cannot  speak.” 
Here  the  examination  has  included  both  the  observation  and  the  conclusion  ;  and 
in  stating  the  conclusion  as  the  diagnosis  does  (“  he  is  speechless,”  VIII 18),  it  simply 
repeats  the  logical  process  already  anticipated  by  the  conclusion  stated  in  the  examina¬ 
tion.  The  diagnosis  concludes  that  there  is  a  discharge  of  blood  from  the  nostrils, 
based  on  observations  in  the  examination ;  but  its  statement  that  the  patient  suffers 
with  stiffness  of  the  neck  is  not  drawn  from  any  observation  in  the  examination. 

The  discussion  of  the  fractured  mandible  in  Case  24  does  not  exhibit  a  very  clear 
logical  connection  between  examination  and  diagnosis,  and  suggests  that  the  surgeon 
in  pronouncing  such  a  diagnosis,  was  often  drawing  on  experience  tacitly  assumed, 
and  nowhere  expressed.  We  find  in  this  diagnosis  two  statements  which  are  really 
new  observations :  “  the  wound  over  it  (the  fracture)  being  broken  open,  .  .  .  (and)  he 
has  fever  from  it.”  The  examination  does  not  contain  any  basis  for  these  statements. 

Case  29,  a  gaping  wound  in  a  cervical  vertebra,  furnishes  a  good  illustration  of 
close  connection  between  diagnosis  and  examination.  The  latter  states,  “  he  is  unable 
to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,”  corresponding  to  which  the  diagnosis 
concludes  :  “  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.”  Otherwise  the  diagnosis  is  repeti¬ 
tion  of  the  examination. 

In  Case  81,  a  dislocation  of  a  cervical  vertebra,  the  examination  discloses  among 
other  interesting  evidences  of  paralysis,  the  fact  that  “  urine  drops  from  his  member 
without  his  knowing  it.”  The  diagnosis  then  concludes  “  his  urine  dribbles.”  In 
an  explanatory  gloss  (X  21-22)  we  are  told  that  this  statement  “  his  urine  dribbles,” 
means  “  that  urine  drops  from  his  phallus,  and  cannot  hold  back  for  him,”  indicating 
the  paralysis  of  the  controlling  nerves  concerned. 

Case  89  concerning  obscure  ulcers  or  tumors  on  the  breast,  perhaps  resulting  from 
some  injury,  is  a  difficult  case  to  understand.  The  examination  discloses  that  “  swell¬ 
ings  have  spread  with  pus  over  his  breast,”  and  the  diagnosis  concludes  that  the 
patient  has  tumors  on  his  breast  which  “  produce  feists1  of  pus.” 

Finally  in  Case  47,  a  gaping  wound  in  the  shoulder,  the  mention  of  fever  (XVII 11) 
is  probably  rather  a  new  observation  than  a  conclusion  based  on  observations  in  the 
examination. 

4.  The  Treatment 

In  discussing  the  foregoing  list  of  fifty-eight  examinations,  the  ancient  surgeon  does 
not  always  decide  to  treat.  It  is  an  important  fact  in  properly  appraising  our  treatise, 
that  out  of  fifty-eight  examinations  the  surgeon  omits  all  suggestion  of  treatment  in 
sixteen.  These  sixteen  instances  are  an  extraordinary  evidence  of  the  surgeon’s  interest 
in  the  pathological  conditions  exhibited,  as  mere  knowledge  of  the  human  body  and 
its  workings.  They  form  a  unique  group  in  Egyptian  medicine  ;  for  the  other  medical 

oi.uchicago.edu 

52 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

papyri  known  to  us,  made  up  as  they  are  exclusively  of  recipes,  by  their  very  nature 
constitute  a  series  of  treatments,  whereas  as  we  have  stated,  these  sixteen  instances 
in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  consist  of  a  body  of  observations  which  lead  the  surgeon  to 
the  conclusion  that  no  treatment  is  to  be  undertaken. 

Twelve  of  these  sixteen  instances  have  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  appended,  and  of 
these  twelve,  ten  are  followed  by  no  suggested  action  of  any  kind ;  while  of  the 
remaining  two,  one  suggests  a  sitting  posture  for  the  patient  (Case  8, 1),  and  the  other 
(Case  5)  warns  against  binding  and  prescribes  a  normal  diet  without  any  medicine. 
Three  of  the  sixteen  have  the  uncertain  verdict  2,  for  one  of  which  (Case  21)  the  surgeon 
can  suggest  only  normal  diet ;  for  another  (Case  45)  he  explicitly  states,  “  There  is  no 
treatment,”  while  he  makes  no  suggestion  for  Case  47,  III.  Finally  one  of  the 
sixteen  (Case  47,  II 2),  an  unfavorable  alternative  development  of  the  case,  receives 
no  verdict  at  all,  and  suggests  no  treatment  beyond  the  caution  against  binding,  and 
the  admonition  to  normal  diet  without  the  use  of  any  medicine. 

List  of  cases  omitting  treatment,  either  by  explicit  instructions  or  by  omission  of 
all  reference  to  any  treatment : 

Case  45.  Bulging  tumors  on  the  breast ; 

Case  47,  II  1.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  shoulder 
with  inflammation  and  discharge  ; 

Case  47,  II  2.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  shoulder 
and  persistent  fever  ; 

Case  31.  Dislocation  of  a  cervical  vertebra  ; 

Cose  34,  II.  Dislocation  of  both  clavicles  with 
rupture  of  overlying  soft  tissue  ; 

Case  7,  II.  Perforation  of  sutures  of  the  skull ; 
symptoms  of  tetanus ; 

Case  21.  Split  in  the  temporal  bone  ; 

Case  24.  Fracture  of  tho  mandible  ; 

Case  37,  II.  Fracture  of  the  humerus  ;  rupture 
of  overlying  soft  tissue  ; 

Case  44.  Fractured  ribs,  overlying  flesh  wound, 
ribs  broken  through  (probably  com¬ 
pound  fracture) ; 

Case  5.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
skull ; 

Case  8, 1.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
skull,  no  visible  external  contusion  ; 

Case  8,  II.  Same,  with  less  favorable  conditions ; 

Case  13.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
nasal  bone ; 

Case  22.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
temporal  bone ; 

Case  33.  Impacted  fracture  of  a  cervical  vertebra  ; 

Verdict  2 ;  statement :  “  There  is  no  treatment.” 
Verdict  2 ;  all  reference  to  treatment  omitted. 

No  verdict ;  binding  forbidden  ;  normal  diet, 
without  medicine. 

Verdict  3  ;  all  reference  to  treatment  omitted. 
Verdict  3 1 ;  „  „  „  „ 

Verdict  3;  „  „  „  „  „ 

Verdict  2  ;  normal  diet,  no  medicine. 

Verdict  3  ;  all  reference  to  treatment  omittol. 
Verdict  3 ;  „  „  ,,  „  „ 

Verdict  3 ;  „  „  „  „ 

Verdict  3 ;  binding  forbidden,  normal  diet, 
without  medicine. 

Verdict  3  ;  sitting  posture  till  crisis. 

Verdict  3  ;  all  reference  to  treatment  omitted. 
Verdict  3  £  „  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,, 

Verdiot  3  j  „  ,,  „  „  ,, 

Verdict  3 ;  „  „  „  „  „ 

It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  group  of  almost  exclusively  very  serious  cases,  if  the 
surgeon  has  any  hope  of  recovery  at  all,  he  depends  on  nature  to  do  its  healing  work. 

1  Verdict  1  by  error. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  63 

He  may  take  precautions,  like  the  sitting  posture  in  Case  8, 1,  but  the  recovery  is  the 
work  of  nature,  not  of  any  remedies  the  surgeon  can  offer.  This  is  the  doctrine  -which 
is  later  so  prominent  in  Hippocratic  medicine. 

Out  of  forty-five  injuries  in  our  treatise,  there  are  forty-two  instances  in  which 
treatment  is  prescribed  at  some  stage.  This  treatment  may  be  : 

(а)  Exclusively  mechanical  or  surgical  (8  cases). 

(б)  A  combination  of  purely  surgical  treatment  with  external  use  of  medicaments 
(20  cases). 

(c)  Exclusive  use  of  medicaments  externally  applied  (19  cases). 

(a)  Exclusively  mechanical  or  surgical  treatment 

The  mechanical  appliances  and  processes  upon  which  our  surgeon  relied  do  not 
form  a  long  list,  but  they  are  of  interest  in  view  of  the  fact  that  some  of  them  appear 
in  our  document  for  the  first  time  in  the  literature  of  surgery.  It  is  a  remarkable 
fact  that  actual  physical  survivals  of  evidence  of  surgical  procedure  in  ancient  Egypt, 
as  recovered  by  modern  investigation,  have  been  unexpectedly  scanty.  A  systematic 
study  of  the  large  number  of  hard  bronze  implements  now  preserved  in  our  museums 
would  undoubtedly  disclose  a  certain  number  which  are  demonstrably  surgical  in¬ 
struments.  The  writer  has  himself  noticed  small  knives  which  had  every  appearance 
of  being  scalpels  and  lancets ;  but  no  thoroughgoing  and  exhaustive  examination  of  all 
such  surviving  implements  by  a  surgeon  or  an  archeologist  familiar  with  ancient  surgical 
appliances  has  ever  been  made.  We  are  still  awaiting  a  final  monograph  on  this  subject.1 

It  has  been  stated  that  “  there  is  a  complete  absence  of  evidence,  in  all  bodies 
[ancient  burials]  hitherto  examined,  of  surgical  procedure  apart  from  splints.”  2  It 
is  indeed  true  that  the  only  additional  evidence  of  surgical  procedure  disclosed  by  the 
ancient  bodies,  besides  Dr.  G.  Elliot  Smith’s  discovery  of  splints,  is  Dr.  Hooton’s 
observation  of  the  boring  of  a  Fourth  Dynasty  mandible  for  the  purpose  of  draining 
an  abscess  under  a  tooth.3  While  very  little  evidence  of  the  surgical  processes  employed 
has  survived  in  the  ancient  bodies,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  success  of 
Egyptian  surgery  in  setting  broken  bones  is  very  fully  demonstrated  in  the  large 
number  of  well-joined  fractures  found  in  the  ancient  skeletons.  Unfortunately  these 
do  not  reveal  the  method  employed  by  the  operator.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
written  evidence  to  be  drawn  from  our  papyrus  is  the  more  interesting. 

List  of  surgical  processes  and  devices  in  Pap.  Edwin  Smith  : 

TAnt,  made  from  a  vegetable  tissue,  and  frequently  applied  both  as  a  vehicle  for 

1  Historians  of  medicine  have  taken  casual  notice  of  such  instruments,  and  Egyptian  surgical 
instruments  of  bronze  have  been  collected  by  Prof.  Meyer-Steineg.  See  Meyer-Steineg  and  Sudboff, 
Oeschichte  der  Medicin,  Jena,  2d  ed.,  1922,  p.  29,  abb.  10. 

*  G.  Elliot  Smith  and  Warren  R.  Dawson,  Egyptian  Mummies,  London,  1924,  p.  101. 

*  See  Harvard  African  Studies,  I,  Dr.  E.  A.  Hooton,  “  Oral  Surgery  in  Egypt  during  the  Old 
Empire,”  PI.  I.  See  also  infra,  PI.  I,  Fig.  1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

54 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

the  medicaments  externally  used,  and  as  an  absorbent  of  blood,  secretions,  etc.  It 
was  called  ^M^ftt;  see  full  commentary  in  Case  1  (18). 

Plugs  or  swabs  oj  linen  usually  in  pairs,  inserted  into  the  nostrils  in  cases  of  injury 
to  the  nose,  both  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing,  and  when  saturated  with  a  medicament, 
for  the  purpose  of  applying  the  latter.  They  are  called  “  dSm-wy  of 

linen.”  See  full  commentary  in  Case  7  (III  18),  Case  11  (V  11),  and  Case  14  (VI  9-11). 

Bandages,  made  of  linen  and  manufactured  for  surgical  use  by  the  embalmers,  at 
least  in  the  case  of  a  particular  bandage  known  as  “  covering  for  physicians’  use  ” 
(Case  9,  IY  21).  The  commonest  Egyptian  word  for  “  bandage  ”  is  although 

this  word  occurs  in  only  three  cases  in  our  document  (Case  2,  I  16,  Case  9,  V  5  and 
Case  10,  V  9  ;  see  commentary,  V  5),  for  the  probable  reason  that  the  discussion,  in 
its  instructions  to  the  surgeon,  regularly  employs  the  verb,  that  is  wt,  “  to  bind  ” 
(see  Case  1, 1 2)  or  wdy,  “  to  apply  ”  (see  Case  11,  Y  11-12).  Medicaments  applied 
externally  were  almost  always  bandaged  on.  The  art  of  mummification  developed 
surprising  skill  in  bandaging. 

Adhesive  plaster,  made  of  bands  or  strips  of  linen,  always  in  pairs,  especially  applied 
transversely  across  gaping  flesh  wounds,  or  as  the  ancient  surgeon  himself  said,  “  to 
the  two  lips  of  the  gaping  wound,  in  order  to  cause  that  one  join  to  the  other  ”  (Case 
10,  V 9).  Such  plaster  was  called  — cpj  “  two  *-■ wy  of  linen.”  (See  commentary 
in  Case  2,  I  15  and  Case  10,  V  9).  See  also  following  paragraph. 

Surgical  stitching,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  ancient  surgery,  as  far  as 
known  to  us.  In  a  list  of  six  “  gaping  wounds,”  all  of  them  flesh  wounds,  the 
surgeon  is  in  each  case  charged,  as  for  example  in  Case  10,  a  gaping  wound  over 
the  eye-brow,  “  Thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  his  gash  with  stitching.”  The 
new  word  designating  the  noun  “  stitching  ”  or  the  verb  “  to  stitch  ”  is  ydr. 

See  commentary  on  Case  10,  V  6.  At  stages  in  these  cases  the  surgeon  used  also  his 
adhesive  plaster.  Whether  the  surgeon  is  applying  plaster,  or  using  stitching,  the  result 
of  the  process  is  in  both  cases  designated  bythe  verb  ndry,  “to  draw  together.” 

Cauterization,  also  for  the  first  time  in  ancient  medical  literature  as  early  as  this. 
It  occurs  in  only  one  treatment,  in  a  case  of  unidentified  tumors  or  ulcers  on  the  breast. 
The  verb  is  S’m,  “  to  burn,”  and  the  instrument  employed  was  the  fire-stick  or  fire- 
drill  used  by  the  Egyptians  for  kindling  fire.  See  commentary  in  Case  89,  XIII 6  and  7. 

Splints  or  braces  of  three  different  kinds  were  known  to  the  practice  of  the 
surgeons,  as  described  in  the  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  : 

(1)  A  “  brace  of  wood  padded  with  linen,”  for  insertion  in  the  mouth  of  a  patient 
suffering  with  constriction  of  ligaments  controlling  the  mandible  (tetanus  ?),  in 
order  to  hold  the  mouth  open  and  permit  feeding  with  liquid  food.  It  is  called 

“  md'-t  of  wood.”  See  commentary  in  Case  7  (III  14).  There  is 

no  reference  to  this  device  in  connection  with  fractures. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION 

55 

(2)  A  kind  of  splint  said  to  be  “  of  linen  ”  is  applied  in  two  different  fractures  of 
the  humerus  (Cases  86  and  87)  and  one  of  the  clavicle  (Case  85).  In  view  of  the 
ancient  wooden  splints,  carefully  wound  or  even  padded  with  linen,  as  found  by 
Dr.  Elliot  Smith,  this  Egyptian  term  “  sS  of  linen  ”  may  designate  possibly 

a  wooden  splint  wound  with  linen,  the  modifier,  “  of  linen  ”  being  loosely  used.  See 
commentary  on  Case  7  (III  18).  On  the  other  hand  it  is  conceivable  that  a  “  sS  of 
linen  ”  may  be  a  strip  of  stiff  “  cartonnage  ”  moulded  to  the  broken  limb,  and  much 
resembling  the  modern  surgical  cast  in  its  physical  make-up.  See  commentary  on 
Case  7  (III  18)  and  Case  12  (Y  18). 

(8)  A  stiff  roll  of  linen,  made  by  rolling  a  strip  of  linen  into  a  more  or  less  solid  and 
rigid  post.  It  was  used  especially  where  a  soft  splint  or  support  was  needed,  as  applied 
to  a  broken  nose  (Cases  11  and  12)  or  a  dislocated  clavicle  (Case  84).  See  commentary 
on  Case  11  (V  18).  They  were  called  — ?!  ^erally  “  posts  of  linen.” 

Supports  for  maintaining  a  patient  upright  in  a  sitting  posture,  especially  in  cases 
of  injury  to  the  skull  producing  a  condition  which  makes  motion  dangerous  and  forbids 
lying  down.  These  supports  are  always  in  pairs  and  are  made  of  sun-dried  brick,  or 
adobe,  probably  moulded  to  fit  the  figure  of  the  patient,  on  each  side  under  his  arms. 
They  were  called  two  supports  of  adobe."  See  commentary 

on  Case  4  (II  7). 

Additions  to  this  list  of  surgical  devices  might  be  made  from  Papyrus  Ebers. 

List  of  cases  prescribing  exclusively  mechanical  or  surgical  treatment : 

Case  39.  Tumors  or  ulcers  on  the  breast  perhaps 
arising  from  an  injury  ; 

Case  48.  Sprain  in  spinal  vertebra  ; 

Case  7,  III.  Perforation  of  sutures  of  skull ; 

symptoms  of  tetanus ;  final  more 
favorable  stage ; 

Verdict  1.  Cauterization  ;  “  wound  treatment.” 

Verdict  1.  Patient  placed  prostrate  on  his  back. 
N.B. :  End  of  document  leaves  treatment 
incomplete. 

No  verdict.  Linen-padded,  wooden  brace  to  hold 
mouth  open  in  order  to  feed  liquid  food ; 
sitting  posture  supported  on  adobe  props. 

(b)  Combination  of  surgical  treatment  with  external  use  of  medicaments 

In  twenty  cases  we  find  a  combination  of  purely  surgical  treatment  with  the 
external  application  of  medicaments.  The  simplest  flesh  wounds  are  drawn  together 
by  adhesive  plaster  in  strips,  as  in  Case  2,  a  scalp  wound,  and  Case  27,  a  flesh  wound  in 
the  chin.  If  the  flesh  wound  is  deeper  or  forms  a  yawning  gash,  and  in  one  case  even 
though  the  bone  beneath  is  injured,  the  surgeon  resorts  to  stitching,  which  we  find 
in  a  list  of  seven  cases  (Cases  8, 10, 14,  28,  26,  28,  and  47).  Full  discussion  of  stitching 
will  be  found  in  Case  10  (V  6).  In  some  cases  both  stitching  and  adhesive  plaster 
were  employed  in  succession  on  the  same  wound. 

Passing  from  flesh  wounds  to  injuries  to  the  bones  we  find  the  reduction  of  dis- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

56  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

locations  carefully  described,  e.  g.,  dislocated  clavicle  (Case  34).  The  reduction  of 
a  dislocated  mandible  (Case  25)  is  described  in  terms  showing  that  the  position  of  the 
surgeon’s  hands  was  identical  with  that  depicted  in  the  illustration  of  the  same 
operation  in  the  commentary  on  Hippocrates  by  Apollonius  of  Kitium  in  the  first 
century  b.c.  (see  PI.  VI).  The  treatise  describes  also  the  reduction  of  a  number  of 
broken  bones.  Wefind  among  others  directions  for  setting  a  fracture  of  the  clavicle  (Case 
35),  and  two  different  fractures  of  the  humerus  (Cases  36  and  37).  When  the  injured 
humerus  is  accompanied  by  a  serious  rupture  of  the  overlying  soft  tissue  the  injury  is 
regarded  as  fatal.  With  each  of  these  fractures  two  of  the  splints  called  — cjPj 
“  sS  of  linen  ”  were  applied,  as  the  Egyptian  said  “  one  of  the  two  on  the  inside  of  his 
arm  (humerus),  the  other  of  the  two  on  the  underside  of  his  arm  ”  (XII 13).  This  is 
in  contrast  with  the  two  cases  of  fracture  (femur  and  forearm)  which  Elliot  Smith 
found  still  wrapped  in  the  surgeon’s  splints.  In  the  case  of  each  fracture  the  splints 
were  three  in  number.  The  modem  usage  in  native  village  practice  is  with  two  splints, 
just  as  prescribed  in  our  papyrus.1 

The  effectiveness  of  the  Egyptian  surgeon’s  methods  in  the  use  of  such  splints  is 
demonstrated  by  Elliot  Smith’s  report  on  more  than  a  hundred  examples  of  fracture 
of  the  forearm.  He  found  among  these  only  one  example  of  ununited  fracture  of  the 
ulna,  and, as  he  further  says,  “in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  certain  proportion  of  the  cases 
of  fracture  (always  due  to  direct  violence)  must  have  been  compound,  only  one  of  my 
series  (of  more  than  100  examples)  shows  any  signs  of  suppuration  having  occurred.”  2 
In  view  of  the  frequency  of  fracture  of  the  forearm  as  found  still  visible  in  ancient 
Egyptian  bodies,  it  is  remarkable  that  our  treatise  leaves  the  arm,  after  discussing  two 
cases  of  fracture  of  the  humerus,  without  any  reference  to  fracture  of  the  forearm. 
A  broken  nose,  or  a  fractured  nasal  bone,  or  a  dislocated  clavicle,  must  be  supported 
in  place  by  softer  splints,  stiff  rolls  of  linen,  called  — £y3j  “  posts  of  linen.” 

See  Cases  11  and  12  and  Case  84. 

The  surgeon  was  evidently  at  a  loss  regarding  the  immediate  mechanical  manipula¬ 
tion  of  a  serious  fracture  of  the  skull.  He  recognized  the  importance  of  quiet,  as  we 
have  seen  above  (p.  55),  combined  with  a  sitting  posture  maintained  by  adobe  piers 
supporting  the  patient  upright,  with  normal  diet  but  with  no  binding  of  the  injury 
and  no  medicine  (see  Case  4).  After  initial  probing,  however,  it  would  seem  that  no 
direct  manipulation  of  the  wound  was  attempted.  Neither  do  the  surviving  bodies 
show  any  indications  that  the  process  of  trepanning  was  practised  by  ancient  Egyptian 
surgeons. 

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  in  our  ancient  treatise  there  is  a  sharp  distinction 
between  such  mechanical  and  Burgical  manipulations  as  we  have  been  discussing  and 
the  treatment  with  medicaments.  In  nearly  all  these  cases  of  injury  the  surgeon  is 

1  Dr.  G.  Elliot  Smith,  The  British  Medical  Journal,  1908,  V.  1,  p.  734.  1  Ibid.,  p.  733. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  57 

charged  to  probe  the  wound,  a  process  carried  out  with  the  fingers  in  most  instances, 
that  is,  palpation.  It  is  natural  that  the  directions  to  probe  should  be  included  in 
the  examination,  to  which  the  probing  would  contribute  essential  information  ;  but 
we  would  not  expect  that  a  process  like  the  reduction  of  a  dislocation  or  the  stitching  of 
a  flesh  wound  should  be  included  in  the  text  of  the  examination.  Nevertheless  such 
is  often  the  case  in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith.  The  directions  for  the  reduction  of  the 
dislocated  mandible  in  Case  25  are  all  included  in  the  examination.  Of  our  seven 
examples  of  surgical  stitching,  six  include  the  directions  to  do  so  in  the  examination. 
The  distinction  between  surgical  and  medical  practice  here  suggested  has  been 
discussed  above  (p.  42). 

In  the  therapeutic  which  the  surgeon  combined  with  the  above  purely  surgical 
procedures,  he  was  still  in  an  archaic  stage,  suggesting  that  surgery  was  far  in  advance 
of  medicine.  In  nearly  all  the  cases  which  our  surgeon  regarded  as  at  all  treatable, 
he  followed  up  his  surgery  with  the  application  of  medicaments.  These  were  for  the 
most  part  very  primitive  in  character.  His  favorite  remedy  was  “  fresh  meat  ” 
regularly  applied  to  a  wound  on  the  first  day,  but  no  longer,  and  usually  followed  by 
a  daily  application  of  lint  saturated  with  an  ointment  of  grease  and  honey.  In  cases 
of  great  soreness  of  the  tissues,  as  after  the  reduction  of  a  dislocated  mandible,  he 
applied  a  mixture  of  honey  and  an  unknown  mineral  called  imru  ( ymrw ).  All  of  these 
medicaments  were  regularly  bound  on.  We  shall  later  see  that  some  of  his  materia 
medica  were  useful  agents. 

List  of  cases  combining  surgery  with  external  use  of  medicaments  : 

Flesh  Wounds  ( except  the  last,  Case  8) 

Case  2.  Flesh  wound  in  the  scalp  j 
Case  27.  Flesh  wound  in  the  chin  ; 

Case  10.  Flesh  wound  in  eye-brow  ; 

Case  14.  Flesh  wound  in  one  side  of  nose  ; 

Case  23.  Slit  in  outer  ear  ; 

Case  26.  Flesh  wound  in  upper  Up ; 

Case  28.  I.  Wound  in  the  throat  penetrating  to 
the  gullet ; 

Drawn  together  with  adhesive  plaster  j  fresh 
meat  bound  on,  first  day ;  then  honey-oint¬ 
ment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Drawn  together  with  adhesive  plaster ;  fresh 
meat  bound  on,  first  day ;  then  honey-oint¬ 
ment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching  ;  fresh  meat  bound 
on,  first  day ;  foUowed  by  adhesive  plaster ; 
honey-ointment. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching ;  cleansed  with 
two  swabs  of  linen  ;  fresh  meat  bound  on,  first 
day ;  honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching  ;  stiS  rolls  of  linen 
as  supports  behind  ear ;  honey-ointment  on 
lint,  bound  on. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching  ;  fresh  meat  bound 
on,  first  day  ;  honey-ointment. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching  ;  fresh  meat  bound 
on,  first  day ;  honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound 
on  ;  28  II,  dry  lint ;  normal  diet,  no  medicine. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

58 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  47, 1 1.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  shoulder ; 

Case  47, 1  2.  Same,  second  stage  ; 

Case  47,  II  3.  Same  ;  fever  and  inflammation 
abate ; 

Case  3.  Perforation  of  the  skull ; 

Drawn  together  with  stitching  ;  fresh  meat  bound 
on,  first  day. 

Adhesive  plaster ;  honey-ointment  on  lint, 
bound  on. 

Honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Drawn  together  with  stitching ;  fresh  meat 
applied  without  binding,  first  day  ;  normal 
diet,  no  medicine ;  honey-ointment  on  lint, 
bound  on. 

Bone  injuries 

Case  34, 1.  Dislocation  of  both  clavicles  ; 

Case  26.  Dislocated  mandible  ; 

Case  36.  Fracture  of  both  clavicles  ; 

Case  36.  Fracture  of  humerus  ; 

Case  37, 1.  Fracture  of  humerus,  with  rupture  of 
overlying  soft  tissue  ; 

Case  11.  Broken  nose  j 

Case  12.  Fracture  of  nasal  bone  ; 

Case  4.  Split  in  the  skull ; 

Reduction  of  dislocated  bones  ;  application  of 
stiff  linen  rolls  as  splints  ;  honey-ointment. 

Reduction  of  dislocated  bone  ;  imru  and  honey 
bound  on. 

Reduction  of  fractured  bones ;  application  of 
^-splints  ;  imru  bound  on  ;  afterward  honey 
every  day. 

Reduction  of  fractured  bone ;  application  of 
si-splints  ;  imru  bound  on  ;  afterward  honey 
every  day. 

Reduction  omitted ;  application  of  si-splints  ; 
imru  bound  on  ;  afterward  honey-ointment 
on  lint  every  day. 

Cleansing  nostrils  with  two  Bwabs  of  linen ;  in¬ 
sertion  of  two  swabs  of  greased  linen  to  reduce 
swelling  ;  application  of  two  Btiff  rolls  of  linen 
as  Bplints  ;  honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Reduction  of  fracture ;  cleansing  nostrils  with 
two  swabs  of  linen  ;  insertion  of  two  plugs  of 
greased  linen  ;  application  of  stiff  rolls  of  linen 
as  splints ;  honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Warning  against  binding ;  sitting  posture  sup¬ 
ported  on  two  adobe  piers ;  normal  diet,  no 
medicine ;  grease  applied  to  head,  neck,  and 
shoulders. 

(c)  Exclusive  use  of  medicaments  externally  applied 
In  nineteen  instances  we  find  our  surgeon  suggests  no  treatment  other  than  the  ex¬ 
ternal  application  of  medicaments.  This  is  not  surprising  in  the  treatment  of  a  group 
of  flesh  wounds,  like  a  scalp  wound  (Case  I),  a  wound  in  the  temple  (Case  18),  or  a  per¬ 
foration  in  the  temple  (Case  19),  an  infected  wound  in  the  breast  (Case  41),  or  finally 
an  abscess  in  the  breast  (Case  46).  It  is  likewise  to  be  expected  in  sprains,  as  of  a 
cervical  vertebra  (Case  80),  or  the  stemo-costal  articulations  (Case  42) ;  or  even  of 
a  perforation  of  the  bone,  e.g.,  in  the  region  of  the  maxilla  and  zygoma  (Case  15),  the 
temporal  bone  (Case  20),  a  cervical  vertebra  (Case  29),  or  the  sternum  (Case  40). 
Perhaps  it  is  a  recognition  of  the  surgeon’s  helplessness  that  in  a  case  of  perforation 
of  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  with  symptoms  of  tetanus  (Case  7),  the  only  suggestion  he 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  59 

makes  is  a  hot  application  to  the  mandible  to  relieve  the  constricted  ligaments,  followed 
by  his  inevitable  honey-ointment  on  lint.  Even  a  displacement  of  a  cervical  vertebra 
(Case  82)  receives  an  application  of  fresh  meat  on  the  first  day,  followed  by  imru  and 
honey,  while  the  patient  is  carefully  kept  in  a  sitting  posture. 

A  dislocation  of  the  ribs  (Case  48),  omitting  the  fresh  meat,  is  otherwise  treated  in 
the  same  way.  We  find  the  fresh  meat  again,  applied  as  usual  for  the  first  day  only, 
to  a  split  in  the  maxilla  (Case  16),  with  caution  to  keep  the  patient  in  a  sitting  position, 
while  continuing  treatment  with  honey-ointment  on  lint.  The  same  injury  in  the 
humerus  (Case  88)  receives  only  the  frequent  imru  followed  by  daily  application  of 
honey. 

Modern  skull  surgery  has  been  so  marvellously  developed  in  the  last  few  years 
that  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  our  surgeon  of  three  and  a  half  millenniums  ago  offer¬ 
ing  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  in  a  case  of  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull 
with  rupture  of  the  meningeal  membranes.  He  could  suggest  no  more  than  an  allevi- 
ative  application  of  grease,  while  cautioning  against  bandaging  or  adhesive  plaster. 
The  same  type  of  injury  in  the  maxilla  (Case  17)  receives  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  by 
scribal  error,  whereas  the  surgeon  has  some  hope  of  recovery  and  prescribes  the  same 
treatment  as  for  Case  16  above.  Finally  Case  9,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of 
the  frontal  bone,  prescribes  a  treatment  which  is  unique  in  our  treatise.  From  some  old 
recipe  papyrus,  like  all  the  others  preserved  to  us  in  Egyptian  medicine,  the  surgeon 
has  culled  the  only  magical  treatment  in  our  book  of  surgery  and  external  medicine. 
It  is  a  well-known  fact  that,  even  in  the  mind  of  a  modern  man  otherwise  rational  and 
scientific,  there  may  be  found  lurking  surprising  manifestations  of  superstition. 
Undoubtedly  our  surgeon  never  more  than  partially  escaped  the  current  superstitions 
of  his  age,  even  those  which  ran  counter  to  his  general  attitude  toward  his  craft  or, 
as  here  in  the  treatment  of  Case  9,  to  the  rational  views  which  he  usually  held  regarding 
each  individual  case. 

While  the  general  content  of  his  materia  medico  would  not  commend  itself  to 
modem  surgery,  it  may  be  noted  with  interest  that  in  the  case  of  an  infected  or 
necrotic  wound  in  the  breast  (Case  41),  he  prescribes  the  earliest  known  external 
application  of  salicin,  in  the  form  of  a  decoction  of  willow  ( salix )  leaves,  experience 
having  probably  taught  his  ancestors  centuries  earlier  the  antiseptic  effect  of  its  use. 
In  the  same  case  another  application  for  allaying  the  inflammation  contains  dung  and 
is  probably  ammoniacal.  His  astringent  application  in  this  case,  after  he  has  reduced 
the  inflammation,  is  a  solution  containing  copper  and  sodium  salts. 

List  of  cases  prescribing  exclusive  use  of  medicaments  externally  applied  : 

Case  1.  Flesh  wound  in  the  scalp  ;  Fresh  meat  bound  on,  first  day  only  ;  honey- 

ointment  on  lint,  bound  on  daily. 

Case  18.  Flesh  wound  in  the  temple ;  Fresh  meat  bound  on,  first  day  only  ;  honey- 

ointment  daily. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

60 

Case  19.  Perforation  in  the  temple ; 

Case  41.  Infected  wound  in  the  breast ; 

Case  46.  Prominent  abscess  in  the  breast ; 

Case  30.  Sprain  in  cervical  vertebrae ; 

Case  42.  Sprain  in  stemo-costal  articulations  ; 
Case  15.  Perforation  of  bone  in  region  of  maxilla 
and  zygoma ; 

Case  20.  Perforation  of  temporal  bone  ; 

Case  29.  Wound  in  cervical  vertebra  ; 

Case  40.  Perforation  of  the  sternum  ; 

Case  7,  I.  Perforation  of  sutures  of  the  scalp 
with  symptoms  of  tetanus ; 

Case  32.  Displacement  of  cervical  vertebra  ; 

Case  43.  Dislocation  of  the  ribs  ; 

Case  16.  Split  in  the  maxilla ; 

Case  38.  Split  in  the  humerus  ; 

Case  6.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
skull  with  rupture  of  meningeal  mem¬ 
branes  ; 

Case  17.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the 
maxilla  ; 

Case  9.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of 
frontal  bone  ; 

Normal  diet  with  no  medicine  ;  honey-ointment 
on  lint,  bound  on  daily. 

Cooling  application  :  decoction  containing  willow 
leaves  ;  astringent  application  :  solution  con¬ 
taining  copper  and  sodium  salts  ;  poultices  of 
unidentified  herbs. 

Two  cooling  applications,  the  second  containing 
“  mason’s  mortar ;  ”  decoction  for  allaying  in¬ 
flammation  :  sycamore  leaves,  acacia  leaves, 
and  “  ox  dung ;  ”  astringent  applications  : 
solution  containing  copper  and  sodium  salts  ; 
poultices  of  herbs. 

Fresh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only  ;  imru  and 
honey  daily. 

Imru  bound  on  ;  afterward  honey  daily. 

Imru  bound  on  ;  honey-ointment  daily. 

Sitting  posture ;  constricted  muscles  of  head 
softened  with  grease ;  uncertain  fluid  (milk  1) 
in  both  ears. 

Fresh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only ;  normal 
diet,  no  medicine. 

Fresh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only;  honey-oint¬ 
ment  on  lint,  bound  on  daily. 

Verdict  2  ;  hot  applications  to  ligaments  of  man¬ 
dible  ;  honey-ointment  on  lint,  bound  on. 

Fresh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only  ;  ointment 
applied  to  head  (sio  !) ;  imru  bound  on  injury  ; 
afterward  honey  daily  ;  patient  must  maintain 
sitting  posture. 

Imru,  bound  on ;  afterward  honey  daily. 

Freeh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only ;  patient 
must  maintain  sitting  posture ;  honey-oint¬ 
ment  on  lint,  bound  on  daily. 

Imru  bound  on  ;  afterward  honey  daily. 

Verdict  3 ;  application  of  ointment ;  caution 
against  binding ;  caution  against  application 
of  plaster. 

Verdict  3 ;  fresh  meat,  bound  on,  first  day  only  ; 
patient  must  maintain  sitting  posture  ;  honey- 
ointment  on  lint,  bound  on  daily. 

Magical  treatment ;  see  commentary  and  transla¬ 
tion. 

This  surgeon’s  general  word  for  treatment  is  *  inch,  the  original  meaning  of 
which  is  uncertain.  See  commentary  in  Case  1  (I  8).  It  is  applied  to  all  kinds  of 
treatment,  so  that  the  surgeon  may  be  charged,  “  Treat  {inch)  according  to  these 
directions  ”  (e. g.,  Case  41 ,  XIV  7).  Nevertheless,  as  used  in  our  treatise  inch  designates 
the  external  application  of  medicaments  in  at  least  twenty-six  cases,  and  possibly  more, 
out  of  thirty-three.  In  four  cases  it  designates  the  maintenance  of  the  patient  in 
a  sitting  posture,  expressed  in  the  words,  “  His  treatment  (inch)  is  sitting  ”  (Case  4, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  61 

II  7  ;  Case  7,  III  15  ;  Case  8,  IY  9  ;  Case  16,  VI  20).  There  was  a  special  course  of 
treatment  for  wounds  (perhaps  also  including  sores)  evidently  already  long  current, 
or  at  least  well  known,  called  {1*^  ®  &rwh  wbnw,  “  wound  treatment,”  which  is 
twice  mentioned  in  our  document  (Case  89,  XIII  7-8,  see  commentary ;  and  Case 
46,  XVI  7).  Unfortunately  we  know  nothing  about  this  treatment.  It  was  perhaps 
contained  in  a  surgical  treatise  already  in  circulation  in  our  surgeon’s  day  and  pro¬ 
bably  already  old,  which  bore  the  title,  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a  Wound  ” 
(see  commentary  on  Case  5,  II  17). 

5.  The  Glosses  Forming  the  Ancient  Commentary 

The  sixty-nine  glosses  in  our  treatise  form  the  most  valuable  body  of  materials  which 
it  has  brought  to  us.  They  constitute  a  little  dictionary  of  terms  distributed  through 
the  treatise,  which  was  already  so  old  in  the  Twenty-sixth  Century  b.  o.  that  it  contained 
numerous  terms  no  longer  current  and  requiring  explanation.  At  the  end  of  any  case 
containing  such  terms,  or  discussing  any  matters  which  needed  explanation,  a  com¬ 
mentator  has  added  his  definitions  and  explanatory  comments.  His  identity  is  as  totally 
unknown  to  us  as  that  of  the  author  of  the  treatise  himself.  He  cannot  have  been  the 
scribe  who  copied  our  papyrus.  This  worthy  was  far  too  careless,  and  betrays  his  ignor¬ 
ance  of  medical  science  far  too  obviously  to  have  been  able  to  produce  such  a  remarkable 
little  medical  dictionary.  It  is  evident  then  that  this  commentary  was  added  at  some 
date  not  merely  earlier  than  our  surviving  copy,  but  earlier  even  than  the  Middle 
Kingdom,  and  doubtless  toward  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom  (see  discussion,  pp.  9-11). 

In  twenty-nine  out  of  our  forty-eight  cases,  it  was  found  necessary  to  add  one  or 
more  of  these  explanatory  glosses,  making  altogether  a  total  of  sixty-nine.  The  only 
other  ancient  Egyptian  medical  papyrus  containing  this  kind  of  commentary  is  the 
Papyrus  Ebers,  which  has  twenty-six  glosses.1  Unfortunately  they  are  broken  up 
into  groups  by  irrelevant  matter  which  has  been  intruded  by  error  of  some  scribe  or 
editor.  None  follows  the  case  or  prescription  which  it  is  supposed  to  explain,  and  the 
entire  body  of  glosses  in  Papyrus  Ebers  has  thus  been  separated  from  the  treatise 
to  which  it  belonged,  an  accident  which  has  seriously  limited  their  value. 

In  form  each  gloss  is  invariably  introduced  by  !}«=»  yr,  “  as  for  ”  or  “with  regard 
to,”  followed  by  a  verbatim  quotation  of  the  word  or  phrase  to  be  explained.  The 
term  to  be  discussed  or  explained  in  the  gloss  is  thus  clearly  brought  before  the 
reader.  The  definition  follows,  usually  marked  by  the  copulative  o<?  pw,  “it  is,” 
i.e.,  “it  means.”  The  whole  gloss  then  has  the  following  form  : 

(]-=»  (yr) . (quoted  words  to  be  explained), 

q<?  (pw) . (explanatory  proposition). 

1  They  were  first  noted  by  Schaefer  in  1892.  See  ZeiUchrift  fiir  Aegypiische  Sprache,  Vol.  30 
(1892),  pp.  107-109. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

62  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

The  pw  is  of  course  postpositive,  as  usual,  and  does  not  stand  at  the  head  of  the 
explanatory  proposition  or  phrase,  but  after  the  first  word  or  two.  The  form  of  the 
gloss  in  English  is  then  : 

As  for:  “ . ”  (quoted  words  to  be  explained), 

it  means . (explanatory  proposition  or  phrase). 

Occasionally  we  find  the  definition  introduced  by  “he  (meaning  the  author  of 
the  treatise)  is  speaking  of  ”  (four  times,  Cases  80,  Gloss  A ;  81 ,  Gloss  A  ;  82,  Gloss  A  ; 
and  83,  Gloss  A).  Twice  wo  have  the  definition  introduced  by  ^)o<?  “  it  says” 
(Case  1,  Glosses  B  and  C).  In  five  glosses  there  is  no  introduction  of  the  definition  at 
all  (Cases  6,  Gloss  A  ;  11,  Gloss  B  ;  81,  Gloss  B  ;  40,  Gloss  A  ;  and  41,  Gloss  E). 

In  these  glosses  the  commentator’s  chief  purpose  was  first  to  ensure  that  the 
terms  designating  and  describing  the  injury  should  be  understood.  Accordingly  in  the 
first  eight  cases  concerning  injuries  of  the  skull,  we  find  the  following  matters  selected 
first  for  explanation  in  the  glosses : 

Case  1,  C.  “  Penetrating  to  the  [bone  of  his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash].” 

„  2,  A.  “  A  [gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone].” 

„  8,  A.  “  [Perforating  his  skull].” 

„  4,  A.  “  Splitting  his  skull.” 

„  5,  A.  “  Smashing  his  skull  ”  (compound  comminuted  fracture). 

„  6,  A.  “  Smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull  ”  (rupture 

of  meningeal  membranes). 

„  7,  A.  “  Perforating  the  sutures  of  [his  skull].” 

„  8,  A.  “  A  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no  wound  at 
all  upon  it.” 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  first  gloss  (designated  A)  under  each  case,  except  the 
first  case,  regularly  discusses  and  explains  the  nature  of  the  injury.  In  the  first  case 
some  preliminary  explanations  have  naturally  been  placed  first ;  but  after  Case  1 , 
throughout  the  treatise  this  explanation  of  the  nature  of  the  injury  appears  as  the 
first  gloss  in  every  important  case.1 

These  explanations  of  the  nature  of  the  injury  deal  chiefly  with  its  physical  and 
meohanical  character.  They  make  clear  to  the  ancient  medical  student  what  he  should 
understand  by  a  “  perforation,”  a  “  split,”  or  a  “  smash  ”  of  the  skull.  Following 
the  discussion  of  a  ^  Jf  thm,  that  is,  a  “  perforation  ”  of  the  skull,  the  commentator 
explains  that  it  means  “  a  contracted  smash,  through  his  incurring  a  break  like  a 
puncture  of  a  (pottery)  jar  ”  (Case  3,  Gloss  A).  Explaining  pSn,  a  “  split  ”  of 
the  skull,  the  commentator  says,  “  it  means  separating  shell  from  shell  of  his  skull, 
while  fragments  remain  sticking  in  the  flesh  of  his  head  and  do  not  come  away  ”  (Case 

1  See  Cases,  12,  14, 18,  22,  26,  30,  31,  32,  33,  34,  39,  41, 42,  43,  45,  and  46. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  63 

4,  Gloss  A).  Finally  the  commentator  explains  dd,  as  meaning,  “  a  smash  of  his 
skull  (such  that)  bones,  getting  into  that  smash,  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull. 
The  ‘  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  His  Wounds  ’  states  :  ‘  It  means  a  smash  of  his 
skull  into  numerous  fragments,  which  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull  ’  ”  (Case  5, 
Gloss  A).  The  commentator  draws  upon  another  treatise  on  wounds  for  a  description, 
making  it  clear  that  the  injury  is  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull. 
Similarly  we  find  an  injury  of  the  neck  called  a  u mh  of  the  neck,  regarding  which 

the  commentator  says,  “  He  is  speaking  of  a  separation  of  one  vertebra  of  his  neck  from 
another,  the  flesh  which  is  over  it  being  uninjured  ;  as  one  says,  ‘  It  is  wnh,’  concerning 
things  which  had  been  joined  together,  when  one  has  been  severed  from  another  ” 
(Case  31,  Gloss  A). 

These  examples  may  serve  to  illustrate  this  type  of  explanation  added  by  the 
commentator.  Having  thus  explained  the  physical  character  of  the  injury,  the 
commentator  also  devotes  much  attention  to  the  symptoms  and  the  condition  of  the 
patient,  explaining  all  terms  which  he  regards  as  needing  some  definition.  For 
example,  he  discusses  the  ancient  word  describing  the  shuffling  motion  of  one  foot  in 
walking,  presumably  an  evidence  of  partial  paralysis  resulting  from  an  injury  to  the 
brain  (Case  8,  Gloss  B),  and  in  the  same  case  he  endeavors  to  explain  the  convulsive 
motions  of  the  hands  and  arms,  which  he  intends  to  be  distinguished  from  similar 
symptoms  accompanying  some  disease.  One  of  the  most  interesting  glosses  in  the 
treatise  is  a  discussion  of  the  observation  that  a  dislocation  of  the  neck  is  accompanied 
by  an  erection  and  seminal  emission  (Case  31,  Gloss  B).  An  ancient  word  for  “  speech¬ 
less,”  designating  a  symptom  accompanying  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of 
the  temporal  bone,  calls  for  explanation  (Case  22,  Gloss  C).  Along  with  these  evidences 
of  paralysis  resulting  from  injuries  to  the  head  and  neck  we  find  a  whole  series  of 
discussions  explaining  other  symptoms,  like  stiffness  of  the  neck  (Case  3,  Gloss  C  ; 
Case  7,  Gloss  E),  clammy  countenance  (Case  7,  Gloss  D),  odor  of  the  skull  wound 
(Case  7,  G),  facial  distortion  (Case  7, 1),  paleness  (Case  7,  J)  and  others.  In  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  these  dangerous  head  wounds,  and  likewise  in  the  case  of  a  fracture  of  the 
humerus  with  a  wound  over  it  (Case  87),  the  surgeon  is  charged  to  adopt  a  waiting 
policy,  “  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  something.”  This  obscure  clause  is 
explained  in  Gloss  C  (Case  4)  as  meaning  “  until  thou  knowest  whether  he  will  die  or 
he  will  live.”  This  seems  very  much  like  an  early  recognition  of  the  Hippocratic  KpUns 
(“  crisis  ”).  The  cases  in  which  it  appears  will  be  found  listed  in  the  commentary  on 
Case  4,  Gloss  C. 

The  external  source  of  the  causes  which  induce  all  these  symptoms  is  a  matter 
regarded  by  the  commentator  as  a  very  important  fact,  which  must  be  fully  recognized. 
A  crushed  cervical  vertebra  is  discussed  in  the  gloss  (B,  Case  38)  and  explained  again 
as  due  to  a  fall  on  the  head,  although  the  text  had  already  stated  this  fact.  In  a  case 

oi.uchicago.edu 

64  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

where  a  dangerous  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  has  occurred  without 
leaving  any  externally  visible  contusion  the  commentator  has  repeated  and  further 
explained  the  statement  of  the  text  that  the  patient  must  be  regarded  as  “  one  whom 
something  entering  from  the  outside  has  smitten  ”  (Case  8,  Gloss  C).  This  term 
“  something  entering  from  the  outside  ”  must  also  be  further  explained,  and  the 
commentator  takes  it  up  in  another  gloss  (D,  Case  8),  one  of  the  most  interesting 
explanations  in  our  treatise.  Here  he  warns  his  reader  that  “  something  entering 
from  the  outside  ”  is  “  not  the  intrusion  of  something  which  his  (the  patient’s)  flesh 
engenders,”  that  is,  the  patient’s  condition  is  not  due  to  disease,  which  is  strikingly 
recognized  here  as  “  something  which  his  flesh  engenders.”  On  the  contrary  “  some¬ 
thing  entering  from  the  outside  ”  means  “  the  breath  of  an  outside  god  or  death,” 
that  is,  the  external  casualty,  the  accident  from  the  outside,  the  force  majeure,  which 
was  to  the  Egyptian  as  to  later  men  an  impenetrable  mystery,  and  which  in  the 
Papyrus  Ebers  is  deified  like  a  Fortuna  or  a  Tvyr]  (see  commentary  on  Case  8,  Gloss  D). 

In  the  course  of  these  sixty-nine  short  paragraphs  of  explanation  a  good  deal  of 
light  is  thrown  upon  the  Egyptian  surgeon’s  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology. 
The  first  gloss  in  the  treatise,  which  is  also  the  longest  in  the  entire  series  (Case  1, 
Gloss  A),  deals  with  the  meaning  of  “  thou  examinest  a  man.”  It  takes  up  the  pulse 
in  some  detail,  in  a  discussion  which  is  the  more  remarkable  in  view  of  the  fact  that  we 
find  no  mention  of  the  pulse  in  early  Greek  medicine  until  the  observations  of  Demo¬ 
critus  regarding  it.  The  earliest  reference  to  it  in  Greek  medical  documents  seems  to 
have  been  in  a  treatise  entitled  nepl  rpof>y}s,  “  On  Nutrition.”  It  has  been  stated  that 
Hippocratic  medicine  knew  nothing  of  the  pulse  ; 1  but  the  Hippocratic  school  cer¬ 
tainly  recognized  tactile  observations  in  examining  a  patient,  and  regarded  touch  as 
a  means  of  testing  the  pulse.2  In  our  treatise  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  method  of 
employing  the  touch  in  observing  the  pulse  was  that  of  counting  the  strokes,  a  method 
the  more  remarkable  if  really  employed  over  twelve  centuries  before  Hippocrates. 

In  observing  the  pulse  our  surgeon  knows  that  he  is  examining  the  operation  of  the 
heart,  and  he  states  that  the  observation  of  the  pulse  is  undertaken  “  in  order  to  know 
the  action  of  the  heart.”  He  also  affirms  that  there  is  a  canal  leading  from  the  heart 
to  every  member  of  the  body.  He  enumerates  the  extremities  and  other  points  where 
the  pulsations  of  the  heart  are  discernible  and  adds  that  its  “  pulsation  is  in  every 
vessel  of  every  member.”  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  he  has  recognized  the  existence 
of  a  cardiac  system,  with  which  he  is  dealing,  no  matter  what  region  may  be  affected 
by  the  injury  he  is  treating.  He  takes  up  this  fact  in  connection  with  the  very  first 
case  under  discussion,  a  wound  in  the  head,  as  a  matter  of  the  first  importance  for  the 
surgeon.  As  he  advances  to  injuries  of  the  skull  penetrating  the  brain,  he  finds 

1  W.  H.  S.  Jonee,  Hippocrates,  V.  1,  p.  xx,  foot-note. 

2  See  Meyer-Steineg  and  Sudhoff,  Qeschichte  der  M  edict  n,  2d  ed.,  p.  60. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  65 

within  the  brain  itself  the  action  of  the  heart  evinced  in  what  he  calls ' 1  something  throb¬ 
bing  and  fluttering  under  thy  fingers,  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before 
it  becomes  whole  ”  (Case  6,  II  20-21).  His  recognition  of  a  cardiac  system  therefore 
is  clearly  demonstrated ;  we  cannot  affirm  that  he  recognized  the  circulatory  character 
of  that  system.  In  any  case,  however,  he  was  so  near  a  discernment  of  the  circulation 
of  the  blood,  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  re-examine  the  evidence  regarding  a  possible 
knowledge  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  by  the  Alexandrian  physicians  after  800  b.c. 

This  extraordinary  account  of  the  cardiac  system  introduced  to  explain  the  nature 
of  a  surgical  examination  is  quoted  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers  (99, 1-5),  where  it  is  preceded 
by  the  title,  “  Beginning  of  the  Secret  Book  of  the  Physician.”  It  would  Beem, 
therefore,  that  Papyrus  Ebers  drew  the  material  from  an  ancient  book  of  that  name. 
If  Papyrus  Ebers  drew  this  discussion  from  our  treatise,  which  is  therefore  cited  by 
its  title,  we  have  at  the  head  of  this  citation  in  Papyrus  Ebers  the  title  of  our  treatise, 
as  we  shall  see  in  the  commentary  on  Case  1  (Gloss  A). 

The  human  brain  appears  for  the  first  time  in  medical  literature  in  the  text  and 
the  glosses  of  our  treatise.  Our  surgeon  knows  that  the  folds  of  the  brain  lie  in  con¬ 
volutions,  which  he  says  are  “  like  those  corrugations  which  form  on  molten  copper.” 
He  takes  up  this  comparison  in  a 'gloss  (Case  6,  Gloss  B),  and  explains  that  the  refer¬ 
ence  is  to  the  floating  slag  forming  on  molten  copper,  which  the  copper-smith  rejects 
before  he  pours  the  metal  into  the  mould.  Any  one  who  has  observed  the  convolutions 
into  which  metallic  slag  forms  itself  will  recognize  the  aptness  of  the  ancient  surgeon’s 
comparison.  In  another  gloss  (A)  appended  to  the  same  case,  the  commentator 
explains,  that  “  rending  open  the  brain,”  accompanying  a  compound  comminuted 
fracture  of  the  skull,  is  a  reference  to  “  the  membrane  (or  skin)  enveloping  his  brain,” 
■which  is  rent,  “  so  that  it  breaks  open  his  fluid  in  the  interior  of  his  head.”  This  is 
the  earliest  known  reference  to  the  meningeal  membranes. 

The  earliest  observations  showing  that  the  brain  is  a  center  of  nervous  control 
are  likewise  contained  in  the  text  and  glosses  which  we  are  now  discussing.  The  surgeon 
has  noticed  that  injuries  to  the  skull  and  brain  result  in  disturbing  the  normal  control 
of  various  parts  of  the  body,  even  as  far  away  as  the  feet.  As  the  result  of  a  perfora¬ 
tion  of  the  sutures  of  the  skull  (Case  7)  he  records  extreme  facial  distortion,  which 
the  commentator  has  explained  in  Gloss  I.  In  the  same  case  he  also  notes  constric¬ 
tion  of  the  ligaments  of  the  neck,  and  the  commentator  discusses  this  matter  in  Gloss  E. 
Similar  effects  in  the  temporal  muscle  controlling  the  mandible  are  likewise  observed, 
and  in  two  interesting  glosses  (Case  7,  GlosseB  B  and  C)  the  commentator  explains  the 
anatomy  and  pathology  involved.  The  most  remarkable  observation  of  this  kind 
is  made  in  connection  with  a  case  of  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull 
which  however  displays  no  visible  external  contusion  (Case  8).  The  surgeon  makes 
the  following  note  :  “  His  eye  is  askew  because  of  it,  on  the  side  of  him  having  that 

F 

oi.uchicago.edu 

66  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

injury  which  is  in  his  skull ;  he  walks  shuffling  with  his  s6le,  on  the  side  of  him  having 
that  injury  which  is  in  his  skull.”  The  repetition  of  the  words  “  that  injury  which 
is  in  his  skull  ”  suggests  that  the  surgeon  is  calling  attention  to  the  fact  of  the  effects 
of  an  injury  in  a  situation  which  may  be  distant  from  the  place  of  the  observed  effect. 
Much  more  remarkable  is  the  repetition  of  the  detail,  “  on  the  side  of  him  having  that 
injury  which  is  in  his  skull,”  showing  that  the  surgeon  was  already  aware  of  the 
importance  of  the  relationship  between  the  side  of  the  brain  which  has  suffered  the 
injury  and  the  side  of  the  body  which  is  affected  by  the  brain  injury.  The  fact  that 
he  distinctly  specifies  in  both  cases  on  which  side  the  affected  eye  and  foot  are  with 
reference  to  the  injured  side  of  the  brain  is  highly  significant,  and  indicates  that  he 
has  already  discerned  the  localization  of  control  in  the  brain.  All  this  raises  the 
question  whether  the  absence  of  any  visible  external  contusion  may  not  have  been 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  actual  fracture  itself  was  a  contre-coup,  throwing  the  paralysis 
of  the  foot  over  to  the  same  side  which  had  received  the  blow.  In  this  case  we  must 
suppose  that  the  surgeon’s  term  “injury”  refers  to  the  blow  causing  the  contre-coup. 
The  commentator  takes  up  this  paralysis  of  one  foot  for  discussion  (Case  8,  Gloss  B), 
but  unfortunately  goes  no  further  than  an  explanation  of  the  evidently  archaic  word 
used  for  “  shuffle.”  • 

There  is  no  effort  on  the  part  of  the  commentator  to  correlate  these  evidences  of 
a  nervous  system  centering  in  the  brain,  with  similar  effects  arising  from  injuries  of 
the  vertebrae.  We  find  him  adding  two  very  interesting  discussions  of  an  emissio 
seminis  and  inability  to  control  the  flow  of  urine,  both  due  to  a  dislocation  of  a  cervical 
vertebra  (Case  81,  Glosses  B  and  C) ;  but  he  does  not  discuss  the  speechlessness 
ensuing  when  a  cervical  vertebra  has  been  crushed  (Case  88,  examination).  In  the 
diagnosis  of  this  case  and  also  that  of  Case  81  (dislocated  neck),  the  surgeon  makes  the 
interesting  observation  that  both  arms  and  both  legs  are  paralysed.  In  both  cases 
the  commentator  adds  an  excellent  explanation  of  the  mechanical  processes  which 
have  caused  the  fracture  and  the  crushing  of  the  cervical  vertebra,  but  he  leaves 
without  remark  the  observation  of  the  paralysed  limbs. 

It  will  be  seen  then  that  our  surgeon  and  the  commentator  had  already  observed 
a  series  of  effects  arising  in  other  parts  of  the  body  as  a  result  of  injuries  to  the  brain 
and  the  spine.  They  were  furthermore  already  aware  of  the  shift  of  these  effects 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  according  as  the  injury  to  the  brain  was  on  one  side  or 
the  other,  and  in  so  doing  had  probably  been  misled  by  the  contre-coup.  These  observa¬ 
tions,  however,  had  not  been  correlated  into  a  system,  nor  connected  with  a  complex 
of  ramifying  nerves.  Indeed  our  document,  as  far  as  preserved,  discloses  no  word  for 
nerves,  and  there  is  no  indication  in  any  of  the  Egyptian  documents  that  such  a 
designation  existed  at  this  remote  stage  of  scientific  knowledge  of  the  human  body. 
As  we  shall  see  in  the  following  paragraphs  our  Egyptian  surgeon  was  still  in  a  very 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  67 

early  stage  of  observation  concerning  such  filaments  and  cord-like  connections  as  the 
nerves,  and  when  he  found  them  as  disclosed  by  dissection,  he  was  probably  not  aware 
of  their  function.  The  clear  correlation  of  brain  and  spine  with  the  nervous  system 
was  first  achieved  by  Herophilos  at  Alexandria  in  the  Third  Century  b.c. 

While  the  ancient  commentator  was  unaware  of  nerve  filaments,  he  was  acquainted 
with  the  character  and  function  of  the  muscles  and  ligaments,  and  was  interested  in 
them.  Case  7,  a  perforation  of  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  records  the  surgeon’s  observa¬ 
tion  of  a  constriction  of  the  “  cord  of  his  mandible ;  ”  also  that  “  the  ligaments 
of  his  neck  are  tense.”  The  commentator  appends  three  discussions  of  these  observa¬ 
tions,  two  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  ancient  word  for  “  contracted,”  “  constricted  ” 
or  “  tense  ”  (Glosses  B  and  E),  and  one  to  define  the  “  cord  of  his  mandible  ”  (Gloss  C). 
In  explaining  the  constriction  of  the  “  cord  of  his  mandible,”  the  commentator  says 
that  it  refers  to  “  a  stiffening  on  the  part  of  the  ligaments  at  the  end  of  his  ramus, 
which  are  fastened  to  his  temporal  bone  ”  (Gloss  B).  It  is  not  likely  that  he  had 
already  built  up  a  complete  catalogue  of  the  muscles  of  the  body,  but  the  above 
examples  suffice  to  show  that  he  had  studied  them  in  dissection  and  in  the  treatment 
of  wounds,  and  not  merely  casually  as  revealed  in  the  course  of  embalming.  It  is 
noticeable,  however,  that  the  surgeon  says  nothing  of  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and 
shoulders,  although  he  was  aware  of  their  effects  as  he  directs  the  practitioner  how 
to  reduce  a  fractured  humerus  or  clavicle,  by  prying  on  a  fulcrum  against  the  pull  of 
these  muscles  (Cases  85  and  86). 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  the  commentator’s  discussion  of  the  soft  tissues  of 
the  body,  especially  the  cardiac  system,  the  nerves  and  the  muscles,  it  should  be 
noted  that  our  surgeon  and  the  commentator  likewise,  both  use  the  same  word  for 
canal  or  vessel,  and  muscle  or  ligament.  This  word  ^  mt  is  employed  throughout 
the  commentator’s  long  discussion  of  the  cardiac  system  as  the  word  for  “  canal  ” 
or  “  vessel  ”  (Case  1,  Gloss  A).  Again  where  the  surgeon  has  used  w'-t,  an 

old  word  for  “  cord  ”  to  designate  the  temporal  muscle,  the  commentator  explains 
it  as  meaning  the  mt-w  (plural),  “  ligaments  ”  fastened  to  the  temporal  bone.  It 
is  certain  therefore  that  the  same  word  served  both  for  “  vessel  ”  and  for  “  ligament  ” 
or  “  sinew.”  Under  these  circumstances  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  the  Egyptian 
had  included  also  the  nerves  among  these  cord-like  connections.  The  Egyptian 
surgeon  knew  quite  well  that  the  vessels  or  canals  of  the  cardiac  system  were  hollow 
and  conveyed  blood,  but  he  nevertheless  applied  to  them  the  word  ^  mt,  which  must 
have  been  a  general  term  for  any  cord-like  connection,  which  in  external  form  might 
not  be  so  unlike  a  sinew  or  a  nerve.  In  this  use  of  a  common  designation  for  sinew 
and  canal,  and  perhaps  also  nerve,  we  doubtless  have  one  of  the  reasons  why  the 
three  groups  of  such  connections,  namely  nerves,  blood-vessels,  and  muscles  were  not 
clearly  grouped  as  three  separate  systems. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

68  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

On  the  other  hand  the  bony  framework  of  the  body  must  have  been  early  familiar 
to  the  Egyptian,  in  a  climate  where  skeletons  last  so  long.  Even  among  the  Greeks, 
that  is,  in  a  climate  less  favorable  to  such  preservation  of  the  bones,  the  physicians 
knew  far  more  of  the  bones  than  of  the  soft  tissues.  The  commentator’s  above  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  temporal  muscle  and  the  mandible  connects  very  interestingly  with  his 
explanations  and  descriptions  of  the  anatomy  of  the  mandible  and  the  temporal  bone. 
In  discussing  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  temporal  bone  the  surgeon 
naturally  is  involved  in  a  reference  to  “  the  end  of  his  ramus  ”  (condyle  and  coronoid 
process).  For  ramus  he  uses  a  term  derived  from  the  name  of  a  bird.  The  com¬ 
mentator  fears  that  this  perhaps  already  ancient  name  is  no  longer  familiar  to  the 
reader,  and  he  therefore  adds  a  remark  explaining  “  the  end  of  his  ramus  ”  by  saying 
that  “  it  means  the  end  of  his  mandible.  The  ramus  — it  is  in  his  temporal 

bone  just  as  the  claw  of  an  >amre-bird  (,mr)  grasps  an  object  ”  (Case  22,  Gloss  A). 
The  fork  at  the  summit  of  the  ramus  is  thus  compared  to  the  claw  of  a  two-toed  bird, 
which  grasps  a  thing  as  the  bifurcating  tip  of  the  ramus  engages  with  the  t  emporal  bone. 

These  anatomical  explanations  of  the  commentator  thus  make  use  of  a  variety 
of  objects  from  the  world  of  nature  or  of  the  arts  to  suggest  the  shape  or  the  function 
of  the  parts  to  be  described,  just  as  modern  science  employs  similar  figures.  We 
have  already  seen  how  the  surgeon  likens  the  convolutions  of  the  brain  to  slag  forma¬ 
tions  floating  on  molten  metal,  and  the  commentator’s  discussion  of  the  comparison. 
In  the  same  way,  we  have  the  dome  of  the  skull  designated  as  “  the  chest  of  his  head,” 
and  the  commentator  thinks  it  wise  to  add  an  explanation  here,  saying  “  it  means 
the  middle  of  his  crown,  next  to  his  brain.  The  likening  of  it  is  to  a  chest  ”  (Case  7, 
Gloss  H),  a  very  common  article  of  furniture  in  an  Egyptian  household.  Similarly, 
an  architectural  term  is  applied  by  the  surgeon  to  the  nose  ;  he  deals  in  Case  11  with 
a  “  break  in  the  column  of  his  nose.”  The  commentator  adds  what  is  for  us  a  confused 
and  difficult  explanation  of  the  exact  limits  of  the  portion  of  the  nose  included  under 
this  term  (Case  11,  Gloss  A).  In  Case  40  it  is  doubtless  the  appearance  of  the  sternum, 
with  its  bristling  lines  of  ribs,  which  has  suggested  that  the  manubrium  be  called  by 
the  name  of  an  animal  like  a  porcupine  or  hedgehog,  having  vigorous  hair  or  spines. 
This  term  likewise  leads  the  commentator  to  add  an  explanation  indicating  what 
animal  has  suggested  the  designation  (Case  40,  Gloss  A). 

In  one  case  the  commentator  warns  the  reader  against  accepting  such  a  descriptive 
term  too  literally.  In  discussing  a  fracture  of  the  nasal  bone,  the  surgeon  is  in¬ 
structed  to  cleanse  both  nostrils  “  until  every  worm  of  blood  which  coagulates  in 
the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils  comes  forth.”  The  commentator  adds  a  gloss  to  this 
case  explaining  that  only  a  comparison  is  involved  in  the  passage,  which  he  says 
designates  merely  “  the  clotting  of  blood  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils,  likened  to  a 
worm  (^^°  "to"-  rnrrt),  which  subsists  in  the  water.”  The  word  “  worm  ’’was  obviously 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  69 

employed  by  the  original  writer  of  the  treatise  to  designate  the  fibrous,  stringy  forma¬ 
tions  in  coagulated  blood  (Case  12,  Gloss  C). 

The  interest  of  the  commentator  in  the  text  he  is  explaining  is  both  scientific  and 
pedagogic.  With  the  gloss  just  discussed  we  have  probably  passed  from  the  scientific 
to  the  pedagogic.  The  same  motive  has  led  to  the  insertion  of  not  a  few  of  the  com¬ 
mentator’s  explanations,  especially  where  the  text  contains  an  ancient  word  no  longer 
commonly  current.  Indeed  he  was  so  concerned  lest  the  ancient  word  for  “  ruddy  ” 
should  not  be  understood,  that  he  has  inserted  his  explanation  of  the  word  in  no  less 
than  three  different  cases  (Cases  7,  Gloss  F  ;  41,  Gloss  C  ;  and  46,  Gloss  C).  We  find 
him  explaining  the  presumably  old  or  unusual  words  for  “  shuffling  ”  (Case  8,  Gloss  B), 
“  blood-shot  ”  (Case  19,  Gloss  A),  “  piercing  through  ”  (Case  26,  Gloss  A),  “  dribbles  ” 
(Case  81,  Gloss  C),  or  the  word  bkn,  a  no  longer  current  word  for  “  urine  ” 

of  a  sheep  (Case  7,  Gloss  G).  In  one  case  it  is  an  extraordinary  and  picturesque  idiom 
or  figure  of  speech  which  the  commentator  explains  to  us,  and  which  seems  to  have 
been  as  enigmatic  to  the  reader  of  the  Third  Millennium  b.c.  as  it  is  to  us.  We 
find  the  surgeon  given  the  curious  instructions  “  Moor  him  (the  patient)  at  his  mooring 
stakes,”  or  “  Put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes  ”  in  nine  different  cases.  At  the  first 
occurrence  of  this  remarkable  injunction  (Case  8,  I  22-28),  the  commentator  has 
added  an  explanation  (Gloss  D),  which  reads,  “  It  means  putting  him  on  his  customary 
diet,  without  administering  to  him  a  prescription.” 

We  are  often  at  a  loss  to  know  exactly  what  kind  of  an  appliance  is  intended  when 
the  text  of  the  case  prescribes  the  use  of  some  surgical  device,  and  we  are  usually  not 
enlightened  as  to  the  character  of  the  device  or  the  manner  of  its  use.  We  must 
suppose  that  such  information  was  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  among  surgeons. 
Of  adhesive  plaster  the  commentator  has  thought  it  advisable  to  add  an  explanation 
(Case  2,  Gloss  B) ;  but  by  the  time  he  reached  Case  10  he  had  forgotten  this  fact  and 
he  therefore  inserted  the  same  explanation  again  (Case  10,  Gloss  A).  In  explaining 
a  certain  kind  of  bandage  he  also  gives  us  the  interesting  information  already  men¬ 
tioned  above,  that  it  was  prepared  by  the  embalmers  (Case  9,  Gloss  A). 

The  full  value  of  this  ancient  body  of  commentary  can  be  understood  only  by 
reading  it  in  connection  with  the  text  of  the  treatise  which  it  is  intended  to  explain. 
Preliminary  to  such  a  reading,  it  will  be  found  useful  to  study  the  following  com¬ 
plete  list  of  the  passages  which  the  commentator  has  selected  for  explanatory 
discussion. 

List  of  terms  and  expressions  explained  in  the  glosses  in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  : 

Case  1.  A.  “  Thou  examinest  a  man.”  The  explanation  contains  a  possible  reference  to  counting 
the  pulse  and  also  an  aocount  of  the  cardiac  system. 

B.  “  While  his  wound  does  not  have  [two  lips].” 

C.  “  Penetrating  to  the  [bone  of  his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash].”  Compare  Case  18,  A. 
Case  2.  A.  “  A  [gaping]  wound  [in  his  head  penetrating  to  the  bone].” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

70 

Case  2.  B. 

C. 

Case  3.  A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

Case  4.  A. 

B. 

C. 

Case  5.  A. 
Case  0.  A. 

B. 

Case  7.  A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

F. 

G. 

H. 

I. 

J. 

Case  8.  A. 

B. 

C. 
I). 
E. 

Case  9.  A. 
Case  10.  A. 
Case  11.  A. 
B. 

Case  12.  A. 

B. 

C. 

Case  13. 
Case  14.  A. 
Cases  16-17. 
Case  18.  A. 
B. 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

“  Two  strips  of  linen,”  meaning  adhesive  tape  or  plaster. 

“  Not  having  a  split,  a  perforation,  (or)  [a  smash].” 

“  [Perforating  his  skull].” 

“  Unable  to  look  at  his  shoulders  and  his  brefast].” 

“  Suffering  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.” 

“  Moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes  :  ”  an  ancient  idiom  for  “  putting  him  on  his 
customary  diet,  without  administering  to  him  a  prescription.” 

“  Splitting  his  skull.” 

“  The  swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes.” 

“  Thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point :  ”  the  crisis. 

“  Smashing  his  skull,”  explaining  a  compound  comminuted  fracture. 

“  Smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull,”  explaining  a  rupture 
of  the  meningeal  membranes. 

“  Those  corrugations  which  form  on  molten  copper,”  used  as  illustrating  the  external 
appearance  of  the  convolutions  of  the  brain. 

“  Perforating  the  sutures  of  [his  skull],”  explaining  “  sutures  ”  as  “  what  is  between 
shell  and  shell  of  his  skull.” 

“  The  cord  of  his  mandible  is  contracted,”  explaining  probable  symptoms  of  tetanus, 
and  the  anatomy  of  the  mandible  and  its  ligaments. 

'*  The  cord  of  his  mandible.” 

“  His  countenance  clammy  with  sweat.” 

“  The  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense.” 

“  His  face  is  ruddy.” 

“  The  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  of  sheep,”  bbn  being  an  ancient  word 
for  urine. 

“  The  chest  of  his  head,”  this  being  an  ancient  term  for  the  dome  of  the  skull. 

“  His  mouth  is  bound,  (and)  both  his  eye- brows  are  drawn,  while  his  face  is  as  if  he  wept :  ” 
facial  distortion  accompanying  an  injury  of  the  skull. 

“  He  has  become  pale  and  has  already  rshown  exhaustion!.” 

“  A  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no  wound  at  all  upon  it:  ” 
a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  without  visible  external  contusion. 

“  He  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole :  ”  partial  paralysis  of  one  foot  resulting  from  an  injury 
to  the  brain. 

“  One  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten,”  emphasized  because  of  lack 
of  external  contusion. 

“  Something  entering  from  outside,”  outside  deBtiny,  the  will  of  Providence,  “  not  the 
intmsion  of  anything  which  his  flesh  engenders.” 

“  One  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork  and  who  does  not  fall  with  his 
nails  in  the  palm  of  his  hand :  ”  obscure  convulsive  action  like  symptoms  accompanying 
injury  to  the  brain. 

“  Covering  for  physicians’  use,"  explained  as  a  bandage  prepared  by  the  embalmers. 

“  Two  strips  of  linen,”  repeating  the  explanation  already  given  in  Case  2,  Gloss  B. 

“  The  column  of  his  nose,”  explained  as  the  soft  outer  nose,  including  the  septum. 

“  His  two  nostrils.” 

“  A  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose.” 

“  His  nose  is  bent,  his  face  disfigured.” 

“  Every  worm  of  blood  which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils.” 

No  glosses, 

“  A  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through.” 

No  glosses. 

“  A  wound  not  having  a  gash,  while  it  penetrates  to  the  bone  ;  ”  compare  Case  1,  C. 

“  His  pro’,”  explained  as  meaning  his  temple,  and  therefore  evidently  some  old  designa¬ 
tion  no  longer  current  at  the  date  of  the  insertion  of  this  explanation. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  71 

Case  19.  A.  “  His  two  eyes  are  blood-shot,”  the  terra  for  “  blood-shot  ”  being  some  old  and  un¬ 
familiar  term. 

Cases  20-21.  No  glosses. 

Case  22.  A.  “  The  end  of  his  ramus,”  the  term  for  “  ramus  ”  being  an  ancient  word  derived  from 
the  name  of  a  two-toed  bird,  whose  forked  claw  suggested  the  fork  at  the  head  of  the 
ramus. 

B.  “  Thou  seest  its  fragments  in  the  interior  of  his  ear,”  the  term  for  “  fragments  ”  being 

an  archaic  word  designating  the  fragments  of  bone  visible  in  the  inside  of  the  ear  after 
a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  temporal  bone. 

C.  “  He  is  speechless  :  ”  a  symptom  accompanying  the  compound  comminuted  fracture  of 

the  temporal  bone,  but  designated  by  an  uncommon  word. 

Cases  23-25.  No  glosses. 

Case  26.  A.  “  A  wound  in  his  lip  piercing  through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth,”  the  term  “  piercing 
through  ”  being  some  old  word  requiring  elucidation. 

Cases  27-29.  No  glosses. 

Case  30.  A.  “  A  sprain  :  ”  evidently  an  archaic  word  explained  as  meaning  “  a  rending  of  two  mem¬ 
bers,  (although)  it  (=each)  is  (still)  in  its  place.” 

Case  31.  A.  “  A  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  explained  in  the  following  words  :  “  He  is 
speaking  of  a  separation  of  one  vertebra  of  his  neck  from  another,  the  flesh  whioh  is 
over  it  being  uninjured  ;  as  one  says,  ‘  It  is  umh  ’  (dislocated),  concerning  things  which 
had  been  joined  together,  when  one  has  been  severed  from  another.” 

B.  “  It  is  an  emissio  aeminia  which  befalls  his  phallus  :  ”  a  result  of  a  broken  neck. 

C.  “  While  his  urine  dribbles,”  the  ancient  word  for  “  dribbles  ”  requiring  explanation. 
Case  32.  A.  “  A  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck.” 

Case  33.  A.  “  A  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck.” 

B.  “  His  falling  head  downward  has  caused  one  vertebra  to  crush  into  the  next.” 

Case  34.  A.  “  A  dislocation  in  his  two  collar  bones,”  with  an  interesting  description  of  the  anatomy 
in  this  region. 

Cases  35-38.  No  glosses. 

Case  39.  A.  “  Tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast.” 

Case  40.  A.  “  The  manubrium  of  his  sternum,”  named  from  a  spiny  animal  like  a  porcupine. 

Case  41.  A.  “  A  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  inflamed:”  a  wound  sluggish  in  healing,  persistently 
remaining  open,  explained  by  quoting  an  ancient  work  called,  “  Treatise  on  what 
Pertains  to  a  Wound.” 

B.  “  A  whirl  of  inflammation  in  his  wound.” 

C.  “  Its  two  lips  are  ruddy,”  explaining  the  archaic  term  for  ruddy  which  had  been  already 

explained  in  Case  7,  Gloss  F. 

D.  “  His  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage.” 

E.  “  While  heat  continually  issues  from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy  touch,”  explaining 

an  archaic  word  for  “  issue  ”  employed  in  the  discussion. 

Case  42.  A.  “  Ribs  of  his  breast,”  explaining  the  presumably  archaic  term  for  ribs. 

Case  43.  A.  “  A  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,”  explained  as  meaning  “  a  displacement  of  the 
heads  of  the  ribs  of  his  sternum,  which  are  articulated  in  his  sternum.” 

B.  “  He  suffers  with  swellings  in  his  two  sides.” 

C.  “  His  two  sides.” 

Case  44.  No  glosses. 

Case  45.  A.  “  Bulging  tumors  on  his  breast.” 

Case  46.  A.  “  An  abscess  with  prominent  head  on  his  breast.” 

B.  “  Clamminess  of  their  surface.” 

C.  “  There  is  no  ruddiness  upon  it,”  explaining  the  meaning  of  the  term  for  ruddiness  again, 

after  having  explained  the  same  term  twice  above,  Case  7,  Gloss  F,  and  Case  41,  Gloss  C. 
Case  47.  No  glosses. 

Case  48.  Glosses,  if  any,  are  lost. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

72 

II.  Function  and  Age  of  the  Treatise 

In  studying  the  surviving  treatises  of  the  Hippocratic  school  of  medicine  one  is 
struck  by  the  fact  that  the  physician  of  that  school  was  far  more  interested  in  the 
human  body  when  it  was  sick  than  when  it  was  well.  His  knowledge  of  anatomy  and 
physiology,  therefore,  as  based  on  a  study  of  the  normal  human  body,  was  not  extensive 
or  systematic.  Hippocratic  study  of  the  human  body  when  ailing,  furthermore,  was 
evidently  more  often  inspired  by  a  desire  for  knowledge  than  by  the  hope  of  curing 
the  patient.  Thus  among  the  forty-two  case-histories  recorded  in  the  Hippocratic 
treatises  on  Epidemics  I  and  III,1  twenty-five,  that  is  considerably  more  than  half, 
end  in  death,  and  this  group  of  case-histories  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  a  body  of 
evidence  collected  by  the  methods  of  scientific  investigation,  rather  than  the  casual 
observations  incident  to  the  physician’s  daily  practice.  It  may  be  for  modern  medical 
men  to  decide  whether  this  evidence  might  possess  any  value  in  a  subsequent  effort 
to  heal  or  cure ;  but  such  a  conclusion  would  seem  to  be  very  doubtful. 

In  the  same  way  the  author  of  our  surgical  treatise  was  obviously  interested  in 
the  human  body  and  the  phenomena  it  exhibited,  even  though  he  could  do  nothing  for 
the  patient.  That  the  knowledge  of  the  human  organism  which  the  ancient  Egyptian 
surgeons  gained  by  this  attitude  of  mind  was  laid  down  in  systematic  treatises,  we 
can  hardly  doubt.  These  treatises,  if  they  really  existed,  have  unhappily  been  lost. 

It  should  therefore  be  clearly  borne  in  mind  when  examining  our  treatise,  that 
while  the  observations  on  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  human  organs  here 
recorded  are  not  purely  casual,  nevertheless  our  treatise  is  not  a  systematic  discussion 
of  the  human  body.  In  the  systematic  organization  of  the  materials,  beginning  with 
the  head  and  proceeding  downward,  we  note,  however,  that  it  has  some  outward 
resemblance  to  an  organized  treatise  on  anatomy  and  physiology.  It  is  nevertheless 
a  group  of  discussions  of  injuries,  and  not  of  organs  and  parts  of  the  body. 

We  see  then  that  the  treatise  may  have  served  one  or  more  of  a  number  of  different 
functions.  There  were  evidently  at  least  three  classes  of  surgical  documents  in  ancient 
Egypt.  First,  handbooks  used  by  surgeons  in  their  daily  practice,  just  as  the  physi¬ 
cians  must  have  used  the  recipes  collected  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers  ;  again,  second,  it  is 
obvious  that  there  were  outlines  from  which  Egyptian  surgeons,  in  those  medical 
schools  which  preceded  the  one  founded  by  Darius,  lectured  to  their  students  ;  for 
we  cannot  suppose  that  the  great  mass  of  details  discussed  in  the  Edwin  Smith 
Papyrus  was  a  matter  of  oral  transmission.  It  was  doubtless  in  the  use  of  such  lecture 
outlines  that  the  lecturer’s  comments  on  already  ancient  discussions,  formulas  and 
directions  would  gradually  accumulate.  These  explanations  of  all  matters  needing 
elucidation  would  appear  as  the  glosses  which  form  the  commentary  in  our  treatise. 

1  W.  H.  S.  Jones,  Hippocrates,  London,  1923,  V.  1,  p.  144. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  73 

Finally,  third,  there  must  have  been  records  of  the  instruction  received  by  students 
of  medicine  and  surgery  :  lecture  note-books  and  clinical  note-books  such  as  modern 
students  produce.  Was  our  treatise  any  one  of  these  three  ? 

In  view  of  the  magical  recipes  on  the  back  of  our  papyrus,  the  probabilities  are 
that  its  owner  was  a  practicing  physician,  and  that  our  treatise  was  a  reference  book 
from  his  medical  library.  Even  so,  however,  our  treatise  may  likewise  have  partaken 
of  the  nature  both  of  the  lecturer’s  outline  and  the  student’s  note-book ;  for  the 
student  will  have  roughly  reproduced  the  form  and  content  of  his  instructor’s 
lecture  notes  and  may  afterward  have  continued  to  employ  his  note-book  as  a  refer¬ 
ence  hand-book. 

In  this  connection  it  is  well  to  emphasize  the  memorandum  character  of  our 
treatise,  which  is  very  noticeable.  Repeatedly  a  whole  paragraph  is  merely  suggested 
by  an  introductory  phrase  or  two,  or  merely  a  few  catch  words.  Important  surgical 
processes  are  indicated  by  a  short  phrase.  The  surgeon  is  charged  to  apply  this  or 
that  method  or  process,  without  the  slightest  explanation  of  the  details  or  the  method 
of  procedure.  Devices  designated  by  a  single  word  are  in  no  way  described,  and  terms 
which  are  not  explained  are  tacitly  assumed  to  be  understood.  All  these  things  may 
have  been  matters  which  received  full  and  sufficient  oral  explanation  not  included  in 
the  present  text  of  the  treatise.  As  a  whole  therefore,  the  treatise  is  very  much  in 
the  nature  of  notes,  whether  those  of  lecturer  or  student.  One  is  reminded  of  the 
condition  in  which  some  of  the  treatises  attributed  to  Aristotle  have  come  down  to  us. 

These  notes  originally  took  form  and  were  recorded,  whether  by  lecturer  or  student, 
at  a  very  early  date.  Both  in  vocabulary  and  grammar  the  language  repeatedly 
exhibits  the  characteristics  of  Old  Kingdom  speech,  that  is  of  the  period  between 
3000  and  2500  b.  c.  The  following  is  not  a  complete  list  of  these  evidences,  but  it 
contains  the  more  noticeable  examples  of  these  early  words  or  forms.  It  is  important 
in  this  connection  to  note  whether  these  archaisms  are  found  in  the  original  discussion 
(called  “  text  ”  below),  or  in  the  ancient  glosses  forming  the  commentary,  which  we 
have  discussed  above  (pp.  61-71). 

List  of  archaisms  in  the  language  of  the  surgical  treatise  : 

I.  Text : 

1 .  Grammar : 

a.  The  ancient  third  person  dual  of  the  pseudo-participle,  fhd-xoy 

(Case  34,  XI 18). 

b.  The  archaic  and  very  rare  dual  of  the  feminine  genitive  particle  ^  nty 

(Case  4,  II  7  ;  Case  7,  III  15  ;  and  Case  25,  IX  4). 

c.  The  ancient  third  person  dual,  biy,  “  of  them  both  ”  (Case  14,  VI  8 ; 

Case  36,  XII 13  bis ) ;  compare  also  the  incorrect  [K  (Case  35,  XII  7). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

74  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

d.  The  archaic  construction  in  which  we  must  probably  recognize  the  pseudo¬ 

participle  preceding  a  nominal  subject.  See  the  discussion  in  Case  4,  II  4. 

e.  The  particle  ny,  “  for  it  ”  or  the  like,  in  verdict  3  :  | 

See  the  commentary  on  Case  5,  II 15.  This  form,  first  noticed  by  Gardiner, 
is  regarded  by  him  as  already  “  moribund  ”  in  the  Old  Kingdom  ( Pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  40  (1918),  p.  7). 

/.  The  uniformly  archaic  writing  of  the  noun  hnw,  “  inside  ”  or  “  interior,” 
without  the  determinative  of  the  house  n,  regularly  appearing  in  the 
Middle  Kingdom  and  later.  It  occurs  in  our  treatise  twenty-two  times 
(see  glossary),  of  which  nine  occurrences  are  in  the  text  and  thirteen 
are  in  the  ancient  commentary  (see  below). 

g.  The  archaic  use  of  dr,  meaning  “  when  ”  or  “  as  soon  as  ”  (Case  4,  II  6, 

consult  commentary). 

h.  Use  of  £  my  with  the  phonetic  value  mr  in  ymrw  (Case  15, 

VI 17). 

i.  Omission  of  the  preposition  m  :  before  (j^O  ydr,  surgical  “  stitching” 

(Case  26,  IX  8)  ;  before  ®  ,  byt  “honey  ”  (often,  e.  g.,  Case  82,  XI  6 ; 
Case  35,  XII  8,  etc.);  before  mrh-t,  "grease,”  passim  (e.g., 

Case  15,  VI  17).  The  last  case  has  been  thought  to  be  due  to  mergence 
of  the  preposition  m  with  the  following  initial  m  of  the  word.  In  view  of 
the  other  cases  this  is  unlikely.  Another  explanation  may  be  the  memo¬ 
randum  character  of  the  treatise,  involving  intentional  abbreviation. 

2.  Dictionary  : 

a.  The  word  pSn,  “  split,”  found  elsewhere  only  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 

and  the  Middle  Kingdom  Book  of  the  Dead. 

b.  The  archaic  word  nhbhb,  “  break  through,”  occurring  elsewhere 

only  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (three  times)  and  once  at  Abydos  (see  com¬ 
mentary  on  Case  13,  VI  4-5).  Besides  the  five  occurrences  in  our  papyrus 
it  is  not  found  in  the  Egyptian  medical  documents. 

c.  The  obsolete  word  w’-t,  “cord,”  explained  in  Gloss  C,  Case  7, 

III  18. 

d.  The  obsolete  word  Qjteo  ySw,  "protrude,”  found  only  in  the  Pyramid 

Texts  and  its  oldest  derivatives. 

e.  The  archaic  word  rr-ty,  “  mandible,”  explained  by  the  ancient  com¬ 

mentary  as  equivalent  to  the  current  word  <?®„ jjwgwt ,  “jaw”  (Case  7, 
Gloss  C,  III  18  ;  compare  III  7  and  Gloss  B,  III  16-17). 

/.  The  archaic  word  hit,  “contracted,”  explained  in  Gloss  B,  Case  7, 
III  16-18. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  75 

II.  Glosses  Forming  the  Ancient  Commentary  : 

1 .  Grammar : 

a.  The  archaic  writing  h'ty,  “  heart,”  for  the  classic  in  Gloss  A 

(Case  1,1  9). 

b.  The  writing  |  hnw,  “  inside  ”  or  “  interior,”  without  the  determinative  n . 

Out  of  twenty-two  examples,  thirteen  are  found  in  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentary  (see  above). 

c.  The  archaic  interchange  of  h  and  £  in  hh,  “  fluid,”  Gloss  A  (Case  6, 

II 24-25),  and  elsewhere  in  our  treatise  always  written  with  1=3,  S  (five  times, 
see  glossary). 

d.  Indiscriminate  use  of  and  See  discussion,  Case  1,  I  10,  Gloss  B. 

e.  Archaic  writing  for  ymxjtw,  “  between  ”  in  Gloss  A  (Case  7,  III  16). 

2.  Dictionary  : 

A  number  of  the  archaic  words  listed  above  as  found  in  the  text  occur  also  in 
the  ancient  commentary  ;  but  as  quotations  from  the  text  they  cannot 
be  called  original  to  the  glosses. 

While  the  ancient  commentary  does  not  disclose  as  many  archaic  words  as  the  text 
of  the  discussions,  nevertheless  it  is  obvious  that  the  glosses  contain  conclusive 
evidence  of  their  Old  Kingdom  origin.  The  alphabetic  writing  of  h'ty,  “  heart,”  and 
the  exchange  of  •«=>  h  and  <=>  $ ;  besides  thirteen  out  of  twenty-two  examples  of  the 
archaic  writing  of  hnw,  “  interior  ”  without  a  determinative,  all  in  the  glosses,  are 
very  significant.  It  is  hardly  to  be  doubted,  therefore,  that  the  commentary  is  older 
than  the  Middle  Kingdom. 

If  an  explanatory  commentary  on  the  text  of  the  treatise  was  already  necessary 
before  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  treatise  itself  must  be  dated  to  the  early 
part  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  may  therefore  be  an  example  of  the  medical  learning 
which  made  Imhotep,  the  earliest  known  physician,  already  famous  in  the  Thirtieth 
Century  b.c.  In  that  case  our  treatise  would  be  some  five  thousand  years  old. 

III.  The  Lost  Beginning  of  the  Treatise  and  the  Reconstruction  of 
Column  I  from  the  Fragments 

When  the  papyrus  wras  placed  in  the  present  editor’s  hands,  it  consisted  of  twenty- 
one  complete  columns  and  w'as  accompanied  by  a  group  of  seventeen  fragments,  pasted 
mostly  at  random  on  a  sheet  of  manila  paper.  The  paper  bore  interesting  notes  in 
ink  in  the  hand-writing  of  Mr.  Edwin  Smith.  The  most  important  of  these  notes  reads : 

“  These  fragments  were  recovered  from  a  factitious  papyrus  made  up  of  the  fragments 
from  3  others  March  17,  1862,  nearly  2  months  after  the  original  purchase,  Jan.  20, 
both  from  Mustapha  Aga,  and  the  fragments  A  and  G  [our  A  and  B]  were  saturated  with 

oi.uchicago.edu 

76  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

glue  which  was  removed  by  maceration  and  carefully  scraping  the  glue  away  which  had 
been  used  to  seal  the  factitious  papyrus  composed  of  these  fragments.” 

It  is  obvious  at  the  first  glance  that  these  fragments  were  written  by  the  same 
scribe  who  made  our  copy  of  the  Surgical  Treatise.  When  the  native  discoverer  or 
owner  sold  the  main  roll  of  the  document  to  Mr.  Smith  on  January  20th,  1862,  he  had 
lying  at  home  outer  fragments  of  it,  which  he  had  removed,  perhaps  with  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  producing  the  impression  that  the  document  proffered  for  sale  to  Smith  was 
complete  and  perfect.  A  cursory  examination  would  have  disclosed  to  Mr.  Smith 
the  presence  of  the  lower  right  hand  comer  of  a  column  (our  fragment  E)  preceding 
Column  II,  and  doubtless  did  betray  to  him  the  fact  that  a  column  preceding  Column  II 
was  lost. 

Mustapha  Aga  on  returning  home  took  the  fragments  of  the  roll  which  he  had 
removed  and  pasted  them  around  a  dummy  roll,  as  the  modern  natives  very  often 
do.  He  waited  two  months  and  then  took  this  dummy  roll,  looking  very  attractive 
on  the  outside,  to  Mr.  Smith,  who  forthwith  purchased  it,  well  knowing  as  the  event 
disclosed,  the  real  character  of  his  new  roll.  The  methods  of  papyrus  salvage  as  it 
is  now  so  skillfully  practiced  by  such  deft  preparators  as  Ibscher,  were  of  course 
entirely  unknown  two  generations  ago ;  and  Mr.  Smith  deserves  great  credit  for 
rescuing  these  fragments  as  successfully  as  he  has  done. 

Moreover  Mr.  Smith  was  not  content  with  merely  disengaging  the  fragments  from 
the  bogus  roll.  He  examined  them  with  care,  and  recognizing  that  they  were  a  part 
of  the  papyrus  which  he  had  bought  from  Mustapha  Aga  two  months  previously,  he 
endeavored  to  put  them  together.  I  find  the  date  “  Dec.  10,  68  ”  written  beside  some 
of  the  smaller  fragments,  showing  that  some  twenty-one  months  after  the  purchase 
of  the  fragments  he  was  still  engaged  in  trying  to  put  them  together.  His  efforts  were 
crowned  with  several  successes.  He  recognized  that  fragments  A  and  B  (see  Yol.  II, 
Plate  I  A)  belong  together,  with  B  at  the  right,  and  an  interval  between  them.  He 
discerned  that  C  and  D  belong  on  the  right  edge  of  B  and  he  had  roughly  added  to 
the  right  edge  of  B  the  readings  from  C  and  D.  He  had  probably  concluded  that  F 
was  from  the  lower  half  of  the  oolumn  and  had  continued  the  numbering  of  the  lines 
to  include  F  (14-26).  He  knew  also  that  G  and  I  belong  on  the  right  edge  of  F,  as  his 
memoranda  show.  That  was  as  far  as  he  had  gone,  but  his  progress  shows  him  a  keen 
and  penetrating  student  of  the  document. 

The  reader  will  find  on  Plate  I A  (Yol.  II)  the  materials  enabling  him  to  follow  the 
process  of  reconstruction.  The  connection  between  fragments  A  and  B  is  demonstrated 
not  only  by  the  duplicate  passage  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (see  Case  1,  Gloss  A,  pp.  106  f.), 
but  also  by  recurrences  of  the  same  passage  from  Pap.  Smith,  like  1.  8  or  1.  12.  The 
most  difficult  connection  to  establish  was  that  between  the  group  of  fragments  ABCD 
forming  the  upper  half  of  the  column  and  the  group  FGHI  forming  part  of  the  lower 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  77 

half  of  the  column.  The  connection  is  demonstrated  in  two  ways.  First  by  the 
sequence  of  the  content :  the  group  ABCD  ends  with  a  diagnosis  (11.  18-14)  and  the 
group  FGHI  begins  with  a  verdict  and  a  treatment.  This  iB  the  correct  order  of 
content  of  the  cases  throughout  the  treatise.  Secondly  the  joint  between  A  and  F, 
which  is  just  at  the  level  of  1. 18,  can  be  reconstructed,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that 
only  a  few  traces  of  1.  18  have  survived  along  the  upper  edge  of  fragment  F.  It  is 
possible  to  read  along  the  lower  edge  of  A  the  words  On  the 

left  of  the  fragment  A  still  preserves  the  upper  part  of  the  the  small  loop  at  the 
upper  end  of  the  heavy  oblique  stroke,  which  will  be  found  intruding  into  1.  14  on 
fragment  F.  The  short  ^  above  it  on  A  will  be  found  illustrated  in  gm  in  1.  25  of 
the  same  column.  Again,  in  the  word  the  rent  between  A  and  F  passes  directly 
along  the  second  - — ,  so  that  the  lower  edge  of  the  horizontal  stroke  forming  the 
hieratic  n  is  visible  in  the  original  along  the  upper  edge  of  F.  We  thus  have  two 
signs  here  part  of  each  of  which  is  visible  on  both  A  and  F. 

The  fragments  therefore  belonged  to  a  single  column  of  which  we  have  approxi¬ 
mately  the  upper  right  and  left,  and  the  lower  left-hand  quarters.  The  greatest  loss 
is  the  lower  right-hand  quarter  and  a  vertical  strip  along  the  right  edge  of  the  page 
extending  from  top  to  bottom,  some  of  which  can  be  restored  as  on  Plate  I A  (Vol.  II), 
from  the  surviving  parallels. 

The  question  now  arises  :  where  did  this  fragmentary  column  belong  ?  Did  it 
immediately  precede  the  columns  of  the  main  roll,  beginning  with  our  Column  II  ? 
These  questions  are  easily  answered.  Fragment  E,  now  inserted  on  Plate  I A  (Vol.  II), 
was  still  part  of  the  main  roll  at  the  right  of  the  foot  of  Column  II  when  the  papyrus 
was  handed  to  the  present  editor.  It  contains  the  ends  of  eight  lines,  and  a  study  of 
these  shows  that  they  are  the  ends  of  11. 19-26  of  our  reconstructed  column,  which  is 
thus  linked  up  with  our  main  roll  as  Column  I. 

Of  the  seventeen  fragments  the  reconstruction  of  Column  I  now  disposes  of  all 
the  large  ones  and  the  most  important  of  the  small  ones,  or  a  total  of  nine.  This 
leaves  eight  very  small  pieces  which  have  not  been  placed.  The  writing  has  faded 
considerably,  from  the  rough  handling  by  the  natives  and  the  maceration  to  free  them 
from  the  glue  used  in  patching  up  the  dummy  roll.  These  pieces  have  been  assembled 
on  Plate  I  and  lettered  from  K  to  R  inclusive.  They  are  so  small  and  the  ink  so  pale 
that  I  have  not  been  able  to  place  them  in  the  text  of  Column  I. 

Column  I  contains  parts  of  three  cases,  of  which  the  first  is  evidently  the  first  case 
in  the  treatise.  Its  beginning  occupied  the  last  few  lines  of  the  preceding  column. 
Unless  the  introduction  preceding  the  cases  was  very  long,  the  remainder  of  the  lost 
column,  that  is  nearly  all  of  it,  would  have  furnished  sufficient  space  for  the  introduc¬ 
tion.  In  that  case  we  have  lost  only  one  column  at  the  beginning  of  the  treatise, 
preceding  our  present  Column  I. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

78 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

CASE  ONE 

Bottom  lines  of  lost  column — I  12 
A  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

The  beginning  of  this  case  is  lost  at  the  bottom  of  the  last  column  preceding 
Column  I.  Only  a  portion  of  the  last  twelve  lines  of  the  case  is  preserved  at  the  top 
of  the  fragmentary  Column  I.  At  the  bottom  of  the  preceding  lost  column  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  Case  1  must  have  occupied  at  least  nearly  two  lines,  each  about  28  cm.  long, 
for  the  restored  text  measured  in  hieratic  of  the  proper  scale  is  about  56  cm.  long 
(see  Vol.  II,  lb).  It  is  highly  probable  that  no  other  case  preceded  our  Case  1,  as 
we  shall  see.  This  observation  shows  us  that  the  preceding  portion  of  the  lost 
column,  probably  over  twenty  lines,  was  not  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  cases. 

From  the  twelve  lines  of  Case  1  which  are  preserved  at  the  top  of  Column  I,  it  is 
quite  evident  that  this  case  was  arranged  and  organized  as  to  subject  matter  in  the 
same  way  as  all  the  others  which  follow.  We  must  expect,  therefore,  that  the  diagnosis 
will  have  been  substantially  a  repetition  of  the  examination,  and  that  the  title,  with 
which  the  case  was  introduced,  consisted  of  the  first  part  of  observations  recorded 
in  the  examination.  It  is  quite  possible  therefore  to  restore  a  large  part  of  the  beginning 
of  Case  1,  now  lost  at  the  bottom  of  the  lost  column.  There  is  unavoidable  uncertainty 
as  to  the  length  of  the  title,  as  it  is  impossible  to  establish  with  precision  how  much  of 
the  examination  was  employed  as  title.  The  preserved  portion,  at  the  top  of  Column  I, 
begins  in  the  diagnosis,  in  the1  middle  of  a  word,  after  which  nearly  two-thirds  of 
the  diagnosis  is  preserved.  Combining  the  information  disclosed  by  the  glosses  with 
our  knowledge  of  the  stereotyped  form  of  the  diagnosis  as  found  in  other  cases,  it  is 
possible  to  restore  the  entire  diagnosis  with  the  exception  of  a  lacuna  of  three  or  four 
words.  From  the  diagnosis  thus  restored,  it  is  possible  to  work  back  in  the  same  way 
through  the  examination  to  the  title,  as  already  indicated. 

Title 

Bottom  of  lost  column 

© 

] 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  79 

Translation 

[Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone  of  his  skull.] 

Commentary 

Of  the  forty-seven  other  cases  preserved  in  Papyrus  Smith,  every  one  begins  with 
a  title  anticipating  the  examination,  and  employing  its  introductory  words.  It  cannot 
be  doubted  that  like  the  remaining  forty-seven,  Case  1  also  began  with  a  title  of  the 
same  form. 

V^(?  JY]  Sd’w,  “  instructions,  indications.”  This  word  is  preserved  as  the  first  word 
of  the  title  in  46  out  of  the  48  cases  in  our  treatise,  and  it  was  obviously  present  also 
in  Case  3  (as  shown  by  the  preserved  portion  of  the  title,  I  18),  giving  us  47  cases 
introduced  by  it,  out  of  48.  We  cannot  doubt  that  it  also  introduced  Case  1.  The 
word  is  written  with  the  transferred  sign  )sfe,  because  of  the  word 
“  antelope,”  e.  g.,  Davies,  Deir  el-Gebrawi,  I,  pi.  XI ;  Ptahhetep,  II,  pi.  XIX  ;  Mariette, 
Mastabas,  D.  15,  &c.  It  is  construed  with  a  following  noun,  either  in  the  direct  or 
indirect  genitive.  In  the  earlier  documents  we  find  the  direct  genitive  exclusively  ; 
e.  g.,  throughout  Pap.  Smith,  and  the  M.K.  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus,  1,  15  ;  2,  18  ; 
1,  23  ;  1,  27  ;  et  passim.  Pap.  Ebers  also  uses  the  direct  genitive  quite  commonly 
(100, 15  with  suffix  pronoun;  109,2;  109,18;  103,19;  etc.);  but  it  at  the  same  time 
employs  the  indirect  genitive  (109,  11  ;  36,  4 ;  106,  13  ;  107,  5  ;  108,  17  ;  etc.),  as 
does  also  the  late  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  3038  (14,  3  ;  14,  6  ;  12,  12,  three  times  in 
all).  SPw  does  not  occur  in  Pap.  Hearst. 

Outside  of  the  medical  treatises  the  meaning  of  the  word  is  fairly  clear.  Thus  in 
a  Hymn  to  Thoth  the  worshiper  says  : 

I  I  I 

“  Come  to  me,  (O  Thoth),  that  thou  mayest  make  regulations  for  me,  and  that  thou 
mayest  make  me  instructed  in  thy  office”  (Pap.  Anast.  V,  9,  3).  In  the  self-laudatory 
phrases  of  oriental  scribes  and  officials  the  term  is  frequently  used  to  describe  the 
experienced  or  well-informed  man. 

In  the  medical  literature  the  exact  shade  of  meaning  has  still  to  be  determined. 
It  is  used  in  four  of  the  medical  treatises  :  Papyrus  Ebers,  Kahun  Papyrus,  Papyrus 
Smith,  and  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus,  to  designate  the  entire  discussion  of  the  case.  It 
is  not  employed  as  a  title  of  mere  recipes,  though  it  approaches  this  usage  in  the  Kahun 
Papyrus  ;  for  this  reason  it  does  not  appear  at  all  in  the  exclusively  magical  documents 
like  Papyrus  Hearst  or  the  London  Medical  Papyrus,  and  is  used  only  three  times  in 
the  Berlin  Papyrus  (8038).  The  chief  question  is  whether  the  word  designates  the 
objective  indications  observable  in  a  given  case,  or  the  instructions  based  on  these. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

80  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

A  significant  case  in  Pap.  Ebers  in  the  discussion  of  the  heart  might  indicate  the  former. 
The  physician  is  discussing  the  meaning  of  a  term  indicating  a  symptom  of  the  heart 
and  says  :  “  It  means  the  non-pulsating  of  the  heart,  or  that  the  vessels  of  the  heart 
are  silent  (not  pulsating),  there  bein8  no  in" 

dications  of  them  (the  *  vessels  ’)  under  thy  two  hands  ”  (Ebers  100,  14-15).  It  is 
highly  probable  that  Si’w  here  means  the  “  indications  ”  observable  in  the  objective 
situation,  that  is,  that  the  physician  laying  his  hands  upon  the  vessels  of  the  heart 
is  unable  to  discern  any  pulsations.  It  is  conceivable  also  that  we  should  render 
S&'w  here  “  instructions,”  understanding  the  statement  to  mean  that  the  physician 
will  find  at  hand  (“  under  thy  two  hands  ”)  no  available  instructions  compiled  from 
past  experience  ;  but  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  former  interpreta¬ 
tion  is  the  correct  one.  The  word  may  therefore  originally  have  meant  the  observable 
“  indications,”  and  as  the  records  of  such  indications  accumulated  and  were  accom¬ 
panied  also  by  the  instructions  to  be  followed  by  the  practitioner,  Sd’w  still  continued 
to  appear  in  the  title  and  thus  came  to  cover  both  the  “  observations  ”  of  the  surgeon 
and  the  “  directions  ”  he  was  expected  to  follow.  In  such  cases  as  those  in  the  Kahun 
Papyrus  it  is  difficult  to  find  any  other  rendering  for  the  word  than  “  instructions,” 
and  this  is  the  rendering  I  have  employed  in  the  translation  of  Papyrus  Smith.  The 
word  is  used  in  the  plural  throughout  our  treatise,  and  is  three  times  accompanied 
by  the  plural  demonstrative  (]  “  these  ”  (XIY  7-8 ;  XY  16  ;  XVII  6).  In  these 

three  cases  the  physician  is  admonished  to  treat  the  patient  JL  "  according 

to  these  instructions,”  and  this  passage  favors  the  rendering  “  instructions  ”  rather 
than  “  indications.” 

While  the  restoration  of  the  initial  word  “  Instructions  ”  in  the  title  of  Case  1  is 
obviously  correct,  justification  for  the  insertion  of  the  next  phrase  is  not  so  obvious 
at  first.  Its  correctness  is  demonstrable  on  the  basis  of  an  examination  of  the  group 
of  cases  in  which  it  occurs,  and  especially  of  a  comparison  of  this  group  with  a  later 
analogous  group.  Reference  to  the  index  of  titles  (p.  88)  makes  it  evident  at  once 
that  following  upon  Case  1  is  a  group  of  six  cases  each  called  “  a  wound  in  his  head.” 
A  similar  group  of  five  cases  in  the  temporal  region  begins  with  Case  18.  The  first  of 
these  five  cases  is  designated  merely  as  "  a  wound  in  his  temple,”  and  the  subsequent 
discussion  shows  that  it  is  not  a  serious  wound.  The  remaining  four  cases,  however, 
are  much  more  serious,  involving  injury  to  the  temporal  bone  beneath  the  fleshy 
tissue  which  limited  the  injury  in  the  first  case.  Examining  again  Cases  2  to  7  we 
find  that  the  last  five  involve  injuries  to  the  skull,  while  Case  2  preceding  them  is 
a  wound  of  the  exterior  overlying  soft  tissue,  not  involving  injury  to  the  bone.  It 
is  evident  then  that  Cases  2  to  7  form  a  group  arranged  like  the  group  of  Cases  18-22, 
with  the  flesh  wound  placed  first  and  injuries  to  the  underlying  bone  following  after. 
If  now  we  turn  to  the  preserved  text  of  Case  1  we  find  that  it  begins  (I  1)  with  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  81 

words  “  his  head,”  followed  shortly  by  the  words  “  his  wound.”  The  character  of 
“  his  wound  ”  is  also  explained  in  Gloss  B  (I  9-10),  and  we  learn  that  it  has  no  gash. 
We  must  conclude  therefore  that  this  group  of  seven  cases  of  wounds  in  the  head  was 
introduced  by  two  so-called  flesh  wounds  (Cases  1  and  2),  after  which  the  surgeon 
continues  with  injuries  to  the  skull  (calvaria).  As  we  are  explicitly  told  that  the  wound 
had  no  gash,  the  word  “  wound  ”  in  the  title  of  Case  1  must  be  followed  immediately 
by  the  words  “  in  his  head  ”  (see  1 1),  just  as  in  Case  18  we  have  :  “  a  wound  in  his 
temple.”  The  “gash-wounds”  or  “gaping  wounds”  are  then  discussed  in  Cases  2-7. 

The  character  of  the  wound  is  then  further  discussed,  but  it  is  impossible  to 
understand  this  discussion  without  further  investigation  of  the  use  of  the  word 
“  wound  ”  in  our  treatise. 

w^nw<  “  wound,”  is  one  of  the  commonest,  if  not  the  most  common  surgical 
term  in  our  treatise.  It  occurs  142  times.  It  is  either  written  in  full  as  above,  or 
with  the  determinative  ;  but  it  is  often  abbreviated  to  a  varying  extent,  thus : 

(once  only,  VIII  18),  A,  ;  or  this :  fif,?,,  «*,  or 

even  a  (twice  only,  X  8  ;  XII 17).  The  plural  strokes  are  rare  and  never  appear  with 
the  full  phonetic  writing.  The  gradual  appearance  of  the  abbreviated  writings  is 
interesting  and  is  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  Case  1  is  too  near  the  beginning  of 
the  document  to  have  been  preceded  by  many  cases.  Throughout  the  first  three 
cases  (eight  times  preserved,  several  lost)  the  scribe  carefully  employs  the  full 
phonetic  writing,  but  at  the  very  beginning  of  Case  4  he  drops  into  an  easy 

abbreviation,  (II  2),  although  he  at  once  returns  to  the  full  writing  (twice). 
With  occasional  reversions  of  this  kind,  he  nevertheless  reaches  at  the  bottom  of 
the  fourth  column  (IV  21).  Indeed,  after  a  full  writing  in  II 18  and  III  2  (Case  7),  we 
find  prevailingly  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  treatise.  It  is  reasonable 

to  conclude  that  this  gradual  resort  to  abbreviated  writing  on  the  part  of  the  scribe 
took  place  near  the  beginning  of  the  document. 

Wbmv  designates  the  commonest  form  of  injury  treated  in  the  document,  as  its 
frequent  occurrence  demonstrates.  It  stands  as  the  first  word  of  the  title  in  the 
nineteen  cases  in  which  the  injury  is  so  designated  in  the  diagnosis.  These  cases  are 
as  follows  :  1  (probable,  though  title  is  lost),  2,  8,  4,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10,  14,  18,  20,  28,  26, 
27,  28,  29,  40,  and  47.  Although  the  word  has  long  been  known  and  rendered 
“  wound,”  the  nature  and  character  of  the  injury  it  might  designate  has  not  hereto¬ 
fore  been  precisely  determined,  and  it  is  the  new  material  from  Papyrus  Smith  which 
now  makes  this  possible.  The  word  usually  designates  any  injury  to  fleshy  tissue, 
which  may  be  severed  or  gashed  as  with  a  knife  or  sword  blade,  or  ruptured  as  with 
the  blow  of  a  blunt  weapon  like  a  club,  or  rent  as  with  the  crushing  action  of  some 
heavy  object,  or  laid  open  by  any  agency  which  might  destroy  the  skin ;  but  more 
rarely  it  may  also  indicate  an  injury  to  the  bone. 

G 

oi.uchicago.edu 

82  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  I 

A.  Injuries  of  the  Soft  Tissue 

A  wbnw  is  often  described  or  indicated  as  obviously  in  the  fleshy  tissue,  e.  g., 
Pap.  Smith  several  times  refers  to  “  its  (the  wbnw’ s)  flesh”  (XVII 1  and  5).  In  Pap. 
Ebers  there  is  a  small  group  of  “  Recipes  for  healing  a  wbnw  inflicted  on  the  flesh  ” 
(Ebers  70,  1).  An  interesting  case  in  Pap.  Smith  deals  with  a  fracture  of  the  skull 
incurred  without  injury  to  the  overlying  external  tissue  (Case  8).  The  surgeon  states 
that  “  there  is  no  wound  upon  it  (the  wbnw) . . .  the  flesh  of  his  head  being  uninjured  ” 
(IV  18).  The  clear  implication  is  that  the  wbnw  would  be  in  the  “  flesh  ”  of  the  head. 
There  are  frequent  references  in  Pap.  Smith  to  an  injury  to  the  bone  (fracture,  split, 
perforation,  etc.),  having  “  a  wbnw  over  it  ”  (VII 15  ;  IX  1  ;  XII  15  ;  XII  16-17  ; 
etc.).  Such  a  wbnw  must  necessarily  be  in  the  fleshy  tissue.  The  same  is  true  of  a 
wbnw  in  the  chin  (Case  27),  the  bone  beneath  which  is  “  uninjured  ”  (IX  14, 15). 

Papyrus  Smith  furnishes  numerous  important  indications  of  the  character  of  a 
wbnw  in  the  soft  tissue  overlying  a  bone,  for  in  practically  every  case  of  wbnw  in  our 
treatise,  it  is  said  to  penetrate  to  the  bone,  or  if  there  is  no  underlying  bone,  then  to 
the  underlying  organ.  For  the  sake  of  completeness  all  important  data  from  the  other 
Egyptian  medical  documents  are  also  adduced  in  the  following  collection  of  materials. 

1.  Penetration.  The  wbnw  treated  in  Pap.  Smith,  as  we  have  already  noted,  is 

usually  described  as  (also  *=»)  “  penetrating  to  the  bone  ”  (II  3  ;  II  12  ;  II 

18  :  etc.).  Of  a  wbnw  where  there  is  no  immediately  underlying  bone,  we  have  a 
similar  description  (Case  28) :  (]  P<==»J  J  f  "  piercing  through  to  his  gullet  ” 

(IX  19).  The  reference  is  to  a  wound  in  the  throat. 

2.  Gash  produced  by  a  sword,  knife  or  battle  axe.  In  an  ironical  catalogue  of  the 

miseries  of  a  military  officer  we  find  it  stated  that  “  his  head  is  split  with  a  wound 
(wbn)  ”  (Pap.  Anast.  IV,  9,  7  =  Anast.  Ill,  5,  8).  This  is  a  type  of  wound  often  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Pap.  Smith  and  called  or  “  wbnw  of  a  gash,”  meaning  “  a 

gaping  wound.”  It  occurs  thirty-one  times  in  our  treatise  (II 2  ;  II 11 ;  III  2;  etc.). 
Such  a  wound  may  be  called  indifferently  a  wbnw,  or  a  “  gash  ;  ”  compare  the  two 
following  parallel  passages  : 

Case  14  (VI  8~9)- 

Case  47  (XVI  20)- 

The  same  variant,  that  is  kf-t,  “  gash  ”  for  wbnw  will  be  found  by  comparing 
IX  8  (Case  26)  with  V  6  (Case  10).  See  the  commentary  on  kf-t  in  Case  1  (examination, 
pp.  90  ff).  The  character  of  this  type  of  wound  is  very  clearly  indicated  in  several 
cases,  especially  Case  10,  in  discussing  which  the  surgeon  is  instructed  to  apply  a 
certain  type  of  bandage  “  to  the  two  lips  of  the  gash-wound,  in  order  to  cause  one  to 
join  to  the  other  ’’  (V  9).  The  “  two  lips  ”  of  such  a  wound  are  referred  to  in 
Pap.  Smith  a  number  of  times,  e.  g.:  II;  VI  8  ;  VI 18  ;  VIII  21  ;  etc.  Similarly 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  83 

the  “  gash  ”  and  the  “  two  lips  ”  are  introduced  to  describe  a  wound  of  different 
character  of  which  it  is  said  : 

“  It  (the  wbnw)  has  no  gash  .  .  .  and  his  wbnw  has  not  two  lips  ”  (YII  12-13). 
The  character  of  a  “  gash-wound  ”  is  also  indicated  in  the  directions  to  the  surgeon 
to  “  bring  together  his  gash  with  stitching  ”  (XVI  20).  Such  a  wound  may  also  be 
described  as  having  a  “  mouth  ”  (IX  20  ;  XVII  9) ;  but  this  term  is  not  decisive  for 
it  is  also  employed  of  wounds  which  are  not  called  “  gash- wounds  ”  (IV  20  ;  VII  24- 
VIII  1 ;  or  especially  Case  41,  which  employs  it  five  times  !).  The  “mouth  ”  of  a 
wound  is  also  referred  to  in  Pap.  Ebers  (70,  5  and  71, 15),  and  in  Pap.  Hearst  (XII 11) 
there  is  mention  of  a  “  wound  (wbnw)  having  an  open  mouth.” 

3.  Perforation  produced  by  a  pointed  weapon  like  an  arrow  or  spear.  Such  wounds 
are  not  clearly  and  precisely  defined  in  our  treatise.  The  word  j o  thm  indicating 
the  verb  “  to  perforate  ”  or  the  noun  “  perforation  ”  is  usually  applied  to  injuries  to 
the  bone,  as  in  Cases  8  (see  commentary,  1 18),  7, 15,  etc.  The  verb  [1<=J  j  Mb  “  to  pene¬ 
trate  ”  or  “  perforate  ”  is,  however,  employed  to  indicate  that  a  perforating  wound  in 
the  fleshy  tissue  has  penetrated  through  the  lip  to  the  interior  of  the  mouth  (Case  26), 
or  through  the  nose  to  the  interior  of  the  nostril  (Case  14).  See  the  discussion  of  these 
two  cases. 

4.  A  contusion  or  a  less  clearly  defined  rupture  of  the  tissue,  produced  by  a  blunt 

weapon  like  a  club.  This  is  the  type  of  wound  referred  to  in  the  familiar  apostrophe 
to  a  drunkard:  “(People  flee  from  thee,  for)  thou  inflictest 

wounds  ( wbn )  on  them  ”  (Pap.  Anast.  IV,  11,  12).  Such  wounds  are  described  in 
Pap.  Smith  as  having  no  gash  and  therefore  lacking  two  lips  (Case  18,  VII  12-13, 
cited  above  under  2). 

5.  Laceration  and  rupture  of  the  soft  tissue  caused  by  the  crushing  action  of  a 
heavy  object  which  lays  open  the  flesh.  Papyrus  Ebers  refers  to  a  “  wound  (wbnw) 
of  crushing  ”  (Ebers  110,  4),  and  it  may  be  that  Case  18,  just  classified  under  4,  should 
be  placed  here.  The  only  direct  reference  to  crushing  in  Pap.  Smith  is  a  case  of  a 
crushed  cervical  vertebra  (Case  88). 

6.  Burns.  There  is  no  reference  to  burns  in  Pap.  Smith,  but  Pap.  Ebers  contains 
a  recipe  for  a  “  burn-wbnw  ”  (Ebers  68, 17-18),  that  is  a  “  burn-wound,”  and  it  contains 
other  recipes  for  burns  not  designated  as  “  wounds,”  e.  g.,  68,  20  ff. 

B.  Injuries  of  the  Bones 

Wbnw  is  not  commonly  applied  to  injuries  of  the  bones.  In  Case  29,  however, 
Pap.  Smith  clearly  defines  a  “  gaping  wound  in  the  vertebra  of  his  neck  ”  (X  8  ff.). 
More  often  the  terms  for  injuries  in  the  bones  are  not  general  like  “  wound,”  but 
specific,  like  id  “  smash  ”  (compound  comminuted  fracture),  a  "T  pin,  “  split,” 
ra^ki0  thm’  “  perforation,”  or  shm,  “  crushing,”  etc.  The  range  of  our  sur- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

84  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

geon's  knowledge  and  mention  of  wounds  must  include  a  study  of  such  words,  which 
will  be  found  in  the  index.  Nor  do  these  wholly  exhaust  the  available  materials,  for 
the  surgeon  deals  with  wounds  of  the  brain  (Cases  6  and  8) ;  and  the  reference  to 
canals  leading  to  the  lungs  (XII  2)  would  indicate  that  if  our  treatise  were  preserved 
to  the  end,  we  would  find  injuries  to  the  internal  organs. 

The  observed  symptoms  of  various  types  of  wbnw  and  the  surgeon’s  medicinal  or 
surgical  treatment  will  be  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  the  cases  themselves. 

C.  Sores 

Somewhat  less  common  is  the  use  of  wbnw  to  designate  a  sore,  the  origin  of  which 
may  not  have  been  a  wound  ;  e.  g.,  even  in  our  treatise,  written  to  discuss  injuries, 
wbnw  appears  in  Case  89  (XIII  9)  with  the  probable  meaning  “  sore.”  Confer  the 
Greek  eA ko?  which  means  both  “  wound  ”  and  “  sore.” 

to  tp'f,  “  in  his  head.”  Regarding  the  correctness  of  restoring  these  words 
after  “  wound,”  there  cannot  be  any  doubt,  as  we  have  the  injury  called  “  a  wound 
in  his  head  ”  in  the  diagnosis  (1 1).  The  word  for  “  head  ”  demands  some  discussion, 
partly  grammatical,  but  chiefly  anatomical.  The  scribe  has  used  the  word-sign,  and 
it  is  well  known  that  in  such  cases  we  are  often  unable  to  determine  which  of  the 
two  common  Egyptian  words  for  head  we  should  read,  tp  or  d'd\ 

Taking  up  first  the  word  tp,  it  should  be  noted  that  it  never  occurs  written  with 
phonetic  complement  in  Pap.  Smith.  In  my  judgment  we  cannot  be  certain  there¬ 
fore  that  the  reading  tp  is  correct,  although  the  employment  of  tp  for  the  “  head  ”  as 
a  whole  is  in  accordance  with  Egyptian  usage.  In  view  of  the  possibility  that  we  should 
read  tp  here,  we  must  examine  the  anatomical  meaning  of  the  word  as  determined  by 
usage.  The  word  originally  meant  the  “  tip,  top,”  or  “  head  ”  of  a  thing.  This  meaning 
is  very  old.  As  far  back  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find  “  the  tips  of  the  two  wings  ” 
(Pyr.  2048b,  1122b  pi.);  “the  tip[s]  of  their  (female)  breasts”  (Pyr.  1282a) ;  or  in  an 
example  very  appropriate  to  our  inquiry,  “  the  nW-tree  inclines  its  head  (©□  tp)  to  thee  ” 
(Pyr.  808a).  It  is  also  used  as  far  back  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  for  the  human  head  as 
a  whole,  e.g.,  “  He  has  given  to  thee  thy  head  ”  (®o  tp),  said  to  the  deceased  king 
(Pyr.  639b)  ;  or  “  Thy  head  (®a  tp)  is  fastened  on”  (Pyr.  1262a,  cf.  682e).  References 
to  the  detached  head  of  the  deceased  with  the  word  written  phonetically  tp  continue 
down  into  Greek  times.  Cf.  de  Morgan,  Ombos,  I,  89,  36,  bis,  and  often  at  Ombos  ; 
likewise  in  Naville,  Mythe  d’Horus,  XV.  The  severed  head  of  Osiris  at  Dendera 
(Mariette,  Dend&rah,  IV,  87,  66)  is  called  =j®  tp  ntr.  The  best  anatomical  evidence  that 
tp  means  the  wholehead  is  perhaps  the  phrase  “the  seven 

openings  of  the  head  ”  (read  tp  as  shown  by  the  Demotic,  Bilingual  Pap.  Rhind,  I, 
8,  8).  The  “  seven  openings  ”  are  of  course  the  ears,  nostrils,  eyes  and  mouth, — 
a  good  indication  of  the  anatomical  meaning  of  tp,  viz.,  the  whole  head. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  85 

As  we  turn  to  the  use  of  tp  in  the  medical  documents  however,  we  meet  with  a 
difficulty ;  for  they  do  not  contain  a  single  example  of  tp  (caput)  with  a  phonetic 
writing  ensuring  the  reading  tp.  Examples  of  anatomical  usage  of  tp  are  common 
in  Pap.  Smith,  with  the  original  meaning,  “  tip,  top,  head  ”  of  some  other  organ  or 
part  of  the  body.  The  list  is  as  follows  : 

®j  m,  <?  UJ  “  tips  of  his  toes  ”  (IV  14-15). 

“  tjiP  of  his  shoulder-fork  ”  (IV  17). 

® — “  top  of  his  eye-brow  ”  (V  6). 

"  I*  the  upper  tip  of  his  nose  ”  (V  14). 

® — J  “  the  tip[s]  of  his  two  clavicles  ”  (XI  18). 

w  2 c?i i  y* —  “it  means  the  displacement  of  the  tips  of  his  A'6-bone  ” 

(XI  22-23). 

j=j»®j  1 2  — “  the  tips  of  them  (clavicles)  are  fastened  in  the 

upper  bone  of  his  breast  ”  (XI  23). 

“  <?-#*• in  hia  sternum  ”  (Xffl  3). 

®2.  “  The  uppermost  tip  of  his  sternum  ”  (XIII 17). 

IJJl®,  ?  . ®Pi"m  "  the  ribs  of  his  sternum  . . .  and  their  heads  [are 

. .  "  red]  ”  (XIV  23-XV  1). 

^„®j  “  the  heads  of  the  ribs  of  his  sternum  are  displaced  ” 

(XV  4). 

“  ihr  tp-ikr  in  his  sternum  ”  (XVI  12-13). 

Tp  is  not  phonetically  written  in  any  of  these  cases,  but  the  reading  tp  cannot  be 
doubted  in  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  and  the  context  in  the  above  examples. 
The  fact  that  these  unquestionable  examples  of  tp  are  all  invariably  written  ®  is 
perhaps  a  fair  reason  for  regarding  this  writing  ®  where  it  means  “  head  (caput)  ” 
as  likewise  intended  for  tp,  and  although  this  conclusion  is  not  certain,  the  reading 
tp  has  been  adopted  herein  for  all  such  writings,  of  which  there  are  forty-seven 
occurrences  in  our  treatise. 

The  other  word  for  “  head,”  d‘d\  occurs  only  three  times  written  out 

phonetically  in  our  text  (IV  13  ;  IV  20  ;  XI  16).  This  word  likewise  indicates  the 
head  as  a  whole.  In  Pap.  Ebers  it  is  used  of  the  head  of  a  fish  (Ebers  52,  22),  of  an 
ass  (ibid.,  25, 15  ;  cf.  91,  10  ;  88, 15) ;  and  Pap.  Westcar  (8,  21-22)  employs  it  of  the 
head  of  a  goose  cut  off  by  the  magician.  The  severed  head  of  an  ox  written  j[|  appears 
in  a  tomb  relief  at  Leyden  (Leemanns,  Mon.  fun.,  pi.  XXIV ;  cf.  also  Pap.  judic.  de 
Turin,  8,  2  and  Pap.  Boulaq,  11,  obverse).  Similarly  it  is  used  of  the  human  head  in  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  (Naville,  18, 81  Aa) ;  also  for  the  severed  head  of  Osiris  (ibid.,  93, 5  Ca). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

86  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

In  Pap.  Anastasi  (III  5,  8)  the  well-known  example  : 

“  His  head  is  split  with  a  wound,”  is  a  good  illustration  of  our  group  of  head 
wounds,  as  well  as  a  demonstration  that  it  was  customary  to  use  d’d’  in  such  con¬ 
nections.  A  demonstration  that  d’d'  designates  anatomically  the  whole  head  is  to 
be  found  in  the  phrase  :  "  the  seven  openings  of  his  head  ”  (d’d’) 

(Pap.  Leyden,  845,  verso  5, 5-6,  from  text  prepared  for  Berlin  Warterbuch  by  Gardiner). 
This  example  demonstrates  that  the  anatomical  meaning  of  d’d’  is  essentially  the  same 
as  that  of  tp  which,  as  we  have  seen  above,  likewise  contains  seven  openings.  When 
used  of  the  human  head  in  the  medical  papyri  and  phonetically  written  out  so  as  to  be 
unmistakable,  the  occurrences  of  the  word  d’d’  are  not  numerous,  e.  g.,  Ebers  66. 1 1  ; 
86, 15  ;  90, 18  ;  109,  10  (probably)  ;  Kahun  Med.  Pap.  2,  26  ;  Pap.  Hearst,  II,  1.  In 
the  vast  majority  of  cases  in  the  medical  papyri  the  word  “  head  ”  is  written  ©  i, 
which  we  may  of  course  read  either  tp  or  d’d’,  e.  g.,  Ebers  1,  4. 

An  important  variant  in  Pap.  Smith  illustrates  the  loose  use  of  d’d ’  as  “  skull.” 
In  discussing  an  injury  of  the  forehead  in  Case  9,  the  surgeon  twice  refers  to  the  injury 
as  follows  : 

"  fracture  °f  the  shell  of  his  skull  ”  (IV  19). 

°71LfL  “  fracture  of  the  shell  of  his  head  ”  (IV  19-20). 

It  may  be  therefore  that  d’d’  is  more  closely  related  to  or  connected  with  “  skull  ” 
than  tp.  In  this  connection  the  following  list  of  phrases  is  important : 

A  fracture  of  the  skull  is  under  "  the  skin  of  his  ®i  ”  (IV  12-18). 

Fragments  (of  bone)  are  embedded  in  “  the  flesh  of  his  ©  i  ”  (II  9). 

“  The  odor  of  the  crown  (literally  “  chest  ”)  of  his  ®i  ”  (III  21). 

“  As  for  (the  following  statement  of  the  text)  ‘  His  countenance  is  wet  with 
sweat,’  it  means  his  ©i  is  a  little  moist  ”  (III  18-19). 

Whether  we  are  to  read  tp  or  d’d ’  in  the  above  list  of  passages  it  is  evident  that 
©  i  means  more  than  the  calvaria. 

The  word  !rj<=®  dnn-t,  which  we  have  rendered  “  skull  ”  above  should  be  carefully 
examined  in  this  connection.  In  the  first  place  it  should  be  noted  that  the  serious 
injuries  of  the  skull,  like  “  fracture  ”  (II  11),  “  perforation  ”  (I  19),  and  “  splitting  ” 
(II  5),  are  all  said  to  be  in  the  dnn-t.  In  describing  different  kinds  of  fracture  of  the 
dnn-t,  the  surgeon  mentions  “  bones  that  have  got  into  this  fracture  and  sunk  deep 
into  the  interior  of  his  dnn-t  ”  (II  16).  Again  a  fracture  is  described  as  “  large  and 
opening  into  the  interior  of  his  dnn-t  ”  (II  24).  Of  a  fracture  in  the  forehead,  the 
surgeon  says,  “  the  shell  of  his  dnn-t  is  fractured  ”  (IV  19).  In  our  own  Case  1  the 
surgeon  mentions  the  “  bone  of  his  dnn-t”  (1 11).  Under  these  circumstances  we  cannot 
doubt  that  the  surgeon’s  technical  use  of  the  word  identifies  it  with  the  calvaria.  In 
the  other  medical  papyri  the  word  occurs  only  in  Pap.  Ebers  and  Pap.  Hearst,  which 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  87 

do  not  employ  it  of  the  human  body,  except  possibly  Ebers  90,  16-17,  where  dnn-t 
is  significantly  parallel  with  “  bones.”  Otherwise  Ebers  and  Hearst  employ  dnn-t  only 
for  the  head  of  a  fish  as  a  medicinal  ingredient  of  a  prescription  (Ebers  47,  12  ;  47, 
14-15  ;  88,  8 ;  Hearst,  VI,  4).  Outside  of  the  medical  papyri  the  word  does  not 
occur  in  the  entire  range  of  the  older  documents  and  is  not  found  until  Greek  times, 
e.g.,  Diimichen,  Geogr.  Inschr.  Ill,  48  (Dendera) ;  Piehl,  Inscr.  II,  68,  8  and  68,  4  = 
Rochem.  I,  576,  5  (Edfu).  The  indications  are  that  our  document  has  taken  a  term 
current,  though  not  of  common  use,  and  has  adopted  it  as  the  technical  anatomical 
term  for  skull. 

The  justification  for  the  restoration  rr  n  fa  “  penetrating  to  the  bone  ” 

is  the  fact  that  the  ancient  commentary  (Gloss  C,  I  10-12)  contains  an  explanation 
of  this  phrase.  The  reason  for  the  insertion  of  the  phrase  just  at  this  point  is  its 
occurrence  after  “  his  head  ”  in  all  the  other  cases  of  this  group,  1  to  7,  except  Case  5, 
where  its  omission  in  the  title  is  doubtless  an  oversight,  for  it  is  inserted  in  the 
examination  (II 12). 

'r,  “  to  extend,  penetrate.”  It  appears  twice  in  our  document  in  the 
archaic  form  l)|S=  yr  (XIII  18  ;  XIII 15) ;  otherwise  it  is  written  with  the  greatest 
regularity  (twenty-nine  times),  and  always  without  A.  There  is  no  trace  or 

indication  of  a  third  weak  radical,  as  sometimes  in  the  M.K.,  even  where  reduplica¬ 
tion  would  be  required  by  the  form  in  case  the  root  were  III-iuf.  To  the  total  of 
thirty-one  passages  in  which  it  occurs,  we  can  add  some  others  with  certainty  by 
restoration  of  Case  1,  which  must  have  contained  several  more  occurrences.  It  was 
probably  used  at  least  85  times  in  Papyrus  Smith. 

Its  first  occurrence  in  our  treatise  was  in  Case  1,  for  as  already  noted  the  com¬ 
mentary  on  this  case  contains  an  explanation  of  it  (Gloss  C),  which  is  unfortunately 
very  fragmentary.  Before  we  undertake  to  discuss  it,  we  should  examine  a  cognate 
gloss  in  Case  18  (Gloss  A,  VII  12)  in  which  we  find  the  following  parallelism  : 

Phrase  to  be  explained  :  — (|i  =“  rr  to  the  bone.” 

Explanation  :  =“  arriving  at  the  bone.” 

It  is  obvious  then  that  our  word  rr  means  “  to  reach,  to  arrive  ”  or  with  the 

following  preposition  “  to  reach  as  far  as,”  “  to  arrive  at,”  for  the  explanation  can 
only  be  understood  as  meaning  :  “  to  arrive  at,”  “  to  reach  as  far  aB  ”  the  bone. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  study  the  fragmentary  gloss,  explaining  our  word  and 
its  context  in  Case  1  (Gloss  C,  1 10-12).  Accepting  the  restorations  of  the  broken  text 
which  will  be  further  justified  in  the  commentary  (p.  117),  the  gloss  may  be  rendered  : 
“  As  for  (the  quoted  words) :  ‘  <Y  to  the  bone  of  his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a 
gash,’ — it  means  (literally,  ‘it  says’),  there  is  a  gaping  of  the  flesh,  although  r — 1 . . . 
(loss  of  several  words)  .  .  .  r — 1  over  the  bone  of  his  skull,  without  gaping  of  one  (lip) 
from  the  other,  being  narrow,  not  wide.”  The  general  sense  of  this  fragmentary  com- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

88  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  1 

ment  is  evidently  that  the  exterior  orifice  of  the  wound,  while  gaping  slightly,  is  not 
large  nor  gaping  like  a  gash  with  two  lips ;  but  that  in  depth  it  penetrates  through 
the  flesh  to  the  bone. 

The  simplest  meaning  of  fr  as  an  anatomical  term  is  to  be  found  in  its  use  to  define 
the  extent  of  a  region  or  organ.  In  Papyrus  Smith  we  find  the  following  examples 
of  this  kind  : 

1.  “  The  two  sides  of  his  nose  ”  w  "  extending  (rr)  to  his  maxillary  ” 

(V15). 

2.  “The  chamberof  his  nose  is  the  middle  of  his  nose  as  far  as  the  back”  (or“end”), 

**  extending  (rr)  to  the  region  between  his  two  eyebrows  ”(V  21). 

8.  “  It  is  a  dislocation  of  the  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  "Z?***  ,  “extending 

(rr)  to  his  backbone,  which  causes  him  to  be  unconscious  of  his  arms  and  his  legs  ” 
(X  16-16). 

4.  “  In  the  upper  bone  of  his  breast,”  “  extending  (rr)  to  his  throat  ” 

(XI  23). 

The  examples  of  the  anatomical  use  of  the  verb  rr  certainly  do  not  confirm 

its  usually  accepted  meaning  “  to  ascend.”  Gardiner  has  made  the  same  observation 

regarding  its  meaning  in  other  connections  ( Notes  on . Sinuhe,  pp.  12-18).  It  is 

obvious  that  the  verb  must  mean  “  to  pass  on  ”  in  the  first  place,  and  then  “  to  reach,” 
“  to  pass  by,”  or  “  pass  through,”  or  “  pass  beyond.”  For  example,  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  the  deceased  says :  “  I  reach  it  (dung)  not  with 

my  two  hands  ”  (BD  ed.  Budge,  189,  from  Nu  19, 18 ;  six  duplicates  all  with  same  text). 
It  is  this  meaning  “  reach,”  “  penetrate  to,”  which  has  led  our  surgeon  to  employ  it  to 
indicate  the  passage  of  a  wound  rupturing  the  fleshy  tissue,  through  that  tissue  to 
the  bone  beneath.  He  employs  it  especially  to  describe  deep  wounds,  both  “  gaping 
wounds  ”  (wbnu >  n  kj-t)  and  others  with  a  smaller  and  more  irregular  orifice,  described 
as  “  having  no  gash  ”  (nn  kj-t  or  n  vmt  kj-t),  in  all  twenty-Beven  times.  In  all  of  these 
examples,  rr,  which  in  such  cases  we  may  render  “penetrate,”  is  followed  by  a  preposi¬ 
tion  and  the  word  “  bone,”  thus  :  — >  (twenty-three  times),  or  (four 

times,  twice  with  archaic  writing  (jHs).1 

It  is  significant  that  this  anatomical  and  surgical  use  of  with  the  meaning 

“  extend  ”  (anatomical),  or  "  penetrate  ”  (surgical)  is  unknown  outside  of  our  treatise. 
It  iB  evident  that  our  Egyptian  surgeon  or  his  ancestors  had  built  up  a  list  of  words 
with  specialized  medical  or  surgical  meanings  not  occurring  in  other  literature.  As 
we  shall  Bee,  it  is  largely  if  not  exclusively  these  terms  which  have  gained  a  technical 

1  The  Berlin  Woerterbuch  has  only  six  examples  with  the  preposition  — ,  and  only  four  with  «=». 
Our  material  in  Papyrus  Smith  shows  that  >  is  the  normal  preposition.  The  phrase 
which  Gardiner  in  his  commentary  on  Sinuhe  has  shown  to  mean  "  in  the  vicinity  of  ”  or  similar,  is 
of  course  related  to  the  verb  'r. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  89 

or  professional  meaning,  to  which  the  ancient  reader  of  the  roll  found  it  necessary  to 
append  an  explanatory  commentary. 

The  inclusion  of  the  phrase  “  of  his  skull  ”  in  the  title  may  be  open  to  question. 
That  it  occurred  in  the  examination  and  diagnosis  cannot  be  doubted,  for  reasons 
fully  indicated  in  the  discussion  below.  The  commentary  on  dnn-t  will  be  found  above. 

Examination 

Bottom  of  lost  column  to  I  1 

'  MWM  \  wvw  ^ -1 

(from  Casel8> 

[(0^©  ^**7^  H  Case  2, 118;  cf.  Case  7, 

L  X  O  v _ s* 

H- 

t 

VII  8-9);  or 
III  9-10). 

*  This  position  of  the  beginning  of  I  1  is  almost  certain.  See  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  B,  1.  1. 

Translation 

[If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone  of 
his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound  (or,  thou  shouldst 
lay  thy  hand  upon  it) ;  shouldst  thou  find  his  skull  uninjured,  not  having  a  perfora¬ 
tion,  a  split  or  a  smash  in  it,]  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  restoration  as  a  whole  is  drawn  from  Case  18,  but  also  with  the  use  of  Case  7 
and  Case  2.  In  some  minor  points  the  restoration  is  uncertain,  but  in  the  main  it 
represents  without  doubt  the  general  content  of  the  examination  as  it  was  originally 
written  in  the  lost  column.  The  following  parallel  between  the  group  to  which  Case  1 
belongs  and  the  analogous  group  of  injuries  to  the  temporal  region  in  Cases  18  to  22 
will  demonstrate  the  correctness  of  basing  the  restoration  on  Case  18. 

Cases  1  &  2.  Superficial  wound  ;  bone  Case  18.  Superficial  wound  ;  bone  un- 
uninjured.  injured. 

Case  3.  Skull  perforated.  Cases  19  &  20.  Temporal  bone  perforated. 

Case  4.  Skull  split.  Case  21 .  Temporal  bone  split. 

Case  5.  Skull  fractured.  Case  22.  Temporal  bone  fractured. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

90  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

An  examination  of  the  content  of  Case  1  as  revealed  in  the  partially  preserved 
diagnosis,  and  also  in  the  glosses  which  quote  from  the  discussion  of  the  case,  as  we 
shall  see  in  discussing  the  diagnosis  itself,  demonstrates  that  Case  1  was  closely 
parallel  in  content  and  arrangement  with  Case  18.  This  is  also  true  of  Case  1  as 
compared  with  Case  2,  which  was  also  a  wound  exposing  but  not  injuring  the  calvaria, 
and  Case  2  furnishes  a  number  of  valuable  hints  for  the  recovery  of  the  text  of  Case  1 . 
All  these  details  will  be  noticed  in  the  following  commentary. 

In  the  description  of  the  wound  there  are  two  chief  observations  :  it  penetrates 
to  the  bone  ;  and  there  is  no  gash  (kf-t).  In  the  diagnosis  the  observation  regarding 
the  lack  of  a  kf-t  comes  first,  and  penetration  to  the  bone  second,  as  shown  by  the 
preserved  text  (1 2).  In  Gloss  C  however,  in  the  quotation  of  the  words  to  be  explained, 
the  penetration  to  the  bone  comes  first  and  the  lack  of  a  kf-t  is  second.  Gloss  C  there¬ 
fore  did  not  quote  from  the  diagnosis,  and  consequently  must  be  quoting  from  the 
examination.  The  examination  therefore  must  have  contained  a  statement  having 
the  penetration  of  the  bone  mentioned  first  and  the  lack  of  a  kf-t  second.  A  variation 
in  arrangement  as  between  examination  and  diagnosis  is  sometimes  observable  in 
other  cases  of  our  treatise.  The  restoration  of  the  two  observations  regarding  the 
wound  in  the  examination  is  therefore  drawn  from  the  quotation  in  Gloss  C  (1 10-11, 
p.  110). 

In  the  opening  words  of  the  examination  the  word  “  examine  ”  itself  is  an  impor¬ 
tant  technical  term,  which  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  Gloss  A 
(I  3-9,  pp.  104-6),  a  long  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  the  term  by  the  ancient 
practitioner  himself. 

kf-t,  noun,  “gash,  cut.”  There  was  no  inherited  word-sign  for  the  word 
and  it  is  therefore  always  written  out  phonetically,  with  a  knife  as  the  determinative. 
It  is  hardly  likely  that  this  knife  once  served  as  the  word-sign.  The  existence  of  no 
word-sign  may  suggest  that  this  exclusively  surgical  word  did  not  find  written  form 
until  after  the  picture  stage  of  writing  had  been  left  behind. 

This  surgical  word  is  found  only  in  Pap.  Smith  and  the  fact  that  it  occurs  there 
no  less  than  thirty-six  times  enables  us  to  establish  its  meaning  with  certainty.  The 
ancient  commentator  found  it  necessary  to  explain  the  term  wbnw  n  kf-t,  “  gash- 
wound  ”  (Case  2,  Gloss  A,  I  15-16),  but  the  entire  explanation  is  lost  in  the  lacuna 
at  the  beginning  of  1. 16,  only  its  last  words  “  his  wound  ”  being  preserved.  The  knife- 
determinative  gives  us  a  preliminary  indication  of  the  meaning,  which  is  amply 
corroborated  by  the  use  of  the  word.  In  Case  18  we  have  a  wound  in  the  temple 
which  is  said  to  have  no  kf-t,  and  the  ancient  commentator  explains  in  a  gloss  (YII 13) 
that  this  means  “  his  wound  has  not  two  Ups.”  “  Two  lips  ”  are  obviously  the  chief 
characteristic  of  a  gash.  Concerning  this  wound  of  similar  character  Case  1  says  in 
Gloss  B  :  “  There  is  no  gaping  (kf-t)  of  one  (Up)  from  the  other  ”  (1 10  ;  again  in  1. 11). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  91 

Complete  parallelism  between  “  two  lips  ”  and  kf-i  is  clear  in  the  following  two 
examples  (XVI  18-20  and  VI  8-9) : 

1-  r 

2- 

1.  “  Shouldst  thou  find  its  kf-t  separated  from  r — 1  .  .  .  thou  shouldst  draw 
together  for  him  his  kf-t  with  stitching  ”  (Case  47  ;  XVI 18-20). 

2.  “  Shouldst  thou  find  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  separated  from  each  other, 
thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  that  wound  with  stitching  ”  (Case  14  ;  VI  8-9). 

In  the  second  part  of  the  above  parallelism,  it  is  important  to  note  that  “  his  kf-t  ” 
(plur.)  is  parallel  with  “  that  wound  ”  in  the  other  text.  In  other  words,  the  term  “  his 
kf-t”  (plur.)  is  simply  a  variant  for  “that  wound.”  The  same  parallelism  of  “  his  kf-t 
(plur.)  and  “his  wound”  occurs  again  in  Case  26  (IX  8)  and  Case  10  (V  6).  See  com¬ 
mentary  on  Case  10  (treatment).  Further  examination  shows  that  what  is  here 
designated  both  by  kf-t  (plur.)  and  “wound”  is  the  injury  to  the  soft  tissue.  The 
use  of  kf-t  in  the  plural  in  the  first  example  above  (XVI 19-20)  is  found  also  in  V  6 ; 
XVII  4  (bis).  That  the  plural  is  meant  is  clearly  shown  by  the  use  of  the  plural 
demonstrative  in  XVII  4.  This  usage  throws  light  on  the  origin  of  the  word.  It  is 
obvious  that  in  the  cases  where  this  plural  occurs,  as  shown  by  the  above  parallelism 
with  “  his  wound,”  only  one  gash  is  being  discussed  ;  but  such  a  gash  is  shown  by 
the  discussion  to  be  gaping,  thus  exposing  two  faces  of  gashed  tissue,  and  it  is  these 
which  the  surgeon  is  to  draw  together.  Such  gashed  tissue  is  laid  bare,  and  reminds 
us  at  once  of  the  well-known  verb  ^cfJ  kfy,  “  to  lay  bare,”  of  which  our  word  must 
be  a  regular  feminine  infinitive.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  term  was  consciously 
devised  by  the  surgeon  to  describe  this  particular  kind  of  injury,  in  view  of  the  facts 
that  the  word  is  found  nowhere  else  outside  of  our  surgical  treatise,  and  that  it  needed 
an  explanatory  comment  (Gloss  A)  in  order  to  be  understood. 

Kf-t  is  used  especially  to  add  greater  precision  to  the  more  general  word  wbnw, 
“  wound  ”  (see  p.  82),  being  appended  as  a  genitive  after  wbnw.  As  we  say  “  a  thing 
of  beauty,”  so  the  Egyptian  might  say  “  wound  of  a  gash,”  meaning  a  “  gashed 
wound.”  This  phrase,  <?J  ^  wbnw  n  kf-t  occurs  thirty-one  times  (five  restored 

from  context  in  Cases  2  and  8)  in  our  treatise,  and  in  all  cases  designates  a  deep  and 
dangerous  wound.  Although  the  table  on  p.  92  does  not  contain  all  the  available  data 
for  describing  each  case  and  the  symptoms  developed,  the  depth  and  serious  nature 
of  the  wound  will  be  evident. 

Out  of  the  eleven  cases  the  wbnw  n  kf-t  (“  gash- wound  ”)  penetrates  to  the  bone 
in  nine,  while  of  the  two  remaining,  it  penetrates  the  throat  to  the  gullet  in  one,  and 
the  other  (CaBe  47)  is  shown  by  the  context  to  be  a  yawning  wound.  In  six  out  of  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

92  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

eleven  cases  there  is  serious  injury  to  the  bone  beneath  the  “  gash-wound ;  ”  and 
it  is  evident  that  the  whole  injury  has  been  produced  by  a  violent  blow  with  a  weapon 
like  a  sword  or  battle  axe  (Cases  4,  5,  6)  or  a  spear  (Cases  8,  7,  29).  Obviously  such 
wounds  are  those  of  battle,  and  we  must  conclude  that  the  surgeon  had  gained  know¬ 
ledge  of  such  injuries  while  following  the  Egyptian  armies  and  treating  the  wounded 
on  the  field — a  fact  of  substantial  historical  importance,  for  the  author  of  this  treatise 
on  wounds  is  the  earliest  known  surgeon  in  history  to  possess  such  experience.  His 
employment  in  such  work  denotes  a  high  degree  of  civilization  and  of  humanitarian 
sentiment. 

Case. 

Injury  to  bone  if  any. 

Depth  of  flesh  wound. 

Reference. 

2 

Head  :  skull  uninjured 

“  penetrating  to  the  bone  ” 

112;  112-13;  1  14  ;  I  15 

3 

„  „  perforated  (thm) 

tt  tt  ti  tt  ti 

I  18;  I  19;  I  21 

4 

„  „  split  (pin) 

It  a  ft  tt  ti 

112;  II  3;  115. 

5 

„  ,,  fractured  (id) 

a  a  »*  tt  a 

II  11  ;  II  12;  II  14. 

0 

„  „  fractured  (id)  brain 

ruptured 

»’  »»  ti  it  a 

II  18  ;  II  18-19. 

7 

Head  :  tp‘w  of  skull  perforated 

a  tt  tt  it  a 

Ill  2  ;  III  5  ;  III  12. 

10 

„  eyebrow  ;  no  injury  to  bone 

a  it  tt  tt  tt 

V  9. 

27 

„  chin  ;  no  injury  to  bone 

tt  it  tt  tt  ti 

IX  13  ;  IX  13-14  ;  IX  16. 

28 

Throat 

“  perforating  to  gullet  ” 

IX  18-19. 

29 

Neck  ;  “  vertebra  of  his  neck  ” 

“  penetrating  to  the  bone  ” 

X  3  ;  X  4. 

47 

Shoulder 

gaping  wound 

XVI  16  ;  XVI  17  ;  XVII 1  ; 

XVII  10. 

It  will  be  obvious  that  the  absence  of  kf-t  was  an  important  negative  observation 
in  the  description  of  the  wound  in  our  case  as  also  in  Case  18. 

As  the  wound  penetrates  to  the  bone  it  is  the  duty  of  the  surgeon  to  investigate 
the  injury  and  determine  whether  it  not  only  “  extends  to  ”  but  also  includes  the  bone. 
ThiB  investigation  is  designated  by  the  word  drr,  “  to  seek,  search,  search 

out,  investigate,  probe,  palpate.”  The  word  has  long  been  known  outBide  of  the  medical 
papyri,  where  it  is  common  ;  but  its  surgical  use  has  never  been  determined  clearly, 
for  it  occurs  outside  of  Pap.  Smith  only  in  Pap.  Ebers,  and  there  only  three  times. 
One  of  theBe  passages  is  of  importance  for  determining  the  surgical  meaning  of  the 
word.  It  reads:  °  jj^  “  If  thy  finger  palpates  and 

it  is  like  hj>r  under  thy  fingers, ...”  (Ebers  106, 18-19).  The  surgeon  is  investigating 
a  lanced  boil  or  cyst,  and  the  verb  d'r  indicates  his  subsequent  palpation  with  the 
finger.  This  is  quite  in  accord  with  the  usage  in  Pap.  Smith,  where  the  word  occurs 
ten  times  besides  the  restored  passage  in  our  Case  1 .  The  significant  passages  are  as 
follows : 

“  Thou  shouldst  palpate  (drr)  his  wound,  and  if  thou  findest  something  disturbing 
therein  under  thy  fingers  ”  (Case  4,  II  8-4). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  93 

“  Thou  shouldst  palpate  (drr)  his  wound,  and  if  thou  findest  that  smash  (fracture) 
which  is  in  his  skull  deep  and  sunken  under  thy  fingers  ”  (Case  5,  II 12-13). 

“  Thou  shouldst  palpate  (drr)  his  wound  and  if  thou  findest  that  smash  (fracture) 
which  is  in  his  skull  .  .  .  and  something  therein  throbbing  and  fluttering  under  thy 
fingers  ”  (Case  6,  II  19-21). 

“  Thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound  and  if  thou  findest  the  temporal  (bone)  unin¬ 
jured  ”  (Case  18,  VII  8-9  ;  cf.  Case  27,  IX  14-15). 

Besides  the  explicit  statement  that  the  surgeon  palpates  with  his  fingers,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  it  would  only  be  in  this  way  that  he  could  feel  the  pulsations 
in  the  brain.  There  is  no  reference  in  the  surgery  of  our  treatise  to  probing  with  an 
instrument.  Another  evidence  that  such  investigation  is  done  with  the  fingers  is 
found  in  the  fact  that  Case  2  and  Case  7  display  a  variant  but  parallel  text  at  this 
point,  which  reads  :  “  Thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it  ”  (see  text  of  examination 
above).  It  should  be  noted  also  that  our  word  “  palpate  ”  (drr),  as  found  in  Case  10 
(V  6),  is  twice  represented  by  the  variant  “  examine  ”  in  Case  26  (IX  7)  and  Case  29 
(X  5).  See  commentary  on  w  h’y,  “  examine  ”  in  Case  1  (I  8).  This  would  suggest 
that  “  drr  ”  may  sometimes  also  connote  the  idea  of  making  a  more  general  examina¬ 
tion.  In  this  connection  it  is  important  to  observe  that  in  Case  8  (IV  5-6)  the  surgeon 
is  directed  to  “  palpate  ”  (drr)  a  serious  fracture  of  the  skull,  when  the  overlying  soft 
tissue  is  uninjured.  See  commentary  on  Case  8,  examination,  IV  5-6. 

gmm-k,  “Shouldst  thou  find,  etc.,”  is  restored  as  in  Case  18.  Case  2 
has  a  slightly  different  text  at  this  point. 

The  list  of  three  injuries  to  the  bone  :  thm,  phi,  and  id  (“  perforation,”  “  split,” 
and  “  smash  ”  (“  fracture  ”))  are  restored  here  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  taken  up 
in  Cases  8, 4,  and  5  respectively  ;  but  Case  18  gives  the  list  at  this  point  in  a  different 
order,  viz.,  pin,  thm,  id  (VII  9  ;  likewise  Case  2,  I  17),  although  the  cases  following 
Case  18  take  up  the  injuries  in  the  order  thm,  phi,  id. 

Diagnosis 
I  1-2 

»  The  amount  of  space  lost  here  at  the  beginning  of  1.  2  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  certain 
restorations  at  the  beginnings  of  the  lines  of  this  column  on  PI.  I  B  and  C. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

94  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

(J  P  *=>  - - ?J  I - 

»  Part  of  this  sign  is  preserved  at  the  beginning  of  the  lacuna  ;  see  commentary. 

Translation 

[Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him  :  “  One  having  a  woun]d  in  his  head,  while 
his  wound  does  [not]  have  two  lips,  -  -  nor  a  gash,  although  [it  penetrates  to  the 
bone  of]  his  head.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

That  Column  I  begins  with  the  diagnosis  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  verdict  is 
in  1.  2,  and  in  all  cases  it  is  preceded  by  the  diagnosis  which  makes  the  verdict  possible. 
It  will  not  have  differed  in  form  from  the  other  cases  in  the  same  group  and  throughout 
the  document.  The  beginning  of  the  preserved  text  of  Column  I  must  be  compared 
with  an  analogous  case  to  justify  the  restorations  suggested.  As  we  have  already  noted 
Case  1  is  the  first  of  a  group  of  cases  chiefly  concerned  with  grave  injuries  to  the  skull. 
In  the  same  way  Case  18  is  the  first  of  a  group  of  cases  dealing  chiefly  with  injuries 
of  the  temporal  bone.  See  comparative  table  in  examination,  p.  89.  Case  1  and 
Case  18  deal  with  flesh  wounds  over  the  bone,  and  they  are  parallel  or  analogous  both 
in  position,  each  in  its  respective  group,  as  well  as  in  the  character  of  the  content  of 
the  discussion.  Like  Case  1,  Case  18  states  that  the  wound  has  no  gash,  and  a  gloss 
explains  this  statement  as  meaning  that  the  wound  does  not  have  two  lips  (VII  18). 
Placing  the  two  statements  together  : 

“while  his  wound  has  [not]  two  lips”  (1 1,  from  Case  1) ; 

and  his  wound  has  not  two  lips  ”  (VII 18,  from  Case  18), 
we  cannot  doubt  that  the  lacuna  in  Case  1  contained  a  negative,  although  it  is  difficult 
to  determine  the  exact  word  which  will  fit  the  fragmentary  signs  still  visible  on  the 
upper  edge  of  the  papyrus  at  this  point.  In  view  of  the  certainty  that  some  negative 
filled  the  lacuna  in  Case  1  at  this  point,  it  is  remarkable  to  find  the  verb  mn 

preceding  dpt-tvy  in  the  repetition  of  this  passage  quoted  for  purposes  of  explanation 
by  the  ancient  editor  in  Gloss  B  (I  9-10).  This  difficulty  will  be  found  discussed  in 
the  commentary  on  Gloss  B  (pp.  114-116). 

Continuing  the  discussion  of  the  restoration  before  taking  up  the  commentary, 
it  is  regrettable  that  the  short  lacuna  at  the  beginning  of  1.  2  resists  all  efforts  to 
determine  its  former  content.  The  only  source  for  material  is  Case  18  and  nothing 
drawn  thence  seems  to  fit  the  sense,  though  it  would  be  easy  to  fit  the  space.  The 
restoration  in  the  last  bracket  is  certain.  In  the  first  place  the  edge  of  the  papyrus 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  95 

at  the  beginning  of  the  lacuna  has  preserved  the  right  end  of  the  cross  stroke  of 
Turning  now  to  Case  18  (VII  12)  we  find  after  n  um~t  kj-t,  the  words  yst  &w  rr  n  k&. 
This  makes  the  correctness  of  our  restoration  quite  certain. 

P£wo>  ipl-uoy,  “  two  lips.”  This  term  is  used  eleven  times  in  the  Pap.  Smith  to 
designate  the  two  edges  of  a  gaping  gash-wound.  This  usage  is  peculiar  to  our  treatise, 
for  it  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  other  medical  papyri.  Pap.  Ebers  employs  it  once  for 
the  “  two  lips  of  the  vulva  ”  (95,  22,  correcting  determinative),  which  is  a  similar 
comparison ;  but  otherwise  it  is  used  only  for  the  shores  of  a  body  of  water. 

The  concluding  statement  of  the  diagnosis  is  the  most  important  proposition  it 
contains.  For  lack  of  a  modern  equivalent,  we  call  it  the  “  verdict.”  The  reader  is 
referred  to  the  discussion  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46-48).  As  we  have  noticed  in 
the  introduction,  the  verdict  is  the  conclusion  of  the  diagnosis,  both  together  form¬ 
ing  an  apodosis  of  which  the  examination  is  the  protasis.  It  is  quite  certain  that  the 
principal  proposition  of  the  apodosis  is  the  statement  “  Thou  shouldst  say,”  at 
the  head  of  the  diagnosis,  and  the  verdict  is  simply  a  second  direct  object  of  the  verb 
“  Thou  shouldst  say.” 

mr  “  hurt,  injury,  pain,  ailment,  disease.”  This  word,  used  both  as 
verb  and  noun,  evidently  applied  either  to  artificial  and  accidental  injury,  or  to 
natural  suffering  and  disease.  An  old  example  of  its  use  in  connection  with  an  artificial 
case  is  found  in  the  Fifth  Dynasty  tomb  of  f  \  at  Sakkara  in  a  scene  of  manicure 
and  pedicure  treatment  in  which  the  patient  says  to  the  man  operating  on  his  foot  : 

not  *et  ^  hurt  ”  (mr)  (from  my  own  copy).  Its  use  in  our  treatise 
is  exclusively  confined  to  artificial  injuries. 

-**-() (]^  yry-y,  “  which  I  will  treat  ”  (literally  “  make  ”)  is  grammatically  a  fine 
example  of  the  new  “  prospective  relative  ”  form,  of  the  existence  of  which  Gunn  has 
recently  given  a  brilliant  demonstration  in  his  Studies  in  Egyptian  Syntax.  See  p.  8, 
example  No.  (8)  for  the  form  Strong  and  unquestionable  evidence  as  addi¬ 

tional  proof  of  the  correctness  of  his  recognition  and  identification  of  the  new  form 
might  have  been  adduced  from  Papyrus  Ebers,  where  it  occurs  sixteen  times  in  this 
form  of  the  physician’s  verdict. 

Of  the  three  forms  of  the  verdict  this  one  which  we  call  verdict  1  is  found  outside 
of  our  papyrus  a  total  of  nineteen  times  :  twice  in  the  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  (8088, 
Nos.  154  and  161) ;  once  in  the  Hearst  Papyrus  (No.  174,  12,  2)  and  sixteen  times 
in  Papyrus  Ebers  (fourteen  times  in  the  concluding  group  of  suppurating  sores  and 
the  like,  Nos.  857-860,  868-872,  and  twice  elsewhere,  Nos.  200  and  617).  Among  the 
fourteen  occurrences  at  the  end  of  Papyrus  Ebers  are  four  in  which  this  verdict  receives 
the  addition  thus:  -<=-() “  An  ailment  (mr)  which 

I  will  treat  with  the  lancet  ”  (105,  4).  In  this  connection  one  might  conclude  that 
yr  means  “  operate,”  but  it  is  used  so  often  in  cases  where  no  operation  is  involved 

oi.uchicago.edu 

96  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

that  one  can  hardly  doubt  the  rendering  “  treat.”  In  Pap.  Smith  this  verdict  occurs 
thirty  times,  and  in  twenty-nine  of  these  treatment  is  prescribed.  The  case  lacking 
treatment  is  the  second  group  of  symptoms  in  Case  84,  where  it  is  quite  evident  that 
the  scribe  has  inserted  verdict  1  when  he  really  intended  verdict  3,  a  verdict  indicating 
treatment  is  useless.  Compare  his  similar  error  in  Case  35  (see  list  of  titles).  In  these 
thirty  occurrences  of  verdict  1  the  result  of  the  treatment  is  given  in  twenty-five  and 
in  all  of  these  twenty-five  it  is  continued  “  until  he  recovers  ”  (r  ndm-f).  Of  the  five 
cases  in  which  no  result  (like  r  ndm-f)  is  given,  one  is  due  to  the  loss  of  the  conclusion 
(Case  48),  one  to  the  error  of  the  scribe  already  noted  (Case  84) ;  and  in  only  three  is 
there  really  no  statement  of  the  result,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  where  given  at  all 
is  uniformly  favorable.  It  is  evident  that  verdict  1  suggests  a  favorable  outcome 
of  a  case  easy  to  treat,  although  it  is  not  evident  that  r  ndm-f  always  indicates  complete 
recovery. 

Treatment 
I  2-8 

*  Written  out  fully  as  in  XIII  16 ;  the  restoration  then  exactly  fills  the  gap.  Otherwise  it  is 
taken  from  Case  18. 

b  Remains  of  a  single  sign  in  rod ;  the  Bcribe  has  employed  the  red  for  the  entire  text  of  the 
treatment.  c  Restored  as  in  Case  18. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  [fresh]  meat  [the  first  day]  (and)  treat  afterward  with 
grease,  [honey]  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

2^  t ct,  “  to  bind,  to  bandage.”  The  Egyptian  idiom  seems  to  us  curiously  perverted. 
It  literally  means  “  Thou  shouldst  bind  it  (the  wound)  upon  fresh  meat.”  Any  one 
who  has  visited  a  modern  museum  and  seen  a  really  good  example  of  the  Egyptian 
embalmer’B  bandaging  knows  that  he  was  a  master  in  the  art  of  applying  and  arrang¬ 
ing  bandages  (see  PI.  Ill,  Figs.  6-7).  The  same  skill  was  available  for  the  benefit 
of  a  wounded  patient.  We  therefore  find  bandaging  occupying  an  important  and 
effective  place  in  Egyptian  Burgery  and  medicine.  Bandages  were  applied  for  two 
purposes  :  for  covering  and  keeping  effectively  in  place  the  medicaments  prescribed ; 
or  for  mechanically  retaining  in  position  and  protecting  while  healing  the  ruptured 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  97 

tissue  or  the  broken  bone  of  the  injury.  The  first  is  a  matter  chiefly  of  medicine,  the 
second  is  purely  a  matter  of  surgery.  We  shall  postpone  the  discussion  of  the  second 
until  later  (Case  7,  Gloss  C,  III  18 ;  Case  11,  treatment,  V  18),  as  we  are  concerned 
here  solely  with  the  first. 

The  medicaments  applied  by  being  bound  on  are  either  simple  remedies  like  the 
fresh  meat  above,  or  a  combination  of  two  ingredients,  especially  grease  and  honey 
applied  with  lint  as  above ;  or  a  more  elaborate  prescription  of  as  many  as  five  in¬ 
gredients  to  be  triturated  together  and  bound  on  (Cases  41  and  46).  There  are  in 
our  treatise  thirty-three  instances  in  which  medicaments  are  externally  applied  in 
this  way.  They  are  the  following  : 

Fresh  meat :  Cases  1,  2  (restored),  8  (restored),  10, 14,  16,  17,  18,  26,  27,  28,  29, 
30,  82,  40,  and  47. 

Grease,  honey,  and  lint :  Cases  7  and  14.  These  are  the  cases  with  our  verb  wt  “  to 
bind”;  but  all  the  instances  employing  drwh  “treat”  with  grease,  honey,  and  some¬ 
times  lint,  as  shown  in  Case  1  (pp.  100-102),  should  also  be  added  here.  There  are 
nineteen  of  these  instances,  see  Srwh,  below,  p.  100. 

With  ymrw  :  Cases  15,  82,  85,  86,  87,  38,  42,  48. 

With  ymrw  and  honey  :  Case  25. 

With  a  triturated  prescription  of  several  ingredients  up  to  five  :  Cases  41  (three 
prescriptions),  and  46  (four  prescriptions). 

We  will  take  up  the  discussion  of  these  medicaments  as  we  meet  them  in  the  course 
of  translating  the  document. 

ywf  "  fresb  meat-”  In  aN  fch®  sixteen  cases  in  which  meat  is 
employed  in  this  way  as  an  external  medicament,  it  is  carefully  specified  in  fifteen 
(omitting  Case  2)  that  “fresh  meat  ”  shall  be  used,  and  that  it  shall  be  applied  for  the 
first  day  only.  It  was  a  preparatory  remedy,  anticipating  the  application  of  other 
medicaments.  In  only  one  case  (Case  29)  do  we  find  “  fresh  meat  ”  as  the  only 
medicament  employed.  As  a  “  folk  remedy  ”  it  has  survived  down  to  the  present  day, 
although  modem  scientific  therapeusis  would  regard  it  with  a  smile.  It  has  been  suggested 
that  its  use  was  purely  magical.  This  suggestion  is  at  once  refuted  by  an  examination 
of  the  table  below,  showing  that  in  the  most  dangerous  cases  where  the  assistance  of 
supernatural  forces  would  be  most  needed,  like  Cases  4  and  5,  it  was  not  employed. 

Cases  in  which  “fresh  meat  ”  is  bandaged  on  a  wound  the  first  day 

Case  1.  Flesh  wound  on  head  over  calvaria,  penetrating  to  bone  (verdict  1, 
treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  2.  Flesh  wound  on  head  over  calvaria,  penetrating  to  bone  (same). 

„  3.  Wound  on  the  head,  puncturing  the  calvaria  (same). 

,,  10.  Flesh  wound  in  top  of  eyebrow,  penetrating  to  bone  (same). 

H 

oi.uchicago.edu 

98  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

Case  14.  Flesh  wound  in  nose  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  16.  “  Split  ”  (p$n)  in  maxilla  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  17.  “  Fracture  ”  (id)  in  maxilla  (verdict  8  by  error,  treatment  “  till  he 

recovers  ”). 

„  18.  Flesh  wound  in  temple  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  26.  Flesh  wound  in  upper  lip  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  27.  Flesh  wound  in  chin  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  28.  Flesh  wound  in  throat  (verdict  2,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  29.  Wound  in  cervical  vertebra  (verdict  2,  result  doubtful). 

„  80.  Sprain  in  cervical  vertebra  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  82.  Displacement  in  cervical  vertebra  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  re¬ 
covers  ”). 

„  40.  Wound  in  sternum  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

„  47.  Wound  in  shoulder  (verdict  1,  treatment  “  till  he  recovers  ”). 

Out  of  the  sixteen  cases  thirteen  receive  the  favorable  verdict  1 ,  and  there  should 
be  fourteen  including  Case  17,  q.  v.  In  fifteen  cases  the  verdict  is  followed  by  treat¬ 
ment  “  until  he  recovers"  This  would  indicate  that  the  surgeon  employs  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  fresh  meat  almost  exclusively  in  simple  and  less  dangerous  cases,  in  which 
recovery  is  regarded  as  practically  certain.  It  is  significant  that  after  having  recom¬ 
mended  its  use  in  two  head  wounds  which  penetrate  to  the  calvaria  without  injury 
to  the  bone  (Cases  1  and  2),  he  also  advises  its  employment  when  the  calvaria  itself 
has  suffered  a  perforation  (Case  8),  but  not  in  the  case  of  a  more  serious  injury  like 
a  split  (Case  4),  or  a  fracture  (Case  5).  On  the  other  hand  a  split  or  a  fracture  of  the 
maxilla  is  not  serious  in  our  surgeon’s  opinion,  and  may  wisely  receive  the  application 
of  fresh  meat. 

In  all  but  one  (Case  29)  of  the  sixteen  cases  employing  the  application  of  fresh  meat, 
it  is  introductory  to  further  remedies.  In  seven  cases  (1,  2,  18,  26,  27,  28,  and  40)  it 
is  followed  at  once  after  the  first  day  by  an  application  of  grease  and  honey  sometimes 
bandaged  on  with  lint.  In  two  cases  (16  and  17)  there  is  intervening  treatment  for 
reducing  the  swelling  before  the  application  of  the  grease,  honey,  and  lint.  In  one  case 
(14)  there  is  special  attention  to  the  bandages  holding  together  the  wound  in  the  nose, 
before  the  grease,  honey,  and  lint  are  to  be  bandaged  on.  This  is  also  true  of  Case  10, 
a  wound  in  the  eyebrow,  of  Case  47,  a  gaping  wound  in  the  shoulder,  and  of  Case  82, 
the  only  dangerous  wound  of  the  fifteen — a  displacement  of  one  of  the  cervical  vertebrae. 
In  this  case  the  final  bandaging  is  with  the  problematical  ywirw,  which  we  find  combined 
with  honey  for  the  bandaging  immediately  after  the  fresh  meat  in  one  case  (80). 

In  the  other  medical  documents  the  use  of  an  external  application  of  “  fresh  meat 
the  first  day  ”  is  not  common.  It  occurs  twice  in  Pap.  Ebers,  once  for  crocodile  bite 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  99 

(64,  18)  and  again  for  human  bite  (64,  9).  For  the  crocodile  bite  it  is  also  employed 
in  Pap.  Hearst  (XVI 5)  and  likewise  for  the  bite  of  a  swine  (XVI 6),  but  is  limited  to 
these  two  cases.  Pap.  Ebers  employs  other  kinds  of  meat  in  poultices  and  ointments, 
especially  for  softening  stiffness  of  the  limbs  (88,  9,  where  the  meat  is  called  “  living 
flesh”)  or  limbering  the  groin,  etc.  (77, 7;  80,19;  81,1 ;  82, 19,  all  employing  “ox  flesh;” 
and  76,  20  employing  “fat  meat”;  cf.  also  Pap.  Hearst  VIII 16,  and  XV  5).1  It  is 
quite  characteristic  of  the  gross  superstitions  of  the  Ebers  papyrus  that  it  should 
advocate  the  use  even  of  decayed  meat  for  application  to  an  open  wound  (70, 12-14) ; 
but  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  use  of  fresh  meat.  As  an  ingredient  in  prescriptions 
for  internal  use  Pap.  Ebers  employs  “  fat  meat  ”  a  number  of  times  (50,  21  ;  51,  10  ; 
51, 14  ;  55, 1  ;  88, 1  ;  88,  21  ;  likewise  Pap.  Hearst  III  12)  and  once  even  “  decayed 
meat  ”  (55, 11).  The  London  Medical  Papyrus  and  the  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  8088 
do  not  employ  “  fresh  meat,”  but  the  Berlin  Papyrus  once  advocates  the  use  of  “living 
flesh  ”  internally  (18,  8-9) ;  compare  also  “  meat  of  living  ox  ”  (Ebers  28,  2). 

P'p'  irwh,  “to  treat,”  “treatment.”  Usually  with  but  again  with  — n 
in  II  7 ;  the  abbreviation  *— »  occurs  twice  (VI  17  and  XV  16),  — o  once  (XIV  7), 
and  once  (VIII  21).  This  word  was  long  read  Stwh,  and  is  found  in  this  form  in 
all  the  existent  glossaries.  In  his  transliteration  of  Pap.  Hearst  Wreszinski  was  the 
first  to  be  able  to  employ  the  correct  reading,  which  had  been  communicated  to  him 
by  Devaud.  The  real  reading  drivh  has,  however,  long  been  available  in  hieroglyphic 
texts,  e.g.,  Harhotep  887  (old  468);  cf.  850  and  806-807  (old  476  and  482-488). 
Gardiner  calls  my  attention  to  its  existence  in  Book  of  the  Two  Ways  11,  2  and  6 
(Schack-Schackenburg,  Das  Buck  von  den  Zwei  Wegen,  p.  82).  An  interesting  example 
is  found  also  in  Newberry,  Rehhmara,  pi.  VII,  11.  22-28  : 

“  I  fostered  my  office  ”  (as  collated  by  Gardiner). 

In  meaning  the  word  is  a  general  term  for  “  foster”  or  “  cherish,”  and  then  in 
a  medical  sense  to  “care  for,”  or  to  “treat.”  It  is  employed  in  the  medical  papyri 
with  the  widest  and  most  inclusive  meanings.  In  Pap.  Hearst  it  is  used  only  eleven 
times,  six  of  them  for  the  treatment  of  diseased  fingers  or  toes  (Hearst  XI  17  ;  cf. 
Ebers  78,  16  ;  Hearst  XII  8,  cf.  Ebers  78, 12-14  ;  Hearst  XII  7-8,  cf.  Ebers  78,  10 
and  18-19  ;  Hearst  XII  13  ;  XIII  2,  cf.  Ebers  78,  10-12  ;  Hearst  XIII  4,  cf.  Ebers 
78,  18).  The  remaining  five  uses  are  for  the  lungs  (Hearst  IV  8,  cf.  Ebers  6,  17-18  ; 
11,  19),  blood  (Hearst  I  7),  urinary  affections  (IV  12),  the  “  left  side  ”  (II  12)  and 
an  uncertain  ailment  (V  4).  The  four  occurrences  of  the  word  in  the  Berlin  Medical 
Papyrus  are  instructive ;  among  them  are  two  treatments  for  the  heart :  one  external 
fumigation  with  incense,  etc.  (7,  5)  and  the  other  internal  (10,  2),  but  both  treat¬ 
ments  are  called  &rwh.  In  Papyrus  Ebers  it  appears  forty-five  times  for  both  external 
and  internal  treatments.  It  may  take  as  its  object  (if  a  verb)  either  the  patient,  the 
1  The  use  of  “  meat  ”  without  further  qualification  in  Pap.  Ebers  103,  13  is  not  clear. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

100  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

organs  to  be  affected,  like  the  teeth  (89, 12-18),  or  the  bowels  and  anus  (80, 18) ;  or 
the  ailment  itself  (a  wound,  107,  1)  or  the  agent  of  the  ailment  (worms,  22,  16).  In 
the  London  papyrus  it  does  not  occur  at  all. 

This  highly  promiscuous  application  of  the  term  in  the  other  medical  documents 
is  confirmed  by  its  use  in  Papyrus  Smith.  As  a  surgical  treatise  Pap.  Smith  employs 
the  term  chiefly  to  designate  external  applications.  It  is  used  as  in  our  passage  above 
nineteen  times  for  the  application  of  grease,  honey,  and  sometimes  lint,  six  times  for 
application  of  honey  alone,  and  once  for  ymrw  and  honey,  a  total  of  twenty-six  times 
with  the  meaning  treatment  by  external  applications  bandaged  on.  Again  the  treat¬ 
ment  is  to  be  “according  to  these  directions,”  whatever  they  may  be  (Cases  41  and  45). 
In  two  cases  the  surgeon  is  to  “  treat  with  a  wound  treatment  ”  (Cases  39  and  46, 
as  in  Ebers  107, 1).  The  troublesome  ®  jj  a  (sometimes  without  pic)  “his 
treatment  is  sitting,”  which  occurs  four  times  (Cases  4,  7,  8,  16),  will  be  taken  up  in 
the  discussion  of  these  cases. 

The  omission  of  the  object  of  Srwh  as  in  our  passage  is  common. 

S1SIMT.  mrh-t,  by-t,  jtt,  “  grease,  [honey],  lint.”  The  kind  of  mrh-t 

“  grease  ”  intended,  when  the  word  is  left  without  any  further  indication  or  qualifica¬ 
tion,  is  unknown.  It  was  made  from  the  fat  of  various  animals.  For  example,  in 
Pap.  Hearst  an  ointment  for  making  hair  grow  was  made  of  gazelle  fat,  serpent 
grease,  crocodile  grease,  and  hippopotamus  grease  (X  6-7).  Even  this  relatively  small 
collection  of  recipes  in  Pap.  Hearst  contains,  beside  the  above,  four  more  kinds  of 
animal  grease  :  ox,  rpnn-t  reptile,  cat  and  fish  grease.  In  Pap.  Ebers,  where  it  occurs 
as  an  external  remedy  scores  of  times,  we  find  the  grease  of  the  above-mentioned 
animals  and  a  number  of  others.  Goose  greaBe  is  very  frequent  (e.  g.,  11, 13  et  passim), 
and  the  most  grotesque  animal  grease  is  that  of  the  hippo’s  foot  (67,  6).  An  ointment 
found  in  the  tomb  of  Tutenkhamon  yielded  on  analysis  “  90  per  cent,  of  neutral 
animal  fat  and  10  per  cent,  of  some  sort  of  resin  or  balsam,”  of  course  of  vegetable 
origin.1  The  surviving  recipes  likewise  show  that  in  making  mrh-t,  plants  were  also 
employed,  e.g.,  castor  beans  (Ebers  27, 11),  and  Q(0(  (76, 11-12),  evidently  the  oil  of 
the  castor  bean  (so  Loret),  and  called  mrh-t  Q(0(.  In  such  cases  mrh-t  might  properly 
be  rendered  “  oil,”  as  doubtless  also  occasionally  elsewhere ;  but  the  occurrence  of 
mrh-t  Sw(-t)  “  dry  mrh-t,”  would  indicate  the  meaning  grease  very  clearly 
(Ebers  88,  14 ;  96,  14).  Other  sorts  used  medicinally  are  “  new  grease  ”  (Ebers 
78, 16) ;  “  grease  two  days  old  ”  (Ebers  82,  7);  “pure  grease”  (Ebers  26,4);  “white 
grease  ”  (Ebers  26, 12;  also  Hearst);  “fuller’s  grease  ”  (Ebers  85, 4-5) ;  and“foreign 
mrh-t  (perhaps  “  oil,”  Ebers  22,  8).  “  Head  grease  ”  (Ebers  85,  10)  is  obscure  in 

1  Paper  by  A.  Chaston  Chapman  and  Dr.  A.  Plenderleith  read  at  ninety-fourth  meeting  of  British 
Association  for  Advancement  of  Science,  Oxford,  1926.  See  New  York  Times,  Aug.  6,  1926, 
p.  4,  col.  6. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  101 

meaning.  Mrh-t  as  the  designation  of  a  fragrant  toilet  pomade  is  widely  mentioned 
outside  of  the  medical  papyri  and  constantly  appears  in  tomb  paintings  and  reliefs,  for 
it  was  a  universal  luxury  of  the  toilet.  Much  additional  information  regarding  it 
might  be  added  from  such  sources.  See  the  useful  essay  by  Chassinat  on  mrh-t 
(Recueil  Champollion,  pp.  447-465). 

The  combination  of  mrh-t,  “  grease”  with  honey  (by-t),  was  evidently  a  recognized 
standard  mixture.  The  proportions  are  given  in  a  prescription  for  ear  trouble  in 
Ebers  91,  7.  In  Pap.  Ebers  in  a  case  of  internal  ear  trouble  we  find  the  instructions : 

“  Thou  shouldst  prepare  for  it  grease  and  honey  ”  (Ebers 
92,  1-2)  “  applied  in  its  interior  with  lint  ”  and  bandaged  on.  The  combination  was 
a  kind  of  honey  ointment.  In  Pap.  Smith  we  find  mrh-t  used  alone  only  six  times, 
whereas  the  honey  ointment  (Written  simply  “  grease-honey  ”)  is  employed  twenty- 
two  times.  Besides  this,  mrh-t  appears  twice  as  the  vehicle  in  an  ointment  prescrip¬ 
tion  (IV  20 ;  XVI 11). 

In  our  treatise  honey  alone  is  applied  externally  toawoundinsix  cases .  If  bandaged 
on,  it  might  have  been  protected  from  the  swarms  of  flies  which  otherwise  would  have 
settled  on  it.  More  often,  as  noted  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  honey  is  employed  in  an 
ointment,  by  mixing  it  with  mrh-t,  or  “  grease.”  In  two  cases  in  Pap.  Smith  honey  is 
mixed  with  the  problematical  ymrw  mineral  for  external  application  (IX  6  ;  X  11). 

Of  the  twenty-two  cases  in  which  honey  ointment  is  employed  in  Pap.  Smith,  its 
application  is  effected  by  means  of  absorbent  lint  in  seventeen.  This  lint  was  called 
ftt,  a  masculine  noun  in  which  the  final  t  is  not  the  feminine  ending.  It  was 
some  kind  of  vegetable  tissue  obtained  from  a  plant  called  dby-t. 

Three  times  in  cases  where  is  prescribed  in  Pap.  Ebers  it  is  said  to  be 

nw  dby-t  (Ebers  70,  4)  or  »  dby-t  (Ebers 

70,  17 ;  see  variant  in  78,  15-16).  The  plant  dby-t  has  not  yet  been  identified  with 
certainty.  In  these  three  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers  jtt  is  laid  over  an  injury  and  bandaged 
on.  It  occurs  in  four  more  cases  in  Pap.  Ebers  (seven  in  all),  and  these  are  very  in¬ 
structive  as  to  the  character  of /ft.  In  a  recipe  for  preventing  conception  ftt  is  impreg¬ 
nated  with  the  medicaments  and  inserted  into  the  vulva  (98,  8).  Similarly  it  is  dipped 
into  an  ointment  and  inserted  into  the  anus  (Ebers  82,  2),  and  likewise  into  the  ear 
(Ebers  91,  7  and  92,  2).  Medicated  /ff-lint  was  thus  employed  both  for  external 
application  and  for  insertion  into  the  orifices  of  the  body.  Its  preparation  was  under¬ 
stood  as  a  matter  of  course,  as  shown  by  one  of  the  ear  cases  just  cited  : 

o . 

*o  <?  i  i  i 

<? 

“  Thou  shouldst  prepare  for  him  lint  (Jtt),  grease  (mrh-t)  §  and  honey  £,  applied  to  it 
frequently”  (Ebers  91,  7-8).  In  our  treatise  lint  is  used  with  honey  ointment  in  seven¬ 
teen  instances  out  of  a  total  of  eighteen.  In  the  one  case  (X  2)  in  which  it  is  employed 

oi.uchicago.edu 

102  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  1 

alone  “dry  ftt”  is  prescribed  to  be  applied  to  a  wound  in  the  throat  in  the  secondary 
stages  of  healing,  and  seemingly  when  the  bandages  had  been  removed  because  of 
fever  (Case  28). 

r  ndm-f,  “  until  he  recovers.”  This  phrase,  which  is  common  in  the 
medical  papyri,  has  been  of  somewhat  vague  meaning  heretofore.  Its  force  is  rendered 
more  definite  by  the  use  of  it  in  Pap.  Smith.  It  is  never  used  with  the  untreatable  or 
hopeless  cases,  and  its  appearance  in  Case  17,  seemingly  after  verdict  8,  the  hopeless 
verdict,  is  an  error.  As  shown  in  the  commentary  on  that  case  verdict  8  is  either  an 
error  for  verdict  1,  or  the  insertion  of  r  ndm-f  is  an  error.  With  the  doubtful 
verdict  2,  designating  cases  of  uncertain  outcome,  the  result  “  until  he  recovers  ” 
occurs  once  (Case  28)  in  a  total  of  eight  cases.  On  the  other  hand  we  find  it  inserted 
after  the  treatment  in  twenty-five  out  of  thirty  instances  receiving  verdict  1,  the 
favorable  verdict  (see  p.  46).  Of  the  five  cases  with  verdict  1  not  inserting  “  until 
he  recovers,”  the  conclusion,  where  it  should  appear,  is  lost  in  one  (Case  48) ;  the 
verdict  itself  is  an  error  in  one  (Case  84,  XI  22) ;  and  the  conclusion  “  until  he 
recovers  ”  is  therefore  really  lacking ‘in  only  three.  It  is  certain  then  that  this  often 
repeated  result  should  be  rendered  by  “  until  he  recovers,”  “  until  he  is  well,”  or  the 
like,  with  perhaps  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  unqualified  completeness  of  the  recovery 
from  a  scientific  point  of  view. 

Gloss  A 
I  8-9 

Explaining  :  “  Thou  examinest  a  man  ” 

4 

*  The  right-hand  ends  of  these  two  signs  make  their  restoration  certain. 

b  The  restoration  is  based  upon  the  certainty  of  the  s  and  the  preceding  context. 

«  Part  of  the  sign  is  preserved. 

a  The  traces  fit  the  restoration  fairly  well,  but  are  hardly  sufficient  to  make  it  certain. 

*  Fragments  of  three  uncertain  signs  are  visible.  *  Remains  of  a  vertical  sign. 

*  The  left-hand  half  of  the  sign  is  preserved  ;  one  expects  something  under  it,  see  Vol.  n,  p.  x, 
col.  2. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

11  Restored  from  Ebers  99,  1.  1  Restored  from  Ebers  99,  4. 

J  Restored  from  Ebers  99,  2. 

k  This  sign  in  1.  6  might  be  read  r,  giving  us  dr-t ;  but  in  1.  7  it  is  clearly  a  hand. 

1  Restored  from  Ebers  99,  3.  m  Restored  from  Ebers  99,  4. 

°  Restored  from  Ebers  99, 5.  Left  end  of  a  short  horizontal  sign,  which  is  certainly  n  is  visible. 
The  length  of  these  lacunae  at  the  beginnings  of  all  the  lines  in  Gloss  A  may  be  seen  on  PI.  I  B, 
Vol.  II,  especially  by  examination  of  the  certain  restorations  bridging  the  gaps. 

0  This  /  is  certain,  although  almost  entirely  gone,  for  the  tail  may  be  seen  in  1. 9  just  at  the  left 
of  the  middle  lacuna  of  Column  I. 

p  In  all  probability  there  is  nothing  lost  at  the  end  of  this  line. 

<i  The  word  is  fragmentary,  but  the  restoration  is  certain,  although  not  at  first  evident  owing 
to  the  distortion  caused  by  the  mounting  of  the  papyrus  on  paper.  See  full  discussion  of  this 
reading  in  the  Introduction,  Vol.  II,  p.  x. 

r  The  right-hand  half  of  these  two  signs  is  preserved. 

»  In  this  group  of  four  signs :  ?  Q  4_J,  there  is  some  displacement  owing  to  distortion  on  the 
edge  of  the  papyrus  fragment.  For  the  writing  with  ,  see  I.  4  (p.  102)  and  PI.  I,  Vol.  II. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

104  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

Translation 

As  for:  “  Thou  examinest  a  man,”  [it  means]  counting  any  one  -  -  [rlike  coujnting1 
things  with  a  bushel.  (For)  examining  (h’-t,  literally  “  measuring  ”)  is  [Hike1]  one’s 
['counting1]  a  certain  quantity  with  a  bushel,  (or)  counting  something  with  the  fingers, 
in  order  to  [know]  -  -  It  is  measuring  (h’-t)  things  with  a  bushel  which  -  -  -  one  in 
whom  an  ailment  is  [cou]nted,  like  measuring  (h’-t)  the  ailment  of  a  man  ;  [in  order  to 
know  the  action]  of  the  heart.  There  are  canals  (or  vessels,  mt)  in  it  (the  heart)  to  [every] 
member.  Now  if  the  priests  of  Sekhmet  or  any  physician  a  put  his  hands  b  (or)  his  fingers 
[upon  the  head,  upon  the  back  of  the]  head,  upon  the  two  hands,  upon  the  pulse,  upon 
the  two  feet,  [he]  measures  (h'y)  [to]  the  heart,  because  its  vessels  are  in c  the  back  of  the 
head  and  in  the  pulse ;  and  because  its  [pulsation  is  in]  every  vessel  of  every  member.  He 
says  “measure”  (h'-t)  regarding  his  [r wound1]  because  of  the  vessels  (mt-w)  to  his  head 
and  to  the  back  of  his  head  and  to  his  two  feet  -  -  -  -  his  heart  in  order  to  recognize 
the  indications  which  have  arisen  therein ;  meaning  [rto  meas]ure  it1  in  order  to  know 
what  is  befalling  therein. 

a  Pap.  Ebers  has  a  third  investigator  here,  a  ft  <?  ^  s',  or  “  priest  of  a  phyle ;  ”  see  variant 
text,  p.  100.  b  Literally  “  two  hands.” 

c  The  preposition  m  is  omitted  by  an  error  common  before  another  m. 

Commentary 

The  words  to  be  explained  in  Gloss  A,  form  the  first  clause  of  the  examina¬ 

tion,  which  is  itself  always  introduced  by  (J«=».  It  might  be  at  first  supposed  therefore 
that  our  paragraph  beginning  jj]  is  an  examination.  Its  position,  however, 

at  the  end  of  a  case,  that  is,  following  upon  the  treatment,  shows  conclusively  that  we 
are  here  dealing  with  a  gloss,  introduced  as  usual  by  the  particle  (]-=>  yr  and  followed 
by  the  quoted  words  to  be  explained  :  h7y-k  s,  “  thou  examinest  a  man.”  With 

regard  to  the  restoration  of  “  man,”  it  should  be  noted  that  the  preceding  word 
^  **  thou  examinest  ”  is  certain.  It  is  followed  by  the  horizontal  s  at  the  top 
of  the  line,  leaving  room  below  for  the  determinative  and  stroke  as  usual  in  forty-six 
cases  in  our  papyrus.  Granted  that  the  particle  (j<=»  yr  must  be  followed  by  a  quota¬ 
tion  from  the  preceding  text  of  the  case  as  reconstructed  from  other  cases,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  quotation  must  read 

The  reading  of  *-j  as  h7y  is  not  new.  It  was  known  from  Ebers  86, 4-5 :  !)«=>| 

as  compared  with  88, 17  :  (|— In  Pap. 
Smith  the  abbreviation  u  is  used  in  all  forty-eight  cases  (Cases  1  and  8  restored) 
in  the  introductory  formula  of  the  examination  :  yr  h'y-k ;  but  it  occurs  in 

other  connections  in  Pap.  Smith  written  out :  (IX  7)  and  ©J  (XVII  6). 

The  meaning  “  examine  ”  or  “  investigate  ”  drawn  from  the  frequent  use  of  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  105 

word  in  Pap.  Ebers,  is  now  confirmed  by  the  variant  d'r,  found  in  Pap.  Smith  in  the 
following  two  passages,  which  immediately  precede  the  parallel  passages  exhibited 
in  the  commentary  on  Case  10,  treatment  (V  7-8)  : 

Case  26  (IX  ?)• 

Case  10  (v  6)- 

From  this  parallelism  it  is  evident  that  h'y  must  be  very  similar  in  meaning  to 
drr,  “  to  seek,  search,  search  out,  investigate,  probe.”  See  commentary  on  this  word 
in  Case  1  (examination,  p.  92).  Compare  also  h’y  in  Case  29  (X  4-5)  in  parallelism 
with  d'r  in  Case  4  (II  8). 

The  word  may  be  related  to  the  well-known  verb  h'y  “  to  measure,”  1 

used  of  grain  or  of  the  superficial  area  of  land,  or  of  weighing.  Our  treatise  conceives 
that  the  physician  or  surgeon  “  counts  ”  or  “  measures  ”  the  symptoms  observable 
in  a  patient  and  as  it  were  appraises  his  condition.  It  is  with  these  parallels  that  this 
explanatory  gloss  deals,  when  it  states  “  ‘  thou  examinest  ’  means  counting  any  one 
— ,  [Hike  coujnting"'  things  with  a  bushel.”  In  the  next  comparison  the  short  lacuna 
after  1  ^  ^  (middle  of  1.  4)  perhaps  requires  a  little  more  than  the  word  i)  °  yp 

to  fill  it  up,  but  it  is  obvious  that  he  is  here  explaining  h’-t  as  like  or  identical  with 
“  measuring  (or  counting)  a  certain  quantity  with  a  bushel,  (or)  counting  something 
with  the  fingers.”  It  is  barely  possible  that  the  three  uncertain  signs  at  the  end  of 
the  lacuna  at  the  beginning  of  1.  5  are  part  of  the  word  h'ty  “  heart,”  for  the  long 
narrow  Fragment  C  bearing  these  traces  is  distorted  (see  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  A).  It  matches 
badly  with  the  lines  on  Fragment  B.  It  might  also  be  moved  to  the  right  a  trifle, 
for  there  is  a  slight  loss  of  a  narrow  vertical  splinter  of  papyrus  between  Fragment  C 
and  Fragment  B.  Making  these  changes  it  is  perhaps  possible  to  reconstruct  the  word 
“  heart,”  although  the  determinative  (see  1.  6  directly  under  it)  would  be  lacking.  To 
reconstruct  here  then  "in  order  to  know  the  action  (lit.  ‘  going  ’) 

of  the  heart,”  is  too  hazardous  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  correctness  of 
the  restoration  of  the  same  phrase  (from  Ebers  99,  1)  at  the  beginning  of  1.  6. 

When  we  note  that  the  discussion  in  the  next  few  lines  (11.  6-8)  pictures  the  physi¬ 
cian  as  placing  his  hands  or  fingers  at  various  points  along  the  body  of  the  patient 
and  discerning  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  the  ques¬ 
tion  inevitably  arises  whether  he  is  not  discussing  the  counting  of  the  pulse  in  making 
these  references  to  0  °  yp,  “counting.”  If  so  it  is  the  earliest  such  reference  in  the 
history  of  medicine,  for  the  counting  of  the  pulse  was  unknown  to  early  Greek  medicine 
and  is  not  mentioned  until  Democritus  and  the  Hippocratic  treatises.  It  first  occurs 
in  the  treatise  Trepl  rpcxfnjs  about  400  b.c.  It  would  be  of  especial  interest  as  occurring 

1  In  discussing  the  meaning  of  h'y  the  possibility  of  some  connection  with  1 ^  b'V’l 

or  hy  t  “  disease  ”  may  be  disregarded  as  remote. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

106  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

at  this  remote  age,  not  only  in  the  history  of  physiology,  but  also  in  the  history  of 
the  development  of  instruments  for  time  measurement ;  for  it  would  be  impossible 
to  count  the  pulse  without  an  instrument  finely  enough  developed  to  measure  small 
intervals  of  time.  The  Egyptian  water  clocks  or  shadow  clocks  now  known  to  us  would 
have  been  rather  ill  suited  for  use  in  accurate  counting  of  pulse  beats.  The  physician 
would  have  needed  a  portable  time  measurer.  Such  an  instrument  was  carried  by 
Thutmose  III  on  his  first  campaign  in  Palestine  in  the  Fifteenth  Century  b.c.  ;  and 
an  actual  example  of  such  a  portable  shadow  clock  was  found  in  Palestine  at  the 
excavation  of  Gezer.  It  bears  the  name  of  the  Pharaoh  Memeptah  (Thirteenth  Cen¬ 
tury  b.c.).1  The  earliest  known  counting  of  the  pulse  with  a  time  measurer  was  done 
by  the  distinguished  Herophilos  of  Alexandria  in  the  Third  Century  b.c. 

On  this  whole  point  of  counting  the  pulse  the  fragmentary  condition  of  the  text 
unfortunately  leaves  us  in  some  uncertainty.  Beginning  with  “  one  in  whom,  etc.” 
it  is  perhaps  possible  that  we  should  divide  the  text  differently  and  render  thus  : 
“  Counting  an  ailment  is  like  examining  (h'-t,  lit.  *  measuring  ’)  the  ailment  of  a  man, 
in  order  to  know  the  action  of  the  heart.”  Observing  that  the  counting  is  done  with 
the  fingers  (1.  4)  and  that  this  counting  is  done  “  in  order  to  know  the  action  of 
the  heart,”  the  conclusion  that  counting  of  the  pulse  is  what  is  meant  is  very  plausible. 

It  is  in  explanation  of  the  term  h'-t,  “  examine,”  literally  “  measure,”  that  all 
this  obscure  discussion  of  counting  is  introduced.  Evidently  the  author  of  our 
treatise  considered  that  the  origin  of  the  term  “  measure  ”  =“  examine  ”  was  to  be 
found  in  an  enumeration  of  some  kind.  In  usage  h’y  (infinitive  A’-t)  may  take  as  its 
object  either  the  ailment,  the  diseased  organ,  or  the  patient,  the  last  being  much 
the  most  common.  It  would  seem  that  the  last  is  the  only  object  which  really  suits 
the  explanation,  although  our  surgeon  uses  the  word  “  ailment  ”  itself  as  the  object 
of  both  yp  “  count  ”  and  ty‘t  “  measure.” 

The  correctness  of  the  restorations  based  on  the  duplicate  passage  in  Pap.  Ebers 
will  be  more  evident  if  the  two  texts  are  placed  parallel  for  comparison.  The  passage 
paralleled  in  Pap.  Ebers  (99,  1-6)  extends  from  the  beginning  of  1.  6  into  1.  8. 

Ebers  Title 

Smith  1  _ 

Ebers  |  - 

Smith  ,[?] 

Ebers  t  Zl  ISIK 

smith  is;  ^ 

1  See  E.  J.  Pilcher  in  Palestine  Exploration  Fund,  LV  (1923),  pp.  85-88. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  107 

Ebers^  ®Tr,TJn?TI 

Smith 

Smith 

Ebers  f 

I  OQ 

— Q  ^  ^Z7 

W  o 

smith 

EbersiryT^-iir^M^1*: 

smith7^[jTi-(ir]^^- 

^7 

a 

At  the  beginning  of  the  parallel  the  question  might  be  raised  whether  the 
of  Smith,  1.  6,  should  correspond  to  the  first  or  to  the  second  in  the  text  of  Ebers. 
The  question  is  easily  settled.  An  examination  of  PI.  I  A  (Vol.  II)  shows  that  the 
lacuna  at  the  beginning  of  1.  6  has  the  same  length  as  the  words  : 
restored  at  the  head  of  1. 18.  The  length  of  this  phrase  in  the  original  proportions 
of  our  column  will  be  found  by  measuring  it  in  I.  18.  This  length  carried  over  with 
the  dividers  to  our  lacuna  shows  we  have  a  liberal  amount  of  room  for  the  restoration  of 
but  not  for  the  restoration  of  The  lacuna 

in  the  middle  of  1.  6  cuts  off  the  right  end  of  the  group  At  the  end  of  the 
lacuna  beginning  1.  8  the  end  of  —  from  the  word  is  we^  preserved. 

This  extraordinary  discussion  of  the  action  of  the  heart  is  preceded  in  Papyrus 
Ebers  by  the  title:  ‘Z’rTT^,  “  Beginning  of  the  Secret  Book  of  the 

Physician.”  The  papers  of  the  scribe  who  was  copying  Papyrus  Ebers,  however, 
were  in  such  confusion  that  his  excerpt  on  the  action  of  the  heart  is  cut  in  two  by 
intrusive  matter  made  up  of  glosses  incorrectly  introduced  in  the  middle  of  the 
excerpt.1  Must  we  conclude  that  this  treatise  has  perished?  How  far  we  have  in 
the  material  following  this  title  in  Pap.  Ebers  a  trustworthy  excerpt  from  it  is  a 
doubtful  question,  and  in  view  of  demonstrably  intrusive  matter  now  appearing 
embedded  in  it,  we  may  seriously  question  whether  it  represents  an  unalloyed  citation. 
It  is  significant  that  the  Ebers  text  is  paralleled  by  Pap.  Smith  only  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  “  Secret  Book,”  to  the  point  where  the  latter  leaves  the  heart  and  begins 
a  catalogue  of  the  vessels  or  canals  of  the  heart.  It  is  highly  probable  that  this 
catalogue  is  from  another  source.  It  displays  much  less  sane  and  intelligent  command 
of  the  scanty  knowledge  regarding  the  heart  and  its  system  than  the  preceding  general 
statements  about  it.  We  have  indeed  in  the  section  placed  in  parallel  lines  from  the 

1  See  Schaefer,  ZeiUchrifl,  30  (1892),  pp.  107-108. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

108  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  1 

two  papyri  above  (Ebers  99,  1-5  =  Smith  I  5-8),  a  little  summary  of  the  cardiac 
system  as  known  to  the  ancient  physician.  In  Pap.  Ebers  this  summary  is  obviously 
a  citation  and  its  source  is  indicated.  In  Pap.  Smith,  however,  there  is  no  indication 
that  it  is  a  citation.  Indeed  its  beginning  in  Pap.  Smith  (I  5-6)  appears  as  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  what  would  otherwise  be  an  incomplete  sentence,  a  fact  which  goes  far  to 
show  that  the  whole  summary  of  the  cardiac  system  is  an  integral  part  of  the  text 
in  Pap.  Smith.  If  in  Pap.  Ebers  it  is  quoted  from  Pap.  Smith,  then  the  title  given 
in  Ebers  is  the  title  of  our  treatise.  If  this  conclusion  is  correct,  and  I  do  not  regard 
it  as  wholly  certain,  the  title  of  our  book  of  surgery  was  :  “  The  Secret  Book  of  the 
Physician.”  Quotation  by  Pap.  Ebers  directly  from  our  copy  of  Pap.  Smith  is  of 
course  impossible,  in  view  of  the  difference  in  text.  The  scribe  of  Pap.  Smith  was 
not  an  accurate  copyist,  and  his  text,  at  three  points  slightly  less  full  than  that  of 
Ebers,  doubtless  contains  omissions  ;  or  the  transmitted  text  used  by  the  scribe  of 
Pap.  Smith  was  less  full  than  that  employed  by  the  scribe  of  Pap.  Ebers. 

In  any  appraisal  of  this  summary  of  the  cardiac  system  two  important  questions 
arise  :  has  this  ancient  surgeon  discerned  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ?  and  whatever 
its  meaning,  why  has  this  little  account  of  the  heart  and  its  connections  been  inserted 
in  this  place  ?  Taking  up  the  first  question,  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  that  our  surgeon 
“  must  have  noted  that  the  apex  beat  and  the  pulsation  of  the  peripheral  arteries 
were  roughly  synchronous  and  therefore  that  the  rate,  volume,  and  regularity  of  the 
latter  were  roughly  an  index  of  the  state  of  functional  activity  of  the  former.”  It 
is  then  obvious  that  the  ancient  surgeon  has  discerned  that  the  action  and  influence 
of  the  heart  are  carried  to  all  parts  of  the  body  by  means  of  canals  or  vessels.  From 
the  enumeration  of  these  canals  in  Pap.  Ebers  it  is  also  clear  that  he  conceived  these 
vessels  as  supplying  the  organs  they  reached,  some  of  them  with  blood,  some  with 
water,  some  with  air.  With  regard  to  the  air  we  have  the  remarkable  statement  of  the 
physician  :  “As  for  the  air  that  enters  at  the  nose  it  enters  to  the  heart  and  lungs, 
and  they  convey  to  the  whole  body  ”  (Ebers  99, 12-18).  He  had  thus  recognized  that 
the  heart  was  the  center  of  a  system  which  conveyed  needed  supplies  from  the  heart 
to  all  parts  of  the  body.  There  is  no  intimation  that  these  supplies  came  back  to  the 
heart  again,  much  less  that  they  went  through  a  process  of  oxygenation  before  being 
again  discharged  into  the  system.  Oxygenation  involves  a  knowledge  of  chemistry 
and  of  chemical  elements  which  the  world  of  science  did  not  attain  until  thousands 
of  years  after  our  Egyptian  physician  was  dead.  It  would  carry  us  much  too  far 
afield  to  discuss  the  difficult  question  of  whether  the  Hellenistic  physicians  of  Alexandria 
had  gained  a  knowledge  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  There  are  scholars  who  think 
they  did,  and  certainly  our  old  Egyptian  physicians  of  the  Seventeenth  Century  b.c., 
nearly  fifteen  hundred  years  before  the  highest  development  of  Hellenistic  science, 
had  already  summarized  a  knowledge  of  the  cardiac  system  in  a  form  very  likely 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  109 

to  suggest  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  They  brought  investigation  to  the  point 
where  it  would  be  obliged  to  meet  the  question  of  what  happened  to  the  blood  and 
water  carried  by  the  heart  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
would  seem  not  at  all  unlikely  that  this  question  would  be  dealt  with  by  the  Alex¬ 
andrians,  and  the  mere  fact  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  (leaving  out  the  process  of 
oxygenation)  is  not  a  phenomenon  so  difficult  of  discernment  that  we  must  conclude 
it  was  beyond  the  means  of  observation  available  by  Alexandrian  scientists. 

We  may  take  up  now  the  second  question,  that  of  the  physician’s  reason  for  intro¬ 
ducing  this  brief  summary  of  the  cardiac  system  in  discussing  the  word  h'-t,  “  measure, 
examine,”  incident  to  an  injury  in  the  head.  It  is  clear  from  the  remarks  which  follow 
the  discussion  of  the  heart,  that  the  physician  regards  the  connection  between  the 
injury  or  the  injured  region  and  the  heart  as  of  great  importance.  The  injury  has 
an  effect  upon  the  heart,  which  he  calls  “the  indications  which  have  arisen  therein,” 
or  “  what  is  befalling  therein  ”  (1.  9),  meaning  in  the  heart.  It  is  clear  that  he  means 
the  heart  is  a  gauge  by  means  of  which  the  patient’s  condition  may  be  appraised. 
This  he  recognizes,  no  matter  where  the  injury  may  be  located.  When  we  consider 
that  all  that  the  ancient  physician  could  examine  in  the  heart  was  the  rate  and  power 
of  its  pulsations,  the  probability  that  he  counted  the  pulse  is  considerably  increased. 
One  cannot  but  admire  the  physician’s  intelligence,  which  in  an  age  of  such  limited 
knowledge  of  the  human  body,  discerned  the  vital  importance  of  the  heart’s  action 
and  endeavored  to  determine  its  condition  as  a  gauge  for  establishing  that  of  the  patient. 

In  this  connection  we  have  no  means  of  determining  the  extent  of  the  Egyptian 
physician’s  knowledge  of  the  heart  itself.  Popular  custom  and  belief,  already  ancient 
in  our  ancient  medical  man’s  time,  made  the  heart  the  seat  of  emotions  and  intelligence. 
Philosophical  theologians  regarded  it  as  the  shrine  of  the  god,  whose  very  voice  was 
heard  there.1  Over  against  these  notions,  and  probably  divesting  himself  of  them  to 
no  small  extent,  our  physician  endeavors  to  determine  the  anatomical  and  physio¬ 
logical  character  of  the  heart.  The  fuller  form  of  the  text  in  Pap.  Ebers  gives  as  the 
subject  of  the  brief  summary  of  the  cardiac  system  this  title  :  “  Knowing  the  action 
of  the  heart  and  knowing  the  heart.”  Here  is  a  clear  distinction  between  anatomy 
(“  the  heart  ”)  and  physiology  (“  the  action  of  the  heart  ”).  There  is  no  reference  to 
inherited  popular  notions  regarding  the  heart.  The  physician  merely  states  his 
observations  regarding  it,  its  connections,  and  its  action  discernible  at  the  remotest 
points  in  those  connections. 

Several  terms  in  the  discussion  of  the  cardiac  system  require  some  commentary. 
The  first  of  these  is  mt,  “  canal,  vessel,  ligament,  muscle.”  The  plural  is  ^|\| 
mt-w.  The  meaning  “  canal,  vessel  ”  has  long  been  recognized  from  its  use  in  Pap. 

1  See  the  present  writer’s  essay  in  Zeitschrift,  39  (1901),  pp.  46-60. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

110  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

Ebers.  The  meaning  “  ligament,  muscle,”  however,  seems  to  have  remained  unnoticed.1 
This  meaning  is  perfectly  clear  from  a  number  of  passages  in  Pap.  Smith,  especially 
the  gloss  in  Case  7  (III  18),  where  mi  is  used  to  explain  the  word  “  cord.”  See  the 
discussion  in  the  commentary  on  Case  7. 

As  canals  or  vessels  of  the  cardiac  system  it  is  important  to  know  to  what  organs  and 
parts  of  the  body  the  mt-w  lead.  The  following  list  makes  no  attempt  at  organization. 

List  of  organs  or  parts  of  the  body  to  which  the  “  mt-w  ”  lead  : 

Heart :  their  connection  with  the  heart  is  shown  by  our  Gloss  A,  now  under 
discussion  and  the  corresponding  passage  in  Pap.  Ebers.  The  latter  also  states 
(108,  2-8)  that  these  canals  are  twelve  in  number,  an  error  of  the  scribe  for  twenty-two, 
as  Schaefer  has  shown.2  See  also  Ebers  100, 18  ;  100,  21-101, 1 ;  and  especially  100, 
19-20  which  states,  “  It  is  the  heart  which  causes  them  to  enter  into  his  canals  (mt-w).” 

Two  to  the  Srtyiv  of  the  two  maxillae  :  Ebers  108,  8  (emended  after  Berlin 
3088,  15,  6). 

Two  to  the  loins  :  Ebers  108,  6. 

Two  to  the  neck  :  Omitted  in  Ebers  103,  8  (see  Schaefer,  loc.  cit.). 

Two  to  the  arms  :  Ebers  108,  11. 

Two  to  the  back  of  the  head  :  Ebers  108,  18-14. 

Two  to  the  forehead  :  Ebers  108,  14. 

Two  to  the  eyes  :  Ebers  108,  14. 

Two  to  the  eyebrows  :  Ebers  108,  14^15. 

Two  to  the  nostrils  :  Ebers  108,  15. 

Two  to  the  right  ear  :  Ebers  108,  15. 

Two  to  the  left  ear  :  Ebers  108,  1G. 

This  completes  the  list  of  twenty-two. 

Another  list  of  fifty  follows  immediately  upon  the  summary  of  the  cardiac  system 
in  Pap.  Ebers.  They  are  the  following  : 

Four  to  the  two  nostrils  (Ebers  99,  6-6). 

Four  to  the  two  temples  (?  gmh-ty ) :  Ebers  99,  6-7. 

Four  to  the  crown  (read  pSn  ?)  of  the  head  :  Ebers  99,  10. 

Four  to  the  two  ears  :  Ebers  100,  2. 

Two  to  the  right  shoulder  :  Ebers  100,  2.3 

Two  to  the  left  shoulder  :  Ebers  100,  2-8.3 

1  Stem  has  used  the  word  “junclvra  ”  to  define  mi  (s.  v.  in  Glossary  of  Pap.  Ebere) ;  but  does 
not  indicate  any  such  function  of  mi. 

*  See  Schaefer,  Zeilschrifl,  30  (1892),  pp.  35-37. 

J  Schaefer  ( Zeitachrifl ,  30,  pp.  35-37)  makes  a  total  of  forty-six  mt-w  by  omitting  these  four  which 
are  introduced  by  a  different  formula  in  connection  with  the  four  leading  to  the  two  ears  ;  but  I  see 
no  good  reason  for  such  omission. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  111 

Three  to  the  right  arm  :  Ebers  100,  5. 

Three  to  the  left  arm  :  Ebers  100,  5.  These  six  lead  also  to  the  fingers. 

Three  to  the  right  leg  :  Ebers  100,  6. 

Three  to  the  left  leg  :  Ebers  100,  6.  These  six  lead  also  to  the  bottom  of  the  sole. 

Two  to  the  two  testicles  :  Ebers  100,  7. 

Two  to  the  phd-w  (kidneys  ?)  :  Ebers  100,  7-8.  One  to  each  of  a  pair. 

Four  to  the  liver  :  Ebers  100,  8. 

Four  to  the  lungs  and  spleen  :  Ebers  100,  10. 

Two  to  the  bladder  :  Ebers  100,  11. 

Four  to  the  anus  :  Ebers  100,  11-12,  cf.  100,  18. 

Not  in  connection  with  any  list,  Pap.  Smith  mentions  two  mt-w  which  are  under 
the  thorax  and  lead  to  the  lungs  (XII  1-2),  and  Ebers  and  some  other  documents 
make  casual  references  to  the  mt-w  as  being  in  the  groin  (m'4-t,  Ebers  79,  19) ;  toes 
(Ebers  81,  2  ;  81,  5  ;  Hearst  VIII  15) ;  lower  legs  or  calves  {yns-t,  Pap.  Berlin  8088, 
10,  10-11) ;  feet  (Ebers  108,  18  ;  Berlin  8088,  16,  5) ;  “  every  member  ”  (Ebers 
81,14;  99,2;  99,4;  Hearst  XV  10;  Ebers  108,18;  Hearst  XV  12).  In  the  Metter- 
nich  Stela  (1.  170)  they  are  called  the  “  mt-w  of  the  flesh.” 

When  we  recall  that  the  mt-w  of  the  above  lists  are  possibly  not  always  canals,  but 
that  some  of  them  may  be  ligaments  or  nerves,  the  effort  to  identify  them  severally 
and  one  by  one  with  the  various  blood-vessels  of  modern  science  must  proceed  with 
discretion.  In  so  far  as  they  are  avenues  conceived  as  conveying  substances,  the  latter 
are  said  to  be  :  blood  (Ebers  61,  8)  ;  nSw-t  (Ebers  99,  5-6) ;  water  (Ebers 

99,  19)  ;  air  (Ebers  100,  9-10  ;  and  very  clearly  implied  in  99,  12-18)  ;  and  semen 
(Ebers  100,  7).  Popularly  they  seem  to  have  been  regarded  as  vital  to  health  and 
essentially  contributing  to  it,  so  that  a  friend  might  be  greeted  with  a  wish  for  the 
health  of  his  mt-w,  and  such  a  wish  was  not  infrequently  placed  on  his  tombstone.1 
This  popular  notion  is  supported  by  the  views  of  the  physician.  He  regards  the  mt-w 
as  “  taking  up  ”  (§3p)  the  remedies  or  the  disease.  There  were  recipes  supposed  to 
accelerate  the  process  of  absorption  by  the  mt-w  of  the  remedies  administered  (Ebers 
80,  15-81,  1)  and  the  mt-w  of  an  affected  region  are  said  to  have  “  taken  up  ”  the 
disease  (Ebers  103,  6-7  ;  cf.  also  Hearst  VIII  12).  In  a  document  relying  so  largely 
on  magic  as  does  Pap.  Ebers,  the  mt-w  are  made  to  disgorge  disease  by  magic  (Ebers 

1  On  the  wooden  statue  at  Turin  No.  176  we  find  ^  ,>  “  may  his  mt-w  flourish  ” 

(Recueil  de  trav.,  2,  p.  175 ;  the  same,  Amon  Ritual,  Berlin,  P  3055, 12, 10  ;  and  tomb  of  Vizier  Peser, 
Sethe’s  copy  11,  23)  and  quite  commonly.  A  similar  good  wish  is  “  may  (his)  mt-w  be 

comfortable  ”  (Tomb  of  Paheri  9  in  Taylor,  Paheri,  pi.  XVI ;  Tomb  of  Nebamon,  Bouriant,  Recueil 
de  trav.  9,  p.  96).  Less  common  is  ^  11  may  thy  mi-w  be  sound  ”  (Tomb  of  Vizier  Peser, 

Sethe’s  copy  11,  50).  In  Ptolemaic  times  we  find  once  “  may  (his)  mt-w  be  excellent  ”  (Edfu, 
Rochem.  I  192). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

112  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

108,  14).  They  are  addressed  by  the  magician  in  the  Mettemich  Stela  (1.  170).  It 
is  in  accordance  with  magical  notions  that  an  ailment  is  conceived  as  an  “  enemy  of 
the  mt  ”  (Ebers  109, 17). 

Based  on  saner  pathological  conceptions,  however,  there  are  diseases  of  the  mt-w 
themselves  as  observed  by  the  physician.  It  is  obvious  that  some  of  these  ailments 
are  those  of  the  muscles  and  ligaments,  as  when  they  are  said  to  be  “  stiff  ”  (Ebers  85, 
12  ;  Hearst  VIII  11),  and  probably  also  when  they  are  said  to  “  tremble  ”  (Ebers 
91,  6).  Unfortunately  it  is  impossible  to  determine  with  any  degree  of  certainty  what 
the  designations  of  the  various  diseases  of  the  mt-w  mean,  or  how  they  should  be 
rendered  in  the  modem  terminology  of  scientific  pathology.  We  find  the  following 
ailments  of  the  mi-w  in  the  medical  papyri : 

nhp  (Ebers  84, 14  ;  Hearst  VIII  8  ;  or  Ebers  80, 18). 

(Bap.  Anast.  IV  18,  6). 
nrw  (Pap.  Berlin  8088,  18,  7). 

^  f'-i  (Ebers  106,  20  ;  108,8;  108,6;  108,9;  108,11-12). 

*“4,? ,  wSr  (Ebers  82,  21  =  Hearst  VIII 17). 

P'Tm,  (Ebers  109>  14  ;  109>  11  ;  106>  17-18). 
ikr  (Ebers  109,  14). 

“S  fy'1  (Ebers  84>  19)- 

f-wt  (Hearst  VIII  18).  “  Swellings  ”  of  some  kind. 

(I“  Sw-t  (Ebers  82,  16  =  Hearst  VIII  14).  The  recipe  is  for  the  “softening  of 
the  Sw-t  of  the  mt.” 

The  physician  acquainted  with  a  list  of  troubles  like  this,  affecting  the  mt-w,  of 
course  had  treatments  for  these  ailments.  We  find  the  following  : 

“  giving  life  to  the  mt-w  ”  (Ebers  81,  17=Hearst  VIII  5  and  IX  1). 

P  'lf|  |  "  making  vigorous  the  mt-xc  ”  (Ebers  81 , 17  =  Hearst  VIII  5). 

PH?  “  making  firm  the  mt-w  ”  (Ebers  79,  5  ;  70,  18  ;  84,  21). 

P|^^-s=.  “  making  comfortable  the  mt-io”  (Ebers  108,  2;  81,  20;  79,  5;  81,  10, 14 
=  Hearst  XV  6  ;  VIII 1  ;  VIII  4  ;  VIII  6  ;  Berlin  8088,  4,  12). 

PaJJ/ISEE;  “coding  the  mt-w”  (Ebers  85,  10  =  Hearst  VUI 18;  XVI  8  ;  VII 16; 
XVI  18). 

“softening  the  mt-w  ”  (Ebers  85,  3-4;  81,  7;  82,  10-11  ;  82,  22; 
Hearst  VII 14). 

Plfa  "  the  mi-w  ”  (Ebers  85,  2  =  Hearst  VIII  7). 

“  anointing  the  mt-xv  ”  (Hearst  VIII  14). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  113 

Some  of  these  remedies,  like  the  one  for  “  softening  the  mt-iv  ”  doubtless  refer  to 
affections  of  the  muscles  or  ligaments,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  circulatory 
system. 

It  will  now  be  clear  to  the  reader  that  the  observations  of  the  Egyptian  physician 
regarding  the  heart  and  its  “  canals  ”  ( mtnv )  had  disclosed  to  him  that  the  heart  was 
the  center  and  active  force  in  a  system  which  conveyed  the  effects  of  both  disease  and 
remedy  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  It  is  on  the  basis  of  this  knowledge  that  our  Burgeon 
introduces  a  discussion  of  the  cardiac  system  and  the  importance  of  examining  the 
heart  and  pulse  in  treating  a  wound  in  the  head. 

j  n?  i't-yb  (or  yH-yb),  “  pulse.”  Gardiner  has  remarked  that  the  word  J  ^ 
(&-t)  “  when  prefixed  to  words  meaning  some  member  of  the  body,  .  .  .  expresses  the 
activity  of  that  member  ”  ( Proc .  Soc.  Bib.  Arch.,  85  (1912),  p.  261).  This  state¬ 
ment  cannot  be  improved  upon  ;  the  “  s-t  of  the  heart  ”  means  the  activity  of  the 
heart,  and  in  this  case  that  activity  as  it  is  locally  manifested  at  the  pulse.  Other¬ 
wise  the  more  inclusive  term  for  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  as  a  general  and  con¬ 
tinuous  activity,  and  not  any  local  manifestation  of  it,  is  mdw,  literally  “  to 

speak.” 

hnt,  commonly  “before.”  On  the  meaning  “in,”  see  Sethe,  Zeitschrift,  44 
(1907),  Tafel  II,  1. 12  and  p.  82,  n.  18. 

3k®  must  ko  regarded  as  a  scribal  error  for  mkh\  in  spite 

of  the  fact  that  our  copyist  has  written  it  twice  in  two  successive  lines.  The  omission 
of  m  before  this  word  is  like  the  frequent  omission  of  m  before  mrh-t  (p.  74). 

[*?Jo?w  [rwbnw^]-f.  The  restoration  is  a  guess  based  upon  the  preservation 
of  the  /.  It  fits  the  requirements  very  well,  but  is  not  entirely  certain. 

yh-wt  hpr  ym  “indications  having  arisen  therein”  with  the  perfect 
participle,  seems  to  be  explained  by  bPr'V't  ym>  “  what  is  befalling 

therein,”  with  the  imperfect  participle.  The  physician  recognizes  that  the  effects 
observable  in  the  heart  are  a  continuing  process.  It  should  be  observed  that  the 
technical  medical  use  of  hpr  “  to  happen  ”  very  often  includes  an  unfavorable  im¬ 
plication  like  that  of  our  word  “  befall.”  The  other  technical  meaning  of  ]ipr  is 
“  arise,  originate.”  Besides  the  two  cases  in  our  Gloss  A,  the  verb  hpr  occurs  fourteen 
times  in  Pap.  Smith.  A  typical  example  is  : 

“  every  wound  that  befalls  in  his  breast  ”  (XIII  9).  See 
also  YII  12-18  ;  X  16= X  19-20;  XIII 17;  XIV  7;  XIV  21  ;  and  further  dis¬ 
cussion  in  Case  80  (X  10).  A  similar  usage  of  hpr  occurs  in  Pap.  Ebers,  e.  g., 
106,  5. 

The  question  may  arise  whether  ym  may  not  be  rendered  “  to  it,”  the  heart,  as 
in  the  Coptic  ujtone  JJjlxo-  “  happen  to  ”  (Zoega,  p.  804).  If  so  our  phrases  would  mean 
“  the  things  that  have  befallen  it  ”  (the  heart),  and  “  what  is  befalling  it.”  It  is  not 

i 

oi.uchicago.edu 

114  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  1 

likely  that  the  implied  pronoun  after  ym  could  refer  to  anything  else  than  the  heart 
which  is  the  last  noun  mentioned  in  the  preceding  context.  To  happen  in  an  unfavor¬ 
able  sense  is  expressed  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  by  hpr  r  (Pyr.  1654  c),  and  it  occurs  in 
the  Middle  Kingdom  with  mr,  e.g.,  Shipwreck,  1.  22 ;  and  see  also  Case  80  (X  10). 
On  the  translation  of  the  final  phrase  see  note  s,  p.  108. 

Gloss  B 

I  9-10 

Explaining  :  “  While  his  wound  does  not  have  two  bps.” 

o  mwm  . — <r> — -  n  avwsaw  n 

[awwa]  ■ 

*  On  the  amount  of  space  available  see  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  B.  The  restoration  is  certain  ;  see  discussion, 
p.  115. 

b  This  sign  is  placed  low  in  the  line  as  in  1.  12,  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  B. 

0  The  space  is  sufficient  for  this  restoration,  as  will  be  seen  by  measuring  the  same  phrase 
(nn  u>ih)  in  1. 12.  Cf.  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  B. 

d  The  word  is  fragmentary,  but  parts  of  each  sign  are  preserved  and  the  reading  is  certain. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  While  his  [wou]nd  does  not  have  [two  lips],”  it  means  his  wound  is 
narrow,  [not  wide]  ;  without  gaping  of  one  (lip)  from  the  other. 

Commentary 

The  chief  difficulty  in  this  passage  is  the  word  mn,  “  be  ailing,  sick,”  where 
we  expect  a  negative.  This  difficulty  cannot  be  discussed  until  the  restoration  at  the 
head  of  line  10  is  made  certain.  The  restoration  of  the  words  “  his  wound  ”  is  shown 
to  be  indubitably  correct  by  the  survival  of  the  last  three  signs  of  the  group  wbnw-j, 
discernible  in  red  on  the  original.  The  preceding  group,  dj>t-wy  “  two  lips,”  is 
demonstrated  to  have  been  present  in  the  quoted  statement  by  the  phrase  n  ° 
ia-rae-s,  "its  (fem.)  second  "  =  “  the  other.”  The  use  of  the  numeral  “ second  ”  proves 
that  a  pair  was  mentioned  in  the  lacuna.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  feminine  pronoun 
s  shows  that  this  pair  could  not  have  been  djptnvy  “  lips,”  which  is  not  feminine,  it 
may  be  replied  that  ipf  is  nevertheless  treated  unmistakably  as  a  feminine  noun  in 
Case  10  (V  9),  which  tells  us  of  bandages  “applied  to  the  two  lips  of  a  gash- wound” 
<=>^i  “  in  order  to  make  one  join  to  the  other.”  Here  ipt  is  twice 
resumed  by  the  feminine  substantive  adjective  uf't,  written  with  the  feminine  ending. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  115 

Furthermore  Gloss  B  introduces  for  explanation  a  quotation  beginning  with  (j  ydt. 
In  our  case  there  are' only  two  occurrences  of  this  word,  both  in  the  diagnosis.  Now  the 
clause  introduced  by  the  second  occurrence  of  ydt  is  explained  in  Gloss  C,  leaving  only 
the  first  ydt  clause  as  the  one  explained  in  Gloss  B.  On  this  basis  alone  we  are  entitled 
to  restore  in  Gloss  B  the  quoted  words  dpt-ioy  wbnw-f.  Unfortunately  there  is  in 
the  diagnosis  a  small  lacuna  preceding  the  word  dpt-wy ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  this 
lacuna  contained  the  negative  (see  the  discussion  of  the  diagnosis,  p.  94).  We  may 
now  place  the  two  texts  parallel :  the  phraseology  of  the  diagnosis  and  the  quotation 
from  it  in  the  gloss  : 

Text  of  diagnosis  : 

Text  of  Gloss  B: 

Where  the  gloss  has  the  diagnosis  has  a  negative.  That  the  gloss  is  in 

error  is  obvious.  The  error  may  have  arisen  from  oral  dictation  at  some  stage  in  the 
transmission  of  the  text,  the  scribe  hearing  mn  for  nn ;  or  he  may  have  heard  the 
wrong  mn,  and  while  ^."7"!  mn  was  read  to  him  he  wrote  mn  “  be  sick” ; 

although  we  must  admit  that  this  would  be  an  early  occurrence  of  the  New  Egyptian 
negative.  In  any  case  our  statement,  quoted  from  the  diagnosis,  must  mean  “  while 
his  wound  does  not  have  two  lips,”  just  as  it  does  in  the  diagnosis  itself.  It  may  be 
remarked  here  that  a  comparison  of  the  quotations  in  the  glosses  with  the  texts  from 
which  they  quote  discloses  quite  commonly  gross  carelessness  and  inaccuracy  of  the 
scribe.  Whether  these  are  due  to  the  copyist  of  Pap.  Smith,  or  to  some  earlier  scribe, 
is  not  always  to  be  determined,  although  our  copyist  is  obviously  very  careless. 

This  gloss  should  be  compared  with  Case  18,  Gloss  A. 

dd  pw,  literally  “  it  says,”  is  perhaps  a  fuller  form  of  the  simple  pw,  which 
we  found  in  Gloss  A,  and  which  is  by  far  the  more  frequent.  Dd  pw  is  found  in  six 
passages  besides  Gloss  B  (1 11;  II 11;  III  1 ;  X20;  XIII 11;  XIY  11,  perhaps  dd-tw). 

~*~gP  ®  nn  wdh,  “  not  wide.”  In  view  of  the  ^ 3^77 ? P  ®  n4s  nn  wdh  of  Gloss  C 
(I  12),  this  restoration  is  highly  probable,  though  perhaps  not  entirely  certain.  The 
space  available  is  probably  sufficient,  though  not  quite  as  long  as  that  occupied  by 
the  same  words  in  1.  12.  On  the  use  of  the  negative  nn  as  a  conjunction  see  Gunn, 
Syntax,  pp.  162-168.  In  such  cases  it  should  be  called  an  adversative  conjunction. 
Gunn  also  discusses  its  use  with  adjectival  predicates  as  here  (ibid.,  Chap.  XXVII). 
The  phrase  nds  .  .  .  nn  wdh  is  curiously  reminiscent  of  the  well-known  description  of 
the  highway  in  the  Peasant  (R.  45). 

n  [rn1]  hj't.  There  is  probably  room  for  the  insertion  of  the  n,  as  in 
nnkjd ini.  11  in  the  next  gloss.  The  use  of  alone  would  be  another  evidence  of 
the  antiquity  of  our  text ;  for  as  Gunn  has  observed  ( Syntax ,  p.  195)  the  indiscriminate 
use  of  n  and  nn  is  old  and  continued  no  later  than  the  early  Middle  Kingdom.  He 

oi.uchicago.edu 

116  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  1 

has  an  excellent  discussion  of  the  infinitive  negatived  by  nn  ( Syntax ,  pp.  155-159) 
and  has  organized  all  the  cases  of  this  infinitive  with  following  modifiers.  No  case 
of  the  negatived  infinitive  with  following  logical  subject  introduced  by  1)"*"  seems 
to  have  come  under  his  notice.  There  is  another  case  in  the  next  line  (1.  11)  of 
our  text ;  but  otherwise  it  does  not  occur  again  in  Pap.  Smith,  and  I  do  not  recall 
having  met  it  elsewhere. 

*=» '  '_3_  W  r  Sn-nw-s,  “  one  from  the  other.”  The  text  is  inconsistent :  it  should 
read  either  vf  r  dn-nw-f,  or  vf-t  r  dn-nw-s.  In  the  example  above  quoted  (Y  9)  vf-t 
(fem.)  referring  to  “  lip  ”  appears  twice.  The  phrase  makes  clear  the  meaning  of 
kj't,  which  has  been  discussed  fully  above  (pp.  90-92). 

Gloss  C 

1 10-12 

Explaining  :  “  Penetrating  to  the  bone  of  his  skull  but  not  having  a  gash.” 

>  WAWn 

all 

d 

12 

6  I  r 

/VWAV\  I  I 

-1  MVWA 

*  The  line  division  may  have  been  before  the  n,  but  certainly  not  after  dnn  t. 

b  An  unmistakable  part  of  the  possessive  /  is  preserved.  The  tail  of  it  is  visible  on  the  original 
crossing  the  d,  of  id ;  see  Vol.  II,  p.  x,  eol.  2.  The  remnant  of  another  sign  is  doubtless  the  handle 
of  the  knife. 

0  The  sign  is  unusually  short  for  «  and  also  rather  thiok ;  but  the  right  end  of  n  preserved  at 
left  end  of  1.  11  is  equally  thiok.  The  probabilities  are  in  favor  of  n. 

The  lacuna  in  the  middle  of  the  column  begins  to  bo  wider  at  this  point ;  see  Vol.  II,  PI.  I. 

0  Only  half  of  the  sign  is  preserved,  but  the  reading  is  certain  in  view  of  the  duplicate  passage 
in  Gloss  B. 

f  The  restoration  repeats  the  text  of  Gloss  B  without  correcting  the  inconsistency  in  gender. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  Penetrating  to  [the  bone  of  his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash],”  it 
means  that  there  is  a  gaping  of  the  flesh,  although  r.i  .  .  .  .  r.i  over  the  bone  of 
his  skull,  without  gaping  [of  one  (lip)  from  the  other],  being  narrow,  not  wide. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  1  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  117 

Commentary 

As  we  have  already  noticed  in  discussing  the  examination  itself,  this  gloss  is  an 
explanation  of  words  quoted  from  the  examination.  Unfortunately  the  quotation 
is  not  perfectly  preserved.  Regarding  the  restoration  of  the  loss  at  the  end  of  1.  10 
and  beginning  of  1.  11,  there  can  be  no  question,  except  the  minor  one  :  whether  we 
should  restore  the  negative  ***  nn,  or  -jwsSb.^  n  wn-t.  There  is  practically  no  difference 
in  the  meaning  of  these  two  negatives  in  such  a  construction  (see  Gunn,  Syntax, 
p.  166,  IX),  and  there  is  only  room  for  nn.  With  reference  to  the  order  of  the  two 
observations  :  “  penetrating  to  the  bone,  &c.”  and  “  not  having  a  gash,”  the  fragments 
at  the  end  of  the  lacuna  at  the  head  of  1. 11  prove  that  the  last  of  the  lost  words  was 
not  dnn-t-f ;  but  some  other  word  with  the  possessive  /  written  at  the  top  of  the  line. 
This  is  only  possible  when  hieratic  /  is  begun  somewhat  high  along  the  back  of  some 
sloping  sign,  that  is  in  this  case  The  dd  pw  immediately  following  this  /  shows 
that  the  suffix  “  his  ”  was  the  last  sign  in  the  quotation,  and  the  quotation  could  end 
only  in  dnn-t-j  “  his  skull,”  or  kf-t-f  “  its  gash.”  As  it  is  not  dnnd-f  it  muBt  be  kf-t-j. 

In  the  explanation  after  the  introductory  dd  pw  the  scribe  inadvertently  omitted 
o  <?  (following  kf)  and  inserted  it  afterward.  The  possible  reading  pw  would  seem 
to  require  the  infinitive  kf-t,  while  yn  permits  a  preceding  passive.  I  am  unable 
to  suggest  any  probable  rendering  as  far  as  hr  ks.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  our 
treatise  in  which  “  bone  ”  is  preceded  by  the  preposition  hr.  The  remainder  of  the 
explanation  is  unfortunately  practically  a  repetition  of  Gloss  B.  Gloss  B  deals  with  the 
lateral  dimensions  of  the  wound,  while  we  should  expect  Gloss  C  to  discuss  the  depth  of 
the  wound.  The  structure  of  the  explanation  therefore  probably  was :  first  a  statement 
of  the  depth  of  the  wound  (in  the  obscure  first  half  of  the  gloss  preceding  hr  ki)  pene¬ 
trating  to  the  bone,  followed  in  the  second  half  by  a  natural  reference  to  the  fact  of  the 
narrow  lateral  extension  of  the  wound,  meaning  that  this  lateral  limitation  is  a  fact 
notwithstanding  its  depth ;  hence  the  repetition  from  Gloss  B.  See  discussion  of  Gloss  C 
above  in  commentary  on  rr  “  penetrate  ”  (p.  87),  and  compare  Case  18,  Gloss  A. 

Regarding  the  three  glosses  on  this  case  together,  it  is  obvious  that  they  furnish 
explanations  of  terms  an  understanding  of  which  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  compre¬ 
hension  of  such  cases  as  those  discussed  in  our  treatise.  The  term  “  examine,” 
explained  in  the  first  gloss,  is  employed  in  all  the  cases  in  this  document,  without 
reference  to  the  nature  of  the  case.  It  is  quite  evident  that  such  a  term  would  be 
explained  early  in  such  a  treatise  as  Pap.  Smith.  It  is  so  unlikely  that  it  would  be 
explained  in  connection  with  any  other  case  than  the  first,  that  we  must  regard  its 
occurrence  among  the  glosses  of  our  first  preserved  case  as  satisfactory  evidence  that 
it  was  in  real  fact  originally  the  first  case  in  Pap.  Smith. 

On  J^j,  hf-w  (plural)  meaning  “  flesh,”  see  Montet,  Sphinx,  18,  pp.  1  ff.,  and 
Gardiner,  Sinuhe,  p.  111. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

118 

CASE  TWO 
1 12-18 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

Case  2  differs  from  Case  1  only  in  the  addition  of  the  word  “  gaping.”  In  Case  1 
the  soft  tissue  overlying  the  bone  has  been  ruptured  as  by  some  blunt  weapon,  leaving 
an  ill-defined  and  constricted  orifice ;  in  Case  2  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  well- 
defined  gash  such  as  may  be  produced  by  a  knife  or  a  sword,  with  a  resulting  yawning 
or  gaping  of  the  orifice. 

Title 

I  12 

*  The  word  kf-t  itself,  curiously  enough,  falls  in  a  lacuna  wherever  it  occurs  in  Case  2  ;  but  the 
genitive  n  following  wbnw  both  in  the  title  and  Gloss  A  make  the  restoration  certain,  cf.  I  18. 

b  The  left  ends  of  the  arm  and  the  r  are  preserved. 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  [gaping]  wound  [in  his  head],  penetrating  to  the  bone. 

Commentary 

All  the  terms  needing  explanation  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  on 
Case  1.  It  is  noticeable  that  after  the  word  “  bone  ”  the  further  defining  words  “  of 
his  skull  ”  are  here  omitted,  probably  because  they  have  been  used  in  Case  1,  which  is 
regarded  as  making  clear  what  bone  is  meant. 

Examination 

I  12-14 

(?  ^  i  v 

N  X  < — >  <=>  5 — . 

*  Traces  of  the  determinative  of  wbnw  are  discernible. 

b  The  tail  of  the  /  is  preserved.  The  text  is  a  repetition  of  the  title,  making  the  restoration 
quite  oertain. 

*  The  traces  on  left  edge  of  fragment  B  might  be  the  head  and  one  foot  (thrust  forward)  of 
the  pro-bird  (following  wd-hr-k  r-k  hr-}  here  as  in  III  10,  q.  v.) ;  these  same  traces  also  fit 

a  restoration  which  I  rejected  for  reasons  given  on  p.  119;  but  D6vaud  again  urges  the  correctness 
of  this  restoration,  and  the  at  the  end  (tail  crossing  1. 14  above  tp-f  on  fragment  F)  is  a  strong 
argument  for  restoring  as  above  in  accordance  with  IX  14  (q.  v.  p.  310),  which  is  also  followed  by 
yr  ymy-Jb  as  here  in  I  13. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  2  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  119 

d  For  these  words  compare  IX  14  in  the  same  context.  In  our  text  the  head  of  the  ym-bird  is 
a  little  thicker  and  shorter  than  normal,  but  the  m  is  perfect.  The  k  orosses  the  tear  between  fragment 
A  and  fragment  F,  but  the  top  of  its  loop  is  visible  on  fragment  A  and  its  heavy  oblique  stroke  is 
well  preserved  on  fragment  F.  This  is  part  of  the  proof  that  these  two  fragments  belong  together. 

8  This  restoration  is  based  on  IX  14.  The  place  of  the  line  division  is  not  quite  certain,  but  the 
w  was  certainly  in  1. 13,  for  remains  of  it  are  visible  above  the  tail  of  the  /,  just  as  in  VII  9  in  the  same 
context.  In  IX  15  tod >  is  the  first  word  of  the  line  and  is  therefore  separated  from  the  preceding 
/  which  is  in  1.  14. 

*  The  nt  preceding  thm  makes  this  restoration  oertain. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  [gaping]  wound  [in]  his  [head],  penetrating  to 
the  bone,  thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it  (and)  [thou  shouldst]  pal[pate  hi]s 
[wound].  If  thou  findest  his  skull  [uninjured  not  hav]ing  a  perforation  in  it, 
(conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  examination  repeats  the  title  as  usual.  It  might  be  concluded  that  the 
laying  of  the  hand  on  the  wound  means  purely  external  examination,  as  opposed  to 
“  palpation”  {dfr).  Such  is  indeed  the  case  in  III  9-10  (Case  7),  but  the  distinction 
is  not  everywhere  maintained. 

The  restoration  drr-hr-k  wbnw-j  (1.  14)  urged  by  D6vaud  is  doubtless  correct ; 
see  note  °,  p.  118.  There  is  nevertheless,  besides  the  context  in  III  10,  a  gram¬ 
matical  argument  in  favor  of  gmm-k,  etc.,  as  a  continuation  of  the  condition. 
In  twenty-eight  out  of  our  forty-eight  cases  in  Pap.  Smith  it  is  used  as  the  continuation 
of  the  examination.  In  the  majority  of  the  cases  in  which  it  appears  it  follows  imme¬ 
diately  upon  yr  h'y-k  “  if  thou  examinest  ”  (twenty-one  times) ; 1  but  it  occurs  also 
immediately  alter  drr-hr-k,"  thou  shouldst  palpate”  (seven  times:  Cases  3,  as  restored, 
4,  5,  6,  8, 18,  47),  or  wd-hr-k  (sometimes  wd-yn-k)  r-k,  “thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand” 
(four  times :  Cases  2, 7, 24,  and  47).  In  only  one  case  (27)  do  we  find  yr 

gmy-k,  “  if  thou  findest  ”  continuing  the  examination  after  dfr.  Pap.  Smith  evidently 
throws  light  on  the  normal  function  of  gmm-k  as  contrasted  with  yr  gmy-k.  When  our 
treatise  desires  to  start  afresh  with  a  new  condition  observed,  it  does  so  with  yr  gmy-k, 
as  we  observe  immediately  following  the  lacuna  in  the  above  examination. 

The  lacuna  at  the  end  of  1. 13  and  beginning  of  1. 14  may  be  restored  with  certainty 
on  the  basis  of  the  analogous  text  in  Case  27  (IX  14-15).  Allowing  for  a  margin  of 
uncertainty  in  the  length  of  1.  18,  we  may  conclude  with  much  probability  that  the 

1  In  Cases  12,  14,  15,  10,  21,  25,  31,  33  bis,  34,  35,  30,  37,  38,  39  bis,  43,  44,  45  bis,  40. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

120  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  2 

restoration  completely  fills  the  lacuna.  The  word  rendered  “  uninjured  ”  is  more 
literally  “  sound,”  that  is,  it  is  not  a  word  indicating  injury,  to  which  a  privative 
syllable  is  prefixed  to  indicate  freedom  from  injury.  Hence  our  surgeon  adds  a  negative 
statement  that  a  certain  kind  of  injury  to  the  skull  is  not  present.  He  states  that  the 
skull  is  sound  and  re-enforces  this  statement  by  also  denying  the  opposite.  The 
injury  declared  to  be  not  present,  thm  (“  perforation  ”),  is  found  in  the  next  case,  and 
will  be  discussed  there.  We  learn  from  Gloss  C  that  the  scribe  has  been  guilty  of  an 
omission  here.  He  should  have  included  besides  a  “  perforation  ”  also  a  “  split  ”  and 
a  “  fracture.”  See  Gloss  C.  As  in  Case  18  (VII  9),  in  order  to  make  clear  that  there 
is  no  injury  to  the  bone,  our  surgeon  should  have  stated  that  the  entire  list  of  bone 
injuries  known  to  him  was  not  present. 

Diagnosis 
1 14 

—  «=*  /a 

O  <? 

»  The  readings  and  restorations  are  based  chiefly  on  the  obvious  fact  that  the  observable  fragments 
and  traces  of  signs  bIiow  clearly  that  we  have  at  this  point  the  text  of  the  diagnosis.  The  beginning 
falls  just  at  the  lower  edge  of  fragment  B,  and  above  this  lower  edge  only  the  upper  parts  of  signs  are 
preserved,  like  the  head  of  the  serpent,  the  top  of  y,  and  the  upper  part  of  k  under  a  short  n.  As  the 
edge  wanders  we  are  able  to  see  the  end  of  r  in  rf ;  and  just  beyond  it  (at  the  left)  the  upper  end  of 
the  Ar-sign.  Beyond  hr  the  gap  is  complete. 

b  The  words  in  this  bracket  are  restored  from  the  usual  form  of  the  diagnosis  as  regularly  found 
throughout  the  treatise,  and  the  designation  of  the  case  as  above  in  the  title. 

0  The  end  of  the  knife  handle  is  visible  in  front  of  m. 

<■  The  tail  of  the  in  kf-t  is  visible  in  1.  15  just  over  the  determinative  of  fit.  It  is  possible 
that  this  a—  belongs  to  fit  in  1.  16,  but  the  tail  seems  too  high  and  not  at  the  right  angle  for 
joining  with  the  f  in  fit. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  [him] :  “  One  hav[ing  a  gaping  woujnd  in  his  head.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat." 

Commentary 

As  noted  in  the  introduction  (pp.  48  £f.),  the  diagnosis  often  contains  little  more 
than  the  title,  as  if  it  were  simply  a  catch-word  memorandum.  For  the  practical 
purposes  of  the  surgeon  the  essential  thing  in  such  a  diagnosis  is  the  verdict  at  the 
end.  See  the  fuller  discussion  in  Case  1  (I  1-2).  As  usual  this  favorable  verdict  is 
followed  by  treatment  and  recovery,  showing  that  the  injury  is  not  a  serious  one. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  2 

o 

. — D[< 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 
Treatment 
114-15 

rr 

[pi 

>1  ?,*?,? 

121 

*  Part  of  this  h  is  preserved  and  recognizable. 

11  The  place  of  the  line  division  is  not  exactly  determinable.  At  the  bottom  edge  of  fragment  B 
traces  of  the  last  signs  visible  on  this  fragment  may  be  the  tops  of  three  signs  at  the  end  of  the  above 
bracket  or  possibly  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  bracket.  The  restoration  in  the  two  following 
brackets  is  fully  discussed  in  the  commentary.  On  the  amount  of  space  see  the  discussion  of  column  I 
in  volume  II.  0  With  m  omitted  as  commonly  before  mrh  t. 

Translation 

[Thou]  shouldst  bind  [fresh  meat  upon  it  the  first  day  ;  thou  shouldst  apply  for 
him  two  strips  of  linen,  and  treat  afterward  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lin]t  every  day 
until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

Almost  the  entire  treatment  is  lost  in  the  large  lacuna  extending  from  a  point 
toward  the  end  of  1.  14  to  beyond  the  middle  of  1.  15.  Nothing  has  survived  but 
a  few  signs  at  the  beginning  and  a  few  at  the  end.  The  beginning  is  marked  by 
°n  wt  and  the  end  by  W\,  the  determinative  of  lint.  The  treatment  therefore  begins 
with  the  usual  binding  with  fresh  meat  and  concludes  with  the  customary  application 
of  “  grease,  honey,  and  lint  every  day.”  But  Gloss  B  shows  that  two  ’wy-strips  were 
also  applied,  as  we  might  expect  in  the  case  of  a  gaping  wound.  This  application  of 
the  two  strips  must  have  been  mentioned  in  the  lost  middle  portion  of  the  treatment. 
The  treatment  therefore  consisted  of  three  items  : 

(1)  Binding  with  fresh  meat. 

(2)  Application  of  the  two  ’toy-strips. 

(8)  Application  of  grease,  honey,  and  lint  every  day. 

The  ’toy- strips  are  used  in  only  five  cases  (2,  6,  10,  27,  and  47).  An  examination 
of  the  other  four  reveals  the  fact  that  in  one  of  them  (Case  27)  we  find  the  same  three 
items  of  treatment,  although  in  a  different  order,  the  ’toy-strips  being  first  and  the 
fresh  meat  application  second.  The  limitation  of  the  fresh  meat  application  to  the 
first  day  however  is  a  fair  justification  for  questioning  this  order  in  Case  27 ;  and  it 

oi.uchicago.edu 

122  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  2 

should  be  noted  that  in  Case  10  (which  omits  the  lint),  the  order  is  as  in  Case  2,  with 
the  fresh  meat  application  the  first  and  the  5wn/-strips  following  (V  7-8).  We  are  there¬ 
fore  safe  in  restoring  from  Case  27  (IX  16-17)  with  slight  modification,  chiefly  in  two 
particulars.  We  must  insert  the  binding  with  fresh  meat  first  to  connect  with  the 
opening  signs  preserved  in  Case  2  (J^  wt) ;  and  we  must  insert  in  the  text  furnished 
by  Case  27  the  words  “  of  linen,”  which  our  Gloss  B  demonstrates  were  in  the  text  of 
the  treatment.  The  available  space  will  barely  contain  the  long  restoration,  and  it 
helps  in  this  direction  to  omit  the  iw  after  srwh-k,  as  in  VII 19,  to  omit  hr  kf-t  yptf 
after  >i vy  as  in  V  8,  and  to  use  the  short  writing  of  mrh-t. 

^  1 5  8  ’«n/,  “  two  strips.”  It  is  unfortunate  that  we  do  not  better  understand  these 
surgical  appliances.  The  word  is  unknown  outside  of  our  treatise  and  we  are  therefore 
confined  to  the  data  obtainable  from  Pap.  Smith  for  an  understanding  of  the  term. 
It  was  not  clear  to  the  readers  of  the  original  treatise  and  fortunately  for  us  the  ancient 
Egyptian  commentator  has  added  a  gloss  explaining  it.  Almost  all  of  the  gloss  is 
lost  in  the  text  of  our  case,  but  by  a  happy  chance  the  commentator  forgot  that  he 
had  once  explained  ’wy  in  Case  2,  and  he  explained  it  again  in  Case  10  (V  9),  evidently 
in  the  identical  words  used  in  Case  2  (Gloss  B,  I  16-17).  The  explanation  reads  : 
”  ‘  The  two  ’tcy-strips  of  linen’,  it  means  two  bands  of  linen,  which  one  applies  upon 
the  two  lips  of  the  gaping  wound  in  order  to  cause  that  one  (lip)  join  to  the  other.” 
Similarly  in  Case  10  we  find  the  same  function  of  the  two  'ivy- strips  in  the  directions  to 
the  surgeon :  “  Thou  shouldst  draw  together  (the  wound)  for  him  with  two  ’wy-s trips  ” 
(V  8).  The  injury  is  a  wound  in  the  eyebrow.  In  treating  a  gaping  wound  in  the 
shoulder  (Case  47)  the  surgeon  is  directed  “  Thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him 
its  gash  with  two  1  icy-strips  of  linen  over  that  gash  ”  (XVII  8-4).  With  regard 
to  the  method  of  applying  we  find  in  Case  6  this  significant  hint.  The  patient  has 
a  frightful  wound  in  the  skull  which  has  laid  bare  the  brain,  and  the  directions 
charge  the  surgeon :  “  Thou  shalt  not  bind  it  (the  wound) ;  thou  shalt  not  apply 
two  Jwi/-strips  upon  it  ”  (II  28).  It  is  clear  from  the  above  cases  that  the  ’wy- 
stripB  are  not  ordinary  bandages.  They  are  always  “  applied,”  literally  “  laid  on  ” 
(  ?  ui  tod),  and  their  effect  is  to  “  draw  together  ”  the  gaping  wound.  The  words 
“  lay  on  ”  certainly  could  not  be  applied  to  thread  employed  in  stitching  together  the 
wound.  Thread  and  stitching  being  excluded  the  only  other  alternative  is  obviously 
strips  of  linen  plaster,  a  kind  of  adhesive  tape,  of  which  two  pieces  are  “  applied  ” 
transversely  across  the  gaping  wound.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  word  is  always  used 
in  the  dual,  “  two  ’icy-strips.”  The  word  is  curiously  written.  In  Case  10  we  find 
3^1^  >wy  (twice>  V  8  and  9),  Case  6  'ytcy  (II  28),  Case  47  also  ’ywy 

(XVII 4),  and  Case  27  ^  ’yrwy  (IX  16).  The  root  is  ’r  or  ’i/r,  which  weakened 
by  “  mouillirung  ”  of  the  final  r.  Cf.  the  peculiar  writings  of  words  ending  in  Jr, 
e.g.,  or  even  Perhaps  <=*^.  Our 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  2  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  123 

word  is  perhaps  the  source  of  the  cord  which  is  so  commonly  written  after  the  con¬ 
sonants  ’r  thus  The  incorrect  writing  in  our  passage  is  due  to  the 

preceding  particle  {[«=>  yr,  the  two  words  producing  a  combination  very  like 

the  writing  in  Case  27  :  ^ 

The  discussion  of  the  final  treatment  with  grease,  honey,  and  lint  will  also  be 
found  in  the  commentary  on  Case  1 . 

Gloss  A 
I  15-16. 

Explaining  :  A  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone. 

18 

a  The  words  immediately  following  wbnw  n  are  quite  certain  from  the  parallel  passages.  The 
exact  place  of  the  line  division  is  uncertain.  It  would  be  possible  to  restore  further  into  the  following 
lacuna,  but  the  amount  or  extent  of  the  quotation  is  uncertain. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  [gaping]  wound  [in  his  head  penetrating  to  the  bone,”  it  means] 
. his  wound. 

Commentary 

The  entire  explanation  of  a  “  gaping  wound  ”  is  lost.  Its  nature  is,  however, 
recoverable  from  the  observations  regarding  a  wound  which  is  not  gaping,  or  as  the 
Egyptian  puts  it  “has  no  kf-t”  (gash).  See  the  commentary  on kj-t  in  Casel  (pp.90ff.). 

Gloss  B 
1 16-17 

Explaining  :  Two  strips  of  linen 

*  Only  the  right  end  of  this  d  is  visible,  but  the  duplicate  from  Case  10  makes  the  reading  certain. 

b  The  text  of  this  restoration  is  drawn  from  the  duplicate  gloss  in  Case  10,  V  9. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

124  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  2 

Translation 

As  for :  “  Two  strips  of  linen,”  [it  means]  two  bands  [of  linen  which  one  applies 
upon  the  two  bps  of  the  gaping  wound  in  order  to  cause  that  one  join]  to  the  other. 

Commentary 

Fortunately  for  us  the  ancient  commentator  forgot  that  he  had  supplied  this 
explanation  in  Case  2,  and  inserted  it  again  in  Case  10  (V  9),  where  it  begins  with 
iSd-icy  and  ends  with  r  W-t,  as  in  Case  2,  showing  that  both  glosses  undoubtedly  read 
alike.  The  curious  use  of  the  feminine  vf-t  “  one  ”  as  a  substantive  resuming  ijpt 
“  lip,”  which  is  not  feminine,  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  in  the  commentary  on 
the  lips  of  a  wound  (pp.  114  f.). 

<=>£  (]«*-=  dmy  “join,”  with  the  preposition  r,  literally  means  “  to  stick  to.”  In 
surgical  use  it  is  applied  e.  g.  to  the  “  sticking  ”  of  a  fragment  of  bone  to  a  swab  of 
linen  (VIII  16).  In  our  gloss  it  is  evidently  used  for  “  heal,”  and  might  have  been 
so  rendered. 

The  explanation  does  not  make  clear  by  what  physical  arrangements  the  lips  of 
the  wound  are  brought  together,  and  therefore  does  not  indicate  unequivocally  the 
nature  of  the  * wy ,  “  the  two  strips.”  See  the  discussion  in  the  commentary  on  the 
treatment  above  (p.  122),  where  it  has  been  made  practically  certain  that  the  strips 
are  employed  as  plaster  or  adhesive  tape. 

Gloss  C 
I  17-18 

Explaining  :  Not  having  a  split,  a  perforation  or  a  smash  in  it. 

a  Restored  from  VII  9. 

Translation 

As  for  :  "  Not  having  a  split,  a  perforation,  (or)  [a  smash  in  it,”  it  means] 

Commentary 

The  three  injuries  here  enumerated  constitute  the  list  recognized  by  our  surgeon 
as  injuries  of  the  bone.  Undoubtedly  the  text  of  the  examination  (I  14)  should 
likewise  have  contained  all  three.  The  ancient  commentator  may  have  quoted  from 
memory  without  noticing  the  omission,  or  the  omission  was  in  the  older  original 
from  which  our  scribe  copied,  or  he  copied  carelessly  and  skipped  two  words.  It  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  2  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  125 

regrettable  that  the  description  of  these  three  injuries,  or  the  indication  of  what  we 
are  to  understand  by  the  statement  that  they  were  not  present,  is  lost.  Fortunately 
they  occur  frequently  in  the  following  cases,  where  full  discussion  of  them  will  be  found. 
On  pSn,  “  split,”  see  Case  1  and  Case  4  (II  2) ;  on  thm,  “  perforation,”  consult  Case  1 
under  “  wound,”  and  Case  8  (I  18,  pp.  125-126) ;  and  on  id,  “  smash  ”  ( =  com¬ 
pound  comminuted  fracture)  see  Case  1  under  “  wound,”  and  Case  5  (II 11). 

CASE  THREE 
I  18-11 2 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND  PER¬ 
FORATING  THE  SKULL 

With  Case  8  our  treatise  passes  from  the  consideration  of  superficial  wounds  in¬ 
volving  only  the  soft  tissue  overlying  the  skull,  to  a  series  of  wounds  which  involve 
very  serious  injuries  to  the  calvaria  itself,  as  well  as  the  internal  organs  of  the  head. 
This  series  forms  a  group  of  seven  cases  (Case  8  to  Case  9),  which  are  perhaps  the  most 
interesting  in  the  whole  treatise.  They  contain  the  first  references  to  the  brain  now 
accessible  in  the  whole  range  of  earliest  oriental  science,  including  extraordinary 
descriptions  of  its  appearance  and  even  observations  indicating  some  discernment  of 
the  localization  of  functions  in  the  brain. 

Title 

118 

a  This  determinative  and  the  preceding  nw  sign  make  tho  restoration  of  wbnw  obvious.  The  first 
word  M’u;  is  restored  from  the  customary  form  of  the  title,  as  1 12,  et  pageim. 

b  Only  the  foot  is  visible. 

0  The  tail  of  the  /  is  preserved  crossing  1.  19  at  the  extreme  end.  Pnn-l  is  certain  from  the 
examination  (1.  19). 

Translation 

[Instructions  concerning]  a  gaping  [wojund  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone 
(and)  perforating  his  [skull]. 

Commentary 

The  title  indicates  that  the  injury  is  more  than  superficial  and  involves  the  skull. 
The  injury  affecting  the  bone  is  designated  by  the  word 

ihm>  “  Perforate.”  Several  times  we  find  the  word  written  with 

a  circle  as  determinative  to  indicate  more  clearly  the  meaning  of  the  term  (VIII  8 ; 
XIII 18, 15).  It  is  written  out  fully  with  all  three  consonants  throughout  the  calvaria 

oi.uchicago.edu 

126  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

cases,  but  in  the  late  cases  it  may  be  abbreviated,  e.  g.,  J o  (Case  15,  maxilla,  VI 14), 
or  even  J  (Case  20,  VII  22). 

Outside  of  the  medical  literature  it  was  a  not  uncommon  word  meaning  “  to  pass 
over,  pass  through,  penetrate,  pierce,  perforate.”  It  is  employed,  in  accordance  with 
the  use  of  the  legs  as  determinative,  to  express  the  idea  of  traversing  a  country. 
Hence  it  is  applied  to  the  journey  of  the  dead  in  the  next  world  :  “  Thou  passest 
through  ( thm )  the  earth  ”  (Berlin  Pap.  3044, 1.  20).  Similarly  the  rebellious  enemies 
of  the  Pharaoh  lament  in  their  defeat :  ratljFnf  “  The  fire  which  we  have 

made  penetrates  (thm)  to  us  ”  (Semneh  Stela  of  Amenhotep  III,  Brit.  Mus.  138,  1. 12). 
It  is  this  meaning  “  to  pass  over,  through,”  which  accounts  for  the  determinative  of 
the  leg.  Illustrative  of  the  meaning  “  perforate,”  even  outside  of  the  medical  docu¬ 
ments  is  the  application  of  the  word  to  the  horn  of  a  bull.  Thus  Ramses  III  is  com¬ 
pared  to  a  bull  “standing  in  the  arena,  ...  his  horns  pointed,  ready  to  pierce  (thm) 
his  adversary  with  his  head  ”  (Medinet  Habu,  Roug6,  Inscr.  hier.,  145, 1. 57).  Approach¬ 
ing  its  medical  meaning  is  its  significance  in  charms  against  diseases,  as  in  those  for 
mother  and  child,  in  which  the  mother  says  to  the  demon  :  “  Fall  not  on  his  mouth, 
beware  of  being  concealed  ;  fall  not  on  his  teeth,  beware  of  penetrating  (thm)  ” 
(Mutter  und  Kind,  Berlin  Pap.  3027  E  III,  10). 

Our  knowledge  of  the  surgical  use  of  the  term  is  drawn  exclusively  from  Pap.  Smith, 
where  it  is  applied  to  wounds  in  the  calvaria  (Cases  3  and  7),  maxilla  (Case  15),  temporal 
region  (Cases  19  and  20),  cervical  vertebra  (Case  29),  and  ribs  (Case  40).  It  was  defined 
and  explained  in  Gloss  A  appended  to  our  present  case,  but  unfortunately  the  text 
is  fragmentary.  One  item  of  the  explanation  has  however  survived  :  “a  contracted 
smash,  through  his  incurring  a  break  like  a  puncture  of  a  (pottery)  jar.”  The  surgeon 
is  here  comparing  the  calvaria  to  a  bulbous  jar,  in  which  a  blow  with  some  sharp 
instrument  has  punctured  a  hole.  Such  an  injury  may  be  seen  in  the  forehead  of 
King  Sekenenre  (PI.  II,  Fig.  5),  who  lived  in  the  time  when  our  medical  treatise  was 
copied  and  in  use.  Such  a  wound  may  of  course  be  very  serious.  In  Case  7  the 
symptoms  it  causes  are  very  grave  and  the  patient’s  condition  regarded  as  hopeless, 
as  it  was  in  the  case  of  King  Sekenenre.  On  the  other  hand  the  surgeon  does  not 
hesitate  to  pronounce  a  verdict  of  successful  treatment,  as  in  our  Case  3,  or  in  a  per¬ 
foration  (thm)  of  the  maxilla  (Case  15),  a  perforation  of  the  temporal  region  (Case  19), 
or  of  a  rib  (Case  40).  A  perforation  of  the  temporal  bone  however  (Case  20)  may  be 
hopeless ;  and  a  perforation  of  a  cervical  vertebra  very  doubtful  (Case  29).  It  is 
obvious  that  a  thm  is  customarily  a  perforation  of  the  bone,  but  in  Case  19  (q.  v.) 
there  may  be  doubt  about  it.  Such  a  wound  is  one  chiefly  occurring  in  battle,  and 
doubtless  produced  by  a  spear  thrust ;  though  now  and  again  it  may  have  occurred 
in  civil  life. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  127 

Examination 
1 19-20 

19 

a  Restored  from  II  3  and  the  usual  beginning  of  the  examination ;  also  from  the  title  above. 

b  The  tail  of  the  /  is  visible  in  1.  20  under  the  following  r. 

c  Only  traces  of  this  stroke. 

d  The  left  end  of  the  head  of  the  owl  is  preserved  at  the  right-hand  edge  of  fragment  E,  1.  19,  and 
just  below  it,  and  further  to  the  left,  as  it  should  be,  is  the  final  stroke  of  the  owl.  By  measuring  the 
length  of  gm  as  found  in  1.  25,  it  will  be  seen  that  this  m  in  1.  19  is  the  first  m  in  gmm-k  ;  the  second 
to  therefore  being  the  first  sign  of  1.  20.  The  other  material  in  this  bracket  is  drawn  from  I  25  and 
II  4-5.  On  the  question  of  space  available,  see  commentary. 

Translation 

[If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in]  his  [head],  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  perforating  his  skull ;  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound  ;  [shouldst  thou 
find  him  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders]  and  his  [br]east,  (and)  suffering  with 
stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

Down  to  the  end  of  1. 19  the  terms  needing  explanation  will  be  found  fully  discussed 
in  the  preceding  commentary  on  Cases  1  and  2. 

With  regard  to  the  restoration  at  the  beginning  of  1.  19,  there  can  be  no  question 
regarding  its  correctness  ;  for  it  is  obvious  that  1. 18  contained  the  title  of  a  new  case. 
The  words  “  thou  shouldst  palpate,  etc.”  (1. 19)  show  that  the  examination  began 
in  1.  19,  and  began  without  any  doubt  with  the  usual  words  as  restored  above.  Com¬ 
pare  also  the  above  notes  on  the  restoration  of  1. 1 9.  Regarding  the  next  bracket, 
which  begins  at  the  end  of  1. 19  and  includes  1.  20  as  far  as  the  right  edge  of  fragment  G 
(where  the  text  is  preserved  again),  we  should  note  that  this  bracket  begins  after 
the  injunction,  “  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.”  This  charge  to  the  surgeon  occurs 
ten  times  in  our  document ;  in  nine  of  these  passages  the  following  context  is  pre¬ 
served,  and  it  begins  in  six  of  them  with  gmm-k,  and  in  one  with  yr  gmy-k,  “  if  thou 

oi.uchicago.edu 

128  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

findest,”  which  is  the  same  thing.  In  seven  out  of  nine  passages  then,  the  direction, 
“  thou  shouldst  palpate,  etc.”  is  followed  by  “shouldst  thou  find,”  or  its  equivalent, 
“  if  thou  findest,”  thus  furnishing  a  satisfactory  basis  for  the  restoration 
gmm-k  adopted  above.  There  is  hardly  room  for  the  restoration  yr 

gmy-k,  “if  thou  findest,”  as  appears  in  Case  27  (IX  14),  after  “thou  shouldst  palpate, 
etc.  ;  ”  but  this  would  not  alter  the  meaning  of  the  restoration.  There  is  uncertainty 
regarding  the  use  of  the  pronoun  dw,  “  him  ;  ”  but  there  is  just  enough  space  for 
it  in  1.  20.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  restoration  of  the  text  after  gmm-k  dw. 
The  data  are  these  :  1.  Gloss  B  (1.  25)  shows  that  the  discussion  of  the  case  contained 
the  words  “  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast ;  ”  2.  At  the  end  of 
the  lacuna  in  1.  20  we  find  the  signs  which  are  obviously  the  last  four  signs  of 
the  words  “his  breast.”  By  a  curious  coincidence  the  passage  in 

1.  25  breaks  off  at  the  end  of  the  line  at  exactly  the  same  place  in  the  word 
at  which  the  passage  preserved  in  1.  20  begins.  By  measuring  the  length  of  the 
preserved  passage  in  1.  25  from  to  (the  first  two  signs  of  Jc'b-t,  “  breast  ”), 
we  find  by  placing  this  measurement  at  the  right  end  of  1.  20  (before  J^)  that  there 
is  just  room  for  it,  when  we  have  prefixed  to  it  the  signs  continuing  the 

gm  at  the  end  of  1.  19,  in  the  words  gmm-k  dw.  We  may  therefore 

regard  the  restoration  of  1.  20  as  certain. 

One  further  question,  however,  arises  in  view  of  our  restoration  of  the  treatment 
(I  21-23).  This  restoration  mentions  the  fact  of  the  stitching  of  the  wound  as  already 
done,  just  as  in  Cases  10  and  26.  Indeed  all  six  cases  which  employ  stitching  in  our 
treatise,  place  the  injunction  to  stitch  in  the  examination,  and  then  refer  to  it  again 
(if  at  all)  in  the  treatment.  We  should  therefore  expect  instructions  to  stitch  in 
our  examination ;  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  there  is  no  room  for  such  instructions 
in  the  second  large  lacuna  above. 

M  9™y-n-f>  “  h®  i9  n0*  able,”  literally  “  he  does  not  find.”  This 
interesting  idiom  occurs  in  six  cases  in  our  treatise,  each  time  with  context  indicating 
physical  inability  to  turn  or  drop  the  head  (Cases  8,  4,  5,  7,  29,  and  32).  Gram¬ 
matically  this  so-called  gnomic  use  of  the  n-form  in  the  negative  is  of  course  common, 
but  I  do  not  recall  a  case  in  which  it  is  employed  attributively  after  a  pronoun, 
following  the  verb  "  find.”  This  is  clearly  a  construction  parallel  with  the  pseudo¬ 
participle  after  “  find,”  in  the  well-known  example,  “  He  found  a  man  standing  on 
the  dyke  ”  (literally  "  a  man,  he  was  standing  ”).  So  in  our  treatise  the  surgeon  is 
addressed,  “  shouldst  thou  find  him,  being  unable  ”  (literally  “  he  is  not  able  ”).  Gunn 
has  discussed  the  negative  n-form  ( Syntax ,  Chap.  XII),  but  he  too  seems  not  to  have 
met  this  construction  elsewhere  in  the  available  documents.  Gmy  and  a  negative, 
with  the  meaning  “  be  unable,”  seems  to  be  construed  in  our  passage  with  a  finite 
verb  following  it,  literally  meaning  “  that  he  should  look,”  and  really  a  substantive 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  129 

clause  functioning  as  the  direct  object  of  “  find.”  It  is  not  impossible,  however,  that 
we  should  regard  the  form  (dg'-f)  after  “  find  ”  as  an  infinitive,  literally  meaning 
“  his  looking.” 

It  is  assumed  in  this  examination  that  the  physician  will  make  this  observation 
of  the  patient’s  inability  to  twist  or  drop  his  head  without  prescribing  any  means  for 
aiding  such  observation.  In  three  other  cases,  however,  the  physician  is  charged  to 
say  to  the  patient :  “  Look  at  thy  two  shoulders  ”  (Case  19,  YII  16),  or  “  Look  at 
thy  two  shoulders  and  thy  breast  ”  (Case  80,  X  9),  or  “  Look  at  thy  breast  ”  (Snb-t, 
Case  82,  XI  2),  and  then  to  observe  whether  the  effort  causes  pain  or  difficulty. 

The  usage  of  this  common  verb  mn,  meaning  “  to  be  sick,”  “  to  suffer,”  has 
not  yet  been  precisely  determined  in  the  medical  papyri.  While  it  may  be  intransi¬ 
tively  used,  e.  g.,  “  you  are  not  sick  ”  (Eloquent  Peasant  817)  and 

Metternich  Stela  68;  Louvre  Stela,  C  26,  1.  18;  it  is  nevertheless  commonly  and 
strongly  transitive.  In  the  Old  Kingdom  indeed  it  takes  the  neutral  object  “  thing, 
something,”  even  when  it  is  used  to  mean  “  be  sick,”  or  “  be  ailing.”  Thus  a  man 
making  his  will  says  of  himself :  “  who  was  not  (yet)  sick,”  -^-7^'" — .(}•,  literally 
“who  was  not  ailing  (with)  anything”  (Gizeh,  Tomb  of  Nekure,  Lepsius,  Benkmaeler, 
II.  15  :  cf.  also  in  Uric.  I,  152).  It  is  evident  then  that  this  verb  means  “  to 
suffer  with  ”  or  “  to  be  ailing  with,”  without  the  interposition  of  a  preposition,  as 
we  say,  “  He  suffered  a  stroke  of  paralysis.”  Until  recently  it  was  understood  that 
such  transitive  use  of  the  verb  is  always  followed  by  the  name  of  the  ailment,  e.  g., 
Ebers  32,  21 ;  49,  7;  89,  21,  etc.  Such  was  the  understanding  of  the  character  of  the 
object  given  in  the  Erman-Grapow  Handworterbuch,  p.  64.  The  word  mn  is,  however, 
constantly  used  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers  with  some  ailing  member  of  the  body  immediately 
following  as  a  direct  object,  e. g.,  “if  he  is  ailing  in  his  groin” 

(Ebers  103,  6).  This  usage,  already  noted  by  Stern  in  his  vocabulary,  is  now  in  the 
Worterbuch  (see  p.  66).  We  have  then  three  uses  of  mn  “  to  be  sick  :  ”  (1)  intran¬ 
sitive  ;  (2)  transitive  followed  by  the  name  of  the  disease  as  a  direct  object ; 
(8)  transitive  followed  by  the  name  of  the  diseased  part  or  member  of  the  body 
as  direct  object.  These  facts  are  of  importance  in  the  interpretation  of  the  words 
immediately  following  mn  in  our  passage. 

j  j  tsw,  “  stiffness,  rigidity.”  The  word  occurs  seventeen  times  in  our  treatise, 
eight  times  written  out  fully  as  here,  and  nine  times  abbreviated  either  to  (II  4; 
HI  4;  IV9.12;  VII 18;  VIII 4, 18)  or  to  ||  (III  18;  X7).  In  all  seventeen  occurrences 
it  is  immediately  followed  by  the  words  “in  his  neck.”  At  first  glance,  therefore, it 
might  easily  be  confused  with  the  word  ”7'  ts,  “  vertebra,”  which  occurs  thirty-two 
times  in  our  document,  and  is  twenty-five  times  followed  by  the  genitive  phrase  “  of 
his  neck,”  thus,  e.g.,  in  X  8,  4,  etc. :  “vertebra  of  his  neck.”  In  every 

case,  however,  “vertebra”  is  written  with  the  single  sign  *—»,  followed  by  the  stroke, 

K 

oi.uchicago.edu 

130  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

and  is  modified  by  the  following  indirect  genitive ;  whereas  our  word  ^<?  \  j  is 
followed  by  the  adverbial  phrase  “  in  the  neck.”  This  distinction,  combined  with 
the  consistently  different  writing,  clearly  distinguishes  the  two  words. 

Ten  cases  exhibiting  “  tsw  ”  in  the  neck 

Cast. 

1 

Injury . 

J Reference. 

3 

Cut  in  head  with  perforation  of  skull  ..... 

120,21;  1 20-111. 

4 

„  „  „  „  split  in  skull  ...... 

II  4,  6. 

5 

„  „  „  „  fracture  of  skull  ..... 

II  13-14, 15. 

0 

„  „  „  „  brain  envelope  broken  open  .... 

1122. 

7 

„  „  „  „  perforation  of  sutures  of  skull;  various  symptoms 

incl.  constriction  of  “  ligament  of  his  mandible ;  ”  mouth  cannot  be 

opened 

Ill  4,  6,  13. 

8 

Fracture  of  skull  without  visible  injury  to  overlying  external  tissue 

IV  9,  12. 

19 

Perforation  of  temporal  bone  (presumably) ;  neighboring  eye  inflamed  . 

VII  18. 

20 

Wound  in  temple  with  perforation  of  temporal  bone 

VIII  4. 

22 

Fracture  in  temporal  bone  ...... 

VIII  13-14. 

29 

Cut  in  cervical  vertebra  and  perforation  of  this  vertebra 

X  7. 

The  meaning  of  our  tsw  is  superficially  clear.  In  Case  3  the  statement  that  the 
sufferer  has  a  tsw  in  his  neck  immediately  follows  the  observation  that  he  is  unable 
to  “  look  at  his  shoulders  or  his  breast,”  meaning  that  he  is  unable  to  lower  his  head 
either  obliquely  (toward  the  shoulders)  or  vertically  (toward  the  breast).  In  Case  4, 
however,  the  statement  that  the  patient  suffers  with  a  tsw  in  his  neck  is  followed  by 
what  is  essentially  a  clause  of  result  stating  that  he  is  unable  to  “  look  at  his  shoulders 
or  his  breast”  (II  4r-5).  It  is  obvious  that  tsw  must  indicate  some  kind  of  inability 
to  operate  the  muscles  and  articulations  of  the  neck.  This  conclusion  is  rendered 
certain  by  the  explanation  of  the  symptom  “  he  suffers  with  a  tsw  in  his  neck  ”  in 
Gloss  C  (I  26-11 1),  which  states,  “  it  is  a  lifting  up  ( ts-t ),  (resulting)  from  his  having 
incurred  this  injury  which  has  shifted  (lit.,  11  wandered  ”)  into  his  neck,  so  that  his 
neck  (also)  suffers  with  it.”  Our  tsw  is  therefore  a  noun  derived  from  the  verb  tsy  “  to 
lift  up,”  which  is  regularly  employed  of  lifting  or  raising  a  member  of  the  body, 
especially  in  a  middle  voice,  when  the  member  lifts  itself  or  rises  (X  21).  Tsw  is 
therefore  a  permanent  or  stationary  uplift  or  elevation  in  the  neck,  which  cannot  be 
bent  downward.  Obviously,  as  a  rendering,  the  word  “stiffness”  is  pathologically 
very  vague  and  unprecise.  Nevertheless,  Dr.  Luckhardt  states :  “  The  physical 
findings  of  inability  to  look  at  shoulders  and  breast  and  particularly  the  stiffness 
of  the  neck  are  quite  characteristic  of  a  meningitis  or  meningeal  involvement.  The 
stiffness  of  the  neck  really  makes  it  difficult  and  painful  for  the  patient  to  look  at 
the  shoulders  or  bend  the  head  enough  to  look  at  the  chest :  .  . .  I  think  the  rendering 
‘  stiffness  ’  (*  rigidity  ’)  is  very  good.  It  is  so  used  daily  in  medical  practice  to-day. 
It  is  due  to  reflex  spasm  of  the  musculature  of  the  neok.”  It  is  to  be  noted  that  tsw 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  131 

in  the  neck  in  every  case  accompanies  an  injury  in  the  head.  Of  the  ten  cases  in  which 
it  forms  one  of  the  symptoms,  six  are  injuries  of  the  skull  approaching  or  penetrating 
the  brain.  Of  the  other  four  cases  three  are  injuries  to  the  temporal  bone,  and  the 
last  is  a  cut  in  one  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  itself.  The  pathologist  can  best  grasp 
the  nature  of  the  evidence  by  an  examination  of  the  preceding  conspectus  of  the  ten 
cases  exhibiting  tsw  in  the  neck,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  he  will  find  in  the  text  of 
the  cases  themselves  additional  important  symptoms  accompanying  tsw,  which  are 
too  bulky  to  be  incorporated  in  the  previous  brief  summary. 

This  effect  of  the  injury  in  the  head  on  another  region  differentiates  this  case  from 
the  two  preceding,  which  were  superficial  wounds  leaving  the  bone  uninjured. 

Diagnosis 
I  20-21 

*  Traces  of  the  /  are  visible,  especially  the  head  on  fragment  F.  See  Vol.  II,  PI.  I. 

b  A  fragment  of  this  sign  is  visible.  The  other  restorations  in  the  diagnosis  are  obvious,  being 
mostly  drawn  from  the  title  (I  18)  and  the  examination  (I  19). 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  [regarding]  him  :  “  One  having  [a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  his  skull,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in 
his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

This  is  the  first  diagnosis  recording  symptoms  or  conditions  elsewhere  than  in  the 
wound  itself.  See  the  discussion  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45-51).  On  the  verdict  form¬ 
ing  the  conclusion  see  Case  1  (I  1-2).  The  surgeon  now  turns  to  the  treatment, 
which  is  the  first  in  our  treatise  to  make  use  of  a  surgical  suture.  It  is 
unfortunate  that  this  important  reference  falls  in  a  lacuna  ;  but  the  restoration 
including  it  (1.  22)  is  based  on  conclusive  grounds. 

K  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

132  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

Treatment 
I  21-23 

22 

23 

*  On  this  restoration  and  all  the  following  restorations  in  the  treatment,  see  the  following 
commentary  and  also  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  B  and  C. 

Translation 

Now  [after  thou  hast  stitched  it,  thou  shouldst  lay]  fresh  [meat]  upon  his  wound 
the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  not  bind  it.  Moor  (him)  [at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the 
period  of  his  injury  passes  by].  Thou  shouldst  [tre]at  it  afterward  with  grease,  honey, 
and  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

The  restoration  of  this  broken  text  at  first  presented  some  difficulty.  The  large 
lacuna  in  1.  28  is  easily  filled  by  comparison  with  the  parallel  text  in  II  7  and  in 
XYII  12-13  ;  but  the  long  gap  in  1.  22  is  not  so  easily  restored.  Luckily  the  first 
word  of  the  treatment  is  preserved  at  the  end  of  1.  21.  Now  there  are  only  two  more 
cases  in  our  treatise  in  which  the  treatment  begins  with  (j<=»  yr  and  continues  with 
an  apodosis  concluding  with  application  of  fresh  meat,  which  we  find  immediately 
after  the  lacuna  in  1.  22  above.  These  are  Cases  10  (Y  7)  and  26  (IX  0-10).  An 
examination  of  these  two  cases  shows  that  in  both  of  them  the  treatment  begins  with 
yr  and  the  following  context  concludes  with  the  words  ywJ 

w’d  hrw  tpy,  “  fresh  meat  the  first  day.”  We  can  hardly  doubt  therefore  that  our 
text  should  be  restored  in  conformity  with  Cases  1 0  and  26 ;  at  least  this  should  be  done 
with  the  context  immediately  following  yr.  The  text  in  Case  26  is  as  follows  : 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  133 

“  Now  after  thou  hast  stitched  it  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first 
day.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease  and  honey  every  day  until  he 
recovers.” 

The  treatment  in  Case  10  even  more  closely  resembles  that  in  our  Case  8,  because 
it  likewise  inserts  an  additional  precaution  between  the  application  of  the  fresh  meat 
and  the  final  treatment  with  grease  and  honey,  see  Case  10  (V  7-8). 

Our  treatment  in  Case  8  displays  two  noticeable  differences  as  compared  with 
Cases  10  and  26.  Case  8  has  the  words  hr  wbnw-f,  “  upon  his  wound,” 

immediately  following  the  words  “  fresh  meat  the  first  day.”  Furthermore  Case  8 
carefully  enjoins  the  surgeon,  “  Thou  shalt  not  bind  it ;  ”  whereas  Cases  10  and  26 
charge  him  to  bind  the  wound  with  fresh  meat,  or  as  the  Egyptian  text  literally 
rendered  expresses  it,  “  thou  shouldst  bind  it  upon  fresh  meat  the  first  day,”  in  which 
the  object  of  the  binding  is  the  wound,  and  the  meat  is  an  indirect  object.  In  Case  3, 
however,  the  preserved  text  with  the  phrase  “  upon  his  wound  ”  (1.  22)  shows  that 
the  wound  was  the  indirect  object,  and  that  consequently  meat  must  have  been  the 
direct  object.  The  verb  of  which  it  was  the  direct  object  is  lost,  but  this  lost  verb  was 
obviously  not  the  verb  “  bind,”  because  not  only  does  the  prohibition  to  bind  forbid, 
but  also  the  words  “  upon  his  wound,”  a  phrase  never  used  with  the  verb  “  bind.” 
The  lost  verb  was  therefore  probably  wdy,  “  lay,”  as  restored  above. 

With  regard  to  the  fitness  of  introducing  stitching  into  the  above  restoration,  it 
should  be  noted  that  Case  3  is  one  exactly  furnishing  the  conditions  in  which  our 
surgeon  elsewhere  prescribes  stitching.  An  examination  of  the  list  of  such  cases  in 
which  our  treatise  prescribes  stitching  (see  Case  10,  commentary  on  V  6)  reveals  the 
fact  that  they  are  six  in  number,  and  that  in  all  of  them  we  are  dealing  in  each  case 
with  a  wound  in  a  thin  stratum  of  soft  tissue,  just  as  in  Case  8.  We  are  therefore  deal¬ 
ing  with  a  wound  in  Case  3,  such  as  the  surgeon  would  stitch.  When  therefore  we 
find  that  not  only  the  characteristics  of  the  wound,  but  likewise  the  preserved  context 
on  both  sides  of  the  lacuna  (1.  22)  are  identical  with  the  parallels  in  Cases  10  and  26, 
we  may  conclude  that  the  evidence  is  fairly  conclusive  in  favor  of  the  restoration 
above  inserted. 

ydr,  “  stitch,”  see  commentary  in  Case  10  (Y  6). 

wdy,  “  lay,”  used  of  medicaments  in  the  directions,  appears  three  times  in 
our  document  (Case  41  twice  ;  and  Case  46)  with  the  preposition  «=»  r,  “  to,”  and  com¬ 
monly  in  Pap.  Ebers.  With  the  preposition  ^  hr,  “  upon,”  as  above  in  our  text  of 
Case  3,  it  is  used  twice  in  Pap.  Smith,  both  times  with  plaster  or  adhesive  tape  as  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

134  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

object  (Case  6,  II  28  ;  Case  27,  IX  16).  See  full  commentary  on  this  word  in 
Case  11  (V  11). 

“  Thou  shouldst  not  bind  it.”  This  prohibition  is  found  five  times  in  our  treatise. 
In  Case  47  (XVII 12-18)  this  seems  to  be  due  to  the  appearance  of  feverishness  in  the 
wound.  Again  the  seriousness  of  the  rupture  of  tissue  in  Cases  4  (II  6-7)  and  6  (II 16), 
perhaps  causing  the  surgeon  to  apprehend  displacement  of  the  bone  or  soft  tissue, 
may  have  been  the  reason  for  the  injunction  not  to  bind.  The  same  is  true  in  Case  6 
(II 28),  in  which  the  surgeon  is  charged  neither  to  bind  nor  to  apply  plaster  or  adhesive 
tape.  The  case  is  one  of  a  compound  comminuted  fracture.  Just  why  the  surgeon 
should  avoid  binding  on  the  fresh  meat  in  Case  8  is  not  clear,  but  the  prohibition  is 
followed  by  the  same  context  in  all  the  other  three  cases. 

The  extraordinary  injunction,  “  Moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  is  fortunately 
explained  in  Gloss  D  as  meaning :  “  putting  him  on  his  customary  diet  without  ad¬ 
ministering  to  him  a  prescription  ”  (II 1-2).  It  is  evidently  an  archaic  idiom,  not  clear 
even  to  the  usual  ancient  reader  of  this  treatise,  as  the  presence  of  the  explanatory 
gloss  shows.  The  idiom  is  amusingly  suggestive  of  our  western  cowboy  term  “  grub¬ 
stake.”  We  are  aided  in  its  analysis  by  the  variant :  |  |<w,  “  Put 

him  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  which  occurs  in  three  instances  (V  12,  though  lacking  ho ; 
VII 18,  and  VIII  9).  See  commentary  on  wdy  in  Case  11  (V  11-12).  Of  the  ten 
instances  in  which  the  idiom  is  found,  the  other  seven  employ  the  form  wdy  r  V, 
three  times  written  dr  t'  (l  22;  X  8 ;  XVII  18),  three  times  written 
(II  7 ;  II 16  ;  X  8),  and  once  written  (II 1). 

The  scribe  has  in  all  cases  where  thiB  idiom  is  found  abbreviated  the  writing  of 
“  stakes  ”  to  j  t  (eight  times)  or  ')')')  (once,  X  8).  The  sign  is  quite  different  from 
his  writing  of  finger.1  He  always  makes  mnyt,  “  stake,”  thus  (,  once  three  times 
repeated  for  the  plural  as  we  have  seen  (X  8) ;  whereas  his  writing  of  “  finger  ”  J 
(II 18  ;  VIII 10 ;  IX  8,  etc.)  or  plural  jjj  J  (I  4 ;  16;  II  4,  and  usually)  always  turns 
the  tips  toward  the  left,  that  is,  away  from  the  beginning  of  the  line,  as  we  commonly 
find  them  also  in  Middle  Kingdom  hieroglyphic,  e.  g.,  Tomb  of  Hepzefi,  Siut).  It  is 
clear  therefore  that  we  are  to  read  here  an  abbreviated  writing  of  the  word  “(Jo'j 
mnyt,  “  mooring  stake.” 2 

The  regimen  indicated  by  the  injunction  “  Moor  him  at  his  mooring  stakes  ”  is 
followed  by  three  different  results  : 

(1)  “  until  he  recovers  ”  (once,  Case  28,  X  8). 

1  The  distinction  was,  I  think,  first  noted  by  Gardiner. 

*  Dr.  Grapow  make3  the  interesting  suggestion  that  the  passage  in  Shipwreck  53-64,  literally  : 
“  I  put  on  the  ground  on  acoount  of  the  abundance  in  my  hands,”  may  be  explained  from  our 
above  idiom.  The  lack  of  the  phrase,  “  at  his  (my)  mooring  stakes,”  however,  seems  to  destroy  the 
parallelism  with  the  idiom  of  Pap.  Smith. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  135 

(2)  *' until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by”  (six  times,  CaseB 

8  (restored),  4,  5, 19,  29,  47). 

(8)  “  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive 

point  ”  (literally,  “he  is  arriving  at  something,”  once,  VIII  9). 

As  we  have  learned  from  the  discussion  in  Case  1,  (1)  is  very  common  in  favorable 
cases.  (2)  is  used  in  favorable,  doubtful,  and  hopeless  cases  ;  see  discussion  in  following 
paragraph.  (8)  means  a  point  just  past  the  crisis,  when  the  physician  knows  whether 
the  patient  will  “  live  or  die.”  See  Case  4,  Gloss  C,  II  10-11. 

«=»jj  r  dw'y  ’•<  yh-f,  “  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by.”  This 

time  limitation  never  occurs  except  after  the  curious  idiom,  “  moor  him  at  his  mooring 
stakes.”  The  word  ^\®  ,,t  usually  means  a  point  of  time,  an  instant;  but  is  also 
used  for  longer  periods.  Here  it  is  obvious  that  it  must  designate  a  lapBe  of  time 
long  enough  to  permit  a  resumption  of  normal  diet  continuing  at  least  for  a  number 
of  meals,  and  probably  longer.  The  interpretation  of  the  clause  depends  largely  upon 
the  meaning  of  ()ru^  yh-f,  “  his  injury,  ailing,  pain,”  or  the  like.  Does  the  word 
mean  the  concrete,  specific  wound  or  injury ;  or  does  it  mean  pain,  suffering  in  general  ? 
Its  medical  or  pathological  use  is  very  limited.  It  is  found  in  the  medical  documents 
only  three  times  outside  of  Pap.  Smith,  and  all  these  occurrences  are  in  Pap.  Ebers. 
In  each  of  these  three  passages  (87,  15  ;  88, 15  ;  88, 16)  the  word  is  used  to  designate 
a  stomach  trouble,1  that  is,  the  ailment  specifically  and  not  pain  or  suffering  in  general. 
In  Pap.  Smith  the  word  occurs  twelve  times.  Five  of  these  are  in  the  clause  r  iw'y 
**f  yh-f,  and  therefore  do  not  aid  us.  Of  the  remaining  seven  cases,  three  designate  the 
specific  wound  or  injury  under  discussion,  e.  g.,  (J  ra  “  the  side  of  him 

having  this  injury”  (viz.,  a  fracture  of  the  skull  IV  15-16).  See  also  IV  16  and  XVI 18, 
which  are  not  quite  so  certain.  In  four  passages  our  word  designates  the  source  of 
symptoms,  e.g.,  “  his  neck  is  tense  and  stiff  because  of  his  injury”  (yh,  III  20) ;  see 
also  III  17-18  and  XIII 10-11,  but  especially  Gloss  C  (II  1).  The  evidence  therefore 
favors  understanding  the  word  yh  in  our  clause,  r  iw’y  ’-t  yh-f,  as  the  specific  injury. 
The  phrase  “  period  of  his  injury  ”  would  then  mean  the  period  during  which  his 
injury  continues,  that  is,  until  it  can  be  said  to  have  healed  and  thus  “  passes  by.” 
This  interpretation  is  favored  by  the  fact  that  in  Case  28  the  instructions  “  Moor 
him  at  his  mooring  stakes  ”  are  followed  by  the  words  “  until  he  recovers  ”  (X  8). 
The  fact  that  in  one  case  the  word  yh  receives  the  determinative  of  a  typbonic  animal 
(XVII  18)  does  not  aid  us  in  a  scientific  determination  of  the  pathological  meaning 
of  the  word,  though  it  discloses  the  current  superstitions  of  the  age,  in  which  our 
scribe  and  our  treatise  of  course  both  share. 

1  The  other,  older  form  of  the  word,  ’ft,  also  ocours  three  times  in  Pap.  Ebers  :  once  in  a  magical 
formula  (67,  21)  and  again  designating  internal  troubles  (37,  10  ;  100,  14).  These  throw  no  light  on 
the  specific)  meaning  of  the  word. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

136  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

Gloss  A 
124-25 

Explaining  :  “  Perforating  his  skull  ” 

l*[(H=-raly&s£] 

a  The  original  shows  clearly  a  pair  of  legs  ;  hence  we  cannot  read  thm,  as  the  following  dnn-l  would 
suggest.  There  are  no  traces  of  a  sign  over  the  legs. 

b  The  loss  is  some  three-fifths  of  a  line,  the  longest  lacuna  in  this  broken  column.  The  tail 
of  .  at  the  end  of  the  lacuna  is  visiblo  in  1.  26.  See  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  and  I  B. 

Translation 

[As  for :  “  Perforating  his  skull,”  it  means]  -  -  -  -  his  skull,  a  contracted  smash, 

through  his  incurring  a  break  like  a  puncture  of  a  (pottery)  jar, . which  he 

incurred.” 

Commentary 

The  other  three  glosses  appended  to  this  case  explain  all  the  symptoms  and  con¬ 
ditions  following  thm,  and  we  must  conclude  therefore  that  the  first  gloss  contained 
an  explanation  of  this  injury.  The  explanation  itself  makes  this  conclusion  quite 
certain  ;  hence  the  restoration.  The  beginning  of  the  explanation  is  unfortunately 
entirely  lost  and  there  is  no  source  from  which  to  recover  it.  It  proceeds  with  a  loose 
application  of  the  word  “  smash  ”  (dd),  otherwise  our  surgeon’s  technical  term  for 
a  compound  comminuted  fracture  (see  Case  5).  It  is  clear  that  it  is  applied  here  in 
a  loose  and  popular  sense,  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  illustration,  drawn  as 
it  is  from  the  incidents  of  every-day  life.  The  rendering  of  nds  “  small,”  as  “  con¬ 
tracted,”  is  justified  by  the  surgeon’s  use  of  this  word  as  the  opposite  of  wdh,  “  wide,” 
e.  g.,  in  the  head  wound  of  Case  1.  Compare  Fig.  13,  PI.  VII,  infra. 

rpr-f,  “  his  incurring  ”  is  evidently  a  surgical  use  of  the  word  "pr,  "  to 
acquire,  gain,”  e.  g.,  “Thou  gainest  thy  happiness” 

(Letter  from  Ana,  in  Griffith,  Papyri  from  Kahun,  pi.  29). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  137 

^  nrS,  “  puncture.”  This  noun  is  unknown  anywhere  else.  Whether  it  is 
to  be  connected  with  the  word  "ZZ?  nrS,  “  strong,”  or  “  terrible,”  is  not  clear.  Nr$ 
does  not  aid  us  in  the  explanation  therefore  ;  on  the  contrary  it  is  the  obvious  meaning 
of  thm,  which  leads  to  the  translation  of  WS  as  “  puncture.” 

rPT'n'f>  “  which  he  incurred.”  This  restoration,  while  uncertain,  is  very 
probable.  We  cannot  restore  Apr  n-f,  as  in  II  21  and  IV  11,  for  Apr  never  has  a  deter¬ 
minative  in  our  document,  and  seldom  does  elsewhere. 

Gloss  B 
I  25-26 

Explaining  :  “  Unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast  ” 

*  Only  the  left-hand  portions  of  these  two  signs  are  visible  ;  they  make  the  restoration  of  the 
preceding  bracket  quite  certain.  It  is  the  preservation  of  fragment  H  which  makes  the  gloss 
intelligible.  See  Vol.  II,  PI.  I  and  IB. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  [his]  bre[ast,”  it  means  it  is  not 
easy  for  him  to  look  at]  his  two  shoulders  (and)  it  is  not  easy  for  him  to  look  at 
his  breast. 

Commentary 

The  restoration  of  the  first  part  of  1.  26  as  above  can  hardly  be  doubted.  The 
completion  of  the  word  k’b-t-f  is  obvious,  and  the  preservation  of  “  his  two  shoulders,” 
plainly  parallel  with  “  his  breast  ”  (2nd  time),  makes  equally  obvious  the  completion 
of  the  parallel  statement  preceding  “  his  two  shoulders  ”  from  the  statement  preceding 
“  his  breast.”  It  is  clear  also  that  we  must  insert  the  usual  □<?  fw  in  the  restored 
parallel  statement,  although  it  is  not  present  in  the  second.  The  silence  of  the  explana¬ 
tion  regarding  the  cause  of  the  difficulty  is  doubtless  due  to  the  writer’s  knowledge 
of  the  coming  explanation  of  the  stiffness  in  the  neck,  which  is  to  be  inserted  in  the 
next  gloss.  The  explanation  indicates  not  impossibility,  but  difficulty  and  probably 
pain,  caused  by  the  effort  to  turn  the  face  vertically  or  obliquely  downward. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Fragment  H  (PI.  I,  1.  26)  must  be  moved  slightly  to  the 
right  (as  on  PI.  I  B)  to  make  room  for  n“"J,  as  first  observed  by  D6vaud. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

138  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  3 

Gloss  C 
I  26-11 1 

Explaining  :  “  Suffering  with  stiffness  in  his  neck  ” 

ZVtiJJsMP 

Translation 

As  for :  “  Suffering  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,”  it  means  a  lifting  up  (resulting) 
from  his  having  incurred  this  injury,  which  has  shifted  into  his  neck,  so  that  his 
neck  (also)  suffers  with  it. 

Commentary 

The  general  meaning  of  the  gloss  has  already  been  discussed  in  the  commentary 
on  the  examination  (1.  20). 

P'W'J<  “  his  having  incurred  ”  is  an  interpretation  perhaps  subject  to 
question.  The  auxiliary  p'w,  “to  have  done,”  is  commonly  followed  by  an 

infinitive  ;  Qn]'^.  yh,  however,  is  known  only  as  a  noun.  There  may  be  some  doubt 
whether  p’w  yh  may  mean  “  to  have  incurred  an  injury.”  Nevertheless  the  context  is 
strongly  in  favor  of  this  meaning ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  accept  the  form  p’w-f  as  the 
possessive  demonstrative  “  his.”  There  are  two  objections  :  the  form  is  not  normal ; 
and  the  entire  treatise  contains  no  other  example  of  the  possessive  demonstrative,  for 
the  document  is  not  written  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  koint.  However,  even  if  it  were 
accepted  as  the  possessive  demonstrative,  the  sense  would  not  be  essentially  altered. 
We  could  render :  “  (resulting)  from  this  his  injury,”  accepting  the  really  redundant 
second  demonstrative  as  re-enforcing  the  first. 

jZi  nnm.  This  reading,  correcting  the  old  reading  tnm  first  noticed  byDevaud 
(Maximes  de  Ptahhotep,  p.  28),  is  corroborated  by  our  text,  which  has  pretty  clearly 
nn  rather  than  tn.  The  word  means  “  to  go  astray,”  “  to  turn  aside  ”  and  the  like, 
as  of  a  traveler  who  has  missed  the  road  and  gone  astray  (Sinuhe,  B  96 ;  Pyr.  1695  c). 
Its  use  by  the  surgeon  in  this  connection  is  interesting,  suggesting  that  as  the  injury 
is  in  the  head,  any  results  of  it  found  elsewhere  must  have  gone  astray  or  wandered  ! 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  3  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  139 

Gloss  D 
II 1-2 

Explaining :  “  Moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes  ” 

2 

.  A  m  VO-w  WMVi  r~\ 

o 

WWA  Ok  <d>  I  I  I 

Translation 

As  for :  “  Moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  it  means  putting  him  on  his 
customary  diet,  without  administering  to  him  a  prescription. 

Commentary 

The  meaning  of  this  valuable  gloss  in  general  has  been  already  discussed  in  the 
commentary  on  the  treatment  (11.  22-23). 

mtr,  “  customary.”  This  meaning  of  the  word  long  awaited  notice  in  the 
dictionaries  ;  but  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  its  correctness.  From  its  use  in  the 
historical  inscriptions  this  meaning  was  established  twenty  years  ago.1 

There  might  be  some  discussion  as  to  the  more  exact  meaning  of  the  last  phrase 
in  the  explanation,  “  without  administering  to  him  a  prescription.”  The  word 
rendered  “administering”  literally  means  “making,”  and  the  word  “make”  has 
in  Egyptian  a  very  wide  range  of  meanings,  such  that  it  is  possible  the  surgeon  may 
mean  “  prepare.”  Phr-t,  like  its  English  equivalent  “  prescription,”  means  both  the 
actual  medicine  or  the  written  recipe.  Hence  our  final  phrase  may  mean,  either 
“  without  administering  to  him  any  medicine  ;  ”  “  without  writing  for  him  any 
recipe  ;  ’’  or  “  without  preparing  for  him  any  medicine.” 

CASE  FOUR 
112-11 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND 
SPLITTING  THE  SKULL 

This  case  is  far  more  serious  than  those  which  preceded  it.  It  illustrates  the 
organization  of  materials  in  the  treatise  in  groups  of  cases  beginning  with  the  simpler 
and  easier  injuries  and  passing  then  to  more  complicated  and  dangerous  cases. 

1  See  Breasted,  Ancient  Records,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  168,  note  b. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

140  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

Title 
II  2 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and) 
splitting  his  skull. 

Commentary 

The  terms  employed  in  this  title  have  all  been  explained  in  the  commentary  on 
the  preceding  cases  except  the  word  pSn,  “  splitting.”  It  is  an  archaic  word 
found  outside  of  Pap.  Smith  only  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  and  the  Middle  Kingdom 
Coffin  Texts.  In  the  Pyramids  it  is  found  only  in  805a,  679  b,  and  1963  b.  One  of 
these  passages  is  valuable  for  its  graphic  indication  of  the  meaning  of  the  word, 
having  as  the  determinative  ssr,  an  axe  actually  splitting  a  billet  of  wood  (Pyr.  805  a). 
Valuable  for  our  surgical  use  of  the  word  is  the  phrase  D  “  who  splits 

your  heads,  ye  gods”  (Pyr.  1968b).  In  chapter  17  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  the 
word  is  applied  to  the  splitting  of  the  ySd-t  tree;  cf.  Harhotep  208  (old  103),  and, 
referring  to  same  incident,  Book  of  the  Dead,  ed.  Naville,  125,  final  address,  1. 14. 

PSn  is  used  in  four  different  cases  in  Pap.  Smith  as  the  technical  surgical  term  for 
designating  an  injury  to  the  bone,  and  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  ancient  medical 
documents  of  Egypt.  These  four  injuries  are  in  the  skull  (Case  4),  the  maxilla  (Case  16), 
the  tomple  (Case  21),  and  the  arm  (Case  88).  It  occurs  as  one  of  three  different  bone 
injuries  :  pSn,  “  split ;  ”  thm,  “  perforation  ;  ”  and  id,  “  fracture,”  the  presence  of 
which  may  be  denied  to  indicate  that  the  bone  under  a  flesh  wound  is  uninjured, 
e.g.,  Case  2,  or  Case  18.  PSn  is  a  kind  of  wound  which  would  be  produced  especially 
by  the  long-headed  Egyptian  battle  axe  (see  Fig.  2),  which  may  have  an  edge  as 
long  as  16$  inches,  a  type  of  battle  axe  especially  common  in  the  Middle  Kingdom. 
A  sword  might  produce  a  similar  wound  in  the  skull,  but  the  sword  was  little  used  in 
Egyptian  warfare  in  the  age  preceding  our  document,  though  the  Egyptian  armies 
would  probably  have  met  some  type  of  it  in  Asia.  A  wound  in  the  skull  to  which  the 
term  pSn  would  have  been  applied  is  shown  in  Fig.  3,  which  illustrates  the  difference 
between  a  “  split  ”  (pSn)  and  a  “  fracture  ”  (id).  The  weight  of  the  blow  has  fractured 
the  skull  at  both  ends  of  the  pSn,  which  is  the  actual  cut  produced  by  the  edge  of  the 
weapon.  There  are  no  traces  of  healing  and  it  is  evident  that  the  injury  produced 
death  before  any  healing  had  occurred.  A  similar  injury,  seemingly  involving  only 
a  pin,  is  found  in  Fig.  4,  a  case  with  which  the  surgeon’s  art  was  able  to  deal ;  the 
wound  healed  and  the  patient  recovered.  Our  treatise  regards  such  an  injury  as  serious 
and  critical  when  it  is  in  the  skull  (Cases  4,  and  21);  but  when  it  is  in  the  maxillary 

-4  p  o _ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  141 

region  (Case  16)  or  in  the  arm  (Case  88),  it  is  not  considered  serious.  It  is  explained 
in  Gloss  A  of  Case  4  as  meaning  the  “  separation  of  one  shell  from  another  shell  of 
his  skull,  while  fragments  (evidently  of  bone)  remain  sticking  in  the  flesh  of  his  head 
and  do  not  come  away  ”  (II  9).  See  the  commentary  on  Gloss  A. 

Examination 
II  8-5 

bo  ® 

ftWMWA  \ 

nl  i  l 

C3 

w 

jLIJJ 

"""'ey'll  wS2>- 

m 

w 

A 

*  This  to  is  the  first  sign  in  1.  5  and  is  almost  lost  in  the  break  between  columns  I  and  II ;  but 
the  remains  make  the  reading  certain. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  splitting  his  skull,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find 
something  disturbing  therein  under  thy  fingers,  (and)  he  shudders  exceedingly, 
while  the  swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes,  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his 
nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears,  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  so  that  he  is 
unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

All  terms  preceding  the  results  of  the  palpation  have  been  discussed  in  the  com¬ 
mentary  preceding  Case  4. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

142 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

®rTl  yfy'*’  “  ^ing,”  as  used  in  Pap.  Smith,  appears  in  a  range  of  usages  which 
require  discussion.  We  find  it  used  as  follows  : 

1.  Without  a  modifier,  to  designate  some  material  object,  e.  g.,  to  “  measure  some¬ 
thing  ”  in  a  bushel  (I  5) ;  to  seize  “something”  (of  a  bird’s  claw,  VIII 15);  a  “  thing  ” 
is  clammy  (III  19),  etc. 

2.  Without  any  qualitative  modifier,  and  indicating  something  often  immaterial, 
neutral  or  unfavorable  : 

a.  Neutral,  as  in  the  frequent  expression  “  until  thou  knowest  whether  he  (the 
patient)  is  arriving  at  anything,”  meaning  whether  he  is  arriving  at  anything  decisive, 
either  favorable  or  unfavorable  (II  8, 10,  28  ;  III  8,  15  ;  IV  9  ;  VIII  9  ;  XII 18-19). 

b.  Unfavorable,  as  in  the  statement  that  the  skin  overlying  a  fracture  of  the  skull 
is  uninjured,  thus  :  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  of  (var.  “  in  ”) 
his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  while  there  is  nothing  at  all  upon  it  ”  (the  skin, 

•c 

©  = 

') 1  clearly  means  an  injury.  Another 

Case  8,  IV  5),  in  which  “  nothing  at  all ! 
example  will  be  found  in  VIII  18-19. 

8.  With  a  following  modifier,  especially  the  following  : 

a.  An  adjective,  in  cases  where  “thing”  designates  something  purely  material, 
e-g.,  V fc*  “  something  hot  ”  (III  7) ;  yh-t  gnn,  “some¬ 
thing  soft”  (VI  14;  IX  18);  ®jy^ . yh-t  Sfw,  “something  swollen” 

(XIII  10;  XVI  18),  although  this  last  example  may  possibly  belong  under  8  c  or 
8  d  below. 

There  are  indications  that  in  some  such  cases  the  two  words  merge  together,  if  not 
in  pronunciation,  at  least  in  meaning,  and  serve  as  an  abstract  noun,  e.g., 
yfy-t  d§r  (XIII  11),  “  redness,”  literally  “  red  things,”  in  which  “  things  ”  seems  to 
serve  like  an  abstract  prefix  or  termination  Buch  as  -schaft  or  -kcit  in  German.  This 
is  a  usage  which  is  known  in  literary  Egyptian,  e.g.,  “  Happy  he  who  tells  what  he 
has  tasted  (experienced),  when  the  evil  is  passed  ”  (Shipwreck  124),  a  passage  in 
which  “  evil  ”  is  expressed,  yh-t  mr,  “  evil  thing  ”  (or  “  things  ”). 

b.  An  adverb,  especially  ym,  “therein,”  e.g.,  Pap.  Ebers  108,  19.  This 
ym  is  not  infrequently  followed  by  a  noun  in  the  genitive,  as  in  our  text  above, 
•’aa=ll  yl}d  Vm  “  something  therein  disturbing  ”  (II  8-4) ;  or  it  may 

bo  that  we  must  classify  this  modifier  as  a  participle,  as  in  the  following  cases, 
c.  A  participle, e.g.,® yh-t  fc’b,  “something  folded”  (XII  5) ;  ® 

yh-t  pry-t  (XIV  16) 

oi  i  n  jra  !"□  <= 

fluttering  therein 

n  “ 

cl  I 

.  A  participle  also  sometimes  follows  the  adverb  ym  of  8  b,  e.  g., 
TXMKfc  yfy'1  ym  nhdhd  npypy,  “something  throbbing  and 
(II  20). 

1  The  modifier  nb-l  is  not  to  be  classed  as  qualitative  within  my  meaning  in  the  above  discussion, 
and  hence  I  have  placed  the  example  among  those  without  qualitative  modifiers  above. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

143 

d.  A  noun,  e.g.,  yb'inr^  (XVI 1  with  det.  supplied  from  XVI 14), 

“  something  of  clamminess,”  probably  meaning  “  some  clamminess.”  We  should 
perhaps  compare  with  this  usage  the  use  of  “  thing  ”  with  the  meaning  “  portion,” 
as  in  the  archaic  words  for  the  morning  and  evening  meal  in  the  Pyramid  Texts: 
•ran*  yh-t  nhpiv,  lit.  “morning  thing”  and  J(fJ]  yh-t  wh\  lit.  “evening  thing” 
(Pyr.  978  d,  e).  It  is  quite  clear  that  in  such  examples  as  these  two  yh-t  designates 
a  material  thing,  and  its  use  with  a  following  modifier  may  originally  have  arisen  in 
cases  of  this  kind.  It  is  equally  clear,  however,  that  in  some  of  these  phrases  “  thing  ” 
or  “  something  ”  does  not  designate  a  material  object.  We  may  compare  our  English 
“  something  ”  or  “  somewhat,”  employed  to  indicate  a  “  measure  of  ”  or  a  “  certain 
amount  of.”  This  usage  is  closely  allied  to  the  Egyptian  use  of  “  thing  ”  to  mean 
“  manner  ”  or  “  fashion,”  as  in  the  well-known  example  in  the  Piankhi  Stela  ^=1®^!? 
“  in  the  manner  (lit.  ‘  thing  ’)  of  women  ”  (1.  63).  Our  papyrus  has  a  related  case 
in  the  passage  Vb'1  rm~f>  “  as  h0  were  weeping  ”  (III  12  ;  IV  2), 

literally  “  like  the  manner  (‘  thing  ’)  that  he  were  weeping.”  Gunn  has  called  my 
attention  to  its  occurrence  also  in  the  still  unpublished  tomb  autobiography  of 
Gemnikai :  m  yh-t  mrr-t  ny-dw-t,  “  in  the  manner  (lit.  ‘  thing  ’)  which 

the  king  desired.”  These  various  usages  and  shades  of  meaning  of  yh-t  must  be  re¬ 
membered  in  interpreting  the  passage  above  (II  3-4). 

The  lack  of  agreement  in  gender  between  yh-t  and  its  following  modifier  is  of  course 
a  well-known  peculiarity.  Yh-t  is  in  most  of  the  above  cases  obviously  not  plural, 
and  it  is  possibly  singular  in  all. 

— nb’>  “  disturbing,”  the  modifier  of  yh-t,  “  thing,”  is  a  difficult  word. 
Although  it  is  not  uncommon  it  is  applied  with  highly  varied  meanings.  It  is  used 
of  a  “  terrible  ”  face,  of  an  “  unfavorable  ”  wind,  of  “  dangerous  ”  water,  of  a  “  terrify¬ 
ing  ”  voice  ;  it  is  applied  to  fire,  and  it  appears  parallel  with,  or  in  addition  to  f 
dhm,  “  mighty.”  In  Egyptian  medicine  it  is  known  in  only  four  passages  besides  the 
one  we  are  discussing:  one  more  in  our  papyrus  (III  1)  and  three  in  Pap.  Ebers.  Of 
these  fourths  one  in  Pap.  Smith  is  the  most  instructive  :  ®  °  , 

“  something  foreign  (or  ‘  disturbing  ’)  upon  it  like  I- wrinkles1  ( py-w ).”  We  do  not  know 
with  certainty  what  these  py-w  are,  but  the  context  shows  that  the  wrinkling  surface 
of  slag  floating  on  molten  metal  is  meant,  and  this  makes  the  rendering  of  nh'  as 
“  foreign,”  “  disturbing,”  or  “  rough  ”  very  probable.  Such  a  meaning  would  also 
suit  Pap.  Ebers  108,  18,  a  passage  in  which  a  cist  or  swelling  or  abscess  is  found  to 
be  — nb'-  the  other  two  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers  the  determinative  of 
nh ■»  is  ^  (Ebers  89,  9-10 ;  89, 12)  and  the  context  does  not  fit  the  meaning  “rough,” 
nor  suggest  clearly  any  other  meaning.  It  may  indeed  be  that  this  rik>  with  ^  is 
a  different  word. 

>nry,  “he  shudders”  is  not  clear  until  it  is  compared  with  the  five 

oi.uchicago.edu 

144 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

other  passages  in  which  it  occurs  in  our  papyrus.  These  disclose  the  following  five 
variants : 

111 3 ; 

vmi; 

X  5  in  red  corrected  in  over  «=»  in  black) ; 
xm  14 ; 
xiv  18. 

These  variants  disclose  this  curiously  written  word  as  a  form  of  the  verb  ^ 
nry,  “  to  be  terrified,”  “  to  shudder,”  or  the  like.  The  prosthetic  (j^  is  once  written 
{|^,  of  which  the  ^  has  been  inserted  in  red  ink  by  the  scribe  as  a  correction  over 
an  <=»  which  is  in  black.  This  is  an  interesting  suggestion  of  the  weak  pronunciation 
of  in  Hyksos  times,  and  also  of  1]  <=»  as  ’£. 

The  word  is  usually  construed  with  the  preposition  n,  introducing  the  cause  of 
the  fright,  but  <=»  is  sometimes  employed,  e.g.,  *— — THIH  "  Offered 
to  thee  is  the  Horus-eye  at  which  f0)  the  gods  are  terrified  ”  (Abydos  Ritual, 
Mariette,  tabl.  19,  according  to  Amon).  See  also  Lacau,  Textes  relig.  XVII  =  Recueil 
de  Trav.  27,  p.  56.  The  ^  which  immediately  follows  ’ nry  in  all  six  passages  of  our 
papyrus,  however,  is  evidently  not  an  example  of  *=•  introducing  the  cause.  The 
phrase  ^  is  either  the  customary  emphatic,  or  more  probably  its  predecessor,  in 
which  is  still  felt  to  refer  back  to  the  subject  and  has  not  yet  become  impersonal. 
It  is  probably  much  like  the  German  “  ihn  ”  in  “  es  schaudert  ihn,"  an  impersonal 
reflexive  not  common  in  English.  Our  form,  in  which  the  ending  appears  as  either 
y  or  w,  is  probably  a  participle.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  all  six  passages  containing 
our  word,  it  follows  the  surgeon’s  palpation  or  manipulation  of  the  wound,  except 
one  (XIV  18).  In  all  cases  it  is  followed  not  only  by  but  this  ^  is  also  always 
followed  by  wf,  “  exceedingly.”  Our  word,  therefore,  evidently  indicates  the 
patient’s  shrinking  or  shuddering  as  a  result  of  the  surgeon’s  palpation.  But  in  the 
case  of  XIV  18  it  may  refer  to  a  shuddering  or  trembling  caused  by  disease  rather  than 
by  a  wound  (see  Case  42). 

qpfo  y$iv- w,  “protrudes  ”  occurs  eleven  times  in  Pap.  Smith,  with  the  following 
variants  : 

P*?*?^  II  10; 
(|p««/0  1113; 
V  17; 
VI 15  ; 

IV  6  ;  V  10  ; 
VI  19; 

(|P«Hq  psd.  ptcp.,  VIII  6  ;  XV  21  ; 
(JP<?<?  psd.  ptcp.,  XII  22. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  145 

It  would  seem  from  these  examples  that  the  root  is  ySw.  Neither  the  verb  ySS, 
nor  the  noun  y§w  is  known  in  the  medical  papyri  elsewhere  ;  but  comparing  the  noun 
1  ySw,  “  spittle  ”  (Pyr.  246  a,  850  a),  with  the  verb  1  yM,  “  to  spit,” 
it  is  probable  that  our  verb  ySw  is  a  cognate  of  ySS,  “  to  spit,”  and  might  mean  “  to 
spit,”  “  to  ooze,”  “  to  discharge,”  “  to  excrete,”  meanings  which  would  fit  very  well 
all  the  above  passages  in  which  ySw  occurs.  Besides  these  etymological  and  semantic 
evidences,  we  have  also  to  consider  the  evidences  offered  by  Gloss  B  (II  10)  which 
contains  the  following  interesting  explanation  of  our  passage  :  “  As  for :  ‘  the 
swelling  ( thb )  which  is  over  it  protrudes,’  it  means  that  the  swelling  which  is  over  this 
split  is  large,  rising  upward.”  From  this  explanation  we  must  conclude  that  ySw-w 
means  “  protrude  ”  or  “  project,”  a  meaning  closely  allied  to  the  root  significance 
of  ySS,  if  we  understand  its  fundamental  meaning  to  be  something  like  “  exude.”  An 
exuding  substance  of  semi-fluid  consistency  might  be  said  to  protrude  or  project. 
The  same  might  doubtless  be  said  of  the  bulging  tissue  which  covers  the  injury.  In 
our  treatise,  however,  ySw  is  used  exclusively  with  thb  as  subject,  and  if  thb  means 
“  swelling,”  as  the  following  commentary  indicates,  then  it  is  evident  that  y$w  must 
mean  “  project,”  “  protrude.” 

This  rare  word  ySw  is  further  evidence  of  the  early  date  of  the  material  in  the 
Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  ;  for  both  verb  and  noun,  unknown  as  we  have  said  to  the  other 
medical  documents  of  Egypt,  occur  elsewhere  only  in  the  oldest  literature.  The 
appearance  of  ySw  certainly  supports  the  conclusion  that  our  surgical  treatise  was 
composed  in  an  age  far  older  than  Hyksos  times.  The  same  is  probably  true  of  the 
grammatical  form  of  the  word.  In  six  of  the  eleven  passages  employing  ySw  (IV  6  ; 
VI 15, 19 ;  VIII 6  ;  XII 22 ;  XV  21)  the  subject  thb  precedes  the  verb,  which  is  in  the 
pseudo-participle  with  the  ending  <?  or  Ij  !j  written  out.  The  remaining  five  passages,  of 
which  ours  is  one,  place  the  verb  first,  but  everywhere  give  it  the  ending  <?  (four  times) 
or  (jlj  (once).  It  is  true  that  the  pseudo-participle  when  preceding  a  nominal  subject 
does  not  customarily  take  any  ending,  and  is  therefore  indistinguishable  from  a  Mm-f 
form  (see  Sethe,  Verburn  II,  §  8,  1) ;  but  the  question  arises,  nevertheless,  whether 
ySww  (and  ySw-y)  in  these  five  passages  where  it  precedes  the  subject,  is  not  a 
pseudo-participle.  If  so,  we  have  in  this  form  an  additional  indication  of  the  great 
age  of  our  document ;  for  the  sentence  with  the  pseudo-participle  preceding  a  nominal 
subject  has  survived  only  in  the  oldest  texts  (see  Erman,  Zeitschrift,  27  (1889),  78-76 
and  Sethe,  op.  cit.). 

|Jx  thb,  “swelling”  occurs  fourteen  times  in  our  treatise:  once  written  with 
the  determinative  x  as  here,  twice  with  o,  five  times  with  /*►,  and  six  times  with  'Q. 
It  is  evidently  some  cognate  form  of  the  well-known  word  thb,  “  to  moisten,” 

1  These  highly  specialized  determinatives  from  the  Pyramid  Texts  are  not  available  in  type. 
The  first  one  is  three  spewing  mouths,  the  second  one  is  a  face  with  mouth  spewing. 

L 

oi.uchicago.edu 

146  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

“  to  -water,”  “  to  irrigate,"  e.g,,  of  the  effect  of  the  Nile  inundation  in  the  great 
Amama  Sun  hymn.  In  the  medical  literature  the  verb  thb  is  used  of  moistening 
the  ingredients  of  a  recipe  for  mixing,  e.g.,  with  oil  (Pap.  Ebers  IS,  17-18),  or  with 
honey  (ibid.,  69,  22 ;  Hearst  12;  I  3),  or  with  honey  as  a  real  vehicle  (Berlin 
Papyrus  8088,  4,  48). 

In  all  fourteen  examples  in  Pap.  Smith,  however,  thb  is  used  as  a  noun  exclusively, 
and  the  verb  employed  with  it  is  either  ySw,  “  exude,”  “  protrude ;  ”  or  it  is  it',  “  be 
drawn  off.”  The  wound  is  in  all  cases  an  injury  to  the  bone,  which  may  or  may  not 
involve  an  injury  to  the  overlying  soft  tissue.  It  is  used  in  the  description  of  the 
following  eleven  kinds  of  injury  : 

Case. 

Injury. 

Remark  about  “  ttfb.” 

Passage. 

4 

split  in  skull 

thb  exudes  or  protrudes  (yfw) 

H  4,  10. 

6 

smash  in  skull 

thb  exudes  or  protrudes  (yito) 

II 13. 

8 

smash  in  skull,  but  skin  over 
smash  unbroken  (Gloss,  IV 1 3) 

tffb  exudes  or  protrudes  (ySw)  “  on  the  out¬ 
side  of  that  smash.” 

IV  6. 

11 

break  in  bridge  of  nose 

thb  exudes  or  protrudes  (ySw) ;  treatment : 
small  plugs  of  linen  soaked  in  ointment 
inserted  into  nostrils,  “  until  his  thb  is 
drawn  off  ”  (or  “  reduced  ”) 

V  10,  12. 

12 

break  in  inaccessible  portion 
of  nose 

thb  exudes  or  protrudes  (ySw) 

V  17. 

16 

perforation  in  maxillary 

thb  exudes  or  protrudes  (y$w),  obscure  de¬ 
tail  added 

VI 16. 

16 

split  in  maxillary 

“  thou  findest  thb  protruding  and  red  on  the 
outside  of  that  split  ”  ;  treatment  “  until 
tfjb  is  drawn  off  ”  (or  “  reduced  ’’) 

VI  18-19.  20-21. 

17 

smash  in  maxillary 

treatment  “  until  thb  is  drawn  off  ”  (or 
“  reduced  ”) 

VII  6. 

21 

split  in  temporal  bone 

t}jb  protrudes  (yfw)  “  on  outside  of  that 
split  ” 

VIII  6. 

38 

split  in  arm 

thb  protrudes  (yfw)  “  on  outside  of  that 
split  ” 

XII  22. 

46 

uncertain  injury  in  the  breast 

“  thou  findest  thb  very  large,  protruding  on 
his  breast, oily,  like  fluid  under  thy  hand” 

XV  21-XVI 1. 

In  addition  to  the  above  data  it  should  be  noted  that  the  thb  is,  in  four  cases  out 
of  the  eleven,  stated  to  be  “  on  it  ”  or  “  over  it,”  namely  the  injury.  In  view  of  the 
treatment  for  “  drawing  off  ”  the  thb,  one  might  conclude  that  thb  is  a  fluid,  like  pus  ; 
but  it  is  conceivable  that  “  draw  off  ”  or  “  draw  out  ”  may  refer  to  the  act  of  reducing 
a  swelling,  as  we  say  “  to  draw  out  the  swelling,”  although  the  same  verb,  it',  is  used 
a  number  of  times  in  Papyrus  Ebers  for  drawing  off  pus.  The  problem  of  the  meaning 
of  thb  is  evidently  to  be  settled  chiefly  on  the  basis  of  the  other  data  exhibited  in  the 
above  table.  Five  of  the  eleven  cases  (4,  5, 11, 12, 15)  simply  refer  to  the  thb  as  “pro¬ 
truding  or  exuding  ”  (ySw),  while  four  more  of  them  (8,  16,  21,  88)  add  the  phrase 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  147 

“  on  the  outside  of  that  smash  ”  (once,  or  “  split,”  thrice).  The  first  of  these  four 
(8)  is  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull,  the  external  tissue  covering 
which  displays  no  injury.  In  this  case  it  is  a  physical  impossibility  that  the  thb 
should  be  a  fluid  exuding  on  the  outside  of  an  external  wound.  We  might  be  led  to 
conclude  that  thb  is  therefore  necessarily  the  bulge  or  swelling  of  the  tissue  covering 
the  fracture ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  conceivable  that  thb  is  here  under  the  covering 
tissue,  but  “  outside  ”  of  the  fracture,  and  therefore  might  be  a  substance  exuding 
or  protruding  from  the  fracture.  Another  of  these  four  cases  (16)  states  that  the  “  thb 
protruding  ...  on  the  outside  of  this  split  ”  is  red.  The  wound  is  a  “  split  in  the 
maxillary,”  and  the  modern  surgeon  may  be  able  to  determine  whether  the  redness 
of  the  thb  in  this  case  is  of  value  in  identifying  it.  Finally  in  Case  46,  that  of  a  breast 
injury  of  uncertain  character,  the  thb  is  said  to  be  “  very  large  (possibly  “  very  plenti¬ 
ful  ”),  protruding  (or  “  exuding,”  ySw)  on  his  breast,  oily,  like  fluid  under  thy  hand.” 
These  last  hints  come  very  near  giving  us  a  decision  as  between  “  fluid  ”  and  “  swell¬ 
ing  ”  for  the  meaning  of  thb.  The  phrase  “  very  large  ”  may  mean  “  very  plentiful  ” 
in  poetry,  e.  g.,  the  description  of  Syria  in  the  Tale  of  Sinuhe  (B  82),  but  in  a  prosaic 
description  like  Case  46  the  meaning  “  very  large  ”  is  almost  certain.  Accepting 
this  rendering,  we  must  conclude  that  the  thb  is  a  swelling,  the  bulge  of  the  tissue  over 
an  injured  bone.  In  Case  46  the  content  of  this  swelling  is  largely  fluid,  and  under 
the  surgeon’s  hand  is  yielding  and  “oily,  like  fluid.”  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by 
Gloss  B  in  II  10,  which  uses  Sfwt,  a  common  word  for  “  swelling  ”  in  the  medical 
papyri,  as  the  explanation  of  thb.  In  Ebers  (110,  8-4)  we  find  "  any 

swelling  of  a  wound,”  precisely  the  kind  of  swelling  discussed  in  our  gloss  (II  10), 
and  the  word  for  swelling  is  Sfwt.  It  would  seem  that  thb  was  an  ancient  word  for 
“  swelling,”  which,  like  our  “  gathering,”  arose  from  the  thought  of  the  collected 
fluid  within  the  swelling,  and  at  the  time  when  our  treatise  was  written  thb  was 
already  sufficiently  uncommon  or  unfamiliar  to  need  explanation  by  the  more  familiar 
word  Sfwt,  the  only  word  employed  in  Papyrus  Ebers  and  the  other  Egyptian  medical 
documents. 

Srdy-fy,  “  both  his  nostrils.”  The  reading  Srt,  “  nostril  ”  and  not  fnd, 
“  nose,”  is  obvious  from  the  occurrence  of  the  word  in  the  dual,  which  would  be  sense¬ 
less  with  the  word  “  nose.”  Moreover,  when  the  discharge  of  blood  is  from  one 
nostril  only,  we  find  the  word  regularly  written  Srt.  See  VI  5  ;  VII  8  ;  VII  4  ; 
VIII  7  ;  VIII  8.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  in  such  cases  we  are  to  read  the  unusual 
word  mSd-t,  “nostril”  (which  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  11,  commentary 

on  Gloss  A),  a  word  so  unfamiliar  that  when  used  in  Case  11,  we  find  Gloss  B  appended 
as  a  necessary  explanation  of  the  term  (V  15).  The  anatomical  meaning  of  Srt, 
which  includes  more  than  the  mere  orifice  of  the  nares,  will  be  found  explained  in 
the  introduction  of  Case  18.  See  also  the  commentary  on  VI  8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

148 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

44^  mMrwy-fy,  “  both  his  ears.”  In  the  case  of  this  dual  noun  we  find  the 
same  question  arising  as  in  the  preceding  phrase,  “  both  his  nostrils.”  The  word  is 
nowhere  written  phonetically  and  we  are  at  first  uncertain  whether  to  read  rnh-wy  or 
midr-toy.  It  should  be  remembered  however  that  rnh,  “  ear  ”  occurs  only  in  the  dual ; 
whereas  the  word  is  commonly  employed  in  our  document  in  the  singular  in  the  same 
phrase,  e.g.,  VI  5  ;  VII  5  ;  VII  14 ;  VIII  7 ;  etc.  It  is  clear  then  that  we  must 
read  midr.  It  obviously  designates  the  orifice  of  the  ear  in  this  case.  For  fuller 
discussion  see  Case  28. 

The  commentary  on  the  concluding  symptoms  of  the  examination  will  be  found 
in  the  preceding  cases. 

Diagnosis 

II  5-6 

0 

I  l  I 

\\  \\ 

AWvVA  ® -  A 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  splitting  his  skull ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck. 
An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  used  in  this  diagnosis  have  all  been  discussed  in  the  preceding  com¬ 
mentary,  except  the  physician’s  final  conclusion,  “  An  ailment  with  which  I  will 
contend,”  which  we  call  verdict  2.  It  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  introduction 
(pp.  46-48) ;  but  the  following  facts  about  it  should  also  be  noted  here.  It  indicates 
a  case  too  critical  for  prediction  of  the  outcome.  It  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  medical 
papyri  except  Smith  and  Ebers,  and  in  Ebers  it  occurs  only  twice  (105,  12  and  105, 
19-20).  Some  light  on  the  meaning  of  ^  “contend  ”  may  be  gained  from 
the  following  passage  in  Ebers  :  ° ,  S  “  You  should  con- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  149 

tend  with  him  with  femur-prescriptions  ”  (Ebers  41,  15-16).  This  verdict  might 
suggest  demoniacal  disease,  with  which  the  physician  is  obliged  to  “  contend.”  This 
interpretation  is,  however,  obviously  incorrect.  In  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  it  is 
repeatedly  the  verdict  in  cases  of  wounds  and  injuries  which  have  no  possible  connec¬ 
tion  with  demoniacal  causes.  Such  is  our  Case  4,  a  deep  and  dangerous  cut  penetrating 
through  the  calvaria.  Gloss  C  is  quite  specific  in  its  statement  of  the  condition  of  the 
case  denoted  by  this  verdict ;  it  says  :  “  (until)  thou  knowest  whether  he  will  die 
or  he  will  live  ;  for  he  has  ‘  an  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend  ’  ”  (II 11).  Verdict  2 
occurs  in  eight  cases  in  Pap.  Smith,  as  follows  : 

Case  4.  Gaping  wound,  penetrating  to  the  bone,  splitting  skull. 

„  7.  Gaping  wound,  penetrating  to  the  bone,  perforating  sutures  of  skull. 

„  21.  Split  in  temporal  bone. 

„  28.  Gaping  wound  in  throat. 

„  29.  Gaping  wound  in  cervical  vertebra. 

„  87.  Break  in  the  arm,  with  wound  over  it. 

„  45.  Bulging  tumors  on  breast. 

„  47.  (XVII 11)  Gaping  wound  in  the  shoulder. 

Of  these  eight  cases  the  surgeon  expects  a  favorable  outcome  in  only  one  (Case  28), 
although  another  may  show  a  fortunate  turn  (Case  47,  fifth  examination,  XVII 18-14). 
All  the  remaining  six  cases  are  distinctly  doubtful,  and  are  accompanied  by  clauses 
indicating  what  the  surgeon  is  to  do  until  the  critical  issue  between  life  and  death  is 
determined. 

Treatment 
II  6-8 

oi.uchicago.edu 

150  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

Translation 

Now  when  thou  findest  that  the  skull  of  that  man  is  split,  thou  shouldst  not  bind 
him,  (but)  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by.  His 
treatment  is  sitting.  Make  for  him  two  supports  of  brick,  until  thou  knowest  he  has 
reached  a  decisive  point.  Thou  shouldst  apply  grease  to  his  head,  (and)  soften  his 
neck  therewith  and  both  his  shoulders.  Thou  shouldst  do  likewise  for  every  man  whom 
thou  findest  having  a  split  skull. 

Commentary 

yr  dr.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  surgeon’s  examination  and  diagnosis 
have  already  declared  the  presence  of  the  “  split  ”  (pSn),  it  is  clear  that  this  clause 
refers  back  to  the  previous  establishment  of  this  fact.  Yr  dr  must  therefore  mean 
“  now  as  soon  as,”  or  “  now  when,”  introducing  the  observation  already  made. 
Compare  Case  8  (TV  10)  and  Case  20  (VIII  4).  It  is  decidedly  an  archaic  use  of  the 
particle  dr. 

All  terms  following  yr  dr  down  to  yh-f,  “  his  injury  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in 
the  commentary  on  the  preceding  cases. 

°  hms-t,  “  sitting.”  This  word  is  to  be  understood  as  comprising  the  treat¬ 
ment.  It  does  not  mean  that  while  being  treated  the  patient  is  to  occupy  a  sitting 
posture  ;  it  means  that  the  treatment  itself  consists  in  the  quiet  and  repose  of  sitting, 
at  the  same  time  tacitly  showing  that  the  condition  of  the  patient  is  regarded  by  the 
surgeon  as  precluding  a  lying  posture.  The  importance  of  the  sitting  position  is 
further  indicated  by  the  special  mechanical  contrivance  prescribed  for  enabling  the 
patient  to  maintain  it.1  The  same  is  true  in  Case  7,  in  which  “  sitting  ”  is  also  pre¬ 
scribed.  This  treatment  is  found  in  seven  cases  in  our  treatise,  all  of  them  injuries  of 
the  head  :  4,  7,  8, 16, 17,  20,  and  82.  In  four  of  these  (4, 7,  8,  and  20)  little  or  nothing 
in  addition  to  “  sitting  ”  is  prescribed  ;  in  the  remaining  three  the  familiar  “  fresh 
meat  ”  or  “  grease,  honey,  and  lint  ”  appear.  The  significant  fact  seems  to  be  that  all 
the  cases  employing  “  sitting  ”  as  treatment  are  injuries  of  the  head. 

mk'-ty,  “  two  supports.”  This  word  is  clearly  rnk-t,  “  place, 

resting  place,  proper  place,”  etc.,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  word  is  written 
g  mhty  in  Case  7  (III  15).  It  is  more  commonly  written  with  the  determina- 

1  Gardiner  has  suggested  to  me  in  conversation  that  “  sit  ”  may  be  used  here  in  the  sense  of 
“  defer  ”  or  similar  like  Jmw  in  Sinuhe  B  69.  The  suggestion  is  interesting,  but  would  raise  the 
difficulty  of  explaining  the  purpose  of  the  supports  which  clearly  indicate  literal  sitting. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  151 

tive  of  the  book  roll,  but  occurs  twice  elsewhere  with  n  :  Book  of  the  Dead  180, 25  ; 
and  Stela  of  the  Banishment,  1.  21.  The  Pyramids  write  it  but  it  occurs  in 

the  Solar  Litany  and  the  Book  of  the  Gates  written  °r  <=  U  J*,  •  Outside 

of  the  medical  papyri  the  word  means  especially  the  proper  place,  or  resting  place  for 
a  thing,  particularly  for  parts  of  the  body,  e.  g.,  Pyr.  286  d,  896 d ;  especially  the  heart, 
e.  g.,  Stela  of  the  Banishment,  1. 21 ;  Lepsius,  Denkmaeler,  Text  I,  p.  8 ;  Culte  d'Atonou, 
pp.  89,  68  ;  and  quite  commonly.  The  gods  and  the  dead  are  in  their  mk'-t  (Book  of 
the  Gates,  6th  hour,  below ;  also  8th  hour ;  sometimes  with  the  determinative  ,/]). 

The  medical  or  surgical  use  of  the  word  is  confined  entirely  to  Papyrus  Smith, 
where  it  is  used  to  designate  a  “  pair  of  supports  ”  (dual),  designed  especially  to 
maintain  in  an  upright  sitting  posture  a  patient  having  a  serious  wound  in  the  skull, 
which  makes  motion  dangerous  and  forbids  lying  down.  Its  use  is  confined  to  two 
cases  of  such  injury  (Case  4  and  7),  in  one  of  which  (Case  7)  the  patient  is  said  to  be 
“  placed  between  two  supports  ( mk-ty )  of  brick  ”  (II  7).  How  these  were  made  is  not 
indicated,  but  the  word  employed  means  sun-dried  brick.  It  may  be  recalled  that 
a  woman  in  child-birth  among  the  common  people  sat  on  two  bricks  (see  Spiegelberg, 
Becueil  de  Trav.,  XXVI,  p.  47);  and  the  bed  in  houses  of  the  poor  might  be  a  mere 
bench  of  adobe.  It  may  be  of  interest  to  note  at  this  point  that  our  Spanish- American 
word  “  adobe  ”  is  the  same  word  here  employed  in  our  medical  text  of  8,500  years  ago 
or  more  (see  Wiesmann,  Zeitschrift,  52  (1914),  p.  180).  The  probability  is  that  the  clay 
was  moulded  to  fit  the  patient’s  figure,  and  that  our  word  °  db-t,  “  adobe,"  is 
used  rather  for  the  whole  mass  than  for  a  structure  made  of  individual  bricks. 

The  entire  treatment  of  the  patient  consists  in  his  resting  quietly,  sustained  by  the 
two  supports  until  the  crisis  is  past.  Thereupon  the  physician  may  attempt  alleviation 
by  softening  applications  on  the  head,  neck  and  shoulders.  The  frequent  conclusion 
of  the  treatment  “  until  he  recovers  ”  is  here  conspicuously  lacking.  In  its  place 
appears  an  injunction  to  treat  all  patients  with  a  split  skull  in  the  same  way. 

The  interesting  grammar  of  the  first  and  last  sentences  of  the  treatment  is  quite 
in  order.  In  both  cases  pSn  is  a  passive,  presumably  a  participial  form  : 

“  thou  findest  that  man,  his  skull  being  split ;  ”  and 
“  every  man  whom  thou  findest,  his  skull  being  split.” 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  in  the  first  case  pSn  is  attached  to  the  noun  (“  that 
man  ”),  while  in  the  second  case  the  relative  form  gmm-k  functions  as  the  substantive 
to  which  pSn  is  attached. 

The  above  interesting  case  contains  a  series  of  new  and  important  terms, 
difficult  to  understand.  They  were  not  clear  without  explanation,  even  to  the 
ancient  Egyptian  reader;  hence  the  commentator  has  added  three  glosses 
explaining :  A,  “  Splitting  his  skull ;  ”  B,  “  The  swelling  which  is  over  it  pro¬ 
trudes  ;  ”  and  C,  “  (Until)  thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

152 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

Gloss  A 
II  8-9 

x 

Explaining  :  Splitting  his  skull 

I  MMMA  I 

I  mmm  ' 

A^O 
O  9 

~®~  O  fXUUJ\ 

□  *?l  I  I  MWM 

-ju.  ® 

d>  /WAVA  I  XT 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Splitting  his  skull,”  it  means  separating  shell  from  shell  of  his  skull, 
while  fragments  remain  sticking  in  the  flesh  of  his  head,  and  do  not  come  away. 

Commentary 

It  is  important  to  determine  at  once  the  literal  meaning  of  oT'sslw 

p'k-t  n-t  dnn-t-f,  “  shell  of  his  skull.”  P’k-t  originally  means  a  “  sherd.”  We  find 
it  a  number  of  times  in  Pap.  Ebers  as  — £  “Sherd  (p’ky-t)  of 

a  new  pot  ”  (Ebers  61,  18  ;  78,  17  ;  94,  12) ;  similarly  Hearst  XI  17  ;  XIII  2  ; 
Pap.  Westcar  6,  10.  As  an  anatomical  term  it  is  applied  to  the  shell  of  a  turtle 
a  number  of  times  in  Pap.  Ebers  (e.  g.,  67,  5-6 ;  86,  12-18,  etc.),  which  even 
writes  the  turtle  quite  clearly  in  the  determinative  (e.g.,  71, 15).  As  a  term  of  the 
human  anatomy  p'k-t  is  found  only  in  Pap.  Smith,  where  it  occurs  in  four  cases 
(4,  7,  8,  and  9),  all  injuries  of  the  skull.  In  all  these  cases  it  designates  the  squamae, 
the  shell-like  segments  of  the  skull.  In  our  Case  4,  the  region  of  the  skull  is  not 
defined ;  the  same  is  true  of  Cases  7  and  8.  In  Case  9,  however,  the  region  is  the 
frontal  bone,  which  is  fractured.  The  case  is  called  “  a  wound  in  his  forehead,” 
"  smashing  the  shell  (p>'k-t)  of  his  skull”  (IV  19).  This 
passage  shows  us  that  p'k-t  may  designate  the  os  frontale,  and  if  so  is  likely  to  have 
been  limited  by  the  sutures.  Not  only  is  this  conclusion  the  correct  one,  but  we  even 
find  the  word  probably  meaning  sutures  in  Case  7,  where  Gloss  A  defines  the 
°  ®  tp'-w  nw  dnn-t-f,  as  “  that  which  is  between  shell  and  shell  of  [his  skull].” 

See  the  discussion  of  Case  7,  Gloss  A.  The  question  might  arise  whether  in  our  phrase, 
“  separating  shell  from  shell  of  his  skull,”  the  ancient  surgeon  might  not  be  referring  to 
the  separation  of  the  outer  table  from  the  inner  table  of  the  same  segment  of  the  skull, 
as  for  example  of  the  os  frontale.  There  seems  to  be  no  way  to  decide  this  question 
from  the  statements  contained  in  our  Case  4.  In  Case  7,  however,  “  that  which  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  153 

between  shell  and  shell  of  his  skull  ”  is  defined  as  dhr,  “  hide  ”  or  “  skin,” 

obviously  meaning  the  cartilaginous  suture,  and  not  designating  the  spongy  bone 
between  the  outer  and  inner  tables  of  the  skull. 

oVi  ®  (  sp-w,  “  fragments.”  This  meaning  is  not  found  in  the  dictionaries  but  is 
quite  evident  from  the  inscriptions  outside  of  the  surgical  use  of  the  word.  In  the 
Annals  of  Thutmose  III  we  find  "  Fragments  (sp-w)  of  wood 

(and)  much  firewood  ”  (Sethe,  Urk.,  IY,  670,  1.  106).  Again  in  the  Turin  Papyri  : 

“fragments  (sp-w)  of  firewood  ”  ed.  Pleyte  and  Rossi,  VI,  4.  With 
reference  to  food,  “  my  fragments  ”  would  make  even  better  sense  than  “  my 

remainder”  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (ed.  Budge,  189,  from  Nu  19,  6).  The  same  is 
true  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (Pyr.  1674  d  ;  551  e;  cf.  Book  of  the  Dead,  Chap.  52,  5). 
The  surgical  meaning  “  fragments  ”  is  quite  obvious  in  our  passage  in  Gloss  A,  but 
is  even  clearer  in  Case  5,  where  it  is  stated  that  his  skull  is  in  “  numerous  fragments 
(sp-w)  which  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull  ”  (II 17). 

The  following  discussion  will  show  that  the  “  fragments  ”  referred  to  in  our  gloss 
have  been  detached  by  the  violence  of  the  blow  which  inflicted  the  wound,  and  can 
be  nothing  else  but  bone. 

mn  m,  “  stick  fast  in,”  “  be  fixed  in  "  is  a  phrase  which  the  surgeon  draws 
from  the  common  use  of  it  to  describe  a  foreign  or  intrusive  body  sticking  in  flesh.  One 
recalls  at  once  the  familiar  words  in  the  Tale  of  Sinuhe :  (&  ^  I J 

“  My  arrow  stuck  fast  in  his  neck  ”  (Sinuhe,  B  138-189).  Similarly  in  the  autobio¬ 
graphy  of  Ahmose  of  El  Kab  :  S  (“  His  majesty 

discharged)  his  first  arrow,  which  stuck  fast  in  the  body  of  that  foe  ”  (Sethe,  Urk.,  IV, 
8,  1.  33).  The  same  is  said  of  a  spear  in  the  hippo’s  legs  (Naville,  Mythe  d'Horus, 
PI.  VI)  or  of  a  battle  axe  in  the  head  of  the  foe  (Abu  Simbel,  Ptah  Stela,  1.  22).  The 
Berlin  Worterbnch  has  nineteen  examples  of  weapons  “  sticking  fast  in  ”  (mn  m) : 
the  crown,  the  head,  the  ribs,  the  dr-w,  the  loins  (mn-t),  buttocks,  legs  (yni-t),  belly, 
neck,  nose,  and  thnw.  Besides  our  example  in  Gloss  A,  Pap.  Smith  has  one  more 
example  of  a  foreign  substance  or  body  which  remains  sticking  fast  in  a  wound. 
Case  28  mentions  an  instance  of  surgical  stitching  which  “  remains  sticking  in  (mn  m) 
the  two  lips  of  his  wound  ”  (VIII  20-21).  Parallel  with  this  use  of  mn  m  describing 
a  foreign  substance  “  sticking  in  ”  tissue  where  it  does  not  belong  is  its  use  elsewhere 
to  indicate  the  natural  articulation  and  attachment  of  parts  belonging  to  each  other 
anatomically  and  functioning  together.  Of  this  use  of  the  words  mn  m  there  are  three 
very  interesting  cases  in  Pap.  Smith. 

(1)  “  Ligaments  at  the  end  of  his  ramus, 
which  are  attached  to  (mn  m)  his  temporal  bone  ”  (III  17). 

(2)  “The  heads  of  them  (clavicles)  are 
attached  to  (mn  m)  the  upper  bone  of  his  sternum  ”  (XI  28). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

154 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  4 

(8)  ?!  •  •  •  •  ?il?n  ,?  “the  tips....  of  the  ribs 

of  his  sternum,  which  were  attached  (mn  m)  to  his  sternum  ”  (XV  4). 

Case  28  (VIII  18-19)  is  difficult  to  place  in  the  above  classification. 

The  fragments  which  have  been  broken  away  by  the  blow  and  remain  “  sticking 
fast  ”  are  said  to  be  “  in  the  flesh  of  his  head.”  This  last  term  means  the  tissue 

exterior  to  the  calvaria  as  is  shown  by  Case  8,  a  fracture  of  the  skull  inflicted  without 
injury  to  the  external  tissue  of  the  head,  which  is  called  “  the  flesh  of  his  head  ” 
(IV  18)  in  the  commentary  explaining  “  the  skin  of  his  head.” 

71  br'n  ft',"  (and)  do  not  come  away,”  literally  “  do  not  fall  to  the 
earth.”  The  same  idiom  is  found  also  in  Pap.  Smith  of  spittle  hanging  at  the  bps  of 
an  unconscious  man  (III  4),  where  it  might  possibly  be  taken  literally,  but  more  likely 
means  simply  “  does  not  come  away.”  In  Pap.  Ebers  a  finger  nail  that  is  coming 
off  is  said  to  be  to  the  earth  ”  (Ebers  78,  18).  Similarly  in 

the  Shipwreck  (1.  58)  the  hero  says  of  the  superfluous  food  which  he  found  on  the 
island:  ^ '  I  threw  (some)  away”  (literally  “to  the  ground,”  r  f’). 
This  use  of  *=>7^  r  "  t°  the  earth  ”  meaning  “  away,”  “  off,”  may  be  connected  with 
the  use  of  the  same  phrase  as  meaning  “  completely.”  See  Ebers  91, 12  ;  Mutter  und 
Kind,  1,8;  5,  7  (see  also  ibid.  8,  4,  where  the  variant  r  hrw  is  instructive).  In  our 
papyrus  this  use  of  r  t'  is  found  three  times  (Case  4  as  above,  Case  7,  III  4 ;  and  Case  47, 
XVII 14).  This  last  example  is  significant  for  the  verb  is  p  ^  My,  “  scatter,  disappear  ” 
or  the  like,  which  entirely  precludes  any  local  meaning  in  r  t\  and  shows  conclusively 
that  it  means  “  entirely.”  In  Case  41  we  find  the  variant  hr  <>  instead  of  r  t\ 

Gloss  B 
II 10 

Explaining  :  The  swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes 

*  o\\>  written  very  small,  is  a  later  correction  inserted  above  O. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  swelling  (thh)  which  is  over  it  protrudes,”  it  means  that  the 
swelling  (Sfio-t)  which  is  over  this  split  is  large,  rising  upward. 

Commentary 

This  gloss  has  been  fully  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  ySww  and  thh  in  the 
examination  above.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  explanation  employs  a  different 
word  for  “  swelling  ”  (Sfwt)  from  that  (thb)  found  in  the  quotation  to  be  explained. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  4  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  155 

Gloss  C 
II 10-11 

Explaining :  (Until)  thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point 

Translation 

As  for :  “  (Until)  thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point,”  it  means 
(until)  thou  knowest  whether  he  will  die  or  he  will  live  ;  for  he  is  (a  case  of)  “  an  ail¬ 
ment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Commentary 

In  our  translation  the  clause  “  until  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point  ”  is  far  clearer 
than  in  the  Egyptian,  for  we  have  translated  it  on  the  basis  of  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentator’s  explanation.  Literally  rendered  the  clause  runs  :  “  until  thou  knowest 
that  he  has  reached  something,”  to  which  our  rendering  above  adds  the  idea  “  decisive.” 
Gloss  C  shows  that  all  cases  receiving  the  comment,  which  it  explains,  are  doubtful 
cases.  It  is  employed  in  the  following  six  cases  : 

Case  4.  Gaping  wound  in  his  head  . . .  splitting  his  skull. 

„  6.  Gaping  wound  in  his  head  .  .  .  smashing  his  skull. 

„  7.  Gaping  wound  in  his  head  .  .  .  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull. 

„  8.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull,  without  injury  to  external 

tissue. 

„  21.  Split  in  his  temporal  bone. 

„  37.  Break  in  the  arm,  with  external  wound. 

It  is  possible  that  the  climate  of  Egypt  with  its  frequent  cases  of  blood  poisoning 
or  infection,  whenever  an  external  wound  is  present,  may  account  for  the  doubtful 
character  of  a  case  of  a  broken  arm  (Case  37). 

—  is  undoubtedly  the  correct  reading.  The  ^  is  joined  in  ligature  with 

in  a  cursive  form,  but  it  is  quite  unmistakable  (see  Yol.  II,  PI.  II,  1.  11).  This 
reading  makes  a  good  form ;  see  Gardiner,  Grammar,  §  407. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

156  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

CASE  FIVE 
II 11-17 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  WITH  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED 
FRACTURE  OF  THE  SKULL 

Just  as  Case  4  involved  a  more  serious  wound  than  the  preceding  cases,  so  Case  5 
discusses  an  injury  more  dangerous  than  Case  4.  The  fracture  is  such  that  fragments 
of  bone  have  been  driven  deep  into  the  interior  of  the  skull.  The  surgeon  is  unable 
to  suggest  any  treatment,  and  evidently  anticipates  a  fatal  issue  of  the  case. 

Title 
II  11 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  smashing  his  skull. 

Commentary 

All  the  terms  in  this  title  have  been  discussed  in  the  preceding  commentary 
on  Cases  1  to  4,  except  the  important  word  “  smashing  ”  which  remains  to  be  dis¬ 
cussed  here. 

M,  "  smashing.”  This  common  word  appears  frequently  in  Egyptian  as  the 
verb  for  “  to  smash,”  “  break.”  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  its  word  sign,  a  pottery  jar 
with  a  hole  smashed  in  it  (Pyr.  491  a),  and  again  a  pair  of  crossed  sticks  either  breaking 
each  other  or  the  two  parts  of  a  broken  stick,  suggest  its  meaning  very  graphically. 
The  crossed  sticks  long  survived  as  the  graphic  determinative  of  the  word,  as  regularly 
in  our  document.  It  is  used  of  smashing  or  breaking  the  most  varied  objects,  a  board, 
a  pen-case,  sealed  bolts,  a  clay  seal,  or  of  breaching  a  city  wall.  Important  for  our 
treatise  are  especially  the  determinative  of  the  broken  pot  (ex>),  and  the  use  of  the 
word  for  breaking  an  egg-shell  (Pyr.  1969  c;  Amama  Sun-Hymn,  Davies,  Amama, 
Vol.  VI,  pi.  XXVII).  Outside  of  the  medical  papyri  the  word  appears  for  breaking 
a  head,  e.g.,  “  Thy  head  is  broken  (4d)  with  that  knife” 

(Book  of  Apophis,  Brit.  Mus.  Pap.  10188,  80,  1).  Similarly  it  appears  to  express 
the  breaking  of  bones  in  general  in  the  name  of  a  weapon  called  :  “  Bone- 

breaker  ”  ( Zeitschrijt ,  18  (1880),  94-95,  transliteration  as  emended  for  Berlin 
Wdrterbuch).  A  mortuary  demon  hailing  from  Heracleopolis  also  bore  the  name 
“  Bone-breaker  ”  (Book  of  the  Dead,  ed.  Naville,  125,  9). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cass  5  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  157 

Surgically  the  word  may  designate  either  (1)  a  fracture  of  a  bone,  (2)  a  rupture  of 
a  membrane  or  of  fleshy  tissue,  or  (8)  the  opening  of  cists  and  the  like  by  the  external 
application  of  medicaments  causing  the  swelling  to  break  and  discharge  pus. 

(1)  Fracture  of  the  bone.  The  known  cases  are  all  in  Pap.  Smith.  It  is  used  of 
fracture  of  the  skull  in  all  twenty-three  times,  of  which  twenty-one  are  in  the  four 
following  cases  :  5,  6,  8,  and  9  ;  of  the  nose  (Case  18) ;  of  the  maxilla  (Case  17) ;  of 
the  temporal  bone  (Cases  18  and  22). 

(2)  Rupture  of  a  membrane  or  of  fleshy  tissue.  In  Pap.  Smith,  Case  6,  there  is  an 
interesting  use  of  the  word  to  indicate  a  rupture  of  the  meninges  of  the  brain  (II 24-25). 
Again  it  is  used  of  the  rupture  of  fleshy  tissue  overlying  a  fracture  of  the  bone  :  in 
the  mandible  (Case  24) ;  in  the  clavicle  (Case  84) ;  in  the  arm  (Case  87) ;  and  in  the 
ribs  attached  to  the  sternum  (Case  44). 

(8)  Opening  of  cists  and  the  like  by  external  applications.  In  Pap.  Ebers  such 
applications  are  called  ^  °  “  medicines  for  rupturing  (id)  swell¬ 

ings  (and  drawing  out  the  pus)  ”  (Ebers  104,  10-11  ;  similarly  105,  5  ;  cf.  also  Ebers 
28,  2  ;  24,  10  ;  80,  8  ;  Hearst  II  14  ;  II  10  ;  Pap.  Berlin  8088,  5,  2  ;  5,  6  ;  5,  7  ; 
5,  8  ;  5,  9  ;  12,  10  ;  18,  7  ;  18,  11-14,  1  ;  18,  8). 

The  only  gloss  appended  to  our  case  explains  the  simple  term  id  dnn-t-f,  “  smashing 
his  skull,”  as  meaning  a  fracture  so  extensive  and  serious  that  broken  pieces  of  bone 
have  gotten  into  the  break  and  have  penetrated  deep  into  the  interior  of  the  skull 
(Gloss  A,  II 16-17).  Our  ancient  commentator  quotes  some  old  authority  as  affirming 
that  a  id  of  the  skull  means  that  it  is  broken  into  many  fragments  (II  17).  This 
definition  of  a  id  of  the  skull  is  useful  in  aiding  us  to  distinguish  between  a  “  split  ” 
(pin)  and  a  id.  It  is  quite  evident  that  what  we  would  call  a  fracture  of  the  skull 
might  be  called  by  the  ancient  Egyptian  surgeon  a  “  split ;  ”  while  the  injury  which 
he  calls  a  id,  literally  a  “  fracture,”  is  what  modern  surgery  would  term  a  “  compound 
comminuted  fracture.”  In  other  words  the  Egyptian  surgeon  has  given  the  common 
word  “  smash  ”  a  specialized  and  technical  meaning,  “  compound  comminuted 
fracture.”  It  may  be  noted  as  without  doubt  more  than  an  accident,  that  in  our 
treatise  id  is  not  applied  to  any  injuries  of  the  bones  except  those  of  the  head.  As  we 
shall  see,  when  he  wished  to  indicate  a  simple  “  break  ”  or  “  fracture  ”  elsewhere,  as 
of  the  arm,  he  uses  a  different  word,  viz.,  ®  hib,  “  fracture.”  (See  Cases  11,  12,  24, 
85,  86,  37,  42,  and  44).  But  as  id  could  be  used  as  a  verb  meaning  “  to  produce  com¬ 
pound  comminuted  fracture,”  and  we  have  no  such  single  verb  in  English,  the  transla¬ 
tion  of  id  as  a  verb  would  involve  an  interpretation  of  the  term  rather  than  a  transla¬ 
tion.  Under  these  circumstances  the  best  rendering  for  the  verb  is  evidently  the 
original  meaning  “  to  smash,”  which  gives  us  also  the  noun  “  smash,”  employed  above 
for  “  compound  comminuted  fracture.”  The  appropriation  of  this  common  word  as 
a  technical  term  in  surgery  did  not  preclude  its  older  loose  or  popular  application.  We 

oi.uchicago.edu 

158  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  5 

find  the  surgeon  in  one  case  calling  a  “  perforation  ”  or  “  puncture  ”  (thm)  of  the 
skull  a  id,  or  “  smash  ”  (Case  8,  Gloss  A,  I  24).  Grammatically  considered  id  is 
probably  a  participle  in  our  title,  parallel  with  fin,  “  splitting  ”  (in  the  title  of  Case  4), 
and  can  then  only  be  interpreted  “  producing  compound  comminuted  fracture.” 

12 

Examination 
II 12-14 

®  i 

13 

^XWIqW 

©  rm  (h\ 

I  1  I 

* — ^ 

I  I 

r-  -  —  ^ — »-  | 

^  W  A 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  smashing  his  skull ;  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find 
that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  deep  (and)  sunken  under  thy  fingers,  while  the 
swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes,  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  (and) 
both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  look  at 
his  two  Bhoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

All  the  terms  employed  above  have  been  already  discussed  in  the  preceding  com¬ 
mentary  except  the  following  two  : 

¥h  "  deep,”  an  abbreviated  writing  as  if  the  scribe  was  commonly  employing 
the  word.  This  is,  however,  the  sole  occurrence  of  it  in  our  document.  A  more 
accurate  transliteration  into  hieroglyphic  will  be  found  in  PI.  II  A,  1. 18  (Vol.  II). 

=  hrf,  "  sunken  ”  occurs  only  in  this  case  and  in  Case  82,  where  it  is  explained 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  5  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  159 

by  comparison  with  the  sinking  of  a  man’s  foot  into  plowed  ground  (XI  8),  a  graphic 
and  clear  indication  of  its  meaning.  It  is  used  twice  also  in  a  medical  sense  in  Pap. 
Ebers  :  once  of  the  sinking  of  the  heart  from  its  proper  position  (Ebers  101,  14-15, 
emend  dhr  to  <=J[^  dh,  “  sink  ”) ;  and  again  of  a  swelling  which  sinks  under  the 
fingers  (Ebers  110,  5). 

Diagnosis 
II  14-15 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  smashing  his  skull,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in 
his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

In  this  diagnosis,  which  contains  only  repetitions  of  the  examination,  the  most 
important  part  is  the  conclusion,  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated,”  which  is  new.  We 
call  it  verdict  8,  and  a  discussion  of  its  significance  in  this  treatise  will  be  found  in 
the  introduction  (pp.  46-48).  This  remarkable  verdict  is  not  found  in  any  of  the 
other  medical  documents  of  Egypt,  although  it  occurs  no  less  than  fourteen  times  in 
Papyrus  Smith.  One  of  these  cases  (17)  has  received  this  verdict  by  an  evident  error 
of  the  scribe,  as  the  commentary  on  Case  17  shows.  We  have  left,  therefore,  thirteen 
instances  to  which  verdict  8  is  correctly  applied.  Of  these  thirteen,  ten  contain 
no  therapeutic  suggestions  whatever ;  the  remaining  three  commend  certain  precau¬ 
tionary  and  alleviatory  measures  not  intended  to  cure.  Hence  the  outcome  is  referred 
to  in  only  two  cases  (6  and  8  a),  in  both  of  which  it  is  indicated  as  entirely  uncertain, 
by  the  use  of  the  above  discussed  clause,  “  until  thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive 
point  ”  (see  commentary  on  Case  4,  Gloss  C) — a  clause  which  indicates  that  either 
life  or  death  may  follow.  In  these  two  cases  the  possibility  that  the  patient  may  live 
is  suggested  ;  in  all  the  other  (eleven)  cases  containing  this  verdict  there  is  no  sugges¬ 
tion  that  the  patient  can  survive.  It  may  be  said,  therefore,  that,  with  rare  exceptions 
verdict  8  indicates  a  hopeless  case. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

160  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  5 

The  cases  containing  verdict  8  are  the  following : 

Case  5.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull. 

„  6.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  with  rupture  of  meningeal 

membranes. 

„  7.  Perforation  of  sutures  of  the  skull. 

„  8a.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  skull  without  visible  external 

injury. 

„  8b.  Same  with  rupture  of  meningeal  membranes. 

„  18.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  bones  of  the  nasal  region. 

„  17.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  maxilla  (verdict  8  scribal  error). 

„  20.  Perforation  of  the  temporal  bone. 

„  22.  Compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  temporal  bone. 

„  24.  Fracture  of  the  mandible. 

„  81.  Dislocation  of  cervical  vertebra. 

„  38.  Crushing  of  cervical  vertebra. 

„  87.  Fracture  of  the  arm  with  overlying  wound. 

„  44.  Fracture  of  the  “  ribs  of  the  sternum.” 

Regarding  these  cases  Dr.Luckhardt  remarks :  “  Such  cases  were  certainly  hopeless 
in  those  days,  and  most  of  them  would  be  nearly  so  now.”  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the 
surgeon  discusses  nine  of  these  thirteen  cases  without  recommending  any  treatment, 
and  that  in  four  instances  (Cases  5,  6,  8a,  and  20)  conditions  seem  to  him  to  permit 
only  slight  alleviatory  measures,  we  can  conclude  that  the  inclusion  of  such  a  large 
number  of  hopeless  cases  (about  one  fourth  of  the  material  in  the  treatise  as  preserved 
to  us)  is  due  solely  to  scientific  interest  of  the  surgeon  in  the  observed  facts — an 
interest  which  would  not  permit  him  to  exclude  his  observations,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  most  of  these  cases  were  incurable  and  hopeless.  Indeed  at  the  time  of  the  succes¬ 
sive  examinations  of  these  cases  it  must  often  have  been  evident  to  the  surgeon  at 
once  that  he  could  do  nothing  for  the  sufferer  ;  yet  he  nevertheless  continued  making 
and  recording  his  observations  in  the  same  form  as  for  the  more  hopeful  cases  which 
he  could  treat.  There  is  here  an  interest  in  truth  and  in  science  for  its  own  sake, 
quite  unprecedented  and  not  observable  elsewhere  in  any  of  the  ancient  documents 
of  Egypt  whatever  the  character  of  their  content. 

Grammatically  considered  the  words  offer  some  uncertainty.  ny  is 

without  doubt  the  form  (f~ ;  discussed  and  first  noticed  by  Gardiner  ( Proc .  Soc.  Bib. 
Arch.,  40  (1918),  pp.  5-7).  He  concludes  that  it  may  “  best  be  translated  ‘  through 
which  ’  in  a  relative  clause,”  and  thinks  that  the  word  “  will  in  itself  mean  something 
like  ‘  thereby  ’  or,  if  the  expression  be  allowed,  ‘  therethrough.’  ”  These  observations, 
based  on  only  four  Old  Kingdom  cases,  are  undoubtedly  on  the  right  track.  There  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  5  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  161 

an  additional  example  of  this  curious  ny  in  the  Misanthrope  (1. 104),  where  we  find 
unfaithful  friends  described  as  <lfr'ends  of  to-day,  not 

to  be  loved.”  As  in  the  Arabic  the  passive  of  even  an  intransitive  verb  may  be  used 
to  indicate  that  the  action  denoted  by  the  verb  does  not  take  place,  so  here,  if  we 
understand  mr  as  a  passive  participle,  we  may  gain  a  relative  clause  literally 
meaning  “  for  whom  (or  “  through  whom  ”)  the  act  of  loving  does  not  occur.” 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  our  n  yrw  ny  is  parallel  with  the  n  mr(w)  ny  of  the 
Misanthrope.  The  use  of  ny  in  our  surgical  treatise  would  indicate  that  we  must 
add  to  the  meaning  ‘‘through  which,”  suggested  by  Gardiner,  also  the  meaning  “for 
which  ”  or  “  for  whom.”  As  Gardiner  has  noticed,  in  all  four  of  his  examples  ny  is 
preceded  by  a  nominal  form  of  the  verb.  We  may  therefore  look  for  such  a  form  here, 
and  possibly  regard  yrw  as  a  passive  participle.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  all  four  of  his 
examples  were  from  Old  Kingdom  texts,  Gardiner  regarded  the  form  ny  as  “  probably 
moribund  even  at  the  time  of  the  Old  Kingdom.”  This  observation  is  undoubtedly 
correct,  and  we  have  in  our  verdict  mr  n  yrw  ny  a  current  expression  surviving  from 
a  very  remote  stage  of  Egyptian  medical  practice. 

With  regard  to  the  increasing  seriousness  of  the  cases  successively  taken  up  by 
our  treatise,  the  following  glimpse  of  the  successive  verdicts  will  indicate  it  clearly  : 

Cases  1,  2,  and  3,  verdict  1. 

Case  4,  verdict  2. 

Cases  5  and  6,  verdict  3. 

Treatment 
II  15-16 

Translation 

Thou  shalt  not  bind  him,  (but)  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  the  period 
of  his  injury  passes  by. 

Commentary 

The  case  is  so  serious  that  the  surgeon  can  prescribe  nothing,  and  makes  no  remark 
suggesting  his  conclusions  regarding  the  outcome.  The  gravity  of  the  patient’s  situa¬ 
tion  is  indicated  in  the  following  interesting  gloss  (A),  which  describes  how  the 
fragments  of  the  shattered  skull  have  sunk  into  the  interior  of  the  brain.  The 
quotation  of  an  old  and  authoritative  surgical  treatise  by  title  is  of  importance  in 
the  early  history  of  medicine.  Full  commentary  on  the  curious  idiom,  “  moor  him 
etc.,”  will  be  found  in  the  discussion  of  the  treatment  in  Case  3. 

M 

oi.uchicago.edu 

162 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  5 

Gloss  A 
II 16-17 

Explaining  :  Smashing  his  skull. 

fjr _ >pcS:='^*~a^  aQ 

=3X 

i! 

a  rn 

=3X!W.  <= 

*5  (j  ■ — 

»?^LU 

^x 

pj~j  /VWAV\ 

Cl>  AVAVA 

■»  n 

Q  AWWV%  /WAVA  /)/3  ^ 

AWM  \  a«*m 

□  (?l  I  l<?lli' 

o£D 

Translation 

As  for:  “Smashing  his  skull,”  it  means  a  smash  of  his  skull  (such  that)  bones, 
getting  into  that  smash,  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull.  The  “  Treatise  on  What 
Pertains  to  His  Wounds  ”  states :  “  It  means  a  smash  of  his  skull  into  numerous 
fragments,  which  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull.” 

Commentary 

id,  “  smash.”  See  commentary  on  the  title  of  this  case. 

hnw,  “  inside,  interior,”  occurs  twelve  times  in  our  document,  and  is  always 
written  without  the  later  common  determinative  n.  This  is  another  evidence  of  the 
very  early  origin  of  our  treatise.  Compounded  with  m,  “  in,”  we  also  find  hnw 
twelve  times  more  in  the  recto,  and  in  only  two  of  these  is  it  written  with  n.  In 
these  two  (Case  86,  XII 7  and  Case  86,  XII 18)  there  is  undoubtedly  some  difference  in 
meaning  implied  by  n. 

->w>  perhaps  meaning  “  book,  roll,  treatise,  regulation  ”  or  the  like,  is 
a  rare  word.  In  the  well-known  passage  in  the  Installation  of  the  Vizier  : 

*'  k°>  it  is  a  saying  which  was  in  the  regulation 
of  Memphis  ( =  the  Memphite  ceremonial,  t’w),  as  uttered  by  the  king,  etc.”  (Urk. 
IV,  1089,  1.  12),  Sethe  has  suggested  that  t’w  must  be  some  long-accepted  roll 
containing  the  ancient  ceremonial  installation  as  practiced  at  Memphis  (Sethe, 
Einsetzung,  pp.  14-15).  Similarly  the  statues  in  crypt  8  at  Dendera  are  made 
— 11! Ii°m  **  according  to  the  book  (t'w)  of  the  sacred  glyphs”  (Marietta, 
Dendtirah,  III  80a  ;  Duemichen,  ResvMate,  87 ;  Kalenderinschrifien,  pi.  60,  c).  Here 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  5  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  163 

t'y  n  mdw  ntr  must  be  an  ancient  “  book  of  hieroglyphs  ”  containing  the  forms  of  the 
gods  as  traditionally  established.  Otherwise  the  word  t’w  is  unknown  outside  of  our 
treatise,  in  which  it  occurs  three  times  : 

(1)  As  above  in  Gloss  A. 

(2)  JL — “  The  ‘  Treatise  (t’w)  on  What  Pertains  to 
a  Wound  ’  says  concerning  it  ”  (Case  41,  XIV  10). 

(3)  — I  "  The  ‘  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  the 

Embalmer  ’  (or  “  Bandager  ”)  says  concerning  it  ”  (Case  19,  VII 20-21). 

In  view  of  the  three  passages  in  our  papyrus  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  word 
means  a  book  or  treatise.  In  that  case  we  find  the  author  of  our  papyrus  quoting  from 
two  other  treatises,  which  very  interestingly  suggest  the  existence  of  a  literature  of 
medical  science  now  totally  lost  to  us.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  our  Gloss  A  the 
possessive  /,  “  his,”  at  the  end  of  the  title  (“  his  Wounds  ”)  is  very  likely  to  be  an 
error  of  the  scribe  for  ^  r-f  “  concerning  it,”  as  in  the  other  two  occurrences  of  the 
same  title  just  quoted  above.  “  His  wound  ”  is  such  a  common  group  in  our  text 
that  the  mistake  would  be  a  very  easy  one. 

Q*?!*  yry,  probably  meaning  “  what  pertains  to.”  The  word  is  certainly  to  be  read 
yr,  not  yt.  An  examination  of  all  three  passages  in  which  it  occurs  will  leave  no  doubt 
of  the  correct  reading.  It  is  each  time  followed  by  the  determinative  of  the  book-roll, 
done  with  care  and  fullness,  not  in  an  abbreviated  cursive  form.  In  view  of  the  great 
age  of  our  treatise  we  should  consider  whether  the  book  roll  ^  in  this  group  may  not 
be  an  Old  Kingdom  writing  of  the  word  =«=  md’-t,  “  letter,”  or  “  document,”  giving  us 
possibly  the  title  yry  md’-t,  “  keeper  of  letters,”  or  “  keeper  of  documents.” 
This  title  may  be  written  that  is  without  the  determinative  of  the  man.  See 
treatment  of  the  word  by  Gunn,  Annales  du  Service,  XXV,  pp.  251-262.  The  title 
is  not,  however,  written  with  the  (J,  as  in  our  text.  Moreover  the  acceptance  of  this 
official  title  in  our  ancient  book  title  would  make  nonsense.  It  is  true  that  when  it 
means  “  what  pertains  to,”  our  word  yry  is  customarily  in  the  feminine  yry-t;  but 
masculine  formations  of  this  kind  are  not  unknown.  Compare  !  xjmy-w, 

“  interior,”  literally  “  the  things  (masculine)  that  are  in  ”  (Case  12,  V  18,  and  again 
Case  22,  VIII  11).  It  is  doubtless  a  word  of  literary  origin,  being  much  like  the  de 
and  irepl  of  Latin  and  Greek  essay  titles. 

(j. —  yn  is  several  times  employed  in  our  treatise  to  introduce  the  subject  after  an 
infinitive  as  so  commonly  elsewhere  in  Egyptian  writings,  but  with  modifications  in 
sense,  due  to  the  unusual  surgical  and  physiological  connections,  to  which  we  are 
unaccustomed.  For  example : 

"  without  a  gaping  of  (yn)  one  (lip  of  a  wound)  away  from  the  other  (lip)”  (110). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

164 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

“  It  means  a  stiffening  of  (yn)  the  ligaments  ”  (III  17). 

*f C 

“  It  means  a  smashing  of  (yn)  his  skull  into  many  fragments  ”  (II 17). 

m  i 

A  rending  apart  of  (yn)  two  members  ”  (X  12).  See  also  Ill. 

In  the  last  two  of  these  examples  the  word  introduced  by  yn  is  obviously  the 
so-called  “  logical  ”  object,  whose  place  after  yn  is  doubtless  due  to  the  lack  of  voice 
characterizing  the  Egyptian  infinitive,  as  it  does  likewise  the  Semitic  infinitive.  The 
last  two  examples  would  be  more  intelligible  to  us  if  the  noun  had  followed  the 
infinitive  at  once  as  an  objective  genitive. 

CASE  SIX 
II  17— III  1 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  WITH  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE 
OF  THE  SKULL  AND  RUPTURE  OF  THE  MENINGEAL  MEMBRANES 

Of  the  five  wounds  of  the  head  thus  far  taken  up  by  the  surgeon,  this  one  is  far  the 
most  serious.  It  is  in  content  also  the  most  important  we  have  met,  revealing  the 
fact  that  the  surgeons  of  this  remote  Egyptian  age  were  acquainted  with  the  appear¬ 
ance  and  a  number  of  important  characteristics  of  the  brain,  which  is  mentioned  in 
this  case  for  the  first  time  in  any  ancient  document.  Its  reference  to  the  meningeal 
membranes  is  also  the  earliest  mention  of  this  envelope  of  the  brain.  Unfortunately 
it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  exact  meaning  of  all  the  terms  employed,  although 
the  general  sense  of  each  section  of  the  case  is  in  the  main  intelligible. 

Title 
II  17-18 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  6  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  165 

Commentary 

The  last  clause  contains  important  new  terms  involving  the  internal  anatomy  of  the 
head,  which  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  following  commentary  on  the  examination. 

a® 

Examination 
II 18-22 

© 

AWWt  ® -  A 

a  Inserted  from  the  duplicate  text  (IV  10),  which  shows  that  the  scribe  has  omitted  it  here. 
b  Compare  IV  11. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull,  thou  shouldst 
palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find  that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  [like]  those 

oi.uchicago.edu 

166  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

corrugations  which  form  in  molten  copper,  (and)  something  therein  throbbing  (and) 
fluttering  under  thy  fingers,  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  becomes 
whole — when  it  has  happened  there  is  no  throbbing  (and)  fluttering  under  thy  fingers 
until  the  brain  of  his  (the  patient’s)  skull  is  rent  open — (and)  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

ng’y,  “rending  open,”  is  a  word  of  well-established  meaning,  although 
the  writing  here  employed  is  not  the  usual  one.  The  reading  is  rendered  certain  by 
the  gloss  (II  28)  which  furnishes  the  following  parallelism  : 

Text  of  examination  : 

Text  of  gloss:  „  „  „ 

The  ^  has  gone  over  into  (j(j  as  so  often  when  it  is  final,  for  the  root  of  the  word  is 
undoubtedly  ng *  originally,  and  we  have  here  the  common  word  1  ng\  “  to 

open,  break  open  ”  and  the  like.  It  is  written  in  our  treatise  in  three  different  forms  : 
(1)  ;  (2)  >  (8)  55 x  (same  in  Ebers  40,  14).  The  change  of  ^  to  ()() 

seems  to  have  produced  a  verb  Illae  Inf.,  making  a  feminine  infinitive.  Cf. 
ng't,  X  12  ;  and  ng-t  “  break,”  in  a  dam  (Eloquent  Peasant,  277) ;  similarly, 

Ebers  89,  7.  The  medical  and  surgical  use  of  the  word  is  confined  to  our  treatise  and 
Pap.  Ebers,  where  it  is  once  employed  to  indicate  an  opening  or  discharge  in  a  case 
too  obscure  to  assist  us  (Ebers  89,  7).  It  is  again  used  for  a  similar  internal  trouble 
in  Ebers  40,  14.  The  meaning  in  Pap.  Smith  is  quite  obvious,  and  may  be  based  on 
the  usual  significance  of  the  word  outside  of  the  medical  documents. 

^(j  ’yd,  “  brain,”  is  a  word  of  extraordinary  interest,  being  the  earliest  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  brain  anywhere  in  human  records.  In  the  known  documents  of  ancient 
Egypt  it  occurs  only  eight  times,  seven  of  which  are  in  Pap.  Smith.  The  eighth  case 
is  in  Pap.  Ebers  (65,  18-14),  which  commends  “  the  ’yd  of  many  wAr-fish  ”  as  a  recipe 
for  preventing  gray  hair,  when  rubbed  on  the  head.  Preceding  this  delectable  remedy 
in  the  same  document  is  a  decoction  of  the  horns  of  a  black  ox,  made  into  an  ointment 
for  the  head,  and  likewise  constituting  a  perfect  preventive  of  gray  hair.  We  may 
conclude  therefore  that  the  whr- fish  was  a  black  fish,  whose  head  gear,  like  that  of  a 
black  ox,  might  furnish  a  powerful  protector  of  black  hair  on  the  human  head.  This 
sole  occurrence  of  the  word  ’yd  in  Pap.  Ebers  did  not,  however,  suggest  to  anyone  that 
the  word  meant  “  brain  ”  and  it  remained  for  many  years  a  unique  occurrence  of  an 
enigmatic  word,  or  was  understood  as  viscera — a  common  ingredient  of  recipes  in 
ancient  medicine.  Indeed  it  may  designate  organic  substances  of  a  viscous  or  semifluid 
consistency  like  marrow ;  for  in  five  out  of  the  seven  occurrences  of  the  word  in  Pap. 
Smith  it  is  followed  by  the  phrase  “of  his  skull,”  as  if  to  render  the  word  ’yd  more 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  6  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  167 

specific.  “  Marrow  of  the  skull  ”  would  thus  be  the  earliest  designation  of  brain.  It 
occurs  twice,  however,  in  our  treatise,  without  this  modifying  phrase  (II 24  and  IY 1). 

There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  meaning  “  brain.”  It  is  a  substance  or  an  organ 
disclosed  and  “rent  open”  (II 18;  II  19)  beneath  a  compound  comminuted  fracture 
of  the  skull.  When  the  surgeon  probes  with  the  fingers  he  feels  “  a  throbbing  and 
a  fluttering, .  .  .  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  becomes  whole  ” 
(II  20-21).  In  a  gloss  explaining  the  exposure  of  the  ’yd,  we  are  informed  that  “  the 
fracture  is  large,  opening  to  the  interior  of  his  skull,  (to)  the  membrane  enveloping 
the  ’yd,  so  that  it  breaks  open  his  fluid  in  the  interior  of  his  head  ”  (II 24-25).  Perhaps 
the  most  convincing  item  of  the  surgeon's  description  is  his  comparison  of  the  con¬ 
volutions  of  the  ’yd  with  the  rippling  surface  of  metallic  slag  (II 20).  No  one  can  doubt 
that  he  means  the  convolutions  of  the  brain.  The  word  occurs  in  our  treatise  only 
in  Cases  6,  7,  and  8. 

wrm-w,  “corrugations,”  belongs  to  that  interesting  class  of  words 
drawn  by  our  surgeon  from  the  range  of  common  observation,  and  employed  as  a 
descriptive  term  intended  to  render  outward  and  physical  form  and  shape  more  clear 
and  vivid  than  would  otherwise  be  possible.  This  is  a  method  still  employed  in 
description  by  modern  science.  Our  word  has  various  applications.  In  architecture 
its  feminine  form  means  the  crenellations  along  the  top  of  a  battlemented  wall ;  e.  g., 
Sethe,  Urk.  IV,  889  ;  see  also  Mariette,  Abydos,  1, 52, 17.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  it  is 
used  of  the  ribs  of  a  booth :  ^^“(TUTim  (Pyr.  2100b),  which  of  course  produce 
a  rippling  along  the  top  of  the  roof.  This  meaning  was  already  known  to  Brugsch, 
Worterbuch,  II,  pp.  835-886.  See  discussion  of  the  word  by  Sethe,  Gott.  Toten- 
buchstudien,  in  Zeitschrift,  57  (1922),  p.  82,  commentary  on  III  22. 

The  gloss  which  explains  this  term  (Gloss  B,  II  25— III  1)  makes  it  quite  clear  that 
it  is  employed  to  describe  the  convolutions  of  the  brain,  which  are  compared  to  the 
rippled  surface  of  metallic  slag  forming  on  the  top  of  molten  metal.  It  is  a  term  drawn 
from  the  craft  of  the  coppersmith,  and  graphically  suggests  the  external  appearance 
of  the  convolutions  of  the  brain. 

The  passage  fortunately  occurs  twice  and  the  duplicate  (IV  10)  contains  the 
preposition  £!]  my  before  wrm-w,  which  in  Case  6  has  been  omitted  by  error  of  the 
scribe.  The  dd  itself  is  said  to  be  “  like  those  corrugations  ”  found  on  the  surface 
of  molten  metal,  meaning  doubtless  that  the  convolutions  of  the  brain  are  exposed 
at  the  bottom  of  the  dd,  or  within  it. 

rdn-t,  with  the  determinative  >—<,  is  unfortunately  an  unknown  word, 
occurring,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  no  other  document  known  to  us.  The  Berlin  Worter- 
buch  files  contain  no  other  examples.  The  Sign  Papyrus  gives  — 43^  fdn  as  the 
value  of  — ,  which  must  equal  >^or«="  having  the  related  value  rnd.  The  Middle 
Kingdom  Coffins  contain  rdnd,  seemingly  an  armlet  or  collar  (Cairo,  28024;  in 

oi.uchicago.edu 

168  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

Lacau,  Sarcophages,  Yol.  1,  p.  58,  and  especially  LepsiuB,  Denkmaeler,  II  147b).  The 
determinative  is  probably  an  armlet  or  bracelet,  but  might  possibly  be  confused  with 
a  melting  pot  or  crucible  in  the  coppersmith’s  workshop.  I  have  therefore  conjectured 
“  crucible  copper  ”  meaning  “  molten  copper  ”  as  the  rendering  of  It  is 

defined  in  Gloss  B  as  “  metal  which  the  coppersmith  pours  off  before  it  is  Tforcedl  into 
the  ("mould!,  because  of  something  foreign  upon  it  like  f wrinkles.!”  In  spite  of  the  three 
uncertain  words  in  this  passage,  it  is  evident  that  “  rdnd- metal  ”  is  something  that 
gathers  on  the  surface  of  molten  copper.  It  has  “  corrugations,”  meaning  the  wrinkles 
and  folds  which  are  characteristic  of  the  appearance  of  slag,  and  whatever  the  exact 
and  specific  meaning  of  rdn-t,  it  must  in  some  way  characterize  the  metal  as  molten. 

The  n  before  rdn-t  is  so  high  above  its  group  that  it  was  probably  corrected  in  by 
the  scribe.  At  first  sight  it  looks  like  the  negative  n  owing  to  the  fact  that  (j  in  the 
line  above  it  comes  down  into  it.  The  lower  end  of  this  vertical  stroke  has  been  cut 
off  by  the  detachment  of  a  surface  fibre  of  the  papyrus,  producing  the  appearance 
of  the  dot  over  the  horizontal  stroke  of  — >.  It  is  however  the  genitive  — ,  as  in  IV  10, 
where  it  is  quite  clear. 

jk7n^ra,i&i§!  yb‘l  y™  nhdhd  should  be  compared  with  f 
yh-t  ym  nh’  of  II  8-4,  on  which  see  commentary  s.v.,  Case  4,  II  8-4. 

nhdhd np’p\  “throbbing  (and)  fluttering.”  Although 
these  two  interesting  words  are  peculiar  to  our  treatise,  and  are  found  nowhere  else, 
the  root  meanings,  the  formation  and  the  context  combine  to  make  them  fairly  clear 
to  us.  Both  verbs  are  of  course  the  familiar  formation  displaying  biconsonantal 
reduplication  with  a  prefixed  n.  As  in  the  Semitic  grammar  the  reduplication  com¬ 
monly  indicates  intensity  and  repetition.  In  Egyptian  the  formation  is  especially 
common  with  verbs  of  motion.  Np’py  is  the  easier  of  the  two  words.  It  is  of  course 
built  up  on  the  root  p\  “  to  fly,”  and  np'p’  obviously  means  “  to  flutter,” 

describing  the  sensation  experienced  by  the  fingers  of  the  surgeon  as  he  lays  them  on 
or  even  into  the  exposed  brain  which  “  flutters  ”  with  the  pulsations  received  from  the 
heart — pulsations  which  Gloss  A  describes  as  identical  with  those  discernible  on 
“  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  becomes  whole  ”  (II  21).  Nhdhd  is 
built  up  on  the  root  hd  as  in  hd,  “  to  thrust  ”  and  the  like,  which  is  used  for 

example  of  a  bull,  thrusting  with  his  head.  In  the  mastaba  reliefs  it  appears  over 
two  bulls  fighting.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  verb  formed  from  hd  by  prefixing  n, 
which  is  used  of  a  bull  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (897a)  and  similarly  in  the  name  of  a  bull 
(Pyr.  1767b,  cf.  also  London  Med.  Pap.  18,  8).1  The  reduplicated  form  nhdhd  of  course 

1  This  nhd  seems  to  have  no  connection  with  nhd  of  our  treatise  (III  14),  which  appears 

as  a  variant  of  *M»  “  weakness,  feebleness,  faintness”  and  the  like.  This  is  doubtless  the 

173 I  of  Berlin  Pap.  3038, 10, 1  ;  or  pg  '=■' — “  London  Med.  Pap.  13,  3  and  13,  4-6  ;  or 

f£j  of  Pap.  Ebers  100,  21. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  6  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  169 

signifies  “  to  thrust  repeatedly,’’  and  may  be  rendered  by  “  throb.”  The  use  of  the 
determinative  of  speech  is  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  medical  papyri  in 
terming  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  its  “  speaking  ”  ( mdw ). 

“weak  place.”  This  word  is  peculiar  to  our  treatise,  and  iB  not  found  in 
any  other  known  Egyptian  document.  Whether  the  final  t  is  the  feminine  ending  or  the 
third  radical  is  uncertain.  With  regard  to  its  use  and  meaning  we  note  that  it  is  used  as 
a  variant  of  nhd  for  in  Case  7  the  text  of  the  examination  has  nhd 

(III  14),  while  the  quotation  of  the  same  passage  in  the  gloss  has  (IV  4).  In  the 

same  way  our  text  in  Case  6  has  ^2^)  yht  (II  21),  while  the  corresponding  passage 
in  the  duplicate  text  (Case  8)  has  hd,  which  is  doubtless  an  error  for  nhd. 

Evidently  yht  and  nhd  are  synonyms.  In  the  explanation  (Case  7,  Gloss  J,  IV  4)  it  is 
pretty  evident  that  >ht  must  mean  something  like  “  weakness,  feebleness,  exhaustion.” 
This  leads  us  to  compare  our  word  with  ’hd,  “to  be  weak,  feeble”  or  the  like 

in  VII  21-22,  q.v.  If  this  comparison  indicates  actual  root  relationship,  the  i  in  our 
word  may  be  a  weakening  from  d.  On  the  basis  of  the  meaning  “weakness”  for  yht, 
the  rendering  “  weak  place  ”  for  the  fontanel  of  an  infant  would  seem  satisfactory. 

<?rtTj3  whnn,  “  crown  of  the  head.”  This  rare  word  is  known  only  in  a  recipe  for 
the  head  in  Papyrus  Ebers  and  Hearst  (Ebers  86, 17, 18  and  21  =  Hearst  II,  2  and  4). 
These  passages  in  Ebers  and  Hearst  do  not  identify  the  portion  of  the  head  designated 
by  the  word.  It  occurs  only  twice  in  Pap.  Smith,  both  times  to  designate  the  region 
of  the  fontanel  of  an  infant’s  head,  thus  identifying  with  precision  the  portion  of  the 
head  included  in  the  meaning  of  the  word.  In  the  Ebers  and  Hearst  papyri  the 
determinative  of  whnn  is  always  (5  times)  ® ;  whereas  in  Pap.  Smith  it  is  once  ® 
(II  21),  and  the  other  time  (IV  11)  it  is  quite  different  from  that  used  for  tp,  d'dy, 
or  dnn-t,  and  may  possibly  be  read  c=j,  a  chest.  Indeed  our  word  whnn  is  likely 
to  be  connected  with  the  term  hn,  “  chest,”  actually  applied  to  the  head 
several  times  in  our  treatise  (e.g.  Ill  11,  21  and  IV  1). 

n  rd-n-f  ( fnd-n-f ),  “before  it  becomes  whole,”  more  literally  rendered, 
means  “  it  has  not  (yet)  become  whole.”  There  is  no  temporal  adverb  “  yet  ”  in 
Egyptian,  and  it  must  regularly  be  understood  from  the  context  (see  my  note  in 
Untersuchungen,  II,  Heft  2,  p.  11,  ed.  Sethe).  There  is  here  what  Gunn  calls  “  an 
implicit  restriction  of  the  time-field  ”  ( Syntax ,  p.  Ill),  although  he  does  not  cite 
this  particular  construction  in  which  has  the  force  of  “  not  yet.” 

The  duplicate  of  our  passage  exhibits  the  interesting  variant :  —  (for  2 

“  before  it  is  knit  together”  (IV  11),  where  the  verb  **~qJ ^ „  ts,  “  to  knot,  to  join  to¬ 
gether,”  appears  instead  of  to  be  whole.”  It  is  possible  in  II  21  to  trans¬ 
literate  ;  but  the  «=  and  the  lack  of  a  cross  stroke  distinguishing  —»  from 

«=»  in  hieratic  forbid  transliterating  ~  for  “  in  II  21.  Grammatically  the  form 
(in  IV  11)  may  be  pass,  in  tw,  or  Sdm-t-f  with  negative  =  “  not  yet.”  See  p.  208. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

170  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

$  hpr-n-f.  The  connection  and  rendering  of  the  following  context  is  exceedingly 
difficult.  The  rendering  “  When  it  has  happened,”  referring  back  to  the  completion 
by  the  fontanel  of  the  process  of  becoming  whole,  is  perfectly  good  syntax,  and  the 
interpretation  of  —  n  as  the  negative  -j-  n  is  justified  in  our  very  passage  in  the 
duplicate  text  which  employs  *-»  for  in  the  temporal  clause,  — ^  r« —  n  ts-t-f, 
“  before  it  is  knit  together.”  We  must  also  consider  nhdhd  and  np'p'  as  impersonal 
idm-j  forms  ;  if  they  were  nominal  or  substantive  in  character,  the  form  of  the  negative 
would  be  ^  nn  ;  although  Gunn  notes  the  use  of  n  for  ^  nn  in  such  sentences 
as  late  as  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty  ( Syntax ,  p.  195,  8).  “As  soon  as”  or  “when”  is 
the  usual  meaning  of  dr  in  Pap.  Smith.  It  occurs  eight  times,  and  in  seven  of  these 
it  means  “as  soon  as”  or  “when”  (dr  alone  three  times :  II  21  ;  IV  11  ;  XIII  9: 
yr  dr  four  times  :  II  6  ;  III  7;  IV  10;  VIII  4) ;  but  this  “when”  evidently  has 
the  force  of  “  until  ”  when  it  is  preceded  by  a  negative  (II  21  ;  IV  11). 

The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  “  when  it  has  happened,”  that  is  when  the  fontanel 
has  become  whole,  the  throbbing  and  fluttering  it  displayed  are  no  longer  visible  until 
the  skull  is  broken  open.  The  ancient  anatomist  is  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that 
the  pulsations  once  visible  in  the  fontanel,  though  they  are  no  longer  visible  when  it 
grows  over,  are  nevertheless  still  going  on  under  the  calvaria,  and  are  disclosed  when 
it  is  ruptured. 

Diagnosis 
II  22 

Translation 

[Thou  shouldst  say] :  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

Full  commentary  will  be  found  in  Case  5,  which  contains  the  same  verdict  (II 15), 
and  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46-48). 

The  significance  of  the  fact  that  the  surgeon  has  entirely  omitted  any  further 
diagnosis  than  this  unfavorable  verdict,  declaring  the  case  untreatable,  is,  of  course, 
that  for  the  practicing  surgeon  such  a  verdict  serves  alone  as  his  diagnosis.  It  classifies 
the  case  as  belonging  among  those  for  which  the  surgeon  can  suggest  no  remedy,  no 
treatment ;  and  such  a  classification  is  in  itself  a  sufficient  diagnosis.  The  long  descrip¬ 
tion  and  list  of  observations  in  the  examination,  however,  show  that  the  brief  diagnosis 
by  no  means  endB  the  surgeon’s  interest  in  the  case.  Neither  does  this  fatal  verdict 
necessarily  end  the  surgeon’s  concern  for  the  patient,  nor  his  effort  to  alleviate  the 
injured  man’s  sufferings.  It  is  here  followed  by  alleviatory  measures. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  6  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  171 

Treatment 
II  22-23 

23 

(| 

<? 

^  I 

J\  <=>C±\  I  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  anoint  that  wound  with  grease.  Thou  shalt  not  bind  it ;  thou 
shalt  not  apply  two  strips  upon  it :  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive 

Commentary 

nsr>  ren<lered  above  “  anoint,”  is  a  word  entirely  unknown  elsewhere.  The 
rendering  “  anoint  ”  is  a  guess  based  on  the  context. 

The  other  terms  employed  in  the  treatment  have  been  discussed  in  the  com¬ 
mentary  on  Cases  1  to  5.  It  is  evident  that  the  treatment  suggested  is  purely  allevia- 
tory.  The  injury  is  so  serious  that  neither  bandage  nor  Btrip  (adhesive  tape)  shall  be 
applied  to  it,  and  the  surgeon  is  simply  to  await  the  issue  of  a  serious  or  hopeless  case. 

Gloss  A 
II  23-25 

Explaining  :  Smashing  his  skull  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull. 

(j<=>  1 

MMP 

■^x 

==3X< 

(ij  ***>■*  i 

A  \  A 

Translation 

As  for :  “  Smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull,”  (it 
means)  the  smash  is  large,  opening  to  the  interior  of  his  skull,  (to)  the  membrane 
enveloping  his  brain,  so  that  it  breaks  open  his  fluid  in  the  interior  of  his  head. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

172  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

Commentary 

This  extraordinary  gloss  discloses  the  fact  that  our  ancient  Egyptian  surgeon  had 
already  discovered  the  meningeal  membranes  of  the  brain.  Two  difficult  words  in 
the  explanation  need  more  precise  definition. 

ntn-t,  “  membrane.”  The  determinative  is  somewhat  different  in  form 

O  O  * 

from  the  usual  hieratic  sign  for  a  skin  :  but  it  is  different  from  |  ( bnr ,  see  Moeller, 
Palaeogr.  I,  297  Illahun)  and  also  from  |  (rd,  ibid.,  I,  298,  Prisse).  Hence  there  seems 
to  be  no  other  possible  transcription  than  the  skin  When  we  reflect  that  ntn-t  is 
followed  by  the  words  “  enveloping  his  brain,”  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  ntn-t 
should  be  rendered  “  skin  ”  or  “  membrane.”  Outside  of  our  treatise  the  word  is 
found  only  once,  in  a  list  of  parts  of  the  body  with  the  sternum  ( k'b-t )  and  the  breast 
( mnd)  and  followed  by  “  belly  ”  and  “  navel  ”  (Mutter  und  Kind,  4,  5).  It  is  not 
likely  that  it  has  any  connection  with  the  ntnt,  “filth”  or  similar.  On 

the  determinative  see  ( Annales  du  Service  V,  284-285).  Cf.  also  Blackman. 

Zeitschrijt,  47  (1910),  118  and  Gardiner  on  Participial  Formations  in  Rev.  fig.  2  ser., 
2,  pt.  1-2,  p.  52.  The  t  after  'rj-t  would  indicate  that  ntn-t  is  a  feminine  noun  from 
a  root  ntn. 

nb>  “fluid”  is  evidently  the  same  as  ]  f  nh  (Pyr.  1965a)  and  (Pyr. 
686b).  The  determinative  of  the  latter  example  is  the  human  mouth  spitting  or  drooling. 
Very  important  in  this  connection  is  the  form  ^  “  water  ”  (Pyr.  25c).  Compare 
also  the  noun  1  (Pyr.  1965  a).  Elsewhere  this  word  occurs  five  times  in  our 
papyrus  (XIII  19  ;  XIV  15,  where  m  is  an  error  for  w  ;  XIV  16  ;  XVII  9  ;  X  20), 
written  with  $  instead  of  h,  the  interchange  so  often  observable  in  the  Pyramid  Texts, 
and  another  evidence  of  the  great  age  of  our  treatise.  It  is  explained  in  a  gloss  (XIV 
15-16 ;  consult  commentary)  as  meaning  to  “  issue,  stream  forth,  flow  out.”  As  a  noun 
it  means  “  exudation,”  “  fluid,”  and  the  like.  The  noun  is  found  designating 

some  fluid  secretion  (in  Mutter  und  Kind,  1,2:  3,  1  ef  passim )  which  is  adjured  to 
“runout”  (ra^^.7^  2-3  or  raJ^J^M).  Cf.  Oefele,  Zeitschrijt,  89  (1901), 

pp.  149  ff.  The  reference  in  our  passage  is  possibly  to  the  soft  or  viscous  consistency 
of  the  brain  itself.  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  that  this  description  “  most  certainly 
refers  to  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  by  which  the  brain  is  surrounded.”  ,®_  “his  head” 
is  abbreviated  to  the  determinative.  It  is  impossible  to  determine  whether  the  surgeon 
means  “  head  ”  (tp  or  d'd’)  or  “  skull  ”  ( dnn-t ). 

*  The  uncertain  word-sign,  possibly  with  pdz-l-f,  does  not  throw  any  light  on  the  meaning. 
Grammatically  the  verb  is  a  Sim-t-j  form  with  preceding  negative,  meaning  “  not  yet,”  “  before.” 
I  have  rendered  it  as  a  passive  although  Gardiner  notes  lack  of  “  certain  examples  with  pronominal 
subject  ”  {Grammar,  404).  Our  pronoun  « —  may  indeed  refer  to  the  smith  and  we  might  render 
“  before  he  f forces!  (it)  into,  etc,,"  but  this  leaves  us  without  an  object. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  6  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  173 

Gloss  B 
II  25— III  1 

Explaining  :  Those  corrugations  which  form  in  molten  copper. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Those  corrugations  which  form  on  molten  copper  :  ”  it  means  copper 
which  the  coppersmith  pours  off  (rejects)  before  it  is  ’’forced"1  into  the  '"mould1,  because 
of  something  foreign  upon  it  like  ’’wrinkles1.  It  is  said  :  “  It  is  like  ripples  of  pus.” 

Commentary 

This  explanation  makes  it  quite  certain  that  the  surgeon  is  comparing  the  convolu¬ 
tions  of  the  brain  to  the  slag  which  gathers  on  molten  copper.  He  employs  some  of 
the  terms  of  the  coppersmith’s  craft,  which,  however  clear  they  may  have  been  to 
medical  students  on  the  Nile  3,500  years  ago,  are  far  from  clear  to  us.  When  we 
recall  that  the  technical  terms  employed  in  his  autobiography  by  Benvenuto  Cellini 
to  describe  the  successive  steps  of  pouring  the  cast  of  a  statue  are  very  difficult  to 
understand,  although  written  in  a  language  of  which  we  know  more  than  we  shall 
ever  know  of  Egyptian,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  a  comparison  drawn  from  the  ancient 
coppersmith’s  processes  will  not  be  wholly  clear  to  a  modern  reader.  The  first  difficult 
word  is  ^  pds-t-f.  The  only  verb  pds  now  known  is  the  one  occurring  five 

times  in  our  treatise  and  written  JiJjf  e.g.,  V  10.  It  means  ‘‘to  stamp,  trample, 
knock  in,  smash  in  ”  and  the  like,  and  applies  exclusively  to  injuries  to  the  face, 
especially  the  nose  in  Cases  11  and  12.  It  might  conceivably  designate  here  the  act 
of  “  forcing  ”  the  molten  metal  into  the  mould.  See  foot-note,  preceding  page.* 
<=»  r,  “  on  ”  is  a  significant  preposition  in  this  connection.  It  is  to  be  compared 
with  the  use  of  the  same  preposition  with  members  of  the  body,  like  “  at  (r)  the 
nose,”  or  “  at  (r)  the  throat,”  meaning  “  near  ”  or  “  upon,”  that  is  on  the  surface,  as 
of  a  piece  of  jewelry.  The  word  here  suggests  the  idea  of  something  on  the  surface 
of  the  copper,  before  it  is  poured  off. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

174  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  6 

An  examination  of  the  gloss  as  a  whole  discloses  two  processes  (1)  the  pouring 
(wdh) ;  (2)  the  act  of  pds,  which  is  done  with  or  into  an  r'-t.  This  last  is  probably 
an  r>‘t,  that  is  a  “stone  vessel,”  meaning  a  stone  mould.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  copperfounder’s  moulds  in  ancient  Egypt  were  commonly  of  stone,  as  they  were 
likewise  in  early  Europe.  Pds  m  r,d  is  therefore  likely  to  be  the  term  for  “  pouring 
into,”  or  “  forcing  into  the  mould.”  This  would  designate  the  final  process  with 
the  clean  metal,  from  which  the  floating  impurities  have  been  separated.  This  act  of 
“  forcing  into  the  mould  ”  is  thrust  into  our  text  as  a  parenthesis,  between  the 
“  pouring  off  ”  (wdh),  that  is  the  rejection,  of  the  slag,  and  the  words  indicating  the 
reasons  for  rejecting  it  (r  yh-t  hr-f  nh').  These  two  stages  of  the  process  may  be  made 
clear  in  the  rendering  thus  :  “It  means  copper 

(1)  which  the  coppersmith  pours  off  (rejects)  .  .  .  because  of  something  foreign 
upon  it ; 

(2)  before  it  is  forced  into  the  mould.” 

The  rendering  of  the  preposition  r  should  be  more  literally  “  against  ”  in  the 
sense  of  “  to  avoid.” 

Dr.  Grapow  has  suggested  another  rendering  of  interest,  which  connects  r  yht 
with  n  pdsd-f  m  f,4t,  thus  :  “  before  it  stiffens  in  the  mould  to  (become)  something 
(a  cast),  its  surface  ( hr-f)  is  rough  lik epyw.”  The  existence  of  the  inseparable  phrase 
yfy-t  ym  nJy,  however,  indicates  conclusively  that  we  have  a  similar  phrase  here,  thus  : 

stiA-ttSco  an  i) 

(II  3-4) 

The  parallelism  of  the  two  phrases  cannot  be  doubted,  and  it  is  therefore  inadmis¬ 
sible  to  separate  hr-f  from  the  preceding  yh-t. 

o(j$,  °(  py-w,  which  has  been  rendered  “  wrinkles  ”  above,  is  a  word  otherwise 
unknown,  unless  it  be  connected  with  the  feminine  n(|(]“  (Ebers  39,  9),  employed  in 
very  obscure  context,  of  no  value  in  determining  the  precise  meaning. 

<=>QQc‘t?i  or  ryt  (or  “  pus.”  In  our  passage  (III  1)  the  more 

probable  reading  is  decidedly  ryt,  but  the  word  does  not  occur  in  hieroglyphic,  and  it 
has  always  been  read  tyt  in  Pap.  Ebers.  The  word  occurs  five  times  in  our  papyrus, 
and  with  one  exception  (XIII 12),  one  can  hardly  doubt  the  reading  with  r  (see  III  1  ; 
XIII  4 ;  XIII  6  ;  XIII  11).  A  careful  examination  of  the  writing  of  the  word  in 
Pap.  Ebers  leaves  little  if  any  doubt  that  we  should  always  read  r.  Compare  the  form 
of  the  first  letter  in  Ebers  105,  9,  with  the  r  in  “o?  r'-pw  in  the  very  next  line  (Ebers 
105,  10).  Very  decisive  in  favor  of  r  are  the  following :  Ebers  104,  10 ;  104,  11  ; 
104,  14  ;  104,  15  ;  104,  16  ;  105,  12  ;  105,  19  ;  107,  9  ;  107,  10  ;  107, 16.  We  shall 
therefore  read  the  word  ryt.  The  reference  must  be  to  pus  drying  in  ripples  about  a 
suppurating  wound  or  open  sore. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  175 

CASE  SEVEN 
III  2-IV  4 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND  PER¬ 
FORATING  THE  SUTURES 

This  interesting  case  is  the  longest  in  our  treatise.  The  surgeon  had  met  it  a  number 
of  times  and  had  found  that,  following  upon  the  conditions  disclosed  by  the  first  exami¬ 
nation,  the  case  might  further  develop  along  two  different  lines,  one  favorable,  the 
other  unfavorable.  The  discussion  of  the  case  therefore  contains  two  examinations 
following  the  first,  that  is,  three  in  all.  In  construction  the  discussion  is  consequently 
more  complicated  than  any  case  we  have  yet  met.  The  three  examinations  are 
marked  off  and  introduced  as  follows  : 

First  Examination 

The  usual  formula  omitted  by  error  of  the  ancient  scribe. 

.  (Ill  2),  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having,  etc. 

Second  Examination 

(III  8),  “  If  then,  thou  findest  that  man,  etc.” 

Third  Examination 

(HI  18),  “  If  however,  thou  findest  that  man,  etc.” 

This  arrangement  shows  us  that  usually  meaning  “  If  however,"  is 

employed  as  a  correlative  to  introduce  both  the  alternative  groups  of  symptoms.  The 
same  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  Case  47.  It  is  obvious  that  the  two  clauses  :  Yr  iwt 
.  .  .  Yr  iwt  .  .  .  must  mean :  “  If  on  the  one  hand  .  .  .  ;  if  on  the  other  hand  .  .  .” 
The  correlative  relationship  of  these  two  clauses  is  probably  sufficiently  well  indicated 
by  the  above  rendering  :  “  If  then  .  .  .  ;  if  however,  ...” 

The  arrangement  of  the  discussion  is  as  follows  : 

I 

Title  (III  2). 

First  Examination  (III  2-5). 

First  Diagnosis  (III  5-6)  with  verdict  2. 

First  Treatment  (III  7-8). 

II 

Second  Examination  (III  8-12). 

Second  Diagnosis  with  verdict  8  (III  12-18). 

No  Treatment. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

176  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

III 

Third  Examination  (III  18-14). 

No  Diagnosis. 

Third  Treatment  (III  14-15). 

All  three  of  these  stages  of  the  case  exhibit  symptoms  which  would  suggest  tetanus. 
Dr.  Simon  Flexner  informs  me,  however,  that  if  the  tetanus  infection  had  reached  the 
brain,  there  was  no  possibility  of  recovery.  In  I,  however,  our  surgeon  regards  the 
conditions  as  indicating  possible  recovery  ;  but  his  efforts  to  alleviate  the  patient’s 
suffering  and  to  relieve  the  tensely  drawn  ligaments  of  the  mandible  by  hot  applica¬ 
tions,  while  the  wound  in  the  skull  receives  no  attention,  would  not  essentially  affect 
the  patient’s  condition.  In  II  the  case  takes  an  unfavorable  tum,  the  patient  is 
feverish,  flushed  or  livid,  and  the  only  diagnosis  offered  by  the  surgeon  is  verdict  8, 
followed  by  no  suggestion  of  treatment.  It  is  evident  that  if  the  symptoms  set  forth 
in  II  follow  upon  the  first  examination,  a  fatal  issue  is  inevitable.  In  III,  however, 
the  Burgeon  finds  the  patient  pale,  as  contrasted  with  the  flushed  or  livid  face  in  II, 
and  although  exhaustion  is  noticeable,  there  is  evident  hope.  The  surgeon  adds  no 
diagnosis  or  verdict  after  the  third  examination,  but  he  proceeds  at  once  with  an  effort 
to  feed  the  patient  with  liquid  food,  introduced  through  his  clenched  teeth  by  means 
of  a  wooden  device  ;  while  the  sufferer  is  to  be  maintained  in  an  upright  position  upon 
two  supports  of  sun-dried  brick  until  the  doubtful  outcome  is  decided.  No  attempt  is 
made  to  touch  the  wound. 

The  long  discussion  of  the  case  is  followed  by  no  less  than  ten  important  glosses, 
defining  and  explaining  the  various  terms  employed  in  the  text.  They  take  up  what 
seem  to  be  the  sutures,  which  are  well  defined  (Gloss  A)  ;  the  rigidity  of  the  liga¬ 
ments  of  the  mandible  (Gloss  B)  ;  these  ligaments  themselves  (Gloss  C) ;  the  patient’s 
perspiring  face  (Gloss  D) ;  the  tense  ligaments  of  the  neck  (Gloss  E)  ;  the  color  terms 
applied  to  the  patient’s  face  (Gloss  F);  the  odor  of  the  wounded  crown  (Gloss  G) ; 
the  definition  of  “  crown,”  literally  “  chest  of  the  head  ”  (Gloss  H) ;  description  of 
the  distorted  features  (Gloss  I) ;  and  the  exhaustion  of  the  patient  (Gloss  J). 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  item  in  this  case  is  the  description  of  the  sutures, 
which  seem  to  appear  here  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  science. 

Title 

III  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  177 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
(and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull. 

Commentary 

The  title  introduces  a  new  term,  the  “  sutures  ”  (tp’-w),  which  will  be  found 
explained  in  the  commentary  on  Gloss  A,  pp.  185  f.  All  the  other  terms  have  been 
explained  in  the  discussion  of  the  preceding  cases. 

Examination 
III  2-5 

Translation 

[If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull],  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound, 
(although)  he  shudders  exceedingly.  Thou  shouldst  cause  him  to  lift  his  face  ;  if  it  is 
painful  for  him  to  open  his  mouth,  (and)  his  heart  beats  feebly ;  if  thou  observe 

N 

oi.uchicago.edu 

178  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

his  spittle  hanging  at  his  two  lips  and  not  falling  off,  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears  ;  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (and) 
is  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  surgeon’s  purpose  in  having  the  patient  lift  his  face  is  probably  to  disclose 
the  stiffness  in  the  neck,  although  this  is  not  immediately  mentioned.  In  view  of  the 
hanging  spittle  it  may  be  that  we  should  separate  urn  r*-f  from  the  preceding  and 
connect  it  with  the  following  context  thus  :  “  his  mouth  being  open,  etc.”  Such 
a  rendering,  however,  would  seem  to  require  r'-f  wn,  with  the  verb  in  the  pseudo- 
participle. 

“  His  heart  beats  feebly  ”  is  an  interpretation  of  the  literal  meaning  :  “  His  heart 
is  weary  to  speak,”  or  perhaps  “  too  weary  to  speak.”  The  use  of  the  verb  1'//^ 
md-t,  "  to  speak,”  as  a  designation  of  the  “  beating  ”  of  the  heart  has  been  noted 
already  in  Case  1.  In  view  of  the  preceding  reference  to  difficulty  in  opening  the 
mouth,  we  should  perhaps  render  literally :  “  his  heart  ( —  “  his  spirit  ”  or  “  his 
mind  ”)  is  too  weary  to  speak,”  or  “  for  speech.” 

y$>  “  spittle,”  has  been  discussed  in  the  examination  of  Case  4  in  connection 
with  the  word  ()  (!§  ySw.  The  scribe  has  written  the  suffix/  so  far  forward  that  it  seems 
at  first  sight  to  be  in  front  of  the  determinative  ^Jjj,  giving  us  a  word  ySf.  In  the 
writing  of  /,  however,  the  scribes  are  accustomed  to  use  a  good  deal  of  latitude  in 
placing  the  letter,  and  the  context  shows  clearly  that  we  have  here  yS,  “  spittle,”  and 
the  suffix.  It  is  followed  by  the  verb  “  fall,”  but  in  view  of  the  phrase  “  at  his  two 
lips,”  which  immediately  follows  “  fall,”  accompanied  by  the  statement  that  the 
spittle  does  not  fall,  we  must  render  here  “  hangs,”  that  is  “  falling  ”  but  not  com¬ 
pletely.  It  may  be  that  we  should  render  r  t*  literally  here  “  to  the  ground,” 
as  this  rendering  quite  fits  the  preceding  context ;  but  r  t »  is  often  an  idiom  for 
“  completely,”  of  which  I  have  intended  to  bring  out  the  force  by  the  adverb  “  off.” 
It  is  quite  clear  that  the  surgeon  means,  as  indeed  he  literally  says  :  “  falling  at  his 
two  lips,  but  not  falling  completely.” 

All  other  terms  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  preceding  commentary  on  Cases  1 
to  6. 

The  scribe,  or  possibly  the  surgeon  himself,  has  omitted  the  usual  introduction  of 
the  examination,  which  we  have  placed  in  brackets  and  prefixed  to  the  translation 
above.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  text  of  the  examination,  which  we  have  now  gone 
through,  does  not  mention  the  perforation  of  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  the  most  im¬ 
portant  feature  of  the  injury,  it  is  obvious  that  it  must  have  been  mentioned  in  the 
omitted  introduction.  The  omission  in  this  case  was  the  more  easy  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  words  omitted  would  have  been  a  repetition  of  the  title  for  the  most  part. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

First  Diagnosis 

III  6-6 

179 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  -wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull ;  the  cord  of  his 
mandible  is  contracted ;  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both 
his  ears,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will 
contend.” 

Commentary 

The  injury  is  shown  to  involve  the  anatomy  and  pathology  of  the  sutures  and  the 
mandible.  The  terms  employed  in  these  connections  are  explained  by  the  ancient 
surgeon  in  the  glosses  (A  and  B)  and  will  be  found  fully  discussed  there.  The  surgeon’s 
statement,  “  the  cord  of  his  mandible  is  contracted,”  is  based  upon  the  observation 
in  the  examination  that  the  patient  suffered  pain  when  he  opened  his  mouth,  and 
possibly  indicates  the  presence  of  tetanus.  This  is  a  good  example  of  induction.  See 
the  introduction  (pp.  49  ff.),  and  also  the  commentary  on  this  verdict  in  Case  4  (II  6). 

First  Treatment 
III  7-8 

oi.uchicago.edu 

180 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

8 

Case  7 

Translation 

Now  as  soon  as  thou  findest  that  the  cord  of  that  man’s  mandible,  his  jaw,  is 
contracted,  thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  something  hot,  until  he  is  comfortable, 
so  that  his  mouth  opens.  Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint,  until 
thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point. 

Commentary 

4  yr  dr,  “  as  soon  as ;  ”  see  above  Case  4  (II  6),  and  below  Case  20  (VIII  4). 

The  use  of  both  words  for  “  mandible  ”  and  “  jaw  ”  here  would  indicate  that  the 
second  word  (read  wgwt),  which  is  a  later  and  more  common  term,  is  an  old  gloss  which 
has  crept  into  the  text.  It  was  intended  to  explain  the  other  word  fr-t,  which,  as  we 
shall  see  in  Gloss  C,  was  a  very  archaic  term.  On  the  use  of  the  dual  here  see  also 
Gloss  C. 

yh-t  8m,  “  something  hot  ”  (compare  commentary,  Case  81,  X  19), 
is  obviously  a  hot  application,  intended  to  relax  the  rigid  muscle,  “  until  he  is  com¬ 
fortable  so  that  his  mouth  opens.”  After  this  the  surgeon  is  to  bind  on  a  softening 
application  as  long  as  the  case  remains  uncertain,  or  until  the  critical  point  is  reached. 

The  anatomical  terms  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  glosses  on  this  case,  and 
everything  else  in  the  commentary  on  the  preceding  cases  (1-6). 

Second  Examination 
III  8-12 
□ 

******  ^ 

1 A 

m 

<? 

10 

V3  ^  1 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

181 

9 

!0 

J 

(]<? 

<?> 

Ol  I  I 

:W 

11  This  sign  resembles  r  ;  for  similar  writing  of  d  see  Moeller,  Palaeogr.  I,  No.  115  =  Pap.  Westcar, 
6,  7.  It  is  clearly  d  in  our  text,  IV  2. 

Translation 

If,  then,  thou  findest  that  the  flesh  of  that  man  has  developed  fever  from  that  wound 
which  is  in  the  sutures  of  his  skull,  while  that  man  has  developed  ty'  from  that  wound, 
thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  him.  Shouldst  thou  find  his  countenance  is  clammy 
with  sweat,  the  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense,  his  face  is  ruddy,  his  teeth  and  his 
back  [-],  the  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  (urine)  of  sheep,  his  mouth 
is  bound,  (and)  both  his  eyebrows  are  drawn,  while  his  face  is  as  if  he  wept,  (conclusion 
in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

When  a  further  examination  discloses  the  persistent  continuance  of  a  fever  already 
discovered  in  a  previous  examination,  the  surgeon  says  : 

“  If,  then,  thou  findest  that  man  continuing  to  have  fever  ”  (Case  47,  XVII  12) ; 
whereas  the  disclosure  of  a  fever  for  the  first  time  as  the  result  of  a  second  or  later 
examination  is  expressed  as  above  in  our  present  case  (III  8-9). 

HHk'5’  fy**  As  a  symptom  this  word  is  known  only  in  our  Case  7  and  does  not 
occur  outside  of  Pap.  Smith.  The  context  is  of  little  assistance  in  ascertaining  its 
meaning,  and  it  will  remain  for  the  pathologists  to  suggest  a  guess.  The  — ]'^-l 
or  ty’  and  tyw  of  Pap.  Ebers  (55,  11  ;  88,  14 ;  88,  6),  which  is  an 

unknown  ingredient  of  prescriptions,  furnishes  no  help.  This  is  probably  the  same 
as  ty’  in  24,  16.  Cf.  also  ty'"W  in  Kahun  Med.  Pap.  8,  26  ;  1,  16, 

and  8,  8.  Gardiner  calls  my  attention  to  a  passage  in  a  magical  text  among  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

182  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

unpublished  Ramesseum  papyri  which  refers  to  the  birth  of  Set  and  then  proceeds : 

“before  he  comes  forth  (from  the  womb)  to  the  world, 
ty’~.”  Unfortunately  the  loss  of  the  immediately  following  context  leaves  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  tyy  obscure.  Dr.  Luckhardt  queries  “  convulsions  ”  or  “  delirium.” 

“  His  face  livid  ”  (“  red  ”  or  “  flushed  ”)  is  to  be  noted  as  a  symptom  differentiating 
the  patient’s  condition  from  the  second  group  of  alternative  symptoms  (III  18-14) 
in  which  the  patient  is  pale. 

“  His  teeth  and  his  back  ”  are  left  without  any  observation  of  their  condition 
attached,  and  we  can  only  suppose  that  the  scribe  has  again  been  guilty  of  an  omission. 

my  yh-t,  “  as  if,”  is  discussed  in  Case  4  in  the  commentary  of  the  exami¬ 
nation  (II  8). 

All  the  other  terms  will  be  found  taken  up  in  the  commentary  on  the  glosses  attached 
to  this  case. 

Second  Diagnosis 
III  12-13 

lie 

Translation 

Thou  Bhouldst  say  regarding  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull ;  he  has  developed  tyy,  his 
mouth  is  bound,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be 
treated.” 

Commentary 

All  of  the  terms  employed  in  this  diagnosis  have  already  been  discussed  in  the 
preceding  commentary.  It  would  seem  that  the  essential  item  in  the  new  diagnosis 
is  the  enigmatic  tyy  (see  above,  p.  49).  The  symptoms  disclosed  by  this  second  exami- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  183 

nation  are  so  unfavorable  that  the  case  is  regarded  as  hopeless,  and  the  surgeon  closes 
his  diagnosis  with  verdict  8.  See  full  commentary  on  this  verdict  in  Case  5  (II  14), 
and  also  the  discussion  in  the  introduction  to  the  treatise  (pp.  46-48).  As  a  result 
no  treatment  is  suggested. 

Third  Examination 
III  18-14 

Translation 

It,  however,  thou  findest  that  that  man  has  become  pale  and  has  already  rshown 
exhaustion1. 

Commentary 

In  these  second  alternative  symptoms  the  patient  displays  paleness,  as  contrasted 
with  the  first  alternative  symptoms  in  which  he  is  hot,  perspiring  and  flushed.  There 
is  some  uncertainty  in  the  exact  rendering  of  the  second  symptom  “  shown  exhaus¬ 
tion,”  which  will  be  found  discussed  in  Gloss  J. 

Following  these  symptoms  the  surgeon  records  no  further  diagnosis  or  verdict, 
but  proceeds  at  once  to  a  treatment  which  would  indicate  that  the  second  alternative 
symptoms  are  somewhat  more  favorable  than  in  the  preceding  (second)  examination. 

Third  Treatment 
III  14-15 

n 

=>  — 

LMlfcTGW 

I 

□  D 

15 

/vwv wv\  |  Mvyw\  Q 
o  o  o 

cn 

oi.uchicago.edu 

184 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  7 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  a  wooden  brace  padded  with  linen  and  put  into 
his  mouth.  Thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  a  draught  of  w/A-fruit.  His  treatment 
is  sitting,  placed  between  two  supports  of  brick,  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached 
a  decisive  point. 

Commentary 

It  is  unfortunate  that  this  interesting  treatment  is  not  taken  up  in  the  numerous 
glosses  appended  to  this  case.  The  patient’s  mouth,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  “  bound  ” 
and  difficult  to  open.  Here  we  find  he  is  to  be  fed  on  liquid  food,  and  without  doubt 
for  the  purpose  of  introducing  this  food  some  kind  of  a  wooden  device  is  placed  in  his 
mouth.  Meantime  he  is  to  be  kept  quiet  and  remain  sitting,  as  in  Case  4.  A  number 
of  terms  need  explanation. 

m4’‘t  n'l  ¥>  “  a  wooden  brace,”  literally  “  a  brace  of  wood.”  The 
surgeon  regards  this  term  as  in  itself  sufficient  and  furnishes  no  explanation  of  its 
construction  or  method  of  use.  We  must  conclude  that  it  was  sufficiently  well  known 
to  need  no  explanation.  This  is,  however,  the  sole  occurrence  of  the  word  in  the 
medical  papyri,  and  as  a  result  we  must  conjecture  the  exact  character  of  the  device, 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  applied.  It  is  possible  that  the  word  is  identical  with 
^  md’-t,  some  kind  of  “  chisel”  or  “  graver  ”  (Leyden,  K  15,  Leemans,  Mon.  fun., 
pi.  XXIV ;  Schiaparelli,  Libri  deifunerali,  T.  70,  lowest  row,  No.  2 ;  cf.  also  Griffith  on 
md’-t,  in  Proc.  Soc.  Bib.  Arch.,  21  (1899),  p.  270).  It  is  likely  to  be  the  same  word 
as  md’-t,  mentioned  only  in  Book  of  the  Dead  (Budge,  158  A,  from  Nu  20,  80-81) 
as  part  of  a  fowling  net,  and  being  made  of  wood  is  doubtless  one  of  the  posts  or  braces 
which  support  the  net.  It  is  true  that  dmd-t  is  preferred  by  some  as  the  reading  of 
^  (e.g.,  Sethe,  in  Borchardt,  Sahure,  Vol.  II,  p.  76).  The  question  then  arises :  how 
was  the  “  wooden  md’-t  ”  used  in  our  Case  7.  It  was  padded  or  wrapped  in  linen  for 
some  purpose — doubtless  to  make  it  less  hard  and  harsh  before  insertion  into  the 
mouth.  Was  it  simply  a  wedge  (cf.  “  chisel  ”  above)  or  means  of  holding  the  mouth 
open,  like  the  modern  surgeon’s  pieces  of  cork,  while  the  liquid  food  was  being 
administered  ?  Dr.  Grapow  makes  the  interesting  suggestion  that  it  was  a  tube 
intended  for  the  introduction  of  food  by  suction  on  the  patient's  part.  In  Pap.  Ebers 
a  tube  used  for  inhalation  is  a  hollow  reed,  which  would  seem  much  more  suitable  for 
use  in  our  case  also.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  preposition  ®  tp  should  be  rendered 
“  into,”  as  I  have  done.  Its  exact  force  is  difficult  to  grasp,  and  much  depends  upon 
understanding  it  correctly. 

P— ihbw, "  draught,”  is  a  rare  word, found  elsewhere  only  in  Berlin  Med.  Pap. 
8088,  9,  4,  where  it  designates  a  draught  employed  in  reducing  fever. 

^  Wh  is  an  unknown  fruit  or  grain,  which  we  see  piled  up  in  the  granaries  or 
magazines  of  the  Empire,  e.g.,  in  the  tomb  of  Rekhmire  (Newberry,  Rekhmara, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  185 

XII).  It  must  have  been  a  nutritious  product,  as  it  seems  to  be  used  in  our  Case  7 
as  food  rather  than  as  medicine.  Cf.  Oefele,  Zeitschrift,  89  (1901),  p.  150. 

The  treatment  “  sitting,  placed  between  two  supports  of  brick  ”  is  found  also  in 
Case  4,  although  with  less  precision  regarding  the  manner  of  use.  The  two  supports 
evidently  rose  on  each  side  of  the  patient,  probably  to  the  height  of  the  arm-pits, 
where  they  stopped,  thus  supporting  the  patient  under  his  arms.  In  this  case  also, 
as  in  Case  4,  the  treatment  is  quiet.  The  patient  is  to  be  given  liquid  nourishment 
of  the  lightest  character,  and  supported  in  an  upright  position  until  the  critical  point 
is  reached. 

Gloss  A 
III  16-16 

Explaining :  Perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull. 

10 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Perforating  the  sutures  of  [his  skull],”  it  means  what  is  between  shell 
and  shell  of  his  skull ;  and  that  the  sutures  are  (composed)  of  hide. 

Commentary 

This  explanation  probably  discloses  the  earliest  mention  of  the  sutures  in  the 
history  of  anatomy.  What  our  surgeon  calls  “  shell  ”  is  obviously  the  “  squamae  ” 
of  the  skull,  as  they  are  known  to  the  modern  anatomist.  The  original  meaning  of 
the  term  (p’&d),  that  is  a  “  potsherd,”  or  the  “shell”  of  a  turtle,  will  be  found  dis¬ 
cussed  above  in  the  commentary  on  Case  4  (Gloss  A,  II  8-9).  The  °  ,  tp’-w, 

“  sutures,”  are  said  to  be  “what  is  between  squama  and  squama  of  his  skull,”  a  very 
good  identification  of  the  suture  joint.  In  view  of  the  separative  r  it  is  evident  that 
should  be  read  ymytw,  “  between,”  obviously  an  archaic  writing  of  this  pre¬ 
position.  The  force  of  vonn  with  n  is  somewhat  vague ;  whether  we  should  render 
“  belong  to  ”  or  “  composed  of  ”  does  not  greatly  modify  the  surgeon’s  obvious 
intention  of  indicating  that  the  sutures  are  not  of  the  bone  so  much  as  something 
between  the  bones  in  the  nature  of  skin  or  hide,  which  is  evidently  the  ancient  surgeon’s 
designation  of  cartilage.  The  word  ^  dhr,  “  skin  ”  or  “  hide  ”  seems  like  an 
excellent  designation  of  the  tough,  hide-like  tissue  which  fills  the  sutures  before 
complete  ossification  has  taken  place.  The  term  tp’-w,  “suture,”  is  probably  itself 

oi.uchicago.edu 

186  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

a  word  with  some  such  meaning  as  “  cartilage.”  In  our  treatise  it  is  found  only  in 
Case  7,  where  each  time  (six  passages)  it  seems  to  designate  the  sutures ;  but  it 
occurs  also  five  times  in  Pap.  Ebers,  where  it  probably  designates  :  (a)  “  goat’s 
gristle  ”  as  an  ingredient  of  prescriptions  (Ebers  80,  11-12;  88,  17;  85,  9);  ( b )  the 
tough  gristly  rind  of  the  urn-tiee  (Ebers  82,  6  =  Hearst  IX,  4),  and  (c)  some  affection 
of  the  head,  perhaps  a  thick,  tough  dandruff  (Ebers  86,  15  =  Hearst  II  l).1  These  are 
probably  special  applications  of  a  more  general  term  with  the  meaning  “  cartilage  ” 
or  the  like.  When  the  limiting  phrase  “  of  the  skull  ”  is  added,  tp’-w  then  designates 
the  cephalic  sutures. 

The  only  doubt  or  question  about  the  identification  of  the  sutures  in  this  passage 
lies  in  the  interpretation  of  the  phrase  “  between  shell  and  shell  of  his  skull.”  This 
phrase  may  be  understood  as  designating  the  meandering  seam  of  the  suture 
separating  one  squama  of  the  skull  from  another ;  but  it  might  also  be  interpreted 
as  referring  to  the  spongy  bone  which  in  places  lies  between  the  outer  and  inner 
plates  or  tables  of  the  skull.  The  objection  to  this  latter  interpretation  lies  in  the 
ancient  commentator’s  final  remark,  namely,  “  the  tp’-w  are  composed  of  skin  ” 
(or  hide),  a  statement  hardly  likely  to  be  made  regarding  the  spongy  bone.  We  may 
therefore  regard  the  identification  of  the  tp’-w  with  the  sutures  as  fairly  certain. 

The  genitive  ®  nw  “  of  ”  after  tp’-w  in  our  gloss  makes  it  quite  clear  that  the 
scribe  has  inadvertantly  omitted  dnn-t,  “  skull  ”  in  quoting  from  the  diagnosis 
(III  5-6). 

Gloss  B 
III  16-18 

Explaining  ;  The  cord  of  his  mandible  is  contracted. 

1  There  is  also  a  feminine  of  the  word,  tp’-wt,  occurring  four  times  in  Ebers  (32, 20 ;  103, 6 ;  106, 
1-2  ;  and  42,  20).  It  is  a  botanical  term,  except  possibly  42,  20. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  187 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  cord  of  his  mandible  is  contracted,”  it  means  a  stiffening  on  the 
part  of  the  ligaments  at  the  end  of  his  ramus,  which  are  fastened  to  his  temporal  bone, 
that  is  at  the  end  of  his  jaw,  without  moving  to  and  fro,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  him 
to  open  his  mouth  because  of  his  pain. 

Commentary 

This  remarkable  discussion  of  the  muscular  articulation  of  mandible  and  temporal 
bone  should  be  compared  with  the  related  account  of  the  articulation  of  the  same 
two  bones  in  Case  22,  Gloss  A,  and  also  with  the  ancient  surgeon’s  indication  of  the 
situation  of  the  temporal  region  in  Case  18,  Gloss  B.  The  statement  which  our  gloss 
is  intended  to  explain  contains  only  four  words  in  the  Egyptian,  and  of  these,  three 
are  archaic  :  “  cord  ”  (w’-t),  “  two  jaws  ”  {Tty),  and  “  is  contracted  ”  {htr).  The  first 
is  explained  in  the  next  gloss  (C) ;  the  other  two  in  this  one  (B).  tic 

htr,  “  is  contracted.”  The  archaic  noun  from  this  root,  htr-w, 

“  cords,”  is  found  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  referring  to  the  cords  with  which  a  ladder 
is  bound  (Pyr.  2080  b) ;  but  the  verb  is  exceedingly  rare  and  unknown  before  Greek 
times  when  it  appears  as  an  archaic  revival,  e.  g., 

“  The  four  courtiers  twist  (or  bind,  htr)  a  cord  of  reeds  ”  (Mariette,  Dend&ah,  IV  20 
=  Dueraichen,  Kalenderinschriften,  pi.  104).  The  verb  jj  htr,  “  to  catch,  seize, 
bind,”  etc.,  used  of  already  captured  birds  is  probably  the  same  verb  as  ours,  cf. 
Gauthier,  Inscr.  didicatoire,  86. 

Tty-fy,  “  his  mandible,”  is  a  very  ancient  and  rare  word  of  curious 
application,  architectural  and  anatomical,  much  like  our  words  “  buttocks  ”  and 
“  buttress,”  both  of  which  are  covered  by  the  single  Egyptian  word  Tty.  In  a 
developed  form  it  meant  one  side,  that  is  the  doorpost  and  half  of  the  lintel,  of  a  door¬ 
way.  See  for  example  the  writing  with  half  the  doorway  as  determinative 

(Coptos  Decree  of  Pepi  II,  Weill,  Dicrets  Royaux,  p.  25).  The  same  determinative 
is  found  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  with  rrwt  (Pyr.  292  d),  and  hence  we  find  a  right  and 
left  rrwt  (Book  of  the  Dead  125,  Budge,  from  Nu  24,  28-29;  cf.  Gardiner,  Joum.  of 
Egypt.  Arch.,  IV,  1917,  p.  147).  Written  with  the  entire  gateway  as  deter¬ 

minative  it  occurs  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (1740  b).  Designating  the  whole  gateway 
it  was  probably  at  first  a  dual,  “  two  sides  of  the  door.”  In  this  connection  it  passed 
over,  perhaps  in  a  derived  form,  to  designate  the  council  that  sat  in  the  city  gate. 
Anatomically  it  appears  already  as  early  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  written  S|»£i  to 
designate  the  “buttocks”  of  an  ox  (Pyr.  1849a)  or  other  animal.  Similarly  it  is 
used  of  the  buttocks  of  a  man  in  the  Coffin  Texts  with  reference  to  the  anus  : 

*  defecate  with  my  Tt”  (B  1,  1.  850  =  Lacau,  Textes  relig., 

oi.uchicago.edu 

188  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

p.  72  and  p.  108).  In  the  same  age  it  was  applied  to  the  two  arms  of  man  or  woman 
in  the  Coffin  Texts  (ibid.  l.c. ;  compare  also  ibid.  p.  77,  81  ;  p.  110,  LXIII,  5  ;  p.  78, 
XXVII,  81,  and  pp.  186  and  209).  In  our  treatise  it  is  employed  twelve  times  to 
designate  the  mandible,  and  characteristically  appears  six  times  in  the  dual.  This  dual 
does  not  mean  the  upper  and  lower  jaw  ;  but  refers  to  the  two  sides  of  the  mandible, 
as  is  demonstrated  by  the  passages  where  the  scribe  has  written  the  determinative  of 
the  dual  twice,  both  times  depicting  the  mandible,  for  example  in  IX  4  and  IX  5, 
thus :  In  writing  the  dual  determinative  of  Spt-wy,  “  two  lips,”  however,  the 

scribe  regularly  indicates  both  the  upper  and  lower  lip,  thus:  <=>.  If  in  the  case  of 
our  word  rvt  he  intended  to  designate  the  upper  and  lower  jaw,  he  would  have  indi¬ 
cated  each  in  the  determinative,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  two  lips.  This  employment 
of  a  dual  to  indicate  the  mandible  because  of  its  two  branches  is  known  as  early  as 
the  Pyramid  Texts,  where  we  find  (Pjr-  30  a).  In  our  gloss  rr-t  is  explained 

by  the  word  wgwt,  which  is  the  common  and  current  word  for  “jaw,” 

meaning,  as  the  determinative  shows,  the  mandible.  Wgwt  “  jaw  ”  is  likewise  used 
to  explain  rrt  in  Gloss  C  (III  18).  As  we  noticed  above  also  (III  7),  the  scribe  has 
inserted  the  common  current  word  wgwt  “  jaw  ”  as  an  explanation  after  the  archaic 
'T't,  thus:  "  his  two  rr-t,  his  jaw.” 

(j —  yn.  See  commentary  on  Gloss  A,  Case  5  (II 17),  pp.  168  f. 

mt-w,  “  ligaments,”  is  explained  in  the  next  gloss  by  the  ancient  commentator  ; 
for  full  discussion  see  commentary  on  Gloss  A,  Case  1.  In  our  passage  here  it  is 
evident  that  the  surgeon  is  referring  to  the  musculus  temporalis,  which  is  attached  to 
“  the  end  of  his  ramus  ”  (coronoid  process)  and  is  “  fastened  to  his  temporal  bone.” 
It  has  been  customary  to  attribute  the  Egyptian’s  knowledge  of  human  anatomy  to 
the  familiarity  of  the  embalmer  with  the  bodies  he  was  eviscerating  and  embalming. 
Here,  however,  we  find  the  surgeon  familiar  with  a  muscle  of  the  head  which  was  never 
touched  by  the  embalmer.  His  knowledge  of  it  could  have  come  only  from  dissection 
and  from  treatment  of  wounds. 

phntry,  “  end,”  is  commonly  employed  in  our  treatise  for  the  end  of  a  bone, 
or  the  limit  or  margin  of  a  region  or  organ.  The  phrase  “  end  of  his  ramus  ”  occurs 
in  three  other  passages,  Case  22  (VIII  10,  14)  and  Case  25  (IX  3).  See  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  ph- ivy  in  the  commentary  on  Case  12,  Gloss  A  (V  21). 

Ik  “  ramus.”  See  full  discussion  in  Case  22,  Gloss  A  (VIII  14) 

and  compare  Case  8  (IV  17). 

~  ny.  The  force  of  this  particle  is  not  clear  in  this  connection.  See  discussion 
in  Case  5,  verdict  (II  15).  If  we  render  ny  “  thereby  ”  (its  usual  literal  meaning),  we 
must  conclude  that  ph'wy  is  here  not  prepositional  in  force,  and  then  translate : 
“  stiffening  on  the  part  of  the  ligaments,  and  (also  of)  the  back  (or  end)  of  the  ramus 
thereby.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  189 

mn  nt,  “  fastened  in,”  has  been  explained  in  commentary  on  Case  4 

(II 9). 

9m' >  “  temporal  bone.”  See  full  discussion  in  Case  18  (VII  9,  and  18-14). 

^ 2-nK~2-  Vi’*  Vn't’  “  mov>ng  to  and  fro,”  literally  “  taking  away,  (or)  carrying 
to  ”  has  been  discussed  by  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Arch.,  I,  p.  104,  note  8. 

(jro^»  yh,  “  pain,”  has  been  discussed  above  in  commentary  on  Case  8  (I  23).  If 
the  patient  is  suffering  from  tetanus,  which  has  infected  the  brain  through  the  wound 
in  the  skull,  there  is  no  possibility  of  recovery,  as  Dr.  Simon  Flexner  informs  me,  and 
the  verdict  which  follows  the  observation  of  this  symptom  (III  6)  should  have  been 
the  hopeless  one  (verdict  8). 

Gloss  C 
III  18 

Explaining  :  The  cord  of  his  mandible. 

a  — il  ^ 

<=>*==27  \\ 

)»□ 

i 

Translation 

As  for:  “The  cord  of  his  mandible,”  it  means  the  ligaments  which  bind  the  end 
of  his  jaw,  as  one  says,  “  the  cord  ”  of  a  thing  in  (or  as)  a  splint. 

Commentary 

-ft  S'  rv’-t,  “  cord,”  is  an  archaic  word  of  great  rarity.  It  will  bo  found  in  an 
example  from  Greek  times  above  in  the  commentary  on  Gloss  B  (III  16).  In  our 
treatise  it  occurs  only  in  Case  7.  It  is  evidently  a  simpler  form  of  the  better  known 
w’w'-t,  “  cord,”  an  ancient  ceremonial  word  occurring  only  in  the  temple 
foundation  ceremony  of  “  stretching  the  cord.” 

Both  “  mandible”  and  “jaw”  are  here  written  in  the  dual — a  writing  discussed 
above  in  Gloss  B  (III  16).  There  is  intelligible  reason  for  its  use  here,  because  the 
temporal  muscles  are  indeed  a  pair,  one  on  each  side. 

The  colloquial  phrase  at  the  end  for  explaining  w’-t  does  not  make  the  matter 
very  clear  to  us.  It  was  evidently  some  current  expression,  the  full  force  of  which 
escapes  us. 

~~~5  sS,  “  splint,”  is  a  new  word,  the  correct  understanding  of  which  is  at  first  not 

oi.uchicago.edu 

190  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

easy.  In  three  cases  it  is  obviously  an  external  appliance  of  linen  for  holding  in  place 
the  fractured  bone.  These  cases  are  : 

Case  85,  broken  clavicles  ; 

Case  86,  a  broken  arm  (humerus)  ; 

Case  87,  the  same  with  a  wound  over  it. 

It  should  be  noted  that  in  these  three  cases  the  surgeon  is  charged  as  follows  : 
“  Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  two  sS  of  linen  ”  (XII 12).  This  linen  device  is  therefore 
something  made  by  the  surgeon  himself.  In  all  cases  where  the  device  is  mentioned 
it  is  in  pairs.  In  the  use  of  a  pair  of  sS,  the  surgeon  is  charged  as  follows  :  “  Thou 
shouldst  apply  for  him  one  of  them  both  on  the  inside  of  his  arm,  (and)  the  other  of 
them  both  on  the  under  side  of  his  arm.”  The  phrase  “  the  inside  of  the  arm  ” 
(j)  is  a  common  one  meaning  “  embrace”  (noun).  We  cannot  doubt  that 
the  two  sS  of  linen  were  applied,  one  in  the  hollow  of  the  elbow,  the  other  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  arm,  and  that  they  were  long  enough  and  rigid  enough  to  serve  as 
splints.  They  are  always  said  to  be  “  of  linen.”  The  only  ancient  Egyptian  splints 
as  yet  recovered  were  excavated  by  A.  C.  Mace  in  a  Fifth  Dynasty  cemetery  at  Naga 
ed-Deir  in  Upper  Egypt  about  a  hundred  miles  north  of  Luxor.  They  have  been 
carefully  examined  by  Dr.  G.  Elliot  Smith  and  described  by  him  in  The  British 
Medical  Journal,  Yol.  I  (1908),  pp.  782-784.  These  splints,  in  one  case  of  wood,  in 
the  other  of  bark,  were  bound  about  with  linen  before  being  applied.  On  the  wooden 
splints  this  bandaging  is  still  preserved.  Now  the  phrase  “  of  linen  ”  may  conceivably 
be  loosely  employed  in  our  papyrus  to  designate  wooden  splints  covered  with  linen  ; 
just  as  the  Egyptians  spoke  of  things  in  their  inscriptions  as  being  “  of  gold,” 
when  only  overlaid  with  gold.  Another  possibility  is  conceivable,  namely,  that  these 
“  splints  of  linen  ”  were  stiffened  with  plaster  or  gum,  forming  a  cartonnage.  The 
mortuary  craftsmen  were  accustomed  to  shaping  masks,  pectorals,  and  the  like  to 
conform  with  the  body.  These  craftsmen  of  the  cemetery  were  moreover  regularly 
furnishing  this  kind  of  equipment  to  the  surgeons  (see  Case  9,  IV  21),  and  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  cartonnage  was  shaped  to  the  human  body  when  dead,  it  would  have  been 
an  easy  step  to  apply  it  to  the  broken  limb  of  a  living  patient.  Hence  our  “  two  splints 
of  linen  ”  may  have  been  the  earliest  known  casts,  like  those  employed  in  modem 
surgery.  It  is  noticeable  that  our  treatise  prescribes  only  two  splints,  whereas  Elliot 
Smith  found  three  on  the  forearm  and  four  on  the  femur  (op.  cit.).  Modem  native 
village  practice  still  employs  only  two,  continuing  the  tradition  of  8,500  years  ago. 

Again  our  word  appears  in  two  other  cases,  where  it  would  seem  to  designate 
a  tampon  or  swab  for  cleansing  clotted  blood  from  the  interior  of  the  nostrils  (Cases 
12  and  14).  The  difference  between  this  usage  and  the  one  discussed  above  (Case 
85-87)  is  evident.  Obviously  the  two  are  quite  different  devices  of  linen.  Both 
are  used  in  pairs  ;  but  the  first  is  made  by  the  surgeon  himself  and  applied  externally  to 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  191 

serve  as  a  splint ;  while  the  other  is  a  swab  or  plug  for  insertion  into  the  nostrils. 
We  are  dealing,  therefore,  with  two  different  things.  Moreover,  it  will  be  remembered 
that  in  Case  11  the  nostrils  of  the  injured  nose  are  cleansed,  not  with 
but  with  dSm  (?)-i vy.  Otherwise  the  treatment  is  identical  with  that  in  Cases  12 

and  14.  Note  the  following  comparison  : 

Case  11 

“  Thou  shouldst  cleanse  (it)  for  him  [with]  ‘y3!.  Thou  shouldst  place 

two  (other)  — cy1|  saturated  with  grease  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils” 

(V  11-12). 

Case  12 

“  Thou  shouldst  clean  out  for  him  the  interior  of  both  his  nostrils  with  — 'y'j 
. . .  Now  afterward  thou  shouldst  place  saturated  with  grease  and  put 

into  his  two  nostrils  ”  (V  18-19). 

Case  14 

“Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  — <y3|  (and)  thou  shouldst  clean  out  all 

coagulation  of  the  blood  which  has  formed  on  the  inside  of  his  nostril  ”  (VI  9-11). 

In  Case  41  (XIV  11-12)  the  form  (IJij  dud,  indicating  some  action  of  heat  or 
fever,  has  no  connection  with  our  word  dSm.  The  text  in  Case  11  raises  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether  the  cleansing  swab  should  not  in  all  three  cases  be  ^  sSm,  which 
the  scribe  in  Cases  12  and  14  has  momentarily  confused  with  the  linen  splint  sS. 
It  is  much  to  be  doubted  that  there  is  any  word  sS,  “  swab,”  “  plug,”  or  “  tampon.” 
In  conclusion  then,  the  two  linen  devices  under  discussion  seem  to  be :  (a)  sS, 
usually  sS-tmj,  “  two  splints  ;  ”  (b)  ddm  (?),  often  d$m(?)-wy,  “  two 

swabs.” 

Returning  now  to  Gloss  C,  sS,  if  properly  rendered  “  splint,”  is  a  perhaps  better 
designation  of  the  broad,  flat  temporal  muscle  than  “  cord.”  On  the  other  hand  it 
may  be  noted  that  our  scribe  seems  to  have  trouble  with  the  words  for  these  linen 
devices.  He  has  inserted  the  word  where  it  evidently  does  not  belong  in  Case  12 
quoted  above,  and  we  may  raise  the  question  whether  he  has  not  made  a  similar 
mistake  here,  perhaps  using  sS,  when  he  really  meant  did,  “  bandage,” 
which  suits  the  requirements  of  the  passage  here  in  our  gloss  very  much  hotter. 

The  surgeon  employs  the  phrase  “  end  of  his  jaw  ”  here  as  about  the  same  in  mean¬ 
ing  as  “  the  end  of  his  ramus  ”  in  Gloss  B  (III  17). 

The  entire  gloss  is  an  illustration  of  how  limited  our  knowledge  of  Egyptian 
is,  whenever  we  are  called  upon  to  deal  with  highly  specialized  terms ;  and  even 
when  the  ancient  commentator  has  furnished  us  with  a  definition  we  are  often 
unable  to  understand  the  terms  he  uses  in  explanation. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

192  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

Gloss  D 
III  18-19 

Explaining  :  His  countenance  clammy  with  sweat. 

Translation 

As  for:  “His  countenance  clammy  with  sweat,”  it  means  that  his  head  is  a 
little  sweaty,  as  (we  say),  “  A  thing  is  clammy.” 

Commentary 

is  an  error  of  the  scribe  in  quoting  (III  10),  mhnt,  “  counte¬ 

nance,”  a  rare  and  ancient  word.  In  referring  to  the  color  of  the  face  in  III  10,  the 
surgeon  employs  the  common  ^  hr.  The  explanation  of  mhnt  would  indicate  that  it 
might  mean  more  than  merely  the  face. 

b’y-n,  “  clammy,”  is  again  a  rare  word  of  which  the  only  related 
example  seems  to  ho  b-y,  “  pool  ”  or  “  body  of  water”  (Golenischeff 

Glossary  ---Pap.  Hood,  1.  10,  in  Maspero,  Etudes  dgyptiennes,  v.  2,  pp.  1  ff.),  which 
may  bo  connected  with  the  well-known  by',  “  celestial  ocean.”  It  was  a  word 
insufficiently  familiar  to  the  Egyptian  reader  of  3,500  years  ago,  and  needed  explana¬ 
tion.  Nevertheless  it  seems  still  to  have  been  used  in  one  current  expression  quoted 
by  the  ancient  commentator  at  the  end. 

Gloss  E 
III  19-20 

Explaining  :  The  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense. 

<1 

•^>!D 

I 

*=o  i  □  0 

/WW*V\ 

<?!<?  l  J 

© 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  The  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense,”  it  means  that  the  ligaments  of 
his  neck  are  stretched  stiff  by  reason  of  his  injury. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  193 

Commentary 

dum-y,  “  tense  ”  is  a  very  common  word,  most  often  referring  to  the 
human  body  and  its  parts.  It  is  doubtless  for  this  reason  that  the  surgeon  purposes 
to  indicate  that  in  his  use  of  the  word  it  designates  something  special  and  abnormal 
and  not  the  usual  dwn,  so  commonly  applied  to  parts  of  the  body.  Hence  in  the 
explanation  he  adds  the  word  nht,  “  stiff,”  indicating  an  extreme  stretching,  like  that 
when  the  word  dwn  is  employed  for  the  stringing  or  stretching  of  a  bow(e.  g.,Pyr.  673  b). 
This  was  the  more  necessary  in  view  of  the  fact  that  there  was  a  medical  use  of 
the  word  indicating  the  “  stretching  ”  of  contracted  muscles  to  a  normal  condi¬ 
tion.  Pap.  Ebers  contains  a  recipe  entitled: 

“  Another  (recipe)  for  the  stretching  (dwn)  of  contractions  and  the  softening  of  stiffness  ” 
(85,  5-6).  Devaud  also  calls  attention  to  ^  (ibid.  87,  6). 

All  other  terms  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  preceding  commentary. 

Gloss  F 
III  20-21 

Explaining  :  His  face  is  ruddy. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “His  face  is  ruddy”  (tmi),  it  means  that  the  color  of  his  face  is  red,  like 
the  color  of  fm^t-fruit. 

Commentary 

The  significance  of  this  passage  turns  on  two  color  designations.  It  is  well  known 
that  ancient  color  names  are  exceedingly  difficult  to  bring  out  with  precision  or  to 
render  with  exact  modern  equivalents.  To  this  day  the  Arabs,  for  example,  will 
cover  a  wide  range  of  colors  with  one  term,  and  when  an  Arab  guide  tells  you  a  hill 
is  you  may  think  of  it  as  being  any  color  from  green  to  black.  Our  treatise 
furnishes  valuable  material  for  defining  the  two  colors  employed  in  the  above 
explanation. 

o 

oi.uchicago.edu 

194  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

“  ru(ldy  ”  is  evidently  a  color,  prevailingly  red  or  reddish.  This  is 
shown  by  a  gloss  in  Case  46  : 

“  As  for  :  ‘  There  is  no  ruddiness  (tmi)  upon  it ;  ’  it  means  there  is  no  redness  upon  it  ” 
(XYI 15-16).  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  another  important  gloss  in  Case  41  : 

“  As  for  :  *  Its  two  lips  are  ruddy  (tmi),’  it  means  its  two  lips  are  red  like  the  color  of 
the  tm&’t- tree  ”  (XIV  12-18).  We  learn  also  from  this  example  that  tmi  is  a  color 
designation  drawn  from  a  tree  of  some  kind,  although  it  is  impossible  to  identify  it. 
There  seems  to  be  no  other  occurrence  of  the  tree  in  the  Egyptian  documents  unless 
we  recognize  it  also  in  the  tmi  of  the  Dream  Stela  ( TJrk .  Ill,  68),  but 

this  passage  is  of  no  assistance  in  identifying  the  tree.  Besides  the  three  glosses 
above  tho  word  occurs  eight  times  more  in  our  treatise.  It  designates  the  colors  of 
the  following : 

the  human  face,  Case  7  (III  10  ;  III  20); 

a  swelling,  Case  16  (VI 19) ; 

cists  or  the  like  on  the  breast,  Case  89  (XIII  5)  ; 

the  two  lips  of  a  wound,  Case  41  (XIII 20  ;  XIV  12-18)  ; 

tho  “heads  of  tho  ribs  of  the  sternum”  when  dislocated,  Case  43  (XIV  22-XV  1) ; 

absonce  of  (wd- color  in  a  swelling  on  the  breast,  Case  46  (XVI  2). 

The  emphasis  on  red  in  the  first  two  glosses  quoted  above  suggests  “  ruddy  ”  as 
an  approximately  correct  rendering.  Its  use  in  Case  46,  the  last  example  cited  in 
tho  above  list,  would  indicate  that  tmi  sometimes  is  neutral,  meaning  simply  “  color  ;  ” 
and  as  wo  say  of  a  pale  face  that  it  lacks  color,  so  the  Egyptian  might  say  it  had  no 
tmi.  And  when  wo  say  this  we  mean  by  “  color  ”  red  ;  but  this  negative  meaning 
of  “  color  ”  will  not  fit  our  Gloss  F,  where  some  positive  color  designation  must  be 
implied. 

Dr.  Luckhardt  adds  the  following  interesting  remark  : 

“  I  am  inclined  to  tho  view  that  the  color  meant  is  the  one  medical  men  have  in 
mind  when  they  say  that  the  person  is  *  cyanotic  It  is  a  mixture  of  a  red  and  a  blue 
with  the  blue  more  in  evidence,  particularly  as  the  ‘  cyanosis  ’  increases  in  severity. 
The  purplish  discoloration  in  this  condition  is  due  essentially  to  a  deficient  oxygenation 
of  the  blood.” 

i  yrtyw  “  blue.”  Like  tmi  this  color  name  is  derived  from  a  plant,  more 
specifically  presumably  from  its  fruit,  as  we  say  “  orange  ;  ”  or  from  its  flower  as  we 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  195 

say  “  violet."  We  find  it  in  festive  garlands  in  the  Mut  Ritual  (Pap.  Berlin  8053, 
18,  4).  It  is  employed  as  an  ingredient  in  recipes  in  Pap.  Ebers  80,  5  ;  Pap.  Hearst 
IX  5  ;  and  Pap.  Berlin  8088,  5,  2. 

As  a  color  designation  it  appears  as  the  name  of  colored  linen  as  follows  : 

In  addition  to  green  linen  at  Dendera  (Duemichen,  Besultate,  26,  XIII). 

In  addition  to  red  ( ydm )  and  an  uncertain  color  at  Edfu  (Rochem.  I,  126). 

In  addition  to  red  {ydm)  (ibid.). 

In  addition  to  white  and  red  {ibid.,  I,  418). 

In  addition  to  red  {ibid.,  I,  289). 

In  addition  to  white,  green  and  red  in  Room  18  at  Dendera  (Duemichen,  Besultate, 
28  ^Marietta,  Denderah,  II 1  b). 

All  the  above  are  from  Greek  times,  but  it  is  found  in  earlier  examples  of  colored 
linen,  as  follows  : 

In  addition  to  green  and  red  at  Deir  el-Bahri  (Naville,  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari, 
pi.  180,  with  five  chests).  The  above  examples  alone  would  by  comparison  indi¬ 
cate  that  yrtyw  means  “  blue,"  notwithstanding  its  occurrence  over  red  jj.il  in  the 
sarcophagus  of  Sebek-o  (Berlin  45  ;  Mitth.  Orient.  Samml.  IX,  p.  8). 

In  a  relief  at  Dendera  four  calves  led  by  Ptolemy  IV  are  marked  J  (green), 
(red),  £2  (black),  and  j  (white).  In  the  accompanying  text  they  are  called  (white), 
|  (green),  *3*  (red)  and  •  {yrtyw).  Here  yrtyw  corresponds  to  the  well-known  word 
for  black  in  the  preceding  list,  as  dark  blue  much  resembles  black.  The  yrtyw- dye, 
according  to  an  inscription  at  Dendera  in  Room  6,  was  made  of  ^o()\  Jf)  Wn  w'd, 
“  fresh  Wn,"  which  seems  to  have  been  a  needle-wood,  growing  in  Syria  (Mariette, 
Denderah,  I  72  c  «  Duemichen,  Tempelinschriften,  Vol.  2,  pi.  XIX,  8) ;  but  this  may 
have  been  a  blue  dye  called  ijrtyw  with  its  color  meaning,  and  therefore  having  no 
botanical  significance.  Gardiner  concludes  that  yrtyw  may  mean  simply  “  color  ” 
{Zeitschrift,  47  (1910),  p.  162). 

In  the  medical  papyri  the  use  of  the  word  to  designate  color  is  found  only  in  our 
treatise  and  in  Pap.  Ebers.  It  Beems  actually  to  designate  the  contents  of  a  pus  cist 
of  some  kind  (Ebers  105,  11  ;  105,  8),  and  again  to  call  such  content  “  like  yrtyw  " 
(104,  7).  This  might  refer  to  the  cloudy  bluish  color  of  discolored  pus.  It  is  used 
nine  times  in  Pap.  Smith,  as  follows  : 

To  describe  a  hue  mingled  with  the  color  of  a  ruddy,  flushed  or  livid  face,  Case  7 
(III  20-21). 

To  describe  the  hue  of  the  two  lips  of  a  wound  which  are  “  like  the  color  {yrtyw)  of 
the  tmA-t- tree,”  Case  41  (XIV  18  ;  see  commentary  on  tmi  above). 

Yrtyw  also  appears  in  Pap.  Smith  in  connections  which  would  indicate  that  it 
sometimes  means  simply  “color,"  e.  g. :  “the 

O  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

196  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

shell,  the  color  being  like  the  egg  of  an  ostrich  ”  (Case  9,  V  1).  Similarly  in  Case  19  (VII 
20),  the  yrtyw  of  an  inflamed  eye  is  said  to  be  like  °  ,23^,  [1^,  “  yrtyw  of  the 

£’d-plant,”  evidently  referring  to  the  color  of  the  fruit  or  flowers  of  some  unidentified 
plant.  Again  in  Case  46  Gloss  B  contains  the  following  explanation  : 

A.k-juweiMrr,^ 

Ignoring  the  obscurities  in  the  passage,  it  is  obvious  that  “  their  yrtyw  ”  is  rendered 
in  the  explanation  by  “  their  skin  ”  or  “  their  hue  ”  (XVI  14-15).  In  such  a  con¬ 
nection  yrtyw  must  mean  something  like  “  tint.”  It  is  such  a  shade  of  meaning  as 
this  which  makes  it  possible  to  say  :  yriUw  is  hot,” 

whore  it  must  mean  something  like  “  surface  ”  (Case  41,  XIII  22). 

To  sum  up  in  conclusion,  yrtyw  originally  means  a  fruit  or  blossom  of  uncertain 
identity,  presumably  bluish  in  color.  It  then  became  a  color  designation,  indicating 
a  dark  hue,  verging  into  blue,  and  thus  came  to  indicate  blue  linen.  In  some  way  it 
also  gained  the  meaning  “  color,  hue,  tint,”  or  even  “  surface.”  We  may  compare  it 
with  our  use  of  “  carnation,”  which  may  designate  a  flower,  a  color,  the  hue  of  flesh, 
both  the  color  laid  on  by  an  artist  in  painting  flesh,  and  in  art  criticism  sometimes 
having  a  meaning  not  unlike  “  surface ;  ”  although  the  derivation  of  tho  term 
“  carnation  ”  is  not  at  all  parallel  with  that  of  our  Egyptian  word. 

^ |  pr-t,  "fruit,”  lacks  the  phonetic  complement;  but  we  meet  the  same  diffi¬ 
culty  if  we  read  rw-t,  perhaps  the  same  as  ry-t,  “  pigment,”  “  color,” 

which  occurs  in  hieroglyphic  (e.  g.  Mariette,  Abydos,  I  81  a). 

Gloss  G 
III  21-IV  1 

Explaining  :  Tho  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  of  sheep. 

(]<=>Pg 

©  i 

IV  1 

/www\ 

o  o  o 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  The  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  of  sheep,”  it  means 
that  the  odor  of  his  crown  is  like  the  urine  of  sheep. 

Commentary 

This  gloss  is  intended  to  explain  the  unfamiliar  word  o  bkn,  which  is  unknown 
anywhere  in  Egyptian  documents  outside  of  our  treatise.  The  genitive  — «  after  bkn 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  197 

has  led  to  the  omission  of  the  final  —  of  the  word  itself,  as  the  scribe  copied  the 
excerpt  from  III  11.  Whether  a  wound  of  the  head  like  this  one  customarily  exhales 
such  an  odor  would  be  an  interesting  question  for  experienced  surgeons  of  to-day. 
It  may  be  noted  that  the  word  rwt,  rendered  “  sheep  ”  above,  really  means  “  small 
cattle,”  including  a  number  of  varieties  of  both  sheep  and  goats. 

Gloss  H 
IV  1-2 

Explaining  :  The  chest  of  his  head. 

fk — ,  IT]  | - ,  l 

I  AVVWA 

a  In  r  h->u>  the  scribe  at  first  wrote  r  hw  and  then  corrected  the  error  by  writing  ^  over  <? 
and  adding  <?. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  chest  of  his  head,”  it  means  the  middle  of  his  crown  next  to  his 
brain.  The  likening  of  it  is  to  a  chest. 

Commentary 

The  explanation  is  intended  to  make  clear  the  word  “  chest  ”  as  applied  to 
the  head.  This  application  of  the  word  “  chest  ”  to  the  dome  of  the  skull  is  exactly 
parallel  to  the  German  “  Gehirnkasten.”  Our  own  designation  “  chest  ”  for  the 
region  under  the  thorax  is  a  similar  example  of  the  use  of  tho  word  to  indicate  a 
capacious  container  and  protector  of  organs.  The  region  of  the  head  thus  designated 
in  our  treatise  is  defined  as  the  V  wpwt,  “  crown,”  the  situation  of  which  is  graphi¬ 
cally  pictured  in  the  writing  of  the  word  with  the  horns  of  an  ox. 

As  in  the  case  of  whnn  (IV  11),  the  hieratic  determinative  of  hn  is  different  from 
that  employed  with  tp  and  d’d’  (“  head  ”)  or  dnnd  (“  skull  ”).  This  determinative 
is  consistently  given  this  special  form  in  all  four  passages  where  it  occurs  (III  11  ; 
III  21 ;  IV  1  ;  IV  2).  Furthermore,  an  examination  of  the  above  six  passages  shows 
clearly  that  the  determinative  of  hn  is  quite  different  from  that  of  whnn.  The  deter¬ 
minative  of  hn  in  our  treatise  is  always  (4  times)  to  be  transliterated  c=j ;  that  of 
whnn  is  once  ®  and  once  probably  c=j.  See  p.  169. 

o  <o — U  w  <=>raj^>(? 

!  I  I 

ra 

[=3 

Mi' 

oi.uchicago.edu 

198 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

Globs  I 
IV  2-4 

Explaining :  His  mouth  is  bound,  both  his  eyebrows  are  drawn,  while  his  face 
is  as  if  he  wept. 

AVW/A  A“^  \\ 

□  o 

oO -  D 

AVvWA  ^ 

o\\  l 

I 

AW//A  A  Vv 

]<?j 

<? 

9 

/a 

» ■$. 

»  This  sign  is  inserted  above  the  line  as  a  subsequent  correction  by  the  scribe  in  red  ink. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  His  mouth  is  bound,  (and)  both  his  eyebrows  are  drawn,  while  his 
face  is  as  if  he  wept,”  it  means  that  he  does  not  open  his  mouth  that  he  may  speak, 
both  his  eyebrows  are  distorted,  one  drawing  upward,  the  other  drooping  downward, 
like  one  who  winks  while  his  face  weeps. 

Commentary 

jle=.(j(]i»y  My,  “  distorted,”  or  “  drawn.”  In  the  list  of  symptoms  from  which 
this  is  quoted,  it  is  written  with  a  sign  which  resembles  r.  Nevertheless  we  must 
read  d.  It  is  written  clearly  d  in  our  gloss,  and  the  name  of  the  god  (Marietta, 

Mastabas,  D  19,  and  Palermo  Stone,  First  dynasty,  Year  x  + 11),  also  written  with 
a  jackal  as  in  our  text  above,  likewise  shows  that  we  must  read  d.  Such  a  verb  is 
unknown  elsewhere,  and  its  meaning  is  determined  exclusively  from  this  gloss,  in  which 
the  explanation  renders  the  significance  of  the  word  sufficiently  clear. 

my  !$**»  “  aa  if.”  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  examination  in  Case  4,  II 8. 

(|  ^ "Jn  yd,  “  distorted.”  It  occurs  also  in  the  form  H  (Ebers  108,  7).  The 

verb  originally  means  “to  wound,"  or  “  to  injure.”  It  has  also  the  meaning  “to  twist,” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

199 

or  “  to  distort,”  applying  especially  to  facial  distortion.  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
we  read  that  when  Re  addressed  his  followers  f  “  his  mouth  was  dis¬ 

torted  ”  (Budge,  115,  from  Nu  18,  5).  Gardiner  also  calls  my  attention  to  Zeitschrift, 
57  (1922),  p.  8*,  14  for  a  further  example  of  distortion  of  the  mouth  ;  and  to  the 
causative  “  d-yHy,”  “pervert,”  in  Eloquent  Peasant  B  1,  99.  A  similar  medical 
meaning  is  evidently  to  be  found  in  our  treatise,  in  its  only  other  use  of  the  word, 
to  indicate  the  “  diverting  ”  of  fever  till  it  passes  off  (Case  47,  XYII 18-14). 

—  .  .  .  ^ —  .  .  .  ,  literally  “  making  a  case  of  (drawing  upwards),  (and) 
a  case  of  (drooping  downwards).”  Such  a  use  of  sp  is  common  enough,  e.g.,  the  acts 
of  extortion  forbidden  in  the  laws  of  Harmhab. 

dfr-t,  “drawing."  The  meaning  has  been  surmised  from  the  context.  No 
such  verb  is  known  from  any  other  example.  Its  opposite  — a  k’p  literally  means 
“  to  cover,”  referring  to  the  covering  of  the  eye  by  the  drooping  lid  and  eyebrow, 
and  hence  the  above  rendering  “  drooping.” 

trm,  “  to  wink.”  The  meaning  of  this  word  has  been  successfully  cleared 
up  by  Spiegelberg  ( Zeitschrift ,  54  (1918),  p.  184).  The  act  involved  unpleasant  implica¬ 
tions  among  the  Egyptians  and  the  deceased  denies  ^  in  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  (Naville,  125,  26  Aa).  Cf.  also  Coffin  Texts  [Becueil  de  Trav.  29,  p.  145). 

^  “  his  face  weeps.”  For  another  example  of  this  see  Newberry, 

Eekhmara,  pi.  TV  5.  The  t  is  probably  an  error  of  the  scribe.  The  form  must  be 
a  pseudo-participle,  8d  masculine,  singular. 

Gloss  J 
IV  4 

Explaining  :  He  has  become  pale  and  has  already  shown  exhaustion. 

<!■ 

& 

^  x 

fDo- 

»  This  ^  has  been  inserted  in  red  ink  as  a  subsequent  correction,  and  a  second  ^  which  had 
been  written  incorrectly  after  h  has  been  canceled  with  an  oblique  stroke  of  the  pen. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  He  has  become  pale  and  has  already  Tshown  exhaustion!,”  it  means 
becoming  pale,  because  he  is  (a  case  of)  “  Undertake  [Thiml],  do  not  desert  [fhiml],” 
in  view  of  the  exhaustion. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

200  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

Commentary 

The  scribe  or  commentator  has  again  quoted  inaccurately.  At  the  end  of  the  cita¬ 
tion  he  has  written  J}|  ’ ht ,  whereas  the  text  excerpted  has  nhd.  We  may 

conclude  that  the  two  words  are  approximately  synonyms.  The  meaning  “  weakness  ” 
rests  on  the  use  of  the  word  > ht  to  designate  the  “  weak  place,”  the  fontanel  on  the 
crown  of  an  infant’s  head  (see  commentary  on  II  21,  Case  6),  and  from  this  meaning 
the  rendering  “  exhaustion  ”  is  not  far  removed.  From  this  rendering  one  may  infer 
that  wd-t  ’ ht  means  “to  show  exhaustion.”  The  use  of  the  infinitive  following  p'w, 
“  to  have  done  ”  is  common. 

d-hd-t,  “  to  become  pale,”  would  be  an  intransitive  use  of  an  otherwise 
transitive  verb,  but  whatever  the  interpretation  adopted,  it  is  evidently  left  without 
object,  and  therefore  intransitive  in  our  passage.  Literally  rendered,  d-hd  would 
mean  “  to  cause  to  be  white,”  “  to  make  white,”  and  an  intransitive  use  of  a  causative 
transitive  is  a  common  phenomenon.  “  To  become  pale  ”  is  therefore  a  justifiable 
rendering.  It  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  medical  papyri,  and  I  do  not  know  of 
any  other  passage  in  which  it  has  the  meaning  “  to  become  pale.” 

nit  dw  pw,  “  in  that  he  is.”  The  proposition  “  he  is,  etc.”  is  apparently 
substantivized  by  the  prefix  of  ntt,  as  commonly,  and  then  left  in  an  accusative  case, 
like  the  accusative  infinitive  in  Arabic,  indicating  cause.  More  commonly  in  such 
casos  ntt  is  introduced  by  hr,  or  by  dr,  e.g.,  II  11. 

J  *2"  m  f]c  m  btw.  In  all  probability  these  words  have  suffered  corrup¬ 
tion  at  the  hands  of  an  inaccurate  scribe.  The  original  phraseology  can  be  drawn  from 
the  four  occurroncos  of  the  samo  passage  in  Pap.  Ebers.  We  find  it  there  in  two  forms : 
positivo  and  negative,  as  follows  : 

Positivo  : 

r£r-/wl  Hw  “  Undertake  him  ;  do  not  desert  him”  (Ebers 
40,  7;  41,  20-21  ;  42,  5). 

Negative : 

m  rhr-j  btw  pw,  “  Do  not  undertake  him ;  he  is  an  incurable  ” 

(Ebers  41,  15). 

The  word  or  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  (e.  g.,  Pap.  Prisse  10,  2  ; 

see  also  Kahun  Med.  Pap.  2,  18  ;  1,  20),  btw,  literally  means  “  one  deserted,”  or  “  one 
to  be  deserted,”  from  the  verb  bj,  “  to  desert,  forsake.”  Gardiner  also  calls  my 
attention  to  examples  in  Urk.  IV,  117  and  500.  From  meaning  “an  incurable,” 
the  noun  is  also  employed  with  the  meaning  “  incurable  disease  ”  (Metternich  Stela 
57)  and  related  to  this  use  of  the  word  is  doubtless  its  employment  as  the  name  of 
a  serpent  in  the  so-called  Book  of  Apophis  (British  Mus.  Pap.  10188,  82,  45)  and  in 
the  Turin  Pap.  (ed.  Pleyte  and  Rossi,  recto,  181,  6,  magical  text  of  the  Empire). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  7  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  201 

In  view  of  the  above  four  passages  from  Pap.  Ebers,  in  which  rk  precedes 
btw,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  doubtful  word  preceding  btw  in  our  gloss  is  to 
be  read  rk.  This  word  occurs  six  times  in  our  treatise,  and  only  twice  is  it  written 
with  the  usual  bird  In  the  other  four  cases  it  is  each  time  written  alphabetically 
thus  (IV  8;  IV  15 ;  IV  16,  twice).  In  none  of  these  four  cases  does  the  A  form 
a  ligature  with  the  — a  ;  although  in  IV  16  the  A  is  very  Bmall  and  hastily  made. 
Even  if  the  reading  ^  rJf  be  accepted,  our  text  would  still  be  out  of  order  as  compared 
with  the  four  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers,  where  rk  is  followed  by  and  btw  by  ^<?  dw 
or  d?  pw.  Nevertheless  the  use  of  the  passage  in  Ebers  establishes  it  as  a  kind  of 
verdict  characterizing  the  case  and  the  physician’s  attitude  toward  it,  like  one  of  the 
three  verdicts  in  Pap.  Smith.  One  of  these  verdicts  in  Pap.  Smith  is  used  to  charac¬ 
terize  a  patient  thus  :  “  Until  thou  knowest  whether  he  will  die  or  he  will  live, 
«S-  ?  ^  1  Zj  *or  k0  (a  case  °0  * an  ailment  with  which  I  will  con¬ 
tend’  ”  (II 11).  With  this  our  passage  is  strikingly  parallel, 

in  spite  of  the  lack  of  dr  before  ntt.  1  ' 

The  negative  to  before  btw  would  indicate  that  we  have  here  the  positive  form  of 
the  admonition  as  above,  that  is  :  “  Undertake  him,  do  not  desert  him,”  and  the  to 
before  rjc  ia  doubtless  the  introduction  to  the  quotation,  like  the  to  before  tnr  in 
verdict  2  (II  11)  just  quoted.  We  must  also  understand  that  a  case  receiving  this 
verdict  (“Undertake  him,  do  not  desert  him  ”)  is  a  serious  and  doubtful  case,  involving 
“  exhaustion  ”  (’/it).  Emending  the  text  as  follows  then  : 

J5T we  may  render  :  “  For  he  is  (a  case  of)  ‘  Undertake  [think1],  do  not  desert 
['him'1].’  ”  The  emendations  are  too  extensive  to  make  the  result  entirely  certain, 
’/if,  “  exhaustion.”  See  commentary  on  Case  6  (II  21). 

CASE  EIGHT 
IV  5-18 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OF  THE  SKULL  DISPLAYING  NO  VISIBLE 

EXTERNAL  INJURY 

This  case  like  Case  7  is  one  of  unusual  interest.  Notwithstanding  the  terrible 
blow  which  has  shattered  the  skull  like  an  egg-shell,  there  is  no  discernible  external 
contusion.  The  present  editor  would  not  of  course  feel  competent  to  express  any 
opinion  on  the  possibility  of  such  a  terrible  fracture  being  produced  without  any 
visible  external  mark,  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  some  years  ago  he  lost  a  friend  and 
colleague  whose  skull  was  fractured  in  exactly  this  manner,  though  without  any 
visible  external  contusion.  The  injury  was  caused  by  a  fall  on  an  icy  side-walk.  In 
our  case  a  set  of  alternative  symptoms  (II)  probably  gives  us  really  a  second  case. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

202  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

The  discussion  is  divided  as  follows  : 

I 

Title  (IV  5). 

Examination  (IV  5-7). 

Diagnosis  (IV  7-9),  and  Verdict  8  (IV  9). 

Treatment,  only  complete  rest  and  quiet  (IV  9). 

II 

Second  Examination  (IV  10-12).  (Duplicate  of  Examination,  Case  6,  II 19-22). 

Second  Diagnosis  (Verdict  8,  IV  12). 

No  Treatment. 

III 

Five  Glosses  (IV  12-18). 

In  the  first  set  of  symptoms  (I)  the  surgeon,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  science, 
has  noted  the  effect  of  the  cranial  injury  on  the  lower  limbs  with  reference  to  the  side 
of  the  skull  which  has  received  the  injury.  In  other  words  the  ancient  Egyptian  surgeon 
has  begun  observations  on  the  localization  of  functions  in  the  brain.  He  carefully 
notes  that  both  an  eye  that  is  askew  and  a  partially  paralysed  leg  and  foot  are  on 
the  same  side  as  the  injury  in  the  skull.  It  would  seem  that  contre-coup  must  have 
taken  place  in  the  case  which  he  is  reporting.  He  gives  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  and 
prescribes  only  quiet. 

The  second  set  of  symptoms  (II)  involves  laying  open  the  injury  and  disclosing  the 
pulsating  brain,  which  is  described  in  the  same  terms  as  in  Case  6  (II 19-22).  There¬ 
upon  the  surgeon  renders  verdict  8,  and  evidently  regards  the  case  as  hopeless,  for 
he  suggests  no  treatment. 

The  five  glosses  (III)  contain  explanations  of  extraordinary  interest.  It  is  evident 
that  the  lack  of  any  visible  external  mark  of  the  blow  creates  in  the  mind  of  the  surgeon 
the  apprehension  lest  his  readers,  possibly  his  students,  should  in  such  a  case  conclude 
that  the  observable  symptoms  may  be  due  to  disease,  or  what  might  be  termed  some 
internal  cause.  In  the  diagnosis  he  cautions  his  reader  to  regard  the  patient  as  “  one 
whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten.”  In  the  glosses  he  carefully 
explains  what  this  means,  and  warns  his  reader  that  he  is  not  dealing  with  “  the 
intrusion  of  something  which  his  (the  patient’s)  flesh  engenders,”  meaning  some 
seemingly  spontaneous  form  of  disease.  In  this  connection  the  surgeon’s  point  of 
view  toward  the  whole  range  of  casualties  afflicting  humanity  from  outside  reveals 
a  conception  of  an  accident  as  due  to  the  action  of  the  gods,  not  unlike  the  notion  of 
“  divine  Providence  ”  still  widely  current  in  our  own  day.  It  is  evident  that  “  some¬ 
thing  entering  from  outside  ”  was  actually  personified  and  deified  (see  Gloss  D). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  203 

Title 
IV  5 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head. 

Commentary 

The  meanings  of  the  above  terms  describing  this  injury  are  taken  up  in  Gloss  A 
by  the  ancient  surgeon  himself.  It  will  be  recalled  that  what  the  surgeon  calls  a 
“  smash  ”  of  the  skull  is  a  compound  comminuted  fracture,  as  shown  by  Gloss  A  in 
Case  5  (II  16-17).  See  also  the  discussion  of  the  title  of  Case  6  (II  11). 

MVWA  |  /WvWv\ 

Examination 
IV  6-7 

®  (i  I 

Cil  I  I  Q 

()<? 

sc 

I 

JSS>~ 

/a 

^  \\ 

A  \k  0 

CsW 

Q  MWM 

^X^qW 

>© 

®  NNp  A  □ 

© 

o\\ 

*  For  the  correct  form  see  Vol.  II,  PI.  IV  A,  1.  7. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  of  his  skull,  under  the  skin  of  his  head, 
while  there  is  nothing  at  all  upon  it,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou 
find  that  there  is  a  swelling  protruding  on  the  outside  of  that  smash  which  is  in  his 

oi.uchicago.edu 

204  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

skull,  while  his  eye  is  askew  because  of  it,  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury  which 
is  in  his  skull ;  (and)  he  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole,  on  the  side  of  him  having  that 
injury  which  is  in  his  skull,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  slight  variant  id  n  dnn-t-f,  “  smash  of  his  Bkull,”  while  the  title  ha3  m  “  in  ” 
his  skull,  is  of  no  significance.  As  shown  by  the  title  and  the  repetition  in  Gloss  A 
(IV  12-18),  the  scribe  has  omitted  the  first  three  signs  of  ynm,  “  skin.” 

The  scribe’s  inability  to  copy  an  excerpt  correctly  is  useful  to  us  in  the  following  : 

Examination  (IV  5)  : 

Quotation  in  Gloss  A  (IV  18) :  -jl.s21.qr! 

The  parallelism  shows  that  yh-t,  “  thing  ”  is  equivalent  to  wbnw,  “  wound.”  See 
the  discussion  of  yh-t  in  Case  4  (examination,  II  8). 

^  -=*[')  _a]  d<~r  evidently  means  “  palpate  ”  here ;  but  we  know  that  at  some  stage  of 
his  investigation  the  surgeon  cuts  through  the  unruptured  tissue  covering  the  fracture, 
for  it  is  evident  in  the  following  development  of  the  discussion  that  the  surgeon  has 
access  to  the  brain.  See  the  discussion  of  drr  “  palpate  ”  in  Case  1. 

Thb  ySw-w,  “  swelling  protruding  ”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (examination,  II 4). 

=4  hr  i',  “  on  tho  outside  of.”  This  meaning  is  demonstrated  by  the  use  of  this 
compound  preposition  as  the  opposite  of  m  hn,  “on  the  inside  of,”  e.g.,  Louvre  Stela 
C  12, 1. 8.  Of  its  surgical  use  we  have  four  examples  in  our  document  (Cases  8, 16,  21, 
and  88),  all  of  which  modify  the  phrase,  thb  ySw-w,  “  swelling  protruding.”  See  also 
for  the  medical  use  of  the  preposition,  Pap.  Ebers  60, 10,  where  it  means  “  on  the  out¬ 
side  of  ”  (both  eyes). 

gwS-t(y),  “  askew”  is  evidently  the  rare  verb  g-w-5, 

“  to  turn  aside,  divergo,  be  askew,”  or  as  an  adjective,  “  crooked.”  See  Pap.  Anast. 
IV  11, 10  ;  de  Rouge,  Inscr.  hier.  142  ;  Papyrus  of  Nesikhonsu  IV  22  ;  IV  22-28  ; 
IV  23  (Maspero,  Momies  royales,  pi.  XXVI) ;  Papyrus  judic.  de  Turin,  2,  9  ;  Maximes 
d’Ani  (Pap.  Boulaq  4),  9,  18  ;  8,  18-19.  The  determinative  varies  :  ^  (Anast.  and 
Pap.  judic.) ;  ^  (de  Rouge)  ;  and  J\  (Nesikhonsu  and  Ani). 

4krt  “  injury,”  is  doubtless  a  derivative  from  the  familiar  verb  ikr,  “  to 
strike,  to  smite,”  written  in  the  same  way.  It  must  mean  “  bruise,”  or  “  contusion,” 
and  this  is  doubtless  its  meaning  in  the  two  passages  in  which  it  occurs  in  Pap.  Ebers 
(109,  18 ;  109,  14).  It  is  not  known  elsewhere  in  the  medical  papyri,  and  occurs 
otherwise  only  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  referring  to  the  injury  to  the  eye  of  Horus, 
which  is  called  a  (ec^  Naville,  112,  6  and  8Aa).  In  Pap.  Smith  it  occurs 

seven  times  as  follows  : 

Case  8,  as  a  designation  of  the  compound  comminuted  fracture  on  the  side  of  the 
skull  (IV  7,  thrice  ;  IV  15)  with  yh  as  a  variant  (IV  15-16  twice). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  205 

Case  17,  as  a  designation  of  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  of  the  maxilla 
(VII  8). 

Case  19,  as  a  designation  of  a  perforation  in  the  temporal  bone  (VII 17). 

Case  21,  as  a  designation  of  a  split  in  the  temporal  bone  (VIII  8). 

The  surgeon  notes  that  the  affected  eye  is  on  the  same  side  as  the  injury  to  the 
skull.  He  also  observes  that  the  partially  paralysed  leg  is  on  the  same  side  as  the 
wound  in  the  skull.  It  must  be,  therefore,  that  the  case  which  he  is  recording  was  one 
in  which  the  contre-coup  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  patient’s  skull  resulted  in  paralysis 
on  the  same  side  as  that  which  had  received  tho  blow. 

Since  writing  the  above  I  have  received  the  following  interesting  remark  from 
Dr.  Luckhardt:  “  The  interpretation  of  a  contre-coup  fracture  is  convincing.  However, 
the  paragraph  dealing  with  it  is  not  quite  clear.  Early  aftor  such  an  injury  there  may 
be  a  conjugate  deviation  of  head  and  eyes  to  the  side  of  lesion  with  a  hemiplegia  of 
the  opposite  side  because  of  weakness  of  the  muscles  which  turn  the  head  and  eyes  to 
the  hemiplegia  side.  But  this  does  not  fit  this  particular  case.  This  case  can  be  inter¬ 
preted  only  as  a  contre-coup  fracture  since  the  hemiplegia  is  definitely  stated  to  be 
on  the  side  of  the  injury.” 

p(j^  Mj,  “shuffling”  is  probably  an  inaccurate  writing,  for  the  quotation  in 
Gloss  B  (IV  13)  has  hy-f.  See  commentary  on  Gloss  B. 

Diagnosis 
IV  7-9 

8 

»  Comparison  with  the  same  word  in  IV  15  shows  that  this  sign  is  certainly  l.  The  scribe  evidently 
made  some  other  sign  first,  and  then  corrected  it. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  account  him  one  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten, 
as  one  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork,  and  one  who  does  not  fall 

oi.uchicago.edu 

206  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

with  his  nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his 
nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment 
not  to  be  treated. 

Commentary 

This  obscure  diagnosis  is  almost  unintelligible  in  the  second  and  third  items. 
The  first  is  fairly  clear.  It  is  intended  to  affirm  that  the  symptoms  observed  are  due  to 
an  injury  arising  from  an  external  cause,  and  by  implication,  as  explained  in  Gloss  D, 
not  due  to  the  “  penetration  of  something  which  his  flesh  engenders  ”  (IV  17).  This 
distinction  is  obviously  made  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  absence  of  any  visible 
external  injury  might  mislead  the  surgeon  to  conclude  that  the  symptoms  were  due 
to  some  internal  disorder  arising  from  disease  “  which  his  flesh  engenders.”  It  can 
hardly  be  doubted  that  the  second  and  third  items  of  the  diagnosis  are  similar  indica¬ 
tions  of  causes  or  symptoms  affirmed  not  to  be  present,  and  evidently  concerning  the 
shoulder  and  hand  on  the  side  affected.  Apparently  the  condition  of  the  patient  is 
similar  to  that  resulting  from  some  other  injury  or  disease,  producing  the  symptoms 
noted  in  the  second  and  third  items,  and  the  surgeon  is  warned  against  false  conclusions 
resulting  from  this  similarity.  These  matters  will  be  found  discussed  in  Gloss  E. 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  items  two  and  three  of  this  diagnosis  contain  two 
scribal  errors.  The  initial  — j  of  “  fork,”  is  an  error  for  initial  ,  which  the  scribe 
has  written  correctly  in  Gloss  E  (IV  17)  and  elsewhere  in  our  treatise.  Again  the  ^ 
of  the  second  item  should  be  the  negative  as  likewise  shown  by  Gloss  E  (IV  17). 

All  other  items  of  the  diagnosis  have  occurred  before  and  will  be  found  discussed 
above  (I  20). 

In  spite  of  its  obscurity  this  diagnosis  is  the  most  important  one  in  our  entire 
treatise.  It  discloses  its  unique  character  in  the  first  place,  in  the  fact  that  it  is  not 
in  the  usual  form  and  is  not  introduced  by  the  otherwise  invariable  formula,  “  Thou 
shouldst  say  concerning  him,  etc.”  It  is  evident  that  this  departure  from  the  usual 
form  is  due  to  the  apprehension  of  the  surgeon  lest  his  reader  should  make  the  mistaken 
conclusion  that  the  symptoms  are  in  any  way  due  to  internal  causes,  rather  than  to 
the  externally  invisible  injury,  which  nevertheless  originated  externally.  In  view  of 
the  hopelessness  of  the  case,  this  anxiety  of  the  surgeon  to  ensure  a  right  understanding 
of  it  is  a  remarkable  evidence  of  his  scientific  interest.  Throughout  the  treatise 
he  shows  his  understanding  of  the  fact  that  the  troubles  he  is  treating  are  due  to 
intelligible  physical  causes,  not  to  demoniacal  invasion.  In  the  discussion  of  this 
case,  however,  the  surgeon  really  makes  some  effort  to  define  this  distinction  in 
scientific  terms,  although  undoubtedly  hampered  in  this  effort  by  the  superstitions 
of  his  age.  See  the  discussion  of  this  diagnosis  in  the  Introduction,  pp.  49-50. 

The  hopeless  conclusion  (verdict  8)  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5  (II 15) ;  see 
also  the  introduction  to  the  treatise  (pp.  46-48). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  207 

Treatment 
IV  9 

Translation 

His  treatment  is  sitting,  until  he  Tgains  color!,  (and)  until  thou  knowest  he  has 
reached  the  decisive  point. 

Commentary 

The  treatment  in  this  case  consists  simply  in  keeping  the  patient  quiet,  in  a  restful 
posture.  See  discussion  in  Case  4  (II  7).  The  o<?  pw  employed  in  this  sentence  in 
Cases  4  and  7  is  omitted  here. 

occurs  here  for  the  first  time  in  such  medical  connection  as  a  sympto¬ 
matic  indication,  presumably  of  the  patient’s  facial  color.  The  word  is  used  of 
both  natural  and  artificial  coloring :  of  a  cyst  (Ebers  108,  20-109,  1)  ;  of  a  calf 
(Newberry,  Beni  Hasan,  Vol.  II,  pi.  VII);  of  a  woman  (Tale  of  the  Herdsman,  Berlin 
Pap.  8024,  160);  wooden  chariots  (Annals  of  Thutmose  III,  Urk.  IV,  690) ;  a  coffin 
(Berlin  Pap.  10496,  verso  18) ;  clothing  (often  in  Papyrus  Harris).  It  seems  to  mean 
“  brightly  colored,”  or  “parti-colored.”  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  rendering  “  gain 
color  ”  as  above  is  correct.  The  ancient  commentator  furnishes  no  explanatory  gloss. 

Second  Examination 
IV  10-12 

10 

Compare  II  21  where  ®  is  certain. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

208  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

sic 

Translation 

Now  as  soon  as  thou  findest  that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  like  those  corrugations 
which  form  on  molten  copper,  (and)  something  therein  throbbing  and  fluttering  under 
thy  fingers  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  knits  together — when  it  has 
happenod  thero  is  no  throbbing  and  fluttering  under  thy  fingers,  until  the  brain  of  his 
(the  patient’s)  skull  is  rent  open — (and)  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  and 
both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclusion  in  second  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

Wo  have  hero  a  group  of  symptoms  which  are  a  duplicate  of  the  examination 
in  Case  6  (II  19-22),  and  will  be  found  fully  discussed  there.  Some  variants,  etc. 
should  be  noted. 

yr  dr,  “  now  as  soon  as,”  as  in  II  6  and  III  7.  Hence  the  symptoms  are 
probably  those  of  a  second  stage  of  the  same  case. 

hd,  “  weak  place,”  is  a  variant  quite  different  from  ’ht  of  Case  6.  It  is 
doubtless  a  scribal  error  for  7a  =  H  nhd,  which  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  7,  Gloss 
J  (IV  4)  and  Case  6  (II  21). 

ts-t-f,  “  it  is  knit  together.”  See  variant  in  II  21  (p.  169).  Gram¬ 
matically  it  may  bo  passive  in  tw,  or  sdmd-f  with  negative  -  “  not  yet.” 

—  for  the  more  common  is  of  course  a  well-known  variant.  See  the  same 
writing  in  Case  20  (VIII  4). 

The  observation  of  the  pulsations  in  the  brain,  beneath  a  fracture  which  has  been 
accompanied  by  no  visible  external  injury  or  rupture  of  the  soft  tissue  over  the 
fracture,  would  of  course  be  impossible  unless  the  surgeon  operated  and  laid  back 
a  flap  of  skin  covering  the  fracture.  It  is  strange  that  the  ancient  surgeon  makes  no 
mention  of  this  procedure  ;  but  it  is  perhaps  due  to  the  fact  that  he  regards  the  case 
as  hopeless  and  suggests  no  treatment.  The  omission  of  all  reference  to  any  possible 
treatment  may  have  resulted  in  the  omission  of  any  mention  of  the  operation  also ; 
on  the  other  hand  the  direction  to  “  palpate  ”  in  the  examination  may  have  been 
regarded  by  the  surgeon  as  a  sufficiently  clear  indication  that  the  fracture  was  to  be 
rendered  accessible. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  20Q 

Second  Diagnosis 
IV  12 

Translation 

[Thou  shouldst  say] :  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

As  in  Case  6  the  surgeon  attempts  no  further  diagnosis  than  the  unfavorable 
verdict.  He  evidently  considers  that  the  conditions  disclosed  by  the  second  examina¬ 
tion  make  the  case  hopeless.  He  therefore  appends  the  unfavorable  verdict  3  and 
leaves  the  case  without  suggesting  any  treatment.  Verdict  3  will  bo  found  discussed 
in  Case  5  (II 15)  and  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46-48). 

Gloss  A 
IV  12-13 

Explaining :  A  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no 
wound  upon  it. 

Kir.  O 

o  □(? 

I  I  I  Q 

O© 

1  i^w 

11  ©  (p 

.y,  A  K  A 

/ 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  A  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no  wound 
at  all  upon  it,”  it  means  a  smash  of  the  shell  of  his  skull,  the  flesh  of  his  head  being 
uninjured. 

Commentary 

The  gloss  has  misquoted  the  text  of  the  case  which  reads  :  “  there  being  nothing 
at  all  upon  it  ”  (IV  5).  This  does  indeed  need  some  explanation,  but  when  converted 
into  “  there  being  no  wound  at  all  upon  it,”  the  misquotation  furnishes  a  large  part 
of  the  explanation.  One  would  like  to  know  whether  this  inaccuracy  in  quotation 
was  due  to  the  scribe  or  to  the  commenting  surgeon  himself.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that 

p 

oi.uchicago.edu 

210 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

the  scribe,  reading  “  nothing  at  all,”  and  knowing  what  it  meant,  thoughtlessly  wrote 
its  meaning,  viz.  “  no  wound  at  all.”  See  discussion  of  yh‘t,  “  thing  ”  in  Case  4  (II  8). 

i®  obviously  a  scribal  error  for  P’H  “shell.” 

See  Case  4  (II  9). 

The  negative  statement  that  there  is  “  no  wound  at  all  upon  it  ”  is  followed  by  the 
positive  corollary  that  the  flesh  of  his  head  is  whole.  The  verb  in  the  Egyptian  <?  | 
wd » literally  means  “  to  be  whole,”  not  as  I  have  rendered  in  English,  “  to  be  unin¬ 
jured  ;  ” — that  is,  it  does  not  have  the  force  of  a  denial  of  injury  (which  is  expressed 
in  the  preceding  denial  of  the  existence  of  an  external  wound),  but  an  assertion  of 
soundness. 

Gloss  B 
IV  18-15 

Explaining  :  He  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole. 

it— ’sekd.-M'-UZ  “ 

15 

i  i 

i  i  i 

I  o 

r 

<?i  i  i 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  He  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole,”  he  (the  surgeon)  is  speaking  about  his 
walking  with  his  sole  dragging,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  him  to  walk,  when  it  (the  sole) 
iB  feeble  and  turned  over,  while  the  tips  of  his  toes  are  contracted  to  the  ball  of  his  sole, 
and  they  (the  toes)  walk  fumbling  the  ground.  He  (the  surgeon)  says  :  “  He  shuffles,” 
concerning  it. 

Commentary 

iy-j.  The  quotation  in  the  gloss  inserts  /,  which  is  lacking  in  the  text 
of  the  case  (IV  7).  This  word  is  probably  different  from  p!)ji  of  the  Nastesen  stela 
(cf.  Maspero,  Mil.  d’archeol.  Ill,  p.  126,  note  5;  suggested  to  me  by  Devaud). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  211 

Its  meaning  is  sufficiently  clear  from  its  use  in  our  Case  8,  which  is  the  only  case 
employing  it  in  Papyrus  Smith. 

nny-ty,  from  the  verb  nny,  means  “  to  move  feebly,”  “  to  drag  sluggishly 
along  ”  as  of  slack  inundation  water,  or  of  uncontrolled  urine  dribbling  sluggishly 
(seeX  22).  The  <=>  was  inserted  by  the  scribe  in  red. 

“  turned  over,”  is  known  as  early  as  the  Pyramid  Texts 
(685  a).  Besides  this  gloss  it  occurs  once  more  in  our  treatise  in  Case  84  to  describe 
a  dislocated  clavicle  (XI 18),  but  it  is  there  written  phd.  It  is  evidently  identical 
with  the  frequent  verb  phd,  employed  especially  in  the  hymns  of  victory  in 

the  Eighteenth  and  Nineteenth  Dynasties  to  describe  the  overthrow  of  the  enemy. 
In  Greek  times  it  is  twice  written  with  an  overturned  ship  as  determinative. 

®!  tp-w,  “  tips,”  literally  “  heads.”  On  the  anatomical  use  of  the  word  to  indicate 
“  ends  ”  or  “  tips,”  see  Case  1  (lost  column,  commentary  on  m  tp-f,  p.  85). 

^  h-t,  “  ball  ”  of  the  foot.  I  can  find  no  other  example  for  this  meaning  of  the 
word,  but  followed  as  it  is  by  the  words  “  of  his  sole  ”  the  usual  meaning  “  belly  ” 
can  hardly  be  understood  as  anything  else  than  “  ball.” 

y*  h'h',  “  fumble,”  is  a  rare  word.  It  is  known  elsewhere  in  the  medical 
papyri  only  in  the  obscure  passage  in  Ebers  in  which  it  designates  some  ailment  of 
the  heart  (Ebers  101,  8).  Its  ordinary  meaning  seems  to  bo  to  “  go  astray,  wander, 
err,”  related  doubtless  to  the  common  verb  hyhy,  “  to  seek.”  Tho  rare  examples  : 
If  3^©^  h'h‘  (Granite  statue,  Cairo  Cat.  547  =  Urk.  IV,  994)  and  (Theban 

Tomb  of  >$,  Tomb  No.  110)  refer  to  loss  of  the  mummy.  Cf.  Davies,  Amarna, 
Vol.  V,  pi.  XXVIII.  The  rendering  “  fumble  ”  seems  to  convey  tho  idea  intended 
by  the  surgeon — tho  action  of  a  partially  paralysed  and  contracted  foot,  shuffling 
along  in  the  helpless  effort  to  walk. 

Gloss  C 

IV  15-16 

Explaining  :  One  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten. 

4 — 0  /vwwa 

A 

Ac±\  i  i 

0  w 

a  This  seeming  is  obviously  to  be  read  o.  See  original  in  IV  7,  and  compare  (IV  12)  in 
which  «=»  also  appears  as  a  straight  line  like  hieratic 

oi.uchicago.edu 

212 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  One  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten  ”  on  the  side 
of  him  having  this  injury,  it  means  one  whom  something  entering  from  outside  presses, 
on  the  side  of  him  having  this  injury. 

Commentary 

The  commentator  has  included  in  his  quotation  the  words  “  on  the  side  of  him 
having  this  injury,”  but  this  is  an  error,  for  they  do  not  belong  in  the  above  context 
(IV  7-8),  but  were  used  in  the  earlier  discussion  of  the  affected  eye  and  the  paralysed 
foot  “  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury  ”  (IV  6-7).  There  is  no  relevancy  in  their 
inclusion  in  the  text  to  be  explained  in  the  above  gloss.  They  present  an  interesting 
variant,  the  use  of  the  word  IJra3^  2/h  where  the  original  phrase  has  skr. 

“  Pr©8ses,”  is  the  important  word  of  the  explanation,  and  un¬ 
doubtedly  indicates  that  the  chief  cause  of  trouble  from  this  injury  iB  the  intrusive 
pressure  on  the  brain  from  without. 

Globs  D 

IV  16-17 

Explaining  :  Something  entering  from  outside 

<1- 

At 

A 

w 

F==) 

(?□(?  — fj  | 

j  P  Zl 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Something  entering  from  outside,”  it  means  the  breath  of  an  outside 
god  or  death  ;  not  the  intrusion  of  something  which  his  flesh  engenders. 

Commentary 

In  the  preceding  gloss  the  surgeon  shows  a  perfectly  rational  comprehension  of 
an  external  physical  cause.  In  the  last  item  of  the  above  explanation  :  “  not  the 
intrusion  of  something  which  his  flesh  engenders,”  there  is  again  a  clear  distinction 
between  an  internal  affection,  “  something  which  his  flesh  engenders,”  arising  as  it 
seemB  to  the  Egyptian  surgeon  from  within,  and  the  external  physical  cause  of  this 
injury  with  its  resulting  internal  disturbances.  This  rational  distinction  is  unmis¬ 
takable  and  demonstrates  the  surgeon’s  ability  to  discriminate  judicially  in  the  world 
of  objective  phenomena  and  natural  causes.  But  side  by  side  with  this  scientific 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  213 

attitude  of  mind,  we  find  equally  unmistakable  evidences  of  ancient  superstition. 
In  the  experience  of  early  man  the  power  of  the  gods  impinged  hourly  upon  the  daily 
life  of  man,  and  in  the  earliest  scientific  investigation  of  the  human  body  the  surgeon 
could  not  entirely  divest  himself  of  such  primitive  prepossessions.  Even  in  the 
thought  of  a  scientifically  minded  surgeon  the  accidental  injury  which  he  calls  “  some¬ 
thing  entering  from  outside  ”  has  not  taken  place  without  some  relation  to  divine 
decrees.  I  cannot  find  this  phrase  “  something  entering  from  outside  ”  in  any  of  the 
other  medical  papyri,  except  in  Papyrus  Ebers,  where  it  occurs  only  once,  and  in  this 
unique  passage  it  is  given  a  very  interesting  and  unique  writing  (Ebers  102,  14-15). 
It  has  heretofore  been  read  m  hr-t  (e.g.,  Wreszinski,  Der  Papyrus 

Ebers,  p.  212) ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  last  word  is  not  hr-t,  but  ff"^t=irwty. 
The  group  appears  twice  in  our  gloss  (Pap.  Smith  IV  16)  and  the  first  writing  of  the 
two  is  less  cursive,  disclosing  the  true  reading  rwty  quite  unmistakably.  In  Pap.  Ebers 
therefore  the  phrase  is  to  be  read :  What  makes  this  appearance 

of  the  term  in  Pap.  Ebers  of  especial  interest  and  importance  is  the  insertion  after  it 
of  the  figure  of  a  god  as  determinative.  What  god  is  meant  is  impossible  to  determine.1 
The  important  point  to  notice  is,  that  for  the  physician  of  Pap.  Ebers,  “  something 
entering  from  outside  ”  is  personified  and  deified.  The  accident  from  without,  the 
external  casualty,  is  a  Tvxy,  a  Fortuna,  or  rather  a  “  Fortuitas,”  always  unfavorable. 
It  is  the  surgeon’s  force  majeure,  always  to  him  a  mystery.  A  serious  accident  was 
not  thinkable  without  the  decree  of  the  controlling  deity.  And  so  our  surgeon  explains 
“  something  entering  from  outside  ”  as  “  the  breath  of  an  outside  god,”  and  possibly 
alternative  to  this  is  “  death.”  The  two  are  set  up  here  side  by  side  :  one  the  stroke 
of  the  fatal  accident ;  the  other  a  casualty  from  which  one  may  survive,  if  not  assured 
life,  which  would  be  the  logical  correlative  of  “  death.”  Among  the  superstitions  of 
the  Pap.  Ebers  is  one  which  has  bearing  here.  Its  author  in  discussing  the  blood-vessels 
says  that  there  are  four  leading  to  the  ears,  two  to  each  ear  : 

. 

“  The  breath  of  life  enters  at  the  right  ear  ;  the  breath  of  death  enters  at  the  left 
ear  ”  (Ebers  100,  3-4).  The  surgeon  of  Pap.  Smith  is  pathologically  more  sound.  In 
the  first  place  he  recognizes  that  the  accident  may  be  on  either  side,  and  that  on  either 
side  “  something  entering  from  the  outside  ”  is  either  : 

(1)  “  the  breath  of  an  outside  god  ;  ”  or 

(2)  “  death.” 

1  It  is  impossible  to  recognize  this  divine  figure,  although  it  may  be  that  of  a  buck.  Moeller  has 
included  the  figure  in  his  list  (I  76) ;  but  it  is  his  only  example,  and  he  does  not  attempt  to  connect 
it  with  any  known  hieroglyphic  form. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

214 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

(1)  corresponds  to  “  the  breath  of  life  ”  in  Pap.  Ebers,  and  seems  to  mean  possible 
survival  for  the  sufferer ;  (2)  means  a  fatal  accident  and  seems  not  to  be  personified 
or  deified.  In  our  gloss  a  good  deal  turns  on  the  interpretation  of  r'-pw,  “  or.” 
Does  it  in  Egyptian  always  mean  that  something  different  is  introduced  as  an  alternative, 
or  something  identical  merely  mentioned  again  under  another  name  ;  as  we  may  say 
“  twenty  shillings,  or  one  pound.”  In  this  case  the  two  terms  on  both  sides  of  “  or  ” 
are  identical  in  essential  meaning.  If  we  could  so  interpret  our  gloss,  “  death  ”  would 
be  simply  a  synonym  of  “  the  breath  of  an  outside  god.”  In  this  case  the  force  of  r'-pw 
would  be  simply  “  namely,”  or  “  that  is,”  for  which  the  Egyptian  usually  employed 
as  is  well  known. 

I)—*  yn,  “  not,”  is  a  rare  negative.  See  Gunn,  Syntax,  pp.  89-90. 

[I^  i-'ht-n,  literally  rendered  means  “  what  (that  which  his  flesh  engenders) 
brings  in.” 

Gloss  E 
IV  17-18 

Explaining :  One  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork,  and  who 
does  not  fall  with  his  nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm 

A 

o\\ 

-oA\ 

18 

- n  ^ 

<i> 

I 

<!■ 

'©"r 

□» 

A 

c i 

5=^=5 

-  1 

»  The  scribe  has  omitted  the  w  of  pw. 

•>  This  n  was  at  first  omitted  by  the  scribe  and  corrected  into  the  text  in  red  ink  above  the  line, 
after  the  line  was  complete. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  One  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork,  and  who  does 
not  fall  with  his  nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm  ”  it  means  that  he  says :  “  One  to  whom 
the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork  is  not  given,  and  one  who  does  not  fall  with  his  nails  in 
the  middle  of  his  palm.” 

Commentary 

This  gloss,  intended  to  explain  the  difficult  statement  of  symptoms  in  the  diagnosis 
( IV  7-9) ,  hardly  accomplishes  its  purpose  for  a  modern  reader.  In  the  first  place  the  last 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  8  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  215 

item  of  the  explanation  merely  repeats  the  text  to  be  explained ;  and  the  first  item  is  too 
obscure  to  aid  us.  A  number  of  errors  in  the  original  text  of  the  diagnosis  are  corrected, 
and  these  corrections  are  useful.  The  word  W-t,  written  rmr,t  in  IY  8,  is  correctly 
written  here.  We  have  here  literally  “  the  fork  of  his  shoulder,”  that  is  “  his  shoulder- 
fork,”  while  the  diagnosis  had  less  clearly  “  the  fork  in  his  shoulder  ”  (IV  8).  The 
diagnosis  has  nty  hr,  “  one  who  falls,”  which  is  here  corrected  to 

ywty  hr,  “  one  who  does  not  fall.”  In  view  of  the  explanation  in  the  gloss  which 
uses  tm  hr,  “  one  who  does  not  fall,”  with  the  negative  tm,  duly  spelled 

out,  it  is  evident  that  the  ancient  commentator  accepted  the  negative  force  as  the  correct 
one.  Dr.  Luckhardt’s  comment  below  indicates  good  internal  reasons  for  not  accepting 
the  negative  reading. 

As  already  noted  above  in  the  commentary  on  the  diagnosis,  the  surgeon  is  warned 
against  mistaking  the  symptoms  in  Case  8  for  those  of  a  patient  who  exhibits  some 
affection  of  the  shoulder  and  who  falls  down  with  his  fist  clenched  and  his  finger  nails 
tight  against  the  palm  of  his  hand.  It  is  important  in  this  case  to  note  that  the  word 
"  hand  ”  or  “  palm  ”  is  not  written  in  the  dual.  He  is  thinking  of  an  injury  which 
affects  only  one  side.  The  same  is  true  of  the  word  “  shoulder.”  When  the  patient 
with  a  stiff  neck  is  told  to  look  at  “  his  shoulders,”  the  dual  indicating  both  shoulders 
is  regularly  indicated  by  the  scribe  (see  above  Case  8).  Here  however  we  are  dealing 
with  a  symptom  discernible  in  one  shoulder  only,  and  the  word  is  correctly  written 
in  the  singular. 

Turning  now  to  the  details  of  these  similar  symptoms,  which  however  our 
patient  of  Case  8  does  not  exhibit,  we  may  note  the  following  points. 

i-jh  literally  means  “  to  cause  to  be  loose  ”  or  “  to  loosen,”  but  its  exact 
surgical  significance  is  not  determinable.  It  is  not  the  usual  term  for  “  dislocate,” 
for  which  our  treatise  employs  vmh.  I  have  supposed  it  indicated  a  stiff 

joint  due  to  contraction  of  the  ligaments,  which  the  patient  is  unable  to  “  release  ” 

m)- 

n‘*  literally  “  the  fork  of  his  shoulder.”  The  rare 
and  interesting  word  ,mr-t  means  a  “  two-toed  claw  ”  or  a  “  fork,”  as  is  shown  in  Case 
22,  Gloss  A  (VIII 14-15).  It  is  primarily  applied  to  the  fork  at  the  top  of  the  ramus,  and 
must  designate  here  some  bone  of  the  shoulder  sufficiently  double  at  the  end  to  be 
called  a  “  fork,”  like  the  claw  of  a  two-toed  bird.  It  may  be  that  the  two  projecting 
processes  at  the  top  of  the  shoulder-blade  ( scapula )  are  meant ;  that  is  the  acromion 
and  the  coracoid  process,  which  are  not  unsuggestive  of  a  bird’s  claw.  In  view  of  the 
other  symptom  affecting  the  hand,  one  would  look  for  some  bone  of  the  arm  as  the 
one  affected.  It  may  be  therefore  that  the  top  of  the  ulna  is  meant,  where  the  olecranon 
and  the  coronoid  process  project  to  form,  it  is  true,  a  much  less  pronounced  fork.  Here 
then  at  the  shoulder  would  be  the  articulation  which  the  patient  is  said  to  be  unable 

oi.uchicago.edu 

216  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

to  “  release,”  or  the  “  head  ”  of  which,  according  to  the  gloss,  “  is  not  given  ”  to 
the  patient. 

The  other  item  of  these  symptoms  consists  of  two  observations  :  the  patient  does 
or  does  not  fall  prostrate  and  lie  with  clenched  fist  so  that  his  finger  nails  “  are  in  the 
middle  of  his  palm.”  Two  possible  alternative  renderings  should  be  considered  here. 
It  is  possible  that  “finger  nails ”  should  be  construed  as  the  subject  of  “fall,”  in  which 
case  we  must  render  “  one  whose  finger  nails  fall  into  the  palm  of  his  hand.”  This  in 
itself  would  eliminate  the  falling  of  the  patient.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  word 
rn-t,  “  finger-nail,”  is  written  in  the  singular,  both  in  the  diagnosis  (IV  8)  and 
in  the  gloss  (IV  18  twice),  so  that  we  have  it  written  three  times,  all  in  the  singular. 
<■»•{  designates  the  whole  “  claw  ”  of  a  bird,  as  in  VIII 15,  and  the  rendering  “  finger¬ 
nails,”  meaning  as  it  were  the  whole  claw  of  the  hand,  has  therefore  been  retained 
as  probable.  On  the  basis  of  this  rendering  it  remains  for  the  pathologist  to  suggest 
what  ailment  is  indicated. 

Dr.  Luckhardt  has  kindly  added  the  following  important  remarks  on  this  diffi¬ 
cult  passage : 

“  My  interpretation  of  this  case  is  as  follows  :  The  surgeon  sees  this  patient  some 
time  after  the  injury.  I  base  this  statement  on  the  stated  fact  that  the  patient  ‘  walks 
shuffling  with  his  sole.’  Immediately  after  an  injury  to  the  brain  involving  the  motor 
cortex  (or  internal  capsule)  the  opposite  side  of  the  body  would  be  paralysed  (hemi¬ 
plegia)  and  walking  would  be  impossible.  However,  the  hemiplegic  recovers  the  power 
of  walking  even  if,  after  a  few  months,  the  affected  arm  may  at  that  time  still  remain 
powerless.  At  this  time  the  arm  is  particularly  affected  by  what  is  termed  ‘  contracture.’ 
The  upper  arm  is  adducted  (at  the  shoulder).  This  the  scribe  characterizes  as  ‘  one  who 
does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork.’  The  lower  arm  is  bent  at  a  right  or 
acute  angle  with  a  pronated  and  slightly  flexed  hand  and  with  the  proximal  phalanges, 
and  particularly  the  terminal  ones,  quite  flexed.  Since  the  upper  arm  is  adducted  and 
fingors  flexed,  such  a  patient  would  fall  as  ‘  one  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his 
shoulder-fork,’  and  ‘  who  falls  while  the  nails  are  in  the  palm  of  his  hand.’  What  I 
cannot  understand  is  that  the  gloss  reads  ‘  one  who  does  not  fall  while  his  nails  are  in 
the  palm  of  his  hand.’  It  would  seem  to  me  that  one  must  accept  the  positive  form  as 
given  in  the  beginning  of  this  history  as  the  correct  one.  The  negative  form  in  the 
gloss  would  seem  to  be  an  error  of  the  scribe.  When  a  normal  person  falls  during  walking 
ho  involuntarily  extends  the  hand  at  the  wrist  and  extends  and  abducts  his  fingers.  He 
breaks  the  fall  by  extension  of  the  upper  arm  (not  abduction)  and  landing  on  the  palm 
of  his  hand,  not  ‘  while  his  nails  are  in  the  middle  of  his  palm.’  ” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  9  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  217 

CASE  NINE 
IV  19-V  5 

WOUND  IN  THE  FOREHEAD  PRODUCING  A  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED 
FRACTURE  OF  THE  SKULL 

The  examination  in  this  case  contains  only  an  inaccurate  repetition  of  the  title  ; 
the  treatment  which  immediately  follows  this  examination  is  a  recipe,  a  grotesque 
product  of  superstition  and  belief  in  magic,  accompanied  indeed  by  a  magical  charm 
to  be  repeated  over  it  in  order  to  ensure  its  efficacy  !  It  is  obviously  not  an  accident 
that  a  discussion  containing  a  treatment  of  this  character  should  at  the  same  time  not 
only  lack  an  examination  containing  any  observations,  but  also  contain  no  diagnosis 
nor  any  verdict !  Without  these  essentials  of  our  surgeon’s  customary  method,  the 
case  becomes  merely  a  recipe  to  which  have  been  prefixed  a  title  and  the  undeveloped 
formula  of  examination  introducing  no  observations.  The  entire  discussion  is  without 
any  doubt  a  characteristic  product  of  the  recipe-hawking  physician  (as  contrasted  with 
the  surgeon).  See  the  discussion  of  this  case  in  the  Introduction,  pp.  42-48. 

This  case  represents  our  surgeon’s  sole  relapse  into  the  superstition  of  his  age,  of 
which  he  has  elsewhere  so  surprisingly  divested  himself.  It  was  doubtless  the  resem¬ 
blance  of  the  frontal  bone  to  a  segment  of  the  shell  of  an  ostrich’s  egg,  which  beguiled 
some  ancient  physician  into  the  belief  that  a  paste  made  by  triturating  the  shell  of  an 
ostrich’s  egg  would  be  efficacious  in  healing  a  shattered  frontal  bono  !  Such  a  recipe 
and  such  a  method  of  treatment  are  obviously  drawn  from  current  folk  medicine 
universally  practiced  in  ancient  oriental  lands.  The  recipe  must  have  circulated  in 
one  of  the  recipe-papyri  which  have  hitherto  constituted  our  sole  inheritance  from 
ancient  Egyptian  medicine.  We  cannot  but  wonder  whether  our  observant  surgeon 
could  really  have  allowed  himself  to  take  over  into  his  extraordinary  treatise  on  cases, 
a  discussion  which  was  such  a  typical  product  of  the  recipe-mongering  physician  of 
the  time.  The  character  of  our  ancient  book  therefore  raises  the  question  whether 
some  later  copyist  is  not  to  be  held  responsible  for  the  insertion  of  this  solitary 
example  of  a  folk-loristic  recipe  into  his  otherwise  surprisingly  rational  treatise. 

Title 
IV  19 

*  The  scribe  wrote  O'  yb,  “heart”  immediately  after  the  word  “instructions,”  but  noticed 
the  error  and  canceled  the  word  with  an  oblique  stroke  of  black  ink  over  the  red  of  the  rubric. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

218  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  9 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  forehead,  smashing  the  shell  of  his  skull. 

Commentary 

P’^'L  nt  dnn-t-f,  “  shell  of  his  skull,”  is  evidently  here  the  frontal 
bone,  the  squama  frontalis.  On  our  surgeon’s  use  of  the  word  p’JH,  see  above  Case  4, 
Gloss  A. 

“  smashing,”  see  Case  5,  Gloss  A. 
dnn-t,  “  skull,”  see  above,  Case  1,  title,  commentary  on  ® . 

Examination 

IV  19-20 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  forehead,  smashing  the  shell  of 
his  head,  (conclusion  in  treatment). 

Commentary 

This  case  exhibits  the  methods  and  the  form  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  materials  in 
Papyrus  Ebers.  There  is  no  real  examination,  and  its  place  is  taken  by  a  mere 
repetition  of  the  title.  Even  in  this  repetition  the  word  “  skull  ”  of  the  title  is  replaced 
by  the  vague  and  inexact  word  "  head  ”  (d>d‘).  There  is  no  diagnosis,  nor  any  verdict, 
but  after  the  suggestion  of  an  examination,  the  discussion  turns  at  once  to  a  grossly 
superstitious  and  unscientific  treatment. 

Treatment 
IV  20-V  4 

Mo 

ToWTf,?, 

i 

A 

~\nt 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  9  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  219 

foWH^Mr,0, 

tic 

a  This  word  was  at  first  omitted  by  the  scribe  and  afterward  inserted  in  red  ink  above  the  line. 
Its  exact  position  in  the  line  was  then  indicated  by  a  tiny  x  in  red  between  gmm-k  and  pyk~t. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  prepare  for  him  the  egg  of  an  ostrich,  triturated  with  grease  (and) 
placed  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound.  Now  afterward  thou  shouldst  prepare  for  him 
the  egg  of  an  ostrich,  triturated  and  made  into  poultices  for  drying  up  that  wound. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

220  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  9 

Thou  shouldst  apply  to  it  for  him  a  covering  for  physician’s  use ;  thou  shouldst 
uncover  it  the  third  day,  (and)  find  it  knitting  together  the  shell,  the  color  being  like 
the  egg  of  an  ostrich. 

That  which  is  to  be  said  as  a  charm  over  this  recipe  : 

Repelled  is  the  enemy  that  is  in  the  wound ! 

Cast  out  is  the  revil"1  that  is  in  the  blood, 

The  adversary  of  Horus,  Ton  everyl  side  of  the  mouth  of  Isis. 

This  temple  does  not  fall  down  ; 

There  is  no  enemy  of  the  vessel  therein. 

I  am  under  the  protection  of  Isis  ; 

My  rescue  is  the  son  of  Osiris. 

Now  afterward  thou  shouldst  cool  [it]  for  him  [with]  a  compress  of  figs,  grease, 
and  honey,  cooked,  cooled  and  applied  to  it. 

Commentary 

This  treatment  is  a  curious  hodge-podge  of  superstitions,  without  a  suggestion  of 
the  scientific  attitude  of  mind  which  is  so  prominent  in  the  ancient  surgeon’s  discussion 
of  the  other  cases.  As  already  stated,  the  significance  of  the  “  egg  of  an  ostrich  ” 
without  doubt  lies  in  its  resemblance  to  the  frontal  bone.  In  some  way  the  soundness 
of  the  egg-shell,  not  vitiated  by  its  being  triturated,  is  conveyed  to  the  fractured  shell 
of  the  skull.  All  this  folk  superstition  is  then  reinforced  by  the  recitation  of  a  magical 
charm.  In  the  customary  practice  of  medicine  the  procedure  of  the  physician  was 
of  course  dictated  by  the  current  superstitions  of  the  day,  among  which  the  mythical 
story  of  the  rivalry  between  Horus,  the  good  and  faithful  son  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  and 
Set,  the  malicious  and  destroying  enemy,  played  a  great  part.  The  wounds  of  the  two 
heroes  in  their  combat  with  each  other,  and  the  maternal  solicitudo  of  Isis  in  caring 
for  the  injury  of  her  son  Horus,  constantly  appear  in  the  physician’s  charms.  The 
same  means  employed  so  successfully  by  Isis  in  relieving  Horus  are  frequently  referred 
to  in  the  spells  uttered  by  the  medical  man.  The  patient  becomes  Horus;  his  ailment 
is  Set,  the  enemy  of  Horus  and  murderer  of  Osiris  the  father  of  Horus.  Hence  in 
the  above  charm,  “  the  enemy  that  is  in  the  wound  ”  and  the  “  adversary  of  Horus  ” 
are  of  course  Set,  while  the  patient  enjoys  the  “  protection  of  Isis  ”  and  of  Horus,  “  the 
son  of  Osiris  ”  and  Isis. 

The  following  matters  of  detail  require  some  explanation  : 

m°i  (or  “  poultices.”  The  word  occurs  only  in  Pap.  Ebers  and 

in  our  treatise.  In  Ebers  it  is  written  with  the  sign  *=  tm,  showing  that  we  must 
read  tm  and  not  rm  (see  Ebers  78, 14  and  15).  The  form  of  the  root  is  a  little  uncer¬ 
tain.  In  Ebers  it  is  written  all  four  times  tmt-w.  Of  the  three  passages  in  Pap.  Smith 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  9  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  221 

two  write  tmt-w,  and  one  (IV  21)  tm-wt.  It  may  therefore  be  a  masculine  noun  fmf, 
plural  tmt-w  ;  or  a  feminine  noun  tm-t,  plural  tm-wt ;  but  the  genitive  n  in  the  masculine 
(Ebers  91,8;  though  it  should  be  nw)  favors  the  masculine  tmt-w.  It  is  not  to  be  con¬ 
fused  with  tmy-t,  which  is  some  sort  of  disease  (e.g.,  Mutter  und  Kind, 

I,  4,  etc.).  Our  word  tmt-w  has  commonly  been  translated  “  boluses.”  If  bolus  is 
understood  as  a  remedy  administered  internally  (that  is  through  the  mouth),  this 
rendering  is  clearly  incorrect.  The  word  appears  only  four  times  in  Pap.  Ebers.  It 
is  employed  once  for  application  to  diseased  toes,  doubtless  some  rheumatoid  or  gouty 
trouble,  so  commonly  discernible  in  the  feet  of  ancient  Egyptian  bodies  from  the 
earliest  times  (Ebers  78, 14;  and  78,  15).  Again  it  is  employed  for  a  discharging  ear : 

“Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  tmt-w  for  drying  up 
a  wound”  (Ebers  91,  8-9).  Here  the  tmt-w  are  most  probably  poultices.  The  third 
and  last  case  in  Pap.  Ebers  employs  the  tmt-w  for  treating  pustules  or  sores  in  the  anus, 
perhaps  piles.  The  remedies  prescribed  are  to  be  made  into  tmt-w,  obviously  for  local 
application  though  this  is  not  stated  (Ebers  106,  2).  In  this  case  they  might  possibly 
be  suppositories.  In  Pap.  Smith  tmt-w  are  employed  three  times,  that  is  twice  besides 
our  Case  9.  In  both  the  other  cases  they  are  for  external  application  :  Case  41 ,  which 
instructs  the  physician,  “  Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  tmt-w  ”  ...  .  tot  hr-i, 

“  (and)  bind  upon  it  ”  (Smith  XIV  6-7) ;  and  Case  46,  which  likewise  directs  :  “  Thou 
shouldst  make  for  him  tmt-w  ”...  <=«=>[  wdy  r-i,  “  and  apply  to  it.”  The  tmt-w 
applications  seem  to  have  been  designed  especially  to  dry  up  a  sore  or  wound,  e.g., 
the  above  case  in  Pap.  Ebers  (91,  8-9)  ;  and  again  Pap.  Smith  Case  46  states  that  the 
physician  is  to  prepare  remedies  for  “  drying  up  his  wound  ”  (XVI  9-12).  This  leads 
us  to  the  discussion  of : 

The  text  is  certainly  corrupt.  The  most  obvious  corruption  is  the 
omission  of  the  determinative  of  the  first  word,  viz.,  a,  because  it  was  identical  with 
the  word-sign  beginning  the  next  word.  The  same  error  has  occurred  in  XVI  9-10. 
Compare  the  following  passages  : 

°  "  ^'h°u  shouldst  make  for  him  remedies  for  drying 

up  the  wound  ”  (XIV  4-5). 

“  Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  [remedies  for] 
drying  up  [the  wound]  in  his  sternum  ”  (XVI 9-10).  And  finally 

of  Case  9  above  (IV  21),  in  which  we  have  a  second  stage  of  corruption, 
the  passage  in  XVI  9-10  representing  the  first  stage.  Obviously  our  text  of  Case  9 
should  be  emended  with  the  aid  of  XIV  4-5  as  follows  : 

meaning  “  tmt-w  for  drying  up  that  wound.”  The  writing  of  the  corrupt  text  (XVI 
9-10),  quoted  above,  might  suggest  that  we  should  read  here  ° 

oi.uchicago.edu 

222  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  9 

tmt-w  n[w]  s-Sivt  ivbnw,  literally  “  poultices  for  causing  the  wound  to  dry  up  ”  (Ebers 
91,  8-9,  cf.  also  p^3©,  Ebers  65, 15),  but  the  emendation  on  the  basis  of  Smith  XIV  4-5 
is  more  probable. 

'f  '1  hT . h'yt . nthnswnw,  “  a  covering  for  physician’s 

use,”  is  a  device  found  in  the  medical  papyri  only  in  this  passage.  The  word 
h'yt,  “covering”  is  written  exactly  like  the  verb  f” i)  lj  cp  “to  be  naked,”  of 
which  the  noun  is  ‘f  b'V’h  “  nakedness.”  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  our 

word  means  “  covering  ”  however.  In  the  first  place  it  is  something  which  the  surgeon 
is  “  to  apply  ...  to  it  ”  (the  wound) ;  and  in  the  second  place  the  wound  is  there¬ 
upon,  after  an  interval  of  three  days,  to  be  “  uncovered.”  Although  no  other  case 
of  its  medical  use  is  known,  our  word  h'yt,  “  covering  ”  is  doubtless  to  be  connected 
with  the  word  'f  employed  in  the  phrase  m  h'not,  which  must  mean 

something  like  “  in  secret,”  literally  “  under  cover,”  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (808a). 

XJcifa  hn,  “  use.”  The  usual  word  for  a  “  hide  ”  or  a  leathern  “  (water)-skin  ”  is 
feminine,  hn-t.  Nevertheless  there  is  a  masculine  word  hnw,  “  skin.”  It 

is  used  of  goat  skins  and  sheep  skins  ;  cf.  Spiegelberg,  Rechnungen,  taf.  XV  c,  d,  and 
XIII  (col.  a,  5 ;  col.  b,  9, 16,  and  18).  This  masculine  is  also  found  in  Pap.  Mallet  I  5 : 
*?pf ^ ^ ^  i ^ ^  “hide  (hn)  made  into  a  coat  of  mail”  (in  Recueil  de  trav., 
Vol.  I).  The  transliteration  is  from  Gardiner’s  copy,  and  he  has  written  “  sic!  ”  before 
the  determinative  of  hn,  to  call  attention  to  the  lack  of  the  expected  feminine  t. 
It  occurs  again  without  t  in  the  same  document  (I  4).  A  sack  called  (Naville, 
Festival-Hall,  pi.  19  and  24)  and  the  word  ^cf3  hn,  “  tent,”  are  doubtless  both 
simply  the  word  “  skin  ”  to  designate  something  made  of  it,  as  we  say  “  skin  ”  for 
a  leathern  water  bottle,  or  “  canvas  ”  for  a  tent.  In  our  passage  hn  is  further  given 
a  special  meaning  by  an  added  genitive  of  specification.  It  is  some  kind  of  material 
prepared  especially  for  the  use  of  physicians  by  the  embalmers.  The  whole  “  covering, 
etc.”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A  as  a  “  bandage,”  which  the  embalmers  furnish.  The  first 
difficulty  in  rendering  our  An  as  “  skin  ”  lies  in  the  determinative,  which  is,  in  both 
passages  where  it  occurs,  a  papyrus  roll.  Sethe  therefore  suggests  to  me  the  possibility 
of  connecting  the  word  with  the  well-known  verb  X?f.A  hn,  “  to  approach,  to  near,” 
making  a  noun  “  nearness,  approach,  association,  use.”  Thus  it  is  conceivable  that 
hn  swnw  might  moan  “  physician’s  use.”  Then  by  construing  the  genitive  nt  as 
meaning  “  for,”  a  common  meaning,  we  might  render  the  whole  “  a  covering  for 
physicians’  use.”  See  commentary  on  Gloss  A.1 

The  subject  of  the  verb  following  “  find  ”  (V  1)  is  masculine.  It  may  therefore 

1  Lacau  has  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  coffins  the  phrase 
means  “  in  his  hand  ”  ( Recueil  de  trav.  35,  220,  n.  1) ;  that  is,  there  is  a  rare  word  "JHl 
or  -H'  moaning  “  hand  ”.  Our  word,  with  the  determinative  can  hardly  be  identified  with 
this  rare  word  hn,  “  hand.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  9  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  223 

resume  the  noun  “  wound ;  ”  but  not  “  covering  ”  or  “  egg,”  both  of  which  are 
feminine.  The  word  employed  here  for  the  knitting  together  of  the  wound  is  the  same 
as  the  surgeon  used  for  the  knitting  together  of  the  infant’s  fontanel  in  Case  8  (IV  11). 
Grammatically  our  treatise  more  commonly  follows  the  verb  “  find  ”  with  a  noun, 
which  is  then  resumed  by  a  pronoun  as  immediate  subject  of  the  verb  following 
“  find  ;  ”  in  other  words  Egyptian  prefers  to  make  a  substantive  the  object  of  “  find,” 
rather  than  a  proposition,  such  as  we  find  here  in  V  1 . 

o^o  pk-t,  “shell”  is  of  course  the  word  p'bt,  which  we  have  met  several  times 
before  for  the  “shell,”  meaning  one  of  the  squamae  of  the  human  Bkull.  It  does  not 
here  designate  the  “  shell  ”  of  the  egg,  which  we  find  called  the  ynr,  “  stone  ” 

of  the  egg  in  the  great  Amarna  Sun-hymn  (Davies,  Amarna,  Vol.  VI,  pi.  XXVII,  1.  7). 
° ,  yrtyw,  “  color,”  see  above,  Case  7  :  III,  20. 

The  charm  is  introduced  by  the  usual  formula  often  used  in  Pap.  Ebers. 

is  new  and  not  found  elsewhere.  It  is  parallel  with  dr,  “  repel  ”  and 
must  have  some  similar  meaning.  It  is  possibly  a  causative  derived  from  the  verb 
nwr>  “  *0  tremble  ”  (Book  of  the  Gates,  3rd  Hour,  Seti  II,  12  =  RamseB  IV, 

PI.  21). 

is  a  little  uncertain  in  the  reading.  The  first  sign  has  some  resemblance 
to  the  hieratic  form  of  whr.  The  determinative  is  likewise  questionable.  The  rendering 
is  based  on  the  Middle  Kingdom  word  -f\  w’‘*  in  t*16  laudatory  phrase  fi  ^  ^  7 

Swy  m  w'-t,  “  free  from  w-t,"  in  which  the  word  must  mean  something  evil. 

^  nb  n,  is  possibly  a  questionable  reading.  Dr.  Grapow  has  suggested  but 
with  entirely  problematical  meaning. 

‘h-t,  literally  the  “  splendid  one  ”  (feminine)  is  an  epithet  for  Isis. 

PJ™  ibn,  “  fall  down,”  “  sink  down,”  is  common  applied  to  serpent  enemies  in 
the  Pyramid  Texts,  where  it  is  written  — J  — ,  and  appears  in  parallelism  with  °  y** 
hr,  “  to  fall.”  As  for  the  fish,  it  must  be  employed  here  because  of  the  ^fm-fish  known 
only  in  the  Misanthrope  89.  The  “  temple  ”  of  the  patient  is  here  identified  with 
the  injured  forehead,  perhaps  in  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  dead  sink  down  on  one 
temple  as  they  lie  with  head  northward  and  facing  the  rising  sun. 

77  ■*»-  npw,  with  crocodile  determinative  reminds  one  of  the  word  ^  "*»-  dpy, 
“  crocodile.”  It  is  quite  evident,  however,  that  the  word  here  means  something 
hostile  to  the  patient,  and  there  is  a  word  77  nP>  which  is  an  abusive  epithet  applied 
to  Apophis  (Metternich  Stela  1-2,  twice ;  and  the  Book  of  Apophis,  British  Mus.  Pap. 
10188,  29,  22,  copy  by  Lange  in  Berlin  Worterbuch). 

m4'i,  “  compress  ”  is  unknown  elsewhere,  unless  the  sole  occurrence  of  the 
masculine  (Ebers  88,  5)  is  to  be  compared  here.  This  is  the  reading  of  Wreszinski 
(p.  179)  and  is  questionable,  as  he  has  correctly  recognized.  The  meaning  “  compress  ” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

224  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  9 

has  been  drawn  from  the  root  significance  of  the  verb.  The  construction  of  mdd,  as 
a  direct  object  of  a  seemingly  intransitive  form  of  kbb,  “  to  be  cool  ”  indicates  probably 
corruption  of  the  text.  One  expects  i-kbb,  “to  cool,”  followed  by  an  object  such  as 
a  pronoun  referring  to  the  wound,  and  a  preposition  “  with  ”  (^)  before  md-t. 

Gloss  A 
V  4-5 

Explaining  :  A  covering  for  physician’s  use. 

cSa  I 

1 

i— 0 

!  1  I 

oA\ 

Cl  I  <= 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  covering  for  physician’s  use,”  it  is  a  bandage  which  is  in  the  hand 
of  the  embalmcr,  and  which  he  (the  physician)  applies  to  this  remedy  which  is  on  this 
wound  which  is  in  his  forehead. 

Commentary 

This  explanation  has  been  partially  discussed  above  in  connection  with  the  word 
hn,  “  use.”  The  “  covoring  for  physician’s  hn  ”  is  here  explained  as  a  d$d, 

“  bandage.”  The  word  is  well  known.  It  is  found  employed  to  designate  the  bandages 
employed  in  wrapping  the  mummy,  or  as  a  fillet  about  the  head  ;  as  a  New  Year’s 
gift,  or  accompanying  a  charm  (possibly  tied  with  the  customary  seven  magical 
knots).  All  such  “  bandages  ”  were  without  any  doubt  made  of  linen.  We  would 
therefore  expect  that  the  “  covering  ”  explained  in  our  gloss  would  necessarily  be 
made  of  linen ;  and  this  is  probably  the  strongest  argument  against  the  translation 
of  hn  as  “  skin.”  The  embalmers  must  have  required  enormous  quantities  of  linen 
bandages  for  the  practice  of  their  profession.  Any  one  who  has  examined  their  work 
has  been  impressed  with  the  extraordinary  skill  disclosed  by  it.  It  is  the  neatest  and 
most  elaborate  bandaging  ever  done  anywhere.  The  embalmers  therefore  became 
remarkably  adept  in  the  art  of  bandaging,  and  finally  even  practiced  it  as  a  decorative 
art,  skilfully  manipulating  the  final  outer  wrappings  of  the  mummy  into  elaborate 
decorative  designs  (see  Vol.  I,  PI.  Ill,  Figs.  6  and  7).  Their  skill  in  producing  bandages 
made  them  the  inevitable  source  for  such  materials,  and  our  gloss  above  furnishes  us 
with  the  interesting  fact  that  they  manufactured  bandages  for  the  use  of  the  physician. 
The  young  practitioner  is  here  told  where  he  can  secure  his  bandages,  just  as  he  is 
to-day  given  the  address  of  some  manufacturer  of  proprietary  preparations. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  10  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  225 

CASE  TEN 
V5-9 

A  GAPING  WOUND  AT  THE  TOP  OF  THE  EYEBROW,  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

The  surgeon’s  discussion  of  this  case  consists  of  a  few  hasty  notes  regarding  a 
flesh  wound  over  the  eyebrow.  The  diagnosis  does  not  state  as  much  as  the  title. 
The  treatment  is,  however,  sound  surgery,  without  any  such  relapse  into  superstition 
as  we  found  in  the  preceding  case,  and  is  of  unusual  interest  as  containing  the  earliest 
known  mention  of  surgical  stitching  of  a  wound. 

Title 
V  5-6 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  the  top  of  his  eyebrow. 

Commentary 

m  tp,  “  in  the  top.”  This  rendering  is  the  more  probable  one,  but  it  should 
not  be  forgotten  that  the  anatomical  meaning  of  ®  tp  is  frequently  the  “  end,”  or 
“  tip,”  of  some  other  organ  or  part  (see  commentary  on  ®  in  Case  1).  It  may  possibly 
be  that  the  inner  or  outer  end  of  the  eyebrow  is  meant.  It  should  be  noted  also  that 
in  the  diagnosis  (V  7),  the  text  has  only  “  in  ”  showing  that  the  position  of  the 
wound,  “  in  ”  or  “  in  the  top  of  ”  the  eyebrow,  is  not  very  precisely  maintained.  Wo 
may  compare  :  (1^^ — **  a  splitting  blow  upon  his  two  eye¬ 
brows”  (Pap.  Anast.  Ill,  5,  7-8),  in  which  the  preposition  is  “  upon”  (hr),  and  both 
eyebrows  seem  to  be  involved. 

Examination 
V  6 

oi.uchicago.edu 

226  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  10 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  the  top  of  his  eyebrow,  penetrating 
to  the  bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound,  (and)  draw  together  for  him  his  gash 
with  stitching. 

Commentary 

Important  terms  needing  discussion  will  be  found  explained  in  the  commentary 
on  the  preceding  cases,  as  follows  : 

h’y-k,  “  thou  examinest,”  see  Case  1,  pp.  104-106. 
wbnw,  “  wound,”  see  Case  1,  pp.  81-84. 

' r ,  “  penetrating,”  see  Case  1,  pp.  87-88. 
drr,  “  palpate,”  see  Case  1,  pp.  92-98. 

The  last  item,  the  “  stitching,”  is  new  and  important.  It  seems  to  be  regarded 
as  a  kind  of  “  first  aid,”  and  is  included  in  the  examination  in  all  of  the  six  cases  in 
which  it  occurs  in  our  treatise — that  is  preceding  the  diagnosis  and  the  verdict. 
Apparently  the  surgeon  is  to  lose  no  time  in  drawing  together  and  closing  up  the  gaping 
wound,  whatever  the  treatment  that  is  to  follow  may  be. 

ndry,  “  draw  together.”  In  all  of  the  eight  occurrences  of  this  word  in  Pap. 
Smith,  it  is  written  either  ndr-hr-k,  “  thou  shouldst  draw  together  ”  (six  times)  or 
ndr-yn-k,  “  thou  shouldst  draw  together  ”  (once  XVII  8,  written  incorrectly  ndr-n-k), 
except  our  case  above  (V  6),  where  we  should  of  course  emend  to  ndr-hr-k.  The  word 
is  common  and  in  current  non-surgical  usage  means  “  to  seize,  grasp.”  It  takes  as 
its  object :  inanimate  objects,  like  weapons,  fishing  or  fowling  net,  leg  of  a  slaughtered 
ox,  etc. ;  persons  or  animals :  enemies,  arrested  criminals,  oxen,  game,  wild  animals, 
serpents  ;  or  parts  of  the  human  body,  the  hand,  or  the  breasts  in  mourning.  It  is 
important  for  understanding  our  passage  to  notice  that  one  of  its  non-surgical  mean¬ 
ings  is  to  “  close  ”  (a  door).  The  six  cases  in  which  it  occurs  in  Pap.  Smith  will  make 
it  quite  clear  that  its  surgical  meaning  is  “  to  close  up,”  “  to  draw  together.”  Before 
turning  to  these  cases  it  should  be  noted  that  the  surgical  use  of  the  word  is  found 
elsewhere  only  in  three  cases,  as  follows  :  1.  An  obscure  passage  probably  prescribing 
the  bringing  together  {ndry)  of  the  lips  of  the  vagina  (Kahun  Med.  Pap.  8,  19) ; 
2.  Description  of  the  preparation  of  a  lancet  (Pap.  Ebers  109,  6  and  7),  very  difficult 
to  understand ;  and  8.  Description  of  lancing  or  treating  a  swelling  of  some  sort 
(Ebers  109,  10),  likewise  very  obscure.  These  materials  outside  of  our  treatise  are 
therefore  of  slight  value  in  understanding  the  surgical  meaning  of  ndry.  See  com¬ 
mentary  on  ydr  immediately  below. 

Ti  k/'b  “  gash,”  has  been  fully  discussed  in  Case  1,  q.v.,  pp.  90-92.  The  surgeon’s 
notes  on  this  case  are  so  hasty  that  there  has  been  no  indication  heretofore  that  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  10  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

227 

injury  was  a  wbnw  n  kf-t,  “  gaping  wound,”  but  it  is  clearly  so  designated  in  the 
gloss  at  the  end  of  the  case  (V  9). 

ydr,  “  stitching,”  is  a  new  and  difficult  word.  In  seven  different  cases  in 
our  treatise  the  surgeon  is  charged  to  “  draw  together  the  wound  ”  “  with  ydr,"  or 
to  “  ydr  it.”  It  is  instructive  to  note  where  these  wounds  are,  and  their  character  : 

Case  8.  Gaping  wound  in  the  head,  perforating  skull  (ydr  in  restored  passage). 

Case  10.  Gaping  flesh  wound  over  the  eyebrow. 

Case  14.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  nose,  penetrating  to  the  nostril. 

Case  28.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  auricula  of  the  ear. 

Case  26.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  upper  lip,  penetrating  into  the  mouth. 

Case  28.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  throat  or  neck,  penetrating  to  the  gullet. 

Case  47.  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  shoulder. 

It  should  be  observed  that  six  of  these  seven  cases  are  flesh  wounds.  It  is  further 
noticeable  that,  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  last  case  (47)  the  wound  is  in  a 
relatively  thin  stratum  of  soft  tissue,  through  which  it  pierces,  so  that  it  is  incon¬ 
ceivable  that  a  bandage  which  would  “  draw  together  ”  the  wound  could  be  applied. 
In  six  cases,  that  is  all  but  the  last,  no  bandage  could  be  applied  at  all,  except  by 
winding  it  entirely  around  the  head  or  neck.  The  pressure  exerted  upon  the  wound 
by  such  a  bandage  could  not  possibly  “  draw  together  ”  the  “  two  lips  ”  of  the  wound. 
Such  “drawing  together”  requires  two  forces  pulling  toward  each  other,  that  is  in 
opposite  directions,  and  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  general  plane  of  the  surface  around 
the  severed  tissue,  and  not  at  right  angles  with  this  surface,  as  would  certainly  be  the 
case  with  a  bandage  passing  entirely  around  the  head.  It  is  highly  important  to  note 
that  in  Case  3  the  surgeon  is  charged  not  to  bind  the  wound.  Unfortunately  this  is 
in  a  case  in  which  ydr  has  been  restored,  though  the  correctness  of  the  restoration  of 
the  word  can  hardly  be  doubted.  The  only  conceivable  devices  for  meeting  the 
requirements  and  “  drawing  together  ”  these  wounds  as  described  by  the  surgeon 
are  either  plasters  or  stitching.  We  have  already  seen  that  adhesive  plaster  is  called 
’* wy>  or  ’!/r’w2/>  “  two  strips  ”  (Case  2,  commentary  on  treatment), 

which  are  taken  up  also  in  Gloss  A  (V  9)  appended  to  the  present  case.  There  is 
strong  a  priori  probability  that  we  are  dealing  with  surgical  stitching  in  six  of  the 
cases  listed  above  ;  but  the  question  requires  close  examination  of  the  context  in  all 
six  cases  (omitting  Case  8,  because  of  the  restoration  of  ydr  and  its  context).  The 
material  is  arranged  below. 

Case  10  :  Gaping  flesh  wound  over  the  eyebrow 

“  Thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  his  gash  with  ydr.” 
b.  Diagnosis. 

Q  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

228  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  10 

c.  Verdict  1. 
d • 

“  Now  after  thou  hast  ydr  it, 

e.  [Thou  shouldst  bind  it]  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.”  See  demonstration  of 
this  restoration  in  commentary  on  V  7-8. 

/• 

“  If  thou  findest  that  the  ydr  of  this  wound  is  loose, 

MiC 

9- 

thou  shouldst  draw  (it)  together  for  him  with  the  two  strips  (of  plaster).” 

h.  “  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  with  grease  and  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers.” 

Case  14  :  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  nose 

a,  b,  and  c,  as  in  Case  10 ;  in  place  of  d,  Case  14  has  directions  for  cleansing  the 
wound  of  coagulated  blood  ;  e,  as  in  Case  10. 

“  When  its  ydr  loosens,  thou  shouldst  take  off  for  him  the  freBh  meat  ”  (VI 11-12). 

g. '  omitted. 

h.  “  Thou  shouldst  bind  grease,  honey  and  lint  upon  it  every  day  until  he  recovers.” 

Case  23 :  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  auricula  of  the  ear 

“  Thou  shouldst  draw  (it)  together  for  him  with  ydr  behind  the  interior  (of  the 
auricula )  of  his  ear.” 

b  and  c  as  in  Case  10. 

d  and  e  are  omitted. 

“  If  thou  findest  the  ydr  of  that  wound  loose  and  sticking  in  the  two  lips  of  his 
wound  (VIII  20-21). 

thou  shouldst  make  for  him  stiff  rolls  of  linen  and  pad  the  back  of  his  ear  there¬ 
with  ”  (VIII  21). 

h  as  in  Case  10,  but  with  lint  added. 

Case  26  :  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  upper  lip  penetrating  to  the  mouth 

a,  b,  c,  d,  and  e,  as  in  Case  10. 
f  and  g  are  omitted. 
h  as  in  Case  10. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  10  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  229 

Case  28  :  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  throat  penetrating  to  the  gullet 
a  and  b  as  in  Case  10. 
c.  Verdict  2. 
d  of  Case  10  omitted. 
e  as  in  Case  10. 

/  and  g  of  Case  10  omitted. 
h  as  in  Case  10,  with  lint  added. 

Case  47  :  Gaping  flesh  wound  in  the  shoulder 

a,  b,  and  c  as  in  Case  10. 
d  of  Case  10  is  omitted, 
e  as  in  Case  10. 

“  If  thou  findest  that  wound  open  and  its  ydr  loose, 

I  I  I  I  1  1 

thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  his  gash  with  two  strips  of  linen  (plaster) 
upon  that  gash  ’’  (really  plural,  see  commentary  on  kf’t,  Case  1,  examination). 
h  as  in  Case  10,  with  lint  added. 

Unlike  any  of  the  other  cases,  Case  47  at  this  point  discusses  alternative  symptoms, 
among  which  the  wound  is  found  “  feverish,  open  and  its  ydr  loose  ”  as  in  the  first 
examination.  No  further  light  is  thrown  upon  the  meaning  of  the  terms  we  are 
examining,  for  the  surgeon  is  then  forbidden  to  bind  the  wound ;  but  if  the  fever 
passes  off  he  may  treat  with  grease,  honey  and  lint  until  recovery. 

An  examination  of  the  procedure  in  the  above  six  cases,  in  all  of  which  the  wound 
is  first  “  drawn  together  with  ydr  ”  (a),  discloses  the  fact  that  in  four  of  them  (Cases 
10,  14,  28,  and  47)  after  an  interval  during  which  a  fresh  meat  application  may  have 
been  used  ( e ),  the  ydr  is  found  “  loose  ”  (f),  when  the  fresh  meat  (if  used)  has  been 
removed  (Case  14) — a  condition  which  in  two  (Cases  10  and  47)  of  these  four  so  found 
necessitates  drawing  together  the  wound  again  with  two  strips  of  plaster.  In  Case  28 
on  discovering  the  ydr  loose,  the  surgeon  puts  supports  of  linen  padding  behind  the 
auricula,  that  is  between  the  auricula  and  the  skull  of  the  patient.  In  Case  14,  how¬ 
ever,  after  finding  the  ydr  loose  the  surgeon  thinks  it  necessary  only  to  proceed  with 
the  customary  bandaging  with  grease,  honey  and  lint.  In  Cases  26  and  28,  wounds 
piercing  the  lip  and  the  throat  respectively,  the  surgeon  does  not  anticipate  that  the 
ydr  will  be  found  loose,  and  so  does  not  prescribe  any  resulting  precautions. 

The  nature  of  the  ydr  is  unmistakably  disclosed  in  Case  28,  where  the  surgeon  not 
only  mentions  finding  the  ydr  loose,  but  adds  that  they  are  found  “  sticking  in  the 
two  lips  of  his  wound.”  The  words  for  “  sticking  in  ”  are  mn  m,  the  customary 

phrase  for  describing  weapons  “  sticking  in  ”  human  or  animal  flesh,  or  fragments 

oi.uchicago.edu 

230  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  10 

of  bone  “  sticking  in  ”  the  fleshy  tissue  of  a  wound.  Consult  especially  the  com¬ 
mentary  on  Case  4,  Gloss  A  (II  9).  In  describing  a  foreign,  intrusive  substance 
invading  organs  or  tissues  mn  m  always  means  “  sticking  in,”  not  “  adhering  to.” 
In  view  of  this  fact  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  ydr  is  a  word  for  surgical  “  stitching  ” 
or  “stitches.”  We  have  here  then  a  surgical  Buture,  the  earliest  known  reference  to 
sewing  up  a  w'ound  in  the  history  of  surgery. 

We  must  next  inquire  what  happens  to  this  “stitching”  when  it  is  wnh 
“  loose.”  This  term  is  explained  in  two  different  glosses  (Case  31,  Gloss  A,  X  17-19 ; 
and  Case  43,  Gloss  A,  XV  8-4)  q.v.  In  the  first,  where  it  refers  to  the  dislocation  of  a 
cervical  vertebra,  it  is  said  to  designate  the  separation  of  one  vertebra  from  another, 
and  the  commentator  refers  to  the  colloquial  use  of  vmh  to  indicate  the  separation,  or 
loosening  from  each  other  of  two  things  that  had  formerly  been  joined  (see  Case  31, 
Gloss  A).  Applying  this  knowledge  to  vmh,  used  to  describe  the  condition  of  a  stitched 
gash,  we  find  that  in  Case  47,  when  the  stitching  is  found  “  loose  ”  (vmh),  the  wound  is 
“  open  ”  (pgy,  see  above  summary,  Case  47,/).  We  must  conclude  then  that  in  the 
four  cases  of  stitched  wounds  which  the  surgeon  finds  with  the  stitching  “  loose,”  he 
means  that  the  wound  has  failed  to  close  wholly  by  healing,  and  still  gapes.  In  two  of 
these  cases  therefore  (Cases  10  and  47),  the  surgeon  is  charged  to  draw  together  the 
wound  again  with  the  “  two  strips,”  that  is  with  plaster.  Of  the  remaining  two  with 
the  stitching  “  loose,”  one  (Case  23)  is  to  be  aided  by  appropriate  supports  of  linen 
pads  behind  the  gashed  auricula  of  the  ear  ;  the  other  receives  only  the  usual  applica¬ 
tion  of  grease,  honey  and  lint,  bandaged  on  (Case  14).  Finally,  in  two  of  the  cases 
(26  and  28)  as  we  have  already  noted,  the  surgeon  does  not  apprehend  and  does  not 
provide  for  failure  of  the  wound  to  heal  after  being  stitched. 

We  may  now  return  to  consider  further  the  word  ydr  itself,  the  meaning  of  which 
has  been  drawn  from  its  context  in  our  treatise.  It  is  used  thirteen  times  in  Pap.  Smith 
(exclusive  of  the  restored  passage  in  Case  3, 1 22),  and  with  the  exception  of  an  obscure 
passage  in  Pap.  Ebers  (109,  9),  it  is  otherwise  unknown  in  the  medical  papyri.  In  the 
thirteen  passages  employing  it,  it  is  eleven  times  a  noun  and  twice  a  verb  (Case  10, 
V  7  and  Case  26,  IX  10).  In  this  passage  :  “  Now  after  thou 

hast  stitched  it,”  it  is  obvious  that  ydr  must  be  rendered  “  to  stitch  ”  or  “  to  sew.” 
Hence  the  noun  must  primarily  mean  “  stitching,  sewing,  stitches,  suture,”  rather  than 
“  thread  ”  or  “  gut  ”  or  the  like.  Curiously  enough  the  Egyptian  word  for  “  to 
stitch,”  “  to  sew,”  common  as  it  must  have  been  in  every  day  life,  is  unknown  to  us. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  we  have  recovered  it  in  this  surgical  use  of  ydr. 

We  find  it  written  very  erratically.  As  to  determinative,  the  writings  fall  into  two 
groups  :  o  with  /)  and  b  with  O  : 

a.  With  4  : 

(V6);  q^j  (VIII);  (j'yXV?;  1X10);  (V8);  in  VI 9  the  scribe  seems 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  10  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  231 

to  have  written  (j^V,  having  evidently  raised  his  pen  between <=  and  the  seeming  o.  , 
but  in  view  of  the  unmistakable  spellings  with  «=»,  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  intended 
to  write  •=»  here,  just  as  he  has  intended  to  do  in  the  writing  of  the  ligatures  for 
^  dr  in  the  next  group,  where  the  «=»  looks  exactly  like  o  (compare  hkr  in  XIII 11-12), 
as  it  often  does  in  a  ligature  with  some  other  sign  above  it,  as  in  ^  nr  or  ^  'r  (see 
Moeller,  Palaeogr.  I,  Anhang,  I  and  XVII).  It  would  seem  that  the  r  of  ydr  was  pro¬ 
nounced  so  much  like  l  and  n,  as  to  suggest  ydn  and  the  use  of  the  ear  (ydn)  as  a 
determinative. 
b.  With  O : 

(j^O  (IX  21,  clearly  «=»,  detached  and  not  in  ligature) ;  (|^C5  (*=»  in  ligature, 
VIIll9  ;  IX  8  ;  XVI  20) ;  (<=>  in  hgature,  VIII  20  ;  XVII  8  ;  XVII  8). 

Diagnosis 
V  7 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  [One  having]  a  wound  in  his  eyebrow.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  omission  of  w  hry,  “  one  having,”  is  an  obvious  scribal  error.  The  change 
of  m  tp  “  in  the  top,”  to  m,  merely  “  in,”  may  be  due  to  the  haste  of  the 
surgeon  himself,  in  making  his  notes. 

The  diagnosis  is  here  reduced  to  the  briefest  terms,  suggesting  merely  a  few  note¬ 
book  catch-words,  containing  even  less  than  the  title,  to  which  is  added  the  hopeful 
verdict  1.  See  commentary  on  this  verdict  in  Case  1  (I  2). 

Treatment 
V  7-8 

SI'S'LL' 

oi.uchicago.edu 

232 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

°  5 

\i  i  i 

ra^© 

Case  10 

*  The  scribe  has  canceled  the  three  phonetic  signs  preceding  ©  with  a  red  stroke. 

Translation 

Now  after  thou  hast  stitched  it,  [thou  shouldst  bind]  fresh  meat  upon  [it]  the  first 
day.  If  thou  findest  that  the  stitching  of  this  wound  is  loose,  thou  shouldst  draw  (it) 
together  for  him  with  two  strips  (of  plaster),  and  thou  shouldst  treat  it  with  grease 
and  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

The  omission  of  the  bracketed  passage  in  the  text  is  an  obvious  haplography  due 
to  the  occurrence  of  dw  twice  in  the  same  line  ;  the  scribe  having  copied  as  far  as 
the  first  one  jumped  to  the  words  following  the  second  one.  It  is  of  great  importance 
to  establish  the  fact  of  this  error,  for  otherwise  we  would  have  a  sentence  :  ydr-k  iw 
hr  ywf  w’d,  which  might  be  rendered  :  “  thou  hast  bandaged  ( ydr !)  it  with  fresh 
meat,”  which  would  seem  to  give  us  the  meaning  “  bandage  ”  for  ydr — a  meaning 
which  has  indeed  already  found  its  way  into  the  dictionary  from  this  very  passage.1 
It  is  important  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  basis  for  the  meaning  “  bandage,” 
or  “  to  bandage.”  This  will  be  evident  when  we  have  placed  our  passage  in  Case  10 
in  parallelism  with  the  corresponding  passage  in  Case  26,  thus  : 

Case26  ' (IX  8)7 

Case  10  (V6)- _ 

Case  26  followed  by  diagnosis  and  verdict  (IX  8-9). 

Case  10  followed  by  diagnosis  and  verdict  (V  7). 

Case  26f|<-^^^^  +  r IX  9-10). 

CMel0jH^g>jg^4g  (y  7)- _ 

Case  26  (IX  *°). 

Case  10  °  (V  ?)• 

The  continuous  parallelism  between  these  two  cases,  extending  from  the  examina¬ 
tion,  through  the  diagnosis,  verdict  and  treatment,  makes  it  perfectly  certain  that 
the  scribe  has  omitted  the  words  wt-hr-k  Sw,  “thou  shalt  bind  it,”  after 

1  See  Worterbuch  der  Aegyptischtn  Sprache,  p.  164. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  10  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  233 

ydr-k  iw,  “  (after)  thou  hast  stitched  it.”  We  must  therefore  insert  these 
omitted  words  and  thus  separate  “thou  hast  stitched  {ydr-k)  it”  from  the  following 
words :  “with  fresh  meat,  etc.”  Ydr  has  therefore  no  connection  with  binding  with 
fresh  meat  in  Case  10,  and  there  is  no  other  evidence  that  ydr  has  anything  to  do  with 
the  idea  of  binding  or  a  bandage.  The  above  demonstration  should  be  borne  in  mind 
in  reading  the  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  ydr  in  the  examination  (V  6). 

The  application  of  “  fresh  meat  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (I  2-3). 
wnh,  “  loose,”  is  discussed  in  preceding  examination. 

ndry,  “  drawn  together,”  is  discussed  above  in  V  6. 

^  '"wy  (f°r  Tw/),  “  two  strips,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  2  (I  14-15), 
and  in  Gloss  A  below. 

The  treatment  with  grease  and  honey  is  discussed  in  Case  1,  treatment  (I  3). 

Gloss  A 
V  9 

Explaining  :  Two  strips  of  linen 

14 — /$>  ° 

4 _ I 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Two  strips  of  linen,”  it  means  two  bands  of  linen,  which  one  applies 
upon  the  two  lips  of  the  gaping  wound,  in  order  to  cause  that  one  (lip)  join  to  the  other. 

Commentary 

This  gloss  is  a  repetition  of  Gloss  B  in  Case  2  (I  16-17),  where  it  will  be  found 
discussed,  and  the  evidence  adduced  which  shows  that  the  “  two  strips  ”  mean  more 
than  ordinary  bandages,  being  in  reality  strips  of  adhesive  tape  or  plaster. 

The  curious  resumption  of  the  masculine  word  spt,  “  lip  ”  by  means  of  the  feminine 
substantive  adjective  vf-t,  has  already  been  discussed  above,  Gloss  B,  Case  1 
(I  9-10). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

234 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  11 

CASE  ELEVEN 
V  10-15 

A  BROKEN  NOSE 

This  case  involves  interpretation  of  local  indications  so  limited  in  extent  that  it 
is  difficult  to  determine  with  precision  exactly  what  parts  of  the  nose  the  ancient 
surgeon  intends  to  define.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  injury  is  a  rupture  between 
the  cartilaginous  tissue,  especially  the  septum  and  the  cartilagines  laterales  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  nasal  bone  on  the  other.  The  process  of  setting  seems  to  have  been 
no  more  than  the  insertion  of  soft  plugs  or  tampons,  saturated  with  ointment,  into 
the  nostrils  and  the  support  of  the  nose  in  a  normal  position  by  binding  on  rolls  of 
linen,  evidently  sufficiently  stiff  to  act  as  splints,  and  called  indeed  “  spars  ”  or 
“  posts  ”  of  linen. 

Title 

V  10 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  the  column  of  his  nose. 

Commentary 

The  terms  for  the  injury  and  the  parts  affected  can  be  better  explained  in  the 
discussion  of  the  examination,  q.v. 

Examination 

V  10-11 

■  i 

<o\\  ■ 

I  i  l 

n 

<?  i 

w 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  column  of  his  nose,  his  nose  being 
disfigured,  and  a  '"depression1  being  in  it,  while  the  swelling  that  is  on  it  protrudes, 
(and)  he  has  discharged  blood  from  both  his  nostrils,  (concluded  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  11  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  235 

Commentary 

®  Mb  is  a  very  ancient  word  for  “  break,”  graphically  suggested  by  the  word 
sign,  x,  the  pair  of  crossed  sticks,  just  as  in  the  case  of  id  (see  Sethe,  Zahlen,  pp.  75  ff. ; 
and  Grapow,Zet<scfenyf,49(1911),pp.  116 ff.).  It  is  found  as  early  as  the  Pyramid  Texts 
(e.g.,  954b;  1144c;  2030b).  While  it  designated  breakage  of  any  ordinary  object,  it 
already  appears  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  applied  to  the  breakage  of  bones:  P  J  ? 

£2  “He  has  broken  the  vertebrae  of  the  back”  (Pyr.  409b).  Also 

"  A  bone  of  N.  is  not  broken  ”  (Pyr.  1043b).  The  identity  of  our 
word  with  this  Mb  is  not  to  be  doubted ;  for  it  is  written  out  as  f— Jo  (V  11)  and 
|PJo  (XIY  18).  Should  the  identity  of  these  words  with  our  ®  be  doubted,  the 
following  demonstration  is  complete : 

Case  42  is  an  injury  of  the  “  ribs  of  the  sternum  ”  without  wnh  or  j  [I J  o  Mb. 

Case  43  is  the  same  with  wnh. 

Case  44  is  the  same  with 

The  equivalence  between  ||Jo  Mb  of  Case  42  and  ®  of  Case  44  is  obvious. 

The  surgical  use  of  the  word  is  unknown  outside  of  our  treatise,  and  tho  noun, 
hib,  “  fracture  ”  has  not  yet  been  found  in  any  connection  elsewhere.  The  surgical 
meaning  of  hib  has  nowhere  been  defined  for  us  in  Pap.  Smith,  as  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentator  has  defined  the  meaning  of  id,  “  smash  ”  in  Gloss  A,  Case  5  (II 16-17). 
Nevertheless  the  definition  of  id  in  the  above  gloss  and  the  examples  of  its  use  enable 
us,  by  a  process  of  elimination,  to  determine  the  character  of  the  injury  designated 
by  hib  as  the  complementary  term  of  id,  “  smash :  ”  hib  being  used  for  a  simple 
fracture,  while  id  is  applied  to  injuries  so  serious  that  they  are  even  compound  com¬ 
minuted  fractures  ;  see  commentary  above  (Case  5,  title,  II 11).  Another  distinction 
is  the  fact  that  in  our  treatise  Mb  is  always  employed  to  designate  an  injury  of  the 
bone,  while  id  may  also  apply  to  a  rupture  of  the  fleshy  tissue. 

Hib  is  employed  in  our  treatise  in  eight  different  cases,  a  total  of  twenty-nine  times, 
a3  follows  : 

Case  11.  Fracture  in  the  bridge  of  the  nose  (os  nasale). 

„  12.  „  „  „  glabella  (?),  or  possibly  spina  frontalis  (?). 

„  24.  „  „  „  mandible. 

,,  35.  „  „  „  clavicle. 

„  36.  „  „  „  arm  (humerus). 

„  37.  „  „  „  fracture  in  the  arm  ( humerus )  with  wound  over  it. 

„  42.  Sprain  (nr-t  without  Mb)  in  the  “  ribs  of  the  sternum.” 

„  44.  Fracture  in  the  “  ribs  of  the  sternum.” 

[)  i  ywnw,  “  column  ”  (of  the  nose).  This  term  is  explained  by  the  treatise  itself  in 
Gloss  A  (V  14-15),  pp.  240-242. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

236  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  11 

fnd,  “  nose,”  is  a  common  and  current  term  which  has  hardly  gained  technical 
anatomical  meaning.  It  will  be  found  discussed  in  connection  with  Gloss  A,  V  14. 

J  fdi,  “  crushed  in  ”  is  explained  in  Gloss  B,  Case  12,  q.v. 

mk'  hr-f  is  a  very  difficult  phrase.  In  the  first  place  it  is  impossible 
to  determine  whether  hr-f  is  the  prepositional  phrase  “  upon  it  ”  or  “  in  it  ”  (the  nose), 
or  the  noun  “  his  face.”  In  the  latter  case  mk'  would  be  some  stative  verb  describing 
the  condition  of  his  face  ;  in  the  former  case  mk 1  would  be  a  noun  designating  some 
injury  or  disfigurement  of  the  nose,  which  has  a  “  mk'  upon  it.”  The  determinative 
makes  the  latter  alternative  more  probable.  Mk ’  is  probably  to  be  connected  with 
mk'-t  “  support,  resting  place  ”  (see  above,  Case  4,  II  7).  Considering  that  the  bridge 
of  the  nose  is  crushed  in  and  flattened,  the  lower  fleshy  and  cartilaginous  portions 
might  abruptly  project,  suggesting  a  support  or  notch  or  depression.  In  a  situation 
of  such  detail,  however,  guesses  like  this  are  very  hazardous. 

The  last  two  items  will  be  found  discussed  above,  especially  Case  4. 

Diagnosis 
V  11 

»  The  scribe  at  first  omitted  this  s  and  afterward  inserted  it  as  a  correction. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  column  of  his 
nose.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

This  diagnosis  is  again  a  mere  memorandum — a  catch-word  or  two  actually  con¬ 
taining  only  the  title  of  the  case.  It  produces  the  impression  which  we  have  often 
gained  before,  that  in  such  places  the  text  is  a  hasty  record  of  memorandum  notes. 
As  in  the  preceding  case  its  practical  value  lies  in  the  concluding  verdict  1  which  will 
be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (I  2).  Such  brief  notes  serving  as  a  diagnosis  raise  the 
question  whether  the  gradually  developing  diagnosis  was  not  originally  merely  what 
we  find  here,  that  is  a  repetition  of  the  title  to  which  was  appended  the  practical 
direction  furnished  to  the  surgeon  by  the  verdict.  Out  of  such  a  beginning  the 
more  fully  developed  and  logical  diagnosis,  of  which  our  treatise  furnishes  a  number 
of  examples,  may  then  have  gradually  evolved.  See  also  the  Introduction  (p.  73). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  11 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

237 

Treatment 
V  11-14 

PI 

12 

e|' 

\\ 

\\ 

<? 

X 

stc 

<*> 

h  i  i 

<? 

Jilke 

i  i  i 

,...  W  — , 

u 

^  Q  W 
\  I  II 

m 

©^37 
I  <0 

tic 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  cleanse  (it)  for  him  [with]  two  plugs  of  linen.  Thou  shouldst  place 
two  (other)  plugs  of  linen  saturated  with  grease  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils.  Thou 
shouldst  put  [him]  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out). 
Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  stiff  rolls  of  linen  by  which  his  nose  is  held  fast.  Thou 
shouldst  treat  him  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey  (and)  lint,  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

ik,  “cleanse,”  a  rare  word,  originally  written  with  a  broom  as  deter¬ 
minative.  It  seems  in  this  passage  at  first  sight  to  take  “  the  two  plugs  ”  as  its 
object,  but  we  must  recall  here  the  frequency  with  which  this  document  omits  the 
^  m,  “  with,”  even  when  the  following  instrument  or  remedy  does  not  begin  with 
m;  e.g.,“  honey”  (byt)  in  XI 6;  XII  8;  XII  14;  XIII  2  ;  XIV  20  ;  XV  8.  In 
fact  in  every  case  in  which  treatment  “  with  honey  ”  is  prescribed  in  Papyrus  Smith, 
the  “  with”  (m)  is  regularly  omitted.  The  following  passage:  ^ 

“  Cleanse  for  him  with  a  swab  of  linen  ”  (VIII  11-12),  clearly  shows  that  the  normal 
construction  of  ik  followed  by  “  swab  ”  is  with  an  m,  “  with,”  between^  and  “  swab.” 
In  these  cases  ik  is  left  without  a  direct  object  (cf.  also  VIII  16).  Otherwise  it  takes 
a  direct  object  designating  the  organ  or  region  to  be  cleansed  (V  18)  ;  or  the  impurity 
which  is  to  be  removed  (VI  10).  In  the  latter  case  ik  means  to  “  clean  off,”  or 
“  clean  out.”  The  only  surgical  occurrences  of  the  word  are  the  five  passages  above 
cited. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

238  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  11 

~~'£Ti  !  n  hbi,  “  two  plugs  of  linen.”  This  surgical  device,  a  tampon, 

occurs  only  in  our  treatise,  and  is  never  written  out  phonetically.  Hence  the  reading 
may  be  a  little  uncertain  ;  but  the  sign  in  its  hieratic  form  is  quite  clear  and  seems 
to  be  the  well-known  "J*  ibn.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  Case  12  (V  18)  the  two 
plugs  or  swabs  employed  in  cleansing  the  nostril  before  insertion  of  the  two  tampons 
are  called  See  commentary,  Case  7,  Gloss  C,  III  18.  It  designates  a  device 

made  of  linen,  and  employed  in  every  case  for  the  cleansing  of  an  internal  passage : 
twice  of  the  nostrils  (Cases  11  and  12)  and  once  of  the  ear  (Case  22).  There  is  no 
indication  of  its  form  or  construction  further  than  the  genitive  of  material,  “  of  linen,” 
which  follows  it  in  four  out  of  the  five  passages  in  which  it  occurs.  The  fact  that  it 
could  be  inserted  into  the  nostrils  and  left  there  would  indicate  that  it  was  probably 
a  small  and  soft  mass  or  wad.  It  was  also  employed  for  the  application  of  remedies. 
In  our  case  above  (V  11),  in  which  the  surgeon  first  cleanses  the  nostrils  with  the 
two  tampons,  it  is  obvious  that  (as  in  Case  12)  he  is  then  to  take  two  fresh  ones 
which  he  is  to  saturate  with  fat  and  insert  into  the  nostrils  until  the  swelling  is 
reduced. 

wdy,  “  put  ”  is  an  important  surgical  word.  It  is  employed  in  our  treatise 
with  five  different  meanings,  or  at  least  in  five  different  connections  : 

a.  With  the  preposition  ^  hr,  “  upon,”  in  directions  to  the  surgeon  for  “  placing  ” 
his  hand  or  fingers  in  examination  or  operation,  for  example  in  the  manipulation  of 
tho  mandible  in  the  treatment  of  a  wound  in  the  temporal  bone  in  Case  22  (VIII 10). 
Its  force  in  this  connection  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  it  is  exactly  parallel  with  ^ 
rdy  “  put  ”  (literally  “  give  ”)  in  the  setting  of  a  dislocated  mandible  in  Case  25  : 

Case  22: 

“  Place  (wdy)  thy  thumb  upon  his  chin  ”  (VIII  10). 

Case  25: 

“  Place  (rdy)  thy  thumb(s)  on  the  ends  of  the  two  rami  ”  (IX  3). 

The  other  passages  containing  this  usage  of  wdy  are :  113;  III  9-10 ;  VI  4  ; 
VIII  23;  and  XVII  8-9. 

b.  With  the  meaning  “  apply  ”  a  bandage  or  remedy,  with  or  without  a  preposi¬ 
tion.  In  the  case  of  a  remedy,  if  it  is  external,  the  preposition  in  our  treatise  is  <=*  r, 
“  to  ”  (XIV  3  ;  XIV  4 ;  XVI  12),  and  once  f  hr,  “  upon  ”  (I  22  where  wdy  is  a 
restoration).  In  the  case  of  a  bandage  it  is  of  course  an  external  matter  and  the 
preposition  is  ^  hr,  “  upon.”  If  the  remedy  is  to  be  absorbed  by  a  “  tampon  ”  or 
“  plug  ”  of  linen  as  in  our  treatment  above,  and  inserted  into  a  passage,  wdy  must  be 
supplemented  by  a  very  specific  preposition,  like  m  hnw  (V  12),  literally  “  in  the  inside 
of.”  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  two  similar  Cases  11  and  12,  one  (Case  11) 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  11  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  239 

employs  m  hnw,  “  in  the  inside  of,”  after  wdy,  and  the  other  (Case  12)  has  rdy  m,  “  put 
into,”  in  place  of  m  hnw,  after  wdy,  thus  : 

Case  11  :  — cpj - 

Case  12:  „  „  „  - 

“  Thou  shouldst  place  two  plugs  of  linen  ...  in  the  inside  of  (so  Case  11,  but 
Case  12,  “  put  into,”  passive  participle  modifying  “  plugs  ”)  his  two  nostrils.” 

Similar  usage  of  m  hnw  with  wdy  will  be  found  in  Case  35  (XII  7)  and  Case  36 
(XII 12-18). 

c.  To  indicate  the  position  of  the  patient  during  examination  or  treatment,  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  words  “stretched  prone”  (XII  4-5;  XII  10-11  ;  XYII  18-19)  or 
“  between  two  supports  ”  (III  15). 

d.  To  indicate  the  return  of  a  broken  or  dislocated  bone,  which  is  “  put  (wdy)  into 
its  place  :  ”  of  the  nose  (Case  12,  V  18) ;  dislocated  jaw  (Case  25,  IX  5)  ;  dislocated 
scapula  (Case  84,  XI 19). 

e.  In  the  phrase  ^77  r  literally  “  put  to  land,”  that  is  “  moor,”  with  the 
addition  “  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  the  whole  already  explained  in  Gloss  D,  Case  8 
(II  1-2),  and  especially  in  the  commentary  on  I  22-28,  in  the  treatment  in  Case  8. 
In  our  passage  (V  12)  the  phrase  r  t’,  “  to  land,”  is  omitted,  as  also  in  Cases  19 
and  21 .  It  may  be  noted  that  two  of  these  cases  furnish  us  the  correct  reading  with 

dw,  “  him  ”  after  wd-hr-k,  “  thou  shouldst  put,”  which  our  scribe  has  incorrectly 
omitted  in  Case  11. 

thb,  “  swelling,”  has  been  treated  in  Case  4,  commentary  on  II  4. 

bd’-w,  “  stiff  rolls,”  is  a  difficult  term  to  define  with  exactness.  It  is 
a  rare  and  archaic  word  otherwise  found  only  in  the  oldest  religious  texts,  where  it 
twice  occurs  as  a  “spar”  of  a  ship  (Book  of  the  Dead,  Naville,  99,  20  Aa  and  Lacau, 
Recueil  de  trav.  80,  67,  No.  15a).  This  second  passage  is  a  Coffin  Text  list  of  parts  of 
a  ship,  which  are  identified  by  the  ancient  text  with  the  various  members  of  Osiris,  or 
some  other  divinity.  Bd’-w  is  identified  with  the  phallus  of  Osiris,  which  is  so  often 
shown  in  reliefs  during  erection.  This  doubtless  indicates  the  shape  of  the  bd’-w.  We 
must  conclude  that  it  means  a  post-like  roll  of  linen,  of  sufficient  stiffness  to  hold  the 
broken  nose  in  its  proper  or  normal  position.  It  is  unknown  in  the  medical  papyri 
elsewhere,  and  besides  its  use  in  our  Case  11  the  surgeon  employs  it  also  in  Case  12  in 
the  identical  manner ;  in  Case  28  for  supporting  the  slit  auricula  of  the  ear ;  and 
finally  in  Case  84  for  the  support  of  a  dislocated  clavicle.  It  should  be  noted  that 
even  in  hieratic  the  determinative  is  a  narrow,  elongated  rectangle  made  with  notice¬ 
able  care.  This  is  doubtless  a  side  view  of  the  roll,  seen  across  its  axis. 

The  word  is  written  in  the  plural  and  is  resumed  by  a  plural  pronoun  in  the  imme¬ 
diately  following  context,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it  is  construed  with  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

240  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  11 

genitive  n  in  the  singular.  In  case  84  the  plural  is  followed  by  *p,  and  in  Case  12  we 
have  the  dual  ( bd'-wy )  followed  by  —  ;  while  in  Case  23  the  writing  of  both  the  noun 
and  the  genitive  is  again  exactly  as  in  Case  11,  with  —  in  the  singular.  These  facts 
raise  the  question  whether  we  have  in  Cases  11  and  23  defectively  written  duals,  in 
which  case  the  pronoun  (V  13)  would  be  a  plural  resuming  a  dual,  just  as  in  IX  4. 

22  -f[  gw'  is  another  difficult  word.  It  is  as  old  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  where  it 
occurs  once  in  a  very  obscure  passage  (Pyr.  709  d).  Its  one  occurrence  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  is  very  instructive  for  our  text.  The  passage  (Urk.  V,  p.  176,  Spruch  99)  reads : 
“  I  bring  to  thee  this  serpent  ...  I  put  him  for  thee  in  it  (the  barque),  with  his  head 
in  thy  hand,  (and)  his  tail  in  my  hand,”  22  ■£[  ^ ^'TiPT'iP Q ^  “that  we 
may  gw'  him  between  us  for  ourselves.”  Here  the  meaning  “  pull  him  out  straight  ” 
or  “  straighten  him  out  ”  would  fit  the  passage  and  furnish  us  with  exactly  the  mean¬ 
ing  we  need  for  our  passage.  Other  uses  of  the  word  must,  however,  be  considered. 
Construed  with  the  preposition  <=»  before  the  object  it  means  to  “  besiege  ”  (a  city, 
Piankhi  Stela,  11.  6,  7,  9,  82,  91).  It  appears  over  people  drawing  in  a  full  net,  and 
explaining  their  action  (Davies,  Deir  el-Gebrawi,  I,  PI.  IY).  It  occurs  in  three  passages, 
unfortunately  much  too  fragmentary  to  be  understood,  in  the  London  Medical  Papyrus, 
and  it  is  found  once  indicating  some  obscure  action  of  the  heart  in  Pap.  Ebers  (101 ,  5). 
Finally  the  Coffin  Texts  employ  it  twice  ( Recueil  de  trav.  29,  p.  157  ;  and  29,  p.  158). 
In  reduplicated  form  it  is  also  found  in  the  Biography  of  Ahmose,  1.  25  (Urk.  IV,  p.  7). 
The  meaning  most  probably  to  be  drawn  from  these  passages  is  something  like  “  hold 
firmly.”  Grammatically  gw'  is  probably  a  passive  participle  of  which  “  his  nose  ”  is  the 
subject  in  a  relative  sentence:  “held  fast  by  which  is  his  nose.”  The  interpretation 
of  the  participle  as  a  purposive  gerund  is  justified  by  common  usage  in  Egyptian. 

The  subsequent  treatment  with  grease,  honey,  and  lint  has  been  discussed  above, 
Case  1  (I  8). 

The  surgeon  takes  it  for  granted  that  the  practitioner  is  acquainted  with  the  method 
of  making  and  using  this  device.  In  Case  12,  an  injury  to  the  upper  part  of  the  nose, 
and  in  Case  84,  dislocation  of  the  clavicle,  these  “  rolls  ”  are  “  bound  ”  on.  In  Case  28, 
a  slit  of  the  outer  ear,  the  “  rolls  ”  are  used  for  padding  the  “  back  of  the  auricula,” 
presumably  with  a  bandage  to  hold  everything  in  place. 

Gloss  A 
V  14-15 

Explaining  :  Column  of  his  nose 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  11 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

241 

*  This  &  was  omitted  by  the  scribe  in  copying  and  was  afterward  inserted  in  the  much  too  narrow 
spaoe  between  mi  and  d. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  column  of  his  nose,”  it  means  the  outer  edge  of  his  nose  as  far 
as  its  side(s)  on  the  top  of  his  nose,  being  the  inside  of  his  nose  in  the  middle  of  his 
two  nostrils. 

Commentary 

fnd,  “  nose,”  is  carefully  spelled  out  by  the  commentator  as  fnd,  and  is 
evidently  to  be  so  read  throughout  our  treatise  wherever  it  means  the  nose  as  a  whole, 
as  distinguished  from  the  nostrils.  We  find  the  writing  twenty-one  times  in  our 
treatise  as  against  only  two  alphabetic  spellings.  One  of  the  latter,  however,  is 
significant.  It  occurs  in  V  21  in  a  quotation  from  V  16,  where,  however,  the  scribe 
had  written  <£i.  This  is  a  good  demonstration  that  <^i  is  everywhere  to  be  read 
fnd.  The  dual  found  so  frequently  in  our  treatise  is  obviously  a  word  for 
“  nostrils  ”  ( nares ),  and  is  undoubtedly  to  be  read  Srdy  (see  commentary  on  Case  18, 
VI  3).  Anatomically  fnd  (originally  fnd)  means  the  entire  nose,  that  is  at  least  the 
nasus  extemus,  which  includes  the  ossa  nasalia,  and  how  far  back  into  the  cavum  nasi 
our  surgeon  would  have  carried  its  limits  is  nowhere  indicated. 

® . tp  •  •  •  fyry  interpreted  by  itself  would  be  rendered  “  the  upper 

head.”  Tp  is  used  anatomically  to  designate  the  “  heads,”  “  tips,”  or  “  ends  ”  of 
various  bones  (see  commentary  on  ®  in  Case  1,  p.  85),  and  this  might  lead  us  to 
conclude  that  our  gloss  intends  to  designate  the  radix  nasi  and  the  upper  end  of  the 
ossa  nasalia.  Gloss  A  in  Case  12,  however,  quite  precisely  defines  the  Styt  of  the  nose 
as  “  the  middle  of  the  nose,  as  far  as  the  back,  extending  to  the  region  between  the 
eyebrows  ”  (V  21).  This  is  surely  the  ossa  nasalia,  leaving  us  only  the  lower  and  outer 
part  of  the  nose  as  the  part  concerned  in  Case  11.  These  considerations  lead  us  to 
conclude  that  tp  .  .  .  hry,  if  rendered  the  “  upper  tip  ”  or  “  upper  head  ”  must  refer 
exclusively  to  the  soft  or  cartilaginous  tissues  of  the  flexible  outer  nose,  where  it 
articulates  with  the  ossa  nasalia. 

should  evidently  be  read  gd-ioy-fy,  “  its  two  sides.”  The  scribe  has 

certainly  omitted  the  w  under  >w,  for  the  following  context  leaves  no  doubt  that 
the  two  sides  of  the  nose  are  included.  “  The  two  sides  on  the  top  of  his  nose  ”  must 
designate  the  two  lateral  cartilagines.  To  these  soft  tissues  of  the  nose  the  explanation 
now  adds  also  the  soft  central  portion  of  the  interior,  the  septum. 

m  bnw  fnd-f,  “  being  the  inside  of  his  nose.”  With  these  words  the 

R 

oi.uchicago.edu 

242  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  11 

commentator  passes  from  his  indication  of  the  external  limits  of  the  “  column  of  the 
nose  ”  to  define  its  internal  situation  and  limits.  It  should  be  noted  that  m  hnw  might 
of  course  be  understood  here  as  the  common  preposition  “  in  the  inside  of,”  without 
seriously  altering  the  sense :  but  the  interpretation  of  m  as  meaning  “  being,”  or 
“  even,”  a  very  common  use  of  it,  makes  the  discussion  much  more  clear. 

tym'yb  m6d’ty-fy,  “  the  middle  of  his  two  nostrils,”  is  not  clear 
without  defining  the  meaning  of  mid-ty  “  the  two  nostrils  ”  beyond  cavil.  The  word 
is  rare,  and  sufficiently  unfamiliar,  even  to  the  ancient  reader,  to  require  definition 
in  the  next  gloss,  q.  v.  The  word  hry-yb,  “  middle  ”  is  used  anatomically  by  our  treatise 
to  indicate  the  “  middle  region,”  like  the  “  middle  of  the  crown  ”  (of  the  head,  IV  1) 
or  the  “  middle  of  the  palm  ”  (IV  8) ;  or  a  middle  member  of  some  kind  like  the 
“  middle  of  the  nose  ”  (V  21)  in  the  next  case  ;  or,  as  an  adjective,  the  “  middle  ” 
vertebra  of  the  neck  (X  16).  The  last  example  resembles  the  use  of  the  word  in  our 
passage,  except  that,  having  no  single  word  for  the  body  of  tissue  which  he  is  here 
discussing  (like  “  vertebra  ”),  the  surgeon  simply  calls  it  the  “  middle.”  Indeed 
the  m  here,  in  m  hry-yb,  might  be  considered  as  meaning,  “  even,”  “being,”  or 
"to  wit,’  giving  us  the  rendering  “  being  the  middle,”  as  in  m  hnw  just  discussed 
above.  The  tissue  intended  is  of  course  the  septum  nasi,  the  wall  between  the  two 
nostrils  ( nares ). 

Our  ancient  commentator  does  not  define  any  of  the  tissue  he  is  discussing  as  bone 
or  cartilage,  but  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  is  exclusively  describing  what  a  layman 
might  call  the  soft  nose,  that  is,  all  of  the  external  nose  except  the  ossa  nasalia.  If 
this  conclusion  is  correct,  then  the  “  break  ”  which  Case  11  treats  is  a  rupture  between 
the  nasal  bones  and  the  cartilage  which  impinges  upon  them — a  very  common  type  of 
broken  nose  at  the  present  day.  In  that  case  the  Egyptian  surgeon  intended  only  the 
cartilaginous  portions  of  the  nose  to  be  designated  by  the  term  “  column  of  the  nose.” 
Nevertheless,  like  our  colloquial  term  “  bridge  of  the  nose,”  the  designation  “  column 
of  the  nose  ”  may  have  been  sufficiently  loose  in  its  application  to  include  enough 
of  the  nasal  bone  to  enable  the  surgeon  to  speak  of  the  injury  as  a  “  break  in  the  column 
of  the  nose.” 

Gloss  B 
V  15 

Explaining  :  His  two  nostrils 

G  °  w 

<6 

i 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  11 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

243 

*  This  /  is  placed  low  in  the  line  and  there  are  above  it  and  below  it  traces  of  erasures.  As 
Smith  himself  noticed  (Vol.  II,  p.  ix,  2nd  col.),  the  scribe  originally  wrote  and  corrected  it 

to  fh.  See  commentary. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  His  two  nostrils,”  [it  means]  the  two  sides  of  his  nose  extending  to 
his  [two]  cheek[s],  as  far  as  the  back  of  his  nose ;  the  top  of  his  nose  is  loosened. 

Commentary 

mnd-l[?/]-/[i/],  “  his  two  cheeks  ”  should  obviously  be  in  the  dual,  as  is 
shown  by  the  dual  of  dr-wy,  “  the  two  sides.”  It  is  a  word  which  has  been  little  under¬ 
stood.  In  the  first  place  it  has  been  frequently  confused  with  the  common  word 
mnd,  “  breast  ”  (mamma).  It  has  also  been  confused  with  the  eye,  or  some 
part  of  the  eye ;  for  it  appears  in  lists  of  members  of  the  body  associated  with  the 
eyes,  Book  of  the  Dead,  (Budge,  172,  from  Nebseni  32-33,  15  and  18).  In  the 
common  phrase  4-hb  mnd-ty,  “to  make  festive  (meaning  “to  paint”)  the  two  mnd-t” 
(Hymn  to  Amon  11,  2  and  also  of  other  divinities),  it  is  obvious  the  reference  must 
be  to  painting  the  eyes  or  the  region  of  the  eyes.  It  must  be  recalled,  however,  that 
eye-paint  extends  down  upon  the  cheeks.  The  general  situation  of  the  mnd-t  is 
indicated  by  the  position  it  occupies  in  the  list  of  cases  in  our  treatise,  which  takes 
up  injuries  to  the  head  in  the  following  order  :  calvaria,  forehead,  eyebrows,  nose, 
nostrils,  mnd-t  (three  cases :  15,  16,  and  17),  temporal  region,  ear,  mandible,  lips, 
and  chin.  The  mnd-t,  therefore,  is  taken  up  between  the  nose  and  nostrils  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  temporal  region  and  ear  on  the  other.  In  the  transition  from 
the  nose  and  nostrils  to  the  temporal  region  and  the  ear,  we  of  course  pass  over  the 
cheek,  the  maxilla  and  zygoma ;  and  this  is  certainly  the  meaning  of  mnd-t.  More¬ 
over  the  injuries  of  the  mnd-t  (Cases  15,  16  and  17)  are  such  as  could  not  possibly 
occur  to  the  eye  or  the  nostril,  both  of  which  meanings  have  been  wrongly  assigned 
to  mnd-t.  These  injuries  are  a  “  perforation”  (thm),  a  “  split  ”  (pSri),  and  a  “  smash  ” 
(id).  The  first  two  are  never  found  in  our  treatise  in  anything  but  bone.  While  we 
may  render  mnd-t  therefore  “  cheek,”  we  must  understand  that  it  may  also  mean 
the  maxilla  and  the  adjoining  portion  of  the  zygoma  as  far  back  as  the  temporal  bone. 
This  accords  with  the  passage  in  the  Coffin  Texts  ;  “  Re  rises  in  the  east  of  the  sky, 
he  shines  thence  (hr  mnd-ty-t)  upon  thy  two  cheeks,”  meaning  “  thy 

face  ”  ( Recueil  de  trav.  27,  p.  232).  This  must  be  the  word  which  occurs  in  the 
singular  as  far  back  as  the  Old  Kingdom  in  the  mastabas,  e.  g.,  “'""[ASA  (Tomb  of 
Mereruka  A  8,  East  wall).  See  also  Mutter  und  Kind,  III  9. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

244  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  11 

‘©"‘’v  fh,  the  well-known  word  “  to  loosen,”  is  a  scribal  correction.  There  is  evi¬ 
dently  a  statement  here  that  it  is  the  top  of  the  nose  which  is  broken,  or  fh  “  loosened ;  ” 
and  the  traces  of  the  erased  signs  support  Smith’s  conclusion  that  the  scribe 
originally  wrote  imih,  “  dislocate,”  although  this  would  of  course  be  incorrect, 
for  our  surgeon  carefully  distinguishes  between  Mb,  “  break,”  and  wnh,  “  dislocate.” 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  the  ancient  commentator’s  explanation  of 
mid-ty,  “  the  two  nostrils.”  The  “  two  sides  of  his  nose  ”  may  be  understood  as 
including  the  alae  nasi,  the  cartilaginous  wings  of  the  nose,  together  with  the  adjoining 
lateral  cartilage  above.  The  remainder  of  the  explanation  would  seem  to  indicate 
the  other  tissue  surrounding  and  forming  the  nares,  the  limit  on  either  side  being  the 
cheeks.  These  indications  correspond  with  those  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  scanty 
sources  elsewhere.  In  Pap.  Ebers  (99,  5-6)  the  list  of  canals  or  vessels  includes  four 
in  the  (P^AS  mid-ty,  the  “  two  mid-t,”  two  of  which  conduct  an  exudation  and  two 
blood.  The  exudation  niwt  is  obviously  the  secretions  of  the  nose.  At 

Edfu  the  air  and  again  the  incense  enters  the  {mid-t)  “  nostrils  ”  of  the  god 

(Roehem,  Edfou,  I,  569  and  571).  See  also  Book  of  Breathings  (British  Mus.  Pap. 
9995,  II  1  in  Budge,  Boole  of  the  Dead,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  186).  Finally  it  should  be  noted 
that  our  word  seems  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  jp^  “  leg,”  or  “  thigh  ”  or  the 
like  used  both  of  men  and  of  cattle  in  food  lists,  unless  we  consider  the  possibility 
that  the  alae  nasi  were  conceivably  regarded  as  the  “  thighs  ”  of  the  nose. 

CASE  TWELVE 
V  16-VI  8 

A  BREAK  IN  THE  NASAL  BONE 

This  injury,  while  confined  to  the  external  bone,  iB  certainly  higher  up  than  the 
preceding  case,  and  in  contrast  with  it  quite  certainly  affects  the  bone.  Thus  these 
two  caBes  of  nose  injuries  are  arranged  like  the  wounds  of  the  head  in  our  treatise, 
which  discussed  first  the  injuries  which  were  confined  to  overlying  fleshy  tissue 
without  affecting  the  bones,  and  thereafter  proceeded  to  fractures  and  similar  injuries 
of  the  bones  themselves.  The  case  is  interesting  in  that  it  is  the  first  one  we  have 
met  which  involves  setting  the  bone.  The  term  for  “  set  ”  is  literally  “  cause  to 
fall,”  followed  by  the  words  “  so  that  it  is  placed  in  its  position,”  or,  more  freely, 
“  lying  in  its  place."  Not  until  after  the  nose  is  set  does  the  surgeon  cleanse  the  nostrils 
of  the  coagulated  blood,  called  “  every  worm  of  blood.”  After  the  insertion  into  the 
nostrils  of  tampons  of  linen  saturated  with  grease,  this  internal  packing  is  externally 
reinforced  by  two  stiff  splint-like  rolls,  literally  “  posts  ”  or  “  spars  ”  of  linen,  pro¬ 
bably  laid  one  on  each  side,  and  “  bound  on.”  The  three  glosses  are  very  instructive, 
especially  the  quietly  rational  explanation  of  “  every  worm  of  blood  ”  as  the  coagulated 
blood  11  likened  to  a  worm  which  subsists  in  the  water.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cash  12  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  245 

Title 
V  16 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose. 

Commentary 

As  we  shall  see  in  the  course  of  the  treatment  (V  17-20),  our  surgeon  means  the 
nasal  bone  by  his  curious  designation  “  chamber.” 

Examination 
V  16-17 

JM  JLPiJL*! 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose,  (and)  thou 
findest  his  nose  bent,  while  his  face  is  disfigured,  (and)  the  swelling  which  is  over  it  is 
protruding,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  terms  are  all  discussed  in  the  glosses,  except  the  last  remark,  which  has  been 
explained  in  the  commentary  on  Case  4,  examination,  II  8-5  (pp.  144-147). 

Diagnosis 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his 
nose.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

246  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  12 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  bo  found  discussed  in  the  treatment  and  in  Gloss  A.  The  diagnosis 
is  again  a  mere  memorandum  of  a  cue-word  or  two,  as  in  the  two  preceding  cases,  to 
which  the  favourable  verdict  1  is  appended.  See  commentary  in  Case  1  (I  2)  and 
discussion  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.  and  78). 

Treatment 
V  17-20 

a  This  word  was  omitted  by  the  scribe,  but  the  omission  was  discovered  and  the  word  subsequently 
inserted  in  tho  space  over  k,  in  red  ink. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  force  it  to  fall  in,  so  that  it  is  lying  in  its  place,  (and)  clean  out  for 
him  the  interior  of  both  his  nostrils  with  two  swabs  of  linen  until  every  worm  of  blood 
which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils  comes  forth.  Now  afterward  thou 
shouldst  place  two  plugs  of  linen  saturated  with  grease  and  put  into  his  two  nostrils. 
Thou  shouldst  place  for  him  two  stiff  rolls  of  linen,  bound  on.  Thou  shouldst  treat 
him  afterward  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  12  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  247 

Commentary 

The  surgeon  is  charged  to  set  the  fracture  as  the  first  step  in  the  treatment.  It  is 
quite  clear  that  he  is  dealing  with  a  dislodged  portion  of  bone  which  must  be  forced 
back  into  position.  As  the  region  where  the  break  has  occurred  extends,  according  to 
Gloss  A,  as  far  up  as  the  area  between  the  eyebrows,  it  is  obvious  that  the  break  is  either 
in  the  nasal  bone,  or  has  ruptured  the  suture  between  the  os  nasals  and  the  frontal 
bone.  In  view  of  this  description  of  the  setting  of  the  fracture,  we  cannot  doubt  that 
the  “  chamber  ”  (Styt)  of  the  nose  is  the  nasal  bone.  See  discussion  of  Gloss  A. 

■f  ^,1 1 1  ymyw’  “  interior,”  which  occurs  in  only  one  other  passage  in  our  papyrus, 
will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  22  (VIII  11). 

sS-rnj,  “  two  swabs.”  The  corresponding  passage  in  Case  11  has 
It  might  at  first  be  concluded  that  the  text  in  Case  12  should  be  accepted  as  the 
correct  reading  and  that  we  should  understand  Case  12  as  furnishing  the  alphabetic 
writing  of  '3^.  It  should  be  recalled,  however,  that  the  word  sS  properly  means 
“  splint  ’’  and  that  there  is  no  word  sS,  “  swab,”  outside  of  Case  12,  unless  we 
except  the  incorrect  dw$  of  Case  14.  See  full  discussion  in  Case  7,  Gloss  C,  III  18. 
rnrr'l>  “  worm,”  see  Gloss  C. 

^2  Is <  “  coagulate,”  is  a  derived  meaning.  The  common  meaning  of  the  word 
is  “  to  tie,”  “  to  knot.”  It  is  used  physiologically  to  designate  the  growing  together 
of  the  fontanel  on  the  crown  of  an  infant’s  head  in  Case  8  (IV  11),  and  its  use  in  our 
case  quite  appropriately  suggests  the  knotting  together,  as  it  were,  of  stringy  coagula¬ 
tions,  looking  like  worms. 

&&n{?)-wy,  “two  swabs.”  See  Case  11  (V  11-12)  and  Case  7,  Gloss  C 

(III  18). 

"  tw0  stiff  rolls,”  see  discussion  in  Case  11,  V  18. 

The  final  treatment  with  grease,  honey,  and  lint  has  been  discussed  in  Case  1, 1 8. 

Gloss  A 
V  20-21 

Explaining  :  Break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose 

oi.uchicago.edu 

248  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  12 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose,”  it  means  the  middle  of  his  nose 
as  far  as  the  back,  extending  to  the  region  between  his  two  eyebrows. 

Commentary 

a  “  chamber.”  This  is  the  word  really  explained  in  the  gloss,  which 

does  not  take  up  the  word  “  break  ”  at  all.  Throughout  the  literature  of  ancient 
Egypt  Styt  is  a  religious  word,  and  its  appearance  in  our  case  is  certainly  its  only 
medical  or  surgical  use,  if  not  its  sole  occurrence  in  a  secular  document.  It  is  com¬ 
monly  employed  to  designate  any  sacred  chamber.  Hence  we  find  it  applied  to  the 
tomb  (Pap.  Boulaq  10,  verso,  5, 10, 10-11, 18),  or  even  to  the  world  of  the  dead,  as  in 
the  Book  of  the  Gates  ;  but  it  was  especially  a  general  term  for  any  sacred  room, 
chamber,  or  building.  Thus  the  room  for  the  mourning  women  at  Dendera  and  at 
Edfu  is  called  Styt.  Likewise  the  crypts  in  the  temple  of  Dendera  are  so  called,  and 
similarly  an  outlying  chapel  by  the  temple  of  Ombos.  It  is  incessantly  applied  to  the 
dwellings  of  the  gods,  especially  to  that  of  Sokar,  or  of  the  mortuary  gods  like 
Osiris  and  Anubis,  but  also  of  Ptah.  In  the  papyri  of  the  Nineteenth  and  Twentieth 
Dynasties  it  is  commonly  written  ^  n  $’2/4,  and  was  evidently  connected  by 
the  scribes  of  that  age  with  the  word  St1,  “  to  be  secret,  inaccessible.”  It 

appeared,  howevor,  in  the  form  St-t  as  early  as  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  the  t  was 
cortainly  originally  t.  Hence  the  connection  with  St\  “  to  be  secret,  inaccessible,” 
which  had  t,  is  doubtful.  Our  surgeon  writes  the  word  in  every  case  with  the  deter¬ 
minative  of  a  house,  and  must  be  comparing  the  upper  bony  portion  of  the  nose  with 
a  building,  just  as  he  designated  the  rest  of  it  a  “  column.”  That  ho  had  any  esoteric 
suggestion  in  mind  is  highly  improbable.  The  less  accessible  portion  of  the  external 
nose,  the  remotest  from  the  entrance  to  the  nares,  suggests  to  the  surgeon  the  barred 
and  less  accessible  chamber  of  a  sanctuary  or  temple.  The  term  “  chamber  ”  at  once 
raises  the  question  whether  the  surgeon  was  not  thinking  of  the  frontal  sinus,  especially 
in  view  of  the  extension  of  the  Styt  to  “  the  region  between  his  eyebrows.”  The 
instructions  given  the  physician  for  setting  the  broken  Styt,  however,  show  quite 
clearly  that  it  was  a  bone  which  might  be  forced  from  its  normal  position,  to  which 
the  surgeon  must  restore  it,  and  if  so  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  could  include  the 
chamber  of  the  frontal  sinus.  See  commentary  on  treatment  (V  17-18). 

S&^ph'wy,  “  the  back  ”  or  “  end,”  has  anatomical  meanings  which  are  not  always 
clear  in  the  case  of  a  short  organ  like  the  nose.  It  is  used  repeatedly  to  designate  the 
“  end  ”  of  the  ramus  (Case  7,  III  17 ;  Case  22,  VIII  10 ;  VIII  14  twice  ;  Case  25, 
IX  8),  which  is  said  to  be  the  “  end  ”  (ph-wy)  of  the  mandible.  Three  times  it  means 
the  “  end  ”  of  the  mandible  (wgwt,  Case  7,  III  17  ;  III  18  ;  Case  18,  VII  14  ;  and 
rr*f,  Case  22,  VIII  14),  and  once  it  is  used  of  the  end  of  the  phallus  (Case  81,  X  20). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  12  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  249 

We  have  already  had  the  ph-tvy  of  the  nose  in  Case  11  (Y  15),  and  in  our  Gloss  A, 
although  not  followed  by  the  words  “  of  his  nose  ”  (as  in  V  15),  ph-wy  obviously 
designates  a  part  of  the  nose.  In  these  two  passages  where  it  refers  to  the  nose,  it  can 
hardly  refer  to  the  outer  end  of  the  nose  in  Case  11,  and  certainly  does  not  do  so  in 
Case  12.  It  seems  required  then  to  render  the  word  in  accordance  with  its  original 
meaning  “  back,”  literally  “  buttocks.”  This  rendering  would  indicate  that  the 
ph-wy  of  the  nose  extends  at  least  somewhat  toward  the  interior.  It  is  conceivable, 
however,  that  the  surgeon  is  thinking  of  an  “  end  ”  of  the  nose  toward  the  frontal 
bone,  at  the  point  where  the  nose  does  actually  come  to  an  end  and  the  frontal  bone 
begins.  This  view  becomes  more  plausible  if  the  phrase  “  extending  etc.”  is  regarded 
as  modifying  ph-wy,  with  some  such  meaning  as  “  the  end  that  extends  to  the  middle 
of  the  eyebrows.”  There  is  nothing  in  the  grammar  to  exclude  this  rendering.  See 
the  discussion  of  fr,  “  extend,”  “  penetrate,”  etc.  in  Case  1,  pp.  87-88. 

Gloss  B 

V  21 -YI  1 

Explaining :  His  nose  bent,  while  his  face  is  disfigured 

22 

Translation 

As  for  :  "  His  nose  bent,  while  his  face  is  disfigured,”  it  means  his  nose  is  crooked 
and  greatly  swollen  throughout ;  his  two  cheeks  likewise,  so  that  his  face  is  disfigured 
by  it,  not  being  in  its  customary  form,  because  all  the  depressions  are  clothed  with 
swellings,  so  that  his  face  looks  disfigured  by  it. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

250  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  12 

Commentary 

J — °  “  bent.”  There  is  no  such  verb  known  outside  of  our  treatise, 

but  its  meaning  is  determinable.  The  bent  spiral  wire  t  on  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt 
is  called  J  h’b-t,  as  is  well  known.  There  is  a  designation  of  a  sickle  with 

bent  blade  likewise  h’b.  Cf.  also  h'bb  with  determinative  of  two  sickles 

in  the  Eloquent  Peasant,  107  ;  and  hb  with  a  bent  arm  in  Pyr.  1041  d,  which  may  be 
added  to  Sethe’s  discussion  in  Zeitschrif  t,  57  (1922),  p.  17.  Besides  the  above  evidence 
we  have  now  the  indications  of  the  gloss,  which  explains  h’b  by  the  word  ^  J — "  dnb, 
“  crooked.”  The  few  known  examples  of  this  word  are  fortunately  sufficient  to  deter¬ 
mine  its  meaning.  A  dwarf  with  feet  turned  inward  is  called  ^  J  dnb  (Newberry, 
Beni  Hasan,  Vol.  II,  pi.  XVI).  Another  with  crooked  feet  has  the  same  inscription 
(ibid.,  pi.  XXXII).  On  a  Middle  Kingdom  stela  in  Leyden  (V  89,  Boeser,  Beschreibung 
der  Aegyptischen  Sammlung,  Vol.  II,  pi.  XXVII)  a  man  is  named  “  crooked  Kheti,” 
that  is  hty  dnb.  With  these  examples  may  be  compared  the  Middle 

Kingdom  passage:  “  who  follows  in  the  way  without  deflect¬ 

ing  (dnb,  British  Mus.  Stela  No.  572, 1. 18  in  Hieroglyphic  Texts  from  Egyptian  Stelae, 
pt.  II,  pi.  22). 

mnd'ty-jy>  “his  two  cheeks.”  Mnd-ty  has  been  discussed  in  Case  11, 

Gloss  B^V  16. 

jf  pdJ,  “  disfigured,”  is  of  course  one  of  the  well-known  examples  of  a  word 
built  up  by  adding  A  to  the  root,  here  the  word  pd,  “  foot.”  It  means  originally 
to  “  trample,”  "  lay  waste,”  especially  of  fields  or  landscape,  as  in  Uni’s  wasting  of 
the  fields  of  the  Asiatics  (Urh.  I,  p.  108,  1.  28).  Cf.  also  the  obscure  incantation  in 
Ebers  80,  7,  in  which  pdi  indicates  the  destruction  of  a  city.  With  reference  to  the 
face  or  head  the  only  other  known  passage  describes  a  lion  as  ^Pjf®  pdA  tp,  “  with 
head  bruised”  or  “  disfigured,”  Book  of  the  Dead  (Naville,  17,  100  and  106-107). 
This  is  exactly  parallel  with  our  pdA  hr-f,  “  his  face  is  disfigured.”  The  writing 
—  “  his  face  ”  (instead  of  ^ «— )  is  also  found  in  III  20. 

m  kd-f  mty,  “  in  its  customary  form.”  In  this  phrase  m  is  really 
equivalent  to  “  possess  ”  (“  be  in  possession  of  ”),  to  “  have.”  See  the  bull  “  in  ” 
a  certain  color  (Pap.  D’Orbigny,  XIV,  5),  meaning  that  he  “  had  ”  such  and  such 
a  color. 

lerwt,  “depressions,”  literally  “holes,”  is  a  word  otherwise  entirely 
unknown.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  it  is  a  form  related  to  the  familiar 
word  £  <=>  '  *  krr-t,  “  hole.” 

*  hr  can  hardly  be  rendered  otherwise  than  above  ;  but  it  is  not  the  customary 
meaning.  In  the  above  two  passages  its  syntax  seems  to  be  related  to  that  of  the 
Ar-form  in  clauses  of  result,  e.  g.,  above,  Case  7  (III  7-8). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  12  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  251 

Gloss  C 
VI  1-8 

Explaining :  Every  worm  of  blood  which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his 

two  nostrils 

2 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Every  worm  of  blood  which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils,” 
it  means  the  clotting  of  blood  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils,  likened  to  the  rnrr,£- 
worm,  which  subsists  in  the  water. 

Commentary 

— (J.  kfn,  “  clotting,”  is  doubtless  some  word  for  “  thickening,”  but  olsowhere 
usually  meaning  “  to  bake.”  Its  meaning  here  can  hardly  bo  questioned.  Soe  also 
Kahun  Papyri  (7,  29),  where  it  is  once  likewise  connected  with  blood. 

twt,  “likened,”  is  more  than  the  mere  preposition  my,  “like.”  See  the 
same  use  in  Case  45,  XV  18  ;  and  the  causative  i-twt  in  Case  7,  IV  2. 

rnrr-t  is  an  unknown  worm  occurring  elsewhere  than  in  our  treatise 
only  once,  as  an  ingredient  of  a  prescription  for  exterminating  the  hair  of  a  rival 
beauty,  called  the  “  hated  one  ”  (Pap.  Ebers,  67,  8-4).  It  is  evidently  some  slender 
and  slimy  worm  thought  to  resemble  the  fibrous,  stringy  formations  in  coagulated 
blood.  Some  one  familiar  with  the  life  in  the  pools  of  the  Nile  inundation  might  bo 
able  to  identify  it. 

'  imin-t,  “  which  subsists,”  is  an  interesting  example  of  the  verb  wnn  in  its 
ancient  meaning,  that  is,  indicating  far  more  than  merely  “  to  be,”  the  meaning  to 
which  it  finally  weakened.  Our  example  may  be  compared  with  the  admonition  in  the 
Proverbs  of  Ptahhotep  to  cherish  a  wife  as  long  as  thou  “  livest  ”  (vmn-t-k,  Pap.  Prisse, 
10, 10). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

252  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  13 

CASE  THIRTEEN 
VI  8-7 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  IN  THE  SIDE  OF  THE  NOSE 

In  Cases  11  and  12  the  injured  part  is  “  the  middle  of  his  nose  ”  (Case  11,  V  14-15  ; 
Case  12,  V  21).  Case  18  is  followed  by  a  case  of  injury  affecting  only  one  nostril 
(Case  14)  and  Case  15  shifts  completely  over  to  one  cheek.  In  the  diagnosis  of 
Case  18  the  injury  is  said  to  be  “  in  his  nostril ;  ”  he  bleeds  from  only  one  nostril  and 
one  ear ;  and  the  bleeding  is  distinctly  stated,  in  this  connection  ("VI 5),  to  be  “  on  the 
side  of  him  having  this  smash.”  The  injury  is  sufficiently  far  over  on  one  side  to  affect 
the  ear,  and  we  must  conclude  from  all  these  facts  that  the  use  of  “  nose  ”  (jnd)  in 
the  title  and  its  first  occurrence  in  the  examination  (twice  in  all),  is  unquestionably 
in  both  cases  an  error  for  “  nostril  ”  (Sr-t).  While  we  render  the  Egyptian  word  Sr-t 
as  “  nostril,”  it  is  obvious  from  such  a  case  as  this  that  it  means  far  more  than  the 
orifice.  It  includes  also  the  surrounding  tissue  extending  far  enough  laterally  to 
include  some  of  the  bony  tissue  on  each  side  of  the  nose,  the  uppermost  part  of  the 
maxilla,  known  as  the  “  frontal  process,”  which  rises  almost  as  high  as  the  root  or 
top  of  the  os  nasale.  Along  the  sides  of  the  latter  this  frontal  process  of  the  maxilla 
adjoining  tho  nasal  bone  might  very  easily  be  included  by  our  surgeon  in  his  notion 
of  the  structure  of  the  nose.  This  may  explain  why  the  injury  in  our  case  is  regarded 
as  hopeless,  and  the  surgeon  prescribes  no  treatment.  The  fracture  has  burst  through 
into  the  cavum  nasi,  so  that  the  surface  over  it  yields  or  “  breaks  through  "  like  an 
opening  door,  under  the  fingers  of  the  surgeon,  and  he  records  the  unfavorable  verdict 
without  suggesting  any  treatment.  The  injury  must  be  very  much  like  the  compound 
comminuted  fracture  (id)  of  the  maxilla  and  zygoma  in  Case  17,  to  which  the  surgeon 
also  apponds  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  (VII  5),  although  he  does  follow  it  with 
suggestions  of  rest  and  simple  remedies  in  hope  of  possible  survival. 

Title 
VI  8 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  nostril. 

Commentary 

On  the  surgical  meaning  of  “  smash  ”  (id)  as  a  compound  comminuted  fracture, 
see  commentary  on  Case  5  (II 11). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  13  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  253 

Sr-t-f,  “  his  nostril.”  The  demonstration  that  we  are  to  read  Sr-t,  “  nostril,” 
and  not  fnd,  “  nose,”  as  written  by  the  scribe,  has  already  been  given  in  the 

introduction  to  this  case.  It  occurs  four  times  in  this  case,  and  in  only  two  out  of  the 
four  has  the  scribe  written  the  word  correctly  (VI  5  and  6).  It  is  instructive  to 
compare  the  next  case  (14),  where  the  same  word  occurs  five  times,  each  time  written 
correctly.  This  abbreviated  writing  ^  is  found  outside  our  document  only  from 
the  Eighteenth  Dynasty  on  ;  hence  its  earliest  appearance  is  here  in  this  case.  In 
all  earlier  texts  the  word  is  written  alphabetically  [  Zl  ***•  Its  anatomical  meaning 
has  been  unavoidably  touched  upon  in  the  introduction  to  this  case.  It  should  be 
further  noted  that  the  word  is  distinguished  from  fnd,  “  nose  ”  in  such  passages  as 
the  following : 

^3* 

“  The  sweet  North  Wind  for  thy  nose  (fnd),  the  wind  for  thy  nostril  (Sr-t)."  (Tomb  of 
Rekhmire,  Urk.  IV,  p.  1166,  1.  1  ;  cf.  Petrie,  Medum,  pi.  XXIV  ;  Book  of  the  Dead, 
Naville,  172, 14  and  46).  Nevertheless  it  is  commonly  used  in  the  singular  for  “  nose ;  ” 
e.g.,  in  the  well-known  list  of  parts  of  the  body  in  Pap.  Ebers  103,  17  (=*Pap. 
Berlin  3038,  16,  4) ;  but  it  should  be  noted  that  in  this  list  all  other  double  parts  of 
the  body  are  also  in  the  singular,  as  also  in  Pap.  Berlin  3038,  16,  2  ;  and  Mutter  und 
Kind  III  9.  Very  important  for  the  anatomical  meaning  of  the  word  is  the  phrase 
mij;11 — “  the  two  sides  of  his  nose  ”  (Pap.  Leyden  348,  verso  5,  4-5, 
in  Gardiner’s  copy  for  the  Worterbuch).  It  is  quite  clear  here  that  the  singular  of 
the  word  must  indicate  the  nose,  while  the  meaning  “  nostrils  ”  is  equally  evident  for 
the  dual  in  such  a  passage  as  “  Give  me  this  sweet  breath  "v*  ^hat  is 

in  thy  two  nostrils  ”  (Book  of  the  Dead,  Naville,  56,8  Aa).  We  must  conclude,  therefore, 
that  in  the  twelve  passages  in  our  papyrus  stating  that  as  a  result  of  an  injury  in  the 
head  the  patient  is  discharging  blood  “  from  his  two  nostrils,”  we  are  to 

read  Sr-ty.  There  are  seven  more  examples  of  the  writing  &Q  which  we  are  to 
read  Sr-ty  in  Papyrus  Smith,  which  furnish  the  best  evidence  on  this  point.  They  are 
as  follows :  Case  11  (V 12),  Case  12  (V  18, 19  bis,  VI 2,  and  VI 8),  and  Case  22  (VIII  11). 
To  sum  up  :  Sr-t  is  used  for  “  nose,”  or  for  “  nostril,”  and  anatomically,  especially 
as  shown  by  Pap.  Smith,  e.g.,  Case  14,  it  includes  the  tissue  surrounding  the  nostril 
and  adjacent  to  it  as  already  shown  in  the  introduction  to  Case  18. 

This  word  Sr-t  is  a  good  example  of  the  difficulties  experienced  by  our  surgeon  due 
to  the  complete  lack  of  technically  precise  terms  for  designating  organs  and  parts  of  the 
body.  He  is  here,  as  quite  commonly  elsewhere,  obliged  to  take  over  into  his  scientific 
workshop  a  term  which  formerly  served  only  as  a  loose  popular  designation  such  as 
the  modem  Burgeon  has  displaced  by  exact  terms  created  by  adaptation  of  Latin. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

264  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  13 

Examination 
VI  4-6 

a  The  text  has  "y*,  but  the  parallols  elsewhere  show  clearly  that  the  correct  reading  is  as 
givon  above.  See  commentary  below. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  nostril,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
hand  upon  his  nose  at  the  point  of  this  smash.  Should  it  crepitate  under  thy  fingers, 
while  at  the  same  time  he  discharges  blood  from  his  nostril  (and)  from  his  ear,  on  the 
side  of  him  having  that  smash  ;  it  is  painful  when  he  opens  his  mouth  because  of  it ; 
(and)  he  is  speechless,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

^  m  That  we  are  to  read  Srd,  “  nostril,”  in  this  phrase,  and 

not  fnd,  “  nose,”  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  introduction  to  this  case. 

hr  jnd-f,  “upon  his  nose,”  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  to  be  altered  to 
hr  Srd-f ;  for  the  phrase  which  follows  it,  m  h'w  M  pf,  “  at  the  point  of  that  smash,” 
would  in  that  case  be  superfluous.  It  is  probably  the  correct  use  of  the  word  Jnd, 
“  nose,”  in  this  passage  which  has  misled  the  scribe  to  write  “  nose  ”  twice  incorrectly 
in  the  preceding  context,  that  is,  title  and  beginning  of  examination. 

nhbhb,  “  break  through  ”  or  “  crepitate.”  This  rare  word  is  not  found  in 
any  of  the  medical  documents  outside  of  our  treatise.  It  is  an  archaic  word  found 
otherwise  only  in  religious  texts  of  great  age:  three  times  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  and 
once  at  Abydos.  It  appears  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  parallel  with  the  word  ton,  “  open,” 
with  reference  to  bolts  (Pyr.  194  a),  to  doors  (Pyr.  1861b),  and  to  a  coffin  (Pyr.  2009a). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  13  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  255 

At  Abydos  it  is  said  of  doors  (Mariette,  Abydos,  I,  40  a,  11).  It  should  be  noted  that 
the  Pyramid  passage  applying  nhbhb  to  the  coffin  has  been  restored  with  his  customary 
sagacity  by  Sethe ;  and  one  cannot  doubt  the  correctness  of  the  restoration. 
This  passage  indicates  that  the  word  means  somewhat  more  than  “  open,"  and 
suggests  the  idea  of  violent  opening.  It  probably  means  something  like  “  break  open.” 
In  our  papyrus  wre  find  it  employed  five  times  as  a  technical  surgical  term,  applied 
in  each  case  to  a  fracture  and  indicating  some  kind  of  movement  of  the  fracture  under 
the  surgeon’s  fingers.  The  cases  are  as  follows  : 

Case  IS,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  at  one  side  of  the  nose.  “  It  nhbhb 
under  thy  fingers  ”  (VI  4-5). 

Case  17,  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  in  the  maxilla.  “It  nhbhb  under  thy 
fingers  ”  (VII  2). 

Case  24,  a  break  in  the  mandible.  “  It  nhbhb  under  thy  fingers  ”  (VIII  23). 

Case  37,  a  break  in  the  arm.  “  It  nhbhb  under  thy  fingers  ”  (XII  1C). 

Case  44,  a  “  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  sternum.”  “  They  nhbhb  under  thy  fingers  ” 
(XV  7-8). 

With  the  above  material  before  him  the  modern  surgeon  is  better  ablo  to  determine 
the  meaning  of  nhbhb  than  the  orientalist,  and  Dr.  Luckhardt,  after  examination  of 
the  above  evidence,  confirms  my  conjecture,  that  it  means  “  crepitate.” 

(]  yik  dw  hm  dy-f  snf,  “  while  at  the  same  time  he  discharges 

blood.”  A  first  glance  at  this  passage  might  lead  one  to  conclude  that  we  have  here 
an  unusual  verb  hm-f,  “  he  discharges,”  as  if  it  were  a  surgical  specialization 

of  the  verb  or  “  to  repel,  turn  back,”  or  the  liko.  The  same  text  occurs 

again  in  Case  17  (VII  3).  Nevertheless  it  would  be  an  error  to  accept  this  verb.  We 
have  here  undoubtedly  the  particle  hm,  written  without  determinative  as 
frequently.  The  — j  after  it  is  not  a  determinative,  but  must  bo  read  a-j,  giving  us 
the  customary  statement  dy-f  snf ,  “  he  discharges  blood,”  as  in  the  duplicate 

passage  (VII  2-3)  cited  below  (see  also  VIII  7).  I  am  unable  to  cite  another  example 
of  yah  Sw  hm  followed  by  a  verb  in  the  ddm-f  form,  but  essentially  the  same  construc¬ 
tion  with  hm  is  found  in  the  Sinuhe  passage  :  | (Sinuhe  R  16),  which 
Gardiner  renders  “  Even  now  he  was  returning  ”  (see  his  Notes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe, 
p.  168),  the  force  of  the  ty  dw  hm  being  very  well  brought  out  by  “  Even  now,”  as 
I  have  tried  to  render  our  ydk  dw  hm  by  “  while  at  the  same  time.”  See  also  the  follow¬ 
ing  paragraph. 

(corrected  from  ^"7%—),  m  gd-f,  “  on  the  side  of  him.”  The  evidence 
for  this  correction  is  as  follows.  The  phrase  :  m  9Wbry  #*•  pf, 

“  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury,”  occurs  six  times  in  our  treatise  (twice  with 
the  variant  yh  pn,  TV  15-16,  for  dkr  pf).  Indeed  one  of  these  six  passages  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

256  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  13 

Very  similar  to  our  passage  in  VI 5  (except  for  the  omission  of  the  particle  hm  and  the 
parallel  term  dkr  “  injury,”  in  place  of  our  Sd  “  smash  ”).  It  reads  : 

(VII  2-3)  and  contains  where  our  text  has  The  source  of  the  error 

is  moreover  evident.  The  combination  occurs  in  the  next  line  and  without 

doubt  the  scribe’s  eye  fell  upon  it  in  the  original  from  which  he  was  copying. 

‘1  dgm-y,  “  he  is  speechless,”  is  explained  by  our  ancient  author  himself 
in  Case  22,  Gloss  C. 

Diagnosis 
VI  6-7 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  smash  in  his  nostril.  An  ail¬ 
ment  not  to  bo  treated.” 

Commentary 

As  in  the  preceding  three  cases  we  have  the  diagnosis  again  reduced  to  a  mere  catch¬ 
word,  probably  serving  only  as  a  memorandum,  or  possibly  a  student’s  note,  to  which 
the  essential  item,  verdict  3,  has  been  appended.  See  commentary  on  Case  5  (II  15) 
and  discussion  in  the  Introduction  (pp.  46-48  and  73).  The  injury  is  so  serious  that 
it  is  regarded  as  fatal  and  no  treatment  is  added. 

CASE  FOURTEEN 
VI  7-14 

FLESH  WOUND  IN  ONE  SIDE  OF  THE  NOSE  PENETRATING 
TO  THE  NOSTRIL 

As  an  examination  of  the  introduction  to  Case  13  will  show,  Case  14  is  the  last 
of  the  cases  discussing  injuries  to  the  nose.  Like  Case  18  it  carries  the  place  of  the 
injury  toward  one  side,  that  is  away  from  the  middle  of  the  nose  (Cases  11  and  12), 
so  that  in  Case  15  we  leave  the  nose  entirely  and  deal  with  the  maxillary  region. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  14 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

257 

Title 
VI  7 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  nostril. 

Examination 
VI  7-9 

|S 

o\\ 

*8^ 

w 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through,  shouldst 
thou  find  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  separated  from  each  other,  thou  shouldst  draw 
together  for  him  that  wound  with  stitching. 

Commentary 

This  examination  makes  it  clear  that  we  are  dealing  with  an  injury  which  affects 
only  the  soft  tissue.  It  has  pierced  from  the  outside  into  the  interior  of  the  nostril, 
a  condition  indicated  by  the  rare  word  ()P<=JJ,>  yAdb,  which  is  explained  by  the 
surgeon  in  a  gloss  (VI 18-14).  See  Gloss  A  at  end  of  case.  The  inclusion  of  the  stitch¬ 
ing  in  the  examination  is  our  surgeon’s  usual  custom  ;  see  commentary  on  Case  10, 
V  6.  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  :  “  Again  a  good  indication  in  favor  of  stitching,  since 
such  a  wound  is  likely  to  lead  to  a  retraction  of  the  wound  edges,  because  of  severance 
of  the  underlying  cutaneous  muscles.” 

i't,  “  separated,”  is  again  a  new  word.  It  occurs  four  times  in  our  papyrus, 
once  with  the  determinative  as  above,  twice  with  (XII  4  ;  XII  10),  and  once 
followed  by  corrupt  text  which  contains  (XVI  18-19).  It  always  occurs  as  pre¬ 
dicate  of  a  noun  following  gmy  “  find,”  and  is  obviously  a  form  of  the  pseudo-participle. 
It  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  noun  d’t,  “  filth,”  which  appears  from  the 

Empire  on,  especially  in  the  rituals.  It  may  be  identical  with  the  verb  P=^^-^L 
A‘t,  “  to  damage  ”  or  the  like,  which  is  found  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead  onward,  e.  g., 
Naville,  125,  Introduction,  9-10 ;  125,  42 ;  17,  80.  It  is  always  construed  in  our 
document  with  the  preposition  <=-,  a  construction  which  I  have  not  been  able  to 

s 

oi.uchicago.edu 

258  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  14 

find  elsewhere.  This  may  be  due  to  its  specialized  surgical  meaning,  for  it  does  not 
occur  in  any  of  the  other  medical  papyri.  The  translation  suggested  above  is  based 
largely  on  our  passage  in  Case  14,  which  states  that  “  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  are 
d’t  from  each  other,”  whereupon  the  surgeon  is  charged  to  “  draw  together  that  wound 
with  stitching.”  The  implication  is  certainly  strongly  in  favor  of  the  meaning 
“  separated  ”  for  d't.  There  is  a  similar  implication  in  Case  47  regarding  the  gaping 
gash  which  is  stated  to  be  d't,  and  must  then  be  drawn  together  with  stitching  (XYI 
18-20).  In  Case  86,  a  broken  arm,  the  surgeon  finds  the  arm  “  hanging  down  and 
dH-y  from  its  fellow  ”  (XII  9-10).  A  similar  statement  is  made  in  Case  85  in  which 
the  surgeon  finds  a  broken  clavicle  “  short  and  d't  from  its  fellow  ”  (XII  8-4).  If 
**  fellow  ”  means  the  other  arm  and  the  other  clavicle  respectively  in  these  last  two 
cases,  d’t  cannot  of  course  mean  “  separated.”  But  “  fellow  ”  in  these  two  passages 
probably  refers  to  the  other  piece  of  bone  which  has  been  separated  by  the  fracture, 
and  such  an  interpretation  will  permit  us  to  render  “  separated  ”  in  all  the  cases 
employing  d't. 

[]“  dny,  “  each  other,”  is  a  dual  of  the  pronoun  dn,  “  they,  their,”  and  literally 
means  “  they  (or  them)  both.”  It  is  found  also  referring  to  two  bandages  in  Case  35 
(XII  7,  corrupt)  and  Case  86  (XII  18,  bis),  where  we  have  mention  of  “  one  of  them 
both  ”  slight  correction)  and  “  the  other  of  them  both  ”  (<=»([  It  is 

well  known  that  this  dual  form  of  the  pronoun  disappeared  at  an  early  date,  giving 
place  to  the  plural  form  which  supplanted  it.  Its  appearance  in  our  treatise  is  another 
evidence  of  its  great  age. 

ydr,  “  stitching.”  See  commentary  on  Case  10,  V  6,  pp.  227-281. 

Diagnosis 
VI  9 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing 
through.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  is  again  merely  a  catchword  as  so  often  in  the  preceding  cases.  The 
commentary  on  “  wound  ”  will  be  found  in  Case  1 ,  lost  introductory  column  (pp.  82-84). 
On  “  nostril  "  see  Case  18,  VI  8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  14  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  250 

(]  yMb,  “  piercing  through  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Gloss  A  of  this  case. 

On  the  concluding  verdict  1,  see  commentary  in  Case  1  (I  2)  and  consult  also  the 
introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  two  swabs  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  clean  out  every 
worm  of  blood  which  has  coagulated  in  the  inside  of  his  nostril.  Thou  shouldst  bind  it 
with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  When  its  stitching  loosens,  thou  shouldst  take  off  for 
him  the  fresh  meat,  (and)  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  grease,  honey  (and)  lint  every 
day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

iwSnoy  is  without  doubt  a  scribal  error  for  “  two  swabs.”  See 

the  discussion  of  the  parallel  in  Case  12  (V  18),  and  especially  the  full  treatment  in 
Case  7,  Gloss  C  (III  18). 

The  interesting  term  “  every  worm  of  blood  ”  has  been  treated  in  Case  12,  Gloss  C 
(VI  1-3),  and  the  use  of  ts,  literally  “  to  knot,”  with  the  meaning  “  coagulate,”  is 
taken  up  in  Case  12  (V  19). 

On  the  use  of  “  fresh  meat  ”  see  Case  1  (I  2-8). 

wnh,  “  loosens,”  is  fully  discussed  in  Case  10,  V  6  under  ydr.  The  query 
arises  whether  vmh  in  our  passage  may  not  refer  to  the  expected  and  harmless  absorp¬ 
tion  and  loosening  of  gut  stitching,  for  the  reason  that  it  is  not  followed  by  any  further 
efforts  to  draw  together  the  gash  such  as  are  made  in  Cases  10,  23,  and  47.  But 
such  absorption  could  not  occur  within  a  day.  See  the  discussion  in  Case  10. 

S  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

260  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  14 

^^i*f  i  18  doubtless  to  be  read  ydr  as  elsewhere,  not  yd-t.  See  full  discussion  of  the 
word,  including  our  passage,  in  Case  10  (V  6). 

£!T  °n^  is  probably  to  be  read  Ssp-yn-k,  as  a  prescriptive  form,  but  the  dative 
after  the  imperative,  especially  with  Ssp,  is  of  course  common. 

On  the  use  of  “  grease,  honey,  and  lint  ”  see  Case  1  (I  2-3). 

Gloss  A 
VI  12-14 

Explaining  :  A  wound  in  his  nostril  piercing  through 

13 

14 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through,”  it  means  that  the  two  lips 
of  his  wound  are  soft,  opening  to  the  inside  of  his  nose,  as  one  says  :  “  Pierced 
through  ”  concerning  soft  things. 

Commentary 

This  explanation  is  curiously  enough  repeated  in  another  case,  Gloss  A,  Case  26, 
which  contains  some  interesting  variants  noted  below.  The  word  which  the  com¬ 
mentator  is  specifically  explaining  is 

(j  yidb,  “  piercing  through.”  The  explanation  is  not  particularly  successful 

in  making  clear  the  meaning  of  y&db.  Besides  the  four  occurrences  of  the  word  in 
Case  14,  it  is  further  found  nine  times  in  our  treatise,  four  of  which  are  in  Case  26. 
These  passages  are  really  more  valuable  in  determining  the  meaning  of  the  word  than 
any  other  source,  for  the  word  is  unknown  outside  of  our  document.1  In  Case  26, 

1  It  is  evidently  not  related  to  the  well-known  |  j  idb  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  which  appears 
as  P'")  J}  in  the  Pyramid  Texts (1340b,  etc.)  and  moans  “damage”  or  the  like.  Nor  has  it  any 
discernible  connection  with  regularly  occurring  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  in  parallelism  with 

rnb,  “life”  (Pyr.  167a  ;  168a  ;  176-178).  We  cannot  suppose  that  it  is  related  to  P I _J j[  M, 
“  instruments,”  or  the  like,  e.  g.,  Naophoric  Statue  in  the  Vatican,  2.  See  infra,  p.  18, 7th  line  from  top. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  14  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  261 

a  wound  in  the  lip,  the  injury  is  described  as  “  piercing  through  (yidb)  to  the  inside 
of  his  mouth  ”  (IX  7  ;  IX  9  ;  IX  11-12).  Similarly  in  Case  28  a  wound  in  the  throat 
is  described  as  “  piercing  through  (yddb)  to  his  gullet  ”  (IX  19  ;  IX  22).  Helpful  light 
on  the  meaning  of  this  passage  is  thrown  by  a  detailed  comparison  with  Case  27, 
a  “  gaping  wound  in  the  chin.”  The  parallel  passages  are  as  follows  : 

Case  27.  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin,”  — <]  ■  • 

Case  28.  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  throat,”  I)  p<=.J|x 

Except  for  the  two  different  parts  of  the  body  concerned,  the  two  passages  are 
identical  until  we  reach  the  final  descriptive  phrase,  where  Case  27  has  “  penetrating 
to  the  bone,”  and  CaSe  28  has  “  piercing  through  (yMb)  to  his  gullet.”  Thus  it  would 
seem  highly  probable  that  yMb  is  nearly  synonomous  with  rT>  11  penetrate,” 

the  latter  being  here  used  where  the  penetration  reaches  a  solid  body,  the  former 
(yidb)  where  it  comes  through  into  a  void.  In  Case  84  the  surgeon  likewise  describes 
a  rupture  of  overlying  soft  tissue  which  he  finds  accompanying  a  dislocation  of  the 
clavicle,  as  “  piercing  through  (yMb)  to  the  inside  ”  (XI  21),  meaning,  of  course,  the 
interior  of  the  trunk.  In  Case  87,  a  broken  arm  with  a  rupture  of  the  overlying  soft 
tissue,  the  meaning  of  yMb  is  not  so  clear  (XII 20 ;  XII 21).  The  surgeon  first  describes 
a  fracture  “  having  a  wound  over  it  ”  and  regards  this  injury  as  one  with  which  he 
can  deal  (verdict  2).  He  then  adds :  “If,  however,  thou  findest  that  wound  which 
is  over  the  fracture  with  blood  issuing  from  it,  piercing  through  (yMb)  to  the  interior 
of  his  injury,  thou  shouldst  say  ‘.  .  .  A  case  not  treatable’”  (Verdict  8,  XII 19-21). 
See  commentary  on  Case  87. 

The  form  of  the  verb  is  interesting.  With  one  exception  (our  gloss  above),  the 
word  is  always  written  yMb,  with  initial  (j  in  all  the  thirteen  passages  in 

which  it  occurs :  and  it  should  be  noted  with  reference  to  the  sole  occurrence  of 
Pc=JJ(^  ddb,  that  the  parallel  text  (IX  12)  has  yMb.  The  context  would  indicate 
that  we  have  in  this  word  in  every  passage  a  participial  form.  In  our  Case  14  yMb 
occurs  three  times  in  the  phrase  “  a  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through.”  In  none 
of  these  three  passages  does  yidh  take  a  feminine  t,  which  would  show  agreement  with 
Sr-t  (feminine),  “  nostril.”  It  must  qualify  wbnw,  “  wound,”  which  is  masculine, 
and  we  must  therefore  regard  yddb  as  an  active  participle,  describing  the  condition 
of  the  wound.  It  is  evidently  then  an  imperfect  active  participle,  having  the  vowel 
after  the  second  radical,  and  therefore  taking  a  prosthetic  (j  before  the  double 
consonance  at  the  beginning  of  the  word.  Confirming  this  identification  is  the 
occurrence  of  the  form  QP==>J  <?][,>  yidb-w  (XI  21),  with  the  ending  <?.  See  Erman, 
Grammaiik3,  par.  890,  p.  208.  The  form  Mb  in  our  gloss  (VI  14),  which  seems  to 
make  a  sentence  by  itself,  might  be  a  perfect  passive  participle,  and  has  been  so 

oi.uchicago.edu 

202  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  14 

considered  in  the  translation,  notwithstanding  the  occurrence  of  yidb  in  the  parallel 
gloss  (IX  12). 

1 J  tcb’  n  might  possibly  be  considered  as  an  n-form  of  the  verb,  with 

hnw  fnd-f  (“  the  inside  of  his  nose  ”)  as  the  subject,  giving  us  the  sentence :  “  The 
inside  of  his  nose  has  opened.”  The  surgical  and  anatomical  conditions  in  these 
cases,  however,  are  not  described  by  the  use  of  the  n-form  (except  with  the  negative, 
e.  g.,  II  14).  It  seems  to  me  certain  that  we  have  here  the  common  phrase  — 
n  hnw,  “to  the  inside,”  found  also  in  Case  5  (II 16  ;  II 17)  with  hrp,  “ sink ;  ”  Case  6 
(II  24)  with  wb ’  “  open  ;  ”  Case  26  (IX  9  ;  IX  11)  with  yidb,  and  (IX  12)  with  wb\ 
“  open  ;  ”  Case  82  (XI  8)  with  hrp,  “  sink  ”  ( n  omitted  by  error  of  scribe) ;  Case  34 
(XI  21)  with  yidb,  “  piercing  through  ;  ”  and  Case  87  (XII  20),  the  same.  We  must 
regard  wb >  n,  “opening  to,”  as  exactly  parallel  with  fr  n,  “penetrating  to,”  so 
common  in  the  cranial  cases  in  this  treatise. 

my  4d,  “  as  one  says,”  perhaps  literally  a  passive  participle,  “  like  what  is 
said,”  or  better  an  impersonal  passive,  “  as  is  said,”  is  represented  by  literally 

“  he  says  ”  in  the  repetition  of  this  gloss  in  Case  26,  Gloss  A. 

The  plural  of  yh-t,  “  things,”  is  treated  as  usual  as  a  masculine,  gnn  following  with¬ 
out  any  indication  of  agreement  in  gender.  See  Case  81,  commentary  on  X  19. 

CASE  FIFTEEN 
VI  14-17 

PERFORATION  OF  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION  OF  THE  MAXILLA  AND 

THE  ZYGOMA 

With  Case  16  we  pass  from  injuries  of  the  nose  to  those  in  the  maxillary  region, 
including  likewise  injuries  to  the  zygoma  in  all  probability.  Injuries  in  this  region 
are  treated  in  the  three  cases  16,  16,  and  17  :  Case  15  discussing  a  “  perforation  ” 
(thm),  Case  16  a  “  split  ”  {pin ),  and  Case  17  a  “  smash  ”  (id)  or  compound  comminuted 
fracture.  The  arrangement  of  these  cases  of  injuries  in  the  region  mentioned  is  the 
same  as  that  which  we  have  found  in  the  discussion  of  injuries  of  the  skull :  Case  8 
treating  a  “  perforation,”  Case  4  a  “  split,”  and  Case  5a"  smash.” 

Our  surgeon  regards  a  perforation  of  the  bone  in  this  region  as  an  injury  which  he 
can  cure,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  there  is  possibly  a  diseased  condition  of  the 
wound.  The  remedy  which  he  applies,  a  mineral  called  ymrw,  which  cannot  be  identi¬ 
fied,  would  be  interesting  if  it  were  safe  to  conclude  that  it  was  a  mineral  poison  acting 
as  a  disinfectant,  but  the  reader  should  be  warned  that  this  is  pure  conjecture.  Our 
inability  to  identify  this  mineral  is  another  illustration  of  our  lack  of  information 
regarding  the  terms  belonging  to  the  ancient  Egyptian  materia  medica. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  15  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

263 

Title 
VI  14 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  perforation  in  his  cheek. 

Commentary 

Jo  The  reading  thm  is  clear  from  the  examination  (VI 15).  For  full  commentary 
see  Case  8  (1 18). 

mnd-t,  “  cheek,”  is  used  here  as  a  designation  of  the  maxilla  and  the  con¬ 
tiguous  portions  of  the  zygoma,  even  as  far  back  as  the  temporal  bone.  See  com¬ 
mentary  in  Case  11  (V  15). 

Examination 
VI  15-16 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  perforation  in  his  cheek,  shouldst  thou  find 
there  is  a  swelling,  protruding  and  black,  (and)  diseased  tissue  upon  his  cheek, 
(conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

On  thm  m  mnd-t- f,  “  a  perforation  in  his  cheek,”  see  title  above.  Commentary 
on  ihb  ySw-y,  “  the  swelling  protruding,”  will  be  found  in  Case  4  (II  4). 

km  may  mean  “  black  ”  here,  although  with  this  meaning  it  usually  has 
the  determinative  while  its  meaning  with  the  determinative  is  usually  “  to 
be  complete.”  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  in  the  following  case  (VI  18-19), 
the  wording  of  the  examination  of  which  is  exactly  parallel  to  our  passage,  we  find  : 
“  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  (jpSri)  in  his  cheek,  shouldst  thou  find  there 
is  a  swelling,  protruding  and  red,  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  etc. ;  ”  that  is,  we  have 
a  color  designation  immediately  following  the  observation  regarding  the  swelling. 

Sm'y.  This  term  is  the  same  as  im’y  of  Case  41,  see  Gloss  A. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

264 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Diagnosis 
VI 16 

im 

\\ 

i  i 

iVAVM  Q 

Case  15 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  perforation  in  his  cheek. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

Again,  as  so  often,  the  diagnosis  is  merely  a  hasty  memorandum,  omitting  all  that 
should  follow  the  introductory  catchwords.  On  the  meaning  of  these  see  commentary 
on  the  title.  On  the  significance  of  the  concluding  verdict,  see  commentary  on  Case  1 
(I  2)  and  also  the  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

VI  16-17 

©  I 

ISZ7 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw  and  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease  (and)  honey 
every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

iTi  Vmrw>  which  we  may  call  imru,  must  be  identical  with  ymrw, 

which  occurs  seven  times  in  our  treatise.  The  writing  with  £  =  mr,  which  is  found 
in  two  other  passages  (IX  6  and  X  11),  is  further  evidence  of  the  archaic  origin  of  our 
treatise,  for  it  is  known  only  in  the  Old  Kingdom,  or  in  religious  texts  retaining  the 
old  orthography.  The  determinative  shows  that  it  is  a  mineral,  which,  however,  we 
are  unable  to  identify,  as  it  is  entirely  unknown  outside  of  Pap.  Smith.  It  can  hardly 
be  the  Bame  as  the  like-sounding  °  (  yimry,  commonly  guessed  at  as  “  emery,” 

which  appears  for  example  in  Asiatic  tribute  (Sethe,  Urk.  IV,  p.  686).  If  we  really 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  15  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  265 

have  in  our  case  here  an  example  of  gangrene,  one  would  like  to  see  in  imru  some 
poisonous  mineral  which  would  act  as  a  disinfectant ;  though,  if  so,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  nature  of  its  effects  would  not  have  been  understood  by  the  ancient  surgeon. 

v_*  brwh-k,  “  thou  shouldst  treat.”  Although  the  customary  determinative  of 
&rwh  is  the  book  roll,  nevertheless  we  cannot  doubt  that  we  should  read  <— a  as  inch 
in  this  passage,  as  a  comparison  of  the  corresponding  passage  in  Case  16  immediately 
following  will  show. 

The  omission  of  ^  m  “with”  before  mrh-t,  “grease,”  is  frequent  in  Pap.  Smith; 
but  it  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that  mrh-t  begins  with  m,  for  it  is  also  often  found  omitted 
before  byt,  “  honey,”  and  even  ydr,  “  stitching  ”  (Case  26,  IX  8). 

On  the  use  of  grease  and  honey  see  commentary  on  Case  1  (I  2-8). 

CASE  SIXTEEN 
VI 17-21 

SPLIT  OF  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION  OF  THE  MAXILLA  AND 
THE  ZYGOMA 

This  case  is  the  second  of  the  group  of  three  (Cases  15, 16,  and  17)  treating  injuries 
of  the  maxillary  region.  See  the  introduction  to  Case  1 5.  The  case  is  regarded  as  one 
quite  curable. 

Title 

VI  17-18 

i  i  i 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  cheek. 

Commentary 

On  the  surgical  meaning  of  “  split  ”  (pSn).  see  commentary,  Case  4  (II  2).  See 
also  preceding  Case  15  (VI  14). 

Examination 

VI  18-19 

Q  /WAWi 

VAVAA  C~\ 

|  □  Q 

iMS^  U .  I  X 

oi.uchicago.edu 

266  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  16 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  cheek,  shouldst  thou  find  that  there 
is  a  swelling,  protruding  and  red,  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

“  Shouldst  thou  find  .  .  .  that  split  ”  is  found  also  in  Case  8  (IV  6),  referring  to 
a  fracture  of  the  skull  (except  that  our  passage  in  Case  16  has  inserted  the  additional 
detail  “  red  ”).  Consult  commentary  on  Case  8  (IV  6),  and,  on  “  swelling  protruding,” 
see  also  Case  4  (examination),  II  4. 

Diagnosis 

VI  19-20 

a 

w 

X 

AVWV-A  rCA 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  cheek.  An 
ailment  which  [I]  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

As  in  a  number  of  the  preceding  cases  the  diagnosis  contains  only  a  memorandum 
repeating  the  title,  the  verdict  at  the  end  forming  the  important  item.  On  this  verdict 
consult  commentary  on  Case  1  (1 2)  and  the  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

VI  20-21 

f  T  V sKZZa  It  \ ,  ° 

>u. 

-ftth 

©  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  His  treatment  is  sitting 
until  its  swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out).  Thou  shalt  treat  it  afterward  [with] 
grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  16  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  267 

Commentary 

On  the  treatment  with  **  fresh  meat,”  see  commentary  on  Case  1  (I  2-8) ;  and  on 
“  grease,  honey,  and  lint  ”  see  Case  1  (I  2-8).  The  term  “  swelling  ”  (thb)  is  discussed 
in  full  in  Case  4  (II  4).  The  chief  item  in  the  treatment  is  “  sitting,”  that  is  quiet 
and  rest ;  see  Case  4  (II  7). 

CASE  SEVENTEEN 
VII  1-7 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OP  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION 
OF  THE  MAXILLA  AND  THE  ZYGOMA 

This  is  the  third  in  the  series  of  three  progressively  more  serious  injuries  to  the 
bone  in  the  maxillary  region,  beginning  with  Case  15.  As  in  the  case  of  a  similar 
injury  to  the  skull  (Case  5),  to  the  nasal  bone  (Case  18),  and  to  the  temporal  bone 
(Case  22)  the  surgeon  appends  the  fatal  verdict  8,  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 
In  view  of  these  analogous  cases  just  cited  (5,  18,  and  22),  our  verdict  in  Case  17  is 
probably  correct,  and  the  stereotyped  words,  following  the  conventional  treatment 
with  grease,  honey,  and  lint,  “  until  ho  recovers,”  are  doubtless  to  be  regarded  as 
a  scribal  error.  See  discussion  of  these  passages  below,  and  see  PL  VII,  Fig.  14. 

Title 

VIII 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  cheek. 

Commentary 

On  the  surgical  meaning  of  id  “smash,”  really  a  compound  comminuted  fracture, 
see  commentary  on  Case  5  (II 11). 

Examination 
VII  1-4 

MIC 

□ 

n  _  n 

X  M 

oi.uchicago.edu 

268  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  17 

(jf  Jwl 

<NvisZS^P 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  cheek,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
hand  on  his  cheek  at  the  point  of  that  smash.  Should  it  crepitate  under  thy  fingers, 
while  he  discharges  blood  from  his  nostril,  (and)  from  his  ear  on  the  side  of  him  having 
that  injury  ;  (and)  at  the  same  time  he  discharges  blood  from  his  mouth,  while  it  is 
painful  when  he  opens  his  mouth  because  of  it,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  parallel  passage  in  Case  18  (VI  4-6)  has  interesting  variants.  The  surgeon 
uses  wdy  “put,  place  ”  interchangeably  with  rdy,  literally  “give,”  when  the  object  is 
the  hand  placed  on  the  injury. 

M  h’w,  which  I  have  rendered  “at  the  point  of,”  probably  suggests  some  local 
refinement  which  may  not  have  been  sufficiently  suggested  by  this  rendering.  See 
parallel  in  Case  18. 

On  nhbhb,  “  crepitate,”  see  commentary  on  Case  18  (VI  4-5). 

On  ydk  Ac  in  1.  2  and  ydk  iw  hm  in  1.  8  see  commentary  on  Case  18  (VI  5). 

Both  the  nostril  and  the  ear  on  the  side  which  has  suffered  the  injury  are  affected. 
The  apparent  writing  6kn,  as  in  IV  15  (see  also  original,  IV  7),  is  to  be  read  ikr. 

The  discharge  of  blood  from  the  mouth,  as  well  as  from  the  nostril  and  the  ear, 
shows  that  the  wound  has  broken  through  and  ruptured  the  tissue  in  the  oral  cavity. 
Naturally  the  facial  muscles  are  effected,  making  it  painful  to  open  the  mouth,  just 
as  in  Case  18. 

Diagnosis 
VII  4-5 

*  The  scribe  wrote  by  error  immediately  alter  He  then  wrote  ^  over  this  and 
added  « —  at  the  end. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  17  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  269 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “One  having  a  smash  in  his  cheek,  while  he 
discharges  blood  from  his  nostril,  from  his  ear,  (and)  from  his  mouth,  (and)  he  is 
speechless.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  is  fuller  than  in  the  two  preceding  cases,  in  which  it  offers  only  a 
repetition  of  the  title.  It  adds  also  the  interesting  circumstance  that  the  patient  is 
speechless.  This  word,  dgmy,  “  he  is  speechless,”  is  explained  by  the  surgeon  himself 
in  Case  22,  Gloss  C,  q.  v.  This  remark  regarding  speechlessness  is  dropped  in  here  as 
a  single  word  in  Egyptian,  whereas  in  Case  18,  where  it  has  been  properly  inserted  as 
part  of  the  examination,  the  same  Egyptian  verb  has  been  introduced  by  a  preceding 
auxiliary  verb  (j^,  yw-f,  “  he  is  ”  (VI  6).  See  discussion  of  this  diagnosis  in  the  Intro¬ 
duction  (p.  50). 

This  verdict,  regularly  used  of  fatal  cases,  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5  (II 15). 
I  formerly  regarded  it  in  our  case  as  an  obvious  error  of  the  scribe,  in  view  of  the  phrase 
“  until  he  recovers,”  at  the  end  of  the  case.  Indeed  the  scribe  has  made  the  same 
error  and  corrected  it  back  to  verdict  1,  “  a  case  which  I  will  treat,”  in  Case  85,  An 
examination  of  Case  13,  however,  makes  it  quite  possible  that  the  verdict  is  correct 
and  the  conclusion  (VII  7)  an  error.  See  Case  18,  introduction. 

Treatment 
VII  5-7 

o 

<*>/!  <? 

i  i  i 

M 

a 

©l@D 

w 

<? 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  His  rrelief  is  sitting  until  its 
swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out).  Thou  shalt  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey 
(and)  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

270  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  17 

Commentary 

This  treatment  is  identical  with  that  in  the  preceding  case,  but  we  cannot  suppose 
that  the  scribe  has  absentmindedly  raised  his  eyes  to  the  treatment  in  the  preceding 
case  (immediately  above  our  case  in  his  original  roll),  and  thus  copied  the  wrong  treat¬ 
ment;  for  he  has  written  the  extraordinary  “*“()!}*—  for  g  *■—  Arwh-f,  “  his  treat¬ 
ment  ”  (VI  20),  and  he  has  written  the  variant  ^  for  of  VI  21,  besides  the 
cursive  for  the  fuller  by-t,  “honey,”  of  VI  21.  As  for  the  conclusion, 

"  until  he  recovers,”  it  is  so  frequent  in  our  treatise  after  the  treatment  with  “grease, 
honey  and  lint,”  that  the  scribe  may  have  written  it  quite  thoughtlessly,  without 
having  seen  it  in  the  original  before  him.  It  is  quite  possible  therefore  that  this  con¬ 
clusion  is  an  error  and  that  the  fatal  verdict  above  is  correct. 

sry-f,  “  his  rreliefY’  is  not  an  error,  for  it  is  found  in  two  other  passages 
in  our  treatise,  three  in  all.  In  each  case  it  is  written  exactly  a3  above,  without  any 
determinative,  in  a  verbless  sentence  with  “  sitting  ”  as  the  predicate  noun.  In  both 
the  other  cases  it  is  followed  by  the  copulative  jj  pw  (Case  20,  VIII  5  ;  and  Case  32, 
XI  6-7).  In  our  Case  17  it  may  be  used  in  connection  with  a  fatal  condition  of  the 
patient ;  in  Case  20  it  is  certainly  so  used  ;  but  in  Case  32  it  is  immediately  followed 
by  the  clause  “  until  he  recovers.”  If  the  meaning  above  suggested  is  correct,  it  is 
applied  both  to  relief  in  a  favorable,  as  well  as  in  a  hopeless  case,  in  which  temporary 
alleviation  is  all  that  can  be  expected.  The  rendering  hazarded  is  based  on  a  very  un¬ 
certain  identification  of  our  word  with  the  causative  A-rwy,  “to  cause  to  flee,” 

used  of  exorcising  spirits,  and  as  a  legal  term,  of  “  transferring  ”  a  person  or  pro¬ 
perty  levied  for  tax  payments,  a  term  which  might  possibly  be  applied  by  our 
surgeon  to  relief  from  physical  suffering.  In  all  three  occurrences  of  the  word  we 
find  —  s  instead  of  the  p  A  needed  to  justify  the  etymology  suggested.  In  any  case  it 
should  be  noted  that  our  puzzling  word  is  found  in  all  three  cases  in  a  context  which 
elsewhere  repeatedly  has  Arwfi-f,  “  his  treatment,”  in  place  of  our  sry-f— a  fact  which 
shows  that  sry-f  must  have  some  meaning  which  will  make  sense  when  substituted  for 
Arwfr-f,  “  his  treatment.” 

CASE  EIGHTEEN 
VII  7-14 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  SOFT  TISSUE  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  THE  BONE 
BEING  UNINJURED 

ThiB  case  is  the  first  of  a  group  of  five  cases  of  injuries  affecting  the  temporal  region 
between  the  eye  and  the  ear.  The  surgeon  has  thus  been  passing  from  the  nose  back¬ 
ward  towards  the  ear,  which  follows  this  group  of  five  cases.  Like  the  first  eight  cases 
in  the  treatise,  discussing  injuries  to  the  head,  our  group  begins  with  a  flesh  wound 
affecting  only  the  overlying  soft  tissue  (Case  18)  and  passes  then  to  deeper  and  more 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  18  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  271 

serious  wounds  affecting  the  bone :  a  perforation  ( thm ,  Cases  19  and  20),  a  split 
( pSn ,  Case  21),  and  a  compound  comminuted  fracture  (M,  Case  22). 

The  discussion  includes  two  interesting  glosses,  the  first  explaining  the  sizo  and 
nature  of  the  flesh  wound,  the  second  defining  the  new  term  gm and  showing  that  it 
was  closely  equivalent  to  our  modern  popular  word  “  temple.” 

Title 
VII  7 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  temple. 

Commentary 

The  important  new  word  gm',  “  temple,”  or  “  temporal  bono,"  is  explained  by 
the  surgeon  himself  at  the  end  of  this  case  in  Gloss  B,  q.  v. 

Examination 
VII  7-9 

w.... 

□  _ flf-5 

'<=>  x  ra^j  r^x 

*  The  scribe  has  apparently  written  r,  at  least  it  is  unusually  large  for  t.  Such  a  large  t  is  however 
occasionally  found,  and  the  gloss  in  1. 12,  quoting  this  passage,  writes  l. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  it  not  having  a  gash, 
while  that  wound  penetrates  to  the  bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst 
thou  find  his  temporal  bone  uninjured,  there  being  no  split,  (or)  perforation,  (or)  smash 
in  it,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

272  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  18 

Commentary 

The  parallel  passage  in  Case  27  (IX 14— 15)  offers  interesting  and  important  variants. 
Grammatically  it  is  interesting  to  find  above  gmm-k,  “  shouldst  thou  find,”  parallel  with 
yr  gmy-k,  “  If  thou  shouldst  find  ”  in  Case  27.  More  important  is  the  following  variant : 

Case  18  : 

“  Shouldst  thou  find  his  gm ’  uninjured.” 

Case  27  : 

“  If  thou  shouldst  find  his  bone  uninjured  ”  (IX  14-15). 

The  full  discussion  of  gm’,  “  temple,”  will  be  found  in  Gloss  B,  in  connection  with 
the  surgeon’s  own  explanation  of  the  word ;  but  the  point  to  be  made  here  is  the  evident 
application  of  the  word  both  to  a  bone  and  to  the  soft  tissue  lying  over  it.  We  observe 
that  the  injury  is  assumed  both  by  the  title  and  the  first  clause  of  the  examination 
to  be  in  the  patient’s  gm’,  whereas  the  latter  part  of  the  examination  (beginning  1.  9) 
states  quite  clearly  that  the  gm’  is  “  uninjured  ”  and  has  no  “  split,  perforation,  (or) 
smash  in  it.”  The  specified  injuries  are  those  of  the  bone  (jpSn  and  thm  are  used  ex¬ 
clusively  of  bone,  id  primarily)  and  the  parallel  passage  above  cited,  referring  to  the 
chin,  actually  employs  the  word  “  bone  ”  where  our  case  has  gm’.  It  is  obvious  there¬ 
fore  that  our  surgeon  is  describing  an  injury  which  has  penetrated  the  soft  tissue  over- 
lying  the  bone  and  exposing  it,  but  without  inflicting  any  injury  upon  it.  We  find, 
therefore,  wide  latitude  in  the  anatomical  meaning  of  gm’,  here  rendered  “  temple  ” 
and  “  temporal  bone,”  which  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  Gloss  B, 
where  the  Egyptian  surgeon  is  noticeably  vague  in  his  definition  of  gm’,  and  is  probably 
intentionally  so  ;  for  he  calls  it  “  the  region  thereof  between  the  comer  of  his  eye  and 
the  ^orifice1  of  his  ear,  at  the  end  of  his  mandible  ”  (p.  275).  His  terms  leave  it  quite 
uncertain,  therefore,  whether  the  designation  gm’  includes  the  bone  or  refers  exclusively 
to  the  overlying  soft  tissue.  The  superficial  area  included  is  indicated  with  fair  pre¬ 
cision,  but  like  our  own  word  “  temple  ”,  the  Egyptian  gm’  does  not  suggest  what 
is  included  below  the  surface  (see  pp.  275-277  and  PI.  V,  Fig.  11). 

On  the  meaning  of  the  term  fc/*f,  “  gash,”  see  commentary  on  Case  1,  pp.  90-92. 

On  “  palpate  ”  (d'r)  consult  commentary  on  Case  1,  pp.  92-98. 

On  “  penetrates  to  the  bone  ”  ( rr  n  kS)  see  Case  1,  pp.  87-89. 

PSn,  “  split,”  confined  to  injuries  of  the  bone,  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  2). 

Thm,  “  perforation,”  also  confined  to  injuries  of  the  bone,  has  been  discussed  in 
Case  3  (1 18). 

&d,  “  smash,”  primarily  used  of  injuries  to  the  bone,  but  sometimes  of  soft  tissue, 
is  discussed  in  Case  5  (II  11). 

The  order  of  the  three  injuries  excluded  from  this  case  is  different  from  that  of  the 
following  four  cases  (19-22),  in  which  they  are  taken  up,  viz.,  thm,  pin,  id. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  18 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

Diagnosis 
VII  9-10 

10 

273 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  temple.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

Considering  the  surgeon’s  vague  use  of  gm\  “  temple,”  in  this  case  (see  commentary 
on  examination),  this  memorandum  serving  in  the  place  of  the  diagnosis  is  singularly 
insufficient.  It  merely  repeats  the  title,  as  in  the  cases  on  the  maxillary  region  (Cases 
15-17).  For  the  practical  surgeon,  however,  the  line  of  action  he  is  to  follow  is  in¬ 
troduced  in  the  favorable  verdict  1 ,  which  is  explained  in  Case  1  (I  2)  and  discussed 
also  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

o 

Cl 

VII  10-11 

(?  ^ 

i  i 

D 

\\ 

Q  6  ©  i 

^  o  o  d\ — y 

4  Preposition  m,  “  with  ”  omitted  as  commonly. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat 
afterward  [with]  grease,  (and)  honey  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  this  frequent  remedy,  fresh  meat  followed  by  grease  and  honey,  often  with  lint 
added,  see  Case  1,  treatment  (1 2-3).  The  case  is  evidently  a  simple  one,  and  recovery 
is  regarded  as  certain. 

T 

oi.uchicago.edu 

274  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  18 

Gloss  A 
VII  11-13 

Explaining  :  A  wound,  not  having  a  gash,  while  it  penetrates  to  the  bone. 

12 

*  The  scribe  at  first  wrote  "  its  two  lips,”  and  then  discovered  that  his  original  had  “  his  wound  ” 
instead  of  the  pronoun  “  its.”  He  therefore  canceled  “  its  ”  with  a  vertical  stroke  of  red  ink 
over  the  black.  Wn-t  and  t  of  kf-t  (1.  12)  are  also  corrections  entered  in  black  in  the  rubric. 

Translation 

As  for:  “  A  wound,  not  having  a  gash,  while  it  penetrates  to  the  bone,”  it  means 
that  the  wound  is  contracted,  reaching  as  far  as  the  bone,  (though)  there  is  no  gash  in 
it.  He  speaks  of  (its)  narrowness,  his  wound  not  having  two  lips. 

Commentary 

The  scribe  again  demonstrates  his  carelessness  in  quoting  an  excerpt  from  the  text 
of  the  case,  which  has  “  that  wound  ”  (VII 8)  instead  of  “  it  ”  as  quoted  (VII 12). 

This  wound  in  the  temple  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  in  the  head,  described  in 
Case  1,  where  much  the  same  terms  are  employed  to  indicate  the  character  of  the 
wound  as  a  small  rupture  of  the  soft  tissue,  such  as  would  be  produced  by  falling  and 
striking  the  head  on  a  stone,  or  such  as  would  result  from  the  blow  of  a  club.  Compare 
Case  1,  diagnosis  (I  1-2)  and  Gloss  B  (I  9-10).  This  gloss  explains  the  phrase  in  the 
text  “  while  his  wound  does  not  have  two  lips  ”  and  states  the  meaning  as  :  “  his 
wound  is  narrow;  without  gaping  of  one  (lip)  from  the  other.”  Compare  also  Case  1, 
Gloss  C.  The  gloss  is  of  interest  as  showing  the  surgeon’s  intention  to  create  precise 
terms  for  flesh  wounds  just  as  he  does  for  injuries  to  the  bone.  This  gloss,  further¬ 
more,  correlates  well  with  the  term  gm>  as  sometimes  designating  the  soft  tissue  of 
the  temple. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  18  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

275 

Gloss  B 

VII  13-14 

Explaining :  His  gm> 

*  The  two  signs _ have  been  canceled  by  two  oblique  strokes  in  red  ink  over  the  black. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  His  gm it  means  the  region  thereof  between  the  corner  of  his  eye  and 
the  rorifice-1  of  his  ear,  at  the  end  of  his  mandible. 

Commentary 

■f  ymytw  (or  ymyivty)  literally  means  “  between.”  It  is,  however,  twice  used 
elsewhere  in  our  document  to  designate  the  “  region  between  ”  or  the  “  tissue  between,” 
that  is,  it  becomes  a  substantive  meaning  “  what  is  between.”  The  two  examples  are  : 

*'  It  means  what  is  between  shell  and  shell  of  tho  skull,”  a  description  of  the  sutures 
(Case  7,  III  16,  Gloss  A)  ;  and 

. 

“  it  means  the  middle  of  his  nose . ,  extending  to  the  region  between  his  two 

eyebrows  ”  (Case  12,  Gloss  A,  V  21).  These  two  passages  quite  justify  our  rendering 
“  region  between  ”  in  Case  18. 

ny.  The  force  of  the  particle  is  not  wholly  clear  here,  although  it  can  be  under¬ 
stood  as  meaning  “  thereto  ”  or  “  therefor,”  somewhat  in  the  sense  of  “  thereof.” 
See  commentary  on  verdict  3,  Case  5  (II 15). 

P'  °^T  frnd,  corrected  to  id.  The  two  signs  ^  <"n  have  been  canceled  by  the 
scribe  with  two  oblique  strokes  of  red  ink  over  the  black.  Such  a  word  as  id,  with 
determinative  of  the  evil  bird,  is  however  unknown  ;  whereas  the  word  Mnd,  although 
corrected  by  the  scribe,  is  a  perfectly  good  word  with  the  right  meaning  for  this 
passage.  The  correction  is  therefore  in  all  probability  an  error  by  the  scribe. 

&nd  is  employed  as  the  opposite  of  i-wih,  “  make  broad  ”  (Lepsius,  Denhmaeler, 
III,  18,  7) ;  as  the  opposite  of  i-r$\  “  make  numerous  ”  (Pap.  Leyden  347,  3,  8) ;  and 
as  the  opposite  of  i-r>,  “  make  great  ”  (Tomb  of  Neferhotep,  Duemichen,  Hist.  Inschr. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

276  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  18 

II  40a,  11).  It  is  clear  from  these  examples  that  i-cnd  means  “  to  diminish  ” 
(transitive),  or  more  specifically  in  the  three  cases  cited,  “  to  make  narrow,”  “  to  make 
few,”  “  to  make  small.”  Confirmatory  examples  will  be  found  in  Edfu  (Rochem.  I 
294;  I  429  =  Piehl,  Inscr.  II  8  Da) ;  Gardiner,  Admonitions,  p.  30  ;  Devaud,  Maximes 
de  Ptahhotep,  p.  19  ;  and  Gunn,  Syntax,  p.  15,  example  89.  The  meaning  “  to  make 
narrow  ”  fits  our  passage  very  well.  It  must  indicate  the  narrow  end  of  the  eye,  as 
distinguished  from  the  broad  end,  a  difference  accentuated  very  strongly  by  Egyptian 
eye-paint.  Our  surgeon  is  designating  the  outside  corner  of  the  eye. 

J^(j(|^  gnyt  “  '’orifice1  ”  is  possibly  to  be  transliterated  gryt.  It  is  a  new 

and  unknown  anatomical  term,  not  found  in  any  other  ancient  document.  As  a  part 
of  the  ear,  it  renders  a  little  more  definite  one  limit  or  boundary  of  the  region  which 
the  surgeon  is  defining.  Whether  it  designates  a  portion  of  the  auricle  or  outer  ear, 
or  indicates  the  orifice  itself,  we  cannot  decide  on  the  basis  of  this  passage,  the  only 
occurrence  of  the  word  thus  far  known. 

“  At  the  end  of  his  mandible.”  The  preposition  r  is  the  usual  one  indicating  prox¬ 
imity  to  a  member  of  the  body  ;  compare  such  well-known  phrases  as  r  hh,  “  at  the 
throat  ”  (used  of  a  necklace) ;  or  rfnd,  “  at  the  nose  ”  (used  of  a  flower,  or  the  symbol 
of  life).  It  is  grammatically  possible,  however,  that  r,  the  regular  preposition  introduc¬ 
ing  the  other  limit  after  the  word  “  between,”  is  to  bo  so  construed  here.  This  would 
give  us  “  the  comer  of  his  eye  ”  as  one  limit,  while  the  other  limit  would  be  double, 
“  the  ’’orifice1  of  his  ear  ”  and  “  the  end  of  his  mandible.”  An  examination  of  the 
actual  anatomy  of  the  head,  however,  is  conclusive  in  excluding  this  rendering.  We 
must  understand  r  as  meaning  “  at.” 

ffi gm’-/.  The  region  connoted  by  this  word,  as  defined  in  our  gloss  therefore, 
is  that  between  the  eye  and  the  ear,  at  the  end  of  the  mandible,  and  this  conclusion  is 
clearly  confirmed  by  the  other  evidence  in  our  document.  It  is  interesting  to  observe 
that  the  ancient  surgeon  finds  it  necessary  to  define  the  term  gm\  as  if  it  were  un¬ 
familiar  to  his  generation.  It  is  certainly  so  to  ours,  for  the  word  is  entirely  new 
to  us,  and  is  not  found  in  any  other  document.  Fortunately  it  occurs  no  less  than 
twenty-two  times  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus.  Of  these,  three  passages  are  very 
helpful  in  determining  its  meaning.  One  of  them  is  our  Gloss  B,  just  discussed.  Before 
taking  up  the  other  two,  we  should  note  the  position  of  our  case  with  reference  to 
what  has  preceded  and  what  follows.  After  discussing  wounds  of  the  skull,  including 
the  frontal  bone  and  eyebrows,  the  surgeon  has  proceeded  to  take  up  injuries  to  the 
bridge  of  the  nose,  to  one  nostril,  to  the  cheek  and  maxillary  region.  He  then  takes 
up  the  gm%  and  follows  it  with  a  discussion  of  the  ear.  He  thus  proceeds  from  the  nose, 
through  the  maxilla  and  the  gm ’  to  the  ear.  The  order  and  sequence  of  his  discussion, 
therefore,  would  suggest  that  in  taking  up  the  gm »  he  is  proceeding  through  the  tem¬ 
poral  region  to  the  ear.  Gloss  B  has  just  confirmed  this  conclusion,  and  we  may  now 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  18  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  277 

proceed  to  examine  the  other  two  instructive  occurrences  of  the  word  gm1  in  our 
papyrus. 

We  find  symptoms  arising  from  a  gaping  wound  in  the  skull,  partially  described  as 
follows  :  “Stiffening  on  the  part  of  the  ligaments  at  the  end  of  his  ramus,” 

“  which  are  fastened  to  his  gm1,  that  is  at  the  end  of  his  jaw,  without  moving  to 
and  fro,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  him  to  open  his  mouth  because  of  his  pain”  (Case  7, 
Gloss  B,  III  17-18).  The  ligaments  which  operate  the  mandible  are  here  said  to  be 
“  fastened  to  his  gm',”  making  the  identification  of  gm'  as  “temporal  bone  ”  quite 
certain.  The  reference  is  of  course  to  the  temporal  muscle,  which  is  attached  to  the 
coronoid  process  and  to  the  temporal  bone. 

The  third  instructive  example  is  found  in  a  discussion  of  the  ramus,  the  inner  or 
upper  end  of  the  mandible.  It  defines  the  ramus  as  follows  : 

“  as  for  the  ramus,  its  end  is  in  his  gm'  as  the  claw  of  an  ’mf-bird  grasps  an  object  ” 
(Case  22,  Gloss  A,  VIII  14-15  q.  v.).  We  have  here  a  very  interesting  description  of 
the  forked  upper  end  of  the  ramus  as  engaging  in  the  gm1,  just  as  the  claw  of  an 
W- bird  (obviously  some  two-toed  bird)  clutches  a  thing.  The  reference  is  of  course 
to  the  fossa  temporalis,  the  depression  in  the  lower  part  of  the  temporal  bone,  into  which 
the  condyle  is  articulated,  while  the  coronoid  process,  together  with  the  incisura 
mandibulae  between  it  and  the  condyle,  passes  around  to  the  inner  side  of  the  zygo¬ 
matic  process,  which  it  clasps,  as  it  were,  like  the  claw  of  a  two-toed  bird.  See  PI.  V. 

It  is  quite  clear  then,  that  the  ancient  term  gm 1  refers  to  the  temporal  bone,  but 
certainly  not  to  the  whole  of  it.  The  limits  defined  in  our  Gloss  B  confine  it  to  the 
region  between  the  outer  comer  of  the  eye  and  the  ear  “  at  the  end  of  his  mandible.” 
These  limits  would  include  only  the  outer  and  anterior  portions  of  the  temporal  bone, 
especially  the  zygomatic  process,  and  also  the  portion  of  the  zygoma  lying  between 
the  eye  and  the  ear.  It  should  be  further  noted  that  gm1  defines  a  region,  and  hence, 
as  we  have  already  seen  in  the  examination,  it  may  designate  either  the  underlying 
bone  or  the  soft  tissue  lying  over  it.  It  would  seem  therefore  that  our  surgeon  in 
developing  bis  terminology  for  the  parts  of  the  human  skull  did  not  strictly  follow  the 
natural  divisions  suggested  by  the  sutures,  but  was  doubtless  somewhat  governed  by 
the  popular  designations  available,  just  as  we  employ  a  term  “  temple  ”  to  designate 
the  flat  area  between  the  forehead  and  the  ear,  which  does  not  at  all  correspond  in 
extent  to  the  temporal  bone,  and  might  include  both  the  bone  in  this  region  and  the 
overlying  soft  tissue.  Our  popular  term  “  temple  ”,  therefore,  is  a  very  satisfactory 
modem  equivalent  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  gm1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

278  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  19 

CASE  NINETEEN 
VII  14-22 

A  PERFORATION  IN  THE  TEMPLE 

This  case  is  the  second  in  the  group  of  five  cases  of  wounds  in  the  temple  (Cases 
18-22).  It  is  also  the  first  of  two  which  deal  with  a  “  perforation,”  possibly  of  the 
bone  in  the  first  case,  and  certainly  so  in  the  second  (Case  20).  Full  discussion  of  the 
term  thm,  “  perforation,”  will  be  found  in  Case  8  (I  18).  The  difference  between  the 
two  cases  of  “  perforation  ”  (19  and  20)  is  unmistakable  as  far  as  the  patient’s  con¬ 
dition  is  concerned.  Case  19  is  curable  by  simple  treatment ;  Case  20  is  incurable 
and  only  alleviatory  measures  are  suggested.  In  Case  19  the  patient’s  eye  on  the 
injured  side  is  “  blood-shot  ”  and  his  neck  is  stiff  ;  in  Case  20  both  eyes  are  blood-shot 
and  both  are  discharging,  while  blood  also  issues  from  both  nostrils,  and  the  patient 
is  unable  to  speak.  It  is  possible  that  in  Case  20  the  perforation  has  been  so  deep  that 
the  rupture  of  internal  tissues  has  affected  both  the  eye  and  the  nostril  on  the  opposite 
side  from  the  wound,  as  well  as  the  eye  and  the  nostril  on  the  injured  side  of  the  head. 
The  weapon  which  presumably  caused  the  injury  has  perhaps  thrust  more  deeply  in 
Case  20  than  in  Case  19,  but  the  use  of  the  dual  “  two  eyes,”  “  two  nostrils  ”  in  Case 
20  may  be  a  scribal  error  in  writing  (see  commentary). 

Some  further  indication  of  this  difference,  included  in  the  actual  descriptions  of  the 
two  wounds  themselves,  might  therefore  be  expected,  and  it  is  possible  that  we  have 
this  indication  suggested  by  the  surgeon  in  the  examination  (VII 15)  in  Case  19  in  the 
words,  “  a  perforation  in  his  temple,  a  wound  being  upon  it ;  ”  for  it  is  conceivable 
that  we  should  render  “  the  wound  being  over  it  ”  (the  temporal  bone),  and  therefore 
perhaps  confined  to  the  overlying  soft  tissue.  Indeed  it  is  difficult  to  find  any  other 
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  little  circumstantial  verbless  sentence,  “a  (or  the) 
wound  being  upon  it.” 

Title 
VII  14-15 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  perforation  in  his  temple. 

Commentary 

Full  commentary  on  this  injury,  a  “  perforation  ”  (thm)  of  the  skull,  will  be  found  in 
Case  8  (1 18).  On  the  term  “  temple”  (gm ')  see  the  preceding  case,  Gloss  B  (VII 13-14). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  19  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  279 

Examination 

VII  15-17 

<1 

a  ,-raJyf 

sic 

I 

m 

AwwA  a  iii  f?  A  .o  I  — & 

a  The  scribe  has  omitted  the  preposition  “  in  ”  ( m ). 

b  The  scribe  has  corrected  out  this  stroke,  canceling  it  with  an  oblique  cross  stroke  in  red  ink  over 
the  black. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  perforation  (thm)  [in]  his  temple,  a  wound  being 
upon  it,  thou  shouldst  inspect  his  wound,  saying  to  him  :  “  Look  at  thy  two  shoulders.” 
Should  his  doing  so  be  painful  (even  though)  his  neck  turns  around  (only)  a  little  for 
him,  while  his  eye  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury  is  blood-shot,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

ThiB  is  one  of  the  examinations  in  which  a  certain  capability  or  function  of  a  part 
of  the  body  is  tested  by  the  physician  by  means  of  directions  given  to  the  patient. 

Sry,  “  little,”  is  in  a  position  which  makes  it  somewhat  uncertain  whether  we 
should  connect  it  with  the  preceding  or  the  following  context.  Normally,  as  an  adverb, 
it  should  follow  the  proposition  to  which  it  belongs,  and  we  should  render  “  should  his 
doing  so  a  little  be  painful ;  ”  but  this  leaves  the  following  proposition  without  much 
force,  as  a  weak  circumstantial  clause,  “  when  he  has  turned  his  neck  around.”  In 
the  above  translation  I  have  understood  Sry  as  a  predicate  adjective  in  a  sentence  of 
which  the  following  proposition  is  the  subject,  thus  :  “  even  though  little  be  that  his 
neck  turns  for  him.”  The  proposition  phr  n-f  nhb-t-f,  “  his  neck  turns  for  him  ” 
(regarding  n-f  as  a  dative),  may  quite  properly  serve  as  the  subject  of  Sry,  “  little.” 
To  accept  an  n-form,  unless  it  were  nominal,  as  the  subject  of  Sry,  would  not  be  so  easy. 

5  Ssm-ty,  “  blood-shot,”  found  only  in  the  medical  papyri,  is  fully  explained 

by  the  surgeon  in  a  gloss  at  the  end  of  this  case.  The  grammatical  form  with  the 
double  I]  (j  for  y,  is  of  course  wrong,  but  occurs  several  times  in  our  treatise,  see  especially 
Case  31  (X15). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

280  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  19 

P<£-^  "  injury,”  seemingly  written  ikn,  occurs  so  written  in  CaBe  8  (IV  15) 

and  also  in  Case  17  (VII  8). 

On  the  force  of  "  a  wound  being  upon  it,”  see  the  introduction  to  this  case. 

Diagnosis 
VII  17-18 

<? 

a  The  scribe  made  an  erasure  here  while  the  ink  was  wet,  and  made  a  subsequent  alteration  now 
indistinct  and  uncertain.  Below  is  evidently  a  w ;  but  the  traces  above  it  show  two  indistinct 
oblique  strokes  over  a  horizontal  stroke :  hardly  ph,  which  moreover  makes  no  sense. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  perforation  in  his  temple  r-1, 
while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  symptom  “  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck  ”  occurs  seventeen  times  in 
our  papyrus,  and  never  elsewhere  with  the  introduction  yw-f,  “  he  is.”  Hence  it 
is  unlikely  that  the  scribe  intended  to  use  this  auxiliary  verb  here  ;  nor  do  the  visible 
traces  in  the  lacuna  favor  such  a  reading.  Hence  the  uncertain  word  must  belong  to 
the  preceding  ym’-f.  No  probable  restoration  of  the  word  suggests  itself. 

Full  commentary  on  the  phrase,  “  he  suffers,  etc.”  will  be  found  in  Case  8  (I  20). 
It  is  a  symptom  which  the  surgeon  recognizes  especially  as  accompanying  injuries  to 
the  skull,  and  is  therefore  recorded  in  each  of  the  group  of  six  such  cases  (three  to  eight 
inclusive).  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  surgeon  established  the  presence  of  this 
symptom  by  experiment  with  the  patient’s  ability  to  turn  his  neck  and  look  at  either 
shoulder.  In  Case  5,  a  very  serious  compound  fracture  of  the  skull,  the  surgeon  records 
the  symptom  (II  18-14),  but  it  is  not  stated  that  he  directed  the  patient  to  make  an 
effort  to  look  at  his  shoulders.  We  have  there  the  simple  statement  that  he  could  not 
do  so.  The  point  here  is  that  the  stiffness  was  discovered  by  actual  experiment  in  the 
examination,  and  then  recorded  in  the  diagnosis.  Here  then  is  a  case  of  sound  in¬ 
ductive  reasoning  after  experiment — a  method  in  no  wise  different  from  that  of  the 
modem  surgeon,  but  appearing  here  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  science  as 
known  to  us.  (See  introduction,  pp.  48-51).  On  the  favorable  verdict  1,  see 
Case  1  (12). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  19  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  281 

Treatment 
VII  18-19 

1!> 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes 
by,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  the  extraordinary  figure  of  speech,  “  put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  see  Case  8 
(I  22-28).  The  obscure  phrase  “  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by  ”  is  discussed 
in  Case  3  (I  28).  The  nominal  form  of  the  verb  here  (6w’-t)  is  unusual ;  the  other  four 
cases  containing  this  passage  have  Sw'y.  On  the  familiar  treatment,  see  Case  1  (18). 

Gloss  A 
VII  19-22 

Explaining  :  His  two  eyes  are  blood-shot. 
20 

00  l 

O  D 

\  N  O  j&l  I  1^2-  \\ 

i  i  i  -mn  n 

dm  ■■■■£] 

\\  CZZ3  \ 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  His  two  eyes  are  blood-shot,”  it  means  that  the  color  of  his  two  eyes  is 
red  like  the  color  of  ^-flowers.  The  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  the  Embalmer  ” 
says  concerning  it :  “  His  two  eyes  are  red  rwith1  disease  like  an  eye  at  the  end  of  its 
weakness.” 

Commentary 

The  inaccuracy  of  the  scribe  in  quoting  “  his  two  eyes,”  whereas  the  text  of  the 
case  (VII  17)  has  “  his  eye,”  and  expressly  stipulates  that  it  is  the  eye  on  the  injured 

oi.uchicago.edu 

282  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  19 

side  which  is  meant,  is  an  outstanding  example  of  the  carelessness  with  which  he  has 
copied  our  treatise.  In  the  explanation  he  continues  the  dual  as  is  evident  especially 
from  the  writing 

£2  must  certainly  be  read  yr-ty-f{y),  as  shown  by  the  following  feminine  verbal 
form  Ssm-ty  ;  for  the  other  word  for  eye,  of  uncertain  spelling,  is  masculine. 

(j  Ssm-ty,  “  is  blood-shot  ”  is  really  a  color  designation.  As  a  verb  it  is  found 
elsewhere  only  twice,  where  it  is  also  applied  to  the  color  of  the  eyes  :  Pap.  Ebers  38, 
18  and  109,  20.  As  a  substantive  it  occurs  as  a  designation  of  bandages  as  far  back  as 
the  Pyramid  Texts  (2114b)  and  of  a  kind  of  stone  in  the  Annals  of  Thutmose  III 
(Sethe,  Urk.  IV,  p.  706, 1. 12),  and  probably  designated  reddish  or  red-streaked  objects. 
Perhaps  with  such  a  meaning  as  a  masculine  noun  in  Pap.  Ebers  37,  7  ;  41,  3  ; 
41,  16  ;  41,  2 ;  it  is  evidently  so  in  the  case  of  the  feminine  noun  Ssm-t  where  it 
is  used  together  with  dir,  “red,  inflamed”  (Pap.  Ebers,  62,  9).  No  other  examples 
of  the  word  are  known. 

Yrhjw  as  a  color  designation,  especially  as  a  word  for  “  color,”  is  discussed  in  Case  7 
(III  21).  At  the  same  time,  in  our  gloss  it  is  possible  that  this  puzzling  word  may  have 
its  older  more  original  meaning  “  blue,”  and  be  intended  to  designate  the  white  of  the 
eye,  which  so  often  has  a  bluish  cast,  especially  when  an  eye  is  blood-shot.  The  objec¬ 
tion  to  this  interpretation  is  the  repetition  of  the  word  with  the  .W- blossoms,  where  it 
would  seem  to  be  superfluous  if  it  designated  some  particular  color  of  the  blossoms. 
On  the  other  hand  the  phrase  “  like  the  color  of  ^4-blossoms  ”  would  be  expected. 

25^  SI,  is  a  plant  or  blossom  otherwise  found  only  in  the  Berlin  Medical 
Papyrus  (8038),  9,  8.  It  is  impossible  to  identify  it  here. 

^  ?'’w,  “  book,”  or  “  treatise  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  5  (II 17).  It  would  seem 
that  some  current  treatise  on  the  practice  of  the  embalmer  is  cited  by  the  surgeon. 
The  quotation  from  this  book  confirms  the  meaning  of  Ssm  as  “  red,”  or  “  blood-shot,” 
but  is  otherwise  obscure. 

o  IPw  is  a  very  general  word  for  “  ailing,”  or  “  affected,”  and  is  applied  to 
diseased  eyes  in  the  case  of  a  woman  in  the  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus  (3,  10),  where  it 
is  written  d’y.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  (1658b)  d'w  is  contrasted  with 

m’i'w,  “  straight,  right,  correct."  Devaud  suggests  that  £  >]  <?  o  (in  Mutter  und  Kind ) 

is  the  ancestor  of  the  Coptic  ■so  (xvpros),  “  crooked,”  or  “  hump-backed  ”  and  would 
make|]y(]o^  d’yt  mean  “  something  crooked  ”  as  opposed  to  ->7^  m’f-t,  “  some¬ 
thing  straight.”  The  feminine  d‘-t,  meaning  “  sickness,  wretchedness,”  is  very 
common.  Compare  both  masc.  and  fem.  in  Pap.  Ebers  1, 15.  All  this  is  of  slight  value 
in  determining  the  specific  force  of  d’w  in  the  quotation  from  the  Treatise  on  What 
Pertains  to  the  Embalmer. 

The  comparison  “  like  an  eye  at  the  end  of  its  weakness  ”  eludes  explanation.  The 
verb  ^  did,  meaning  “  to  be  weak  ”  or  the  like  is  rare.  It  is  found  in  Medinet 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  19  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  283 

Habu  referring  to  the  limbs  (de  Bougd,  Inscr.  hier.  145,  56)  and  also  in  the  Book  of  the 
Sky  Cow  (29),  where  it  is  written  See  an  uncertain  example  in  Pap.  Ebers 

102,  7.  Consult  commentary  on  Case  6  (II  21). 

CASE  TWENTY 
VII  22- VIII  5 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  TEMPLE  PERFORATING  THE  BONE 

This  case  is  the  third  in  the  group  of  five  cases  of  wounds  in  the  temple  (Cases 
18-22).  It  is  also  the  second  of  two  which  deal  with  a  “  perforation  ”  of  the  temple 
(Cases  19  and  20),  and  as  we  have  seen  in  the  introduction  of  Case  19,  is  much  the  more 
serious  of  the  two.  Our  case  illustrates  the  progressively  increasing  seriousness  of  the 
cases  in  this  group  of  five.  The  introductions  to  Cases  18  and  19  should  be  read  before 
undertaking  the  study  of  this  case.  The  reader  will  find  it  instructive  also  to  examine 
Case  8  in  the  course  of  studying  Cases  19  and  20. 

The  description  of  symptoms  in  Case  20  is  among  the  most  vivid  and  picturesque 
paragraphs  in  the  entire  papyrus. 

Title 
VII  22 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and) 
perforating  his  temporal  bone. 

Commentary 

The  discussion  of  gm\  “  temple,”  will  be  found  in  Case  18,  Gloss  B  (VII  18-14). 
The  injury,  though  consisting  chiefly  of  a  “  perforation  ”  (thm),  is  evidently  much  more 
serious  than  in  Case  19,  which  also  deals  with  a  “  perforation.”  This  injury  is  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Case  8  (I  18),  where  this  abbreviated  writing  of  the  word,  J  thm,  is  also 
taken  up. 

Examination 
VII  22-VIII  8 

23 

oi.uchicago.edu 

284  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  20 

tic 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
(and)  perforating  his  temporal  bone,  while  his  two  eyes  are  blood-shot,  he  discharges 
blood  from  both  his  nostrils,  and  a  little  drops  ;  if  thou  puttest  thy  fingers  on  the 
mouth  of  that  wound  (and)  he  shudder  exceedingly  ;  if  thou  ask  of  him  concerning 
his  malady  and  he  speak  not  to  thee  ;  while  copious  tears  fall  from  both  his  eyes,  so 
that  he  thrusts  his  hand  often  to  his  face  that  he  may  wipe  both  his  eyes  with  the  back 
of  his  hand  as  a  child  does,  and  knows  not  that  he  does  so,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  term  “  blood-shot  ”  ( Ssm-ty )  has  been  discussed  in  the  preceding  case. 

Sr  h ”,  “a  little  drops.”  Here  we  have  the  use  of  h’y,  “  to  fall,”  in 
the  very  specific  application  to  falling  drops,  as  in  this  same  examination,  referring 
to  falling  tears  (VIII  1-2).  It  occurs  with  the  same  meaning  in  our  document  in 
VIII  11  (of  blood  from  the  nostrils),  X  22  (of  urine  from  the  male  member),  and 
XVI  6-7  (of  water).  A  good  parallel  is  found  in  Case  41  : 

“  secretions  drop  therefrom  ”  (XIII  22-XIV  1  ;  same  in  Case  47,  XVII  9-10). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  20  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  285 

These  usages  of  the  word,  which  have  arisen  directly  from  its  meaning  “  to 
fall,”  have  resulted  in  a  further  series  of  medical  applications  of  it.  It  is  applied 
to  various  discharges,  excretions,  outflows  and  the  like  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (48,  1  ; 
41,  4  ;  42,  15  ;  96,  17  ;  42,  16  ;  91,  16  ;  88,  19  ;  56,  9  ;  106,  14  ;  51,  18  ;  37,  4), 
in  Papyrus  Hearst  (III  6),  and  the  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus  (2,  27  ;  2,  29  ;  2,  80).  In 
a  highly  specialized  application,  the  word  designates  a  miscarriage  (Turin,  Papyri, 
ed.  Pleyte  et  Rossi  LV,  1),  and  in  an  interesting  passage  it  is  used  in  the  phrase 
fis,  — meaning  “death  by  miscarriage”  (Magical  Texts  of 
the  Empire,  transcribed  by  Gardiner  for  the  Berlin  Dictionary,  121).  In  the  well- 
known  passages  in  Charms  for  Mother  and  Child  (Mutter  und  Kind)  it  is  applied  to  the 
expulsion  of  disease,  and  so  in  the  idiom  rdy  h’y,  “  cause  to  go  forth,”  it  is  applied  to 
the  effect  of  remedies  on  disease  in  the  medical  papyri  (Pap.  Ebers  89,  14-15  ;  51, 
19 ;  94,  11  ;  73,  20-21  ;  Hearst  III  4  (corrupt,  comp.  Ebers  51,  19) ;  Pap.  Berlin 
8038, 11,  7). 

“If . he  shudder  exceedingly”  is  a  description  of  a  symptom  found  six  times 

in  our  papyrus.  See  full  commentary  in  Case  4  (II  4). 

If  we  accept  the  text  as  we  find  it,  this  examination  reveals  a  more  serious  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  patient  than  in  the  preceding  case,  in  which  only  the  eye  on  the  injured  side 
of  the  head  was  blood-shot  and  there  is  no  mention  of  a  discharge  of  blood  from  the 
nose.  In  Case  20,  however,  both  eyes  are  blood-shot  and  discharge,  while  blood  issues 
from  both  nostrils.  These  symptoms  would  indicate  rupture  of  internal  tissue  so  deep 
as  to  affect  even  the  eye  and  the  nostril  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  head  from  the 
injury.  It  should  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  owing  to  the  ease  with  which  the 
words  “  his  eye  ”  may  be  transformed  in  Egyptian  to  “  his  two  eyes  ”  by  the  addition 
of  two  tiny  strokes  of  the  pen,  our  scribe  has  repeatedly  written  the  dual  out  of  habit, 
where  only  the  singular  was  intended.  Compare  for  example  four  occurrences  of  this 
error  in  Case  22.  Admitting  this  possible  correction  however,  the  symptoms  of  speech¬ 
lessness  and  the  dazed,  half  unconscious  manner  in  which  the  patient  continually 
wipes  the  exudations  from  his  eye,  would  suggest  a  more  serious  injury  than  in  the 
preceding  case. 

Diagnosis 

VIII  3-4 

O 

1!ra 

4 

\\ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

286  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  20 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  his  temporal  bone  ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils,  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (and)  he  is  speechless.  An 
ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

“  Penetrating  to  the  bone  ”  ('r  n  ks)  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (I  2). 

“  Perforating  ”  (thm),  see  Case  8  (1 18). 

“  Temple  ”  and  “  temporal  bone  ”  see  Case  18,  Gloss  B. 

“  Stiffness  in  his  neck  ”  (taw  m  nhb-t-f),  see  Case  8  (I  20). 

“  He  is  speechless  ”  ( dgm-y ),  see  Case  22,  Gloss  C,  where  the  surgeon  himself  ex¬ 
plains  the  word. 

The  first  half  of  the  diagnosis  was  already  contained  in  the  title,  the  discharge  of 
blood  from  the  nostrils  was  observed  in  the  examination,  the  stiffness  of  the  neck 
new  and  is  rather  a  symptom,  as  in  the  preceding  case,  than  a  particular  in  a  diagnosis. 
Finally  the  surgeon  repeats,  seemingly  by  the  use  of  a  technical  term  (for  he  later  thinks 
it  necessary  to  explain  it  in  a  gloss,  Case  22,  Gloss  C),  the  fact  that  the  patient  is 
speechless.  On  the  hopeless  verdict  see  Case  5  (II 15).  This  is  another  evidence  of  the 
very  serious  character  of  Case  20  as  contrasted  with  Case  19. 

See  another  example  of  ~~  for  -a.  in  Case  8  (IV  11). 

Treatment 
VIII  4-5 

*  The  scribe  has  left  an  ompty  space  here,  as  if  he  intended  it  for  the  determinative  of  wdh,  “pour,” 
which,  however,  he  has  failed  to  insert. 

Translation 

Now  when  thou  findest  that  man  speechless,  his  rrelieP  shall  be  sitting ;  soften 
his  head  with  grease,  (and)  pour  rmilk'1  into  both  his  ears. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  20  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  287 

Commentary 

B  yr  dr  again  introduces  a  reference  to  an  observation  already  made  in  the 
examination  and  diagnosis,  and  dr  must  therefore  have  some  such  force  here  as  “  at 
the  beginning,”  or  “  above,”  which  is  perhaps  sufficiently  suggested  by  simply  render¬ 
ing  “  Now  when.”  Compare  Case  4  (II  6)  and  Case  8  (IV  10). 

On  “  his  '"relief1  ”  (sry-f)  see  Case  17,  VII  6. 

i  ?  i  whwy, “  rmilk‘l  ”  is  not  the  usual  word.  It  occurs  in  the  Middle  Kingdom 
in  the  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus  (2,  10)  written  and  in  Papyrus  Ebers 

essentially  as  here  :  It  is  not  a  common  term.  As  an  ingredient  in  pre¬ 

scriptions  it  is  found  in  Pap.  Hearst  IX  2  ;  Pap.  Ebers  88,  10  ;  88,  7  ;  49,  7  (emend) ; 
82,  2-8.  As  produced  by  or  made  of  fat,  ointment,  or  grease,  it  occurs  in  the  mhwy  n 
mrh-t  of  Kahun  Med.  Pap.  2,  10  and  Berlin  Med.  Pap.  8038,  16,  8 ;  18,  8  ;  18,  6  ; 
19,  4.  It  is  perhaps  employed  as  a  verb  in  the  Kahun  Med.  Pap.  (8,  4).  It  is  possible 
that  it  means  cream. 

The  omission  of  the  frequent  clause  “  until  he  recovers  ”  after  the  treatment  is 
noticeable.  The  treatment  is  evidently  only  alleviatory  until  the  patient  is  released 
by  death. 

CASE  TWENTY-ONE 
VIII  6-9 

A  SPLIT  IN  THE  TEMPORAL  BONE 

This  case  is  the  fourth  in  a  series  of  five  dealing  with  injuries  to  the  templo  (Cases 
18-22).  The  surgeon’s  memoranda  on  the  case  are  very  brief,  and  he  seems  to  regard 
it  as  an  injury  rather  less  serious  than  the  “  perforation  ”  in  Case  20.  It  will  be  found 
instructive  to  read  at  the  same  time  Case  4  discussing  a  similar  injury  in  the  skull. 

Title 

VIII  6 

i  i  i 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  temple. 

Commentary 

The  nature  of  the  injury  which  our  surgeon  calls  a  “  split  ”  ( pSn )  will  be  found  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Case  4  (II  2). 

On  the  meaning  of  “  temple  ”  (gm')  see  Case  18,  Gloss  B. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

288 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  21 

Examination 
VIII  6-8 

X 

k® 

□ 

X 

ffi\  □ 

X 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  temple,  shouldst  thou  find  a 
swelling  protruding  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  while  he  discharges  blood  from  his 
nostril  and  from  his  one  ear  having  that  split,  (and)  it  is  painful  when  he  hears  speech, 
because  of  it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

“  Swelling  ”  (thb)  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  4),  which  must  be  carefully 
studied  in  order  to  understand  our  case. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  injury  is  so  close  to  the  neighboring  ear  that 
this  “  his  one  ear  ”  is  spoken  of  as  “  having  that  split ;  ”  and  the  ear  is  furthermore  so 
close  to  the  wound  that  hearing  sound  is  painful.  We  should  perhaps  render  md-t  as 
“  sound  ”  rather  than  as  literally  “  speech.” 

' — *  i  i  X 

Diagnosis 
VIII  8-9 

/a  n  zi 

i 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  temple,  while  he 
discharges  blood  from  his  nostril  and  his  ear  having  that  injury.  An  ailment  with 
which  I  will  contend.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  21  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  289 

Commentary 

On  skr,  “  injury,”  see  Case  8  (IV  7).  For  the  other  terms  see  the  references  in  the 
examination. 

The  diagnosis  merely  repeats  the  observations  already  noted  in  the  examination 
and  adds  no  new  conclusions. 

On  the  doubtful  verdict  2,  indicating  a  case  too  doubtful  for  prediction  of  the 
outcome,  see  Case  4  (II  6),  and  consult  the  introduction  (pp.  45-47). 

Treatment 
VIII  9 

A 

Ql  I  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  thou  knowest  he  has  reached 
a  decisive  point. 

Commentary 

On  the  meaning  of  this  extraordinary  treatment,  see  Case  8,  Gloss  D  (II  1-2), 
where  the  ancient  commentator  found  it  necessary  to  include  an  explanation. 

The  meaning  of  “  reach  a  decisive  point  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  4,  Gloss  C. 

CASE  TWENTY-TWO 
VIII  9-17 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OF  THE  TEMPORAL  BONE 

This  case  is  the  last  of  five  injuries  of  the  temporal  region  and  the  temporal  bone. 
The  nature  of  the  injury,  which  our  surgeon  calls  id,  is  discussed  by  him  in  Case  5 
(II  11).  It  is  the  most  serious  case  in  the  group,  and  includes  the  neighbouring  ear  in 
the  area  of  the  injury,  so  that  in  the  course  of  his  examination  the  surgeon  is  charged 
to  probe  the  ear  and  seemingly  to  remove  splinters  of  bone.  The  examination  is 
followed  by  Verdict  8,  the  hopeless  verdict,  and  no  treatment  is  suggested. 

Some  interesting  anatomy  is  included  in  the  discussion.  The  word  “  chin  ”  occurs 
for  the  first  time  in  the  medical  papyri.  The  three  explanatory  glosses  are  instructive, 
especially  Gloss  A,  where  the  word  w*f,  “  ramus,”  thus  far  found  only  in  our  papyrus, 
is  interestingly  compared  with  the  claw  of  a  two-toed  bird,  which  engages  in  the  tem¬ 
poral  bone  as  the  bird’s  two-toed  claw  clutches  an  object.  It  is  another  striking 

u 

oi.uchicago.edu 

290  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  22 

example  of  our  Burgeon’s  ability  to  find  familiar  objects  in  the  material  world  surround¬ 
ing  his  readers  by  which  to  describe  the  shape  of  the  organs  or  parts  which  he  is 
explaining, — a  method  still  practiced  in  all  branches  of  natural  science  at  the  present 
day. 

Title 
VIII  9 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  temple. 

Commentary 

The  surgeon’s  understanding  of  a  “  smash  ”  (id)  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5 
(II  11)  ;  and  a  gloss  explaining  gm\  “  temple,”  has  been  included  by  the  ancient 
commentator  in  Case  18  (VII  18-14). 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  temple,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
thumb  upon  his  chin  (and)  thy  finger  upon  the  end  of  his  ramus,  so  that  the  blood  will 
flow  from  his  two  nostrils  (and)  from  the  interior  of  his  ear  having  that  smash.  Cleanse 
(it)  for  him  with  a  swab  of  linen  until  thou  seest  its  fragments  (of  bone)  in  the  interior 
of  his  ear.  If  thou  callest  to  him  (and)  he  is  speechless  (and)  cannot  speak,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  22  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  291 

Commentary 

This  interesting  examination  involves  the  surgeon  in  cleansing  the  nostrils  and 
the  ear  on  the  injured  side.  The  detailed  instructions  for  placing  the  thumb  and  finger 
are  presumably  for  applying  pressure  and  inducing  a  flow  of  blood. 

The  question  might  arise  whether  we  are  to  understand  that  the  first  ]}  “  thy 

finger  ”  was  intended  to  designate  the  thumb.  The  spreading  and  stretching  of  the 
other  fingers  from  the  chin  to  the  head  of  the  mandible  would  result  in  a  rather 
ineffective  and  cramped  position  of  the  hand.  In  Case  25  (IX  4)  the  surgeon  uses 
Old  “  claw  ”  for  the  entire  group  of  four  fingers,  and  then  unmistakably 
designates  the  thumb  by  jj^.  We  are  therefore  entitled  to  conclude  that  he  would 
employ  dbr  “  finger  ”  to  mean  thumb  in  Case  22. 

ynf-t,  “  chin,”  is  a  very  rare  word.  Ember  suggests  a  relationship  with 
Hebrew  yS  ( Oriens ,  No.  1,  vol.  I,  Jan.  1926,  p.  7,  No.  10).  The  word  is  not  found  in 
any  of  the  Egyptian  medical  papyri,  and  occurs  outside  of  Papyrus  Smith  only  in  a 
masculine  form  employed  once  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (1808a),  where  it  is  written  f. 
The  chin  beard  seems  to  be  the  significant  thing  about  the  determinative.  In  our 
papyrus  it  is  employed  five  times,  that  is  in  four  more  examples  besides  Case  22.  In 
Case  25,  a  dislocation  of  the  mandible,  the  surgeon  is  to  put  his  two  “  claws  ”  (rn-ty, 
meaning  two  groups  of  four  fingers  each)  “  under  the  ync-t  ”  of  the  patient.  The 
remaining  three  examples  are  all  in  Case  27.  The  position  of  this  case  in  the  treatise 
leaves  little  doubt  as  to  the  region  designated  by  yne-t.  Case  28  carries  us  from  the 
temple  to  the  ear,  Cases  24  and  25  are  injuries  of  the  mandible,  Case  26  is  a  wound 
in  the  lip  and  the  context  shows  that  the  upper  lip  is  meant,  while  Case  27  doals  with 
a  wound  in  the  ynf-t,  which  must  be  the  lower  part  of  the  front  of  the  faco,  having 
bone  underlying  the  soft  tissue.  The  meaning  “  chin  ”  is  obvious. 

The  anatomical  term  “  end  of  his  ramus  ”  is  interestingly  explained  in  Gloss  A 
(VIII  14-15). 

The  doubled  form  of  the  verb  7i”  in  h^-hr  is  also  found  in  the  Mathematical 
Papyrus.  On  the  medical  use  of  Ji”  see  Case  20  (VII  24). 

“  His  two  nostrils.”  The  scribe’s  unfortunate  habit  of  writing  any  paired  member 
or  organ  in  the  dual,  even  when  it  is  obvious  and  important  that  only  one  should  be 
designated,  should  be  remembered  here.  It  may  be  that  he  intended  to  write  “  his 
nostril.”  Compare  the  next  paragraph. 

“  his  two  ears  ”  is  of  course  an  obvious  error  for  midr-j,  “  his  ear,”  as  the 
following  phrase  “  having  that  smash  ”  shows.  The  ear  next  to  the  injured  temple  is 
so  close  that  it  is  referred  to  as  “  having  ”  or  “  carrying,”  or  “  bearing  ”  (hr)  the 
injury,  and  this  fact  makes  it  certain  that  only  one  ear,  the  one  on  the  injured  side,  is 
here  designated.  Compare  the  same  mistake  in  the  next  sentence. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

292  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  22 

PT2  dk,  “  cleanse,”  will  be  found  explained  in  Case  11  (V  11),  where  the  omis¬ 
sion  of  the  object  “  it  ”  is  also  discussed.  The  “  swab  (or  ‘  plug  ’)  of  linen  ”  will  also 
be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  Case  11  (V  11). 

wS-t-f,  “  his  wS-t,”  is  a  difficult  term  which  is  explained  in  Gloss  B  at  the 
end  of  our  case  (VIII 15-16). 

ymyw,  “  interior,”  literally  “  that  which  is  in,”  probably  designates  here  the 
inside  of  the  ear,  not  the  exudation  which  is  to  be  cleaned  out.  In  Case  12  (V  18) 
ymyw  might  designate  the  “  content  ”  of  the  nostrils,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  it  is  the 
direct  object  of  the  verb  dk  “  clean  out.”  In  both  passages  however  it  is  more  pro¬ 
bably  a  variant  of  hnw,  “  interior.” 

The  syntax  of  the  conditional  sentence  at  the  end  of  the  examination  is  unusual, 
beginning  with  the  employment  of  the  n-form  after  the  conditional  particle  yr — a 
combination  which  is  rare.  The  pseudo-participle  ( dgm-y )  followed  by  a  -a.  +  n-form  for 
the  imperfect  is  of  course  common  (cf.  Gunn,  Syntax,  Chap.  XII)  ;  but  the  two  clauses 
here  belong  to  the  protasis  after  yr,  continuing  the  description  of  the  symptoms  on 
the  basis  of  which  the  surgeon  makes  the  diagnosis  which  is  really  the  apodosis.  It 
is  also  true  that  the  two  clauses,  yw-f  dgm-y  n  mdw-n-f,  form  an  apodosis  after  “  If 
thou  callest  to  him,”  but  the  experimental  calling  and  the  observed  result  together 
form  a  composite  protasis  leading  to  the  conclusion  expressed  in  the  diagnosis. 

Diagnosis 
VIII  18-14 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  smash  in  his  temple ;  he 
discharges  blood  from  his  two  nostrils  and  from  his  ear  ;  he  is  speechless  ;  (and)  he 
suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

All  of  the  terms  employed  have  already  been  discussed  above.  The  dual  “  two 
ears  ”  is  undoubtedly  an  error  as  in  two  places  in  the  examination.  “  He  is  speechless  ” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  22  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

293 

(■ dgm-y )  is  explained  by  the  surgeon  at  the  end  of  the  case  in  Gloss  C  (VIII  16-17), 
and  the  final  item,  stiffness  in  the  neck,  has  been  discussed  in  Case  3  (I  20).  See  the 
discussion  of  this  diagnosis  in  the  introduction  (p.  51).  The  unfavorable  verdict  3 
has  been  explained  in  Case  5  (II  15)  and  also  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45-47).  It  is 
a  case  so  serious  that  the  surgeon  cannot  deal  with  it,  and  therefore  follows  the 
diagnosis  by  no  suggested  treatment. 

GLOSS  A 
VIII 14-15 

Explaining  :  The  end  of  his  ramus. 

- - 0  — D 

\\  <d->  Sarvw 

_ _ Q  ^ 

,  sic 

A. 

qi  i  i 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  end  of  his  ramus,”  it  means  the  end  of  his  mandible.  The  ramus  (w*<), 
the  end  of  it  is  in  his  temple  just  as  the  claw  of  an  ’am^e- bird  (’me)  grasps  an  object. 

Commentary 

ph-wy,  “  end,”  as  an  anatomical  term  is  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  17)  and  Case 
12  (V  21)'. 

3?s!\sCic  ’mr  t<  “  ramus,”  is  evidently  a  technical  anatomical  term.  Our  papyrus 
contains  the  only  known  examples,  of  which  there  are  eight.  It  is  twice  written  with 
a  w,  as  the  fourth  radical  (III  17  and  IX  3).  It  is  likely  to  have  been  a  word  mean¬ 
ing  “  fork  ”  or  something  similar,  and  this  would  explain  its  application  (in  the 
masculine  w)  to  a  two-toed  bird.  In  Case  8  it  is  employed  to  describe  a  forked  bone 
in  the  shoulder  (IV  17-18),  and  that  is  obviously  its  application  here.  In  our  gloss 
we  have  the  following  parallelism  : 

“  the  end  of  his  ’mf-t.” 

“  the  end  of  his  mandible.” 

The  second  phrase  is  used  by  the  commentator  as  the  equivalent  of  the  first.  This 
might  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  w-t  is  merely  another  term  for  mandible. 
This  conclusion  would  be  wrong  however.  In  Case  25  (IX  3-4)  we  have  the  phrase  : 

oi.uchicago.edu 

294  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  22 

“  the  end  of  the  two  Jmcwt  of  the  two  (sides  of  the)  mandible.”  This  not  only  shows 
that  the  w-f  is  part  of  the  mandible,  but  also  that  there  were  two  of  them,  one  on 
each  side  of  the  mandible.  The  other  indications  of  the  position  of  the  W-f  in  Papyrus 
Smith  confirm  and  amplify  what  we  have  just  learned.  In  Case  7  (III  17)  the  liga¬ 
ments  which  operate  the  mandible  are  referred  to  as  “  the  ligaments  at  the  end  of  his 
Wwf,  which  are  fastened  to  his  temporal  bone,  that  is  at  the  end  of  his  jaw  ”  (see 
commentary  on  III  17).  In  treating  a  case  of  dislocation  of  the  mandible  (Case  25), 
the  surgeon  is  directed  to  place  his  thumbs  “  on  the  two  1 m'wt  of  the  two  (sides  of)  the 
mandible  in  the  inside  of  his  mouth  ”  and  his  “  two  claws  (  =  groups  of  fingers)  under 
his  chin.”  Finally  our  own  gloss  (VIII 14-15)  states  that  the  end  of  the  W-f  is  “  in  his 
temple,” — a  statement  which  can  leave  no  doubt  that  W-f  designates  the  ramus.  The 
articulation  of  the  ramus  with  the  bones  of  the  skull  is  then  very  interestingly  compared 
with  the  grasp  of  a  bird’s  claw.  Before  discussing  the  possible  identity  of  this  bird,  we 
should  note  that  the  phrase  ^  5^,  "5°  “  claw  of  the  ’amce  ”  is  treated  as  a  single 

word,  to  which  is  appended  the  determinative  <V.  This  is  obviously  the  claw  of  some 
two-toed  bird,  inserted  here  more  or  less  as  a  drawing,  or  Bketch  of  the  bird’s  claw. 
It  is  of  course  an  otherwise  entirely  unknown  hieratic  sign.  To  this  two-toed  bird's 
claw  the  ramus  is  appropriately  compared,  for  its  familiar  forked  head,  terminating 
in  the  condyle  and  coronoid  process,  readily  suggests  such  a  forked  or  two-toed 
claw.  See  PL  V,  Fig.  1 1 . 

The  identity  of  the  JcWe-bird  is  a  difficult  problem.  He  does  not  occur  in  any 
other  scientific  document  of  Ancient  Egypt ;  but  he  is  depicted  once  in  a  Twelfth 
Dynasty  tomb  at  Benihasan1  and  both  Rosellini  and  Champollion  reproduce  his  colors. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  both  in  the  colors  themselves  and  in  the 
distribution  of  the  colors  to  form  the  markings  distinguishing  a  given  bird,  the 
Egyptian  painter  allowed  himself  wide  latitude.  The  old  publications  of  nearly  a 
century  ago  were  likewise  very  inaccurate  in  such  matters. 

I  have  submitted  these  Bonihasan  paintings  to  the  specialists  at  the  Gizeh  Zoo¬ 
logical  Gardens  near  Cairo  and  also  to  the  eminent  ornithologist  Professor  Dr.  A. 
Koenig  of  Mecklenburg  who  has  made  a  special  study  of  African  birds.  Professor 
Koenig  has  kindly  informed  me  that  the  only  known  two-toed  bird  is  the  ostrich,  and 
has  taken  the  trouble  to  study  the  paintings  in  detail.  They  are  obviously  not  the 
ostrich,  but  the  ancient  painter’s  colors,  if  at  all  in  harmony  with  those  of  the  bird 
himself,  do  not,  in  Professor  Koenig’s  opinion,  permit  identification  with  any  African 
bird  known  at  the  present  day.  This  was  also  the  opinion  of  Major  Borman,  Director 
of  the  Gizeh  Zoological  Gardens. 

1  No.  15,  Newberry,  Vol.  II,  pi.  IV  =  Lepsius,  DenkmatUr,  Tert  II,  p.  98  =  Rosellini,  Man.  civ., 
IX  =>  Champollion,  Monuments  TV,  pi.  CCCL  =  Champollion,  Notices  dtscr.,  II,  p.  366. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  22  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  295 

Gloss  B 
VIII  15-16 

Explaining  :  Thou  seest  his  wH  in  the  interior  of  his  ear. 

Ol  I  I 

AWvW\ 

-A 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Thou  seest  its  fragments  (wS't)  in  the  interior  of  his  ear,”  it  means  that 
some  of  the  fragments  ( wS-t )  of  the  bone  come  away  to  adhere  to  the  swab  which  was 
introduced  to  cleanse  the  interior  of  his  ear. 

Commentary 

wS-t,  “  fragments.”  The  ancient  commentator’s  practice  of  not  infrequently 
including  the  word  to  be  explained  as  an  essential  part  of  the  explanation  sometimes 
makes  his  commentary  difficult  to  understand.  We  note  in  the  first  place  that  in  the 
explanation  the  wS-t  (plural)  are  said  to  be  “  of  the  bone,”  and  that  they  can  further¬ 
more  “  come  away  ”  adhering  to  the  cleaning  swab  introduced  into  the  inner  ear.  If 
now  we  recall  the  nature  of  the  injury  as  defined  by  the  ancient  surgeon  himself,  we 
find  that  a  id,  “  smash,”  is  stated  in  Case  5  to  be  “  a  smash  of  his  skull  (such  that) 
bones,  getting  into  that  smash,  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull  ”  (II  16).  A  similar 
injury  of  the  skull  in  Case  4  results  in  carrying  splinters  of  bone  inward  so  that  “  frag¬ 
ments  remain  sticking  in  the  flesh  of  his  head  and  do  not  come  away  ”  (II  9).  The 
word  employed  for  fragments  is  ^  °  |  sp-w.  It  is  highly  probable  that  our  word  wS-t 
is  simply  a  synonym  of  sp-w,  “  fragments.”  The  origin  of  this  meaning  for  the  other¬ 
wise  entirely  unknown  word  wS-t  may  possibly  be  the  familiar  word  wS,  “  to  be 
empty,  to  be  bare,  to  be  destroyed.”  The  last  meaning  might  conceivably  be  applied 
to  fragments  of  shattered  bone.1 

The  dual,  “  his  two  ears,”  is  again  twice  written  by  the  scribe  incorrectly  for  the 
singular  “  his  ear.”  M  hnw  after  4k,  “  cleanse,”  may  possibly  be  a  noun  formation 
with  m,  i.  e.  mhnw,  meaning  “  interior  ”  rather  than  “  in  the  interior,”  which  leaves 
4k  without  an  object.  See  another  possible  example  in  Case  26  (IX  7). 

1  The  word  (for  _ ,^),  occurring  twice  in  the  Empire  (Pap.  Ebers  14,  11  and  Pap. 

Leyden  345,  verso  2,  9-10)  is  very  unlikely  to  have  any  connection  with  our  word  wit. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

296  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  22 

Gloss  C 

VIII  16-17 

Explaining :  He  is  speechless. 

M  J»"‘ IT1!  *1  — w*I^T“'=5 

a  This  is  an  error  of  the  scribe  which  he  has  corrected  by  a  cross  inserted  afterward  in  red  ink 
over  the  black  and  intended  to  cancel  the  >w..  The  word  is  therefore  to  be  read  ‘k-t,  not  ‘i  f-/. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  He  is  speechless,”  it  means  that  he  is  silent  in  sadness,  without  speaking, 
like  one  suffering  with  '"feebleness1  (dgy)  because  of  something  that  has  entered  from 
outside. 

Commentary 

The  word  IsJMQ  dgm-y  explained  in  this  gloss  is  rare  and  difficult.  Outside  of 
our  papyrus  the  word  is  known  only  twice  :  once  applied  to  a  sick  ox  in  the  Kahun 
Veterinary  Papyrus  (1.  59)  and  again  in  a  very  obscure  passage  in  the  Mettemich 
Stela  (1.  202).  These  throw  no  light  on  its  meaning.  It  is  used  in  five  different  cases 
in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith,  where  it  occurs  nine  times  as  follows  : 

Case  18,  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  in  the  Side  of  the  Nose.  The  patient 
is  unable  to  open  his  mouth  except  with  much  pain  and  he  is  dgm. 

Case  17,  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  of  the  Bone  in  the  Region  of  the  Maxilla 
and  the  Zygoma.  The  patient  is  unable  to  open  his  mouth  except  with  much  pain, 
and  he  is  dgm. 

Case  20,  Wound  in  the  Temple,  the  Bone  Being  Perforated.  The  patient  is  semi¬ 
unconscious,  makes  no  reply  when  questioned  as  to  his  condition,  and  is  dgm. 

Case  22,  Compound  Comminuted  Fracture  in  the  Temple.  According  to  the  ex¬ 
amination  (VIII  12),  “  if  thou  callest  to  him,  he  is  dgm,  and  he  cannot  speak,” 
while  according  to  the  above  gloss,  dgm  means  “  his  being  silent  in  sadness,  without 
speaking.” 

Case  88,  Broken  Neck,  One  Vertebra  of  the  Neck  Being  Crushed  into  the  Next. 
The  patient’s  arms  and  legs  are  paralysed,  he  is  dgm  and  unable  to  speak. 

In  view  of  this  evidence  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  dgm  means  “  to  be  speech¬ 
less,”  so  widely  interpreted,  however,  that  it  could  also  designate  the  inability  of  an 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  22  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  297 

ox  to  use  his  voice  ;  that  is,  it  had  originally  some  such  meaning  as  “  to  be  voiceless.” 
The  root  is  doubtless  triliteral,  and  the  1}  (j  at  the  end  is  of  course  the  ending  of  the 
third  masculine  singular  of  the  pseudo-participle. 

Jk  9mw 's  a  rare  word  meaning  “  mourning,  sadness  ”  or  “  to  mourn.” 
During  the  Seven  Years’  Famine  recounted  in  the  Famine  Stela  (1-2),  the  king  says, 
“  I  mourn  in  the  great  seat  in  the  palace.”  The  noun  gmw, 

“  mourning,  sadness,”  is  found  in  the  Tale  of  Sinuhe  (R,  1.  9).  A  feminine  noun, 
seemingly  with  the  same  meaning,  is  found  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (ed.  Naville, 
7,  8  Ca)  and  in  the  Book  of  Apophis  (Brit.  Mus.  Pap.  10188,  26,  18). 

dgy,  ''“feebleness,”1  is  not  a  rare  word,  but  its  medical  or  pathological 
significance  is  difficult  to  determine.  It  is  obviously  something  undesirable,  and  may 
mean  something  like  “  be  feeble  ”  or  “  feebleness,”  “  be  paralysed  ”  or  “  paralysis.” 
In  the  description  of  the  fleeing  king  of  the  Libyans  on  the  Israel  Stela  it  is  said  of 
him  :  ‘  f  \  I)  ()^»  “  His  two  feet  were  dgy  ”  (1.  6). 

“  Something  that  has  entered  from  the  outside  ”  is  our  surgeon’s  designation  of 
an  external  physical  cause.  See  full  commentary  in  Case  8,  Glosses  C  and  D. 

CASE  TWENTY-THREE 
VIII 18-22 

A  SLIT  IN  THE  OUTER  EAR 

This  is  the  only  case  in  our  treatise  which  deals  exclusively  with  the  oar,  although 
a  number  of  injuries  to  the  head  have  involved  the  ear.  It  is  a  very  simple  case  of  a 
wound  by  which  the  outer  ear  has  been  slit,  and  furnishes  one  of  the  clearest  of  this 
earliest  known  group  of  cases  which  obliged  the  surgeon  to  resort  to  sewing  up  the 
wound.  According  to  his  custom  the  ancient  surgeon  has  here  included  the  instructions 
to  stitch  up  the  wound  in  his  paragraph  on  the  examination,  preceding  the  diagnosis. 
The  treatment  therefore  begins  with  the  wound  already  stitched,  and  concerns  itself 
with  what  is  to  happen  after  that  point  has  been  reached,  especially  with  the  con¬ 
tingency  that  the  wound  does  not  heal  and  that  the  stitching  loosens.  The  “  lips  of 
his  wound  ”  are  then  to  be  kept  together  with  linen  rolls  placed  as  pads  behind  the 
auricle,  until  with  the  application  of  the  inevitable  “  grease,  honey  (and)  lint,”  the 
wound  finally  heals. 

Title 
VIII  18 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  ear. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

298  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  23 

Commentary 

The  surgeon’s  understanding  of  the  word  wbnw,  “  wound,”  will  be  found  discussed 
in  Case  1  (pp.  81-84).  “Ear”  has  been  treated  in  Case  4  (II  4).  It  is  to  be  read  msdr 
here,  and  its  anatomical  meaning  in  this  case  will  appear  as  the  discussion  proceeds. 

Examination 
VIII  18-19 

1 

<0 1 

□  ■ 

Cil  I  I 

w 

^  I 

r.,.W— , 

B 

i 

^  ! 

\\4  i 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  ear,  cutting  through  its  flesh,  the 
injury  being  in  the  lower  part  of  his  ear,  (and)  confined  to  the  flesh,  thou  shouldst  draw 
(it)  together  for  him  with  stitching  behind  the  hollow  of  his  ear. 

Commentary 

4  midr,  “  ear,”  has  been  discussed  as  to  the  reading  in  Case  4  (II 4).  Anatomically 
its  range  of  meaning  in  Egyptian  is  wide,  as  it  is  in  English.  It  occurs  twenty-five 
times  in  Papyrus  Smith,  and  of  these  examples  six  are  in  our  Case  28.  Of  the  remaining 
nineteen  examples,  thirteen  occur  in  the  statement  that  the  patient  discharges  blood 
from  his  ear,  meaning  of  course  the  orifice  of  the  ear.  In  Case  22  the  ear  is  mentioned 
four  times  in  the  phrase  “  interior  of  his  ear  ;  ”  in  Case  20  a  medicament  is  “  poured 
into  his  two  ears  ”  (VIII  5).  In  all  these  cases  the  orifice  or  the  inner  ear  is  the 
meaning  of  midr.  The  anatomical  description  in  Case  18,  locating  the  gm’  as  between 
the  corner  of  the  eye  and  the  (VII  14),  possibly  “  rorifice">  of  his  ear,” 

may  be  dealing  with  the  outer  or  the  inner  ear,  or  both.  In  our  Case  28,  however,  it  is 
obvious  that  the  surgeon  is  discussing  an  injury  of  the  outer  ear,  the  auricle. 

(|  yijp ,  “  cutting,”  is  a  new  word,  of  which  only  one  other  occurrence  is  known, 
if  we  may  accept  its  probable  identity  with  the  similar  word  found  in  a  descriptive 
phrase  inscribed  over  a  man  working  with  mallet  and  chisel  in  an  Old  Kingdom  relief 
scene:  (Davies,  Deir  el-Gebrdwi,  I,  pi.  XVI).  Here  ysp  evidently  designates 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  23  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  299 

the  act  of  chiseling  or  cutting,  and  its  determinative  of  an  axe  is  doubtless  a  variant 
of  the  knife  appearing  in  the  Smith  Papyrus. 

r-r’,  “through,”  literally  “into  the  mouth  of,”  is  a  compound  preposition 
not  very  well  understood.  It  is  not  certain  that  the  rendering  “  through  ”  adequately 
represents  its  meaning  here.  The  prepositions  in  our  papyrus  are  employed  to  desig¬ 
nate  positions,  situations  and  local  relations  confined  within  such  narrow  local  and 
physical  limits,  that  the  traditional  renderings  applying  to  more  spacious  situations 
are  insufficient  or  even  incorrect. 

fyr'w'f>  “  it®  flesh-”  It  is  obvious  that  the  pronoun  here  does  not  refer  to 
the  patient  (“  his  flesh  ”),  but  to  the  masculine  “  ear,”  that  is,  “  its  flesh,”  meaning 
of  course  the  flesh  or  soft  tissue  of  the  outer  ear. 

JrTi  yfy't’  "  injury  ”  (literally  “  thing  ”)  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary 
on  Case  4  ;  see  II  8  (2  b). 

mn  m,  “  confined  to,”  is  a  rather  free  rendering  of  one  of  the  anatomical 
meanings  of  this  phrase,  when  it  may  be  rendered  “  attached  to.”  See  Case  4,  Gloss  A 
(II  9).  Reverting  to  its  original  meaning  “  remaining  in,”  we  see  that  its  significance 
here,  “  confined  to,”  is  not  at  all  unnatural. 

ndry,  “  draw  together,”  as  employed  surgically  will  be  found  discussed  in 
Case  10  (V  6). 

ydr,  “  stitching,”  one  of  the  six  earliest  known  examples  of  surgical  stitch¬ 
ing,  has  been  fully  treated  in  Case  10  (V  6).  The  modifications  following  “  stitching  ” 
are  not  easy  to  understand.  As  rendered  above  they  seem  to  be  intended  to  indicate 
the  side  on  which  the  surgeon  will  stitch  the  wound,  suggesting  that  he  will  work 
on  the  convex  side  of  the  auricle,  the  side  next  to  the  head.  We  are  again  confronted 
by  the  difficulty  in  rendering  our  old  and  familiar  prepositions  when  applied  within  very 
restricted  local  limits.  II\  “  behind,”  often  means  “  around  ”  or  “  beside.”  Hnty, 
rendered  “hollow”  is  otherwise  unknown,  and  the  meaning  “ hollow,”  which  doubt¬ 
less  refers  to  the  concave  side  of  the  auricle,  is  based  on  the  common  and  related  word 
hnw,  “  interior,  inside.”  If  now  we  accept  the  rendering  “  with  stitching  behind  the 
hollow  of  his  ear  ”  as  containing  a  correct  interpretation  of  the  local  terms  h >  and 
hnty,  we  have  still  to  interpret  these  instructions  in  terms  of  the  surgeon’s  actual 
manual  and  physical  procedure.  The  wound  has  slit  the  auricle  from  front  to  back, 
and  the  surgeon  might  therefore  pass  the  needle  back  and  forth  between  back  and 
front  of  the  auricle.  It  would  seem,  however,  that  these  directions  are  so  phrased  as 
to  instruct  the  surgeon  to  work  exclusively  from  the  back  of  the  auricle,  that  is,  to 
keep  his  needle  there,  thrusting  it  both  in  and  out  again  from  the  back  of  the  auricle. 

In  this  examination  our  surgeon  has  included  the  directions  to  stitch  the  wound 
together,  in  accordance  with  his  custom  of  inserting  instructions  regarding  purely 
physical  manipulation  in  the  examination  rather  than  in  the  treatment. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

300 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Diagnosis 
VIII 19-20 

20 

Case  23 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  ear,  cutting 
through  its  flesh.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

These  words  are  only  a  repetition  of  the  beginning  of  the  examination  to  which 
the  favorable  verdict  has  been  appended.  On  this  verdict  see  the  commentary  in 
Case  1  (I  2),  and  the  discussion  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

Treatment 
VIII  20-22 

*  The  scribe  has  inserted  a  small  globular  object  under  the  hand.  See  Vol.  II,  pi.  VIII,  1.  21. 

Translation 

If  thou  findest  the  stitching  of  that  wound  loose  (and)  sticking  in  the  two  lips  of 
his  wound,  thou  shouldst  make  for  him  stiff  rolls  of  linen  (and)  pad  the  back  of  his 
ear  therewith.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey  (and)  lint  every 
day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  23  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  301 

Commentary 

The  initial  condition  literally  reads  “  If  thou  findest  that  wound,  its  stitching 
loosened,” — a  common  participial  construction.  Full  commentary  on  ydr,  “  stitch¬ 
ing,”  will  be  found  in  Case  10  (V  6),  and  mn  m,  “  sticking  in,”  has  been  treated  in 
Case  4  (II  9).  “  Rolls  ”  ( bd’-w )  or  “  plugs  ”  of  linen  have  been  taken  up  in  Case  11 
(V  13). 

“f  l1'  n°t  the  preposition  here.  It  is  followed  by  the  genitive  n,  which  never 
appears  with  the  preposition  and  hence  must  be  a  noun,  here  meaning  “  back.” 
Grammatically  it  is  probably  the  subject :  “  wherewith  the  back  of  his  ear  is  to  be 
padded.”  The  question  arises  whether  the  loosening  of  the  stitching  is  due  to  tho 
absorption  of  surgical  gut  or  the  like,  used  in  the  stitching,  a  result  desired  and  in¬ 
tended  by  the  surgeon ;  or  due  to  failure  of  the  wound  to  heal,  so  that  the  rolls  of 
linen  placed  behind  the  auricula  are  a  substitute  intended  to  accomplish  the  healing 
together,  which  the  surgeon’s  stitching  failed  to  do.  An  examination  of  the  related 
material  discloses  four  cases  (10,  14,  28,  and  47)  in  which  the  stitching  is  found  loose. 
They  have  been  discussed  in  Case  10  (V  6),  and  the  loose  stitching  found  to  be  due  to 
failure  to  heal  (see  p.  280).  On  “  grease,  honey  (and)  lint,”  see  Case  1  (I  8). 

CASE  TWENTY-FOUR 
VIII  22-IX  2 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  MANDIBLE 

This  case  is  the  first  of  two  concerning  injuries  to  the  mandible.  Although  the 
surgeon  calls  the  injury  Mb,  not  so  serious  a  type  of  fracture  as  id,  a  compound  com¬ 
minuted  fracture,  it  is  nevertheless  a  case  which  he  regards  as  fatal,  and  he  suggests 
no  treatment. 

Title 
VIII  22 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  fracture  in  his  mandible. 

Commentary 

o  Mb,  “  fracture,”  has  been  fully  treated  in  Case  11  (V  10). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

302  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  24 

Examination 
VIII  22-23 

»  The  demonstrative  was  at  first  omitted  by  the  scribe  and  afterward  inserted. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  fracture  in  his  mandible,  thou  shouldst  place 
thy  hand  upon  it.  Shouldst  thou  find  that  fracture  crepitating  under  thy  fingers, 
(conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  surgical  meaning  of  nhbhb,  “crepitate,”  lit.  “  break  open,”  “  break  through  ” 
will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  13  (VI  4-5). 

Diagnosis 

VIII  28-IX  2 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  "  One  having  a  fracture  in  his  mandible,  over 
whioh  a  wound  has  been  inflicted,  r-  -  -  -1  (and)  he  has  fever  from  it.  An  ailment 
not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  24  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  303 

Commentary 

sd,  “inflicted,”  lit.  “  broken  open,”  as  used  of  soft  tissue  overlying  an  injured 
bone,  is  discussed  in  Case  5  (II  11). 

IJ^U  dqo'> is  totaUy  unintelligible. 

The  injury  is  here  shown  to  be  a  fracture  of  the  mandible  such  that  the  soft  tissue 
overlying  the  fracture  has  been  ruptured.  The  three  or  four  unintelligible  words 
following  this  observation  probably  described  further  the  injury  to  the  soft  tissue. 
The  injury  is  serious  enough  to  cause  fever,  and  permit  no  hope  of  the  patient’s 
recovery.  The  unfavorable  verdict  is  followed  by  no  treatment.  See  the  discussion 
of  this  verdict  in  Case  5  (II 15)  and  in  the  introduction  (pp.  46-47).  The  diagnosis  a3 
a  whole  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45-51). 

CASE  TWENTY-FIVE 
IX  2-6 

A  DISLOCATION  OF  THE  MANDIBLE 

This  case  is  of  unusual  interest.  The  surgeon’s  directions  for  the  reduction  of  the 
dislocated  mandible,  with  the  “  thumbs  upon  the  ends  of  the  two  rami  of  the  mandible 
in  the  inside  of  his  mouth,”  while  the  fingers  of  both  hands  are  clutching  the  mandible 
below,  that  is  on  the  outside,  are  so  detailed  as  to  the  position  of  the  surgeon’s  hands 
that  the  manipulation  can  be  compared  with  that  shown  in  the  drawing  of  the  process 
by  Apollonios  of  Kitium  in  his  commentary  on  Hippocrates.  See  introduction  above, 
pp.  16-17  and  PI.  VI,  Fig.  12.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  Hippocratic 
manipulation  was  identical  with  that  of  our  treatise,  and  Dr.  Luckhardt  informs  me 
that  the  modern  manipulation  is  also  still  the  same  as  described  in  our  papyrus. 

According  to  his  custom  our  surgeon  has  included  his  instructions  for  the  physical 
manipulation  of  the  injury  in  the  examination.  The  treatment  which  follows  is  evi¬ 
dently  intended  merely  to  soothe  the  strained  muscles  and  irritated  tissues  after  the 
surgeon  has  restored  the  dislocated  mandible  to  its  proper  place. 

Title 

IX  2 

Q  I 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

304  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  25 

Commentary 

Wnh,  “  dislocation,”  has  been  treated  in  Case  10  (under  ydr,  V  6).  <"rf,  “  mandible,” 
is  fully  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  16). 

Examination 

IX  2-5 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible,  shouldst  thou  find 
his  mouth  open  (and)  his  mouth  cannot  close  for  him,  thou  shouldst  put  thy  thumb(s) 
upon  the  ends  of  the  two  rami  of  the  mandible  in  the  inside  of  his  mouth,  (and)  thy 
two  claws  (meaning  two  groups  of  fingers)  under  his  chin,  (and)  thou  shouldst  cause 
them  to  fall  back  so  that  they  rest  in  their  places. 

Commentary 

» mfwty ,  “  the  two  rami,”  written  in  the  dual,  has  been  discussed  in 
Case  22,  Gloss  A  (VIII 14).  The  feminine  dual  of  the  following  genitive  ^  n'ty  is  an 
archaic  survival  almost  unknown  outside  of  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith,  and  an  important 
evidence  of  the  early  date  of  the  text. 

In  accordance  with  our  ancient  surgeon’s  custom  we  find  the  physical  manipulation 
of  the  injury  included  in  the  examination  and  not  in  the  treatment. 

rn-ty,  literally  “  two  claws,”  means  of  course  the  two  groups  of  fingers  of 
both  hands  exclusive  of  the  thumbs.  See  discussion  in  Case  8,  Gloss  E. 

J  i  although  written  in  the  singular,  must  be  dual,  as  the  connection  clearly  shows  ; 
for  the  surgeon  is  to  put  his  jj  i  on  each  of  the  two  rami.  The  use  of  rn-ty  for  the  fingers 
also  shows  that  jji  must  designate  the  thumb.  It  is  also  used  for  the  thumb  in 
Case  22,  q.v. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  25  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  305 

<=.  d,  “  so  that  they  rest  ”  (from  wdy),  is  of  course  a  pseudo-participle  of  resulting 
condition,  as  long  ago  recognized  by  Erman  ( Grammatik 3,  §  332,  p.  175).  The  subject 
of  this  verbal  form  is  a  pronoun,  of  which  the  antecedent  is  the  same  as  that  of  in. 
The  latter  must  be  either  the  two  rami,  or  the  mandible  itself  considered  as  a  dual. 

in  is  not  written  as  a  dual ;  another  example  perhaps  in  Case  11  (V  13).  The 
disregard  of  the  fact  that  the  subject  of  <==  d  is  &  feminine  noun  in  the  dual  is  also  to 
be  expected  after  the  pronoun  p^. 

Diagnosis 
IX  5 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  is,  as  so  frequently,  merely  a  repetition  of  the  title  (q.  v.  for  refer¬ 
ences  to  the  commentary),  to  which  the  favorable  verdict  1  has  been  appended.  On 
this  verdict  see  the  commentary  in  Case  1  (I  2)  and  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

Treatment 
IX  5-6 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  ymrw  see  Case  15  (VI 17)  and  for  treatment  with  honey  see  Case  1  (18).  The 
treatment  is  evidently  intended  merely  to  soothe  the  strained  ligaments  and  tissues. 

x 

oi.uchicago.edu 

306  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  26 

CASE  TWENTY-SIX 
IX  6-13 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  UPPER  LIP 

This  case  is  another  convincing  example  of  the  ancient  surgeon’s  employment  of 
stitching  to  draw  together  a  wound  in  the  soft  tissue.  He  does  not  state  anywhere  that 
the  wound  is  in  the  upper  lip,  but  the  instructions  are  to  probe  “  as  far  as  the  column 
of  the  nose,”  indicating  clearly  that  the  wound  is  in  the  upper  lip.  The  discussion  is 
accompanied  by  a  single  gloss,  explaining  the  meaning  of  a  rare  word  ( yidb )  for 
“  piercing  through.”  This  gloss  furnishes  an  interesting  example  of  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentator’s  carelessness  in  collecting  his  materials,  for  in  inserting  this  gloss  he  forgot 
that  he  had  already  included  it  once  in  Case  14  (YI 12-14),  in  explaining  the  character 
of  a  wound  in  the  nostril. 

Title 
IX  6 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  lip. 

Commentary 

Wbnw,  “  wound,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (pp.  81-84). 

Examination 

1X6-8 

7 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing  through  to  the  inside 
of  his  mouth,  thou  shouldst  examine  his  wound  as  far  as  the  column  of  his  nose.  Thou 
shouldst  draw  together  that  wound  [with]  stitching. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  26  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  307 

Commentary 

(|  | x  ysdb,  “piercing  through,"  has  been  treated  in  Case  14,  Gloss  A  (VI 12-14). 

mhnw,  “  the  inside,”  is  a  noun  formation  of  hnw  with  m.  Compare  Case  22, 
Gloss  B  (VIII 16),  which  perhaps  contains  a  similar  example  ;  but  it  should  be  noted 
that  the  text  of  our  case  in  the  parallel  passages  in  the  diagnosis  and  in  Gloss  A  writes 
n  hnw  not  n  mhnw. 

fl  1  '  -  yumw  nfnd-j,  “  column  of  his  nose,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  11 

(V  14),  Gloss  A. 

ndry,  “  draw  together,”  has  been  treated  in  Case  10  (V  6). 

J)c==5C5  ydr,  “  stitching,”  is  also  discussed  in  the  same  connection.  The  omission 
of  the  preposition  m,  “  with,”  is  very  common  in  our  treatise,  especially  before  the 
names  of  medicaments.  This  peculiarity  suggests  for  the  document  the  character  of 
rapid  memoranda.  It  may  also  raise  the  question  whether  these  omissions  are  possibly 
survivals  from  an  archaic  stage  which  practiced  the  omission  of  prepositions,  as  for 
example  on  the  Palermo  Stone. 

Diagnosis 

IX&-9 

a  The  scribe  wrote  [! and  then  covered  one  stroke  of  w  with  the  head  of  w,  leaving  the 
other  stroke  visible. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing 
through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

See  commentary  on  the  examination,  of  which  this  diagnosis  is  a  partial  repetition, 
to  which  the  favorable  verdict  1  has  been  added.  On  this  verdict  see  commentary  on 
Case  1  (I  2)  and  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

This  diagnosis  is  another  good  illustration  of  the  fact  that  the  diagnosis  is  often 
regarded  as  not  necessarily  containing  any  other  conclusion  than  the  statement  of 
the  practical  course  of  procedure  which  the  surgeon  is  to  follow,  that  is,  the  verdict. 
See  Introduction,  p.  48. 

X  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  26 

Treatment 

IX  9-11 
10 

^  D  ©  i 
\l  1  1^37 

*  This  word  was  at  first  omitted  by  the  scribe  and  afterward  inserted  in  red  ink  in  a  passage  written 
in  black. 

Translation 

Now  after  thou  hast  stitched  it  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first 
day.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he 
rocovers. 

Commentary 

ydr,  “  stitch,”  is  one  of  only  two  cases  in  our  treatise,  in  which  it  is  employed 
as  a  verb.  See  Case  10  (V  6)  where  it  is  fully  discussed. 

On  the  treatment  with  fresh  meat,  followed  by  grease  and  honey,  see  Case  1  (1 2-8). 

We  notice  that  as  usual  the  surgeon  places  the  stitching  of  the  wound  in  the 
examination,  and  that  the  treatment  iB  a  matter  of  medicaments.  His  reversion 
to  the  stitching  at  the  beginning  of  the  treatment  is  not  usual.  It  is  found  also  in 
Case  10  (V  7).  In  Case  10,  however,  he  provides  for  the  possibility  that  the  wound 
may  not  heal  after  stitching.  In  our  case  he  does  not  apprehend  any  such  contingency. 

Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  :  “  Because  of  the  high  vascularity  of  the  lips,  wounds  in 
them  heal  with  great  rapidity  and  by  primary  intention  ( per  yrimam  intentionem),  i.  e., 
without  infection,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  neck  wounds  may  be  infected.  But  a  stitch 
in  the  lip,  especially  if  the  cut  is  deep  and  at  right  angles  to  it,  is  important  to  prevent 
gaping  and  subsequent  healing  with  a  separation  of  the  cut  edges  (because  of  the 
transection  of  the  m.  orbicularis  oris)." 

Gloss  A 

IX  11-13 

Explaining  :  A  wound  in  his  lip  piercing  through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth 

(<=sf  /*■ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  26  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  309 

jix|— smf.^ 

a  The  scribe  at  first  incorrectly  omitted  the  — «,  and  afterward  inserted  it  in  red  ink  in  a  passage 
written  in  black. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing  through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth it 
means  that  the  two  lips  of  his  wound  are  soft,  opening  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth.  One 
says  :  “  Pierced  through  ”  (yMb)  concerning  soft  things. 

Commentary 

This  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  yMb,  “  piercing  through,”  has  already  been 
given  by  the  ancient  commentator  in  discussing  a  wound  in  the  nostril  (Case  14,  VI 
12-14).  The  text  in  our  gloss  is  a  little  fuller  than  in  Case  14,  and  the  variant  “  he  says,” 
where  Case  14  has  “as  is  said  ”  or  “as  one  says”  is  of  slight  consequence.  By  gw,  “soft,” 
the  commentator  doubtless  means  “  permeable,”  or  “  penetrable.”  See  commentary 
on  Case  14,  Gloss  A. 

CASE  TWENTY-SEVEN 
IX  13-18 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  CHIN 

This  case  is  the  last  in  the  series  discussing  injuries  to  the  head  (caput).  The  pre¬ 
ceding  case  dealt  with  a  wound  in  the  upper  lip,  and  in  Case  27  the  discussion  passes  to 
the  region  below  the  mouth,  which  the  surgeon  calls  ync-t,  “  chin.”  It  is 

interesting  to  observe  that  in  Case  26,  a  wound  in  the  upper  lip,  we  are  informed  that 
the  wound  has  “  two  lips  ”  (IX  12),  and  that  the  surgeon  is  to  close  it  with  stitching  ; 
whereas  in  Case  27,  a  similar  wound  as  the  description  shows,  he  employs  the  “  two 
strips,”  doubtless  adhesive  tape,  to  accomplish  the  same  purpose,  as  will  be  seen  by 
an  examination  of  the  discussion  of  “  two  strips  ”  in  Case  2  (1 16).  The  explanation 
is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the  different  situation  of  the  two  wounds. 

Title 

IX  13 

4<? 

r-~i 

I  t  I 

^ 

(WWM  O 

oi.uchicago.edu 

310 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  27 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin. 

Commentary 

t vbnw  n  kf-t,  “  gaping  wound,”  is  fully 
amination),  pp.  91-92. 

“  c^'n  ”  is  treated  in  Case  22  (VIII 10). 

discussed  in  Case  1  (ex- 

Examination 

IX  18-15 

— 3, 

AVuWA  1 

— 0  <si 

mwm 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  If  thou  shouldst  find  his  bone  uninjured,  not 
having  a  split,  (or)  a  perforation  in  it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

“  Penetrating  to  the  bone  ”  (rr  n  ki)  has  been  discussed  in  Case  1,  pp.  87-88. 

per,  “  probe,"  or  “  palpate,”  see  Case  1  (pp.  92-98)  and  Case  8  (IV  5). 

On  uninjured  bone  under  the  wounded  tissue,  and  the  list  of  possible  injuries  to 
the  bone  enumerated  as  not  present,  see  Case  2  (1 18-14,  and  Gloss  C,  1 17)  and  especi¬ 
ally  Case  18  (VII 9),  from  which  it  will  be  seen  that  our  text  has  omitted  one  ( Sd ,  “  com¬ 
pound  comminuted  fracture  ”)  of  the  three  injuries  to  the  bone  usually  enumerated 
by  our  ancient  author  in  such  cases.  Commentary  on  these  injuries  will  be  found  in 
Case  4  (p$n ,  “  split,”  II  2)  and  Case  8  (thm,  “  perforate,”  I  18).  It  is  at  this  point, 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  examination,  that  this  treatise  is  inclined  to  insert  instructions 
for  the  physical  manipulation  of  the  injury,  which  in  this  present  case,  however,  are 
included  in  the  treatment.  See  Introduction,  p.  42. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  27  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  311 

Diagnosis 
IX  15-16 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin, 
penetrating  to  the  bone.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

See  examination  above  (IX  13-15),  of  which  the  diagnosis  is  a  partial  repetition, 
followed  by  the  favorable  verdict  1.  See  the  discussion  of  this  verdict  in  the  com¬ 
mentary  on  Case  1  (I  2)  and  in  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

17 

X 

Treatment 
IX  16-18 

MIC 

Kic 

w 

MIC  MIC  18 

©  i 

*  The  knife  drips  blood,  but  the  character  is  not  available  in  the  fount. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  two  strips  on  that  gash.  Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with 
fresh  meat  the  first  day,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey 
(and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  the  meaning  of  the  “  two  strips,”  probably  adhesive  tape,  see  Case  2  (I  15). 
Our  example  is  a  significant  indication  of  the  function  of  the  “  two  strips,”  for  they 

oi.uchicago.edu 

312  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  27 

are  employed  here  on  the  chin  for  the  same  kind  of  injury,  which  in  the  preceding  case, 
a  wound  in  the  upper  lip,  required  surgical  stitching. 

On  this  difference  in  treatment  between  this  and  the  preceding  case  Dr.  Luckhardt 
remarks  :  “  Wounds  of  the  chin  are  likely  to  gape  less  than  wounds  of  the  lip,  particu¬ 
larly  if  the  wound  of  the  chin  is  parallel  with  the  course  of  the  fibers  of  the  m.  trian¬ 
gularis  and  platysma.  Hence  we  have  stitching  in  the  preceding  case  as  against  taping 
in  Case  27.” 

The  use  of  the  plural  of  the  word  “  gash  ”  (kf-t),  which  cannot  be  brought  out  in 
the  translation,  is  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  kf-t  in  Case  1.  On  the  treatment 
with  fresh  meat,  followed  by  grease,  honey,  and  lint,  see  also  Case  1 .  The  meaning  of 
“  until  he  recovers  ”  is  likewise  discussed  under  Case  1. 

CASE  TWENTY-EIGHT 
IX  18-X  8 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  THROAT  PENETRATING  TO  THE  GULLET 

After  the  discussion  of  twenty-seven  miscellaneous  injuries  in  various  parts  of 
the  head,  the  surgeon  now  moves  downward  and  in  Case  28  takes  up  an  injury  in  the 
throat.  It  is  a  gaping  knife  wound  which  penetrates  to  the  gullet,  so  that  if  the  injured 
man  drinks  water  it  issues  from  the  mouth  of  the  wound.  Included  in  the  examina¬ 
tion  is  the  stitching  of  the  wound,  a  physical  manipulation  such  as  our  surgeon 
customarily  inserts  in  his  examination,  confining  the  treatment  to  the  external 
application  of  medicaments.  Such  a  classification  of  the  surgical  operation  suggests 
that  as  a  mechanical  manipulation  it  was  not  regarded  by  ancient  Egyptian  medicine 
as  properly  belonging  to  the  treatment,  which  was  a  matter  of  recipes  and  medicinal 
applications.  We  have  here  a  suggestion  of  specialization.  See  Introduction,  p.  42. 
If  a  second  examination  discloses  that  the  fever  persists,  a  second  treatment  is  pre¬ 
scribed,  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  in  spite  of  the  persistent  fever,  the  patient 
is  placed  on  his  normal  diet,  or  as  the  Egyptian  surgeon  phrases  it,  he  is  moored  at 
his  mooring  stakes  (compare  Case  8,  Gloss  D). 

The  organization  of  the  discussion  is  as  follows  : 

I 

Title  (IX  18) 

First  examination  and  instructions  to  stitch  (IX  18-21), 

Diagnosis  and  verdict  2  (IX  21-22). 

First  treatment  (X  1-2). 

II 

Second  examination  (X  2). 

Second  treatment  (X  2-8). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  28  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  313 

Title 
IX  18 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  throat. 

Commentary 

On  “wound”  see  Case  1  (pp.  81-84).  The  anatomical  meaning  of  hem,  “throat,” 
will  be  found  discussed  immediately  below. 

Examination 
IX  18-21 

20 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  throat,  piercing  through 
to  his  gullet ;  if  he  drinks  water  he  ’’chokes1  (and)  it  comes  out  of  the  mouth  of  his 
wound  ;  it  is  greatly  inflamed,  so  that  he  develops  fever  from  it ;  thou  shouldst  draw 
together  that  wound  with  stitching. 

Commentary 

“  Gaping  wound”  ( wbnw  n  kj-t)  has  been  fully  discussed  in  Case  1  (pp.  90-92). 

hfm,  or  hemw,  “  throat,”  is  a  rare  word  the  anatomical  meaning  of  which 
has  never  been  studied  or  determined.  In  Papyrus  Ebers  there  is  a  case  of  fatty 
swellings  on  the  hem,  which  require  lancing,  but  the  text  does  not  contain  any 

oi.uchicago.edu 

314  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  28 

intimation  of  the  meaning  of  tym  (Pap.  Ebers  105, 1-8).  The  only  other  case  (Ebers 
76,  8)  in  the  medical  papyri  is  likewise  of  no  assistance.  Outside  of  the  medical  papyri 
only  two  examples  of  the  word  are  known  (Petrie,  Dendereh,  pi.  XXXYII  G,  1.  686 
and  Lacau,  Sarcophages,  Yol.  I,  p.  144  =  Cairo  28052),  both  of  which  are  in  hopelessly 
obscure  passages.  We  are  therefore  dependent  on  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  for  the 
meaning  of  the  word.  It  is  not  found  in  our  document  outside  of  Case  28,  which, 
however,  fairly  well  discloses  its  meaning.  We  are  told  in  the  above  examination 
that  the  wound  in  the  h<’m  penetrates  to  the  gullet  (Sbb).  Hem  therefore  means 
“  throat  ”  rather  than  “neck,”  for  which  our  surgeon  regularly  employs  nlib-t. 

Yidb,  “  piercing  through,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  14  (VI  14). 

Sbb,  “  gullet,”  is  not  a  common  word.  The  following  parallel  passages  in 
the  Book  of  the  Dead,  however,  determine  its  meaning : 

<=dT% $  Book  of  the  Dead,  ed.  Naville,  172,  22  (Aa). 

172,  19  (Aa). 

It  will  be  seen  in  these  two  passages  that  Sbb  is  used  as  a  variant  of  htyt,  a  well- 
known  word  for  “  throat.” 

P  □  H-S-1'”-  ^V~kr'5  “  h®  chokes,”  is  really  a  guess.  The  hr- form  of  the  verb  indi¬ 
cates  that  it  expresses  the  result  which  follows  upon  the  act  of  drinking.  We  should 
possibly  regard  this  choking  or  gasping  as  the  cause  for  the  issuance  of  the  water  from 
the  mouth  of  the  wound,  and  render,  “  so  that  it  comes  out,  etc.”  Sip  is  seemingly  a 
anaf;  A eyofievov. 

nsr-y,  “  it  is  inflamed,”  is  explained  in  Case  41,  Gloss  A,  q.  v.  The  masculine 
pronoun  might  be  taken  here  as  designating  the  patient.  A  study  of  the  parallel 
cases,  however,  shows  that  nsr  is  employed  to  describe  the  local  inflammation ;  its 
subject  is  often  the  wound.  The  result  for  the  patient  is  fever  as  here. 

PkIIH  ^r/»  "  fever,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  41,  Gloss  B,  where  the  ancient 
commentator  has  thrown  some  light  on  it. 

On  surgical  stitching  see  ndry,  “  draw  together,”  and  ydr,  “  stitching,”  in  Case 

10  (V  6). 

Diagnosis 
IX  21-22 

»  Probable  traoes  of  the  first  word  of  the  treatment,  afterward  smeared  out. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  28  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  315 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  throat,  piercing 
through  to  his  gullet.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  preceding  examination,  of  which  the 
diagnosis  is  an  incomplete  repetition  of  the  first  part.  The  omission  of  “  gaping  ’’ 
(w  kj-t)  is  probably  a  scribal  error.  The  doubtful  verdict  2  will  be  found  discussed  in 
Case  4  (II  6).  See  also  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

First  Treatment 

12* 

X  1-2 

4 

SIC 

^  6  un  ©  1 
\l  I  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  after¬ 
ward  [with]  grease,  honey  (and)  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  the  treatment  with  fresh  meat  followed  by  grease,  honey  and  lint,  see  Case  1 
(12-3). 

Second  Examination 

X  2 

*  This  word  6w  was  omitted  by  the  scribe  and  was  afterward  inserted  as  a  correction  in  red 
ink  over  black. 

Translation 

If,  however,  thou  findest  him  continuing  to  have  fever  from  that  wound,  (con¬ 
clusion  in  following  second  treatment). 

Commentary 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  first  treatment  deals  with  the  fever  arising  from  the 
inflammation  in  the  wound,  we  expect  some  other  symptom  to  be  disclosed  from  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

316  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  28 

second  examination,  which  necessitates  additional  treatment.  We  must  conclude 
therefore  that  $mm,  “  to  be  hot,  feverish  ”  in  the  second  examination,  either  means  a 
greater  degree  of  fever  than  &rj,  the  synonym  employed  in  the  first  examination 
(IX  21)  ;  or  the  verbal  form  Smm-f  in  the  second  examination  indicates  continuance, 
perhaps  persistent  continuance  of  the  fever.  The  latter  is  the  more  probable  con¬ 
clusion.  In  Case  47  the  fourth  examination  employs  faim-f  in  precisely  the  same  con¬ 
nection.  On  the  other  hand  when  a  case  has  not  yet  disclosed  any  fever  and  it  is 
discovered  in  a  second  examination,  the  surgeon  says,  “  If,  then,  thou  findest  that 
man,  his  flesh  having  developed  (n-form)  fever,”  as  we  find  it  in  Case  7,  second 
examination  (III  8-9).  See  also  the  discussion  of  the  words  for  fever  in  our  treatise, 
in  Case  41,  Gloss  A. 

Second  Treatment 
X  2-8 

3 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  dry  lint  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound,  (and)  moor  (him) 
at  his  mooring  stakes  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

Regarding  the  application  of  “  dry  lint,”  apparently  without  a  bandage,  Dr.  Luck- 
hardt  remarks  :  “  In  a  case  of  high  fever  because  of  infection,  the  dry  lint  was  perhaps 
indicated  to  promote  drainage  in  place  of  the  usual  grease  and  honey  ointment.  By 
capillary  attraction  it  would  hasten  the  absorption  of  the  wound  secretion  and  the  pus.” 

The  discussion  oijtt,  “  lint,”  will  be  found  in  Case  1  (I  8). 

The  strange  figure  of  speech  “  moor  him  at  his  mooring  stakes  ”  is  explained  in 
Case  3,  Gloss  D  (II 1-2). 

CASE  TWENTY-NINE 
X  8-8 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
The  preceding  case  concerning  an  injury  which  must  have  been  located  somewhere 
in  the  general  anterior  portion  of  the  neck  involved  only  soft  tissue.  The  surgeon  now 
proceeds  to  the  back  of  the  neck  and  takes  up  five  cases  of  injuries  to  the  cervical 
vertebrae  (Cases  29-88).  In  only  one  of  these  (Case  81,  X  16)  does  he  designate  which 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  29  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  317 

of  the  cervical  vertebrae  he  means.  In  Case  31  he  refers  to  the  possible  extension  of 
the  injury  further  down  to  affect  the  spine,  and  also  the  peculiar  character  of  the 
symptoms  when  the  “  middle  ”  cervical  vertebra  is  the  one  affected. 

The  injury  in  Case  29  is  one  most  likely  incurred  in  battle.  It  not  only  left  a 
yawning  gash  in  the  overlying  soft  tissue  but  also  “  perforated  ”  one  of  the  cervical 
vertebrae.  It  caused  stiffness  of  the  neck,  but  was  not  deep  enough  to  induce  paralysis 
of  any  of  the  limbs,  as  we  find  happening  in  other  cases  of  this  group.  The  surgeon 
returns  the  doubtful  verdict,  and  probably  regards  a  cure  as  possible. 

Title 
X  3 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

Commentary 

On  the  terms  employed  see  the  examination  below. 

Examination 
X  8-6 

4 

a  In  this  space  the  scribe  at  first  wrote  r  with  black  ink.  He  afterward  came  back  and  with  red 
ink  inserted  the  w-bird  directly  on  the  r.  There  is  possibly  an  intimation  hero  that  yw  and  yr  were 
almost  identical  in  pronunciation,  either  being  used  as  the  prosthetic  vowel. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  a  vertebra  of  his  neck ;  if  thou  examinest  that 

oi.uchicago.edu 

318  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  29 

wound,  (and)  he  shudders  exceedingly,  (and)  he  is  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders 
and  his  breast,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  discussion  of  “  gaping  wound  ”  will  be  found  in  Case  1  (pp.  91-92). 
is,  “  vertebra  ”  is  treated  under  Case  31,  Gloss  A. 

t^im>  "  pejorating.”  See  Case  8  (1 18),  and  consult  p.  272. 

°  wby  is  obviously  an  error  for  the  usual  h’y,  “  examine.”  The  corre¬ 
sponding  context  in  Case  4  (examination,  II  8-5)  has  dfr,  “  probe,”  at  this  point, 
w  ’ nrw  rS>  **  h0  shudders,”  see  Case  4  (II  4). 

n  (Pny'71'!’  “  h0  is  unable,”  has  been  explained  in  Case  3,  examination 
(1 19-20)  and  Gloss  B  (I  25-26).  Dg'-n-j  is  an  error  for  dg'-j,  see  Case  8,  ibid. 

Diagnosis 
X  6-7 

»  The  scribe  at  first  wrote  <?  here,  and  no  plural  strokes.  He  afterward  inserted  the  plural  strokes 
in  black  ink  over  the  w  which  was  in  red. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  [One  having]  a  wound  in  his  neck,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  perforating  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his 
neck.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Commentary 

The  word  “  gaping  "  (n  kj-t)  found  even  in  the  brief  title  has  been  omitted,  doubt¬ 
less  by  scribal  error,  in  the  diagnosis.  It  is  noticeable  also  that  the  situation  of  the 
wound  “  in  a  vertebra  ”  is  likewise  omitted  in  the  diagnosis,  though  included  in 
both  title  and  examination.  Except  for  the  addition  of  the  words  "  perforating  a 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  29  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  319 

vertebra  ”  we  would  not  know  from  the  diagnosis  that  a  vertebra  had  been  injured. 
This  is  perhaps  the  worst  case  of  scribal  carelessness  in  the  whole  document. 

The  last  symptom,  “  stiffness  in  his  neck,”  has  been  treated  in  Case  3  (I  20).  On 
mn,  “  to  suffer,”  see  Case  3  (I  20).  On  the  uncertain  verdict  2  see  Case  4  (II  6)  and  the 
introduction  (pp.  45  ff.).  This  diagnosis  is  also  discussed  in  the  introduction  (p.  51). 

Treatment 

X  7-8 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Now  afterward  moor  (him) 
at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by. 

Commentary 

On  the  treatment  with  fresh  meat  see  Case  1  (1 2-3). 

The  remainder  of  the  treatment  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  the 
treatment  in  Case  3  (I  21-23). 

CASE  THIRTY 
X  8-12 

SPRAIN  IN  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 

The  term  employed  by  the  ancient  surgeon  to  designate  this  injury  ( nrwt )  is 
unknown  elsewhere,  and  indeed  was  not  clear  even  to  the  ancient  reader  without  ex¬ 
planation  (Gloss  A).  It  is  from  this  explanation  that  the  rendering  “  sprain  ”  has 
been  derived.  There  is  no  mention  of  any  wound  in  the  overlying  tissue,  and  it  was 
not  regarded  as  serious  ;  the  surgeon  expected  to  effect  a  cure. 

Title 

X  8 

,  w  , 

i  i  i 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

320  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  30 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  commentary  below. 

Examination 
X  9-10 

0 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  thou  shouldst 
say  to  him  :  “  Look  at  thy  two  shoulders  and  thy  breast.”  When  he  does  so,  the 
seeing  possible  to  him  is  painful. 

Commentary 

nrwt,  “  sprain,”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A  below. 

On  the  surgeon’s  test  of  the  patient’s  ability  to  twist  his  head  to  either  side  or  to 
drop  his  face,  see  Case  8,  examination  (I  20). 

yrr-j,  “  when  he  does  so,”  is  doubtless  a  conditional  use  of  the  so-called 
emphatic  form,  like  gmm-k,  “  when  thou  findest,”  so  common  in  this  papyrus.  The 
*=»  is  written  rather  small ;  to  read  t  is  grammatically  possible,  but  we  find  <=»  occa¬ 
sionally  written  as  small  as  this,  e.g.,  twice  in  this  very  case  (11.  11-12),  in  which  <=» 
is  even  smaller  than  in  our  yrr-j.  See  also  yr  as  compared  with  yst  (VIII 18). 

mf '/>  literally  means  “  done  by  him.”  So  we  find  hpr  mr-y  ds-y, 
“  done  by  mo  myself  ”  (Shipwreck,  22-28).  A  similar  example  is  in  Gesprach  eines 
Lcbensmiiden,  p.  21  ;  Semneh  Stela  of  Sesostris  III,  1.  6  ;  and  finally  in  Papyrus  Ebers 
(21, 14-16)  we  have  the  title  of  a  remedy  for  expelling  "a^‘ 

ments  arising  from  the  jmd-worm,”  more  literally  “  done  by  ”  this  worm.  In  this  last 
example  the  feminine  t  shows  that  hpr-t  is  an  attributive  participle  belonging  to  mr-wt, 
"ailments,”  the  immediately  preceding  noun.  This  is  likely  to  be  the  construction 
of  hpr  mr-j  (literally  “  done  by  him  ”)  in  our  passage.  That  is,  hpr  is  an  attributive 
modifier  of  the  infinitive  m”,  “  to  see,”  so  that  we  may  render  literally  “  the  seeing  done 
by  him;  ’’  or  including  the  potential  element  sometimes  implied  by  the  participle, 
we  may  render,  “  the  seeing  which  may  be  done  by  him,”  or  more  freely  “  the  seeing 
possible  to  him.”  It  is,  of  course,  obvious  that  it  is  not  the  “  seeing  ”  itself  which  is 
the  source  or  cause  of  the  pain,  but  rather  the  movement  making  the  seeing  possible. 
This  movement,  however,  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  preceding  words  “  When  he 
does  so.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  30  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  321 

The  reader  will  find  the  surgeon’s  methods  of  making  his  observations  discussed 
on  pp.  40-41,  (a)  to  (e) ;  see  especially  (e).  The  patient  must  have  turned  his  face 
downward  and  then  to  right  and  left  alternately,  so  that  he  looked  obliquely  down¬ 
ward,  in  a  position  somewhat  cramped  even  for  a  sound  neck,  and  sure  to  cause 
pain  in  a  sprained  one.  We  are  not  informed  whether  in  our  Case  30,  the  surgeon 
noted  the  patient’s  distress  (resulting  from  the  movement  of  his  head)  by  ocular 
observation,  or  by  further  questioning  of  the  patient. 

Diagnosis 
X  10 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his 
neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

On  nrwt,  “  sprain,”  see  commentary  on  Gloss  A. 

“Vertebra”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  31,  Gloss  A  (p.  828).  The  diagnosis  is 
again  only  a  repetition  of  the  title,  to  which  the  favorable  verdict  1  has  been  appended. 
See  Case  1  (I  2)  and  consult  the  introduction  (pp.  45  ff.). 

Treatment 

X  10-12 

<?  ^ 
i  i 

□ 

\\ 

i  i  i 

°  6  ©  1 

\l  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Now  afterward  thou  shouldst 
treat  [with]  ymrw  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

The  second  occurrence  of  mht,  “afterward”  is  an  error  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
word  is  sometimes  inserted  at  this  point  (after  invh-k)  e.  g.,  VIII  21-22.  On  the  treat¬ 
ment  with  fresh  meat  followed  by  ymnc  see  Case  1  (I  2-3)  and  Case  15  (VI 17). 

Y 

oi.uchicago.edu 

322 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  30 

Gloss  A 
X  12 

Explaining  :  A  sprain. 

it 

AWvVA 

ffi 

WjkJn 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  sprain,”  he  is  speaking  of  a  rending  of  two  members,  (although)  it 
( =*  each)  is  (still)  in  its  place. 

Commentary 

ng-t,  “  break  ”  or  “  rend  apart,”  is  discussed  in  Case  6  (II 19). 

'-ty,  “  two  members,”  is  a  word  applied  to  limbs,  members,  organs,  etc.,  and 
designating  almost  any  part  of  the  body.  It  must  here  be  employed  by  the  surgeon 
with  reference  to  two  neighbouring  vertebrae  which  have  been  forced  apart.  Gram¬ 
matically  f-ty  is  the  subject  of  the  infinitive  ng-t,  and  introduced  by  the  particle  yn. 
This  construction  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5,  Gloss  A  (II 16-17). 

In  the  clause  “  it  (each)  is  in  its  place,”  the  antecedent  of  “  it  ”  (an  Egyptian 
feminine)  is  evidently  ‘-f,  “  member,”  meaning  one  of  the  two  separated  vertebrae. 
The  only  other  feminine  noun  in  the  passage,  the  infinitive  ng-t  “  rending  apart,”  is 
not  likely  to  be  the  antecedent.  It  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  a  “  place.”  The 
meaning  obviously  is,  that  the  two  members  are  wrenched  apart,  although  each  (the 
text  actually  reads  “  it  ”)  still  remains  “  in  its  place.”  The  remark  is  intended  to 
indicate  that  no  actual  dislocation  has  taken  place. 

nrwt,  "sprain,”  occurs  in  the  medical  papyri  only  in  our  treatise,  where 
it  is  found  in  threo  cases  (30,  42  and  48).  In  Cases  80  and  48  it  designates  a  trouble  in 
a  vertebra  of  the  spinal  column  ;  in  Case  42  it  affects  the  thoracic  ribs.  Judging  from 
the  above  gloss,  nrwt  concerns  the  articulation  of  one  vertebra  with  another,  or  of  the 
thoracic  ribs  with  the  sternum.  This  articulation  has  suffered  sufficient  strain  so  that 
a  rending  or  wrenching  (ng-t)  has  occurred  ;  but  the  vertebra  or  rib  (referred  to  in  the 
gloss  above  as  “  member,”  '■<)  is  still  “  in  its  place.”  This  is  in  accord  with  what  we 
find  in  Case  42,  where  the  thoracic  ribs  are  affected  by  nrwt,  and  it  is  distinctly  stated 
that  there  is  no  “  dislocation  ”  (wnh),  “  nor  is  it  broken  ”  (M>).  An  injury  which  has 
produced  a  rending  of  an  articulation  without  a  dislocation  or  an  actual  break  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  30  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  323 

evidently  what  we  would  call  a  “  sprain.”  It  is  difficult  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  word 
to  any  known  root.  It  is  a  feminine  noun  formed  from  a  third  weak  root,  for  it  is 
written  three  times  in  Case  48,  j  or  It  may  have  some  connection 

with  the  verb  nry,  meaning  “  to  shrink,”  “  to  shudder,”  or  the  like,  as  used  in  our 
document  and  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  4).  It  evidently  has  inclined  in  its  semantic 
history  in  a  different  direction  from  the  other  feminine  noun  nr-t,  “  fright,  terror  ” 
(Pyr.  1488a;  Louvre  C,  87,  an  Empire  tomb  stela),  or  still  another  feminine  noun 
or  nr-t,  “  neck  ”  in  the  phrase  <=»  r  nr-t-f,  “  at  his  neck,” said  of  a  collar 
( Tomb  of  Senebtisi,  p.  66). 

CASE  THIRTY-ONE 
X  12-22 

DISLOCATION  OF  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
This  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  cases  in  the  papyrus,  especially  in  the  patho¬ 
logical  details,  but  also  in  the  knowledge  of  anatomy  revealed.  The  Burgeon  has 
observed  that  the  dislocation  of  a  cervical  vertebra  causes  paralysis  of  arms  and  legs, 
or  as  the  Egyptian  idiom  expresses  it,  the  patient  “is  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  and 
his  two  legs.”  He  has  noted  that  the  patient  exhibits  an  erection  of  the  phallus  and 
has  no  control  over  the  discharge  of  urine.  He  differentiates  between  a  dislocation 
of  a  lower  cervical  vertebra  near  the  backbone,  which  causes  paralysis  of  the  arms  and 
legs,  and  dislocation  of  the  middle  cervical  vertebra  which  causes  an  emissio  scminis, 
a  phenomenon  observed  in  modern  times  in  the  case  of  a  criminal  whose  neck  has  been 
broken  by  hanging.  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  :  “  Priapism  is  certainly  a  characteristic 
sign  of  cord  involvement  in  the  cervico-dorsal  region.  In  this  case  the  lesion  must 
have  been  below  the  fourth  cervical  vertebra,  since  the  patient  was  still  breathing." 

The  examination  (X  13-16)  yields  the  surgeon  an  unusually  long  and  interesting 
list  of  symptoms.  The  diagnosis,  however,  is  scanty  and  merely  lists  the  paralysis  of 
arms  and  legs,  and  the  escape  of  urine.  The  verdict  is  of  course  unfavorable.  No 
treatment  of  any  kind  is  suggested.  It  is  evident  that  the  case  is  one  which  excites 
the  surgeon’s  interest, — an  interest  which  we  may  properly  term  scientific.  He  records 
the  phenomena  observed  with  no  hope  of  being  able  to  treat  or  assist  the  injured  man, 
but  obviously  solely  from  his  interest  in  the  facts  observable. 

The  three  glosses  are  important,  and  doubtless  indicate  that  the  words  explained 
were  already  old  and  no  longer  fully  understood.  The  explanation  of  wnh, 
“  dislocation  ”  is  very  valuable,  because  the  ancient  commentator  uses  two  different 
words  to  elucidate  the  meaning  of  with,  whereas  he  elsewhere  often  makes  the  word 
to  be  defined  itself  the  chief  defining  term.  The  discussion  of  rnn&’, 

“ emissio  seminis”  and  ^(j (]  nny,  “dribble”  also  enrich  our  knowledge  of  the 
Egyptian  dictionary. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

324  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  31 

Title 
X  12-13 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  [his]  neck. 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below. 

Examination 
X  13-16 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  shouldst 
thou  find  him  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs  on  account  of  it,  while 
his  phallus  is  erected  on  account  of  it,  (and)  urine  drops  from  his  member  without 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  31  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  325 

his  knowing  it ;  his  flesh  has  received  wind ;  his  two  eyes  are  blood-shot ;  it  is  a  disloca¬ 
tion  of  a  vertebra  of  his  neck  extending  to  his  backbone  which  causes  him  to  be  un¬ 
conscious  of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs.  If,  however,  the  middle  vertebra  of  his 
neck  is  dislocated,  it  is  an  emissio  seminis  which  befalls  his  phallus. 

Commentary 

“  Dislocation  ”  and  “  vertebra  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Gloss  A. 

be  unconscious  of,”  literally  “  not  to  know,”  occurs  only  in  Cases  31 
and  33  in  a  pathological  sense.  It  evidently  means  “  both  to  lose  control  of,”  and 
“  to  have  no  feeling  in  ”  either  the  arms  or  legs.  A  similar  use  of  this  verb  applied  to 
the  entire  person  or  the  entire  body,  first  understood  by  Gardiner,  occurs  in  the  Tale 
of  Sinuhe  where  the  hero  says  :  ©^^5  ^  became  unconscious 

in  his  presence,”  literally,  “  I  knew  not  myself  etc.”  See  Gardiner,  Notes  on  the  Story 
of  Sinuhe,  p.  96  (B.  253). 

nht  is  already  known  with  the  pathological  meaning,  “  to  be  stiff,”  e.  g. 
Case  7  (III  17).  It  is  here  applied  to  an  erection  of  the  phallus. 

ft”,  “  fall,  drop,  dribble  ”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  20  (VII  24). 

“  member  ”  is  without  doubt  some  special  word  for  the  phallus  written  here 
with  the  word-sign.  The  determinative  is  not  wholly  clear  in  1.  14,  but  there  can  be 
no  doubt  about  it  in  1.  22,  where  it  is  obviously  a  papyrus  roll.  The  question  of  the 
phonetic  reading  is  difficult.  The  most  probable  reading  is  b’h,  as  in  the  common 
preposition  vi  h’h.  Written  out  h’h,  it  occurs  in  Pap.  Ebers  49,  14  and 

93,  2;  likewise  in  Naville,  La  Litanie  du  Soleil,  pi.  XIV,  11.  87-38  and  spelled 
(where  it  is  distinguished  from  hnn) ;  and  again  Theban  Table  of  Hours  (^q)  II 16,  7, 
written  “her  phallus  ”(!),  and  showing  that  the  word  originally  meant 

sexual  organ  without  distinction  of  sex  (see  the  variant  in  Tomb  6  which  has 
though  rr-t  is  the  female  hippo)  ;  ibid.,  17,  6 ;  18,  5  ;  20,  2,  and  written  once 
(as  if  to  be  read  mt?).  Compare  Champollion,  Monuments,  pi.  272.  No  example  of 
a  word  mt,  “  phallus,”  has  yet  been  found,  but  we  may  compare  ^  mt,  “  suppository  ” 
(Pap.  Ebers  9,  8  ;  81,  11  ;  31, 13  ;  31, 15  ;  33,  8  ;  83, 16  ;  33, 19)  and  for  the  vulva 
also  (ibid.,  94,  17  ;  94,  21).  Mt  meaning  “  man  ”  is  found  only  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 
(510  c,  601  b).  The  evidence  is  therefore  in  favor  of  the  reading  b’h. 

bterally  “his  flesh  has  received  wind”  or  "breath.” 
On  this  curious  statement  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  :  “  One  of  the  early  signs  of  severe 
spinal  cord  involvement  or  actual  transection  is  meteorism.  The  normal  movements 
of  the  intestine  are  interfered  with  ;  gases  develop  in  the  bowel  and  are  not  discharged. 
As  a  result  there  is  great  distension  of  the  abdomen.”  This  observation  by  modern 
medical  science  seems  to  explain  what  our  ancient  surgeon  had  in  mind  in  this  case. 

Ssm-ty,  “are  blood-shot,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  19  (VII  19-20), 

oi.uchicago.edu 

326  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  31 

Gloss  A.  The  incorrect  J  (j  (J  instead  of  |  (j  might  be  regarded  as  an  effort  to  write  the 
dual,  but  we  find  the  same  writing  with  a  singular  subject,  e.g.,  Case  19  (VII  17). 

rr  n,  “  extending  to,”  in  an  anatomical  sense,  will  be  found  discussed  in 
Case  1  (title). 

Ja  bkdw,  “  backbone,”  is  an  ancient  word,  found  several  times  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts.  Its  meaning  “  backbone  ”  is  fairly  evident.  In  the  first  place  we  find  vertebra  or 
vertebrae  of  the  bkdw  (e.  g.  Pyr.  229  b  and  409  b).  The  determinative  in  the  Pyramid 

Texts  is  several  times  written  thus :  evidently  three  vertebrae  seen  from  the 

front  or  back  and  showing  the  connections  of  the  ribs;  or  <0xgu£j,  seen  from  above 
or  below,  and  showing  the  articular  surfaces  and  the  round  foramina  of  three  of  the 
twelve  thoracic  vertebrae.  Finally  the  passage  of  Pap.  Smith  which  we  are  discussing 
shows  that  the  bkiw  approaches  near  the  cervical  vertebrae,  but  does  not  include 
them.  The  chief  occurrences  of  bMw,  which  is  probably  a  plural  (see  e.g.,  the  plural 
genitive  ®  nw  used  with  it  in  Pap.  Ebers  65, 16)  are  the  following  :  applied  to  animals 
(serpent,  grasshopper  (!),  bird,  etc.),  Pyr.  1772  b  ;  Great  “  Amduat,”  twelfth  hour; 
Ebers  65,  10  ;  65,  16 ;  a  vertebra  or  vertebrae  of  bkiw,  besides  two  Pyr.  references 
above,  Lacau,  Textes  Religieux,  p.  78  (XXVII),  1.  47  b  ;  Book  of  the  Dead,  Naville, 
31,  6  ;  in  list  of  parts  of  the  body  of  a  giant  in  Theban  Table  of  Hours  IX,  Tomb  6, 
Tomb  9,  etc.  (written  with  as  eight  times) ;  miscellaneous,  Naville,  La  Litanie  du 
Soleil,  pis.  XIII,  1.  26 ;  XXXI,  1. 25 ;  XIV,  1.  87,  and  XLVII,  1.  47 ;  Great  “Amduat,” 
tenth  hour  (Leyden,  Turin,  Seti  II) ;  same  in  seventh  hour;  Book  of  the  Dead,  Naville, 
149,  5  (determinative  of  balances  evidently  wrong)  ;  ibid.,  Chap,  183,  2  ;  Pyr.  234  c. 

While  the  title  and  the  beginning  of  the  examination  do  not  localize  the  injury 
further  than  to  place  it  somewhere  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,  the  conclusion  of  the 
examination  proceeds  to  assume  two  different  and  more  precise  localizations  of  the 
dislocation  ;  first  one  near  or  extending  to  the  thoracic  vertebrae,  that  is  at  the  lower 
end  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  ;  the  other  higher  up  and  affecting  only  the  “  middle 
vertebra  of  his  neck.”  The  surgeon  seems  to  indicate  that  in  these  two  cases  the 
symptoms  vary  :  in  the  first  case  he  finds  paralysis  of  arms  and  legs  ;  in  the  second 
there  is  loss  of  control  of  the  sexual  organ,  and  an  emissio  seminis  results.  The  word 
for  this  phenomenon  (mnd’)  is  explained  by  the  ancient  commentator  in  Gloss  B. 

Diagnosis 
X  16-17 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  31  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  327 

f^WTT 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of 
his  neck  while  he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  legs  and  his  two  arms,  and  his  urine 
dribbles.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

The  last  symptom  is  explained  by  the  ancient  commentator  in  Gloss  C  below.  The 
other  matters  requiring  comment  have  already  been  discussed.  This  diagnosis  is 
interesting  in  its  connection  with  the  examination  ;  see  introduction  (p.  51).  The 
unfavorable  verdict  3  has  been  discussed  fully  in  the  commentary  on  Case  5  (II  15)  ; 
see  also  the  introduction  (pp.  46-48).  As  usual  when  this  verdict  appears,  the  surgeon 
does  not  venture  to  suggest  any  treatment. 

Gloss  A 
X  17-19 

Explaining  :  A  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

»  In  writing  these  two  words  phd-t  uf  t,  the  scribe  made  some  error,  which  he  erased  by  smearing 
it  out  while  still  wet,  producing  a  smudge.  He  then  inserted  in  red  ink  the  following  corrections  : 
the  last  three  signs  of  pfid-t,  and  a  <=»  which  he  crowded  in  between  the  —a  and  the  stroke.  Compare 
vf-t  in  V  9  (bis). 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  dislocation  (wnh)  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  of  a 
separation  of  one  vertebra  of  his  neck  from  another,  the  flesh  which  is  over  it  being 
uninjured  ;  as  one  says,  “  It  is  wnh,”  concerning  things  which  had  been  joined 
together,  when  one  has  been  severed  from  another. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

328  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  31 

Commentary 

B"p'  ts,  “  vertebra.”  The  evidence  in  our  papyrus,  especially  in  this  case,  con¬ 
clusively  shows  that  “  vertebra  ”  is  the  correct  rendering  for  this  word.  It  is  a  render¬ 
ing  which  has  long  been  common,  although  anatomically  it  has  not  hitherto  been 
wholly  certain.  The  word  occurs  thirty-two  times  in  our  document.  Of  these,  twenty- 
five  are  accompanied  by  the  following  genitive,  “  of  his  neck,”  and  four  by  “  of  his 
backbone."  Only  thrice  (XI  10,  11  and  15)  does  it  occur  in  Payyrus  Smith  without 
one  or  the  other  of  these  modifiers.  The  examination  (X  1 5—1 G)  shows  that  there  are 
ts,  which  are  lower  down  in  the  neck  near  the  “  backbone,”  and  that  there  is  a  “  middle 
ts  of  his  neck.”  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Is  is  here  the  middle  one  of  the  seven 
cervical  vertebrae.  The  recognition  of  a  middle  ts  in  the  neck  also  shows  that  there 
is  a  series  of  ts.  According  to  our  Gloss  A  these  ts  are  attached  each  to  the  next,  and 
a  forcible  separation  may  take  place  in  case  of  a  dislocation  (wnh).  On  the  other  hand, 
in  Case  88  we  learn  that  when  a  man  falls  head  foremost  and  strikes  violently  on  his 
head,  it  “  causes  that  one  Is  (of  the  neck)  crush  into  the  next  one  ”  (XI  11).  The 
correctness  of  “  vertebra  ”  as  the  meaning  of  ts  is  therefore  evident. 

<=£(}ci-=  dmy,  “  join,”  as  the  two  lips  of  a  wound  are  joined  by  healing  (Case  10, 
V  9),  is  evidently  hero  the  word  describing  the  relation  of  two  ts,  or  “  vertebrae  ” 
before  they  have  been  separated  by  the  “  dislocation  ”  (wnh). 

wnh,  “  dislocation,”  is  the  word  which  the  commentator  especially  intends 
that  this  gloss  shall  explain.  In  this  purpose  ho  has  been  unusually  successful.  In 
the  first  placo  he  does  not,  as  so  often  in  other  glosses,  employ  the  word  he  desires  to 
explain  as  tho  most  important  designating  term  in  the  explanation  itself.  On  the 
contrary  he  gives  us  two  different  words  as  suggesting  the  meaning  of  wnh  :  one  being 
"  separation  ”  (ywd)  and  the  other  “  severance,  detachment  ”  (phd)  or  the  like.  The 
first  refers  to  a  “  separation  ”  between  two  contiguous  vertebrae,  the  second  to  the 
“  severance  ”  from  each  other  of  two  things  which  had  been  joined  together.  It  will 
be  seen  then  that  a  wnh  takes  place  between  two  things,  each  of  which  has  an  identity 
of  its  own.  Although  joined  together  they  did  not  at  first  form  one  thing,  like  a  single 
bone,  which  is  broken  into  two  pieces.  An  important  differentiation  between  wnh  and 
a  “  fracture  ”  (hib)  is  found  in  Case  42  (XIV  18),  where  an  injury  of  the  "  ribs  of  his 
thorax  ”  is  said  to  be  neither  a  wnh.  nor  a  “  fracture  ”  (hib).  Wnh  therefore  does  not 
mean  a  fracture  of  any  kind  (M  or  hsb)  ;  it  quite  evidently  designates  something  that 
happens  to  the  articulation  between  two  bones,  and  must  mean  “  dislocation.”  This 
meaning  which  emerges  so  clearly  from  the  ancient  commentator’s  explanation  in 
Gloss  A  is  interestingly  confirmed  by  a  study  of  the  further  use  of  the  wmrd  in  our 
document. 

In  Case  25  it  designates  a  dislocation  of  the  mandible,  and  the  surgeon  is  directed 
how  to  apply  his  fingers  so  that  the  displaced  mandible  may  fall  back  into  its  proper 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  31  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  329 

position.  Similarly  in  Case  34  wnh  is  applied  to  a  dislocation  of  the  two  clavicles  or 
collar-bones,  and  in  this  case,  too,  the  surgeon  is  charged  to  force  them  back  into  their 
places.  A  wnh  “  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast  ”  in  Case  43  is  described  in  Gloss  A  as  a 
“  displacement  of  the  heads  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast  ”  (XV  3-4).  This  word  “  dis¬ 
placement  ”  (njt)  is  also  applied  to  the  wnh  of  the  clavicles  in  Case  34. 

The  use  of  umh  to  describe  the  condition  of  surgical  stitching  that  has  become 
“  loose  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  10  (under  ydr  in  V  6).  The  only  other  occurrence  of 
wnh  in  the  medical  papyri  is  in  Pap.  Ebers  (31,  20),  where  it  designates  an  ailment  or 
condition  in  the  anus  which  is  treated  with  ointment  applied  on  lint.  What  this  ail¬ 
ment  called  wnh  may  be  is  entirely  problematical. 

yh-t,  “  things,”  must  be  a  plural  here  (possibly  a  dual),  in  view  of  the  following 
phrase,  “  one  ....  from  another.”  The  lack  of  any  feminine  sign  of  agreement,  as  in 
the  form  of  wnn,  is  common  with  the  noun  yh-t  in  our  document,  as  indeed  also  else¬ 
where,  especially  when  yh-t  is  in  the  plural.  The  following  are  the  examples  in  Papyrus 
Smith  :  III  1  ;  VI 14  ;  IX  13  ;  XII  5  and  11  ;  XIII 10  and  11  ;  XVI 1,  13  and  16  ; 
some  of  the  preceding  may  be  singular  ;  the  following  are  certainly  singular :  II  3 
and  20  ;  IV  10. 

Wnn  is  of  course  common  with  the  force  of  a  past  tense  ;  its  use  hero  to  throw  the 
following  participle  dmy  into  a  pluperfect  is  interesting. 

D1  vM'Kiv),  “  has  been  severed,”  is  a  rare  word  which  seems  to  be  used  only 
in  the  medical  papyri.  It  is  used  of  the  dismembering  and  cutting  up  of  animals  for 
external  medical  application  :  of  a  bird  (Pap.  Ebers,  76,  9)  ;  of  a  lizard  (Berlin 
Medical  Pap.,  3038,  3,  2).  It  is  also  employed  of  the  cutting  open  of  tissue  with  a  lancet 
over  a  swelling  or  cist  (Pap.  Ebers  109,  6).  Similarly  it  even  appears  as  an  intransitive 
verb  to  designate  the  rending  or  breaking  of  tissue  over  a  pus  cist  {ibid.,  91,  13  ; 
91,  18).  In  all  these  examples  the  word  denotes  the  severance  of  animal  tissue,  but 
our  gloss  would  indicate  that  it  had  a  wider  usage  to  indicate  severance  or  detachment 
of  any  object  from  another  to  which  it  had  been  attached  {dmy). 

,  «,<■•(,  feminine,  is  of  course  out  of  agreement  with  the  in  r  dn-mv-f.  Compare 
the  same  incongruity  in  V  9  and  conversely  in  I  10  and  consult  commentary,  pp.  114 
and  116. 

Gloss  B 

X  19-21 

Explaining  :  It  is  an  emissio  seminis  which  befalls  his  phallus. 

;.!W_ 

/WVVWt  /  '  MVWA 

© n<=> 

9  O 

'I  I  I 

f=u 

oi.uchicago.edu 

330  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  31 

*  This  word  yw-f  was  at  first  inadvertently  omitted  by  the  scribe,  and  was  afterward  inserted 
in  red  in  the  space  at  the  end  of  line  20. 

Translation 

As  lor  :  “  It  is  an  emissio  seminis  which  befalls  his  phallus,”  (it  means)  that  his 
phallus  is  erected  (and)  has  a  discharge  from  the  end  of  his  phallus.  It  is  said  :  “  It 
remains  stationary  ”  ( mn  s’w),  when  it  cannot  sink  downward  (and)  it  cannot  lift 
upward. 

Commentary 

mnA',  “  emissio  seminis ,”  is  a  rare  word  which  has  been  shown  by 
Kees  to  mean  onanism,  self-pollution  (Zeitschr.  fur  Aegypt.  Sprache  57,  p.  110).  The 
ancient  commentator  makes  it  clear  that  he  is  using  the  word  for  an  involuntary 
emission.  This  meaning  is  even  suggested  in  the  text  to  be  explained,  by  the  use  of 
hpr  r,  “  happen  to,”  which  frequently  is  used  in  an  unfavorable  Bense  like  our  “  befall.” 
The  determinative  of  a  jar  employed  in  the  text  (X  16)  is  due  to  the  fact  that  there 
is  a  word  mni',  meaning  “  jar.”  Gloss  B  has  the  correct  text  with  the  determinative 
of  a  phallus. 

n$w,  “  discharge,”  is  fully  explained  in  Case  41,  Gloss  E  (XIV  15-16).  The 
interpretation  of  hr,  the  preposition  so  often  used  by  our  surgeon  to  introduce  the  causo 
of  a  symptom,  is  difficult.  It  follows  directly  after  “  phallus  ”  ( hnn )  in  the  examina¬ 
tion  (X  14),  to  introduce  the  cause,  that  is,  the  injury.  It  is  possible  that  we  should 
understand  our  gloss  as  meaning  that  the  phallus  is  erected  as  a  result  of  the  emission. 
Hr  is,  however,  employed  so  often  with  the  meaning  “  possess  ”  that  this  meaning 
seems  not  improbable  here. 

Having  quite  adequately  explained  mnd’,  the  commentator  proceeds  with  a  second 
explanation,  perhaps  led  to  do  so  by  an  idiom  or  proverb,  yw-f  mn  s’w,  “  It  remains 
stationary,”  in  which  the  occurrence  of  mn  and  s’,  one  following  the  other,  have 
suggested  to  the  commentator  some  connection  with  mnA’,  “emissio.”  It  would  seem 
highly  improbable  that  the  two  words  mn  “remain”  and  s’w’ 

"  protect  ”  (rendered  above  “  be  stationary  ”)  should  have  any  etymological  con¬ 
nection  with  mnA ’,  “  emissio.”  The  commentator  has  either  been  misled  by  the  simple 
paronomasia,  or  found  it  too  attractive  to  be  resisted. 

In  the  translation  of  this  idiom  or  proverb,  the  rendering  of  s’w  as  “  be 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  31  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  331 

stationary  ”  is  based  entirely  upon  the  explanatory  statements  which  follow,  and 
which  clearly  indicate  that  the  member  is  stationary.  Whether  we  should  understand 
s'w  to  be  the  common  verb  “  protect  ”  or  the  less  common  Empire  word 
“  break,  fracture,”  or  the  like,  applied  to  members  of  the  body,  may  be  left  uncertain. 

is  a  relatively  rare  word,  not  otherwise  found  in  the 
medical  papyri.  Its  meaning  is  established  by  its  use  in  the  Eloquent  Peasant  where 
it  occurs  six  times.  Of  these,  five  (77  (B  2)  =  812  (B  1) ;  87  (B  2)  =  322-828  (B  1) ;  96  ; 
162  and  163)  are  employed  to  indicate  the  incorrect  deflection  of  a  pair  of  balances  by 
which  the  peasant  suggests  divergence  from  justice,  symbolized  by  the  balances.  In 
the  sixth  example  (92)  gM  designates  the  collapse  of  a  timber  or  support  and  is  parallel 
with  PJ7  Mm,  which  is  the  ~j~ ■ —  of  the  Pyramid  Texts,  used  to  designate  the  “fall” 
of  a  serpent.  Any  one  who  has  seen  an  upreared  cobra  in  Egypt  will  understand  at 
once  the  meaning  of  dbn,  employed  so  regularly  in  serpent  charms  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts,  adjuring  the  serpent  to  “  fall  ”  or  “  sink  down.”  In  this  passage  then 
(Peasant  92),  gM,  parallel  with  dbn,  evidently  means  “  to  sink  ”  or  “  to  sink  down.” 
In  Pap.  Prisse  it  is  used  once  figuratively  to  indicate  the  “  yielding  ”  of  an  opponent 
(13,  4). 

An  interesting  parallel  between  our  opposed  tsy  n  hrw,  “  lift  upward  ”  and  gMnhrw, 
“  sink  downward  ”  is  furnished  in  a  different  pathological  connection  concerning  an 
ailment  of  the  heart  in  Pap.  Ebers  (101, 16-17) : 

“  It  does  not  rise  upward, 
it  does  not  fall  downward.” 

The  potential  meaning  of  the  negatived  n-forin  is  highly  probable  here.  The  use 
of  the  negative  for  the  usual  —  is  made  certain  by  the  parallel  —  in  the  preceding 
proposition.  Compare  Case  82  (XI  8). 

Gloss  C 
X  21-22 

Explaining  :  While  his  urine  dribbles. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

332  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  31 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  While  his  urine  dribbles,”  it  means  that  urine  drops  from  his  phallus 
and  cannot  hold  back  for  him. 

Commentary 

1+ZZ <?^  nny<  ren£lered  “dribble”  above  is  a  common  word  but  is  unknown 
as  applied  to  human  physiology  outside  of  our  treatise.  Its  commonest  meaning  is 
“  to  be  weary.”  It  is  sometimes  applied  to  the  slow  movement  of  the  back-water 
of  the  inundation,  e.  g., 

tic 

“  Thou  art  tho  great  flood,  settling  itself  upon  the  fields  ”  (Brugsch,  Reise  nach  der 
Grossen  Oase,  Tafel  XXVII,  40-41).  This  and  other  such  examples  indicate  con¬ 
clusively  that  a  slow,  sluggish  movoment  of  water  is  implied.  The  corresponding 
noun  for  sluggishness  of  food  movement  nnw,  which  is  a  word  for  “weari¬ 

ness,  laziness  ”  is  twico  employed  in  Pap.  Ebers  in  a  case  of  digestive  trouble  (36, 21  ; 
37,  3).  It  is  employed  in  Case  8  (IV  14)  to  describe  the  motion  of  half  paralysed 
limbs.  Our  commentator  explains  nny  in  Gloss  C  by  the  word  ft”,  which 

in  its  medical  applications  moans  “  to  fall,  to  drop,”  and  is  the  verb  employed  when 
tho  quantity  of  fluid  is  small.  See  e.g.,  Caso  20,  VII  24,  where  ft ”  is  discussed  in  the 
passago  “  a  little  (of  the  fluid)  drops  ”  (ft”).  “  Dribble  ”  is  evidently,  therefore,  a 
fair  rendering  of  our  verb  nny.  In  quoting  from  the  text  in  X  17  the  commentator 
has  misspelled  the  word,  using  the  noun  form  nnw.  The  text,  though  lacking  a  deter¬ 
minative,  has  tho  correct  form  nny. 

|r?,  probably  to  be  read  ft’ft,  is  discussed  above,  in  the  examination  (X  14). 

is  obviously  a  scribal  error  for  6’k,  “draw-  together,  pull  to¬ 

gether,  contract  ”  and  the  like.  In  medical  usage  it  is  found  with  the  direct  object 
^°[\,  “  vulva  ”  (Ebers  9G,  9-10  ;  96,  6-7)  ;  and  with  the  direct  object 
“  pupil  of  the  eye  ”  (Ebers  57,2-3,seo  Loret,  Recueil  de  Trav.  I,p.l32).  In  these  passages 
it  must  mean  “  contract  the  vulva  (or  vagina),”  or  “  contract  the  pupil  of  the  eye.” 
Besides  such  examples,  with  an  organ  of  the  body  as  tho  direct  object,  we  find  it  also 
with  “  urine”  as  the  direct  object  (Ebers  50,  13  =  Hearst  V  2),  where  its 

meaning  is  probably  “  restrain,  withhold,  control,  hold  back  ”  or  the  like.  The  occur¬ 
rence  of  this  phrase  miaJd,  “control  (or  hold  back)  the 

urine  ”  (Ebers  50,  18),  makes  our  restoration  of  the  verb  in  Pap.  Smith  quite 
certain.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  in  our  passage,  mwyt,  “  urine  ”  is  the 
subject,  whereas  in  Pap.  Ebers  it  is  the  object  of  s'k,  “  restrain,  hold  back.”  The 
potential  meaning  of  the  negatived  n-form  is  again  quite  probable. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  32  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  333 

CASE  THIRTY-TWO 
XI  1-9 

DISPLACEMENT  OF  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 

This  is  the  fourth  of  the  group  of  five  cases  (29  to  33)  treating  injuries  of  the 
cervical  vertebrae.  In  such  groups  the  surgeon  has  usually  proceeded  from  less  to 
more  serious  cases.  Case  32  however,  which  is  regarded  as  an  injury  quite  capable  of 
successful  treatment,  has  been  placed  after  a  dislocation  of  a  cervical  vertebra  (Case 
31).  It  deals  with  a  displacement  of  one  of  the  cervical  vertebrae,  an  injury  which  we 
would  be  inclined  to  regard  as  serious  but  to  which  the  ancient  surgeon  appends 
verdict  1.  He  also  adds  to  the  treatment  of  the  patient  the  clause  “  until  he  recovers.” 
The  gloss  at  the  end,  explaining  the  term  “  displacement  ”  ( nswt ),  is  one  of  the  best 
and  clearest  in  our  papyrus. 

It  is  in  this  case  that  the  ancient  scribo  has  made  use  of  a  scribal  device  of  great 
interest.  At  the  beginning  of  line  four  he  unintentionally  omitted  tho  words  “  Thou 
shouldst  say  concerning  him,”  the  opening  formula  of  the  diagnosis.  Having  later 
noticed  the  omission,  however,  he  inserted  the  lacking  words  at  the  top  of  the  column 
(see  Plate  XI),  and  then  called  attention  to  the  insertion  by  means  of  a  red  cross  (see 
end  of  line  three,  Plate  XI).  This  cross  is  the  lineal  ancestor  of  our  asterisk. 

Title 

XI-1 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below,  especially  in  tho  gloss. 

Examination 
XI  1-3 

oi.uchicago.edu 

334  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  32 

3 

*  This  cross  inserted  in  red  is  the  ancient  scribe’s  asterisk,  explained  in  footnote  a  under  diagnosis 
(XI  3-4,  p.  335). 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  whose 
face  is  fixed,  whose  neck  cannot  turn  for  him,  (and)  thou  shouldst  say  to  him  :  “  Look 
at  thy  breast  (and)  thy  two  shoulders,”  (and)  he  is  unable  to  turn  his  face  that  he  may 
look  at  his  breast  (and)  his  two  shoulders,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

nswt,  “  displacement,”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A,  q.  v. 

“■=-=,  mn,  “  fixed,”  has  a  number  of  interesting  anatomical  uses  in  our  document, 
which  have  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  9).  It  is  here  used  pathologically  to  indicate 
that  owing  to  an  injury  of  a  cervical  vertebra  the  neck  cannot  turn  and  the  face  remains 
“  fixed  ”  as  it  were,  looking  in  one  direction. 

We  have  here  another  good  case  of  the  potential  force  of  the  negatived  n-form. 

Snb-t,  “  breast,”  is  a  word  that  has  commonly  been  rendered  “  body,  surface 
of  the  body,  skin,”  etc.  Its  real  meaning  is,  however,  “  breast.”  See  for  example  the 
epithet  meaning  “  big-breast  ”  as  a  designation  of  a  hawk  or  falcon 

in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (1048c).  The  phrase  P|wJ  Snb-t,  “  make  festive  ( =  adorn)  the 
breast  ”  in  the  Empire  tomb  scenes  is  another  example  in  point.  See  Davies-Gardiner, 
Tomb  of  Amenemhet,  pi.  XXX,  1.  G,  and  p.  48,  n.  18,  where  he  also  renders  “  breast.” 
Our  case  above  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  this  meaning,  for  a  comparison  with  other 
cases  shows  that  they  employ  the  well-known  word  k’b-t,  “  breast,”  where  our  case 
has  Siib-t.  For  example,  Case  80  (X  9)  has 

in  the  directions  for  testing  the  patient’s  ability  to  turn  his  neck,  where  Case  32 
(XI  2-8)  has 

Case  80  puts  “  shoulders  ”  first  and  “  breast  ”  second,  while  Case  82  reverses  this 
order  ;  but  otherwise  the  two  texts  are  strictly  parallel  and  the  equivalence  between 
Snb-t  and  k’b-t  is  obvious.  The  anatomy  of  k'b-t  is  explained  by  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentator  in  Case  40,  Gloss  A  (XIII 17)  and  in  Case  48,  Gloss  A  (XV  8-4). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  32  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  335 

is  obviously  an  error  for 

for  the  usual  — ■  is  found  also  in  the  preceding  case  (X  21). 

Diagnosis 

XI  3-4 

*  These  words  dd-yn-k  r-f,  “  Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him,"  were  unintentionally  omitted 
by  the  scribe  in  the  text  at  the  beginning  of  1.  4.  It  was  an  omission  too  large  to  be  inserted  above 
the  line  in  the  text,  as  he  sometimes  did.  He  therefore  wrote  the  missing  words  in  red  at  the  top  of 
the  column  of  text  and  called  attention  to  the  omission  in  the  text  at  the  proper  point  by  a  cross, 
likewise  in  red.  He  inserted  the  cross  at  the  end  of  1.  3  however,  not  wishing  to  break  the  smooth 
right-hand  edge  of  his  column  with  anything  added  at  the  beginning  of  1.  4.  This  red  cross  is  of  course 
the  ancestor  of  our  asterisk. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  Ono  having  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of 
his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  again  consists  only  of  the  title  with  the  favorable  verdict  1  added, 
as  noted  in  the  introduction  (pp.  48  ff.).  On  verdict  1  see  Case  1  (1 2),  and  the  intro¬ 
duction  (pp.  46  ff.).  The  terms  employed  in  the  diagnosis  will  be  found  discussod  below. 

'sic  ^ 

Treatment 

XI  4-7 

wiiil)  i  w 

a : 

i  i  i 

0, 

Wc 

cn 
l  l  l 

*  It  is  possible  that  the  scribe  wrote 

oi.uchicago.edu 

336  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  32 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  loose  his 
bandages  and  apply  grease  to  his  head  ras  far  as"1  his  neck,  (and)  thou  shouldst  bind 
it  with  ymrw.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey  every  day,  (and)  his 
'‘relief1  is  sitting  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

On  the  treatment  with  fresh  meat  see  the  discussion  in  Case  1  (I  2-3). 

^  is  doubtless  a  sportive  writing  of  the  verb  pjf  J  j\  d'by,  “to  traverse,”  especially 
in  the  phrase  Pf  Ja®  “  to  traverse  the  marshes  ”  in  hunting.  See  Mariette,  Abydos 
I49e;  49  f;  Newberry,  El-Bersheh,  pt.  I,  XX.  It  perhaps  originally  meant  “  to  jackal 
the  marshes,”  ignoring  the  confusion  between  — -  and  p.  I  do  not  know  of  any  other 
examplo  of  our  phrase  here,  r  s'by  r,  literally  “to  traverse  as  far  as  ”  which  probably 
means  simply  “  as  far  as.”  It  would  be  analogous  with  r  mn  m,  “  to  remain  with,”  the 
well-known  compound  preposition  for  “  as  far  as.” 

On  bandaging  with  ymrw  see  Case  15  (VI  17). 

The  word  byt,  “  honey  ”  written  with  a  sign  like  the  flying  bird  instead  of  the  bee 
is  common  in  our  document,  e.  g.,  VII  6. 

—  sry-f,  “  his  ''relief1  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  17  (VII  6). 

“  Sitting  ”  as  used  in  treatment  in  Papyrus  Smith  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  4 
(II  7). 

Gloss  A 
XI  7-9 

Explaining  :  A  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

*  The  scribo  at  first  wroto  J  !j ,  and  then  corrected  the  ]  to  ]  simply  by  drawing  the  oblique  cross 
stroke  in  hioratio  (j  through  tho  J.  It  is  practically  certain  that  he  intended  to  write  dfy-t,  not  dfly  l. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  A  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  concerning 
a  sinking  of  a  vertebra  of  his  neck  [to]  the  interior  of  his  neck,  as  a  foot  settles  into 
cultivated  ground.  It  is  a  penetration  downward. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  32  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  337 

Commentary 

This  gloss  is  one  of  the  most  successful  discussions  appended  by  the  ancient  com¬ 
mentator.  He  first  explains  the  meaning  of  \  nswt,  which  we  have  rendered 
“  displacement  ”  by  the  use  of  the  word  hrp,  “  to  sink  ”  (see  commentary  on  Case  5, 
II 13),  before  he  employs  the  related  verb  nsy,  “  go,  lead,  introduce.”  His  use  of  this 
related  verb  is  wisely  combined  with  the  subject  “  foot  ”  and  the  phrase  “  into  (or 
4  in  ’)  cultivated  ground,”  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  meaning.  The  picture 
is  that  of  a  foot  sinking  into  soft,  plowed  ground. 

The  omission  of  the  preposition  before  hnw,  “  interior  ”  is  probably  a  scribal  error. 
We  have  the  combination  of  n  hnw  with  hrp,  “  sink,”  twice  in  Case  5. 

nsy  is  a  verb  of  going,  otherwise  known  only  in  late  texts  like  those  of  Edfu 
and  Dendera.  It  is  possible  that  the  word  is  used  here  only  with  the  meaning  “  go, 
walk  ”  in  soft  soil,  and  that  the  added  idea  of  sinking  into  the  soft  soil  is  contained 
solely  in  the  verb  dfyt ;  but  it  is  more  probable  that  the  verb  nsy  means  ‘‘to  sink” 
or  “  to  settle,”  and  that  our  word  nswt  is  derived  from  the  verb  nsy. 

dfyt,  “  penetration,”  is  a  rare  word.  The  verb,  with  the  obvious  meaning 
“  penetrate,”  is  found  in  the  following  passage  : 

“  0  ye  who  pass  by,  if  ye  wish  to  live,  etc. 

stc 

so  shall  ye  penetrate  the  stela  of  this  tomb,  and  enter  into  the  writings  that  are  in  it  ” 
(Theban  tomb  of  (j  J  (j ,  Mission  archdologique frangaise ,  Vol.  V,  Aba,  pi.  VI,  left,  11. 9-10). 
Here  dfy,  rendered  above  “  penetrate,”  is  parallel  with  fk  m,  “  onter  into.”  This 
meaning  fits  our  context  in  Gloss  A  perfectly. 

In  view  of  the  ancient  commentator’s  explanation  therefore,  it  is  clear  that  the 
injury  assumed  in  Case  32  is  a  displacement  of  one  of  the  cervical  vertebrae,  it  being 
understood  that  the  vertebra  has  been  displaced  directly  toward  the  inside,  that  is 
toward  the  front  of  the  injured  man.  It  is  a  question  for  the  pathologists  to  decide 
whether  an  injury  of  this  kind  would  so  easily  respond  to  external  treatment  as  our 
surgeon  assumes,  for  in  neither  verdict  nor  treatment  does  the  surgeon  regard  it  as 
a  serious  case. 

CASE  THIRTY-THREE 
XI  9-17 

A  CRUSHED  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 

This  case  is  the  last  of  the  group  of  five  treating  injuries  of  the  cervical  vertebrae. 
It  is  the  most  serious  probably  in  the  entire  group.  The  surgeon  is  at  pains  to  explain 
just  how  the  injury  occurred,  and  this  makes  the  case  one  of  the  most  interesting  in  our 

z 

oi.uchicago.edu 

338  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  33 

treatise.  Many  of  the  injuries  it  discusses  are  such  as  could  be  expected  only  in  war, 
or  in  a  case  of  murderous  assault.  It  is  explained  in  Case  83,  however,  that  the  injured 
man  has  fallen  headlong  and  has  struck  on  his  head,  driving  a  vertebra  of  his  neck  with 
such  violence  into  the  next  that  the  first  vertebra  is  crushed  into  the  other,  the  two 
remaining  jammed  thus  together,  and  forming  what  modem  surgeons  call  an  “  im¬ 
pacted  fracture  ”  as  Dr.  Luckhardt  informs  me.  This  is  such  an  accident  as  might 
happen  any  day  in  civil  life  in  ancient  Egypt,  especially  among  workmen  who  were 
employed  in  such  great  numbers  on  the  vast  buildings  of  the  Pharaohs,  like  the 
pyramids  and  temples.  The  surgeon  appends  verdict  3,  the  fatal  verdict,  and  makes 
no  reference  to  any  treatment. 

It  is  quite  clear  that  the  presence  of  this  case  in  our  document  is  due  to  scientific 
interest  in  the  symptoms  displayed  and  the  nature  of  the  injury.  The  account  contains 
some  old  terms  which  the  commentator  considers  it  wise  to  explain  in  two  interesting 
glosses. 

Title 
XI  9 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck. 

Commentary 

The  title  literally  reads  “  a  crush  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck.”  The  noun  “  crush  ” 
(Mm)  will  be  found  discussed  below  in  Gloss  A,  p.  340. 

Examination 
XI  9-12 

! 

«■ 

10 

i 

i  i 

i  mo 

s 

£23- 

D 

i  mo 

a 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  33  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  339 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck  (and)  thou  findest 
that  one  vertebra  has  fallen  into  the  next  one,  while  he  is  voiceless  and  cannot  speak  ; 
his  falling  head  downward  has  caused  that  one  vertebra  crush  into  the  next  one ;  (and) 
shouldst  thou  find  that  he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  and  his  two  legs  because  of 
it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

foM  shin,  “  crush  ”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A. 

©  hr,  “has  fallen,”  is  an  unusual  application  of  the  common  verb  “  fall,”  and 
is  perhaps  peculiar  to  surgery.  The  explanation  in  Gloss  A  shows  that  it  means 
“  penetrate,”  the  force  of  the  man’s  fall  driving  one  vertebra  into  the  next. 

dgm-y,  “  speechless,  voiceless,”  has  been  explained  in  Case  22,  Gloss  C 

(VIII  16-17). 

QPcS=<5=rli  y^fydhd,  “  be  head  downward,”  is  discussed  in  Gloss  B  (XI  15-17). 

hmy,  “  be  unconscious,”  literally  “  not  to  know,”  employed  to  indicate 
paralysis  of  arms  and  legs,  has  been  discussed  in  Case  81  (X  18). 

Diagnosis 
XI  12-13 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck ; 
he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs,  (and)  he  is  speechless.  An 
ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  all  be  found  discussed  above,  except  ihm,  which  is  treated  in  Gloss  A. 
It  is  interesting,  and  grammatically  important  to  notice  that  the  n-form  of  the  verb, 
hmy-n-j,  is  employed  with  a  permansive  meaning  parallel  with  that  of  the  following 
pseudo-participle  ( dgm-y ). 

Verdict  8  indicates  that  there  is  no  hope  of  recovery.  See  Case  5  (II  15).  It  is 
therefore,  as  usual,  followed  by  no  directions  for  treatment. 

Z  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

340 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  33 

Gloss  A 

XI 18-15 

Explaining  :  A  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck. 

14 

*  This  <=»  was  at  first  omitted  by  the  scribo  and  afterward  inserted  above  the  line  in  red. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  A  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  of  the  fact  that  one 
vertebra  of  his  neck  has  fallen  into  the  next,  one  penetrating  into  the  other,  there  being 
no  movement  to  and  fro. 

Commentary 

ihm,  “to  crush,”  is  a  very  old  word  appearing  in  the  Pyramid  Age  written 
JQ,  though  it  is  otherwise  mostly  written  with  p.  It  means  “to  crush,”  especially 
with  blows,  as  with  a  pestle.  Two  men  pounding  with  large  pestles  are  depicted  in  a 
tomb  painting  at  Benihasan  and  the  accompanying  inscription  calls  their  work  Poj^ 
ihm  (Tomb  15,  Newberry,  Vol.  II,  pi.  VI).  A  small  stela  in  the  Cairo  Museum  has  the 
word  ihm  written  with  the  determinative  of  a  man  pounding  with  a  pestle  in  a  mortar. 
This  writing  suggests  that  the  determinative  of  ihm,  ^  (XI 15)  is  intended  to  represent 
a  pestlo  in  a  mortar.  Indeed  in  Papyrus  Hearst  (X  6),  in  the  next  example  quoted,  the 
doterminative  of  the  word  M,  “mortar  ”  in  hieratic  is  w,  exactly  like  the  curved  line  at 
the  bottom  of  \  which  is  therefore  probably  a  mortar.  The  ingredients  of  a  prescription 
in  Papyrus  Hearst  are  Pof^JI]  “crushed  (ihm-ty)  in  a  stone  mortar” 

(Pap.  Hearst  X  5-6  ;  compare  Pap.  Ebers  77,  8).  In  the  model  kitchens  sometimes 
placed  in  tombs,  grain  is  both  crushed  in  a  mortar  and  ground  in  a  hand  mill.  These 
two  processes  applied  to  a  jar  of  grain  are  designated  in  Pap.  Ebers  (75, 15) 

“  crushed  (ihm)  and  ground.”  The  trampling  and  crushing  by  oxen  on  a  threshing 
floor  is  called  ihm  in  the  tomb  of  Sennofer  (Sethe’s  copy).  In  the  medical  papyri  a 
noun  ihm,  meaning  “  a  trituration  ”,  is  derived  from  the  verb  ihm,  “  to  crush.”  Thus 
in  the  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus  (8,  7)  we  have  °  “  a  trituration  (ihm) 

of  natron ;  ”  and  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (86, 10)  |  ^<^’)  ^ ,  “  trituration  (ihm)  of 

d'r-t  ”  (some  kind  of  fruit).  Related  to  this  noun,  a  crushed  substance,  a  triturated 
drug,  is  our  word  shm  in  Case  88.  Literally  rendered  the  injury  is  “  a  crush  in  a  ver¬ 
tebra  of  the  neok  ;  ’’  that  is,  the  orushed  vertebra  is  called  “  a  crush.”  This  is  perhaps 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  33  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  341 

what  is  meant  in  Papyrus  Ebers  in  a  recipe  intended  to  prevent  “abrasions  ” 

(ihm-w)  occasioned  by  some  ailment  in  the  teeth  (Pap.  Ebers  72,  13). 

Hr,  “  fall  ”  in  this  unusual  connection,  is  discussed  above  (1.  10). 

The  gloss  indicates  that  one  vertebra  has  been  driven  so  firmly  against  and  into  the 
next  that  the  two  are  adhering  and  preventing  all  independent  motion  of  either. 

Gloss  B 
XI  15-17 

Explaining  :  His  falling  head  downward  has  caused  that  one  vertebra 
crush  into  the  next. 

(]<=>(]  —  j^wjy  pjljl  s, 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  His  falling  head  downward  has  caused  that  one  vertebra  crush  into  the 
next,”  it  means  that  he  has  fallen  head  downward  upon  his  head,  driving  one  vertebra 
of  his  neck  into  the  next. 

Commentary 

The  repetition  of  r  in  hrr-f,  after  the  determinative,  is  an  obvious  scribal  error, 
suggestive  of  oral  dictation.  The  text  in  XI  11,  from  which  the  scribe  is  quoting  is 
correctly  written  hr-f. 

PdSX  and  ^e  reduplicated  pj^^j  dhdhd,  are  probably  derived  from  the 
simplex  My,  “  to  stream,  to  flow,”  most  familiar  to  us  in  the  common  verb  My, 

“  to  float  down  stream.”  The  causative  i-hd  is  used  originally  of  clothing  with  the 
meaning  “  hang  down.”  This  is  especially  true  when  the  hanging  object  is  inverted,  as 
when  a  goddess  lets  her  breasts  hang  down.  For  this  idea  of  hanging  inverted,  the 
Pyramid  Texts  employ  the  determinative  m  (Pyr.  2171a).  Similarly  the  stars  hang 
from  the  sky  (Pyr.  1516  b).  See  also  Pyr.  2155  b.  Finally  the  dead  are  said  to  walk 
ihdhd  (see  Lacau,  Textes  relig.,  Chap.  XXIII,  A,  p.  67  =  Becueil  de  trav.,  29,  p.  151, 
1.  59,  compare  determinative  in  B.  Confer  also  Zeitschrijt,  49  (1911),  p.  58)  and  the 
determinative  is  that  of  a  man  with  head  down  and  feet  up.  The  word  is  sufficiently 

oi.uchicago.edu 

342  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  33 

old  and  unfamiliar  to  lead  our  commentator  to  explain  it  by  the  phrase  hr  d'd’-f, 
“upon  his  head.” 

P^®_  i’h,  “  driving,”  is  an  otherwise  unknown  word,  and  the  meaning  given 
has  been  derived  from  the  context  in  this  case. 

CASE  THIRTY-FOUR 
XI 17-XII  2 

DISLOCATION  OF  THE  TWO  CLAVICLES 

In  this  case  we  have  two  examinations,  the  first  of  which  discloses  only  a  dislocation 
without  other  injury  ;  the  second  an  injury  of  the  overlying  soft  tissue,  an  injury 
which  penetrates  to  the  interior.  These  are  conditions  which  the  surgeon  found  in 
two  different  cases,  as  our  text  shows  clearly  enough.  This  conclusion  is  further 
corroborated  by  the  fact  that  Case  86,  a  fracture  of  the  humerus  corresponding  to  our 
first  examination  in  Case  84,  is  discussed  by  itself  as  a  complete  caBe,  while  the  condi¬ 
tions  corresponding  to  the  second  examination  in  CaBe  84  have  become  a  new  case 
(Case  87).  Dr.  Luckhardt  here  makes  the  important  observation  :  “  In  the  second 
case  it  is  plain  that  the  surgeon  is  discussing  a  backward  dislocation,  the  first  case 
being  probably  a  forward  dislocation  of  the  collar-bone.  In  a  80-called  backward 
dislocation  of  the  collar-bone  the  head  of  the  bone  lies  behind  the  upper  end  of  the 
sternum.  This  head  presses  on  the  trachea,  esophagus,  and  larger  vessels  of  the  neck, 
causing  difficulty  in  breathing  and  swallowing.  Because  of  such  pressure  a  semi- 
comatose  condition  may  supervene.  In  modern  surgery  the  head  of  the  bone  is  ex¬ 
cised  if  ordinary  methods  of  reduction  fail.” 

In  the  first  case  (84,  first  examination)  the  surgeon  first  prescribes  the  reduction  of 
the  dislocated  bones  to  their  sockets,  together  with  proper  adjustment  of  pads  and 
bandages  to  hold  them  in  place,  and  soothing  applications.  After  the  second  case, 
however,  the  surgeon  offers  no  diagnosis,  and  no  treatment.  The  injury  to  the  soft 
tissue  is  described  in  the  same  terms  as  in  the  alternative  examination  in  Case  87 
(XII  19-20),  where  verdict  8  follows,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  second 
examination  in  Case  84  is  regarded  as  having  disclosed  a  hopeless  case,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  verdict  1,  which  follows  it  (see  commentary  below). 

The  case  closes  with  an  interesting  explanation  of  the  term  “  a  dislocation  in  his 
two  clavicles  ”  by  the  ancient  commentator,  which  demonstrates  his  knowledge  of  the 
bones  of  the  thorax,  contains  an  unusual  excursion  into  the  internal  anatomy  beneath 
this  region,  and  furnishes  us  with  a  number  of  new  anatomical  terms. 

The  question  arises  whether  the  consistent  writing  of  the  dual  “  his  two  collar¬ 
bones  ”  throughout  this  case  is  due  to  a  common  scribal  habit  in  writing  the  dual 
when  mentioning  members  which  are  in  pairs,  and  therefore  possibly  an  error  for  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  34  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  343 

singular.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  treatment  twice  uses  “  it  ”  (“  bind  it  ”  and 
“treat  it,”  XI 19-20)  to  designate  the  injury;  while  the  second  examination  mentions 
finding  a  “  rupture  (of  the  soft  tissue)  over  it  ”  (the  dislocation,  XI  21).  In  this  case 
only  one  collar-bone  would  be  dislocated.  In  the  first  treatment  (XI 19),  however,  the 
surgeon  returns  the  dislocated  bone(s  ?)  to  “their”  plaoe  ;  while  in  Gloss  A  the  dis¬ 
location  is  described  as  affecting  “  the  heads  ”  (plural)  of  the  bones  concerned,  and  the 
articulation  of  “  their  heads  ”  is  further  explained.  The  rendering  “  his  two  collar¬ 
bones  ”  seems  therefore  to  be  justified. 

Title 

XI  17 

^  \\ 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones. 

Commentary 

The  terms  are  discussed  below. 

First  Examination 
XI 17-18 

?  — J 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones,  shouldst  thou 
find  his  two  shoulders  turned  over,  (and)  the  head(s)  of  his  two  collar-bones  turned 
toward  his  face,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

3mm  an  error  for  qmm-k.  See  the  same  context  in  Case  85,  after  yr  h’y-k 

(XII  3). 

phd-tvy,  “  turned  over,”  is  discussed  in  Case  VIII  (IV  14).  The  form  is 
evidently  a  pseudo-participle,  and  as  one  of  the  rare  duals  of  this  verbal  form  another 
evidence  of  the  early  age  of  our  document. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

344  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  34 

“  The  head(s)  of  his  two  collar-bones  ”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A.  The  remark  seems 
to  indicate  that  the  S-shaped  clavicle,  when  dislocated,  twists  or  turns  somewhat,  so 
that  the  “head,”  the  end  next  the  sternum,  turns  upward  toward  the  patient’s  face. 

First  Diagnosis 
XI  18-19 

19 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar¬ 
bones.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below.  The  diagnosis  again  consists  of  the  verdict 
appended  to  a  repetition  of  the  title  of  the  case.  This  verdict  is  explained  in  Case  1 
(I  2).  See  also  the  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

First  Treatment 
XI  19-21 

n  *vww\ 

□  in 

0^ 

stc 

1 1  ^ 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  cause  (them)  to  fall  back,  so  that  they  rest  in  their  places.  Thou 
shouldst  bind  it  with  stiff  rolls  of  linen ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease 
(and)  honey  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

The  surgeon  has  here  placed  the  physical  manipulation  of  the  injury  in  the  treat¬ 
ment,  where  it  really  belongs,  and  not  in  the  examination,  where  he  has  customarily 
placed  it  (compare  Case  25).  The  slight  error  in  the  writing  of  i-hr-yn-h  may  be 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  34  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  345 

corrected  by  comparison  with  the  surgeon’s  account  of  a  dislocated  mandible,  where 
he  uses  verbatim  the  same  language  (IX  4-5).  The  omission  of  all  directions  for  mani¬ 
pulating  the  dislocation,  such  as  we  find  so  carefully  given  in  Case  25  (IX  3-4),  and 
such  as  he  gives  in  the  next  case,  a  fracture  of  the  clavicle,  is  noteworthy.  It  may  well 
be  due  to  inadvertent  omission  by  our  notoriously  inaccurate  scribe. 

bd^'W,  “  stiff  rolls,”  is  explained  in  Case  11  (V  13). 

On  the  use  of  grease  and  honey  see  Case  1  (I  3). 

Second  Examination 
XI  21 

It _ -g— >  A  avava  mwm  V 

Translation 

If,  however,  thou  shouldst  find  his  two  collar-bones  having  a  rupture  (of  the  tissue) 
over  it,  penetrating  to  the  interior,  (conclusion  in  second  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

M,  “  rupture,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5  (II  11).  It  refers  hero  to  a 
rupture  of  the  soft  tissue  over  the  dislocation  and  penetrating  the  wall  of  the  thorax 
to  the  interior.  The  first  examination  assumes  that  the  overlying  soft  tissue  is  un¬ 
injured  ;  The  second  examination  discloses  an  injury  of  this  tissue,  which  constitutes 
a  new  case,  to  which  a  new  verdict  is  appended.  Dr.  Luckhardt  raises  the  question  : 
“Does  not  the  rupture  here  refer  to  most  of  the  ligaments  about  the  clavicular  manu¬ 
brium  joints  ?  ” 

Second  Diagnosis 
XI  22 

22 

Translation 

(Thou  shouldst  say) :  “  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  consists  only  of  the  favorable  verdict  (see  Case  1,1  2),  which  after 
declaring  “  I  will  treat,”  is  curiously  enough  followed  by  no  treatment.  There  are 
thirty  cases  in  our  treatise  containing  this  favorable  verdict.  In  twenty-nine  of  these 
cases  this  verdict  is  immediately  followed  by  a  description  of  the  treatment.  The  only 

oi.uchicago.edu 

346  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  34 

exception  is  the  above  example  in  our  present  case  (34).  It  should  be  noted  further¬ 
more  that  in  all  other  cases  prescribing  no  treatment,  the  verdict  is  regularly  verdict  3 
(e.g.,  Case  7,  III  18  ;  Case  8,  IV  12  ;  Case  87,  XII  21).  In  this  particular,  Case  37 
throws  important  light  on  Case  84.  Turning  to  Case  37  we  find  that  it  falls  into  two 
parts  exactly  parallel  with  the  two  parts  of  our  Case  84.  The  second  part  in  both 
cases  (87  and  84)  is  an  alternative  condition  of  the  soft  tissue  overlying  a  dislocation 
or  fracture,  the  soft  tissue  having  suffered  a  dangerous  rupture  which  pierces  entirely 
through.  Nowin  Case  37  the  description  of  this  injury  to  the  soft  tissue  in  the  examina¬ 
tion  is  followed  by  a  diagnosis  concluding  with  the  unfavorable  verdict  3.  The  parallel 
second  examination  in  Case  84,  describing  the  injury  to  the  soft  tissue  in  the  same  terms 
as  in  Case  87,  should  therefore  likewise  be  followed  by  a  diagnosis  including  verdict  8. 
This  will  be  cloar  if  we  place  the  corresponding  portions  of  the  two  cases  parallel : 

Case  34.  (XI  21)‘ 

„  87.  . (XII  19). 

„  34.  (XI21). 

»  37.  . (XU  20). 

„  34.  (XI  22). 

»  87.  (XII  21). 

In  view  of  tho  above  evidence  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  in  Case  84,  our  second 
diagnosis  (XI  22)  should  contain  verdict  8  in  place  of  verdict  1. 

It  may  be  objected  that  a  scribal  copyist  would  not  copy  so  important  a  remark  as 
the  verdict  incorrectly.  In  the  very  next  case  (85),  however,  it  will  be  found  that  he 
has  done  this  very  thing.  He  at  first  wrote  verdict  8,  although  his  original  from  which 
he  was  copying  undoubtedly  contained  verdict  1.  To  be  sure  he  noticed  his  error 
before  he  finished  and  corrected  it  by  inserting  verdict  1  over  verdict  8.  In  our  case 
we  must  conclude  that  he  not  only  made  the  error,  but  also  that  he  failed  to  notice  it. 
The  probability  is  that  the  cases  of  dislocation  of  the  clavicle  known  to  our  surgeon,  in 
which  there  was  also  injury  of  the  overlying  soft  tissue,  had  been  fatal  oases.  It  is 
perhaps  significant  that  in  the  only  gloss  appended  to  our  case,  the  commentator  calls 
attention  to  the  “  two  canals  ”  underlying  the  region  of  the  injury,  canals  which  lead 
to  the  lungs.  It  may  have  been  an  injury  in  close  proximity  to  these  canals  which  the 
Burgeon’s  experience  had  led  him  to  think  was  too  dangerous  to  be  treated.  The  mere 
physical  difficulties  involved  in  reducing  a  backward  dislocation  were  probably  beyond 
the  skill  of  the  ancient  surgeon.  He  had  not  yet  learned  to  excise  the  head  of  the 
bone  (see  Dr.  Luckhardt’s  remark,  p.  842) ;  he  had  no  treatment  for  such  disloca¬ 
tions  and  he  probably  lost  most  of  them. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  34  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

347 

Gloss  A 
XI  22-XII  2 

Explaining  :  A  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones. 

<!■ 

l\\^  w 

d  S  J2f-> 

a  * _ D  I  l\  I  I 

_ ^  I 

I  1 1 1  I  I 

XII  1 

AWAVv  A  /Ci  U 

9  w 

*SJ 

I  rr  x^ni 

•JJM 

^  9 

a  1^2*9  mjrils. 

i* 

il  i 

i  i  i 

1 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  A  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones,”  it  means  a  displacement  of  the 
heads  of  his  sickle-bone(s).  Their  heads  are  attached  to  the  upper  bone  of  his  breast, 
extending  to  his  throat,  over  which  is  the  flesh  of  his  gorget,  that  is  the  flesh  that  is 
over  his  bosom.  Two  canals  are  under  it :  one  on  the  right  and  (one)  on  the  left  of  his 
throat  (and)  of  his  bosom  ;  they  lead  to  his  lungs. 

Commentary 

sS|,^  wnh,  “  dislocation  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  10  under  ydr  (V  6)  and  Case  14 

(V1  11). 

J  Jv,<TyT  bb'wy-fy,  “  his  two  collar-bones  ”  is  a  new  word,  the  meaning  of  which  is 
derived  from  this  gloss.  It  is  not  found  in  any  other  Egyptian  document  now  known 
to  us.  It  is  doubtless  related  to  the  rare  word  J  J@j  bb,  “  collar  ”  (Piankhi  Stela, 
1. 112),  otherwise  known  only  in  Ptolemaic  inscriptions.  The  word  J  <?  J  <?,  ® ,  bwbio,  the 
material  for  a  chain  or  necklace  (Pap.  Harris  52  b,  2),  is  perhaps  related.  We  learn 
from  the  ancient  surgeon’s  interesting  description  in  this  gloss,  that  the  heads  of  the 
two  bb-wy  are  attached  to,  or  articulated  with  the  upper  bone  of  the  breast  (manubrium 
stemi)  “  extending  to  his  throat.”  There  can  be  no  doubt  therefore  that  the  two 
bb-icy  are  the  collar-bones. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

348  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  34 

Cl  ^  „  nft,  “  displacement,”  is  a  new  word,  at  least  in  this  form.  We  may  compare 
the  Coptic  itO'YqT,  “  turn  around,  draw  aside,  to  let  out.”  See  also  itoyTq  in  Spiegel- 
berg,  Koptisches  Handwiirterbuch,  p.  81,  and  his  The  determinative  of  a  cord, 

and  the  use  of  nft  to  explain  wrih,  suggest  that  it  means  “  detachment,  loosening, 
displacement.”  The  special  application  in  this  case  to  the  displacement  of  the  heads 
of  the  clavicles  from  their  articulation  with  the  sternum  is  paralleled  by  the  use  of  the 
same  word  to  describe  the  dislocation  of  the  heads  of  the  ribs  which  articulate  with 
the  sternum  in  Case  48  (XV  4). 

jjy  h'b,  “sickle-bone,”  is  a  rare  word  not  otherwise  known  in  the  medical 
papyri.  It  occurs  once  in  the  Book  of  the  Gates  and  Coffin  Texts  (Grapow,  Urk.  V, 
p.  161)  where  it  means  simply  “  sickle.”  There  is  clear  parallelism  between  umh, 
“dislocation”  with  nft,  “displacement,”  as  one  pair,  and  bb-wy-fy,  “his  two  collar¬ 
bones  ”  with  h'b-f,  “  his  sickle-bone(s)  ”  as  the  other  pair.  That  is  to  say,  hyb  is  a  word 
meaning  “  sickle,”  which  is  applied  to  the  collar-bone,  and  is  a  more  popular  designa¬ 
tion  of  that  bone  than  bb,  which  needed  explanation.  The  slightly  S-shaped  form  of 
the  clavicle  probably  gave  rise  to  the  suggestion  that  it  resembled  an  Egyptian  sickle, 
so  that  it  was  finally  termed  a  sickle,  just  as  the  modem  term  clavicle  is  the  old  Latin 
word  “a  little  key.”  Thence  came  the  application  of  the  word  hyb,  “sickle”  to  the 
nock;  ,  hyb,“  neck”  in  Kahun  Medical  Pap.  1, 19  as  the  opposite  of 

^ !  hpd-w,  “  buttocks.”  It  also  appears  as  part  of  the  body  of  the  constellation, 
tho  Giant  (jpJ),  listed  between  (1(5  Sw-ty,  “  two  sides  ”  and  mnd-t,  “cheek,”  an 

order  of  parts  which  does  not  aid  us  much.  In  the  Theban  Table  of  Hours  it  appears 
with  the  Giant  (jj«~)  in  II,  III,  IY,  and  VI,  with  the  writing  J  ^  (see  Cham- 
pollion,  Monuments,  pi.  CCLXXII,  17).  In  our  text  hyb  should  be  plural,  for  the  word 
“  heads  ”  immediately  preceding  is  in  the  plural ;  and  the  words  “  their  heads  ”  in 
the  noxt  sentence  must  refer  back  to  hyb  as  a  plural  (“  their  ”).  See  below. 

. ^  mn . m,  “  attached  to,”  meaning  “  articulated  with  ”  is 

discussed  in  Case  4  (II  9). 

“  Their  heads  ”  is  probably  intended  to  refer  back  to  hyb,  “  sickle-bone,”  which 
should  be  written  in  the  plural  (or  dual).  Otherwise  the  only  other  noun  to  which 
“  their  ”  can  refer  is  bb-wy-fy,  “  his  two  collar-bones.” 

<| 1 JL  71  Ih  J  ks  hry  n  k'b  t-f,  “  upper  bone  of  his  breast,”  is  quite  clearly,  as 
shown  by  this  gloss,  tho  topmost  bone  of  the  sternum,  the  manubrium  stemi,  the  bone 
with  which  the  heads  or  inner  ends  of  the  two  clavicles  are  articulated. 

jc'b-t,  “  breast,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  40,  Gloss  A  (XIII  17). 

1  ktyt,  “throat,”  is  a  very  old  word,  already  found  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  which 
also  employ  a  masculine  (Pyr.  606  d).  The  general  meaning  “throat”  is  well 

established,  e.  g.,  as  the  seat  of  thirst  in  Sethe,  Urk.  IV,  p.  482.  As  we  have  shown 
above,  it  occurs  as  the  variant  of  >=>J  $bb,  “  gullet”  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  34  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  349 

(Naville,  172, 19  Aa  =  172,  22  Aa).  See  Case  28  (IX  19).  Its  mention  here  is  useful 
as  aiding  to  define  the  upper  limit  of  the  region  concerned  in  the  injury. 

J  J?]  (j^  bby-t,  “gorget,”  is  a  very  rare  word.  It  is  doubtless  a  derivative  from  j 
bb,  “  collar-bone,”  already  discussed  above.  Gardiner  tells  me  that  it  occurs  in  the 
unpublished  Ramesseum  Glossary  papyrus,  following  k'b-t,  “  breaBt.”  Unfortunately 
this  list  observes  no  orderly  arrangement,  and  no  safe  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from 
the  juxtaposition  of  bby-t  and  k’b-t.  In  our  gloss,  however,  the  flesh  of  the  bby-t  is  said 
to  be  “  over  it,”  that  is  over  the  throat  { hty-t ).  The  bby-t  is  therefore  evidently  the  soft 
tissue  covering  the  general  region  of  the  front  of  the  throat  extending  downward 
toward  the  top  of  the  sternum  ( manubrium ),  for  this  tissue  is  at  once  explained  by  the 
ancient  commentator  as  that  of  the  bosom  also.  No  common  English  word  for  this 
region  seems  to  exist,  and  the  little  current  designation  “  gorget  ”  may  perhaps  serve 
to  suggest  the  meaning  of  the  Egyptian  word. 

8’8’-t,  “  bosom,”  is  likewise  a  very  rare  word,  and  heretofore  of  quite 
uncertain  meaning.  It  occurs  twice  as  the  seat  of  an  uncertain  disease,  a  swelling 
appearing  on  the  8’8’y-t  (Pap.  Ebers  104,  14  and  104,  17).  Neither  these  two  nor  the 
only  other  known  example  of  the  word  (Mariette,  Denderah,  I  78  a)  throw  any  useful 
light  on  its  meaning.  Our  passage  shows  clearly  that  it  means  the  region  of  the  lower 
throat  extending  downward  to  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum.  We  can  hardly  doubt 
therefore  that  it  is  related  to  the  word  8’8’yt,  “necklace,”  which 

hangs  down  from  the  neck  over  this  region.  The  somewhat  vague  word  “  bosom  ” 
would  seem  to  be  a  fair  rendering. 

The  item  with  which  the  gloss  closes  is  of  unusual  interest,  for  the  surgeon  here 
turns  to  the  internal  anatomy  beneath  the  region  he  is  discussing,  and  makes  a  remark 
possibly  explaining  why  a  rupture  of  the  tissue  in  this  region  was  so  dangerous.  When 
we  recall  that  the  surgeon  suggests  no  treatment  for  the  case  disclosed  in  the  second 
examination,  we  may  raise  the  question  whether  he  had  not  had  experience  with  some 
case,  in  which  a  dislocation  of  the  clavicle  was  accompanied  by  a  rupture  not  only  of 
the  overlying  soft  tissue  but  also  of  one  of  the  large  blood-vessels  beneath, — an  injury 
from  which  the  patient  rapidly  bled  to  death.  The  vessels  of  which  the  commentator 
is  speaking  he  calls  mt,  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  this  term  mt  means  not  only 
“  canal,”  but  also  “  ligament,  tendon.”  See  Case  1  (I  6)  and  Case  7  (III  17).  Since 
writing  the  above  I  have  received  Dr.  Luckhardt’s  important  remark  inserted  in  the 
introduction  to  this  case,  in  view  of  which  he  adds  the  following  observation  :  “  There 
is  therefore  a  direct  relation  between  the  description  of  the  dislocated  clavicle  and  the 
structure  beneath  the  sternum.  Of  course  the  canals  mentioned  may  be  the  bronchi 
(left  and  right)  and  not  blood-vessels,  particularly  in  view  of  the  commentator’s  state¬ 
ment  that  they  lead  to  the  lungs.”  Dr.  Luckhardt  also  mentions  the  fact  that  the 
branching  of  the  trachea  into  the  bronchi  occurs  at  the  level  of  the  third  and  fourth  ribs. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

360  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  35 

CASE  THIRTY-FIVE 
XII  8-8 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  CLAVICLE 

The  surgical  procedure  prescribed  in  this  case,  having,  even  in  the  Seventeenth 
Century  b.  c.,  evidently  developed  from  long  experience,  is  very  interesting.  The 
patient  is  laid  prostrate  on  his  back,  with  some  object  placed  under  him  between  his 
shoulder  blades,  of  such  a  height  that  the  shoulders  are  somewhat  raised  from  the 
bed  or  floor,  permitting  the  surgeon  to  spread  the  shoulders,  probably  by  pressing 
down,  so  that  the  fractured  bone  is  longitudinally  stretched,  and  the  fractured  ends 
can  he  fitted  together.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the  two  bandageB  which  are  then  applied, 
presumably  to  prevent  disturbance  of  the  fracture,  are  so  described  that  their  position, 
as  affecting  the  fractured  clavicle,  is  not  clear. 

Title 
XII  8 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  collar-bone. 

Commentary 

o  Mb,  “  break  ”  or  “  fracture,”  is  explained  in  Case  11  (V  10).  It  is  quite  clear  that 
there  is  only  one  “  break  ”  discussed  in  this  case.  The  scribe’s  writing  of  the  dual 
bb-xmj,  “  two  collar-bones,”  is  either  an  error  from  the  habit  of  writing  the  word  so 
often  in  the  dual,  or  is  a  loose  form  of  expression,  employing  “  hiB  two  collar-bones  ” 
with  the  meaning  “  either  one  of  the  two.” 

Examination 
XII  8-4 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  collar-bone,  (and)  thou  shouldst 
find  his  collar-bone  short  and  separated  from  its  fellow,  (oonolusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  35  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  351 

Commentary 

On  the  nature  of  the  injury  see  commentary  under  title. 

j hvX,  “short.”  This  meaning  has  been  demonstrated  by  Gunn,  Becueil 
de  trav.,  89,  p.  101.  See  especially  j^— hwr,  “dwarf”  (determinative  inexact 
in  type).  It  is  here  a  verb  in  pseudo-participle. 

'5%  “  separated  ”  is  discussed  in  Case  14  (VI  8).  The  physical  situation 
here  described  is  due  to  a  single  break  in  one  clavicle  ;  the  other  claviole  must  not 
be  considered  as  playing  any  part  in  the  situation.  In  view  of  these  facts  we  must 
conclude  that  the  separation  referrod  to  is  between  the  two  pieces  of  the  broken 
clavicle.  As  the  text  stands  the  description  is  obviously  incomplete  ;  before  “  separ¬ 
ated  ”  we  expect  the  words  “  one  piece,”  that  is,  “  (one  piece)  separated  from  its 
fellow.” 

Diagnosis 

XII  4 

w 

[anciently 
corrected 
from 

<?  \\  J 

& 

a  Tlio  scribe  at  first  wrote  verdict  3,  five  signs  all  in  red.  He  then  corrected  the  error  and  con¬ 
verted  the  text  into  verdict  1.  He  canceled  the  red  with  a  cross  stroke  in  black,  and  the  red  \\  in 
the  same  way.  He  inserted  (j  (j  in  black  so  that  one  (j  was  over  ?  and  the  other  over  The  insertion 
of  jiff  at  the  end  completed  the  reading  of  verdict  1.  The  •«*-  was  left  in  red  unaltered.  Cf.  Vol.  II, 
PI.  XII. 

Translation 

Thou  Bhouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  collar-bone.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  is  again  a  repetition  of  the  title,  followed  by  the  verdict  (see  intro¬ 
duction,  pp.  48  ff.).  On  the  favorable  verdict  1  see  commentary  on  Case  1  (I  2)  and 
introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

XII  4-8 

i  i 

A 

oi.uchicago.edu 

352 

X 

A- 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

6 

h 

m _ DA  I  \\ 

=JJ 

w 

r 3=5 

o  o 

I - iWS 

Ti 

8 

I Q, 

i  — * 

sic  v  _ 

^(P1 

i  i  i 

°  D  ©  i 
\l  I  I337 

Case  35 

a 

n 

ft  The  scribe  has  omitted  the  two  cross-strokes  on  s. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back,  with  something  folded  between 
his  two  shoulder-blades  ;  thou  shouldst  spread  out  with  his  two  shoulders  in  order  to 
stretch  apart  his  collar-bone  until  that  break  falls  into  its  place.  Thou  shouldst  make 
for  him  two  splints  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  apply  one  of  them  both  on  the  inside 
of  his  upper  arm  and  the  other  on  the  under  side  of  his  upper  arm.  Thou  shouldst 
bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Commentary 

dtsiv,  “  prostrate  on  his  back,”  is  otherwise  known  in  the  medical  papyri 
in  Pap.  Ebers  (36,  7),  in  which  a  man  suffering  with  digestive  trouble  is  to  be  examined 
by  the  physician,  itsy,  “  prostrate  on  his  back.”  The  determinative  is  a  man 

lying  prostrate  with  face  up,  and  with  both  arms  down  toward  the  waist,  not  up,  as  in 
the  only  available  type.  It  is  important  for  our  case  to  demonstrate  that  the  word 
indicates  this  posture,  particularly  the  detail,  that  the  patient  lies  with  face  up. 
The  evidence  for  this  is  conclusive.  Fallen  enemies  are  said  to  lie  “  dlsy,”  and  the 
determinative  is  that  of  a  human  figure  prone,  with  face  up  (Annals  of  Thutmose  III, 
Urk.  IY,  p.  659  ;  see  also  Rccueil  de  trav.,  2,  p.  143).  Swimmers  in  the  celestial  ocean 
are  depicted  in  the  water  face  up  and  are  said  to  be  dtsyw  (Great  “  Amduat,” 
10th  Hour,  Seti  II,  Turin  and  Leiden).  The  dead,  being  embalmed  and  lying  as 
a  mummy  does,  face  up,  is  called  Msy  (Ritual  of  Embalmment,  Pap.  Boulaq  3, 1, 19), 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  35  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  353 

and  the  embalmed  dead  are  referred  to  in  the  same  way  (Buck  vom  Durchwandeln 
der  Ewigkeit,  Berlin  Pap.  3044,  1.  28).  The  indications  from  sources  outside  of 
Papyrus  Smith  are  quite  conclusive  on  this  point.  In  our  document  also,  even  in 
the  hieratic,  the  determinative  is  clearly  that  of  a  prone  human  figure,  lying  face 
up,  as  shown  by  the  feet  in  both  cases,  and  in  XII  11  also  by  the  arms  which  are 
thrown  upward.  The  root  is  probably  IV-lit.  with  a  fourth  weak  radical,  and  in  our 
passage  the  form  is  a  pseudo-participle,  as  likewise  in  Pyr.  685a  (noted  by  Ddvaud). 

k *  b,  “  folded,”  which  occurs  only  here  and  in  the  duplicate  passage  (XII 11) 
is  in  both  cases  left  without  a  determinative.  It  may  be  that  we  should  ignore  this 
extraordinary  lack  of  the  determinative,  and  that  we  should  accept  the  writing  as  it 
is,  and  understand  the  word  £’!>,  “to  double,  to  fold  over,  be  folded,” 

meaning  a  piece  of  linen  or  the  like  folded  to  give  it  thickness  and  height,  as  required 
by  this  situation.  It  is  conceivable  also  that  the  J  is  possibly  an  error  for  and  that 
we  have  here  the  well-known  word  k'y,  “high.”  It  is  evident  that  the  object 

here  designated  is  intended  to  be  placed  between  the  prostrate  patient’s  shoulder 
blades,  supporting  him  and  lifting  the  shoulders  from  the  bed  or  the  floor.  The  lack 
of  any  sign  of  agreement  in  gender  between  k'b  and  yh-t,  “  thing  ”  is  common  in  our 
document  throughout. 

m^rb'by-Jy,  “his  two  shoulder-blades,”  literally  “his  two  razor- 
blades,”  is  discussed  in  Case  47  (XVI 18). 

%  sny  (s$7),  “  spread  out,”  evidently  designates  the  act  of  spreading  the  shoulder 
apart.  Compare  the  discussion  of  this  procedure  in  the  next  case  where  it  is  repeated 
for  a  fractured  humerus. 

<=»  ^  dwn,  “  stretch  apart,”  is  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  19-20). 

“  Until  that  break  falls  into  its  place  ”  is  an  inexact  expression  doubtless  meaning 
until  the  bones  or  pieces  of  bone  on  each  side  of  the  break  fall  into  their  places,  so  that 
the  fractured  ends  fit  together. 

sS-ioy,  “  two  splints,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  7,  Gloss  C  (III  18). 

^pw . ^(jf)  should  be  read  W-6ny . ktjy-Sny,  in  accordance 

with  the  repetition  of  these  directions  in  the  next  case  (XII 18),  which  has  : 

. “  one  °*  ^em  both, . the  other  of  them 

both.”  The  genitive  p^  buy  after  kyy  shows  clearly  that  we  must  also  expect  a  genitive 
iny  after  uf,  and  the  -=»  appearing  after  vs  (before  iny)  is  obviously  a  scribal  error. 

J— a  g'b,  “  arm”  or  “  upper  arm,”  see  next  case.  An  indication  of  what  the 
Egyptian  meant  by  the  phrase  “  inside  of  the  arm  ”  is  doubtless  to  be  found  in  tho 
expression  lit.  “  inside  of  the  two  arms,”  a  term  meaning  “  embrace.”  The 

application  of  the  two  splints  is  quite  clear,  and  indeed  this  description  of  their  applica¬ 
tion  is  the  best  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  two  as  splints,  which  would  not 
otherwise  have  been  certain.  One  of  them  is  applied  to  the  anterior  surface  of  the  arm, 

a  a 

oi.uchicago.edu 

364  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  35 

which  the  papyrus  calls  the  “  inside  of  the  arm,”  and  the  other  to  the  opposite  side, 
which,  especially  when  the  arm  is  crooked,  is  naturally  described  by  the  Egyptian  as 
the  “  under  side  of  the  arm.”  The  effect  of  this  position  on  the  fractured  bone  is 
not  clear,  but  is  clearer  in  the  next  case,  a  fracture  of  the  humerus,  in  which  the 
positions  of  the  two  splints  are  identical  with  those  in  Case  85. 

Ymrw  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  15  (VI 17).  On  the  use  of  honey  for  wounds 
and  injuries  see  Case  1  (18). 

This  process  of  setting  and  treating  a  fractured  clavicle  is  repeated  verbatim  for 
a  broken  humerus  in  the  next  case,  in  which  the  physical  relationships  involved  are 
somewhat  clearer  than  in  Case  85.  The  two  cases  should  be  studied  together. 

CASE  THIRTY-SIX 
XII  8-14 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  HUMERUS 

The  ancient  surgeon’s  discussion  of  this  case  closely  resembles  that  of  the  fractured 
clavicle  in  Case  85.  It  is  obvious  from  these  two  cases  that  a  fracture  of  this  nature, 
if  free  from  complications,  was  regarded  by  the  surgeon  of  the  Third  Millennium  b.  c. 
as  an  injury  with  which  he  was  quite  able  to  cope.  He  appends  to  both  cases  verdict  1, 
and  proceeds  to  prescribe  the  treatment  for  both  fractures  in  the  same  language. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  our  surgeon  was  acquainted  with  dislocation  of  the  humerus, 
which  is  probably  more  common  than  dislocation  of  the  ribs,  discussed  in  this  treatise 
(Case  48).  His  two  cases  of  injury  of  the  clavicles  are  :  first  a  dislocation  (Case  84) 
and  second  a  fracture  (Case  85).  One  would  therefore  expect  that  the  first  case  of 
injury  of  the  humerus  would  be  a  dislocation  and  the  second  a  fracture,  rather  than 
two  kinds  of  fracture.  There  is  indication  here  that  a  case  has  been  omitted  at  some 
time  in  course  of  copying.  One’s  first  thought  is  that  CaBe  86  may  be  an  error  for 
a  dislocation  instead  of  a  fracture  ;  for  the  two  subdivisions  of  Case  87  are  exactly 
parallel  with  those  of  Case  85,  and  similarly  we  expect  Case  86  to  be  parallel  with  34, 
a  dislocation,  but  the  treatment  in  Case  86  is  too  closely  parallel  to  the  fracture  treat¬ 
ment  in  Case  85  to  be  applied  to  a  dislocation. 

Title 
XII  8-9 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  upper  arm. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  36  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  365 

Commentary 

o  hJb,  “  break  ”  or  “  fracture,”  is  explained  in  Case  11  (V  10). 

g'b,  “  upper  arm,”  is  discussed  in  Case  85  ;  further  discussion  will  be  found 
in  the  treatment  below  (XII  12),  showing  that  it  means  “  upper  arm,”  and  here  of 
course  the  bone  ( humerus )  of  the  upper  arm. 

Examination 

XII  9-10 

10 

Translation 

If  thou  exammest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  (and)  thou  findest  his 
upper  arm  hanging  down,  separated  from  its  fellow,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

dh,  “hang  down,”  see  D6vaud,  Zeitschrift,  49  (1911),  p.  182.  It  is  not 
found  elsewhere  in  the  medical  papyri.  More  literally  it  means  simply  to  “  be  low, 
sink  down,”  as  shown  for  example  in  the  following  antithetic  use  with  k'y,  “  be  high :  ” 

11  high,  the  enemies  are  low  {dh')”  (Hymn  to 

Re-Harmakhis,  Berlin  Pap.  8050,  Col.  4,  1.  4).  It  is  also  written  where  the 

determinative  suggests  a  sinking  of  the  arm.  In  our  passage  it  evidently  describes 
the  helpless  hanging  of  the  broken  arm. 

P^PkM^*  “  separated,”  is  discussed  in  Case  14  (VI  8).  As  only  one  arm  is 
discussed  here,  it  is  clear  that  the  separation  mentioned  is  that  between  the  two 
pieces  of  bone  produced  by  the  fracture.  As  in  Case  85  (XII  4)  the  description  is 
incomplete  ;  before  “  separated  ”  we  expect  the  words  “  one  piece  ;  ”  that  is  “  (one 
piece)  separated  from  its  fellow.” 

Diagnosis 
XII  10 

A  a  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

356 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  36 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  above.  The  diagnosis,  as  so  often  in  this  treatise, 
is  simply  a  memorandum, — nothing  more  indeed  than  the  title  itself,  with  the  essential 
note,  the  favorable  verdict  1  appended.  See  Case  1  (1 2)  and  introduction  (pp.  48  ff.). 

Verdict  1  ;  see  Case  1  (I  2). 

Treatment 

XII  10-14 

Ql  I  1^ 
—  X  © 

^c-£=zb  I 

— &  w 

iU 

A 

Urn  XX 

r 3=5 

o  ° 

I 

A**WW\  AVWWS  — «>—  • 

C~D 

X 

<? 

l  •> 

(I 

“~<?S 

□\\\ 

— 0  ) 

\\ 

XX 

A 

cm 

i  i  i 

°  6  ©  I 

\l  I  1X37 

»  The  —  in  looks  like  «=>,  but  is  doubtless  only  an  unusually  thick  — . 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back,  with  something  folded  between 
his  two  shoulder-blades  ;  thou  shouldst  spread  out  with  his  two  shoulders,  in  order 
to  Btretch  apart  his  upper  arm  until  that  break  falls  into  its  place.  Thou  shouldst 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  36  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  357 

make  for  him  two  splints  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  one  of  them  both 
on  the  inside  of  his  arm,  (and)  the  other  of  them  both  on  the  under  side  of  his  arm. 
Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  treat  afterward  [with]  honey  every  day  until 
ho  recovers. 

Commentary 

This  treatment  is  verbatim  a  repetition  of  that  in  the  preceding  case,  except  that 
the  stretching  apart  here  affects  the  upper  arm  (g’b),  whereas  in  Case  36  it  affected 
the  collar-bone  ( bb ).  The  terms  are  all  treated  in  the  commentary  on  Case  35,  but 
there  are  some  variants  in  Case  86  which  should  be  noticed.  The  use  of  g’b,  “  upper 
arm,”  just  noted,  is  of  value  in  explaining  “  spread  out  with  his  two  shoulders.”  Such 
a  procedure  would  have  no  effect  upon  the  upper  arm  unless  two  persons  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  patient  should  each  grasp  an  arm  and  pull  against  each  other,  thus 
stretching  the  fractured  arm,  and  permitting  the  surgeon  to  fit  together  the  fractured 
ends  of  the  humerus. 

g>b,  “  upper  arm,”  is  commonly  used  as  a  loose  designation  of  the  arm,  and 
its  Coptic  descendant  erfioi  also  seems  to  mean  “  arm,”  without  suggesting  upper  arm 
or  forearm.  Nevertheless  the  physical  situation  above  described  makes  it  probable 
that  g’b  is  used  by  our  surgeon  to  designate  the  upper  arm.  If  he  is  speaking  of  a  break 
in  the  forearm,  we  miss  any  indication  whether  it  is  in  the  ulna  or  the  radius.  More¬ 
over,  he  speaks  of  “  that  break,”  with  the  demonstrative  in  the  singular,  showing  that 
he  has  but  one  fracture  in  mind.  Still  more  important  is  the  fact  that  to  stretch  the 
forearm  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  involve  both  shoulders  ;  whereas  the  stretching 
of  the  humerus  is  much  more  naturally  accomplished  in  the  manner  above  described 
by  pulling  from  both  shoulders.  The  application  of  the  bandages  to  the  fractured 
humerus  is  prescribed  in  the  saino  terms  as  for  the  fractured  collar-bone  in  Case  86. 

The  correction  of  the  superfluous  -=»  in  vfriny,  has  been  explained  above  in  Case  85. 

CASE  THIRTY-SEVEN 
XII  14-21 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  HUMERUS  WITH  RUPTURE  OF  OVERLYING  SOFT  TISSUE 

The  sole  difference  between  this  and  the  preceding  case  of  fracture  of  the  humerus 
lies  in  the  injury  to  the  overlying  soft  tissue.  The  surgeon  has  met  two  different 
cases  of  this  kind.  In  the  first  the  tissue  is  not  deeply  ruptured,  and  apparently  does 
not  bleed,  at  least  not  outwardly  ;  in  the  second  the  wound  bleeds  and  the  rupture 
of  the  tissue  penetrates  clear  through  to  the  fracture  itself.  The  surgeon  regards  the 
first  case  as  doubtful,  and  appends  the  verdict  2,  followed  by  treatment ;  but  the 
second  case  is  hopeless,  and  received  verdict  8,  followed  by  no  treatment.  It  would 
seem  then  that  the  laceration  of  the  soft  tissue  overlying  a  fracture  of  the  humerus 
was  regarded  in  ancient  Egyptian  surgery  as  a  fatal  injury. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

358 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  37 

Title 
XII  14-15 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  with  a  wound  over  it. 

Commentary 

o  hsb,  “  break,”  and  g'b,  “upper  arm,”  see  Case  36.  On  “wound,”  see 

Case  1  (title). 

First  Examination 
XII  15-16 

q  □  — 
i  © 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  over  which  a  wound 
has  been  inflicted,  (and)  thou  findest  that  that  break  crepitates  under  thy  fingers, 
(conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

^  wbnw,  "a  wound  has  been  inflicted,”  is  an  idiom  more  literally 
moaning  “  a  wound  has  been  smashed  ”  over  it  (the  fracture).  See  Case  1,  discus¬ 
sion  of  wbnw,  “  wound,”  A  4. 

1TJ®J  x  nbHlb,  “  crepitates,”  see  Case  18  (VI  4-5). 

First  Diagnosis 
XII  16-17 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  37  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  359 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  two  splints  of  linen  ;  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with 
ymrw  ;  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey  and  lint  every  day 
until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point. 

Commentary 

It  is  very  extraordinary  that  we  have  here  no  instructions  for  setting  the  broken 
bone.  In  the  preceding  case  the  measures  for  bringing  together  again  the  two  pieces 
of  bone  are  carefully  described,  and  only  after  this  difficult  operation  are  the  two 
linen  splints  mentioned.  The  position  of  each  is  then  carefully  indicated.  All  this 
is  taken  for  granted  in  Case  87,  where  the  treatment  consists  chiefly  of  catch¬ 
words  suggesting  measures  which  are  doubtless  quite  familiar  to  the  surgeon.  It 
is  only  on  this  supposition  that  we  can  understand  the  omission  of  all  directions  for 
the  application  of  the  “  two  bandages.”  The  setting  of  the  bone  itself  must  be 
implied  in  the  mere  injunction  to  make  the  bandages. 

~*~^S  sS-wy,  “two  splints,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  18)  and  Case  12 
(V  18). 

Binding  with  ymrw  is  discussed  in  Case  15  (VI 17). 

Treatment  with  “  grease,  honey  and  lint  ”  has  been  explained  in  Case  1  (I  8). 

“  Until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point  ”  has  been  treated  in 
Case  4,  Gloss  C.  Compare  also  Case  8  (I  28). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

V 

300  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  37 

Second  Examination 

XII  19-20 

20 

m^ji  x^oa°£ 

I  1  I _ A  AVAWy  avava  \ _ \ 

Translation 

If,  however,  thou  findest  that  wound  which  is  over  the  break,  with  blood  issuing 
from  it,  and  piercing  through  to  the  interior  of  his  injury,  (conclusion  in  second 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  second  examination  discloses  two  new  particulars  :  the  bleeding  of  the  over- 
lying  wound  ;  and  the  rupture  of  the  tissue  inward  to  what  the  surgeon  calls  “  the 
interior  of  his  injury  ( wbnw )  "  indicating  that  the  wound  is  not  merely  an  abrasion 
but  a  rupture  of  tho  tissue,  presumably  right  down  to  the  fracture  itself.  It  is  probable 
therefore  that  the  meaning  of  wound  in  this  last  phrase  is  the  “  injury  ”  as  a  whole, 
a  meaning  which  the  use  of  the  term  wbnw,  “  wound  ”  in  our  document  quite  justifies 
our  assuming  in  this  case.  See  commentary  on  wbnw  in  Case  1 . 

yiib,  “piercing  through,”  is  discussed  in  Case  14,  Gloss  A  (VI  18-14), 
where  this  passage  in  Case  87  has  received  some  attention.  This  example  again 
illustrates  the  Egyptian  surgeon’s  experience  that  a  serious  rupture  of  the  soft  tissue 
over  a  fracture  creates  a  condition  which  he  cannot  hope  to  treat  successfully. 

Second  Diagnosis 
XII  20-21 

Translation 

Thou  skouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  over 
which  a  wound  has  been  inflicted,  piercing  through.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  37  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  361 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  above. 

The  conclusion  is  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  ;  see  commentary  on  Case  5  (II  15), 
and  especially  the  introduction  (pp.  46-48).  This  verdict  is,  as  usual,  not  followed 
by  any  treatment.  The  difference  between  this  fracture  and  that  of  the  preceding 
case  (86)  consists  solely  in  the  existence  of  a  penetrating  wound  in  the  overlying  soft 
tissue  in  the  latter  case,  which  is  regarded  by  the  surgeon  as  a  situation  too  serious 
to  be  treated. 

CASE  THIRTY-EIGHT 
XII  21-XIII  2 
A  SPLIT  IN  THE  HUMERUS 

This  is  the  last  of  the  three  cases  concerned  with  injuries  of  the  humerus.  Contrary 
to  the  custom  of  the  ancient  author  he  has  placed  at  the  end  of  the  group  a  case  whioh 
he  regards  as  relatively  simple  and  to  which  he  appends  verdict  1.  It  is  the  shortest 
case  in  the  entire  treatise,  occupying  only  a  scant  four  lines. 

The  seriousness  of  a  “  split  ”  (jn&n)  depends  upon  its  situation.  If  it  is  in  the  skull 
(calvaria),  it  may  be  a  serious  and  doubtful  case  (see  Case  4).  The  same  is  truo  if  it 
is  in  the  temple  (Case  21)  ;  but  if  it  is  in  the  maxillary  region  (Case  16),  or  in  the 
humerus  as  in  our  case,  it  is  not  a  serious  injury.  See  the  discussion  in  Case  4  (II  2, 
and  Gloss  A,  II  8-9). 

Title 
XII  21 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  upper  arm. 

Commentary 

y&n,  “  split,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  2).  It  is  an  injury  occurring 
only  in  bones,  and  hence  g'b  must  here  designate  the  humerus  itself. 

Examination 
XII  22-XIII  1 

x 

j  /WWW\ 

XIII  1 
0 

I — Z3  X  oW 

w 

oi.uchicago.edu 

302  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  38 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  upper  arm,  (and)  thou  shouldst  find 
the  swelling  protruding,  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  which  is  in  his  upper  arm,  (con¬ 
clusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

$&>  “  swelling,”  has  been  fully  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  4). 

/j[!|  y$ivw,  “  protruding,”  is  explained  ibid. 

®  hr  S’,  “  on  the  outside  of,”  see  Case  8  (IY  6). 

Diagnosis 
XIII  1 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  upper  arm.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  above.  As  so  frequently  before,  the  diagnosis 
consists  merely  of  the  subject  followed  by  the  verdict,  in  this  case  favorable.  See 
Case  1  (I  2)  and  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 

XIII  2 

o 

Q 

\l 

D  ©  i 
I  133 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw  ;  thou  Bhouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day  until  he  reoovers. 

Commentary 

On  binding  with  ymrw  see  the  discussion  of  Case  16  (VI 17).  The  treatment  with 
honey  is  discussed  in  Case  1  (I  8). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  39  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  363 

CASE  THIRTY-NINE 

XIII  8-12 

TUMORS  OR  ULCERS  IN  THE  BREAST  PERHAPS  RESULTING  FROM  INJURY 

This  case  is  the  first  of  a  series  of  eight  (89  to  46)  concerned  with  ailments  of  the 
breast,  by  which  is  meant  both  the  sternum  and  the  soft  tissue  overlying  it  (see  Case  40, 
Gloss  A).  The  nature  of  the  ailment  (called  bn-wt)  is  not  wholly  clear,  but  the  available 
evidence  adduced  below  would  indicate  some  kind  of  tumors,  or  possible  ulcers.  The 
occurrence  of  such  a  case  of  disease  after  a  series  of  thirty-eight  cases  of  injuries 
requiring  surgical  treatment  raises  the  question  whether  it  is  introduced  into  this 
treatise  because  it  required  cauterization,  essentially  a  minor  surgical  operation  ;  or 
because  the  bn-wt  were  superinduced  by  some  antecedent  injury.  There  is  perhaps 
some  reference  to  this  injury  in  the  phrase  m’  yli-j,  “  because  of  his  yh,"  in  which  yh 
may  mean  “  injury,”  and  probably  does  so  in  our  case  (see  Case  8,  I  28).  It  should 
be  noticed  also  that  the  text  refers  to  a  wbnw,  possibly  “  wound,”  as  designating  one 
of  the  bn-wt  (XIII  9).  The  only  other  case  of  bn-uit  in  our  papyrus,  however,  contains 
no  such  hints  of  any  connected  injury  or  wound  (Case  45). 

The  treatment  by  cauterization  is  the  oldest  known  reference  to  this  practice. 

Title 
XIII  3 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

Commentary 

Discussion  of  all  terms  will  be  found  below. 

t — o- 

Examination 
XIII  3-5 

SIC 

'f=s<gx  ©II  A 

O 

i  i  i 

O  WVWA  I  I  II. 

llll 

oi.uchicago.edu 

3G4 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

5 

Case  39 

a  I 

^3* 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,  (and) 
thou  findest  that  the  swellings  have  spread  with  pus  over  his  breast,  (and)  have  pro¬ 
duced  redness,  while  it  is  very  hot  therein,  when  thy  hand  touches  him,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

On  “  tumors  with  prominent  head  ”  see  Gloss  A. 

swellings,”  is  a  rare  word.  It  is  not  found  again  in  our  treatise, 
and  is  otherwise  known  only  in  four  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers.  In  the  treatment  of  some 
uncertain  kind  of  tumor  or  pustule  ($j?t  hnhn-t),  the  physician  is  enjoined  as 
follows  : 

© 

o  cfl 

-n  <?,  ,  ,  i  I1 

X 

t  _|)‘ 

0 

1  I  I 

"  Thou  shouldst  make  for  her  applications  for  breaking  open  the  swellings  (tw’-w) 
and  drawing  off  tliopus”  (Pap.  Ebers  104,  10-11). 

B.  Ebbell  has  recently  suggested  with  much  probability  that  hnhn-t  in  Pap. 
Ebers  and  also  in  Mutter  und  Kind  means  “  Lymphdriisenschwellung  ”  or  swelling 
of  the  lymphatic  glands  ( Zeitschriftfiir  aegyptische  Sprache  63  (1927),  pp.  78  f.).  See 
also  Pap.  Ebers  105,  5,  a  case  in  which  the  “  swellings  ”  (tw'-w)  in  the  fat  of  the 
throat  are  to  be  “broken  open”  (id)  by  applications.  Again  in  the  same  ailment 
the  physician  shall  “  make  for  it  applications  for  drawing  off  the  swellings  (tw'-w) 
in  his  throat”  (Pap.  Ebers  105, 18).  The  fourth  example  (Pap.  Ebers  105, 18)  is  not 
so  clear.  In  our  case  (Smith  XIII,  4),  the  txo'-w  are  likewise  clearly  accompanied 
by  pus.  The  word  may  possibly  be  connected  in  origin  with  ■fW8  lw'>  “lift-” 
ikd,  “spread,”  may  perhaps  be  cognate  with  [1 ikd,  “slope, 
deflection  ”  (of  a  pyramid),  with  a  meaning  verging  toward  “  divergence,  spread  ;  ” 
but  no  other  occurrence  of  the  word  in  the  medical  papyri  is  known. 
olJljo/O  ry-t,  “  pus,”  often  read  ty-t ;  but  see  Case  6  (III  1). 

tmi-w,  “redness.”  It  is  well  known  that  ancient  color  designations 
are  loose,  indefinite,  and  greatly  lacking  in  precision ;  but  the  root  tmi  is  known  to 
designate  red  in  general.  The  form  tmi-w  is  doubtless  a  formation  like  nfr-w, 
“  beauty.”  On  the  color  tmi,  see  Case  7,  Gloss  F  (III  20-21). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  39  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  365 

Diagnosis 
XIII  5-6 

6 

a  The  scribe  at  first  wrote  the  plural  form  yry-n-in,  all  in  red  like  the  rest  of  the  context.  Ho 
afterward  canceled  the  in  with  an  oblique  stroke  through  the  &  and  a  vertical  stroke  through  the 
n  and  plural  strokes,  and  inserted  /  before  the  in.  All  these  alterations  were  inserted  in  black  on 
the  red. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  tumors  with  prominent  head 
in  his  breast,  (and)  they  produce  r cists1  of  pus.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat  with 
the  fire-drill.” 

Commentary 

“  Tumors  with  prominent  head  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  gloss.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  bn-wt,  “  tumors  ”  is  in  the  plural,  for  it  is  followed  by  the  plural 
demonstrative  in  XIII  7.  Hence  the  ancient  scribe’s  correction  from  yry-n-in,  “  they 
produce  ”  to  yry-f,  “  it  produces,”  or  “  he  produces  ”  is  probably  wrong.  If  the 
antecedent  is  bn-wt,  the  correction  is  obviously  wrong,  and  to  understand  /,  “he  ”  as 
referring  to  the  patient  is  hardly  permissible. 

On  ryt,  “  pus  ”  see  Case  6  (III  1). 

On  the  favorable  verdict  1,  see  commentary  on  Case  1  (I  2),  and  introduction 
(pp.  45-47). 

1 1  d\  “  fire-stick  ”  or  “  fire-drill  ”  is  the  well-known  Egyptian  device  for  kindling 
fire.  The  hieroglyph  is  a  good  representation  of  the  implement.  It  doubtless  furnished 
the  surgeon  with  the  most  convenient  means  of  procuring  a  hot  point  for  application 
to  the  tumors.  The  pointed  top  of  the  stick  was  whirled  between  the  palms,  while 
the  thicker  lower  end  revolved  in  a  hollow  in  a  block  of  wood.  The  friction  quickly 
produced  fire,  and  when  the  end  of  the  fire-stick  was  glowing,  the  surgeon  could  apply 
it  to  the  tumor.  There  is  a  reference  to  a  “  hot  lancet  ”  in  Pap.  Ebers  108,  8.  It  is 
not  usual  to  connect  the  verdict  directly  with  the  device  to  be  employed  ;  but  it  occurs 
again  in  Case  46  (XVI  3)  and  five  times  in  Pap.  Ebers  (Wreszinski’s  860,  866,  869, 
and  870  “  with  lancet  ”  ;  and  200  “  with  applications  ").  See  further  discussion 
below. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

366  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  39 

Treatment 
XIII  6-9 

7 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  burn  for  him  over  his  breast  (and)  over  those  tumors  which  are  on 
his  breast.  Thou  shouldst  treat  him  with  wound  treatment.  Thou  shouldst  not 
prevent  its  opening  of  itself,  that  there  may  be  no  mnhyw  in  his  wound  (sore?).  Every 
wound  (sore?)  that  arises  in  his  breast  dries  up  as  soon  as  it  opens  of  itself. 

Commentary 

“  burn,”  is  a  rare  word,  of  which  tliero  is  only  one  other  medical 
example  known,  viz.,  Pap.  Ebers  (109, 15) :  "  Thou  shouldst 

burn  it  over  firo.”  In  this  passage  S'm,  “  burn”  has  heretofore  been  read  $'w> 

with  final  <?  w.  In  our  text  a  careful  examination  of  the  word  leaves  no  doubt  that  it 
is  written  S’m.  When  the  scribe  makes  the  uppermost  hook  of  the  hieratic  m  hastily 
it  sometimes  almost  disappears,  leaving  a  sign  that  can  with  difficulty  be  distinguished 
from  w  ;  e.  g.  in  the  word  trm  (IV  8,  end  of  line),  the  m  is  scarcely  distinguishable 
from  w.  In  view  of  S’m  in  XIII  6-7,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  we  are  to  read  S’m  also 
in  Pap.  Ebers  109, 15.  See  also  the  incorrect  for  '<?/»  (XIV 15).  Devaud  notes 

S'm  in  hieroglyphic  (Quibell-Lacau,  Saqqara  (1906-07),  p.  58),  parallel  with 

The  use  of  cauterization,  for  which  the  glowing  tip  of  a  fire-drill  seems  to  have 
been  employed,  is  interesting.  In  Pap.  Ebers  (109,  15)  there  may  be  some  question 
whether  the  burning  applies  to  the  reed  knife  or  lancet,  which  the  surgeon  is  to  harden 
by  heating  ;  or  to  the  cauterization  of  the  lanced  cist.  Cf.  Ebers  108,  8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  39  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  367 

PIT  S  srwh  wbnw,  “treatment  of  a  wound”  or  “wound  treatment,”  is 
rendered  according  to  the  prevailing  meaning  of  wbnw  in  our  treatise  ;  but  it  should 
be  recalled  that  the  term  wbnw  is  sometimes  loosely  applied  to  a  sore,  as  indeed  it 
seems  to  be  in  the  immediately  following  context  in  this  treatment  (XIII  9).  The 
term  “  wound  treatment  ”  is  employed  in  only  one  other  passage  in  our  treatise,  where 
it  designates  an  externally  applied  remedy  for  allaying  inflammation.  See  Case  46, 
XYI  7-8. 

The  —  n  preceding  the  subjunctive  verb  after  s'w,  “  prevent,”  is  unusual  and 
superfluous,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a  scribal  error. 

Q  (j  (j  mnhyw  is  otherwise  unknown  and  its  meaning  cannot  be  established. 

Gloss  A 
XIII  9-12 

Explaining  :  Tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

iv 

Hll 

OSM 
s  Jr  i  i  1 1 

A 

/www\  III! 

^M<l 

A 

i  i  i<oi  i  i 
Vi 

\  . 

qi  i 

oil  I 

I  I  I 

a  The  scribe  omitted  (j  by  mistake  and  afterward  inserted  it  in  red  ink. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,”  it  means  that  there  are 
swellings  spreading  over  his  breast  because  of  his  injury  ;  they  produce  pus  and 
redness  on  his  breast ;  (as)  it  is  said  :  “  It  is  like  rparti-coloredn  things,”  whose  pro¬ 
duct  is  pus. 

Commentary 

J7*oO,  bn-wt,  “tumors,”  is  a  difficult  word,  of  which  the  suggested  rendering 
is  doubtless  only  a  very  rough  approximation.  We  learn  at  once  that  the  bn-wt  have 
tp  ikr,  which  as  we  shall  indicate  below  means  “  a  prominent  head.”  The  examina¬ 
tion  (XIII  4)  informs  us  that  the  physician  finds  “  swellings  ”  (tw’-w),  which  spread 
over  the  breast,  accompanied  by  pus,  redness,  and  a  very  fevered  surface  (XIII  5). 
These  observations  are  confirmed  by  our  gloss,  which  explains  that  bn-wt  tp  ikr  means 

oi.uchicago.edu 

368  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  39 

swellings  spreading  over  his  breast,  producing  redness  and  pus.  The  allusion  at  the 
end  of  the  gloss  is,  as  we  shall  see,  unfortunately  not  clear.  The  rendering  “  tumors  ” 
is  further  confirmed  by  Case  45,  in  which  another  variety  of  bn-iot  are  treated.  In  the 
examination  (XV,  9-14)  they  are  said  to  be  cool,  without  fever,  with  no  granulation 
or  fluid  (mtv,  literally  “  water  ”).  In  Gloss  A  Case  45  further  explains  that  this 
second  type  of  bn-wt  is  swellings  spreading  on  the  breast,  having  a  touch  or  surface  like 
that  of  a  kind  of  ball,  and  they  are  likened  to  an  unripe  hm’y-Mruit,  which  is  described 
as  hard  and  cool  to  the  touch  (XV  18-19).  Bn-wt  may  occur,  according  to  Case  45 
(XV  15)  “  in  every  member  ”  (m  r-t  nb-t),  and  this  remark  is  confirmed  by  Papyrus 
Ebers,  which  states  that  bn-wt  may  be  found  ! Vf 1  JJ  ^ ^  “in  the  flesh  of 

a  man  in  any  momber  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  72,  10-11).  The  other  examples  in  Papyrus 
Ebers  aro  important.  In  one  case  the  bn-wt  are  hr  k’bt,  “  on  the  breast  ”  (Pap.  Ebers 
71,  2).  Again  wo  find  the  case  of  a  woman  suffering  from  a  “devouring  (wnm-t, 
“  cancer  ”?)  in  tho  vulva,  producing  bn-wt  in  her  vagina  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  95,  17),  or 
from  “  ferny- 1  (leucorrhea  ?)in  the  vulva,  producing  bn-wt  in  her  vagina  ”  (Pap.  Ebers 
96, 2-8).  In  threo  cases  we  find  bn-wt  in  the  tooth,  which  must  of  course  mean  in  the 
contiguous  gums.  Tho  physician  has  a  recipe  for  “  preventing  crumbling  (shm) 
arising  from  bn-wt  in  the  toeth  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  72,  18),  and  also  for  “  preventing  bn-wt 
in  tho  teoth  and  restoring  the  gums  ”  ( h'-w ,  literally  “  flosh,”  Pap.  Ebers  72,  14-15, 
repeated  in  89, 10).  Twice  in  Pap.  Ebers  the  bn-wt  are  said  to  be  in  a  wbnw  (Ebers 
70,  24-71,  1),  as  above  in  Pap.  Smith  (XIII  9),  raising  the  question  of  rendering 
“  sore  ”  or  “  wound.”  Tho  above  examples  comprise  all  the  occurrences  of  the  word 
in  the  medical  papyri.  Elsewhere  it  is  known  only  once,  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
in  a  passage  whore  the  deceased  says  :  “  When  I  am  led  to  the  fields  where  the  gods 
cut  their  food,  then  may  tho  horns  of  Khepri  be  turned  aside,  and  may  bn-ivt  arise  in 
the  eye  of  Atum  ”  (Naville,  93,  11.  5-6).  Summarizing  this  material  it  may  be  said 
that  the  hard  bn-wt  of  Case  45  may  have  been  boils,  while  their  occurrence  in  the  teeth 
in  Papyrus  Ebers  suggests  ulcers.  The  rendering  “  tumors  ”  may  serve  at  least  as 
approximating  the  ancient  meaning  of  the  word. 

Since  writing  tho  abovo  comments  and  since  they  have  been  in  proof,  I  find  that 
B.  Ebbell  has  recently  discussed  the  nature  of  these  bn-wt  (Zeitschrift  fur  aegyptischc 
Sprachc,  68  (1927),  pp.  71-78).  He  concludes  that  the  word  designates  a  “  gangra- 
noses  Goschwur,”  that  is  a  gangrenous  ulcer  or  sore.  He  regards  the  masculine  word 
bnw  ( Mutter  und  Kind,  III  4),  which  I  had  relegated  to  a  footnote,  as  identical  with 
our  bn-ivt,  and  quotes  the  instructive  charm  addressed  to  it  as  an  exorcism  : 

“  Thou  bnw,  brother  of  blood, 

Friend  of  pus, 

Father  of  hnhn-t, 

Jackal  of  Upper  Egypt,” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  39  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  369 

which  associates  the  bnw  with  blood,  pus,  swellings  of  the  lymphatic  glands  (according 
to  Ebbell),  and  the  evil  odor  of  the  Upper  Egyptian  jackal.1 

?P«£» — °  ty  “  prominent  head  ”  refers  to  the  point  at  which,  as  we  also  say,  the 

tumor  “  comes  to  a  head.”  The  word  ®  tp,  “  head,”  used  in  this  sense  is  found  in 
Papyrus  Ebers  in  the  description  of  a  suppurating  tumor,  of  which  it  is  said  : 

“  Thou  findest  its  head  (tp)  sharp  and  elevated  like  a  breast  ”  ( mamma  ;  Pap.  Ebers 
104, 15-16).  On  the  further  anatomical  or  medical  use  of  tp,  “head  ”  see  Case  1  (title), 
and  Case  10  (V  5).  [i^£_ — »  ihr  “prominent,  elevated  ”  is  a  rare  and  unusual  term, 
which  seems  to  have  no  connection  with  the  well-known  word  &kr,  “strike.” 

The  rendering  suggested  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  Case  46  the  Gloss  writes 
tp  dkr,  while  the  text  of  the  case  writes  ^  and  (XV  20  and  XVI  2).  See 

Case  46.  Dr.  Ware  has  suggested  to  me  the  well-known  parallel  use  of  skr  meaning 
“  to  raise,  lift,  set  up  ”  as  of  a  ladder  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (e.  g.  Pyr.,  1481c). 

fPTl  yh-t,  with  modifiers,  consult  Case  4  (II  3),  p.  142.  It  is  probably  plural 
here,  though  singular  in  Case  46  (XVI  18). 

w  mr  yh‘f>  “  because  of  his  injury.”  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  yh  always 
means  an  “  injury,”  as  contrasted  with  a  disease  ;  otherwise  we  might  conclude 
that  the  bn-wt  in  this  case  -were  due  to  an  injury,  and  the  reference  to  a  wbnw  (XIII  9) 
would  indicate  a  wound. 

UCC  “  pus,”  see  Case  6  (III  1). 

f  yh  t  hkr,  “  rparti-colorod"1  ”,  literally  “  adorned,”  if  this  hkr,  with  the 

determinative  -=  is  to  be  identified  with  the  common  hkr,  “  adorn.”  Tho 

A/cr-ornament  is  sometimes  gayly  colored.  The  text  refers  to  matters  for  comparison, 
which  elude  the  present  editor. 

CASE  FORTY 
XIII  12-17 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  BREAST 

This  is  the  second  of  the  group  of  eight  cases  discussing  ailments  of  the  breast. 
The  wound  is  one  which  penetrates  the  soft  tissue  and  perforates  tho  upper  part  of  tho 
sternum  (k’b-t),  which  the  surgeon  calls  hnt1,  meaning  the  manubrium,  as  he  explains 
in  a  gloss  at  the  end.  Ancient  methods  of  warfare  made  wounds  of  this  kind  common  ; 
a  wound  “  perforating  the  manubrium  ”  is  likely  to  have  been  inflicted  by  a  spear. 
Presumably  none  of  the  underlying  organs  was  injured,  for  the  treatise  appends  the 
hopeful  verdict  and  prescribes  simple  external  applications,  leading  to  recovery. 

1  Bnw  was  discussed  many  years  ago  by  Oofele,  Zeitschrift  fiir  aegyplische  Sprache,  39  (1901), 
p.  149. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

370  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  40 

The  gloss  at  the  end  is  another  illustration  of  the  origin  of  anatomical  terms  in 
natural  objects,  and  combined  with  the  other  references  to  k’bt  in  our  papyrus  makes 
it  possible  to  determine  the  Egyptian  names  both  for  the  sternum  and  the  manubrium. 

Title 
XIII  12 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  breast. 

Commentary 

“Wound”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (title),  “breast”  is  explained  in  Gloss 
A  at  the  end  of  our  case. 

Examination 
XIII  12-14 

(]  £££•=■  3 1 

1  AAVWA  't 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  breast,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
perforating  the  manubrium  of  his  sternum,  thou  shouldst  press  the  manubrium  of  his 
sternum  with  thy  fingers,  (although)  he  shudders  exceedingly,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

(jtgs  f,  “  penetrating,”  is  the  same  as  < 'r,  “  penetrating,”  discussed  in  Case  1 

(title),  q.  v. 

ra^ki0  thm,  “  perforating,”  is  discussed  in  Case  1  (under  wbnw)  and  Case  3  (1 18). 
bni>’  “  manubrium,”  is  explained  in  Gloss  A  at  the  end  of  this  case. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  40  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  371 

wm,  “  press,”  is  doubtless  a  transitive  or  pil'd  form  of  the  common  verb 
win,  “  abide,  endure,  be  firm,  etc.,”  with  a  causative  meaning,  “  to  make  firm,  to  press.” 
As  the  second  main  verb  after  the  conditional  particle  yr,  it  is  parallel  with  the  common 
gmm-k,  which  we  have  found  so  often  as  the  second  conditional  verb. 

Vnrw  r'f>  “  he  shudders,”  is  explained  in  Case  4  (II  4). 

Diagnosis 

XIII  14-15 

— 0  1 

u  zzzs. <— * 

I  AMWA  1 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  breast,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  perforating  the  manubrium  of  his  sternum.  An  ailment  which  I  will 
treat.” 

Commentary 

The  diagnosis  repeats  only  the  terms  of  the  examination,  where  the  discussion 
will  be  found.  The  favorable  verdict  1  forming  the  conclusion  will  be  found  discussed 
in  the  commentary  on  Case  1  (I  2) ;  see  also  introduction  (pp.  45-47). 

Treatment 

XIII  15-16 

WI4 

l  i 

□ 

w 

^  6  I 

\l  I 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  after¬ 
ward  [with]  grease,  honey,  and  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

B  b  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

372  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  40 

Commentary 

Treatment  with  fresh  meat  followed  by  the  application  of  grease,  honey  and  lint, 
will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (I  2-3).  See  the  commentary  on  “  until  he  recovers  ” 
in  the  same  connection. 

Gloss  A 
XIII 17 

Explaining  :  The  manubrium  of  his  sternum. 

Translation 

As  for :  “  The  manubrium  of  his  sternum,"  (it  means)  the  upper  head  of  his  sternum ; 
it  is  like  as  it  were  a  porcupine. 

Commentary 

We  have  in  this  gloss  another  explanation  of  the  designation  of  a  bone  of  the  human 
skeleton  which  is  drawn  from  its  resemblance  to  some  animal  or  part  of  an  animal, 
like  the  'm r-t,  “  ramus,”  so  called  because  of  its  resemblance  to  the  two-toed  claw  of 
the  W-bird  (pp.  215,  293-294).  The  animal  in  our  case  is  called  1  hnt', 

and  very  little  is  known  about  him.  A  recipe  for  a  hair  tonic  in  Papyrus  Ebers 
has  as  its  chief  ingredient  the  hair  of  hnt'  (Pap.  Ebers  66, 12),  from  which 

it  is  obvious  that  the  animal  must  have  vigorous  and  robust  hair.  Another  recipe 
prescribes  srt  n-t  hnty,  “  the  spine  of  a  hnty  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  92,  7), 

which  is  doubtless  the  same  animal  as  the  hnt ',  and  seems  probably  to  be  a  hedgehog 
or  porcupine.  The  latter  animal  is  depicted  on  the  ancient  Egyptian  monuments. 
No  other  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  hnt'  is  available.  The  appearance  of  the 
thorax  seen  from  in  front,  especially  the  sternum  with  the  spreading  ribs  which  diverge 
from  it  like  the  legs  of  an  insect,  strongly  suggests  an  animal,  and  the  comparison  with 
a  porcupine  is  quite  possible.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  further  limitation  of  the  hnt * 
by  our  surgeon  as  being  the  “  upper  head  ”  of  the  breast  (sternum),  as  we  shall  see 
below.  If  we  limit  hnt '  to  the  manubrium,  as  our  gloss  clearly  does,  the  resemblance 
to  a  porcupine  is  far  from  obvious,  though  it  might  still  suggest  an  animal. 

k'b't,  “  breast,”  is  a  word  of  which  the  meaning  has  been  commonly  mis¬ 
understood  as  the  “  nipple  ”  of  the  mamma.  It  occurs  sixty-five  times  in  Pap.  Smith 
in  sufficiently  varied  use  to  indicate  its  meaning  with  some  precision.  In  eight  passages, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  40  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  .  373 

where  the  surgeon  desires  to  ascertain  the  patient’s  ability  to  use  the  muscles  and 
vertebrae  of  the  neck,  he  directs  the  patient  to  look  “  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his 
breast  ( k’bt ).”  See  Cases  3,  4,  5,  7,  29  and  30.  In  these  cases  k’b-t  obviously  means 
the  breast  in  general.  It  is  used  in  thirty-four  passages  to  locate  swellings,  tumors, 
or  abscesses,  some  of  which  secrete  pus  and  have  to  be  drained  (Cases  39  and  46)  or 
are  so  described  as  to  show  that  they  are  in  the  soft  tissue  (Case  45) ;  and  wounds  in 
the  soft  tissue  (Case  41),  which  may  penetrate  to  and  include  the  bone  (Case  40). 
The  remaining  twenty-three  passages  containing  the  word  use  it  in  a  more  limited 
sense,  designating  bone.  They  are  very  instructive.  In  Case  34,  a  dislocation  of  the 
clavicles,  these  bones  are  described  as  follows  : 

“  Their  heads  are  attached  to  (articulated  in)  the  upper  bone  of  his  k’b-t  ”  (XI  28). 
Here  k’bt  is  clearly  the  sternum,  and  its  “  upper  bone  ”  is  of  course  the  manubrium 
stemi.  The  explanation  of  the  hnt’  in  our  Gloss  A  as  J  w  “  ^ie  uPPer 

head  of  his  k’b-t,’’  is  obviously  a  variant  of  the  term  “  upper  bone  of  his  Jc’b-t  ”  in 
Case  34.  The  use  of  k’b-t  to  designate  the  sternum  is  corroborated  by  Gloss  A  in  Caso  48, 
which  refers  to  the  thoracic  ribs  as 

‘is. 

-VSU: 

“  the  ribs  of  his  k’b-t,  which  are  attached  to  (articulated  in)  his  k’bt  ”  (XV  4).  In  the 
same  case  the  patient  suffers  with  pains  in  his  sides,  which  the  surgeon  explains  in 
Gloss  B  as  follows  : 

<?  oiin  w 

“It  means:  he  suffers  in  the  articulations  thereof  (viz.,  of  his  two  sides,  including 
their  ribs)  in  his  k’b  t  ”  (XV  5).  In  accordance  with  this  evidence  there  are  fourteen 
passages  mentioning  the  true  ribs  ( costae  verae)  as  "the  ribs  of 

his  k’b  t  ”  in  Cases  42,  43  and  44. 

Summarizing  the  evidence  for  the  meaning  of  k’b  t  in  our  papyrus,  we  find  it  used 
as  a  designation  for  the  breast  in  general,  for  the  soft  tissue  overlying  the  bony 
structure,  and  finally  quite  specifically  for  the  sternum.  It  nowhere  means  the  mamma 
in  particular  or  any  part  of  it,  and  the  Coptic  enihe,  mamma  is  evidently  a  later  and 
secondary  development. 

®  ^  "  |  tp  hry,  “  upper  head,”  employing  “  head  ”  in  an  anatomical  sense  to 
designate  the  end  of  a  bone,  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  1  (title). 

my  hpr-t  m,  literally  “like  what  happens  (or  what  has  happened)  in,” 
or  “  like  what  is  ”  (with  porcupine  as  predicate  introduced  by  m),  which  occurs  also 
in  Case  42  (XIV  21),  is  perhaps  only  a  circumlocution  for  "  as  it  were,”  meaning 
simply  “  like.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

374  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

CASE  FORTY-ONE 
XIII 18-XIY  16 

AN  INFECTED  OR  POSSIBLY  NECROTIC  WOUND  IN  THE  BREAST 

This  is  one  of  the  most  completely  discussed  cases  in  the  papyrus.  It  is  the  third 
in  the  group  of  eight  cases  concerned  with  the  breast.  The  examination  is  one  of 
the  most  detailed  presentations  of  the  pathological  conditions  which  we  find  in  our 
treatise,  and  the  interesting  glosses  add  much  to  this  description.  Gloss  A  especially 
explains  the  sluggish  character  of  the  wound,  its  refusal  to  heal,  and  quotes  from  the 
venerable  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a  Wound,”  which  we  find  quoted  also  in 
Case  5,  Gloss  A.  The  data  seem  hardly  sufficient,  however,  to  determine  whether  the 
wound  is  infected  or  in  a  necrotic  condition. 

The  treatment  is  medicinally  very  elaborate.  It  consists  of  external  local  applica¬ 
tions,  which  are  systematically  arranged  in  a  succession  of  three  stages  : 

1 .  Cooling  applications  for  drawing  out  the  inflammation  : 

a.  Various  leaves,  etc.,  bandaged  on. 

b.  The  same. 

2.  Astringent  applications  for  drying  up  the  wound  : 

a.  Ointment  of  mineral  salts  bandaged  on. 

b.  The  same. 

3.  Poultices  : 

a.  Various  herbs  bandaged  on. 

Unfortunately  the  drugs  employed  cannot  be  identified  in  more  than  a  few  cases. 
It  is  of  interest  to  noto  that  in  the  first  recipe  for  allaying  the  inflammation  (1,  a  and  b) 
there  seems  to  be  salicin  or  salicylic  acid,  in  the  form  of  willow  ( salix )  leaves,  although 
in  modem  times  before  its  synthetic  production,  salicin  was  obtained  from  willow  bark 
rather  than  tho  leaves.  Tho  astringent  applications  (2,  a  and  b)  contain  copper  and 
sodium  Balts ;  the  only  constituent  of  the  poultices  which  can  be  identified  is  sycamore 
leaves.  The  surgeon  was  evidently  accustomed  to  find  these  agencies  effective,  for 
he  giveB  the  case  the  hopeful  verdict,  and  adds  to  the  treatment  the  injunction  to 
treat  the  same  trouble  in  any  part  of  the  body  in  the  same  way. 

At  the  end  the  commentator  has  added  five  important  explanations  of  terms  not 
otherwise  clear,  including  an  already  ancient  color  designation  which  he  had 

once  before  explained  in  Case  7,  Gloss  F  (III  20-21).  In  the  other  four  glosses  the 
commentator  is  especially  interested  in  the  discussion  of  the  feverish  and  inflamed 
condition  of  the  wound  and  in  explaining  the  terms  involved.  In  so  doing  he  quotes 
from  the  already  ancient  and  now  lost  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a  Wound.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

Title 
XIII  18 

18 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  diseased  wound  in  his  breast. 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below. 

375 

Examination 
XIII  18-XIV  1 

O  □ 

oO^  □ 

□ 

c^\\' 

«  ,?,Q 

-^ar  |a — "Q, 

I  /WAW\  1 * 

p  ^ 

o 

tic 

I  I  11  I  I  I 

XIV  1 

xAi 

h 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  while  that  wound 
is  inflamed  and  a  whirl  of  inflammation  continually  issues  from  the  mouth  of  that 
wound  at  thy  touch  ;  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  are  ruddy,  while  that  man  continues 
to  be  feverish  from  it ;  his  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage,  that  wound  cannot  take  a 
margin  of  skin  ;  the  '‘granulation1  which  is  in  the  mouth  of  that  wound  is  watery,  their 

oi.uchicago.edu 

376  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

surface  is  hot  and  secretions  drop  therefrom  in  an  oily  state,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

$m'y,  “  diseased,”  see  Gloss  A. 
k'bt,  “  breast,”  see  above,  Case  40,  Gloss  A  (XIII  17). 
nsr-y>  “  inflamed,”  see  Gloss  A  (XIV  8). 

‘  /»  n$w,  “  issue,”  see  below,  Gloss  E. 
o  jH  p  jiQj  *?-=.  tm&,  “  ruddy,”  see  below,  Gloss  C. 

dwS,  “  whirl,”  see  below,  Gloss  B. 

*=»ti  srj,  “  heat,  inflammation,”  see  below,  Gloss  B. 

(]<=l  ^  ydb,  “margin,”  is  really  a  topographical  term  meaning  “shore.”  Its 
medical  or  surgical  use  here  is  quite  parallel  with  dpt  “lip,”  which  is  also  a  word 
for  “  shore.”  The  reference  is  to  the  contracting  margin  of  newly  forming  skin  around 
a  healing  wound. 

j P’l/S‘b  r“  granulation”1,  is  an  otherwise  entirely  unknown  word.  The 
translation  is  a  suggestion  by  Dr.  Luckhardt.  The  word  lacks  any  indication  of  the 
plural,  but  it  is  resumed  by  a  plural  pronoun  in  the  next  clause. 

(j  (]  mwy,  “  be  watery,”  is  a  rare  verb,  of  course  cognate  with  the  noun  ™  mw, 
“  water.”  It  occurs  in  the  same  connection  in  Papyrus  Ebers  (91,  8) ;  !J^;EEi)(]EE2E 
“  if  its  (the  ear’s)  mouth  is  watery.”  There  seems  to  be  a  non-medical  use  of  the  verb 
in  the  obscure  passage  ^ — EE^EE^*"3*  (Eloquent  Peasant  B  1,  258). 

rendered  above  “  be  hot,”  is  a  transitive  verb  in  Case  89  (XIII  6-7). 
The  meaning  is  obviously  that  of  an  intransitive  verb  here.  The  reading  S'm,  rather 
than  S’w,  is  here  quite  certain. 

yrtyw>  “  surface,”  see  Case  7  (III  20). 

lYAi  rbr'w>  “secretions,”  is  the  word  originally  meaning  a  “pile”  of  grain  or 
goods,  then  a  “  measure  ”  or  a  “  quantity,”  as  in  mathematics.  Its  medical  applica¬ 
tion  is  known  chiefly  from  our  papyrus,  where  it  occurs  three  times  as  follows  : 

"Secretions  (< ’he-w)  drop  therefrom  in  an  oily  state 

(Case  41,  XIII  22-XIV  1).  /$EE  “  Secretions  (chf-w)  dropping 

therefromarecool(Casc47,XVII9-10).  -^-yi  V”!?""  “  They  generate 

no  secretions  of  fluid  ”  (Case  45,  XV  18).  With  this  we  may  compare 
IJIJo  “  It  forms  secretions  of  pus  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  105,  19). 

byk-y,  “in  an  oily  state,”  is  doubtless  a  verb  derived  from  the 
noun  b’k,  “  oil.”  It  may  be  compared  with  the  verb  mwy,  “  be  watery  ”  used  imme¬ 
diately  above  (XIII  22).  Grammatically  it  is  parallel  in  construction  with  ~~  febb, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  377 

“  be  cool,”  occupying  an  analogous  position  in  the  example  quoted  above  from  Case  47 
(XVII 9-10).  It  may  of  course  be  derived  from  the  verb  b’k,  “to  be  clear,” 

and  the  only  other  example  of  our  word  in  the  medical  literature  would  at  first  sight 
seem  to  support  this  meaning.  In  Case  46  we  find  “  b'k  like  fluid 

under  thy  hand  ”  (XV  21-XVI  1).  The  reference  is  to  a  “  swelling  (thb)  very  large, 
protruding  on  his  breast.”  We  have  only  to  understand  “  protruding  ”  ( ySw-y )  as 
meaning  “  discharging  ”  and  we  obtain  an  excellent  rendering  for  b'lc  etc.,  namely 
“  clear  like  water  under  thy  hand.”  Against  this  interpretation,  however,  there  are 
conclusive  objections.  In  the  first  place  the  touch  of  the  hand  is  obviously  not  the 
means  for  observing  clearness,  a  quality  appreciable  only  by  the  eyes.  The  very  fact 
that  the  quality  here  observed  is  one  appreciable  by  the  touch  of  the  hand  shows 
that  it  must  belong  to  the  order  of  physical  qualities  like  hot  or  cold,  hard  or  soft 
and  the  like.  Furthermore  a  study  of  all  the  cases  in  which  the  above  “  swelling  ” 
(thb)  and  “  protrude  ”  (ySw)  occur,  makes  it  highly  improbable  that  a  fluid  exudation 
is  here  meant.  The  reference  is  to  a  protruding  swelling  which  is  here  discerned  by 
the  fingers  to  be  soft  or  “  oily  like  fluid  under  thy  hand.”  See  the  commentary 
on  thb  and  ijSw  in  Case  4  (II  4). 

Diagnosis 
XIV  1-2 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  diseased  wound  in  [his]  breast, 
it  being  inflamed,  (and)  he  continues  to  have  fever  from  it.  An  ailment  which  I 
will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  in  the  preceding  commentary  on  this  case,  or  in 
the  glosses  which  follow.  On  the  favorable  verdict  1  see  Case  1  (I  2)  and  the  introduc¬ 
tion  (pp.  45-47).  Since  rendering  Smm-f,  “  he  continues  to  have  fever,”  I  note  that 
Gardiner  in  his  new  Grammar  (pp.  852  f.)  especially  emphasizes  “  repetition  or  con¬ 
tinuity  ”  as  implied  in  the  geminated  form.  This  is  good  Semitic  as  well  as  Egyptian 
usage,  as  noted  above,  supra,  pp.  315-316. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

378 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  41 

Treatment 

XIV  2-8 

jto'jjjq 

!  A 

i  i 

te=<=> 

.□  ^?o  o  o  i  r — i  a 

$  Q.  (0  ^ 

5! 

WMV\ 

l  i  l 

AW«W\  q  a  c 

O  0  0  Cl—I 

I 

I 

I 

h»l 

o 

Gill 

!  I  I 

I 

7 

- -  o  dS^:<=>  o  cm  «  -n  <=>  o  A  o 

□  - 1  I  lc=  \  I  .  ll  \  O  O  OLd  — AlA  o  o  o  o  o  o  ra^Voo. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  379 

Translation 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  cool  applications  for  drawing  out  the  inflammation  from 
the  mouth  of  the  wound  : 

a.  Leaves  of  willow, 

nM-tree, 

ksnty. 

Apply  to  it. 

b.  Leaves  of  ym'- tree, 

dung, 

hny-t', 

ksnty. 

Apply  to  it. 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  applications  for  drying  up  the  wound  : 

a.  Towder1  of  green  pigment 

wSb-t, 

thn-t 

grease. 

Triturate  ;  bind  upon  it. 

b.  Northern  salt, 

ibex  grease. 

Triturate  ;  bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  poultices  : 

Red  Spnn, 

garden  tongue, 
d’rt, 

sycamore  leaves. 

Bind  upon  it. 

If  the  like  befalls  in  any  member,  thou  shalt  treat  him  according  to  these  instruc¬ 
tions. 

Commentary 

The  following  notes  contain  the  little  that  is  known  regarding  the  character  and 
identity  of  the  herbs,  minerals,  and  other  constituents  of  the  five  recipes  above  pre¬ 
scribed,  and  the  form  in  which  they  are  employed. 

oV.!.  sp-w,  “  applications,”  is  a  word  of  varied  meanings.  The  meaning  “  frag¬ 
ments  ”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  9).  Its  more  common  meaning  is  “  remedy  ” 
in  a  very  general  sense.  It  is  usually  used  in  the  plural  as  in  our  text,  though  referring 
to  a  single  recipe,  e.g.,  Pap.  Ebers  40,  7  ;  40,  21  ;  89,  10  ;  and  is  quite  commonly 

oi.uchicago.edu 

380  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

introduced  by  the  injunction  §"^7^,°,  “  Thou  shalt  make  for  him  remedies,” 
followed  by  the  genitive  ®  nw  with  the  effect  of  the  remedy,  the  name  of  the  ailment 
or  the  ailing  organ,  or  by  the  content  of  the  prescription,  e.g.,  Pap.  Hearst  III  17  ; 
IV  9  =  Ebers  2,  7  b  ;  Hearst  IV  14  =  Ebers  50,  6-9  ;  Hearst  11=  Ebers  11,8; 
Ebers  73, 13  ;  etc.  Very  much  less  commonly  it  occurs  in  the  singular,  e.g.,  Ebers 
89,  17  ;  7,  11 ;  Kahun  Medical  Pap.  3,  19  ;  3,  15  ;  3, 17  ;  3,  20  ;  Ebers  39,  17,  19  ; 
42,  11  ;  86,  9.  Cooling  applications  as  in  our  case  are  found  also  in  Pap.  Ebers  : 

J/5E“  (Eber8  43>  !)  and  r<?,  °  (Ebers  91,  5-6).  It  may  finally  be 

noted  that  while  sp  almost  invariably  designates  a  medicinal  remedy,  it  may,  though 
very  rarely,  also  indicate  a  magical  remedy,  e.g.  Kahun  Medical  Pap.  3,  23  ;  Mutter 
undKind,\ III  3-4. 

yth,  “  draw  out,”  is  a  verb  primarily  designating  the  application  of  physical 
power  in  drawing  a  heavy  object  like  a  monument,  and  hence  the  determinative  of 
a  coil  of  rope.  Its  use  in  the  medical  papyri  elsewhere  is  limited  to  three  examples  in 
Pap.  Ebors,  in  which  the  remedy  acts  to  “  draw  out  ”  (yth)  “  blood  ”  (Ebers  70,  4-5  ; 
and  96, 18)  or  a  “  swelling  ”  (tw-w)  (Ebers  105, 18),  meaning  in  the  latter  case  doubtless 
tho  content  of  the  swelling,  so  that  in  these  cases  the  object  of  the  verb  is  material 
substance.  In  the  two  cases  employing  this  word  in  Pap.  Edwin  Smith  however,  the 
object  of  the  verb  is  the  word  irj,  “  heat,  inflammation  ”  (Pap.  Smith  XIV  8  ;  XVI 8), 
an  intangible  thing,  which  could  be  allayed  to  be  sure,  but  only  figuratively  “  drawn 
off,”  although  even  among  us  the  phrase  “  draw  out  inflammation  ”  is  not  unusual. 

."f.  4r4,  “  leaves,”  is  a  difficult  word.  It  is  universally  written  with  the  ear,  £> ,  and 
tho  reading  drd  is  known  only  from  a  single  passage  where  it  is  written  out  j  in 
tho  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  3038  (Verso  8,  7).  It  is  a  part  of  various  trees  (Hearst 
XV,  4  ;  XVI,  8)  of  which  the  following  are  known  : 

0&0  rZQ  ^ 

QH  ssMI^a  O 

>¥ro  rro  nro 

and  onco  “divine  drd,"  which  are  explained  as  f  <?—■ ^0:  Berlin  Med.  Pap. 

8038, 10,  5).  The  rendering  “  leaves  ”  is  not  wholly  certain  ;  the  word  might  possibly 
mean  “bark”  (cortex),  and  indeed  in  the  case  of  willow,  the  bark  is  medicinally  more 
efficacious  than  the  leaves. 

3  P  0  !  a  *,ree  mentioned  as  far  back  as  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  occurring  in 
Greek  as  -vovip,  but  not  yet  identified  with  certainty.  The  word  drd,  (“  leaves,”  or 
“  bark  ”)  may  possibly  be  understood  also  with  nbd. 

A  TTi  ? ,  famty,  occurring  at  the  conclusion  of  each  of  the  first  two  recipes,  may 
possibly  refer  to  some  form  of  preparing  the  preceding  ingredients.  It  is  more  probably, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  381 

however,  an  additional  ingredient,  an  herb  which  is  written  <]~i  ° ,  hmty  (Pap.  Ebers 
45, 4)  and  °  ]  in  the  corresponding  passage  in  Hearst  (VII 2).  This  is  probably  the 

same  as  (Ebers  46, 18  and  78, 2 ;  see  variants  in  Hearst  X  1  and  V  8).  It  has  not 

yet  been  identified. 

!  ym*  is  an  unidentified  fruit  tree. 

J  bn/,  as  used  in  the  medical  papyri,  is,  with  the  exception  of  one  passage, 
always  followed  by  the  name  of  some  animal.  We  have  the  bnf  of  cattle  (Ebers  87, 10 ; 
104,  5  ;  Berlin  Med.  Pap.  3038,  verso,  2,  8)  ;  of  an  ox  (Ebers  22,  7)  ;  of  a  fish  (Ebers 
62,  6 ;  65,  6).  It  appears  outside  the  medical  papyri  probably  as  early  as  the  Pyramid 
Texts  (1464  b,  doubtful).  In  our  papyrus,  where  it  is  used  twice,  the  other  passage  has 
“  the  bnf  of  an  ox  ”  or  “  bull  ”  (XVI  9).  Judging  from  this  passage  our  recipe  in 
Case  41  has  probably  omitted  the  word  ox  by  error.  One  might  be  tempted  to  read 
bnf  hny-t\  and  interpret  hny-t'  as  the  animal  hut’,  “  porcupine,”  which  we  met  in 
Case  40.  This  supposition  is  rendered  improbable  by  the  fact  that  we  find  hny-t*, 
written  N''ZZi  °  i  occurring  twice  in  Pap.  Ebers  (79,  21  ;  and  96, 1)  as  an  ingredient 
by  itself.  In  Pap.  Smith  (XVI  9),  furthermore,  the  word  is  written  with 

the  determinative  of  a  plant.  We  must  conclude  then  that  it  is  an  herb,  the  namo 
of  which  terminates  in  “  earth,  ground.”  Compare  the  plant  name  “  ground- 

hair  ”  written  also  with  /Z  in  Pap.  Ebers  (48,  16).  It  cannot  be  identified  with  any 
known  plant.  These  considerations  make  it  highly  probable  that  our  scribe  has  unin¬ 
tentionally  omitted  the  word  ox  after  bnf.  The  determinative  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 
suggests  that  bnf  means  “  excrement  ”  or  “  dung.” 

s-Sr-t,  “drying  up,”  is  evidently  derived  from  the  verb  p<?^©d-wJr, 
occurring  so  written  only  once  (Pap.  Ebers  40,  4).  Otherwise,  without  the  <?  w,  it 
occurs  seven  times  in  Pap.  Ebers  (62,  21  ;  65,  15  ;  82,  21  ;  95,  8  ;  95,  15  ;  92,  5  and 
70,  13).  Of  these  passages  five  are  pharmaceutical  and  refer  to  the  drying  of  drugs 
(62,  21  ;  65,  15  ;  82,  21  ;  95,  3  ;  95,  15).  The  other  two  refer  to  treatment :  one  to 
the  drying  up  of  a  running  ear  (92,  5,  read  i-Sr-t  as  in  Smith  XIV  4)  and  the  other  to 
the  drying  up  of  a  wound  (70,  18)  as  in  our  Case  41.  A  case  quite  parallel  to  ours  is 
found  in  Pap.  Ebers  (91,  5  ff.)  prescribing  the  treatment  of  an  ear.  After  the  use  of 
cooling  applications  to  reduce  the  inflammation,  combined  with  absorbents,  the  text 
prescribes  :  ° "  It  hs  (the  ear’s)  mouth 

is  watery,  thou  shouldst  make  for  him  poultices  for  drying  a  wound  ”  (Ebers  91, 8-9). 

In  our  case  the  process  of  drying  up  the  wound  is  accomplished  by  two  prescriptions, 
both  of  which  are  ointments.  The  basis  of  the  first  is  merely  called  “  fat  ”  or  “  grease  ” 
(cdy),  while  the  second  prescribes  “  ibex  grease.”  The  remedies  carried  by  these  bases 
are  the  following  minerals,  two  of  which  cannot  be  identified  : 

5 !  U-t,  is  a  difficult  word,  which  probably  indicates  the  form  in  which  the  mineral 

oi.uchicago.edu 

382  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

is  used,  like  powder,  crystals,  or  the  like  ;  but  its  occurrence  in  a  single  passage  as  an 
ingredient  of  a  prescription  (Ebcrs  56,  12)  without  the  name  of  a  mineral  following 
would  indicate  that  it  must  be  used  exclusively  in  connection  with  one  mineral,  the 
name  of  which  might  therefore  on  occasion  be  omitted.  The  only  other  known  occur¬ 
rences  of  the  word  (see  next  paragraph)  combine  it  with  w'dw,  “  green  pigment  ”  as  in 
our  case. 

°  ,  wdio,  “  green  pigment,”  is  given  an  eccentric  writing,  which  is  doubtless 
archaic.  The  sign  r^i  dw,  is  found  at  the  end  of  the  word  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (1681  a), 
but  outside  of  our  papyrus  no  other  example  is  known  with  the  sign  w\  There  can 
be  no  doubt  about  the  reading  w’dw, however,  for  the  combination  m 

hy-t  n-t  w’dio,  “  powder  of  green  pigment  ”  is  found  in  Pap.  Ebers  (78,  5-6),  and  again 
with  exactly  the  same  writing  as  in  Ebers  in  Pap.  Hearst  (XII  1).  The  word  w’dw, 
really  meaning  simply  “  green  ”  is  applied  especially  to  the  green  pigment  used  as 
a  cosmetic  for  painting  the  eyes  ;  but  also  designates  a  green  pigment  employed  by 
Egyptian  artists  in  painting.  It  consisted  of  copper  salts  (chiefly  basic  carbonate 
according  to  Lucas),  which  the  physicians  had  discovered  were  astringent.  It  is 
employed  for  drying  a  wound  in  the  same  way  in  Case  46  (XVI 10),  written  <?,  °  ,. 

?  J.».  wSb't  is  an  entirely  unidentifiable  mineral,  known  elsewhere  in  the  Egyptian 
documents  only  in  two  passages,  both  in  Pap.  Ebers.  The  first  is  a  recipe  for  softening 
hard  or  stiffened  tissues  (Ebers  80,  9-10)  and  the  other  is  a  recipe  for  the  treatment  of 
a  icbnw  (“  wound  ”  or  “  sore  ”)  in  tho  breast,  which  is  evidently  a  case  like  ours.  In 
this  recipo  (Ebers  70, 1-8)  wSb-t  is  employed  along  with  “  northern  salt  ”  just  as  in  the 
two  astringent  recipes  of  Pap.  Smith  (XIV  4-6),  and  applied  in  the  form  of  an  oint¬ 
ment.  As  a  medicinal  agent  it  was  also  doubtless  an  astringent. 

lhn-t  is  another  unknown  mineral,  which  is  not  unlikely  some  form  of 
mineral  glass,  in  view  of  the  word  thn  employed  by  the  Egyptians  both  for  glaze 
or  glazed  ware,  and  glass.  It  is  not  elsewhere  found  in  our  papyrus,  and  is  known 
otherwise  only  in  four  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers  (49,  21  ;  80,  6  ;  105, 15  ;  108, 16),  where 
tho  usual  reading  (^]  is  an  error  for  j|j  (see  Moeller,  Palaeogr.  I,  No.  504,  where  the 
hieratic  sign  for  jf[  No.  417  has  been  mistaken  for  f^j).  It  is  employed  once  internally 
for  urinary  troubles,  but  otherwise  in  an  ointment  externally  for  softening  hard  or 
stiffened  tissues  or  for  drawing  off  the  content  of  a  swelling  ;  and  once  in  a  magical 
charm  (Ebers  108,  16). 

“  i  has  been  given  the  determinative  of  a  stone  by  our  scribe,  but  the  prescription 
is  obviously  an  ointment  like  the  next  one  and  we  must  conclude  that  the  scribe  has 
written  ”j  in  error  for  “ej  *dy  “  fat,  grease.” 

C*  nd,  “  triturate,”  has  been  graphically  abbreviated  by  our  scribe  who  has  drawn 
a  hand  and  arm  over  a  mortar.  A  comparison  with  the  directions  following  the  next 
prescription  shows  that  this  abbreviation  stands  for  ’|‘0^  nd,  “  triturate.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  383 

°  ,^=j  hm’t  mh-t,  “northern  salt  ”  is  evidently  one  of  the  salt  minerals  from 
the  northern  desert  along  the  west  side  of  the  Delta,  chiefly  chloride  of  sodium.  It  is 
commonly  used  in  Pap.  Ebers  in  recipes  for  the  same  purpose. 

' — is  a  defective  writing  for  "If/®*  3s,  mfw>  also  written 
nr’w  (XVI  11)  the  name  of  Ibex  Nubiana.  See  Gaillard,  Revue  d'Ethnogr.  et  de 
SocioL,  1912,  p.  338. 

tmt-w,  “  poultices,”  is  fully  discussed  in  Case  9  (IV  21). 

,  ° ,  Spun  is  an  unidentified  drug,  presumably  an  herb.  It  is  once  called 

^  ‘p,  °  Spun-w  nw  gpn  “Spun  (pi.)  of  Spn  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  93,  8),  indicating 

that  Spn  is  an  herb,  as  shown  by  its  determinative,  of  which  the  Spun  (pi.)  are  parts, 
like  blossoms,  leaves,  petals  or  the  like.  On  the  other  hand  Spun  has  identity  of  its 
own  to  stand  alone  in  all  other  known  examples,  namely  three  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers 
(64, 17  ;  64,  21  ;  65, 1)  and  one  more  in  our  papyrus  (XVI 12).  It  is  employed  intern¬ 
ally  to  quiet  a  crying  child  (Ebers  98,  8),  and  in  ointments  and  poultices  for  scalp 
troubles  (Ebers  64, 17  ;  64,  21  ;  and  65, 1).  Whether  ^*7*,  °  ,  dSr,  “  red  ”  is  a  designa¬ 
tion  of  some  drug,  or  merely  a  modifier  of  Spun,  is  not  wholly  certain. 

ns~$’’  “garden  tongue,”  is  evidently  the  same  botanical  term  as 
found  in  Pap.  Ebers  (31, 12),  in  which  the  determinatives  of  ns  and  S’  show  that  we  are 
dealing  with  the  words  ^  “  tongue  ”  and  “  “  garden.”  It  is  an  unidentified  plant 
employed  in  Pap.  Ebers  in  a  recipe  for  allaying  inflammation  in  tho  anus.  It  occurs 
twice  also  in  the  London  Medical  Papyrus  (6, 8  and  6, 6)  where  it  is  written  ^ ,  (  ®  and 
seems  to  be  employed  in  external  applications  for  allaying  inflammation. 

ilikir.!.  <?>r  ^  *s  a  occurring  very  commonly  in  the  medical  papyri,  which 
nevertheless  cannot  be  conclusively  identified.  It  is  very  common  without  any  pre¬ 
ceding  or  following  modifiers  in  the  following  papyri :  EberB,  Hearst,  London,  and 
Berlin  3038.  It  occurs  also  with  various  modifiers,  as  follows  : 

D’r-t  •  •  •  n't  i  fh0  oasis  ”  (Ebers  48,  16). 

D’rt  “  fresh  (or  “  green  ”)  d’rt  ”  (Ebers  14,  12  ;  58,  1  ;  54,  17  ;  65,  7). 

“f  ^ —  d’r-t,  “inside  of  d’r-f-fruit  ”  (Ebers  47, 10,  etc.,  Pap.  Berlin  8088, 19, 11,  etc.). 
— •  d’rt,  “  fruit  of  the  d’rt  ”  (Ebers  passim,  Hearst  XVI,  11  ;  also  Pap.  Berlin 

3038). 

°  i  °f  fhe  ”  (Hearst  XIII  7). 

°  flT d’r-t,  “  ffiberl  (or  something  similar)  of  the  d’r  t  ”  (Ebers  69,  8-9). 

“  ju*ce  °f  fhe  d’r-t”  (Ebers  62, 1,  etc.;  Pap.  Berlin  8088,  4,  4  ;  etc.) 

| —  d’r-t,  “Hops’!  of  the  dirt”  (Hearst  IX  2).  Munier,  Deux  recettes 
medicales  coptes  (in  Annales,  XVIII,  285-286)  identifies  our  d’r-t  with  the  Coptic 
rxieipe,  which  he  believes  is  the  “  caroube 

oi.uchicago.edu 

384 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  41 

Gloss  A 
XIV  8-11 

Explaining  :  A  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  inflamed. 

_  r\  AAAMAA 

<?r 

^  A 

D 

cA**'  w 

\  I 

«!_  ^  /WAVA 

III 

A 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  A  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  inflamed,”  it  means  that  the  wound 
which  is  in  his  breast  is  sluggish,  without  closing  up  ;  high  fever  comes  forth  from  it, 
its  two  lips  aro  red,  (and)  its  mouth  is  open.  The  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a 
Wound  ”  says  concerning  it  :  “  It  means  that  there  is  very  great  swelling ;  (and) 
‘  inflamed  ’  is  said  concerning  the  height  ”  (of  the  fever). 

Commentary 

8m'y,  "diseased,”  is  a  word  not  otherwise  known  in  the  medical  papyri. 
It  is  probably  a  different  word  from  an  epithet  applied  to  the  Asiatics  in  the 

Eighteenth  Dynasty  (Urk.  IV  890  and  740).  It  seems  to  be  found  elsewhere  only  in 
tho  following  late  texts  of  Ptolemaic  date.  In  the  Edfu  temple  we  find  the  words  : 

; j  fj  3^  j  “protecting  thy  body  against  8myy  ”  (Ptolemy  IV, 
Rochemonteix,  Edfou,  I,  287) ;  and  again  “They  (the  gods) 

protect  thee  against  Sm'y  ”  (Ibid.,  278).  At  Philae  the  goddess  Wosret  is  called 
“Wosret,  mistress  of  8m ’y”  (Philae,  Berlin  Dictionary  photograph 
No.  505,  reign  of  Neos  Dionysos).  At  Kom  Ombo  the  temple  inscriptions  have 
“  Exorcising  (i-hr)  the  Sm'y”  (De  Morgan,  Ombos  I,  pp.  44,  45,  8-9).  From 
these  examples  we  would  conclude  that  8m’y  must  mean  some  form  of  disease  or  decay, 
and  in  the  last  example  the  demons  of  disease.  It  is  therefore  probably  some  general 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  385 

word  for  disease.  Applied  to  a  wound  which  refuses  to  heal,  as  in  the  present  case,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  decide  whether  the  ancient  surgeon  means  some  form  of  infection, 
or  a  gangrenous  condition  of  the  tissue — necrosis.  The  grammatical  construction  in 
which  the  term  is  here  used  literally  “  disease  (decay  ?)  of  a  wound,”  is  that  “  wound  ” 
really  has  the  force  of  an  adjective,  “wound  disease,”  like  “  house  of  stone,”  meaning 
“  stone  house.”  What  is  intended  is  doubtless  the  disease  or  decay  that  arises  in  a 
wound.  In  Case  15  the  noun  $m’y  seems  to  be  used  for  “  diseased  tissue.”  It  was  not 
considered  dangerous,  for  Case  15,  the  only  other  case  in  which  it  is  known,  a  perfora¬ 
tion  of  the  bone  in  the  region  of  the  maxilla  and  zygoma,  also  receives  the  favorable 
verdict  and  the  patient  recovers  (Case  15,  VI  15-16).  The  curious  writing  of  the  last 
radical,  with  ",  seemingly  after  the  determinative,  occurs  four  times  in  Case  41,  but 
in  Case  15  the  last  radical  is  written  (](),  and  there  is  no  determinative.  In  all 
probability  the  "  should  be  written  above  the  determinative  in  a  hieroglyphic  trans¬ 
literation.  We  should  without  doubt  recognize  $'mw  (PaP-  Edwin 

Smith  XX  1  ;  XX  9),  meaning  “  demons  of  disease,”  as  another  form  of  our 
word  Sm'tj. 

nsr'y“  inflamed,”  is  of  course  derived  from  the  common  verb  nsr,  “  to 
burn,”  with  its  nouns  nsr  and  nsr-t,  “  flame.”  It  is  not  common  in  a  pathological 
sense,  for  it  is  not  otherwise  found  with  the  above  meaning  “  inflamed  ”  in  the  medical 
papyri.  It  occurs  in  an  Empire  magical  text  with  this  meaning  : 

m&zsiM-v  i&jh 

“  Another  spell  (Sn-t)  for  inflammation  arising  on  the  leg'1  ”  (Leyden  Pap.  345,  Leemans, 
Monuments  egyptiens,  pi.  CXXXI,  I,  II,  1.  r12'1).  In  our  papyrus,  however,  it  is 
employed  eight  times  in  a  pathological  sense.  These  passages  are  important  for 
determining  whether  the  word  means  local  inflammation,  or  designates  a  general 
condition  of  fever,  affecting  the  patient’s  whole  body.  As  we  havo  juBt  seen  in  the 
examination  in  Case  41  (XIII  19),  the  wound  itself  is  nsr-y : 

“while  that  wound  is  nsr-y”  (XIII 19).  The  same  description  is  repeated  verbatim  in 
Case  47  (XVII  8)  and  again  in  the  same  case,  with  a  slight  variant  (XVII  12).  In 
view  of  these  examples  it  is  obvious  in  Case  28  that  jj.,  following  as  it 

does  directly  upon  the  words  “  his  wound,”  (wbnw-f),  must  be  rendered  “  it  (the 
wound)  is  inflamed,”  and  not  “  he  (the  patient)  has  fever.”  This  conclusion  har¬ 
monizes  perfectly  with  the  fact  that  when  the  wound  is  nsr-y,  the  patient  develops 
fever  ;  so  in  Case  28  :  (the  wound)  is  greatly 

inflamed  (nsr-y),  so  that  he  (the  patient)  develops  fever  from  it  ”  (IX  20-21). 
This  is  paralleled  by  a  variant,  and  hence  strongly  confirmatory,  description  of 

the  same  phenomenon  in  Case  41  :  “ . .a  diseased  wound  in  his  breast, 

(j (] ^ [I  “inflamed,  (and)  he  continues  to  have  fever  ( Smm-f)  from 

oi.uchicago.edu 

386  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

it  ”  (XIV  2).  This  wording  is  repeated  verbatim  in  Case  47  (XVII 11).  The  Bame  case 
describes  this  situation  further  on  in  very  explicit  terms  which  cannot  be  mistaken  : 

“  If,  then,  thou  findest  that  man  continuing  to  have  fever  ( Smm-f ),  while  that 
wound  is  inflamed  ( nsr-y )  ”  (XVII  12). 

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  verb  nsr  is  employed  to  describe  local  inflamma¬ 
tion,  rather  than  a  general  condition  of  fever  involving  the  whole  system. 

“fever,”  is  derived  from  an  old  intransitive  verb.^^^d  §mm, 
“  be  hot,”  which  was  later  used  transitively,  but  was  originally  intransitive  as  the  old 
causative  cognate  form  and  to  heat”shows.  The 

verb  is  employed  pathologically  six  times  in  our  treatise.  In  two  of  these  passages  the 
patient  is  unmistakably  the  subject :  I)  “  while  that  man  con¬ 

tinues  to  be  feverish  from  it  ”  (Case  41,  XIII 20).  The  second  case  has  just  been  quoted 
above  (Case  47,  XVII 12).  In  the  other  four  cases  (Case  24,  IX 1 ;  Case  28,  X  2 ;  Case  41 , 
XIV  2;  Case  47,  XVII  11,  repetition  of  XIV  2)  the  subject  is  the  pronoun  and  might 
refer  either  to  the  wound  or  the  patient,  but  the  context  is  decisive  in  indicating  the 
patient.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that  in  our  papyrus  the  verb  always  indicates  general 
fever  of  the  patient  and  not  local  inflammation.  The  noun,  8mm- 1,  however,  is  not  so 
decisive.  In  our  gloss  above  (XIV  9)  Smm-t  is  said  to  come  forth  from  it  (the  wound).  This 
must  refer  to  local  inflammation.  The  adjective  “  high  ”  applied  to  it  is  interesting, 
and  seemingly  exactly  parallel  with  our  use  of  “  high  ”  in  the  common  phrase  “  high 
fever.  ”  It  is  superfluous  to  state  that  it  obviously  does  not  refer  to  the  thermometer,  an 
instrument  unknown  to  the  ancient  world.  Even  our  own  use  of  “high”  to  describe 
a  fever  is  probably  far  older  than  the  introduction  of  the  bedside  thermometer. 
Literally  rendered  the  Egyptian  8mm-t  k'-t  means  “  high  heat,”  which  is  said  to  come 
forth  from  it  (the  wound).  The  reference  is  to  the  physical  sensation  of  heat  affecting 
the  hand  when  it  is  laid  on  the  wound,  as  the  explanation  in  Gloss  E  discloses.  The 
Egyptian  thinks  of  such  heat  as  streaming  from  a  wound.  In  this  case  the  heat  is 
extreme,  and  “  high  ”  used  thus  to  describe  it  is  doubtless  equivalent  to  “  exceed¬ 
ingly,”  or  “extremely.”  As  we  shall  see  in  Gloss  D  Smm-t  is  probably  used  there  also 
to  designate  local  inflammation.  In  the  third  and  last  passage  employing  the  noun 
(Case  47,  XVII  18-14)  it  probably  means  “  fever,”  describing  the  patient’s  general 
condition.  Summarizing  the  evidence  in  our  papyrus  we  may  say  that  the  verb  Smm 
regularly  means  “  to  be  feverish,”  but  this  precise  use  of  the  verb  is  probably  an  acci¬ 
dent  in  view  of  the  employment  of  the  cognate  noun  bnm-t  to  designate  either  “  fever  ” 
or  “  inflammation  ”  of  a  local  character.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  verb  Smm  in 
Case  28  (X  2)  is  introduced  in  a  second  treatment  after  4rf  has  been  employed  to  de- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  387 

scribe  the  patient’s  condition  in  the  examination.  It  may  be  therefore  that  8mm 
indicates  a  greater  degree  of  fever  than  8rf.  In  that  case  the  three  words  for  an  ab¬ 
normal  degree  of  heat  in  a  patient  would  be  distinguished  as  follows.  Nsr  is  employed 
exclusively  to  designate  local  inflammation  as  just  demonstrated  above  ;  8mm  perhaps 
implies  an  extreme  degree  of  fever  but  may  also  (at  least  in  the  noun  form)  describe 
local  inflammation  ;  while  8rj  possibly  indicates  a  milder  degree  of  fever  but  usually 
designates  local  inflammation.  On  8rf  see  Gloss  B  (XIV  11-12). 

The  venerable  book  on  wounds,  here  called  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a 
Wound,”  from  which  our  ancient  commentator  quotes,  is  cited  also  in  Case  5,  Gloss  A 
(II  16-17).  See  commentary  ibid. 

Gloss  B 
XIV  11-12 

Explaining  :  A  whirl  of  inflammation  in  his  wound. 

Translation 

As  for  :  ‘‘A  whirl  of  inflammation  in  his  wound,”  it  means  a  whirl  of  inflammation 
which  circulates  through  the  interior  of  his  entire  wound. 

Commentary 

8w8,  “whirl,”  is  derived  from  the  verb  8w8,  meaning  “to  twist  cord  ” 
or  similar  (see  Great  “  Amduat,”  10th  Hour)  and  it  occurs  in  connection  with  spinning 
in  Mutter  und  Kind  (verso),  11,1.  The  noun  used  in  a  pathological  sense  is  confined  to 
Case  41.  With  the  meaning  “  coil,  bandage,  wrapping,”  the  noun  is  used  once  in 
Papyrus  Ebers  (95, 11),  and  this  meaning  in  our  treatise  is  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  18) 
and  Case  11  (V  11).  Its  pathological  meaning  is  obscure.  In  Papyrus  Ebers  wo  find 
a  recipe  for  treating  a  —  iwS  n  t'w,  “  8w8  of  heat  ”  in  the  heart  (Pap. 

Ebers  44, 8).  Among  the  glosses  in  the  papyrus  we  find  explained 
“  the  fall  of  a  8w8  on  his  heart,”  which  is  defined  by  the  gloss  in  the  following  words  : 

"  I*  ^eans  the  fall  of  a  iw8  of  heat  upon  his  heart  ” 
(Pap.  Ebers  102,  6-7).  Among  recipes  for  the  eyes  is  one  for  the  treatment  of 
“aiic£of  heat  in  the  two  eyes”  (Pap.  Ebers  57, 18).  These  are 
the  only  pathological  examples  known  in  the  medical  papyri  besides  its  occurrence  above 
in  Case  41.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  “  8w8  of  heat  (t’w)  ”  occurring  three 
times  in  Papyrus  Ebers  is  parallel  with  our  “  8w8  of  inflammation  (8rf)  ”  in  Case  41. 

o  c  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

388  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

In  our  gloss  the  dwS.  is  explained  as  one  -which  “  circulates  ”  throughout  the  entire 
interior  of  the  wound,  and  the  meaning  of  going  around,  whirling,  twisting  is  evidently 
inherent  in  the  verb,  employed  as  it  is  to  designate  the  twisting  of  cord.  The  thought 
suggested  by  dwS  seems  to  be  a  twisting,  whirling  circulation  of  the  heat.  This  is  no 
more  remarkable  than  our  use  of  the  Greek  word  paroxysm,  derived  from  a  verb 
meaning  “  to  sharpen  ”  (o£vva>). 

Srf,  “inflammation,”  is  not  common  as  a  pathological  term  in  the  medical 
papyri.  It  is  more  usually  employed  of  artificial  heat.  In  the  preparation  of  prescrip¬ 
tions  and  of  kyphi- incense  we  find  it  in  Berlin  Papyrus  3038  (7, 12)  and  Papyrus  Ebers 
(76, 14).  Prescriptions  are  brought  to  the  warmth  (drf)  of  the  finger  (Ebers  76, 1 ;  8, 2 ; 
9, 14 ;  10,  6  ;  4, 10  ;  89, 17  ;  54, 16-17  ;  94, 13-14 ;  69,  21  ;  81,  6  ;  and  confer  66,  5) ; 
to  an  agreeablo  warmth  (Ebers  28,  19;  53,  9;  24,  3 ;  71,  12-18);  between  two 
warmths  (tepid  ?,  Ebers  46,  10  ;  24,  6  ;  Berlin  8088,  12,  12)  ;  or  merely  warmed  up 
(only  medical,  Ebers  12,  8  ;  85,  20).  Outside  of  our  treatise  the  use  of  the  noun 
“  fever,  feverish  heat  ”  is  not  frequent  (Berlin  8088,  8,  7  ;  Hieratic  Writing  Tablet, 
Brit.  Museum  5645,  verso,  1.  9,  see  Gardiner,  Admonitions  of  an  Eg2jptian  Sage, 
p.  100).  It  is  employed  14  times  in  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  if  we  include  XIV  16  where 
the  writing  jj_  is  without  doubt  to  be  read  irf.  In  all  of  these  cases  it  is  possible  to 
render  “  inflammation  ;  ”  of  these  it  must  mean  local  inflammation  in  ten  passages 
(Case  41,  XIII 19,  XIV  3,  11,  12,  15, 16  ;  Case  45,  XV  12  ;  Case  46,  XVI  8  ;  Case  47, 
XVII  9,  and  14).  This  meaning  is  also  quite  probable  in  Case  39,  XIII  5.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  being  a  word  originally  meaning  “  to  heat,”  or  “  heat,”  drf  may  mean  “  fever.” 
It  is  quito  clear  that  it  means  “  fever  ”  in  the  three  following  interesting  cases  (7, 
28,  47)  in  which  it  indicates  the  first  appearance  of  fever  (A)  disclosed  by  examina¬ 
tion,  as  contrasted  with  a  second  examination  revealing  persistence  of  fever  (B) 
already  noted  in  the  first  examination  : 

(A) 

(B)  „  „  „  ^ 

(A)  Pwdi 

(B) 

(A)  “  If  then,  thou  findest  that  the  flesh  of  that  man  has  developed  fever  from  that 
wound  ”  (Case  7,  III  8-9)  employs  drf,  “fever;”  while  (B),  “  If,  however,  thou  findest 
him  continuing  to  have  fever  ”  (Case  28,  X  2)  uses  the  verb  Smm,  “  to  be  hot,  have 
fever.”  See  also  Caso  28  (IX  21)  and  Case  47  (XVII  6-7). 

m  w^nw'J<  “  in  his  wound,”  are  words  which  have  been  inserted  in  the 
quotation  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  text,  where  they  would  be  quite  superfluous 
in  view  of  the  following  phrase  “  from  the  mouth  of  that  wound.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  389 

Gloss  C 
XIV  12-18 

Explaining  :  Its  two  lips  are  ruddy 

Translation 

As  for  :  "  Its  two  lips  are  ruddy,”  it  means  that  its  two  lips  are  red  like  the  color 
of  the  tmd't-tree. 

Commentary 

tm^’  “ruddy,”  is  evidently  an  archaic  color  designation  which  had 
become  more  or  less  unfamiliar  to  the  reader  of  the  Seventeenth  Century  b.o.  ;  for 
after  applying  the  term  to  a  patient’s  face  in  Case  7,  our  treatise  appended  an  explana¬ 
tion,  using  the  same  term  dSr,  “  red  ”  to  describe  the  hue  indicated  by  tmi.  See  Case 
7,  Gloss  P  (III  20-21)  where  full  discussion  will  be  found.  The  surgeon  then  repeated 
this  explanation  in  our  Case  41,  Gloss  C. 

Gloss  D 
XIV  13-15 

Explaining  :  His  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage. 

m 

<?  ^ 
i  i  i 

□  ft  (?  ^ 

UlWi  I  I 

o  □ 
*1  I  !<?. 

~~'v'  (D 

OQ  I  Qd  I  I  I 

Translation 

As  for :  “  His  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage,”  it  means  that  his  flesh  will  not 
receive  the  remedies  because  of  the  inflammation  which  is  in  his  flesh. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

390  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

Commentary 

The  surgeon  identifies  “  bandage  ”  with  the  remedies  bandaged  on,  and  explains 
that  the  inflammation  {hnm-t,  possibly  “  fever  ”),  prevents  the  patient’s  flesh  from 
absorbing  these  remedies.  The  repetition  of  ntt  hr  is  obviously  a  scribal  error. 

Gloss  E 

XIV  15-16 

Explaining :  While  heat  continually  issues  from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy  touch. 

nic 

oi  i  \<=>J\  i  i  n 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  While  heat  continually  issues  (nSw)  from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy 
touch,”  (it  means)  that  heat  comes  forth  from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy  touch ; 
as  it  is  said  that  a  thing  which  has  come  forth  entirely,  has  issued  ( nSw ).” 

Commentary 

This  gloss  covers  some  material  already  explained  in  Gloss  B ;  that  is  they  both 
include  the  word  &rj.  Hence  the  quotation  from  the  text  of  the  case  has,  probably 
intentionally,  omitted  everything  between  (j  [1q  yit  and  p^jj.  irj  (XIII  19),  which 
would  have  included  p  §“ « —  iwS  n  (before  srf)  already  explained  in  Gloss  B. 

is  obviously  an  error  by  the  scribe  who  has  mistaken  the  w  in  nSw  for  m 
and  read  nhn  instead  of  nSw.  This  is  an  error  sometimes  made  by  modern  scholars 
in  reading  hieratic.  See  for  example  the  word  23  S'm,  usually  misread  S'iv  in 

Pap.  Ebers  (109,  15).  Cf.  commentary  on  Case  89  (XIII  6-7).  The  scribe  has  written 
the  word  correctly  in  1.  16.  nSw,  “  issue  ”  is  a  rare  word  derived  from  the 

uncommon  verb  75  nS,  “  drive  out.”  This  transitive  verb  is  found  as  far  back  as  the 
Old  Kingdom ;  compare  “  I  drove  out  (  — ,  nS-n-y)  the  domain  ofBcials  who  were 

there  ”  (Uni,  1. 9,  Urk.  I,  p.  100).  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find  “  f  nhy,  designating 
the  treatment  of  a  new-born  child  (Pyr.  1 965  a,  infinitive  nhwt,  ibid.).  This  nhy  must  be 
a  variant  form  of  n&w.  The  explanation  in  Gloss  E  above  shows  that  n$w  is  equivalent 
in  meaning  to  pry,  "  go  forth.”  We  have  here  therefore  an  intransitive  verb  nhc 
meaning  “  to  issue,”  the  use  of  which  is  confined  to  our  treatise  where  it  occurs  four 
times,  three  times  in  Case  41  and  once  in  Case  47.  The  curious  writing  in  Case  47 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  41  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  391 

(XVII  9)  is  of  course  an  abbreviation,  writing  the  word  with  the  determinative,  or 
word-sign  already  found  in  the  Old  Kingdom  in  the  form  (see  Uni  above).  The  word 
has  been  discussed  by  Sethe  in  Zeitschrift,  57  (1922),  p.  21  (Gott.  Totenbuchstudien). 
We  have  already  met  the  noun  “<?|<^'|  nSw,  “  issue,  discharge  ”  in  Case  31  (X  20). 
It  must  be  related  to  the  word  1  (Pyr.  199  a)  and  1  (Pyr.  1270  b),  which 
must  mean  something  like  “  emanation.”  Compare  also  ^  “  water  ”  (Pyr.  25  c) 
in  the  term  nS-mpio,  “  fresh  water.”  In  the  Middle  Kingdom  the  noun  nSw 

is  used  as  a  designation  of  an  uncertain  disease  ( Mutter  und  Kind,  1,2;  8, 1  et  passim).2 
See  Case  6,  Gloss  A  (II 24-25).  Cf.  ^  <?“/*■!  an  exudation  of  the  nose  (Pap.  Ebers  99, 6). 
(J.  is  evidently  an  abbreviated  writing  of  p^j|,  bf,  discussed  above  under  Gloss  B. 
-ir  literally  “  upon  the  ground  ;  ”  see  Case  4  (II  9),  p.  154. 

CASE  FORTY-TWO 
XIV  16-22 

A  SPRAIN  OF  THE  STERNO-COSTAL  ARTICULATIONS 

This  case  is  the  fourth  in  the  group  of  eight  cases  concerning  the  breast,  and  the 
first  in  a  smaller  group  of  three  dealing  with  the  ribs.  These  three  cases  are  as  follows  : 

Case  42,  sprain  of  the  sterno-costal  articulations. 

„  43,  dislocation  of  the  true  ribs. 

„  44,  break  in  the  true  ribs. 

We  meet  with  the  Egyptian  word  ^ ,  hn-w,  “  ribs  ”  for  the  first  time  in  these 
three  cases,  and  it  does  not  occur  in  any  other  oriental  document  of  this  remote  age. 
In  the  above  cases  the  word  is  always  followed  by  the  qualification  J  ^  nw 
“  of  the  sternum  ”  in  a  total  of  fourteen  passages.  Our  surgeon’s  term  for  the  true 
ribs  ( costae  verae)  is  therefore  evidently  J  ^  bn'w  nw  “  ribs  of  tbo 

sternum ;  ”  but  the  designation  was  not  sufficiently  clear  to  the  reader  of  the  Seven¬ 
teenth  Century  b.  c.  and  the  commentator  has  added  a  gloss  to  explain  it. 

Title 

XIV  16-17 

1  There  are  no  exact  hieroglyphic  types  for  these  highly  specialized  determinatives. 

*  This  word  has  been  discussed  from  the  medical  point  of  view  by  Oofele,  who  suggests  that  it 
means  Pemphigus  (Zeitschrift,  39  (1901),  pp.  149  f.). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

392  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  42 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Commentary 

Full  discussion  of  the  terms  will  be  found  below. 

Examination 
XIV  17-18 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  [a  man  having  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast],  (and)  he  suffers 
in  tho  ribs  of  his  breast,  not  having  a  dislocation,  (and)  it  is  not  broken,  while  that 
man  continues  to  suffer  with  it  and  shudders  exceedingly,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  usual  form  of  the  examination  runs  :  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having,” 
followed  by  the  name  of  the  trouble  or  ailment  already  mentioned  in  the  title.  It  is 
clear  therefore  that  our  Bcribe  has  here  omitted  the  words  which  are  inserted  within 
brackots  in  the  above  translation. 

The  exclusion  of  a  dislocation  and  a  broken  bone  by  means  of  the  negative  n  wnt 
is  customarily  indicated  in  our  document  by  the  mere  enumeration  of  the  injuries  not 
found,  which  follow  the  negative  n  vmt  as  nouns  ;  e.  g.: 

“  Not  having  a  split,  a  perforation  (or)  a  smash  in  it  ”  (Case  18,  VII  9).  N  hJb-j 
therefore,  following  n  wnt  vmh,  is  unusual,  and  the  question  might  arise  whether 
in  n  Mb-f  is  not  possibly  the  preposition  — ,  giving  us  the  rendering  “  because  of  his 
break  ”  or  the  like.  This  possibility  is,  however,  excluded  by  the  fact  that  the  next 
case  (48)  is  a  “  dislocation  ”  ( vmh )  and  the  next  (44)  is  a  “  break  ”  (Mb).  It  is  clear 
that  we  have  a  group  of  three  cases  of  injuries  to  the  ribs,  the  first  being  a  “  sprain,” 
without  a  dislocation  or  a  fracture  ;  the  second  being  a  dislocation  (vmh) ;  and  the 
third  a  break  or  fracture  (Mb).  The  three  cases  are  arranged  in  a  succession  of  increas¬ 
ing  seriousness,  like  the  first  five  cases  in  the  treatise. 

m  ^'/>  "  it  i®  not  broken,”  is  perhaps  to  be  understood  as  a  predicative 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  42  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  393 

negative  n  +  infinitive  with  suffix,  where  we  more  commonly  have  ^  nn.  See  Gunn, 
Syntax,  Chaps.  XXV  and  XVII.  The  identification  of  the  antecedent  of  the  pronoun 
is  important.  The  meaning  of  the  verb  is  such  that  the  pronoun  must  refer  to  a  bone, 
and  the  only  masculine  noun  preceding  is  either  the  patient  or  one  of  the  ribs  (hri). 
It  is  obvious  therefore  that  the  surgeon  desires  to  state  that  the  rib  is  not  broken, 
although  the  wrench  or  sprain  is  exceedingly  painful. 

^3^*,  win,  “  suffer,”  see  the  discussion  in  Case  1  (I  9)  and  Case  8  (I  20). 

i  1 nr >  “  shudder  ”  or  the  like  ;  see  Case  4  (II  4). 

Diagnosis 

XIV  19 

a  \ 

I  I  I. 

0^0 
Ol  I  1 1 

A 

iU. 

u  The  scribe  intonded  to  write  nrw  t,  with  <?  written,  as  ho  has  done  throughout  Caso  48  ;  but  he 
changed  his  mind  at  once  and  having  written  <?  he  insertod  <=>  over  the  <?,  both  being  in  red  ink. 
Both  signs  are  still  legible. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

'  o  \  nrw-t,  “sprain,”  is  explained  in  Case  80.  On  the  remaining  terms,  sec  below. 
On  Verdict  1,  the  favorable  verdict,  see  Case  1  (I  2). 

The  diagnosis  is  again  a  repetition  of  the  title  followed  by  the  verdict.  Seo 
introduction  (pp.  48  ff.). 

Treatment 

XIV 19-20 

l^?(| 

cm 
i  I  l 

1  <? 

■Q  o  ©  I 

\i  1  1^3? 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

394  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  42 

Commentary 

On  treatment  -with  ymrw,  see  Case  15  (VI 17)  ;  and  with  honey,  Case  1  (I  3). 

Gloss  A 
XIV  20-22 

Explaining  :  Ribs  of  his  breast. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Ribs  of  his  breast,”  it  means  the  bones  of  his  sternum  ;  being  spine(s) 
like  as  it  were  a  spine-roast. 

Commentary 

i  ?  i  hn-w,  “  ribs,”  is  a  word  which  we  meet  in  this  case  for  the  first  time  ;  for 
it  is  unknown  outside  of  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith.  In  this  gloss  the  ancient  commentator 
has  given  a  colloquial  explanation,  drawn  from  the  daily  familiarity  of  his  readers 
with  meats  served  as  household  food.  It  is  not  as  good  an  explanation  as  we  find  in 
the  next  case  (43,  Gloss  A),  where  a  dislocation  of  the  hn-w  is  explained  as  “  a  displace¬ 
ment  of  the  heads  of  the  hn-w  of  his  breast,  which  are  fastened  to  (articulated  in)  his 
sternum  ( k'b-t-j ).”  It  is  clear  then  that  the  hn-w,  on  the  basis  of  Case  43  (Gloss  A) 
alone,  are  the  seven  (sometimes  eight)  true  ribs  which  are  articulated  in  the  sternum 
on  each  side  (fourteen  in  all),  and  our  case  is  therefore  a  sprain  or  wenching  of  the 
sterno-costal  articulations,  while  Case  43  is  that  of  an  actual  rending  of  these  articula¬ 
tions,  producing  a  dislocation.  Our  gloss  is  evidently  using  the  word  “  breast  ”  with 
the  meaning  “sternum  ”  (see  Case  40,  Gloss  A,  XIII  17).  The  commentator  does 
not  mean,  however,  that  “  the  bones  of  his  sternum  ”  are  the  parts  of  the  sternum 
itself,  like  the  manubrium  ;  he  means  the  bones  attached  to  the  sternum,  as  is  shown 
by  Gloss  A  in  Case  43,  that  is,  the  true  ribs. 

fo-t,  “  spine  ”  or  “  thorn.”  The  hieratic  writing  is  misleading,  and  seems  at 
first  sight  to  be  almost  certainly  P^/>  ko-t,  which  is  the  more  tempting  in  view  of  P£o 
foot,  “  grain  ”  or  p^>(j“  kcy-t  “  bead  ”  (Berlin,  Mittheilungen  aus  den  Or.  Samml.,  VIII, 
p.  29).  Compare  Lacau, Sarcoj>hages,\o\.  2,  p.  22  (Cairo,  28089).  This  last  word ,&wy-t, is 
used  to  designate  a  pill,  bolus,  or  suppository  in  Pap.  Ebers  (14,9 ;  4,20;  22,4;  31,20; 
84,  2).  In  all  likelihood,  however,  we  should  not  read  in  this  gloss  any  of  the  words 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  42  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  395 

just  cited.  We  recall  that  in  Case  40  the  manubrium  is  called  hnt\  and  in 

the  accompanying  explanation  (Case  40,  Gloss  A,  XIII 17),  this  word  is  identified  with 
^ 1  “porcupine.”  Now  in  Pap.  Ebers  we  find  that  the  “spine  of  a 
porcupine  ”  is  called  ^  n't  bnty  (Ebers  92,  7).  The  sternum,  with  the 

ribs  diverging  from  it,  was  therefore  thought  to  look  roughly  like  a  porcupine  with 
his  bristling  spines.  It  is  highly  probable,  therefore,  that  in  our  gloss  above  the  com¬ 
mentator  is  talking  about  the  diverging  ribs  as  “  spines.”  The  hieratic  ligatures 
wt  and  rt  are  often  practically  identical.  Compare  the  ligature  wt  (Moeller,  Palaeogr.  I, 
p.  68,  IY,  Sinuhe,  87)  and  rt  (ibid.,  p.  71,  XXIX,  Sinuhe  h,  182).  Notwithstanding  the 
high  top  of  our  ligature  (XIV  21  and  22),  so  characteristic  of  the  ligature  wt  (see  bn-wt, 
XY  10),  it  seems  much  more  probable  that  we  should  read  rt,  and  translate  “spine.” 
Any  explanation  of  the  word  requires  that  it  Bhould  be  in  the  plural.  Such  abrupt 
changes  from  plural  to  singular  are  not  rare  in  oriental  documents  ;  compare  Case  80, 
Gloss  A  (last  clause,  X  12).  It  has  therefore  been  rendered  “  spines  ”  in  the  translation. 

£(l$T.!k  my  bPr  i  m  bas  already  been  discussed  in  Case  40,  Gloss  A,  where  it 
cannot  mean  “  like  what  is  in,”  as  it  might  very  well  be  rendered  here.  In  view  of 
the  unlikelihood  of  this  meaning  in  Case  40,  it  has  not  been  employed  here  in  Caso  42. 

| hum,  “roast  ”  or  the  like,  is  a  meat  dish  ready  for  the  table.  A  picture  of  it, 
§  lying  in  a  bowl,  is  often  shown  as  the  determinative  of  the  word  hwn  in  the  food  lists 
displayed  on  tomb  chapel  walls,  at  the  end  of  the  series  of  meat  dishes,  e.g.,  Newberry, 
Beni  Hasan,  Vol.  I,  Tomb  2,  PI.  XVIII ;  Cairo,  Tomb-stela  20057  ;  Mariette,  Abydos, 
I,  83,  29.  The  earliest  examples  are  from  the  Middle  Kingdom.  It  is  evidently  a  cut 
of  meat  containing  ribs,  which  seems  to  have  been  colloquially  called  a  “  spine  cut,” 
or  a  “  spine  roast,”  from  the  ribs  still  in  it,  as  our  housekeepers  say,  “  a  rib-roast.” 
Other  orientalists  may  be  able  to  offer  some  other  explanation  of  this  gloss,  but  it  is 
very  improbable  that  any  intelligible  explanation  can  be  derived  from  the  reading  Swt. 

CASE  FORTY-THREE 
XIV  22-XV  6 

A  DISLOCATION  IN  THE  STERNO-COSTAL  ARTICULATIONS 
This  case  is  the  fifth  in  the  group  of  eight  cases  concerning  the  breast  and  the 
second  in  the  smaller  series  of  three  having  to  do  with  the  ribs.  The  cause  of  the 
dislocation  is  not  stated  but  the  surgeon  finds  redness  over  the  “  heads  ”  of  the  ribs 
and  there  is  pain  in  the  sides,  where  swellings  appear. 

The  discussion  says  nothing  of  any  surgical  effort  to  reduce  the  dislocated  bones, 
but  proceeds  at  once  to  alleviatory  remedies  externally  applied,  and  the  patient  is 
expected  to  recover.  The  case  is  followed  by  three  instructive  glosses  giving  us  valuable 
surgical  and  anatomical  data. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

396 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  43 

Title 
XIV  22 

1  I  I 

so 

=^1 

o  ^  o 

<?i 

i  1 1 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below.  The  genitive  ®  nw  between  wnh  and 
hn-w  is  a  scribal  error  ;  see  examination  and  diagnosis. 

Examination 
XIV  22-XV  1 

*0  ^  o 

(?l  I  II 

<)• 

XVI 

o 

©n — 

i  mi 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast,  (and)  thou 
findest  that  the  ribs  of  his  breast  are  rprojecting\  and  their  heads  are  ruddy,  while 
that  man  suffers  continually  with  swellings  in  his  two  sides,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Commentary 

^  wnh,  “  dislocation,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  10  (V  6  under  ydr) ;  also  in 
Case  14  (VI 11),  and  especially  in  Case  31  (X  17-19). 

?  i  bn'w>  “  ribs,”  has  been  discussed  under  Gloss  A  of  the  preceding  case. 

tf'b't,  “  breast,”  is  here  a  designation  of  the  sternum.  It  has  been  discussed 
in  Case  40  (XIII  17). 

A ’4  “  rprojectingV’  is  a  new  word  unknown  anywhere  else  in  Egyptian 
documents.  A  word  written  ©|  ^  p  h'd,  occurring  in  the  Amon  Ritual  (Berlin  Pap. 
3055,  34, 1-2)  designates  some  action  connected  with  the  face,  but  is  otherwise  entirely 
obscure.  It  may  have  some  connection  with  our  word,  which  has  the  determinative 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  43  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  397 

of  face.  The  meaning  “  to  project  ”  is  a  conjecture,  suggested  by  the  following  state¬ 
ment,  “  their  heads  are  ruddy.”  The  dislocation  is  of  course  due  to  an  injury  ;  but 
the  surgeon  does  not  state  that  the  overlying  tissue  covering  the  dislocation  has  been 
ruptured.  In  stating  that  the  heads  of  the  ribs  are  ruddy,  he  can  hardly  mean  that 
they  are  projecting  through  the  overlying  soft  tissue,  and  are  visible.  What  he  pro¬ 
bably  means  is  that  the  soft  tissue  over  the  dislocation  is  bruised  and  congested,  while 
the  heads  of  the  ribs  in  a  forward  dislocation,  though  invisible,  are  projecting. 

P^i  ?  i  “  swellings,”  is  without  doubt  the  familiar  word  V  i  "  swelling,” 
though  written  without  "f*,  for  the  phrase  a  ^P6^011  °*  our 

passage,  except  for  is  known  (Pap.  Berlin  8088,  4,  9). 

Pfl  Sw  ty,  “  two  sides,”  is  discussed  in  Gloss  C  (p.  400). 

Diagnosis 
XV  1-2 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his 
breast.  An  ailment  winch  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  above,  and  in  the  gjpsses.  The  insertion  of 
m,  “  in,”  is  a  variant  not  found  in  the  preceding  text.  We  again  find  the  diagnosis 
consisting  of  a  repetition  of  the  title  with  the  verdict  added.  See  introduction 
(pp.  48  ff.).  On  the  favorable  verdict  1  see  Case  1  (1 2)  and  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Treatment 
XV  2-8 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw ;  thou  shouldst  treat  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

398  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  43 

Commentary 

Treatment  with  ymrw  has  been  discussed  in  Case  15  (VI 17),  and  the  use  of  honey 
has  been  taken  up  in  Caso  1  (I  8). 

Gloss  A 
XV  3-4 

Explaining  :  A  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  A  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,”  it  means  a  displacement  of  the 
heads  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast  (sternum),  which  are  fastened  to  his  breast  (sternum). 

Commentary 

Jj  nft>  “  displacement,”  is  discussed  in  Case  84,  Gloss  A  (XI  22),  where  it  is 
applied  to  the  heads  of  the  dislocated  clavicles,  as  here  to  the  heads  of  the  dislocated 
ribs. 

®„!.  lP'w>  “  beads,”  applied  to  the  sterno-costal  tips  of  the  ribs  by  the  ancient 
surgeon  is  interesting,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  modem  anatomy  designates  these  tips 
as  “  capitulae,”  or  “  little  heads.”  It  is  applied  by  our  surgeon  also  to  the  heads  of 
the  clavicles  in  Case  84.  See  the  discussion  of  ®  as  an  anatomical  term  in  our  docu¬ 
ment  in  Case  1  (pp.  84-87)  and  Case  10  (V  5). 

mn  m,  “  fastened  to,”  literally  “  being  fast  in,”  meaning  “  articulated  in,” 
as  an  anatomical  term  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  9). 

J  ^  k'b-t,  “  breast,”  is  obviously  used  here  to  designate  the  sternum  ;  see  the 
discussion  in  Case  40,  Gloss  A  (XIII 17). 

Gloss  B 
XV  4-5 

Explaining  :  He  suffers  with  swellingB  in  his  two  sides. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  43  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  399 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  He  suffers  with  swellings  in  his  two  sides,”  it  means  that  he  suffers  in 
the  articulations  thereof  in  his  breast  (sternum)  '’spreading1  in  his  two  sides. 

Commentary 

M  Sw-ty,  “  two  sides,”  is  discussed  in  the  next  gloss. 

e ^  tcd-t,  “  articulations,”  is  a  new  word,  not  found  elsewhere  in  our  document, 
nor  indeed  in  any  other  Egyptian  document.  The  meaning  above  suggested  is  derived 
from  the  technical  and  surgical  use  of  the  verb  £  wdy,  “  put,  place,”  to  designate 
the  return  of  a  dislocated  bone  to  its  socket,  e.g.,a  dislocated  mandible  in  Case  25 
(IX  5),  or  dislocated  clavicles  in  Case  34  (XI  19).  The  feminine  noun  wd-t,  in  the 
plural,  might,  therefore  mean  “  puttings,”  or  “  placings,”  and  designate  the  point 
where  one  bone  is  put  or  placed  into  another,  that  is,  the  articulation. 

P  ^^dtio,  “  spreading,”  is  a  very  uncertain  guess  based  on  the  use  of  the  verb 
P  ■?*  ity,  to  describe  the  scattering  of  inflammation  or  fever  in  Case  47  (XVII  14). 
We  have  here  in  our  case,  however,  an  unusual  writing,  and  one  gains  the  impression 
that  the  text  is  not  correct.  The  determinative  suggests  that  it  may  be  connected 
with  the  verb  ^ ^  used  in  Pap.  Ebers  (91, 12)  to  describe  the  discharge  of  secretion 
in  the  ear.  It  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  the  scribe  was  intending  to  write  St'wt, 
“  swellings,”  in  which  case  it  would  be  construed  as  parallel  with  “  articulations,” 
giving  us  the  rendering :  “  he  suffers  in  the  articulations  thereof  in  his  breast,  and 
(in)  the  swellings  in  his  two  sides.” 

Gloss  C 
XV  5-6 

Explaining  :  His  two  sides. 

Hippy 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  His  two  sides,”  it  means  his  two  flanks. 

Commentary 

^  ^  dpty,  “  two  flanks,”  is  a  rare  word,  of  which  the  exact  anatomical  applica¬ 
tion  is  still  to  be  better  determined.  It  seems  to  be  the  ancestor  of  the  Coptic  ^ne 
“  groin,”  used  in  the  Coptic  version  of  the  Old  Testament  to  render  the  Greek  6<j<f>vs, 
“  hip  ”  and  Hebrew  D'X^n,  (dual)  “  two  loins,”  “  two  hips.”  It  has  been  treated  by 
Ddvaud  ( Btymologie  Copte,  pp.  18-20).  His  oldest  example  (Middle  Kingdom 

oi.uchicago.edu 

400  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  43 

Glossary  from  tho  Ramesseum)  lists  three  different  internal  parts  possessing  a  dp-t. 
The  first  two  are  anatomically  unidentified  ;  the  third  is  called  “  dp-t  of  the  anus.” 
In  its  earlier  history  the  word  evidently  was  very  general,  requiring  some  identifying 
modifier.  It  had  therefore  some  range  of  application,  like  fr-ty,  meaning  “  buttocks  ” 
or  “two  sides  of  the  mandible”  (see  pp.  187  f.),  and  was  probably  an  unprecise 
designation  like  our  “  flanks  ”  for  sides.  In  the  Golenischeff  Glossary  (7,  10,  con¬ 
tinuation  of  Pap.  Hood)  there  is  a  list  of  parts  of  the  body  which  has :  “  back,  ribs, 
loins,  buttocks”  and  then  dp  and  knkn-t.  A  list  of  members  of  the  body 

in  a  papyrus  in  Turin  (ed.  Pleyte-Rossi,  125,  8;  magical  texts  of  the  Empire  copied 
by  Gardiner)  contains  ^  “the  dp-t  of  his  back,”  and 

Pap.  Ebers  (40,  20)  mentions  o  dp  in  connection  with  an  ailment  in  the  right 
side.  In  our  case  the  swelling  evidently  extended  beyond  the  area  over  the  dis¬ 
located  ribs  and  over  the  patient’s  sides. 

Swty,  “  two  sides,”  is  hardly  a  specific  anatomical  term,  for  it  may  mean  “  side” 
with  reference  even  to  the  head  ;  e.  g.,  P  Pi~m  "  place(l  (his)  eye(s)  in  their 

sides,”  viz.  one  on  each  side  of  the  head  (Rochem,  Edfou,  1, 417=Piehl,  Inscr.  II,  20g). 
In  the  lists  of  the  parts  of  the  body  in  the  Tables  of  Hours  we  find  p  [I  occurring  after 
“  cheek  ”  ( mnd-t )  and  tonguo,  and  again  on  both  sides  of  ®  f  (in  I) ;  the  same  order 
is  found  in  II,  III  (before  neck),  IV,  V,  VI,  examples  which  indicate  that  the  two 
sides  of  the  head  aro  meant.  Again  (in  III)  Sio-ty  is  found  after  “  buttocks  ”  (hpd) 
and  mnd-t,  an  order  indicating  great  confusion.  The  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus  3088 
(4,  8-9)  contains  a  prescription  for  removing  “  swellings  in  his  two 

sides,”  presumably  tho  two  sides  of  the  body.  In  a  case  of  heart  trouble  of  some  kind 
Pap.  Ebers  states  PX"  "  *10  8uffers  continually  in  his  two  sides  ”  (Pap.  Ebers 

41, 14),  a  statement  which  must  refer  to  the  two  sides  of  the  body.  In  Leyden  papyrus 
848  (verso  5,  7)  Swty  is  listed  between  the  arm  and  fingers  and  the  back,  a  placing 
which  is  evidently  significant.1  The  word  is  usually  in  the  dual,  but  among  the  eight 
examples  of  it  in  our  treatise  there  are  four  in  the  plural  in  Case  47.  One  of  these 
possibly  refers  to  tho  “  sides  ”  of  a  wound,  a  use  of  the  word  which  is  parallel  with  the 
“  sido  of  a  ligament  ”  (Pap.  Ebers  82,  16).  The  only  other  example  of  the  singular  of 
Sw-t  is  in  the  case  of  a  patient  with  heart  trouble,  who  suffers  some  displacement  of 
tho  heart  due  to  fatty  growths  “in  Ins  left  side  (Sw-t)  ”  (Pap.  Ebers 

101,  14).  In  this  case  Sw-t  obviously  designates  the  left  side  of  the  body  in  the 
general  region  overlying  the  heart.  This  passage  in  Papyrus  Ebers  illustrates  a  use 
of  the  word  closely  analogous  to  our  case  where  the  swellings  in  question  occupy  the 
region  over  the  kidneys. 

1  Incidentally  it  may  be  mentioned  that  this  passage  compares  the  word  Swty  with  the  two 
foathers  of  Min,  and  thus  determines  the  correctness  of  the  reading  Swty.  I  owe  this  remark  to 
Gardiner. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  44  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  401 

CASE  FORTY-FOUR 
XV  6-9 

FRACTURED  RIBS 

This  case  is  the  sixth  in  the  group  of  eight  cases  concerning  the  breast,  and  the 
third  of  the  smaller  series  of  three  dealing  with  the  ribs.  Tho  examination  shows  that 
the  injury  is  more  than  a  fracture  of  the  true  ribs  (“  ribs  of  his  breast  ”),  for  the  soft 
tissue  overlying  the  fractured  ribs  has  been  ruptured,  and  tho  shattered  ribs  give  way 
under  the  pressuro  of  the  surgeon’s  fingers.  The  fatal  verdict  3  is  appended,  and  is 
followed  by  no  treatment,  showing  that  the  surgeon  had  no  expectation  of  the  patient’s 
recovery.  We  cannot  hut  wonder  whether  the  surgeon  had  never  met  a  caso  of 
fracture  of  the  ribs  without  a  serious  rupturo  of  tho  overlying  soft  tissue,  as  in  CaBe  36, 
a  fractured  humerus,  which  the  surgeon  is  able  to  cure  ;  whereas  in  Caso  37  when  ho 
finds  a  serious  flesh  wound  overlying  the  fracture,  he  regards  it  as  a  fatal  case  just 
like  our  Case  44.  We  would  like  to  know  whether  our  surgeon  had  never  successfully 
treated  a  caso  of  fractured  ribs.  It  is  possible  that  wo  havo  a  scribal  omission  boro, 
and  that  an  entire  case  has  fallen  out  by  carelessness  of  tho  scribe. 

Title 

XV  6 

’O 

I  I  II 

o^o 

<?i  i  1 1 

A 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  tho  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Commentary 

O  hsb,  “  break,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  11  (V  10).  On  hn-w,  “ribs  ”  see 
Case  42  (XIV  20-21)  ;  k’b-t,  “  breast  ”  has  been  explained  in  Case  40  (XIII  17). 

Examination 
XV  6-8 

D  d 

oi.uchicago.edu 

402  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  44 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,  over  -which  a 
wound  has  been  inflicted ;  (and)  thou  findest  that  the  ribs  of  his  breast  crepitate  under 
thy  fingers,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  word  Mb,  “  break,”  is  in  the  singular,  but  it  is  stated  to  be  “  in  the  ribs,” 
suggesting  that  the  expression  “  break  in  the  ribs  ”  indicates  that  several  ribs  are 
broken.  This  indication  is  rendered  certain  by  the  fact  that  the  surgeon’s  fingers  find 
the  “  ribs  ”  (plural)  yielding  to  pressure  and  giving  way,  so  that  “  they  crepitate  ”  (lit. 
“  break  through  ”).  In  addition  to  this  situation,  the  soft  tissue  overlying  the  fractures 
has  boon  ruptured  forming  an  open  wound. 

sd,  “  inflicted,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  5  (II 11).  Compare  Case  87  for 
a  similar  wound  over  a  fractured  bone. 

8^/**  wbnw,  “  wound,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  1  (pp.  81-84). 

nhbnhb  is  an  error  for  "^J©J  x  nhbhb,  “  crepitate,”  which  will  be  found 
discussed  in  Case  18  (VI  4-5). 

Diagnosis 
XV  8-9 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast, 
over  whioh  a  wound  has  been  inflicted.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  disoussed  above,  especially  under  the  examination. 

On  the  unfavorable  verdict  8  see  Case  5  (II 15)  and  also  the  introduction  (pp.46ff.). 
In  view  of  this  verdict  the  surgeon  considers  the  case  hopeless  and  hence  adds  no  treat¬ 
ment. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  45  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  403 

CASE  FORTY-FIVE 
XV  9-19 

BULGING  TUMORS  ON  THE  BREAST 

This  case  is  the  seventh  in  a  group  of  eight  concerning  ailments  of  the  breast.  The 
tumors  described  differ  essentially  from  those  treated  in  Case  89.  It  is  clear  further¬ 
more  that  these  bulging  tumors  result  from  a  disease  and  not  from  an  injury  which 
may  be  the  source  of  the  tumors  of  Case  89.  There  seems  to  have  been  no  treatment 
known  to  the  physician,  either  for  these  tumors  or  for  the  same  trouble  appearing 
anywhere  on  the  body.  It  is  possible  that  the  detailed  description  devoted  to  them 
both  in  the  text  and  in  the  interesting  gloss  at  the  end  of  the  case  may  enable  the 
modern  pathologist  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  disease  described. 

Title 
XV  9 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  bulging  tumors  on  his  breast. 

Commentary 

2  bn-wt,  “  tumors,”  is  discussed  in  Case  89,  Gloss  A  (XIII  9-12).  On  “  bulging  ” 
see  the  explanation  in  the  gloss  on  this  case  (45). 

k'b-t,  “  breast  ”  is  treated  in  Case  40  (XIII 17). 

Examination 
XV  9-14 

D  d  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

404 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  45 

13 

f - \  I  o  o  o  n  AVWWV 

j  £  AWvVA 

J  AWW 
I  i  WWWi 

W 

I  I  I 

'O- 

o  I 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  bulging  tumors  on  his  breast,  (and)  thou  findest 
that  [swellings]  have  spread  over  his  breast  ;  if  thou  puttest  thy  hand  upon  his  breast 
upon  these  tumors,  (and)  thou  findest  them  very  cool,  there  being  no  fever  at  all 
therein  when  thy  hand  touches  him  ;  they  have  no  granulation,  they  form  no  fluid, 
they  do  not  generate  secretions  of  fluid,  and  they  are  bulging  to  thy  hand,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

The  description  of  these  tumors  on  the  breast  has  some  resemblances  in  form  to  the 
description  of  a  different  variety  of  tumor  in  Case  89.  We  find  there,  however,  that  the 
subject  of  the  verb  “  they  have  Bpread  ”  is  the  noun  tw’-w,  “  swellings  ” 

(XIII  4).  It  is  obvious  that  the  scribe  has  omitted  the  word  in  Case  45  (XV  10, 
between  gmm-k  and  ikd-n-in)  by  error. 

J7$TT!  bn-wt,  “tumors,”  is  discussed  in  Case  89,  Gloss  A  (XIII  9-12),  where 
a  totally  different  variety  of  bn-wt  is  described. 

hm'ty  is  discussed  in  the  gloss  at  the  end  of  the  case. 

The  throo  negativo  statements  all  seem  to  be  in  the  same  form,  raising  the  question 
whother  Sr,  “  sand,”  known  hitherto  only  as  a  noun,  may  not  here  be  used  as  a 
verb,  meaning  “  to  be  sandy,”  that  is  “  to  be  granulated,”  just  as  the  noun  ~  mw, 
“  water  ”  is  used  by  our  surgeon  as  a  verb  meaning  “  to  be  watery  ”  (Case  41,  XIII 22). 
chf-w,  “  secretions,”  is  discussed  in  Case  41  (XIII  22-XIV  1). 

~~  mw,  “  fluid,”  literally  “  water  ”  is  an  elastic  word  widely  applied  in  medicine 
and  botany  to  the  juices  of  fruits  and  plants,  or  the  secretion  of  a  sore,  ulcer  or  wound. 

/a 

w 

Diagnosis 
XV  14-15 

Ji  o  Jr  o  0  o 

^3 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  45  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  405 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  bulging  tumors.  An  ailment 
with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  are  all  discussed  above  or  in  the  gloss  at  the  end  of  the  case. 

Verdict  2,  the  doubtful  verdict,  has  been  discussed  in  Case  4  (II  6). 

Treatment 

cii  i  i 

□  (? 

XV  15-16 

Translation 

There  is  no  r treatment"1.  If  thou  findest  bulging  tumors  in  any  member  of  a  man, 
thou  slialt  treat  him  according  to  these  directions. 

Commentary 

rTiD  ?  n  yfy't  Pw>  “  there  is  no  rtreatmentV’  literally  means  “  there  is  nothing.” 
It  stands  immediately  after  the  verdict,  that  is,  in  the  position  usually  occupied  by  the 
treatment.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  all  treatment  is  lacking,  the  terse  statement  “  thero 
is  nothing  ”  probably  means  “  there  is  no  treatment.”  On  the  highly  varied  use  of 
flTi  yb't>  “  thing,”  see  Case  4  (II 8).  The  curious  injunction  “  thou  shalt  treat  him,” 
when  no  treatment  is  offered  in  the  discussion,  must  mean  that  the  treatment  is  omis¬ 
sion  of  treatment. 

Gloss  A 

XV  16-19 

Explaining  :  Bulging  tumours  on  his  breast. 

»  This  □  has  been  inserted  as  a  correction  over  some  earlier  incorrect  sign. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

406 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Case  45 

a-awa 

/&  «=* 
I 

V3* 

b  This  • — «  was  at  first  omitted  by  error  of  the  scribe  and  he  afterward  inserted  it  in  red  ink. 

Translation 

As  for  “  Bulging  tumors  on  his  breast,”  it  means  the  existence  of  swellings  on  hi3 
breast,  large,  spreading  and  hard  ;  touching  them  is  like  touching  a  ball  of  wrappings  ; 
the  comparison  is  to  a  green  kemaf-fruit,  which  is  hard  and  cool  under  thy  hand,  like 
touching  those  swellings  which  are  on  his  breast. 

Commentary 

J  ™  j£‘  f  m  hn-wt,  “  tumors,” a  variety  quite  different  from  those  treated  in  Case  39, 
Gloss  A  (XIII  9-12). 

"  bulging,”  is  without  doubt  connected  with  ° , 

hm'y-t,  a  fruit  of  unknown  identity  occurring  only  in  our  treatise.  Prom  1.  18  of  this 
gloss  wo  learn  that  when  this  fruit  is  green  it  is  hard  and  cool  to  the  touch.  In  the 
magical  treatise  on  the  verso  of  our  papyrus  the  preparation  of  thiB  fruit  for  use  in 
a  recipe  required  that  it  be  bruised,  dried,  husked,  winnowed,  and  the  “  fruit  ”  (jpr-t) 
sifted  (XXI 9-18).  In  this  recipe  the  determinative  is  not  ^  as  in  our  gloss.  This  is 
the  common  writing  of  hm’y-t,  “  salt  ”  from  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  on  ;  but  the  de¬ 
scription  of  the  preparation  of  the  hm’y-t-trmt  leaves  no  doubt  whatever  that  it  is  to 
be  distinguished  from  salt,  and  regarded  as  a  vegetable  product.  It  may  have  been 
a  rotund  fruit,  much  like  a  ball,  and  hence  possibly  given  a  name  derived  from  \y  ^  ft 
hm’,  “  ball  ’  (1.  18).  It  is  possible  that  f^^ft  hm’  moans  “  to  be  round,  rotund,” 
from  which  we  have  the  masculine  noun  hm’,  “  ball,”  the  feminine  noun  hm’y-t, 
"  rotund,”  meaning  the  fruit ;  while  the  form  following  bn-wt,  “tumors,”  might  be 
a  pseudo-participle  modifying  bn-wt,  and  meaning  “  swelling  like  a  ball,”  rendered 
above  “  bulging.” 

<=s»£(Jda»  dmy  is  a  familiar  verb  meaning  “  to  reach,  touch,  arrive  at,  adhere,  join, 
attach  ”  and  the  like ;  e.  g.,  to  touch  the  ground  in  obeisance  in  Shipwreck,  11. 187-138 
and  Sinuhe,  B  200-201.  It  is  not  common  in  medical  or  surgical  use  and  is  known  in 
the  medical  papyri  elsewhere  only  in  Pap.  Ebers  where  it  occurs  twice  in  rather  obscure 
connections  (Pap.  Ebers  91,  14-15  and  109,  9-10).  In  our  papyrus  it  is  used  of  the 
adhesion  of  one  lip  of  a  wound  to  the  other  in  healing  (Case  10,  V  9),  of  the  adhesion 
of  a  fragment  of  bone  to  a  cleansing  swab  of  linen  (Case  22,  VIII 16),  of  the  cohesion  of 
two  parts  of  a  thing  afterward  separated  by  breakage  (Case  31,  X  19),  and  finally  of 
the  touching  of  the  tumor  or  the  fruit  by  the  surgeon’s  fingers  in  our  gloss. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  46  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  407 

CASE  FORTY-SIX 
XV  20-XVI  16 

AN  ABSCESS  WITH  PROMINENT  HEAD  ON  THE  BREAST 

This  case  is  the  last  in  a  group  of  eight  concerning  ailments  in  the  breast.  The 
abscess  which  it  discusses  is  not  very  definitely  defined  beyond  the  facts  that  it  is  soft 
and  secretes  pus,  that  it  protrudes,  has  a  prominent  head,  is  cool  or  clammy  and  with¬ 
out  redness.  It  is  several  times  called  a  uibnw,  “  wound  ”  or  “  sore,”  and  once  a  yh, 
“  injury,”  or  “  ailment,”  leaving  open  the  possibility  that  a  wound  or  injury  may  have 
been  the  origin  of  it,  just  as  in  Case  89.  Dr.  Luckhardt  remarks  :  “  I  wonder  if  he  is 
treating  a  so-called  ‘  cold  abscess.’  It  would  certainly  fit  the  description.  An  abscess 
which  is  cold  to  the  touch  and  not  ruddy  or  inflamed  is  of  a  tuberculous  nature.” 

The  treatment  resembles  that  in  Case  41,  but  is  slightly  more  elaborate,  containing 
four  stages,  whereas  Case  41  contains  but  three.  These  four  stages  are  : 

1.  Cool  applications,  which  seem  incompatible  with  the  symptom  of  a  cool  or 
clammy  surface  of  the  abscess.  One  of  these  two  applications  contains  mason’s 
mortar,  the  only  ingredient  besides  water,  identifiable. 

2.  “  Wound-treatment,”  which  is  to  be  employed  only  if  the  preceding  treatment 
has  failed.  It  consists  of  an  application  containing  acacia  and  sycamore  leaves,  ox 
dung,  and  two  more  unidentified  ingredients,  and  was  intended  to  allay  inflammation, 
which  we  must  conclude  has  succeeded  the  “  clamminess  of  surface  ”  observable  before 
treatment  began. 

8.  An  astringent  application  including  the  copper  salts  employed  for  the  same 
purpose  in  Case  41,  and  the  other  ingredients  included  there. 

4.  Poultices  also  like  those  which  concluded  the  treatment  in  Case  41. 

Three  glosses  at  the  end  discuss  the  terms  needing  explanation. 

Title 
XV  20 

2° 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  an  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

Commentary 

All  the  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below,  especially  in  connection  with  the 
three  glosses  at  the  end  (pp.  413-415). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

408 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  46 

Examination 
XV  20-XVI  2 

|  - -  0=5^ 

/vWAAA  I  I  I  I  |  I  1 

o 

H  I  I 

<£>  i  n 

Mill! 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  an  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,  (and) 
thou  findest  a  very  large  swelling  protruding  on  his  breast,  oily,  like  fluid  under  thy 
hand,  while  they  produce  some  clamminess  of  the  surface,  (and)  their  faces  have  no 
ruddiness,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

^ir  1p  ,s'rr  (var-  ^T)> see  ^i°s9  a. 

qJcq  thb,  “  swelling,”  see  Case  4  (II  4). 

(j[i <?!)()  ySmj,  “  protruding,”  see  Case  4  (II  4). 

^  J^’K  “  breast,”  see  Case  40  (XIII  17). 

J  1%  “  oily,”  see  Case  41  (XIV  1). 

yh  t  (lit.  “  thing  ”),  see  Case  4  (II  8). 
nr “  Pallor,”  see  Gloss  B. 

"  ruddiness,”  see  Gloss  C. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  while  the  title  and  the  examination  seem  to  refer  to 
a  single  “  abscess  ”  (Mr),  the  description  suggests  that  there  is  a  group  of  abscesses. 
“  They  ”  (XVI  1)  and  “  their  faces  ”  (XVI  2)  can  refer  to  nothing  other  than  ihr, 
“  abscess,”  which  is  treated  as  in  the  plural.  On  the  other  hand  the  occurrence  of 
m  r'  n  wbnw  m  k'b  t-f,  “  from  the  mouth  of  the  wound  (sore  ?)  in  his  breast  ”  (XVI  8) 
again  indicates  that  the  trouble  is  a  single  abscess,  although  the  text  further  on  (XVI 
15)  again  employs  the  plural  pronoun,  “  their  ”  (in  “  their  skin  ”)  in  referring  to  the 
ailment.  The  question  arises  whether  n  tmi  n  may  not  be  regarded  as  a  negative 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  46  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  409 

followed  by  the  n-form  of  a  verb  tmd,  “  to  be  red,”  the  subject  being  “  their  faces,” 
giving  us  the  meaning,  “  their  faces  are  not  red.”  See  further  discussion  of  Gloss  C 
below. 

Diagnosis 
XVI  2-4 

□  <?i 

A 

M 

AVvWA  j 
/WvWA  | 
iVvWM  I 

9 

jo _ nj_ 

, ir~L 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  an  abscess  with  prominent 
head  in  his  breast.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat  with  cold  applications  to  that 
abscess  which  is  in  his  breast.” 

Commentary 

See  commentary  below,  especially  Gloss  A.  In  this  diagnosis  the  verdict  conclud¬ 
ing  it  at  the  same  time  connects  with  the  treatment  as  in  Case  89,  q.  v.  and  it  is  at  this 
point  difficult  to  make  any  separation  between  diagnosis  and  treatment.  See  intro¬ 
duction  (p.  46). 

Treatment 

XVI  4-12 

|]0=  O  cn<=,  o  £  '”vvw  O 

I  nl  I  I  I  q  I  I  I  -<o  -  q\\I  1  1 

f  P 

I  O  J\a  J)<=> 

0 'm  w  °  3  0 

IX  - CO -  I  I  I  I  - CE -  CA  Wo  O  O  /VwVWV\  |  I  1  1  0  0  V  J21  /WVAV\ 

sic 

Q  Do  ! 

/WWWi 

AWWA 

WWW 

0=> 

o 

O  o 

A  /VW*W\  ~J/ 

o\\ 

© 

oi.uchicago.edu 

410  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  46 

8 

O  <? 

I 

/WWW  /VWWA 

o 

,<?i  I  I 

CZTD  ^  O  r«=^ 
□  - k|  I  lC=3 

q  MMW 

\  i  i  i rm 

Translation 

a.  $A-f-fruit, 
nirt, 
ksnty, 

Triturate,  bind  upon  it. 

b.  Fruit  of  Ss, 

Jcsnty, 

mason’s  mortar, 
water, 

Triturate,  bind  upon  it. 

If  there  is  resistance  to  these  cooling  applications,  thou  shouldst  avoid  those 
remedies  until  all  fluid  which  is  in  the  abscess  with  a  head  exudes. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  46  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  411 

Thou  shouldst  treat  him  with  wound-treatment,  with  applications  for  drawing  out 
the  inflammation  from  the  mouth  of  the  wound  (sore  ?)  in  his  breast : 

Leaves  of  acacia, 

sycamore, 
juice  of  t/m'-leaves, 
ox  dung, 
hny-V, 

Bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  astringents,  in  his  breast : 
a.  rPowder1  of  green  pigment, 
d'r-t  of  cedar, 
ointment  fat, 
northern  salt, 
ibex  grease, 

Bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  poultices  : 

Red  Spnn, 
sycamore, 

Triturate,  apply  to  it. 

Commentary 

The  verdict  is  immediately  connected  with  the  treatment,  an  arrangement 
also  in  Papyrus  Ebers  in  several  cases  (see  p.  366). 

sp-w,  “  applications,”  see  Case  41  (XI Y  2),  where  the  purpose  of  the 
applications  ”  is  stated  to  be  “  drawing  out  the  inflammation  from  the  mouth 
wound  ”  (XIV  2-3).  In  our  Case  46  we  have  the  same  statement  of  the  purpose  of 
a  certain  “  treatment,”  called  “  wound-treatment  ”  (XVI  7-8),  which  is,  however, 
the  second  stage  of  the  entire  treatment  (see  introduction  to  Case  46).  The  word 
“  applications  ”  (sp-w)  seems  to  be  sufficiently  verbal  in  force  to  take  the  preposition 
r,  literally  “at  the  abscess,”  like  r  fnd,  “at  the  nose”  or  r  hh,  “at  the  throat,”  well- 
known  uses  of  the  preposition  r  with  parts  of  the  body. 

P'Ti  °  i  i8  a  frequently  recurring  fruit,  from  the  Old  Kingdom  on.  The 
Pyramids  write  p^u  (or  o),  and  the  Old  Kingdom  It  was  gained  by  a  process 

of  pounding,  doubtless  to  free  it  from  husks  (see  Newberry,  El  Bersheh,  pt.  1 ,  pi.  XXXI) 
and  was  obtained  in  two  varieties  f  and  J,  that  is  “white”  and  “green.”  It  is 
common  in  the  offering  lists  beginning  as  far  back  as  the  Pyramid  Texts  (108  b  and  c, 
96  b) ;  see  also  Mariette,  Mastabas,  D  16,  p.  215  and  D  38,  p.  269.  It  was  so  plentiful 
that  it  was  kept  in  granaries,  e.g.,  Tomb  of  Kagemni  (Sixth  Dynasty).  It  continued 

found 

“  cool 
of  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

412  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  46 

in  very  common  use,  appearing  regularly  in  the  offering  lists,  e.  g.,  in  the  great  Medinet 
Habu  calendar,  down  to  Saitic  times.  In  medicine  its  use  has  hitherto  been  known 
only  in  Pap.  Ebers  and  Pap.  Hearst ;  see  Ebers  10,  21 ;  37, 14  =  duplicate  38, 14) ;  41, 
4  ;  43,  6  (twice) ;  82, 21  ( =■  Hearst  VIII 17) ;  89, 20-21  (Hearst  XIII 12) ;  90,  9  and  10 
(twice).  A  drink  known  only  in  Pap.  Ebers  (90,  6)  called  was  probably 

prepared  from  this  fruit.  Its  use  in  our  Case  46  as  an  externally  applied,  local  febrifuge 
is  an  added  datum  to  be  noted  in  identifying  this  drug,  but  no  satisfactory  identifica¬ 
tion  has  yet  been  offered. 

°  (  ntr-t  is  an  unidentified  drug,  otherwise  known  only  in  Pap.  Ebers  (48, 16  ; 
48,  18  ;  79,  1),  in  prescriptions  which  do  not  enable  us  to  identify  it.  It  is  possibly 
a  preparation  of  natron,  the  native  sesquicarbonate  of  sodium,  found  in  great  quantities 
in  the  Egyptian  deserts,  especially  on  the  west  side  of  the  Nile  valley,  and  known  to 
the  Egyptians  at  a  very  early  date  under  the  name  ntry,  a  designation  from  which 
our  word  nitre  has  descended  through  Greek  virpov  and  our  word  natron  likewise 
through  Arabic  “  natrun,”  which  reached  us  through  the  Spanish  and  French. 

•A  7T,  °  ,  ksnly,  see  Case  41  (XIV  8). 

The  first  “  application,”  consisting  of  the  above  three  drugs,  is  dry ;  the  second 
“  application  ”  was  mixed  with  water  and  must  have  been  a  soft  paste. 

^  dk(r),  “  fruit,”  has  been  hastily  written  by  the  scribe,  or  was  perhaps  an  in¬ 
tentional  abbreviation.  The  lack  of  the  determinative  is  noticeable,  but  the  spelling 
with  omission  of  tho  r  is  common.  Compare  the  frequent  form  ;  or  the  late 

form  us  in  Pap.  Harris  frequently. 

_8_  ( °  t  Is  is  an  unknown  plant  or  tree,  not  occurring  elsewhere  as  a  botanical  name, 
and  hardly  to  be  connected  with  the  Empire  word  8/™  is,  “  grain.” 

° ,  din,  “  mortar,”  is  not  a  common  medicament.  It  is  otherwise  known  only 
in  two  cases  in  Pap.  Ebers  where  it  appears  as  an  ingredient  in  an  externally  applied 
remedy  for  a  pus-secreting  sore  (75,  1).  In  this  recipe  it  is  triturated  with  a  juice 
(as  in  our  Case  46  with  water)  and  the  word  °  t  stands  alone  without  the  mason. 

In  Ebers  48,  17,  however,  we  find  dbn  n  yJcdiv,  with  genitive  n  con¬ 

necting  the  two  words.  (Cf.  Pap.  Hearst  XIV  17).  In  this  second  recipe  the  mortar, 
together  with  the  other  remedies,  is  triturated  with  water,  just  as  in  our  Case  46, 
and  is  externally  applied  “  for  cooling  a  head,  when  it  is  ailing,”  perhaps  headache, 
is  of  course  a  scribal  error  for  tin,  “  these.” 

“  These  cooling  applications  ”  (XVI 6-6)  of  course  refers  back  to  the  two  preceding 
prescriptions.  If  they  are  ineffective  the  physician  is  to  resort  to  “  wound-treat¬ 
ment,”  for  allaying  the  inflammation,  a  treatment  here  consisting  of  a  long  prescrip¬ 
tion  containing  much  the  same  ingredients  which  we  find  employed  for  the  same 
purpose  in  Case  41  (XIV  2-4),  where  the  discussion  of  these  drugs  will  be  found.  The 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  46  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  413 

term  “  wound  treatment  ”  is  otherwise  found  in  our  treatise  only  in  Case  39,  where 
it  is  employed  after  cauterization.  See  Case  39,  XIII  7-8. 

The  third  stage  of  treatment  consists  of  an  astringent  prescription  for  drying  up 
the  abscess  (or  abscesses  ?)  of  much  the  same  content  as  we  found  employed  for  the 
same  purpose  in  Case  41  (XIV  4-6). 

The  fourth  stage  repeats  the  poultices  found  in  Case  41  (XIV  6-7),  though  with  two 
ingredients  omitted. 

Gloss  A 

XVI 12-14 

Explaining  :  An  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

i  p. 

A 

A 

J 

/WWW 

AWAV\ 

/a  ^ 

^  i 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  An  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,”  it  means  that  there 
is  a  large  swelling  due  to  the  injury  which  is  in  his  breast,  soft  like  a  fluid  under 
the  hand. 

Commentary 

ihr,  “  abscess,”  is  an  entirely  new  word,  unknown  in  any  other  Egyptian 
document.  We  learn  from  this  gloss  that  it  is  a  soft  swelling,  and  the  treatment 
(XVI  6-7)  states  that  it  contains  pus.  On  these  two  data  rest  the  justification  for 
translating  the  term  “  abscess.” 

tp  ikr,  “  prominent  head,”  is  written  in  the  title  fiu^  (XV  20)  and  in 
the  examination  ® (see  also  tp  rr  in  XVI  2).  We  can  hardly  assume  that  the 
occurrence  of  rr  twice  and  Mr  once,  is  due  to  incorrect  writing  by  the  scribe.  It  seems 
probable  that  we  have  here  the  familiar  verb  rr,  “  rise,  ascend,”  suggesting  the  idea  of 
a  “  rising,”  that  is  a  “  prominent  head.”  See  commentary  on  the  same  term  applied 
to  a  tumor  in  Case  39  (XIII  10). 

f  rTl  yfy't’  “  is  seemingly  rather  superfluous  here.  See  discussion,  p.  142. 

hr  yh,  “  due  to  the  injury,”  literally  “  on  account  of  the  injury.”  One 
is  tempted  to  see  a  local  meaning  in  the  preposition,  and  to  render  “  over  the  injury,” 
meaning  on  the  spot  or  place  of  the  injury.  This  rendering  is  unlikely  in  view  of  the 
variant  text  in  Case  89  which  reads:  J 

oi.uchicago.edu 

414  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  46 

“  It  means  that  there  are  swellings  spreading  over  his  breast  because  of  his  injury  ” 
(XIII 10-11).  Yh  may,  as  in  Case  89,  designate  disease,  rather  than  injury,  and  there 
is  no  way  of  settling  this  uncertain  point. 

ELM:  9n>  "  s°ft>”  of  course  refers  back  to  the  swelling. 

Gloss  B 
XVI  14-15 

Explaining  :  Clamminess  of  their  surface. 

O  n  aww. 

°  J 

i  i  ii  i  i  i 

/Cl 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  Clamminess  of  their  surface,”  it  means  their  skin  is  not  hot. 

Commentary 

Wb',  “clamminess,”  is  a  word  entirely  unknown  outside  of  this 
Case  (46).  It  is  here  parallel  with  nbybyw,  “  be  hot,”  preceded  by  a  negative,  and 
must  therefore  contain  the  idea  of  being  cool. 

° ,  yrtyw,  “  surface,”  is  discussed  in  Case  7  (III  20).  It  is  here  parallel  with 
^ I Z ^  ynm,  “skin,”  which  also  has  the  well-established  meaning  “surface.” 

- — J  (j  J  (j  <J  jj.  nbybyw,  “  be  hot,”  iB  derived  from  the  simplex  — J  (j  ^  nby,  a  well- 
known  verb  meaning  “  to  burn,  be  hot.”  No  other  example  of  the  reduplicated  verb 
is  known. 

It  may  be  noted  that  the  quotation  of  tho  text  of  the  case  in  the  gloss  is  inaccurate  ; 
®  (V)  before  n<'&>  has  been  omitted  and  the  suffix  sn,  "  their  ”  is  not  in  the  original 
text  of  the  case  (XVI 1). 

Gloss  C 
XVI  15-16 

Explaining  :  There  is  no  ruddiness  upon  it. 

Translation 

As  for  :  “  There  is  no  ruddiness  upon  it,”  it  means  that  there  is  no  redness  upon  it. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  46  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  415 

Commentary 

The  quotation  varies  essentially  from  the  original  text  of  the  case  (XVI  2),  which 
has  :  “  their  faces  have  no  ruddiness,”  or  more  literally  “  there  is  no  ruddiness  to 
their  faces,”  in  which  the  phrase  “  to  their  faces  ”  has  become  “  upon  it  ”  (singular), 
giving  us  an  interesting  suggestion  of  the  meaning  of  the  words  “  to  their  faces.” 

tmd,  “ruddiness,”  must  be  an  archaic  word  which  aroused  special 
apprehension  that  it  would  not  be  understood,  for  this  is  the  third  time  that  the 
commentator  has  explained  it  as  “  redness.”  See  commentary  on  Case  7  (III  20, 
Gloss  F). 

flT!  yh-t,  literally  “  thing,”  employed  as  here  with  a  following  adjective,  is 
discussed  in  Case  4  (II  8),  p.  142. 

CASE  FORTY-SEVEN 
XVI  16-XVII  15 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  SHOULDER 

This  case  deals  with  the  soft  tissue  enveloping  the  articulation  of  the  shoulder. 
Although  not  as  long  as  Case  7,  the  discussion  of  Case  47  is  very  intelligently  and 
systematically  organized,  and  is  more  complicated  indeed  than  that  of  Case  7.  It 
first  follows  the  case  through  two  stages  of  progress  toward  recovery.  It  then  takes 
up  an  alternative  second  stage  (third  examination)  which  is  unfavorable.  It  is 
attended  with  inflammation  of  the  wound  and  with  fever,  which  tho  modern  Burgeon 
would  presumably  consider  due  to  infection.  The  patient’s  condition  is  declared 
critical  (verdict  2).  Two  different  developments  may  follow  this  stage  :  one  unfavor¬ 
able  with  continuance  of  the  fever  (fourth  examination) ;  tho  other  with  abatement 
of  the  fever  (fifth  examination)  and  presumable  recovery. 

These  five  examinations  are  introduced  as  follows  : 

First  Examination 

With  the  customary  formula,  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  etc.” 

Second  Examination 

“  If  thou  findest  that  wound  etc.”  (XVII  8). 

Third  Examination 

(j  ^  ^ ^ j^>, ^  8  ?  ^ »vL. >  however,  thou  findest  that  wound  etc.”  (XVII 

6-7). 

Fourth  Examination 

then,  thou  findest  that  man  continuing 

to  have  fever  ”  (XVII  12). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

416  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  47 

Fifth  Examination 

however,  his  fever  abates,  etc.”  (XVII 13-14). 
On  the  correlation  of  the  last  two  examinations  by  means  of  the  introductory 
“  If  however,”  compare  the  same  correlation  of  two  alternative  examinations 
in  Case  7,  introduction  to  case  (p.  175). 

The  organization  of  the  discussion  may  be  outlined  as  follows  : 

I.  Normally  Favorable  Development : 

1.  First  Stage  : 

First  Examination,  stitching  of  wound,  verdict  1,  simple  first  treatment. 

2.  Second  Stage : 

Second  Examination,  stitching  loose  (possibly  absorbed),  open  wound  drawn 
together  with  plaster,  simple  treatment  and  recovery. 

II.  Doubtful  Development : 

1.  Alternative  Second  Stage  : 

Third  Examination,  inflammation  of  wound,  stitching  loose  (possibly  absorbed), 
wound  open  and  suppurating,  fever,  patient’s  condition  critical,  verdict  2. 
Leading  either  to  : 

2.  Final  unfavorable  condition  : 

Fourth  Examination,  disclosing  inflammation  and  continued  fever,  no  applica¬ 
tions,  normal  diet,  no  medicine  ;  outcome  uncertain. 

Or  to  : 

8.  Final  favorable  condition  : 

Fifth  Examination,  fever  abates,  inflammation  disappears,  simple  treatment, 
patient  recovers. 

A  point  concerning  which  there  is  some  doubt  is  the  interpretation  of  the  state¬ 
ment  that  the  surgeon  finds  the  wound  with  “  its  stitching  loose.”  This  question  has 
been  discussed  in  Case  10  (V  6).  While  the  indications  are  that  the  wound  has  failed 
to  close  wholly  by  healing,  and  has  still  to  be  drawn  together  by  piaster,  the  fact  that 
it  at  once  enters  the  second  stage  and  heals,  would  indicate  the  possibility  that  the 
loose  stitching  had  simply  been  absorbed.  If  not,  however,  then  we  must  consider 
that  the  stitching  proved  insufficient,  obliging  the  surgeon  to  resort  to  plaster  for 
drawing  the  gash  together. 

Title 
XVI  16 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  47  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  417 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder. 

Commentary 

The  terms  are  all  discussed  in  the  examination  below. 

First  Examination 

XVI  16-20 

; — a 

8 

a  ^ 
— 

9. _ 01  I  I  I  - _ 0  (?^°  °  ° 

A  ^  ^A:-. —  [3  I 

°  Q  |, 

^ <?  ' ^>8 
cSs'<-> 

0  ^ 

o  ^ 

>u. 

V— D^\ 
20 

»  The  scribe  wrote  dd  wbnw-f,  which  is  nonsense.  He  then  inserted  in  red  ink,  in  the  insufficient 
space  between  dd  and  wbnw-f,  the  three  letters,  hr-k,  making  dd-hr-k.  On  the  meaning  see  com¬ 
mentary. 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder,  its  flesh  being  laid 
back  and  its  sides  separated,  while  he  suffers  with  swelling  (in)  his  shoulder  blade,  thou 
shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find  its  gash  separated  from  r-’1  its  sides 
in  his  wound,  as  a  roll  of  linen  is  unrolled,  (and)  it  is  painful  when  he  raises  his  arm 
on  account  of  it,  thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  his  gash  with  stitching. 

Commentary 

wbnw  n  kf-t,  “gaping  wound,”  is  an  injury  treated  in  Cases  2  to  7,  as 
found  in  the  head.  On  kf-t  see  Case  1,  pp.  90-92. 

htt  t,  “  shoulder,”  a  meaning  long  ago  demonstrated  by  D6vaud.  It  is  not 
a  common  word,  see  Pap.  Ebers  1 10, 2  and  confer  the  verb  j[  *  htl,  “  to  carry  on  the 
shoulder  ”  (Pyr.  2171  b  ;  determinative  in  type  inexact)  or  as  in  English  “  to  shoulder.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

418 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cask  47 

£’f>  “laid  back.”  Devaud  calls  my  attention  to  an  example  of  h’ t  with 
cj,  as  a  variant  of  h'<‘  with  o,  in  Lacau,  Textes  religieux,  p.  49.  A  parallel  passage 
in  Pap.  Ebers  (64, 12)  shows  that  we  have  here  the  familiar  verb  ]  5  compare  : 

In  this  passage  the  variant  ywf,  “  flesh  ”  for  is  very  instructive. 

J^*— 0  wdc,  “  separate,”  is  not  a  word  with  an  established  surgical  or  anatomical 
meaning.  It  is  in  this  passage  however,  as  in  the  parallel  from  Pap.  Ebers  just  cited 
above,  intended  to  be  understood  in  its  original  meaning,  “  separate,”  from  which  its 
more  common  meaning,  “  distinguish,”  “  judge  ”  is  derived. 

PTL1!  "l*-8  sides,”  while  written  with  the  plural  strokes  is  obviously  a  dual 

in  sense,  and  is  written  in  the  dual  in  the  Ebers  parallel.  The  pronoun,  both  here  and 
with  “  flesh,”  may  of  course  be  rendered  “  his  ”  and  might  be  referred  to  the  patient. 
A  comparison  of  the  parallel  in  XVII 5-6  in  our  Case  47,  however,  shows  that  it  must 
refer  to  the  wound  and  not  to  the  patient. 

dt  wt,  “  swelling  ”  or  “  swellings,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  43,  XV  1. 

m$rk  t,  “  shoulder-blade,”  is  a  feminine  noun  derived  from  the  rare  word 
mhfk  (mirk),  “  razor,”  known  from  the  following  three  examples  : 

mhck  ( British  Museum  Inscr.  in  the  Hieratic  Character,  pi.  XVI,  5633 
verso,  left  1.  5,  in  a  list). 

CP<C\°I  mhrk’W  (Memeptah  Libyan  War,  Mariette,  Kamak,  55,  61,  in  list  of 
spoil). 

tc  mhck  (Sign  Papyrus  X,  1.  5,  explaining  /o  ). 

Theso  examples  are  all  sufficiently  late  to  contain  only  h,  and  include  no  writing  with 
S,  so  commonly  alternating  with  h  in  the  Pyramid  Texts.  In  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith, 
however,  all  four  occurrences  of  the  word  have  $  (Case  85,  XII  5  ;  Case  86,  XII  11  ; 
Case  47,  XVI  18,  XVII  2),  furnishing  another  indication  of  the  great  age  of  our 
document,  for  this  interchange  of  h  and  had  ceased  by  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom, 
let  us  say  about  2500  b.c.  The  shape  of  the  shoulder-blade  suggested  to  the  Egyptian 
surgeon  the  bronze  razor,  of  which  the  hieratic  determinative  furnishes  one  form,  and 
the  first  example  above  discloses  another.  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  phonetic 
history  of  the  Germanic  “  Scbulterblatt  ”  (literally  “  shoulder-leaf  ”)  has  resulted  in 
the  English  “  shoulder-blade,”  so  closely  parallel  to  the  ancient  Egyptian  “  razor- 
blade  ”  for  the  same  bone.  The  term  is  otherwise  unknown  in  the  medical  papyri,  or 
in  any  early  Egyptian  document  before  the  Ptolemaic  Age,  when  it  is  found  in  five 
passages  in  the  Dendera  temple,  in  a  list  of  the  parts  of  the  body  of  Osiris  (Mariette, 
Denterah,  IV  42  =D\imichen,  Geographische  Inschr.  I  82;  III  1;  III  48,  three  times). 
In  all  these  passages  it  is  written  with  h,  with  one  exception  which  has  h. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  47  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  419 

dd-hr-k  is  obviously  an  error  for  d^r-hr-k,  “  thou  shouldst 

palpate  ;  ”  compare  Case  4,  II  8,  where  we  have  d'r-hr-k  in  the  same  context. 

evidently  contains  a  corruption  of  the  text  after  iHy.  The  dis¬ 
cussion  of  iHy  in  Case  14  (VI  8)  shows  that  it  means  “  separated,”  especially  if  followed 
by  r.  It  is  obvious  that  we  should  read  the  r  in  the  text  immediately  after  d’ty,  leaving 
the  enigmatic  before  Swt-J.  The  phrase  “  in  his  wound,”  directly  following, 

introduces  a  reference  to  the  patient,  and  it  may  be  that  we  should  understand  the 
immediately  preceding  /,  in  Swt-f,  as  referring  to  the  patient,  not  to  the  wound,  and 
thus  giving  us  “  his  side  ”  not  “  its  side.”  If  we  disregard  the  plural  strokes,  so  often 
superfluous,  we  then  have  a  reference  here  to  the  side  of  the  patient.  If  the  wound 
were  not  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  the  surgeon  might  mean  that  a  portion  of  the 
severed  tissue  was  thrown  back  like  a  flap,  and  separated  from  the  Bide  of  the  patient. 
This  leaves  unexplained  the  enigmatic  for  the  text  really  reads  “separated 

from  the  of  his  side.”  This  explanation  is  in  close  agreement  with  the  probable 
meaning  of  the  following  comparison,  “  as  a  roll  of  linen  is  unrolled.”  The  inner  face 
of  the  flap  of  severed  tissue  would  then  be  designated  by  kf-wt-f,  lit.  “  its 

gashes,”  as  demonstrated  in  the  commentary  on  Case  1,  examination  (pp.  90-91), 
where  the  “  two  lips  ”  of  the  wound  are  exactly  parallel  with  the  plural  kf-wt,  literally 
“  gashes,”  not  meaning  more  than  one  gash,  but  designating  the  two  surfaces  of 
severed  tissue  which  are  to  be  drawn  together  by  the  surgical  stitching. 

nfnfn>  “  unrolled,”  is  a  new  word,  unknown  outside  of  this  passage.  The 
meaning  proposed  above  is  a  guess,  suggested  by  the  context,  and  in  harmony  with  the 
determinative,  a  coil. 

fw-t,  “roll  of  linen,”  is  a  very  ancient  word,  found  for  example  in  the  reliefs  of 
Hesire,  and  occurring  also  in  the  tomb  lists. 

ndry,  “  draw  together,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  10  (V  6). 
ydr,  “  stitching,”  see  commentary  ibid. 

XVII  1 
<=>| 

=  I  <=■ 

First  Diagnosis 

XVI  20-XVII  2 

.0  ^  I 

_ D I  I  »_0j?O|  I  I 

r  o 

I  ol  I  a  -flQo  o  ? _ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

420  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  47 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder, 
its  flesh  being  laid  back  and  its  sides  separated,  while  he  suffers  with  swelling  (in)  his 
shoulder  blade.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

All  the  terms  have  been  discussed  above  in  the  commentary  on  the  examination. 
The  favorable  verdict  at  the  end  is  explained  in  Case  1  (I  2)  ;  see  also  introduction 
(pp.  46  ff.). 

First  Treatment 

XVII  2-3 

<? 

_  3 

f  ®|  ©ow 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day. 

Commentary 

On  the  treatment  with  fresh  meat  see  Case  1  (I  2-8). 

This  treatment  is  assumed  by  the  surgeon  to  be  successful  and  leads  to  a  second 
examination  disclosing  normal  progress  of  the  patient  toward  a  second  favorable  stage 
which,  in  the  judgement  of  the  surgeon,  does  not  require  a  second  diagnosis.  The 
following  account  of  the  new  conditions  therefore  passes  naturally  over  any  diagnosis 
directly  to  tho  concluding  treatment  as  the  patient  advances  to  complete  recovery. 

Second  Examination  and  Treatment 
XVII  3-6 

sic  4 

wvvvvv  |  /V WAV,  ^  o  O  O  ^ 

“:ado 

\\\  III 

d 

II  I  I 

^  0  ©  I 

\|  I  idd"^'^ 

i  i 
i 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  47  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

421 

Translation 

If  thou  findest  that  wound  open  and  its  stitching  loose,  thou  shouldst  draw  together 
for  him  its  gash  with  two  strips  of  linen  over  that  gash  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  after¬ 
ward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

If  thou  findest  a  wound,  its  flesh  laid  back,  its  sides  separated,  in  any  member  of 
a  man,  thou  shouldst  treat  it  according  to  these  directions. 

Commentary 

pgy,“  open,”  is  without  doubt  a  form  of  the  verb  pg1  “to  spread  out, 

to  open.”  The  determinative  /*■  is  employed  to  indicate  its  surgical  use,  just  as  we 
find  ©1^*0*  in  our  treatise,  which  a  parallel  passage  in  Pap.  Ebers  shows  is  the  com¬ 
mon  verb  (see  above  commentary  on  XVI 17).  A  suggestive  derivative  from 

our  verb  pg ’  is  the  noun  pg ,  “  bowl,”  or  flat  open  vessel,  spreading  and  opening  as 

a  wound  might  do.  The  verbal  form  pgy  is  probably  a  pseudo-participle. 

On  the  loosening  of  the  stitching,  see  Case  10  (V  6). 

'y-wy,  “  two  strips,”  doubtless  adhesive  tape,  see  Case  2  (1 15)  and  Case  10 
(V  9).  It  is  important  to  note  that  “  gash  ”  is  hero  in  the  plural,  designating  the  two 
faces  of  the  gash,  which  are  to  be  drawn  together  by  the  plaster.  See  commentary,  ibid. 

On  treatment  with  grease,  honey,  and  lint  see  Case  1  (I  8). 

Third  Examination 
XVII  6-10 

0 

I  I  I 

<=>\\ 

I 

<*>  i 

.  ^3* 

<? 

o 

Will 

oi.uchicago.edu 

422  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  47 

Translation 

If,  however,  thou  findest  that  his  flesh  has  developed  inflammation  from  that  wound 
which  is  in  his  shoulder,  while  that  wound  is  inflamed,  open,  and  its  stitching  loose, 
thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it.  Shouldst  thou  find  inflammation  issuing  from  the 
mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy  touch,  and  secretions  discharging  therefrom  are  cool  like 
wenesh- juiee,  (conclusion  follows  in  second  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

While  the  second  stage  of  the  treatment  led  to  uninterrupted  recovery,  an  alter¬ 
native  development  of  the  case  disclosed  in  this  third  examination  Bhows  the  presence 
of  infection  and  the  discharge  of  pus.  The  contrast  is  marked.  The  surgeon’s 
observation  that  he  finds  “  that  wound  open  and  its  stitching  loose,”  already  con¬ 
tained  in  the  second  examination  (pp.  420-421),  was  not  followed  by  unfavorable 
results  (see  Case  10,  p.  280).  Here  in  our  third  examination  however,  the  “  open  ” 
wound,  with  “  its  stitching  loose,”  is  found  to  be  “  inflamed  ”  and  discharging 
“  secretions.”  While  the  second  examination,  omitting  any  diagnosis,  proceeds 
directly  to  treatment  with  favorable  result,  this  third  examination  discloses  a  con¬ 
dition  so  questionable  that  the  surgeon  appends  the  uncertain  verdict  2  (p.  243) 

The  beginning  of  the  third  examination  really  reads,  more  literally  rendered  : 
“  If,  however,  thou  findest  that  wound,  his  flesh  has  developed  inflammation  from  that 
wound  which  is  in  his  shoulder,”  in  which  the  first  “  that  wound  ”  would  have  been 
resumed  by  a  pronoun,  except  for  the  fact  that  a  relative  clause  (“  which  is  in  his 
shoulder  ”)  followed,  and  it  could  not  be  appended  to  a  pronoun. 

PdH  ^r/>  "  inflammation,”  has  been  discussed  in  Caso  41  (XIV  12). 
nsr-y,  “  inflamed,”  is  taken  up  in  Case  41  (XIV  8). 

On  the  loosening  of  the  stitching  see  Case  10  (V  6  under  ydr). 

U  nSw,  “  issue,”  is  of  course  an  abbreviated  writing  of  (22?/*  nSw,  discussed  in 
Case  41  (XIV  15). 

chc-io,  “secretions,”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  41  (XIII  22-XIV  1, 
p.  370).  The  question  may  arise  whether  secretion  discharging  from  a  feverish  and 
inflamed  wound  would  be  cool. 

vmSy,  “wencsk -juice,”  is  a  substance  not  yet  satisfactorily  identified. 
The  plant  is  referred  to  as  far  back  as  the  Old  Kingdom  ;  see  ^  icnS  in  Berlin 
13466.  See  also  Griffith,  Hieratic  Papyri  from  Kahun  and  Gurob,  pi.  XXVII, 
1.  21,  which  mentions  umi-fruit.  It  occurs  frequently  in  Pap.  Ebers  and  also  Berlin 
8038.  In  later  times  it  occurs  in  the  Dendera  temple  (Marietta,  Denddrah,  1 17), 
where  it  is  parallel  with  wine ;  and  three  times  in  the  same  temple,  for  wine  (ibid. 
II  76  ;  III  16  c,  and  III  19  p).  Loret  has  suggested  that  it  is  to  be  identified  with 
coriander  (see  Recueil  de  trav.  15,  p.  105)  ;  but  this  identification  seems  uncertain. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cask  47  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  423 

Diagnosis  Following  Third  Examination 
XVII  10-11 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder, 
it  being  inflamed,  and  he  continues  to  have  fever  from  it.  An  ailment  with  which  I 
will  contend.” 

Commentary 

Although  this  diagnosis  follows  the  third  examination  it  is  not  the  third  diagnosis, 
for  the  second  examination  revealed  normal  progress  toward  recovery  and  was  there¬ 
fore  followed  by  no  diagnosis.  The  insertion  of  a  diagnosis  with  a  different  verdict 
after  the  third  examination  shows  that  we  have  disclosed  by  it  an  alternative  second 
stage  of  the  case. 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  above.  It  is  important  to  note  that  nsr-y,  “  it 
being  inflamed,”  refers  to  the  wound ;  while  Smm-f,  “  he  has  fever,”  refers  to  the 
patient.  See  the  discussion  in  Case  41  (XIV  8-9).  The  doubtful  verdict  2  has  been 
discussed  in  Caso  4  (II  6).  See  also  introduction  (pp.  46  ff.). 

Fourth  Examination 
XVII  12 

Translation 

If,  then,  thou  findest  that  man  continuing  to  have  fever,  while  that  wound  is  in¬ 
flamed,  (conclusion  in  following  treatment). 

Commentary 

On  the  distinction  between  “fever”  and  "inflammation  ”  see  Case  41  (XIV  8-9). 
No  treatment  follows  the  above  diagnosis  because  the  surgeon  evidently  desires  first  to 
introduce  one  of  the  two  alternative  stages  which  he  knows  will  follow  the  condition 

oi.uchicago.edu 

424  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  47 

revealed  by  the  third  examination.  He  therefore  passes  at  once  to  the  unfavorable 
persistence  of  the  inflammation  and  fever,  for  which  the  following  treatment  can  do 
nothing.  Like  English  “  as,”  which  may  mean  either  “  while  ”  or  “  because,”  yik  here 
has  much  of  the  force  of  “  because.”  This  is  demonstrated  by  the  parallel  passage  in 
Case  28  (X  2),  which  in  place  of  this  ydk  clause  has  hr  wbnw  pf,  “  on  account  of  (or, 
because  of)  that  wound.” 

Treatment  Following  Fourth  Examination 
XVII  12-13 

Translation 

Thou  shalt  not  bind  it  ;  thou  shalt  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  the 
period  of  his  injury  passes  by. 

Commentary 

On  the  meaning  of  the  extraordinary  injunction,  “  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring 
stakes,"  see  Case  8  (1 22-28)  and  ibid.,  Gloss  D  (II 1-2).  It  is  obvious  that  the  surgeon 
can  do  nothing  but  await  the  course  of  nature,  meantime  feeding  the  patient  a  normal 
diet.  Discussion  of  the  concluding  temporal  clause  and  the  unusual  determinative 
of  yh,  “  injury,”  will  be  found  on  p.  185. 

Fifth  Examination 

XVII  18-14 

1 1*~ 

Translation 

If,  however,  his  fever  abates  and  the  inflammation  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound  dis¬ 
sipates  entirely,  (conclusion  in  following  treatment). 

Commentary 

We  have  here  disclosed  a  final  favorable  outcome,  which,  as  after  the  second 
examination,  is  followed  by  no  diagnosis. 

On  y’t,  “abates,”  more  literally  “  is  diverted  ”  or  “  turned  aside,”  see 

commentary  on  Case  7  (IV  8). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  47  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  425 

Sty,  “dissipates,”  means  more  literally  “scatters,”  as  for  example  in  the 
scattering  of  seed-grain. 

r  t\  “  entirely,”  literally  “  to  the  ground,”  is  discussed  in  Case  4,  Gloss  A 

(II  9). ' 

Treatment  Following  Fifth  Examination 
XVII 14-15 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  treat  him  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day,  until 
he  recovers. 

Commentary 

We  find  here  the  final  favorable  outcome  possible  after  the  disclosure  of  tho  un¬ 
favorable  conditions  listed  in  the  third  examination.  On  the  simple  treatment  with 
grease,  honey,  and  lint,  see  Case  1  (I  3). 

CASE  FORTY-EIGHT 
XVII  15-19 

A  SPRAIN  IN  A  SPINAL  VERTEBRA  (INCOMPLETE) 

This,  the  last  case  in  our  treatise,  is  the  first  of  what  waB  doubtless  a  series  of  dis¬ 
cussions  of  injuries  to  the  spine,  beginning  with  the  less  serious,  an  arrangement  which 
we  have  found  was  likewise  that  of  similar  groups  of  cases,  like  the  series  of  five  cases 
of  injuries  to  the  temple  (Cases  18  to  22).  The  case  is  a  simple  one,  unfortunately 
incomplete,  breaking  off  abruptly  at  the  beginning  of  an  interesting  treatment  by 
manipulation.  Inspection  of  the  original  or  the  facsimile  of  Plate  XVII  discloses  the 
fact  that  the  scribe  stopped  in  the  middle  of  a  line,  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence;  in  the 
middle  of  a  case.  With  his  pen  full  of  ink  and  with  space  on  the  papyrus  sheet  before 
him  for  several  columns  more,  he  laid  down  his  pen  and  never  copied  any  more  of  the 
remarkable  surgical  treatise  we  have  been  studying.  See  Introduction,  Vol.  II,  p.  xii. 

Title 

XVII  15 

□ 

oi.uchicago.edu 

426  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cash  48 

Translation 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  [in]  a  vertebra  of  his  spinal  column. 

Commentary 

The  terms  will  be  found  discussed  below.  It  is  obvious  that  our  scribe  has  omitted 
the  preposition  “  in  ”,  See  commentary  below. 

Examination 

XVII 15-18 

16  tic 

*£2>- 

0  c\ 

ini 

ittt 

Translation 

If  thou  oxaminest  [a  man  having]  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  spinal  column,  thou 
sliouldst  say  to  him  :  “  Extend  now  thy  two  legs  (and)  contract  them  both  (again).” 
When  he  extends  them  both  he  contracts  them  both  immediately  because  of  the  pain 
he  causes  in  the  vertebra  of  his  spinal  column  in  which  he  suffers. 

Commentary 

The  form  of  the  examination  is  always  :  “  If  thou  examinest  a  man  having ;  ” 
henco  it  is  clear  that  the  scribe  has  omitted  by  error  the  words  “  a  man  having.” 

I  nrw-t,  “  sprain,”  is  discussed  in  Case  80,  Gloss  A  (X  12).  It  is  regularly 
followed  by  the  preposition  ^  m,  “  in,”  as  here,  and  hence  it  is  clear  that  this 
has  been  omitted  by  scribal  error  in  the  title. 

“p  ts,  “  vertebra,”  has  been  discussed  in  Case  81,  Gloss  A  (X  18). 

L'  psd,  originally  fid,  has  long  been  known  to  mean  “  back,”  but  primarily 
“  Bpine  ”  or  “  spinal  column.” 

w’f,  “extend,”  is  evidently  an  anatomical  or  physiological  use  of  the 
verb  m'c,  “  send,  dispatch,  lead.”  A  very  apt  illustration  of  its  meaning  in  our 
passage  is  found  in  the  Great  “  Amduat  ”  10th  Hour,  where  Horns  says  to 
smmmers :  ^ "Stroke  (or  paddle)  the  Celestial  Ocean  with 
your  feet”  (Leyden,  Turin  and  Seti,  II  19).  This  is  exactly  the  motion  which  is 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Case  48  TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  427 

required  of  our  patient  with  the  injured  spine.  Dr.  Grapow  calls  my  attention  to 
a  similar  use  of  the  word  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (ed.  Budge,  Chap.  11,  8,  cf.  Pap. 
of  000$/^  not  in  Naville):  “  1  extended  my  arm  as  lord 

of  the  icrrt-crown.” 

me,  “  now,”  presumably  the  rather  rare  particle  ;  it  is  written  with  a  ligature 
which  might  possibly  be  read  ^  rd,  the  phonetic  writing  of  “  foot  ”  before  the 
determinatives  jff.  Compare  the  similar  writing  of  the  ligature  . o  in  XIII  11. 

A  krf,  “  contract  ”  or  “  draw  in,”  is  a  rare  verb,  and,  with  one  exception, 
unknown  in  the  medical  papyri.  Its  meaning  however  can  be  determined  from  two 

passages  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  We  find  the  deceased  saying :  “  Geb . has 

opened  my  two  jaws,  he  opens  my  blind  eyes,  and  5=^,^ he 
stretches  out  my  two  contracted  legs”  (ed.  Naville,  26,  7,  Pb).  Again  the  deceased 
is  addressed  as  follows  : 

“  Geb  opens  for  thee  thy  two  blind  eyes  ;  he  stretches  out  thy  two  contracted  legs  ” 
(ed.  Budge,  169,  2-3).  In  this  example  it  is  important  to  note  that  Geb’s  action 
in  the  first  line  is  one  which  reverses  and  overcomes  blindness  ;  that  is,  the  condition 
indicated  by  the  word  after  “  eyes  ”  is  more  or  less  the  opposite  of  that  resulting  from 
the  god’s  action.  In  the  second  line  therefore  the  word  after  legs  must  denote  a  condi¬ 
tion  rather  the  opposite  of  that  produced  by  the  god  when  he  “  stretches  out  ”  the 
legs  of  the  deceased.  They  are  therefore  in  a  condition  of  contraction  or  constriction. 
These  examples  enable  us  also  to  understand  a  passage  in  an  obscure  case  in  the  Berlin 
Medical  Papyrus  (3038,  verso  1 11):  ThoU  shaIt  contract  her  arm-” 

An  example  in  Mutter  und  Kind  (8,  7)  is  not  clear.  On  the  other  hand,  in  connection 
with  cases  of  stiffness  and  rheumatoid  troubles,  Papyrus  Ebers  contains  the  following 
instructive  example  of  the  noun  derived  from  our  verb,  in  the  title  of  a  recipe  for 
— <^  .0  A  “stretching  out  the  contractions  ( krf-wt )  and  soften- 

inglhe  stiffness”  (Pap.  Ebers  85,  5-6).  Here  again  the  noun  krf-wt,  “contractions  ” 
is  opposed  to  the  verb  dwn,  “  stretch  out,”  as  is  the  verb  krf,  contract  in  the  two 
examples  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  In  our  treatise  the  verb  krf  occurs  only  in  the 
above  examination,  where  it  twice  appears  opposed  to  the  verb  m>r,  “  extend.” 
The  meaning  “  contract  ”  or  “  constrict  ”  would  seem  to  be  established. 

yrr-f,  “  (which)  he  causes,”  literally  “  he  makes,”  may  also  be  rendered 
“  when  he  does  (so),"  as  a  parenthesis,  before  “  in  the  vertebra.” 

mn-y-f,  “  in  which  he  suffers,”  literally,  “  his  made-to -suffer,”  seemingly 
a  passive  participle  ;  for  mn,  “  to  suffer  ”  is  a  transitive  verb  in  Egyptian.  See  dis¬ 
cussion  in  Case  3  (I  20). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

428 

THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 

Diagnosis 

XVII 18 

<?  \  — 

cl  i  i 

□  a  c\ 

Case  48 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his 
spinal  column.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Commentary 

The  terms  have  all  been  discussed  above.  This  diagnosis,  as  so  commonly,  consists 
only  of  the  title,  followed  by  the  verdict.  On  this  verdict  see  Case  1  (I  2)  and  the 
introduction  (pp.  4G  ff.). 

Treatment 
XVII  18-19 

i» 

^  /WVVVVN  a 

. 

1  The  scribe  wrote  the  preceding  diagnosis  in  red  ink.  On  resuming  the  black  ink  pen  he  filled 
it  very  full  and  when  he  stopped  as  indicated  above  in  the  middle  of  1.  19,  his  pen  was  still  flooded 
with  ink  producing  broad  and  intensely  black  lines.  The  interruption,  whatever  it  may  have  been, 
therefore  appears  to  have  been  a  sudden  one,  unexpected  by  the  scribe.  See  Vol.  I,  p.  xv ; 
Vol.  II,  p.  xii. 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back  ;  thou  shouldst  make  for  him 

Commentary 

P=<^J<?3=i  dt’&v,  “  prostrate  on  his  back,”  is  usually  written  dts(y),  without  the 
^  appearing  here.  See  discussion  in  Case  85  (XII  5). 

The  last  sentence  has  been  left  incomplete  by  the  scribe,  and  the  discussion  of  the 
case  remained  unfinished.  See  full  discussion  in  the  introduction  to  Volume  II,  p.  xii. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  OP  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE 
NOTES  FOR  THE  GUIDANCE  OF  THE  READER 

The  reader  should  note  that  the  introduction  to  this  treatise  has  been  lost,  and 
hence  the  abruptness  of  the  beginning.  Furthermore,  no  modern  reader  will  be  able 
to  understand  this  ancient  surgical  treatise  as  presented  in  the  following  consecutive 
translation  unless  he  consults  the  introductory  material  at  the  beginning  of  this 
volume.  In  order  to  gain  a  general  knowledge  of  the  background  necessary  to  an 
understanding  of  the  document,  pages  1  to  25  of  the  General  Introduction  should  be 
carefully  read.  Equally  or  even  more  indispensable  is  an  acquaintance  with  pages 
38  to  73  of  the  Special  Introduction. 

In  the  long  section  called  Translation  and  Commentary,  which  begins  on  page  78, 
and  forms  the  bulk  of  the  volume,  the  discussion  of  each  separate  case  is  introduced 
by  explanatory  material.  In  attempting  to  read  any  particular  case  in  the  following 
consecutive  translation,  therefore,  the  reader  should  turn  back  to  the  case  in  question 
in  the  Translation  and  Commentary,  which  he  will  find  it  very  easy  to  do  because  the 
case  numbers  are  inserted  as  running  heads  at  the  top  of  the  page.  He  should  then 
read  the  introduction  to  each  case  before  attempting  to  read  the  translation  in  the 
following  consecutive  rendering.  The  introduction  to  Case  1  will  be  found  on  page  78  ; 
the  introduction  to  Case  2  will  be  found  on  page  118  ;  Case  8  on  page  125,  etc. 

Some  few  technical  terms,  names  of  medicaments,  etc.,  of  which  we  do  not  know 
the  meaning,  have  been  carried  over  in  the  form  of  transliterations  in  italics,  oven  in 
this  consecutive  translation.  They  will  be  found  explained  in  the  Commentary. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  case  numbers  and  the  titles  of  the  case  subdivisions  are 
insertions  of  the  modern  editor. 

CASE  ONE 

Bottom  lines  of  lost  column  to  I  12 
A  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

Title 

[Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone  of  his  skull.] 

Examination 

[If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone  of 
his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound  (or,  thou  shouldst 
lay  thy  hand  upon  it) ;  shouldst  thou  find  his  skull  uninjured,  not  having  a  perforation, 
a  split,  or  a  smash  in  it,]  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

430  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  1, 2 

Diagnosis 

[Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him  :  “  One  having  a  woun]d  in  his  head,  -while  his 
wound  does  [not]  have  two  lips,  -  -  -,  nor  a  gash,  although  [it  penetrates  to  the  bone 
of]  his  head.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  -with  [fresh]  meat  [the  first  day]  (and)  treat  afterward  with 
grease,  [honoy]  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  Thou  examinest  a  man,”  [it  means]  counting  any  one  -  -  [Hike  counting"1 
things  with  a  bushel.  (For)  examining  ( h'-t ,  literally  “  measuring  ”)  is  [like1]  one’s 
['“counting1]  a  certain  quantity  with  a  bushel,  (or)  counting  something  with  the  fingers, 
in  order  to  [know]  -  -  -.  It  is  measuring  (h'-t)  things  with  a  bushel  which  -  -  -  one  in 
whom  an  ailment  is  [cou]nted,  like  measuring  (h'-t)  the  ailment  of  a  man;  [in  order  to 
know  the  action]  of  the  heart.  There  are  canals  (or  vessels,  mt)  in  it  (the  heart)  to  [every] 
member.  Now  if  the  priests  of  Sekhmet  or  any  physician  put  his  hands  (or)  his 
fingers  [upon  the  head,  upon  the  back  of  the]  head,  upon  the  two  hands,  upon  the 
pulse,  upon  the  two  feet,  [he]  measures  (h'y)  [to]  the  heart,  because  its  vessels  are  in 
the  back  of  the  head  and  in  the  pulse ;  and  because  its  [pulsation  is  in]  every  vessel 
of  every  member.  Ho  says  “  measure  ”  (h'-t)  regarding  his  [r wound1]  because  of  the 
vessels  (mt-w)  to  his  head  and  to  the  back  of  his  head  and  to  his  two  feet  -  -  -  -  his 
heart  in  order  to  recognize  the  indications  which  have  arisen  therein ;  meaning 
[rto  meas]ure  it1  in  order  to  know  what  is  befalling  therein. 

Gloss  B 

As  for :  “  While  his  [wou]nd  does  not  have  [two  lips],”  it  means  his  wound  is 
narrow,  [not  wide]  ;  without  gaping  of  one  (lip)  from  the  othor. 

Gloss  C 

As  for :  “  Penetrating  to  [the  bone  of  his  skull,  (but)  not  having  a  gash],”  it 
means  that  there  is  a  gaping  of  the  flesh,  although  r-1  -  -  -  -  r-i  over  the  bone  of  his 
Bkull,  without  gaping  [of  ono  (lip)  from  the  other],  being  narrow,  not  wide. 

CASE  TWO 

I  12-18 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  [gaping]  wound  [in  his  head],  penetrating  to  the  bone. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  2, 3  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  431 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  [gaping]  -wound  [in]  his  [head],  penetrating  to 
the  bone,  thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it  (and)  [thou  shouldst]  pal[pate  hi]s 
[wound].  If  thou  findest  his  skull  [uninjured,  not  hav]ing  a  perforation  in  it, 
(conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  [him] :  “  One  hav[ing  a  gaping  wou]nd  in  his  head. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

[Thou]  shouldst  bind  [fresh  meat  upon  it  the  first  day ;  thou  shouldst  apply  for 
him  two  strips  of  linen,  and  treat  afterward  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lin]t  every  day 
until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  [gaping]  wound  [in  his  head  penetrating  to  the  bone,”  it  means] 
. his  wound. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  Two  strips  of  linen,”  [it  means]  two  bands  [of  linen  which  one  applios 
upon  the  two  lips  of  the  gaping  wound  in  order  to  cause  that  one  join]  to  tho  other. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  Not  having  a  split,  a  perforation,  (or)  [a  smash  in  it,”  it  means] 

CASE  THREE 
I  18-11 2 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND  PERFORATING 

THE  SKULL 

Title 

[Instructions  concerning]  a  gaping  [wo]und  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone 
(and)  perforating  his  [skull]. 

Examination 

[If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in]  his  [head],  penetrating  to  tho 
bone,  (and)  perforating  his  skull ;  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound  ;  [shouldst  thou 
find  him  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders]  and  his  [br]east,  (and)  suffering  with 
stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

432  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  3,  4 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  [regarding]  him  :  “  One  having  [a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  his  skull,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness 
in  his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Now  [after  thou  has  stitched  it,  thou  shouldst  lay]  fresh  [meat]  upon  his  wound 
the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  not  bind  it.  Moor  (him)  [at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the 
period  of  his  injury  passes  by].  Thou  shouldst  [tre]at  it  afterward  with  grease,  honey, 
and  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

[As  for:  “Perforating  his  skull,”  it  means]  -  -  -  -  his  skull,  a  contracted  smash, 

through  his  incurring  a  break  like  a  puncture  of  a  (pottery)  jar, . which 

he  incurred. 

Gloss  B 

As  for :  “  Unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  [his]  bre[ast,”  it  means  it  is 
not  easy  for  him  to  look  at]  his  two  shoulders  (and)  it  is  not  easy  for  him  to  look  at 
his  broast. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  Suffering  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,”  it  means  a  lifting  up  (resulting) 
from  his  having  incurred  this  injury,  which  has  shifted  into  his  neck,  so  that  his 
neck  (also)  suffers  with  it. 

Gloss  D 

As  for  :  “  Moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,”  it  means  putting  him  on  his 
customary  diet,  without  administering  to  him  a  prescription. 

CASE  POUR 
II  2-11 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND 
SPLITTING  THE  SKULL 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
(and)  splitting  his  skull. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  splitting  his  Bkull,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find 
something  disturbing  therein  under  thy  fingers,  (and)  he  shudders  exceedingly,  while 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  4, 5  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  433 

the  swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes,  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  (and) 
from  both  his  ears,  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  look  at 
his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  splitting  his  skull ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck. 
An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Treatment 

Now  when  thou  findest  that  the  skull  of  that  man  is  split,  thou  shouldst  not  bind 
him,  (but)  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by. 
His  treatment  is  sitting.  Make  for  him  two  supports  of  brick,  until  thou  knowest  he 
has  reached  a  decisive  point.  Thou  shouldst  apply  grease  to  his  head,  (and)  soften 
his  neck  therewith  and  both  his  shoulders.  Thou  shouldst  do  likewise  for  every  man 
whom  thou  findest  having  a  split  skull. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  Splitting  his  skull,”  it  means  separating  shell  from  shell  of  his  skull, 
while  fragments  remain  sticking  in  the  flesh  of  his  head,  and  do  not  come  away. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  The  swelling  (thb)  which  is  over  it  protrudes,”  it  means  that  the 
swelling  (Sfwt)  which  is  over  this  split  is  large,  rising  upward. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  (Until)  thou  knowest  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point,”  it  means  (until) 
thou  knowest  whether  he  will  die  or  he  will  live  ;  for  he  is  (a  case  of)  “  an  ailment  with 
which  I  will  contend.” 

CASE  FIVE 
II 11-17 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  WITH  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE 

OF  THE  SKULL 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  smashing  his  skull. 

Examination 

If  thou  examineBt  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  (and)  smashing  his  skull ;  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find 

f  f 

oi.uchicago.edu 

434  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  5, 6 

that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  deep  (and)  sunken  under  thy  fingers,  while  the 
swelling  which  is  over  it  protrudes,  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  (and) 
both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  look  at 
his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bono,  (and)  smashing  his  skull,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in 
his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shalt  not  bind  him,  (but)  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  the  period 
of  his  injury  passes  by. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  Smashing  his  skull,”  it  means  a  smash  of  his  skull  (such  that)  bones, 
getting  into  that  smash,  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  Bkull.  The  “  Treatise  on  What 
Pertains  to  His  Wounds  ”  states  :  “  It  means  a  smash  of  his  skull  into  numerous 
fragments,  which  sink  into  the  interior  of  his  skull.” 

CASE  SIX 

II  17— III  1 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  WITH  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE 
OF  THE  SKULL  AND  RUPTURE  OF  THE  MENINGEAL  MEMBRANES 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull,  thou  shouldst 
palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find  that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  [like]  those 
corrugations  which  form  in  molten  copper,  (and)  something  therein  throbbing  (and) 
fluttering  under  thy  fingers,  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  becomes 
whole — when  it  has  happened  there  is  no  throbbing  (and)  fluttering  under  thy  fingers 
until  the  brain  of  his  (the  patient’s)  skull  is  rent  open — (and)  he  discharges  blood 
from  both  his  nostrils,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclusion  in 
diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

[Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him]  :  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  6, 7  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  435 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  anoint  that  wound  with  grease.  Thou  shalt  not  bind  it ;  thou  shalt 
not  apply  two  strips  upon  it :  until  thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive 
point. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  Smashing  his  skull,  (and)  rending  open  the  brain  of  his  skull,”  (it 
means)  the  smash  is  large,  opening  to  the  interior  of  his  skull,  (to)  tho  membrane 
enveloping  his  brain,  so  that  it  breaks  open  his  fluid  in  tho  interior  of  his  head. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  Those  corrugations  which  form  on  molt  en  copper,”  it  means  copper 
which  the  coppersmith  pours  off  (rejects)  beforo  it  is  ■’forced1  into  tho  ■’mould’1,  because 
of  something  foreign  upon  it  like  ■"wrinkles’1.  It  is  said  :  “  It  is  like  ripples  of  pus.” 

CASE  SEVEN 
III  2-IV  4 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  HEAD  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE  AND 
PERFORATING  THE  SUTURES 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penetrating  to  tho  bono, 
(and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull. 

Examination 

[If  thou  oxaminest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head,  penolrating  to  tho 
bone,  (and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull],  thou  shouldst  palpato  his  wound, 
(although)  he  shudders  exceedingly.  Thou  shouldst  cause  him  to  lift  his  face  ;  if  it 
is  painful  for  him  to  open  his  mouth,  (and)  his  heart  beats  feebly  ;  if  thou  observe 
his  spittle  hanging  at  his  two  lips  and  not  falling  off,  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears  ;  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (and) 
is  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his  breast,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

First  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull ;  tho  cord  of  his 
mandible  is  contracted  ;  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his  nostrils  (and)  from  both  his 
ears,  while  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

First  Treatment 

Now  as  soon  as  thou  findest  that  the  cord  of  that  man’s  mandible,  his  jaw,  is  con¬ 
tracted,  thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  something  hot,  until  he  is  comfortable,  so 

F  f  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

436  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  7 

that  his  mouth  opens.  Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint,  until 
thou  knowest  that  he  has  reaehed  a  decisive  point. 

Second  Examination 

If,  then,  thou  findest  that  the  flesh  of  that  man  has  developed  fever  from  that 
wound  which  is  in  the  sutures  of  his  skull,  while  that  man  has  developed  ty *  from 
that  wound,  thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  him.  Shouldst  thou  find  his  counten¬ 
ance  is  clammy  with  sweat,  the  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense,  his  face  is  ruddy,  his 
teeth  and  his  back  [-],  the  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  (urine)  of  sheep, 
his  mouth  is  bound,  (and)  both  his  eyebrows  are  drawn,  while  his  face  is  as  if  he  wept, 
(conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Second  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  regarding  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  head, 
penetrating  to  the  bone,  perforating  the  sutures  of  his  skull ;  he  has  developed  ty », 
his  mouth  is  bound,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be 
treated.” 

Third  Examination 

If,  however,  thou  findest  that  that  man  has  become  pale  and  has  already  rshown 
exhaustion1. 

Third  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  a  wooden  brace  padded  with  linen  and  put  into 
his  mouth.  Thou  shouldst  have  made  for  him  a  draught  of  ie<A-fruit.  His  treatment 
is  sitting,  placed  between  two  supports  of  brick,  until  thou  knowest  he  has  reached 
a  decisive  point. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  Perforating  the  sutures  of  [bis  skull],”  it  means  what  is  between  shell 
and  shell  of  his  skull ;  and  that  the  sutures  are  (composed)  of  hide. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  The  cord  of  his  mandible  is  contracted,”  it  means  a  stiffening  on  the 
part  of  the  ligaments  at  the  end  of  his  ramus,  which  are  fastened  to  his  temporal  bone, 
that  is  at  the  end  of  his  jaw,  without  moving  to  and  fro,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  him 
to  open  his  mouth  because  of  his  pain. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  The  cord  of  his  mandible,”  it  means  the  ligaments  which  bind  the  end 
of  his  jaw,  as  one  gays,  “  the  cord  ”  of  a  thing  in  (or  as)  a  splint. 

Gloss  D 

As  for :  “  His  countenance  clammy  with  sweat,”  it  means  that  his  head  is 
a  little  sweaty,  as  (we  say),  “  A  thing  is  clammy.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  7, 8  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  437 

Gloss  E 

As  for  :  “  The  ligaments  of  his  neck  are  tense,”  it  means  that  the  ligaments  of 
his  neck  are  stretched  stiff  by  reason  of  his  injury. 

Gloss  P 

As  for :  “  His  face  is  ruddy  ”  (tm£),  it  means  that  the  color  of  his  face  is  red, 
like  the  color  of  fwt^  f-pigment. 

Gloss  G 

As  for  :  “  The  odor  of  the  chest  of  his  head  is  like  the  bkn  of  sheep,”  it  means 
that  the  odor  of  his  crown  is  like  the  urine  of  sheep. 

Gloss  H 

As  for  :  “  The  chest  of  his  head,”  it  means  the  middle  of  his  crown  next  to  his 
brain.  The  likening  of  it  is  to  a  chest. 

Gloss  I 

As  for  :  “  His  mouth  is  bound,  (and)  both  his  eyebrows  are  drawn,  while  his 
face  is  as  if  he  wept,”  it  means  that  he  does  not  open  his  mouth  that  he  may  speak, 
both  his  eyebrows  are  distorted,  one  drawing  upward,  the  other  drooping  downward, 
like  one  who  winks  while  his  face  weeps. 

Gloss  J 

As  for  :  “  He  has  becomo  pale  and  has  already  rshown  exhaustion1,”  it  means 
becoming  pale,  because  he  is  (a  case  of)  “  Undertake  [Jhim1],  do  not  desert  [rhim1],” 
in  view  of  the  exhaustion. 

CASE  EIGHT 
IV  5-18 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OF  THE  SKULL  DISPLAYING  NO 
VISIBLE  EXTERNAL  INJURY 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  skull  under  the  skin  of  his  head. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  of  his  skull,  under  the  skin  of  his  head, 
while  there  is  nothing  at  all  upon  it,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou 
find  that  there  is  a  swelling  protruding  on  the  outside  of  that  smash  which  is  in  his 
skull,  while  his  eye  is  askew  because  of  it,  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury  which 
is  in  his  skull ;  (and)  he  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole,  on  the  side  of  him  having  that 
injury  which  is  in  his  skull,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

438  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  8 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  account  him  one  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten, 
as  one  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork,  and  one  who  does  not  fall 
with  his  nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from  both  his 
nostrils  (and)  from  both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An 
ailment  not  to  bo  treated. 

Treatment 

His  treatment  is  sitting,  until  he  rgains  color1,  (and)  until  thou  knowest  he  has 
reached  tho  decisive  point. 

Second  Examination 

Now  as  soon  as  thou  findest  that  smash  which  is  in  his  skull  like  those  corruga¬ 
tions  which  form  on  molten  copper,  (and)  something  therein  throbbing  and  fluttering 
under  thy  fingers  like  the  weak  place  of  an  infant’s  crown  before  it  knits  together — 
when  it  has  happened  there  is  no  throbbing  and  fluttering  under  thy  fingers,  until 
tho  brain  of  his  (the  patient’s)  skull  is  rent  open — (and)  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils  and  both  his  ears,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (conclu¬ 
sion  in  second  diagnosis). 

Second  Diagnosis 

[Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him]  :  “  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  smash  in  his  skull  under  tho  skin  of  his  head,  there  being  no  wound 
at  all  upon  it,”  it  means  a  smash  of  the  shell  of  his  skull,  the  flesh  of  his  head  being 
uninjured. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  He  walks  shuffling  with  his  sole,”  ho  (the  surgeon)  is  speaking  about 
his  walking  with  his  sole  dragging,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  him  to  walk,  when  it 
(tho  sole)  is  feeble  and  turned  over,  while  the  tips  of  his  toes  are  contracted  to  the  ball 
of  his  sole,  and  they  (the  toes)  walk  fumbling  the  ground.  He  (the  surgeon)  says  : 
“  He  shuffles,”  concerning  it. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  One  whom  something  entering  from  outside  has  smitten  ”  on  the  side 
of  him  having  this  injury,  it  means  one  whom  something  entering  from  outside  presses, 
on  the  side  of  him  having  this  injury. 

Gloss  D 

As  for  :  11  Something  entering  from  outside,”  it  means  the  breath  of  an  outside 
god  or  death  ;  not  the  intrusion  of  something  which  bis  flesh  engenders. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  8, 9  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  439 

Gloss  E 

As  for  :  “  One  who  does  not  release  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork,  and  who  does 
not  fall  with  his  nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm,”  it  means  that  he  says  :  “  One  to 
whom  the  head  of  his  shoulder-fork  is  not  given,  and  one  who  does  not  fall  with  his 
nails  in  the  middle  of  his  palm.” 

CASE  NINE 
IV  19-V  5 

WOUND  IN  THE  FOREHEAD  PRODUCING  A  COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE 

OF  THE  SKULL 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  forehead,  smashing  tho  shell  of  his  skull. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  forehead,  smashing  tho  shell  of 
his  head,  (conclusion  in  treatment). 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  prcparo  for  him  the  egg  of  an  ostrich,  triturated  with  grease  (and) 
placed  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound.  Now  afterward  thou  shouldst  prepare  for  him  tho 
egg  of  an  ostrich,  triturated  and  made  into  poultices  for  drying  up  that  wound.  Thou 
shouldst  apply  to  it  for  him  a  covering  for  physician’s  use  ;  thou  shouldst  uncover 
it  the  third  day,  (and)  find  it  knitting  together  tho  shell,  tho  color  being  like  the  egg 
of  an  ostrich. 

That  which  is  to  be  said  as  a  charm  over  this  recipe  : 

Repelled  is  the  enemy  that  is  in  the  wound  ! 

Cast  out  is  the  roviP  that  is  in  the  blood, 

The  adversary  of  Horus,  ron  every1  side  of  the  mouth  of  Isis. 

This  temple  does  not  fall  down  ; 

There  is  no  enemy  of  the  vessel  therein. 

I  am  under  the  protection  of  Isis  ; 

My  rescue  is  the  son  of  Osiris. 

Now  afterward  thou  shouldst  cool  [it]  for  him  [with]  a  compress  of  figs,  grease, 
and  honey,  cooked,  cooled,  and  applied  to  it. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  covering  for  physician’s  use,”  it  is  a  bandage  which  is  in  the  hand  of 
the  embalmer,  and  which  he  (the  physician)  applies  to  this  remedy  which  is  on  this 
wound  which  is  in  his  forehead. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

440  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  10,11 

CASE  TEN 
V5-9 

A  GAPING  WOUND  AT  THE  TOP  OF  THE  EYEBROW,  PENETRATING  TO  THE  BONE 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  the  top  of  his  eyebrow. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  the  top  of  his  eyebrow,  penetrating 
to  the  bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound,  (and)  draw  together  for  him  his  gash 
with  stitching. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  [One  having]  a  wound  in  his  eyebrow. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Now  after  thou  hast  stitched  it,  [thou  shouldst  bind]  fresh  meat  upon  [it]  the  first 
day.  If  thou  findest  that  tho  stitching  of  this  wound  is  loose,  thou  shouldst  draw  (it) 
together  for  him  with  two  strips  (of  plaster),  and  thou  shouldst  treat  it  with  grease  and 
honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  Two  strips  of  linen,”  it  means  two  bands  of  linen,  which  one  applies 
upon  the  two  lips  of  the  gaping  wound,  in  order  to  cause  that  one  (lip)  join  to  the  other. 

CASE  ELEVEN 
V  10-15 

A  BROKEN  NOSE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  the  column  of  his  nose. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  column  of  his  nose,  his  nose  being 
disfigured,  and  a  depression"1  being  in  it,  while  the  swelling  that  is  on  it  protrudes, 
(and)  he  has  discharged  blood  from  both  his  nostrils,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  column  of  his 
nose.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  11, 12  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  441 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  cleanse  (it)  for  him  [with]  two  plugs  of  linen.  Thou  shouldst  place 
two  (other)  plugs  of  linen  saturated  with  grease  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils.  Thou 
shouldst  put  [him]  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out). 
Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  stiff  rolls  of  linen  by  which  his  nose  is  held  fast.  Thou 
shouldst  treat  him  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint,  every  day  until  he 
recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  The  column  of  his  nose,”  it  means  the  outer  edge  of  his  nose  as  far  as 
its  side(s)  on  the  top  of  his  nose,  being  the  inside  of  his  nose  in  the  middle  of  his  two 
nostrils. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  His  two  nostrils,”  [it  means]  the  two  sides  of  his  nose  extending  to 
his  [two]  cheek[s],  as  far  as  the  back  of  his  nose  ;  the  top  of  his  nose  is  loosened. 

CASE  TWELVE 
V  16- VI  3 

A  BREAK  IN  THE  NASAL  BONE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose,  (and)  thou 
findest  his  nose  bent,  while  his  face  is  disfigured,  (and)  the  swelling  which  is  over  it  is 
protruding,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  chamber  of  his 
nose.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  force  it  to  fall  in,  so  that  it  is  lying  in  its  place,  (and)  clean  out  for 
him  the  interior  of  both  his  nostrils  with  two  swabs  of  linen  until  every  worm  of  blood 
which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils  comes  forth.  Now  afterward  thou 
shouldst  place  two  plugs  of  linen  saturated  with  grease  and  put  into  his  two  nostrils. 
Thou  shouldst  place  for  him  two  stiff  rolls  of  linen,  bound  on.  Thou  shouldst  treat 
him  afterward  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

442  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  12-14 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  break  in  the  chamber  of  his  nose,”  it  means  the  middle  of  his  nose 
as  far  as  the  back,  extending  to  the  region  between  his  two  eyebrows. 

Gloss  B 

As  for :  “  His  nose  bent,  while  his  face  is  disfigured,”  it  means  his  nose  is 
crooked  and  greatly  swollen  throughout ;  his  two  cheeks  likewise,  so  that  his  face 
is  disfigured  by  it,  not  being  in  its  customary  form,  because  all  the  depressions  are 
clothed  with  swellings,  so  that  his  face  looks  disfigured  by  it. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  Every  worm  of  blood  which  coagulates  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils,” 
it  means  the  clotting  of  blood  in  the  inside  of  his  two  nostrils,  likened  to  the  Wr-t- 
worm,  which  subsists  in  the  water. 

CASE  THIRTEEN 
VI  3-7 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  IN  THE  SIDE  OF  THE  NOSE 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  nostril. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  nostril,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
hand  upon  his  nose  at  the  point  of  this  smash.  Should  it  crepitate  under  thy 
fingers,  while  at  tho  same  time  he  discharges  blood  from  his  nostril  (and)  from  his  ear, 
on  the  side  of  him  having  that  smash  ;  it  is  painful  when  he  opens  his  mouth  because 
of  it  ;  (and)  he  is  speechless,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  smash  in  his  nostril.  An 
ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

CASE  FOURTEEN 

VI  7-14 

FLESH  WOUND  IN  ONE  SIDE  OF  THE  NOSE  PENETRATING  TO  THE  NOSTRIL 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  nostril. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  14, 15  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  443 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through,  shouldst 
thou  find  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  separated  from  each  other,  thou  shouldst  draw 
together  for  him  that  wound  with  stitching. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing 
through.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  two  swabs  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  clean  out  overy 
worm  of  blood  which  has  coagulated  in  the  inside  of  his  nostril.  Thou  shouldst  bind 
(it)  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  When  its  stitching  loosens,  thou  shouldst  take  off 
for  him  the  fresh  meat,  (and)  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  grease,  honey  (and)  lint  every 
day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  wound  in  his  nostril,  piercing  through,”  it  means  that  the  two  lips 
of  his  wound  are  soft,  opening  to  the  insido  of  his  nose,  as  one  says  :  “  Pierced 
through  ”  concerning  soft  things. ' 

CASE  FIFTEEN 
VI  14-17 

PERFORATION  OF  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION  OF  THE  MAXILLA  AND  THE  ZYGOMA 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  perforation  in  his  cheek. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  perforation  in  his  cheek,  shouldst  thou  find  there 
is  a  swelling,  protruding  and  black,  (and)  diseased  tissue  upon  his  check,  (conclusion 
in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  perforation  in  his  check.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymno  and  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease  (and)  honey 
every  day  until  ho  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

444  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  16, 17 

CASE  SIXTEEN 
VI  17-21 

SPLIT  OF  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION  OF  THE  MAXILLA  AND  THE  ZYGOMA 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  cheek. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  cheek,  shouldst  thou  find  that  there 
is  a  swelling,  protruding  and  red,  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  cheek.  An  ail¬ 
ment  which  [I]  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  His  treatment  is  sitting  until 
its  swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out).  Thou  shalt  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease, 
honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  SEVENTEEN 
VII  1-7 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OF  THE  BONE  IN  THE  REGION  OF  THE 

MAXILLA  AND  THE  ZYGOMA 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  cheek. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  cheek,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
hand  on  his  cheek  at  the  point  of  that  smash.  Should  it  crepitate  under  thy  fingers, 
while  he  discharges  blood  from  his  nostril,  (and)  from  his  ear  on  the  side  of  him  having 
that  injury  ;  (and)  at  the  same  time  he  discharges  blood  from  his  mouth,  while  it  is 
painful  when  he  opens  his  mouth  because  of  it,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  smash  in  his  cheek,  while  he 
discharges  blood  from  his  nostril,  from  his  ear,  (and)  from  his  mouth,  (and)  he  is 
speechless.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  17-19  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  445 

Tkeatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  His  r relief1  is  sitting  until  its 
swelling  is  reduced  (lit.  drawn  out).  Thou  shalt  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey, 
(and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  EIGHTEEN 

VII  7-14 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  SOFT  TISSUE  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  THE  BONE  BEING  UNINJURED 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  temple. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  it  not  having  a  gash, 
while  that  wound  penetrates  to  the  bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst 
thou  find  his  temporal  bone  uninjured,  there  being  no  split,  (or)  perforation,  (or) 
smash  in  it,  (conclusion  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  temple.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat 
afterward  [with]  grease,  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  rocovors. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “A  wound,  not  having  a  gash,  while  it  penetrates  to  the  bone,”  it  means 
that  the  wound  is  contracted,  reaching  as  far  as  the  bone,  (though)  there  is  no  gash 
in  it.  He  speaks  of  (its)  narrowness,  his  wound  not  having  two  lips. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  His  pm’  (temple),”  it  means  the  region  thereof  between  the  corner 
of  his  eye  and  the  r orifice1  of  his  ear,  at  the  end  of  his  mandible. 

CASE  NINETEEN 

VII  14-22 

A  PERFORATION  IN  THE  TEMPLE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  perforation  in  his  temple. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

446  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  19,  20 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  perforation  (thm)  [in]  his  temple,  a  wound  being 
upon  it,  thou  shouldst  inspect  his  wound,  saying  to  him  :  “  Look  at  thy  two  shoulders.” 
Should  his  doing  so  be  painful  (even  though)  his  neck  turns  around  (only)  a  little  for 
him,  while  his  eyo  on  the  side  of  him  having  that  injury  is  blood-shot,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “One  having  a  perforation  in  his  temple  r-"1, 
while  ho  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes 
by,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat  with  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  His  two  eyes  are  blood-shot,”  it  means  that  the  color  of  his  two  eyes 
is  red  like  the  color  of  ^d-flowers.  The  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  the  Embalmer  ” 
says  concerning  it :  “  His  two  eyes  are  red  •’with1  disease  like  an  eye  at  the  end  of 
its  weakness.” 

CASE  TWENTY 

VII  22-VII1  5  , 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  TEMPLE  PERFORATING  THE  BONE 

Titlb 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrating  to  the  bone,  (and) 
perforating  his  temporal  bono. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
(and)  perforating  his  temporal  bono,  while  his  two  eyes  are  blood-shot,  he  discharges 
blood  from  both  his  nostrils,  and  a  little  drops  ;  if  thou  puttest  thy  fingers  on  the 
mouth  of  that  wound  (and)  ho  shudder  exceedingly  ;  if  thou  ask  of  him  concerning 
his  malady  and  he  speak  not  to  thee ;  while  copious  tears  fall  from  both  his  eyes,  so  that 
he  thrusts  his  hand  often  to  his  face  that  he  may  wipe  both  his  eyes  with  the  back  of  his 
hand  as  a  child  does,  and  knows  not  that  he  does  so,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  temple,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  his  temporal  bone  ;  while  he  discharges  blood  from 
both  his  nostrils,  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck,  (and)  he  is  speechless.  An  ailment 
not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  20-22  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  447 

Treatment 

Now  when  thou  findest  that  man  speechless,  his  'relief1  shall  be  sitting ;  soften 
his  head  with  grease,  (and)  pour  rmilk1  into  both  his  ears. 

CASE  TWENTY-ONE 
VIII  6-9 

A  SPLIT  IN  THE  TEMPORAL  BONE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  temple. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  temple,  shouldst  thou  find  a 
swelling  protruding  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  whilo  ho  discharges  blood  from  his 
nostril  and  from  his  one  ear  having  that  split,  (and)  it  is  painful  when  he  hears  speech, 
because  of  it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  temple,  while  ho 
discharges  blood  from  his  nostril  and  his  ear  having  that  injury.  An  ailment  with 
which  I  will  contend.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  put  him  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  thou  knowest  he  has  reached 
a  decisive  point. 

CASE  TWENTY-TWO 
VIII  9-17 

COMPOUND  COMMINUTED  FRACTURE  OF  THE  TEMPORAL  BONE 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  smash  in  his  temple. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  smash  in  his  temple,  thou  shouldst  place  thy 
thumb  upon  his  chin  (and)  thy  finger  upon  the  end  of  his  ramus,  so  that  the  blood  will 
flow  from  his  two  nostrils  (and)  from  the  interior  of  his  ear  having  that  smash.  Cleanse 
(it)  for  him  with  a  swab  of  linen  until  thou  seest  its  fragments  (of  bone)  in  the  interior 
of  his  ear.  If  thou  callest  to  him  (and)  he  is  speechless  (and)  cannot  speak,  (con¬ 
clusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

448  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  22, 23 

Diagnosis 

Thou  Bhouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  smash  in  his  temple ;  he 
discharges  blood  from  his  two  nostrils  and  from  his  ear  ;  he  is  speechless  ;  (and)  he 
suffers  with  stiffness  in  his  neck.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  The  end  of  his  ramus,”  it  means  the  end  of  his  mandible.  The  ramus 
( W-f),  the  end  of  it  is  in  his  temple  just  as  the  claw  of  an  5amfe-bird  (’mi")  grasps  an 
object. 

Gloss  B 

As  for :  “  Thou  seest  its  fragments  (wS-t)  in  the  interior  of  his  ear,”  it  means 
that  some  of  the  fragments  (wS-t)  of  the  bone  come  away  to  adhere  to  the  swab  which 
was  introduced  to  cleanse  the  interior  of  his  ear. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  He  is  speechless,”  it  means  that  he  is  silent  in  sadness,  without  speak¬ 
ing,  like  one  suffering  with  ''feebleness1  ( dgy )  because  of  something  that  has  entered 
from  outside. 

CASE  TWENTY-THREE 

VIII 18-22 

A  SLIT  IN  THE  OUTER  EAR 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  ear. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  ear,  cutting  through  its  flesh, 
tho  injury  being  in  the  lower  part  of  his  ear,  (and)  confined  to  the  flesh,  thou  shouldst 
draw  (it)  together  for  him  with  stitching  behind  the  hollow  of  his  ear. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  ear,  cutting 
through  its  flesh.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

If  thou  findest  the  stitching  of  that  wound  loose  (and)  sticking  in  the  two  lips  of 
his  wound,  thou  shouldst  make  for  him  stiff  rolls  of  linen  (and)  pad  the  back  of  his 
ear  therewith.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every 
day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  24-26  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  449 

CASE  TWENTY-FOUR 
VIII  22-IX  2 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  MANDIBLE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  fracture  in  his  mandible. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  fracture  in  his  mandible,  thou  shouldst  place 
thy  hand  upon  it.  Shouldst  thou  find  that  fracture  crepitating  under  thy  fingers, 
(conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  fracture  in  his  mandible,  over 
which  a  wound  has  been  inflicted,  r-  -  -  (and)  he  has  fever  from  it.  An  ailment  not 
to  be  treated.” 

CASE  TWENTY-FIVE 
IX  2-6 

A  DISLOCATION  OF  THE  MANDIBLE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible,  shouldst  thou  find 
his  mouth  open  (and)  his  mouth  cannot  close  for  him,  thou  shouldst  put  thy  thumb(s) 
upon  the  ends  of  the  two  rami  of  the  mandible  in  tho  inside  of  his  mouth,  (and)  thy 
two  claws  (meaning  two  groups  of  fingers)  under  his  chin,  (and)  thou  shouldst  cause 
them  to  fall  back  so  that  they  rest  in  their  places. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  ‘‘One  having  a  dislocation  in  his  mandible. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  TWENTY-SIX 
IX  6-18 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  UPPER  LIP 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  lip. 

og 

oi.uchicago.edu 

460  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  26, 27 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing  through  to  the  inside 
of  his  mouth,  thou  shouldst  examine  his  wound  as  far  as  the  column  of  his  nose.  Thou 
shouldst  draw  together  that  wound  [with]  stitching. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing 
through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Now  after  thou  hast  stitched  it  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day. 
Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  wound  in  his  lip,  piercing  through  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth,”  it 
means  that  the  two  lips  of  his  wound  are  soft,  opening  to  the  inside  of  his  mouth.  One 
says  :  “  Pierced  through  ”  (y&db)  concerning  soft  things. 

CASE  TWENTY-SEVEN 
IX  13-18 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  CHIN 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin,  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  thou  shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  If  thou  shouldst  find  his  bone  uninjured, 
not  having  a  split,  (or)  a  perforation  in  it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  chin, 
penetrating  to  the  bone.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  two  strips  on  that  gash.  Thou  shouldst  bind  it 
with  fresh  meat  the  first  day,  (and)  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease, 
honey  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  28, 29  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  451 

CASE  TWENTY-EIGHT 
IX  18-X  8 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  THROAT  PENETRATING  TO  THE  GULLET 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  throat. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  throat,  piercing  through 
to  his  gullet ;  if  he  drinks  water  he  •chokes"1  (and)  it  comes  out  of  the  mouth  of  his 
wound  ;  it  is  greatly  inflamed,  so  that  he  develops  fever  from  it ;  thou  shouldst 
draw  together  that  wound  with  stitching. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  throat,  piercing 
through  to  his  gullet.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

First  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it 
afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Second  Examination 

If,  however,  thou  findest  him  continuing  to  have  fever  from  that  wound,  (con¬ 
clusion  in  following  second  treatment). 

Second  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  dry  lint  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound,  (and)  moor 
(him)  at  his  mooring  stakes  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  TWENTY-NINE 
X  8-8 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  (and)  perforating  a  vertebra  of  his  neck ;  if  thou  examinest  that  wound, 
(and)  he  shudders  exceedingly,  (and)  he  is  unable  to  look  at  his  two  shoulders  and  his 
breast,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

G  g  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

452  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  29-31 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  [One  having]  a  wound  in  his  neck,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  perforating  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  (and)  he  suffers  with  stiffness  in  his 
neck.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Now  afterward  moor  (him)  at 
his  mooring  stakes  until  the  period  of  his  injury  passes  by. 

CASE  THIRTY 
X  8-12 

SPRAIN  IN  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  thou  shouldst  say 
to  him  :  "  Look  at  thy  two  shoulders  and  thy  breast.”  When  he  does  so,  the  seeing 
possible  to  him  is  painful. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his 
neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Now  afterward  thou  shouldst 
treat  [with]  ymrw  (and)  honey  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  sprain,"  he  is  speaking  of  a  rending  of  two  members,  (although)  it 
(=each)  is  (still)  in  its  place. 

CASE  THIRTY-ONE 
X  12-22 

DISLOCATION  OF  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  [his]  neck. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  shouldst 
thou  find  him  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs  on  account  of  it,  while  his 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Oases  31, 32  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  453 

phallus  is  erected  on  account  of  it,  (and)  urine  drops  from  his  member  without  his  know¬ 
ing  it ;  his  flesh  has  received  wind  ;  his  two  eyes  are  blood-shot ;  it  is  a  dislocation 
of  a  vertebra  of  his  neck  extending  to  his  backbone  which  causes  him  to  be  unconscious 
of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs.  If,  however,  the  middle  vertebra  of  his  neck  is 
dislocated,  it  is  an  eniissio  seminis  which  befalls  his  phallus. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  a  vertebra  of  his 
neck,  while  he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  legs  and  his  two  arms,  and  his  urine  dribbles. 
An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  dislocation  (wnh)  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  of  a  separa¬ 
tion  of  one  vertebra  of  his  neck  from  another,  the  flesh  which  is  over  it  being  uninjured  ; 
as  one  says,  “  It  is  wnh,"  concerning  things  which  had  been  joined  together,  when  one 
has  been  severed  from  another. 

Gloss  B 

As  for :  “  It  is  an  emissio  seminis  which  befalls  his  phallus,”  (it  means)  that  his 
phallus  is  erected  (and)  has  a  discharge  from  the  end  of  his  phallus.  It  is  said  :  “It 
remains  stationary  ”  ( mn  s'w),  when  it  cannot  sink  downward  (and)  it  cannot  lift  up¬ 
ward. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  While  his  urine  dribbles,”  it  means  that  urine  drops  from  his  phallus 
and  cannot  hold  back  for  him. 

CASE  THIRTY  TWO 
XI 1-9 

DISPLACEMENT  OF  A  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,  whose 
face  is  fixed,  whose  neck  cannot  turn  for  him,  (and)  thou  shouldst  say  to  him  :  “  Look 
at  thy  breast  (and)  thy  two  shoulders,”  (and)  he  is  unable  to  turn  his  face  that  he  may 
look  at  his  breast  (and)  his  two  shoulders,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of 
his  neck.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

464  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  32, 33 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day.  Thou  shouldst  loose  his 
bandages  and  apply  grease  to  his  head  ras  far  as1  his  neck,  (and)  thou  shouldst  bind 
it  with  ymrw.  Thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey  every  day,  (and)  his 
•‘relief1  is  sitting  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  displacement  in  a  vertebra  of  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  concerning  a 
sinking  of  a  vertebra  of  his  neck  [to]  the  interior  of  his  neck,  as  a  foot  settles  into 
cultivated  ground.  It  is  a  penetration  downward. 

CASE  THIRTY-THREE 
XI  9-17 

A  CRUSHED  CERVICAL  VERTEBRA 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck  (and)  thou  findest 
that  one  vertebra  has  fallen  into  the  next  one,  while  he  is  voiceless  and  cannot  speak  ; 
his  falling  head  downward  has  caused  that  one  vertebra  crush  into  the  next  one ;  (and) 
shouldst  thou  find  that  he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  and  his  two  legs  because  of 
it,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck  ; 
he  is  unconscious  of  his  two  arms  (and)  his  two  legs,  (and)  he  is  speechless.  An  ailment 
not  to  be  treated.” 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  crushed  vertebra  in  his  neck,”  he  is  speaking  of  the  fact  that  one 
vertebra  of  his  neck  has  fallen  into  the  next,  one  penetrating  into  the  other,  there  being 
no  movement  to  and  fro. 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  His  falling  head  downward  has  caused  that  one  vertebra  crush  into  the 
next,”  it  means  that  he  has  fallen  head  downward  upon  his  head,  driving  one  vertebra 
of  his  neck  into  the  next. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  34, 35  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  455 

CASE  THIRTY-FOUR 
XI 17-XII  2 

DISLOCATION  OF  THE  TWO  CLAVICLES 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones. 

First  Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones,  shouldst  thou 
find  his  two  shoulders  turned  over,  (and)  the  head(s)  of  his  two  collar-bones  turned 
toward  his  face,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

First  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  his  two  collar¬ 
bones.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

First  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  cause  (them)  to  fall  back,  so  that  they  rest  in  their  places.  Thou 
shouldst  bind  it  with  stiff  rolls  of  linen  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease 
(and)  honey  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Second  Examination 

If,  however,  thou  shouldst  find  his  two  collar-bones  having  a  rupture  (of  the  tissue) 
over  it,  penetrating  to  the  interior,  (conclusion  in  second  diagnosis). 

Second  Diagnosis 

[Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him] :  “  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.”  (Scribal 
error,  cf.  pp.  345  f.) 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  dislocation  in  his  two  collar-bones,”  it  means  a  displacement  of  the 
heads  of  his  sickle-bone(s).  Their  heads  are  attached  to  the  upper  bone  of  his  breast, 
extending  to  his  throat,  over  which  is  the  flesh  of  his  gorget,  that  is  the  flesh  that  is 
over  his  bosom.  Two  canals  are  under  it :  one  on  the  right  and  (one)  on  the  left 
of  his  throat  (and)  of  his  bosom  ;  they  lead  to  his  lungs. 

CASE  THIRTY-FIVE 
XII  3-8 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  CLAVICLE 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  collar-bone. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

456  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  35, 36 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  collar-bone,  (and)  thou  shouldst 
find  his  collar-bone  short  and  separated  from  its  fellow,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  collar-bone.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back,  with  something  folded  between  his 
two  shoulder-blades  ;  thou  shouldst  spread  out  with  his  two  shoulders  in  order  to 
stretch  apart  his  collar-bone  until  that  break  falls  into  its  place.  Thou  shouldst  make 
for  him  two  splints  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  apply  one  of  them  both  on  the  inside 
of  his  upper  arm  and  the  other  on  the  under  side  of  his  upper  arm.  Thou  shouldst 
bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  treat  it  afterward  with  honey  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  THIRTY-SIX 

XII  8-14 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  HUMERUS 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  upper  arm. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  (and)  thou  findest  his 
upper  arm  hanging  down,  separated  from  its  fellow,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back,  with  something  folded  between  his 
two  shoulder-blades  ;  thou  shouldst  spread  out  with  his  two  shoulders,  in  order  to 
Btretch  apart  his  upper  arm  until  that  break  falls  into  its  place.  Thou  shouldst  make 
for  him  two  splints  of  linen,  (and)  thou  shouldst  apply  for  him  one  of  them  both  on  the 
inside  of  his  arm,  (and)  the  other  of  them  both  on  the  under  side  of  his  arm.  Thou 
shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw,  (and)  treat  afterward  [with]  honey  every  day  until  he 

recovers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  37, 38  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  457 

CASE  THIRTY-SEVEN 
XII  14-21 

A  FRACTURE  OF  THE  HUMERUS  WITH  RUPTURE  OF  OVERLYING  SOFT  TISSUE 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  with  a  wound  over  it. 

First  Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  over  which  a  wound  has 
been  inflicted,  (and)  thou  findest  that  that  break  crepitates  under  thy  fingers,  (con¬ 
clusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

First  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  over 
which  a  wound  has  been  inflicted.  An  ailment  with  which  I  will  contend.” 

First  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  two  splints  of  linen  ;  thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw  ; 
(and)  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until 
thou  knowest  that  he  has  reached  a  decisive  point. 

Second  Examination 

If,  however,  thou  findest  that  wound  which  is  over  the  break,  with  blood  issuing 
from  it,  and  piercing  through  to  the  interior  of  his  injury,  (conclusion  in  second 
diagnosis). 

Second  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  his  upper  arm,  over 
which  a  wound  has  been  inflicted,  piercing  through.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

CASE  THIRTY-EIGHT 
XII  21-XIII  2 
A  SPLIT  IN  THE  HUMERUS 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  split  in  his  upper  arm. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  split  in  his  upper  arm,  (and)  thou  shouldst  find 
the  swelling  protruding,  on  the  outside  of  that  split,  which  is  in  his  upper  arm,  (con¬ 
clusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

458  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  38-40 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  split  in  his  upper  arm.  An 
ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day  until  he  recovers. 

CASE  THIRTY-NINE 
XIII  3-12 

TUMORS  OR  ULCERS  IN  THE  BREAST  PERHAPS  RESULTING  FROM  INJURY 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,  (and) 
thou  findest  that  the  swellings  have  spread  with  pus  over  his  breast,  (and)  have  pro¬ 
duced  redness,  while  it  is  very  hot  therein,  when  thy  hand  touches  him,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  tumors  with  prominent  head  in 
his  breast,  (and)  they  produce  '"cists"1  of  pus.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat  with  the 
fire-drill.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  burn  for  him  over  his  breast  (and)  over  those  tumors  which  are  on  his 
breast.  Thou  shouldst  treat  him  with  wound  treatment.  Thou  shouldst  not  prevent 
its  opening  of  itself,  that  there  may  be  no  mnhyw  in  his  wound  (sore?).  Every  wound 
(sore  ?)  that  arises  in  his  breast  dries  up  as  soon  as  it  opens  of  itself. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  Tumors  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,”  it  means  that  there  are 
swellings  spreading  over  his  breast  because  of  his  injury ;  they  produce  pus  and  redness 
on  his  breast ;  (as)  it  is  said  :  “  It  is  like  rparti-colored1  things,”  whose  product  is  pus. 

CASE  FORTY 
XIII 12-17 

A  WOUND  IN  THE  BREAST 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  wound  in  his  breast. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  40, 41  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  459 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  wound  in  his  breast,  penetrating  to  the  bone, 
perforating  the  manubrium  of  his  sternum,  thou  shouldst  press  the  manubrium  of  his 
sternum  with  thy  fingers,  (although)  he  shudders  exceedingly,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  wound  in  his  breast,  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  bone,  perforating  the  manubrium  of  his  sternum.  An  ailment  which  I  will 
treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  after¬ 
ward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  The  manubrium  of  his  sternum,”  (it  means)  the  upper  head  of  his  ster¬ 
num  ;  it  is  like  as  it  were  a  porcupine. 

CASE  FORTY-ONE 
XIII  18-XIV  16 

AN  INFECTED  OR  POSSIBLY  NECROTIC  WOUND  IN  THE  BREAST 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  diseased  wound  in  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  while  that  wound  is 
inflamed  and  a  whirl  of  inflammation  continually  issues  from  the  mouth  of  that  wound 
at  thy  touch  ;  the  two  lips  of  that  wound  are  ruddy,  while  that  man  continues  to  be 
feverish  from  it ;  his  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage,  that  wound  cannot  take  a  margin 
of  skin;  the  ''granulation'1  which  is  in  the  mouth  of  that  wound  is  watery,  their  surface 
is  hot  and  secretions  drop  therefrom  in  an  oily  state,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  diseased  wound  in  [his]  breast, 
it  being  inflamed,  (and)  he  continues  to  have  fever  from  it.  An  ailment  which  I 
will  treat.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

460  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  41 

Treatment 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  cool  applications  for  drawing  out  the  inflammation  from 
the  mouth  of  the  wound  : 

a.  Leaves  of  willow, 

nM-tree 

ksnty. 

Apply  to  it. 

b.  Leaves  of  ymy- tree, 

dung, 

hny-t\ 

ksnty. 

Apply  to  it. 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  applications  for  drying  up  the  wound  : 

a.  r Powder”1  of  green  pigment 

wSb-t, 

thn-t 

grease. 

Triturate  ;  bind  upon  it. 

b.  Northern  salt, 

ibex  grease. 

Triturate  ;  bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shalt  make  for  him  poultices  : 

Red  Sfnn, 

garden  tongue, 
d'rt, 

sycamore  leaves. 

Bind  upon  it. 

If  the  like  befalls  in  any  member,  thou  shalt  treat  him  according  to  these  instruc¬ 
tions. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  A  diseased  wound  in  his  breast,  inflamed,”  it  means  that  the  wound 
which  is  in  his  breast  is  sluggish,  without  closing  up  ;  high  fever  comes  forth  from  it, 
its  two  lips  are  red,  (and)  its  mouth  is  open.  The  “  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  a 
Wound  ”  says  concerning  it :  “  It  means  that  there  is  very  great  swelling ;  (and) 

'  inflamed  ’  is  said  concerning  the  height  ’’  (of  the  fever). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  41-43  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  461 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  A  whirl  of  inflammation  in  his  wound,”  it  means  a  whirl  of  inflammation 
which  circulates  through  the  interior  of  his  entire  wound. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  Its  two  lips  are  ruddy,”  it  means  that  its  two  lips  are  red  like  the  color 

of  the  tm£-t-  tree.  ~  „ 

Gloss  D 

As  for :  “  His  flesh  cannot  receive  a  bandage,”  it  means  that  his  flesh  will  not 
receive  the  remedies  because  of  the  inflammation  which  is  in  his  flesh. 

Gloss  E 

As  for  :  “  While  heat  continually  issues  {nSw)  from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy 
touch,”  (it  means)  that  heat  comes  forth  from  his  wound  at  thy  touch  ;  as  it  is  said 
that  a  thing  which  has  come  forth  entirely,  has  issued  (n&c).” 

CASE  FORTY-TWO 

XIV  16-22 

A  SPRAIN  OF  THE  STERNO-COSTAL  ARTICULATIONS 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  [a  man  having  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast],  (and)  he  suffers 
in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,  not  having  a  dislocation,  (and)  it  is  not  broken,  while  that  man 
continues  to  suffer  with  it  and  shudders  exceedingly,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 
An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day  until  he  recovers.  Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  Ribs  of  his  breast,”  it  means  the  bones  of  his  sternum  ;  being  spine(s) 
like  as  it  were  a  spine-roast. 

CASE  FORTY-THREE 
XIV  22-XV  6 

A  DISLOCATION  IN  THE  STERNO-COSTAL  ARTICULATIONS 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  dislocation  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

462  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  43, 44 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  dislocation  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast,  (and)  thou 
findest  that  the  ribs  of  his  breast  are  ^projecting1,  and  their  heads  are  ruddy,  while 
that  man  suffers  continually  with  swellings  in  his  two  sides,  (conclusion  follows  in 
diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his 
breast.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  ymrw ;  thou  shouldst  treat  afterward  [with]  honey 
every  day,  until  he  recovers. 

Gloss  A 

As  for  :  “  A  dislocation  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,”  it  means  a  displacement  of  the 
heads  of  the  ribs  of  his  breast  (sternum),  which  are  fastened  to  his  breast  (sternum). 

Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  He  suffers  with  swellings  in  his  two  sides,”  it  means  that  he  suffers  in 
the  articulations  thereof  in  his  breast  (sternum)  'spreading!  in  his  two  sides. 

Gloss  C 

As  for :  “  His  two  sides,”  it  means  his  two  flanks. 

CASE  FORTY-FOUR 

XV  6-9 

FRACTURED  RIBS 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast,  over  which  a 
wound  has  been  inflicted ;  (and)  thou  findest  that  the  ribs  of  his  breast  crepitate 
under  thy  fingers,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  break  in  the  ribs  of  his  breast, 
over  which  a  wound  has  been  inflicted.  An  ailment  not  to  be  treated.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  45, 46  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  463 

CASE  FORTY-FIVE 
XV  9-19 

BULGING  TUMORS  ON  THE  BREAST 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  bulging  tumors  on  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  bulging  tumors  on  his  breast,  (and)  thou  findest 
that  [swellings]  have  spread  over  his  breast ;  if  thou  puttest  thy  hand  upon  his  breast 
upon  these  tumors,  (and)  thou  findest  them  very  cool,  there  being  no  fever  at  all 
therein  when  thy  hand  touches  him  ;  they  have  no  granulation,  they  form  no  fluid, 
they  do  not  generate  secretions  of  fluid,  and  they  are  bulging  to  thy  hand,  (conclusion 
follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  bulging  tumors.  An  ailment 
with  which  I  will  contend.” 

Treatment 

There  is  no  treatment1.  If  thou  findest  bulging  tumors  in  any  member  of  a  man, 
thou  shalt  treat  him  according  to  these  directions. 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “  Bulging  tumors  on  his  breast,”  it  means  the  existence  of  swellings  on 
his  breast,  large,  spreading  and  hard  ;  touching  them  is  like  touching  a  ball  of  wrap¬ 
pings  ;  the  comparison  is  to  a  green  hemat-imii,  which  is  hard  and  cool  under  thy 
hand,  like  touching  those  swellings  which  are  on  his  breast. 

CASE  FORTY-SIX 
XV  20-XVI 16 

AN  ABSCESS  WITH  PROMINENT  HEAD  ON  THE  BREAST 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  an  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast. 

Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  an  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,  (and) 
thou  findest  a  very  large  swelling  protruding  on  his  breast,  oily,  like  fluid  under  thy 
band,  while  they  produce  some  clamminess  of  the  surface,  (and)  their  faces  have  no 
ruddiness,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

464  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Case  46 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  an  abscess  with  prominent  head 
in  his  breast.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat  with  cold  applications  to  that  abscess 
which  is  in  his  breast.” 

Treatment 

a.  $A-<-fruit, 
nirt, 
ksnty, 

Triturate,  bind  upon  it. 

b.  Fruit  of  Ss, 
ksnty , 

mason’s  mortar, 
water, 

Triturate,  bind  upon  it. 

If  there  is  resistance  to  these  cooling  applications,  thou  shouldst  avoid  those 
remedies  until  all  fluid  which  is  in  the  abscess  with  a  head  exudes. 

Thou  shouldst  treat  him  with  wound-treatment,  with  applications  for  drawing  out 
the  inflammation  from  the  mouth  of  the  wound  (sore  ?)  in  his  breast  i 

Leaves  of  acacia, 

sycamore, 
juice  of  i/m’-leaves, 
ox  dung, 
hny-t 

Bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  astringents,  in  his  breast : 

a.  ["Powder1  of  green  pigment, 
d’r-t  of  cedar, 
ointment  fat, 
northern  salt, 
ibex  grease. 

Bind  upon  it. 

Thou  shouldst  make  for  him  poultices  : 

Red  Spnn, 
sycamore. 

Triturate,  apply  to  it. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

Cases  46,  47  CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION 

465 

Gloss  A 

As  for :  “An  abscess  with  prominent  head  in  his  breast,”  it  means  that  there  is 
a  large  swelling  due  to  the  injury  which  is  in  his  breast,  soft  like  a  fluid  under  the 

hand'  Gloss  B 

As  for  :  “  Clamminess  of  their  surface,”  it  means  their  skin  is  not  hot. 

Gloss  C 

As  for  :  “  There  is  no  ruddiness  upon  it,”  it  means  that  there  is  no  redness  upon  it. 

CASE  FORTY-SEVEN 
XVI 1 6-X  VII 15 

A  GAPING  WOUND  IN  THE  SHOULDER 
Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder. 

First  Examination 

If  thou  examinest  a  man  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shouldor,  its  flesh  being  laid 
back  and  its  sides  separated,  while  he  suffers  with  swelling  (in)  his  shouldor  blade,  thou 
shouldst  palpate  his  wound.  Shouldst  thou  find  its  gash  separated  from  r.l  its  sides 
in  his  wound,  as  a  roll  of  linen  is  unrolled,  (and)  it  is  painful  when  he  raises  his  arm 
on  account  of  it,  thou  shouldst  draw  together  for  him  his  gash  with  Btitching. 

First  Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder, 
its  flesh  being  laid  back  and  its  sides  separated,  while  he  suffers  with  swelling  in  his 
shoulder  blade.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

First  Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  bind  it  with  fresh  meat  the  first  day. 

Second  Examination  and  Treatment 

If  thou  findest  that  wound  open  and  its  stitching  loose,  thou  shouldst  draw  together 
for  him  its  gash  with  two  strips  of  linen  over  that  gash  ;  thou  shouldst  treat  it  after¬ 
ward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day  until  he  recovers. 

If  thou  findest  a  wound,  its  flesh  laid  back,  its  sides  separated,  in  any  member  of  a 
man,  thou  shouldst  treat  it  according  to  these  directions. 

Third  Examination 

If,  however,  thou  findest  that  his  flesh  has  developed  inflammation  from  that 
wound  which  is  in  his  shoulder,  while  that  wound  is  inflamed,  open,  and  its  stitching 
loose,  thou  shouldst  lay  thy  hand  upon  it.  Shouldst  thou  find  inflammation  issuing 

H  h 

oi.uchicago.edu 

466  THE  SURGICAL  TREATISE  Cases  47, 48 

from  the  mouth  of  his  wound  at  thy  touch,  and  secretions  discharging  therefrom  are 
cool  like  wenesh-jnice,  (conclusion  follows  in  second  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis  Following  Third  Examination 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him  :  “  One  having  a  gaping  wound  in  his  shoulder, 
it  being  inflamed,  and  he  continues  to  have  fever  from  it.  An  ailment  with  which  I 
will  contend.” 

Fourth  Examination 

If  then,  thou  findest  that  man  continuing  to  have  fever,  while  that  wound  is 
inflamed,  (conclusion  in  following  treatment). 

Treatment  Following  Fourth  Examination 

Thou  shalt  not  bind  it ;  thou  shalt  moor  (him)  at  his  mooring  stakes,  until  the 
period  of  his  injury  passes  by. 

Fifth  Examination 

If,  however,  his  fever  abates  and  the  inflammation  in  the  mouth  of  his  wound 
dissipates  entirely,  (conclusion  in  following  treatment). 

Treatment  Following  Fifth  Examination 

Thou  shouldst  treat  him  afterward  [with]  grease,  honey,  (and)  lint  every  day,  until 
he  recovers. 

CASE  FORTY-EIGHT 
XVII 16-19 

A  SPRAIN  IN  A  SPINAL  VERTEBRA  (INCOMPLETE) 

Title 

Instructions  concerning  a  sprain  of  a  vertebra  [in]  his  spinal  column. 

Examination 

If  thou  examincst  [a  man  having]  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his  spinal  column,  thou 
shouldst  say  to  him  :  “Extend  now  thy  two  legs  (and)  contract  them  both  (again).” 
When  he  extends  them  both  he  contracts  them  both  immediately  because  of  the  pain 
ho  causes  in  the  vertebra  of  his  spinal  column  in  which  he  suffers. 

Diagnosis 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  him :  “  One  having  a  sprain  in  a  vertebra  of  his 
spinal  column.  An  ailment  which  I  will  treat.” 

Treatment 

Thou  shouldst  place  him  prostrate  on  his  back ;  thou  shouldst  make  for  him 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PART  II 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

(THE  VERSO) 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

(The  Verso) 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION 

The  group  of  texts  to  which  we  have  prefixed  the  title:  “The  Incantations  and 
Eecipes  ”  has  no  internal  connection  whatever  with  the  Surgical  Treatise.  These 
texts  are  like  stray  and  disconnected  memoranda  which  a  modern  reader  might  write 
on  the  fly-leaf  of  a  book.  In  the  first  place  they  are  physically  separated  from  the 
Surgical  Treatise  by  two  things  :  (1)  a  blank  space  at  the  end  of  Case  48,  with  which 
the  Surgical  Treatise  stops ;  (2)  by  the  fact  that  they  occupy  four  and  a  half 
columns  on  the  back  of  the  papyrus  which  bears  the  Surgical  Treatise  on  the  front. 
Furthermore,  they  are  in  subject-matter  a  totally  different  body  of  writings  as  a  glance 
at  the  table  of  contents  will  demonstrate.  Their  method,  their  purpose,  and  their 
conception  of  disease  are  identical  with  those  of  the  well-known  recipe  papyri  like 
Papyrus  Ebers  or  Hearst,  and  in  sharp  contrast  with  that  of  the  Surgical  Treatise. 
They  form  a  magical  hodge-podge,  without  plan  or  arrangement,  and  we  must  regard 
these  incantations  and  recipes  on  the  verso  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  as  in  no 
conceivable  respect  a  continuation  of  the  Surgical  Treatise.  This  obvious  fact  is 
emphasized  here,  even  at  the  risk  of  being  repetitious,  because  some  readers  of  the 
present  writer’s  preliminary  reports  on  the  new  papyrus  seem  to  have  gained  the  im¬ 
pression  that  the  group  of  magical  texts  on  the  back  form  part  of  the  Surgical  Treatise. 

As  already  remarked  in  the  general  introduction,  the  same  scribe  who  wrote  the 
seventeen  columns  of  the  Surgical  Treatise  on  the  front  of  the  papyrus  abruptly 
abandoned  the  copying  of  that  important  document  in  the  middle  of  a  case,  and, 
much  to  our  regret,  never  completed  the  copy.  Presumably  at  a  later  date,  he  turned 
over  the  roll,  then  not  less  than  sixteen  feet  long,  and  leaving  a  blank  and  unwritten 
space  at  the  end  of  the  front,  and  a  second  such  space  at  the  beginning  of  the  back, 
he  began  to  write  on  the  back  the  miscellaneous  group  of  incantations  and  recipes, 
a  list  of  which  is  as  follows  : 

Eight  Incantations  against  Pest  : 

Title  of  the  First  Incantation 

First  Incantation  ..... 
Conclusion  of  the  First  Incantation 
Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  First  Incantation 
Title  of  the  Second  Incantation 
Second  Incantation  .... 

Directions  for  pronouncing  the  Second  Incantation 

XVIII 1 
XVIII  1-8 
XVIII  8-9 
XVIII  9-11 
XVIII  11-12 
XVIII 18-15 
XVIII  15-16 

oi.uchicago.edu 

470  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Title  of  the  Third  Incantation 
Third  Incantation  . 

Fourth  Incantation  .... 

Fifth  Incantation  ..... 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Fifth  Incantation 
Title  of  the  Sixth  Incantation 
Sixth  Incantation  ..... 
Title  of  the  Seventh  Incantation 
Seventh  Incantation  .... 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Seventh  Incantation 
Eighth  Incantation  ..... 
Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Eighth  Incantation 

Recipe  foe  Female  Troubles 

Two  Recipes  for  the  Complexion  : 

Recipe  for  Transforming  the  Skin 
Recipe  for  Beautifying  the  Face 

Recipe  for  Transforming  an  Old  Man  into  a  Youth 
Recipe  for  some  Ailment  of  the  Anus  and  Vicinity 

XVIII  17 
XVIII  17-19 

XVIII  19-XIX  2 

XIX  2-9 
XIX  9-14 
XIX  14 
XIX  14-18 
XIX  18-19 

XIX  19-XX  5 

XX  5-8 
XX  8-11 
XX  11-12 

XX  18-XXI  3 

XXI  3-6 
XXI  6-8 

XXI  9-XXII 10 

XXII  11-14 

This  list  at  once  discloses  the  fact  that  these  writings  on  the  back  do  not  form  an 
organized  or  coherent  treatise  like  that  on  the  front.  A  more  grotesquely  incoherent 
hodge-podge  could  hardly  be  conceived.  Of  the  four  and  a  half  columns,  nearly 
three  are  devoted  to  incantations  exorcising  some  form  of  annual  epidemic  or  pest,  and 
to  these  the  copyist  appends  a  column  and  a  half  containing  five  recipes :  one  for 
female  troubles,  three  for  improving  the  complexion,  and  the  fifth  for  some  ailment  of 
the  anus. 

The  animistic  conception  of  disease  is  interestingly  illustrated.  The  bearers  of  the 
pest  are  not  only  malignant  divinities,  genii,  and  demons  of  disease,  but  also  the  dis¬ 
embodied  dead,  male  and  female,  both  human  and  animal.  It  is  of  interest,  and  pos¬ 
sibly  of  scientific  importance  to  note  that  the  pest  might  be  borne  by  other  agencies, 
notably  the  wind.  We  have  here  doubtless  the  earliest  occurrence  of  the  belief  in 
pest-laden  winds.  Again  we  find  an  entire  incantation  devoted  to  the  unfortunate  who 
has  accidently  swallowed  a  fly. 

In  view  of  modern  knowledge  of  the  fly  as  a  carrier  of  diseases  like  dysentery,  this 
early  example  of  similar  experience  is  notable.  Similarly  we  observe  that  the  pest 
must  be  exorcised  from  food,  bedding,  and  household  articles.  The  process  is  so  strik¬ 
ingly  suggestive  of  the  modern  practice  of  disinfection,  that  the  reader  should  be 
warned  against  any  such  cone  usion.  It  is  barely  possible  that  the  ancient  Egyptian 

oi.uchicago.edu 

SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  471 

physicians  had  noticed  that  this  unidentified  disease  had  been  communicated  through 
bedding  or  food,  but  the  method  of  rendering  these  things  innocuous,  as  prescribed  on 
the  back  of  our  papyrus,  is  magical  incantation  pure  and  simple,  and  has  not  the  re¬ 
motest  resemblance  to  the  modern  processes  of  disinfection.  Microscopic  life  was 
entirely  unknown  to  medical  practice  throughout  the  ancient  world,  and  must  have 
remained  unknown  until  the  introduction  of  lenses  and  the  microscope  in  the  Seven¬ 
teenth  Century  of  our  era. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  devote  further  space  to  the  discussion  of  the  five  recipes 
occupying  the  last  two  columns  of  the  verso.  The  “  Recipe  for  Transforming  an  Old 
Man  into  a  Youth  ”  (XXI  9-XXII  10)  is  a  very  interesting  example  of  the  apothe¬ 
cary’s  art,  furnishing,  as  it  does,  full  directions  how  to  make  an  aqueous  solid  extract ; 
but  as  a  remedy  it  proves  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  face  paste  believed  to  be  efficacious 
in  removing  wrinkles  and  other  facial  evidences  of  old  age. 

These  last  two  recipes,  copied  by  a  different  scribe  from  the  one  who  copied  the 
Surgical  Papyrus  and  all  the  preceding  material  on  the  verso,  bear  on  the  question 
of  the  date  of  our  copy.  The  writing  of  this  latter  scribe  is  small,  crabbed,  and  ungrace¬ 
ful.  It  makes  the  impression  of  being  later  than  the  time  of  the  first  scribe.  It  is 
possible  that  our  roll,  bearing  all  that  the  first  scribe  had  written  (1 1-XXI  8)  was  in 
use  for  a  generation  before  the  second  scribe  added  the  last  two  recipes  (XXI  9-XXII 
14).  The  final  owner  or  user,  for  whom  the  second  scribe  copied  the  last  two  recipes, 
may  have  been  contemporary  with  the  scribe  of  Papyrus  Ebers.  He  may  indeed  have 
been  the  owner  both  of  our  document  and  Papyrus  Ebers,  thus  making  it  quite  possible 
that  the  two  papyri  were  found  together  by  the  modern  natives,  and  brought  to  Edwin 
Smith  together. 

Regarding  the  age  of  these  incantations  and  recipes  on  the  verso,  there  is  little  to 
establish  a  precise  date.  The  section  XVIII 1  to  XXI  8  shows  some  indications  of  an 
earlier  date  than  our  copy,  but  the  last  two  recipes,  written  by  the  second  scribe,  are 
probably  not  equally  old. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

EIGHT  INCANTATIONS  AGAINST  PEST 
XVIII  1-XX  12 

These  interesting  exorcisms  are  directed  against  some  form  of  annually  recurring 
disease  called  “  the  pest  of  the  year  ”  or  even  merely  “  this  year,”  an  epidemic  which 
cannot  be  identified.  Various  divinities  and  disease  demons  are  regarded  as  bearing 
this  pest, — and  the  charms  are  accordingly  addressed  to  these  maligant  beings.  The 
most  prominent  among  these  is  Sekhmet,  a  goddess  often  associated  with  war  and 
destruction.  In  one  charm  the  hostile  beings  are  enumerated  as  men,  gods,  spirits, 
and  the  dead  (XVIII  18).  Again  they  are  summarized  as  “  every  male  spirit,  every 
female  spirit,  every  male  dead,  every  female  dead,  the  form  of  every  animal,  the  one 
(fem.)  which  the  crocodile  has  taken,  the  one  which  the  serpent  has  stung,  the  one  which 
has  perished  by  the  knife,  (or)  the  one  who  has  died  in  his  bed.”  It  will  be  seen  that 
the  dead,  both  of  men  and  animals,  occupy  a  prominent  place  among  malignant 
beings  who  afflict  the  living.  The  charms  operate  not  merely  to  banish  the  hostile 
powers,  but  also  to  call  in  beneficient  divinities  and  spirits  to  aid  in  the  protection  of 
the  patient.  All  these  divinities,  spirits,  genii,  or  demons  are  introduced  with  allusions, 
usually  very  obscure,  to  incidents  in  the  sacred  myths  now  largely  lost,  producing 
a  magical  hocus-pocus  difficult  to  understand  at  best,  and  sometimes  quite  unin¬ 
telligible. 

The  manner  of  uttering  these  charms  is  carefully  prescribed  and  was  evidently 
considered  important,  for  five  of  the  incantations  are  followed  by  full  directions  for 
pronouncing  them  in  connection  with  certain  acts  and  equipment.  Thus  the  man  to 
be  protected  by  the  first  incantation  must  wear  two  vulture  feathers  while  the  charm 
is  pronounced  over  him ;  the  beneficiary  of  the  second  incantation  must  pronounce 
it  himself  while  carrying  a  piece  of  des-wood  around  the  outside  of  his  house  ;  again 
everything  in  a  man’s  house  may  be  protected  from  pest  if  he  says  the  seventh  incanta¬ 
tion,  while  he  has  before  him  a  nefret-ft ower,  bound  with  a  strip  of  linen  to  a  piece  of 
des-wood,  which  he  passes  over  the  food,  the  bed,  and  other  objects  in  the  house. 

The  bearers  of  the  pest  are  any  of  the  malicious  beings  listed  above,  as  those  against 
which  the  exorcisms  are  employed  ;  but  there  may  also  be  some  other  sources.  It 
is  interesting  to  note  that  the  bearer  of  the  pest  may  be  the  wind  (XVIII  8-9  ;  and 
12-18).  It  enters  at  the  mouth  and  throat,  and  to  prevent  this  a  man  should  wear 
about  his  neck  a  band  of  linen  bearing  written  upon  it  the  words  of  the  fifth  incanta¬ 
tion.  Even  asses,  “  the  besbes- goose,”  and  “  the  green-breasted  goose  ”  may  enter 
his  throat  unless  prevented  by  this  charm  (XIX  12).  Again  the  bearer  of  the  pest  is 
a  fly  which  a  man  may  accidentally  swallow,  and  the  sixth  incantation  is  entirely 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  473 

devoted  to  such  a  case.  It  raises  an  interesting  question  of  possible  knowledge  of  the 
fact  that  the  fly  is  a  bearer  of  disease.  In  this  connection  it  is  important  to  observe 
that  the  seventh  charm  is  directed  against  the  possible  lurking  of  the  pest  in  food, 
bedding,  or  any  of  the  articles  in  the  house. 

Title  of  the  First  Incantation 
XVIII 1 

XVIII  1 

I  ■ 

Translation 

Incantation  for  exorcising  the  wind  of  the  pest  of  the  year. 

Commentary 

“  The  pest  of  the  year  ”  presumably  designates  an  annual  epidemic  of  some  kind. 
There  is  no  indication  of  the  character  of  the  disease  anywhere  in  the  following  text. 
It  is  characteristic  of  these  magical  exorcisms,  which  are  both  exorcisms  and  recipes, 
that  there  should  be  no  proper  examination,  and  no  conclusions  regarding  the  seat 
and  the  nature  of  the  disease.  The  word  (j  y'd-t,  rendered  above  as  “  pest,” 

has  been  touched  upon  by  Gardiner  in  his  Admonitions  of  an  Egyptian  Sage  (p.  25), 
where  the  common  application  of  the  word  as  a  term  of  opprobrium  is  mentioned, 
and  especially  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  term  “  y'd-t  of  the  year  ”  in  magical 
texts.  The  medical  significance  of  y’d-t  still  remains  to  be  cleared  up.  The  genitive 
mp-t  “  year,”  apparently  adjectival,  would  be  more  in  accordance  with  common 
usage  if  joined  by  the  genitive  n-t  “  of ;  ”  but  the  direct  genitive  does  not  preclude 
understanding  mp-t  as  adjectival  in  force,  and  equivalent  to  “  annual.” 

First  Incantation 
XVIII 1-8 

oi.uchicago.edu 

474  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Translation 

0  Flamo-in-His-Face !  Presider  over  the  horizon,  speak  thou  to  the  chief  of  the 
Hemosut-house,  who  makes  Osiris,  first  of  the  land,  to  flourish.  0  Neklibet,  lifting  the 
oarth  to  the  sky  for  her  father,  come  thou,  bind  the  two  feathers  around  me,  around 
mo,  that  I  may  live  and  flourish  because  I  possess  this  White  One.  The  first  is  the 
Great  One  dwelling  in  Heliopolis ;  the  second  is  Isis  ;  the  third  is  Nephthys  ;  while 
I  am  subject  to  thee  (fem.). 

0  Seizor-of-the-Great-One,  son  of  Sekhmet,  mightiest  of  the  mighty,  son  of  the 
Disease- Demon,  Dened,  son  of  Hathor,  mistress  of  the  crown  ( ni ),  and  flooder  of  the 
streams  ;  when  thou  voyagest  in  the  Celestial  Ocean,  when  thou  sailest  in  the  morning 
barque,  thou  hast  saved  me  from  every  sickness. 

Commentary 

Tho  incantation  consists  of  adjurations  addressed  to  hostile  demons,  as  well  as  to 
protecting  divinities,  and  filled  with  obscure  epithets  and  allusions. 

Y©  Hmi-u't  are  personifications  of  graces  and  good  qualities  who  appear  at  royal 
births,  as  in  the  birth  scenes  of  Hatshepsut  at  Deir  el-Bahari,  and  of  Amenhotep  III 
at  Luxor.  Isis  and  Nephthys  are  familiar  as  beneficent  goddesses,  but  Sekhmet  is 
a  goddess  of  terror  and  destruction,  and  throughout  these  incantations  is  closely 
connected  with  the  pest. 

Dnd  is  the  name  of  a  demon  doubtless  derived  from  the  old  word 
dnd,  “  anger,  wrath  ”  (Pyr.  68  b  and  2072  d).  Compare  also  dndn  and  dndn  ; 
likewise  the  barque  called  Dnd-dndrw.  ^  dnd  is  an  ailment  in  Pap.  Ebers  102,  7 

(compare  also  ibid.  102,  10).  As  a  god  Dnd  appears  as  one  of  the  four  ram-headed 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  475 

divinities  in  the  Book  of  the  Portals,  12th  hour,  upper  row  (Ramses  VI,  Tausert, 
Ramses  III,  but  not  Seti  II).  Written  Dndn  this  god  appears  as  early  as  the  Pyramid 
Texts  (200d),  and  as  Dndnw,  Pyr.  1254b.  In  late  times  he  still  survives  as  ^  ^  kvu  jQ 
or  Dndn  in  Edfu  and  Dendera  (Rochem.  I,  p.  525  and  II,  p.  25  ;  Mariette, 

Denddrah,  I  28). 

fy’yty’  “Disease-Demon,”  is  evidently  a  derivative  from 
h’yt,  “  disease,”  but  seems  to  be  a  rather  rare  word.  It  appears  in  the  plural  in  the 
Book  of  the  Dead,  Chapter  CXLIX  (ed.  Budge,  1898,  Text,  p.  872),  as  a  designation 
of  malignant  demons. 

oSL-sfLxEE:  “  flooder,”  or  “  flooding  ”  (fern.)  is  rare.  See  Pyr.  295  c  where  it 

is  parallel  with  — Compare  also  Pyr.  298  a. 

dhr-t,  “  sickness,”  is  common  in  the  medical  papyri.  See  Pap.  Hearst 
IX  10;  Pap.  Ebers  41,  20;  52,  20;  89,  16;  89,  18;  101,  1-2  (twice);  100,  18-20 
where  it  is  explained  in  a  gloss.  A  charm  against  snake- poison  adjures  the  vessels 
of  the  body  not  to  take  up  (Sip)  “^e  excretion  of  sickness  ” 

(Pap.  Turin,ed.Pleyte-Rossi,181,I.ll,  magical  text  of  the  Empire,  copied  by  Gardiner, 

11.  10-11). 

Conclusion  of  the  First  Incantation 

XVIII  8-9 

idh  I  MW 

,  , 

!  I  iJ 

JBi 

* 

Translation 

Incantation  against  this  year,  with  the  breath  of  every  evil  wind. 
Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is  around  all  my  flesh  for  life. 

Commentary 

The  point  of  this  conclusion  is  of  course  a  mythological  reference  to  the  success  of 
the  youthful  Horus  against  his  enemies.  The  flesh  of  the  speaker  of  the  charm  is 
perhaps  parallel  with  the  flesh  of  Osiris,  the  father  of  Horus,  who  shielded  his  father’s 
body.  The  same  charm  is  found  again  in  XIX  9  and  XX  11. 

This  final  charm  introduced  at  the  end  is  preceded  by  what  appears  to  be  a  con¬ 
cluding  title,  such  as  are  so  commonly  found  at  the  end  of  a  charm  in  the  Coffin  Texts. 
The  determinative  of  nf-t  “  breath,”  is  incorrectly  written,  by  habit  of  the  scribe, 
with  following  w,  as  in  the  common  word  t’w  “  wind,”  always  written  with  the  sail 
and  w.  See  following  context. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

476 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Directions  fob  Pronouncing  the  First  Incantation 

XVIII  9-11 

10 

IP 

AWWv 

w\o\\ 

Translation 

Speak  the  words  over  two  vulture  feathers,  with  which  a  man  has  covered  himself, 
placed  as  his  protection  in  every  place  where  he  goes.  It  is  a  protection  against 
the  year,  expelling  sickness  in  the  year  of  pest. 

Commentary 

The  two  feathers  here  used  in  pronouncing  the  spell  are  of  course  applied  to  the 
man  to  be  protected,  while  uttering  the  passage  (XVIII  8-4)  of  the  spell  referring  to 
the  two  feathers.  It  would  seem  that  any  person  not  yet  suffering  from  disease,  who 
assumes  tho  two  feathers,  and  pronounces  the  incantation,  is  assured  of  protection 
against  the  pest. 

Title  of  the  Second  Incantation 
XVIII  11-12 

12 

Translation 

Another  (incantation)  for  exorcising  the  plague-bearing  wind,  the  demons  of  disease, 
the  malignant  spirits,  messengers  of  Sekhmet. 

Commentary 

ky,  “  another,”  is  a  common  introduction  in  the  medical  papyri  for  a  new 
recipe  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  last.  It  passed  on  into  Greek  treatises  as  aAW 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  477 

or  aXXo.  See  Wessely’s  publication  of  the  Greek  magical  Papyri  in  Paris  and  London 
in  Denkschriften  der  Wiener  Akademie,  1888.  We  have  in  this  fact  a  clear  indication 
of  the  use  of  the  old  Egyptian  papyri  in  Greek  times. 

n4s'tyw ,  “malignant  spirits,”  is  a  rare  word  of  vague  meaning  not  closely 
determined.  I  find  no  other  example  of  its  appearance  outside  of  our  papyrus,  except 
in  a  copy  of  a  Kamak  inscription  made  by  Sethe  for  the  Berlin  Worterbuch,  in  a  text 
of  Graeco-Roman  age,  which  suggests  that  nds-tyw  are  genii  or  semi-divine  beings  of 
some  kind  ( Worterbuch  copies  by  Sethe,  4,  44). 

Second  Incantation 
XVIII 18-15 

Translation 

Withdraw,  ye  disease  demons.  The  wind  shall  not  reach  me,  that  those  who  pass 
by  may  pass  by  to  work  disaster  against  me.  I  am  Horus  who  passes  by  the  diseased 
ones  of  Sekhmet,  (even)  Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet.  I  am  the  unique 
one,  son  of  Bastet.  I  die  not  through  thee  (fem.) 

Commentary 

In  these  incantations,  “  those  who  pass  by  ”  is  a  designation  of  all  the  hostile, 
disease-bearing  demons  or  beings  against  whom  the  charms  are  directed.  The  picture 
seems  to  be  that  these  malignant  spirits  pass  by  on  the  wind,  as  if  borne  by  it.  We 
notice  that  this  incantation  is  to  be  uttered  while  the  man  pronouncing  it  goes 
around  the  outside  of  “  his  house,”  thus  evidently  preventing  the  dangerous  winds 
from  entering  the  house.  We  have  here  doubtless  the  earliest  occurrence  of  the 
notion  of  pestilential  or  disease-bearing  winds. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

'Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Second  Incantation 
XVIII  15-16 

A  n 

Translation 

Let  the  words  be  spoken  by  a  man  having  a  stick  of  des-wood  in  his  hand,  while 
he  comes  forth  into  the  open  and  goes  around  his  house.  He  cannot  die  by  the  pest 
of  the  year. 

Commentary 

The  alleged  power  of  the  incantation  is  doubtless  due  to  the  unidentifiable  wood 
which  the  man  pronouncing  the  charm  carries  in  his  hand  as  he  makes  the  circuit  of 
his  house,  walking  around  the  outside,  and  thus  preventing  the  winds  from  entering. 

Title  of  the  Third  Incantation 

XVIII  17 

Translation 

Another  protection  against  the  pest  of  the  year. 

Third  Incantation 
XVIII 17-19 

<=>A 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  479 

Translation 

I  am  the  abomination  that  came  forth  out  of  Buto.  0  Meskhenet,  that  came  forth 
out  of  Heliopolis ;  0  men,  0  gods,  0  spirits,  0  dead,  be  ye  far  from  me.  I  am  the 
abomination. 

Commentary 

The  protection  consists  in  becoming  something  abhorred  which  the  spirits  dare 
not  approach.  The  form  hr-tyumy,  a  plural  pseudo-participle,  is  found  again  in  the 
singular  with  the  same  meaning  in  the  next  charm  (XIX  2).  Its  optative  force  is 
unusual.  Gardiner  calls  my  attention  to  its  similar  use  in  Mutter  und  Kind  (8,  6-8, 
several  times). 

Fourth  Incantation 
XVIII 19-XIX  2 

o  « 

( 

XIX  1 

<?  J 

w 

P=ll  I  lc=*S=3 

O 

c=j  i 

l  l 

9  £-5 

Translation 

Another  (incantation).  I  am  the  healthy  one  in  the  way  of  the  passer  by.  Shall 
I  be  smitten,  while  I  am  healthy  ?  I  have  seen  the  great  disaster.  0  this  fever,  do 
not  assail  me,  (for)  I  am  the  one  who  has  come  forth  out  of  the  disaster.  Be  thou  far 
from  me. 

Commentary 

A  charm  the  effectiveness  of  which  consists  in  its  asseverations  of  safety  and 
escape,  a  common  device  in  Egyptian  magic. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

480  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Fifth  Incantation 

XIX  2-9 

Translation 

Copy  of  another  (incantation).  0  Jubilation,  Jubilation,  take  not  this  my  heart, 
nor  this  my  breast  for  Sekhmet.  Take  not  my  liver  for  Osiris,  in  order  that  the 
hidden  things  that  are  in  Buto  may  not,  shall  not  enter  into  my  seat  on  the  morning 
of  counting  the  Horus-eye,  even  every  male  spirit,  every  female  spirit,  every  male 
dead,  every  female  dead,  the  form  of  every  animal,  the  one  (fern.)  which  the  crocodile 
has  taken,  the  one  (masc.)  which  the  serpent  has  stung,  the  one  which  has  r perished1 
by  the  knife,  (or)  the  one  who  has  died  in  his  bed.  Ye  demons  of  disease,  of  the 
followers  of  the  year  and  its  yield,  lo,  Horus,  even  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is 
[around]  ail  my  flesh  for  life. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  481 

Commentary 

The  force  of  the  charm  seems  to  be  exerted  against  a  group  of  the  dead,  both  men 
and  animals  residing  in  Buto,  and  who  are  first  called,  therefore,  “  the  hidden  things 
that  are  in  Buto,”  as  a  kind  of  group  designation  followed  by  a  list  of  the  members  of 
the  group.  They  belong  in  the  innermost  center  of  Buto,  for  the  unusual  phrase 
"f  literally  “  dwelling  in  the  inside  of,”  must  have  some  special  significance 

here. 

The  two  negatives  together,  are  probably  a  double  negative  for  the 

sake  of  emphasis  ;  the  verb  to  which  they  most  probably  belong  is  2  n ,  where  we 
would  expect  hn,  “approach.”  oi^  literally  means  “my  mat,”  here  used  for 
“  my  seat.”  The  verb  before  “  knife  ”  has  been  smeared  by  the  scribe’s  finger  and 
is  illegible  ;  but  the  context  and  parallelism  show  clearly  that  it  must  mean  something 
like  “  perish.”  Presumably  the  slaughter  of  an  animal  with  the  knife  is  the  form 
of  death  here  intended.  *  hp,  rendered  above  “  die,”  is  doubtless  connected  with 
the  verb  ®  A  hpy,  “  to  go  ”  or  “  depart.”  The  final  statement  of  the  charm  is  found 
also  in  XVIII  9  and  XX  11,  and  from  these  parallels  we  are  able  to  supply  the  word 
"f”  A’,  "  around,”  omitted  by  error  of  the  scribe. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Fifth  Incantation 
XIX  9-14 

10 

?  A*vV^ 

IWAVA  WWiW 

0\ 

14 

oi.uchicago.edu 

482  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Translation 

Speak  the  words  over  (images  of)  Sekhmet,  Bastet,  Osiris,  and  Neheb-kau, 
written  with  frankincense  on  a  band  of  fine  linen  and  attached  to  a  man  at  his  throat. 
It  will  prevent  asses  from  entering,  -  -  the  besbes- goose  to  me,  and  the  green-breasted 
goose.  The  protection  of  the  life  of  Neit  is  around  me,  (even  of)  her  who  is  over  the 
escaped  of  the  sower.  Bastet  is  repelled  from  the  house  of  a  man.  A  man  shall  say 
(it)  at  the  life  of  the  year. 

Commentary 

The  mention  of  the  asses  and  the  geese  is  of  course  in  harmony  with  the  inclusion 
of  the  animals  in  the  charm  in  1.  6.  There  is  apparently  corruption  of  the  text  in  the 
passage  ^  which  remains  unintelligible.  The  besbes- goose  is  rare  and  found 

only  in  the  mastaba  tomb  of  Manofer  (Sakkara  Tomb  17,  Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  II 
70  =  Berlin  1108).  It  is  evidently  an  old  word.  The  “green-breast”  is  better 
known  and  occurs  in  the  Middle  Kingdom  a  number  of  times,  and  once  in  the  Empire. 
Neither  variety  can  be  identified  with  exactness.  The  obscure  epithet  after  Neit  (or 
should  we  render  “crown”  as  in  XVIII  6?)  is  quite  unintelligible.  Bastet  as  an  un¬ 
friendly  goddess  is  also  found  in  XIX  20.  The  “  life  of  the  year  ”  perhaps  means  the 
“  yield  of  the  year,”  that  is,  at  harvest  time  ;  but  this  is  uncertain. 

Title  of  the  Sixth  Incantation 
XIX  14 

Translation 

Incantation  for  cleansing  a  fly. 

Commentary 

Although  not  clear  in  this  title,  the  case  is  one  of  a  man  who  accidentally  swallowed 
a  fly,  thought  to  be  a  bearer  of  disease,  here  presumably  the  pest. 

Sixth  Incantation 
XIX  14-18 

15 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  483 

Translation 

The  mouth  of  this  man  who  is  under  my  fingers,  and  so  forth,  is  the  mouth  of 
a  Qiungry'1  calf,  when  he  comes  forth  from  his  mother’s  womb.  This  insect  which  has 
entered  into  this  his  belly,  (although)  he  has  entered,  shall  come  forth  alive,  issuing 
to  the  ground  as  earth  or  as  excrement,  without  injuring  his  belly,  (but)  coming  forth 
as  his  excrement  from  him,  having  been  assigned  to  Akeru. 

Commentary 

As  literally  stated  in  the  title  the  charm  is  for  cleansing  the  fly,  not  for  cleansing 
the  man  of  the  fly.  Nevertheless  the  first  statement  of  the  incantation  is  that  the 
mouth  of  the  man  who  has  swallowed  the  fly  is  as  the  mouth  of  a  new-born  calf,  that 
is,  entirely  clean.  It  is  evidently  considered  highly  important  that  the  stomach  and 
intestines  should  be  relieved  of  the  fly. 

^hs  h’bw,  rendered  above  “  rhungry1  calf  ”  is  a  rare  term  of  great 
age.  It  is  known  elsewhere  only  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (225  b).  The  difficulty  is  the 
word  h'bw,  which  is  of  uncertain  meaning.  Important  for  our  passage  is  a  similar 
statement  in  the  Pyramid  Texts.  The  dead  king  is  purified,  and  one  says  to  him : 

Q1ik  “  Thy  mouth  is  the  mouth  of  a  milk-calf  on  the  day 
on  which  he  is  born  ”  (Pyr.  27  d).  The  parallelism  would  suggest  that  h’bw  might 
possibly  mean  “  sucking  ”  or  the  like.  “  Akeru  ”  is  an  earth-god,  to  whom  the 
excrement  is  here  consigned. 

Title  of  the  Seventh  Incantation 

XIX  18-19 

I  I  o 

Translation 

Incantation  for  cleansing  everything  from  pest. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

484 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  BECIPES 

Seventh  Incantation 
XIX  19-XX  5 

Translation 

Thy  messengers  are  consumed,  0  Sekhmet ;  thy  demons  of  disease  retreat,  0 
Bastet.  The  Year  does  not  pass  by  to  work  disaster  against  me.  Thy  breath  does 
not  reach  me.  I  am  Horus  over  the  diseased  ones  of  Sekhmet,  I  am  thy  Horus, 
0  Sekhmet ;  I  am  thy  unique  one,  0  Buto.  I  die  not  by  thee ;  I  die  not  by  thee. 
I  am  the  rejoicing  one,  I  am  the  jubilating  one.  0  son  of  Bastet,  descend  not  upon 
me ;  0  Dweller  in  the  Sepsepu,  approach  me  not,  draw  not  near  me.  I  am  the  king  in 
the  midst  of  hiB  ''shelter1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  485 

Commentary 

The  charm  is  full  of  obscure  allusions.  (J,  ndsds,  probably  meaning  to  “  burn, 

consume,”  is  a  rare  word  occurring  elsewhere  seemingly  only  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
ed.  Naville,  78,  82.  The  obscure  “  sepsepu  ”  may  possibly  be  connected  with  the 
Ptolemaic  word  spsp,  “to  rob”  or  similar.  The  older  word  pap □*— « 

&p£p,  “  to  tousle,  disarrange,  pull,  drag  ”  (Carter-Newberry,  Tomb  of  Thoutm6sis, 
IV,  46042)  makes  little  or  no  sense  here.  The  last  word,  h'yt,  rendered 

with  uncertainty  “  ["shelter1,”  is  unknown  elsewhere. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Seventh  Incantation 

XX  5-8 

v'w<s> 

III 

7 

^C=ZS£ =3 

Ql  1  1 

53k  ^ 

?! 

1 

Q 

la-a 

Tm 

□ 

_i 

Translation 

Let  a  man  say  this  incantation  before  a  nefret-d ower,  bound  to  a  piece  of  des-wood, 
and  tied  with  a  strip  of  linen.  Let  them  be  passed  over  the  things  ;  the  post  will  be 
exorcised,  (and)  the  passage  of  the  disease- demons  by  everything  that  is  eaten,  like¬ 
wise  by  the  beds,  will  be  prevented. 

Commentary 

n/r*  13  a  unidentified  flower,  and  des- wood  is  likewise  uncertain.  The 
latter  was  used  against  the  pest  in  the  Second  Incantation  (XVIII  15). 
ly-tyw  is  commonly  considered  to  mean  “  clothing,”  as  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  (787  b) 

oi.uchicago.edu 

486  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

or  later,  Gayet,  Le  Temple  de  Louxor,  pi.  12,  4  (Eighteenth  Dynasty)  and  Diimichen, 
Historische  Inschriften,  II  86  d  (Medinet  Habu,  Eighteenth  Dynasty) ;  but  it  seems 
obvious  that  we  must  render  linen  in  our  incantation. 

Eighth  Incantation 
XX  8-11 

Translation 

Another  (incantation).  A  shames-B ower  is  on  me,  the  abomination  of  thy  followers. 
Thy  diseased  ones  avoid  me,  the  stretching  of  thy  snare  avoids  me  ;  lam  the  escaped 
one  of  thy  birds.  Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is  around  all  my  flesh  for  life. 

Commentary 

The  identity  of  the  S’md  or  “  sha/nes-flower  ”  is  unknown.  It  is 

evidently  some  flower  supposed  to  be  effective  in  warding  off  pest,  and  may  have  been 
Borne  marsh  flower  growing  like  a  thicket  and  thus  furnishing  a  refuge  for  birds  in 
escaping  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Eighth  Incantation 
XX  11-12 

Translation 

Let  a  man  say  this  incantation  when  a  shames-flower  has  been  given  to  him  in 
his  hand. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  487 

Commentary 

This  is  in  accordance  with  the  statement  in  the  charm,  “  A  s/iames-flower  is  on  me.” 
This  eighth  incantation  concludes  the  series  employed  in  exorcising  the  pest.  The 
following  recipe  is  for  a  female  trouble  and  has  no  connection  with  the  pest  series. 

RECIPE  FOR  FEMALE  TROUBLES 
XX  18-XXI  8 

This  case,  like  those  in  the  latter  part  of  Papyrus  Ebers,  begins  with  an  examina¬ 
tion.  No  title  is  prefixed.  The  diagnosis  clearly  indicates  suspension  or  interruption 
of  the  menses.  The  treatment  consists  of  three  recipes  :  one  internal  and  two  external. 
The  composition  of  the  internal  remedy  is  too  uncertain  to  permit  any  opinion  regard¬ 
ing  its  efficacy ;  while  the  ointments  applied  externally  were  quite  obviously  of  no 
value.  The  final  fumigation  was  rather  a  matter  of  toilet  than  of  medical  treatment. 

Examination 
XX  18-14 

Translation 

If  thou  examinest  a  woman  suffering  in  her  abdomen,  so  that  the  menstrual 
discharge  cannot  come  away  for  her  ;  and  thou  findest  trouble  in  the  upper  part  of 
her  vulva,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Commentary 

It  is  obvious  that  in  this  recipe  the  word  r’-yb,  commonly  meaning  “stomach,” 
is  applied  here  to  the  female  organs,  especially  the  uterus,  and  as  doubtless  loosely 
used  to  designate  this  region,  perhaps  best  rendered  by  “  abdomen,”  as  above.  The 
most  common  term,  usually  employed  by  the  Egyptians  for  this  region,  is  the  more 
general  designation  h-t,  “  belly,  womb.”  See  XIX  15,  16,  and  17. 

The  word  rendered  “  vulva  ”  °  is  written  with  the  determinative  only,  and  should 
perhaps  be  otherwise  interpreted.  See  the  word  vulva  in  the  diagnosis. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

488  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Diagnosis 

XX  14-15 

15 

«.  <vwwv\  /vwwwv 

llllo 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  her  :  “  It  is  obstruction  of  the  blood  in  her  vulva.” 

First  Treatment,  Internal  and  External 

XX  15-17 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  prepare  for  her  : 

Warn,  tV 

Grease,  £ 

Sweet  beer  | 

Cooked  and  drunk  for  four  days. 

Besides  preparing  for  her  (the  prescription  called)  “  Discharge  of  the  blood  ”  (as 
follows) :  Oil,  tejmenet,  eye-paint,  sweet  frankincense.  Mix,  (and)  anoint  the  organ 
therewith  very  frequently. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  489 

Commentary 

The  first  drug  in  the  internal  prescription,  which  was  to  be  carried  by  the  beer  as 
a  solvent,  is  unfortunately  entirely  unknown  and  cannot  be  identified.  A  plant  of 
this  name  occurs  twice  in  Pap.  Ebers  (92, 17  and  69, 11),  and  once  in  the  Berlin  Medical 
Papyrus  (3038,  5,  12) ;  and  the  fruit  of  this  plant  is  employed  in  recipes  in  Hearst 
(VIII  6 ;  IX  6-7  ;  V  8  and  duplicates  in  Ebers).  See  also  Ebers  18,  8  ;  21,  22  ;  22, 
3;  22,  5 ;  5,  1  ;  50,  15;  18,  14;  and  Pap.  Berlin  (3088,  1,  2).  Presumably  it  is 
this  unidentified  fruit  which  is  employed  here. 

As  commonly  in  the  Egyptian  medical  papyri,  the  solids  are  enumerated  first  and 
the  solvent  which  is  to  carry  them  is  placed  at  the  end.  The  measures  of  parts  seem 
to  be  in  two  different  series.  Warn  is  measured  by  the  heket,  a  common  grain  measure 
containing  almost  800  cubic  inches.  Our  common  bushel  contains  about  1\  heket. 
Roughly  a  heket  was  a  little  more  than  half  a  peck,  that  is  a  little  more  than  four 
quarts,  and  a  sixteenth  of  a  heket  would  therefore  have  been  a  trifle  over  half  a  pint  of 
the  warn  fruit,  of  which  the  patient  is  to  take  a  decoction.  The  grease  is  followed  by 
the  fraction  §  which  does  not  imply  any  unit  of  measure  ;  but  the  sign  after  the  sweet 
beer  indicates  J  of  a  heket  which  would  be  a  little  over  a  pint. 

The  external  remedy  also  begins  with  an  unknown  drug.  The  eye-paint  was  black 
antimony.  Its  Egyptian  name  mMm-t  has  been  corrupted  into  Coptic  cthju. 

Greek  arififu,  and  finally  Latin  stibium.  Whether  the  ingredients  when  mixed  formed 
a  powder  or  an  ointment  is  uncertain  without  knowing  more  about  tepnenet,  but  the 
verb  “  anoint  ’’  suggests  ointment. 

The  word  employed  for  the  female  organ  here,  ks,  is  not  known  elsewhere. 

Alternative  External  Treatment 
XX  18-XXI  8 

oi.uchicago.edu 

490  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  put  hezret-e&ts  into  ointment.  If  afterward  she  has  an  evil  odor, 
wipe  her  off  and  anoint  her  two  labia  therewith  very  frequently.  Thou  shouldst  apply 
frankincense  and  incense  between  her  two  loins,  (and)  cause  the  smoke  thereof  to 
enter  her  flesh. 

Commentary 

The  active  agency  in  the  ointment  prescribed  is  a  plant  evidently  having  leaves 
which  resemble  the  ears  of  an  animal.  This  animal,  |  hdr  t,  is  known  from  a  list 
of  villages  in  an  Old  Kingdom  mastaba  (No.  45,  Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  II  29),  in  which 
the  determinative  looks  something  like  a  hyena.  See  also  Cairo  20066  and  20055,  both 
from  the  Middle  Kingdom.  In  the  storming  of  Dapur  (Lepsius,  ibid.  Ill  166),  Sethe, 
collating  the  original,  suggests  a  Springmaus  or  some  similar  creature.  It  must  have 
been  some  animal  not  distasteful  to  the  Egyptians,  for  the  word  occurs  as  the  name 
of  both  men  and  women. 

nphmj  (dual)  is  anatomically  uncertain,  but  occurs  with  meanings  which 
must  be  connected  with  the  lower  part  of  the  trunk ;  hence  the  rendering  above,  which 
may  be  too  much  localized.  The  purpose  of  the  incense  burning  is  of  course  obvious. 

TWO  RECIPES  FOR  THE  COMPLEXION 
XXI  8-8 

These  are  obviously  toilet  preparations  having  no  place  among  medical  recipes, 
although  a  number  of  recipes  for  such  preparations  are  included  in  the  Papyrus  Ebers. 
The  ingredients  are  again  of  too  uncertain  identity  for  us  to  say  much  regarding  the 
virtue  of  these  two  preparations  for  the  complexion. 

I.  Recipe  for  Transforming  the  Skin 
XXI  8-6 

4 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  491 

Translation 

A  recipe  for  transforming  the  skin  : 

Honey,  1 

Red  natron,  1 

Northern  salt,  1 

Triturate  together  (and)  anoint  therewith. 

Commentary 

If  the  natron  here  called  °  ,  Mmn  is  the  same  as  the  other  variety  ntry, 

discussed  above  in  Case  46,  its  chief  ingredient  was  a  sesquicarbonate  of  sodium.  See 
commentary  on  XYI  4.  “  Northern  salt  ”  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  41  (XIV 
5-6)  and  was  chiefly  chloride  of  sodium. 

II.  Recipe  for  Beautifying  the  Face 
XXI  6-8 

<Sa  O  Y  CD 

A  i  i-~-i  i  i 

Translation 

Another  (recipe)  for  beautifying  the  face  : 

Alabaster  ■'kernels'1 ,  1 

Natron  ■’kernels'1,  1 

Northern  salt,  1 

Honey,  1 

Mix  together,  (and)  anoint  therewith. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

492  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Commentary 

The  uncertain  word  dkw,  rendered  "rkemels’1,”  is  elsewhere  a  designation  for 
a  preparation  of  grain.  It  may  here  possibly  designate  the  physical  form  in  which  the 
alabaster  and  the  natron  were  employed. 

RECIPE  FOR  TRANSFORMING  AN  OLD  MAN  INTO  A  YOUTH 
XXI  9-XXII 10 

Thus  far  the  writing  of  the  Papyrus  Edwin  Smith  was  the  work  of  a  single  scribal 
hand,  which  copied  all  the  material  on  the  recto  (seventeen  columns)  and  three  columns 
and  eight  lines  on  the  verso.  The  last  twenty-six  lines  (XXI  9-XXII  14)  were  added 
by  a  different  hand  at  some  later  date.  The  two  recipes  added  by  this  second  scribe 
have  no  relation  to  each  other  whatsoever  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  first  of  the  two, 
which  we  are  now  taking  up,  was  suggested  by  the  preceding  recipes  for  the  com¬ 
plexion  ;  this  recipe  for  transforming  an  old  man  into  a  youth  being  simply  another 
face  ointment  designed  to  banish  the  traces  of  age  from  the  face. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  apothecary’s  art  in  the  Sixteenth  Century  b.c.,  this  recipe 
is  of  unusual  interest.  It  describes  in  great  detail  the  preparation  of  an  aqueous  solid 
extract  of  an  unidentified  fruit,  and  the  successive  stages  of  the  process  are  fully  ex¬ 
plained.  The  resulting  paste  or  ointment  is  externally  applied,  and  the  directions  for 
use  assure  us  that  the  result  is  complete  removal  of  all  signs  of  age.  It  will  be  seen 
then  that  what  wo  have  in  this  early  oriental  predecessor  of  the  elixir  of  life  is  simply 
a  face  paste  which  will  remove  wrinkles.  It  seems  to  have  claimed  no  effect  upon  the 
waning  vitality  of  an  old  man.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  like  the  later  elixir  of  life 
it  was  to  be  kept  in  a  precious  vase  or  flask  of  semi-precious  stone. 

Title 
XXI  9 

Translation 

Beginning  of  the  Book  of  Transforming  an  Old  Man  into  a  Youth. 

Commentary 

While  the  meaning  of  this  title  is  perfectly  clear,  a  slight  verbal  modification  of  the 

rendering  proposed  is  possible.  The  idiom  ^ . ^  yr-t . m,  meaning  “  to 

transform . into,”  literally  to  “  make . into  ”  is  well  known.  In 

oriental  hyperbole,  when  a  boastful  official  digs  a  well  in  the  desert  he  says  :  “  I  made 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  493 

the  highlands  a  river,  and  the  upper  valleys  a  water  way  ”  (see  Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  II 
149,  e,  11. 10-1 1 ,  and  the  author’s  Ancient  Records,  I,  paragr.  447).  My  friend  Professor 
Golenischeff  suggests  that  we  should  find  here  two  other  idiomatic  uses  of  yr-t,  “  to 
make,”  which  are  also  well  established,  viz.  “  to  pass  ”  (time),  or  again  “  to  make  ” 
an  official,  meaning  “  to  be  ”  such  an  official.  He  quotes  the  well-known  passage  from 
Papyrus  Prisse  (5,  2)  : 

cal  I  I  o 

and  renders,  “  To  be  an  old  man  is  evil  for  people  in  every  respect  ”  (or  “  to  pass  old 
age  is  evil  etc.”).  While  we  may  object  to  render  the  form  S5  as  an  infinitive  in  Papy¬ 
rus  Prisse,  Professor  Golenischeff’s  suggestion  seems  to  be  perfectly  possible  in  our 
passage.  It  would  not  essentially  alter  the  meaning  of  the  title,  which  in  either  ease 
signifies  much  the  same  thing,  whether  we  render  as  above  or  call  it  with  Professor 
Golenischeff  “  the  Book  of  Passing  Old  Age  as  a  Youth.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

494 

THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

_ _ 0  I  ©  1  *__0  I 

MVMl S 

><? 

16 

o  — 

i  i » —fl  I  i 

0  zs 

><? 

D  nn<?. 

I  II  o 

□ 

PJ 

<?© 

I  ^ 

AVAVA 

I  I  I  I 

<ititp:®p; 

amava 

Ifl 

PJ- 

/WwVvV\  /WVVW\ 

>i  i  i  r  </] 

w  I  i  r  <?  1 1  i  i 

/WWW 

Oi  AWW  < 

©  <=* 

!)<==>  HP^p^ziJ/5 

A  -tx  -  ©  ^  Qi 

A  ^ 

I  /WVWM  \  AWWW  T 

T-ICEW 

21 

1  O-d^i  ^  ^  c^3  ^ 

ITd\@<?  □  ^ 

<=>  ^-JrwiS  A* _ D' - 

^<=>  ^y<=>(  — no 

AMVWVA  \  I 

iCi  WWWW 

HTO 

WW ws  |  ^  f]  /WWW 

I  I  I 

|  — /~x  AVWWN  AV*VW\  /W/AVN 

AWWA  WWW\ 

d\\ 

[V46 

<?  i 

XXII  1 

<i> 

MP-P^lt^fTAl^P^ 

p=) 

AMiVWI  ^ 

•<?  I 

/www\ 

AlVWM 

-<£2>- 

o  m 

1 - 1  ^  A'AWA 

I  1  I  /VWM  WMW 

»<? 

i  i 

rs: 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY 

495 

□ 

\<?L3 

i 

A 

□  n°!' 

O  I  <3 

I  I  I 

“<?  o  a  o  n 

i  I  a  ■  r  <■ - >  A  I  i  I  <dl^>  *f\ 

U 

ra|™s 

A 

>r 

<?  i 

/WAW\  L...  1 

Translation 

Let  there  be  brought  a  large  quantity  of  hemayd-lruit,  about  two  khar.  It 
should  be  bruised  and  placed  in  the  sun.  Then  when  it  is  entirely  dry  let  it  be  fhusked1 
as  grain  is  ("husked1,  and  it  should  be  winnowed  until  (only)  the  fruit  thereof  remains. 
Everything  that  comes  therefrom  shall  be  measured,  (and)  let  it  bo  sifted  after  the 
manner  of  the  rthreshing  floor1  with  the  sieve.  Measure  likewise  everything  that 
comes  from  these  fruits  and  make  them  into  two  portions :  one  consisting  of  these 
fruits  and  the  other  even  so.  Treat  one  like  the  other. 

(First  Process) 

Let  it  be  set  aside,  mixed  with  water.  Make  into  a  soft  mass  and  let  it  be  placed 
in  a  new  jar  over  the  fire  (and)  cooked  very  thoroughly,  making  sure  that  they  boil, 
evaporating  the  juice  thereof  and  drying  them,  until  it  is  like  dry,  without  moisture 
therein.  Let  it  be  dug  out  (of  the  jar).  Now  when  it  is  cool,  let  it  be  put  into  (another) 
jar  in  order  to  wash  it  in  the  river.  Let  it  be  washed  thoroughly,  making  sure  that 
they  are  washed  by  tasting  the  taste  of  this  water  that  is  in  the  jar  (until)  there  is  no 
bitterness  at  all  therein.  It  should  be  placed  in  the  sun,  spread  out  on  launderor’s 
linen.  Now  when  it  is  dry,  it  should  be  ground  upon  a  grinding  mill-stone. 

(Second  Process) 

Let  it  be  set  aside  in  water.  Make  like  a  soft  mass  and  let  it  be  placed  in  a  jar 
over  the  fire  and  cooked  thoroughly,  making  sure  that  it  boils,  that  the  fluids  of  the 
mass  may  go  forth  therefrom.  A  man  shall  dip  out  the  mass  that  has  come  of  it  with 
a  dipper.  Put  into  a  hin- jar  after  it  is  rof  the  consistency1  of  clay.  Rub  and  make 
thick  its  r consistency1.  Dip  out  this  mass  and  put  upon  a  linen  cover  on  the  top  of 
this  Tiin-jar.  Now  afterward  it  should  be  put  into  a  vase  of  costly  stone. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

496  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Commentary 

There  is  much  that  is  not  clear  in  this  interesting  account  of  the  processes  for 
making  an  aqueous  extract.  In  the  first  place  the  fruit  from  which  it  is  made  cannot 
be  identified.  It  will  be  found  discussed  in  Case  45  (XV  15).  It  evidently  had  a  hard 
husk  or  shell,  which  suggests  that  it  might  even  have  been  a  variety  of  nut. 

h'r  must  be  a  loose  use  of  the  term  here  as  “  measure.”  It  can  hardly  be 
2§  bushels,  making  a  total  of  5  bushels,  as  computed  by  Griffith  in  his  excellent  article 
(Proceedings  of  the  Socy.  of  Biblical  Archaeol.,  14  (1892),  p.  421). 

dn,  “  thresh,”  or  possibly  rnd~l,  perhaps  meaning  “  to  husk,”  is  slightly 
uncertain  in  tho  reading.  The  *— >  is  thrown  back  under  the  so  that  one  is 
uncertain  whethor  tho  n  or  the  d  is  to  be  read  first.  It  may  possibly  be  an  alphabetic 
writing  of  ’f’jl*— 11  rid,  “  grind,”  although  if  so,  it  would  be  the  only  example  of  thi3 
writing  in  our  papyrus. 

In  favor  of  the  reading  dn,  Devaud  recalls  (Sail.  I  4,  12  and 

Ainenemope  19,  9),  probably  meaning  “threshing  floor”;  compare  S.  ‘xitoo'^: 
B.  3'iuoo‘Y.  This  etymology  would  indicate  the  meaning  “  thresh  ”  for  our 
verb  dn. 

The  meaning  of  “  everything  that  comes  therefrom  ”  is  not  wholly  clear.  It  might 
mean  exclusively  the  kernel  or  meat  extracted  from  the  husk  ;  it  might  also  include 
tho  husk  which  in  the  immediately  following  instructions  might  form  the  second 
portion. 

c~3  is  a  word  of  uncertain  reading,  and  the  meaning  furthermore  is  also  un¬ 
settled.  It  might  also  be  read  c~3. 

Very  important  for  an  understanding  of  these  directions  is  the  meaning  of  the 
"  two  portions.”  As  noted  just  above,  it  might  at  first  be  supposed  to  mean  the  husks 
as  ono  portion  and  tho  fruits  or  kernels  as  the  other.  This  would  seem  to  be  involved 
in  tho  phrase  “  ono  consisting  of  these  fruits  ;  ”  but  the  other  portion  is  not  sufficiently 
described  in  the  following  directions  to  make  its  character  unequivocal.  In  any  case 
wo  must  conclude  that  the  “  two  portions  ”  are  both  subjected  to  the  same  two 
processes  for  making  an  aqueous  extract.  These  two  processes  are  identical  in  the 
beginning  stages.  They  both  begin  as  follows  : 

First  Process: 

Second  Process  :  ^ 

o  a 

I  I  I  (WMM 

O  55 

O 

(XXI 15-16) ; 
(XXII  2-8), 

the  second  being  somewhat  shortened.  They  then  proceed  with  the  steps  for  producing 
a  thick  decoction  by  boiling  and  evaporation.  The  language  of  the  two  show’s  interest¬ 
ing  variants,  important  for  our  knowledge  of  the  Egyptian  dictionary.  The  first 
process  concludes  with  the  production  of  a  dry  powder,  while  the  second  results  in 
a  mass  obviously  of  thick  consistency,  which  is  kept  in  a  vase. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  ,  497 

The  relation  of  the  two  processes  is  obscure.  There  is  no  explicit  indication  in  the 
text  where  the  directions  for  the  second  process  begin.  Furthermore  the  product 
resulting  from  the  first  process  is  never  mentioned  again.  Indeed  the  directions  for 
using  the  preparation  (XXII  7)  clearly  show  that  the  finished  preparation  is  a  soft 
mass  with  which  the  user  can  “  anoint  ”  himself.  These  facts  seem  to  show  that  the 
dry  powder  produced  by  the  first  process  (and  otherwise  dropped  in  XXII  2,  without 
further  reference  being  made  to  it)  is  again  placed  to  soak  in  water  (XXII  2)  just  as 
at  first  (XXI  15-16),  and  is  then  boiled  and  evaporated  a  second  time,  to  form  at 
last  a  thick  paste.  In  that  case  we  must  suppose  that  the  directions  to  make  two 
portions  simply  indicate  that  the  quantity  of  the  fruit  taken  was  too  large  to  be  made 
up  in  one  lot,  and  that  the  apothecary  is  therefore  to  divide  it  up  into  two  lots  merely 
for  making. 

® ,  Sd-t,  meaning  “  mass  ”  or  similar,  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  read  O  rd-t 
“  fat,”  used  like  mrh-t,  “  grease,”  in  this  passage  for  designating  a  soft  mass ;  but 
Devaud  calls  my  attention  to  the  Coptic  jJJxooy  epoc 

CTpenujtOTe  <yHoit  (Zoega,  Cat.,  p.  562,  14),  which  makes  the  reading  Sd-t  per¬ 
fectly  certain.  For  the  Sd-sign  see  also  XXI  18. 

PJ®?  4bh,  “jar,”  is  a  new  word,  seemingly  unknown  elsewhere. 

*7$“=  nkw-t,  “  moisture,”  is  also  an  unknown  word,  but  the  context  here  renders 
this  translation  fairly  certain.  See  Coptic  etymologies,  pp.  595  f. 

The  curious  use  of  f  before  finite  forms  of  the  verb  in  1.  17  and  again  in  1.  21  raises 
a  question  of  syntax.  Sethe  suggests  that  it  simply  means  “  and  ”  as  sometimes 
between  two  nouns. 

rhh,  “evaporate,”  is  not  known  elsewhere  with  this  meaning.  In  the 
examples  known  (Daressy,  Recueil  de  trav.  16,  125  and  Dumichen,  Geogr.  Inschr., 
IV,  118)  it  means  “  consume.” 

P  "  Swgm,  “grinding,”  is  not  otherwise  known  with  the  causative  6  with  the 

following  <?  preserved.  The  simplex  occurs  in  an  interesting  Old  Kingdom  relief 
scene  showing  two  women  grinding.  One  says:  “  Grind  thoroughly,” 

and  the  other  replies :  “  I  am  grinding  as  hard  as  I  can  ”  (Erman, 

Reden,  pp.  18-19,  from  Cairo  1584).  The  causative  with  loss  of  the  <?  is  found  in 
Pap.  Ebers  (21,  12),  where  a  recipe  is  to  be  triturated  in  “in  a  stone 

mortar”  until  you  pulverize  it.”  wgm  as  a  kind  of  grain, 

evidently  from  the  root  “  to  grind,”  occurs  in  the  Ramesseum  List  Papyrus  261, 
and  again  ZJrJc.  IV  687. 

JUTi  is  otherwise  unknown  except  in  two  passages  in  Pap.  Ebers,  which 
do  not  aid  us  as  to  the  meaning.  An  examination  of  the  parallel  passage  in  the  first 
process  (XXI  17)  shows  that  our  pnS-t  is  parallel  with  “  the  juice  thereof.”  Pns-t 
must  therefore  mean  something  like  “  fluids.” 

E  k 

oi.uchicago.edu 

498  ,  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

(possibly  to  be  read :  ^  ^  is  an  entirely  unknown  word.  The 
rendering  above  is  a  guess.  Just  what  happens  to  the  mass  placed  in  the  kin- jar  is 
not  at  all  clear.  At  the  end  of  the  kin-jar  stage  the  soft  mass  is  spread  on  a  piece  of 
linen  stretched  over  the  top  of  the  jar,  seemingly  as  old-fashioned  cottage  cheese 
is  so  placed  in  order  to  drain  it,  the  fluid  draining  back  into  the  jar.  It  was  at  this 
stage  still  fluid  enough  to  be  “  dipped.” 

At  the  close  of  the  second  process  the  resulting  paste  is  ready  for  use,  and  is 
therefore  placed  in  a  toilet  vase  of  some  costly  stone  like  lapis  lazuli,  jasper,  or 
possibly  alabaster  or  aragonite. 

Directions  for  Use 
XXII  7-10 

Translation 

Anoint  a  man  therewith.  It  is  a  remover  of  ■‘wrinkles’1  from  the  head.  When 
the  flesh  is  smeared  therewith,  it  becomes  a  beautifier  of  the  skin,  a  remover  of 
■blemishes"1,  of  all  ■’disfigurements1,  of  all  signs  of  age,  of  all  '"weaknesses1  which  are 
in  the  flesh.  Found  effective  myriads  of  times. 

Commentary 

The  passage  contains  a  series  of  uncertain  words  which  are  not  found  elsewhere. 
These  are  all  enclosed  in  half-brackets.  The  word  Q tny  is  evidently  a  derivative 
of  the  familiar  word  tny  “  grow  old,”  and  must  mean  something  like  “  signs  of 

old  age.”  The  other  words  undoubtedly  list  some  of  the  unsightly  external  indications 
of  advanced  age,  but  it  is  impossible  to  determine  their  specific  meanings. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

TRANSLATION  AND  COMMENTARY  499 

RECIPE  FOR  SOME  AILMENT  OF  THE  ANUS  AND  VICINITY 
XXII  11-14 

The  examination,  introduced  by  the  verb  “  inspect  ”  (m”)  in  place  of  the  usual 
“  examine  ”  (h’y),  is  hardly  worthy  of  the  name,  and  recalls  the  lack  of  a  full  examina¬ 
tion  so  usual  in  the  recipe  papyri.  As  there  is  no  diagnosis,  the  recipe  follows  directly 
upon  the  brief  examination,  the  whole  case  occupying  only  a  little  over  three  lineB. 

Examination 
XXII  11-12 

Translation 

If  thou  inspectest  a  man  ailing  in  his  anus,  (and)  whether  standing  or  sitting, 
suffering  very  greatly  with  seizures  in  both  his  legs,  (conclusion  in  treatment). 

Commentary 

n4r'wt>  “  seizures,”  is  a  word  not  found  elsewhere  in  Egyptian  documents. 
It  may  possibly  be  derived  from  the  well-known  word  ndry,  “  to  seize,”  and 

hence  the  rendering  above. 

Treatment 
XXII  12-14 

;=>  o  “xi- 
i  i  i 

jh?,X' 

,--W 

i  i  i 

o 

I  1  I 

^  _  X  °  f 

I  I  I  /VWVWS  rCi  Yl  I  I  I 

1  I— JJ  I 

o  ^ 

9— o(p 

i  1  w 

K  k  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

600  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Translation 

Thou  shouldst  give  to  him  a  recipe,  an  ointment  of  great  protection  (as  follows) : 
Acacia  leaves,  ground,  triturated  and  cooked  together.  Smear  a  strip  of  fine  linen 
therewith  and  place  in  the  anus,  that  he  may  recover  immediately. 

Commentary 

,rjpep  dtp,  “  strip,”  is  not  a  common  word.  It  is  found  made  of  “  fine  linen  ” 
(pk-t)  as  here,  in  Turin  Papyri,  ed.  Pleyte  and  Rossi,  81,  8  and  77, 17 ;  and  in  Pap. 
Leyden  I  846,  2,  8.  Gardiner  calls  my  attention  to  it  also  in  his  transcription  of  Pap. 
Leyden  947,  12,  9.  As  a  magical  bandage  it  is  also  mentioned  in  Mutter  und  Kind 
VIII  8 ;  the  London  Medical  Papyrus  14,  8-9.  Made  of  h'ty  it  appears 

in  the  Kahun  Medical  Papyrus  2,  8  and  in  Pap.  Hearst  116;  and  without  indication 
of  the  material  it  appears  again  in  Pap.  Hearst  X  8-9. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE 
INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

N.B.  The  sub-titles  have  all  been  inserted  by  the  modern  editor  and  are  not  found 
in  the  original  text.  Each  of  the  ancient  titles  has  likewise  been  introduced  by  a  title 
inserted  by  the  present  editor. 

EIGHT  INCANTATIONS  AGAINST  PEST 
Title  op  the  First  Incantation 
XVIII  1 

Incantation  for  exorcising  the  wind  of  the  pest  of  the  year. 

First  Incantation 
XVIII  1-8 

0  Flame-in-His-Face  !  Presider  over  the  horizon,  speak  thou  to  the  chief  of  the 
Hemesut-house,  who  makes  Osiris,  first  of  the  land,  to  flourish.  0  Nekhbet,  lifting  the 
earth  to  the  sky  for  her  father,  come  thou,  bind  the  two  feathers  around  me,  around 
me,  that  I  may  live  and  flourish  because  I  possess  this  White  One.  The  first  is  the 
Great  One  dwelling  in  Heliopolis  ;  the  second  is  Isis  ;  the  third  is  Nephthys  ;  while 
I  am  subject  to  thee  (fern.). 

0  Seizer-of-the-Great-One,  son  of  Sekhmet,  mightiest  of  the  mighty,  son  of  the 
Disease-Demon,  Dened,  son  of  Hathor,  mistress  of  the  crown  (nt),  and  flooder  of  the 
streams  ;  when  thou  voyagest  in  the  Celestial  Ocean,  when  thou  sailest  in  the  morning 
barque,  thou  hast  saved  me  from  every  sickness. 

Conclusion  of  the  First  Incantation 
XVIII  8-9 

Incantation  against  this  year,  with  the  breath  of  every  evil  wind. 

Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is  around  all  my  flesh  for  life. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  First  Incantation 
XVIII  9-11 

Speak  the  words  over  two  vulture  feathers,  with  which  a  man  has  covered  himself, 
placed  as  his  protection  in  every  place  where  he  goes.  It  is  a  protection  against  the 
year,  expelling  sickness  in  the  year  of  pest. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

502  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

Title  of  the  Second  Incantation 
XVIII  11-12 

Another  (incantation)  for  exorcising  the  plague-bearing  wind,  the  demons  of  dis¬ 
ease,  the  malignant  spirits,  messengers  of  Sekhmet. 

Second  Incantation 
XVIII  13-15 

Withdraw,  ye  disease  demons.  The  wind  shall  not  reach  me,  that  those  who  pass 
by  may  pass  by  to  work  disaster  against  me.  I  am  Horns  who  passes  by  the  diseased 
ones  of  Sekhmet,  (even)  Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet.  I  am  the  unique 
one,  son  of  Bastet.  I  die  not  through  thee  (fern.). 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Second  Incantation 
XVIII  15-16 

Let  the  words  be  spoken  by  a  man  having  a  stick  of  des-wood  in  his  hand,  while  he 
comes  forth  into  the  open  and  goes  around  his  house.  He  cannot  die  by  the  pest  of  the 
year. 

Title  of  the  Third  Incantation 

XVIII  17 

Another  protection  against  the  pest  of  the  year. 

Third  Incantation 
XVIII  17-19 

I  am  the  abomination  that  came  forth  out  of  Buto.  0  Meskhenet,  that  came  forth 
out  of  Heliopolis ;  0  men,  0  gods,  0  spirits,  0  dead,  be  ye  far  from  me.  I  am  the 
abomination. 

Fourth  Incantation 
XVIII 19-XIX  2 

Another  (incantation).  I  am  the  healthy  one  in  the  way  of  the  passer  by.  Shall  I 
be  smitten,  while  I  am  healthy  ?  I  have  seen  the  great  disaster.  0  this  fever,  do  not 
assail  me,  (for)  I  am  the  one  who  has  come  forth  out  of  the  disaster.  Be  thou  far 
from  me. 

Fifth  Incantation 

XIX  2-9 

Copy  of  another  (incantation).  0  Jubilation,  Jubilation,  take  not  this  my  heart, 
nor  this  my  breast  for  Sekhmet.  Take  not  my  liver  for  Osiris,  in  order  that  the 

oi.uchicago.edu 

CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  503 

hidden  things  that  are  in  Buto  may  not,  shall  not  enter  into  my  seat  on  the  morning 
of  counting  the  Horus-eye,  even  every  male  spirit,  every  female  spirit,  every  male  dead, 
every  female  dead,  the  form  of  every  animal,  the  one  (fern.)  which  the  crocodile  has 
taken,  the  one  (masc.)  which  the  serpent  has  stung,  the  one  which  has  ’"perished1  by  the 
knife,  (or)  the  one  who  has  died  in  his  bed.  Ye  demons  of  disease,  of  the  followers  of 
the  year  and  its  yield,  lo,  Horus,  even  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is  [around]  all 
my  flesh  for  life. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Fifth  Incantation 
XIX  9-14 

Speak  the  words  over  (images  of)  Sekhmet,  Bastet,  Osiris,  and  Neheb-kau, 
written  with  frankincense  on  a  band  of  fine  linen  and  attached  to  a  man  at  his  throat. 
It  will  prevent  asses  from  entering,  -  -  the  besbes- goose  to  me,  and  the  green-breasted 
goose.  The  protection  of  the  life  of  Neit  is  around  me,  (even  of)  her  who  is  over  the 
escaped  of  the  sower.  Bastet  is  repelled  from  the  house  of  a  man.  A  man  shall  say 
(it)  at  the  life  of  the  year. 

Title  of  the  Sixth  Incantation 
XIX  14 

Incantation  for  cleansing  a  fly. 

Sixth  Incantation 
XIX  14-18 

The  mouth  of  this  man  who  is  under  my  fingers,  and  so  forth,  is  the  mouth  of  a 
fhungry1  calf,  when  he  comes  forth  from  his  mother’s  womb.  This  insect  which  has 
entered  into  this  his  belly,  (although)  he  has  entered,  shall  come  forth  alive,  issuing  to 
the  ground  as  earth  or  as  excrement,  without  injuring  his  belly,  (but)  coming  forth  as 
his  excrement  from  him,  having  been  assigned  to  Akeru. 

Title  of  the  Seventh  Incantation 
XIX  18-19 

Incantation  for  cleansing  everything  from  pest. 

Seventh  Incantation 
XIX  19-XX  5 

Thy  messengers  are  consumed,  0  Sekhmet ;  thy  demons  of  disease  retreat,  0 
Bastet.  The  Year  does  not  pass  by  to  work  disaster  against  me.  Thy  breath 
does  not  reach  me.  I  am  Horus  over  the  diseased  ones  of  Sekhmet,  I  am  thy  Horus, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

604  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

0  Sekhmet ;  I  am  thy  unique  one,  0  Buto.  I  die  not  by  thee ;  I  die  not  by  thee. 
I  am  the  rejoicing  one,  I  am  the  jubilating  one.  0  son  of  Bastet,  descend  not  upon  me ; 
0  Dweller  in  the  Sefsepu,  approach  me  not,  draw  not  near  me.  I  am  the  king  in  the 
midst  of  his  rshelterl 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Seventh  Incantation 

XX  5-8 

Let  a  man  say  this  incantation  before  a  nef ret- flower,  bound  to  a  piece  of  des-wood, 
and  tied  with  a  strip  of  linen.  Let  them  be  passed  over  the  things ;  the  pest  will  be 
exorcised,  (and)  the  passage  of  the  disease-demons  by  everything  that  is  eaten,  like¬ 
wise  by  the  beds,  will  be  prevented. 

Eighth  Incantation 
XX  8-11 

Another  (incantation).  A  skames-flower  is  on  me,  the  abomination  of  thy  followers. 
Thy  diseased  ones  avoid  me,  the  stretching  of  thy  snare  avoids  me  ;  I  am  the  escaped 
one  of  thy  birds.  Horus,  Horus,  healthy  despite  Sekhmet,  is  around  all  my  flesh  for 
life. 

Directions  for  Pronouncing  the  Eighth  Incantation 
XX  11-12 

Let  a  man  say  this  incantation  when  a  shames- flower  has  been  given  to  him  in 
his  hand. 

RECIPE  FOR  FEMALE  TROUBLES 
XX  18-XXI  8 

Examination 
XX  18-14 

If  thou  oxaminest  a  woman  suffering  in  her  abdomen,  so  that  the  menstrual  dis¬ 
charge  cannot  come  away  for  her ;  and  thou  findest  trouble  in  the  upper  part  of  her 
vulva,  (conclusion  follows  in  diagnosis). 

Diagnosis 
XX  14-15 

Thou  shouldst  say  concerning  her :  “  It  is  obstruction  of  the  blood  in  her  vulva.” 

oi.uchicago.edu 

CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  505 

First  Treatment,  Internal  and  External 

XX  15-17 

Thou  shouldst  prepare  for  her  : 

Warn,  tV 

Grease,  \ 

Sweet  beer,  | 

Cooked  and  drunk  for  four  days. 

Besides  preparing  for  her  (the  prescription  called)  “  Discharge  of  the  blood  ”  (as 
follows) :  Oil,  tcp71e.net,  eye-paint,  sweet  frankincense.  Mix,  (and)  anoint  the  organ 
therewith  very  frequently. 

Alternative  External  Treatment 
XX  18-XXI  3 

Thou  shouldst  put  hezret-ears  into  ointment.  If  afterward  she  has  an  evil  odor, 
wipe  her  off  and  anoint  her  two  labia  therewith  very  frequently.  Thou  shouldst  apply 
frankincense  and  incense  between  her  two  loins,  (and)  cause  the  smoke  thereof  to  enter 
her  flesh. 

TWO  RECIPES  FOR  THE  COMPLEXION 

XXI  8-8 

I.  Recipe  for  Transforming  the  Skin 

XXI  8-6 

A  recipe  for  transforming  the  skin  : 

Honey,  1 

Red  natron,  1 

Northern  salt,  1 

Triturate  together  (and)  anoint  therewith. 

II.  Recipe  for  Beautifying  tiie  Face 

XXI  6-8 

Another  (recipe)  for  beautifying  the  face  : 

Alabaster  rkemels"l,  1 
Natron  rkemelsl,  1 
Northern  salt,  1 

Honey,  1 

Mix  together,  (and)  anoint  therewith. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

606  THE  INCANTATIONS  AND  RECIPES 

RECIPE  FOR  TRANSFORMING  AN  OLD  MAN  INTO  A  YOUTH 
XXI  9-XXII  10 

Title 
XXI  9 

Beginning  of  the  Book  of  Transforming  an  Old  Man  into  a  Youth. 

Directions  for  Making  the  Recipe 
XXI  9-XXII  7 

Let  there  be  brought  a  large  quantity  of  hemayet-finit,  about  two  khar.  It  should 
be  bruised  and  placed  in  the  sun.  Then  when  it  is  entirely  dry  let  it  be  I’husked’1  as 
grain  is  Unasked1,  and  it  should  be  winnowed  until  (only)  the  fruit  thereof  remains. 
Everything  that  comes  therefrom  shall  be  measured,  (and)  let  it  be  sifted  after  the 
manner  of  the  rthreshing  floor1  with  the  sieve.  Measure  likewise  everything  that 
comes  from  these  fruits  and  make  them  into  two  portions  :  one  consisting  of  these 
fruits  and  the  other  even  so.  Treat  one  like  the  other. 

(First  Process) 

Let  it  be  set  aside,  mixed  with  water.  Make  into  a  soft  mass  and  let  it  be  placed 
in  a  new  jar  over  the  fire  (and)  cooked  very  thoroughly,  making  sure  that  they  boil, 
evaporating  the  juice  thereof  and  drying  them,  until  it  is  like  dry,  without  moisture 
therein.  Let  it  be  dug  out  (of  the  jar).  Now  when  it  is  cool,  let  it  be  put  into  (another) 
jar  in  order  to  wash  it  in  the  river.  Let  it  be  washed  thoroughly,  making  sure  that  they 
are  washed  by  tasting  the  taste  of  this  water  that  is  in  the  jar  (until)  there  is  no  bitter¬ 
ness  at  all  therein.  It  should  be  placed  in  the  sun,  spread  out  on  launderer’s  linen. 
Now  when  it  is  dry,  it  should  be  ground  upon  a  grinding  mill-stone. 

(Second  Process) 

Let  it  be  set  aside  in  water.  Make  like  a  soft  mass  and  let  it  be  placed  in  a  jar  over 
the  fire  and  cooked  thoroughly,  making  sure  that  it  boils,  that  the  fluids  of  the  mass 
may  go  forth  therefrom.  A  man  shall  dip  out  the  mass  that  has  come  of  it  with  a 
dipper.  Put  into  a  kin-jar  after  it  is  rof  the  consistency1  of  clay.  Rub  and  make  thick 
its  Consistency1.  Dip  out  this  mass  and  put  upon  a  linen  cover  on  the  top  of  this 
kin-jar.  Now  afterward  it  should  be  put  into  a  vase  of  costly  stone. 

Directions  for  Use 
XXII  7-10 

Anoint  a  man  therewith.  It  is  a  remover  of  r wrinkles1  from  the  head.  When  the 
flesh  is  smeared  therewith,  it  becomes  a  beautifier  of  the  skin,  a  remover  of  ■’blemishes1, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

CONSECUTIVE  TRANSLATION  507 

of  all  ■"disfigurements1,  of  all  signs  of  age,  of  all  ■'weaknesses1  which  are  in  the  flesh. 
Found  effective  myriads  of  times. 

RECIPE  FOR  SOME  AILMENT  OF  THE  ANUS  AND  VICINITY 
XXII  11-14 

Examination 
XXII 11-12 

If  thou  inspectest  a  man  ailing  in  his  anus,  (and)  whether  standing  or  sitting, 
suffering  very  greatly  with  seizures  in  both  his  legs,  (conclusion  in  treatment). 

Treatment 
XXII  12-14 

Thou  shouldst  give  to  him  a  recipe,  an  ointment  of  great  protection  (as  follows)  : 
Acacia  leaves,  ground,  triturated  and  cooked  together.  Smear  a  strip  of  fine  linen 
therewith  and  place  in  the  anus,  that  he  may  recover  immediately. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PART  III 

THE  INDICES 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

EXPLANATIONS  AND  ABBREVIATIONS 

References  to  Part  I,  the  Surgical  Treatise  on  the  recto,  are  all  double,  that  is,  first  by  case  and 
second  by  column  and  line.  Thus,  C.  =  “  Case  ”,  that  is,  one  of  the  forty-eight  cases  of  the  Surgical 
Treatise  ;  the  number  is  that  of  the  case  ;  thus  “  C.  25  ”  =  Case  25.  In  the  second  reference  the 
Roman  numerals  designate  the  columns  of  the  original  manuscript ;  while  the  following  Arabic 
numerals  designate  the  lines  of  the  original  manuscript.  The  numbering  of  the  lines  is  not  consecu¬ 
tive  throughout  the  document,  but  begins  anew  with  each  column. 

References  to  Part  II,  the  Incantations  and  Recipes,  the  magical  material  on  the  verso  (which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Surgical  Treatise),  are,  in  the  case  of  an  incantation,  double;  that  is, 
first  by  incantation,  and  second  by  column  and  line.  Thus  “I.  4  ”  *=  Incantation  No.  4. 

A  reference  in  black  letter  thus :  C.  18,  VII  13,  indicates  the  particular  passage  in  the  com¬ 
mentary  where  full  discussion  of  a  word  or  passage  will  be  found.  Occasionally  more  than  one  such 
black  letter  reference  indicates  that  the  discussion  was  necessarily  divided.  All  other  references 
indicate  merely  the  occurrence  of  the  word. 

The  half-brackets  (r - 1)  indicate  that  the  word  so  enclosed  is  of  uncertain  meaning.  If  they 

enclose  hieroglyphs  or  a  transliteration,  the  half-brackets  indicate  an  uncertain  reading  or  uncertain 
restoration. 

“  g.”  after  a  proper  name  =  god  or  goddess. 

A  brief  explanation  of  the  transliteration  of  hieroglyphic  into  Roman  letters  will  be  found 
on  pp.  xxi  and  xxii,  and  should  be  consulted  by  non-Egyptologists. 

> 

to 

0  !:  I.  1,  XVIII 1. 

’•T 

period:  C.  3, 1 23 restored ;  C.4,II7;  C.  5,  II 10;  C.  19,  VII 18; 
C.  29,  X  8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 

>yS 

brain;  also  with  plural  strokes:  C.  0,  II  18,  19,  22,  23-24,  24; 
C.  7,  IV  1 ;  C.  8,  IV  12. 

’B 

U 

of  uncertain  meaning:  C.  24,  IX  1. 

’PD 

bird:  I.  8,  XX  10. 

’MY 

mix:  XXI  8. 

>W 

an  unidentified  two-toed  bird,  C.  22,  VIII 15. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

512 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

>Mf-T 

fork,  ramus,  or  with  det.  » — o,  or  ^ ;  also  (once 

(•M'W-T) 

only  III  17),  (once  only  IX  3)>  *-^7*“ 11  (once 

only  IV  8):  C.  7,  III  17;  C.  8, IV 8, 17, 18 ;  C.  22, VHI  10-11, 
14  bis;  C.  25,  IX  3. 

•MM-WR-T 

Seizer-of-the-Great-One  (a  hostile  demon):  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

•NIIY 

shudder;  also  (III  3),  (VI11  J)> 

<?\  (X  5),  H  ?  (xni  14),  f)^C^  (XIV 18) :  C.  4,11 4; 

C.  7,  III  3 ;  C.  20,  VIII 1 ;  C.  29,  X  5 ;  C.  40,  XIII 1 4 ;  C.  42, 

XIV  18. 

>[R]-WY 

two  strips;  also  (once  only  XVII  4),  (once only 

or  YR-WY 

II  23),  (once  only  IX  16),  ^5  5  (once  only  I  16); 

C.  2, 1 15,  restored,  16;  C.  6, 1123;  C.  10,  V  8,  9;  C.  27,  IX 16; 

C.  47,  XVII  4. 

>HT 

weakness,  exhaustion,  weak  place:  C.  6,  II  21;  C.  7,  IV  4  bis. 

See  also  NHD  and  HD. 

•HD 

be  weak:  C.  19,  VH  21-22. 

•H-T 

&L?. 

cultivated  ground :  C.  32,  XI  8. 

■HW 

spirit,  also  (XIX  6) :  I.  3,  XVIII 18;  I.  5,  XIX  6. 

•H-T  (^f^),  female  “  spirit  I.  5,  XIX  6. 

•H-T 

d3) 

c.r3 

horizon:  I.  1,  XVIII  1. 

•H*T 

Isis:  0.  9,V2,  8. 

*KR 

Akeru:  I.  6,  XIX  18. 

•D 

rto  be  of  the  consistency"1 :  XXII  5. 

-a  £5^3  *= ista 

1  1 

’"consistency’1 :  XXII  6. 

Y’BY 

+J-^ 

left :  C.  34,  XII  2. 

Y'W 

old  man :  XXI  9. 

Y»T 

distort,  turn  aside:  C.  7,  IV  3;  G.  47,  XVII  13. 

Y’D*T 

<ivr? 

snare:  I.  8,  XX  10. 

Y’D*T 

pest;  also  with  det,  \:  I.  1,  XVIII 11 ;  1.  7,  XIX  19,  XX  7. 

Y’D-T-RNP-T 

QkTwft®*,! 

pest  of  the  year ;  also  \  (XVIII 1) :  1. 1,  XV 111  1; 

I.  2,  XVIII  16;  I.  3,  XVIII  17. 

YY 

HU 

come  away ;  also  (XX  13) :  C,  22,  VIII 16 ;  XX  13. 

Yr 

j 

see  rR. 

YrY 

||  m  -i.fl  ****** 

wash,  or  with  further  det,  ^  ;  also  (j  — (XXI  20) :  XXI 

19,  20  bis. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  513 

Used  as  main  verb : 

YW+subject+ prepositional  phrase:  C.  1,  I  6;  C.  7, 
III  11 ;  C.  9,  Y  3;  C.  30,  X  12;  C.  31,  X  19;  1. 1,  XVIII  5; 
I.  5,  XIX  13. 

YW  without  subject  -^prepositional  phrase:  C.  6,  III  1; 
C.  39,  XIII  11. 

YW+subject+ predicate  noun:  C.  9,  V  3. 

YW+predicate  adjective +subject :  C.  7,  III  3;  C.  13, 
VI  5;  C.  17,  VII  3;  C.  19,  VII  16;  C.  21,  VIII  7;  C.  47, 
XVI  19. 

Used  as  auxiliary  verb: 

YW+main  verb  in  n-form:  C.  5,  II  16;  C.  19,  VII  20; 
C.  81.X14;  C.  41,  XIV  10;  1. 1,  XVIII  8;  I.  4,  XIX  1. 
YW+main  verb  in  simple  form:  C. 39,  XIII 9;  I.  8,  XX 11. 
YW+subject+qualitative:  C.  7,  III  20;  C.  8,  IV  6; 
C.  11,  V  10;  C.  18,  VI  6;  C.  19,  VII 16;  C.  20,  VII 23;  C.  22, 
VIII  12,  16;  C.  28,  IX  20;  C.  31,  X  13,  15,  20;  C.  32,  XI  2; 
C.  41,  XIII  21;  C.  45,  XV  13. 
ox:  C.  46,  XVI  9. 

flesh,  meat : 

YWF  of  the  patient:  C.  31,  X  14;  C.  41,  XIII  21, 
XIV  14  bis,  15;  XXI  3. 

YWF  as  a  medicament : 

WT-HR-K  gW  HR  YWF  W’D  the  first  day,  followod 
immediately  by  use  of  greaBe,  honey  and  somotimes  lint: 
C.  1, 1  2;  C.  2,  I  14  restored;  C.  18,  VII  10;  C.  26,  IX  10; 
C.  27,  IX  17 ;  C.  28,  X  1 ;  C.  40,  XIII 16. 

WT-HR-K  gW  HR  YWF  W>D  the  first  day,  followed  by 
gRWH-F  HMS(Y)-T  R  gT>  THB-F  and  then  uso  of  grease, 
honey  and  lint :  C.  16,  VI  20 ;  C.  17,  VII  5. 

WT-HR-K  gW  HR  YWF  W'D  the  first  day ;  intervening 
attention  to  bandages  and  removal  of  meat,  then  uso  of  grease, 
honey  and  lint:  C.  14,  VI 11, 12. 

WT-HR-K  (restored  in  C.  10)  gW  HR  YWF  W’D  the 
first  day,  followed  by  attention  to  bandages,  then  use  of  grease 
and  honey  with  sometimes  lint  (C.  47)  or  YMRW  (C.  82): 
C.  10,  V  7 ;  C.  32,  XI  4 ;  C.  47,  XVII  2. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

514  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

YWF  ( cont .) 

M,?, 

WT-HR-K  gW  HR  YWF  W’D  the  first  day,  followed 
immediately  by  YMRW  and  honey :  C.  30,  X  1 1 . 

WT-HR-K  gW  HR  YWF  W*D  the  first  day  with  no 
additional  medicaments :  C.  29,  X  7. 

WD-HR-K  YWF  ...  HR  WBNW:  C.  3, 1  22  restored. 
YWF  in  incantations:  I.  1,  XVIII  9;  I.  5,  XIX  9; 
I.  8,  XX  11. 

YWNW 

S' 

column:  C.  11,  V  10  bis,  11, 14;  C.  26,  IX  8. 

YWNW 

02 

Heliopolis:  1. 1,  XVIII  5;  I.  3,  XVIII  18. 

YWH 

saturate:  C.  11,  V  12;  C.  12,  V  19. 

YWTY 

one  who  does  not;  also  (IV  8) :  C.  8,  IV  8,  17  bis. 

See  also  NTY,  C.  8,°IV  8. 

YWD 

separate:  C.  4,  II  9;  C.  31,  X  18. 

YB 

•o* 

i 

heart:  C.  7,  III  3;  I.  5,  XIX  3. 
g-T  YB,  “  pulse  ” :  C.  1, 1  7  bis. 

YB 

hi 

to  count :  C.  1, 1 3,  4  ter  (twice  restored),  5 ;  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

YP-T 

bushel:  C.  1, 1  4  bis,  5. 

YPW 

h$ 

those :  C.  6,  II  25. 

YPN 

hi 

these,  those:  C.  6,  II  20;  C.  8,  IV  10;  C.  41,  XIV  8;  C.  45, 
XV  16;  C.  47,  XVII  6. 

YPTF 

h°*Z 

those:  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  39,  XIII  7;  C.  45,  XV  11;  C.  47, 
XVII  4. 

YF 

injuring:  I.  6,  XIX  17. 

YM 

hk 

there:  LI,  XVIII 11. 

therein:  C.  1,  I  5,  9  bis;  C.  4,  II  3;  C,  6,  II  20;  C.  8,  IV  10; 
C.  9,  V8;  C.  39,  XIII  5. 

therewith:  C.  4,  II  8;  C.  23,  VIII  21 ;  1.1,  XVIII 10;  XX  17, 
XXII;  XXI  6;  XXI  8;  XXII  7,  8,  13. 
therefrom :  C.  41,  XIV  1 ;  XXI 12,  XXII  4  bis. 

YMY 

+K 

that  is  in :  C.  9,  V  2  bis. 

+K  (fem0 

YMY  THNW:  1.5,  XIX  5. 

one  dwelling  in:  I.  1,  XVIII  4.  Dweller  in  :  I*  7, 

XX  4. 

YMY-W  HT,  “  followers  ”:  I.  5,  XIX  8. 

YMYW 

+^,?, 

that  which  is  in  (the  “interior”),  or  without  plural  strokes: 
C.  12,  V18;  C.  22,Vmil. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

YMYTW 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  515 

between;  also  (once  only  XII  11):  C.  7,  III  15;  C.  85, 

YMY 

XII  5;  C.  36,  XII  11;  XXI  2. 

the  region  between  (lit.  “  what  is  between  ”) ;  also  (twice 

III  16,  V  21) :  C.  7,  III  16;  C.  12,  Y  21 ;  C.  18,  VH  13. 

Verb  of  negation. 

YM> 

L>Mi 

Negative  commands :  C.  3, 1  22;  C.  4,  II  6;  C.  5,  II  15; 
0,  6,  II 23  bis ;  C.  39,  XIII 8 ;  C.  47,  XVII 12 ;  I.  5,  XIX  3  bis. 
Negative  purpose  clause :  C.  89,  XIII  8 ;  1.5,  XIX  4. 
an  unidentified  fruit  tree:  C.  41,  XIV  4;  C.  46,  XVI  9. 

YMN-WT 

o-vr; 

the  hidden  things :  I.  5,  XIX  4. 

YMRW 

unidentified  mineral;  also  (threo  times  only  VI  17, 

YM8-WT 

1X6,  X  11). 

YMRW  used  alono:  C.  15,  VI 17;  C.  82,  XI 6;  C.  85,  XII 8; 
C.  86,  XII 14;  C.  37,  XII  17-18;  C.  38,  XIII  2;  C.  42,  XIV 
20;  C.  43,  XV  2. 

YMRW  with  honey:  0.25,1X6;  C.80.X11. 
'"disfigurements1 :  XXII  9. 

YN 

WMU\ 

by:  C.  8,  IV  18;  I.  2,  XVIII 15. 

YN 

YN  at  head  of  sentence,  introducing  subject:  C.  1,  I  5; 
0.  31,  X  15;  C.  33,  XI 11, 15. 

YN  after  infinitive,  introducing  so-called  “  logical  subject  ” : 
C.  1,110, 11  bis;  C.  5,  II 17;  C.  7,  III  17;  C.  30,  X  12. 
negative :  C.  8,  IV  17. 

YNY 

MW <W 

bring,  carry  to :  C.  88,  XI 1 5 ;  XXI  9. 

YNr-T 

1  AWWl  O  N 

jjT  “  moving  to  and  fro  ”  (C.  7,  III  17). 

chin  Ah  22,  Vm  10;  C.  25,  1X4;  0.27,1X13,14,16. 

YNM 

^IM 

skin,  or  with  det.  ^i,  or  also  (onco  only  IV  5) : 

YNH 

fit’ll- — 

1  MW*M  A 

0.8,  IV  5  bis,  12-13;  C.  41,  XIII 21;  0.46,  XVI 15;  XXI 4; 
XXII  8-9. 

eyebrow,  or  with  det.  0.  7,  III  11,  IV  2,  8;  C.  10,  V  6  bis, 

YNK 

7;  C.  12,V21. 

first  person  pronoun  “  I  ”,  emphatic:  I.  2,  XVIII  14, 15;  I.  3, 

XVIII  17,  19;  I.  4,  XVIII  19,  XIX  2;  I.  7,  XX  1,  2  bis, 
8  bis,  4;  I.  8,  XX  10. 
mine,  belonging  to  me :  1. 1,  XVIII  4. 

L  1  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

516  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

YR  !)*=»  if,  as  for : 

YR  H’Y-K:  C.  1,  lost  column  restored;  C.  2,  I  12;  C.  3, 
1 19  restored ;  C.  4,  II  3,  C.  5,  II 12 ;  C.  6,  II 18 ;  C.  7,  III  3 ; 
C.8.IV5;  C.  9,  IV  19;  C.10.V6;  C.ll.VIO;  C.12.V16; 
C.  13,  VI  4;  C.  14,  VI  7;  C.  15,  VI  15;  C.  16,  VI  18;  C.  17, 

VII  1;  C.  18,  VII  7;  C.  19,  VII  15;  C.  20,  VII  22;  C.  21, 

VIII  6;  C.  22,  VIII  10;  C.  23,  VIII  18;  C.  24,  VIII  22; 
C.  25, 1X2;  C.  26,  IX  6;  C.  27,  IX  13;  C.  28,  IX  18;  C.  29, 

X  3;  C.  30,  X  9;  C.31,X13;  C.  32, XII;  C.  33,  XI 9;  C.  34, 

XI  17;  C.  35,  XII  3;  C.  36,  XII  9;  C.  37,  XII  15;  C.  38, 
XII 22;  C.  39,  XIII 8;  C.  40,  XIII 12;  C.  41,  XIII 18;  C.  42, 

XIV  17;  C.  43,  XIV  22;  C.  44,  XV  6;  C.  45,  XV  9;  C.  46, 

XV  20;  C.  47,  XVI 16;  C.  48,  XVII 15;  XX  13. 

YR  introducing  miscellaneous  verbs;  C.  2,  I  13;  C.  10, 

V  7 ;  C.  14,  VI  11 ;  C.  20,  VII  24,  VIII  1 ;  C.  22,  VIE  12; 
C.  23,  VIII 20;  C.  27,  IX  14;  0.28,1X19;  C.29.X4;  0.41, 
XIV  7;  C.  45,  XV  11,  15;  C.  46,  XVI  5;  C.  47,  XVII  3,  5; 
XXII  8;  XXII  11. 

YR  SWT  followed  by  verb:  C.  7,  III  8,  13;  C.  28,  X  2; 
0.  81,  X  16;  C.  34,  XI  21 ;  C.  37,  XII  19;  C.  47,  XVII  6, 
12, 13. 

YR  DR  followed  by  GMM-K :  0.  4,  II  6 ;  0.  7,  III  7 ;  C.  8, 
IV  10;  C.  20,  VIII  4. 

YRNW:  C.  1, 1  6  restored. 

YRYSKorYST:  XXI  19,  XXII 1. 

YRMHT:  0.3,121;  0.  9,IV20,V3;  C.10,V7;  C.  12, 

V  19;  0.26,1X9;  C.29,X7;  C.  30,  X  11;  XXI11,XXII7. 
YRRS>:  XX  18. 

YR  introducing  glosses:  C.  1, 1  3,  9,  10;  0.  2, 1 15, 16, 17 ; 
C.  3, 1  24  restored,  25,  26,  II 1 ;  0.  4,  II  8, 10  bis ;  0.  5,  II 16 ; 
C.  6,  II  23,  25;  0.  7,  III  15,  16,  18  bis,  19,  20,  21,  IV  1,  2,  4; 
0.8,  IV  12, 13, 15,16,17;  C.9,V4;  0. 10,  V  9;  C.  11,V14, 
15;  C.  12,  V  20,  21,  VI  1;  0.14,  VI  12;  C.  18,  VII  11,  13; 
0.  19,  VII  19;  C.  22,  VIII  14,  15,  16;  0.  26,  IX  11;  C.  30, 
X  12;  C.  31,  X  17,  19,  21;  C.  32,  XI  7;  0.  33,  XI  13,  15; 
C.  34,  XI  22;  C.  39,  XIII  9;  C.  40,  XIII  17;  0.  41,  XIV  8, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  517 

YR  ( cont .)  (|<=»  11,  12,  IS,  15;  C.  42,  XIY  20;  C.  48,  XV  3,  4,  5;  C.  45,  XV 

16;  C.  46,  XVI 12,  14,  15. 

YR  miscellaneous:  C.  1, 1  2;  XXI  12. 

YRY  (]X  thereof:  C.  48,  XV  5;  XXI  3;  XXI  12, 17. 

YR  ^  what  pertains  to :  C.  5,  H  17 ;  C.  19,  VII  21 ;  C.  41,  XIV  10. 

YR-T  eye;  also  ^  (dual). °°  (dual  VII 19):  C.  8,  IV  6;  C.  18,  VII 14; 

C.  19,  VII 17, 19,20,  21  bis;  C.  20,  VII  23,  VIII  2  bis ;  C.81, 
X  15;  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

YRY  ^  to  make. 

Used  in  prescriptions  with  the  meaning  “  prepare”:  C.  4, 

II  7;  C.  7,  III  7, 14  bis;  C.  9,  IV  20  bis,  21;  C.  14,  VI  9; 
C.  28,  VIII  21;  C.  85,  XII  6;  C.  86,  XII  12;  C.  87,  XII 17; 
C,  41,  XIV  2,  4,  6;  C.  46,  XVI  9, 11 ;  C.  48,  XVII 19;  XX  15, 
16;  XXI 14, 15,16,  XXII  2. 

Used  in  descriptions  of  symptoms  with  the  meaning  “  pro¬ 
duce”:  C.  7,  IV  3;  C.  89,  XIII  5,  6,  11;  C.  45,  XV  13; 
C.  46,  XVI 1 ;  C.  48,  XVII 17. 

to  do:  C.  4,118;  C.  19,  VII 16;  C.  20,  VIII 2,  8 ;  C.30.X10. 
to  treat,  as  used  in  verdicts:  C.  1, 1  2;  C.  2, 1  14;  C.  8,  I  21 ; 
C.  5,  1115;  C.  6,  1122;  C.  7,11118;  C.  8,  IV  9,  12;  C.  10, 
V  7 ;  C.  11,  V  11 ;  C.  12,  V  17;  C.  13,  VI  7;  C.  14,  VI  9; 
C.  15,  VI  16;  C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  18,  VII  10; 
C.  19,  VII 18;  C.  20,  VIII  4;  C.  22,  VIII 14;  C.  23,  VIII  20; 
C.  24, 1X2;  C.  25,1X5;  C.  26, 1X9;  C.  27, 1X16;  C.  30, 
X  10;  C.81.X17;  C.  82,  XI  4;  C.  33,  XI 13;  C.  34,  XI 19, 
22;  C.  85,  XII  4;  C.  86,  XII  10;  C.  37,  XII  21;  C.  88, 
XIII 1 ;  C.  39,  XIII  6 ;  C.  40,  XIII 15;  C.  41 ,  XIV  2 ;  C.  42, 
XIV  19;  C.  48,  XV  2;  C.  44,  XV  9;  C.  46,  XVI  3;  C.  47, 
XVII  2;  C.  48,  XVII 18. 
to  administer :  C.  3,  EE  2. 

YRY  M,  “  to  transform  into  ”:  XXI  9. 

YRY  M  YH-T  Wr-T,  “  to  mix  ”:  XX  17;  XXI  15. 

YRTYW  ° ,  color;  also  ° ,:  C.  7,  m  20,  21 ;  C.  9,  V  1 ;  C.  19,  VII 

20 bis;  C.  41,  XIV  18. 

surface  (of  a  wound),  or  with  det.  o:  C.  41,  XIII  22;  C.  46, 
XVII,  14. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

518 

YH 

YHHY 

YII-T 

YS 

y£p 

y£k 

o!  I  I 

<IP 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

injury,  pain,  or  with  det.  $  (XYII  IS). 

YH  to  designate  a  specific  wound  or  injury  under  discus¬ 
sion  :  C.  8,  IV  15-16, 16;  C.  46,  XVI 13. 

YH  as  source  of  symptoms:  C.  3,  II  1 ;  C.  7,  III  18,  20; 
C.  89,  XIII  11. 

R  SW-Y  »*T  YH-F:  C.  3, 1  23  restored;  C.  4,  II  7 ;  C.  5, 
1116;  C.  19,  VII 19;  C.29.X8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 
the  jubilating  one:  I.  7,  XX  3. 
thing 

YH-T  used  without  a  qualitative  modifier: 

Designating  some  material  object:  C.  1,1  4  bis,  5;  C.  7, 
III  18,  19 ;  C.  22,  VIII 15 ;  I.  7,  XIX  18,  XX  7,  8. 

Indicating  something  immaterial  but  neutral:  C.  45, 
XV  15. 

gPR-F  R  YH-T :  C.  4,  II  8, 10 ;  C.  6,  II  23 ;  C.  7,  III  8, 
15;  C.  8,  IV  9 ;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  37,  XII 19. 

Indicating  something  immaterial  and  unfavorable  as 
shown  by  further  definition  meaning  “  injury  ”,  “  disease  ”, 
etc.:  C.  8,  IV  5;  C.  23,  VIII 18;  XX  14. 

YH-T  with  a  following  modifier: 

With  adjective:  C.  7,1117;  C.  14,  VI 14;  C.  26, 1X13; 
C.  39,  XIII 11;  C.  46,  XVI 16. 

With  adverb  YM,  or  adverbial  phrase,  followed  by  noun 
or  participle :  C.  4,  Q  3;  C.  6,  II  20,  III  1 ;  C.  8,  IV  10. 

With  participle:  C.  31,  X  19;  C.  85,  XII  5;  C.  36, 
XII  11;  C.  39,  Xm  10,  11;  C.  41,  XIV  16;  C.  46,  XVI  13; 
I.  5,  XIX  4. 

With  noun :  C.  46,  XVI  1 . 

MY  YH-T:  0.  7,  III  12,  IV  2. 

YRY  M  YH-T  Wr-T,  “  to  mix  ”:  XX  17;  XXI  15. 

M  YH-T  Wr-T,  “  together  ”:  XXI  5;  XXI,  8;  XXII  13. 

I.  5,  XIX  9. 

to  cut :  C.  23,  Vm  18,  20. 

also  (j^  (once  only  III  9). 

Introducing  circumstantial  clause;  “  while  ”:  C.  7,  III  9; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

YSK  ( cont .) 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  519 

C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  21,  VIII  7;  C.  33,  XI  10;  C.  89,  XIII  5; 

YfiT 

kh 

C.  42,  XIV  18 ;  C.  48,  XV  1 ;  C.  47,  XVII 12. 

YSK  SW  HM,  “  while  at  the  same  time  C.  13,  VI  5; 

C.  17,  VII 8. 

YR  YSK,  “  now  when  XXI  19. 
also  (j  "2"  (once  only  VII 8). 

YS[W] 

Introducing  circumstantial  clauses;  “while”:  C.  1,  I,  9; 
C.  18,  VII  8, 12;  C.  23,  VIII 18;  C.  41,  XIII 19,  20,  XIV  15; 
C.  47,  XVII  8. 

Introducing  a  parenthetical  clause;  “although”:  C.  1, 

Ill. 

Y&T  YR,  “although  ”:  C.  1, 12. 

YR  YST,  “  now  when  ”  :  XXII  1. 

Y§T  miscellaneous :  I.  5,  XIX  9. 
spittle :  C.  7,  HI  3-4. 

YSW-W 

m* 

protrude;  or  with  det.  also  (onco  only  II  10), 

YKDW 

(twico  only  V  17;  VI  19),  (once  only  VI  15), 

(j  (!<?()()  (twice  only  VIII  6;  XV  21),  {]{!<??  (once  only  XII  22): 
C.  4,  n  4,  10;  C.  5,  II  13;  C.  8,  IV  0;  C.  11,  V  10;  C.  12, 
V  17;  C.  15,  VI  15;  C.  1G,  VI  19;  C.  21,  VIII  6;  0.  38, 
XII  22;  C.  40,  XV  21. 
a  mason :  C.  46,  XVI  5. 

YT 

* 

..'CD 

grain:  XXI 11. 

YTF 

father:  I.  1,  XVIII  3. 

YTRW 

river:  XXI  20. 

streams:  I.  1,  XVIII  7. 

YTH 

draw  out ;  C.  41,  XIV  3  ;  C.  4G,  XVI  8. 

YTY 

take,  take  away ;  also  o  (twice  only  III  17 ;  XIX  7) :  C.  20, 

YDB 

VIII  2;  C.  33,  XI 15?  I.  5,  XIX  3,  4,  7. 

^ “  moving  to  and  fro  ”  (C.  7,  HI  17). 
margin :  C.  41,  XIII  21. 

YDR 

stitching  (noun,  surgical  suture) ;  or  with  det.  4 ;  also 

i  (onco  only  VI 11),  t  i  (once  only  V  8) :  C.  10,  V.  6, 

8;  C.  14,  VI  9,  11 ;  C.  23,  VIII  19,  20;  C.  26,  IX  8;  C.  28, 
1X21;  C.  47,  XVI  20;  XVII  3,  8. 
to  stitch:  C.  8, 1  22  restored ;  C.  10,  V  7 ;  C.  2G,  IX  10. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

520 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

c 

—0 

I 

arm:  C.  47,  XVI 20. 

Patient  unconscious  of  his  fWY:  C.  31,  X  13,  15,  17; 
C.  83,  XI 12, 13. 

hand:  C.9,V5;  C.  20,  VIII  2;  I.  2,  XVIII 15. 

r  of  surgeon  used  in  examination:  C.  1,  lost  column  re¬ 
stored;  C.  2,  I  13;  C.  7,  III  10;  C.  13,  VI  4;  C.  17,  VII  1 ; 
C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  47,  XVII  8. 

HR  r-WY,  “immediately”:  C.  48,  XVII 17;  XXII 14. 

r-T 

—A 

member:  C.1,I6,8;  C.30.X12;  C. 41,  XIV 7;  C.45,XV15; 
C.  47,  XVII  6. 

r> 

many,  great,  greatly ;  also  (once  only  XXII 12) :  C.  20, 

VIII 1 ;  C.  46,  XV  21;  I.4.XIX1;  XXII 12. 

r»«T 

A 

greatness. 

Rr>-TWR-T:  C.  41,  XIV  11;  XXI 10. 

r> 

ass:  I.  5,  XIX  12. 

r>-T 

costly  stone:  XXII  7. 

r>*T 

I\ 

•'mould'1:  C.  0,  EH  1. 

r»*T 

oV 

roll  of  linen:  C.  47,  XVI 19. 

rW-T 

MU 

sheep:  C.  7,  m  11,  21, IV 1. 

animal :  I.  5,  XIX  G. 

rW[»]TYW 

r\ 

adversary:  C.  9,  V  2. 

rPR 

iz 

incur  (lit.  “  acquire  ”):  C.  3, 1  24,  r25‘1. 

rFF 

rMr-T 

a  fly;  also  ^.i  (XIX  16):  I.  6,  XIX  14, 16. 
see  ’Mr-T. 

rN-T 

"W***  *!=» 

claw,  finger-nails:  C.  8,  IV  8,  18  bis;  dual  =“  two  claws,” 
indicating  the  two  groups  of  four  fingers  of  the  surgeon’s  two 
bands,  in  setting  dislocated  mandible,  C.  25,  IX  4. 
rN-T-*Mr,  “  claw  of  the  We- bird”:  C.  22,  VIH  15. 

fNrR-T 

— il— J  O 
<o  T/Vl. 

a  kind  of  worm:  C.  12,  V  18,  VI 1-2,  3;  C.  14,  VI 10. 

fiNH 

^  © 

live:  C.  4,  II 11 ;  LI,  XVIII  4;  I.  6,  XIX  16. 
life;  also  (once  only  XIX  14):  1. 1,  XVIII  9;  I.  5,  XIX  9, 

18,  14;  1.  8,  XX  11. 

rNTYW 

frankincense,  or  with  det.  o:  I.  5,  XIX  10;  XX  17,  XXI  2. 

rNDW 

— JltsflS 

f*~t*  ^  1 

jar:  XXI  19,  21. 

cR 

Yr[R]  (older  form) 

to  extend,  to  penetrate;  also  I]™  (C.  40,  XIII  13,  15). 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  521 

rR  ( cont .)  rR  N,  employed  with  other  things  than  the  term  “bone”: 

C.  11.V15;  C.  12,  V21;  C.  81,X15;  C.  34,  XI  23. 

rR  N  KS :  C.  1,  lost  column  bis  restored,  I  2  restored,  10; 
C.  2,  I  12,  13,  16  restored;  C.  4,  II  2,  3,  5;  C.  5,  II  12,  14; 
C.  6,  II  18,  19;  C.  7,  III  2,  5, 12;  C.  10,  Y  6;  C.  18,  VII  8, 
12;  C.  20,  VII  22,  23,  VIII 3 ;  C.  27,  IX  14, 16;  C.29,X4,6. 
rR  R  K&:  C.  3,  1 18, 19,  21  restored. 

Yr[R]  R  K&:  0.  40,  XIII 13, 15. 

rR 

— J) 

elevated,  prominent:  C.  46,  XV  20,  XVI  2. 

See  also  §rR  and  &KR. 

rR-T 

— J C  <=» 

mandible,  or  with  det.  <^;  also  (once  only  IX  2):  C.  7, 

m  6,  7,  16,  18;  C.  22,  VIII  14;  C.  24,  VIII  22,  23,  IX  1 ; 
C.  25,  IX  2  bis,  4,  5. 

rRF 

to  envelope:  C.  6,  II  24. 

rH> 

(&M 

contend,  or  with  det.  v_j  or  _o:  C.  4,11 6, 11;  C.  7,  III  6;  C.  21, 
VIII  9;  C.  28,  IX  22;  C.  29,  X  7;  C.  87,  XII  17;  C.  45, 
XV  14-15;  C.  47,  XVII  11. 

rHr 

to  stand:  XXII 11. 

rHr-W 

MAI 

secretions,  or  without  det.:  C.  41,  Xm  22 — XIV  1;  C.  45, 
XV  13;  C.  47,  XVII  9. 

rHH 

evaporate:  XXI 17. 

rS 

cedar,  or  the  like:  C.  46,  XVI 10. 

rS> 

numerous  (adjective):  C.  5,  II 17. 

often,  greatly  (adverbs);  written  C.  20,  VIII  2; 

C.  28,  IX  20;  XX  17,  XXI 1. 

rK 

enter;  also  C.  8,  IV  8,  15,  16  bis;  C.  22,  VIII  17;  C.  33, 

XI 14;  I.  5,  XIX  12;  I.  6,  XIX  16  bis;  XXI  3. 

Idiomatic  with  possible  meaning  of  “undertake”:  C.  7, 

IV  4. 

rD 

***=> 

to  bo  whole:  C.  6,  II  21. 

rD 

"  6 

C=al  1  1 

grease,  fat,  or  with  det.  °,  also  ”j  (once  only  XIV  5):  C.  41, 
XIV  5,  6;  C.  46,  XVI 10, 11. 

rDN-T 

_ now* 

xJT  t~t -i 

\  & 

''crucible'' :  C.  6,  H  20,  25;  C.  8,  IV  10. 

W’-T 

cord;  also  (once  only  III  16):  C.  7,  HI  6,  7,  16, 18  bis. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

522 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

W’-T 

d  1 

way:  I.  4,  XVIII 19. 

W>-T 

a  (It 

evil:  C.  9,  V  2. 

W’BW 

U'*’ 

of  uncertain  meaning:  C.  24,  IX  1. 

W’M 

an  unidentified  drug:  XX  15. 

W>H 

apply :  C.  28,  X  2. 

w>p 

’ft— 

fresh;  also  J^,  }■**=,  }  (once  only  X  1). 

WT-HR-K  6W  HR  YWF  W>D  HRW  TPY  (YDR  instead 
of  WT  by  ancient  error  of  omission  Y  7):  C.  1,  I  3  restored; 
C.  2,  I  14  restored;  C.  10,  V.  7;  C.  14,  VI  11,  12;  C.  16, 
VI  20;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  18,  VII  10;  C.  26,  IX  10;  C.  27, 
1X17;  C.  28,  XI;  C.  29,  X7;  C.  80,  X  11;  C.  82,  XI  4; 
C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  47,  XVII  2. 

[YWF]  W’D  HRW  TPY  HR  WBNW-F:  C.  3, 1  22. 
green;  Jc,  (once  only  XV  18). 

W’D-T:  C.  45,  XV  18. 

W’D 

I- 

to  be  healthy:  I.1.XVIII9;  1.2,  XVIII 14;  1.5,  XIX  9;  1.8, 
XX  11. 

W’PW 

green  pigment ;  also  ^t=a|  °  (:  C.  41,  XIV  5;  C.  46,  XVI 10. 

W’DY-T 

Buto:  I.  7,  XX  2. 

W’D-H’-T 

“  green-breasted  ”  (goose):  I.  5,  XIX  12. 

WY 

(dependent  pronoun,  first  person,  common,  singular):  I.  1, 
XVIII  8;  1.2,  XVIII 13;  1.7,  XXI;  1.8,  XX  10. 

Wr 

+c£- 
•— 1  1 

one:  C.  1, 1 10, 12  restored ;  C.  21,  VIII  7;  C.  31,X19;  C.  34, 
XIII;  XX  17;  XXI  5;  XXI  8;  XXI 14, 15;  XXII 13. 

Wr,  numeral,  written  i :  XXI  4,  5  bis ;  XXI  6,  7  ter. 

W r  ....  Wr  (also  the  fem.),  “  one  .  .  .  the  other  C.  2, 
I  17  bis  (once  restored);  C.  10,  V  9  bis;  C.  88,  XI  14  bis; 
XXI  15  bis. 

Wr-gNY,  “  one  of  them  both  ” :  C.  35,  XII  7;  C.  36,  XII 13. 
Wf'TY  the  one;  also  (XX  2):  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I.  7, 

XX  2. 

WrB  $=<?$!  priests:  C.  1,1 6. 

WrF  to  contract:  C.  8,  IV  15. 

WrH  ^  an  unidentified  fruit  or  grain :  C.  7,  HI  15. 

WB>  to  open:  C.  6, 1124;  C.  14,  VI 13;  C.  26, 1X12;  C.  39,  XIII 8,  9. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  523 

wound,  or  with  det.  %  or  ^3  (once  only  VIII  18);  also 

ft§i  m>  8  (twice  only  X  8,  XII 17). 

General:  C.  1,18  restored;  C.  2,  I  13  restored,  16;  C.  8, 
122;  C.  9,V2;  C.10.V5,  7;  C.  14,  VI  7;  C.  18,  VII  7, 10; 
C.  28,  VIII 18;  C.  26, 1X6;  0.28,1X18;  C.  40,  XIII 12. 

WBNW  N  KF-T,  “  gaping  wound  ” :  C.  2,  I  12  bis,  14  re¬ 
stored,  15, 17  restored ;  C.  8, 1 18  partly  restored,  19  restored, 
20-21  partly  restored;  G.  4,  II  2,  3,  5;  C.  5,  II  11, 12,  14; 
C.  6,  II  18,  18-19;  C.  7,  III  2,  5,  12;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  27, 
IX  18  bis,  15;  0.28,1X18;  C.  29,X3,4;  C.  47,  XVI 16, 17, 
XVII  10. 

WBNW  said  to  be  without  KF-T  (“  a  gash  ”):  C.  1,  I  10; 
C.  18,  VII  7,  11,  12. 

WBNW  N  KP-T . H>r  Hr-F,  WDr  SW-WT-F:  C.  47, 

XVII 1,  5. 

Also  SW-WT-F  M  WBNW-F:  C.  47,  XVI  19. 

Miscellaneous  characteristics : 

Perforating,  piercing  (fjP^J}^):  C.  14,  VI  7,  9,  13; 
0.26,1X7,9,11;  0.28,1X21. 

Penetrating  (^f^s5),  without  KP-T  or  without  mention 
of  KF-T:  C.  1,  lost  column  bis  restored,  1 1  restored;  C.  10, 
V  6;  0.  18,  VII  8;  C.  20,  VII  22,  23,  VIII  3;  C.  29,  X  6; 
0.  40,  XIII 12-13,  14. 

Cutting  (|J  :  0.  23,  VIII 18, 19. 

Smashing  (p^):  C.  9,  IV  19  bis. 
fiPT-WY  WBNW-F,  “two  lips  of  his  wound”:  C.  1, 
I  1,  10  restored;  C.  14,  VI  8,  13;  C.  18,  VII  13;  C.  23, 
VIII  21;  0  26,1X12;  C.  41,  XIII  20;  see  also  C.  10,  V  9. 

R’  N  WBNW-F,  “  mouth  of  his  wound  ”:  C.  9,  IV  20; 
C.  20,  VII  24-VIII  1;  C.  28,  IX  20,  X  8;  C.  41,  XIII  19, 
22,  XIV  3,  15, 16;  C.  46,  XVI  8;  C.  47,  XVII  9, 14. 

HNW  WBNW-F:  0.87,  XII  20;  C.  41,  XIV  12. 
WBNW  PG[’]-Y:  C.  47,  XVII  3. 

WBNW  HR-F  (or  -6):  C.  8,  IV  18;  C.  19,  VII  15; 
0.  24,  IX  1 ;  C.  87,  XII  15  bis,  17,  21 ;  C.  44,  XV  7,  8. 
WBNW  PF  NTY  HR:  C.  87,  XII 19. 

WBNW,  symptoms  resulting  from:  0.  7,  III  9  bis; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

524 

WBNW  (coni.) 

WP-T 

WPY 

WPW-TYW 

WNN 

WNT 

WN 

WNM-T 

WNMY 

V 

<=>  I 

YiV>*! 

s§. 

gs. 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

C.  28,  X  2;  C.  41,  XIII  19,  XIV  12;  C.  47,  XVII  7  bis,  8, 
12;  see  also  T§W,  “  stiffness,”  etc. 

WBNW,  surgical  and  medical  treatment  of: 

Palpation  (^  «=•')./'>) :  C.  1,  lost  column  restored;  C.  2, 
I  18;  C.  3,  I  19;  C.  4,  II  3;  C.  5,  II  12;  0.  6,  II  19;  C.  7, 
III  2;  C.8,  IV  6;  C.  10,  V  6;  C.  18,  VII  8;  C.  27,  IX  14; 
C.  47,  XVI 18  by  error). 

Inspecting  C.  19,  VII 15. 

Examining  (©^M):  C.  26,  IX  7;  C.  29,  X  5. 

Healing  or  drying:  C.  9,  IV  21;  C.  39,  XIII  9;  C.  41, 
XIII  21,  XIV  5,  8. 

Miscellaneous  treatment:  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  9,  V  5;  C.  10, 
V 8,  9;  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  23,  VIII 20;  C.  26, 1X8;  C.  28, 1X21; 
C.  89,  XIII  8;  C.  46,  XVI  7. 

WBNW  obscure:  C.  5,  II  17;  C.  39,  XIII  9;  C.  41, 
XIII  18  bis,  XIV  1,  8,  10. 
crown  (of  the  head) :  C.  7,  IV  1  bis. 

to  account:  C.  8,  IV  7. 

messengers;  also  (XIX  19):  I.  2,  XVIII 12;  1.7, 

XIX  19. 

subsist :  C.  12,  VI  3. 

to  be;  also  4L  (XVI  16):  C.  7,  III  16,  21;  C.  9,  V  5;  C.  84, 
XII  1  bis;  C.  40,  XIII  17;  C.  42,  XIV  21;  C.  45,  XV  17; 
C.  46,  XVI 13,  16;  XXI 18,  XXII 10. 

WNN + qualitative:  C.  7,  III  19,  20;  C.  14,  VI  10;  C.  19, 
VII  21;  C.  22,  VIII  17;  C.  81,  X  19,  20;  C.  39,  XIII  10; 
C.  41,  XIV  8, 10;  C.  43,  XV  4;  C.  45,  XV  18. 

WNN+HR  with  infinitive:  C.  22,  VIII 15;  XXII  4. 
only  with  negative  N  WNT:  C.  1, 1 1  restored,  I  2;  C.  2, 1 14, 
17;  €.  8,  IV  5,  13;  C.  18,  VII  8,  9,  12,  13;  C.  27,  IX  15; 
C.  42,  XIV  18;  C.  45,  XV  12. 

open:  C.  7,  III  8,  7, 17,  IV  2;  C.  13,  VI  6;  C.  17,  VII  4;  C.  25, 
1X3;  C.  41,  XIV  10. 
diet:  G.  8,  II  2. 
right:  C.  84,  XII  2. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  525 

WNH 

#4 

dislocation:  C.  25,  IX  2  bis,  5;  C.  81,  X  12,  13,  15,  16,  17,  18, 
19;  C.  84, XI 17  bis,  19, 22;  C.  42,  XIV  18;  C. 43, XIV 22 bis, 
XV  2,  8. 

loosen,  be  loose  (of  surgical  stitching) :  C.  10,  V  8 ;  C.  14,  VI 11; 
C.  28,  VIII  20;  C.  47,  XVII  3,  8.  See  also  V  15. 

WNSY 

&=>  ° 

Will 

“  icenesJi-juice  C.  47,  XVII 10. 

WR 

large,  great,  greatly,  very;  also  (once  only  XXII  12), 

(thrice  only  XV  12,  XXI  10,  XXII  12):  C.  4,  II  10; 
C.  6,  II 24;  C.  12.V22;  C.  89,  XIII  5;  C.  41,  XIV  11;  C.  45, 
XV  12, 17;  C.  46,  XV  21,  XVI 13;  XXI 10;  XXII 12  bis. 

WR-T  (or  WR)  with  the  meaning  “  exceedingly  ”  in  the 
phrase  “  he  shudders  exceedingly  ”:  C.  4,  II  4;  C.  7,  III  3; 
C.  20,  VIII 1 ;  C.  29,  X  5;  C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.  42,  XIV  18. 

WR 

the  great  one:  I.  1,  XVIII  4. 

WRMAV 

corrugations,  ripples:  C.  6,  II 20,  25,  III  1 ;  C.  8,  IV  10. 

WRH 

anoint,  smear:  XXII  7;  XXII  13. 

WRD 

to  be  feeble :  C.  7,  HI  3. 

WHY 

ro-®^ 

to  escape:  I.  5,  XIX  18. 

WHNN 

era _ © 

crown  of  the  head ;  or  with  determinative  c=j :  C.  8,  II  21 ;  C.  8, 
IV  11. 

WHf 

SJj 

to  loose:  C.  32,  XI  5. 

WSS-T 

oTI  1  1 

urine:  C.  7,  IV  1. 

wSyr 

Osiris ;  also  j  ©  (once  only  XVIII 2) :  C.  9,  V  3 ;  1. 1 ,  XVIII 2 ; 
I.  5,  XIX  4,  10. 

wSh 

<?PjL 

wide:  C.  1, 1 10  restored,  12. 

WB-T 

r— 1 — i 

<?  II  1 

Q 

fragments;  C.  22,  VIII  12,  15,  16. 

WSrK-T 

scribal  error  for  mSrht,  q.  v. 

WSB-T 

<?  1  o 

1  1  1 

an  unidentified  mineral:  C.  41,  XIV  5. 

wsr 

JLT 

to  dry  up:  C.  89,  XIII  9. 

WGW-T 

jaw;  also  (in  dual,  once  only  III  7),  (onco  only 

VII 14):  C.  7,  HI  7, 17,  18;  0. 18,  VII 14. 

WT 

to  bind;  also  (three  times  only  I  14,  XVI  11,  XVII  2), 

2—j  (two  times  only  VI  20;  IX  10). 

WT  in  applying  a  medicament : 

WT  fresh  meat:  C.  1,12;  C.  2, 1 14;  [0. 10,  V  7  restored]; 
C.  14,  VI  11;  C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  18,  VII  10; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

526 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

WT  ( cont .)  2^ 

WT 

WT 

o* 

WTH  SqA 

WDY 

C.  26,  IX  10;  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  C.  29,  X  7;  C.  30, 
X 10-11;  C.  32,  XI 4;  C.  40,  XIII 15;  C.  47,  XVII  2. 

WT  grease,  honey  and  lint:  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  14,  VI 12. 
WT  YMRW  (or  YMRW  and  honey):  C.  15,  VI  16-17; 
C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  32,  XI  5;  C.  35,  XII  8;  C.  36,  XII 13;  C.  37, 
XII 17;  C.  38,  XIII  2;  C.  42,  XIV  19;  C.  43,  XV  2. 

After  a  recipe,  WT  HR-S:  C.  41,  XIV  5,  6,  7;  C.  46, 
XVI  4,  5,  9,11. 

WT  in  applying  a  surgical  bandage  for  purely  mechanical 
purposes,  such  as  support,  compression,  etc.:  0.  12,  V  20; 
C.  34,  XI  19. 

Do  not  WT:  C.  3,  I  22;  C.  4,  II  6;  C.  5,  II 15;  C.  6, 
1123;  C.  47,  XVII  13. 

bandage;  also  (once  only  XI  5):  C.  32,  XI 5;  C. 41,  XIII 21, 
XIV  14. 

WT-W  (*),  “  wrappings  ”:  C.  45,  XV  18. 
embalmer,  professional  bandager,  or  with  det.  — j:  C.  9,  V  5; 

C.  19,  VII  21. 
to  escape:  I.  8,  XX  10. 

put;  also  «=,  L-n  (three  times  only  II  7,  15;  X  3),  ^  (once 
only  II 1). 

WDY  the  surgeon’s  hand  or  finger:  0.  1,  lost  column  re¬ 
stored;  C.  2, 1  13;  C.  7,  III  9;  C.  13,  VI  4;  C.  22,  VIII  10; 
C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  47,  XVII  8. 

WDY  a  bandage,  a  surgical  device  or  a  medicament : 

WDY  with  meaning  “  apply  ”  used  with  bandage  or  other 
surgical  device:  C.  2,  I  15  restored;  C.  11,  V  11-12;  C.  12, 
V  20. 

WDY . . . .  M  HNW:  C.  35,  XII 7;  C.  36,  XII 12-13. 
WDY...RDYM:  C.  12,  V  19. 

WDY  with  meaning  “apply”  used  with  the  remedy: 
C.  41,  XIV  3,  4;  C.  46,  XVI 12. 

WDY,  “  apply  ”  with  HR,  “  upon,”  “  to  ”:  C.  3,  I  22 
restored ;  C.  6,  II  23;  C.  27,  IX  16. 

WDY,  “  place,”  to  indicate  the  position  of  patient  during 
examination  or  treatment:  C.  7,  III  15;  C.  85,  XII  4-5; 
C.  36,  XII  10;  C.  48,  XVII  18-19. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  527 

WDY  (coni.)  WDY,  “  put  ”  a  fractured  or  dislocated  bono  “  into  its 

place  C.  12,  V  18;  C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  34,  XI 19. 

WDY  ....  HR  MNY-WT-F  in  diet  directions :  C.  3, 1 22, 
III;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5,  II  15;  C.  11,  V  12;  C.  19,  YII  18; 
C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  28,  X  3;  C.29.X8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 

WDY  miscellaneous: 

WD-T  NHD  and  WD-T  >HT  meaning  to  rshow  ex¬ 
haustion1:  C.  7,  III  14,  IV  4. 

WD-T,  “  articulations,”  lit.  “  puttings  ”:  C.  43,  XV  5. 
WDY  M,  “  assail  ”:  I.  4,  XIX  1-2. 

WDH 

pour,  pour  off,  C.  6,  II  25 ;  C.  20,  VIII  5  (with  gap  whore  deter¬ 
minative  should  be). 

WD> 

to  be  whole,  uninjured :  C.  1 ,  lost  column  restored ;  C.  2, 113-14 
restored;  C.  8,  IV  13;  C.  18,  VII  9;  C.  27,  IX  15;  C.  81, 
X  18. 

to  bo  healthy,  to  flourish:  I.  1,  XVIII  4;  I.  4,  XVIII  19, 
XVIII 19-XIX  1. 

WDr 

separate :  C.  47,  XVI 17,  XVII 1 ,  6. 

WDrW 

k\ 

cists :  C.  89,  XIII  6. 

WDF 

to  be  sluggish:  C.  41,  XIV  9. 

B’Y 

J^ME 

clammy;  also  =  (onCG  only  111  19)>  JMt^E 

(once  only  III  19):  C.  7,  HI  10, 19  bis. 

B’H 

phallus,  member;  also  ^  (twice  only  X  14,  22):  C.  31,  X  14, 
16,  20,  22. 

B’ST-T 

Bastot:  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I.  5,  XIX  10, 13;  I.  7,  XIX  20,  XX  3. 

B>K 

to  bo  in  an  oily  condition;  also  (XIV  1):  C.  41, 

XIV  1;  C.  46,  XV  21 -XVII. 

B’D-T 

dipper:  XXII  5. 

BY-T 

honey ;  or  with  det.  o,  also  seemingly  ^  \ ®  ,  (although  seem- 

ing  ^  may  be  cursive  form  of  ^ ) . 

BY-T  used  alone:  C.  32,  XI 6;  C.  35,  XII 8;  C.  36,  XII 14; 
C.  88,  XIII  2;  C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  43,  XV  3;  XXI  4;  XXI  7. 

Grease  and  BY-T:  C.  9,  V  4;  C.  10,  V  8;  C.  15,  VI  17; 
C.  18,  VII 11 ;  C.  26,  IX  11 ;  C.  34,  XI  20. 

Grease,  BY-T  and  lint:  C.  1, 1  3  restored ;  C.  2,  I  15  re¬ 
stored;  C.8,123;  C.  7,1118;  C.  11,  VIS;  C.12,V20;  C.  14, 
VI  12;  C.  16,  VI  21;  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  19,  VII  19;  C.  23, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

528 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

BY-T  ( cont .) 

VIII  22;  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  C.  37,  XII  18;  C.  40, 
XIII 16;  C.  47,  XVII  5, 15. 

YMRW  and  BY-T:  C.  25, 1X6;  C.  30,  Xll. 

BW 

place:  I.  1,  XVIII 10. 

BW-T 

abomination;  also  (once  only  XVIII  17):  I.  3, 

XVIII  17,19;  I.  8,  XX  9. 

BB-WY 

i  i  <?  ^ 

J  J 

collar-bones;  also  J  J?^:  C.  34,  XI  17  bis,  18,  19,  21,  22; 

C.  35,  XII  3  ter,  4,  6. 

BBY-T 

JJM? 

gorget:  C.  34,  XII 1. 

BN-WT 

J“V!7i 

tumors,  or  with  det.  o ;  also  ^  ( (once  only  XIII 5-6), 

(once  only  XIII  3),  ^ — o  (once  only  XV  9),  ^  (once  only 
XIII  8):  C.  39,  Xm  3  bis,  5-6,  7,  10;  C.  45,  XV  9,  10,  11, 
14, 15,  16. 

BNW-T 

a  o 

Jo?  a' 

mill-stone:  XXII  2. 

BNE 

excrement,  dung:  C.  41,  XIV  4;  C.  46,  XVI  9. 

BHS 

'—^1 

calf:  I.  6,  XIX  15. 

BSBS 

JUPV 

a  species  of  goose:  I.  5,  XIX  12. 

BK&W 

backbone :  C.  31,  X 15. 

BKN 

(jV3^  O 

A  — i  i  i 

urine;  also  Jj^“  (III  21):  C.  7,  m  11,  21. 

BTW 

desert;  forsake:  C.  7,  IV  4. 

BD-W 

stiff  rolls;  also  (V  20):  C.  11,  V  13;  C.  12,  V  20; 

C.  23,  VIII  21 ;  C.  34,  XI  20. 

P 

0 

i 

mat,  seat :  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

P 

?• 

Buto:  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

P> 

this,  the;  also  (once  only  II  10):  C.  1,  I  11  (partly 

restored);  C.  4,  II 10;  C.  9,  V5  bis;  XXI  21. 

P>W 

to  have  done,  rto  have  incurred"1 ;  also  (once  only  III  13) : 

C.  3,111;  C.  7,  III  13,  IV  4. 

p»y6-t 

rscabs1 :  C.  41,  XDI  21-22. 

P’HD 

to  turn  over;  also  (once  only  XI 18):  C.  8,  IV  14;  C.  34, 

XI 18. 

P>K-T 

tJkT 

fine  linen;  or  without  \:  I.  5,  XIX  11 ;  XXII  13. 

P>K-T 

o 

s  0 

a 

shell  (or  squama  of  the  skull) ;  also  (once  only  IV 19-20), 

o£o  (once  only  VI),  (once  only  IV  13):  C.  4, 

H° 9  bis;  C.  7,  HI  16  bis;  C.  8,  IV  18;  C.  9, IV 19, 19-20,  V 1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

py-w 

PW  0<? 

PF 

PN 

0 

pn£-t 

o  n-j 

1  O  1 

PNK 

0 

PR 

n 

i 

PRY 

5?^ 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  529 

rwrinkles1 :  C.  6,  HI  1. 
also  □  (once  only  IV  18). 

Demonstrative  adjective  with  meaning  “this”:  C.  9, 

IV  21. 

Used  in  nominal  sentences  as  subject  or  copula:  C.  1,  I 
11;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5,  II  17;  C.  6,  III  1 ;  C.  7,  III  15,  17, 
IV  2;  C.  20,  VIII  5;  C.  31,  X  16,  20  bis;  C.  82,  XI  6,  8; 
C.  34,  XIII;  C.  39,  XIII 11;  C.  41,  XIV  11;  C.  45,  XV  15; 
1. 1,  XVIII 11  bis;  XX  14;  XXII  8. 

Subject  of  apodosis  in  a  gloss  with  the  sense  of  “  it  means  ” : 
C.  1, 1  4  restored,  10,  11 ;  C.  2,  I  16  restored;  C.  8,  I  24  re¬ 
stored,  26  restored,  II  1,  2;  C.  4,  II  9,  10,  11;  C.  5,  II  16; 
C.  6,  II  25;  C.  7,  III  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  IV  1  bis,  8,  4; 
C.  8,  IV  18,  16  bis,  18;  C.  9,  V  5;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  11,  V  14; 
C.  12,  V  21,  22,  VI 2;  C.  14,  VI 18;  C.  18,  VII  12, 14;  C.  19, 

VII  20;  C.  22,  VIII  14,  16,  17;  C.  26,  IX  12;  C.  81,  X  22; 
C.  88,  XI 16;  C.  34,  XI  22;  C.  89,  XIII 10;  C.  41,  XIV  9, 12, 
18,  14;  C.  42,  XIV  21 ;  C.  48,  XV  4,  5,  6;  C.  45,  XV  17; 
C.  46,  XVI 13, 15, 16. 

R>PW,  “or":  C.  8,  IV  16. 

NT[T]  PW,  “  because  ” :  C  1,  I  7  bis. 
that:  C.  4,  II  6;  C.  5,  II  12,  16;  C.  6,  II  20,  28;  0.  7,  III  7,  8, 
9  ter,  13;  C.  8,  IV  6,  7  bis,  10;  C.  18,  VI 4,  5;  C.  14,  VI  8  bis; 
C.  16,  VI  19;  C.  17,  VII  2,  8;  C.  18,  VII  8;  C.  19,  VII  17; 
C.  20,  VIII  1,4;  C.  21,  VIII  7  bis,  8;  C.  22,  VIII 11;  C.  23, 

VIII  20;  C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  26,  IX  8;  C.  28,  IX  21,  X  2; 
C.  29,  X  5;  C.  35,  XII  6;  C.  36,  XII  12;  C.  87,  XII  16,  19; 
C.  38,  XIII  1;  C.  41,  XIII  19  bis,  20  bis,  21,  22;  C.  42, 
XIV  18;  C.  48,  XVI;  C.  46,  XVI  3;  C.  47,  XVII  3,  7  bis, 
8,  12  bis. 

this:  C.  8,  IV  16  bis;  0.  9,  V  8;  C.  10,  V  8;  I.  5,  XIX  3  bis, 
I.  6,  XIX  14, 16;  I.  7,  XX  5;  I.  8,  XX  11 ;  XXII  7. 
fluids:  XXII  4. 

dip  out :  XXII  4,  6. 

house:  1. 2,  XVIII 16;  I.  5,  XIX  14.  PR-HMS-WT,  XVIII  2. 
come  forth:  C.  12,  V  18;  C.  28,  1X20;  C.  37,  XII  19;  C.  41, 

m  m 

oi.uchicago.edu 

530 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

PRY  ( cont .) 

o 

XIV  9-10,  15,  16;  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I.  3,  XVIII  17,  18;  I.  4, 
XIX  2;  I.  6,  XIX  15, 16,  17;  XXII  4  bis. 

become:  XXII 8. 

PR-T 

O  III 

fruit:  XXI 12, 14  bis;  s^/^,  III  21,  see  p.  196. 

PH 

A 

reach:  I.  2,  XVIII 18;  I.  7,  XX  1. 

PH-WY 

< 

end,  back. 

PH-WY  of  the  ramus:  C.7,mi7;  C.  22,  VIII 10, 14  bis; 
C.  25,  IX  3. 

PH-WY  of  the  mandible:  C.  7,  III  17,  18;  C.  18,  VII  14; 
C.  22,  VIII 14. 

PH-WY  of  the  nose:  C.  11,  V  15;  C.12,V21. 

PH-WY  of  miscellaneous:  C.  19,  VII  21 ;  C.  81,  X  20. 

anus;  written  £&:  XXII  11. 

PHWY-T 

anus:  XXII 18. 

PHD 

DI^ 

detach,  sever:  C.  31,  X  19. 

PHR 

<=» 

turn,  turn  around,  circulate;  also  nD  ^ a  (once  only  XI  8): 
C.  19,  VII 16;  C.  32,  XI  2,  3;  C.  41,  XIV  12;  I.  2,  XVIII 16. 

PHR-T 

T  i 

prescription,  recipe,  remedy:  C.  3,  II  2;  C.  9,  V  2,  5;  C.  41, 
XIV  14;  C.  46,  XVI  6;  XXI  3;  XXII 12. 

PSH 

sting:  1.5,  XIX  7. 

PSD 

spinal  column,  back  ;  or  without  v.  C.  7,  III  11 ;  C.  48,  XVII 
15,  16, 17,  18. 

PSY 

•IPlt 

to  cook;  also  (J,  (three  times  V  4;  XX  16;  XXII  13):  C.  9, 
V  4;  XX  16;  XXI 17  bis,  XXII  3  bis;  XXII 13. 

PSN 

0  ' — 

c=>  X 

split. 

PSN  of  the  skull:  C.  1, 1  1  restored;  C.  2, 1 17;  C.  4,  II  2, 
8,  5,  6,  8  bis,  10. 

PSN  in  maxilla:  C.  16,  VI  18  bis,  19  bis. 

PSN  in  the  temple:  C.  18,  VII 9;  C.  21,  VIII  6  bis,  7  bis,  8. 
PSN  in  the  chin:  C.  27,  IX  15. 

PSN  in  the  arm:  C.  88,  XII  21,  22,  XIII 1  bis. 

PG  [*]-Y 

open :  C.  47,  XVII  3,  8. 

PDS 

some  process  in  metal  working:  C.  6,  HI  1. 

PDS 

-LPJ 

disfigured,  braised:  C.  11,  V  10;  C.  12,  V  17, 21-22,  22,  VI 1. 

F»Y 

to  rise,  lift;  also  w^|uii  (III  3,  with  across  ^):  C.  4, 

II 10;  C.  7,  III  3;  C.  47,  XVI  19-20. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  531 

rpW1 

of  unknown  meaning :  C.  47  XVI 19. 

FND 

1 

nose;  also  (twice  only  V  14,  21):  C.  11,  V  10  ter,  11,  13, 

14  auater,  15  ter;  C.  12,  V  16  ter,  17,  21  ter,  22;  C.  18,  VI 4; 
C.  14,  VI 14;  0.26,1X8. 

FH 

TP* 

to  loosen :  C.  11,  V  15. 

FTT 

mi. 

lint. 

Dry  FTT  alone:  C.  28,  X  2. 

Oil,  honey,  and  FTT :  C.  1, 1 3;  C.  2, 1 15 ;  0.  8, 1 23 ;  0.  7, 
III  8;  C.  11,  V  13;  C.  12,V20;  C.  14,  VI 12;  C.  16,  VI  21; 
C.  17,  VII  7;  C.  19,  VII  19;  C.  23,  VIII  22;  C.  27,  IX  18; 
C.  28,  X  1 ;  C.  87,  XII 18;  C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  47,  XVII  5, 15. 

FD 

to  sweat:  C.  7,  III  19. 

FD-T 

sweat:  G.  7,  III  10,  19. 

FDW 

till 

four:  XX  16. 

M 

* 

in,  on,  to,  etc.  (indicating  place  where);  also  (]j^  before  suffix 

pronouns:  C.  1,  lost  column  bis  restored,  I  1  bis  (once  re¬ 
stored),  6,  7;  C.  2,  I  12  restored,  18  restored,  14  bis,  15  re¬ 
stored,  17  restored;  C.  8,  I  18,  19  restored,  20,  21  bis  (once 
restored),  II  1 ;  C.  4,  II  2,  8,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9;  C.  5,  II  11,  12, 
13  bis,  14, 15;  C.  6,  II 18, 19,  20  bis,  22,  25;  C.  7,  III  2,  4,  5, 
6,  9,  12, 18, 17, 18;  C.  8,  IV  5,  6  bis,  7  ter,  8,  9, 10, 12  bis,  15, 
16,  18  bis;  C.  9,  IV  19  bis,  20,  V  3,  5;  C.  10,  V  5,  6,7;  C.  11, 

V  10  bis,  11,  12,  14;  C.  12,  V  16  bis,  17,  18, 19  bis,  21,  VI  2, 
3  bis;  C.  13,  VI  3,  4  bis,  5,  6;  C.  14,  VI  7  bis,  9, 11, 13;  C.  15, 

VI  14,  15,  16;  C.  16,  VI 18  bis,  19;  C.  17,  VII  1  bis,  2,  8,  4; 
C.  18,  VII  7  bis,  9,  10,  18;  C.  19,  VII  15,  17  bis,  18;  C.  20, 

VII  22,  23,  VIII  3,  4;  C.  21,  VIII  6  bis,  8;  C.  22,  VIII  9, 
10,  12,  13  bis,  14,  15;  C.  23,  VIII  18  ter,  19,  20,  21;  C.  24, 

VIII  22,  23,  IX  1 ;  C.  25,  IX  2  bis,  4,  5  bis;  C.  26,  IX  6,  7, 
9.  11 ;  C.  27,  IX  13,  14,  15,  16;  C.  28,  IX  18,  19,  22,  X  2; 
C.  29,  X  3,  4,  6,  7;  C.  30,  X  8,  9,  10, 12;  C.  31,  X  12,  18, 17, 
18;  C.  32,  XI  1  bis,  4,  5,  7;  C.  33,  XI  9  bis,  12,  13;  C.  34, 
XI 17  bis,  19  bis,  22,  23;  C.  35,  XII  8  bis,  4,  6,  7  bis;  C.  86, 
XII  9  bis,  10,  12,  13  bis;  C.  37,  XII  15  bis,  16,  20;  C.  88, 
XII  21,  22,  XIII 1  bis;  C.  89,  XIII  8,  4,  6,  9  bis,  10;  G.  40, 
XIII 12, 13, 14;  C.  41,  XIII 18  bis,  22,  XIV  1,  7,  8, 12;  0. 42, 

Mm2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

XIV  17,  19;  C.  43,  XV  1,  2,  3,  4,  5  ter;  C.  44,  XV  6  bis,  8; 
C.  45,  XV  12, 15;  C.  46,  XV  20,  21,  XVI  2,  3,  7,  8, 10, 13  bis; 
C.  47,  XVI  16,  17,  19,  XVII 1,  6,  7, 11,  14;  C.  48,  XVII  16, 
17,18;  I.  1,  XVIII  7;  1.2,  XVIII 15;  I.  4,  XVIII 19;  1.7, 
XX  5;  I.  8,  XX  12;  XX  14;  XXI  9,  16,  21,  XXII  3,  5,  6, 
10;  XXII 11, 13. 

M,  “in,”  introducing  state  or  condition:  C.  12,  V  22; 
C.  22,  VIII  17;  C.  41,  XIV  1. 

M,  “  into,”  introducing  limit  of  motion:  C.  3,  II  1 ;  C.  5, 
II  16;  C.  6,  III  1;  C.  32,  XI  8;  C.  33,  XI  10,  11,  14  bis, 
16  bis. 

M,  “into,”  introducing  a  change  of  state  or  condition:  C.  5, 

11  17;  C.  9,  IV  21;  XX  17;  XXI  5;  XXI  8;  XXI  9,  14, 
15,  16;  XXII  13. 

M,  “  from,”  indicating  source:  C.  4,  II  4  bis,  6  bis;  C.  5, 
II 13  bis;  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  4  bis,  6  bis;  C.  8,  IV  8,  9  bis, 

12  bis,  15, 16  bis;  C.  11,  V  11;  C.  13,  VI  5  bis;  C.  17,  VII 
3  ter,  4,  5  bis;  C.  20,  VII  24,  VIII  2,  4;  C.  21,  VIII  7  bis, 
8  bis;  C.  22,  VIII  11  bis,  13  bis,  17;  C,  28,  IX  20;  C.  31,  X 
14,20,22;  C.  37,  XII 19;  C.  41,  XIII 19,  XIV  3, 10, 15, 16; 
C.  46,  XVI  8;  C.  47,  XVII  9, 10;  I.  3,  XVIII  17, 18;  I.  4, 
XIX  2;  I.  6,  XIX  15;  XXI 14. 

M,  “  from,”  indicating  separation:  I.  7,  XIX  19;  XXII  8. 
M,  “  resulting  from  ”:  C.  3,  II 1. 

M,  “with,”  indicating  means:  C.  1,  I  3,  4  ter,  5;  C.  3, 
I  23;  C.  6,  II  23;  C.  7,  III  14;  C.  8,  IV  7,  13;  C.  10,  V  6, 
8  bis;  C.  11,  V  12;  C.  12,  V  18,  19,  20,  VII ;  C.  14,  VI  9; 
C.  19,  VII 19;  C.  20,  VIII 2,  5;  C.22,VIII11;  C.23,VIII19; 
C.  28,  IX  21 ;  C.  35,  XII  5;  C.  36,  XII 11 ;  C.  39,  XIII  6,  7; 
C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.  46,  XVI  3,  7  bis;  C.  47,  XVI  20,  XVII  4 ; 
I.  5,  XIX  10;  I.  7,  XX  6;  XXI 13,  XXII  5. 

M,  “  with,”  introducing  the  cause  of  state  or  condition: 
C.  7,  III  10,  19. 

M,  “with,”  giving  further  description:  C.  33,  XI  11,  15; 
C.  39,  XIII  4;  1. 1,  XVIII  8. 

M,  “  as,”  indicating  purpose:  C.  9,  V  1 ;  1. 1,  XVIII 10. 

M,  “  as,”  meaning  “  in  form  of  ”:  I.  6,  XIX  17  ter. 
WPY....M:  C.8.IV8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  533 

M  ( cont .)  ^  M,  indicating  time  when:  1. 1,  XVIII 11 ;  I.  5,  XIX  14. 

M,  “consisting  of  XXI 14,  XXII  5. 

M  with  copulative  force:  C.  4,  II  11 ;  C.  7,  IV  4;  C.  11, 

V  14. 

M  HT,  “  after,”  “  afterward,”  “  when  ”:  C.  1,  I  3;  C.  2, 
I  15  restored;  C.  3,  I  22  restored,  23;  C.  9,  IV  20,  V  3; 
C.  10,  V  7;  C.  11,  V 13;  C.  12,  V  19,  20;  C.15.VI17;  C.  16, 

VI  21 ;  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  18,  VII  11 ;  C.  23,  VIII  21 ;  C.  26, 
1X9,10;  C. 27, 1X17;  C. 28, X 1 ;  C.29,X8;  C.30,  X 11  his; 
C.  32,  XI  6;  C.  34,  XI  20;  C.  35,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII  14; 
C.  37,  XII 18;  C.  38,  XIII  2;  C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  42,  XIV  20; 
C.  48,  XV  8;  C.  47,  XVII  4,  14;  XXI 11,  XXII  7. 

M,  idiomatic: 

MY  HPR-T  M,  “like  as  it  were":  C.  40,  XIII  17; 
C,  42,  XIV  21. 

MH  M,  “  grasp  ”:  C.  22,  VIII  15. 

WDYM,  “assail”:  I.  4,  XIX  2. 
l’KN  M,  “  draw  near  to  ”:  I.  7,  XX  4. 

M  HT  N,  “  subject  to  ”:  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

M  SHR,  “even  so”:  XXI  15. 

R  MN  M,  “  as  far  as  ”:  C.  26,  IX  8. 

M  MYT-T,  “  likewise  ”:  0.  12,  V  22. 

M,  partitive:  XX  13. 

M,  used  erroneously  for  NT:  C.  8,  IV  8. 

M,  scribal  error:  0.  8,  IV  17;  C.  39,  XIII  8. 

M 

& 

ancient  verb  used  to  negative  a  command:  C.  7,  IV  4;  I.  4, 
XIX  1 ;  I.  7,  XX  3,  4  bis. 

M” 

to  see,  inspect, look  (with  meaning  “appear  ”) ;  also  (twice 

only  VI  1,  XIX  1):  C.  12,  VI  1 ;  C.  19,  VII  15;  C.  22, 
VIII 12,  15;  C.  30,X10;  I.  4,  XIX  1 ;  XXII 11. 

M>r 

to  extend:  C.  48,  XVH  18,  17. 

M>r 

T * 

temple  (of  the  head):  C.  9,  V  3. 

M>[W] 

new:  XXI  16. 

MY 

come  (imperative):  1. 1,  XVIII  8. 

MY 

ZZ. 

water:  C.  12,  VI  8. 

MY 

n 

like,  as:  C.  1 . 1  4  bis  restored :  C.  3. 124;  [C.  6,  II  20  restored], 

oi.uchicago.edu 

534 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

MY  ( cont .) 

21,  III  1  bis;  C.  7,  III  11,  18,  19,  21  bis,  IV  1,  3;  G.  8, 
IV  10, 11;  C.  9,  V  1 ;  C.  14,  VI  14;  C.  19,  VII  20,  21 ;  C.  20, 
VIII  2;  C.  22,  VIII  15, 17;  C.  31,  X  19  ;  C.  32,  XI  8;  C.  39, 
XIII  11 ;  C.  40,  Xm  17;  C.  41,  XIV  13,  16;  C.  42,  XIV  21; 
C.  45,  XV  17-18,  19;  C.  46,  XVI  1,  14;  C.  47,  XVI  19, 
XVII  10;  XXI  11,  15;  XXII  2. 

MY  SHR,  “like”:  XXI  18. 

MY  YH-T,  “  as  if  ”:  C.  7,  III  12,  IV  2. 
likewise:  C.  4,  II  8. 

MYT-T 

the  like,  a  copy:  C.  41,  XIV  7;  I.  5,  XIX  2. 

MYT-T,  “about”:  XXI  10. 

M  MYT-T,  “  likewise  ”:  C.  12,  V  22. 

MYT-T,  “like,”  “likewise”:  G.  1,  I  5;  I.  7,  XX  8; 
XXI  14. 

MYfi-T 

TP* 

liver:  I.  5,  XIX  4. 

Mr 

because  of:  C.  7,11118,20;  C.  39,  XIII  11;  C.  41,  XIV  14. 

Mr  NTT:  C.  12,  V  22. 
from,  indicating  place:  I.  6,  XIX  18. 

HPR  Mr,  “  done  by  ”:  C.  30,  X  10. 

N1IM  Mr,  ‘  save  from  ”:  I.  1,  XVIII  8. 
now:  C.  48,  XVII 16. 

[M]rND-T 

5= 

morning  barque:  I.  1,  XVIII  7. 

MW 

water,  fluid  (secretion),  juice:  C.  28,  IX  19;  C.  45,  XV  13  bis; 
C.  46,  XVI  1,  5,  7,  8,  14;  C.  47,  XVII  10;  XXI  16,  17,  21, 
XXII  2. 

MWY 

^f|(j 

be  watery :  C.  41,  XHi  22. 

MWY-T 

urine:  C.  31,  X  14, 17,  22  bis. 

MW-T 

mother:  I.  6,  XIX  16. 

MWT 

to  die,  death:  C.  4,  II  11;  C.  8,  IV  16;  I.  2,  XVIII  15,  16; 
I.  7,  XX  2. 

MWT 

a  dead  person,  or  with  <=>  in  fern.;  also  (XVIII  18): 

I.  3,  XVIII 18;  I.  5,  XIX  6  bis. 

MN 

MN  M,  “  fixed  in,”  “  attached  to  ”  (used  anatomically):  C.  7, 
III  17;  G.  84,  XI  23;  C.  48,  XV  4. 

MN  M,  “  confined  to  C.  23,  Vm  18. 

MN  M,  “sticking  in”  (used  of  a  foreign  substance  sticking 
in  a  wound):  C.  4, 119;  C.  23,  VIII  20. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  .  535 

MN  ( cont .)  fixed,  rigid,  stiff  (as  a  symptom):  C.  32,  XI 2. 

to  press  firmly  (in  feeling  an  injury):  C.  40,  XIII 13. 

MNS’W:  C.  31.X21. 

RMNM:  C.  26, 1X8. 

MN 

someone:  C.  1, 1  8. 

MN-T 

something:  C.  1, 1  4  bis. 

MN 

to  be  sick,  to  suffer  with;  also  (once  only  XVI 18). 

MN  TSW:  C.  3, 1  20,  21,  2G;  C.  4,  II  4,  6;  C.  5,  II 13, 15; 
C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  4,  C,  13;  C.  8,  IV  9,  12;  C.  19,  VII 18; 
C.  20,  VIII 4;  C.  22,  VIII 13;  C.29.X6-7. 

MN  miscellaneous:  0.  3,  II  1 ;  C.  42,  XIV  17,  18;  C.  43, 
XV  1,  4,  5;  C.  47,  XVI 18,  XVII 1 ;  C.  48,  XVII 18;  XX  13; 
XXII 11  bis. 

MN  by  error:  C.  1, 1  9. 

MN-T 

ailment:  C.  1, 1  5  bis;  C.  20,  VIII 1. 

MN-TY 

“-I! 

the  two  loins :  XXI  2. 

MNY-WT 

V, 

mooring  stakes:  also  (once  only  X  8). 

WDY  (or  EDY)  11  T>  HR  MNY-WT-F:  C.  3, 1 23  restored, 
II  2;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5, 1115;  C.  28,  X  3;  C.  29,  X  8;  C.  47, 
XVII 13. 

WDY-HE-K  SW  IIR  MNY-WT-F:  C.  19,  VII  18;  C.  21, 
VIII  9. 

WDY- HR-K  HR  MNY-WT-F:  C.  11,V12. 

MNH 

w 

—  9“ 

It  MNH,  “  thoroughly  ”:  XXI 17,  20,  XXII  8. 

MNHY-W 

of  unknown  meaning :  C.  89,  XIII  8. 

MNS> 

emissio  scminis;  or  with  dot.  0 :  C.  31,  X  16, 19. 

MND-T 

O  ^ 

cheek;  or  without  C.  11,  V  15;  C.  12,  V  22;  C.  15,  VI  14, 

15, 16  bis;  C.  16,  VI 18  bis,  19;  C.  17,  VII 1  bis,  2,  4. 

MR 

ailment,  hurt,  once  without  det.  (Ill  18). 

MR  in  verdict  1:  C.  1, 1  2;  C.  2,  I  14;  C.  8,  I  21;  C.  10, 

V  7 ;  C.  11,  V  11 ;  C.  12,  V  17;  C.  14,  VI  9;  C.  15,  VI  16; 
C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  18,  VII  10;  C.  19,  VII  18;  0.  28,  VIII  20; 
C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  26,  IX  9;  C.  27,  IX  16;  C.  80,  X  10;  C.  82, 
XI  4;  C.  84,  XI 19,  22;  C.  85,  XII  4;  C.  86,  XII 10;  C.  88, 
XIII 1;  C.  39,  XIII  6;  C.  40,  XIII 15;  C.  41,  XIV  2;  C.  42, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

536 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

MR  ( cont .)  XIV  19;  C.  43,  XV  2;  C.  46,  XVI  3;  C.  47,  XVII  2;  C.  48, 

XVII 18. 

MR  in  verdict  2:  C.  4,  II 6, 11;  C.  7,  111  6;  C.  21,  VIII 8-9; 
C.  28,  IX  22;  C.  29,  X  7;  C.  37,  XII  17;  C.  45,  XV  14; 
C.  47,  XVII 11. 

MR  in  verdict  3:  C.  5,  II  15;  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  13; 
C.  8,  IV  9,  12;  C.  13,  VI  6-7;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  20,  VIII  4; 
C.  22,  VIII 14;  C.  24,  IX  2;  C.31,X17;  C.  33,  XI 13;  C.  37, 
XII 21;  C.  44,  XV  9. 

MR  bind;  also  (once  only  111 18):  C-  7> 111  U>  13>  18> IV  2- 

MRH-T  grease;  also  ^ or  with  sj,  or  =^|,  (once  only  I  23), 

2:j[g  (once  only  VII  6),  ^ !  (once  only  II  8). 

MRH-T  used  alone:  C.  4,  II  8;  C.  6,  II  23;  C.  11,  V  12; 
C.  12,  V  19;  C.  20,  VIII  5;  C.  32,  XI  5. 

MRH-T  and  honey:  C.  9,  V  4;  C.  10,  V  8;  C.  15,  VI  17; 
C.  18,  VII 11 ;  C.  26,  IX  10;  C.  34,  XI  20. 

MRH-T  with  honey  and  lint :  C.  1, 1  3;  C.  2, 1 15  restored ; 
C.  3, 1 28 ;  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  11,  VIS;  C.  12.V20;  C.  14,  VI 12; 
C.  16,  VI  21;  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  19,  VII  19;  C.  23,  VIII  22; 
C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  C.  37,  XII  18;  C.  40,  XIII  16; 
C.  47,  XVII  4,  14. 

MRH-T  in  prescription:  C.  9,  IV  20;  C.  46,  XVI  11; 

XX  15. 

ointment:  XX  18;  XXII  12. 
mass:  XXn  4  bis,  6. 

MHWY 

rn  wiii 

rinilk1 :  C.  20,  Vm  5. 

MH 

“A 

—a 

to  grasp:  C.  22,  VIII  15. 

MH-T 

see  HM>-T  MH-T. 

MIINT 

countenance;  also  [§|7>  (III  18-19):  C.  7,  HI  10, 18-19. 

MHNW 

interior:  C.  22,  VIII  16;  C.  20,  IX  7. 

MSH 

I  **- 

crocodile:  I.  5,  XIX  7. 

m£hn-t 

Meskhenet,  g.:  I.  8,  XVIII  18. 

m£d-ty 

MV** 

two  nostrils:  C.  11,  V  14-15,  15. 

mSdm-t 

eye  paint :  XX  17. 

M&DR 

4 

ear:  C.  13,  VI  5;  C.  17,  VII  8,  5;  C.  18,  VII 14;  C.  21,  VIII  7, 

8;  C.  23,  VIII 18  bis,  19  bis,  20,  21. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  537 

M&DR  (conf.) 

1 

MSDR-WY(^):  C.  4,  II  4,  6 ;  C.  5, 1118;  C.  7, 1114,6; 
C.  8,  IV  9, 12;  C.  20,  VIII  5;  C.  22,  VIII 11, 12, 18,  15, 16. 

m$dr-w- 

“  Hezret-eam  ”  (leaves  of  some  plant) ;  or  with  det. . . XX  18. 

HDR-T 

MSrK-T 

shoulder-blade;  also  <?“£\  (once  only  XII  5,  scribal  error  of 

hieratic  w  for  m ;  cf.  S'rn  in  XIII 6  where  w  has  been  corrected 
to  m) :  C.  35,  XII  5;  C.  86,  XII 11 ;  C.  47,  XVI 18,  XVII 2. 

MK-T 

protection:  C.  9,  V  8. 

MK» 

'“depression'1 :  C.  11,  V  10. 

MK-TY 

luKn 

two  supports;  also  (HI  15):  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  7,  III  15. 

M[K]H> 

Mik® 

back  of  the  head:  C.  1, 1  7  bis  (once  restored),  8. 

MT 

I\ 

vessel,  canal:  C.  1, 1  8,  7,  8  bis;  C.  9,  V  3;  C.  84,  XII  1. 

muscle,  ligament,  without  det.  \:  C.  7,  HI  10, 17, 18,  19,  20. 

MTR 

211- 

customary;  also  ^  (V  22):  C.  3,  II 2;  C.  12,  V  22. 

MDW 

ITi 

speak:  C.  7,  IV  8;  C.  20,  VIII  1;  C.  22,  VIII  12,  17;  C.  83, 

XI 10-11. 

MDW  as  designation  of  “beating”  of  heart:  C.  1,  I  8 
restored ;  C.  7,  m  3. 

MDW 

!' 

word:  I.  1,  XVIII  9;  I.  2,  XVIII  15;  I.  5,  XIX  9. 

MD-T 

ITfl 

speech:  C.  21,  VIII  8. 

MD 

deep:  C.  5,  II 13. 

MD-T 

TV.  1  1 

compress :  C.  9,  V  4. 

MD-T 

MkC. 

brace:  C.  7,  HI  14. 

MD-T 

book:  XXI  9. 

MDD 

to  press :  C.  8,  IV  10. 

N 

also  (ten  times  X  21;  XI  8;  XII  2;  XVIII  2,  8,  9,  16; 

XIX  8,  4, 18). 

N,  “to,”  “for,”  dative  of  reference  or  indirect  object: 
C.  2, 1  15  restored;  C.  8, 1  26  bis  (once  restored),  II  2;  C.  4. 
II  7,  8;  C.  5,  II  17;  C.  7,  III  7,  14  bis,  17;  C.  8,  IV  14,  18; 

C.  9,  IV  20  bis,  21,  V  4;  C.  10,  V  6,  8;  C.  11,  V  11,  IS; 

C.  12,  V  18,  20;  C.  14,  VI  8,  10,  12;  C.  19,  VII  16  bis,  21 
C.  20,  VIII  1 ;  C.  22,  VIII 11,  12;  C.  23,  VIII 19,  21 ;  C.  25 

IX  8;  C.  27,  IX  16;  C.  28,  X  2;  C.  80,  X  9;  C.  81,  X  22 

C. 82, XI 2 bis;  C. 85, XII 6;  C. 86, XII  12,18;  C. 87, XII 17 

oi.uchicago.edu 

538 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

N  ( cont .) 

N[Y]  — 

a 

C.  39,  XIII 7;  C.  41,  XIV  2,  4,  6, 10;  C.  46,  XVI 9, 11 ;  C.  47, 
XVI  20,  XVII  4;  C.  48,  XVII  16,  19;  LI,  XVIII  2,  3; 
I.  5,  XIX  3,  4;  I.  6,  XIX  18;  I.  8,  XX  12;  XX  13,  15,  16; 
XXII 12. 

N,  “  to,”  indicating  place  to  which:  C.  1,  lost  column  bis 
restored,  I  2  restored,  6,  7  restored,  8  ter,  10;  C.  2,  I  12,  13, 
16  restored;  C.  4,  II  2,  3,  5;  C.  5,  II 12, 14, 15  (dittography), 
16,  17;  C.  6,  II  18,  19,  24;  C.  7,  III  2,  5,  12;  C.  8,  IV  15; 
C.  10,  V  6;  C.  11,  V  15;  C.  12,  V  21;  C.  14,  VI 13;  C.  18, 
VII  8,  12;  C.  20,  VII  22,  23,  VIII  3;  C.  26,  IX  7,  9,  11,  12; 
C.  27,  IX  14,  16;  C.  29,  X  4,  6;  C.  31,  X  15;  C.  34,  XI  21, 
23,  XII  2;  C.  37,  XII  20. 

N,  “  for,”  indicating  duration  of  time:  1. 1,  XVIII  9;  I.  5, 
XIX  9;  I.  8,  XX  11. 

N,“  despite”:  1. 1,  XVIII  9;  I.  2,  XVIII 14;  I.  5,  XIX  9; 
I.  8,  XX  11. 

DG’  N,  “  look  at  ”:  C.  3,  I  20  restored,  25,  26  bis  (once 
restored);  C.  4,  II  5;  C.  5,  II  14;  C.  7,  III  5;  C.  19,  VII 16; 
C.  29,  X  5;  C.  30,  X  9;  C.  32,  XI  2,  3. 

N,  indicating  possession:  C.  46,  XVI  2. 

N  miscellaneous: 

RDY  N,  “  apply  to  ”:  C.  9,  V  4;  “  attach  to  ”:  I.  5, 
XIX  11;  “putin”:  XXI 10,  XXII 1. 

I)MY  N,  "  touch,”  C.  45,  XV  17, 18. 

TWT  N,  “  liken  to  ”:  C.  7,  IV  2;  C.  12,  VI  3;  C.  45, 
XV  18. 

N  HEW,  “  upward  ”:  C.  7,  IV  3;  C.  31,  X  81. 

N  HRW,  “  downward  ”:  C.  7,  IV  3;  C.  81,  X  21 ;  C.  32, 
XI  8. 

GS  N  HRY,  “top”:  XXII  6. 

M  HT  N,  “  subject  to  ”:  1.1,  XVIII  5. 

N,  scribal  error:  C.  39,  XIII  8. 

N,  used  for  negative  particle:  C.  6,  II  21;  C.  8,  IV  11  bis; 
C.  20,  VIII  4. 

because  of:  C.  3,  I  24;  C.  22,  VIII  17;  C.  48,  XVII 17;  1.2, 
XVIII 15, 16;  I.  7,  XX  2. 

genitival  adjective;  also  once  (XIX  5),  ™  (IV  13):  C.  1, 
lost  column  ter  restored,  1  2  restored,  8, 10  restored,  11 ;  C.  2, 

(feminine) 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

539 

N[Y]  (coni.) 

oV>  (feminine  dual) 
°  (plural) 

I  12  ter  (once  restored),  14  restored,  15  bis  (once  restored), 
16  bis  (once  restored),  17  restored;  C.  3,  I  18,  19  bis 
restored,  21  restored ;  C.  4,  II  2,  3  bis,  5,  7,  9  bis ;  C.  5,  II 11, 
12  bis,  14,  17;  C.  6,  II  18  ter,  19  bis,  20,  21,  22,  24,  25, 

III  1;  C.  7,  III  2  bis,  5,  6  bis,  7,  9,  10,  11  bis,  12  bis,  14, 
15  bis,  16  quater,  18,  19,  20,  21  bis,  IV  1  ter,  3  bis;  C.  8, 

IV  5  quater,  6,  8  ter,  10,  12,  13  ter,  15,  16  bis,  17  ter,  18  tor; 
C.  9,  IV  19  bis,  20  ter,  21  bis,  V  1,  2  bis,  4  bis;  C.  10,  V  5, 
6  bis,  9  ter;  C.  11,  V  10  ter,  11  bis,  12,  13,  14  bis,  15;  C.  12, 

V  16  ter,  17,  18  bis,  19,  20,  21  bis,  VI  2;  C.  13,  VI  4;  C.  14, 

VI  7,  10  bis;  C.  15,  VI  15;  C.  16,  VI  18,  19;  C.  17,  VII  1 ; 
C.  18,  VII  7, 14  bis;  C.  19,  VII  21;  C.  20,  VII 23, 24,  VIII  2; 
C.  21,  VIII  6,  7;  C.  22,  VIII  10,  11,  16  bis;  C.  23,  VIII  18, 
19  bis,  21  bis;  C.  24,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  4;  C.  26,  IX  6,  8; 
C.  27,  IX  13  bis,  14,  15;  C.  28,  IX  18,  19,  20,  X  2;  C.  29, 
X  8  bis,  4  quater,  6;  C.  30,  X  8, 9  bis,  10;  C.  81,  X  12, 13  bis, 
15, 16, 17, 18  bis;  C.  82,  XI 1  ter,  4,  7  bis,  8;  C.  38,  XI  9  ter, 
12,  13,  14,  16;  C.  84,  XI  17,  18,  20,  22,  28,  XII  1,  2  bis; 
C.  35,  XII  3,  7;  C.  86,  XII  9,  12;  C.  87,  XII 15,  17;  C.  38, 
XII  22  bis;  C.  89,  XIII  8;  C.  40,  XIII 12, 13,  14,  15, 17  bis; 
C.  41,  XIII  18  ter,  19  bis,  21,  22,  XIV  1,  3  bis,  4,  5,  8,  10, 
11, 15,  16;  C.  42,  XIV  17  bis,  19,  21  ter;  C.  43,  XIV  22  bis, 
23  bis,  XV  2,  8,  4  bis ;  C.  48,  XIV  22  ( nw ,  scribal  error) ; 
C.  44,  XV  6  bis,  7  bis,  8;  C.  45,  XV  9,  13,  15,  18,  19;  C.  46, 
XV  20,  XVI  8,  9,  10,  14;  C.  47,  XVI  16,  17  bis,  XVII  1,  4, 
6,  9,  10  bis,  14;  C.  48,  XVII  15,  16,  17,  18;  I.  1,  XVIII 
1  bis,  8  bis,  10;  I.  2,  XVIII  11,  12;  I.  3,  XVIII  17;  I.  5, 
XIX  5,  6,  8;  I.  6,  XIX  14  bis,  15  bis;  I.  7,  XIX  18,  XX  5, 
6,  7;  I.  8,  XX  10  bis;  XX  14;  XXI  7;  XXI  9,  13,  14  bis, 
21,  XXII  1,  4,  7,  8,  9,  10;  XXII  12,  13. 

N-T 

crown  (of  Lower  Egypt) :  I.  1 ,  XVIII  6. 

N-T 

AW<*\  ft 

oVP 

rNeit1  g. :  I.  5,  XIX  13. 

N» 

& 

these:  C.  45,  XV  19;  XXI 14  bis,  21. 

NY 

w 

for  which,  or,  for  whom. 

NY  in  verdict  3:  C.  5,  H  15;  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  111  13; 
C.  8,  IV  9,  12;  C.  13,  VI  7;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  20,  VIII  4; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

540 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

NY  ( cont .) 

\\ 

C.  22,  VIII 14;  C.  24,  IX  2;  C.31,X17;  C.  38,  XI 13;  C.  37, 
XII 21;  C.  44,  XV  9. 

NY  with  obscure  meaning:  C.  7,  III  17 ;  C.  18,  VII 14. 

NY-SWT 

king:  1.7,  XXL 

NY’W 

******  (p  ^  i 

ibex;  also  (XVI 11):  C.  41,  XIV  6;  C.  46,  XVI  11. 

NYW 

- — (| 

ostrich:  C.  9,  IV  20,  21,  V.  1. 

NY& 

' — 

to  call:  C.  22,  VIII 12. 

Nrr 

rto  gain  color1 :  C.  8,  IV  9. 

NrB> 

clamminess;  also  “  (XVI 1):  C.  46,  XVI 1,  XVI 14. 

NrS 

AWW  1  1  1 

. — a  O 

puncture:  C.  3, 124. 

rNWNW1 

ooo 

p=jZ^*t 

the  Celestial  Ocean:  I.  1,  XVIII  7. 

NW 

'Xe 

this:  C.  8,  II 1. 

NW 

weak  particle  in  YR  NW,  “  now  if  C.  1, 1  6. 

N13 

every,  all,  any:  C.  1, 1  8,  6  bis  (once  restored),  8  bis;  C.  2, 1 15; 

C.  8,  I  23;  C.  4,  II  8;  C.  8,  IV  5,  13;  C.  9,  V  2;  C.  10,  V  8; 
C.  11,  V  18;  C.  12,  V  18, 20,  VI  1,2;  C.  14,  VI 10, 12;  C.  15, 

VI  17;  C.  16,  VI  21;  C.  17,  VII  7;  C.  18,  VII  11;  C.  19, 

VII  19;  C.  23,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  6;  C.  26,  IX  11;  C.  27, 
1X18;  C.  28,  XI;  C.S0.X11;  C.  32,  XI  6;  C.  84,  XI  20; 
C.  35,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII  14;  C.  37,  XII 18;  C.  38,  XIII  2; 
C.  89,  XIII  9;  C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  41,  XIV  7;  C.  42,  XIV  20; 
C.  48,  XV  3;  C.  45,  XV  12, 15;  C.  46,  XVI  7;  C.  47,  XVII  5, 
6,  15;  LI  XVIII  8  bis,  10;  I.  5,  XIX  6  quinquies;  I.  7, 
XIX  18,  XX  8;  XXI 12, 14,  XXII 1,  9  ter. 

NB-T 

S3? 

Ck 

mistress :  1. 1,  XVIII 6. 

NB-T-H-T 

Nephthys,  g.:  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

NB 

XL 

tic:  I.  7,  XX  6. 

NBY-M-IIIt-F 

Flame-in-His-Face  (a  hostile  demon):  1. 1,  XVIII 1 

NBYBYW 

-JUWl 

be  hot:  C.  46,  XVI 15. 

NBS 

— JPOi 

a  kind  of  tree:  C.  41,  XIV  3. 

NP’P> 

to  flutter:  C.  6,  H  20,  21 ;  C.  8,  IV  10-11,  11. 

NPW 

enemy :  C.  9,  V  3. 

NPH-WY 

7K 

two  labia:  XXI  1. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  541 

NF-T 

^  1  SIC 

breath,  wind;  also  ZL^l  (XVI11  13)>  Zl1?!  (XX  !):  L  1> 
XVIII  8;  I.  2,  XVIII 18;  I.  7,  XX  1. 

NF> 

those:  C.  46,  XVI  6. 

NFNFN 

ww  m  fl 

unroll:  C.  47,  XVI  19. 

NrF",NFRY 

Z -M* 

of  unknown  meaning:  I.  5,  XIX 12. 

NFR-T 

unidentified  flower:  I.  7,  XX  5. 

NFRY-T  It 

as  far  as:  C.  11,  V  14, 15;  C.  12,  V  21. 

NFT 

a  _ _ Q 

displacement:  C.  34,  XI  22;  C.  48,  XV  4. 

NN,  N 

negative  particle;  also  — » (II  21 ;  IV  11  bis;  VIII  4). 

C.  1,  I  1  restored,  2;  C.  2,  I  14  restored,  17; 

C.  8,  IV  5,  18;  C.  18,  VII  8,  9,  12,  18;  C.  27,  IX  15;  C.  42, 

XIV  18;  C.  45,  XV  12. 

—^"7:  C.  5,1115;  C.  C,  1122;  C.  7,  III  13;  C.  8,  IV  9, 
12;  C.  18,  VI  7;  C.  17,  VII  5;  G.  20,  VIII  4;  0.22,  VIII 14; 
C.  24,  IX  2;  C.  81,  X  17;  C.  83,  XI 13;  C.  87,  XII  21;  C.  44, 

XV  9. 

With  infinitive:  C.  1,  I  10,  11;  C.  8,  II  2;  C.  7,  III  17; 
C.  22,  VIII 17;  C.  33,  XI  15;  C.  41,  XIV  9;  C.  42,  XIV  18; 
I.  6,  XIX  17. 

With  Mm-f  form:  C.  6,  II  21,  III  1;  C.  8,  IV  11  bis; 
C.  9,  V  8;  C.  18,  VII  12;  C.  20,  VIII  2;  C.  81,  X  14;  I.  2, 
XVIII  13,  15;  I.  7,  XIX  20,  XX  1,  2. 

With  N-form:  C.  3, 1 20  restored,  25,  26  bis  (onco  restored) ; 
C.  4,  II  4,  9;  C.  5,  II  14;  C.  6,  II  21 ;  0.  7,  III  4  bis,  17; 
C.  8,  IV  14;  C.  20,  VIII  1;  C.  22,  VIII  12;  C.  25,  IX  8; 
C.  29,  X  5;  C.  31,  X  21  bis,  22;  C.  32,  XI  2,  3;  C.  83,  XI 10 
C.  41,  XIII  20,  21,  XIV  13;  C.  45,  XV  12,  18  bis;  I.  2, 
XVIII  16;  XX  13. 

With  noun:  C.  1,  lost  column  restored,  I  1  '"restored'1, 
11  restored;  C.  9,  V  3;  C.  45,  XV  15;  C.  46,  XVI  15;  XXI 
18;  XXII  1. 

With  pronoun:  C.  12,  V  22. 

With  adjectival  predicates:  C.  1, 1 10  restored,  12. 

Used  for  dative  N  or  genitival  adjective  N[Y]:  C.  31,  X  21; 
C.  32,  XI 3;  C.  34,  XII 2;  1. 1,  XVIII 2, 8,  9;  I.2,XVIII16; 
I.  5,  XIX  3,  4,  5,7;  I.  6,  XIX  18. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

642 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

NN 

UT 

these,  this;  also  (XXII  6):  C.  48,  XVI  6-6;  XXII  6. 

NNY 

to  move  feebly,  drag :  C.  8,  IV  14. 

to  dribble;  also  ^Z?j&(X22),  (X17):  C.31,X17,22. 

NNM 

to  wander:  C.  3,  II 1. 

NR’W 

See  NY’W. 

NR-T 

vulture:  I.  1,  XVIII  10. 

NRW-T 

<0\  | 

sprain;  orwithdet.\;  also -==^1  (twice  only  XVII 15, 16),  or 
with  det.  \  (once  only  XVII  18):  C.  30,  X  8,  9,  10,  12; 
C.  42,  XIV  17, 19;  C.  48,  XVII 15, 16, 18. 

NH-T 

ra<aO 

sycamore:  C.  46,  XVI 12. 

DRD  NH-T  (,f  ,^0,  ° ,,  XIV  7;  or  without  o),  “sycamore 
leaves”:  C.  41,XIV7;  C.  46,  XVI  8. 

NHD 

ro 

exhaustion:  C.  7,  III  14. 

See  also  >HT  and  HD. 

NHDHD 

to  throb:  C.  6,  H  20,  21 ;  C.  8,  IV  10,  11. 

NIR 

disturbing,  foreign ;  or  with  det.  'O:  C.  4,  II 3-4;  C.  6,  III  1. 

NHB-[T]-K>W 

Neheb-kau,  g.:  I.  5,  XIX  10. 

NHB-T 

UJ* 

neck:  C.  8, 1  20,  21;  II  1  ter;  C.  4,  II  4,  6,  8;  C.  5,  II  14,  15; 
C.  6, 11  22;  C.  7,  III  4,  6, 10, 13, 19,  20;  C.  8,  IV  9, 12;  C.  19, 
VII 16,  18;  C.  20,  VIII  4;  C.  22,  VIII 14;  C.  29,  X  8,  4  bis, 
6  bis,  7;  C.  80,  X  8,  9,  10;  C.  31,  X  12-18,  13,  15,  16,  17, 
18  bis;  C.  32,  XI 1  bis,  2,  4,  5,  7,  7-8,  8;  C.  33,  XI  9,  10,  12, 
14  bis,  16. 

NHM 

oM 

to  save:  I.  1,  XVIII  8. 

NHM-T 

dKZ 

rescue  (noun) :  C.  9,  V  3. 

NHR-WT 

teeth:  C.  7,  III  10-11. 

NHB-T 

UA* 

Nckhbet,  g. :  I.  1,  XVIII  3. 

NHBHB 

7» 

to  break  through,  crepitate ;  also  x  (once  only  XV  7-8) : 

C.  13,  VI  4-6;  C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  37,  XII  16; 
C.  44,  XV  7-8. 

NHT 

to  be  stiff,  or  with  det.  — o  (twice  III  17,  20):  C.  7,  III  17,  20. 
HNN  NHT  (applied  to  erection  of  phallus) :  C.  31,  X  14,  20. 

NH 

■^^‘n 

fluid:  C.  6,  H  24-26. 

See  also  NSW. 

NSY 

to  settle :  C.  32,  XI  8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  543 

NSW-T 

^l\ 

displacement :  C.  32,  S3  1  bis,  4,  7. 

NS-S’ 

“garden  tongue,”  a  plant:  C.  41,  XIV  7. 

NSR 

to  bum,  to  be  inflamed:  C.  28,  IX  20;  C.  41,  XIII  19,  XIV  2, 
8,11;  C.  47,  XVII 8, 11  12. 

NSR’T 

fever:  I.  4,  XIX  1. 

NSR 

VT— 0 

anoint :  C.  6,  II  22. 

NSW 

issue  (verb);  also '  />  (once  only  XIII  19),  °)gf  (once  only 

XVII  9),  (scribal  error,  once  only  XIV  15):  C.  41, 

XIII 19,  XIV  15, 16;  C.  47,  XVII  9. 

(p  C5 

i — >  i  i  i 

issue,  discharge  (noun) :  C.  31,  X  20. 

See  also  NH. 

NSNY 

disaster,  to  work  disaster;  or  with  det.  j I.  2,  XVIII  18-14; 
I.  4,  XIX  1,  2;  I.  7,  XIX  20-XX  1. 

NKW-T 

<V  Q  ff ***** 

A  ZZ 

moisture :  XXI 18. 

NKR 

A  —a 

to  sift:  XXI  18. 

NKRW 

TTft1 

sieve:  XXI  18. 

NKT-W 

^7*  \  l  1  1 

some,  also  a  pieco  (XX  5):  C.  22,  VIII 15;  I.  7,  XX  5. 

NG’Y 

to  rend  open:  also  (once  only  II  28),  (onco  only 

X  12),  55  x  (twice  only  II  22,  IV  11):  C.  6,  II 18, 19,  22,  28; 
C.  8,  IV  11;  C.  80,  X12. 

NTY 

o\\ 

which,  also  (twice  only  I  7  bis):  C.  1,  I  7  bis;  C.  4,  II  4, 

(feminine) 

10  bis;  C.  5,  II  13  bis;  C.  6,  II  20;  C.  7,  III  9;  C.  8,  IV  6, 

7  bis,  10;  C.  9,  Y  5  bis;  C.  11,  V10;  0.  12,  Y  17,  19,  VI  2; 
C.  81,  X  18;  C.  87,  XII  19;  C.  38,  XIII  1;  C.  39,  XIII  7; 
C.  41,  XIII  22,  XIV  9,  14,  15  (dittography) ;  C.  45,  XV  19; 
C.  46,  XVI  8,  7,  13;  C.  47,  XVII  7;  XXI  21. 
one  who:  C.  7,  IV  3. 

NTT  introducing  proposition  after  particles  meaning 
“because”:  C,  7,  IV  4. 

DR  NTT:  C.  4,  II  11. 

Mr  NTT:  C.  12,  V  22. 

HR  NTT:  I.  1,  XVIII  4. 

NTY  used  erroneously  for  YWTY :  C.  8,  IV  8. 

NTY  used  for  N[Y]:  C.  8,  IV  18. 

NTNT  membrane;  C.  6,1124, 

NTR  y  god:  C.  8,  IV  16;  I.  3,  XVIII 18. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

544 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

NTR'T 

ir,;, 

an  unidentified  drug :  C.  48,  XVI 4. 

rND"' 

rto  husk1:  XXI 11  bis;  more  probably  to  be  read  ^ 0-  v. 

ND 

TojS 

to  ask:  C.  20,  VIII  1. 

NP 

ToS 

triturate,  grind ;  or  with  det.  — o;  also  S~°  (once  only  XIV  5) : 
C.  9,  IV  20,  21 ;  C.  41,  XIV  5,  6;  C.  46,  XVI  4,  5,  12 ;  XXI  5 ; 
XXII  2;  XXII  13. 

NDM 

to  be  easy,  comfortable;  also  (I  26,  twice,  once 

restored;  III  17;  IV  14):  C.  3,  I  26  bis  (once  restored); 

C.  7,  III  7,  17;  C.  8,  IV  14. 
to  recover. 

R  NDM-F  (“  until  he  recovers  ”):  C.  1,  I  3;  C.  2,  I  15; 
C.  3, 1  23;  C.  10,  V  8;  C.  11,  V  14;  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  14,  VI 12; 
C.  15,  VI  17;  C.  16,  VI  21;  C.  17,  VII  7;  C.  18,  VII  11; 
C.  19,  VII  19;  C.  23,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  6:  C.  26,  IX  11; 
C.  27, 1X18;  C.  28,  X  2,  3;  C.  30,  X12;  C.  32,  XI  7;  C.  34, 
XI  21 ;  C.  85,  XII  8;  C.  36,  XII  14;  C.  38,  XIII  2;  C.  40, 
XIII 16;  C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  43,  XV  3;  C.  47,  XVII  5, 15. 
sweet:  XX  15, 17. 

NDRY 

«  a 

to  draw  together,  or  with  det.  — j;  also  Q  <=»  (twice  only  VI  8, 
IX  21):  C.  10,  V  6,  8;  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  23,  VIII  19;  C.  26, 
1X8;  C.  28,  IX  21;  C.  47,  XVI  20,  XVII  8. 

NPR-WT 

o 

<=»  <o  1  1  1 

seizures :  XXII 11. 

NPS 

little,  contracted,  narrow;  also  (once  only  VII 12):  C.  1, 

110,12;  C.3,124;  C.  7,  III  19;  C.  18,  VII 12. 

NPS-TYW 

malignant  spirits :  I.  2,  XVIII 12. 

NDSDS 

consume:  I.  7,  XIX  19. 

R 

«=> 

or  (j before  suffix  pronouns. 

R,  “  to,”  showing  direction  of  motion:  C.  2,  I  17;  C.  4, 
II  10;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  20,  VIII  2,  5;  C.  34,  XI  18;  I.  1, 
XVIII  8;  I.  2,  XVIII 16;  rI.  5,  XIX  121;  I.  6,  XIX  17. 

R,  “  to,”  with  meaning  “  as  far  as  ”:  C.  3,  I  18,  19,  21 
restored;  C.  12,  V  22;  C.  18,  VII  12,  14;  C.  28,  IX  19,  22; 
C.  40,  XIII 18, 15;  0.  41,  XIV  11, 12;  XXI 10. 

&PR  R  YH-T,  “  to  reach  a  decisive  point”:  C.  4,  II  8,  10; 
C.  6,  II  28;  C.  7,  III  8, 15;  C.  8,  IV  9;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  37, 
XII 19. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  545 

R,  “  to,”  used  of  application  of  medicaments:  C.  41, 

XIV  8,4;  C.  46,  XVI  3, 12. 

R,  “to,”  dative  of  reference:  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  81,  X  16, 
20;  C.  41,  XIII  19,  XIV  15,  16;  C.  45,  XV  14,  19;  C.  46, 
XVI  5;  C.  47,  XVII  9. 

R,  indicating  place  into  which :  I.  5,  XIX  5;  1.6,  XIX  16; 
XXI  3;  XXI 19,  XXII  7. 

R,  indicating  place  at  which  (especially  of  parts  of  the 
body):  C.  6,  H  25;  C.  7,  III  4;  C.  8,  IV  10;  C.  18,  VII 14; 
C.  22,  VIII 16;  1. 1,  XVIII 10;  I.  5,  XIX  11;  I.  8,  XX  9. 

R,  “  concerning  ”:  C.  1,  I  1  restored,  8;  C.  2,  1 14;  C.  8, 
I  20  restored;  C.  4,  II  5;  C.  5,  II  14;  C.  7,  III  5,  12;  C.  8, 
IV  14, 15;  C.  10,  V  7;  C.ll.Vll;  C.  12.V17;  C.  13,  VI  6; 
C.  14,  VI  9,  14;  C.  15,  VI  16;  C.  16,  VI  19;  C.  17,  VII  4; 
C.  18,  VII  10,  18;  C.  19,  VII  17,  21;  C.  20,  VIII  3;  C.  21, 
VIII  8;  C.  22,  VIII  13;  C.  28,  VIII  19;  C.  24,  VIII  23; 
C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  26,  IX  8,  13;  C.  27,  IX  15;  C.  28,  IX  21 ; 
C.  29,  X  6;  C.  80,  X  10, 12;  C.  81,  X  17, 18, 19;  C.  32,  XI  8, 
7;  C.  83,  XI  12,  14;  C.  34,  XI  18;  C.  35,  XII  4;  C.  36, 
XII  10;  C.  87,  XII  16,  20;  C.  38,  XIII  1;  C.  39,  XIII  5; 
C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.  41,  XIV  1,  10,  11;  C.  42,  XIV  19;  C.  43, 

XV  1;  C.  44,  XV  8;  C.  45,  XV  14;  C.  46,  XVI  2;  C.  47, 

XVI  20,  XVII  10;  C.  48,  XVII 18;  XX  14. 

R,  “  to,”  before  infinitives:  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  8,  IV  14;  C.  22, 
VIII  16. 

R,  “  until  ”:  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  6,  II  23;  C.  7,  III  8,  15;  C.  8, 
IV  9  bis;  C.  11,  V  12;  C.12.V18;  C.  16,  VI 20;  C.  17,  VII 6; 
C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  22,  VIII  12;  C.  35,  XII  6;  C.  86,  XII 12; 
C.  87,  XII 18;  C.  46,  XVI  6;  XXI 12,  18. 

R  NDM-F:  C.  1,  I  3;  C.  2,  I  15;  C.  3,  I  23;  C.  7,  III  7; 
C.  10,  V  8;  C.  11,  V  14;  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  14,  VI  12;  C.  15, 

VI  17;  C.  16,  VI  21;  C.  17,  VII  7;  C.  18,  VII  11;  C.  19, 

VII  19;  C.  23,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  6;  C.  26,  IX  11;  C.  27, 
1X18;  C.  28,  X  2,  3;  C.  80,X12;  C.  82,  XI  7;  C.  34,  XI 21; 
C.  35,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII  14;  C.  88,  XIII  2;  C.  40,  XIII  16; 
C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  48,  XV  8;  C.  47,  XVII  5,  15. 

R  SW’Y  >-T  YH-F:  C.  3,  I  23  restored;  C.  4,  II  7; 
C.  5,  II  15;  C.  19,  VII 18;  C.  29,  X  8;  0.  47,  XVII 13. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

546  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

R  ( cont .)  *=>  R,  “  in  order  to  C.  1,  I  4,  5,  9  bis;  C.  2, 1  17  restored; 

C.  10,  V  9;  C.  22,  VIII 16;  C.  85,  XII  6;  C.  36,  XII 12;  1.2, 
XVIII 18;  1.7,  XIX  20;  XXI 19. 

R,  “  in  order  that  I.  2,  XVIII 13;  XXII 14. 

R,  “from,”  expressing  separation:  C.  1, 1 10,  12  restored; 
C.4,119;  C.  7,  III  16;  C.  81,  X  18, 19;  I.  8,  XVIII 19;  1.4, 
XIX  2;  I.  5,  XIX  14. 

£>TR:  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  35,  XII  4;  C.  36,  XII 10;  C.  47, 
XVI  19. 

R,  with  suffix  pronoun,  as  emphatic  or  impersonal  re¬ 
flexive:  C.  86,  XII  9;  1. 1,  XVIII  2,  3;  I.  4,  XVIII 19;  I.  5, 
XIX  4. 

’NRY  R-F:  C.  4,  H  4;  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  20,  VIII  1; 
C.  29,  X5;  C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.  42,  XIV  18. 

R  miscellaneous : 

R,  “as”:  C.  8,  IV  7. 

R,  “  because  of  ”:  C.  6,  III  1. 

R,  “or”:  C.  4,  II 11. 

R,  “  for  ”  (duration  of  time) :  XX  16. 

R-g,  “  therein  ”:  XXI  18,  XXII  1. 

R  idiomatic :  , 

WDY  R  T>,  “moor”:  C.  8,  I  22,  II  1;  C.  4,  II  7; 
C.  5,  II 15;  C.  28,  X  3;  C.  29,  X  8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 

R  T>,  “off,”  “away,”  “entirely”:  C.  4,  H  9;  C.  7, 
III  4;  C.  47,  XVII  14. 

R  H’W,  “  next  to  ”:  C.  7,  IV  1. 

R  S>,  “  afterward,”  “  after  ”:  XX  18;  XXII  5. 

R  MNH,  “  thoroughly  ”:  XXI 17,  20,  XXII 3. 

R  HR,  “  against  ”:  I.  2,  XVIII 14;  I.  7,  XX  1. 

R  R’,  “  through  ”:  C.  23,  VUI 18,  20. 

R  MN  M,  “  as  far  as  ”:  C.  26,  IX  7. 

R  S’BY  R,  r“  as  far  as  ”1 :  C.  32,  XI  5. 

NFRY-T  R,  “  as  far  as  ”:  C.  II,  V  14,  15;  C.  12,  V  21. 
R,  scribal  errors:  C.  88,  XI  15;  C.  36,  XII  18. 

R’  *7*  the  mouth:  C.  9,  V  2;  I.  6,  XIX  14, 15. 

R>  of  the  patient:  C.  7,  III  8,  8,  11,  13,  14,  18,  IV  2,  3; 
C.  13,  VI  6;  C.  17,  VII  3,  4,  5;  C.  25,  IX  3  bis,  4;  C.  26, 
IX  7,  9,  12  bis. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  547 

R’  (coni.) 

1 

R>  of  the  wound:  C.  9,  IV  20;  C.  20,  YII  24;  C.  28,  IX 
20,  X  2;  C.  41,  XIII  19, 22,  XIV  8, 10, 15, 16;  C.  46,  XVI 8; 
C.  47,  XVII  9,  14. 

incantation:  1. 1,  XVIII 1 ;  1. 6,  XIX 14;  I.  7,  XIX  18,  XX  5; 
I.  8,  XX  11. 

R’PW,  “or”:  C.  8,  IV  16. 

E  R>,  “  through  ”:  C.  23,  VIH  18,  20. 

R*  used  erroneously  for  GS:  C.  13,  VI 5. 

See  also  HMW-T-R’. 

R’-YB 

1 

abdomen:  XX  13. 

R>-HMN(W) 

tut 

£:  XX  15. 

RY-T 

Hl°u. 

pus,  or  with  det.  C.  8,  HI  1;  C.  89,  XIII  4,  6,  11,  12. 

Formerly  read  TY-T. 

RW-T  (BY-T) 

O  O  1 

pigment,  color,  is  possible  in  C.  7,  HI  21,  see  p.  196. 

BWTY 

<? 

outside:  C.  8,  IV  8, 15, 16  ter;  C.  22,  VIII 17. 
the  open:  I.  2,  XVIII  16. 

EWD 

hard:  C.  45,  XV  17,  18. 

RMY 

to  weep:  C.  7,  III  12,  IV  2,  4. 

RMY-T 

tears:  C.  20,  VIII  1. 

RMT-T 

men:  I.  8,  XVIII 18. 

RNP-T 

ft 

year;  or  with  det.  I.  1,  XVIII  8,  11  bis;  I.  5,  XIX  8,  14; 

I  7,  XIX  20. 

RNPY 

Z>fM 

a  youth:  XXI  9. 

RH 

©  d^ 

to  know,  recognize:  C.  1, 1  6  restored,  6  restored,  9  bis;  C.  4, 
11  7,  10,  11 ;  C.  6,  II  23;  C.  7,  III  8,  15;  C.  8,  IV  9;  C.  20, 
VIII  8;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.81.X14;  C.  87,  XII 18;  XXI 17, 
20,  XXII  3. 

RHTY 

launderer:  XXII  1. 

RD 

i' 

foot,  leg;  also  ^  f  f  (as  dual,  once  only  1 8) :  C.  1,17,  8;  0.81, 
X  13,  16,  17;  C.  82,  XI  8;  C.  83,  XI 12, 13;  C.  48,  XVII 16; 
XXII 11. 

RDY 

— D 

give:  C.  8,  IV  18;  I.  8,  XX  12;  XXII  12. 
cause  that;  also  0.  2,  I  17  restored;  C.  7,  III  8,  7, 

14  bis;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  22,  VIII  16;  C.  31,  X  15;  C.  83, 
XI 11, 15;  1.7,  XX  6;  XXI  3;  XXI 18. 

TM  RDY,  “  prevent  ”;  I.  5,  XIX  11. 
n  n  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

548 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

RDY  ( cont .)  ^  discharge;  written  t_a,  also  — o,  DY :  C.  4,  II  4,  5;  C.  5,  II 18; 

C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  4,  6;  C.  8,  IV  8, 12;  C.  11,  V  11 ;  C.  13, 

VI  5;  C.  17,  VII  2,  3,  4;  C.  20,  VII  24,  VIII  3;  C.  21,  VIII  7, 
8;  C.  22,  VIII 13. 

put  (patient  on  normal  diet) :  C.  3,  II 2. 
apply;  also  *-»: 

RDY  the  hand  or  finger:  C.  1,  I  6;  C.  17,  VII  1;  C.  20, 

VII  24;  C.  25, 1X8;  C.  45,  XV  11. 

RDY  the  remedy:  C.  4,  II  8;  C.  9,  IV  20,  V  4;  C.  32, 
XI  5;  XXII. 

RDY  a  bandage  or  similar:  C.  2, 1 17  restored;  C.  7,  III  14; 
C.  9,  IV  21,  V  5;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  12,  V  19. 
lead ;  written  C.  84,  XII 2. 

put,  place;  also  u  (XXII 6):  LI,  XVIII 10;  XX18;  XXI 10, 
16,  19,  XXII 1,  8,  5,  6,  7;  XXII 13. 

RDY  N,  “  attach  to  ”:  I.  5,  XIX  11. 

RDW 

"C=:>9  O 

1  1 

excrement:  I.  6,  XIX  17,  18. 

H’Y 

enter,  descend:  C.  22,  VIII 16;  I.  7,  XX  8,  4. 

fall,  drop,  exude,  discharge;  also  (once  only  VIII  2): 

C.  20,  VII 24,  VIII  2;  C.  22,  Vm  11;  C.  81,  X  14,  22;  C.  41, 
XIV  1 ;  C.  46,  XVI  6-7;  C.  47,  XVII  9. 

H’W 

vicinity,  neighbourhood,  or  with  det. 

R  H’W,  “  next  to  ”:  C.  7,  IV  1. 

M  H>W,  “  at  the  point  of  ”:  C.  13,  VI  4 ;  C.  17,  VH  2. 

HN 

chest:  C.  7,  III  11,  21,  IV  1,2. 

HNY 

the  rejoicing  one:  I.  7,  XX  3. 

HNW 

ra?? 

hin- jar:  XXII  5,  6-7. 

HRW 

® 

1 

day;  also  C.  1,  I  3  bis  (once  restored);  C.  2,  I  14 

restored,  15;  C.  8, 1  22,28;  C.9.V1;  C.  10,  V  7,  8;  0.11, 

V  13;  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  14,  VI  11,  12;  C.  15,  VI  17;  C.  16, 

VI  20,  21 ;  C.  17,  VII  5,  7;  C.  18,  VII  11  bis;  C.  19,  VII 19; 
C.  28,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  6;  C.  26,  IX  10,  11 ;  C.  27,  IX  17, 
18;  C.  28,  XI  bis;  C.  29,  X7;  C.  30,  X  11  bis;  C.  32,  XI 4, 
6;  C.  84,  XI  20;  C.  85,  XII  8;  C.  36,  XII 14;  C.  37,  XII 18; 
C.  88,  XIII  2;  C.  40,  XIII  16  bis;  C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  43, 
XV  8;  C.  47,  XVII  2,  5, 15;  XX  16. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  649 

HRP 

ra  p 

to  sink:  C.  5,  H  13, 16,  17;  C.  32,  XI  7. 

HHNW 

rarn09^ 

jubilation:  I.  5,  XIX  2-8. 

HD 

weak  place:  C.  8,  IV  11. 

See  also  ’HT  and  NHD. 

H-T-HR 

Hathor,  g.:  LI,  XVIII  6. 

H’ 

behind:  C.  23,  Vm  19. 

around:  1. 1,  XVIII  4,  9;  I.  5,  XIX  13;  I.  8,  XX  11. 

H> 

fik® 

back  (noun) :  C.  23,  VIII  21. 

H’-TYW 

f&WF 

linen:  I.  7,  XX  6. 

H>Y-T 

tm-r 

covering :  C.  9,  IV  21,  V  4. 

H’Y-T 

''shelter'' :  I.  7,  XX  6. 

H-T 

the  front: 

H>-T  HR,  “  forehead  ”:  C.  9,  IV  19  bis,  V  5. 

HR  H’-T,  “before”:  I.  7,  XX  5. 

H’TY-r 

A 

beginning:  XXI  9. 

H’TY 

heart;  also  (once  only  19):  C.  1, 1  6,  7,  9. 

breast :  I.  5,  XIX  8. 

H>H> 

IMV 

fumble:  C.  8,  IV 15. 

Hr-W 

JfcJ 

flesh  (plural):  C.  1, 1  11;  C.  4,  II  9;  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  8,  IV  13, 
17;  C.  28,  VIII  18,  19,  20;  C.  81,  X  18;  C.  84,  XII  1  bis; 
C.  47,  XVI 17,  XVII 1,  5,  7;  XXII  8, 10. 

HWY 

to  smite:  I.  4,  XVIII 19. 

HW* 

to  have  an  evil  odor:  XX  18. 

HWr 

short :  C.  35,  XII  4. 

HWN 

us* 

roast :  C.  42,  XIV  21, 

HBS 

Tl 

linen;  or  without  plural  strokes. 

Used  in  surgical  dressings: 

Strips  of  linen:  C.  2,  I  15  restored,  16;  C.  10,  V  9; 
C.  47,  XVII  4. 

Bands  of  linen:  C.  2,  1  17  restored;  C.  10,  V  9. 

Swabs,  plugs,  or  tampons  of  linen:  C.  11,  V  11,  12; 
C.  12,  V  18, 19;  C.  14,  VI 10. 

Stiff  rolls  of  linen:  C.  11,  V  13;  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  23, 
VIII  21;  C.  34,  XI  20. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

550 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

HBg  ( coni .) 

Ti 

Splints  of  linen:  C.  85,  XII  7;  C.  36,  XII  12;  G.  87, 
XII  17. 

Padded  with  linen:  C.  7,  III  14. 

HF'W 

serpent :  I.  5,  XIX  7. 

HM-T 

vulva ;  also  ®  (XX  14) :  XX 14, 15. 

HM 

weak  temporal  particle. 

YSK  SW  HM,  “  while  at  the  same  time  ”:  C.  13,  VI  5; 
C.  17,  VII  3. 

HMW'T-R’ 

c=> 

I  1  1 

incantation:  1. 1,  XVIII 8. 
and  so  forth:  I.  6,  XIX  15. 

HM> 

i>^° 

ball:  C.  45,  XV  18. 

HM’-T-MH-T 

northern  salt ;  also  1]  ° ,  (XXI  5) :  C.  41,  XIV  5-6; 

C.  46,  XVI  11 ;  XXI  5;  XXI7. 

HMJY'T 

an  unidentified  fruit;  or  with  dets.  V  °  :  C.  45,  XV  18;  XXI 
9-10. 

HM’TY 

jOM')'* 

bulging;  or  with  plural  strokes:  C.  45,  XV  9,  10,  18-14,  14, 
15, 16. 

HMSY 

to  sit;  or  with  det.  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  7,  III  15;  C.  8,  IV  9; 

C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  20,  VIII  5;  C.  32,  XI  6; 
XXII  11. 

HMT 

£■! 

copper:  C.  6,  II  20,  25  bis;  C.  8,  IV  10. 

HMT-Y 

coppersmith:  C.  6,  11  25. 

HN-W 

111,?, 

ribs:  C.  42,  XIV  17  bis,  19,  20-21;  C.  43,  XIV  22,  22-23,  23, 
XV  2,  8,  4;  C.  44,  XV  6,  6-7,  7,  8. 

HNY-T’ 

—  0 

A  *#*•  t  iS  1  1  1 

a  kind  of  herb;  also  |  C.  41,  XIV  4;  C.  46,  XVI  9. 

HNW 

I*?? 

jar,  vase:  C.  8,  124;  XXII  7. 

IJN  r 

1 _ 0 

and,  with:  C.  8,  I  20  restored,  25;  C.  4,  II  5,  8;  C.  5,  II  14; 
C.  7,  III  5;  C.  8,  IV  8, 17,18;  C.29,X5;  C.30.X9;  C.  32, 
XI  2,  3;  XXII;  XXI 13. 

rH>  HNr,  “  contend  with  ”:  C.  4,  II  6,  11 ;  C.  7,  III  6; 
C.  21,  VIII 9;  C.  28,  IX  22;  C.29.X7;  C.  87,  XII 17;  C.45, 
XV  15;  C.  47,  XVII  11. 

HNr,  “  besides  XX  16. 

HNN 

phallus:  C.  81,  X  14,  20  bis. 

HNS 

HP*- 

narrowness:  C.  18,  VII  13. 

HNKY-T 

bed ;  or  with  plural  strokes :  I.  5,  XIX  8 ;  1.7,  XX  8. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  551 

HNT’  porcupine:  C.  40,  Xm  17. 

HNT*  f  manubrium:  C.  40,  XIII  18  bis,  15,  17. 

HR  Horns,  g.:  C.  9,  V  2;  I.  1,  XVIII  9;  I.  2,  XVIII 14  bis;  I.  5, 

XIX  5,  9;  I.  7,  XX  1,  2;  I.  8,  XX  10. 

HR  *  face:  C.  7,  III  3,  10,  12,  20,  21,  IV  2,  3;  C.  12,  V  17,  22  bis, 

VI  1 ;  C.  20,  VIII  2;  C.  82,  XI  2,  3;  C.  84,  XI  18;  C.  46, 
XVI  2;  XXI  6. 

H>-T  HR,  “  forehead  ”:  C.  9,  IV  19  bis,  V  5. 

R  HR,  “  against  ”:  I.  2,  XVIII 14;  I.  7,  XX  1. 

See  also  HFT-HR. 

HR  ^  upon,  on,  in,  into,  etc.  (indicating  place  where  or  place  to  which) ; 

also  ?  :  C.  1,  lost  column  restored,  I  7  quinquiens  (twice 
restored);  C.  2,  I  18,  15  restored,  17  restored;  C.  3,  I  22; 
C.  6,1123,1111;  C.  7,  III  10;  C.  8,  IV  5,  13;  C.  9,  IV  21, 
V  5  bis ;  C.  10,  V9;  C.  11,  V10  bis, 14;  C.12.V20;  C.13,VI4; 
C.  15,  VI 16;  C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  19,  VII  15,  21 ;  C.  20,  VII  24; 
C.  22,  VIII 10  bis;  C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  25,  IX  8;  C.  27,  IX  16; 
C.  83,  XI  16;  C.  89,  XIII  4,  7  ter,  10,  11 ;  C.  41,  XIV  5,  6, 
7,  9,  15  bis  (dittography) ;  C.  45,  XV  9, 10  bis,  11  bis,  16, 17, 
19;  C.  46,  XV  21,  XVI  4,  5,9, 11,  15,16;  C.  47,  XVII  4,  9; 
I.  5,  XIX  8,  11;  I.  7,  XX  4  bis;  XX  15,  18;  XXI  20, 
XXII  1,  2  bis,  6. 

HR  S’  N :  C.  8,  IV  6;  G.  16,  VI  19;  C.  21,  VIII  6;  C.  88, 
XII  22. 

HRY’BY:  C.  84,  XII 2. 

HRWNMY:  C.  84,  XII  2. 

HR,  “  on  ”  (figurative):  C.  8,  II  2. 

HR,  “  over  ”  meaning  “  above  ”:  C.  1,  I  11 ;  C.  4,  II  4, 
10  bis;  C.  5,  II  18;  C.  11,  V  10;  C.  12,  V  17;  C.  24,  IX  1; 
C.  81,  X  18;  C.  84,  XI  21,  XII 1  bis;  C.  87,  XII 15  bis,  17, 
19,21;  C.  44,  XV  7,  9;  XXI 16,  XXII  8. 

HR,  “  over  ”  in  the  expression  “  to  say  a  charm  over  ”: 
C.  9,  V  2;  I.  1,  XVIII  9;  I.  5,  XIX  10. 

HR,  “  over  ”  (“  in  charge  of  ”):  I.  7,  XX  1. 

HR  in  the  phrase  HR  MNY-WT-F,  “  at  his  mooring 
stakes  C.  8,  I  28  restored  II  2;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5,  II  15; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

552 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

HR  {coni.) 

HRY 

9  w 

HRW  X? 

HRW 

HRY-YB  * 

C.  11,V12;  C.  19,  VII 18;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  28,  X  3;  C.  29, 
X  8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 

HR  in  WT  HR,  “  to  bind  with  C.  1,  I  2;  C.  2,  I  14 
restored;  C.  7,  III  8;  C.  10,  V  7;  C.  14,  VI  11,  12;  C.  15, 
VI  17;  C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  18,  VII  10;  C.  25, 
IX  6;  C.  26,  IX  10;  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  C.  29,  X  7; 
C.  30,  X  11;  C.  32,  XI  4,  6;  C.  34,  XI  20;  C.  35,  XII  8; 
C.  36,  XII 14;  C.  37,  XII 17;  C.  38,  XIII  2;  C.  40,  XIII 15; 
C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  43,  XV  2;  C.  47,  XVII  2. 

HR,  “  with,”  used  in  “  to  mix  or  triturate  with  C.  9, 
IV  20;  XXI  16. 

HR,  “  because  of  C.  1, 1  8;  C.  46,  XVI 13. 

HR  NTT:  I.  1,  XVIII  4. 

!HR,  “in  act  of,”  “by”  before  infinitives:  C.  7,  IV  3; 
C.  8,  IV  15;  C.  22,  VIII 16;  C.  41,  XIV  9;  XX  13;  XXI 17, 
18,  21,  XXII  4;  XXII 11  bis. 

HR  miscellaneous :  XXI  2 ;  XXII  4. 

SW>YHR:  I.  7,  XX  6, 8  bis. 

HR  idiomatic: 

ND  HR-F,  “  ask  him  ”:  C.  20,  VIII  1. 

HR  rVVY,  “  immediately  ”:  C.  48,  XVII 17;  XXII 14. 
HR  T»,  “  entirely  ”:  C.  41,  XIV  16. 

HR  KD,  “  entirely  ”:  XXI  11,  17. 

HR  H’-T,  “  before”:  I.  7,  XX  5. 
upper:  G.  34,  XI  23;  C.  40,  XIII  17;  XX  14. 

TP  ...  .  HRY,  “  outer  edge  ”  (lit.  the  "  upper  tip  ”): 
C.  11,  V 14. 

M  GS  N  HRY,  “  on  the  top  ” :  XXII  6. 
top:  C.  11,  V  14,  15. 

up ;  or  without  plural  strokes ;  also  _Vj==i  (XVIII  3). 

R  HRW,  “upward,”  “on  high”:  C.  4,  II  10;  I.  1, 
XVIII  3. 

N  HRW,  “  upward  ”:  C.  7,  IV  3;  C.  31,  X  21. 
middle ;  also  V  9. 

Used  as  rn^n:  C.  7,  IV  1 ;  C.  8,  IV  8,  18  bis;  C.  11,  V  14 
C.  12,  V  21. 

Used  as  adjective:  C.  31,  X  16. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  663 

HRY 

be  far  away:  HR-TY  (2nd  pers.  sing.,  XIX  2);  HR- 
TYWNY  (2nd  pers.  pl„  XVIII  18);  I.  8,  XVIII  18;  I.  4, 
XIX  2. 

HH 

myriad:  XXII 10. 

hSb 

Q 

1 

a  break,  fracture  (noun);  also  o,  jfj"a  (once  only  V  11): 
C.  11,  V  10  bis,  11;  C.  12,  V  16  bis,  17,  20 ;  C.  24,  VIII 22  bis, 
28,  IX  1;  C.  85,  XII  3  bis,  4,  6;  C.  86,  XII  9  bis,  10,  12; 
C.  37,  XII 14, 15, 16  bis,  19,  20;  C.  44,  XV  6  bis,  8. 
to  break  (verb);  |PJo:  C.  42,  XIV  18. 

h&mn 

natron:  XXI  4;  XXI  7. 

hSmn 

ipsirf, 

menstrual  discharge:  XX  18. 

HK-T 

\A  O 

A  011  1 

beer:  XX  15. 

HK’-T 

grain  measure. 

. — 

|  heket  (a  little  over  one  pint) :  XX  16. 

2>- 

■jk  heket  (a  little  over  £  pint) :  XX  16. 

HK’-W 

charm,  incantation:  C.  9,  V  1. 

HTY 

smoke :  XXI  8. 

HTY-T 

throat:  C.  34,  XI 23,  XII  2. 

HTR 

lb 

to  be  contracted:  C.  7,  III  6,  7, 16. 

HTT-T 

JK 

shoulder:  C.  47,  XVI 16, 17,  XVII  1,  7,  11. 

HD 

become  light,  bright. 

HD  T%  “  the  morning  ” :  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

HD-T 

?\ 

White  One  (name  of  goddess) :  I.  1,  XVIII  4. 

H-T 

fa 

fire:  XXI 16,  XXII 3. 

H’Y 

measure,  examine,  treat;  also  u,  (once  only  IX  7), 

l  2^.  or  with  det.  —o,  (1 4 ;  var.  u,  1 9),  ^2^ 

(once  only  X  4-6,  error),  (once  only  XXI 13). 

H’Y  in  the  formula  YR  H’Y-K  (()<=>^):  C.  1,  lost  column 
restored,  I  3;  C.  2, 1  12;  C.  3, 1 19  restored;  C.  4,  II  3;  C.  6, 
1112;  C.  6,  II 18;  C.  7,  III  3;  C.8,IV5;  C.  9,  IV  19;  C.  10, 
V  6;  C.  11,  V  10;  C.  12,  V  16;  C.  18,  VI  4;  C.  14,  VI  7; 
C.  15,  VI 15;  C.  16,  VI 18;  C.  17,  VIII;  C.  18,  VII  7;  C.  19, 
VII 15;  C.  20,  VII  22;  C.  21,  VIII  6;  C.  22,  VIII 10;  C.  28, 

VIII  18;  C.  24,  VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  2;  C.  26,  IX  6;  C.  27, 

IX  18;  C.  28,  IX  18;  C.  29,  X  8;  C.  30,  X  9;  C.  81,  X  18; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

554 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

H’Y  ( cont .) 

C.  82,  XII;  C.  83,  XI  9;  C.  84,  XI 17;  C.  35,  XII  8;  C.  36, 

XII  9;  C.  87,  XII  15;  C.  38,  XII  22;  C.  89,  XIII  3;  C.  40, 

XIII  12;  C.  41,  XIII  18;  C.  42,  XIV  17;  C.  43,  XIV  22; 
C.  44,  XV  6;  C.  45,  XV  9;  C.  46,  XV  20;  C.  47,  XVI  16; 
C.  48,  XVII 16;  XX  13. 

H’Y  miscellaneous :  C.  1,  I  4,  5  bis,  7,  8,  9;  C.  26,  IX  7; 
C.  29,  X  4-5;  C.  47,  XVII  6;  XXI 18  bis. 

H’Y-TY 

Disease-Demon ;  also  (plural  XIX  20):  1. 1,  XVIII 

6;  I.  2,  XVni  12, 13;  I.  5,  XIX  8;  I.  7,  XIX  20,  XX  7. 

H’f 

•IVo 

to  lay  back;  also  — a  (once  only  XVII  5):  C.  47,  XVI  17, 
XVII  1,  5. 

H’BW 

rhungry-1:  1.8,  XIX 15. 

H’H> 

winnow:  XXI 11-12. 

H>£ 

to  ’'project'1 :  C.  43,  XIV  23. 

HrM 

throat;  also  (once  only  IX  22):  C.  28,  IX  18, 19,  22. 

HWY 

©  <? 

A—flcJsta 

avoid:  I.  8,  XX  9,  9-10. 

HP 

to  die:  I.  5,  XIX  7. 

HPR 

arise,  originate:  Cl,  I  9;  C.  5, 1116;  C.  6,  II  20,  21,  25 ;  C.  8, 
IV  10, 11;  XXI 12,  14. 

befall  (in  unfavorable  sense):  C.  1, 1  9;  C.  18,  VII  12;  C.  31, 
X  16,  20;  C.  39,  XIII  9;  C.  41,  XIV  7. 
exist  (as  in  MY  HPR-T  -  “  what  is  ”):  C.  40,  M  17;  C.  42, 
XIV  21. 

HPR  participle  with  meaning  “  done  ”:  C.  30,  X  10. 

#PRW 

form:  I.  5,  XIX  6. 

HFHF-T 

the  flooder:  1. 1,  XV ill  7. 

HFT 

• 

according  to:  C.  41,  XIV  8;  C.  45,  XV  16;  C.  47,  XVII  6. 
when:  C.  81,  X  19. 

HFT-HR 

o 

in  view  of :  C.  7,  IV  4. 

HFTY 

enemy:  C.  9,  V  2. 

HMY 

to  be  unconscious  of:  C.  31,  X  13, 15,  17;  C.  83,  XI 12, 13. 

HMT-NW 

Olii 

1  1  1 

D  O 

CP* 

3 

third:  C.  9,  VI;  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

HNT 

[®U 

in:  C.  1, 1  8  restored. 

HNT 

'’wrinkles"1 :  XXII  8. 

5NT 

see  MHNT. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  555 

HNTY 

one  who  is  over,  the  first:  1. 1,  XVIII 1,  2;  I.  5,  XIX  18. 
chief  of  the  Hemesut -house:  1. 1,  XVIII  2. 

HR 

fall  (literal):  C.  8,  IV  8,  17, 18;  C.  33,  XI 11, 15, 16. 

HR  indicating  physiological  or  anatomical  shift  or  move¬ 
ment:  C.  33,  XI 10, 14;  C.  85,  XII  6;  C.  86,  XII 12. 

HR  R  T1  (“  come  off,”  “  come  away  ”  and  similar):  C.  4, 
H  9;  C.  7,  III  4. 

HR 

© 

so  that:  C.  12,  V  22,  VI 1 . 

HH 

S' 

throat:  I.  5,  XIX  11. 

hSf 

4^ 

prevent,  exorcise:  1. 1,  XVIII 1 ;  I.  2,  XVIII 11 ;  I.  7,  XX  7. 

H&F 

4^ 

resistance:  C.  46,  XVI  5. 

h£fy 

4^ 

HSFY  R,  “  to  turn  toward  ”:  C.  34,  XI 18. 

HT 

o  1 

wood:  C.  7,  III  14;  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I.  7,  XX  6. 

HT 

©^ 

after,  afterward. 

&RWH-K  (gW)  MHT:  C.  1, 1  8;  C.  2, 1 15  restored;  C.  8, 
I  28;  C.  11,  V  18;  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  15,  VI 17;  C.  16,  VI  21 ; 
C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  18,  VII  11;  C.  23,  VIII  22;  C.  26,  IX  10; 
C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  C.  80,  X  11;  C.  82,  XI  6;  C.  84, 
XI  20;  C.  85,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII 14;  C.  37,  XII  18;  C.  38, 
XIII  2;  C.  40,  XIII  16;  C.  42,  XIV  20;  C.  43,  XV  3; 
C.  47,  XVII  4, 14. 

YSMHT:  C.  3,  I  22  restored;  C.  9,  IV  20,  V  8;  C.  10, 
V  7;  C.  12,  V  19;  C.  26,  IX  9;  C.  29,  X  8;  C.  30,  X  11; 

XXI  11,  XXII  7. 

M  HT  N,  “  subject  to  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 
YMY-W  HT,  “  followers  I.  5,  XIX  8. 

HTY 

w*— 

©o^ 

retreat;  also  i|  (imperative  XVIII 18):  I.  2,  XVIII 13; 

I.  7,  XIX  20. 

HTM 

S&S 

to  close:  C.  25,  IX  8. 

H-T 

d  1 

ball  (of  the  foot):  C.  8,  IV  15. 
belly,  womb:  I.  6,  XIX  15, 16,  17. 

H’B 

to  bend:  C.  12,  V  16,  21. 

H>B 

sickle-bone :  C.  34,  XI  22-23. 

H>R 

khar  (unit  of  measure) :  XXI 10. 

HN 

use  (noun) :  C.  9,  IV  21,  V  4. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

556  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

HNW  23?  interior,  inside;  also  (twice  only  V  12,  VI  11);  usually 

without  CD,  but  see  (twice  only  XII  7,  18). 

HNW  as  noun:  C.  5,  H  16,  17;  C.  6,  II  24;  C.  11,  V  14; 
C.  14,  VI  18-14;  C.  26,  IX  9,  11,  12;  C.  32,  XI  8;  C.  34, 
XI  21 ;  C.  37,  XII  20;  C.  41,  XIV  12. 

M  HNW  (j^22£):  C.  6,  II  25;  C.  11,  V  12;  C.  12,  V  19, 
VI  2, 3;  C.  14,  VI 11;  C.  22,  VIII 12, 15;  C.  25,  IX  4. 

M  HNW  (J^2zf<?n)  before  G'B  (“arm  ”):  C.  35,  XU  7; 
C.  36,  XII  13. 

M  HNW :  I.  7,  XX  5. 

YMY-THNW:  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

See  also  MHNW. 

HNW 

enter:  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

HNY 

to  voyage:  1.1,  XVIII 7. 

IINTY 

s: 

Hollow'1  (of  the  ear) :  C.  23,  VIH  19. 

HR 

a 

under:  C.  4,  II  4;  C.  5,  II  13;  C.  6,  II  21  bis;  C.  8,  IV  5  bis, 

II  bis,  12;  C.  9,  V  5;  C.  18,  VI  5;  C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  24,  VIII 
28;  C.  25,  IX  4;  C.  84,  XII 1;  C.  37,  XII  16;  C.  44,  XV  8; 
C.  46,  XVI  1,14. 

HR,  “  because  of  ”  or  “  from  ”  (source):  C.  8,  II  1 ;  C.  7, 

III  9  bis;  C.  8,  IV  6;  C.  12,  V  22,  VII;  C.  13,  VI  6;  C.  17, 

VII  4;  C.  21,  VIII  8;  C.  24,  IX  2;  C.  28,  IX  21,  X  2; 
C.  31,  X  18, 14;  C.  83,  XI  12;  C.  41,  XIII  20,  XIV  2;  C.  47, 
XVI 20,  XVII  7,11. 

HR  with  meaning  “possess”:  C.  21,  VIII  7,  8;  C.  22, 

VIII  11;  C.  81,X20. 

HR  erroneously  used  for  HRY :  C.  7,  III  5, 12;  C.  13,  VI  5, 
6;  C.  14,  VI  9;  C.  22,  VIII 13;  C.  46,  XVI  2. 

HR  scribal  error:  C.  45,  XV  19. 

IIRY  one  having,  one  who  has;  also  (seven  times  only,  III  5, 12; 

VIS,  6,  9;  VIII 18;  XVI  2):  C.  1, 1 1  restored;  C.  2, 1 14; 
C.  3, 1  20;  C.  4,  II  5;  C.  5,  II 14;  C.  7,  III  5, 12;  C.  8,  IV  6, 
7,15,  16;  C.  11,  V  11;  C.  12,V17;  C.  13,  VI  5,  6;  C.  14, 

VI  9;  G.  15,  VI  16;  C.  16,  VI  19;  C.  17,  VII  3,  4;  C.  18, 

VII  10;  C.  19,  VII  17  bis;  C.  20,  VIII  3;  C.  21,  VIII  8; 

C.  22,  VIII  18,  17;  C.  23,  VIII  19;  C.  24,  IX  1 ;  C.  25, 

IX  5;  C.  26,  IX  8;  C.  27,  IX  15;  C.  28,  IX  21 ;  C.  80,  X  10; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

HEY  ( cont .)  J* 

HRY 

\\ 

HRW 

ffl  (j> 

HR-T 

/a  ° 

HKR 

HRD 

M 

S 

T, 

S-T 

S’ 

£ 

S’BY 

S’ 

K'Z, 

S’W 

b*  3^ 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  557 

C.  81,X17;  C.  82,  XI  4;  C.  33,  XI 12;  C.  34,  XI 19;  C.35, 
XII  4;  C.  86,  XII  10;  C.  87,  XII  16,  20;  C.  88,  XIII  1; 
C.  89,  XIII  5;  C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.41.XIV1;  C.  42,  XIV  19; 
C.  43,  XV  2;  C.  44,  XV  8;  C.  45,  XV  14;  C.  46,  XVI  2; 
C.  47,  XVII  1,  10;  C.  48,  XVII  18. 
one  who  is  under:  I.  6,  XIX  15. 
lower  part  (of  the  ear):  C.  28,  VIII 18. 
under  side  (of  the  arm) :  C.  85,  XII  7 ;  C.  36,  XII 18. 
or  with  det.  sr  or 

N  HRW,  “  downward  ”:  C.  7,  IV  3;  C.  81,  X  21 ;  0.  82, 
XI  9. 

yield,  production:  I.  5,  XIX  9. 

rparti-colored"1 :  C.  39,  XIII  11-12. 

child,  infant:  C.  6,  II 21 ;  C.  8,  IV  11 ;  C.  20,  VIII  2. 

man:  C.  1,  lost  column  restored,  I  8  restored,  5;  C.  2,  I  12; 
C.  8, 1  19  restored;  C.  4,  II  3,  6,  8;  C.  5,  II  12;  0.  6,  II 18; 
C.  7,  III  7,  8,  9, 18;  C.8.IV5;  C.  9,  IV  19;  C.10,V6;  0.11, 
V  10;  C.  12,  V  16;  C.  13,  VI  4;  C.  14,  VI  7;  C.  15,  VI  15; 
C.  16,  VI 18;  C.  17,  VIII;  C.  18,  VII  7;  C.  19,  VII 15;  C.  20, 
VII  22,  VIII  4;  C.  21,  VIII  6;  C.  22,  VIII  10;  C.  23,  VIII 
18;  C.  24,  VIII  22;  C.  25, 1X2;  C.  26,  1X6;  0.27,1X13; 
C.  28,  IX  18;  C.  29,  X  3;  C.  80,  X  9;  C.  31,  X  13;  0.  32, 
XII;  0.33,  XI  9;  0.34,  XI 17;  0.85,  XII  3;  0.36,  XII  9; 
C.  37,  XII 15;  C.  88,  XII  22;  C.  39,  XIII  8;  0.  40,  XIII 12; 
C.  41,  XIII  18,  20;  C.  42,  XIV  18;  C.  43,  XIV  22,  XV  1 ; 
C.  44,  XV  6;  0.  45,  XV  9, 16;  C.  46,  XV  20;  C.  47,  XVI 17, 
XVII  6,  12;  I.  1,  XVIII 10;  I.  2,  XVIII  15;  I.  5,  XIX  11, 
14  bis;  I.  6,  XIX  14;  I.7.XX5;  I.8.XX11;  XXII 4, 7, 11. 
woman:  XX  18. 

son;  also  or  without  dot.:  C.  9,  V3;  1.  1,  XVIII  5,  6  bis; 

1.2,  XVIII 15;  I.  7,  XX  8. 

R  S’BY  B,  r“  as  far  as  ’’t  :  C.  32,  XI  5. 

protection:  I.  1,  XVIII 10,  11 ;  I.  8,  XVIII  17;  I.  5,  XIX  13; 
XXII  12. 

prevent:  C.  89,  XIII  8. 

avoid;  written  C.  46,  XVI  6. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

558 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

S*W 

to  issue:  I.  6,  XIX  17. 

S>W 

to  be  stationary :  C.  31,  X  21. 

S’TW 

“ion 

1  | 

ground:  C.  8,  IV  15. 

SWNW 

0?$ 

physician:  also  (once  only  16):  C.  1, 1  6;  C.  9,  IV  21,  V  4. 

SP 

□  o 

time,  instance;  C.  7,  IV  3  bis;  XXII 10. 

SP  SN-WY:  I.  1,  XVIII  4,  9;  I.  2,  XVIII  14;  I.  5,  XIX  3, 
9;  1.7,  XX  2;  1.8,  XX  10;  XX  17,  XXII. 

SPY 

-~>v  l-^-l 

D© 

remain:  XXI  12. 

SP 

□  © 

portion:  XXI 14. 

SP-W 

"  *  o 

0  9m  i 

fragments:  C.  4,  II  9;  C.  5,  II 17. 

applications ;  or  without  <? :  C.  41,  XIV  2,  4;  C.  46,  XVI  8,  6,  7. 

SP 

DO''* 

meaning  uncertain:  C.  24,  IX  1. 

SM> 

IS** 

lungs :  C.  84,  XII  2. 

SNY 

—  X 

1 - 1  f\ 

spread,  spread  out;  also  (once  ordy  XV  17),  or  with  det. 

^  (XXII  1):  C.  85,  Xlf5;  C.  86,  XII 11 ;  C.  39,  XIII  10; 
C.  45,  XV  17;  XXII 1. 

SNrr 

rub,  triturate:  XXII  5;  XXII 13. 

SNF 

blood:  C.  4,  II  4,  5;  C.  5,  II  13;  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  4,  6; 
C.  8,  IV  8,  12;  C.  9,  V  2;  C.  11,  V  11 ;  C.  12,  V  18,  VI  2  bis; 
0.  18,  VI  5;  C.  14,  VI  10;  C.  17,  VII  2,  3,  4;  C.  20,  VII  24, 
VIII  3;  C.  21,  VIII  7,  8;  G.  22,  VIII 11,  18;  C.  37,  XII  19; 
XX  14-15, 16. 

SKY 

z\\ 

’’relief1 :  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  20,  VIII  5 ;  C.  32,  XI  6. 

SS 

splint,  or  with  det.  '’v  (once  only  V  18);  also  ^  g  5  (once  only 
VI  10). 

SS  and  SS'WY  (two  splints):  C.  7,  HI  18;  C.  85,  XII  6; 
C.  36,  XII  12;  C.  37,  XII  17. 

SS-WY  probably  error  for  SSM-WY:  C.12.V  18;  C.  14, 
VI  10. 

SS 

write:  I.  5,  XIX  10. 

SSR-T 

rm  o  w 

drying  up;  also  «  (XVI  9-10),  (IV  21):  C.  9,  IV  21; 

C.  41,  XIV  4;  C.  46,  XVI  9-10. 

Jn 

place:  C.  12,  V  18;  C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  80,  X  12;  C.  34,  XI  19; 
C.  85,  XII  6;  C.  86,  XII  12. 

6-T  YB,  “  pulse  ”:  C.  1, 1  7  bis. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  559 

g-T 

jK 

Isis:  I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

g> 

d 

1 

back. 

HR  g>  N,“  on  outside  of  ”:  C.8.IV6;  C.  16,  VI 19;  C.21, 
VIII  6-7;  C.  88,  XII  22. 

M  g’  N,  “  with  the  back  of  ”:  C.  20,  VIII  2. 

R  g>,  “  after,”  “  afterward  ”:  XX  18;  XXII  5. 

g>H-W 

toes:  C.  8,  IV  14-15. 

g’H 

to  drive  (meaning  to  “  force  ”):  C.  33,  XI 18. 

s? 

1 — I 

'6h 

to  hold  back :  C.  31,  X  22. 

g’T 

Separate'1,  or  with  det.  (XII 4) ;  also  p^}(]  (XVI  18-19), 
or  with  det.  ^  (XII  10):  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  85,  XII  4;  0.  86, 
XII 10;  C.  47,  XVI 18-19. 

gY 

K 

(dependent  pronoun,  third  person,  feminine,  singular;  also 
used  impersonally):  C.  45,  XV  11;  C.  48,  XVII  16,  17  bis; 
XXI  1. 

gY 

m 

to  shuffle:  C.  8,  IV  7, 13, 15. 

gYP 

m 

assign:  I.  6,  XIX  18. 

gYN 

HZ 

wipe,  wipe  off;  also  p  (XX  18):  C.  20,  VIII  2;  XX  18. 

gYN 

MSm, 

clay:  XXII  5. 

grND 

p* 

comer:  C.  18,  VII 14. 

grR 

elevated,  prominent:  C.  46,  XV  20. 

See  also  rR  and  gKR. 

grK 

PV^ 

to  bring  in,  intrude:  C.  8,  IV  17. 

gw 

(dependent  pronoun,  third  person,  masculine,  singular). 

As  object  of  verb:  C.  1,  I  2;  C.  2,  I  14  restored;  C.  8, 
I  20  restored,  22  bis  (once  restored),  28;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5, 
1115;  C.  6, 1128;  C.  7,1118;  C.  8,  IV  7;  C.  9,  VI;  C.  10, 
V  7  bis  (once  restored),  8;  C.  11,  Y  18;  C.  12,  Y  18,  20; 
C.  14,  VI  11,  12;  C.  15,  VI  17  bis;  C.  16,  VI  20,  21;  C.  17, 

VII  6;  C.  18,  VII  10;  C.  19,  VII  18;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  23, 

VIII  21 ;  C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  26,  IX  10  ter;  C.  27,  IX  17  bis; 
C.  28,  XI  bis,  2;  C.29,  X7;  C.80,X11;  C.81,X13;  C.  32, 
XI  4,  6  bis;  C.  83,  XI  10;  C.  84,  XI  20  bis;  C.  85,  XII  5, 
8  bis;  C.  86,  XII 10, 14;  C.  87,  XII 17, 18;  G.  88,  XIII 2  bis ; 
C.  89,  XIII  5,  7;  C.  40,  XIII 15,  16;  C.  41,  XIV  7;  C.  42, 

oi.uchicago.edu 

560 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

gW  ( coni .) 

¥ 

XIV  18,  20  bis;  C.  43,  XV  2;  C.  45,  XV  12,  16;  C.  46, 
XVI  7;  C.  47,  XVII  2,  4,  6,  13, 14;  C.  48,  XVII  19. 
YgKgW:  C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  21,  VIII  7;  C.  33,  XI 10. 

YgK  gW  HM,  “  while  at  the  same  time  C.  13,  VI  5; 

C.  17,  VII 3. 

YgTgW:  C.  18,  VII 12. 

YgT  YE  gW:  C.  1, 1  2  restored. 

NN  gWM:  C.  12,  V  22. 

DR  NTT  M:  C.  4,  II 11. 

NTTgW...M:  C.  7,  IV  4. 

gW’Y 

X 

A 

to  pass  by ;  also  P  -£)  %  <?  A  A  (once  only  XX  7),  P  •£) a  (once 
only  XX  6):  C.4.II7;  C.  J, lit*  0. 19, 

VII 18;  C.  29,  X  8;  C.  47,  XVII 13;  I.  2,  XVIII  13  bis,  14; 
I.  7,  XIX  20,  XX  6,  7. 

the  passer  by:  I.  4,  XVIII 19. 

gWrB 

Pfl= 

cleanse:  1.  6,  XIX  14;  I.  7,  XIX  18. 

gWMT 

P'>- 

to  make  thick :  XXII  6. 

gWR 

to  drink;  or  with  det.  C.  28,  IX  19;  XX  16. 

gWIPT 

P^ 

egg:  C.  9,  IV  20,  21,  V.  1. 

gWS 

P?T 

a  whirl:  C.  41,  XIII 19,  XIV  11, 12. 

gWGM 

p^lr* 

to  grind :  XXII  2. 

gWT 

weak  adversative  particle. 

YE  gWT,  “  if  then  ”  or  “  if  however  ”:  C.  7,  III  8,  18; 
C.  28,  X  2;  C.  31,  X  16;  C.  34,  XI  21 ;  C.  37,  XII 19;  C.  47, 
XVII  6,  12,  13. 

gBN 

pj^: 

to  fall  down :  C.  9,  V  3. 

gBH 

P>? 

jar:  XXI 16,  XXII  3. 

gPNr 

PJi.^ 

transform:  XXI  3-4. 

gPR 

^75 

reach;  also  (once  only  II  7),  J±^.A  (once  only  II  10): 

C.  18,  VII 12.^ 

gPR  R  YH-T  (“  reach  decisive  point  ”):  C.  4,  II  7,  10; 
C.  6, 1128;  C.  7, 1118,15;  C.  8,  IV  9;  C.  21,  VIII  9;  C.  37, 
XII 19. 

gpgpw 

P°P°Cn* 

of  uncertain  meaning,  probably  disease- demons:  I.  7,  XX  4. 

gPT 

P> 

lip;  also  ■  (twice  only  V  9,  VI 13). 

gPT  of  the  human  mouth :  C.  7,  III  4 ;  C.  26,  IX  6,  7,  9, 1 1 . 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  581 

6PT  ( cont .) 

p°~ 

6PT-WY  (“  two  lips  ”)  of  a  wound:  C.  1, 1 1, 10  restored; 
C.  2,  I  17  restored;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  14,  VI  8,  18;  C.  18, 
VII  18;  C.  23,  VIII  21;  C.  26,  IX  12;  C.  41,  XIII  20, 
XIV  10,  18  bis. 

6FHY 

PV-* 

to  release:  C.  8,  IV  8, 17. 

&FR-T 

drawing  or  similar  (of  movement  of  an  eyebrow) :  C.  7,  IV  3. 

6ft 

P*~  6 

1  1  l  l 

oil:  XX  16. 

6mn 

1  fMM 

to  set  aside:  XXI 15,  XXII  2. 

6n 

P""~ 

IMI 

(dependent  pronoun,  third  person,  common,  plural):  XXI  18. 

Snw(Y) 

II 

two:  C.  34,  XIII;  XXI 10. 

6n-nw 

llo 

m2  (fem-) 

the  second,  the  other:  C.  1, 1 10, 12  restored;  C.  81,  X  18,  19; 
C.  33,  XI  10,  11,  14,  16,  17;  C.  85,  XII  4;  C.  86,  XII  10; 
I.  1,  XVIII  5. 

6ny 

PT 

them  both  (dependent  pronoun,  third  person  common,  dual) ; 
also  PNN  by  error  (once  only  XII  7):  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  35, 
Xn  7;  C.  86,  XII 13  bis. 

r6NWRT 

P^IS 

rcast  out1 :  C.  9,  V  2. 

6nb 

p  j 

recover:  XXII  14. 

6nfr 

P£~ 

beautify:  XXI  6;  XXII  8. 

6ntr 

°f° 

incense :  XXI  2. 

6r-t 

PT4 

spine,  thorn :  C.  42,  XIV  21,  22. 

6rwh 

PTi 

treat,  or  with  det.  —a  (once  only  II  7);  also  (twice  only 

VI 17,  XV  16),  ^  (once  only  VIII  21),  — « (once  only  XIV  7). 
$RWH  as  a  noun:  C.  39,  XU1  7-8;  C.  46,  XVI  7 ;  see  also 

&RWH-F  PW  HMS(Y)-T. 

&RWH  with  medicaments: 

SRWH  with  grease,  honey  and  lint,  with  M  (j^):  C.  1, 
1 3;  C.  8, 1  28;  C.  10,  V  8  (without  lint);  C.  12,  V  20;  C.  19, 
VII  19. 

&RWH  with  grease,  honey  and  sometimes  lint,  without 
M  (J^):  C.  2, 1 15  restored;  C.  11,  V  18;  C.  15,  VI 17;  0.  16, 
VI  21 ;  C.  17,  VII  6;  C.  18,  VII  11 ;  C.  28,  VIII  21 ;  C.  26, 
IX  10;  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1;  0.  84,  XI  20;  C.  87,  XII 
18;  C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  47,  XVII  4,  14. 

&RWH  with  honey,  without  M  (j^):  C.  82,  XI  6;  C.  85, 

o  o 

oi.uchicago.edu 

562  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

toWgt  (cont.)  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII 14;  C.  88,  XIII  2;  C.  42,  XIY  20;  C.  43, 

XV  8. 

&RWH  with  YMRW  and  honey  without  M  (^J:  C.  80, 
X  11. 

gRW 5,  manner  of: 

toWH  “according  to  these  SS’W”:  C.  41,  XIV  7; 
C.  45,  XV  16. 

toWH  with  toWH  WBNW:  C.  89,  XIII  7;  C.  46, 

XVI  7. 

toWH-F . HMS(Y)-T:  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  7,  III  15; 

G.  8,  IV  9;  C.  16,  VI 20. 

toWD 

PTT^ 

to  make  flourish:  I.  1,  XVIII  2. 

toF 

pra 

inflammation,  fever;  also  (once  only  XIII  19),  (J.  (once 

only  XIV  16):  C.  7,  III  9;  C.  28,  IX  21;  C.  89,  XIII  5; 
C.  41,  XIII  19,  XIV  8,  11-12,  12,  15,  16;  C.  45,  XV  12; 
C.  46,  XVI 8;  C.  47,  XVII  7,  9, 14. 

toF-WT 

p~-,?, 

’’weaknesses1 :  XXII  9. 

to'-T 

Pra^ 

discharge:  XX  16. 

Shm 

P 

to  crush;  also  (once  only  XI  15):  C.  33,  XI  9  bis,  11, 

12, 13, 15. 

Shr 

PIX^ 

abscess;  also  (once  only  XV  20):  C.  48,  XV  20  bis,  XVI  2, 

8,  7, 12. 

Shry 

PX^ 

exorcise:  I.  7,  XX  7  (causative  of  HRY  “  be  far  away  ”). 

top 

Pl^ 

to  become  pale :  C.  7,  III  13,  IV  4  bis. 

Shm 

f1 

mighty  one;  or  with  det.  1. 1,  XVIII  6  bis. 

SgM-T 

4  © 

1 

Sekhmet,  g.;  or  with  det.  C.  1, 1  6;  1. 1,  XV1I1  6,  9;  1. 2, 

XVIII  12,  14,  15;  I.  5,  XIX  3,  9,  10;  I.  7,  XIX  19,  XX  2 
bis;  1.8,  XX  11. 

She 

i  <=»i  1 1 

SgR  N,  "  after  the  manner  of  ”:  XXI 13. 

MY  SgR,  “like”:  XXI  18. 

M  SHR,  “even  so”:  XXI  15. 

toR 

PJL^ 

force  to  fall  in,  cause  to  fall  back:  C.  12,  V  17;  C.  25,  IX  4; 
C.  84,  XI 19. 

toT 

to  stretch:  I.  8,  XX  10. 

P<2=^ 

to  be  head  downward:  C.  33,  XI 18. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  563 

Shdhd 

to  be  head  downward : 

M  3HDHD,  “  head  downward  C.  33,  XI 11, 15. 

3h-t 

pr,:, 

an  unidentified  fruit :  C.  46,  XVI 4. 

3HBW 

ii*=  j  ? 

1  w*wi 

draught,  a  drink:  C.  7,  HI  14. 

3  hr 

p  ‘  * 

to  cover:  1. 1,  XVIII 10. 

r33l>r 

> 

swab,  tampon,  plug;  also  (VIII 16):  C.  11,  V  11, 12;  C.  12, 

V  19;  C.  22,  VIII 11, 16. 

33d 

pa? 

band,  bandage;  or  without  stroke,  also  (1 16):  C.  2, 1 16; 

C.  9,  V  5;  C.  10,  V  9;  I.  5,  XIX  11. 

3kbb 

uma 

to  cause  to  be  cool;  also  aJ  by  error:  C.  9,  V  4  bis. 

Skr 

Pi>^ 

prominent,  elevated;  or  with  det.  *==%,  or  ^ :  C.  39,  XIII  3  bis, 

6, 10;  C.  46,  XVI 13. 

See  also  3cR  and  rR. 

3kr 

PiA 

to  smite,  injury,  or  with  det.  *— o:  C.  8,  IV  7  ter,  15;  C.  17, 

VII  8;  C.  19,  VII 17;  C.  21,  VIII  8. 

3kd 

pit— 

to  spread:  C.  39,  XIH  4;  C.  45,  XV  10. 

3kdy 

sail:  I.  1,  XVIII  7. 

3k 

PT2 

to  cleanse,  or  with  det.  C.  11,  V  11;  C.  12,  V  18;  C.  14, 

VI 10;  C.  22,  VIII 11, 16. 
to  smear:  XXII 8. 

3gnn 

I^A 

to  soften :  C.  4, 11  8 ;  C.  20,  VIII  5. 

3t 

h 

(dependent  pronoun,  third  person,  feminine,  singular):  C.  81, 

X  14;  XXI 19  bis;  XXII 1. 

3ty 

hr 

dissipate,  scatter:  C.  47,  XVII 14. 

3tw 

P-TA 

'“spreading"1 :  C.  43,  XV  5. 

3t[W] 

M 

sower:  I.  5,  XIX  18. 

3T-WT 

p:,?, 

swellings:  C.  43,  XV  1,  5;  C.  47,  XVI 18,  XVII  2. 

3ty 

PS 

odor:  C.  7, 11111,21,  IV  1. 

3twt 

see  TWT. 

3tp 

psi 

to  rehoke1 :  C.  28,  IX  19-20. 

3tp 

VT 

strip:  I.  7,  XX  6;  XXII 13. 

3t> 

P^ 

reduce  (lit.  draw  out);  also  (once  only  V  12):  C.  11, 

V  12;  C.  16,  VI 20;  C.  17,  VII 6. 

3tsw 

P^S 

be  prostrate  on  the  back ;  also  PgL  (once  only  XVII 19) : 

C.  35,  XU  5;  C.  36,  XII 11;  C.  48,  XVII 19. 
0  0  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

564  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

SD  |l^  fracture,  rupture,  break  open,  inflict :  also  p^. 

SD  of  the  bone  (compound  comminuted  fracture): 

3D  of  the  skull:  C.  1,  I  1  restored;  C.  2,  I  17  restored; 
C.  8, 1  24  bis;  C.  5,  II 11, 12  bis,  15, 16  ter,  17;  C.  6,  II 18, 19, 
20,  28,  24;  C.  8, 1Y  5  bis,  6, 10, 12, 13;  C.  9,  IY  19  bis. 

3D  in  his  nostril:  C.  18,  VI 3,  4  bis,  5,  6. 

3D  in  his  maxilla  (MND-T-F):  C.  17,  VII 1  bis,  2,  4. 

3D  in  his  temple  (GM’-F):  C.  18,  YII  9;  C.  22,  VIII  9, 
10,  11,  18. 

3D  in  the  flesh  (rupture) : 

3D  of  the  meninges  of  the  brain:  C.  6,  II 24. 

3D  of  fleshy  tissue  overlying  a  fracture  of  the  bone :  C.  24, 
IX  1 ;  C.  84,  XI 21 ;  C.  87,  XII 15, 16, 20-21 ;  C.  44,  XV  7,  8. 

3dy 

M4S 

distorted,  drawn,  or  with  det.  j£j):  C.  7,  III  11,  IV  2. 

3db 

to  pierce  through,  without  det.  or  with  det.  x ;  the  participle 

with  prosthetic  Y  occurs  12  times:  C.  14,  VI  7-8,  9, 13,  14; 
C.  26,  IX  7,  9, 11,  12;  C.  28,  IX  19,  22;  C.  84,  XI  21 ;  C.  37, 
XII  20,  21. 

3dm 

to  hear:  C.  21,  VIII  7. 

S’M 

to  bum:  C.  39,  X1H  6-7  (where  m  is  corrected  from  w;  cf. 
MSrK-T  s.v.). 

to  be  hot :  C.  41,  XHI  22. 

3>m3 

an  unidentified  flower:  I.  8,  XX  8-9, 12. 

S>3 

an  unidentified  flower:  C.  19,  VII  20. 

S’S’-T 

bosom:  C.  34,  XII 1,  2. 

SrY 

m,  — E  0 

to  be  sandy,  to  be  granulated :  C.  45,  XV  12-13. 

SW 

PI 

sun:  XXI  10,  XXII  1. 

S\VY 

PI 

dry,  be  dry:  C.  28,  X  2;  XXI  11,  18  bis,  XXII 1. 

SW-TY 

p:\\ 

two  feathers:  I.  1,  XVIII  8,  10. 

SW-TY 

pp 

two  sides,  usually  dual,  but  also  jJ“|  (quater);  (once  only 

XV  5):  C.  43,  XV  1,  5  bis,  6;  C.  47,  XVI  17, 19,  XVII  1,  6. 

SW 

see  YSW-W 

Sbb 

gullet;  also  (IX  22):  C.  28,  IX  19,  22. 

Spnn 

f - 1  *****  o 

□  Awm  1  i  I 

an  unidentified  drug:  C.  41,  XlV  6;  C.  46,  XVI  12. 

Sfw 

□  (3 

to  swell;  also  (XIV  11):  C.  12,  V  22;  C.  39,  XIII  10; 

C.  41,  XIV  11;  C.  46,  XVI 13. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  665 

SFW-T 

^  Jr  i  ii 

swelling:  C.  4,  II 10;  C.  12,V11;  C.  46,  XV  17, 19. 

SM 

to  walk,  to  go;  or  without  det.:  C.  8,  IV  7, 18, 14  bis,  15;  1. 1, 
XVIII 10. 

SM-T,  “  action  ”  (of  the  heart):  0.  1, 1  6  restored. 

SM 

=M 

hot  (adjective) :  C.  7,  III  7. 

SMM 

to  have  fever:  C.  24,  IX  1 ;  C.  28,  X  2;  C.  41,  XIII  20,  XIV  2; 
C.  47,  XVII 11, 12. 

Smm-t 

heat,  inflammation,  fever;  or  with  plural  strokes  (mi):  C.  41, 
XIV  9, 14;  C.  47,  XVII 13-14. 

Sm>y 

disease;  also  *-'•  15,  VI  15-16;  C.  41,  XIII  18  bis, 

XIV  1,  8. 

SM’-W 

diseased  ones:  I.  2,  XVIII 14;  I.  7,  XX  1 ;  I.  8,  XX  9. 

SMSW 

Mi 

followers :  I.  8,  XX  9. 

SNrW 

±1** 

obstruction:  XX  14. 

SNB-T 

cm  « o 

- 

breast :  C.  32,  XI  2,  8. 

Snd-t 

IT  0 

acacia : 

DRD  of  SND-T,  “acacia  leaves;”  also  with  det.  ,  °  ( (XXII 
12):  C.  46,  XVI  8;  XXII  12. 

SR-T 

nostril;  also  dr  (twice  only  VI  8,  4). 

SR-T  used  in  the  singular:  C.  13,  VI  3,  4,  5,  6;  C.  14, 
VI  7  bis,  9, 11, 18;  C.  17,  VII  8,  4;  C.  21,  VIII  7,  8. 

DY-F  SNF  M  SR-TY-FY  (his  two  nostrils):  C.  4,  II  4,  6; 
C.  5,  II  13;  C,  6,  II  22;  C.  7,  III  4,  6;  C.  8,  IV  9, 12;  C.  11, 
V  11 ;  C.  20,  VII  24,  VIII  4;  0.22,  VIII 18. 

Proof  passages  that  the  writing  (SR-TY)  designates  the 

nostrils:  C.  11,  V  12;  C.  12,  V  18,  19  bis,  VI  2,  3;  C.  22, 
VIII 11. 

SRY 

to  be  little:  C.  19,  VII 18. 
a  little:  C.  20,  VII  24. 

Ssp 

....  □ 
dH£ _  _  n 

receive,  take;  or  without  det.:  C.  31,  X  14;  C.  41,  XIII  20-21, 
21,  XIV  14  bis. 

take  off,  remove:  C.  14,  VI 11-12. 

ss 

5^ 

mi 

found  effective:  XXII  10. 

ss 

5  = 

-m-\  i  i 

alabaster:  XXI  6. 

ss 

5  ° 

-m-\  1  1 

an  unidentified  plant  or  tree :  C.  48,  XVI  4. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

566  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

gg-T  ^ ,  '"powder1 ;  also  5  |  (XIV  5) :  C.  41,  XIV  5;  C.  46,  XVI 10. 

gg’W  instructions;  also  and  (once  only  I  12). 

8£>W  in  titles  of  cases:  C.  1,  lost  column  restored;  C.  2, 
112;  C.  8, 1 18 restored;  C.  4,112;  C.  5,1111;  C.  6, 1117-18; 
C.  7,  III  2;  C.  8,  IV  5;  C.  9,  IV  19;  C.  10,  V  5;  C.  II,  V  10; 
C.  12,  V  16;  C.  18,  VI  3;  C.  14,  VI  7;  0.  15,  VI  14;  C.  16, 

VI  17;  C.  17,  VII  1;  C.  18,  VII  7;  C.  19,  VII  14;  C.  20, 

VII  22;  C.  21,  VIII  6;  C.  22,  VIII  9;  C.  23,  VIII 18;  C.  24, 

VIII  22;  C.  25,  IX  2;  C.  26,  IX  6;  C.  27,  IX  13;  C.  28, 

IX  18;  C.  29,  X  3;  C.  80,  X  8;  C.  81,  X  12;  C.  32,  XII; 
C.  88,  XI  9;  C.  84,  XI 17;  C.  85,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII  8;  C.  37, 
XII 14;  C.  88,  XII 21;  C.  89,  XIII 3;  C.  40,  XIII 12;  C.  41, 
XIII 18;  C.  42,  XIV  16;  C.  43,  XIV  22;  C.  44,  XV  6;  C.  45, 
XV  9;  C.  46,  XV  20;  C.  47,  XVI 16;  C.  48,  XVII 15. 

SS>W  with  plural  demonstrative:  C.  41,  XIV  8;  C.  45, 
XV  16;  C.  47,  XVII  6. 

indications :  C.  1 ,  I  9. 

SSM 

to  be  bloodshot;  or  with  det.  «=-:  C.  19,  VII 17, 19-20;  C.  20, 
VII 28;  C.  81,  X  15. 

STY-T 

TMW3 

chamber;  also  (V  16  bis):  C.  12,  V  16  bis,  17,  21. 

8DY 

<=£=> 

develop,  or  with  det.  »— «:  C.  7,  III  8,  9,  18;  C.  28,  IX  20-21; 
C.  47,  XVII  7;  dig  out:  XXI 18. 

SD-T 

■ho  o 

i  i  l 

mass:  XXI 16;  XXII  2. 

K’Y 

high:  C.  41,  XIV  9. 

K>-T,  height  (noun):  C.  41,  XIV  11. 

K>B 

to  be  folded:  C.  35,  XII  5;  C.  36,  XII 11. 

K>B-T 

breast. 

K’B-T  as  designation  for  the  breast  in  general,  shown  in  the 
test  of  ability  of  patient  to  turn  the  face  downward:  C.  8, 
I  20,  25-26,  26;  C.  4,  II  5;  C.  5,  II  14;  C.  7,  III  5;  C.  29, 
X  6;  G.  80,  X9. 

K’B*T  as  designation  for  the  soft  tissue  overlying  the  bony 
structure  of  the  breast: 

Swellings,  tumors  or  abscesses  in  or  on  K’B-T:  C.  89, 
XIII  8,  4  bis,  6,  7  bis,  9, 10  bis,  11 ;  C.  45,  XV  9, 10, 11  bis, 
16,  17, 19;  C.  46,  XV  20,  21  bis,  XVI  2-3,  4,  8,  10,  13, 14. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  667 

K’B*T  {coni.)  WBNW  M  K*B-T:  C.  40,  XIII  12,  13,  14-16;  C.  41, 

XIII 18, 18-19,  XIV  2,  8,  9. 

K*B-T  as  designation  for  the  sternum : 

The  manubrium  of  the  K'B-T: 

Kg  HRY  N  K>B*T-F:  C.  34,  XI 23. 

TP  HRY  N  K'B’T-F:  C.  40,  XDI 17. 

HNT*  N  K'B-T-F:  C.  40,  Xm  13,  14,  15,  17. 
Articulations  in  the  K>B*T: 

MN  M  K’B-T-F:  C.  43,  XV  4. 

WD-T  M  K'B-T-F:  C.  43,  XV  5. 

HN-W  (ribs)  NW  K>B-T-F:  C.  42,  XIV  17  bis,  19, 
21  bis;  C.  43,  XIV  22,  23  bis,  XV  2,  8,  4;  C.  44,  XV  6, 
7  bis,  8. 

KrH 

A  *-* 

— JA  1 

shoulder;  also  dual  ^  (five  times  1  20  restored,  25,  26, 11  5, 
XII  11):  C.  3,  I  20  restored,  25,  26;  C.  4,  II  5,  8;  C.  5, 

II 14;  C.  7,  III  5;  C.  8,  IV  8,  17,  18;  C.  19,  VII  16;  C.  29, 

X  5;  C.  80,  X  9;  C.  82,  XI  8  bis;  C.  84,  XI  18;  C.  85, 

XII 5-6;  C.  86,  XII 11. 

KBB 

4J/SE 

to  cool,  to  be  cool,  cool;  cold;  also  a J/j  (XIV  2),  yi1^ 

(twice  XV  11-12,  XVI  8),  ft=j  (XVII  10):  C.  41,  XIV  2; 
C.  45,  XV  11-12,  18-19;  C.  46,  XVI  8,  6;  C.  47,  XVII  10; 
XXI 19. 

See  also  SKBB. 

KFN 

d-d 

to  clot:  C.  12,  VI 2. 

KM> 

to  engender,  produce,  generate ;  also  a  (once  only  XIII 

12):  C.  8,  IV  17;  C.  89,  XIII 12;  C.  45,  XV  13. 

KNKN 

A  A  * 

etr****,  www  i 

bruise :  XXI 10. 

KR-WT 

A  o  0 

<r>  1  1  1 

depressions :  C.  12,  VI 1. 

KRF 

dY 

contract :  C.  48,  XVII 18, 17. 

KSNTY 

yj  n***.  0 

-^d\\I  1  1 

possibly  an  unidentified  herb:  C.  41,  XIV  3,  4;  0.  46,  XVI 4,  5. 

Kg 

* 

bone. 

rR  N  Kg:  C.  1,  lost  column  bis,  restored,  I  2  restored,  10 
restored;  C.  2,  I  12,  18,  16  restored;  C.  4,  II  2,  8,  5;  C.  5, 
1112,15;  C.  6,  II 18, 19;  C.  7,  III  2,  5, 12;  C.  10,  V  6;  C.  18, 
VII  8,  12;  C.  20,  VII  22,  28,  VIII  8;  C.  27,  IX  14,  16; 
C.  29,  X  4,  6. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

568  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

Kg  ( cont .)  (ji  rR  (or  Yr[R])  R  Kg:  C.  3,  I  18,  19,  21  restored;  C.  40, 

XIII  13,  15. 

gPR  R  Kg:  C.  18,  VII  12. 

Miscellaneous  uses  of  Kg:  C.  1,  1  11;  C.  5,  II  16;  C.  22, 
VIII 16;  C.  27, 1X14;  C.  34,  XI  23;  C.  42,  XIV  21. 

KgN  ^  to  be  painful,  painful:  C.  7,  III  3;  C.  13,  VI  6;  C.  17,  VII  3; 

0.  19,  VII  16;  C.  21,  VIII  7;  C.  30,  X  10;  C.  47,  XVI  19; 
C.  48,  XVII 17. 

KD  form:  C.12.V22. 

HR  KD,  entirely:  XXI  11,  17. 

K’P  '7— *  droop:  C.  7,  IV  3. 

K’P-T  linen  cover:  XXII  6. 

KYY  ^l|(|  the  other,  another:  C.  35,  XH  7;  1.2,  XVIII 11;  1. 8,  XVIII 17; 

f  (fern.)  I.  4,  XVIII 19;  I.  5,  XIX  2;  I.  8,  XX  8;  XXI  6;  XXI 15. 

KYY-gNY:  C.  36,  XII  13. 

KFY  ^ejP  uncover:  C.  9,  VI. 

KF-T  gash,  cut,  to  gape;  or  without  det.,  also  (once  only  1 11). 

WBNW  N  KF-T:  C.  2,  1  12  restored,  18  restored,  14 
restored,  15  restored,  17  restored;  C.  8,  I  18,  19  restored, 
21  restored;  C.  4,  II  2,  3,  5;  C.  5,  II 11,  12,  14;  C.  6,  II  18, 
19;  C.  7,  III  2,  5, 12;  C.  10,  V  9;  0.27,1X13,14,15;  C.  28, 
IX  19;  C.  29,  X  8,  4;  C.  47,  XVI  16,  17;  XVII 1,  10. 

KF-T  with  negative:  C.  1,  lost  column  restored,  1  2,  10, 
11  bis  (once  restored);  C.  18,  VII  8,  12,  12-18. 

Drawing  together  the  KF-WT  with  bandages  or  thread: 
C.  10,  V  6;  C.  27,  IX  16;  C.  47,  XVI  20,  XVII  4  bis. 
Uncertain  uses:  C.  1, 1  11 ;  C.  47,  XVI 18. 

KM 

black:  C.  15,  VI 15. 

KS 

the  female  organ :  XX  17. 

G’B 

arm,  upper  arm;  also  *  (once  only  XII  7):  C.  35,  XH 

7  bis;  C.  36,  XO  9  ter,  10,  12,  18  bis;  C.  37,  XII  15  bis,  16, 
20;  C.  88,  XII  21,  22,  XIII 1  bis. 

GW' 

to  hold  firmly :  C.  11,  V  13. 

GWg 

to  be  askew :  C.  8,  IV  6. 

GM> 

ffl 

temple  (of  human  head);  also  ® 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  569 

GM*  ( cont .)  s  J?  ^  Proof  passages  of  the  meaning  of  GM‘:  C.  7,  III  17 ;  C.  18, 

VH  9, 13;  C.  22,  VIII 15. 

General:  C.  18,  VII  7,  7-8,  10. 

Cases  involving  THM,  PSN  or  &D  M  GM*:  C.  19,  VII 
15  bis,  17;  C.  20,  VII  22  bis,  28  bis,  VIII  8  bis;  C.  21,  VIII 
6  bis,  8;  C.  22,  VIII  9, 10,  13. 

GMY  -"2^  find. 

GMM-K,  conditional: 

After  WD-HR-K  (or  WD-YN-K)  r-K:  C.  1,  lost  column 
restored;  C.  7,  III  10;  C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  47,  XVII  9. 

After  YR  H*Y-K  (sometimes  with  intervening  condi¬ 
tions):  C.12.V16;  C.  14,  VI  8;  C.  15,  VI 15;  C.  16,  VI 18; 
C.  21,  VIII  6;  C.  25,  IX  8;  C.  81,  X  13;  C.  33,  XI  10,  11; 
C.  84,  XI  17-18;  C.  85,  XII  8;  C.  86,  XII  9;  C.  87,  XII 16; 
C.  88,  XII  22;  C.  89,  XIII 4,  5;  C.  43,  XIV  23;  C.  44,  XV  7; 
C.  45,  XV  10, 11 ;  C.  46,  XV  21 ;  XX  14. 

After  DrR-HR-K:  C.  8,  I  19-20  restored;  C.  4,  II  8; 
C.  5,  II  12;  C.  6,  II  19;  C.  8,  IV  6;  C.  18,  VII  9;  C.  47, 

XVI  18. 

YRGMY-K:  C.2,118;  C.10.V7;  C.  28,  VIII 20;  C.  27, 
IX  14;  C.  45,  XV  15;  C.  47,  XVII  3,  5. 

YR  6WT  GMM-K:  C.  84,  XI  21 ;  C.  87,  XII 19. 

YR  SWT  GMY-K:  C.  7,  III  8,  18;  C.  28,  X  2;  C.  47, 

XVII  7,  12. 

YR  DR  GMM-K:  C.  4,  II  6;  C.  7,  III  7;  C.  8,  IV  10; 
C.  20,  VIII  4. 

N  GMY-N-F  (“he  is  not  able”):  C.  3,120  restored,  25; 
C.  4,  II  4-5;  C.  5,  II 14;  C.  7,  III  4;  C.  29,  X5;  C.  82,  XI  3. 
GMM-[W]-K,  relative  form:  C.  4,  II 8. 

GMM-K  continuing  treatment:  C.  9,  V  1. 

GMW 

sadness:  C.  22,  VIE  17. 

GN 

soft;  also  ®=:  C. 20, IX 13;  C. 46, XVI 14;  XXI 16;  XXII 8 

GNY-T 

'orifice'1:  C.  18, VH  14. 

GNN 

e 
!  1 

to  be  feeble:  C.  8,  IV  14. 

to  be  soft:  C.  14,  VI 13,  14;  C.  26,  IX  12. 

GR 

to  be  silent:  C.  22,  VIII  17. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

570 

GRT 

GS 

BJ  . 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

weak  particle. 

N  GRT:  C.  81,  X  21. 

side. 

M  GS-F  HRY  followed  by  SD,  SKR  or  YH;  C.  8,  IV  6, 
7,  15, 16;  C.  17,  VII  8;  C.  19,  VII 17. 

GS miscellaneous :  C.  9,  V 2;  C.  11,  V 14;  XX 14;  XXII C. 

gS 

3 

anoint:  XX  17;  XXII;  XXI  6;  XXI  8. 

GS* 

to  sink :  C.  31,  X  21. 

T’ 

this :  C.  9,  V  5. 

T’ 

in 

land,  earth:  I.  1,  XVIII  2,  3;  I.  6,  XIX  17  bis. 

R  T’  and  HR  T>,  “  away  ”  or  “  off,”  with  meaning  of 
“  entirely,”  “  completely 

After  HR  (“  fall  ”):  C.  4,110;  C,  7,  III  4. 

After  PRY  (“  issue  ”) :  C.  41,  XIV  16. 

After  STY  (“  scatter  ”) :  C.  47,  XVH  14. 

WDY  R  T’  meaning  “  to  moor  ”  or  “  to  land  ”  (figurative) : 
C.  3,  I  22,  II  1;  C.  4,  II  7;  C.  5,  II  15;  C.  28,  X  3;  C.  29, 
X  8;  C.  47,  XVII 13. 

UDT>:  I.  5,  XIX  5. 

TY-T 

see  RY-T. 

TY» 

of  unknown  meaning:  C.  7,  m  9,  13. 

TWY 

this:  I.  1,  XVIII  4;  I.4,XIX1. 

TW-W 

swellings :  C.  39,  XUUL  4. 

TWT 

#!- 

liken;  also  (XV  18) :  C.  12,  VI 3;  C.  45,  XV  18. 

6TWT  (|I^“J— .):  C.  7,  IV  2. 

TB-T 

sole;  also  ojog  (IV  14),  (IV  15):  C.  8,  IV  7, 14  bis,  15. 

rTpi 

® 

i 

head;  also  ®  (three  times  only  11  8,  25,  IV  17). 

Proof  passages  that  ®  CTP1)  means  more  than 

calvaria : 

“  Skin  ”  of  TP-F:  C.  8,  IV  5  bis,  13. 

“  Flesh  ”  of  TP-F:  C.  4,  II  9. 

“  Chest  ”  of  TP-F:  C.  7,  III  11,  21,  IV  1. 

“  Interior  ”  of  TP-F:  C.  6,  II  25. 

TP  used  in  gloss  relating  to  [M]HNT  (“  countenance  ”): 
C.  7,  III  19. 

NHB-T  (neck)  as  part  of  TP:  C.  32,  XI  5. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

rTPi  (coni.)  ® 

TP 

© 

1 

TPY 

(fern.) 

TP’-W 

sxv.t 

TPNN-T 

Oa“l  1  1 

TM-W 

TM 

TMS 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  671 

TP  meaning  caput  in  general:  C.  1,  lost  column  bis 
restored,  1 1,  2, 7  restored,  8;  C.  2, 1 12  restored,  18  restored, 
14,  15  restored;  C.  8,  I  18,  19  restored,  21  restored;  C.  4, 
II  2,  8,  5,  8;  0.  6,  II 11,  12,  14;  C.  6,  II  18,  19;  C.  7,  III  2, 
5,12;  C.  20,  VIII  5;  XXII  8. 

TP,  “  head  ”  of  organs  or  parts  of  body: 

TP  as  head  or  end  of  bone:  0.  8,  IV  8,  17,  18;  C.  84, 
XI  18,  22,  28;  C.  40,  XIII 17;  C.  43,  XV  1,  4. 

TP  meaning  “  tip  ”  of  the  toes:  C.  8,  IV  14. 

TP  meaning  “  top  ”  of  the  eyebrow:  C.  10,  V  5,  6. 

TP  . . .  HRY  N[Y]  PND :  C.  11,  V 14. 

TP,  “  head  ”  of  tumors  or  abscesses :  C.  39,  XIII 8  bis,  G,  10; 
C.  46,  XV  20  bis,  XVI 2,  7  12. 
used  as  preposition:  C.  7,  HI  14. 

first  (adjective):  C.  1,  I  8  restored;  C  2,  I  14  restored;  0.  8, 
122;  C.  10,  V7;  G.  14,  VI 11;  C.  16,  VI  20;  C.  17,  VUG; 
C.  18,  VII  11;  C.  26,  IX  10;  C.  27,  IX  17;  C.  28,  X  1 ; 
C.  29,  X  7 ;  C.  80,  Xll;  C.  82,  XI  4;  C.  40,  XIII 16;  C.  47, 
XVII  3. 

the  first  (pronoun):  I.  1,  XVIII  4. 
sutures:  C.  7,  HI  2,  5,  9,  12, 15-16, 16. 
an  unidentified  drug:  XX  16. 

all;  also^^:  1. 1,  XVIII  9;  I.  5,  XIX  9;  1.8,  XX  11. 
negative  verb;  also  (once  only  XIV  14):  C.  7,  IV  2; 

C.  8,  IV  18  bis;  C.  41,  XIV  14;  C.  46,  XVI  15,  15-16;  I.  5, 
XIX  4,  11. 

ruddy;  also  (once  only  III  10),  (once  only 

XIII  20). 

TMS  referring  to  inflamed  or  feverish  condition  of  parts  of 
body:  0.7,010,20;  C.  16,  VI 19;  C.  41,  XIII 20,  XIV  12; 
C.  43,  XIV  28-XV  1. 

redness,  ruddiness  (noun);  also  (XIII  5):  C.  89, 

XIII  5;  C.  46,  XVI  2. 

Proof  passages  of  meaning  of  TMS: 

Defining  TMS  as  DSR:  C.  46,  XVI 15. 

Red  like  the  color  of  TMS-T-fruit:  0.  7,  HI  21. 

Red  like  the  color  of  the  TM$*T-tree :  0.  41,  XIV  13. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

572 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

TMT-W 

1  1 

poultices;  also  °  ,  (once  only  IV  21):  C.  9,  IV  21;  C.  41, 

XIV  6;  C.  46,  XVI 12. 

TN 

a 

this:  C.  9,  V  2;  1. 1,  XVIII  8;  I.  6,  XIX  16. 

TNY 

signs  of  old  age:  XXII  9. 

TR-T 

Oi 

willow;  C.  41,  XIV  8. 

THM 

ra^sl 

to  perforate,  perforation;  also  rgj^jfo  (three  times  only 
VIII  8,  XIII  13,  15),  Jo  (once  only  VI  14),  J  (once  only 

VII  22). 

THM  in  the  skull:  C.  1, 1 1  restored;  C.  2, 1  14,  17;  C.  3, 
1 18, 19,  21,  24  restored;  C.  7,  III  2,  5, 12, 15. 

THM  in  the  maxilla:  C.  15,  VI 14, 15, 16. 

THM  in  the  temporal  bone:  C.  18,  VII 9;  C.  19,  VII 14-15, 
15,17;  C.  20,  VII  22,  28,  VIII  3. 

THM  in  the  chin:  C.  27,  IX  15. 

THM  in  cervical  vertebra :  C.  29,  X  4,  6. 

THM  in  the  HNT1  (manubrium)  of  the  sternum:  C.  40, 
XIII  13,  15. 

THB 

swelling,  or  with  det.  o  (twice  only  II  10,  13),  x  (once  only 

II  4):  C.  4,114, 10;  C.  5, 1113;  C.  8,  IV  6;  C.  11,  V  10, 12; 
C.  12,  V  17;  C.  15,  VI  15;  C.  16,  VI  18,  21;  C.  17,  VII  6; 
C.  21,  VIII 6;  C.  88,  XII 22;  C.  46,  XV  21. 

TKN 

-A 

draw  near:  I.  7,  XX  4. 

T’W 

treatise:  C.  5,  H  17;  C.  19,  VII  20-21 ;  C.  41,  XIV  10. 

T’W 

breath,  wind:  C.  8,  IV  16;  C.  31,  X  14;  I.  1,  XVIII  1,  8; 
I.  2,  XVIII 12. 

T’M 

to  close  up :  C.  41 ,  XIV  9. 

TRM 

to  wink :  C.  7,  IV  3. 

THN-T 

irr,;, 

kind  of  mineral :  C.  41,  XIV  5. 

TS 

**—■3  _ 

to  knot,  knit,  join,  to  coagulate,  or  with  det.  *-j:  C.  8,  IV 11; 

C.  9,  V 1 ;  C.  12,  V 19,  VI 2;  C.  14,  VI 10. 
to  bind ;  or  with  det.  :  1. 1 ,  XVIII  3 ;  I.  7,  XX  5. 

TS 

1 

vertebra. 

TS  N  NHB-T-F  (vertebra  of  his  neck):  C.  29,  X  8,  4  bis, 
6;  C.  80,  X  8,  9, 10;  C.  31,  X  12, 13, 15, 16,  17, 18  bis;  C.  82, 
XI 1  bis,  4,  7  bis;  C.  88,  XI  9  bis,  12,  18,  14,  16. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  573 

TS  ( cont .) 

1 

TS  N  PSD-F  (vertebra  of  his  spinal  column) :  C.  48,  XVII 
15,  16,  17, 18. 

TS  without  modifier  but  referring  to  TS  N  NHB-T-F: 
C.  83,  XI  10, 11, 15. 

TSY 

“1 

to  lift,  to  hold  up,  or  with  det.  — o:  C.  8, 11 1 ;  C.  81,  X  21. 

TSW 

rn; 

stiffness,  also  ^5,  ^  j  (twice  only  III  18,  X  7):  C.  3,  I  20,  21, 
I  26-11  1 ;  C.  4,  II  4,  6;  C.  5,  II  13,  15;  C.  6,  II  22;  C.  7, 
III  4,  6,  18;  C.  8,  IV  9,  12;  C.  19,  VII  18;  C.  20,  VIII  4; 
C.  22,  VIII 18;  C.  29,  X  7. 

D[>]B-W 

“Uolll 

figs :  C.  9,  V  4. 

DWN 

to  stretch,  stretch  apart,  be  tense;  or  with  dets.  j\  or 

C.  7,  m  10, 19-20,  20;  C.  85,  XII  6;  C.  36,  XII 12. 

DBN 

WWW  1  1  1 

mortar:  C.  46,  XVI  5. 

DP 

to  taste:  XXI  21. 

DP-T 

taste  (noun):  XXI  21. 

DP 

D?® 

Buto:  1.8,  XV1I117. 

DP-TY 

0 

two  flanks :  C.  43,  XV  8. 

DM-T 

knife:  I.  5,  XIX  7. 

DMY 

to  touch,  join:  C.  2,  1 17  restored;  C.  10,  V  9;  C.  31,  X  19; 
C.  45,  XV  17, 18, 19. 

DMY  R,  “  adhere  to,”  with  det.  C.  22,  VIII 16. 

DND 

the  name  of  a  demon :  1. 1,  XVIII 6. 

DR 

•— 0 

repel,  expel;  also  (XIX  18):  C.9,V2;  1. 1,  XVIII 11;  1.5, 
XIX 13. 

remove ;  with  det.  ^ :  XXII  8,  9. 

DH 

«=■!** 

hang  down :  C.  36,  XII  9. 

DHR 

skin:  C.  7,  HI  16. 

DHR 

c=3^^ 

bitterness:  XXII  1. 

D£R-T 

<C2»  ^  1  1  1 

sickness,  plague;  or  without  det.  I.  1,  XVIII  8,  11;  I.  2, 

XVIII  12. 

DS 

ro 

an  unidentified  wood;  also  (XX  6):  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I. 

7,  XX  6. 

dsr 

=t 

red;  or  with  det.  p  (VII  21), ,  °  ,  (XIV  6;  XVI  12;  XXI  5): 
C.  7,  III  20;  C.  19,  VII  20,  21;  C.  89,  XIII 11;  C.  41,  XIV  6, 
10,  13;  C.  46,  XVI 12, 16;  XXI  5. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

574 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

DKW 

.d<?i  i  i 

’’kernels"1 :  XXI  6,  6-7. 

DK[R] 

A 

fruit :  C.  46,  XVI 4. 

DG> 

to  look  at  (with  preposition  N) :  C.  8,  I  20  restored,  25,  26  bis 
(once  restored);  C.  4,  II  5;  C.  5,  II  14;  C.  7,  III  5;  C.  19, 
VII 16;  C.  29,  X  5;  C.  80,  X  9;  C.  32,  XI  2,  8. 

DGY 

’’feebleness1 :  C.  22,Vmi7. 

DGM 

be  speechless ;  or  with  dets.  «=-,  or  without  det. :  C.  18,  VI 6 ; 

C.  17,  VII  5;  C.  20,  VIII  4,  5;  C.  22,  Vm  12, 13, 17;  C.  33, 
XI  10,  18. 

D> 

I- 

fire-drill:  C.  89,  XIII  6. 

P’W 

disease :  C.  19,  VII  21. 

P’R-T 

aMl 

an  unidentified  fruit :  C.  41,  XIV  7. 

iT.t, 

D’R-TrS:  C.  46,  XVI 10. 

P’P’ 

ii® 

head:  C.  8,  IV  13;  C.  9,  IV  20;  C.  33,  XI 16. 

Dr-W 

’’blemishes1 :  XXII  9. 

DrR 

probe,  palpate;  also  ij)  (IV  5),  a  (1  19),  ^  scribal  error 

(XVI 18) :  C.  1,  lost  column  restored;  C.  2, 1 18  restored ;  C.  8, 
I  19;  C.  4,  II  8;  C.  5,  II  12;  C.  6,  II  19;  C.  7,  III  2;  C.  8, 
IV  6-6;  C.  10, V  6;  C.18.V118;  C.  27,  IX 14;  C.  47,  XVI 18. 

DW 

evil:  1. 1,  XVIII  9. 

DWY 

lift:  1. 1,  XVIII  8. 

PB-T 

brick:  C.4,117;  C.  7,  III  15. 

DB> 

to  clothe,  pad:  C.  7,  III  14;  C.  12,  VII;  C.  28,  VIII  21. 

DBr 

S' 

finger,  thumb:  C.  1,14, 6;  C.  4,114;  C.  5, 1118;  C.  6, 1121  bis; 

C.  8,  IV  11  bis;  C.  18,  VI  5;  C.  17,  VII  2;  C.  20,  VII  24; 
C.  22,  VIII  10  bis;  C.  24,  VIII  23;  C.  25,  IX  3;  C.  87,  XII 
16;  C.  40,  XIII 14;  C.  44,  XV  8;  I.  6,  XIX  15. 

PPY-T 

penetration :  C.  32,  XI  8. 

DN 

to  thresh :  XXI 11  bis. 

DNB 

crooked :  C.  12,  V  22. 

DNN-T 

skull  (meaning  the  calvaria );  also  with  stroke  (II  12,  17,  24) 

C.  1,  lost  column  ter,  restored,  1,  11  bis  (once  restored);  C.  2, 
1 18;  C.  8,  1 18  restored,  19,  21,  24  bis  (once  restored);  C.  4, 
II  2,  8,  5,  6,  8,  9  bis;  C.  5,  II  11,  12,  18,  15,  16  ter,  17  bis; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY  575 

DNN-T  ( cont .)  ^ 

C.  6,  II  18  bis,  19  bis,  20,  22,  23,  24  bis;  C.  7,  III  2,  6,  9, 
12-18,  16  bis  (once  restored);  C.  8,  IV  5  bis,  6,  7  bis,  10, 
12  bis,  13;  C.  9,  IV  19. 

DR 

9 

R  DR-F,  “  entire,”  “  throughout  ”  (literally  “  to  its  limit  ”): 
C.  12,  V  22;  C.  41,  XIV  12. 

DR-WY 

9 

two  sides:  C.  11,  V  16. 

DR 

9 

until:  C.  6,1121;  C.  8,  IV  11. 
as  soon  as:  C.  89,  XIII  9. 

YR  DR,  “now  when,”  “now  as  soon  as”:  C.  4,  II  6; 
0.  7,  III  7;  C.  8,  IV  10;  C.  20,  Vm  4. 

DR  NTT,  “  because,”  “  for  ”:  C.  4,  II  11. 

DR-T 

<=> 

1 

hand,  touch;  also  dual  (twice  only  I  6,  7):  0. 1, 1  6,  7; 

C.  8,  IV  8, 18  bis;  C.  20,  VIII  2;  C.  89,  XIII  5;  C.  41,  XIII 
20,  XIV  15,  16;  C.  45,  XV  11,  12,  14,  19;  C.  46,  XVI  1, 
14;  C.  47,  XVII  9;  I.  8,  XX  12. 

DRD-W 

1  1  1 

leaves:  C.  41,  XIV  8  bis,  7;  C.  46,  XVI  8  bis,  9;  XXII 12. 

DS- 

23 

self:  C.  89,  XIII  8,  9. 

DD 

say,  speak. 

DD-YN-K  in  diagnosis:  C.  1,  I  1  restored;  C.  2,  I  14; 
C.8,120;  C.  4,115;  C.  5,  II 14;  C.  7,  III  5, 12;  C.10.V7; 
C.  11,  V  11;  C.  12,  V  17;  C.  13,  VI  6;  C.  14,  VI  9;  C.  15, 
VI 16;  C.  16,  VI 19;  C.  17, VII 4;  C.  18, VII 9;  C.19,VII17; 
C.  20,  VIII  8;  C.  21,  VIII  8;  C.  22,  VIII 13;  C.  23,  VIII 19; 
C.  24,  VIII  28;  C.  25,  IX  5;  C.  26,  IX  8;  C.  27,  IX  15; 
C.  28,  IX  21 ;  C.  29,  X  6;  C.  80,  X  10;  C.  81,  X  16;  C.  82, 
XI  8;  C.  83,  XI 12;  C.  84,  XI 18;  C.  85,  XII  4;  C.  36,  XII 
10;  C.  87,  XII 16,  20;  C.  88,  XIII  1;  C.  39,  XIII  5;  C.  40, 
XIII 14;  C.  41,  XIV  1 ;  C.  42,  XIV  19;  C.  43,  XVI;  C.  44, 
XV  8;  C.  45,  XV  14;  C.  46,  XVI  2;  C.  47,  XVI  20,  XVII 10; 
C.  48,  XVII 18. 

DD-^R-K  in  diagnosis:  XX  14. 

YW  DD-N,  quoting  a  book:  C.  5,  II  17;  C.  19,  VII  20; 
C.  41,  XIV  10. 

MY  DD  in  explanation  in  gloss:  C.  7,  III  18;  C.  14,  VI 14; 
C.  81,  X  19;  C.  41,  XIV  16. 

DD-F,  introducing  explanation  in  ancient  gloss  or  citation 
in  gloss  from  surgical  treatise:  C.  1, 1  8;  C.  8,  IV  14,  15,  18; 

oi.uchicago.edu 

576  EGYPTIAN  GLOSSARY 

dd  (cont.)  c. 18> vn  18;  c-  26> IX  12;  c- 30> x  12;  c-  81» x  18; 

C.  82,  XI  7;  C.  38,  XI 14. 

DD  PW  in  glosses:  C.  1, 1 10, 11 ;  C.  4,  II 11 ;  C.  6,  III  1 ; 
C.  S1.X20;  C.  89,  XIII 11. 

DD  introducing  surgeon’s  directions  to  patients  in  ex¬ 
amination:  C.  19,  VII  16;  C.  30,  X  9;  C.  82,  XI  2;  C.  48, 
XVII 16. 

DD  in  directions  for  saying  a  charm  or  incantation:  C.  9, 
V  1 ;  I.  6,  XIX  14;  I.  7,  XX  5;  I.  8,  XX  11. 

DD  MDW :  1. 1,  XVIII  9;  I.  2,  XVIII 15;  I.  5,  XIX  9. 
DD  miscellaneous:  C.  1,19;  C.  41,  XIV  11;  I.1.XVII12. 
DD  used  erroneously  for  DrR :  C.  47,  XVI 18. 

Words  of  Uncertain  Phonetic  Reading 
threshing-floor:  XXI 13. 
linen:  XXII  1. 
rperish"1 :  I.  5,  XIX  7. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX 

Abbot  Collection,  21 
Abdomen,  487 
seat  of  consciousness,  12 
Abscess,  36,  60,  407-409,  410,  413-414 
of  a  tooth,  9,  63 
Absorbents,  381 
Absorption,  111 
Acacia  leaves,  60,  407,  411,  600 
Accidents,  11,  213 
occupational,  11,338 
Acromion,  215 
Adducted  arm,  216 

Adhesive  plaster,  8,  64,  65,  57-58,  60,  69,  121, 
122-123,  124,  171,  227,  228,  229,  230,  232, 
233, 309, 311-312, 416, 421 
Adobe,  8,  55, 56, 58, 151 
Aesculapius,  see  Asclepios 
Age,  signs  of,  492,  498 
Ailments,  95,  112 
Air,  108,  111 
Akeru,  483 
Alabaster,  491 
Alae  nasi,  244 
Alexandria,  13,  17 

Alleviatory  measures,  159,  160,  161,  170,  171, 
270,  287 

Amenhotep  IV,  28 
America,  9 

Ammoniacal  application,  9,  59 
Anatomical  terms,  10,  84-87,  88,  147,  152- 
163,  185-186,  187-188,  189,  226,  241,  242, 
243,  248-249,  253,  272,  275,  276-277,  291, 
293-294,  313-314,  326,  328,  334,  347-349, 
353,  372-373,  394-395,  399-400,  417,  418, 
487 

Anatomy,  2,  9,  10,  11-14 
of  Smith  Papyrus,  64, 68, 72, 108-10, 162, 164- 
170,  171-172,  179,  185-186,  188,  241,  242, 
243,  244,  252,  253,  272,  276-277,  289, 
293-294,  313-314,  323,  334,  342,  347-349, 
372-373,  391,  394-395,  398,  399-400 
Animals,  malignant  dead,  472,  480,  482 
Animism,  470,  472 

Annual  epidemic,  470,  472,  473,  475,  476,  478 
Antimony,  489 
Antiseptic,  59 
Anubis,  5 

Anus,  19,  100,  101,  111,  187,  221,  329,  383,  470, 
499-600 
Apex  beat,  108 

Apollonios  of  Kitium,  16,  56,  303 
Apothecary,  471,  492,  497 
Applications 
hot,  9,  60,  176,  180 

for  allaying  inflammation,  9,  69,  60,  374,  383, 
407 

cooling,  60,  220,  374,  379,  380,  381, 407,  410 
of  salicin,  59,  374 
ammoniacal,  9,  59 

astringent,  9,  59,  60,  374,  379,  382,  407,  411 
softening,  151,  180,  286,  382 
Aqueous  solid  extract,  471,  492 
preparation  of,  495-498 
Arad-Nanai,  1 
Archaisms,  73-75 
Aristotle,  16,  73 
Arm,  110-111 
split  in,  140,  361-362 

fracture  of,  52,  56,  58,  149,  155,  160,  235,  255, 
261,  354-360 

splints  on,  190,  352,  353-364,  357 
“  contracture  ”  of,  216 
Arrow, 

wounds  made  by,  83 
Arteries,  13 
peripheral,  108 

Articulation  of  bones,  10,  60,  153-154,  187,  215- 
216,  277,  293-294,  322,  328,  348,  394,  398, 
399 

Asclepios,  3 
Asses, 

malignant  dead,  482 
Assyria,  1 

Asterisk,  19,  333,  335 

Astringent  application,  9,  59,  60,  374,  379,  382, 
407,  411 

Astronomy,  2, 15, 16 
Auricle  of  ear,  276,  298,  299 

A  ii  vi/'iil/i 

of  ear,’227,  228,  229,  301 
Author, 

of  Smith  Papyrus,  9.  10 

Babylon,  1 

Back  (of  patient),  181,  182 
Backbone,  88,  325,  326,  425 
Backward  dislocation,  342 
Ball  (of  foot),  210,211 

Bandages,  8,  54,  69,  70,  96-97,  114,  171,  222, 
224,  227,  238,  240,  336,  350,  359,  375,  389- 
390 

Bastet,  477,  482,  484 
Battle  axe, 

wounds  made  by,  82,  92,  140 
Beat, 

of  heart,  108,  177,  178 
Beer,  as  solvent,  488,  489 
Belly,  483 

Beneficent  divinities,  472, 474, 475, 477, 480 
Berlin  Medical  Papyrus,  4,  5,  47,  95 
See  also  Medical  Papyri 

pp 

oi.uchicago.edu 

578  GENERAL  INDEX 

Berlin  State  Museum  No.  3038,  see  Berlin  Medical 
Papyrus 

Binding,  96-97,  121,  133, 180,  232-233,  246, 269, 
264,  266,  269,  273,  306,  308,  311,  316,  319, 

321,  336,  344,  352,  367,  359,  362,  371,  379, 
393,  397,  410,  411,  420 

forbidden,  132,  134,  150,  161,  171,  227,  229, 
424 

Birch,  21,  24 
Bird, 

two-toed,  10,  277,  293-294 
Birth,  151,  182 
Bitterness,  495 
Bladder,  111 
fBlemishes,1  498 
Blood,  99,  368-369 
Circulation  of,  13,  65,  108-109 
-vessels,  111,  244,  349 

discharge  of,  141,  158,  166,  178,  206,  208,  234, 
254, 268, ,284, 285, 286, 288, 290, 292, 360,488 
poisoning,  156 

clotted,  10, 68-69,  190, 191,  228,  244,  246,  247, 
251,  269 

-shot,  279,  281-282,  284,  325 
obstruction  of,  488 
Boiling,  495,  496,  497 
Boils,  43,  92,  368 
Bolus,  221,  394 
Bones, 

reduction  of,  16-17,  53,  55-56,  58,  234,  238, 
239,  244,  246-247,  303,  304,  342,  344,  350, 
362-354,  356-357 

articulation  of,  10,  60,  163-154,  187,  215-216, 
277, 293-294,  322,  328,  348,  394,  398,  399 
injuries  to,  44,  58,  82,  83,  92-93,  120,  124-125, 
126,  136,  140-141,  146,  162,  167,  262,  263, 
265-266,  278-279,  283,  284,  287-288,  289- 
290,  301-302,  303-304,  316-317,  319-320, 

322,  323-326,  327-329,  333-334,  337-339, 
340-341,  342-344,  347-349,  350-351,  352, 
354-358,  361,  391-393,  401-402,  425-427 

See  also  Fractures 

fragments  of,  141,  152,  153,  162,  295 
anatomical  knowledge  of,  68,  152-153,  169- 
170,  185-186,  187-188,  277,  293-294,  372- 
373,  391,  394-396,  398 
uninjured,  270-271,  310 
“  Book  of  Transforming  an  Old  Man  into  a 
Youth,”  492 
Bosom,  347,  349 
Bouriant,  U.,  Ill 
Bowels,  100 

seat  of  consciousness,  12 
Brace, 

Wooden,  8,  54,  55,  184 
Brain,  172,  197 

convolutions  of,  10, 12,  65,  166,  167, 173,  208 

word  for,  12,  166 

in  Greek  medical  documents,  12 

in  Smith  Papyrus : 

injuries  to,  12,  164,  165,  166,  171,  208 
localization  of  function  in,  12,  45,  50,  125,  202 
source  of  control  of  movements,  12,  45,  50, 65- 
66 

connexion  with  nervous  system,  13,  45, 50, 66- 
67 

infected,  189 
Break,  see  Fracture 

Breast,  88,  334,  347,  348,  349,  372-373,  399,  480 
injuries  to,  36, 146,  363,  369-370,  374-375 
“diseased ”  or  infected  wound  in,  59,  60, 374, 
375,  384-385 

tumors  or  abscesses  on,  52,  55,  60,  71,  149, 
363-369,  403-404,  406,  407-409,  413-414 
cists  on,  194,  365 
swelling  on,  194,  364,  367 
ribs  of,  373,  392,  394,  396,  398,  401-402 
Brick,  see  Supports  of  brick 
British  Museum  No.  10059,  see  London  Medical 
PapyruB 
Bronchi,  349 
Brugsch,  23,  24 
Bums,  83 

Bushel,  104,  489,  496 
Buto,  484 

abomination  out  of,  479 
hidden  things  in  480,  481 

Calf,  483 

Calvaria,  86,  97,  98,  125,  170 
Canals  of  the  body,  5,  104,  107,  108,  109-113, 
244,  346,  347,  349 
Cancer,  368 

Capillary  attraction,  316 

Cardiac  system,  64—65,  69,  108-110,  113 

Car&ube,  383 

Carriers  of  disease,  472-473, 475, 476, 477,482-483 

Cartilage,  185,  186,  242,  244 

Cartilagines  laterales,  234,  241,  244 

Cartilaginous  suture,  153 

Cartilaginous  tissue,  234,  241 

Cartonnage,  see  Splints 

Cases,  Cross  references  to 

Case  one,  41,  49,  69,  64,  65,  69 
Case  two,  67,  69-70,  89-90,  92,  93,  97 
Case  three,  58,  62,  69,  70,  83,  89,  92,  97,  126, 
130  227 

Case  four,  56,  58,  62-63,  63,  70,  89,  92,  130, 
140, 146, 149,  150, 155, 184, 185 
Case  five,  62,  63,  70,  89,  92,  93,  130,  146 
Case  six,  37,  45,  46,  60,  65,  70,  84,  92,  93,  122, 
130, 134, 155, 157, 159, 160 
Case  seven,  37,  39,  40,  41,  49,  52,  60,  63,  65, 
67, 68, 70,  83, 92, 93, 110, 126, 130, 149, 150, 
152,  155,  160,  277,  388 

Case  eight,  36-37, 39, 46, 49, 52, 63,  64, 66,  70, 
82,  84,  93,  130,  146,  150, 152, 155,  157,  159, 
160,204 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  579 

Cases,  Cross  references  to  (cont.) 

Case  nine,  37,  42,  47,  59,  60,  70,  152,  157 
Case  ten,  37,  57, 70,  82, 91,  92, 93,  98, 122, 124, 
132—133 

Case  eleven,  56, 58, 68,  70, 146, 157, 191,  235 
Case  twelve,  56,  58,  69,  70,  146,  157,  191,  235, 
239 

Case  thirteen,  52,  157,  160,  296 
Case  fourteen,  57,  70,  83,  91,  98,  191,  227,  228 
Case  fifteen,  60,  83,  126,  146,  385 
Case  sixteen,  60,  98,  140,  146,  150,  194,  263 
Case  seventeen,  47,  50,  60,  98,  146,  150,  157, 
159,  160,  205,  255,  296 

Case  eighteen,  59,  70,  89,  93,  94,  98,  157,  298 
Case  nineteen,  40,  41,  50,  60,  71,  89,  126,  130, 
205 

Case  twenty,  40,  50,  60,  89,  126,  130,  150,  160, 
296,  298 

Case  twenty-one,  41, 52,  89,  140, 146, 149, 155, 
205 

Case  twenty-two,  40,  51,  52,  63,  68,  71,  89, 
130,  157,  160,  187,  238,  277,  296,  298 
Case  twenty-three,  67,  153,  227,  228,  229,  239 
Case  twenty-four,  61,  52,  157,  160,  235,  255 
Case  twenty-five,  41,  56,  58,  238,  239,  291,  328 
Case  twenty-six,  40, 67,  71,  83,  91, 93,  98,  132— 

133,  227,  228,  232,  260-261 

Case  twenty-seven,  67,  82,  92,  93,  98,  121-122, 

134,  261,  291 

Case  twenty-eight,  39,  57,  82,  92,  98,  149,  227, 
229,  261,  385-386,  388 

Case  twenty-nine,  51,  60,  92,  93,  98,  126,  130, 
149 

Case  thirty,  41,  60,  71,  98 
Case  thirty-one,  38,  51,  52,  63,  66,  71,  160 
Case  thirty-two,  41,  60,  71,  98,  150 
Case  thirty-three,  52,  63,  71,  83,  160,  296,  328 
Case  thirty-four,  37,  39,  46,  52,  56,  58,  71, 96, 
239  261  329 

Case  thirty-five,  45,  56,  58,  67,  96,  157,  190, 
235,  346,  357 

Case  thirty-six,  39,  45,  56,  58,  67,  157,  190, 
235  342  377 

Case  thirty-seven,  37,  39,  52,  56,  58,  63,  149, 
155, 157, 160,  190,  235,  255,  261,  342,  346 
Case  thirty-eight,  60,  140,  146 
Case  thirty-nine,  41,  43,  46,  51,  71,  194 
Case  forty,  41,  60,  68,  71,  98,  126 
Case  forty-one,  59,  60,  71,  133,  194,  407,  411 
Case  forty-two,  60,  71,  157,  235,  322,  328 
Case  forty- three,  60,  71,  194,  329,  394 
Case  forty-four,  52,  157,  160,  235,  255 
Case  forty-five,  41,  43,  52,  71,  149,  368,  376 
Case  forty-six,  43,  46,  60,  71,  133,  146,  194, 
369 

Case  forty-seven,  37,  39—40,  41,  51,  52,  58,  91, 
92,  98, 122, 149,  227, 229,  258,  376,  385-386, 
388 

Case  forty-eight,  41,  322-323 

Cases,  surgical,  6 
order  of  topics,  36-37 
Casts,  190 

Cauterization,  8-9,  54,  363,  365-366 
Cavum  nasi,  241,  252 
Cedar,  411 
Celestial  Ocean,  474 
Cemeteries, 

Egyptian,  11 

Cerebrospinal  fluid,  171-172 
Champollion,  21 
Charms, 

magical,  220,  472-478 
Cheeks,  243,  263,  265,  266,  267,  268 
See  also  Maxilla 
Chemistry,  108 
Chest  of  head,  181,  190,  197 
Child-birth,  151 

Chin,  57,  98,  261,  289,  291,  309-310 
Chloride  of  sodium,  491 
Choking,  313,  314 

Circulation  of  blood,  13,  65,  108-109 
Cists,  92,  157,  194,  195,  329,  365,  366 
Clamminess,  407,  408,  414 
Clammy,  181,  192,  407 
Clavicles,  85,  153,  347,  348 
injuries  to,  34 

dislocation  of,  52,  56,  68,  239,  261,  342-349 
fracturo  of,  56,  58,  235,  350-351,  352,  354 
splints  for,  190,  352 
Clavicular  manubrium  joints,  345 
Cleansing  from  pest,  483,  485 
Clocks,  13,  106 

Coagulation,  10,  68-69,  190,  191,  228,  244,  246, 
247,  261,  259 
Code  of  Hammurapi,  1 
Codex  Laurentius  LXXIV,  16 
Cold  abscess,  407 
Collar-bones,  see  Clavicles 
Column,  lost, 

reconstruction  of,  78-79,  80-81,  84,  87,  89-90 
Column  I 

reconstruction  of,  76-77,  89-90,  93-95,  103, 
105-107,  113,  114-115,  117,  121-122,  127- 
128,  132-133 
Commentary, 
ancient,  10,  61-71 
author  of,  10,  61 
Complexion, 

recipes  for,  470,  471,  490-498 
Compress,  220,  223-224 
Conception,  101 
Condyle,  68,  277,  294 
Conjugate  deviation,  205 
Consciousness, 
seat  of,  12 

Constriction  of  ligaments,  65,  67,  179,  180,  187, 
192 

Contractions,  427 

P  p  2 

oi.uchicago.edu 

580 

GENERAL  INDEX 

“  Contracture  ”  of  arm,  216 
Contre-coup,  12,  66,  202,  206 
Contusion,  70,  83,  201,  204 
Convolutions  of  brain,  10,  12,  65,  166,  167,  173, 
208 

Convulsions,  182 
Cook  (recipes),  220,  488,  495,  500 
Cooling  applications,  60,  220,  374,  379,  380,  381, 
407, 410 
Copper, 

salts,  9,  59,  60,  374,  379,  382 
foundry,  10 

slag,  10,  65,  167-168,  174 
molten,  166,  168,  173,  208 
Coracoid  process,  215 
Cord,  74 

of  mandible,  179,  180,  187,  189 
See  also  Ligament 
Coriander,  422 

Coronoid  process,  68,  188,  215,  277,  294 
Corrugations,  166,  167,  168,  173,  208 
Costae  verae,  373,  391 
Countenance,  181,  192 
Crepitate,  264-265,  268,  302,  358,  402 
“Crisis,”  the,  9,  63,  70,  135,  151,  155,  171,  180, 
184,  207,  289,  359 
Critical  injury,  140 
Critical  point,  185 

See  also  Decisive  point 
Crocodile,  480 
Crocodile  bite,  98-99 

Crown  (of  head),  110, 166, 168, 169, 181, 196, 197, 
200,  208 
Crucible,  10, 168 
Crushing, 

wound  caused  by,  83,  337-342 
Cubic  inches,  489 
Cutaneous  muscles,  257 
Cyanosis,  194 

Dandruff,  186 
Darius  I,  17,  72 
Dawson,  W.  R.,  8,  53 
Dead, 

malignant,  470,  472,  479,  480,  481 
Death,  64,  212,  213 
forms  of,  480,  481 

Decisive  point,  9,  135,  150,  155,  171,  180,  184, 
207,  289,  359 
Delirium,  182 
Democritus,  64,  105 
Demoniacal  medicine,  15,  206 
Demons  of  disease,  385,  470,  472,  474,  475,  476, 
477,  480,  484,  485 
Dened  474  476 

D4vaud,  E.’,  118,  119,  193,  417,  497,  593-595 
Diagnosis, 
in  recipe-papyri,  4 

in  European  medicine,  7 
in  Smith  Papyrus,  7,  45-51,  93-96,  120,  131, 
148-149,  159-161,  170,  179,  182-183,  205- 
206,  209,  217,  231,  236,  245,  256,  258,  264, 
266,  268-269,  273,  280,  285-286,  292-293, 
300,  302-303,  305,  307,  311,  314-315,  318- 
319,  321,  326-327,  335,  339,  344,  345,  351, 
355-356,  358-359,  360-361,  362,  365,  371, 
377,  393,  397,  402,  404-405,  409,  419-420, 
423,  428,  488 
Dictionary, 

of  medical  terms,  10,  61-71 
Diet,  normal,  10,  52, 57,  58,  60,  69, 132, 134-135, 
139,  150, 161,  237,  281,  289,  316,  319,  424 
liquid,  184 
Digestive  system,  14 
trouble,  332,  352 
Directions  for  use,  498 
Disaster,  477,  479,  484 

Discharge,  141,  158,  166,  178,  206,  208,  234,  254, 
268,  284,  285,  286,  288,  290,  292,  330,  360, 
422 

menstrual,  487 

“  Discharge  of  the  blood,”  488 
Discoloration  of  wounds,  263,  266 
Disease,  43,  49,  64,  95,  111,  112,  113,  126,  202, 
206,  281,  285,  384-385,  403,  414,  470,  472 
-demons,  385,  470,  472,  474,  475,  476,  477, 
480,  484,  485 

carriers  of,  470,  472-473,  475,  476,  477,  482- 
483 

“  Diseased  ones,”  486 
“  Diseased  ones  ”  of  Sekhmet,  484 
“Diseased”  wound,  71,  262,  263,  375,  384-385 
Disease  of  women,  4,  470,  487-488 
“  Disfigurements,”  498 
Disinfectant,  9,  262,  265 
Disinfection,  470-471 

Dislocation,  44,  244,  322,  328-329,  392,  394 
of  cervical  vertebra,  12,  52,  66,  160,  323,  324- 
327 

of  mandible  16-17,  56,  294,  303,  304 
reduction  of,  16 — 17,  41,  56,  294,  303,  304,  342, 
344 

of  clavicles,  52,  56,  68,  239, 261,  342-349 
of  ribs,  395-398 

Displacement,  44,  60,  71,  98,  333,  334,  336-337, 
347,  348,  398 
Dissection,  11,  67,  188 
Drainage,  316 
Draining, 

an  abscess,  9,  53 
Draught, 

for  reducing  fever,  184 
Drills,  9,  see  Fire-drill 
Drink  (medicinal),  184,  412 
Drugs,  374,  381,  383,  412,  489 
Drying  up  wounds,  366,  379,  381,  382 
Duff  Gordon,  Lady,  21 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  581 

Dung,  59,  60,  379,  381,  407,  411 
Dweller  in  the  sepsepu,  484 
Dysentery,  470 

Ear,  14,  110,  148,  238,  239,  286,  289,  295,  381 
slit  in  auricle,  57,  227,  228,  229,  297-298 
-trouble,  101 

discharge  from,  141,  158,  178,  206,  208,  221, 
254, 268,  288, 290,  292,  381, 399 
orifice  of,  275,  276,  298,  299 
“  hollow  ”  of,  298,  299 
Ebbell,  B„  368 
Ebers,  Georg,  22-25 

Ebers  papyrus,  4,  5,  9-10,  22-25,  35,  47,  61,  65, 
72,  92,  95,  101,  106-108,  110-111,  148,  157, 
159,  166,  186,  195,  200-201,  213,  220-221, 

244,  282,  285,  314,  325,  329,  332,  341,  352, 
364,  365,  366,  368,  369,  372,  376,  380,  381, 
382,  383,  387,  388,  394,  399,  400,  412,  427, 
475,  593-595 

Egypt,  3,  11,  13 
Eisenlohr,  23-24,  25 
Elixir  of  life,  492 

Embalmer,  8,  69,  188,  222,  224,  281,  282 
Embalming,  11,  188 

Emissio  seminis,  66,  71,  323,  325,  326,  329- 
330 

Epidemic 

annual,  470, 472, 473, 475, 476,  478 
Epidemics, 
treatises  on,  72 
Erasistratos,  13,  17 
Erection 

of  phallus,  12,  63,  323,  324,  330 
Esarhaddon,  1 
Europe,  3,  9 

Evaporation,  495,  496,  497 
Eviscerate,  188 
Examination,  64,  102-106 
in  recipe  papyri,  4, 42 

in  Smith  papyrus,  6-7,  38-45,  49-51,  57,  89- 
93,  118-120,  127-131,  141-148,  158,  165- 
170,  175,  177-178,  180-182,  183,  203-205, 
207-208,  217,  218,  225-231,  234-236,  238, 

245,  254-256,  257-258,  263,  265-266,  267- 
268,  271-272,  279,  283-285,  288,  290-292, 
298-299,  302,  304r-305,  306-307,  310,  313- 
314,  315,  317-318,  320,  324-326,  333-334, 
338-339,  343-344,  345,  350-351,  355,  358, 
360,  361-362,  363-364,  370,  375-377,  392- 
393,  396-397,  401-402,  403-404,  408,  415- 
416,  417-419,  426421,  421-422,  423-424, 
424-425, 426427, 487, 499 

Excrement,  483 
Excretions,  see  Discharge 
Exhaustion,  183,  199,  200 
Exorcisms,  472487 
Exudation,  244,  285,  377,  410 

Eye,  14,  110,  282,  387 
askew,  202,  204,  205 
comer  of,  275,  276 
blood-shot,  279,  281-282,  284,  325 
diseased,  282 
discharge  from,  284-285 
pupil  of,  332 
-paint,  488,  489 

Eyebrow,  57,  85, 98, 110, 181, 198, 225,  226,  227- 
228,  248 

Faber,  Knud,  7 
Face, 

flushed,  181,  182,  193-194,  195 

distorted,  181,  198 

pale,  183,  199,  200 

color  of,  207 

disfigured,  245,  249 

fixed,  334 

beautifying,  491 

ointment,  492 

Fatal  cases,  159, 160, 189,  208, 209, 256,  269, 286, 
292,  302,  327,  339,  360,  402 
Fatty  growths,  400 
Feathers  (in  exorcisms),  472,  474,  476 
Febrifuge,  412 
rFeebleness,1  296,  297 
Feet,  111 
rheumatoid,  221 
Female  troubles,  470,  487 
organ,  489 

Fever,  40,  58,  102,  181,  302,  312,  313,  315-316, 
375,  384,  385-388,  404,  415,  416,  423,  424, 
479 
Figs,  220 

Finger-nails,  206,  214,  216 
Fingers,  99 

“  Fire-drill,”  8,  54,  365 
Flame-in-His-Face,  474 
Flanks,  399 
Flesh, 
of  ox,  99 
“  living,”  99 

of  patient,  86,  116,  141,  152,  154,  181,  209, 
212,  298,  325,  327,  347,  375,  089,  422,  475, 
480,  486,  490,  498 
of  wound,  417,  421 

Flesh  wounds,  43,  52,  54,  55,  57,  58,  69,  81,  82- 
83,  88,  97-08,  118,  227-229,  266,  257,  270, 
271,  272,  297-298,  306,  308-309,  310,  415, 
417-425 

Flexed  hand,  216 
Flexner,  S.,  176,  189 
Flies,  101 

Flooder  of  the  streams,  474 
Flowers  (in  exorcism),  485,  486 
Fluid,  408,  410,  413,  495 
cerebrospinal,  171-172 
secretions  of,  404 

oi.uchicago.edu 

582  GENERAL  INDEX 

Fluttering,  166,  168,  170,  208 
Fly, 

as  carrier  of  disease,  470,  472-473,  482-483 
Folk  modicine,  2,  6,  217,  220 
Fontanel,  160,  168,  169,  170,  200,  208 
Food,  liquid,  55,  184,  185 
Foot, 

paralysis  of,  12,  63,  70,  202,  204,  210-211 
sole  of,  204,  210 
ball  of,  210,  211 
Force  majeure,  64,  213 
Forehead,  110,  218,  224 
Fortuitas,  213 
Fortuna,  64,  213 

Forward  dislocation,  342,  343,  344 
Fossa  temporalis,  277 
Fractures,  8,  11,  44—45,  53,  56 
Simple,  52,  146,  149,  155,  157,  160,  234,  235, 
244,  245,  247,  255,  301,  302,  322,  328,  350- 
351,  352,  354-360,  392-393,  401-402 
compound  comminuted,  12,  49,  50,  51,  52,  60, 
63,  86,  89,  98,  124-126,  130,  140,  146,  147, 
155,  156-158,  160,  162,  164,  165,  171,  203, 
204,  205,  208,  209,  218,  235,  252,  254,  255, 
267,  268,  271,  289,  290,  295,  296 
impacted,  62,  71,  160,  296,  337-339,  340-341 
Frankincense,  482,  488 
Frontal  bone,  247 

compound  comminuted  fracture  of,  60,  218 
Frontal  process,  252 

Fruit  in  proscriptions,  183-184,  220,  383,  410, 
411,412,489 

in  recipes,  406,  492,  495-497 
Fumigation,  99,  487 
Function, 

localization  in  brain,  12 

Gangrene,  265,  385 
Gangrenous  sore,  368 

Gaping  wound,  82-83,  88,  90-92,  95,  114,  118, 

123,  124,  125,  127,  140,  141,  149,  155,  156, 
158,  164,  165,  177,  227-229,  233,  261,  309- 
310,  312-313,  316-317,415,  417-419 

“  Garden  tongue,”  379,  383 

Gardiner,  A.  H.,  4,  88,  134,  150,  172,  349,  400 

Gasos,  325 

Gash,  89,  90-91,  94,  116,  121,  226,  229,  271,  274, 
417,419,  421 

-wounds,  82-83,  88,  90-92,  95,  114,  118,  123, 

124,  125,  127,  140,  141,  149,  155,  156,  158, 
164,  165,  177,  227-229,  233,  261,  309-310, 
312-313,  316-317,  415,  417-419 

Geese, 

malignant  dead,  482 
Genital  organ,  14 
Glabella,  235 

Glosses,  10,  11,  61-71,  72,  176 
of  case  one,  (1),  102-117 

of  case  two  (2),  123-125 
of  case  three  (3),  136-139 
of  case  four  (4),  152-155 
of  case  five  (5),  162-164 
of  case  six  (6),  171-174 
of  case  seven  (7),  185-201 
of  case  eight  (8),  209-216 
of  case  ten  (10),  233 
of  case  eleven  (11),  240-244 
of  case  twelve  (12),  247-251 
of  case  fourteen  (14),  260-262 
of  case  eighteen  (18),  274—277 
of  case  nineteen  (19),  281-283 
of  case  twenty-two  (22),  293-297 
of  case  twenty-six  (26),  308-309 
of  case  thirty  (30),  322-323 
of  case  thirty-one  (31),  327-332 
of  case  thirty-two  (32),  336-337 
of  case  thirty-three  (33),  340-342 
of  case  thirty-four  (34),  347-349 
of  case  thirty-nine  (39),  367-369 
of  case  forty  (40),  372-373 
of  case  forty-one  (41),  384—391 
of  case  forty-two  (42),  394-395 
of  case  forty-three  (43),  398-400 
of  case  forty-five  (45),  405—406 
of  case  forty-six  (46),  413-415 
Golenischeff,  W.,  493 
Goodwin,  C.  W.,  20-21,  22-23 
Gorget,  347,  349 
Gout,  221 
Grain  measure,  489 
Grammar, 

archaic  forms  of,  73-74,  75 
'Granulation,’1  376,  404 
Grapow,  H.,  134,  184 

Groase,  as  medicament,  57,  58,  60,  96,  97,  98, 
100-101,  121,  132,  150,  171,  180,  191,  219, 
220,  228,  229,  232,  237,  238,  246,  259,  264, 
266,  269,  273,  281,  286,  300,  308,  311,  315, 
316,  336,  344,  359,  371,  379,  381,  411,  421, 
425,  488,  489 

Great  One  dwelling  in  Heliopolis,  474 
Great  Pyramid,  9,  11 

Greek  medicine,  3,  5,  7,  9,  12,  13,  14,  15-17 
Green  pigment,  379,  382,  411 
Griffith,  F.  U.,  4 
Grinding  (in  recipes),  495,  500 
Gristle,  186 
Groin,  99,  111 
Growths, 
fatty,  400 

Gullet,  57,  82,  92,  227,  229,  261,  312,  313,  314, 
348 

Gums  of  teeth,  368 
Gut  stitching,  259,  301 

Haigh,  D.  H„  23 

Hammurapi,  see  Code  of  Hammurapi 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  583 

Hand, 

palm  of,  200,  214,  216 
pronated,  216 
Harvest  time,  482 
Hathor,  474 
Head  (caput),  84-86 

injuries  to,  33-34,  36,  79,  89,  94,  97,  118,  125, 
127,  130,  131,  140,  141,  155,  156,  158,  164, 
165,  177 

back  of,  104,  110 

crown  of,  110,  166, 168, 169, 181, 196, 197,  200, 
208 

flesh  of,  141,  152,  154,  209 
softening  applications  on,  151,  286 
odor  of,  181,  196 
sweaty,  192 
skin  of,  203,  209 

Head  (=  end)  of  a  bone,  85,  194,  205,  343,  344, 
347,  348, 372, 373,  396,  398 
Head  of  tumor  or  abscess,  363,  364,  367-369, 
407-408,  410,  413 
Headache,  412 

Healthy,  475,  477,  479,  480,  486 
Hearing, 
painful,  288 

Hearst  Papyrus,  4,  47,  95 
See  also  Medical  Papyri 
Heart,  480 

in  Ebers  Papyrus,  9-10,  65,  80,  106-108,  159, 
387,  400 

in  Smith  Papyrus,  10,  14,  64 
seat  of  consciousness,  12,  109 
in  cardiac  system,  13,  64,  104,  108-109, 
113 

treatments  for,  99 
vessels  of,  104,  108,  110 
beat  of,  108,  177,  178 
Heat,  386,  390 
Heliopolis,  479 
Great  One  dwelling  in,  474 
Hemesut-house, 
chief  of  the,  474 
Hemiplegia,  205,  216 
Herbs,  60,  379,  381,  383 
Herophilos,  13,  14,  17,  67,  106 
Hippocrates,  9,  14,  16,  56,  64,  303 
Hippocratic  medicine,  9,  14,  15,  10-17,  64,  72, 
105 

the  “  crisis,”  9,  63 
Holmes,  Bayard,  24 

Honey,  as  medicament,  57,  58,  60,  96,  97,  98, 
100,  101,  121,  132,  146,  180,  220,  228,  229, 
232,  237,  246,  259,  264,  266,  269,  273,  281, 
300,  305,  308,  311,  315,  321,  336,  344,  352, 
357,  359,  362,  371,  393,  397,  421,  425,  491 
Ointment,  57-58,  59-60,  101,  316 
Hooton,  E.  A.,  53 

Hopeless  cases,  159,  160,  189,  208,  209,  256,  269, 
286,  292,  302,  327,  339,  360,  402 

Horus,  220,  475,  477,  480,  484,  486 
-eye,  480 

Hot  applications,  9,  60,  176,  180 
“  House  of  Life,”  17-18 
Humerus, 
injuries  to,  35 

fracture  of,  52,  56,  58,  235,  354-300 
split  in,  60,  361-362 
dislocation  of,  354 
Hurry,  J.  B.,  3 
Husk,  495,  496 
Hyksos,  19 

Ibex  grease,  379,  381,  411 
Ibscher,  76 

Images  (in  exorcisms),  482 
Imhotep,  3,  9,  75 

Imru,  57,  58,  60,  97,  98,  100,  101,  262,  264-265, 
305,  321,  336,  352,  357,  359,  362,  393,  397 
Incantations, 
in  recipe-papyri,  5 

Smith  Papyrus,  5-6,  19,  469-470,  472-487 
Incense,  490 
Incisura  mandibulae,  277 
Incurable,  200 
“  Indications,”  79-80 
Inductive  process, 

oldest  known  evidences,  7,  49-51,  179,  269, 
280  286 

Infected  wound,  59,  60,  262,  263,  374 
Infection,  155,  308,  316,  385,  415,  422 
Inflammation,  9,  68,  59,  60,  313,  314,  367,  374, 
375,  379,  380,  381,  383,  384,  385-388,  389, 
407,  412,  415,  416,  422,  423,  424 
whirl  of,  375,  387-388 
Injuries,  11 

causes  of,  11-12,  63-64,  92,  317,  337-338 
in  Smith  Papyrus,  14,  33-35,  43-45,  62-63,  95 
“Injury,”  135,  138,  150,  161,  192,  204-205,  211- 
212,  268,  279,  281,  288,  319,  367,  369,  407, 
413—414,  424 
“  Instructions,”  79-80 
Instruments,  see  Surgical  instruments 
Intestines,  325,  483 
Isis,  220,  474 
Itch,  5 

Jackal,  368,  369 
Jaw,  180,  187,  188,  189,  277 
See  also  Mandible 
Joint, 
stiff,  215 
manubrium, 
clavicular,  345 
Jones,  W.  H.  S„  64,  72 
Jubilation,  480 

oi.uchicago.edu 

« 

584  GENERAL  INDEX 

Juice,  411,  412,  422,  495,  497 
Junctura,  110 

Kahun  Papyri,  4 
See  also  Medical  Papyri 
Karpinski,  L.  C.,  16 
r Kernel,1  491,  496 
•'Khemmis,1  5 
Khufu,  5 
Kidenas,  16 
Kidinnu,  see  Kidenas 
Kidneys,  111 
Kitterman,  P.  Gad,  24 
Knife  wounds,  82,  118 
Koenig,  A.,  294 

Labia,  490 
Laceration,  83 

Lancet,  53,  96,  226,  329,  365,  366 
Lancing,  92,  226 

Laurentius,  see  Codex  Laurentius 

Leaves  as  medicament,  374,  379,  380,  411,  500 

Leg,  111 

paralysis  of,  12,  49,  66,  202,  205 
“  seizures  ”  in,  499 
Lepsius,  22-23 
Letopolis,  5 
Leucorrhea,  368 
Life,  213-214 

Ligaments,  13,  67,  111,  112,  113,  345,  349 
of  mandible,  9, 60,  130, 153,  176,  179, 180,  187, 
188,  189,  277,  294 
of  neck,  65,  181,  192 
contraction  of,  215 
Linen, 

two  strips  of,  8, 54, 55, 57-58,  60, 69, 121, 122- 
123,  124,  171,  227,  228,  229,  230,  232,  233, 
309,311-312,416,  421 

splints  of,  8,  55,  56,  57,  58,  190-191,  229,  234, 
237, 239,  244, 352,  353-354,  357,  359 
stiff  rolls  of,  8,  55,  56,  67,  58,  228,  229,  234, 
237, 239-240,  244,  246,  300,  301,  344 
swabs  of,  8,  54,  57,  58,  124,  190-191,  237,  246, 
247,  259,  290 

tampons  of,  8,  54,  190-191,  234,  237,  238,  244 

plugs  of,  8,  54,  58,  191,  237,  238,  246 

padded  with,  8,  54,  55,  184 

bandages,  224 

band  of,  482 

strip  of,  485,  500 

launderer’s,  495 

Lint,  8, 53-4,  57-58,  60, 96,  97,  98,  100,  101-102, 
121,  132,  180,  228,  229,  237,  246,  259,  266, 
269,  281,  300,  311,  316,  316,  359,  371,  421, 
425 
Lip,  178 

flesh  wound  in,  57,  98,  227,  228,  306,  308,  309 

Lips  of  wound,  82-83,  90-91,  94,  95,  114,  116, 
124,  194,  195,  227,  228,  233,  257,  260,  274, 
300,  309,  375,  384,  389 
Liquid  food,  184,  185 
Liver,  111,  480 
Loins,  110,  490 
London  Medical  Papyrus,  4,  5 
See  also  Medical  Papyri 

Luekhardt,  A.  B.,  108, 130, 160, 172, 182, 194, 205, 
215,  216,  255,  257,  303,  308,  312,  316,  323, 
325,  338,  342,  345,  349,  376, 407 
Lungs,  14,  84,  99,  108,  111,  346,  347,  349 
Lymphatic  glands,  364,  369 

Magic,  6, 14-15, 111-112,  126,  217,  219-220, 469, 
470,  472-487 

Magical  treatment,  69,  60,  218-220 
devices,  479,  485,  486 

Malignant  beings,  470,  472,  474,  476,  477,  479, 
480 

Mandible,  68, 74, 187-188, 275 
drill-hole  in  mental  foramen  of,  9 
ligaments  of,  9, 70,  130,  176,  179,  180,  187,  189 
articulation  of,  10,  187,  293-294 
dislocation  of,  16-17,  41,  56,  57,  58,  238,  239, 
303-304 

fracture  of,  52,  160,  235,  255,  301,  302 
manipulation  of,  238,  303,  304 
Manicure,  96 

Manipulation,  238,  303,  304,  310,  312,  344-345 
Manubrium,  68,  71,  348,  349,  369,  370,  372,  373 
joints, 

clavicular,  345 

“  Mason’s  mortar,”  60,  407,  410,  412 
Materia  medico, 

Assyrian,  2 

of  Smith  Papyrus,  9,  57,  59, 60,  374,  379-383, 
410-412,  488-489 
Mathematics, 

Egyptian,  15 
Mather,  Increase,  15 
Maxilla,  110,  243,  252 
perforation  in,  60,  126,  262 
split  in,  60,  98,  140,  265,  266 
compound  comminuted  fracture  of,  60,  98, 
157,  160,  205,  255,  267,  296 
Measures,  489,  495,  496 
Meat  as  medicament 

fresh,  9, 57-58, 59-60, 96, 97-99, 121, 132,  228, 
229,  232,  259,  266,  269,  273,  308,  311,  315, 
319,  321,  336,  371,  420 
fat,  99 
decayed,  99 

Mechanical  appliances,  8,  53-56 
Medical  literature,  1-5,  7,  9-10,  12 
Babylonian,  1 
Assyrian,  1-2 
earliest  reference  to,  3 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  585 

Medical  literature  ( cont .) 

Egyptian,  3,  4 
divine  origin,  5 
Greek,  7,  12 

“  Secret  Book  of  the  Physician,”  possibly  name 
of  Edwin  Smith  Surgical  Papyrus,  9-10 
Two  early  medical  books  quoted  in  Smith 
Papyrus : 

“Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  his  Wounds,” 
162  f. ;  with  variant  title,  “Treatise  on 
What  Pertains  to  a  Wound,”  384,  387 
“Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  the  Embalmer” 
(or  Bandager),  281  f. 

Medical  papyri,  4,  79, 86-87,  95,  98-99,  112,  129, 
135,  146,  148,  169,  285,  287,  329,  332,  340, 
368,  380,  381,  383,  387,  388,  412,  427,  475, 
489 

See  also  Smith  Papyrus,  Ebers  Papyrus, 
Hearst  Papyrus,  Berlin  Medical  Papyrus, 
London  Medical  Papyrus,  Kahun  Papyri 
Medical  terms,  10,  61-71,  88-89 
See  also  Surgical  terms 

Medicaments,  9,  54,  55-61,  97,  133,  374,  379- 
383 

Medicine, 
ancient,  1 
Babylonian,  1,  2 
Assyrian,  1-2 
legal  regulations  of,  1 
god  of,  3 
Egyptian,  3,  4 
relation  to  Greek,  16,  17 
European,  7 

distinction  between  surgery  and,  7,  9,  18,  42- 
43  57  97 

Greek,  3^  5,  7,  9,  12,  13,  14, 15-17,  64,  105 
demoniacal,  15 
oldest  science,  15 
schools  of,  17-18,  72 
Medicine  (medicaments),  139 
extemal,55-61, 97, 374,379-383,410-412, 488, 
500 

internal,  99,  184-185,  488—189 
“  Medicine  men,”  15 
Meissner,  B.,  1,  16 
Membranes 

meningeal,  12,  60,  65,  70,  130,  157,  160,  164, 
171,  172 

Meningeal  involvement,  130 
Meningeal  membranes,  164,  172 

rupture  of,  12,  60,  65,  70,  130,  157,  160,  171 
Meningitis,  130 
Menses, 

suspension  of,  487 
Menstrual  discharge,  487 
Memeptah,  106 
Meskhenet,  479 

Messengers  of  Sekhmet,  476,  484 
Meteorism,  325 

Meyer-Steineg,  63,  64 

Microscope,  471 

Milk,  as  medicament,  286,  287 

Mill-stone,  495 

Mineral  salts,  374,  379,  382 

Mineral,  as  disinfectant,  57,  262,  264-265 

Miscarriage,  285 

“  Mistress  of  the  crown,”  474 

“  Mix  ”  (prescriptions),  488,  491,  495 

Moeller,  G.,  28 

Moharb  Todrous,  24 

“Mooring  stakes,”  10,  69,  132,  134-135,  139, 
150,  161,  237,  239,  281,  289,  316,  319,  424 
Morning  barque,  474 
Mortar, 

mason’s,  60,  407,  410,  412 
Motor  cortex,  216 
Mouth, 

painful  to  open,  177,  180,  184,  187,  254,  268 

bound,  181,  198 

wound  penetrating  to,  227,  228 

discharge  from,  268 

clean  (exorcism),  483 

Mouth  of  wound,  219,  284,  313,  316,  375,  376, 
379,  384,  390,  411,  422,  424 
Movements  of  body, 
source  of  control  of,  12 
Mummy,  8 

Muscles,  13,  67,  112,  113,  268,  303 
temporal,  66,  67,  188,  189,  191,  277 
rigid,  180 
cutaneous,  257 
M.  orbicularis  oris,  308 
M.  triangularis,  312 
Muscular  articulation,  187 
Musculature, 
of  neck,  130 

Musculus  temporalis,  188 
Mustapha  Aga,  22,  75,  76 

Naburianos,  16 

N abu-rimannu,  see  Naburianos 
Nares,  244,  248 
Nasal  bone,  241,  242 

fracture  of,  52,  56,  58,  146,  157,  160,  234, 
235 

reduction  of,  239,  244,  246-247 
Nasus  extemus,  241 
Natron,  412,  491 
Natural  science, 

earliest  recorded  observations  in,  12,  15,  18 
Naville,  E.,  23 
Neck,  110 

injuries  to,  12,  34,  36 

stiffness  in,  50,  51, 127, 129-131,  137,  138,  141, 
158,  166,  178,  206,  208,  279,  280,  286,  292, 
317,  318 

softening  applications  on,  151 
ligaments  of,  181,  192 

oi.uchicago.edu 

686  GENERAL  INDEX 

Neck  (eont.) 

vertebra  of,  52,  60,  71,  88,  98,  126,  130,  149, 
160,  296,  316-317,  319,  320,  323,  324-325, 
326,  327,  328,  333,  334,  336-337,  338,  339, 
340,  341 
Necrosis,  385 
Necrotic  wound,  59,  374 
See  also  Infected  wound 
Neferirkere,  3 
Neheb-kau,  482 
Neit,  482 
Nekhbet,  474 
Nephthys,  474 
Nerves,  13,  66-67,  111 
Nervous  control, 
center  of,  12-13,  45,  50,  65-67 
Nervous  system,  12—13,  50,  66-67 
Noterhotep,  5 

New  York  Historical  Society,  21,  22,  25,  28 
Nitre,  412 

“  Northern  salt,”  379,  383,  411,  491 
Nose,  70,  85,  88,  237,  239,  241,248,  249,  253, 
260 

bridge  of,  10,  146,  235,  242 
“  column  ”  of,  10,  70,  234,  241-242,  306 
flesh  wound  in,  57,  08,  227,  228,  257 
fracture  in,  58,  146,  234-235,  245 
compound  comminuted  fracture  in,  52,  157, 
160,  252,  254,  296 
chamber  of,  245,  248 

Nostrils,  70,  110,  147,  190-191,  227,  234,  237, 
238,  241,  243,  244,  246,  251,  252,  253,  264, 
257,  259,  260 

discharge  from,  141,  158,  166,  178,  206,  208, 
234,  268,  284,  288,  290,  292 
secretions  of,  244 
Nourishment,  liquid,  184,  185 

Ocular  observations,  40 
Odor, 

of  head,  181,  196 

evil,  369,  490 
Oil,  146,  488 
“  Oily,”  376-377,  408 
Ointment,  489,  490,  492,  500 
Ointment  fat,  41 1 
Olecranon,  215 
Olfactory  observations,  41 
Onanism,  330 
Opening  of  tumors,  366 
Operation,  96,  208,  238 
Optic  nerve,  14 
Oral  cavity,  268 
Os  frontale,  152 

Osiris,  84,  220,  474,  475,  480,  482 
Ossa  nasalia,  235,  241,  242,  247,  252 
Ossification,  185 
Oxygenation,  108,  194 

“  Pain,”  135,  187,  189,  426 

“  Painful,”  177,  254,  268,  279,  288,  320,  417 

Pale, 

of  face,  182,  183,  199,  200 
Palpation,  38, 41, 56-57, 89, 92-93, 119, 127, 141, 
144,  158,  165,  177,  203,  204,  208,  226,  271 
310,  417 

Papyrus  Ebers,  see  Ebers  Papyrus 
Papyrus  Hearst,  see  Hearst  Papyrus. 

Paralysis,  12,  49,  51,  63,  70,  202,  205,  210-211, 
216,  297,  317,  323,  324,  325,  326,  339 
Paste,  492,  497 

Pathology,  2,  11-12,  112,  130-131, 146-147, 179, 
181,  189,  204-205,  206,  216,  263,  284-285, 
296-297,  316,  322-323,  324-330,  332,  336- 
337,  349,  363,  364,  367-369,  374,  376-377, 
384-388,  399-400,  403-404,  406,  407 
Peck  (measure),  489 
Pedicure,  95 
Penetration, 

of  wounds,  82,  87-89,  91-92,  94,  116,  118, 123, 
125,  127,  140,  141,  149,  158,  164,  165,  177, 

226,  227,  229,  257,  260-261,  271,  274,  283, 
284,  298-299,  306-307,  309,  310,  313,  317, 
345,  360-361,  370 

Perforation,  11,  44,  60,  62,  83,  89,  119,  124-125, 
125-126,  127,  130,  136,  146,  155,  160,  177, 

227,  262,  263,  271,  278,  279,  284,  296,  310, 
317,  369,  370 

Pest, 

incantations  against,  469-470,  472-487 
bearers  of,  470,  472,  473,  475,  476,  477 
cleansing  from,  483,  485 
Phalanges, 
proximal,  216 

Phallus,  61,  71,  323,  324,  325,  330,  332 
Pharmaceutical,  381 
Physician,  5,  70,  72,  73,  104 
in  Babylonia,  1 
in  Assyria,  1,  2 
Arad-Nanai,  1 
Egyptian,  3,  5,  9,  18 
earliest  known,  3,  9,  75 
Imhotep,  3,  9,  75 
Neterhotep,  5 
“  Secret  Book  of  the,”  10 
Greek,  3,  9,  13 
Asclepios,  3 
Sydenham,  7 

Hippocrates,  9,  14,  16,  56,  64,  303 
Erasistratos,  13,  17 
Herophilos,  13,  14,  17,  67,  106 
Apollonios,  16,  56,  303 
Uzahor-resenet,  17-18 

distinction  between  surgeon  and,  18,  42,  217 
Alexandrian,  65,  108-109 
Democritus,  64,  105 

Physiology-,  2,  9,  11-14,  72,  106,  109,  169,  170, 
251 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  687 

Pigment, 

green,  379,  382,  411 
Pilcher,  E.  J.,  106 
Piles  (haemorrhoids),  2,  221 
Pill,  394 
Pint,  489 

Plague-bearing  wind,  476 
Plantain  prescriptions,  379,  381,  383,  410,  411, 
489,  490 

Plaster,  see  Adhesive  plaster 
Platysma,  312 

Plugs,  surgical,  8,  54,  58,  191,  237,  238,  246 
Poison, 

of  snake,  475 
Pomade,  101 
Porcupine,  68,  372 

Position  of  patient,  52-53,  55,  56,  58,  60,  ISO- 
151,  184,  185,  207,  239,  266,  269,  286,  336, 
352-353,  356,  428 

Poultises,  60,  219,  220-222,  374,  379,  381,  383, 
407,  411 

Powder,  489,  496 

Preparation  of  aqueous  extract,  495-498 
Prescriptions,  87,  97,  139,  181,  186,  251,  340, 
379-383,  388,  410-113,  488,  489,  490 
Priapism,  323 
Primary  intention,  308 
Probing 
see  Palpation 
Pronated  hand,  216 

Protection  against  pest,  472,  474,  476,  479,  482 
Providence,  70,  202 
Ptolemies,  18 

Pulsation,  14,  64,  80,  93,  104,  105,  109,  113,  166, 
169,  170,  208 

Pulse,  7,  13,  41,  64,  69,  104,  113 
counting,  105,  106,  109 
Puncture,  136,  137 

Pus,  51,  173,  174,  195,  316,  364,  366,  367,  368, 
369,  376,  407,  412,  422 
drawing  out,  157 
Pustules,  221 

Quart,  489 
Quiet,  185 

Radius  (bone),  357 
Radix  nasi,  241 

Ramus,  10,  16,  68,  71,  153,  187,  188,  191,  238, 
277,  289,  293-294,  304 
Recipe-papyri,  4—5,  35,  59,  217 
Smith  Papyrus,  5-6,  42-43,  59,  217,  220,  469- 
471 

Recipes,  4,  35,  47,  111,  146,  166,  193 
in  Smith  Papyri,  5-6, 42, 59, 217, 219-220, 379, 
470,  471,  487-500 

Recovery,  96,  98,  102,  121,  132,  134,  232,  237, 
246,  259,  264,  269,  270,  273,  281,  300,  305, 

308,  311,  315,  316,  321,  336,  344,  352,  357, 
362,  371,  393,  397,  420,  421,  425,  600 
“  Redness,”  364,  367,  368,  408,  414 
Reduction 

of  bones,  16-17,  53,  55-56,  58,  234,  238,  239, 
244,  246-247,  303,  304,  342,  344,  350,  352- 
354,  356-357,  359 
Reflex  spasm,  130 
“  Relief,”  269,  270,  286,  336 
Remedies,  111,  113,  221,  224,  238,  285,  379-380, 
389-390,  410 

Retraction  of  wound  edges,  257 
Rheumatism,  1,  221,  427 
Ribs,  71,  154,  194,  373,  394-395 
fracture  of,  62,  160,  235,  255,  401-402 
dislocation  of,  60,  395-397,  398 
perforation  of,  126 
sprain  in,  235,  391-393,  394-395 
Rochemonteix,  M.  do  C.,  Ill 
Rolls  of  linen,  8,  55,  56,  57,  58,  228,  229,  234, 
237,  239-240,  244,  246,  300,  301,  344 
Rubrics,  29 
Rupture, 

of  tissue,  52,  58,  83,  157,  235,  261,  268,  274, 
278,  285,  342,  345-346,  349,  357-358,  360- 
361,401,402 

of  meningeal  membranes,  12,  60,  65,  70,  130, 
157,  160,  171 

Sais 

Medical  schools  at,  17-18 
Salicin,  9,  59,  374 
Salix,  59,  374 
Scalp  trouble,  383 
Scalp  wounds,  57,  59 
Scalpels,  53 
Scapula,  215 

Schaefer,  H„  18,  29,  61,  107,  110 
Schone,  H.,  16 

Schools  of  medicine,  17-18,  72 
Science, 
in  Egypt,  15 

Scientific  foundations,  17-18 
Scientific  observation,  7,  10,  12,  14-15,  18,  43, 
47,  49-51,  62,  72,  160,  206,  212,  323,  338 
“  Secret  Book  of  the  Physician,”  10,  65,  107-108 
“  Secret  chamber,”  10 
Secretions,  244,  316,  376,  399,  404,  422 
Seeing, 

painful,  320 

Seizer-of-thc-Great-One,  474 
“  Seizures  ”  in  legs,  499 
Sekenenre,  126 
Sekhem,  5 

Sekhmet,  472,  474,  477,  480,  482,  484,  486 
priests  of,  104 
messengers  of,  470,  484 
diseased  ones  of,  484 

oi.uchicago.edu 

588  GENERAL  INDEX 

Self-pollution,  330 
Semen,  111 

Seminal  emission,  12,  63 
See  also  emissio  seminis 
Sened,  5 
Sennacherib,  1 
Sept  um,  70,  234,  242 
Serpent,  480 

Sesquicarbonate  of  sodium,  412,  491 
Sethe,  K.,  3,  111 

Setting  of  bones,  see  Reduction  of  bones 
Sexual  organ,  326 
Shoulder,  110 

flesh  wound  in,  36,  62,  68,  98,  149,  227,  229, 
416-423 

-fork,  85,  206,  214,  216,  216 
manipulation  with,  360,  352,  353,  356,  357 
-blades,  352,  356,  417,  418 
Shrine 
of  god,  109 

Shudder,  141,  144,  177,  284,  318,  370,  392 

“  Sick,”  129 

“  Sickle-bone,”  347-348 

Sickness,  474,  475,  476 

Sieve,  496 

Sinew,  67 

Sinus,  10,  248 

Sitting  posture  (as  treatment),  52-53,  55,  56,  58, 
60,  150-151,  184,  185,  207,  266,  269,  286, 
336 

Skin,  86,  185-186,  203,  376,  414,  491,  498 
Skull,  70,  86-87,  92 

Compound  comminuted  fracture  of,  12,  62,  66, 
60,  70,  92,  130,  146,  155,  156,  157,  160,  162, 
164,  165, 171,  203,  204,  208,  209 
perforation  of,  68,  70,  92,  119,  125-126,  127, 
130  136  227 

split  in,  58,’  70,  92, 130, 140-141, 146, 149,  150, 
152-153,  165 
bones  of,  79,  89,  116 

sutures  of,  62,  65,  60,  70,  130,  149,  155,  160, 
177,  181,  186-186 
shell  of,  141, 152-153, 185, 186, 218 
meningeal  membranes  of,  12,  60,  65,  70,  130, 
157,  160,  164,  171,  172 
brain  of,  164,  165,  171 
Smash,  136 

See  also  Fractures,  oompound  comminuted 
Smith,  Edwin,  20-26,  28,  75-76 
Smith,  G.  Elliot,  8,  53,  66 
Smith,  Leonora,  22,  28 
Smith  Papyrus, 

organization  of  material,  5-6,  19,  29,  469-471, 
492 

date  of,  19,  26-29,  693-595 
history  of,  19-25 
provenience  of,  25 

connection  between  Ebers  Papyrus  and,  22- 
25,106-108,471 

physical  condition  of,  20,  25,  28,  75-77 
handwriting  of,  19,  28-29,  492 
incantations  and  recipes,  5-6,  19, 469-507 
surgical  treatise,  6-9, 10, 11-14, 19, 28-29, 33- 
466 

Snake-poison,  475 

Sodium,  9,  59,  60,  374,  379,  411,  412,  491 
Softening  applications,  151,  180,  286,  382 
Sole  (of  foot),  204,  210 
Solvent,  489 

Sores,  84,  221,  366,  367,  368,  404,  407,  412 
“  Sower,” 

“  the  escaped  of  the,”  482 
Spalteholz,  W.,  35 

Spear,  wounds  made  by,  11,  83,  92,  126,  369 
Speechlessness,  50-51, 63, 254, 269, 286,  290, 292, 
296-297,  339 
Spina  frontalis,  235 
Spinal  column,  426 

center  of  nervous  control,  12-13,  66-67 
injury  to,  36,  425-426 
Spinal  cord 
involvement,  323,  325 
Spinal  vertebra,  425-426 
Spine  (of  patient),  66,  67, 425,  427 
Spine-roast,  394-395 
Spittle,  178 
Spleen,  111 

Splints,  8,  54-55,  190-191 

“  of  linen,”  8, 65, 66,  57, 58,  190-191,  229,  234, 
237,  239,  244,  352,  353-354,  357,  359 
cartonage,  8,  65,  190 
bodies  wearing,  8,  53,  190 
soft,  8,  55,  56,  57,  68,  228,  229,  234,  237,  239- 
240,  244,  246,  300,  301,  344 
See  also  Brace 

Split,  44-45, 52,  58,  60, 62, 89, 124-125, 130, 157, 
271,  310,  361 

in  maxilla,  60,  98,  146,  263,  265,  266 
in  skull,  58, 70, 92, 130, 140-141, 146, 150, 152- 
153,  166 

in  temporal  bone,  146,  155,  287,  288 
in  arm,  146,  361-362 

Sprain,  60,  71,  98,  319,  320,  322-323,  391-393, 
394,  425-426 
Squama,  162,  185,  223 
frontalis,  218 
Stern,  L.,  110 
Stemo-costal  articulations, 
sprain  in,  60,  391-393,  394 
dislocation  in,  395-397,  398 
Sternum,  68,  71,  85,  153-154,  342,  344,  349,  373 
injuries  to,  35,  36 
perforation  of,  60,  369,  370 
ribs  of,  71,  154,  160,  194,  235,  255,  391-395, 
395-397,  398,  399 
articulation  with,  348 
manubrium  of,  369,  370,  372,  373 
Stibium,  489 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  589 

Stiffness,  427 

in  neck,  50,  51,  127,  129-131,  137,  138,  141, 
158,  166,  178,  206,  208,  279,  280,  286,  292, 
317,318 
of  Limbs,  99 
of  muscles,  112 

of  ligaments,  187,  192-193,  277 
of  joints,  215 

Stitching,  surgical,  8,  54, 65,  57-58,  83,  132,  133, 
226-231,  232-233,  257,  258,  259,  297,  298, 
299,  200,  301,  306,  308,  309,  312,  313,  416, 
417,  421,  422 
used  on  mummy,  8 
Stomach,  483 
Suction,  184 
Sudhoff,  53,  64 

“Suffer”  with  (or  “in”),  127,  129,  138,  141, 
158,  166,  178,  182,  206,  208,  280,  286,  292, 
318,  392,  396,  399,  417,  426,  487,  499 
Superstition,  69,  213,  217,  220 
Supports  of  brick,  8,  65,  150-151,  184,  185 
of  linen  padding,  229 
Suppositories,  221,  325,  394 
Suppurating  tumor,  369 
Suppuration,  8,  56,  174,  416 
Surgeon,  72,  73,  190 
in  Babylonia,  1,  2 
in  Assyria,  1 

as  natural  scientist,  12,  18 
see  Physician 
Surgery, 
ancient,  1 
Babylonian,  2 
Egyptian, 

see  Smith  Papyrus 

distinction  between  medicine  and,  7, 9,  18, 42- 
43, 57, 97 

legal  regulations  of,  1 
history  of,  230 

Surgical  devices,  8,  53-56,  69,  184,  189-191, 
222,  224,  238,  239,  240,  316,  352-353,  365, 
366 

Surgical  instruments,  8-9,  18,  53 
Surgical  terms,  92-93,  140-141,  156-168,  204, 
211,  226-230,  235,  237,  238-239,  254-255, 
257-258,  274,  322,  328-329,  336-337,  340, 
396-397 

Surgical  treatise,  6,  9-10,  72 
see  Smith  Papyrus 
Surgical  treatment,  53-57 
Suture,  surgical, 
see  Stitching,  surgical 
Sutures  of  skull,  70,  162,  176,  185-186,  247 
perforation  of,  62,  55,  60,  130,  149,  166,  160, 
177,  181,  185 

Swabs,  surgical,  8,  54,  67,  58,  124,  190-191,  237, 
246,  247,  259,  290,  295 
Sweat,  70,  181,  192 

Swelling,  112,  141,  145-147,  154,  157,  158,  159, 

194,  203,  226,  234,  237,  245,  249,  263,  266, 
269,  288,  314,  329,  349,  362,  364,  367,  368, 
369,  377,  382,  384,  395,  396,  399,  404,  406, 
408,  413,  417 

Sword  wounds,  11,  82,  92,  118,  140 
Sycamore  leaves,  60,  374,  407,  41 1 
Sydenham,  7 
Symptoms,  38-39,  63 

Tactile  observations,  41,  64 

Tampons,  8,  54,  190-191,  234,  237,  238,  244 

Tears,  284 

Teeth,  1,  9,  53,  100,  181,  182,  341,  368 
Temple,  70,  110,  223,  272,  275-277,  293 
perforation  in,  50,  60,  126,  130,  160,  205,  278, 
279,  283,  284 

flesh  wound  in,  59,  98,  271 
split  in,  52,  140,  146,  149,  156,  205,  287,  288 
compound  comminuted  fracture  in,  51,  52, 
130,  157,  160,  238,  290 

Temporal  bone,  10,  68,  71,  153,  187,  188,  271, 
277 

perforation  of,  50,  60,  126,  130,  160,  205,  278, 
279,  283,  284,  296 

compound  comminuted  fracture  of,  51, 52, 130, 
157,  160,  238, 289-290,  296 
split  in,  52,  140,  146,  149,  155,  205,  287,  288 
Temporal  muscle,  65,  67,  188,  189,  191,  277 
Tendons,  13,  349 
Terminology,  10,  62-71,  88-89 
archaic,  74 
Testicles,  111 

Tetanus,  9,  49,  62,  54, 55,  60,  70,  176,  179, 189 
Therapeutic,  9,  57-60 
Thermometer,  386 
Thorax,  111,  342,  345,  372 
Throat,  88,  347,  348-349 
injuries  to,  34,  36,  57,  98,  149,  227,  229,  261, 
312-313,  314 

Throbbing,  166,  168-169,  170,  208 
Thutmose  I,  28 
Thutmose  III,  106 
Time  measurer,  106 
Tip  of  an  organ,  85,  211 
Tissue,  253 

soft,  67,  82,  91,  133,  257,  270,  272,  277,  299, 
317,  342,  349,  357,  360,  361,  363,  373,  397, 
400,  415 
soreness  of,  57 
swelling  of,  147 

rupture  of,  52,  58,  83,  157,  235,  261,  268,  274, 
278,  285,  342,  346-346,  349,  357-358,  360- 
361,  401,  402 
cartilaginous,  234,  241 
bony,  252 
diseased,  263,  385 
stiffened,  382 
Title,  9-10 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX 

590 

Titles  of  cases,  37-38,  78-89,  118,  125-126,  140, 
156-168,  164,  170-177,  203,  217-218,  225, 
234,  245,  252-253,  257,  263,  265,  267,  271, 
278,  283,  287,  290,  297  ,  301,  303,  306,  309- 
310,  313,  317,  319,  324,  333,  338,  343,  350, 
354,  358,  361,  363,  370,  375,  391-392,  396, 
401, 403, 407, 416-417, 425-426 
Toes,  99,  111,221 
tips  of,  85,  210 
Toilet,  487 
pomade,  101 
preparations,  490-498 
Toothache,  1 
Top  of  an  organ,  85 
Trachea,  349 
Treat,  95-96,  99-100 

“  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  the  Embalmer,” 
103,  281 

“  Treatise  on  What  Pertains  to  His  Wounds,” 
61,  63,  162-163,  384 

Treatment,  6,  7-9,  51-61,  96-102, 112,  121-123, 
132-136,  149-151,  161,  171,  179-180,  183- 
185,  207,  218-224,  231-233,  237-240,  240- 
247,  248,  259,  264-265,  266,  269-270,  273, 
281,  286-287,  289,  300,  305,  308,  311-312, 
315,  316,  319,  321,  335-336,  344-345,  351- 
354,  366-357,  359,  362,  366-367,  371,  374, 
378-383,  393,  397,  405,  407,  409-413,  420- 
421,  424,  425,  428,  488-490,  499-500 
in  examination,  7, 42, 67 
mechanical,  7,  8,  160>-15l 
magical,  69,  60,  218-220 
“  wound  treatment,”  01,  100,  366,  367,  407, 
412-413 
for  swelling,  140 
Tremble,  112 
Trepanning,  56 

Trituration,  210,  340,  379,  410,  411,  412,  491, 
500 
Tube, 

for  feeding,  184 
Tuberculous,  407 

Tumors,  30, 43, 62,  54, 55,  71,  149,  363-369, 403- 
406 

Ulcers,  43,  64,  55,  363,  308 
Vina,  215,  367 

Unconsciousness,  3,  88,  323,  325,  339 

Urinary  troubles,  99,  382 

Urine 

of  patient,  66,  71,  323,  324,  327,  331-332 
of  sheep,  70,  181,  196 
Usephais,  5 
Uzahor-resenet,  17-18 

Vagina,  226,  332,  368 
Verdict 

one  (1),  47,  55,  94,  95-96,  102,  120,  131,  231, 

236,  245,  258,  264,  266,  273,  280,  300,  305, 
307,  311,  321,  335,  344,  345-346,  351,  356, 
362,  365,  371,  377,  393,  397,  409,  420,  428 
two  (2)47,  52,  60,  102,  148-149,  155,  179,  201, 
288,  315,  318,  359,  405,  423 
three  (3),  6,  47,  52,  60, 102,  159-161, 170, 182, 
189,  206,  209,  256,  267,  269,  286,  292,  302, 
327,  339,  346,  360, 402 

in  Smith  Papyrus,  46-48, 95-96, 148-149, 159- 
160,  217,  365 

in  other  medical  papyri,  47,  95,  148,  210,  365 
Vertebra,  328 
cervical,  88 

dislocation  of,  52, 71, 160, 323, 324-325, 326, 
327 

impacted  fracture  of,  52,  71,  160,  296,  337- 
339,  340-341 

sprain  in,  60,  98,  319,  320 
perforation  of,  60,  98, 126,  130, 149, 316-317 
displacement  of,  60, 71, 98, 333, 334, 336-337 
spinal 

sprain  in,  55,  425—426 
Vessels 

of  body,  13,  14,  104,  108,  109-113,  244,  349, 
475 

Veterinary  papyrus,  4,  296 

Vulture  feathers  (in  exorcisms),  472,  476 

Vulva,  101,  332,  368,  487,  488 

Walk, 

shufflingly,  204,  210-211,  216 
War, 

Wounds  received  in,  11,  82,  92,  126,  140,  338, 
369 

Water,  108,  111,  407,  410,  495,  497 
Watery,  376,  381 
Weak  place,  see  Fontanel 
r  Weaknesses,"1  498 
Wennofer,  6 
Weshptah,  3 
Westcar  papyrus,  22,  29 
White  One,  474 
Williams,  Caroline  Ransom,  21 
Willow  bark,  9,  374,  380 
leaves,  59,  60,  374,  379,  380 
Wind, 

pest-laden,  470,  472,  473,  475,  476,  477 
(in  meteorism),  325 
Winnow,  495 
Womb,  182 

Wood  (in  exorcisms),  478,  485 
Worm, 

existing  in  water,  10,  251 
“  of  blood,”  246,  251,  259 
Worms,  100 

Wounds,  81-84,  274, 279,  360, 366,  367,  368, 407, 
causes  of,  11,  43,  92,  126,  140,  212-213,  317, 
337-338,  339,  369 

oi.uchicago.edu 

GENERAL  INDEX  591 

Wounds  (coni.) 

infected,  59,  60,  262,  263,  374 
“  diseased,”  71,  262,  263,  375,  384-385 
gaping,  82-83,  88,  90-92,  95,  114,  118,  123, 
124,  125,  127,  140,  141,  149,  155,  156,  158, 
164,  165,  177,  227-229,  233,  261,  309-310, 
312-313,  316-317,  415,  417-419,  421 
flesh,  43,  52,  54,  55,  57,  58,  59,  81,  82-83,  88, 
97-98, 118, 227-229, 256, 257, 271,  272, 297- 
298,  306,  308-309,  310, 415, 417-425 
mouth  of,  219,  284,  313,  316,  375,  376,  379, 
384,  390,  411,  422,  424 

lips  of,  82-83, 90-91, 94,  95, 114, 1 16, 124, 194, 
195,  227,  228,  233,  257,  260,  274,  300,  309, 
375,  384,  389 

no  external  evidence  of,  209 

discolorations  of,  263,  266 
secretion,  316 

“  Wound  treatment,”  61,  100,  366,  367,  407, 
412-413 

Wrinkles,  173,  174,  492,  498 
Year,  484 

pest  of,  470,  472,  473,  475,  476,  478 
"  yield  of,”  480,  482 
“  followers  of,”  480 
“  life  of,”  482 
Yield  of  year,  480,  482 
Ymrw,  same  as  imru,  q.  v. 

I  Zygoma,  60,  243,  263,  265,  267,  277,  296 
Zygomatic  process,  277 

oi.uchicago.edu 

LIST  OF  ABBREVIATED  BOOK  TITLES 

Diimichen.  Geogr.  Inschr. 
Diimichen.  Hist.  Inschr. 
Erman.  Reden. 

Gauthier.  Inscr.  didicatoire. 
Leemans.  Mon.  fun. 

Mitth.  Orient.  Samml. 

Pap.  Anast.  Ill  and  IV. 

Pap.  judic.  de  Turin. 

Piehl.  Inscr. 

Pyr. 

Recueil  de  trav. 

Rochera.  Edfou. 

Rosellini.  Mon.  civ. 

de  Rouge.  Inscr.  kiir. 

Uric. 

Zeitschrift. 

Geographische  Inschriften  altdgyptischer  Denbndler. 
Historische  Inschriften  altdgyptischer  Denkmdler. 

Reden,  Rufe  und  Lieder  auf  Graberbildem  des  alten 
Reiches.  (Akad.  d.  Wise.,  Berlin.  Phil. -hist.  Klasse. 
Abhandlungen.  1918,  no.  15.) 

La  grande  inscription  didicatoire  d’Abydos. 

Monumens  igyptiens  du  Musee  d’antiquitis  des  Pays-Bas 
d  Leide.  III.  Monumens  funiraires. 

Berlin,  Staatliche  Museen.  Mittheilungen  aus  den  orien- 
talischen  Sammlungen.  IX.  SteindorS.  Grab f unde  des 
Mittleren  Reichs.  II.  Der  Sarg  des  Sebk-o. 

Papyrus  Anastasi  III  and  IV.  Select  papyri  in  the 
hieratic  character  from  the  collections  of  the  British 
Museum.  [Part  1,  No.  2]  1842. 

Deveria,  Theodule.  Le  papyrus  judiciaire  de  Turin. 

(Extrait  de  la  Bibliothbque  egyptologique,  t.  V.) 
Inscriptions  hiiroglyphiques  recueillies  en  Europe  et  en 
Egypte. 

Sethe,  K.  H.  Die  altdgyptischen  Pyramidentexte. 
Recueil  de  travaux  relatifs  d  la  philologie  et  d  Varchiologie 
igyptiennes  et  assyriennes. 

Rochemonteix,  M.  de.  Le  temple  d’Edfou.  (Mdmoires 
publics  par  les  membres  de  la  Mission  archeologique 
franjaise  au  Caire,.t.  10-11.) 

I  monument i  dell’  Egitto  e  della  Nubia,  t.  2  :  Monu- 
menti  civili. 

Inscriptions  hiiroglyphiques  copiies  en  Egypte. 

Urkunden  des  dgyptischen  Altertums,  hrsg.  von  Georg 
Steindorff. 

I.  Sethe,  K.  H.  “  Urkunden  des  alten  Reichs.” 

III.  Schafer,  H.  “  Urkunden  der  alteren  Athiopen- 
konige.” 

IV.  Sethe,  K.  H.  “  Urkunden  der  18.  Dynastie.” 

V.  Grapow,  H.  “  Religiose  Urkunden.” 

Zeitschrift  fiir  agyplische  Sprache  und  Altertumskunde. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

ADDENDA 

1.  The  Date  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Surgical  Papyrus. 

After  the  discussion  of  the  date  of  this  surgical  treatise  was  in  print  (pp.  28-29), 
my  friend  Professor  Devaud  has  recalled  my  attention  to  the  question  of  the  date  of 
this  papyrus  as  a  manuscript,  especially  in  view  of  the  orthographic  criteria  which  he 
published  in  his  recent  valuable  treatise1  on  the  dating  of  Egyptian  papyri,  and  which 
had  unfortunately  escaped  my  notice.  The  orthography  of  Late  Egyptian  writing  has 
long  been  used  as  a  basis  for  recognizing  the  late  date  of  Nineteenth-  and  Twentieth- 
Dynasty  papyri.  In  this  useful  essay  of  Professor  Devaud  he  has  carried  the  study  of 
such  orthographic  indications  back  through  the  Eighteenth  to  the  Twelfth  Dynasty. 
By  a  careful  examination  of  the  writing  of  fifty-six  selected  words  in  thirty  papyri, 
forming  a  chronological  sequence  from  the  Twelfth  to  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  he  has 
furnished  new  criteria  for  dating  hieratic  documents  belonging  to  this  general  period — 
the  period  of  our  papyrus. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  these  new  orthographic  criteria  at  once  place  our 
papyrus  in  the  same  general  period  indicated  by  the  palaeographic  evidence,  as  already 
discussed  above  (pp.  25-29), — that  is,  in  the  Westcar-Ebers-Hearst  group  of  papyri. 
For  the  assignment  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  to  this  general  group,  the  palaeo¬ 
graphic  and  orthographic  evidence  are  therefore  in  complete  agreement.  The  question 
at  once  arises,  however,  whether  the  new  orthographic  criteria  will  enable  us  to  determine 
the  date  of  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  within  narrower  limits  and  to  place  it  with  certainty 
before  or  after  the  Papyrus  Ebers.  The  evidence  follows. 

Of  Professor  Devaud’s  fifty-six  test  words  only  a  little  over  one-fourth  are  found  in 
the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus,  and  unfortunately  only  a  small  proportion  of  these  furnish 
any  indications  regarding  the  narrower  limits  just  mentioned.  These  words  are  : 

No.  50, 2  is  a  dual  writing  occurring  only  subsequent  to  Papyrus  Ebers.  It 

occurs  but  once  in  the  Smith  Papyrus  (X  13).  Of  the  other  six  occurrences  of  this 
dual,  two  are  written  — (XVII  17  ;  XXII 14)  in  the  adverb  hr  'ivy,  which  Devaud 
writes  me  is  not  to  be  included  in  these  dating  criteria.  The  remaining  four  havo 
which  is  an  archaic  writing  not  included  in  Devaud’s  list.  Against  four  archaic  writings 
the  sole  occurrence  of  one  post-Ebers  writing  has  little  weight. 

No.  51 ,3  ^  ,,  so  written  very  often  in  Papyrus  Smith.  In  Ebers  and  earlier  it  is 

usually  written  without  \.  This  might  indicate  that  our  papyrus  follows  Ebers,  were 

1  Eugene  Devaud  :  L'dge  dee  papyri  igypliena  hidratiquee.  Paris,  1924. 

2  The  numbers  are  those  of  D&vaud’s  publication. 

3  The  use  of  a  hieratic  sign  resembling  ^  for  the  bee  in  hyt  “  honey  ”  is  common  in  both  Ebers 
and  Smith,  and  has  no  bearing  on  the  date.  This  bird-like  sign  may  be  another  hieratic  form  for  ; 
but  for  the  sake  of  distinction  it  has  been  transliterated  as  in  these  volumes. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

594  ADDENDA 

it  not  for  the  fact  that  \  in  this  word  does  occur  also  before  Ebers,  as  cited  by  Devaud 
from  the  Carnarvon  Tablet  (o.  c.,  p.  8*). 

No.  52,  'j  I  f,  °  (  ,  occurs  once  in  Papyrus  Smith.  The  use  of  £  in  this  word  is  not 
habitual  until  post-Ebers  documents  ;  but  it  is  found  as  early  as  the  Middle  Kingdom 
in  one  document,  viz.,  the  Shipwreck  (see  Devaud,  o.  c.,  p.  8*). 

No.  54,  with  the  determinative  ^  is  unknown  before  Papyrus  Hearst.  It 

is  significant  that  its  sole  occurrence  in  Papyrus  Smith  (XXI  20)  is  not  in  the  Surgical 
Treatise  but  in  the  recipes  on  the  verso,  in  the  appendix  by  a  second  scribe,  presumably 
later.  Otherwise  Papyrus  Smith  employs  I]—,  the  form  appearing  in  Papyrus  Ebers 
and  earlier,  or  the  exceptional  form  (j — (once)- 

The  above  four  writings  comprise  all  the  orthographic  evidence  pointing  towards 
a  post-Ebers  date.  We  must  place  with  the  above  evidence  the  following  counter¬ 
indications. 

No.  5,  found  once  in  Papyrus  Smith  (XVIII 4),  occurs  only  in  the  Twelfth 

Dynasty  or  earlier.  Otherwise,  in  Papyrus  Prisse  and  later,  the  phonetic  elements 
before  $5  are  not  employed,  and  had  begun  to  disappear  as  early  as  Ptahhotep,  L  1 
(see  Devaud,  o.c.,pp.  7-8  and  1*).  Ebers  uses  without  the  phonetic  elements  preceding. 

No.  15,  *$.  (also  with  ^),  appearing  twice  in  Papyrus  Smith,  is  an  early  form, 

like  No.  5  just  cited,  written  with  phonetic  elements  first.  This  form  is  found  only  in 
Papyrus  Prisse  and  earlier.  After  Prisse,  beginning  with  the  Thirteenth  Dynasty 
(Kahun  Papyri),  the  word  is  written  with  the  ideogram  first  and  the  phonetic 

elements  following.  Ebers  has  this  form,  and  the  earlier  form  in  Papyrus  Smith  (as 
also  in  the  case  of  No.  5  above)  indicates  that  Smith  is  earlier  than  Ebers. 

No.  88,  p^(j  ^j),  is  a  form  occurring  once  in  Papyrus  Smith  (IX  19),  and  again  written 
with  ~  (XX  16).  The  form  without  ~  is  the  invariable  writing  in  the  Thirteenth 
Dynasty  Kahun  Papyri  and  earlier.  In  Papyrus  Westcar  and  later  it  is  habitually 
written  This  is  also  the  usual  writing  in  Papyrus  Ebers,  although  the  form 

without  «“>  is  not  entirely  unknown  in  Ebers. 

Summing  up  the  orthographic  evidence,  we  find  seven  out  of  Devaud’s  convenient 
list  of  words  which  have  some  significance  for  the  date  of  our  papyrus.  Turning  first  to 
tho  possible  indications  of  post-Ebers  date,  we  find  that  two  of  the  seven  words  listed 
above  exhibit  writings  which  are  usually  post-Ebers  (Nos.  51  and  52) ;  but  occurrences 
of  both  of  these  forms  are  found  earlier,  as  shown  in  Devaud’s  table  (o.  c.,  p.  8*).  They 
are  therefore  not  unequivocally  post-Ebers  forms.  Two  more  of  the  above  list  of  seven 
are  actually  found  only  in  post-Ebers  manuscripts  :  one  occurrence  of  the  determinative 
^  with  (j=  (XXI 20)  and  one  occurrence  of  the  dual  writing  1 1.  The  single  occurrence 
of  the  former  is  in  the  (presumably  later)  magical  melanges  on  the  verso,  and  the  latter 
is  one  writing  among  seven  occurrences  of  the  word,  the  remaining  six  being  either  as 
in  Ebers  or  archaic  and  older  than  Ebers. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

ADDENDA  595 

Over  against  this  equivocal  orthographic  evidence  for  a  post-Ebers  date,  we  find 
three  writings  of  words  in  the  above  list  of  seven  (Nos.  5,  once ;  15,  twice ;  and  88, 
once),  two  of  which  are  not  only  older  than  Ebers,  but  are  not  found  later  than  the 
Middle  Kingdom.  The  scantiness  of  this  orthographic  evidence  as  a  whole  weakens 
its  force,  but  if  it  is  of  any  weight  at  all  it  points  rather  towards  a  pre-Ebers  date  and 
two  of  the  last  three  writings  would  even  fit  a  pre-Westcar  date.  In  any  case  these 
slight  orthographic  data  do  not  weaken  the  palaeographic  evidence  discussed  above 
(pp.  25-29)  that  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus  was  written  somewhat  earlier  than  the 
Papyrus  Ebers,  and  possibly  earlier  than  the  Papyrus  Westcar. 

2.  Additional  Textual  Notes. 

I  9,  h'ty  (p.  108).  This  writing  with  instead  of  is  of  course  not 

customary  in  hieratic,  but  a  comparison  of  the  first  preserved  sign  in  1.  9  (Vol.  II,  PI.  I) 
with  the  A’-sign  as  found  close  by  in  1.  7  and  (directly  under  this  example)  again  in  1.  8, 
shows  clearly  that  we  cannot  regard  the  first  preserved  sign  in  1.  9  as  The  top  of 

h >  in  11.  7  and  8  is  totally  different  from  that  of  the  sign  in  1.  9.  On  the  other  hand 
this  first  preserved  sign  in  1. 9  has  the  exact  form  of  |,  for  example  in  |™  in  II 11  (see 
Yol.  II,  PI.  II,  1. 11).  The  evidence  for  the  reading  therefore,  seems  to  be  good. 

On  the  reading  hHy  for  see  Sethe,  Zeitschrift,  89  (1901),  p.  185 ;  and  D6vaud 

( Sphinx ,  XIII,  pp.  98-100). 

The  following  notes  and  references  are  due  to  Devaud : 

II 22,  gg  x  (pp.  165  and  166).  On  the  reading,  Devaud  calls  attention  to  the 
proper  name  written  (Eleventh  Dynasty  Stela  in  the  British  Museum, 

Am.  Journal  of  Semitic  Lang.,  XXXII,  17)  and  also  (Middle  Kingdom 

Stela,  Mus.  Guimet  C  6). 

Ill  16,  <r  t  (PP*  186,  187  f.).  An  interesting  new  example  of  the  meaning 

“  anus  ”  is  found  in  a  Middle  Kingdom  Assiut  text :  “  I  eat  with  my  mouth,  I  defecate 
with  my  Vf  ”  (Chassinat-Palanque,  Fouilles  d’Assiout,  p.  100).  It  is  important  to 
note  that  V*f  is  here  written  with  animal  buttocks  as  determinative. 

III  17,  ~  (p.  189).  Devaud  states  that  he  has  a  number  of  examples  of  this 

idiom  in  which  it  often  seems  to  mean  “  change,  modify,  alter.”  These  references  are  : 
de  Morgan,  Catalogue  des  Monuments,  III,  245  (Ombos) ;  ibid.,  Ill,  19  (Ombos) ; 
Rochem.,  Edfou,  II,  260, 11 ;  Lepsius,  Denkmdler,  Text  TV,  p.  118  ;  Mariette,  DenMrah, 
II,  25  ;  Ny  Carlsberg  E  70 ;  Amelineau,  Nouvelles  fouilles,  pp.  161  and  292  ;  Berlin 
6910  ( Zeitschrift ,  II,  68,  27).  The  references  have  not  been  verified. 

IV  2,  (p.  197).  Compare  the  French  “ boite  du  crdne,”  and  possibly 

Coptic  Mt  in  mithAji*  “  skull,”  e.  g.,  Judges,  9,  58. 

VIII  10  (p.  291).  Compare  also  the  obviously  related  noun  (Zauber- 

spriiche  4,  1;  Pap.  Mag.  Vatican  4,  7;  Pap.  Leide  848,  v°.  2,  4;  11,  10)  and 

oi.uchicago.edu 

596  ADDENDA 

^  (Pap.  Boulaq  7,  2,  2;  cf.  Maspero,  Pap.  Louvre,  p.  60),  which  also  means 

“  chin 

XI  22  and  XV  4,  w  ^  „  (p.  848).  Compare  also  (Sinuhe,  B.  274),  presumably  the 
same  as  the  later  rdf  of  Israel  Stela  6 ;  Pap.  Anast.  I,  24,  5 ;  Magical  Pap.  Harris, 
verso,  A,  6 ;  etc.  Important  is  Devaud’s  observation,  that  in  Proverbs  6,  35,  O'pfc.e 
niteqtto'Y'rq  is  parallel  with  oy^e  qitaJKoAiwit  in  the  liturgic  text.  no*yTq  is 
thus  identical  with  fewA  “  loosen,”  exactly  the  meaning  also  disclosed  in  Pap.  Smith. 

XXI  18  (p.  497).  Note  also  the  contrast  between  “moist  grapes”, 

(B)  oy\\o\i  ri£H  n\wH,  and  “  dried  grapes  ”,  o'y^Aujoio-y,  in  Numbers  6,  8; 
and  likewise  between  “the  green  (juicy,  moist)  tree”  muje  ctA.hr,  and  “the 
dried”  neTUjo'Ytoo'y,  in  Luke  23,  81.  In  these  two  passages  Aom  and  Ahk 
evidently  represent  the  same  root  as  our  nhwt ,  “  moisture  ”,  and  Horner  renders 
ctAhr,  “  lit.  moist  ”.  The  Old  Egyptian  verb  corresponding  to  our  noun  nhwt 
seems  to  have  been  lost,  or  has  escaped  notice. 

8.  Discovery  of  a  Single  Example  of  Ancient  Egyptian  Trepanning. 

The  statement  (p.  56)  that  no  Egyptian  bodies  thus  far  exhumed  show  any  traces  of 
the  practice  of  trepanning  must  now  be  modified.  Dr.  Ales  Ilrdlifika  of  the  United 
States  National  Museum,  in  a  letter  dated  May  22nd,  1929,  has  kindly  reported  to  me 
the  discovery  of  a  trepanned  skull  taken  from  one  of  the  “deep  pits  at  Lisht”.  He 
further  states  that  it  “  belonged  undoubtedly  to  one  of  the  nobler  families  of  the  Xllth 
Dynasty”.  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  HrdliSka  for  a  photograph  of 
this  unique  specimen.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  trepanning  was  known  to  the 
ancient  Egyptians,  but  was  apparently  very  rarely  practised,  if  we  may  judge  by  the 
rarity  of  surviving  examples. 

CORRIGENDA 

P.  76,  last  paragraph,  1.  1.  For  “  Plate  I A  ”,  read  “  Plate  I  ”. 

P.  77,  third  paragraph,  1.  8.  For  “  Plate  I A  ”,  read  "  Plate  II  ”. 

P.  78,  first  paragraph,  line  5.  For  “  56  cm.”,  read  "  43  to  45  cm.” 

P.  78,  first  paragraph,  line  6.  For  “  Vol.  II,  1  b  ”,  read  “  Vol.  II,  pp.  xi  f.” 

P.  81,  third  paragraph,  head  of  fourth  line,  insert  alphabetic  n  in  wbnw  (VIII 18). 
P.  181  (I  21),  in  the  verdict.  Enclose  the  first  (j  in  brackets. 

P.  182,  (I  28),  in  mht,  enclose  m  in  brackets. 

P.  158  (II 18).  For  read 

P.  162  (II  17).  In  dnn-t  (first  time),  insert  stroke  after  a  and  before  « _ 

ADDITIONAL  CORRIGENDA 
May  25,  1930 

P.  11,  for  “PI.  I,”  read  “Vol.  I,  PI.  II.” 

P.  475,  in  hieroglyphic  text  of  XVIII 9,  in  “cn£,”  delete 
second  “n.” 

P.  493,  in  hieroglyphic  text  XXI  14,  in  “pr't”  third 
plural  stroke,  broken  off  in  press,  should  be  inserted. 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  I 

Fig.  1.  Egyptian  Mandible  of  the  Old  Kingdom  (about  3000-2500  b.c.) 

In  addition  to  the  mental  foramen  are  two  borings  which  w-ore  made  by  the  Egyptian  surgeon  to  drain 
an  abscess  below  the  first  molar.  (Photograph  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.  E.  A.  Ilooton,  Oral  Surgery  in 
Egypt  during  the  Old  Empire  (Harvard  African  Studies  I),  pi.  I).  Compare  infra,  p.  33. 

Fig.  2.  Middle  Kingdom  Egyptian  Battle  Axes  (about  2000  b.c.) 

The  hafting  thongs  arc  modern.  Tho  longer  blade  is  10|  inches  long,  and  well  able  to  produco  the  head  wounds  described 
in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus.  Compare  Commentary  on  Case  4  and  sec  Fig.  3,  next  plate. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  II 

Figs.  3  and  4.  Sword  cuts  in  Egyptian  Skulls  of  a  century  or  two  before  tub  Christian  Era 
In  Fig.  3  (left)  tho  cut  and  the  resulting  fractures  caused  death;  in  Fig.  4  (right)  the  art  of  the  surgeon  healed  the  wound  and  the  man  survived. 
(From  G.  Elliot  Smith  and  F.  Wood  Jones,  The  Archaeological  Survey  of  Nubia.  (Report  for  1907-1908.)  Vol.  II.  The  Human  Remains,  pi.  XU, 

Fig.  3,  and  pi.  XLIII,  Fig.  2.)  Compare  Commentary  on  Case  4. 

w 

Fig.  5.  Wounded  Skull  of  the  Pharaoh  Skkk.nenre.  (Early  16th  century  b.c.) 

The  arrows  indicate  tho  five  terrible  wounds  in  the  head  which  caused  the  king's  death.  He  was  one  of  the  opponents 
of  the  Hyksos  and  may,  therefore,  have  received  these  wounds  in  battle.  Several  of  these  wounds  are  exactly  those 
for  which  surgical  treatment  or  operation  is  prescribed  in  the  Edwin  Smith  Papyrus.  (From  G.  Elliot  Smith,  The 
Royal  Mummies,  Cairo,  1912,  pi.  II.)  Compare  infra,  p.  126. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  III 

Figs.  0  and  7.  Elaborate  Mummy  Bandages  ok  Homan  Age 
Compare  Case  9.  (From  VV.  M.  Flinders  Petrie.  Homan  Portraits  and  Memphis  (IV).  London.  1911.  pi.  XI), 

.uchicago.edu 

>3L5 

.uchicago.edu 

<- 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  V 

Fig.  11.  Ancient  Egyptian  Skull  pkobably  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  (about  2000  b.c.) 

a  is  the  temporal  bone  called  -rjema>  (jin')  in  the  Smith  Papyrus;  b  is  the  ratnu .1,  with  its  claw-like  fork  at 
the  top  called  in  the  Smith  Papyrus  •am' el  (’ m'-t j,  after  the  two-toed  claw  of  the  >omce-bird;  c  is  the  orifice 
of  the  right  car.  (From  H.  Stahr,  Die  Rassenjrage  im  antiken  Aegypten .  Berlin.  1907.  PI.  Ill,  Fig.  12). 

Compare  infra.  Cases  18-22. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  VI 

Fig.  12.  Reduction  of  a  Dislocated  Mandible  by  a  Gkeek  Surgeon  as  shown  in  an 

ILLUSTRATED  COMMENTARY  ON  HlI’i'OCRATES 

This  commentary  with  illustrations  was  the  work  of  Apollonius  of  Kitium  (First  Century  b.c.)  now  surviving  in  a  Florentine 
manuscript  of  the  ninth  century  a.  d.  Sec  H.  Schoene,  Apollonius  i-on  Kitium,  Leipzig,  1S96.  PI.  XIV.  Compare  infxi. 

pp.  16-17,  and  Case  25. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  VII 

Figs.  13  and  14.  Mace  Wounds  in  Ancient  Egyptian  Skulls 

Fig.  13  (left),  skull  of  Harsicse,  High  Priest  of  Amon  at  Thebes  (Ninth  Century  b.c.),  discovered  1927  by  the  Oriental  Institute, 
University  of  Chicago.  It  shows  fatal  wound  in  frontal  bone  with  indications  that  death  was  not  immediate.  Fig.  14  (right),  skull 
of  Eleventh  Dynasty  soldier  (Twenty-first  Century  B.C. ),  showing  similar  wound  in  frontal  bone,  also  on  right  of  nose.  Discovered 
by  Metropolitan  Museum  Expedition  (Bulletin,  Section  II,  Feb.,  1928,  p.  15).  Photograph  by  kindness  of  Mr.  A.  M.  Lythgoc. 

Figs.  15  and  lfi.  Skull  Wounds  of  Eleventh  Dynasty  Soldiers,  Twenty-first  Century  b.c. 

Doth  men  received  two  wounds,  one  on  the  crown,  the  other  over  the  right  eye.  Death  was  immediate  as  in  the  case  of  their  comrade 
(Fig.  14).  Discovered  by  Metropolitan  Museum  Expedition  ( Bulletin ,  ibid.,  p.  17).  Photographs  by  kindness  of  Mr.  A.  M.  Lythgoe. 

.uchicago.edu 

oi.uchicago.edu 

PLATE  VIII 

Figs.  17  and  18.  Arrow  Wounds  of  Eleventh  Dynasty  Soldiers  (Twenty-first  Century 
b.c.)  with  the  Arrows  still  Sticking  in  the  Wounds 
Fig.  17  (upper)  shows  the  arrow  in  the  victim’s  shoulder ;  in  Fig.  18  (lower)  the  arrow  has 
penetrated  the  left  eye  and  is  visible  in  the  photograph.  Discovered  by  the  Metropolitan 
Museum  Expedition  (Bulletin,  ibid.,  pp.  16-17).  Photographs  by  kindness  of  Mr.  A.  M.  Lythgoe. 

.uchicago.edu
