Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 

a- 1 1 " ■■■ ■ ^ -^-•m.^mm-.^smam^mmmamKm^ 

'2 
,1 

THE ANNOTATOES 

OF THE 

CODEX BEZAE 

HottllOtt: a J. CLAY and SONS, 

■CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 

AVE MARIA LANE. 

«la0sot»: 50, WELLINGTON STREET. 

umm 

Ueip^ts*. F. A BROCKHAUS. 

l&eto lorfe: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 

iSamlias: E. SEYMOUR HALE. 

\^All Rights reserved] 

THE ANNOTATOES 

• * • • 

OF THE 

CODEX BEZAE 

(WITH SOME NOTES ON SORTES SANCTORUM) 

BY 

^^ 

J?'"kENDEL HARRIS, 

M.A., D.LiTT. (Dubl), CL.D. (Haverford), 

FELLOW OF CLABE COLLEGE, CAMBBIDGE. 

LONDON: 
C. J. CLAY AND SONS, 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 

AVE MARIA LANE. 

1901 

•• • ' • 

PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. OLAT, 
AT THE UNIVBR8ITY PBBBB. 

THE ANNOTATOKS 

OF THE 

CODEX BEZAE. 

The 'present condition of the Bezan problem. 

The interest which attaches to the Codex Bezae arises 
partly out of the dignity which naturally belongs to the leading 
representative of what is known as the Western Text of the 
New Testament, and partly from the Sphinx-like character 
both of the MS. and of its text, for it seems hard to write 
satisfactorily the history of either the one or the other. All 
investigations which have hitherto appeared have something 
tentative and preliminary about them, and one condition of 
progress still lies in the assiduous contradiction by scholars of 
the positions of other scholars and the persistent and reciprocal 
exposition of errors and partial statements. We are thus 
driven into a more microscopic scrutiny of the problem, and if 
we do not know to-day all that we want to know concerning 
Codex Bezae and the Western Text, the probability is that we 
shall know it to-morrow, or that some one else will know it the 
day after to-morrow. 

It will be remembered by all who are interested in the 
problem of the Bezan origins that in my Stvdy of Codex Bezae 
I discussed at some length the asserted Gallican origin of the 
book and the traces of Gallicism on the Latin side of its text. 
Rejecting as improbable and undeserving of attention certain 

H. 1 

suggestions which had been made by Schulz and Kipling that 
the Codex Bezae was written in Egypt, we proceeded to test 
de novo the general belief that it was written in France. 

A striking confirmation of this belief was found in the fact 
that the system of Sortes Sanctorum, which was found to have 
been inscribed on the pages of the Codex Bezae in Greek some- 
where about the tenth century, was also found in Latin in the 
pages of a famous Latin MS. belonging to the Abbey of 
S. Germain and dating from the tenth century ; and we inferred 
from the proved consanguinity of the MSS. a probable collocality. 
This argument, whatever be its value, has not been invalidated. 

In the next place we sought to identify the system of 
liturgical annotations which are found throughout the Codex 
with a possible Gallican usage, related more or less nearly to 
the Byzantine system. In this, as will be seen below, our 
judgment was much at fault, and the supposed verifications of 
Gallicism from liturgical use are not established. 

We discussed the question whether Scholz had correctly 
stated that the home of the MS. was in Central Gaul, as an 
inference from the presence of Latin forms which might be 
described as Gallican ; and pointed out that there was hardly 
one of the instances given by Scholz that would stand criticism. 

But we proceeded to show, what had not previously been 
suspected, that the Bezan Latin was full of sixth-century 
transitional forms, which intimated that the Vulgar Latin of 
the original translator was far on its way to one or other of the 
Romance languages. 

The point arose at once whether the language in question 
was French or Italian. The j^o and con of the argument was 
not easy to estimate. 

The form ame amie for amice (p. 21) seemed to suggest 
France rather than Italy. So did hoernum (p. 21) for hodier- 
numy and (p. 23) haute for habente; but on the other hand 
fate for fcunte (p. 22) seemed to be more Italian than French, 
and so did no[c]te, where some reader had erased the c as 
non-sonant. 

On p. 26 it was stated " that the balance of the evidence is 
in favour of regarding the MS. as a Gallican rather than an 

Italian production." In a later chapter on the ' Phonetics and 
Morphology * of the Codex, it was shown that there were cases 
like the use of sum for sunt which appeared to have an Italian 
flavour, and the suggestion was thrown out that the MS. had 
perhaps after all come to Lyons from the other side of the 
Alps. 

It will be found that the further enquiry resolves itself iuto 
two separate questions, (i) what is the local origin of the Latin 
translators and transcribers ? (ii) what is the nationality of the 
annotators? The two groups are separated by nearly three 
centuries, and a conclusion under one head is not necessarily 
the conclusion under the other. In three hundred years an 
Eastern MS. may move West, or a Western one may move East ; 
a Northern MS. may move into Africa, or, with greater proba- 
bility, an African MS. into Europe. We should, therefore, as 
far as possible, keep the questions apart; and for this reason 
our present volume will deal with the annotators rather than 
with the first translator or his succession of transcribers. And 
it may be noted in passing that when we actually come to the 
Latin text and its peculiarities, we shall have a peculiarly diffi- 
cult task before us in separating those forms or tendencies 
which may properly be called Romance forms from those which 
are only Vulgar Latin : and the more we know about both, the 
slower we may perhaps be to say, either that this peculiarity is 
African Latin, or that the other is Romance French. But in all 
these cases we must go on criticising and being criticised until 
we know enough to say that we have found the truth. In this 
tract, however, we do not expect to go beyond the annotators, 
and we shall leave the early scribes and the translators alone for 
the present. Neither shall we be able to discuss in these pages 
the very important allied problems which concern the scholar 
who reads the Latin text of Irenaeus by the side of his Codex 
Bezae and notes the coincidences ; or who studies the parallels 
between the Latin of the famous Lyons Pentateuch and the 
Latin of Codex Bezae. 

If it could be assumed that Irenaeus' works were translated 
in his own church at Lyons, we could argue many things from 
the parallels between d and Ir*"* (to use the symbols of the 

1—2 

Apparatus Criticus). In the same way if we could argue that 
the Codex Lugdunensis had always been at Lyon8^ we could 
register a number of Bezan forms as Qallican, in a more than 
tentative manner. But here also we must forbear for the 
present, and reserve what might be said for some other time 
or, which is perhaps better, delegate it to some other person. 

It appears from this self-denial in the investigation that we 
are not discussing the question of the Bezan origins in the 
wide sense in which that question is usually asked. We are 
not asking whether its Latin text was made in Antioch or in 
Carthage or in Rome. Our problem is a subordinate one. 
But if subordinate, it is also co-ordinate, and the solution of it, 
if one can be rendered probable, will help greatly to the solu- 
tion of the larger problem. 

In any case, we are driven to the enquiry. On a number of 
sides doubts are being expressed as to whether the Codex 
Bezae is a French MS. at all. Dr Sanday suggests to me that it 
may have come from Ravenna ; Mr Lake has publicly declared 
for Amalfi*; and my lamented friend M. Berger, while ad- 
mitting the force of my argument from the Sortes Sanctorum 
in the Codex Bezae and in the S. Germain MS., went on 
to suggest that I carried ingenuity to the verge of paradox 
and that the only person who could solve the problem was 
Dr Sanday ; both of which propositions may be true ; if, how- 
ever, only one of them is to be counted correct, we should 
naturally prefer the latter^ ! The feeling that we had come 
almost to an impasse in the history of the Codex Bezae has led 
the editors of the Journal of Theological Studies to invoke 

^ I was interested recently in noting, under this head, the occurrence of 
the form mascle for mascuVus in several passages of Numbers in Cod. Lugd. 
Is it not a peculiarly French (Provencal) spelling ? 

^ On the Italian Origin of Codex Bezae in Journal of Theol, Studies, i. 
441—446. 

3 Berger, Un ancien texte des Actes des Apotres^ p. 16. *' Un rapprochement trds 
ing^nieux fait par M. B. Harris entre ce manuscrit et le c^ldbre manuscrit 
15 de Saint-Germain tend a lui donner pour lieu d*origine la vall^ du Bhdne. 
n est vrai que les corrections qu'il a regues pendant longtemps de plnsieurs 
^crivains qui savaient le grec jettent quelque doute sur cette hypothdse.... 
M. B. Harris, avec sa critique p^n^trante mais quelquefois paradoxale, etc.'' 

fresh discussion in the direction where least seemed to be 
satisfactorily known, viz. that of the annotators. And they 
asked for counsel's opinion with regard to the liturgical 
element in these annotations from Mr F. E. Brightman, who 
is in such matters an expert. The paper which he contributed 
to the Journal in question^ will do much to help forward 
investigation. It corrects my own work in certain important 
points, and opens the way for a good deal of further investi- 
gation. It is the most valuable paper that has appeared on 
the subject for a long time. Moreover the incidental cause 
which produced this paper is one which will aCFect all scholars, 
viz. the fact that a trustworthy representation of the Codex 
Bezae is at last before the world. 

The recent publication of the splendid Dujardin facsimile 
by the University of Cambridge has now put the MS. into the 
possession of all scholars who are within reach of large libraries, 
and we may expect fresh observations from many quarters. 
And the time has certainly come when a closer investigation 
should be made of the annotating hands, especially of those 
that have been so busy with the margins of the MS. as distinct 
from those that emend the text. For these hands ought to 
furnish data for the external history of the book. The following 
pages are a suggestion of the method that should or may be 
pursued. 

General survey of the Correctors and Annotators, 

According to Scrivener, there are nearly twenty hands that 
have been engaged with the correction or annotation of the 
Bezan text ; he denotes them, following a chronological order, 
for both correctors and annotators, by the successive letters 
of the alphabet. A, B, &c., and further discriminates these 
letters of the alphabet by suffixes, as Mi, Mg, &c., when the 
resolution of the separate individualities of the scribes is less 
certain than it normally is. We have thus the following series 
of correctors : 

ABCDEFGHIJKLMM,M,M3M,N0 0a, 

A Vol. i. pp. 446—454. 

a formidable list, in all conscience. We may tabulate some uf 
Scrivener's concluaions with regard to tbe correctors and 
annotators represented by this alphabet, in the following 
form: 

No. o( changBB 

Cent. 

Con-. 
Gr. 

Corr. 
Lat. 

Annot. Gr. 

^ot 

Nation- 

alityT 

81 in text A 

Ti 

ysH 

rarely 

zz 

7 

27 in text B 

vu 

je^ 

yea 

30 in teit C 

viifin. 

yes 

T 

e-i Id text D 

vii (in. 

yee 

72 in tt^xt E 

vii fin.? 

yea 

rarely 

Latin 

Ai ID ti^xt F 

viii?i 

yes 

? 

83 in tert G 

ii» 

rarely 

yea 

LatinT 

97 in text H 
3 annot. I 
1 in textl 

xii? 

yea 

rarely 

yea 

— 

^ 

IX 

4 nnnot. i' 

ix 

yaa 

yes 

yes 

? 

7i in text' K 

modern 

yea 

rarely 

? 

49 annot. f ^ 

ix' 

yes 

yea 

— 

[Utinl' 

12 annot. 7 M 

xii? 

ieot. notea 

32 uinot. M, 

rlrXat in Matt. 

7 

22 uinot. M, 

I?-* 

TlrXoi in John 
and Lake 

— 

? 

69 annot. M, 

^ 

^ 

~ 

Mark 

~ 

7 

23 annot. M, 

I? 

lect. and liturg. 
Dolea 

— 

7 

25 aunot. N 

T 

lect. notes in 

— 

7 

8 annot. 

xii early 

' 

eight litiirK. 
notes in Autx 

— 

1 

1 annot. 0, 

modem 

one liturg. 
note in Acts 

— 

7 

Now in surveying this table, with its twenty possible 
correctors and annotators, we shall be struck with some re- 
markable facts. 

In the first place it will be observed that the MS. during 
the first half of its history underwent systematic con-ection 

■ vii aeoording to Kenyon. 

^ Tii acoording to Kenyon and earlier than F. 

> Bboiild be i. 

* Should be at least ii, as we shall see. 

' As we shall see later on. 

chiefly on the Greek side, but during the whole of the period of 
correction there is not the least trace of its having been used 
for lectionary purposes. This is the more remarkable because 
the archetype from which it is derived has transmitted to the 
Bezan text some peculiarities which can hardly be explained 
except by lectionary usage, such for instance as Acts iii. 1, 

€V dc TMS TJfl€paiS TaVTMS 

TTfTpos KM itoavTjs avffiaivov €IS TO IfpOV 

TO 8(i\(ivov €7ri Trjv oapav €vaTq ti; npotrcv^r^s^ 

where the first line looks like a lectionary preface S and where 
we should even be tempted to regard to heiXivov as a note to 
the lector if it were not that there is a somewhat similar inter- 
jection of TO 7rpo)(f in Acts v. 21. (The first line is also pre- 
served in the closely allied Latin text from Perpignan to which 
M. Berger has drawn attention.) Moreover the very division 
of the archetype into cola and commata implies, as Euthalius 
allows, a division 7rpo9 eifarifiov dvdypmacv. It is, then, the 
more curious that the text of the Codex Bezae which from the 
sixth to the ninth century should have escaped liturgical use 
should from that time onward have passed through the hands 
of seven or eight persons who wished to adapt it to ecclesias- 
tical usage. What is the meaning of this curious revival of 
Greek lessons to which our Codex seems to testify ? 

In the next place remark that, with all this wealth of 
Greek liturgical annotators, there is not a single Latin lesson 
marked. The text is free from any notes which intimate a 
single Latin feast day or a single Latin lectionary preface. 
Even the Latin correctors of the text (of whose nationality 
Scrivener gives conclusive evidence in one case, and we shall 
add presently a number of similar identifications) have not 
taken any pains to erect the Latin text to the dignity of a 
standard, if we except the annotators B and G, of whom B 
makes the Latin agree more closely with the Greek, and G 
reforms it in its spelling and occasionally deflects it in the 

^ If it be not a lectionary preface, then it must be compared with the 
wording of Acts i. 15 koX iv rats iip4p€us Ta&rcus dvoffrds Hirpos ktL That is, it 
will be a storyteller's introductory or connecting formula. 

8 

direction of the Vulgate. And it would seem that the infer- 
ence might be drawn that the Latin lectionary was already the 
Vulgate, when the Codex Bezae began to be used as an official 
Greek lectionary, and that Old Latin copies were at that time 
of day superannuated. At all events it is significant that the 
lectionary usage is entirely on the Greek side of the house, 
although some of those annotators who follow the usage are 
certainly bilingual. More curious still, there appears to be no 
attempt made to translate the rirXov which have been added 
by Ml and Mg at the head of pages of the Gospels, nor to 
translate the annotations (which we have shown to be a series 
of sortes sanctorum^) which were made at the foot of the pages 
in Mark by the scribe Mg. How does it come about that there 
were no persons who wanted their fortunes told in Latin ? 
And the case would be the more surprising if (as has been 
suspected) the sortes were themselves a translation from a 
similar series in Latin. If that should turn out to be the case, 
we shall have to ask the question, why the Latin sentences 
were not also inserted : had councils of the Church fulminated 
against divination in Latin to tolerate it in Greek? And if 
not, what did the Latins mean by not coming to the Holy 
Gospels to have their fortunes told ? 

Let us, then, see whether we can find out anything further 
with regard to these correctors and annotators, and through 
them of the history of the MS. 

And first of all with regard to the dates assigned to the 
different hands. 

Mr Kenyon has pointed out {Journal of Theol. Studies, 
L 296) that the hands denoted F and G are dated too late. 
G is a hand of the seventh century ; it must be earlier than F, 
since no notice is taken by it in its corrections of the Latin 
of the additions which F has made to the Greek text. F itself, 
according to Kenyon, may be as early as the seventh century. 
If Kenyon is right, the hand denoted by G has been dated four 
centuries too late. We give a case such as Kenyon alludes to, 
in facsimile : viz. Acts iL 30 (additions by G and F)^ 

1 See Study of Cod, Bezae, c. 2. 

2 Plate i. 1. 

10 

These short titles or summaries are assigned in the Gospels 
of John and Luke to the annotator M.^ : now it will be ob- 
served that over this note there is the woi*d avvar/voa-fia 
mai-ked by L, and it follows that L is later than ISlj. Probably 
L erased both this note and the one previously alluded to when 
he made the entry of the lessons in question. The alphabetical 
oinler of the annotatoi*s must therefore be corrected and L must 
be placed lower down ; and in accordance with Mr Kenyon's 
suggestion we will provisionally place him in the tenth century, 
and this involves the carrying of Mj back to the ninth, or at 
least to an eailier date than L. These corrections as to the 
dates assigned to the annotating hands being premised, we ask 
in the next place whether anything can be further deteimined 
with regard to the nationality of the scribes. 

Scrivener has observed that the scribe E was a Latin, 
though he hardly ventures a correction on the Latin side of 
the MS.; for in correcting in Acts v. 27 the expression xav 
€7rijpa)Tija'€v avrou<; o i€p€v^ Xeryayi/, he writes over the words 
t6/06U9 the letters arxi, and by the use of the Latin r, Avithout 
provocation, betrays his native tongue. (Observe, we say 
* without provocation,* for, if he had been engaged in ti^anscrip- 
tion of a bilingual text, he would have been under constant 
provocation to make mistakes on both sides of the transcription ; 
e.g. if a word or name has to be written in two parallel columns, 
its writing or spelling in one column and alphabet is likely to 
aflfect its spelling in the other ; but in the case of a straight- 
forward emendation or expansion, the scribe is not likely to 
mix his alphabets, except by reverting to that alphabet which 
is his normal mode of expression. The importance of this 
consideration will appear again later on.) 

After E the scribe whose nationality is most evident is G. 
His interests are entirely in the reformation of the spelling of 
the Latin, and his textual influence is small. From the zeal 
with which he corrects the misspelt b and u in Latin we may 
be fairly certain that his native tongue is Latin. He also 
appears to have some knowledge of the Latin Vulgate. 

We shall next determine the native language of that 
important annotator who is covered by the sign L. 

THE ANNOTATOES 

OF THE 

CODEX BEZAE 

12 

We shall presently tabulate all these lections so as to 
recover the system upon which L is working : for the present 
let it suffice to have established conclusively his Latinity. 
Note, in passing, that this scribe L writes f. 65 b apvaypoa-fia 
€t9 TOP irapaa-Kevyop, and on £ 99 b apparfpoafia 6t9 tip irapa- 
a-KvyijPy and on f. 279 b appcpypocfia €t9 tip irapaa-Kevyrfp, Now 
this inserted 7, whatever be its phonetic explanation, is charac- 
teristic of the spelling of L, and we shall perhaps be able to 
show its meaning presently. In view of what has already been 
established concerning L, and his fundamental Latinity, we 
need not hesitate to say that it is a bond fide pronunciation, 
without deciding whether it is Celtic or Gothic, Roman or 
Italian. He is writing the Greek from the ear rather than 
the eye. It is not a transcriptional blunder. 

The importance of this phonetic peculiarity lies in the fact 
that it turns up in one of the other annotators. The scribe 
whom Scrivener calls My has the following titles to the matter 
contained in the text 

f. 204 b. r« Tv(f)o\ti to Xcuyi to. 

Here two titles appear to have been combined, viz. : irepl 
Tov TV(f>\ov and irepl tov Aevl tov TeXdpov, 

The peculiarity is the spelling A€i;7i for Aeut; evidently 
the inserted sound is a semi-consonant, probably of the nature 
of a y : the word being pronounced Levy% with which we com- 
pare the irapaaxevy^ of the scribe L. On the next leaf, 
f. 205 b, the same annotator gives us a title irepi Aavyt ©re 
carjXdep ev to BvaiaaTiprjo Kai ifxx/yep T09 apTo^ t^9 irpoadeaeo^;. 

Here Aavyv is for AauiS : without speculating why the 
scribe drops the final letter, and makes David into Davy, we can 
see again a semi-vocal 7 as in the previous instance, and say of 
the scribe Ma that he belongs to the same Greek school as L, 
whatever may be the cause of the peculiarity. 

The remaining scribes and annotators either do not furnish 
any criteria for their native place or tongue, or the discrimina- 
tion can only be made after much microscopic work. I think, 
however, that we shall be able to show that the scribe Mg is 
also a Latin, though he writes nothing but Greek, but this we 

13 

cannot prove satisfactorily without a long investigation into the 
Sortes Sanctorum which he transcribes, if indeed we can settle 
the point at all. Reviewing this part of our enquiry, we may 
sum up as follows : the correctors and annotators in Codex 
Bezae are about 20 in number; and they can be very nearly 
divided into two chronological periods, first, that of the cor- 
rectors, second that of the* annotators. Of the scribes we are 
sure that E was a Latin, and almost certain that the same 
thing can be said of G. We have also shown that amongst the 
annotators L was a Latin, and that the Greek of Mg is under 
the same phonetic influences as that of L. The remaining 
annotators require further and closer examination. 

On a curious phonetic peculiarity of the scribes L and ifg. 

As we have pointed out, there are traces in certain of the 
annotating hands of a phonetic intrusion of the letter 7, between 
certain vowels, by which it seems as if an effort had been made 
to avoid hiatus, or else to pronounce certain Greek sounds in an 
abnormal manner. 

The tendency, which expresses itself in such spellings as 
TrapaaKevyrjj Aevyl and Aavyi, appears in our MS., where 
the letter v stands between two vowels, and where we should 
have supposed the vocalisation was sufficiently easy from the 
consonantal sound of the u. The ^r-sound that is interjected 
can hardly be the full consonant which we usually associate 
with that sign, but may, more probably, be a sound nearer to 
that of the semi-yocalic y^. 

The question is whether we can deduce anything chrono- 
logical or local from the occurrence of these peculiar spellings. 
Are they Celtic, or Gothic, or Roman, or Italian ? 

The first conjecture with regard to this intrusive sound was 
that the g in question belonged to the Moeso-Gothic alphabet, 

^ In which case it is just the opposite tendency to what we actually find in 
the written text of D, where a hard intervocalic g tends to disappear, as in 
Xeluw for Xeyltav etc. In the annotators we might speak of such a sound as 
' beginning to appear ' ; but in either case we should suspect that the transitional 
sound is y rather than g. 

14 

which has two ^r-sounds, denoted by the Latin G and the Greek 
r, "of which one is a spirant. This suggestion was, I believe, 
first made by Hickes in his Thesaurus, to explain the peculiar 
spelling of iriarevo) {piMeugo) in certain transliterated creeds. 
Wetstein followed Hickes, in claiming the spelling referred to 
(and the parallel phenomena in our annotators) as evidence of 
Frankish hands. And Scrivener, working upon Wetstein, but 
substituting Celtic for Frankish, elaborated the argument in 
the following note : 

p. xxvii. The insertion of the guttural y here [i.e. in havyt\ and in 
\tvyiTov Fol. 204 b after v, of v before y in irapavyfia (npayfia) Foil. 301 b, 
302 a, and of y even by L in wa^ao-iccvy— Foil. 95 b, 99 b, 279 b, points to 
a Western and Celtic origin of all this marginal writing. See Wetst. N.T. 
Proleg. p. 31, who cites pisteugo from a Creed in the Bodleian in Tjatin 
letters, and ehporeugomenon from Mabillon de re diplomatica lib. v. p. 366 
(1681). Mabillon also gives (p. 367) pisteugo from Thuan. Col. No. 537 of 
the tenth century, and Wetstein compares cvavyayrffrav 1 Tim. i. 19 from 
Cod. Alexandrinus. 

This note will cause the student no little perplexity, 
especially if he is unfamiliar with Scriveners method of 
composition. 

He will not suspect that Wetstein is transcribing Hickes, 
Avith errors of his own in the transcription, and that Scrivener 
is transcribing Wetstein, including the errors, and adding some 
further confusions of his own. 

Wetstein was citing Hickes' preface to a creed which, by 
a misunderstanding of Hickes* use of nostro, he said was in the 
Bodleian library, as follows : 

" In nostro symbolo 7n(rr€v<a scribitur pisteugo quemadmodum et in 
specimine Franco-gallici codicis, qui olim fuit Dionysiani prope Parisios, 
quod exhibet D. Jo. Mabillon lib. y de re diplomatica p. 366. Sic quoque 
in nostro symbolo €K7rop€v6fi€vov scribitur ekporetigomenonJ* 

Hickes had said it was a MS. Lat. Bibl. Publicae Cantahr, 
Francica manu exaratum, and we have verified the correctness 
of his statement by finding the MS. (after a fruitless search in 
Oxford), in the MS. Gg. v. 35 of the University Library at 
Cambridge. Hickes had further written iropevcofievov and 
poreugomenon for what Wetstein gives more correctly. 

15 

In the next place, notice that Scrivener's reference from 
Wetstein with regard to ekporeugomenon is in confusion. 
Wetstein said, that the transcribed word with the peculiar 
spelling was from the same Bodleian (= Cambridge) creed, but 
he added further, following Hickes, that the spelling pistetcgo 
would also be found in a facsimile of Mabillon, from a MS. 
formerly belonging to St Denys (the reference being given to 
Mabillon, de re diplomatica lib. v. p. 366). Scrivener, finding 
in Mabillon that the MS. had passed from the Abbey of 
St Denys into the collection of Colbert and de Thou, makes a 
new reference to Thuan. Col. No. 537, as though it were a 
different MS. from what he had already cited. Avoiding these 
pitfalls, we find ourselves, then, referred to a couple of trans- 
literated creeds, in which the same spellings occur, and which 
are almost certainly connected by some genealogical link. More- 
over, as will appear from the references, they are Nicene creeds, 
as is seen from the word describing the procession of the Holy 
Spirit, but Nicene adapted for the use of a single person, 
instead of collective recitation or confession (inaTeva) for 
7na-T€vofi€p). That is they are baptismal creeds, to be recited 
by Greek-speaking peoples in Western Europe, or surviving 
from the time when the baptismal services were bilingual. 

We naturally want to know whether the existence of such 
transliterated formulae implies Frankish or Celtic spellings; and 
we can hardly settle the point by saying that the MSS. referred 
to appear to be French MSS. of the tenth century, without 
enquiring further whether their peculiar spellings may not 
occur elsewhere. And when we make the examination for the 
spelling of the transliterated creed, we are surprised to find 
how widely diflused it is, how characteristic it is of the Western 
baptismal service, and that it is (in spite of the prevalence of 
the Nicene form, which is a further case of the unexpected that 
always happens) a peculiarity of the Roman ritual, as it used to 
be conducted by the Pope himself. 

The bilingual character of the baptismal confessions is at- 
tested by the Roman rituals passim : and these rituals, by their 
unconscious or half-conscious survivals, are the conclusive proof 
that the early Roman Church knew nothing of infant baptism, 

16 

but that they baptized catechumens in two languages, Greek and iv^ 
Latin, with a priority for the Greek candidates over the Latin, and 
apparently the men and women separately, with a priority for 
males over females. When the double confessions in Greek and 
Latin which were proper to bilingual churches were becoming 
obsolete, they were perpetuated by making the men stand for 
the Greek candidates and the women for the Latin. And 
further when the lowering of the age for baptism had rendered 
the recitation of the creed, the paternoster &c. impossible on 
the part of the candidates, so that there could no longer be an 
intelligent traditio symboli to the competentes, or a subsequent 
redditio by them, the fiction of the traditio and redditio was kept 
up through the means of inferior clergy, who held the infants 
in their arms and repeated the symbol and the paternoster for 
them; and it is curious how carefully they maintained the 
bilingual feature of the primitive confessions and repeated in 
Greek the transliterated creeds which they could, apparently, 
no longer even read in the original script. 

Accordingly in the Gelasian Sacramentary we are instructed 
that when the candidates make their redditio symboli before 
the Pope on Easter Eve, the baptismal questions are conserved 
in Greek (ad reddentes dicit Dominus Papa post pisteugis), 
where the transliterated word and its spelling should be noticed ; 
it is the question of the Pope, Dost thou believe ? to which the 
candidates reply with 

pisteugo is ena theoii etc. 

And where the Roman order is followed, but the Pope is not 
officiating, we learn that the same bilingual feature characterises 
the ritual ; for in the Rituale sive Ordo Romanus contained in 
Cod. Ambros. Z. 52 (sup.) (eleventh century) the proceeding is 
as follows : 

Accipiens acolutus unum ex ipsis infantibus masculum et tenens in 
sinistro brachio, ponit manum super caput ejus dexteram. Et interrogat 
eum presbyter graece : Dicit ya [lege Pya=»rota] glossa omologesin ton 
kirion ymon jesun christen. Respondit acolutus EUenestin. Iterum 
dicit presbiter, anangilon tin pistin auton tonos [i.e. irS>s\ fisteugisin, Et 
dicit acolutus simbolum graece, decantando his verbis, Pysteugon ysena 
theon patera... kezo intu melontos eo nos amin etc. (i.e. iriorfvo) tU €va 
Oebv iraTipa.,,Ka\ ((orjv tov fifWovros alatvos- dfirjp). 

17 

Here again the spelling of the transliterated words should 
be noted and the fact that the Nicene creed, as used in the 
Roman baptismal services, was pronounced in this way. And 
it may be almost taken for granted that all the churches which 
use the creeds and the paternoster in the peculiar trans- 
literations to which we refer are directly dependent upon an 
early Roman ritual. If we wish to collect and classify such 
forms, we should have to examine Swiss, German, and French 
MSS., and the result of our enquiry would be, so far as concerns 
the peculiar spelling of ecclesiastical Greek words like tna-Teva) 
with an inserted 7, that no conclusion of a geographical nature 
could be drawn from the occurrence of the form (for it turns up 
everywhere)*, unless we choose to call them Roman. They are 
certainly not Celtic as against Frankish, nor Moeso-Gothic as 
against Italian. So that the parallels brought forward from 
Hickes and Mabillon by Wetstein and Scrivener do not help us 
to finally determine the nationality of the scribes L and Mg in 
the Codex Bezae. They may be suspected to be Roman, but 
even of this there is no final proof. For we do not know 
whether the transliterations represent Latin pronunciation or 
Greek dialect and neither of these is necessarily limited to Rome. 
And we shall have to go further afield and search for the same 
phenomenon elsewhere than in the baptismal formulae, before 
we can hope to settle the nationality of the scribes in question*. 

^ Poitiers, St GaU, Dilsseldorf , Vienna etc. 

* Caspari, Tauf-aymbol i. p. 23S, has the following note on the inserted g 
which we have been discussing, and which he found in a St GaU MS. (Cod. 
Sangall. 328) and elsewhere. "«/ vor einem Vokal (w, 0) bald durch euu 
(spricht evv) bald durch eug {pisteugOt ekporeugometion), Der G-laut tritt 
zwischen jenen Diphthong und diesen Vokal und verhindert, sie von einander 
scheidend, den kakophonischen Hiatus euo. Dasselbe g finden wir auch sonst 
mehrfaoh naoh eu und vor w und 0. So in der von Binterim in seiner Schrift 
De prohationibm theologicis epistulae catkolicae B. 2 "Epistola Catholioa 
Secunda'* aus einem Codex der konigliohen Bibliothek zu Dusseldorf, der 
den ' Ordo Bomanus Gregorianus sed non purus ' enthalten und in Anfang des 
zehnten Jahrhunderts geschrieben sein soU, herausgegeben in einer mit lateini- 
schen Buchstaben geschriebenen griechischen Uebersetzung des apostolisohen 
Symbols (Pistengo), sowie in einem mit lateinischen Buchstaben geschriebenen 
griechischen Nicano-Constantinopolitanum in einer fruher der ' Ecclesia Essen- 
dis' angehorigen Handschrift derselben Bibliothek (Pysteugo, ekporeugome- 
non).'* We suspect that Caspari's alternative form p'utewuo is merely a false 
transcription of pisteugo^ for we shaU find it associated with ekporeugomenon, 
and that aU the evidence of these baptismal creeds is reaUy one way. 

H. 2 

18 

Now if we could find further material and new instances 
of the inserted g, we might be able to settle the question 
whether it was a Latin transliteration that was responsible 
for the spelling, or Avhether it was a case of Greek dialect, 
faithfully imitated by those who were trying to transliterate 
the creed. There is a Greek MS. extant from which Lipsius 
has published the text of the Acta PetH which is marked by 
the same peculiarity. Here we find such cases as Bpairerev- 
yofiev, TTopevyofiivr), TnarevyopTa^, ^ovKexr/eiv, j3a<ri\€vy€it^, 
(TTpaTevyrff aTparevyofieOa. And here the phenomenon is so 
pronounced, that we are carried over a much wider area of 
speech than in the baptismal confessions ; in fact, we are out- 
side of ecclesiastical language, and in literature properly so 
called. And so we must interrogate the MS. and find out, if 
possible, when and where the peculiar irrational spirant was in 
vogue. And the interesting thing is that the MS. comes from 
Patmos, where it was probably written, that the phonetic 
peculiarities appear to be due to dictation and that they 
represent therefore genuine Greek dialect of the beginning of 
the ninth century. We thus arrive at the conclusion that the 
Codex Bezae is under the influence of annotators who speak 
Modern Greek and write it as they speak it. It is clear that 
we cannot describe these annotators as Roman, merely because 
we find that parallel phenomena to the irrational spirant which 
they exhibit are to be detected in baptismal orders which can be 
traced back to Rome ; for the very same linguistic phenomena 
begin to appear elsewhere at the very time to which our anno- 
tators are referred. And so we must make an exhaustive 
survey of the forms in question as they occur in written and 
spoken Greek and see if we can determine more accurately 
when and where they arose. 

Meanwhile let it be observed that the theory that such 
forms are Celtic, Frankish or Latin has disappeared ; they are 
Greek, and we shall abundantly confirm that point by a closer 
examination. 

Such an examination has, indeed, been made for us by the 
leading lights in modern philology and Modern Greek grammar 
whose attention had been drawn to the problem. For instance 
if we turn to Foy, Lautsystem der griechischen Vulgdrsprache, 

19 

we shall find the phonetic peculiarities recognised, and we shall 
see suggestions of a dispute which has arisen amongst philo- 
logians as to whether the 7 in Tnareirfm and similar forms is 
due to an original spirant {j) in the language or whether it is 
a later development, the former view being naturally the 
tempting one to the native Greeks, who have an exaggerated 
idea of the extent to which they are conservative of primitive 
speech \ However, here is the general statement made by Foy 
with regard to the interpolated 7 that has turned up in our 
investigations. 

Foy, p. 64. " Vor a, o, u ist y eingeschoben, z. B. in 

Ikvya (mfya), daneben iivyui (mfja) /ivia. 
a^6 (avy6) oder trapez. w/Syo (ovy6)=«oi/.... 

Namentlich findet sich ein solchea y vor den Verbalendungen, wenn ein 
Vocal oder wenn ein v vorhergeht, z. B., 

KkaiytA (kl^yo) K\ai<a 

Kaiyta (k^^yo) Kaioa 

(jyraiyta (ft^yo) 9rraia> 
dialektisch femer : 

nov\dy<o (puldyo) frcaXco) 

rrjpdyta (tirdyo) n^pco) 

ipoxTaya (er6taya) rfpartov 

^aart\fvy<a (vasil^Vyo) /^acrtXet'O) 

icXadcvyo) (klad^vyo) jcXadcvo) 

B\i^<o (BUvyo) B\i^<o 

Tpipy<a (trfvyo) rpi/3« z. B. in Kretischem. 

Dass hier natiirlich nicht an einen erhaltenen uralten Jodlaut zu 
denken ist, wie Maurophrydes will, ist schon deswegen schlechthin 
unglaublich, weil uns bis ins Mittelalter hinein kein j noch viel weniger 
y in solchen Formen, wie die obigen sind, begegnet^/' 

^ Foy is very severe in his preface * gegen jene antiqnarische Manie, welohe 
in jedem vulgaren Consonant-Znsatz ein uraltes Digamma oder Jod, in jedem 
valgaren a einen uralten A-laut and in manohen vulgar-entstellten Formen 
sogar graoO'italische Urgebilde erblicken mdchte.* 

^ The reader may compare the foUowing statement on the same point from 
Cartias, QrundzVge, p. 612. 

Uebergang des Jod in andre Consonanteii. 

j als 7. 

Im Munde der heutigen Griechen hat 7 vielfach (vgl. Deffner, Stud. iv. 241) 

2—2 

auch z. B., 

20 

The best investigation of the whole matter is to be found in 
the papers of Krumbacher, who has devoted special care to the 
collection of all the cases of the phenomena referred to, and has 
rightly seen that it is idle to speculate about remote philo- 
logical origins for the inserted 7 until we have made sure of 
the facts and observed the order of evolution of the sounds. 
Krumbacher's great paper on the subject is entitled Ein irra- 
tionaler Spirant im Qriechischen and appeared in Sitzungs- 
berichte d. philoL hist. Classe der Akademie zu Munchen for 
1886 ^ 

The first thing, as we have said, was to collect the facts 
from Greek literature and actual Greek speech. 

.Omitting certain sporadic traces which have been affirmed 
of the existence of the spirant in Pamphylian and Cjrpriote, and 
setting on one side the doubtful form iroTiKXaiyo) of the 
Heraclean tablets, whose exact meaning is not clear, we have a 
few traces in Egyptian pap3m : e.g. KXaiyto (Not, et Extr. 18. 2 
f. 323, 160 B.C.), ^apaTriyrja) (ibid. p. 306, 156 B.C.), €K<f>opi]ya = 
€K<f>opia (Wiener Stvd. 4. 196 etc.). Following these the next 
great case is the Patmos MS., to which we have referred 
above, of the ninth century. The next to this is a series of 
MSS. of the Interpretamenta of Ps. Dositheus, which con- 
tains Latin transliterations of Greek words, for the use of 
learners of the Greek language. These MSS. and the arche- 
type from which they are derived give us Greek as it was 
meant to be pronounced by the learners at a time which 
coincides almost exactly with that of the Bezan annotators. 

die Aussprache eines Spiranten. Hieher gehurt namentlioh iAvTya=fAvia, wo 
sich 7 aus dem i des Diphthongs entwiokelt, so wie mehrere FaUe, in welchen 
MuUach (140) und vor ihm Giese (295) das 7 weniger wahrscheinUch aus f 
erklarten: xaAycj (gespr. kavjo), /cXa<7a) (gespr. klajo), aiVydi^ (gespr. ayjo) Ei, 
das wir bei No. 597 aus avjan entstehen sahen. Das neugrieohisohe 7 mit dem 
Lautwerth eines Spiranten ist, genau genommen, als erhaltenes, nicht als 
verwandeltes j zu betraohten. Im deutsohen Sprachgebiet hat sioh g zuweilen 
aus j entwickelt (Grimm, Gr. 1S7, 220), so entspricht das g des ahd. Plurals 
eig-ir und des engl. egg ebenfaUs dlesem Spiranten. 

The statement should be corrected and completed by what follows from 
Krumbacher. 

^ Vol. iii. p. 859 sqq. 

21 

From them we obtain a series of equivalences represented as 
follows : 

anagoreugo, etc. 

( = dpayop€Vfo)y 

apolaugo, etc. 

( = dfroXavo)), 

agueugo 

( = dyptva)f 

geugi 

{==yevifh 

episceugazo 

( =€Vt(rje€va^o>), 

triambeugo 

( = 0piafiP€vm)f 

thireugis 

( = di;p€U€t£), 

iceteugo 

( = iK(T€V«o)j 

and a host of others, including sceuge-Bo-iccvY; which may be compared 
with the Bezan irapao'Kevtj, 

Krumbacher further points out the baptismal cases to 
which we have already referred, as existing in the Codex 
Frisingensis (=cod. Monac. Lat. 6425) written early in the 
eleventh century. 

From the twelfth century on the irrational spirant appears 
in prose and poetry written in the popular Greek language. 
An enormous list of cases is made out from Modem Greek. 
The next step was to test the modem language and see 
whether the intrusive element was uniformly distributed 
everywhere. This was done by letters of enquiry to Greek 
schoolmasters, officials and scholars throughout the whole of 
the Levant. 

Roughly speaking we find the 7 in question to be geo- 
graphically distributed as follows : 

Mainland after vowels (K\aiya), aKovyay), 

Sporades (with Cyprus) after spirants (BovXevyay, K6fiya}). 
Cyclades after both. 

This would give TrapaaKetryij in the islands. 

The form Trapaa-Kevyrj (which is one of our Bezan forms) 
occurs with slight variations in Andros, Tinos, Syra, Naxos, 
ParOs, Siphnos, Lesbos, Chios, Ikaria, Patmos, Leros, Kalymnos, 
Karpathos, Rhodos, and Cyprus. 

These forms are not to be explained by digamma, nor by 
making later forms into earlier (as by assuming an early form 
/cofiyo) for Kowra)), nor by arguments drawn only from analogy. 

They arise, like such modernisms as 

oi yuavOpiairoi 

22 

from prefixes to a following syllable, and not from evolutions of 
a previous vowel. 

The sum of the whole matter is, according to Krumbacher, 

"(1) Infolge des lautphysiologischen Strebens nach Vermeidung des 
Hiatus, der sich im Griechischen in zahlreichen Wortem eingestellt 
hatte, bildete sich im Inneni der Worter...eiii dem zweiteii der auf- 
einander stossendeu Vokale vorgeschlageuer spirantischer Laut, den 
man in der Schrifb dui*ch y wiedergab und den wir deshalb y irrationale 
nennen. Im Laufe der Zeit erschien derselbe auch im Anfang vokalisch 
anlautender Worter. In den Verbis auf -av«, -cuo) und in den iibrigen 
Wortem mit fu+Vokal hielt sich der irrationale Laut auch nach Kon- 
stantisierung des v. Das griechische Sprachgebiet teilt sich beziiglich 
dieses Lautes je nach der Lautkombination in bestimmten Gruppen : 
in die festlandische (Vokal + y), in die Kykladengruppe (Vokal-l-y und 
Spirant + y) und in die Sporadengrup^je (Spirant + y). Erst nachdem 
dieser Laut sich festgesetzt hatte, riss jene Gleichgiltigkeit gogen den 
Hiatus ein, welcher sogar echtes y vielfach beseitigt. 

(2) Nachdem in -av und -6v das v in den Spiranten iibergegangen 
war, drang das irrat. y in vie! spaterer Zeit (etwas 10— 13 Jahrh.), und niir 
in den Bezirken, in welcheu es in den Verbis auf -avo> und -€v<o horbar 
war, also in der Kykladen- und Sporadengruppe durch Analogie in die 
durch eine fruhere Association von Verbis auf -n-ro) stark vermehrte 
Gruppe der Verba auf -)3a> ein : man sagte wegen der gleichen Aoriste auf 
-tfra nach ttavyfn dovXcvyo) nun auch pd(iyo>, KXdpyio. Wahrend die in 
Nr. 1 erwahnte Lautentwickelung eine rein lautmechanische ist, liegt 
hier eine Wirkung der Analogie vor; daher bemerken wir in der ersten 
Keihe (icXaiyo) wavy to) innerhalb derselbeu mundartlichen Bezirke vollige 
Regelmassigkeit, in der zweiten (pdffyio, KXtpyw) treffen wir vielfaches 
Schwanken und unerklarbare Ausnahmen." 

The great advantage of Krumbacher's statement of the case 
over those who preceded him, lies in the mass of facts on 
which he bases his inductions. For our purpose, engaged as 
we are in finding an explanation for a small group of rare 
forms irapaa-tcevyi], Aevyi and Aavyi[B], it is a great advantage 
to have the places tabulated where people used the form irapa- 
a-Kcvy^, which being the name of a day of the week, can be 
found in all mouths and can have its pronunciation tested 
everywhere. 

It will be interesting to examine whether any traces of 
this form can be found in those parts of Italy which were 
formerly bilingual. 

23 

The investigations of recent years have brought to light an 
extraordinary number of proofs of the survival of Greek words 
and forms amongst the villages of S. Italy, where they are still 
extant in the songs, prayers and proverbs of the people. From 
these we may gather some idea of the dialects of Greek in- 
volved in the various streams of colonization which went to 
make up and maintain the Hellenic contingent in the life of 
Southern Italy. 

Suppose we were to test these linguistic survivals in order 
to see whether they involved such forms as we have been 
discussing previously, where irapaaKew] was wiitten irapa- 
a/cevyi], and where a similar phonetic change appeared in 
Tna-Tevto and i/cnopevofievov. Here is a love-song in the dialect 
of Soleto, in which a fond lover affirms that the beauty of his 
innamorata increases with every day of the week. In that 
case he must have something to say about Friday {irapaaKevi]). 
The transcribed song runs as follows : 

Oria tu fani 's tin addin im^ra 
Pleon oria simberi, pippara mai ; 
Oria tin ciuriaci ce tin deftera, 
Co ja ti tridi pleon oria pai ; 
Ce i tetradi i^nta, is mia manera 
To pefbi rodo pu fiurei torn mai ; 
Oria to samba ce i parassoghi, 
Ce pleon oria mu pai tin ciuriaci. 

In Modern Italian this is given by Morosi as follows : 

Bella mi apparisti V altro giomo, 

Pih bella oggi, piii che mai ; 

Bella la domenica e il Imiedl, 

E per il martedl piii bella vai ; 

E il mercoledl sempre alio stesso modo, 

E il giovedl (sei) rosa che tiorisci il maggio, 

Bella (sei) il sabbato e il venerdl, 

E piu bello mi vai la domenica. 

If we try to restore the song into a Greek script, we shall 
find inter alia that the form for Friday will be a clear derivation 
from irapaaxevy^. Morosi gives another form (or is it meant 
for the same ?) of the word, also from Soleto, and writes pras- 

24 

saguly and cites prassaghi from Sternatia and Castrignano. 
The inserted 7 is clearly in evidence. 

Equally striking is the proof of the existence of the related 
group of forms which belong to verbs in -evcD, which we 
stumbled upon in the iriaTevyoi) and iKiropevym of the bap- 
tismal creeds. 

For example, Morosi, in his DialeUi dei Greci delta terra 
d Otranto (p. 116) writes as follows: 

" Lo stesso 7 che vedemmo nel cap. 1" § 3, ciofe ancora un 
digamma rinforzato da un gamma ^ ma intemo, ne si presenta 
in aghhra etc. ; e per conseguenza altresi in dvleguo jnstkguo 
prassagul di Soleto, dulego, pistego, prassaghi di Sternatia e 
Castrignano, da anteriori BovXevyay, TrurTevyoi), irapaaKevyi], che 
trovano il perfetto riscontro in aKovytOy veif^Wy Kaxr^to della 
Grecia." 

As an illustration of these forms, here is a specimen from 
the patois of a modern Calabrian^ in which he expresses his 
faith on a model that is certainly not pure Greek. 

Eg6 pist^gguo ta mist^ria ti Santissimo Trinitk Patre, lo, ce Spiritu 
Santo. 

Eg6 pist^gguo 's to podi tu Theu, pu encai'nesti 's tin yilia ti Patruna 
ja 6pera ce virtu tu Spiritu Santu : ejennfthi ce epatepse ce apethane 's 
to stauro ja 'md : errisuscitepse ejai 's to cielo etc. 

This specimen of the dialect of Bova will be found to 
involve Greek (Modern) and Italian in about equal proportions. 
The form pistegguo shows the g not only prefixed to the u, but 
actually doubled, and the form becomes so well established 
that other similar forms are made by analogy from Italian 
roots. The following opening verse of a hymn from the same 
locality will furnish an illustration. 

Jiiro pu en ehi jerusia, 
Niftanim^ra panda to lodegguo ; 
En ^na manaho, somata tria, 
Ecfno crazzo ce ecino pistegguo, etc. 

^ As we have seen, it has nothing to do with digamma ; the phenomenon 
being far too widely diffused for that explanation. 

^ For these specimens see Pellegrini, II dialetto greco-calabro di Bova in 
Rivista di Filologia ii and iii, or in the published volume with the same title, 
p. 86. 

26 

which Pellegrini gives in the following equivalent Italian : 

II Signore che non ha vecchiaja, 
Notte e giorno sempre lo lodo : 
£ uno solo, tre persoue, 
Quello invoco e in quello credo. 

Here is one more verse of a hymn on the Omnipotence of 
God from the neighbourhood of Soleto. 

Pisteguo ti addo en ehi tosso potento 
Sa tto Se6 pu stei 's to paradiso ; 
Po' game tosso mea firmamento, 
C egame tosso mea cosmon impiso etc. 

which may be done into Italian as follows : 

Ci'edo che altri non ci sia cost potente 
Come il Dio che sta nel paradiso ; 
Che fece un cosi grande firmamento, 
E fece un si gran mondo sospeso. 

Here the student of Modem Greek will recognise the 
familiar Kafivm (exafie) for facio (which we shall presently 
find in the Bezan margins); and the phonetic weakening of 
fiiya into fiea must be observed along with the opposite 
tendency of TnaTevym. We have shown, then, that the forms 
which we discussed in the Codex Bezae were Modem Greek 
dialectical variations; they belong to an actual speech, and 
not to literature. And those who use them are either Greeks 
or Greco-Latin bilinguals. 

The question will suggest itself whether such forms are to 
be looked for in communities more to the North and West than 
Calabria; would they, for instance, occur in the speech and 
script of Greeks at Ravenna, at Lyons, Poitiers or Paris ? It 
would scarcely be possible to answer such a question definitely 
at this stage. We must, however, recognise that when Greeks 
migrated they took their language with them, and when they 
taught it to others, as in the Munich Inteiyretarrienta, they 
taught it commonly as they spoke it. If so, the dialectical 
variations may appear unexpectedly in all sorts of places. 

26 

On the lection system of the annotator L. 

In a rapid survey of the annotations made upon the margins 
of Codex Bezae, I bazai-ded the suggestion* that the system to 
which these lections belonged would be found out to be, not 
the oixlinary Byzantine lectionary, but some closely allied and 
related system current in the Gallican Church : and that this 
was the cause of certain divergences from the traditional 
Byzantine systems and of the use of certain peculiai* teams to 
describe the Sundays of the calendar, such as tcvpiaKrj rwv 
irpoifHOTiafidTcov for Palm Sunday, where, as it seemed to me, 
we should naturally have expected KvpuiKtj t£v l3at<ov. 

It has, however, been shown by Mr Brightman in the 
JimiTval of Theological Studies'^ that the system of lections is 
undoubtedly the Byzantine, and that the variations in the 
lections are not such as may not be incident to any systena 
which undergoes frequent transcription ; moreover Mr Bright- 
man has pointed out the use of the term irpoffxoTtafjM^ for the 
pre-baptismal services in the E^t, and we have thus got rid of 
the necessity of supposing that Palm Sunday and Prophotisni 
Sunday were two names given originally in diflerent districts, 
presumably in the East and in the West. 

A careful extraction and transcription of the lessons given 
by the scribe L would have at once shown, and that conclusively, 
that the Byzantine system was the one involved: I can only 
regret that I did not make such a transcription, as it has a 
value of its own apart from the question of the history of the 
Codex Bezae and its annotators and may throw some light, 
ultimately, upon the historic evolution of the Greek lectionary. 
The fact that L has one or two broken leSsons exactly on the 
line of the Byzantine lectionary would of itself be conclusive 

1 study of Codex Bezae, pp. 12 — 15. 

2 Vol. i. p. 450. 

^ Note the important reference to Ducange, Ghssar. nied. et inf. graec. b.v. 
0(6r«rfia, and especially the reference to u sermon de pascJiate et m, euchanstia, 
ascribed to S. Euthymius of Constantinople, which speaks of Palm Sunday as 
the occasion ri/i^tKaDra woiovfjicv rd irpofp<aTL<rfxaTa. 

27 

as to the connexion between the systems, if all the rest of the 
lections marked had perished or become illegible *. 

However, here is the system in full, for convenience of 
reference, so far as the annotator L has transmitted it to 

us. 

St Matthew. 

Description of lesson. Conte?Us. 

apx ii. 1 — 

appaypoo-fJM [iT€pi rov] aafifia'' iv. 18 — 23 

1T€pl TOV O'V^ifklTOV V. 14 — 19 

ovvayvovyM n€pi rov (rci/3[oroi;] vi. 1 — 13 

avpayvoo-fia wtpi rov lOiyNaiciy x. 1 — 10 

apvayvoa-fia irtprf to aafka-o xiv. 22 — 34 

p€Taip4}p(f}os apvayvoo-pa xvii. 1 — 9 

avvayvoapa ntpi rov a'a^tiarov xvii. 14 — 23 

avvayvoa-pa n€pi to KvptaKrj xvii. 14 — 23 

vel xviii. 1 

avpotrpa {I) n€pt to o-c^arov xviii. 23 — 35 

aPvayvocpM ntpt to KVpiaKrf 

xix. 1 — 12 

avvoapa (?) n€pi tov trafiParov xix. 16 — 26 

avvayvoa-pM XX. 20 — 28 

avvayvocfAa ntpi to KvptaKrj xxi. 6 — 27 

Byzantine parallel. 
?Dec. 25 

2nd Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

? 

Sabbath ri;^ Tvpo<f>ayov 

? 

9tli Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

Transfiguration (Aug. 6) 

10th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

10th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

1 1th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

nth Sabbath after 

Pentecost 
[xix. 3—12] 

12th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

? 

I 

^ Such a broken lesson, for example, as the one for Good Friday, Matt, 
xxvii. 1 — 38, Luke xxiii. 89 — 43, Matt, xxvii. 39 — 54, where the break in Matt, 
is marked by u8c anfiKri; or the one alluded to above from Aots xx. 16 — 18, 
28 — 36, where the break is marked by hxep^vvq and the resumption by /cat 
XC717. The break here is exactly as in the printed Apostolos. 

^ Scr. avvayvocfM... alia nequaquam legenda ascripsit M (lege L). Probably 
an erasure of an error by the original scribe who found that Saturday was 
wrong. 

28 

St Matthew. 

Description of lesson. Contends, 

avvayvofrfjM rrcpt rov (ra^fkiTov xxi. 33 — 42 

[av^vayvoafia n'€piTov[Kv]pidKrj^ xxii. 2 — 14 

avvayvoo-fia ntpi rov KvpiaKij'^ Xxii. 15 — 33 

avvayvocfia ntpi rov aafiParov xxii. 33 — 46 

\a\vvayvofTp4i \ir\spi rov [k]v' 
puiKrj 

avvayvoap^i ntpi rov KVpuiKrj 

end of a lesson marked 

xxiii. 1 — 12 

XXV. 13—46 
xxvi. — 29 

appayvoo'fia €is ttjv ptyaXriv XXvi. 29, 30 
ntpTrfv (sic) 

end of a lesson marked 

/( 

avvayvoapa tis rov napao'Kfv- 
yov 
-i [note cade oTTfKrfl^ 
lapvayvocpa fis riv napaaKv- 
\ yrfv 

avvaypoixpa 

xxvii. — 2 

xxvii. 1—38 
-l-Luke xxiii. 

39—43 
-I- Matt, xxvii. 

39—54 

xxviii. 1 — 20 

Byzantine parallel. 

13th Smiday after Pente- 
cost 

14th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 

13th Sabbath after 

Pentecost 
has the lesson xxii. 15 — 

22 

15th Sunday after Pente- 
cost 
[xxii. 34—46] 

14th Sabbath after 
Pentecost 

Sunday ri;^ anoKpfon 

? 

Holy Thursday 
lesson in Byzantine use 
is xxvi. 1 — 20 

Good Friday 
ri; ayia napavKtvr} m 
rrjv XfiTovpyuiv exactly 

Tfo dyifo Kcu p(ya\a> vafi- 
parca iairfpas 

avvayvofrpa 

St John. 
iv. 5—25 

5th Sunday after Easter 
[iv. 5—42] 

^ Not quite clear: is it not Kvp id' or some corruption of it? 

'-^ Scrivener suggests that this is the lesson for the 13th Sabbath pius the 
lesson for the sixth day of the 10th week. 

3 And under Luke the entry for the continued lection avvayvocpM eis tw 
xapa<rK€vyTiv, 

29 

Description of lesson. 

avvagvocfia 
avvagvocfia 
avvayvo(Tii.a 
avvayvoafia 

avvayvo(rfia 

avvayvo(rfia 

avvayvoafia 

avvayvoo-fia 

avvayvoafia 

avvayvotrfJM 

apxij — TcXof 
apvayvoo'iia 

€19 TTfv cvKrjvriovv 

St John. 

Contents. 
V. 19—24 

V. 24—30 

V. 30— vi. 2 

vi. 14—27 

vi. 22—33 

vi. 35—40 

vi. 39—44 

vi. 48—64 

vi. 66—63 

vii. 1—13 

viii. 20—30 

2 

ix. 1—38 (?) 
X. 7—16 
X. 17— 

X. 22—28 

Byzantine parallel. 

4th day of the 6th week 
after Easter (?) 

6th day of the 2nd week 
after Easter (?) 

6th day of the 2nd week 
after Easter (?) 

Sabbath of the 2nd week 
after Easter 

3rd day of the 3rd week 

after Easter 
[vi. 27—33] 

6th day of the 3rd week 

after Easter 
[vi. 35—39] 

5th day of the 3rd week 

after Easter 
[vi. 40—44] 

4th day of the 3rd week 
after Easter 

2nd day of the 4th week 

after Easter 
[vi. 66—69] 

3rd day of the 4th week 
after Easter 

6th day of the 4th week 

after Easter 
[viii. 21—30] 

6th Sunday after Easter 

?? 

6th day of the 5th week 
after Easter 

^ Not quite clear whether this is due to L. Note that the common Byzan- 
tine expression is ets KOLfi-qOevTai, 
^ Note the Latinism in encaenium. 

so 

Description of lesson, 

TcXoff 

St John. 

Contents. 
X. 27?— 38 

avvayvoa-fia nepi rov (ra/3/Sarot; xi. 1 — 45 

avvayvoa-fia irfpi to KvpMKrj^ xii. 1 — 18 

avvayvoafta xii. 24 — 36 

avvayvoa-fia xii. 28 — 47 

avvayvoa-fia €is riv fieyakrfv xiii. 3 — 17 

avvayvoafia 

avvayvotrfia 

avpaypotTfia 
Tov afroXvariop^ 

xiv. 1—12 

XV. 17 — xvi. 2 

xvii. 1—13 
XX. 19—? 

Byzantine parallel. 

Sabbath of the 5th week 
after Easter 

6th Sabbath of the Fast 

Palm Sunday 

? 

? 

Holy Thursday 

6th day of the 6th week 

after Easter 
[xiv. 1—11] 

Sabbath of the 3rd week 

after Easter 
[xv. 17 — xvi. 1] 

6th Sunday after Easter 

? 

St Luke. 

avvayvoa-fM ir€pi rov KvpiuKti ? iv. 31 — 36 

avvayvoafM irepi tov aapParov iv. 32 — 42 

avvayvoafia ircpi tov KvpiaKrj v. 1 — 11 

avvayvoafia irepi tov KvpiaKtf V. 17 — 26 

avvayvoapM irtpi tov aa^fiarov vi. 31 — 36 

avvayvoafia irtpi tov aa^fiaTov vii. 1 — 10 

avvayvoafia ir€pi tov KVpicucrf vii. 11 — 16 

avvayvoapa nepi tov aa^aTov vii. 17 — 28 

1st Sabbath in New Year 

? 

1st Sunday in New Year 

2nd Sabbath in New 
Year 

2nd Sunday in New Year 

5th Sabbath in New Year 

3rd Sunday in New Year 

5th day of the 3rd week 

in New Year 
[vii. 17—30] 

^ This is the lesson that is written over one marked by J for the Sunday of 
the Prophotism, of which more elsewhere. 

^ The word has been supposed to be the same as aToXinrc/iOf, but no satis- 
factory explanation has been given of it. 

31 

St Luke. 

Description of lesson. Contents, 

avpaypoo'fia nfpi tov KvpuiKt} viii. 4 — 15 

avvayvocfia ir€pi tov (rap^arfw viii. 16 — 21 

avvayvoafM ir€pi to KvpiaKrj viii. 41 — 66 

avvayvo(TpM irtpi tov (m^^arov ix. 1 — 6 

avvaypocTfia irepi tov KvpiaKrf xii. 16 — 22 

avyayvoapa ir€pi tov aa^arov xii. 32 — 40 

avvaypoo-fM nfpi tov aafi^Tov xiv. 1 — 11 

avvayvoafjia nepi tov KvputKti xiv. 16 — 35^ 

avvayvoafM ir€pi tov aapfiarov XV. 2 — 10 

avvayvoa-fia nfpi tov aafifiarov XV. 11 — 32 

avvayvoa-fM irtpi tov tra^^aTov xvii. 3 — 10 

avvayvoa-fia nepi tov KvpiaKtf xvii. 11 — 19 

avvayvoa-fia irepi tov o-afi^aTov x\iii. 18 — 27 

avvvyvoa-fJM €is tiv 7rapaaK€vyriv xxiii. 39 — 43 

Byzantine parcdlel, 

4th Sunday in New Year 
[viii. 5—15] 

6th Sabbath in New Year 

7th Sunday in New Year 

7th Sabbath in New Year 

9th Sunday in New Year 

11th Sabbath in New 
Year 

13th Sabbath in New 
Year 

11th Sunday in New 

Year 
[xiv. 16— 24] 

Sabbath npo ttjs anoKpca 
[xv. 1—10] 

Sunday npo Ttfs anoKpfca 

15th Sunday in New 
Year 

12th Sunday in New 

Year 
[xvii. 12—19] 

13th Sunday in New 
Year 

Good Friday, see under 
Matthew 

St Mark. 

avvayvoapa ircpi tov aapfiarov i. 35 — 45 

avvayvoa-fia irepi tov KvpiaKtf ii. 1 — 12 
awayvoafjM ire pi tov aafi^aTov ii. 14 — 22 

2nd Sabbath of the Fast 
[i. 36—44] 

2nd Sunday of the Fast 

3rd Sabbath of the Fast 
[ii. 14—17] 

^ Scrivener saggests that this includes the lesson for the third day of the 9th 
week : (xiv. 24 — 35). 

32 

St Mark. 

Description of lesson. Contents, Byzantine parallel, 

avvayvoo'iJM irepi rov irafificerov vii. 31 — 37 4th Sabbath of the Fast 

avvaypoafw, wepi tov (to^^tov viii. 27 — 31 5th Sabbath of the Fast 

avvayvoa-fia nepi tov KvpiaKtf viii. 34 — ix, 1 3i"d Sunday of the Fast 

apvayvoa-fia irepi tov KvpiaKrj x. 32 — 45 5th Sunday of the Fast 

Finally we have in the Acts against ii. 46 the two following 
notes : 

[ai/]ayi/0(r/xa [wcjpi tov atJ[pPa]rai 
TTfs [di]aKovp([(r(]/xov 

where the margin has been encroaching on the text. This 
important note intimates the beginning of the lection of the 
Sabbath rrj^ SiaKivrjaifioVy which characteristic Byzantine term 
is used to distinguish the fluctuating part of the calendar from 
the fixed part. 

Scrivener, however, notes that the proper Byzantine lesson 
for this day is Acts iii. 1 — 16. 

And on f. 435 b at the top of the page 

ITfpl TOV KVpiaKfl 

and the apxn marked against Acts vi. 1, a lesson which appears 
to be the lesson for the third Sunday, or, as we should say, 
for the second after Easter (=Acts vi. 1 — 7). 

A review of this system (which we may call the L-system) 
is conclusive that it is the Byzantine system ; in spite of certain 
confusions^ between Saturdays and Sundays, the scribe has 
a system of Saturday-Sunday lections running through the 
Synoptic Gospels, and a series of unattached lections marked 
simply avva/yvoafia running through John. 

Over and above this system (the double system of Saturday 
and Sunday lessons, beginning with the fixed new year for 
Luke, and with the moveable ecclesiastical year for Matt, and 
Mark), the L-system contained 

a lesson for Transfiguration, 
a lesson for Holy Thursday, 

^ EspeoiaUy in Matthew, where Sabbaths and Sundays are frequently dis- 
placed. 

33 

a lesson for Good Friday, 

a lesson pro defunctis, 

a lesson for the Dedication (? of a Church), 

a lesson for Palm Sunday ^ 

a lesson for Saturday in Easter week (SiaKi^vrfaifio^), 

a lesson described as tov airoXvarfov (John xx. 19 — ?). 

These lessons are for the most part introduced by a 
barbarous formula (irepi tov KvpiaKrj) which is somewhat 
modified in the lessons of Holy Thursday and Good Friday 
into €t9 Tqv irapaaKevrfv &c., as if the scribe had been mending 
his grammar, though even here the barbarism clings to the 
spelling (irapaaKevyrjvy, 

As we have already stated, L is a Latin. That is proved by 
his alphabet (G for F), and by his vocalisation (reXoi;? for 
reXo?)'; it is also probable that his blunders over irepi arose 
from his familiarity with a lectionary formula pro sabbato &c. 
and the supposition that pro^irepL In that case he must 
have been transcribing his notes from a briefer form than his 
own, probably a Gospel in which there was only an entry on 
the margin of aafi. and Kvp., or avay. aa/S.) If we could be 

KVp,) * 

sure of the reading against Matt. xxii. 2 which Scrivener 
gives as 

av\vayvoafia ntpi tov 
Kv]pifiKri 

then in view of the fact that it is the lesson for the fourteenth 
(tS) Sunday, we might conjecture that the scribe had been 
deciphering a note where li had been superposed upon some 
abbreviation of Kvpiafcr). But the reading is too uncertain to 
dogmatise on, in view of the necessary similarity of A and A, 
It is more likely that it is an error of decipherment on the part 
of Scrivener. 

1 Which however only appears as an ordinary Sunday, after aU; for the 
distinctive name for Palm Sunday has, as we shall see, heen corrected away by 
the scribe. 

^ The script is a little smaller than L's normal annotations but the hand 
appears to be the same. 

^ Cf. vcTpovi for w€Tpoi in the text of Cod. Bezae. 

H. 3 

34 

Reviewing the work of L summarily, we see a Latin scribe 
(with hardly enough Greek to deserve the title of bilingual) 
transcribing from a Greek Gospel a system of lectionary notes ^ 
Of these there is little that diverges from the Byzantine 
system, and there is no special festival unless it be Dedication 
Day and the Transfiguration. There is not a single saint nor 
any mention of the Blessed Virgin. 

We pass on to show that the system of lections which the 
scribe L has given us is not the same as that of the scribe J, 
whom he corrects and alters. 

Of the annotator J and his lection-systeni. 

It had been remarked by Scrivener that, on fol. 150 b, the 
scribe L had superscribed a note of an earlier scribe J, 
intimating that the passage of the Gospel of John which 
followed was a lesson 

Out of this L made avvayvoafia ireprf to KvpiaKr), omitting 
the reference to the Prophotism as if he did not understand 
it. Thus he corrected the Lection for Palm Sunday into an 
ordinary Sunday lection, as the annexed facsimile will show 
more clearly^. 

Moreover in this particular lection L appears to have cor- 
rected J for giving a verse too much to the lesson, and with- 
draws the T€\o9 of the lesson to v. 19. It might be argued 
that this minute correction was the very best proof that L's 
system was the same as J's, as Mr Brightman maintains^ but 

^ His Greek is not literary, but colloquial. His use of the form ^epfitpwri, 
for example, is exactly paralleled in the Greek dialects of S. Italy, and pr^Mtbly 
elsewhere. Thus in the district of Otranto we have dpapewut and in the dialect 
of Bova we have Kara^evvta. But we must not draw hasty conclusions, for in 
Acts iii. 1 we have the spelling apaipevvov in Cod. A and wt^pvov in Cod. C. 

3 Plate i. 4. Where it should also be noted that J had for his note of com- 
mencement of the lesson a sign which meant originally &pxfli ^^^ X ^i^d p being 
made into a monogram, but which appears in J's hands as a monogram of % 
and p with a and <a on the wings of the cross that stands for x* 

35 

the fallacy of the inference will be clear from the following 
considerations. 

The lection in question being the proper lesson for Palm 
Sunday, as will be generally admitted though L does not 
actually write tcop fiatmv for tcSp irpoifHOTiafidTtop, then the 
preceding Sabbath lesson will be the lesson for the Saturday 
which precedes Palm Sunday. Accordingly we have in the 
L-system a lesson marked (John xi. 1 — 45), which Scrivener 
identifies as the Byzantine lesson aaff/SaTa) r tcop prjaTeitop^. 
But that this is not J's lesson for the day in question will be 
seen by turning to fdl. 67 b, where against Matt. xx. 29 there is 
a note which Scrivener did not decipher, and which we give in 
facsimile. It runs 

^ ra> aa^^ 

(jiOVTiafJLOTtOV 

with the apxv sign^ and the hand of the annotator whom we 
call J. It is, from the language, a con^esponding lesson to the 
one in John, and belongs with it. But that it is not the lesson 
of the L-system is clear from the erasure (by L ?) of the whole 
note, and from the substitution by L of another lection for the 
day. We are thus carried into an earlier system. And the 
decipherment of the note may be of importance in the histor)' 
of the Codex. 

That the system is earlier may be seen from the fact that it 
keeps the baptism of the Competentes more in mind, which was 
a much more careful and long-drawn-out order in the days of 
adult baptism than it becomes when infant-baptism is the rule. 
The lesson for the Saturday before Palm Sunday is one of the 
stages in the initiation of the Catechumens ; it is not merely 
marked as Sabbath of the Prophotisms or Pre-illuminations, 
but the J-lesson is intended to impress the fact of the illumina- 
tion: it is the lesson which relates the opening of the eyes of 
the blind men at Jericho, and is, therefore, altogether appro- 
priate to the time of baptismal initiation*. But it can hardly, 

1 From which lesson it is commonly known as the Sabbath of Lazarus. 
3 Plate ii. 1. This time without the added a and w. 

^ As the miracle immediately precedes the triumphal entry in Matt., it may 
m'erely be introduced to lead up to Palm Sunday. 

3—2 

36 

as we have said, belong to a later stage of evolution of the 
baptismal ritual, for L replaces it by a lesson from John with 
Palm-Sunday lesson in sequence and apparently erases alto- 
gether the reference to the Illumination of the Catechumens*. 
But the use of such a lesson is, further, an argument against 
its being recognised as a Western ritual, for the characteristic 
miracle which illustrates baptisai in the Western rituals is the 
opening of the ears, which gives a special feature (known as 
Effeta) to the initiations. We have thus to ask the question, 
In what outljdng region of the West or in what part of the 
East, did they use the miracle of Matt. xx. 29 — 34, and the 
lesson which reports it, in the initiation of Catechumens ? To 
which we must add a further question : Since this lesson is 
not to be referred to mere erudition, transcribing notes for their 
own sake, nor to the revival of Greek letters, nor to any form of 
the desire to be more Greek than one really had a traditional 
right to be, in wliat city or district did they keep up the 
custom of instructing the Catechumens in Greek, not merely, as 
at Rome, through transliterations of the Greek responses, but 
by the actual reading of Greek Gospels ^ 

It is in the answer to such questions that the solution of 
the perplexity as to the origin and history of the Codex Bezae 
is to be sought. Let us, however, finish our treatment of the 
scribe J by collecting any further traces of his hand in the Codex. 

So far as I can see there are only two other cases in which 
the hand of J is suspected. 

At the beginning of Luke, Scrivener makes the following 
annotations : 

185 b, 1. 10. marg ^ (Marc 24 ; Liic i. 39 — 56) aliend. manu (forsan J) : 
in eSdem. 

188 b, 1. 9. T« medio lineae (Jun 24 : Luc i. 80). 

191 b, 1. 23. apx ad to per + refert M [Jan 1 : ii. 40]. 

ibid. 1. 25. fin t reXos M [Feb 2 : ii. 40] rcXor a J ad init. lineae 
eraso. 

^ This is also clear from the fact that verses which foUow the displaoed 
lesson (or which formed a part of it) turn up in the Morning Service for Palm 
Sunday, thus : rod 6p0pov' Mor^. Sre 'tjyyiff€v...i:iilKl<rdri ^/cet, i.e. Matt. xxi. 1 — 18. 

3 If, indeed, we are right in assuming that the Gospels were read in Latin in 
the Roman ritual for baptism. 

37 

Here I suppose *Mare 24* to stand for 'March 24/ The 
sign which precedes it is the dpxv of the lection; and it is 
quite possible that the t€\o9 is the one noted on £ 188 b. 
Scrivener suggests that these two entries are due to J, and 
proposes to identify them with conventional lessons for the 
Annunciation and the Birthday of St John the Baptist; but 
the proof is incomplete on all the points proposed. It is 
quite doubtful whether J has been rightly invoked in this 
place. 

It is further suggested that a lesson was marked by J on 
f. 191 b and erased by the scribe M, at least so far as its reXo^ 
is concerned. An examination of the facsimile will show the 
dpxn belonging to this t€\o^ on f. 190 b after irepl Xvfiedov. 
But a reference to Scrivener p. 451 will show that he identified 
this sign of the beginning of a lection as due to the hand which 
he calls Mj. So that here also it is very doubtful whether the 
hand J has been rightly identified. 

On the whole we are inclined to believe that the only cases 
where this hand is found are the two [baptismal] lections for 
the Saturday before Palm Sunday and for Palm Sunday. 

Of the annotator I and his lection-system. 

There is one lectionary annotator left, who is supposed to be 
anterior to J and L, and whom Scrivener denotes by I. His 
hand is traced in two places only : the first is , 

f. 130 b, 11. 13. 14. (IS TrfP fi€a-oir€PTrfKoaT^ 

where the lesson suggested is John vii. 14[ — 80 ?]. This is the 
proper lesson for the fourth day of the fourth week after Easter, 
which is appropriately described as fieaoTrevTrjKoaTijf as being 
just midway between Easter and Pentecost. 
The second passage is 

f. 197 b. €IS TO V€OV aiTOS 

where the lesson suggested is Luke iv. 1 — . 

38 

The beginning of the New Year is a regular feature of the 
Byzantine Menology, where the Ist of Sept. is so named', 
and where the fixed part of the calendar begins. Of these 
two festivals attributed to I, both appear to be characteristically 
Byzantine. The Western Church did not create the term 
fiea-oTTevrfj/eoa-T^ nor did it commence its ecclesiastical calendar 
in Sept. If then the scribe I has been rightly dated, the Codex 
is under Byzantine influence from its first annotator. 

Of the annotators of lections whom Scrivener denotes 

by the sign M. 

The discrimination of the remaining annotators is much 
more difficult. We have a group of five, whom Scrivener 
denotes by the signs M, Mj, Mg, M3 and M4, but with a caution 
that the matter may have been subdivided more than was 
necessary, and that some of the hands may be identical. 

The hands employed from this group in marking lections 
are M, Mg and M4 ; of whom M and Mg are found in the Gospels, 
and M4 once in the end of Mark, and the rest of the time in the 
Acts. We will first tabulate the occurrences of M. 

St Matthew. 

Description of lesson, 

XV yevur 

i.e. xpiarov ycpvrjo'is 

Tov fjLayov 

to 
rf\os oTt va(ppos KXt^t<r[f]''« 

rtff eOpTtS TOP BcofJHlVliiiV f, 

i.e. Trjs eoprrjs twv Beoffmvfuov 

Contents. 
11. 1 — 

ii. 13—23 

• • • ^ 
111. 1 — 

Byzantine parallel. 
Christmas 

December 26 
Epiphany 

^ Some reckoniDgs begin the New Year with the Equinox. 

39 

St Luke. 

Description of lesson. Contents, 

Perhaps a lesson marked by f, i. 39 — 80 (?) 
(= apx*?) which Scr. attri- 
butes to J 

Perhaps a lesson marked by ii. 40 — 1 
apx 

Perhaps a lesson marked by ^ ii. 25 — 40 
(=iap)(Tj) and by rtXos 

A lesson marked by t€\os — xii. 31 

Byzantine parallel. 

\ Circumcision 

Scrivener suggests the 
2nd day of the 8th 
week 

The places where Mg is suspected are as follows : 

-frtvayoi'ocrts rtr BttarmKov to 

ayovoTo te 
I.e. avayvonris rrjs Bcotokov tov 

avyovoTou u 

A lesson marked by Te\os + 

Luke X. 38 — 42 Assumption of the Vir- 
gin (Aug. 15) 

Luke xvi?— 31 

Scr. suggests the 5th 
Sunday, for which the 
lesson is Luke xvi. 
19—31 

The lessons referred to M4 are as follows : 

f Tfjs av(iKtv^rjiJLov 

i.e. ap)(rj rrfs avtzKrjfi^ifjLov 

Mark xvi. 9 [ — Ascension Day 
20] eis opBpov 

and the following places in the Acts: 

^ Tt TTci/rucooTt Acts ii. 1 

i.e. ctpxri TTj irePTrjKOfmj 

A lesson marked with reXor Acts ii. — 38 
at Acts ii. 38 

Whit Sunday 

apx and T* 
[cro]/3« apX and r« 

[r]iy Tpi'^ apx and rc^ 
[avTi^nacxa apX 

Acts iii. 1 — 8 5th day of the 1st week 
Actsiii.ll — 16 Sabbath of the 1st week 

Actsvii. 30—35 

Acts viii. 26 — 
39 

Acts X. ?— 16 

5th day of the 3rd week 
after Easter 

2nd day of the 4th week 
after Easter 

40 

Description of lesson. Contents. Byumtitie p(irallel. 

[f)iifpa\ Kf* Acts X. 21 — \ 3rd day of the 4th week 

after £a8ter 

i;/Lt« kB apx and t« xi. 19—30 5th Suuday after Easter 

\fi'^ apx and t« xii. 25 — xiii. 12 3rd day of the 5th week 

after Easter 

[rjp.y Xy3 apx and t« xiii. 13 — 24 4th day of the 5th week 

Kc ^* and T* xiv. 6—18 4th day of the 4th week 

after Easter 

X5 apx and r« xiv. 20 — 27 5th day of the 5th week 

after Easter 

apx rfp^ Xr and t« xvi. 16 — 34 6th Sunday 

In the lessons coutained in this group, the most noteworthy 
point is the steady adherence to the Byzantine lectionary, 
especially in the case of M4, where the Acts of the Apostles is 
read from Easter to Pentecost (But note that the actual days 
from Easter are counted, and not the weeks and days as in 
most lectionaries and calendars). 

The lesson attributed to Mg for the Assumption of the 
Virgin should be noticed (Aug. 15th). It is the only festival in 
which the Virgin is specially named. 

On tfie Annotators N and 0, 

The remaining annotators need uot detain us long, especially 
since the previous examination has abundantly verified that all 
the scribes referred to (unless an exception be taken for J) are 
drawing upon the Byzantine Synaxarion. The annotator N 
stands for a number of pencil marks, consisting merely of apx^'i' 
and reXrj for lessons ; and I do not see that anything is gained 
by tabulating them. They agree for the most part with lessons 
in the Greek calendar. 

^ Scr. suggests that this is an error for k8\ 
'^ Scr. suggests that this should be Xa'. 
^ Scr. suggests that this should be XjS'. 
* i.e. the 25th day, apxv* 

41 

But with (whom Scrivener divides into O and O2) the 
case is different. He introduces impoi^tant festivals, which may 
have a bearing upon the problem of the history of the Codex. 
His hand can be traced as follows ^ : 

Description of lesson. 
B AP and t€ 

apx and T«*^ 
apx and T« 

[rjou ayiov 
\y\Eiapyiov 

^* TQi^ ayiov diopvaiov o/jeo)- 
nayiTov 

Contents. 
Acts i. 12—26 

Byzantine parallel. 

2nd day of the first 
week after Easter 

Acts ii. 1 — 11 Whitsunday 

Acts ii. 14 — 21 Sid day of the tii-st week 

after Easter 

Acts xii. 1 — 11 Festival of St George 

(Ap. 23)3 

Acts xvii. 19 — Festival of St Dionysius 
34 the Areo^wgite (Oct. 3) 

[Acts xvii. 16—34] 

The first three of these five lessons (which we refer to O 
without more minute division) show that the Byzantine lessons 
from Easter to Pentecost are being followed. The last two 
introduce important festivals of the Church or Monastery where 
the Codex was preserved. We shall return to the discussion of 
them by-and-by. 

Of the headlines to the Gospels in Codex Bezae, 

Amongst the apparatus of the Gospels in Greek, a prominent 
feature is the tltXoi or summaries of the chapters, which are 
usually tabulated at the beginning of each Gospel, and written 
seriatim along the upper margins of the text. 

In the Codex Bezae there is also a series of titles which 
diverges a good deal from the canonical type both by excess 
and defect but cannot be wholly independent. They are 
assigned by Scrivener to two scribes Mi and Ma, of whom Mj 

1 Plate ii. 2. 

^ The entry having already been made at the head of the page by M4. 

» Plate ii. 3. 

* i.e. apxVt Bee Plate iic 4. 

42 

is credited with the rirXoc in Matt., M^ (for the most part) 
with those in John and Luke. We have shown above that 
M3 is older than L, and must therefore be assigned to the 
end of the ninth or the beginning of the tenth century. This 
conclusion may perhaps cany back to the same date the scribe 
to whom we shall presently i*efer, who has written the Sortes 
Sanctorum in Mark. For Scrivener suspects that he is the 
same person as M^, and even if that should be a mistake in 
judgment, they cannot be far apart in time. The following 
is a list of the titles, which we give in full, as we have 
deciphered a good deal more than is found in Scrivener. The 
numbers on the margin are the conventional numbers of the 
rirXoLy and the foliation of the MS. is also given, and occasional 
abbreviations resolved. 

Matthew (i-eferred to Mj). 

28 6 [^fpt] Tov BtpiiTfiov KOI TOP anooToXov 

336 . . fc y€V€as <oiiva tCTip irtSvs 

346 €K€iv<o [icaiptt)] €irlop€vBrj] Sta tov 
[<r]7ropifjLov ev acuifiaaiv 

KA 35 6 \n€pi Tov\ (ipav e)(OPTos x^P^^ 

37 6 fkuriKuis tov Bv 

38 6 tov ypafiareop km <f>api<r€ov 

39 6 wapa^oXis € [? cic] to ttXuo 

426 [aXXi;i/] napapoXiP napt&iKfv avTvs Xtyo*" rj /SacrtXia tov 

oipavov avBponoi anipovT + 
436 [aX]Xu/ wap^Xiv nfpi kov [ = icoicicoi/] aivantoi 
456 [7r€pt i;pfi>]dow t«w jSacriXf*** 

Kr 476 [TTCpt TO)I/] 7r€[|/]T€ apTov 

KZ 48 6 [TTCpt tO] irtpXirarovvTOi is tiv ^a[Xacrcrai/] 

49 6 [iTfpi TO)!'] <l>apX(r€ov 

A A 51 6 [ntpi Tcov] f ' apTov 

AB 526 [fl'cpt] TOV ffrnptctov 

AF 536 ...Tt*" Tiva p.t Xfywrii' avBponoi 

AA 55 6 [TTcpt n;r px^apx^pyftoa-tos 

\Z hlh TO)i/ paBrfTt,,. Xtyov*' pctBrjT , , apa tis p'i(ov 

AH 596 [TTCpt] TOV p' iTpofiarov 

606 ...TTO /3a<r(Xevff riBckia-tv avvapiv Xoyov ptTa tov SoXov avrov 

61 6 TTCpi aV^py^S KCU yvv€Kos 

636 [7r€pi TOiv vrj\7rtov tov irpoiTfVtKBtvTo t© K[vf)t6)] 

646 [ffrept tov cL\vir€\ovos 7rapa/3oXt 

43 

Mr 66 6 [^w€pL rwi/] t/3 airo(TToXov km rov vgdv (t^tdfov 

MA 67 b [TTcpi rwi/] fi Tv<f}\ov 

686 [TTf/ji T(OP /3ac]oi/ 

696 ? 

MH 706 [^rep]* €pa>Ti(ravTov^ €v nva f^ovarja Ttwra irvis 

M0 71 6 [irepi Tov ajvircXovos top /3 T€kpov 

NA 736 icoXecrai/rcf tovs K€K\XKOTas 

75 6 fc TTipa^op avTOP km Xcyoi/ Trva evroXc 

John (referred to Mg). 

E 1146 [wfpt] Ti]s (TajMaprfTibos 

116 6 [wjepi TOV BtpnTfiov 

S" 117 6 [Tfp]t TOV ^aCKrja-Kov 

Z 1186 [wejpt TOV irapakvTVKOv 

H 122 6 [wc]pi TOP Trei/Tf apTOP 

124 6 7r€pi TOW TTfptTrarovi/Tor fi/ rt BaXaai 

128 6 orjt (TicXi/poff fOTiv o Xoyor.... 

129 6 Trepi ri;ff KTKrjponvrjas 

1 1386 Trepi tou tv<I)Xov 
lA 1456 [wfjpt rov \a(apov 

Luke (i-eferred to Mg). 

1846 1^ TTfpi rtff rrapBfpov 

1906 1^ <rvp.€o>p KM as (sic) rir npof^vribo 

191 6 TTfpt rou icu rtr 7rfdi;af to) [yJeva/Ltcvos^ 

192 6 1^ itaappov to ^anTioTov en. Trei/re km StKaToo 
194 6 ip rou rjpo86 to^^ i,<app^^ 

197 6 1^ (ff nipaa-Bfis 

lA 2006 [^rcpt] Tts ay pas top i\6vop 

ir 202 6 1^ rov TrapaXvrifcov 

lA 2046 [ip] rov rv^oXov ro Xevyt to 

205 6 1^ bavyi oirc urrjKBfp ep to Sva-iaariprjop Kai <f}ay€P tos apTos 
Tis irpoB((r€os 

2066 fi TOP fiaBrfTop avrov 

2366 + ir€pi woKocriov 

N0 252 6 fp TfXovcrov Kat Xa^apov + 

Sr 257 6 |( crrfpoTLO-fos apxoPTos 

S?E icoi rov ^a\€ov 

^ This, I suppose, is equivalent to irepi cpuTr/iraPTWv, 

'^ Perhaps something like repi tov prffjuaros Tpos iwopprjp yevofupov, but of. 
f . 192 b. 

44 

These tabulated lists of titXoi are critically of importance 
in the following points: (1) by their frequent coincidence with 
the conventional Byzantine rirXoi, they show that there has 
been a transcription made from some other copy of the Gospels 
into the pages of the Codex Bezae^: (2) such a transcription 
was not necessitated by any liturgical demands, and must 
therefore have arisen out of simple literary interest; the 
conclusion is important, as bearing upon the point whether 
the addition of the marginal lections necessarily implies 
liturgical use of Greek Gospels: (3) the language of the 
annotator shows a trace of the vowel prefixed to 8 impurum 
in laKfjponoua {a/crjpoTrrjyLo) ; this cannot of itself be taken as 
a Gallicism as traces of the same linguistic peculiarity are 
to be found elsewhere (as in Semitic languages and in Greek 
papyri) : but here there is no need to suspect Semitic influence, 
and it is a question between a possible Greek dialect and a 
Gallicism. In French lips, the vowel would have been perfectly 
natural. (4) The very same hand (apparently) that gives us the 
form La/crjpoTroua is responsible for the semivocalic g in Savyc 
and Xevyi. So that the evidence of the tltXoi must be added to 
the evidence furnished by the scribe L for the existence of this 
peculiarity, not only in official documents, such as baptismal 
creeds, concerning which we have spoken above, but also 
in the dialect of the people amongst whom the Codex was 
preserved. 

All of these points must be borne in mind before we come 
to the final arguments as to the home of the Codex. 

There remains one annotator of the M group, not necessarily 
a different or a new personality, though his hand is peculiarly 
novel in the series of notes to which we have to draw attention ; 
we refer to the annotator who inscribed the Sortes Sanctorum 
in St Mark, to whom Scrivener gives the mark of recognition 
Ml or Mg. In order to estimate his evidence rightly, we 
transcribe the series of sortes, and prefix some notes for the 
better appreciation of the subject. 

^ At the same time note that on f. 117 b he writes irepi tov patnXrfffKov which 
is the spelling of Cod. Bezae : if he has copied from elsewhere it looks as if he 
had harmonised with his own text. 

45 

Of Sortes Sanctorum in general. 

It was pointed out in my Study of Codex Bezae^ that 
there was a series of annotations in the MS. written at the 
foot of the pages containing the Gospel of Mark, which was a 
part of a system of Sortes Sanctorum or sentences for divi- 
nation ; and that these sentences, which were written in Greek, 
were closely connected with a similar system in Latin, which 
was found on the margins of a famous Old Latin Codex of 
the Gospels, the S. Germain MS. g^ in the Gospel of John. 
And we drew the inference from the close relationship between 
the two series of annotations, both in matter and in point of 
time, that there was also some local propinquity between the 
two MSS. involved, and that they were both Gallican MSS. 
in the tenth century, whatever might have been their prior 
geographical habitat. The suspicion which has been cast 
on the lawfulness of this inference, by M. Berger and others, 
makes it proper to re-examine the question of the system of 
Sortes with a view to the verification or rejection of the 
geographical conclusion. But first let us get some further 
idea as to the diffusion, antiquity, &c. of the method of 
divination in question. 

The oracles to be consulted may be (a) an actual collection 
of possible answers to enquiries, from which a special oracle 
is selected by some more or less random method ; (6) they may 
be the whole of a sacred book (Bible, Virgil, Koran^, &c.) 
considered as a mine of oracles and a storehouse of possible 
guidance, where the book is opened by some chance method 
and the eye or the finger lights upon the sentence that is 
to determine action or predict destiny ; (c) both these methods 
appear to be combined in the Codex Bezae and the Codex 
Sangermanensis where the sentences are placed in the margins 

^ c. u. 

^ A good instance for the Koran is its use by the Vizier of Amurath I. 
(1389 A.D.) when battle was impending with the Servians: the first verse found 
was *0 Prophet, fight the unbelievers and the hypocrites': the second was 
'Verily a large army is often beaten by a weaker one.' 

46 

of the Gospel, and by this means acquire the religious character 
which they certainly are not otherwise overburdened with. 

The oldest case known to me of divination by sortes will be 
found in an inscription fi'om Asia Minor which is given in 
Kaibel, Epigrammata Graecay no. 1038, from Hirschfeld, Act 
Acad. Berolin, min. 1875, p. 716. 

The inscription was found at Attalia in Pamphylia and 
runs as follows: 

I. ar$"r[y] k/3 MoipSiv eniffrnvav, 

Els] x'*°^» '■p«f ^^] ^{"'■^j niviTTos Tptios TTfiirrav, 

Bvar)(€p€S fOTt t[o\ irpayfuif irfpi ov [v^ev^fj k€ airvarov. 
dXX* ^crv;(to£ fievf, X^(ra[t] rf oBov Koi dyopiis. 

II. bbbb^ Kfi Ho€r€^a>vos, 

T4(Ta-apa 5* oi Tcacapes., V...8 fK«]nyf r... 
€ls TriXayos airtpiia ^a[Xcri/ kcu y^pafifjutra ypd^ai 

dfl<l)6T€pOV p.6\6oS T€ K€v6s [<c]<I( aTTpOKTOS, 

III. 57[y]$*^ *ci3 "Apttas Bovpiov, 
Tianrapa kcu hvo rpels, bvo 5* i^circ Tdb€ <f>pd{[€v. 
,,.,viKi]v,,, [fl^i'f T^vB€ yap ovbtXs 

fjuya (Tov T€ <f>v\d^ai 

dfl ["Ix^f anpaKTos [o /io;^^]of, cV* ^o\y]x^n ^* d[i'd/ieti'oi/]. 

IV. aS'S'S'B icy *ABrjvas, 

Eilr x^^^f ^P^*y ^* ^i^^'f'f *fflt Tf(ro"[ap* 6 7r]ci/7rTor. 
IlaXXdd* *ABrjvairjp Tfipxi kcu ndwa croi eorc 
oo'O'a ^€X]tr, icot croi ra Sedoy/xci/a irdvra rfXftrat 
X]u<rt 5* €y8€iTp.£>v koi [r]6[i/] voacovra Si crd>[crfi]. 

V. ^S'bby Ky 'Ev<l)po<rvvri5, 

SjreXXf* oTTov [^H* ^]vftdf TrdXti/ ydp 86fiop (arai 
€vpiVf Koi 7rpd^t]f Kard i/oui/ 7rdi/ro re KpaTrf(T€ts 
'Ev<l)po(TvvrfVj [caji/fto'^e TTcaXfti/ rf Kat oilra>r. 

VI. $"$*$"7y <cd Ilu^tov *A7rdXXo)vor. 

MifiP€ »c[at] ft^ ^pdiflS' ^oifiov xprfo-fioiiTi 5c 7rft[^ov]. 
ciXXoi/ xfP'i icatpj^v TTiptlp' vvv ^ rjavxos tcr^i* 
/Li(]fcpoi/ f[7rt]crx««>v rfXeo"tr [7rd]v^* ocro-a fic[p]4!Mi'$ff]* 

VII. Sd5$"$" K^ Kpdi/ov TeKVO<l)dyov, 

Mifiv€ dd/io>i/ eVl o-cav* TrdXt fii^b oKXoBi paiv€, 
p.r) <roi 6r)p [dX]o[6]f Koi akdartdp ivyvBtv fKBrj- 
ov yap 6pS> [(rfip n^pd^ip dcr^aX^i'^ ovSe /3e)3eov. 

1 Sic. 

47 

VIII. ^S'S'S'y K€ Mrfvos <fxa<r(t>6pov. 

6d]p<r(, KMpov €;^tr, irpd^is t S€\is, Kaipov r €[9r](rfv[^] 

cpyjov r* €V)(€ipiv dyaSov koi dyava dcic[a(oi/]. 

IX. $"$*$*$*a K€ MrjTpos BtSiv, 

*fi]£ apv€^£\ ica[T]f;^oucrt XvKot Kpartpoi re Xeovr[ff] 
jSbvr fXdcar. wavroiv rovrav koi av Kpdrlps ^^^ir], 
Koi irdvr €aT€ o"[o]i, o<ra €V[ei]pa>raff o"v f/x' odtra]. 

X. rrrSS »£$" ['E]p/Li€[(a €/3tov]i't[ov. 

*H irpa^is Koi \v^t\v n]T6[X^ff... 
XvfTi^pa Tis 6b6s yap,.» 
rji]piir0[ai\ X'f^M.^lP^'" 

It will be noticed that each throw of the dice is named after 

some divinity : each oracle is attached to a special throw of the 

dice; five dice are thrown, or rather, one die is thrown five 

times, and the die is the ancient knuckle-bone with rounded 

ends, the flat sides being numbered 1, 3, 6 and 4. We thus 

obtain for the first oracle, which is presided over by the Molpai, 

the throws : 

arrr[7]=l, 6, 6, 6, 3, 

for which the total 22 (kB') is marked \ 

I do not see the special reason for giving the total of 
the five throws, as it does not add anything to the definition 
of the oracle; unless it be that the maximum of the five 
throws being 30, the number of days in the month, the total 
throw was taken to test the luck from the day of the month, 
e.g. from a table of lucky and unlucky days. If the number 
was unlucky the question would not be asked. The number of 
oracles on the stone is ten, which does not exhaust the system, 
of which it can be only a fragment. But the importance of the 
inscription lies in the proof furnished thereby, not only that 
the system of divination goes back to Greek times, but that 
the dice were used in the finding of the desired oracle, a 
point which we might otherwise have missed, but of which we 
shall find many traces, coming down through the middle ages. 
The importance of this consideration will appear in the dis- 
cussion of a collection of oracles published by Pithoeus, to which 
we shall presently refer, where the separate oracles are marked : 

ccc, ccv, CCIIII, &c. 
^ For a similar inscription from Tefeny, see appendix. 

48 

Pithoeus did not recognize that these were the numbers of 
a series of dice-throws, the c being a misreading of a Greek 
sign for six, so that when the correction for the obscure sign 
is made, we have a series of oracles numbered : 

6, 6, 6 ; 6, G, 5 ; 6, 6, 4 ; &c. 

to correspond with three throws of an ordinary die, or, if we 
prefer it, to the throws of three ordinary dice. 

This establishes, in passing, the fact that Pithoeus' system, 
though it is composed of a series of Latin sentences, must 
be ultimately derived from the Greek. 

But, further, we are enabled to see that certain numbers 
may be expected to turn up in connexion with a system of 
Sortes. 

The number of possible throws, when three dice are thrown 
together, is 56 ; but if we throw a single die three times, and 
take account of the order in which the numbers come, the 
number is 6 x 6 x 6, or 21(). This is the number that we may 
expect to find in an elaborate system of Sortes. The series 
of sentences in the S. Germain Codex will be found to bear 
numbers running, with breaks, from I to ccxvi : for this, in 
my Study of Codex Bezae, I had corrected cccxvi, as there 
were many cases of numbers higher than the final number, 
with which the series concludes. The correction should per- 
haps stand, but it should stand with a suspicion that a 
primitive system of 216 sentences has been expanded by the 
addition of a hundred more oracles. For it is certainly curious 
that we should have a system of dice-throws amounting to 
216, and a system of Sortes amounting to 816. Between these 
there is probably some connexion, as we have intimated in 
what precedes. Supposing, however, we do not regard the 
order in which the throws come, we have a case of Sortes, 
56 in number. And this is the case in the system of Pithoeus 
to which we shall now refer : only by an error, a scribe's post- 
script has been counted in with the Sortes so as to make the 
total number 57. But it is easy to make the necessary cor- 
rection. 

The series to which we now refer was first published by 
Pithoeus, at the end of the Codex Canonum (ed. Claude le 
Peletier, A.D. 1687), from a MS. formerly in the possession 

49 

of the abbey of Marmoutier. And it is extremely interesting 
that the same series, translated into Provengal, was found 
in a MS. of the thirteenth century, walled up at Cordes near 
Albi, and was published by Rocquain in the Biblioth^ue de 
r^^cole des Chartes for 1880K We print, for convenience, in 
an appendix, the Latin of Pithoeus and the Provengal of 
Rocquain in opposite columna 

Somewhat similar to the foregoing is a system of divi- 
nation based on throws of dice, which is found in Cod. Mona- 
censis 14846, of the tenth or eleventh cent., published by 
Winnefeld at the end of his Sortes Sangallenses to which we 
shall refer presently*. 

Here we have 51 sentences preserved, out of a possible 56', 
and each sentence has not only its throw indicated, but a letter 
of the alphabet is attached to it, in the following manner : 

No. 10. m. VI. V. I est recte quod cogitaa, &c. 

Here the figures 6, 5, 1 show conclusively the use of the 
dice, but what is the meaning of the alphabetic sign? No 
doubt it serves some purpose in the divination like the nu- 
merical sign which we found in the Pamphylian Sortes, and 
which we suspected to be connected with the day of the 
month, the five throws of the dice giving numbers ranging 
from 5 to 30, and thus covering the greater part of the lunar 
month. That it was customary to test one's fortune not only 
by asking questions, but by asking them at given hours on 
given days may be seen from the Oracles of Astrampsychus 
which were published in 1863 by Hercher in a Joachimsthal 
Programm. These oracles profess to be the invention of an 
Eg3rptian priest and are written in Greek. After giving di- 
rections for selecting the question and answer, the enquirer 
is told that the best days of the week for consulting the oracle 
are the Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday, which are 

* pp. 467 aqq. 

^ With which compare a collection of Sortes in the National Library at 
Madrid (L. 95) also of the tenth centnry, and said to have been written in 
Germany: see Loewe, Sitzungsherichte der kon, Akad. Wiss, phil. hist, Classe 
cxiii (1S86) pp. 234 sqq. 

^ The throws 6, 6, 6: 5, 5, 3: 3, 2, 1: 2, 1, 1: and 1, 1, 1 are missing or 
absorbed in previons or foUowing sentences. 

H. 4 

50 

under the signs of the planets Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and the 
Sun^ On other days no enquiry should be made. Further, 
the proper hour for oracle is, according to the preface, the 
third hour on Sunday, the sixth hour on Saturday, the fifth 
hour on Thursday, and the third on Tuesday. But besides this 
a special table is given of the days of the month, considered 
as suitable either wholly or in part, for the oracle; and last 
of all there is amongst the questions which may be addressed 
to the oracle one which is preliminary to all the rest, viz. 
the question whether this is a suitable time for enquiry. 
Here then we see how many numerical pivots can be intro- 
duced practically into the Sortes : and it is clear that we were 
right in our speculation into the meaning of the number in the 
Pamphylian Sortes ; indeed, we may go further, and say that 
the use of five dice was meant to furnish a number up to 30, 
and so to cover the days of the month (though as there are 
no zeroes in the throws it leaves the first four days of each 
month ^ out of account) ; nor shall we be likely to be far wrong 
in speculating that the alphabetical signs which turn up in 
the Munich Sortes have something to do either with the days 
of the month, or the week, or the hours in the day. In the 
case of a Greek system of Sortes, the seven days would, if 
denoted by letters, naturally be represented by the seven 
vowels, aerjiovoD] and it is significant that in the Munich 
Sortes the letters attached to the different throws are in the 
first instance the vowels and not the consonants. This looks 
as if these various systems were all (or at least many) of 
them derived from some early Greek system of which the traces 
have been worn down. For this reason I think it will probably 
throw light upon the Sortes in the Codex Bezae, if we study 
the Oracles of Astrampsychus a little more closely. 

As arranged in the MS. these oracles consist of a series 
of questions numbered from 12 (t)8') to 103 (py') inclusively : 
followed by 1030 answers, arranged in groups of ten, there 
being in all 103 groups or decads. It seems then that to each 
question there are ten answers. But how are the questions 

^ The signs of the planets only are given, and are transcribed carelessly, bat 
apparently this is what is meant. 

^ And some others, when the die has only four faces. 

51 

and answers to be arranged so that we shall draw an answer 
that corresponds to the question ? In order to accomplish this 
there is a third table given, consisting of two columns of 
figures, viz. a column in black ink from 13 (ly) to 115 (pee) 
inclusive, and a column in red ink, containing an irregular 
series of figures in correspondence with the black figures. The 
table is as follows: 

Rubric Bubric Bubrio 

*y 

K 

m 

€ 

7r/3 

prj 

id 

pa 

^ 

t^f 

Try 

TTC 

t€ 

/^ 

V 

P 

Trd 

Tf 

tr 

9»? 

va 

na 

TTf 

kF 

*f 

iB 

v/3 

\B 

ttT 

«s- 

*>? 

9y 

vy 

la 

^f 

iC 

10 

oB 

vi 

ob 

TTIJ 

6 

K 

Xf 

vt 

I 

TT^ 

0/3 

Ka 

>? 

vf 

y£ 

9 

«y 

kP 

i^^ 

"f 

ity 

9" 

na 

Ky 

Kb 

vt, 

9« 

9i3 

•^ 

Kb 

<C 

vO 

wC 

97 

"f 

Kt 

oa 

f 

i» 

9« 

IC0 

kS- 

tV 

«a 

Of 

9e~ 

Kf 

< 

l€ 

^/3 

v^ 

9$" 

wd 

KM) 

H 

^ 

r 

9f 

«f 

kB 

vS- 

& 

M/3 

9»? 

I'd 

X 

P^ 

^ 

or) 

9^ 

^ 

Xa 

Xfj 

««■ 

PV 

P 

oy 

XiS 

\b 

«f 

vB 

pa 

X^ 

\y 

y 

I-? 

C 

Pfi 

»r 

xa 

$v 

k6 

a 

py 

iS 

Xe 

oS- 

O 

9« 

pb 

t>a 

xr 

V 

oa 

9 

p^ 

(CIJ 

H 

vy 

0/3 

'f 

p^ 

Xr 

Xrj 

b 

oy 

kP 

pC 

«y 

\e 

9^ 

od 

IT 

PV 

T^ 

f- 

f- 

0€ 

« 

pB 

iri) 

fia 

Ka 

or 

irb 

P* 

9» 

/^ 

Ky 

of 

py 

pia 

9/3 

f^y 

oi; 

lb 

pifi 

9f 

f.b 

90 

oB 

Vf 

piy 

fy 

M^ 

^ 

n 

X 

pib 

Mf 

t^^ 

\a 

na 

^s 

pi€ 

«* 

f^C 

^7 

4—2 

52 

The way to use the table, according to the preface to the 
Sortes, is to select a question, and note the number of the 
question. Add to this any number x selected by the ques- 
tioner, not higher than 10. Having added x to the number 
of the question, then look in the table for the number in 
red that corresponds to the sum. This number will be that 
of one of the 103 decads, and looking under that decad the 
arth answer is the one required. All of which will appear very 
complicated until we study the method of composition of the 
tables. In order to understand the structure of them, let us 
imagine a somewhat simpler case : let us say the case of 100 
answers, arranged in groups of ten under ten questions. The 
simplest thing in the way of an oracle would be to select a 
question, and then by means of a number ranging from 1 to 10, 
find the answer. And a little reflection will show that, if the 
answers are to correspond to the questions, this is all the 
liberty of choice we have. 

We may arrange the ten questions side by side, and the 
ten answers vertically beneath them in the compartments of 
a square of which each side is ten units, as follows : 

10 

«?. 

% 

§3 

«4 

% 

Ve • • • 

QlO 

A,\ 

A^\ 

' 

^i2 

^22 

• 
• 
• 

^ilO 

iijlO 

Nothing can be more simple, and in its present form it 
does not even need a diagram. But as it stands, there is 
not sufficient mystery about it to make an oracle of. Suppose 
now we wrap the square round a cylinder, and commence 
moving the answers horizontally, so that each answer in the 
first row moves one place to the right, each answer in the 
second row two places to the right, each answer in the third 
row three places to the right, and so on, we should then find 
that the answers to each question, instead of l}ring vertically 

53 

beneath them were lying along a series of diagonals of squares 
as Allows : 

«?, 

e, 

«» 

^4 

Q. 

«.« 

^ 

^^ 

^,1 

A{i 

A^ 

A^ 

^*i*? 

^M^ 

A^ 

J,3 

Afi 

"^ 

^i^ 

\ 

\^ 

^ilO 

\^ ^\ 

^,,10 

The diagonal lines indicating the directions in which to 
look for the answer, and each answer being still in its own 
row, the series of answers to any given question is read oflF 
along a single diagonal. Suppose now we take out the groups 
of answers which stand in the vertical columns as displaced, 
we shall then have a series of ten decads of answers which 
we may number in any way we like, and each decad will 
contain an answer to each of the ten questions. The person 
who asks for the mth answer to the nth question will find 
his answer m squares to the right of where it would naturally 
be expected, Le. he would find it under the (m + n)th question, 
i.e. in the (m + ri)th of the final collected decads. So much 
has been done by the keeper of the oracles to make the giving 
of the appropriate answer more wonderful. But more remains 
to be done. The matter may further be complicated by moving 
the groups of constructed decads of answers about, provided 
only we keep a key for restoring them to their right places, 
and register the correspondence between the columns as they 
stand in their final displacement with their position before 
they were thrown into disoi-der. This registration is the 
table of numbers in red and black of the system of Astram- 
psychus. It is not necessary to frame any special law of 
displacement, provided we have the table to tell us what has 
become of any given group of answers in the disordered 
columns. 

We have imagined in the course of our argument that the 

54 

series of 100 squares was folded over on itself so as to lie 
on a cylinder, in which case the answers in the right hand 
columns move successively into the blanks made on the left 
by moving the answers to the right. 

Now there is no reason why we should limit ourselves 
to 10 questions ; let there be any number r, greater than 10. 
Arrange these r questions in order, and under them verti- 
cally the 10 answers to each; then move each answer to the 
right, one, two, three, &c., squares as described above; and 
we shall have an arrangement: 

Cl Qi Qz Qr 

■Af X jnL| L ■*^2 •••••••••••••••••••••■•• ■ii,>_| 1 

where any question can be made to lie on a diagonal with all 
its answers by wrapping the diagram round a cylinder. The 
decads of answers are the separate columns. 

Now in the system of Astrampsychus, r = 92, for the total 
number of questions. In order, however, to avoid placing 
those columns first which have the answers brought round 
the figure from the right (Ar* &c.), he begins his count of 
the questions with Q12, and by consequence the questions 
Qi &c. are written as Q^ &c. Qioa* What particular method 
was adopted of displacing the columns inter se, is not clear 
nor is it necessary to know it. It is evidently quite an arti- 
ficial thing to begin counting the questions from 12 onward, 
and this is the reason why the other table begins with ly' (= 13), 
for the 13th column is the one in which stands the first answer 
to the 12th question &c. It would have been simpler to 
write 1, 2, 3 &c. instead of 13, 14, 15 &c. 

Now that this is the real method of composition of the 
table may be tested by an example: the 57th decad in the 
tables of Astrampsychus contains the following ten answers : 

ov X^^ Xtyarovy firf irpotrboKa 
7rt<f>apfidK€V(r€U' (r€avT^ /So^^ec 

55 

dirciKkayrja-ff Ttjs yvvaiKos Kai fi€Tafi€\rjSrf(TU 
Xrjaerai <rov 6 dpatrfios irpos Kcupov 
ov y(vrf(rff /SovXeur^r aprr <Pp6pTi(€ 
irp€ir^€va'€is ov p.wos* avpxf>€p€i yap 
ov ifuvycAtvOriaTf' pji (fto^ov' €vSvfi€i 
y^vrifTfi fitonpayos koi tvxcLpurrritriis 
ayopwrtis b iv6vp.ij Ktu p.€rafu\TjSrffrjf 
oifx evp^trtis aprt Traikrjo'M* v(pip.€ivop. 

The table tells us that this 57th column is a displacement 
for the 93rd; under the heading Q^ we ought to have the 
following answers: 

1 
etc. 

On referring to the table of questions, we find that the 
questions corresponding to these answers, viz. the 92nd, 91st, 
90th, &c. are as follows: 

€( Xrf^ofjuu Xcyarov 
€( V€<l}apfidK(vp.cu 
tl dvaXXay^aoficu, r^s yvvaiKos 
.€c \a6os forat pjov r^ bpau-p.^ 
(I y€vri<Top.cu. ^vXtvrrfs 
€( npio'^fva'io ra irpos Qtov 
€( <l)vyad€v6^op4u 
€1 ycPTftrofioi fiioTTpdyos 
6( dvp^iropMi dyopdaai h evBvp^vp^ii 
€i tvprfato Tnaikrjo'ai 

which correspond exactly to the decad of replies. And so in 
other cases. 

We have now resolved the structure of these oracles and 
explained the artificial mystery that attaches to them. 

It will be seen that where a number of answers can be 
given to a single question, the case is not really different from 
that of oracles relating to special subjects, for the subject, such 
as Health, Wealth, &c., can be considered as involving general 
questions under those heads. Thus one heading, such as irepl 

56 

a-fOTfjpia^, might be attached to a whole decad of oracles as its 
leading question. 

It is interesting to pass on from these oracles, reserving 
their complete statement for an appendix, to the system 
which Winnefeld published from a palimpsest at St Gall, to 
which his attention had been drawn by Bucheler^ These 
oracles are in Latin of the sixth century, and Latin which, 
from its Romance forms, can be used to illustrate the Latin 
of the Codex Bezae. Here the answers come in blocks of 
twelve, instead of ten. But the idea of the arrangement of 
the dodecads is just the same as that of the decads in the 
tables of Astrampsychus. So that we could easily reconstruct 
from them, if the palimpsest were complete, and completely 
deciphered, the system of questions from which the enquirer 
made selection. Compare for examples these three successive 
dodecads which we print side by side, only raising the second 
and third columns by one and two oracles respectively. 

IV. 

V. 

1 precede ad publi- 

cum feliciter 

2 vade in ezpedi- 

tionem feliciter : 
victor venies 

3 habeto consortium 

et miUtum lucraris 

1 noli illi donare, qui 

non est obsequens 
tibi 

2 noli ad publicum 

procedere ne forte 
paenitearis 

3 non tibi expedit in 

expeditionem ire, 
ne captus inter- 
ficiaris 

4 habeto consortium 

et multum lucraris 

4 si neglegens non 
f ueris, accipies pro- 
missum a quo vis 

5 accipe promissum ; 
quare tristaris 1 

VI. 

1 finget tibi promit- 

tendo nam non 
donabit 

2 donat quae expedit 

tibi ut gratiam 
habeas 

3 non est quod vere- 

aris : procede in 
publicum 

4 vade feliciter in 

expeditione, quia 
tua est victoria 

5 non tibi expedit 

habere consortium 
quia finget tibi et 
de fraude cogitat 

6 aliquantum pro- 

mittit sed plus 
mentitur tibi 

They had been barely noticed by Niebuhr. 

57 

IV. 
5 durum est, ut glori- 

ens 

V. 

6 in bono gloriaris 
feliciter 

7 succurre tibi et 

citius fac testa- 
mentum, quia 
mors tibi super- 
est 

8 vera sunt visa : 

observa ne in 
aliquo damno in- 
ciuras 

9 si lion esses avarus, 

olim obtinueras 
per libellum 

10 quern suspicaris, 
minas facit et 
multum lacerat : 
cautus esto ab illo 

VI. 

7 si forte b...os eris, 

lie forte captuspae- 
nitearis: sitaceas, 
poteris gloriari 

8 adhuc tibi vita de- 

betur: quare vis 
facere testamen- 
tum? 

9 visa vera sunt et 

lucrabis 

10 obtinebis, sed per 

patronum, quod 
vis per libellum 

11 in abseuti multum 

lacerat, de quo 
consulis 

6 quid tarn cito vis 

facere testamen- 
tum, cum domino 
juvante vita habe- 
bis bona ? 

7 observa istum 

visum, ne forte in 
laqueo incidas 

8 tardum erit, ut ob- 

tineasper libellum : 
melius est ut com- 
ponas 

9 ^ quid tam ver- 

boBus vel impor- 
tunus amicum ? 
quem diligis in 
absenti te lacerat 

10 quem vis, finget 

tibi ; nam multis 
se promittit: re- 
cede inde mono 

11 hunc annum fructi 

rati nascuntur et 
tempuslaboriosum 
significat 

12 in quo vadis, non 

constas ibi 

Here it is evident that the answers have been arranged 
as in the system of Astrampsychus, for we have the same 
question underlying the group of oracles : 

4, 1 : 6, 2 : 6, 3 : 

so for the group 

4, 2 : 5, 3 : 6, 4 

and throughout the columns. 

11 non tibi consentit, 12 in multum tibi con- 

quem vis sentitet obsequens 

est 

12 hunc annum boni 

fructi sunt et mul- 
tum gaudebis 

58 

The (|ue8tionH in fact are: 

Shall I go into public life/ 
Ought I to joiu the expedition ? 
Ih it witie to take a partner? 
and »o on, 

each question being nusceptible, as we have seen, of twelve 
different answers. 

The imperfect state of the papyrus prevents us from saying 
how many questions there were in the series; we can see by 
a little calculation that there must have been at least as 
many as 126, but how many more than this, it is impossible 
to determine. But the parallelism in the method of com- 
position with the Oracles of Astrampsychus is very striking, 
and there is a frequent assonance between the Oreek and 
Latin sentences in the two systems, so that it is very likely 
they are derived fi'om a common root. As has been pointed 
out by Winnefeld, the Latin is vulgar Latin of the sixth 
century. It is interesting to observe a word which has caused 
much debate amongst the students of the Latin of Codex 
Bezae. In the twelfth group of oracles we find : 

xii. 11 noli dimittere persona, de qua soniaris 

and in the thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth we have: 

xxxvii. 11 

..*. ,, non es fugiturus : noli soniaru 
ssxxxvin. 11 ° 

in the forty-seventh we have : 

xlvii. 11 noli soniariy quia non est obligata domus tua. 
Finally in the fifty-second group, we have : 

lii. 9 de sonio liberaris, et deo adjuvante ad filios tuos reverteris 
salvus. 

The form sonium occurs in Codex Bezae, Luke xxi. 34 : 

et soniis saecularibus 
=sK<u fitpifipms ^wrriKcus 

where it was hastily claimed to be a Gallicism, on account 
of the relation between sonium and soin. One would like 

59 

to know whether the Sortes Sangallenses could be traced to 
a geographical centre in France. For the rest of Winnefeld's 
system, we refer to the appendix. 

The Sortes Sanctorum continued. 

We come now to the system of Sortes of which the traces 
remain in the Codex Bezae and in the Codex Sangermanensis 
(g^)." The connexion between the two systems, the system in 
the Gospel of Mark in the Codex Bezae, and the system in 
the margins of the Gospel of John in the S. Germain Codex, 
is so intimate, that we are obliged to treat them together. 
For the latter MS. we use a transcript made from a copy 
by Mr G. L. Youngman^ 

Nnmber (rf D 

aentenoe, 
l^ count 

(1) a06(r fii (f^ikoviKfi&ifT 

(2) TO yrfptoficvop rtXtovrt 

(3) ovK cirirvxavio' rav irapvfia- 

(4) T€\'iovfitvov Trapyofta-I- 

(5) irtpi fwiys^' 

(6) TO voTtpov €inrvxavo' 

(7) +fu tofUHrrfU- tap mfio(ri<r 

<l>av€povT€ -^ 

(8) Tpijrov irapavfJM €;^»cr. cttV;^?;- 

ptire 

(9) ov bwi ^€v<raxr6tv 

' For which my hearty thanks both to Mr Youngman and to my friend 
Mr H. J. White, as well as to Mr Cronin who re-examined the MS. for me in Paris. 

2 For ei 1. ne. 

3 Nearly the Modem Gk. irpa/M, 

^ Note that here and thronghout the Sortes, we have causa as the equivalent 
of thing; i.e. the French chose and the Italian cosa, 

^ Suspicioasly like the heading of a group of Sortes, which has been turned 
into a Sorg. 

Actual no. 

in gi 

• 

1 

cessa ei^ certaueris 

• • 

11 

qd fit cdplebitd (i.e. con- 
plebitur) 

• • • 

HI 

nou adipsis cansa (i.e. 
non adipisceris cau- 
sam*) 

iv 

perficitur causa 

60 

Number of 
sentence, 
l^ count 

Actual no. in 

g' 

(10 
(11 

(12 

(13 

(14; 

(15 

(16 

(17 

(18; 

(19 

(20 

(21 
(22 
(23 

(24 

(25 

(26; 

(27 

+ Xc»yoa" ioTjs Ka'i (^o-'icr KoXi 
+ rairXvoaop Koi yrjptrt 
-^bvviMfUP fi€yaXtp irpofT- 

-|-Xoi'/3oi'ecr rip X'V**' ck Bv 

•\-airo Xvirur rfc X9P^^ 

+ ft€Ta BtKa tffKpcur ytVcre 

+T0 fi^Ttcr (vpuTKvrc 

+fii TrapaKov&ur tov Xoyov + 

+ aKovkovSrf(rop #ca» koAoi' <rv 
yipert + 

+ OVK txio" afiapTtap rjo" ra> 
Trapvfia 

+ fu(op irpoKfairl KOI x^H^ 
yiyi/rrai 

+ dt <r€ Xapfiapip rtjp xapip + 

'{'TtXTJOVfUPOP TTOpVfia KflKoP 

•{-aTTpoo'doKrirop Trapvfiayrfpo- 

•\- 7riaT€V(rop orrj to Trapyfia 
KoXoi/ €aTlP + 

+ €ap TTorfO" TOVT& TO napa- 

PAPOP + 
KM €V^€ TO BcO 

•\-hriaxopX&lfr 

•\-airoTa^c kcu airofrrpt^op 

Xlll 

xiv 

XV 

spes bona^ 

gaudium fiiet^ 

est [L post] dec6 dies fiet 

xviii et bene 

xxii perfectum opus^ 

xxii credere uia (L quia) causa 
(1. xxiv) bona 6 [i.e. est] 

[xxv] si facies istut permane 

(28) ■\-briakv&i€r fitTa Tp'i<r rjp.€pa 
yiPtT€ + 

xxvi accede et auerte 
[1. xxvii] 

xxvii absolueris post tres dies 
[1. xxviii] 

^ Here the syBtems are out of harmony. 

^ Probably ex tristitia gaudium fiety which wonid make the two colamns 
agree. 

3 Note the variation of opus = vpayim for the more usnal causa, 
^ Note, as in 4, the ase of the present participle as a present tense. 

61 

Number of 
sentence, 
by count 

Actual no. in 

g» 

(29) + fieravarfirop to Sat kcu yrf- 

(30) + fi€Tavorf<rov to* Bo i^ yrj- 

(31) +T€\rfoviJL€Pov cpyav k(iKo*' + 

(32) -^TcXovfiivop Trapavyfia 

(33) •{-a'rrpoa'btaKiTov irafMvyfia-^ 

(34) -fcav yjrvoTf eXtyxovo'tp ere 

(35) deesta 

(36) deest3 

(37) +7r£pi diyicTcr* €ap aXiBevtrXa 

cvXvr... 

(38) +TO (rfTi^T Xafi^pur tip 

Xapi'V + 

(39) +TO irfTia irpo<f>3dpi <r€ + 

(40) '{'TOlfTO €K BfV boTOP COTIP'^ + 

(41) +a7roTa^^ + 

(42) +7r€/My epitrfiov firj €p'i(rrja'^ 

xxviii ne credas alienis sermoni- 
[1. xxixj bus ; poenitere dO et fiet 

XXX 

perfectum opus 

xxxi 

insperata causa perficitur 

xxxii 

quod uerum est dicito 

xxxiii 

si mentiris arguent te 

xxxiv 

gloria magna 

XXXV 

pro manifestatione 

xxxvi 

de iuditio quod uerum 

est si dixeris libera 

eris^ 

xxxviii 

ad perei;riuatione itineris 

xl 

xli 

uenies^ 

qd qd quesieris non in- 
uenies 

de contentatione ne crea- 
ueris 

^ Here a line has been anticipated in the Greek. 
^ These two Sortes should read thus : 

29 [xxviii] ne credas alienis sermonibus 

30 /lerapoviaov Kxk [xxix] poenitere deo et fiet 

3 The leaf is cut away. 

^ The heading of a group of Sortes? (ire/u &ici;s=de iudicio.) 

^ liberaberis? 

^ The two sides are not in accord. 

7 doroK e<my looks like a translation of datum est, Cf. No. xciii in the Latin 
series ex do datum est, 

^ Discord again between the two sides. 

* Here again it seems as if we had both in Greek and in Latin the heading 
of a group of Sortes. 

62 

Number of 
sentence, 
by count 

D 

(43) +€ap drjKap^ virtp <rov akov 

(44) -^irepi avaTrava-coo' <^ Kcp- 

(45) +TO €x'ur KafiTjp #caft€^ + 

(46) -\-€av ir'tarTtvaTja' xapa av 

(47) +iroKaarTov i^^eXicra CTrviycre* 

(48) +K(upocr foriv Xva yrjptr€ 
OP fTTt<r* + 

(49) +op6loar TTjp tabop /Sc/Sfovrf 
(Tov TO irpayyLa^-\- 

(60) +fivarf}piop ficya yuptraP 
KOi^ a7r€KaXv<l)dr) + 

(61) +mirpo(rlioKr}Top ic€pdoa' + 

Actual na in 

g* 

xliii si credideris gloria tibi 

xlvii secreta incipit reuelare 

xlviii insperata causa 

* i.e. dixdtV' 

^ Apparently this is only the heading of a group of Sortes. 
3 Note the use of the Modern Greek Kdfivut for facia, 

* Perhaps for woXKoucit rd '^BiKrfffas woirjffai. 
» Cf. No. 52. 

^ Apparently a combination of two sentences : 

6p0ios if 656f 

pepaiovral aov rd irpayfia 

where the first, if our dissection is right, may show an acquaintance with Hesiod 

r^s dper^ ISpura 0€ol irpor&poiOep ^OijKay 
dOiofaroif fiaKpbs Si Kal opOios otfMS iir* aMiv, 

7 We are here very near to the pronunciation of the dialect of Bova. See 
Pellegrini p. 170 (gh)j^nome, where the dialect of Otranto has gh6nome= 
yipoiMi, 

^ L tya airoKaKv<l>0in, 

But perhaps no change is necessary, as both in Modem Greek and in the 
Greek dialects of S. Italy the use of koa with indie, instead of pa with the sub- 
junctive can be traced. See Morosi, p. 156, *' Sovente per tal uso cangiasi il 
costruzione, in guisa che di due proposizioni, V una principale e V altra dipen- 
dente col verbo al congiuntivo retto da na^ abbiamo per endiadyn due proposi- 
zioni prindpali entrambi e copulate dal cong. ce^ 

63 

Number of D 
sentenoe, 
byoount 

Actual no. in 

(52) 

'\'K€poa' ttrriv Jpa y avert o 

(53) 

-Hircp irpityfiaroa' KaKo-^- 

(54) 

+ «cr avairav(riv^ ^PX^^ 

0)1/ C'''*'^'^ 

(66) 

+ avo fci/ov tpx^^ 

Iv 

(56) 

fit airriaTurfja' tovto 

Iv (? Ivi) 

(67) 

+ ap aTTcX^cr «rtrvi';(ai/<<r + 

(68) 

+ fav aKovtri firf dtp avriv 

(69) 

•{•aXXo irpayfia {^f)T'i<rop 

Iv 

(60) 

-\-ircpi awrfprfaa' creDferai* 

xl (1. Ix) 

(61) 

+dfvrcpoo'c c;^<cr Toirirpay- 

Iviii 

(62) 

+ a7ro KivBvvov cra»^0"< + 

(63) 

+ trcfH (Tcreplaa' Km ictpSov^-^ 

g» 

aliam causam quere^ 

non sis incredulus 

aliam causam quere 

de salute 

reperire abes [1. repetere 
habes] causa 

^ i.e. in pace venit, where note the Modern Greek use of the preposition 
ccf for ev, and the peculiar word for pace, 

' The Latin of this appears to be extant lower down in the form alium 
nuntium ueniet. But it is open to suspicion whether aXi is not an error for 
jraXi, as we find in No. ocxxyii. de peregrino ueniet honum nuntium. If this 
suspicion were groundless, which would give the Greek priority over the Latin, 
another suqncion would arise on the opposite side as to whether de peregrino 
were not the heading of a section, in which case aro ^evov would be a mistrans- 
lation for i-epi 70V ^ei^ov and the Latin would have the priority. 

^ At this point the Latin is in great disorder, as follows : 
Iv aliam causam quere 

Ivi non sis incrednlus 

Ixii (? Ivii) ecoe sanus factus es iam noli peccare 
Iviiii si credis gaudium tibi fiet 

Iviii reperire abes causa 

xl de salute 

xlii (bis) ne abneges sed profiteris 
xlv qd cupis bonu e 

— aliu nciu ueniet (sic) 

[i.e. alium nuntium ueniet] 
xlviii expecta modo 

^ Here again we have the heading of a group of Sortes and one answer — 
<r(^erai. Of. No. 68. 

^ Heading of a group of Sortes ? 

64 

Number of 
sentence, 
by count 

D 

Actual no. in 

g» 

(64) +fii aTTOpvloTf aXX ofu>Xo>yi- 

crov + 

(65) +td£ vyrfo- ycyoi/flwr fUKtri 

afjMprave + iva fi'i re X^pov (tv 

(66) +K(iKov €(rTiv to cpyov to 
T€\XovtX+ 

Ixii ne abneges sed profiteris 

Ixii ecce sanus factus es iam 
(? Ixiv) noli peccare 

(67) +Kd\ov irpay.,, 

(68) +TO €vBvfiifJM y^Vrre 
5 KoXof (TV coriV 

(69) +fi€Tafiov\Tj KoXt 

(70) +aK(aTj KoXiy frvvepx€T€ to)... Ixx 

(71) +drf avv&ivfpK,. 

Ixxi 

si credis testimonium 
bonum 

oportet te multum luc- 
tare 

At this point the Bezan series drops and we continue with 
the S. Germain series only. 

Ixxvi (? Ixxii) lucro et uita et dO^ 

Ixviii (1. Ixxviii) oportet te accipere gratiam 

^ This is a very important sentence : it provokes our suspicion that it is not 

a Sors at all, for there is nothing biblical about the Sortes, which do not quote 

texts. Moreover the glosses are in the S. Oermain Codex upon the margin of 

the Gospel of John, and this is John v. 14. The S. Germain Codex is in two 

columns and the pages in the neighbourhood of this supposed Sors run as 

follows : 

FoL 127 a. 

Col. 1. Col. 2. 

Servi oocurrerunt — bant enm Judaei 

John iv. 51. John v. 18. 

Here the supposed Sors stands opposite to John iv. 44 (*Ipse enim Jesus') 

on Fol. 126 b (Col. 2). It is therefore quite conceivable that the sentence may 

have stood on the left-hand margin of Fol. 127 a and have been transferred to 

the right-hand margin of Fol. 126 b. That is, an error in the archetype of g^ 

would explain the appearance of the sentence as a Sors with the number of a 

Sors. That the Sortes did stand in the ancestry of g^ has been shown from 

other considerations. 

^ The last two sentences are out of harmony on the two sides, and the last 

sentence in the Greek is unintelligible (? Set ainaOev l^pxeffdai), 

^ Probably the heading of a group; cf. No. 63 ircpi fftarripias Kai Kepdovs. 

Fol. 126 b. 
Col. 1. Col. 2. 

dicit ei Jesus Interea rogabant 
John iv. 8. John iv. 31. 

65 

Ixxx 

de uita et salute^ 

Ixxx (bis) 

/// tiita //// bona 

Ixxxiv 

Bpes bona 

Ixxxiii 

an gaudio fiet' 

1 ••• • 
Ixxxuii 

conuersio bona' 

1 • • • 

Ixxvui 

si credis bene 

Ixxxviii 

ne discreda8 hoc bonum est^ 

credis qm fiet 

Ixxxvii 

ista causa ex do e 

zc 

fiet tibi ista causa 

xciii 

ex do datum est 

seruate multum^ 

cxvi 

de insidiis a multis 

cxvii 

ali& causa incoas 

cxviii 

necdd est causa facienti^ 

cxviii 

tardabis quadiu fiet 

c 

per omnia absconsa causa manifestabitur 

ci 

doctrina bona 

• • • • 

xcuu 

auertat non fiet 

cv 

noli timere 

cvi 

ne timeas causa 

cvii 

maior gloria 

cviii 

impoesibile est hoc fieri 

• • • • 

cvmi 

si perdideris quodlibet non inuenies 

ex 

maiorem gloriam 

cxx 

non potest hoc fieri 

• • •• 

CX1111 

testimonium ueniet tibi 

cxxiii 

fiet bene 

cxvi 

falsum testimonium dicis 

cxvii 

bona communio 

cxviii 

quod incipis facito 

cxxviii 

facias hoc causa 

^ Again the heading of a group. 

' Apparently a qaestion, the heading of a group of Sortes (gaudio =gaudium). 

' Perhaps the equivalent of /uera/SoXJ) KoKij in § 69. Cf. § 278 (mala replicatio). 

* Cf. § 66 /tj) dirurr^irifs rovro ica\6v iffriv, 

* Perhaps this is a part of the following Sors. 

* Probably bonum est catua facienti, Cf. § 66 KaX6y ^oriy to ipyw r^ tcXcIovti, 

H. 5 

66 

CZXVUll 

cxxx 

cxxx 

cxli 

cxxxiii 

cxxxv 

cxxxiii 

cxxxiii 

cxlviii 

^ • • • • 

cxlvuii 

« • • • • 

cxlvmi 

clii 

cliii 

clvii 

clvii 

clviii 

cxli 

cxlii 

cxliii 

cxliv 

cxlv 

cxlviii 

cxlviii 

clxxx 

clxxi 

clxxii 

clxxiii 

clxxiiii 

clxxvii 

clxxviii 

clxxxi 

clxxxii 

ne facias causa huhic (sic) 

ne timeas causa isti (sic) 

spes bona causa 

insperata causa ne fiet 

causa facta e et in sermone uenit 

saluabitur conligatio et de pdicto inueni eorum 

de salute^ 

quaerens causa inuenitur (i.e. quam quaeris etc.) 

gloria spes 

sperata causa 

ne credas alienis sermonibus 

possibile est hoc fieri 

gloriam consequeris securus de omni malo 

uere fiet causa tua 

quod non speras accipies 

causam banc ne facias 

roga et fiet 

ora et exaudietur 

qd queris inuenies et inquoas^ causa 

consilia per alio 

expecta paucos dies 

manifestabitur causa in gaudio 

exaudi qc(?) causa tua celtius (i.e. exaudietur causa tua 
celerius) 

confide qnm fiet 

causam banc ne facias 

roga qnm fiet 

salus bona 

post tempus et causa tua qc(? quod) speres hoc 

ne prohibe quod bona 

ne faces (1. facias) ista 

ne discredas de causa qnm fiet 

translatio multos testificantes^ 

'^ Again the heading of the group of Sortes irepl <rwniplas, 

^ inohoas ? of. exci. 

' Apparently not a Sors, but a various reading in the form : [alia] translatio; 
multos testificantes. But where in the text of John can we find the place for 
such a various reading or rendering ? The Sors actually stands against John 
xi. 89, 40. 

67 

clxxxiii non inuenies gloria sed auertitur 

clxxxiiii non accipies glori& sed auertitur ante sex dies paschae q^ in 

die dominica legitnr^ 

clxxxviii peniteris dO in causa tua 

clxxxviii homines lacereuis [lacerare vis ?] in autentica ely domadu' 

cxc saluabitur causa 

cxci bona causa inchoas 

cxcii de castitate et sapientia' 

cxciiiii (sic) et (1. ne) dicas hoc alicui 

cxcY secretum hoc nulli diceris 

cxcvi ne vellis (1. velis) uerbum superbum* 

cxcvi quod speres [L speras] fiet 

cxcviii ne a cupias^ ista sermons quia duas facies habet 

cxcix amari habes in causa 

cc adipisceris hoc sed dolus 3 

cci ex moerore ad glori& ueniet 

ccii praepara ante qd incipias 

cciii causam amicitiam habuit 

cciiii amicitia redit causa 

ccy ne sol[lici]tus [sis de cjausa 

ocvi a do dabitur gaudiiun 

ccvii bonam habebis gratiam 

ocviii amenda causa 

ccviii inchoa et implebitur 

ocxii ueniet bond nimtid 

ccxiii in pace redit causa^ 

ccxiii non te laedit nihil metuas 

ccxvi XXX (sic) in uni fiet bona facito 

^ This is eyidently in part a lectionary note for Palm Sunday (John xii. 1) 
whioh has been copied by mistake. 

' Here we have another perplexing note which does not seem to be a Sors 
but a lectionary direction. Ely domadu may be corrected at once to ebdomadu 
but what is the meaning of the prefixed in autentica? 

' Not a Sors, but the heading of a group of Sortes. 

* +dioere? 

* i.e. ne accipias. 

* Causa seems superfluous : it is clearly the answer to an enquiry whether 
some one will return, under a heading de peregrine, [I have some doubt about 
the transcription of this sentence.] 

5—2 

68 

CCXXUl 

ccxxvi 

ccxxvii 

ccxxviii 

ccxxviiii 

ocxxx 

ccxxxi 

ccxxxii 

ccxxxiii 

ccxxxiiii 

ccxxxv 

ccxxxvi 

ccxxxvii 
ccxl 

ccxli 

ccxlvi 

ccxlvii 

ccxlviii 

cclvi 

cclvii 

cclviii 

cclviiii 

cclx 

cclzi 

cclxii 

cclxiii 

cclxiiii 

ne consideres illut 

lect* in pentecostem item alia infra ^ 

ne prohibeas causa fiet 

de peregrino ueniet bonum nuntium 

uade et consequeris 

sermones alienis^ abuenient tibi qm fiet 

de secundo probas koc 

ex tristitia gaudium fiet tibi 

ista causa tibi data est et non ali 

quod queres fiet tibi 

omnia manifesta fiet 

discesi' oportet inchoare 

uersi^ sermonem dicent quia 
uera stmt quae testantur 

ia* 

uinces fidestimoniiun (L fide testimoniiun) 
item lect in pentec. 

ne prohibeas causam 

ex tristitia ad gaudium fiet tibi 

interpretati^ causa tibi immanet 

ora ad dm ex toto'^ 

lucrum magnum ueniet tibi si animo oraueris 

bene istud ex dO datiun est 

forte est ut non soluetur causa haec 

ne suscipias istud qm ////® contrariiun est 

alia causa fiet melior huic causae 

gloria 

ex tristicia in gaudium ueniet tibi 

ista causa tibi soli concessa 

deformari [L defamari] habes^ et proscribi in causa 

1 This liturgical note must be detached from the Sortes ; theie is a cor- 
responding note a little lower down ; see § ccxl. The lessons should be noted. 

> alieni? > disce si ? ^ verum ? 

> Evidently not a Sors, but a various reading or omission in the text of 
John: but what passage does the variant or insertion belong to? It stands 
over against John xv. 21. Perhaps an alternative rendering for pOp in John 
XV. 22. 

' insperata? ^ + animo? 

^ An erasure; but nothing lost. 
* A Bomance fatore? 

69 

cclxvi ne speres istud qm non fit 

non sit^ haec causa forti cum oratione 

causa haec saluabitur 

in iudicio ueniet causa dicet^ 

manifeste non fiet 

mala replicatio fiet tibi 

ne proibitur causam^ 

se dies^ causa fiet causa in^ desideras 

sermonem dixisti ne perdas quia in hoc sta causa 

oportet te peregrinaii et postea bene ibi [1. tibi] fiet 

bona causa est conplebitur 

insperata causa 

in sermone uenies et habes gaudiimi 

lucrabitur in commendato haec^ 

de causa ista quam queris qm fiet inuenies gaudio^ 
ccxcviiii (bis) de tristicia in gaudium reuertetur causa tua 
ccxcvi de glori& accipies de causam tuam expectas^ 

ccxcviii ne adpropinques causam 

ccxcviii (bis) spera gratiam a do bene tibi fiet in causa haec 

cclxvii 

cchu 

cchu (bis) 

cclxxviiii 

cclxxx 

cclxxxiv 

cclxxx 

cclxxxvii 

cclxxxviii 

ccxc 

ccxci 

ccxcii 

ccxcviiii 

ccc 

ccci 

ccciii 

cccxi 

ccxvi 

coelata causa inuenietur 
in testimonium ueniet causa 

adipisceris causam quam postulas coram aliis discipulis^ 
serua verbum quem habet (1. habes) in corde tuo 
et aliud misterium reuelabitur tibi aliud gaudium 

EXPL(icit) 

1 fit? 

3 The word is snperflaons ? 

> ne prohibeatnr causa : of. ccxxvi, ccxli. 

^ post sex dies ? 

' quam? 

' 1. hoc. 

7 ? [ne sollicitus sis] de causa ista qaam queris : qnoniam fiet etc. 

« Sic. 

' The sentence is made up of a Sors and a various reading from the 
following page to the text of John. The passage against which it stands is 
John xxi. 15, 16. Assuming the reading to belong to John xxi. 15 we have an 
important and hitherto unknown variant, which answers to the following Greek 
text: 

"Ore ovv •^plffrria'ap X^ei rtjy 'SLfjuain liirfHfi 6 'Ii7<roDs ivtStTiov rCov SXKtav 
fkaOfirlaVi ^Ifjuay *I<adpoVf dyavqis fie wXiov To&nav; 

\ 

70 

We have now transcribed the two related systems of 
Sortes in the Codex Bezae and the Codex Sangermanensis ; 
and a few general considerations may be enunciated concerning 
them. 

The two systems are identical as to origin, but neither 
copy is derived from the other: it would not be possible, for 
example, to obtain the Bezan system by retranslation from 
the S. Germain system on account of lacunae in the latter. 
The converse statement is also obviously true. They therefore 
come from a previous system. 

This archetj^al system was, like the S. Germain system, 
a series written on the margin of a copy of S. John. For there 
has crept into both of the subordinate systems a sentence 
from John v. 14, which was meant for the text itself. The 
error in referring it to the Sortes cannot have arisen in the 
S. Germain text, as might conceivably be urged in similar 
cases to which we have drawn attention (e.g. the reading 
under ccciii), for it is also in the Codex Bezae* : it follows, 
therefore, that the archetypal series was written in a copy 
of St John, which was itself the archetype of the S. Germain 
Codex. Unless, then, this archetj^e was a bilingual text, 
the Codex Bezae has taken the sentences in its Gospel of 
Mark from a Latin system of Sortes written in a Latin Gospel. 
The improbability that the assumed bilingual codex had also 
a bilingual system of Sortes will be suflBciently evident. It 
scarcely needs to be stated. We shall, therefore, assume 
that the Bezan system is a translation from the Latin, as 
was stated in our Study of God. Bezae^ pp. 10, 11. This 
does not mean that there may not be a Greek system under- 
Ijdng the Latin archetype of D and g\ We have given 
abundant illustration of the extent to which Sortes were used 
in Greek forms : and nothing prohibits the belief, if it should be 
thought otherwise reasonable, that an ancient Greek system is 
behind all that we have tabulated. 

The traces of some earlier system can be made out, though 
not very clearly. For instance, both the Greek and Latin 

* And in a more extended form. 

71 

sides have occasionally incorporated with the answers the 
subjects or questions proposed. Compare for instance : No. 
37 (irepi 8iier)^=^de iudicio); No. 42 (irepi epur^ov^de con- 
tentatione); Noa 44, 60, 63, Ixxx, cxxxiii, cxcii. Evidently 
there has been a grouping of the questions into subjects. The 
subject was either written at the head of its group, or has 
been attached to the individual answers and taken as part of 
the Sors, Sometimes the question only has been transcribed 
as if it were an answer. 

The same fact of grouping comes out from an examination 
of the answers themselves. There was e.g. a question con- 
cerning lost property^ as might have been expected ; another 
question about an absent traveller', and so on. 

Here we have distinct traces of grouping of the questions 
as in the system of Astrampsychus and elsewhere. But 
the traces are not sufficient to restore the system with 
confidence. 

Supposing we are correct in these considerations, we cannot 
omit to recognise that the assumed Greek translator of the 
Sortes was not one of the class of literati, but a person whose 
Qreek was colloquial. Take for example § 45 : 

This must be the Modem Greek tcdfivo), and the sentence 
means, ' What you have to do, do,* i.e. Quod habes facere, 
facito. 

Here we should not draw any inference as to the priority of 
the Latin from the use of habeo as a future of necessity, closely 
related to the Romance future, for both the Greek and Latin 

^ cviiii (bis) si perdideris quodlibet non inuenies 

oxxxiii quam quaeris causa invenitur 

oxliii qaod queris inuenies 

000 ooelata oausa inuenietur 

&c, 
^ e.g. 55 alium nuntium ueniet 

.. I ueniet bonum nuntium 
coxxvu j 

ooxiii in paoe redit 

72 

languages take up this usage. But tcdfipco tor/dcio is a distinct 
ease of Modem Greek, which would puzzle a person who had 
only learned Greek from books. We shall therefore treat it as a 
translation of /acio and in that case l;^6£9 tca^etv is a trans- 
lation of a Latin future of necessity \ 

The extraordinary recurrence of vpayfia is due to the 
Romance element in the Latin dialect of the writer, where 
caiisa which it translates is simply the French chose or the 
Italian cosa. Only once or twice does it seem to have a classical 
meaning (in ivdicium ueniet causa § cclxx: de tristitia in 
gaudium reuertetur causa tua § ccxcviiii)*. 

As far then as we have taken the matter, we have found 
in the Sortes of the system under discussion from the Codex 
Bezae a system translated by a person very little skilled in 
Greek, and that little rather conversational than literary, from 
a collection of Latin sentences which was seriously aflected by 
Romance forms. 

We have not succeeded in finding, so far, a geographical 
home for the transcriber of the Bezan Sortes. The use of 
KCL^vw is common enough everywhere: the question however 
may be asked whether it was current amongst the Greeks of 
N. or S. Italy in the time when Greek life was flourishing 
there and when, in consequence of exiles and deportations, it 
was being vigorously reinforced. We can test the matter 
from the surviving traces of Greek in the songs and prayers 
of the S. Italian peasantry, which represent a Greek dialect 
nearly S3mchronou8 with our annotator. Pellegrini's Lexicon' 
shows how common is the use of kcl^vco (in the worn-down 

^ For similar oases take 

§ 8 Tplro¥ TpayfAa ix^^* iTixaplaai 
§ 61 Scvrepioaai ^cis rb wpayfia 
=repetere habes caasam. 
^ Compare the parallels in the Provenpal Sortes given below with their 
Latin equivalents: e.g. 

No. 16 De la cauza que primieirament cosiras e quers oooeil, d* aqui auras 
gran gloria 
=0. iii. iii. De qua re primum oogitasti et oonsulis tuus animus inde magis 

habebit gloriam. 
^ II dialetto Greco-Calabro di Bova, pp. 123 sqq. 

73 

form canno) which turns up in all sorts of idiomatic con- 
nexions^ 

We must not, however, argue from the existence of any 
special Modem Greek forms to the locality where the MS. was 
preserved, until we know something more about the diffusion 
of those forms. They might be carried into any Greek settle- 
ments by travelling monks or wandering teachers. And no 
conclusion must be drawn from their existence until we have 
looked at the matter on all sides. 

The question may be asked, why did the scribe of the 
Bezan Sortes take the trouble of translating the oracles into 
Greek, when he himself was a bilingual and probably lived 
in a district where Latin was understood ? Or why, having 
translated the Latin, did he not transcribe both the Latin 
and the Greek ? It is conceivable that the translation height- 
ened the mystery which attached to the divination ; from 
another point of view it is also possible that ecclesiastical 
influence had been thrown in the way of the practice. In 
France and England this was certainly the case, for the 
councils of various churches show, by their records, a series 
of attempts to suppress divination by Sortes, or rather to 
qualify the practice in such a way as practically to cripple it. 
This is the more remarkable, because it is probable that it 
is an ancient Christian practice, going back perhaps to the 
very first period. It has its parallel in the election of Matthias, 
and perhaps in the prophecies that went before upon Timothy. 
It was certainly the custom in some parts to hold the open 
Gospel over a newly-elected bishop, with a view to finding 
out from the passage disclosed what kind of bishop he was 

^ e.g. here is the opening of a love-song from Castrignano: 

Fiehnddit ec4nno panta 8*a paddia 
Itto cerd pa ec&nnn ti fodd6a: 
Ec&nnu tossn stanta ce fatia 
Na fabrichefsu apanu's mian al^a: etc. 

which is being interpreted, 

Poveretto, faccio sempre come gli nccelli 
In quel tempo in cai fanno il nido; 
Fanno tanti stent! e fatica 
Per fabricarlo sopra an olivo: etc. 

74 

likely to be ; nor is it to be thought of that such a practice 
was merely prognostic, without influence upon the election; 
there are cases of candidates rejected by Sortes from the 
highest oflSces, sometimes by the device of setting an innocent 
child to cast his ecclesiastical horoscope (a more expert astro- 
loger being probably behind the arras). Now the custom 
which obtained so widely in ecclesiastical ordinations would 
require some severe discipline before it was finally got rid of. 
And we need not be surprised if we find that there was much 
vitality in the ancient superstition. But the fact of eccle- 
siastical censure would explain at once why the Proven9al 
Sortes were found hidden away in a wall, and why the Bezan 
Sortes were found in Greek but not in Latin ^ 

Of the locality to which the Bezan annotators should be 

referred. 

We have now examined with much detail the annotations 
on the margins of the Codex Bezae, and it is probable that the 
reader will think that much of the investigation might have 
been spared, especially if he is not familiar with the problems 
at issue in the solution of the Bezan origins and ^live to their 
importance. 

We have found that these annotators form a series which 
extends from about the ninth century to the twelfth ; they are 
the work of a group of persons, who are some of them certainly 
bilingual^ and of whom not a single one is what we should call 
a Greek scholar^ Their Greek spelling is almost uniformly 
barbarous and phonetic, and the Greek that is meant by the 
spelling can, in a number of cases, be paralleled in, if not 
identified with, some dialect of Modern Greek. The Latin 
which those of them who can be proved to be bilingual 

^ The student who is interested in the further examination of the subject of 
Sortes will find, in the splendid article on the subject in Ducange, a collection 
of all the ecclesiastical and historical evidence. 

2 L and M. 

' Unless perhaps J might deserve this distinction. 

75 

speak and write can be shown in certain cases to be Romance 
Latin \ 

We should, therefore, look for some Greco-Latin centre 
where both languages were spoken, and not for a Latin centre 
where Greek was merely read and written. The Greek part of 
the play has to be acted by real Greeks. Almost all the anno- 
tators are devoted to the Greek Gospels and service books, 
from which they transcribe the chapter-headings of the Gospels 
and a steadily increasing stream of ecclesiastical lessons. If 
they used these lessons in the public service as well as tran- 
scribed them, they must have kept up a Greek ritual through- 
out the year. The ecclesiastical year of the Greek Church was, 
in fact, known to them, for one of the first scribes of the group 
notes the lesson for its commencement. 

Of the group of scribes, J is marked by his deflection from 
Byzantine rituals as known to us, in the matter of lessons for 
Saturday before Palm Sunday, and for Palm Sunday. It is 
tolerably certain, both from the title he gives to this Sunday, 
which he calls the Sunday of the Pro-photisms, and from the 
lessons which he marks, which are not the ordinary Byzantine 
lessons, that the time of the festival named was a time at 
which public baptism was practised, with a ritual that, at least 
in part, was Oreek, Whether this is an ancient custom con- 
served or whether it is an ecclesiastical revival, is a point to be 
considered. It is, however, not very probable that a newly 
introduced Greek ritual would have shown so much archaism 
as is found in the title and matter of the lessons given by it, 
or that it would have been limited to this single function. 
The suggestion arises that perhaps we are amongst a Greek 
community where the revival of Greek is due to a reinforce- 
ment of the Greek element already existing or still surviving 
in the community. Such a reinforcement might be due (a) to 
literary interest, (b) to popular interest, arising from migratory 
additions to the Greek population; or both causes might be 
combined. 

^ As for example, in the Sortes of M, who translates causa in its Bomanoe 
sense and appears to use an early volgar Latin future for his verb. 

76 

The church or monastery to which the book belonged 
during these centuries is hard to identify. That it was a church 
rather than a monastery is suggested by the apparent persist- 
ence or possible revival of a Greek rite of adult baptism at a 
special time of the year. This custom is less probable in a 
monastery than in a church. Moreover there is a special lesson 
marked off by L (in a manner that savours both of Latin and 
Greek) for the dedication festival of the church in question (or 
could it conceivably be a monastery ?). 

The hagiology of the annotators is peculiarly scanty: 
there is only one festival of the Virgin, and that is a late 
festival and in a late hand (the Assumption, which is simply 
marked as the festival of the Theotdcos). It is, therefore, 
more likely that the church, or the monastery, was dedicated 
to the Assumption of the Virgin than to the Virgin herself. 
From the special attention given to the Transfiguration by the 
scribe L, we might imagine a community like that of the Laura 
on Mt Athos, who are devoted to the worship proper to that 
day and even go up the adjacent mountain to celebrate it. 
But perhaps we ought not to isolate the festival so decidedly. 

Two special saints, marked by one of the latest hands, are 
all that the calendar of the annotators betrays. Both of them 
are Eastern Saints who have become popular in the West long 
after their period of first renown in the Blast, viz. St George 
and St Denys. They make the impression upon us of migrant 
traditions. And it is a strange thing that no earlier saints are 
known than these twelfth century migrations. It is very diffi- 
cult to believe that the Codex Bezae can have been all its days 
in the monastery of St Irenaeus at Lyons, without any festival 
of the patron saint of that community being recorded. Is it 
likely that St George would have been commemorated and 
St Irenaeus and St Pothinus forgotten? 

But if we abandon faith in Beza's statement that the MS. 
came from the monastery of St Irenaeus, on account of the 
absence of the names of the founders of the church at Lyons, 
we should a fortiori be obliged to look for its home in a centre 
where St George and St Denys are honoured in an especial 
manner, the positive argument drawn fi:om the occurrence of 

77 

saints having naturally more weight than the negative one, 
drawn from their absence. 

The suggestion having thus arisen that we should forsake 
Lyons, ought we at the same time to abandon France? Or 
might we venture on the supposition that perhaps the MS. was 
at one time in possession of the monks of St Denys at Paris ? 
Let us see what can be said in favour of such a supposition. It 
would explain one of the festivals : it would further explain the 
traces of Greek learning and Greek liturgies, for Paris, and in 
particular its great abbey, is a centre both for Greek worship 
and for Greek learning. Nor is it to be omitted that such 
studies (and the studies include on the religious side the use of 
the rituals) had a singular revival in Paris about the time when 
we first find illiterate and quasi-literate hands at work upon 
the margins of the Codex Bezae. 

The most conspicuous fruit of this revival is the translation 
of the works of Dionysius the Areopagite by John Scotus 
Erigena for Charles the Bald. It was natural that such an 
attempt should be made in Paris, for the fame of the writings 
of St Dionysius had reached the West and he had been identi- 
fied with the patron saint of the Parisian monastery. Having 
thus changed their founder for a more ancient and apostolic 
one, they naturally made an effort at translating his works. 

Miss Gardiner, in her interesting Studies of John the Scot, 
tells us that by this translation of Erigena the works of Diony- 
sius were now for the first time presented to the western world. 
About a century before, a copy of them had been given by 
Pope Paul to Charles' great-grandfather Pipin. More lately 
the eastern Emperor, Michael Balbus, had given a copy to 
Lewis the Pious, and an abortive attempt to translate them 
had been made by Abbot Hilduin of St Denys. The evidence 
for Greek studies at St Denys is thus increased, for we have 
Greek readers and translators as well as Greek books : but it is 
admitted that Hilduin was a bad Greek scholar, nor can it be 
proved that Erigena was a good one. Thus Miss Gardiner says\ 
" John was not a very well-read Greek scholar. He knew, at 

p. 18. 

78 

least, some stories from Homer (as De J)iv. Nat ill. 39, the 
recognition of Odysseus by his dog^. He knew something of 
Aristotle, but probably only from fragmentary translations, 
including an exposition of the Categories attributed to St 
Augustine ; even Plato whom he calls ' philosophantium de 
mundo maximus' was perhaps only known to him by means of 
a Latin translation of the Timaeus." 

Where then did John the Scot get enough Greek to trans- 
late such a difficult writer as the Areopagite ? It could hardly 
have been possible to acquire such philosophical and theological 
knowledge in Ireland : and we are driven to conclude that 
there must have been Greek teachers in Paris to whom John 
the Scot had access, and upon whose lesser shoulders this giant 
mystic stood (if we may reverse a familiar figure). But this is 
only another way of saying that there was a native Greek con- 
tingent in Paris in the ninth and tenth centuries, precisely the 
time when we begin to find annotators at work on the Codex 
Bezae. 

Moreover it should not be forgotten that we have estab- 
lished conclusively the existence of a nexus between the Codex 
Bezae and the Codex Sangermanensis in the matter of the 
Sortes, where they are derived from a common origin. If we 
may judge from the analogy of the Latin and Proven9al group 
of Sortes, which come respectively from Marmoutier and the 
neighbourhood of Albi, we should expect that the Codex Bezae 
and the S. Germain Codex would be not very remote from 
each other. The hypothesis of a Parisian residence for the 
Codex Bezae would, at any rate, exactly fall in with such a 
suggestion. And last of all there is the evidence of Greek 
worship at St Denys. Thus Mart^ue tells us that the custom 
of reading the lessons both in Greek and Latin, at least in the 
principal festivals, lasted to his own time, the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. 

De antiq, rit. lib. i. c. 3 § 2. "Hodie in percelebri Sancti Dionysii in 
Francia Monasterio epistola et evangelium in quinque praecipuis festivi- 
tatibus graece et latine pronuntiantur." 

1 But the story of MacLaertes and his dog was already known in Irish, and 
did not need to be read in Homer. 

79 

On the other hand it has been pointed out that the Mass 
said at St Denys in Greek is only a translation of the Latin 
Mass^ 

But this fact must not be pressed too far. It does not 
mean that the Greek Gospel or Epistle used in the Mass is a 
translation of a Latin Gospel. An examination of the edited 
Greek Mass will show that the lesson from the Acts which 
passes for the Epistle of the day is a portion of the Greek text 
of the Acts, in a rather late recension. And it is quite practi- 
cable, in reading the lesson proper to the saint's day, to read it 
out of the Greek New Testament, just as in the Codex Sanger- 
manensis to which we have referred, the Latin lessons for 
Pentecost are marked in, and were evidently read from, the 
Codex. 

At St Denys, however, the masses in question must have 
been in MS. form long before the time of the annotator O, and 
this suggests that the monks of St Denys did not read the 
Codex Bezae on the festival of their saint, for their Biblical 
text appears in a much later recension. The gospel which they 
read from their special service-book does not show any traces 
of connexion with the Bezan text. It can hardly have been 
corrected from it, any more than it can have been copied. And 
when we reflect that all, or almost all, the liturgical traits in 
the Codex Bezae have been found to be features of the 
Byzantine ritual, it is safe to conclude that if it was ever used 
for liturgical purposes in France, the Greeks or quasi-Greeks 
who used it must have surrendered entirely to Byzantium, and 
not merely turned Greek for one or two high days, of which 
conversion there does not appear to be the least sign in the 
history of the French Church. 

Moreover it is diflBcult to believe that a city so far west 
and so far inland as Paris could furnish such a succession of 
bilingual scribes as is betrayed by the annotations, who know 
Greek conversationally and yet are often proved to be Latins. 

^ Mr Brightman qaotes Vincent, Note sur la messe grecque qui se chantait 
autrefois a VAbbaye Royale de St Denys^ Pan's 1864 (Bevae Arch^ologique), and 
has drawn my attention to the printed editions of the mass in question : e.g. 
Metse greque (sio) en Vhonneur de St Denys <bc. Paris, Lottin, 1777. 

80 

We might expect one or two travelling Greeks to settle in 
Paris and to become thoroughly Latinized, but it is diflBcult to 
imagine in such a centre so steady a tradition of them as is 
required by the Codex Bezae. We note also that no reason 
has yet been found for the celebration of St George in Paris in 
the time of the same annotator whom we call O. We want a 
Greek or quasi-Greek celebration for St George as well as St 
Denys ; and this does not seem to be forthcoming. 

Now let us try an alternative hypothesis, say one of the 
South Italian cities, where Greek influences are known to 
prevail at the time in question, or some Italian city where 
Greek culture and Greek populations were to be found far into 
the middle ages (like Naples, Amalfi, Ravenna and Brindisi). 

And first for the proofs of the continuance of the Greek 
ritual in such cities and districts. 

Take, for instance, Naples : we have evidence of the per- 
sistence or intrusion of Greek factors into the ritual from a 
number of quarters : Mart^ne, from whom we cited above for 
the service of St Denys, states as follows : 

"In MSS. constitutionibus Ecclesiae Neapolitanae haec leguntur: in 
die resurrectionis, dicto evangelio, Dominus Archiepiscopus incipit credo 
in graeco sermone, si placet, et supradictus Archiepiscopus, presbyter 
S. Qeorgii ad Mercatum cum sociis suis et archipresbyter S. Mariae 
Rotundae decantant in graeco sermone in conspectu Domini Archiepiscopi 
alta voce." 

Here is a case of recitation of the Creed in Greek by three 
apparently Greek ecclesiastics. It is true that the Gospel for 
the day appears to have been read in Latin, although it was 
Easter Day, when we might have expected Greek. But there 
are also traces of the reading of the Gospel in Greek in the 
very same city : for Joseph Catalanus has a statement to the 
following effect, in a note on Patricius* Ceremoniale Ecclesiae 
Romanae\ " Ceterum consuevisse olim in nonnuUis nostri Regni 
Neapolitani Ecclesiis Epistolam atque Evangelium Graece ac 
Latine pronunciari in missa, diximus iam in nostro opere De 
codice 8. Evangeliif lib. ii, c. ii, ubi etiam notavimus, semel in 

1 pp. 117, lis. 

81 

anno Dominica Palmarum Brundisii in Sallentinis Epistolam 
item et Evangelium Graeca lingua ex prisca et immemorabili 
ejusdem Latinae Eeclesiae consuetudine recitari consuevisse/' 

The writer, in explaining the bilingual character of certain 
Italian churches, has stumbled on the fact that Palm Sunday 
at Brindisi was notable for the use of a Greek (rospel. It is 
the very day on which a lesson is inserted in the Codex Bezos by 
the annotator whom we call J. I think it will be admitted that 
the coincidence is very curious, especially as this is the only 
Sunday lesson which J indicates. 

When we go still further south, we come into the region 
where we should most naturally expect to find Greek influ- 
ences. Whole groups of villages continued Greek both in 
language and ritual until the sixteenth century. Thus Barrius\ 
speaking of certain districts, Pedavoli, S, Oiorgioy Cocjrpedonum, 
Lubrichi and Sitizzano, says distinctly, " hi pagi Graeci sunt et 
rem divinam graeca lingua ac more faciunt, in quotidiano vero 
sermone latina et graeca lingua utuntur." The Greek language 
and the Greek ritual are thus afiBrmed to exist near the end of 
the sixteenth century. So in speaking of Leucopetra he says, 
"a Leucopetra uilla hucusque incolae in familiari sermone 
latina et graeca lingua utuntur, sacra vero graeca lingua grae- 
coque ritu faciunt." 

At Nardo, where a celebrated school of Greek calligraphy 
was long continued, it is said that the sacred vestments of the 
Greek rite are still preserved, and that at the chief festivals 
they recite the Gospel and the Epistle in Greek. 

But we need not multiply the proofs that the traces of the 
Greek ritual as well as of the Greek language in Calabria and 
Apulia come down nearly to our own times. The fact is that 
the ninth century, which is the time when the annotations in 
the Codex Bezae begin, was a time when the Hellenization of 
S. Italy was at its height. Basilian monasteries arose all 
over the country, under the influence of exiles and deportations 
from the East ; and in the following century, the Patriarch of 
Constantinople carried the process of Hellenization to such a 

^ De antiquitate et situ Calahriaey p. 173 (Bomae, a.d. 1571). 
H. 6 

82 

pitch on the religious side as to order the Archbishop of 
Otranto to entirely suppress the use of the Latin language in 
the Church. 

There is, therefore, no diflSculty in imagining a Church or 
Monastery in S. Italy where the general process of Bezan 
annotation can have been carried on ; the only diflBculty lies in 
the identification of the special features which have come to 
light in our investigation^ 

Let us try and recapitulate some of these points : 

(1) A Greek lection for Palm Sunday and the preceding 
Saturday ; the name of Palm Sunday being replaced by Sunday 
of the Pro-photisms. 

(2) A Greek lection for the Transfiguration. 

(3) A long series of Byzantine lessons, with some pecu- 
liarities in the names of the special lessons, such as irepl 
dvairava-afiivoDv, &c 

(4) A number of peculiarities in the Greek dialect of the 
notes, both in the lessons, and in the inserted chapter-headings 
and elsewhere. 

(5) A special cult of St George, St Denys, and, for at least 
one festival, of the Virgin. 

Now of these points, the series of peculiarities under No. 4 
has been shown, in our investigation, to be exactly paralleled 
in the Greek of Calabria and Apulia. No. 1 is suspiciously 

^ Morosi (p. 200) sums up the influenoe of the monastic movement of the 
times referred to as follows: *'E difatti ogni monastero non fa solamente 
tin consorgio religioso che alia greca celebrava i divini officii, ma fa anche ana 
scuola, ove parlavasi e insegnavasi in greco, nel greco volgare di tempi, e ove 
nella lingaa greca erano ammaestrati nello stesso tempo che nella greca sapienza 
i natarali chi in folia vi accorreyano. Ogni monastero insomma riasci an foco- 
lare di civilt^ italo-ellenica. Nd meno forti legami avea coll' Oriente il clero 
secolare, poichd fino dei tempi di Leone lU le diocesi di qaesta parte d' Italia o 
coll' arte o colla forza sottratte una dopo 1' aitra alia giurisdizione de* yesoovi di 
Boma, erano entrate qaasi tutte nella giurisdizione de' patriarchi di Gostantino- 
poli; e insieme col rito, la lingaa greca era divenuta la lingua quasi universale 
deUa chiesa. II greco anzi a poco a poco divcDuto una lingua commune, essendo 
la lingua della chiesa e del govemo, della liturgia e della cancelleria bizantina, 
dell' esercito e del commercio e insomma delle alte classi della civile society 
italo-ellenica." 

83 

like the ritual of Brindisi, but the proof needs to be rendered 
complete by the actual recovery of the peculiar Saturday lesson. 
Nor does this exclude the existence of a similar usage in other 
churches, for it is unlikely that the Brindisi use has no parallels 
in S. Italy. What can be said under the remaining heads? 
Suppose we try the calendar. St George has already turned 
up in connexion with a church in Naples which has a Greek 
presbyter, or at least one who can read the Gospel in Greek; 
but there are much more significant traces of his sanctity as 
we go further south. Pompilio RodotJt speaks of the prevalence 
of the cult in his work DelV origine e progresso del rito greco in 
Italia. He tells us^ that in the neighbourhood of Corigliano 
a great monastery was built, apparently with St George for 
patron; and the surrounding population had the greatest 
reverence for him, the more so that St George is the protector 
of cattle. Miracles were wrought by the saint of quite a 
different type from those which we commonly associate with 
his chivalry. One peasant found a lost cow ; another had an 
ox raised to life ; and finally the patron's day at the monastery 
became the occasion of a great fair, and when the monastery 
itself fell into ruins, the fair was transferred to Corigliano, 
where it is said still to be held on April 23rd, which is the day 
over which St George presides, and when he is most accessible. 
It is, therefore, to the existence of an annual benediction of 
cattle, and not to chivalrous recognition of the patron saint of 
England by French monks (as Scrivener seems to suggest) that 
we owe the mention of St George in the margins of our MS." 

It appears from the foregoing that there is no diflBculty in 
finding reasons for a special cult of St George in the southern 
parts of Italy. His agricultural and pastoral value was too 
great for him to be neglected. If we had no towns, villages or 
churches* named after him, the fact that he was involved in 

^ Lib I. a X. § 6. 

' There is, however, so far as I can see, nothing in the lesson read (Acts zii. 
1 — 11) to suggest miracles on horned beasts. 

* M. Batiffol, VAhhaye de Rossano, gives the titles of three Basilian 
monasteries or churches dedicated to St George, viz. St George de Piscopio 
attached to La Cava, St George of Trocco, attached to the abbey of S. Salvatore 

6-2 

84 

the Life Insurance of Horned Beasts would be suflBcient to 
explain his recognition in the liturgical directions of any MS. 
But in finding St George, have we not perhaps lost St Denys ? 
Mr Brightman says not : he points out that the Monastery of 
Bossano had attached to it a church known as S. Denys de 
Casubono ; and further that in a MS. which formerly belonged 
to the same abbey, but which is now in the Vatican Library 
(Cod. Vat. 1456), there is a palimpsest leaf from an Apostolos 
of the 8th century, which contains the lesson for St Denys' 
day. 

Perhaps the remembrance of St Denys is to be explained by 
the existence of a church or abbey dedicated to him, but 
whether this be the case or not, there are traces of the interest 
taken in his works by the Basilian monks of S. Italy. In 
an Inventory of the MSS. at S. Salvatore of Messina, made 
in 1563S we find the entry of a Greek MS. of the works of 
St Dionysius. In the series of short tracts which are commonly 
found bound up with the copies of the Greek New Testament 
belonging to that peculiar group of MSS. known to students 
as the Ferrar-group, and definitely traced to a S. Italian or 
Sicilian origin, we find the following curious piece : 

'loTcov art 17 €KK\rj(ruiaTiKff Upap\ia t^s ovpavias Upapxias itrnv €(f>dfuKka' 

a tS>v dyyiXoiv oi dvayvSxrrm 

P rS>p dp\ayy€kwv ol virt^uLKovoi 

y tS>v dc BpovoDV oi BiaKovoi' cas iv ^oBp,^ tS>v Karovpavlav 

B tS>V KVplOTTfT^V oi IT p€(rPvT€ pOl 

c tS>v dpx&v oi irepioBevTal 

S" rS>v Be €^ova-iS)v oi xtop^irio'KOiroi a>r iv fiaBp,^ rStv fjL€a-ovpavi<av 

( rS>v dc Bvvdp,€<i}v oi cVtVicoTrot 

1/ rS>v Be X€pov^ip,* oi firfTpoiroXiTcu 

6 tS>v Be fT€pa<f>lpL' oi dp^uirlfTKoiroi.'' rS)V dv<a ovpop&v. 

The writer of this little tract was probably Nilus Doxa- 
patrius (see my Studies in the Ferrar-Group, where the whole 
tract is given in facsimile), and it is either a Sicilian or a 

at Messina and St George of Siacca, a convent attached to the same abbey. 
Note also the casale of S. Qiorgio attached to the Abbey of Bossano. 
1 See Batiffol, p. 128. 

85 

S. Italian product ; but it is also clear that it is a summary of 
what the writer has derived from a study of the works of 
Dionysius the Areopagite. 

It may be further noted that amongst the MSS. at Grotta- 
ferrata, most of which come from Rossauo and the neighbour- 
hood, there is one of the 10th century (MS. Z. a. V.) which 
contains an Interpretatio vocum quae continentur in libro 
S. Dionysti Areopagitae ; from which it appears that the 
Dionysian writings were carefully studied in this region. 

It appears, then, that we are not wholly destitute of traces 
of St Denys in S. Italy. We may not have succeeded in 
finding a monastery dedicated to him, but we find a church, a 
copy of his works, and a short tract based on his writings, 
which appears to have had a wide circulation in this region. 
The reference to St Denys is, therefore, not hard to explain on 
the hypothesis of a S. Italian home for the Codex Bezae. We 
need a little more light on the subject, and this may come at 
any moment. 

Let us now return to the statement which was made that the 
church at Brindisi read the Gospels in Greek on Palm Sunday, 
which was the very day selected by the annotator J for marking 
a Greek lesson in the Codex Bezae. Our first impulse was to 
say that here we probably have the very church that we are 
in search of. But a little closer investigation will show that 
(a) Palm Sunday is a very popular festival in S. Italy, (6) one 
of the peculiar honours of the day is the Greek Gospel, which 
is not confined to Brindisi. The reason for the special honour 
given to the day is something like the explanation of the 
popularity of the cult of St George ; if the latter festival was 
the day of benediction of the beasts, the former was the day of 
benediction of the fruits of the earth, and in general, of fertility 
animate and inanimate. One of the best proofs of this is the 
custom which still survives of begging from house to house on 
Palm Sunday, with appropriate songs and promises of a hundred- 
fold return during the year for whatever is given. 

Morosi gives us a specimen of a Canto delle Palme from 
Martano, which runs as follows: 

86 

Na proattiddia ce agheldte 
Sas vanzinune 's hilikte ; 
O e ornis^ssa ja' n' aguo 
Passiomia na cai agat6 : 
i.e. 

Le pecorelle e le giovenche 

Vi crescano k migliaia ; 

E le galline vostre per un uovo 

Ciascuna ne faccia cento. 

The basis of these Greco-Italian songs is to be found in the 
special prayers for fertility that belong to the day. The follow- 
ing passage from Rodot^ will show the survival on the ec- 
clesiastical side: 

lib. i. p. 432 "Uno splendido monumento dell' estinto grecismo, rimane 
oggidi nelle greche lezioni della Dominica delle Palme. Dato fine nella 
cattedrale alia funzione propria di qual giorno, i Ministri dall' Altare 
vestiti delle loro divise di color violaceo, e il restante del clero delle 
respettive ecclesiastiche insegne, s' incamminano con divota e pomposa 
ordinanza ad un colle, che sorge innanzi al Convento di Capuccini in un 
sito vantaggioso ed eminente, il quale signoreggia le contigue vaste, e 
deliziose campagne. Disposto il clero con buon ordine, si leggono le 
divine scritture in lingua greca, con istraordinaria magnificenza e pietk. 
II Suddiacono canta la lezione tratta dall' Epistola di S. Paolo a Romani : 
Quamdiu quidem ego sum gentium apostoluSy minuterium meum honori- 
ficaho : e '1 Diacono, il Vangelo di S. Matteo : In iUo tempore : cum appro- 
pmquasset lesus lerosolymis et venisset Bethphage ad m^ntem oliveti, Indi, 
chi presiede a questa celebritk, con alcune preci che recita, spinge i comuni 
voti al Cielo, per implorare della divina beneficenza sopra i fertile terreni, 
che cadono sotto gli occhi per un lunghissimo tratto di paese, la copia ed 
ubertk di tutto ci6 ch' h necessario all' umano sostentamento : con 
imprimere loro la celeste benedizione sospirata dalla turba del popolo, dk 
fine alia solenne funzione." 

This passage is conclusive as to the place which the Palm 
Sunday festival occupied in the district of Rossano; the 
survival of the Greek lessons is one of the features that we are 
in search of, and it is significant that the Gospel read in the 
open air is not the Gospel of John, but the parallel in Matthew, 
upon the traces of which we stumbled in deciphering the 
marginal notes of the Codex Bezae. 

Nor is it only at Rossano that the festival in question has 
this prominence. To quote again from Rodotk (p. 431) : 

87 

"L' uso del rito orientale nella Diocesi di Cosenza riceve ancora maggior 
forza dal canto del Vangelo in Greco, che ivi udivasi risonare nella 
Domenica delle Palme. L' ordine di quella cattedrale riferito dal lodato 
Mart^ne, prescrive che il Diacono nella Processione di tal giomo reciti in 
lingua Greca il Vangelo che descrive V ingresso di GJesti Cristo in Geru- 
salemme ; e che indi il Yescovo commova il Popolo con una efficace omelia 
etc." 

The same custom survives at Messina (ii. p. 270) : 

" Nella Domenica delle Palme, in cui V Archivescovo, il Capitolo, e 1 
Senato intervengono nella medesima Chiesa con pompa molto magnifica 
alia celebrazione della messa, cantasi il Vangelo in greco e in latino." 

Here again Palm Sunday is signalised by a popular con- 
course and by the reading of the Greek Gospel. No doubt the 
evidence could be much increased : and we may fairly conclude 
that this custom is characteristic of the Greek Churches of 
S. Italy. We shall find it carried almost into Rome itself, for 
the monastery of Grottaferrata celebrates pontifical mass with 
a Greek Gospel on high days, and amongst these special 
festivals we note the dedication of their Church (Dec. 17), the 
Assumption of the Virgin, Palm Sunday and Pentecost. The 
list is very suggestive of what Greek Gospels we found selected 
from the Codex Bezae. 

At the same time we must remark that Grottaferrata itself 
appears from this very list to be excluded from the possible 
homes of the Codex Bezae. There is n6 sign at Grottaferrata 
of tribute to St George as a special saint, except in his 
occurrence in one case amongst the carved figures on the 
outside of the abbey, where he is found with Laurence and 
with Sergius and Bacchus. The chief saints are St Nilus and 
St Bartholomew ; and while the Virgin, to whom the Church 
is dedicated, occupies a conspicuous place, and especially in 
connexion with the festival of the Assumption, there is no 
trace of St Denys. The pontifical masses, in which the Grotta- 
ferrata monks are responsible for the Greek lessons, are thus in 
evidence against the belief that the history of the annotators of 
Codex Bezae is another name for the history of Grottaferrata. 

The argument is, in fact, precisely similar to the one 
which arises in connexion with the special festivals of the 

88 

abbey of St Denys at Paris, where we find front rank given 
to the following days by means of quasi-Greek masses, viz. 
Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, All Saints, St Matthew, 
St Denys and the Dedication Festival. Here Palm Sunday 
and St George are significantly absent. 

Returning to Southern Italy we find that a similar enquiry 
excludes the church of Taranto, of which Rodot& tells us^ as 
follows : 

''Approdando i Greci levantini nella cittk di Taranto, vi portarono 
V USD de' riti greci : de' qiudi un vestigio h rimaso a poster! oggigiorno, nel 
canto dell' Epistola e Vangelo in lingua greca nelle messe Pontificali, che 
si celebrano nella chiesa metropolitana nella sollennitk del Natale, della 
Pasqua di Resurrezione, di S. Cataldo protettore e dell' Assunta, del cui 
titolo essa h decorata." 

Here the special festivals do not suflBciently overlap with 
those in the Bezan margins, although we again notice the 
prominence given to the festival of the Assumption. This 
festival must also have been a conspicuous one in the order of 
the Greek church at Galatona, which is dedicated under that 
very title. But I do not know any special features which 
otherwise characterise that church. 

So far, then, as the enquiry has gone we may say that the 
whole of the indications point to the reference of the Codex 
Bezae to some S. Italian church or monastery. There has 
been shown to be (1) a close agreement between the Modem 
Greek, of which traces are found in the Codex Bezae, and, the 
dialects of S. Italian colonies; (2) a coincidence in usage 
between the Codex Bezae and the S. Italian churches in the 
honour paid to Palm Sunday and especially in the use of a 
Greek Gospel on that day : (3) the cult of St George which is 
intimated in Codex Bezae is phenomenal (for agricultural and 
pastoral reasons) in S. Italy, and we actually find towns, 
churches and monasteries which bear his name; (4) the 
selection of the Assumption of the Virgin as her special 
festival is implied in the language of the marginal note in the 
Codex Bezae. The Assumption is to the Greek churches what 
the Annunciation is to the Latin. And we have sufficient 

^ Progresso, iii. 103. 

89 

traces of the regard paid to the day by the S. Italian churches. 
The weak point, then, in the chain of evidence which we have 
been collecting is still St Denys, of whom we have not found 
all the traces that we might have expected, though we have a 
number of intimations that he was both studied and honoured 
by the Greeks of Calabria and Sicily. If we might venture 
into the region of conjecture, the following hypothesis might 
perhaps be found a tenable one. We will imagine the case of 
a Greek community which has established the festival of the 
Assumption of the Virgin, and, if we please, has its church 
dedicated either to the Virgin or to her KoLfi'qai,^. It will be 
found that the festival in question is supported upon two 
apocryphal documents: of these one (if it be not rather a 
group of connected forgeries) is the story of the Passing of the 
Virgin which occupies a prominent position amongst Greek 
and Syriac Apocrypha. The other is the much more weighty 
and important letter of Dionysius the Areopagite to Timothy, 
in which he records the Passing of Mary and the attendant 
miracles, and becomes the real sponsor for the new festival, 
and practically carries it into the calendar and keeps it there. 
This sponsorship is suflSciently proved (a) by the fact that the 
Roman Church condemned the legends of the Dormitio as 
apocryphal, (6) by the transference into the breviary of a long 
passage from St John of Damascus, who establishes the festival 
by direct reference to Dionysius \ But if this be the case a 
church or monastery which held the Assumption of the Virgin 
in high honour amongst its festivals would readily associate 
with that festival the honour of St Dionysius the Areopagite. 
And it is possible that this is the explanation for the appear- 
ance of the Saint in the Bezan margins. In that case we 
should say that it is probable that the home of the Codex was 
a church dedicated to the Virgin, with, if possible, a centre 
for the special cult of St George somewhere in the neigh- 
bourhood. In that case Rossano itself would do admirably. 
But it must be remembered that we have wandered into the 
region of hypothesis in our treatment of St Denys, and that 

^ See Nilles, Kalendarium Manuale, i. 246. 

90 

the force of the conclusion is affected by the probability of the 
hypothesis. 

Moreover the weakness of the reasoning is that it is some- 
what of an ignoratio elenchi : for while the establishment of a 
connexion between the festival of St Dionysius the Areopagite 
and the Assumption of the Virgin will explain why the former 
should find its way into the Calendar along with the latter, it 
will not explain why the two feasts should at a later date 
stand side by side in a local Calendar, especially when the 
Menology of selected saints in which they are found is so scanty; 
unless indeed it can be shown that the very same causes which 
operated to bring the two festivals into existence continue to 
operate so as to keep them in practical juxtaposition. In order 
to see whether there is any further light to be obtained on this 
point we must dig a little deeper, we must not only enquire 
whether St Denys stands sponsor for the Assumption, but why 
he does so. We must study the Menology in the making, and 
with a closer scrutiny of the origin of the Christian festivals 
that have come under our special observation in the Codex 
Bezae. 

First of all we will give more in detail the proof that the 
two festivals came into the Calendar together; then we will 
show why they came into the Calendar ; and finally we will 
exhibit reasons why they should stand in the Codex Bezae 
together, and in company with the festival of St George. 

The proof that St Dionysius came into the Calendar along 
with the Assumption of the Virgin lies in the fact that he is 
the accepted ecclesiastical authority for that festival. If she is 
honoured on account of him, he is sure to be honoured also 
along with her. The classical reference is to the treatise De 
divinis nominibm iii. 2 in which Dionysius speaks of the pre- 
sence of his teacher Hierotheus and himself with Timothy at 
the Virgin's death-bed. 

'Ettci Koi Trap' avTois rois deoXrjirrois rffi&v icpdpxats, ^vUa Koi ^fictr, 
as ola-Qay kcu avros kcli ttoXXoi tqi>v UpSiv rjfuiv ddeX^^i^, €ir\ r^ Beap 
rov ^aiap\iKov koi Beoboxov (ro>pMTOs avveXrjkvBafieVf iraprjv be ical 6 abiK- 
<f>6B€os 'lafC6>/3or Koi Herpos, rj Kopv<f>aia koi rrpfa-fivTarrf r&v BeoXoyoav 
aKpAniSf KTf, 

91 

This passage is the foundation of those passages in the 
Menaeum that refer to Dionysius, and probably also the ground 
of the allusions that occur in the various Lives and Martyria 
of the Saint. 

Thus we find in the Menaeum the following address to 

Dionysius : 

*Ayiav dirotrroKav d^imSels OeaTTjs p^pi/fuxriVai fcai avfiwovos avyK0ivav65 
y4yovas Tfj£ d6^Sy Koi avv avTois iirl t^v Biav tfrirfvfras <ra>fiaTO£ rov Svtods 
{€Mpxiicov TTJs fiovTfs BeoTOKOv KOI {rfPaa-fuayraTTfs fjv eVaf (a>r fi€y(iKvvofjL€v. 

Also the following address to the Virgin : 

*Ey r^ (reinj KOifi^<r€i aov, iravayla HapBmy iraprjv 6 Atovvatos (rvv 
r^ 'l€po0€^ Koi TifioBia ra Beta dfia tois an-oaToXotr, vfivov i^alUav €KaaTos 
frp6axl>opov rfj ajj do^, ftc^* tiv koi vvv ktL 

Here the sponsorship of Dionysius for the festival is clearly 
implied ; now it is significant that the extant Apocalypse of the 
Virgin does not mention the blessed Dionysius or his companion; 
and the inference is that the Apocalypse was earlier in pro- 
duction than the Dionysian legend and was not adequate to 
establish the festival, which had to be bolstered up by the 
additional evidence of the Dionysian writings. This explains 
at once why the Roman Church rejects the Apocalypse of the 
Virgin, but accepts the festival and supports it on the authority 
of St Denys. It is, therefore, quite possible that there have 
been two attempts to establish a new festival of the Virgin, of 
which the first was either unsuccessful or imperfectly successful, 
and the second, for some occult reason, acquired rapidly an 
oecumenical popularity. But whatever be the meaning of this, 
we may take the connexion between the festival of the Assump- 
tion and the festival of St Dionysius as involved in the state- 
ments which we quoted above. 

We pass on to find the reason for this nexus of the two 
festivals. In which connexion observe that we are dealing with 
Athenian festivals, for it may be taken for granted that the first 
place to celebrate Dionysius the Areopagite will be the city 
that claims him as its bishop. In no other place would he be a 
name that would naturally suggest itself to conjure with ; no- 
where else would he be readily accepted as an authority. In 

92 

the next place remark the dates assigned to Dionysius and 
Hierotheus in the Greek Calendar : we have 

Oct. 3. Tov Aylov Aiovv(riov tov 'ApcoTrayiVov 

or Aiovv(riov tov * Kpcoirayirov ^lepofidprvpos. 
Oct. 4. TOV Aylov *l(poB4ov iiruTKoirov *\Br)vS>v, 

Now the time to which Dionysius has been assigned coin- 
cides closely with the date of the Thesmophoria in the Athenian 
Calendar. The Roman Fasti, in taking over in 191 B.C. the 
worship of Demeter, assigned the date Oct. 4 to the Jejunium 
Cereris, which was meant to be the equivalent of the Greek 
Nrjareia, or Fasting of Demeter, which is the middle of the 
festival of the Thesmophoria ^ The original date of the Thes- 
mophoria is still somewhat obscure: a string of authorities 
give the 11th, 12th and 13th Pyanepsion as the old Attic date. 
Plutarch, however, sets the Nrfarela four days later. Probably 
neither statement is perfectly trustworthy: what is certain is 
that in the month Pyanepsion fell the festival of the Thesmo- 
phoria, when mysteries of Dionysus, Demeter and Persephone 
were celebrated. Thus the festival of Dionysius the Areopagite 
was closely coincident with one of the great Attic festivals; 
and the connexion would be perhaps closer if we took the 
Latin date (Oct. 9) for St Dionysius, which appears to be 
arrived at by simply writing October for Pyanepsion. A con- 
nexion is thus established in another direction between the 
Dionysius festival and the worship of Demeter, and the hypo- 
thesis immediately springs to light that the festivals we have 
been considering are substitutes for festivals of the Great 
Mother and of Dionysus the Wine-god. On this hypothesis the 
Assumption of the Virgin stands for the Assumption of Demeter 
when she returns to Olympus ; and St Dionysius the Areopagite 
is the ecclesiastical decency for Bacchos, lacchos and Dionysos. 

The connexion between the festivals of Demeter and 
Dionysos is a commonplace of Attic worship : it is expressed 
in the language of mythology by saying that Demeter and 

1 Cf . PreUer, Rom. Myth. ii. 46 : " EndUch wurde seit dem J. 191 v. Chr. 
wieder auf Anstifien der SibyUinischen Biicher, zuerst alle vier J&hre, dann 
jahrlioh am 4. October ein Fasten der Ceres (jejunium Cereris) beobaohtet, welches 
wenigstens der Zeit naoh den grieohischen Tesmophorien entspraoh." 

93 

Dionysos came to Attica together, she on her way to Eleusis, 
and he to Icaria. Their festivals, however, are well known to 
be nature festivals which developed into mysteries, in which the 
death and resurrection of the Corn-spirit gave rise to the story of 
Demeter and Persephone, and the death and resurrection of the 
Vine-spirit to the parallel story of Semele and Dionysos ; the 
two rituals evolved in parallel myths and ultimately blended, in 
such a way that Semele disappears, and the three divinities 
Demeter, Persephone and Dionysos share a common ritual and 
divide their honours. Even on the side of a simple nature- 
worship, it was difiScult to keep Dionysos and Demeter apart : 
the harvest and threshing festivals which were sacred to the 
latter ai-e not far removed either in time or in idea from the 
vintage festival presided over by the former: moreover the 
functions of the two deities often overlap, for Demeter some- 
times is a Tree-spirit as well as a Corn-mother, and it can be 
shown that Dionysos also had a wider vegetable government 
than the single plant with which he is commonly connected^ 

As we have shown, the date of the festival of St Deuys 
coincides closely with that of the Thesmophoria, and we are 
almost entitled to say that it is the Thesmophoria or a part of 
the same, or if this be thought too rapid a reasoning, we may 
restrict ourselves by saying it is one of the harvest-threshing- 
vintage festivals, without necessarily restricting it to Athens or 
demanding an exact coincidence with a date in the Calendar. 
The identification explains at once the rapidity with which the 
festival spread, for almost everywhere there was a half-pagan 
naturalistic worship waiting to be absorbed into a more dignified 
ritual. 

But what of the date (Aug. 15) assigned to the Assumption? 
Is that a known festival of the Demeter-Dionysos order, or is it 
a nature festival ? 

So far as Attica is concerned the date might very well be 
that of a harvest or threshing festival. 

^ Preller, Or, Myth. i. 769 : ** Die nahe Yerbindang zwischen Demeter und 
Dionysos zeigt sich aach darin dass jener Gottin ein gewisser Antheil an der 
Banmzaoht zugesohrieben wurde. So woUten die Phytaliden in Attika Yon 
ihr die ^rste Feige erhalten haben *' etc. 

94 

It is suggestive that in Edward DodwelFs Classical Tour 
through Greece ii. 9, the remark is dropped incidentally that 
" the harvest [in Attica] is completely finished and the com all 
trodden, about the 15th of August" Such a statement is 
significant of the period at which to look for a harvest or 
threshing festival at Athens. Moreover we must remember, 
when we are thinking of Demeter as the Great Mother of the 
Eleusinian and other cults, that under the shadow of the state- 
liest and most solemn of mysteries there still survived the 
ancient worship (if it can be called worship) of the Corn-mother 
and the Corn-child. 

We cannot write the story of the worship of Demeter at 
Athens or Eleusis >vithout going into the harvest-fields of 
Attica, and for a complete explanation of the mysteries we may 
have to go to the furthest limits of the cultivation of the com, 
where Eleusinian mysteries are all unknown: in the outlying 
villages of Greece or in the farthest Hebrides we can find 
survivals of those very customs which Athens and Rome 
developed into the worship of Demeter and Ceres. Even if no 
special Demeter festival can be found to coincide with the date 
of the Assumption, we might still allow the Assumption as a 
harvest-festival to absorb and annex a number of commemora- 
tions which have regard to the alternate death and life of 
nature and which represent the dying and rising again of the 
invisible spirits that fertilize the tree and the grains 

The question then is asked whether Aug. 15 is selected for 
the Assumption as a substitute for some special Demeter cult ? 
Was there anything special going on in Attica about that time ? 
As we have shown the Attic harvest and the Attic threshing 
were about over. 

We naturally expect that the date will be the Eleusinian 

1 The foUowing note from Preller, Demeter p. 326, expresses the same 
point : " Die Feste der Demeter als Aokergdttin betreffen grosstentheils die 
Erndte- and Saatzeit; so lange das Eom aaf dem Felde war, wurden wohl 
einzelne Opfer gebracht, ein Fest im eigentlichen Sinne aber fand nicht statt. 
Unter jenen sind nun einzige Mysterien geworden, wie die Eleasinien nnd 
Thesmophorien, von welchen anderswo ausftihrlicher za handeki, theils sind 
sie das geblieben, was sie zunachst waren, Gebranohe landlicher Religion nnd 
Freude, wie das natiirliche Gefiihl fiir die Erndte sie eingab." 

95 

festival, which is the greatest of the days in the Demeter- 
Dionysus worship. But it is agreed on all sides that this 
festival belongs to the 20th of Boedromion, and that therefore 
it falls in September. On the other hand it is almost exactly 
the festival of the Panathenaea. The Diet, of Gk. and Roman 
AnUquities advises us that " the principal day [of this festival] 
was the third from the end of Hecatombaeon (about Aug. 13). 
Proclus (in Plat. Tim. p. 9) says so expressly of the Greater 
Panathenaea, and this agrees with Schol. on Hom. IL viii. 39, 
where Athena is said to have been born on that day^*' 

The determination of the corresponding date in a fixed 
and corrected calendar is not an easy matter. According to 
some interesting modem investigations, the axis of the Parthe- 
non was directed to a point of the horizon where the sun rises 
29 days before the autumn equinox. And August Mommsen 
{Feste der Stadt Athen, p. 55) gives the result of the calculation 
for 458 B.C. as Aug. 31. This would be the day of consecration 
of the Parthenon and the birthday of the goddess. But this is 
a speculative method of enquiry which requires not a little 
verification and in any case must be corrected as the Calendar 
is corrected. 

Moreover there is a collateral reason for believing that the 
13th of August is the chief day of the Greater Panathenaea. 
For we have the same date given as the birthday of the Arician 
Diana, one of the oldest and most famous of the great Italian 
festivals. "During her annual festival," says Mr Frazer^ "cele- 
brated at the hottest time of the year, her grove shone with a 
multitude of torches, whose ruddy glare was reflected by the 
waters of the lake ; and throughout the length and breadth of 
Italy the day was kept with holy rites at every domestic 
hearth." Mr Frazer adds a note in which he expresses a little 
doubt as to whether the day of the festival has been rightly 
fixed on the 13th of August. "From Martial xii. 67 it has 

^ So PreUer, Gr, Myth. i. 212 : ** Die musisohen, gymnisohen ond ritter- 
isohen Uebungen beschaftigen die ersten Tage, bis mit dem 28. Hekatombaeon, 
an welchem man die Gottin geboren glaubte, der eigentliche Haupttag des 
Festes anbraoh." 

^ Golden Bough, Vol. i. p. 6. 

96 

been inferred that the Arician festival fell on the 13th of 
Augusts The inference, however, does not seem to be con- 
clusive." 

The date may, however, be defended and sustained. 
Martial's language is: 

In Natalem Maronis. 

Maiae Mercurium creastis Idus. 
Augustis redit Idibus Diana. 
Octobres Maro consecravit Idus. 
Idus saepe colas et has, et illas, 
Qui magni celebras Maronis Idus. 

The writer is celebrating birthdays that, like Virgil's, fell on 
the Ides. The word birthday in the case of a deity may mean 
the day of consecration of his temple. But the fact of the 
festival on the Ides of August is clear. And to the same effect 
we have in Ausonius 

Et medias Idus Mail, Augustique recursu, 
Quas sibi Mercurius, quasque Diana dicat. 

Supposing this identification to be rightly made, we have 
the parallel festivals of ancient Italy and Greece brought into 
clear view. And this confirms us in our belief that the date 
of the Assumption of the Virgin is the date of the Panathenaea 
(and the festival of the Arician Diana) and not of the Eleusinia. 

But it may be urged, it was essential to your argument that 
it should be a Demeter festival and not an Athena festival. 
Recall, however, what was said above that the festival of the 
Assumption showed two stages of development, one in which 
there is no sign of Dionysius and Hierotheus, and one in which 
Dionysius not only appears but is the spokesman and apologist 
of the festival. Remember also that we are in Athens, and 
engaged in tumiiig old feasts and fasts into new. The first 
stage of annexation is to take over the Parthenon and the 
Parthenon-festival, which naturally fall into the lap of the 
Blessed Virgin who displaces Athena and is celebrated on her 
festival. But in the second stage Demeter and Dionysus are 
replaced, Demeter and her festival are joined to the ancient 

^ It is certainly right for the festival Dianae in Aventino as the Fasti 
show. 

97 

Panathenaic festival, and apparently the Eleusinia are dropped. 
The Thesmophoria are transferred to Dionysius. The festival 
of the Virgin is now the Assumption of the Great Mother, the 
SeoTOKo^y and not the more limited and less interesting festival 
of Athena. Dionysus and Demeter, however, may still be seen 
side by side at the festival of the Thesmophoria, for Dionysius 
the Areopagite has stationed himself close to the ^rjareia or 
Jyunium Cereris^, 

One test of the general accuracy of the foregoing theory of 
the festivals is to see the light that it casts on the Dionysian 
writings. 

We may safely say that any one who wishes to understand 
the great Dionysius and his theology will have to go to Eleusis 
for the key. His mysticism is merely mimetic of the older 
doctrine of the mysteries. We will give a specimen of what 
we mean. Here is a passage from the Mystica Theologia (§ 3) 
describing the way in which Moses initiates the Israelites into 
the knowledge of the Invisible God. 

Kat yap ov\ &7r\a>s 6 Beios Mavaijs airoKaOapd^vai np&Tov airos iccXcvcrat, 
K€u aZBis tS>v fi^, ToiovT<ov a<f>opia-Bfjvaif icai fiera naaav dnoKaBapa-iv aKovei 
r&v 7ro\v<f>a>vtov <ra\Triyya>Vy opq, <^5>Ta iroKKa^ KaOapas diratTTpatrrovra Koi 
ir6kvj(yTov£ aKrivctS' ^Ira rS>v TroKKS>v d0a>p(OTa( Koi p.€Td r&v iKKpirtov 
Upimv €ir\ T^v dKpvnjjTa rS>v deicDV dvaPd<r€Oi}v <fiBdv€U 

Could anything be more like a description of an Eleusinian 
festival with Moses for a hierophant? And this is only a 
single specimen which the reader of the Dionysian writings 
can multiply for himself. His commentator Maximus takes 
pains to apologise for his master when he uses some word 
that especially belongs to the Eleusinian ritual ; as for example, 
when Dionysius, in telling the story of the visions of Carpus, 
speaks of his prae-communion prayers as irporeXeiov^ €VX^^» 
Maximus explains : 

"EXfyoi/ irpoTf^i^ea-dai koi to irpopveia-Qoiy kcli oiovci 7rpOKa6aip€<rdai els 
iroifiaaiav fivarrfpiov a>s Kparlvos drfXad^ iv UvXaia bpapxeru fidXtara yap 
ra fivarrripia vivos ra>p '^evbavvfKov avr&v de&v reXrj koi reXerds fjcaXcwi/, a>r 
reXeiovtras Kal els to reXfiov dyovtras Toifs reXovfuvovs, to yovv nap* *EXXi;crti/ 

^ For the same conjunction see the inscription C J. Att, iii. 77 to be quoted 
presently. 

H. 7 

98 

acrejSeSr \fy6fievov tls t6 rrjs aXriBfias fivcrrrjpiov ovo/iacrev 6 yAyas Aiopixrios 
Koi irporeXciovs ciircv fifxas. 

Here Maximus, as we have said, is apologising for the use 
of the language of the mj'steries by his master. And so we 
might continue the illustration from other passages. But if 
Dionysius is in language an Eleusinian, he writes with Demeter 
and Dionysos in mind, that is, as we suggested, he is Dionysos 
made decent. 

We have explained, then, the origin of the festival of 
Dionysius the Areopagite and its connexion with the festival 
of the Assumption. Both are ultimately nature festivals, 
though they spring from the highly evolved Attic ritual, and 
as this is the prime cause of their being in the Calendar 
together, so is it also the explanation why they came to stand 
together in the Bezan Menology. And certainly in Calabria 
either of the festivals is perfectly at home : the worship of 
Dionysos having always been a feature of S. Italian life, and 
the Arician Diana, whose date so closely coincides with the 
Assumption of the Virgin, being one of the most popular of 
Italian festivals, as we have shown above. 

When we reflect upon the suggested genesis for the 
festivals from the Athenian worship, we can see that the 
solution is in one respect what we might have expected ; for 
it is where the pagan worship is most highly evolved and 
has its roots deepest in the national life, that we may expect 
displacements of the older ritual by parallel or mimetic forms of 
the newer. Think of the superb buildings, the widely rami- 
fied priesthoods, the imposing mysteries and all that went to 
make Athens in its prime the most religious city the world 
has ever seen; and then ask the question how a newer and 
a foreign religion is going to annex it all. The answer is, that 
it will annex it by being itself annexed : there will be a rap- 
prochement in the rituals caused by the moving of the newer 
cult towards the older, so that Athena need not wholly leave 
the Parthenon, nor Dionysos desert Eleusis. 

But if this be so, what will be said of other stately buildings 
and ceremonies belonging to Athenian worship ? Who is to have 
the Theseum ? It is well known that this beautiful building is 

99 

turned into a church of St George : and we even suspect that 
the cult of St George, considered as oecumenical, received its 
main impetus from the fact that it reconsecrated the Theseum. 
It might be thought suflScient to explain the displacement, to 
observe that a hero should take the place of a hero : but we 
have doubts if this is all or even the main part of the truth. 
The early Christians had a habit of annexing and perverting 
the ancient votive inscriptions of Athens, to which they were 
perhaps helped by St Paul himself, who appears to suggest 
that for the ayv(oa'Toc<; 0€oc<; of certain altars^ one might read 
dyvdo'T^ $€&, which was certainly not what the Athenians 
meant ; they had not planned a foundation for mysticism when 
they tried to appease the invisible spirits that had devastated 
Athens with plague. 

Now it is curious that amongst the votive titles of Zeus in 
Athens we find one in the form 

All Tffopy^. 

Let a Christian read this, and will he not turn the Zeus that 
presides over agriculture into a St George ? This, at least, is 
what we suspect to have happened ^ 

^ It is quite possible, however, that dyvtaffroLs Oeois may be the original 
reading in Acts xvii. ; it would harmonize better with the argument (r6 Oeiov 
V, 29, TovTo V, 23). 

^ Moreover a similar explanation wiU help us to understand the genesis 
of the perplexing Hierotheus who comes in along with Dionysos. The ecclesi- 
astical mind has agreed to abandon Hierotheos of whom no traces can be 
found, and he has been explained away in the Calendar by saying that it 
is merely a title of Dionysius which has got into the wrong line. 

Thus Nilles, Calendarium i. 296 : ** unde hodiemum [sc. Oct. 4] nostrum 
episcopum Atheniensium sanctum fiotitium habent ac 'lepoO^w Ealendariorum 
non alium putant esse ac epitheton ejusdem s. Dionysii Areopagiticae, ut qui 
revera fuerit Deo sacer,** 

It would be more simple to suppose that the error arose from a votive 
inscription, something like 

AHMHTpi 

KM 

AiONyccoi 
lepoic 66010. 

From such an inscription it will be easy for the average Christian to extract 
the Virgin, St Dionysius and Hierotheos. 

7—2 

100 

In this connexion the following votive inscription from 
Athens in the time of Hadrian will show the place occupied by 
Zeus Georgos among the gods to be no insignificant one (C /. 
AU. iii. 77). 

MerayeiTviMvos dtais B...|tov rrjs fravrtXtias iroiravov d6>d€Koi/]|^aXov 
XpiviKiaiov u vr]<^aKiov \ Borj8pofuS>vos yC f^€<l}6vi km *0(ripLbL \ akfKrpvova' 
KapTToxTfiSt a-iTfipdiv fTvplpvs] Koi Kpi6ds, (rfrivBcav fitXiKparov, (i ArjfiriTpi 
Koprj b4\<l}aKa dvvTrfpOfTcas, rji rpvy[i;]|r6v Atovvci^ koX Talis SKkois Bcols 
dvlyfT^pBirdis]] Uvavtyfn&vos 'AwoXXwvt koi *ApT€fuBi f 7r[o}7ravov xL®*"]*" 
Kialov 6pB6v<l}akov koi ica^^/x€i/[oi/] | dcudcKOv^aXov | Maifiaicrripiaivos Aii 
rro>py^ K iroiravov \ xoivikuuov 6pB6v<^(iKov dcDdeKOV^aXov kt€... fray Kapir lav 
vr)<l}aKiov. 

Here we have Zeus Georgos in excellent company : and it 
needs (as in the case of Dionysos) only the stroke of a pen to 
make him into Georgios. Demeter and Dionysos are side by 
side in the same inscription, and I suppose the festival referred 
to, the I7th and 18th of Boedromion, is the beginning of the 
Eleusinian festival (the Great Mysteries): Demeter has her 
pig [SeX^a/ca], the blood of which, mingled with seed-corn, is 
supposed to energize and fructify the grain ; and Dionysos has 
honours of the vintage order. Apparently Zeus Georgos has 
a festival on the 20th of Maimacterion, i.e. in November, 
perhaps at the time of country Dionysia. But the confirmation 
is lacking of a connexion between Zeus Georgos and April 23rd, 
the inscription being incomplete, and we must leave this part 
of the problem unsolved, merely remarking that on the Latin 
side of the house the date in question is that of the Vinalia, 
which can be demonstrated to be sacred to Jupiter^ We have, 
however, shown that in Christian Athens St George had a 
position hardly inferior in dignity to that of the Virgin herself. 
It has been already intimated from the Calabrian evidence 
that St George is not a warrior but a leading agricultural and 
pastoral saint. And Frazer has shown, in the Oolden Bough^^ 
that St George is the male counterpart of the May-lady, and is 
closely related to the King of the Wood of the Arician festival. 
The following striking passage may be quoted in this connexion: 

^ Warde Fowler, Roman Festivals^ p. 85. 
2 L c. i. 209. 

101 

« 

"In Carinthia, on St George's day (the twenty-third of 
April), the young people deck with flowers and garlands a tree 
which has been felled on the eve of the festival. The tree is 
then carried in procession, accompanied by music and joyful 
acclamations, the chief figure in the procession being the Green 
George, a young fellow clad from head to foot in green birch 
branches. At the close of the ceremonies the Green George, 

that is an eflSgy of him, is thrown into the water In many 

places, however, the lad himself who plays the part of Green 
George is ducked in a river or pond, with the intention of thus 
ensuring rain to make the fields and meadows green in summer. 
In some places the cattle are crowned and driven from their 
stalls to the accompaniment of a song — 

* Green George we bring, 
Green George we accompany, 
May he feed our herds well ; 
If not, to the water with him.' 

"Here we see that the same powers of making rain and 
fostering the cattle, which are ascribed to the tree-spirit re- 
garded as incorporate in the tree, are also attributed to the 
tree-spirit represented by a living man." 

It is very interesting to discover that the Green Man who 
figures on our public-house sign-boards is a survival of the 
oldest Nature Worship, and that ecclesiastically he is St 
George. 

His later development as Hero and Dragon-slayer is perhaps 
due to the fact that in Athens he displaced Theseus ; that is, 
he does not occupy the Theseum because he is a hero ; on the 
contrary, he is a hero because he occupies the Theseum. The 
dragon that he slays is the Minotaur, and the princess that he 
rescues is Ariadne. 

There is still something to be explained in the matter of 
his occupation of the Theseum. If that beautiful building was 
to be Christianised we should rather have expected that 
Hippolytus would have been Theseus' successor, for Hippolytus, 
the son of Theseus, was, as the Calendar will show, easily 
whitewashed. The Roman Church, at all events, had no 
difficulty in annexing him ; and it is significant that be was 

102 

(a) the King of the Wood at Aricia, (b) a Roman Saint 
celebrated at the very time of the Arician festival. For ac- 
cording to Mr Frazer* 

" Legend had it that Virbius [the King of the Wood] was 
the youthful Greek hero Hippolytus, who had been killed by 
his horses on the shore of the Saronic Gulf Him, to please 
Diana, the leech Aesculapius brought to life again by his 
simples. But Jupiter, indignant that a mortal man should 
return from the gates of death, thrust down the meddling 
leech himself to Hades; and Diana, for the love she bore 
Hippolytus, carried him away to Italy and hid him from the 
angry god in the dells of Nemi where he reigned a forest 
king under the name of Virbius." 

And according to the Roman Calendar we have 

Aug. 13. SS. Hippolyti et Cassiani, Mm. 
Aug. 15. Assumptio B. V. M.y 

where Diana and Hippolytus still live for those who have eyes 
to see. 

There can be no mistaking who is covered by the name of 
St Hippolytus or by that of the Virgin ; and the hold which the 
festival of Aricia had on the Italians is clearly expressed by the 
substitutions for it which occur in the Calendar. And for this 
reason, as we noted above, we should have expected that St 
Hippoljrtus would have occupied the Theseum and not St 
George. Perhaps the fact that each of the two (Hippolytus 
and George) displaces the popular tree-spirit (for as pointed 
out, St George is probably the May r King) would suggest that 
there is some unknown reason for connecting the two saints 
who discharge such similar functions. But at this point we are 
* gravelled for lack of matter,* and must leave the problem 
unsolved. What is certain is that George got the Theseum 
and kept it, and the acquisition profoundly aflfected his own 
history^ 

^ loc. cit. i. 7. 

^ In view of what has been said, the reader will be in a position to estimate 
the justice of a remark made by a writer in the Journal of Christian Biography 
who, reviewing Calvin's statement {Instit iii. 20, 27) that there were people who 
esteemed Christ's intercession as of no value "nisi accedant Georgius aut 

103 

We thus have arrived at a result which might easily have 
escaped the students of the building of the Menology, that Athens 
was a powerful factor in the determination of the saints whom we 
ought to worship and the times when they are most accessible. 
Moreover the identification of the meaning of the festival of St 
Denys and his connexion with other ecclesiastical festivals leads 
us to the belief that there must have been a special effort made 
to combat Paganism, which led to the establishment of the 
festivals in question. This would probably be due to the 
re-action which followed the revival of Paganism under Julian. 
It is too often supposed that this revival was a very shallow 
and ineffective movement, whose proper illustration is to be 
found in the solitary priest of Daphne, striding through the 
grass of the over-grown courts of the temple with one goose 
under his arm. But this single picture does not portray the 
pagan revival. The festivals of Demeter and Dionysus were, at 
all events, still kept up in Athens ; and Julian writes one of his 
letters to the priestess of Demeter whom he congratulates on 
her fidelity and endows with the fresh honour (a kindred 
honour) of the high-priesthood of Cybele. But if Athens was 
one centre of the pagan re-action, Paris, where Julian lived for 
so many years, must have been another: and it is significant 
that at Paris (the 'dear Lutetia' of Julian) we have such decided 
developments of the worship of St Denys from a previous 
worship of Bacchus and Dionysos. It is not even necessary 
to suppose that the Parisian Areopagite was formally imported 
from Athens : it is suflScient to show that the Parisian cult of 
Dionysius rests upon a Bacchic foundation. Whether Dionysius 
was immediately, and from the first, recognized as the traditional 
Bishop of Athens is not a point of the first importance. The 
three names Dionysius, Rusticus and Eleutherus are a very thin 
mask for the rustic Bacchus who is also Liber. And I see that 
this identification was made long ago by Dulaure in his history 
of Paris, although, along with the rest of Dulaure's proofs of 

Hippolytus aut similes larvae," expresses himself as follows : " unfortunately for 
himself, [Calvin] places Hippolytus in the class of ghosts or phantoms along 
with St George." He perhaps thought he was dealing with Hippolytus of 
Portus t 

104 

the worship of Bacchus in the vineyards round Paris, it has 
been strangely overlooked. Baumgarten-Crusius is, as far as 
I know, the only person that shows signs of having appreciated 
Dulaure's arguments, which led him to the same conclusion 
which we have ourselves arrived at, viz. that Dionysius the 
Areopagite was putting a Christian dress on the Greek mysteries. 
But he appropriates Dulaure rather than appreciates him, and 
no one would suspect from the slight footnote in which he 
expresses his indebtedness that the debt was a substantial one\ 

Even if we do not decide whether the Parisians in their cult 
of St Denys directly drew upon and imitated what they saw 
taking place in Athens, we may be sure that there was cross- 
play between the French and the Athenian Dionysians. The 
Greek lives of St Denys must go back to a Parisian source, at 
least in part. We will give one striking illustration of this 
dependence. The ordinary tradition in the Greek lives of the 
saints takes Dionysius to Paris where he is martyred by decapi- 
tation, and, as is well known, the saint carried his decollated 
head in his own hands for a long distance. According to the 
Greek account he was met by a woman named Catula who took 
the head from him and reverently buried it^ 

In the mythology Athena carries the head of Dionysus to 
Jupiter, which explains part of the legend. 

The reader of the legend is, however, puzzled by the name of 
the woman Catula, who appears as an undertaker ex machind. 
When, however, we turn to the life of St Genevifeve, we find 
the explanation, for this saint had an especial affection for 

^ See Baumgarten-Grnsius, OpmcuUit p. 270 : '' In ea incidere tempora 
librorum originem opinamur, quibns et a gnosi se intentius sejungeret Christ- 
ianorum philosophia, et ad certam aliquam formam doctrinae externamque 
eoclesia eniteretur. Turn Alexandrinae scholae etiam hunc foetum esse arbitra- 
mur, Deque yero e monachis extitisse. Postremo hoc maxime egisse anotorem, 
ut mystica Graecornm Sacra, Dionysiaca potissimum, ad rem Christianorum 
admoyeret, in quibus supremam Platonismi mentem inesse opinatns est." 

He suggests that the name of Dionysius was assumed after the manner of 
hierophants who take names from the deities whom they worship : p. 271 : 
« nempe quod Dionysiacorum sacrorum interpres esse yellet inter Ghristianos, 
quemadmodum consueyissent olim sacerdotes atque hierophantae se dicere 
Deomm suorum nomine." 

' The head is extant, according to Dulaure, in seyen different places 1 

105 

St Denys and desired to build him a church in the place 
called Catalocus where he was buried. Thus the woman 
Catula is the French village Chateuil !^ The curious blunder 
has at least the advantage of showing that the biographer 
was really working from French sources. But whether the 
East owes more to the West than the West does to the East in 
the evolution of the worship and legends of St Denys is a point 
on which we are not, at this moment, prepared to express 
ourselves definitely^ 

Enough has been said to show that all the leading festivals 
which we have been discussing from the Codex Bezae, are 
nature-festivals, in spite of their connexion with the highly 
evolved Athenian ritual: and we can hardly help inferring 
that the Codex belongs to some country district rather than 
to the city. Athens is impossible, and Paris not very likely. 
We may finally banish ecclesiastical and political identifica- 
tions of our saints ; we do not need to quote England for St 
George or France for St Denys, nor to go in quest of the patron 
saints of Churches. We may go anywhere where vintage 

^ The accounts in the different lives of St Genevieve vary slightly: one 
account says: *'yicum Catholicensem in quo S. Dionysius et passus est et 
sepultus, grandi amore ac veneratione dilexit. Hie yero Episcopus in sexto 
a Parisiis miliario martyris vitam finivit." 

^ As we have said above the student will do well to refer to Dulaure, History 
of Paris, for the general treatment of the early pagan cults in that city and for 
its progressive Christianization. There is an especially interesting investiga- 
tion, partly conjectural, into the origin of a Church of St Benoit which stood 
formerly in the Bue St Jacques, which church Dulaure believes to have replaced 
an earlier Church of St Bacchus, which stood itself on the site of an altar of 
Bacchus. The identification is based on the existence of the donation of a 
Church of St Bacchus in 1030 a.d. to the bishop of Paris, and to the fact that 
the cult of St Sergius and St Bacchus was carried on in the Church of St 
Benoit, but minus St Sergius. The date of the combined festival is Oct. 7, 
which intimates a vintage festival. Further the Church stood originally in 
the vineyards. Now comes the extraordinary confirmation of the theory from 
an inscription in the Church itself. *'Sur un vitrage d'une chapelle de cette 
6glise on lisait ces mots : In hoc sacello sanctus Dionysius coepit invocare nomen 
sanctae Trinitatis" The inscription is said to be of the 14th century and 
behind it and behind Dionysius there lies an earlier worship: the wine-god 
remains in his vintage chapel as St Bacchus and St Dionysius ; as the latter he 
would have disappeared, but for the inscription ; as the former, he would have 
been lost in St Benedict, but for the festival of St Sergius and St Bacchus. 

106 

festivals are kept up and harvest homes are celebrated, and 
where the spring is marked by special appeals to the fertilizing 
powers of nature. 

But then it must also be a district where the Greek 
language is in especial honour on these days and where Greek 
is spoken colloquially. And I think we must conclude from 
the linguistic and other evidence which has been brought 
forward, that the weight of the argument thus far is in favour 
of assigning the Codex Bezae to a Calabrian or at least a 
South Italian home, at least as late as the twelfth century\ 

There is one objection, however, which ought to be stated 
which may prevent us from accepting the foregoing conclusion 
too absolutely. 

An examination of a number of MSS. from Rossano and the 
neighbourhood, preserved in the library of Grotta Ferrata, does 
not furnish us with any Greek hands that are paleographically 
like the annotating hands of the Codex Bezae. So that I am 
disposed to believe that they are not Rossano hands; it is 
possible that a further investigation might reverse this judg- 
ment, but so far as I have gone with the matter, Calabrian 
scripts do not illustrate the Bezan annotators as I expected 
they would. This may mean nothing more than that the 
schools of Rosanno, Nardo, &c., are excluded. The induction is 
not to be made so wide as to exclude the whole of S. Italy. 

With this caution, we may go on to examine another point 
on which we have as yet said nothing, viz. the question of the 
scribe that restored the missing pages in the Codex Bezae. 

A certain number of leaves are lost from the Codex Bezae, 
containing parts of the Gospels, the Acts, the Catholic Epistles 
and some other unknown matter. But of these missing leaves 
those that constitute lacunae in the Gospels have been restored 
by a hand which is commonly referred to the tenth century : 
viz. the seventh leaf, the quire which ran from the 169th to 
the 176th, and the 348th. 

It is required to know whether this restoring hand is 
capable of a geographical as well as a chronological delimi- 

^ That is, if Scrivener has rightly assigned the date of the scribe 0. We 
incline to think he may be earlier than the twelfth century. 

107 

tation, and whether it has any connexion with the annotating 
hands that are discussed in this volume. It has usually been 
thought suflScient to compare those restored portions of a 
bilingual Gospel with other similar bilingual and half-uncial 
texts such as the Codex Sangallensis, and the Codex Augiensis, 
and to say that it is, like them, cleai-ly a Western product. 
But here again the delimitation is too indefinite to be satis- 
factory. Is there an)rthing, then, further that can be found out 
with regard to the restorer ? 

First of all we may say something as to the position in 
which he stands relatively to the annotators. On these restored 
leaves there are no lections marked, nor are there any tltXoc. 
Now considering that eight successive leaves of John are 
restored, and that nowhere in the rest of that Gospel do we 
find eight successive leaves without lections, we are entitled to 
conclude that the supplied leaves are later than the hand that 
supplied the lections in John: i.e. the restoring hand (R) is 
later than L. 

With regard to the tltXoc we cannot speak so positively ; 
for they do not begin in Matthew till the 28th leaf, and in John 
they do not run beyond the 145th leaf, so that they do not 
traverse the ground where the lacuna is found. 

A similar statement may be made with regard to the Sortes 
which are written in Mark ; they stop on the 321st leaf, and so 
we cannot say whether they were earlier or later than the 
supplied 348th leaf. 

But here we recall what has already been proved, that 
the hand which wrote the tltXoc in John (M,) was older 
than L, fi^om the fact that an annotation of L was found 
written over an erased t/tXo9. We may then say, d fortiori, 
that the annotator (Mj) is older than the restorer (R). We 
thus begin to find the chronological sequence. The next 
thing to be done is to examine the transcription and see 
whether, like the other scribes, this one betrays his nationality 
or his locality. 

Imprimis, it will be found that the restorer is a Latin and 
not a Greek, for he writes 

PAPPHCIA for HAppHCiA in John xviii. 20, 

108 

and this bilingual error in the spelling is due to the fact that 
the Latin p was more familiar to him than the Greek. As to 
the actual Greek that he writes, it is full of itacisms and 
blunders, such as do not seem, at first sight, to be those of a 
person acquainted with the spoken Greek. Some of them are 
such as are common in all periods, like ai for e, and oi for y, but 
others appear to be his own, as when five times he writes a 
short e for a long one (ei/ for ^v John xviiL 14, 15, ewepayrea-ov 
John xviii. 21, e ypa^fyrf John xix. 24, eSeaav for rfSecaav John 
XX. 9). 

These are not what we should expect from a person ac- 
quainted with spoken Greek. 

As we examine his transcript more closely, we find two 
cases where the pronunciation has aflfected the script, viz. : 

/SovXcoTOi for ^ovXfo-^e, John xviii. 39. 
apT<o(nv for ap6&<nvy John xix. 31. 

In both cases the aspirate has disappeared. But this may 
just as well be due to his reading Greek like a Latin, as to his 
pronouncing it like a vulgar Greek. 

One more curious error comes to light. In John xviii. 26 
we have the spelling 

where we recognize the very same phonetic error which oc- 
curred in the tltXoc as written by Mj on f. 69 b {/j^era rov 
Sokov avTov). This can hardly be accidental, and it tempts us 
to ask whether M^ is not actually the restorer. We have, it is 
true, a similar case in M, where toi;9 aprov^ is written T09 
apTo<;, but here the pronunciation is indicated by the bar, and 
the absence of any such bar in Sov\o<: in B and M^ is the more 
striking. We shall, at all events, throw the two scribes very 
close together, and place them in a bracket so far as time and 
place are concerned \ 

^ Of other transcriptional errors, not the common itacisms, we have clkcvos 
for €K€Ufot which appears to be a transposition ; and twice we have lovdaiots spelt 
as (oi/dois, perhaps under Latin influence. Several times at and ei are confosed. 

109 

So far, so good : we have seen that R is a Latin, and we 
have him placed in a chronological series 

J, Ms, L and |j^4. 

It remains to be seen whether the paleographer can tell us 
anything more about R, from a study of his handwriting. 

Here again the judgment must be, I think, that the restoring 
hand is not Calabrian. The closest parallel, paleographically, 
is the hand of Sedulius Scottus in the famous Psalter that is 
named after him. Here we are really in the presence of West- 
em characteristics ; and the errors alluded to above, such as the 
Latin confusion between e and h, are of the same type. It is 
not, however, fatal to an Italian origin for the Codex Bezae, if 
Western character should be aflSrmed of the hand of the restorer. 
For the MS. may have moved north and west by successive 
stages, and the restorer may really belong to a diflferent home 
from the main body of the annotators. 

We must now leave the matter to the further criticism of 
our fellow-labourers. They will credit us with an absence of 
prejudice even if they cannot obtain from us all the support 
that might be desired for a somewhat startling hypothesis. 
And if Mr Lake's speculation should be further confirmed (and 
Mr Brightman and myself have certainly spoken well of it), it 
will be a distinct step forward in the solution of one of the most 
difficult problems in the history of the New Testament. 

It is to be regretted that the result, if established, will be a 
serious blow to the credit of the great reformer Beza, for we 
cannot go to Rossano or Amalfi or Ravenna or to any other 
Italian home for the Codex without greatly reducing the 
probability that Beza spoke the truth when he called his 
codex vetustissimus by the title Claromontanus or Lugdunensis. 
We may evade the slur upon his accuracy by suggesting that 
the MS. was indeed at Lyons, but not for the length of time 
that Beza imagined, as in the case of its having been brought 
from the council of Trent by William k Prato the bishop of 
Clermont, and then bestowed by him upon the monastery of 
St Irenaeus. Beza would, in that case, have been guilty 

110 

merely of exaggeration in sapng that it had long lain covered 
with dust at Lyons; but this exaggeration would be natural 
enough, for all explorers and discoverers have a tendency to 
believe that the books which they bring to light are of no 
value at all in the eyes of those from whom they acquire them, 
a judgment which exalts their own reputation for acuteness in 
detecting the treasure and is an apology for anything of a 
doubtful character in the manner of its acquisition. 

It might also be suggested that it was a mistake to attach 
so much importance to the statements which Beza makes as to 
the previous history of the MS., when examination of the use 
which he makes of its text shows conclusively that he did not 
recognize it to be the very MS. which had been collated for 
Robert Stephen by his friends in Italy. But this suggestion 
merely means that criticism of New Testament MSS. was still 
in its infancy when Beza was at work on the text. It is one 
thing to have an imperfect judgment as to the value of the 
inside of" a book, and quite another thing to make a wilful 
misstatement as to its external history. Even so late as the 
time of Bianchini, who certainly ought to have known better, 
we find the Codex Bezae treated as distinct from the Codex ^ 
of Stephen (cf. Bianchini, Evan, quadruples, p. 483 "Lucae 
c. 6. V. 4 extat hie et in Steph. ^ insignis pericope de homine 
operante die sabbati"). That is, it is a blunder but not a fault, 
and does not count for much, if anything, in our estimation of 
Beza's repeated (though slightly inconsistent) statements that 
the MS. was of French origin. And if we were in the habit of 
yielding to impressions (which may be only a name for disguised 
prejudices) we should object to the opinion of our Oxford friends, 
who have urged us to abandon Beza and to cross the Alps in 
search of the home of the MS., that we think nobly of Beza and 
nowise approve their opinion. But as our investigation of the 
annotations has shown that, on the linguistic side at least, there 
are decided evidences of Italian influence, we have given the 
result of our examination as tending strongly to confirm the 
Oxford view. Nor do I see how the scale can be turned back 
again, except by the demonstration of the existence of a Greek 
school amid the monastic and ecclesiastic life of Southern 

Ill 

Gaul, continuously existing, reinforced by immigration and 
carried far into the heart of the middle ages. For such a 
movement we have not succeeded in finding the necessary 
evidence. And we, therefore, leave Beza, for the present, with 
the rope of an unfavourable criticism about his neck. 

APPENDIX A. 

Sortes alearum in Gfreek verse. 

To the fragment of a collection of Sortes from Attalia we may 
add the following from Tefeny in Asia Minor, published by Sterrett*. 
The oracles are inscribed on the four sides A, B, C, D of a 
quadrangular stone, of which one side is illegible by position. 

A. 

I. {aaaay f ) ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ 
[et bi Kc] fiovvoi lT€a'a'c^}€s fcat rpeio]; els. 
[oTt] [ic]aicoTi;TO ^vo",,, 

fiovlbopol o]i KaTa6l[yfi}u)S fjv €Vt|j3aXXi/]. 

II. [da]aaa rf Moipav, 

T4a'a'<J[pa 5* els ttJcittto)!' koi fiovvoi rla'O'apes Svres. 
Trjpo^iv ^v TTpdaaeis firj 7rpda[arjs, aXX*] apa fielvov 
dfiffn fie icd/ii/o[vo'(v], p^oXcTrov, d[5]ta/iifxfl»'0»' fOTt 
[vJttA brjfiov IbifrOcu,, XP^^^ ov6{^iv Ka\K6v earcu. 

III. yyaaa & 'ActoO Aui[ff]. 

€t hi Ke ireiwroixriv 5vo rpeioi, rpels 5' &fia fMvvoi. 
derbs v'^ifrirqs els 8€$ia x^^P^^ SdeirrjSj 
S>v eirX fiavTciav dyaBr)v <n>v Zrjvl firyiofr]^ 
Tcv^Tj* e<^* fjv opfjMS TTpa^iv /i)7^€[v] be <f>oPi]6jfS, 

IV. S'aaaa i Aai/io[v]off Meyiarov. 
[i^eirrjSy fiovvoi reaaapcs ovrcs. 

baifiovi rjvTiv* ^X^*[*] ^^XV^ dirobovri vol earai* 
fifkrtiov el fiekXeis Trpdaaeiv koto, vovv & fupifiv^s. 
Arjfujrrjp yap aoi koi Zevs [a-layrripes eaovrcu. 

* An Epigraphical Journey in Asia Minor, p. 79, in Papers of the American 
School at Athens, vol. ii. 

H. 8 

114 

V. aaa^y i Tvx»7[f EuJ^eufuwos. 

€t d€ K€ Tpls fiovvoi, cU Tia-fTopa^ Tpia 6 irtfiirros, 
rrjv [wpaj^tv fjof trpd^rjS rjv vvv 67^l^aX[X];;, 
[icoi] T* €V vovvf^ iovra Beoi Kar€)^o\ya'i ae] ravrov 
t6v T€ ttovov Xvo'o[vo'i (rjot kcu ovBtv KaKhv €aTcu. 

VI. [yyyaa] m "SeUrfs. 

el 84 K€ rpcls [rpclot €lar]iVy x^^^ ^^ ^^* 3X\oi, 

Xi}/iJ^I7 b* A 6e\€i5 ra [ 

\T€ifu}rov 0'€[ 
irdvra Kparri<r€is. 

B, 

VII. \p)fib(ui iJlf *Ay[a^oO ^aipjovyti, 

[i7y€/i]ovfV(r€i (rot baifuav 6d6v \^v €ir]ipaKkjj 
iriv^i d* «ff d'ya[9r}7]v ere (fyikofifuJiris *A<^pod€in; 
vOv Kfipnoiv vnqye koi atrrffiov r oipij 

VIII. ayyaS tc' AiAff 2fi>r5p[o4 

ei£ pjovvoSy bva rpioij dvo rerpSiOi. 
^v €9ri/3aXXj7 trpa^iv BappS>v Wi bpatre* 
iv\€ip€iy kolKcl fiavTcla StoX rah^ €<l}TjvaVf 
fujT €Wi vovv dkeov ovdiv yap aoi KaKhv tfarcu, 

IX. aaaST tc' At6s "AfxpMvof, 

^v <l>p€a'\v Spftaifuis [trpa^w ra]vTj;v Wi Biip[p}&v 
wavd^a- V dwrei 9r/Mi[(]ciff Wff? 'A^ijvi;] 

ijdc Kot? Zcirt] vyjtiPpefUTris (rcanip [rt wanip re] 

X. yyyyy i*' Tvxi;*. 

ai 9ravr€( rptUn. 
ffie a-a fipiiftoi ^\rip]pvi ?X**'' 

a iraKiv /3X[a(r]n7(rc ical d yJdXoieroff 
ica[i 9r]or€ cifeiff i irejpt &v fi' ivtpwr^, 

XI. dyroa [tc'] Ai^ ZfvLav, 

rcrpo) clip Kat rptbr icat (eidos eh K.\ai djvo powoL 
frpa^iv €<l>* fjv p^XXeis i[fv]ai fi^ (r9rci)d* o09ra> yap 6 Koipos 
Kai [r* ?] «*(") "ovo-^ d« r* eovrcu Oeoi (rci^c^va-iv Ijroifuat 
KOI t6v iv SlKKji x^Ip^ irovaiil Xif^iv Oebs avd$. 

XII. ryyya [ir' 'HpaicXjcovt. 

(eiroff flip icai rpc[iff rpcioi], ftovvo£ eh* 
o£f9ra> iccu[p6f, lea^Jcvdeir de crv, fi^ kcv^ [^P<>£27^] 
fuyjd* a>( tU Tf \4<ov rvffikrfv [cKvi;(rc Xox]€ti;v 
fjavxa jSovXcvov Ka[i (tck ^c^ iTyJc/iovcvcrci. 

115 

XIII. rbdaa ir' 

$€i]6{o£ eU r€a'(rdp€oi\ dv[a> k€U dvo fiovvoi. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. SaSyy 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

0. 

[d^^aa ti;*] • 

[reo'a'apa 5* €15] kcu €^€\t(u dvo kcli dvo» /lovvoi. 
[ft^ trpd^rjs np^a^iv ravrrjVf [oHira yap ?] 6 KOipbs 
(V y€V((r€i V Koi 6 Kivbwoi 9rap[aj3aiVci] 

KCU fr€p\ tS>v SWiov /iav[r€i&v] eari Kok&f trou 

aTbby \ir{ Ai6s K]cpavviov. 

fjMvvos els Ka\\ (eijror, dvo rtrpStoi koI rplos [^eh. 
OVK eoTiv TTpd^ovra K(J[Ta] yvoifirfv & fupifiv^s 
oUre yap iv [ofjXXfip brjpjt^ Uvai avv<l}op6p iariv 
ofjT e>vovfi€vos alaBTJarj jj ovijaifMu ecrroi. 

^b'l Aaifiovos 'lK€(riov. 

rerpaoi Tp[€]ls Ka\ 8voi rpioi, 

00 a'Oi 6p& /3ot;[X]^v njvde da<l>dKriVj dXX* dvofieivov 
€virpd^€is earai (r[e] rvxelv fifra ravra* t6 vvv dc 
^avxos Jja-Of Bcois irelBcv^ kou, etr* €[X]irtdoff ttrOi. 

^yyn **?' *Aya^o[v Kjpdvov. 

^eWos Ka\ T€(ra'ap€i rpun. 

firf (rnevo'jfSf batfjuav ya\j)] avBlaTarai^ aXX' vir6yJ^€\Lvov 

M'/M* ^^ '''** '■* *cv»v rv^Xffv eicwyoft] Xox^i^v- 

rjavxo. ^v\€voVf Kai crcft] x^pievra rcXeiroi. 

rrayy {[^J 'EXfridos 'Aya^^y. 

e^odd (TOi ird[v}r' f'ori fcai dir<^aX$ irepi S>v fi ivepwr^s, 
pifbe <l}oPov' daifiMV yap [^dji^yi/crei 7rp6£ dfravra* 
iraxxrti \y\oLp Xviri;; xaktirris, Xvcrci d* vir6voiav. 

888^a iff Aths Ktijctiov. 

Bapa&v €yx€ip€i [fcjai c<^* ikvlbos earlv 6 p^piytr/btdr 
«i)[ff ?] Tt fJMVvei 1 KCU t6v votriovT [ai'ao']d>[(r]ai 
€t dc n fiavrevrj ^P XP '^^ diroXi/fiifri;. 

vlov €vck' cotcu 

[t^] [*E]p[/i]ov Kepdeviropov. 

TrdvTa [5c 0*04 cVijrcv^iy ^ /SovXei €[;(]©v... 

fuarrevfj Kal ovBev {voi KaK6v ?(rr]ai. 

XXI. ^yyyb 

iB' 

D not accessible. 

8—2 

116 

Without attempting to expend editorial care upon these in- 
scriptions, we can see at once their exact similarity to the inscription 
from Attalia which we printed above. And we can further note a 
curious trait of heredity which connects these Sortes with the 
asa^iated systems of Rocquain and Fithoeus. Twice in the de- 
ciphered matter we have an allusion to blind puppies which have 
come into the world too soon, the reference being made as a text 
from which to advise the enquirer against undue precipitancy. 
Thus 

XVII. fi^ (TTrciJo'i/y, baifitov yap avBiararai, aXX' vnofieivoVf 
fjajd* &£ Tis T€ Kva>v Tv<l>\riv €Kvrfa'€ \oxcIt}V' 
rjavxa /SovXevov Kai aoi xapUvra TfXcirai. 

So in XII. 

oCfiro) Kaipos, Ka6€vb€is bk crv, /x^ K€va irpadjs 
firjS* o>ff Tis T€ \4tiov Tv<l}\riv €Kvrj(r€ \o\€irfv 
rjavxo^ fiovXevov Kai trot 6€6s rfyep.ovtva'tu 

Now if with these we compare the following oracle from 
Pithoeus [and Rocquain], we shall see that there is somewhere a 
nexus between the early inscription from Asia Minor and the late 
French oracles. 

v. iiii. in. Canis festinando caecos catulos parit, sic et tuus animus : 
improperare noli de quo postulas ; si patiens ^ens, ueniet tibi 
ultro in potestate tua cum magno gaudio. 

As we have said, there is an extraordinary similarity between 
the Sortes from Tefeny and the Sortes from Attalia. On looking 
more closely, we observe that in the case of the Tefeny inscription, 
there has been an attempt made to arrange the Sortes according to 
the total of the dice thrown. The numbers run thus 

A 7 to 11 (six oracles) 

B 14 to 16 (seven oracles) 

C 18 to 19 (eight oracles) 

D absent 

and on looking at the Attalia inscription we see that they are in a 
series whose totals run from 22 to 26. It is, then, extremely likely 
that the Attalia inscription furnishes a part of the unread matter 
on the Tefeny stone and may be edited with it. Tefeny is not 
many hours from Attalia, so that the propinquity of the stations 
emphasises and illustrates the internal coiinexion of the text. The 
two inscriptions must be bracketed together. 

APPENDIX B. 

The Latin and Provencal system of Sortes. 

We have described in the text a system of Sortes in use in the 
South of France, which was published in Latin by Pithoeus and 
in Proven9al by Bocquain, both Latin and ProYen9al being sus- 
pected of derivation from a lost Greek original. We here reprint 
the system at length, for convenience of reference, as these systems 
of Sortes are not easy to find and occur in out-of-the-way corners of 
Journals, or in Supplements to costly folios, which are often 
inaccessible to scholars. We give the Latin on the right-hand 
column, and its version on the left, as follows: 

PROVENgAL (OP RoCQUAIN). 

Eu pregui lo Paire e V Fil e 
r Sanh Esprit : pregui los Angil(s) 
et Ts arcangils : pregui las Senh- 
orias e las Pozestats ; pregui los 
Patriarchas et Vb Prophetas : pregui 
los Apostols e Va Martirs ; pregui 
los Cofesatz e las Verges e totz lo(s) 
Sanhs de Dieu, que cil preguo la 
Sanhta Trinitat e la Unitat, lo 
Paire et V Fil et 1' Sanh Esperit, 
per lo meus esgardemen, que vueilo 
far que demostre k mi drecha via 
per aquestas letras e per aquesta 
leiso e per aquestas sortz, que no 
m' puesca lo Diables decebre en 
aquesta mia bezonha, per V apela- 
ment e per lo clam de nostre senhor 
Ihesu Christ, loqualo viu e renha 
dreg per totz los cegles dels cegles 
verament. 

Latin (op Pithoeus). 

Sortes Apostolorum, 

In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiri- 
tus Sancti, et in nomine Summae 
et Individuae Trinitatis. Incipiunt 
sortes Sanctorum Apostolorum quae 
nunquam fallentur nee mentientur. 
In ordine sortium est consuetudo, 
quod si illas aliquis interrogare 
voluerit, triduo jejunet cum pane 
et aqua, et tertia die omne officium 
Sanctae Trinitatis psallat et expleta 
missa cum magna humihtate orando 
et lachrymando a sortibus petat 
quidque necesse fuerit. Pater 
Noster. 

118 

PROVENgAL (op RoCQUAIN). 

Aduebri, Senher, las doptozas 
causas que so els nostres cortes per 
aquestas sortz, et endresa la mia 
sort enaisi coma endresiest la sor 
dels nautaniers que sofriu peril, 
quant cazet la sortz sobre Jonas, et 
enaisi coma endresie(s)t las sortz 
dels teus Apostols, cant cazet sobre 
Mathia. Tramet, Senher, esperit 
verai, loqual tramesist el teu pro- 
pheta, loqualo vezia tot lo poble 
d* Ysrael sobarat si con oeilhas 
maridas els pueg(s). Decasa, Senher, 
esperit deceben loqual tu tramesist 
Achap, cant cazet am tota caval- 
guada. Endrese, Senher, aquestas 
sors, laqual metem el teu nom, pels 
teus meritz e per las orazos e per 
las preguieiras de totz los teus 
sanhs angil(s) liqual govemo las 
sortz de totz los amix, que las sortz 
aduebro a nos d' aquesta causa per 
Deu lo ver. 

Aiso so las sortz dels apostols. 

Latin (op Pithoeus). 

Oratio. 
Aperi, Domine, dubia quae sunt 
in cordibus nostris per banc sortem, 
et dirige eam sicut direxisti sortem 
nautarum qui naufragium patie- 
bantur, quando cecidit sors super 
Jonam, et sicut direxisti sortem 
Apostolorum tuonun, quando ceci- 
dit sors super Mathiam. Immitte, 
Domine, spiritum veracem quem tu 
misisti per prophetam tuum qui 
vidit universimi Israelem dispersimi 
sicut oves errantes in montibus. 
Expelle, Domine, spiritum fallacem 
quem tu misisti ad decipiendum 
Acab, quando cecidit cum omni ex- 
ercitu suo. Dirige, Domine, sortem 
banc quam mittam in nomine tuo 
per merita et orationes sanctorum 
angelorum tuorum qui sortes ami- 
corum cunctorum regunt, ut baec 
sors veritatem nobis hujus rei in- 
ducat per te, Salvator mundi, qui 
vivis etc. 

Alia Oratio, 
Oremus ad te, Domine Pater, 
Rex coeli et terrae, qui es Creator 
omnium rerum creatarum, qui 
cuncta ex nihilo omnia mundi 
creasti, et Abraham Patrem nos- 
trum te datiunim nobis jurasti, et 
Moysi in Monte Sinai legem de- 
disti, et Susannam de falso <;rimine 
liberasti, et Tobiam de contritione 
cordis in alacritate mutasti, et 
nurui suae de magna amaritudine 
cordis afflictae et lachrymarum 
fonte tribuisti dulcedinem : qui 
exaudisti lonam de ventre ceti, et 
deinde prostratum et jacentem et 
Petrum lachrymantem Domine sus- 
cepisti ; suscipe, Domine, preces 
meas, ut de hac re quam peto per 

119 

PROVBNgAL (op RoCQUAIN). 

1. Seguentre lo soleil ce levo 
las estelas, sol ar e ja so retomadas 
h lutz; enaisi lo teus coratgues, 
don iest . vistz doptos, em breu 
termini am clardat venra autu (sic) 
de Dieii, e Dieus cera h, tu en 
ajutori et auras also que cobezeias. 

2. D' aiso que quers coceil sia 
ferms tos coratges, que puescas 
venir ad aiso que esperas. 

3. Dieus ajudara h tu d' aiso 
que cobezeias ; preguo Dieu e per- 
venra h ton desirier. 

4. Aiso que quers venra h, tu 
am gran gauh : estai segurs, pregua 
Dieu e non aias paor. 

5. La tua destra esten al Paire 
lo teu Dieu ; pregua et aura(s) 
Concordia e bona esperansa. 

6. De lutz te vols metre en 
tenebras, e garda te que non sias 
cosiros. 

7. La via que tu quers es 
drecha. No vueilhas temer ; Dieus 
er k tu en ajutori, et auras aiso que 
cobezeias e pervenras ad aquo que 
desirafi. 

8. Grans caussa es aiso que 
t' es veiaire et aras pasara, ^e te, 
lacey! penedras t' en ; quar aiso que 
demandas non er en tom poder. 

Latin (op Pithoeus). 

has sortes mibi notum facias, qui 
sciens es per onmia et in omnibus, 
qui in sancta et in perfecta Trinitate 
vivis et in unitate consistis, per 
omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen. 

G. G. G. Post solem surgunt 
stellae, et iterum sol ad claram 
lucem revertitur, sic et animus 
tuus, unde dubius esse videris in 
brevi tempore ad claritatem per- 
venerit, et veniet tibi et obtinebis 
quod cupis Deo adjuvante, age ei 
gratias. 

c. G. v. De quo consulis animus 
tuus sit sicut speras, ut possis per- 
tingere ad quod desideras. 

c. G. iiii. Deus te adjuvabit de 
quo cupis et de quo consulis : Deum 
roga, cito perveniet tibi quod de- 
sideras. 

G. G. I. Quod postulas nunc ita 
veniet cum magno gaudio, securus 
esto, Demn roga, et noli timere. 

G. G. m. Dexteram tuam porrige 
et habebis concordiam et spem 
bonam et pauperibus tribue. 

G. G. IL De luce in tenebris 
mittere quaeris, ubi nulla directa 
est semita, et vita tua carere cupis ; 
moneo te ne cures ab hoc consilio. 

c. c. w (sic). Est via certa 
quam tu petis, noli timere, Deus 
tibi in adjutorium erit, et pervenies 
ad quod desideras. 

G. V. niL Magnum quod tibi 
videtur esse jam transit et quomodo 
volueris, nam hoc quod consulis in 
potestate tua non erit. 

^ La lecture des trois mots qoi 8uiyent...e8t assez difficile. 

120 

Provenqal (op Rooquain). 

9. No vueilhas doptar d* also 
que demandas ; pregua Dieu ; bon 
es ; niens es also que temps. 

10. De cervi coren cobezeias 
tener los corns, et el torna c' en e 
son jacis ; enaisi venra k tu s' o 
quers. 

1 1. D* also que quers ni preguas 
estai cosiros; am gran suzor et 
am gran trebail pervenras ad aquo 
quedeziras. 

12. Ap suaus paraulas te quero 
amenar ; per also depar te d' aquest 
coceil, que pueg no t' en penedas. 

13. Also CO lo naus e mar, 
quant es govemada, sail e loc que 
desira ; enaisi lo teus cosiziers 
venra k tu em breu termini, ce 
preguas Dieiu 

14. Lo teus vezis, qu' esta ben 
am tu, te quer amenar am suaus 
paraulas ; per aiso Dieus fara savia- 
ment, e veias la tua simpleza que 
alcuna caussa non endevengua k tu. 

15. En aquest cosizier no sia 
ferms tos coratgues, quar vas es. 

^ ? 1. saavibus. 

Latin (op Pithoeus). 

c. V. III. Ne dubitaveris de quo 
consulis, Deum roga, bonum est 
quod petis, et noli timere. 

c. V. II. Cervo currente comua 
tenere cupisti manibus, sed difficile 
est, quia in silvis moratur, sed 
revertatur in cubili suo, et ibi capi 
potest : sic veniet tibi in manibus 
tuis in quo dubius es. 

c. V. I. Qui petis et qui rogas, 
cum magno sudore et labore per- 
venies ad hoc quod desideras, se- 
curus esto, Deum roga. 

c. niL ini. Vicinus tuus cum 
ad te venerit, blandis sermonibus 
te inducere quaerit, tu vero caute 
agere debes, ne postea incipias 
poenitere. 

c. iin. IIL Prava ne velis, saevis^ 
sermonibus te decipere volunt qui 
te quaerunt, securus esto, ab hoc 
consilio, ne postea incipias poeni- 
tere. 

c. III. n. («tc)2. Sicut navis in 
pelago gubemata fuerit, quod desi- 
deras ita tibi veniet. Si jam per- 
venias ad quod desideras, Deum 
tuum roga ut placatus sit tibi. 
Blandis sermonibus te decipere 
volunt, tu vero caute vide sim- 
plicitatem tuam, ne postea incipias 
poenitere. 

Vide supra (c. iin. iin.) 

c. niL I. In hoc cogitamento 
non est animus tuus firmus, quia 

2 1. 0. nil. n. 

121 

PROVBNgAL (of RoCQUAIN). 

16. De la cauza que primieira- 
ment cosiras e quers coceil, d' aqui 
auras gran gloria. 

17. Lo teus requeremens es 
agradables : d' aiso que quers si (a) 
ferms tos coratges ; ce preguas 
Dieu, venra k tu em breu termini. 

18. Aiso que quers es ferm ; 
antra caussa cosira ; antra canssa 
7enra k tu que non cosiras. 

19. La tua via es apareilhada ; 
sias sufrens e pregna Dieu et per- 
venras k ton desirier. 

20. Dizes que temps : li ten 
enemic cairau et...ceras meilhert. 

21. Dizes que temps ; bon es ; 
aiso que quers es en tas mas. 

22. Aisso que quers bon es ; 
amorossament^ pervenras k ton 
dezirier. 

Latin (op PrrHOEUs). 

pravae sunt in pectore tuo cogita- 
tiones : sollicitus esse noli, et veniet 
tibi desiderium tuum bonum, quod 
animum tuum confirmet, securus 
esto. 

c. in. HL De qua re primum 
cogitasti et consulis, tuus animus 
inde magis habebit gloriam. 

c. HL n. Et si ni societatem ni 
filium non habent, non fiunt, sic et 
tuus animus cito consilium mu- 
tavit, sed ad nos venies. Placa 
Deum ut secutus^ possis fieri. 

c. III. I. Petitio tua accepta 
erit, cogitare noli, de quo consulis, 
perveniet tibi in brevi tempore. 
Ideoque Deum roga, et obtinebis 
quod cupis. 

c. II. II. Via tibi parata est, 
patiens esto, Deum roga, et venies 
ad desiderium tuum. 

c. II. I. Quod cogitasti firmum 
est, aliud cogita, ad lucrum per- 
veniet quod cupis. 

Cf. c. n. II. supra. 

c. L I. Disce timere, inimici tui 
cadent, et adhuc melior eris. 

Cf. V. V. II. infra. 

V. V. V. De quo postulas bonum 
est, diligentius age, et pervenies ad 
desiderium tuum bonum. 

V. V. nil. Bonitas omnium qui 
querunt Deum, serva mandata Dei, 
et omnia tibi prospere fient. 

^ ? securus. 

* diligentius translated as from diligo=amo. 

124 

PROVBNgAL (op RoCQUAIN). 

37. En aquesta hora t' en 
toma ; la sortz non respon k tu ; 
d' autre dia toma, e dira k tu 
vertat. 

38. Bo so li teu do que tu 
quesist; mos (sic) no I's recebras, 
que no so donah k tu. 

39. Quant er temps, t' apropja 
al loc : nient as que cemenes^ 

40. Niens es que temias ; lo 
Senhor t' ajudara, que puescas esse 
segurs ; e auras clardat, e no 
vueilhas laisar Dieu. 

41. Grans gauh venra k tu 
d' also que quers ni demandas ; tos 
enemix venceras, e Dieus er en 
ajutori k tu, et auras also que 
cobezeias. 

42. Per que causiguas contra 
r agulho ? No vueilhas gabar, que 
mal es, e tu no vueilhas anar contra 
Ts sortz. 

43. Also que tu quers ja es 
aparalhatz k tu, e niens es que 
temias ; sias cosiros, e Dieus ajudara 
te. 

44. Quar te venguist acoceilhar 
am nos? leu pregui Dieu que 
perdo k tu, que fortment iest [1. es] 
iratz. 

Latin (of Pithobus). 

laetitia. Secundo de abundantia 
rerum temporalium. Tertio de 
laetitia, et in itinere tuo accipies 
gaudimn. 

iiii. iin. UL Tu hac hora recede 
a nobis, quia sortes meae non dant 
responsa : alia die venies et observa 
conditionem tuam. 

nil. im. II. 
pies, nihilque 
sunt tua data. 

ini. ini. L 
timeas, Deus 
possis securus 
tempus lucrum 
quod cupis, et 
noli timere. 

Dum tempus acci- 
pharis («mj), bona 

Nihilque est quod 

adjuvabit tibi, ut 

esse, et in breve 

invenies, et tenebis 

habebis claritatem : 

ini. ni. ui. Qaudium magnum 
de quo petis veniet tibi, et protegat 
te Deus : inimicos tuos vinces, quia 
Deus tibi in adjutorium erit ; se- 
curus esto ; spem tuam recipies. 

iiiL HL n. Quid calcas contra 
stimulum ? jactare noli temetipsum, 
quia malum est de quo consulis. 
Contra sortes noli ire. Moneo te 
ne velis esse contrarius Deo. 

IIIL HI. I. Quid venisti con- 
sulere? Deum tuum neglexisti, 
multmn promisisti, et non imple- 
visti: primitus placa Deum, ut 
propitius sit tibi, quia valde iratus 

est, et sic veniet ad ta 
1 Perhaps a misreading of the next sentence. 

125 

PROVBNgAL (of RoCQUAIN). 

45. Lo desirie que tu cobezeias 
auras ; pregua Dieu et k lui fai 
gracias. 

46. Fortuna promet k tu aquo 
que as en ton cor ; so paraulas que 
m' pacho k tu. 

47. Tu cuias isausar la tua vita 
seguentre la mort ; sias sufrens ; 
pregua Dieu. 

48. Aiso so sortz que aduberta- 
ment respondo k tu ; no t' vueilhas 
trigar mas plus qu' en [L quer] la 
gloria Dieu, que bon requeremen 
pervengua k tu. 

49. Fel e vinagre desiras, veras 
qual te plus leu ; quar aiso que tu 
quers non es dat k tu. 

50. Aiso en que iest doptos, 
niens es que temias; pregua Dieu 
et caras plus fortz. 

51. Per que iest doptos ? niens 
es que temias ; sueM te um pauc, 
et trobaras bon tems. 

Latin (of Pithobus). 

iin. II. n. Votum quod cupis 
obtinebis, Deum roga, ut ipse sit 
tibi in auxilium : patiens esto ; 
noli dubitare quod consulis. Se- 
curus esto, veniet tibi, Deo adju- 
vante, quod desideras. 

iin. n. I. Tibi fortuna quae 
promittitur in terra est, et sermones 
qui te impediunt, nee pertinges ad 
quod desideras. 

rni. 1. 1. Exultans te praecipi- 
tare cupis, et quaeris vita tua 
carere, sed modo tempus non per- 
mittit : patiens esto, et Deum roga, 
ut petitionibus tuis misericordiam 
merearis. 

in. III. III. Hae sunt sortes 
quae manifesto respondent interro- 
gantibus, et abscondita hominum 
patefaciunt. Ideo te moneo ne 
moras facias interrogare necessaria, 
sed magis pete gloriam Deo, ut 
petitiones animi tui invenias. 

III. in. II. Mel tones et acetum 
desideras. Vide boniun quod lenius 
est: nam quod petis non est tibi 
datum. 

ni. m. L In quo speras pisces 
latent et tu laetus capies eos : sic 
animus tuus dubius esse videtur et 
tamen feusile dono Dei accipies, si 
Deum rogaveris. 

ni. n. n. Quod sollicitus esse 
videris, et undis maris navigare 
quaeris, vide, et sustine, in brevi 
tempore invenies et pertinges ad 
quod desideras. 

126 

PROVBNgAL (op RoCQUAIN). 

52. Grans gauh er k tu ; (d') 
also que quers non aias cosizier; 
mos {sic) estai cegurs. 

53. Intramens es apareilhatz h, 
tu per que iest doptos ; la tua 
esperansa acoceguda; pregua Dieu 
que sia k tu en ajutori, et auras so 
que deziras. 

54. Also que quers non er en 
torn poder em breu termini ; estai 
et atrobaras melho(r) acabament. 

55. Aver quers; lo loc es 
perilhos ; cel^ ton coceil ; estai 
saviament 

56. Sias fizels jace en totas 
cauzas, e Dieu dara h, tu en totas 
caussas. 

57. Aiso las sortz dels sanhs 
apostol(s) que ja non falirau : per 
aiso pregua Dieu, e auras so que 
cobezeias. 

Latin (of Pithokus). 

ni. n. I. Gaudium magnum 
veniet tibi, de quo petis, noli cogi- 
tare, securus esto, roga Deum et 
invenies gratiam. 

ni. n {dc)\ Jam tibi introitus 
est paratus, et aperta janua potes 
introire ad quod desideras, ubi 
hortare vel spem tuam, ora Deum, 
ut adjutor sit tibi. 

II. IL n. Pecuniam tuam ad 
lucrum mittere quaeris, vide ne ad 
damnum perveniat tibi : iste locus 
periculosus est, utere consilio, sa- 
pientem fatigare cava 

n. n. I. Quod in potestate tua 
non est tantum quaeris, sed breve 
tempus sustine, et meliorem in- 
venies oonditionem tuam. 

Vide IL II. IL supra. 

IL II {9ic)\ Fidelis esto in 
perpetuum, et quicquid petieris, 
Deus omne tibi praestabit, et foelix 
eris in aevmn si obtemperaveris 
mandatis Dei. 

I. L I. Hae sunt sortes sanc- 
torum quae nunquam falluntur nee 
mentiuntur; id est, Deum roga et 
obtinebis quod cupis. Age ei 
gratias. 

As we pointed out above, there are only 56 Sortes that properly 
belong to the system. The last pair of sentences is not a Sors, but 
a repetition of the opening sentences on the Latin side. Perhaps 
the concluding clauses (Deum roga etc.) may be a genuine Sora. If 
so, there is a wrong subdivision somewhere in what precedes. 

' 1. ni. 1. 1. 

* Cod. eei. 

* 1. n. X. I. 

127 

The preceding system of Sortes is full of interest, not only on 
account of the light it throws upon the arrangement of systems of 
Sortes and upon their religious use, but also for the sake of the 
specimen of early Proven9al which it furnishes. This last is made 
direct from the Latin, and very nearly from the Latin of Pithoeus. 
Yet, as we have pointed out above, the Latin itself is probably 
made from a Greek base. 

APPENDIX a 

The Sortes of Astrampsychus. 

The system, which we have explained above, consists of 92 
groups of oracles, containing 10 answers in each. A prefixed 
table shows how to correct the displaced answers in the separate 
groups, so that they shall stand in groups, with all the answers to 
any given question arranged under that question. See the analysis 
which we have given. In some of the MSS. which transmit the 
oracles to us, this auxiliary table is given, not only in a bicolumnar 
table of the relation of the displaced answers to their proper 
positions, indicated in two columns of figures in red and black, but 
by a subordinate table, in which every number in one* column is 
attached to a scripture name and every number in the other to its 
interpretation, thus forming a series of secondary oracles, which 
can be taken en route to the general solution. We may compare 
the way in which the oracles in the Famphylian system are placed 
under the patronage of gods and demi-gods. We thus have not 
only a table 

id = pa 

l€ = flB 

etc., as printed above, 

but also , 

ly Beov Kparos k 

id *Ada/i pa 

i€ Eva /id {(ori fj bvarvxla 

ir Aovd 91; 

iC 'A.(ovpa 16 Pofi6€ia deov 
<kc. &C. 

The complete list can be seen in Hercher. 

129 

The following is the table given for the luck of the moon : 

rifi€pas 

a 

irp<otas 

la 

BeiXrfs 

/3 

SeiXrjs 

iP 

b€i\rjs 

y 

H'V XP^ 

*? 

TTpattK 

8 

di oKtjs 

Trjs rjfjJpas 

i8 

dftXi/ff 

( 

firj xP^ 

l€ 

npiatas 

r 

bC oKrfs 

Trjs Vfifpas 

ir 

&p^ rpirrj 

C 

TTpiOttaS 

if 

BciKtjs 

1 

M XP^ 

«7 

&pq. rpiTfj 

e 

Biikrjs 

16 

ph XP^ 

I 

BilXrjs 

Ka 

<^ 

led 

K€ 

KfJ 

X 

TTpofar 
npmtas 

PV XP^ 
8€iKtjs 

dciXi^r 

PV XP^ 
ddXrjs 

K 

PV XP^ 

Supposing the enquirer to have safely evaded the perils of the 
plauets and the moon, as explained in the text and in this table, 
the following is the series of questions and answers which he will 
have access to : 

*Apx^ Tcitv (rjTrjfioTav 

ttXcvcto) QKivdvvias 

toTiv &pa Tov eVt/SoXeo'^at r^ XP^^P^ 

(rrpco'eva'ofjuu 

Kotvcov^cro) ra Trpdyfiari 

TTpOKO^ia iv Tlflfj 

dnodrffi^o'oi) 

<rui^(iK\d$€U avfi<l>€p€i /mm 

€VTVxfji' *tfi* 

ayopd(rci> ro npoKcifUvov 
yafirjaca kcu avfjL(f>€p€i fioi 
cjfi) ffka^TJvcu €V r« Trpdyfiari 
KivrjBrjo'Ofjuu tov tottov fiov 
T€^€Tai fiov ri yvvrj 
€vpr)(roi> BaveiaaaBM apri 
aTToSoxro) & o<^€tXo> 
€\€V(T€T(u 6 dirodrffios 

H. 9 

iS 

€^ 

if 

1 

tr 

61 

iC 

€1 

irj 

€i 

iO 

€l 

K 

fl 

Ka 

€i 

kP 

€i 

Ky 

a 

Kb 

fi 

K€ 

ci 

Kr 

fi 

Kf 

€1 

"J 

*i Avmt Toir Xoyovr flow Spri 

*» 

X 

«i TO 7(»l'iB)j(i'0i' 6pi-ffa 

\a 

«I vSpiaBiiannai iv tw irpdypirt 

W 

(I riirnXXny^iTo/ini tpjs BouXtiot 

>'7 

tJ (XiifKii'Ofi^frA) roi" jraripa 

M 

X< 

tl Sp(v if ry ffpay^ioTt 

Xr 

ti «&p^ Ti- ^tTWi-ro 

XC 

«' .'fo. ^irx"^" •''•^i" 

Xi 

X0 

*• 

tl tiipjiffb) TO aito\6nfvov 

*" 

«' aiKpKTTtiirai 

/^ 

^T 

fi dwoigoj fpyaTn)piov 

/^ 

» .> xp^vor C«i|» 

*« 

f*- 

fi KaratXayijaoiuu rote mvpioa 

/^ 

tl TtKV&<T<i 

W 

W 

tl \if^oiiai riiv iPtpy^v 

► 

fl Bopnfin-fl /ux ra 6irdp;(oi'™ 

HQ 

(( viKTiaa ^v Ixai 6Ui]v 

-^ 

tl KXipowojiiiffu) T^i' yuimiito 

"7 

fl ffi;it(i(f>avrDt/ifi'oc aaSriirofuu 

I'd 

tl atTvtvav iratihjirtTat 

>•« 

tl Xfrhi^ n" ^''*" v""'" 

i-f 

tl m*,xV-'« d.roX«0^,Top» 

-f 

VI} 

.1 Jo-*.'.™. oi« d»-oX^<r»> 

v6 

(! inTpwti IMV if yovi} 

e 

tl otKovoiattnt 

fr. 

tl pvT6i«ronai unl Tvp^pa im 

69 

<1 K'KljpOVOpt}<Tli Tl) ITpwrWITOV 

It 

«' ««^ rhv AutiSiKO" 

& 

«' ri»ri(70/»(i( flavrafni' WKWoti 

e* 

(I (rrpanpnjuu 

fr 

(I yeuijo-ofiDi (XijpitLor 

if 

(1 (irir(v£o/uu Ti7C ^itiieXtitfiiic 

in 

.; t$a, iXwlda irfimuc 

i6 

(I Stit irapaffo^tor vijc^cru 

«i yoji^uu riiv i^iktiy 

oa 

tl dttoKrl^optu rqv iropaitorofl^iiii: 

off 

tl M^^ 6iri>v«. 

131 

oy 

€i 

fLevS> onov vrroyo) 

od 

€l 

TroXi/^i/o-ofUU 

06 

1 

6(fci> o<f)e\os dno rov <^iXov 

or 

€1 

doOrfO'ercd fioi €r4p<D avvcLKXd^ai 

oC 

» 
€C 

anoKaTafrn^tTOiuu els top ronov fwv 

or) 

» 
€1 

Xrjyjroficu KOfiTjTdrop 

06 

1 
€( 

Xriylroficu to dpyvpuov 

n 

1 
€1 

Cfj 6 dirodrifjLos 

na 

€1 

K€p8av& dno rod irpdypuaros 

nfi 

1 
61 

irpoa'ypa<l>fia'€Tai ra tpA 

ny 

€1 

evpTfo-o) irooiKrja-fU 

n8 

1 
61 

bwrfo-ofim dyopda-fu 6 fvBvfwvfitu 

TTC 

1 
€1 

yevria-ofuu ffioTrpdyos 

wr 

1 
61 

^vyab€v6r)(ropjai 

^c 

6t 

npea-fieva-o) ra irpos Beov 

nrj 

€l 

yevria-ofuu fiovXevTTfs 

n6 

1 
61 

\a$os toTcu puoi T^ bpaa-fiS 

9 

6i 

dirciKXayria'OfjLai r^s ywcuKos 

9« 

61 

7r€<t>cipfidK€Vfiai 

90 

61 

'■ Xrjylroficu Xeydrop 

9r 

6i 

6 emfiaXXofuu dirapria^^ 

9a 

6< 

! Bedaofiai rTjv irarpiba 

9« 

6 

I yevrffrofuu deKdnpcaros 

9^ 

1 
61 

dnfAXayria-Ofiai rov KXrfpov 

9C 

61 

' napafievel ftoi 17 yvvrf 

9^ 

1 
61 

nap(ifievo> Trpea-fivrepos 

9^ 

61 

' dyopda-o> x^P^ov fj oIkigv 

P 

61 

' KaT(iXrf(t>0ria'Ofim pmx^s &pTt 

pa 

6 

I ytPTja-ofitu firia-Konos 

p/3 

6 

I dirciXXayTia'OfJMi rrjs <f)iXfis 

py 

6 

I 6 (rvv€x6fi€vos diroXvBrja'ercu 

'Apx4 ''®'' dcKubav 

Ukos a' 

a ovx 6^6t£ iXirida iriarreois 

/3 ovK €irtT€v(rj r^s erriKX^a'tcis apri 

y KOTaarTaOrja-jj KXrfpiKOSy fipad4o>s ^6 

8 OTparrjyija'eis koi €vrjfiepija'€is koi bo^cBrjcif 

6 €^tis Bdvarov Ibeiv kcli xaprivai dpri 

S' viK^a-eis' dya>via-cu 

( KXrjpovofiria-€is fiera diKTfs 

rf iav fUtrBoixruy fiXafirjo'ij noXv 

B olKOVofirj<T€i£ pAvy <^6ovr)6r)<r[i St nap 6tovovv 

I eKTpaxrti fiera KivbvvoVf TrXfjv g-9»3rja-er<u 

9—2 

'1 

(i d«<r<u roui Xiiyovt piu apri 

■tf 

(t (Tw^trofuu Kon^TOfiovfUivc 

X 

«J ri y...i,^,.o. dpi^ 

Xa 

ft iSpfSii-T 0)101, h- Tw frpayiam 

X^ 

tl niTiiXXoy^crij/uii Tijt itniktua 

>T 

\i 

\t 

,1 Spi-a iv T^ irpdy/ioT. 

Xf 

« tvpfi<nu riv ^irydim] 

M 

,1 ,-|. .Vjin,, ,.Xi. 

X, 

\B 

f 

Ita 

ti aorfuaT€i<Ta 

«8 

in 

tt aroi^ ipyairnjpiBV 

W 

ti i(» XP^VOK C^ 

*" 

.1 .V.rrif,^ ypo^pi™. 

f*- 

/^ 

(! r«v<i<r« 

w 

/^ 

va 

<; w«ijirot $»■ ?x" *''"7'' 

-|8 

(I KXifpoto/iijiTa) Tijp yuroiita 

"7 

ft cruKWjwurOUfJfVOT (TBflTffO/UU 

>» 

H 

.i xw^.pu 4- flA» r""""" 

)'r 

fi trei'tx*'/*"'" diroXufl^<ropii 

»C 

fl irajX^ffOS rii- ^prow 

v^ 

(I 9av(iirac o£k ditoX4<Tto 

vS 

tl tuTpmrn pni 7 yuvq 

k 

<i olKOCO/iTtrai 

fo 

^ 

*1 ^Xijpoi'O/iiirra TO jrpwroiiroi' 

ft- 

*i PKijirai ri^ niridiKav 

f8 

(1 fltacropa. -^cii-QTo.' nVi-ou 

fr 

ll (TTparTy^cTB 

fr 

«• y^i-ijcTDfioi «X^p..cdt 

if 

tl (Vir»|o)uu t^r (VucX^o-foc 

f^ 

(( (|s> AiriAo jrioTMW 

ffl 

«■ To^" ^' *»? " 

M 

o|8 

d X^p« ■(+•-«-. 

131 

oy 

f( 

od 

d 

06 

1 

€1 

or 

1 
€C 

oC 

» 
€1 

Off 

» 
6t 

06 

1 
€1 

IT 

CJ 

na 

1 

^0 

€2 

ny 

1 
€t 

n8 

€1 

ir€ 

1 
€1 

rrr 

€1 

^C 

1 
61 

nx) 

1 
61 

nO 

1 
61 

9 

1 
61 

9« 

61 

90 

€1 

9r 

1 
61 

95 

€^ 

9^ 

6 

9^ 

61 

9f 

€1 

9»? 

61 

9^ 

6< 

P 

61 

pa 

6 

p/3 

6 

py 

6 

*» If 

fKP<o oirov vrrayo) 

na>\rf6rja'OfJMi 

6(fo> o^6Xor aTTo roO <f)iKov 

doOrfarrai fwi rripfo avvoKKa^M 

anoKaraxrrr^a'oyMi tls top toitov fwv 

XrfyjroiJMi KOfjajrdrop 

X^^oficu TO dpyvpiov 

(fj o anoorifjLOS 

KtpdavS) diro rov irpdyfuxros 

7rpoaypa<t>rio'€rcu to. ipjd 

€vpria'ai ira)\rj<rcu 

dwrfaofuu dyopdacu 6 tvBvfiovficu 

y€vria'OfjMi fitOTrpdyos 

^vyabtvBr^aopLOi 

irp€a'fi€va'o> to. npos Ocov 

yevrjcofuu fiovXevTTjs 

\a$os toTTcu fioi r^ hpaap.^ 

diraK\ayr)fTonai r^r ywaiKOi 

It tffxipfid K evfuu 

Xriyjrofjiai \cydTov 

6 €ntpaX\ofjMi dnapria-fo 

Otdaofim T^v narpiba 

yevfia-ofim btKdnpoarros 

dndXXayrjo'OfUU tov KXrfpov 

7rap€Lfi€P€l fioi Tj yvvri 

irapafi€vS> 7rp€(rfivT€pos 

dyopd(To> xoipiov ^ olKiav 

Kordkri^Or^a^opM, fimx^s &pTi 

y€vria'Ofi(U (irio'Konos 

dirdXXayria'ofuu r^s ^iXi/r 

6 aw€x6fi€vos diro\v6^(r€Tai 

'Apx4 '''^^ dcKddav 

UKas a 

a ovx €^€15 iXniba niarTeas 

/3 OVK €ntT€v(rf T^S 6VncAl7(r€0)£ apTi 

y KaraoTaOritT'Jii KXrfpiKoSt fipabiois ^4 

d arTpaTTjyijfreis icai evr]fjL€p^a'€iS koi bo^curOria'ji 

6 €^cis Bdvarov Ihtiv kcli x.apfjvai apri 

( KXrjpovofirjo'ds fAera dlKr}s 

rj idv futrBoia-Tjy fiXafirja-jf noXv 

6 (nKovofxria'€is pAv^ <f)6oprj6rj(rfj de nap orovovv 

I €KTpd>(T€t p-era KivdvvoVf nX^v Q'9»Bf}<rer(u 

9—2 

132 

a dncLKXay^ofj r^£ <l>i\rjs <rov 

P ovx €^(15 rvxT/v € jritrKOTrt viTcu' fiq cXfrtfc 

y fUHXov y4p€(nv €(eis tranpav 

b dyopda-€ts 6 ^cXeir xtaplov rj oIkLov 

€ irapafifvels npco'^vrtpos €^s Oavarov 

$■ ov napofifvei trot rf yvv^' aXKrjv yafu^trcis 

C dfroXXayi/o'^ rov K\rfpov ^tXriiras 

Tf yf^V^U b€Kdirp<iyros Ta^icos 

B cifftr TTiv irarpiha Ib^iv fura )(p6pov 

I ovK dnapriaas 6 ipOvfijf p,^ irpotrhoKa 

dtKas y' 

a OVK iK€vBtp&Brifrj[i dpri 

)3 vppKrBijaTj ov ndw dc* fi^ \virov 

y iTo>OijiT€rai t6 yevvrfOtv p,cTa kowov 

d ov iTo>Orj(ru Trjs Kcenjyopias dpri' fifpipva 

€ doixreis dpri rovs \6yovs (rov cVt to arvfKf>4pov 

T iXevo'ercu 6 dnodrjpos vytaivav 

{ dirodoiiTds dpTt a o(f>€ik€is kcu X^P^^ 

rj ovx €vp^a'€is apri daveiaacBm nap* ov iXiri^tis 

B ri^erai kcu. Ktpdvv€v<ret ea>£ Bavdrov 

I ov KivrfB^oTj Tov Tonov <rov dpri* p^ (fyofiov 

otKas o 

a ovx cjwff icxdrrfv koK^p 

)3 ovx €vpiia'€is TOV (fnryovTa vvp 

y dp^tis KcX evrfpep^trtis 

b K\ripoPop:ija'€is t^v prp'€pa 

€ K\rfpovopfja-€ts top iraripa 

^ OVK €\€vB(p<oBij(ru dpri* prj irpotrboKa 

C /**XP* Xoywv vfipia-BijoTj 

Tf Tpa<t>^iTerai t6 y€PPrfB4p 

B ov (raB^OTj TTJs KOTTfyopias 

I doKrctr Tov£ \6yovs <rov fipadtag 

0€Ka£ f 

a ov arvpxf}€p€i croc dpri TtKPwrm 

/3 ov KaraXXceYTia'Tj tois Kvpiois pvp 

y dAr TO, ypdp,pjaTa' tirircv^ji 

b €$€(£ XP^^^^ C^^^ KoXoy 

€ dpoiiop ipyaoT^pioP' d)<l)4\ipov yap 

.C a^BTjaji r^ff dcBiveiaSy ppadecog dc 

133 

Tf ovx €vpi]a'€ts t6 diroKofievov vw 
6 dyopavofU]a'€tSy apri dc oH 

ov K\rfpovofir}a'€is tov <f)i\oP' n-poXct^^i/oT/ 7^ 

I 

dcjcar f ' 

a ov K.Xripovofiija'tis 

)3 fiio'Saam' Kcpdavtis yap iroXv 

y olKOvofufo'ds icaXa)£ jcat do^aaBijarf 

B T^ ipxofjJvfj yaarpl Kpar^o'ei 

€ p.ri davtiajfs eVcl diroXcls 

$■ ov nci\rj<r(i£ t6v <l)6pTov Sipri 

f dnoXvOifaTj rrjs avvoyrii vvv 

fj X^ylrrj ^v 6€\€is yvvaiKa kcu fierafKXrfB^frff 

6 6 dtrOcvav Kii^dwcvo'ct 

( 0*0)^17077 rrjs orvKo^avTias hih, <f)i\ov 

d(Kas f ' 

a €inT€v^fj Ttjs €7riK\^a-(a>s 

/3 ov KaTaa-Ta$i]<rTj KXrfpiKos 

y OTparrjyija'eis ical Kivbvvtvo'ds 

ovx ^?^*^ oavoTov iO€iv vvv 

€ i'tKi70'€tr dpTi' dyavi^ov x^P^^ 

^ K.Xrfpovofu^o'fiSy ov irdvra 84 

( p.ri futrOoaaTj dprr ov yap orvpx^ipci <roi 

rj olKovofirjaeis vvv Jcat bo^curSijo'ij 

6 OVK €KTp6i>(T€l I7 yVVlj' fl^ <f)p6vTl(e 

I €av hav€ia"jusy (ttI virod^Krj ddv€urov 

dc/car 17 ' 

a OVK dyopdatis to irpoK€lfi(vov 

fi (VTvx'ja'eis cV* taxdrav fuiKpav ytpdaas 

y avvdk\d$as Ktpdavtts iroXv 

b fiff djrobrffi^aTis' ov yap arvfi<f)(p€i aoi 

t irpoK6^€is fiera xp^ov kuOods iwi^vfitis 

^ Koi,v(avTi(r€i,s kcli dfiapTri<r€is 

f eav oTpaTcvo'Uy fierafUXrfdfjaT} 

17 OVK €xtis &pav TOV iircp&Trja'ai 

6 €av TrXciKrug apri, Kivbvvevo'ds 

I 6 avv^xop^voi )^6vt^ dirokudfjo'erai 

134 

itKas 

hs B' 

/3 olf <f)vyab€v$tja'rf, vfipurBtjiru dc fierpitos 

y ov y€vij<rj} irori fiiorrpdyos 

B dyopdo'tis o ivBvp.^ kcli TrcaXifo'cir (fwpdo'as 

€ iav ipTt 7rci>\rj(rrjSj fiXa^ijau 

^ ov npoaypa<l)^a'€Tcu rd (rd' firj <^/3ov 

{ ic€p8av€ls dtrh roO irpdyfiaros okiyov 

V ^ Ca ^ ciTrodi/fior* €<f)apfjLaK€V$t) ydp 

B MV^ '''^ dpyvpiov Korro) troXX^ 

I ^^H^y KOfUfrdrov dprt 

Ukos I* 

a (rcuBrjo'tTcu. atro rfjs d(r$€V€ias aprt 

j8 ov (rmOfjcrf rrjs arvKO<f>avTias* rrcpirpe^e 

y ov Kkqpovofiqa'cis r^p yvvaiKQ' npoTcXfvnjo'cis ydp 

d p.ri \iyc r^v bUrfv Spri' riTrrjBfjaTJ ydp 

€ ov Tropa/ievcl croc ndvra rd virdpxovra 

f X];^i7 rrfv <f)tpvrfif fipabitas 

f K\rjpovofifja'€i,s rovs yov€is troVf ov fiovos 84 

rj T€Kvd>a'€is ical Ope^cis koI Bdyfteis 

6 KaTciXXayfjo"}] rois Kvpiois KapArt^ 

I 8oi)a'€is rd ypdp.para Koi a><l>€\rfBija'jf 

Ukgs la' 

a ov KKrjpovop;q(T€is r^v yvvtUKa 

/3 Xcyc rriv bUrfv ipTf viKrja-€is ydp 

y vapfm^vfl (rot rd virdpxovra ndvra 

d ov XiJ^/fj; rriv <f)€pvrjv dprt 

€ K\ripovop:qa'€i£ rovs yov€is ovk els p^Kpdv 

^ rtKvdxretSy XvnrfOijo'rf bt iir* avrois 

C ov fcoroXXoyi^o'^ rois Kvplois cov vvv 

fl OVK €irir€vfy ypo^ipdrtdv dprt 

B fiaroxpovios cr p,^ Xvnov, dXX' €ij)(ov 

I dvoi$€i<i ipya<rnjpiov perd p-dxris 

htKas tfi' 

a n€<l>apfmK€v<rcu* <r€avr^ fioijBei 

P OVK a9raXXayi;o77 rrjs yvvaiKos €<as Oavdrov 

y Xi/crerm aov 6 dpatrpos vvv 

8 y^>"?<n7 povXevnjSi dpri 5c ov 

€ OV np(a'fi€va'€is povos* p^ Tkni^t 

T ov <fnryad€vOij<rif prj <f>oPov 

135 

f ov ytvijoTj Pionpayos rcXcior 
Tf oifK dyopaa'€is aprn 6 evOvfifj 

( oif 7rpo(rypa<l)^a'€Tm to, (rd" firf ^o^v 

otKas (y 

a dXdBriTos tfoToi aov 6 dpacfAos 

)3 yfvriajf povXtvr^g fiera davtiov 

y irpto'pcva'ds fjtovos koI a^c\ri6r)(rji 

b (t^vyabevBfio'Tj frpor ^ovov kcu, Ktpbav^is 

€ ov yfv^ajf ^lonpdyos 

^ ovK dyopdcds aprt- p.^ €vOvpov 

{ ovx fvprfaeis apri iroaXrjo'cu 

ri ov 7rpoaypa<f)ria'€Tcu apri, ra (rd' prj dytovia 

6 K€pbav(is diro rov irpdyparos oKlyov 

( (,11 6 dirobfjpos Koi vyuuv€i- •)(povia^(i dc 

a OVK diroKaTaaTaOfia^ (Is rov roirov (rov 

j3 oif doOrfO'erai (rot crvPoXXd^cu €T€pto 

y a><f}€\rj$ria'rf dn^ rov trpdyparos rov <f}ikov (rov 

b nooikrfBtjo'if pfVy dpri de otJ 

€ oxf Pavels oirov virdyfis 

$* Xrjyjrij oylroaviov, Spri dc ot; 

f dnoXrj^jj rriv irapaKoraBr^Kriv 

$ $€5 irapa^Xiov viK^crctr yap 

I oxfx ((((f (Xrr/da ni(rT€a>s 

a OVK dnoboixrfis cl o^iXctr 

P oif bav(l(rji cVi vnoBrjKTj 

y ri^erai kcli rh y€vvoi>p€vov a'ci>Brja'€Tcu 

b KivfjOrjirrj tov roirov aov cVi to xV-pov 

€ pXafirjOfjf oXiyov bt 

r yaprfo-eis ftfV, Xvo-cts be top ydpop 

( dyopdatis t6 npoKeiptvov Koi pXafirjirjj 

17 oyftirvxos «• p^ dyo>via 

6 (TwcL^d^eis Taxicis koi Kepbav€is 

I dnobrfprjo'eis i^airivrjs cVl JcoX^ 

136 

a ovx cfcir yivta^iv iina-Koirov 

/3 Kordkfi^OritT'Jii cVl fioixdq, vvv 

y ayopao'tis dypov hv ^^'Xctr ^ otjciav 

d 7rap€LfjL€V('is np€a'pvTepos €&>£ yrip&s 

€ oxf Trapa/i€i/ec croi 17 yxnnj* fioixevBrfO'erm yap 

^ dircLKkayrio'ii rov KXrfpov p.€Ta fidxH^ 

( yfVTfO'Tj deKatrpayros ra^efos 

17 e^ftf r^v irarpiba Ib^iv cVl koX^ 

B anapTio'tis o cVt^dXX^ raxttos 

I oif X^tfrj; Xcyoroi'* biafiXriBriar^ yap 

b€Kas tf ' 

a ovjc dtroKri^rf Ttjv napaKoraBrJKriv 

/3 ou yafifjo'tis rfiv (^tXiyv n€Tr6pv€VK€ yap 

y pj) Bjjs napa^Xiov viKtjBr^a'ri yap 

d cfcir cXfTtda 7rtoT66>r icaXi;i/ 

€ iniTtv^m T^£ cVdcXi^o'Cfiar 

^ KaTa<rTaBri<rrf KXrjpiKos 

( ov arvp^pct cot OTpaTrjyrja'ai 

17 2^€( Bdvarov €iri,Kepbrj 

B viKtjaeis' dytovi^ov €as riXovs 

I K\rfpovopria'€is Ta\itds 

bcKas Iff' 

a ov)(^ tvpTfO'cis dapeio'curBcu 

/3 ri^erai koXov koi KciK&s 

y ov Kivr}Bri(rif rov roirov (rov &pTi 

d oif ^c^r)<rji' prf dytovia 

€ yap^aets km \v(T€IS top ydjiov (rjXoTVTrrfa'as 

$* ayopdatis to npoKcipcvov iv rdx'^^ 

C tVTVXOC^iS €$ Ibioap Koncov 

17 oif crvvc^Xd^tis Sprt oifbfvi 

B oifK dnobrip;qa'€is vv¥* 7r€pipeivov 

I npOKo'^cis €ir\ jcoX^ icai bo^acBijoTj 

d€Kas iB' 

a oif irpoKoy^tis &pTi 

/3 KOlVC»Vl^(T€iS KcCkSii K€U a><f)€\rjBija'jf 

y OTpaTtvoT} /icra kottov km perapcXrfB^o'Tj 

d p^ ipoara' ivavria itrrXv 17 r)p4pa 

€ irkcvo'tis pATa rh iyKOirrjvM 

S' 6 arvp€x6pfvos aTToXvB^a-erM rrjs avvoxfis 

137 

( diraXkayrffrj} rrjs (JHkrfs fitra jStar 

Tf y^vrjfrj} iiri(rK07ros kcli ci><f)€\riOi}aTf 

6 KaT(ikr)<f)$ija'u cVi fiot;^€ta* irpwr^xf 

i ovK dyopda'€is to icTrjfia vvv 

:KaS K ' 

a ov irXevcds Kok&s 

j8 6 arvvexofievos diro\v6rj(r€r(u 

y dirdXXayi^a^ t^s ^iXiyr ore ovk cXTriYetf 

b y^^^ni ^f^l'O'f^OirOS OT€ OVK €\irl{^€is 

€ icaT(ikrf<f)6rj(Tif crrl fioix^iq. vvv 

S" oifK dyopdaeis xmpiov vvv 

f napafi€V€'is npta'^vrtpos €a>s yrjp<os 

Tf ov irapap.cvci (roi, rj yvvrj' yap,r}6rja'€Tai, mpfo 

6 drraWayrfO'ij rov jcX^pov koI a><f)€\ri6^a'rf iroKv 

I y^WJI btlcaTTptOTOS OT€ OVK oiBas 

Ukcls Ka' 

a oifx €vpij(r€i,s r6 dno\6p.cvov 

OVK dyopavofirjcfis aprr frepifieivov 
y K\i]povofitj(r€is rov <f)i\ov fiera biKtjs 

b ovx €$€is eaxdrrfv Kcikfjv iitaiTTjO'cu. aoi drroKeircu 

€ ovx cvpijo'cif Tov <f)vy6vTa vvv, fiera xpovov d€ 

S" ap^cis Koi €v8oKip;qa'€is Koi do^aaBrjajj 

f K\ripovofirja'€i,s r^v firjrepa e$ rjfua-das 

17 ov KXripovofiqcfis rov nartpa' nporeXevnfo'eis yap 

$ oifK €\€v$€pci>Ofja^ vvvy dk\a fura xp^vov 

1 v^piaBrjo'Tj fiera ravra, apri bt ov 

bfKas Kfi' 

a MV^t*? o^^viov 

3 OVK drroXijylrij r^v irapaKaraBiJKriv 

y oif Bvvijo'Tj y^/icu rrfv ^ikrfv 

8 Bis napapoKiov viKtjo'cis yap 

€ f^ctf ekniba niarT€as icaXiJi' 

r imrcv^rf r^s (VticXi/o'ccaff 

{ KaTaaTa6ija']j KXrfpiKOSy ppa84ci>s dc 

17 arparriyijatis koi €ui;/x€pi;o-(ir Ka\ do^ao'Ofjajf 

6 Bcda^ji hvo Oavdrovs aicfpdftr 

( oif VlKfjatlS T€a>S' fl^ <f)p6vTl(€ 

138 

dc/car icy 

a ov hwrjo"]] (ro<lHaT€V(rcu 

/3 ov)( tvp^afis t6 diroXoficvov apri, 

y dyopavofiifa'€is apri 

b ov KkqpovopTJafis rov ^iKov firj cXwtfc 

€ €^€tf io'xdrrjv icakijv 

f oif)( €vpifa'€is Tov (ftvyovra' eTrXcvo'c yap 

f apxpvTos y€V€(riv fjetr 

rj ov K\r}povofuja-€is t^v firjHpa* npoTcXevrijo'ds yap 

B K\rfpovofiija'€is rov naripa rpiTrjv fwlpav 

i ovK €\€v$€p<i>$ij<rj}' (riwna 

b€Kas fed' 

a p\afiij<rfj fi€yd\a>s 

j3 ya/iifcrciff koi fjL€Tafi€\r}6ija7j pr}8€V d><f)€\civ 

y dyopdo'f IS t6 npoK€ip^vov, cav OeXrjs 

b €VTvxija€is €^ dWorpmv Kkripovop^aas 

€ arvvaKkd(€i,s /cat d)<l)€\ri6ija'ij rroWd 

S' drrobfjfiqo'f IS Kal p^rafieXriOija'ri 

( npoKo'^eis ($ avcXTTtWfi)!' 

i; ov crvfKl)€p€i (rot Koi,voi)vrj(rcu' (r)fiui>B^<Tij yap 

6 OTparfvoTi kcu. Ta\v irpoKO^^is 

( ai^fiepov KapTfprfa'ov Kal adpiov (pa>Trf(rov 

a oifx <{«*ff T^v rraTplba Ibdv 

j3 OVK dirapria^is o eTn^dXXjj 

y Xiy^j; Xcyaroi', oKiyov 84 

8 ov irctfyapfidKevaaiy aXXa p/epAytva'ai 

€ diraWayfjO'rf Trjs yvvcuKbs yfXoifievos 

r Xfia-eral aov 6 dpaa-fios irpos oKlyov 

f ytvYia-Tj PovXevrrjs #cat ^vpaTf}S 

Tf irp€(r^€va'€i,s koi €vrififpfi<r€i,Sf iav (rirfvajis 

B ov ^vyab€vBr\(rri to orvvoXov firj <f>opov 

I ycvrjcfj fiiojrpdyos koi do^eurBrfau 

d€Kas kS"' 

a dyopda'€is h ivBvfifj 

j3 ovx €vpr)<r€is apri nfoXrjo'ai Kal K€pbdvai. 

y ov npoa'ypa<t>ri<rerai ra ad* p^ pxpipva 

d Kfpdavels oiXiyov diro rov rrpdyparos 

€ ij 6 dnodrfpos Kal epx^rai' p,ri dyndvia 

139 

^ X^^ TO dpyvpiov )3padco>f 

f ov A^tfrj; aftritos tcofiTfrdrov 

ri drroKaTaaTaOriffjf ciy toi' tottov aov 

B fi^ (TvvaWd^s afyrr pXa^^ajj ydp 

I ovx e^fis (o^cXecav drro rov ^iXov aov 

dcfcar fc(' 

a ow KiPfjOria'Tj rov roirov (rov 

P oif pXc^rfO'u* fi^ dytovioy aXX* eSxov 

y yafirjo-fis ^p olbas, ei ^cXctr, raxtfos 

8 dyopdatis to irpoKtifxevov yuerd kottov 

€ €VTVXTIO'€lS €*{ idio>V KOITODV 

S' <n;vaXXa^et£ dpn kcu Kcpbaveis noXv 

( aTTobrifirfO'eis fioKpdv 

rj irpoKoyjrfis t^airivrjs ore ovk oiBas 

6 fi^ Koiva>v€i,' ov <rvfi<f)€p€i <roi 

I <rrpaT€v(rjiy apri 5c oC 

a nXeiKrcis JcaXoff jcal irepix<ip^s 

/3 diroKv6ri<T€TCu, 6 (rw€x6fi€vos p/trd kottov 

y dTraWay^aif rrjs ^/Xiyr (tov 

8 y^^WV crria'KOTros icoTrid(ras iroWd 

€ ov KaTaXrj<f)dij(Trf fioixos' fi^ dytovia 

T dyopdatis \ci>piov r/ oiKiav 

( oif 7rapafi€V€is irpco'PvTCpos 

Tf napafi€V€l (rot 17 yvvijj iav OeXjfs 

6 OVK dirdKKayr)(r'Jii rov KXijpov ea>ff Bavdrov 

i y^^V^tl ^CKdirpoiyros 

deKas kB' 

a d'iraprl(r€is h cVt^oXX^ 

fi ov X^yj^fj Xtydrov oko>s 

y ov 7r€<f)apfidK€vacu' fi^ dy<avia 

b OVK dnaWayTi(rif rrjs yvvcuKOf 

€ OV \rj(r€Tai (rov 6 bpa(rfi6s 

r y^vi](rri ^v\€vnjsy apri dc otJ 

C irp€ap€v<r€iSy ov fiovos bt 

17 oif <f)vyaB€vOjj(r]] • firj dyoavia 

6 y^ofj pioTTpdyos ((anivijs 

i dyopdacis o €vOvfi^, edv B^Xfjs 

140 

a ov Xi;tfrj7 ipri t6 apyvfMov 

fi Xf/tfrj; KOfirfTOTOP KOYT^ troXX^ 

y dnoKOTaara^ijarji els top tottop cav 

d ov dvPTJ<rff rripia (rvP€iXXd(tu 

WK at<f>€\fi&q<rg airo rov t^iKov ovbip 

T ov iratKijBijaTj aprr ov yap arvfKl}fp€i croi 

^ ov fifpcis, oAA air€pxg 

Tf ov Xf/^7/ oyltapiop 

B ovK airoki^'^ rrfp irapaKoraBiJKriP 

I yafn^cds TTjP <f)ikrjp koi ffkti^arjj 

€ 

t€Kas 

hs \a' 

a K(vS>s €irir€v^rj ypafipartov 

fi ovx «?«if "Xpopop (co^ff iTfiKvp 

y apoi^tis ifyyatm^piop fipabtws 

8 (r«i6i]a'rj r^s d(r6tP€ias €( npoire^ds 

f <ro(fnaT€va'€is ($airiprjs 

C oifx €vprja'€is t6 dnoXop^pOP 

C dyopapofujo'ds icai aKl>€\rjOija'jf 

ij ov K\rjpopop;ija'€is top (^iXov* firf npoaboKa 

B €^fK ia^xarr^p KCLKrjp 

I €vp^a'€is apTt TOP <f)vy6pTa 

dtKos X/3' 

a ov KordkrffliB^ajj cVc potx^ui, 

/3 OVK dyopda-eis x^P^^^ 9 oIkiop 

y ov irapap^P€is irp€a'pvT€pos 

d ov irapap.€P€i aoi rf nptSn] yvprf 

€ dndkXayriar^ rov KX^pov 

S' ov ytPflo^Jl btKairpnoTos ipri 

( ov dvprjajf apTi rrfp narpida Ibflp 

Tf OVK diraprio'fis t eVi^oXX^ 

B ov X^^j; Xfydrop* p,^ irpovboKa 

i ir€<l>appdK(va'cu' aeavn^ fiofjBti 

bcKQS Xy* 

a ov fcaraXXay^(rj7 rotr Kvplou 

pt) 8Ss TO, ypdppara apri 

y cjcis ;(/joi'ov C^^r, nX^p dXyrjo-eig rovs nobas 

d OVK dpoi^cis ipyao'TTipiop aprt 

€ a-<aBfiaff TTJs dcBtPeias' dp€KXrjBrj£ yap 

141 

^ (To^icrrcvcrctff €v rfj narpidi cov 

( ovx €vprf<T€i£ t6 dnoXofifvov 

17 ovic dyopavofiri(r(is apri 

6 ov K\ripovofiria'€i.s rov <f)ikov' xK(vd{jf 

I ovx €$€i9 €(rxdTrjp /coXiJv cVotT^o'ctf yap 

dcicar \d' 

a vfipurOrfoji d(ivS>s 

Bpiyfteis TO ytvvrjBiv 

y (raBfjfTTj ttjs Karrfyopias 

d daia€is Tovs \6yovs (rov firf dycovia 

€ ovK iX€v<r€rcu 6 dirobrnjMS* ^yrifi€ yap 

S' OVK dlTohtd(T€l,S h O^CtXctf 

^ baveio'rf /cat eifOvs avra batravrjo'cis 

Tf Tf^fTOl fJL€Ta KivbvVOV tCOprjP 

B KivrfOrjajf Tov Torrov aov €TriaK€vd{ov 

1 ov fiXafirjO'rj' p,^ dyoovia 

a oifK (I (vrvxfjs 

3 avvaXKd^tis e^anivrjs ical K€pbav€is 

y OVIC dirobr}p^a'€is pjaKpdv 

d npoKO^fis Tax4o>s eirl Ka\^ 

€ pjj Koivavtf ov avp^ipci cot 

^ iav orrpaTevajf, /xcra/ifXi^^i^o'i; 

C OVK toTiv &pa' ta(rov ipri 

17 prf nXevaffs aprv vavay^<r€is yap 

6 avP€x6p€vos Tax€<as dnoXvBrjo'erai 
OVK drraXXayrfO']] rrjs <f)l\r}s <tov 

dtKas Xr' 

a [ovK €X((f S^cXor dno rov <l>ikov crou]* 

8 p^ TrXcvcriyr, irpoXfyoa aoi 

y 6 avv€xop^vos dwoXvB^o'iTcu 

b OVK aYToXXay^o'i; rrjs (^tXi/r (rov 

€ ov y(vr)(rrj (iri(rKoiros' pt) irpo(rh6Ka 

f ov KaT€LKrj^6r)(r'[i pjoixos Wor 

^ ayopd(r€if r6 Krrjpa kcu ov irapapjtvii 0*01 

17 irapapcvfis irp€(rpvrtpos 

ov napap€V€2 (roi tj yvvrj 

OVK arraXXay^oT/ tov KXrfpov 

^ A wrongly placed answer. 

144 

dcKas fid' 

a ov boBrio'erai aoi OTptrreva'aa'Bcu 

/3 firepcuTTfa'ov km oKovajj r^v aKrf0€iav 

d 6 crvv^xofji^pos dtroXvOria'eTcu apri 

€ anoLKXayrjaTj rrj^ ^tXiyr koi fjLerofifXrjB^a^ 

r y€vrfaij €nia'KOiros orav yrfpdajfs 

f KaTa\ri<l>Briai] cVt yuoix^la kcu (rifutoSriayf 

rf ovK ayopda-cis r6 KTrf/ia. fiff irpwrhoKa 

B oif ir<ipafi€veis irptcpyrepos 

I napafievei <roi 17 yvvrj ctos yripo>s 

dtKCiS fit* 

a K\ripovofiria'€is rovs yovtls 

/3 TtKvaMTdS app€V Koi 6rj\v koi X^V^ 

y KOTcikXay^ajj tois Kvpiois kqI dKf>€\rfBrf(rff 

d KfvS>s bo><r€is ra ypap^pjora 

€ ovx €$€is xp^^o^ C®^^* didBov 

S" ovK dvoi^fis ipyaarripiov' ov yap dcdorot <roi 

f dnciKXayriaTj r^s dxrBfvtlaSy ppabtoas di 

rj <ro<l)iaT€V(r€is koi cvrvxffO'tis cV r^ trpdyfiart 

6 €vprja'€is t6 dtroXop^vov vvv, <f)p6vTurov 

I OVK dyopavop-rjireis orav Sfkrjs- ip.irodi(ji ydp 

b€Kas p.^ ' 

a [/cXiypovo/iiJcrctr rov^ yovccr]* 

j3 oivK dyopdaets ro TrpoKcipevov 

y cvrvx^(r€(£ c/c noWmv <rov Kc^idrcov 

d pri arvvaXkdijjs, prfdev iroUu ov arvp^4pet 

€ dnobrfpria'cis t^arrivrjs kcu iroXv <o^€Xf;^^(rj7 

S" npoKoyltciS ot€ ovk iXni^tis cVi r6 Kp^irrov 

( KOivo>vfia'€is Koi ^Xa^€(r perapeXqBrifrTj 

17 aTpaT€V(rfj Kal raxy irpoKO^^is in\ to Kpeirrov 

6 ipoara pera niaTcoas /cat aKOvaji rriv aki^Oaav 

i irXeiKreis pera t6 eyKonrjvcu JcaX&r 

dtKas pC 

a (r^rnTfi rrfs Korriyopias ttoXX^ 9rapaicX^(r€t 

/3 ba>(r€is rovs \6yovs aov ppab€<as 

y iXcvo'erai 6 dirobrjpos Spri x^P^^ 

b dnodaxrfis a of^c/Xcir Kara pepos. prj dymvia 

€ bav€iaji €ir\ viro6r)Kri kcu. btaavptis kaipov 

^ A wrongly placed answer. 

145 

S' ri^erau. a^r^arov, fitj Xvnov 

f KivrjOr/OTf Tov tottov crov. eroifid^ov Koi X'^P^ 

Tj pXaPrjvcu efeir. (fiofiov koi aavrbv rrjpei, 

B yafiTfo'cis Koi creavroO Karayvoxri} fieravoav 

I oifK ayopda'€i5 t6 npoKeifitvov 

a ov OTparrfyria'eis nonTroTf 

j3 ovx ^i^is Bdvarov Ideiv vvv. fitj ayoDvia 

y viKrj<r€i5, aytovl^ov eeas Qavarov 

d K\T)povofirja'€i5 Koi raxif T€\€VTri<r€is 

€ fuaOcDOTf Koi KCpbavels ttoXv 

S' oiKovofirjatis /cm Kan]yopf)dq<ru koi (fiOovrjBrfaTj 

f ovK €KTpoi><r€i, fi^ ^ojSoO, dXX' tUxov 

ly 8dv€urov dTroXrj^jrrj ydp cvxapiorciiv 

B TTcoX^creir rbv (fiopTov KokSis 

I dno\v6r)(rj[i r^r crvi/op^^y. cvOvfiei 

a Xi7'\frj7 ^v Ofkfis yvvcuKa 

j3 6 d<r0€vS>v (rtoOrfO'CTiu Ka/xar^ noW^ 

y ov (rcoOrjoTf t^s avKO<f)avTias. Trcplrpcxf 

8 K\rfpovofi^<r€i5 T^v yvvaiKO, ov pjovos 84 

€ fi^ Xc-ye TTjv 8iKT)v &prn' ^midrjajf ydp 

S' 7rapafi€V€i <roi rot vndpxovra ndvra 

f oif X^>Jr^ T^v <l)€pvrjv 

rj KXripovofifiaeis rotfs yovels fwvos 

6 T€Kvci)a-€i5 Koi x°PWl] **'*'* ct^Tots ficyokcis 

I oif KtrraWayrfo-rj vols Kvplois apri 

a ov dvvrfo^ vvv ap^au. 

P K\rjpovofiTja-€is Trjv firjHpa ef fffua-fias 

y ov Kkrfpovofiria'fis rbv rraripa. fi^ fXTrtfe 

5 OVK iXevOepcaOrfaTj ofpri, oKkd fiera xp^vov 
€ OVX vPpiO'BrfO'rf. fir) dyoDvioy dXKd Koprcpei 
$" acaBijaerai t6 y€vvT)0€v fierh KapArov 

f frcDdrjaTj rrjs Korrjyopias Bia <f)i\ov koKov 

rj daxreiff &pTt Toifs \6yov5 a-ov enl koK^ 

6 fXevaercu 6 d7r68T)px)5 vyicuvoDV 

I fiTj dwob^ &pTi a oi^eiXeir. ntplp^ivov 

H. 10 

146 

a [ov fi€V€'i5 oTTov VTra-yetr]* 

/3 dTraWayfjOTj rrjs (fiiXris <rov &pTi 

y y^^h^ iirlo'Konos raxv, fierafieXrjSriaij d4 

d KaTa\Tj<l)0rfaTj fwixbs koi ov p\aPTj<ru 

€ ayopdaeis t6 KT^fta 6 ivOvfifj 

S' TTOpafifve'is npeaPirrepos €(os yrjpfos 

f ov 7rapafi€P€i aoi fj yvvrj' pjoix^vcrcu yap 

rj aTToXXay^oT/ tov Kkrjpov, <f)p6vTi(€ 

6 yevrfojj beKanpcoiTOS iv rdxei 

I ov Oedaji rfjv narplba apri 

beKas vP' 

a €av S-pTi lua-^cDcrj, fiXaPrjajf 

P oiKovofirjo'eis evSicas Ka\S>s 

y iKTpSaei koL Kivdweuaei. npoat^f 

d iav 8av€ia7}5, Ppab4<os dirokq'^ri koll fiera fidxV^ 

€ wcoikrjO'eis t6v (fydprov raxfas /cat x°Pl^ 

r* dTToXvdffajj TTJs ovvox^s €v rdxci 

i Xi7>Jrjy ^v 34\€i5 yvvaiKa ctti kukS cov 

rj 6 dcBcvSiV fiera Kivbvvov o'toOrjo'CTiu 

6 cwdrjajj T^s (TVKO^vrlas iroKkri 7rapaK\rja'€i 

I ov K\rfpovofiria-€i5 Trjv yvpcuKcu fiff cX^rifc 

dejcaff vy' 

a ovx €vprja'€is rhv (fivyovra 

P &p^€is KOi €vrifi€pria-€ts koi bo^curBrjoTj 

y K\rjpovop.r)<T€is t^v fiifrdpa puovos 

h ov Kkrjpovofifja-eis t6v naripa' nporiKevrrja-eis yap 

€ iXcvBcpioBrjaTf bovs dpyvpiov fiera irapaK\ria-€CDS 

S' vfipiaBrja^ deiv&S' dWd p,^ ^p6vTi,^€ 

f ov (rja-CTCU t6 yevvoip^vov, &pTi T€\€vrq, 

i; ov a'<o6r)ayi Karrjyopovp^vos, ova-K€vd(ov 

B doMretr &pTi Toiis \6yovs cov koI ci)<l>€\rjdTjaTj 

I ovK iXevo'erm 6 aTrddi/fior* dcrp^oXen-oi ydp 

dcKcis vb' 

a ov 7r(Zpap.€V€i aoi ij yvvrj 

P ov bwrifTQ dtrdKkaryrivcu. tov K\r)pov 

y ov y€vrfOTj btKanptoTos. p,rj fkniCe 

8 Qfdtrji rrfv narpiba iv rdx^i 

f OVK dnaprla-eis 6 eVi^aXXi; 

^ A misplaced answer. 

I 

147 

( ov Tr€<l>apftdKev(r(Ui aXXct fi€fidyev<rcu 

rj ovK dwaWayrjajj Trjs yvvcuKbs dpri, Kopripti 

6 XTjirerai aov 6 8pa&fjk6s npos 6\iyov 

I ov y€vri<ru ^vXcvrris rcwy. irepip^ivov 

a ov ^Tjyltrj KOfirfTOTOV 

P airoKaTaaTaBr)(rj[i eis top tottov crov 

y (rvva\\d$€i5 kuX Kfpbavets ra ir4p<ov 

b fj^€i <roi o<f)€\os dwb rod <f)i\ov cov no\v 

€ ov 7rci>\rj3fi<ru. ov <rvfi<l>€p€i o'ol ncplpxivov 

r ftcvets oirov vnaytis oXiyov Konpov 

( Xriylr^ o^caviov Ppabitos 

rf dTToXrjyjrfj rr^v napaKoraBrjKriv dKivbvv&s 

6 ov yafi^(r€i5 t^v (fiikrjv, fiq 7r\av& 

I pji Bfjs napaPoXiov viKrj3rjaTj yap 

beKas vS'' 

a Saxretr rovs \6yov5 crov 

P OVK iXevacTcu 6 dnobrifios &pTi 

y dnobos dpri & o^eiXetr, eiTrep fSfKcis 

b ov bvvritrri bavcitraaBcu apri. 7r€pifi€ivov 

€ ri^erai fiera Kivbvvov noWov 

S' KivrjOriirrj tov tottov aov €ir\ to KpiiTTOV 

f pXa^rjoTf oXiyov dWa p.r) \virov 

rj ov yap,r)(T€iS &pTi. n€pifi€ivov avfixfyipei yap 

6 dyopdcfis t6 7rpoK€ifi€vov koi x^Pl^ 

i cvrvx^aeis ra^tas inX rb Kpetrrov 

a ov Xrjyiru Xcydrov. fiq npocboKa 

P 7r€<l}apfMK€va'(u, a-eavr^ fiorfdei 

y dnaWayrifri} rrjs yvvaiKos koi fierafifkTjB^a^ 

b Xriaerai <rov 6 bpacfibs nphs Kcupov 

€ OV yfvrfOTj jSovXnrr^r 5pri. <f>p6vTi,f^€ 

$" TrpccrjSfvo'etr ov fiovos' (rvpxf)4p€i yap 

f ov (jivyabfvdrjaTj. fiq (fiofiov, evdvp^i 

Tj y^vrj<ru Piowpdyos kcu evxapurTTjo'cis 

6 dyopdfrcis t ivQvfiri kcu fi€TafUXr)BTj(r]j 

I ovx evpria-eis &pTi rrooX^o-oi. wepifieivov 

10—2 

148 

dcKoir vrj ' 

a Kfpdaveis o\iyov an 6 rov npdyfiaros 

P a o aTTO^fios Koi tpxrrcu fiera xpovov 

y ^1^ dpyvpiov firra xpovov 

h OX) y^Y^ &pTl KOfUTfTOrOV 

€ dTroKaraaTaBrfOTj ciy t6v tottov <rov 

^ €civ avvaXkd^St jSXajS^oT; 

f ov 7r<o\rj(r€i5 eni r^ avpxf>€povTl (rov 

rj oxf}€\rjBffaTj dnb rov <f>iXov cov noKv 

6 fi€V€is oTTov vTrdyeiSy edv (rnevajjs 

dcKcis v3' 

a ov KoraaTaBrjayf kXtjpikos 

P ov aTpaTriyr)<T€is apru fi^ cXTrtft 

y ovx cffts Bdvarov Ihciv 

b ov viKfjaeis reXeiW. fii) tkni^e 

« KXrfpovofiTjO'eiSi ov fjL6vo5 dc 

^ fucBaccu' o><f>€\rjdri<rif yap noXv 

i ov didoTcd a-oi olKovofirja-cu &pTi 

rj ovK €KTpoi>a'€i. fi^ <f>oPov 

B pji davela^Si iva fi^ fierafUXridjjs 

i 7rot>X^(r€(ff t6v <l>6pTov koK&s kcu X'^ph^ 

dfKClS $' 

a naiKrfdrjajf, dpri be ov 

P fi€V€is OTTOV virdy€i5 oXlyov 

y X^^ oyftciviov KciXbv vvv 

8 aTToX^^ TTjV irapaKoraBriKrjv 

€ yafirfireis r^v <l>i\rjVj vvv bf oii 

^ $€9 napaPSkiov viKYfceis ydp 

( ovx *?**s iXniba niarecas t6 avvokov 

T) iniT€v^ T^s i7riK\rfa'€(os rax^tos 

6 KaTaaraBrjOTj K\r)piK6s Ppad4<os 

I ov OTpaTrjyfjO'eis irori. pji eXTrife 

b€Kds ^a' 

a CKrpaxrei koi Kivdwcvcei 

P 8dv€ia'ov ini vttoO^k^ Scov dtXeis 

y 9rot>Xi7(r€(ff t6v <f)6pTov fipctbeas, fi^ eKKdnfi 

d OVK aTToXXay^oT; rrjs avvox^s* nepifieivov 

c ov X^^ fjv dikfis yvvcuKa 

149 

S" 6 daBev&v fiaKpovo<rri<ras acoO^a-erai 

i a-<oBr)irii Trfs avKo^avrlas dm ^(Xo)y 

17 ov Kkrfpovofi^ireis r^v yvvcuKa 

6 a-novbaa-ov €ln€lv ttjv Biktjv apri 

I ov napafitvci <roi ra vndpxpvTa eVi 

iroKv 

a ovx f^fis xp6vov fw^ff 

j3 ovK dvoi$€is €pyaaTripiov dpri 

y ov caBrifrji r^s daSeveias. 8idBov 

8 oif 0'0<l)l(JT€V0'€lS VVV. SXXo Tl TTolci 

€ ovx fvpTia-fis VVV TO dnoXofjifvov 

^ oifK dyopavofiri<r€i5 aprt, fi^ TKni^e 

( ov KXrjpovofirja'eis vvv tov <f)iKov 

T) ovx cfftff ia-xdrrjv KoKrfv, acavra /So^^ei 

oifx €vprja'€is tov (fyvyovra vvv 

1 OVK Sp^€is apTiy oXXct pjera •)(p6vov 

dcKcis $y' 

a aTpaT€v<rif, aXX* ctti Pkafirf 

j3 [*P7^& fierh, novov Koi kottov rroXXov]^ 

y 7rXfv(r«tff vvv K(ikS>s koi X'^ph^ 

b OVK dTToXvOrfaerai 6 avv^xofievos dpTi 

€ dndWayrjajj t^s <f)iX.r}s in* oxfiekfia 

S' ovx *¥^*^ Tvxjiv iiTiU'Konfva'cu, 

i [/ioi;(6s oifK et aXX* ^ yuvi} crov aXkov ^iXet]^ 

rj OVK dyopdo'cis &pTi ;(a>p(oy fj oLKiav 

6 ov 7rapafi€V€i5 np^o'^vTCpos 

I ov 7rapafi€V€t croc fj yvvri 

' bcKas (8 ' 

a oif a'(ii>Orfa-€TCU 6 dnddrffios 

P n€p\ TOV dpyvpiov dnoarfiKov Tax^f^s 

y X^'^U KOfirfTaTOV o)ff ^cXcir 

8 OVK diroKaTCUTToBriayi els t6v tottov <rou €0)r y^pcas 

€ €av avvoKXd^s ^T€pa, a><l>€\rf6^ajj 

f ovx *?^*y o)<f}€\€iav dnb tov <I>iXov crov 

f OTTOV hv TTpaB^Si fi€Tafi€\ri3ria'u 

Tj fi€V€is OTTOV V7rdy€i5 Koi icaXcor 

6 ovvdKKd^cis iv r© TTpdyfiari tov o^aviov 

I oifK OTToX^i^ TTjv TrapaKaTOjdrjKriv 

^ Misplaced answers. 

150 

a ov 7rapafi€V€is npctrfivrtpos 

j3 ov 7rap€^tfV€i aoi fj yvv^ teas yriptos 

y ovK aTToXXay^oT/ tov K\ripov eoof Oavdrou 

d y^^V^ SfKawpcDTOs raxy 

€ oifX €^€IS T^V TTOTplba Ibclv 

$" anapTiO'eis raxftos t cVi/SaXX;; 

f Xiji/fj7 XeydroVf oXiyov 84 

rj irf^apfidKcvfTaju <T€avT^ ^oi^Bci 

B OVK aTraXXayiJcTfy rrjs yvvaiKos nore 

I Xi/creroi o'ov 6 dpaafios nphs oKiyov 

8€Kds $r ' 

a y^v^OTj fiionpdyos 

j3 OVK ayopdatis t iv6vp%' ov yap cv/KJiepti 

y naiXi^a'cis Koi Kcpbavcls noXv 

8 7rpoaypa<l)rja'€TCU rd era. aXXa KTrjacu 

€ K€p8av€is dwb TOV npdypMTOS oXiyov 

S" Cli o d7r68r)fios kcu tpx'^Tcu, vyiaivoav 

( Xi^'^U t6 dpyvpiov Kord fi€pos 

ly oif X^^Tf dpTi KOfirjrdrov 

6 OVK dnoKaTaaraOi^aTf els t6v towov cov 

I €av €T€p(o ovvtiXXdfys, pXa^T^ajf 

a <f)vyab€v3i^ajf 7rp6s oXiyov 

j3 ov yevrjo'ii TeXcias Piowpdyos 

y dyopdireis 6 €v3vfi^ Kal X'^Pl^ 

b Ppabiuis cvprjaeis TrcoXijcrai, kc^&s 84 

€ OV npoaypa^i^a'CTcu, ra crd. /x^ ^ojSoO 

r* Ktpbaveis dnb rov npdyfMTos noXv 

f OVK iXevo'CTcu 6 dnodrjiios' ov ydp (^ 

i; Xi^ylrrj t6 dpyvpiov dpri 

6 ov Xrj'^ KOfiryrdrov vvv 

I OVK dnoKaraaTaBi^ojj els tov tottov (tov 

beKos ^ ' 

a ov KXT)povofii]a'€is t6v nar4pa 

j3 OVK iXcvBepciB^aTf dpri. fi^ npoaboKa 

y oifx vfipio'dTJa'u. frnXXov x^^P^ 

8 a'toBrjO'eTCU. r6 yevvqQev fierd KapMTov 

« O'caOi^a'u TTJs Karqyopias napaKXrjo-ei 

151 

S' daxreis roifs \6yov5 <rov dmpedv 

( iXevfrercu 6 dirdSrjfios ^(povia'as. X^P^ 

Tj ovK dnobaxrcis d 6<f)€ik€is ciprif aK\6. fierd \p6vov 

6 Ppabecis bav€i(rji nap* od Oi\€is 

I T€^€T€U KOi t6 y€VV0i)fl€POV &XpTjaTOV COTCU 

d€Khs $0 ' 

a TrXfvcretff vvv 

j3 dTToXv^jycrcrctt h avv€xofi€vos vvv 

y aTraXXoyiJoT/ r^s <f>iX.rj5 Sta xpovov 

B ov^ €$fis y€V€<rOai €ni<rKonos, fi^ fkirtCe 

€ oif KaTa\Tj<l)0i]<rrj fwixos 

r dyopaaeis x&piov ^ oIkigv 

i napafi€V€is TrpecrjSvrepoff 

ly ov 7rapafi€V€i <roi rj yuvij* <f)ikov yap f\€i 

B dnaXkayrjoTj rov K\rfpov 

I ov yeyijo"^ bcKanpoiTOS 7ror€ 

dcKos o' 

a acad'qa'Tj rrjs do'Oeveias a-ov 

P av a'o<l}iarT€va'€is. 5XXo rt Trparre 

y €vpi]a-€is t6 dnokop^vov raxicus kcll X^'PW? 

b dyopavofi^<r€is koi axfiikrjdija^ ttoXv 

€ K\T)povofi^<r€is Tov <f>iX.ov €^ f]fua-€ias 

S' €$fis eo'xdrrfv KaXi^v. fi6vov tvxpv 

f evpi^acis &pTi t6v <f)vy6vTa 

rj ap^€is Kcu €vrjfi€pr]a-€is Kal 8o^a<rdi^a^ 

6 ov Kkripovofirja-eis ttjv fir)T€pa. Sk\<^ dTroKCircu 

I KXxjpovofiija'eis t6v naripa fiovos 

dcKOff oa ' 

a re^eroi /xera Kivbvvov 

P KtvrjB'qayj tov tottov <rou di^vta in\ t6 Kp€irTov 

y pXa^oTf iv rovrt^, iv Se r^ irip^^ d><f)€\rj6i^aj} 

d yrjfjMi €(f«ff eVl koK^, iav CTrevaTjs 

€ oifK dyopdacis t6 npOKeificvov ov yap inapK^is 

$■ €vn;x»;<r€tff in* ifrxdrtav kcll olKobc(TnoTi^€i,s 

^ (TvvoLKKd^fiS Ka\ K€p8av€is bid t&v oXXorpicav 

1; dnobrffii^ireis c^anivrfs koi Kcpdaveis 

6 ov npoKoyftcis dpri, fi^ cXtti^c 

I Koivrnvi^a-fis cV* (u^fXem 

152 

a ov ytPTJoj} PcvXrvTi^s 

P ov npeo'Pfva'eis fiovos' ov yap (rvfi<f>€p€i coi 

y ov (fivyabevdi^oTj, fi^ (fyofiov 

8 oif y€vrjajf Pionpayos r6 (rvvokov 

€ dyopdaeis t ipBvfifj Koi fierafieXrjBi^fru 

^ tvp-qcets TroiXrja'cu PpaSicas 

C 'n-poaypa<f)^a-€T(U rh era. irpoa-txi 

Tf KcpSaPfts dn6 rov npdyfuiTos. np6a'€\€ 

6 eKcwrerai 6 dwobrffios ficrd (fiikov k<iKov 

I ov ^TJyfrjj t6 dpyvpiop okas 

dcjcaff oy' 

a ovK dyopdacis x<aiipLov r\ olKiav 

P 7rapafi€V€2s npctrPirrcpos €a>s yrjpcos 

y ov napafievei aoi rj yvvTj' fwixcvcrai ydp 

5 dnaWayi^ajf rov K\^pov fierd yijpa>s 
€ yfvrja'ii beKdwpayros t^aTrivrjs 

S' €^€15 T^v narpiba ihiiv^ fipajbitos hi 

f dTrapTio'cis t eVi/SaXXi; rax^ims 

rj ^^f^ Xeydrov, oXiyov 84 

6 ov 7r€<l>apfidKev<T(u, ri aKcupeis; 

i OVK dnaikXayrfajf rrjs yvvaiKos. fitj fitpifiva 

)€Ka5 

as o8' 

a ov (Tca^jJoT; rrjs (rvKof^avrias 

j3 Kkqpovop.rjO'tis rrfv yvvaiKa fiovos 

y elnf Trjv biKrjv dprv viKi^aeis ydp 

d ov wapafifvcl aoi ra vndpxovra €a>s yrjpa>s 

€ oif X'q^Tfj T^p (jitpv^v OV ydp evp^atis ri 

S" oif Kkrjpovofi^o'fis rovs yovcls (rov €iua'^Or)s ydp 

( oif T€Kvoi>a'€is dpTi, lit) npofrbdKa 

rj KoraWayi^ajj roXs Kvpiois kcu dyanrjOi^aif vn* aifTcav 

B bhs rd ypdfifioTcu cVtrcv^ od XPVC^''^ 

I €^€is xpovov i^curis KCii irdvv koKov 

UkOS 0€* 

a OVK oiKOVofirifreis 

P cKrpoxrci koi Kivbvvcvaci ecus Bavdrov 

y idv davcioTjs, Ppc^dws aTroXi^ij 

8 oi) TTOiXija-fis t6v <f)6pTov raxy 

€ aTToXvBi^ajj rrjs avvox^s 5prt 

163 

( 6 daOevcav (rm^rfO'erai Kafidra noXk^ 

ri (TdiOrjiTij TTjs ovKixfiavTias raxv 

6 oh Kkrjpovofiijtreis t^v yvvaiKa fiovos 

I dy<avi(ov, elne t^v SiKr)V' viKTJ<r€iS yap 

dcKcis o$" ' 

a K\rjpovofii^€is r^v fiijTcpa 

j3 ov K\T)povofi^<r€i5 t6v naHpa* firf eXTrtfc 

y i\€v6€puiBrj(r(i^ dpri Se ov 

d ovx vfipiod^OTf vvvy dWa ficra xpovov 

€ TO yevvonfifvov fiff Tp€<l}€, cru/AjSovXevo) (rot 

f Kiv8vv€vo€i5 eVt TTJ KaTTjyopia 

( boaaeis tovs \6yovs oov fitB* v^pcfos 

t) ovK iXevoercu 6 dTrobrjfios' dcrpfoXelrat yap 

B dno8ci)<T€i5 &pTi A 6<l>€i\eis €k KOirtov aov 

I ov bvvi^ajf apTi daveioaoBai' ov yap TrtOTCvcret croi ris 

bcKas of 

a ov 7rapafi€V€i aoi 6 K\rjpos 

j3 y^vrjOTfi biKanpaoros^ ot€ ovk oiSas 

y €$€is T^v naTplha Ibciv c^anivrjs 

8 dnaprlofis t cnifidWrj /cat do^aaBT^OTj 

€ OV XiJ^Jrj; Xeydrov, fi^ eXTrtfc 

S' ov 7r«l)apfidKeva'cu, firf <f)oPov 

f dTraXXa-yijcTTy rrjs yvvaiK6s in* axjiiktia 

rj ov Xijcrerat crov 6 Spairfxds 

B yci/ijcriy jSouXcvriJff, dpri be ov 

t Trpco^evaj} fiovos koI bo^aaBija^ 

bcKas Off ' 

a 8^€i Bdvarov tv ov BiXfis 

P oif viKijo'cis &pTi, <rvii^4p€i (rot Kaprcprjo'cu 

y ov K\rfpovofii]a'€is Sipn. ai^na 

8 fuoBoaajj Koi K€pbav€7s o<tov iTriBvficTs 

€ oiKovofu^oeis apri' ovbeis yap ere c/xTrodtVet 

$" OVK CKrpcdcrct. fi^ <f)o^v t6 ovvoXop 

f bdvciaov fVi vwoBi^KTj Ka\ ovk aTroXfcretr 

Tj ov nfoXrjo'cis rhv (fioprov. pj) cTTrcCSe 

B dnoXvBTJajf rrjs ovvoxfjs €^ dveXTriaroDV 

I fi^ Xdfirjs ^v BiXfis yvvcuKa' crv/i^epet yap aoi 

154 

deKhs 06 ' 

j3 aTrodrjfirja'fis e^awivrjs koI fuucpdv 

y ov TTpoKoyjreis &pTi. €fi7rodi(rj yap 

8 KciXas Koiva>vi^a'€is koi cvp^apton/O'eir 

€ oTpar^va-'d koll ra^v npoK6'^€is in\ rh Kpeirrov 

f €7r €pciyrrj<rov &pq. S"' Koi okovo-jj Tr)v akijOeiav 

( Tr\€va'€is fiera t6 eKKonrjvai koi jcaXof 

rj dTToXv^iJcrerat 6 avvcxofifvos fiera kottov 

6 dnaWayijaTj rrjs <f>iKrjs raxifos 

I yevijcri; iniaKonos n\fjv fipadicus 

a fi€V€is onov virdycis 

P ov X^^f^i; oyftQuviov. fitj npoadoKa 

y dnoXriyjrjf rrjv napaKaTaOrjKrjv okoKXrjpop 

8 yafiT}a'€is ttjv <l>i\rjv 

€ Bis napaPoXiov' viKrjaeis yap 

$■ €^fis cXttiSo ttIotcods Koi ndvv kclKt^v 

f €7riT€v(ll TTJs cVticX^crcwff rax^cos 

Tj ovK dTroKaraoTaBTja^ KXqpiKos. oKko ri Trparre 

6 ov OTpaTTfyria-fis cipri. pj) npoaSoKa 

I t$(is Odvarov Ihiiv ini(r)pnov 

b€Kas na' 

a diraXkayrjajf rrjs yvvcuKos 

j3 ov XfjO'CTal aov 6 bpaa-fios. cipri ip,nlnT€iS 

y y^vfiaji Pov\€vrris jSpadco);, (rjp^aBriajf Se 

d npea-^va-fis pxtvos koli ov avfi<f)4p€i (rot 

€ ov <f>vyalbevdrjaTj. fi^ <f)o^v, paKpo6vp.rja-ov 

S" y^vriarj ^lonpdyos koli KTrjcrj TroXXa dyaBd 

( dyopda-fis t ivBvp,^ kcu, pL€ran<oKr)(T€is avro 

TJ ovx €vpria'€is irooikrjaai ms BcXets 

6 7rpoaypa<f)r]a-€TCU rh era apri, <f}p6vTi(€ 

I ov Keplkivfls okfos dirb rov npdypxiros 

a pri Koivmv^a^s. ov avpxf)€p€i <roi 

j3 OTptrrevayj ovk €iri to avp,<f)€pov 
y * * 

d nXevtrfis dirpoaBoK^as Koi icaXcor 

€ OVK dTroXvOrfa-enu 6 avv€x6p€vos 

155 

^ oi/K dnc^Xayfiajj r^s (fiiKrjs dia ttoWov 

( inio'Konr^a'ns ttoXXoi dytovia'dficvos 

ri ov KaTa\Tj<l)0rj(rTj (ir\ iioixelif. fi^ <f)o^v 

6 dyopd<r€is ^apiov fi€Ta Kafidrov 

I ov irapafi€V€i5 Trptafivrepos 

deKas Try ' 

a ovK drroKvOrifrji r^y (njvo-)^s 

P ^^V^?7 ^v OfXcis yvvcuKa kcu eajj Kvpios 

y <r<ii>OT}<rer€U ttjs daBevtias Taxicas^ cl Trpoaixas 

8 ov (rcuB^a^ r^s <rvKo<f)avTias noWd laxiKras 

« ov K\rjpovofiT}a-€i5 TTjV yvpaiKo, eripc^ bcBorai 

S" idv etTT/yy rriv 8ikt)v &pTi^ viKY)<T€iS 

( napaficvei aoi 6\iya t&v vnapx6vT<ov 

rj ^V^V "^^ (fytpvriv koi o'KOpnia'fiS axfrrjv 

6 OV K\rjpovoiir)a'€is tovs yovtls. mp<o hibvrai 

I oif rcKi/oxrciff dpri. wepifitivov 

a oifx ^$fis di^ikfiav dnb rov (fyiXov <rov 

P nui\r)Br)<Tri kcu k(iKS>s coi fcrrat Trap' ols TrpaBrjo'Tf 

y oif fifveis onov virdytis' oif yap <f)ddv€is 

d ov Xiji/riy oyft&vuiv dpri 

€ dnoXrj'^Tf Trjv napaKoraBr^Kriv okdKkqpov 

r yafiT}a'€is r^v (fiikrjv koi ov Trapafievii <toi 

( fi^ Bffs TrapojSdXtov* viktiBtjo'ij yap 

ri f^fis iXniba wiarcas KaXrjv 

6 €7riT€v^jf eTriKXi^crco);, ifs ttoBcis 

I Ktrraarc^TjaTj k\t)pik65 Ppabitos 

hfKas we ' 

a npoaypa<f>^a'€T€U rd ad 

P K€p8av€is OTT^ Tov iTpdyfAOTOs oXiyov 

y (jl ^ dnoSrifios koi €px€T£U 

8 Xi^^frj; TO dpyvpiov Kara fiipos 

€ X^>Jr^ Koprfrdrov 

S" dnoKOTajfrTaBrjaji cts rov ronov (rov raxcfos 

( (TvvaWd^fis iripc^ koi Kcpbavcis ttoXu 

r) ovx f^fis axfyiXfiap dnb tov <l>i\ov (tov 

6 irfo\q3T)<ru Koi ovk iXevBcpaB^trjj 

I fi€V€ls onov vndytis 

156 

dcKClS ITS' ' 

a firj bavciajfs* ov ycip crvyij(^4p€i 

P 7rai\rja'€is t6v (fyoprov ra^itas 

y ouK airokvBrja-g rr\s avvo^s &pTi 

b ^^"^V f^oin^ ^v OcXcis yvvcuKa 

€ 6 ourBfvSiv fMKpovoa^<ras vyiavei 

S' aatBriaTf ttjs truKotfiavTiaSy iav 7rpo<r€)(ffs 

{ K\ripovofiq<r€is ttjv yvvaiKa, ov fwvos dc 

Tj viKfjatis T^v biKTjVf iav Kafius, p^XP'' "^^ovs 

ov Trapap^vti coi irdvra ra vnapxovra 

X^^ T^v <f)€pvr)v p.€Ta fuxx'?^ 

e 

deKcis Trf 

a ov^ evprjircis ttodX^ctcm to. era 

j3 ov 'n-poaypa<l)fia'€Tcu ra era. ft^ <f>p6vTt{l€ 

y ov Kcpbaviis dno tov wpdyparos t6 avvokov 

8 ov (^ 6 dn6di]px)S. pji npoaSt^ov avrov 

€ ^V'^ ^^ dpyvpuov Kara pipos 

S" oif X^^J^iy dpri Koprprdrov, €k84xov S4 

f dnoKoraaTajd^a'jj els t6v towov <rov ptrd \apds 

rj cl avvaWd^cis iripfj^, pXafirjajf ttoXv 

6 f^fis dxpiXfiav woXkqv a7r6 tov (fyikov trov 

I ov 7rai\T)0ffa7j dXX' i\€vB€pci>Briajf 

a npoKd^eis KciK&s 

j3 p.^ KOlV0i)V€l. OV (rvp<f>€p€l (TOt 

y <TTpaT€V(rjj kcu npoK6y^€i,s raxtas 

d [j^pyda^j <f>3ovovp.€vos vn6 ifktidvfovY' 

€ [o>Jre TeXeo-^jyo-erot 6 ydpos 8i dvdyKtjsY 

f 6 (rvve^opevos dirokvBria'ercu 

f dn(ik\ayri<ru Tfjs (fyikrjs (rov cVt (fjpla 

rj yf^WV i^^o-KOTToSf &pTi be oxj. wepipcivov piKpov 

6 KaTa\ri<l>6ri<rrj poix6s &pTi. npoa-exf 

I ovK dyopda-ets x&piov ^ oiKiav 

deKcis n6 ' 

a y€vri<rji b^KdirpioTos 

P €$€15 TTiv irarplba Ihelv k€U x^P^^ 

y ditapTia-eiS t cTri/SaXXjy 

b X^*^ Xfydrov nokvy iav itpofrixjl^ 

€ ir€<f>appMK€va'cu d\rj3ci£, treavT^ fiorjmi 

^ Misplaced answers. 

167 

f ovK dnaWayriaTj r^s yvv€UK6s koK&s 

( Xrjarrcd cov 6 dpacfjibs cods xpovov 

T) y^vrjoTj /SovXorr^ff kcu a<l}€\r)dij(r]j TrXovrrja-as 

B npta-fieifa'cis koi cirirev^ iv r^ irpayfutri 

I <f)vya8ev3ij<ru 

8€Kas 9 ' 

a yafirjaeis ttjv ^iXiyy cipri 

j3 des 7rapaP6\iov viKTJa-eis yap 

y ovx f$€is iKnlBa Triorcwr t6 avvoXov 

d €7riT€vfy €7nK\i]<r€0i)S rjiTTrep rjii^to 

€ KaraaTaBijaTj KXripixos koi y€P^(rjj XoifMS 

S' aTpan]y^<r€is koi €vrifiep^(r€is €<&£ riXovs 

( Sylrei Odvarov oIkciov raxdoDS. dWd fiaKpoBvixti 

rj viKi^aeis. fi^ aymvia 

6 K\r}povofii^<r€is koi (rjfuonBifa^ ttoKv 

I iav fuaBaxrTjf pXa^jjajf ttoXv 

a d7roSr)fiTJa'ai e^ets &pTi 

P ov npOKO'^cis vvv. firj <f>avTd(ov 

y lit) Koivoi>v€U ov (rvpxf)€p€i croc. (rffuoiBTJa-rj 

d (rrpaT€vajf koi ttoXv fiXafitjayj 

€ * * 

S' 7r\€V<r€is ficrd kipSvvov, dWa ddppei 

f 6 <rvv€\on€Vos dnokvB-qa-rrai. XP^^^ 

rj dnaWayTjO'Tj rrjs <l>iKrjs koi p\aP^<rjf 

B ycvijajf enia-Konos Ppa84<os 

I ov Kordkrii^BriaTi puoixps, fi^ dyavia 

dcKcis 9)3' 

a avvdX\a(ov d><f>€\rfB^<ri} ydp 

P iav d7rodrjfjaja^£, pXafii^oTj 

y TrpoKdylreis kc^cds rfi^^o) 

d ov avfi<f>4p€i (Toi Koivavelv 

€ ov arpareva^. fi^ TrpofrddKa 

f fiera <f)6Pov ipoyrqa-ov kcu dKOvoTf ttjv dkfjB€iav 

( 7rX€U<r«ff, &pTl §€ 0\J 

rj KlvdvV€V€l 6 €rVV€XOp-fVOS KCU T€\€VrT}a'€l 

B OVK aTToXXayiyoTy rrjs (fyikrfs a-ov 

I oifx ^(eis iTTtfrKOTTTJa-aL p.^ npoirhoKa 

158 

a ovK ano^rjfi^a'ets vvv 

j3 npoKoyjteis i^anlvrjs ore oifK oldas 

y Koivcav^o'cis eVl PXd^rj 

d ov arTparcvoTj apm. ri cirevdeis ; 

€ €4 wioT&s ipdor^Si fpflnrrja'OP 

S' ir\€v<r€is fura t6 iyKonrivai, kcu <rvfjixf)€p€i <roi 

f 6 (rvv€x6fi€V05 dTrokvB^a-ercu 

Tj dnciKKayi^trif rrjs (fyikrjs koi fjLcrnfiekrjO^aTj 

6 ytvtjajf eniaKOTTos, Ppabeoas 84 

I ov KaT(iKrj<f)0i](rij fjLoix<^s apri, vartpov hi 

a ov TTcoXi/creir rov ^oprov apri 

P dnoXvOfja'jj r^s <rvvox^s 

y ov ^fj'^u fjv OiXeis yvvcuKa 

8 (TcaBijo'CTCu T^s d(r0€V€ias rax^as 

€ ov a'todijo'rj TTJs (TVKO^avrlas. p.€pifiva 

f KKr)povop.j\(T€is rrjv yvvaiKa 

( ciTTC TTjv biKTjv viKfjaeis yap 

Tf wapafievci crot ra vndpxovra 

6 ^^"^V "^v <f>€pvr)v Kara fitpos 

I ov K\T)povofiija'€i5 Toifs yov€ls' irpoT€\€xm}a'€is yap 

a Bts napafiokiov viKijo'cis yap 

y €7riT€V^rj rrjs cwiKXrjo'ffos 

d KaraoTaBija-u KkrjpiKos ficra xpovov fuucpov 

€ OV (rvft<f>€p€i aoi aTparrjy^a'ai 

S" OVK o'^fi &pri Bdvarov 

( ov viK^treis, aiayna 

rj K\T)povofirja'€i5i aXX* ov fiovos 

B iav fiiadcuarj, ^XaPtjo'fj 

I oiKovofifja'€i£ TrurrevBels kcu bo^curBija-rj 

bcKcis 9^" ' 

a ov K\r)povofiTJ<r€is t6v <f)iKov 

j3 oifx €^€15 ia-xdrrfv Ka\fjv, creavT^ jScwJ^ci 

y evpija-eis r6v <l>vy6vTa cvBias. fifj Xvnov 

8 oifx €^€is dp^cu vvv. ri Trpoa-SoKas ; 

€ K\ripovofijja-€is Trjv firjTepa, ov fiovos 84 

S' ov K\TjpovofiTJ<r€is t6v iraT4pa fiovos 

( iKevBepaB^a-]] Ppab4(0£, dXka firf Xvttov 

169 

Tj oifx v^puT&i^a-ii* lit) ayooym, aKKa Sdppei 

6 ov fiycrcrcu r6 ycvvonficvovy dKKa reXcimycret 

i frtoS^irrj TTJs Korrjyopias fura okiyov 

8€Kas 9f ' 

a eurv;(i;(reir IkapSts 

j3 fiff avvaWd^ffs &pTL nepificivov 

y ovK dnobrjfirj<r€is ra^fas' €n4\€i, yap 

d TTpoKoylreis koi €VTV)(^a'€iS Ta\4(0£ 

« Koivoi)v^<r€is Koi ov (rvpxf>4p€i <roi' (r)fjLuo3ij<rrj yap 

f aTpartva-fi vvv kcu dxfyikrfBijo'rj wdkv 

( CTTc/SaXov fiera KoBapov tov avveib&ros 

ri n\€V(T€is fi€Ta r6 iyKonrivai. 

6 6 avvtxopxvos vvv dnokvBrjiTrrtu T^r <rvvoy(ris 

I d7raXkayij<rrj rrjs <f>ikris. ftcopoTroiet avfi<l}€p€i aoi 

bcKcis 91;' 

a KoivoDvijacis koi pXafi^a-jj 

P ov OTpareva-ij vvv. irtpifieivov 

y OVK cariv &pa tov ini^akifrBai 

h ov TrXcucreis vvv ov yap eroifios €i 

,€ OVK aTro^vBrjaerai 6 <rvv€x6fi€Vos 

r OVK aTroXXcryifoT/ rrjs ^tXjys 

f ytv^arj iirla-KoiroSy iav dyan^trfis t6v KXrjpov 

TJ KaTciKri<j)6fja-u p^oix^s Ppdbiov^ ahXa a-toOfja-fj 

d dyopdceis Krrjfia ^ oIkIov e^ Ibicnv kottchv 

I Trapafi€V€is TrpecrjSvrepoff ea>r Oavdrov 

a OVK dvoi^fis tpyaurrqpuov 

P oif 0*0)^1/0*17 d<r0€vS>v 

y o*o<^tOT€vo*etr c^anivris /cat bo^aa-Brja-rj 

8 €Vp^a'€l5 TO dno\6fi€Vov PpaJb€(0£ 

€ dyopavofiija-€iSy &pTi bf o0 

^ oif KX/jpovofjojcfis t6v <I>[Kov 

C o^X ^"f^*^ iiTxdrriv koXi/v, ahXa novrjpdv 

rj oifx €Vp^a'€i5 t6v <f>xry6vTa 

6 OVK ap^€is vvv t>v ifrijQviieis, fi^ irpofrboKa 

I ov K\TjpOVOfui<T€lS T^V fl1]T€pa. fl^ €kiri(€ 

bcKas p ' 

a ov krj'^ll rrfv (^epi/i;V 

j3 ov K\rjpovofuja-€is rovs yovels' npoT€\€vnj<r€is ydp 

y T€KVOia-€lSi &pTi de 00. 7r€ pifi€ivov 

160 

b ov KerraXXayi/o*^ vols Kvpiois <rov cVt avfi<f}€povTi 

€ enirev^rj ypa^fidrav &v XPVC^^^ 

( dvoi(€LS epycumjpiov i^airlvrjs 

rj <r<aBij<ru daBevav, fi^ dy<avia 

I ovx fvpij<r€is TO dwo\6fi€v6v TTore 

dcKas pa ' 

a cV(/3aXot; &pa y\ aira^ bi 

P 7r\€va-€K, dXX* cyKOwtjaij r^ Trpdyfiari 

y OTparfva-Tj kcu p.€TafjL€\TjB^<ru nokv 

b KOiv<av^<r€is koI CvH-^^^V^U ^okv 

€ ov bwijajj wpoKoyjrai &pTV ifiirMf^n yap 

S" dnobrjp.ija'cis onov ^fXcir cVi Ka\^ <rov 

C firj crvvaLKXd^TjSf cVci pXa^rjo'Tj nokv 

rj €VTVXV^^^^ ^'^ KOTTOiv iro\kS>v Koi KaK&V 

6 dyopd<r€is t6 irpOK€ip.€vov 

I oif yafuja-eis dpru w€pifi€ivov 

beKcis pfi' 

a a-mdtjofj rrjs Korrfyopias apri 

P ba}(r€LS 3.pTL Tovs \6yovs <rov in ^^(kdq, 

y ovK ekfixrerai 6 dnobrjfios' cVo^iycc yap yvvcuKa 

b OVK d7roba}<r€i£ 3.pri A o<^€iXctff 

€ bdvfurai Ka\ ov C^p^oBi^a-jij K€pbav€ls be 

r Tf^rrot, aXX' axprjarov corot t6 yfvvci>p^vov 

( ov Kivrfd^trrj rov ronov (rov, firj dycDvia 

rj €^€is okiyov fiXa^^vm. firj Xvnov 

6 yap.tjo'cis Koi Xvirrjd^tru •p.CTafifXrjBeis 

I OVK dyopd(r€is t6 irp0K€ip.€V0Vy cVci firj €vnop€is 

b€Kas py' 

a [ov Kajdiaraa-m KXrjpiKds] ^ 

P ov yfv^o'u initTKonos. p.^ ntpip^vf 

y fvp^BijiTfj pxiixos p.€T ov noXv 

b OVK dyopdaeis p^oiptov fj oIkIov 

€ ov irapafi€V€ls irpftrfivr^pos 

S" 7rapap.€V€i <rot rj yvvij' a-fd^^povtl yap 

( dndXXayi^a-rj rov KXifpov iv rdxti 

rj y^vi^^n bcKanpayros Ka\ evboKipj^treis 

6 ov fiXiylreLS t^v narpiba 

I [aTraXXda-a-T} rrjs ywcuKOs apri]^ 

^ Misplaced answers. 

APPENDIX D. 

The Sortes Sangcdlenses, 

These Sortes were deciphered by Winnefeld from a palimpsest at 
St Gall of the sixth century, and published by him in a tract 
entitled Sortes SangallensesK 

The frequent parallels with the language, questions and answers 
of the system of Astrampsychus should be noted, as for example, 
* Shall I take a partner 1 ' is evidently the question which underlies 
St Gall ii. 1 *non tibi expedit habere consortium,' and answers to 
the Greek ic' of Astrampsychus, 

The question is not one which we should expect to turn up 
independently in two systems. 

So when we find in St Gall iii. 1 and 2 the sentences 

iii 1 non poteris in expeditionem ire ; caue 
iii 2 expedit tibi, ut habeas consortium 

the sequence of the answers, as well as their content, is exactly that 
of the 3rd and 4th questions of Astrampsychus 

[td'] €t OTpaTeva-ofuu 

{if'] €1 Koci/oi/i^co r^ irpayfiarif 

to which the following are typical answers : 

arpartva-ri kcu Ta\v irpoKo^^is 

ov (Tvp^ipd, <roi Koiva>v^<rar irjfua>6ij(rrj yap. 

It cannot be an accident that these unlikely questions occur and 
are adjacent in the two systems. 

^ Bonnae, ap. Max. Cohen et fil. 1887. 
H. 11 

162 

In the same way, the office-seeker who wishes to be assured of 
his election or appointment to some position of dignity or trust, 
enquires in the St Gall system whether he will become a decenv- 
primus, curialisy praetor^ praetor urbanuSy aedilia^ of which the third 
and fourth are probably identical, and in the system of Astrampsy- 
chus we have enquiries as to the offices of 8€#cairp<i>ro^ and punrpayo^j 
together with Christian offices KXrjptKo^, cirt(r#co7ro? and irp€a-pvT€poSi 
which belong to a working-over of the Sortes in question after they 
have passed into Christian hands. The coincidence in the desire to 
be made a decemprimua is remarkable, and implies community 
of ultimate origin in the Sortes discussed. The curious disappear- 
ance of the other titles, and their probable replacement by ecclesi- 
astical titles, show that the offices were already extinct or not 
coveted. Winnefeld points out that by the times of Septimius 
Severus and Caracalla the office of aedile had lapsed, and the office 
of curialis had undergone such changes that it had ceased to be an 
honour. We are thus obliged to regard the original system of 
Sortes as early : Winnefeld suggests that it is as early as a.d. 200. 
The extant Latin system, as we pointed out, is of the sixth century. 
It is curious to note that the one office that survives is that of 
decemprimua. We must not assume from the name of the office in 
question, that the system was originally Latin; for here also the 
traces of a previous Greek system are to be found. When, for 
example, we find such an expression as 

agoniari plus noli 
and find the constant parallel in Astranipsychus 

fU7 ay<ovia 

we must regard the Greek as the original. 

However, here is the system of Winnefeld, which is to be 
compared with that of Astrampsychus, as printed above, whenever, 
as frequently happens, they overlap. 

Sortes Sangallenses, 

(I) 

{desunt quatttMr responsa et dimtdium.) 

uera et bona lot . . . 

VI in nullo t[e la]c[erat nee te] deridet. 

VII hunc annum [multum gaudebijs ; habe|bis enim [fructus 
bones.] 

163 

VIII 

[Villi] s non I 

[X] sed mox | | obtinebis 

[XI] quid prom religiosus | et aliut cogitas. 

[XII] les sed deum | posturam. 

{11) 

I non tibi [expedit habere] consortium. 

[II] accipies pr[omissum tuum et] multum | gratulaueris. 
Ill in multo(s) gloriaris. 

nil quid urges facere testamentum, | cum domino iuuante uita bona 
tibi resta[t] ? 

V uisum utilem non est, sed caue | ne incurras inimicorum insidias. 

VI sine causa laboras, nam non | optines per libellum. H 

VII male lacerat amicus de te, 

VIII expedit tibi ut accipias quod desi|deras, quia toto animo in te 

pendit. 
Vim hunc annu &ucti miserrimi sunt; | caue ne inopiam patiaris. 

X ubi uades, paenitebis te. 

XI noli ire, quia non susciperis. 

XII cum gaudio optinebis quod desideras. 

I non poteris in expeditionem | ire ; caue. 

II expedit tibi, ut habeas consortium. 

III accipies promissum, sed cum gaudio. 
nil in nuUo gloriaris; caue. 

V tempus tibi proximum est; fac tes|tamentum ita, ut seruos 

tuos liberos dimittas. 

VI uisa fantasmatae sunt. 

VII tardum erit, ut per libellum | optineas. 

VIII quid uereris ? de quo suspicaris, | non te lacerat, sed magis 

bonum | testimonium de te reddet. 
Vim quam uis, cons(t)entit tibi { toto animo. || 

X hoc anno fructas bonus tibi | significatur. • 

XI si eris diu, ubi constabis. 

XII animo te suscipit amicus. 

I precede ad publicum feliciter. 

II uade in expeditionem feliciter ; | uictor uenies. 

III habeto consortium et multum | lucraris. 

mi si neglegens non fueris, accipies | promissimi a quo uis. 

V durum est, ut glorieris. 

11—2 

164 

VI quid tarn cito uis facere testamentu[m], | cum domino iuuante 

uita habebis bona? 

VII obserua istum uisum, ne forte | in laqueo incidas. 

VIII tardum erit, ut obtineas per { libellum ; melius est, ut conponas. 
Vim sed quid tam uerbosus uel in|portunus amicum ? quern diligis | 

in absenti te lacerat. 

X quem uis, finget tibi ; nam multis | se promittit. recede inde 

morio.ll 

XI hunc annum fructi rari nascuntur | et tempus laboriosum 

significat. 

XII in quo uadis, non constas ibi. 

(V) 

I noli illi donare, qui non est | obsequens tibi. 

II noli ad publicum praecedere, | ne forte paenitearis. 

III non tibi expedit in expeditionem | ire, ne captus interficiaris. 
nil habeto consortium et multum | lucraris. 

V accipe promissum ; quare tristaris ? 

VI in bono gloriaris feliciter. 

VII succmre tibi et citius fac tes|tamentum, quia mors tibi superest. 

VIII uera sunt uisa ; obserua ne in ali|quo damno incurras. 
Vim si non esses auarus, olim optinue|ras per libellum. 

X quem suspicaris, minas facit et mul|tum lacerat ; cautus esto 

ab illo. 

XI non tibi consentit, quem uis. 

XII himc annum boni fructi sunt||et multum gaudeuis. 

(VI) 

I finget tibi promittendo, nam non do[nabit]. 

II donat quae expedit tibi ut gratiam liab[eas]. 

III non est quod uerearis ; precede in publ[icum]. 
mi uade feliciter in expeditione, quia | tua est uictoria. 

V non tibi expedit habere consortium, | quia finget tibi et de 

fraude cogitat. 

VI aliquantum promittit, sed plus | mentitur tibi. 

VII si forte b . . . os eris, ne forte captus | pae[nit]earis ; si taceas, 

poteris gloriar[i]. 

VIII adhuc tibi uita debetur ; quare | uis facere testamentum ? 
Vim uisa uera sunt et lucrabis. 

X obtinebis, sed per patronum | quod uis per libellum. 

XI in absenti multum lacerat, | de quo consulis. 

XII in multum tibi consentit | et obsequens est. 

165 

{VID 

I circumuenit te, ut te expoliet ; || nam non te adfiliabit ; uade 

tibi fatuae. 

II manifeste tibi donat ; sed tu illi | obsequens esto. 

III deo serua fidem et quod promisis|ti dona ; expedit tibi. 
nil procede feliciter ad publicum | et cum lucro redies. 

V moneo te, ne uadas ad expeditionem. 

YI expedit tibi, ut consortium habeas, | ubi fides est et multum 

lucraris. 
YII noli neglegens esse et accipies | promissum. 
VIII obserua, uerbose, quid sic flagites, | ne incautus pericliteris ad 

mortem. 
Villi fac testamentum ita, ut pauperibus | dimittas et anima tua 

deo commendes. 

X magnum uisum uidisti ; ut scias, | honorem cum hereditatem | 

tibi significat. 

XI non obtinebis per libellum. 

XII quem suspicaris, non te lacerat | sed bonum de te dicit. 

(F///) 

I fideliter tibi obsequitur. || 

II si obsequens illi fueris, adfiliab[it] { te et ens dominus. 

III promissum suum couplet ; noli ue|reri, quia donauit. esto 

securus. 
nil qui tibi obsecundatur, dona illi | et bene facies. 

V non tibi expedit, ut ad publicum | procedas. 

VI uade feliciter in expeditionem | et uictor uenis cum lucris tuis. 

VII tolle te inde et noli habere con|sortium, quia inpostor est. 

VIII satage et accipies promissum. 
Vim si taces, in multo gratulaueris. 

X quare facies testamentum, | dum bona uita habeas? 

XI non utilem uisum uidisti ; obser|ua hora mala. 

XII quid cogitas tantum ? iubante deo | optinebis, quod uis per 

libellum. 

( Villi) 

I noli appellare, ne incadas. 

II fideliter tibi obsequitur. 

III toto animo te adfiliauit.|| 

nil finget tibi in promittendo ; nam | non est douat[urus]. 

V noli donare, quia superbus est et ingratus. 

VI procede ad publicum feliciter. 

VII festina ad expeditionem, quia in uicjtoria felicissimus eris. 

166 

YIII habeto consortium ; expedit enim | tibi et multum lucrabia 

Vim noli uereri ; accipies promissum. 

X iubante domino in magno honore gloriaueris. 

XI roga dominum, ut tibi uita concedat ; | fac testamentum ita ut 

an ... m .... es I tuos legatorios dimittaa. 

XII uisimi [utilem uidisti : imde non] | speras lucrauis. 

I timendum est, ne condemneris. 

II appella, quia expedit tibi et objtinebis quod uis. 

III noli illi credere, quia non tibi | fideliter obsequitur et male I de 

te cogitat. 
nil fingit in promittendo ; nam non | te adfiliabit. || 

{desunt octo responsa dodecadis X, ncyueni totae dodecades, quattiwr 

responsa dodecadts XL) 

{XI) 

V non uidebis mortem inimici, quia dae|[mon]es [illjum custodiunt 

quos coli[t]. 

VI adhuc magno tempore uiues. 

VII non babes tempora uitae longa ; | uiuis itaque d uis. 

VIII quidem consulis de . m ; citius | moriturus es ; ora dominum. 
Villi eger. 

X na I mam deo. 

XI non condemnaris in appellatione. 

XII appella, quia expedit tibi et ob|tinebis quod uis. 

{XII) 

I noli fidem seruare, ne te peniteat, | quia lederis. 

II habebis occasionem [ut interficias | inimjicum tuum. 

III aude celerius et circumuenies, | de quo cogitas. 
nil succurre tibi, quia aduersarius | circa te egit. 

V si praemium promiseris, inuenies | quod quaeris, sed de quo 

suspectus e[s], || non est conscius. 

VI uidebis mortem inimici primam. 

VII non magno tempore uiuis. 

VIII habebis uitae tempora, sed non | in longo tempore. 
Vim in dei nomine diu uibis ; esto securus. 

X obserua, ne forte circumuentus injcrimineris et multum paeni- 

tearis. 

XI noli dimittere persona, de qua soniaris. 

XII in dubio erit condemnatio(r). 

167 

{XIII) 

I habebis fidem, sed semper in dubio est. 

II noli fidem frangere, ne te paeniteat. 

III moneo, ne male facias inimico tuo, | quia nihil est. 
nil non poteris hominem circumjuenire ; tolle te. 
y caue, quia aduersarius contra te egit. 
YI in quo suspicaris, innocens est ; | quare tibi fidem praestat ? 

VII in celerius uidebis mortem | inimici tui. quid times? 

VIII multum tempus uiuendi interest. 
Vim habebis tempora uitae. || 

{desunt tria responsa dodecadU XIII, quattuor totae dodecades, 
guinque et dimidium responsa dodecadis XIIII,) 

{XlIIl) 

et licet exiguam spem habeas, sed | multas fides habes. 

VII serua fidem, expedit enim tibi. 

VIII quare minaris inimico, qui(a) tibi | inter mortuos mortuus est ? 
Vim si celerius ieris, mox ilium circum|uenies et de ipso lucrauis. 

X uide quid agas, quia aduersarius | contra te egit. obserua ne 

capiaris. 

XI quare facile innocentem incri|minas, cum non sit conscius? 

XII in dubio erit, sed non morietur I inimicus tuus. ><.^ 

{XV) 

I grande tumultum hoc anno in populo. 

II noli uereri, quia tristitiam, | quam pateris, in dei nomine. 

imde non | speras, multum lucrabis. 

III caue inimici persecutionem. 
IIII expedit fidem praestare. 

V obserua, ne tibi fidem frangat | nuptiarum. 

VI fidem tibi seruat amicus. 

VII habebis spem fidei, licet non creda[sj.|| 

VIII fidem serua, ne te paeniteat. 
Vim si adire uolueris indicia, mox | mox interficies inimicum tuum. 

X tolle te, quia non poteris circimi|uenire, ne captus puniaris. 

XI caue, quia aduersus te explicuit | aduersarius. 

XII de quo consulis, manifeste consjcius est, et alicui prosunt. 

{XVI) 

I quidquid finges, eueniet, | quia sic natus es(t). 

II hunc annum in populo salus saluuer|rima et annona bona 

significatur. 

III noli timere tristitiam. 

•« 

168 

IIII noli uereri inimici persecuti|onem, quia nihil dominus fecit 

ilium. 

y facito ill! satis, ut prestes illi Mem. 

YI consilium mutant, ut fides tibi | frangatur. 

YII noli male sentire de amico tuo, | qui tibi fidem seruat. 

YIII habebis spem fidei, sed de disperato. 

Vim fidem serua, ne penitearis. 

{desunt responsa tria dodecadis XVI et plus undedm dodeccuies totae,) 

(XVII) 

(desunt octo responsa,) 

YIIII [per]||iculum accusationis habebis. 

X rat||iones non habebis iustas, | un{|de noceri habes. 

XI no[n] II derelinqueris ; para te reddere j ra||tiones ; aes facies 

rationem | et || lucraueris. 

XII si|| . . licaueris, remoueris. 

(XVIII) 

I co||nsules, an uincat ; uincet necesse est. 

II sa[l]||uus recedis a circumuentoribus. 

III ma[e]||reris quidem, sed non habes | ca[l]||umniam ; securus esto. 
IIII lib||erabitur, sed per patronum. 

V sojjlueris de uinculis. 

VI no||n accipies contumeliam. 

YII ha||bes iniuriam pati ; obserua te j a p||ersonas inimicales. 

YIII in II accusatione eris et sumtus | n[o]||n modicus, sed uinces. 

Vim n[o]||n sine causa accusaris. 

X ac||cusaris ; succure tibi. 

XI n||oceberis quodcumque coe|pe||ris ; itaque obserua te. jj 

(desunt vltimum responsum dodecadis XVIII, primum dodecadis XVIIIL) 

(X Villi) 

II I et gra .... 

III 

IIII 

Y ora deum [ut liberetur de custodia,] | de quo me consulis. 

VI prop 

YII accipies co[ntumeliam 

VIII I ris, non pote[ris 

Vim exsuperas de acc[usatione | sed 

169 

X sine de . . . . onmiu . . . | habet causas | cusatus est 

S6CI • • • 

XI accusa || 

(desunt vltimv/m responsum dodecadis X Villi et tres dodecades,) 

(JTX) 

I manumitteris, cum bene ser|uieris, sed cum controuersiam. 

II aput personam dominicam acjceptus non es(t). 

III peruinces crimina. 

nil non poteris modo uincere. 

V habebis litem ; ut uincas eam deum ro[ga]. 
YI uinces et aliam litem habebis. 

VII obsenia calumniam, quam pateri[s]. 

VIII suspectus es ; modo non calum|niaris ; aliud age. 
Villi expendat denarios et libera|tur de custodia. 

X demitteris et iterum alligaris. 

XI caue tibi, ne accipias contumeliam. 

XII per uerba iniuriam patieris. 

{XXD 

I non habebis hereditatem matris tu[ae]. 

II per amicum et actum tuum | manumitteris cito. 

III licet irascaris^ sed adrogans es ; | ideo acceptus non es. 
nil crimen adinuenietur. || 

V uinces et in plenius gaudeuis. 

VI licet uinces litem per patronum | tarde, sed sumptibus fatigaris. 

VII non uinces ; sine causa laboras ; | cautus esto, quia et turbaberis. 

VIII noli timere ; leuis erit calumnia, | quam pateris. 
Vim tu tibi molestus es ; non calum|niaris in nullo. 

X ora deum, ut liberetur de custodia, | quia quomodo intellego 

periclitatur. 

XI dimitteris necesse est. 

XII contumeliam patieris, sed non | ualde senties. 

{XXII) 

I patris hereditatem non habes. 

II eris hens, quia amaris a matre tua. 

III securus esto ; manumitteris et hajbebis bonum fatum ; sed 

serua onmia. 
nil persona dominica te adleuat, | sed non modo. 

V non uinces modo crimina. 

VI uinces sed cum magno labore. 

VII uinces quidem litem, quam habes, || sed sumptibus fatigaris. 

170 

YIII uinces aduersarium paulo tardius. 

Vim noli uerere calumniam, quam pateri[s]. 

X s es tibi | 1 . acturus est. 

XI tarde . . . sr ur de | [custojdia, quern consulis. 

XII non magno tempore uiiicula patieri[s] { hae[c. 

{XXIII) 

I us sed fraude | a esto t[ut]us. 

II noli offendere patrem tuam, | et heres ens. 

III alium heredem facit mater tua, | et litigaueris [multu]m. 
nil quid ad te? ma[numitter]is necesjse est cum l^ato. 

y cum sint accept anti aput | personam domnicam, tu 

dubitas ? 

YI crimen babes ; noli timere, euades. 

YII uinces quidem ilium, quern uis, | sed tarde. 

YIII non uinces modo litem, quam habe[s]. 

YIIII laborabis, sed non poteris uincer[e] || 

X noli timere ; deus auertit mala tua | et calumniam, quam 

pateris. 

XI modo non timeas calumniam ; { exsuperas in amicum. 

XII liberabitur sine macula, de quo consulis. 

{XXIIII) 

I multos babes et aduersarios. 

II beres heris parentum ; securus esto. 

III tenebis bereditatem patris tui, | sed cum lite, 
nil amittis matris bereditatem | per bomines malos. 
Y manumitteris necesse est ; li|bertas tibi data est. 
YI persona domnica nee amat te j nee edit te. 

YII adinuenientur crimina. 

YIII ad pactum uenies, nam non uinces. 

YIIII uinces litem, sed tarde. 

X et multum loquens et non | uinces ; modo conpescere. 

XI non euades calumniam ; caue tibi. 

XII calmnniam times ; fatigaris, | sed noli tediare. 

{desunt dodecades qinattuor et qitattitor resporua dodecadia XXV,) 

(XXV) 
(tiersits primTis plane euanuiL) 

[Y ens bjeres amici tut. 

[YI accipiejs et litem babebis. 

[YII] .... beres parentibus. | . . . . s non bereditaris modo | . . . . ibus 
non potes. 

171 

[VIII] , . . . ur tibi pater tuus ; facito | [satis], ut sis heres. 

[Vim obtin]ebis matris hereditatem. 

[X non man]umitteris modo. 

[XI] .... esse potes circa ratio|[nem dom]nicam. 

[XII euade]s crimina, quia nana sunt. 

(XXVI) 

[I non eris] modo magistratus nee aedilis. 

[II habes l]egatum certum ; securus | [esto ; et q]uidem a duobus, 

sed non | [ab eo que]m speras. 
[Ill amicus] uenti animo te diligit ut de| . . . . [n]oli neglegens esse. 
[IIII stat fi]des ; prode est tibi amicus | [tuus], et lucraris, quia 

necesse { [est co]nsequaris aliquid ab amico. 
[V amici] hereditatem obtinebis. || 

(deimnt septem respwisa dodecadia XX VI^ qtuitttwr totae dodecades, octo 

et dimidium responsa dodecadis XXVIL) 

{XXVIl) 

amicus tuus; nihil consequeris ab [illo]. 

X non possidebis amici tui heredit[atem]. 

XI cum lite magna heres eris. 

XII solidam hereditatem habiturus e[s]. || 

{XXVIII) 

I accipies quod promissum est. 

II inmittis odium bono tuo. 

III et cum factus fueris decemprimus | displiceb[it tibi et fati]- 

gaberis. 
IIII curialis esse de[si]der[as] . . . rias dif|ficilest . . . quod potes. 

V eris praetor et . . . mnes humanus ; | nam malos am . . . feliciter 

euenient. 

VI amicus tuus aedilem te facit. 

VII magis[tr]ati ge[stis] ; assem non habes : | non tibi debetur honor 

hie. 

VIII agoniari plus noli ; tenebis tua ; mul|tum pugnauis, [ut] l[e- 

gatum] tuum accipias. 

Vim amicus tuus s[incere te] diligit ; noli | post ilium ere. 

X non est tibi utilis amicus, nee aliquid | inde consequeris ; sine 

causa erubescis. 

{deaunt duo ultima responsa:) 

172 

{XX Villi) 

I laboriosa tempora habuisti, | a modo meliora, habes quidem 

Dojuissima bona, sed cum diutumo | et cum magno labore. 

II accipies, quod promissum est, ne|cesse est ; et multum gratu- 

lauer[is]. 

III societas incerta est et non stat fid[e8]. 
nil eris decemprimus, sed tempore | interposito. 
y ualde agoniaris ; curialis eris ; securu[s]. 

VI sine causa circa patronos praeciuT[is] | quasi stultus ; nam non 

eris praetor. 

YII per aliqua persona poteris | esse aedilis. 

Yin obserua res tuas ; eris enim magisjtratus aut aedilis et dam- 
num patier[is]. 

Villi in fatis habes accipere sed non | tota legata. 

X amicus te in multum diligit, sed tu || circa eum neglegens es. 

XI licet multos amicos habes et ab e|is tibi promittitur, sed ab 

amico ni|hil consequeris ; nemo tibi prode est. 

XII amici hereditatem habebis sed | . . nd . . . . e . litigabis. || 

(desunt dime dodecades et quattiuyr responsa dodecadis XXX,) 

{XXX) 

V accipies promissum ; suspectus | esse noli nee tristari. 

VI necesse est tibi socium habere. 

VII officiosum te esse oportet, | si uis decemprimus esse. 

VIII si uelis iam curialis esse ; noli agoniar[i]. 

Vim luticarius es, dum nullo ualeat { ambitio tua ; nam non eris 
pretor. 

X aeris aedilis et amicos multos habeb[i8]. 

XI non eris modo magistratus nee aedil[is]. 

XII accipies legatiuam non totam. 

{XXXI) 

I et si fugeris, prenderis. 

II ^ugij i^oli hie esse. 

III non fuges; noli uereri. 

nil expedit discedere, quam nihil agas. 

V tempus obserba malum ; nam | posterior, si uixeris, melior 

tibi I eueniet et bona nouissima ha|bebis et prode tibi eiit. 

VI aliquantum promittit, sed plus | mentitur ; noli omnia credere 

illi. 

VII non expedit tibi socium habera 

VIII decemprimus esse poteris, || sed inpediris a persona. 

173 

Villi interest an uelis ; nam curialis | esse potes, si uelles esse. 

X tardum erit, ut sis pretor urbanus. 

XI non eris aedilis. 

XII [dam]num patieris, [se]d de magistr|[atu] lucrum facis. 

{XXXIPj 

I non [inueniris modo], s[ed] alio temjpore; [no]n [euadejs. 

II si fug[eris], celabitiu* fuga tua. 

III facile euades in fuga. 

nil fugere cogitas, [sed reue]r[teris]. 

V non expedit esse domo. 

VI non habebis nouissima bona. 

VII noli [esjse et accipies promissum. 

VIII socium tte[re] expedit tibi. 

Vim difficile p . . . iases bis injstans [decem]p[ri]m[u]8 eris. 

X licet in quam s conueni|as, non eris c[u]r[iali]s ; 

securus esto. . 

XI tardo erit, ut sis praetor urbanus. 

XII aedilis modo non procedis.| 

{XXXIII) 

I quidem fugire uult, sed in itinere ca[pietur]. 

II non inueniris, noli suspicari. 

III non celabitur fuga tua. 
nil fugire tibi non est datum. 

V non fugit; noli suspectuj esse. 

VI non poteris ibi uibere. 

VII multum laborasti, sed poste|riorem tempus meliorem tibi 

futurum significat. 

VIII satag[e] . . . f . r . quod promissmn est. 
Vim modo tibi . . . 6 . . . societas. 

X nominaueris, decemprimus eris. 

XI eris curialis et honores insequeris, 

XII iuuante domino eris praetor. 

{XXXIIII) 

I fugitibus [modo cela]tu[r] su[peri]orib[us] | partibus, [sed re]uenit 

tunc, qui fug[it], | cum necessitate magna pati coepe[rit]. 

II de quo consulis, fugire uult ; | custodi eum. 

III in dubio est uenire. 
mi periclitaueris in fuga. 

V non facis ullo loco. 

174 

VI fugis ; necesse est et iterum reuerte[ris].|| 

VII cum litteris a forte. 

VIII laborasti, sed tempus posterior me|lior est ; uarietatem temporis 

habebis. 
Vim noli uereri ; accipies promissum tuum. 

X non expedit socium habere. 

XI ens decemprimis post aliquod | temporis ; modo non poteris. 

XII ens c[u]rialis et multum laborabis ; | necesse est ex cursus 

fatorum. 

{XX XV) 

I non est ibi fugitibus, in quo suspicaris. 

II non potes[t] latere, qui fugiuit; aut in|uenietur, aut siue re- 

uertitur, sed tarde. 

III uide quid agas, quia si fugerit, | non eum inuenies. 
IIII derideris, nam modo inueniri non | poteris. aliut age. 

V si fugeris, euadis pressura. 

VI fugere tibi non expedit. 

VII fugis sed non modo. 

VIII non tam cito discedis. 

Vim bonum tempus tibi futurum significat. 

X accipies promissum; quare tris|taris? sed non totum.|| 

{desunt dv/o responsa dodecadU XX XV^ dtuze tota£ dodecades, quinque 

responm dodecadis XXXVL) 

{XXXVI) 

VI si fugerit, non inuenitur; custodi eu[m]. 

VII non inueniris; n[o]l[i u]ere[ri]. 

VIII si fugis, celabitur fuga tua. 
Vim noli fugere ne [pericjliteris. 

X 

XI non [expedit tibi d]iscedere. 

XII t re . elios. 

{XXXVII) 

[I in quo suspectus es,] non ipse tulit. 

[II] le fatiga | it«. 

{plane euanvsrunt duo uersits,) 
enies | p , g . ad . . | eni . . . fugitib | 

niri po t aut in fis | fugiet | 

nus alio I d 

175 

VIII si fu[gerit], non inuemet[ur3 ; custodi e[um]. 

Vim non celatur fuga tua. 

X si fugeris, [pren]d[eri]s. 

XI non es fugiturus; noli somari.|| 

XII non constas; discedis necesse est. 

{XXXVIIl) 

I modo quidem euades ualetudinem. 

II non ipse tulit ; quare innocentem incriminas ? 

III per indicium res tuas inuenies. 

nil inuenitur, quod periit, sed cum de|trimento, ut indicium pro- 
mittas I et cum patientia et subtilitate quaeras. 

V obserua, ne cum quaeris, captus penitearis. 

VI sine causa suspicaris ; non est tibi | fugitibus. 

VII sollicitatus est, qui fugit ; decipitur | ab eo et sic inuenietur 

cum detrimen|to et lite ; nam mutauit regionem. 

VIII de quo consulis, fidelissimus est; noli uereri, non fugit. 
Vim non inueniris modo. 

X si cucurreris in certe capieris. 

XI non es fugiturus ; noli soniari. 

XII noli fiigere neque te confundere. 

{XXXVIIII) 

I ac re uezaris, sed exsuperas. 

II euades ualetudinem ; quid times ? 

III • in quo suspectus es, ipse tulit. || 

{desunt ncmem responsa dodecadis XXXVIII, qtmttuor totae dodecades, 

duo et dimidium responsa dodecadis XL.) 

(XL) 

sed non eris plenus iuris studios[us]. 
nil stude, ut homo esse possis, non or[ator]. 

V dubium est, de quo consulis; ora d[eum]. 

VI exsuperas, sed diu infirmaris ; | non liberaris infirmitate ins | 

adhuc n . . men. 

VII ut careas ualetudinem, medicum | adhibe et ora deum. 

VIII in quem suspicaris, manifesto ipse [tulit]. 
Vim [inuenies re]8 tuas, quas perdidis[ti]. 

X quod perdis, reperibis ; aliut time. 

XI quid defatigas? nihil ibi inuenies. 

XII in quo suspicaris, ibi celatur fugiti[uus]. 

176 

{XLI) 

I habebis litem, sed nihil est. 

II agita causam tuam et uiaces. 

III ius dicis, l[onga] est causa, deuinces | in nouissimum. 

nil omnia babes, | sed animus tuus denuntia- 

bitur. 

V si studeas, | potes esse orator | non mediocris sed bonus. 
VI exsuperas quidem, sed in[firmaris]. 

YII tu n[on] laborabis [longo tempore] || et cito explicabis te de in- 

firmitate. 

[V]III in breui euades ualetudinem, quam pateris. 

[VJIIII in quem suspicaris, insiste in eum, | quia per istum inuenies. 

X p[erdis] no[n] to[t]um, et res tuas inuenies. 

XI quod periit, inuenitur per indicem. 

XII caute age et inuenies, quod quaeres. 

{XLII) 

I noli uereri [de h]ac causa aliquid ; exsolueris. 

II habebis litem. 

III dicis causam leuiter. 

nil causam dicis et iuras pa . . es omnia | nee de hac causa . . . 

V «ris 

VI s 

VII 

VIII ualde [lajborabis, [se]d exsuperas. 
Vim dast des operam. 

X in quo suspicaris, ipse tulit sed cons | es res tuas. 

[XI] ed .... II ^ 

{desunt responsum vltimwm, dodecadis XLII^ nov/em totae dodecades, 

septem responsa dodecadis XLIIL) 

(XLIII) 

VIII capitalem negotium habes, sed libe[raberis]. 

Vim in dubio eris, sed euadis. 

X age causam et uinces. 

XI noli uereri de hac causa aliquid ; | exsolueris. 

XII et si habes litem, nihil e[ri]t. 

{XLIIII) 

I non poteris in plenius discere litte[ras]. 

II ad artificium non habet animus | filius tuus, sed operam discat, | 

quia prode erit ei et datom illi est. 

ti 

177 

III accipies argentum si bonus argen|ta[riu]s ufFe . . r . n ur. 

nil aquam cum u [ue]|neficium datum est s h. 

V tu da litteras pe . . tiag .... [ijnpetras. 

VI iniiuiam pateris de stationem, | quam cupis. 

VII in periculum putas ne[copi]num | te uenire ; caute age et cum 

gaudio I lucraris de re periculosa. 

VIII non poteris Ipberari] de periculo. 

Vim capitalem negotium habes ; non li|bera[ris] || aut 

certe fugeris. 

[X] succurre tibi ; accusaris de causa periculosa. 

[XI] laborabis ualde sed euadis. 

[XI]I grauem causam habes, soUicitus esto, | ne contra te sent[en]t[i]a 
fera[tur]. 

{XLV) 

[I] noli tristari enti . . cap . dit. 

[II] ad litteras non habet [ani]m[u]s tuus. 

[II]I poterit artem dis[ce]r[e fijlius tuus 1 ... at. 

[II]II licet habeas inuidos, [ac]cipies | argentum ; n[o]l[i agoniari]. 

[V] quam non | putas differt. 

[V]I qu strad a...|l t... proderunt 

tibi ; nam | p s quod cupis. 

[V]II quod do . i . ped . . s ; accipies | stationem. 

[V]II [ quod [assem] non habes, nihil est quod | timeas ; negotia 1 . . . 

nis habebis j lucrum | certum scito tibi de re periculosa. 
[V]IIII liberatiu* de periculo, de quo consulis. 
X causa capitalis ; difficile liberabitur. 
[XI] lucraris. || 

(desunt plus undecim dodecades.) 

(XL VI) 

{desunt octo responsa.) 

Vim in domo quam t[ene]s, multos inim[i]|cos habes, et uerere, ne 
te effugen[t]. 

X quid suspicaris, dum domus tua { non sit obligata ? 

XI domus, in qua uis manere, mane, | quia utilis tutela est. 

XII bonam tutelam [hab]et domus ; | quid uereris ? 

(XLVII) 

I uix expedies, quod cogitas. 

II incipe, quia et tempus est. 

III si laborare potueris, perficies quod u[is]. 

H. 12 

178 

IIII quod fabricare cogitas, in citius cadet, 

y tu mallis a corpore curari | quam secarL 

VI modo non expedit secari. 

VII curari quidem ad tempus poteris. 

VIII obligatus n(>D 68, sed temporis | beneficio imp .... 
Vim suciure tibi, quia medicameutatus [es]. 

X remediis tibi tuendum est, si uis | non fiigari de dome. 

XI noli soniari, quia non est obligata | domus tua. || 

XII domus, in qua uis manere, utilis est | et utilem habet tutelam ; 

quid uereris? 

{XL VIII) 

I noli petere modo conmeatum, ne pae|niteat te petisse ; aut 

enim cum pericujlo tuo erit, aut magno tibi constabit, | quia 
uix poteris accipere commeatum. 

II si quid cogitas, expedies cito. 

III quid est incipio an uelis incipe nunc. 
IIII deum roga, ut possis perficere, quod uis. 

V cum tempus habes, fabrica. 

VI sine nuUo periculo curaberis, | si sectus fiieris. 

VII non expedit secari. 

VIII tarde quidem, sed curari poteris. 

Vim non est maleficatus, sed magis es | subiectus. 

X succurre tibi, quia a muliere | medicameutatus es. 

XI fugari non potes de domo, in qua moraris. 

XII succurre tibi, quia obligata est | domus tua. 

{XLVIIII) 

I noli ponere sponsionem, quia haec 

{desunt undecim respoiisa et dimidium dodecadis XL Villi et plus 

undedm dodecades.) 

{desunt quinqtie responsa,) 

VI inter uos patienter agite ; quid | nobis cum iudice ? 

VII festina celerius ne incipiant | filii tui alio seruire. 

VIII post modicum tempus uidebis | parentes tuos. 
Villi parum ages in ciuitate. 

X si instans, consequeris honores, | sed et infamaueris. 

XI bene tibi est; ut quid patriam | tuam desideras? 

XII habes in fatis patriam tuam uidere. 

179 

{LI) 

I succurre tibi, ne praesignentur | bona tua. 

II liberaberis a fisco, sed per amicum tuum. 

III salua est fortuna tua, sed nou tota. 

IIII uix consequeris obsoDium | quern uis accipere. 

y accipies salarium in perpetuo. 

YI accipies pignus, sed non cum inuidia. 

VII adi iudicem, quia expedit tibi. 

VIII filii tui te desiderant, et tu ad illos | festina et uidebis filios 

tuos in sit . . . || 

Vim si no cum gloria redis | ad tuos [parentes]. 

X non 

XI nunc fac age periculum f . . tis cordis | guuernaris. 

XII et si reuerteris, non constas | in patr[ia]m tuam. 

{LII) 

I in dubio est fortuna tua. 

II quid ad te ? non proscribuntur | bona tua ; noli acidiari. 

III caue te, quia f[ugit] ; custodiendus est. 
IIII nou est salua fortuna tua. 

V non accipies modo obsonium. 

VI non accipies modo salarium. 

VII iuste accipies pignus ; noli uereri. 

VIII adi iudicem, et optinebis omnia, | quae cupis. 

Vim de sonio liberaris et deo adiuuante | ad Mios tuos reue[rteris 
salujus. 

X cum gloria redies ad tuos parentes. 

XI facit ad actum ciuitas, sed inuidiam | habebis. 

xii II 

APPENDIX E. 

The Munich Sortes Alearum, 

This system, as published by Winnefeld, in an appendix to his 
Sortes Sangallenses, is taken from a Munich MS. (Cod. Mon. 14846) 
of the tenth or eleventh century. It is a system of divination by 
dice, very similar in structure to the system of Pithoeus given 
above, and the actual Sortes will show some coincidence with the 
system referred to. Its peculiarity is that it has an auxiliary 
divination by letters, which are attached to the several oracles ; 
their existence is also recognised in the Sortes, which contain such 
sentences as 

h. III. I. I. haec littera prohibet unam quamque rem pro tempore 
ebdomadis, et postea iuuenies si patieus fueris, etc. 

where it seems that the enquirer has stnick an unlucky number 
or letter and is sent away for a whole week. Is this the lucky 
or unlucky number of a special day of the week, or week of the 
month, or what 1 A similar deterrent note will be found in 

t. nil. nil. nil. caue ne decipiaris malorum insidiis, qui tibi in- 
sidiant, ut capient te. hac hora recede a sortibus meis 

where the hour is said to be unpropitious. Either the hour was 
marked with an unlucky sign (letter or number*), or perhaps as 
in the system of Astrampsychus the actual question has been 
asked whether this is a good time to interrogate the Sortes. 
The Latin is often corrupt and obscure. 

^ The throw VI. IV. I. is expressly said to be a lucky number: 'ondecim tibi 
ipse letitiam facit.' In the Attalia-Tefeny Sortes this number is under the 
patronage of Nki;. 

181 

Sortes Monacenses, 

Deest a. VI. VI. VI. 

1. [e.] Vim. V. {lege VI. VI. V) cautus tuus firmus sit, ut possis 
peruenire ad quod speras. 

2. [i.] VI. VI. nil. recte quod cogitas ; noli timere ; tenebis quod 
desideras et possideris illud quod optas. tempta infiuire, dum tempus 
datur. 

3. o. VI. VI. III. fortitudinis accede auimo et contine beuitas. 
nunc ingredieris ; tibi deus adiutor tuus ; quod postulas, eueniat tibi cum 
gaudio magno. 

4. u. III. III. II. {lege VI. VI. II.) de hac re gaudebis et collegis 
fructum desiderii tui, sicut gaudet piscator, qui detulit praedam magnam, 
et habebis concordiam et spcm bonam. 

5. VI. VI. I. incredibiles es ; non oportet ; noceris autem ; hec 
enim res de qua cogitas, caue ne depiaris. sors iubet te fugere ; reuersua 
esto ab hoc consilio, quia multi serpentes ualidi latent. 

6. VI. V. V. cautus esto atque nimium tementam bonitatem tibi 
adfert et damnum fueris, nisi cautus es. tantum certa uia est querere et 
quae petis et noli timere, quia penienies locum quem desideras et deus in 
adiutorium erit tibi, si cautus fueris ; sin autem 

7. h. VI. V. nil. ilium magis retinere, quod tibi sompnum habes 
praesentem tractatum transiat. si quo modo uolueris, postea incipies 
poeniteri ; nam que consules, in tua potestate non est. pro enne in- 
ueniamini, quod magnum tibi uidetur, iam 

8. L VI. V. III. caue | ne dubites ; iam nunc incipe et perficies 
quod desideras et peruenies ad in manibus tuis quod dubius esse ; quod 
speras a te omiti non debet quod perueniet. 

9. n. VI. V. II. totus animus tuus in uario cogitatu, sed caue tibi, 
ne sudore et labore perficies uel suis ; ad quod desideras si possis. 

10. m. VI. V. I. est recte quod cogitas ; quod nunc incipe consules, 
cautum uide et fac magis quam queris, quam in tua potestate gaudebis. 

11. g. VI. nil. nil. lingue blande loquitur ; non serit . . es uerbi 
oris, ne captus postea penitueris ; recessus est ab hoc consilio. 

12. c. VI. nil. III. non est tempus fatiendi huis rei ; properare 
caue nee procesum habes ; omittas ; posterior ibi fructus dabitur quic- 
quam ; peruenies ad locum quem desideras uel ad desiderium tuum. 

182 

13. d. VI. nil. II. quod cogitasti me | noli uincere aduersarius 
tuos et deus adiutorium dabit tibi ; sed uide simplicitatem tuam, ne 
postea peniteris, quam uicinis tuis, cum ad te placitus fiierit, blandis 
te inducere querit. 

14. f. VI. nil. I. fides tua lurica est tibi ; ne decipiaris ; ueniet 
tibi bora, quae magnam letitiam adfert tibi, et ueniet tibi desiderium 
tuum bonum ; securus esto et animus tuus firmus sit. 

15. X. VI. III. III. de qua re primum cogitasti et sulasti inde 
magis gloriam habebis magnam et honorem in saeculo. 

16. &. VI. III. II. deus rem tuam constituet et confirmet, quia 
bonam rem seruatam ; qui tibi inimici erant uinctos ; peticio tua acoepta 
erit. de quo perueniet tibi in breve tempore. 

17. b. VI. IV. I. semper animus tuus in uario cogitatu ; undecim 
tibi ipse letitiam facit ; de qua re meditaris, adueniet tibi nuntius bonus 
cum gaudio magno et peruenies ad desieas. 

18. p. VI. II. II. quod bonum expectas, adiuuat te deus ; nunc lux 
est, incipe ; tibi deus letitiam magnam et uenies ad quod desideras, 
si patiens fiieris que uita triti est tribi. 

19. q. VI. II. I. cogitatu magnus animus tuus ; uinces opes et 
pedes ; sed requiem cum deo habebis et oras deum tuum, ut possi ab 
ipso defendi ; non fit tibi timor, | inimici tui cadent et adhuc melior 
eris. 

20. f. VI. I. I. dolor illi uel offensio magna inminet, cui tenetur 
liber, caue i^rpetuam uitam; hac hora [? recede] a sortibus meis, non 
dant tibi ressponsum. 

21. V. V. V. qui te nocere cupit, noceat ilium uirtus tua. con- 
sequeris uero spem tuam ; dominum roga, ut peruenies ad desiderium 
tuum. 

22. V. V. nil. sicut seritur in terram tuam bonam, sic inuenies 
illud quod desideras. iam nunc incipe rem ; quod cogitas erit in tua 
potestate. sicut uirgo qui seruit suum pudorem, ita principium huius rei 
bonum et finis | malum erit ; et quod animo excides ueniet^. 

23. o. v. v. II. duplex pcrmanet animus tuus. nondum est tibi 
causa laboris, quod tibi times, nuncius cum claritate et quod postulas 
ultro perueniet cum gaudio magno in tua potestate, si patiens fueris. 

24. h. V. V. I. noli quod ponis facere, quia effugit te ista res, quam 
desideras ; recessus es et haec littera prohibent te. 

25. u. V. nil. nil. rem quem queris inuenies sine dubio ; tu iam 
incipe uel facere uel petere. 

' V. y. III. is missing. 

183 

26. 1. V. nil. III. rem tuam custodi ; spes et salus facta est in te, 
nam fluctu magno dabit tibi. 

27. m. V. nil. II. iubet te deus tuus, ut contentus fueris ; quod 
cogitas, incipe facere ; lucnmi uel bonum adfert tibi. 

28. p. V. nil. I. quam rem curas ex amo donabit tibi deus idque 
gubemat ad illam ; noli nimius incredibilis esse, quia in manibus tuis 
magnum fructum adquires. 

29. h. v. III. III. non oportet banc rem facere neque cogitare 
de fine, quod cogitas. caue simplicitatem tuam. 

30. q. V. III. II. uenit mihi bonum et querens cor meum dabitur. 
deus tu conuersus uiuificabis nos et pleps tua letabitur in te. 

31. d. v. III. I. I nulla sit tibi causa, in tam facile posset de hoc 
consilio ; quiescere pusillum conare, nam melius tibi erit et peruenies ad 
quod cupis et habebis gaudium magnum. 

32. n. v. 11. II. cecus sum si hec faciam et perditionem facultatum 
uanam licet euentum fiierit, cum magno sudore perueniet in manibus tuis 
quod desideras. 

33. s. V. II. I. domine deus meus implebitomam quaecunque uolueris, 
si in sumptu us sine in itinere inuenies gaudium magnum. 

34. r. V. Ill {lege V. I. I) tacitus esto de hac cogitatione ; unde 
insidias times ? quia non potes habere lucrum et et bonum consilium, an 
recede a sortibus meis ; modo non dant tibi responsum. 

35. t. nil. nil. nil. caue ne decipiaris malorum insidiis, qui | tibi 
insidiant, ut capient te. hac hora recede a sortibus meis. 

36. &. nil. nil. III. nuntius adueniet tibi cum gaudio magno 
quecumque uis audire et uidere et accede ad locum quam desideras. 

37. b. nil. nil. II. sine modo ; nondum tibi tempus ; sed pro 
modum inuenies gloriam ; nihil protimeas. noli relinquere, si patiens 
fueris. 

38. c. nil. nil. I. animus tibi paratum, tu moram facis ; ad quem 
uis locum ire, ibi gratulaueris de eo pro cupis gaudium euenietur tibi. 

39. g. nil. III. III. adpraehendere te inimicus iam querit sine 
discrimine. deus gubernat, ideo in omnibus gaudebis. 

40. a. nil. III. II. quod optas, in manibus tuis continebis et dabit 
tibi in causa tuorum operum. ostenditur tibi bonum ; sors indicat tibi. 

41. c. nil. III. I. tene quod meditaris, quia damnum ab eo accipies 
et conuertetur in laborem. 

42. e. nil. II. II. inuenies bonum quod queris et accipis fructum 
ex eo et prodiet tibi, sed age fideliter.
