{|| Imam Muhammad Bin Yazeed ||] 

Ibn Majah Al-Qazwini 

|) || From Hadith No.01 to 802 
Jill || —Ahadith edited & referenced by: |) 
He || Hafiz Abu Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i | 

| e ~~ Translated by: | | 

{|| Nasiruddin al-Khattab (Canada) |} 
SOHEI Final review by: alll 
HH ISS\\ Abu Khaliyl (USA) 77a 

. t 
Sinz & 4 oe 

English Translation of 
Sunan [bn Majah 

Im4m Muhammad Bin Yazeed 
Ibn Majah Al-Qazwini 

Ahddith edited, researched and referenced by: 
Hafiz Abu Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i 

Translated by: 
Nasiruddin al-Khattab (Canada) 

Edited by: 
Huda Khattab (Canada) 

Final review by: 
Abu Khaliyl (USA) 

DARUSSALAM 

GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS 
Riyadh e Jeddah e Al-Khobar e Sharjah 
Lahore e London «Houston e New York 

In the Name of Allah, 
the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful 

alli alle 

Kalamullah.Com 

© Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, 2007 

4 King Fahd National'‘Library Catalog-in-Publication Data 

Imam hafiz abu abdullah 
Sunan ibn:majah, Imam hafiz abu abdullah, Riyadh-2007' 
5v. 520 1p, 14x21 cm 
ISBN: 9960-98841-3-9 (set) '9960-9919-4-6 

4-AL-hadith-commentaries 2- Al-hadith 3-Title 

237.7de 1428/1078 

Legal Deposit no. 1428/1078 
ISBN: 9960-9881-3-9 {set) 
9960-9919-4-6 {vol.1) 

Books and Chapters of Volume 1 

The Book of the Sunnah.......... Per rere ee 
Chapters of Purification.................-:-ecceenee 
Chapters on Dry Ablution ...................... ere 
The Book of The Prayet.......0....0...:.sessesseenseeeeeee 
Chapters on the AdHan.........cse--creecreienececeinens | 

Chapters on the Mosques and the Congregation... 

a 

Allah’s Messenger said: 

“May Allah make the man flourish who hears 
from me a Hadith, commits it to memory, and 
then communicates it (to others).” 
(Sunan Abu Dawud : Hadith no. 366) 

Allah’s Messenger said: 

“Oh, do look! [have been given the Book 
(Qur'an) and the like thereof (i.e., Sunnah) 
along with it. Oh, do look! I have been given 
Qur'an and the like thereof (i.e., Sunnah) 
along with it.” (Musnad Ahmad: 4/131) 

Contents 

Publisher’s Foreword.........ccccccccsssteccessecccusvssvcccusenccosasesseseccacessseseeconanens 15 
Preface siagc chavo oiccseacchboseei cna ads dade sausseesGucatds Deak od eccawen tec dekak sabes eseek’ sided 18 
EMtrOAUCHON 3 si0555 Jobe cewteincenseecdendbe dsdees RentawenSone Sasi Uacaseesogeeaaeistonesunaneateus 27 
The Six Collections and what the Eminent Scholars said about them.......... 31 
A Life Sketch of Imém. Tbr Majah ........ccccccccccseeeeee cere ceeenaeeseeeeeeeneeeeeerens 38 
Ton Majah’s Book: As-Sundtt ...0....ccccceecceeesecsseesseeeneneanessaeeneeeeeteeeeeetenegs 42 
How to benefit by Sunan Tort Majaht.........ccccccccccceeeeeeeceeseesaneneereeeneeneeeenes 56 
Technical Terms used by Hadith Scholars...........c:::cccccceeeeseeeeeesteeeeeeeeseeeas 58 
Kinds of Hadith Compilations. ............52:.cccccccccsssssee cree deceareneceeepetaneseneesees 64 
Era-Categories (Tabagat) of Hadith Compilations................:cs:seeesecseeeteenee 66 
Meanings of Masfdir (Sourcebooks) and Maréji’ (Reference Works)............ 68 
Technical Arabic Terms .............cccccccccsectececcceseseeeeeeeseeacensanareeres pectetori ts 69 

(1) The Book Of The Sunnah 

Chapter 1. Following The Sunnah Of The Messenger Of Allah 2 ........... 73° 

Chapter 2. Venerating The Hadith Of The Messenger Of Allah #§ And 
Dealing Harshly With Those Who Go Against It ..........-....4 79 

Chapter 3. Caution In Narrating Ahadith From The Messenger Of Allah #¢ . 89 

Chapter 4. Severe Condemnation Of Deliberately Telling Lies Against 

The Messenger Of Allah 88.00.0000... c:ssceessecsececesneecseeeeeeessees 94. 
Chapter 5. He Who Narrated (A Hadith) From The Messenger Of Allah 

#@ Thinking It To Be False .........csceesseescessceeeesseeeeeteneneeees 97 
Chapter 6. Following The Path Of The Rightly-Guided Caliphs............... 99 
Chapter 7. Avoiding Bid’ah (Innovation) And Dispute... ae --. 102 
Chapter 8. Avoiding Individual Opinion And Analogy (With Regard To 

Matters Of Religion)............... debabng sub ooies ccdeettgdasteheee tesco getesse 108 
Chapter 9. Regarding Faith ..............ccccececseeeccee tee eeeeecetseaeceeeeeereeeerertees 111 
Chapter 10. Regarding The Divine Decree (Qadar).........-sesscserrrreseosoetonees 126 
Chapter 11. The Virtues Of The Companions Of The Messenger Of Allah #% . 141 
Chapter 12. The Khaw rij......cccccccssssceeesccrseccenacnenseeesseaaasssecennrenerersenesenns 185 
Chapter 13. Concerning Denial By The Jahmiyyah (i.e., Seeing Allah In 

The Hereafter, €tc.)..0c....cc.cceccceceecesccesseeeeeeeeseeeeeceeenennesaaeanees 191 
Chapter 14. One Who Introduces.‘A Good Or Evil Practice.........:00.:0 209 
Chapter 15. One Who Revives A Sunnah’That Had Died Out.................. 213 

Chapter 16. The Virtue Of One Who Learns The Qur’én And Teaches It ... 214 

Chapter 17. The Virtue Of The Scholars, And Encouragement To Seek 
KROWlEA SC io eeeccseliscortiesieaebevnets<pcvies canedegnaatesstascesdepaaaectias 219 

Chapter 18. He Who Conveys Knowledge............::::::::seeceeeseeeeeereteserseees 225 

Contents 

Chapter 19. 
Chapter 20. 
Chapter 21. 
Chapter 22. 
Chapter 23. 

Chapter 24. 

Chapter 1. 

Chapter 2. 
Chapter 3. 
Chapter 4. 
Chapter 5. 
Chapter 6. 
Chapter 7. 
Chapter 8. 
Chapter 9. 

Chapter 10. 
Chapter 11. 

Chapter 12. 
Chapter 13. 
Chapter 14. 
Chapter 15. 
Chapter 16. 
Chapter 17. 

Chapter 18. 

Chapter 19 

Chapter 20. 
Chapter 21. 
Chapter 22. 
Chapter 23. 
Chapter 24. 
Chapter 25. 

One Who Opens The Door To Good ........2.:::ccceeereccsenentceeenes 229 
The Reward Of One Who Teaches The People.................000044 230 
He Who Dislikes Having People Walk Behind Him............... 233 
Taking Care Of The Seekers Of Knowledge ............0...0-: 235 
Gaining Benefit From pana And Acting In Accordance 

Withee Sste tee decvacnteeniseuccesttectiag pease ac vcsvetiarmcestissadievteoests 237 

The Chapters Of Purification And Ks Sunnah 

The Quantity Of Water Required For Ablution And Bath In A 

State Of Sexual Impurity... eee e cece ee eecceeesenaanaaeneenernens 248 
Allah Does Not Accept Sal@h (Prayer) Without. Purification <a 250 
The Key To Prayer Is Purification ........0......cceeseeeeeneteeeeeeee 251 
Maintaining One’s Ablution .............0.:cccccccceeeeseeeeneneeeeaeeaee 252 
Ablution Is Half Of Faith.........0.2.2..:0ccscececeeeeeseseneennrerneneeeaes 254 
The Reward For Purification .........000....0ccccccecceesseeeeeeeeeeteeees 255 
Toot: SUCK. is fe sceiiiaesetceliclve thins dilse ee es ok seks 258 
The Fitrah (Natural Inclination Of Man)................... eiedatiee deh 262 
What Is To Be Said When Entering, The Toilet............222...0.... 264 
What Is To. Be Said When Exiting The Toilet........00000000000... 266 
Remembering. Allah Before Entering, The Toilet, And 

(Removing) Rings In The Toilet... ccceesneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 268 
Itis Undesirable (Makruh) To Urinate In The Place For Washing . 269 
Urinating While Standing ............. cess eeeeeeeeccceeeeneeneeeeaereees 270 
Urinating While Sitting. ... 0.0.0: . ees eseeceeseeeeeedeneeeceeeeeeetes 271 
It Is Undesirable (Makruh) To Touch The Penis And To Clean 
Oneself With The Right Hand. .........0.. cee eeseestessesseeeeeeeeeees 272 
Cleaning Oneself With Stones, And The Prohibition. Of Using 
Dung And Bones. .i.cccccccediccedivstcacse.tesencecksdees Acguatgaceeteecant ses 274 
The Prohibition Of Facing The Qiblah When Defecating Or 
UPI oi. swt.oog as cbc vescanntetediela sos San tha da dae cn stub ostuteha sane sasediats 276 
Permission Concerning That In The (Constructed) Toilet. And 
Permitting It Anywhere Except In The Desert ...........0000.000. 278 
Cleaning Oneself After Urinatiing..........ccccscceccecccecneeeenneee 281 
One Who Urinates. And Does Not Use Water... wsteneaasever 2OL: 
Prohibition Of Urinating In The Middle Of The Street epstetee ys 282 
Going Far Away When Relieving Oneself Out Of Doors......... 283 
Looking For A Place To Defecate Or Urinate............. eee 285 
The Prohibition Of Gathering Or Talking In The Toilet........... 288 
The Prohibition Of Urinating Into Standing Water............0... 289 

Contents 

Chapter 26. 
Chapter 27. 
Chapter 28. 
Chapter 29. 

Chapter 30. 
Chapter 31. 
Chapter 32. 

Chapter 33. 
Chapter 34. 

Chapter 35. 

Chapter 36. 

Chapter 37. 
Chapter 38. 
Chapter 39. 

Chapter 40. 

Chapier 41. 
Chapter 42. 
Chapter 43. 

Chapter 44. 
Chapter 45. 
Chapter 46. 
Chapter 47. 
Chapter 48. 

Chapter 49. 
Chapter 50. 

Chapter 51. 

Chapter 52. 
Chapter 53. 
Chapter 54. 

Chapter 55. 

Strict Rulings Concerning Urination............-:.ceeeeeee eres 290 
A Man Who Is Greeted While He Is Urinating............-......... 292 
Cleaning Oneself With Water (Istinja’) .........:ccccccereeeeeees 294 
One Who Rubs His Hand On The Ground After Cleaning 

Himself: e.cciciett ac Siscagatasidecrasetestensedenesteeastuccssssesdivensesseeters 296 
Covering, Vessels ...........ccccccseesceneeecnssenesnenssusntsebeseccstnecenests 297 
Washing A Vessel That Has Been Licked By A Dog......-........ 298 
Ablution With Water Left Over By A Cat And The 

COnCesSHON Es 55455, sisietaetess ne sabeeceeseovincs vases dtssugainestevee te aveaaees 299 
Concession Regarding Water Left Over From A Woman's 
ADB OR wise chs eect sa shocsunuseestaistaceteisasievangs tauey donaavs secs tvnee sea 301 
The Prohibition Of That (i-e.Performing Ablution With The 
Leftover Water)... cee ee eerer cess snnnedeneesbeneneeeereaeead 302 
A Man And Woman Taking Bath From A Single Vessel......... 303 
A Man And Woman Performing Ablution From A Single Vessel. 305 
Performing Ablution with Nabidh...c......cccccccsceeeeteetee ene e ee 306 
Ablution With Seawater .........ccccecscecesseeeee eects seeseeeeenseneneeeees 307 
A Man Who Asks For Help With His Ablution And Water Is 
Poured On Hirn......... eee pecescsessecvoneeeuersoursrcsestansooaersertaeceas 309 
When A Man Wakes Up From Sleep, Should He Put His 

Hand In The Vessel Before Washing It?......:..--.0sscctreeeeeeees 311 
Concerning Saying ‘Bismillah’ When Performing Ablution....... 312 
Starting On The Right In Ablution..........-.::c:esietscesteeeeeees 314 
Rinsing The Mouth And Sniffing Up Water Into The Nostzils 
With One Handful Of Water ..............::ccceccceenttnnrreeneeerneeeees 315 
Going To Extremes In Sniffing Water Up Into The Nostrils 

and blowing it OU... eee cree eee eee eeeeanereserseoneeeees 316 
Concerning Ablution Washing Each Part Once........-......+++ 318 
Performing Ablution; Washing Each Part Three Times ........... 319 
What Was Narrated Concerning Ablution; Washing Each Part 
Once, Twice Or Thrice... 0. .cccc cece ec eee ece eee e ea ec een eeeeu see eceseeeees 321 
Concerning Moderation In Ablution And Avoiding 

Bxdeavaranice.. s2igi sores os dos.; soaps hod ance baa iaday din dete estecexeeee setae 322 

What Was Narrated Concerning performing Ablution Properly . 325 
Concerning Running The Fingers Through The Beard (When 

Performing Ablution) ......00...0cccceeece cesses eeesaneeeteneeeenettteneees 326 
What Was Narrated Concerning Wiping The Head................ 328 
Concerning Wiping The Ears.............:..ccssseessseeeceeteeneeeeeeenees 330 
The Ears Are Part Of The Head ...........:::::eeecceeeseeneteeeeeneeeeees 331 
Running The Fingers Of One Hand Between The Fingers Of 

The Other (And The Toes) -......00...c0:cceeeseeeteeeeeteeeereeeeeeeeeee 332 
Washing The (Heels and) Achilles’ Tendon............::::::eeeee 333 

Contents 

Chapter 56. 
Chapter 57. 

Chapter 58. 
Chapter 59. 
Chapter 60. 

Chapter 61. 
Chapter 62. 
Chapter 63. 
Chapter 64. 
Chapter 65. 

Chapter 66. 

Chapter 67. 
Chapter 68. 
Chapter 69. 
Chapter 70. 
Chapter 71. 
Chapter 72. 

’ Chapter 73. 
Chapter 74. 

Chapter 75. 
Chapter 76. 
Chapter 77. 
Chapter 78. 

Chapter 79. 
Chapier 80. 

Chapter 81. 

Chapter 82. 
Chapter 83. 

Chapter 84. 
Chapter 85. 
Chapter 86. 
Chapter 87. 

Chapter 88. 

10 orga 
Washing The Feet ..............eseecsecceceeeeeenseesseecseensnenteseerecenees 336 
Ablution In Accordance With The Commands Of Allah The 
Most SOW cusses cede cusssuiscssuetviesssubeaeesvesshsebéensaabe ese sovnuvigenyeeie 337 
Sprinkling Water After Abltution............eecee cee eeeeeeeeeeeeees 338 
Drying Oneself With A Cloth After Ablution Or The Bath...... 340 
What Is To Be Said After Ablution............. ccc eeeeteeeeeeee 341 
Ablation Using Brass 2.0.0... ..cceccseeseesecsneetsseseetereeessseeeteeeens 343 
Ablution After A Sleep .........cccccecsesessccsecsecesesssseceseneestenceee 344 
Ablution After Touching The Pemis..............::ccccscceeeeeeeseees 346 
Concession Concerning That .....0...::ccccccsessececseeseeseerseneeeeeece 348 
Ablution After (Eating) That Which Has Been Changed By 
Fire (Le. Cooked upon Fire).............cccccccceeeteeeeesnnseeeeneeeeeeens 348 
Concession Concerning That........ igavsdalie fepesasdgieataamagedeescacedes 350 
Concerning Performing Ablution After Eating Camel Meat..... 352 
Rinsing The Mouth After Drinking Milk..........0...cccse eee 354 
Ablution After Kissing. .....0....ccccccescceeeeeseeeeseeeecneneeneeeseeecsees 355 
Ablution From Prostatic Fluid. .........0cc0cccescceseesesseeees eats 000: 
Ablution After Sleeping ............ccccc eens eteeeeeeeneeeneees baat 358 
Performing Ablution For Each Prayer And Offering All ; 
Prayers With One Ablution.....0...000.0..cccccscesesscceeeceneceaeee terres 359 
Ablution When In A State Of Purity 2.00.00... eeeeeeeeee 360 
No Ablution Except For Imputrity ........2. 0... cccsceseeseereneeees 361 
The Quantity Of Water That Does Not Become Unclean......... 362 
Water Basins i iiessitssccceitisccsas oes doveo stat ecdawetsnasebseest dua cncbeedees 364 
Concerning The Urine Of An infant Boy Who Is Not Yet 
Eating Solid Food ..............cccccsceeleceeeeseeecsseeeressnnnnaaaeeseeoaeeas 365 
Ground That Is Soiled With Urine And How It Should Be 
Washedicessicccceessetaciss ces. tevestsasiacdvonnfaceheandearsveduuvvvssouateethte 368 
Some Parts Of The Earth Purify Others .0.............c::cscessseeees 370 
Shaking Hands With One Who Is In A State Of Sexual 
TMP UPAY 1 gesiaisdesss eee ssdeececectoaNesisnekecns saiee sabeeatbestedtacegses 371 
Semen That Soils Clothes .........ccc:cccseeeececeeessseneeee bvateeuuaele 373 
Scraping Semen From Clothing ............::ccccsccssesseeeseeseeenene 373 
Offering Prayer In A Garment In Which One Has Had 
TintercOurse ............ecccseseeccesesteseceeeeeees sda gatececdveusadsapnesieccbeaahes 374 
Wiping Over Leather Socks...........ccccceeeeeeteesseseeeeesesteetvens 376 
Wiping The Top And The Bottom Of The Leather Socks .:...... 379 
What Was Narrated Concerning The Period Of Wiping For 
Residents And Travelers .............cccccseesceeeseeteneeeetteeeeeescceauaes 380 
Concerning Wiping Over The Leather Socks With No Time 
Sate ots secs civsah dha gale is eee cusses avaauctes d cikta vals evans Qusnantdees 382 
Concerming Wiping Over The Socks And The Sandals............ 383 

Contents . 11 un eal 
Chapter 89. What Was Narrated Concerning Wiping Over The Turban..... 384 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

Chapter 90. What Was Narrated Concerning Dry Ablution..............:008 386 
Chapter 91. Concerning Striking The Ground Once In Dry Ablution......... 388 
Chapter 92. Striking The Ground Twice In Dry Ablution................... 00 389 
Chapter 93. An Injured Man Who Becomes Sexually impure And Fears 

For His Life If He Takes A Bath ...........0.0.:csessssscsssceeerereneeees 390 
Chapter 94. Concerning Performing A Bath For Being Sexually Impure.... 391 
Chapter 95, Bathing To Cleanse Oneself From Sexual Impurity................. 393 
Chapter 96. Ablution After The Bath ............0.c:ccceceeeeeseegesecesnsseeeeseenes 394 
Chapter 97. The Sexually Impure Person Warming Himself With His Wife 

Before She Had The Bathy..........cccececccsseeesneeneedeerseeeescweeees 395 
Chapter 98. The Sexually Impure Person Sleeping As He Is Without 

Touching Water. ....cci.c.cccs0cccccdennsssensetbesseabadvcosaceegedsasea ancien 396 

Chapter 99. Concerning Those Who Say That The Sexually Impure Person 
Should Not Sleep Until He Performs Ablution As For Prayer.. 397 

Chapter 100.When A Person Who Is Sexually Impure Wants To Have 
Intercourse Again, He Should Perform Ablution................... 398 

Chapter 101.One Who Has One Bath After Being Intimate With All His Wives.... 398 

Chapter 102.Concerning One Who Has A Bath After Intimacy With Each 

OF His WIVES, 25. :ccssccetesacsceniy gues tiean sddnecbbtececcwsextuenteetstes sissies 399 
Chapter 103.Concerning Eating And Drinking Of One Who Is Sexually 
; Tenipure oe seccie cock peed ecana oeteseeescusistaeaahasgasneesccueate csstebbersaugeaees 400 
Chapter 104.Concerning One Who Says That Washing The Hands Is 
SUPINE «<c.2esesssvbebessssscdcdedesernaedesvecscousseacegeseteeeeteeeistysae 400 
Chapter 105.What Was Narrated.Concerning Reciting Qur’an When One 
Is Not In A State Of Purity 0.0.00 eee escent reeeeeeneens 401 

Chapter 106.Under Every Hair There Is The State Of Sexual Impurity ....... 402 
Chapter 107.A Woman Who Sees In Her Dream Something Like Men See . 404 
Chapter 108.Concerning Women Taking A Bath To Cleanse Themselves 

From Sextial Impurity ......:.c.ceccccsssccceeeeeeeeeeeensccnerenseteeceeeees 405 
Chapter 109.Is It Sufficient For One Who Is Sexually Impure To Immerse 

Himself In Standing Water? ..........ccccccceeecsesseseenreneeeereeeees 406 
Chapter 110.Water Is For Water ..........ccccccccssccsececsteeseseneacereseeeeensseeeasaaes 407 
Chapter 111.What Was Narrated About The Obligation Of Bath When The 

Two Circumcised Parts Meet...........cccccceseceeeeccecceseeeeseeeesenees 408 
Chapter 112.One Who Has An Erotic Dream But Does Not Feel Any 

WOIMMERS oi zi ec cccdeeneges subd abebenveseg oi hdtcuadaaa seat eee,vepeuuves siadasatasias 410 

Contents 12 eee 

Chapter 114.Concerning The Prohibition Of Suppressing Urine Or Feces 
During: Prayer iy. co... ca. ays ocekacndeneecentieescdnnneong vcctenewsigavesqedoece 412 
Chapter 115.What Was Narrated Concerning The Bleeding Woman Who 
Has Counted The Days Of Her Period Before Her Flow Of 

Blood Became Continuous. ...........ccccccccncccetcceesececeseeetreseeneas 413. 
Chapter 116.Concerning The Woman Who Is Confused About Her 
Bleeding And Does Not Know The Days Of Her Cyele.......... 417 

Chapter 117.Concerning A. Virgin Who Starts To Experience Prolonged 
Non-Menstrual Bleeding, Or If She Has A Regular Period But 

Ors ets FE sec ops sincence osu tee eats eceiot caters ease Secu eh ei denaaSete gi encstens 418 
Chapter 118.What Was. Narrated About Menstrual Blood That Gets On 

Clothing ....... adabsutdegsencaded cider tuditud sede cuathtect es ccsuxtet Seecesthirely 419. 
Chapter 119.The Menstruating Woman Does Not Have To. Make Up For 

The Prayer She Missed ....-c...-..eccccissennececeeeretentenesseseecceeeenees 420 

Chapter 120.A Mensiruating Woman Taking Something Brom The Mosque 421 
Chapter 121.What A Man May: Do. With His Wife When She Is 

Moenistruating is. cccciciiscieteenias toccs dese tusuveses ccesuseebeeeabace<dgeuess 422 
Chapter 122. Prohibition Of Sexual Intercourse With A Sdeneicastihig 
VAPOMIAR LS: 2205 ceo ct -25cheics songs svashddnss Sucatosdeeeatedas0s covedibvedes:terudees 424 
Chapter 123.The Expiation For One Who Has Sexual Intercourse With A 
Menstruating WoOmian............cc ces ceeecceneaneeetenecedeveeeeaapeeeeecees 425 
Chapter 124. How A. Menstruating Woman Should Bathe ..............:0005. 425 
Chapter 125.What Was. narrated Concerning Eating With A Menstruating 
‘Weomnart : 252, tes setecss ccc cele ivn cp Seancnteedh doenede totes aig etbavtd-tenived 427 
Chapter 126.Concerning Menstroating Women Keeping Away From the 
DMOsqQue oe: ceive decuctedadus coh sana ih sncdocsuctlanes saenesttieanesevoseaareesiays 428 
Chapter 127.Concerning What A Woman Sees Of Yellowish Or Brownish 
Discharge After Her Period Is Over ..........00:ccsceccecseeeteeeees 429 
Chapter 128.How Long Should Women In Postnatal Bleeding Wait (Before 
PLAY IMG; CLC) Paves ceeseslssveds soap'ss wvlechgugunvers sotevesesdecwets daaidleoouds ses 430 
Chapter 129.One Who Has Intercourse With His Wife When She Is 
MeMstruatinng....... eee ceeccccceeeeeeeeeeesenaensneesateeneeeabanessenaeeeaeees 431 
Chapter 130.Eating With A Menstruating Womian.......:.cc0ccccceeeeeteeeeee 431. 
Chapter 131.Performing Prayer In The Garment Of A Meristruating 
WOME oes clas holds lshosed cay hapapee stant isnniebevioduaeciex yeasts. 432 
Chapter 132.When A Girl’s Puberty Period Begins, She Should Not Pray 
Unless She Is Wearing A Head Cover oo... ccccceesseeesrereeenees 433, 
Chapter 133.A Women Who Is Menstruating May Dye Her Hands ........... 434 
Chapter 134. Wiping Over Bandages ...0..........200:c:ccceseee cece eeresaneeeseebereenta 434 
Chapter 135.Saliva That Gets On Clothes. ............cccccccceeseeeeeesenenennsneesnnens 435 
Chapter 136.Spitting Into A Vessel...........:0000cc cece ee eeee eee eee ceeeeeseneesseeeneeees 435 

Chapter 137.Prohibition Of Seeing One’s Brother’s Nakeduess .................. 436 

Contents 

13 weg) 

Chapter 138.If A Person Bathes To Cleanse Himself From Sexual Impurity 

And There Remains A Spot On His Body: That Was Not 
Touched. By Water, What Should He Do?............::::2::::::2eeee 437 

Chapter 139.If A Person Performs Ablution And. Leaves A Place Where 

Chapter 1. 
Chapter 2. 
Chapter 3. 
Chapter 4. 

Chapter 5.. 
Chapter 6. 
Chapter 7. 
Chapter 8. 
Chapter 9. 
Chapter 10. 
Chapter 11. 

Chapter 12. 

Chapter 13. 

Chapter 1. 
Chapter 2. 
Chapter 3. 
Chapter 4. 
Chapter 5. 
Chapter 6. 
Chapter 7. 

Water Does not. Reach .........ccccccsesececeeeceeceeeeeeceeeeeesessceteceseee 438 

{2) The Book Of The Prayer 

The Chapters On The Times Of Prayer ..............0::::esseeseesees 441 
The Time Of The Fajr Prayer .........cccccccssesessssenesneneerereeneenee 443 
The Time Of The Zuhr Prayer .........cc:022:ecceeceeeenenenesneeeeetees 446 
Waiting For It To Cool Down Before the Zuhr Prayer When 

The Heat Is Intense:.............cccececceeeegeeccseeeseeeeeceueneensenenesanecs 447 
The Time Of The ‘Asr Prayer. .......-..c.cccccceeseeeesseeeeesseeenecenees 449 
Maintaining The ‘Asr Prayer ................cccccceeeeccceeeesseneneeeaeees 450 
The Time Of The Maghrib Prayer .......ccccccesceccesssrenssscceeeseenes 451 
The Time Of The ‘Isha’ Prayer...........00ccccccscceeceeeececneeeseeeeeeens 453 
Times Of Prayer When It Is Cloudy ...........--:-21:ccsseeseeeeeeees 455 
Whoever Sleeps Through Prayer Or Forgets It.....:.........:0necsne 455 
The Time Of Prayer When One Has. An Excuse Or In Cases 

OE Necessity: ss. csthes es aseteestitldecavereets nevececantatasectabasestieuaes 458 
The Prohibition Of Sleeping Before The ‘Isha’ Prayer And 
Engaging In Conversation. After Tt .............ccceceecceseneeeeeeneenes 459 
Prohibition Of Saying The “‘Atamah Prayer’ (Prayer Of 

Darkness yoo sc2. cod deteesteseciiedecobihanchsn Suds eas deu, ane sawensssssaaaaitee 461 

(3). The Chapters On The Adhan 
And The Sunnah Regarding It 

How The Adhiéin Began. .............c.cccccseeeecceeeeeceneeteeeeeeeeeeeeeenes 463 
Repeating The Words In The Adhiiit .............:cc2ccceceeeeseeeeeeees 466 
The Sunnah Regarding the Adhan ..........:c::::ccccssseeseeeeeeeeeeeees 471 

What Should Be Said When The Mu’adh-dhin Calls the Adhin. 475 
The Virtue Of The Adhén And The Reward Of The Mu’adh-dhin .. 478 
Saying The Phrases Of The Iq@imah Once...........cccccceesseeeseeeees 480 
If The Adhdn Is Called And You Are In The Mosque, Then Do 

Contents 

Chapter 1. 
Chapter 2. 
Chapter 3. 
Chapter 4. 
Chapter 5. 
Chapter 6. 
Chapter 7. 
Chapter 8. 
Chapter 9. 

Chapter 10. 
Chapter 11. 

Chapter 12. 
Chapter 13. 
Chapter 14. 
Chapter 15. 

Chapter 16. 
Chapter 17. 
Chapter 18. 
Chapter 19. 

4 we nga 

(4) The Chapters On The Mosques 
And The Congregations 

One Who Builds A Mosque For The Sake Of Allah................ 484. 
Construction Of Lofty MoSque ........0 cc cscecececceeeteessrseeeeeeseeees 485 
Where It Is Permissible To Build Mosque ..........0:.c00::::ceseeeeee 486 
Places Where It Is Disliked To Perform Prayer .....00.....00:0006 488 
What Is Disliked In The Mosques ................cccscscsssseseceeeeanees 490 
Sleeping In The Mosque ..........:::ccccccesseereeeeeseeetessreeeestenaces 492 
Which Mosque Was Built First? 0.0... ......e cc ceeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeneeeees 492 
Mosque In Houses ............ccccceceesssseessesseceesceeenseseetavecenseesess 493 
Purifying And Perfuming The Mosque...............csesssssssreeeeeee 496 
Repugnance Of Spitting In The Mosque. ...........::::csceesseeeeeees 497 
Prohibition Of Making Lost-and-Found Announcements In 

TNE MOGQue eis tetuv.ce si seceuelaboosivegsdvescenstaccestsescvesecoostavcescedces 499. 
Prayer In Camels’ Resting-Places. And Sheeps Resting-Places .. 501 
Supplication When Entering The Mosque ......-.:..00:secessseseeees 502 
Walking To Prayer... .icscsesseeessecceceeseeeeteneeetessteteesaeeaes 504 
The Greater The Distance From The Mosque, The Greater The 
REWar dia. a cade ctene Saeisacc.sigs Leacetesaewiber lv, oe bage eres Sdadinag ett cwansedcy 509 
The Virtue Of Prayer In Congregation....... Ptah Ren caeeyn ts 511 
Severe Warning Against Missing Prayer In Congregation....... 513 
Performing The ‘Isha’ And Fajr Prayers In Congregation......... 516 
Staying In The Mosques And Awaiting The Prayer................ 517 

sg - Sel A yo 
Publisher's Forewold 

islam has given two.reliable pathways for the guidance of mankind. One of 
them is the clear Verses of Qur’an while the other, quite consistent with the 
first, is what we call Sunnah or Hadith. 

To explain and interpret its basic and brief teachings, Our/a an has itself 
mentioned the need for Sunnah and the Prophet's model lifestyle. The latter 
explains the former. The Sunnah is an indispensable guide to understand 
the commandments and passages of Qur’an. Without Ahdédith, the entire 
faith and the entire Shari‘ah (Islamic Law) will become no better than a 
riddle. It is to be noted that the wealth of expository material relating to 
Shari‘ah, as found in Ahddith, was also given to the Prophet #¢ by Allah 
through the archangel Gabriel (Jibra’il). This is why Qur’an is called 
Revelation Recited (Waly Matlu) while the Hadith is called Revelation 
Unrecited (Wahy Ghair Matlu). 

The Arabic word Hadith means conversation, account, narrative, report, 
and also novel or modern. But as a technical term, however, it means the 
deeds, utterances, circumstances and matters of Allah’s Messenger 2 or, in 
other words, whatever has come down to us concerning Allah’s Messenger 
#€ and his mission (through his Companions and their followers). Hadith is 
also called Sunnah (Tradition), Akhbar (information, report, communication, 
and message) and Athar (track, trace, sign, mark). Hadith may be verbal, or 
practical or just tacit (that is, when the Prophet #¢ did not object to’ some 
thing, thereby giving his tacit approval). However, some include even the 
Prophet's Shamé’il (his physical descriptions, natural disposition and habits) 
under the general heading of Hadith. . 

The authority of Hadith, its truth and its position in Shari‘ah is indisputable. 
The proper art of writing began soon after the Prophet #§ began his 
mission. The Verses of the Revelation “Who has taught by the pen,”“I and 
-“Nun; by the pen and by what they write (therewith), )/’2! save impetus to 
the art of writing during the era of the Prophet #8. The people of Arabia 
who boasted of a retentive memory and their ability to reproduce with 
accuracy what they committed to memory now began to set down what 
they learnt in writing. We have come to know from varied sources that the 
scribes of Quran totalled more than fifty in numbers. As for the narration 
and recording of Ahdédith, a much wider and more elaborate system 
evolved in the succeeding ages. 

(1 AL‘Alag 96:1. 
Pl ALQalam 68:4. 

Publisher’s Foreword 16 dadfia 

The things being set down in writing, in addition to Qur'an, during the Prophet’s 
era were: official letters of the Islamic State, the Prophet’s letters, the State 
Constitution, the Prophet’s sermons, treaties, deeds of gift, writs guaranteeing 
security, census, writs of manumission of slaves, names of governors and officials 
appointed for different regions and provinces, state instructions and guidelines, 
details of revenues and expenditures of Baitul-Mal (Exchequer), and the Ahddith 
based on what the Companions saw the Prophet #@ do or heard him say. All 
these documents, written down with great care and accuracy, make an 
invaluable treasure. Moreover, we have authentic details that prove the 
Companions recorded Ahédith carefully and responsibly. 

On many an occasion did the Prophet #8 instruct his Companions to put in 
writing what he said. For example, the Farewell pilgrimage sermon was set 
down in writing at the request of Abu Shah of Yemen. 

These Traditions dating back to the era of the Prophet #é, and his 
Companions, set in motion a trend that continued during the successive 
generations of Muslims, till an elaborate science of Hadith blossomed forth 
with many technical terms, like Riwi@yah (narration), Dir@yah (cognizance), 
Al-Jarhu wat-Ta’dil (Science of Validation of Ahédith), terms that gave a 
scientific dimension to this branch of knowledge ensuring the 
safeguarding, preservation, and interpretation of Ahadith. The Biographies 
of Narrators (Asma’ur-Rijal), a branch of Hadith sciences, holds a prominent 
place among the arts and sciences developed by mankind. It is about this 
branch of knowledge that German Orientalist Dr Springer, while editing 
Al-Isibah fi Tamizis-Sahabah, remarked: “No nation in the past or in modern 
times ever invented an outstanding science like Asmd’ur-Rijal that provides 
information about five hundred thousand Muslims.” 

Of course, we concede that the enemies of Islam, hypocrites and liars 
fabricated some Ahddith in an attempt to spread them. But, then, the Hadith 
scholars goaded by faith and endowed with keen observation, knowledge, 
and comprehension, while using scientific methods. of inquiry, challenged 
and eliminated those fabrications from the treasure of (genuine) Ahédith. 
No doubt, it was a notable achievement worthy of praise in the annals of 
human knowledge. Here is an incident illustrating the scholars’ 
achievement in this field: 

The Abbasid caliph Harun Rashid (170-193 AH) had a disbeliever arrested 
for fabricating Ahddith and ordered his execution. The disbeliever said to the 
king: “O Commander of the Faithful, how will you deal with those four 
thousand Ahdédith I have already fabricated, making lawful things unlawful, 
and the unlawful lawful, although not a word in those ‘Ahddith’ was ever 
spoken by Allah’s Messenger.” Thereupon, the king retorted: “O enemy of 
Allah, how can you escape from Abu Ishdq Fazari and ‘Abduliah bin 

Publisher's Foreword 17 dete 

Mubarak? They will sieve them out and eliminate them letter by letter.” 

It is a well-known fact that the painstaking efforts of scholars gave Ahddith 
a high degree of reliability next to Qur’an. When the Ahddith had been read 
over carefully, revised, corrected and expounded in the light of the 
principles of Hadith sciences like Jarh (invalidation), Ta’dil (validation), and 
Asmi’ur-Rijal, the stage for the recording of Ahddith was set. Thanks to the 
exhausting efforts of Hadith scholars and their deep sense of responsibility, 
the Muslim nation got, in addition to Sihdh Sittah (the Sound Six books of 
Hadith) a vast treasure that included Musannafit (Hadith compilations 
according to subject-headings), Jawimi’ (comprehensive books of Ahddith), 
Sunan (collections of legal and doctrinal Ahédith), Masainid (Hadith 
cempilations according to complete chains), Ma‘éjim (compilations 
arranged according to names of Companions or regions or names of 
teachers of compilers), Mustadrakat (compilations of Ahadith meeting the 
conditions of other compilers but not found in their books), and 
Mustakhrajét (compilations containing Ahdédith of other compilers with 
different chains of narration), the manuscripts of which—numbering in 
thousands—researched, edited and furnished with explanatory and 
marginal notes, exist even today in international libraries attracting the 
attention of research scholars. Anyhow, among those compilations, the six 
canonical books of Ahadith (Sihah Sittah) rank as the centerpiece. 

I have a wish since long to present the Sound Six (Sihah Sittah) translated 
into modern English in such a way as to list the inferences and gainful 
conclusions drawn from each Hadith, to remove any misgiving and 
misunderstanding, satisfying the mind and soul, and reinforcing the faith. 
With this noble cause in view, Darussalam has solicited the services of 
several learned scholars and researchers who are working with zeal on the 
translation of the Sound Six and writing commentaries on them. 

All the Ahddith of this collection have been documented, referenced and 
traced by the great research scholar, Hafiz Zubair ‘Ali Za’i. 

One thing I want to mention is that in these collections, the original Arabic 
texts of the Ahddith contain complete chain of narrators while in translation, 
for the sake of simplicity, only the name of the first narrator is mentioned 
who narrated the Hadith from the Prophet #. 

‘Abdul-Malik Mujahid 

Servant of Qur’an and Sunnah 
Director Darussalam 
Riyadh and Lahore. 

Preface 18, date 

Preface 

Hadith is next only to Qur'an as a source of Islamic laws and proofs. The 
term Hadith applies to the words and acts of Allah’s Messenger #€ as well 
as his tacit approvals called Tagrir. The latter refers to acts done in his 
presence but he did not disapprove of them, his silence indicating his 
approval. All these three categories of Ahddith are variously known as (1) 
Khabar, (2) Athar, (3) Hadith and (4) Sunnah. (All these words have already 
been mentioned under the technical terms employed by Hadith scholars). 

In contradistinction with Khabar and Athar, the words Hadith and Sunnah 
are widely popular, so much so, that a mere mention of any of these two 
words, inevitably brings to mind the words, acts and tacit approvals of 
Allah’s Messenger #@. No other thought comes to our mind except the 
foregoing at the mention of the word Hadith or Sunnah. Yes, of course, 
some people have made a distinction between Hadith and Sunnah, 
advancing as argument the words of some scholars, but, in fact, this 
distinction is not right. The Hadith scholars make no distinction between 
the two. According to them, Hadith and Sunnah are synonymous terms. 
Similarly, taking. Sunnah as referring to the Prophet’s habits, modes of 
behavior and manners and thereby denying their legal authority is equally 
wrong. It is, in fact, a deception, a concealed escape route leading to the 
rejection of Ahadith. Again, in the same way, considering only the acts of 
the Prophet #§ that he did persistently and uninterruptedly as binding is, 
in fact, a rejection of a vast number of Ahédith. Those who say so have, in 
deed, allied themselves with the rejecters of Ahddith. Moreover, rejecting a 
Hadith on the ground that it is in conflict with Qur’an and entraping people 
into believing so, is not the way befitting a Muslim. That is the way of the 
crooked, the sectarians and the dissenters who reject a lot of Ahadith on the 
seemingly attractive plea of being in disharmony with Qur’an. 

Two centuries after the advent of Islam, the Mutazilites (Mu’tazilah)™ 
rejected some Ahédith. Their’ purpose was to justify their wrong and 
misleading beliefs. Likewise, about a century and a half ago, the 
naturalists, too, criticized the canonical authority of Ahddith, their purpose 
being no more than to affirm naturalism and reinterpret Qur’an according 
to their own desires and whims. It is the same group of naturalists who, 
impressed in our times by the ‘rare research works’ of the Orientalists and 

i] A medieval theological sect that maintained that nothing but eternity could be 
asserted regarding Allah, that the eternal nature of the Qur’an was questionable, and 
that humans have free will. 

Preface 19 date 

charmed by the wizards of the West and their civilization, ate working in 
an organized way to alienate the Muslims from their own culture and 
Islamic values and traditions and are moulding them according to modern 
civilization. 

Anyhow, the term Hadith or Sunnah applies to whatever the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said, did, or gave his tacit consent to. This, like Qur’an, is an 
independent, distinct and reliable source of faith and. law (Shari’ah). To 
benefit by Hadith and rely on it in giving legal rulings, we need to know 
the following: : 

Things worthy to note 

1. The faith revealed by Allah is Islam and only Islam. “Truly, the religion 
with Allah (is) Islam.”"! “And whoever ‘seeks a religion other than 
Islam, it will never be accepted of him and he will be one of the losers 
in the Hereafter.””! Allah commanded the believers to hold fast to the 
religion and forbade them to divide and fall apart: “And hold fast, all 
of you together, to the Rope of Allah, and be not divided among 
yourselves.”1 Allah also warned us through His Messenger 2%: “And. 
(He commands you, saying): This is My straight path, so follow it, and 
follow ae (other) paths, for they will separate you away from. His: 
P ath,” 

2. Since Qur’an has warned us, in several Verses, against separation and 
disunion, which means only dissenting and dividing up into sects, and 
since the Prophet #¢ has commanded us to follow one course only and: 
condemned other courses as wrong, it naturally follows, therefore, that 
the True Path can only be one, not many. How can many paths be true 
at one and the same time? It is not possible, neither by reason nor by 
tradition. Qur’an declares: “After the Truth, what else can there be 
except error?! 

3. What is this religion of Islam or the Straight Path? Where is it to be 
found? It consists of two things: Qur’an and the Hadith of the Prophet 
#g. Allah’s Messenger #§ said: “I am leaving to you two things. You 
will not go astray as long as you cling to them: the Book of Allah and 
the Sunnah of His Prophet.’ 

{Al ‘Imrin 3:19. 

21 Al ‘imriin 3:85. 

1 Al ‘Imran 3:103. 

1) AL-An‘am 6:153. 

Fl Yunus 10:32. 

(6l Muwatta’ Imam Malik: 3. 

Preface 20 datiie 

4. This religion, unlike other religions, is not unguarded. It is secure from 
tampering. Since this religion is final and the only way of deliverance 
for mankind till the Judgment Day, AH@h has undertaken the 
responsibility of guarding it. He said: “Verily, We, it is We Who have 
sent down the Reminder and surely We will guard it”! The intended 
meaning of the Reminder is Qur’an that is guarded and made secure. It 
remained unchanged. and will remain ever so in future. Since it was 
impossible to understand it and act by it without Ahédith, the 
safeguarding of it implies the safeguarding, of Hadith also. Therefore, in 
order to safeguard the Ahédith, Aah created a group of Hadith scholars 
who took. pains to safeguard the Ahédith, separating the genuine from 
the spurious. Hence, Qur'an. and Sunnah are the only two basic sources 
of religion. However, to: understand them correctly, the way of the 
Prophet’s Companions. and the righteous predecessors is an 
indispensable aid. 

5. None of the founders of the schools of Islamic jurisprudence ever 
claimed that their ruling was final. On. the contrary, they acknowledged 
they may have erred and, hence, advised their followers to ignore their 
ruling, in. case a sound, authentic Hadith is ever found contradicting 
their ruling. Moreover, they: are known to: have recanted some of their 
opinions. In case a Hadith. was found later on contradicting the ruling of 
some jurist, his. students are reported to have declared that the Hadith 
in question: had remained unknown to their Imam (the jurist) and. that 
he would have surely recanted. his ruling if only he had known it. It 
should be noted that Ahddith were collected, recorded and examined 
long after the founders. of the schools had gone. For example, the 
Sound Six (Sikah Sittah) and. other books of Ahadith were compiled: later 
on. But, no doubt, those Imams: of jurisprudence were excusable for 
their errors. Hopefully, they may be rather rewarded because their 
intent was good. Anyhow, now that Ahddith have been collected and 
recorded, insistence on a particular legal ruling and. rejecting a Hadith 
on different pleas. is. quite unjustified. 

6. The students of the Imams of Figh (Islamic jurisprudence) disagreed 
with their own teachers and mentors on some issues, but none blamed 
or rebuked them for having done so, but rather praised them for their 
truth and scholarly ability. So it is no error or sin if today someone 
disagrees with the learned Imams of Islamic jurisprudence. He deserves 
praise, rather than condemnation. 

EY ALHijr 15:9. 

Preface 21 dette 

About the Four Books of Sunan 

The Four Books of Sunan (Sunan Arba‘ah) refer to Sunan Abu Déwud, Sunan 
Tirmidhi, Sunan Nasa’i and Sunan Ibn Majah. The term. Sihah Sittah, widely 
known in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent, refers to the six books of Hadith, 
that is, the foregoing four books of Sunan and the Sound Ahddith of Bukhéri 
and Muslim (Sahih Bukhari and Sahih. Muslim). The latter two books, also _ 
called Sahihain, are believed by orthodox Muslims (Ahlus-Sunnah). to 3: 
contain only Sound (Sahih) Ahddith. With: respect to the chain of narration ; , 
(Sanad), no: Hadith in those two books is weak. J i 

Shah Waliullah wrote, while commenting on the two. books: “As for the i : 
two authentic books of Ahadith (Bukhari and Muslim), scholars of Hadith.: 
sciences are unanimous that the Muttasil (Connected)™! and Marfu’ 
(Traceable)! contained in the twain are absolutely Sound and Mutawitir « 
(Continuous)®! up: to. their compilers and that anyone who belittles. the | - 
two is an innovator (Mubiadi’), following a way other than that of the’: 
believers.” : 

Anyway, it is accepted by all, that the Four Books of Sunan do contain! | 
some Ahédith that are Weak (Daf). They: are grouped together with the: 
two: books: of Bukhari and Muslim and often referred to as the Sound Six: : 
(Sihah Sittah). This collective name is in popular usage: This. title has been; — 
given to them, not because all the Ahddith of the Four Sunan are Sound like! 
those of Bukhari and Muslim but because most of them. are, except somé ° 
that are Weak. In other words, the Ahadith of the Four Sunan are generally, 
not totally, Sound. That is the reason. why they are grouped together with 
those of Bukhari and Muslim and collectively called Sihdh Sittah. Anyhow; 
this collective title created an impression among the Jaymen that all the Six 
are the collections. of Sound Ahédith. Besides, a large section of learned 
scholars who. are. usually unaware of the science of the Methodology of 
Critical Evaluation of Ahddith (Nagdul-Hadith) and the science of 
Biographies of Narrators. (Asma’ur-Rijal), believe that the mere fact a Hadith 
exists in any one of the Four Sunan is enough to guarantee its. soundness 
and, especially in the event of argumentations, they make good use of it 
and the Weak Ahddith of the Four Sunan are taken as Sound and advanced 
as argument to prove their point. The majority of scholars find it difficult to 
tell the Weak from the Sound because this matter cannot be decided 
without a thorough knowledge of the science of the Methodology of 

lA Hadith with a continuous chain of narration 

Pl A Hadith attributing the words of the Hadith to the Prophet,. 

I Hadith reported by a large group of narrators, it being impossible in practice for them 
to cooperate and coneur on a falsehood by the authority of a similar group until it 
reaches the mind and the senses. 

Preface 22 dadéie 

Critical Evaluation of Ahddith and Biographies of Narrators. Only a few 
scholars are expert in the Hadith sciences. 

This state of affairs continued till our times when the great traditionist and 
Hadith scholar of this century, Shaikh Nasiruddin Albani (d. 1999 CE) 
undertook, by grace of Allah, the task of researching Ahédith all over again, 
in a spirit of revival and reformation. Ever since the recording and 
compilation of Hadith books, no notable research work on Ahddith had been 
done. This field of activity was almost stagnant. It was Shaikh Albani who 
initiated this work in modern times with a renewed determination. On the 
one hand, he prepared a team of experis, endowed with a talent for 
research and inquiry, from amongst his own students and, on the other 
hand, he himself carried out an immense and wide-ranging research work 
on Ahdadith. His achievements in the field of Ahddith are briefly given below: 

One of his notable achievements is that he researched the Ahédith of the 
Four Sunan and identified the Weak and the Sound, a work that proved 
that, unlike Bukhé@ri and Muslim, not all the Ahddith of the Sunan are Sound 
and that the mere fact a Hadith exists in the Sunan is not enough to prove 
its reliability but, rather, its soundness or weakness can be determined only 
in the light of the principles of Hadith evaluation. He divided each book of 
the Four Sunan into two parts, the Weak and the Sound, thereby making it 
easy for any cleric not skilled in the methodology of evaluation to benefit 
by this division and know the. Weak from the Sound. 

Shaikh Albani also called for the term ‘the Sound Six’ (Sihah Sittah) to be 
changed. He proposed a new name: the Six Books (Kutub Sittah) for all the 
six books of Hadith because the four books of Sunan contain some Weak 
Ahéadith. To call all the six books Sihdh Sittah (Sound Six) conveys the idea 
to general public that all of them are Sound. His view was that the four 
books of Sunan should be called the Four Sunan (Sunan Arba‘ah), Bukhdri 
and Muslim the Sound Two (Sahihain) and all the six be renamed the Six 
Books (Kutub Sittah). 

An Earnest Plea 

I entreat the readers of Kutub Sittah (the Six Books), a publication of 
Darussalam, to make their intent clear and pure before reading or teaching 
them, and determine that they would accept without hesitation each and 
every Hadith of the Prophet #% and give it precedence over the opinions of 
others. 

Second, they should pray to Allah fervently and sincerely to guide them to 
the Straight Path. We say “{O Allah,) Guide us to the Straight Path” in our 
daily prayers, but it seems to have little effect on us because we do not 
realize what we say. I entreat you, dear readers, to pray from the deepest 

Preface 23 ; darkia 

depths of your hearts for guidance and not to take for granted or remain 
self-satisfied with your denomination that may well be an accident of birth 
or milieu. 

Third, Allah has given you intellect, good sense and reasoning faculty. You 
use them to improve your material wealth and worldly possessions. You 
do not feel contented with what you inherit from your parents but ever 
strive to increase it and add to your material comforts, although you know 
that the joys of the world are short-lived and will perish sooner or later. Is 
it sensible to strive day and night for the fleeting pleasures of the world 
and ignore the joys and comforts of the Hereafter that are abiding, 
unending and supreme? Is it wise of us to keep on following the religious 
traditions we inherited from our family or acquired from our environs, no 
matter what they are? 

Surely, it is not a good use of the gifts of Allah, the gifts of reason and 
intellect. Reason demands of us to seek the Straight Path. Not to do so is to 
wrong yourself as well as your children. Remember that straying away 
from the Straight Path means loss in the Afterlife. It is our duty, therefore, 
to save us and our children from that great loss that is the inevitable end of 
those who digress from the Straight Path. And the only way. to avoid 
losing in the Afterlife is the one we have outlined in the foregoing pages. 

Our Actions and Day of Accounting 

We, too, are not exempt from what we have said earlier. Our instructions 
to others are equally binding on us as on them. We call Allah as witness 
that we have been fair in our evaluation of Ahddith. While deciding the 
soundness or weakness of a Hadith, we never let ourselves be swayed by 
bias for any particular sect, party or denomination or mental reservations, 
or preconceived notions or circumstances. We have been completely fair, 
just and honest in our evaluation of Ah@dith. We have tried to be 
completely neutral. We have kept our inquiries untainted with prejudice. 
Our research is purely scientific. We followed only the accepted principles - 
of Hadith evaluation. Only then did we decide a case or give a ruling as to 
which course is right or preferable. Twisting or distorting a Hadith, or 
wriggling out of it, or stretching it in an attempt to arrive at far-fetched 
meanings, dubbing a Sound Hadith as Weak or a Weak one as Sound, 
declaring without proof a Hadith as abrogated or abrogating—all these 
things we believe to be fraud, deception, and concealment of truth. We 
seek Allah’s refuge from these trickeries. Of course, we may have erred in 
applying the principles of Hadith evaluation, or we may have erred for lack 
of access to information, or we may have misunderstood something —and 
we will be grateful to those who point out our errors and we pledge to 
correct them forthwith—but, by grace of Allah, we remained honest and 

Preface 24 dade 

fair throughout our research work, there being no taint of bias for or 
prejudice against any school of thought, or party, or sect, or denomination, 
nor self motive or desire for profit. Allah is the Warden over what we say. 

Conclusion 

If a person realizes the greatness of Allah, his fear of Him will increase. 
And if a slave is afraid of His Lord’s retribution, he will increase in 
righteous deeds. Fear of Allah is a cure for idleness. It is also an excellent 
trait for a believer. 

Hasan Basri said, “I have kept the company of a people who are more 
worried of their righteous deeds being rejected than of their being 
punished for their misdeeds.” 

Yusuf bin Abdul-Hasan was described as follows: “Whenever he emerged, 
he would look as if he was coming from the funeral of a close relative of 
his; and whenever he sat down, he would look as if he was a captive who 
was about to be executed. Whenever Hell-Fire was mentioned, he would 
react as if it was created exclusively for him.” 

Know that a Muslim should maintain balance between fear and hope. For, 
fear only, if it is not accompanied by hope, can kill. Breeze of haope enlivens 
the souls. 

Fear is the driver of the soul while hope is its guide. If it becomes slack 
with its. guide, its driver eggs it on; and it refuses to abide by the 
instruction of its driver, its guide encourages it. Coolness of hope 
ameliorates the hotness of fear, and the sword of fear deals a deadly blow 
on procrastination. If a servant ponders over the favor of his Lord, he will 
show gratitude to Him and forsake anxiety and worries. If he looks at his 
sins, he will take precaution and will spend the night seeking pardon and 
forgiveness, 

My dear brother, death in the cause of seeking knowledge is better than 
perdition in the path of idleness. Continue to awake in the night and 
observe frequent supererogatory fasting. Leave sleep alone for the sleepers. 
Endeavor to catch up with righteous people. After you. have attained cure 
to your ailment, rejoice with the assurance of Allah: “And give good news 
to those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah and in His Prophet 
Muhammad 2%) that they shail have with their Lord the rewards of their 
good deeds?” (Yunus 10:2) 

But if you die in your ailment, console yourself with Allah’s promise for 
the martyrs: “Verily, the Muttagiin (the pious), will be in the midst of 
Gardens and Rivers (Paradise): In a seat of truth (Le., Paradise), near the 
Omnipotent King (Allah, the All-Blessed, the Most High, the Owner of 

Preface 25 dadie 

majesty and honor).”” (Al-Qamar 54:54-55) 

Be always in remembrance of Allah; perhaps. your little remembrance of 
Allah. may make Him also remember you, as He said: “And the 
remembering, (praising) of (you by) Allah (in front of the angels) is greater 
indeed [than your remembering (praising) of Allah in prayers]. (AL 
‘Ankabut 29:45) So be sincere in your remembrance of Him. 

Abu Hurairah # narrated: “Allah’s Messenger #¢ was traveling along the 
path leading to Makkah that he happened to pass by a mountain called 
Jumdan. He said: ‘Proceed on, it is Jumdan. The Mufarridun have gone ahead.’ 
The Companions said: ‘O Allah’s Messenger, who are Mufarridun?’ He said: 
‘They are those males and females who remember Allah much.”"! 

Abu Hurairah 4 said, while he was in the house of Umm Darda: “The 
Messenger of Allah #@ reported from his Lord that He said, “I am with My 
slave when he remembers Me and his lips move (in My remembrance). 

Abu Darda said: “Those who always remembered Allah shall enter 
Paradise smiling.” 

One of the signs of a lover is that he feels stirred up whenever the name of 
his beloved is mentioned. If you love someone from among the people of 
this world and you hear his name being mentioned, you feel stirred up 
from within. ‘ 
However, remembrance of Allah is being recited to you and nothing 
changed in you! You hear Allah’s commands and prohibitions many times 
and. yet you fail to reflect upon them; though He has made the reflection 
on His Verses easy for whoever strives in His way. But there are some 
among His slaves who ponder, implement His commandments, and 
abstain from His prohibitions. Whenever such people look at their good 
deeds they realize that they have not done enough. They never enjoy any 
food, drink or sleep. without remembering Allah. Can’t you hear Him 
describing such slaves of His and commending them in His Glorious Book 
saying: “The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a 
fear in their hearts and when His Verses (this Qur'an) are recited unto 
them, they (i.e., the Verses) increase their Faith.” (Al-Anfal 8:2) 

He also describes them as: “As-Sabirun [who patiently bear whatever may 
befall them (of calamities)].” (Al-Hajj 22:35) 

So He thanked them for that and concealed their misdeeds. He informed 
them that He will be pleased with them on the Day the sky shall split open 

1] Muslim (2676). 
2) Ahmad 2/540. 

Preface 26 date 

and, the Day “Man will be informed of what he sent forward (of his evil or 
good deeds), and what he ieft behind (of his good or evil traditions).” (AL 
Qiyamah 75:13) 

On that Day, the sinner shall regret and be in sorrow for his negligence. He 
will be weighed down with his misdeeds. When he will be called to read 
his record of deeds, he will see that it is full of evil acts and he will be 
confused. When he sees other sinners like him being sent and dragged to 
Hell, he will then show a remorse that will be of no avail to him. He will 
cry but he will not be heard. He will neither be shown mercy nor be 
excused. — 

The punishment is severe for those who transgressed and behaved 
arrogantly. Therefore, my admonition for you is that, you should repent 
and give up sinning. Perhaps, you will be lead aright. For, Allah helps 
those who seek.refuge with Him and work righteously. 

Introduction 27 datic 

Introduction 

Methodology of Research and Tracing of Ahdadith 

Praise is to Allah. We extol Him and seek His help. None can misguide 
him whom Allah guides and none can guide him whom Allah misguides. I 
bear witness that there is no God except Allah, Alone, without any partner, 
and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger. The 
best speech is the Book of Allah and the best course is the course of 
Muhammad #¢ while the worst things are (religious) innovations and 
every innovation is.an error and a delusion. 

I thank Allah, our Lord, Who made it possible for me to research and trace 
the Ahadith of Sunan Arba‘ah (Sunan Abu Dawud, Sunan Tirmidhi, Sunan 
Nasé@i and Sunan Ibn Majah). 

Among the four Sunan, Sunan Ibn Méajah holds a prominent place. I have 
already done research work and written a commentary on it in Arabic 
under the tithe Tas-hilul-Hajah fi Mukhtasar Takhrij Sunan Ibn Majah. It is 
included in the Urdu edition now. To know my work and methodology, in 
this treatise, the following points need to be borne in mind: 

e Sunan. Ibn Majah contains two types of Ahddith: 
a) Ahédith that occur in Sahih Bukhéri or Sahih Muslim or in both. 
b) Ahddith that occur neither in Bukhari nor in Muslim. 

2 My own research finding is that all the Musnad (with chains of 
narrations) and Marfu’ (traceable to the Prophet #%) Ahddith of Sahih 
Bukhari and Sahih Muslim are Sound (Sahih). This is also the opinion of 
all the scholars of the nation. As for the other Ahddith, J have given my 
verdict as to their soundness or weakness. See, for example, Hadith no. 
50: the chain of narration is Hasan (Good), and Hadith no. 11: the chain 
of narration is Da‘if (Weak). 

e If I ruled a narration to be Weak, I also stated my reasons for that. For 
example, Hadith no. 19: Abu Bakr bin Khallad Al-Bahili narrated to us 
from Yahya bin Sa’eed from Shu’bah from Ibn ‘Ajlan that ‘Awn bin 
‘Abdullah told him, narrating from ‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud. After I had 
declared it to be Weak, I wrote: “There is an interruption (Ingita’} in its 
chain of narration because ‘Awn bin ‘Abdullah did not. hear from 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud.” 

e When I ruled a Hadith to be Hasan or Sahih, I also gave the reference of 
another Hadith scholar in case he also declared it to be so. See, for 
example, Hadith no. 87. 

Introduction 28 dese 

e Incase a narration of Iba Majah occurs in Bukhari and Muslim as well as 
in other books, | have given the reference of Bukhari and Muslim only 
while tracing it. See, for example, Hadith no. 10: (Muslim) although this 
narration also exists in Sunan Tirmidhi (Hadith no. 2229). 

e The references of Bukhiri and Muslim do not mean that the narration, 
with respect to its text, is exactly the same in both Bukhéri and Muslim. 
It only means that the narration in both the books is the same with 
respect to the chain of narration. As to the text, it may be long in one 
and short in the other or vice versa or words may differ but the 
meaning is the same. 

e Since, according to research scholars, Bukh@ri has precedence over 
Muslim, I have given precedence to Bukhari while tracing Ahddith. But 
in some places, Muslim has been mentioned first while tracing. The 
reason for that is that a greater part of the chain of narration exists in 
Muslim. See, for example, Hadith no. 58: collected by Muslim on the 
authority of Sufyan bin ‘Uyainah and by Bukhiiri on the authority of 
Malik. The following chart explains it further: 

‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar 
Salim bin ‘Abdullah 
Ibn Shihab (Zuhri) 
Malik bin Anas Sufyan ‘Uyainah 

‘Abdullah bin Yusuf Zuhair bin Harb, Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah 
Abu Bakr bin Abu Shaibah, bin Yazid, 
‘Amr Nagid Sahl bin Abu Sahl 

Imam Bulchari Imam Muslin Imam Ibn Majah 

It is clear from the foregoing chain that Muslim is closer to Ibn Majah. 
Hence, he has been mentioned before the other. 

[For some reasons, like explicit affirmation of a Mudallis (Truncated - 
immediate narrator not known) having directly heard from whom he is 
reporting, references from outside the Sound Six have also been given. See, 

! 

introduction 29 dadiia 

for example, Hadith no. 35, collected by Ahmad from Hadith of Muhammad. 
bin Ishaq about whom it was affirmed that he had heard directly from 
e® Two things should be noted about Tadlis (truncation): 

a. There are those who cannot be accused of truncation, any such 
charge against them being baseless and false, like Bukhari, Muslim, 
Abu Qilabah Jarmi, Makhul Shami, Zaid bin Aslam, Jubair bin 
Nufair, and Hammad bin Usamah. All of them are leading Hadith 
scholars and narrators of the First Level. Their Mu’an’an Ahdadith (in 
which the narrator relates using the preposition ‘an, meaning “from’) 
are considered to have been heard directly ‘by narrators unless there 
be a reason ruling it out. 

b. The Mu‘an’an narrations, in Hadith books other than those of Bukhiri 
and Muslim, by narrators like Qatadah, A’mash, Sufyan Thawri, and 
Abu Ishaq Sabi’i against whom it is proved that they did truncate, 
are considered Da’if (Weak) in case they did not hear them directly 
or any follow-up. Imam ‘Shafi‘i said: “We do not accept a Hadith 
from a Mudallis {truncater) until he says ‘so-and-so told me’ or ‘T 
heard”! . In the matter of Tadlis, his opinion is generally prevalent 
and preferred. 

« Some scholars take the Mu’an’an narrations by Sufyan Thawri, Sufyan 
bin ‘Uyainah, A’mash and others as Sound and those of Hasan Basri, 
Abu Zabair, and Abu Ishaq etc., as Weak. I do not see it as the right 
methodology. In my opinion, a decisive and categorical stand should 
be taken regarding this issue. See my treatise At-Ta’sis fi Mas’alah At- 
Tadlis for details. 

° Incase there is a difference of opinion among scholars about a narrator 
regarding his trustworthiness or weakness, finding it impossible to 
apply a single, consistent rule or reconcile between divergent opinions, 
J have always preferred the opinion of the majority of scholars. 

*® Ifa narrator is considered trustworthy by the lenient (Mutasdhil) experts 
in the science of Biographies like Tinmidhi, Ibn Hibban, Hakim, I have 
classified him as Unknown (Majhul), but if he is endorsed as 
trustworthy by two of them, for example, by Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban, 
T have classified him as good (Hasanul-Hadith) and truthful (Sadugq). 
Note: Some scholars consider Imam ‘Tlf as lenient. I do not agree with 
this view but consider Imam ‘Ili as moderate (Mu ‘tadil). 

e When a narrator is classified as trustworthy or good, it endorses the 

®] Kitabur-Risdlah, p. 380. 

Introduction 30 dotsa 

reliability of each narrator in the chain of the narration. For example, 
Nafi’ bin Mahmud Al-Maqdisi’s narration has been graded Hasan 
(Good) or Sahih (Sound) by Déréquini and Baihagi. Hence, he is 
trustworthy (Thigah), according to them. See also Nasbur-Ré@yah 1/49 
and 3/264, and Silsilatus-Sahihah 7/16, Hadith no. 3007. It is wrong to 
classify such a narrator as Unknown (Majhul) or concealed (Mastur). 

While grading a Hadith as Sahih or Hasan, I have taken into account 
other Ahfdith as corroborators (Shawéhid) or follow-ups (Mutabi‘at). So 
some Ahddith have been graded Sahih or Hasan in the light of Shawdhid 
and Mutabi‘at. 

Despite these methodologies of Hadith evaluation, errors may creep in. 
To err is human. But I declare hereby that.1 will not hesitate to recant if 
it is proved that there is error in my inquiry and the tracing of Ahédith. 
While validating or invalidating narrators, I have invariably referred to 
original books of biographies of narrators and, after thorough 
investigation, selected the most correct and most preferable opinion. In 
case, the name of a preceding scholar of Hadith has been given without 
remark or note, it means I agree with him. 

Abu Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i 
August, 2006. 

The Six Collections 31 dataie 

The Six Collections 
and what the Eminent Scholars said about them 

Sahih Bukhari: 

Ibrahim bin Ma’qil Nasafi said that he heard Muhammad bin Isma’il 
Bukhari saying: “I collected the book Al-Jami’ in ten plus years and I made 
it a proof between me and Allah.” 

Ibrahim bin Ma’gqil Nasafi also said that he heard Bukhéri say: “I did not 
include in the book Al-Jémi’ but only that which is authentic. I have 
excluded many other authentic Ahfdith to avoid prolongation.”"™4 

Sahih Muslim: 

Hafiz Abu Abdullah bin Mandah said that he heard Abu ‘Ali Husain bin 
‘Ali Nishapuri saying: “There is no book of Hadith under the heaven more 
authentic than the book of Muslim bin Hajjaj.”"7! 

Muhammad. bin Husain Masarjasi reported from his father who said that 
he heard Muslim bin Hajjaj saying: “I compiled this Al-Musnad As-Sahih 
out of a collection of three hundred thousand heard Ahddith.” 

Sunan Abu Dawud: 

Abu Bakr bin Dasah said that he heard Abu Dawud saying: “I collected 
five hundred thousand Ahédith reported from the Messenger of Allah #é. 
And I selected from this number four thousand eight hundred Ahddith that 
T included in this book of mine - the Sunan. In this collection, 1 mentioned 
those that are authentic or closer. Four of these authentic Hadith are enough 
for a Muslim as the basis for his religion. These four are: 

1. The Prophet's saying: “The reward of deeds depends upon the 
intentions,””! 

2. The Prophet's saying: “The proper practice of one’s Islam demands that 
he should leave alone that which does not concern him.’”!! 

3. His saying: “None of you believes until he loves for his brother what he 
loves for himself.” 

4. His saying: “The lawful things are clear and the forbidden things are 

[) Tahdhibul-Kamél 1/671. 

2 Tehdhibul-Kamél 1/168. 

& Bukhari (1); and Abu Dawud (2201). 

[8 Tirmidhi (2317); Albani classified it as Sahih. 
©! Bukhari (13); and Muslim (1599). 

The Six Collections 32 dado 

clear. But between the two are things are not so clear..." 

Abu Bakr Sawli reported that he heard Zakariya bin Yahya Saji saying, 
“The Book of Allah is the foundation of Islam, and the book of Sunan by 
Abu Dawud is the covenant of Islam.” 

Isma’il bin Muhammad Saffar narrated that he heard Muhammad bin 
Ishaq Saghani saying, “Knowledge of Hadith was softened for Abu Dawud 
as iron was softened for Prophet Dawud xa.” 

Abu Sulaiman Khattabi reported: I heard Ibn A’rabi saying while he was 
reading to us the Sunnah by Abu Dawud, he pointed the manuscript from 
which he was reading and said, “If someone has no source of knowledge 
beside a copy of Allah's Book and then this book - Sunan Abu Ditwud - they 
are enough for him.” 

Khattabi then said, “There is no doubt in what Ibn A’rabi said. This is 
because; Allah revealed His Book as explanation for everything. He says: 
“We have neglected nothing in the Book.’ (Al-An’am 6:38) In the Verse, 
Allah the Exalted informs us that there is nothing in matters. of religion that 
the Qur’an does not address.” 

However, this explanation is. of two kinds: clear and explicit explanation 
and hidden and implicit mentioning. The detailed explanation of the latter 
was assigned to the Prophet #¢. This is the interpretation of Allah’s. saying: 
“And We have also sent down to you (O Muhammad #£) the Dhikr 
(Reminder) and the advice (ie., the Qur’an) that you may explain clearly to 
men what is sent down to them, and that they may give thought.” (An- 
Nahl 16:44) Therefore, whoever combines between the Qur’an and the 
Sunnah has indeed attained both sources of explanation. 

In his: book, Abu Dawud included Ahédith about foundations of knowledge 
and traditions and rules of Figh. As far as I know, no scholar before Abu 
Dawud or after him had. accomplished this. 

Abu Sulaiman said: A report reached us that Abu Dawud said, “I did not 
include this book of mine a Hadith that the scholars unanimously 
rejected.”“1 

Sunan Tirmidhi: 

Hafiz Abu Sa’eed Abdur-Rahman bin Muhammad Idrisi said, 
“Muhammad bin ‘Eisa bin Sawrah is one of the leading scholars of Hadith. 
He had a number of works among them. are: Al-Jimi’, Tawdrikh and Al-‘Tlal. 

"1 Bukhari (52); Muslim (1599); and Abu Dawud (3329). 
PY Tahdhibul-Kamél 1/169. 
81 Tahdhibul-Kaméal 1/170. 

The Six Collections 33 ; dedi 

These works are compilation of a widely-read scholar, who is cited as an 
example in erudition.” 

Abul-Fadi Muhammad bin Tahir Maqdisi said: 1 was with Imam Abu 
Isma’il Abdullah bin Muhammad Ansari at Hira’ when the mentioned was 
made of Abu ‘Eisa Tirmidhi and his book. He said, “In my view, his book 
is more useful than those of Bukhari and Muslim because; the benefits that 
are in the books of these two scholars can only be attained by well-versed 
scholars. But as for the book of Abu ‘Eisa Trimidhi, all the people can 
benefit from it.” 

Sunan Nasa@’i: 

Abul-Fad! bin Tahir said: I] asked Imam. Abu Qasim Sa‘d bin “Ali Zanjani at 
Makkah about the situation of one of the reporters of Hadith and he 
declared him as trustworthy. I then said: But Abu Abdur-Rahman Nasa’i 
regarded him as Weak. Thereupon Zanjani said: “My son, the condition of 
Abu Abdur-Rahman on narrators of Hadith is stricter than that of Bukhari 
and Muslim.” 

Hakim Abu Abdullah bin Bayya’ said: I heard Abu Hasan Ahmad bin 
Mahbub: Ramali at Makkah saying: I heard Abu Abdur-Rahman Ahmad 
bin Shu’aib Nas@’i saying, “When I decided to compile the book As-Sunan, 
I made Istikhfrah to Allah concerning some Shaikhs about whom I had 
some reservations. The result of the Istikhdrah was that I should reject their 
narrations. As a consequence, I had. longer chains of narrators in some 
Hadith in-which I would have had shorter chains.” 

Hafiz Abdul-Ghani bin Sa’eed Misri said: I heard Abu Hasan Khidr As- 
Suyuti saying, “I saw the Prophet § in my sleep while there were in front 
of me many books among them was As-Sunan. by Abu Abdur-Rahman 
Nasa‘i. The Prophet #@ then told me: ‘When are you going. to stop 
gathering books and how much books are you going to acquire before you 
stop?! This is. enough!” He then picked with hard part one of the Book of 
Purification from Sunan Nasa’. It then occurred to me that what the 
Prophet #§ meant was that Nas@’i’s book is dearest book to him.”"! 

Sunan Ibn Majah: 
Abu Zur’ah Razi said, “I read the book compiled by Abu Abdullah Ibn 

Majah and I did not find there but few Ahédith whose authenticity is 
contestable.” And he mentioned some Ahédith that are less than twenty. 

Abu Abdullah Ibn Majah: said, “T showed this transcript to Abu Zur’ah 
Razi. He checked it and said, ‘T think if people lay their hands on this book, 

Ol Tahdhibul-Kaméal 1/472. 

The Six Collections 34. peer.vy 

all or most of other great compiled works will become unnecessary.”’! 

Comparing Ibn Majah’s Book with Other Collections 

Comparisons have been made between Sunan Ibn Méjah and other 
‘collections such as Muwatta’ of Imam Malik, Sunan Ad-Dérimi, Musnad 
Ahmad and Sahih Ibn Hibbén. Yet, Sunan Ibn Méjah succeeded in becoming 
the sixth of the major collections. The following are books compared to 
Sunan Ibn Majah: 

Muwatta’ by Imam Malik 

Abu Abdullah Malik bin Anas 4% was born in the year 93 or 94 AH. He 
was among the leaders of the generation that succeeded the Tabi’in. He was 
a pious scholar and a great jurist. He showed great concern for the 
Prophet’s Sunnah. He valiantly defended it and ferociously waged war 
against those who sought to oppose the Sunnah. He gave the Sunnah 
priority over all other things and never did he rely on invalid analogies at 
the expense of the Sunnah. He died in the year 179 AH.?! 

As regards comparing Muwatta’ to Sunan Ibn Majah, Shamsuddin Jazari 
said about Sunan Ibn Majah: “Tt is the sixth of the six major collections, 
according to the scholars of Hadith. What Ibn Athir said that Muwatta’ - not 
Sunan Ibn Majah. - is. the sixth of the major collections is his personal 
view.” 

There are scholars who regarded Muwatta’ as the sixth of the major 
collections. Some of these scholars are: Razin bin Mu’awiyah ‘Abdari and 
Ibn Athir Jazari,!4! 

Musnad by Imam Ahmad 

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal is a real leader and Shaikhul-Islam. He is one of 
the eminent Imams. 

Ibrahim Harbi said, “I saw Abu Abdullah — Imam Ahmad. It was as if 
Allah has endowed him with the knowledge of the earlier and latter 
generations combined.” 

A man said, “I have never seen anyone more knowledgeable about Figh 
and Hadith and its meanings more than Ahmad.” 

Ishag bin Rahwaih said, “I would sit in the company of Ahmad and Ibn 
Ma’een and we would do joint study. Whenever I inquired about 

© Tahdhibul-Kamél 1/173. 

2] Mashdhir ‘Ulama’ Al-Amsar 1/223. 
®) Kashfuz-Zunun 2/1473. 

4] Ar-Risilah ALMustatrafah, p. 11. 

The Six Collections 35 Aerie 

something as regards its meaning and interpretation, no one but Ahmad 
would dare speak.” 

His book, Al-Musnad, is one of the greatest and most comprehensive books 
of Hadith. But it needs some arrangement. 

Ibn Kathir said, “There are in Musnad of Imam Ahmad many Isndd and 
narrations that are equal in status to many of those found in Sahih Muslim, 
even in Sahih Bukhdri, but which none of them and none of the four 
collectors of Sunan had collected. 

As for the statement of Hafiz Abu Musa Muhammad bin Abu Bakr Al- 
Madini concerning Musnad Ahmad that its Ahddith were Sahih, is not 
cotrect. This is because; the book contains, in addition to authentic Ahéddith, 
Weak and even spurious narrations such as narrations about virtues of 
Marw, ‘Asqalan and Birthal-Ahmar, as pointed out by the scholars. 

This is in addition to the fact that Imam Ahmad had missed many Ahddith. 
It is said that there are narrations from close to two hundred Companions 
that Imam Bukhari and Im4m Muslim recorded but that Imam Ahmad did 
not have in his Musnad.! 

Sunan Ad-Darimi 
Ad-Darimi is Hafiz Abdullah bin Abdur-Rahméan bin Fad] bin Bahram bin 
Abdullah Abu Muhammad Tamimi Darimi As-Samargandi. 

Abu Hatim bin Hibbaén said, “Darimi was one of the learned scholars of 
Hadith and was pious. He was well-versed in Hadith and. Figh. He authored 
may works and taught Hadith to others. He promoted the Sunnah in his 
country, called unto it, defended it and defeated those who sought to 
oppose it.”P] 

Some eminent scholars such as HAfiz Ibn Salah, Nawawi, Salahuddin ‘Ala’i 
and Hafiz Ibn Hajar #& believed that it would have been had Sunan Ad- 
Dérimi been regarded as the sixth of the six major collections.!! 

Sahih Ibn Hibban Al-Busti 

Imam Abu Hatim Muhammad bin Hibban was a great and well-versed 
scholar. He was the leading scholar of Khorasan. He has many great and 
famous works to his credit. He was born in the year 270 AH. 

Abu Sa’d Idrisi said about him, “He was the judge of Samarqand for quite 
sometime, and he was one of the eminent jurists and scholars of Hadith. He 

[l Siyar Alam An-Nubala’ 11/188. 
Pl Al-Béith Al-Hadith, pp. 22 and 25. 
2] Siyar A‘lam An-Nubala’ 12/224 

(4) Ar-Risdlah Al-Mustatrafah, p. 11. 

The Six Collections 36 deise 

was also well-versed in medicine, astrology and other sciences. 

Among his works are: Al-Musnad As-Sahih, Al-Anwd’ wat-Tagiésim, Kitébut- 
Térikh, Kitébud-Du’af’ and many others. And he taught people Figh at 
Samargand, 

Hakim Nishapuri said, “Ton Hibban was one of the vessels of knowledge in 

Figh, Arabic language, Hadith and admonition. He was among the wisest 
w{1] 

men. 

YAqut said, “Ibn Hibban accomplished in the science of Hadith what others 
failed to do. People used to travel to Khorasan to read his works.” 

His book Al-Musnad As-Sahih is regarded as more authentic than Sunan Ibn 
Majah.?! 

Signs the Scholars Adopted for Sunan Ibn Majah: 

After the six major collections - Sahih Bukhdri, Sahih Muslim, Sunan Abu 
Déwud, Sunan Tirmidhi, Sunan Nas@’i and Sunan Ibn Méjah - have become 

popular among the scholars, they adopted signs as a shortcut to each of 
them. 

The signs that are used as shortcuts for the each of the six collections, 
according to Suyuti are as follows: 

Cé&) for Bukhari 

Ce) for Muslim 

(3) for Bukhari and Muslim 

(2) for Abu Dawud 

(<=) for Tirmidhi 

(02) for Nas@’i 

(2) for Ibn Majah 

(4) for the four collectors of Sunan 

(3) for the collectors of Sunnah excluding Ibn Majah 

( «> ) for Ahmad in his Musnad"* 

1 Siyar A’‘lém An-Nubala’ 16/94. 
2] ALA lam by Khairuddin Zirakli 6/78. 
©! Kashfuz-Zunun 1/762 

The Six Collections 37 dake 

An Important Point 
Most of the collectors of the Sunan i& died with close intervals. 

Imam Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Majah Al-Qazvini died in the year 
273 AH. 

Imam Abu Dawud Sulaiman bin Ash’ath As-Sijistani died in the year 275 AH. 

Imam Abu ‘Eisa Muhammad bin ‘Eisa bin Sawrah Tirmidhi died in the 
year 279 AH.@ 

A number of scholars wrote eulogies in honor of Imam Ibn Majah aw. 
Among his scholars are: Yahya bin Zakariyya Taraiqi and Muhammad bin 
Aswad Qazvini. 

(1) Al-Wafayat by Ibn Qunfudh 1/6. 

A Life Sketch of Imam Ibn Majah 38 daisic 

A Life Sketch of 
Imam Ibn Majah 

Imam Ibn Majah, a is a bright star that continues to shine to this day on 
the firmament of Hadith sciences. He is counted among the greatest and 
most high-ranking Imams of Hadith. He has also the honor of being one of 
the six Imams whose collections of Hadith are widely popular among the 
Muslims. 

Like other Imams, he earned great fame for serving the Hadith sciences and 
played an important role in the recording of Ahddith. His whole life he 
spent watering the garden of this science. To collect and record the sayings 
of the Prophet #8, he traveled to several countries, learning from the 
greatest Hadith scholars of his times and then gathering together those 
pearls in a single place for the benefit of later generations. 

Ibn Majah was a great scholar of Hadith, Qur’anic interpretation and 
history. Especially in the field Hadith sciences, he was counted as a great 
memorizer of Ahédith and an expert in this field. For this very reason, Hafiz 
Shamsuddin Muhammad Dhahabi, Hafiz Ibn Hajar and other critics in the 
field of Hadith sciences have acknowledged his leading position, high 
station, breadth of vision, and the ability to memorize Ahddith, extolling his 
academic and technical services in this field. 

Name and Lineage: 

Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad bin Yazid bin ‘Abdullah Rab’i Al-Qazvini 
nicknamed Ibn Majah. He was a non-Arab. He was Rab’i because he 
belonged to the tribe of Rab’i and was called Al-Qazvini because he 
belonged to Qazvin (Iran). Various explanations have been given for his 
nickname. Allamah Zubaidi, writing in Tajul-’Urus, has given several 
explanations for the nickname, one explanation being that Majah was his 
mother’s name. Imam Nawawi gives weight to this explanation. Shah 
‘Abdul-’Aziz Dehlavi in Bosténul-Muhadithin says: (The correct opinion is 
that Majah was his mother.) That is why the Arabic word for son (Ibn) is 
written with the Arabic letter alif to indicate that Ibn Majah qualifies 
Muhammad, not ‘Abdullah. Anyhow, some scholars believe that Majah 
was his father’s name. That is also the opinion of Hafiz Ibn Hajar. 

Birth and Early Education: 

He was born in 209 AH corresponding to 824 CE. Yaqut bin ‘Abdullah Al- 
Hamavi, quoting Ja’far bin Idris’ Tarikh Qazvin, wrote: Abu ‘Abdullah died 
in the year 273 AH and IJ heard him say “I was born in 209 AH.” Much of 

A Life Sketch of Imam Ibn Majah 39 datiea 

Ibn Majah’s childhood is unknown but it appears that, according to the 
practice of those days, after receiving his early education, he turned to the 
Hadith sciences in his own hometown first that had become by then the 
cradle of Hadith sciences. 

Travels in Pursuit of Knowledge: 

After learning from the teachers in his own home town and the towns 
nearby, he began his travels in 230 AH, when he was 21 or 22 years old, to 
other countries to acquire more of Hadith sciences. Ibn Jawzi writes in Al- 
Muntazim : “He travelled to Khorasan, Iraq, Hijaz, Egypt and Sham and 
attended the gatherings of Hadith scholars.” Imam Hanbal writes: “He 
journeyed to Kufah and Basrah, Egypt, and Sham. He also learned from 
the scholars of Makkah and Al-Madinah and, later, traveled to Baghdad 
that was in those times, according to Imam Dhahabi, the ‘home of chains of 
narration and memorization’ (Dérul-Isnddul-’Ali wal-Hifz), the seat of the 
caliphate and knowledge. But he never ceased or tarried but continued his 
journeys in quest of knowledge. Again he traveled to Damascus, Homs, 
Egypt, Isfahan, Ashkelon (seaport in SW Palestine) and Nishapur where he 
became a pupil of the stars and celebrities of Hadith sciences. This gives us 
a good idea of how hard he strove to learn Hadith sciences and, in his 
desire to collect Ahadith, journeyed to distant seats of learning. 

His Teachers: 

Imam Ibn. Majah had the honor of learning Hadith sciences from a number 
of great scholars of his times including those of Makkah, Al-Madinah and 
Qazvin. Among those of Al-Madinah were Hafiz Ibn Mus’ab Zubairi, 
Ahmad bin Abu Bakr Al-’Awfi and Hafiz Ibrahim bin Al-Mundhir. His 
Makkan teachers were Hafiz Jalwani, Abu Muhammad Hasan bin ‘Ali Al- 
Khilal, Hafiz Zubair bin Bakkar, the Judge of Makkah, Hafiz Salamah bin 
Shabib, etc. Notable among his teachers in Qazvin were ‘Amr bin Rafi’ 
Bajali, Isma’il bin Tawbah and Muhammad bin Abu Khalid Qazvini. He 
also studied under other prominent teachers like Jubarah bin Mughallis, 
Abu Bakr bin Abu Shaibah, Nasr bin ‘Ali Nishapuri, Abu Bakr bin Khallad 
Bahili, Muhammad bin Bashshar, Abul-Hasan’ Ali bin Muhammad Tanafisi 
and ‘Ali bin Mundhir. 

His Pupils: 

The list of his pupils is very long. They are scattered far and wide, in 
Qazvin, Hamadan, Isfahan, Baghdad, and. other places. Notable among 
them are ‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah Al-Falani, Ibrahim bin Dinar Al-Jarshi, Ahmad 
bin Ibrahim Qazvini, Hafiz Abu Ya’la Al-Khalili and Abu ‘Amr Ahmad bin 
Muhammad bin Hakim Al-Madani Al-Isfahani. 

A Life Sketch of Imam Ibn Majah 49 datie 

Narrators of Sunan Ibn Majah: 

Among his closest students who had the honor of narrating Sunan Ibn 
Majah wete Abul-Hasan Al-Qattén, Sulaiman bin Yazid, Abu Ja’far 
Muhammad bin ‘Eisa, and Abu Bakr Hamid Al-Abhari. 

Recognition of his eminence by Scholars: 

A great Hadith scholar, interpreter of Qur’an and historian, his outstanding 
rank, especially in the field of Hadith sciences, has been acknowledged. by 
scholars of Hadith sciences in every age. 

-— Imam Dhahabi says: “Imam Ibn Majah remembered Ahddith by heart. 
He was a critic in the field of Hadith sciences, truthful, upright and a 
man. of wide learning.” Imam Dhahabi wrote in Tadhkiratul-Huffaz: “He 
was a great memorizer of Ahddith and a Hadith scholar and Qur'an 
interpreter of Qazvin.” 

— Abu Ya’la Khalili said: “He was very trustworthy and an authority; 
and had a deep knowledge of Hadith sciences.”’. 

— Allamah Sindi said: “Among the Imams of Hadith, he had a high rank, 
was pious and a trustworthy scholar by consensus.” 

Writings of Ibn Majah: 

After completing his education, Ibn Majah turned to writing and 

composing and left behind three great works: 

As-Sunan. The Sunan Ibn Majah.is counted among the Sound Six (or, say, 
the Six Books) and ranks sixth. A detailed account can be seen in the 
following pages. 

At-Tafsir: It was a large commentary on Qur’én in which the Imam had 
collected Ahddith and comments of the Companions and Tébi‘in'! 
supported with chains of narrations. Sayuti counted this commentary and 
that of Ton Hatim among the voluminous commentaries of Qur’an. Ibn 
Kathir, in Al-Biddyah, said the same thing. 

At-Taérikh: A great history book and a manifestation of his great 
scholarship and learning, Ibn Kathir called it a complete history while Ibn 
Khalkan, the famous historian, called it Tarik Malih (nice history). 

It is a pity that the last two books are no longer extant. 

Death: 

The Imam died on Monday, 22 Ramadan, 273 AH corresponding to 887 
CE, aged 64. May Allah forgive him and have mercy on him. Amen. 

[ Literally, the word means ‘Followers’ or ‘Successors’. A technical term meaning those 
who saw and met a Companion of the Prophet #8. 

A Life Sketch of Imam Ibn Majah 41 datiie 

Hafiz Abui-Fad) Muhammad bin Tahir Maqdisi said, “I saw a book Ibn 
Majah authored on biographies and history of regions from the time of the 
Companions till his time. At the end of the book, there is a statement with 
the handwriting of his student Ja’far bin Idris that reads: Abu Abdullah 
Muhammad bin Yazid Majah died on Monday and was buried on Tuesday 
22nd of Ramadan 273 AH. I heard him saying, ‘I was born in the year 209 
AH.’ He was aged 64 years. The funeral prayer was performed on him by 
his brother Abu Bakr, and he was buried by his brothers, Abu Bakr and 
Abu Abdullah; and his son, Abdullah.” 

Some scholars said that Ibn Majah died in the year 275 AH! 

Many a poet wrote moving elegies on his death. Hafiz Ibn Hajar, in 
Tahdhibut-Tahdhib, quoted a verse written by Muhammad bin Aswad 
Qazvini: “The loss of Ibn Majah weakened the columns of the throne of 
knowledge and shook up its pillars.” 

[1 Tahdhibul-Kamél 27/40. 

Tbn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 42 date 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 

Ahadith began to be put down in writing even during the era of the 
Prophet #% but these Ahddith were no better. than compilations by 
individuals. Their purpose was just to put them down in writing, with no 
regard for order or sequence. Later, during the caliphate of ‘Umar bin 
‘Abdul’ Aziz (99 AH-101 AH), the state undertook this task but most of the 
works in this field were the products of individual labor. During the 
second century of the Hijra calendar, famous books like Muwattd’ of Imam 
Malik and Musnad of Imam Shafi'i were prepared but the third stage of 
recording Ahddith, known as the Golden Age, came only in the third 
century AH. Many a collection was made in this age. These included the 
Six Books (Kutub Sittah), popularly known as the Sound Six (Sahah Sittah), 
Sunan of Ibn Majah being one of them and considered the last of them, 

Sunan Ibn Majah began to be included in the Six Books by the end of the 
fifth century AH. Since then, in every succeeding age, it kept on growing in 
value and importance. With respect to soundness and strength, Sunan Ad- 
Darimi, Sunan Ad-Dérdqutni and other books of Sunan were superior to 
Sunan Ibn Majah but they did not gain popularity like Sunan Ibn Majah. 

It is to be noted that Sunan is a technical term used by scholars of Hadith 
' sciences to denote a book of Ahddith relating to legal rulings, from the 
Chapters of Purification (Abwébut-Taharah wa Sunanha) down to the 
Chapter on Wills (Kitabul-Wasfya) in the same order as followed in books 
of Islamic jurisprudence. 

How important and useful the Sunan Ibn Majah is, can also be guaged by 
the fact that when Ibn Majah showed his work to Imam Abu Zar’ah, the 
latter remarked: ‘If this book reached the public, all or most of the existing 
Jawami’ would cease to be used. The words of Imam Abu Zar’ah proved to 
be true to the last letter. Several Jawami’,.Musnads and Sunan were eclipsed 
by Ibn Majah’s Sunan. 

Hafiz Ibn Hajar, writing in Tagribut-Tahdhib, termed the book Jami’ Jaiyid (a 
good, comprehensive Hadith collection). 

‘The book, As-Sunan by Imam Ibn Majah was an excellent and beneficial 
work that stunned the scholars of his time. ; 

He himself said about the book: “I showed this book to Abu Zur’ah Razi. 
He checked it and said, ‘I think if people lay their hands on. this book, all 
or most of other great compiled works will become unnecessary.’ 

() Tahdhibul-Kamél 1/173. 

Ybn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 43 datie 

The book was published and is popularly known among students of 
knowledge as Sunan Ibn Majah. 

There was also an old edition of the book printed in Egypt in whose cover 
was written: ‘Sunan Al-Mustafa by Ibn Majah’. However, there is no 
authentic proof for correctness of this latter name, and no one has ever 
called the book of Ibn Majah with this name. 

As for the first name Sunan Ibn Majah, it is inconceivable that author could 
give his work this name. For, the custom is that the author gives his book a 
name and then adds ‘by so-and-so’. It is not in the habit of the scholars to 
ascribe their books to themselves in a genitive construction. It is even 
unimaginable. 

There is a very old and authorized manuscript of Sunan Ibn Majah that 
dates back to year 601 AH. The manuscripts had writings of a number of 
scholars including Ibn Qudamah and Imam Mizzi, in this manuscript, Ibn 
Majah’s work is called As-Sunan li Ibn Majah. This is the correct title of the 
work. 

One should not say that there is little difference between the title Sunan Ibn 
Majah that means ‘the Sunan of Ibn Majah’, or As-Sunan li Ibn Majah that 
means ‘the Sunan collected by Ibn Majah’. For, in the second title, what 
normally comes to mind is that you are talking about the Sunan (traditions) 
of Allah’s Messenger #¢ while in the first title; the reader will think that 
you are talking about the Sunan of Ibn Majah and not that of the 
Messenger of Allah #§. Also, if you compare between the two titles, you 
will realize that the respect the second title commands in the hearts is 
greater than that of the first one. 

All this is in addition to the fact that the author did not title his work 
Sunan Ibn Méjah. Therefore, books and opinions of their authors in giving 
titles to their books should be respected. It follows then that, Ibn Majah’s 
book should be called ‘As-Sunan by Ibn Majah’, especially when printing 
the work. 

It is, however, strange that though this book has been published several 
times, the correct title did not appear in the cover of any of these editions. 
What is more astounding is the fact that one of the editors of the book, Dr. 
Muhammad Mustafa A’zami adopted the authorized manuscript in which 
this title appeared. Yet, he disregarded this title. 

While the scholars might be excused if they refer to Ibn Majah’s work as 
Sunan Ibn Majah in their normal conversations, this usage should not be 
condoned if it is written on the cover of the book. 

Ibn Majah’s. Book: As-Sunan 44 dotiie 

The Work’s Printed Editions: 

The work of Ibn Majah was first printed in 1233 AH in India. One volume 
of it was printed. The printing was then discontinued until the year 1273 
AH when the second volume was printed, also in India. The work was 
republished once again in Lahore, India in 1311 AH. 

In 1313 AH, it was published in Cairo. It was this Cairo edition that has in 
its margins the commentary of Sindi. 

The book was published several times thereafter, the latest and most 
recognized of these editions is the one edited by Muhammad Fuwéd 
‘“Abdul-Bagi published in 1373 AH. It is the edition recognized by most 
scholars whenever they wanted to quote a Hadith from Ibn Majah’s 
collection. This edition was reedited by Dr. Muhammad Mustafa A’zami 
and published again in 1404 AH. 

General Information on Sunan Ibn Majah: 

It has been pointed out earlier that the work is published in two volumes. 
It consists of thirty-two books on knowledge and Fiqh, and of one thousand 
five hundred and fifteen. (1515) chapters. 

According to Muhammad Fuwéad ‘Abdul-Baqi’s edition, it consists of four 
thousand three hundred and forty-one Ahfdith; and according to A’zami’s 
it. consists of four thousand three hundred and ninety-seven Ahéadith. 

Ibn. Majah started his collection with ‘the Book of Sunnah’, which is 
alternatively called ‘the Introduction’. Indeed, this book with which he 
started his work is one of the most beautiful and most wonderful 
introdyctions for such a work. This is because; the collection. itself is about 
the Sunnah and its fundamentals. It is therefore, very appropriate to start 
by fliscussing the Sunnah. 

In this wonderful introduction, Ibn Majah mentioned many chapters. If he 
were to separate them, each of them would have been like individual 
Sunnah books such as As-Sunnah by Abdullah bin Ahmad, As-Sunnah by 
Lalka’i and As-Sunnah by Tbn Abu ‘Asim. 

Ibn Majah then mentioned chapters that deal with the virtues of the 
Prophet’s Companions such as Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, “‘Uthman, ‘Ali and others. 
He then mentioned chapters concerning the Khawé4rij and Jahmiyyah. 

In the Book of ‘Agidah, Imam Ibn Majah mentioned chapters concerning a 
person who introduced good practice or bad practice; a person who 
revived a Sunnah that was extinct; and the virtue of a person who learnt 
the Qur'an and taught others. 

These and other chapters mentioned by Ibn Majah are like fundamentals 

Ybn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 45 datiia 

and principles of the science of Sunnah that should be inevitably read by 
whoever wanis to learn the Sunnah or is keen about the Prophet's practice. 

The first Hadith in the Sunan by Ibn Majah is as follows: 

Tbn. Majah narrated with his Isndd that goes to Abu Hurairah 2 who 
narrated that the Messenger of Allah #@ said: “Whatever I have commanded 
you, do it; and whatever I have forbidden you, refrain from it” This 
statement from Allah’s Messenger #€ seems like an. interpretation of Allah’s 
Word, “And whatsoever the Messenger (Muhammad #8) gives you, take it; 
and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it).” (Al-Hashr 59:7) 

Starting the book with this Hadith also has its significance. The 
comprehensiveness of the Hadith in the sense of its command that the 
Prophet #¢ should be followed is an indication that the “Book of Sunrah’ is 
the best and the most beautiful thing the compilation can be started. with. 

The last Hadith in the Sunan by Ibn Majah is the one he reported with his 
Isnad to Abu Hurairah 2 that the Messenger of Allah 2 said, “There is no 
one among you who does not have two abodes: An abode in Paradise and an 
abode in Hell. If he dies and enters Hell, the people of Paradise inherit his 
abode. This is what Allah says, “These are indeed the inheritors.” (Al- 
Mu’minun 23:10)?! 

Though this Hadith is one of those ones that only Ibn Majah narrated to the 
exclusion of the other five collectors, it is authentic. The other five collectors 
are: Bukhari, Musiim, Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi and Nasa’‘i. 

One of the wonderful lessons this Hadith teaches is that entering Paradise is. 
the goal of all slaves and the consequence of. all their actions. Ibn Majah 
concluded his collection with this Hadith to indicate. this and. that it is the 
end of whoever followed the Allah’s pleasure. It also indicates though the 
misguidance of those who deviated from the Sunnah of the Messenger of 
Allah #@ may hurt the Ahklus-Sunnah in. this world, they will be comforted 
on. the Day of Resurrection. For, they shali inherit in Paradise the places of 
the inhabitants of Hell. The recompense shall be according to the deeds. 

They were hurt by these people’s abandonment of the religion and the 
Prophet's Sunnah in this world, so Allah. rewarded them for that by making 
them happy in the Hereafter and making them inherit places in Paradise 
allocated to the dwellers of Hell. 

Further, it is also authentically reported from the Messenger of Allah #¢ 
that he said, “The scholars are the heirs of the Prophets, for the Prophets 

[I Yon Majah (1); Albani classified it as Sahih. 
Pl Tbn Majah (4341); Albani classified it as Sahih. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 46 datse 

did not leave behind Dinar or Dirham, rather they left behind knowledge, 
so whoever takes it has taken a great share." The legacy the Messenger 
of Allah #¢ left behind is his Sunnah. Those who inherited it in this world 
are the scholars who follow his Sunnah and act upon it. Therefore, they 
deserved to be exclusively described as ‘the inheritors’ in the above Verse. 

This should not be surprising; for, in this world, they inherited the legacy 
of knowledge left behind by the Prophets; and, in the Hereafter, they shall 
inherit the abodes of Paradise. 

The above explanation is an attempt at finding reason for Ibn Majah’s 
concluding his collection with this Hadith. 

Concerning describing the Sunan Ibn Majah as collection of Ahddith that 
deal about Figh issues - in line with the definition of latter scholars who 
defined Sunan as a collection of Ahddith arranged according to Figh 
chapters - we do not believe that this description is accurate enough. This 
is because; the Sunan collections, in addition to their inclusion of chapters 
on Figh, also include chapters that are unrelated to Figh. Therefore, it is 
better to define them as ‘the Sunan collections are books that mostly consist 
of Ahédith arranged according to Figh chapters.’ 

For example, Sunan Abu Déwud consists of Ahddith about Mahdi, and this 
has nothing to do with rules of Figh. 

There are also books in Ibn Majah’s collection that have nothing to do with 
rules of Figh such as ‘Chapters on the Interpretation of Dreams’, ‘Chapters 
on Asceticism’ and ‘Chapters on Tribulations’. 

The Chapters on Asceticism, which is the last part of the collection, consists 
of Ahédith that describe the Day of Resurrection and its horrors, description 
of the Prophet’s Water Fountain, and mentioning of the Prophet's 
intercession. Ibn Majah then mentioned Ahédith about description of Hell- 
Fire and then description of Paradise. 

It is therefore clear that Ibn Majah’s collection does not consists of chapters 
of Figh only but also comprises other chapters of knowledge. 

The Sunan Ibn Majah is the sixth of the six major collections of Ahédith. 
Others are: Sahih Bukhdri and Sahih Muslim, Sunan Abu Dawud, Sunan 
Tirmidhi, and Sunan Nasé’i. Hafiz Ibn/*Asakir made a collection of parts of 
each of the Hadith of the collection and Mizzi did the same on all its 
narrators. 

However, Ibn Salah and Nawawi did not make a mention of Ibn Majah’s 

1 Ton Majah (223); Albani classified it as Sahih. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 47 dotia 

collection in their works. They did not regard it as one of the major 
collections. They regarded the major collections as only the five, following 
the way of the earliest scholars of Hadith and methodology of the many of 
latter scholars. When some of these scholars realized that Ibn Majah’s 
collection is immensely useful and strong in terms of Figh and they realized 
that it included many Ahddith that are not in the Muwatta of Imam Malik, 
they included it among the major collections making them six. 

The first Imam to include Sunan Ibn Méjah to other five collections is Abul- 
Fadl Muhammad bin Tahir bin ‘Ali Maqdisi in his work, Atré@ful-Kutub As- 
Sittah. He was followed in doing so by Hafiz Abdul-Ghani bin ‘Abdul- 
Wahid bin ‘Ali bin Surur Maqdisi in his work, Al-Kamél fi Asma’ur-Rijal, 
which is a work about the narrators of the six major collections, and 
summarized under the name Tahdhibul-Kamél by Hafiz Jamaluddin Abu 
Hajjaj Yusuf bin Abdur-Rahman AJ-Mizzi. 

There were scholars such as Razin bin Mu’awiyah ‘Abdari and Athiruddin 
Abu. Sa’adat Mubarak bin Muhammad - otherwise known as Ibn Athir Al- 
Jazari Ash-Shafi'i - who counted Muwatta’ Imam Malik as the sixth of major 
collection in place of Sunan Ibn Méjah. ‘Abdari did so in his work Tajrid 
while Ibn Athir did so in his work Jami’ul-Usul. 

There were also eminent scholars such as Ibn Salah, Nawawi, Salahuddin 
‘Ala‘i and Hafiz Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani who believed that it would have been 
more preferable to count Sunan Darimi as the sixth of the major collections 
instead of Sunan Ibn Majah." 

Date of Composition: 

Ibn Majah left his home town in 230 AH in quest of Ahdadith and died in 
264 AH. It was during this intervening period that he composed his Sunan 
and showed it to Abu Zar’ah. This leads us to infer that Ibn Majah wrote 
his Sunan between 230 AH and 264 AH. 

Number of Narrations and Their Degree of Soundness: 

According to Abul-Hasan Qattan, the Sunan Ibn Majah contains 32 Books, 
1510 chapters and 4000 Ahédith while, according to Muhammad Fuwad 
‘Abdul-Baqi, it contains 37 Books, 1560 chapters and 4341 Ahddith. The 
latter opinion has more weight. 

According to Fuwad ‘Abdul-Baqi’s research, of the additional 1339 Ahddith, 
called Zawéi’id of Sunan Ibn Majah, 428 Ahédith are Sahih, 199 Hasan, 613 
Da'if and 99 Munkar (Denounced) and Maudu’ (Fabricated). Shaikh 
Nasiruddin in his book Da’if Ibn Méjah, counts 948 Ahddith as Da’if. 

5] See Ar-Risalah Al-Mustatrafah, p. 11. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 48 date 

Ibn Majah’s Conditions Regarding the Ahddith of His Collection: 
We did not find that Imam Ibn Majah wrote any introduction to his book 
in which he explained the conditions he followed and the methodology he 
used in compiling his book As-Sunan. He neither did that at the beginning 
of the book, as most scholars did, nor in a separate booklet; as some of 
them, such as Abu Dawud did. 

Also, we did not know of any scholar who gave any assessment to Ibn 
Majah’s collection that its Ahddith are generally authentic, as it happened 
with the collection of Nasa’i and those of others. As a result, we could not 
say that Ibn Majah stipulated that he would include only authentic Ahadith 
in his collection. In fact, the reality of his book indicated the contrary. What 
the study showed is that Ibn Majah’s collection contains greater number of 
Weak Ahddith and greater number of narrations that can be described as 
fabricated - though these are very few - than any of the other five 
collections. 

How then can we know the conditions Ibn Majah followed in compiling 
his book and the methodology he used? To start with, two things should 
attract the attention of the reader of Ibn Majah’s collection: 

One: Ibn Majah was greatly keen on compiling as mbny Ahddith as he 
could as long as they are explicitly related to detailed Branches of Figh. He 
was enthusiastic about mentioning evidences for detailed Figh issues. That 
is why his book was praised in this aspect. Ibn Kathir described Ibn 
Majah’s collection in his book, ikhtiséir ‘Ulumul-Hadith, as ‘a good and 
useful work, strongly chaptered in Figh.’ 

While making exhaustive compilation of these evidences of Figh, he was 
compelled to collect as many Ahddith as he could regardless of authenticity 
or weakness of the Ahddith. Perhaps, some scholars of Ibn Majah’s time 
used to cite some of these Weak narrations as proofs and he wanted to 
bring out to our knowledge their chains so that we could know their 
status. 

Two : It is related to ihe first factor - Ibn Majah has additional Ahéadith over 
those of the other fivé collections. These additions are many. If one was to 
consider the numbé? of Ahddith of the two Sahih collections and then those 
of the other thred: ééllections, namely Sunan of Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi and 
Nasa’i, and he Was to consider the fact that the other three collectors also 
arranged their coflections according to Figh chapters without stipulating 
that they collected only authentic narrations; he would realize that Ibn 
Majah still had more exclusively additional Ahddith than any of the other 
five collectors. The number of these additional Ahadith is one thousand five 
hundred and fifty-two (1552) Ahddith, according to the book Miftah Az- 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 49 detia 

Zujajah by Imam Busairi. This number is undoubtedly great. 

In the light of the above two clear factors - namely that Ibn Majah was 
enormously concerned about branches of Figh and collecting proofs on 
detailed Figh issues and that he had more exclusively additional Ahddith 
than any of the other five collectors - we can then be able to answer the 
question: What was the methodology of Ibn Majah and what was his 
purpose of compiling the book? 

It is now clear to us that the purpose of Ibn Majah was to bring to us 
chains of transmitters of reports cited as basis of the rules of Figh regardless 
of the degree of authenticity or otherwise of the chains. 

Works Concerning Narrators of Sunan Ibn Majah: 

1. Imam Dhahabi wrote biographies for narrators of Sunan Ibn Miéjah 
whose narrations were not collected by Bukhari and Muslim. He 
named this work, Al-Mujarrad fi Rijal Sunan Ibn Méajah. The work has 
been published twice. 

2. Dr. Abdullah Murad ‘Ali’s thesis, Al-Matrukunal-ladhina fee Ikhraji lahum 
Ibn Majah; this is a contemporary work. 

3. There is also another work in this regard by Dr. Sa’di bin Mahdi Al- 
Hashimi. It is published by Islamic University of Al-Madinah in 1402 
AH. 

Distinguishing Qualities of Sunan Ibn Majah: 

The Sunan of Tbn Majah possesses some distinguishing qualities that kept it 

apart from other books of Ahédith, made it outstanding and popular and 

called the attention of scholars in all ages. Here are those distinguishing 
qualities: 

— The style is excellent. The titles of chapters are in harmony with the 
Ahddith listed under them. There is no confusion or meshing. or 

' disorder. The chapters follow each other in the same order as in the 
books of Islamic jurisprudence; and. the Ahédith, too, are well- 
ordered —a quality that poses no difficulty in deriving legal rulings. 

— The chapters are well-ordered and well-arranged. There is no 
repetition, a quality lacking in other basic Hadith books. 

— The book, though brief, is comprehensive with respect to legal rulings. 
It is for this quality of comprehensiveness that Ibn Hajar, in Taqribut- 
Tahdhib, called it a “good Jami”. 

— On several occasions he identified those Ahddith that are Gharib 
(Unfamiliar). Of course, Tirmidhi is famed for having already done so, 
yet Ibn Majah’s work in this field, namely, identifying Ahadith in some 
special chapters and ruling them as Gharib is unique. We do not find it 

fbn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 50 datic 

in other books. 

— There were some Ahddith specific to some particular town, there being 
no narrator of those Ahddith in other towns. But Ibn Majah, while 
recording, gives the name of the town the narrator of a particular 
Hadith belongs. 

— Ibn Majah added 482 Sahih Ahadith to his Sunan that do not exist in the 
other five books of Hadith. 

— There are 3002 common Ahdédith existing in both Sunan Ibn Méajah and 
the other five books but Ibn Majah recorded them with quite different 
channels of narration. This multiplicity of channels of narration has 
further strengthened Ahédith, a distinguishing quality of Sunan Ibn 
Majah, a quality that is not found in other books. 

— There are 1339 Ahédith in Sunan Ibn Majah that do not exist in the other 
Five books. Hadith scholars have also recorded them as Zawé’id 
{additions or supplements). It is owing to those Zawdé’id that the Sunan 
of Tbn Majah has been elevated to the position of ‘the sixth of the Six’. 

Position of Sunan Ibn Majah among the Six Collections: 

Allah, High and Exalted has appointed for the Sunnah well-versed and 

learned scholars who shall protect it against the distortions of extremists, 

arrogation of liars and misinterpretations of the ignorant. These scholars 
devised various ways of recording the Sunnah in order to preserve it. One 
of the best results of these efforts, the most authentic, the most accurate 
and the most well-accepted by all and sundry is ‘the Sahih’, collected by 

Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad bin Ismda’il Bukhari. This is followed in terms 

of accuracy and acceptance by Sahih collected by Abu Husain Muslim bin 

Hajjaj Nishapuri. 

These two collections are then followed by ‘the Sunan’ collected by each of: 

Abu Dawud Sulaiman bin Ash’ath Sijistani, Abu ‘Eisa Muhammad bin 

‘Eisa Tirmidhi, Abu Abdur-Rahm&n Ahmad bin Shu’aib Nasa’i and Abu 

Abdullah Muhammad bin Yazid who is also known as Ibn Majah Qazvini; 

though he did not attained the status of the other five. 

Rafi’i (d. 623 AH), said in his book, At-Tadwin about Ibn Majah’s collection: 
“Ibn Majah’s collection, As-Sunan can be mentioned along with the two 
Sahih collections and the Sunan collection of each of Abu Dawud, Nasa’i 
and Tirmidhi.” 

[) Tghdhibul-Kamél 1/147. 

~ - 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 51 dotie 

As it has been pointed out earlier, there was a controversy among the 
scholars as to which of the three collections - Sunan Ibn Majah, Muwatta’ 
Imam Malik and Sunan Darimi - should be counted as the sixth of the six 
major collections. This controversy was widened by Majduddin Ibn 
Taimiyyah’s argument that Musnad of Imam Ahmad deserved to be 
counted instead of Sunan fbn Majah. 

This controversy was, however, brought to a logical end by the latter 
scholars; that is by incorporating all the suggested books and raising the 
major collections to nine. Hence, we have the basic five collections: Sahihs 
of Bukhari and Muslim, the Sunan collected by each of: Abu Dawud 
Sulaiman bin Ash‘ath Sijistani, Abu ‘Eisa Muhammad bin ‘Eisa Tirmidhi 
and Abu Abdur-Rahman Ahmad bin Shu’aib Nasa’i with the addition of 
Sunan of Ibn Majah. Added to the list are: Muwatta’ of Imam Malik, Sunan 
of Darimi and Musnad of Imam Ahmad. 

These nine collections are therefore the major basic collections of Hadith 
upon which the latter scholars finally agreed. 

Ibn Hajar, in his work An-Nukdt, did mention the reason that made Ibn 
Tahir to count Sunan Ibn Maéajah as the sixth collection as opposed to 
Muwatta’ by Imam Malik. He said, “Ibn Tahir and others counted Sunan 
Ibn Majah as the sixth collection as opposed to Muwatta’ because; Muwatta’ 
contains fewer fully-connected additions to the Hadith of the five collections 
whereas Sunan Ibn Méjah contains more and more. Therefore, the intention 
of the scholars in choosing Sunan Ibn Majah was to maximize the number 
of Ahadith.” 

In the above statement, Ibn Hajar mentioned the clear reason for the 
scholars’ choosing of Sunan Ibn Méajah as opposed to Muwatta’ of Imam 
Malik though it is indisputably clear that Muwatta’ is more recognized and 
more authentic in terms of its contents than Sunan Ibn Majah. However, by 
choosing Sunan Ibn Maéjah, the scholars were adding a great number of 
Ahédith - more than one thousand five hundred additional Ahddith - to the 
treasure of Sunnah. 

Sunan Ibn Majah’s Rank among Hadith Books: 

Initially, only four were chosen from among the many Hadith books by Ibn 
Sakan and Ibn Mandah and called them the ‘Four Bases’ that included 
Sahih. Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sunan Abu Diwud and Sunan An-Nasd’i. Later 
on, Sunan Tirmidhi was also included in them and a new term ‘the Five 
Bases’ was coined. Towards the end of the fifth century AH, Hafiz Abul- 
Fad] Muhammad bin Tahir Al-Maqdisi added Sunan Ibn Majah to the Five 
Bases, calling it the sixth of the Six (Sddisus-Sittah) and by writing his book 
Shurutul-A ‘immaus-Sittah (The conditions laid down by the six Imams) 

Ibn. Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 52 datia 

included it permanently in the Six Books. Later on, Hafiz ‘Abdul-Ghani Al 
Maqdisi, writing in his book Al-Kémil, followed the same line that was laid 
down. by fbn Tahir. 

The Scholars’ Interest in Sunan Collections: 

The scholars showed great interest in Sunan collections. They transcript it, 
quoted it, memorized it, narrated it, commented on it and explained the 
situations of its narrators. 

® One of these scholars is Imam Hafiz Mahammad bin Tahir bin “Ali bin 
Ahmad the well-traveled scholar and the author of many books. He 
was born in Jerusalem. 

Salafi narrated that he heard Muhammad bin Tahir saying: “I wrote the 
two: Sahihs of Bukhari and Muslim and Sunan Abu Ditwud seven times 
for wages. And I wrote Sunan Ibn. Majah ten times at Ray.” 

Ibn Tahir also said, “I discharged blood while urinating twice in the 
cause of seeking Ahddith. Once in Baghdad and the other time in 
Makkah. That was. due to my walking barefooted in extreme heat. | 
never rode any mount in the cause of seeking Ahadith and. I used to 
carry my books on my back. Also, I never begged anyone for anything 
while I was a student of Hadith. 1 only used to live upon whatever 
came to me.” 

Tt was also reported that Ibn Tahir would walk. continuously for a day 
and a night; for he was endowed with the strength to do so. 

Abdullah bin Muhammad Ansari Harawi said, “A student of Hadith 
should be fast at reading, writing and walking. Allah endowed this 
young man - meaning Ibn Tahir - with these qualities.” 

Shuja’ Dhuhli said, “Ibn Tahir died when he arrived for Hajj on Friday 
28th or 29th of Rabi’ul-Awwal 507 AH." 

@ Sakhawi said, “Hafiz fbn Hajar read the entire Sunan Ibn Méjah in four 
sittings; Sahih Muslim in four sittings, Sunan An-Nasa@’i Al-Kabir in ten 
sittings, and each sitting was approximately of four hours. He also read 
Mu’jam At-Tabarini As-Saghir in a single sitting between Zuhr and ‘Asr 
prayers - And this is his fastest.”! 

The scholars had shown great interest in the books of Sunan. The lesser 
the number of narrators of a book and the closer its chains of narrators 
to the Messenger of Allah #8, the higher the status of that book, as long 
as long as the reports are authentic. That is why the scholars paid 

© Sivar A'lam An-Nubala’ 19/361. 
?) Khulasah AL-Athar fi A’yan Al-Qarn Al-Hadi ‘Ashar 1/46. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 53 dasha 

greater attention to some Ahadith whose chains of narrators are shorter. 
For instance, they paid greater attention to Ahddith whose Isnéd consist 
of one, two or three narrators. 
As for Isnéd with only three narrators in the chains, Imam Shéafi’i 
recorded a number of them in his Musnad. Imam Ahmad also has a lot 
of them in his Musnad. Bukhari has about twenty of them; and Abu 
Dawud and Tirmidhi have one each. As for Ibn Majah, he has about 
five of them but each of his narrators is accused of lying. Tabarani in 
his Mu’‘jam also has a few of these Isndd. 
As for Imam Malik, he has reports in his Muwatta’ with only two 
narrators in their Isnéd. Imam Abu Hanifah also has narrations with 
only one narrator between him and the Messenger of Allah 38. 
However, these reports are rejected because; the fact is that Abu 
Hanifah never heard anything from any of the Prophet’s Companions. 
It then follows that one or more narrators must have been dropped 
between him and the Companions he is reported to have narrated 
from. 
The Scholars’ Interest in Sunan Ibn Majah: 
It is in the habit of the scholars to read and memorize Sunan books. One of 
the most prominent among such scholars is Abu Zur’ah Maqdisi. The great 
scholar, who was well-versed in Hadith was Tahir bin Muhammad bin 
Tahir bin ‘Ali Shaibani Al-Maqdisi Al-Razi Al-Hamdani. He was born in 
Ray. 
‘Umar bin ‘Ali Al-Qurashi said, “I started reading Sunan Ibn Majah to Abu 
Zur’ah when he came for Hajj. He said: ‘T heard the book from Abu 
Mansur Miqwaémi, and it was from a copy written by my father.”” Al- 
Qurashi then said, “We then confirmed that he had Hézah (i.e., certificate of 
approval) from Miqwami.” 

Abu ‘Abdullah Dubaithi said, “Abu Zur’ah died in the year 566 AH at 
Hamdan.’""! 

Another prominent scholar in this regard is Muhammad bin Shafi’i bin 
Muhammad bin Tahir Nishapuri who was. also known as as-Sinawbari, the 
jurist. He visited Baghdad and lived there for sometime. While he was 
there, he narrated Sunan Ibn Majah to people.”! 

"T Siyar A’lém An-Nubala’ 20/504. 
2] Tarikh Dimashg 53/244. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 54 dautiia 

Scholars Who were Unable to Acquire Sunan Ibn Majah: 
h, 
2. 

‘Ali bin Ismd’il bin Abbas bin Qarqin Al-Ba’li (d. 772 AH). 

Hafiz ‘Ailamah Shaikhul-Iskam Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Husain bin ‘Ali 
bin Musa Al-Khazrujardi Khorasani Al-Baihaqi. He was a great scholar. 
His knowledge was blessed and he has many useful works to his 

credit. He did not have any of Sunans of Nasa‘i, Tirmidhi or Ibn Majah. - 

He died in the year (458 AH). 

Explanatory Commentaries on Ibn Majah: 

Like the other Five Books, in view of the usefulness, importance and fame 
of Sunan Ibn Majah, many notable commentaries and marginal notes have 
been written on it. Some of them are: 

1. 

The first known commentary on Sunan Ibn Majah is the one done by the 
Egyptian Hafiz Abu ‘Abdullah ‘Ala’uddin Mughalta’i bin Qalij bin 
‘Abdullah Bakjari Al-Misri (d. 762 AH). He named his work Al-Ilam bi 
Sunnatihi ‘Alaihis-Salam. The author died before he could complete it. It 
still remains in manuscript and unedited, and it is in four volumes. 

Mé Tamassu minhul-Héjah min Sunan Ibn Maéajah: An eight-volume 
commentary, written by Shaikh Sirdjuddin ‘Umar bin ‘Ali bin Al- 
Mulaqgin in 801 AH, on Zawé’id of Ibn Méajah. The book explains the 
odd words and describes difficult names and surnames with accuracy. 

Some authors mention a book called Ma Tamass ilayh H@jah liman 
Yutélih Sunan Ibn Majah. This book was written by one of the Indian 
scholars, Muhammad Abdur-Rashid Nu’mAni. The impression the title 
of the book gives is that it is about Jbn Majah’s methodology and other 

' necessary things a readers should know about Sunan Ibn Méjah. But, 

sadly, the book is mostly devoid of that. It was only written in response 
to an issue that affects the Hanafites only. The only important thing the 
book has is that it made a mention of spurious Ahédith. , 
Ad-Dibajah fee Sharh Sunan Ibn Méjah is a five-volume work by 
Kamaluddin Muhammad bin Musa Ad-Damiri, the author of the 
famous Haydtul-Haiwan Al-Kubra; he died in the year 808 AH. 

Allamah Jalaluddin Suyuti also had a commentary on Sunan Ibn Méjah. 
It was printed along with a very old edition of Sunan Ibn Majah in New 
Delhi. Suyuti’s commentary is called: Misbah Az-Zujajah. However, | do 
not know whether or not this name is authentic. 

Sharh Sunan Ibn Méajah by Ibn Rajab Hanbali (d. 795 AH); we know 

{] Ad-Durar Al-Kaminah fee A’yan Al-Miah Ath-Thaminah 1/350. 
PI Sivar A’lim An-Nubala’ 18/163. 

Ibn Majah’s Book: As-Sunan 55 datiic 

10. 
11. 
12. 

13. 

nothing about this commentary except that Sindi quoted from it in his 
own commentary on: Sunan Ibn Majah. 

Sharh Ibn Majah: The work of Shaikh Burhaénuddin Halabi. According to 
Imam Shaukéni, it is a very delicate and refined commentary. 

Misbah Az-Zujajah fi Zawdid Ibn Majah’ by Busairi (d. 840 AH). The 
unique feature of this work is that Busairi edited those narrations that 
Ibn Majah exclusively recorded. He then classified each of these 
narrations in terms of its authenticity or otherwise. It should be pointed 
out that this Busairi is different from the one who wrote a poetry in 
which the Prophet #§ was excessively praised and which is recited all 
over the Muslim world. We ask Allah for guidance. 

Kiffyatul-Hajah fi Sharh Ibn Méjah: Marginal notes by Shaikh Abul- 
Hasan Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-Hadi Sindi, a twelfth century AH 
scholar (d. 1138 AH). In his marginal notes, ‘Allamah Sindi explains 
odd words, gives correct spellings of words and, in particular, writes 
on declension inflections of words. It is a bit more comprehensive than 
‘Allamah Suyuti’s marginal notes. 

Raful-Hajah ‘an Sunan Ibn Majah: A translation and commentary by 
Maulana Wahiduz-Zaman. 

Inja@hul-Hajah: Marginal notes by Shaikh ‘Abdul-Ghani Al-Mujaddadi 
Dehlavi. 

Ta'lig Sabt Ibnul-’Ajami: A nice commentary on Sunan Ibn Maéjah by 
Hafiz Sabt Tbnul-’ Ajami. 

Injézul-Hajah bi Sharh Sunan Ibn Majah: A very useful and comprehensive 
commentary written in Arabic by famous Pakistani scholar, Shaikh 
Muhammad ‘Ali Janbéz. He documented and referenced each Hadith, 
gave his ruling on its soundness or weakness, wrote a. brief biographical 
note on the narrators of each Hadith, gave accurate names of narrators and 
places, and quoted Ahédith similar in.meaning to the respective Hadith. 
Moreover, while writing his commentary, he mentioned the Madhhab of 
each school of Islamic jurisprudence, quoting from their authentic books 
and, after an objective analysis of the arguments of each jurist in the light 
of Qur’an and Sunnah, mentioned the preferred opinion. At the end of 
each volume, there is also a list of famous biographies. The foregoing 
qualities make this commentary very useful, excellent and 
comprehensive. But it is still incomplete. The commentary on about half 
the book running into six volumes has already been published. May Allah 
help the author complete his work and reward him for his labor. Amen. 

How to benefit by Sunan Ibn Majah 56 . dadée 

How to benefit by 
Sunan Ibn Majah 

Introduction: The Sunan of Ibn Majah is one of the basic reference 
works. It occupies a special position among the six canonical books of 
Ahddith (the Sound Six}, next to the Sound Traditions of Bukhdri and 
Muslim. It has been arranged under subject-headings. Imam Ibn Majah 
(209 AH-273 AH) divided his work into three parts according to the 
subject-matter: (1) chapters (2) subchapters (3) Ahddith. This type of 
division and arrangement is technically called the Figh classification. 
The Sunan of Ibn Majah consists of 37 books and 4341 Ahédith in all. 

Chapters: To begin with, titles have been given according to subject- 
matter, following the Figh classification (that is, the classification 
method followed in the books of Islamic jurisprudence), fot example, 
chapters of Purity and its Sunan, chapters of Funerals. Following this 
pattern, Sunan Ibn Majah make 37 chapters, a separate list of which has 
been given on another page. 

Subchapters: These carry titles relating to each of the Figh subjects. For 
example, the chapter of Purity and its Sunan has 139 subchapters. The 
same method is followed in the chapters on Prayer-call (Adhén), 
Mosques, etc. 

Ahadith: The Ahadith quoted under each chapter and each title have 
been arranged with respect to their contents and follow a well-ordered 
sequence, The Afiddith quoted vary in numbers, more in some chapters 
and less in others. Readers should follow the same order in their search 
for a Hadith relating to a particular subject. 

Refrences: Readers will notice the word Al-Mu jam in the beginning of 
each subchapter and the word Af-Tuhfah at the end of it in the chapters 
of the Arabic part of Sunan Ibn Méajah. The following explains the terms: 

a. Al-Mu’jam refers to Al-Mu’jam Al-Mufahras li Alfathil-Hadith, a 7-8 
volume work prepared by the (non-Muslim) Orientalists over a 
period of 65 years stretching from 1922 to 1987. It is an alphabetical 
list of words occurring in the texts of Ahédith collected by nine 
traditionists in their compilations: Sahihul-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, 
Sunan Abu Déwud, Jami’ Tirmidhi, Sunan An-Nasa’i, Sunan Ibn. Majah, 
Musnad Ahmad, Muwatia’ Al-Imam Malik, and Sunan Ad-Déarimi. Its 
purpose is to help readers find the text of any Hadith wherever it 
eccurs among the foregoing nine Hadith compilations. 

How to benefit by Sunan Ibn Majah = 57 daria 

b. At-Tuhfah refers to Tuhfatul-Ashraf bi Ma’rifatil-Atraf, a book prepared 
by Jamaluddin Abul-Hajjaj Yusuf Al-Mizzi in the course of 27 years, 
from 696 AH to 722 AH. It contains the texts of all the Ahddith of the 
Six canonical books plus As-Sunan Al-Kubra of Nasa’i and Shamda’il of 
Tirmidhi along with the names, alphabetically arranged, of the 
Companions, their followers (Tabi’in) and the followers of the 
followers (Taba’ T@kj‘in), who narrated them. This arrangement is 
technically called Kee Numbers have also been given along with 
Al-Mu’jam and At-Tuhfah in the Arabic part of Ibn Majah. These 
numbers guide the reader to where those Ahf@dith are to be found in 
AL-Mu’jam Al-Mufahras and Tuhfatul-Ashrif, thereby enabling him to 
get to other reference works relating to Ahddith. This arrangement 
has proved very helpful to research. scholars in their search for a 
particular Hadith. 

© Numbering Ahddith: Muhammad Fuwad ‘Abdul-Baqi introduced 
about 60 to 70 years ago the system of giving number to each Hadith in 
the collections: Bukhéri, Muslim, and Sunan Ibn Majah to make it easy to 
find a particular Hadith. It is called in Arabic Ragamul-Hadith. Now it 
has become a normal practice in Hadith books. This method of 
numbering Ahadith has made access to any Hadith very easy. You can 
find a Hadith now very quickly. 

¢ Sanad (chain) of Hadith: The traditionist transmits a Hadith, beginning 
from his teacher (Shaikh) through each narrator up to the Companion of 
the Prophet #g. This sequence of narrators is called chain (Sanad) of 
narration. 

@ Matn (text) of Hadith: The words beginning at the end of the chain is 
called Matn (text). 

e Comments: To further explain the meaning of each Hadith and to 
recount all the rulings and the points of law that can possibly be 
deduced. from a particular Hadith, a new section, Comments, has been 

‘added in the English edition. While writing this section, quotations 
from Qur'an and Hadith books, along with their references, have also 
been given. Sometimes Hadith numbers. have also been given, the 
purpose being to help the reader gain more information if he so desires. 

Readers will note in this English edition of Iba Majah that at the end of 
each Hadith, the quoted Hadith has been investigated and traced. It is a 
technical thing normally useful for learned men and Hadith scholars but a 
layman may also benefit by discovering. whether a particular Hadith is. 
Weak or Sound. 

es 

Technical Terms used by Hadith ... 58 datia 

Technical Terms used by 
Hadith Scholars 

Definition of Hadith: Whatever has come down to us concerning Allah’s 
Messenger #@ through narrators is called Hadith. It is also sometimes called 
Sunnah (practice, usage, etc), Khabar (report) and Athar (track, trace, sign, 
impression, tradition). 

Basic Kinds of Ahadith: 

— Qdauli (Verbal): It records the utterances of the Prophet #8. 

— Fi'li (Practical): It records the deeds of the Prophet #8. 

— Tagrir (Tacit): It records the Prophet’s tacit approval of some action, 
behavior, etc. 

~ Sham#@’il (physical characteristics): It records the physical characteristics, 
appearance, habits or behavior of the Prophet #8. 

Note: The main text of a Hadith is called Main, which is preceded by Sanad 

(chain of narrators). If the chain is complete and no name of the narrator is 

missing from the chain, the Hadith is called Muttasil (Connected). Else, it is 

called Mungati’ (Interrupted). 

Kinds of Ahadith with respect to Ascription (Nisbah): 

— Qudsi (Sacred): It records the very Words of Allah narrated by the 
Prophet #%, transmitted through narrators, and not found in the 
Qur’an. 

— Marfu’ (Traceable): A Hadith ascribing an utterance, deed, or tacit 
approval te the Prophet #8. : 

— Mauquf (Discontinued): A .Hadith ascribing an utterance, deed, or tacit 
approval to a Companion of the Prophet 2. 

— Magtu’ (Intersected): A Hadith ascribing an utterance or deed to Tabi’i!) 
or Tabi’ Tabi’i.”! 

[I See the glossary. , 
21 See the glossary. 

Technical Terms used by Hadith ... 59 dakée 

Kinds of Ahddith according to the Number of Narrators: 
— Mutawatir (Continuous): Hadith fulfilling the four conditions of 
continuity: 
1. narrated by a large number of narrators; 
2. human reason and usage cannot possibly rule it out as false; 

3. occurring much in each chronological Level (Tabagah) of narrators, 
right from the era of the Prophet #% to the time of the compiler; 

4, relates to human senses. 
Note: Tabagah (Era-Level) is a group of narrators hearing Ahddith from one 
or more than one teacher. 
— Khabar Wahid (Isolated): A Hadith which does-not meet the four 
conditions of Mutawétir Hadith. It is of four kinds. 

— Mashhur (Well-known): A Hadith with more than two narrators at each 
Level (Tabaqah) but not an equal oe of narrators at any Level (e.g., 
three, four, five). : 

— Mustafid (Extensive): Hadith with a uniform number of narrators but 
more than two at each Level or a uniform number of them at the 
beginning or the end of the chain of narration. 

— ‘Aziz. (Precious): Hadith with only two narrators at any Level. 

— Gharib (Unfamiliar): Hadith with only one narrator at any Era-Level. If 
the narrator is a Companion or a Tabi’, it will be called Gharib Mutlag 
(Absolutely Unfamiliar). In case the narrator is some other ‘person, it 
will be called Gharib Nisabi (Relatively Unfamiliar). 

Note: Of the foregoing kinds, the Mutawatir Hadith gives you certainty or 
positive knowledge (‘IImul-Yagin). The other kinds may be Mardud 
(Rejected) or Magbul (Accepted). 

Kinds of Ahadith according to Acceptance or Rejection: 

— Magbul (Accepted): The one that is obligatory to act by. 
— Mardud (Rejected): Hadith that is not Accepted. 

Kinds and grades of Magqbul Ahadith according to the extent they 
meet the conditions of acceptability: 

. Sahih li-Dhatihi 
. Sahih li-Ghairihi 
. Hasan li-Dhatihi 
. Hasan li-Ghairihi 

re ON Re 

Technical Terms used by Hadith... 60 detiio 

® 

a. 

b. 

d. 

e€. 

Sahih li-Dhatihi (Sound by itself): the Hadith that fulfills the five 
conditions of soundness. 

Should have a connected chain of narration. That is, each narrator 
received the narration from his teacher. 

Each narrator should be upright (Adil), commits no major sin, does 
not insist on minor sins, is good-tempered and of good moral 
conduct. 

Perfectly accurate (Kémilud-Dabt), transmitting his narration orally 
from memory or in writing perfectly and accurately. 

The Hadith should not be Shddhdh, that is, it should not contradict 
other Ahddith. 

The Hadith should not be Ma’Tul (Defective). 

(Detailed definition of Shadhdh and Ma’lul will soon follow). 

Hasan. li-Dhatihi (Good by itself): A Hadith, some narrators of which are 
less accurate, but it fulfills all the remaining conditions. 

(Note: Hasan li-Dhatihi ranks after Sahih li-Ghairihi. We have changed 
the sequence to make definitions easier. 

Sahih li-Ghairihi (Sound owing to supperting narrations): If a Hasan 
Hadith has more than one chain of narration, it is elevated to the grade 
of Sound (Sahih). It is called Sahih li-Ghairihi (Sound owing to 
supporting narrations) since it has become Sound by virtue of other 
supporting narrations. 

Hasan li-Ghairihi (Good owing to other supporting narrations): Hadith 
having several chains of narrations, each chain being a little weak but 
the weakness offset by virtue of multiplicity of chains, and, hence, 
reaching the grade of Hasan li-Ghairihi. 

Kinds and Grades of Sound Ahadith (as they occur in Hadith 
books): 

Muttafiq Alaih (Agreed upon): Hadith occurring in both Sahih Bukhéri 
and Sahih Muslim. Such a Hadith is sound to the highest degree. 

Afrdd Bukhari: Hadith occurring in Sahih Bukhari but not in Sahih 
Muslim. : 

Afrad Muslim: Hadith occurring in Sahih Muslim but not in Sahih 
Bukhéri. 

Sahih ‘ala Shartihima: A. Hadith not found in Sahih Bukhéri or Sahih 
Muslim but meeting the conditions laid down by both. 

Sahih ‘ala Shartil-Bukhéri: Hadith not found in Sahih Bukhdri but meets 

Technical Terms used by Hadith... 61 dawia 

the conditions laid down by him for a Hadith to be Sound. 

© Sahih ‘ala Sharti- Muslim: Hadith not found in Sahih Muslim but meets 
the conditions laid down by Muslim for a Hadith to to be Sound. 

e Sahih “ala Sharti-Ghairihima: A Hadith that meets the conditions laid 
down by Hadith scholars other than Bukhari and Muslim. 

Kinds of Mardud (Rejected) Ahadith due to Interrupted 
ea) chain: 
Mu'‘allag (Suspended): A Hadith with the initial part of its chain of 
narration or the whole chain deleted (deliberately). 

¢ Mursal (Disconnected): A Hadith narrated by a Tabi’i from the Prophet 
#2 without an intermediary. 

e Mu’dal (Double Break): Refers to a Hadith in which two or more 
consecutive narrators are deleted in the middle of the chain. 

© Mungati’ (Interrupted): This term is applied to a Hadith in which one or 
more than one narrator has been deleted at random from the middle of 
the chain of narration. 

® Mudallas (Truncated): The term is applied to a Hadith in which the 
narrator hides the name of his teacher in a subtle way, such as calling 
him by an unknown or nickname, giving the impression that he did not 
do so. In this case, the chain is Muttasil (Connected) and the 
subnarrators are known to have met and heard directly from the 
relevant teachers but there is no proof that they heard the respective 
Hadith directly from them. 

@ Mursal Khafi (Disconnected-hidden): A Hadith in which the narrator 
narrates from a contemporary whom he could not have possibly heard 
from or seen, there being no proof of both having met each other. 

@ Ma'lul or Mu‘allal (Defective): A technical term applied to a Hadith that 
looks. Magbul (Accepted) externally but contains an inherent, hidden 
defect making it unacceptable. Only an expert and highly skilled in the 
Hadith science can detect such a defect: It is impossible for others. 

Kinds of Rejected Ahadith, according to lack of integrity of narrators: 

© Riwéii'yatul-Mubtadi’ (narration of innovator): A Hadith-from a narrator 
committing’ innovation '(Bid‘ah), by word: or act, theréby reneging his 
faith. Anyhow, in case his sin of innovation does not warrant the 
charge of disbelief, his narration may be reliable providing he is a 
person of integrity (‘Adl) and accurate (Débii). It is to be noted that 
innovation reneging disbelief leads, of necessity, to apostasy. 

© Riwéyatul-Fasiq (narration of dissolute): A Hadith narrated by one 
committing major sins, short of disbelief. 

Technical Terms used by Hadith ... 62 dato 

® Matruk (Abandoned): A Hadith narrated by a known liar and whose 
narrations have been rejected by traditionists (Muhaddithin). 

¢ Maudu’ (Fabricated): A Hadith whose narrator attributed a false report 
to the Prophet #8 on some occasion. Any narration by such a person is 
called Forged or Fabricated. 

Kinds of Rejected Ahadith according to inaccuracy of narrator: 

e Musahhaf (misrepresented): A Hadith containing a word that looks right 
apparently but is actually mispronounced or misread due to 
misspelling or misplaced diacritical marks. 

© Maglub (Inverted): A Hadith containing words put before or after their 
proper place by the narrator forgetfully or containing the name of a 
narrator in place of another. 

® Mudraj (Interpolated): A’ Hadith containing, in part, intentionally or 
unintentionally, a narrator's own word or words that look like a part of 
the text of the Hadith itself. 

© AlMazid fi Muttasilil-Asanid (Additional): Narration so named when 
two narrators, one trustworthy and another more trustworthy, transmit 
a tradition, the former adding one more subnarrator to the chain. 

© Shddhdh (Contradicting): A Hadith transmitted by an accepted 
(trustworthy or truthful) narrator who contradicts another narrator 
more trustworthy. than himself or several trustworthy narrators like 
himself. The antonym (opposite) of Shaédhdh is Mahfuz (Conforming). 

e Munkar (Denounced): A Hadith whose narrator is Weak (Da’if) and 
contradicts one or more than one trustworthy narrators. The antonym 
of Munkar is Ma’ruf (Conventional). 

© Riwéyah Saiyyil Hifz (Poor): A Hadith narrated by one born with a poor 
memory. V 

® Riwayah Kathirul-Ghaflah (Lax): Term applied to Hadith narrated by one 
who is very lax and negligent or commits errors very often. 

® Riwdyah Fahishul-Ghalat (Monstrous): Hadith narrated by one who 
commits monstrous errors. 

© Riwéyatul-Mukhtalit (Muddled): A Hadith narrated by one who lost 
memory through senility, dotage or accident or whose written 
narrations were lost. 

e Mudtarib (Confounding): A Hadith, the chain or text of which contains 
conflicting things impossible to be resolved. 

Technical Terms used by Hadith ... 63 data 

Kinds of Rejected Ahadith due to narrator being Unknown: 

Riwayah Majhulil-’Ain (Unknown): The Hadith of a narrator who is quite 
unknown, there being no comment about him by a Hadith scholar and 
no knowledge as to whether he was trustworthy or Weak and there 
being only one subnarrator narrating from him. Such a narrator is 
called Unknown. 

Riwayah Majhulil-Hal: The Hadith of a narrator unknown, there being no 
comment about him by a Hadith scholar and no knowledge as to 
whether he was trustworthy or Weak and there being only two 
subnarrators reporting from him. Such a person is called Unknown 
(Majhul). He is also called Masiutr (Concealed). 

Mubbham (Vague): A Hadith whose chain does not clearly state the 
name of any narrator. 

Kinds of Hadith Compilations 64 datiia 

Kinds of Hadith Compilations 

® Kutub Sihah (Books of Sound Ahdadith): Any book, the compiler of 
which has committed himself to include only Sound (Sahih) narrations 
in his compilation and made the word Sahih a part of the title of his 
book. In the opinion of the compiler at least, the narrations of such a 
book are Sound. If he himself points out the defect in a Hadith he has 
recorded, it does not tarnish or detract from the soundness of his 
compilation. 

e Sihah Sittah (the Sound Six): This term is applied to the sound six 
compilations — Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sunan Abu Dawud, Sunan 
An-Nasa@’, Jami’ Tirmidhi, and Sunan Ibn Majah. They are also known as 
Usul Sittah (the Six Majors or Basics) or Kutub Sittah (Six Books). The 
first two are called Sahihain and have earned universal acclaim. They 
are not considered Sound only by their compilers but by the whole 
Muslim nation. Anyone finding fault with the Twain is, in the words of 
Shah Waliullah, the renowned traditionist of Delhi, an innovator 
disputing the consensus of the nation. The last four books are called 
Sunan Arba’ah. These contain some Weak (Da’if) narrations but, on the 
whole, most of them are Sound. Hence, learned scholars include them 
in the ‘Sound Six’. 

© Jami’ (Comprehensive): The term is applied to a book that contains 
Ahfdith on all subjects relating to Islam like doctrines (‘Ag@‘id), laws, 
and commandments (Ahkim), exegesis (Tafsir), the Paradise (Jannah), the 
Hell (fahannam). Examples: Sahih Bukhari, Jami’ Tirmidhi, etc. 

e Sunan: Books containing Ahddith of a practical nature, legal and 
doctrinal, focusing on topics of relevance to a Muslim’s daily life like 
Sunan Abu Dawud. 

e Musnad: A collection of Ahdadith narrated by a Companion or 
Companions, each collection arranged separately under the name of a 
Companion, like Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Humaidi. 

® Mustakhraj. A genre of Hadith literature in which the compiler gathers 
narrations from other books and writes them with his chains of 
narration like Mustakhraj Isma’ili ‘ala Sahihil-Bukhéri. 

@ Mustadrak: A compilation of Ahadith not found in the book of a Hadith 
scholar but fulfilling the conditions laid down by him. Example: 
Mustadrak Hakim. 

e Mu’jam. A compilation listing the Ahédith narrated by each of the 
compiler’s teachers separately, arranged in a particular order. 

Kinds of Hadith Compilations 65 dadie 

e Arba‘in: A book listing forty Ahddith on one or more than one subject 
like Arba’in Nawawi, Arba’in. Thuna’t. 

@ Juz’: A collection containing the narrations of a single narrator or on a 
single subject like Bukhari’s Juz’ Rafil Yadain and Juz’ Al-Qira’ati Khalfal- 
Imam and Baihaqi’s Kitdbul-Qird’ati Khalful-Imam. 

Era-Categories (Tabag@t) of Hadith... 66 dete 

Era-Categories (Tabagat) of Hadith Compilations 

1. The first Tabagah covers Sahihul-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim and Muwatta’ Al- 
Imam Malik. The latter precedes the former two with respect to the time 
of compilation but ranks third in the order of value and importance. 
Imam Malik and his group of scholars believe all the Ahédith in Al- 
Muwatta’ to be Sound but other traditionists believe some narrations 
found therein to be Mungati’ or Mursal although these are found in 
other books with Connected (Muttasil) chains. (But a Connected chain is 
not enough to establish the soundness of a Hadith). 

2. The Four Sunans (Sunan Arba’ah) rank second. Some include Musnad 
Ahmad and Sunan Ad-Dérimi also in this Rank. The compilers of these 
books had a thorough knowledge of the Hadith sciences. They were 
known for their trustworthiness, integrity and accuracy. They were 
never negligent or lax in achieving their objectives and fulfilling the 
conditions they had set for themselves. In every age their books were 
liked and acclaimed by traditionists and learned scholars. 

3. The Masanid™ Jawami’"! , and Musannafit®! , written before, during 
and after the Sound Six (Sihah Sittah) fall third in order of rank. The 
purpose of their writers was just to collect and compile Ahddith. This 
explains why their compilations contain all kinds of Ahédith. These 
books are not unknown to Hadith scholars but, nonetheless, they do not 
find favor with them. The Muslim jurists did not make much use of the 
Ahédith occurring in these compilations only but not in other books of 
the first two categories. Nor did Hadith scholars care much to 
investigate them as to their soundness or weakness, acceptance or 
rejection, exposition or elaboration. Under this category and rank come 
the works like Musannaf ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Musannaf Ibn Abu Shaibah, 
Musnad At-Taydlisi, and the works of Baihaqi, Tahawi, and Tabarani. 

4, To the fourth rank belong those books that were composed much later, 
containing Ahddith not found in the books of the top two ranks but 
rather in the compilations of little academic value. These books consist 
of arguments of preachers, proverbs of wise men and Israeli traditions 
that some weak transmitters mixed up, accidentally or purposely, with 
the Prophet's traditions. Or they are mere speculations or probabilities 
drawn from Qur’an and Sunnah that ignorant mystics began 

"] Plural of Musnad. See the glossary. 
2] Plural of Jami’. See the glossary. 
®] Plural of Musannaf. See the glossary. 

Era-Categories (Tabagat) of Hadith... 67 deniia 

transmitting by meanings (not by words) down the ages till the 
common people took them as the sayings of the Prophet #¢ himself. Or 
they pruned words and lines from a number of Ahédith, pieced them 
together, and coined a new Hadith altogether. Examples: Kitébud-Du ‘afi’ 
(the Book of Weak narrations) of [bn Hibban, Al-Kaémil (The Complete) 
of bn ‘Adi, and the books of Khatib Baghdadi, Abu Nu’aim Isfahani, 
Ibn ‘Asakir, Juzqani, Ibn Najjar, and Dailami. They all belong to this 
category. And so are Musnad Al-Khwarizmi and Al-Maudu’at of Ibn 
Jawzi and Mulla ‘Ali Qari. 

5. To this category belong the books containing the Ahédith that were 
widely current among the circles of jurists, mystics, historians and 
experts in various fields as well as the Ahfdith fabricated by ungodly 
people with fluent tongues who embellished them with eloquent words 
and even forged chains of narration themselves. 

@ The books of the first and the second category or Rank are fully trusted 
by Hadith scholars. They have always remained deeply attached to 
them. 

e The Ahddith of the third Rank can only be advanced for argument by 
those who are experts in the Hadith sciences and have profound 
knowledge of narrators and the degree of their reliability, and have a 
sharp insight into the hidden defects of Ahddith. In general, these 
Ahédith cannot be advanced for argument or evidence except, of course, 
as supporting evidence for Magbul (Accepted) Ahédith. 

e To gather and advance the Ahddith belonging to the fourth category 
(Rank) as argument in support of the Ahddith of the top two Ranks is a 
mere forced, affected behavior of the later scholars. That is the way of 
the innovators in their bid to support their particular rite of Figh or 
their denomination or religious creed. But Hadith scholars consider it 
wrong to advance Ahédith from this category for evidence - (synopsis of 
Hujjatullahil-Balighah). 

68 ee 

Meanings of Masddir... dartiia 

Meanings of Masddir (Sourcebooks) 
and Maraji’ (Reference Works) 

¢ Sources or sourcebooks: These refer to books, the compilers of which 
recorded Ahédith with their own chains of narrations. In the foregoing 
classification of Ranks, Hadith books mean sourcebooks (Masédir, plural 
of Masdar). 

@ Reference works: The books containing Ahéddith collected from different 
sourcebooks. These are of three kinds: 

a. 

b. 

Reference works containing only Sound Ahfdith like Allu’lu wal- 
Marjan fima Ittafaga ‘Alaihish-Shaikhan and ’Umdatul-Ahkam. 

Reference works containing Ahadith, both Sound and Weak, selected 
from sourcebooks like Mishkatul-Masabih, Riyddus-Sélihin, At-Targhib 
wat-Tarhib, and Bulughul-Marim, etc. 

Reference works containing Ahédith from both authentic and 
inauthentic sourcebooks without inquiry or criterion of selection like 
Kanzul-"Ummial. 

Note: It is not right to advance as argument a Hadith from the second and 
third types of reference works (b and c) without inquiry. 

How to deal with Accepted (Magbul) but Contradictory (Shadhdh) 
Ahadith 
There are different ways to overcome this difficulty: 

1, 

Note 

Reconciling between those two Ahédith, and taking a common 
meaning, making it possible to act by both. In this case, preference 
shall be given to the meaning found in the third Hadith or the one 
stated by the scholars of Hadith sciences. 

In case, this is not possible, we shall investigate which of the two has 
been abrogated. If it is established that one of the two has been 
abrogated, we shall take the abrogater and leave the abrogated. 

. In case there is no proof of abrogation, the Hadith that has a greater 

right to preference on technical grounds shall be taken, with no 
regard for the rite of Figh of any school (Madhhab) whatsoever, and 
the other Hadith abandoned. That is, the Hadith possessing the highest 
degree of soundness or occurring in a book of superior rank shall be 
given preference, 

: In case of conflict between Magbul and Mardud Ahédith, the former 

shall prevail. 

Technical Arabic Terms 69 dakia 

Technical Arabic Terms 

We have already described some basic technical terms in the preceding 
pages. A revision of them to refresh memory will be hopefully useful: 

Technical Arabic terms in short with their English equivalents are given in 
alphabetical order from the right—the Arabic Terms. 

Biographies of narrators _ 

Persons who  met/accompanied a 
\ 

Person who met a Tabi’ 
Authentic 
Trustworthy a 

Perfect-Good 

fects ee 

Companion; second generation of Muslims 

Let ad 
Perfect-Strong 
Tradition; Hadith : 

Legal Hadith 
oe ee dl 
Good-Sound 

Good-Unfamihar cee oye 

& 
~ 
ee 
Scent 
Good-Sound-Unfamiliar 
Good-by-itself Cpe 
oe 
F 

a2 
pee 
ay 

Pst ee | 
Good-through-others 
Good-Disconnected Gem 
[Good-Intersected tthe ee 
[Absolute certainty et 
Seger 
Monstr 

S 
iS 

dam 

oe 
oe 
oy) 

‘ 

G : 
~ : 
Comprehensive Hadith compilation 
do 
id 

i PEE 

ial as a 
wal ae, 

Muddled zeatl ls) 
Zawa'id; supplements; additions 

EE 

{ 

Jilg5 

Technical Arabic Terms 70 

Righteous predecessors aL 
Actual hearing from person from} gl 
whom one is reporting 

Chain of narration 

Contradicting 

dew 
3u 
Au 

Physical characteristics etc. 
Corroborating Ahadith 

The Sound Six SS*dYC 
[Sound owing to supporting narrations |. 

ne Bho 
Reed [ETRE] £ | 

& 
te 

Sc. Kes 

Sound-Traceable 
Sound-Intersected 

Sound-Discontinued 

Truthful 3 
Truthful but less accurate glasl Ss Gste 

| 

Accuracy of memory all dene 

BST dad 

ae ne 
US 

Speculative knowledge 

Speculation (Zann) closer to certainty) er!) y& 
than to falsehood 

as 
[Absolutely Unfamiliar [lle 

Weak-Discontinued a 5d gt Chas 

Cc, Cc. - . ' 

| 
bee 
is 
Ge 

2 
Me 

[Unrecited 

Obscure ~ 
Not-Defective djlee pe 

M. 

Technical Arabic Terms 71 

Unaccepted 

Unfamiliar 

Minor matters 

Jurisprudence; legalistic science 
Jurist; legal scholar 
Sacred 

Continuous 
Unknown 

Disconnected 
Disconnected-Hidden 

Extensive 

Uninterrupted 
Hadith compilation according to 
Companions’ names 
Misrepresented 

Technical Arabic Terms 72 

Hadith compilation. according to 
subject-matter 

Doubtful — 

Hadith compilation according to | px. 
names of Companions, regions, or 
names of teachers. of compilers 
Medium Mu’jam 

Moinor Mu’jam 

Major Mu‘jam 

| Conventional 

| Defective 

| Defective 

Hadith in which narrator narrates| -. 
using the Arabic word ‘an (meaning 
‘from’) 

Interrupted 
Denounced 
Trustworthy 

Hadith beginning with the 
Arabic word. anna 

Fabricated 
| Discontinued 

Absurd 

Positive knowledge: certainty 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

In the Name of Allah, the Most 
Beneficent, the Most Merciful 

And may the blessings and peace of Allah 
be upon our master Muhammad, 
his family, his Companions, 
and those who love him. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Chapter 1. Following The 
Sunnah Of The Messenger 
Of Allah 2 

1. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said, ‘Whatever I have 
commanded you, do it, and 
whatever I have forbidden you, 
refrain from it’ ”’(Sahth) 

73 AS) ly 

sai _ Si af 3 

sew de plus dil bey 

Auous g Aree g al hemna 

() act) [ARES QS] C.. gennatld 

ais oe - ae “4G ore € 

ten ME il J yd5 JE dE ag I 
a ae gat gee eat ° oe 
gb Ee hg ty bgddd & Sal 

PI cadet aly cay Eh jd Cale ye P00 /V ideo d or ol [eel teed 

Comments: 

a. Each and every command of the Prophet 8% is binding on the community. 
Numerous Verses of the Qur’4n confirm the assertion. 

b. Anything and everything the Prophet # prohibits must be avoided. Allah 
the Glorified says in His Book: “... And whatever the Messenger gives you, 
take it; and whatever he forbids you, desist from it...” (59:7) 

c. The above quoted Verse proves that a command, as a rule, is binding 
although in certain contexts it could simply mean preferability or 

recommendation. 

2. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: “Leave me as I have 
left you (Don’t ask me the minor 
things that I have avoided to tell 
you). For those who came before 
you were doomed because of their 
questions and differences with their 
Prophets. If I command you to do 

oe ye OT 108 eet 3h 

4 

sets Kil OE etl WE pedis 

The Book Of The Sunnah 74 dred) Qn 

something, then do as much of itas ,, .4a. yee tegeay pee 48S 
you can, and if I forbid you from rae IS cqtadate) Le aie I pits 
doing something, then refrain from QB eet 
it” (Sahih) ‘ 

ce VVOViG cde TVG cal]. BB oS Oh ce ftladl ghar eel tee ss 

oe] aye aly IMIG ep sbedl are aboly vy tee ge opis yb 

Comments: 

a. Permissibility is the rule in all worldly affairs as long as they are not 
prohibited by the Qur’4n and Sunnah. In the case of acts of worship, 
however, the rule is that only those acts are allowed that have their proof in 
the Qur’an and Sunnah. It, therefore, follows that any newly-invented thing 
in religious matters is an innovation (Bid‘ah). Not so in the case of worldly 
affairs. 

b. Discussion on matters having no practical relevance must be avoided. 

c. Disobedience to the commands of the Prophet 2 means inviting one’s own 
doom and destruction. 

d. In cases where a person is not able to comply with a certain commandment 
for a reason, accepted in the sacred law of Islam as genuine, he will not be 
reckoned a sinner by Allah, as expressed in the following Verse of the 
Qur'an: “Allah burdens not a soul with more than it can bear...” (2:286) 

3. It was narrated that Abu yf Gis G3 Wis XS gi Gis -¥ 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of fez 2h ee cejelee Ses w 
Allah # said: ‘Whoever obeys & % ‘y™***) Of ‘C43 Se 
me, obeys Allah; and whoever il 3,25 dU :56 LA UI Be iedle 
disobeys me, disobeys Allah.’” So eis ae a > 
(Sahih) ee a a cha 

oe EE ats 

4a gélbl f2) te 
AG) gab Aid jlas 

Sb adodls cy Say glee al ge YOR VON /Y test ae ol Cee] tees 
- bee eg VAY Ore Cplnas eYAovie (Gobel ve 3,25 

Comments: 

The rule quoted above has also been expressed in the Qur’an in the 
following terms: “Whoever obeys the Messenger, thereby obeys Allah...” 
(4:80) 

This is so because the Messenger of Allah #8 never prescribes any rule of 
Shari‘ah out of his own likes or preferences; he only communicates what is 
revealed to him by Allah, Who says in the Holy Book: “And he (the 
Prophet) never speaks of (his own) desire. It is only a revelation revealed.” 
(53:3-4) 

In fact the Prophet #¢ himself obeyed the commandments of Allah just like 
the rest of the community. The Prophet 8, rather, presented a far greater 

The Book Of The Sunnah 75 ARN las 

example of righteousness and piety than the ordinary Muslims. 

oa 

- 

4. It was narrated that Abu Ja‘far 320 of dl we 23 Gas = ¢ 
said: “Whenever Ibn “Umar heard pee ae en aia rere “ae 
a Hadith from the Messenger of ane ve “de on Lyps ae 
Allah %, he would not do more =: JG wens Zl bf Be of Ase LE 
than it said, and he would notdo . , POE Aor Sher re 
less.” (Sahih) 5 BI 54 be Gee Nl OP Gl ob 

553 dat os rae os thus 

MV phen 4p Byer oy dares hate oe AY /V tae l an sl Leone oo kins! ] Tex Sad 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith under reference shows how keen the Companions were to avoid 
innovation and literally implement each word of the Prophet’s ordainments. 
They left no stone unturned in their effort. Nor did they try to put one step 
ahead of the Prophet #§. It is because the Qur'an expressly forbids the 
doing of it in the following terms: “O you who believe! Do not put 
yourselves forward before Allah and His Messenger.” (49:1) 

b. The Hadith would also explain why ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar 4, when he heard 
a Hadith from the Prophet #8, neither added to it nor omitted from it 
anything. 

5. It was narrated that Abu is : Aas gle ie elie Gis ~ 6 

Darda’ said: “The Messenger of emia ; ee eter 

Allah 2% came out to us when we 9 ‘a [yy ool] ist of aa 

were speaking of poverty and how Ed 4) Sicie 43 tues aS 

we feared it. He said: ‘Is it poverty . : ae ae . pect ; 
that you fear? By the One in Whose yer SF (Sd! ger Dl be op Ay! 

Hand is my soul, (the delights and peje os 4s cet fee ot 

q Cale tS cel 5 Cal | . 
luxuries of) this world will come to eee e i ea & oF a ve 
you in plenty, and nothing will .33555 j4d| SU Lay BE al U5 
cause the heart of anyone of you to , wo ge Bye ae 
deviate except that. By Allah,I am 9 78 g™® Silly Lopes jay: Jus 
leaving you. upon something like Cf Are y es ts Gas wale ipa) 

Bayda’ (white, bright, clear path) the ga... 7 oe uk eee ok < 

night and day of which are the PSF a at oily ae YW] 4eL) Sue 

same.” M855 3G WS veld Jb Us 
AED Mee 6 Eee 2 

Abu Darda’ said: “He spoke the ; oe ig he 9 

truth, by Allah. The Messenger of as! 55 cls GAS relS5l gl Jb 

Allah #¢ did indeed leave us at set 8 fe ie ees ae 

upon something like Bayda’ (the HS celal fe ost alg SS 

white, bright, clear path) the days Bye GS 
and nights of which were the 

ore 
ree 

The Book Of The Sunnah 76 Seid AS 

same.” (Hasan) 

ze pen of Wie 6 Redd oe pele wl cr ae ol ioe oatinsl | ‘eps 

Comments: 

a. Poverty is a kind of trial from Allah. It drives a lot of people to unlawful 
ways in search of sustenance. Similarly, too much affluence is also a trial, 
which induces people to indulge in evils like false pride, greed, arid so on. 
The Hadith, however, seems to suggest that the affliction of affluence is 
greater than the affliction of poverty. May Allah protect us from all trials 
and temptations! 

b. The “days and nights of which are the same” probably means that 
everything in the Divine Law is bright like day. It could also mean that just 
as right was made completely distinct from wrong during the lifetime of the 
Prophet #¢, the light of guidance would continue to shine even after his 
death, thanks to the luminous rays of the Book and the Sunnah that would 
guide. the community to discriminate between truth and falsehood. 

PBud 

6. Mu‘awiyah bin Qurrah jis Gis hb to dias is = 9 
narrated that his father said: “The het ase eet ia 
Messenger of Allah #§ said: ‘A Qf tybe GF sta Bie aad cn! 

group of my Ummah will continue. ge ay OE OE ar 
to prevail and they will never be sod - ~ eat aaa 
harmed by those who forsake  p®y4i Y Gaypes gel be ish di53 Vp 
them, until the Hour begins.” kes cs 

(Sahih) BUN 6 BE lL 

VAAY se cpa fal Bele le Ob coal pda dl ae] [eeene oolied : ets 
eVAOV ie cCaslpe) Ole cpl armmreey Woeee Cee Cale Wiad SB, cay dad Calo tye 
TAYE oT Ta COlh op) 

Comments: 

a. Allah the Glorified has honored the community of the Prophet Muhammad 
#¢, by decreeing that it will not go astray en masse as was the case with the 
earlier communities: they went astray so completely that no one; except 
whom Allah pleased, remained. on the right track, 

bp. Islam, the religion of truth, is immune from distortion, since the holy book 
of Islam — the Qur’an ~ is fully preserved, and. so are the traditions of the 
Prophet #8, thanks to the efforts of those who faithfully transmitted. them, 
and to those who faithfully implemented them. 

c. A great number of scholars hold the view that the people referred to in the 
Hadith are Ahl Hadith, for it is they who do not consider anyone deserving 
unquestioned compliance after the Messenger of Allah #8. 

d. The Hadith does not imply that those treading the path of truth shall be 
spared all trials and tribulations in life. It rather means that those trials and 
tribulations shall not force them to deviate from the path of truth. 

The Book Of The Sannah 

77 Sh ous 

e. The phrase “until the Hour begins” means ‘until the time Islam. remains in 
the hearts of the people’ since the last generation of men that shall witness 
the Hour will be such that no one among them will say ‘Allah, Allah’ since 

the Prophet 2% has foretold that. 

7. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah 2#& said: “A group of my 
Ummah will continue to adhere 
steadfastly to the command of 
Allah and those who oppose them 
will not be able to harm: them.” 
(Hasan) 

Aa { Age 

alia Gas OU cat 2 9 

Jali aly Ole cals sll poe ails paced dedle gy pai [ewe ostiwl] : ope oo 
\AoP ie e(oyh ge) OLe gpl amoney CTYV/Y) dgot te 

8. Bakr bin Zur’ah said: “I heard 
Abu ‘Inabah Al-Khawlani, who 

had prayed facing both prayer 

directions (Qiblah) with the 
Messenger of Allah #8, say: ‘I 
heard the Messenger of Allah 
say: Allah will continue to plant 
new people in this religion and 

use them in His obedience’. 

(Hasan) 

elie Gis :dU cal we fl he - A 

aN 
g 
' * 
° 
\ 
ca 

Joh oo otha Ae 85 gv 

ae Sa mT oe ee Saye 
to) 5a; BE al D525 Cees id BE | 

tae cl (ha So ok a dig Ww 

q ea. ergo 
tgelb 3 pglaxics 

od Chet of Ae yy puell Of You (Erdem ao > beam olin] ‘Ge ed 
€Pecomne Stine] hia? Sey Js cAAT Ca ylged Le yl ancy 

Comments: 

a. Abu “Inabah Al-Khawlani #, a Companion of the Prophet 2%, is among 
the earliest entrants into Islam. He, like so many other Companions, prayed 
for sixteen or seventeen months facing Jerusalem before the revelation came 
for the change of direction (Qiblah) towards the Sacred House of Allah in 

Makkah. 

b. Spread of Islam has not been a transitory phenomenon restricted to a 
particular period in history. People of different religious persuasions have 
all along been entering and, Allah willing, will continue to enter its fold, 
and the Muslim Ummah shall continue to benefit by their capabilities. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 78 

9. ‘Amr bin Shu’aib narrated that 
his father said: “Mu’awiyah stood 3 
up to deliver a sermon and said: 
“Where are your scholars? Where 3 
are your scholars? For ] heard the ~*~ 
Messenger of Allah # say: The <3) ¢ 
Hour will not begin until a group 
of my Ummah will prevail over 

the people, and they will not care 4 5,aib 

who lets them down and who 

supports them’.” (Sahih) i v oie : 

VUNG Sobel we 2S Gb Cytol! feds 6 pee deol [eee] Fes Sal 
ae Ml ody Ushe ye lem poy VAYE 2 & cha VPI ee thes 

Comments: 

a. “Where are your scholars?” because there were very few senior 

Companions at that time.” 

b. “...prevail over the people” means: they will continue to prevail over the 
deviant groups through the might of their proofs and arguments. It could 

_ also mean that those on the right path will win discernable supremacy. 

c. The halimark of scholars treading the path of truth is that they popularize 
the truth, and. expose falsehood in belief and action, regardless of whether 
the number of people supporting them is large or small, or what position of 

authority their adversaries are holding. 

* 10. It was narrated from i653 

Thawban that the Messenger of 

* Allah #8 said: “A group among oF 
“my Ummah will continue to 7% 

follow the truth and prevail, and 
those who oppose them will not 
be able to harm them, until the oll 
command of Allah comes to 

pass.” (Sahih) ok 

of VA¥ere Fea ... aelb cis ¥ we 43 Ob cd LVI 6 plane dee oh z 

The Book Of The Sunnah 79 Pods) i es 

11. Jabir bin ‘Abdullah said: “We ‘Tass 33 dl Kel nas gf Gls - 14 
were with the Prophet #g, and he 2 2 igs ty we A aes 
drew a line (in the sand), then he © wey - ne 
drew two lines to its right and He ot gt OF Soil 46 $45 Slee 
two to its left. Then he put his ras gz - 36 
hand on the middle line and said: bs 1S : i ea a : 
‘This is the path of Alléh’ Then 32 3 hs bs5 cae G2 ght LS; 
he recited the Verse: And verily, - y : on) ug 
this (ie. Allah’s Commandments) #42! 55 gt oe co glig 
is My straight path, so follow it, SV oda S68 tail hee Ga» 2S 
and follow not (other) paths, for 

they will s x rapes you away from as WS ths 56 oe Bie Om Ohh 
His path... (Da‘if) eee eter 2 Rae og GES Seas 
[\o¥ 

wey Ube eal Oe teow cy dle oe Yay /¥ steed a ol [tend odlinnl] ees 
Cayhye) She gpl Le Johns Syted! Gaal COA /V Stewed! jase) cid thes 
ee gh: t¥0 [Vitel cate y cnilly MIA/Y  pSbodl army candy WEVIE 

Comments: 

a. There is only one straight path leading to Allah; those leading to error are 
many. 

b. In order to exemplify the nature of error, the Prophet #@ drew lines on 
either side of the straight line. By doing so he seemed to suggest that error 
sometimes arises through exceeding the limits in religion, and at other times 
through unlawful remission or default. Exceeding the limits leads to 
innovations and heresies in belief and action. 

Chapter 2. Venerating The sents af Cale AY eared 
Hadith Of The Messenger Of hay ec ete 
Allah #¢ And Dealing of sé me HE al yw) 
Harshly With Those Who Go (Y¥ deel) 42518 

Against It 

12, It was narrated from Miqd4am (445 -%23 =| AG as gi Gis - vy 
bin Ma’dikarib Al-Kindi that the Pe eee Me ae 
Messenger of Allah 2 said: “Soon 7b? gp Highs GF cle 4D 
there will come a time thataman 6? 33} ceae to oK ae 

Ee i 
will be reclining on his pillow, zo ie oF Sz ts 
and when one of my Ahadith is ‘JU #§ i! 5525 ST GES ite 

@ ALAn‘am 67153. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

narrated, he will say: “The Book of 
Allah is (sufficient) between us 
and you. Whatever it states is 
permissible, we will take as 
permissible; and whatever it 
states is forbidden, we will take as 
forbidden.’ Verily, whatever the 
Messenger of Allah #§ has 
forbidden is like that which Allah 
has forbidden.” (Hasan) 

80 etd) al 

é 

je 43 UES LG eg fe a Ss 
ele Se ad Chey bey atlas! Jos 
is HE tl 525 eG Sy WI coteie 

Ge 

. as ea G 

eG}... dle al we gg & Ok cob! chest anol [yee cole] ge ps 

Comments: 

VARIN Sled trees 

a. “Reclining on his pillow” indicating the splendor enjoyed by the newly- 
wedded brides in their decorated beds in the Arabian societies of bygone 
days. This suggests that the denial of Hadith is the vocation of the over-fed, 
luxury-loving individuals, given to sitting and leaning against the backs of 

their sofas. 

b. Nowadays we find such people who say that Qur'an is enough for the 
rulings of Islam, while Ahddith have been manipulated by some persons 
with evil intentions in the early times, so these cannot be trusted to be true. 
Such rejecters of the Ahédith are called, by some; Munkir Hadith. 

13. It was narrated from 
‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Rafi’ from 
his father, that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “I do not want to 
find anyone of you reclining on 
his pillow, and when news comes 
to him of something that I have 
commanded or forbidden, he 
says, ‘I do not know, whatever 
we find in the Book of Allah, we 
will follow.’” (Sahih) 

Beg We AES Bea 4 

cata § wow 2 foe ett eee 
cade ul Oe od ELE YS Oltad ewes 

ews! 3% Fat OT do be 

I 

col i tl ae ge PLT 5 5 GT 238 
Ve dE BB bl 425 OT gl 32 55 
BM ast oh) Je bt sae Sal 
V dps de 2G gle Spf 

CEB dl OS 3 C4E5 & ig ST 

c8VOre Ervewn | ea3 we wh cau cagla gel ar oh Lame odbew)] es Saad 
Wie cOlL> oy! Aone g (pond ‘ gcbe I JB» 6% Olaw Cade ir TU 6 Ge pity 

Comments: 

CVV VALY) ca ily « pSlodly 

a. Just as compliance with the commandments of the Messenger of Allah 2 
was mandatory on people who took them direct from his mouth, it is 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 81 AES) las 

equally binding on all those who receive them from others provided the 
source of transmission is dependable and. trustworthy. It is, therefore, the 
rule that any Hadith that is adjudged as ‘authentic or Sahih (Sound) or Hasan 
(Good) in the light of the criteria set by the scholars of Hadith is binding on 
the believers. 

b. To hear a Prophetic Hadith and then respond to it by saying, “I do not 
know,” is indicative of one’s false pride, willful denial and disrespect to the 
words of the Prophet #¢, which is a grave sin, for Allah says: “... So, let 
those who go against his (Messenger’s) command beware, lest a trial befall 
them or a painful torment overtake them.”’ (24:63) 

c. Denial of Hadith means the denial of the Qur’an. The reason being that the 
Qur’an has again and again commanded the believers to obey and follow 
the precepts of the Prophet #8, and declared it as. the very purpose of the 
Prophet's duty to explain and exemplify the teachings of the Noble Qur’an 
through his word and action. The first people in the Islamic history to deny 
the Hadith of the Prophet # were the Kharijites (the Seceders). 

14. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 433 by dans O16 Pe ae - \¢ 

that the Messenger of Allah # ~ 9, , . gus om yxee jest 

said: “Whoever innovates e222} cf 2X ce ply} Goes Bll 
something in this matter of ours ae cde Le he g pe 5l awe gil 

(ie., Islam) that is not part of it ~ 0  ee e , i 
will have it rejected.” (Sahih) al Sg Ol Angle GE came op mylill 
ed oA ET 3 Gost ga G6 ge 

te Lst te 
~Usy SR tts 

caprye chal oye che cle Ipdbel Bl) Ob cabal «bd eel taps 

et hl Syd cya WATE Fea! .. Sb els! yaw wl 1 aed YI plans oYVAVi 

4s haw cyl 

Comments: 

a. “In this matter of ours” may either mean matters pertaining to religion or to 
the sacred law of Islam. It may also mean the commandments of Allah and 
His Messenger #¢. Every new thing added to or deleted from the acts of 
devotion through one’s own whim or desire is Bid‘ah (innovation). The 
Prophet # has also said: “Each innovation is an error.” (Muslim, Book of 
Friday — Shortness of Prayer & Sermon.) Worldly affairs, such as clothes of 
various types, local methods of cooking, or the use of modern appliances in 
cultivation — these things are outside the purview of innovation. 
Nevertheless, matters violating the general rules of Shari’ah, such as dresses 
that do not fulfill the basic purpose of covering the concealable parts of the 
body, or those particular to non-Muslims shall be prohibited. 

b. Any action that the Prophet of Allah #@ has abstained from doing due to 
some consideration or expedient reason, although he wished to do it is, in 
principle, permissible. Therefore, the doing of it after the consideration no 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

82 lett) is LS 

longer exists is perfectly in order without the fear of its being branded as 
innovation. Cases in point are (i) the Prophet's abstaining from leading the 
Tarawih prayer (Ramadan optional night prayer) through, the entire month 
of Ramadan, lest it should assume the status of an obligatory duty, and (ii) 
the Companion’s decision not to compile the whole of the Qur’an as a 
codex during the lifetime of the Prophet #¢, since the revelation had not 
stopped, and there was always the possibility of a Verse being revealed or 
another being abrogated by Allah. There remaining no such possibility after 
the death of the Prophet #%, when the Companions lost no time in 
compiling an authentic copy of the Noble Book, and ‘Umar <% reintroduced 
the congregational form of the Tardwih prayer. 

15. It was narrated from ‘Urwah 
bin Zubair that ‘Abdullah bin 
Zubair told him that a man from 
the Ansér had a dispute with 
Zubair in the presence of the 
Messenger of Allah #@ concerning 
a stream in the Harrah") which 
they used to irrigate the date- 
' palm trees. The Ansfri said: “Let 
the water flow,” but (Zubair) 
refused. So they referred the 
dispute to the Messenger of Allah 
#¢, who said: “Irrigate (your 
land), O Zubair, then let the water 
flow to your neighbor.’”” The 
Anséri became angry and said: “O 
Messenger of Allah, is it because 
he is your cousin?” The face of 
the Messenger of Allah 2 
changed color (because of anger) 
and he said: “O Zubair, irrigate 
{your Jand) then block the water 
until it flows back to the walls 
around the date-palm trees.” 
Zubair said: “By Allah, I think 
that this Verse was revealed 
concerning this matter: ‘But no, 
by your Lord, they can have no 
Faith, until they make you (O 
Muhammad) judge in all disputes 

a ° aot 3 

pee o Co aa pees as = \o 
ol oF eges 2p Eat OT ob eal 

Gi al eT og GE be wks 
pole gla oe Sts OF Bhs shh 
So che 3 MB Bl dxty Be 
aN SRS os A 

Be hae gle QU 5% sll oh 

gain 6 al 25 OS a at Jt 

Pa 
\ 

eke tings ~ doe Pat ee 

wo HG abl S525 435 3S Paste Gi 

° 3 “oe 

Be tll Gath gat 355 db 

ge adeeb Suet tne pee oF, eee 

« aii’ ” 1 du :J € desl! al ere 
at 

OS pl ghd IS is 
[vo tell] Gt Wks cass 

[4 Fields of volcanic rock in and around Al-Madinah. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 83 ARE) ls 

between them, and find in 
themselves no resistance against 
your decisions, and accept (them) 
with full submission’. (Sahih) 

cpbenny VOUS cYPOAre BVI See Gk BL ewybedl el Ferbree] 

vay daw op Sall Soue oy YVOV ie «Me acl! ge yg oh « taal 

Comments: 

a. 

People with their farms nearest to a river or a rivulet and the first recipients 
of its water for their farms, have more right over the water. Only after they 
have done with it, comes the right of others in line. 

It is the moral duty of a believer to be mindful of the needs of his 
neighbors. 

. While dispensing justice, the judge must see to it that the judgment takes 

care of the interest of both the parties. The Qur’an says: ~...And 
reconciliation is better...” (4:128) 

. To deliver full rights to the deserving party, and no benefits to the opposing 

party, is perfectly in order. The Prophet #%, in his first ruling, had kept the 
interest of both the parties in mind. Later on he ruled for full right in favor 
of Zubair a. 

. The Arabic word Jadr refers to a low, wall-like boundary used to retain 

water inside the cultivation area. Scholars have defined the encircling wall 
to be as high as the ankles of men working in the field. 

. Feeling pain in the heart or the appearance of the signs of displeasure on 

the face is a part of human nature. Our decisions, however, should not be 
colored by our anger. The Prophet #§ has expressly instructed as follows: 
“The judge must not give his verdict between two parties in a state of 
anger.” (Bukhari: 7158 & Muslim: 1717). 

The Prophet #@ enjoyed a special gift of infallibility from Allah, and as such 
he spoke nothing but truth even when angry. No one after him is immune 
from error. 

Mistrust of others is a bad human trait born of satanic whispering. It was 
this trait that led the person mentioned in the Hadith to impute kinship bias 
against the Prophet 2¢. 

AGea epi, 

16. It was narrated from Ibn Gy negs ceed Jy tase Gas - 
‘Umar that the Messenger of —- 

Allah #& said: “Do not prevent 9 ‘7° 
the female slaves of Allah from yr, i) 

ra in the mosque.” A son of 2 
his © ‘ 

[4 An-Nisa’ 4:65. 
I That is, a son of Ibn ‘Umar. 

i“ 

a9) te Bhs 
“2 ° + BO GF ” of 
ee on oF ghia oF 6G PH 

of osF °¢ ba 47 seer < ~ te ae 4 
said: “We will indeed oh Gl i ela Nyrced Yo 2G SR tl 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

prevent them!” He got very angry 
and said: “T tell you a Hadith from 
the Messenger of Allah #6 and 
you say, we will indeed prevent 
them?!” (Sahih) 

cad ye AVE caf. 

» Ups aly Olde! Ob cOBM cg bel a et : 

84 AR wis 

EBaI GT A Ow esa 3 

“3 2 ao 2 a ed Prd gee 

M6551 2585 lyst Lab Cad sce 
o% ft a 4 

Fox el 

- gro! god 64 Gaz Ge. cyl Cyd oye Wo /tttie tbe olgys cates & pare 

Comments: 

a. The women are allowed to go and join the congregational prayer in the 
mosque. Nevertheless it is preferable for them that they pray at home. 

b. The Companions’ displeasure with each other was: not prompted by 
personal reasons. They did not, however, keep quiet when things improper 
were said or done before their eyes. We. would, however, be well-advised to 
choose the right moment, and proper method, to admonish people against 

doing things wrong or unfair. 

c. If a show of sternness is likely to: be more effective, it is. all. right to adopt 

this course of action. 

d. Ti was. not the intention of Bilal, the son of ‘Abdullah bi ‘Umar 2 to 
oppose the commandment of the Prophet #. He only meant to say that 
ladies. of his time no longer took full care of the code of decency required of 
them: outside their homes; hence they should not be permitted to. go out to 
the mosques. for prayers. But since the words used by Bilal were apparently 
improper, Ibn ‘Umar # showed great anger. Musnad Ahmad (2/36) reports 
that ever since that day until his last breath Ibn “Umar # never spoke to 

that son. 
17. It was narrated from Sa‘eed 
bin Jubair that ‘Abdullah bin 
Mughaffal was sitting beside a 
nephew of his; the nephew hurled. 
a pebble and he told him not to 
do. that, and he said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #¢ had 
forbidden that. He (the Prophet) 
said: ‘It cannot be used for 
hunting and it cammot harm an 
enemy, but it may break a tooth 
or put an eye out.’” He said: “His 
nephew hurled another pebble 
and he (‘Abdullah bin Mughaffal) 
said: ‘T tell you that the Messenger 
of Allah forbade that (and you go. 
and hurl another pebble)? I will 

ae Bis VE ee YL alt Ge 
gh dee b2 Sat Be By Og 
Cie Os TR of bl we gs 
S65 YS GS ST el tate 
Sp 3385 182 8B a) 55 

gol Oil Sua 56 galt tess 5s 

ais 4 “ - 8 gge. - oe - 
HE wl S505 ee 1 2 Sli rer weat 
- 4? ° e 7 

The Book Of The Sunnah 85 

Add | boat Le” 

never speak to you again.’” 
(Sahih) 

Comments: 
a. 

pally olde Yi he gy Oley be deb ol ecbily deal Cela ae el tea oe 

4% > nh 9 stl Cag do oF VAokre cel 

The Messenger of Allah #¢ has prohibited every unseemly or harmful act 
even though it would seem petty to the naked eye. The reason being that 
oftentimes a thing may appear petty at the moment, but may have 
extraordinary consequences in the end. 

. If an evil act, which is a major sin before Allah, becomes rampant in the 

society, people begin to take it lightly. We must be on our guard and avoid 
even those seemingly minor sins. 

All matters having no spiritual merit or worldly benefit, but fraught. with 
harmful possibilities, must be avoided. 

. It is perfectly in order to severe relations with persons given to committing 

acts of sin, as part of admonition to them, or an expression of our disgust at 
their conduct. Such an attitude from us might prompt them to repent and 

reform their conduct. 

e. All acts likely to harm the interests of Muslims must be avoided. 

18. It was narrated from Ishaq 
bin Qabisah. from his father that 
“‘Ubadah bin Samit Al-Ansari, 
head of the army unit, the 
Companion of the Messenger of 
Allah #€, went on a military 
campaign with Mu’awiyah in the 
land of the Byzantines. He saw 
people trading pieces of gold for 
Dinar and pieces of silver for 
Dirham. He said: “O people, you 
are consuming Riba (usury)! For I 
heard the Messenger of Allah 2% 
say: “Do not sell gold for gold 
unless it is like for like; there 
should be no increase and no 
delay (between the two 
transactions).’’” Mu‘awiyah said 
to him: “O Abu Walid, I do not 
think there is any Rib@ involved in 
this, except in cases where there is 
a delay.” ‘Ubadah said to him: “I 
tell you a Hadith from the 

opts ie ea ree Ns 

be whe YS ge is Oi 
je Bae ji acl tf dan’ o SES 

Cole ole Stal colt 
a Sa) Sige’ f eo 52 RB abl 5 
esi HS SANS AG DI J 5k 
GDB .eGUl dedi 5255 30UL 

55 cil ee aX} ch gl 

Cs (265 Ve 5b Be it O25 
ar gs 3 i563 Y ‘ » Ke ¥ ALL 

Y tad of & Eye 3 J es 

The Book Of The Sunnah 86 SLA tae 

Messenger of Allah #¢, and you te 
tell me your opinion! If Allah 

live in a land in which you have 

Sal as ge BW oil sisul 
brings me back safely I will never #3 7422 Edt je as 

oo te te Gye 8h ae. a 
authority over me.” When he vo Sass GIG al & “oles 
returned, he stayed in A\l- OW kL be oe les cea) ale 

Madinah, and ‘Umar bin Khattab 
said to him: “What brought you 4! A «dLs5/ 
here, O Abu Walid?” So he told. “J a 
him the story, and what he had , oe ae 
said about not living in the same = GI for ls ale GU ay! Y 1% 
land as Mu’awiyah. ‘Umar said: ieee 

“Go back to your land, O Abu 
Walid, for what a bad land is the 
land from where you and people 
like you are absent.’”” Then he 
wrote to Mu’aéwiyah and said: 
“You have no authority over him; 
make the people follow what he 
says, for he is right.” (Hasan) 

ay Aloevall fowls ye gl rare ded AG) J dred [sperm oobinal] Fee Peaed 

YYOE: SMI Satoh daily combs glue tie aalyt 

Comments: 

a. 

Selling gold for gold or silver for silver is only allowed if it is like for like, 
and the parties to the deal hand over their commodities on the spot. If the 
deal is silver for gold, they do not have to be equal in quantity. The deal 
must, however, be finalized in the same sitting. By the same analogy, 
exchange of old currency notes with new ones shall also be governed by the 
same rule. Thus, exchanging new 100 denomination currency notes for the 
old 110 denomination notes is not permissible in Islam. 

. No one’s word, even that of a Companion, carries any weight if it is in 

conflict with the words of the Prophet #§. It may, however, be the case that 
one Companion interpreted the Hadith in a certain way while the other 
Companion thought that the Hadith did not support the first Companion’s 
deduction, or else he gave more weight to another Hadith related to the 
subject. In a situation like this, the right course for us is to analyse the 
Hadith to see which interpretation has more weight. Any well-meaning 
error in making the right choice through Ijtihdd (independent reasoning or 
excercise of judgment) is condonable. 

. The Companions attached so much importance and value to the Hadith that, 

when an opinion sounding different from the meaning of the Hadith was 
presented, the Companion was so enraged that he decided to leave the land 
he was staying in. ‘Umar @ appreciated the position taken by him so much 

The Book Of The Sunnah 87 doen) let 

that he declared to Mu‘awiyah 4% that ‘Ubadah 2 would not be under his 
authority. 

d. If two Companions have divergent views on a matter, the view more in line 
with teachings of the Qur’an and Sunnah should be adopted. “Umar did 
just that. He ascertained the views of the two, and preferred the one that 
was in line with the teachings of the Prophet #¢ and enforced it. 

19. ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: - ajar) sikh 72 & Af Gas - 4 

“When I tell you of a Hadith from eat ja a s rae : 
the Messenger of Allah 2%, then cx! Ce stat FE che Sy ee OF 
think of the Messenger of Alldh yy ect cai te 23 See GET Sune 
#@ as being the best, the utmost ~~“ ~ ier . ; 
rightly guided and the one with = I 545 Je pXS4> WL cE agate ot 

the utmost Taqwa (piety PORE Ga ABS tes. (5 eS aes 
, *¢ - y Vek 
righteousness).” (Da‘if) cal 30 gl RB al ym Ips 3 

Some gdl Shs ca Core ge £10 cYAG/V taael a ol Lda soliuf] Gee 

20. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin (y Gis ty Sy ij Ut Ge - y. 
Abu Talib said: “When I narrate a ges os ec ts et te ct tt 
Hadith from the Messenger of  ‘* 7267 Of SS OF aa o 
Allah #% to you, then think of him -,.5-5!| ate Py, fF eel Ql is 
as being the best, the most rightly ~~ |. ¢ a aera 
guided and the one with the utmost Is] sdb Je tl ihe SF Zoho J| 

| 

Taqwa (piety, righteousness).” 4, 4 283 (445. HE bl 5 > ERE - 
(Sahih) 2 Oo pate tp sees. al 

Sy ce heb Gate ge WNT /Viteot aol [epee ooled] ces 
Wrens) 6 68 rh ge asl) ‘eee abel Lar tg no gl 

Comments: 19 & 20 

a. The Hadith means that if we come across an authentic Hadith that seems to 
contain an impropriety, we should interpret it in such a way that the 
impropriety is removed. It is because a Hadith can sometimes admit of more 
than one interpretation. In that situation we must adopt the interpretation 
that is supported by the Qur'an and other traditions of the Prophet 3. 

b. Just as some of the Verses of the Qur’én contain concepts that are beyond 
the realm of human intellect (not against it), a Hadith may also contain such 
concepts, The right course to adopt, in such a case, is that we keep faith in 
the text of the Hadith, and leave the ultimate meaning to Allah. Traditions 
referring to the attributes of Allah and details about life in Barzakh 

The Book Of The Sunnah 88 onto) alt 

(intervening period between death and resurrection) belong to this category. 
c. The suggested course is the best course, it being nearest to true guidance 
and piety. 
21. It was narrated from Abu 3f2% Gis - pry 43 ale is - yy 
Hurairah that the Prophet # said: 5 ew, |g weet ese Og 
“I do not want to hear of anyone = U* 624 OF CG ptell Gas ‘ Sova ol 
of you who, upon hearing a Y :GG i a ea ie eee al 
Hadith narrated from me, says Fes th GAS SG, LEE’ Pease dk 
while reclining on his pillow: 349 Gye 66 pS4el Coe be 23 oI 
‘Recite Qur’an (to verify this - feed £4, 4 25 2 € ff. y eas 
Hadith).’ (Here the Prophet g 2 AD Uso B13) gb ES 
said:) Any excellent word that is Recrmre oo SS be SS 
said, it is I who have said it.” 
[How then can you reject what I 
have said?} (Da‘ip 

LW SAY /Y eel 

Comments : 

a. It is an extremely Weak. Hadith. The last sentence of the “Hadith” is in 
obvious conflict with the more dependable Mutawétir (Continuous) Anhédith 
narrated by the “Ten Companions’ (who were given in advance the glad 
tiding of admittance to Paradise in the life after death.) The Hadith referred 
to above quotes the Prophet #€ as saying: “Whoever intentionally forges a 
lie against me, let him take his place in Hell-fire.” (Bukhari H.110) 

b. A Da‘if (Weak) “Hadith” is one that does not fulfill the conditions of a Sahih 
(Sound) or Hasan (Good) Hadith. Scholars have three different opinions 
about acting on weak Hadith as follows: (i) A vast majority of traditionists, 
researchers and scrupulous scholars do not regard the contents of a Weak 
Hadith as conclusive proof or binding, regardless whether it relates to the 
rules (of permission and prohibition) in Islam, or to the merits of 
performing certain acts of virtue or devotion, (ii) Some Traditionists and 
scholars accept them in matters related to acts of devotion or virtue, as well 
as for awakening the desire for Divine reward, or creating a fright from the 
impending doom in the Hereafter, (iii) There is also a third group of 
scholars that accepts a weak Hadith if (a) it is not extremely weak, (b) the 
Hadith belongs to some everyday matter and (c) while acting on it, one 
should not assume that he is doing a bidding of the Prophet #% and it is 
none of his commands. Observing all these conditions is, however, a 
difficult proposition. As such one would be well-advised not to accept a 
Weak Hadith at all. And Allah knows best of all. 

22. It was narrated from Abu me esi ste S 422% Sis — vy 
Salamah that Abu Hurairah said 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

to a man: “O son of my brother, 
when I narrate a Hadith of the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ to you, 
then do not 2) to make any 
examples for it.” (Hasan) 

Commenis: 

89 ARS: las 

Grd 0 Seo 4 + ¢ 
CF Faye Cp dares Ge Cd Oe bog] 
Pe fe coer ® j 

BY BeBe sys oF du] 
oe cased 23 ale GS tS ad 

° “. 
aie. wo ges Ae gas 0 er ee tod 
ENE Sate 4 a eS aaa S al ve wed 

3 ENOL ee «pail L pmo oo lunst ] “ees 

Abu Hurairah # faulted the conduct of the man, who was Ibn ‘Abbas, and 
warned him for raising objections to it. For more details see no. 485. 

Chapter 3. Caution In 
Narrating Ahdédith From The 
Messenger Of Allah #@ 

23. ‘Amr bin Maimun said: “I 
used to visit Ibn Mas‘ud every 
Thursday afternoon, but he never 
uttered the words: ‘The 
Messenger of Allah #€ said.’ Then 
one evening, he said: ‘The 
Messenger of Allah #¢ said, then 
he let his head hang down.” He 
said: “I looked at him and saw 
that his shirt was unfastened; his 
eyes were filled with tears, and 
his. veins were bulging out (with 
fear). He said: ‘Or more than that, 

edt 3 SB SU - OF ped 
(Y dio!) BE atl Sg BF 

Le cael LE cel pall SE Bae 
xo Ae - WE Boe R 4 
cyl lbs | e iJ O gee8 gn Ire 

{ For the first part of this Hadith, see no. 485. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 90 AS) ls 

or less than. that, or close to that, reek) og fart Bice tey 
or something similar.’ (Sahih) = —°2927' 2? Sones oho - 
J 

= Gone gdl doreey 6a opty Shes ye LON /Videol og ol Teemene waked]: ces oi 

Comments: 

a. “Amr bin Maimun used to visit ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud 4% every Thursday 
since he (‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud ) used to hold a weekly session of his 
scholarly discourse in his house on that day. It is narrated (in Bukhdri, 70) 
that he was requested to hold those sessions of admonition and knowledge 
often times once a week, but he said in reply: “The Prophet #% also used to 
preach only on appropriate times and occasions, lest the audiences should 
start feeling bored. It follows from this that it is most advisable that we fix a 
particular time for purposes of preaching or imparting knowledge, so that 
the people can really benefit by the discourses. 

b. The Arabic word ‘Ashiyyah used in the Hadith may mean any time from the 
decline of the sun until sunset. So, the time of the discourse may have been 
either after Zuhr or ‘Asr prayer. And Allah knows best. 

c. ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud 4% avoided giving a verbatim narration of the Hadith, 
lest a word that the Prophet # had not spoken should be attributed to him. 
There were many other Companions who made a verbatim narration of the 
traditions. Both methods of narration are correct. Direct narration is 
considered better although the indirect narration is a safer option. 

d. It is also a part of the etiquette of Hadith narration that if the narrator does 
not remember the exact words of the Hadith, he should finish his narration by 
saying: “Or as the Messenger of Allah #@ said.” We shall read about it in the 
next Hadith that narrates the practice of Anas bin Malik # in this regard. 

ra ee 

24, Muhammad bin Sirin said: GAs :3 wl & 4 yl Gas - Ye 

“Whenever Anas bin Malik : ; es 
finished narrating a Hadith from ot wae bf Ose cn! oF dle bY st 

the Messenger of Allah #@, he S15 13, se 3S en) OS SE 2 ew 

would. say, ‘Or as the Messenger aie 2 ae: 

of Allah 8 said.” (Sahih) 51:06 & p58 bs % il ek 3 
i ai Jyt5 38 us 

steel Mad 65 ao gll Sy cay Slee ge YO Piel ax ol [eee iG Fox Saeed 
Gly) apr Lect] 128 bret bys he eee 

{I That is, Ibn Mas‘ud was indicating that the Prophet #¢ said something similar to what 
he had narrated. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 91 ded) et 

25. It was narrated that ‘Abdur- ac xg a ee si Ge - v0 
Rahman bin Abi Laila said: “We ie Me ene - 
said to Zaid bin Arqam: ‘Tell usa fy; Meme GIS5 te thes BS code 

Oo 
Hadith from the Messenger of Bbc te wo Be Nee, fen ees es 
Allah #8.’ He said: we have CO ee ees ee erie 
grown old and have forgotten, 12)! ule 32 8% of oe 36 AG 
and (narrating) Ahddith from the “5, Lz foe es oe ae 
Messenger of Allah 2% is difficult eae o : 
(not a simple matter).’” (Sahih) Cais. Os. ait 2 Al d25 82 

By ce ones kb ye TVYEMVY c¥VO/E tel at [eee oolinss] Fes Seae) 
Ward | esl 2 re ee wis nels ale) 6 eee okie} hia Syme sl 

Comments: 24 & 25 

a. It clearly shows that the Companions considered a Hadith something quite 
great and momentous. They, therefore, only narrated what they 
remembered well. 

b. From this, some Hadith scholars have deduced the rule, that ftom the 
moment a scholar begins to make mistakes in narrating the Ahédith, he 
should stop narrating them. 

c. Our scholars must, therefore, make it a rule to quote only those Ahédith in 
their writings and speeches that they know for sure belong to the category 
of Sahih or Hasan Ahdadith, and avoid narrating weak Ahédith. 

26. It was narrated that ‘Abdulldh —s t5 os ail ate 3) A Hs - 
bin Abu Safar said: “I heard Ash- See Bes: Gee wes «» late oe a 
Sha’bi saying: ‘Isat with Ibn‘Umar ot Bl ke GF cde Ge cal gh Gas 
for a year and J did not hear him “Jj 2 ge8y Fe. 14 te ‘ 
: pres) Cares SL lg! 
narrate anything from the “ ie ae : = & 
Messenger of Allah #8.’” (Sahih) bb GdSS Gant Lb Ee Ze Gl Ce 
2 al J 525 

cglaey VY: cdtod gl afl ot Oh oY shel gob asl tgs 
Vy ey pad ge Gyll BF Sete ge VALET all SLL bl gills spall 
LOVIN dart ae el tad ol oyl Gutey 

Comments: 

a. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar also avoided narrating Ahéddith in the name of the 
Prophet #¢, for reasons that made other Companions cautious, namely that 
they were afraid of attributing to the Prophet #% words that he had not 

spoken. 
b. Not that the Companions did not engage in the teachings of Islam but their 

The Book Of The Sunnah 92 ARH! hes 

method was different. They clearly told the people the things that were 
obligatory, or permissible, or unlawful, as well as the things they would do 
well to avoid. Ali these things they told them in the light of the Ahédith they 
had heard from the Prophet #¢, but they did not narrate those traditions in 
his name. 

27. It was narrated from Ibn pass] he tS tah Gis -— yy 
Tawus that his father said: “I Te iets GET -aiten as he ach 
heard Ibn ‘Abbas saying: ‘We ‘2 UP) (GU) Ae Ge 
used to memorize Ahddith, and tt) dks 206 i ie ATs th ag 

pape : 7 Cr) Gees Dard of bop o oF” 
Ahédith were memorized from the Roe eae eo ee 

Messenger of Allah #8. But if you GussSl bast 6 fds y 

go to the extremes of either iS] le Be at 425 38 3 OAT |p 
exaggeration or negligence (in 

narrating Ahddith), there is no Elgg JS shlss Call 6255 
way we can trust your Ahédith.’” 
(Sahih) 

cgi] ela ge RLS ge Gell Gh cre dade 8 glee eel tga pd 

4 Bij Se Cade os View 

Comments: 

a. Prophetic Ahadith axe conclusive proofs in the Islamic law. That is why the 
Companions listened to them attentively and memorized them studiously. 
Ibn ‘Abbas 4, as we know, was passing through the childhood phase 
during the lifetime of the Prophet #¢. As such he could hear only a limited 
number of Ahddith from him. He nevertheless memorized a large number of 
Ahédith from the senior Companions, so much so, that he came to be 
regarded as one of the major narrators among the Prophet's Companions. 

b. Real Islam is the word of the Prophet #€. Rulings given by others cannot 
take the place of Prophetic traditions. It is therefore, imperative that we 
seek the proof straightaway from the Qur’an and Sunnah in all matters. 

c. Recourse to the words of Companions and the Followers can only be taken 
where we have no word of the Prophet #. The Followers sometimes even 
used to write the words of the Companions. Ibn ‘Abbas 2 did. not like the 
idea of writing the words of others beside those of the Prophet #. That is 
why he counseled the people to memorize the Ahédith, not the sayings and 
rulings of others. 

d. The Arabic expression (As-sa‘ba wadh-dhalul) literally means “to tread the 
hard and soft ground’. In this Hadith it figuratively means: “You cannot 
distinguish between an acceptable and unacceptable tradition.” It could also 
be understood as in; “riding both the arrogant and the docile animal but one 
would be well-advised to avoid the arrogant animal.’ The total meaning of 
the phrase is thus the same, namely: “You must not accept the word of each 
and every narrator, but only of those narrators that are dependable and 
trustworthy, lest anything that the Prophet #¢ has not said be unknowingly. 
attributed to him.” 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

28. It was narrated that Qarazah 
bin Ka‘b said: “Umar bin Al- 
Khattéb sent us to Kufah, and he 
accompanied us as far as a place 
called Siraér. He said: ‘Do you 
know why I walked with you?’ 
We said: “Because of the rights of 
the Companions of the Messenger 
of Allah #@ and because of the 
rights of the Ans@r.’ He said: ‘No, 
rather it is because of words that I 
wanted to say to you. I wanted 
you to memorize it due to my 
walking with you. You are going 
to people in whose hearts the 
Qur’4n bubbles like water in a 
copper cauldron. When they see 
you, they will look up at you, 
saying: “The Companions of 
Muhammad!” But do not recite 
many reports from. the Messenger 
of Allah #%, then I will be your 
partner.” (Da‘if) 

93 ALLS tas 

foe fo 4tuot wee. 

Sus Gis te ft: Acct Gas - va 
ea Al Soe ab SS Si J 

+ an€ o2ge tf 2e 8 of oy ede 
35 6 SS Lol Raryy| Sutod cea 

war 9 £8 oder ny Zor tes 2F 
& gad i) «Sas Glass} ogee Ol 

an an) a a ee as ek . 4 
PP 3A paysie 3 AY oy 
watel Sal Wis 3h SB. be Sali 
$8 S57 1b ait Steel. 135 

Sige cp Olde Alyy od Gly duliy cVViC cpus Bie # [Line asl!) es 

Comments: 

a. To be moved by the reading of the Qur’an and the melting of the heart by 
it, is the characteristic of a true believer, and the sign of the tenderness of 

the heart. 

b. Along with the Qur'an, it is also essential ihat we acquire the knowledge of 
the Hadith since ‘Umar # did not forbid to narrate the Hadith. He only 

forbade overdoing it. 

c. While teaching, consideration should be given to the level of the students, 
and they should only be given at a time as much as they can easily take 

and digest. 

d. Forbidding giving too much of Hadith at a time is also meant to keep alive 
the interest of the students in them, and make their lessons more fruitful. 

29. It was narrated that Sa’ib bin 
Yazid said: “I accompanied Sa‘d 
bin Malik from Al-Madinah to 
Makkah, and I did not hear him 
narrate a single Hadith from the 

rly ty ins Ge - v4 

i ies Gas ga I 

The Book Of The Sunnah 94 AA Kole 

Prophet #4." (pelsth SM Such ie ae 83 ks 
B RI ae 
dels Gute 3B fe gf AS Cage 

faced otal Cant 3p wh +g jkeadl 6 GoeJI Ane alely Lenovo sot] Tex aaa 

Canimenes: ~ ds Jbl cae dbl ee) sd ude ce YAYE cht: c «tel a pd 
The reason for this was the extreme caution the Companions were wont to 
exercise in the matter. However, they regularly explained the rules of the 
Shari‘ah and engaged in wise counseling or admonition ~ all drawn from 
the Ahédith. 

Chapter 4. Severe jess 3 BE Ot - ( pail) 
Condemnation Of Deliberately 
: ‘ : diel j 

Telling Lies Against The DE th dye 3 de visi 

Messenger Of Allah 2 

30. It was narrated from ‘Abdur-  y335 3 Li os fi Ge - y. 

Rahman bin ‘Abdullah bin ~~ ~ * % - ae a 

Mas‘ud that his father said: “The !35 ow ge ge al aos dee GI 

Messenger of Allah #8 said: fe ee ide A te AS 

‘Whoever tells lies about me a PE const oF Seley 

deliberately, let him take his place ons a) woe os eee we U8 dln 3s 

nie Sal £6 il 425 JE OG af 32 ca hes 
iy tas Hab ee gle Gis ga 

er) 

Be tee 

«pass cea! Ans ais| St 3) es oh oe Sede at dor pol [enol : ead i, 
Mere Cpe Calm ta a Vibes ay San Ge dad dale os YYoy: Ta 

Comments : 

a. ‘Deliberately telling lies’ means fabricating something, then attributing it to 
the Prophet #¢ and presenting it as a Prophetic Hadith. It is an act of great 
sin. 

b. It is on the basis of this that the Hadith scholars have drawn the maxim that 
if, on a certain occasion, one feels the need to narrate a Weak Hadith of the 
Prophet #8, it must be clarified to the listeners that it is a Weak Hadith. The 
reason being that a Weak Hadith does not create the conviction as to 
whether the Prophet # did really speak those words, or the narrator has 
mistakenly narrated it as such. 

c. ‘Taking one’s place in Hell’ means the person is doomed to be consigned to 
Hell, and he must be sure that, due to his act of sin, his seat has been 
booked in Hell. However, it is hoped that, if the person repents and admits 
before the people that such and such traditions narrated by him in the name 

The Book Of The Sunnah 95 AeRtS) les 

of the Prophet #% were coined by him, his sin may be forgiven by Allah, 
although the Hadith scholars would not even then accept his narrations. 

For 

31. It was narrated that ‘Ali said: “eggs o pe: ce al we Gas - vy 
“The Messenger of Allah 2 said: 5 2 ope 254 
‘Do not tell lies about me, for dhs le V6 oe SF cee Lawl 
telling lies about me leads to Hell Ede 6 te of tA je «waa je 
ire).'”’ (Sahih 4 eu Doin sated 
eas c Ede I gdSG Yo BE y wire 5 db sdb 
681 ae gle GIS 5b 

( pelenes tio eo cel ode eds o e! wh cpbal ¢ Go bedl ao ol eee 
hy gpate of head Cade ge Vic BB bt dpe le GIS Bs Ol dasa 

32. It was narrated that Anas bin -4 She Be Fes a 

i& ‘al iss Gis - yy 
Malik said: “The Messenger of he aes “te 
Allah #@ said: ‘Whoever tells lies GF ye? ot! oF Re & ; Ec She 
about me,’ I (the narrator) think ae gy Jo GE GE wun tO 
that he also said, ‘deliberately,’ SB 3 ve i a a 
‘let him take his place in Hell’ = - Serie :JU tm - Glo GAS fo 
Sahih, i 24555 igacls 
¢ ) . «US “Cpe ohne ig 

A ges gle IS abd 3 ele bk Ob call gles nel [epee] tee pd 

ct tll Nha cy CEP eh ee Calm find Ss ca, AU cde ope YAW ie Be 

Sears ne 

Comments: 31 & 32 tee 

a. The narrator (probably Anas bin Malik #) doubts whether or not the 
Prophet #% also spoke the word ‘Muhammad’. There is no such doubt 
about the rest of the words of Hadith. 

b. It is the proof of the narrator's integrity that he clearly pointed out his 
doubt about the authenticity of a word in the Hadith. 

c. Other narrations of the Hadith confirm that the word ‘Muhammad’ was part 
of the Hadith. It is, therefore, not right to doubt its authenticity by the 
transmitter of the report. 

33. It was narrated that Jabir oe 8 sock Sefot FF Uta - 
: : anne yl Ge - *Y 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 eo is ee 

said: ‘Whoever tells lies about me ple Je 55 os jf yen) (Shs. 
deliberately, let him take his place 7) tz we ae ee HSK 
in Hell’” (Sahih) Ge HS Sot 1a Bl dy Ju cul 

GBI oe sada ise Cece qin 

ire cash Tres oh cma of Ye [hs aol aor oi [ jt gte eee) eee 
ekg MB lgall Cust YI Cf Flea! jlajVt 3 LS shee Cytboally 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

34. It was. narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 28 said: ‘Whoever attributes 
to me something that I have not 
said, let him take his place in 
Hell.’” (Sahih) 

Gis eb I OS fl Gas - ve 
bE pe gi wee UF Ok GY die 
J325 dE db GA Uf te ke Lf 
Iga al SG le 5a Sn: 

Cee GR Fae get Cp ames Eade ope o«h {Fs Loot aoe ol Leee } ees 
Mer 525 Gjb cates «CWE Sle! Ol je) Cull 

35. It was narrated that Abu 
Qatadah said: “While he was on 
this pulpit, I heard the Messenger 
of Allah #€ saying: ‘Beware of 
narrating too many Ahédith from 
me. Whoever attributes. something 
to me, let him speak the truth 
faithfully. Whoever attributes to 
me something that I did not say, 
let him take his place in Hell.’” 
(Hasan) 

~ a. 
a {ae 

is it fas & of ic - v0 

Wh Le Sys BE abt 545 Stas HG 
yas ge Sass) 1155 ath : pall 
S38 30g iy she Jeb oe 36 

AO Se soaks [gis Bt ad u gle 

Cre hs 6% Gloew! gp dere Syd> cys YOV /O:do>1 dom oh Leno osliel] 73a 

36. It was narrated from ‘Amir 
bin ‘Abdullah bin Zubair that his 
father said: “I said to Zubair bin 
‘Awwam: ‘Why do I not hear you 
narrating Aha@dith from the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ as I hear 
Ton: Mas‘ud and so-and-so and so- 
and-so?’ He said: ‘I never left him 
from the time I became Muslim, 
but I heard him say a word: 
“Whoever tells a lie about me 
deliberately, let him take his place 
in Hell.” ’ ” (Sahih) 

okie gladly 
ints 3 OI XS gf Gls - rs 

€ ae “6° boo <r - tee 
caf 103 ob wl Ge RS Os se 
i2 SB gf Mae of yl bb She 
x , 2 sats os “12 € 
Vb relgall gf SU Gb 208 4! 
us Me at ts gs Gh Ghosh 
st “2 ew Ff wee, sor «8 zat 
tel Sts PES LOGS apace Sl pani 
\ Soff tos 92  c# * 

2 oe 
. 

a31) Ge odade WE 

ade cy VeVie Se gl Ape wis oy ml wh tgbdl 6 gyleedl ae ol eps 

The Book Of The Sunnah 97 Art) sn 

Sa‘eed said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘Whoever tells lies =~”, ig woe ee 

about me deliberately, let him IS fod Be al S55 JE cdl ee 
take his place in Hell.’” (Sahih) ol oa sack isa Wi pats 

37. It was narrated that Abu ide GAS tds fp ye Gs - tv 
se 

ogy bn hg 6% esl Jaw oy dhe Cade op ¥4 [Pt deed ax ot [ere] eeps 
clas Bits CaaS died! oleb) Cent adil sygte obit ine cody es 
NYG cps LS sige ately MVS. 

Comments: 33, 34, 35, 36 & 37 

a Scholars have enumerated several reasons for the evil practice of fabricating 
the Ahadith. A look at the reasons for fabrication would by itself indicate 
why the narrating of such Ahddith, or considering them worth following in 
matters relating to the supposed merit of doing certain acts or circulating 
them among the people, is an abominable practice. Some of the reasons are: 
a desire to buttress the position of one’s school of thought and disparage 
the opposing school, seeking proximity to the rulers, wanting to revile the 
faith of Islam or using them as a ploy to earn sustenance or gain fame, and 
so on. 

b. Fabricated Ahfdith create doubts about the infallibility of the Prophets, 
degrade the position of the scholars, and defile the fair face of Islam. 
Circulation of such Ahfdith is, moreover, a major factor in the prevalence of 

innovations in the community. Therefore, the danger of citing fabricated 
Ahdadith is clear. 

Chapter 5. He Who Narrated ra bas oF ot ~ (0 peered!) 
(A Hadith) From The ae ote <2 1h 7 Be il hod; 
Messenger Of Allah 2 4) sn gag [tye] bed Bl Jems 
Thinking It To Be False (0 Lim) OAS 

Be ta 

38. It was narrated from ‘Alithat (ic -ii J) 23 oS gi Bas - va 
eee ge ag OF FH 

the Prophet #@ said: “Whoever . we dk nga hie 

narrates a Hadith from me o& vids gh cl oF temtle G Ube 

thinking it to be false, then he is zg 1 fj fo 2" ats te ea 
one of the two liars.” (Either the i ue ead ae * ey ae 

one who invents the lie or the one —_.g& O4> Ge) cd RE Zl of side 

who repeats it; both are liars). 4-f 255 9.2 sf 0+ Ur 4 \- 

. nea Jo al bas 

(Sahih) OO, yee) ae ee Pere 

Med 

C090 /A 2 GLAS dedhe oe S53 Lb GL cool can gl cpl eel Lene] ees 

The Book Of The Sunnah 98 Ab 

« ely ca} als Ml Sydead|s comely cA) oe pre ws als oad gl cn! % YOUN eS 

eae 

Comments: . 

a. Just as the fabrication of Ahddith is unlawful, it is also a grave crime and sin 
to circulate them in the name of the Prophet %. And since the carrier of 
such a Hadith is an equal partner in crime with the one who minted it, he 
must also share the same punishment of burning in Hell-fire, as was 
forewarned for the fabricator of the Hadith. 

b. Quoting such a Hadith in front of the people with the purpose of dissuading 
them from being duped is permissible, since the purpose is not to deceive 
the audiences but to undeceive them. 

39. It was narrated from Samurah —_: JG 3 gl on OS a Gis - 4 
bin Jundub that the Prophet 2 oer era oe Aoties eee 
said: “Whoever narrated a Hadith “2 & 495 °C ade 
from me thinking it to be false, (i:4 Gis - YG pres es Aee E 
then he is one of the two liars.” 5 , Deron, 
(Sahih) AS ol of HOH! AE GE «SSSI ye 

ASK Ast 593 
4 dot ol 

Ab, 

40. It was narrated from ‘Ali that (Gis 7&3 ) 2) bu Gis - «. 
the Prophet #¢ said: “Whoever : 3h) i ont 40 tees 
transmits a Hadith from me of ‘oY! Gf toe Gt dew 
thinking it to be false, then he is tz (ofS ft 22s ate te Sh 
one of the two liars.” (Sahih) a ve bi " ae e ae mf , Lan : 
Another chain similar to the ¢* 69) G4) JB 88 GI oe oe 
narration of Samurah bin Jundub. = 4. 36 38 rH 62 PS bus 

Ss Bo 

29K ‘ 
ado vi 3 A oF eee | i cyl 

IN) SemaSf 555 Cd tard cy dle ae sly Qld Cosel [eee] 2 ee pe 
42 And Gol gy Olete ge (AHP ONY 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

41. It was narrated that Mughirah 
bin Shu’bah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #% said: ‘Whoever narrates 
a Hadith frora me thinking it to be 
false, then he is one of the two 
liars.’ (Sahih) 

het cal ol ge all --- 

Comments: 39, 40 ,41 

99 SLABS Eolas 

Bie a a . 
is st ft: oe fl ie - 8 

bp 4 ae 4 L Se0% os 
U6 dil Sym y JE JE CAS of sll 
Peo ME oe Fa 2. 
OST al sh B Geos (oe Gm cyl 

ABI Jet 58 

a ge Ely S oye Gl daniel! Cpe an el igs 
ei... hee Ge Oley dat C6) lady cu 

The Ahddith tell us about the punishment awaiting those who tell lies about 
the Prophet #%. There is no doubt in the fact that a lie against the 
Messenger of Allah 88 is among the worst of all lies in the world. 

Chapter 6. Following The 
Path Of The Rightly-Guided 
Caliphs 

42. Yahya bin Abu Muta’ said: “1 
heard ‘Irbad bin Sariyah say: ‘One 
day, the Messenger of Allah # 
stood up among us and delivered 
a deeply moving speech to us that 
melted our hearts and caused our 
eyes ito overflow with tears. It was 
said to him: ‘O Messenger of 
Allah, you have delivered a 
speech ot farewell, so enjoin 
something upon us.’ He said: ‘T 
urge you to fear Allah, and to 
listen and obey, even if (your 
leader) is an Abyssinian slave. 
After I am gone, you will see 
great conflict. I urge you to 
adhere to my Sunnah and the 
path of the Rightly-Guided 
Caliphs, and cling stubbornly to 
it. And beware of newly-invented 
matters, for every innovation is a 

elds Pah raed at = Gl pol) 
(1 deed) Fy SA gadl Sct SN 

phn 83 Adsl Gas gabe 185 
25 Gl tay Mal BP a te Gis 
at 25 3 96 Dk Blog Satial 
Shes a Thess hes oo Oa 
a Of ti, Sigs 
igo phy Heese Shey lai 3,25 

aging as ine Sy, aethy aicilg 
Bis iS hyd Ot as by 
Lab coe seslh Gudblith otal ty 
esi 74, Sty dell, tgele 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

100 Peaee | ree Rey 

going astray.” (Hasan) 

AV {Vi gSlodlg CIV G CVEA/VAL SN Od Gil ball ore] [gee ool] 

GY) cued! jBily Gea b ale dy) a odd gy diline Gute ye 

Comments: 

a 

b. 

It is the Sunnah of the Prophet #% for a departing man to give good advice 
to those he is leaving behind. 

Importance of Taqwa (piety; righteousness): Taqwa as a special term means 
obeying the commands of Allah, and avoiding evil acts that would 
displease Him, so as to escape the punishment of Hell-fire. 

. Obedience to a legally recognized ruler is mandatory as long as he does not 

give an order that openly conflicts with the dictates of Shari‘ah. 

. The Prophet # had already forewarned the people of impending coriflicts 

in the community after him. The prediction came literally true. There 
cropped up many conflicts on religious and political grounds among the 
community. The Prophet's giving advance information about them is proof 
of the veracity of his prophethood. 

e. The best adjudicators. in the event of conflicts are the Qur’an and Hadith. 

. Life stories of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs are the shining examples of 

adherence to the dictates of the Qur’4n and Sunnah. They had taken them 
direct from the Prophet #g. We can, therefore, rightly depend on their 
understanding of Islam, especially because the Prophet #6 himself had 
declared them as the rightly-guided ones. 

43. It was narrated from ‘Abdur- 
Rahman bin ‘Amr As-Sulami that 
he heard Aj-Irbad bin Sdriyah 
say: “The Messenger of Allah 2% 
delivered a moving speech to us 
which made our eyes flow with 
tears and made our hearts melt. 
We said: “O Messenger of Allah, 
this is a speech of farewell. What 
do you enjoin upon us?’ He said: 
“I am leaving you upon a (path 

of) brightness whose night is like | 

its day. No one will deviate from 
it after I am gone but one who is 
doomed. Whoever among you 
lives will see great conflict. I urge 
you to adhere to what you know 
of my Sunnah and the path of the 
Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and cling 

cypela of hy Ui polis Gis - 
Gas SG Ren coll oF Gi 
1 Glee O8 EG eel 

Ge oF ale 

ii 5,25 thes cde He YI 
gs eles Og) a 2555 Shey 
oa Sp tal 555 ¢ ls 218i 
Sv GE 9) Ags bus. g552 ies 325 
Y - Wales igs celarlt sé Xs3 
Xs te bs ANY gat Be bey 
ba pie Gy (RIS (Les Cdl Get 

The Book Of The Sunnah 101 SRS 

stubbomly to it. And you must Big te ae las Gh £2, 2 
obey, even if (your leader is) an conelgell Getdt eee eo 

Abyssinian slave. For the true as ttl wacles eneale ile Lyatab 

believer is like a camel with a ring sito, 5 eae a P 3 
wee: Sitigess s ae Pn eT ae 
in its nose; wherever it is driven, QS Gebel WE bee Ie of 

it complies.” (Sahih) UG) 43 ES ay 

cEUVIC ces aad 2 Gh chdl cosy ar el [pene osleed] tay se 
See op om Se ge OYU/O) sartT olyys Meno Speed idly CVT egde sll 
-ghllly C4490 /1) psbodly V+) ole on Aaeree 9 4 

Comments: 

a. Deviating from the teachings of the Shari‘sh is tantamount to inviting one’s 
own destruction and doom. 

b. A true believer faithfully submits to the rules of Shari‘ah even though. it 
might seem difficult to do so. The reason why a believer is compared to a 
camel is because it (the camel) obeys the command of the master, even 
though the going might be tough for it. 

c. History is witness that, even as the Messenger of Allah #¢ had foretold, 
wide-ranging conflicts raised their head in the community after the expiry 
of the first three centuries. New sects and deviant groups took their birth. 
Each one adopted its own leader or locus of following, although the 
Prophet #§ had instructed that should there arise any conflict, the 
community was to adhere to his Sunnah and the Sunnah of the Rightly- 
Guided Caliphs. 

44. It was narrated that Irbad bin 42 Gis SS YY Gs - tt 

Sariyah said: “The Messenger of 4. 545 a#@-" 1g eo ey te eyed 

Allah #% led us in Fajr (morning) Sa sere os cn tall 

prayer, then he turned to us and uN we BE Ol of WE Be cg 

delivered an eloquent speech” “4. 2. . 1% - Se oe 

And he mentioned something Tis ediyle on Yaliall GF «ype or 

similar (as no. 43). (Sahih) of geal Ble Ma 325 & le 

Bb By Hey hes ots, Ge Ji 
yon 
~Gied! Sate! bi ca ys tate op EVALe cosh yi aor pl [ere] ce Baad 
Comments: 
a. It is a part of the Sunnah of the Prophet #€ that the Imim, having finished 
the prayer, should turn his face towards the worshippers. 
b. The best time to give religious instruction to the people is immediately after 

the conclusion of the obligatory prayer, since the worshippers are all 
collected in the mosque and are attentive to the Imam. The speech should 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 

102 SEAS ules 

not, however, be so long as to create boredom among the listeners. 

Chapter 7. Avoiding Bid‘ah 
(Innovation) And Dispute 

45, It was narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said: “When the 
Messenger of Allah #% delivered a 
sermon, his eyes would turn red, 
he would raise his voice and he 
would speak with intensity, as if 
he were warning of an (enemy) 
army, saying, “They will surely 
attack you in the morning, or they 
will surely attack you in the 
evening!’ He would say: ‘I and 
the Hour have been sent like 
these two, and he would hold 
up his index and middle finger. 
Then he would say: ‘The best of 
matters. is the Book of Allah and 
the best of guidance is the 
guidance of Muhammad. The 
most evil matters are those that 
are newly-invented, and every 
innovation (Bid‘ah) is a going 
astray.’ And he used to say: 
“Whoever dies and leaves behind 
some wealth, it is for his family, 
and whoever leaves behind a debt 
or dependent children, then they 
are both my responsibility.’ ’’ 
(Sahih) 

gad GH OU - (V penal 
dnl) Saag 
ares aus Je ae aie de 
vig i Gis VU GSA et 
MG bl 3425 OE IE Bl ve yf LE 
JEbIg Spo Wey the S5s1 ChE 

ere ay 

103 ae 2 os a 

de uk 3 Se 

ee ae, ae a woe 
SF Ob ae UT coe Se bail 
4 of “007 2 - < 
Sb lg GFF dt SUS el! 
iy By gles AN! 585 yet 

SE Bees ee ee Fo Pee ens Bee 
cla Yu SB) weer ols (ae 
AGNy Gab Lote 51 tas AG 

Cal ope MWe cAbesSly Beh) GG WL cdnsoll € plana dor ool ‘es 

Comments: 

4 ladle 

a. The main purpose of the sermon is to caution people against falling into 
error and the consequences of falling into error. It is therefore imperative 
that the sermon be used to pinpoint to the people the mistakes prevalent in 
the present times, and guide them to the right path. 

b. It is also perfectly all right to give the sermon an emotional touch in accord 

with the nature of the subject. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 103 $d 

c. The sum total of the true path is in following the Book of Allah and the 
Sunnah of His Prophet 28. 

d. Pointing with the finger of the hand during the sermon is the Sunnah of the 
Prophet #% and the use of appropriate gestures to drive home a point is an 
acceptable practice. 

e. Reference to proximity of the Hour represents the clear indication that 
Muhammad #¢ is the last of the Prophets. And just as no finger is there to 
intervene between the index and middle fingers, there is also no Prophet to 
come after the Messenger of Allah #¢ until the Last Hour. The descent from 
heaven of Prophet ‘Eisa s& does not negate the finality of the prophethood 
of Muhammad #% for the simple reason that he had already been invested 
with prophethood, and in his second coming he will follow the Shari‘ah of 
Muhammad 2. 

f. Reference to proximity of the Hour contains the message for the community 
that they must not be so engrossed in the affairs of the world as to lose 
sight of the approach of the Hour. They should instead prepare themselves 
more intently for the Hour. 

g. It is not proper to classify the Bid‘ah into ‘good’ and ‘bad’. In fact Bid‘ah in 
all its forms and manifestations must be avoided. 

h. Inheritance of the deceased person must be distributed among the rightful 
heirs as per the rules given in the Qur’an and Hadith. Rulers have no right 
to interfere in them. It is rather their duty to ensure that each inheritor gets 
his rightful share. 

i. Taking care of the needs of the survivors and other persons in distress is the 
responsibility of the state. Similarly, if the deceased person has left some 
unpaid debts, and the property left by him is insufficient to pay off those 
debts, it is the responsibility of the Islamic state to pay off the debts from 
the state treasury and look after other genuine financial needs of the 
surviving members of the family. 

46. It was narrated from 5.2% .2 33 t dase Gis - 64 
‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud that the 

: ‘ aes we nr as a 

Messenger of Allah #6 said: J GF «gl Coe cane yh e Zot 
“Verily, there are two things — obs 0 , se 

, CARE op Cw td cal | 

words and guidance. The best AE MP OF LIP BO IO 

words are the Words of Allah,and = 3+ (eget al fF 6 Sled! wl re 
the best guidance is the guidance of ‘ : i 
Muhammad. Beware of newly- : ; ; ‘ 
invented matters, for every newly- 3.3.6 gs a 9G a Lap 
invented matter is an innovation Hibs st 

(Bid‘ah) and every innovation isa ¢™ fi 4 
going-astray. Do not let the desire 313. < 
for a long life cause your hearts to tee 2s 5 ; 7 
grow hard. That whichis bound to = *4°-4 #4o~ 4 cigiics ge th t 
happen is close to you, and the 

“Ws aie 2 et oc oy ee 
JG BE ail J505 Ol agane gy) al we 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

only thing that is far away is that 
which is not going to happen. The 
one who is doomed to Hell is 
doomed from his mother’s womb, 
and the one who is destined for 
Paradise is the one who learns 
from the lessons of others. Killing a 
believer constitutes disbelief (Kufr) 
and verbally abusing him is 
immorality (Fusug). It is not 
permissible fora Muslim to forsake 
his brother for more than three 
days. Beware of lying, for lying is 
never good, whether it is done 
seriously or in jest. A man should 
not make a promise to a child that 
he will not keep. Lying leads to 
immorality and immorality leads 
to Hell. Truthfuiness leads to 
righteousness and righteousness 
leads to Paradise. It will be said of 
the truthful person: ‘He spoke the 
truth and was righteous,’ and it 
will be said of the liar, “He told lies 
and was immoral.’ For a person 
continues to tell lies until he is 
recorded with Allah as a liar.” 

Da'if 

ae 9, oc. cg Wee ay aa 
eke Hb VW ONS wi, 8; 
as 32 ‘ 

% 
x 
Xv 

EDI a Vo did Vo dy ales 
A ei OSI DAVES 
5 28 NS sti sth Oy Al 
A} gti BOG Gt A eats Sa 
Ho Ge :G lS dE By fall 
stall 55 VW bg Sls st dua 

Cp teree Se ye Tore 6 tST a pele il cyl doe ol [tae oat! | Fes Sea 
oY BEN gale) lib) a el gay Galidh sygted Glen! gle Grete pier 
eel cell 3 tee Cyodl blll pis) cgwey (WI ig p/p 

Comments: 

As regards the chain of narrators the Hadith is Weak. However, most of the 
sentences contained in it also appear in the authentic Ahdadith. They are, 
therefore, correct. We will offer our comments on them as and when they 

occur. 
47. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #€ 
recited the following Verse: ‘It is 
He Who has sent down to you 
(Muhammad) the Book (this 
Qur'an). In it are Verses that are 

a 
a 
ACY 
b. 
he 
er 
i 
fe 
{ 
= 

Ble (say A ey, be 
rd Gl Bae 86 Th Let ais 
go FoF 

255 ob dae ct 3 hel ais; 
is gil ds SS VG 6 oS aul 

The Book Of The Sunnah 105 SRE as 

entirely clear, they are the -... .. erie of ees eeey 

foundations of the Book; and  *% oF (®* oa! gn Bl Ae OF cy | 
others not entirely clear. (up to Ad -A\) ik BE dt 525 SE 
His saying:) “And none receive A Gos sy & 

admonition except men of 
understanding.“! Then he said: > :- 3 
‘O ‘Aishah, if you see those who . pare poe 
dispute concerning it (the Qur’an), [V obec Jil QM G5! SY) 52eu 

Se 
» Go, 
ye 
| 
AR 
er 
aN 
So 
~ a 
S 
? 
‘ 
us 
ie 
my 4 

they are those whom Allah has | « ,a¢, ¢ .2-).0 7 ew 
referred to here, so beware of 2! | ee 
them.’”” (Sahih) Bi thes ull t8 cad Sybtes 

od Tyee) 
onl oe abe Ge sl Gab dy ca beled ge CA/Vided oe Jl Lemgomne] : ge seas , 
Lge abl oy clgie deer cpl pula ge Be QQ! 
Comments: 
Some Verses of the Qur’an deal. with ordainments that are either ‘clear’ in 
themselves. or the Ahddith provide their clarification. As such they can be 
implemented without any difficulty. All such Verses belong to the category 
of ‘clear’ Verses. Some other verses deal with the articles of faith, such as 
the Oneness of Allah, the prophethood, the resurrection, and so on. All the 
details and the proofs concerning them have been mentioned in the Qur'an 
and Ahddith. These are also ‘clear’. On the contrary there are Verses whose 
exact meaning cannot be determined such as Mugatta‘ét, the initial 
‘abbreviated letters’ prefixed to certain Surah of the Qur'an. The right course 
regarding them is to have the belief that they are also part of the Noble 
Qur’an, and he who recites them gets the same reward as he gets for 
reciting other Verses of the Quran. There is no need to involve oneself in 
further investigation. Similarly, there are matters belonging to the domain 
of the unseen, Regarding them as well, we just need to believe that they do 
exist, and the events that have been foretold are certain to pass, and 
whatever details the Qur’én and Ahddith provide regarding them are 
sufficient for us, and there is no need to further investigate them. For 
example, it is enough to know that angels are the obedient creatures of 
Allah operating in areas and engaged in tasks assigned to them. Moreover, 
we just have to believe that our actions shail be weighed on the Day of 
Judgment, and so on. Avoiding unnecessary debate on Mutashabihat 
(matters not entirely clear) is the method of the true scholars. 

48. it was narrated that Abu ist Gis : 3h 23 ade Gils - tA 
Umamah said: “The Messenger of eta aT ceca? ees 
Allah #§ said: ‘No people go “3 of 2 Ee y 27 * fas on 

(8 Ay ‘Imran 3:7. Ss 

The Book Of The Sunnah 106 ARE les 

astray after having followed right . 2 & 
guidance, but those who indulge ¢ : ‘ 

in disputes.’ Then he recited this Sul Uf ye WE Gf ye ole fi 
Verse. “Nayl But they are a iy He ge Bg ota 
quarrelsome people.”’”"! (Hasan) das eh fe tan He al Jot JE cd 

[OA 2.3 5 3H) 

A PVON ECGS Ey ge sey Oh cenit eg de all om el Cone vokeef] 1 ee os 
«hilly teSlodl Aoveee9 Meurer Canoe Capelom liad 2S 9 copes piu fp deme tuto 

Commenis: 

a. The Arabic word jadal (translated as dispute), in this context, means arguing 
with falsehood and lies against the truth. 

Allah has sent down the Prophets to separate the truth from falsehood. As a 
result of their preaching, some people have believed in them while others 
have stuck to falsehood, even though the truth had been made manifest to 
them. Even among the believers there are some who are of firm faith while 
others are weak in their faith, thus creating the apprehension that they 
might go off the track once again. That is why it behooves all of us to 
continue to pray to Allah for fortitude, so that we remain steadfast in our 
" faith until the last breath. 

b. The natural course, which is the only right course to adopt for putting an 
end to the disputes, is to sincerely discuss them with the intention to arrive 
at the truth. Once the truth of the matter is proved, it must be accepted at 
all costs. 

49.It was narrated that :% S23) Sucls cs 33ls Gis - <4 
Hudhaifah said: “The Messenger Cgc iia de Sr. Wi apoe, Laks 
of Allah #6 said: ‘Allah will not go! col Fee ob Meee Ea: 
accept any fasting, prayer, charity, fy As’ Gas it Alessi lds 
Hajj, ‘Umrah, Jihad, or any other & Se ne tay! ala uy 
obligatory or voluntary action 46 SF «the ool op pale) GF ¢Qnems 
from a person who follows 4 3-42 . 44g S0t4 ¢- irl ear 
é A pene 56 GG iL 32 coin oF ail 
innovation (Bid‘ah). He comes out Ux @ * ae cai ve 
of Islam like a hair pulled out of pe 464, ola) GI) fe Yo 88 al 

ace acca A Wj Ws Vy iis He 
Wie V3 be VG chal V5 dae 

 Az-Zukhruf 43:58. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

107 PE Aieles 

fe BA tps us peyl ja to 

cn oy el! JB LS Wiis ot Sod CpOree Cyt haces Le 9m 32 ool! ] eps 

50. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas said: “The 
Messenger of Allah # said: “Allah 
refuses to accept the good deeds 
of one who follows innovation 
until he gives up that 
innovation.’” (Da‘if} 

Cadel! Gls) ones 

2 eg ea aaa oO: 

oy dilage Gate ye FAre ES pele al col ool Le volte] ey ss 
seb a asl BUS OV sere Syatall gily oe) ged he QA! te 

51. It was narrated that Anas bin 
Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #% said: ‘Whoever gives up 
telling lies in support of a false 
claim, a palace will be built for 
him on the outskirts of Paradise. 
Whoever gives up argument 
when he is in the right, a palace 
will be built for him in the middle 
(of Paradise). And whoever has 
good behavior, a palace will be 
built for him in the highest 
reaches (of Paradise).’” (Hasan) 

oY V44aY: a cel oll 3 

LS Cpe tald aly Cam) chap tol whine Gad 

cle be Gk cabally Sl cgde gl ae sl [ye] : 

For 

oath e Recah aes Gis — o} 
was Vu Swi ee Ban 

oF 101853 gy? : 5 gle oF S855 at jl 
186 bt 5525 dB IG We Yl 
2x8 i of Joe Hs oh Bg 
on Game ohG elzait 43 gee) era wt 
5 of Wb ts 543 aos Bd 

ayei - 

‘es 
aeleyy 6% Shs cal cyl Cade 

. tAveie co pak GSS) cer Ze wh cool toglo ol 

Comments: 50 & 51 

a. Effort must be made to end all disputes, be they of mundane nature or of 
‘religious type. Allah says in the Qur'an: “And reconciliation is better.” 

(4:128) 

b. As soon as a person realizes his mistake, he should recite this Verse so that 
the dispute is put to an end. The doing of it is of so much greatness, that 
the person doing it is promised a palace in Paradise as reward. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 108 FREI ails 

c. In worldly affairs, it is always possible that a person forgoes his due right 
and ends the dispute. This kind of sacrifice made for the sake of 
togetherness and unity is rated very highly by Allah. As a reward for this, 
the person shall get a palatial abode in the middle of Paradise. 

d. Muslims must excel in morals so that the daily affairs of life continue to run 
smoothly. They must cultivate the virtues of good demeanor, friendly 
disposition and tolerance, and thus avert all chances of dispute. The greater 
the number of such people in a society, the better will be the chances of 
peace and amity in it. Hence it is that the person doing it shall be ranked 
higher than the other two mentioned in the Hadith and shall, therefore, be 
awarded a higher place in Paradise. , 

Chapter 8. Avoiding 1 lt SG - A pans) 
Individual Opinion And $ 2 ee bad: ase 
Analogy (With Regard To (A dio!) wlll 
Matters Of Religion) 

Fe yy For 

52.It was narrated from 23 al Ae Gis sys Pi Gas - oy 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin ‘As that 4, , 0 2 Us gf eee 
the Messenger of Allah @ said: Ht! Les tgs gly GES «G5 
‘Allah will not take away gioco isos s ra bide th aes vies 
knowledge by removing it from 7) oe acy aot ah 
people (from their hearts). Rather cf “Hes com @ Ge Ge iano 
He will take away knowledge by #2 ft er4- geese 42 4 te f 
taking away the scholars, then we : ; 
when there are no scholars left, {6 «4ul 32 «835% op plan SF <Glas| 

the people will take the ignorant - oe a 

as their leaders. They Sil be a eae i tel ae ge al ke 
asked questions and they will  <leljsi pill Gadi Y GI op :JU a8 
issue verdicts without knowledge, ee he ie ares OH <n 2B-% 
thus they will go astray and lead cel AR ONS tll Ge om 
others astray.” (Sahih) Gt GAN tue go SB cotetth 

cue ph 186 bs yt Lyi 

. ial {has 
wh thal tolues LE al bet ek aS ob chal! tSoleedt tor ol Fes Sata 
Gy cleanse ape gh auby ca lta tale ge TW cal]. eady glell eo 
ptily Ogas VVIC coli) CaSy GES pd ge Sh Lk Ch cpleeY eg yb 
Comment: Ne oe Oya a 

a. Muslims will not lose knowledge of religion in one go. What in fact will 
happen is that the true scholars will gradually be taken away from. the 
community. That will herald the end of the religious sciences as well. In 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

109 AS! et 

order to forestall such a dangerous situation, the Muslim community must 
exert its utmost effort to produce scholars specializing in the Islamic 

sciences and law. 

b. It is the duty of a religious scholar to give his verdict in the light of the 
Qur'an and Ahédith, instead of giving it on the basis of his own personal 

opinion or analogy. 

53. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of _ 
Allah #€ said: ‘Whoever is given a ° 

Fatwa (verdict) that has no basis, 
then his sin will be upon the one 
who issued that Faiwa.’” (Hasan) 

‘ep Cpe Be os ee. 
ibe is el 33 SS gl Gus - oy 
» t# € 2 ee SP Re a Bee 
Syl ol of dso GF chy G al te 
- Bo Foe 3 oa at Wate 
ee Ge ee Sh te 

ce TUM re cle OS Bal Gh cola caste gh ae el Cwm soled] ee as 
«grils ¢pStodl foes 64 dey oy dle Eye 

Comments: 

a. It is the duty of a common man to seek religious opinions from scholars 
who, in turn, must answer them with proofs from the Qur’an and Ahddith. 

b. Issuing religious edicts and opinions simply on the basis of subjective 
opinions is an act of sin. The reason being that the questioner puts his faith 
in the scholar and, if the scholar gives a wrong opinion, the entire 
responsibility of the action of the questioner will be on the scholar. 

54. It was narrated that ‘Abdullah 
bin ‘Amr said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 38 said: ‘Knowledge is based 
on three things, and anything 
beyond that is superfluous: a clear 
Verse, an established Sunnah, or 
the rulings by which the 
inheritance is divided fairly.’”’ 

(Da'if) 

gleg Sabi Ub Acne Bhs - of 

O38 Ub ES oe YE Sat 
se ie a! ¥ al gl gf 

A) gle 

log 

oe oes 

$ ME + “9 ’ s 7 
is os 36 abs: : #2 al 4 ts db db 
Ee 5\ (aoe if ‘ es 3@ As og 

7 » 

6 ysl all ook gee & ob sill coglo gl ae tl Tt coli!) Fcc Sagel 
Aine Cotodiy gS) tS cts gay ce AS) ger lie Gale ce VAAOIE 

diged daly aly PVT /E 

Atte) jase 3 al 

The Book Of The Sunnah 110 AR las 

Comments: 

a. As to the chain of transmitters, thé tradition is Weak. Nevertheless, the 
importance of the knowledge of Qur'an and Sunnah is established from 
many other proofs. Similarly, the importance of the law of inheritance can 
also hardly be overemphasized. 

b. The expression ‘Muhkam’ (translated as clear) means a Verse that has not 
been abrogated, nor is it allegorical or ambiguous. The Qur’anic Science of 
Abrogation is an equally important branch of knowledge. To give a ruling 
in any matter in ignorance of this science can lead one into error. 
‘Established Sunnah’ also means the prophetic tradition that has not been 
abrogated. 

55. Mu‘adh bin Jabal said: “When = 5185 sts i ood is - 00 

the Messenger of Allah € sent ° 

me to Yemen, he said: ‘Do not 

pass any judgement or Make any: 9) ile or colar ey kas, ol 

decision except on the basis of 97, 7 

what you know. If you are (2 3e GF fee op geri we be 

uncertain about a matter, wait 4 gi kt ee See (AT oe ee 
until you understand it fully, or oh #s #\ a 4 ie - ee ‘he 
write to me concerning it’ le Yi Sled Vo joes We sdb yc 

(Maudu’) : f 

Shwe: 18 OR Pe ee a 

5 cab oh Sele JRA ay aks 
tas GY CAS Fg 

oh 5 sll JB LS HIS cgbesdl aw Gy dome # Le eye olive] Tex S eae) 

+h 

Cadell ig) 
56. It was narrated that ‘Abdullah cul Pi Gist tae ah as = 8% 

bin ‘Amr bin ‘As said: “Iheardthe 7 - 
Messenger of Allah #@ say: ‘The 97°F gp gemsl we Se dle5l 
affairs of the Children of Israel a 

remained fair until Muwalladun 
emerged among them — the res id cell op at gp dil 
children of female slaves from a ae A Sa ce ee ae 
other nations. They spoke of their A of er cdse RS A ae? 
alae inp religious igi gall ree ta a Vie Ani 
matters), and so they went astray 4. . aoe 3 aye ict 
and led others astray.’”” (Da‘if) | plas gh oe cel bie 26! 

Bh pb ee He byl cerall eeled) BLS pl bll oo! Lied okie] ty sd 
aad tal Sy (oe) rd Sle SN cal gl Boley OPV /V GLI ded) ye gh 
slg ace 

The Book Of The Sunnah 111 AEN ly 

Chapter 9. Regarding Faith OY! Ze 2OG ~ 4 peerall) 
(4 Aaoesd}) 

57. It was narrated that Abu : dpi wasn 3) Ee Gis - ov 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 

Allah #@ said: ‘Faith has sixty- d= O° Oke Bis 455 Gis 
some or seventy parts, the least of (224 383 + di) wee oF le oy f 
which is to remove a harmful i “a ae yi Steet ‘e 
thing from the road and the *#! 525 JE dB A gl Le ae 
greatest of which is to say Lé ilaha bb. jgnic i ie jtayn - 86 
aly Gateites te Dee bee ors se 
worshipped but Allah). And ig25315 - Seal oF ol ibu Ly tats) 

Pad 

modesty is a branch of faith’” — -. 20% 4) -iy- % Way _ tes 
(Gakth in Kok tually .- ONY ay ¥ - d3 
Another chain from Abu (gles! 
Hurairah, from the Prophet # Po ee aa oe er ae 
with similar wording. # Gas ob ol GS pl Woe 

fe SF ae ie aD di sine 
al Fle of at us ye bos 

BES of GRA Yl UF idle 

aie dle Gh cle) clay iC Ola ay ob OY! goblet! quad 
1 Ay hoger Sado ce lane sor ols 64 phar cyl Eude ge VOre call wee Oly! Ons 

Comments: 

a. The likeness of Imén (faith) is as the likeness of a tree. Faith in Oneness of 
Allah and the institution of prophethood is the root, virtuous deeds the 
branches, and the benefits of this world and of the Hereafter are its fruits. 
So, if you pull out the root, the tree is gone. As regards the branches, even if 
you cut them, the tree still remains although in a depleted form. Similarly, 
sins do harm our faith while good deeds lead to its perfection and growth. 

b. All good deeds are but the branches of faith, but the most important of 
them all is the affirmation by word of mouth of the Oneness of Allah, 
namely L4é ilaha illallah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah) since 
it is this by which accrue other benefits of faith. 

c. Modesty is an important branch of faith, since it protects man from 
numerous acts of sin. It does not, however, imply that misplaced sense of 
shame, which prevents man from asking about religious matters, or forbids 
him from the acquisition of knowledge, or doing a good deed. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 1i2 Are ol 

d. Faith includes deeds of the tongue, of the heart and of other parts of the 
body. Affirmation of the formula “La ilaha illallith’” is thus the deed of the 
tongue. To believe in it is the deed of the heart, and removing a harmful 
thing from the road is the deed of other parts of the body. All these deeds 
are thus the parts and branches of faith. 

58. It was narrated from Sélim int5 «go Gl 3b (gs Ghee - oa 

that his father said: “The Prophet Teen eae ar ae ae eee 

#6 heard a man urging his - ; we mae ae 

brother to be modest. He said: “dG daah jf ‘plc fe (Ga oe 

‘Indeed, modesty is a branch of om Aaa ate teats eg at, 

faith.” (Sahih) stas! 3 oleh Le Me HE Gal aac 

QUAN Ss Teh otal Gp : 56 

Cade ge PU ee eg] Ob Gand ote Oh Gl cole! celine ar oh tee se 
We ead oo oF 5 Vere COLI oF elo] wh col «gy bedt tom ly 4s OLew 

Commenis: “4 AGM oF 

a. Modesty (Haya) means that state of morality in man which makes him 
avoid things improper and unseemly, but does not fall short in giving the 
rightful person his due. 

b. Modesty is a special characteristic of a man. It is, therefore, necessary for 
mani to avoid all actions and things that propel him to acts of immodesty. 

c. The Hadith affirms once again that faith has many branches which may 
increase or decrease. So does Imén, iLe., it also increases and decreases. 

d. While speaking on the subject of modesty, the man referred to in the Hadith 
was trying to suggest to his brother that excessive use of modesty was not 
good, but the Prophet #% corrected him. 

59.It was narrated that ie ix <d aig Tes = 4 

‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger rane 

of Allah #% said: ‘No one will Ge Gies t¢ tell pF cygee Gh 

enter Paradise who has even a 208 ge Pie A eg Bde tp ee. pit 
dali fy dead Ws 12a Oo ssl 
mustard-seed’s weight of c ; ne oo ae me 
arrogance in his heart, and noone = 3,8 «Aaalé 36 call BO «MEY Ge 
will enter Hell who has even a 4402 0). «us ke oe TS Ue yee 
+ y: i a ea . 

mustard-seed’s. weight of faith in ay HE eee ON a ee 
his heart.” SSE Sy 05 Se oi 2 OB Eel 
4b 3 O64 58) BAY Os 
tole) Je de je HS DE 

ore yt tage alm ye WE cals SI peed GL COLA cplee ax ctl ‘ees 
4 anh s 

j 

The Book Of The Sunnah 113 dent) i 

Comments: 

a. Arrogance is an extremely detestable trait. The saying of the Messenger of 
Allah #§ that “arrogance means rejecting the truth and looking down upon 
the people” reflects the true meaning of the word. 

b. If belief in the commands of Allah and His Messenger is rejected out of 
arrogance, abiding permanently in Hell is the punishment because 
arrogance is totally antithetical to faith. Even if arrogance is of another type, 
and the man belittles others on account of his supposed superiority in 
wealth, or his presumed good looks and social status, or refuses to accept 
the truth out of obstinacy, even this is extremely detestable to Allah. 

i 

60. It was narrated that Abu Ke Gis sts prerhes Gia 4. 
Saeed -Kiudri ‘said; *TRe ee eg yh ed 
Messenger of Allah 8% said:‘When — S® tebe! gp BD GF cpexe UST 2 
Allah has saved the believers from te 24 525 fs cadet oe sie 
Hell and they are safe, none of-you C2 e z S 3 = re 
will dispute with his companion 4! ale ibp #6 al 5425 GE 36 
more vehemently for some right of , 

his in this world than the believers il hice WS gals ? Gl Se Gap 
will dispute with their Lord on 3 3 3,5) Gell 2 stad a 
behalf of their brothers in faith who - i, Heit 3 ty 
will have entered Hell. They will @ #2 Gaeb4ll Ge Us us “G 
say: “Our Lord! They are our + ‘Sala SE 5th (gles Salt git! 
brothers, theyusedtopraywithus, . , .) 2 -#., 4, Ae oe 
fast with us and perform Hajj with — Osapag «Cae Ogle, Wyle Gilge] 1h; 
us, and you have admitted them to “3 £3 GH “gest Ce ee 
Hell.” He will say: “Go and bring mae u bees tee ie 
forth those whom you recognize ' rials nes pase oe 36 | ths! 
among them.” So they will come-to ose ei AE Y cect Eb 2 
them, and they will recognize them i all ae GY cy gnas pee aa 
by their faces. The Fire will not ala Gail I 38 Sass : Opie! 
consume their faces, although aad ' if: 

there will be some whom the Fire ‘ rests Pe J OE & nes 

will seize halfway up their shins, 3 yal Bogs Gest 105 ‘i ghyacd 

re A 

and others whom it will seize up to ee oe: af 5h 
their ankles. They will bring them gh 033 ad 3 alg eZ 1d sy 
forth, and will say, “Our Lord, we ial ee sels aw 2 F la! Se 2 
have brought forth those whom ™ wits a $8 8 o fs Stee: 
You commanded us to bring xo Ste audi Zo Oe by fc ybss 
forth.” Then He will say: “Bring a Si rs $49 Sas A ae ass 

forth those who have a Dinar’s : ie 
weight of faith in their hearts, then al Fis SE wb Y af Ay bak 
those who have half a Dinar’s Lue ve 24 eae, nae 38 KES 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

weight in their hearts, then those 
who have a mustard-seed’s 
weight.” Abu Sa‘eed said: “He 
who does not believe this, let him 
recite: ‘Surely, Allah wrongs not 
even of the weight of an atom (or a 
small ant), but if there is any good 
(done), He doubles it, and gives 
from Him a great reward’ “U! 
(Sahih) 

114 hay oles 

[é« teludi] 

o- cin ES al cOLAYI ask3 el cles YI & Gla! ae ol [gereve oaliunl | [ePs 

Comments: 

SY VY S/Ate Gli She Que 

a. Great Intercession on the Day of Judgment shall only be the exclusive 

privilege of Prophet Muhammad #¢, but other Prophets and believers shall, 
in their turn, also be allowed to intercede on behalf of the sinners. 

. No Prophets or ‘holy men’ will have the power to extricate anyone from 
Hell on their own. They will simply pray to Allah and intercede on behalf 
of their sinning brethren. Alld4h will, then, accept the intercession for 
whoever He wills, and grant deliverance from Hell to whoever He wishes. 

- Sinners among the believers will be recognizable in Hell-fire through their 
unburnt faces. A Hadith of the Prophet # says that the angels shall 
recognize the sinners from the prostration marks on their foreheads. The 
Hadith also underlines the singularly important place prayer occupies 
among all the acts of worship. 

. The sinners shall be subjected to severe or light punishment according to 
the degree of the gravity of their sins. 

. All believers are not equal in faith since faith increases and decreases, 

. Allah’s mercy is so pervasive that even those at the lowest level of faith 
shall get deliverance, not so the polytheists. 

61. It was narrated that Jundub 
bin ‘Abdullah said: “We were 
with the Prophet #, and we were 
strong youths, so we learned faith 
before we learned the Qar’an. 
Then we learned the Qur’an and 
our faith increased thereby.” 

(Sahih) 

1 An-Nisd’ 4:40. 

a gs 
“uae Beh Fo 

AS5 GAS raake 3 ide Cis. - 5) 
ofl WB of GAZ 3 Zsdi ajc 
S955 OB Fa Bw tN we 236 

bey y G556 Sigh cake 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

115 ALS tls 

C59 Sede oe VIVAL NTO /¥S SS sl dell el [apne cobel] ceed 
ald Sle, Farcaer shawl Liat Se gl Js ca ophs 

Comments: 

a. Knowledge of the Oneness of Allah and other basic beliefs gets priority 
over acts of worship and the code of daily dealings. That is why the main 
focus in Makkan Surah (chapters) of the Qur’dn is on basic beliefs while the 
Madinite Surah mostly deal with daily dealings and transactions. 

b. Increase in knowledge leads to increase in faith. 

c. The last sentence in the Hadith is a proof of the phenomenon of increase and 

decrease in faith. 

62. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘There are two 
types of people among this 
Ummah who have no share of 
Islam: The Murji’ah and the 
Qadariyyah.’”"") (Da’if) 

Seedy 

Gis is ye Gas - wv 
€ ae 4. 808 gir wee, act ose 
saul BF ol Gp Ede Bae + bed oy! 
4 ee = Fee > “eee ee 
S525 JE IE le oil oF BS iF 
eB GS EM a Gp ploy 1a al 
fg -ct, fe ost ae Petco 7 
AGB ABN Healt toad POY 8 

eA WYER Aad oo cle be Ob cosa cgda to oT Leia este] see set 
aly «Cog Bt) Caend gly (epee ee pee hag Lan Sy ca fed Cy dere Cae 

63. It was narrated that “Umar 
said: “We were sitting with the 
Prophet #@ when a man came to 
him whose clothes were intensely 
white and whose hair was 
intensely black; no signs of travel 
could be seen upon him, and 
none of us recognized him. He sat 
down facing the Prophet #%, with 
his knees touching his, and he put 
his hands on his thighs, and said: 
‘O Muhammad, what is Islam?’ 
He said: ‘To testify that none has 
the right to be worshiped but 
Allah, and that I am the 

+ Ghee Cane tolt 

ess Ge aged gama a 
ae BN ob OH op Pd UF EL 
HG 23! Be Lk Eb ae oe 
lp dd coi (ots had Jos is 
V3 jis SH ale of Y war ~ 
86 NO oles 136 tef be 33 
Je $5 2355 55 J ESS RACs 

ars 

MUN G Mint gdb ties 

" The Murji‘ah sect has the belief that Iméan (faith) concerns with words only, it has no 
link as far as deeds are concerned. The Qadariyyah sect has the belief that a person is 
bound to do what has been written for him, he is not free to do anything he wants 
— as against the Jabariyyah sect whose belief is just the opposite. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Messenger of Allah; to establish 
regular prayer; to pay Zakat; to 
fast in Ramadan; and to perform 
Hajj to the House (the Ka‘bah).’ 
He said: “You have spoken the 
truth.’ We were amazed by him: 
He asked a question, then told 
him that he had spoken the truth. 
Then he said: ‘O Muhammad, 
what is Iman faith?’ He said: ‘To 
believe in Allah, His Angels, His 
Messengers, His Books, the Last 
Day, and the Divine Decree 
(Qadar), both the good of it and 
the bad of it.’ He said: “You have 
spoken the truth.’ We were 
amazed by him: He asked a 
question, then told him that he 
had spoken the truth. Then he 
said: ‘O Muhammad, what is 
Thsén (right action, goodness, 
sincerity)? He said: ‘To worship 
Allah as if you see Him, for even 
though you do not see Him, He 
sees you.’ He asked: ‘When will 
the Hour be?’ He said: ‘The one 
who is being asked about it does 
not know more than the one who 
is asking.’ He asked: “Then what 
are its signs?’ He said: ‘When the 
slave woman gives birth to her 
mistress’ (Waki' said: “This means 
when non-Arabs. will give birth to 
Arabs”) ‘and when you see the 
barefoot, naked, destitute 
shepherds competing in 
constructing tall buildings.’ The 
Prophet #§ met me three days 
later and asked me: ‘Do you 
know who that man was?’ | said: 
‘Allah and His Messenger know 
best.’ He said: ‘That was Jibril, 

(Ebi JB te as5 bass 
Gu :du a galery ae. ca ene 
SL 8 oh G8 EY G 
BU o5alls cag hg enki 
his 256 hey oe Ail 
é 36 33 eee ly <2, Cos 
5 Sous G ke 

“ ae BE 
(ge dof wo 38 sisi 8 3G 
:J6 eu gul us -de ABU Se 2 pel, 
AG es ASS SE - gS; 5 OY ag gb 
Huds Abr ae 65 tg Sialt peat 
2) JS GN 8 Sboths thn ce, 
OB eS Ay we 4d - ca 28 
$255 a) 2B jen o goth 
ecole si cee BYE) o lef 

sip ples 

“Sor if 

ng roa ae 

of 
oe 

The Book Of The Sunnah 117 408) OLS 

who came to you to teach you 
your religion.’” (Sahih) 

4 C3 adm oe Ale OLY! ‘plane tor ot Fer Saeed 

Comments:: 

a. 

The Hadith is known as the Hadith of Jibril. Jt encompasses important 
matters of our religion. It deals with acts of worship; with deeds of the 
heart and of other parts of the body; with acts that are categorized as 
compulsory or Sunnah, as well as the acts that are classified as desirable, 
undesirable or forbidden. 

. The term Islam here denotes the apparent acts, whose doing or not doing 

determines whether the person in question is or is not a Muslim. Iman, 
however, is the testimony or affirmation of the heart on which depends 
deliverance in the Hereafter. Ihséin is the highest form of Imén, which 
bestows beauty to one’s acts of devotion. 

. One must worship Alléh as though one is before Allah, which means that 

the focusing of one’s heart towards Allah and the extent of one’s turning in 
submissiveness, in fear and in repentance towards Him, must be at their 
peak. As far as the question of being able to see Allah within the span of 
this life on earth, it is an absolute impossibility, for no creature can find 
itself equal to it. In Paradise, however, the faithful will be able to see Him. 
The Qur’an and Hadith bear testimony to this. AL Bukhéri (H. 7437) and 
Muslim (H. 1820) expressly mention. it. 

. The exact time of the coming of the Hour nobody knows, not even the 

Prophets and angels. It is Allah’s special preserve, for He alone is the 
Knower of the unseen. 

. Constructing large, stately buildings just for worldly benefit and comfort or 

for ostentation and pride is. not right. 
Beliefs and dealings are all part of religion, and as such right belief and 
right action are both necessary for deliverance in the Hereafter. 

. ‘Divine Decree’ means the fact that whatever will happen, forever, Allah 

knows it all from before. Whatever happens now is absolutely in keeping 
with what Allah knows, and what He has already written down. The 
goodness or badness of the Decree means the things that are good for us, 
such as good health, economic prosperity, abundance and increase in 
productivity, or the things that we consider bad for us, such.as famine and 
pain and misery. All this is happening according to Allah’s wise. scheme 
and will. So, the good or bad is only in relation to us, the creatures. 
Otherwise, all the actions of Allah are the reflection of His superior 
prudence and wisdom, and are, therefore, absolutely good. 

. The coming down of Jibril #4 with Qur’anic revelations is a proven fact. 

His coming down for the clarification of the teachings and tenets of Islam is 
also proved from this Hadith. 

There are different methodologies for learning religious and Islamic 
teachings. One of these is to hold question-answer sessions. Lessons are 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

118 

Senda S wet LAS 

very well driven home through this method. 
j. Etiquette demands that the one who is asking should sit respectfully with 
folded legs before the one being asked, and the manner of his asking should 

be polite and reverential. 

k. The faithful angel Jibril #63 was dressed in white. The Prophet #¢ also 
emphasized his preference for white clothes and even chose white raiment 
for himself. Even for the dead he chose the white shroud. (Tirmidhi: 2810). 

64. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “One day the 
Messenger of All4h #8 appeared 
among the people. A man came to 
him and said: ‘O Messenger of 
Allah, what is Imédn (faith)?’ He 
said: ‘To believe in Allah, His 
Angels, His Books, His 
Messengers and the meeting with 
Him, and to believe in the Final 
Resurrection.’ He said: ’O 
Messenger of Allah, what is 
islam?” He said: ‘To worship 
Allah (alone) and not to associate 
anything with Him; to establish 
the prescribed prayers; to pay the 
obligatory Zakét; and to fast 
Ramadan.’ He said: ‘O Messenger 
of Allah, what is Ihs@n?’ He said: 
‘To worship Allah as if you see 
Him, for even though you do not 
see Him, He sees you.’ He said: 
‘O Messenger of Allah, when will 
the Hour be?’ He said: ‘The one 
who is being asked does not 
know more than the one who is 
asking, but I will tell you about its 
signs. When the slave-woman 
gives birth to her mistress, that is 
one of its signs. When the 
shepherds compete in 
constructing tall buildings, that is 
one of its signs. And there are five 
things which no one knows 
except Allah.” Then the Messenger 

Gis Sb IS ff he - x 

gl ie SE gf be BE Bn ecy 
Highs OE cob tee lb 6&3 
Grd <2 206 cll Tht by ag 
:J6 FOLLY) G lat 5425 
By cals aly eX cal 
di d525 G dE Gs Carl Gos 
je Ys i 5 Sh <u asa 
3 BH GAH Sas 5g ied 
Mylaes pals eeyti 
OB TULLYI ve ail oe z5 

65 « pls | esl Ge dupes 
ry - Lgbt ai iF isk 
te, dyihi fi A bs ANG Sj 
se gbisf Age M5 ot a eal 
al dgt5 4S a a Vy Sele Ye 
NS; etal & jhe St A> 1% 
Ge oes ks Cy UNE Oe es ell 
33 oi A EE gd 5% ted 

Ive cold) .€%2 Fue ail & 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

of Allah #% recited the Verse: 
“Verily, Allah, with Him (Alone) 
is the knowledge of the Hour, He 
sends down the rain, and knows 
that which is in the wombs. No 
person knows what he will earn 
- tomorrow, and no person knows 
in what land he will die. Verily, 
Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware 

119 

Aen rar as 

(of things). (Sahih) 

conte eel Bal he die Gh ole gb esl igus 

way pelea] Cote ye Vig clat Olay Cyale dLaY! Gl LAN cplans 

Comments: 

a. 

65. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin 

Precise knowledge of the future is the exclusive preserve of Allah. All 
matters mentioned in the Quranic Verse belong to the realm of the future. 
Not to speak of the exact timing of the impending Hour. Even the precise 
timing of the appearance of its signs, mentioned in the Hadith, are known to 
no one but Allah. Similar is the case of the other matters for which man can 
only conjecture, which may or may not come true. A case in point is the 
clouds, a sight of which awakens the hope, but holds no guarantee, that it 
will bring down rain. We can plan for the future but have no means of 
knowing beforehand what unexpected impediments or circumstances might 
be in store for us. Likewise, no one except Allah knows for sure about 
anyone's life or death. Man can only conjecture about the future, but cannot 
guarantee that his conjecture will come true. 

. If a scholar does not know the answer of a question, let him plainly say that 

he does not know it without considering it an offense to his dignity. 

. A learned man should never get angry but answer the queries of the 

questioner with tenderness and love. 

ee ree Gis - +0 

Abu Talib said: “The Messenger +: <aay *:2 (S42. SE Velcro 22 
of Allah @ said: ‘Faith ee: Peres ee Jee ol 
knowledge in the heart, words on 3; {de Che 1G 55! GLEN gl alle 
the tongue and action with the Jel Bek: hee at oe LBs “eS 
physical faculties. (limbs of the “ 7? or See oe uy 
body).’” (Maudu’) Be hed of he U6 cael B26 id 

dé db oh I gt ee be al 

(4 Lugman 31:34. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 120 Aedes) thn 

rele FIG ye8y Jeag otcite 
A ages Je Sty da cu 3 
G38 Cade oe NAV lege ll 8 Sige! ol el [egege cola] tg ad 

Vi ote Vid gems gel Gdets Crd) opts pile yl dS ONS os ll chell gl we 

Relezdh De OL VIP e 6 SIS pA de pera LT] dole 3 LS «they 

66. It was narrated from Anas bin 33 Linas Gl 2b it Gis - 
Malik that the Messenger of Allah s,s, feed Mic VE. Bh 
#@ said: “None of you truly “7 oF te Se : 
believes until he loves for his fb i 6 hn dk as Gas 
brother” or he said “for his = 2 ¢ 

neighbor, what. he loves for ¥” : 
himself.” (Sahih) je 3 

cael Gow Le at Coy O) OLA ge Cl cole Ql eel gee 

ade ge £0i¢ cg 6. OLLYI has ge Ot dle YUWI Gl OLAYE cplany Wig. 

1h de 

Commenis: 

a. We should do to the Muslim brother as we would be done by: For example, 
if a person does not like to be deceived by the people, let him also not 
deceive others. And just as a man likes others to help him in his hour of 
need, he should also help others in their hour of need or difficulty. 

b. Man is generally very touchy about his rights, but oblivious of his 
obligations, although his obligations are the rights of others. Thus, if each 
one of us respects the rights of others, the rights of all will be safeguarded 
and peace and amity will prevail in the society. 

67. It was narrated that Anas bin ie pees és 3 jak Be 
Malik said: “The Messenger of a a eae ame ee me 
Allah #% said: ‘None of you truly S4* + et Oi dete Gas VG Se 

believes until I am more beloved a a ie BS 2us -d8 cid 

to him than his child, his father aa be, se a he nO 

and all the people.’” (Sahih) age VRE al Jyh JE sdb UG 
coils Se sl Caf ast & esac 

Kiger) el cally 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

421 Keil Qe 

Codey chOre COL ge dae Hh ce wh col! egobedl tor ol ees 

Comments: 

4 Re Cake ge EET HH di ge doe yey el cola! 

a. Love of the Prophet 2% is the very foundation of faith. The stronger the love 
for him, the greater the faith. Increase or decrease in love for him is an 
indication. of increase or decrease in one’s faith. 

b. The proof of love is not in lip service but in obedience. Allah the Glorified 
says: “Say (O Muhammad to mankind): ‘If you (really) love Allah, then 

follow me.” (3:31) 

c. The real test of a person’s having more love for Allah and His Messenger 
®#€ than others, comes when the love of one’s children, parents, a religious 
leader or friend, demands that one do a thing that Allah and His Messenger 
#¢ have prohibited, but he will not bother about the displeasure of others 
and obey and follow the example of the Prophet of Allah in disregard of his 
love for others. If, on the other hand, the love of others is greater, then he 
will go against the dictates of Shari‘ah in order to please those others, and 
thus fall short of achieving the required level of faith. The same criterion 
holds true in respect of one’s love for the traditions of the Prophet #§ and 
customs prevalent in one’s tribe or community. 

68. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘By the One in 
Whose Hand is my soul! You will 
not enter Paradise until you 
believe, and you will not (truly) 
believe until you love one 
another. Shall I not tell you of 
something which, if you do it, 
you will love one another? Spread 
the greetings of Salém amongst 
yourselves.’”’ (Sahih) 

cg) oe. Opagell VW dadl Jaw Vo af oy ob cole! aly esl 

Comments: 

- 

3 Ju & fi Gis - wu 

sl gta bab YI oF Gyles 5 255 

hie y odes et gilts ec 
clglad 36 (ge V5 ee 
il ee dgailed Wf eceh le Sash 

ES SES 

wz 
bs ex, e 

6& ded col oh ge Oe 

a. Iméan is an essential requirement for entry into Paradise. 
b. Mutual love is a means of gaining complete faith. We must, therefore, do all 
those things that promote mutual love and avoid things that would 

generate mutual hatred. 

Greeting each other with Salim is a good way of establishing and 
maintaining good relations with each other. Other Ahéddith speak of the 
other things as well, such as shaking hands, hugging and exchanging 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

122 ARS) Ges 

presents with each other. Gee Muwatta Imam Malik: 1731 & Adabul-Mufrad: 

594) 

69. It was narrated that ‘Abdullah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ 
said: ‘Verbally abusing a Muslim is 
immorality and fighting him is 
Kufr (disbelief).” (Sahih) 

ey 4 - We “eS oy on 

Se 8 ot 25 OE OE ai te 
° fee 4 4 7 

AS D3 God Lech 

cry Vo gay alee bow of ge gegell Get wl COL! egobell aes] Fete 
Ue 64 yee Tl Cade ye Cplnes UVES 6 go bed cole Ty 

Comments: 

a, Since maintaining cordial relations between the Muslims is desirable in 
Islam, our sacred law forbids doing things that might spoil relations. One of 
those undesirable things is verbally abusing each other—an act wholly 
unbecoming a good Muslim. That is the reason why it has been branded as 
an act of disobedience, immorality and sin. 

b. Fighting a Muslim is Kufr. The word Kufr as. used here does not mean the 
Kufr that drives man out of the pale of Islam. It only means an act which is 
unfit for a Muslim. It is technically called a minor Kufr. The Qur'an says: 
“And if two parties of believers fight, make peace between them’. (49:9) 
The Verse is categorical on the point that believers, even when they fight 
each other, continue to remain believers; they do not turn disbelievers. 

70. It was narrated that Anas bin 
Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘Whoever departs 
this world with sincerity towards 
Allah, worshipping Him alone 
with no partner, establishing 
regular prayer and paying Zakit, 
has died while Allah is pleased 
with him.’ ” 

Anas said: “This is the religion of 
Allah which was brought by the 
Messengers, and which they 

Wily Ste SSD lJ IAM oy 

ry re hae 
ay Sete ol di bo 35 ET du 
AOS os GE telly de 

The Book Of The Sunnah 123 domed Hd 

conveyed from their Lord before vehi She le 

there arose the confusion of -elga dl rae cele 

people’s chattering and conflicting oo 21 3 cal OS (3 SS Guay 
desires. fe ae eR mere ty ee 
This is confirmed in the Book of og JB - 6 QixG oy tail Ogi dp 

Allah, in. one of the last Verses to ics ZsLan (AG - : yites oui 

be revealed, where Allah says: . Sane 

“But if they repent.” renounce [o sal] 3235 

their idols, and worshipping  {fc4ij (AG ob 2 tat 3 J 

Z a Ip WBF SG Bl oe UUs 
them; “And establish Saldt and : on ee ee = om 
give Zakét.”7] And Allah saysin - €o2l & MOSS BEF ry Uke 
sage Verse: “But if they repent, LV) :ayit] 
perform Saldt and give Zakét, then : a ie 
they are your brethren in 3) al abe Gas rk pl Gite 

religion.”9! (Da’if) P 5. ue oe, “4 

SN! at gl GIS tA Cg 
Another chain with similar  ‘*? 2 et ee Si “a 
wording. ee ol of aed ge 
ay pine ol Sade ge Orda NYS [Uren BS Gybll ot Line] ges 

ks O 585 50 aSle y 6 Syne gl Aarne 9 £0 5a goed am 3 PTY /¥ 2 Slocdi Amr 9 

pier gl Biles ge OWS be te Osis old ST op ae ST Boke gel UB GS psgernll 

Seana (cle!) B25 CLal ae doll 3 oY as 

a. Translation of the meaning of the first quoted Verse (complete text) shall 
read: “Then when the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists 
wherever you find them, and capture them and besiege them, and lie in 
wait for them in every place of ambush. But if they repent and perform 
prayer, and pay Zakét, then let them go their way. Verily, Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful’. (9:5). 

Anas comments that repentance here means relinquishing disbelief. 

b. The Verses are clear in their meaning, which is that a community will only 
be recognized as Muslim when, along with affirmation of the Oneness of 
Allah and due testimony, they also perform the practical duties such as 
Salat and Zakét etc. In case of refusal, it would be declared disbeliever and 
deserving of being engaged in Jihad, just like Abu Bakr #, in interpretation 
of the above quoted Verse, had conducted a Jihad against those who refused 
to pay Zakét or accept it as an obligatory duty in Islam. 

j 

71. It was narrated that Abu ff Gis : FSyI 25 acct eis - v1 

Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 

Gl At-Taubah 93. 
2] AtTaubah 9:5. 
BI 4t-Taubah 9:11. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 124 Dredd) tant Li 

Allah #& said: ‘I have been . $e ok teu ‘ ed 
commanded to fight the people ‘ut # oF 69 ee sel 
until they testify to La ilaha ill-allah it 325 GE (G8 i Uf ye cali 
(none has the right to be a eee ee ae 
worshipped but Allah) and that He = GW BEI & 

am the Messenger of Allah, and (42.335 il 435 als a My ay ¥ Sf 

they establish regular prayers and pat) Sac ed J 
pay Zakat.”’ (Sahih) ISS 13559 BAT 
as ysl / cots) lab) obi) (pts pe ge Gaeredl [31 gre eel Fe Saeed 
cae ai) dy Bp ye cal ge lambs lacy Gre! te BS Gb Sete) egeey (Ei 
63 lysed} Goole NI - 
Comments: sisal Cys of PS 

a. Fighting in the way of Allah is the collective duty of Muslims with the 
objective of turning people away from the worship of others to the worship 
of Allah. 

b. Three things are reckoned as proof of a person’s entry into the fold of Islam: 
(i) his affirmation of the Oneness of All4h and the prophethood of 
Muhammad 2§, (ii) to performing regularly the ritual prayers, and (iii) 
paying Zakat, which is a prescribed financial obligation in Islam. 

ce. The tradition does not mention the other two pillars of Islam, namely 
fasting and. Hajj. The reason being that. fasting is a hidden act in the sense, 
that it is always possible for a non-fasting person to make others believe 
that he is fasting. As for Hajj, it is not in the first place obligatory for each 
Muslim. Secondly, even for the obligated person, it is compulsory just once 
in the entire lifetime. Additionally, even if the people against whom war is 
an Islamic duty affirm their commitment to. fasting and Hajj, the practical 
demonstration of these acts will have to wait for the particular months of 
the year. It would, therefore, be against better judgment to link the decision 
about waging war against them to such matters. And Allah knows. best. 

72. It was narrated that Mu’adh = 4257 (S42 - Jail 23 ast Gls - vy 
bin Jabal said: The Messenger of a Page RY a en ere 
Allah #§ said: ‘I have been ‘else Gf teal te Gir tettg Gl 
commanded to fight the people 3) tee) ec 25 (Cee ot ah tg 
until they testify to La ilaha itlallah FO OP A on te 

(none has the right to be 4! 535 dé JB KS cp alk 3 pats 
worshipped but Allah) and that 1 Feit: Bo os ee eaten te ae 
am the Messenger of Allah, and ae a ot el ol ae as 
they establish regular prayer and I yesg cdl Sgy lg Ol VI a Y SH 
pay Zakéat.” (Sahih) sear ee rere 

LM Sedo BH one abe Mat rg ve sell duly Lilt eel ess 

The Book Of The Sunnah 125 SAS las 

‘Abbas and Jabir bin ‘Abdullah . ; 3 
said: “The Messenger of Allah @ 9 j di 42 Gas tyme Gog UG 
said: “There are two types among 
my Ummah who have no share of 
Islam: the people of Inja’ and the =. ue 5 266 
people of Qadar’” (Datif™ wee es 

73. %t was narrated that Ibn : S35 ‘ess seo% Bis _ wy 

; a jpls a 

Hinds 6 Gly OF MENTE Ckedl b pole col gl el Le ole] tee sd 
0 eg Gia yl dis Aare bal gd a} s. Wie ene oly *% Sore gl 
74. It was narrated that Abu 2) ian SK bus ff Gas — ve 
Hurairah and Ibn ‘Abbas said: PO ear : 
“faith increases and decreases.” S4* 242, 3} el Bie 5B inks 
(Daf) we Ye - AS YI ot - jely 
gl GF ples BF ees of Sigil 
Lg OLN! 9G YE ots BS 

+ Ree 

pseey 6 (yt) Sy gl ads des oy pd wha Sle a [oe ewe se) salut | Saad 
. a rer cyrokncd! des) OL ye sIdL Sat (eeree pM 

a lat, Ty ts fF gee 
75. It was narrated that Abu Gis Gyles Ole gp) Gas - vo 

Darda’ said: “Faith increases and ; ee UR ee a gee bets 

decreases.” (Da’if) toe OF shel] Tae 2 egll 
8.¢ aes 

cdalis oF ab] cytes! 4S cOlte 

Sy Guy :d6 tsa of 3s 
» (ABS 

CASE AS oS pdt coleb) oly lS Sle oy she law), 3 [ane ort] : eye 

eel Le ad» 64d y asi co zlodls 3 

Comments: 74 & 75 J ad i. mila 
Although, as to the principles of Hadith classification, the two traditions are 
Weak and do not come up to the level of Marfu’ (Traceable) Ahddith, these 

1 See no. 62. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

126 ALS es 

are Mash-hur (Well-Known) Ahédith and have all along been consecutively 
reported from the pious predecessors. As such the concept of increase and 
decrease in Imén is an established fact among the followers of Sunnah. 
Imam Bukhari # in his Sahih (Book of Faith, Ch. 1) has cited several Verses 
of the Qur’an as evidence, and has followed them up with a number of 
Ahéadith in the next several chapters, to prove that virtuous deeds are but 
the parts of faith. It needs to be understood in this connection that anything 
that has parts shall remain imperfect or defective if one part or more thereof 
is missing. For further detail, it will be useful to study the relevant chapters 
of Fathul-Bari, the well-known commentary of Sahih AL-Bukhari. 

Chapter 10. Regarding The 
Divine Decree (Qadar} 

76. ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: 
“The Messenger of Allah 2€, the 
true and truly inspired one, told us 
that: “The creation of one of you is 
put together in his mother’s womb 
for forty days, then it becomes a 
clot for a similar length of time, 
then it becomes a chewed lump of 
flesh for a similar length of time. 
Then Allah sends the angel to him 
and commands him to write down 
four things. He says: “Write down 
his deeds, his life span, his 
provision, and whether he js 
doomed (destined for Hell) or 
blessed (destined for Paradise).” By 
the One in Whose Hand is my soul! 
One of you may do the deeds of the 
people of Paradise until there is no 
more than a forearm’s length 
between him and it, then the decree 
overtakes him and he does the 
deeds of the people of Hell until he 
enters therein. And one of you may 
do the deeds of the people of Hell 
until there is no more than a 
forearm’s length between him and 
it, then the decree overtakes him 
and he does the deeds of the people 

SB 8 OG - 1+ peat) 
(V+ deat) 
Gis 1235) wat 8 ge We - vs 
ie gles Pi « ads og MEALS RSG 
gf Bs 18 one 8 ge Gis; 
nee oF (hae ee Rocery, Eyles 
Gobi Ae SE IE cokg oh 5 Le 
Sala 585 BB dl S25 Gs sy kas 
oe ob Sued He Re 7 nda 
is b ids 8X bg gaa af 
Sai dag d ap few Led 
C81 dG5 colds ih x8 GL 
pS ine leaky Gig deh, ths 
Boh al fae ead SET yom 
G8 PGs Ys HE GS 
gn SF gow dead Lesh ele 
38 Jal fom Jaad pSaeh yy itis 
Gnd PW ES aK eS 

The Book Of The Sunnah 127 id et 

of Paradise until he enters therein.” 
(Sahih) 

Nl GL RAS Gh Ail Coley copy TONED? dil ued ag el eee 

4 S39 Eagles gh Cade oe lame der el ca hee VI Gade oe VUE G call... 

Comments: 

a. 

Man’s good and bad deeds, his life span, his provision, and his going either 
to Paradise or to Hell—all these things—even the angels only come to know 
when told by Allah at an appropriate time. The angels then write those 
things which had been decreed and recorded in the Preserved Tablet since 
eternity. 

. Everyone has a predetermined life span, and will not die before that. No 

one should, therefore, abdicate his faith out of his fear for life, but be 
prepared to lay down his life in defence of his faith. 

. Everyone’s quota of provision is predetermined, which he is sure to get 

anyhow. Man’s test lies in what means he adopts to get it. He shall get his 
allotted provision even through lawful means, and what is not destined for 
him, he will not get it even through unlawful means. We must, therefore, 
put our trust in Allah and try to earn our livelihood only through lawful 
means. 

. We must not decide, of our own, about someone’s being of Paradise or of 

Hell, for Allah alone knows who is designated for Paradise or destined to 
be the fuel of Hell-fire. We must, however, have faith in Allah’s mercy, and 
keep the hope that a person whom we believe to be virtuous shall, by the 
grace of Allah, be admitted to Paradise. Nevertheless, we must have the 
belief that the people whom Allah or His Messenger #% expressly named as 
going to Paradise or Hell shall surely go there. Cases in point are the 
inevitability of Abu Lahab’s (and his wife’s) being consigned to Hell-fire — 
as mentioned in the Quranic Surah of that name — and the certainty of a 
place in Paradise for each of the Ten Companion who have already been 
given the glad tiding of admittance to that blessed abode. 

77. Tt was narrated that Ibn Gis3) Gis gist Ap ae Gis - w 
Dailami said: “I was confused i Sok Sp 2 ap 
about this Divine Decree (Qadar), 9 5% solby uf Gree dB cold fol 

and 1 was afraid lest that 
adversely affect my religion and 

Je 

«fol! ol 2 cheated ME of Ay 

my affairs. So I went to Ubayy tl ida ee tet eet re Re du 

bin Ka‘’b and said: ‘O Abu 
Mundhir! I am confused about 
this Divine Decree, and I fear for 4 re t Pavel “s : 
my religion and my affairs, so tell by eee huge Vee en se 
me something about that through “=~ pial Wa Ge Bet sot a 

2 che of atc 2 fe BROR yer 
Esl coals Coo EE And Ol Cet 

» 

E 

o 96 

Ana ae 
iss gi 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

which Allah may benefit me.’ He 
said: ‘If Allah were to punish the. 
inhabitants of His heavens and of 
His earth, He would do so and 
He would not be unjust towards 
them. And if He were to have 
mercy on them, His mercy would 
be better for them than their own 
deeds. If you had the equivalent 
of Mount Uhud in gold, or the 
equivalent of Mount Uhud which 
you spent in the cause of Allah, 
that would not be accepted from 
you until you believed in the 
Divine Decree and you know that 
whatever has befallen you, could 
not have passed you by; and 
whatever has passed you by, 
could not have befalien you; and 
that if you were to die believing 
anything other than this, you 
would enter Hell. And it will not 
harm you to go to my brother, 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud, and ask 
him {about this).’ So I went to 
‘Abdullah and asked him, and he 
said something similar to what 
Ubayy had said, and he told me: 
‘It will not harm you to go to 
Hudhaifah.’ So I] went to 
Hudhaifah and asked him, and he 
said something similar to what 
they had said. And he told me: 
‘Go to Zaid bin Thabit and ask 
him.’ So I went to Zaid bin Thébit 
and asked him, and he said: ‘I 
heard the Messenger of Allah 2 
say: “If Aliah were to punish the 
inhabitants of His heavens and of 
His earth, He would do so and He 
would not be unjust towards 
them. And if He were to have 

428 ELA Wola’ 

aot .% 

reat S| By elgla jal Ole 
ENS pied 5S “et fb 3B OBS 
AB SS 3h5 ceghtcel ere re eae 
gt oth ge Be cls wll ce 

gi nb 8 She JSG abl Jum 3 
O15 « das) Ses eles 
Ez bf aren tral} oJ SiH 

Bi ale Vy oh ELE lia 3 fe 

533 Est AAR cul: a3 O85 sl :J83 

seek 

4a dae ie NS Pai tact ait ot 

gigi jal ols ay Si gb 5b ae 
35 ppb 33 35 ped weil aly 
be oe LA Bey GI es 
Wiglias Hl fe at oe iy cpgitcct 

dl Jace 3 sant Bia wh pe 
68 i oy BS He Ws 
ed Set Gy dad 3 A) aotel 

Wh le 82 Yay nal ES 
SEs e4E5 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 129 AES bee 

mercy on them, His mercy would 
be better for them than their own 
deeds. If you had the equivalent of 
Mount Uhud in gold, or the 
equivalent of Mount Uhud which 
you spent in the cause of Allah, 
that would not be accepted from 
you until you believed in the 
Divine decree, and you know that 
whatever has befallen you, could 
not have passed you by; and 
whatever has passed you by, 
could not have befallen you, and 
that if you were to die believing 
anything other than this, you 
would enter Hell.” (Sahih) 

Sad ge EVAR hall Sl cad cosh gl rel Lemree ooltel] tee od 

Canina AAW IG Gaylge) Ghe cyl smeeney ca Ohne cl 

a. The calamity destined to happen is bound to happen, even if the person 
concerned — out of the fear of it — leaves the path of virtue and takes to 
the path of evil. And the bounties and comforts destined for a person are 
sure to come to him, albeit preceded by a difficult and turbulent phase. We 
must, therefore, put our trust in Allah, remain hopeful of His mercy, and 
never fall prey to despair, for Allah cites, with approval, the following 
words of Ya’qub ssa: “Certainly no one despairs of Allah’s mercy except the 
people who disbelieve.” (12:87) 

b. The Companions were gifted with the kind of knowledge which was as 
profound as it was strong, which is why their faith was also firm and 
strong. Even on. issues as: delicate as the Divine Decree, their self-assurance 
and awareness of the truth made them brimful of contentment of the heart, 
with no iota of doubt to disturb their minds. 

c. It is perfectly in order to consult more than one scholar on any matter for 
the satisfaction of one’s heart. 

d. Religious opinions (Fatwa) given by the Companions are all drawn from the 
Qur’an and Ahddith. Not only this, they oftentimes quote the very words of 
the Hadith without mentioning the Prophet's name. 

e. The issue of the Divine Decree is among Islam’s fundamentals. of faith. No 
one’s belief is, therefore, of any consequence unless he also has faith in the 
Divine Decree. Denying the truth of the Divine Decree means inviting one’s 
own punishment by Hell-fire. 

78. It was narrated that ‘Ali said: 
“We were sitting with the Prophet 

SB ie SeeG ; 
take fhe ost! 

= 

go Fats ge. 
cp Ole Lae - VA 

The Book Of The Sunnah 130 ARAN las 

#@ and he had a stick in his hand. P ee ee ee 
He scratched in the ground with ra Bie yemt re ead aly ec 4 
it, then raised his head and said: cp wae BS « a oF +555 eplew 
There is no one among you but ~~ 
his place in Paradise or Hell has = o* ental el te Zl jf eae 
already been decreed.’ He was 4 i : Pama ee pes OG 
asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah, | . a Ss "33 as ake - 
should we not then rely upon “5 #2) #9 (gh go ESS Os 
that?’ He said: ‘No, strive and do 44-3 - 2 

: oes 4b I ssf: We : LB 
not rely upon that, for it will be % i ag 2 
made easy for each person to do 4345 & 743 os fe hake DSS Se 
that for which he was created.’ ; 

ry ¢ tai 

Then he recited: “As for him who W% wis bY sdb Js sui a 

% 

gives (in charity) and keeps his 13 o w Ge WwW “ 4s A gh 

duty to Allah and fears Him, And ee vost chee ae 

believes in Al-Husnéa."| We will 42° rates SL b dies & ae 1 a 

_ make smooth for him the path of eit GS pels dé fm Gh pen 
ease (goodness). But he who is a : ae ee 

greedy miser and thinks himself [ve—0 2 Jal] .€oeall goes 

self-sufficient. And denies Al- 

Husna. We will make smooth for 

him the path for evil.”") (Sahih) 

3 ge 

ee ce GP SS Cl ttn BL fSlyt Taye peel Qo ae el tee ee 

ee YUEV ie sé ens ye! Be 4a5 Ob « aall Cplines Co hg EREV Ie ch pail y 

claws Gob aly ca eg Syd 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith affirms the reality of Divine Decree. 

b. Divine Decree is another name for Allah's attribute of iswicaos ‘Tt does 
not mean predetermination in the sense that man has no power over his 
actions. 

c. Admittance of man to Paradise or Hell is linked to his actions. Nobody 
knows what the future holds for him. It is, therefore, necessary that we 
keep trying to do righteous deeds and avoid sinful acts. 

d. Faith in the Divine Decree does not mean that man give up trying and 
doing hard work. He should rather make it a point not to be afraid of 
impending dangers nor despair of Allah’s mercy for, if success is to come 

(i Al-Husna: The Best (i.e. either: Lé ilaha illallah: none has the right to be worshipped but 
Alléh) or a reward from Allah (i.e. Allah will compensate him for what he will spend 
in Allah’s way or bless him with Paradise). 

2 Al-Lail 92:5-10. 

The Bock. Of The Sunnah 

131 S22 wales 

by Allah’s permission, it is bound to happen in spite of all odds and 
difficulties. If not, the person shall at least get reward for his good 
intentions and hard work. Allah does not let the good done by anybody go 

to waste. 

79. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: “The strong believer 
is better and more beloved to 
Allah than the weak believer, 
although both are good. Strive for 
that which will benefit you, seek 
the help of Allah, and do not feel 
helpless. If anything befalls you, 
do not say, “If only I had done 
such and such.” Rather say, 
“Qaddara Allahu wa ma shai’a fa‘ala 
(Allah has decreed and whatever 
He wills, He does).” For (saying) 
‘If opens (the door) to the deeds 

“ Zee 

ais ES LI OS ff Gis - v4 

ao bl ts Gas : Ve gach Bee BI 
cn me bE Ol ff BLS 32 «GuyS 
gl of cel Ra cous o a 
Zedaiin 8 Bi dyohb Lae a3 
gel ye a Bs 23h x ¥ 

b ud am SE SS Ba hall 

bral af «jess 5 3 4 di jake BARS 
Ms5 Ns is As oe 96 88 

U5 GS fod eb tag i 5B 2B 35 

of Satan’” (Sahih) 

Mgt jas ec 

hed cal ot ge VUEre oad OlSYL) al OLA OL gail glee ar oT tae od 

Comments: 

a. 

b. 

Physical, mental and financial strength is a gift of Allah which must be 
utilized in the doing of good deeds. 

A man short of others in any kind of strength is not altogether without 
good in him. Maybe, the one who is weak in one area is strong in another. 
It, therefore, behooves us all to be grateful to Allah for whatever capacity 
He has given. to each one of us, and utilize it for the avoidance of evil and 
the acquisition and accumulation of as much good as possible. 

. Striving for worldly good is not against the doctrine of trust in Allah. It is 

not, However, allowed to use unfair means to achieve one’s goals, nor is it 
proper to engross oneself in the pursuit of worldly gains so absolutely that 
all attention is focused on that alone. 

It is not desirable in the Islamic Shari’ah that a person, instead of working to 
earn his bread and be of benefit to others, himself becomes a burden on 
others. It is wrong to give such an attitude the name of ‘trust in Allah’. If, 
however, for some reason, a person is not capable of earning his bread for 
himself he is exempt from it, and it is the duty of the Islamic community to 
take care of his needs. 

. If the outcome of an endeavour ends up in an unexpected result that cannot 

be remedied, there is no reason for the person concerned to give himself up 

The Book Of The Sunnah 132 deeded) ut Lied 

to negative thinking since, far from being beneficial, such an attitude would 
only be harmful to him, and then it would be no use regretting at the 
aftermath and say, “Would that I had done this work that way and not this 
way.” It is nevertheless all right to critically evaluate one’s work so that the 

mistake done now should be avoided in the future. 

80. It was narrated that ‘Amr bin 
Dinar heard Tawus say: “I heard 
Abu Hurairah narrating that the 
Prophet #@ said: ‘Adam and Musa 
debated, and Musa said to him: 
“QO Adam, you are our father but 
have deprived us and caused us 
to be expelled from Paradise 
because of your sin.” Adam said 
to him: “O Musa, Allah chose you 
to speak with and He wrote the 
Tawraéh for you with His own 
Hand. Are you blaming me for 
something which Allah decreed 
for me forty years before He 
created me?” Thus Adam won the 
argument with Musa, thus Adam 

3 GyBG ols Bi fide Ge - a. 
bis Gis SE cow of ge 
tisth poo jb gh opt UF ES 
#6 2) ot BA a i dae Ge 

ae foe 

G seuge NB eng pal en aie 
fal) ye el, ES Og) GT es 
il Sot ge : eat 3 Sti ASL, 

se eal cde HS HD bS5 SK, 
jel ils US ge a 8 Zi 
corse §T Ask cut OT god Ts 
WOE «gh pal ges 

won the argument with Musa, 
thus Adam won the argument 
with Musa.’ ”’ (Sahih) 

tplney UU Ele cal we ee) eal iia wh «pda | cg yee x >] Fabel 
ace) tows oe Olt Sato o VUOV ie cles Ligde aul she ys pal ce wh peel! 

Comments: 

a. Musa x3 did not mean to put Adam # on the dock as to why he 
committed. the mistake, because Allah had already condoned it. The Qur'an 
accordingly says: “Then his Lord chose him, and turned to him with 
forgiveness, and gave him guidance. (20:122) 

He only meant to say that because of him, the human race had to suffer all 
those worldly trials and tribulations. Adam 4 replied by saying that those 
trials had already been divinely decreed a long long time ago. 

b. The Prophet 3% thrice repeated the words: “Thus Adam won the argument 
with Musa.” The repetition was meant to drive home the idea that what 
Adam 34 did was nothing but the implementation of Allah’s decree and 
will. 

81. It was narrated that ‘Ali said: 

“The Messenger of Allah £§ said: 

303 of ys alé 33 dil te Gas - AN 

The Book Of The Sunnah 133 Kod at 

‘No slave truly believes until he Sih angst, ae Beoe* thee 
believes in four things: in Allah 9 0% ‘G42 OF Soe OF SN Be 
alone with no partner; thatT am = 34% Yo :Be 4k yee 25 db 356 thé 
the Messenger of Allah; in the a 

resurrection after death; and in Ay 9 Y aasy ay ik: ek ke 
the Divine Decree (Qadar).’” egal nex eodky cai Arey al 4) 
(Hasan) 

C5515 
cops apt AHL GlayYI dT cle be Gb chil cesde dl ar ol Cyl tee pei 
‘tll tpSbelly cole cn! Amr 3 os pay 64 yee ye Eee ae Salo oO Yybore 
cea td cael ol ell Way clayey PVC ode cals VOU Ce cgundlaball 

Co sctss ene WESC edad GB role ool oul He salpt Codd 

The Hadith contains the fundamentals of Imén (faith) which also include 

belief in the Divine Decree. 

82. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
the Mother of the Believers said: 
“The Messenger of Allah #8 was 
called to the funeral of a child from 
among the Ans@r. I said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah, glad tidings 
for him! He is one of the little birds 
of Paradise, who never did evil or 
reached the age of doing evil (i.e., 
the age of accountability).” He said: 
‘Tt may not be so, O ‘Aishah! For 
Allah has created people for 
Paradise, He created them for it 
when they were still in their 
fathers’ loins. And He has created 
people for Heli, He created them 
for it when they were still in their 
fathers’ loins.’” (Sahih) 

VUYic call... 
Comments: 

4a. 

ais5 ak Jf ty Ss of als - ay 
fol he. AS as VG nt 3h 
gab 32 cdl ace of Ib gp a 
Seal el ie 32 Eb cy ite 
pe aie Sy Be al S325 ce3 ESE 
wie Vail dy25 G E1B lal je 

Joe oF Bah lak be Stat Migs 

a yadt gle Wy oye IS cee oh entidl colic a oh Saal 

4 ded Gol eg! Ye 

a. The tone of certainty with which ‘Aishah %& spoke about the boy’s being of 
the people of Paradise did not find favour with the Prophet #, and he said 
that knowledge of it rested with Allah alone. Imam Nawawi has claimed 

The Book Of The Sunnah 134 ARAN lier 

consensus of religious scholars on the fact that all the children of the 
believers shall be in Paradise. Several Ahddith of the Prophet # support the 
assertion. The Prophet # probably spoke the above quoted words while 
still the knowledge of it had not been conveyed to him by Allah. Maybe, 
Allah gave him the knowledge thereof at a later date. 

b. The Ahadith affirms the reality of Divine Decree. 

83. It was narrated that Abu G3 «4p wl ib SS sf as - ae 
Hurairah said: “The idolators of ayer 255 Sic VE Sos 50 
Quraish came and disputed with rs 1a G 
the Prophet #§ concerning the pels! g: 2kj be ‘S el oka 

Divine Decree. Then the following Be ed ol el a2 8 ct thc 
Verse was revealed: ‘The Day Yar gh OF ote OF S589 

they will be dragged on their Rog pee He 2G ees gh OF 
faces into the Fire (it will be said Spits deer, . OGts «1, toe Leak fone Vets 
to them): “Taste you the touch of °%* CSF shall 3 BE Gl Opes 
Hell!” Verily, We have created all {34 2025 (© Gf & Sfscb oh EY 
p bes Se sul 3 dycud peg 1A! 
things with Qadar. (Divine re F 

Decree)" (Sahih) ‘pill 46 Si A FG eS 
[£4 8A 

A obs dd ol gal ge TUOU eG ede ed JS Gk ual glee oe of ees 
Comments: 
a. The Qur’anic Verse and the Hadith both reaffirm the certainty of the Divine 
Decree. 
b. Idolaters are surely destined for Hell. 
c. Allah does not approve of argumentation on matters that are certain and 
clear. 
84. “Abdullah bin Abi Mulaikah jg Gey f 23 KO Gis - ak 
narrated that his father entered nae ieee oe 
upon ‘Aishah and said something 3) 2 Gas: pelt] 3 WWE Gas 
to her about the Divine Decree. + { 
She said: “I heard the Messenger 

of Allah #§ say: ‘Whoever says 55 47 4] be ARG wl as) gue 
anything about the Divine Decree or, ae Oe ae eee 
will be questioned about that on cpa Ge Ee Wl pds ale OIF 

- S ge a4 ee otc 

the Day of Resurrection, and fy :d 9 cst 
whoever does not say anything = 4 -, -24 | gh oe Ste 
about it will not be questioned (2 *% be 2d! Se cet 2 ols 
about it.’” (Da‘if) aS SS wl ab ARS ol S05 data 

GJ Al-Qamar 54:48-49, 

The Book Of The Sunnah 135 AS ed 

Another chain with similar dees 
wording. 

ied Gb Gipead le TE rye) dat 3 oe Vl ool [Lied ole] cd 
Ware abi] Wet i egS| Sy 6 cere Cad ge (Gl)... nelly Cond! S35 Ob 
Cony) Syed yd Gents Colote op! oe Cire (dle lB 

85. ‘Amr bin Shu’aib narrated ig nee thames Jy tb Gis - Ao 
from his father that his grandfather ae ee ae ee ee 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # 22° of ‘3% ost) Cp gle Em a glae 
came out to his Companions when. fa dG obs ie baal Le eee os 
they were disputing about the 7, . ., 0 .¢ 2 uw 4G 
Divine Decree, and it was as if Ose pas alee! Je 8S ol 525 
pomegranate seeds had burst on a oe, fats Hor wat, 
his face (i.e., it turned red) because ene ie a ta bait aa o 
of anger. He said: ‘Have you been 3) Sys Wgn 2 SUB all Ge OLHI 
commanded to do this, or were ee ree sai 2 42 gothi2 ‘ys 
you created for this purpose? You Gers a rs, Benen sere 
are using one part of the Qur’an Sd eau She My 
against another part, and this is |, _ Be farsi es Seta Tet . 
what led to the doom of the nations - 2+ at OF 4s) se Jl 1 JG 
who came before you.’” ‘Abdullah Pro sear. 2%ee oe ay 
bin ‘Amr said: “I was never so aS 3 dsm) ue i rapt yrs ae 
happy to have missed a gathering _ab53 ARS Wi ws Ebe & 
with the Messenger of Allah #$asI] 7 2% bes 
was to have missed that 
gathering.” (Hasan) 

B Greg Ss 6 Esher gh ge WALT dead eel [oem oobi] ogee sei 
old dle, Tecmned shun! iad 2 JL y 3H 

« Ne 

Comments: 84 & 85 

a. Divine Decree is one of the closely-guarded secrets of Allah. It will suffice 
us to have a general belief in it. Similarly, in other matters relating to the 
unseen world, it is enough that we believe in what has been told, without 
making an effort to discover the details of things deliberately left 
unexplained. 

b. The main purpose of the study of the Qur’an and Hadith is to reform one’s 
morals and deeds. If there is.a person who opens the paradox of delicate 
issues just to demonstrate his gift of the gab, or impress the people by his 
excessive knowledge and skills, it is an act of distraction from the main 
objective, and amounts to inviting the wrath of Allah. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 136 dosed uli 

c. During the course of admonition, it is perfectly in order for the speaker to 
take recourse to a show of anger if the situation so demands, especially if 
the speaker is a person of eminence and a show of anger is not likely to 
have a negative effect on the audiences. 

d. The Companion in question felt happy at having been absent from the 
assembly because in it, the Prophet #@ had expressed his displeasure to the 
listeners. This means that a person’s expression of happiness on being able 
to do a good deed or avoid an act of sin, is not to be considered an act of 
self-pride or hypocrisy. It is rather a sign of his love of good and hatred of 
evil, which is a part of Imén (faith). 

86. It was narrated that Ibn 2465 (423 on oo OS gl the AN 

“Umar said: “The Messenger of 2. Fi 

Allah #€ said: ‘There is no ‘Adwa We a5) Gur 

(contagion), no gale ee ie eishi ws Base Ol 2s ee 

omen) and no Hamah. A 

Bedouin man stood up and said: # ¢ 

‘O Messenger of Allah, what do <8 gue Ye ee » Be 

you think about a camel that a . oe a yee 

suffers from mange and then all !4) J,25 G idl 21% 

the other camels get mange?’ He —_ - 

said: ‘That is because of the 

Divine Decree. How else did the Oj 

first one get mange?” (Sahih) 

as 

Fe res ts MO VS 
RIT 

a cpl Vtias os SA 64 Css oe Yo VE /Y tool tor ol Fecal dude] CeLPs 
{is lus (4,3) Jggree ogy 6 da 32s 0 stad a> al Ce este F £4 /4 hs 
«ope g CVV °c c4ola Yo ob oda ego bedl Ae daly d Soto Pots 11 Re ha dodt 

Comments: 

a. The chain of narrators mentioned by Imam Ibn Majah is Weak. 
Nevertheless, because of other reliable chains of narrators it must be 
considered a Sound Hadith. The remark: “That is because of the Divine 
Decree” is, however, missing in other reports. 

b. It is a common perception that if a healthy person comes into contact with a 
person suffering from certain diseases or shares the meals on the same table 
with him, or uses his clothing, the former would contract the disease of the 
latter. These categories of diseases are known as ‘contagious diseases’. The 

1 Meaning one will not automatically be infected by another's ailment, rather only if 
Ajlah has decreed it. 

Pl Scholars mention different meanings for this pre-Islamic belief: It is a worm that 
comes out of the murdered person’s head seeking vengeance; it refers to the owl 
which was considered a bad omen if seen in certain circumstances; or it was a bird 
that came from the bones of a dead person which would fly away. See Fathul-Bari 
and An-Nihdyah. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 137 

S22 oles 

fact of the matter, however, is that diseases do not travel like that. It could, 
however, be the case that the very fact that had caused the first man to get 
the disease might be present in the other fellow as well, which would make 
him also sick. The ‘germ theory’, as we know, is very popular in modern- 
day medicine, but the germs only act by Allah’s permission. 

. Arabs took their omen by the movement of the birds and beasts. For 
instance, if a person desired to start some work, he would throw a stone at 
a sitting bird or deer etc. to make it fly or run. If it went to the right they 
would presume that the outcome of their work would be favorable. If, on 
the other hand, it went left, they thought that their effort would not 
succeed. Such things just indicate one’s. superstitious nature; they have no 
basis in the world of reality. Even today people have several similar 
superstitions. For example, if they meet a lame or one-eyed person on their 
way, or if a black cat crosses their path, they take it as a bad omen. Similar 
is the case of those who consider certain numbers (13 for example) or days 
(e.g. Tuesday) or a certain month (Safar or Shawwél) inauspicious for them. 
To the same category belong acts like drawing ’magical’ charts or figures by 
the people, and divining their future through blindly putting their fingers in 
them, or drawing lots for similar purposes, and so on. All these acts are 
indicative of a lack of faith. 

. Arab idolaters also had a misplaced notion that if the murder of a person 
was not avenged, his spirit would assume the form of an owl and haunt 
around shrieking for revenge. It was primarily because of this misplaced 
notion that a never-ending chain of killing and plundering continued for 
generations after generations among them. All these things are baseless. 
Similarly, it is baseless to consider the owl a symbol of bad omen. The owl 
is just another creature of Allah which has nothing to do with the destinies 
of men. 

87. Sha’bi said: “When ‘Adi bin 
Hatim came to Kufah, we came to 
him with a delegation of the 
Fugaha’ of Kufah and said to him: 
‘Tell us of something that you 
heard from the Messenger of 
Allah #¢.’ He said: ‘I came to the 
Prophet #% and he said: “O ‘Adi 
bin Hatim, enter Islam and you 
will be safe.” I said, “What is 
Islam?” He said: “To testify to La 
ildha illallah (none has the right to 
be worshipped but Allah) and 
that J am the Messenger of Allah, 
and to believe in all the Divine 
Decrees, the good of them and the 

hk LEM ke 88 SI he GI 
Sse Gb US OE get oe yglccl 
GB fe i BUT BS pte Uh 
te Sted GBS 33 GE BSH yal 
eB) Ef SB aw at 25 

The Book Of The Sunnah 138 AAAS) es 

bad of them, the sweet of them 
and the bitter of them.” (Da‘if) 

Sele gt MOC Bad GB pele eal ool an el [ee ee oolial] ig se 
Ade Vie cine le Bla rind alin! Wiad 2g pe gd Sy 0 he Vine 

88. It was narrated that Abu. +z spoglie $8 gk se le AAA 
Musa Al-Ash‘ari said: “The te eee i vee ae 
Messenger of Allah #8 said: ‘The «= ¥! Gas syose fo busi © 
likeness of the heart is that:of a  :-; of et oe 6 as 2s 
feather blown about by the wind 
in the desert.’”” (Sahih) 

vw 

“obs seh onl ge YYArC chill Bo mole col onl eel [ene Cede] te Se 
E0A/Erdaol ne aoe dale dy EVA Erdal te oy all a 26 & 

Comments: 87 & 88 

a. The dislodged feather of a bird is so weightless that even a light wind can 
easily turn its head into tail and tail into head. If it is in an open field, the 
air shall have more effect on it, since there would be nothing to impede its 
flight, and it (the feather) would travel to and fro or up and down quickly. 
Similar is the case with the human heart. Numerous feelings and emotions 
play upon it in quick succession, which drive him to virtue at one moment, 
and to sin at the next. 

b. Since the condition of the heart could change any moment, man can never 
rest assured about his ultimate end. It is, therefore, necessary that man pray 
to Allah for the safety of his faith at the dying moments of his life. 

89. It was narrated that Jabir (JU Gls 1yikt 2h abe hs - Aa 

said: “A man from among the f © He ne | yee Sd) eee 
Ansér came to the Prophet #% and gl of (ea MW ge eles 
said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, I < be5 re sig. aie Se eT 

ie Gap te Rr GF the 
have a slave girl. Should I do ‘Azl Be Noe 3 

(coitus interruptus) with her?” He Sx & :Jlé «Ee go! 

said: ‘Whatever is decreed for her —- 3 cigs J sat Hl OS Gy ta 
shall come to her.’’ He (the : ee ya 
Ansfri) came to him later on and dl Us 35 6G «gs 58 ska 

said: “That slave girl has become -72 |) asp 4, HE ey ee 
M5 ey BE 2 Gls 
pregnant.” The Prophet #€ said: ” HB “2 iva a 

“Nothing is decreed for a person ESS 2 YY Bgl nt 

H 
| 
¢ 
| 
i 
; 

The Book Of The Sunnah 139 Aid es 

but it will surely come to pass.” 

(Hasan) 

(Some gl Aree g 6 nee eager or YAANAY [¥: dom! ax ol greed | eee 

XAVIER corel 3 a stcell Aaauom 9 copes tert ue cpr Jali aly 

Comments: 

a. There is no doubt that the Divine Decree shall overtake man’s Airis, but 
this should not deter man from taking the necessary steps. He should do his 
bit and leave the result to Allah. 

b. ‘Azi (coitus interruptus) means the process by which man, having an 
intercourse with his wife or slave girl, withdraws from her the moment he 
feels like ejaculating, so that he discharges himself outside, in the hope that 
no pregnancy would take place. This was their method of family planning 
in those days. 

c. Recourse to ‘Azl is permitted with the slave girl for the simple reason that 
her pregnancy might impede her serviceability for the master and interfere 
with the domestic work, which is the main purpose of her presence in the 
house. As for the free woman (the wife), there is difference of opinion 
among the scholars as to the permissibility or otherwise of it. 

90. It was narrated that Thawban 255 Gis cules a ade (ie as 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #% 
said: ‘Nothing extends one’s life 4% 38 ¢ (me oy dbl we 3S soled 2 jf 
span but righteousness, nothing “ee et ook os o- 8 ty tar oe 
averts the Divine Decree but y ae OP eae cl Be ral 
supplication, and nothing  <5d) Vf asl of Jag Yo BE dl S25 
deprives a man of provision but gg ne. og oh oh eee tee Ke 
the sin that he commits.’”” (Da‘if) cad bral oy «bleu Y] Wall an Vy 
tghady Bs 55 
Cates ATT /T GLY diss) GSU S SLi on ol [ede ool} te oe 

cde SI ane cpa tals Cagdocdt yards tail Bam 9 0s e593 oF YAY c¥VV/o: Jools 
LENNY 1h Se Cedoddl Mia ley oVVTA Te 

Comments: 

a. The promise of extension in one’s life has been variously interpreted as (i) 
Life span gets Allah’s blessing in the sense that it is spent in the doing of 
good deeds, and is saved from going waste; (ii) Man is enabled to engage in 
righteous deeds, whose reward continue to flow to him even after death, as 
the Qur’an says: “But the righteous deeds that last are better with your 
Lord for rewards and better in respect of hope”. (18:46) 
or (iii) The life span made known to the angels, particularly to the Angel of 
Death, is extended. This extension is only from the angel’s point of view; 
otherwise Allah had all along the knowledge that the man would do such 
and such righteous deed, or deeds that would be rewarded by an 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

140 ALS) tas 

appropriate extension in the span of his life. 
b. ‘Averting the Divine Decree’ means that, because of man’s supplications, 
the misfortune that the man dreaded would be blocked, and the calamity 

that had set in would be warded off. 

91. It was narrated that Suraqah 
bin Ju’shum said: “I said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah, is one’s deed 
in that which has already dried of 
the Pen and what has passed of 
the Divine Decree, or is it in the 
future?’ He said: “No, it is in that 
which as already dried of the Pen 
and what has passed of the 
Divine Decree, and each person is 
facilitated for what he has been 
created.’”’ (Sahih) 

‘ prhens ae JALS aby (HAL ce Come P Asbo 25 pe gl JB, Larne] eps 
ele! eae ag VUEAIC cel} 8. aol gle Lis OL «will 

Comments: 

The question of a man’s being righteous or otherwise is also linked to the 
Divine Decree, but he does not know it. He is, therefore, obligated to follow 
the laws of Shari’ah. For more details please see notes on Hadith 76. 

92. It was narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #% said: “The Magians of 
this Ummah are those who deny 
the decrees of Allah. If they fall 
sick, do not visit them; if they die, 
do not attend their funerals; and if 
you meet them, do not greet them 
with Salam’ ” (Da‘if) 

H et te FG ER geStL 
tdacrdl aessl fy dome Coe - AY 
~ 7 
o fa. tte 

Se ea excel ae ae ie 

gt gt OF saul gl oF see yl 
é si Sa ee ae ee oe oe 
Op 1B al Jp JE cJB al we 

° “3% - shes? ow Pa Ge 
Bf edt NBL, BAK LS gdh Ge ghee 

eos 

Yoigh Uy Gadt Wo 12 
fyolcs Yo pastel Sy cphgtgti 

cay evan! gal ge FIAT eC chedd BS pele ol gel el Lae colkul] gy se 
bel Gb Eutosdl oads cline sted g Chur onl ® Sone sll dandy 

Comments: 

Those who deny the Divine Decree, claim that Allah is only the creator of 
virtue, while it is man who is the creator of vice. In this way, they invest 

The Book Of The Sunnah 141 Rioniad ed eS 

every man with the attribute of creation. The Magians believe in two 
deities, one (Ahuramazda) the creator of good and the other (Angra Mainyu 
or Ahriman) the creator of evil. Thus both, the deniers of Divine Decree and 
the Magians, ascribe the attribute of the creation of evil to someone other 
than Allah. Ahlus-Sunnah (People of the Prophet's Path), however, believe 
that Allah alone is the creator of all things — be they good and virtuous, or 
bad and evil — while man is the doer of those deeds. Allah in His infinite 
wisdom has granted His slaves the ability to do the deeds accordingly. 

Chapter 11. The Virtues Of 25 BHC 
The Companions Of The § ? ist b, 
Messenger Of Allah #¢ CV) Beall) 388 al J gins eel 

The term Sahabi (Companion) literally means a person who assumes the 
company and association with another person, although for a short period 
of time. Scholars, however, hold that a Sahabi is anyone from amongst the 
Muslims who has transmitted a report from the Prophet #§ or has had the 
good fortune of seeing him. A comprehensive definition of a Sahdbi, 
therefore, would be: “A Sahabi is one who, as a believer, saw the Prophet #¢ 
during his lifetime and died a believer.” 

(1/11) The Virtues Of Abu GAA SS ol fab (11/1) 
Bakr Siddiq “ % ie soe ie 

[ae dil <5] 
His real name is ‘Abdullah, born in the sacred city of Makkah, two and a 
half years after the birth of the Prophet #%. Here is his genealogy: ‘Abdullah 
bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Amir bin ‘Amr bin Ka’b bin Sa’d bin Taim bin Murrah bin 
Ka’b bin Lu’ai bin Qurashi At-Tamimi, known as Abu Bakr bin Abu 
Qahafah, the successor of the Messenger of Allah #€ as the first caliph. He 
joins the Messenger of Allah #@ in lineage at his sixth ancestor. He is 
nicknamed Abu Bakr. 

93. It was narrated that ‘Abdullah OS | Bas yas Uf a ee - 4 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #@ 1 

said: ‘I have no need of the ¢ ed f 
friendship of any Khalil (close 98 -36 
friend) but if I were to have taken 1 8s bg gh ile a iy 
anyone as.a close friend, I would bie JS ret wt Yio 288 abl Jt 

= 
Seay # 

have taken Abu Bakr as a close ede Sus tink 2 gly cag be 
friend, but your companion is the 

close friend of Allah.’” (One of the eal fds pele | Specs 5 ui 
narrators) Waki’ said: (by the 
phrase ‘your companion’), he was 
referring to himself. (Sahih) 

ale ee - 2S 

The Book Of The Sunnah 142 SRS a aS 

cae dl 2d) pbrall SS a at cp Gh c&becli ples pln oe | Tex Bete] 
a) 6 ya 9 tes Cade fe YAN 

Comments: 

a. The Prophet #§ has said: “Verily, Allah has taken me as His Khalil just as 
He had taken Ibrahim His Khalil. (Muslim: H. 532) 

b. The Hadith affirms the superior position of Abu Bakr #® since the Prophet 
# declared him as deserving the highest level of his love. 

94. It was narrated that Abu 2485 «3 of ty 
Hurairah said; “The Messenger of = a. og os xg ye 
Allah #@ said: ‘The wealth of none SH Page yl Gam : igen 
of you has benefited meas much i774 fos catia cb ce ey 
as the wealth of Abu Bakr’” Abu 2% Po yee 
Bakr wept and said: ‘O Messenger Jt gat ler 185 al J 305 JE cd 
of Allah, I and my wealth are Hee SNe we SN al ear Ves ead 
only for you, O Messenger of Ae a : * f 

Allah.’” (Da‘if) seg b 

64 Usle ial of AV ere 6S SSI we slull doe pel [ute ooliuf] Feat gael 
» Lar aes YOo\re eggurordly eVUV ie 6egde ll Je dine tal pe als re) oe cyl Amen? 9 

Comments: 

a. Proximity to Allah is achieved through righteous deeds. The more the 
righteous deeds the higher shail one’s position be near Allah and His 
Prophet #8. 

b. The Hadith shows the extent of Abu Bakr’s sincerity and love for the 
Prophet 2%, as a result of which he not only did not exult on his deeds, but 
also declared his wealth as the Prophet's. 

c. An Imam (or leader) must appreciate and acknowledge the services of his 
companions, so that others also develop a love for the servicé of the faith, 
and give due respect to them, and try to follow their footsteps. 

d. It is all right, as part of some expediency, to give appreciation, and praise to 
a person to his face, if we are sure that such an act would not create a sense 
of vanity or pride in his heart, although we should generally avoid praising 
a person in his presence. 

e. The Hadith under discussion deals with just one aspect of Abu Bald’s 
personality, namely his openhandedness in spending for the pleasure of 
Allah, although we find numerous other points of his excellence mentioned 
in the Ahéddith, 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

95. It was narrated that ‘Ali said: 
“The Messenger of Allah #€ said: 
‘Abu Bakr and ‘Umar are the 
leaders of the mature people of 
Paradise, the first and the last, 
except for the Prophets and 
Messengers, but do not tell them 
about that, O ‘Ali, as long as they 
are still alive’ (Da‘if} 

Maw goes Se gh Ol Sb cgde dl an el Cobh... 

143 ALAN tas 

SS 

Lowtgal 32 GUE ot gos oF 
JG Bhe UF Sy gf «Zc 
Mig 5685 «Xi oth 6 bs 5525 
nore SGM Se Salt yal 
le Nade & GAS SS Y choy 525 

Ke SS Gls 

Ze. OC) 
we ay 
No 
™ 
. 
Se 
\ 
‘e 
XN 

nd 

Lignd sola] gy os 

Sudeddt erds cy ggercl! As Cae lee] 4 gsr Eade op YUVA ee Teall wae 
: rae ol + pails clan 2 9 (ghe onl Lamas! ils 5 pderl oy dilie we ine Gb 

Comments: 

a. The expression ‘mature people of Paradise’ means people who died in that 
age, otherwise’ there will be no age difference for the people in Paradise, 
and_all those lodged there shall enjoy the bliss of youth in it. 

b, The Hadith is also explicit on the point that a non-Prophet, however exalted 
in rank he might be, can never equal or surpass a Prophet. 

c. It also affirms the fact that Abu Bakr and “Umar & rank the highest after 
the Prophets, in the sense that they are superior to all other believers, 
whether of Prophet Muhammad’s community or of the community of 

previous Prophets. 

96. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: “The 
people of the highest degrees of 
Paradise will be seen by those 
beneath them as a rising star is 
seen on the horizon. Abu Bakr 
and ‘Umar will be among them, 
and how blessed they are!’” 

(Da‘if) 

ae $0 sore Bes Bo lee i Pa 
AE op gary cates Op Ge Cite 44 
Aa, 

aces is DaS5 Gls YG cal 

wey eo 

jal fp ae as 8,85 SE 8 

US odie Gal 3 wale Palmers 
air 8 3y . AYIA) + oo “3 
Sh fs SW go wl C5551 6b 
MaaG cogs 57085 8S UF Oy cetac 

cgde ly TRAV c cclel wy Gy ed cog gp] are l [ets aoleel] tee sei 
6a gall dee tule cy VUOAT cae dil Ps Gebel) SS ol eke OL ccd! 
og pda ee Gee dale Lado) aad oped tears Cpr iegde dl SEs Vie sedi 

Cutie VY) bag 3 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 

Comments: 

144 ARES ales 

a. The difference between two levels of Paradise is not a minor one. It is, 
therefore, necessary that a believer exert his maximum effort to attain to as 

high a level as possible. 

b. The tradition affirms higher degrees for Abu Bakr and ‘Umar as well as 
contains glad tidings of Paradise for them tboth. 

97. It was narrated that Hudhaifah 
bin Yaman said: “The Messenger of 
Allah # said: ‘I do not know how 
long I will stay among you, so 
follow the example of these two 
after I am gone,’ and he pointed to 
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.” (Hasan) 

ta59 Gis ruins bo ble Was - ay 

Poe! + 

Bee 1 ae se AG et eee, 

op OU ate be oats GS VE 
Fie of Zid Se oF one 
Os! gf a §F tle of By 

“ s 

& 3l ¥ Jp 228 bi 455 JE 38 

=> = 

cpg wl Ste ot Gah (sl oh «sled <gdejsl doy >] Lem] ‘er 
LE cpm Jald aly cop Sy ae dy (él oe TJbsy o& SLAn Sado ye PUY 

Comments: 

VV ee «Cayl ge) Ole cy! Ao ren 5 6 Se ct 

a. The Hadith contains a broad hint about the caliphate of the two venerable 

Companions. 

b. The leader must train and cultivate individuals that would manage the 

affairs after him efficiently and well. 

c. The rulings and judgments of these two venerable Companions are not only 
more weighty and valuable, but also more worthy of being followed than 
the opinions of other Companions and religious leaders. 

98. It was narrated that Ibn Abi 
Mulaikah said: “I heard Ibn 
‘Abbas say: ‘When ‘Umar was 
placed on his bed (ie., his bier), 
the people gathered around him, 
praying and invoking blessings 
upon him,’ or he said, ‘praising 
him and invoking blessings upon 
him before (the bier) was lifted 
up, and I was among them. No 
one alarmed me except a man 

ori Ge yi Yb ye Gs - 4A 
of Se Be SGN Gi he ops 2 
ao3 cdi oe Gl Cae 28 
SG GO GSI one fe ie 
G5 ste Slats 08 56 Sf Sky 
3B ES My ts ph pas OG Ga 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

who crowded against me and 
seized me by the shoulder. I 
turned and saw that it was ‘Ali 
bin Abu Talib. He prayed for 
mercy for ‘Umar, then he said: 
“You have not left behind anyone 
who it is more beloved to me to 
meet Allah with the like of his 
deeds than yourself. By Allah, I 
think that Allah will most 
certainly unite you with your two 
companions, and that is because I 
often heard the Messenger of 
Allah # saying: ‘Abu Bakr, 
‘Umar and I went; Abu Bakr, 
‘Umar and I came in; Abu Baks, 
‘Umar and I went out.’ So I think 
that Allah will most certainly join 
you to your two companions.” 

(Sahih) 

cPU0 re gel a 

145 Abate) sl 

ake IS Cals ge ara er5 
ane uae eee ude Z z 

-o en & LY, Gy, Tee F 
EU35 cia le ae e5 3 al ated 
€ 2 ok cares 3g 

i855 aby 5 oy OI diss hh 
Poet Ey cae ae 
@ “| Gta Ebi ES AES 

tele 

“a e 

eld] gp ae ike Ch eda obs! a el tg ss 

Led cyl Cade ye YPAR cae abl 2 se ples oY wh Abell (plas bplnes 

Comments: 

2 

a. This shows that ‘Ali 4 held a very high opinion of ‘Umar &, because the 
Prophet #¢ kept the two Companions ‘Umar and Abu Bakr & with him in 

all important matters. 

b. ‘Ali 4s considered both the venerable Companions superior to himself. That is 
why he wished that he would also be enabled by Allah to do acts like them. 

c. It is desirable to try to follow those who are better than us in the doing of 
good deeds. It would, however, be wrong to envy the lot of those who are 
ahead of us in worldly riches, or are engaged in the doing of evil deeds. 

99. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 2% came out standing 
between Abu Bakr and ‘Umar 
and said: ‘Thus will I be 
resurrected.’” (Da‘if) 

Gis 2 ate 2b ue he - 44 
io Hal of helen Ue dtl Bo dns 
dil J 525 EF 238 Ae oth oF rely 
lik 08 nts X LI SB 
ve 

Lise joey SS GN BBB CL Ses! cgi dl ol Lae mohel] 1g ss 

Fo inher bAa encanta eenreetraiaiaitosed 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

146 SBS) Quiles 

5 gL pre a dademe oy dew gl ISR 5 64: ew Cyd ope YUVA ee Teal} we Con 

100. It was narrated from ‘Awn 
bin Abi Juhaifah that his father 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #8 
said: ‘Abu Bakr and ‘Umar are the 
leaders of the mature people of 
Paradise, the first and the last, 
except for the Prophets and 
Messengers.’”” (Hasat) 

dl Gi Gls eh Ge - 
SEE pill ee oe gel 
at 3,25 00 00 wal ys de A 
dali Jal dyes Mila 2085 JX gh ay 
jet Ye sIG BN & 

ho 255 

Spee cy Wl Cute oy YAY e sCrjlge) Sle ggil erence [opm orbunl] ex baed 

Comments: 

A Nabi (Prophet) is one who receives the revelation while the Rasul 
(Messenger) is a special category of the Prophets. Some scholars hold that a 
Rasul, as distinct from Nabi, is the one given a separate Book and Law, and 
sent down towards a particular nation or people. As for the Nabi, he keeps 
him company and engages in preaching among the people the message 
delivéred to the Rasul. The revelation (Wahy) is, however, sent down to 

both. 

101. It was narrated that Anas 
said: “It was said: ‘O Messenger 
of Allah, which of the people is 
most beloved to you?’ He said: 
“Aishah.’ It was asked, ‘And 
among men?’ He said: ‘Her 
father.’ ” (Sahih) 

Seek ve 

23 daddy its 23 scot Gs - 104 
bs pant Ge SU eS ss5di gcc 
a rales say 2 st ort Gl tan 3425 

thagh JE GE Se js higten 

clue dh pty Little bad ge Cb cdlall asked! esl [meee] tape 
pail Cede cy ae gil lia oe OF Ce ed tbs ca Be Cp toot oF VAG ee 
+0 goed ed oy 9 pee ute ce Law ne 9 prhnes 6 ga beJ] aa 

Comments: 

' a. The Hadith clearly affirms the superior position not only of Abu Bakr 4 but 

also of ‘Aishah . 

b. Aba Bakr and ‘Aishah & were the best beloved of all to the Messenger of 
Allah #8. Therefore, anyone who loves them would be loved by the Prophet 
#8, and he who harbors hostility or enmity towards them would atiract the 

displeasure of the Prophet #8. 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 

(2/11) The Virtues Of “Umar 
& 

147 ARS wis 

6 ail 05 Gb fad (1/1) 

His full name is ‘Umar bin Khattab bin Nufail bin ‘Abdul “Uzza bin Riyah 
bin ‘Abdullah bin Qurat bin Razah bin ‘Adi bin Ka’b bin Lu’ai bin Ghalib 
Al-Qurashi Al-Adawi; nicknamed Abu Hafs, known by the title Amirul- 
Muxu'minin (Commander of the Faithful) and Faérug. His mother’s name was 
Hantamah bint Hashim. He was born thirty years before the Mission of the 
Messenger of Allah #8. He met his martyrdom in 23 AH. 

102. It was narrated that 
“Abdullah bin Shaqiq said: “I said 
to ‘Aishah: ‘Which of the 
(Prophet's) Companions was most 
beloved to him?’ She said: ‘Abu 
Bakr.’ I said: ‘Then which of them?’ 
She said: “Umar.” I said: ‘Then 
which of them?’ She said: ‘Abu 
“Ubaidah.’” (Sahih) 

il dy Gebel Se gl Gabe Ob cba gba Sl ane] [epee soled] og os 
fs 4 ote Sorel ® epee gum TSBs 64 og ped ede ye POV Fea! we Ae 

Comments : 

Ales ae olgys abe | 

The Hadith affirms the superiority of the three venerable Companions 
mentioned in it, for the Prophet #¢ had extreme love for all the three of 
them. By the same token they were also loved by Allah. 

103. It was narrated that Ibn 
“Abbas said: “When ‘Umar became 
Muslim, Jibril came down and 
said: ‘O Muhammad! The people 
of heaven are rejoicing because of 
‘Umar’s Islam.’ (Da‘if) 

a 1 yest 3 hein) Gs - ver 
For 

oF ong ye oe 4s Le nee 
oi 2 ss 12 bs 5} igs 

plats JAY hks1 od tas G cds 

does 64s ply cpl Cade Gye VOTO /Er de oy! é 2] [tend oohinnl] ees 
tind Cond) MIS she g le ale Glbl, cdne? Ge opel # AL/T Stull 

104, It was narrated that Ubayy 
bin Ka’‘b said: “The Messenger of 

- a sgeersl 
cae Beds ba 4 roy (ahr 
eels) tame Gp cheba} tas - (ef 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Allah #% said: ‘The first person 
with whom Aljiah will shake 
hands will be ‘Umar, (and he is) 
the first person to be greeted with 
the Salam, and the first person 
who will be taken by the hand 
and admitted into Paradise.’” 
(Da‘if) 

148 ASS) wis 

gle 32 <Czgdd she 3 355 CH 
saeete led gil ge OLS i! 
Gol Vatah go doh we al 3,25 
1b 56 Oils ale Gs bs oat cat 

ek, Bt. og 
~ESed{ asses atts 

helen! 6 VEore «Kadh ae pole all cl ae el [Gs tari? 03m} | Fe Saael 
Crane le | yitil usr role oy ayld Sy 65 weigdl ated sy 64 cola 

105. it was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 
said: ‘O Allah! Strengthen Islém 
with ‘Umar bin Khattéb in 
particular.’ (Da’if) 

oF FO FG od 

gees) ate as es ie oe 
G6 26 te 36 cal 38 GH 
ob poh EY Sel tal 3 a 525 

Gk vhs 

als cypgerdll us Glas ets SiSe 6 ee gl ain [rte oslul] aed 
ecm Sudedls gs tll AB go Coy dep tdl bs le soreoy CAT [Ts Slo! te epee a ls 

Comments: 

Galen Jb Oya 

a. The Hadith is Weak through this chain of reporters, but is Sound from other 
sources. The event of ‘Umar’s accepting Islam took place in the 6th year of 
the Messenger of Allah’s Mission, i. e., seven years before the Prophet's 
emigration to Madinah. (See The Sealed Nectar, Safi-ur-Rahman 

Mubarakpuri, p. 112). 

b. The fact that the Prophet #@ prayed to Allah to bring ‘Umar to the fold of 
Islam is a clear proof of his superior standing in the sight of the Prophet 28. 

106. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Salimah said: “I 
heard ‘Ali say: ‘The best of people 
after the Messenger of Allah 2 is 
Abu Bakr, and the best of people 
after Abu Bakr is ‘Umatr.’”’ 
(Sahih) 

+ tee - eo aye (gee 
aS Bas syece Uh ele Bas - 18 

& 

ao “5 

<6 . ar oe Ae. 

Le OF Ba Cr StF OF (tae 55 

eo A ae << We ke os 

*o He WG Case dt ak cp ai 

75k A ag al gs ae 
e - 

ges 

eons Vas, el 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

149 ALS) las 

cn Bee flys of abo! na ol cadet spur dale oy dilie & [epee] eee 
CF PPS Opes gabe we Gb 4S, c OVI oe 6 Steer] eer) Saad eo waar Is 6a 

Comments: 

Lal gel Cysb-YI 

This shows that ‘Ali #5 also believed in the superiority of Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar &. As such, any statement to the contrary imputed to ‘Ali # is pure 

fabrication. 

107..Abu Hurairah said: “We 
were sitting with the Prophet 2 
and he said: ‘While I was sleeping 
I saw myself in Paradise (in a 
dream), and I saw a woman 
performing ablution beside a 
palace. I asked: “Whose palace is 
this?’’ She said: “Umar’s.’”’ I 
remembered his protective 
jealousy, so I turned away and 
left.’”” Abu Hurairah said: “ Umar 
wept and said: ‘May my father 
and mother be sacrificed for you, 
O Messenger of Allah! Would I 
feel any protective jealousy 
against you?’ ” (Sahih) 

ceil tbs ge ee Gale Gh ca besli flab egubdl al 

e 

Comments: 

zt 

: Splat eylhl Gi ine Gos ~ vey 
“fl gb «fae Ba eg ene) 

“ho ee a ee 

sit ¢ if i B51 oie 
hs a » 248 «pb Ht 3 ce 

Tex Seae) 
+4 rn] Leyd> ye 0 ph 9 TMA 

a. The dreams seen by the Prophets are part of the Divine Revelation. As such 

this dream of the Prophet #8 is a conclusive proof that ‘Umar 2» 

people of Paradise. 

» is of the 

b. The leader must respect the sensibilities of his associates; he should 
particularly consider their honor and dignity as his own. 

c. This shows the great sense of reverence and love the Companion, especially 
the senior ones among them, had towards the Prophet #¢. And since love 
for the Prophet is part of faith, intensity in it is indicative of the strength of 

one’s Imén. 

d. There shall absolutely be no impurity or filth in Paradise. Therefore the 
ablution performed by the woman must be for purposes. of added 

cleanliness and purity. 

108. It was narrated that Abu 
Dharr said: “I heard the 

aE ss ile y 

The Book Of The Sunnah 150 eS LS 

Messenger of Allah #@ say: ‘Allah 4 
has placed the truth on the tongue *% 
of “Umar, and he speaks with that 2 
(truth).’” (Sahih) “s 

Lal of LAA! e eX te Gas 

4 ae on oe ps 
cSiybedl op Caae 32 cd gnda be 
Spt MG di 5,25 Stas dE 0S 
Se ee abe - je teh ote ay 8 

So jae gk) dé Gall aes Gt op 

May 

VAN collet gest Gd GL LY, chad cule ye! asl Terme] ted 
cones dor! ue tal yd Jy ‘ell cpSlod amreey 4; Glen! on! Cade oe 

Comments: 
There were several instances in the life of ‘Umar # where he said 
something out of his own judicious opinion or judgment, and Allah’s 
ordainment came in accord with that judgment, Cases in point are: the 
commandment regarding Hijdb (women’s veil); the question of the prisoners 
of the Battle of Badr; taking the “Station of Ibrahim #4” as a place of 
prayer; and the decision concerning the funeral prayer of the chief of 
Hypocrites ‘Abdullah by Ubayy. (See Sunan Al-Kubra, Baihagi, p. 7/88). This 
attribute of forming correct opinions was certainly a special gift or favor 
granted to ‘Umar @ by Allah. 

(3/11) The Virtues Of 22 atl ty GUE Lab CY) 
“Uthman te. 

His full name is ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan bin Abul-As bin Umayyah bin ‘Abd 
Shams bin ’Abd Mandf Qurashi Umawi. He joins the lineage of the Prophet 
#% at the 5th forefather. He is nicknamed Abu ‘Abdullah and Abu ‘Amr. 
The titles given to him are Dhun-Nurain and Amirul-Mu’minin (Commander 
of the Faithful), His mother Arwa bint Kuraiz was the daughter of the 
Prophet's paternal aunt Baida’. He was born six years after the Year of the 
Elephant. Was 36 at the time of the Messenger of Allah’s Call. He was the 
fourth person to accept Islam at the preaching of Abu Bakr &. He met his 
martyrdom in 35 AH at the age of 82. 

109. It was narrated from Abu 5tci2 2s Asse St55s i as — 4-4 
Hurairah that the Messenger of f 

ae 4 go 4 ts Gar lg.) ks 
Allah 2% said: “Every Prophet will 0% ‘PE G2 oles ey! Ge 2 lca 
have a friend in Paradise, andmy 2 ...f 26 os@h of) ek EH ate 
friend there will be ‘Uthman bin Aa hie a a ec A apa 
‘Affan.” (Da‘f) BE dl 525 Ol Se ol LE eee 

os 

lad 2805 Bad 3 355 gf Jp 3d 

i 
i 
f 
i 
i 
it 
} 
i 
i 
\ 
i 

The Book Of The Sunnah 151 SLA les 

-~,4, go Fee? 
QUE Fo Olas 

de Chee ald ly Conf) Eytod! Hy ce LE oy lie & [eae] eed 
URAL 6 She pH 

Comments: 

It is a Weak Hadith. Nonetheless ‘Uthman’s being of the people of Paradise 

is above all doubt since it is proved from a number of other authentic 

Ahédith. 
110. It was narrated from Abu Oi 35 Aiks .dlgy gl Gs - ne 
Hurairah that the Prophet #2 met 
‘Uthman at the door of the 
mosque and said: “O ‘Uthman! = (4), Lf te cat UP oo et ate 
Jibril has told me that Allah ~ ? ee ie aie nro ‘s 
married you to Umm Kulthum for 88 &) ol ee ol iF ce! ea 
a dowry like that of Ruqayyah, yy . 31S oh Ol Be Suk PI 
provided that youtreatherasyou 5 4. a me oat 
treated Ruqayyah.” (Da‘if) He55 Bat ol gi chyee Ms Iola 

je tb Bs Sis fa dt 
Gre 
GSH Cedocdt bs! [dpe] tae eh 

- eo v? € 4a Preset 
je dle oe Olete cal as 1 Eg lesss| 

Comments: 

a. It is also a Weak Hadith. It is, however, historically proved that the Prophet 
#@ gave his daughter Ruqayyah % in marriage to him. After her death he 
gave his second daughter to him in matriage. 

b. The Messenger of Alléh’s giving away his second daughter to ‘Uthman 
is a clear proof that he #¢ was extremely pleased with ‘Uthman, and 
appreciated his exemplary conduct. 

111. It was narrated that Ka’bbin yz Gis att 23 ts Gs - 1 

‘Ujrah said: “The Messenger of as 

Allah #8 mentioned a Fitnah jf cole ot ple bé Gaus) 3 al 
(tribulation) that had drawn nigh, «4 Sob of OE Be heme of ee 

Then a man passed by with his | eee Pigs 4 
head covered. The Messenger of  (Je5 403 «\gijab Sha BE al J yt5 553 
Allah #& said: ‘On that day, this 
man will be following right . 
guidance.’ I leapt up and took = ¢gna: 2586 CS 5b ght ae Bry 
hold of ‘Uthman’s arms, then To aes 1 4 ge ste, 62 tyes 
turned to face the Messenger of 9 *“# BE AN diy Cleol ob colete 
Allah #€ and said: ‘This man?’ He dar 5G Sida 
said: ‘This man.’” (Sahih) 

ry 

The Book Of The Sunnah 152 bombs NS 

{Erece Gly} pes any ca ple ade oye VEY /Esdaol am ol Leet] ‘eps 
AS oe emt pd cree Cyt tearee pile gel JE cabetin sll Wied 2g pe gd UB y c VEY 
Cian +O ae g VV dle ccgde cl aie Asli pd aly (i re 
a. The Prophet #§ foretold many things about the future at Allah’s bidding, 
and they came to pass exactly as he had foretold. This is a proof of the 
veracity of his prophethood. There are many things that are yet to happen, 
and it is our belief that they shall all happen at their appropriate time 
exactly in the manner foretold by the Prophet #. We must, however, make 
it a point that, before we attribute to the Prophet #, any news about the | 
future events, we must make sure that the related report has been i 
transmitted through reliable chain of narrators. 
b. Forewarning about trials and turbulences destined to take place in the 
future, is meant to urge upon the believers to stick to the right path and 
avoid going astray. When what was foretold does happen, it serves to | 
increases the faith in the heart of the believers. i 
c. The Hadith also proves that the accusations labeled against ‘Uthman by 
the mischief-mongers were totally unfounded and baseless, and his conduct 
was absolutely above reproach. 
d. The Arabic word Fitnah (literally trial or affliction) here refers to the : 
systematic campaign of false accusations carried out by the miscreants i 
against ‘Uthman #, which culminated in his wrongful assassination. 

112. It was narrated that ‘Aishah gh SERS ges fe de Wie = vt 
said: The Messenger of Allah # = | He ae oe 

on a Sh ee De ORS ee Se ee 
said: “O “‘Uthman, if Allah places 3) o* dla oy cA We ca glee 
you in authority over this matter tts os olesdsl of <agheil 49 on | 

(as the caliph) some day and the cided «fe nde tee = paeeg® sea) 
hypocrites want to rid you of the =: RB il S525 JET EIG cabsle Bs | 
garment with which Allah has 955% cles Wy GA Br ON fy AUS j 
clothed you (i.e. the position of aes oe a ; ae ies sae ; [ 
caliph), do not take it off” He hess oi! and as Ol Sgt 

said that three times. (One of the wre £00 Gl Ak petts ae oa i 
narrators) Nu‘man said: “I said to “le GO US pay aled  cabl i 

“ og io ae + ode ? od eres | 
‘Aishah: ‘What kept you from i Gh Gi CIB -Sun - de i 
telling the people that?’ She said: 3 8 etc et Ce “2 
‘I was made to forget it.’ ” (Sahih) Aeepil TCU Flekgy Gall ee 

el ee oh Sb lee Gee ete Bs) gle tl ol [Eel gees 

Polis cr Aapy Cate Ye Cae Cire) ole Cy PV Ore cal... dlete ME 

cn! trees ce Oleh ge nS lg: dle Ge tee egy @ Lolo oy dle? a! 
VAT & eGo jhge) Lm 

i 
i 
{ 
i 
i 
H 
i 
i 
} 
{ 
i 
i 
t 
j 
. 
¢ 
i 
i 

The Book Of The Sunnah 153 decranial | oot Lia 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith foretells an impending trial or affliction for ‘Uthman that 
happened exactly as was foretold by the Messenger of Allah #8. This is a 
proof of the veracity of his prophethood. 

b. Italso shows that ‘Uthman 4 was the rightful ruler (caliph) of the believers. 

c. When the ruler of a country is running his administration, it is unlawful to 
unleash a campaign of distrust and strife, on flimsy grounds, against him 
unless he is really found guilty of promoting infidelity and unbelief and 
weakening the foundations of Islam. 

d. The tradition is explicit on the point that the adversaries of ‘Uthman & 
were all hypocrites. 

113. It was narrated that ‘Aishah , pe cp al we SS CEA CN ome 

said: “When he was ill, the Mile We soamde Geel, eee we Dees 

Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘I PES CRS. Tes TO SAN 8 

would like to have some of my Aes ob BF ME gl RS ela 

Companions with me.’ We said: re 

‘O Messenger of Allah! Shall we  #! Jx5 J 

call Abu Bakr for you?” But he ~-,.- 

remained silent. We said: ‘Shall ae 5 

we call ‘Umar for you?” But he U6. Vi tat Jy25 G 0B alee 

remained silent. We said: ‘Shall eek OG 202 QE th cet et 

we call ‘Uthman for you?’ He i ae ree i a 

said: ‘Yes.’ So ‘Uthman came and: fue GN 25 

he spoke to him in private. The p 

Prophet #§ started to speak to & aes 

him and ‘Uthman’s expression. cas Se spe GUS 4255 Ak 2 

changed.’’ Qais said: “Abu see 

Sahlah, the freed slave of Olase 

‘Uthmdén, narrated to me that on Fart pe 

the Day of the House“! ‘Uthman mie a oe 

bin ‘Affan said: ‘The Messenger of agi] ple GB age EB! Age 

Allah #@ told me what would 

come to pass and now I am 

coming to that day.’”” 
In his narration of the Hadith, 

‘Ali (one of the narrators) said 

(that he said): “And I am going to 

bear it with patience.” 

Qais said: “They used to think 

ale Hie O15 rus 3 Ble dS 
pl AS S33 (SS 135 OG 

"1 The Day of the House: This refers to the day when the rebels besieged ‘Uthméan in his 
house and murdered him. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 154 ALS) ois 

that that was the Day of the 
House.” (Sahih) 

Wate TVVNg osha tly ce es oF VV (Video! on oh [epee] tee sd 
SHE ae le ded gl gy! te GLSL Cpe eelau! # Mud mre Geet idlly 

Comments: “4? 

a, This shows that ‘Uthman 4 was a close confidant of the Messenger of 

b, The promise here refers to the instruction of the Messenger of Allah 2 to 
‘Uthman 4%, not to give in to the unjust demands of the miscreants, but 
remain patient and resolute. 

c. So absolute was ‘Uthman’s devotedness and obedience to. the Prophet #¢ 
that he preferred to lay down his life over bowing down before falsehood. 
At the same time, he revered the Prophet #¢ so much that he abstained 
from taking military action against the rebels in order to avoid bloodshed in 
the city of the Prophet 2. 

d. Foretelling the future events so exactly, is a proof of the prophethood of the 
Messenger of Allah #é. 

(4/11) The Virtues of “AK SY gl of Ae fab (11/8) 
Bin Abu Talib 4S dil 5 

His full name is ‘Ali bin Abu T4lib bin ‘Abd Al-Muttalib bin Hashim bin 
‘Abd Manaf bin Qusai bin Kil4b bin Murrah bin Ka’b bin Lu’ai Qutashi 
Hashimi. Mother's name was Fatimah bint Asad bin Hashim. He is 
nicknamed Abul-Hasan and Abu Sibtain. He was born ten years before the 
Prophet's Call, and received his breeding under the careful patronage of the 
Prophet #§ and his venerable wife Khadijah %. He was the first among 
children to accept Islam. The eh arti pledged their allegiance to him 
after the martyrdom of ‘Uthman . He was martyred in 40 AH at the age 
of 60. 

114. It was narrated that ‘Ali < ass 5 Es cake sy oe édé Gis. - 
said: “The Unlettered Prophet 2 oe ot ote gy 
informed me (saying) that none SFY ot 
but a believer would love me and oS Ls jf ccual rs Ese bs «heb Yi 
none but a hypocrite would hate ~~ if ° 

Fone 

ez Ege i, 

me.” (Sahih) rl a 4g 236 Ele CF 6 hee 
V3 he Yee YT ge 

cr VAre ell wee gles a of cle bil Ob col! « plana rear Fez Saal 
oy glee gly OSs Cate 

i 
i 
i 
} 

The Book Of The Sunnah 155 Aint) ules 

Comments: 

a. Unmatched are the feats performed in the service and defence of Islam by 
the senior Companions. That is why anyone who loves Islam loves and 
respects them, while their very presence was a thorn in the side of the 
enemies of Islam. ‘Ali # is also one among such great Companions. 
Therefore, love for him. is the sign of love for Islam, and enmity towards 
him is the sign of hypocrisy. 

b. Love for ‘Ali 4% does not mean going beyond all limits, which a trait is 
found in some of the innovators. Some of these innovators, for example, 
regard him sinless like Prophets. Others hold him superior to Abu Bakr and 
“Umar &. Still others invest him with Divine attributes, while others go still 
farther and deify him. 

c. Differences among the Companions were their acts of judgment although, 
thanks to the machinations of the hypocrites, these differences of opinion 
sometimes even resulted in wars. It would, therefore, be unfair on the basis 
of these disputes to brand anyone of them a hypocrite. To believe like this is 
the hallmark of innovators. Ahlus-Sunnah (People of the Prophet's Path) 
consider it advisable to hold their tongues and avoid blaming any of them 
in such matters. 

115. Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas ics: Gis zy 2 2g deme WAS - V0 

narrated from his father that the ote tg ke BE ttt 

Prophet 2% said to ‘Ali: “Would it % oF ts ee 

not please you to be fo me aS ogy sa Bp pooled Ebee 2d eal 

Harun was to Musa?” (Sahih) os - tos of 

6 é caal 36 Shs 6 ges st! 
eo a sf 3 Yh : Edad Att el 
8 gg be G5 Dy 
ib gt oe de Cie Oh BE ll bee) fla cdl ol tess 
cSte cal op de fla ge Gl chbea!l fled coling efVetic cal}... yall 

Comments: 

a. The Messenger of Allah #§ spoke these words to ‘Ali 4 when the Prophet 
#8 set out for the battle of Tabuk, and charged ‘Ali 2 to look after the 
affairs of Al-Madinah in his absence. ‘Ali 4 grieved at being left out from 
Jihad (fighting in the cause of Allah) and said: “Do you want to leave me 
with children and women?” It was in response to this that the Messenger of 
Allah 2 spoke the words quoted above. (Bukhari: 4416). 

b. Some people have tried to deduce from this Hadith proof of ’Ali’s being the 
immediate successor of the Prophet #%. Harun s&, they argue, was the 
successor of the Prophet Musa #8, therefore ‘Ali 4 must also be considered. 

the rightful successor of the Prophet Muhammad #% as caliph of the 
community. It is because of this assumption that they question the validity 

The Book Of The Sunnah 156 

Ae) Las 

of the appointment of the first three caliphs and hold them guilty of 
usurping the right of “Ali . This is a clear case of misconception as the 
commission of Harun s& as his brother's deputy was just a temporary 
arrangement meant to last only as long as Musa sx lived. Similarly, ’Ali’s 
commission to work as the Prophet's deputy during the Prophet's military 
campaign of Tabuk was for a certain period of time during the lifetime of 
the Prophet #. Moreover, Harun #8 never succeeded Musa 8, as he had 
already died during the lifetime of his brother. It was in fact Yusha’ bin 
Nun #4 who assumed the mantle of Musa #4 after his death. Thus, even if 
the Hadith is interpreted as containing a promise of ’Ali’s. caliphate, there is 
no basis to believe that he would be the first caliph after the Prophet's 

demise, without anyone intervening in between. 

116. It was narrated that Bard’ 
bin ‘Azib said: “We returned with 
the Messenger of Allah #2 from 
his Hajj that he had performed, 
and we stopped at some point on 
the road. He commanded that 
prayer should be performed in 
congregation, then he took the 
hand of ‘Ali and said: ‘Am I not 
dearer to the believers than their 
own selves?’ They said: ‘Yes 
indeed.’ He said: ‘Am I not dearer 
to every believer than his own 
self?’ They said: “Yes indeed.’ He 
said: ‘This man is the friend of 
those whose master I am.’ O 
Allah, take as friends those who 
take him as a friend, and take as 
enemies those who take him as an 
enemy.’” (Da‘if) 

al ax veo ue Gis - v4 
te ie dhe os dh th 
eld o - bé olede 3 ao i 
Jxh5 ao EBT 236 eile seein 
wait Ge Sl BE 3a 
oy EG ens Ben 6 ha 
be Gael il Cath 25 ge 
ch Cathe 236 ee Hh (Siegen 
3h Sy wall ye OF gs aby iyhe 
GSE J ole Bgl! CVG 

Spt ydl ddan s ca alee Cate cyo YAN [£2 dool ae] [ote oa lanel] FS ated 
Ce CoV ye Pee BV go eS tye) Cadosll els Cog) tad Dede oy ole 

Comments: 

roby lao! bi arly 6 sil ge 

a. The Prophet #8 spoke these words in praise of ‘Ali 4s when he reached the 

place known as Ghadir Khum (Lake of Khum) on his way back from the 
Farewell Pilgrimage. An expression of proximity and close relationship with 
“Ali 28 was considered necessary by the Prophet 2 because some people 
had come up with complaints against him who had just returned from 
Yemen. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 157 doe ws 

b. Some people have used even these remarks to establish ‘Ali's title to being 
Prophet's immediate successor as caliph, although proximity of relationship 
or friendship has nothing to do with title for caliphate. 

c. The tradition also contains condemnation of the Kharijites who denied the 
merits of ‘Ali 4, as well as of those extremists among Shi’ahs who had 
deified “Ali #5, as a consequence of which he had punished them with 
death. (Bukhdri: 6922) As regards our attitude towards ‘Ali , the Hadith 
simply means that we must have a feeling of love and not of hatred or ill- 
will towards him. 

117. It was narrated that ‘Abdur- = Gis 73 oi 4) 

Rahman bin Abu Laila said: “Abu oe a ee pete pets 

Laila used to travel with ‘Ali, and teed | Ge 2 id al gf Ge aS 

he used to wear summer clothes gf §ig JG AS gl ot etl ae iB 
in winter and winter clothes in © we 
summer. We said: ‘Why don’t you CE Gb oS Glee Geet 
ask him (about that)?’ He said: 5 eS cE at at 
“The Messenger of Allah #¢ sent ie : as we a : : oF 

for me and my eyes were sore, on 525 Of 1d ts 5) Cs CN 
the Day of Khatbar. T said: “O22. set, Sae8 he 94), od ee gee 
Messenger of Allah, my eyes are {* ‘on : cma aes = 
sore.’ ie a = ee a se copa L3H os} Mil S925 UY reds joe 
eyes, then he said: ‘O Allah, take wg. og 4%, cet we 
heat and cold away from him’ 1 “* coal pally JE ge 8 be 
never felt hot or cold again after {537 Ys 45 2355 U3 8 SAI Sool 
that day. He [the Prophet #§)  , .+,. yea bed Sask’ aC 
said: ‘I will send a man who loves i! Gan MES GY 1505 days ae 
Allah and His Messenger, and a pee a CAA | Ey a Pear 
whom Allah and His Messenger fh oF ar ; ca ae 
love, and he is not one who flees lhe G o2de J] CaS 3.0 d GSES 
from the battlefield.’ The people 
craned their necks to see, and he ; 4 “" 
sent for ‘Ali and gave it (the 

banner) to him.” (Da‘tf) 

AOE re Syne gdl JE cysgerdt ates odd cal gy doves # Ldn oti] Fes Seael 
barney tools 6S do slo! ne Jalyd aed 

Comments: 

a. The battle of Khaibar took place in 7 AH. When Allah granted the Muslims 
victory over the Jews, the Messenger of Allah #@ concluded with them a 
share-cropping agreement for 50% produce of the dates. It may be 
mentioned here that Khaibar is on the road to Syria from Al-Madinah, and 
is known as the land of forts and date palms. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 158 AS Qed 

b. Successors of the Companions revered the Companions so much, that they 
dared not ask them questions not directly related to education or 
knowledge. That is why, when they wished to know why ‘Ali 4 did not 
put on clothes appropriate for various seasons, they asked the question 
through one of their associates who was relatively free with him. 

c. ‘Ali’s being specially summoned to lead the army of the believers is a proof 
of his special status. 

d. The eyes of ‘Ali # getting cured from the spittle of the Prophet #@ is a 
miraculous phenomenon that is another proof of his prophethood. 

e. The Hadith also makes it clear that the word Maula used in the previous 
Hadith means ‘friend’. 

118. It was narrated that Ibn  :2bulgl (4 23 SA Ge - tN 

‘Umar said: “The Messenger of ,., Geo A Ree see ines Saphe eeS 

Allah 2@ said: ‘Hasan and Husain A an ee ae eee 

will be the leaders of the youth of = JE SU 52 oh oe eal be rans) al 

Paradise, and their father is better Syl peuple: ari? pee aie ee a 

than them.” (Hasan) me Gitodlg Goel BE bl Jt) 

Mage 3S Agily Zod gat Oc 

Sy 6 erg gp eee te ge VT Shi ae el Teed te sd 

ME Cyan eye opal ligls free ead bi 60 ph 9 sisi cyl dS 9 5) 5 xe chee: onl 

hill aidlys carrey Lal Sbdl 

Comments: 

The Hadith contains the good news of Hasan and Husain being among the 
people of Paradise. 

119. It was narrated that Hubshi 42-43 (623 Uf 22 & i Gin — 

153 (Ae col Gb SG gi! Be — 144 
bin Junddah said: “I heard the ae be fee Se nla waked! oe 

Messenger of Allah #8 say: “Au is NSB ese Ce feletly cae ol 

part of me and I am part of him, 

and no one will represent me o ‘ : ete 
except ‘Ali.’”” (Hasan) ME bl 505 Cees dB KE ofl 

< are 4 aie 
GEE LE Glas gl be thd Bie 

Be SEV ee Oy Se ther 2,6 
ie Yl 

oe PVG ede ge Llp ee de Ob ikl gb SI asl [yee] te se 
Te Glen gle cones Goll aul Cht # (eee Gad geod idUy ce felt 
»glaodl 

Comments: 
a. ‘Ali is a part of me’, is an expression denoting his extreme proximity and 
closeness to the Prophet 2&. 

b. ‘Representing someone’ means delivering and proclaiming the message on 

The Book.Of The Sunnah 

his behalf. 

159 A os 

c. It could also mean fulfilling financial obligations, i.e, he had been 
authorized to carry out sale-purchase transactions on behalf of the Prophet 

&¢ during his lifetime 
120. It was narrated that ‘Abbad 
bin ‘Abdullah said: “ Ali said: ‘I 
am the slave of Allah and the 
brother of His Messenger #8. I am 
the greatest teller of the truth 
(Siddiq Akbar), and no one will'say 
this after me but a liar. I prayed 
seven years before the people.” 

(Da’if) 

Sal adi Ut 

gat Gye VY CSM Silence 

ise Gay yt J cde elie Yi 

Cxdod|s ee) Auaal EVV GAVY/P 2 Sle! ay ol es ae) arkiw{] : cx ata 

Comments: 

(og ti) and dille oy ale # seal silat 3 

It is a Weak. Hadith. Nasiruddin Albani has declared it a fabrication. A 
scrutiny of the text will also reveal that it is highly improbable that ‘Ali # 
would claim that he alone prayed with the Messenger of Allah #¢ for seven 
years which was quite a long period, since after the declaration of the 
Prophet’s mission. We know that, even during the first three years, a 
number of people in Makkah had accepted Islam through secret preaching. 
Moreover, how could a virtuous and modest servant of Allah like “Ali # 

utter words of boasting like “I am Siddigq Akbar,” 

(the greatest of the 

truthful)? It is, thus, undoubtedly an extremely weak and false Hadith. 

121. It was narrated that Sa’d bin 
Abu Waqaas said: “Mu‘awiyah 
came on one of his pilgrimages 
and Sa‘d entered upon him. They 
mentioned ‘Ali, and Mu’‘awiyah 
criticized him. Sa‘d became angry 
and said: “Are you saying this of a 
man of whom I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #@ say: “If I 
am a person's close friend, ‘Ali is 
also his close friend.” And I heard 
him say: “You are to me like Harun 
was to Musa, except that there will 
be no Prophet after me.” And I 
heard him say: “I will give the 
banner today to a man who loves 

an (he rm aes _ Sade 
ot GF he yt Bas 
gi Be Be gl Le phy choke 

Se pe B 
1G glas 

* PA ee oe 
Ge 1,755 ale JF sls 
is oc “Wee e ae Lee nate 
ida Jot :dB5 as Ca a dG 

cyan spe Hoa dso ous aoe 
Sy yd Wy és 
VY ost . Sasi Day fo Efe 
GI) GREY 1S Chea gat gs 

he dis Lost SES acl 

4 8 Be Le 
1 98 Aero § 

The Book Of The Sunnah 160 ARES) las 

Allah and His Messenger.” (Sahih) 

came Gil SB LS ce atl oy dew oe wom gb ble ot Leone] cx Saad 

Co ents: Oph 9 plane Sie al 5h Sudo 

a. It was a difference based purely on judgment. It is, therefore, not allowed 
that in such matters we take to reviling a Companion of the Prophet 2. 

b. If a person is being criticised in absentia, those present on the occasion are 
required to speak for him and mention his good points. 

c. The Hadith refers to a number of the virtues of ‘Ali &, some of which have 
already been mentioned in the previously quoted Ahddith. 

(5/11) The Virtues Of Zubair 4S bl cobs 5 bea (11/0) 

His full name is Zubair bin ‘Awwaém bin Khuwailid bin Asad bin ‘Abdul- 
"Uzza bin Qusai. bin Kiléb bin Murrah bin Ka’b bin Lu’ai Qurashi Asadi. 
His mother Safiyyah, was the paternal aunt of the Prophet #%, his 
grandfather was the father of Khadijah the Mother of the Believers. He 
accepted Islam at the age of 15, and met his martyrdom on 10th Jumadah 
Al-“Ula, 36 AH during prayer, at the hands of Ibn Jarmuz, approximately at 
the age of 64. Zubair <& had a charming and handsome figure. He was tall, 
fairly built, and of brown complexion. He had a sparse beard, and long 
hair, and enjoyed perfect health at the time of martyrdom. 

122. It was narrated that Jaébir 455 Gis ese 3 Be tas - VY 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # > ieee, Autidngs ah Shit. oiee 
said on the Day of Quraizah:; 6% «hell gf ase G6 voles Bas 
“Who will bring us news of the — . fe-3 ce. we ay 4 e- E E 
people?’ Zubair said: ‘I will’ The es a aE 3 os 25 se Be 
Prophet #§ said: ‘Who will bring «EI: 5a 3! Sls (Spall poe Gh Go 
us news of the people?” Zubair 1-4) 42 pe ost) oS ae oy. UE 
said: ‘I will,’ es Uaioe The we aoe sad cae we if he ; 
Prophet # said: ‘Every Prophet {5 JS» :8§ 25) die UN Ul 
has a Hawari (sincere supporter or” ea bees fe bas 
disciple), and my Hawéri is CAN GIF O19 slr 
Zubair.’”” (Sahih) 

SLAB colney CEVIT CVAETI GC chalet Lead GY calgell eyed ae ol es 
4 Gag Olden Syke ge VEVOTe clagic dil 8) sy jlly Soke flab 2 ol cd bell 
Comments: 

a. The military campaign against Banu Quraizah started just after the Battle of 
the Trenches. Thus, for all intent and purpose, the two battles were one battle. 
The term “The Day of Quraizah” here refers to the event of a particular day. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 161 Aled i iy 

123. It was narrated that Zubair 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% P : eo is ; 
named his parents together forme «sul 3 «83)8 Gf elie Gas 1G 
{1 - ao ’ Z © 
on the Day of Uhud. (Sahih) 8 246 she 3 pita. 33 
atl og ach am an 3,25 3 ae 
A ty ely op eH ike Ob RE I! mies Sls ug bs are igs 
slge dis} ets pels Joule (plas of wl cisbevall files volun s CPV le cae 
4% piss Cade oye Tevtie 

Gus - \ye 

Comments: 

a. It was also during the Battle of Uhud that the Prophet #§ had named the 
his parents together for Sa’d bin Abu Waqgas #%, and. said: “Shoot the 
arrows, may my father and mother be sacrificed for you!” (Bukhdri: 6184) 

b..Both Zubair and Sa’d bin Abu Waqgas 4 are of those ten persons who 
were given the good news of Paradise in their life. 

124. It was narrated from Hisham 2 2) 2285 (ghee 3) plas Gis - Wt 
bin ‘Urwah that his father said: .- z.-s +. Aa - 48 
*Aishah said to me: ‘O Urwah, OF Se G0 Be SVE wy et 
your two fathers were of thosewho —__ 3 E36 dG al fF 68552 op pls 
answered (the Call of) Allah and... - PS Ai eee: a 
the Messenger (Muhammad) after BREEST GAIN Ge Sigil OW 'e558 & 
being wounded,””! (they were) Jf] east aplal Ga few SANG 4 
Abu Bakr and Zubair.” (Sahih) Pee 

Fo SS BI LIV tole 

do ps ule (Sled! ores 64 Claw Oe stood! ax ol Leeeene ool] Ps 
sgl afl 55 © Syme | 

Comments: 

a. The tradition refers to the events that had taken place after the Battle of 
Uhud. The Prophet # pursued the enemy until Hamrd’ Al-Asad, at a 
distance of eight miles. When the idolaters got the news of the pursuit, they 
were frightened and went back without invading Al-Madinah. (See The 
Sealed Nectar, p. 291). 

b. ‘Urwah bin Zubair is a nephew of ‘Aishah %. His mother is Asma’ bint 
Abu Bakr ws. Abu Bakr #» is, thus, his maternal grand father and Zubair 
bin “Awwém is his father. 

a] Meaning, he said: “May my father and mother be sactificed for you.” 
Pl Al “Imran 3:172. 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 162 A ly 

(6/11) The Virtues Of Talhah Saag Seals 
Bin ‘Ubaidullah 2 tol fab (VN /%) 
£5 ail 53) 
His full name is Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Amr bin Ka’b bin 
Sa’d bin Taim bin Murrah bin Ka’b bin Lu’ai bin Ghalib Quraishi Taimi, 
nicknamed Abu Muhammad. He enjoyed many distinctions in Islam: He 
was one of the Ten given the good tiding of Paradise. He was the eighth 
entrant into Islam and fifth among those who accepted Islam by the 
preaching of Abu Bakr #. He was a member of the Consultative 
Committee of ‘Umar #, and was killed on Thursday, 10th of Jamadaul- 
Ukhra, 36 AH, in the Battle of the Camel, by an arrow shot at the behest of 
Marwé4n bin Hakam. 

il sas 

\ 
: 

G 
rho 

Fo fore BrP Fo ger she 

125. It was narrated from Jébir Ge ata thew Cy os Gus - \Yo 
that Talhah passed by the Prophet ie ot ce ttn YE Chat at ae 
: : 1 dil we 

#@ and he said: “A martyr ad ae ee ae 
walking upon the face of the {4 <3}4) si! Gas 2 Go5NV1 Chas 
earth.” (Da‘if) 

A PIW AE de ghd sgt 

LoS Sy to cobradl we My AP ISB y ca hyo Gy Chall Cute ge TYTN cae al ney 

cCue Ve yee tab 4) te we aad dalyd Cutels Cougs) obs aor! SU 

Comments: op 4) Jals gl! Geos, 

a. The authenticity of this Hadith is under dispute. Shaikh Albani considers it 
sound. (Silsilatul-Ahadithus-Sahihah: 126) The Hadith foretells that he will die 
a martyr which is a matter of great honour. 

b. He met his martyrdom during the Battle of the Camel, which means that 
the believers killed in battles between the Companions are not sifiners 
before Allah, or else the news of his death would not have been given as a 
glad tiding. 

aero thy, 30 Fe oF eee 

126. It was narrated that Ue 2 AS dp deel Gas - YT 

Mu’‘awiyah bin Abu Sufyan said: 6g jn2 40 7052 Soe hE ts tte 

“The Prophet #@ looked at Talhah =~ 7 ; = Jet ce as et 

and said: ‘This is one of those jf «db op 2) fp Gl) os 

who fulfilled their covenant,’ ”“"! Byte ie ae is es, ONE nee 

(Hasan) oGe cal of Ayls Le Aol of uy 

Kia 3 Sib CS te 23 GS dG 

[4 Referring to Al-Ahzab 33:23. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 163 id) tit 

“Ye TT cole Bg cpg GL col all end & Soke I ae 2) [opm] ‘eps 
td cere oy Gleewl| & pal iets ‘Slot doeeey oligo) ISlbg ca Glew) Code 
Mage Speer SB ET al cgde shi ee seem yb ale «(Oy ti) 
Comments: 
The Hadith accords great honor to Talhah % by describing his death as a 
covenant fulfilled by him. In other words, the deeds done by him were 
considered so meritorious that he was ranked as a martyr even before his 
death. 

127. It was narrated that Musa 49 Gis :o€ 
bin Talhah said: We were with eo 
Mu‘awiyah and he said: “I heard 9 oO" 

the Messenger of Allah @ say: ig3] -dlé .%, ui ve & -5u 
‘Talhah is one of those who PA Rae AS ar ee ee ee 
fulfilled their covenant.’ ”’ (Hasan) Gee Selby J ya BB tl J 55 Cael 

GL Soto) Jal Lye] ge 

128. It was narrated that Qais «2.53 (Sas yin’ 3 Ale is - vA 
said: “I saw the paralyzed hand _, te 4G Bogen 2 Kal tg 
of Talhah, with which he had “S20 (08 td GF heleal OF 
defended the Messenger of Allah ae we ds J 5 Ye my) rae 
#€ on the Day of Uhud.” (Sahih) 

dily WAS OF Ke ObiLL Cor Sf Ob cgjledl gsi oe! [epee] tse 
“4% ese gto op eee cbaged s 
Comments: 127 & 128 
“Defending by the hand’ here refers to the fact that he put his hand in front 
to block the arrows being directed by the enemy at the Prophet #, so as to 
keep him from harm. This had the effect of permanently paralyzing his 
hand. Probably there was no shield at hand at that moment. 

(7/11) The Virtues Of Sa’d vhs al gf ae bee 11 /¥) 
Bin Abu Waqqas # ee il a 

His full name is Sa’d bin Malik bin Uhaib bin ‘Abd Manéaf bin Zahra bin 
Kilab Qurashi Zahri, nicknamed Abu Ishdq, born approximately thirty 
years before emigration. He was one of the Ten given the good tidings of 
Paradise, a famous Arab horseman, an important member of the 
Consultative Committee of "Umar 4%, and was the first archer in Jihad (war 

The Book Of The Sunnah 164 dred ont iS 

waged for the cause of Allah). He was the maternal uncle of the Prophet #¢, 
and the third entrant into Islam. He founded the city of Kufah at the behest 
of "Umar #. He died in a valley of Al-Madinah known as Aqiq at the age 

of fifty. 
yee a SGLS 

129. It was narrated that ‘Ali Gas: - gly o Aint Gis - 14 
said: “I never saw the Messenger eee Sie 2a 
of Allah # mention his parents ot be et pe ol 
together"! for anyone except Sa‘d we if 3th on a) we Be hats 
bin Malik. He said to him on the Ace te a E Z 
Day of Uhud: ‘Shoot, Sa’d! May GE RG a 045 S85 GJ 
my father and mother be 4 ey au 36 mOlv o Jeo fb 4 ae 
sacrificed for you!” (Sahih) 

ee Ga as 

gly Pike Mag Nae pol cae 

ale oe ote Oral CL celly olen cgobdl eel tay ss 
yells ol Cy dew fred es wh cabenell poles tglues oVWAEC EH 04 CENOACYS 8 Ore 
ody daw eye ye VEVVI 2 cae dil (2) 
Comments: 
Zubair 4 also enjoys this distinction, as reported under Hadith 123. It may 
be that either ‘Ali 2 had no knowledge of it, or else he did not hear those 

words in relation to Zubair # directly from the Prophet #¢, while the 
comments about Sa’d 4% were made in his presence. 

130. It was narrated that Sa’eed = & 31) UL 
bin Musayyab said: “I heard Sa‘d : 
bin Abu Waqqas say: ‘The 2 
eaihaed of Allah #@ mentioned be detanyy « dhetetd a Peiea he 
parents together for me on the : os el wie . 
Day of Uhud. He said: ‘Shoot, Cr eS GE he a se OF tle 
Sa‘d! May my father and mother & fs ee “4 NE eth 
be sacrified for you!” (Sahih) eee “d a cae 
es: 5 ae ais) bas 3 aor a aj sf 

i Aaa is pe : Su a ees 
thy 

ced] 2. Waa OT Kee Ole le Crom Hk cs jleall ego ae ol ees 
cas ds\ Pa) pels al on ers (bah PP wh ¢ Alona} plas Celene 9 cE OVin 

[l Meaning, to say ‘May my father and mother be secrificed for you.’ 

The Book Of The Sunnah 165 diated |) Hs 

131. It was narrated that Qais 4s i gt? 2s ale Gis - vy 
said: “I heard Sa‘d bin Abu . lOc iA 
Waqqas say: ‘I am the first of the (6 +555 «Je JES «Gud Ib ail 
Arabs to shoot an arrow in the Eee ee ee ee 
cause of Allah.” (Sahih) Cn See ee eter ‘deele| 

6S AD Gelby cal gp dee Gabe Ob dbus! pla gobi ae ees 
bebo) Lode ys YAW 6 ISU Sey co geld coe Ll Ob cata ji 6 ley eYVYALE 
% 
Comments: 130 & 131 , 
It is certainly a matter of honor for anyone to be the first in any work 
related to Jihad, and there is no harm describing such a feat as part of 
Allah’s bounty, and the individual’s thanks and gratitude to Him for the 
same. 
132. It was narrated that Hashim = GAS styl 33 Gains Bhs - wy 
bin Hashim said: “1 heard Sa’eed aie ge cule te weet. - 
bin Musayyab say: ‘Sa‘d bin:Abu {7 3? [* ue Bilas Stns 

Wagqais said: No one else became JU: Ect Se dee Caan ta 
Muslim on the same day asIdid; = .2 | sl ¢o7,¢.. Pe ae oe 
for seven days I was one-third of oe Fee ees oak spi 
Islam’ ” (Sahih) 3 cpl Sia CK. IDG cag Cadel oil 

i ie e+ SEY! EE Zr 
ee . e : 
we al gp tee Cake Gl cabeall pla (Qybsl ol [epee] 2 ees 
42 05 gl gpl Gude ge PVIV iG es ag 
Comments: *. * 
By all accounts Abu Bakr 4% was the first among the free persdns to accept 
Islam, and there was just one more entrant to Islam between him and Sa’d 
4%. Thus, Sa’d # rightly earns the title and honor of being included in the 
list of those early Companions who are foremost in good deeds. 

(8/11) The Virtues Of The dil pb) Sa fold (1.1 /A) 
Ten 2 9a 

133. It was narrated that Sa’eed 9 ne EHS 1p e Gy ples Ge — et 
bin Zaid. bin ‘Amr bin Nufail said: 4 Moi 28 Bho Ge eee 2 

2 ‘ peas ye 48s “ow se op 
“The Messenger of Allah #2 was “ oo 7 ds. Baa vd e pies 
one of the Ten (given glad tidings «Gybl gf cK ote GE desl Cas 
of Paradise). He 2% said: ‘Abu - 

The Book Of The Sunnah 166 And) let 

Bakr will be in Paradise; ‘Umar Pee ae ee ree a 
will be in Paradise; ‘Uthmén will = 98 je GIF of A ot ee 
be in Paradise; ‘Ali will be in gi UB s ae Bole BE ai Aieod jis 
Paradise; Talhah will be in bdwee vigitien, 5, ae. 
Paradise; Zubair will be in se jt Belt ge res ‘deeb eA < 

Paradise; Sa’d will be in Paradise; £5) 3 inlb5 cea 2b es; ran 
‘Abdur-Rahman will be in , oF. 4 Ge ge 
Paradise.” He was asked: ‘Who +3 «44s! (3 Jaa ceed) 3 aillo 

will be the ninth?’ He said: ‘I we toe 
By 2 3 ‘La rea \ 
will’” (Sahih) Neel cp eo 

tae 

«Gh db 

Gh 

Euloe oye £1Oeie ce lasi if wh Aud) coglo gil dom ol Lemee oa lial | Fs Pagel 
4 Be 

Comments: 

The Hadith names nine people given glad timings of Paradise. Together 

with them the tenth is Abu ’Ubaidah bin Jarrah. These are known as ”The 

Ten given glad tidings of Paradise.” These ten rank higher than all other 

Companions of the Prophet 28. 
134, It was narrated that Sa’eed tn Gas : ee ee Gis — wwe 
bin Zaid said: “I bear witness that 
I heard the Messenger of Allah # = 5 
say: ‘Stand firm, O (mountain of) ez oi os ay ns tél os 
Hira’, for there is no one upon uF ie CA a os ‘ * 
you but a Prophet, a Siddig ora = 1 S555 (Je sgl : 
martyr.’” Then he listed them asc ,,,, a +4 st 

3 12 ee . ne * 

follows: “The Messenger of Allah ed cui soa pate ae | 
ss Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, “Uthmén, aga 3) Ge 5I és YW de 
Ali, Talhah, Zubair, Sa‘d, Ibn is ate 0 tg cane as oes Ree: 
‘Awf and Sa‘eed bin Zaid.” trey oan ely SE al D5n5 + phe s 
(Sahih) inky eG cil} Ede ARI ey 

8t a FL sor Fo 
BS Gl Apes BSE ly 

cram Sade ot EVEATC clit Gk cid! coyl pl eel [peed esd 
-OL> pls cPVOV ie cggde gil deere 9 64 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith is explicit on the superiority of these Companions, because they 
accompanied the Prophet #@ on so many occasions. 

b. The Prophet #% spoke these words when the mountain of Hira’ started 
shaking. The mountain stabilized the moment he spoke the words: “Stand 
firm.” It is certainly a miracle performed by’ the Prophet #6. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

(9/11) The Virtues Of Abu 
“Ubaidah Bin Al-Jarrah 2 

167 SLA is 

clas of Rs I hab C10) 
‘ 4 

ae dl 5] 

His fall name is ‘Amir bin ‘Abdullah bin Jarrah bin Hilal bin ‘Uhaib bin 
Dabba bin Harith bin Fihr Qurashi. He became known by the nickname 
Abu ‘Ubaidah, the last part Jarrah being the name of his grandfather 
instead of the father. He joins the genealogy of the Prophet #¢ at his 
forefather, Fihr. His father never accepted Islam and was killed at the hand 
of this son of his. He accepted Islam, at the invitation of Abu Bakr # at the 
age of 29. He is the ninth entrant into Islam. He died during the plague 
epidemic of ’Amwas in 8 AH, approximately at the age of 58. 

135. It was narrated from 
Hudhaifah that the Messenger of 
Allah #2 said to the people of 
Najran: “T will send a trustworthy 
man with you, who is indeed 
trustworthy.” The people craned 
their necks to see, and he sent 
Abu ‘Ubaidah bin Jarrah. (Sahih) 

Ber eee | eek 80 gee Gee 

‘ess tous idem fy Ele Gis — \vo 
A aN ee, Ee 
o FOL oF 
Son Bo FSG Hd tH, 

# af “a 
levee . cas Gus : to ese TS 
earl “ eee 

A teak eth he 4 
Gl 2x3 Zaft al us5as oJ 

clad g: See 

chadl op Bee al Cole Ol BE GQ Ober! folad gull el eps 
Chadd gy Fane gh Lad ge Gh cubeall flad celery combs WVEOIe cae di 8) 

Comments: 

4% lou] cal Cato cya VEVere Ce ds| ws) 

a. The Prophet #g deputed Abu Ubaidah bin Jarrah % to collect the wealth 
agreed upon in the peace treaty. It was on this occasion that he spoke these 
words. Soon after, those people accepted Islam. (The Sealed Nectar, p. 452) 

b. For offices involving financial responsibilities we should only appoint 
people who are trustworthy. Alongside other qualities, trustworthiness is 
the most important attribute for appointment to such offices. 

136. It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah that the Messenger of 
Allah said to Abu ‘Ubaidah bin 
Jarrah: “This is the trustworthy 
man of this Ummah.” (Sahih) 

eee eee | aD oe aye 4h 2 
‘ rE de 

Sen ol Se Sst] Bae 65h Bu 

“ - *€ oe - Pe ard ov 
dil S325 Ol dil we BF 638) oh dle be 

The Book Of The Sunnah 168 Ahad Gus LAS 

” as od oda 

«Gale! Codeddt it [ ]: se 
& 2 \ ected Cx: 
Comments: a 

That is the reason why he is known as the “trustworthy man of this Ununah 
(community of the believers).” 

Bow ° bey or 7 os 
(10/11) The Virtues Of agrme cp wl Le fad CVV/1+) 
‘Abdullah Bin Mas‘ud 2 . Bey fe 
as 4) 2) 

His full name is Abdullah bin Mas‘ud bin Ghafil bin Habib bin Shamkh bin 
Far bin Makhzum Al-Hadhali, nicknamed Abu ‘Abdul-Rahman. His 
mother’s name was Umm ’Abd Wadd. He embraced Islam in its early phase, 
and says that he was the sixth entrant into Islam. He died in 32 AH in Al- 

Madinah at the age of 63. In keeping with his will he was buried at night. 
137. It was narrated that ‘Ali aS5 Gas dese 3 Ble Gas - \v 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 ; : 
said: ‘IfIweretoappointanyoneas o ‘ GE 
my successor without consulting | oe Pree ie aul ide CF we gbull 
anyone, I would have appointed war ofS f. 
Ibn Umm ‘Abd’” (Da’if) we ie hash Whe 2S oe 
(8 al GW CARY 35 9k 

eb) Spee ot dilge Gale Oh Cabs cgde dt ae ol [Liane oolel] gy pd 

i ° 

ye tte Be 

oe yb Cyto oye 4B yd Lash Gy ye) td Bs ca glen! ig! Cade oe VAtAr cae itl 

Comments: [LROte 6 pail] «be 
There is no need to try to rationalize the purported comments because the 
Hadith itself is weak. 

138. It was narrated from = - jy) ake 23 tach Gs - wa 

‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud that Abu oe sae, 

Bakr and ‘Umar gave him the glad. és x gh Gis 265i boi Ge 

tidings that the Messenger of Allah Pe cages a 31% 

#@ had said: “Whoever would like a dy 6 uF pee oF ee 

to recite the Qur’4n as fresh as of ee aes * Ul ob royate ol 

when it was revealed, let him recite 

it like Ibn ‘Umm ‘Abd’ (Sahih) ie 0 Sst gan 50 ae tt 3,85 

Se ra Fe 

wig 6 Hkh dg LS Lae Oia 
058 FF ost 

The Book Of The Sunnah 169 AA he 

an She oy yl ca mele Cud> op £08 0 ££0/) deobae sl [pe] tee sd 
Cem Rte) usls 60 pe 9 BANS 5 

Comments: : 

a. The Hadith praises Abdullah bin Mas’ud 4 for his manner of reciting the 
Qur’an. The expression ‘as fresh as when it was revealed’ means that 
Abdullah bin Mas’ud # has a precise technique of producing the various 
sounds and words of the Qur'an without the slightest deviation from the 
established norm. 

b. Just as it is important to read the Qur’4n with understanding and follow its 
teachings, it is also essential and praiseworthy to recite it to the best of our 
ability. This shows the importance of learning the science of reciting the 
Qur’an with the accuracy of pronunciation and intonation. 

139.It was narrated that ie Gis ui én ide Gas - 14 

‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger i ns Be eee rey BS x 
of Allah #@ said to me: ‘The sign 9 69) 78° rth oF Gel ce ot 

on 2 

that you have been permitted to 23 22S te BF ctige of mle! BF 
come in is that you raise the ~ 3% ~ 24. 4. . ue 
curtain and that you hear me |S pm5 J SE JE cal we Be 6A 
speaking quietly, until I forbid 3 f5 ( Ctsoslt eas af ede Chip : Be 
you.’ (i.e. unless I forbid you).” eke ae oy ho 
(Sahih) AG ZF sole aos 

fea ope al cote Go Os cher Sly wh cet plane romps Lene] Fc Sial 
% ok 5 wl gy dilae Sade ge VAG roe esi) 

‘8, G 

\ 

Comments; 
‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud & would most of the time keep himself in attendance 
with the Prophet #@, and was often called for various errands. That is why 
the rules of entry had been relaxed for him. Even slaves and slave girls have 
been exempted in the Noble Qur’an from seeking permission before entry, 
except on three occasions in the day and night. (24:58) 

(11/11) The Virtues Of ‘Abbas vg GS) 
bin. ‘Abdul-Muttalib. 4 cs a : Bo, oa 2 i 3? 
26 dt 5 dbs 

His full name is ‘Abbas bin “Abdul-Muttalib bin Hashim bin ‘Abd Manaf 
bin Qusai bin Kilab bin Murrah; nicknamed Abul-Fadl. He is Prophet's 
uncle. His mother Natilah, bint Janaéb bin Kulaib was the first woman to 
clothe the Sacred House in silk. Abbas 4 was two years older than the 
Prophet #%, and was the chief of the tribe of Quraish in the pre-Islamic era, 
and performed the voluntary duty of providing water to the pilgrims. He 
lost his eyesight in old age. He died in Al-Madinah on Friday the 12th of 
Ramadan, at the age of 88, two years before the martyrdom of "Uthman 4. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

140. It was narrated that ‘Abbas 
bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib said: “We 
used to come across groups of 
Quraish who would be talking, 
but. they would stop talking 
(when we approached), We 
mentioned that to the Messenger 
of Allah #6 and he said: ‘What is 
the matter with people who talk, 
then when they see a man from 
my family they stop talking? By 
Allah, faith will not enter a 
person’s heart until he loves them 
for the sake of Allah and because 
of their closeness to me.’” (Da‘if) 

170 AR lis 

ae Sars gE, 

Gas Ga yb 3 Cp laos tae - \Es 

eo Fas 

gal $8 Gece is :fhab Uf cs 
BAN OS of wes 32 ee I 
A sop este gate 
bbs .ofeg Bs AS i 5i 
Boa Ot) GS OSE Bus 
Bh, BB asiag eigil Jb a Se 
caditl ‘gd ey se Jal be 2 Se5i 

AU gos 3 Brey 5 Pan ja Y 
Mga rentals 

Cp heres Hy Cb oy domes Cade ge VO/E 1p SLeadl ae oT [Land colin] Feral 
Gr He abs Cdyt op pie, SE case bl oy wheal oye omy pb oad 

141. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: “Allah 
has taken me as a close friend 
(Khalil) as He took Ibrahim as a 
close friend. So my house and the 
house of Ibrahim will be opposite 
to one another on the Day of 
Resurrection, and ‘Abbas will be 
in between us, a believer between 
two close friends.” (Maudu’) 

Code oye yy /y 

lege soll 3 Sill ol ane! [ep ye coleul] 

MRA YF otis te Bis - 144 
of Sljee 32 cate & Jere (Sas. 
at Sp 2 ati 5425 dE 5G ae 
Ade peal] Sr us SUE si 
atl oss Sell opal dp i 
AyAIS 35 Soh ES YY taiig uals 
gues 

Cd) opty pile gh dS Gla gllies # a ole gllne 

Comments: 140 & 141 

Both the Ahdédith quoted here are unauthentic. He is nevertheless a highly 
respected uncle and Companion of the Prophet #%. This by itself is no 
insignificant matter of prestige and honor. - 

The Book Of The Sunnah 171 AE las 

(12/11) The Virtues Of Hasan ec2is ced LSE VN 
And Al-Husain, The Two gros 3 one bab ( AY 
Sons Of ‘Ali Bin Abu Talib 4) (725 Jib wl on Me 

o go. 
+ 

142. It was narrated from Abu utas GAs shite ts acetal ey 
Hurairah that the Prophet #% said . é 

to Hasan: “O Allah, I love him, so oF oh os! 
love him and love those who love ye, 4, 4 Ff z-0-2 fes ck ot ob 
him.” He said: “And he hugged = & a seg Fee 7 6 
him to his chest.” (Sahih) cooly SE 21 3 tabi ssl 38 

Layo SJ] 25 JG tae oy 
LAR cglany YVYY Ie CSlped! 3 Sd 6 Cb cesedl ego asl gy dd 
ca Ole Qyde ye YEVViC clagse dsl eae) Seely gee! lai ow Gh cdbeall 
«aioe y Y glen 
Comments: 

The Hadith affirms the excellence of Hasan #% in that love for him is the 
means of getting the love of Allah. 

143. It was narrated that Abu «453 cae eS ede Sis - yey 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of fos of tt te Stn te 
Allah #§ said: ‘Whoever loves 2) 75% tl Of 29P OF SOle OF 
Hasan and Husain, loves me; and cele ual be bey O85 Ed 
whoever hates them, hates me.’” She einen faventen sas Ye wet 
(Hasan) #8 | erry) Jb idl a wl oF 
gel 1S Sls Good Cel ga 

A geiatsl LB OZAuT 325 

64 Sag! Olde Cade ge MV UIE 6S S sll oo! [eee] tee od 
Lgvae recmmat, lam pe 5 rbsls + gl bl ds fou daly aly Soe sll Aoern4d 9 

Comments: 

a. Hasan and Husain were the beloved grand children of the Prophet of Allah 
#). Love for the Prophet #%, therefore, demands that we love all those 
whom the Prophet #¢ loved. 

b. Love for the Prophet's. family and the Companions is not a matter of mere 
lip service. The essence of love for them in fact lies in following their life 
examples. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 172 ARAN is 

144. It was narrated from Sa‘eed 2 Z 8 werk B8 aps ic — \Es 
bin Abu Rashid that Ya‘la bin A ge oer We 
Murrah told them that they had gy dil we JE ade fy op Gas 
gone out with the Prophet #€ to a ‘ CE Cree 

meal to which they had been sates, hes ie eee 
invited, and Husain was there 43) 2 Ij pal peut She GLY 
playing in the street. The Prophet RS inate BATS Be Bae aes ie age 
came in front of the people wal Game BY ial (yee ee JS 
and stretched out his hands, and ceil aul HE 4 rac) JG AKI 
the child started to run here and © in gh pi pe MR A. Ba es, 
there. The Prophet # made him «43 Gr GH pl ed go bos 
laugh until he caught him, then 4c5 UE] fe ae etn Ze 
he put one hand under his chin Se ; a ie # a ageis 
and the other on his head and = (l Z CAM 65 ESF ahs si} 
kissed him, and said, “Husain is f 
part of me and I am part of him. ‘ 2 ; 

May Allah love those who love Jace ctyce Col fe Gl Cal once 
Husain. Husain is a tribe among oy eae 
tribes.” (Hasan) DEY Ge be 
Another chain with similar (E55 (ic at 23 tye Wie 
meaning). ce : i 

oe - Wie Aft B 
on bis ‘one Kear) 7JB5 cals 4yl5 

cel) BE nay cole Gabe HSL ccd dl ae sl Dope soliel] es 

Ole gpl smrees hr Cyto ds 6& att gl Gude Ge PVVO le cake Gal Qmoalls 

alle, oa shud INES) Se gh dbs 6 gels civ /¥ pStedly YY Etre Gayl ge) 
ol Gb 5 cole 

Comments: 

a. It is a part of Sunnah to accept an invitation for the meal. 

b. It is all right if yourig children play in a street. 

c. It is a part of Sunnah to hold a child and kiss him on the face as an 

expression of love. 
145. It was narrated that Zaid bin 3 
Argam said: “The Messenger of 

ore 

Wt ale ty inch as - ye0 

Allah #@ said to ‘Ali, Fatimah, ‘OM #! Ete YE hal Gf Bes 

Hasan and Husain: ‘I am peace Seu eaeih ge jaa 2 best iz 

for those with whom you make eT re See! ee ae 

peace, and I am war for those 0! & 45 OF ¢ el! odie ‘ee 

on you make war.’” bbs 2) Ea Bene oe 38 
as ao tae = Be 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

173 ied) ln 

ae SA S555 

ce] bb ad ob cle be OL SL cde d! a eT Tete asl] te as 

ch dss toy & Coed By ca bla Gate ge PAVE 

Comments: 
It is a weak Hadith. 

(13/11) The Virtues Of 
‘Ammar bin Yasir 2 

clge dil 2) [BB toe 
Ole ol p& adlp oly crane Qed dob 

pi oh gs fab ON /1¥) 

His full name is ‘Ammar bin Yasir bin ‘Amir bin Malik bin Kynanah bin 
Qais bin Husain bin ‘Ans, nicknamed Yaqzan. His mother’s name is 
Sumayyah. He embraced Islam with his parents in its early stage, and 
withstood tortures at the hands of the idolaters. He participated in the 
battle of Siffin on the side of ‘Ali 4 and met his martyrdom at the age of 
93, in the year 37 AH, at the hands of the Syrian army. 

146. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin 
Abu Talib said: “I was sitting 

HE2 

ib UT 3p bude he - ye5 

with the Prophet #, and ‘Ammar Git 1453 Gis YU uns Bn 
be Yr ed Pm Sg al OF gl 6 
him in, welcome to the good and = E35 :J8 Clb ol gs he UF cz clk 
the purified.’’”” (Hasan) ye eleg ey & Al ae Ls K 
tye MS (ill ae BS dle et 
bait bi 

cL el ge hee Ch Gh Cat egies! gl Teel tess 

ipSbosdls 6Ole cyl ArrPuO 9 ST exetened Cpe) : JB» ay 6.95! Ulan eye or TV4Ar eo 
eb y dal ey Glee ool ge dat oly) cc erilly 

Comments: 

a. “Purified” here means the one whom Allah has blessed with sincerity, and 
has exempt from traits and manners unbecoming of a person possessed of 

complete faith. 

b. It is also a part of good manners to warmly welcome one’s friends. 

147. It was narrated that Hani 
bin Hani said that Ammar 
entered upon ‘Ali. and he said: 
“Welcome to the good and the 
purified. I heard the Messenger of 

seated Ye by ai Gs - vey 

The Book Of The Sunnah 174 dared) ul nS 

Allah say: ‘Amméar’s heart ee ere re ee 
overflows with faith (Literally: up Cen steg: FO Eade Lae ole 
to the top of his bones.’ ” (Da‘if) vigai #6 tl d25 Cees hath 
adits J Gy juss «dar 
cpl meng VYVVTE [VV tall Bb dank ol gy! ort] [edt onli] fey oe 
pSesly «Slit! sue died dalys dy c£12¢ ced clue obeliy Glunl gf # ole 
-etel dishy lam pes 
Comments: 
a. The Hadith is an affirmation of Ammiér’s being a sincere believer. 

b. It is allowed to praise a person in his face if we are certain that it will not 
give him false vanity or pride. 

148. It was narrated that ‘Aishah (GAS 723 | 23 So gil Ge ~ Va 
said: ‘The Messenger of Alldh # 4. 4.5 cee. eg to 
said: “Ammar — no two things ~ cee Cn oe at oe Bl ee 
were shown to him but he chose: fant 2 YE dil te Jo 53885 che 
the better of the two.” (Da‘if) 

5 3 
3k Y algal als we te «jeep 
thegs 43551 

Jals ly cote Gee # Mee ceed dy Cu Lege Cp dle Cate cy YVAA Se 
Guat y add dy Cprilly pSbdl ones ctor! te Lies 

Comments: 
This and other similar Ahadith have been taken to mean that, in the dispute 
between ‘Ali 4 and Mu’Awiyah 4, ‘Ali's position was nearer the truth 
because, in that battle, Ammar #% had sided with ‘Ali 2s. 

i < £_ ee Pog 
alee Paves taca ie 3 alg Slee fas (11/18) 
Miqdad slGdalts 

Salman: When asked about his genealogy, he replied: “I’m Salmén the son 
of Islam.” His family tree before Islam is as follows: Mabah (or Rouzbeh) 
bin Budakhshan bin Moursalén bin Bahbudhan bin Firouz bin Sahrak. He is 
nicknamed ’Abdullah, but was famous by his title Salman Al-Khair He was 

The Book Of The Sunnah 175 AAS) lt 

born in a Zoroastrian family, then spent considerable time in getting 
Christian education and training, but was finally blessed with the creed of 
Islam. 

Abu Dharr: His full name: Jundub bin Junddah bin Sufyan bin ‘Ubaid bin 
Haram bin Ghifar Al-Ghifari, was popularly known by his nickname Abu 
Dharr. He was the fourth or fifth among Muslims when he embraced Islam 
in Makkah. He died in Rabadhah in 23 AH. ‘Abdullah led his funeral 
prayer. He occupied a very high place in the attribute of piety and 
abstinence from worldly pleasures. He was completely averse to accepting 
official gifts and positions of authority. He was absolutely focused on 
aversion to this world and fondness for life in the next world. 

Migdad: His full name is Miqdad bin ’Amr bin Tha‘labah bin Malik bin 
Rabi‘ah bin Thumamah bin Matrud bin ‘Amr bin Sa‘d (according to Al 
Isti‘ab). He was an ally of Aswad bin ‘Abd Yaghuth in the pre-Islamic era. 
Aswad had adopted him as his son. That is the reason why he became 
known as Miqdad bin Aswad in Makkah and elsewhere.. He was the first. to 
openly declare his Islam in Makkah. In the battle. of Badr he only possessed 
a horse. He thus enjoys the honour of being the first horseman to take part 
in Jihad for the sake of Allah. He died during the caliphate of ‘Uthman 4 at 
the age of seventy. His funeral prayer was led by "Uthmdan ». 

149. Ibn Buraidah narrated that +%-+- , oe te A ye ay ate 
Bae ts Letay Gs - ve4 
his father said: “The Messenger of — ae i de roe 
Allah #@ said: ‘All&h has gi (6 «tht Gas sYE chat 3 
commanded me to love four “ie fee crouse 
people, and He told me that He on ee e i 
also loves them.’ He was asked: su (Jy) Gt Sp: db! J5d5 dL 
‘O Messenger of Allah, who are Ae : sl oe 2. eethe acef 
they?’ He said: “Ali is one of ‘“*? * “bb Modems ST ee le clea 
them, and he said that three Sy § 5 v2 2369 36 8A 8 Al 
7 v. ge A FS } of as 
times, ‘and Abu Dharr, Salman oe desta #e i Sate 
and Miqdad.’” (Da‘f) GES Glelag «35 glgr 6S 
ol; err pl jay) BE ews 5 ook relore) 6 gade aor ol [ulna Z satin] ‘cepa 
Po Wh Sade ce VE ad Ve Gard tly oe coe lam! ge PVVAr eo ‘ety dl 
send Lely cab des! de Sy OS abd CSU aed Jem cy) LEW) gta 8 15d 
gggersl By ctodosdl gam 9gi 

ao Fa ae Gee 

150. It was narrated that 24,10! anc 33 Losi Gas - tos 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: “The oo ce, acs fete ete 
first people to declare their Islam b45|3 Ga> ‘2k ws) eee Bie 
publicly were seven: The *3 12 (5.3% eee es BAK 
Messenger of Allah #8, Abu Bakr, Cae thc oe 3 Sas a 
‘Ammar and his mother 1S gynme cp dl ae Be co gy 

7 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Sumayyah, Suhaib, Bilal and 
Miqdad. With regard to the 
Messenger of Allah, Allah 
protected him through his 
paternal uncle Abu TAlib. With 
regard to Abu Bakr, Allah 
protected him through his people. 
As for the rest, the idolaters 
seized them and. made them wear 
coats of chain-mail and exposed 
them to the intense heat of the 
sun. There was none of them who 
did not do what they wanted 
them to do, except for Bilal. He 
did not care what happened to 
him for the sake of Allah, and his 
people did not care what 
happened to him. Then they gave 
him to the children, who took him 
around in the streets of Makkah 
while he was saying, “Ahad, Ahad 
(One, One).’” (Hasan) 

176 ARS) ola 

¥) ot ee oboe rhpoy eee f on GEE tye 
Bl S525 ae GO| Gebi Be OG) OW 
ae. Boe, fee € wie 

ae Gi, Ges OS gh ee 
by ft pe Oe aye Be “oe - For av 
dol S525 UG Stas cd G5 
XS sh el Sb al soa ail anc RE 
aicls cpazile Lely oer au 
dude EIS) aes O95 bd 
Ps ar o 40 Be o% ~ oF seer 

Jel oe re Las cymmell Sd pas ges 
%< if ee Poe ee 

CVS Y] cl3iGl Ge le A Abs Jag YI 
dé SG cdl (3 Ae ole Chu OG 
ee ea 7 off tak 4 

[glared COI opt coylt bb conte 
eG AR op she ) ‘ eee 

AE! IJ 58 GAG Ae OLS od 42 08 ght 

vt 

. ds! 

Fetes 

Ole cpl sernes 4 care Ye E28 /\ taaml fon ol gece oo bins} ] Fc aad 

Comments: 

»erily cVAE /P i Slots eVOAY ie (be Yi) 

a. Whatever the Companions 4 said with their- tongues, in conformity with 
the wishes of the idolaters, does not adversely affect their rank or status, 
since the Qur'an itself gives us the permission to articulate the words of 
disbelief to protect our lives, if persecution and torture reach beyond the 
limits of human endurance (see 16:106). 

b. This shows the steadfastness and greatness. of Bilal 2%, that he chose the 

path of determination and resolution instead of licence and permission. 

151. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: ‘I have been 
tortured for the sake of Allah as 
no one else has, and I have 
suffered fear for the sake of Allah 
as no one else has. I have spent 
three days when Bilal and I had 
no food that any living being 

Ber Eee | ae BO gle Qe 
6as3 as ides Oy Ube Ge \o\ 

Boll be ont YY dle gy ols 32 
59h Say BE i 5425 GE dE eu 
tg ME ois 2H SH, Sst GES uy 
ils eV ad 8 WE pub Sy J 

The Book Of The Sunnah 177 Road) ot” 

could eat but that which could be «J dal 
concealed in the armpit of Bilal.’” a ae 
(Hasan) 

ses oly Astle Cpl] OL Ula dike «cde dl ao ol [eeoee orlisf] ‘ees 

cyl eee y eer Cel TSB, ca alee Cade cy VEV¥ ie «gl wee Bye oils 
Comments: »YOYAIE cole 

The Prophet 8% endured the cruelties of the idolaters much before his 
Companions. This shows that anyone who invites the people to the path of 
truth, must demonstrate more fortitude and determination so that he 
becomes an exemplar for others. 

i v a “7 
(15/11) The Virtues Of Bilal J frlad (11/10) 
His full name is Bilal bin Rabah the Abyssinian, nicknamed Abu ’Abdul- 
Karim or Abu ’Abdullah. His mother’s name is Hamamah. He was the 
Prophet's Mu‘adhdhin and treasurer. He was a slave of Banu Jumah of 
Makkah. He embraced Islam at an early stage and endured great suffering 
at the hands of the idolaters. He # died after reaching the age of sixty in 
the year 20 AH, in the territory of Syria. 
152. It was. narrated from Salim ff Gis :uict 3 gle Gls - yoy 
that a poet praised Bilal bin << 1 42 atte ee eee 
‘Abdullah and said: “Bilal bin Ol PS OF CO gt Pe OF etalel 
‘Abdullah is better than any other JS: JUS] cal we GTS Ee eld 
Bilal.” Ibn ‘Umar said: “You are : 
lying. The Bilal of the Messenger *** 
of Allah is better than any other #33 ay 425 UY els 
Bilal.’ (Da‘if) te e see 7 

Rebel ol Cade ge 40 /Viodls) Gd deed gy bine oo tl Lede cotta] “Gye 
cee nh bv poy Y aly Gabe ter gy ee # (M10 /P ll SLbT eet) « 
: oe Fy at 

(16/11) The Virtues Of we las (11/14) 

Khabbab 2 
His full name is Khabbab bin Aratt bin Jandalah bin Sa’d bin Khuzaimah 
Al-Tamim, nicknamed Abu ’Abdulléh or Abu Ahmad or Abu Yahya. He 
was enslaved in the days of pre-Islamic Ignorance (Jahiliyyah) during the 
plundering of a certain tribe, and was sold in Makkah. Umm Anmér bint 
Siba’ purchased him. He is the sixth among those who loudly proclaimed 
their Islam. The idolaters tortured him by making him lie over burning-hot 
stones that burned the flesh of his back. All these cruelties failed to break 
his determination. He died after a protracted illness at the age of seventy- 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

178 ARAN hey 

three in 37 AH. ’Ali @ led his funeral prayer. He was the first Companion 

to be buried in Kufah. 

153. It was narrated that Abu 
Laila Ali-Kindi said: “Khabbab 
came to “Umar and said: ‘Come 
close, for no one deserves this 
meeting more than you, except 
‘Ammar.’ Then Khabbab started 
to show him the marks on his 
back where the idolaters had 
tortured him.” (Da‘if) 

cSlodl um Bendy yxie Glew) gl Sone gdh arrney [okpaye odie} ] 

Comments: 

bn AEG cpm Uy dle Gas - voy 
Ola Gis: ey as 7 YG dl Le 
eda NG AN be Stay OT ey 
SSP US b81 NS Gee J SE ce 
Gash Sie Vas a oy ST 
5 A HE Uy othe | WU 4 2 ots 
eed 

wo phy (N10 /T) dae cyl Le died dal gd Cute, 

a. "Umar & seated Khabbab #s close to himself. This shows both his honour 
and esteem as well as ‘Umar’s & love for him. 

b. Muslim rulers must give due honor and respect to those who strive for the 
glory of the faith and endure torture and persecution for its sake. 

154. It was narrated from Anas 
bin Malik that the Messenger of 
Allah #% said: “The most merciful 
of my Ummah towards my 
Ummah is Abu Bakr; the one who 
adheres most sternly to the 
religion of Allah is ‘Umar; the 
most sincere of them in shyness 
and modesty is ‘Uthman; the best 
judge is ‘Ali bin Abu T4lib; the 
best in reciting the Book of Allah 
is Ubayy bin Ka‘b; the most 
knowledgeable of what is lawful 
and unlawful is Mu‘adh bin Jabal; 
and the most knowledgeable of 
the rules of inheritance (Faré‘id) is 
Zaid bin Thabit. And every nation 
has a trustworthy guardian, and 
the trustworthy guardian of this 
Ummah is Abu ‘Ubaidah bin 
Jarrah.” (Sahih) 

See GSS: Sh ty iss Gs - v0t 

SU oe Be jf BG eal iF hash 
» 36 Be ay os si 
carat) 2 a 5K gf 

ai ts) “sd “sat J 
fat pally Set eh Perec 

yf ul 2 oe 33 beni Me 
] es Bid oly nel a 
arabes 

ot Ade der Gy Shee Cite oh Sls cogdegl ar el [pee solid] tee sei 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

cyl Aa? 9 nome Cent Welty 6% wis Slane Code oF YVAN ‘él ears cal 

179 A os 

ry 

ol Gye Lydockly ble gl Ju cpm al 3 pe Y ans yl resis cole 

155. Another chain with similar 
wording (as no. 154) but he #% 
said that Zaid was: “The most 
knowledgeable of them 
concerning the rules of 
inheritance.” (Sahih) 

Comments: 154 & 155 

(255 Gls shat 2 ble Bis - Veo 
wl (6 tishl we ye hue Ye 
Bo bs TE GS oh Bel Ae 9s 
[.cyathaly alba 225 
Giled! Cydod! jbl Lane] seed 

a. The Hadith points out the special characteristics of certain Companions. 
Mention has been made here of the distinctive feature that characterizes 
each Companion, although the Companions were, in general terms, 

endowed with all such qualities. 

b. A leader must be aware of the qualities of his associates and companions, 
so that he is able to entrust each one with the responsibility that he is best 

capable of performing. 

(17/11) The Virtues Of Abu 
Dharr 

156. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “I heard 
the Messenger of Allah #§ say: 
‘There is no one on earth, or under 
the sky, who speaks more 
truthfully than Abu Dharr.’’’ 
(Hasan) 

33 oh fad (11 /1¥) 

ae GAS gins 3p ass Ge - ton 
oh Oaks Be ued Yy ss sch tt a 
a aia sé ad & 

JU ab of Bi ae be eat) 

ne ais elif we 3,5 Be ai Js 
ts tee Gael Joo ye eed obi 

cae dil oy GSI 3d pl Cake Ol db ghd antl [eed yee 
Cee dale aly ce Cte pee onl (er? tJ y 64 ed gl Cade ge TAY 
«gly ipSledly Ole fy! dary Cdr y cVAtY ie code Sh ate 

Comments: 

The Hadith does not mean that Abu Dharr «4 has outdone Abu Bakr 2 in 
superiority, since Abu Bakr 4 had many other virtues as well in which he 

was superior to Abu Dharr 2. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 180 ALAS) ole 

(18/11) The Virtues Of Sa‘d A ae 
His full name is Sa’d bin Mu’adh bin Nu‘m4n bin Imra’ul-Qais bin Zaid bin 
‘Abdul Ashhal Al-Ansari, nicknamed Aba ’Amr. His mother’s name was 
Kabshah bint Rafi’. He entered the fold of Islam by the preaching of Mus‘ab 
& appointed by the Prophet # to invite people to Islam in Al-Madinah. He 
met his martyrdom as a result of excessive bleeding from a wound received 
in the battle of Banu Quraizah. The Prophet #¢ himself led the funeral 
prayer for him. And when the Prophet 3 returned from his burial, tears 
were seen trickling down to his beard. Sa‘d # died at the age of 37 in the 
month of Shawwal 5 AH. 

157. It was narrated that Bara’ 
bin ‘Azib said: “The Messenger of ; 
Allah #§ was given a gift of ag sly! ge: 
length of silk fabric. The people . 
started passing it around to one 
another. The Messenger of Allah 
#§ said: ‘Are you admiring this?’ 
They said: ‘Yes, O Messenger of 
Allah.’ He said: “By the One in 0 OH Lait ie if re 
Whose Hand is my soul! The 3. be 
handkerchief of Sa’d bin Mu‘adh S23! 3 3U2 gf who poli toy 
in Paradise is better than this.’” ga be BS 
(Sahih) : : ie 
cP Vee 2 qs! Oe els was wh cpddls ola sabes 4a | Tex banal 

+4 OP rol re Cade 
Comunents: 
a. The Hadith affirms that Sa’d bin Mu’adh will not only be housed in 

Paradise, but will also receive superior blessings there. 
b. Even the most extravagant article of this world cannot match the ordinary 
item of Paradise 

158. It was narrated that Jabir fi Gis ideo by ose Gis - \oA 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # : Bote 
said: ‘The Throne of the Most Stas Zi oF eM Ce 

Merciful trembled wpon the death ey ap Et ‘eas dle “5b 2 

of Sa‘d bin Mu’adh.’” (Sahih) Pee 
W3ee of Seo chal J55 BS 
cae dtl ody Slee Gy new Cole Oh lei Gale gobi a el Tere] 

a 

24 pee VI Code 

The Book Of The Sunnah 181 ARS) les 

Comments: 

a. Even the Throne of the Most High swayed in delight when the biessed soul 
of Sa’d bin Mu’adh -@ reached the heavens above. 

b. The apparently lifeless and irrational objects in Allah's creation are not 
really so. In fact even these objects have consciousness and feelings of their 
own that are beyond our perception. 

(19/11) The Virtues Of Jarir dl as «3 pS “LBS CVN/14) 

Bin ‘Abdullah Al-Bajali ee cee as 4 
His full name is Jarir bin ’Abdullah bin Jabir bin Malik bin Nadr Al-Bajali, 
nicknamed Abu ‘Amr or Abu ‘Abdullah. His mother’s name was Bajilah 
bint Sa‘d. He takes his family name Al-Bajali from her. He came to the 
Prophet # in the year 10 AH in Ramadan, and embraced Islam at his 
hands. He died in 51 or 54 AH. 

159. It was narrated that Jarirbin 25 oj Ml we 3 Ln Gls - 
‘Abdullah Al-Bajali said: “The eon ke were at Gey: 
Messenger of Allah #€ never & declan] GF eC] og Bl ne Cae 
refused to see me from the time I : el & od 

became Muslim, and whenever he Z 
saw me he would smile at me. I : 
complained to him that I could y cal 3 43 of i we 
not sit firmly on a horse, so he ,, * a : 
struck me on the chest with his Y (J! 4) 25 

hand and said: ‘O Allah, make at er eee; 

77 - \ as 
him firm and cause him to guide a 28 ae ee ve pu 
others and be rightly-guided.’” (Gigs Lol itty SS gun - dis 
(Sahih) 

eV eVOre b bodh de ce VY ge Gh ted alge! csp reages| Feige) 

as ee) aS op ye Silas ge Gh cabal! plas Caney See cpl Ge VAN Cg 

4s ped Calm ye VEVO! ; 

Comments: ene er cm 

a. Jarir bin ‘Abdullah & was very handsome and tall. ‘Umar # used to call 
him “Yousuf of this Ummah.’ 

b. Jarir bin “Abdullah <& enjoyed much closeness to the Prophet #. 

c. Meeting someone with a smiling face is an indication of joy born of love for the 
person concerned. It is because a person feels happy when he meets his loved 
one. This also shows the happy and affable disposition of the Prophet #8. 

d. Horsemanship is an art which is essential for a fighter for the cause of 
Allah. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 182 AAS 

20/11) Th i Of Th eo, poe 40 
molec 2G AT BS C/o) 

160. Rafi bin Khadi said: “Jibrl «AS Hho Be GG Be He - ne 

or an angel came to the Prophet 3 ws Gis :4s5 Gis -VG 
#@ and said: ‘How do you regard ee ; “- 

those among you who were  j% «4b, op Ge BF cde ol 
present at Badr?’ He said: ‘They ane ie <6 2.3 2 
are the best among us.’ He said: SH eho “JU Gut yt gh - 

G 
‘We think the same (of the angels 3s 545 G SIS 2 Z3\ Sy ae 
who. were present at Badr), they 94. 2. 
are the best of the angels.’’’ idle cUgle dt 5 Ok ses 

(Sahih) BSN GS She As Ey 

yes Gob ay cee Olas 4 ess oF £40 [Ys tanh Peagey | Ceemve | Tex Sal 
VAAT I E 6190 [Vi eet dma gb Gyles) Le +b gimws 

Commenis: 

a. The Hadith is: explicit on the superiority of those Companions who 
participated in the battle of Badr. According to a well-known Hadith the 
number of Companions who participated in the battle of Badr was 313 
while other reports say it was 314 or 317 (see Fathul-Ban, 364/7, H. 3956). 

b. The angels have come down on occasions other than Badr as well. 
However, those who witnessed Badr are superior to others in rank. 

c. jihéd is a matter of great virtue. Hence, it is a thing of honor, not. only for 
human beings, but also for the angels. 

to FG,3 

161. It was narrated that Abu Gas ‘chal cy dates Gis - 141 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 9 .z#- | “a -2 40 

Allah #@ said: ‘Do not fee my a Serres ou Ge Biss : ‘C Syt 
Companions, for by the One in jl Gas 3 ral ann ie ‘8 
Whose Hand is my soul! If any f ts one 
one of you were to spend the = o* ‘yo™* 2 
equivalent of Mount Uhud in 4} Cee Siteeesits oe J bf celle 

gold, it would not equal a ne ee he eat ee 
Mudd"! spent by anyone of them, wen Gigh ccglical Nyed Ya 2 
nor even half a Mudd.” (Sahih) Gtk Las a ra fe Gi 34 esas if 3 Vedes 

heya VG [pels 4 % Ai 

Jad celnny PUT col BB ll Obeel pla cobdl eel ta ed 

H] A dry measure of two thirds of a kilgram (approx.) 

The Book Of The Sunnah 183 BEEN a led 

Bove eee Cale ye TOE IC cage dl Gey bled) Ge apd Gh cibedl! 
cee A LS Ce al get Gl pally tae dl 4) tne col ye? tele Gomes Jol 

10 ab beSI 
Comments: were Ps 

a. The Hadith is addressed to all those Muslims who come after the 
Companions. Even a vastly meritorious act of the late day Muslims would 
not, before Allah, equal a seemingly petty act done by the Companions. 

b. The reason why the deeds done by the Companions rank so high, is simply 
this that they made their sacrifices at a time when Islam was just laying its 
foundations. 

162. It was narrated that Nusair +; ,*22; , yisd ty aye Gis - vw 
bin Dhu‘luq said: “Ibn ‘Umar Sore : ae : 
used to say: “Do not revile the Gis dv e535 Gas SVG cal we 
Companions of Muhammad #8, +5) 4g NG : ° gee 
for the stay of anyone of them for ~ ‘ «gales y oe 
a brief period (with the Prophet 2 wish Cal As V 1b, 52 
#%) is better than all the good of ‘ . . 29% 
deeds that anyone of you does in al pe bs Bla mss pli 
his lifetime.’’”” (Da’tf) Ryee 
Bi OS) yf VOMilouall plait ob5 Jor} ae oh [uted soli] tee Ad 
lg CSI ASS /sybraS! Gleb) WUE dedi OW Ly Gendell 3 pSde ys! Olin 
MOAB Shey ¢gereve aur] WAP eg peue gel Uy caelaw ces pial ai 

of. Foe 
(21/11) The Virtues Of The Lyte (Las (14/19) 
Ansar ° 
The Arabic word Ansfr is the plural of Nasir which means a helper. When 
the Prophet #6 came from Makkah to Al-Madinah after emigration, the 
tribes of Aws and Khazraj believed in him and made an agreement of help 
and cooperation with him. It was in recognition of their meritorious act that 
the Prophet #§ gave them the title Ansér. (Bukhari: 3776). 

163. It was narrated that Bara’ bin Gi 95639 theme cn dé Gas - vy 
‘“Azib said: “The Messenger of +- ¢s4 oe te tte Qs ay ee 
Allah 8 said: ‘Whoever loves the OF thal UF 6eS . #8 

Ansar, Allah will love him, and a 238 & elt oe Ht yb Ge 
whoever hates the Ansdr, Allah Uk 24 

will hate him.’’’ (One of the =) Lait ¢ csi ja fake nd 
narrators) Shu’bah said: “I said to Ob An ws | SG Z J 3 a 
‘Adi: ‘Did you hear that from Bara’ 
bin ‘Azib?’ He said: ‘It was to me 2 
that he narrated it.” (Sahih) “b& Bil dE fo 

<a 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

184 die Hs 

ty had Syd oye VOTE Spline 9 oPVAT Gy bed! tor ol tes 

Comments: 

Hatred towards those devotees of Islam is indicative of hatred towards Islam, 
as well as towards the Messenger of Allah 2&. It, therefore, follows that hatred 
towards the Helpers (Ansér) can only lodge in the heart of a hypocrite. 

164. It was narrated from ’‘Abdul- 
Muhaimin bin ‘Abbas bin Sahl bin 
Sa’d, from his father, from his 
grandfather, that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “The Ansér are an 
inner garment and the people are 
an outer garment. If the people 
were to head towards one valley 
or a narrow mountain pass and 
the Ansdér towards another, I 
would travel to the valley of the 
Ansar, atid were it not for the 
Hitjrah, | would have been a man 
from among the Ansér.’”’ (Sahih) 

plnns Gobedl tue 5S Jalyd aod (25) ie Gagine # [mene] tay ed 

Comments: 

7 wo, So log Son “5% 
soul GF pt ke he — ne 
Hy aot € 5 oe. 
gh yates Ke Be kB gl Gi is 
ot BE cal BF ks of Jie of Ye 
jes Slab JG Be at O25 al 
hals Ltt 0 OF yy 5s Zi 
EELS choy tai hes, Les 3f 
Weal ZEST ose Volg cyte Galg 
GLA je 

Late po& 9 

a. Words of the Prophet #¢ quoted above confirm not only the excellence of 
the Ansér, but also the fact that they occupied a very prominent status in 

the sight of the Prophet #8 

b. The Hadith points out that just as Hijrah (emigration of the believers for the 
sake of Allah) is a laudable act, extending help and assistance to the 
emigrants (Muhdjir) is also an extremely meritorious act. 

c. The Ansér are the best community second only to the Muhdjir in Islam. 

165. Kathir bin ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Amr bin ‘Awf narrated from his 
father, that his grandfather said: 
“The Messenger of Allah #8 said: 
‘May Allah have mercy on the 
Ansar, and the children of the 
Ansér, and the grandchildren of 
the Ansér.’” (Da‘if) 

x a 

as 3 Yl GK yl Gls — 0 
OB ot 36 cal 32 «SF of ah 

% 4 we ake 2 4 eee 
GLA i peo) BE al 25 JU 

Pa 

Ola 6h sig tai eet 

oe) HASH Sand ge bal Gasd oioll oS & fis oll] te pd 
VU5Ore bas todos CSM dle Dlead oul gl ge Vs dU ge JS CH oy 

Aide OF ue 

The Book Of The Sunnah 185 245) les 

(22/11) The Virtues Of Ibn 2 Ld CVV /¥¥) 
‘Abbas ae ak 
His full name is Abdullah bin ’Abbds bin ’Abdul-Muttalib bin Hashim bin 
‘Abd Manaf Qurashi Hashimi. He was the paternal cousin of the Prophet # 
and the maternal cousin of Khalid bin Walid #. Due to his amazingly vast 
knowledge, he was popularly known as the ‘Sea of Knowledge’ and the 
“Learned Man of the Community’. He was born during the Prophet’s period 
of confinement in a narrow tract known as the Valley of Abu Talib, and 
died in the year 68 AH at the age of 71 in the city of Taif. 
166. It was narrated that Ibn & Re SG «eal G Line Ge — 55 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of «2-4 422 kx - YE Ai ae 
rola} ee Gas TYG Ale ove 
Allah #2 embraced me and said: es ¥ i : hs : a 
‘O Allah, teach him wisdom and gpl oF «de Se 36 lidl ME Gas 
the (correct) interpretation of the O63 « jy 8 ds Ky = 4:36 oe 

Book.’” (Sahih) ee ae are ee 
AEN fogs Go sale gin 

lage bl ody Gale ol 53 Ob BB tI Obeel blab cg bul asl ie sd 

Comments: ai eee aia lr 3 

a. The word ‘wisdom’ used. in the context of this Hadith means the knowledge 
of Hadith. 

b. Allah, the Glorified, accepted the prayer of His Messenger #%, and 
bestowed upon Ibn ‘Abbas # that high position in the exegesis 
(interpretation) of the Noble Qur’an, such that he has come to be known as 
the Prince of the Exegetes. 

c. Prayer for the bestowal of useful knowledge is the best prayer, because it is 
a treasure that brings honor in this world and earns higher ranks in the 
Hereafter. 

Chapter 12. The Khawarij cated $3 Bb SU - OF pnnall) 
: OY decdl) 

Khawarij (literally those who go out or secede) are known by several names, 
such as (i) Hukmiyyah: So named. because they had rejected the verdict of 
the arbitrators appointed by ‘Ali and Mu’awiya # under the plea that 
judgment rests only with Allah; (ii) Haruriyyah: Nicknamed as such because 
they were stationed at the place known as Haruri’ ; (iii) Shurat (Purchasers): 
So called because they thought that they had sold their lives for the 
pleasure of Allah; and (iv) Mérigah (Passers through): So named because 
they had strayed away from true faith. 

167. ‘Ubaidah narrated from ‘Ali Bis 4a cat ie a; ra 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

bin Abu Talib, that he mentioned 
the Khawérij, and said: “Among 
them there will be a man with a 
defective hand, or a short hand, 
or small hand. If you were to 
exercise restraint (i.e. not become 
overjoyed), I would tell you of 
what Allah has promised upon 
the lips of Muhammad #¢ for 
those who kill them.” I (‘Ubaidah) 
said: “Did you hear that from 
Muhammad ##?” He said: “Yes, 
by the Lord of the Ka‘bah!’ — 
three times.” (Sahih) 

186 a2b3 Olas 

Ges of - 8 ar “6 > - 
dete $2 cyl UF He BN doy 

a) ot Be UF GA BE See oll 

a HB esd 5555 SE sb 
Sgte SF cach S55e Sf cack cake JS5 
“i 525 bey pSBI5S 15h OF VG cdi 
MBps ol Se i ke aul 

-3E ¢ eka Pre hes 

ol att Se VMS gules bb Ge gayeull Gh ats Colne de Tt oy yet 

Comments: 

+A Oph 9 A 

a. The Prophet #§ has spoken about the Khawérij at some length; and the 
events happened exactly as he had described them. It is a proof of his 

prophethood. 

b. The Hadith affirms the virtue of ’Ali 4% and his associates that waged a war 

against the Khawirij. 

c. It is allowed to swear by Allah for purposes of emphasis. 

168. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘At 
the end of-time there will appear 
a people with new teeth {i. e., 
young in age), with foolish minds. 
They will speak the best words 
ever uttered by mankind and they 
will recite the Qur'an, but it will 
not go any deeper than their 
collarbones. They will pass 
through Islam like an arrow 
passes through its target. 
Whoever meets them, let him kill 
them, for killing them will bring a 
reward from Allah for those who 
kill them.” (Sahih) 

a 

de. cae a3 gl 2X as - WA 
SS | ee “VG 68515 car 

7 

I Se de Set eg ogi 
cmgal sles y Shah 45k sp 
ee) ee ore | LS daa oe ia 

weeyes 

ede oe TYAN Bll die 3 cle be Ob cll gk dl ol eel tees 

The Book Of The Sunnah 187 iets) i is 

Ler poy glues GiEedl te BytS Jal yd alos Cerne Gar? tdby cu dle oy S ol 

Comments: 

a. Innovation in religion, be it in belief or action, is a sign of lack of 
understanding or stupidity. In other words, only a person who either has 
no understanding of religion, or considers it imperfect and incomplete, 
indulges in acts of innovation. 

b. The Qur’an ‘not going any deeper than the people’s collarbones’ would 
either mean that they would repeat the Qur’an by the tongues, but it would 
not create any effect upon them, or that they would be denied the true 
understanding of it. 

ec. An innovator considers his self-invented words and actions as true Islam. 
That is why he is deprived from the real face of Islam. 

d. We must first try to instruct them into true Islam and make manifest their 
error. In case they refuse to see reason and become a source of misguidance 
for others, the Islamic government should treat them as traitors and crush 
their mischief by force. 

169. It was narrated that Abu Gis :i23 alt 3 SS gh Bs - 104 

Salamah said: “I said to Abu ag te fess cf :3 

Sa‘eed Khudri: ‘Did you hear the oF ‘ayer oF 

Messenger of Allah #¢ mention eye oats 2 él 36 ae 

anything: about the Haruriyyah (a de i Bt Sito ig ax sie 

sect of Khawarij” He said: ‘Theard $5/53 la $i; 8 ald 25 Cans Js 
him mention a people who would & gens es ie ie Slee Flee 
appear to be devoted worshippers; = g) gle a ee 

“Such that any one of you would @# #329 pgdhe w Se c Jel Jam 

regard his own prayer and fasting + ‘no o- . A 

as insignificant ane compared to rest sedis - a oe on eaes 

theirs. But they will pass through ° dai 3 iS ape SST CED Se 

Islam like an arrow passin ts Lt fei. Lhe heh 

through its target, oe Gre HB Meng gehts 

archer) picks up his arrow and sii) ) ts gd m4 ls don J5 
looks at its Iron head but does not 7 yf eS Ges 
see anything, then he looks at the CF Te a JA Gas 
shaft and does not see anything 

then he looks at the band: that . 

which is wrapped around the Iron 

head where it is connected to the 

shaft, then he looks at the feather 

and is not sure whether he sees 

anything or not.” (Sahih) 

ar 
9 Us 

ade Sealy Cpe eolely 64 Jape Ge YEN taeda] Leone] eps 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Comments: 

188 pean | es ay 

Ee tplnes CO8OAL «So GeJl) 

a. The Khawérij exerted great effort in the doing of devotional acts like prayers 
and fasting, so much so that even the Companions were amazed at their 
zeal and zest. But no amount of effort in the doing of acts of worship will 
be of any benefit if there are flaws in one’s faith. 

b. The Khawiirij are certainly the people gone astray from the right path and 
lost touch with true Islam. The majority of the scholars, however, consider 
them just a misguided and rebellious lot. 

170. It was narrated that Abu 
Dharr said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: ‘There will be people 
among my Ummah. (nation) after 
me who will recite the Qur'an, but 
it will not go any deeper than their 
throats. They will pass through 
Islam like an arrow passing 
through its target, then they will 
never return to it. They are the 
most evil of mankind and of all 
creation.’” ‘Abdullah bin Samit 
said: “I mentioned that to Rafi’ bin 
‘Amr, the brother of Hakam bin 
‘Amr Ghifari and he said: ‘I also 
heard that from the Messenger of 
Allah #8.’” (Sahih) 

“cd 

Gis a “al oS x SUS - AVS 
6 gael Ou fe hull 
celal og dil we BE de of wee 
ees! eae ee a 
Spy 88 ol 525 dE 5B SG 
fs ot bee of at : 
‘gal ow ete Og 3/ al Of Se 
ose fs 2 ens ty caedt, coed fog 
ceil Se Vo cSGdl beh Lys 
- SoG Avo ae Z - od Juee 
St well Sp GS ell Ge Ot 
oLo rs ra a? woe 
GEN SB pA cad asd V ob cea 

(+ 

fs 

Cc: o 
‘Es 
Zs 
CN. 

Gi 

f 
Ga 

Sle ge VWie cael GLAND 8 Gls Gl BIS ghee oe ol ees 

Comments: 

a. Innovators are worse than animals. 

+4 Oleh 

b. The Hadith has been taken to mean that the group of innovators are part of 
the Ummah, which means that in worldly affairs they shall be treated like 
other Muslims. They are nevertheless a deviant and sinning lot. 

171. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘Some people 
among my Ummah will recite the 
Qur’an, but they will pass 
through Islam like an arrow 
passing through its target.’’’ 
(Sahih) 

Soa ot hat dl le - wi 
6 gee Sf is YG aes 3H 
cee eee were 
° a ie <qedt Tay bees: gaat Ae 
ce el OS Glaoy :# | S55 JG 
Po See ee Kee eRe es. 2 ee ae at 
remit Sys US pelt je Ost gal 

The Book Of The Sunnah 189 ARI) ws 

EM Ss 

da Se ce Slew Aides cu Slow Sym ye OV/V ideal ae ol Leone] Fer Saad 
6 eee Gated ees cal pc Cadell s 60 ph 9 YEA /orteHell edel oye al Pevrew-) 
PM Cyaedi it 

172. It was narrated from Abu = ({f 

Zubair that Jabir bin ‘Abdullah | 
said: “The Messenger of Allah a 9 2 GF «25! sl bb cate GS Olas 
was in Ji‘ranah and he was a : ‘ 

‘e: 
By a 
Ae 

distributing gold nuggets and Bee gh ate. asc Ne 
spoils of war which were in Bilal’s Gd 585 «pilsSly Gall eet Gay Seed 

lap. A man said: ‘Do justice, O jte-s Sie) 4 WK we 
i Yaasee GY Suel : las 
Muhammad! For you have not, a J ‘: - ae a 
done justice!’ He said: “Woe to dans 345 a le . Jad a dbp 
you! Who will do justice after me . .. . eG hual 6 oe 
if I do not do justice?’ ‘Umar said: b ge ee lB eal ty ae 
‘O Messenger of All&h! Let me gael ia Ge yal & 1 dist S355 

strike the neck of this hypocrite!’ ee ja Ree 
The Messenger of Allah #§ said: eel 2 is op ze roe 
‘This man has some companions 4427 Y «(3h 47k 2 Cuts cf 
who recite the Qur’an but it does a i sa plas : isl 3 
not go any deeper than their pel Ge GS cull Se OP pie 
collarbones. They will pass ies 
through Islam like an arrow “3 
passing through its target.’’’ 

(Sahih) 
cel Sede Ge VIWie ep gilkes Golda! Sd Gh aS SI colar eel all 
Comunents: 

a. To raise objections to an action or word of the Prophet #¢, or to find fault 
with it, or consider it impracticable — all these are the characteristics of the 
hypocrites. A true believer will never do any such thing. 

b. The incident stands out as a shining example of the Prophet's attribute of 
tolerance, clemency and patience for which reason he chose not to punish 
the man for his insolence. 

173. It was narrated thatIbn Abu Gis 7S 1 3 oS gi Ws - we 
Awfa said: “The Messenger of f Oe aR ont di aga drat, 
Allah # said: ‘The Khawérij are oa) oi! GF «ee! 4 635M) SRS] 
the dogs of Hell.’ (Sahih) Za'jeein Ee ait Pe 5. de 1d 355) 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

190 aL) tes 

GEN Ss 

‘5 Wie 6 ail cp ale aly cay Glew! ce Yoo /&: 4am] a ol [>] ‘Cees 

174, It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Umar that the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: “There will emerge 
people who will recite the Qur’an 
but it will not go any deeper than 
their collarbones. Whenever a 
group of them appears, they 
should be cut off (ie. killed).” Ibn 
‘Umar said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah 2% say: 
‘Whenever a group of them 
appears, they should be killed’— 
(he said it) more than twenty 
times — ‘until Dajjdl emerges 
among them.’” (Hasan) 

oy GIS 1 jhe Uf elke Bas - we 

dree 

of cal Be cdelhl Gis his Sh 
sie City 6 ag at 0525 SF 58 oh 
GA NE pai igi 9 ST ast 
dil Sy Choc ae fh 36 we oP 
rer gs 35 ge lds Os i 

wees Ce SS Gk 
EM 

Lar pe 9 ely soot ss Jnl yt aby Se gl Are g Lon oats) | Saeed 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith contains the indication that only a small number of people shall 
be influenced by the erroneous ideas of the Khawdrij. The majority of the 
people shali not only stick to the right path with regard to this misguided 
group, but also fight them and liquidate them. 

b. It seems that the Dajjal (False Christ) will also try to misrepresent falsehood 
as truth in order to misguide the people. The Prophet ’Eisa #4 shall kill him 

and his associates. 

175. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 32 said: ‘At the end of time 
or among this nation (Ummah) 
there will appear people who will 
recite Qur’an but it will not go any 
deeper than their collarbones or 
their throats. Their distinguishing 
feature will be their shaved heads. 
If you see them, or meet them, then 
kill them.’ ” (Sahih) 

ty ff agli OK Gls — we 
ge ror ae 46 For eft, 
6533 6 «eae GF SIGN Le Gos 

ae ne -E 

WE sl rae JG : 

fee iy ae phen ss an 
ed gi coh gata If 5f 

The Book Of The Sunnah 191 roan er eay 

Bij Sle Cath oP EVUT Ee gall dks ea wh and! eoglo yl tor ol ep 
[cyeoddeS! lab) QSadL sygce sald & Ply CoSled! dorreey ¢dilrre Bab ca 
Lae oe VOW told] Eades cope CSS 25 5d 
Comments: ree om cere ‘haat 
Some scholats consider it'a Sound Hadith. Shaving the heads as the 
distinguishing feature of the Khawérij does not mean that anyone that 
shaves his head is necessarily a Khériji. It only means that they did it as a 
habit. Among the noted Companions, ‘Ali # also used to regularly shave 
his head. : e 
176. Abu Ghalib narrated that Gis : fis i dy Ugo le - wr 
Abu Umdamah said: “(The : 
Khawérij) are the worst of the 
slain who are killed under wa! St | is oss aa) ta is PACA 
heaven, and the best of the slain ~., ,. Betts, eek ce ts 
are those who were killed by  #! @>S (!h8 Ge he eg cll 

Je oft ole Be Y bee 

them. Those (Khawérij) are the | ,*1 33 Sohne oa SI SE. ht 
dogs of Hell. Those people were Ak geet ae goede er 
Muslims but they became =i Wa lal Gl G rol cals 
disbelievers.”” I said: “O Abu ais 8 see S20 2 oe 4 ott Ee 

; \ ‘ye 4 1a Sad a 
Uméamah, is that your opinion?” AE BN dates ise ase Jt 0 a 

He said: “Rather I heard it from 
the Messenger of Allah #8.” 
(Hasan) 

ies is COL poe St ip ee) wh t pant | 6 gee SI yeaes| [cpa odtiunf] rex Seed 
Mopac Caylod Sy ca Ske cal Oe pbs debe cy aber Cade oye 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith contains a strong condemnation of the Khawérij, and is 
categorical on the point that they are disbelievers and are of the people of 
Hell. 

b. The Hadith confirms the heretical nature of their beliefs for which reason 
they have been declared as having gone out of the fold of Islam and entered 
the realm of disbelief. 

c. Muslims fighting the Khawdérij shall earn for themselves a higher rank and a 
distinctive position before Allah. 

Chapter 13. Concerning wii lag 2OG - Cr poe) 
Denial By The Jahmiyyah CY dicell) Legh il 

(i.e. Seeing Allah In The 

Hereafter, etc.) 

177. It was narrated that Jarir bin eae oh dl te 33 nt Gis - ww 
‘Abdullah said: “We were sitting ee) oe 

The Book Of The Sunnah 192 ARES) ins! 

with the Messenger of Allah 2. “a ay Doe f Gite 

Fo gy ate 8 
He looked at the moon, which “& Ge Gury ie teS5s wes 

was full, and said, ‘Indeed, you 5. 2.555 « Ja Ju Gas yt 

will see your Lord as you see this Gs noha, Weer Be sb 
moon. You will not feel the os! c bela} bie ary Cay 
slightest inconvenience and of nt bE epgle ol ood fF se 
overcrowding in seeing Him. If ~ *7 ope ge oe 

you have the power not to be il dy25 He Lyle US JU al se 

overcome and to say this prayer * 4%, og. Sh) ES chy ES cae 
before the sun rises and before it et = ‘2 AAG) all ol sa 
sets, then do that.’ Then he Y «jadi ida G53 LS 655 o5 fo 

recited: “And glorify the praises 32 6 
of. your Lord, before the rising of elas 

“ao 0% “an. 

$Y Bb peibic oF ig 5, fas 

the sun and before (its) eae $s pees gb is Me Je 

setting.” (Sahih) 

me ee oe og rr f-c-82 qonas 
JA Gb Ae Fee IF AS ul 

v8 23] doy TS LET pl 

« e} slat opal des 9s opr gl: dle dis| Js wh ce gill cgybedl ar ol ep 
ababeSl» paaliy eral ise Aw woh der Lael ¢plne's copey cVEto cE EL 

Commenis: 

a. 

The Jahmiyyah sect takes its name from its progenitor Janm bin Safwan. This 
heretical sect differs from the mainstream school of the People of the Sunnah 
in several conceptual matters. 

. The Hadith affirms. that the believers’ seeing their Lord on the Day of 

Resurrection and thereafter in Paradise is an undeniable fact. This is, 
however, not possible in this world for the simple reason that we, with our 
present body and its potential, are not capable to endure seeing Allah with 
our mortal eyes. 

. It does not mean that the other three obligatory prayers have no 

significance. It only means that anyone who can regularly perform the Fajr 
and ‘Asr prayers is in a better position to perform other prayers as well. It is 
because Fajr is performed at a time when a person tends to be sleepy and 
lazy. As for the ‘Asr, it is the peak time for man’s occupation with his 
business and other worldly activities. That is why it needs much greater 
effort on the part of the man to perform them on time and in congregation. 
Anyone who does them well can also take care of other prayers with 
comparative ease. 

. Striking the similitude of the moon is also meant to convey the idea of 

Allah’s being above and aloof from His entire creation. 

1] Qf 50:39. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

178. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 2% said: ‘Do you crowd one 
another in order to see the moon 
on the night when it is full?’ They 
said: ‘No.’ He said: ‘And you will 
not crowd one another in order to 
see your Lord on the Day of 
Resurrection.’”” (Sahih) 

193 Koadd ils 

a Py ted 

il S325 dB dt 
idk Hy cai 
we peat ear 0 tte we x e ayn 
GAN 053 5 O45 8 Op la 

asd, QU Asp) foadadl olab) Jy als gee # [meee] tee ad 
Samay ‘Avy BLS Eyed! (Bl 1b ES ald abtets topes ON CVV AYE pees! 
egal ed cay cle of cate ge VATA chen eels TAS /T dead pL 

Comments: 

The believers shall be able to see Allah with as much ease as they can see 

the moon when it is full. 

179. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa’‘eed said: “We said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah! Will we see 
our Lord?’ He said: ‘Do you crowd 
one another to see the sun at mid- 
day when there are no clouds?’ We 
said: ‘No.’ He said: ‘Do you crowd 
one another to see the moon on the 
night when it is full and there are 
no clouds?’ We said: ‘No.’ He said: 
“You will not crowd one another to 
see Him, just as you do not crowd 
to see these two things.’ (Sahih) 

2sag Ma os Ais ils — 1a 
« eel oF Gel ee | Ase as. 
Bas ol 32 OS dle yf ie 

Ca) 

af 

6 985 off tal 3425 yi 
BH 2 pA OBS 3 A ytain 
of gla :d6 .Y 26 Gotke 3b 
Coles 2b 3 i Us na oy) 
55 3 Sgplad Y Sip 8 .Y sé 

tga 3 aaglas laS VY 

- abalell Gttodt Sails ca hee ede ge VT teed on of [eee ees 

180. Waki’ bin Hudus narrated 
that his paternal uncle Abu Razin 
said: “I said: ‘O Messenger of 
Allah, will we see Allah on the 
Day of Resurrection? And what is 
the sign of that in His creation?’ 
He said: ‘O Abu Razin, do each of 
you not see the moon 
individually?’ I said: “Of course.” 

$e dels $5 5us GS 5,36 3 Lg 
- as Fy - - fe joe 
oF 8 cha on es OF cs lee oF ht 
PA % oF a < os - 3 

Yad| J 5) 5 rods od oP) sl rues 

- 1 ” 2 . 
a OS 8 Gy ext ax di Cl 
0 Bed 

SH PAS BH to of @ dE elt 

The Book Of The Sunnah 194 ALA las 

He said: ‘Allah is Greater, and Bite See A etage ee Bie 4 
¥ Aas ie. Att z ae oF ee 
that is His sign in His creation’” 70 ck 1e cde Why Yee Gaal 

(Hasan) ale 3 i A; casi ab 

Sule ge TVG RET BG Ob Hl yb gh eel [yee acted] teu 5 
+ gly bse! areee9 64 les 

Comments: 
The phrase ‘each one seeing (the moon) individually’ is used to convey the 
idea that, notwithstanding the fact that those seeing Him shall be in 
multitudes, no one shall have any difficulty in seeing Him. 

181. Waki’ bin Hudus narrated ijn 7203, gabita ase ae 5s - vAN 
that his paternal uncle Abu Razin arn eke a ae 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #@ 9 GF «tele Gy oles UI oss Gy ay 
said: ‘Allah laughs at the despair. - Pe 0 ee oe he 8 Gan 
of His slaves Sihough He fae 4 ae S oes ee one ee 
changes it.’] | said: ‘O  :#8 al 5325 JU dB aah Gl 482 
Messenger of Allah, does the Lord |g ke pe 
laugh? He said: ‘Yes.’ I said: ‘We  °#" Se. $n PR of My 

shall never be deprived of good 43s Gi Nal 3425 © re SG 
by a Lord Who laughs.’ (Hasan) en ae ere ee ee 

oo fea) a aloe Cade cp VYAVV/E deol tor ol Dope oath] or cx Baga 
Feat rae) pobedls soda ly cOL> cyl 4B 59 60 pF 5 olkas cpl alge rownes)| 

182. Waki’ bin Hudus narrated +625. ce ft & Ff aie 

‘s ° 1 Gas - VAY 
that his paternal uncle Abu Razin om or ca ae 
said: “I said: ‘O Messenger of 75354 33 Ly Gis :VG clea 3 
Allah, where was our Lord before < re Set, te Mee hE 
He created His creation?’ He said: : i ie dale G7 sls UU 

He was above the clouds, below Besy) ia ane SE epee oe eso 3 
which was. air, and above which 77 °°.) “f ta Dy glia eae seg 
was air and water. ThenHecreated = do 4) OS Gal Tail Uy GE re cb 
His Throne above the water’” ; , eles 2 Sidr 256 ried hk if 
(Hasan) ee aes is eee 

ge a Ploy Vi- 4 cal Vir « 

( The calamity that gave rise to the despair. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Oe PVG cage Bag ag oho penal 6 Gade yl dom ol Tepmm eoliwef] : 

Comments: 

195 GRAN Les 

Fe Saad 

a Calo iNe:S) Jy 64 ep Cat 

The word ‘Amé’ occurring in the Arabic sentence Kéna fi ‘ama’ could stand 
for the cloud. It could also mean ‘something beyond human 
comprehensior’. In other words, the answer to the question asked would be 
beyond the understanding of man. Anyhow, there was probably the need to 
rationalize the answer or justify the text if the Hadith were Sound, it is not. 
It is in fact a Weak “Hadith”, (according to Shaikh Albani) which needs no 

rationalizing. 

183. It was narrated that Safwan 
bin Muhriz Al-Mazini said: “We 
were with ‘Abdullah bin “Umar 
when he was circumambulating 
the House; a man came up to him 
and. said: ‘O Ibn ‘Umar, what did 
you hear the Messenger of Allah 
#8 say about the Najwa?"! He 
said: ‘I heard the Messenger of 
Allah #@ say: ‘On the Day of 
Resurrection, the believer will be 
brought close to his Lord until He 
will cover him with His screen, 
then He will make him confess his 
sins. He will ask him: “Do you 
confess?” He will say: “O Lord, I 
confess.” This will continue as long 
as Allah wills, then He will say: “I 
concealed them for you in the 
world, and I forgive you for them 
today.” Then he will be given the 
scroll of his good deeds, or his 
record, in his right hand. But as for 
the disbeliever or the hypocrite, 
(his sins) will be announced before 
the witnesses.’’’ (One of the 
narrators) Khalid said: ” At: ‘before 
the witnesses’ there is something 

ali do 

os 555 a eens gas ao 2 

Br wed 

oy ake i oof 

cas 1502 GG da 5 3 Gee 

Ss581 6 8 al Ot) Cas 
ci Si BE dl 545 Sage 28 

ale pate GS dateall 655 5 be Sahel 
G85 fo IS cash OE les 
i de aly 2 Gg 165 & is 
Bo dle Be BY de ay of ay ad 
it dB gal AS Ajai 4s tan 
Manat AES 3i Sle dimes ii dione 

eS. 

we peice) ota gi aah & 

ne 

“ij 

ca. 
berg 

of Fb EYAY SB 3 
giles 
tes 3 de | at <oil Ngee 

4] The secret conversation that Allah will have with His slaves on the Day of Resurrection. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

missing.” “These are the ones 

who lied against their Lord!’ No 
doubt! the curse of Allah is on the 
wrongdoers.”") (Sahih) 

gS call eV ge olga J pis 9? 

196 

rags lc pent Coyle ae ol 

CEN colney 04 hy se cal oy daw Gale ge CEPV/OI GL OY dis 3 LS ETA0T 

$4) 3915 ge ST Gib ge WAI ‘él Sabet 

Comments: 

cabal ole (JLG ail does dee 3 OL 

a. The Hadith contains the affirmation of Alléh’s attribute of speech. The 
People of the Sunnah hold the belief that Allah speaks whatever He wills, 
whenever He wills and, to whoever He wills; and the addressee hears Him 

speak. 

b. It speaks of a great bounty from Allah which encourages the believers to 
hope for His mercy. It also mentions the disgrace of the sinners, regarding 
which the believers are to remain in constant fear of Allah, since both hope 
and. fear are the necessary ingredients of Imdn. 

184. It was narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #€ said: ‘While the 
people of Paradise are enjoying 
their blessings, a light will shine 
upon them, and they will raise 
their heads, and. they will see 
their Lord looking down upon 
them from above. He will say: 
“Peace be upon you, O. people of 
Paradise.” This is what Allah says 
in the Verse: “Sal#m (peace be on 
you) — a Word from the Lord 
(Allah), Most. Merciful.”! He 
will look at them and they will 
look at Him, and they will not 
pay any attention to the delights 
(of Paradise) so long as they look 
at Him, until He will screen 
Himself from them. But His light 

[4 That is: ‘They say’ as visible in the Verse. 

2) Hud 11:18. 
8] yé-Sin 36:58. 

Aad eZee 

5 sich Le oe dass Gis — 
“eo past 
si 36 esl Lath Gis 

ual ot \At 

ests eee gf Gls 

ress Bal) Jal eco cag a S25 
BG pests Iss 33 @ jae 5 
SE ngs Se ppl GAT Si 
is 36 Y fsh Gal Sale pS 
€, po ot WG py :at 8 

4} 95885 rel BS QB LOA + a] 
po be tet SM oft Vo 
3 ASS ree eae Pe asi} gpk 

Mpasls 3 pgilé 2535 

ive 

The Book Of The Sunnah 197 Sek) es 

and blessing will remain with 
them in their abodes.’” (Da‘if) 

deo d doe Mee aa ES Ladd # Smeg lt ainss [rie cold] tee od 
Coke) opts 

185. It was narrated that ‘Adi bin (255 Bis sist th ele hs - the 
Hatim said: “The Messenger of ae ee iek < 
Allah #§ said: ‘There is no one gi GH UF stem LE cell OF 
among you but his Lord will «2% .-. Lae ay 4 - WE U4 ae 
speak to him without any pe 2a a : : ous a oe 
intermediary between them. He 425 45 3.) «45 alkic Y Jol Sy 
will look to his right and will not EA Van SET Ere Pan he ae 
see anything but that which he YY) st ee Gaal GAB Gis cole 
sent forth. He will look to his 46 & “eal [36] 2 pan 3 aaa LS 
left and will not see anything but tee wg ote ok 8s fet 
that which he sent forth. Then he “4 aslo] SBY OS ae LS YY ch 
will look in front of him and will =f, <Gy) -25 3 ¢S, Sth 3. tk 
be faced with the Fire. So Ha 38) a re ome ee 
whoever among you can protect (faa B05 aH 
himself from the Fire, even by 
means of half a date, let him do 

so.’”” (Sahih) 

VERY CVONR2e cde led Ss ye Ch GEN (obdl a el ig sd 
ay hae VI Cade ge VANE G eal oly Baal le Codi Gk cst cplunes 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith also contains the confirmation of Allah’s attribute of speech. 

b. Each person shali render his account by himself. No one in this world 
should, therefore, put his trust in some religious or divine person for 
intercession. 

c. Virtuous deeds are a prerequisite for deliverance from Hell-fire. 

d. Charity is also one of the means of securing deliverance from Allah's 
punishment. 

186. Abu Bakr bin Qais Al  f Gis: th a ilee ie SA 
Ash’ari narrated that his father sts MG OGee < eaid., maker» aoe 
said: “The Messenger of Allah @ ‘2+! 4 & pli AF coal se 
said: “Two gardens of silver, their = ss Jl aes Perel bite a She 
vessels and everything in them; 7 7 ° ~ : 

"ie. his good and bad deeds. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

and two gardens of gold, their 
vessels and everything in them, 
and nothing between the people 
and their seeing their Lord, the 
Blessed and Exalted, except the 
Veil of Pride covering His Face in 
the Garden of Eden (Jannat 
‘Adn).” (Sahih) 

198 SLA lis 

JB aol 32 1G AbV OS gf dl we 
head fy oer 8B a 3,85 JB 

gil CAS Se OUEES lig lig GT 
(yi 1 Gs pb Go Gd liga tig 
sist a5, Vy Suis 56 Hs A 
- 7 i rae aes 
Ade BE 8 ser dé 

6 EAAS— AVAL tOlee Lagi go ce? 1a) 8 vb © penal 6 Ga FedI a el es Saad 

denallie col cyto cys Vast cad)... geegell B53) OL] Gk OLY colaey cVEtE 

Comments: 

4 

a. The Hadith confirms the certainty of seeing Allah. 

b. The people of Paradise, once inside their abodes, shall be able to see their 
Lord — the only impediment being the Veil of His Pride. But when Allah 
decides to shower His benevolence and mercy upon His servants, the screen 
will go and seeing will be made possible. 

c. Countless and unmatched are the bounties of Allah in Paradise. What we 
find mentioned in the Qur’an and Hadith is only that which man can 
comprehend. Even the gold and silver in Paradise will be unlike the gold 
and silver of this world. They are superior beyond imagination. 

187. It was narrated that Suhaib 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # 
recited this Verse: ‘For those who 
have done good is the best 
reward and even more’ Then 
he said: ‘When the people of 
Paradise enter Paradise, and the 
people of the Fire enter the Fire, a 
caller will cry out: “O people of 
Paradise! You have a covenant 
with Allah and He wants to fulfill 
it.” They will say: “What is it? 
Has Allah not made the Balance 
(of our good deeds) heavy, and 
made our faces bright, and 
admitted us to Paradise and 

TY yunus 10:26. 

tose) Gis ST Yeoh Bully 
E5h doh al jos bp 2385 orn 
15H gal G role PAY 5G tht Jas 
isidindt Of hg hey dt Be (SY 
Eile Gl Je ll Oph Gy 23185 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

saved us from Hell?” Then the 
Veil will be lifted and they will 
look upon Him, and by Allah, 
Allah will not give them anything 
that is more beloved to them or 

199 Seay cates 

CS | oh err 4 Iasi é 
al Gk Sled Gass JE 8 th 
2 8 8 BE fot the Peek Ce 
ot re oes 1k Zl athe! « dil 
(pare 4 Pas 

eee BIG - cal 

more delightful, than looking 
upon Him.’” (Sahih) 

oeesell 45) OLY Ch OLN! cglae eel ig as 
44 Bales oy oles 

agalom oys VANig Fe Biceiis 

Comments: 

a. Looking upon Allah is the greatest and most pleasing bounty to be 
showered over the believers lodged in Paradise, and they will relish it more 
than anything else. 

b. Admittance to the Paradise, in itself a blessing, will also be the means of 
having the pleasure of seeing their Lord. 

188. It was narrated that ‘Aishah Ji is 1ytsk ty als GS - AA 
said: “Praise is to Allah Whose ~~ | |” A at 

hearing encompasses all voices. GH mY uf 
The woman who disputed cae 
concerning her husband (AI- 7 ile racer a a 
Mujadilah) came to the Prophet # docs ee wohl a asdtl coJb 
when I was (sitting)inacornerof ,4, 4 4 25% 1. eg 2 ak 

the house, and she complained a oe cel dea ; a 
about her husband, but I did not 6 Y55 XE ce GS CG Ul te 

hear what she said. Then Allah ee > iy 486 3. G teehee 
revealed: ‘Indeed Allah has heard (2 3 *a! JPG tdsa G oe) 
the statement of her that disputes 4ig235 a a a dg Zit 
with you concerning her aa steel 
BPAnyes 

husband.” (Sahih) 

ailes 64 nee Cade oye Vetere VALI: Slact aor ool Lerme] eps 

« billy eVPAT I he haves aver il OLS gh tha Pri] Js ok tek gl se Goel 

. Yee: ‘a 

Comments: 

a. Inclusion of this Hadith in this chapter is intended to confirm Allah’s 
attribute of hearing. It may, however, be pointed out that Allah's attributes 
are totally unlike human attributes. Even the slightest sound anywhere in 
the universe is not outside His hearing because, like other attributes, His 
attribute of hearing is also limitless. 

[i Al Mujadilah 58:1. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

200 

AES el 

b. The Prophet #% only followed the ordainments of Allah. He never permitted 
or prohibited anything except by Allah’s command and permission. 
Therefore, he only gave the answer after he received the revelation from 

Allah. 

189. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Your Lord wrote 
for Himself with His Own Hand 
before He created the creation: 
“My mercy precedes My wrath.” 
(Sahih) 

ete AA Cte) Of Gl cole! egie dl ol Feed ooliwl] ees 

Comments: 

ENGOIe 6 Bly CENT /V deol ue 

The Hadith confirms Allah's attributes of mercy and anger. It also mentions 
the Hand of Allah. It is necessary to believe in all of these, even as they are 
mentioned without coining similitude or imputing resemblance to. anything 
else. It is also not right to claim or suggest that Allah’s Hand in reality 

symbolizes His attribute of power. 

190. Talhah bin Khirash said: “1 
heard Jabir bin ‘Abdullah say: 
“When ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin 
(Haram) was killed on the Day of 
Uhud, the Messenger of Allah #8 
met me, and said: “O Jabir, shall I 
not tell you what Allah has said to 
your father?” Yahya said in his 
Hadith: “ And he said: ‘O Jabir, why 
do I see you. broken-hearted?’ | 
(Jabir) said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, 
my father has been martyred and 
he has left behind dependents and 
debts.’ He said: ‘Shall I not give 
you the glad tidings of that with 
which Allah met your father?’ I 
said: ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah.’ 
He said: ‘Allah never spoke to 
anyone except from behind a 
screen, but He spoke to your father 

a 

ZelGodl SB Catt] 

Base :VG fee op eet Bb Ry 

‘* 

Gis - 14. 

Crk 
“GC 
° 

tit 5425 6 728 SE Le Si 

The Book Of The Sunnah 201 ded i 

directly, and He said: “O My slave! er 
Ask something from MeandIshall ~ Zprt 3 

give it to you.” He said: “O Lord, 155 & :J . Shes fats ja Lge & 
bring me back to lifesothatImay ,, «. ee fete 

be killed in Your cause a second a} Sl EG sd 
time.” The Lord, Glorified is He, Yy gj rar 
said: “I have already decreed that  . ” : 
they will not return to life’” He J® gly 3+ eb 
said: “My Lord, then convey (this 
news) to those whom I have left Fae oa : rans , 
behind.” Allah said: “Think not of — . «455993 Pass) ise KS OG 6 aul 
those as dead. who are killed in the ~ 
way of Allah. Nay, they are alive, 
with their Lord, and they. have 
provision.’ (Hasan) 

tOl es dt Be eg GL OLB! eens cegde sl ax oI Lope oat! ] FeSa] 
« pails i pStedty cOle cyl are yg ole peed colby ce Cee Se OF Pevere 
vegbs arb sce tal ly cVArricn 

Comments: 

a. One should not say to a bereaved person anything that might increases. his 
sorrow and give him pain. 

b. The Hadith confirms Allah’s attribute of Speech. 

c. After a man dies: he enters the next world where it will be possible that 
Allah will bless him with special attributes. 

d. The Hadith confirms the reality of a higher rank for the martyrs. 

e. It is a proof of the high status of ‘Abdullah bin Haram, that Allah Himself 
asked him to decide and say what he wanted. 

f. All links of men with this world are severed after death, and they can never 
go back to the world they have left behind. This categorical statement cuts 
at the root of the people’s belief in the transmigration of souls. 

191. It was narrated that Abu G35 :4223 2! 33 Ss A gas - 145 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of Sok eg aad ce be 

Allah # said: ‘Allah will laugh at O* (243) al OF ORS SE 6255 
two persons — one of them kills gi J 25 06 :d6 SYA UI 3s 8 
the other, and both of thementer 4,, 0 -,0 <> ded S bs 
Paradise, for the first one fought Fe oles a} eets ail op #2 

in the cause of Allah and was Craecal| ness aus EU (age 
martyred, then his killer repented +o 

v 

Al ‘hnrén 3:169. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

to Allah and became Muslim, 
then he also fought in the cause of 
Allah and was martyred.’” 
(Sahih) 

202 aha ots 

2 % @f 4,8 aay os ark 

Bi Sst ob gts al oo Me 
wr Y 

: « “get * pet sie fe 

4 he Zs ples Teed calls dé 

4s 

« 2 920M 

chad) OMe SV ase bb gle Oly OL cB LYL cab eel tay pei 

ree 4p oy y head cal oh ge VANE 

a. Allah’s laughter is an expression of His pleasure. Therefore, pleasure is also 
an attribute of Allah. 

b. Only Allah knows what the end of a man would be like. Even the most 
hardened criminal can be expected to receive Allah’s guidance at some 
point in life. As such it is not proper to claim, as long as a person lives, that 
he will not accept guidance, and as such it is not right to stop inviting him 
to the right path until the last breath of his life. 

192. Sa‘eed bin Musayyab bey ies BS AS ie = Vay 

narrated that Abu Hurairah used 
to say: “The Messenger of Allah 
#€ said: Allah will seize the earth 
on the Day of Resurrection, and 
He will roll up the heavens in His 
Right Hand, then He will say, “I 
am the Sovereign. Where are the 
kings of the earth?” (Sahih) 

cn ote) oer 

é ai Be Gis ive 
le ol oF tee oe 

51g isa uf St ea A tere #e 

vi] oa 78 al ny ae ie 

‘dno ees oe dolgall (3 Sa 

Ao Se gh ual oF 8 

CVYAY TOV aLB og Qo dl Gad Ob GES! gb al ig sd 

Je oe tig Cade ge WAVE CE cgllhy Aedly alah dave Obl cpptdlel! lie clues 

Comments: 4 

a. This confirms the reality of Allah’s Hand. However, it is not allowed for 
anyone to invent a mental picture for such attributes of Allah. It is, instead, 
necessary that we believe in however much we have been told about His 
attributes, and not commit the mistake of likening the Divine attributes to 
those of the created things. 

b. The sky as it exists now shall cease to exist on the Day of Resurrection. 

193. It was narrated that ‘Abbis (Sis 745 3) Aint is - vay 
bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib said: “T was era hc = a tt Ate? 
in Batha’ with a group of people, 2” =’ & Jp Gis a | Gy tate 
among whom was the Messenger si le 32 cst BE Has sil 
of Allah #€. A cloud passed over 6 ae ae oe o 
isl ob Sf BEM oo Se 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

him, and he looked at it and said: 
‘What do you call this?’ They 
said: ‘Sahdb (a cloud).’ He said: 
‘And Muzn (rain cloud).’ They 
said: ‘And Muzn.’ He said: ‘And 
‘Anan (clouds).’ Abu Bakr said: 
“They said: “And ‘Andn.’” He 
said: ‘How much (distance) do 
you think there is between you 
and the heavens?’ They said: ‘We 
do not know.’ He said: ‘Between 
you and it is seventy-one, or 
seventy-two, or seventy-three 
years, and there is a similar 
distance between it and the 
heaven above it (and so on)’ until 
he counted seven heavens. “Then 
above the seventh heaven there is 
a sea, between whose top and 
bottom is a distance like that 
between one heaven and another. 
Then above that there are eight 
(angels in the form of) mountain 
goats. The distance between their 
hooves and their knees is like the 
distance between one heaven and 
the next. Then on their backs is 
the Throne, and the distance 
between the top and the bottom 
of the Throne is like the distance 
between one heaven and another. 
Then Allah is above that, the 
Blessed and Exalted.” (Da‘if) 

203 GL tas 

7 9 ° i il e ° - 3 

aa RbSL 2S 258 Gah we 
oaet 2 8 4, - 8 - 7 

4 5b RE tl S505 ogds chlee 
hyped iG GSEs 

ili dE Cte AIG a 
S38 Geli 236 Shy a j6 
Xs 5355 as G6 565 1b 1S 
i dE i Y Js teen 355 
tse of oi i te GY Gee xe 
EE CAUSE Geteg 
renee) acon js ” PIGS go Je 
A lis oy GS dis Sel gy 1% 
phic J plan Go US 59535 EBSBI 
sil al 35 eid Seth Je 
HB Gg IG sles J clan By US 

Ms S46 

dase ge EVYN IG Chega! Gok ceed! cosh gf or el Lede colin] ee ou 
Vobypee ply bbel Shae # Mle Ged ids SARE al segde gly cay Cheval orl 

194. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet #¢ said: 
“When Allah decrees a matter in 

1S ye claw I ae 

The Book Of The Sunnah 204 cen awl eny 

heaven, the angels beat their Be ek eer ee ns re 2 
wings in stb seins to His decree gu! OU" eg! OF ee OF iyhe 
(with a sound) like a chain ,4ti (3 il An] ees bp :55 #8 
beating a rock. Then “When fear AG Pe ee so ae ee 
is banished from their hearts, they #8 45a) Glas Ugeee! 2! Cpe 
say: ‘What is it that yourLordhas -,.% .2 34 Ge cardio fe FL 
said?’ They say: ‘The truth. And i a & y ae ae 
He is ie Most High, the Most Ge! sx Gil UB Be Je BL ib 
Great.” He said: “Then the fcet peteed UG “f an 
eavesdroppers (from among the - a 5 ae . = a8 
jinn) listen out for that, one above = «aS! nit «ak OH ean een 
the other, so (one of them) hears 5 44, e266 ves rec ee at 
the words and passes it on to the eo sae gs co a] is 
one beneath him. The Shihab Je Gal 285 cili J) gab Sf gs 
shooting star) may strike him «.., .- s- ¢ Be oe | 
ate he can pass ae tothe one D4 ot les cle J ls! gk) 
beneath him and the latter can, rats Bin Ver CARS Ga 
pass it on to the soothsayer or es fea, View Oe ; 
sorcerer, or it may not strike him G2 4s gil AWN! A Gia 
until he has passed it on. And he Wares 
adds one hundred lies to it, and 
only that word which was 
overheard from the heavens is 
true.” (Sahih) 

eed oe 68 BE er Ob che Bape Cit eyed ae eT [eee] ty 

fe a 4: Ola Cade oye VEAL ehAssie Sy a 

a. Aliah’s speech consists of both sound and words, which the angels are able 
to hear. 

b. Angels possess the consciousness and knowledge of Ajlah’s greatness and 
pride. That is why they affirm their lowliness and humility on hearing the 
Words of Allah. In fact, it behooves man to show greater humility than the 
angels because he has been given greater status. 

c. Soothsayers and astrologers have their links with the evil spirits (satans). 
Soothsaying and astrology etc. are, therefore, rightly branded as satanic 
sciences. Muslims must not believe in them. They should even avoid 
studying them. : 

195. It was narrated that Abu yi Gis sain 3) tle Ble - 140 

Musa said: “The Messenger of tgs foo ae aed oak ee Ae iy 

Allah #% stood up among us and *°*_ & 32°" OF wala Bh yet Rusk 

[4 Saba’ 34: 23. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

said five things. He said: ‘Allah 
does not sleep, and it is not 
befitting that He should sleep. He 
lowers the Scales and raises them. 
The deed done during the day is 
taken up to Him before the deed 
done during the night, and the 
deed done during the night before 
the deed done during the day. His 
Veil is Light and if He were to 
remove it, the glory of His Face 
would burn everything of His 
création, as far as His gaze 
reaches.’ ’” (Sahih) 

205 SES oles 

eared 

“a @ 3G vst gl b6 ade Tbe 
Sp 20 iS tb, 8 at d425 

cas GD Be Va FEY ay 
S5 I ke Sy iy is boa 

ed ve Gee youn Yee of ve 
«gt fF bs us oes « fell! je 
bis L535 Bs FGA abe 

Pur 

MBE So tas oS) ga le ages 

vo ple Vail Of pM ale IS 8 Ob cole colar ol Eeeel gees 

Comments: 

1A gles ol ade oye WAI e ote) 

a. Sleep and rest are the needs of the creatures since they remedy the fatigue 
and weakness caused by work. Allah, by contrast, is Ever Living and 
Sustainer of the entire creation. He is, therefore, exempt from both 

weariness and sleep. 

b. One of the interpretations of lowering the Scales and raising them is that 
He, in His infinite wisdom, decreases in this life the provision for some and 

increases it for others. 

c. Nothing in this mortal world can stand the glory of Allah. That is why 
when Allah manifested the splendor of His glory on the Mount of Sinai (Le. 
the Tur), it could not stand it and. was reduced to dust. 

196. It was natrated that Abu 
Musa said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: ‘Allah does not 
sleep, and it is not befitting that He 
should sleep. He lowers the Scales 
and raises them. His Veil is Light 
and if He were to remove it, the 
glory of His Face would burn 
everything of His creation, as far as 
His gaze reaches.’”” Then Abu 
‘Ubaidah recited the Verse: 
“Blessed is whosoever is in the fire, 
(i.e. the light of Allah) and 
whosoever is round about it! And 

AB 

259 Sas 14s 25 ale Gs - 144 
3,25 d6 db ts hte age OI 
BS ge Vo GY Bi op a 

g 8 ga.) BRo one Ff omty *~ aed eee 
cogil dla cadng bod) aie pli 

eee 

one ae - 2% “a of 
4 ¢ Aor ee cat ve Bgeok 
dye Sp ite gis S aha S55 

CoP gt GB EL oS Go 

KERN SS al Gy NS ii 3 

[A : fod! 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Glorified is All4h, the Lord of all 
that exists." (Sahih) 

Comments : 

206 

LBs) ts 

» Gthed| Cytecdt B51 Laowe] Foal 

a. It was not a worldly fire but, as mentioned in Sahih Muslim, the Light of 
Allah, The Arabic expression Hijabuhu nur or Hijabuhu n@r means His Veil is 

Light or Fire. 

b. ‘And whosoever is roundabout the fire’ means the Prophet Musa ssi and 
the Angel Jibril #4 (Tabari’s Commentary, 11/165). 

197. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet #¢ said: 
“The Right Hand of Allah is full 
and that is never affected by the 
continuous spending, night and 
day. In His other Hand is the 
Scale, which He raises and lowers. 
Have you seen what Allah has 
spent since He created the 
heavens and the earth? And that 
has not decreased what is in His 
Hands in the slightest.’ ” (Sahih) 

nye MH LOre cBBLAlL By ge cpg ol cat att 
uF Tc ge OPI SM aren 

Gis ab oli & gf Gis - vav 

Coa 
et +t_0' 

Gey 3 ss ET ju 4 
A ol YF eal oF ae ra 
:JU #@ 48 
wes GIS hr tts Bigs eu 
jaihis boat By Giell GAY 
pool! ait oe Kt = t Sgigh :d6 

y a as fii 

SB ge5NG 

plas Gobel wes Gb Eyteds cope Glew cyl # mene ceed dbs ca dy Cede 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith contains the mention of “Hand” as well as “Hands” 

Lat 5 
for Allah. 

This is also one of those phenomena (attributes) that needs unquestioning 
literal faith without searching for resemblance in this world. The Qur’an 
speaks of the two Hands of Allah at several places (e.g. Sad. 38:75). 

b. This Hadith describes Allah’s Hand as ‘right’. The Arabic text, in fact, contains 
the word Yamin that contains the sense of Barakah (blessing). A Hadith in Sahih 
Muslim (H. 1827) says that both His Hands are Yamin. Therefore, to describe 
one of Allah’s Hands as right or blessed does not mean that the other Hand is 
not so. The truth is that both His Hands are blessed. 

198. It was narrated that 
“Abdullah bin ‘Umar said: “I 
heard the Messenger of Allah # 
say, when he was on the pulpit 
‘The Compeller will seize the 

2) An-Naml 27:8. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

heavens and the earths in His 
Hand’ and he clenched his fist 
and began to open and close it. 
Then He will say: “I am the 
Compeller! Where are the tyrants? 
Where are the arrogant?’’ He 
said, the Messenger of Allah 2 
was turning to his right and to his 
left, until I saw the pulpit moving 
from below and I thought: ‘What 
if it falls with the Messenger of 
Allah #@ on it?’” (Sahih) 

207 aL) ous 

ea OG ST 522 of abl ats 32 
dite 3,8 A. JE gty ae a 

ol OAs — cote Gail sls Stell 
Ber Bate eae Peo guands ford 
age gl sas5ted af yeh 
SS st SF 3 a S925 JS J6 

iy Ass Bh A SES ots 
2 bul 3 Pieper Be gegh Jas 
$35 il J 925, 

ce WAAL e lly Eady Leal dee Ob egal! Clee cglee ae al es 

Comments: 

4 obs pyallye Cade 

a. The Hadith gives us an idea of Allah’s attribute of greatness and pride 
inasmuch as this universe, however vast it might be, is no more than a 

particle of dust before Him. 

b. It is allowed to make an occasional show of anger in religious sermons and 

admonitions. 

199. Nawwas bin Sam‘an Al- 
Kilabi said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #§ say: ‘There 
is no heart that is not between 
two of the Fingers of the Most 
Merciful. If He wills, He guides it 
and if He wills, He sends it 
astray.’ The Messenger of Allah 
# used to say: ‘O You Who 
makes hearts steadfast, make our 
hearts steadfast in adhering to 
Your religion.’ And he said: ‘The 
Scale is in the Hand of the Most 
Merciful; He will cause some 
peoples to rise and others to fall 
until the Day of Resurrection.’” 
(Sahih) 

ie hel 5 Bw bk 
Ab 3G GE as Gy yt abel 
to 5 Be atl wie Sig 15h 
JG tdi 6 G8 23 oft om 

aie Ligil 3 ee yet te enn 
i 5 A sl 

Cyt Cem Sle Sade ye VVTAT 6S SSI oP glut tor ol [epee eotuwt] saa 
Meoene abn] Lad ies eg ll SB y ca ple op tee 

The Book Of The Sunnah 208 ARES tas 

Commeats: 

a. The author has included this Hadith to prove the attribute of the Fingers for 
Allah. With regard to all such Ahédith the unanimous view of the. pious 
predecessors is that we must have faith in them without imputing any kind 
of resemblance in them to anything in the world. 

b. Giving guidance is the prerogative of Allah alone. We must, therefore, keep 
asking Him for guidance and steadfastness in our adhering to faith. 

c. Making someone high or low or enduing someone with honor and the 
other with disgrace, is sometimes decreed by Allah in consequence of man’s 
acts of commission or omission. At other times it is a test and trial from 
Allah, and. it is on the basis of his conduct in these tests and trials that man 
earns his high or low grades with Allah. 

a 4% 

Gas — yee 

200. It was narrated that Abu = :-Sull 33 Ai was 
Sa’eed Al-Khudri said: “The ae ey ae ae 
Messenger of Allah # said: ‘Allah 9 ‘PE OF «deekea} a Ae acd 
smiles at three things: a row inc isi gas oh ge calbgll Uf 
the prayer, a man who prays in 47 we ge ee, 
the depths of the night, and a = Seed Sh Oph 3B dil dp) SE od 
man who fights’ I think he said, JF5U3 GMS 8 “Bal 7896 
‘behind the batialion’”” (Da’if) a ade 
ols) Bla Jes «fu See 3 be 
eS AE g 

ee 

*y 

wy 

iy 

che pl heer 4 Whee Syde gye At [Pi teot ae th Tete eolinf] Forte 
dl Ror Land dali. Eytedl yards (4 wD J ggene aoroli y Vier 

201. it was narrated that Jabir bin itz GSS ets 33 dase Gis - yey 
‘Abdullah. said: “The Messenger ee ee ee ee Soy fhe st 
of Allah #% used to appear before 9 ‘Ol 3 « fSlo] Ge ogle5 Cy ail 
: 7 © ue ae git ae ot ome ee 
the People during the Hajj season oh pile 34 - eal agit Sr gk - 
and say: ‘Is there any man who 7 le ae fad "ees 
can take me to his people, for the OS ‘JB al we op ple GF ctest os 
Quraish have prevented me from s oth le 42 ts cs we at Js 
conveying the speech (i.e. the i ye ; ue uae wr : a ee ‘i 
Message) of my Lord.” (Sahih) SL slot ded VW dyes top gel 

o 

asi 

eae mee em 62 een Eye e 
eas all if apts Bo bagd O8 as 

code Shy cEVNE D> Old 6 Ob cul cagls J ax ol £ oakiwhl + Pei 
$ ‘a tees Bi Aor et Lenmane + ep 
se 2go-be le ¥ (ye Cee ee? 2 gde Si SEs ca boll Gute oe VAYOre 

The Book Of The Sunnah 209 2h4 wus 

- plel aly care Lia OS Vs (4st 4 45 ,aSI) Cede 
Comments: 
‘Appearing before the people’ (i.e. his meeting the people) was in the hope 
of finding a person or tribe from amongst the people coming from all parts 
of the Arab world at the time of Hajj that could help him in his preachings, 
and thwart the designs of his opponents, so that the people could 
comprehend the truth and accept it. 

202. It was narrated from Abu 23h rare 2 sé bi lee ie -— vey 
Darda’ that the Prophet #§ said o 
concerning the Verse: “Every day a oF ¢ cde 2 o ars Was fess cn 
He is (engaged) in some z 

eat “Elie ae include 8 iB oe ash Jl & ela 
forgiving sins, relieving distress, gli 3 > ge Af: le 

retinue some Pecpleand PANGS fie ah ale fe dB EY4 teem 

others low.” (Hasan) A ols 7 P on cased 
cain hg Bas lee GAs he 

My a 

(OLY She ppl ree C6 pen oe pe gl cpl ae ot Fey] eps 

e wb 48. ga Bb als os el G,b dos «Grell dbus esr * Gone gl Ham 9 CARL 

» EAVAR Case bd VAN [At dopo: (3 gjbell adley OLYT Ce 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith confirms Allah's. attribute of action manifested at all times 
without break. 

b. Forgiving sins is also one such matter in which there is absolutely no 
intermediary between man and God. Some misguided souls think that, 
even in this, ar: intermediary is an imperative necessity. Christians believe 
that forgiving the sins is within the domain of their popes and priests. 
Hindus consider it impossible to approach God without the mediation of 
the Brahmins, and it is only through them that they can have their sins 
forgiven. The Qur’an, on the other hand, asks in the form of a rhetorical 
question: “And who can forgive sins except Allah?” (3:135), i-e., no one has 
the power to do it. 

Chapter 14. One Who Ee Bie Bye Fe OU - (VE peneall) 
Introduces A Good Or Evil (VE dined) oo a 
Practice : es 
203. It was narrated from oe! & roles LE fp dees Ie ~ Yoo 

Mundhir bin Jarir that his father ie ee : Sige J is aI 

QO) AeRahman 55:29. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

said: “The Messenger of Allah 2¢ 
said: “Whoever introduces a good 
practice that is followed, he will 
receive its reward and a reward 
equivalent to that of those who 
follow it, without that detracting 
from their reward in the slightest. 
And whoever introduces a bad 
practice that is followed, he will 
receive its sin and a burden of sin 
equivalent to that of those who 
follow it, without that detracting 
from their burden in the 
slightest.’ ” (Sahih) 

of 6 ete CVVWie ceed Stach 

210 SLs) oles 

ae OS le bod Be Ee he 355 
a fee 4 2 Te oe 38 e a#e 
oe oat VY le ee & 5593 Bddy 

eg essa! 

Baal le Codi GL ISN cglee aol cea sd 

4 oh 9 Abt ne oy dares 

Comments: 

a. 

‘Introducing a good practice’ means that a need was being felt for an act of 
virtue but no one was practising it, or else introducing a good practice 
would mean reviving the implementation of a Sunnah that had since been 
abandoned, and when someone revived it, others also took to following it. 
It would also apply to the situation where one devises a new methodology 
for the promotion of a proven act of virtue. Declaring an action as good and 
giving it currency in the society on the basis of one’s own subjective opinion 
is a form of innovation (Bid‘ah) which will attract retribution or punishment 
instead of recompense or reward from. Allah. 

. ‘Introducing an evil practice’ means a situation where a man did an evil act 

which was nor-existent in the society. Then, taking the cue from him, 
others also started doing the same. The Prophet #@ has warned against it. 

. People engaged in the work of Da‘wah (calling people to the right path) 

must be on. their guard lest they themselves start doing an act or inviting 
others to do something, on the basis of some weak or spurious Hadith, not 
proved from the sound sources. If they do so, not only will their entire 
labor go to waste but they shall also have to carry on their shoulders the 
burden of the sins of others who followed them in that act. 

. Crediting the reward or punishment for deeds done by a person to his 

account is an automatic operation, by the will of Allah, in which the person 
concerned has no say either way. It is, therefore, meaningless to argue in 
support of the concept of the transference of the reward of one mat’s 
actions to another. If such a philosophy of transference were accepted, then, 
by the same token, the transference of a person’s sins to others will also 
have to be accepted. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

204. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “A man came to 
the Prophet #¢, who encouraged 
the people to give charity to him. 
A man said: ‘I have such and 
such,’ and there was no one left in 
that gathering who did not give 
him something in charity, to a 
greater or lesser extent. The 
Messenger of Allah 2 said: 
‘Whoever initiates a good practice 
that is followed, he will receive a 
perfect reward for that, and a 
reward equivalent to that of those 
who follow it, without that 
detracting from their reward in 
the slightest. And whoever 
introduces a bad practice that is 
followed, he will receive the 
complete burden of sin for that, 
and a burden of sin equivalent to 
that of those who follow it, 
without that detracting from their 
burden in the slightest.’”” (Sahih) 

211 ALE) Lee 

siSlh 2 Ef esis ke Gla - 14 

al ee DE al be eylght se of 
Ess M3 SN 5 ce dU Gk 
JE 1555 105 cade 27185 SS cole 
de SAM fo al o ws 
of 86 al 5525 SB HB 
Mi Uet S SS cy Yb 1s Ge 
be Ge Vag SE ge ol os 
Gab a Es Be og ced pa ol 

ell bal ong < Mel¥ eas ahs ta 

ee tas sG5h a fates Wi cas SEH 
beret ee Ee ee a eS ae 

NEA 26S pn gol Sy ca Lawalie ge Yor /Viusold ap Lene eatin} ] ‘ed 
Opby BAM hind oye Gojy che’ ye tagl ged bin / (roe oul 

205. It was narrated from Anas 
bin Malik that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Every caller who 
invites people to misguidance and 
is followed, will have a burden of 
sin equal to that of those who 
follow him, without that 
detracting from their burden in 
the slightest. And every caller 
who invites people to true 
guidance and is followed, will 
have a reward equal to that of 
those who follow him, without 
that detracting from their reward 

iG paell US Fe GE - Yee 
€ ao 4 ~ ee ° resi <f 
se! cp AZ OF CR je reas 8 sii 

e 

° 

ot 
pis Geshe GE ST Be it 685 be elle 
of 3i Be FSG .a56 TNS Sy es 

- deat 

et a a shoal be Galt Vg GH 
age) fe BSG a6 chk Jy ots 
AEE pat) be Gali VG RHI 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

in the slightest.’”” (Hasan) 

212 A235) oie 

Caodl cam ace di! wes ol se sl © 6 pe gl ated 9 [cpmom oobi! ] Fes Beal 

Comments: 204 & 205 

VOACI Ee 63 pase oe er 

The term ‘misguidance’ as used here includes things like idolatry, 
innovation, sinful acts and all those actions that are forbidden in Islam. As 
such, anyone who invites the people, or persuades them, or cooperates with 
them. in the doing of such acts, will receive the burden of sins equivalent to 
that of those who follow it. ‘Guidance’, on the other hand, includes things 
like believing in the Oneness of Allah, following the Prophet's. Sunnah, 
doing the obligatory duties, and avoiding all things that are sinful or evil. 
Therefore, anyone who invites others to the doing of such virtuous acts will 
receive a reward equivalent to the reward of all those who followed him in 

those matters. 

206. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah. that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Whoever calls 
people to true guidance, will have 
a reward equal to that of those 
who follow him, without that 
detracting from their reward in 
the slightest. And whoever calls 
people to misguidance, will have 
a (burden of} sin equal to that of 
those who follow him, without 
that detracting from their sins in 
the slightest.’ (Sahih) 

< a 
1 Ge 

Suis 4 Ate Sys Ff Ge es 

cele 122 ggah 2c Gs sack 

fea YAVE Le sel wae Beagles as ee XU ‘bl t pln ae ol Ps 

207. It was narrated that Abu 
Juhaifah said: “The Messenger of 
Allféh 8 ~~ said: ‘Whoever 
introduces a good practice that is 
followed after him, will have the 
reward for that and the 
equivalent of their reward, 
without that detracting from their 
rewatd in the slightest. Whoever 
introduces an evil practice that is 
followed after him, will bear the 

2 oe ee OF ot go te A. 
passe be als OFS be payed dhs 

Seer ye | SR See Ss pore Tey 
6 oaks ie poss Ct An Cp pg ¢ ed 

og Za ° pat ao 2 ls 12 
SF cb Se pa ylbal Bed chy ale SW 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

burden of sin for that and the 
equivalent of their burden of sin, 
without that detracting from their 
burden in the slightest.’”’ (Sahih) 

213 Paaens ere ey 

oe tt cof o go, 
Cee meal Se Gals 

YOU SL YAY oye RLS yale Vt ait etal pty [ommend tee ai 

208. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘There is no caller 
who invites people to a thing but 
on the Day of Resurrection he will 
be made to stand next to that to 
which he called others, even if he 
only called one other person.’” 
(Da'if) 

the of ot iF ed 2 aya 
x Aad 428 a 
tan AG il JG dE SE EA OT Be 
A tek od » 

4 Red ol eel ge VW0ie ctl Sb mele ool gt ol Lae altel] ogee 
-& ggeardi dard pale gl cpl gh Gd & Cte oll Nad 2S ne gol airy) 

Chapter 15. One Who 
Revives A Sunnah That Had 
Died Cut 

209. Kathir bin ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Amr bin ‘Awf Al-Muzani_ said: 
“My father told me, narrating 
from my grandfather, that the 
Messenger of Allah #8 said: 
“Whoever revives a Sunnah of 
mine, which people then act 
upon, will have a reward 
equivalent to that of those who 
act upon it, without that 
detracting from their reward in 
the slightest. And whoever 
introduces an innovation (Bid’ah) 
that is acted upon, will have a 
burden of sins equivalent to that 
of those who act upon it, without 
that detracting from the burden of 
those who act upon it in the 
slightest.’ "(Da ‘if) 

“ 

a 

- se > 

M5 2 CAT SoCal = Cho cena 
ee ee ee? ‘aioe 

(\0 dame!) Cone] 

be ogl BS EE Oe ot one 
Ze si ga dE ag ot 025 Of chs 
AN Se 898 ntl & bs 2 by 
GS patl ie Sal Te ee & 
Sip) ale OW te Jo Hk FE oa 
dee 3 Sl GV te he & 

MES ly 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

214 ALI) was 

ded JY 3 ele be Gb gla cgbe dl aot [le Cie wlell tg sd 
NVOre cle puis 2S Cod Ny ca BS Cade oye YWV ie ded! oleety 

210. Kathir bin ‘Abdullah 
narrated from his father, that his 
grandfather said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #§ say: 
‘Whoever revives a Sunnah of 
mine that dies out after I am 
gone, he will have a reward 
equivalent to that of those among 
the people who act upon it, 
without that detracting from their 
reward in the slightest. Whoever 
introduces an innovation (Bid‘ah) 
with which Allah and His 

Bo Fars 

ie ea oe 
er 30342 Fe, ont E90 4 ey 
BE Sp ES Be Fl ol or felt 

4 eB og RS BS ra € ae ‘ 
Spey Cares 1S oe FE cal SE cali! 

Gis - ye 

B Bo yy Es el ga Si BE ail 
3 A Be BW OB gue ei 
ath be Ga Y pl & & he 
il Loy V M4, C8) ag eS 
Ss My dob & lt Se le SB 55 

a ae. 

1° % id Ge an id 
Messenger are not pleased, he will ie ae & oat Y ‘th 
have a (burden of) sin equivalent 
to that of those among the people 
who act upon it, without that 
detracting from their sins in the 
slightest.’” (Da‘if) 

Gill) Qyedt st he Chae] 2g Se 

Comments: 

a. The term ‘dying Sunnah’ means an action or deed perfectly in order in the 
sight of Islam—be it an enjoined duty or a compulsory or desirable 
act—that was neglected by the people out of their indolence or ignorance, 
And ‘reviving’ it means promoting it in the society once again. 

b. The Hadith holds out a stern warning to those who try to promote 
innovations in the society and also invite others to indulge in them. 

Chapter 16. The Virtue Of ss oe A tat 
One Who Learns The Qur’an aaa a ace 

oe Bytes a aA 
And Teaches It (V1 dime!) sabe g Of 5atl 

211. It was narrated that rg R$ 1S ty dans Gs - NN 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan said that the =~ s,s Spann dice = 5% 
Messenger of Allah #% said:  G sOlaus das Dte coll pao oy 
(According to one of the :- Se ee et eat ae 
narrators) Shu’bah (he) said: ‘The a 7 
best of you’ (and according to) : : 
Sufyadn (he) said: “The most +4.42 42 we se Ae Ae 28, 
2 J — 3 4b) JE Ole 
excellent of you is the one who 2 Ms Dh dye JE tee 

The Book Of The Sunnah 215 <A les 

learns the Qur’én and teaches it.” 2% -: phi ee iy Ost 
(Sahih) eShath — bit Jb 3 — mS abe s- 
Caley SH ole : ia 

cOrYVie castes OL a pis os pat ok <1 wl plas «soba Poapes Fea Sael 
«4 datle Cute oye OTA 

212. 1t was narrated that :453 as oe ide Gas - yiy 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan said: “The bse oe gach a 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘The & py ga rs 20 ue 
most excellent of you is the one SE on See See A 0% sei fe 
who learns the Qur’an and 7 

teaches it.’ (Sahih) obs 3 4 paLashy 8 rf 525 dB dt 
ashes Srsdit 

Comments: -ciibell Caled jt Legoenel 2 gay Al 

a. The test of a person’s excellence, in consideration with Allah, lies in his 
good deeds, although the general criterion in the world is to measure up 
the value and worth of a person by the yardstick of his wealth, his good 
looks and his status in the society, which, is an incorrect criterion. 

b. Learning and teaching the Qur’én means learning and teaching the reading 
of the Qur’an along with its rules of recitation, articulation. and intonation, 
as well as its meaning and interpretation. And since Hadith is but the 
explication of the Qur’aén, anyone who learns the science of Hadith and 
teaches it, is also included in that roll of honors. 

c. A person not following the teachings of the Qur'an has no share in that 
honor, as proved from other Ahadith. 

213. Mus‘ab bin Sa’d narrated Gi§z 4505 25 tat) SR oy 

\ 

that his father said: “The se ae ee ae ee 

Messenger of Allah 2% said: ‘The «44g op pele Gas cole Ge Sybil 
best of you is one who learns the ea a oe red oe 
Qur'an ee teaches it.’ ‘Then he : ae = a eas j uF 
(Mus‘ab) took me (the narrator) Sa! ols 3 eso 1B al ISG 
by the hand and made me sit oie gett ~ th ge eles 
here, and I started to teach Cflnte gh Six Ils 4 
Qur'an.” (Da‘f) Pee ence 

OL asl as YVAN: estat ae ol Cee Cadosdls [om Vind 03 bine! ] FeSaed 
Se yled| Canal Cte show) \ind Sone gel Jy 4 eo lel ad oye YYTA I cViaob 
Adem oe dk one y WWhies coll 8 LoS hy xo my COLES gpl 

The Book Of The Sunnah 216 ARN Qld 

Comments : 

a. ‘Asim whose name appears in the chain of the narrators of this Hadith is the 
well known Imém (authority) in the science of the Qur'an recitation. 

b. The man gifted with the capacity to do some noble work should be advised 
and encouraged to occupy himself in it for the benefit of the Muslim 
Ummah, as well for the sake of his own prosperity in this world and the 
next. 

214, It was narrated from Abu 
Musa Al-Ash‘ari that the Prophet 
%~ said: “The likeness of the 
believer who recites the Quran is cg pay gf te UE te ERE 
that of a citron, the taste and aids an on Fos 2 
smell of which are good. The ‘Jb 88 43! gé «GASY! Coy J! 
likeness of a believer who does ie Re tz il ong je 

not read the Qur'an is that of a : 3 j ; . 
date, the taste of which is good a3 «Cth ug Ch Garb agi 

Saes 

23 danas sly i: Aas Bhs - vie 

16 wee eG YE. 

Seo % 

but it has no smell. The likeness 
of a hypocrite who reads. the 
Qur’an is that of sweet basil, the 
smell of which is good but its 
taste is bitter. And the likeness of 
a hypocrite who does not read the 
Qur’an is that of a colocynth 
(bitter apple), the taste of which is 
bitter and it has no smell.’” 
(Sahih) 

pd 

zg Bk go £6 Pa 1 3 
Bye fos Gla a CY] oul crit 
ea fad eee Aree OF eT on ot 
BEN fos cl wey V5 cb Garb 

You BERN ses SH GE oh 

r re ae Sty Fee % ed oq - if 
Y ol eas noy, yeas cab 

qe @ vb oF aF4e 8 a ea 
V3 ¥ (gab « Allars)| fas Oba en 
Baia = 

cal]... OL a BLA Sel) ow ol CL Ola folad col asl tg sd 
cae Sate ge VV COL a Lab Dad Ob tgp dled! DLs colacy Condy O104re 

Comments: 

“4 

a. Both reciting the Noble Qur’an and implementing its teachings are acts of 
ereat virtue, and are both required of all of us. Recitation being an outward. 
quality has been likened to the sweet smell of the fruit. Implementation, on 
the other hand, is an internal phenomenon, since it includes qualities like 
deep-rooted faith, sincerity of purpose, love and fear of Allah, as well as 
righteousness of conduct and piety. As such it has been likened to the taste 

of the fruit. 

b. Both faith and conduct of a hypocrite are sour, but his recitation. of the 
Qur’an could be of benefit to others. That is the reason why he is likened to 
a flower whose sweet smell is sensed from afar, but its bad taste makes it 

unfit to eat. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 247 Armd) ole 

215. it was narrated that Anas xe) | 2 ee be abe GiB 

bin Malik said: “The Messenger of ee Seige er es oS anh 
Allah 2% said: ‘Allah has His own nasi RWanCKES nes Oo gaol es 
people among mankind.’ They Wie Aer. igo. ans g 
said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, who SE% oy! OF tel OF baja cal 
are they?” He said: ‘The people of +, «yal al Sp :@@ i 3,25 J 

the Qur’én, the people of Allah ™ Pee nna 

and those who are closest to Jus 

ea aS) ESE ot (aT sal Lat pa 

c£ONr OL ail plas 3 SSSI eo sll fom ol [cpm olin! ] Fea Banal 
Sessile 66 deol Ape g 649 oge ot odo oy oot/\ = pSbosSts 
Comments: 
The term “people of the Qur’an’ means the reciters, the memorizers and the 
learners of the meaning of the Qur’an, in the light of the Ahéddith of the 
Prophet #8, as well as those who apply the teachings of the Qur'an in their 
daily lives, and also those who carry its message to others. 

216. It was narrated that ‘Alibin oi das gh OK Boye Bhs - v8 
Abu Talib said: “The Messenger 3. +425 a> op 8 fo oe. eg 
of Allah # said: ‘Whoever reads ie” oracle a ge 
the Qur’an and memorizes it, 34 .565 3 oS SF Ke gl UF OS 
Allah will admit him to Paradise Gene aces ted “neces te, Soa 
and allow him to intercede forten S1™ us! g che jf clea] oe rok 
of his family members who all Sait i Sao. ME dl S25 ga 38 
deserved to enter Hell.’”” (Da‘if) 5 Peer ee er 
be TAS Ob ntcg Sol ail alot abery 
GE Ce Sa 8 BS ase al 

aif ole be ok coh a Glad egde dl asl [Me cia oolef] Teckel 
ere we oD dB, 64 soll Olde Oo pam pe gl Ceaghor oP YQs Ore cl ail #60 
ard y Cadosdt Ny ze ge fp Ciudad! (3 Chet: Olek 9 Gain F Ree Oke I Cnty 
Svea 

217. It was narrated that Abu 5M Ol ae 23 tie Gls - vw 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of aD ae ee ee Cae 

Allah #@ said: ‘Learn the Quran, teed! AF Ge cael yh Cue 
recite it and go to bed, for the { jee sibs te oe tech se 2 Bis 
likeness of dhe Ouran and the one a pa ee - cane = oa 
who learns it and acts upon itis #1 doa) JE sdb soja Ql Le ved 
that of a sack filled with musk, + 
which spreads its fragrance 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

everywhere. And the likeness of 
one who learns it then goes to bed 
with it in his heart is that of a 
sack that is tied up from which no 
fragrance comes out.’”” (Hasan) 

218 Se Hee 

splie SS ox Bales 5 SS 
S85 «gs JS Bay Cy Ke ghee 
tpl dé 3) 

ily BAS] Sype od cle Le WL 6 OF yall Bad «ste pl ae ol Depa oa lunf] cx Fae 
LOL> cyly Charger cpl dren ele ISBy cu dalal gil ado cya YAVT 6 we I 

218. It was narrated that Nafi’ 
bin ‘Abdul-Harith met ‘Umar bin 
Khattaéb in “Usfan, when ‘Umar 
had appointed him as his 
governor in Makkah. ‘Umar 
asked: “Whom have you 
appointed as your deputy over 
the people of the valley?” He 
said: “I have appointed Ibn Abza 
over them.” ‘Umar said: “Who is 
Ibn Abza?” Nafi’ said: “One of 
our freed slaves.” ‘Umar said: 
“Have you appointed a freed 
slave over them?” Nafi’ said: “He 
has great knowledge of the Book 
of Allah, is well versed in the 
rules of inheritance (Fara’id) and is 
a (good) judge.” “Umar said: “Did 
not your Prophet #@ say: ‘Allah 
raises some people (in status) 
because of this Book and brings 
others low because of it?’ ’’ (Sahih) 

S fo FGoB 

Sls fp Acs Sige ff as - via 
ol o& pho YF pal] Gls sulk 
ié fas of is gf pe ts ls 
wish Ge A eyo oe gf gt 

- 

Pie oe aes fae OSG Olin, 
Scag) Jal és MSE oO heb Je 
e518 .oBh Gil agile Cakes : 30 
GE Gigs de 85 a8 etl tn 

cA 

41 dG SS pyle Ciane fe 

(aie ele eles al ots 2636 
OE SE ul 32 OE ob 

cell we. dole Rigel po% of fb wh coy lull se 6 plane rouge) ‘ers 

Comments: 

14% oot lel Cad of Ai 

The Hadith only mentions the Book of Allah. It, however, goes without 
saying, that in order to qualify for the title of a scholar of the Book, one also 
has to be well versed in the science of Hadith, since Hadith is both the 
theoretical interpretation and the practical application of the Qur’an. 

219. It was narrated that Abu 
Dharr said: “The Messenger of 

tbl dil te 35 2a Gas - 14 

The Book Of The Sunnah 219 ALAS has 

Allah #8 said to me: ‘O Abu sia Oe — Dera” tek oir 
Dharr! For you to come out inthe =O $2 Be FP Bed 263 oe ail 
morning and learn one Verse od ait 3 {lies 

from the Book of Allah is better *% . 04, 5 22 cf Gy ae at hte 
for you than praying one hundred pS 4 OY 2s UI GB tl 525 

Rak‘ah, and for you to come out U3 bf fe HS ail OS te 
and learn a matter of knowledge, ~*~ .,, 7 <> 4, 06° , 2 
whether it is acted upon or not, is «lath Ge UE pled ad OY5 SG Sle 

better for you than praying one ted sj ote eos of -f “3 
thousand Rak‘ah.’”’ (Da‘if) Geo xe ¢ fee ol gl & for 

alm ge YO /Vralady lal! Oly aele 3 SLE ol or el Tete coli] tee po 
pai eb cy ge # leads Spmregdly «Sl pall atansy b Spd Aor 6 kb gp dlLe 
OL) gies cplalally odyeli 5 Wie call 

Chapter 17. The Virtue Of clea) fab SG - AV areal) 
The Scholars, And ne ae Ae ee ee 
Encouragement To Seek ee piel gh orally 
Knowledge 

220. It was narrated that Abu gee i ale jy 45 ic -— vye 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of Boe eins Ne Se ae 
Allah #% said: ‘When Allah wills 9% ‘7 Of scieMl ke Bae 
good for a person, He causes him a ibs oa oh de BB SA 
to understand the religion.’” ~~ ~ 7% |”, en Re ween 
: i a0 BE ath D525 SG SUB 835 
(Sahih) il og Sar HE ath D925 A 
3 2 20549 Fos 
- Cell oo Aeae Nt 

dood alsys Ar pore Caydo cps A\ete peas! ry ot lal ar ol Leone] Fea Baad 

& pleat 9 Viie cgaldedl he 3 oS dalpt Jy ce Gal #4 eVine oe (NE /¥) 

Comments: bem pey VOVVi 

a. Only a person well versed in the rules of Shari‘ah concerning all important 
matters of life can achieve the blessings of this world and the next. This 
underlines the importance and need of acquiring the knowledge of religion. 

b. It also highlights the lofty position of teachers of religion. However, the 
only people capable of delivering this knowledge to the people after the 
passing away of the Prophet #% are the scholars of religion. The Messenger 
of Allah was himself a teacher, as the Qur’an says: “And he (the Prophet) 
will instruct them in the Book and wisdom” (2:129). 
The term Hikmah (translated as wisdom), used in the Qur’an, stands for the 
understanding of the religion, namely the laws and rules of the Islamic 
jurisprudence. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

221. It was narrated that Yunus 
bin Maisarah bin Halbas said: “] 
heard Mu’awiyah bin Abu Sufyan 
narrating that the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: “Goodness is a 
(natural) habit while evil is a 
stubbornness (constant prodding 
from Satan). When Allah wills 
good for a person, He causes him 
to understand the religion.’ ’”’ 
(Hasan) 

Ssh Bas sles 3y fds Bhs - v1 

ve 8 ere) 4% ot So 
ire ice OF Oly Gis hens cpl 
J z t 

Mie cOlLe ol Arr 9 YAO {N42 WSS e ceil ball tom ol Depno oaliw|] Fez Seal 

Comments: 

-plylall sie Jedd! gladk cpe tS il 

a. The expression “Goodness is a (natural) habit’” means that the knowledge 
of the straight path is already ingrained in human nature. Thus, a person 
possessed of upright nature has no difficulty treading the straight path. 

b. “Evil is a stubbornness” means that a person treading the path of sin. is all 
the time contending with himself. The inciting soul pulls him to the ways of 
sin and tries to keep him from repentance, while his conscience tries to keep 

him from the ways of sin. 

222. It was narrated that Ibn 
“Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #¢ said: ‘One Fagih 
(knowledgeable man) is more 
formidable against the Shaitén 
than one thousand devoted 
worshippers.’ (Da‘if) 

idglt Gis ses 23 fds Gls - vry 
foegke Bot Be re i 
OB ylE gh gb cls be ches 
et a a ae 4 ge “Us 
ge Ab) doly 4a BE dN Ud JE 

le il by old 22M 

cde ada fad bole be Gl tbl cde dt an] [ee Gis cola] ta oe 
aagily crygardl siete che oy cay Moye idlby ca Ad gll Gute ge VIAN ¢ canta 

223. It was narrated that Kathir 
bin. Qais said: “I was sitting with 
Abu Darda’ in the mosque of 
Damascus, when a man came to 
him and said: ‘O Abu Darda’, I 
have come to you from AIl- 
Madinah, the city of the 
Messenger of Allah #, for a 

wees GLe spl 

rdeaishl 26 Uf pai Gis - yee 
HES of elk J 555 3) ail Le Che 
gos est of ul LF BH gpl 
2 HSH (of te Coie 28 250 V8 
ty SO 15, BOG Ge et 

- ge 

KAN he ELST 5155551 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Hadith which I have heard that 
you narrate from the Prophet #8.’ 
He said: ‘Did you not come for 
trade?’ He said: ‘No.’ He said: 
‘Did you not come for anything 
else?’ He said: “No.” He said: ‘I 
heard the Messenger of Allah 2 
say: “Whoever follows a path in 
the pursuit of knowledge, Allah 
will make easy for him a path to 
Paradise. The angels lower their 
wings in approval of the seeker of 
knowledge, and everyone in the 
heavens and on earth prays for 
forgiveness for the seeker of 
knowledge, even the fish in the sea. 
The superiority of the scholar over 
the worshipper is like the 
superiority of the moon over all 
other heavenly bodies. The 
scholars are the heirs of the 
Prophets, for the Prophets did not 
leave behind Dinar or Dirham, 
rather they left behind knowledge, 
so whoever takes it has taken a 
great share.’ ” (Daf) 

tO) 8 y Hh AT Bt eu & 
YVo:d6 His Sh ste Gi dG cae 
wou 3 tO See eb ale Sy 2G 

or 242 ik 4 rs e rf 
oe ake =o ea nee ae ve 

ts Sic iy dh A ap 
ib 8 cobalt Ae me igsasl 
(AN oe Ob fs Sls j plal 
eld fad Oso cel 3 vt Ss 
ge 3 al fais stl Je 
Bf ed Boy eu Sy ostgS 
hie V5 Lae Log pl ach 
ily basy Jéh daef 325 celali Rye 

or celell as 6 ob YUEN Ie « pbelt cago rn doe ol arr e asi! | es 
torres st fares Ghee cal! podgh iSlby cVUAY cGdeslly cosh gy dle Gye 
Adan 3s dal gd tudo y 6 AP WBS 5 Cae aslo & OLe cyl 

Comments: 

a. Scholars of religion must either sit in the mosques in order to impart 
knowledge to the people, or hold sessions at conveniently located places 
where everyone—rich or poor, high or low—can reach them and profit by 

their teaching. 

b. It is a praiseworthy act if a man travels from one city or town to another, in 
order to gain knowledge from a learned man. 

c. All the creatures of Allah love and pray for the prosperity of the man who 
undertakes a journey in pursuit of knowledge. 

Qa 

. It is a matter of great honor for the scholars of religion to be termed as the 

spiritual heirs of the Prophets. The honor, however, puts on their shoulders 
a heavy burden of responsibility to (i) make plain the essence of truth, (ii) 
_ invite the people. to accept it, (iii) try to wean them away from falsehood. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

222 Sn) ls 

and, (iv) never allow greed or fear to distract them from the doing of their 
duty. They should, in short, try to emulate the example of the Prophets of 
Allah who were the embodiments of fortitude, sincerity of purpose, and 
commitment to their mission of preaching the message of Islam among the 

people. 

224. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “Seeking 
knowledge is a duty upon every 
Muslim, and he who imparts 
knowledge to those who do not 
deserve it, is like one who puts a 
necklace of jewels, pearls and 
gold around the neck of swines.’”” 

(Da’if) 

8 te we Bo 8 

ais GIS 2 lee Uy ples hs ~ ve 
Boodle G58 Bie chal gy 
EMG os TE ae of 
aie pili Ciby Be és es Jb 

i - is cll & , gen T cane ds 

"acai Sighs Saye Gli sles 

Riad WIS Gb aly VV cpa Gaim # [ioe tend osliwl] Fes Saacd 

Comments: 

The expression ‘Every Muslim’ means both men and women, since 
following the laws of Shari‘ah is the bounden duty of both sexes. It is, 
therefore, essential for both men and women to know the permissible from 
the prohibited in Islam. The Prophet # also taught the tenets of our faith 
and its demands to both the sexes alike. 

225. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: ‘Whoever relieves a 
Muslim of some worldly distress, 
Allah will relieve him of some of 
the distress of the Day ef 
Resurrection, and whoever 
conceals (the faults of) a Muslim, 
Allah will conceal him (his faults) 
in this world and on the Day of 
Resurrection. And whoever 
relieves the burden from a 
destitute person, Allah will relieve 
him in this world and the next. 
Allah will help His slave so long 
as His slave helps his brother. 
Whoever follows a path in pursuit 
of knowledge, Allah will make 
easy for him a path to Paradise. 
No people gather in one of the 

Bee ay 

ae abl aoe ax) aie Pes re 
| 6s wi ix HS 
sé eb el an es a so 
Vs Pax 2 als al 55 ifioee bt pen 

Lelae eat Peri) 

oe 3 isi 56 & sh 36 QB Bl 
ie aa al 
ace! big rai J bs Ji Go 
al os 4 tod & ot OB 
ES ill Ags YY wb 251555 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

houses of Allah, reciting the Book 
of Allah and teaching it to one 
another, but the angels will 
surround them, tranquility will 
descend upon them, mercy will 
envelop them and Allah will 
mention them to those who are 
with Him. And whoever is 
hindered because of his bad 
deeds, his lineage will be of no 
avail to him.’” (Sahih) 

223 ELAN ules 

Mere es Ho pease ESN (gs 
pee earige code fed 

38% 

Cd 

% 

CSI gles OT all ay He glee VI ab Ob colewly SUN colee a ol tees pte 

Comments: 

ar onby dnd col onl of VIAGIE 

a. 

b. 

The Hadith confirms the fact that each and every action done by man shall 
have its appropriate reward or recompense from Allah. 

Not all the retribution or recompense for the deeds of man is necessarily 
postponed by Allah till the next world, since some of the punishment or 
reward is also given in this world. 

. The Hadith holds out the inducement for such virtuous deeds as helping the 

believers in their hour of distress, concealing their faults and failures and 
doing one’s bit to create ease for his brethren-in-faith. All of this is meant to 
build relationships between. the Muslims on the foundation of mutual love 
and. well-wishing. 

. Educational gatherings are like receptacles for the special mercies from ~ 

Allah. It is, therefore, important that one punctually attends and not miss 
his lessons in the Qur’an and Hadith study circles, or in the religious 
institutions. 

. It is a matter of great honor for the seekers of knowledge, that Allah 

approvingly mentions them to the angels with Him. It means that the 
pursuit of knowledge is an important means of gaining nearness to Allah. 

FG By GE e 

226, It was narrated that Zirr bin 482 (in - ces 22 AE HE — oven 
Hubaish said: “I went to Safwan p> ¢ oe. one Af 
bin ‘Assal Al-Murddi and he said: el of pele $2 jax b UH! 

‘dest OF 

‘What brought you here” Isaid:‘I + «f 6 oe 

am. seeking knowledge.’ He said: 
‘I heard the Messenger of Allah 
#% say: “There is no one who goes 
out of his house in order to seek 
knowledge, but the angels lower 
theix wings in approval of his 
action.” (Hasan) 

w 
Lares 

The Book .Of The Sunnah 

224 Ahad | ot 

ida ey Ley ctgsanl ARS 

Ble gl oweey ce Hj Sae ge VENTA /Esteod oe sl Lyne ool] eas 

227. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #§ say: 
“Whoever comes to this mosque of 
mine, and only comes for a good 
purpose, such as to learn or to 
teach, his status is like that of one 
who fights in Jihad in the cause of 
Allah. Whoever comes for any 
other purpose, his status is that of 
a man who is keeping an eye on 
other people’s property.’”’ 
(Hasan) 

VAre Crh ye) 

Gis 3 SS fl Gis — wv 
(pee gf HA Be celal Bb ae 
So . 1 yh ceo t eae coat 2 
Carin SB oy us| oF 6G paal ea 
4 ai aie a “ - 

glows te Se) de ME i S85 
at Sata of a58 ot 4 oe <1 
5B ctohes 3! dole pod YI 4 ¢ lds 

gab chs Ay hs fen dpe 58 Ns 

Aowrin 9 64s he lane| oO me Cad cya ENA/Y tal ao ol Depa oo linsl] cSt 

Comments: 

Gee gdly br dls teSlells 6Olo onl 

a. The purpose of building a mosque is not only to use it as a place for 
- worshipping the One and Only God, but also to use it as a center for the 
propagation of Islam, and as a school for imparting and receiving 

knowledge and education. 

b. Engaging in. the teaching of religious sciences is also a form of Jihdd, since 
the real purpose of fighting in the cause of Allah is to extricate the people 
from the misguided darkness of disbelief into the radiant light of Islam. So, 
if there were no centers for teaching and learning, it would be a difficult 
task. to educate the new converts to Islam, which would nullify the very 

purpose of Jihad. 
228. It was narrated that Abu 
Umamah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #% said: ‘You must acquire 
this knowledge before it is taken 
away, and its taking away means 
that it will be lifted up.’ He joined 
his middle finger and the one that 
is next to the thumb like this, and 
said: ‘The scholar and the seeker 
of knowledge will share the 
reward, and. there is no good in 

His Gis rye 3 Ales Gas - yra 
ie ASG ou HE we 
Suh of be cee 42 ay of ye 
tig oSglen zo | dake Jé 36 
G55 1S Das Ga OF J ba 
GY 6 go Lil ce gy 

at 
ae 

é 
gh ,4 shath, lal 5B Sika 

The Book. Of The Sunnah 

the rest of the people.’” (Da‘if) 

225 Aan) tl as 

MEN glo 3 2k T9  SW 

Sado ge VAVOTE TAL SUS gl abl ool [Me Gat ebul] ca ed 
vedeoh 1ISy We Cee pe cy de au AGL ot oy Slate 

229. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #@ came out 
of one of his apartments one day 
and entered the mosque, where 
he saw two circles, one reciting 
Qur’an and supplicating to Allah, 
and the other learning and 
teaching: The Prophet #€ said: 
“Both of them are good. These 
people are reciting Qur’d4n and 
supplicating to Allah, and if He 
wills He will give them, and if He 
wills He will withhold from them. 
And these people are learning 
and teaching. Verily I have been 
sent as a teacher.’ Then he sat 
down with them.” (Da‘if) 

15231 Se 3 5h Gs - yva 

oe 8 pe geek 4 yeast 
gan be pk Ob RE Bl deo oS 

ley 38 158 <Spencll JER co et 

4 t, eee Test tg ae 
«al 0 9645 ONS Sth 

= 

a, e Fode “ ae - ° Feta 
Lails 6Qgeless Ogeled LY, gee 

6 pl ak3 only « yaqearell dane Sunt 9 Ayn sgl & ply Aten 5 Lote | Tes Sata 
ety gt Yin) ins coltuly gril ae fay) yay core 

Chapter 18. He Who Conveys 
Knowledge 

230. It was narrated from Zaid bin 
Thabit that the Messenger of Allah 
#8 said: “May Allah cause his face 
to shine, the man who hears what I 
say and conveys it (to others). 
There are those who have 
knowledge but no understanding, 
and there may be those who 
convey knowledge to those who 
have more understanding of it than 
they do.’” 

Nahe Me ye SU - CA pend 
CVA dae) 

one ok en Sa AGL pee _ 
et cp AT Le Cp temas Le - YY 

4 

e 
gon 8 po thgy coed ‘ f- a 
asl of cola 3 a! ook on 
oa a 4 4 : tee 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

(One of the narrators) “Ali bin 
Muhammad added to it: “There 
are three things because of which 
hatred does not enter the heart of 
a Muslim: Sincerity in doing an 
action for the sake of Allah; being 
sincere towards the rulers of the 
Muslims; and adhering to the 
Jama@‘ah (main body) of the 

ABN les 
Je Y 246 cuisz eer Bese i Ele ab 515 Che 

eas SONA] ‘phe asl Ran} Sele 
eis Seek aS eas ca 

Muslims.” (Hasan) 

Ons od cpt ade oy £4Ne: Case: sl 

Comments: — 
a. 

3 (gl plait ae ol Lip]: ‘es 
Lae ne 9 poedls cogls wl ait 4s 98 "al gc Ads doed 5 oYrA: G cede ed 64 

The Hadith speaks of the honor and esteem of those who engage themselves 
in acquiring the knowledge of Hadith and conveying it to. others. It says that 
the Messenger of Allah #¢ himself has praised those that are engaged in this 
laudable task. 

. The Hadith mentions one of the benefits. of learning the Ahadith, which is 

contained in the fact that at times it happens that a man knows. the Hadith, 
but is incapable of exercising his independent judgment, or deducing the 
rules of Shari‘ah that could be derived from it. But the same Hadith lights up 
with another man when it reaches him, and he is either able to draw 
various rules of Shari‘ah from it, or draw more rules from it than were done 
by the first conveyor of the Hadith. 

. ‘Adhering to the Jam@‘ah’ means not to create dissensions in the community, 

and avoid doing things that could do harm to the Muslims and good to 

their opponents. 

231. Muhammad bin Jubair bin 
Mut‘im narrated that his father 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 3 
stood up at Khaif in Mina and 
said: ‘May Allah cause his face to 
shine, the man who hears what I 
say and conveys it (to others). 
There are those who have 
knowledge but no understanding, 
and there may be those who 
convey knowledge to those who 
have more understanding of it 
than they do.’” (Hasan) 

Other chains with similar 
wording. 

DAS of dl ae 2g Atak Ge ~ wy 

ve 

he oe CGS! op sate be tog! Cea 
Ber BE GAD ge «pH 
iG as a325 ab “JG aol ob cakes oil 

mA 4 or) dB At ot assy 
oo pe SS GE Se es 
hg BB 3s 6B JE O19 a 
Ji Bie it & ye We 

Gis 2 le | “As Benue 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

227 CES! ws 

go 4 

a ae “qe, Rs Say 

ty dace sae 2G teers Cp tne 

os © ted oF of , ery 

rer Op ee OF (GAS oF Ged] 
ages BE EN 98 tel BF canbe’ gl! 

Ch A eed ol ade ge VOLE VIV/TE SS gh ebll ol Lye ged 
deol ae BS talpd Cody cies Gye ol gp ple Gedy gre Glee| 

232. ’Abdur-Rahman bin 
‘Abdullah narrated from his father 
that the Prophet 2@ said: “May 
Allah cause his face to shine, the 
man who hears a Hadith from us 
and conveys it, for perhaps the one 
to whom it is conveyed may 
remember it better than the one 
who (first) hears it.” (Sahih) 

0 ne 9 

Ba FG rae o Fa. 

Cp heceas chy Uy Aint Gls - yy 
as : fee 3p Mins Gas YE sgh 
it jain SG BE BN OF ag BE cal 
Bash 5B tas © Ge Us 

als be Sodio cle bb ol colall 6gde Jl tor pl Freed eatin} | Tex Seae) 
Ole cpl arenes arcana’ a tly Ca dad Colm op YUOVie ¢glandl 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith contains the glad tiding that each age, even after the age of the 
Companions, shall have its preservers (memorizers) of Ahéadith, regardless 
of whether their number is more or less. 

b. Memorizing the Ahédith is generally taken to mean learning them by heart, 
although the term would also include preserving them in black and white. 

233. It was narrated that Abu 
Bakrah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #¢ delivered a_ religious 
speech on the Day of Sacrifice and 
said: ‘Let those who are present 
convey to those who are absent. 
For perhaps the one to whom it is 
conveyed will understand it better 
than the one who (first) hears it.’” 
(Sahih) 

peg GSS thy ty diet hs - vee 

Sat 

3 Gis Ge Sul Sibel om YI 
5 US cael eS ho 
ex 2S atl pos Che tS oo of 3s 
SB sth lett ska 5 pal 

| 
| 
: 
| 

The Book Of The Sunnah 228 Aad) at LS 

kL eget egyBdl cpa GML ale Ghee cboly Eble cerere oolienf] tee se 
ANWAe cel woe elo mew Bb SL 6 doll ‘ prlnes Wee tooe ell Abs 

234, Bahz bin Hakim narrated (Gas 3:3 1 33 XS in Gas - ye 
from his father that his eshte de eae : fe, 8 sf 
grandfather Mu’awiyah Al- y oe peas Cama ae CS ee 
Qushairi said: “The Messenger of 6S oh 5H UF es Salt cei 
Allah # said: “Let the one who is Be ge grate says tag BP fe: 
present convey to the one who is (J Gyetill Gyles ote GF cael LF 

absent.’” (Hasan) RYN ees ag Yh we an 3,25 JG 
mee 

7 7 

Gone gi Har 9 6 5g, Calo cys 0/0 :4a>K ae ol Depa odtinsl | ‘eps 

Comments: 
The expression ‘Those who are absent’ also includes those who, being 
present somewhere else at that time, were not able to hear the Prophet's 
word first hand. It also includes those that were to come after that period, 
but had the benefit of hearing the words of the Prophet #¢ from the lips of 
the Companions #. 

235. It was narrated from Ibn ite UG 
‘Umar that the Messenger of 5 05 ce, og epee, cea oe 8 
Allah # said: “Let those of you #48 ge 1 G203!Ul ems Ye pl 
who are present convey it to those «3.51 a COE ay er mee 

£ oe 
toe 30 Seek fa, 

ae By aeol Gas - Ye 

of you who are absent.” (Da‘if) a ge le : 
& ole ol Sy Aeele Col SF ¢Zeaccill 

O Se tl GF ee gl JH cglig be 

ce! Brainy: Lagat PF) op wh sg gel sagls yl tor ol [ote oobi] | es Baad 
cpl a BP Sy cy UAW Cate ge BLE Gy deed ge EVVIC cgdedly VIVAL 
6 oy HLS Cotedly (2B) J pgaee cod] 

Pars 

236. It was narrated that Anas =: {22s wall Ge dace Gis ~ ye 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of ous 22g (28, 4 pe ay 20 B09 KEE 
Allah #€ said: ‘May Allah cause BUR UE Sigel elec ores ee, 
to flourish a slave (of His) who 23g 23 Gly ae fe eb, ol 
hears my words and understands ‘ 
them, then he conveys them from 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

me. There are those who have 
knowledge but no understanding, 
and there may be those who 
convey knowledge to those who 
have more understanding of it 
than they do.’” (Hasan) 

Ale aes EG a RE 

Pony a ge “a, gt angie 
oe eB hole OF . Ge WAL SS cates) 
ge ae 

iy Bl gb 3 os pte 25 a 

capes oJ Land yoy cay Olas ge Utell ol ge ted sl [pel igi Ad 
pda! ts 3 Sine gl te Gee Gob Cotes 

Chapter 19. One Who Opens 
The Door To Good 

237. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: ‘Some people open 
the door to good and close the 
door to evil, and some people 
open the door to evil and close 
the door to good. Glad tidings to 
those in whose hands Allah places 
the keys to good, and woe to 
those in whose hands Allah places 
the keys to evil.’” (Da‘if) 

EF liie BF Bs SU - (18 pnaalld 
(\4 dail) Al 
x55 cdl 25 BA hs - yev 

Bo Fae s 

Do tomer PTR EEE ch 
ol £2 3 fait Be get GI 
5525 d6 38 awe g OT be il 
cpr Asis oO Se Spy aE ai 
SA Gest EN Se OG GAY Gute 
Gilet i fee BS os SD Gite 
els he SA iy ts Me 2S 

eglh op Anes edd Cd SEI le mele col gpl on ot Lae cok] ees 
+8 ph 9 male gh on! Ae Fated Gb Sado’ s rar new) nee 

238. It was narrated from Sahl 
bin Sa’d that the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: “This goodness 
contains many treasures, and for 
those treasures there are keys. So 
glad tidings to the one whom 
Allah makes a key to good and a 
lock for evil, and woe to the one 
whom Allah makes a key to evil 
and a lock to good.” (Da‘if) 

cs ok - #0 2 Bee Ee 
re. 2A! deus oO Ogle bus — YA 
é Mee ee ote 

& 
Lon 
. 
cs 
i 
Bea 
* 
- 

cM lds «35158 5d a bp: 
col) Gt Gn the cd yb Astis 

y 

The Book Of The Sunnah 230 See las 

Jas or Dy Eade oye TVA/ATELS Ob Slee ae i Lee ostiuf] ees 
obs Casill BLS cies Lj op Gaede # Ger cli cw 
Comments: 
Arabic phrases, literally translated here as ‘keys of good’ and ‘locks of evil’, 
are in fact expressions meaning ‘the people who open the door of good and 
close the door of evil’, and so on. Thus, in plain language the person 
possessing the keys of good is the one whom Allah grants the ability to 
" attract more and more people to the path of good, and block the path of 
evil and, thus, keep the people from falling into error. On the other hand, 
the person who chooses to be an associate of the Devil, would be the one 
who opens the door of evil through which multitudes of people go astray, 
and take the path of Hell. Such a man can be said to have closed the door 
of good on the people and kept them from taking the path of guidance. 

Chapter 20. The Reward Of 
One Who Teaches The 
People 

239. It was narrated that Abu 
Dharr said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah 2% say: 
‘Everyone in the universe, in the 
heavens and on earth, prays for 
forgiveness for the scholar, even 

tl let vis OG = (ys pared) 
(Ys dinesti) a 

6 ai 3,2 re 36 S550 gf ge 
SEN BS pal ld Op Sil 

the fish in the sea.” (Da‘if) 4 ei 3 otedl ; yal Ji 

BLL sll elke gy Olte # GUL Beh 8 ge oe oi [Line ostul] EPs 
AVYY) Geld) Stosd! Lge alg aly Coup) pgree pee cp pain y cogil Sy ae 

Comments: 

a. ‘Everyone in the heavens’ means the angels, and ‘on earth’ means Allah's 
creation on earth, namely animals, minerals, insects, birds and sea creatures, 
etc. The presence of a virtuous man on earth is a blessing for all the 
creatures. 

b. The Hadith confirms the high place of honor and status of teachers and 
preachers before Allah. Conveyance of Allah’s Message and propagating it 
could be done either through word of mouth, or writing, or formal 
teaching, provided that the promised honor will only go to a person if he is 
also acting upon the knowledge he is delivering to others. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

240. Sahl bin Mu‘adh bin Anas 
narrated from his father that the 
Prophet # said: “Whoever 
teaches some knowledge will 
have the reward of the one who 
acts upon it, without that 
detracting from his reward in the 
slightest.” (Hasan) 

Comments: 

231 AB ES 

MB ble pe Bo dU ae gt OF 
oF 6 foe “4 9 Be 
| ie Get Vg bee Ye BI 

Behe Cop ool] ‘eps 

It is because giving knowledge to others is also a form of preaching. The 
reward of one who engages in inviting others to the path of virtue has 
already been mentioned under Ahédith 205 and 206. 

241. ‘Abdullah bin Abi Qatadah 
narrated that his father said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #% said: “The 
best things. that a man can leave 
behind are three: A righteous son 
who will pray for him, ongoing 
charity whose reward will reach 
him, and knowledge which is 
acted upon after his death.’” 
(Hasan) 

Another chain with similar 
meaning. 

aS gl fo des is - vei 

al ie cdl By Ades he caprtch 

oo AE al 25 dE OE aT be 
ile Hy 268 ot ty jen ie 

BAe a. 

cles AST A gd Bing Bg 
[32] sk of Bis; gas Pages 
Sept Gis gla! OL ot Lag gp wees 

Ce a ae aa a 
sol 36 BS ol of Bl we 32 chs 
[ised 5b. att 25 Ca 

Gobet OLS gpl drmecy £5 SI e gst tor ol Lepnm] Foote] 

Comments: 

a. Children, both sons and daughters, are the priceless gifts of God. The best 
way to pay one’s thanks to Allah for these gifts is to give the children good 
education and breeding, so that they grow into good Muslims and useful 

The Book Of The Sunnah 232 Foded et i 

members of the society. 

b. ‘Ongoing charity’ means doing things whose benefit endures for a long 
period of time. For instance, it is an act of ongoing charity to make 
provision of water to the people in a place of scarcity. Another example 
woud be the teaching of the skills of a trade or profession to an 
unemployed person, so that he is able to earn his livelihood through lawful 
means. 

c. Teaching a branch of knowledge to someone or doing some useful scholarly 
work, is also an act of virtue whose reward shall endure. Works compiled 
by the scholars of Ahddith and other scholars also fall in that category; their 
reward shall also continue to flow to the compilers as long as the people 
keep benefiting by them. 

242. It was narrated that Abu ae tans 48 ji GS - vey 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of ,, se ce, | 
Allah 2% said: ‘The rewards of the Ge Ads! Gas: Che 
good deeds that will reach a 
believer after his death are: 

es 

So, 4 ge gy ee a ? 
» bight we! ey B955 as “kee 

Knowledge which he taught and 
spread; a righteous son whom he 
leaves behind; a copy of the 
Qur’an that he leaves as a legacy; 
a mosque that he built; a house 
that he built for wayfarers; a canal 
that he dug; or charity that he 
gave during his lifetime when he 
was in good health. These deeds 
will reach him after his death.’” 
(Da‘if 

EY fi we ff gue GAB ais 
#6 ai 3,25 dG 2c6 igs wal 
Sy ghesg shes Se Gh GE Le Sp 
tiie iy pig ide Lh ay 
by Sh ay tanta Gf ig Geary is 3 
Big saber Ges) xs ded of 
tial oles ake 3 al be UEP 

or 6 

Madge Wy ye 

timmy Aa gpl ores Ole Gas 3S ded! el (ete wbell ge ss 
sy gger| Abnd ety foolenoll pladk cya ob tb lle gto 

Comments: 

The Hadith only mentions a few acts of virtue that would attract Allah’s 
mercy and form a basis for the forgiving of a person’s sins and the raising 
of his status after his death, as though the occurrence of his good deeds 
were still continuing. 

It may be noted that all the acts of virtue mentioned in the Hadith are those 
that the dying person had himself performed during his lifetime. Acts like 
the reading of the Qur’an or performing the prayers on the dead person’s 
behalf do not figure in the List. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

243. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet # said: 
“The best of charity is when a 
Muslim man gains knowledge, 
then he teaches it to his Muslim 
brother.” (Da‘if) 

233 diet las 

be coal GF Gls] Ss: gil 
Sf gd of ie cad yooh ae 
fh :36 RE ee] 
clele ehucl aycis 

Ghat 

Cpe Ceed| ca Cydy ge JEN! ig e sje tor ol [itpa.d eolinl] Ces 

Chapter 21. He Who Dislikes 
Having People Walk Behind 
Him 

244, It was narrated from Shu’aib 
bin ‘Abdullah bin “Amr that his 
father said: “The Messenger of 
Allah # was never seen eating 
while reclining or making two 
mien walk behind him.” (Sahih) 
Other chains with the same 
meanings. 

Sore gl Atauds WIG epi 
thd af oF b4 SU - 01) pnd 
(Y) ties) hE 
Gis eb Ty XK ff Gls - ver 
oF iho gf 2s 32 tant “by 
ts JSG a at 05 gh G dE a! 

9985 age fly Vy hs 

Bye Bsg cyl A oe 

: deli cess ib oat) Gls - 
aes a da «eicte jy bus Gas 
dele eligi ya fh pala) Glsy 
cae cetiel yey Gls « jl 

ee GE TWN ig Se ISVS Gl chaabY! cash gl a 21 [gree] 2 yes 
dle ode ge cl tayl yet alyis Ca eh op aie cy dere Gil ge re ee beled cpl 
V4 /£) Bytenalt begets AT THT /D GLSY! dt LS 90% Gl 

Comments: 

a. It is a sign of vanity or pride on the part of a man that he walks in front 
and makes others walk behind him. It means that the person concerned 

The Book Of The Sunnah 234 ARS Le 

thinks himself superior to others and cannot bear others to walk alongside 
himself. 

b. Some people follow the custom that if a holy’ man or an elderly person is 
sitting on a couch, they will not share the couch with him but sit on the 
ground. This is again a bad custom, since there is more humiliation in it 
than in walking behind someone. 

245. It was narrated that Abu) (Gis 7335 
Umamah said: “The Prophet 2% 
walked on a very hot day & 
towards Baqi’ Al-Gharqad yz <: 
(graveyard of Al-Madinah), and ~, - ; 
the people were walking behind Gl 54 :dB GUN ol Ge Susy rH 
him. When. he heard the sound of forte we et aot 4 erg ale 
their shoes, it affected his soul so aa eg me * ' eas Ae Ses 
he sat down until he made them © 3.2 @2% Lb cas Syhts 2H OK 

go 4Gra spae 

“yy decee Lie — Yho 

—\ 
° 
\ 
cas 

a 

\ 

» 
\ 

go ahead of him, lest that make g- Lf 

£ Get & - 0 -S 4 
him feel too proud.” (Da‘if) i a ca = ~ - Chat 
is tit et BEE GG a 
_ sil 

cles Olas Gina) YEO CTYATC Bip CS me gd! adedy [rigene ookied] tee a 
“tage ol 

246. It was narrated that Jabir bin «53 sas yaks YF ose is - ven 
‘Abdullah said: “When the Prophet ten et Ws atl ty 
#8 walked, his Companions would = i ae ae a a cae 

walk in front ofhim, andhe would 5 :dG al we of pK be Fall 
leave his back for the angels.” raul Lust os es 1 MH 2S 

(Hasan) ; 
BEY 054 L555 

CoS SoGll Cys) ooney ou leak) of Yor [Ns sao ae >| [op] ees 
dnd Cydmy (VONOOTe MAACT AY /) tool te J tals oped ge Ble Gl cutesy 
«pled aly alan (YAY /£: Att) 

Comments: 

a. What we learn from this Hadith is that it is all right, that of the people, some 
walk in front of the revered person and others behind him. What is 
forbidden is that all of them walk behind him. 

b. It is no offense to the dignity of the revered person that people walk in 
front of him. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 235 iS) et OS 

Chapter 22. Taking Care Of {le stots 2 bar 
The Seekers Of Knowledge oa 2 slo's] ad (TY paced) 
(YY dao!) piel 

247. Abu Sa’eed Al-Khudri 1315 o to load epee Gis - yey 
narrated that the Messenger of 7 ge eg gt 
Allah 8% said: “People will come to ol GF Oke Gy pel! Gis 1G past 
you seeking knowledge.Whenyou ea Jit wl Le Ga Pelee 

see them, say to them, ‘Welcome, : 
welcome,’ in obedience to the :JG BE ail deny bf 
injunctions of the Messenger of 24 3a “ 

Allah #2, and instruct them in is Fe rom i5 i cpl i gilas 

“vs 
ss) 
+ 
—1, 
: 
i? ond 
X 
2. 

N 

e 
~ 

knowledge.” Bd ds Bey Gye LE 
(One of the narrators said) “I said ° cad; 

to Al-Hakam: ‘What is ‘Iqnuhum?’ ee 

He said: ‘Instruct them.’ ” (Da‘if) HG (ed Fp bo: Real i 

Beat 
gap clase) 3 ele bl call cde axel [Moe Cie ootied] tee 
alam 4dS Alyce Oy slagly UIT Shy ca Dobe ol Cede ge TOKE coball ly 

Lr phy ere Cully LS cpl 

Comments: 

a. Blessed are the seekers of the knowledge as given by the Prophet 2, 
because these are the people who have been declared as deserving of a 
warm. welcome by the Prophet #¢ himself. It is true that other arts and 
sciences do not fall in that category, yet the learning of them is also the 
need of the society. 

b. It is the duty of the scholars of religion to treat their students with kindness 
and love, and make them aware of the place of honor occupied by the 
religious sciences, so that the students feel inspired to learn them with zeal 
and passion, and bear with patience the hardships, if any, faced by them in 
their acquisition of that knowledge. 

248. It was narrated that Isma‘il elas o Pac iy ail ie as - YEA 

said: “We entered upon Hasan to Z : ae or eee 

inquire after him until we filled JE gelisy §2 Ge Y Jedi Gls 
the house. He tucked up his. 234 GSE as Bo onc de és 

legs," then he (Hasan) said: ‘We 5 ae i 

entered upon Abu Hurairah to) Ge USS sdb BS ale, Gad 

"] Tucked up his legs: i.e., he was sitting with his legs stretched out in front of him, but 
when they entered he tucked up his legs (to sit cross-legged) as a sign of respect, 
good manners and giving them space. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

inquire after him until we filled 
the house. He (Abu Hurairah) 
tucked up his legs and said: “We 
entered upon the Messenger of 
Allah #@ until we filled the house. 
He was lying on his side, but 
when he saw us he tucked up his 
legs then he said: ‘After I am 
gone, there will come to you 
people seeking knowledge. 
Welcome them, greet them and 
teach them.” (Maudu’) 

A narrator said: By Allah! we 
came across some people who did 
not welcome us, greet us, nor 
teach us until we used to go to 
them, then they treated us rudely. 

236 GLEN las 

oS ech Ge OS BS bys 
p , a. Bes eee See? oo as 
#6 il d25 Je O55 dG cae, 
SSS flees 585 SE Oe 

2 4 dS oe slasi Gal wlds Dye oy alae [ene aalew! | Fc Bagel 

Comments: 

Shaikh Albani has described it as a fabricated ‘Hadith’. Obviously, Al- 
Hasan Basri is a successor of the Companions. His only teachers. were the 
Companions and their venerable successors. It is, therefore, hard to believe 
that they treated their disciples inappropriately. 

249. It was narrated that Abu 
Harun Al’ Abdi said: “When we 
came to Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri, he 
would say: “Welcome, in 
accordance with the injunction of 
the Messenger of Allah #8, for the 
Messenger of Allah #% said to us: 
“The people will follow you; they 
will come to you from all parts of 
the earth seeking to understand 
the religion. So when they come 
to you, take care of them.” (Da‘if) 

YEVIc «bl [fhe Cae] tee et 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Chapter 23. Gaining Benefit 
From Knowledge And Acting 
In Accordance With It 

250. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “One of the 
supplicatioris that the Prophet 
used to say was: ‘Alléhumma, inni 
audhu bika min ‘ilmin la yanfa’u, 
wa min du‘@’in la yusma’u, wa min 
galbin la yakhsha’u, wa min nafsin la 
fashba’u [QO Allah, I seek refuge 
with You from knowledge that is 
of no benefit, from a supplication 
that is not heard, from a_ heart 
that does not fear (You) and from 
a soul that is not satisfied].’” 

(Sahih) 

237 SLB alas 

elaly pI LEG] - OF pee 
(VY ddl) 4 josty 

os it TX af Gls - ve. 

ie SE gl oe REY WE gi 

rs 

5 gBh J gin Me gil led fe SS 

dale ay ca Ue gl Sade ge OOPAI VAL LAL Shall aor ol Lee] cx aed 
cepts Ca Stedl arrreey cOOMR i Slutty CLOEAT SE cogls cal we ¢ 
erly 95) 3 de eae Se a aa 

Comments: 

a. Beneficial knowledge for which the supplication has been made in the Hadith, 
is that knowledge which is also acted upon, since it is the virtuous deeds that 
are of benefit to a person not only in this world but also in the next. 

b. ‘A supplication that is not heard’ means a prayer that is not answered. 
‘Seeking refuge from it’ means praying to Allah to answer all of one’s 
supplications, and enable him to articulate his supplications with all its 
precedent conditions, so that they are met with approval. “A soul that is not 
satisfied’ means a soul craving for worldly riches and fame, and position of 
authority. Yearning for more and more knowledge and not resting satisfied 
with the present, is the happy trait of a man’s character. That is why we 
have been commanded to pray to Alléh thus: “O my Lord! Increase me in 

knowledge.” (20:114) 
251. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 2% used to say: “Allahumma, 
anfa'ni bima “allamtani, wa ‘allimni 
ma yanfa'uni, wa zidni ‘ilman. 
Wa'l-hamdu Lillahi ‘ala kulli hal. [O 
Allah, benefit me by that which 
You have taught me, arid teach 
me that which will benefit me, 

“é. 

ais ib 133 & gl he - v0 
56 EE I et U2 eB ai ie 
SS :dB igya e Be ol gp 
Ky gaa ge 2S ae at 25 
ale 59 «tlt piles « ile 

Qe § 6 J isi; 

The Book Of The Sunnah 238 imi) is 

and increase my knowledge. 
Praise is to Allah in all 
circumstances].””’ (Da’if) 
teed] ose 093 peal ae ol cl gel 6 gde gl aor ol ere osbuef] Geyer 
sqrt deny Chad Wee cp Cys # GUS S35 cu ped tpl Cyto oye Voadie 
oye /\ : pStod! dee Walp Cadel Gaels (8 
Comments: 
Alongside the prayer for grant of useful knowledge, the supplication also 
includes prayer to the effect that Allah make beneficial the knowledge 
already granted by Him to the supplicating servant. 
252. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of , : 
Allah #€ said: ‘Whoever acquires Ord Sel Leismls ase bb jig 
knowledge by which the pleasure bp ee ee fyeete fe ae eee dye 
of Allah is sought, but he only Bl ane a ee ee Beas 
acquires it for the purpose of 32 Sljb ol cc ok ES ae oS 
worldly gain, will not smell the 4. 42.2.5 "¢.- ° . 
fragrance of Paradise on the Day SL f OF glee on awe 

Gis it fap Ss of Gis - vey 

. iia toot pO GO Gee oe ais oy 7 a 
a eerinig ea ene oy 4 sig aa bole elas San SE i S45 
nother chain with similar Wee gage eb Sapte he 9 en gees 
wording. on Lee x eed Yt dodats Y cal amy 
a-qrute 0" Fed Soe hee. Jee we 

ot py Sel he do cL 

Br ee 

Gas Peles Pi Got © gest a J] 
[e365 5848 

VUE e cds] a) idl lb 13 oh «tell costo gl aol Lopate od bin! ] ec Saal 
«hills épSbSly 6OL> cpl dooney lates 4 OS el cpl ge 

Comments: 

a. ‘Not to be able to smell the fragrance of Paradise’ means that the person. 
under reference shall be far away from Paradise and, not to speak of the 
sight of Paradise, he shall not even get a scent of it. It so happens in the 
world that the scent reaches where even the sound cannot. Being so far 
away from Paradise obviously means that he shall straightaway go to Hell. 
May Allah protect us all from this! 

b. Learning the religious sciences for purposes of material gains has been 
condemned, because a person with this characteristic would certainly 
misrepresent the Jaws of the Shari‘ah for worldly gains, since his sole 
intention would be to deceive the people and get them to serve his selfish 

The Book Of The Sunnah 239 Redd) et led” 

designs. Thus, instead of guidance, he will make himself a carrier of 
misguidance. 

c. Acquiring the knowledge of worldly sciences with the purpose of being 
able to earn one’s livelihood through lawful means is not included in this 

condemnation. 

253. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Umar that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Whoever seeks 
knowledge in order to argue with 
the foolish, or to show off before 
the scholars, or to attract people’s 
attention, will be in Hell.” (Da‘if) 

Jos dalgd codes (5) Sygrne Gedy Grd olor & [ete coll] 

Comments: 

Sis Gis sje 3 fliy Ble - vor 
2M OS ff Ge stl ue 3 
BE ipl oo He oil oe wal YF 
E1gaEN & GK colt cb far sdb 
165 Gpad gl sth 4 pats if 

8 3 543 ca} pti 

a. Anyorie who acquires knowledge without sincerity of intention is generally 
prompted by such motives as have been mentioned in the Hadith. His evil 
intention, therefore, will drive him to Hell. 

b. There are people who either want to be more and more famous among the 
population, arid also wish that many titles are added to their names both in 
speech and writing. Or else their aim is to secure a high position in a 
religious or political organization. With these aims in view, they use various 
tactics for the glorification of self, and the degradation of other scholars. The 
main reason behind all this is their lack of sincerity. 

254. It was narrated from Jabir 
bin ‘Abdullah that the Prophet #2 : eke 
said: “Do not seek knowledge in 
order to show off in front of the | Een a Se | J ee 
scholars, or to argue with the da ee, a of 
foolish, and do not choose the aa {ysis y 3 BB Sl ol bl 
best seat in a gathering, due to it Gil a 13K Vg cole 4 1At8) 
(i.e. the knowledge which you re cee ae ie a 
have learned) for whoever does 5 & oy Sesh 4 lye 55 NG 
that, the Fire, the Fire (awaits Tere 
him).” (Da‘if) . Jy 4G 
Vere cle opl oemewy ‘ball e lage cyl dor pl rerresy 03 liwe{ ] ees 
vale dy cline aends Gre ol # Alls cAU/V 2 Slolly 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

255. It was narrated from Ibn 
“Abbas. that the Prophet #€ said: 
“There will be some people 
among my Ummah (nation) who 
will gain knowledge of the 
religion, and they will recite 
Qur’an, and will say: “We come to 
the rulers so that we may have 
some share of their worldly 
wealth, and we will make sure 
that our religious commitment is 
not affected,’ but that will not be 
the case. Just as nothing can be 
harvested from the Qatéd!" 
except thorns, so nothing can be 
gained from being close to them 
except (sins). (Da‘if) 

(One of the narrators) 
Muhammad bin As-Sabbéh said: 
“It is as if he meant, ‘except sins.’ ” 

oF 85 6 a 3% Leek See 2 ok, Boe 
ealss Ge Sad ale al Og) gia 
‘ +e ate be Rae - oF. cotn 
Y us «U3 59 NG «bay pelea 

qe tate eh eh oth toes 
Foe VY WS S5aH YY) Ea GG 

rs 
YS eet Se 

ee ate ‘CaN & yeas it 
ae 

CyB) Egy Galil 2S 4S ddr plas gp Aisi a [Lied osu] Forte! 

256. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘Seek refuge with 
Allah from the pit of grief.’ They 
said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, what 
is the pit of grief?” He said: ‘A 
valley in Hell from which Hell 
itself seeks refuge four hundred 
times each day.’ It was said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah, who will 
enter it?’ He said: ‘It has been 
prepared for reciters of the Qur’4n 
who want to show off their deeds. 
The most hateful of reciters of the 
Qur'an to Allah are those who 
visit the rulers.’ (Da‘if) 

" Tragacanth, a thorny shrub. 

ie) 
Fo FG se B-S 30 gye yah 
Cp deseag odors 6 GIS Gide - Yor 

“ae, 

wie BF 5ue Gs ta tech BUee, 

er rarey F ei-3 

Cte pal Slee ws! oF 
s 

Paar rs Or 90 wy oy (eo ae 
je be cpa jy GLE SA 1 oses 

% 
1 

“Ae ost é we Ek “ e 
we 33? Jb So5adl CS le’ Yi Je) 
4g 26-- 9 fare pe. 

Gy Blais! eg JS as Se 3505 ge 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Other chains of narrators. 

5 pat aah wi 
ne a9%s Sdll dt SS tS 

a. el aspen 8 dg) dé 
Bs A HE Ge yc 
ies 
o&, pal igglaa 3 iF opal AL iis 
Leg hol 2 pe ees as a Pe 
Guts ff is pat GY Gi ide 
eo jee BAS + eles] fy 
(ie JG : 

: ; ee ree 
° ot Pa, of < 
Sree 8 Sl asm sy3h Y 

ube Ste ge FPAY Te cook ctagll cgde zl dx oh Fld colin] apr 

(a) A ygree Sandy ILE OWS y gto] das glee (Lye eo dy cy 

257. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: “If the 
people of knowledge had taken 
care of it and presented it only to 
those who cared for it, they 
would have become the leaders of 
their age by virtue of that. But 
they squandered it on the people 
of wealth and status in this world 
in order to gain some worldly 
benefit, so the people of wealth 
and status began to look down on 
them. I heard your Prophet #€ 
say: ‘Whoever focuses all his 
concerns on one issue, the 
concerns of the Hereafter, Allah 
will suffice him and spare him the 
wotries of this world. But 
whoever wanders off in concern 
over different worldly issues, 

Gas - Yev 

3 Fe, 4 ii; “ oes bb dle 

Ux paris de VE cnet we 

dl we Be Z J 
idle poh af S01 sd ates 

4 Jie ent By ess E55 «giles 
HE SS Lae agile 1s are 

os clits ts oh Wa Fyagll be oe) : fs 

4 G85 jag cats o ri] sus asl 
oi 3 al dG os men Jigs a Frees] 

ara Baars % 
OL Ueie5i 

€ 

payee a re 

pos 

Ji] 

The Book Of The Sunnah 

Allah will not care in which of 
these valleys he is destroyed.’” 
aif) 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

242 SLES las’ 

Bans? al oe. ea gn eae ‘eed 
ay, 

as 

Bo Aa 7k. 

Reid 2 > 4 on 

DVB ce oy al Ae Cp eee 

hB O85 eG a Byes 42 2S 
3 oe fot oot af 

Ceptob ogres Cadet 553 63 

ome of GA Smeg! dies hed gl onl axel [ee ire oolel] tg oe 

Comments: 

EVV « pls) c4ngAly cp Glow} 4dS Aly ze 

a. The Hadith tells us that a man must keep an eye on the gains and losses of 
the Hereafter, even in matters mundane and temporal. A true believer thus 
sacrifices his worldly benefits for his gains in the Hereafter. Consequently, 
he relishes, rather than grieve over his worldly losses and sacrifices, and 
thus becomes secure from all worldly concerns. 

b. Neglecting the Hereafter has its evil consequences, even in this world, to the 
extent that anyone who does it, is always plagued by worries and concerns. 
He falls into grief at anything that he loses, while a true believer maintains 
his patience and fortitude for the simple reason that he hopes of a better 

reward in the Hereafter. 

258. It was narrated from Ibn 
“Umar that the Prophet #€ said: 
“Whoever seeks knowledge for a 
reason other than for the sake of 
Allah, or intends it for a purpose 
other than for the sake of Allah, 
let him take his place in Hell.” 
(Da‘if) 

Be se FG ee TRE 

ge fy Sine GAs VE cadsh 38 Ste 
BBS she Bde Gis gh 
3 of WE Ye BAS OS 32 
ob fa 35 ag eb 2 oh ye 

ry 
ata 

ays io Ohaies 

YUCOre CLS eles Culley Gad ol chal cqgde sll ax 1 [tga colin] es 
Hoy po op! Aye J choo gy UE & Ge Go iB, ca she pl demee Cute cye 

259. It was narrated that 
Hudhaifah said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #@ say: ‘Do 
not acquire knowledge in order to 
show off before the scholars, or to 
argue with the foolish, or to 
attract people’s attention, for 

- lagi 
: esis rele oy gat! Gis - yo4 
gis 3s Saye ot ge NSS GH 
Situ ae al ee 
1g3Uc SF cstelll a At lait | sakes 

The Book Of The Sunnah 243 aA las 

whoever does that will be in 5 Be i ees Lie 
Hell.’ ” (Da‘if) Hf th re) 135 pas) r c elgacst Ps 
80 3 98 itl Jad 35 

re Sopa Ogee op et # Cas oll Mer og esd! JU, Ltd] Fez Seal 
YORE 6 led ydod! (uo Paee ree Cadell y Cg) Chad glow Cy Cath 

260. It was narrated that Abu Gti delet 4) Akt Gis - vie 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of ai 28s he ore 
Allah 2 said: ‘Whoever seeks ci cael S24 cee Lal Gos 
knowledge in order to argue with = i348 sl Le weds 1 Spall yg Jats ay 
the foolish, or to show off before Fie cb cae 

the scholars, or to attract people's coal mae a Al Ss 5 dé 238 
attention, Allah will admit him to, i434 elit; ets és ales 
Hell.’”” (Da‘if) steep Pee aes 

ere oy die cis le pilBY Gans ole] Mad cme yll JU Le] tee tet 
-¥o4 cYOR Ie cl gee tal gc ay Coa yell 8 LS So cs gay 

Chapter 24. One Who Is ele oF See be OE - (VE paesl) 
Asked About Knowledge But (6 tty ES 

He Conceals It : 
261. It was narrated from Abu (Gas 2% wl i ~ re 
Hurairah that the Prophet #§ said: ccc se 2 

“There is no man who memorizes : : 2 . 
knowledge then conceals it, but i¢ tthe Gis rel fo dds as 
he will be brought forth on the , | a 3 tugs. OF 
Day of Resurrection bridled with o O85 8 il Me ER a! 
reins of fire.” (Hasam) rae 3 yy ees ae bis J25 
Another chain with similar O58 6 Tiki I os nate i 
wording. AEN bs pled: Caske sata 

sl G555 bbe of ceed Pins 
23 GS Ge alg gh Gas 

ioe 
q 

tye 55 S15 

wpe gly PUOATE eda ee LalS Ob pli coy gl oe el [yee] tens 
cals VOI e cole Eyl amrery cMepemd ily ca Sed) on de Sete ge WEA 
Labbe VT /1) pSlodiy CATE COL Gi! he Jal yt 

The Book Of The Sunnah 244 AR lis 

Comments: 

a. Imam Khattabi is reported as saying: The knowledge under reference is the 
knowledge that is essential for each Muslim to have, for example the 
formula of ritual prayer, etc. The warning does not apply to the sciences of 
secondary importance, such as the knowledge of grammar, logic, 
philosophy and so on. 

b. Reply to a questioner may be avoided if there is reason to believe that the 
questioner will put that knowledge to unlawful uses. 

c. If questions are put to a person in order to test his knowledge, he must be 
given adequate opportunity to answer according to his knowledge, and no 
one else should try to help him in that, otherwise the very purpose of the 
examination will be failed. 

$gr38 3 “pe 

262. It was narrated that ‘Abdur- 
Rahman bin Hurmuz Al-A‘raj 
heard Abu Hurairah say: “By 
Allah, were it not for two Verses 
in the Book of Allah, I would 
never have narrated anything 

Roe) « Agtakslh Sly rs) tiie -— ¥UY 
oF ee Le pel] Gas Gu Bh 
CBN BE of tN ae os SD 
eS ee ae ne ae ene rs Ce 96 
ol Ys 1 anl mayen ap Gh oo 45] 

from him, meaning from the . .2 _ 4% — a vis 
Prophet #8, were it not for the ii oe e 
Words of Allah: Verily, those who 

conceal what Allah has sent down z AAG SEES 
wisali & SKS . R “5 

of the Book, and purchase a small < aes we St ee 

gain therewith (of worldly [Wocl\Vé ta 4st] “ony! 2! 3 

things), they eat into their bellies 
nothing but fire. Allah will not 
speak to them on the Day of 
Resurrection, nor purify them, 
and theirs will be a painful 
torment. Those are they who have 
purchased error at the price. of 
guidance, and torment at the price 
of forgiveness. So how bold they 
are (for evil deeds which will 
push them) to the 
Fire’! (Sahih) 

IY Al Bagarah 2:174-175. 

The Book Of The Sunnah 245 ae oles 

Eyl oye YYos ra cpl e ele L whl cde yl saSls & pill ‘gy bedl a i Fc Sane 

as| Pd etl eee al fled ce wh cA leewadl ples planes 60 nF og ota cpl 

Conunents: .% SA Z Gado cys ¢ eal Wie poe TEA Cae 
Ahédith reported in the Books of Hadith from Abu Hurairah # are more 
numerous than those reported by any other Companion. Reasons for this 
are as follows: 

1. Emigrant Companions devoted part of their time to trade activities etc, in 
order to earn sustenance for themselves and their families through 
legitimate means. Moreover, most of the Helpers were cultivators, a 
profession which naturally took up a lot of their time. Abu Hurairah, 
however, belonged to the group known as Ahlus-Suffah (People of the 
Platform). He was not concerned about earning his bread. Instead, he 
devoted all his time to the acquisition of knowledge, by which reason 
oftentimes he even had to go hungry. 

2. Abu. Hurairah @ did not seek knowledge from the Prophet #¢ alone. He 
even turned to other Companions for the knowledge of Ahddith etc. in times 
when the Prophet #2 was either inside his house or busy with other things. 

3. Abu Hurairah enjoyed another point of distinction. The Prophet #¢ had 
made a special supplication to Allah to grant him good retentive memory. 
(Bukhiri118 & Muslim: 6085). The Verses mentioned in the body of the 
Hadith speak of the sin of concealing knowledge, and the dire punishment 
awaiting those guilty of it, especially when it is necessary to reveal it. 

263. It was narrated that Jabir % (2) el a and Gis - yy 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ pea aereks 

said: ‘When the last people of this ge ae ce G3 ae Bis = Stans) 
Limmah curse the first, (at that Le oe re i prea G Pal ai 
time) whoever conceals a Hadith ~ ay = oe 2 . 
will be concealing what Allah has ia Bp 8 ab dy5 dE :d8 pls 

revealed.’”’ (Maudu‘) 53 in, 4 os us sh GNI ois ’s] 

Goll gy dbs eb gs Ob oe ands Gre gl el [eney] ted 
Ct bene ge SAT LS Ge ee ge desl Le eee Gp Aol Gy dare Sb 
LS ce) jpbKeoS| oil oF (sh x) ONS or dors of (ees oe gl ole; Sy 20) cram Ske 
ETT Ie e pl pb beg! pmnall 

o. 2k Sa Pace € “55 

264. Yusuf bin Ibrahim said: ‘1 Ga TAGYI Gp deel De - NE 
heard Anas bin Malik say: “I 2 98 see 8 oe Ste 
jas et \ 
heard the Messenger of Allah # Dead OF Dae oe ‘ oe ae 
| Cn AiG eel yh ts des is 

The Book Of The Sunnah 246 ALS les 

say: “Whoever is asked about heat Sigel Re A OFS aa dee 
knowledge and conceals it, will be al ee Z Js UG Gl 
bridied on the Day of Resurrection 43 40555 ‘6 a) sie ra 
ee Sa o 
with reins of fire.”” (Hasan) (ep oz 7 
6 be play sual 

ct SE beetle op Chey 4b cts oben Wat ig esd SE Cg ] s ey eet 
NUVI Ge shily tae Aly Sl fos Y cate ge Gad be ol oF Gasp 1Ol> 

Comments: 

a. The term ‘concealing’ as used here applies to a situation where a person 
knew the law of the Shari‘ah but abstained from narrating it, for the benefit 
of others, without any reasonable excuse. 

b. This confirms the handing down of dire punishment for those who conceal 
their knowledge. 

265. It was narrated that Abu 813 op Ol 3 dete Gis - ye 
Sa‘eed Khudri said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: 

“Whoever conceals knowledge 32 .Wl5 . on is; A auele S 4a 
which Allah has made beneficial ° Pye te Dae : 
for mankind’s affairs of religion, sgh o er 5! Le OF ht yt Olja 
Allah will bridle him with reins of = % 33.4 

Gs Jem f 6G esi dacs 
fire on the Day of Resurrection.” = te es ua ae ? 
(Da‘if) lle sa co 128 ais ifs Ju wit 

cpl vl cet! Zl ae 4y al es las 
EN Be ek 4 Sata 655 i al 

cls gy deme ad edad skied Mad rege gd! JU [ibe when oatonel] 2 gay es 
Mdgdonll ads al Gandy obs 1053 yl ads 

266. It was narrated that Abu yak os dsl we by hase Gas - yw 

Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #& said: ‘Whoever is asked 
about knowledge that he has and 
he conceals it, will be bridled on 
the Day of Resurrection with reins 
of fire.””” (Hasan) 

exe UG gS GT gf B5 gf plas oil 
eal 3h ‘eta eal) pI 
ch BEA BE OE oll gb deel 5 
dil dy25 DB dE ie AT Se Suey 
coll GBS aI ple bs Je ba as 

26 Se plik, Stal 654 

cal TUOATE cogla gail die Aa aod y ceded Gd ceeesl SU Cop] tee eet 

The Book Of The Sunnah 247 as) oles 

2 YU: a 

Comments: 265 & 266 
It is also an act of sin to give out a law of Shari‘ah without knowledge, 
simply on the basis of one’s personal opinion. It is, however, a different 
matter if one gives an opinion based on one’s independent judgment after 
he has done his best, but failed to find the answer either in the Qur’an or in 
the Sunnah. 

| 
; 
| 
| 
| 
| 
: 
| 
i 
! 
: 
| 
} 
| 
I 
i 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 248 Wgriewg Srlgtat! wala! 

(1) The Chapters Of Bj lgdall wo 'gil CY ponsll) 
Purification And Its (Y tisedl) ts “19 
Sunnah 
Comments: 

a. The Arabic word Tahdarah literally means: 
(i) to be cleansed of all filth, and 

(ii) to be blameless in word and deed. 

b. In the context of the Islamic law, Tahdrah means: 
(i) to remove the impurity of Hadath Asghar (minor impurity caused by 
passing wind or urine, or relieving oneself) by making Wudu’ (ablution), 
and 
(ii) to remove the impurity of Hadath Akbar (major impurity caused by 
sexual discharge) by making Ghus! (full bath). 
The first practical lesson that we learn in Islam is the lesson of Tahdrah 
(cleanliness). In fact, it is a prerequisite ordained by the Messenger of Allah 
#8 for the validity of the ritual prayer (Saldt) offered by a believer. 
When comparing this elevated system of purification and cleanliness in 
Islam with the practices of other religionists, it is no wonder that these 
people feel amazed at the decent system of purity advocated and practised 
in Islam. According to a famous report, a Jew once said tauntingly to the 
Companion Salman. Farisi: “It is said that your Prophet even teaches you 
how to secure purity after relieving oneself?’ The Companion answered in 
a tone of perfect self-assurance and ease, “Yes, our Prophet teaches us 
everything, even the rules of purification after relieving oneself. 

Chapter 1. The Quantity Of (ae db ele GOGH G6 iN) 
Water Required For Ablution oe es a se fo ewer ae 
And Bath In A State Of BLES Ge [owls sprog elt 
Sexual Impurity (\ dint) 

267. It was narrated that Safinah (Gis 3 al aS se pf Gs = vw 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # = 2. 7% 1” Pees ane 
used to perform ablution witha  &* cls Col GF candle) G hel] 
Mudd (of water) and bath with a (335 #e ii 5425 36 236 Bas 

sa’) (Sahih) Bono dee 
GLI fetes ctl 

HT Mudd is a measure of two thirds of a kilogram (apporox.), while Sa‘ equals 4 Mudd 3 
kilograms approx.). 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

249 (erie g Solgtdl ilgi 

Teall ede Ao fone ob sled Gye Cocina ll! Ob t gael 6 line ae ol Fea Sate 

268. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 

said: “The Messenger of Allah #% 

used to perform ablution with a 

Mudd (of water) and bath with a 
Sa’. (Sahih) 

6 ego gl 

269. It was narrated from Jabir 
that the Messenger of Allah 2 
used to perform ablution with a 
Mudd (of water) and bath with a 
Sa‘. (Sahih) 

4 ded gl gl ge TYE 

Gis Gt 13S gf ais - rw 

Z * See 
oe Fe 

508 : ee ee 

oy 

gall juikss Ady Lose ag a 

ost ehedl oe eg jrey  k cayleball cole glee Leemee orkew{] : Tex Saoe) 

3 ta kel, 

4855 Ay lag os él ous 

ude! Les ines Byes daly Sy Cn 8) Sy ce oe oy ee! % Leone] eps 

270. ‘Abdullah bin Muhammad 
bin ‘Aqil bin Abu Talib narrated 
from his father that his 
grandfather said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #€ said: ‘A Mudd is 
sufficient for the ablution and a $2’ 
is sufficient for the bath.’ A man 
said: “It is not sufficient for us.’ 
He (the narrator) said: “It was 
sufficient for one who is better 
than you and had more hair” 
meaning the Prophet #§. (Sahih) 

VW: gbsi 

2 Alas ls - yys 

ball of Bah y 
ee AG wees 
gi ug LE ge Boe Bs 2565 
gf Jae of HE gf Ie 8 02 ool 
jb 236 os jb cae oF tb s 
ch ey 05ll Se best al b325 
(G3 VY is OW Ble Joshi 55 
si 

Bly MEE ie tad U6 J 
BE gl: gk 

oa 

p18 Bh 

daly J OSs Gung Ube cinal cies ole! Mat oC me sl JB Leeeel : eae 

Commenis: 

60 phy Goes) Le 

By answering so, ’Aqil % means to say that if excessive use of water is 
intended to secure purification and cleanliness, then the Prophet 
presented a perfect example of it, If it means taking extra caution, then the 

The Chapters Of Purification... 250 (grin g So lgta! wll 

Prophet # was more God-fearing and pious than anyone else. If you mean 
to say that you have more hair, then the Prophet’s hair was not less than 
yours. Therefore, your excessive use of water was either the result of your 
inclination for doubting and satanic whisperings, or of your disposition to 
extravagance, which must be avoided. 

Chapter 2. Allah Does Not Me 2h KEY SL - ed) 
Accept Salat (Prayer) Without : Jat a sei, 
Purification (Y dined) yg hs 

271. it was narrated that Usimah ty Gs sy 23 At Ge - ry 
bin ‘Umair Al-Hudhali said: “The eek ge te ewe Bhs 
Messenger of Allah # said: ‘Allah 9 S49 +7 Spr ce tomes tee 
does not accept any prayer 8g peal Taos gil ees eS 
without purification and He does nee ad 4 

not pee any charity from chad We : 

Ghulul’’") (Sahih) nc oftct -s ich of te esl te 

{2 lol of edd Ql Se asdf 
Another chain with similar a aes a og Nae tg ats cad 
wording, JE SB Bgl nee oy Slal agi 

ag ee, ae ca 
A Se je Ble fe V3 4 
Jl Se Bio fe Vo <p sqe 
as al OS gl bt 
Porn = é 0 fees 0 ey tord 
ae? ho 8 Boy dee 78 
ot Oo Calg Cp Alay in 4 

oon we 

° 
Fy et 

~d 9x) 
oe OMe ce gad gS ob OL cayighll coglo yl ar ol [aoe odliuul] teed 
Ole gal memes 4 Lad cule 
Comments: 
The Arabic word Tahfrah (cleanliness) or Tahur here means Wudu (ablution) 
and Ghis{ (bath). It is a prerequisite for the ritual prayer that the 
worshipper be free of both the minor and major impurities in addition to 
any other apparent filth. And just as one is required to be mindful of the 
lawful and the unlawful mode of expenditure, he must also be cautious 
about the lawful and unlawful ways of earning his wealth. 

272. It was narrated that Ibn 655 Sis het Uh ele Was - vy 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of Aoee . Pir Bree cere Aa, 
Allah @ said: ‘Allah does not “3 ‘7 tee SF «fsle) Bus 
] a en ae 
accept any prayer without we OAS Gas sou 3 

1 Ghulul refers to withholding goods captured among the spoils of war, and the 
meaning includes deceitfully taking what one has no right to. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

purification, and He does not 
accept any charity om Ghulul’”’ 
(Sahih) 

4; Mowe Canim ye TVET Cal 

273. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #@ say: ‘Allah 
does not accept any prayer 
without purification, and He does 
not accept any charity from 
Ghulul.’’’ (Sahih) 

251 Wgrion 9 Sy lgkall sl gsi 

gb 3 ie & Biz V3 ass 

By bgbsl Ur gey h cb yl gel cprline am tt: eps 

(as ‘dee gl 2 deo Ge - ww 
Lg bf GES of git 36 ca) 
ks Soe Y et of oI 
86 il 525 Citgo :d8 We gf V5 

=o 

th 

#. 

V5 casee Ge Be GI SW 35, 
Ab ie Biz 

AL Le Geld Cytol y Cg ee sell dian edly [Qermre] 2 eee 

274, [t was narrated that Abu 
Bakrah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: “Allah does not 
accept any Salt (prayer) without 
purification, and He does not 
accept any charity from Ghulul.’” 
(Sahih) 

Te + 

Gis «jae 2 Mink Ge - ye 
‘i 

cOLLS BF ple (as. 055 & ali 
nee dé dG BX fF el oF 
WG ash he Be i ae Ye ceca] 

3b ty Biz 

«_ylai) S35 cp bd! nal ne abu jied: Some gl Js [eee] Tex Seenl 

Chapter 3. The Key To Prayer 
Is Purification 

275. It was narrated from 
Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyyah 
that his father said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #% said: “The 
key to prayer is purification, its 
opening is to say ‘Allahu Akbar’ 
and its closing is to say As-salamu 
‘alaikum.’ ” (Hasan) 

AYVY Te 
Fw] ct ot = (¥ poll) 
(Y dsett) any 

4a, 

a59 Bis sine Uy ise Gas - we 
oy deme ea a Le jf cola of 
asl G2 ESSN oh nk Ue «jue 
SAAN Zin 88 tt 3425 dE 236 
ye ete a oe yds ote > 3% 
Ylloci's 6 SI Gaps 3.9) 

Cah 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

ea Cato oP Wie ce gud gil 

Comments: 

252 \gitwg Srigtatt teil gal 

ye? wh cB yell coslo €l ae oi [>] Tex Saeed 

Ga g5ly 6S sl Kar 9 04 

a. Just as no lock is opened without a key, there is also no entering into prayer 
without freedom from minor and major impurities. This shows that 
cleanliness is a prerequisite for prayer. 

b. Pronouncing the formula of Allah’s greatness (Alléhu Akbar) signals the 
banning of all things incompatible with prayer. This is why the formula 
pronounced at the start of the prayer is called Takbir At-Tahrim (formula of 

prohibition). 

c. All restrictions imposed by the utterance of the Takbir At-Tahrim are waived 
when the worshipper, at the close of his prayer utters the words As-salamu 
‘alaikum. That is why this action is known as Tahlil (legalizing or loosening), 
which means that all those things that were specifically prohibited during 

the prayer are now permissible again. 

276. It was narrated from Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri that the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ said: “The 
key to prayer is purification, its 
opening is to say Alla@hu Akbar and 
its closing is to say As-salému 
‘alaikum.” (Hasan) 

do 

de as Hub sa ange 

os 

¢ yas Gh cota Jee “ fel 
Salt a ies = Ss rs eves a 

st 6, 

he Goats ee ol iF gli pl Bas 
fl of 5355 pas Jl ie Gai gl 
ay Pag Jol aH Cele 30 ae 

gh gloss JS 

i Ugbdowg a dal pdb rle by oh camel ¢ ode yl dr Fh Dope] es 
a als aif Gilt Cotodl ely Cems ce Olin al Gate ys TALC 

Chapter 4. Maintaining One’s 
Ablution 

277. It was narrated that 
Thawban said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: “Adhere to 
righteousness even though you 
will not be able to do all acts of 
virtue. Know that the best of your 
deeds is Salat (prayer) and that no 
one maintains his ablution except 
a believer.’”” (Hasan) 

fo BE Ge pad 
(£ dnl!) 5 525) 

E55 Gis syne Jb ibe Gas - yw 
2 De ae ak cg ial 
BE ai 3,25 36 36 S08 te ase 
32 A ifb 258 3h ihaesn 
epost de Ws Vy Sa esuasi 
eh YI 

The Chapters Of Purification... 253 lgriwg Solgtal wil gul 

Hie Olin Wald Cutolly cae dil ody Obs ge pone pb lle # Lye] as 

comes SIS cpl arerenag comes YAY cYA /O7 tool 

Comments: 

a. ‘Adherence to the righteousness’ means adherence to the path of Islam. 

b. “You will not be able to do all acts of virtue’ means none of you would be 
able to stick to the path of virtue in a manner that all deviations and 
shortcomings are banished from your life. Nor is it possible for you to offer 
your obeisance and remembrance to Allah as would be commensurate with 
His supernal glory and majesty. 

c. Maintenance of ablution or the nullification of it, is a state of being which 
no one else but the person concerned would generally know, and it could 
easily be kept hidden from others. It could only be taken due care of by the 
firm belief that, no matter whether others know it or not, Allah surely 
knows it. 

d. Imén is a matter of the heart. It finds expression in actions and deeds. And 
we have been told that the most important of all virtuous deeds is the 
prayer. Obligatory prayer (Salat) is of so much importance that it has been 
described as a dividing line between belief and disbelief. No wonder then, 
that prayer has been described as the highest attribute of the pious and the 
foremost condition for prosperity in the Hereafter. 

278. It was narrated that :cee co mall bo GES As ~ YVA 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “The. 50 0 ae cyeotp tes ceed, Kee 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: i aS a 
‘Adhere to righteousness even $6 :dU 5,26 of dl sé 32 ce 
though you will not be able to do ee re See ee ee 
all acts of virtue. Know that “rd Sia Nyala Jy) 
among the best of your deeds is yy (Say 45 Gal (as) thi S181 
prayer and that no one maintains se 38 ee os ae ee 
his ablution except a believer.’” Wiehe Wee g le bile, 

(Hasan) aos paly Gill Gated Bily 66 re gl ded Lye oe ed 

279. It was narrated that Abu 74 5a - ote 48 42s Bhs - 

7 te : cr de fee Cy decce Cis ¥Vv4 
Umamah said, in a Marfu’ Hadith Be ; =a : ; 
“Adhere to righteousness and itisa 9 (etx! GO ee Be ae 

blessing if you are able to do so. gicilt t- Of ear tat 
Know that the best of your deeds is "ge ne toe f uF a > a . * 
prayer and that no one maintainshis  :JB Cy! toll Co) 38 
ablution except a believer.” (Da‘if) doe 

| 
Fs Gel of leggy chain | 
| 

| That is, a Traceable Hadith attributed to the Prophet #8. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

254 igrteg Sylgiall wiloi 

spog 16 bites V5 GSuaN patael 

pga Ateniy and 45 wl cy Glew! # [edad ookiusl] Fer teeel 

Chapter 5. Ablution Is Half 
Of Faith 

280. It was narrated from Abu 
Malik Ash‘ari that the Messenger 
of Allah #8 said: “Performing 
ablution properly!) is half of 
faith, saying Al-Hamdu Lillah fills 
the Scale (of good deeds), saying 
Subhén-Allah and Allahu Akbar fills 
the heavens and the earth, prayer 
is light, Zakat is proof, patience is 
brightness and the Qur’an is proof 
for you or against you. Every 
person goes out in the morning to 
sell his soul, so he either frees it 
or destroys it.’” (Sahih) 

Jhb by SM OG - (0 pnnall) 
(0 dani!) Gla 

cole of Reet de G4E - Ae 
oy ee Gp is hs cage 

wet 

Pees] 
el lop 
eo 

fis phe ye ve 

ae 

e or Fert j ai 

Hb gle gl ole oF Gt 5 
Gea) Str a bE ie oF me 
Fd oy S53 peop :3E #6 as Ot 
Jeet Neal Sas ob dasdiy a 
ES OATE ‘25M Apt tbe 5.5315 
Tag the RAN Sus Wy Gy 
Riv ip SN tle 2 

As Capea Cy heres meee ara AO /0: Slautl ar ol Forced ootiw| ] x Sagal 

Giinaientee. 

OF ke ig Lb oF YYY: a & plane ax ols (3 ogi) 

a. The term Scale here means the side of the Scale that weighs the good deeds 
done by a man. The formula Al-Hamdu Lillah (praise is to Allah) is not only 
an expression of praise for Allah, but also an affirmation of the fact that He 
is the possessor of all those sublime attributes that are commensurate with 
His glory and majesty. Not only this, all the praiseworthy qualities found 
anywhere in the creatures are also created and invested in the creatures by 
Him. This is another aspect of His magnificence, deserving all praise. 

b. Subhan-Allah Glorified is Allah means that Allah is exempt from all those 
matters, actions and attributes that are unbecoming His majesty and glory. 

c. Prayer has been dubbed as light because it keeps the worshippers from 

{I Performing ablution properly means either covering all required areas completely, or, 
washing them three times, and the scholars have elaborated upon it. See no. 426. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 255 Wgrieng Srlgtall algal 

indulging in acts of sin. 

d. Giving Zakét (obligatory sharing of wealth with the poor) is a proof that the 
man in question is sincere in his profession of faith. 

e. Patience means (i) perseverance in obeying Allah’s commands and 
steadfastness in the doing of good, (ii) adhering to the principle of piety in 
the face of worldly temptations of lust and sin, and (iii) abstaining from 
falling prey to evils, like bewailing and grieving over mishaps and 
misfortunes, as well as keeping away from other acts of sin. 

f. Man’s salvation in the Hereafter is linked to his deeds. This has been 
illustrated in the Hadith by means of a parable, which says that when man 
starts his day, open before him are both the options ~ of good and of evil. 
Now, it is for the man to decide whether to sell his soul to Allah or to the 
Devil. Thus, anyone who chooses the path of virtue and does good deeds, 
he certainly secures his salvation. But the one who surrenders his reins to 
Satan and does his biddings, brings about his own ruin. 

Chapter 6. The Reward For ran) ui [26] — OV psi) 
Purification ° G re. 

281. It was narrated that Abu (Gis :i23 | a os Pl Gis - YAS 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of of af oats akacte tear 
Allah #§ said: ‘When anyone of cqjle il OF «mee I GF stile yl 
you performs ablution and does it =. #¢ i} Jytj de AIG sae os is 
well, then he comes to the  ,, be st Pe, Gel 

mosque for no other purpose than @ ‘#23! Goeb Leg fal esael op 
prayer, he does not take one step = $3 - +j WAT She Y aoe of 
but Allah will raise him one , * e = c Pee Iie a 
degree (in status) thereby, and -L>5 «4555 Uy J5 56 Gil 4085 Y) Spe 

remove one sin from him thereby, eet ap & ERE we 25 

me cea 4 1 as ~ ua > - 
until he enters the mosque. ? drs ge tae le <P 
(Sahih) 

LWVE LS Shang cae Uybl Gude 3 ale Gee yey [Eee] esd 

Comments: 

a. Greater reward is promised for those who perform their ablution and do it 
well. 

b. Sometimes when a man comes to the mosque, his intention is to meet 
someone or to do some other necessary work. In addition to that, he also 
performs his prayer in the mosque. Of course this does not decrease his 
reward of the prayer, but if his coming out from the house were solely for 
the purpose of the prayer, his reward would be much more. 

c. It is much more preferable to come to the mosque having performed the 
ablution at one’s home, or shop, or office. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

282. It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah As-Sunabihi that the 
Messenger of Allah #% said: 
“Whoever performs ablution and 
rinses his mouth and nose, his 
sins will exit through his mouth 
and nose. When he washes his 
face, his sins will exit from his 
face, even from beneath his 
eyelids. When he washes his 
hands, his sins will exit from his 
hands. When he wipes his head, 
his sins will exit from. his head, 
and even from his ears. When he 
washes his feet, his sins will exit 
from his feet, even from beneath 
his toenails. Then his prayer and 
his walking towards the mosque 
will earn extra merit for him.” 
(Sahih) 

256 (grteng Sy lates) tal 

poe aes Sa, ES VAY 
L2 cow Gall dl we 2 log of elke 

are aa ee fe ee . He ake - 
canes (29 fa dE Be I 425 
caails ad fe cuths Ess .Ghey 
cage Ge oblhs Cad yey Gab 1G 

v3he oe 

fake dae stad oa aS oe cr oe 

- 
2 q 

ye one Dyers z Berg ave 2 
Wb cade Ge ofthe Geis ay fos 

x 

ath 

2 | a aE TCT Sean ee fe ae 

ea ag A 
ESF gle, Lob 1G cabal S60 ers 
CBE tons 

4 Ay) Eade oye Whe eVOuVE/Y: Slush] ae of lee] eps 

Comments: 

a. The exiting of the sins means the forgiving of sins by Allah. 

b. Sins forgiven. through ablution are generally the minor sins. Major sins are 
forgiven through sincere repentance, or else Allah in His infinite mercy may 
pardon them. However, in case the sins had a bearing on the rights of 
others, their forgiveness depends upon remedying those grievances, or on 
being pardoned by the aggrieved party or parties. 

283. It was narrated that ‘Amr 
bin “Abasah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #@ said: “When a person 
performs ablution and washes his 
hands, his sins exit through his 
hands. When he washes his face, 
his sins exit through his face. 
When he washes his forearms and 
wipes his head, his sins exit 
through his forearms and head. 
When he washes his feet, his sins 
exit through his feet.’ (Hasan) 

rhe bea% € po fee of - 
Msa5 23 125 SS gl Bhs - vay 

v4 

SGC vot 4a, onrd €, ° 
done ope GS VU Ou 3h 
ra 

4-0 Suc ft aed aie 4 - 
ja (S35 ei Sp :8 ai 325 

vor 

kod 136 4gh9 bs sUthé LS tgs 

The Chapters Of Purification... 257 Wgriwg Sy kgs! tei 

HENS by Mths DS sly Aiag CHL 
iy the 2 oh, cd OE ely 
Maile 5 

Oger aj Vyke gb jhe gp dees ge VE /Etteel ol [pe] ceed 
YAY Gold) Coded! Ups walyd Goteds «(oy t) Cease cubs 

Comments: 
Sins of the hands are the sins of acts either neglected or committed by the 
hands. Likewise, the sins of the face are the sins related to uttering 
improper words, or giving ear to things that were not fit to be heard, and 
so on. If it is just a mistake or slip on the part of the person concerned, then 
it is a minor sin that would be removed ‘through ablution. In case it is a 
deliberate and preplanned act, then it is a major sin for which repentance is 
an essential requirement. 

284, ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: 76, SUS 5 15 Sint Che - vat 
“It was said: ‘O Messenger of es ow, gs ne a ae 
Allah, how will you recognize “7 Pee op ame hea gi tele 
those whom you have not seen of 252 3355 38 ceelb 36 GUS Bhs 
your Ummah?’ He said: ‘From the ~~ 7 oot 4 Uy eg 
blazes on their foreheads and feet, Js © i JS :JB ape Gp al Ae Ol 

like horses with black and white — . 4g wheal fo aS ys a ae Vd 
traces (which make them distinct i ee eae ae ere 
from others) which are the traces bs 25M Ul Se GL co glares (pl 

of ablution.’” (Hasan) 4 ts -3ihd Say oe Se 
Another chain with similar 21! S** +O%#! o ld 

wording. i, 3858 adsl ff as prec 

vay alte oy pita ge VOVIC code Bo dll a ol [pe oohiul] igy pe 
Gj ge) Aaa 9 ete 6OL> cpl mee ys 

Comments: 

a. This shows the excellence of the followers of the Prophet 2%, since their 
distinguishing mark would be a blazing light on their parts of the body 
washed in ablution. 

b. The blaze of light on the parts of body would be generated by the 
performance of ablution. It means that the Muslims neglecting their prayer 
shall be deprived of this blessed glow, so they would be indistinguishable 
from non-Muslims. There can be no greater misfortune for a person calling 
himself a Muslim, that the Prophet #¢ refuses to recognize him as such. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

285. Humran the freed slave of 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan said: “I saw 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan sitting in 
Magd‘id.“| He called for water 
and he performed ablution, then 
he said: ‘I saw the Messenger of 
Allah #€ sitting in this place 
where I am sitting, performing 
ablution as I have done. Then he 
said: “Whoever performs ablution 
as I have done, his previous sins 
will be forgiven.’”’ And the 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: “And 
do not be conceited (due to this 
great virtue).” (Sahih) 

258 Lgrieng Sylgtall ois gil 

2 

reel G2 ctl ke Gas - vdeo 
r2eG5Ni Mis 2 bes 2 sgh Gis 

EG cacti 3 tel Sus 3) Gu 
di 4,25 dh :d6 ASS 5454 
AB 2,35 fb SU pak 3B 
5B NA b583 he 2S Ba 
13 oi 3,25 385 US te GE UA 

Another chain with similar 

br8e qe 
wording. gas V9 

“ty fen Ete ae ° - a” 
does ae as 1 Ge 3p lke We 
3 

gis aeraeh 

! use’ 

JsN Gabbe g elie) Gob ge VU Vitel el [epee altel] taps 

1p OL pm 6 BMS Ge tudeally cperere Lal Ul 

Comments: PORT oe nme we 
‘Do not be conceited or deceived’ means that the promise of such a great 
reward for an act of virtue might make you contented, or neglectful of other 
virtuous deeds or, maybe, you start taking the acts of sin lightly under the 
illusion that the ablution would wash off all of your sins. This kind of 
contentment is in itself an act of sin. Nor should anyone allow the illusion 
to go into his head that he is the most virtuous or blameless of all his fellow 
human beings. 

Chapter 7. Tooth Stick (V dined!) S150 man —V aeprell) 

286. It was narrated that es oh dl ate 33 Uns Gs - yan 
Hudhaifah said: “Whenever the es 

{11 A place in Al-Madinah near the mosque where people used to sit to discuss things. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 259 Lge g Sy lgdall wulgil 

Messenger of Allah # got up for . st Ke 
prayer at night to pray Tahajjud °C ‘oe Ni oF Mg ij % es gh Cas 

(night optional prayer), he would 32 (aS5 We rains 3) te Gas 
clean his mouth with the tooth ¢ es me oe See adar, paces, 
stick.” (Sahih) gl &F Geet 5 gyal LB cold 
HE dt 3425 GW 355 TELL ye «Bhs 
2b fogs Ine 5 gh je pe 
SIGE 

CB Ugh! clans CAAVIC chroradl ey: Spell Gh cdeordl eqgybedl an si ees 
ols ys ¢ Laadie bb ajy Gas Olaue ah fea) Yoore co Kel! ule # 900 gS acon J wh 

3 ee) oe 

Conuments: “ae Oth GF ples 

a. The mouth and the tongue are the tools of pronouncing the glory of Allah. 
It is, therefore, necessary for all of us to be particular about their cleanliness 
and purity. That is the reason why ablution has been declared as a 
precondition for the performance of prayers, since it contains both the 
elements connected with the purity of mouth, namely rinsing and using 
tooth stick. 

b. Sleep creates a kind of foul smell in the mouth that needs to be removed 
through rinsing the mouth and use of tooth stick, regardless of whether a 
person gets up to offer Tahajjud (optional midnight prayer) or Fajr 
(obligatory dawn prayer). 

287. It was narrated that Abu mic ee Of 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of eorre 7 F 
Allah 2 said: ‘Were it not that it = i! Ane GF cee op al ae 5 GLO! 
would be too difficult for my jeri Leigh ie tae 

Ummah (nation), I would have re! Pe SR aime 
commanded them to use the tooth :8 4! — Jb :db ip oa! jf 
stick at every time of prayer.’ ” oe 4 {ic tiff yj 
(Sahih) SjSh og YS dé Goi al Yb 
Ge ns te 

on dilane ge YYW TYEE SS Gb Gh al [epee eakel] tee pd 

Commenis: ee 

a. ‘Were it not that it would be too difficult’ means the Prophet #8 feared that 
it might become too difficult for his followers to comply with his orders, 
since there could be occasions when the tooth stick might not be available, 
or at least not easily available. 

b. ‘Would have commanded’ means that he would have made the use of tooth 
stick compulsory, since it still enjoys the status of a recommended act. It is 

The Chapters: Of Purification: ... 

not, however, a 

260: Ugrteng: Sylglsl wolige! 

pterequtisite for the validity of ablation: 

ce. The words ‘At every time of prayer’ means that if the tooth stick was: not 
used before ablution it would Have been ordered to: use it just. before 

énteririg: the prayer. 
288. It was narrated that Tbr 
‘Abbas: said: “The Messenger of 
Allah used to pray in the night 
(Qiyamul-Lail) two: Rak’ah by two, 
then: wher he finished he would 
use the tooth stick.” (Da‘if) 

eS pS es slacdly oak. gle oF VIA LY bcased aoe oT | er aeee ostiael] 

pts Sis: ash bf bias Gas - vAA 
Df oe OF eBid 2 cae UN 
vt gl F Cee gf deo 58 esa 
joy J at des OS 336 
Bia Capale Eg 385 gods 

eer, WATE cela oye yee SI Olde erly © VE0 /V: Sod! AoW 

Comimients: 

a. As regards: the prayer of Fahajjud, the Prophet #g was most often used: to 
perform two Rak’ah units by two, until he made a total of eleven: Rak‘ahs 

including the Witr prayer. 

b: As has already beers mentioried,. the Prophet #¢ often: used: a tooth stick 
even while preparing for the prayer of Tahajjud (see H:. 286). Here it is 
mentioned that he used to do-it. even after each two Rak’ah. 

289. It was narrated from Abu 
Umamah that the Messenger of 
Allah #¢ said: “Use the tooth 
stick, for the tooth stick purifies: 
the mouth. and is: pleasing. to the 
Lord. Jibril never canie to me but 
hie advised me to use the tooth 
stick, until I feared that it would 
be made obligatory for me and 
my Unimah. Were it not that I ees 
that it would be too d 
my Ummah, I would Have 
énjoizied it upon then: Arid I use 
the tooth stick until I fear that I 
may make the front of my mouth: 
sore.’ (Le. my gums) (or cause my 
teeth to fall out due to brushing 
them so often). (Da‘if) 

FG ae 

as Ole ols Hy fds Ble ~ vas 

ASN OI By Oude GE tb BH 
gl GE egy ll 58 “- zs ‘ne Sf 

SS <fS5ade dE BE td t5 OF 
V3 Bee Hoye « " a Brat} 
& AGI glest VW be gle 

a Bs fe oA Ese id 
2558 Aes Sil YT GET JI Vs 
St Es BS ae Mb ee 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 261 (gitten'g Syl gall cutigd 

Dbete Cy ye VAW ITE CP /AD SH OS SL dill oe ot [teas oslion] 2 lectegel 

: YYATE o it's way SS LS well oy! 
296. It was narrated from Gis GS wl i Ke gh Gla — v4 
Migdanx bin. Shuraih: bin Hani’ whe, wih ey eon a 
that his father said: “I said to  ‘ed™ cp Eo of pltell GF ocho 

‘Aishah: ‘Tell me, what was: the pees ae ag MG ine 42 caf 22 
first thing that the Messenger of eae x a = zi 
Allah #§ did when he entered 65 bb] by 8 o. aS gy Gb 
upon you?’ She said: ‘The first era ks es 65 EE Caxtle 

thing he would do would be to 
use the tooth stick’ ” (Sahih): 

way plated] Cyto ge FORTE oS yell ol ca ytgbell cpebine we el ees 

Comments: 

a. This shows that even outside the prayer timirigs the Prophet #@ used: the 
tooth stick quite frequently. 

b. Some of the scholars: of Figh Gurisprudence) have added’ certain. conditions 
with regard to the use of the tooth stick. They say, for example, that the 
tooth stick must be of the length of one spari, of that one must not do if 
without drer hing it in water, and: so on. Nothing. of these assertions. is 
supported by any evidetice or proof. 

291. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin Gis : yah ae a isk Gis - yay 

Abu Talib said: “Your mouths are ne gs a ve. 

the paths of the Qur’an, so 8 } = Je eal we pobne 

perfume them with the tooth , x4 a haat tg gs g Suk te 
stick. (Da‘if) ‘ i oe ca 4 ra ra e 

-xaigh & :d6 We Of gg oe os 

Sty Hs oT! ath 

pel on oes Saks of ¥44 (Et Adsl re ote I reeea} Lenina! Pri comm Tex ated 
fal cosas ust dy oe el ake ad's choy 8) chee so ® Goi gdh tess NE gi ye ay 

Tig WE AV godl past 

Comments: 

a. It is a Mawquf (Discontinued) Hadith since it is 5 the saying of a Companion, 
not of the Prophet #%. Nevertheless, the merits of the tooth stick ate proved 
even from Marfu’ (Traceable) Ahadith, i.e. from. Ahddith traceable back to the 
Prophet #€ in ascending order. 

b. ‘Moutlis are the paths of the Qur'an’ ’ means that, mouths are the Yiedia in 
recitirig the noble words of the Qur'an. It is, therefore, necessary that the 
mouths be ina state of purity at the tine of the recitation of the Noble Book. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 262 igre g Sylgta! lol 

Chapter 8. The Fitrah Chae Se ea CAG a iI 
(Natural Inclination Of Man) ieee sae 
292. It _was narrated that Abu Gis 1&3 ol 23 55 ff Bhs - var 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of Ste em, 18 eo 
Allah #@ said: ‘The deeds te (f «G Pj oF cee Gy ole 
connected to the Fifrah are five (or 4,2 45 gee fe a9t) oe 
B iJB a I. wend! spl 
five things are connected to the % sy ceil naa A oe es 
Fitrah): circumcision, shaving the just 31 «Zee shal ME Ol J 4d5 
pubic hairs, clipping the nails, Pitta. pS eqn (fete watt al. @ 
plucking the armpit hairs and rots oe HNN ee ae we 
trimming the mustache.” (Sahih) AN Jady cde! ag «Ub 

wh 63 ylgbst Colmes COAAR Ie cw sls ge ol «LU ¢ guest to ol Tex Seiad 
ONS) ej Cd gay 6 de op Old Sad ye YOVIE <3 bal Jet 

Comments : 

a. Fitrah means the things that are part of a religion which are in perfect 
harmony with the demands of nature and, therefore, part of the Sunnah and 
Shari‘ah of all the Prophets of Allah that have gone before. 

b. Circumcision means to remove the prepuce (the foreskin or the fold of skin 
that covers the head of the male organ) so that the head of the organ is 
bared. The process has great medical advantage because the filth collected 
inside the foreskin, if not removed, might breed various diseases. 

c. Plucking the hair of the armpit is a Sunnah of the Prophet ¢. The act of 
plucking keeps the hair from growing again for a considerable period of 
time although shaving it also serves the purpose of achieving purity. 

d. Nails, if left to grow, also tend to collect filth. It is, therefore, in the interest 
of cleanliness that they be clipped. 

e. Growing the mustache was a custom of the non-Arab polytheists. Arabs 
also contracted this evil habit from them. The Prophet #2 enjoined that it be 
closely trimmed, but the Hadith only speaks of trimming, and not of 
shaving it. 

293. It was narrated that ‘Aishah (Gis :&3 Ji 3 XS gi Gis - vay 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # Pease ae oe ee 
said: ‘Ten things are connected to O* = +51) gl & &S5 Ge cass 
the Fitrah: trimming the mustache, F tue gf git Be eee eat 

letting the beard grow, using the . Uae Soto is 

tooth stick, rinsing out the nostrils Jj) JB SE Ale Be 2 Cyl 
with water, clipping the nails, Ui) 4k -achalt <u 7s ge 

? ‘ Fat] 3 1% ot) 

washing the joints, plucking the pes we “ma we ae al cal 
armpit hairs, shaving the pubic GULE2YIG SSM, = cal ea 
hairs, washing the private parts Bee dats 28, ae me 
with water.” (Sahih) egal 1 jnes ub) © a et 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

(One of the narrators) Zakariyya 

said: “Mus‘ab said: ‘I have 
forgotten the tenth thing, but it 
may have been rinsing out the 
mouth.’” (Sahih) 

Comments: 

263 \giiwg Sy lgball el gui 

: Zt atet Afe- ee 
telat Gelesls BUS eer) oda Wai'g 

PREM 2 gai 
Cooly Came Jb 055 db 

a. ‘Letting the beard grow’ means that, unlike the mustache, it should not be 
trimmed or shaved. Shaving the beard is unlawful and the person doing it 
is a transgressor, since he violates the dictates of those Ahddith that make 

the growing of beard mandatory 

b. Finger joints also collect filth. One, therefore, needs to be particular about 
cleaning them well during ablution. Similarly, the other parts of body that 
are more likely to collect filth need special attention during a bath. It is 
necessary because, if no special care is taken, bath water at times fails to 
reach those spots, and the bath remains incomplete. 

294. It was narrated from 
‘Ammar bin Y4asir that the 
Messenger of Allah #8 said: “Part 
of the Fitrah is rinsing out the 
mouth, rinsing out the nostrils, 
using the tooth stick, trimming 
the mustache, clipping the nails, 
plucking the armpit hairs, shaving 
the pubic hairs, washing the 
joints, washing the private parts 
and circumcision.’ (Da‘if) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

Ws NGS ol ee ge en AS 
ios aril) Gere Vb 4 

aha Gor SU El 25S 

. 4 Sie - 247422 
Jeg NGG GUL Gad 
bY! C5 bY A Oth 

CMI peldl fobs Sik 
MQGENG 
Bis je g del bee eb 

4% dol o ole Cato Sen okie cd sight cogle yl az ol [apes 93 inf] tes 

Comments: 

- J sgree Adena § Ve 6 Pda Ay} fy gle 

The Arabic word Intidah used in the Hadith means the sprinkling of water 

The Chapters ‘Of Purification ... 

264 Wgrrew'g Sylgda! Gitosl 

on the lower garment. But the narrator also used the word Istinja’ to clarify 
that it means ‘washing the private parts’. The rationale of the action lies in 
the fact that, if perchance a drop of urine trickles down the body 
‘unintentionally, the person concerned should not feel unduly bothered 
about it, but persuade himself that the dampness is from the water 
sprinkled on the lower garment. Anyhow, it is Allah who knows best. 

295. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “We were given a 
time limit with regard to 
trimming the mustache, shaving 
the pubic hairs, plucking the 
armpit hairs and clipping the 
nails. We were not to leave that 
for more than forty days.” (Sahih) 

Sha Se 3 jh Gis - rae 

dle yl U4 olgke Yb jae ie 

B55 sdb ale oT ge a 235e 
Oe ly a, 2 
why SE Gey ce Ll a8 a 

sef 

tye SI HEY SF bs) is LN) 

AD Si 

Ay pine Cad oye YONI ci eal Slat Gb ci zigbell phir ae of tay pei 

Comments: 

The acts must be performed as and when considered necessary. But even if 
delayed, the delay must not be for more than forty days, otherwise it shall 
be counted as sin. It should not, however, be construed that it is forbidden 
to do these acts in less than forty days. 

Chapter 9. What Is To Be 
Said When Entering The 
Toilet 

296. It was narrated that Zaid bin 
Argam said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘These Hushush 
(waste areas) are visited (by 
devils), so when anyone of you 
enters, let him say: ‘Allahumma 
inni a’‘udhu bika minal-khubthi wa’l- 
khaba@’ith (O Allah, I seek refuge 
with You from male and female 
devils).’”’ (Sahih) 

Other chains with similar 
wording. 

[JES dy GSE - 4 pratt) 
(4 dined) ENS JAS 134 

Sao 

ee Abe a, gp “ae. i 
iene GIS 2 Us Uo ake Bas - van 
# 

an 

As Je og Soe 6 Toe ° 
NG BGG gel eG ee ON 

JAS SB apie Cty ttll oda bp 2g 

estliy 
? q s 

Juss 55] 2 Sei ace 23 EN ite 

eee ra [555 OF rays gl él 

The Chapters. Of Purification... 265 igrmg. Sy lgtalt igi 

aoe 
1 
4 
€ 
E 
G 
iS 

Exicd| $5 GU BE ai 
weal Leo BL fe Sl Spd be Gl caylebll coglo gl ax eT agree oolel] sey ae 
«gly ipSlesly COL> gply cdegje cpl dormer 64 Ted Calm ge Te 

Comments: 

a. ‘Male and: female devils’ means the devils among the Jinn, that. take 
pleasure in. teasing humans just for fun. 

b. The devils, of impure disposition. as they are; only like unclean: places. That 
is why they: frequent the toilets. 

c. The supplication quoted above must be recited before entering, the 
washroom or lavatory. (See Bukhéri: 142.) It is against the rules of decency: 
to articulate supplications inside the lavatory with the tongue: In case a 
person is going to relieve himself in an open field, let. him pronounce the 
supplication. before: undressing: himself. 

297. It was narrated: that ‘Ali 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% 
said: ‘The screen. between the Jinn 
and: the nakedness of the sons of 
Adam is that when a person 
enters the Kanif!) he should say: 
Bismillah (in the Name of 

“a8 on 0 Fee “Zh. ; 
Gis wun 3h ke Ge - rv 
Se Gis cote of nk Gy el 

al be «Ge Keli ye eAaalt 
OE ale 3a det Uf ge Gs 
Sell ga G Bene at 25 ds 

Allah).’” (Da‘if) a chai peey itd Se. Aste, 
Sh ag JSS pT Ce lige 
Cai) ane : gle 
dyes sue Lendl) ge 53 b Oh cheer cede dl a el Lied wolf] te se 
gl * toga! Sid, od coli s tee 

abt Sly cy deem yy deren ge THe coe! 

Comments: 
Tt means that it is also necessary to say Bismillah along with the 
abovementioned: supplication in Hadith 296. Alternatively, one may first say 
Bismillah, then recite. the supplication. 

298. It was narrated that Anas “4% 2 

ae sae ee = 
bin Malik said: “Whenever the ot Ie 

al 
eo 

(1 A man-made structure for relieving, oneself. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Messenger of Allah #% entered the 
toilet, he would say: ‘A’udhu 
Billahi minal-khubuthi wa'l-khaba’ith 
(I seek refuge with Allah from 
male and female devils).’” (Sahih) 

Gude oP cYV¥O: ra ceed! J5e> atyl 13} Js la wh « 

299. It was narrated from Abu 
Umamah that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “None of you 
should fail to say, when he enters 
his toilet: ‘Allahumma inni a‘udhu 
bika minar-rijsin-najis, al-khabithil- 
mukhbith, ash-Shaiténir-rajim (O 
Allah, I seek refuge with You 
from the filthy and impure, the 
evil one with evil companions, the 
accursed Shaitén).’” (Da‘if) 
Another chain with a slightly 
different wording from Ibn Abi 
Maryam who mentioned similar, 
but he did not say in his narration: 
“Minar-rijsin-najis (From the filthy 
and impure)” he only said: “Minal- 
khabithil-mukhbith, ash-Shaitanir- 
rajim (From the evil one with evil 
companions, the accursed 
Shaitany” 

266 grieng Slgdall witgul 

aes 

pel se ye EB Joy 
Me ‘ot oll (he 
Sea je5 BY HE atl 
testis LB Se 

I ta a <a 
Ap oh y pele 

y 72s 80 Foe Ge 

2 GIS shoes Ub aks Gs - 44 

I GE ae gl 
Fe he of Be ls 
#e in 3,25 Sf Gul al cpl 
Si aie 55 13) acs Pex Ye 36 
tH je th 542i a pe Fe 
ot] etl CaS 

ae oF et 

dye Gado oye VARA cVER/At SS o coil pla aoe of [tgand soli] Fer Saad 
Lp op os JJ YYALe «jails Sze gall Abad 9 64s ree gl cyl 

Chapter 10. What Is To Be 
Said When Exiting The Toilet 

300. Yusuf bin Abi Burdah 
narrated: “I heard my father say: 
‘I entered upon ‘Aishah, and I 
heard her say: “When the 

eg 13) Ogi Ve SG + geal 
(\+ ddl) IS Se 
as. ier wl BS & ai ee 

tae -— Yee 
r hst5) eared LS] al Ce we 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Messenger of Allah #@ exited the 
toilet, he would say: Ghufranaka (1 
seek Your forgiveness).’”” (Sahih) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

267 (greg Solgtal! ili 

- 78 “Ce, 

Bhi ie ie uN ae eae ate 
wh be FO a At 525 58 
ANGE) :J6 
A Gly de yy gach 1 ut 
Bis sGug ok A Ge sate 

Le5eS «fated 

oF Te Wh de doe 4 Ok cb lghll caylo gh eel [eee ow! ] Fez Sea 
only 64a > orl Arr 9 Vir & gael Amur 9 6 Amigo Sate oP Vere ce MGS 

Comments: 

shally ipSbessly 6OLe 

a. Asking forgiveness from Allah after relieving oneself is recommended, 
because clearly the person concerned was unable to recite words of the 
remembrance of Allah during that period of time. Imputing this failure by 
the person to himself, although for reasons involuntary, is a part of 
etiquette and respect for the Creator. Hence the appeal. for forgiveness. 
Another likely explanation is that freeing the body of impurity is a great 
favor from Allah which must be acknowledged and thanked for. And since 
we cannot thank our Benevolent Lord as much as we should, we ask Him 

for forgiveness. 

b. The supplication under reference is to be offered after exiting the toilet. In 
case the person had used an open field for the purpose, the prayer should 
be offered by the person after he has properly dressed up himself. 

301. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “When aver the 
Prophet #€ exited the toilet, he 
would say: “Al-hamdu lillahilladhi 
adhhaba ‘annial-adha wa “afani 
(Praise is to Allah Who has 
relieved me of impurity and given 
me good health).’” (Da‘if) 

tgs SY 

el lees cg fran] Maat shieol bled ies me gl! Sy [tarde oolionl] ees 
Onby VY Ie cogedl cpl ee Cans dale aly CG etl Pe ads Cu 8) Ceti ins 

The Chapters Of Purification... 268 Ngreg Bylgdalt cilgsi 

g 

‘Chapter 11. Remembering eee A ee P Ae oy 4 i 
Allah Before Entering The i $ “s -? a : at v 
Toilet, And (Removing) eWod! 2 eiledly sted! Je 

Rings In The Toilet "OY dpe) 

eee Gh e | - ane 
302. “Urwah narrated from wos ES tet U2 Gas - ry 
‘Aishah that the Messenger of 

BE 22 cant 32 <5 Teh B55 bul 
Allah #6 used to remember Allah ~* BE NR OF EY Se oR 285 oo 

in all circumstances. (Sahih) age UF o zhi al te te Pe ve bee 
al $555 SS Me il 325 OF Abe Be 

eg]... ol OB gal ame fe tok COBY GbS cysbedt ales ca Bul) ol ol Gib 

SWite chs 
Comments: a 
a. ‘Remembering Allah in all.circumstances’ means that the Prophet #¢ used 
to remember Allah at all times regardless of whether he was in a state of 
ablution or not. What we infer fromthe Hadith is that, in-order to remember 
Allah with the tongue, we do not have to follow all those rules of purity 
that are a-prerequisite for the ritual prayer. 
b. ‘In ail circumstances and times’ could also mean that, unlike the prayer that 
is undesirable (Makruh) to -perfotm at certain hours, there is no such 
restriction on engaging in the rememibrance of Allah. 

303. It was narrated from Anas att ihe bb pa Gas — yey 
bin Malik that when the Prophet 4. 32. <<. . yee e. “ae 
#€ entered the toilet, he would — f ia Aen ae st * gi Bae 

take off his ring. (Da‘if) if eps oe er Pa oF teed 
J SE we hi ot we gy 
Jel x a3 NSS 

Blas Gl 555 48 OS, pS GL caylghll cost gil ar el Tete soled] tay pe 
4 VETO 6 Sebo 535 Aon ren? 9 4 Sx ude (er Sy hd pyc oF TAS ee ceed a jee 
46 Leu osama so-j ws ord De Cr cyl ® (YAO /\ 151 SY Roo) git ARR § 

Comments: 
The Hadith is not only weak but Munkar (Denounced) as well. An authentic 
‘Hadith has orily this; that the Prophet #@ had a silver ring made for himself, 
‘but later on he took it off. (See Sunan Abu Dawud, 19). We cannot, 
therefore, say for sure as to whether or not the Prophet :8 used to take off 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

269 

tgrwg Bolg oilgul 

ihis ting while entering the toilet. Anyhow, etiquette demands that a ring or 
a ‘book with Allah’s ‘Name inscribed or written in it must not be taken 

inside the lavatory. 

Chapter 12. It is Undesirable 
(Makruh) Te Urinate In The 
Place For Washing 

304. It was narrated that 
“Abdullah bin Mughaffal said: 
“The Messenger of Allah 2% said: 
‘None of you should ‘urinate in 
his wash area for most -of the 
insinuating thoughts! .come 
from that.” (Da‘if) 

Abu “Abdullah bin Majah said: 
(“Abul-Hasan said: ‘I heard 
Muhammad bin Yazid®! saying:) 
“Ali bin Muhammad At-Tanafisi 
said: ‘This (prohibition) applies to 
cases where the ground (in ‘the 
place used for washing) was soft. 
But nowadays this does not 
apply, because the baths you use 
now are built of plaster, Séruj®! 
and tar; so if a person urinates 
there then pours water over it, 
‘that clears it away, and that is 
fine’ auf : 

BAGS BIS SE - OF par 
OY ttt) foal 

dé Ws Aacas 33 Shae GS - vet 

Le oy bash if eer, ti SSSI 

Bert + 

58] ay CB aah 8 dk 
Sb tals 25LEG Jer SEAS 

Wie ( portenel! SB doodl cd oh cajkgbdl caylo wl sor o-| Tata satin] eae 
creel erltly i pSled! dowmenny VV I tga od rewly 64; Sh Sle Late tye 
SAE ght TALE sagls sgl lo 9 Whi eed 6 Cpu 

Commenis: 

When all is said and done, it must still be considered a part of the manners 
and respect for the Sunnah of the Noble Prophet # that we avoid ‘urinating 

in the wash area. 

(li e., doubts about whether the utine has touched him.and made him impure. 
PI ‘That is Ibn Majah, being a statement from.one of the manuscripts. 

2! A niixture-of chalk and sand. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Chapter 13. Urinating While 
Standing 

305. It was narrated from 
Hudhaifah that the Messenger of 
Allah #& came to the garbage 
dump of some people and he 
urinated on it standing up. 
(Sahih) 

270 lgrtwng Sr lgtass wiloui 

S5dI 3 HE Le OL - OF pnnslt) 
OY teal) LSB 

cplnny conby VYEIC cles UIE Spt Ob cepssll cdl ae! tee sd 
A Re Cade ge TYPE Coed le ema! GL ca ylghal 

Comments : 

a. The best way to urinate is to do it in a sitting position. It was a part of the 
Prophet’s normal practice to urinate while sitting. 

b. On this occasion the Prophet #§ is reported to have urinated in the standing 
position. Maybe, his intention was to show to the Ummah that this was also 
permissible, so that a hard pressed man, obliged to do so, does not suffer from 
guilt-consciousness. There is also the possibility that the Prophet # himself 
was faced with a situation where he feared. to defile his clothes if he did it ina 
sitting position, or maybe he found it too difficult to sit down at that hour. 
However, Allah knows best of all. It is nevertheless essential that all of us take 
due precaution lest a splash of urine should defile our clothing. 

306. Shu’bah narrated from 
‘Asim, from Abu Wa’il, from 
Mughirah bin Shu‘bah that the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ came to 
the garbage dump of some people 
and urinated standing up. 
(Hasan) 

Shu‘bah said: “That day, ‘Asim 
said: ‘Amash reported this from 
Abu Wa’il, from Hudhaifah,”! 
but he did not remember it 
(correctly). So I asked Mansur 
about it, and he narrated it to me 
from Abu Wa’il, from Hudhaifah, 
that the Prophet # came to a 

Bo go *% 

SIGS cy abe Bb Ges Ge - res 

fo 4 edie 

fo e- zee 4 yt 
os! ea pele CF 6d Gas 13513 

te Se EP eae ee oT 2 - 
ai S55 iP ase or Bal oF ‘bls 
= = 4 
Ub US co3s Abe 351 Be 
1 trae # - ne fro ue 
Fs ° 2 foe nh 

"l That is the chain for the preceding narration. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 271 Lge Solgtatl wl gui 

dump of some people and 
urinated standing.’” : 
4% ok 9 Dig op mole ed pl Gaye cr YEU/E dom aor Depa ool] Fc Saeed 

Chapter 14. Urinating While het S5H 3b SG - Epa) 

SHEDS (\t deel) 

deo % sf GS - 

307. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 43, 4 i235 al 33 OS fl Gs - rev 
said: “If anyone tells you that the, ,, Rea eee a 
Messenger of Allah 2% urinated Gt) se Ge hele) 9 sda Gl 
while standing, do not believe ok 6 yeh He 8 4 eee Ly te 
him, for I (always) saw him on ghee oy a as 
urinating while sitting down.” dG cAbsle 32 cal 38 ce Sa cpl 
(Hasan) a a Pe ae eee er ee 

V¥re U5 Sgt ge gdl pele be Ok ca ylgbll cede sll x A [ye] ee os 
VEY VV AVS geld SSN cya!) opty hth pel aaly 04; th ph Code oye 

Comments: 
Denial by ‘Aishah % is based on her personal knowledge and observation, 
because inside the house, the Prophet #% always urinated in the sitting 
position and inside the toilet. In the preceding Hadith, however, Hudhaifah 
& described what he had seen at the outside, of which the Mother of the 
Believers was not aware. Both of them are, therefore, right in their 
respective descriptions. 

308. It was narrated that ‘Umar xg Gis : yoy ty Mt Gis - yea 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #8 gis wee ee Sate ght Ws 

saw me urinating while standing, eel Le EF cme Gil Ge Shs! 
and he said: ‘O ‘Umar, do not +; --2 .4 .2 (atts ei oil 

urinate standing up.’ So I never Ge tee se! ee oe » 
urinated whilst standing after dy! Oly 288 abl Jy2) lb :dB je 
that.” (Da‘if) A SY ork op 1 OT 

SBy ca Shee Gab ge VV Vagal atl [ete sole] og od 
4 
Maas le pee mls Code ative! baad Sone sll 

309. It was narrated that Jabir bin is: j ahh 22 ts ES - weg 
xe - ot oss 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger ° se F oa 

of Allah #% forbade us to urinate o ile oF «fea! & Se Ge “ple 

The: Chapters. Of Purification... 272: (gring: Sylgdal! wslqul 
while standing.” (Da‘if) 

1 heard Muhammad. bin Yazid; 
Abu ‘Abdullah say: “I heard 
Ahmad bin ‘Abdir-Rahmén Ai- 

, ; Fs ; & ae aoe 4 oe 70 “oes Bo, 
Makhzumi say: ‘Sufyan Ath- «Hl a6 Ul chip G deme Cred 
Thawri said concerning the ’ Ae Ree ee 

Hadith of ‘Aishaty — ‘T (always) . : ene ee 
saw him: urinating whilst sitting (3 — Gy! oat JG tga Soy 
down’ — a man knows more _ ec ; 
about that (about such matters) , 2 

than she.’ Ahmad bin ‘Abdur- lghe ip wist AesAl 

Rahman said: ‘It was the custom 
of the Arabs. to. urinate standing 
up. Do you not see that in the 
Hadith of ‘Abdur-Rahmdan bin 
Hasanah. it was said: ‘He sits 
down. to urinate as a woman 

te Oy Spel we) aS NG 
us cal yi Ls Ayal jal ali 

- 

3 

ae Bt 

cen 4 o fog ox - 
"Set ee ee te 

does,’’”7 

ple gl cade ge THAT 0: Lol 8 te ool exe [he Cine colael] ees 
CB) Ag zo beall op CAE Seg aterty oa GAaall 

Comments: 308: & 309 
Both. the above: Ahadith are Weak. As such no. cognizance can. be taken. of 
them,: and' no. interdiction on urinating: in the standing: position can be 
proved from them: There is, however, no doubt that the Prophet's. normal 
practice was to urinate in the sitting position. As such the believers: should 
follow this: practice. The main issue. in this context is to avoid defiling one’s 
clothes: from the splash of urine: Failure to take care of that: is not 
pardonable, since there are strict warnings against it in. the Ahddith of the 
Prophet: 2. 

BW ine BGS SU 0 ppl 
10 tinal) Seed EWG secll 

Chapter 15. It Is Undesirable 
(Makruh} To Touch The: Penis 
And To. Clean. Oneself With: 
The Right Hand 

310. ‘Abdullah bin Abu Qataédah 
said: “My father told: me that he 
heard. the: Messenger of' Allah. #@ 
say: ‘When anyone of you 

Eee a4 4 + Bo Pat 
S68 oh ob SEE eel S 

[I That is, Ibn Majah. 
Pl See no. 346. 

The: Chapters: Of Purification ... 

urinates, let him not touch. his 
penis with his right hand nor 
clean himself with his right 
hand.” (Sahih) 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

273: lgrung, Sigil! ilgili 

srl 10308 ol Gb ail te 
go- 2 4 Sie ae OR he’ 
Tdi bp cdg Me a d,25 
ere 

| CdSng ls end Va cates 0555 5 ats 

1 

ais oath Gb gat de Ue 
cole So15501 GIS stat 3b Sushi 

v 
a.07 

. ogre 

Cagle oye Vokre cd la apo 0 SS his V wh ce ge gh ¢guledl doe ot] Tse 
Cade ge PWG gen elec ge Gell Ol caylghll cghaes copby om lig! 

Commenis: 

“4 gH 

it is one of the features. of the Islamic culture that purity and cleanliness 
occupy such a prominent place in it. The culture even teaches. us as to how 
we-are to. cleanse ourselves after satisfying relieving ourselves. This Hadith, 
in particular, gives us the useful direction that we are not'to use the right 
hand for cleaning the secret parts of our bedy, or even for touching those 

parts. 

311. It was narrated. that ‘Uqbah 
bin Suhban said:. “IT heard 
“Uthman bin ‘Affan say: ‘T never 
sang ai song or told a lie or 
touched: my penis with my. right 
hand. after I’ swore on: oath. of 

allegiance: to the Messenger of 

Allah #¢ to:that‘effect:’” (Da‘if) 

obig dol SUP LS ctgtedl Ay ca glia Oo 

312. It. was narrated. that Abu 
Hurairah.said:.“The Messenger of 

Allah #€ said: ‘When anyone of 

you: cleans himself; he: should. not 
clean himself with his right hand. 
Let him clean himself with: his left 
hand.’”” (Hasan) 

aS Hs int Uf ye Ge - ri 

i ten 

: Bee hype A Bet tye FF YS 
eg GPS Gye V5 Cas V5 

ciball a [ee Caene ostiul] : fetal 
Cordell rig) 

: Zo 68 ane 80 8 fe, pga 
owls cp hee or yey Ge - PY 

a gy 4enn ° oe o fe. 3 hE 
on au AG y earl ds Fe opel Was 

7 

oped 2h a 
bp :#6 at d,25, JE sdb A 
Saces rae see} ty cesdef chet: 

ree oe 

-  itye ee 68 eee eg Bet ve 
OF ORE Cy dee OF «EX! gle}, 

The Chapters Of Purification... 274 -. Wiig By tgdal tei 

Callas ins) 
clad see Ua) Shin! Lal S Ob ciyighll cosh gh atl [em ‘coll : Fer teacd 
Ole ply dag je cyl ameoney CV igee ay SMene yp taoee hale oye A: 7, the bo! 

Chapter 16. Cleaning Oneself 
With Stones, And The 
Prohibition Of Using Dung 
And Bones 

ela YI mails = Oni pose) 
BN LEM op Gilg B5EeaL 
Vt oii) 

313. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: ‘I am to you like a 

father to his son, and I teach you. he ia pile ay ee o id 
So when you go to relieve ss rr 
yourselves, do not face the Qiblah df Leip ee al S25 Se dB S58 

or turn your backs towards it.” He re Gy c&thel PR et A 

ordered us to use three pebbles, 3 } ; a 3 Se - 
and he forbade us to use dung 
and bones, and he forbade od 2 ioe 

a 
cleaning oneself with the right : 
Seog GED Coby OF als EG 

hand.” (Hasan) 

Comments: va x Too] ge As 

a. It is not allowed for a person going out to urinate or relieve himself, either 
to sit facing the Qiblah, or turning his back towards it. Scholars consider the 
ruling applicable to the open areas and fields, since sitting inside the 
lavatory with the back turned towards the Qiblah is proved from the Sunnah 
of the Prophet #¢ himself. (Bukhdri: 148 & Muslim: 266) 

b. Prophet's order to use three pebbles for cleansing is meant to ensure greater 
degree of purity. In case one is using water for purification, then there is no 
need to use the pebbles or lumps of clay. Interdiction on the use of dung 
and bones for purification stems from the fact that Allah has willed that 
they be the food of the jinns. 

314. It was narrated from 

] $4 ¢ | ert | 
sede! one Bo OS gl Gas - rie 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud: “The GE ade a Nw 

do 

Messenger of Allah #@ went to the 
toilet and said: ‘Bring me three 
stones.” So I brought him two 
stones and a piece of dung. He 
tock the two stones and threw the 
dung away, saying: ‘It is 

 <t be hee 

Se ihe! bao 2h os es 
ae of gd sdb - Guy Uf ys 
s or ote see 

— 250 BP tn ke 305 085 
f 

Bf Ans gf al we 32 9M os 

The Chapters Of Purification... 275 gira g Sy lgtadl wil gui 
tips. (Senet) an NB SE ST ae at 525 
ib S355 ay SE UuSl aE 

ee Soa aie eee 2% 
oe reley 4g Sl Als ee) 

Comments: 
We can deduce from the Hadith that in case only two stones or lumps of 
clay are available, they are enough for the purpose, although it is preferable 
to use three lumps or stones for purification. 

315. It was narrated that (7 ‘Cal 3 Aece tis eye 

Khuzaimah bin Thabit said: “The TS ee Senate ties 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: ‘For 3 GJé Gisg te fee Ge ole 
cleaning yourself you need three —. 7 4 

stones, no one of them being % ¢ 
dung.’” (Da‘if) 

ot EV g be Yk chee Yl Gb caylgell cogl planet Lape ool] Sess 
OL> oph ne Ally ot dit op ayer 4 plea cute 
Comments: 
The term Raji’ used in the Hadith includes both the dung and the excrement. 
Here it has been translated as dung. And since even the dung is ruled out 
for the purpose of cleaning, interdiction on the use of human excrement can 
very well be understood or surmised. 
316. Salman said that one of the «4.53 mas rece fo Ale Gas - 114 
idolaters said to him, while they ke tt 48k ice kw ay og 
were making fun of him: “I see «2777 & nn See oo 
that your companion (the Prophet 32 (dtaA Gis 22.55) Ae Gis 
##@) is teaching you everything, pel est +h sie oe Ni; “ie 
even how to relieve yourselves?” #* OF ¢patlel GF cme tls apa 
He said: “Yes indeed. He has 56 <d6 vos fe hs op pe 
ordered us not to face the Qiblah r Bi Ia ilged pA ak RG” Sys 
(prayer direction) nor to clean ce) '# OSj;E4 A (GSA! (Ae 

The Chapters Of Purification... 276 ‘Wgttewg Sylgtal wigal 

ourselves with our right :hands, a Fy $98 og 

and not to be nee with 7 %& ds woke rele al Al 
anything less than three stones, “aet y re Gs _jef NS caste 
‘which are not to include any ae ey area ce, 
excrement or.bones.” (Sahih) eS V3 sGlak ges N35 sali 

Ay obs aS 9 Cade ye VAY Cc chlee Ob caybgell cglas a ol ees 

Comments: 

a. The religion of Islam is in perfect harmony with nature. Hence :it is, that it 
has not neglected any aspect of human life. Even on matters often 
considered as taboo there is enough guidance for us.in.Islam. 

b. The four things that form part of the lavatory etiquette mentioned by 
Salman AI-Farisi conclusively prove the superiority .of ‘the ‘Islamic culture 
over others. The concept of reverence for respective Qiblah is there in other 
‘faiths as well, but the detailed instructions in the matter that.exist in Islam 
are missing in them. Avoiding to face, while defecating, the Qiblah that is 
used as direction for ‘the prayers, clearly demonstrates the reverence that 
Muslims attach to it. No such concept of reverence for the Qiblah is in 
evidence either among the Jews or the Christians. Particularizing the left 
and tight hands for different purposes is also the specialty of the Islamiic 
culture. 

Chapter 17. The Prohibition Stas a es ait - Ov gael 

Of Facing The Qiblah When ~ atc 

Defecating Or Urinating Oy dail) dilly stl a 

317.“Abdullah bin Harith bin :% Sree! = e oe Gis - rv 

Jaz’ Az-Zubaidi said: “I am -the 

first one who ‘heard the Prophet 

#% say: ‘No one among you ,33 oye & il ne gs! af wre 

should urinate facing towards the efecs ae og Cd 

Qiblah’ and I am the first one cell Aas ia djl if si ea 

oe a the people of that.” — {j, «aa he os isl Ke Y = digh 
ahi 

Ad, el cara ie Jal 
COLm gph ames cy Call Cate ge WAV /Etdeed sel Depee odtusf] eps 
pPrxks Smegsls épSbedls 

go S26 @ sete 
318. It was narrated that Abu 27 & too! « pli gy Gas - PIA 

Ayyub Ansari said: “The ee AS Gi al dts cei : Cl ol 

The Chapters Of Purification... 277 lgriwg Sylgiall! itqui 

Messenger of Allah #8 forbade the CR Oe se sey og 2s 
person who went to the Gha‘ift] ©! ee or hr OF sled cal oF Cri 
7 3 ae |e 

to face the Qiblah. He said: ‘Face 3525 ob ds GLE OSI Gf ays 
towards the east or the west’! Behe ee ageicky RS Bibi piace 
(Sahih) Bs! SH Ca oil ratte Ol Se abl 

gid sphiy 38, ili 

ca] oe SH Yy ge A fe Yb eps! god eel tay eel 
4% S53 ame yee cP VEE cA ber YI wl <3 ylgbi ‘planes VAS ies sVhbre 

Comments: 317 & 318: 
As-will be evident from. the Ahddith of the next chapter, the interdiction only 
applies to open places. In.cases where the toilets are constructed facing that 
direction, it is allowed to sit in them. However, it is preferable not to make 
them facing towards the Qiblah initially. 

| ce paar pal se ea ae ve mi oe gh Gas - 04 
in Abu Ma’qil Al-Asadi, who og cure oe ite te tus 
was a Companion of the Prophet ‘SH oy Clade eagle Cpe 
x6, said: “The Messenger of Allah al be <b iglsdl | BS oy ge fete 
#§ forbade us from facing either =; | Tree, ge 
of the two Qiblah®! when of! & je oF Grad! Sh 5 

defecating or urinating.” (Da‘if) E38! Coe Pecan jax 

clas ee AD Shaul LalS Ol caybebll cast gl one] Leas asked] ee es 
roby maze BLS Sgr As gl ce gee Cade ge V8 ie cde bel 

320. It was narrated from Jabir = 238241 ashi 2) 7G) Gis - yy. 
bin ‘Abdullah: “Abu Sa’eed AL 5; y. cs. cep we Faces ate 
Khudri narrated to me, that he (6) Ge! Ge deme Oy Oly Cae 
bears witness that the Messenger : : 

of Allah forbade facing the Qiblah - noe cee 
when defecating or urinating’” =. 2% 44 6! Gel dee gl ge 
on) dah ees Of Ne a 25 

[1 .Gna‘it refers to defecation, and to the hole in which one defecates. 

7] This applied specifically to the people of Al-Madinah because the Qiblah for them was 
towards the south. 

Bl je., Jerusalem and Makkah. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 278 Lgrweg Sy hgba) lui 

JHs Wk 

gills PALE oily codes SB ches teety dng) ol # [epee ] Fcc Saged 
als 

Comments: 
The expression “He bears witness’ means that he bears the testimony that 
the Prophet 2% did forbid facing the Qiblah while urinating or defecating. 
The tone of the speech used by the narrator has been adopted to make the 
narration more forceful. It is also meant to convey the idea that the narrator 
has heard it firsthand from the Prophet 2%, without the intervention of any 
other Companion. 

321. It was narrated that Jabir #6465 :tlo 3 pci gi de - rn 

heard Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri say: Kee gotet aa 38 ders _ 

Gas tA] late Gy ee ede gil 
“The Messenger of Allah 2 nim Salsa IR BA 
forbade me from drinking while (3 yi cali OG git Sl ae 

standing and from urinating 

while facing the Qiblah.” (Sahih) ‘225! gl G& Hngl Oh Bae 2g al 

ee 

Os EHH geo of ao Tf pe 32 

Olle 8155 ge Coded! We GL cuted bs! Peone] Fortes] 
Comments: 
The Hadith forbids the people from drinking water in the standing position. 
Some of the scholars take this prohibition as not punishable, which means 
that drinking water while standing up, although permissible, is by no 
means the best option. 

Chapter 18. Permission 
Concerning That In The 
(Constructed) Toilet And 
Permitting It Anywhere 
Except In The Desert 

322. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar said: 
“People say: ‘When you sit to 
relieve yourself, do not face the 
Qiblah.’ But one day I climbed up 
onto the roof of our house, and I 

AWS 3 4S SG - OA penal) 
Sail S93 ally AZ 3 
(VA dad!) 

se Gs she 24 sida Ge - vy 

ae ASN ie ts EF tell 

oe 

Se ge ee, a -! ° - Fe roe 
yl Wous5 cE ase BSS 

FG be 

ONG toes 7 cules 

saw the Messenger of Allah #8 
sitting on two bricks (to relieve 
himself), facing the direction of 
Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem). This 

Bo “Ze 

Of pee EE) Saye. as ae 

oe oe 0 AB aw # 

el OS yb A GY US Ol as 

The Chapters Of Purification... 279 lgirieg Sylgtal Gil gui 

is a Hadith narrated by Yazid bin sieges 
Harun. (Sahih) 

Bl OE GY Ey Ue FY 
we J 306 32 3) 
high ily iil pies 8 det 

die ok le let al J25 
a s “ay a8 
O98 op dag Cade Wa eda om 
eR Sede ge VEN gd A ill Ob pes! obi asl cass 
Ae dame op Comey Cal ye Ye cS lew VI OL cayigbll plane y Comes Og sla 

Comments: 

a. This was the apartment of the Mother of the Believers Hafsah %& the sister 
of the narrator of the Hadith ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar Y. (see Bukhdri: 148) The 
narrator described the house as his own because it was his sister’s house. 

b. The words ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah’ does not mean that Ibn ‘Umar 
saw the Prophet #¢ without a screen covering him. The fact of the matter is 
that the toilet wall being not very high he was able to see the Prophet's 
head, which indicated that the Prophet #@ was sitting with his back 
towards the House of Allah and face towards the Baitul-Maqdis 
(Jerusalem). As for the mud bricks, Ibn ‘Umar already knew that they were 
there. (See Fathul-Bari (Eng.) p. 28/1). 

323. It was narrated that Ibn 1 Gs oles 38 dis’ Gs - vv 
“Umar said: “I saw the Messenger tide Se contage as 
of Allah #¢ in his (constructed) «git CF bls ne GF Ce in Sl 
toilet, facing towards the Qiblah.” os #8 bl d425 és :30 38 ofl 5 
Da'ip : 

a7? 

(One of the narrators) ‘Eisa said: SLB jie sacs 
“T told that to Sha‘bi, and he said: Hee Rea SU teas AE 
‘Ibn ‘Umar spoke the truth and a Men t= ie ees 
Abu Hurairah spoke the truth. As ds Gl iggy gl G4es joe bi! Glo 
for the words of Abu Hurairah, toac5 we «ote 5 et eee F 
he said: “In the desert do not face GA“ Y clewall g cdle ie col 

the Qiblah nor turning one’s back 6538 oi 38 hy yey Vy i 
towards it.” As for the words of Tae oar tee eae 
Ibn ‘Umar, he said: “In the “o #3 b&4! «ld 43 Ged AES Of 

(constructed) toilet there is no is 

Qiblah so turn in whatever rae aes ee a ee ‘ 

direction you want.” gy! Wieg tackle fy oo 1 pl JB) 
207 1 do is Fae d 5%. 

The Chapters. Of Purification... 280, | Nigktaag: Sy kgaatt watgal 

Another chain with similar ests 
wording. . 

324. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 265 23 (1 23 SS of Ge - eve 
said: “Mention was made in the og... + ce zee Rye es ae 
i yg LC VG Closes 
presence of the Messenger of * - 
Allah #8 of some people who did 5 whe 32 glist we $2 dele os 
not like to face towards the Qiblah =~ _ a ead a ; 
with their private parts") He of Mle o aise SF wobell 2 
said: ‘I think that they do. that. ree BE dil dg Se ish ‘216 thus 
Turn my. seat (in. the toilet) to face PCIe nr S00 SRS ree 
the Qiblah’ ” (Da‘if) ls AA ge gd Igheng ol Oya5sy 
Another chain with similar pads, felsic la ghd % eats 
wording, a : 

= 

aries 
by ge Ge soll god yf JU] 

4S 

ME 56 « sal 2p ppl Le hs ALE 
i, ola of ft te atlsh 

odmy Ole Gyl ally WE a ASy ge Vdd o ol Le ostieel] : eave 
Goel fle aby cGodllne simds copes tool ales 

325. It was narrated that Jabir (83 Gas 2 jbey ty dace 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ cere 
forbade facing the Qiblah when 
urinating. But I saw him, one year 
before he died, facing the Qiblah 
(while urinating).” (Hasan) > 

sav ate coer ee - ei 
cp dese Ne Wie wld. 3 Las wh cb yl gb} caglo yl ar ol Lon] eps 
“Ah cls cgSbedls Ole ply cderpr cpl emery Mie ¢ Gebe I among 6d hoy 

Comments: 324 & 325 
Jabir’s narration seems to suggest that the prohibition. on facing the Qiblah 
was subsequently abrogated. But if the prohibition may be taken. as. 
applying, only to: the open fields, or it be construed that facing the Qiblah is 

OI i.e, when relieving themselves. 

‘The Chapters Of Purification ... 

281 (gig Syglal! atasl 

permissible although avoiding it is preferable, then the question of 

abrogation will not-arise. 

Chapter 19. Cleaning Oneself 
After Urinating 

326. It was narrated from ‘Eisa. 
bin Yazdad Al-Yamani that his 
father said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘When anyone of 
you urinates, let him squeeze his 
penis three times (to remove the 
remaining urine drops).’”’ (Da‘if) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

Bay shew OE - (14 paces) 
(14 deed!) Soult 
6255 GIS alee 2) ee Gls - rr 
Eee, pow Bo, FH OR WG, | 

O65 5G aol 32 «sgl 55% of he 

85 Aa sash de Bp sag ot d,25 

ale Gs le 3 oh ft aa 

a. 2. tent: ae a . - on Bo 

oN 
¥ 
4 
ey 
G 
¥ 
St 
& 
a5 
& 

oo iw) Sore sl Jy ca fee) of FEV /E sage l a ol [kn arliwt] es 

«hod J sgae0 slop op ong ONig ¢ bails (Gee deajg see 

Chapter 20. One Who 
Urinates And Does Not Use 
Water 

327. It was narrated that “Aishah 
said: “The Prophet 8 went out to 
urinate, and “Umar followed him 
with water. He said: “What is this, 
O ‘Umar?’ He said, “Water.” He 
said: “I have not been commanded 
to perform ablution every time I 
urinate. If I did that it would have 
become a Sunnah.’” (Da‘if) 

rare Sv) 

Sod lg SE Se SU = + eed 
(t+ dead!) 2b 

fa ws ee ae fey .t sf 

lB CAE of dl we Ue ELI 
Bos. ed et oe Soros € . y 
aasle 6 cael Ge cate Col cpl oF 
#t 4 aie og * 4.772 ws 

jab Sd ME ES GR 
26 SG jd & Sida ber SB cel 
- £G -£ of ° Uf ot 2 Ag 
33 oles) ji ed Ls epi ie iJb 
BS C55 ELS 

Sade ge EV cel cell 3 oh cBylglall cagls gb ae ol [dene ooliusl] ed 
cui 3 LS has gay cu ell on oy tile 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Chapter 21. Prohibition Of 
Urinating In The Middle Of 
The Street 

328. Abu Sa‘eed Al-Himyari 
narrated that Mu’adh bin Jabal 
used to narrate something that the 
Companions of the Messenger of 
Allah #@ had not heard, and he 
used to keep quiet about what 
they had heard. News of this 
report reached ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Amr, and he said: “By Allah, I 
never heard the Messenger of 
Allah #@ say this, and Mu’adh 
will put you into difficulty with 
regard to relieving yourself.” 
News of that reached Mu‘adh, so 
he met with him (Abdullah). 
Mu’‘adh said: “O ‘Abdullah! 
Denying a Hadith from the 
Messenger of Allah is hypocrisy, 
and its sin is upon the one who 
said it (if it is not true). I did 
indeed hear the Messenger of 
Allah 2@ say: ‘Beware of the three 
things which provoke curses: 
Relieving oneself in watering 
places, in places of shade and in 
the middle of the street.’”” (Da‘if) 

282 igitng Srlgtall igi 

NES oF gl SU — 1) penal 
(Y) dined!) Geb! 16,8 Je 

Fo, a 

Se 5S es bY 

Bis Geli nas OO 58 of GE 
pi ty base fe YF SA GE 338 
Wes EK255 BE ail Jpg Deal gy 
ELE G a fe Gal te GB ee 
ME BI ,25 Cage G NG I ew 
2 ee Mie ay 1 og 
Jl Kali are AS ais Pe Ea 
CA Sy tyne Gi a Ke bee 

\ 

CS Uy SUS BB A 25 YF Gey 
HG a x25 Cig WE AE ye de 
NA) S581 seh (dw dE 

Age bls 3885 «JMG coylgalt 

Ssh ge coh Al walyell Ob cBlebi cob gpl sl Lae coltud] gy os 
wd gel 4d a oben War 265 we gdl SE cay Jaye oe GU Cade ge Wie cle 

Comments: 

aL ys Slee of aly) 

a. The term “watering places’ means banks of ponds or rivers etc., frequented 
by the people for their needs of water or other purposes. 

b. The Prophet’s command to avoid relieving oneself in ‘the middle of the 
street’ is meant to spare the passers by possible inconvenience. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

329. It was narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #@ said: “Beware of 
stopping to rest and praying in 
the middle of the road, for it is 
the refuge of snakes and 
carnivorous animals, and beware 
of relieving yourselves in the 
middie of the road, for this is an 
act that provokes curses.’”” (Daf) 

283 Wgii'g Sy lyst! Gil gui 

Pars eZee 

Gas itty fy as - v4 
ou oe eS cals Je gpk 
Be Gis 30,8 Goch days se 

«Sel Se CEE 
Leis cpeally ea le gis < tgile 
Kell [34] GB tga etd 

eStp ae a cS 56 3b dt we 

«bbl y: dusted PD OF Ga) tole op gee oe bool el! JG [ano] ‘ep 
woes (TAY 0 /) deol tie did Gob Cotes «(Quig) 

Comments: 

At night time when traffic comes to a halt on the streets, insects and 
carnivorous animals come out of their hiding and pass through the streets. 
So, if someone chooses to sleep there he runs the risk of being stung or 

bitten by scorpions and snakes etc. 

330. Salim narrated from his 
father that the Prophet #6 forbade 
praying in the middle of the road, 
or defecating there, or urinating. 

Da'if 

“a, 

ene 

- wor So AG as 
: ! dacs 

- Ye 
‘ be deg Ea: Te 28 aise 
é ce iglle J we gl 
5 BN 

ge EN on Gf 

is 
Oh 
mw 
lon 
® 
=X 
aes 
LS 
Se 
y oe 

3 dE Sic 

ce NYE VAY ANY: eS pmenall Gd gh abll oe! [ae ‘eke eed 
Ayo! [opdaddt oli bil) clinall ge ty ded ol ae Sled] WE oy ype Cate 

Chapter 22. Going Far Away 
When Relieving Oneself Out 
Of Doors 

331. It was narrated that 
Mughirah bin Shu‘bah said: 
“Whenever the Prophet #@ went 
to relieve himself, he would go far 
away.” (Hasan) 

Gore ssl dia ody wll 
NU se SU - Ory panel 
(YY teutt) clad 
is GS FS gl Gis - ov 
ae yess if 2 SN jetsy 
JB tas ib of sgl ra ihe ol 

si Coal C85 15) ste 251 SK 

Vig debedl clad we sell ob cist costo gf ar el [pw aoked] tee Se 
» gtd s bpSbells 6 dag je only egde l Arr 9 

The Chapters Of Purification... 284 igriosg Sylgtal) wrHligul 

Comments? 
Hiding the private parts from the view of others: is mandatory: at all’ times. 
Therefore, it would be best to: take shelter behind a tree or wall provided 
that there is no forbidding factor there, namely the tree is not used as a 
resting place by the people. 

332. It was narrated that Anas: Be op al ae 3p iss She - vvv 

said: “I was with the Prophet 2 Wath, ah spuist eens nee peed ee 
on a journey. He went away to ecetell or RP OF dee On Lael Gus 
relieve himself, then he came and = 238 jG eet Le egglorsBst she te 
called for water and performed 2, 7% 77 FO 
ablution.” (Da’if) ecard 2 odo 3 BE Gl & 

(sted oy p00) wie) eiies atte Wan 26g peo gl Sy [ripen altel] ty oes 
38S 

Comments: 

a. This Hadith is again about going away from the view of others for purposes 
of relieving. oneself. 

b. Defecation and. urination are the nullifiers of ablution. Fherefore, if orie feels 
the need for doitig ablution for certain acts, let him do it. Otherwise, 
performing, ablution is not riecessary. 

eee z ‘ f Loe ihe 
333. It was nartated from Yala 24S gp be sash GAS = HY 

bin Murrah that when the y i pe a as ee “25 Bae 
Prophet #€ went to relieve OF SRE Ot OF Seer Ot Use 

himself, he would go far away. 3.) O) 3% of (de fe we SS Bg 
(Geen) ah Ls 5S) CaS 15, Ss ae 
Egidly Mots gr ody Chea) Cind stn] Mat 1g pois! is Lyne] tse 

oJ sla PYF) Golesi 

ee PG ede teh & we be Em 4 oe 

334. It was narrated that ‘Abdur- 2925 <8 a oe & if tse — YYE 
Rahman bin Abu Qurad said: “I 2 88 nee hee RE lg 
een ape i dake * Ged YG ele A 

went for Hajj with the Prophet 22, Bi o arr aa : cy ° 
and he went far away to relieve gf! JB - efjebadd! at gl 52 colball 

himself.” (Hasan) 2 ly Gigs yoo IRs ato eens ee 
LB ges GE g Hue i 

SEE OEP ool Bp 5 LE Ly 

Ab god CAE 2 ooh 

The Chapters Of Purification... 285. (griaug. Sylgdalli wlgul 

C4 dye oy ope Eyl oye! Vere CVAGAV/Y : sll oe i Le ostiw| Tc Boge 
VAC Teo EVA fT) SLO (8 Bild ane y: 
335. It was narrated that Jabir (Gis -ic5 at as 4 Sc — yee: 
said: “We went out on a journey Mr ee tae 
with the Messenger of Allah 2%, LS op he benl Gist: 
and the Messenger of Allah 2% HG pe SF « adh en Te eat 

would not relieve himself until he 2 9 * ae ee ee . 
had disappeared and. could not be O53 «4% (3 88 dl J) we eS 
ah bagy. oe cd eu 4 oe | ae res Are 
seen by: anyone.” (Daf) cc S wh bY #6 an 3,25 
so WS 

¥ *T eee eLar Ue (soul wok: ob yl glad exgls ra am 1 area osskiwel } "expel 
uh ee lps Cytol) aads cones Ce ill re LoS cays gry car polawl Cote oye 
1 ong Vere orale: 

336. It was narrated: from Bilal ual ats fo std Ge - ees 
bin. Al-Harith. Al-Muzani that  °™ 7 i . 

EE Re er Pe oN Ee ee 
when the Messenger of Allah # 9° 4 gS Gb ail ae Gar iG al 
wanted to relieve himself, he Bee pect by ee Be we ee 

aul f Focal dl Le oy Ges UG 
would go far away. (Hasan) ki ° =e eat s ne ir 
OF ZB5l Gyles gf JI GE cot - 

ge 

sth tcH sigh hy OW Be an Jt 

dal ye Cydealls Cygne obras) Syl 2S ceeal V0re «bil eosakk ea 
wee Lge gig CPT ETYY 2 GLI Cub dt Ugo 

Chapter 23. Looking For A Bl) tN SG - OY eed 
Place To Defecate Or Urinate ie a om 
CY deed) SENS 

337. It was narrated from Abu »,. Gi ys SG ‘ 
Hurairah that the Prophet # said. 4° 17 yo Jesus Gus — VY 

“Whoever uses stones fo clean 32 (ig 2) 53h Gs hat 3 ad 
Pee or eS oe oe a 

fet Witeacaiedinaiier ee ie 

of stones. Whoever does that has 0” a de gh OF vegies 

done well, and whoever does not, “eee = Oe x zs é i a 

fhere is no harm in it. Whoever x 

uses a toothpick should spit: out og Gu ane) [43] a ioe Sgt 
(whatever he removes) and « duaksls “fee : 
whoever’ removes: (the particle of ere a Jed Sas ‘oF 3 
food) by dislodging it with his  «V 343 «gash 38 AB BS a Roe 
tongue should swallow it. , 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Whoever does that has done well, 
and whoever does not, there is no 
harm in it. Whoever goes to the 
toilet should conceal himself, and if 
he cannot find anything except a 
pile of sand (behind which to 
conceal himself), then he should 
use that, for the Shaita@n plays with 
the backside of the son of Adam. 
Whoever does that has done well, 
and whoever does not, there is no 
harm in it.” (Da‘if) 

«VO: c ce scl eo ple VI wh cay gbli saglo re ax 3 [tanae sok): 
Cop pill (b LS S yeree gram OLS Gy! emery 

338. A similar report was 
narrated by ‘Abdul-Malik bin As- 
Sabbah with a similar chain, with 
the additional words: “Whoever 
applies koh] to his eyes, let him 
add it an odd number of times. 
Whoever does that has done well, 
and whoever does not, there is no 
harm in it. And whoever 
dislodges (a particle of food from 
between the teeth) by dislodging 
it with his tongue, let hin 
swallow it.” (Da‘if) 

286 (gris Sy lgtsi itigal 

we fe 

5B fob bo 6 gil seis Cal Gthzy 
MES SY be Goel 

cx aaa 

as Seb BF dS te Ge — wra 
35 yea ool coal & aS 5 tbs ws 
5% je cs Sigil Sees on 74.8 
Ng ge WY geal 

e es 

VEGA ccileey RLU Cuted! jb! [ee] gps 

339. It was narrated from Ya‘la 
bin Murrah that his father said: “I 
was with the Prophet #@ on a 
journey, and he wanted to relieve 
himself. He said to me: ‘Go to 
those two small date-palm trees 
and tell them: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ orders you to come 
together.’’’ So they came together 
and he concealed himself behind 
them, and relieved himself. Then 

pasa We Saas 2) si Gas - ya 
oF cae oF : Jutdh of «eee! ea 

Wi Ge 206 al 46 of dt 
JB Ee ak Sf sok Ck 3 

255 OE tySetSy Gb cto: 3 
‘ gh Jo Gh Yh ot 

ess sah ehh 52 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

he said to me: ‘Go to them and 
tell them: “Go back, éach one of 
you, to your places.’ So I said 
that to them and they went back.” 

287 

(griowg Sy lgdal! lol 

wo SES ab cig Sob eed 
a4 5 oy eat ge “ue 
Ay Fees hag js Lagat ‘os J 

2 ta Z 

Els gle J) uk. 

guerly 

(Hasan) eg 

WAC cpdds gate tee # & Ss ge We /titeol nel [pee] teed 
6 o pS 9 Tse  pline ws ebay Sudo 5 oo et dle 4.5 9 begs gy fom od alvrenl i 
Commenis: 
It is one of the miracles of the Prophet #@ that, for his sake, Allah moved 
the trees from their places, then made them go back where they were 
before. It is also noteworthy that the Messenger of Allah did not address the 
trees himself directly, but the message was conveyed through a Companion, 
and the trees obeyed him. This is a supernatural happening (a sort of 
miracle or Karémah) performed by a Companion. 

Sore ogi 

340.It was narrated that if Gis tees ff aks Bae - HE: 

‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far said: “The 

Bie 1 ter ae Bee hee eyed 
thing that the Prophet #¢ most Ge iQ ot gle Ge rola 
liked to conceal himself behind on edd gk og ol 33 #ici4 

when relieving himself was a 
hillock or a stand of date-palm 
trees.” (Sahih) 

¢ 

3h Gas ccs ME 2S Bsr G Sci 

Sedo ge TEYIe esd ee cecil Ob ¢ aol! ‘plane ae ol Cenoeve ] easel 

Comments: 
It is in order to relieve oneself behind a tree, provided that it is not a fruit 
tree. Dates are picked at a certain time of the year from the tree. Therefore, 
no one has any need to go to it and pluck its fruit in other seasons. As 
regards the shade, the date-palm garden is good for the purpose but the 
individual tree is not considered worthwhile for it. Nevertheless, trees of 
small height, not yet attained the stage of bearing fruit are good providers 
of shade. 
2 ° - fo FS r BR pte, 
341. It was narrated that Ibn *3R5> cp bie Gy dene Ge - tN 
“Abbas said: “The Messenger of + .,-,  f%- oy eg te a te gee 
Allah 2 turned towards a ae ene Al Re os oo aa 
2 0183 op wee be cOlgh 3h 

mountain pass and urinated, until ¢,¢ 
I took pity on him because of the Per ae vi. tans En Ge eee 
ee OF ger ot dee OF SE gt 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

way he parted his legs when he 
urinated.” (Da‘if) 

Chapter 24. The Prohibition 
Of Gathering Or Talking In 
The Toilet 

342. It was narrated from Abu 
Sa‘eed Khudri that the Messenger 
of Allah #8 said: “No two people 
should converse while relieving 
themselves, each of them looking 
at the private parts of the other, 
for Allah, the Mighty and 
Sublime, hates that.” (Da‘if) 
Other chains with similar 
wording. 

288 igre Sylgtalt esliga! 

cl) HB al d425 d5e dE Le gil 
Si Fol JS 3G ou 

% Syne gl Aare 9 rare oolul] caged 

oF el ml — (FE prerall) 
‘aie Sassy WSS pr germ! 
(YE ded!) 

Fon whe wae fo 

ies 5S: cas 2) A he - ver 

ie te YES. Co: 

Ge gf yete FS gl J XS 

HE ail 3455 i anes dence gl oF 

pon sNegte lt 9h se 36 

il OB carle 36 J ge ety is 
As Je Lis jé3 5% 

“7 Te o> Py. - 
ts eats mass — She 

r6he5 yal 

ell 
Je oo o “pte fF «738 ol oF 
Cia)! 585 ela ee 
bi ge Gis ye Yui ub 
oh take UF eG yj! Ott Be Kl 
ve YS ld Ai ye 

Cee ee ee ee 
+ 0 9>e call Lee op 

ce sed) the pss al S rae cb ylglell cdgls gl am ol [ude adtunl] ‘ees 
oF eydeodl bee As Se * cots ipSlsly cOl> crs Chon cpl sree s Ore 

Comments: 

oS lug 

a. There is some weakness in this chain of the Hadith. Nevertheless this very 
Hadith is also reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar and Jabir 

The Chapters Of Purification... 289 lyri g Byigiall otal 

& which is considered sound. (Sahih Al-Jémi’ As-Saghir : 6013) 

b. A person who has uncovered his private parts must avoid conversing with 
the others, it being against the principle of modesty. That is why it is 
tantamount to inviing the wrath of Allah. 

c. Talking together is prohibited because in order to do it the persons 
concerned shall have to sit close to each other which means uncovering 
themselves before others. 

Chapter 25. The Prohibition Js of esl ot — (YO gonad) 

Of Urinating Into Standing oat. em qane 4 
Water (Yo died!) ASH ST ell 2 

343. It was narrated from Jabir Rats ct Daag apo eae is - yey 

S 

that the Messenger of Allah # .. is oe Ay ft cate ty 
forbade urinating into standing ~ ‘27 ee or eee 
: ¢ as 38 4298 ie E 
water. (Sahih) cll 3 dG oi 3e (8 al BB at 25 
ASIII 

dane ge VAI caSl sl eli od ydl ge call Gl aye cles a et tg eet 
42 obs Ceey cpl 

344, It was narrated that Abu i4@- eet fee bf ite 
: Gas 1a col Gp SG gl Bue — Wee 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of gil tear Gad 

Allah #% said: ‘No one among {4 «ORE gil Ge EV we re 
you should urinate into standing ai dae HE GE ered of tg ‘ 
water.’ ” (Hasan) al dss J ; _ —- s ss “tel 

CAS oll 3 Sel Bhs We ag 

oe Vie AST oll Co pd ob cayigbt costa gif axel [epee ook]: ey eh 
4% OMe opf hyde 

wor $e F573 

345. It was narrated that Ibn ‘Gas Leet Gp tee Gis - go 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of — zc0- s2 os (te cel 2 Ase 
Allah 2% said: ‘No one among “7? ate 

you should urinate into standing 444 -3! 22 Fel 36 0853 cel Bo) Gas 
water.” (Da‘i Pe ea ae a ae SDS eee 
Oa" essed Se Woe abi S25 JE o 38 
rely elt 

aoul ig 8 cal gil # are obl Mat og me gl Sy [er Chad oolul] tay se 
2S 5 pare Slouusl 
Comments: Pp ge one 
a. ‘Standing water’ means still water in a pond etc., that is not flowing. If 
people make a habit of urinating in such waters, they shall turn dirty and 

The Chapters Of Purification... 290 lgrrevg Syigtel! iloui 
unfit for other uses. 
b. What we infer from the Hadith is that it is not, as a rule, impermissible to 

urinate in the running water of a stream or river, still it would be best to 
avoid it, since doing so would be against the principle of cleanliness and 

purity. 

Chapter 26. Strict Rulings 
Concerning Urination 

346. It was narrated that ‘Abdur- 
Rahman bin Hasanah said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #€ came out 
to us holding a small shield in his 
hand. He put it down, then he sat 
down and urinated towards it. 
Some of the people said: “Look at 
him, he urinates like a woman!’ 
The Prophet #@ heard that and 

5A Bb tA SG 14 peal 
(V1 decd!) 

Gk ot fi Sf Ge - ren 

oh be new ye Gye oI 

OE Eos gh AB He Be oky 

BUN oi 35 Hg ail 545 Cle OS 

tincd AG IS KS ye cot 15h 

said: “Woe to you! Do you not 
know what happened to one of 
the Children of Israel? If any 
urine touched any part of their 
clothes, they would cut that out 
with scissors. He told them not to 
do that, so he was tormented in 

BL LSE MEL a Sele tel 
aS panty tho Igdh pete! 
9,3 3 ois LU5 oF] 

his grave.’ (Da‘if) gl aS eile 4 ea si Jb 
Another chain with similar ctf eee - ab art he sé 

wording. bgt eee 
Vie edgdl ge ele Gb ciylebll coyls gel a el Leta oobel] ey pa 
AVAL 6 pha 45 Laue Ce aot ws evel Ad a pes 

Comments: 

a. While urinating in an open place, a person must be particular about 
screening, which could be had either from a tree or a wall etc., or from any 
other thing available to the person concerned. A case in point is that of the 
shield which the Prophet #¢ used for the purpose. 

b. Inviting the people to an act of sin, or dissuading them from following 
some virtuous habit, or doing something good, is a deadly crime 
punishable even in the grave before the Day of Resurrection. 

c. The Hadith confirms the reality of torment in the grave. 

347. It was narrated that Ibn (Gis : 3 x Pi Ga — wey 

‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 

(t 
7 

be Se 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Allah #§ passed by two new 
graves, and he said: ‘They are 
being punished, but they are not 
being punished for anything 
major. One of them was heedless 
about preventing urine from 
getting on his clothes, and the 
other used to walk about 
spreading malicious gossip.’’”’ 

291 Verne 9 5 5 Lgtead | walaai 

“8 - car Ge yes e 
wee of e553 & gles re 
te ofl gb cp Sth FF cl 

on * eran os os, 4 go Ge 
Cophde git BB Al dyn 
‘ 2 43 ace Aes eat 
Vl cpeS 2 oid Gy ghd Kep 

15 cae de aseeg VY 6 Galt 

4, 

Md ts OS BN 

(Sahih) 

al Cade Cp WAN ee « pall ude By od wh ¢ jikosSh 6 gubtl don ot ep 
ee dade ge YANG cf) oo Dp debes Ge LIU GL casledall cglans clash 
74 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith again confirms the reality of torment in the grave. 

b. ‘Preventing urine from getting on the clothes’ means taking due care to 
prevent any drops of urine from defiling the body or the clothes, and doing 
proper cleaning of the concerned part after urination with soil or water. 

c. “Not being punished for anything major’ means that it was by no means a 
difficult task to guard against the drops of urine. What was needed was just 
a little bit of precaution in the matter. 

d. The Arabic word Namimah translated here as ‘malicious gossip’ means 
carrying the word spoken by one person to another with the intention of 
creating dissension and bad blood between them. Even if the news thus 
carried is true, to transmit it with an evil intention is a major sin. In case the 
report thus carried is false, the seriousness of the crime increases manyfold. 

se fo, 

348. It was narrated that Abu iz: aN to 3 ff Gis — ves 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of Pee ie seh ie, peas 
Allah #8 said: ‘Most of the (¢° wee | oF cGlGe gl GS Ole 
torment of the grave is because of 4 5- GG Gu eek Uf te - Ff 
B rb 5 yes le oe! 
urine.” (Hasan) by9 ; oa Fe a ae if 
SSN Se Bl Olds Sty ME atl 
N:4gd gl gl ae oo he 64 dlie ge FAA/T deol ae ol [yee] geese 
Jali aly eVWALe bedi Cer oe wl * Srressls ills eS Ao wreO 9 c\¥T 
AVERT ¢ glut Je cpm 
349. Bahr bin Marrér narrated = i43 Fak me ee = Zi is — weg 
that his grandfather Abu Bakrah Sete i 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # 9 4 (Sue cols 3 35551 Bis 85 

passed by two graves, and he ati ts db EX a eae ae Bh 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

said: ‘They are being punished, 
but they are not being punished 
for anything major. One of them 
is being punished because of 
urine, and the other is being 
punished. because of backbiting.’” 
(Sahih) 

292 grew 9 Sylglal) wilgsl 

Cig 

“a0 2 

LZ otk Lgp - dls = ite 
Ze Ran est thet ui oes os td 1 
isl 3 C5 39 Oj ee 

ct ted Ue aa pe oe Sy ge WA /orded a el [epee] ceed 
Alot Cyt ws LISVE gee gay eNO [02 domT ne cal ye aS ust ox cp las 
LYEV GLAST Cytol Ue B85 daly Codoels codes de cab oth [3 a 

Chapter 27. A Man Who Is 
Greeted While He Is 
Urinating 

350. It was narrated that Muhdjir 
bin Qunfudh bin (‘Umair) bin 
Judh’an said: “I came to the 
Prophet #% when he was 
performing ablution and greeted 
him with the Salam, but he did not 
return (the greeting). When he had 
finished his ablution he said: 
‘Nothing prevented me from 
returning your greeting but the fact 
that I did not have ablution.’” 
(Daf 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

ale (hcg JE SE ~ CV pratt) 

(XV daoesS1) des Ss BS 

«deli y Hct bb etaty Gs - yo: 
~ 93 Sis :VG call dae Bde 

dam) 
if on Ce te if Sale jel 
BIEN gh 9 pees) 13 rar OF ged 
. 25 o! ae 3 

+ 
=; 
=: 
= 
* a F 
+ 

rj Bort % 

433 bee TY oo 

f , oe eet arr 
Os Bh 8 gash ff d 
oh gh a oF ad Gas pile 

ee ge 

yes Kat) 6459 ye 

CO ge ges pr a2 bel gob ca ylgbl cagls 7 ax 2} [ote ooliel] : Tessa 

Commenis: 

- Wie Cpa ote Gael WiC 

Greeting someone with Salém or returning it is an act of remembering 
Allah. And although the remembrance of Allah is permitted even when one 
is not in a state of ablution, it is better to be in the state of ablution. The 
Prophet #€ delayed the returning of the greeting for adopting the better 

course. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 293 (grr g Syigball igi 

351. It was narrated that Abu i-jo- qe “te a lbs Gig -~ vo 
Hurairah said: “A man passed by 

the Prophet # while he was ¢2 ou i el55N Bis see 2 
urinating, and greeted him with 

the Saline, ache aia not return the 855 ‘ al if tale 8 iy ae Fd 
greeting. When he finished, he di 33 Zl er a5 3 
struck the ground with his palms eo6 whe 2525 ie 
and did dry ablution (Tayammum), C8 163 GE aile 5% ae le re 

then. he returned the greeting.” POLES! aie 55 - ica oo Rice 
(Daf | 
oF LoS Dy te gay de cp doles 435 Gro gll iets [lie Cayard oolinel] Tex ¥ ae 

enh Cb 
Comments: 

This chain of narration has weakness in it. However, another authentic 
source also report a similar happening. 

352. It was narrated from Jabir  wene GAS idee Jf yt Gls - rey 
bin ‘Abdullah that a man passed ayer ae oe ae fa se 
wes eatles 
by the Prophet #@ while he was i as Aegl a ee OF tone ot 
ee en greeted ee table op ple BF ¢ al ces oF 
e Salam. The Messenger of Alla foe ae 353 ye agae SF 
#@ said to him: ‘If you see me in pind 6 58 es) ve % 95 ol 
this situation, do not greet me 1) bp ail S925 3 5 athe 
with the Salam, for if you do that I eae 4 
will not respond to you.’” (ge pli 36 Jisdh oda J ule 

(Hasan) wate 3 a is CLG of 

ce come LS ee oF poll Sado cps Yove /Vi gue cx! ao | [pau ] Fa ¥eted 
Cay > ey 3 5a gw OY Cpe ee] Lad 2g pene gd Sy cay cml ys 
Comments: 
It is not allowed for a defecating or urinating person to return someone’s 

greeting. It is; therefore, better that he be not greeted in such a situation. 
And Allah knows best. 

353. It was narrated that Ibn S2edl5 aes Gi al de Be - ror 
‘Umar said: “A man passed by Sis 3 VG os gest ont of 224 
the Prophet #¢ while he was = or & ~ 
urinating and greeted him with Olds o es oe sola Je 63515 
the Salém, and he did not return fe 4ae oe : 

Be 25 Se dB 55e yi! 98 gil ea 

the greeting.” (Sahih) ete : ee 
piers Ss 535 98 2 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

294 Wgiieng 55 lgdst) Gli 

A hdr Cyd ye FVII Cpe Ol eaedl cabins ar el [ene] te ee 

Chapter 28. Cleaning Oneself 
With Water (Istinja’) 

354. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “I never saw the Messenger 
of Allah #% come out of the toilet 
without first (cleansing himself) 
with water.” (Da‘if) 

CAS As SN cpa! lab) Say ols gee ws 

Comments: 

LIL elo SU - (1A gerald 
(YA dacs) 

Bo or 

Y ceadl nl 2 typare OF 
Sons G35 w 250 Tye 32 ge 
als * ss Sy LS atk b. E55 ae 

poll # Ledane salient] 2 ey ous 
Fd 

a. This shows that the Prophet’s normal practice was to clean himself with 
water, since it is the best method of securing cleanliness. 
b. In the outside, he mostly cleaned himself with pebbles, but even there he 

sometimes carried water with him. 

355. Abu Sufyan said: “Abu 
Ayyub Al-Ansari, Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah, and Anas bin Malik 
told me that when this Verse: “In 
it (the mosque) are men who love 
to clean and to purify themselves. 
And Ailah loves those who make 
themselves clean and pure.” 
was revealed, the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: ‘O Ansari Allah has 
praised you for your cleanliness. 
What is the nature of your 
cleanliness?’ They said: ‘We 
perform ablution for prayer and 
we take bath to cleanse ourselves 
of impurity due to sexual activity, 
and we clean ourselves with water 
(after urinating). He said: “This is 
what it is. So adhere to it.’” 
(Hasan) 

See ate 

Blo jee 3 plas Gs - Yoo 
se gf 33 ee Bs sus ty 

1 

oe boty ie. sa Gr a 
1 rr es « yagi a Sie 
Gees wedi < ot nck 8 SLAU {3:6 

. 3 ches ANs 3950 :d6 rin 

[Ni pStod] sree 04 Ese Sade oye V1 0/0 aged! a FT [yee oolief] See sei 

i] AtTawbah 9:108. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Comments: 

_ 295 girwg So lgtall lg 

sSyded! Smo Une # padlls ooo 

a. The Hadith confirms that using water for eatin is better than relying only 

on pebbles. 

b. According to some scholars, the mosque referred to in the Qur’anic Verse is 
the Prophet’s Mosque, while others take it to mean the mosque of Quba’. 

356. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Prophet 2#§ used to wash 
his private parts three times. Ibn 
“Umar said: “We did that and we 
found it to be a healing and a 
means of purification.” (Da‘if) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

(eS Gis syne 2s dle Gas - Yor 
Le tpl 35 be oye & thd be 
gall of tie 32 ce gla Uf 
ab Bn dU ESE Sinks HL oe we 
Aydhs tgs Hise aides 
A Gis:Gh GY gosh gf dd 
YE. thats Suet Bs pale se 

oF of Pa 

yen hd tis. ry! as 

Laas shy ceo! 45 ad alu Me? See gl JB, [de Aare eskufT : Fes eaed 
4aad ceive pd wey cpl Jus rresepese] eo Ls gly Lane gry ples #.. 

357. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #% said: ‘The (following) was 
revealed about the people of 
Qubda’: “In it (the mosque) are men 
who love to clean and to purify 
themselves. And Allah loves those 
who make themselves clean and 
pure.” He said: ‘They used to 
clean themselves with water (after 
urinating), and this Verse was 
revealed concerning them.’” 
(Hasan) 

5 sVI 
iy Sik Gis aS gh Gls - yoy 

Bll GE ceybdl of G4 be cole 
g £ 

“20 

Bo cS cag a 25 UE 58 i 

“55 si I ots Mey a5} 2G Jal 
ake ih C4 or 

Shells ChEre colatl elect Yh 3d ol caslghll costo gl oe el Lepwcm] eS aa 
4 dale (00) Gold! Gatos SS Upgree beady Chee ood gt a ha bP Sy 

1] At Taubah 9:108. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Comments: 

296 

Lorie g Sylgtalt sl oui 

It is reported in Sahih Muslim from Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri that when he 
enquired the Prophet #2 about the mosque referred to in the Qur’anic 
Verse, he answered that it was the one known as the Prophet’s Mosque 
(Muslim: 3221). Nevertheless even the Quba’ Mosque was founded by the 
Prophet #% himself. As such this one can also be described as the ‘mosque 

founded on piety’. 
Chapter 29. One Who Rubs 
His Hand On The Ground 
After Cleaning Himself 

358. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet #§ 
relieved himself, then he cleaned 
himself (with water} from a pot 
made of brass, then he wiped his 
hand on the ground. (Hasan) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

8G ANS Be SU- (14 gnnall) 
(V4 din!) sa ag 259k 

é coe Oem 4 Gis - ° 
te 34s ol GS yl Gas - won 

A ee Fe Gee < v3 go 
Sh OF bed to B oderee fy! 

+ 

‘y 
of 5 of be ee of call Gal 

6? ad wero q ee re or 
rece ol 1a al oF ‘2 o jt 
ef oat ea, FR Fee ee “2 aye 
re ty oP | iad 6a Le aad HE 

25 Mb 8G bls 
gl Gis sie 3 yas gl Je] 
ccd GS YF des Wh ok 

Liged thd 38 

BBL GV oy Hy fo SH ol cayleblt casts gf arse i [gn eobel] fey oe 

Comments: 

-OL> yl dr reey c£Ore 6 peel 

Rubbing the earth on one’s hand while washing ensures better purity. The 
use of soap etc, for the purpose being done these days is also in order. It is 
not, however, mandatory. Mere washing the hand with water is enough. 

359. Ibrahim bin Jarir narrated 
from his father that the Prophet of 
Allah #@ entered a thicket and 
telieved himself, then Jarir 
brought him a small water skin 
from which he cleaned himself, 
then he wiped his hand in the 
dirt. (Hasan) 

ce loeten V4) de pel dst ds ob ca jlblt 60 /\2 slit yoapes| Cpa ] Fc Seaal 

gl Gas tks i 3is3 Ge - 04 
f @ic «od 

So 

HB abl 25 Ol al Le ce GH mall 

o a 

gant pb ASS Gober watl al # AVI Cg CEV/V idee onl dmreos 04 OUT Cade oye Vie 

The Chapters Of Purification... 297 (grtwwg Sy lgdall cl gui 

1B yfS Al ged Autos cant oy 
ol { adass Bt - (rs gaerel) 

Chapter 30. Covering Vessels See. 
(Yr dans!) 

360. It was narrated that Jabir 0 Gis seg Yb ie as - : 
said: “The Prophet #2 commanded 
(us) to tie up our water skins and 
cover our vessels.” (Sahih) id 

py Gal oss Of we 28 (ert 

. EI 

oe 

¢ pai Vole gall eg Gh Ame gy Call Cae oy lne Peaes Ten Seaal 
ksi {Jus ce YYVAVCVE Ne: 
Comments: . 
All containers of water or food must be duly covered in order to prevent 
dust or insects sneaking into them, mainly because some of the insects 
could be dangerous. Particularly at night time the insects etc., come out of 
their hiding and possibly enter food and drink items. Hence the order to 
especially keep the vessels covered at night. (Bukhari: 5623) 
a ven - oe, £0 fe 8 aa 
361. It was narrated that ‘Aishah = soe 9 ei! Gy) tee Le — WY 
said: “I used to cover three vessels okeped $0 4 oe hho hs Par 
sp aye op f Ge DYE ese oy! 
for the Messenger of Allah #€ at oe : os eo = be a 
night: A vessel (of water) for his <‘[eusil (3 Gs Gis tae | 
ablution, a vessel for his tooth Aa ey ake mee eee 
stick and a vessel for his drink.” TCS Ane BF A ol wu 
(Da‘if) Se Sel BSG BB al Jt) Alo Eis 

raS(55 $05. vay 2032552 tii 
45d 20s 

ade Gate at oe Gye Cae abe lier Se gd! Sy Tignne oobionl] Seas) 
NEN ¢ Cliily cain 

Pal 

362. It was narrated that Ibn 35)! §3 3te ase yl Gas - way 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ never entrusted his Cat pas , 
purification to anyone nor his «zanail 526 gl al LB expel Ss 

charity that he had given to <, w ,.% 54-22 42 wee 
anyone; he would be the one to» Be Seo HU: ole oll OF 

gue 

jl elle Ce ea aa ae 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

take care of these matters himself.” 

(Da‘f) 
Byer pal cp dedle cca alu Ler 

Chapter 31. Washing A 
Vessel That Has Been Licked 
By A Dog 

363. It was narrated that Abu 
Razin said: ‘I saw Abu Hurairah 
hitting his forehead with his hand 
and saying: “O people of Iraq! Do 
you claim that I would tell a lie 
against the Messenger of Allah #¢ 
so that it may be more convenient 
for you and a sin upon me? I 
bear witness that I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #€ say: ‘If a 
dog licks the vessel of anyone of 
you, let him wash it seven 
times.” (Da‘if) 

45 oll [edad lab) Gedudl Gyo ge clgler gf a [rte sola] 

eS me gS SE) Lagan ootenf] 

298 greg Sylgbs! lou 

Al Biz 3 tS bab Ss 
dates BS lll 98 3,5 le anes 

es Saad 
haan ell cr yeas oS gree 

oY e CY! jue ot -~ oO (ae 
(YS dame!) AS as 

eae 7 Svort “A of- “15 
ode igs Gril 3 2 ef cul id 

i VA ae abl ceSacl 

Gees 

AS fabs pSe Gk cdybgell colin antl) clme WAIC cede Greely (tll 

cepeall oS 

Comments: 

Seeded! bly rs beth gy poll ciate a mee 6 2) Gb oe YAte 

Ghent cgle Bgprone 

a. If a dog licks a vessel, it must be washed seven times. 
b. In addition, along with washing, it is also necessary to rub the vessel in 

question with dust. 

c. The dog saliva contains rabies that cannot be cleaned by just one wash. As 
for dust, it contains germ-killing properties. That is why the sacred law of 
Islam has, of all the animals, particularised this method of cleaning only for 

the licking of dogs. 

364. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #% said: “If a dog licks the 
vessel of anyone of you, let him 
wash it seven times.” (Sahih) 

von te Fars 

¢3) he pied her Cea Lae 

al jf coll 7 uu Gis 5 30 
af Prsegt “gl jf cew oF 9% 

1 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

299 Igitws Slats! wigul 

ef 3 AS As yn dU Be tl 425 
oly aa adel seach 

cae dbadld pSuod ob) § GAS pd BL Ob cepegll cob! eel ees 
4 Le Cade op Y4te dst] en pe oh 0B yl gb | Shey VV 

365. It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah bin Mughaffal that the 
Messenger of Allah #§ said: ‘If a 
dog licks a vessel, wash it seven 
times and rub it with dust the 
eighth time.” (Sahii:) 

OS ao Jl ik Po is - ¥\0 

ca. 
Bf 
mS 
es 
im 

¥ 

2 si a; (3p0 J $86 ait a pey if 

Bee ee a 

4 Rak Cade oye TAS CIS bly Se Gh calla cglae ae stl eps 

366. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 2€ said: ‘If a dog licks the 
vessel of any one of you, let him 
wash it seven times.’”” (Hasan) 

Kolin 295885 ccrl9a abE etl 
1B 

1 727 Fe ee 4 
ep Gas poet Cy omee ws — TN 

ater 

eee? aie | 
dil D525 GB dE AE oN ge ol 
east 20) 3 dish ay ip 6 

tole gio scl 

yaw Cade ge WYOVi eVUO/VY: SU 3 3l ball a ol Cpa odie] : es 
JG tag. ea irg css cope gle dam! ol gs feos OF Gl dilne # 4 my call nh 
Mery say Dine ye Geusll you J aby? TUE! 3 ojoll Labatt 

Chapter 32. Ablution With 
Water Left Over By A Cat 
And The Concession 

367. It was narrated from 
Kabshah bint Ka’b, who was 
married to one of the sons of Abu 
Qatddah, that she poured water 
for Abu Qatddah to perform 
ablution. A cat came and drank 
the water, and he tilted the vessel 
for it. She started looking at it (in 
surprise) and he said: “O 

Dba 25 SE OF penal 
(FY dnl!) GUS (3 ad My el 

f., 
rey 

‘Es 

% & 

Gr 

G 

f 

G. 

te 

‘ 

et 
we 
> Gr, 
: 
C.% 
1,4 Ge we 
Vk 
f 
Z 

eG 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 300 Wgrreug Srhgkss ol gui 

daughter of my brother, do you 4-7 aF ee a er fa, 
find it strange? The Messenger of US Aels cori aie Gilad ew Log 
Allah 2% said: ‘They (cats) are not |G: dl call SA Cisse cet 

impure, they are of those who go Pe ae eee a 
around among you.’” (Sahih) Ger yh JB FG prea el 
JN Sith Ge ge te ect 

th 

Sede ge VOre cB gil phew Gl caylghll casio ra ax ol Leegree oa lins! | Fe Sate 
glad IH 6 Gobedly cOlLm vple cdo cply cA¥ie 6 ode I Amowog oh El 
rhs tills ¢pSlbesly 

Comments: 

a. What is left by the cat after drinking, is not impure. 

b. Islam is a religion of facility and ease. Since we cannot take as much 
precaution from the cats as we can from the dogs, rules of purity from them 
are more lenient than from dogs 

368. It was narrated that ‘Aishah helesl «gil eee is - wri 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 eee See See oN ae 
and I used to perform ablution of &53 Ge eu Be SVE as Gl 
from a single vessel, when. the cat 
had drunk from it beforehand.” 

: a -- wt to 4 é ose digo 

(Da‘if) a) 95g OF Let 23s 256 Zig 
J5 dhl & Cael B et ly 

- 4 

U3 

al op Bole eal ins okal Mer rg peg! SU [dee cole] ees 
ON e « pails GSLe I 
Comments: 
A husband and wife can perform ablution from a single vessel. 

369. It was narrated from Abu ke 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: “Cats do not 
invalidate the prayer"! because a3 ol 33 at te Gis zach 
they are one of the things that are, aks ee TE wal ay 
useful in the house.” (Hasan) Bye ae ce aN Oe ee oe 

{ Tf they walk in front of the worshipper. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 301 lg g Sylgiad! wlgil 

edt phe bs gy A> wl] 
c4y ghd LBs Gy dome Cade Gye VOAT/EZ she el aor! [cpm oon!) ees 

com UB cal ge gee de Lat oly cept, cTOOCTOR/Vi.Sbdll ames 
Hopddl aby OLS] SB geet 590 ce Mihi> LS ytd! 

Chapter 33. Concession J ai, 3 ra Gis ar i) 
Regarding Water Left Over iat ss 
From A Woman’s Ablution re Loci) al (sis & gn 

370. It was narrated that Ibn jz ences eon x Fe Wie - vve 
“Abbas said: “One of the wives of me 

the Prophet #@ took a bathfroma = O* Fo oy ia je cee a 
large vessel, then the Prophet # »*..- - ots te 

So jek =o} | 

came and had a bath or ablution, ee :d gr oF ai gis 
and she said: ‘O Messenger of 2% #5 i aS ore oe 8 Pal cls 
Allah, I was sexually impure.’ He, pee eae 
said: ‘Water does not become r J x5 GEN 1% SO 
impure.” (Da’if teagh Vite 236 1 2S A 

Al 

oe Wie we Vo els Gk cajlgbsl cogls ra a | [tee caliw!] eee 
LoS dine Ue Se ye Slee Udy Sy VOLE cgde dl ores ca Gage og) Cute 
=o Sg We lve dhe dalyt Cotedi jaeds VV) °c 6 eds 
Comments: 
We know from the Hadith that it is allowed for a man to perform ablition 
from the water left over by a woman in a vessel after taking her bath. It is, 

therefore, all the more acceptable for a man to perform ablution from the 
water left over by the woman after performing her ablution. 

+ yah 

371. It was narrated from Ibn A55 GIS tac Ube Gis - vt 
‘Abbas that one of the wives of 
the Prophet #¢ took a bath to oF ie Xe oF edly oF Stas iF 
cleanse herself from sexual we + 2153) 3. fics SP ute 
S ost a) odie é : : 

impurity, then the Prophet #¢ 3 e = pis os Rae * 
performed ablution and had a Ge! Jets Lege hla Ge Choe 
bath with the water left over from oe ee NS 8 aes 
her ablution.” (Da‘if) Hines ga ot 3 
Gill Cyto) ft Ledger] te a 
372. It was narrated from Ibn +e-+- este pe te oe gee 

worrag 6 shod 1 sp Aecee Lite - ¥VY 
‘Abbas, from Maimunah the wife ahs ae 
of the Prophet #%, that the <is@ j,2% {2 GlSlg cle il 

The Chapters Of Purification... 302 igriwg Srlgls! igu/ 

Prophet #§ performed ablution 
with the water left over after she 
had taken a bath to cleanse herself reper te Pape 3 onl oF cs Xe ie 

from sexual impurity. (Da‘if) , cas ae eee 
eae Ls ee ol 2 055 
psd 34 ye 

CHily cy ed LI og Gl ge TK /tideed ae el [eta ooled) cg ss 
abd Vere 

- oe So 24 ee, cn ae 
clin $6 «tho Bas 23515 gl Bas 

Comments: 
The foregoing Ahddith did not mention the name of the Mother of the 
Believers concerned. This Hadith has indicated that she was Maimunah %. 

Chapter 34. The Prohibition qk ee ot A 

Of That (i.e. Performing bs OF ee Fl - OE penal) 
Ablution With The Leftover (YE déoedt) 

Water) 

373. It was narrated from Hakam an as : sls 23 Ass’ Gis - yw 
bin ‘Amr that the Messenger of cat Bi? west 
Allah #@ forbade men to perform ‘937 ¥! pel® OF HGS Ble 25515 

- . e¢ os ° es 2 - ae 
ablution with the water left over Gj, 25 ob SS colt ol tg 

by a woman. (Hasan io eae eee 
7 ee) ae, J251 Loe Of we a J,25 

e+ Ae 
BS 6 85 

oth ge AVI 6 AUS ge el wh caylgbll cols el doe ol [arp online] Ps 
Ole cn! Aare 9 Vee gle pit Army 64: glk 

Comments: 

Imam Ibn Majah has expressed the view that the truth is on the side of the 
first while the second is an illusion. Exact translation of the report is as 
follows: Abu ‘Abdullah Ibn Majah said, “The first (narration) is correct, and 
the second (narration) is Wahm (an error).” It could also be construed from 
this that the ruling described in the previous chapter allowing both the 
husband and wife to have a bath from the water left over by each other, 
while the prohibition to do so as mentioned in the following chapter is not. 
correct. 

we qe cet Bet a 

374. It was narrated that Gis :ycy 3 Vint Ge - yve 
‘Abdullah bin Sasjis said: “The ., 0 + 4.0 aee Uf 9 
Messenger of Allah #€ forbade ~ ap ee Gis cyl Jett 
men to perform ablution with the ts 36 «S54 wee as + eh 
water left over by a woman, and 

OF BB ath dy25 8 dB Ges gf abl 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

women to perform ablution with 
water left over by a man, 
however both (spouses) may start 
their ablutions at the same time.” 
(Sahih) 

Abu Abdullah Ibn Majah said: 
“The first (naration) is correct, 
and the second (naration) is Wahm 
(an error). 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

303 lgriwg By lgtall il gi 

‘Talis Nh e535 yak JA50 Jcs 
# eae ° ¥ oe 
beet DEG BSG «JED foal 

BB fel eh GN al ge fT SG 

64 SIS Te col Cote ye VAC TVT/Y 2 sb a ao] Lemrere sskianl] : ee Se 
Molpadh cdl gas oe 5 59 ga \La 9) + pbb iwi Jy eu pele oF oer) 423 

375. It was narrated that ‘Ali 
said: “The Prophet #6 and his 
wife would take a bath from one 
vessel, but neither of them would 
have a bath with the leftover 
water of the other.” (Da‘if) 

Fae “qe yor - “Zee 
ake Gas ios Up ise Gas - ve 

oe Glee ool 36 cate] be cal 

HE 25 OW 2G Ble LE celal 
aie 4y- e tT) ¢ vg ; co, tet. 
GE YS cued cUl Se Spe dal 

3F LE 

4ole jae Kaisl 

More ce bily ca tle) Cede ge W/V ideo on ot Lie skied] ia od 

Comments: 

- ahed 

The fact of the matter is that both the husband and wife can have a bath 
together as well as use the water left over by each other for having a bath. 

Chapter 35. A Man And 
Woman Taking Bath From A 
Single Vessel 

376. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 
and I would take a bath from a 
single vessel.” (Sahih) 

I cSg JES SG - (ro pnaall) 

2 OF “fo ° ° 29 egies 

ED CGT 25 Bp aie Ble - rvs 

gl sree a tole oul oF anew jal 
So 8 ts Ke fot oe 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

304 (grteng Sy lgbalt oilgul 

GIP oe ted fe Gd ell ge Coen dll Ol egal cal al aes 

Comments: 

ay Leth y hed cal only cen cel ge TV4ie 

‘Taking a bath from a single vessel’ means that each one of the couple is 
taking water from the same vessel and having the bath individually. This is 

perfectly in order. 

377. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Abbas that his maternal aunt 
Maimunah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #¢ and I used to take a 
bath from a single vessel.” (Sahih) 

erly EDT ap ‘él ads 

378. It was narrated from Umm 
Hani that the Prophet #@ and 
Maimunah took a bath from a 
single vessel, a large bow! in 
which there were some traces of 
dough. (Da‘if) 

od SLaEY SS Gh cajglbdi cVTV/V: sll a ot Flea ookuf] 

dels el bs Be 

eal Ge Goctmall pad ob Cael ceber oel ig sd 

142 opty dnd col 

ef ge 

Mi te bot le ff is - eva 

° “ge, 2 

ee al = toy (GS “#f 

do 3 a 

as al 4g cba lies oF 
sad a a ol de Bytte5 Gas 

: eg an gs 

alee ye 251 cord col gy dbs & 4 pal yl Cade oe VEVIC cles gree A nal 
ENO: Sladh Sydey CB Aso yield oles) Glo LW, ates co ly Ulsy 

379. It was narrated that Jabir bin 
“Abdullah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #@ and his wives used to 
take a bath from a single vessel.” 
(Hasan) 

roi e tT ete toy et. 
dels cb) Ss Osler: arta jls 

cbalsd Cuda cadel VEQIC bis cg PU/V ALS Gl gd oe el [eed eed 

AYVA: GLAST Cydocdt bs 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

380. Zainab the daughter of 
Umm Salamah narrated from 
Umm Salamah that she and the 
Messenger of Allah #@ used to 
take a bath from a single vessel. 
(Sahih) 

305 (gritos Sylgtali wilgsi 

ek se 

cIGoa! elie 32 He BN beter 
ae tans OR ie & € 6 eee ere 
ie the le OS gl oo HL 
ots (-% cet, 28 oe cet, ot 8 eet 
ES (gi Ge ol 32 ake el oe C55 

Ate ee itp 28 aie ca 4p eee 
dels gb} Se OWS BE tl S055 

PL ceed! cobues CVAVAIE epSlall Wall Ol ca pall «eybes ao 4 ee es 

Chapter 36. A Man And 
Woman Performing Ablution 
From A Single Vessel 

381. It was narrated that Ibn 

BSN JES SG - 0 peat) 
(1 dedi) Joly ell ge Glee 
fy Gs oie 3 tke Bs — 9m 

‘Umar said: “Men and women eae ee Ne ee ee 
used to perform ablution from a ne ae UR ah See eae 
single vessel during the time of Age sé 51535 LBN3 een its 
the Messenger of Allah 28.” Ge the Mee na ms 
(Sahih) dele ohh Ge BB atl S54) 

Bly opty pads alyl ae ed eps Gh copes! wil asl iq ed 

4 AU Le Sade ce VAY: 

Comments: ; a C 
It was discussed in the previous chapter that both husband and wife can 
take water from a single vessel and have a bath together. By the same 
analogy they can also perform ablution together. Ahddith of this chapter 
have further established the permissibility of it. 
Men and women performing the ablution together could also mean their 
being mutually Mahram (near relations forbidden to marry each other). 

382, It was narrated that Umm 
Subyah Al-Juhaniyyah said: 
“Often my hand would touch the 
hand of the Messenger of Allah 
#¢ while performing ablution 
from a single vessel.” (Hasan) 
Abu ‘Abdullah bin Majah said: “T 
heard Muhammad say: ‘Umm 
Subyah was Khawlah bint Qais. I 
mentioned that to Abu Zur‘ah, 
and he said: “It is true.” 

eotlnl 3b gt ke Gs - vay 
ws “pels ae names : abst 
— Que of dle $2 i YB eb 
math tee Gf se - oe of BS 
i 345 35 oe Ca KS SG 

old 20) be ep o5ll 3B 

ga cand 

okies eee a al ats ih 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 306 ‘tgties 5 a egdad) Quahgal 

a6 ies "gery rab 4 Pe i 

wae 

cae SB eit 8. L185 tod 
oY VAle 63] poll (base # pnd ob | wh ct jlgtall eagles gl “ee Tas calif] : ‘ers 

4g do lLui ce 
Comments: 
A clarification: Imam Abu ‘Abdullah bin Majah: I heard Muhammad (bin 
Yahya Dhali) say: Umm Subyah was Khawlah bint Qais. I mentioned that 
to Abu Zur’ah, and he said: “It is true.” Maybe the report belongs to the 
pre-Hijab period or else the lady had some close relation with the Prophet 
#€ which prevented the observance of Hijab from him. And Allah knows 
best. 
383. It was narrated from ‘Aishah $315 is es es ee 
that the Prophet #% and she used ' sO ete is : 
to perform ablution together for GF ‘> cs! op Gee Bae Capt cyl 
prayer. (Sahih) lise $2 6h ie ie cpm 3 aps 
Lem 63S bb aly 6 ceeerad cell Lely ccm Sed ind ool Leone | Fen Saael 
GSS AS yaSl [eyeball cae) yall 2s 

Chapter 37. Performing RB (ge pay | eas ac OT 

Ablution with Nabidh peau eee 
os Aioud!) 

384. It was narrated from 323 «a oi 35 a fh Gs - vas 

‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud that on the — ;¢ Bes 4. 

night of the jinn, the Messenger of tael SF 3s Bis VG aint oh 

Allah #@ said to him: “Do you v2 Gis : 25 3) Uns Gas; ral 
have water for ablution?’’ He EOE cae ne i ee 
said: “No, I have nothing but Eis ol) e OF oles SF Sli 
ppt] 3 ” ae ot OF oe 
some Nabidh in a vessel.” He s WH gf aie Bas al is 
said: “Good dates and pure ~* Be 
water. (ie, there is no harm from dU #8 a! er OF pana cn al ae 

the mixing of the two).” So he yy . 4 «etgb Ages tah i 
performed ablution. with it. This is abe :d j96b Adie ies 3 
the narration of Waki’. (Da’f) ib ia dU 51, Bo be Ys tet 

eee Cee ee 
059 Cede Wie LSS O gph Bg 

( Water in which grapes or dates are soaked, but not fermented. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

307 igri g Sylgtall lg 

ce Abi¢ chehl ope Ol caylebtl cayle gl orl Lede oobel] tee pe 
Cystosd| s ole gdeaddt (pal te J sgaea (bro 3 Pal) MALE 6 Gael Jus Gay 35133 sil Sgt 
Nia of cle opdtnall aatd :Sler sell dB ob berats Gabbly cole gl sins 

385. It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas that on the 
Night of the Jinn the Messenger of 
Allah #¢ said to Ibn Mas’ud: “Do 
you have water?” He said: “No, 
only some Nabidh in a large water 
skin.” The Messenger of Allah 2% 
said: “Good dates and pure 
water.” (i.e., there is no harm 
from the mixing of the two) pour 
it for me.” He said: “So I poured 
it for him and he performed 
ablution with it.” (Da‘if) 

td Audet 
ahaa ashi 35 Za Gis - rA0 
‘ 3 

gas 
: taagl i 55. aver) fn olgys (i. 

f at gal se ea ! 

Pi 

So upate gf db Be 

rtedt 

2 fae YY sdb ee dee 
igs ‘ci ME bi d425 IB Gk 
cals Liab dU ugls Ce sgh 25 

ol 9 Sy ce dag) gal ge VI/V 2 pled Mt ane] Lede ooktenl] te Sei 

al ogee Gag) cpl inal Cine sku bie 
asl shpSt ates Codedly ab etl by a cue 

Comments: 

Syne sl alty) cadet tae rs) «Lang 

Some of the scholars take their cue from this ‘Hadith’ and declare it lawful 
to perform ablution from it. However, the Hadith being ‘Weak’ no ruling 

can be based on it. 

Chapter 38. Ablution With 
Seawater 

386. It was narrated that 
Mughirah bin Abu Burdah, who 
was from the tribe of Banu 
‘Abdud-Dér, said that he heard 
Abu Hurairah say: “A man came 
to the Messenger of Allah #@ and 
said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, we 
travel by sea and carry a small 
amount of water with us. If we 
use it for ablution, we will 
become thirsty. Can we perform 

eles ope) OU — (TA prnall 
(WA tins!) oe 
Je le bh ply Gis - YAn 

shall se os ae Ae ore ane 
fos se d,% Gh uf gaa SF Shs 
El Yat 5425 Gd BE I 25 Il 

cpa jo Gud tea ents padi £53 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

ablution with seawater?’ The 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘Its 
water is a means of purification, 
and its dead meat is permissible. 
(i.e. the fish found dead in the 
sea).’”’ (Sahih) 

oP Vie ¢ ped thes # gad gil wh «3 ylgbesi oagls 

308 (grr g Solgtall wuigui 

oy 

re edi 
ts edi thu 

aes = 

yl a oi [emoene olin] Ce 

Anh s Ole onls tho only cgsledly eVre 6 Gebel Arun 9 6% Aa Syt> 

Comments: 

a. The Prophet #€ has clarified that seawater is both pure and a purifier. It 
can, therefore, be used for ablution and other purposes. 

b. ‘The dead meat of the sea” means the meat of the sea animal. And just as it 
is a lawful food if caught alive, it is also lawful if it dies inside the sea or 
outside it after capture. It is, however, best to avoid eating the animals that 
can live on both land and sea. And Allah knows best. 

387. It was narrated that Ibn 
Firasi said: “I was fishing and I 
had a vessel with me in which I 
kept water, and I used seawater 
for ablution. I mentioned that to 
the Messenger of Allah #@ and he 
said: ‘Its water is a means of 
purification, and its dead meat is 
permissible.’ (Da‘if) 

< 

is 2 Jie gl 2 jes Ble - vav 
Pa ew te SS 

pbs GF 8515 of SS LF Aa) Cp pe 
ee gees kis 

aT ate 1 8 88 ol 
ME jest BG Le 5 gglall 5A0 

ly coke Gl pb ady pl ype iter Gy plan # [Lane oolul] eed 
ae oe (FAD) BLS! Cowdis cally oye Sond hb (ul pall 

388. It was narrated from Jabir 
that the Prophet #% was asked 
about seawater, and he said: “Its 
water is a means of purification, 
and its dead meat is permissible.” 
(Hasan) 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

309 igri g Sotgdal) iloii 
aed ed fos re Se Sie 
2a gh cal oS Be Qk YF GY 

OUD gpl lls ge Wing ca PVE [Video ae el [opm cole] tay el 

Chapter 39. A Man Who 
Asks For Help With His 
Ablution And Water Is 
Poured On Him 

389. It was narrated that 
Mughirah bin Shu’bah said: “The 
Prophet #¢ went out to relieve 
himself and when he came back, I 
met him with a water skin and 
poured water for him. He washed 
his hands and his face, then he 
went to wash his forearms but his 
garment was too tight, so he 
brought his arms out from 
underneath his garment and 
washed them, then he wiped over 
his leather socks, then he led us in 
prayer.” (Sahih) 

Peon “i Se Sb r4 fae 

v4 pa ale cats 55 

wis peo fl le — rm 
ra iad of 3 aa oF B iGsie iF 
aes ile yak) a ESN C edu 

vale cae) ag 1YL S . 

dott Ca ats fab 
sees fe) veregeat rea alas 
dete es esa 

“owe 

dG 
aoe 

seis 

VAVACPAACY Ve Al SN Ledt Gb BLA GL cddball ub asl ees 

Voges ca tee tate ge WET ccpitell (de 

Comments: 

‘cma wh o3 sl gbll tlanes 6 OV4A 

4A line bul ol atsae 9 

a.. Accepting service from those younger than oneself is quite in order even if 
the service belongs to an area connected with the rituals of worship. 

b. The Hadith proves the permissibility of Mash (wiping) on socks. 

c. The rest of the parts must be washed even though one might find it 
somewhat difficult, as was done by the Prophet #6 when he washed his 
forearms, although he had difficulty removing his garment. 

390. It was narrated that Rubai’ 
bint Mu‘awwidh said: “T brought 
a basin of water to the Prophet # 

te, 

Was 

ree Bo 

‘ea o Bete? as - 4. 

2 font \ 

The Chapters Of Purification... 310 (gir g Soleil wilgul 

and he said: ‘Pour it, sol poured .,., 9. #2, - oe 8 hoe 8 
it and he washed his face and 7” S% ez! of vi chae ot ere orl 
forearms, then he took fresh water: JL Glas Be 3! Lf 256 
and wiped his head, front and sida Waldo Teen Utah i.’ ae 

back, and then he washed his feet. caFlb39 Agr yg to MgReab 
He washed each part three 455% (inh 2 2233 clause cu GET; 
times.” (Da‘if) a fs ion ee ¢ : 
USE BSG 625 Jeg eG 

; LAND dpb fi as foe op! & [ude ool] ed 

Comments: 

a. Rubai’ & is among the younger female Companions of the Prophet #8, 
which is to say she was a minor during the lifetime of the Prophet #. She 
belonge to the Helpers’ tribe of Banu Najjar. Her father Mu’awwidh bin 
‘Afra’ had participated in the battle of Badr. 

b. It is part of Sunnah to wipe the entire head. This is what we mean by the 
expression ‘wiped his head, front and back’. There is no proof that the 
Prophet 8 wiped half or one fourth of his head. It is, however, proved that 
the Prophet #@ first wiped part of the head, then completed the remainder 
part of it on his turban. 

c. The original order in respect of the feet is washing them. Wiping them is 
only allowed if one is wearing socks while the feet had been washed for 
ablution before putting them on. 

391. It was narrated that Safwan = 23 335 Gis 65t 3 ak, Gis - yay 
bin ‘Assal said: “I poured water obie ede. he Pees Dees ips 
for the Prophet # on journeys s4* ‘tae G) asp] > sled 
and as a resident, when he <)-2- 22 (8 2); suis 0 f 40 S007 
y ol "6 egal 4ede ol tp dain 

performed ablution.” (Da‘if) a i : ies se oe ins 
zl ee tll de Gme idB Jlts oi! 

Big. ets Ae : 

£051 3 ‘ passls post og 

ype Abend (La 8) I pgone Lie cy AS! # [tae olf] 7 cx Via 

392. Umm ‘Ayyash, the slave i} ts sal 3 Aa Gis -— ¥4y 
woman of Ruqayyah, the ae ee way See r 
daughter of the Messenger of “C3? ut myn Ae Gar 2 Eel git 
Allah #¢, said: “I used to help the 1% pas, 8 Eeag te fee OF ae 
Messenger of Allah #& perform e a 5 os ; a, o a 
ablution, when I was standing ae] fe 6OLes os ole She « ple 
and he was sitting.” (Da‘if) ¢ 

Q e , oe « fae 
el cant al Ae 8S cha of Ante 

#6 il S925 ck BY GI L565 oo 
sf oe 

+é i re ew ge tg 4 Lt 5 od Paerd 
Gl «He at! S425 tee QS reJSb 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

311 igitwg Sr lgdal! wl gui 

fee 

6 5a5 

& 

alo op WEE CAN/YO: AS Od lab oot [Me Cee sla] ge 

re, LAS Vad PS ¢ bas walises moles pyre sul {ied 
lel tJ al)... 

Chapter 40. When A Man 
Wakes Up From Sleep, 
Should He Put His Hand In 
The Vessel Before Washing 
It? 

393. Sa‘eed bin Musayyab and 
Abu Salamah bin ‘Abdur-Rahman 
narrated that Abu Hurairah used 
to say: “The Messenger of Allah 
said: ‘When anyone of you. wakes 
up from sleep, he should not put 
his hand into the vessel until he 
has poured water on it two or 
three times, for none of you 
knows where his hand spent the 
night.’”” (Sahih) 

“Sesh SBs 64 908 

Iyer tenky Gy al 

yp BAEG JED OU - (E+ prea 

TBA aM bee Soe 
(és dill) (ghd 

wala GF oath ae he - yar 
(55 phe ty dd ais 2 EBhol 
on dee be SAM ge :4e(M 
eh ae rel be eS LE op abe Si als oacall 

age ‘36 a Bit ages rei Sf erat 
a ee oe oe Giisl By ae a 

So lgile ey & Yh 2 dg jose 

25 we So y esas 8 7 UNG 4] 

oF 

- Mody 

» Aolie ye Sto} bab! 1) ele be Ob ca ylghll egde dl ae el [eee] ty sd 

Cline ees all, Meme oe Calm {Jus} 

Comments: 

tS 5 cu Ads! Gate oye Vere Fea 
dh y YWALe 

a. The commandment covers both night and day. The Hadith mentions the 
word ‘night’ because people mosily sleep at night. 

b. ‘Pouring water on the hand two or three times’ is meant to ensure purity of 
the hand beyond any shred of doubt. However, if washing once serves the 

purpose, it would suffice. 

394. It was narrated from Salim 
from his father that the Messenger 
of Allah 8 said: “When anyone 
of you wakes up from sleep, he 
should not put his hand into the 
vessel until he has washed it.” 
(Sahih) 

“oe 3D 

ite as: ee or oi Ase Gas - ¥4ae 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

312 

Wgrrewg Sy lgkall wal gui 

GL ds as 26Y! Ze 

bye de Geel eres NYU te EA/N ph IT ae sl eee] fe ed 

395. It was narrated that Jabir 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ 
said: ‘When anyone of you gets 
up from sleep and wants to 
perform ablution, he should not 
put his hand into the vessel he 
used for ablution until he has 
washed it, because he does not 
know where his hand spent the 
night or where he put it.’” [(One 
of the narrators) Abu Ishaq said: 
“What is correct is that it is 
narrated from Jabir, from Abu 
Hurairah.”’] (Hasan) 

wa Wel idl Sadossiy ¢ 43 os lud € rlane 

3G) Gis 205 3, helas} Gas — v40 
cl of CU ate Be cag at ce 3 

oe ag A a 2 ae ee 

iveeey) 
BSE ol 88 RE Geeetall : Glee! 

£4 ISH dblae gy obs Gade ge Wore cfA/V 1 ghd lull ox 21 Cee te as 
Dee wl Ps) yl * (ols Sle, ‘eee aku} \ had Syne sl JG 5 re coal Lawl dbs 
islgd cytes gates GUI Gall / gash tab) Jal 

Comments: 

Although Hadith 393 mentions the washing of hands ‘two or three times’ 
the scholars hold the order to wash more than once to be recommended 

rather than mandatory. 

396. It was narrated that Hérith 
said: ” Ali called for water, and he 
washed his hands before putting 
them in the vessel, then he said: 
‘This is what I saw the Messenger 
of Allah #@ doing.’” (Hasan) 

le aby cold oie. 

Chapter 41. Concerning 
Saying ‘Bismillah’ When 
Performing Ablution 

397. It was narrated from Abu 

« ily 60 pF 5 EV /V gel ws al gd ahs Lip] 

gt fe 

ah of OS of Gis - van 
yp Gia of 32 ante BS A 
855 Jedd coli, oe les 258 eseyled 
Sab os 2 . “00 
se dE tN! ued of OS 
ib 3 365 EN} 
cal gL cary Coded ddl gol 
ee ee 

™ 

(£\ dared) 2 ell ef ent de 

48 

conlall 35 aknc is sf Gs - vw. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Sa’eed that the Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: “There is no 
ablution for one who does not 
mention the Name of Allah 
(before doing it).” (Hasan) 

313 Lgiiwg Sy lgtall wale 

ee eee ae + fe vo 4 

Sos lade fp dee] Ce 
de>] 3! <a 

oe ot fe a he te wd 
oe ere) 2 ey ape \45 6S peo pl 
oo” oe j ° et or uf owt 
CF thee ol Ge gerd Ae ep 
- e¢ Ceo os 
ave, 1 oye aul 

ABs ay F Spee gdl ces ca dood ol ge €) Prdeed on el pe] ead 

Comments: 

8 oS al gc atdod cegde cnls Oke 

Basing their opinion on the words of the Hadith, some of the scholars 
consider it obligatory to say Bismillah before starting the ablution, while 

others regard it as a Sunnah. 

398. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed bin Zaid said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #% said: 
‘There is no prayer for one who 
does not have ablution, and there 
is no ablution for one who does 
not mention the Name of Allah 
(before it).’’”” (Hasan) 

Gea 

Sih ee Sp Uns) Ge - van 

Gl oo. 
te 
Cry 
OS 
[omay 

Ets 
B. 
Gs 
& 
Sey 
EN 
= 

Mahe dil ro oi 

VC cepts tee Lendl Bele be Gb isle gd dt a ol [yee] tae ss 
cones gla ac sh Gb tydady cols Gale gh # e JEST de gp geod ge 
dbl Qahe gl cae of st ob BLS Caseell Li, 

399. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘There is no prayer 
for one who does not have 
ablution, and there is no ablution 
for one who does not mention the 
Name of Allah (before it).’”” (Da‘if) 

bb pt SN LES ccs fi Bhs - 184 
Bis ah of bn Gis YE eal 
° oe € ° 3S poe eee 
oe an} de ost! ooo on wharee 

foe “4 or Fe 
cel GF ty GE CEU Ee gp ae 

mae. Sa a ae fee FSi ee 
Se W He ai 55 JE 36 EY 

The Chapters Of Purification... 314 (gran g Solgtall wil gsi 

cog gll le Ae dl b Oh caylebll coyle pl anol [ae ooluf] eyes 
Obs Y COL gene ogy ctl Lo gles Ay ger ge Gy eres hed Ge Velho 

400. It was narrated by ‘Abdul- ell oy ee! ns Gis - ta. 
Muhaimin bin ‘Abbas bin Sahl bin or 

: i 
Sa'd Ae-Sé'idi, from his father, Gee! #2 UF hE 

from his grandfather, that the {6 «¢ SiN gees ies ute 
Prophet #@ said: “There is no <, 42 we Js, -  #- e-  ¢ 
prayer for one who does not have Yo 23GB Bl ge spd GF cag 
ablution, and there is no ablution o jad yor) Yo de yey y 2 Me 
for one who does not mention the Be Eh chen ht ges 
Name of Allah (before it). There is seas Y Gal Be V5 calle at el Si 
no prayer for one who does not ¢43 3 Be WG i 
send Blessing; (Gelli) upon the “07 ig 

do pete 

cp ae 

Prophet, and there is no prayer GLa 
for one who does not love the ‘ ae a 
Ansar.” (Da‘if) gi Gis cicls 3 ols Zi JU] 
Another chain with similar ths (rr ca epee eres ‘ie & 
wording. Bootee 

Ubges 3855 ce BY gotath ie Gis 
eB cand obo Mad i ne sl SB, cans orliul (oer ole]: Tosa) 

Chapter 42. Starting On Thee. 5) 3 coc) GU — (2 pani) 
Right In Ablution cha 

C£Y 4aecci|) 
n os (4a, “og pe Say fe, 
401. It was narrated from ‘Aishah =! Gas i Ail Gp oka Gus - t+} 
that the Messenger of Allah 8, usty “fs ictficg “2h 
liked to start on the right when ‘C ** I OF SP 

purifying himself, when combing 2 35 302 Gls : a5 bias Wass 
his hair and when putting on his ae 

footwear. (Sahih) be bl ol of Cabl 2 «gah 

Sf igs angle jf gos OF ose 
6 yet 3 Yi Let Oe ae a 

Sl 85 EF BY aes gs oie 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

315 (ging Byigiall wl gsi 

» Aas 151 

copbs VIALE ehudlly epg a geal Ob cepedi ubdl os! eee 
Sam oye ge ge Yl asl Ede oy VUAie (enh 9) ggbl eo cpedl Gh cayightt 6 elnes 

Comments: 

4 hal 

‘Starting on the right hand’ is the golden principle for the deeds done with 
one hand, e.g., shaking hands, taking and giving things, and writing etc. 
Some of the scholars have, in the light of this Hadith, even stated that we 
should wear our watches on the right hands. 

402. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #% said: ‘When you perform 
ablution, start on the right.’”’ 
(Da’tf) 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

a eee) tae be Sa oe et 

romcnce tears Cp dees Ge - fF 

- Se prt 80 pert gt. -2 oe foe 
oF 64 plas ce ok) eae : Eee ye 
Zeon Fd 

6a 2 pl of cglle | OF 6 eNT 
eles Gp 86 ai J.25 de 236 
fag ts esl ot Jb] 
iy gle Se Ge oe 

* 
-Faote 

Mess 5 nets as ape lew nes 

ae 
yl ene 
“3 

ee 

4 

EVEN EC LOY CS Ob coli cogle gol ae eT Pete ecb] tee os 

as ake Ly 0s Gad iL obse bal wc dnd olyys OWALE cpddt gar tec 

Chapter 43. Rinsing The 
Mouth And Sniffing Up 
Water Into The Nostrils With 
One Handful Of Water 

403. It was narrated from Ibn 

‘Abbas that the Messenger of . 

Allah #€ rinsed his mouth and 
sniffed water up into his nostrils 
from one scoop of water. (Sahih) 

eeuall 

Iara! SG - (21 pani) 

: Bis ° a4? 6 - 
(2¥ dinll) tol AS Gye GLENS 

x hg co lgadi 23 ail ts Gs - coy 
™ 9 6clel op al 4 
bh sal Ke Che sabe te 

cp glee SE Abel of ah Be calm 

yaa “ - %¢ é- > - ge 

BE il 525 OF ile gil oF QS 
rte 

of Vere coeds ABS co cattle do gl fee ol ce ped oll 6gy bell aor ol Tex Saeed 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Comments: 

316 (git § Sylgbads laul 

NV gles 4 5 tye 

a. The Hadith means; let one hold water in his hand, then put part of it into 
the mouth to rinse it, and enter the rest in the nose to clean it, without the 
need to take séparate water for the nose. The process may be repeated three 

times. 

b. It is also allowed that a person first rinse the mouth three times, then sniff 

water up into the nostrils three times. 

404. It was narrated from ‘Ali 
that the Messenger of Allah 2 
performed. ablution and he rinsed 
his mouth three times, and sniffed 
water up into his nose three 
times, from one handful. (Sahih) 

Re Ye tht Ee 
dels GS ba GW GEelg «bb 

as Ad ool gal ge VIP /Vitieell tly) Co deol op dite a el [empoene] = ees oi 

405. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Ansari 
said: “The Messenger of Allah # 
came to us and asked us for water 
for ablution. I brought water to 
him and he rinsed his mouth and 
sniffed water up into his nostrils 
from one handful.” (Sahih) 

LB piS Aalyd aly ctoly nd cult tht @ V pee 

gl Gs cyt I ale Ble - tro 

Le sail 2 of BE 36 2h) ai cdl 

#g ai dts U6 
2 aCe aes - ons f % 
paeaesd och: a5 cleo Wis 

4,788 6 

Be ° - 

VAN Bdoly Be oye Gels eee oye Gh cope gl t goed! ae ol Saal 

Vigee 4 dle oy UL Gude ge Wore 

Chapter 44. Going To 
Extremes In Sniffing Water 
Up Into The Nostrils and 
blowing it out 

406. it was narrated that Salamah 
bin Qais said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ said to me: ‘When you 
perform ablution, clean your nose, 

and when you use pebbles to- 

clean yourself after defecating, 
use an odd number.’” (Sahih) 

gost dee Bl ob cizlebll Glu, 
= pace g 
3 BI SU - Cet anal) 
(£6 deed) JEG GLAELY 

freer bo Foot ete 

SUS cae 1 Be oF deol as - £s4 

oe ao Boe ee ot Se 
5X pl Cas5 'e tye Of 65 cy! 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

317 igiiwg Sylgiad! wilgul 

Gp :#6 #1 5.25 J db db LS 
356 ee a 5g BG Bir 
Leora ge & ob cb ylgbli cpg de ah ae ol Leoene ootiuf] FSeaed 

Comments: 

“eee Cem NB Ce pprate td oe Wie eli Vly 

a. The Hadith is clear on the point that mere passing water into the nose is not 
enough. If necessary, the nose should be thoroughly cleaned. 

b. It is better to use three pebbles for cleaning after defecation. 

407. It was narrated from ‘Asim 
bin Laqit bin Sabrah that his father 
said: “I said: ‘O Messenger of 
Allah! Tell me about ablution.’ He 
said: ‘Perform ablution properly”! 
and sniff water up into your 
nostrils thoroughly, unless you are 
fasting.’”” (Sahih) 

pee at 

ee igo of eb Sof gett o2 8 

of al 1 a! eee " EAE : 
3 8 bye eh OG bei 
gle 5488 if Yi (GUELY 

cary Sade oe VENI ob Bb cayighll cag yl eo sl awe] tq pd 
pants ly epSbdls Cle cyly cde Gils cisde cl army 64: oho gpl 

Comments: 

The Arabic expression Asbighil-Wudu’ means doing the ablution so 
attentively and thoroughly that no part of the body meant to be washed 
remains dry. Thus, rubbing and washing each part thrice is also part of the 

completion of ablution. 

408. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: ‘Sniff up water into 
the nostrils thoroughly, two or 
three times.’”” (Hasan) 

“ate Seo 

tide ob Iu ks Ae 
is dds Bley ce shtche Ges 
52 8 Gl oll ge « (59 GIS yin 
oF ¢ ee nah aa 
6 oii 3,25 SE 08 le gh 

ESE Sf BAU 3% (385 13 

is - bel 

yen 

Sade ge VEVIG ob Bb caylblt cosle pl aed [gw oobeed] cay set 

1 See nos. 280 and 426. 

4 @S5 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

409. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘Whoever performs 
ablution, let him clean his nose, 
and whoever uses pebbles to 
clean himself after defecating, let 
him use an odd number.’” 
(Sahih) 

318 Ng g Sleds) wi gsi 

as 

oF, 
ca} we Zp 39135 tdi? on 335 

cd yigbsi clues VG co gud g/l J oe Ob rer 6 go bed] tom ol ‘eps 
642 SPB Cyd oye YYVie clea Vig gle VI 2 sR ok 

Chapter 45. Concerning 
Ablution Washing Each Part 
Once 

410. It was narrated that Thabit 
bin Abi Safiyyah Ath-Thuméli 
said: “I asked Abu Ja‘far: Was it 
narrated to you from Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah that the Prophet 2% 
performed ablution washing each 
part once?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ I said: 
‘And each part twice, and each 
part thrice?’ He said: “Yes.’”” 
(Sahih) 

ae ois by reel od 

of HE & OL - (£0 co 

> 

(£0 0 tinal) 82 8% Per 

rare a 
ra} GLa at 
e 

dele b GL sasha gee ax ol Laie ita 

Comments: 

4S dal cst “5 

Some of the scholars regard the Hadith as weak, but the rule drawn from it 
is correct, since all the three methods of ablution are proved from the 
Messenger of Allah #8. (Bukhari: 159, 160, 161). 

411. It was narrated that Ibn 

“Abbas said: “I saw the Messenger 

of Allah #¢ performing ablution, 

taking one handful (of water) at a 
me.” (Sahih) 

‘dbl te BX gi Gis - 611 
(tas Se nota dao ts es he 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

ob gh} cogls oly CVOVie C5 ya iy 2 gu bl wh 6 g42 oll cg Gel ax ol ceed 
6 Gost Olds Cate Ge Lape Are bye by ee ll OL 

412. it was narrated that ‘Umar 
said: “I saw the Messenger of 
Allah #@ during the campaign of 
Tabuk performing ablution, 
washing each part once.” (Da‘if) 

35 oF hit 3 5 MAB cei TYAS 
235 dB 552 $2 cal 32 ie of 
3a doh lies Ass Ge 3 HB a SY 

Saxl5 

Sy cpgde dl ales cay pats Cade oye YY {Vs taml ae ol [de oolenl] ed 

ow g ther! we dag) cyl aly (Uae op Goby cand) rane olul pa? Some gl 
ab fF a deg) oul Gudod ple ol oY ns 

Chapter 46. Performing 
Ablution; Washing Each Part 
Three Times 

413. It was narrated that Shaqig 
bin Salamah said: “I saw “‘Uthman 
and ‘Ali performing ablution, 
washing each part three times, 
and they said: ‘This is how the 
Messenger of Allah # used to 
perform ablution.’” (Hasan) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

BE UE 6 25) SG — (27 prea!) 

(£4 dace) 

Paid 4 se 4 toe epee 

oil g& «daha gee 
gigs i lo 

Zee 

Set ey ow \GSa bey Att 

sf ae. Ei 

rs asus op oll» 6 
we ae ge 

ot Le Che pe Nee pe 

yen) Kar cous ot cpl 

Sete oe THEE OVATE ped) Bld eel [ye mobil] tae ss 

414, It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Umar performed ablution 

4 OLS Gel Gob oy am dbe 

xa 

wala) Go geil is Gis - tt 
Gis ile 4b dig Gis cegbl 

The Chapters Of Purification... 320 grew g Bylgtall cailgel 

washing each part three times, and oy, 

he attributed that to the Prophet a » ' af ov a7 gr ese BN 
#8. (Sahih) CM (39 af 522 oh gs «he 

MG 23) J) US G55 HSE 
se ik eS alae SEAL! Le, ae ol Leewel :ged 
CEE ope gly cogil pile pol I tle pe poe gal ge Gilles Alyy ce elig! Cute oy 

2 Oph g Prciom)| gto el Me al Dy ye cul 

7 o Ft hee | od 8h ate. 
415. It was narrated from ‘Aishah i BE Gas a yp) Gide — tho 

and Abu Hurairah that the . ¢- 2- AA Ge A ea 
Ogee GF cyplesl ol Hkh 36 cole 
Prophet #g did ablution washing 77 a 2 a a v oa ai 
each part three times. (Hasan) ol 188 gly ARE Be olbe ol 
tor toe SG 4 e 

USE ES Les Bg oo 

aoe eee tg Ete 
416. It was narrated that cmt SY 255 Gp oles Ge - ENN 
‘Abdullah bin Abi Awfa said: “I ez oe ee-h Of pasth ne oe 2 
saw the Messenger of Allah # ~~ : a ‘ie ae or 
performing ablution, washing each = ‘dls Jil oa! ot 
part three times, and wiping his eur oe 6 ae at Ge EE 
head once.” (Sahih) CEE EG Lee Re ail J 5 

48 JB yee Sle yy OE # Gand stuf Led ig peydi JE [eee] tay pd 
Sudo y Mie 5d ye cuslel sl wl cel oF sap? ‘pS Jog coded ues gles 
pled| Qodosd! Le {gd 
Comments: - ee aa 
The Hadith proves that, unlike other parts that are washed three times each, 
the head must be wiped only once. 

417. It was narrated that Abu (Gis :3cj 3) Ait Ge - tw 
Malik Ash‘ari said: “The Goes Sate ee | ag ss Fes 
Messenger of Allah #§ used to . 

perform ablution washing each = Ut al fo nde of gh be 
art three times.” (Sahih ees is eeeear 
x one) Los MB al 5425 OE dB GW 

J tals CVOr ening abd VeAre «bly ce me gl aines [peel te os 

The Chapters Of Purification... 321 Ugete 9 Srtgkad) ol gui 

418. It was narrated from Rabi’ bones, «Siete oy. Male we ea 2 
bint Mu‘awwidh bin ‘Afra’ that 29 “Se gl Gi NW ph Ge - £10 

the Messenger of Allah 2 cols is (255 Sic VE Meena e 
performed ablution washing each fics? in =f ane ee ee dea 
part three times. (Hasan) a2! oF ‘J cn deo gt BT Le BF 
S55 AB hl 425 OF oie ofl 358 ct 
GSE HE 

die Gk ci jbgbll cogls Gol ne aeaall oy py wl gost Olde a [oem] tee 
LY je 4 While 2 gel #92 9 

Chapter 47. What Was egos Bb HE Ge OG (EY reall) 
Narrated Concerning on é flue. Bee aees 
Ablution; Washing Each Part (2¥ deal US oyna 3 

Once, Twice Or Thrice 

419. It was narrated that Ibn 2b sé 33 gi Gis - 414 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of bh hh ae eee 
Allah #§ performed ablution ~? SA RE a pr ge 
washing each part once. He said: .au/ 32 ofhall 33 3 ml as Bs 
‘This is the ablution of the person Ot ae ae, eee A ae 
from whom Allah will not accept SJE Fee gil OF 8d op Aylee BF 
his prayer without it’ Then he - iS fin15 ely BE di 5525 129 
performed ablution washing each Ba Bee adi ei oye ee ae 
part twice, and he said: ‘This is the "4 ‘YJ se He ail SHY 36 ty25 Miao 
ablution that Allah appreciates.” 203 (jhy -g@ (0 (66 33 
Then he performed ablution Hise oa an Bs 
washing each part three times, and 1SB5 CEM LS G5 leo 5l Se pial 
said: ‘This is how ablution is pte , 4s de toh tcef iby 
performed properly, and this is "9799 Ir? 9 Shr? Se og 

my ablution and the ablution of JU < ike L335 325 coal dil fle 
the Close Friend of Allah, Ibrahim. a be ee ieee & coax on 
Whoever performs ablution like “~~ BV Ob gal 4615 Le 
this, then on completing it says: i343 es Pe Pericpar corsa Rr | 
‘Ashhadu an 1a iladha illallah, wa 
ashhadu anna Muhammadan ‘abduhu : 2) oe 
wa rasuluhu’ (I bear witness that 

none has the right to be 

worshipped but Allah, and I bear 

witness that Muhammad is His 

servant and his Messenger), eight 

gates of Paradise will be opened to 

The Chapters Of Purification... 322 (gris Sylhet! leu 

him and he may enter through 
whichever one he wants.’ (Da‘if) 

(Lard 99 boa] yj 4d onl Lied 265 ee gd! SUS akon Ayr? volioal] Tex Sanal 
CJ od cal ul JE joe ol Gb pI OB gy Lglees US fp Ay me ar Slee auly 
dane [IS Gb Sytods tS ares 3 plat a ces 
Comments: ° 
The chain of transmission in the Hadith is weak on account of the presence 
of Zaid Al’Ammi and ‘Abdur-Rahim in it. However, its contents are 
proved from other Ahédith. 

420. It was narrated from Ubayy (3s: sit is jes Ge - tye 
bin Ka’b that the Messenger of |, =, oe 

Allah #€ called for water and 4! Ae BIS: ry ra orcas due lec| 
performed ablution washing each A iechy ot ¢ sein ire 43) 
part once. He said: “This is the Be Bl gf A OF ‘et mr ot 
minimum requirement of jf «4 

ablution’ or he said: ‘The ablution 
of one who, if he does not *” Soi eaece see I ee 
perform this ablution, Allah will te ,54)i 4i.b3 (ian dW 3 i 1255 
not accept his prayer.” Then he ,,. 2, of 
performed ablution washing each oy a ns los ig “ egogy 28 5 
part twice, and he said: ‘This is 9G 65% ee 3 as ro 3 
the ablution of one who, if he ae 

performs it, Allah will give him o Ame ay asl ABs 3 byes ‘ay 

two shares of reward.” Then he Os yi thE 1b6 «yy 
performed ablution washing each 3 ; is os - SS 
part three times, and said: ‘This is hd [ey] Geko yal! 8 yng ges 

my ablution and the ablution of 
the Messengers who were sent 
before me.” (Da‘if) 

Sy ca bela! Cute ope AV/\: glad shat de ol [odeyd odlivel] ex Saeed 
o paily oder oh SI AUIS y Cire orl ye Galged| cy da ad olan] Wad 215 pe gl 

ot: 
a 
Chapter 48. Concerning sda od HE GSU - (8A pred) 
Moderation In Ablution And i tee 
Avoiding Extravagance ab gdadl La 55 pai Ze 

(EA decd) 
421. It was narrated that Ubayy i “3. “ks a ai a 

The Chapters Of Purification... 323 (ging Sylgkall lgul 
bin Ka‘b said: “The Messenger of ver 
Allah 8% said: ‘There is a devil for 3 
ablution who is called Walahan, 523 23 228 36 6 yom il oe ate gil 

so be on guard against the . 4-2 42 .2 1 Aer veg 

insinuating thoughts (Waswis) J 55 JB td Se on dsl oF Ghana 
rer{l] . ae Fy Be 3B 9 eats : 

about water. (Da‘if) 3 dy Gihet 2,23) Sp Ed 

All olgag LE highs 

SLM EALS Boke be ob cdslebl cede dl an tT Me Cian ole] tee os 
we ele Cty te Cees Gy debt oe adesy ce OL gal ge OVC ll eyes Cs 
nbs el ely Geli 

“8 Lore Se gre (ate 
422. It was narrated from ‘Amr fh Ge ieee fy Ele Go — £YY 
bin Shu‘aib, from his father, from of woe GP Ole BE oy 

his grandfather, that a Bedouin ~~ ar . 
came to the Prophet #@ and asked oF cael oF on o BF JF sdcsle 
him about ablution. He showed *f-< we 64 1 teeny cic ee 4 e 
him how to perform it washing te a cel oh Gel - ad 
each part of the body three times. ‘Jl ~ BSE OSE 21568 cep gl GF 
Then he said: ‘This is ablution, tk fe ee ekg gt TN 
and whoever does more than this, JB Wa Ie 1h Gab ce pesll We 
has done evil, transgressed the Glib teddy 
limits and wronged himself.’’”” 

(Hasan) 

68 ph 9 Wore Ge be ego Sl Wh caylgbll copglo yl dor ol [epno] ‘er 

raphy Aare cyl dmrneys 

Comments: 

a. An effective method of teaching is to demonstrate the subject through 
action. Teachers must make use of this method for explaining practical 
matters. 

b. ‘Doing more than this’ means to wash a part more than thrice. 

423. It was narrated that ‘Amr 
heard Kuraib saying: “I heard Ibn 
‘Abbas say: ‘I stayed overnight 
with my maternal ‘aunt 
Maimunah, and the Prophet 2% 
got up and performed ablution 

ee Zoli Gis gf Gis - eve 

Bo sae Sa oe ae Eee 
he Gi tee td sat Ls eee ta nb 
pA at ee i ee 
ae f cae Se = Z | As 

1 Meaning: “That prompt you to waste water.” 

The Chapters Of Purification... 324 \girtewg Sylgball cilgal 
from an old water skin, and he ey et ae a ee Ge 
did a brief ablution.! Then I got =” calla clogs Sit Ce Lege 6 
up and did the same as he had Ge ie ote 

done.” (Sahih) 

Bee celnns OVATE cope sll Bo cists Gb coped god a el tay sd 
& Rane cyl Cato oP \AVies VW eh ales s #E cell ae wh © rt lowed 

Comments: 

a. Children must be made to join voluntary acts of worship in order to 

habituate them. 

b. Using more water than needed in ablution is wrong. Having a brief 
ablution with a small quantity of water is enough. 

424, It is narrated that Ibn ‘Umar 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ 
saw a man performing ablution, 
and he said: ‘Do not be 
extravagant, do not be extravagant 
(in using water).’”” (Maudu’) 

trae Ake oy feall cars otul War 

425.It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr that the 
Messenger of Allah #@ passed by 
Sa‘d when he was performing 
ablution, and he said: ‘What is 
this extravagance?’ He said: ‘Can 
there be any extravagance in 
ablution?’ He said: ‘Yes, even if 
you are on the bank of a flowing 
river.’ (Da‘if) 

dates! alli 3 dint Gls - eve 
ae dG ae oil oF ipdle pita sel 
w d6 (bg 565 ae at Jy 

AG,59 

Se gl JB Le ney ote) } Tex Saeed 

Mtoe Ly COS aly 

PGrs 

dao 

ar ihog 4 £Yo 

iis + 

ee we el be ce pla a 

ra 
ius v9) SB nied 33 Gates +e ue 

C3155) eget of 5 tae 
EB fb SS Uy res :Jb 

cp Labdl assy ca 2S ge VV /Tiael oe sl Tene oldu] es 
Yee ¢ pails lg Gd Sore sdly & paselslt 

(2 Using little water and done quickly. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 325 \gerinat 9 So lgdall ot gui 

Chapter 49. What Was gia) 3 ele be SE - (24 peal) 
Narrated Concerning oe nec5 Asis 
performing Ablution e4 ) eney 
Properly 

426. It was narrated that Ibn Us Gis ite Keres Acct GS - ev 

‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of Z eo, , 
Allah 2 commanded us to ; Sc ; : 
perform ablution properly.”@! 

(Hasan) 

epi fron poo 
eB De CA Bel) WE OL MA coy gh asl [yn wba] cass 
WN ie egal domes y 04 ble cp nye Cade ge AS At « paalls 
Comments: 
Please see note on Hadith 407. 

427. It was narrated from Abu (Gas :%23 125 SS i Gls - trv 
Sa’eed Khudri that he heard the pata ed gree 4 ee ee 
Messenger of Allah #§ say: “Shall ‘7° 0 *7 Woe 1 gl Ot 
I not tell you of something by nc 32 co [ae oh We oy ol we Le 

means of which Allah expiatesfor ag ase” gt hee *4) 
sins and increases good deeds?” al Sal dae gl GF eel ool 
They said: “Yes, O Messenger of Yh GG HE Oh Sot5 aye 
Allah.” He said: “Perform ablution J iA iene ae 

properly despite difficulties, 2 4% ats) testi 2 i US G 
increasing the number of steps one tai yeh: 6 aL 16 ehcsdt 
takes towards the mosque and 7 

waiting for the next prayer after 3355 « aKa sé epost pope 2d 

prayer.’ ” (Hasan) a3 Mal jad cdeplall A hadi 
LAN 

64 p> Cyd ope VP aed on ol [. : od 
Comments: a le ca 
a. Virtuous deeds wash off the sins of man, provided that the deeds are done 
with sincerity and are in conformity with the Sunnah of the Prophet 3. 
b. “Increasing the number of steps towards the mosque’ means going to the 

1] Us’ refers to the people of his family. This is part of a longer narration clarifying that, 
recorded through the same chain, by Tirmidhi: no. 1701 and Ahmad: 1:225 and others. 

The Chapters Of Purification. ... 

326 tyre g Bolg! loi 

mosque to join the congregational prayers even if the mosque is at some 

distance from home. 

c. ‘Waiting for the next prayer after prayer’ means (i) not to get so much 
bogged down in worldly affairs as to be forgetful of the obligation of prayer 

or (ii) fail to do it in proper time. 

428. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet #8 said: 
“Sins are expiated by well- 
performed ablution despite 
difficulties, increasing the number 
of steps one takes towards the 
mosque, (and waiting for the next 
prayer after prayer).” (Hasan) 

owl gf at I Dyas Be - tA 

Zeoe 

Bg ce Hee as 
res Ne Ga -3e & “ o 
BM Subs co Kahl fe 2 o5h pe 

day wal J tsi] cde JA 
Le ZI 

oS Sate ge VAE LV deed atl [Le oof] Fez Saa] 

Comments: 

The words ‘Increasing the number of steps one takes towards the mosque’ 
seem to suggest that it is more meritorious and rewarding if one walks his 
way to the mosque than to ride a conveyance. And Allah knows best. 

Chapter 50. Concerning 
Running The Fingers 
Through The Beard (When 
Performing Ablution) 

429. It was narrated that ‘Ammar 
bin Yasir said: “I saw the 
Messenger of Allah # running 
his fingers through his beard.” 
(Da’if) 

chad Ques od ele be bk ciylghll cles os] [eta oolul] 

jdes 3 ele SE - (0+ poeell) 
(0% Samcc5!) rea 

: egal as al 3 nt Gls - tv4 

so- 

if GEN AM a Sh ae let as 

C ttl y ght i2 (J gi ots 
plas (S06 Sie ot Sistas 

* 

“y ce OLS 
+ Ae tes I ae a aera h 

ctl ws 42 9 sl cn tyes (4) fare mule # 4 Olan aplo cya VeaVace 

ego SV Cobol hae I Wore 

« bily «(LEaN 

The Chapters Of Purification... 327 (griwg Splgtss! wil oui 

Comments: 
Imam Ibn Qayyim has said that the Prophet #¢ ran his fingers through his 
beard only occasionally, not regularly. (Z@dul-Ma‘ad; p. 68/1) However, 
there is no proof to support the view that he did it ‘only occasionally’. On 
the contrary, some of the Ahddith explicitly enjoin the doing of it, which 
means that doing it ‘consistently’ is preferable. And Allah knows best. 

g 

430. It was narrated from got 602 ky 
“Uthman that the Messenger of a Ses. hee cabs - 
Allah #@ performed ablution and «hil52) GF «Gj Le ae 2 Zea gall 
ran his fingers through his beard. ee eee ae - 6 
i: BOY Gad gh le ? 
(Hasan) Sade ads ieee oe 
(25 we ait 5425 OF OUR 82 «15 
gS JSS 
VY ic chee Gua Ob ele Le ol ca slghll ge il sor | Popnom sokieal] : ee sh 
oe ec Ce Cade Wiad rSBy cu Gh dae Cade oye 
Comments: 
The Hadith indicates that ranning the fingers through the beard is a part of 
Sunnah. 
ie een setae Tae ros ae of bl oe ff Ls Gas - a 
in Malik said: “ en the Do kes Gas Vek ie ee ae de 
Messenger of Allah # performed = “* UG oe gl ot Bo ce glee ol 
ablution, he ran his fingers cole «ad re és ee eae 
through his beard and separated eile ae ar ih, ed, be A 
his fingers (to let water run °° gol oF ‘So tags GF eG pall 
through them) twice.” (Da‘if) ioe 15) et S925 SE dB sue 

one ae i “ote Bee aie 
oy aylel C3 od le 
AS oe cee an) Gane ote Med ice gd! JB, Lee sole] ger pel 

432. It was narrated that Ibn is Gas : le 3b eles Gis -— ery 
‘Umar said: “Whenever the e 

x 

HAN 
te 
we 
& 
we 
Fa 
in 
GQ? 

Messenger of Allah #@ performed : “oF zs vee 

ablution, he rubbed the sides of ol oF gat ses ee ge sonlgil rs 
his face then run his fingers 7 eg oe ee a os 
through his beard from beneath.” 44 (a3 13] $88 abl Spm OF -JL Jas 
PED ts) Saal Gath 23, 

The Chapters Of Purification... 328 

gig Solgisti ial 

shad ile gay clo lplline 4b abel Mar ig esl! dibs Lean ooled] : ee Se 

433. It was narrated that Abu 
Ayyub Al-Ansari said: “I saw the 
Messenger of Allah #2 performing 
ablution and he ran his fingers 
through his beard.” (Sahih) 

AEBS Jrolys te gl ea) ins 

Chapter 51. What Was 
Narrated Concerning Wiping 
The Head 

434.’Amr bin Yahya narrated 
that his father said to ‘Abdullah 
bin Zaid who was the 
grandfather of ‘Amr bin Yahya: 
“Can you show me how the 
Messenger of Allah 2 used to 
perform ablution?’ ‘Abdullah bin 
Zaid said: “Yes.”” So he called for 
water, poured it over his hands 
and washed his hands twice. 
Then he rinsed his mouth and 
sniffed water up into his nostrils 
three times. Then he washed his 
face. three times and his arms up 
to the elbows twice. Then he 
wiped his head with his hands, 
from front to back. He started at 
the front of his head, then went 
with them to the nape of his neck, 
then he brought them back, 
returning them to the place he 
started, then he washed his feet.” 
(Sahih) 

+a gteredl sda s 
235 di we Ub Leis Gis - ev 
CBige l E20 St BJ 
J525 235 248 Glan off if 3 

ater 

os GES Les 2 a 

obes| ad 6 pe yl Sy Lermel seed 

Whe 6S tal gh cytes 

cent gb HE be OU - (0) arena) 
° (O} damedi) Py) 

DAs walls jy asl Gas - tye 
Gail fase AT VE Tse Bi 
. Ese Faye ye ns eat 
be cal fF Me UG SE 2nd LEN 
re er ee ee 2 
dil a) SE Ol al $2 (Le of 9 fe 
. Seis oe 4, Us, ot 
Sige Ot Dy Ae GAs 6) il 
: > “0d 7 ps Zot 

< a ee ee Coe 
cs) ogy Cass me tse abies 1% pols 

ill ot&abi @55 EE Ss ea 

The Chapters Of Purification... 329 Lgrie'g Sylgiatl wil gui 

6b bhi chines cVAOre cals ols om wh 66 gad gil Gales ax of eps 

. Yo: pO gif Aa ee 

Comments: Ce gee 

a. It is in order to wash some of the parts twice and others thrice during 
ablution. However, the head is to be wiped only once. 

b. Wiping the ears is also a part of wiping the head. 

c. ‘He went with his hands to the nape of his neck, then he brought them 
back’ means that the Prophet #@ did the passing of hands from the front of 
the head to the nape of the neck and back to the place he had started, as 
one continued action, not two separate actions. 

ot 

435. It he gears that Gis :&3 al BS gl 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affaén said: “I saw ey 4s aha eae 
the Messenger of Allah x ‘2° oF cr Sa ur be 
performing ablution and he | 3,45 2215 :dU ola oy OK Aes 

wiped his head once.” (Sahih) Pre ae a? eae 
£ aye aah) oo Lio 33 Fed 

is ~ tye 

VAYi¢ bye oll cont GL copes Cgobadl we coalye Jy Lapeel tees 
+8 nh 9 
Comments: 
This means that, unlike other parts which the Prophet #¢ washed two or 
three times, he wiped his head only once. 

= Bae 

436. It was narrated from ‘Ali ff Gas Bt 2h Ste ihe ~ evs 
that the Messenger of Allah Nae One ee ng 
wiped his head once. (Sahih) BS ol GF Gt] gl LF «yee 
Ba tal aca BB al 525 OF gs be 
eld] GudoSI bi! Lee]  Geyeel 

437. It was narrated that Salamah —- & Jal & fyleelt 23 diss Giles ~ ev 
bin Akwa’ said: “I saw the eee ee ae ee ee 
Messenger of Allah 2 performing ‘4&2 O* Spas! BB ot ae Gas 
ablution, and he wiped his head. jg eeu ie ma ae a 
once.” (Sahih) gees Te EG oe oe 4 af 
oa toh and og a at 25 2h 

Oh BL op Cpe Cima) cde abel Mad ges! dO Cepeel teed 
18 tals Gebel tuted, 

438. It was narrated that Ar- 2423 «3 | ee a 5s ~ eva 
Rubai’ bint Mu‘A4awwidh bin ‘Afra’ * 5 7 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

said: “The Messenger of Allah #% 
performed ablution and wiped his 
head twice.” (Da‘if) 

330 (greg Sp bgbal! ool oii 

- Eee 

cokes oF 6e53 Was ‘VG chases jl 
ged - or o oes o y or ae 
cel oF hse ob bem gf ail we be 
Sek ’ aoe OFS: feo ta 1 oy, ee ‘ 
i 3905 Cash E50 aie ofl 35x et, 

wae tbe oe ot ae 

Wie #8 sl egg dive Gh ciylgbSi casio Pa ar ol [dae astif] Fes Saeed 
olny) duly er ger pb Gye ogi) pie fy al recudedl Ginny Vybe & fle ool Cae ge 

Comments: 

YAtie cpt aie yl & (56 5. 

“Wiped his head twice’ means that once Prophet # took his hands from the 
front to the back, and then from the back to the front. 

Chapter 52. Concerning 
Wiping The Ears 

439. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Abbas that the Messenger of 
Allah #¢ wiped his ears, putting 
his forefingers in his ears and 
wiping the back of them with his 
thumbs, so he wiped them inside 
and out. (Sahih) 

440. It was narrated from Rubai’ 
that the Prophet #¢ performed 
ablution and wiped his ears inside 
and out. (Hasan) 

gems ob BLE Le GE (OY pmnall) 
: (OY daastl) os 

Gis 23 IX of Gls - eve 

Fee ea ee ee ey Pn Ps 
EF ORE ol GF tGu sl Gi dil ae 

cil oF cys op lke be ceed of 85 
81 Acs ME I O25 SF te 

AL la) GZ gets, ges 

peas qe BE ae whe ogee ‘ 

LGEbES Lajalb cemab caus ale 
TERT al ‘eda Leneue 1 ess 

7 ° Gre Pa y Foe “qa. aa “ 

c feBe cp Sores Cy dl we Gos Toh 

(Gin soe ee ee ow SE age a 

Sale aa Ley Be ZO Ol SY ye 

aoiesdk “Oae 

egabts 25] 

ol gph Sade gs VATE NV ETAT ES eS OS Shall ol [ype] ees 
(EEX) GV Sade! Bil aly cade cay dad 

441. It was narrated that Rubai‘ 
bint Mu’awwidh bin ‘Afra’ said: 
“The Prophet # performed 
ablution, and he put his fingers in 

at oF aS5 as VG hese 3 
gh bal we bs lle gf 

7 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 331 (gimwg Srlgiss! wilgi 

the (holes) inside of his ears.” oe, og cues eet 7 2 
(Hasan) e\ ae on! ee eal oF So 
3 seo, E36 wei Us; 

o?f aero Fh 

f. 

Sade ge WV BB ll opty dee Gb ciyighll cose gl a el Led ceed 

+4 @Sy 
442. It was narrated from (fis sue 33 lbs Gis — £8 
Migdam bin Ma’dikarib that the eer eat an ded whee 
Messenger of Allah #@ performed + OF sole Gy pe Boe ci5l 

ablution and he wiped his heads jit hy 1g Giese 
and his ears, inside and out. “ 5 er a see A wd 
(Hasan) aad Log BE tl dytd Ol OSes 

ede ey fe ott. e. 
Lgbbs Lan jale «asly awl 

Ce YTV BB ll eyes the ob cizlgbll cash yl ah Ce] tees 
Ay glen oy AD ST Cade 

Chapter 53. The Ears Are Part Fes, oS 2 — (oF garnall) 
Of The Head wr uF $ au pred 

(oY diol) 
443.It was narrated that 25 GS yes 1) yt Gls - tev 
‘Abdullah bin Zaid said: “The a eee o wet 

oe Sait nd do 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: ‘The 0% ‘*** of COUN) ca! ot W83 cl 

ears are part of the head” 4% ie cess on 202 be oS ee was 
(Hasan) re. ee ee a aor 
HE tl gt JE td 53 gy al 

aly cCaletme Sua cy deg OLS Ol Gem sul RES) Sy sll Ju [o>] ‘ep 

Comments: i Codosd) bi} (sald 

a. The Hadith means that just like we wipe the head, we must also wipe the 
ears. The ears are not to be washed like the face. Therefore, while washing 
the face the ears must not be washed. 

b. The water taken for wiping the head should also be used for the wiping of 
the ears. No additional water needs to be taken for wiping the ears. 

444. It was narrated from Abu 3165. GUT ra; 24 dike Gas - ee¢ 

Umamah that the Messenger of ae ee a ee ee 

Allah #% said: “The earsarepartof o% 76" oF SY oF Qe oF +8) ol 

the head.” He used to wipe his a 1 3425 5! ic Pietra 

The Chapters Of Purification... 332 tgriwg Sylglal! wile 

head once, and he used to wipe sof 4 wo eye, fey - oat La 
over the inner corners of the eyes aly foes OB 9 Nisa UH Se gts “dbs 
(that are close to the nose). (Hasan) ; old one 35 oh 

oe Wiig BB dl epes die Ob aylebll carlo gl ee tl [yn ook] ees 
eed dee ge oxy V lagite gNly Lage Slates odliy pg # & Lb Gy ole Cue 
2 al pace as 

445. It was narrated that Abu Gis 1 cts a Mat Gls - €£0 
Yiurairah said: “The Messenger of gg ke 
Allah 3 said: ‘The ears are part =! LF fy tore Ge ‘opal oF oe 
of the head.’” (Hasan) 2 i 

2 i fo ° as = ry - 
oN fe Oba Be tl 55 

dacee Cina) ieee oka Ua ig esd! SEs cpld Cetell Bit Cope] tee 
Kall gp LS Sate yey elem! on gees BE oy able o, 

Chapter 54. Running The Ley LJ cara ae (of qoerail) 
Fingers Of One Hand ¢ oes f 
Between The Fingers Of The (0% dao) 

Other (And The Toes) 

446.It was narrated that -2 2h 2th 4 diss Gis - een 

Mustawrid bin Shaddad said: “I ah yt epee Cea). 
saw the Messenger of Allah #¢ Ea Ot oF Gar Gy tae Gas 

performing ablution, and he ran . ee a 

Me taal as gis 
his little finger between his toes.” aa ‘S3 spt GAS 
(Sahih) sis o F 23h oe + aod Hy ane i Bes 

Another chain with similar hes (34 @& a 32; Refs sis 
\ 5 314 id 
eran jes Leg gee al 

Bis es Bis til CAD 3 
ape 555 « dag) jel 

ch adem ce VEAT Ett ab Gl ciglghll cash yl ae pl [eee]: ey ad 
20 hg daw ol Soll ans glad Toe ded) yl Erie cghe alow, 4s dang 

Comments: 
More often than not the part between the two fingers or toes remains dry 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

333 

greg Bylgbs! wlgul 

because the water fails to get there as it should. We must, therefore, run our 
wet finger between them. The next Hadith specifically speaks about running 
the wet finger between the fingers of the hands. 

447. %t was narrated that Ibn 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “When you get up 
for prayer, perform ablution 
properly and make the water run 
between your toes and your 
fingers.’ (Hasan) 

° 

Pie 

- FoF 

dsc 2b peal] Gis - tev 

+o ACs oe 
\ te Qe 

ual gi 
OE le of ye alsin Sys calle 
Man J) cd Gp :ag ar b,25 de 
gtel go stat fats 

- rd 

& gui ali 
(AGG 9 Bebe , 

oe V8ic cele Les od ele G Gb caytbll cgde dl ae ol Lye] cae ed 

bo che oe ae Gey # GIES Hoy 

448. ‘Asim bin Laqit bin Sabirah 
narrated that his father said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #6 said: 
perform ablution properly and let 
the water run between your 
fingers.” (Sahih) 

449. ‘Ubaidullah bin Abu Rafi’ 
narrated from his father that 
whenever the Messenger of Allah 
#€ performed ablution, he moved 
his ring. (Daf) 

hagls jane Camda Ciad olin! lad : 

Chapter 55. Washing The 
(Heels and) Achilles’ Tendon 

450. It was narrated that 

Ms 6 cee apd toad iby 64 etl 

Abi! 
Bis ih iy XS pl Gis - ta 
3 ety eb by 
ib dgo GRID pole 8 
ao 2 at dt5 db dE gl 
: tale on Hes é yo 'il 

VIE cele Lael cs Saal 

wae dp gl we Gis - £44 
aie yet Sis ca Uf oil 
obi 525 OT al b2 ab Gl ol 

eSNG Jb GG - (00 pneall) 
(00 démlf) 

The Chapters Of Purification... 334 (griewg Sy lgtat! waloui 

‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #2 saw some 
people performing ablution, and al be «akg 3 SMe: be aye ts 
their heels were dry. He said: eee > cen See a 
‘Woe to the heels because of Hell- So ‘JU see on al ee OF eld 
on ablution properly!’ ”” eel; ane 455% Lass BE isl yes 
«Est és we ko “OW ‘Z9f 
yell (dal 
ul ont of Velie su be Mi bene erg wh cb plghdl tpl ae ol FS 

+44 6 9 dat 

cote OF aS3 (is Yu chases jel 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith confirms that the feet must be washed for ablution. Wiping 
them would not do. Wiping the feet is permitted if (i) one has put on the 
socks after performing the ablution or (ii) there is some injury on the foot 
and water is likely to aggravate or harm it. 

b. Particular care must be taken for washing those parts where water does not 
get easy access, lest they remain dry. 

c. A believer can also be consigned to Hell-fire due to an act of sin committed 
by him but the punishment shall not be interminable, whereas punishment 
for disbelievers and polytheists shall be without end. The Arabic word 
‘Wail’ means ruin, destruction, perdition. 

451. It was narrated that ‘Aishah peice a hs (hha Ge] - ¢e1 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 8 => Me coy tt eh ee ee 
said: ‘Woe to the heels because of 2% SIF [EK & ipl ae Gos 

Hell-fire.’” (Sahih) 58 of plbs ie Y seaeoe pee 
de aon 32 5 dé 1256 Hse tg Pe 
6s A ew bo 

OP! fob gry oh cazlebll 48/12 shill a ely [eee] 3 ae pei 
4 Age Ge VV Ie copills 

452. It was narrated that Abu ».- ee 
A 33 Gas - to 
Salamah said: “Aishah saw ee Gas - igtaall ¢ oe oy 

‘Abdur-Rahm4n performing ra SS cn) oF 2 Sahi le jy 4s 
ablution, and she said: Perform a See 

E so Se, sf Ate 
ablution properly, for I heard the ov ts a id) co a gh 
Messenger of Allah #% say: “Woe 3254 24 « peal ME Tb cass 28 
to the Achilles’ tendon because of |_| a, See ee ee 
Hell-fire.’” (Hasan) OF ches col op done GE COMRE cpl 

The Chapters Of Purification... 335 (griwg Sy lgdall igual 

oti ie ie 2h dé Gk Lf 

we 

Z A € of er fe LD : 
gb -te5l acl cis Lag gh; 

etal Jon 5% BG al d25 Coe 
Ot 3 
0 phy LEVI bpline dee Jal gt aly cg bandh, 
Comments: 

The Hadith contains the word ‘Aragib, which is the plural of ‘Urqub meaning 
the back part of the ankle joint which is above the heel. It is thus clear that 
the feet must be washed along with the ankle joints and their back. 

i on 30 4G eS VE 

453. It was narrated from Abu .g! op tall as 3S ance is — go¥ 
Hurairah that the Prophet # said: sat 5. ot tee kee es 
“Woe to the heels because of Hell- 7 gbeeslt oe By Ae i> alge 
fire.” (Sahih) oF es gl tg ee Le ee Kata 
OI So BG Jb SE Be 25 
ad ge YENI AGL gale NI ee yey Ob caste gle ae el cee eeh 
+4 hogee 
€ aL 

454. It was narrated that Jabir bin Gis :i53 og! oe pl Bae - of 
‘Abdullah said: “I heard the ie ee ee 3%, of 
jee 4 aot ae ea Yi yl 
Messenger of Allah #@ say: ‘Woe 9 ~~" Oe Sa ae ep ee 
to the Achilles’ tendon because of = :JB dil we op pe Be CS cg! oy! 
Hell-fire’” (Sahih eesti 87 Gs wade ee ean 
Pee Sed Sa 9 de BE a yt Cee 
CON Ss 

SEs ca Blea! cal ge ded Gate ge PVA /P ited ol [epee wolinl] te sd 
MENG atley abil Wa? 266 wre gl 
455. It was narrated from Khalid 01825 GUE 33 2. Gas - too 
bin Walid, Yazid bin Abu Sufyan, At kee Re ee eB 1 Cie oy 48 
2 ’ . SVG colescasl Lane} cpl 
Shurahbil bin Hasanah and ‘Ame “2! S97 V8 «obseANT Jeeta) ot 
bin ‘As that they all heard the {6 «2eNi 3; GS Gls cb ii 
Messenger of Allah #8 say: 

2 F e- oak ra £ 
“Complete the ablution. Woe to ele i ae ase or 
the heels because of Hellfire.” (2538 ai we gh 5 22 28 
(Sahih) a nS Ter Ree 

age Adal ot Ble OF 

a 
is 
& 

re 

The Chapters Of Purification... 336 Ugrieg Sylgka! oulgui 

JB pot of 5805 Ee of tots 
OE HB i 505 be Laas OVE 
EN Se EW by cep S5ii (asfn 
Te ies ley ob coke be cer abu] Hat i gel diy Laeeel : eased 
Sipe cere Cadel froly efukenall gladl epar pl ttslly Ole opl pe adiye ol dt 

Chapter 56. Washing The hob BE Ve OG - (0% paral) 
Feet (o% discdt) Reoxri 

456. It was narrated that Abu Giz -i3 ol SS Be 208 
Haiyah said: “I saw ‘Ali y Cog, ea : - 
performing ablution and he ul GF «dls al OF yee gl 
washed his feet up to the ankles, jens 4255 FRc aye Soke AE eee 
then he said: ‘I panied to show a] a Lae ey We Gal 00 te 
you how your Prophet #§ js¢b -XyI Oo 
purified himself.’” (Sahih) : we 
AV ec oll egg dae wh cdslgbli cays sl ano] Laue] ees 
add Bie ¢ phils cgde pl drones 
Comments: 
The fact of washing the feet is proved from the reports of many 
Companions. It is rather the case that anyone of the Companions who has 
described the Prophet's way of performing the ablution has also mentioned 
the fact of his washing the feet. And since the Shiite scholars deny it, the 
Compiler of the book has quoted a Hadith to prove that “Ali 4 himself used 
to wash his feet during ablution. 

457.lt was narrated from 443) Gas se 3; pli Gis - tov 
Miqdém bin Ma’dikarib that the Re ee ae eee Ine 
Messenger of Allah #@ performed 4% O% 6OlM® Or 5 aos cam ol 
ablution; so he washed his feet on plies! be ES oil 
three times. (Sahih) eae ene ee fe ae 
jo Uhsi a tt dt5 OF OK 

gil aati ca SSM Cate ge WWW/T HS A BL bil ol [eel ees 
Gre gdly ailedi cuoy conbs VVIC cogle col Le 5 pt 

The Chapters. Of Purification ... 

458. It was narrated that Rubai’ 
said: “Ibn ‘Abbds came to me and 
asked me about this Hadith” 
meaning the Hadith, that she had 
narrated, saying that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 performed 
ablution and washed his feet. “fbn 
‘Abbas said: ‘The people are 
insisting on washing their feet, 
but I do not find anything in the 
Qur’an except (the injunction to) 
wipe them.’” (Da‘if) 

337 Uri 9 Sy lgtati eit gal 

~ desi a $e tks yt EN gol 
a 5425 ol — 2583 oil us = 38h 

oth seni er) ae Bb be ot JVs cere sll cums [etn aoliel] ¢ ee oss 
#(YEr Ge Lal) pail M cacy rd lS oppor! U8 ll ero dey Condy VO /1s 3S 

Comments: 

Tate eae RRP hte on! 

Ibn ‘Abbas @& said it on the basis of an irregular reading of the Noble 
Qur’iin. The fact of the matter is that the regular reading of the Qur’an only 
mentions ‘washing’, not wiping the feet. 

Chapter 57. Ablution In 
Accordance With The 
Commands Of Allah The 
Most High 

459. It was narrated that Jami’ 
bin Shaddad — Abu Sakhrah — 
said: “I heard Humran telling 
Abu Burdah in the mosque that 
he had heard ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan 
narrating that the Prophet # had 
said: ‘Whoever performs ablution 
perfectly as Allah has enjoined, 
then his prescribed prayer will 
serve as expiation for what is 
between them.’""] (Sahih) 

cB FE Ue OG — (0V prenall) 
green! Hebi oes 4A gf 
UE HN al le 5 p85 
(OV dau!) 
ins ie oS A Ue Ge = 404 
oo ek ies Gas ee 
Riyoes ies ree JU S38 aa ghd 
Ste aoe ST gen 3 BE OF SAS 
“Vk ales “ - 2.48 Par 
cao dG ME ZO oe SAS Oe oh 
SNe Bt spel GS e455 ht wl 
ES a EW Su gk 

Fs 
i 

oles gal ge WV ig cade Bally epesll ad Gb yiybll le ar ze 

[ Meaning the minor sins committed. 

4 Opes 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Comments: 

338 (girieg Syigiatt loi 

Ahéadith of this nature must not delude one into thinking that any amount of 
sins a worshipper commits, no harm shall come to him after that, since 
failure to observe the proper etiquettes of the prayer and lack of 
submissiveness and humility on his part would drastically lessen the 

chances of his sins being forgiven. 

460. ‘Ali bin Yahya bin Khallad 
narrated, from his father, from his 
paternal uncle Rifa’ah bin Rafi’ 
that he was sitting with the 
Prophet #€ who said: ‘No 
person’s prayer is complete until 
he performs ablution properly as 
Allah has commanded him, 
washing his face, his arms up to 
the elbows, wiping his head and 
his feet up to the ankles.’” (Sahih) 

cor el Dee vem ra <P re 3 
oe 80 Mie oy He Be ee ea 
3g ih de So ebb lo} a 

yogi Gol Be eV Be Vp 
A 8s te fo «Je BN ol Us 
A tess el Et pal 

eS) 

EIN SB the pe Y ge he Ob dal! caste gf are! [eee aati] og os 
oly 6pSledl drereay 6 lem Lato cys AOA: & 65 grly 

Comments: 

a. Deficiency in the performance of ablution has its consequence on the prayer, 
which does not warrant its complete reward. 
b. The complete formula of ablution is the same as discussed at some length in 

the preceding Ahadith. 

Chapter 58. Sprinkling Water 
After Ablution 

461. It was narrated from Hakam 
bin Sufyaén Ath-Thaqafi that he 
saw the Messenger of Allah 2 
perform ablution then take a 
handful of water and sprinkle it 
over his private area to remove 
any doubts about urine drippings. 
(Hasan) 

geal 3 GLE SY ~ (0A gaa) 
“(0A dial) ogee Bt OG 

Ghia abl at ee ah ae 

aprais Cade ga VWI chad $k ca ylgbll casle gl eel Le] eps 

The Chapters Of Purification... 339 igriong Sy lgted! tay 

+ calls ied Amr 9 64 
Comments: : 
a. The action (sprinkling water over the private parts) is not a part of ablution. 
It is, however, a part of the Prophet’s Sunnah. 
b. The rationale behind the action, as stated by the scholars of religion, is that 
the doing of it deters any apprehension in the mind of the person that some 
urine droppings might have trickled into his clothes. 

Gee Bo FH 

462. Usémah bin Zaid narrated + 2g 7a deme on ell Gis — sy 
that his father Zaid bin Harithah fee, oe de 

said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% cdo a Ge sl oe ee oes Ble 
said: ‘Jibril taught me (how to JB 3536 32 SAM of “6 « bee ie 
perform) the ablution, and he “4 
ordered me to sprinkle water a cca 
underneath my garment, lest a 134 she 8B isi Ras aon 
drop of urine leak out after the JBL - 

ot 30 ae 

Bee we Ales wie 

a 

ablution.’” (Da‘if) La PY eed 5 fail of 8 als © F gmir'ghl 
Other chains with similar Me geht Ss Sg ie Pa 
wording. 

rae ach. ell Pim 
Gag 3 dl Me Bhs 05 ¢] pst 
3565 358 del 3 as : eet 
Gree sl Sy cH bang gel Cate ge VV [Ei domt an tl [ede ootieal] tee oes 
Ys Ta c pails Clegg) oul cae) card all (der 
Comments: 
It is a Weak Hadith. It is, however, proved from other Ahddith as well that 
the Angel Jibril #24 had taught the Prophet # the correct method of 
performing ablution. 

463. It was narrated that Abu. dycech) Gis 3 toca Gis - e4y 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of ea Baws © Met, upg” gate eee nae 
Allah # said: ‘When you perform EH & Loe Gide Ta op plo Gas 
ablution, sprinkle water.’” (Da‘if) ae i 

cep gil dey ewe, she be oh caslghit cpcde Sl ae ol [tee ookuil] es bead 
reren (oJ) Viesee Caney eee faoeye to tus) JB 642 dag Oo pie Sapo Poe Laat a 

A Egdosd | Kr0 lg se Cn Cee 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

464, It was narrated that Jabir 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 
performed ablution and sprinkled 
his private part.” (Hasan) 

Stes hated s ed Gest Cans olul [ind 

Chapter 59. Drying Oneself 
With A Cloth After Ablution 
Or The Bath 

465. Umm Hani’ bint Abu Talib 
narrated that when it was the 
year of the Conquest (of Makkah), 
the Messenger of Allah #§ got up 
to perform a bath and F&atimah 
screened him. Then he took his 
garment and wrapped himself in 
it (Such that it became like the 
towel used to dry oneself), (Sahih) 

$0 nF 9 YArie ¢ ptt ds Aves oe pew vk 6 peel 6 Sabedl a: 

340 Wgireg Sy lgtels los 

Gis sis ak ie - te 
os! cel oF Ges as ike OG pele 
fa o- “oe te Neste i a 
Lay ae A i Zé F et 

So gl JB, Cope] Fc Saeed 

one y VIA CVV NV? cog col ne daly 

des utiel ot — (04 sate 
(04 dames!) ates 455 2 gail 

BS i S525 6b coded ple OW US Si 
tf g? Ler. 7 . s - 
dol «dab 4 as 

ee 

+43 858 wll Sado oye PPV: aaa) we oy petrol pei ole 6 eal Cohesy 

Commenis: 

Even while there is a small cloth on the body, it is preferable to have further 
screen or cloth on the body in the bathroom during the bath. Nevertheless, 
it is quite in order to have a bath without any cloth on the body in the 

bathroom. 
466. lt was narrated that Qais bin 
Sa‘d said: “The Prophet #€ came 
to us and we gave him water to 
perform a bath.’’ Then we 
brought him a Warsiyyah™ cloth, 
and he wrapped himself in it. It is 
as if I can see the marks of the 

[QSo Gis syns bye Ble - tun 

ig 4a, 

BB of west 2 IS OT bn Ge 

gf ee Le 85155 gf HR gf gat 5i 
ld 4ckb ue J os we 

"Dyed with Wars: memecyclon tinctorium, a plant from Yemen used as a liniment and 

yellow dye. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 341 (ging Bylgbs) wig 

Wars on the folds of his stomach.” Rae Gigi ot Guede! AM 
(Da‘if) os] Sl gs ke (pen fw Ube 

SE J Gh SI 
Spgree hee pt cp bores Hu 8a oe VAs tor | Puta orlwul] ees 
el Abed NOE EVE Te « pails Co, 8) 

467. Ibn ‘Abbas narrated thathis 6425 +425 o! GS il Bas - tw 
maternal aunt Maimunah said: “I ft, 255 Mic VE okt of 
brought a piece of cloth (for eg Peco: 
drying) to the Messenger of Allah 3 & «sasdi I re lla bs ee} I 
# when he performed a bath to Le ayes oe ei yb de pe, ihe _ ood 
: Sz : Sh is: 

Cleanse luineelt fom sexual. 2S ee Oe 

Dock 

impurity. He refused it and began go «os SE al J25 CST SG 

to shake off water.” (Sahih) Pde vas rade Latest bie (ekg et 
ams (prs 62° GSS! ‘eel ae! 

FSI 
copby YOU chbodl 3 GL Lanta ob cfedl cg sted toe i eed 
Yj “& ome Cade oy YYV OTA ee Abad (pee do wh gael Colney 

€ 

Comments: eee 
The Prophet ¢ returned the cloth, which was not needed by him, (i) to 
exclude the impression that using something like it was obligatory, as also 
(ii) to spare the believers any embarrassment in the event of the 
nonavailability of any such cloth. 

468. It was narrated from Salman Leth cadgli 25 Zoteh Gos - ena 
Al-Farisi that the Messenger of 
Allah #¢ performed ablution, then 

he turned inside out the woolen 23 3.53) Gis :bis Yo ag Gis 
garment that he was wearing and ein a “RS i Se I” ey 
wiped his face with it. (Da‘if) Olela UF cteale oy Byime GF colhe 

fa 

2 £6. aie ok 4 - <t 
Cle ley BE al dyes ol ysl 

SMe 2s Glos Ce VG aS 
a 

wes 

He5 ey GA ale SIE Oyo 
CBS Slabs oe Bylo Claw Jat 8 Go Gare gd exme Lhe eoltedl] ty oe 

- tain i} ons 

Chapter 60. What Is To Be Bas St OG C+ penned 
Said After Ablution (1+ disc) ¢ el 

469. It was narrated from Anas: oe iia fs goes gas - ¢44 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

bin Malik that the Prophet # 
said: “Whoever performs ablution 
and does it well, then says three 
times: ‘Ashhadu an 14 ildha illallah 
wahdahu la@ sharika lahu, wa 
ashhadu anna Muhammadan 
‘abduhu wa rasuluhu (I bear 
witness that none has the right to 
be worshipped but Allah alone, 
with no partner, and [ bear 
witness that Muhammad is His 
slave and His Messenger), eight 
gates of Paradise will be opened 
for him; whichever one he wants 
he may enter.” (Da‘if) 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

« billy Chaya phy cl Wj 4d oll (ied 

Comments: 

342 gira g So lgtall wil oul 

anes ie ot ahs Ede ¢ ror) fecal 

‘xe wis lg gah: sce 
gl Gas 1 oe Re ee Gas5 °C 
7 Ae, 

Gis bd EY coh Jf de 
ot so F 

ph pie fh Gs po lh 

“Sone gl dy Pte oslinel] : eed 

Vote 

Zaid Al-’-Ammi’s name among the narrators makes this chain of 
transmission weak. But reciting the blessed words once is proved from 

authentic Ahadith. 

470. It was narrated that ‘Umar 
bin Khattab said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #§ said: ‘There is no 
Muslim who performs ablution 
and does it well, then says: 
Ashhadu an 1d iléha illallah, wa 
ashhadu anna Muhammadan 
‘abduhu wa rasuluhu (1 bear 
witness that none has the right to 
be worshipped but Allah, and I 
bear witness that Muhammad is 
His slave and Messenger),’ 
{except that) eight gates of 
Paradise will be opened for him, 
and he will enter through 
whichever one he wants.’ (Sahih) 

io IU g ne 33 ide Gs - tv. 

Fi ght Ge tr 8G al 45 JE 
$4 

My B59 tts et Sf agkh, cn yy 

& 

The Chapters Of Purification... 343 (greg Sylgll) ili 

Gaye of Whe 68 gad oll whe Qrewall eu) wh cd Gb plus aor ol rs Saeed 
4 Ale Calo - el 
Comments: = 
It goes without saying that only one door is enough for entry, but to make 
it more is meant to make the incomer feel more honored and happy. And 
Allah knows best. 

Chapter 61. Ablution Using pads ope OG — C11 prnall) 

Riese (AY decd!) 

471. It was narrated that ic -&3 Jt: & J) Gis - evy 
‘Abdullah bin Zaid, the Oe as sae 

said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 ie eae eer aT ee Pee 
came to us, and we brought water ‘ 

Companion of the Prophet #%, ot pe) ae OF cM) Be bp tes 

out to him in a vessel of brass, el wele «Lh op dl we be vey 
and he performed ablution with 9% ¢.le® ge 4 er ae ee 
Can : 3 G3 Be al Gul i 
it” (Sahih) i a a 
i ae ts 6 ee lene 
4 Lap ce it oF go tb 

j 

gl vee (ede) PP ge silly bs oh cepa 6Gobbedl 4 Tc Saad 
AYN cepa Sl dite 3b el ob 63 ylgbli cpluny eVAVie 

472. it was narrated from Zainab 7S 33 ee Jes Gas - evy 
bint Jahsh that she had a tub of : : 
brass. She said: “I used to comb 
the hair of the Messenger of Allah 3 4052 gi pall G4 he op al ate 
#€ in it.” (Hasan) ° f 

bé Gis Bs Gi yall Le Ble 

rf 

A) GF ttl GF soteer op al de 

° ° Pana ae 
72 8 BAe, oe Tye Fe 2°- 4? 
te bye Cutts iO 41 pat Cy 
‘ 

ad 6 Al 25 ob Mol eS - cle 

S35 

Sames3! Sy 6 dthine ge oT Gob ge We itel oi [er] tess 
a fn) Fr Sle ys (Tee showed Vien 

473. It was narrated from Abu 2485 «td ol tb oS fi Gis - eve 

Hurairah that the Prophet 2 beh eureka, PegN eee 
. : ig 445 2 Ee : Jotea 

performed ablution using (the  ‘“7¥~ oF ‘8 eee ol 

water in) a vessel made of brass. 55 633 ol $2 ye of wall dF 

(Hasan) ciwteite Caan ORGS Sena. aie 

5 Ell ol 8 Bi! OF Spor of ah 

The Chapters Of Purification... 344 igri Sstgbs! wailgul 

TOAte 6 phe [ipo] Saeed 

Chapter 62. Ablution After Ap! 2g Ml SG OY gral!) 
sleep ‘ (VY dal) 

474. It was narrated that ‘Aishah yz, ,2i ft: & 2f GK - eve 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 as 7 as ee Bs Sci Pras 

would fall asleep until he was  %+> ae Gus TYR chases — 
breathing deeply, then he would 
get up and offer the prayer, and . ia nee 
he did not perform ablution.” <> iy ahi 55 5 o8 SIG ate 
(Hasan) ae bak ch, 
Tandfisi said: “Waki’ said: ‘She BENG og Got 
meant while he was prostrating 335 - : aS S56 :s sth 38 

vet 

(he would sleep). ° ; spe! 

WAIC cpdai gate Ghee ca aSy ge Weftitel os! [pel teed 

webel Sd ge ad GUS V Ling 6525 dal yt atinds 

Comments: 

a. It was a characteristic of the Prophet #§ since all his senses remained intact 
even during sleep. He himself says: “My eyes sleep but my heart does not 
sleep.” Bukhari: 770. 

b. Among the various explanations in the matter is the one hinted at by Waki’ 
& who said that the said happening took place during a prayer. Based on 
this explanation, some of the scholars have formulated the opinion that sleep 
during; the various actions connected with a prayer such as Ruku’ (bowing 
down), Qiydém (standing position) or Sujud (prostrations) does not invalidate 
the prayer. On close analysis, however, even this view is not much different 
from the previous one, since no manner of sleep during prayer is like 
sleeping in the stretched (lying down) position which alone, of all man’s 
physical positions, invalidates the ablution. And Allah knows best. 

475. It was narrated from = *3!35 o yle gd 

‘Abdullah that the Messenger of »- <-..7 aot te ree tae 
: 3G) \ u ibe 

Allah #¢ slept until he was & ‘"7? @ ot 2? eee ig 

breathing deeply, then he got up caaalal G2 cyt of Mead Le ‘eee 
and prayed. (Hasan) ME bi 325 oi ail we fF « isda : EF 

cn ae 

dab (6 oF aS Ss 66 

cgpue atbyl o (che Hoa eo Cade oye EYV/V deed ae i [pum]: eps 
Bt) daly lagly cd sels GLI! Cosedly 

The Chapters Of Purification... 345 igrteng So lgdall cuales 

476. It was narrated that Ibn BG) ot ple 33 ae Gis — ¢yvy 

‘Abbas said: “He #@ would sleep Bee nas Seis Ve 

like that while he was sitting up.” ag! op HF UF SI el! gt 

Da’i aa, aoe ee ee mee 

(Da'f/) ees cs he of oes oF «jes 
ol gf fh of dee LE laid 

a tee ol op Cae 4d ote Mer cig esdl diy [tae ool] er Seeed 
hens 

477. It was narrated from ‘Alibin  : {uated ati {i Gls - ew 
Abu Talib that the Messenger of Ps bs -t wal 6 Be Bite 
Allah #% said: “The eye is the OF ‘SBF of ged! oF «ah Cae 
leather strap (that ties up) the 43 251 we 38 revesrs ge bys 

(1) 3 3 
Af sth of of le 32 S581 be 

anus,’ so whoever falls asleep, 
let him perform ablution.” (Da‘if) 
Spb aS 28 2gal SE a a 5,25 
lege at 

Vale tes foc © ane SI eo wh cay bil coglo ra dom ye} [ote eolint ] ep 

ied dala dy cgile gly dey5 yl SE LS foe de ge dle ol # 4 ka Cae gy 

Comments: 
Wika’ in Arabic is the string, thread or strap used to tie the mouth of a purse 
(or bag) full of gold coins etc. The obvious advantage is that, as long as the 
Wika’ is in place, nothing can be taken out of the purse. In other words, it is a 
guardian over the contents of the purse. Similarly, as long as a person is 
awake he knows whether his ablution is intact or has been invalidated by the 
wind passing from his body. The moment one’s eyes are closed for sleep he 
loses control over his body, as though a Knot had been loosened and as such, 
he cannot tell whether or not he has released the wind. It is because of this 
that sleep has been dubbed as the invalidator of ablution’. 

478. It was narrated that Safwan (Gis 253 at 28 Sk a Gas - £vA 
bin ‘Assal said: “The Messenger.) , 0 0. 4. tals ae Put, 
of Allah 8@ used to command us O* ‘29 oF cee OF (EF fy Ole 

(1 What is meant is that when a person is asleep, it is as if the (muscle) straps tying his 
anus are loosened, because he may easily break wind in his sleep, thus invalidating 
his ablution without realizing it, so he should perform ablution when he wakes up. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 346 Lgriwg Sokgbd! laul 

not to take off our leather socks es 
for three days except in the case reves ; 

of sexual impurity, but not in the fe YI celtl #YE tes. a y sf et 
case of defecation, urine or sleep Toe i mo, 
fie. during travel].” (Hasan) 099 9 Jes BE : oF isi cole 

lool) gaidll che gemell Gb bylebll ecgde sit aes Depo coll] 2 Quy Sei 

* 6de Si JB 5 eas geele Peeere Co op Lat yah 9 VYVGAYA: of al c Slaaill s 60 Sy Wie bated s 
Mme - » 

Comments: cue 

a. Washing the feet is an integral part of ablution. But if a person is wearing 
(leather) socks, he is allowed to do Mash (passing wet hands) on them, 
provided that he had performed ablution and washed his feet before 
putting on the socks. (Sahih Muslim: 520) 

b. It may be pointed out that the three-day validity of wiping the socks is for a 
person on journey. A resident is, however, allowed to do it just for a day 
and night. 

Jlte os jljae 

Chapter 63. Ablution After Ct bye eel OU - CY panel!) 
Touching The Penis (AY tied!) - ay 

Sg 

Sisk Gas — eva 

or > 3 as fo 

479, It was narrated that Busrah «eg Ml ee Oy tame 

bint Safwan said: “The Messengers 413, ¢3 ,- 5 23 dil ie recive 

of Allah #§ said: ‘If anyone of you 7" a A Ge Sat 

touches his penis, let him perform  o* 
dis| 

ey on 1958 38 sel fe i552 
ablution.’” (Hasan) : 

c 
Hee ais E565 Si4ee Ss Egon) 
AS gli 0355 Sst 3a Bp ae 
i AVE 6 SU ae ge ene sll Ob caleba code Jl ar el [ome oolinl] tee oa 
A) sik: MANie 6agle al oH erly CO rere Cpmord :JBs ca plies aren es 
{> gosadl 

Comunents: ae 

a. It shows that touching the urine outlets nullifies the ablution. 

b. Some of the scholars have raised their doubt on the Hadith saying that, for 
one thing it is a regular occurance and, secondly it is a male-specific 
problem but the narrator is a lone woman. The objection is, however, not 
tenable, since Imam Tirmidhi #8, after narrating the Hadith, has commented 
that the Hadith has been transmitted by eight other Companions as well — 
five of them men and three women. Some of those Ahddith transmitted by 
the Companions, alluded to by Imam Tirmidhi <, are to follow next in this 
chapter. Moreover, the ruling in question does not concern the men alone. 
Even women, if they touch their particular parts, are liable to refresh their 
ablution. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 347 igruwg Srkgtall igi 

480. It was narrated that Jabirbin’ og eh ety te * aie (4 E 

+ elo! oda ¢ pl Game — As 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger - oe Pern ee ene es 
of Allah #¢ said: ‘If anyone of you be Wues °c Siete Gp Gee Bas 

touches his penis, then he has to di ite Gis caghstn ai ane! 

perform ablution.’” (Hasan) . 
BE 8b gl ofl oF cleet 86 Gi 
oe : ere ey 2 phy rae aks 
BE gp deme GF cger dl de 
Bl Le gh ple 32 OOF gb ed 
eSisl S.2 Bp 28 dl J425 JE dG 

o 

poh hed 555 

4b eld GL) tudes COL> ol ab ai ob (Cu 8) gprs dae # Lp] Tc Saad 

¢ 
AG. 

481. It was narrated that Umm Gis: fy Jk fh Bs - tay 
Habibah said: “I heard the fe ne ee oO ee wae 
Messenger of Allah 2% say:  é¢ Ml te Gie5 te type Cp (dell 
Whoever touches his sexual jz agtcty 368 2 as “dco 
organ then let him perform = 

* ” $0 Ffon 7? na; TT 63 te. Free 
ablution.” (Hasan) cp etl Gos SYR chek Op Oly 

a ee 
Hl ge Ott Oh gg ke Ye A 
Osi HB a J 65 Eigse 215 Bs 

ageb 23 Bs ja 

Cadodls 66 meg SE ca phagll Cade ge W/V: deel a +1 [pe] eed 

482. It was narrated that Abu ““é Gis ‘eS jg Ola Gas - tay 
Ayyub said: “I heard the < 7 
Messenger of Allah #¢ say: 
‘Whoever touches his sexual es 
organ, let him perform ablution.’” wee 
(Hasan) sabe 

SE al V) 4s pads Cyd oye PAYA Tc VES /E gh dll FN [gmc] tee eel 
Bg cl el lee Me 3 6 pah 9 SUS Cal gi ce pelts LS Geel Si abedy Qolne oy eo Jue 
EVA) Gold Cobol! Lge dal yo Codecs cle yas Ladd sed VE02e «bil 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Chapter 64. Concession 
Concerning That 

483. Qais bin Talq Al-Hanafi 
narrated that his father said: “J 
heard the Messenger of Alléh 2% 
being asked about touching the 
penis. He said: ‘That does not 
require ablution, because it is a 
part of you (your body).’” (Sahih) 

348 Igrieg Splgtall loi 

US gb Lak NOG - CE pneatl) 
(VE AaeaSl) 

285 Gis : yok Uf ie Gis - tar 

ea aie ¢ 06 gle Met Oe 

Jxi5 Eee J sf 38 gel sib 

Cee SE SI Yo BE ta a 

ple Cp teres Cade Cp VAN ic cogle ply YY [Erdal ae ol Lewel rca 
VAY: Ta eagle gl Le ple oy alie aa! al ch 6% 244 oan aces Lard phy ody 

Comments: 

+O nh 9 

a. “It is a part of you’ means that just as touching any other part of your body 
does not invalidate the ablution, touching this organ also does not 

invalidate it. 

b. The Hadith narrated by Talq #% is undoubtedly a sound one, but the ruling 
was subsequently abrogated. Some of the scholars have justified both the 
Ahéadith by saying that the one that rules out the invalidation of ablution 
speaks of touching the part if it is covered by a cloth, while the other speaks 
of invalidation if it is touched while uncovered. 

484. It was narrated that Abu 
Umdamah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ was asked about 
touching the penis and he said: 
‘Rather it is a part of you (your 
body).’” (Daf) 

Chapter 65. Ablution After 
(Eating) That Which Has 
Been Changed By Fire (i.e. 
Cooked Upon Fire) 

485. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Prophet #§ said: 
“Perform ablution after (eating) 
that which has been changed by 

des of OL YF sue Bhs - £AE 

Bony Gls sZt she gf 3s 

Ce RE aI jg fee 
Ma t32 tp airs ei fo 

ce pie 4b abel Mar rec og dl SE ies what orto]: eed 

«Ms gongs hs Alo 53 ge 

Les 05)! SE - (10 ean 

(10 daoest) Aa wee 

a 

GaN 2: Ass Gls - treo 

The Chapters Of Purification... 349 (gig Sylgtal! ile) 

fire.” Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Should I ri et LE ee ats as, S 
do ablution after (touching) hot les Ker idl 8 ial ol aya wl 
water?” Abu Hurairah said: “O iy (33 : ws a nS SN yet 
son of my brother, when I narrate 7 |e ge ge ee ic 
a Hadith of the Messenger of “2 3 Nel tl © sa) Sl Feel 
Allah #8 to you, then do not 58 36 chat ae al J 

abo MS « z er 
to make any examples for it.” oe eee =< 
(Hasan) SKY! 

eels 64: Ola Sut oy VAre 6 Gaba SI ae 3] cVVre cede [i>] es 

M1 pd) dm BY JU Gh abba ode 8 cube gl ge aeee oleb PU/V tel 

Lag Baal Sp’ od pod aS fst BE dl Jey Coit gs cole gs bee Sui Lo sige 

vygdas JSly dae one IG Lay 

Comments: 

a. “That has been changed by fire’ means anything that has been prepared by 
cooking or frying on fire. 

b. Ahédith included in the next chapter would clarify that the command is not 
mandatory, which is to say that performing ablution after eating recipes 
cooked on fire is recommendatory, not mandatory. 

486, It was narrated that ‘Aishah 31 Gis shy 3 ys Gis - tan 

said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ , 

said: ‘Perform ablution after oe 

(eating) that which has been 

changed by fire.’”” (Sahih) 

a ee ° ? 1b Ae oe 
oy 52 oe ee cui rat) 

:E3G assle ita 63556 je owls 
oe 48 Soe wikis + 5 - 
GON 285 the bso :ae at 3,25 

Soe Se 

of i yb oe Yo¥ie cSt ce Lae & ne g/l wk cd ylgbll «line fon ol cepa 

Sa 

487. It was narrated that Anas err 
bin Malik would place his hands © 
over his ears and say: “May my = al 32 cel ol op ag 3 WE Ce 
ears be made deaf, if I did not Doe aide, Gh aN tad 
hear the Messenger of Allah sh elt eae Ol 7 
“saying: ‘Perform ablution after 2, sa a Viemee Sas ae 
(eating) that which has been aoe) ‘cee ee ee ae 
changed by fire.’” (Da‘if) cas Les Wyler cys RE ail dye) 
Gs 

aeeersiy agl ye ayy led oom inl ads ap cy Ue & he Chad colin] Fc Saed 

{ The second part appeared under no. 22. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 350 (grt g Sylgbal igi 

ceded Migs gl ty ode Sot oe sl UB, cates le 

Chapter 66. Concession jus oe is NI eb- pre!) 
Concerning That - CVI tee!) 

488. It was narrated that Ibn (Gis :it3 eat eS ff Gas - tan 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of Naas ye 
Allah #@ ate a shoulder,"! yao OF HS Slaw b6 ‘eg Yh rl 
he wiped his hands on a Mish!” "Bel a ime | Fa Se BE a 

that was undemeath him, then he a Fa & y ors ba Fas 
got up for prayer, and performed = @8 pi cee5 OU Gh By aoe BS Les 

the prayer. (Da‘if) soles SNEI I 

CUS come Lee eg gl SS 8 GL cd ylgbll copie pf art Lae ooluef] es 
. abe) White t pels ca yee Vl es! Eade op NAVI 
Comments: 
This clearly shows that the command contained in the previous chapter is 
recommendatory, not mandatory. Or else, as stated by Imam ShéAfi’i, the 
order to perform ablution was subsequently abrogated. Shaikh Ahmed 
Shakir also holds this theory of abrogation as preferable and weighty. 
Another possible explanation is that the Ahadith of the previous chapter 
simply mean washing the hands and mouth, not performing the formal 
ablution which is not mandatory. 
489. It was narrated that Jabir bin atl > tal 23 dist Gis - 644 
‘Abdullah said: “The Prophet 2%, b St Pics aad eed h aun: gets 
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar ate some (yl! cp fee be Tete Gi] oles 
bread and meat, and they did nei 

° ors ° a ore i“ ° ore 
sp dems cp atl 65 che of ant 
perform ablution (after that). i . pe ee 

(Sahih) El JS SU al we oh le Be «fas 
ee 

2% Le 

950054 

BBS dal gd Sy Water 2 Olan ye FAV VT tool oo] [eel To Reael 
490. Zuhri said: “I had dinner <i) 23.2% Jts Gis - ¢¢. 
oll Gt gael te Ge - £4 
with Walid or ‘Abdul-Malik. a i re ee 
When the time for prayer came,]  S4* iplee Cy Jp Bue: Latah 
got up to perform ablution. Ja‘far 2°35. 4G SA} as : Bela! 

[ Meat from the shoulder of a lamb or goat, see no 491. 
1A thin cloth made from animal skin.’ (Explanation by Sindi). 

The Chapters Of Purification... 351 (gris Syigbas) lou 

bin ‘Amr bin Umayyah said: ‘I aT ae aoe Braaere ae 
bear witness that my father bore 9 72777 SB sushi we ST asst alte 
witness, that the Messenger of , pe iS es MNS MEW 235 SSN 
Allah #E ate food that had been ey - 4 ste eo 12) or, Pe er 
changed by fire, then he w* 44 4) col Ge aged real git 
performed prayer and he didnot 3 i, Lub sf SY a a Jy 
perform ablution.’ (Sahih) Pane & BB dios 

$6 jos-e¢e VL. at aye 
And ’Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin LS 5 he BK 
‘Abbas said: ‘And I bear witness thy swe fal ote th ade OG 
to similar from my father.’ ” Soghh ot BAF on oe 3 

VASE eGepadly BLS pod ga Lage ob ge Ch capes sublet tay se 
4% GAS gdm ye TOOT ee cobST ce Lee eget gl cos wh 6 al ples 60 ak 9 
Comments: 

‘I bear witness’ means: ‘I say it with full assurance and certainty’. The 
purpose is to strenghten the statement made by him. 

491. It was narrated that Umm = (Gis ital by dake is - £44 
Salamah said: “Some meat from gh TON gt Soe ce aie eg 
the shoulder of a sheep was Care ot par SF c felerdl oy le 
brought to the Messenger of All4h 5.33 32 ( -tcdh ot 4le 22 

dO beer! on GE GF tte 
# and he ate some of it, then he f cewe ee gk vi f 
performed prayer without &@ 
touching water (for ablution).”’ 2, 16 sts cS we a Je 
(Sahih) ar aaa g RE Bl dns 

Low epee So ob cdl VA CVV /Vs sll ao th [eee colin] oy oe 
4p phar Cade oe VAT IG etl pe 

492. Suwaid bin Nu‘mdn Ansari 
narrated that they went out with 
the Messenger of Allah 8 to 32 «dno oh OU 36 cyte If he 
Khaibar. When they reached As- F a ¥ 

<~ 

earl 3s Fors EAE | pte 8 ote 
Sahba’ (a place near Khaibar), he 94") G 434 SUI kt gf oe 
performed ‘Asr (Afternoon gi ai Jy25 x2 125% 2ST Zyl 
prayer), then he called for food, soe - Are poe 
but no food was brought except 1? cleal 1yG lb] ce oe ll 
for Sawig."! So they ate that and Yi ee +h cabb us «3 act 

Hl A kind of mush made of wheat or barley. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 352 (gr g Sylgtas! ies 

drank, and then he called for (ieeort gq Fae tA oe 
water and rinsed his mouth, then (‘22 *? (SRY Coad REY 

he stood up and led us for ean Ge Lai 26 2 2b “ac kd 
Maghrib (Sunset) prayer.” (Sahih) ic : oe 

So legs rs Gap CP penee Cp wh 68 gud Sl egy bedl Peagea| res Saeed 
A cages Calor ye 0 nh 9 
Comments: 

Sawiq is a kind of mush made of roasted barley. This also. shows that 
performing ablution after eating items prepared on fire is not mandatory. 

493. It was narrated from Abu ol Breed Bee hist Gis - cay 

a aS 
Hurairah that the Messenger of = _ ean ae a 
All4h #% ate meat from the ‘gli oy aol he Gis hl 
shoulder of a sheep, then he jf i343 Jf ts cayl 38 eee as 
rinsed his mouth and washed his 8 oa ne tne 
hands, then he prayed. (Sahih) vyaeaed sla cas Jf! _ a iy 

CV) ace ob phy ce hegee Gale Gye PAN /Viteod ae ol ee oolinl] re 
-sbeesdl oy pidlne Ely 

Chapter 67. Concerning a tle bb SE - Cv erell) 
Performing Ablution After i ate 4s 
Eating Camel Meat sek LY! Rags of tes 

494. It was narrated that Bara’ Gus :424 2 
bin ‘Azib said: “The Messenger of = x,.- 
Allah #6 was asked about * 

performing ablution after eating = cas! We cp dil we 2 

: oF 
camel meat. He said: ‘Perform ee ee ee ee 
ablution after eating it.’” (Sahih) oe eld oF Sos?’ os! Yt eaeaie Bee 
eye5hl oF BE adil J 5 Je SE ie 

tgs doi Si ELM! ¢ 3h 
cNAk: Ta «bY! pe ce epg GL caylgbl cogh ph ae iel Looe] : FS aged 
AN: 7 Ge gl APEPrAO 9 

PGoeR Eee 

495. It was narrated that Jabir bin tg. As 2 (hy 3 ; dome GIS - £40 
Samurah said: “The Messenger of 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Allah # commanded us to 
perform ablution after eating 
camel meat but not to perform 
ablution after eating the mutton.” 
(Sahih) 

353 Lgirietsg Ba lgtati waloui 

Wage oye Atet (BH LB ee FO te 
eSSMls 54) Bae 2 Gus GF eS 

on gent $8 tn of og Saal te 

ra ee OF 

YS bY! Ad be Logs OF gw an 5,25 
a . 

Taal eo ie BS 

par Sodom oe YUE LY ped oe opel ob coaedt cele eel ge sd 

Comunents: 494 & 495 

4 

The previous chapter was about not performing ablution after eating meat. 
But all the descrptions there pertained to eating mutton. In this chapter, 
however, all the narrations are about performing ablution after eating camel 
meat. The second Hadith even brings out the different rulings for mutton 

and camel meat. 

496. It was narrated that Usaid 
bin Hudair said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #@ said: ‘Do not perform 
ablution after (drinking) sheep’s 
milk, but perform ablution after 
(drinking) camel’s milk.’ (Da‘if) 

eal «<Ss54l Gly ff is - cas 
25 3tée Gas ret gf il we Bi 
AE gh Bl ae GF ccs be cplgail 

“ < wile ee 3 ss 

ce Whos Yo RE al Jt) 
as ae eo 

ALY Gl be logis 

Ble) gy cle Vie) Gans olinf Med toes dl dy [aed oslul] Fe heae 

497. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “I 
heard the Messenger of Allah 2 
say: ‘Perform ablution after 
(eating) camel meat, but do not 
perform ablution after (eating) 
mutton. Perform ablution after 
(drinking) camel's milk, but do 
not perform ablution after 
(drinking) sheep’s milk. Perform 

«he ne wale JS Lage Y crowenty) 

tee nee od YY Fars Gis — £4y 

gi lhe Se Nah EA of 02 ol 
Bs: ho ease ene Se | 
“ag as tas = “or Re) Pe 
Us ope Gi Ml Le ceed dy 

: 2c 42 ge 8, Ge te 
Oe Whos cst RE al S325 Cage 

The Chapters Of Purification... 354 lgiteng Sylgtal! will 

prayer in the sheep pens but not Be og 
do so in the camels’ Ma‘étin.’’™ «a (5: uF \,lozs VS: JY esd 

(Da’if) ty Ilo 35 “hl gid be Wylegs 
Ng pil cl a nie pial gil 
ALY! yb 3 I glial 

aienty cLaially oly thy le say dd 480 Se regdl SW y Ltd ooliel] 2 ee oes 
MSL S ggree ULE 

Chapter 68. Rinsing The tee See ok eat) 
Mouth After Drinking Milk eee aS Ne 
(AA deed) Cn Wht 

498. It was narrated from Ibn - ey s2 hay tee et 
Wl os cam } we Gite - £4A 

‘Abbas that the Prophet #¢ said: oe ca 2 oy 
“Rinse your mouths after Gis: 2) ayy) Gis ssabcliy 
drinking milk for there is some gh sat wed) 8 eg cept ty 
greasiness in it.” (Sahih) ce Bl gee GP Ae a oF ocsetie¥l 
GENT ote gil ge EE og al ae 
3 55 od ye typed 750 
te 

3 oe er drsie dil dbs coll Get Ch A AY gubdl el teres 

«kt an Loe ud sll eo wh 6 acell 6 pene s sels Cade cys OTA choos 

« eal) (as pas as pl dude cy POA: 

Comments: aiid C 
Islam lays great emphasis on cleanliness. Hence it is, that rinsing the mouth 
and using the tooth stick have been made part of ablution. Traces of 
greasiness left by our eating and drinking are injurious for health. One 
must, therefore, be extremely particular about cleansing his mouth after 
drinking milk or eating greasy food. 

499. It was narrated that Umm (Sie - iti ii gf? im gh Gas - 244 
Salamah, the wife of the Prophet % 2 

#8, said: “The Messenger of Allah Logit 3 wee bb he Y ue 
#@ said: ‘If you drink milk, then ie a5 of dl we Bae ff is 
rinse your mouths, for there is S 
some greasiness in it.’” (Hasan) ENG a Bi) cs petite ag cal 

{ The kneeling place of camels near water. (Explanation by Sindi) 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

355 (gti Sy lgtal! Gigi 

foe AE ae 4, ae 
aad ab 3 apwe oe) 

Sade ge VFI PVE VY 2 SOS SL all a el Cum sole] tee os 
cod Bo Bad ney COV /V Carell (3 gay ca ded ol oy! 

500. ‘Abdul-Muhaimin bin 
“Abbas bin Sahl bin Sa’d As-Sa‘idi 
narrated from his father, from his 
grandfather, that the Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: “Rinse your 
mouths after drinking milk, for it 
has some greasiness in it.” 
(Hasan) 

cman og Cade ge OVINE YO/T SH od Las an el [yee] : Fees 
Motos] Soo 1g ybedl ad SE pogellie crea abel er ig eg)! Sy cu ones 

501. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #§ milked a sheep and 
drank some of its milk, then he 
called for water and rinsed his 
mouth and said: ‘It has some 
greasiness in it.’” (Da‘if) 

sails cosgerdl sine Jy thay J 
Chapter 69. Ablution After 
Kissing 

502. ‘Urwah bin Az-Zubair 
narrated from ‘Aishah, that the 
Messenger of Allah #@ kissed one 
of his women (i.e., wives), then he 
went out to perform the prayer, 
and he did not perform ablution. I 
(Urwah bin Zubair) said: “ That 
was not anyone but you,’ and she 
smiled.” (Hasan) 

wal als GASI Getodly 

“alge 

xo tre 

fo a5 Gs suk 25 SEN ais 

wall Gf Gls Gis - 064 

esd SBy [iad cowl] ogee sed 

VV e 

WA Ge eg OG - 14 pawl 
(14 diel) 

iB UF So of SY 

46 

aA i aoa 

The Chapters Of Purification... 356 lgrieng Sy tga wilgui 

cgay WAI e CMB ge eee Ob jbl coylyl ool Lowe] tees 
cea bai 6 Cpe odlusl olzdl see wale as egy bell Aang 6& oe) Sade Ge Ae 
VE ANAL SI 
Comments: 
a. ‘Urwah «4% was the son of ‘Aishah’s sister. 
b. Kissing one’s wife does not nullify one’s ablution provided that no prostatic 
fluid is secreted. 

503. It was narrated from gis -i3 123 X gi Gis - ow 
Aishah: “The Messenger of Allah eo ace Dr ataa roe 
#§ would perform ablution, then ay* GF sel OF «jets Cy Aooue 
he would kiss, then he would sf ise ae cee geil ea £8 a 
perform prayer without F Pace at hare 3 
performing ablution again. And (lass [a w exe o8 BE adi J 525 
sometimes he did that with me.” : Pa an 7 eee 
(Da‘if) -og ahd Lays (Le33 YG 
DIS sles! el pa Glee Cas okie We te me gd! IU Lede coll] ges os 

Sp oe ane Har oly y By Cady 

Chapter 70. Ablution From be exe OG - We prea) 
Prostatic Fluid (Ve ime!) code 

504. It was narrated that ‘Ai Gas :23 ia ibe 4) Cie — 0-8 

F 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #8 as ghd of oe Ge $a? 
was asked about prostatic fluid ** Of $242 gl oF RR OF See 

and he said: ‘For that-ablution {is jee db de $2 ot eal op ges 

necessary), and for semen, bath is — igen. Supe at Phat 

necessary.” (Sahih) a3) idle cil Ge BE al J 505 

LEH saath 35 «bb 3iI 
ee VEE Shelly eat GB clk Ob cijlgbll cghe dl esl epee] ty sd 
ote Gell BLS ies ob ol op be Gee ee idly ce eke Ca 

PM Cabell Bly Geers delyt Cats CVTEVEV BIL) 

Comments: 

a. Prostatic fluid is a sticky fluid that appears on the male organ during sexual 
foreplay with one’s wife. Its appearance does not diminish sexual desire. 
Semen, on the other hand, is a thick whitish fluid produced in the male 
productive organs and discharged at the completion of the sexual act. 

b. Prostatic fluid does not necessitate the bath; mere ablution is enough. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 357 (Bites By lglali wl gi 

Ablution has the benefit of diverting a person’s attention and putting an 
end to sexual excitation. 

505. It was narrated from 323 Gis - ease te 
Migdad bin Aswad that he asked - eae ee Pepi tet 
the Prophet # about aman who & S6 «gel Gy AG Gas ye i 
approached his wife, but did not - sd At Pat £ 
ejaculate. He said: “If anyone of = * Pe e . red 

you finds that"! he should y@ # gi Jo 

sprinkle water over his private “ie NE 0448 UE kes fee ag 
; :JB fds Wal cy pe 

part (meaning he must wash it) BOS Tope oe 2 ve a 2 a 

and perform ablution.” (Sahih) ei - EG ma Ub Sac! Je; 

64 “Eble Sade oe POV egdodl 3 Ob cb lgbli cogld gil «=| [eee] eee 
-oyb9 pole ace Al Ge yb aly Ole cply Aan je Cpl amore 
Commenis: 
‘Approaching the wife’ means kissing and lovemaking but not intercourse, 
since intercourse necessitates a bath even though no ejaculation takes place. 
506. It was narrated that Sahl bin 
Hunaif said: “I used to suffer 
from a great deal of prostatic r ee eee 
fluid, and I took many baths <1 **™ of wOlaghs Cp obey eSplall 
because of that. I asked the eG oh Hee 5 Ges teas ie 
Messenger of Allah #¢ about that, 2 —_ i‘ 
and he said: ‘Ablution is sufficient <> : 
for you in this. case.’ I said: ‘O Sueky 2. 8 dts chill <. ocif 
Pen’ ana 13 coke cohol Fo all 
Messenger of Allah! What about Pas — 7 “ ae ae = 
the prostatic fluid that gets onto «than Gp : Sle BE Nal J yt Chie 
?” He said: ‘It i Sarees ‘ 
my clothes? He said: ‘It is er ree 
sufficient for you to pour a et Z 
handful of water on the part of 3. ui Chass tap dB 623 Cad 

your clothes wherever you see it Mot fee ak 3 oak ot 
has reached.’” (Hasan) O GP Som MEP Of kT 
(oleal 

cpl Sade oe Vie 6 Sobol of tee obj lgiall cagls gl am ol [epmim orliwf ] ees 
Ole only cheng pls ALES cgde gl Aone 6a: Slaw! 

ws 
507. It was narrated from Ibn oe, cet ge eo eee 
‘Abbas that he came to Uhayy bin 1 S44 og! Gh SN pl Ge - env 

That is, prostatic fluid. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Ka’b, accompanied by “Umar. 
Ubayy came out to them and 
said: “I noticed some prostatic 
fluid, so I washed my penis and 
performed ablution. ‘Umar said: 
“Is that sufficient?’” He said: 
“Yes.” He (Umar) asked: “Did 
you hear that from the Messenger 
of Allah #%?” He said: “Yes.” 
(Da‘if) 

Greg N ME cage Vl oy sladatls Sie al gy de 

Comments: 

358 (gig Sy lgtat! wi gil 

a 38 5 sy 

The chain of transmission in respect of this Hadith makes it Weak. It is 
nevertheless a proven fact that prostatic fluid does not necessitate a bath. 

Chapter 71. Ablution After 
Sleeping 

508. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Abbas that the Prophet #¢ got up 
during the night and went to the 
toilet and relieved himself, then 
he washed his face and hands, 
and went back to sleep. (Sahih) 
Another chain with similar 
wording. 

esl egy OE - (V1 pneall) 
(V\ died!) 
aS Gas wens 25 gle Ble - oa 
1aGlS oy: a, 3 doe Stas 22,5 
WS ed a 4b Cree Ye relay 
ol ob hs Le dhs Y Gls Gls 

eo 

fess cl: oP eu ite Pa it yl 

8 at LJ al 
eg Lee tS Cab 
ago aS 8 23) 

phe cgdinas WTEC call oe all Bf lel! Ob colyeull gid eel gases 
Vga 53g Opes Sad oye VV: Cdl: leas ME Sl Egle OL 6 yp zt Lena | 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 359 Vgriwg Srlgball wilaui 

Comments: 
Doing ablution while going to sleep is a virtuous act meriting reward in the 
next world. (Bukhdri: 247, & Muslim: 2710) However, sleeping in a state of 
ablution is not mandatory. Mere washing hands and mouth would suffice. 
Not only this, there is no harm in sleeping without ablution, even when in a 
state of major impurity necessitating a bath. See Ahédith 581-583. 

2 s . 
Chapter 72. Performing J egal OG - wy renal!) 
Ablution For Each Prayer - aan ye (KLaNs alo 
And Offering All Prayers dels trey GS oljtally .3 
With One Ablution (VY deel) 

bin Malik said: “The Messenger of Dobcad aioe, eee 
Allah #% used to perform ablution eh yt! GF sye® op ah GF eth 
for every prayer, and we used to js Less Ed Hee o& -3E eye 
perform ali of the prayers with eg ae eye 

one ablution.” (Sahih) pYglall dar Ges US5 «ake 

5 rs 
"ors grey 

509. It was narrated that Anas Cr ean Reve oe Aye Ge Se 
we 

Beh Calm oe VVE TE chide ob oe ego gl Ob cepa sll ccc yleadl ao =] eps 
Vaioee 4s 

Comments: 

a. Ablution performed for one prayer if intact, is valid for any number of 
obligatory and voluntary prayers. 

b. An ablution performed for one prayer even though intact, can be refreshed 
before another prayer. This action, ie., making a fresh ablution during the 
validity of the previous one, is also proved from the Sunnah of the Prophet 
x. 

510. Sulaiman bin Buraidah fare) Fs a eer oe ; 

7 on ON RF 
narrated from his father that the ~*~. | ye gla 

Prophet #€ used to perform ‘OG GF ¢aSy Ge TY eters Gi 

ablution for every prayer, buton (537 08 Sue 82 ols 2 OK tg 

the day of the conquest of ee ee eh eee er 

i 

Makkah, he performed all of the (8 (3% 6 a 231 Uf af zy 
prayers with one ablution. (Sahih) Be ie; os a we UG ale 

s - 
AG pets QS oigla 

or YWVie ctols egy lls cil ghiall Sgr oh cdylebll ‘phone axe ees 
partes 4 yg Ola Cute 

The Chapters Of Purification... 360 (grteng Sy lgiai wiloui 
Comments: 
This was an act of the category of desirable (Mustahab) deeds, but the 

Prophet #@ did away with it in this case, lest it should become one of the 
obligatories for the Ummah, just as he had stopped leading the 

cogregational form of the Tardwih prayer. (See Fathul-Béri, 412/1). 

511. Fadl bin Mubashshir said: “1 
saw Jabir bin ‘Abdullah 
performing every prayer with one 
ablution,. and I said: ‘What is 
this?’ He said: ‘I saw the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ doing this, 
and I am doing as the Messenger 

of Allah #@ did.” (Da‘if) 

Aan pire op adl card oliul hin 

Comments: 

Syd! SU [atraye cobinl] 

Dapan (B4e. “ae 
33 : 

2b det, Bis - 01) 
O6 ke Boe he jad GIS cat te 3 

sgl Se LE és he aay 
S of << i) 
cals: 

ah 
Ju Sida le 248 col epee 

ja i RE ttl 5505 
BE aS jy) Bie 

es Baael 
Oe ge COV GL Cotodls 5 ygerl 

It is no offence to the dignity of a scholar to enquire of him about the 
rationale and proof of doing an action that was not seen by anyone before. 

Chapter 73. Ablution When 
In A State Of Purity 

512. It was narrated that Abu 
Ghutaif Al-Hudhali said: “I was 
listening to ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar 
bin Khatiab in the mosque, and 
when. the time for prayer came, he 
got up, performed ablution, and 
offered prayer, then he went back 
to where he had been sitting. 
When the time for ‘Asr (Afternoon 
prayer) came, he got up, 
performed ablution, and offered. 

prayer, then he went back to. 

where he had been sitting. When 
the time for Maghrib (Sunset 
prayer) came, he got up, 
performed abltition, and offered 
prayer, then he went back to 
where he had been sitting. I said: 

BE ooh SG - OF pnnsil) 
(V¥ des!) 35 \gb 

fe Sere 

ue Gis sng ip ais Gas - oy 
Bb gat Sil de Gls. tall Lig 3) i 
de 6 igh be Lf 32 6; 
pelts gp willl of gh al Le 
pS IS jas Ub etl YG 
ME setts se i oles Ges 
se a edie (38 pS josh 52s 
(6 S35 oat GE a 
eee Gioe Ss 

bt GAL si 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

‘May Allah improve you ({i.e., 
your condition) Is it obligatory or 
Sunnah to perform ablution for 
every prayer?’ He said: “Did you 
notice that?’ I said: “Yes.” He said: 
‘No (it is not obligatory). If I 
perform ablution for Morning 
prayer I can perform ali of the 
prayers with this ablution, so long 
as I do not get impure. But I 
heard the Messenger of Allah #8 
say: “Whoever performs ablution 
while he is pure, he will have ten 
merits,” so I wanted to earn the 
merits.’” (Da‘if) 

361 tgrien'g Sy lgtals wil gal 

tS wiglat 4 Eda EakaS pial Stal 

xe ail ere ae er Js ne i 

je i ab 8 Je es ya ck 
lsd 3 255 ly apc 

of op epegll ston ei Ob caykghll caso ph a i [daw estul] Fes Saead 
U5 ge Gem lae 43 sll Lda ts me gd dliy COR ee gde ll aanty AVE Cte 

Chapter 74. No Ablution 
Except For Impurity 

513. ‘Abbad bin Tamim narrated 
that his paternal uncle said: “A 
complaint was made to the 
Prophet # about a man who 
sensed something (some doubt 
about his ablution) during prayer. 
He said: ‘No (he does not have to 
perform ablution) unless he 
notices a smell or hears a 
sound.’” (Sahih) 

AVG 6 Cyan on Fd Boal} ea Le gu Y wth 6 # gad oll 6 goed l ae ol 

ByUgledl 85 oye OF de JI Ob cQaeadi cplucy 

Ane cyl Sede ye MU ie Fo bya 

Comments: 

‘ otk OS aaaye foi ay ted LAA phy 

a a x 4 Od 

of yy bane Y ere -~ (VE erell) 
(VE dell) GIS 

dB eee 3) dint Gs = ovr 

iF yh 

ao 
oie 
q 
c 
: 
Gy 
& 

ae 
Sy 

- Agog 

BNA 3 eet ta dos E31 a oS 
ome fl clay dex es oY J 

ToS al 

4% 

a. The passing of the wind nullifies the ablution even though no sound is 

heard. 

b. Mere doubt (in the absence of certainty) does not invalidate the ablution. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

514. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The 
Prophet #§ was asked about 
doubts (concerning ablution) 
during prayer. He said: ‘He 
should not leave until he hears a 
sound or detects an odor.’”’ 
(Sahih) 

362 igruwg Sigil wig 

oor 

dog 3) bye Rang oh ats YD 
Aes 

515. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “No ablution (is 
needed) unless there is an odor or 
a sound.’” (Sahih) 

+ ame - ° + nie 
6AS5 GIs syne Uf ble Gis - ole 

PGus Wee, 
dare VU 

° ‘ s eee: 
Wey al Se St VI byes 

# 

cel] we pd le gas ge Ol le QIU Gh cael glen eel te sd 
«eS g Sm fe VEL Ee ego gl Aeron 5 642 fogen Cede oye TAY e 

516. It was narrated that ‘Amr 
bin ‘Ata’ said: “I saw Sa‘ib bin 
Khabbab sniffing his garment, 
and [ said: ‘Why (are you doing) 
that?’ He said: ‘I heard the 
Messenger of Allah 2¢ say: “No 
ablution (is needed) unless there 
is an odor or a sound.” (Da‘if) 

oF a “y or oe afer Bo 4 ra 
Bee ot pall Le GF CALF oy elo} 
OB the of 5 Ae gf wie 82 ail 
if 6H IE] g au Sth 
“ ey 4 ede ea ee 
of a eee 4a < Ad ge 
3h ces Se YI yea We de BE at 

dood 

dort ue Cis dale J. Lad pebble oo megs! SE [tye aotiwl] eps 

Chapter 75. The Quantity Of 
Water That Does Not Become 
Unclean 

517.1It was narrated from 

CVO08V ie oft /¥) 

il etal plas ot - (Yo poral) 
(VO ami) Carats Y 

rddoth se 3S gi Gis - ov 

The Chapters Of Purification... 363 gris Sylgtal! wii gui 

‘Ubaidullah bin ‘Abdullah bin ae esas WES 

rd a eS ao a ce 
‘Umar that his father said: “J Oo: “7 BGI cok of kp Gir 
heard the Messenger of Allah @ 22 6 SUN 3 BS of 32 Gs 
being asked about water in the Bee ESS, age oy, ee i ee 

wilderness that is frequented by ‘J | bb ae cp Ml Le of atl ate 

beasts and predators. The 3g; Re 5 en Me a 3 fe bee 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: “If a i aie Per ete 
the water fae the amount of = eit Ge ash 3 (gel os BSL 
two Quilah"! nothing can make zp fy as oy ee US eee 

if {s}) | la Selt5] 
it impure (Najis).’” (Sahih) Ch BY AS al dyes dle Seals 

7 

“ as 2 
7 % 3 B ob 40 47H 0 ogie sar 
Another chain with similar Boge anor od eels Eas 
wording. fe Soe +]7 90) toe 

pai dee WIS iG BS shee Ute 
fee 35 AG 

4 

ag E ales 

& 

ogee eed eal oF (asl if jae 
cel Cade ye Tete celal Gey be Ok cil gball cogla gt ae al [eee] ed 
AVI C84 /\ kag so Cul dees ou Glew} 
Comments: 
The Arabic Quilah is a large earthen jar or container. Quilah made at the 
place known as Hajr were very popular in the Arab world. The container 
was big enough, i.e. of the size of two-and-a-half water skins. Scholars have 
described the quantity of two Qullah as equivalent to 500 Rail. One Rail 
weighs half a seer, ie., forty tolas. Thus, the total quantity of five water 
skins of water measures approximately 240 kilograms or, according to some 
scholars, about 227 kilograms. So much quantity of water would qualify for 
the definition of ‘abundant’ water. As such a little amount of impurity 
would not change the basic characteristic of the purity of water. 

518. It was narrated from :a55 Ghs ais 27 ale hs + ora 
“Ubaidullah bin ‘Abdullah bin : aoe ee pee ee 
‘Umar that his father said: “The & eee BF caele Gy sls Gis 
Messenger of Allah # said: ‘If the ae 
water is the amount of two or ¢” tone 
three Quilah, nothing can make it GIS (3) 1B abl J 525 JE iB al Be 
impure (Najis).’” (Sahih) 

Ml A Quilah is a large water container whose size the scholars differ over, from five to fifty 
waterskins. Tirmidhi said (no. 67): “And they say, it is approximately fifty Qirbah (water 
skins).” Khattabi said (Ma’alamus-Sunan: 1:35): “The scholars have stated the size of two 
Quillah is five Qirbah.” See Ahmad Shakir’s comments on Jami’ At-Tirmidhi. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Another chain with similar 
wording. 

Cemments: 

364 lgriwg Syigks! wiloui 

AGS hk & gcch Ff a 
bio ils Mb adsl AAG se 
ide 3s Gs ib geod tau 
Gilet Cadond jbl Lerma] i gy os 

Other Ahddith confirm that the original limit is two Quilah. If the size of 
water is less than this, then anything impure falling into it shall turn the 
water impure, regardless of whether its smell, taste or color remains 
unchanged. But water in a greater quantity than this shall only be 
considered impure if the impurity has either changed its color, or smell, or 

taste. 

Chapter 76. Water Basins 

519. It was narrated from Abu 
Sa’eed Al-Khudri that the Prophet 
#€ was asked about the water 
basins located between Makkah 
and Al-Madinah, which were 
visited by wild animals, dogs and 
donkeys, and about using them 
for means of purification. He said, 
“Whatever they (the animals) 
have carried in their bellies is for 
them, and whatever is left over is 
for us, and is pure.” (Da’‘if) 

YALE cyily « ae otiul Lda 

520. It was narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said: “We came to a 
pond in which there was the 
carcass of a donkey, so we 
refrained from using the water 
until the Messenger of Allah #% 
came to us and said: ‘Water is not 

led SE - (7 pra 

(V4 dedi) 
<2% geet “oo fF ege 
Bis: gyi Gees gi GIS - 04 
ip cad bo lol ga Beg de 
Bf (bel Lao gl 2s cylag op thé 

e: ca ° 7 cs 
& di vel ys ws 
Ah 25s; real a3 5 6 Beaahly 
Elis igh 2S Sele Huh 585 

Gs Gb 6 Oy ght 2 

Sao gel SU [oe Cisaad oolkel] tg od 

aoe Kk “te go F708 ied 

ey Woe oly Cy doe! Lue - oF: 
x - . 4 tee ae ae 
ce Seb BF oth Boe fogjls Sl 

The Chapters Of Purification .. 365 Lgirrang Sy lgkall wih gsi 

made impure by anything.” Then ote, een pe eet 
we drank from it and gave it to BAH ofp: Sled RB abl 55 CH esl 
our animals to drink, and we AGES Ep aes ee aloes y 
carried some with us.” (Da‘if) : 

Bis tO gp Vay 4b ake) Min ig me gl SE Me ae lel] te sd 
2 Mand gle Ignael 
Comments: ue : 
The addition of the words ‘the carcass of a donkey’ in the Hadith being 
unsubstantiated by other sound. authorities is Denounced (Munkar). The 
remaining part of the Hadith, being Traceable (Marfi’), is authentic. 

s 

521. It was narrated that Abu soGalls cMLE 3 Syne Gis - ov) 
Umamah AJ-Bahili said: “The + .. ~s- .<; eK Ee ae 
Messenger of Allah 2% said: ole ae eae ser aliey 
‘Water is not made impure by 75 Hu. GG 
anything except that which 2. ot ¢,0  ,. 42 xe u 
changes its smell, taste and Giger OP OE opel ge tele 
color’” (Da‘if) ell Spy BE abi J 425 JU dG dati 

4a ee Fo 

Para fe <m - 
* Cade) Gus theres cy! 

calls (Lie re) Cgpdt y 43 kwh ines “gre gl Js [agen os kwh] es S eae! 
+O nh 9 VYoV¥i je YY: Ge «peed! on glaxl! Bil cglax ll ae ok ‘ sand aa dle 

Comments: 
Although, as to the chain of transmission, the Hadith is ‘Weak’, yet there is 
consensus among the scholars on the point that water whose basic 
characteristic has been changed because of some impurity is no longer good 
as a means of purification. 

oa e Ee a BR ge F 
Chapter 77. Concerning The Ja ob tle bob - WW presll) 
Urine Of An Infant Boy Who OW tess tabs SS yd 2 ch 
Is Not Yet Eating Solid Food pe oh lll da 
522. It was narrated that ir -&% ft: & 2f Gis — ovy 
Lubaébah bint Harith said: we are rae 
“Husain bin ‘Ali urinated in the GF «ye gp dey SbF (eel! 3! 
Jap of the Prophet #8, and I said: 2 t 
‘O Messenger of Allah, give me ~*~ * ae 7 . 
your garment and put on another 3 GE 33 Gpeodi JE CIE Sled 
garmeni.’ He said: “Water should 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

be sprinkled on the urine of a 
baby boy, and the urine of a baby 
girl should be washed away.’” 
(Sahih) 

oe YVOre 

366 (grtuog Solgtall wl gi 

a Oui rts us eel aks ebel 
i be bky SO de ye RE 
Cyt 

cog] Cee ral Je eh <aylebll c2glo gel a el Leer] Fc Sage 

- grills cgSbelly Aas Cyl deere y 64 yee Nl sl Sade 

Comments: 

a. If a suckling infant boy (who has not been weaned) urinates over the 
garment, it is not necessary to wash it. A cloth urinated over by a baby girl 

must, however, be washed. 

b. We do not know for sure the wisdom behind this difference, but we are 
obligated to obey all the commands of Allah and His Prophet #. 

523. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “A baby boy was brought to 
the Prophet 8 who then urinated 
on him. He sprinkled over it with 
water and did not wash it.” 
(Sahih) 

piel Be He 

a8 Ges Bo 

ps 

256 Able “sg cs gt sd re 

ae z 
ia ke 6 ye eh 

3 lS etch 

ee NAUIG talab LAS y Ed dt fall dye p> Gl cd zlebll cplur ae oh Fer tcel 

524. It was narrated that Umm 
Qais bint Mihsan said: “IT came to 
the Messenger of Allah #§ with a 
son of mine who was not yet 
eating solid food, and he (the 
baby) urinated on him. He called 
for water and sprinkled it over 
(the urine).” (Sahih) 

4% ples Sado 

se nga 

oe tae 

sb 3th 35 a a 425 sé 
ale 33 oly ES vaile 

E 

wk <dy{gblil Clas SRA al cOhmall dy Ch capes! ecole sel ‘ques 
4 SASS Cum oye YAV ie cALue AS 9 eee! Sati dy ok 

525. It was narrated from ‘Ali, 
that the Prophet 2% said 
concerning the urine of a nursing 

Fors Gao e 24% 

fo , 
Cp terns 9 darna 

ee hee Vy oe a eo 

t 
3 ido > 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

infant: “Water should be 
sprinkled over the urine of a boy, 
and the urine of a girl should be 
washed.” 

Abul-Hasan bin Salamah said: 
“Ahmad bin Musa bin Ma’gil 
narrated to us that Abul-Yaman 
Al-Misri said: ‘I asked ShAfi‘i 
about the Hadith of the Prophet 
#6, “Water should be sprinkled 
over the urine of a boy, and the 
urine of a girl should be washed,” 
when the two types of water 
(urine) are the same. He said, 
“That is because the urine of the 
boy is of water and clay, but the 
urine of the girl is of flesh and 
blood.” Then he said to me: “Did 
you understand?” I said: “No.” 
He said: “When Allah the Most 
High created Adam, He created 
Eve (Hawwa’) from his short rib, 
so the boy’s urine is from water 
and clay, and the girl's urine is 
from flesh and blood.” Then he 
said to me: “Did you 
understand?” I said: “Yes.” He 
said: “May Allah cause you 
benefit from this.” (Hasan) 

367 (grtwg Sy lets! Gigi 

oF 
ace . a db #8 & ol w 

Lan 

Gute BF ees! Ei 36 & plas 
835 pM UR be Ce cll 
clelg beet gills Gye dx be 
sgl eal a im oF oY as 

pal ; co rata ae 535 galls ¢ 21a 
eas ds (Eig 23 JE SE 

oy YVAr eC col Ces sal Sp Ol caylee) coglagl ae [eam] ee 
cOle only ¢ dey p> Cpl dorreey gba sl Aum 9 63915 Antal Vind cling cts Slee Cole 

526. Abu Samh said: “I was a 
servant of the Prophet #%, and 
Hasan or Husain was brought to 
him and (the infant) urinated on 
his chest. They wanted to wash it, 
but the Messenger of Allah 2 
said: ‘Sprinkle water on it, for the 
urine of a girl should be washed, 

Wor 8,85 dal yt tudes Day eeSbatls 

pla 5 Be Jb shee Gas - on 
SG oosl we ee Gl 5 S jee 

Gas Ge 
oe in ee 

sg HB cd Gale 8 CMS ee 

x 

utes 

¢ 
° 
maw Dy 

*N 

* 
bs any 
7s: 

The Chapters Of Purification... 368 griwg Srlgla) itgui 

but the urine of a boy should be ap RR ee seate “fo ou8 

sprinkled over with water.’”’ *22 se dls ‘or ry g k 

3 = Ae eo o¢ Lie 

(Sahih) BE 525 SB caghg ST 15156 
a 9 S og ste 

be HRs diye dy Jk Sb abn 

& 

: Fors Je 

4 ome whe ge TYE « Laays cdylglall colo gl ae oi [eoee oatiww|] Fes Satel 
etsy tpSlodly cag on! we] 

sf ee. Spo FG -8 tt, 

527. It was narrated from Umm x! Wie 1 ley gy dene Ge - FV 
Kurz that the Messenger of Allah 
#@ said: “The urine of a boy ' z 
should be sprinkled over and the =i} J 4.25 SI 35 
urine of a girl should be washed.” ie hits Mauer B aes E88 Diane ave pay 
(Sahih) Kyla Ss eae PMA Jin SU BS 
A we 

JB cw, tol ®t al edo ops ETE EL EVV / Tides l dor ool [ern Fes Sate 
A dals GLI Eatodly 35 el ge Qeoant oh red Cy yee eedaiio alee! Lhe 16 pave pull 

Comments: 
All these Ahddith are explicit on the point that clothing urinated over on by 
a suckling girl is to be washed, while the baby boy’s urine is to be sprinkled 
over with water. 

Chapter 78. Ground That Is gems seo OG ~ (VA prxell) 
Soiled With Urine And How ogee pte “eg fied 
It Should Be Washed (VA diol!) baad CAS SSS 

528. It was narrated from Anas 316s Gil :dite of icf Gis - ova 
that a Sedouin urinated in the tof # Sa er eee 
mosque, and some of the people LE! Oo! Gal GF eeyb Bae os on 
rushed at him. The Messenger of cell Jas ol Cis cae mal ie eis 

Allah #§ said: “Do not interrupt ~~ 4. 4. ate veer 
him.” Then he called for a bucket 63 J + gay WBE al JH) ls 
of water and poured it over (the le Ed cele te iis 
urine). (Sahih) : Pa 

cdylgbll cphnas CUVOre lS > ) Nl wh cus yl eGobedl dom ol ups 

1 ALS gy alam Cade Gye VARI C cpl 6. lobed ce opty dod bee rey Ob 
529. It was narrated that Abu Benes ol 23 | hs — 0x4 
Hurairah said: “A Bedouin oe i ub goes ton as Bete 
entered the mosque when the of ‘37°% of Ae OF Se oF ose 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Messenger of Allah # was sitting 
there, and (the man) said: ‘O 
Allah, forgive me and 
Muhammad, and do not forgive 
anyone else with us.’ The 
Messenger of Allah #@ smiled and 
said: “You have placed restrictions 
on something that is vast.’ Then 
the Bedouin turned away, went to 
a comer of the mosque, spread his 
legs and began to urinate. After 
he had a better understanding, 
the Bedouin said: “He got up and 
came to me, and may my father 
and mother be ransomed for him, 
he did not rebuke me nor revile 
me. He said: “This mosque is not 
for urinating in. Rather it is built 
for the remembrance of Allah and 
prayer.’”” Then he called for a 
large vessel of water and poured 
it over the place where he had 
urinated.” (Hasan) 

369 

Wgrteng Stebel! witgul 
Ss 6 ek foe ak J 

Fle BE ON 6355 Go 28 
BES es J eI IU 8 
G5 MG bl d425 Bead te ac 

de 

s on x # oe eet » 
SS (3) dy oo Clewly SFB aay 

ales) oc Ay 8 ob aan 
dbl pres usb OG Y dwt 

Wa Sp 

ver 

let ot 

Sis ably ca gee cp dames Cade ce OTT dard ae tt [sm ool] eee 

Comments: 

VV Deg yb 

a. Even a big mistake by a person ignorant of the Jaws of Shari‘ah should be 

Q 

tolerated and he should be politely told that what he had done was not 
proper. 

. The Prophet #¢ allowed the Bedouin to complete his urination in the 

mosque because he had already started doing it. Had the man been stopped 
in the middle, it would have caused harm to his body system, or else he 
would start running away in panic, and the drops of urine would have 
defiled not only a considerable part of the mosque but also his own body 
and clothes. 

. The Prophet #¢ drew the attention of the Bedouin to the mistake he had 

committed in his supplication to Allah, although the mistake was the result 
of his excessive love and reverence for the Prophet #. 

. The mosque must be kept free from all kinds of trash and impurities. 
. In order to remedy the defilement of an unmettled piece of earth caused by 

somebody’s urine, it is enough to pour a bucket of water over the place. 
Thus, once the earth absorbs the water and the remains of the urine, it shall 
regain its purity. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

530. It was narrated that 
Wathilah bin Asga‘’ said: “A 
Bedouin came to the Prophet 
and said: ‘O Allah, have mercy on 
me and Muhammad, and do not 
allow anyone else to share in 
Your mercy.’ The Prophet #8 said: 
“You have placed restrictions on 
something that is vast, woe to 
you!’ Then (the Bedouin) spread 
his legs and urinated, and the 
Companions of the Prophet # 
told him to stop, but the 
Messenger of Allah #% said: ‘Let 
him be,’ then he called for a 
vessel of water and poured it over 
(the urine).” (Hasan) 

370 igri g Solel) wigs 

igh el ee Gags Se eb 

Mig bé 2S del oh OST cance 
cl A eel me sdb YW gt 

5a» : NG apeS 
JG GS HH 1G6g5 chug Ochs 

Be gO Seal JE dy Bt 
Sy ES ob ddan BE i S85 SE 

and Ge oy Uy Cute sled gees ge He ed diiy [ed tee es 

60 pF 9 we el o LS ated] Sy xs sy 4 

Chapter 79. Some Parts Of 
The Earth Purify Others 

531. It was narrated that Umm 
Salamah, the wife of the Prophet 
#€, said: “I am a woman whose 
hem is lengthy, and I may walk 
through a dirty place. The 
Messenger of Allah 2€ said: ‘That 
which comes after it purifies it.” 
(Hasan) 

see igh able cin le gilt 
5a SS OE - (V4 pel) 
3 Zoe qe 4 ae 
(V4 dnl!) Lan Gees 
be Gis : jee ff ple Gis ~ ov 
gph op HUE 3) Rt GS: Bn 
dbl of alah ot BR LE OE yf! 
PPM LE of pat as A be «zo 
“6 ot zee, ae oo fk, |e mise ° 
ce\ G35 64olen el cSe el 356 cr! 
a ttl uh Jal ys 3) 2G ae 
#6 bt 3455 JG ENS Ha otal 
CAS le oi ghe 

Exydo oye VAY Fe « hal! ey oy wh 5 jlgled | cago gil ax oi [o>] rc Sal 
dll fim ad ye asl, ECV EY )a gy bedi cpl Ugais Byer lpowl roll is el # 4 GUL 

(YOY /¥ lini!) tee ple 

The Chapters Of Purification... 371 igriwg Bylgdal! wilqul 

Comments: 
If a person’s garment or shoe has no visible impurity over it, then it should 
be presumed that walking further on clean ground has purified it. In case 
some impurity can still be seen over either of them, then it is a definite 
uncleanness, which must be washed off. 

so # 

532. It was narrated that Abu = gy eal (S55 as gl as — ory 
Hurairah said: It was said: “O .- 2 - € 4 - @ bet 4 i 

: { - Fs Ke * ij ° 
Messenger of Allah, we want to oe ae of oF ‘$y : del} 
come to the mosque, but the path = og) 32 coke Col BE coteadl 2) 3515 
that we walk upon is impure.” 5 > « ei 3 Sens. yes Seine cs Sa 
The Messenger of Allah #€ said: 9%’ UL ta dye G ; aa JB S58 
“Some parts of the earth purify Sh ne Lig Se bl iL mn All 

others.” (Da‘j P 7 é ‘ 
Oey) as gan Yhi Beso : Be a 

cr petlyl douils dem gl cyl 43 ote] Wa io me gdl By Ledgand solinafl : ‘ee 
» (eS!) J sgaue (ae) sal sls 6 Aa le gis ee Lom! 

533. It was narrated that a (42-3 ft: & 2f Ge — ory 
woman from (the tribe of) Banu ire * 5 a s gala 0 
‘Abdul-Ashhal said: “I said to the 1g? OF Smt ot Sl LF OF coh, 
Prophet #§: “Between the mosque 7 4 +, sf-3) 

and | there is a filthy path.’ He PH oe Sl oF 
said: ‘After that is there a cleaner 8 gol dit “25 JEN he 

path?’ I said: ‘Yes.’ He said: “This ore seo eee 3 the 
is (a remedy) for that.’ (Sahih) 58 Gb socal O29 se 54 cu 
28 «ig, Gh Bb vad -36 
Wedge algo dG pa 

Cade ye TALI Co feil Crer GY Gl LIT coplagl a el epee] teu sd 
Comments: 4 Cine oy able ye em} 
a. Feet defiled by any kind of indiscernable impurity while walking on the 
earth shall become pure by walking further on clean ground, and there is 
no need to wash them. The view is confirmed by the first Hadith of this 

chapter that speaks of a part of garment dragged over a dirty place. 

b. Islam is not about unnecessarily stiff rules and restrictions. It is one of its 
characteristics that it is a religion of facility and ease. 

Chapter 80. Shaking Hands 24 exit Ob - cs 
Wi OneWaosinasie. “SO ee: ee) 
Of Sexual Impurity (A* deel) 

534. It was narrated from Abu 4+ 3&4 wl o a 3 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

Rafi’ that Abu Hurairah was met 
by the Prophet 2% in one of the 
streets of Al-Madinah when he 
was in a state of sexual impurity, 
so he slipped away. The Prophet 
#@ missed him, so when he came 
(later on), he said: ‘Where were 
you O Abu Hurairah?’ He said: 
‘O Messenger of Allah, you met 
me when I was in a state of 
sexual impurity, and I did not 
want to sit with you until I had a 
bath. The Messenger of Allah #¢ 
said: ‘The believer does not 
become impure.’” (Sahih) 

372 igitwg Sylgiatt Gtoui 

BA Are as 2 ably Ae 
wo gm 
WSs ie 25 cae 
ta of G ES th dG ce 
ae 

-f 

J 
aS 22 oy ae ai dy 

#6 i 3425 OS LST OE Ge 
nies V Sagabn 

cYAOuYAY: A aaa Oe ae ac ye wh « ‘Sena! 6g BedI te ol: ‘ees 
ot enbs det al cal ge FVS: Cfo Y plead al de Jil wh 6 ae! pee 5 

Comments: 

4 che gla! yam Sapte 

The body of a believer, whether dead or alive, is pure. It is, therefore, 
perfectly in order to shake hands with him and sit and eat together. It is, 
however, preferable that a sexually impure person performs ablution before 
starting to eat and drink. Even before going to sleep such a person should 
perform ablution in order that, at least, he attains to a partial state of purity 

(Bukhéri: 287). 

535. It was narrated that 
Hudhaifah said: “The Prophet 2% 
came out and met me when I was 
sexually impure, so I kept away 
from him. Then. I had a bath and 
came to him. He said: “What is 
the matter with you?’ I said: ‘I 
was sexually impure.’ The 
Messenger of Allah #% said: ‘The 
Muslim does not become 
impure.’” (Sahih) 

6A55 Gas yess 3 ble ls - ye 
gos at “pate 23 GIS Tenia t 
els bE ate LE chet ht 3 
dB WIA 32 og of Be LLY 

died 2 0G cal ae ah 68 

bat are ee s we = Ss 
«Ss a» : Sas pron “3 GALE cal 
> 
4 eo ee ae 3g o2 
os 

SY path 

Sade oe YVY IG 6 ree Y pleat al le Hl Ok «eed 6 pline Peapesn Fc Saad 

+4 ads 

The Chapters Of Purification... 373 lgrteng Sy lglal! wilgui 

Chapter 81. Semen That Soils Cena eat Gb - (A) paacll) 
eee (AS RasesSt) oil 

536. It was narrated that ‘Amr (Gis :i23 al aes a Ge — oe4 
bin Maimun said: “I asked sig We. Mae Sein: Date cate Sind 
Sulaiman bin Yasar about a ‘08 9se% gt ape GF colede Gone 
garment which gets semen on it wl ao ss oS i. dit 
Should I wash it off or wash the fF oe : 
entire garment?” Sulaiman said: JU S45 GSU! pow gl abel elooll 
Aishah said: “Semen used to get = + 2 Be 451 56 Liss 58 Buk 
on the garment of the Messenger we Pr eo, hg . Pee 
of Allah #8 and he would wash it 43) (3 GE cay Ge le cap 
off his garment, then he would go re ee ke ak eee ee 
out to pray wearing that garment, 83 Seal BI es! Bly NAH 
and I could see the marks left on 

it by washing.” (Sahih) 

eS 

NY 

BL ge Cena be fay Shy pall fae Gh cape gl quell oe i ees 
42 O gene Cp gph Eade oye VAG ee te pall Se Ob coy lek! t ahne PV YY AT 

Chapter 82. Scraping Semen geal 33 co  - (AY erst) 
From Clothing 7 i ae 
(AY diel) Sl Se 

Ab 

537. It was narrated that ‘Aishah a Gis :uist 23 ele Gas - orv 

said: “I often scraped it (semen) Pe eee re oe ie nd 
from the garment of the Arye Gp Jame Gey ie fail 
Messenger of Allah #@ with my oF ae cates . tee Ge 
hand.” (Sahih) ei 
gh leh SE ae GE Med! 
yg BEE tty BIE Shots 36 cw teh 

SHAFL 4 Poel Cyde ye VAAL ‘poll pe ol 63 ylgbs} « prbena aoe oi eas 
ee) 
Comments: 
It shows that it is enough to to scratch it off with a finger nail. There is an 
obvious possibility of certain particles of it still remaining in the garment. 
Yet the clothing shall be considered as pure even without washing. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

538. Hammam bin Harith 
narrated: “A guest came and 
stayed with ‘Aishah, and she 
ordered that he be given a yellow 
blanket of hers. He had a nocturnal 
emission in it, and he felt too shy to 
send it back to her when it had the 
traces of that emission on it, so he 
dipped it in water and then sent it 
to her. ‘Aishah said: ‘Why did he 
spoil our garment? It would have 
been sufficient for him to scrape it 
off with his finger. I often scraped it 
(semen) from the garment of the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ with my 
finger.’ ” (Sahih) 

Wie ou gl cers gall (3 

374 Lore g Sylgtal) citi 

Set oa e a Be ° 
cai glee re WES een) jp! 

e 

Mb SB peal GF MAEM 
Geni les toy dg 056 eek 
Leib ys HEE ade Gil, 
Backs op KEM FT GSS cle Ged Of 

ce 

o 1 ats le ESB ck ‘las ow celal = 

- 

11%; OF aah SS Uy oes itis ss 

BES ES NG sl Bis - ova 
- 
a 

“Gs 

HE BN S525 OF be oh es 

geek 

dele be ok casbebll «cde sl aoe ol [eee] : ‘es 

J ale ot GUS Cote ily « CEP Cem ale Via rSBy ce drgles “gl Eade bye 

539. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “I remember when I found it 
(semen) on the garment of the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ and I 
scratched it off.” (Sahih) 

Gis :G3 fi: S ff Gis - ova 
of ere) Ce 6 Bake ta 
det wh 5a E55 Ase be 63504 

50, Se B20 Be ait 985 OF 

Mpattes a hed Gol gal ge VAAL C tall pK Ob casi ghtl elie ae oT tga pei 

Comments: 

The ruling relates to a situation where the substance is thick enough to be 
scratched off. If it is thin, it penetrates into the texture of the clothing and 
leaves its mark. It would not, therefore, disappear by mere rubbing it or 
scratching it. In that case, it would be better to wash off the relevant portion 
of the garment in order to ensure its purity. 

Chapter 83. Offering Prayer 
In A Garment In Which One 
Has Had Intercourse 

540. It was narrated from 
Mu’awiyah bin Abu Sufyan that 
he asked his sister Umm Habibah, 
the wife of the Prophet #@: “Did 

oH 3 8 MSI SG - (ar pes 
car dao!) yd eke gil 

ver 

of g0 Fa 8 ate 

ma] Gal eee err en 

et al of bg be ee UN 

if (Ge gf Gy Le id cx Bryer 

The Chapters Of Purification... 375 Lgrtieng Solgbad! wil gil 

the Messenger of Allah 28 ever af 
offered prayer in a garment in ¢ 

of + a4 Ce ae 
7 a Cope ol | oa ey ar 
. . 24 4 eS on SN, a te 
which he had sexual intercourse? dh Nye) OS fe BE BS G55 Se 

She said: “Yes, if there was re ae ae eee 
nothing noxious on it.” (Sahih) Sas eke oh ye) ae Ae 

oil 43 1% wi (Gh gas 1256 

ez il esi b a yball wh cdyigbli eagle gl a ol [eerene odtinl] Tx Seaed 
laa peg Ob eats: dass gpl he 22S Gob aly ca CU] tade gy PUI: a ala] 

Comments: WAL e «jails 

a. It shows that we do not have to have separate clothing because of sexual 
activity. 

b. The garment on one’s body does not become impure because of ritual 
impurity. 

541. It was narrated that Abu :33341 we 3 elie Gis - of) 

Darda’ said: “The Messenger of pes , A0o $6 Rete AES 
Allah #€ came out to us with Jgj Bae foes ers os bcc Was 

water dripping from his head, Z he cdl a2 ot pt OF dil Sa 
and he ied us in prayer wearing a Seu eo hee : 
single garment, placing its one B 155531 mi oF ail ore 

end on the right shoulder, and the t ne Pos ele g- 
other end oe the other shoulder. st ae P inks #5 3! ae 
When he finished praying, ‘Umar 38 «4 ts viol) LF 2h eds 
bin Khattab said to him: ‘O 5. 5-3 ‘6 sca “%5 ah oe HS 
Messenger of Allah, did youlead  ™ a 

us in prayer wearing a single 

garment? He said: ‘Yes, I perform < . i ‘ : cee Pe a oi 
prayer in it, and init I (ie. [had 9 &' “9 6% Tea els 
sexual intercourse in it).”” (Da‘if) ad Gaal 

oper) Gal cpt Cp Geel ad alu! Loa Ge gel St 5 [tyne colin! ] eyes 

Commenis: 

a. Be it the imam of the prayer or his follower, it is not binding for him to 
cover the head during prayer, although it is not desirable to make it a 
practice to remain without a head cover. 

b. This rule is man-specific. As for the woman, she must always have a head 
cover. This means that the prayer of a woman shall be in order if she puts 
on two pieces of clothing — a long shirt that covers her body including the 
feet and a cover for her head. 

PGrs 

542. It was narrated that Jabirbin ins 1 <3; ty Atas Gils - ety 
Samurah said: “A man asked the ce 

The Chapters Of Purification... 376 lyri g Sylgtel! igi 

Prophet # whether he could reef Rhee - 
perform prayer in a garment in : 
which he had intercourse with his 
wife. He said: “Yes, unless he sees 
something on it, in which case he 
should wash it.” (Sahih) 

dtust hie “Sone gel Jy car dpe ude or A4 [02 samt ax oi Leen] rec Sated 
sama pe de wile gils sderI abel, YTS sole on! dor 6 ld Je) ‘eo 

Chapter 84. Wiping Over sil a tle Ge Sb - (At eared) 
Leather Socks 4 : r 

(Ab doall) gaol de 

543. It was narrated that «as3 Gis :atsa Uf 21s the - ty 
Hammam bin Harith said: “Jarir ve eo en ee ety og 
bin ‘Abdullah urinated, then he 9 ("Of ‘pels OF Some® OF 
performed ablution and wiped 
over his leather socks. Someone ry ee ae an ee 
asked him: “Do you do this?’ He desl id bab sree eas Ley 

said: ‘Why shouldn’t I? I saw the 3.25 2317 385 © 205 Gs <a Sk 
Messenger of Allah #¢ doing eee Sige ta ae 
this.” Ibrahim (who narrated it alas, $8 al 
from Hammam) said: “They were Bs Bao Sy et Sy Bae ea 
pleased by the Hadith of Jarir ‘22 CH pee O8 cpl d 
because he accepted Islam after BCS alg 5 Os Os OY By 
the revelation of Méa‘idah.”’"! “ee : rd 
(Sahih) 

cSylgbal cglinas PAV C clas! GB aghall Gh gla oll esl igi ad 
way Gane Cate ye WYN egal de ema Ol 
Comments: 
Ahdadith affirming the provision of wiping over the socks have been narrated 
by more than eighty Companions, including the Ten who were given the 
glad tiding of Paradise. 

O That is Al-Mé‘idah 5:6. 

The Chapters Of Purification... 377 (gai g Srlglat! ilosi 

544. It was narrated from cae NTs 
Hudhaifah that the Messenger of 7 7 

Allah # performed ablution and :¢ taS3 Gas SVE gins 3} ise 
wiped over his leather socks. 6 oye 4 ge 4 at re. 
(Sahih) pie ee Ae pes es 

panes LBS He oi 25 ST it ys 

bin Mughirah bin Shu’bah from . Ba? dered seme s 
his father Mughirah bin Shu‘bah, 2 GF (hse gf GES GF ee inl 

545. It was narrated from ‘Urwah 2) EEF - 
that the Messenger of Allah 2 g-o2 0c 

a 6 an «po oa ra re. ° 
went out to relieve himself, and oe eo Sa a gb oF ‘etl ol 
Mughirah followed him with a gf Seo! ai 36 Eas of ahaa ot 
vessel of water. When he finished ie me sf #6 dl J sg Mee 
relieving himself, he performed 9°77 7 G7 ©) Be Med OF Chae 

ablution and wiped over his 3, 3 > hh igh HL Hat 286 
leather socks. (Sahih ase “ea 
ele) gael Le fanag 1338 cet 

CYHUie COW ath Leng ley foot i) Gl copes! equi ai gees 
a pine slang 64 ead Cyd ope Wie 6 ptecll ee ‘emmel wh cd ylgbsl cline s 
“8 Ons eA) pl 
Comments: 
The Prophet 2%, while intending to ease himself, used to go a long distance 
to be out of the view of the people (Ibn Majah: 331-336). Any Companion 
volunteering to take the water with him used to stop at a distance from the 
Prophet #6, after which he alone carried the water, and either went far to 
make himself out of sight, or screened himself behind something. 

546. It was narrated from Ibn =: 22! pegs iY ole Gas ~ of 
“Umar that he saw Sa‘d bin Malik 

ee : oe aes, Keds S4VESt el Aa: hae 
wiping over his leather socks and #1 Of 4" BY i lj ae ae 
said: “Is it you doing this?” They 32 3! 35 cab b2 Ol Be .ay5e 
both went to ‘Umar and Sa‘d' said Hoey pane. cit t. 38¢ 

to ‘Umar: “Give my brother's son GE HE HE & 4 ch Gl 

a verdict regarding wiping over ye. ¢auh 4  haiss or OS cnet 
leather socks.” ‘Umar said: “We “ a ° 

The Chapters Of Purification... 378 (giriwg Sylgtall igi 
used to wipe over our leather hoon 8 peeay tee Ales 
socks when we were with the 97! v2! J! ease oa asi: 
Messenger of Allah # and we do ES Sie dls .e ed lb etch ie 
not see anything wrong with eee g 

that.” Ibn “Umar said: “Even if 
that is after one has defecated?” 
He said: “Yes.” (Sahih) 

ps SE TSN Se ale 

cert on Ol ae ge WAre CVEA/V EN pelt 8 oid ol Cee] ee ee 
Caples copes VO/Videot te jane del ae VARI CAT /V idee oil ones c& 

Comments: 

Oy oS al gd 

a, Scholars have a duty to to satisfy the questions or points of doubt with 
proofs, just as ‘Umar -% provided the evidence by saying that he and others 
had been doing it in the presence of the Prophet 2, and he never objected 

to it. Hence it was perfectly in order. 

b. An act being done in the presence of the Prophet #% and his refraining from 
objecting to it is called a Hadith Tagriri (a Hadith proved from the Prophet's 

silent. approval). 

547. ‘Abdul-Muhaimin bin 
‘Abbas bin Sahl As-Sa’idi narrated 
from his father, from his 
grandfather: “The Messenger of 
Allah #¢ wiped over his leather 
socks and he ordered us to wipe 
over the leather socks.” (Da‘if) 

Mis saad) Cent ff Gis - ctv 
SHEEN oo of UR BF pated 

fans MB al 4425 Of ole Be cal 8 
et fe eet keete ett fe 
el Ge ely Uyely Cos! de 

Boe 

Le 

gh Sade ge OVINE NTO/TE SB il dal a eT [eda soli] te sel 
» gggerdl 42d cpoggobye Coders ob) Wa ioe gdl SEs 64: Cares 

548. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “I was with the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ on a 
journey, and he said: ‘Is there any 
water?’ He performed ablution 
and wiped over his leather socks, 
then he joined the army and led 
them (in prayer).” (Da‘if) 

ele the yjyl SU cabs Cine olin) Le 

wt 6 ¢ or 36 Feos pH 
28 3 dbl we 73 ake We — ofA 
Paes Sx Bh aie cyt 

ot ie og at 
jae Gas 1 Abs 

oF Ro Re eo. 

dee Op ee Ge 
gl BE ego 5) phe 32 «Bh Bi 
JHB a dss GCE 6 awe 
(338 ele fe as OS ie ae 

vee 

con 

iwig sh 3 SB Totpane orbit] Fes Saae 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

379 lgrtwe 55 lgdall tet hgul 

: bb pares eb ato soa) cp poe ‘ghaall Jibs cord cyt gon ob sll sul 

549. It was narrated from Abu 
Buraidah from his father that An- 
Najashi gave the Prophet #€ a gift 
of a pair of plain black leather 
socks. He put them on, then he 
{performed ablution and) wiped 
over them. (Da‘if) 

AS5 GIS ust 2b ae Gis - 044 
wee YF GHSN ile Gah Gls 
32 SE ol 6 cGatsi ar we gl 
oe call goed OF aS 

Lage Gaal 

VOOre ceptdll le cemell OL ca jlghil coglag:) axe} Lute colin] Fee Banal 

Chapter 85. Wiping The Top 
And The Bottom Of The 
Leather Socks 

550. It was narrated from 
Mughirah bin Shu’bah that the 
Messenger of Allah #@ wiped over 
the top and the bottom of the 
leather socks. (Da‘if) 

ie o§ld H opts 
Al om ee 1 ~ (Ao ernall) 
(Ao dimes!) abinly Ciel 

agi Giese by ples ts - oo 

o 4 mi ts A ° y on 
Bl S505 Ol Sad os Haas Ge ctas 
g sa 

ale loieaes eure x 

7 

ede Gye VOI Ec zemmall LAS Gl ca ylghall caging d ae ei Leta ookedl] ees 
ghee oy Ll oro y «gba YI dle 434 CW re ise ly 6% i Ji 

Comments: 

The Hadith is Weak. It cannot, therefore, be presented as supportive of the 
content of the heading of this chapter. 

551. It was narrated that Jabir 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% 
passed by a man who was 
performing ablution and washing 
his leather socks. He gestured 
with his hand, (and said): ‘Rather 
I have been commanded to wipe 
them.’ The Messenger of Allah # 
gestured with his hand like this, 
from the tips of the toes to the 

tated aaa 25 3ins Gis - 001 
7B Li of pe OF ty GS 336 
to HE ol 0th % dG ne Be 
Ble 3 

Abs Se code J sie e555 bs 
6 ot p25 35 ngnaly Sof dp 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

base of the shin, tracing lines with 
his fingers.” (Da‘if) 

380 igri g Solis ilgul 

Jet Sy ete Gibl fy. Me oe 

gery bbe; Gi 

we al exes) 6 ggrna al ae Aout 6 pees rls Aa & [ie srlist] ted 

Chapter 86. What Was 
Narrated Concerning The 
Period Of Wiping For 
Residents And Travelers 

552. ft was narrated that Shuraih 
bin Hani’ said: “I asked ‘Aishah 
about wiping over the leather 
socks and she said: ‘Go to ‘Ali 
and ask him, for he knows more 
about that than I do.’ So I went to 
‘Ali and asked him about wiping. 
He said: ‘The Messenger of Allah 
#€ used to tell us that the resident 
could wipe for one day and one 
night, and the traveler could do 
so for three days.’”” (Sahih) 

Comments: 

VINE oily) copes 
gh HE OE - AT penal) 
BLAIS pode Qi 8 ead 

"(AY deel) 
ie lit bint Gis - coy 
du sedi a aes (Sas eros i) 
Se ai oe ask 23s 256 sgl 
este oe 

dye . tt z a 
ees gé Wl Oe CSE ete A, 

Sf 72k we a 3425 SE 

43 pel 

a. If a person on a journey does not take off his socks, he can do away with 
washing and continue to to wipe over them. In case he takes off the socks, 
it becomes compulsory for him to wash the feet. 

b. A non-traveler, if he puts on the socks after performing his ablution, can 
only wipe his socks for a day and night. 

553. It was narrated that 
Khuzaimah bin Thabit said: “The 
Messenger of Allah 3¢ set a time 
limit for the traveler of three days, 
and if the questioner had 
persisted in asking, he would 
have made it five (days).” (Sahih) 

LF ee ate 2 82% 422 gic 45 - 
@S3 oe ‘dose Oy Ele Kus ~ oor 

OSE pictl) ae at 425 ae: db 
gees giles Ge en Qa gf; 

The Chapters Of Purification... 381 tories Syigilt witgil 

it VOVie teal U8 eed Ob cd kbhl caglogt ae ol Leow oa Low! ] Fs Saeed 
Ole only & cypee ols us al 6 Guha SI Arr 3 6 ool pols Syd 

554. It was narrated from i244 Gis : th 33 Link Gls - oot 
Khuzaimah bin Thabit that the “ 
Prophet #¢ said: “Three days.” I 
think he said, “And three nights 2 ease «alti all 250s 306 
during which the traveler may ~*~ , , 4, es ‘ 

wipe over his leather socks.” ‘99 ot ay! OF hE OF Sy 

od a Set, oe fot eee, Ter Fa 

va 

(Sahih) 6 #6 220 os cell of EEE By 
aye Fit a “Ae “5 oe 0 E ae ees 
pluals Cady oe Aaa | ul YG 

Mat dé petal 3 
» GST Sayeed} b5) Ferrand oolinf] Tex Seaal 

“oy 

555. It was narrated that Abu Pap easel tf gl Chie one 
Flurairah said: “They said: “O Pa ee a ee ae ee 
Messenger of Allah! What about ‘J8 yledl G4 Ee Ye SP 
the purification of the leather ao OF ot a ote 2 ae 
socks?’ He said: ‘For the traveler = _ e = CA. ams a hi 3 
it is three days and nights, and for = «<5 oe! G et SHE db BJ 
the resident it is one day and one cr ae ae een eee 
ASG dU S bie cdila of! 

night’” (Da‘if) pe ROG ta aren aa oF 
6B Je iflar vam tal O25 
pty Settls pf BE pithy -56 

iy ty 

AY Cyodly Coney Cail LS ind dike gr pe & [aa ool] ge pe 

556. 1t was narrated from 33 335 mee Zp Aske Gas - 004 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakrah, reas ee oe 
from his father, that the Prophet  % ; 
#8 granted a concession to Wee’ rt fete Gas 2d dooess |. CE 
travelers: “If a traveler performed 

ablution and put on leather socks, ‘42, OF B55 oe! a 3 ~) ne 36 

then he performed a fresh (32 O . beth - 28° SF anes yg Se 
|e pla Gots ot RE Zo; 

ablution, he could wipe over the ee ie Pike es 

on BE Bg er ek ek Ee 
leather socks for three days and 4 ol cle gos Stet ~ AA Cyund 5 

nights; ee could do a0 i; ie : ath : fea; etl Kye 

The Chapters Of Purification... 382 lgrrwg Brigit! wileil 

for one day and one night.” 
(Hasan) 

Cakes dees OAV /YAD SUS! Gude oS) clayton el Dyno anliel] ey os 
cee peleoll & cps de Gm VES OSs tals 64 le gle gy dere of 

Chapter 87. Concerning “<3 cK Gu JG - av i!) 
Wiping Over The Leather . ’ i oie : 
Socks With No Time Limit (AV dined!) Sub 95 he 

557. It was narrated from Ubayy 2a giabg «dpcog 23 aiegs is - ooy 

bin ‘Imarah, in whose house the 7 
Messenger of Allah #% performed {3 ail de Gis 3G JE agli 35 

prayer facing both prayer oe: :2 (ff 22 ese ef ee 
direction, that he said to the i i er ae : 
Messenger of Allah #§: “Can 1 gf Ag gi wom b6 on ot eet 
wipe over my leather socks?” He BSE ee ee ae Mee ae 
said: “Yes.” He said: “For one ° OF Pa ct pl es 634) sl 
ar * it or > 4 Ue) fee o ” o- 4 
day?” He said: “For two days. 4) Sym5 GIS che op Bol BE AG 
He said: “For three?” And so on, gg - A Dg. Pies © pede 

* “os een oe + ra 
until the number reached seven. “*! «eS gota Se db de Re 
He (the Prophet #$) said: “For as ¢. #33.) Js antl M6 al 3,23 36 
long as you see fit.” (Da‘if) z ares ou 
tomge :JG Shy db aes :Jdb 
ign 3 dB Ls a sb du 

OA 1 

of VOATe cqemall 3 Crd gl wh caylgbli cogld gel ae ol [open octal] : ‘eps 
Cale 9 6.3.95) Jb, ‘ pias ooliel aly) Joel om ont JB» oa exh oy ou fone 
. Cyded! al G6b ans 

558. It was narrated from ‘Ugbah : delti cdg £3 Acs] EES: = on, 
bin ‘Amir Al-Juhani that he came s beer Ss iE jie rata 
to ‘Umar bin Khattéb from Egypt. ‘To Ot BG Eg 
‘Umar said: “How long has it ee o Sell oe oa P o ze UF 
been since you have taken off . 
your leather socks?” He said: pens foes ch o se oF Si I isl 

2 sth 

“From one Friday till the next.” of fe dé p ie ahd eral wt oF 3 ab 
He said: “You have acted in we i 
accordance with the Sunnah.” ¢* as oo Ba dB pas by wes] 

(Hasan) ne i A ed 2; a6 eal 

The Chapters Of Purification... 383 Wegcrieng Sj lgdat) sl gsi 

EE Esai dG 

ce (stl Ges VV IV) IES Cig 3 gil ae pum os liul] — 

1% le gl Qudo 

Comments: ape aes 
On the face of it, the Ahadith of this chapter seem to be in conflict with the 
Ahddith of the previous chapter. The scholars have, however, removed this 
apparent anomaly by suggesting that the Ahddith prescribing a time limit on 
wiping the socks would be applicable if the person on a journey has no 
difficulty in taking off the socks after three days and three nights. However, 
in case the journey is long and the person cannot afford lagging behind the 
caravan, or else he finds it difficult or painful to take off the socks, he could 
wipe over the socks for an indefinite period of time, as was the case with 
‘Ugbah bin ‘Amir #. It was on this basis that ‘Umar # expressed his 
approval of the action by commenting: ‘You have acted in accordance with 
the Sunnah.’ 

ot} soir tr 4“ 

Chapter 88. Concerning ‘ is cs & <b = (An aoe 

Wiping Over The Socks And (AA dice!) oS ¢ 3 3 555d Je 

The Sandals i 

559. It was narrated from AS3 ae rassen 33 Ele tis — 004 

Mughirah bin Shu‘bah that the De ahe ck we BG Seay sane 

Messenger of Allah #8 performed 0% S29 nad og! GF voles Gas 

‘ . . ot feo ee 2 “8 ian oon at 
ablution and wiped over his socks ona 1 35g 52 LEG of J Pil 
and his sandals. (Da‘if) . os 

seal poe Ss vee eg a) josG 
- dls 

YORE 6 cya gael! ule ome wh 3 Ugh cagla gl dor | ere) ostuul] ‘ees 

oe Je VAY ee 6 eda ‘gogl Olan ety Vie 6 Geko Si doen g 6% fee) Sato oP 

ghz Ubeuall glaz|y dine Sy 225 alpd Cutelly carla ce pal Jed ply ¢palusli 

Comments: aa 

a. Arabs had open sandals, ie., that they had only one or two small leather 
straps over the soles of their shoes. It was, therefore, not necessary to take 
off the shoes for wiping over the socks. The Hadith can be acted upon even 
today in the case of plastic slippers etc. 

b. The report also speaks of wiping over the socks and the shoes separately, 
which means that he did both in turns, ie., either wiping only over the 
socks or wiping over the strapped shoes alone. 

560. It was narrated from Abu 42-1 ts t 4o02 Ge ots 
Musa Al-Ash/‘ari that the . 

The Chapters Of Purification... 384 Lg g Sigal! wrtqul 

ablation and wiped over his socks SO 9S ofS) S858 5 zyats 2 Se 
and his sandals. (Da‘if) oF Oly os gue 3f rs Pe pee 
oF Sie ce tN AE op SAI 
(23 a aot dy25 SF EES! Lg Gf 
AG Sis Le eas 

abet Y caus 3 Ae ju 
» galetg mate 

Sty cap laa! Sade ge VAC EVAL / V2 gel a tT Lede oolinl] Fortra 
Aine SSNs ¢ Gide Dhow oy Cemls toeeye col ge dela Cat ol Gaels oy Shea 
eile) ydondt Ups ded B25 daly aby 6 dre odin Ge gd! Sly copes oylogd 

Chapter 89. What Was 3 ‘He ue oh - (4 cae? 
Narrated Concerning Wiping ede: 73 
Over The Turban"! (AS dam) dala ee 

561. It was narrated from Bilal we SI 1 glee u elie Bis - ony 
that the Messenger of Allah # o:2 0 ech) cg , ect\i ce oe ty 
wiped over his leather socks and ae . a ~ 7 a oy a 
his head cover (i.e, the Imamah). gp SS 3 6 bd ol gf atl se 
(Sabi) ase Me dt 325 ST I ge ee 
_ gasdls oes Je 
edo ye VVOIe cheleally Erclh gle cemaSl oh cd ylgball «plane ax ol gaps 
4 Ope 5 ‘ 
Comments: ieee ia 
Wiping over the head can take several forms, namely (i) wiping over the 
head or (ii) wiping over the head cover or turban. Another method, the 
third, could, be starting with the head and finishing off with -wiping over 
the turban. There is, however, no clear-cut proof of wiping just over one- 
fourth of the head. : 
562. It was narrated from Jafar 2) Jj) Gis cess Gas - ony 
bin ‘Amr that his father said: “I ota P - Sales 
saw the Messenger of Allah # ~* ee a Path & Bea 
wiping over his leather socks and wots ay oases Gas Be we 
turban.” (Sahih) ‘ ie 

'] Or similar head covering as is mentioned in the first narration. 

The Chapters Of Purification ... 

42 get VI) Sudo oye VOLE 

563. It was narrated that Abu 
Muslim, the freed slave of Zaid 
bin Suhan, said: “I was with 
Salman, and he saw a man 
removing his leather socks for 
ablution. Salman said to him: 
‘Wipe over your leather socks and 
your head cover, and your 
forehead, for I saw the Messenger 
of Allah #€ wiping over his 
leather socks and head cover.’” 

(Daf) 

-4 xgl> Qe VOU ec odnne 

564. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “I saw the 
Messenger of Allah #@ performing 
ablution, wearing a Qatari turban. 
He put his hand beneath the 
turban and wiped the front part 
of his head, and he did not take 
the turban. off.” (Da‘if) 

385 (gris Sylgbs! oligal 

& ga rey 
at! Ob ao 

2 
° tO a 

- Set. < Ae « 
Ce 64ake gl Gas 1 gs 

Gis tg Gis 

. 

we 2 

weg we Rg ee foe es 

ME abl yes Cgly DB aul GF cs oe 
whe c 

Eliglls gust fe Ants 

«pith dle cemad ok coped gl egy bedl ax 21 Fee Wael 

ac et Ny k Age ow 
celal oof or 558 bE cine Yr Bog 

oes oe 
wl F ait al BS gf dent $8 

Sok 

oS WB Bey gia J chine 
ipo ae 4 =F 58 445 ne eolels 
per ihe Be Re sah rolls 3 Oe 
al d525 E35 Zh « iehs cipires 

ahi Sidr Je pec a 

oe ote ax 1 [edad orkinel] ‘eps 

or Fo Fao 

SF Cp tem cplb gf Gis - ont 

ais ae i al ae je Ss AE SSN gl 

dala! od & ou a 4 3 
-Gheadt 8s ol tats fae eae 

or VEN: 7 thebadl he mena ek 2 ylgbs capld gl tom ool ne orkuaf] : Tez Sead 
-opeg Shee Yt Oty. LS Cas V Te 4 Cay mewnee 
og tt Sle 3 Por 54 AF on 

ae hee 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 386 pond) sl oai 

The Chapters On [ eb Sigil] 
Dry Ablution : 

Chapter 90. What Was ew] BME OE - 4+ penal) 
Narrated Concerning Dry ° . (4+ dit) 

Ablution 

565. It was narrated that ‘Ammar ES Bis. es 13a% this - ote 
bin Yasir said: “ Aishah dropped a ih ae oe cl ob cate 2 
necklace and she stayed behind to ot #! 4=* Of be ethigk cine os 

look for it. Abu Bakr went to 32 (dG 3 
‘Aishah and got angry with her e aens 
for keeping the people waiting. 
Then Allah revealed the yo 3 utes ES ise ff & 
concession allowing dry ablution, 4 = ie a ae Se 
so we wiped our arms up to the = 2 42> «jeg 56 call JOB ZU 
shoulders.) Abu Bakr went to Batt, Ge izes, ona eee | se 
Coe] ne Be Cried SL “Ni 
‘Aishah and said: ‘I did not know “TS ol BH ean 

that you are blessed.’” (Sahih) SU Sage J & sh Gis 36 

64 GAS Code Ce PIATS cpm oh ca lebll coglag! ae ol Leonel FesSege] 
<0 bh 9 bey op cogls call cguw hl (dome Bye dS ys clits ool! 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith clearly establishes the excellence of ‘Aishah, the Mother of the 
Believers %, that, because of a momentary inconvenience, a great facility in 
the form of dry ablution was granted to the entire community of believers. 

b. Ordainment to wipe the head up to the shoulders was later abrogated. Dry 
ablution, as clearly indicated in other Ahédith, is only necessary now over 
the face and the palms of the two hands. 

1) Sindi said: “Either because that was legislated, then abrogated, or due to their Héhad 
(judgment) without asking, in which case it was a mistake. It also contains proof that 
the Prophet #¢ ordered them with it, and this is supported from one angle, except 
that it is said: ‘The meaning is that he ordered them to perform dry ablution, not the 
how of it’” 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 387 post) sl gui 

566. [t was narrated that ‘Ammar saetek) ee8 Be tars Gee 
[bin Yasir] said: “We did dry °#"! ~* A aaa dae 
ablution with the Messenger of ¢2 «906 36 <&ie 3 olat Gls 
Allah #, (wiping our arms) upto 5s, 
our shoulders.” (Sahih) uF 

oF 

pre aes ee ae rere 
@ Gino JG LG oul gs OF 7 
SES J BE ait J 25 

CA TNO epee 3 posh ol ciylebll VIA/1: SLI a ol Peel teed 
“4 GAB oe Glo Cade 
567. It was narrated from Abu ols 2s dae 3 
Hurairah that the Messenger of ae bac ay ee, eae 
Allah #€ said: “The earth has neat] a hg wl Of a) ae Gus 
been made for me a place of oy helael ase Se a ia 
worship and a means of i is Z 

ee € oe Sirt - f Soe 
purification.” (Sahih) OF cul GE ve Mel oF keer LF a2 
2. va t 

Oj 9@b3 late G5! 33 
gdm ye OVNI ee cB ghall cele Jobe! Wh debra 6 plane a ol Te Saeed 
Vlas a pine oy oe len| 
Comments: 
a. The earth being a place of worship means that a mosque is not a 
precondition for the performance of prayer, it can be offered even outside it. 
b. The earth has been made ‘a means of purification’ means that, in the event 
of a valid excuse, purity through dry ablution is a permissible alternative to 
ablution and a bath. 
568. It was narrated from ‘Aishah (Gis. 223 a ; 
that she borrowed a necklace ae 
from Asma’, and she lost it The ‘2! 3 + 
Prophet #8 sent some people to, Z 
look for it, and the time for prayer om : So es 2 
came so they prayed without  <@lb 3 WU ag 25 Jojb esis 
ablution. When they came to the * ceclkt he had ea trek 
Prophet 28 they complained to ae ei ee es rere 
him about that, then the Verse of 4! CJ33 ca] dle 155 Be gl 351 
dry ablution was revealed. Usaid 
bin Hudair said: “May Allah ee 
reward you with good, for by (nt VY bs fh dS Ge aly 
Allah, nothing ever happens to “ : 

foe 

a ce 2% ° A ae a 
al SIGS sta 2 ate) Ol oS 

7 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

you but Allah grants you a way 
out and blesses the Muslims 
thereby.” (Sahih) 

cle ai ut) 

388 posdl tot! gal 

‘ aM eee TF ke Me 4 9 

tare 
AS 

itl Lab Ob ileal fla qo idl el tags 

a opts oll gl cade tye PIV em cpl Ob coped colines COVTECYYVY: 
3 OFS gt! See oe Cc aad isch . c. 

Chapter 91. Concerning 
Striking The Ground Once In 
Dry Ablution 

569. It was narrated from Sa’eed 
bin ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abza 
from his father, that a man came 
to ‘Umar bin Khattaéb and said: “I 
became impure following sexual 
emission and cannot find any 
water.” ‘Umar said to him: “Do 
not pray.” But ‘Ammar bin Yasir 
said, “Do you not remember, O 
Commander of the Believers, 
when you and I were on a 
military expedition and we 
became sexually impure and 
could not find water? As for you, 
you did not pray, but I rolled in 
the dust and then prayed. When I 
came to the Prophet #¢ and told 
him what had happened, he said: 
‘It would have been enough for 
you (to do this).” (Then 
demonstrating) the Prophet # 
struck the ground with his hands, 
then blew on them, and wiped his 
face and palms with them.” 
(Sahih) 

Gb Ot - a pal) 

(4A tinct!) Hels 555 

pal 

isa Gis 1 lk by As as — 004 
if pelt of ad is se BI 
ce ete aes Bes 
ht Soe M25 Of af 38 
O68 id af ob Est 4 sds 
Tt & oe chai Vine 

we 

a eae 
ob oS 

Liles Li! 3g ERS 6 

[.S) Gus 298 cag oti sf UG 
$6 23) 05.35 olay O86 Up: 

nae cst aed 2 eet ere 
ate # s 
el 

j 

cad az 

EH85 slags AES csi LI Sy 

At ded Cad oe PAE & pol wh o aedi lene 60 pak 9 YPALC 6 pacsee 

Comments: 

a. This shows the correct way to perform the dry ablution. It is like this: Strike 
your hands on a piece of pure ground, then blow the dust off. After that, 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 389 pond! algal 

pass the hands over the face and, finally, wipe one hand with the other. 
This completes the dry ablution. You do not have to wipe your arms and 
feet. Neither do you have to wipe your head and ears. 

b. Dry ablution thus done is as good a substitute for a bath as it is for 
ablution. There is no need to soil your entire body with earth to secure 
purity from sexual impurity. 

c. The rationale behind blowing off the hands after striking the ground with 

them is to shake off the extra dust. The idea is simply to comply with an 
order, not to cover the body with dust. 

570. It was narrated from Hakam iz cee f 2 Ak Bis — oye 
and Salamah bin Kuhail that they ee ; 
asked ‘Abdullah bin Abi Awfa «fad col ofl g 2 cgee Shi we Oo ae 

about dry ablution. He said: “The <,¢ WM seo we oe 

Prophet #6 commanded ‘Ammar ~ i ge vy ae ‘f ee 
to do like this;’ and he struck the 331: GU «25 of baal col Si dul Le 
ground with his palms, shook the Seen” seas ote Paes 

dust off and wiped his face. “7°? WA Jaa ol Lie ie él 

(Da‘if) se aaay gad 25 I a 
Hakam said, “and his hands.” “ een 
Salamah said, “and his elbows.” gt 9 
alo U5 ey pS 
£835 
. ached a al «pail [tne oakief] Te Sate 
Comments: 

The upshot of the matter is that one of the narrators (Hakam) reports that, 
having wiped the face, the Prophet § rubbed his one hand on the other 
(which is correct). The second narrator (Salamah) said that he 2&, 
afterwards, wiped his elbows with the hands. This version is not acceptable 
since it contradicts the other dependable narrations. Moreover, the Hadith 
itself is Weak. 

Chapter 92. Striking The 

Ground Twice In Dry 
Ablution 

571.It was narrated from 
‘Ammar bin Yasir that when they 
did dry abluton with the 
Messenger of Allah 2, he 
commanded the Muslims to strike 
the dust with the palms of their 
hands, and they did not pick up 

ol Bb GU - (AY penal) 
(AY deat) SS 

Pe 

ope 3p keh th ff Ge - ovy 

a <a 

fy dl Se G35 1b eli] cs git 

° - - 9 ae fae r ed 
or! oa tape op ears bol ra 
Je Be ed ae of aa Be Oe 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

any dust. Then they wiped their 
faces once, then they struck the 
dust with their palms once again 

390 pad! Glgsl 

BE B25 GAAS Se poll gi 

ls SAT mgSE Le Geka ob 

and wiped their hands. (Sahih) ee Cae ee ee hy 
Ce Np ee Cale Ge Neat 
a 4368 

eae 

iijad 1S 0 Sely bess 
é < of 2 Fg 

eel [yeas oiAl Be LB 

O10 coda [eee] eps 

Comments: 

Most of the narrations reported from ‘Ammiar bin Yasir 4 speak of striking 
the dust once. His own Fatwa (formal legal opinion), as pointed out by 
Imam Tirmidhi, speaks of doing the dry ablution by a single strike of the 
hands. Imam Shawkani says: “All reports speaking of double strike of the 
hands on the dust are open to question. Had the reports been sound they 
would have been implemented, especially because they contain one 
additional element which would have to be accepted.” The right thing to do 
is, thus, to accept the Hadith contained in the two most authentic books 
(Sahih Bukhari & Sahih Muslim) which is about making a single srike of the 
hands on the dust, unless the report telling about double strike of the hands 
were proven to be authentic. (Nainul-Awtiér 264/1) 

Chapter 93. An Injured Man 
Who Becomes Sexually 
Impure And Fears For His 
Life If He Takes A Bath 

572. It was narrated that ‘Ata’ 
bin Abu Rabéah said: “I heard Ibn 
‘Abbas saying that a man was 
injured in the head at the time of 
the Messenger of Allah #8, then 
he had a wet dream. He was told 
to have a bath, so he took the 
bath, became rigid and stiff, and 
died. News of that reached the 
Messenger of Allah 2 and he 
said: “They have killed him, may 
Allah kill them! Is not the cure for 
a lack of knowledge to ask 
questions?’ ” 

‘Ata’ said: “We heard that the 

corel Bb OU - OY penal 

a 8 fe feet Z Biro ty 4 
O} dei AE GS SSI da 
(AY dias!) face 

ie Gas 2 te ff ples Ble - ovy 
cA 

Ate .- 2? F » - Be -? 

DE U5 gl oh othe 32 ctelh5 
< % ee, be ae 
Lal O! 5d ele Gl Cane 

cedeel aglal 4 

1 ait Gls ad 258 
OSNGEM et 
he Ob 

\ 

ie “~ ge EF pctv 
#6 asl 3455 of CAG 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 391 pod! Gal gui 

Messenger of Allah #@ said: ‘Tf 2,. st ge sl - 402 oh os 
only he had washed his body and 9 “7 dal; S59 cde he gdb 
left his head alone where the telat Slot 
wound was.’ ” (Sahih) 

4 elle ye aah ail elie Cad gga PAPVie coglagl olys Leeee] Fen Seged 
Cato, tape he ol Cuded OVA /\gStosit ds elke cys glad Pape tres 
SLY Wr Teal we Oka pee 3 telbe Capon 9 ug el Gye 

Comments: 

a. If the water is too cold and there is no way to heat it, and if taking a cold 
bath is fraught with risk of death or sickness, it is perfectly in order to do 
dry ablution of prayer. At the expiry of the risk the person concerned shall 
have to take a bath. 

b. The injury factor mentioned in the report leads one to presume that this 
was also a contributing factor to his ailment. Thus, although the immediate 
cause of death was extreme cold, it is also true that the cold water poured 
on the wound also aggravated the sickness that eventually resulted in his 
death. 

c. Issuance of Fatwa demands extreme caution. While issuing a ruling, it is one 
of the imperatives to give due consideration to the situation of the 
questioner. 

d, If the question asked has no easy answer, it is best to avoid giving the 
answer, and advise the questioner to refer the matter to a higher authority 
on Islamic jurisprudence. 

e. If the mistake is grave, it is permissible to use harsh words of reprimand 
provided that there is no fear of a negative reaction to it. It may be noted 
that anything that invalidates ablution also invalidates dry ablution. Dry 
ablution shall also be nullified as soon as a person regains the ability to use 
water or, alternately, the water that was non-existant, or out of reach, 
becomes available to the user. And Allah knows best. 

Chapter 94. Concerning jai be OU - (48 ennai) 
Performing A Bath For xsl 
Being Sexually Impure (as inal!) GLEN Se 

573. Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that his 93 «te gl GS 
maternal aunt Maimunah said: “] oe (255 Gis 3 VG cents 2 

2 

put out some water for the it car ? i 

Prophet #€ to take a bath, andhe = 5% teed! col gi ple Ge come 

bathe to cleanse himself from he Pa ahs. ite ay for end 
Le cpl Was : “yo 

impurity following sexual activity. pee . oe cs rea rad 

He tilted the vessel with his left #€ 220 2245 :210 S22 git fs 
hand, pouring water into his 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

right, and washed his hands three 
times. Then he poured water over 
his private parts, then he rubbed 
his hands on the ground. Then he 
rinsed his mouth and nose, and 
washed his face three times, and 
his forearms three times. Then he 
poured water over the rest of his 
body, then he moved aside and 
washed his feet.” (Sahih) 

Comments: 

392 pod enslgal 

sy) (SG oe oo be Sd 
es OSE os cd bss (Jd Shad, 

(a5Tb AGOIE - ar Je Jalil 

L Free ~- Seg oh 

ute Age 5 jak ba ernly eX es 
gia fe ach Goth EW ace 

oe 

ity Go SES ace 
AWie Fo Leeman] : ee ps 

a. Before putting the hands into the water, the hands must bé washed. 

b. Rubbing the hands on the ground after cleaning one’s private. parts ensures 
better purification. Using soap for the purpose is also in order. 

c. Feet should not be washed while performing ablution during the bath. They 
should be washed after the bath is a 

574. Jumai’ bin ‘Umair At-Taimi 
said: “I went out with my 
paternal aunt and maternal aunt 
and we entered upon ‘Aishah. We 
asked her: ‘What did the 
Messenger of Allah #@ do when 
he had. the bath to cleanse himself 
from sexual impurity?” She said: 
‘He used to pour water on his 
hands three times, then he would 
put them in the vessel and wash 
his. face three times, then he 
would pour water over his body, 
then he would get up and 
perform prayer: As for us, we 
would wash our heads five times 
because of our braided hair.’” 

(Da'if 

op GUSH ute 3s at ie - ove 

- 

s 
ry Gey 

Me gel de is eras 
aes is 4a oes 3) Gis Gis 
gob pe wah 1 GB 2S ee YS 

Boks ibe Je Gs . J; 
bg sie Be 8 ah 5 Gs OE GS 
S8E 6 le Gad OS ESS oHtEh 
Ae 5 ge es = aes ed « wel5s 

a? 

a Celie sé oo of als EG 

VENT e cabal ge anil Sb cash gall coylay! ost [awe ooleuf] tg os 
2 efor) lagied Clie att y Bie # e Bio tute ya 

The Chapters On Dry Abiution 

Chapter 95. Bathing To 
Cleanse Oneself From Sexual 
Impurity 

575. It was narrated that Jubair 
bin Mut‘im said: “(The 
Companions) disputed in the 
presence of the Messenger of 
Allah #% about having a bath to 
cleanse oneself from sexual 
impurity. The Messenger of Allah 
#@ said: ‘As for me, I pour three 
handfuls of water on my head.’” 
(Sahih) 

393 pond) Gl gsi 

Be Lea ob SU ~ (40 anne!) 
(40 deed!) SCS! 

23 3 gf Gls - ove 

6905 | 
Bpakt of ot UF a5e ofl bud 

dil dy25 Be Head So goal 2 ios 

Jase Gh -86 ai d.t5 He 
3 

plans Votre Ue aly le vil ot lk eel ult an el ig pa 
14 Bleed col Sate ge PYVEG CUM ones eI de ele Hall Gleael Ob 1 doull 

Comments: 

a. ‘Disputed’ here means started talking about the subject and everybody 
narrated how he had a bath after sexual impurity. 

b. The Hadith discusses only one of the issues connected with the bath after 
being sexually impure. Maybe, the Prophet. #¢ had discussed the entire 
procedure, but the narrator chose to mention only the most important one. 
It is also possible that the Prophet #% did not mention other points because 
the Companions had rightly stated them, and he just mentioned what was 
missing in their narrations. And Allah knows best. 

576. It was narrated from Abu 
Sa‘eed that a man asked him 
about having a bath to cleanse 
oneself from sexual impurity. He 
said to pour water three times. 
The man said: “But I have a lot of 
hair.” He said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #¢ had more hair than you 
and he was cleaner.” (Da‘if} 

gic 7 f0% ft: See 
cde 5 days es oo Pz 
“a ov 2 Bre to 

GIS5 te ASG Bis VE aknt 3h 
iS okt 0 EG OE BSE 
Gt, [2b BT SS ae ai 25 us 
bl 

te head ols ads Ge oe V¥ C08 Pi deel oe si hearer ese oa lins!] ees 
SE cole pd gl dhe ge Gay datdy Vig tpl dhe & LEY! dbs 3 o Sh oly 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 394 prod) Galgal 

Comments: aac . 
‘Atyab’ could also mean that the Prophet #6 was cleaner and more 
particular about cleanliness than you (the questioner). Still three handfuls of 
water was enough for him. Therefore, it should be enough for you as well. 

577. It was narrated that Jabir . 4 ra ae aoe Pe Gis — ev 
said: “I said: ‘O Messenger of ‘ 
Allah! I live in a cold land, so CH AR 
how should I have a bath to & 
cleanse myself from sexual : 
impurity?’ He said: ‘As for me, I 53 
pour three handfuls of water over 
my head.’” (Sahih) 

CEM oe 9 ult cde eled] 41} lee! wh sacl Lae ae aan 

578. It was narrated from Abu = jg - £3 A fe & 2 Bik — OVA 
Hurairah that a man asked him: gs 
“How much water should I pour 6 ‘Oe gl oF 

over my head when I am sexually —7f- Sica. gl he tied 
impure?” He said: “The Messenger ee te 
of Allah # used to pour three ‘C2 Oly Quis Je Gas 
handfuls of water over his head.” : 
The man said: “My hair is long.” 
He said: “The Messenger of Alldh ¢ 53 3) 125 dB cot ot 

#§ had more hair than youand he « | - or ae ae ae a 4 
was cleaner.” (Sahih) Lab FSI RB ait 95 OF 238 jus 

tyes car OMe gel ye Olea) Sate oye TOV/V aed ae ol [eee] fee ed 
«Gildl tated! igs 25 Jal gt 

Chapter 96. Ablution After Jay 2B db OG - (40 pret) 
ceva (41 dina!) je) | 

af 5% 

579. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 325 . £24 Ji? 3 Ss | Gas — ev4 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢ %: Pave 
would not perform ablution after er Ei de Lacs 513 Ei Ze & 
the bath to cleanse himself from ail Le oth 5 ice “138 CATA 
sexual impurity.” (Daf) aa a : 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 395 pod! cal gui 

chet dar pag Bebe Gk cizlgall cgda dl ono! [ete coli] tee se 
does coll dew cpl ol gin Ce ee JBy ca rr ot ye lowl oe ia a 

ee cpelibe Glee psf ae (VO D2 patel! fob LS alll y co Stealt 
Comments: 

The reason being that while going for a bath, he used to first clean his 
private parts and perform ablution. After that he did not touch the private 
parts. Thus, the ablution performed alongwith the bath sufficed him for 

prayer. 

Chapter 97. The Sexually ib a POG - (av nD) 
Impure Person Warming ere. af ae Oe acn Te 
Himself With His Wife det ol $8 alel #_ sting 
Before She Had The Bath (AY daceil) 

Pa 

580. It was narrated that ‘Aishah Gis :%23 il 2s So of Gis - ev. 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #8... , 2g aes are 44 
used to have a bath to cleanse J age: Gar: Joe aie 
himself from sexual impurity, ad! 525 OW :E3G the 22 oGy3ts 
then he would warm himself with 3... we eh eet eee pe 
me before I had the bath.” (Da‘if) dg Fda oF RU! Se Sets HS 
jest of 

BS edt Le SB ele OL ca ylglll egde ll ao of [ae ookul] gees 
pb LS cia Cay she ol ge Cee ge OSs Cade ge VIG cull dy 
: me solely od ode Jl Jb sus foal 60 phy we sl 

Comments: 

It has already been stated (Ahddith 534 & 535) that the body of a sexually 
impure person is not impure. Unlike the palpable and. observable 
uncleanness caused by urine, impurity caused by sexual activity is an 
impalpable and unobservable matter. As such there is no harm if a person 
who has taken a bath shares the bed with his sexually impure wife. 

Nevertheless, the narration is Weak. As such we should avoid quoting it as 
a Hadith of the Prophet #8. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

Chapter 98. The Sexually 
Impure Person Sleeping As 
He Is Without Touching 
Water 

581. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 
would become sexually impure 
and then sleep without touching 
water until he got up later on and 
taken a bath.” (Da‘if) 

396 post! il gal 

eC Aad gd SU - 4A prea 

(4A dint) Ble Jug Y asngy 

i 

4 ott yl Gore 2 aL 
“bead Ud Jal pst Se 

Ol LS ply Gardl Bb clk Ok caylghll gies ool [ues esl] Ferber 
Sled yi & a oly ‘steel aay 64 Ouhe tp wl Cede ge VAT 6 fanty 
had ad] teal gy CTY VV AM agedl te pludk coy gate 

Comments: 

a. Sleeping ‘without touching water’ means that he went to sleep without 
performing either ablution or having a bath. It does not mean that he did 
not even cleanse the impurity from his body. 

b. The better course would be to sleep after performing ablution as we will see 

in the next chapter. 

582. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #¢, 
if he needed any of his wives, 
would satisfy his need, then he 
would sleep as he was, without 
touching water.” (Da‘if) 

583. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Messenger of Allah #% 
would become sexually impure 
then sleep as he was, without 
touching water. (Da‘if) 

Sufyan said: “I mentioned this 
Hadith one day, and Isma‘il said 
to me: ‘O young man, you should 
support this Hadith with 

#6 Sas Yates OG 
Gill) Cytod) Jail Lede] ge 
59 Gis yon Uy eke Gs - ony 
SS BE fl d425 Of Me 32 a 
JB by Sys 25555 sou de 
dys! He 1B 18 6 det J 

2° 

nage 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 397 pod! cloul 

something else.’ ’’ me 
. A ot 

vedas SUly OAVi¢ «6 bil [ede] ed 

Comments: 
Isma’il means to say that this is only reported on the authority of Abu Ishaq 
who reports it ‘from Aswad, from ‘Aishah %’. As such, in order to support 
Abu Ishaq’s version, there must be another chain of narration as well. 
However, on the basis of other chains of narration the Hadith can be dubbed 
as Sahih (Sound) or Hasan (Good). For detailed discussion see Egyptian 
scholar Ahmad Shakir’s commentary on Tirmidhi, 202/1. 

Chapter 99. Concerning ats VY db 32 2 - (a i) 
Those Who Say That The ¢ 2 om oe ro 
Sexually Impure Person BLAU 0 eee) HE eo 
Should Not Sleep Until He r 

Performs Ablution As For eer 

Prayer 

584. It was narrated that ‘Aishah  ‘¢ 
said: “When the Messenger of i 
Allah # wanted to sleep and he ~*~ , pce 
was sexually impure, he would 88 ab) 345 ol : cS atsle Ge cash 

ae ablution as for prayer. ay eae! BS 6G if sii 13) 

cl... Sept sll Olecely Cod eg Shyer Cb cyaedl he are] isd 

42 9 ob ty deseo (ye Yeo: 

Comments: ii ees as C 
This Hadith has a greater degree of soundness than the ones quoted in the 
previous chapter. Nevertheless, the earlier Ahddith are also without any 
blemish. Reconciliation between both versions could be achieved by 
interpreting the action of performing the ablution as Desirable (Mustahab) 
and that of sleeping without performing the ablution as simply Permissible 
(Mubih). . : 

585. It was narrated from Ibn = Zags Ble Jy ei Ble - odo 

‘Umar that ‘Umar bin Khattab 4.) tun cee feky, tee HES 

said to the Messenger of Allah #: a ae Pa spe ee 

“Can anyone of us sleep if he is 33 522 el cae ol of gil Ce ie 

sexually impure?” He said: “Yes, ey Rg 

if he performs ablution.” (Sahih) Je] al 3 ail dy 3 Jb tht 

MBG HY psi dE OLE Gs 

cel nls ah #2 gil wloels anes a Shae Gb 6 peel ‘bus dor ol Fez aaa) 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 398 pond! Gut! gai 

4 Milage Code on Pete 

xe Ge 

586. It was narrated from Abu 3254 ABLE Olg3e gl Gas - oA% 
Sa‘eed Khudri that he used to 
become sexually impure at night, 
then he would want to sleep. The jj we 35 colli of dil ME oS ag 3 
; : a ae > a Se ee Oe eae 
Messenger of Allah #8 told himto 1 yg a ; a Se ane . 
perform ablution and then go to Of 41 get dao ol GF cole ol 
sleep. (Sahih) re Ac sf ee je beh ta 

pS pS Lass Of a at 25 

Bre so | ot For Whee 4 es so, 
Chores Cp pl Le Gas :olete cnt 

4 dap Cade ya 00 fT: tam] aor ol [omens oan! ] cs Saeed 

Chapter 100.When A Person 5] Gael gb SOU - (1+ penal) 
Who Is Sexually Impure ‘vee tinestt) Locd Saat sit 
Wants To Have Intercourse : ? leg age) si 
Again, He Should Perform 

Ablution 

587. It was narrated that Abu adit os Sidehi we 53 Sa (As -— eAV 

Sa'eed said: “The Messenger of ~ " ,, a ae, eee 
Allah #8 said: ‘If anyone of you 203 G dell ae Bae to IgA 
has intercourse with his wife, then =, (2-c*) Jf ts .dccNl CLE ie 
he wants to do it again, let him Pre cee ne es 

oe 

ae oy # - 448). NE - € oe 
perform ablution.’” (Sahih) BE al dye JE cB dee ol be 
338 af sof pb alt sist uA ip 

43 wale ude cya VeAte 
Comments: 
This ablution is not obligatory but Desirable (Mustahab), since the Prophet 
#@ has himself said that the benefit accruing from the act is that it provides 
further stimulus or energy. (Sahih Ibn Khuzaimah: 221) 

Chapter 101. One Who Has Cpaed He Le ot — OY geal) 
One Bath After Being ee 1 ar ee der ie ie 
Intimate With All His Wives 213 Ane SG eet Ge Jott 

(vey dinzil) 
588. It was narrated from Anas Bon (ht, | BEST pe Fa Ze 
ee ae seis (75 oases GS — CAA 
that Prophet #¢ used to go round to : > : 
all his wives with one bath. (Sahih) be dee! ala “Shee fe gee iil 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

Jee tls le Gua Jel J 

399 pod! al gyl 

Ol aT 32 6 Bs ass be hth 
bg sts fe Sols oe ae oh 

dels 

b elale ah cd sbgbll «cde pt tor | [eee] : Fes Saeed 

VUE re VEEVER/V: ght ers ciples) or! Auli g 64 S93! Sade cr Veere cdo|s 

Comments: 

obs Gobdl mee J sbels 

If a person has sex with more wives than one in the same night, it is not 
necessary to have a bath after each act. One bath at the end will be enough. 

589. It was narrated that Anas 
said: “I put out water for the 
Messenger of Allah #2 for a bath, 
and he hade a bath after going to 
all of his wives in one night.” 

(Daf) 

259 Ge ce ee 
i 3 — beats i fle 

tll 3 LS 4 poe tee Me anata staf] eed 

Chapter 102. Concerning One 
Who Has A Bath After 
Intimacy With Each Of His 
Wives 

590. It was narrated from Abu 
Rafi’ that the Prophet # went 
around to all of his wives in one 
night, and he had a bath after 
each one of them. It was said to 
him: “O Messenger of Allah, why 
not make it one bath?” He said: 
“This is purer, better and 
cleaner.” (Hasan) 

“ 28e or tue 

nt Spond SG — (V+ Y penal) 
i ge ne FES 
C\+¥ dad!) Mee Bely IS te 

3 oe 

ope dé Gas bus Gs 

¢ 

J 
ably Lbf; 3) gh: 

dg of af crs epee gl GS Gh cyl! copbyl ao sl Cpu ool | as 
cgbilly TVVIV i pSlelly COL oul Wily Gale #4 alee Cate ye V4 

Comments: 

The Hadith proves that the Prophet # was extremely particular about 
cleanliness and purity. This also explains why he so much loved perfume 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 400 pod! algal 

and why he had profound abhorrence for things of foul odour or smell. 

Chapter 103. Concerning aided ie 1 OG - Sa Y fey 
Eating And Drinking Of One - Pee 
Who Is Sexually Impure che °Y deel) oo pg 5 jst Q 

So % 

591. It was narrated that ’‘Aishah as 2g8 ali on sl Bis - 04) 
said: “If the Messenger of Allah e046 “aie 30 
: rom es dale 3h 
#@ wanted to eat when he was Se oad e553 [Saat is 
sexually impure, he would 36 «33M! 36 cml GE opi 
perform ablution.” (Sahih) sf ssf (5) BE oh hier OS 1258 tgs 
ce db cpa locals Cardl agi She Gh cyaedl «elas eel tg se 
64 dd Cal cpl ge Teo: 
Comments: Ce Se C 
The term ablution as used here, may either mean the formal ablution 

performed for the prayer (as shall be mentioned under Hadith 592) or just 
washing the hands and mouth, which is the lexical meaning of the term. 

592. It was narrated that Jabir bin —o of EE San Gils - oy 

‘Abdullah said: “The Prophet 2 48. 
was asked about whether a gh Gis ‘te & deli} Sis 
person who is sexually impure ve BF odes o bee os & to i 
can sleep, or eat, or drink. He os ; 
said: ‘Yes, if he does ablution as of ho je: 5 dl we 
for the prayer.’” (Da‘if) es cea? “5G $583 51 AG - a ats 
MOLAY 065.5 23 
ccpteell IE CAST syger adndy Ole Gy! ay ho pt Ltd coll] : Fete) 
CEANY) 23 patel 5 
Chapter 104. Concerning One 5 Ses ale ce a — V6 & peenadl) 

Who Says That Washing The 
Hands Is Sufficient 

593. It was narrated from ‘Aishah Gas :i23 wi a nS a Gis - 04 
that if the Prophet 8 wanted to : sey 22 Sey 
eat when he was sexually impure, re 2 EN GY at 
he would wash his hands. (Sahih) Sf ihe 32 ith al fe GAH 

(BE SF sul hy SS Be eh 

(V«% decd) aia (Ab 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

401 proc) algal 

one Tee pas 
ee foe clam 

wprline te Lal yd aly COAET? cpt Leonel ees 

Comments: 

It is desirable to wash hands before eating the meals even though one is not 
sexually impure. But washing the hands is a must, and performing ablution 
a desirable act for a sexually impure person. 

Chapter 105. What Was 
Narrated Concerning Reciting 
Qur’4n When One Is Not In 
A State Of Purity 

594. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Salamah said: “I 
entered upon ‘Ali bin Abu Talib 
and he said: ‘The Messenger of 
Allah #€ used to go to the 
lavatory and relieve himself, then 
come out, and he would eat bread 
and meat with us and recite 
Qur'an, nothing stopped him’ or 
perhaps he said: ‘prevented him 
from doing so except sexual 
impurity.’” (Hasan) 

a se ole Le SE - (+0 ‘cared 
(+0 dametl) 3 sigh 2b sé ora 

ae 4. Bre 
Jina GIS Us bf As 4 Gis - 04% 

SS oh ale be Ea Bs ee Ih 

“ee 

che Je Lids iJ doko og ail oe 8 
RE as) as os 7 dus Jb al or 

ates “ raed pais Pea oa 
sae e 

45 Sah 15 aby, i cae (Sts 

Sil gg Bass Vg 236 ey hs 

bEH Vy teh 

ear e cola! La Cedt fb Ol iba coslagel eel Laem eobel] ces 
hills teSlesty cOle oply cderje cpl rrmcy ¢ Pee Cem VetiE 6 gde ] SBs 

Comments: 

“pants 

a. On the basis of proofs, it can be asserted that it is better to abstain from 
reciting the Qur’a4n when one is in a state of impurity, although there is no 

question about its permissibility. 

b. In our present times: the problem frequently raises its head, especially in 
girls’ schools, where the situation is this; at times it is the lady teacher, and 
at other times it is the girls that are faced with this problem. Considering all 
aspects of the matter it seems expedient to say that reciting the Qur’an ina 
state of impurity is undesirable although permissible in pressing 

circumstances. And Allah knows best. 

595. It was narrated that Ibn Gis sue 23 alin Gs - 040 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of i 7 

a cee : 7 im Seis do Ss pate ayer oe 4 ate 
Allah #@ said: ‘No one who is CAR Oe gt Me 2 he cp beled] 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 402 poe! matoal 

ga sages ne eee ea pe Bi dps SB 06 562 ofl of a uF 
Qur'an.” (Da‘if) ast V5 CEA SF nes » 8 
beds Gerd Bp cle le ob cdylebll egde dl oot [utes cola] tg ss 

OF helen) ENy59 coil Cage # 4 feple| Cute Ga VN: a cola nie Y Gel 
6B Celt oth fal ge Cede Gar gay copds Gobel G LS tae gujleall 

596. It was narrated that Ibn: sis 

‘Umar said: “The Messenger of ,* , 9. Sates: 

Alldh #¢ said: ‘No one who is &! dele] Gas syle fy elae Gis 

sexually impure and no woman cit ie 2S fe: 

who is menstruating should recite yo se : 

anything of the Qur’an.’” (Da‘if) 9B ah S25 JB IE Hee gil oF 
AT Se eb Gasttlty CEN Gi 

EG, 

«Gilad! Gude) 23] [tee] Fez Saeed 

Chapter 106. Under Every Pe WS ed tol et eel) 
Hair There Is The State Of & mes 
Sexual Impurity Ce" dined!) BOS 

597. It was narrated that Abu -: ash sie 25 +n Gis - ody 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of eee it cn rs ~ 
Allah # said: ‘Under every hair & ie Gs CE: ara] 3: bbl Gas 
there is the state of sexual <--+ : 

a i ce Rea ok 
impurity, so wash the hair and 7” OF Skee oh jf «yt 

cleanse the skin.’” (Da’if) cs Ess ip 1 ai! jes ars] “31 
igly path USE Zee ad 
areca 

CYEATE cise! ge Jadll 3 Ob lghll coslagd on ol [rie coll] tay ee 
pag (tao oy YI 43 yah y Coe Cod Ard oy 2s yell Calo iB, oVetie Soke aly 

tlh od Get 
598. Abu Ayyub Al-Anséri 5 Gis : Ke f} pte Gs - o4A 
narrated that the Prophet #8 said: = __. (ts te Sie wre ty 
“The five daily prayers, from one cag ht nan 

4 Pr 

Friday to the next, and fulfilling ri Pl gus , ab Y persis iia 
the trust are all expiation for sa af a “a 
whatever (sins) come between Sighain -J8 i es Fol gylaryl 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 403 pos) wut gul 

them.” I said: “What is fulfilling ,-2 5: Woo ddd tt 
the trust?” He said: Having a bath Ig ened ! wis _e 
to cleanse oneself from sexual (5) 43 E48 28 gs GS 35 US SEY 
impurity, for under every hair +, 0 ,-2- _.. exc 
there is the state of sexual = OB « Bed Joby 238 SCY) 

impurity.” (Hasan) 4 S cs sad 

alae gy plta Cade ge (TUMre 6100/8) SH 3 shall oe ol [gee] tees 
And dels Ml Seudosdis «Ludi ded VOOre « Sails a ylseod] re eLiall ody gl 64 

Comments: 

a. Taking a bath to remove sexual impurity has been likened to ‘fulfilling a 
trust’. Which means that just as fulfilling a trust is mandatory for the person 
concerned, taking a bath to remove sexual impurity is also an obligatory 
duty which must be accomplished, since this impurity cannot be removed 
without taking a bath. 

b. Sins promised to be expiated through a bath are those that belong to the 
category of minor sins. As for the major sins, they are not expiated through 
man’s actions or deeds, but only through sincere repentance or a special 
grace from Allah. 

599. It was narrated from “Alibin 44: . Fak al S XS fis — 094 
Abu Talib that the Prophet # eae 
said: “Whoever leaves an area the pi ota oe sus Gis : ne cx age VI 
size of a hair on his body and 
| WS LES (he ° 

does not cleanse it from sexual He uF 1515 oF rg oes - oF 
impurity, such and such will be {yo :dG 28 e oF Sib al 3S 
done to him in the Fire.” ‘Ali said: xis: : [i 7] 44 
“Because of that I am hostile ‘29% of ‘? of at ees! 5; 
towards my hair,’ and he used to 4 lg jes 35% 9 35 4 Je « Ugh; es 
shave his head. (Hasan) fe ie 
RICH «gas ease * ~ ee Ele is 
ot VERE CAST oye feall 8 ob cB ylgbed | cagla gel reaps [pam 23 bus} ] ex Saead 

weed) jase! (3 bbledly Cae gy! mney ca alae Cyto 

Comments: 
Keeping hair on the head is doubtless a desirable act, provided that the hair 
is full-grown and straight — as proved from the Sunnah of the Prophet #% 
— and not of the European style. Nevertheless, shaving it off is also 
perfectly in order. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

Chapter 107. A Woman Who 
Sees In Her Dream 
Something Like Men See 

600. It was narrated from Zainab, 
the daughter of Umm Salamah, 
that her mother Umm Salamah 
said: “Umm Sulaim came to the 
Prophet #2 and asked him about 
a woman who sees in her dream 
something like a man sees. He 
said: ‘Yes, if she sees water 
(discharge), let her take a bath.’ I 
said: ‘You have embarrassed the 
women. Do women experience 
wet dreams?” The Prophet # 
said: “May your hands be rubbed 
with dust, how else does her child 
resemble her?’ ” (Sahih) 

ePPYACTAV AV ete pba e plod 
VIN c lee soll cate Ball be 

Commenis: 

404 pod miigal 

Sp afi eZ 1b ai (\ “Vv oral!) 
Cv tl (ED 6p G es 8 

2385 gS A eX pl Gis - 
gle Ge O83 (ie AY ces jl 

. oe 
vebre 

pe pes 
Me te 

e 

BE LEN OE SSiycll UES ag cet 

a 

068] ily eed od ttt Cap 
book epbdl egbll al tages 

eS gery WL ¢ paedl ¢ ge SWVC THY 
wae. * 

a. The Mother of the Believers expressed her surprise because she had never 
experienced anything like it. The reason being that an occurrence like this is 
a rarity among women, while it is a normal occttrance among men. 

b. Merely having a vision of something like intercourse in dreams, does not 
necessitate a bath; only a wet dream, ie., the discharge of the male or 
female water makes it compulsory. Therefore, if traces of semen become 
visible on the body or clothes, a bath becomes mandatory regardless of 
whether, on awakening, the person concerned remembers or does not 
remember the dream experienced by him. 

c. The Prophet # means to say that since the woman has the fluid inside her 
that procreates the child, it could as well be emitted in her dream, and there 

is no reason to feel surprised about it. 

601. It was narrated from Anas 
that Umm Sulaim asked the 
Messenger of Allah # about a 
woman who sees in her dream 
something like that which a man 

A WS Sehgal = ve 
ol of Late iF ey Ate3 Ge al 
2 a 

Fase | j\ Fe ea Pester) re ary 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

sees. The Messenger of Allah # 
said: “If she sees that and has a 
discharge, then let her perform a 
bath.” Umm Salamah said: “O 
Messenger of Allah, does that 
really happen?’”’ He said: “Yes, the 
water of a man is thick and white 
and the water of a woman is thin 
and yellow. Whichever of them 
comes first or predominates, the 
child will resemble (that parent).” 
(Sahih) 

oe VMs cad... aij de Gaull 

602. It was narrated from 
Khawlah bint Hakim that she 
asked the Messenger of Allah #% 
about a woman who sees in her 
dream that which a man sees. He 
said: “She does not have to take a 
bath unless she has an orgasm, 
just as man does not have to take 
a bath unless he has an orgasm.” 

(Daf 

405 pod! cos gul 

oF Td ye Bai dy dit 
HG abi 3,25 SB CIE oe G el 
ea gis cig a5 2h bp 
1s Sf at d05 G ctks Af cis 
Sy uy eaok ele eB eG pce 8 
Se i Ge ude Gael 355 atch 

wore Sk tyaedl cele esl tgs 

rae. 

i653 GS AS Ai Gs - vey 
a 345 die WT SS ch TS Ye 

€. 22 

Ch we 8 Gb Ih! yt 
ee joe gle Gab dle PS 

aa pee 

ted Lo ge He 4 ess oF £94 /Aiteol ow sl [tee olul] Tex Saeal 
ce LS Cpl ONS clbey COVAAL cVVO/V) SL are Gleb sel elbe auliy Ve 
rae Se VV Bll Cytedly cael ge pai del oly 60 yah 9 ay yall 

Chapter 108. Concerning 
Women Taking A Bath To 
Cleanse Themselves From 
Sexual Impurity 

603. It was narrated that Umm 
Salamah said: “T said, O Messenger 
of Allah! Iam a woman with tight 
braids. Should I undo them when I 
take a bath to cléanse myself from 

fed BEG SG - 6d pen) 
(\+A ised) BES Se els! 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 406 . pod! Galosl 

the state of sexual impurity?” He ee er ee ee bia. 
said: “Rather meaperennte you Ae I ae ee eel on! 
to pour three handfuls of water gals aw ai al A tat d5S5 
over them, then pour water over an eae eee ae ere 
yourself, and you will be purified” Sh8 py :Jlas SHES fon iat] 
or he said: “In that case you would a cele tye ts ES ale gs si 
have become purified.” (Sahih) 7 

Aad al cyl oF a a a cALaceeS! lie ral eh saci ies a a 

Comments: eat 
Much like men, women are also required to wet the skins of their head 
along with their bodies while taking a bath from sexual impurity. However, 
she can have the ritual shower without undoing the braids of her hair if 
they are bound tightly. In case the hair is loose or loosely tied, she must 

wash them well. 
ot a 

604, It was narrated that ‘Ubaid Sis 33 oak te a pl Gas - Vek 
bin ‘Umair said: “ Aishah heard ee se we es he i 
that ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr was! OF soul EE SN Sets] 
telling his wives to undo their fing it -G6 232 -3 at te 6 oth 
braids (when they bathed). She C one ee a a 
said: ‘How odd that Ibn ‘Amr {1 eels BE ate Ye al Ke Ot 
would do that! Why does he not hs 682258 ck Mr cicd 
tell them to shave thks heads? : EN aera) coats ol Lege 
The Messenger of Allah #§ andI oO 
used to bathe from a single vessel, 
and I never did more than pour i 
three handfuls of water over my 3 

pete Ss. . 4 
head.’” (Sahih) els] 2 Par ie ‘Bi 

ded cl ol ge YTV ic calcd gles 6 Ob cyaedl alee eel iggy ss 

4) anh y 
Chapter 109. Is It Sufficient eee Sal Se - (164 panel) 
For One Who Is Sexually 4g. 0 of 
Impure To Immerse Himself oe ios) ay! iu ela 2 

In Standing Water? 

605. It was narrated from Bukair 9 455 4 «pe Aceh Ws — +00 
bin ‘Abdullah bin Ashajj that Abu ao, ihe kas ae rr 
Sa‘ib, the freed slave of Hisham GH Gis V6 (OE pled) Tee Ul 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 407 pod) ol gui 
bin Zuhrah, told him that he 
heard Abu Hurairah say: “The 
Messenger of Allah #% said: ‘No 
one of you should bathe in 

Fe seybl op ape bf AS 
te 

cs of BN es di te 
Sys Say gf abl 

dear? if ee st Kate «sree oe ear 
standing water when he is ** 4 Ge ©) Oe SAD Gn pit 
“ew “s 4 

sexually impure.’ He (Abu Sa’ib) ‘Ls YW we tI 4 a 4G 4 
said: “What should he do, O Abu as He al ds) s% 

Hurairah?” He said: “Let him Jl (222 583 pill ott e Sie 
take some out (and pour it over Hone 64g sh POE Gear Bete) eeage 
Gs. 13 Gl g 
himself).” (Sahih) Bis SE ae Elle ea a 
3G 
Ge VAT ASS eld GB SLAY ge ell GL caylebll glen asl tay ed 

~% 6 re 3 nal oO Sas] 

Comments: 
The rationale behind forbidding one to immerse themself in standing water 
for purposes of a bath is that, if person after person starts doing it, the 
water shall soon become unusable. Taking the water out of it for the 
purpose, on the other hand, will ensure that the water remains clean and 

useful for all. 

Chapter 110, Water Is For 
Water 

606. It was narrated from Abu 
Sa’‘eed Al-Khudri that the 
Messenger of Allah #€ passed by 
(the house of) one of the Ansér 
and sent word for him to come 
out. He came out with his head 
dripping and (the Prophet #%) 
said: “Perhaps we made you 
hurry?’’ He said: “Yes, O 
Messenger of Allah.” He said, “If 
you are hurried (by someone) or 
obstructed (from orgasm) and do 

el Se el SG - 11+ pmeald 
(\\* dal!) 

ty Aas ke Bs VG «3th jl 
tgs Be pSall gf tad 36 os 
e 3 i al 5,25 & 

ZS a) jos chal! be Jb5 fe 
3G esses! tk : 56 Le 22155 
3 Eloi 130: 

5 OF G5 aes Jié 

not ejaculate, then you do not ach 
have to take a bath, but you tye! 
should perform ablution.” (Sahih) 

J ce creel oo Wepesll 2 dd oe Oh pes eguibdl eel tess 
cal... pO al 3 OWS cleadl OF Oly GL ceedl colaey cWArie cps 

4p aya al cp PEOIe 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 408 pad) al gei 

607. It was narrated that Abu 4%. fey 22 44-3 ae 
J t arrate nat £Ak Gas :-CeZs 2 Gas - 4eV 
Ayyub said: “The Messenger of oF eat pce a 

Allah #% said: ‘Water (of bath)is  g& «ye cont GF see cn Oe 
for water (of seminal discharge). glad 3 

(Sahih) 

3 

1H bh 25 SE SOT OH of 

s 

cell oe Vy plore Gil Gh caylghli V0 /V2 gl asi [emo] eed 
+0 yh 9 TEP «hens se salt als 64 Olea Sule cope VAN ee 
Comments: 
The Ahddith imply that no bath is obligatory for a man who was in the 
process of intercourse with his wife but had to leave it midway before 
ejaculation for some reason. However, the concession belongs to the early 
days of {slam which was later abolished. Now the ruling is that, ejaculation 
or no ejaculation, bath becomes obligatory by the mere consummation of 
the intercourse. 

Chapter 111. What Was Ze ele be wh ~ VNY pasrall) 
Narrated About The “Gk! SG ow ay a3 
Obligation Of Bath When se ie sl SL d Tors 
The Two Circumcised Parts (VV 1 Adal) 

Meet 

608, It was narrated that ‘Aishah 4 «fed CII wore iy dhe GE = eA 
the wife of the Prophet #¢ said: aie pee o pitta 
“When the two circumcised parts YN ame eel OH rst As 

meet, then bath is obligatory. The «#1334; GSE = 423 23 Ach Gas 

? “E'S ; : famed : 33) aad 
Messenger of Allah #6 and I did Sue Se ees = a, > Gens 
that, and we bathed .” (Sahih) bel Cell Gi gaaill Le bul 

teal o35 Able 22 cates Jl oll 
C65 38 otis) U2 1h) ie 

Me a S55 BS ath 
eG 

Korg OULES SB) telele bl caylbtl cgbe dl ae el [ogee abel] tess 
Oba! oly Cole gpl reves ¢ pee Gee Sy VATE cfd 
Comments: ; 
The expression ‘When the two circumcised parts meet’ means the 
happening of intercourse. In other words, it means that, ejaculation or no 
ejaculation, bath becomes an obligation the moment the pair is engaged in 
the sexual act. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 409 posdl col gul 

609. Ubayy bin Ka’b said: “That ide he. us 28 hies ee 04 
was a concession that was : . 
granted in the early days of Islam, :J8 & 45) 
then we were commanded to +. 34 tf .4 
have a bathe after that.’ clan eae 

(Sahih) do a fash ENS Uy OE cute 
Be JU Cool SF eSeyl 

oe VWtie cebadl oye elell OF telels col od plglall 6 Gobel ae ol [eee] : ees 
Voie 6sgho ost! die pile yl asl Sas eee ya PSRs ca bs oy Gale Cutt 
-ttedly ged jy cOls gply cAag je cpl arnicy opts 
610. It was narrated from Abu Gas 2428 we ce Fe Gis - ve 
Hurairah that the Messenger of «- , see fe 648 
; . Ege “i (hs : 
Allah #% said: “When a man sits cy ¢ oF CoP? ox ee 
epider a ae ene oY a oe <gilb A if « egal of 55S 
egs of his wife) an as a gee rr 
intercourse with her, then bath is re isp J6 ae al Joa Ge ig 
obligatory.” (Sahih) a et& ig e3 GN Bad By zee a *y 
ee C55 
¢ all tplnes VAY re cObsdt etl \3{ wh « hes ogy Bet dom el ‘ers 
64 plas ee Cano Five coplsdl clad pal eo pegs eldb ca clad Famed wh 
1b eS bal po bude g 
Comments: 
The expression: ‘sits between the four parts (of the wife)’ tiedris 
approaching thie woman for the sexual act. The Arabic expression Jahadaha 
in. the context mearis going into the woman, which necéssitates the bath 
whether or riot ejaculation takes place. 

611. It was narrated from ‘Amr (is i Ip OX gf Ge - 1 

bin Shu‘aib, fron: his father, that bs te ok Ke 4 
lis grandfather said: “The #2 uF SG A 
Messenger of Allah @§ said: 445 06-06 34 32 cal 2 nd 

‘Whert the two circumcised parts Teutis.. tee: eae te 
meet, and (the tip of the penis) oAGS glist a ip #8 ail 
disappears, then bath is ass 665 [eee 

obligatory.’”” (Daf) 
cle y| yl gas Clee Cina) cad ole! Le ty ney JU Le olin] De se 

®T He was referring to: ‘Water is for water’ as-is clear frorti other versioris of it. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

410 

pond) Kal gal 

1 oe CUA Bld Eytodly dae doled Cotas 6 deel ols) to, caultts 

Comments: 

The expression “When the two circumcised parts meet’ means the same 
thing as the disappearance of the tip of the male organ into the female 

organ. 

Chapter 112. One Who Has 
An Erotic Dream But Does 
Not Feel Any Wetness 

612. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Prophet #€ said: “If 
anyone of you wakes up and sees 
some wetness, but he does not 
think that he had an erotic dream, 
let him have a bath. But if he 
thinks that he had an erotic 
dream but he does not see any 
wetness, then he does not have to 
take a bath.” (Da‘if) 

Fh pola EH SU - C1y penal 
CNY det) SW 

Gis 63 135 & ff Gls - vy 

cdl ace 32 Gaal of cle 3f Stes 

MD go AE Ge call 2 

li uf Ye gSlsl Beer Gp 36 

sh By «hath pst oT oly OG 

ae 

casks od AS! dee oH Gd Ob call! caglagd ae ol [dae oolul] ees 
Cg poi) able sgde i Shy ca WE oy shee ute oye VPI sede ly PE 

Chapter 113. About 
Concealing Oneself When 
Taking A Bath 

613. Abu Samh said: “I used to 
serve the Prophet #%, and when 
he wanted to take a bath he 
would say: “Turn your back to 
me.’ So I would turn my back and 
hung up a cloth, and concealed 
him with it.” (Sahih) 

cb FE Ge SU - N0 panes) 

” 

CY tinct) LS Be Gos 

pba we atl ie - say 
cat hy bal 
M6 at Ys bets Ltd 
A fe 88 3 bt gal as 
OG i oh HAT 28 108 gts 

0G er SG ks bf 35 

cw ill ners all Jy wh cB gb coglo gl don ol Teerene aoliinf] 7 cx Fated 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 411 

pod!) cal gel 

« bddly ipSloSls Chay Cpl dere y 60 phy rb! of Ye 
Comments: . 
It is not permissible to undress oneself in anybody else’s view or presence. 
One can, however, undress oneself, when necessary, in loneliness or 
seclusion. 

614. It was narrated that :& peal =) ates 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Harith bin Nawfal .. - oa ee ae Bott chee 

: Soil, fs dd ct 
said: “I asked whether the fer aes ‘a o mae ° ’ 
Messenger of Allah #6 prayed Jb a) BY gp Gy gs al we 
voluntary prayer when travelling, .;; phe a6 ht 3425 Of LE 

Gis - iW 

but I could not find anyone to tell 
me until Umm Hani’ bint Abu . 
Talib told me that he had come ""¢. on a a 
during the year of the Conquest 
(of Makkah). He ordered that a esi n#0 *$ ech catle 225 
screen be held up, and that was o geen a soe 
done, and he took a bath; then he “ZbS) 
prayed eight Rak’ah (units) of 
voluntary prayer.” (Sahih) 
Teal aks ceuall aialee whew! wb « Cp pb owed ihe « prdene yeaa Fcc Saeed 
egg, BEL SAH Sule cp COT 
Comments: 
The Prophet #@ stayed in Makkah on the occasion of its conquest in the 
capacity of a ‘person on a journey’. In spite of it, he performed the forenoon 
(Dhuha) voluntary prayer. He, however, did not perform the Sunnah prayer 
(regular supererogatory prayer performed before and after the obligatory 
prayers). 
615. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: “The is 

Vio 

Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘No 
one of you should bathe in open 
land or on a roof where he is not 
concealed; even if he does not see 
anyone, he can still be seen.’” 

(Da’if) 

ea Wes ae Cee : éslighi 
gf ike 3 asd Gis: yt 
Yo 8B bt d,05 JE OG opts of al 
che 55 V5 G56 Jacl (sisi GL 

i Lr a ee a et ge 
sn OB cst 35 ol OB cals Y 

T hd codne gl coded sb! We rece gd! JU, [Ie Cid ooliol] 7 oo 
— s =; : tensed er 
rMydo Ni ple pares Bylee oy Quests cogaue op bLuE aul ye po 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 412 prossd | algal 

Chapter 114. Concerning The rl a rs Oke ig ee 
Prohibition Of Suppressing ye ae - . 4 ae , 
Urine Or Feces During Prayer CVVE dina) clas Ol StU 

616. It was narrated that (ff . sy 2: 4822 GK 
GG :-C2 2b ae Bas - vt 

‘Abdullah bin Arqam said: “The 97 07" 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘If { «33 
anyone of you needs to defecate 
and the immediate call to prayer Z ’ gOS 
(Igamah) is given, let him start cagly «bstl os3si sg) Bp - Be a 
with it (relieving himself).’’’ er es 
(Sahih) : ) «Uy TGS aL 
ct MIE eeile gas ded chard Ob cajlebll coslyd oot [ree] tg ee 

Ants milly ipSbolty Ole ply cdog je cpls «Gabe yl Ameren 9 64s ples Cade 

° 

Zee (wd a fe 
plea oF Aer Cp Ola 

JU A55f 23 al ae 38 cal 

13 

Comments: 
The rationale behind the ruling is that if someone starts his prayer by 
suppressing the urge to relieve himself, he will neither feel at ease nor be 
able to pay due attention to the prayer which is the most important act of 
worship. 

617. It was narrated from Abu 

Umdmah that the Messenger of 

Allah #@ forbade a man to oF calle & 

perform prayer when he was z 4 

suppressing (the urge to urinate = : os Nae 

or defecate). (Sahih) cher Ol gs BB al d4d5 O 

[Sess] SB, V jn 4 vledl of 25 ge Yue fordael ae ol Lee] Tox Saaed 
CU AY Cyteddl Ugo dal Coded Cia gay jdedl ad obi Lie 

S04 \ 

618. It was narrated that Abu ae Areth ogt 

Hurairah. said: “The Messenger of fies eM oa ts Zt af 
Allah #% said, ‘No one of you ‘= &% ‘#297) ot, Of 6% yee 

bb os ff Gas - sv 

should stand to pray when he Y> :2¢ iti 3 Fevers caer cae eee | ez 
feels some discomfort (because of Sf as SH NS ea 
needing to urinate or defecate).’” 53} 49 SLall J} peas tae 
(Sahih) 

aly OB hey ge sdd Sy ce EVV /V Re Col gl el Leome] 2 ey oe 
-dal ye 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

619. It was narrated from 
Thawbén that the Messenger of 
Allah #8 said: “No one among the 
Muslims should stand to pray 
when he is suppressing (the need 
to urinate or defecate), until he 
has relieved himself.” (Hasan) 

Vere Lge yay Jed! lal ob 

Chapter 115. What Was 
Narrated Concerning The 
Bleeding Woman Who Has 
Counted The Days Of Her 
Period Before Her Flow Of 
Blood Became Continuous 

620. It was narrated from ‘Urwah 
bin Zubair that Fatimah bint Abi 
Hubaish narrated to him that she 
went to the Messenger of Allah 8 
and complained to him about 
bleeding. The Messenger of Allah 
#% said: “Rather that is a vein, so 
look and see when your period 
comes, then do not perform. the 
prayer. When the period is over, 
then purify yourself and perform 
the prayer between one period to 
the next.” (Da‘if) 

413 pod! al. gil 

Apatonll aaah 23 ins ds - 114 

WS 

os oat, a re o 4% 6 
es Vo dE ST at dt be SUH 

eae ow ° 44 - * Le 
BAS pene ewe) on ast 

Raa 

cist coslogl aol [gee] ie pd 

-SHSl5 cPOVie ogee i Kam 9 
fd te be SE - (10 prea) 

gral poh Side 8 si abeec 
(\\0 divest) est Ye joes oT av 

iby oth 1th y dadt Ge - 
J ot ol PRE oe 

call ne. Gob TSB Ob idl cybyl eel Le ole] ce sd 

Comments: 

a. ‘That is a vein’ means it is a ailment, not the regular menstrual blood. As 
such the rules governing the routine period do not apply to it. 

b. A.woman suffering from bleeding out of her ordinary periods must also take 
a bath at the end of the menstruation period, like a’ normal woman and 
thereafter start praying like a normal woman. She can also go to the mosque, 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

414 prose wns gal 

read the Qur’an and let the husband have intercourse with her, and do all 
things that are forbidden during the monthly period for a woman. 

621. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “Fatimah bint Abi Hubaish 
came to the Messenger of Allah 
#8 and said: ‘O Messenger of 
Allah #6! I am a woman who 
bleeds continuously and never 
becomes pure, should I give up 
the prayer?’ He said: "No, rather 
that is a vein and it is not 
menstruation. When the time of 
your period comes, leave off the 
prayer, and when it is over, take a 
bath and wash the blood from 
yourself and perform the prayer.” 
This is the Hadith of Waki‘. 
(Sahih) 

Gis clad By ai te Gas - xy 

al & SS ol S55 te 95 Uy Sue 
Gan 2G deme tp Be 4 ats 
“F cel iF 63558 o elke OF +e53 
oe J dy hed Gee ci the 

- s ° 

weit jas Chl Gb AIL 
fur obs Leb S58) yy GaN 
Pe Tes ee 

E59 Sade Mia be5 

ad Ge YING ches Yes Labetenall Ob could talus tor ol To eael 

622. It was narrated that Umm 
Habibah bint Jahsh said: “I used 
to bleed continuously and 
heavily. I went to the Prophet # 
asking him for advice and telling 
him (about my situation). I found 
him with my sister Zainab and 
said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! I 
need to ask you something.’ He 
said: “What is it?’ I said: ‘I bleed 
continuously and heavily, and 
that is keeping me from prayer 
and fasting. What do you 
command me to do about it?’ He 
said: ‘I advise you to use a piece 
of cotton, for that will take away 
the blood.’ I said: ‘It is more than 
that.’"" And he mentioned 
something like the Hadith of 
Sharik (below). (Da‘if) 

4 a} oy olay AS 
es GS sg fy akAL Gs - wy 

GEN OS cals be gle ee] - GI5SH 

we et oe 

Jame 
tas Joel 28 :eI0 pee ot 
#625) Jy Cbs S10 Lb 38 
ol te Hiss cle B2t ial 
od Of Nal 525 G EH ce 
GE Zl fe uy dE 
Hs Wh tae oct att 
er iS eels ASI ghee 85 
Cok Bb 4255 i dh 36 sys 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 415 pod) onsl gai 

oF 

cus 65 SE OBI EB Gin 

Wa tye: 
235 La loeSl ol (S99 le Ob 63 lhl woglo i A> { kar ree asluut] wr ) a3 
2 rite et oe & oer 

Ure Cpl daw bite only & 4 bse cyl Sade oe YAAT CO cd gleo [sd 

Comments: 
“Use a piece of cotton’ means: I advise you to put some cotton on the blood 
spot, and tie it with a piece of cloth so that the blood gets absorbed in the 
cotton, and does not intermittently spoil your clothes, and you are able to 
perform prayer etc., with perfect ease. 

623. It was narrated that Umm #é 5 .it3 a OX a sas wy 
Salamah said: “A woman asked ‘i Poa een eA ced ienag 

oe gary cares Rie ° 
the Prophet #@: ‘I bleed G% Hla yl Gas SVB cdeme oy 
continuously and do not become 4, ral We Le es Be 5s of al ad 
pure. Should I] give up the : pit cc ahete eNn he Cee 
prayer?’ He said: ‘No, but leave oils ES dale e! OF ke yl 
off praying for the number of yg *yiecef 4 fie we «Sy fey 
days and nights that you used to oa ie #5 a ; e 
menstruate.’’’ (One of the sf 385 Yo SU teSh esti «gbl 
narrators) Abu Bakr (Ibn Abu PC: 3 Age yh eg 
Shaibah) said in his Hadith: ~ Vt™"" = Petar tal, 
Reeoied ae oe = orks a oe ong) cas 8 OS gl 

e month, then take a bath an ot wc Z «t o# 
cover your private part with a ‘74 gptnls ae Pe set 
cloth and perform prayer.” (Da‘if} de 4 

“gl cee blond ab poll we vl caleba cogiog! tor ol [rtprnt sabinnl] ed 

dels SLA ge fey ge Olek ge dB at YI ca dhe Gate ye Wie 
adel dil cS ggmee 

Comments: een 

Just like the woman's bleeding out of periods, if a person is suffering from 
some other condition that invalidates his ablution’, such as frequent passing 
of wind, or involuntary dripping of urine, then the person concerned is to 
be regarded as exempt from normal rules of Shari‘ah. In such cases he is not 
to shun his prayers but to perform fresh ablution for each prayer, and 
complete the entire cycle of his prayer including his Sunnah 
(supererogatory) and Naff (voluntary) prayers. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

624. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “Fatimah bint Abi Hubaish 
came to the Prophet #6 and said: 
‘O Messenger of Allah! I am a 
woman. who bleeds continuously 
and never becomes pure. Should I 
give up prayer?’ He said: “No, 
that is just a vein and is not 
menstruation. Do not perform 
prayer during the days of your 
period, then take a bath, and 
perform ablution for each prayer, 
even if drops of blood fall on the 
mat.’” (Da‘if) 

416 pod! algal 

Pee 

‘f SLE el haisdl Sai aie 
ane cs s259 eb! 3 rea We-we 
Cnasdt dé Paty 5S iy 

«re cdl eb oy dbo JE ge Gh cayigbli cogs gl reape | [utp estinf] oF cS ual 
. he TAY Fe Cems o WATE t elas ee spe cols OUball eH Atri s eVAAt ee 

Comments: 

it is preferable for a woman undergoing the phase of bleeding out of 
periods, to: perform twe prayers. at a time with one bath. Alternately, it is 
enough that she just makes the ablution for each prayers. 

625. It was narrated from ‘Adiyy 
bin Thabit, from his father, from 
his. grandfather, that the Prophet 
#@ said: “The woman who 
experiences irregular non- 
menstrual bleeding should leave 
prayer during the days of her 
period, then she should take a 

bath, and perform ablution for 

each prayer, and she should fast 
and perform: the prayer. ” (Da ‘ify 

‘on tis - Yo 

“ae, 

tht Bis VE Butt SF detias 

a ctgrat adh Sees et iS wastiv 

eras De J lags; 

dias oVWie cGibedl OU cayslgbll coshoyl ath Lee oobufl ees 

+O hg eel ee 

Ly eleSE Spgs endig VOTE cpl poe ob SUAS yf 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 417 

Chapter 116. Concerning The 
Woman Who Is Confused 
About Her Bleeding And 
Does Not Know The Days Of 
Her Cycle 

626. It was narrated from ‘Urwah 
bin Zubair and ‘Amrah bint 
‘Abdur-Rahman that ‘Aishah the 
wife of the Prophet #€ said: 
“Umm Habibah bint Jahsh 
experienced prolonged non- 
menstrual bleeding for seven 
years when she was married to 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf. She 
complained about that to the 
Prophet #@ and the Prophet # 
said: ‘That is not menstruation, 
rather it is a vein, so when the 
time of your period comes, leave 
the prayer, and when it is over, 
take a bath and perform prayer.’” 
‘Aishah said: “She used to bathe 
for every prayer and then perform 
the prayer. She used to sit in a 
washtub belonging to her sister 
Zainab bint Jahsh and the blood 
would turn the water red.” 
(Sahih) 

paced) eth gai 

ood BLE OE - N70 peel) 

ole paul Ugele Lists 15) ao teens 
QV ddl) Quate el st as 

Pe 

Hie ys yet Bie — a 
reas oF Zel5g¥l cate seth 
He Sy B55 ceil o seis 
oii a gg G3) Hae OF ge 
#3 or oy are f Sa oets| 
bp 2g 251 SS ae 28s Gs EKG 
Eph hy Ba ye Lash oft 
; 5 BF Ne % aes 
ke JS jBF ES tbe he 
WY 3S go bw Aad 

cael cebu WIVIE cise Ge Cb Qaedl cgi asl ees 
4 SP Sade ge PV Ete cles hie s deleted ob 

Comments: 

a. “When the time of your period comes’ means when there come the days of 
your menstruation before you developed the present condition. 

b. Taking a bath separately for each prayer was Umm Habibah bint Jahsh’s 
independent judgment. The Ahddith of the Prophet #¢ speak of only one 
obligatory bath to be done by women at the end of their period of 
menstruation. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablation 

Chapter 117. Concerning A 
Virgin Who Starts To 
Experience Prolonged Non- 
Menstrual Bleeding, Or If 
She Has A Regular Period 
But Forgets It 

627. It was narrated from 
Hamnah bint Jahsh that she 
experienced prolonged non- 
menstrual bleeding during the 
time of the Messenger of Allah #8. 
She came to the Messenger of 
Allah #§ and said: “I am suffering 
prolonged and painful bleeding.” 
He said: “Fill it with a pad of 
cloth.” She said; “It is worse than 
that, it is flowing copiously.” He 
said: “Then bind yourself with a 
cloth and observe your menses for 
six or seven days, in the 
knowledge of Allah, then have a 
bath and perform prayer and fast 
for twenty-three or twenty-four 
days. Delay Zuhr and bring ‘Asr 
forward, and take (one) bath for 
both, and delay Maghrib and 
bring ‘Isha’ forward, and have 
(one) bath for both. This is what I 
prefer of the two matters.’’’ 

(Da’if 

Comments: 

418 preston l gall 

se G OG - Civ ped 
[iowa 0551 15 

“ee, sf ge 

SoS cas Fd o ae: ca sus -— 1YY 

x 
xv 
A 
x 
te y 
° 
x 
aN 
\. 
‘ 
\ (: 
nN 
x 
\ 
ou 
ithe, 

§ chides po og de 
ae pfs [rag of A ell $4 

aah Sd elas ofl zc sf 
«Sept yl mi Guphes Bs wires 
3 an 2é 
gs pocar «Salas 5 eel rear 
lig 1555 OS ct, Sh 
oN dsf ky Gus Gd Ley 
‘oh 

SUN cpaai Lote] fee pe 

a. The Arabic expression Fi ‘ilm-i-llah (literally, in Alléh’s knowledge) used by 
the Prophet #£ in his reply means: Reckon the days of your impurity 
according to your best judgment, and put your trust in Allah who knows 
perfectly well your limitations in keeping count of your days. He will surely 
forgive any genuine mistake made by you in reckoning the days of your 

purity and impurity. 

b. The expression “This is what I prefer of the two matters’ conveys the idea 
that three bathes in a day is not a binding necessity. The Prophet #%, 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 419 prod) ealoul 
however, preferred it because it ensures greater cleanliness and purity. 

Chapter 118. What Was HE 3 OU - (NA penal) 
Narrated About Menstrual CNA sisal) y Sy) Cet td 05 
Blood That Gets On Clothing Hl cme gaeeel f° 

628. It was narrated that Umm =, 45 Gs st 23 atet Gas - wa 
Qais bint Mihsan said: “I asked gs g die Fae aie 
the Messenger of Allah #€ about PA SS ot oe) eee anes | 
menstrual blood that gets on "Ay 

ue! oO col oF cokes Gas 
clothing. He said, ‘Wash it with “42, 0° 0° OG Le 
water and lote leaves, and rub it, o~ el SF she oe ole OF cpliaell 
even with a piece of stick.’”’ #2 8) 3,25 eis. 2 23€ ch 
(Sahih) p 

JE OG) Cael Gall 6s Be 
tala 335 4555 hig tly atbin 
ash te CU led fas Bi aS! Col, caleba! coglagd a ol Lerne oo wf] ‘eps 

Ole only chery cpl mermeg 64 is Cade cp YU te olga 

Comments: 

a. This shows that menstrual blood is impure and must be washed off. 

b, At times, mere washing with plain water does not remove the blood spot. 
The clothing should, therefore, be rubbed to clean it. Any faint impression 
still lurking on the garment after one’s best effort is condonable. The Arabic 
word Dila’i (literally a rib) used by the Prophet # as a rubbing agent here 
means any thin and semi-long twig or piece of wood. 

629. It was narrated that Asma (ij .- Fae fal ec eo Gis — wW4 
bint Abi Bakr Siddiq said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #§ was asked = O* S895" cp plas JF Se ME yl 
about menstrual blood that gets x of ot sel ts oth eh SbG 
on clothing. He said: ‘Rub it off, * & Te : 3 - nae Pelee 
wash it and perform prayer in 5 {56 BG al J 525 fee CSG ce tall 
(the garment).’”” (Sahih) sel a6 rer) a ge wd 
43 bo} dhodly 
cheba plang TEVENYV EE cpl dae Oh cepa Qld asl igasd 

630. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 31 GAS sg is Gis - we 
the wife of the Prophet #€ said: 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 420 pou! calgsi 

“One of us used to menstruate, ote ch to tte otf ect 
then rub the blood off her 7° Of S32) Ot I sar! Fs 
garment when she became pure cASslé ge cal be cpt re Reet 
again, and wash it, and sprinkle BN, 

water over the rest of the fas, ENS bf EI6 gl pd ei €33 
garment, then perform prayer in ab ite “es - . as ais, 3 
it.” (Sahih) Ogee 

hs Oil ade ge PrAre beeall po ae Ob ¢ gaol ee ax oh: Fc teed 

Comments: 
The clothing on the woman’s body during the period, if free from any trace 
of blood, is perfectly pure. If smeared with blood, washing will turn it 
clean. As such there should be no hitch in performing prayer with such 
clothes on. It is also perfectly in order if separate clothes are used during 
those particular days by the ladies. (Bukhdri: 323) 

Chapter 119. The Yo pi 2t = (ie 5 
Menstruating Woman Does ee ee re 
Not Have To Make Up For CVV4 dell) Ball vat 

The Prayer She Missed 

631. It was narrated from‘Aishah (Gj. 23 i aoe AN has, = 4) 
that a woman asked her: “Does a 3 rae 2 , 
woman who menstruates have to ‘452% sl of de UF eo: ide 
make up for the prayers she  3f 4; 

misses?” ‘Aishah said to her: “Are ie > mal a yi ea baa o 
you a Haruriyyah?) We used to Seal! Gaile aiil gills § 
menstruate with the Prophet # a2 oc fof och fcc ig xe 
then become pure, and he did not a = ; 
tell us to make up for the prayers UU 4J3 « Jaki $ a ot Be Jao 
we missed.” (Sahih) eer Be 

Cade oye PY: C tisha paid! 28 Y ob «all gobs alt Fes Saeed 
ce YYO: a 6b gluall O52 jailed lg pal Plas yey Gh 6 pall bleiey cooks 
43 Babee Qa 
Comments: 
a. Women are not allowed to perform prayer during their monthly course 
period (Bukhari: 304). All Muslims, with the exception of Kharijites are 
agreed on this point. This is the reason why ‘Aishah % asked the woman 

@] Meaning from the Khawérij, taken from Harara’ the location where they originated. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 421 poll al gel 

questioner in surprise if she was a Kharijite because it is only they who ask 
such questions. 

b. It is a special favor of Allah on women that He did not command them to 
make. up for the missed prayers, for it would surely be quite a difficult task 
for them to make good their missed eight to ten days of ritual prayers each 
month. Fasts, on the other hand, come only once in a year, and it is not 
such a great task to fast for the missed eight to ten days during the course 
of the coming eleven months. 

Chapter 120. A Menstruating 53k aie ia = O08 Spaced) 
Woman Taking Something a eo eee 
632. It was narrated that ‘Aishah = 45. Sane | are Ps Gis - wy 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% eh ee Seema 
said to me: ‘Get me a mat from the —‘cs¢2! oF lead ool oF ‘yee Vl #! 
mosque.’ I said: ‘I am menstruating.’ BE isl j ae ob cciG ate 22 
He said: “Your menstruation is not in aan no : ee. A 
your hand.’ ” (Sahih) co} TAB otal Ge Ferd ob gl 
AAG 3 EES Bath 5 Sale 

gia SB edt dle ge Gene ob Vettel ti [epeel ig ed 
»FpaSI ssh kyle Sl treme! 3 OIS BE ail Jy of dsste 

Comments: 

a. Women in the state of menstruation or Nifis (postriatal bleeding) are 
prohibited from entering the mosque. 

b. It is a different matter if a woman, standing outside the precincts of the 
mosque takes something of necessity from, or put it inside the mosque, 
since this action, not falling under the definition of ‘entering the mosque,’ is 
perfectly in order. 

633. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 285 03 of 23 XS ff Gas - we 
said: “The Prophet # used to eee ee WE cated t 
bring his head close tome when]  f? oF ¢e59 Gir TYE cee ol 
was menstruating and he wasin = 56 - C3 iS bé cal bh 85% oil 
l’tik@f (seclusion in a mosque for bat Yuen ts. eee BA as ie: 
the purpose of worship), and I 383 (43> Gls A aol ot BE Eo 
would wash it and comb his 4 BG = fect re S Ae 
hair.” (Sahih) , 5 : a 
Eh 

ot YAO e cake Sy ke s3 wl best fue ob 6 peel 6s bedl ax ol Tes 3 eae] 
be gly eh «aru! belenry VA Fests ol ges AWA? Shoes ta pla Sagal 
4 plan ob laws cAglee op ed oe YAAIC call... Gate 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 422 post! malo 

Comments: 

a. Aman ina state of I’tikdf (seclusion in a mosque for worship) is not allowed 
to come out of the mosque without a genuine excuse or pressing necessity. 

b. Peeping the head out of the mosque does not fall under the definition of 
coming out of the mosque. 

634. It was narrated that ‘Aishah tg Gis. 2k tp on Gis — we 
said: “The Messenger of Allah #% 2 eB. ne: <p BeA a” casa 

used to put his head in my lap 2" Of ‘ole GE ali 
when I was menstruating and 3) -25G ite [12] cal te ofan 
recite Qur’an.” (Sahih) 

Sed bs; 6 ale Gl; 

cal ty Byler BS det bls Ch cpaedl cdl eel tase 
eet. gees ely HIG Ab lee Gh cutee! cpbany eVOEVI Cy TAVEC 
64 pew Calm Gye PV 
Comments: 
a. It also confirms the fact that the entire body of a menstruating woman is 
pure, the only exception being the part connected with the “blood”. 

b. Rules for reciting the Qur’an from memory are different from those relating 
to the touching of the Noble Book for that purpose. 

Chapter 121. What A Man of Jah SG - (vy) peal 

May Do With His Wife - 
When She Is Menstruating CVV) dacs!) als ENE 13) al 

635. It was narrated that ‘Aishah Gis ic! sol if al de Gas - sve 
said: “If one of us was ; 2] aa 

. menstruating, the Messenger of °C ‘Xl Be [bAl tye al 
Allah #@ would tell her to tie her = Gi :calé 2 Ages Ate a iss 
waist-wrapper around herself if 
the bleeding was heavy, then he 
would embrace her. And who a iué (he <3 reaCa Bs A ix ah Bis; 
among you can control his desire Se cae See Os : 
as the Messenger of Allah #§ used 4* OF = esc oF Sytem 
to control his desire?” (Sahih) 

1¢ SG] gf wise Be eg lbV! Le 

tbe 38 cad S46 OM gh gett 
late 256 By Gey LIE L5G 
gas 8 3 ost of aw abu er 
SE us 4 dey 6h bee 8 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

423 pron | eal gal 

a) type ane 4 ra 
$eg5) Les BE dt S525 

wh 6 paocll ‘planes PeVie 6 abe Boke GL ¢aedt col ax ol read 
4 gee Cy gle Eaplm cy VA re coISY! Ssh abled! 5 ble 

Comments: 

a. Having sex with a menstruating woman is prohibited in Islam. 
b. Short of the intercourse, all other things like embracing her or kissing her 

etc., are perfectly in order. 

c. Mubasharah in Arabic means either (i) having sex or (ii) simply embracing 
and caressing the wife. Here it is used in the latter sense. 

636. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “If one of us was 
menstruating, the Messenger of 
Allah #6 would tell her to tie her 
waist-wrapper around herself, 
then he would embrace her.” 
(Sahih) 

eVeVy Vey Peete cpatled! tle 

Bis 63 1S fl Gs - ws 

ok 6 ptepall gobedl ax ol Fer Saal 

+ 4r gee Lake Cpe Yatie CGY! Gb jailed! Btls Ol col thnes 

637. It was narrated that Umm 
Salamah said: “I was with the 
Messenger of Allah #@ under his 
blanket, then I felt that I was 
menstruating as women do, so I 
slipped out from under the cover. 
The Messenger of Allah #8 said: 
‘Are you menstruating? I said: ‘I 
feel that 1 am menstruating as 
women do.’ He said: ‘That is 
what Allah has decreed for the 
daughters of Adam.’ So I slipped 
out and sorted myself out, then I 
came back, and the Messenger of 
Allah #§ said to me: ‘Come under 
the cover with me,’ so I went in 
with him.’” (Hasan) 

Abe tt a ae 
Ms 3 ft Ss Jf is ~ wy 

or $e 449 (iE a. 4¢ Sous 
Bre Cp dors who oe Cp borne 

Gb SEY Bl 2 Bal J 325 & 
oe CALE aa 3. ALN Aad 

Gendt ae dt 5425 JIB LH 

OT eG fe it CS Be 3 

gi #8 ol 325 J OB dts; 

JB, C4 gee Cp dares Gude ow Y4E [TV iaaml tor ol [pu oolwel | ees 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 424 pod! ssl gal 

. elt Jb, meee alo) lia Spe ssl 
Comments: : 
“Sorted myself out’ means took due precaution against defiling my clothes 
from impurity. 

638. It was narrated from 31 cones 1g pek oy Anes as — YA 
Mu’awiyah bin Abu Sufyan that er aes tom oe dla sie oka 
he asked Umm Habibah, the wife 2 OF SOP] gn dem OF taole 

E 

of the Prophet #8: “What did you & yl ig Gast ee ee es | 
used to do with the Messenger of yer, aig oe Rh hes 
Allah #6 when you were Of ‘Ube col cp Gyles GF cee oy 
mensiruating?’” She said: “If it it. og we eth 43 "ee 4 
was at the beginning of the period La : : cad iA oY Bie C 
when the bleeding is heavy, we  é 88 al ds) init oS OS 
would tie the waist-wrapper Ci ee ey Pel mmr eee ee 
la Us) 25S :258 ¢ 

tightly around our thighs, then lie 2 a t as ; 2 ania 
down with the Messenger of  L2il (JI 5) Wie wee ast 
Allah #¢.” (Sahih) ‘ i A 

8B Bid 525 & hai gis 
cp Cad 4 Glau) cyl 4s dole op dere ge HV0 / Ti eal ae | [geome] ‘ers 

OES Te 6 lait Chew 
Chapter 122. Prohibition Of GY yb GN DE OTT peal 
Sexual Intercourse With A ° ay ¥ dines!) ileal 

Menstruating Woman Mo eohat aah ho 
639. It was narrated that Abu &}F 3 «4s y! on a gi Bas - 4 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of ace (fee 4 ee tte Qe) eee 30 
lex We : Uae oY ota | 
Allah #€ said: ‘Whoever has ~ : cs ; Se cease ch 
intercourse with a menstruating desi (ol 6 cep Y oS Je Aalo oy 
woman, or with a woman in her 4 GG He eas ae aa 
rear, or who goes to a fortuneteller one 7S EA og! OF Cleared! 
and believes what he says, hehas 3 asl 3i « Lasis ial fab Eat 
disbelieved in that which was 7. 5 3) sce et gg tu 
revealed to Muhammad.’” cdg Ley ated clalS 3 claps 
oe te 4% ye -e 
(Hasan) Wheres (Ab d3i] ay 48 

eegeha sy PREZ e COU BOL epdadiy GUS coslagt ott [ym] ‘ees 
opty bine ee dalpt atody cyygort! ay SY pKe at allel Yb LS Sd, Wie 

Comments: 
a. Allah has appointed a natural channel for satisfying men’s sexual urge with 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 425 pond! sl gal 

women. It is a channel that would breed offsprings. The anus is not the 
place for the purpose. It is unnatural to use it the way the inhabitants of 
Sodom did among whom the Prophet Lut ai was sent as a warner. 

b, A Kahin (fortuneteller) is one who claims to know the future of the people. 
In our part of the world people practising Nujum (astrology), Ramal 
(foretelling by figures) and Jafar (art of prediction) all belong to the same 
category which the Messenger of Allah #@ has denounced and warned 
against. 

Chapter 123. The Expiation 9s Be a a ey 

5 : - Yr erenall) 
For One Who Has Sexual ai ieee aaa Bs. hee 
Intercourse With A CVYY diosdt) Laie oI 
Menstruating Woman. 
640. It was narrated from Ibn ood St 2 gts iy ise Gis - 1: 
‘Abbas that the Prophet # said (Sie ie Be eer ee 
concerning one who has cseaiad Z : e; cae 

intercourse with a woman when £4 GF (pel oF chase be (Gde 

she is menstruating: “Let him give _- te ee 2h ee -t 

a Dinar or half a Dinar in ‘y°* ot! oF on pr eel 

charity.” (Sahih) Galt cag Sig 3h cil 3 cate oS 

Gb city 5h ay Shag dt 
ce VUE e cal! Ola} CS Gk ca jlgbll cogla gl ae yet Leoue aotwwl| Fetal 
pA nhs silly ipSledls (deel arereoy 64 cee, al 

Comments: 

a. Dinar was a gold coin used in the days of the Prophet #¢ in Arabia. It 
measured about 4.4 grams. It is is, therefore, incumbent, in the light of the 
Hadith, on any one committing this act to give in charity a price equivalent 
to 4.4 grams of gold to a person who is deserving, poor and hard-pressed. 

b. Some scholars from among the pious predecessors have reconciled the 
apparent difference between the figures of one Dinar and half a Dinar, by 
suggesting that one Dinar of charity is expiation for committing the act in 
the early stages of menstruation when blood is reddish in colour, while half 
a Dinar is for doing it in the later stages when the blood colour is yellowish. 
Some other scholars have suggested that it depends on your capacity. If 
weil-to-do, give a full Dinar, if hard-pressed, give just half a Dinar. 

Chapter 124. How A attedt d Posts = CVE xaeall) 
Menstruating Woman Should ue e ie ae ee 
Bathe CYS dest!) fats iS’ 

641. It was narrated from ‘Aishah cdf 3 odes sl SS x rs) as - 14) 
that the Prophet #€ said to her, otha ae Pa Sic -YG ees 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 426 pods) malas 

when she was menstruating: 
“Undo your braids and bathe.” 
(Sahih) 

(A narrator) ‘Ali said in his 
’ narration: “Undo your head.” 

BG GN ON Hie 88 aah 58 532 fl 
Sh abo la S585 oy Ju 
iM deibly 
thal ain ras ob 26 Jb 
C0nb 9 Lad Gl deal amos 0 VA/V hed ol onl ono! [eepene olin] Ferber] 
Comments: como patel, 

‘Undo your head’ means: Undo the braids of your hair or plaits and wash 
your head. The ruling does not apply to a bath from sexual impurity. 
(Compare previous Ahddith 603 & 604). 

642. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that Asma’ asked the Messenger 
of Allah #¢ about bathing after 
one’s period. He said: “One of 
you should take her water and 
lote leaves, and purify herself, 
and purify herself well, or 
thoroughly. Then she should pour 
water over her head and rub it 
vigorously so that the water 
reaches the roots of her hair. Then 
she should take a piece of cotton 
perfumed with musk and purify 
herself with it.” Asma’ said: 
“How should I purify myself with 
it?’” He said: “Subhan Allah! purify 
yourself with it!” ‘Aishah said, as 
if whispering to her: “Wipe away 
the traces of blood with it.” Then 
she (Asma’) asked him about 
bathing to cleanse oneself from 
sexual impurity. He said: “One of 
you should take her water, and 
purify herself, and purify herself 
well, or thoroughly. She should 
pour water over her head and rub 
it so that water reaches the roots 
of her hair, then she should pour 
water over her body.” ‘Aishah 

o- a “ae 3 
aA 234 sae 7 - sites 

- of ti 425 GIL ee ji 
els ale ZSiisy Stl oe cgaeeall Be 
pia (Jee Lad pa Biren 
isds iS Gl; fb bas Pada Ec gal 
ets ab leeds ast as - hyd 
rl) Ki ip 3 kG ott tgile 
_ SG, 34h GS ual Sie tly 
~ 148s 250 Tes ees ash GRD 
me Fe Les) - ab Bh gt 
HEE 3s igs of Hh, :eh8 

Ls SE cghll 3 iis if sail 
i$h as Ze Ss Gel Je aud 
Magee Je allt Sa A gel; 

ol LylaiNi tio cL os be SIs 

2 ofte. 

Nie 
“pl 3 Gals OF ees Sees 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

said: “How good were the 
women of the Ansér! For they did 
not let shyness keep them from 
understanding their religion 
properly.” (Sahih) 

427 poe) cal gal 

oP ip 3 aol oY Abused! Sloat cle! Ob ‘pall & pede aor ol ‘taps 
4 anh slo ox! iF CYT t re cel 9 od Clee 

Comments: 

a. A bath from the impurity of menses needs more elaborate cleaning than a 
bath from the impurity of intercourse because the frequency of the former is 

less than that of the latter. 

b. Putting lote leaves in boiling water makes it a better detergent. 
c. Applying perfume on the particular spot is meant to remove any 

unwelcome smell. 

Chapter 125. What Was 
narrated Concerning Eating 
With A Menstruating Woman 

643. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “I used to eat the meat from 
a bone when I was menstruating, 
then the Messenger of Allah # 
would take it and put his mouth 
where my mouth had been. And I 
would drink from a vessel, and 
the Messenger of Allah #@ would 
-take it and put his mouth where 
my mouth had been, and I was 
menstruating.” (Sahth) 

dE be OE - (YO penal) 

* 

(\Y¥o dint) Lay hOG ales 15152 

SBeS VE Park 

Sint Gs Uh 3) Us Gis - ver 

2 ’ 

ares 

* “2 4 a tee | tHe Be 
ote 1 . € ks ae Se fae 
ise Lo cal be lk g Ait 

AL tet Aged ‘ “ste 
Gas Oy phd Ghat 2S: Lhe 

ar pt ths 

tye Fee FT RA ge of 
OS Es 4b 228 BB al J 545 2G 

ey pe 8 tks Zeean et ae < 
4i| Jan ode US ce YI Se ORANG bo ged 
“tL ¢ “tag For 9-0 8 4 foes 
ul og ols Cie Aad a Re 
’ “ 

» ail 

Peere cg oe. bersd uly yatlall Jab Slee oh (uae tpl onal tay sd 

Comments: 

a. It shows that the body of a menstruating woman is pure, and the impurity 
in essence is ‘legal’ except for the blood whose impurity is perceivable. 

b. The mouth and saliva of a menstruating woman is also pure. It is perfectly 
in order to eat and drink from the food and water left over by her. 

644. It was narrated from Anas 
that the Jews would not sit with a 

o Fara gZee 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 428 pod! Gal gal 

menstruating woman in a house, SARS oie: BETS oe SES GAB 1 aot 
nor eat with her, nor drink with ‘S2> of « py Ree eae 
her. That was mentioned to the 42 5,45 Y ig 3,21 eee a 

ares Bas = gn of 
Messenger of Allah #8, then Allah c ST Oe ae) re ee 
revealed the words: “They ask you O90? Y3 OsS6U YG coe 3 aie 
concerning menstruation. Say: that = 3h Jt ie nou As “8.5 gu 
is a harmful thing, therefore, keep Bead Mee sae tage «Male nt pe Toe 
away from women during ssc G3 Sm $8 Gesell ~ Gijleasy 

w(t] a ; » 
menses.” The Messenger of NE sae sc a 
i ALYYY 23,231] {3 Acai 
Allah #§ said: “Do everything 3 8 aes ic - a a i 
except sexual intercourse.” (Sahih) bocce JS Iya! S485 
66 Leo 

Vigan ay alam Cae gy THE eGyledl OU Cgaedl cglan ont gees 

Comments: 

a. Islam attaches the highest importance to cleanliness and purity. It is, 
nevertheless, free from the strict laws of the Jews. Hence it is that, except 
sexual intercourse (which is prohibited during the monthly course and days 
of impurity after childbirth), all other activities — sitting together, eating 
and drinking together, kissing each other, and sharing the bed together — 
are all permissible in Islam. 

b. Should a person feel that, while embracing his wife, he might not be able to 
keep a check on his passion and might feel tempted to commit the 
prohibited, he would be well advised not to avail the juridical licence but 
try to avoid being too intimate with his wife during that period. 

Chapter 126. Concerning be Se 1 eal 
Menstruating Women F 7 F a er > 
Keeping Away From the (VY damal!) Jomewed aie whe 
Mosque 

- feo % | a ce a eA 

645. It was narrated that Jasrah 3 +44 gl Cy SO yl Ge - iho 
said: “Umm Salamah told me: 
‘The Messenger of Allah #€ : Sone ¥ 

entered the courtyard of this Gibil Uf 32 2 ig de 
mosque and called out at thetop 2. .. L104 ae eee 
of his voice: “The mosque is not 9 “7 o* ica crt Fb pre 
permissible for anyone who is 425 :CJG dike al Sel cis 
sexually impure or any woman oe Pay er ee ee 
who is menstruating.” (Da‘if) Gols cdpcall Wa ajo $B al Jy) 

as fot Y itd Gp capo yeh 

ae € gd, qq ys roe ° oe 
Taal yl Gus iYG cpa Kidd 

() Al-Bagarah 2:222. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

429 peed) algal 

(ass V5 

ciple ae YVY cYV eH JLSS! al f gj neal Lapae aie: es 

Comments: 

ne oe ee et estoy cathy 

Scholars have divergent views on this Hadith. Some of them regard its chain 
of transmission as ‘Weak’ while others consider it of the category of Hasan 
(Good) because of other supporting evidences. There is, however, a 
consensus among the scholars that the ruling contained in the Hadith is 

valid and binding. 

Chapter 127. Concerning 
What A Woman Sees Of 
Yellowish Or Brownish 
Discharge After Her Period Is 
Over 

646. It was narrated from Umm 
Bakr that she was told that 
‘Aishah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #& said concerning a 
woman who sees that which 
causes her doubt (i.e. some 
bleeding) after she becomes pure: 
‘That is a vein or veins.’” (Da‘if) 
Muhammad bin Yahya said: 
“What was meant by ‘after she 
becomes pure’ is after having a 
bath (following the end of her 
period).”” 

Ze ele \ ral Ses C\Y¥V ‘seamen 
aes pry ney si yes 

CVYV dacs) BiSiN5 

fos le yor fy det le - 44 

ef - ae € ° “ae 
foe Eile ol oe aS ol ot 
d6 :245 tee Sf ehh gi Us 
ik; Wag G oh ahah op 28 at Its 

4958 ;f Se cp Wap :Ju jas 
é “or wae ° Ges 4 
geal 3S ag A Uf eae db 

4 

hath Lolormadl OT gy be Gh cdjlghll casing! ae | [tnmend orliouf | cx? aad 
DS pl # & OLS Sate oe YIV/1: cstendls ca gen dade ge YANig cighe Js 

647. It was narrated that Umm 
‘Atiyyah said: “We did not think 
anything of the yellowish or 
brownish discharge.” (Sahih) 

(Another chain) It was narrated 
that Umm ‘Atiyyah said: “We did 

dal gs Cytodls cdledl Dyers 

en eH E56 the He See 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

not think that the yellowish or 
brownish discharge counted for 
anything.” 

Muhamamd bin Yahya said: 
“Wuhaib (who narrated the 
second version) is the better of 
them with this according to us.” 

430 post! Gilosi 

Bg dais wee ions ae Agea ane 
on or aed : ro? b on 
GF «lcey Gat 1 2sUl dl we 
as 

+ “ 
OFS Sy e fF ee 48 e oe - ae 
rESG thé Ol 8 cAvaem BE 6 gl 
foe Sethe oe3 a Bae 4% 
AS SASS15 Bagi ae Y 

of pors von fo FEL 

LAI ah iNeed Cp dedes Ju 
Mg, Cate 

GA NIV Gg cote oil pe 8 EuSly Bball Oh cydedl qubsl eel tay ss 

Comments: 

The narrator means to say that they (the women in those days) did not 
consider it a part of menstruation. The previous Hadith has already 
indicated that the ruling belongs to the time following the bath at the end of 
the period. However, if the yellowish or brownish discharge is once again 
followed by the red fluid, then it shall be considered a part of menstruation. 

Chapter 128. How Long 
Should Women In Posinatal 
Bleeding Wait (Before 
Praying, etc.)? 

648. It was narrated that Umm 
Salamah said: “At the time of the 
Messenger of Allah #8, women in 
postnatal bleeding (after 
childbirth) used to wait for for 
days, and we used to put Wars!t 
on our faces because of freckles.” 
(Hasan) 

oF LBW OG - OVA panel 
CYA dined!) Cpdoad 

va 

xe of ge be abd pad Gis 
5M ies te leo oh de ey 
O33 lis Gath GH BB A 25 

ASN So aight GRAS bi 

Gis - 1A 

CA TVG celal Coy fo cles Gk cajlgbll cogly! axel [yo] eee 

Commients: 

Sagi aw 3 + Pils pba Amen g ody deVing on ose sath 

a. Nifés is the blood secreted from inside a woman after childbirth. Scholars 
have divergent views about its maximum duration. A majority of them are 
inclined towards considering it for forty days. In case the flow of blood 
persists beyond that period, then technically it is not postnatal bleeding but 
vaginal secretion other than postnatal bleeding. In this condition the woman. 
must bathe and start performing devotional acts like prayers and fasting. If 

1] See no. 466. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 431 post) wl gal 

bleeding stops earlier than forty days, then abstinence from the 
aforementioned rituals is not needed, and normal devotional activities can 
be restarted after taking the bath. 
b. Wars, as explained under Hadith 466, is a yellowish plant from Yemen used 
(especially by women) as a liniment and for dye. 
649. It was narrated that Anas (G35 sagn 25 al de Gls - 144 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2% By wg vis a 
set the time for postnatal bleeding «40a 51 cl cp SF Eyles! 
at forty days, except for one who oe he ee eae. ee 
e } ably -— pel 1 she 
becomes pure before that.” (Da‘if)  ~* a 7 a 

“4 7 

reel slay Gh a at Its 36 
ASS 5 gla FOI yy ile33 

- pes bees oly OW obec & Seg! omnes [Ltne artim] > ee A 
325 dal gc Sudo bok 9 rane me) aS Ag ts PS TED /V: clgedl Ju beS by sha! 

Comments: 
As to the chain of narration, the Hadith is ‘Weak’ but the ruling contained in 
it, being proved from other sound Ahddith, is correct. 

Chapter 129. One Who Has aes ee G-ar4 i 
Intercourse With His Wife oe Cor at ata 
When She Is Menstruating (VY dined) es Bs lp 

650. It was narrated that Ibn = ,x#- ae%) se ay Jor aa 
Boe :-Vedl +p dtl ce te - 40> 
‘Abbas said: “If a man had ; a o ee 
intercourse with his wife while «ide $2 «a SUI we GF «ye VI gil 
she was menstruating, the 2-2. <, 4s6y <2 .45 fe ye 
: f \ ls : dB LE cpl - 

Prophet #§ commanded him to ©? I>} Lee OG IE cole onl oF 
give half a Dinar in charity.” | #@ 25) el ale LAS 8 ios sé 
(Sahih) = ; 
jb Adey Shah 

ce WV Ee cb GB UST OB ele Ol ca slgbll ¢ gle it 1 [eee] see 
A tals ol CUED ely cw Cel al) pe She Cote 

Comments: 

For detailed comments see notes under Hadith 640. 
Chapter 130. Eating With A as (a not - are ee 
Menstruating Woman eo 

651. It was narrated that 1s 2 Aa ioe eee ha Gis — ye 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d said: “T asked 
the Messenger of Allah #¢ about 
eating with a menstruating 
woman and he said: ‘Eat with 
her.’” (Hasan) 

432 pod! Kalai 

be pyle of Sl ge elle gil 
fie of abl UE BE BE SS of pF 
sigs 6 7M a dt 2h 38 

Qsigr SS «sted 

Cade oy WAY egal! Sb ob cajylebll caglogl oe of [pum eolieel] eps 

Comments: 

NYT Te & gde I Wann $6 AL eS 

The question has been dealt with under Hadith 643. 

Chapter 131. Performing 
Prayer In The Garment Of A 
Menstruating Woman 

652. It was narrated that ‘Aishah 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 
was performing prayer, and I was 
by his side. I was menstruating, 
and I was wearing a wool cloak, 
and part of it was over him.” 
(Sahih) 

BENS OU - OT) nell) 
CY) dint) ailedl ois 
as it A & si Bhs - voy 
ah ee 32 ue of Gb 32 ass 
cy ESE Este 2 SE ot dl We gt 
qe te 1 ra Lie ales ‘ 5 - 
Oty cats SN fy ce dad Be a 3,25 

- ¥ - # 
haar; sey oS bie ghey «Gaile 

wl cel of OVETe « haolt GL ow else ob vB glial 6 lens ae i ees 

Comments: 

AL opp Sadi 

The use of a cloth or garment as a covering for the body by a menstruating 
woman does not make the entire clothing unclean: Her blood, however, if it 
soils. the cloth, shall only make the affected part unclean. Once the spot is 
washed, the entire cloth or garment becomes fit for all uses, even for prayer 
etc. 

653. It was narrated from 
Maimunah that the Messenger of 
Allah #§ performed prayer 
wearing a wool cloak. Part of it 
was over him and part was over 
her, and she was menstruating. 
(Sahih) 

Gis ces oy je Gis - vor 
gio aj coh takes See ee 
wales cade tay by oles he a 

oe FUN e 6B Let SH Ob cay Ugbll cosloyt al [peer cold] tg ad 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

433 roel | eet ligal 

CONG Cabana VVK IC ces sbbedl) ade pits alely ca Ohes Code 

Chapter 132. When A Girl’s 
Puberty Period Begins, She 
Should Not Pray Unless She 
Is Wearing A Head Cover 

654. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Prophet 2 entered upon 
her, and a freed slave girl of hers 
concealed herself. The Prophet 2% 

SoBe 1) OG - ONY ann 
po ek ASF et bee 
phase VY] bai od & belt 
OYY disci) 

22 5 ES I XS gf Gls - vot 

aes 8 

OAS 32 e853 (as YE se 31 

zs ae 

oP dee oh oft IF op Nl 98 38 

asked: “Have her periods begun?” 
She said: “Yes.” He tore a piece of 
his turban and said: “Cover your 
head with this.” (Da‘if) 

BELG igh j65 Zeal ol : 4st 
$8 oan JB ls 
DB atic fy ld GE ad Lhe 

Ags og p30 

here) 

43 ati] Mia eg re sl SG s ca VYA/Y dak ol ol ae el Tete wold] tee sd 
‘ ind cle pare Slike cpl JB ob opts dar! adayd (Gd yleroS] gl ieee mus 

655. It was narrated from ‘Aishah fi GAs 2,25 3) Lint Gls - 100 
that the Prophet #@ said: “Allah 46. ¢- ope 

does not accept the prayer of a , 
woman who menstruates (ie, an. 
adult woman) except with ahead = 

ow ‘ ‘ ied adie + e- ra 
cover.” (Sahih) oF seybell cy tee 36 thay 
i ke W106 gh ys ibe 

6 aks 
Aylesy VY] patted! ie 

Sade ge TEV colt ye hai il pt ob celal cogla gl ax tl [eee] toy 
«bills cpSlodhs COL& Gply chao opt amererey CYVV ie cgde Sl aumy 643 lem 

Comments: 

a. Covering the head for prayer is compulsory for a woman, even if she is 
secluded from the sight of others. This command for covering is not related 
to rulings concerning veil, which is not needed before non-marriageable 
near relations. 

b. Singling out ‘woman’ for the ruling clearly indicates that it is a female- 
specific ruling, and a man can perform prayer without a cover on his head. 
However, even for men it is not desirable to make it a habit to perform 
prayer with a bare head. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 434 n> pod) srl oul 

Chapter 133. A Women Who lsd CU — cee 7 
Is Menstruating May Dye we ef 2 f iS, ae 
Her Hands CVTY died!) Cais 

656. It was narrated from Gas icy 3) dint Gs - v04 
Mu’ddh that a woman asked 

‘Aishah: “Can a woman who is 
menstruating, dye her hands?” iis RKitA Ae St ud tb ard 
She said: “We were with the 43 .. sce oe ot gw ete ace 
Prophet # and we used to dye 'S B :cJl8 fyailll quae 1 db 
our hands, and he did not tel us 8&3 {§ ( Cossih 28%, we oth Ze 
not to do that.” (Sahih) OF ge Ree a Ae ag 

eae reall 23 dg 5S lS 

te bigs 
cS gre ol gt gee Teecaned oka] Ma io re gd! Sy [omen od Lins! ] Tex Saeel 
gisele only 
Comments: 
a. The Prophet's not prohibiting a thing means his silent approval. 
b. The term. ‘dye” stands for anything that, when applied to the hands or the 
head, changes their color. Henna is also a dyeing agent. 

Chapter 134. Wiping Over sé sli SE - (NE peal!) 
Bandages “(YE deel) ies 

~ 
“48 

657. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin is. : asic oul ty Miss Gls — sev 
Abu Talib said: “I broke one of Far ae CF re SS 
my forearms and I asked the of 37% GF «dsle| UI igi! ae 
Prophet #8 about that. Hetoldme 22 ..f 2 cstc .f gst te (i 
to wipe over the bandages.” er pis of ie A ited cs 
(Maudu’) E5055 | SG He os! 2 che oF Code 
Another chain with similar if oe 26 23 Fa\ tort eae gan 
meaning. sie ee 
SS) Je acl 
bi del idle 3 ach gf oe 
2505 GIS SE 32 
OF Gan CUS 2 gall ME oy 5yee 3 deol pl! JE [p gee ge salen] ty 3 
+ AIS fe gut go Cualed SU ge he oy 45 
Comments: 

The ruling contained in the Hadith is correct because the affected person has 
no other alternative. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 

Chapter 135. Saliva That Gets 
On Clothes 

658. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “I saw the Prophet 
#§ carrying Hasan bin “Ali on his 
shoulder, and his saliva was 
dripping down on him.” (Sahih) 

435 post) clos 

Cems wut ot — YO prreralt) 
_ore daoel) Dee 

a oF 3 eo Be 
ox 34s 3 

SZ geoe4 foe 
JU ia cs! OF 

joe we 2h ch J 

hood Yl awe Me gle of gnch 

BE ot geod SE AE YL ce Ss ge CAV /Ti deol eel [eqeee cole] cept 

Comments: 
a. Human saliva is not impure. 

: Bee oka] lia ‘Se gS Js cel si gay 

b. It is no affront to a person’s dignity, however high or mighty he might be, 
to hold a child in his lap or carry it on his shoulders. 

Chapter 136. Spitting Into A 
Vessel 

659. It was narrated from ‘Abdul- 
Jabbar bin Wa’il that his father 
said: “A bucket was brought to 
the Prophet #%; he rinsed his 
mouth and spat into it, and it was 
like musk or better than musk, 
and he rinsed his nostrils outside 
the bucket.” (Da‘if) 

Shy 6a pre Cade ce PIACTVUT VO /Es deed ae tl [ete oslinl] 

eEY go Gall SE -— OTT peracid 

(AYU dépesd!) 
tas WS suas 33 52 Gs - 104 
Bp dias Bhsgce + toe SE Ek 3 
aaa ar Bic tS gf buk 

i cil 28 a ads “de 
cde apes wes 
SBN Se Gye Beaty 

‘es 

in Goes ‘one cx! Puity Cant al oe coms ob sladline a cbeis olin} {us Spee gl 

660. It was narrated from Zuhri 
that Mahmud bin Rabi‘ 
remembered that the Prophet # 
spat into a bucket from a well 
that belonged to them. (Sahih) 

So geal] Gis bye ff is - an. 
ee oF “py agers 3 BAB ge “e iit aay 
oe El Hae 8 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 436 pod! ealaul 

(Bf be 
NORTE « bs) Leen] eee 

Comments: 

a. Whatever the Messenger of Allah #@ touched with hand or body became 
blessed. Hence it is that the Companions preserved his hair and other 
personal belongings. However, the Companions and their Successors never 
ever kept anything associated with other Companions or Successors as a 
holy relic. 

b. The Messenger of Allah #€, on this occasion took some water in his mouth 
and blew it over the face of Mahmud for fun. This shows that it is all right 
to make merry with small children. 

Chapter 137. Prohibition Of 2 OF gl SG - Orv peed 
Seeing One’s Brother’s ee ie ae. 
Nakedness CAYV dad!) Pies 3g 

661. It was narrated from (“$2 -%3 Jt & 34 Ge - a 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Sa’eed war aes eee 
Al-Khudri from his father that the role 3 Abeall ae wld! = 45 
Messenger of Allah #¢ said: “No 
woman should look at the 
nakedness of another woman, and 

ne man should look at the ; ee ° ; 2 
nakedness of another man.”’ jal i036 J aia i Y 38 = 

(Sahih) OH 3556 SN JEN be Ys 
vy onl oF PYAt chy gad SB pd wh «Qacdi line ax oI Fox Sata 
Vhs & ts 

~ 
Ca 
re 
ce 
oe 
oS 
= t 
ss 
a: 

Comments: 

a. There is consensus among the scholars that, among the things prohibited 
for man to look at, are the private parts (anus and penis of another man). 
There are, however, divergent views about the permissibility or otherwise 
of seeing the thighs of another man. Im4m Bukhari does not include them 
among the concealable parts. Still he thinks it prudent to conceal them. 
Generally for men, this is from the navel to the knee, and for women it is all 
of her body except the hands, feet and face. 

b. Women should also avoid seeing the private parts of other women. Even in 
case of childbirth, etc., only the women whose services are indispensable for 
the job may see them. All others must avoid seeing them. 

c. Women must not lay bare even their breasts before other women. 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 437 pod) il gal 

662. It was narrated from a freed 
slave of ‘Aishah that ‘Aishah said: 
“I never looked at (or I never age 32 tae be OS 2 RSG 
saw) the private part of the 

Cs tal Aes al as AY 

Messenger of Allah #8.” (Da‘if) jb AB Sy be th cn ail Le cr! 

(One of the narrators) Abu Bakr es 236 v sf 2b uo 258 tye 
(Ibn Abu Shaibah) said: “Abu nn S 
Nu‘aim would say: ‘(From) a des 88 ail S305 
freed female slave of ‘Aishah. oe 4 ih whe a aie 2 P| 36 

sted We 2S pre gl JB ca @Sy ge W/Videmd ar el Lda ooled] ty 3d 
VA [Vidksol tie glee Gl Ol parigyl pane ol Ate Soe Lins 

Chapter 138. If A Person \ cra] G- aya 1 
Bathes To Cleanse Himself o 7 o = : ae es 
From Sexual Impurity And Gana o ina) hot i as wt 
There Remains A Spot On - 4 ict 
His Body That Was Not EAE ce bee eta 
Touched By Water, What 

Should He Do? 

663. It was narrated from Ibn 3 «423 Qo 
‘Abbas: “The Prophet #2 bathed ,. e 
to cleanse himself from sexual “ 

impurity, then he saw a spot that #é |, 
the water did not reach.” Thenhe <<, ~, 
motioned with the hair hanging 
over his shoulders and squeezed os repre < 
{the water from it) over that eh ERs, gigs Aa Ls saa recs 
spot.” (Da‘if) de Ys ee Sta LS Ges 
In his narration, Ishaq said: “So Siete ce 

he wrung his hair over it.” , 

cn gen fowl ol de yl Cctred shol lie Sone gl JB, Lefpawe] : ‘eps 

[Vad cgi cyl werner g VI c Ha al deol go rere Jali ay Ad VAS Vgc cd 
ERE 6) 

664. It was narrated that ‘Ali VS Sates Sie Ge -~ We 

said: “A man came to the Prophet er , Pa nie 
#6 and said: ‘I bathed to cleanse ‘HH! See cp tee SF Clee 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 438 pod!) algal 

myself from sexual impurity, and 4; y) 2. Fee je wat 
I prayed Fajr, then I noticed a oO aur Ses aur eee 3 eo 
spot the size of a fingernail that al lS geil al tee te 
the water did not reach.” The {, 1 ,¢ 0° Ue sar 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: ‘If pill Ces HEE Gy Clos 
you had wiped it that would have #3 -j thy 2a oS Cate Laci 
been sufficient for you.’” (Da‘if) : ag .8 ‘ =. oa 

ES 3 Be Ml ied Sl ZU 

dltne gy Aarne anal Giad alin] We ig mo gl Sly ee eer ae genes 
Comments: (a8) Bye 6 aj al 
Both the Ahddith are Weak. As such they do not prove the intended ruling. 

The correct position is that the person concerned shall have to redo his bath 
or ablution. And Allah knows best. 

Chapter 139. If A Person ge { 8 oS OG ~ (¥"4 ) 
Performs Ablution And Siti 

erforms ution i” 
Leaves A Place Where Water (V4 dana!) Avy dys os sys 

Does not Reach 

665. It was narrated from Anas its Gis - ty 3) Hiss Gs — 0 
that a man came to the Prophet |. Ay ao 
#@; he had performed ablution o* sce Oo yr Gis TAS cn gal 

and has missed a spot the size of +o yen 4 BIS 
a fingernail where water had not, #8 ee a ne é ca Aa Rae 
reached. The Prophet 2 said to “= ra fis eee Shy Les 5 
him: “Go back and perform. + soy : ie 11 3 5 3 ctuh 
ablution properly.’ (Sahih) Cee ee ee ts 
O36 529 

cl Sede Ge Wie cope! Gd CL yldall coylayt ae i [ereel sees 

dass Cpl dmreoy ods 

Comments: ee pe 
If a dry spot from essential of washing during ablution is spotted before 
going for prayer, then the prayer must be repeated. In case it was 
discovered after the prayer then, as explained in the next Hadith, both the 
ablution and the prayer have to be done again. 

666. It was narrated that ‘Umar AiG eee ts iis Gis 444 
bin Khattab said: “The Messenger 5, : 
of Allah # saw a man Yj Gus tyee Cyl Garg te toa; 

performing ablution and he fesk Ate eG wea a 
missed a spot the size of a BOF ug 3 oe 

The Chapters On Dry Ablution 439 pond! ntl gai 
fingernail on his foot. He are et eer eee oh THe ot 
commanded him to repeat his oi) gi te OF ale oF tga 
ablution and his prayer, so he 453 1235 445 BE I 3 Per oh :d6 
did.” (Sahih) Bpee guste 4 et Chun ates Th ack 
dass Ol o5alb coed JE pa) oe 
EB SE BABNG 2555 

YENI Cyl eee eled qee Gltel Gry Gh algal glee eel ig ee 
4 sl gl ge paw Gate ye 

The Book Of The Prayer 440. Baa) wt 

(2) The Book Of Cf danali) B Meza) ET Crees) 
The Prayer 
Comments: 

a. According to the lexicographers and jurists the word Sal#f means prayer or 
supplication. Some of the scholars hold that the essence of Salft is 
reverence. The ritual prayer is so called because it signifies reverence for 
Allah. 

b. Prayer is a devotional act consisting of a series of utterances and actions 
that start with pronouncing the the greatness of Allah symbolized by the 
words Allahu Akbar and end with turning one’s face right and left, 
articulating Taslim (greeting), symbolized by the the words: As-Salému- 
‘Alaikum Wa Rahmatullah (Peace and Allah’s mercy be upon you). 

c. Prayer is an important pillar (among the Five Pillars) of Islam. It is the 

surest means of securing nearness to Allah, the coolness of our beloved 
Prophet's eye, a healing for the believer’s pains and miseries, a bulwark 
against the believer's misfortunes, and the key to the doors of Paradise for 
the chosen ones of Allah, even as the Qur’an says: “And seek help in 
patience and prayer.” (2:153) 
Important as the prayer is, the manner of its performance is also equally 
important. A prayer performed by one’s devised method will not be 
acceptable to Allah. Its acceptability is linked to doing it exactly according 
to the Sunnah of the Prophet #8, since he himself has said: Pray as you have 
seen me pray. (Bukhdri: 631). It is, therefore, essential that we perform the 
prayer complete with all the Sunnah, obligatory duties and. desirable acts 
specified by the Prophet #é. It will be a punitive act on the part of anyone 
who belittles and neglects anyone of the blessed Sunnah on the basis of 
one’s own deviant interpretations and arguments. The degree of reward 
promised for performing prayer in conformity with the precepts of the 
Prophet # can be estimated by the following saying of our beloved 
Prophet #¢: Abu Hurairah # reported: I heard the Messenger of Allah 2% 
say, “Say, if there were a river at the door of one of you in which he takes a 
bath five times a day, would any soiling remain on him?” They replied, 
“No soiling would be left on him.” He #€ said, “That is the five (obligatory) 
prayers. Allah wipes out all sins as a result of performing them.” (Bukhdri: 
528 & Muslim: 666) 

The Book Of The Prayer 

1. The Chapters On The 
Times Of Prayer 

667. It was narrated from 
Sulaiman bin Buraidah that his 
father said: “A man came to the 
Prophet #2 and asked him about 
the times of prayer. He said: ‘Pray 
with us for two days.’ When the 
sun passed its zenith he 
commanded Bilal to call the 
Adhan, then he commanded him. 
to give the Iqamah for Zuhr; then 
he commanded him to give the 
Igamah for ‘Asr when the sun was 
high and clearly white. Then he 
commanded him to give the 
Igamah for Maghrib when the sun 
had set; then he commanded him 
to give the Igamah for ‘Isha’ when 
the red afterglow had 
disappeared; then he commanded 
him to give the Iqdmah for Fajr 
when dawn came. On the 
following day he commanded 
him to give the Adhén for Zuhr 
when the extreme heat had 
passed and it had cooled down; 
then he prayed ‘Asr when the sun 
was still high, but he delayed it 
more than he had done the day 
before; then he prayed Maghrib 
before the red afterglow 
disappeared; he prayed ‘Isha’ 
when one-third of the night had 
passed; and he prayed Fajr at the 
time when it was already light. 
Then he said: ‘Where is the one 
who was asking about the times 
of Prayer?’ The man said: “Here [ 
am, O Messenger of Allah.’ He 
said: ‘The times of your prayer 

agi Bal) bs 

BME S155 IGT - 1 el 
(\ deli) 

4 So FG ed pee 

ae ioe ec leall Cp hetes Gas — ANY 

A cin lig UE usd hk Ge 

* ao 

66 UE Gaal ab ge abl pa al 
se 33 gis 536 al i esa a 
Gat So Bog 3g ah 
5 gil os WAT hay Lt; 

“of - 

eA EB Cad Cie site (la; 
gh 56 Se feb oad Ula; 
EO HS MS cis 36 Spt 

+ 

“ots, Se “ae 2 ated ve 
Se pRB Cagr SE Nail 55 © OU 

The Book Of The Prayer 442 SMa) ey 

ate between the times you have 

seen.’ (Sahih) 

ede oe UNC Cet cbse OUT Ol tela! gle eel tase 

4 GM 

Comments: 

a. With regard to any prayer, it is best to perform it at the earliest after the 
onset of the permissible time for it, although it is also permissible to delay it 
as long as it does not cross the prescribed limit of time for that particular 
prayer. 

b. It is permissible to sometimes leave the optimum for something other than 
optimum, but only for purposes prudent or educative. It is not, however, 
proper to make a habit of it. 

c. Cooling down of the day for Zuhr (early afternoon prayer) means waiting 
for reduction in the intensity of the heat. It is, as we all know, extremely hot 
at noon in the summer season. The Zuhr prayer can, therefore, wait a little 
after the sun has passed its zenith. There is, however, no justification for 
such delays in colder weathers. 

d. It may be noted that the time for Asr (afternoon prayer), for both the days 
mentioned in the Hadith, has been expressed in similar terms, namely: (i) 
“When the sun was high and clearly white,’ and (ii) ‘When the sun was still 
high.’ We will read more discussion about the sun’s height in coming 
Ahéddith. 

e. The time for Maghrib (early evening prayer) starts with the sinking of the 
sundisk on the horizon, and ends with the disappearance of the red 
afterglow appearing on the west. 

f. The time for ‘Isha’ (night prayer) starts with the disappearance of the red 
afterglow. As inferred from the Hadith, its end seems to be the passing of 
one-third of the night. Some other Ahddith suggest it to be until the passing 
of haif of the night. 

668. It was narrated from Ibn : G pasll wip ates Bhs - A 
Shihab that he was sitting on the # Big aie ak cane ta Oe Mae ete 
cushions of ‘Umar bin © abdul él le re a a os aA oe 
‘Aziz when he was the leader < yyal we of Hb Sle (dé Ie OW 
over Al-Madinah, and with him 4.73... s0 7 oe oe OL, 
was ‘Urwah bin Zubair. ‘Umar 92% 3 sell Ge le] og 
delayed ‘Asr somewhat, and 4 Sw 13 jadi 72 AE sth 
“Urwah said to him: “Jibril came Sou hie) Bib Se ee Ee oe 
down and led the Messenger of 92°) FUL had J ie of LI ray)e 
Allah 3% in prayer.” “Umar said jj, fb) 458 3 OW ae 
to him: “Know what you are 
saying, O “Urwah!” He said: “I  29™™" 
heard Bashir bin Abu Mas‘ud $e) 

voem «NO 
° 

The Book Of The Prayer 443 Sua! ks 

saying, ‘I heard Abu Mas‘ud 
saying, “I heard the Messenger of  ‘s* a Ae Jj des 5B al dy) 

Allah 2% saying, ‘Jibril came edie ef tee mi Zoe dc ma “5 
down and led me in prayer, and I ae bin 4 ods ede oo ce 
prayed with him, then I prayed -“4* Cole pb cdas Cole 6 cans 
with him, then I prayed with him, eile 2% alot C42: 
then I prayed with him, then I Re Pree nee 
prayed with him, and he counted 

five prayers on his fingers.” 

(Sahih) 

oVVY: ae ‘pele ais ayes ASS) SB CL cGgh i on 6 Gabel a ol: cx Saad 

oe ales olsys 6% Chl Cato os Were 6 pode | ol hall oli gf Ob cde Luo « prleme y 

Comments: eA d CAD Ot 

a. The coming down of Jibril (the Archangel) for the determination of prayer 
times highlights the importance of prayer in general, and of congregational 
prayer in particular. It also highlights the importance of performing the 
prayers on time. 

b. No one in an Islamic society is above criticism. But even while dissenting 
with someone, it is essential that we do not neglect the norms of decency 
and respect towards others. 

c. If the point at issue is not clear, it is no offence to the dignity of the speaker 
to seek further clarification from him. 

d. Any Hadith narrated before the people will carry more conviction if it is 
supported by reference to the source of the Hadith or its chain of narrators. 

e. The practice of narrating Ahddith along with their chain of narrators had 
started as early as the age of the Successors, which made it easy for the 
people to distinguish between an authentic Hadith and a fabricated one. 

Chapter 2. The Time Of The so «33 GE -(r )) 
Fajr Prayer pas rte oe 
(¥ dees!) 

669. It was narrated that ‘Aishah (jn - £23 oan 2 S s gas - 144 

said: “The believing women used ony = 

to perform the Subh!] prayer ‘83% OF ‘G2 

with the Prophet #8, then they <j -~? Set ales a 5G Tee ae 

would go back to their families : . ‘ rae 

and no one would recognize ! §> 3k oS teal Se ME fel “ 
ot ig 

6G gf B23 bis 

them,” meaning because of the 
darkness. (Sahih) 

0 The obligatory Fajr prayer. 

B32 op GF & jot 

The Book Of The Prayer 444 Boa) Qube 

pala 

cel ge Veo: <gelt ids ara pS) Shece! GL cop Lud! & bene reagena| Tex Seal 

opby dot gl 

Comments: 

a. Women also used to join the prayers along with their male counterparts. 
The reason for this was that, when the Prophet #§ delivered his discourses 
or the people asked him questions, even the women would listen to it and 
gain knowledge about their religion. 

b. Being able to listen to longer recitations of the Qur’4n and still finish it early 
means that the congregation assembled quite early, and the prayer was 
performed in its earliest prescribed hour. 

c. The women did not stay back after the prayer for purposes of doing other 
devotional recitals, but left the mosque immediately after the prayer. As for 
men. they, as becomes clear from other Ahadith, waited until all the women 
had left the mosque. : . 

670. It was narrated from Abu atts of biel 2b oe Ge - ww. 

Hurairah that the Messenger of 5 es “Y) g ae ea 

Allah #8 recited: And recite the oO ‘Y SF Se ger 

Qur’an during the Fajr. Verily, the idl be OMEN cal ale Le ealih 

recitation of the Qur’an during syed Pee ee eee ae ; 

Fajr is ever witnessed.” He — °35 Ml Js) GF coe gl be tebe 

said: “It is witnessed by the we pal OY Saal aye 

angels of the night and the day. sities 4° oe oe 

(Sahih) edges? id TVA tele NI] 266,70 

UEC 

Syd oye YAVOre cgde Shy cas bial ce EVEL dam) ae ol [mene] ye Pagel 

cul sag 6 CP idBs ca ae dl ody Bye ool ge oti bLal yy te 

60 pS g Solel Jc RES per) Sudo s ‘lll s oY VY i pSlelly Clevere dag 

: of Ov fs 3s Ct) en 

Comments: 

a. This shows the importance and merit of the of Fajr prayer. The ‘Asr prayer 
also partners it in merit. 

b. Angels witnessing the congregation is indicative of the pride of place in the 
Divine scheme occupied by the believers. 

+ 

671. Mughith bin Sumayi said: “I lA) GE se is - wy 
prayed the Subh with ‘Abdullah = ce. meee jag Sec gab 

Alisa’ 17-78. 

The Book Of The Prayer 

bin Zubair in the darkness, and 
when he said the Taslim, I turned 
to Ibn “Umar and said: ‘What is 
this prayer?’ He said: “This is how 
we prayed with the Messenger of 
Allah #@ and with Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar. When ‘Umar was stabbed, 
‘Uthman delayed it until there 

445 Boal!) bs 

etehy eo oe Ft tee 8.172% 
ie @ cde JE gat Goat Ge 

$ é PS 

dist ie ui Le So Gf al 
BUS oda ae 
5 io e =e ote oda 35 

was light.’”’ (Sahih) 

Js ca ela’ Cyl ge £07/1 stil aoe | Leoene odtiust] ei 

Comments: : 

a. The best time of Fajr prayer as proved from the precept of the Prophet # in 
this regard is to offer it at its earliest hour. This was the practice followed 
during the times of Abu Bakr and Umar u. 

b. ‘Uthman’s -4 decision to delay the prayer until there was light, was only 
dictated by the particular circumstances of the time, and was not meant to 
be permanent. That is why ‘Abdullah bin Zubair did not feel the need to 
delay the prayer, and performed it at its earliest prescribed time in accord 
with the Sunnah of the Prophet 2%. 

672. It was narrated from Rafié UU ictal fy 
bin Khadij that the Prophet # - 2 <qe- > 
said: “Pray the Subh early, for 4 

indeed its reward is greater” or - 0 25 = BS oy 

“your reward.” (Sahih) sage sax ee oe 
ow Go EF th of ope OF TH 
tol SE RE BN Ol: eat 

al 
6S 29 al ou oil 2 eel 
Bhd Cade oye EYEIC ccenall Cay Ob cB gall caglogl ar el [ern] te oe 
Ole cy! APP? o 6 el Gb Saou y cOkAT CYVY/V2 Slat ce oom anliy 64 

Comments: 

a. The words Asbihu bis-Subh spoken by the Prophet #%, correctly translated 
here as ‘Pray the Subh early’, is sometimes translated as “Delay it until there 
is morning light.” It is on this basis that the adherents of the Hanafi School 
of Jurisprudence delay the Fajr prayer until there is clear light. Such an 
interpretation is clearly against the teaching and practice of the Prophet #¢ 
who always performed the Fajr prayer at the earliest hour, in darkness. As 
such, even if the second translation is taken as correct, it would either 

The Book Of The Prayer 446 bec! ww hs 

mean: (i) “Avoid performing the Fajr prayer at Subh Kadhib (at the 
appearance of reddish blackness) but do it when you are sure of the onset 
of Subh Sadiq (daybreak; true dawn), or it would mean: (ii) ‘Prolong the 
recitation of the Qur’an so that when you finish your prayer, it is already 
bright morning’. It is so because the preceding Ahédith unmistakably 
highlight the merit of performing each prayer at its earliest prescribed hour. 

Chapter 3. The Time Of The yell Me ese ce reel) 
Zuhr Prayer m Sten 

(Y deal) 
673. It was narrated from Jabir 45 hs : ols 23 diss Gas - rv 
bin Samurah that the Prophet # ‘ 
used to pray Zuhr when the sun : 
had passed its zenith. (Sahih) dad OS BE AS Af ie os ole he 

z are Ky ook 
» Cpreend) Canad 1d} Seal 

Bid pb Go CHS Syl 3 eB! pu lose! oh ctrl! Calan esl gy ed 
4 anes glee cpl ge VWAie spl 

ar o os eon Saeo% oe Bo 
cue . Nis : Amd + Peeve Somme | 
Ir Ph OF Cat OF Oe OF 

Comments: 

a. The time for Az-Zuhr prayer starts just after the sun has passed its zenith. 

b. The Prophet's way is to perform the prayer at its earliest hour. 

674. It was narrated that Abu a5 GS lk 25 Ass Gils - we 
Barzah Al-Aslami said: “The = oh 
Prophet #@ used to pray the Hajir GF «thst ig! Ch Se oe fee on! 
prayer, which you call ‘Zuhr,’ eieMy oo of te BMS ot ks 
when the sun had passed its *° ag eS yor? 

oye ¥ ie op Be SS a ye 
zenith.” (Sahih) prt pw ai HE cel ob :Jb 
Be eras is) ese nltlgs FAG ri 

ee a EY a bole) das panel oye oy bb wh iSsLall ash ye «gyal a pl ‘er 
cell es doh CS mmadl SI Gleed GL ctr bacll cabins Cee Cale 
4 SU geast al cole Gude cy VVC 
675. It was narrated that Po pte oo Bae Ee gue eee 
Khabbab said: “We complained to "C83 OAT a ot gf Eas = We 
the Messenger of Allah #§ about {6 «GlAol ol BF «eel Gus 
the heat of the sunbaked ground, 

mrt 2 ae Zork B°S 0 SE ye 
but he did not respond to our SOON OPN ee or ae 

ve 4 ow we 

complaint.” (Sahih) wi SLAs SS ae I th I GRE 
Another chain with similar Pie 

The Book Of The Prayer 

wording. 

ee Ware call. 

Comments: 

447 SMa) wats 

Gee 

Gis sk gf Gis E81 36) 
[egad Gye Bhs 2 ua 

6S ph lol Ol cterlnal cobs atl tee pel 

a. The Companions’ plea was to the effect that the sun turns the sand burning 
hot, and prostration for the Zuhr prayer over it becomes difficult during 
summer, would it not, therefore, be better to delay the prayer until the sand 
cools down a little? The Prophet #¢ did not concede to the implied request, 
but continued to lead the prayer early even in the hot season. 

b. Some other Ahddith do speak of delaying the Zuhr prayer during the hot 
season (as we shall see under Ahddith in Chapter 4) but it only means a 
slight delay, not so much that it should push the worshippers towards the 

end of the prayer time. 

676. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: “We 
complained to the Messenger of 
Allah #€ about the heat of the 
sunbaked ground, but he did not 
respond to our complaint.” 
(Sahih) 

bi eye Gis cas of Gls - wi 
of dl ate 36 aol 3 eae gf Gls 
ts ob cele! 

oh ge VYVi m oyl BabST pare TV (iS) Il el [eee] te ed 
rs NAY Gey SD Olaue of y gles YW skuYI igs als) os NY dB y cay a ey wees 
«Gale! Coded Lge tals dy cool dle aby Carlaw cy pai dol 

Chapter 4. Waiting For It To 
Cool Down Before the Zuhr 
Prayer When The Heat Is 
Intense 

677. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: ‘When it is very 
hot, then wait for it to cool down 
before you pray, for intense heat 
is from the flaring up of the Hell- 
fire.’”” (Sahih) 

cb aL IBY OU - Cf neil) 
(£ dinclt) FAS sg 

4 UV i tb yall 3b ke am 21 [perme oobieef] tes Set 

The Book Of The Prayer 448 SMa) alt 

Comments: 
The wisdom behind waiting for the prayer until it cools down a little, is the 
fact that intense heat dampens the spirit of devotional submissiveness and 
fervor, while under cooler conditions the prayers are likely to be more 
focused. The wait should, however, not be excessive. 

678. It was narrated from Abu Sat stif ros Sy EES ES sR 

Hurairah that the Messenger of . 

Allah 2¢ said: “When it is very of he oF soles on oF epee Gl 

hot, then wait for itto cool down oe ea oe oe tet, OE a, sf 
. ts | oy 4h \ emer] | 

before you pray, for intense heat a ae wo oe ees 

is from the flaring up of the Hell- 5441 ip :JE BE a 595 af aA al 

Fire.” (Sahih) wd fe fall he Uf peli (93,26 Ys. 

vty 

.€ 

cGll .. sodl Bat Sell OLY) Glee! Gb ctr baddl calin ae l tee sal 
Ap Oph 9 Cee Cpt dere oye WW0ie 

679. It was narrated that Abu Pal Gis sus al Gis - ww4 
Sa‘eed said: “The Messenger of |. ut eee eta! ak wees hoy 
Allah #8 said: ‘Wait for it to cool =o ‘ele el oF chee I OF sighs 
down before you pray, for intense 1, ah ray yoy Ob TG aes | 
heat is from the flaring up of the G 7 LO get 

eho af oe 8o8 ce, oe 8, 
Hell-fire.’”” (Sahih) Menge ced Se pol bs OL «gdh 
Cad gt FYONIG iB gle Ugly GUI tke Gl Gl eb glad ast ige pe 
La Ghee VI 

680. It was narrated that  :{bulqli reel 3 Bp Gis - ws 
Mughirah bin Shu’bah said: We i 
were praying Zuhr with the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ at the time all 32 : ge al 3 ve Lh «a 
of intense heat (ie, midday when is Pee , Geek 
the sun has just passed its zenith) BE tt S55 Ge pai & tot 
and he said to us, “Wait for it to 443 shh 3 ape gle aaa) So 
cool down before you pray, for Fe Sab adit ig weed: ete: bens 
intense heat is from the flaring up Meee ced Se All Bae of sal 
of the Hell-fire.” (Da‘if) ° 

CF ch 36 lag Bb GAs] Gis 

cpu one ht ee Glee! ye Vor /Etieel aol [ee oll] tay pd 
NB Se) egeree akin Mie seg Sy ESS talyt Cael fos VEE 

The Book Of The Prayer 449 Brad) lS 

681. It was narrated that Ibn = ite .--3 te ey Je UAE 
en ae | ue Woe - TAN 

‘Umar said: “The Messenger of ae wr i la 
Allah #§ said: ‘Wait for it to cool UF «ail dre Ge «Zee wiles! ite 
down before you pray the Zuhr.’” Se ee ee: 
(Sahih) 4! dy45 Ju iJb ai on! a ae 
Cg Wyo gh Be 

epee she} Vin tgp sd) Sy Lee od tinuf ] Tex Bagel 

Chapter 5. The Time Of The eZ LS 8s Ot - 
‘Asr Prayer $ Bee Shy Lh - (0 pannel) 

(0 dass!) 
682. It was narrated from Anas Say ect rb by Re eS ES om YAY 
bin Malik that the Messenger of sy 7 

Allah @ used to pray ‘Asr when ee BF led gi! oF re Sl 
the sun was still hot and high, Lot 4e we a G2 Sf thf Af euu 

z ja, OlS Be al J 0 al EU 
and if a person were to goto the = % oa - ae 
suburbs (of Al-Madinah) he CAS <a dade Jetily joel 

would be able to reach it while Be G ag EGS pA. Te Reis 
the sun was still hot and high. Reet PENG ego a ail 
(Sahih) 

ey tee ge TN Cea Koll Gleced Gh ctrleall cole ead co eae 
gor Gas 

a. The sun being ‘hot and high’ is the condition when it is still white and has 
not become pale. The term ‘delay’ in this context would mean the condition 
when the sun either turns pale or red. 

b. It is reported from Jabir 4 that a man asked the Prophet #§ about the times 
of prayer. He said: ‘Attend the prayers with me.’ Then the Prophet #§ 
performed the Zuhr prayer when the sun passed its zenith, and the ‘Asr 
prayer when the shadow of everything became twice the size of the 
original. Then the next day he # performed Zuhr prayer when each person 
had a matching shadow, and the ‘Asr prayer when the shadow of each 
person became twice the original. (Sunan An-Nas@7: 505) 

683. It was narrated that ‘Aishah Gs 73 of 33S ges - ve 

said: “The Prophet #¢ prayed the nS ee as 

‘Asr when the sun was shining ‘9% * ‘¢2* Zl i See ones 

into my room and there were no. 5.25)! BE 25) le 255 liste oF 

shadows yet.” (Sahih) . ai Kile . Bs o¢ 5 
ae $7 Sos. ~ 5 Cymnteted 

For 

The Book Of The Prayer 

‘ plnes 6087: ia opel ods Ob 

Comments: 

coe abl ge ego sor ol 
6% Chew ade oe VA: an & nase) cal phuall oli) wk 6d Led! 

450 SMa) bs 

Fox Saal 

This shows that the Prophet #¢ performed the “Asr prayer early, since if the 
prayer had been delayed, the shadow would have covered the entire 
courtyard and started mounting the walls. 

Chapter 6. Maintaining The 
‘Asr Prayer 

684. It was narrated from ‘Ali bin 
Abu Talib that, on the Day of 
Khandaq, the Messenger of Allah 
# said: “May Allah fill their 

oe aA SG - 0 pel 
(1 died!) paall ale 
sus hs tia fs List he - was 

B35 EAE ot pele be 

2 

dots Sf th of of ge BF te 

houses and graves with fire, just ||, ,, -_ 
as they distracted us from the sx “! Sua BIE es Se ie a 

middle prayer.” (Hasan) salt Re G isa me at ey is 

op Sey) 

Jad ge O0ViG CVAVEVAS/T EA ped shyt onl [yee oobf] Ferber 

1 Be cy! 

Comments: 

a. Loss in religious matters is greater than loss in worldly affairs. 

b, The ‘Asr prayer has greater importance than other prayers. 

c. The very tongue that had remained silent at the trials of Taif, was forced to 
invoke Allah’s wrath upon the invading idolaters when the events of the 
battle of the Confederates {also known as the battle of Trench) distracted 
the believers from offering the ‘Asr prayer on time. He #¢ was so angry at 
this failure, that he besought Allah to fill the infidels’ houses and graves 
with fire. In it perhaps, is sufficient food for thought for those who miss 
their prayers just out of laziness, or because of their indulgence in sports or 

business activities. How reprehensible will this act of theirs be to Allah and 
His Messenger :#¢! May Allah protect us all from His wrath! 

685. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Umar that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “The one who 
misses the ‘Asr prayer, it is as if 
he has been cheated out of his 
family and his wealth.” (Sahih) 

Stat Gis :jtee 25 gil, Bde - whe 
oF igllo 32 GAH oe ES BI 
oil Sp JG ag bt S425 UF 5k ot 
leg GAT 335 UK el Be Sli 

The Book Of The Prayer 451 BM! hs 

Comments: 
For a man of the world there can be no greater loss than that his family, his 
relations and his herd of animals all meet their sudden death, all his 
buildings collapse in an instant, all his money is taken away by thieves, and 
he is reduced to the state of an absolute beggar. But, in the sight of the 
Messenger of Allah, all this loss cannot match the loss of failing to observe 
one prayer on time. We can thus say that anyone who misses just one 
prayer from the bidding of the inciting soul or the temptation of Satan, his 
loss is as irreparable as the loss sustained by the miserable man cited above. 

686. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah said: “The idolaters 
kept the Prophet #§ from the ‘Asr 33 ty GAs; al sede Bo yt SN 
prayer until the sun had set. He xe) gc ee pe tL eee 
ae ‘They kept us from Woe rYB os le gy Ju 52 We oe 
performing the middle prayer; Le ihe BE if be cisdb ty Ak 
may Allah fill their graves and |g wg aye gt 
their houses with fire’ ” (Sahih) CF RE BAO pl Ge iE abl te 

OW ot ecA ck OS opal sue 

ie GIS 1 n8 Yo Geet he - 05 

high 1 9G «Jah Bh op yt 
HG ress 

pan igo At ghee! glad :J8 yo UU) ol tele pln eet te 

2 dole +p Aeres tude se TTA! 
Comments: , i ee c 

a. The Hadith confirms that the middle prayer is another name for the ‘Asr prayer, 
whose importance has been underlined by the Qur‘an in the following terms: 
“Guard strictly the prayers, especially the middle prayer” (2:238). 

b. Prayer in Islam is more important than even Jihdd (fighting in the cause of 
Allah). 

Chapter 7. The Time Of The w roll we oss SU - paral) 
Maghrib Prayer (V dead) 

687. Abu Najashi said: “I heard pled 3 Reeatl ie he - wv 
Rafi’ bin Khadij say: ‘We used to i4z set te 4y-hy Ste cag tcty 
perform the Maghrib at the time of pee ot ly = 

the Messenger of Allah #%, and Cake elle Seles Zo ees ela! 
one of us would be able to see the ote FF ot 4 # AH thawed 

poy kas BS ich meee 9 eat 
places where his arrows would aoe stil lee qe we <e 
land when shot from his bow.’” Gis! Gyaid BB hl S525 aye Je 
(Sahih) A 

AS Sis AJ ES Sy 

The Book Of The Prayer 452 Bead) es ba 

Another chain with similar hc tty ce of oe 
wording. Ae ENED Go pl oe 
FL eT a do Ft oo 
OS te Oe ell 

‘plane s ral cr predl aby Wh cosh! oisly 6 gulbes axe ol Tex S tad 
wy dad gl Lyd ye WV ee etl Cyt ke Gell ody yl oF Oly Oh ete bea! 

Comments: 
One reason for completing the ‘Maghrib prayer so early was that they used 
to perform it just at the setting of the sun. The second is that the prayer was 
relatively brief, in the sense that, unlike other prayers, there was no 
prolonged recitation of the Qur’an in it. 

688. It was narrated from 
Salamah bin Akwa’ that he used 
to pray the Maghrib with the 
Messenger of Allah #% when the 
sun set. (Sahih) 

ol gat Boos Be - 

Aug be At ae Yi tygtll Che 
5s af e380 o ila b2 cote eal 
ing ih op he Je 

ely 

‘pln sy cOW ie oe prod wos wh 63 ylaall wn ge 6 goed! a ol es Sagal 
Ay dey Cade ge Wig cdl oo. eal cdy Jal oF Oly GL ete lel 

689, It was narrated that ‘Abbas 
bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib said: “The 
Messenger of Allah # said: ‘My 
Ummah will continue to adhere to 
the Fitrah!! so long as they do 
not delay the Maghrib until the 
stars have all come out.” (Hasan) 
Abu ‘Abdullah bin Majah said: I 
heard Muhammad bin Yahya 
saying: ‘The people in Baghdad 
were confused in narrating this 
Hadith. Abu Bakr Ai-A’yan and I 
went to ‘Awwam bin ‘Abbad bin 
‘Awwam and he brought out to 
us the book of his father, and this 
Hadith was in it.’”’ 

M Natural inclination of man, ie., Islam. 

, ee Fe Agee 

Se ue Bae Ge. Ww 
ort) Be Bee het . gS ge sf “0 
cplgall 3p 3Ge OWT soy YF lil 
oe BS 82 oI ot LSE] 8 
a - on e wok - set 
itl PF tot oF EY! oF tool 
oa a ie te Ssh) ae 
142 abl Rs JB SB dhs we oft 
WAS ple hdl Je 2h dig 
Mp gel DER 35 fal 

2i8 oh 2 a Se ft de 

s 

ne yp ete 7 @ “@es 

ae ee ee 

oo Ol Sf tds Le GG tee 
i ty ET RG 
3 plat Be 

ayete ot, 3) 
Sak Eudes! Nua 

The Book Of The Prayer 

453 Sac) tes 

vad sss BG caf Gol cj cet 

Sb yore Bole Cy Cee Ce peble Gud oe EEA/Y eel eT [ged teed 
Ar Caterd|s ene 9 RAteE sagls eg whe Lal gt laginleads «bare Aguperg B93 He bakS 

Comments: 

> Sore gl 

a. It is better to perform the prayer in its earliest prescribed time. One should 
especially avoid delaying the Maghrib prayer, since the time limit for it is 

less than for others. 

b. Delaying the prayers is deviation from the faith of Islam. 

Chapter 8. The Time Of The 
Isha’ Prayer 

690. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Were it not that it 
would be too difficult for my 
Ummah, I would have commanded 
them to delay the ‘Isha’.” (Sahih) 

eliall Be 255 OU ~ (A pen 
(A daeedl) 

ce Bs oytke Bf fle Ge — 0 

CPN oe ol al 6 Be th 

Yoo 56 a at 3,25 Sf ee Ais 

tolaglt pea ee | Ae SAT Gf 

1% Olsen had cya TOV e CSged| Wh caylgblt 6 prlewe reaped ex Sead 

Comments: 

a. Unlike other prayers, it is preferable to delay the ‘Isha’ prayer. 
b. The delay should only be to the extent that the worshippers in general do 

not feel inconvenienced. 

691. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #€ said: “Were it not that it 
would be too difficult for my 
Ummah, | would have delayed the 
‘Isha’ prayer until one third or one 
half of the night had passed.’” 
(Sahih) 

OF thee ol op dae Je 

4 ~ = 

Bal Af Yoh ae at J,25 OE 38 

edt J til ie 239 gh Ue 

uy ages of foi 

elasdi 3jlie el (2 «lel ish caput 6 gabe I a ol Taeee oaliuf] Fcc Saal 
Sel 3b Ludo, © Cee Oe : JB» by ee oy dle Cale cy VWie ei 

Comments: 

We may infer from this, that the ‘Isha’ prayer must be performed before half 
of the night has passed, since the Prophet #¢ had only wished to delay it 

The Book Of The Prayer 

454 Baal) Qibs 

until the half of the night. Nevertheless, the congregational prayer should 
be held at a suitable time, taking into view the convenience of the 

worshipers. 
692. Humaid said: “Anas bin 
Malik was asked: ‘Did the 

Prophet # wear a ring?” He said: 
‘Yes.’ One night he delayed the 
‘Isha’ prayer until almost the 
middle of the night. When he had 
prayed he turned to face us and 
said: ‘The people have prayed 
and gone to sleep, but you will 
still be in a state of prayer so long 
as you are waiting for the (next) 
prayer.’”’ (Sahih) 

Anas said: “It.is as if I can see 
the sparkle from his ring.’” 

mis: cA ey 4a BGs ay 
je dU Ie hs cn nec 

had 4a a é 4 
SLi Be 2S JES) fe « ae 

re as plaal Me is 5 3 
Ages Wyle 8 yt) Ht SUB capt yy 
aes iu Me SS 3 Sy 
BABII 

$k yay) od} ET 2 2H 38 

Ca 
os 

celta! pb ce Cty be GL cdg! CTA/T: SLT a ol [eeeel : eps 
Verte tplues Wie «gabe hl ged Cydoads ca oye s stall oy teree ge Obie 

Comments: 

a. The Prophet #§ mostly performed the ‘Isha’ prayer early, which means not 
delaying it unduly. However, at times he departed from the normal practice 
in order to highlight the merit of delaying it. 

b. Religious speech can be delivered after the congregational prayer. 

c. Sitting in wait for the prayers is a meritorious act. 

d. It is permissible to wear a ring. Men can, however, wear only silver. Use of 
gold is prohibited for men (Sunan Ibn Majah: 3595). 

693. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa’eed said: “The Messenger of 

Alléh #@ Jed us for the Maghrib 

prayer. Then he did not come out 
until half the night had passed. 
Then he came out and led them in 
prayer, then he said: “The people 
have prayed and gone to sleep, 
but you are still in a state of 
prayer so long as you are waiting 
for the (next) prayer. Were it not 
for the weak and the sick, I 
wanted to delay this prayer until 

Bo 

e s 4 “GL 
2eU us 3 Ole he - var 

23 3315 (as de eg eee 

tea aN oe 

3 NA ~ ly Ags Nghe 5 xt 

Cig Se Vsly Bai Syke 

The Book Of The Prayer 

the middle of the night.’”’ (Sahih) 

«Shs a 

oe AYN aS Y claddl cay Ob vighall xsggl ang [eqeune oli]: ey pei 

Chapter 9. Times Of Prayer 
When It Is Cloudy 

694. It was narrated that 
Buraidah Al-Aslami said: “We 
were with the Messenger of Allah 
#€ on a campaign, and he said: 
“‘Hasten to perform prayer on a 
cloudy day, for whoever misses 
the ‘Asr prayer, all his good deeds 
will be in vain.’” (Sahih) 

-43 oglo tude 
BLA ole SU - 4 preeall) 
(4 toed) gall 

cole GL ti te Gis - vat 
ip digg Gis 9G a 3 dint 
eh Sy ase Sy oS ol 
fl x25 GS 38 gol Say ge 
2 SAL IK lb HE 3 
2 Rites 

toe ce lpally ce Gels! ge aSe ge TU /0:deol ool Lome]: ey oe 

plead) De eat ca 

Comments: 

abadls co pbs Your elsyhye) Ole oleae A LoS tga al 

+O nh 9 Gabes! we salt ass c AS Aaa 

Sinful acts eat up the good deeds. Missing the ‘Asr prayer is a grave sin, 
which might eat up the deeds of the whole day. 

Chapter 10. Whoever Sleeps 
Through Prayer Or Forgets It 

695. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: ‘The Prophet #% 
was asked about a man who 
forgets prayer or sleeps and 
misses it. He said: “He performs it 
when he remembers it.’’” (Sahih) 

ade oe bie Teal obs 

BLAM g2 6 Bo OU - C+ pee) 
(Ve diel) Ugged 3 
sdetesll ge bf jad Gls - x40 
25 ge sdb ate . gil 38 be 

MAGES Aiy Ueland SE ge 

SLI Sglall clad Gh tele! glen eel tee sd 

The Book Of The Prayer 

Comments: 

456 Baad) hy 

Aylie SUL cas sobs 

a. Forgetfulness and sleep are valid excuses. No sin devolves on account of 
them, provided that the event is not the result of one’s carelessness. 

b. A prayer missed out of forgetfulness must be performed as soon as one is 
reminded of it. Delaying it without a valid reason is not right. 

c. Do not deliberately pray at sunrise or sunset. Anyone who remembers his 
prayer or wakes up at the undesirable time must wait for his prayer till the 

undesirable time has passed. 

696. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of 
Allah # said: ‘Whoever forgets a 
prayer, let him perform it when 
he remembers it.’”” (Sahih) 

697. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that when the 
Messenger of Allah #6 was 
coming back from the battle of 
Khaibar, night came and he felt 
sleepy, so he made camp and said 
to Bilal: “Keep watch for us 
tonight.” Bilal prayed as much as 
Allah decreed for him, and the 
Messenger of Allah #8 and his 
Companions went to sleep. When 
dawn was approaching, Bilal 
went to his mount, facing towards 
the east, watching for the dawn. 
Then Bilal’s eyes grew heavy 
while he was leaning on his 
mount (and he slept). Neither 
Bilal nor any of his Companions 
woke until they felt the heat of 
the sun. The Messenger of Allah 
#@ was the first one to wake up. 
The Messenger of Allah #2 was 
startled and said: “O Bilal!” Bilal 
said: “The same thing happened 

A555 1 
» glad] Cadosd| Jas] Looe] wees 
ws Gas riod 3) dys Gis - 14Vv 
ad ao ra 

fs kt - , 8 
oF 6 ed 92 Coos +hany cn we 

Jas sole 

is 

oA By Ge AL Gu ce 
aed hi Op 2 IG, «5058 
Moai 325 6 A Bu 
J, Saat 2d Co UE eh; 
Vy, 25 sal Sig shy 
rie & gitl y LEW 
eel Bo 25 OS eb 
Gi) 0S BB ail S525 G38 Mba 
ish gdh 2 LT 8, de de 
3565 0 oh ET Ob cae 

we Gd sgeis5 BE astm 236 

The Book Of The Prayer 

to me as happened to you. May 
my father and mother be 
ransomed for you, O Messenger 
of Allah!” He said: “Bring your 
mounts forward a little.” So they 
brought their mounts forward a 
little (away from that place). Then 
the Messenger of Allah 2% 
performed ablution and told Bilal 
to cali the Iqdmah for prayer, and 
he led them in the prayer. When 
the Prophet #¢ finished praying, 
he said: “Whoever forgets a Salah, 
let him pray it when he 
remembers, for Allah says: And 
perform the prayer for My 
remembrance.” He (one of the 
narrators) said: “Ibn Shihab used 
to recite this Verse as meaning, 
“when you remember.’ ” 

dee ge Urine Teal eet 

Comments: 

457 BMaall) ts 

VS, 545 ae ait dty 3 
Me os jad dB SNS BE esl 
— Jes - a OG SS Hy Ghat 
[\g seb] ee Zoy Shai aby db 
684 Wigs Os 31 OK, SI 

ay 

asl i gball lab wh cde lool cptne tor | Fz aged 

4 

a. How much importance the Prophet #¢ attached to the prayer may be 
gauged from the fact that even when extremely exhausted from journey, he 
was keen that the prayer be not delayed. That is why he #¢ charged Bilal 
to see to it that the prayer is performed on time. 

b. If there is reason to believe that any default in work is not the result of 
deliberate negligence, the person concerned may not be chided or rebuked 

but pardoned and excused. 

c. Getting the party to bring their mounts forward a little was meant to help 
them shake off their sleepiness, so that no trace of laziness is left while they 

perform their prayers. 

d. A missed prayer can also be performed as a congregational prayer. 

698. ‘Abdullah bin Rabah 
narrated that Abu Qatadah said: 
“They mentioned negligence 
because of sleeping too much, and 
he said: ‘They slept until the sun 

") Tg-Ha 20:14. 

Suis Gis site 3) cst Gils - 14a 
(0G of dl Me Le coal BF oa GI 
B pens 19/59 
rege calb ie Lge J ce ssl 

The Book Of The Prayer 

had risen. The Messenger of Allah 
#@ said: “There is no negligence 
when one is sleeping, rather there 
is negligence when one is awake. 
If anyone of you forgets to pray, 
or sleeps and misses a prayer, 
then let him pray when he 
remembers, and during its time if 
it is the day after. (Sahih) 
‘Abdullah bin Rabah said: 
“Imran bin Husain heard me 
when I was narrating this Hadith 
and said: ‘O young man, look at 
how you are narrating the Hadith. 
I was present at the time of this 
Hadith with the Messenger of 
Allah #%.’ And he did not deny 
anything of the Hadith.” 

458 Baal Qutes 

bE BN 8 Gch Be a 5525 OG 
(i555 Sy lath ge a0 ot Be 
CUE Se eigls 

Oljie grad oe fg dil Ate JG 

208 

fe Sl dis BB AI deo & 

63 as 

reer 

c lg gl ae oF eE ge od oh si gliall coglagsl anol [eee 03 baw! ] eps 

Comments: 

Aaa Cpl seer y 8¥Vie 

a. Itis perfectly in order if youngsters narrate prophetic Ahddith before the elders, 
since in this way their mistakes in the narration, if any, would be rectified. 

b. Narration of Ahfdith demands great caution lest the listeners should 
construe anything (mistakenly mentioned by the narrator from outside the 
original) as being part of the Hadith, and start acting upon it. 

Chapter 11. The Time Of 
Prayer When One Has An 
Excuse Or In Cases Of 
Necessity 

699. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Whoever catches 
one Ra‘kah of the ‘Asr before the 
sun sets, then he has caught it, 
and whoever catches one Ra‘kah 
of the Subh before the sun rises, 
then he has caught it.” (Sahih) 

2 Plas ah a seal 
ae GAS: La ee Gis - 144 
435 Soil gene 3b ppl 

ge EFS chat of athe 8 oplel git 

ot sei 

ae, 

je A58t yan Ji a6 5585 ol Sp 
5B OF Sf Bs be, pall 
jl jS Bs5 ll ip Sesh: Ber) ssi 

The Book Of The Prayer 459 Sra) by 

ir ge grees 

cOVAE gaa pill er Sh yaf oF wh ce ylcall | ga eg ybedi tor ol Tex Saeed 
4) day Cade ye VAT Teel bf iS pry cpt wel cde lal Claws s 

Comments: 

a. Another Hadith reports the Messenger of Allah #@ as saying: “The time for 
‘Asr is as long as the sun has not become pale.” (Sahih Muslim: 612). So 
much so, that even if one is able to perform just one Rak‘ah before sunset, 
the prayer is considered to have been performed on time. However, it is 
forbidden te delay the ‘Asr prayer, without any valid reason — just out of 
laziess. Such a prayer has been characterized by the Prophet #§ as the 
“‘hypocrite’s prayer’. (Sahih Muslim: 622) 

b, The same ruling holds good for the Fajr prayer as well, ie., if a person is 
able to perform even one Rak’ah before sunrise, his prayer will be 
considered to have been performed on time. 

ae 
700. It was narrated from ‘Aishah san a IF on pA Gls - ve. 

that the Messenger of Allah 3 Z voc fe 

said: “Whoever posine one Ra‘kah a a Moe ae 
of the Subh before the sun rises, 9 ee xe! sdb « AS fy bl ae 
then he has caught it, and 4 a0 Sf Sisle RE xk wl “1 
whoever catches one Ra‘kah of the ae a aig a 
‘Asr before the sun sets, then he {3 1055 g wal Sa 453 fan dB BE as! 
has caught it.” (Sahih) es asf + aes sf 4g yaks giles af 

Another chain with similar : eee / 
wording. ced) OBR G) LS SG all 
553) 

Ae rors of ers Gas ee 
#6 oi J,25 OG A ye kh Cf 

Fe 

E 
ah 

[omny 

Lali Ae syoh sa 3 glued oP iS Iyoi ce wh cde Ll! cline Pees ex Bae 
4 ae Ce ore Sake oe VA 

Chapter 12. The Prohibition ee oF a SE - (Vy onal) 
Of Sleeping Before The ‘Isha’ Rares ge Laelt se ne 
Prayer And Engaging In gro & . J 
Conversation After It (VY died) 

en 4 eae ee en ee 
701. It was narrated that Abu 2 Ge kd Gy Lene GAS — ve) 

The Book Of The Prayer 460 Bead) tS 

Barzah Al-Aslami said: “The Sea) Zee igh, ae 2 — 
Messenger of Allah #€ used to : 2 
like to delay the ‘Isha’, and he of te G32 Gis Je «oligll 
disliked sleeping before it, and 7 PDE eee Oe es at 
engaging in conversation after it.” Ue cil OF «tele oe gee eSlesst 
(Sahih) colts BE il 5425 SE 
gs ASN oh Gisy eth 539 ST 

Ba Eachty 

ge Wie coll LF pl ge oS Ob ida edly ug idiest igi ss 

. anS| wsle Jie GC 
Comments: 4 Adil le Slie Cate 

a. Anyone sleeping before the ‘Isha’ prayer runs the risk of not waking in time 
to perform the ‘Isha’ prayer or, even if he awakes, laziness might get the 
better of him and not allow him to perform the prayer with due 
submissiveness and devotion. It is, therefore, necessary that we go to sleep 
only after performing the ‘Isha’ prayer. ; 

b, Staying up and talking after the ‘Ishi’ is also not proper, because it could 
result in one’s sleeping past the Fajr prayer. 

702. It was narrated that ‘Aishah Gis 723 0 2a i is - vey 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 8 = og. g. 255 see 
did not sleep before the ‘Isha’ nor 9°77" © ¢ 
stay up (talking) after it.” (Hasan) #3 a Le Gs VE CL 

acsle if cagl oF col ep! prtog 
oplicd! JS HE I 425 ae G 2256 
as a NG 

"See ssl SEs ca silell Cade oy YUE [As sod a oi Co orn] Tex Saal 
Settallic, & skiul Wis 

Comments: coer 
‘Aishah, the Mother of Believers %, has spoken of the general habit of the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ otherwise, on occasions, his having discussions with 
the Companions and. delivering admonitions is proven from authentic 
Ahédith. 

703. 1t was narrated that ean mat 

‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud said: “The SaRs cwdidy Spee sn te J gop! Be 

Messenger of Allah # rebuked us 28! Gt GE 3 te ot pela GI! 

for staying up (talking) after the iL; ¢ °4 ; : 

The. Book Of The Prayer 461 Bal) wey 

Be ED) cp al we Se Git GF SEN 

508 ME al 2 a oas rE 9 at 
= be gat — otha 

domes «4 elke Gute oy EV AGCYAA/V tard ae ol ree) alouf] Fes Banal 
cy elke... Soe gs JB, Dee a COLO M) Ol> cpls AVS re dea Cpl 
6a oles of ples lass « bMENY das Ee S9) head o dorwey yea bk} Sus! 
BAU! le es daly Cudedl bey 

Comments: ; 

The prohibition was in respect to the long sittings of poetic recitations and 

tale-telling that the Arabs were wont to have in those days. It does not 
apply to engaging in useful and purposeful speeches and discussions. 

Chapter 13. Prohibition Of HE 5 ge SG OF prnesll) 
Saying The “‘Atamah Prayer” eves 
(Prayer Of Darkness) QT tout!) accall me 

704. It was narrated that Ibn 43 3in2 5 ke 3 elie Gis — veg 
‘Umar said: “I heard the © Bite ORs. Ee | es 
Messenger of Allah #§ say: ‘Do O* ‘*>% & oles Gus i Yb ec lwall 
not let the Bedouin make you af sacle sai 2 ced Pe oh atl ate 
change the name of your prayer. *, , ~*~ BS tee 
It is the Isha’, and they bring their 7d 5% 88 hl d545 Cans :SU 52 oy! 

camels in and milk them at 
a! Get 
nightfall.” (Sahih) «SIs - Be iY Ss y 
ALL jad P wails cb lal igs 

Comments: “% 
‘Atamah in Arabic means darkness. Since the Bedouin used to bring their 
camels in for milking after darkness, they started calling the ‘Isha’ prayer 
the ‘Atamah prayer.’ However, we find the term ‘Atamah also appearing in 
some of the Ahddifh. As such, the Prophet’s command to this effect is to be 
taken as recommendatory rather than obligatory, ie., it is preferable that we 
avoid calling it the ‘Atamah prayer. And Allah knows best. 

705, It was narrated from Abu eaglé o wee 3 yas is — veo 

Hurairah that the Prophet #¢ said: Pn Ae 

“Do not let the Bedouins make 2 d# cope 5l we Ge spel Bis 

you change the name of your greek \ : 

prayer.” Ibn Harmalah added: es dl Fy iF Saas el 

“Rather it is the ‘Isha’, but they jel as eb oo sits Gis, 7a 

The Book Of The Prayer 

say the ‘Atamah because they 
bring their camels in for milking 
at that time (when it is dark).” 
(Sahih) 

462 SMe! whe 

be MGS of ASS we be 
fel if her Je wel 

a ie ee a a 

Adhdan And The Sunnah 

(3) The Chapters On The 
Adhan And The Sunnah 
Regarding It 

Comments: 

463 Lgnd Lrsdlg CI otgul 

PESAIT) gla’! Sigil CW poxnal!) 
C... dealt) Qed 

a. Adhén literally means to inform somebody of something. Adhdn as a special 
Islamic term, means a series of specific phrases repeated to proclaim the 
time of the prayer to the people. (Naylul-Awtér : 1/31) 

b Raising the Adhén for the five daily prayers as well as for the Friday prayer 

is a ‘Compulsory (Wéjib) obligation. 

c. Since the Adhdn is but an announcement of time for the obligatory prayer, it 
is not the Prophet’s precept to proclaim the Adhdén for non-obligatory 
prayers such as “Eid prayers, Duha (Forenoon Prayer), Eclipse prayers and 

so on. 

d. It is not in order to call the Adhén before the prescribed time of the prayer. 
e. It is better to call the Adhén while standing on a raised part of the ground, 
although the purpose of the voice reaching far is achieved through the loud 

speaker these days. 

Chapter 1. How The Adhan 
Began 

706. It was narrated from 
Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah bin 
Zaid that his father said that the 
Messenger of Allah # was 
thinking of a horn, and he 
commanded that a bell be made 

and it was done. Then ‘Abdullah ~ 

bin Zaid had a dream. He said: “I 
saw a man wearing two green 
garments, carrying a bell. I said to 
him, ‘O slave of Allah, will you 
sell the bell?’ He said; “What will 
you do with it?’ I said, ‘I will call 
(the people) to prayer.’ He said, 
‘Shall I not tell you of something 
better than that?’ I said, “What is 
it?’ He said, ‘Say: Allahu Akbar 

BY) 24g SU - CO penal) 

(VE Aeedt) 
oe GL ae ff Ge - ven 
ils ff Aine Gas Lagi) ote 
BE gh Las UF Sell peal] G ke 
di 925 OS dE al 32 5 of a 

moi 1G) Oe a) ele lag 
i a at Pye ae ee Zn 

ggll rods Fa oe 9 SG Fz atl 
2 tet Bie oe Oe ee Oy ’ 

o> dé SUS WT IB ca He 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

Allahu Akbar, Alléhu Akbar Alléhu 
Akbar; Ash-hadu an 14 iléha illalléh, 
Ash-hadu an 1é@ iltha illallah; Ash- 
hadu anna Muhammadan 
Rasululiih, Ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan Rasulullah; Hayya 
‘alas-salah, Hayya ‘alas-salah ; Hayya 
‘alal-falah, Hayya ‘alal-falah ; Allahu 
Akbar Allahu Akbar ; Lé ilaha illallah 
(Allah is the Most Great, Allah is 
the Most Great, Allah is the Most 
Great, Allah is the Most Great; I 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah, I 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah; I 
bear witness that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah, I bear 
witness that Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah; Come to the 
prayer, Come to the prayer; come 
to the prosperity, Come to the 
prosperity; Allah is the. Most 
Great, Allah is the Most Great; 
none has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah).’’ 
‘Abdullah bin Zaid went out and 
came to the Messenger of Allah 
#2, and told him what he had 
seen. He said, ‘O Messenger of 
Allah, I saw a man wearing two 
green garments carrying a bell,” 
and he told him the story. The 
Messenger of Allah #€ said, “Your 
companion has had a dream. Go 
out with Bilal to the mosque and 
teach it to him, for he has a louder 
voice than you.” I (‘Abdullah) 
went out with Bilal to the mosque, 
and I started teaching him the 
words and he was calling them 
out. “Umar bin Al-Khattéb heard 

464 (god diadlg fS31 Ula 

Ges 

z 4 SF 
er) ayers) pee 

al 3525 dS SH ale 5.8 LG 
@ EAE OH ohh B Kole Op 
J 3s cake Gal wens A 
& 23555 MG de Be iif 5 
5 ole gall Less ehh Sy oS 
sb bee GS J le we 

dil Lait D525 & : 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

the voice and came out saying: “O 
Messenger of Allah! By Allah, I 
saw the same (dream) as him.” 
(Hasan) 

Abu “Ubaid said: “Abu Bakr Al- 
Hakami told me that ‘Abdullah 
bin Zaid Al-Ansari said 
concerning that: 

‘I praise Allah, the Possessor of 
majesty and honor, 

A great deal of praise for the 
Adhan. 

465 Lond ded ISB! igi 

ikl XS oh gt ce MN 38 

2 Ob Sia a5 go at te Of 

a 

’ - 

S31 65 J be At 
iF oS ks Loe ob 

i 

Since the news of it came to me 
from Allah, 

So due to it, I was honored by 
the information. 

During the three nights. 

Each of which increased me in 
honor.’ ” 

Sus Sopa Ne 
(a ec ae oy 

sees ENV C COBY GS Gl cighall Cybyl est Lye abel] apse 

en ve we) eeSel oe Ce nes GrbeSly cole cnhy 6 Aas 3 crs 6 ge SI 

Comments: 

a. Allah sometimes even sends His guidance to a virtuous believer through 
dreams. That is why the Prophet #% has said: “The dream of a believer is 
one forty-sixth part of Prophecy.” (Sahih Muslim). 

b. A mere dream cannot be the basis for deducing any religious principle. The 
vision seen by ‘Abdullah bin Zaid became a tenet of Shari‘ah only with the 
approval of the Messenger of Allah 3. 

c. Administrative affairs, even in matters of religion, must be decided through 
mutual consultation among the believers. Matters proven from an express 
text of the Book or Sunnah are exempt from this requirement. They must be 
implemented right away. 

d. The incident affirms the virtues of “Abdullah bin Zaid and “Umar #. 

e. The Mu’adh-dhin (caller to prayer) chosen to call the Adhfn, should be a 
person with a louder voice. 

707. It was narrated from Salim, 4! ue 6 JE Jf a Bae - vey 

from his father, that the Prophet . 1. 

#2 consulted the people as to how ne 

he could call them to the prayer. aah CF 6 

They suggested a horn, but he ea We ¢ 

disliked that because of the Jews ol pee BGS 0 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

(because the Jews used a horn). 
Then they suggested a bell but he 
disliked that because of the 

Christians (because the Christians 
used a bell). Then that night the 
call to the prayer was shown in a 
dream to a man from among the 
Ansér whose name was ‘Abdullah 
bin Zaid, and to ‘Umar bin 
Khattaéb. The Anséri man came to 
the Messenger of Allah #§ at 
night, and the Messenger of Allah 
#¢@ commanded Bilal to give the 
call to the prayer. (Da‘tf) 

Zuhri said: “Bilal added the 
phrase “As-salétu khairum minan- 
nawm (the prayer is better than 
sleepy’ to the call for the morning 
prayer, and the Messenger of 
Allah #§ approved of that.” 
‘Umar said: “O Messenger of 
Alléh, I saw the same as he did, 
but he beat me to it.” 

466 (gad Amadig GIDE! Gioal 

del be BS Ssh 135 sen 
Je BS ost USS SB og 
is O85 Meh Gai art Gc juat 

2 

She oe § I 555 -S Aj 36 
Jy25 STE oS Se HE BAN a1 
Be daly Bota d25 G 2358 Ob 

“ meh. &. 2 
peer 4555 «sly oll 

GES ASIN) oral 3 s9Sde yay once Gapl & [Me Liye oobull tdi 
PLS CISL ogee Me Cae LE Gy derery Ctgdodll Geer gual ole olrelis 
FVACT VV ie bplnas cE 6 gubeJl ws Jal gc eres | gerd 6a ne 9 igs 

Comments: 

Lads jab y 

a. It was an. accepted principle with the Companions that copying the Jews 
and Christians was not a desirable act. 

b. The addition of the sentence meaning: “The prayer is better than sleep” to 
the Fajr prayer was also made with the approval of the Messenger of Allah 
#&. As such it is also a part of his Sunnah. 

Chapter 2. Repeating The 
Words In The Adhan 

708. Ibn Juraij narrated: “ Abdul- 
‘Aziz bin “Abdul-Malik bin Abu 
Mahdhurah narrated from 
‘Abdullah bin Muhairiz who was 
an orphan under the care of Abu 

OBS 3 ae AI OU - OF peal 
(10 dame!) 

by dint lh 2b nt Gls - ven 

LH OGT - oe of is 9G sy 

reat or 36 | et Foe eo er ee 
Mel oe op pall ae Sl cee 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

Mahdhurah bin Mi’yar that when 
he was preparing him to travel to 
Sham, he said: ‘O my uncle, I am 
going out to Shdm, and I will be 
asked about how you started the 
Adhén.’ So he informed me that. 
Abu Mahdhurah said: ‘I went out 
with a group of people, and we 
were somewhere on the road, 
when the Mu‘adh-dhin of the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ gave the 
call to prayer in the presence of 
the Messenger of Allah 2%. We 
heard the voice of the Mu’adh- 
dhin, and we were shunning it 
(the Adhén), so we started yelling, 
imitating it and mocking it. The 
Messenger of Allah #§ heard us, 
so he sent some people who 
brought us to sit in front of him. 
He said: ‘Who is the one whose 
voice I heard so loud?’ The people 
all pointed to me, and they were 
telling the truth. He sent them all 
away, but kept me there and said 
to me: ‘Stand up and give the call 
to prayer.’ I stood up and there 
was nothing more hateful to me 
than the Messenger of Allah #¢ 
and what he was telling me to do. 
I stood up in front of the 
Messenger of Allah #€ and the 
Messenger of Allah #§ himself 
taught me the call. He said: “Say: 
‘Allahu Akbar Allahu Akbar, Allahu 
Akbar Allahu Akbar; Ash-hadu an 1é 
ilaha illallah, Ashhadu an la ilaha 
illall@h; Ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan Rasulullah, Ash-hadu 
anna Muhammadan Rasulullah 
(Allah is the Most Great, Allah is 
the Most Great, Allah is the Most 

467 Lynd Aredig GIDE! toi 

pee gf al 8 i Bl of gl 
fe fi isles ol fo > ob leg 55 
yids ot Es mi Al SE Se 
Ste ey pth Ave 2 ie ra 
fd oie Ul ol eyes bal 42 

on ae 

O36 gb pate SOS go des 
J9o5 He GAN BE dl J625 Oby 
5 ol 
est 64 ie 64S tey25 PPK < “4 
cae (38 CH 38 cae at J,25 
ipo Eis agi 2h 

ae eal gi 5b 6s) i 
J JS a ils Jest ee 
be NST eek V5 Ea HE Gh 
cag 2 ak in VG BE I J3m5 
beh fe BE ag al dts GHGS 
at: (39 ue css Gh 5.58 BE al 

eso 29,8 
Vira pear shel Bye Cages 

“2 or 

weirs 6 4335 on 

ok 9038 9 a4 7 n nek 
gil sh Ost an Si ar st 
‘ @ A - o¢ a48 5 @ 1 y Pa 
cas YY AY ST og8) cat Wy a Y I 
< _2¢ L & - 4 @- BE 4 
St gat dt Jgt5 ice Sf agif 

- Ae ath 3 2s Boge 
Je gm sd Jb po Mal S gee Luecet 

Adhén And The Sunnah 

Great, Allah is the Most Great; I 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah, 
I bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah; 
I bear witness that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah, I bear 
witness that Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah).’” Then he 
said: “Raise your voice (and say). 

Ash-hadu an 1@ il@ha illallah, Ash- 
hadu an 1@ iléha illallah; Ash-hadu 
anna Muhammadan Rasulullah, 
Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 
Rasulullah; Hayya ‘alas-salah, 
Hayya ‘alas-salah ; Hayya ‘alal-falth, 
Hayya ‘alal-falah; ‘Allahu Akbar 
Allahu Akbar; La iléha illallah (1 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah, 
I bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah; 
I bear witness that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah, I bear 
witness that Muhammad. is the 
Messenger of Allah; Come to the 
prayer, come to the prayer; Come 
to the prosperity, come to the 
prosperity; Allah is the Most 
Great, Allah is the Most Great; 
none has the right to be 
worshipped but Allah).’’” Then he 
called me when I had finished 
saying the Adhdn, and gave me a 
small bag in which there was 
some silver.’ Then he put his 
hand on the forelock of Abu 
Mahdhurah, then passed it over 
his face, then over his chest, and 
over his heart, until the hand of 
the Messenger of Allah # 
reached his navel. Then the 

bs Wad Led! GSB! Grtoul 

fas 3 ie aLets 2 if 
has fe th Ga Bo sibel ssl 

a ene of 

. BH ylks gl iol sé og 73 
wr Sgt 8 ai J25 36 GE air 
5 ele ble Sou, 0 
il Ji} O68 a8 8 CAB nati 
He el of oe Eb 2 ag a 

Y 
sor cg 

a) b tae Cal (aR He | ues 

85 ais dd ro Ae 

Pa “ok a ae Pare Se 
Gl sgh fe OB sels db 
eS on eek 3 ¢, . 
jy al ‘ue aye! b ie aes 
ont 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

Messenger of Allah #¢ said: ‘May 
Allah bless you and send 
blessings upon you.’ I said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah, do you 
command me to give the call to 
prayer in Makkah? He said: ‘Yes, 
I command you (to do so).’ Then 
all the hatred I had felt towards 
the Messenger of Allah 
disappeared, and was replaced 
with love for the Messenger of 
Allah #@. I came to ‘Attab bin 
Asid, the governor of the 
Messenger of Allah #% in Makkah, 
and gave the call to prayer with 
him by command of the 
Messenger of Allah #8.” (Sahih) 
He (‘Abdul Aziz) said: “Someone 
who met Abu Mahdhtrah told me 
the same as ‘Abdullah bin 
Muhairiz told me.” 

469 

Land Arsdlg Gld¥1 wigil 

trues 64 mole | ale Ce Whe cVeO fT: Sach rears | Leone] ‘eps 
wa dale BVI cadedly Vi OLY ole only TVA chase ol 

Comments; 

a. On hearing the loud voice of Abu Mahdhurah, the Messenger of Allah 28 

709. It was narrated that Abu Gis :i23 wi on SS 

decided to make him a Mu‘adh-dhin (caller to prayer). Thus, everyone must be 
assigned the task in keeping with his ability, so that he is able to do it well. 

. It is also a useful proposition to give awards to children for their 

encouragement. The award could either be in the form of cash or of 
something of utility, or just a few words of praise or blessing. 

. If a capable person makes a request for an office or job, it could be assigned 

to him, although it is not desirable to crave an office or position. 

. The act of repeating the twice uttered words of testimony called Tarji’ 

(repetition of recitation) is a Sunnah of the Prophet #. In everyday use it is 
called ‘Dual Adhén’. The Mu’adh-dhin is at liberty whether to say the Adhan 
with or without Tarji’. Both methods are permissible. 

fa, 

#5 

tae - ved 

Mahdhurah said: “The Messenger 
of Allah #8 taught me the Adhan 
with nineteen phrases and the 

E 
os 

BUF cai Yt he 

a 

jus 

“3 4s ie i ines VA& Si Je 

Adhan And The. Sunnah 

Igémah with seventeen. The Adhan 
is: All@hu Akbar Allahu Akbar, 
Allahu Akbar Allahu Akbar; Ash- 
hadu an 14 iléha illallah, Ash-hadu 
an 1@ iltha illallah; Ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan Rasulullah, Ash-hadu 
anna Muhammadan Rasulullah ; 
Ash-hadu an 14 ila@ha illallah, Ash- 
hadu an 1a iltha illallah; Ash-hadu 
anna Muhammaedan Rasulullah, 
Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 
Rasulullah; Hayya ‘alas-salah, 
Hayya ‘alas-salah ; Hayya ‘alal-falah, 
Hayya ‘alal-falah; ‘Allahu Akbar 
Allahu Akbar; La ilaha illallah 
(Allah is the Most Great, Allah is 
the Most Great, Allah is the Most 
Great, All4h is the Most Great; I 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshiped but Allah, I 
bear witness that none has the 
right to be worshiped but Allah; I 
bear witness that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah, I bear 
witness that Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah; I bear witness 
that none has the right to be 
worshiped but Allah, I bear 
witness that none has the right to 
be worshiped but Allah; I bear 
witness that Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah, I bear witness 
that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of Allah; Come to the prayer, 
come to the prayer; come to the 
prosperity, come to the 
prosperity; Allah is the Most 
Great, Allah is the Most Great; 
none has the right to be 
worshiped but Allah). And the 
Igémah is seventeen phrases: 
Allahu Akbaru Allahu Akbar, Allahu 

Lgnd Lindi g CSE mul gal 

ge tae Ve af Ife, aod 
8) glows bl OO) 6 dake Re 
30 

SiS) BE ail Jy 

Adhan And The Sunnah 471 Lad diewdlg IDS! il gul 

Akbaru Allahu akbar; Ash-hadu an 
la ilaha illall@h, Ash-hadu an 1@ ilaha 
illall@h; Ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan Rasululléh, Ash-hadu 
anna Muhammadan Rasulullah; 
Hayya ‘alas-salah, Hayya ‘alas- 
salah ; Hayya ‘alal-fal@h, Hayya ‘alal- 
fal@h; Qad gématis-salah, gad 
gamatis-salah; Allahu Akbar Allahu 
Akbar ; La ilaha illallah (Allah is the 
Most Great, Allah is the Most 
Great, Allah is th Most Great, 
Allah is the Most Great; I bear 
witness that none has the right to 
be worshiped but Allah, I bear 
witness that none has the right to 
be worshiped but Allah; I bear 
witness that Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah, I bear witness 
that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of Allah; Come to the prayer, 
come to the prayer; Come to 
prosperity, come to the 
prosperity; the prayer is about to 
begin, the prayer is about to 
begin; Allah is the Most Great, 
Allah is the Most Great; none has 
the right to be worshiped but 
Allah).” (Sahih) _ 

4; ple dado cy YV4i¢ OMI dive. wl sbalt thane don ol caged 
Comments: ~~" 
Some people say that making Tarji’ in Adhan is the result of Abu 
Mahdhurah’s misunderstanding. Had Abu Mahdhurah got it wrong in 
Adhén in the days of the Prophet #, Allah would have informed the 
Prophet #¢ through Wahy (revelation), and he would have communicated 
the command to Abu Mahdhurah. 

Chapter 3. The Sunnah . EY » ZN 20a ae 
Regarding the Adhan SRA 2 See Soe A eae 
(V7 déeel) 

710. ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sad bin 2. cee | te ge uc. dite 
‘Ammar bin Sa’d, who was the Ab Ws le fy plig Gee — V1 

Adhin And The Sunnah 472 Vgnd Arvdig G12Z1 wolgei 

Mu’adh-dhin™! of the Messenger ee ee ae ee ee ane 
of Allah 2%, narrated from his 9° So flee Ge dee Ghee 

grandfather, that the Messenger of =z ve GF sik ces 18 il dG 
Allah #8 commanded Bilal to put =. af ee Rakes eee a aie a 
his fingers in his ears when d*2 Ol YL Hl BE BI S45 Ol sae 
calling the Adhin, and he said, “It 35 py :00; til axa 
makes the voice louder.” (Da‘if) ; : 

cb al tee og) Gin Gee ob Me is med Js Lede onli] ee oe 
zi Cem sass daw jsle 
Comments: 
As to the chain of narration, the tradition is Weak, but the content is correct. 

711, It was narrated from ‘Awn «Ee dlglt ssa 3y on Gis - vv\ 
bin Abu Juhaifah that his father ees a eae 
ee ' Se eee anes y é 
said: “I came to the Messenger of cha OF 3k) ot deig se Gas 

Allah # in Abtah, when he was af 32 .dasé Uf oi ose 32 iib5i 
in a red tent. Bilal came out and Gat ee Oe ee See re 
gave the call to prayer, turning 9 */ chy 3 a Dyed Sail ol 
around and putting his fingers in; sya SSE SS, GAS as 
his ears.” (Hasan) : 3g a3 oe 

MS Ob axe] GREG call 

Vie ogo SH de eel bb udeells caked EAT « bails Depo] Texted 
7 6 ee 3 
Comments: 
a. Even while on joumey, it is necessary to call Adh@n for the congregational 
prayer. 
b. “Turning around in his Adhén’ means turning his face right and left while 
saying Hayya ‘alas-salah and Hayya ‘alal-falah respectively. 
c. It confirms the practice of putting the fingers in one’s ears during Adhdn. 

2 °° ¢ e sk) se tare ae 

712. It was narrated that Ibn 9 ‘eee! teal! 2 dee te - NY 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of vz tg ots ft Sgn 2 ES 
raat Ae ¢ Jka ey Oly 64h We 

Allah #€ said: There are two " oa ie o “a a ; ; 
characteristics in which the = 3° ¢! of abl GF cols us! on pp 
Muslims are dependent upon Bee hi acs 5. vas hp) Bes = Sie 
. ytales giles» 88 al J JB i db 

their Mu’adh-dhins: their prayer ? x : ead aoe a as : d 
and their fasting.” (Da‘if) ree ‘Speokell Gog! GEBI 3 

4 

[1 That is, Sa’d. 

Adhan And The Sunnah 473 gud dredig QIO2) igi 

Gane 
JSS! op Hay Ged id ole) We ge gl SU [ee Cie oobi] tee oe 
- (ug fi) Cael one 9 og bel ole yg ‘ Is je pl oy olay Atenas 9 cOOVIe 6 pda 

713. It was narrated that Jabir bin ay 55: Sth tp aint die - vie 
Samurah said: “Bilal did not delay ae ee ee eRe ener 
the Adhén from its proper time, 69> of Slee GF «tht se 23515 
but. he sometimes delayed the y Jy, 4% -jU fic ok UK tg 
ols id le 
Igimah a little.” (Da’if) Pag) in ager se 
Las cea! Ge OMI BR 
3 Gey) 

cone tht geal) od tht ye Wei adda ar sl Liam coll] tg se 
ae gts (E°M)ogho Col cade 

Comments: 
If the Imam takes a little time before he comes to lead the prayer, the 
worshipers should patiently wait for him, and not put forward another man 
in haste in his place. It is, however, another matter if we know for certain 
that the regular Imém is not available to lead the congregation at that time. 
In that case someone else may be asked to lead the prayer. 

714. It was narrated that Be ty 
‘Uthman bin Abul-As said: “The gp, Rn : 
last instruction that the Messenger «gpl GF chaal 36 cle op Geet 

of Allah # gave tome wasthatl J,--2 42 4% cite we 
should not appoint a Mu‘adh-dhin s s a os a et Big Oe oF 
who took payment for the ist ty G1 V Of Be 420 ay age 
Adhan.” (Sahih) eres ee 

At oN! be 

cde Ojo deh ot daLs Bebb Ch lal cit ol eewel cyst 
Aly 6 epee Gem lbs ca (pl peo Cs ne oy) Gadd Code ge V4 ele] OBY! 
20 yah 9 Ove woglo ol die Jal ga 

Comments: . 

a. It is for the Imam to appoint the Mu’adh-dhin. 

b. It is preferable for a person rendering communal service, not to claim any 
money in return. However, it is proper to duly compensate him for his 
services. 

a 
\ 

fA 

715. It was narrated that Bilal es 
said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 

3 yl 2S gl Gs = v00 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

commanded me (with Tathwib) in 
the Adhdn.for Fajr, and he forbade 
me to do so in the Adhén for 
‘Isha’.” (Daf) 

474 

lige dieadg QIdB1 il gul 
BW LEY KS 9 Jae 
1325 goal db UY ue I 
sil 3 os of ag 

slag 3 

cl 36 bac a ate 

cil Bo ag Bo rll Ob gba cgi eel [ied ast] ose 
Udy Geddy. Sool yl SB y EIS S35 cu Sa pll dle gy deren Cade oye VATE 

Commenis: 

The word Tathwib used in the context means saying As-salé@tu khairum 
minan-nawm (the prayer is better than sleep). The Hadith confirms that the 
words.As-salitu khairum minan-nawm were included in the Adhén for Fajr at 
the bidding of the Prophet 2 himself. 

716. It was narrated that Bilal ‘9; js 

came to the Prophet #é to call him 
for the Fajr prayer, and was told: 
“He is sleeping.” He said: “As- 
salétu khairum minan-nawm, As- 
salitu khairum min an-nawm (The 
prayer is better than sleep, the 
prayer is better than sleep). These 
words were approved of in the 
Adhan for the Fajr, and that is 
how it remained. (Da‘if) 

vp hae “albthsl as bt Sp cd ie, 

717. It was narrated that Ziyad 
bin Harith As-Suda’i said: “I was 
with the Messenger of Allah # 
on a journey, and he commanded 
me to call the Adhén. Bilal wanted 
to call the Igamah, but the 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: “The 
brother of Suda’ called the Adhdan, 
and the one who calls the Adhdn 
is the one who calls the Igaémah.’” 

(Daf) 

eS gl Sy [eden salen} ] 

- So Bow 

: row) CH oe 
(GPS ob oe 36 AGG 25 it 

sf Al Sh oF seca op 

as — vi 

ZB GB fal Me, BY Be gh 
a Ghia. we ot 2s “Wst ele 
3a)! eal o = oa! 2 Las bl 

“8 Bot 

caged 

sit ul 3X ot le viv 
os 62 day Gs ure ye 
JE GE eybll of 2 3 gid 

EG. 
ewes 

Kok 

el to 3 HB aI 5 BS ES 
3 tee 

J565 OB oa ST Oy sob .2h6 

oF ace zit og a cee ples ok 
ost 345 633) B ela EI Op :Be a! 
SF oF LF 

Adhan And The Sunnah 475 Lgnd Arig IDR) Gilgul 

COVED SC CT padey O52 Jot Ob cighall cogla gel anol [obsand aoltenf] ees 
1 Cade! fal te and ay a BY! Cade ge Gy be] by VV Che Sy 

Comments: 7 
It is preferable that the person who calls the Adhan also calls the Ig@mah. 
However, there is no bar to anybody else’s calling it either. 

. 288 oy Age ge 3 
Chapter 4. What Should Be js la} Jl & Ob - ( possi) 
Said When The Mu’adh-dhin CY dees!) 3441 
Calls the Adhan baie 

2 0 a std mye Hate 

718. It was narrated that Abu pot!a} «G8! Glas] y! Gus — VIA 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of Zul dil Ate exh ite op Me EN 
Allah #8 said: ‘When the Mu’adh- Pe ne aes eae 
dhin calls the Adhin, say as he — op! g& sdleo| cp ole GF Zell ke} 
says. ' (Hasan) a io. ee 4 3 ia te cles 

ver 

asf Gp :88 a 3425 JE 256 ES 
AS Se eB Sig 
Jb, OVeVig cede Oe Sz * VALE tga I aales [zp] ex Seal 
“VY¥e ra ¢ pail cal gd aly co. Bgtrecdls doles alu} bis Syme gl 
Comments: 
When the Mu’adh-dhin calls the Adhén we should say as the Mu‘adh-dhin 
says. But when the Mu’adh-dhin says: “Hayya ‘alas-salah (Come for the 
prayer)” and “Hayya ‘alal-falah (Come to prosperity)’ we are to say: “Lé 
hawla wa la quwwata illa billah’ (There is no change of conditions nor power 
except by Allah).” (Muslim: 385). 
o “8 ¢ vo) o t,, 4 4a. 
719. Umm Habibah narrated that padi gf abs 3: pu Ge - via 
when the Messenger of Alldh 2 9 § og (hte wees eee 4 
= of ye ok Af CGT ek Che 2d 
was with her on her day and “@ es eas oa as 
night, and he heard the Mu’adh- 5 S32 go} BI we 32 ELI Gada 
dhin calling the Adhén, she heard if Bocce eos, ate aes f 
him saying what he said. (Hasan) ME arp cee? gee late 
Boe te 3 ges. gua ote. laude = on 28 
SS yp dye ME ol dt Saas 
2288 ic. ope eee rae <i “70 
Od$ell aod clglls Uo b re 
op Bild diy ceVeevo/Videol, oS G Ghd esl [pel taps 
- dal pd autor, 6 otc 4a ggh APE? 3 aad Aas onl eel YVY [0 Co igl 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

720. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The 
Messenger of Allah 2 said: 
“When you hear the call (to 
prayer), say what the Mu’adh-dhin 
says.’ (Sahih) 

476 Won dimallg 99) il gui 

AES AS oes A Ge - vy 
oi othe 32 GAM of TS we 
OE GSS ano of ie oge hy 
HEN Ges Lip BE dl 5525 58 

ABS Jo US 1hyii 

colnny CU Ie eqsalill pow 1) Sg G Ob COBY! egoball axel eed 

Ble Syt> oF TAY iC call et 

Comments: 

atau ged Ghyll dg fhe dgdl Glee! GY caghall 

4 

What it all means is that when the Mu‘adh-dhin says Alléhu Akbar, the 
listener should also say Alléhu Akbar. Thus he should repeat after each 
phrase. It does not mean that the listener listens silently and repeats the 
entire Adhan after the Mu‘adh-dhin has finished it (Muslim: 385). 

721. It was narrated from Sa‘d 
bin Abu Waqqas that the 
Messenger of Allah #8 said: 
“Whoever says, when he hears 
the Mu’adh-dhin, ‘Wa ana Ash-hadu 
an 1a iléha illallah wahdahu 1a 
sharika lahu, wa ash-hadu anna 
Muhammadan ‘abduhu wa rasuluhu, 
radaytu Billahi rabban wa bil-Islimi 
dinan wa bi Muhammadin nabiyyan 
(And I bear witness that none has 
the right to be worshiped but 
Allah alone, with no partner, and 
I bear witness that Muhammad is 
His slave and Messenger, and I 
am content with Allah as my 
Lord, Islam as my religion and 
Muhammad as my Prophet), his 
sins will be forgiven to him.” 
(Sahih) 

Spall ath Uf Ae Gis - vr 

Js25 88 yells ol of Bo 32 «yells 
ed ee SE en dG ST ae a 
aig Gs yy Y Sf ght Gly -Sbgaii 

& ae + - 
by cl pny 

chy SEALS «U5 sil 

dase ge TAUIC edd gall dg fe sil Olan Ob aglall gl eel igus 

74% 2 nh 3 Cj cyl 

Adhan And. The Sunnah 477 Lgnd Liedig QIOEF ealoui 

Comments: 
a. Affirmation of the Oneness of Allah (monotheism) and the institution of 

prophethood is the very foundation of Islam and a prerequisite for 
salvation. 

. To be content with Allah as one’s Lord (Rabb) means to believe in His 

Lordship as it suits His majesty. The feeling that He alone is the Dispenser 
of all favours and Provider of all the necessities of life to us, creates a sense 
of gratitude and love in our hearts. 

722. It was narrated that Jabir bin Pa iio 2y dace a = Ne 
‘Abdullah said: “The Messenger of eh, Geghe® «hie i as 
Allah #8 said: ‘Whoever says when hg eee Ee I! 

he hears the call to the prayer: afi 88 aye Re Ly Te 8h 
“All@humma Rabba hadhihid- FU GP CAE ish ogee 
da’ watit-tammah was-salatil-q@’imah, 36 8S gh G3 Ces Ge WY 
ati Muhammadanil-wasilata wal- 
fadilah, wab'athhu maqiman ~ 

mahmudanilladhi wa‘adtah (O Allah, ye SE Ga) 2B ol 545 de td 
Lord of this perfect call and the iy 38% dk So 2 ett 2s 
prayer to be offered, grant ™ : ; Cs 
Muhammad the privilege (of ilujt Wiki ol HSI PAE 
intercession) and also the WE oe Sexe. Gre epee. chads sheets 
eminence, and resurrect him to the BASS SAI Isgaoee Llde ately aL yaal 
praised position that You have erat a3: thn 3 Che Vi 
promised),” my intercession for ae sy 3 
him will be permitted on the Day 
of Resurrection.’ ”’ (Sahih) 

4 Ske oy de ge VWVEie cell sue le Gb COBY (ob eel ty sd 

Comments: 

a. 

There will be intercession on the Day of Resurrection. First of all, the 
Prophets will be granted this privilege (of intercession). Thereafter, the 
believers, one by one according to their ranks, will be allowed to intercede. 

. Al-Wasilah is the name of the highest station in Paradise reserved for the 

most exalted and loved one of Allah in the entire humankind, ie, the 
Prophet Muhammad #§. (Sahih Muslim : 384) 

Magim Mahmud (the praised position) means the privilege of grand 
intercession on behalf of the the sinners promised by Allah to be granted 
only to the Last of the Prophets Muhammad #8. 

. These are the only authentic words of supplication after Adhin taught by 

the Prophet 2. 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

Chapter 5. The Virtue Of The 
Adhan And The Reward Of 
The Mu’adh-dhin 

723. It was narrated from 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdur-Rahman 
bin Abu Sa‘sa‘ah that his father, 
who was under the care of Abu 
Sa‘eed, said: “Abu Sa‘eed said to 
me: ‘If you are in the desert, raise 
your voice when you say the 
Adhan, for I heard the Messenger 
of Allah #@ say: “No jinn, human, 
tree or rock will hear it, but it will 
bear witness for you.’”” (Sahih) 

a> Oe ones U4: c celal 2 pall 

Comments: 

478 

(4d Kraalig 381 Gat gul 

wire ot eas ot ~ © pzenall) 

(VA doe!) arya 

wis : Gall 23 diss Gis - viv 
we op wl ae 26 aS OF ota 

OW cal iF eee al o eee 
P| is Jb :JG 6 dyes gl p> zl 
Hye 5G ceglgal oo EES BL tae 
Op Ba 425 Coes G8 oSYy 

Se ae 

HEY DG be BY 
5 3g Y Ss 

ay ol COBY c gobs aol : ees 
142 GILES Cp cpr She 

a. If a man who is in a lonely place and calls the Adhan for his prayer in 
obedierice to the commands of Allah and His Prophet #%, even for him the 
Prophet's instruction is to cali the Adhdn in a loud voice. 

b. Even inanimate objects have some kind of consciousness which we are not 

aware of. 

c. Conditions in the Hereafter and on the Day of Resurrections will be totally 
different from the Divine laws operating in this world. Even inanimate 
objects shall be witnesses for or against human beings. 

d. Mu’adh-dhin occupy a place of great eminence near Allah. The reason being 
that the Adh@n is the doorway to the congregational prayer. 

724, It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ himself 
say: ‘The Mu’adh-dhin’s sins will 
be forgiven as far as his voice 
reaches, and every wet and dry 
thing will pray for forgiveness for 
him. For the one who attends the 
prayer, twenty-five Hasanat (good 
deeds) will be recorded, and it 
will be an expiation (for sins 
committed) between them (the 

Gis 228 a ol rand Gas - vye 

f Bic bk 
A gl be es gl GF ous 

Ayii HE BN 5h) Bb by Cte di 
a ae goa ae FF Bat FSS ot 
US 5 jlttsy ape ole SQ gan 
SK Se Ualty ats Cbs 

gs Le 4 7aks Ess yp heg Fe 

Adhén And The Sunnah 479 lgnd Ared!g GiB! wilgei 

yer 

two prayers). 

ce OVete COBY Spall by Gh cighaal! coglogl axel [eum eotiedl] : Fe eae 
-OL> oply cdeg jt Gl mrmeney 4 dat Cyto 
Comments: 
‘Sins being forgiven as far as the Mu’adh-dhin’s voice reaches’ means his sins 
will be forgiven even if they are so numerous as to occupy such a vast 
expanse of the earth. 

725. It was narrated that ‘Esa bin a! 5 egths 4g dks Gls — wre 
Talhah said: “I heard Mu‘awiyah 42,” Fs poe ae 
bin Abu Sufyan say that eee eae Bis VG ane 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: "The 3 og 8 ots oo EL te cbc 
Mu’adh-dhins will have the longest ji a - bee Pa . : ay 
necks of all people on the Day of = OS™. a! & gg lee Carac iS dle 

Resurrection.” (Sahih) bi jgagelio BE ast 3} 923 dE dG 
tach 6 BEST chi 

OF YAV ie céslew whe OUT ay OGY Lad wh Si glall ‘plone toe oi t ‘eps 
40 ae 3 2 ) gen o Glow 
Comments: 
‘Mu ‘adh-dhin having the longest necks’ could either be an expression for their 
lofty and elevated position, or simply a statement of fact. 

726. It was narrated that Ibn (Gis 7&3 gl by ole Gis - vr4 
‘Abbas said: “The Messenger of . ah de sere 
Allah 2% said: ‘Let the best of you 99 ‘Y? ch Flite SE 

give the call to prayer (Adhéan), le ol oF Se: je col ¢ 

and let those who are most versed = si aie 
in the Qur’4n lead you in eS Sag BE i 0,25 36 JG 
prayer.’” (Da‘if) S513 wxahals pdb 

oF OMe chal ol ee Ob eheall coglog:) ae oT [tee eolienf] Fes Seaed 
wgpgerd| Ate Che Coe Op Cer HH & late 

4 Eee 

727. It was narrated that Ibn 23 5Ged Gas 18 gi Gs - vrv 
“Abbas said: “The Messenger of 7, 3, 0 7, ee 
Allah #@ said: ‘Whoever calls the GM eG Gawt GE Ole 
Adhan for seven years, seeking yoo eo te te ts fa tet 

‘a egl oo ‘ . es * é { 
reward (from Allah), Allah will lee ed z - OF Viera! 

decree for him deliverance from Gas : aii oe tao Garg ce te 
the Fire’ ” (Da‘j Pe x jad ene 
( if) gree sl is : 1G gest? & ose 

Adhan And The Sunnah 480 Lgnd dradig G13) wolaul 
JB le of! oF Se be gle i 
Ge betes Si jan ag al 85 JE 
GON Se Bel BN CHS ee 

el Gey arrlls eFOUre cle ‘ead tens ne [iam fer re se) oak] | eee 
la pes Gordy chadll ates Cydodly AGEL, VTi ecgde sll ae 
Losdl etd 3p Aes hs - va 
tpl ke te 9G OE aye 

728. It was narrated from Ibn 
“Umar that the Messenger of 
Allah #6 said: “Whoever calls the 

Adhan for twelve years, he will be os! es Dil op agen leas adie 

guaranteed Paradise, and for each en Sf nck oy og sh tg . 

day sixty Hasandt (good deeds) an ia EP OF 8 

will be recorded for him by virtue (dee yer = asi i Ou ME ais 

of his Adhan, and thirty Hasan@t +, . SEN, et airipihan tape HeS Sees ce 

by virtue of his Iqamah.” (Da‘if) S38 causle S85 che I Ciz5 
oo ae: 2 23 4 x # 

H AU, THO /V i gSledl ommey candy Gee cyl or el Line soli tee Se 
-pSbedl re ae wale dy cg ol de aby egress le cae oy! 
Comments: 
It demands a lot of perseverance to call Adhdn for twelve years without a 

stop. No one can accomplish it except by Allah’s help and favor. Hence the 
glad tiding for those who perform this feat. 

Chapter 6. Saying The 
Phrases Of The Igamah Once 

729. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “They looked for 
something by means of which 
they could call out informing of 
(the time of) the prayer. Then 
Bilal was commanded to say the 
phrases of the Adhfn twice and 
the phrases of the Iqamah once.” 
(Sahih) 

Aol 3158] GE ~ Cr prcncl) 
O14 deel) 

Gis : cited 2b dil Le Gls - va 

of ielaasl we iF cole e Pinal 

prc JE awe of Gil ge Bu of 

Adhén And The Sunnah 481 gad dredlg 192! tgui 

yl wh eB gLiall 6 elnes CTR ie COM ek wh co 6 Goel ae ol Fe Saeed 
4% eldodt WL oye WVALe cals Gils BY! Gols WW OEY sll, SY! 23, 
: ow a cs : fees 

Comments: 
For the details of the story kindly refer to Ahfdith 706, 707 & 708. 

said: “Bilal was commanded to , a er aie aE 
say the phrases of the Adhan twice O* clas ae OF & es cp gee Wise 
and the phrases of the Igamah 4M al: mele Se oF 
once.” (Sahih) ae det c 

730. It was narrated that Anas 4 a digiell we bs tai Gis - vy. 
é we 

fee 

ae ery SiN) aes 
GST Qutocd! fil [ee] Fc Saael 

731. ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sa‘d bin KF GIF 3 Ue 3) pldy Ge ~ vey 
‘Ammar bin Sa‘d narrated (from oak dea g) ois Que te ol 
his great-grandfather who was the = © Ga CE athe eee ae a a 
Mu’adh-dhin of the Messenger of 3,4 ‘aul 3 cal Pe RE a 55 
Allah #8) that in the Adhan of 2 g- de S15 Sw SbF Af 42 
Bilal, the phrases were two by ~~” ae pee Oe oe ee 
two, and in his Igamah they were Eyes 
said once. (Da‘f} 

66 gk (WYN G LS Cydodly cacld Vier «Bil [ede oolel] cee oa 

732. It was narrated that Abu; 33s) 2h 3te as A Gis - vey 
Rafi’ said: “I saw Bilal calling the Si Sie 
Adhan in front of Allah’s ol of #1 2 gf A Bi ee Sie 
Messenger 28, (saying the 4-2 { 5 | \" 
phrases) two by two, and saying ee ie ee oF ‘2 ‘ 
each phrase once in the Igémah.” ol SF od ane 4] Ge edil see El 

Oa7) b5 GH BS bg Vy 2 du 2alo 

Rely aby «Ba Ss 3 a 
cp ae cand le gil ind olin} Mle i esd Sip Laden eolid] tees pet 
. doses uly dliline Cy Aemea 
Comments: 
If the words of the Adhén are said twice the words of the Igémah will also 

have to be said twice as we have seen in the Hadith 709 narrated by Abu 
Mahdhurah @s. 

Adhan And The Sunnah 

Chapter 7. If The Adhan Is 
Called And You Are In The 
Mosque, Then Do Not Leave 

733. It was narrated that Abu 
Sha‘tha’ said: “We were sitting in 
the mosque with Abu Hurairah 
when the Mu’adh-dhin called the 
Adhén. A man got up and walked 
out of the mosque, and Abu 
Hurairah followed him with his 
gaze until he left the mosque. 
Then Abu Hurairah said: ‘This 
man has disobeyed Abul-Qasim 
#8.’”" (Sahih) 

482 (Gad Aisadlig GIDE) otosl 

S 286 fo a 
od EATG Gil 13} OG — WV prenali) 
(Vs din) C555 9G teeth 

AG, ‘ 

(Bas. 63 1S ol Gis - vr 

bo ole of pala OF See il 
ia Joell ae ing28 6S JG Rea wl 

ja [eS rats Sigh 336 5558 al 
Be as SSR al at a6 bi poy deci) 

& 

ia Gj eye rl Oe cdgetsll Z fee hag 

te OS] 13) Sommedt ye eee ye el eh tela Coline eal eps 

Comments: 

4 hed ol ol ge V008e 

Leaving the mosque after the Adhdn, as a rule, is prohibited. However, 
there may be relaxation in the rule if the excuse is valid. 

734. It was narrated that 
‘Uthman said: “The Messenger of 
Allah 8 said: ‘Whoever hears the 
Adhén when he is in the mosque, 
then goes out and does not go out 
for any (legitimate) need and does 
not intend to return, is @ 
hypocrite.’ (Da‘if) 

1 787 20 Hes 

Yon Eee 
we Ws cae cy 

5551 4538 tay ae it 5425 SU dE 

geo 

UGS 5g Ht an YA 

capil § LS ad sleds cPhore cpus ig 3 cal ol # Liesl ty se 
AOE Te OHV OV {Erbe si ol pbll re Jalph Codd! Gaels copbs 
cee ob mg: Gree tly, Sly NAQV/V eS 6 Lad pe 9 OUP: Agudly 

Comments: 

The reason being that he deliberately declined the merit of joining the 
congregational prayer. No true believer, aware of the importance of doing 
of virtuous deeds, can do such a thing. 

Mosques And The Congregations 483 wale loses! 9 wt benad! ul qui 

(4) The Chapters On The aad lacias f wt ga! (£ peered) 

Mosques And The (... Reel) Gulélaadly 
Congregations 
Comments: 

a. 

b. 

The mosque is, without doubt, the most important of all structures in an 
Islamic state and an Islamic society. 

In the early days of Islam all devotional acts and non-obligatory prayers 
were only carried out in the Sacred House at Makkah. But when an 
organized Islamic authority came into being, after emigration, in Al- 
Madinah, the first thing the Prophet #¢ did, was to lay with his own 
blessed hands, the foundation of a mosque at Quba’. He then followed it up 
with the construction of what came to be called the Prophet's Mosque. Side 
by side with the Prophet # the Emigrants (Muhdéjir) and Helpers (Ansfr), 
with great zeal and fervor, participated in the construction of the mosque. 

. Receiving wages for providing various facilities such as arrangemertt for 

lighting and the performance of ablution etc., in the mosque, is permissible 
in Islam, but it is a highly commendable act if some one donates, free of 
charge, a piece of land or building materials etc., just for the sake of Allah. 
Although the entire face of the earth has been proclaimed as mosque for the 
Believers, it is not in order to perform prayer in places like garbage 
dumping spots, animal slaughterhouses, graveyards, baths at public places, 
camels’ enclosures, and the top of the Sacred House. 

. Mosques play an extremely significant and fundamental role in the building 

of the Islamic society. The Messenger of Allah #@ used the mosque for a 
myriad of purposes — as the capital of the Islamic state, as a command 
center for military expeditions, as a. consultation chamber for state affairs, as 
a public treasury, as an Islamic court, as the first Islamic university, as a 
Civil secretariat, as a state guest house, and for many other constructive 
purposes. The Noble Qur’an, however, particularized the mosque only for 
purposes of prayer and remembrance of Allah, and as a place most suited 
for bowing and prostrating before Allah, for delivering sermons and for the 
communication of the Divine message, as weil as for the recitation of the 
Noble Qur’an and the learning and teaching of the tenets of faith. 

- Management of the mosque and their upkeep is the primary duty of the 

Believers. But the way the mosques are being increasingly used for 
purposes. contrary to the precepts of the Prophet #@ is a matter of great 
concem, and needs critical examination. For more information about the 
institution of the mosques and the necessary etiquettes in respect of them, 
one would do well to study the forthcoming Ahédith. 

Mosques. And The Congregations 484 

ulelasstla ue lanal! cul gil 

Chapter 1. One Who Builds re See an ee 1) 
A Mosque For The Sake Of a oe 

Allah (¥\ dame) 

735. It was narrated that ‘Umar (Gis :i3 al as Re sf 5s - vre 
bin Khattab said: “I heard the =, gg te ee) oes ae a ts 
Messenger of Allah #@ say; ‘CT #* G Cd GE thee be Oey 

a te 

“Whoever builds a mosque in EVE Gis 8 at Ss 1S Pei cctey 

which the Name of Allah is 

mentioned, Allah will build a 4 eH pl se SF Gell 4 dil we 
house for him in Paradise.’” efit wt a een ee ee 

(Sahih) an 
Glade 32 cadgll hi sail Ec otgll 
asa cial Bish oh Ate of 

oy ME zy) Jy25 Cae Je vhs 
- ai) Balas fete lie as 
bd 3 ty ty 4 

ee gf dilic oy Olite #4 GS ge ote Ye /{\ idol a oI Lene] eps 
+ doe al gt dado y Co ak 9 JLSS wigs) dey 

Comments: ‘ 

a. “Mentioning the Name of Allah’ means not only the performance of prayer, 
but also other devotional acts, such as the recitation of prophetic 
supplications and other texts containing the remembrance of Allah, and the 
glorification of His majesty. It also includes giving admonitions, delivering 
the message of Islam, as well as the learning and teaching of the tenets of 
Islam. 

b. It is great tiding for anyone who participates in the building of a mosque 
that, as a reward for it, Allah will build a house for him in Paradise. This 
amounts to a Divirie promise that such a person shall certainly be admitted 
to Paradise. 

WeESs 

736. 1t was narrated ‘that’ Pi ee me Ey hase Chae SVP 
“Uthman bin ‘Affan said: “T heard oe ee as gee 

the Messenger of Allah #8 say: ‘(7 & desodi te : eis * 
‘Whoever builds a mosque for the 4\-t2 +2 (a 3 ath ts ft 
sake of Allah, Allah will build ee a eee Se eee 
something similar for him in #8 Ml dye) Cred db ole oy 

ay 
Paradise.’ ”’ (Sahih) ii, 63 

Be 

1 gs clits US ja ‘yk 
Bed 3 

Mosques And The Congregations 485 alelosdss slat! cigui 

or OFT ee oye dehy do lud) ely je wh bale Lived & plana tom ol ee 
1) dyerdldge Cade 

Comments: 

a. Building a mosque “for the sake of Allah’ means doing the deed with full 
sincerity. No action done without sincerity is acceptable to Allah. 

b. ‘Building something similar in Paradise’ means that just as a mosque is 
superior to all the other structures raised by man, the person concerned 
shall be given a house in Paradise that will be superior to all others. 

737. It was narrated that ‘Ali bin: abs) Guke 33 4.06) Gls - vrv 
Abu Talib said: “The Messenger 2; « | A Be Sok ie 
of Allah # said: ‘Whoever builds ‘dang op! oF cae Gi Ag!) Bus 
a mosque for the sake of Allah =. ake Se 1556 Le eel ae 
(from his own wealth), Allah wil =" 0) We ae oF 
build 2 house for him in 4" 3S A) defo db 16 a 

Paradise.’” (Da’‘if) “3 ty 25 fy e: Age i xe es 3g 
area 

degh cps 6 pte Ad! cea shu! hia Se gl Sy [oteaye oo kun! ] Fes aged 
4) Gals GS! totally © Vda 
738. It was narrated from Jabir Gis : dtveats 39 33 se veh 

ors ee 

bin ‘Abdullah that the Messenger bel ot all te ea Re 
of Allah # said: “Whoever builds S77 Gt petlzy oP Sas on DY Ae 
a mosque for the sake of Allah, ees eg! oO cpl LE of ail te be 
like a sparrow’s nest or even *  ,o oy ¢ , el. og 
smaller, Allah will build for hima 2% OF ¢c%d gl ot tthe GF scp 
house in Paradise.” (Sahih) Ate OG 6 ot 385 OT bt oe gt 
JB Bol gf gb jeskes ob tes 
Bed! 3 by 3 a 

«Gp ake Wha ig megs] SEs [epee oa tinh] ex Saeed 

Comments: 
Rather than the apparent volume of the deed or deeds done by a person, it 
is the amount of effort and the sincerity behind the righteous deed that shall 
count with Allah in the Hereafter. 

Chapter 2. Construction Of Joli duoots QE — CY panel) 
Lofty Mosque 7 CY saat) 

739. It was narrated that Anas : dpa ri gles jp a hts Gas - v4 

Mosques And The Congregations 486 werlelecss! 9 berlewal! wlgu/ 

bin Malik said: “The Messenger of f 24 
Allah #% said: ‘The Hour will not! oO” S# 
begin until the people compete in jj gee is teh 
(building) mosques.’”’ (Sahih) Ae a ee eee 

tll AL om MELO ogi Vy UE ail 

Melosh 3 

rar 

oy fE4re cde leed! ely oe wh hall coglo gl ay ol [perme arlnn{] Tex Sat 

YAY /Y daa3e ol es 
Comments: [X thas gpl omeey ca slam ty 

‘Competing in mosque’ has been interpreted in two ways: (i) People will 
boast of their wealth and prosperity in the mosques. (ii) They will vie with 
each other in the building of mosques. 

740. It was narrated that Ibn (Sin: ith ts eee We — ve. 
. cr oy ne 

vabbas Said: The Messenger GF ee, cs at | a 
Allah #% said: “I see you building 6 ‘Gbesl ge Ae pos ae 
your mosque high after Tam jg - Guts oy ec Ke te cael 
gone, just as the Jews built their rae a, ha A ; ee - : ee 
synagogues high and the pSdzlas Optio sigh 8 dl J 405 
Christians built their churches ee apter Aj teG’ Auiz “3 
LS lgcdgts’ wore ye hes 

high.” (Da‘if) 3 AGHSUS oygdl >t ‘i oon 
gas Sola ry ‘ 

cal cpl ghy ted 4d cede olul Mie tes ee yl Sly [Ie Cigare colin] ‘eee 
‘jee css ‘ IAS gry ordeal cp Byles Coen alee 

741. It was narrated that ‘Umar (52 : ii2h % be Gis - vey 
bin Khattaéb said: The Messenger ‘oar ae .— 
of Allah #% said: “No people’s ce! oF soar yl AF OS pal — 

= 

deeds ever became evil deeds but SA Rem 8. Pe Hos. felscrs 
i “pt po Y Sot Cp ope ‘ Gls} 
they started to adorn their places ve a a ‘ 

digs ay ae IE 2 Ae 5 phe 
of worship.” (Da‘if) ele Lor UE dh Jot JE SG sl 
Mddelad 155 VY] bi oS oe 

EN oy ached Qld Syed! bt [le Cad olin] ‘gees 

Chapter 3. Where It Is by Je Sel ol = oe 0 
Permissible To Build Mosque (YY Gieei!) to Laas! 

oe 

Ber wate | Bek se gre yee 
742. It was narrated that Anas ‘@53 Gis :uens J) Ue Was - vey 

Mosques And The Congregations 487 wee lecetlg whem lnmel) a! gy! 

bin Malik said: “The location ret fits (ik i 
where the Prophet's Mosque was  C™  O* » * ‘A 
built belonged to Banu Najjar. In 6% :Ju ke oy Gal Je « cea 
it there were date-palm treesand cg, a i (as 
graves of the idolaters, The S39 «744i = - oper Cay 
Prophet #2 said to them: ‘Name ol rw om (aa a hues yes Pe 
its price.’ They said: ‘We will me 

never take any money for it.’ The ta J EY Ags » Kay spat “ay, 
Prophet #8 built it and they were + 5- ee ye  ty 5te ECL 
assisting him, and the Prophet 2% pao oe BS ie 6 a8 ale 
was saying: “The real life is the Cas if Vh schgi 5 Ue ES5 Bly 
life of the Hereafter so forgive the y , 
Ansaér and the Muhdjirah.’ Before os galls ja ws Ge ra 
the mosque was built, the Prophet 233 Si sa ih Ols3 

#¢ would perform prayer : ey a ae 
wherever he was when the time SAI) 2553 ies ee teeta 
for prayer came.” (Sahih) 

cdl. Malad GSphe ond Gh ge oh Gla oil esl cgi sd 

dom ope OVE te RE ll sos ell GL ite Lull blne ys lam ne 9 VATA CEVA 
oo Lall ol 

Comments: tee 

a. It is perfectly in order to ‘purchase’ land for the construction of a mosque, 
and the landowner is allowed in Islam to charge price for the land sold to 
the mosque management. Similarly, there is no bar to receiving wages for 
services rendered for the construction, repairs and the putting in place of 
electric and water supply systems for the mosque. 

b. Gifting land for the building of a mosque, rendering free various services 
for it and donating things of necessity to it, are-acts of great virtue that may 
earn reward from Allah. 

c. It is prohibited to perform prayer in the graveyard. However, if all traces of 
the former graves of the past have been erased, the site shall be considered 
as good as any other piece of Jand, and there will be no bar to the 
construction of a mosque there. 

d. There is no bar either on reciting or on listening to the verses of poetry 
whose contents are not aganist the teaching of Shari‘ah. Use of musical 
instruments as accompaniment thereto is, however, prohibited in Islam. 

e. In places where there is no mosque in the neighborhood, prayer can be 
performed on any appropriate piece of Jand. 

743. It was narrated from # es topes Uf ak gis -— ver 

‘Uthman bin Abul-’As that the 

Messenger of Allah = #¢ 

commanded him to build the 

iF tebe 2 oe aad ced NSM elas 

Mosques And The Congregations 488 lees! 9 tr lewal! wil gui 

mosque of Ta’if in the place 4 Cees 

where their Taghuts used to be.!"! oF olate 56 tye we ot Tbe op dome 
“a Pies BE Geka tee ot ie 
(Da‘if) jase OF tpt Be at 325 OT eI I 

oy f0ere ote lived! ely ei wh Syhall coglo yl Peeper awe) ow} ] eps 
Shodl Sygree 548 Oe gil nb diy gb Yele oy dilie gy dare te ples col tute 

744, It was narrated that Ibn G55 11k im Heer (ANS nS 
‘Umar was asked about gardens are exe aa 2 a 
in which excrement was thrown. SFT Ce eye Wm culate Cy 9 ee 

He said: “Tf it has been watered ofl of egal 2 poe oe (he 
several times, then perform 7 7 4&, A eS . 
prayer there” and he attributed [4d] 4 ollaodt GF eg ce 

that to the Prophet #. (Da‘if) | eLead LG 224? ip NS meager | 
HG 25) JI Gy Gs 

Bleed gpl ltd Gand olen Le cme ydl dy [ete cole] cy pe 
ea tll od LS Wha al dle cp Olete Cp goes 

Comments: 

Repeated watering in the gardens turns the excrements etc., used in them 
(as manure) into soil and almost completely changes its character. The 
earth, therefore, should be considered as clean. The Hadith proves that any 

unclean piece of land, when cleansed, becomes fit for erecting a mosque 
into it and for performing prayers in it. 

Chapter 4. Places Where It Is ox ed ee lga OE - (E eral!) 
Disliked To Perform Prayer (YE died!) BUGS Var 

745. It was narrated that Abu j,5 Gis : cts Uf Aint Gls - veto 
Sa‘eed Khudri said: “The are eae ee are ee 
Messenger of Allah #€ said: ‘All of %7** Of cols Ge fosjle oy 
the earth is a mosque, except for té ale es 

graveyards and Hamméam.’”’ eg 
(Sahih)?! eae gl GE ody 

[1] “Where they used to worship others besides Allah, from the idols and other than that’ 
(Explanation by Sindi). 

[2] Hammam: It is the place (it is not restricted to a room) where washing is performed 
with hot water, and they also say it includes any kind of water. See Tuhfatul-Ahwadhi. 

Mosques And The Congregations 489  ealelesetle bea) toi 

Welsdly sai Yj (Bois tls 

Ugab Jged Y git ne 3} gal ge ol vealall ee dor | Teeoee asleal] : Tex ated 
col opls dare Cpl dames 64 shar gdm “ys gaa St Adley «£47: ra CF pha 
= cer illy cf pSboelty 

Comments: 

a. Prohibition on performing prayers in the graveyard is meant to avoid any 
resemblance of prostrating before the graves. 

b. Some people build their mosque close to the grave of a “holy man’ or 
Prophet under the assumption that praying by the side of the deceased holy 
man is a virtuous act. All of this is prohibited in Islam. 

ao aa. 9 

746. It was narrated that Ibn: 225.4) ola! Go tame as — VE4 
“Umar said: “Allah’s Messenger fe “ee th he tt ay 28s We 
#% prohibited prayer from being Se OF SRE Cr BI te ee 

performed in seven places: The op 3518 be rs cn BS Se er 
garbage dump, the slaughtering ~*~. .. 3, | 0” | 2 
area, the graveyard, the | ua ‘JB 6 ol cas « goparell 

of 
commonly used road, the .<yi-3 3. 3 2 
bathroom, in the area that camels —— oPly ore te ne) 
rest at“! and above the Ka‘bah” i jy Bag wie a5 e 
Dat eote ee i 
(Da‘if) 3989 al class iplasdls ‘Sa bl 

aS 

ast cghnts \e Aah s es elo le wel 68 plea eegela st ae ol [twee sobre! ] Foca 

lS 85 Sel Mas jad orkul SdBy 4 eG doll dae gy die Gute ys VEte ads 

Oe Sad ial Ibs coh cp phell 3 LoS Aly no gay «Abin IS Ge Fer ot 
ae ey SM cododly Cog) Ue Sis datos gran gs ash 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith is ‘Weak’, yet the rule to the effect that we must avoid praying in 
unclean places is corréct, since the Prophet #¢ has directed that the mosque 
must be kept clean and smelling good. (See Sunan Ibn Majah: H.758). 

b. Slaughterhouses also fall in that category. Therefore, no prayer should be 
performed there. The Hadith concerning prohibition of prayer in wash areas 
(public baths} and graveyards is correct. (See no. 745). 

("In no. 746, it is possible that it means ‘watering holes’ that camels rest at. See 
Tuhfatul-Ahwadhi, and this is the meaning that Sindi- preferred, he said: “It is: where 
they kneel around water, because it is feared that the camels wili flee and stampede 
through it, and perhaps that will lead to ruining the prayer.” And: this is the 
understanding that most commentaries endorse. 

Mosques And The Congregations 

747, It was narrated from ‘Umar 
bin Khattaéb that the Messenger of 
Allah # said: “There are seven 
places where it is not permissible 
to perform the prayer: The top of 
the House of Allah; graveyards; 
garbage dumps; slaughterhouses; 
bathrooms; the area that camels 
rest, and the main road.” (Da‘if) 

490 culelest!g tele! Giloui 

Be Fe wae be 

ip dine 5 S58 Youle Gas - vev 
giles gh Ge YE oth Uf 
Ae oth oo Be Bis LD Bie 
plane ca 
Wa Gs Sad Y Shige Gor Je 
Gy ahalig at ot pb 
oa BY! Ghes plalls hiaSH 

Sesh 

obeed} oe oe BG aes [tyre colina} ] a 

oF Gpeall poe 

er taal ae da oy 28 bi. gpl vie ree aale NWS 5 cay gt 
tombs GELS SWod! ce Gon le eg Une dhesils ® apes YIO/S: a sdil 

Chapter 5. What Is Disliked 
In The Mosques 

748. It was narrated from Ibn 
‘Umar that the Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: “There are things 
which are not befitting for the 
mosque: it should not be taken as 
a thoroughfare; weapons should 
not be unsheathed in it; bows 
should not be drawn nor arrows 
shot in it; no one should pass 
through it carrying raw meat; no 
prescribed punishment or 
retaliatory punishment should be 
carried out in it; and it should not 
be used as a marketplace.” (Da‘if) 

ee Adand Sydodly 

rrr b- (0 pee? 

(Yo diel) spats 

“6 st oF cgnatdl gi “2 Ogls 36 
Suse 236 ME al Jyt5 3 Get 

ol 
y 
Yo lab TE Y ston 3 és 
oF) 

pee 

4 yk sb a YG (le 38 4 
mh ad Fe VS HS 43 4b 

7 eet eee 

VY eg 

“Gyre ghd dines celal VETIC «bil gue yl toro] [Ie Caray ool! gees 

Comments: 

‘Not taking the mosque as a thoroughfare’ refers to a situation where, for 

Mosques And The Congregations 491 wale lesdls tlmadl il gl 

example, a person is standing at one end outside the mosque and wants to 
go to the other side and, instead of going around the mosque, he decides to 
pass through the mosque. This is not proper. 

-pi. 

749, It was narrated from ‘Amr =: GUS! suc {3 al Le Gis - ved 
bin Shu‘aib, from his father, that 
his grandfather said: “The 
Messenger of Allah # forbade of 32 cal 36 «RS of 9 dE LE 
buying and selling in the mosque, ache Sn ae nc nat eS oe 
daa seciHing poetry in ane gles cal oF HE al dx) oe 2d 

mosque.” (Hasan) worl) od gusyy sits of3 

VeVAre cbghall [5 dxecll Px Gell Cl aphlall coslgl a el Copeman bewd ] Fs Saeed 
wAaod te glad Tyre Dhexe lB Nic eghedl ney ce Mee oh dude oy 

oe. 
{ 

ORE ol oe EM HE fT Bis 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith further confirms the point made in no.748, namely the 
prohibition of using the mosque as a marketplace. It is because buying and 
selling often degenerates into wrangling, giving rise to unseemly noises that 
are antithetical to the dignity of the mosque. 

b. Lines of poetry that promote monotheism and good moral conduct or 
degrade idolatry and idolaters, are allowed to be recited inside the 
mosques. 

a] Pay 0 teak epee 
750. 1t was narrated from : Zool vag GF Aes) Gls ~ vos 
Wathilah bin Asqa’ that the 2: 2h Gis coats 22 202 Bike 

"yp SES! Woe taaldl cp alee Bas 
Prophet #§ said: “Keep your “7 y Dea rae ead 
infants, your insane and your evil al OF solbg fo ee Bis cole 
ones away from your mosques, go 2 Se tg she oz . 
Avoid engaging in transactions C7" & ee af ty ore 
and disputes, raising your voices, pide lias loo? dG BE ath Sl 
carrying out your prescribed 2000 wae kee ee 
punishments and unsheathing = pale pMEbts rlne 
your swords therein. Make places 45,15 Elily ASalgol p55 Kiki eds 
for purification at their gates, and 5 Be dee a ‘ e ie eo) 
perfume them with incense on ‘Wl!  Npleely cpg fag 
Fridays.” (Maudu’) heabdl 3 955 ald 
dae ily (uy 8) tens de VAN Ie pai aybSl x Le ga ge 2d bw! ] cS ated 

Mosques And The Congregations 

Chapter 6. Sleeping In The 
Mosque 

751. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Umar said: “We used to sleep in 
the mosque at the time of the 
Messenger of Allah #8.” (Sahih) 

492 ale bes!9 im beall wil gil 

docall g PFU SG ~ CO prea 
(V1 démesl!) 

Sis types 3b ale Gis - vot 

° or 2t oF or J . De 
Be of dl de CET cs Bh a ke 
« yt 82 SG: oehe ° - a7 
Ze bs id ea oF ¢ sL te 

BE bh Jyh age JE src 

4 Aline tude oy W/V ttael tor | [rene oobunl] es 

Comments: 

It is all right if a traveler or any other hard-pressed person sleeps in the 
mosque. We should not, however, make a habit of it. However, it is not a 
matter of reproach or censure if a person waiting for the congregational 

prayer falls asleep in the mosque. 

752. Ya‘ish bin Qais bin Tikhfah 
narrated that his father, who was 
one of the people of Suffah, said: 
“The Messenger of Allah #% said 
to us: ‘Come with me.’ So we 
went to the house of ‘Aishah, 
where we ate and drank. Then the 
Messenger of Allah #§ said to us: 
‘If you want, you can sleep here, 
or if you want you can go out to 
the mosque.’ We said: ‘We will go 
out to the mosque.’” (Sahih) 

atts. Cae Eso Bee 8 yete 
Bas 1S Te SS pl Gas - vor 

vot Gy o28iEt teen fee ee Lote, 
Waoeinall og] patllail Ae fs CEm pias 

or a ac ad cathy gle chs fe to ob cw cogla gl ae oi [ew] Tox Saed 
cpl be ga Jal als NAVE cOlL> cyl ArePreO § oY plan ay Shag) bel ‘tee gl 

Chapter 7. Which Mosque 
Was Built First? 

753. It was narrated that Abu 
Dharr Al-Ghifari said: “I said: ‘O 
Messenger of Allah! Which 

VV /8)pStodly eVIOAre cOlm 

OG! es de Gi OG - (V panel) 
(XV dda) 

GBs 25 ont bi ahs Bhs - vor 

go 4a 

de G5 ce ae G 

Mosques And The Congregations 

mosque was built first?’ He said: 
‘Al-Masjid Al-Hardm (in Makkah),’ 
I said: ‘Then which?’ He said: 
‘Then Al-Masjid Al-Agsa (in 
Jerusalem).’ I said: ‘How many 
years between them?’ He said: 
‘Forty years, but the whole earth 
is a mosque for you, so pray 
wherever you are when the time 

493 walelossilg tela! Wilgul 

pee) oF Byles yi res 1 desee 
% a iF «sel if «esl A easly! dF owe 
Ftd 5525 b :2b dU oth 
iad docs de el & a5 3 deus 
diotall oh id eg a3 28 .u 

josh 36 segs oS hE ety 

Or 

oe 

> 

= 

for prayer comes.’” (Sahih) 

te bss fab dat Ub So ad cle 
BABS EES534 

éghnes cV RYO: ‘tS a fan a O ee igi cies wh cols YI tuyole| i Gobedl tom ol ‘es 

ay hee Gade ge OVE ei ghall as al ga5 do Led wk poe LoSt 

Comments: 

a, 

Chapter 8. Mosque In Houses 

The reference here is to the building of the first mosque ever built in 
history, which was accomplished at the hands of Adam si. As for the 
Prophets Ibrahim # and Isma’il #4, they rebuilt Al-Masjid Al-Hardm after 
old marks had been erased. Similarly, Sulaiman ss was also not the first to 
build Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. 

. This confirms the superiority of these two mosque. Apart from these two 

mosque the only other mosque on earth for which we are allowed to 
undertake an exclusive journey is the Prophet’s Mosque at Al-Madinah. 

. Since even setting out on a journey exclusively to visit any mosque (except 

the three mentioned above) is prohibited, the situation of those who 
undertake journeys to visit the graves of ‘holy men’ etc, can very well be 
judged. 

. Visits to the graves are permitted, but only to draw lessons about the 

impending death and the life in the Hereafter. 

. ‘Pray wherever you are’ means that except for the three mosques mentioned 

above, all other mosques are equal in rank, and we can pray anywhere we 
like. 

yg 3 a dor linadl SE = (A pares) 
(YA deel) 

754. Mahmud bin Rabi’ Al- 2h §0 Fae “78. Yok 

OU 1h aoe Oe oO tite - 

Ansari, who remembered that the 
Messenger of Allah #% spat a 
mouthful of water from a bucket 
into a well that belonged to them, 

wwled ot! oF eee id oll (as 
§ os “etal oll yt ‘y > pore jf 

Mosques And The Congregations 

narrated that ‘Itban bin Malik As- 
Salimi who was the chief of his 
people Banu Salim and had 
participated in (the battle of) Badr 
with the Messenger of Allah 2 
said: “I came to the Messenger of 
Allah #@ and said: ‘O Messenger 
of Allah, my sight is failing and 
the flood comes and prevents me 
from reaching the mosque of my 
people, and it is too hard for me 
to cross the water. Do you think 
you could come and perform 
prayer in my house in a place 
which I can then take as a place 
for prayer?’ He said: ‘I will do 
that.” The following day, the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ and Abu 
Bakr came, when the heat of the 
day had grown intense. He asked 
permission to enter, and I gave 
him permission. He did not sit 
down until he said: ‘Where would 
you like me to perform prayer for 
you in your house?’ I showed him 
the place where I wanted him to 
pray, so the Messenger of Allah 
®é stood and we lined up behind 
him, and he led us in praying two 
Rak‘ah (units). Then I asked him 
to stay and eat some Khazirah!’) 
that had been prepared for 
them.’” (Sahih) 

494 culelesstlg tlie!) Gilg 

lB lal dx5 & 

Pa Fa Box eo ihe sa owt 
ee 30 best ols 6s ras fe ESE 

2 84 ee ge) ate. be 
oe es eee 
3 Aad ob Uf ah Ob ches 
“ ot zo 4 mf 8 o 
OU BG lat tisdh Ui Os 
: fe ee 4 - ae #48 
to ply Fes 4s\ J ges) ee) «fab 
(J E36 ase Parsi 523 Vesa 

sil ska 5 2338 way y. 
6 ai 5525 FB ass clei Sf Eel 

60 pe 9 VAQ CO cpl egy fred Shartul GL ced! + Sybedl dor ol Fda 
ed Ge VVC cd PRI 6 gdal delerdl ge Cabell (3b det HI Ob ete Lic «plane y 

Comments: 

4, S85 

a. The Prophet's spitting a mouthful of water into the well was intended to 
bring Barakah (blessing) to the water. His spittle (and saliva), as confirmed 
by both his biographers and compilers of Ahddith, had on several occasions 

fl A dish made with ground meat and flour. 

Mosques And The Congregations 495 

worked wonders and brought Barakah to the people. (See Bukhdri: 4151) 

b. On this occasion the Prophet #€ had even sprinkled some water from his 
mouth on the face of the child Mahmud. (See Bukhéri:77) The idea was to 
have fun with the child. Thus, any playful activity that provides amusement 
to the children but causes no discomfort to them is permissible — being it 

an expression of the elders’ love and affection for the little ones. 

c. There was a depression in the path between the house of ‘Itban @ and the 
mosque that used to be flooded by rain, making his access to the mosque 
difficult. In situations like this it is allowed to perform prayers inside one’s 
house. 

d. An invitee for the meals can also bring someone else with him, provided 
that he is sure that it will not be an inconvenience to the host and may be a 
source of pleasure to him. 

e. It is permissible to designate a place for prayers in the house. 

f. It is all right to invite or ask a pious person, or a revered personality, to 
inaugurate a noble program or venture. 

g. It is permissible to offer voluntary prayer as a congregational prayer. 

calclesls tetuall wig 

755. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that a man among the 
Ansér sent word to the Messenger 
of Allah #@ saying: “Come and 
designate a place in my house 
where I can perform prayer,’ that 
was after he had become blind. So 
he went and did that. (Hasan) 

Comments: 

[é3ssJi] Jal 2h od Ws - veo 
oe Kok Ge woh, Te Ze, 

is isle § Sus Che: pe Y 
Of ia af 3 glia ol 3 eee 
4 925 a5) SUN Ge HE 
fol 8 go laps J LES Ss 2 

GB AES eb OARS 5 as 

oat 

- cere okam| fie Sym? gal Js Co od liu] Forse 

The Companion under reference, as specified in the previous Hadith, was 

‘Itban 2. 
756. It was narrated that Anas 
bin Malik said: “One of my 
paternal uncles made some food 
for the Prophet #@ and said to the 
Prophet #: ‘I would like you to 
eat and perform prayer in my 
house.’ So he went to him, and in 
his house there was one of these 
Fahl. He ordered that a corner be 
swept and water sprinkled in it, 
then he performed prayer and we 

bh Gas 26S Bf A Gls - von 

o 

© ss ai ee By ear. of 
ol SF oe A oF SE 

Mosques And The Congregations 

prayed with him.” (Sahih) 

Abu ‘Abdullah bin Majah said: A 
Fahl is a mat that has become 
black (through use). 

496 + ale loc g te tinmal! rll 

sb Addl 

Fee yok oe me 
wana Lyles 

a ny a 
Oro35 ois bane tl, 

Pa 

sh jad tu 3 a ef 8 
3521 8 eH Ses 

werh ope» gis ial cel oF VAY VY eel ax ol Tene ookw|] ‘ep 

Chapter 9. Purifying And 
Perfuming The Mosque 

757. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed. Al-Khudri said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #8 said: 
“Whoever removes something 
harmful from the mosque, Allah 
will build for him a house in 
Paradise.’ (Dai‘f) 

ph oles cyl ge glee # as ob] Le 

758. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Messenger of Allah 2% 
commanded that mosque be built 
in (Ad-Dur) villages,"] and that 
they be purified and perfumed. 
(Sahih) 

Comments: 

FEVA/\ deemed! GULT daily cp glad 3 jw 

Stoel ghd SE - (4 pret 
(V4 diol!) UGreebag 
ke GAS. tye 3 olds Gis - voy 
Siz :ogedt il of pee oo 
ake Gis gid gle Ye 
ios Boalt ee 
sonal Se Sl GAT Sor 238 ait 2 

MESH 3 tp di 

ig mesdl SB y Ledyard ooltell : Gey od 

od 43 brbeons g Sl dae al oe goes 

sh oh Attn Me Ge — von 

Bis VE AN Beh 5 «Sa 
ae | 

se igi Y fle OT oe 

ra 
sal BBB 425 ol AE Be cal 
pave oh. 2 2 cok 8 F -7t 
jee O13 cogil Cd fo OF ae lk 
+ oy te 
+ Cobei'y 

PI Cedondl tt [eeoene ooled] | ges poe 

a. Having just one central mosque in a city or town is not enough. There must 
be a mosque in each district so that the Believers may perform 
congregational prayer with facility and ease. It is in order to build a mosque 

Hi The areas. where large family tribal branches reside as neighbors. 

Mosques And The Congregations 

at some distance from the other. 

497 waletoralls world) oslo 

b. ‘Perfuming’ here means burning incense or some other substance producing 

a sweet odor. 

759. It was narrated from ‘Aishah 
that the Messenger of Allah 2% 
commanded that places of prayer 
be established in villages, and that 
they be purified and perfumed. 
(Sahih) 

a Ke 

Bis : uy UY dl G5, Gis - vea 
bps au etd C2 sats 
sl L662 gh pls be tae 2 
Sf Me at 5425 gal 245 ie gz 
es ad ofy godt 3 deed LS 

53515 is ag 

or £o0re eg re doled! Sa Ok (3 yLall coglogsl anol Leqone] ‘ees 

760. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The first 
person who put lamps in the 
mosque was Tamim Ad-Dari.” 

(Dai’f) 

ose | sail By ell os 

Chapter 10. Repugnance Of 
Spitting In The Mosque 

761. It was narrated from Abu 7 

Hurairah and Abu Sa‘eed Al- 
Khudri that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ saw some sputum on the 
wall of the mosque. He picked up 
a stone and scraped it off, then he 
said, “If anyone of you needs to 
spit, he should not spit in front of 
him or to his right; let him spit to 
his left or under his left foot.” 
(Sahih) 

Olm ont Amro g ody A515 odo 

“Le. - Bo 

Al Gls cot, 2 deef Ge - vs. 

o wed oF coll oy 7 LE I jf Gyles 

ee ° log or 

lites wel net Gea gee 

Ps 

seta ob gyal fp So cl feasts 

» UL oslo SF Ge gl JBs [im tennis adteaf] : Fcc Saeel 

2 hg yall 2 LoS Cytodt Sig te ahs 6 dane 

oo BES aS SE - + peel 
(V+ dined) dowd! 

oh sgn Gus 25 aks BS - vit 

a 2 - §e - 

oe of ered cn ola hs Og 
° low on o on F ‘< 
oe one! Be cp ter FF cles 
do gl 5 KE GI YE Oe 

shh BE al 425 Ob aget us 63S 
ware Sys edged Rees 2 ales 
ui ech oF GF 445 - a 
MG pas pad Bp JE GF ikes 

vn Be Bee, 

Syd5 teed 38 VS es 
Meg 2cil wos 55 GI des 33 

Mosques And The Congregations 498 wale lesdlg tole! oil gui 

deal ge pad bu tb oh gla equi eel tees 

oF OkATe 6 doeanad | e dle! of ell wh ode Lad Colney 60 ah 9 ENQehrAte 

Comments: OR ORE 

a. Keeping the mosque clean is an absolute necessity. 

b. It is essential to avoid activities that spoil the purity of mosque. 

c. If the floor of the mosque is unmetaled or muddy and without matting, it is 
allowed to spit under the foot since once rubbed under the foot the spittle 
will be absorbed by the soil. 

d. Spitting to one’s left is only allowed if there is no worshipper on that side. 

e. It is not allowed to spit on a solid constructed floor or a rug or carpet—it 
being against the principle of cleanliness. 

f. The Prophet's act of cleaning the wall himself is indicative of his exemplary 
manners and humility. 

762. It was narrated from Anas ig 4c coat ARs ts Vat 
that the Prophet #8 saw some hie Ee, te et gat 
sputum in the prayer direction of — &<!\ o! yl GF ter OF bee cy! 
the mosque and he became so - st De, ies On Os ee ee 

Coad odode! ALG als ol x 
angry that his face turned red. ne ee ro a vie a 
Then a woman from among the ,L2iVi Ss sijal Gels cageg Soel 2S 

Ansar came and scraped it off, Ye Pe oe. GR Myuebes 
and put some Khalug''! on that Ul 6 gl ee class ei 
spot. The Messenger of Allah #% Sa Gc84 ter BE hl S25 

said: “How good this is.” (Dai‘f) 

carla! GES ctr laadl come ON/V: sll ar et [dee cole] cg pe 
[ung yd) cpelbe dat be hall yam se VVAIe chase Cyl dorreneg ca dle tad oe VIVE 
Gast b Goes! alle Cadoally carlaw pep pad ded oly Cgelte! olab ge BWI 45 pS 

Pa A fA | 

Comments: i 

a. It is permissible to express anger on seeing someone doing something 
abominable. 

b. Sometimes, mere facial expressions may serve the purpose of admonition. 

c. It is permissible to give words of praise or appreciation to someone who 
has done something good. 

d. Both praise and punishment, whether in the form of a few words or 
through some other opportune method, are the recognized tools of 
education. 

[3 A kind of perfume containing saffron etc. See explanation by Sindi. 

Mosques And The Congregations 499 ilelesd!9 tela cules 

763. Tt was narrated that sie tll seh ee ee. cay 
Abdullah bin ‘Umar said: “The 

Messenger of Allah 8 saw some i 4é 32 «gl: 36 gas 43 Ec Cf 
sputum in the prayer direction of _ — Joe ots 
the mosque, a was praying GS #8 aN 25 ls SE ae ot! 
in front of the people. He «ll i 35 pa 583 sal ats 
scratched it off, then when the Bees ta et 

prayer was over, he said: ‘When Bkvall Gye eal Ger JE ps GSAS 
anyone of you is performing 4 St .sSuall a os Bie sich op 
prayer, Allah is before him, so a 3 hx ; # 
none of you should spit toward 46-9 SB piel E8e 36 <4ge9 Ae 
the front while praying.’”” (Sahih) GAB 3 

call... ES cy Jl fa dg eV cath fo Gh COBY cubed ae sl tee ae 

cei 1 yes glial e deemed e Glad oF sel wh ode lool cplies cVOre 
14 QS Gar? oe Goes cas eal Syd Ce ORV 

Comments: 

a. Prayer, is an occasion where Allah’s slave offers his homage and servitude 
to his Lord. It is, therefore, contrary to the spirit of that occasion to indulge 
in acts like spitting towards the front. 

b. ‘Allah’s being before the worshiper’ is an expression, which in plain 
language means Allah’s beneficence and mercy being directed towards him. 

c. Some people have put forward the claim on the basis of these words that 
Allah is physically present everywhere. But the argument is not tenable, 
since if it were the case that Allah was present everywhere, then spitting on 
one’s left and behind should also have been prohibited because, as they put 
it, Allah is physically present everywhere. 

764. It was narrated from ‘Aishah e835 Gis 74ish 2) ide Gis - vit 
that the Prophet #§ scratched “f Sing : Baer ae 
some spittle from the prayer ©! oF esl ee ¢ oF 

direction of the mosque. (Sahih) on mal as a aig As ie gal 
O84 Ie § pang 4 oe of WA / idem! ar ol [eee ooluaf] : ‘ee ps 

“8 

Chapter 11. Prohibition Of glail 36 el et (1 pall) 
Making Lost-and-Found ee la 
Aunouncenicnts In The (1) dine) dona eZ Nigel 
Mosque 

765. It was narrated from a55 (Sis false os dé is. -— yt0 
Sulaiman bin Burdah that his .~, |, “ 
father said: “The Messenger of idle OF lhe op dae coy ot Poca 

Mosques And The Congregations 

Allah #8 performed prayer, then a 
man said: ‘Who was looking for 
the red camel?’ The Prophet #¢ 
said: ‘May you not find it! The 
mosques were built for that for 
which they were built.’” (Sahih) 

500 icleadly uptuall wil el 

aol 2 RY of Guiles BB hs 

Ta ae ge Ao poe Se ae 
ie bes Ske He at Sy de id 
MB gS le Te fed ys 

bah W) Jptcal och Gy Shey 
ar) 

cGsl os. deed 8 Thal) ue ge gl Gh cele) clas el igs 

Comments: 

24 AS sy Cale oy ONE 

a. The purpose behind the harsh words is to show his disapproval of the 
annouricement. This, in fact, is a form of admonition. 

bi Mosques are built for conducting prayers, delivering admonitions, 
imparting wise counsels and engaging in learning and teaching, not for 
making searches for things lost otitside. 

766. It was narrated from ‘Atnr 
bin Shu’aib, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that the 
Messenger of Allah #8 forbade 
making lost-and-found 
announcements in the mosque. 
(Hasan) 

767. It was narrated from Abu 
‘Abdullah, the freed slave of 
Shaddad bin Had that he heard 
Abu Hurairah say: “I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #€ say: 
“Whoever hears a man making a 
lost-and-found announcement in 
the mosque, let him say: “May 
Allah not return it to you!” For 
the mosques were not built for 
that.’’”” (Sahih) 

Eg <a 
GH GGT tas ose Bae - vin 
ak Gas : os gt s3 Tal $ daagl 
ee 2 - af | 

S ° o* ° Pree “Ee 2 
oe fae aoe OF for Za. 
be 8 Ga cael: ws 5 ts | he ewes 
tog en > Bes on k 
; ate fae oak < a 
Bi ee ol GF 255M ool «Gas 
geovd pe op , SE Le a4 ae 
ae al glgl zy olb 532 

iS saat op BS Bs 85 Ee 

G8 pl Spt Sp le 4 35 Y 
Ags 

Mosques And The Congregations 501 

culelacsls dete! wil qi 

Foon w+ deiwell 3 ULall 33 SE oT kh ete lacdt cobs a el eps 

Chapter 12. Prayer In Camels’ 
Resting-Places™ And 
Sheep’s Resting-Places 

768. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: The Messenger of 
Allah 28 said: “If you cannot find 
any where (for prayer) except 
sheep’s resting-places and camels’ 
resting-places, then perform 
prayer in the sheep’s resting- 
places and do not perform prayer 
in the camels’ resting-places.” 
(Hasan) 

doomog 4 diy ade oe WAVE PTY /): 

Ay Og Cpl Cele bys DIATE 

Zz 
° 

glbsl 3 sal OU = OY peeesit) 
(TY deedi) mala ain Y 

mau tasty pi Sale Ise 
5 od Nghad MW; «pal yal? 3 {las 
bY olbsl 

oll an ol Tepe] ‘eps 

pls * Some gdly Te Cs yhgo) Ske pls cVA0re. dag cxta eVEATE & Gade I 
« phil eVAN Aa on doin? 9 6d nk 9 Fear 6 gde Jl die Jali isto) y & pee 

Comments: 

WY? t: 

The reason behind it is that, if a sheep tries to gore you with its horn, it is 
not life-threatening, and you can very well defend yourself against it. But if 
you see a camel bent on mischief, you will be hard put to handle it. 
Especially, its sudden attack could be fatal. As for a camel sitting at rest, the 
Prophet #% is known to have performed his prayer facing it. (See Sahih Al- 

Bukhari: 507). 
769. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al- 
Muzani said: “The Prophet #¢ 
said: ‘Perform prayer in the 
sheep’s resting-places and do not 
perform prayer in the camels’ 
resting-places, for they were 
created from the devils.” (Hasan) 

Dl See no. 746. 

ie is ae & gf Bhs - v14 
8 3p 3 Ss yok ft 
ee on V3 «peal yale ey 
pba 32 Cale GE | othe 

corals 
7 

Mosques And The Congregations 502 

culelosslle rlemal! rlgal 

VEU COU/Y: Slay cay peter Qe TAVWi ce chek col ol antl Le] eee 
au odes) il chal pc Sedody caked Vive c Baily cay cpmrell oF 1 ab oy 

Comments: 

“Camels being created from the devils’ means they are mischievous by nature. 

770. ‘Abdul-Malik bin Rabi’ bin 
Sabrah bin Ma’bad Al-Juhani said: 
“My father told me, from his 
father, that the Messenger of 
Allah #§ said: ‘Do not perform 
prayer in the camels’ resting- 
places, and perform prayer in the 
sheep’s resting-places.’”” (Sahih) 

Gis 48 LI YX fl Gis - w. 
oo) GE a ke Gs ted 3 435 

cal sei eg Bley a pe oo! 

ha Wo 58 2 bt 5,25 
piadt ct a 3B daly bY gthet 4 

rae 

ug g 
ol asl B2 

64 ye EYV/Y rote! LBT Co Pi tool ae ol [emrene oolina! | gees 

Chapter 13. Supplication 
When Entering The Mosque 

771. It was narrated that Fatimah 
the daughter of the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “Whenever the 
Messenger of Allah #¢ entered the 
mosque he would say: ‘Bismillah, 
was-salamu ‘ala Rasulilléh, 
Alléhummagh-firli dhunubi waftah li 
abwiba rahmatika. (In the Name of 
Allah, and peace be upon the 
Messenger of Allah. O Allah, 
forgive me my sins and open to 
me the gates of Your mercy).’ 
When he left he would say: 
‘Bismillah, was-salamu ‘al@ 
Rasulillah, Alladhummagh-firli 
dhunubi waftah li abwiba fadlika. 
(In the Name of Allah, and peace 
be upon the Messenger of Allah. 
O Alléh, forgive me my sins and 
open to me the gates of Your 
bounty).’” (Dai) 

Uehd She EN SG - OY pnadi 
(YY dacs!) dorcel) 

Gis :£5 OI S ff Ge - wy 
ie iiglad alg cool] 32 Geles| 
Sees Pras 925 oh EbG 
cA pty 9 Teecchl JES 15) BE ai 
e abl rs chil dye (6 ons 
fea By bead oil J ea we 
A S55 Je PENG call pty 

Ag 3 go oS 3 “gb lt 

be 2 os 
ma feat e-y) 

7 

Mosques And The Congregations 503 

culelesslg Ae Lnall wigil 

gto ue yh Le cle Ob cighall egies eet [aes oll] guts 
oe ed & bore, ool ode oe Serko tds au helen] Cad oe TVET ee 6 deewall 
Oe gon ald Pi eutoss| ils eVrAre ole phai aalen Sat 

772. It was narrated that Abu 
Humaid As-Sa‘idi said: “The 
Messenger of Allah #@ said: 
‘When anyone of you enters the 
mosque, let him send peace upon 
the Prophet, then let him say: 
“Allahummaftah li abwaba rahmatika 
(O Allah, open to me the gates of 
Your mercy).” And when he 
leaves, let him say: “Allahumma 
inni as’aluka min fadlika. (O Allah, 
I ask of you from Your bounty).” 
(Sahih) 

bo gl Le 5 tated op 2 
gh & Sb gpelis] Gis VE shai 

ch dee Sy OU 2h he Gis - vvY 

Bom of ase of HSI ate Be «opel 
: JG Suelti Wee al fF Glas) 
ag4s{ fo tip * Bi 3525 dt 
ee a ‘ ass ot g wh cl 

Lis 5 aS Al pall = gab 

or SVAN ie 6 doeneS| de> {34 J5s& Le Ob 6 Cp pilwel! sli thine ae elt ee 

Comments: 

-4 Byles Code 

The purpose of going to the mosque is worship, which would hopefully be 
the harbinger of Allah’s mercy. Hence it is that, while entering the mosque 
we pray for Allah’s mercy. Once out of the mosque, however, man becomes 
engrossed in worldly affairs, e.g., the earning of his bread-and-butter. It is, 
therefore, the time for him to ask for Allah’s bounty in order to get lawful 

and blissful sustenance. 

773. It was narrated from Abu 
Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “When anyone of 
you enters the mosque, let him 
send peace upon the Prophet, then 
let him say: ‘Allahumma aftahli 
abwiba rahmatik (O Allah, open to 
me the gates of Your mercy).’ And 
when he leaves, let him send peace 
upon the Prophet and say: 
‘Allahumma-‘simni minash-shaitanir- 
rajim (O Allah, protect me from the 
accursed Shaitan).’” (Sahih) 

“5 

fi Gs yh by es Gas - yvr 
Sf Gk of 3 eg. fet ie 
efi Ba) Ss ip 30 Be a 3,25 
ch: ls a gh fe Gla Spach 
elt ¢ ce 13> « eitreag org of ed 
Se gel <a gis hl 

Kae thei 

Mosques And The Congregations 504 culelassig tm temal) algal 

ca kbs pl ge Arie cally psd fae) 65S! 8 Sol an ol Tmene] : ees 
(Gayla ol> yl memes 6 Cl JL) Tecauead ole] bbe "Syne gd JN 5 bcp olin gy 
Jos pb Me J glotl Ss gbily YOV/V i pSbedly CEOVi e chee ily PTV ic 

Comments: 
The reason. behind asking protection from Satan is that, as long as a person 
is in the mosque, he is busy in the worship and remembrance of Allah. 
Satan, therefore, has no sway over him. But as soon as he comes out of the 
mosque, Satan sees his opportunity to mislead him in his business affairs. 
That is the time when the person needs to come under Allah's special 
protection so as to be secure from the evil machinations of Satan. 

Chapter 14. Walking To Pell ‘all pall OE -— OE prnall) 
fae (FE dint) 

774. It was narrated that Abu (jz - #23 ‘2 = & rl Gis -~ we 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of etn oe. Ce 
Allah #€ said: ‘When one of you ‘7b? a! GF Cee! GF cliylee sl 
erforms ablution and does it me 3) 4 o- 45 24h geek oF ee 
ral, then he comes to the BS al : eg - i # z 
mosque with no other motive but J) et «tye 4 — a nen ip 
prayer and not seeking anything qs % 
other than the prayer, he does not pow? 
take one step but Allah raises him iy 4! 4435 | ‘eh b35 ai Pte 
in status one degree thereby, and -3., g, 4,2. we #-- £0. 
takes away one of his sins, until d= > «#4 ie Ma 
he enters the mosque. When he sta (3 5 low: Zi eS RE doetlt 
enters the mosque he is in a state ‘i ge aire 
of prayer so long as he is waiting Mao Dall SS 

for the prayer.’”” (Sahih) YAN iC ce aat [eegrene] tech 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith confirms the superiority of congregational prayer since it is an 
established fact, that it is better to perform the voluntary prayers at home. 

b. There is much reward for one who performs ablution and does it well. 

c. When the reward for just walking towards the mosque is so great that at 
each step Allah takes away one of the worshipper’s sins and raises his 
status one degree, the amount of reward to be awarded to him for the 
performance of prayer can very well be imagined. 

d. There is great reward promised even for those who just wait for the 
congregational prayer in the mosque. We must, therefore, try to reach the 
mosque after the call to prayer as soon as possible. 

Mosques And The Congregations 505 ilstessdig tetualt west gat 

775. It was narrated from Abu 
' Hurairah that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “When the Ig@mah 
is called for the prayer, do not 
come running. Come walking, 
with tranquility. Whatever you 
catch up with, pray, and 
whatever you miss, complete it.” 
(Sahih) 

Bias 21a Sigye gf els - we 
J 5 ted of uae Ge cole 
#6 ai O05 Ss OI ye ke 
edly se 96 Sai coal Bp 38 
ESN EGS Gh Ugly age 

gs 56 tay ctghad 53h 

call. BSay By aghall ole Glad Gh cae ludll ples on sl tee pe 

Comments: 

4 pala) Cade oe TV 

a. It is not permitted to come running to the mosque in order to catch up with 

the prayer. 

b. ‘Walking with tranquility’ does not mean to move at a snail’s pace as if 

prayer had no value for him. 

c. A person joining the prayer at a stage where the Imiim has already 
completed one Rak’ah or two, must not follow the Imam in saying the 
concluding salutation (Salém), but say it after completing the missed part of 
his prayer. In his book Subulus-Salim, which is a commentary on the well 
known Hadith book Bulughul-Marim, Imam Amir San’ani says: There is 
divergence of opinion among the scholars as to whether the part of Salah 
the late comer performs with the Imam should be reckoned as his initial 
Rak’ah or the final ones. The truth, however, is that these are to be reckoned 
as his initial Rak’ah. And Allah knows best. 

776. it was narrated from Abu 
Sa’eed Al-Khudri that he heard 
the Messenger of Allah #€ say: 
‘Shall I not tell you of something 
by means of which Allah expiates 
for sins and increases good 
deeds?’ They said: ‘Yes, O 
Messenger of Allah.’ He said: 
‘Performing ablution properly"! 
despite difficulties, increasing the 
number of steps one takes 
towards the mosque and waiting 

4 
4 5G ASE Setcad 
555 costal Be eg b3it ep 706 

e 
Cy 
5: 
Q& 
ome 

1] See nos. 280, 426, and 427, and this narration preceded under the last of them. 

Mosques And The Congregations 

for the next prayer after prayer.’ 
(Hasan) 

506 lelessdlg tele! lei 

ae: eye a ae ae 
Bad BA Sib celal cal desc! 
GRA) 

4 8) ge ple gl ge Vitel ei [wel] tyes 

777. It was narrated that 
‘Abdullah said: “Whoever would 
like to meet Allah tomorrow (i.e. 
on the Day of Judgment) as a 
Muslim, let him preserve these 
five (daily) prayer when the call 
for them is given, for they are 
part of the ways of guidance, and 
Allah prescribed the ways of 
guidance to your Prophet #8. By 
Allah, if each of you prays in his 
house, you will have abandoned 
the Sunnah of your Prophet #¢, 
and if you abandon the Sunnah of 
your Prophet you will go astray. I 
remember when no one stayed 
behind from the prayer except a 

hypocrite who was known for his 

hypocrisy. I have seen a man 
coming supported by two others, 
until he joined the row (of 
worshippers). There is no man 
who purifies himself and does it 
well, and comes to the mosque 
and prays there, but for every 
step that he takes, Allah raises 
him in status one degree thereby, 
and takes away one of his sins.” 
(Hasan) 

“Z é 

Scns Gis. ih; 3) Atas Gis - vw 
’ - ae oo “Ze . tee to 
ell Ge thas Gos Foe cp! 
ale be gee Gl YF Gaal 
Les Ub ait ar ot the de cde 
comacl AGle Ve, Cle dat 
sili 32 be SEB he oe Ls 
igh Gs we SS Eh a Sp 
a tee§ ee a Se eA EET o-fe 
5S 68S od be ARS OF ees tals 
aM al 4S EE neaes Sig ees ee 
BEY Ge Gis uy Bh i; 
we eyed Ae, Fake Bee op, a Foe 
ym Sle Jel Culp tay «ales ezine 
ie 8 BY LS 

SB plne op pablaly 4 palal Gale ye YAY [Videod an et [yee] teed 
EVOCEVE/Videel ce BY! oy de an gy cobs Gedigll 3 LS dete! Cine 

Comments: 

a. In ‘Abdullah bin Mas’ud’s estimation, a true Muslim is one that regularly 
attends congregational prayers. It means that a defaulter, when he is called 
before Allah on the Day of Resurrection after death, will not come as one of 

the Musiims. 

Mosques And The Congregations 507 

cilelecsig A> Laall lol 

b. If the Sunnah of congregational prayers is abandoned, there will be nothing 
left to distinguish between the comununities of believers and non-believers. 

c. The keenness exhibited by the Companions to attend the congregational 
prayers shows that they did not think it permissible to miss the 
congregational prayers without a valid reason. That is why even a sick 
man, unable to walk by himself, would come supported by others to the 

mosque but would not pray at home. 

778. It was narrated that Abu 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The 
Messenger of Alléh #§ said: 
“Whoever leaves his house for the 
prayer and says: ‘Alléhumma inni 
asa'luka bi-hagqis-sa’ilina ‘alaika, wa 
as‘aluka bi-haqgi mamshdya hadha, 
fa innit lam akhruj asharan wa ld 
batran, wa la riyd’an, wa la 
sum‘atan, wa kharajtu-ttiqa’a 
sukhtika wabtighd’a mardiatika, 
fa’s‘aluka an tu‘idhani minan-néri 
wa an taghfira li dhunubi, Innahu la 
yaghfirudh-dhunuba ila Anta. (O 
Allah, I ask You by the right that 
those who ask of You have over 
You, and J] ask You by virtue of 
this walking of mine, for I am not 
going out because of pride or 
vanity, or to show off or make a 
reputation, rather I am going out 
because I fear Your wrath and 
seek Your pleasure. So I ask You 
to protect me from the Fire and to 
forgive me my sins, for no one 
can forgive sins except You),’ 
Allah will turn His Face towards 
him and seventy thousand angels 
will pray for his forgiveness.” 

(Dai‘f) 

(Asal gp Abe celinall prbine dll Ms 

clin lS 

779. It was narrated that Abu 

re a 23 feed 

tA Gf kee GP Lome Gas - YVA 
Bodhi 3 jad Bhs bead oly) 
ie dy U bas Gs sel 
36 db & pidel hance gl oe the 
Jl i be GF a a 3525 
oy Jif | PAU eS ESS A 

fda glass Joy Bitels tiele Sts 
ar sy Vg Lhe Vy 14 Ad # 
Hit Ghes sl 22565 chats 
Ar . Sa mee Sf MG .ae33 

Gyre sll Jus [hepren os liwsf] eps 
Ga gobl op fedly cSsi ye cp heeds Vie 

BE of dee 3b dai Gis - v4 

Mosques And The Congregations 508 walelecsdlg tm lmal! aul gui 

Hurairah said: “The Messenger of en es os be alte nae se - og 
Allah 28 said: ‘Those who walk to! cae ca ee Be sce 
the mosque in the dark are those ngs ida JE ‘ oe Late] ¢ ail5 
who are diving into the mercy of | |, ¢ Je e 
Allah.” (Dai’f) “8 og! o ale J ae Z 

we) ere ate «lls Bb drt 

ecae 

Ma L-5 

cAband (gle I yroel aloyl Coane otinl hia 1G mo gdl Shy Let colin] ees 
» Ae bbs sYOOle Pk ble line op A sSly 

780. It was narrated. that Sahl bin : dlahi wore by ootlel Gs — VAs 
Sa‘d As-Sa‘idi said: “The Coe ee A Slee 

Messenger of Allah #§ said: ‘Give oa “34 sybedl Set oe 
glad tidings, to those who walk to 6 ool ie cdeoessll sss nee erage 

‘ f2 
the mosques in the dark, of perfect 47; _- es : 
light on the Day of Resurrection.’”” a 7JG a Jeli yas on Je if 
(Hasan) pelt a a slash pe ME di) 5425 

raat 638 6G yo ete 
4 cglodl ge doen SEMI PWT lags il ol Lone ooliwl] oe ost 
spel faye ge dp, Y ated Stedly bAog > cpl y ¢ glasell ay ill 
Comments: 
At one of the stages on the Day of Resurrection pitched darkness shall 
envelop all men. In that situation the believers shall be aided in their walk 
ahead by the light of their good deeds. The disbelievers shall be shorn of 
this light. The hypocrites shall get some light initially only to be deprived of 
it after a few steps. Among the deeds that would help bring this light to the 
believers would be the fact that they had not allowed the darkness of the 
night to make them stay away from congregational as el 

781. It was narrated that Anas ciivl oo Sat 23 ies Ws - vai 
bin Malik said: “The Messenger of o, 4. 3 ar, oe ae es 
Allah # said: “Give glad tidings, 0 ¢f oll Gis dh ot Sy 
to those who walk to the mosques ws tg oath Gule te Le 
in the dark, of perfect light on the oe - ; ag oa ees ae & : 
Day of Resurrection.’ (Hasan) po) RB atl dpe Se db a 

Pt 2k delat J plist 2 Spflbedt 

Mosques And The Congregations 

509 alelasetig de lanall wilgul 

ages 6 dale GuI) Gately cypiet obaliy Jagex glall ie Lope] er Beael 

Chapter 15. The Greater The 
Distance From The Mosque, 
The Greater The Reward 

782. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Meéssenger of 
Allah #€ said: ‘The greater the 
distance from the mosque, the 
greater the reward.’” (Hasan) 

> hse xl 
jo aN G AGN Sy = C0 penal) 
(ro dati) 1 ABET yah 

“te 2p 

nes S28 gl & SX ol Gis = var 
PEW AS ed ol ol oF QS 
Nw 286 a Jo85 38 236 a LI 
ere doe) a 2 ANG 

“ 

cgheall cote! ad J ele GL cijLall ate ae 1 [eyance aokivel] Feo baeel 
gaily ¢pStodl Ades § 6 WSS el pl Cyde cys ong 

Comments: 

a: In it is motivation for those who live at a distance from mosque, to attend 

the congregational prayers. 

b. Subjecting oneself to unnecessary hardship is not thé demand of Shari’ah. 
But the ease that the Shari‘ah gives us doés not mean open licence for 
laziness and inaction. What we must d6 is remain clear of all extremes anid 

tread the middle path. 

783. lt was narrated that Ubayy 
bin Ka‘b said: “There was a man 
among the Ansdr whose house 
was the furthest house in Al- 
Madinah, yet he never missed 
prayer with the Messenger of 
Allah #8. I felt sorry for him and 
said: “O so-and-so, why do you 
not buy a donkey to spare 
yourself the heat of the scorching 
sand, to carry you over the stony 
ground, and keep you away from 
the vermin on the ground?’ He 
said: ‘By Allah! I do not want to 
live so close to Muhammad #6.’ 
This troubled me until I came to 
the house of the Prophet #¢ and 

fo SEI ‘ bs N aie, ae ss 
Ede A) Ce dG oe al Jd 

Ag [ie ae ath gf 158g 
FA Seals SGN Gy ES Gat 
oye a fale cdg geod! 
Se 4 Rave cd ee aes rene) 
Sis £555 ge obi Lest Est 

Mosques And The Congregations 510 crlelosells tm bimal) il gui 

mentioned that to him. He called se Late cyl ae 8-2 ties Eg 
(the man) and asked him, and he Bl 3585 cs a gee eles Gl 
said something similar, and said Sp Me ds dats je og l ae ae 
that he was hoping for the reward ° Sea 

for his steps. The Messenger of AEE Ue MS 
Allah #€ said, ‘You will have that 
(reward) that you sought.’”’ 
(Sahih) 

Sede ge VUNG cde lenedd df Uns 225 fab ol cderlnell cline axel tee oe 
74s 6 ne 9 ole 

Comments: 

a. How keen the Companions were to do the deeds of piety and virtue! This 
incident is but a smail example of how the Companions used to bear all the 
hardship of the path, and walked a long distance to reach the mosque in 
order to get more reward from Allah. 

b. Sincerity towards brethren-in-faith demands that we give them good 

advice, even though we are not asked to. 

c. If a complaint is brought forward against a person, no adverse opinion 
should be formed without investigation against him. The best thing to do is 
to ask the person concerned himself what he meant by the ‘improper 
words’ purportedly spoken by him. 

d. A good intention by a believer merits. reward from Allah. 

784. It was narrated that Anas 7) A252 « 63 I Bas VAS 
id: “B Salimah d zs rave 
said: “Banu Salimah wanted to Kae, a ane Cane < Sa 
move from their homes to “Ss ae sal 
somewhere near the mosque, but SR Bere | Pant a ee ° 
wars ats ee gk ey 
the Prophet # did not want the NF Gainey, Sn cs, Seats 
outskirts of Al-Madinah to be left 9 ree of Adee ol ale 
vacant, so he said: ‘O Banu Bach Go if ae 136 ed metal 
Salimah, do you not hope for the 7 ae ie is 

reward of your footsteps” So they "534 § sede Vi Mike 33 sé 
stayed (where they were).’’ ; ee 
(Sahih) 

ce YAAY 61OT 0072 GEV Gl Ob COBY egubdi evel tease 
Wore dee Led I UaseSI as bad wh die Lnedl © plane dos dal gt ag ou door Cyt> 
Ones 
Comments: 
a. The Prophet #@ forbade them to move to a residence near the mosque in 
order that the outskirts of the city remain well protected from sudden 
attacks by the enemy. 

Mosques And The Congregations 

511 waleloss!g web!) ilaul 

b. Attending the congregational prayers is a must even for those who live at a 
distance from the mosque, or else the Prophet #¢ would have allowed them 

to pray at home. 

785. It was narrated that Ibn 
‘Abbas said: “The houses of the 
Ansar were far from the mosque 
and they wanted to move closer. 
Then the following Verse was 
revealed: ‘We record that which 
they send before (them), and their 
traces.’”') He said: So they 
remained (where they were).”’ 
(Hasan) 

2 wie 

:@S5 IS syle bs ile Ble ~ vae 
Eke $e tly be «dage Bis 
AMA foe | Ree Came le ofl oF 
(3 Aa BT 1356 teeth y rie 
S85 WEG HeGy seis 

AgS Prat 

Mines (bad olinny 0h) L5l pe) Cader yt peal oS gue oil eel Lyd eee 

«SB cgiphll ce 5 cine ol 
gle SI ce hs 6A eS ce & cal ons caljdls 60: 

Comments: 

aay aly carded Wie « pails 6 Gon? gl 
Co tpklne tie Aalst Contos, 
OVD aay 

For people endowed with firm determination it is better to live at a distance 
from the mosque. But for the people who do not take the mosque so 
devoutly, it is better to live close to the mosque, so that they are not 

tempted to miss their enjoined duty. 

Chapter 16. The Virtue Of 
Prayer In Congregation 

786. It was narrated that Abu 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 
Allah #¢ said: ‘A man’s prayer in 
congregation is twenty-some 
levels higher than his prayer in 
his house or in the marketplace.’” 
(Sahih) 

BU bab SE - 14 eld 
(11 dined!) doe 

ol &: oS ff Gs - van 
igs a be nt ye igi ei 
8 dv ds IE 2d ak eeue 
She Je dai dele 3 Be ES a) 
fates le be 3 25 oh 3 

eer) 

Mey 

vad “47 
“Ze i 

NES 

tabs ofVV: z Bg! dreams ea: 3 gleall ek 63 yheall tegabindl ae ol Fer Saeel 

a Ar gles call Cade oy TE4: ae cell . 

1 yg Sin 36:12. 

» BASS ley deladi ili (bed el cde lil! 

Mosques And The Congregations 512 ule lecs 9 tr bumall Ql gai 

. Vwaties 5 Y glae 

Comments: 

a. The timespan allowed to us to act in this world is very limited. It is Allah’s 
special favor that He bestows great reward over some of our good deeds. 
We must take advantage of this act of mercy and try to be regular in 
attending the congregational prayers, in order to win greater reward from 
Allah. 

b. The Arabic expression Bid’ (over ‘Ishrin, ie, twenty) used in the Hadith 
means any number between three to nine. Its precise definition appears in 
the ensuing Ahdadith that contain the words ‘twenty-five times’ and ‘twenty- 
seven times’. 

c. The numbers mentioned in the Ahddith mean the upper limit of reward for 
the specified acts. Thus, if the level of submissiveness, devotion, and 
tranquility on the part of the devotee is less, the reward will also be less. 

go AGS 

787. It was harrated from Abu Oleee o oma alge P| Gis - VAY 
Hurairah that the Messenger of “og oe tt ly he sack] 
Allah 2% said: “The prayer in Of) OF SOX Ot petly, Se lel 
congregation is twenty-five times _,j LE 6 Saat cp ee BE told 
more virtuous than the prayer of 3, . De See he. cues Tee Ck 
anyone of you on his own.” Jj? JG ME i d425 Ol TES 
(Sahih) Sats tidy pus) Me fe wisi 
Wie Sse 
CEVIVI GC  Bygcte OLS sei OLS OL AS OL cpl Qed el tages 
SAB ye Gb op apes VERE Teal - 2. acl Solos ded cal ode Lived blames 

788. It was narrated that Abu ra eerie i Gis -— VAA 
Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “The ce ems ee bet eae 
Messenger of Allah #% said: ‘The 2 42 SF (Qe & She be hy 
prayer of aman incongregationis 4 { 

twenty-five levels higher than his 

* 

prayer in his home.’” (Sahih) tele "3 eo Shs RE I 525 

isha MN tall Gab B eb Ob ala oybyl eel [Qeeel igidd 

«hls ipStedls 6Ol> ey! dowry 64s Aaglee og | ern ee cy OVE 

789. It was narrated that Ibn = 24225 jae 3) eri de Gas - va4 
‘Umar said: “The Messenger of 

Mosques And The Congregations 513 alslessdss totes! woloul 

Allah #@ said: “The prayer of a ,, 
man in congregation is twenty- ~ 
seven levels more virtuous thana Jj 

man’s prayer on his own.” & . sei Sen err ee 
(Sahih) BLS B frst shen 2R6 bl J 525 
ey SEG EN Me fe Lak 
E58 Gu phes 
Calon ge Wie ell. delegll agle fad Ob celal celee enol reese 
Comments: 

We have Ahddith that speak of twenty-five times the reward and Ahédith 
that speak of twenty-seven times the reward for performing prayers in 
congregation. Scholars have opined that the difference relates to an increase 
or decrease in the level of adherence to the norms and rules, as. well as the 
degree of submissiveness in prayers exhibited by the worshipper. 

790. It was narrated that Ubayy 
bin Ka‘b said: “The Messenger of : - 
Allah 2% said: ‘The prayer of a «GL&4] 2! 
man in congregation is higher. - ’ 

fo “qe acc 
easer one bos XS 
j 

ea oy ag ee Sr 

than his prayer on his own by OO PE NS ed me tee Or 
twenty-four or twenty-five i J,25 JU :JB USS AN EF cal 
els,” atk Cee Naan ‘i 
levels.” (Hasan) if BUS ea er 8 
Lis af inpbes isi M85 JEN is 

eae. 

- dors jnytes 
or CLC elerdl gle Yad B Ob cial ybyl el pol cass 
pt) only cone Gils Ole only chee ys! owesy cy Goel al ge Lat Ge 

4 Bleeul cal ye dad Cade Ge MEE ¢slulll sol Cpr es cally 

Chapter 17. Severe Warning et SLE OG ~ QV arated 
Against Missing Prayer In OV does!) rare Firs 44 
Congregation : oF 

791. It was narrated that ae Hc ee fa & fe 

- Tad g 1 Usae - V4 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of oe oad a : j 
Allah #% said: ‘I was thinking of gle Ate MEY! of cAislet rel 
commanding that the call to i 14.25 a OE ed fitz 
prayer be given, then I would tell ~** BN lg) °F os! OF 
a man to lead the people in i “s «pls all I 3h nea Sap 

Mosques And The Congregations 514 wulelecsig tole! wilgal 

prayer, then I would go out with 4... ra fy te Spee 
some other men eee bundles Me diy Gibll 5 agai Glas He 
of wood, and go to people who BNE 5 95g35 es cal bs iy ae 
do not attend the prayer, and ae , 
burn their houses down around eas me OP 
them.’”” (Sahih) 

ce O8Ate cdeled! SS od kt Ob iid weysel eet Leereve] 2 ee oss 
Cline CVOV Ee ga Gesls 64 yee YI of ade Gite Sade s9 6a XU gle all Cydo 
10) a 

Comments: 

a. It shows that attending the prayer in congregation is an enjoined duty for 
men; no such warning or threat of punishment has been mentioned for 
missing the voluntary prayers. 

b. It is allowed to raid the the houses of culprits and force them out of their 
homes without prior warning, or notice. 

792. It was narrated that Ibn (Gas 723 wl eB ss sl Gas - vay 

Umm Maktum said: “I said to the f ts 26 kel te ET ef 

Prophet #: ‘Iam anoldmanand “% eas Ee aE 

blind; my house is far away, and I call ae cdl eae ai ot! oF ae 

have no one to lead me. Is there o 

any concession (for me not to its « sl oe eee 5 el 6 

have to attend the prayer in the Siar) bys ded che were xa re 

mosque)?’ He said: ‘Can you hear eh ty ies ey pe ae 
id: ‘Yes.’ JG 555 Eds PEIN peed Jar dG 
the call?” I said: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘JU ps: Telus aond Jar 2d 

‘Then | do not find any ad), Bb dof tw 

concession for you.’” (Da‘if) 7 

oH pole E> ye OV 6 Gola] LI cBiglaall coylogl am ol [ripen oobi! ] ‘eps 

Comments: 

a. The Hadith underlines the importance of the prayer in congregation, so 
much so, that the Prophet #§ did not grant any sort of concession, even to 
Ibn Umm Maktum 4% although he was handicapped in several ways. 

b. The Prophet #¢ did not accept Ibn Umm Maktum’s request to allow him to 
stay away from the prayer in congregation, because he #8 wanted him to 
earn more and more reward in the Hereafter. His wish was to create an 
inducement in him for the congregational prayer although, as we know, a 
blind man who finds it difficult to attend the prayer in the mosque is 
allowed to perform it at home as it happened in the case of ‘Itban bin Malik 
& (Sunan Ibn Majah: 754). 

Mosques And The Congregations 515 cle lecetls Aorlimal! wil gsi 

793. It was narrated from {bn eae ai kW So yay 
‘Abbas that the Prophet # said: *~ = pos, Lathe ane : 
“Whoever hears the call and does i, cand 36 caida UGl : day l5SI 
not come, his prayer is not valid, ze 

on F ° 3 - es < oy vars 

except for those who have an S ‘2°7 yf Me OF SSE ght Ge 
excuse.” (Sahih) em fa? cd 5 tN ge le Gt 
fe WD Be sk FE ct 

«dd 

potas #4 Oly oy deerde Gude ge VUE Ole yl ol epee] ters 
bO0VIE crgls ul be I Gk ay ‘galls 6 pSlel! Amer? 9 teSbetl he glad Cre 
Cte rll 
Comments: aia 
The prayer being invalid either means that the prayer shall lose its full 
reward or that the blessing of Allah promised for a prayer in congregation 
shall be denied to it. 

794. Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Umar gf Gis :aint 2h tle as - vas 
narrated that they heard the det ee see ie ee et 
Prophet #€ say on his pulpit, of a2 of ‘GIF pene oe she 
“People should desist from failing ma Pees ike op ooh oe 65 eh 
to attend the congregations, = ©, ee" og a Oe 
otherwise Allah will seal their 88 Sl! Keo Gel He Gil 5 «le 
hearts, and then they will be Ae algal sce caalgsl Je dd 
among the negligent.” (Sahih) Soe thoes ‘ 
de it Sakd GF cctstic ty0is 
a edie cs, 82 Ded co 8 
KSBU Se HS GF cogs 
pedi Sudo cy AV0ie Ansar) 135 a BEWESI| wh -c dasa! ‘plns ae ol [ees 

Comments: 

a. Pointing out the mistake of a few before the assembly was intended to 
admonish others, and dissuade them from falling into that error. 

b. Pointing out the mistake of someone without naming him is designed to 
make him concerned, and realize his mistake without humiliating him. 

c. Some of the sins could be the cause of the hearts being sealed that would 
slam the door on reform in the future. 

d. Avoiding prayers in congregation is a huge sin, punishable by the sealing of 
the heart even in this world. 

795. it was narrated that Usimah — 2 14) jek 33 Buk Gas - va0 

bin Zaid said: “The Messenger of ~~ ey eee og 

Allah #6 said: ‘Let men desist gt! oF op G2 ijl Gar slg 

4 

Mosques And The Congregations 516 cle lecrsdlg ctor lematl malas! 

from failing to attend the 
congregation, otherwise I will 
burn their houses down.’ 
(Sahih) 

J Jal Qld dudes (fb) Gand ooldel [ermal : ge ee 

Chapter 18. Performing The eliall se ot — VA pacaadl) 
deka’ And Pepe Prayers Tn (TA tins) BLE 3b Fedllg 

Congregation 7 
796.’Aishah said: “The galzl 3 gel we Gas - van 
Messenger of Allah 8 said: ‘If the Ate, pes 8 ed 
people knew what (reward) there gat of ag el ee 
is in the ‘Isha’ prayer and Fajr : 26 Gl 3 os Ge :4elisi 

prayer, they would come even if he. Legit Be deer xe 
they had to crawl.’” (Sahih) er cal oe com ce hase gle 

ui 2h ols r 1 ai nee 3 

: LAST «dull 25 obhelt us 
gs 

cal on gee Sele oe FAVE ge 66S Uo sll al [eegran oalivsl Fe S aoa 
ar geees 

Comments: 

a. “If the people knew: what there is’ is the literal translation of the Arabic 
words. of Hadith. The ‘what’ here means the reward and the blessings 
promised by Allah for the worshippers. 

b. Reward and blessings in question have only been promised for prayers 
performed in congregation. 

797. It was narrated that Abu ff 13 Lis XS gf Gs - vav 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of ; Bee Pe ae 
Allah #8 said: ‘The most «ale gi GF «ner dl of ‘tigla yl 
burdensome prayers for the # 

hypocrites are the ‘Isha’ prayerand =~ se HN yi Jb 206 EA J of 

the Fajr prayer. If only they knew - Lisl ie Gwe Je Sal Jal bp 

what (reward) there is in them, eR to G28 oc 
they would come to them even if Lasy tegd 1 Ogek a 3 4 ail \ 25 
they. had to crawl.’ (Sahih) hee ree 3 5. 

Mosques And The Congregations 517 le lass! 9 se lemes! oul gil 

veal wee AES! Olay de lane! tsk pai wh ctelidd| 6 lane tor >| ters 
4 T tebe yo V04: 
Comments: PRR Pinon sare 
a. ‘Isha’ and Fajr prayers are most burdensome for the hypocrites, because 
they are quite demanding physically and, in order to perform them in 
congregation, one has to strive against oneself. 
b. Anyone who performs these prayers with fondness and punctuality, 
practically proves that he is free from hypocrisy. 
c. The more burdensome an act of devotion, the more reward would it fetch 
from Allah provided that it does not go against the Sunnah of the Prophet 
798. It was narrated from ‘Umar (is :ig ol me jude Gas - van 
bin Khattab that the Prophet 2% i 28 oa mn 
used to say: “Whoever performs [456] o slab LB «ple o che acti 
prayer in congregation at the é vib e ee be od e gil he 
mosque for forty nights, never ae 
missing the first Ra’kah of the she ia de OS 2 we gah oF 
‘Isha’ prayer, Allah will thereb on ae ae ae ” 
bral him salvation from mi “en A ey instil anand oo 
Fire.” (Da‘if) itl CS cothall Se be AA sa 

ON Se lide & 

cS bly 6 ath oly KS T Ayu gd Bybee Smeg) Ss Teter oalieef] : or 
ol ad 

Comments: 

a. ‘Forty nights’ means (prayers performed for) a continuous period of forty 
days and nights. 

b. Performing the prayers in congregation for forty days on end by a person, 
will have the effect of making him used to it, and enables him to continue 
with it on a regular basis which, in turn, would earn him Allah’s pleasure 
and salvation from Fire. 

t ee 
Chapter 19. Staying In The Joli! » 93) SE - O14 panes) 
Mosques And Awaiting The : ne ae ee 
Prayer (14 del) Sad alas! 

4 

799. It was narrated that Abu (Gas 33 wl jy a gi Gs - va4 
Hurairah said: “The Messenger of 2 
Allah # said: ‘When one of you te le @ i as <a Ss Hg 9 
enters the mosque, he is in a state i a Re Sale 100 Geos ‘dl 
of prayer, so long as the prayer ’ ; 4 
keeps him there, and the angels of cdot ES hy sae! of 

ee 

Mosques And The Congregations 518 

will send prayer upon anyone of 
you so long as he remains in the 
place where he prayed, saying: 
“© Allah, forgive him; O Allah, 
have mercy on him; O Allah, 
accept his repentance,” so long as 
he does not commit Hadath nor 
disturb anyone.’”’ (Sahih) 

cutclerst!s tm leal! ilo 

Ky Ass a cls i ae 
call alse G76 ach Je isha 
coh <a) He ce he 4d he 
sd asd SG cathe CF Gh das 

are 

we! Cate gy EVV: ra 6 geod) dome gi 5 pluall wh sighall 6S peed art: ‘eps 

Comments: ro oe 

a. We must reach the mosque well before the prayer begins so that we are 
able to perform the Sunnah and voluntary prayers, or earn reward from 
Allah by His remembrance or the recitation of the Noble Qur’an. 

b. Waiting for the start of the obligatory prayer in the mosque fetches as much 
reward as for the performance of it. Recitation of Allah’s Names and 
praises, and the performing of voluntary prayers in the mean time can 
bring us additional reward. 

c. It is extremely rewarding to continue to sit reciting the Names and praises 
of Allah at the same place after the completion of the obligatory prayer. 

d. (i) ‘So long as he does not disturb anyone’ has also been taken to mean that, 
as long as he does not affront any worshipper by uttering improper words. 
(ii) ‘Committing Hadath’ could mean the passing of the wind which, if done 
in the mosque, could cause discomfort to the worshippers. And Allah 
knows best. 

800. It was narrated from Abu te int fte be Hee 

Hurairah that the Prophet #€ said: sg i go a ees 

“A Muslim does not regularly «pall 5 

attend the mosques to perform 5 eee fitz ees ft Bes 

prayer and remember Allah, but O° ‘°** S a ee al 

Allah feels happy with him just as we :JG Be 25 

the family pak who is ibn: ee « oo rs ie igs “ 

feels happy when he comes back 4 i) GAS iT «Sig SAU dela 
to them.” Gala) ; 38 (5 pes OS sti jal Oaks 

2. & so xte 2s 
i ca! ol Gus :ate 

va Cee 

gil 
onl ene 6 OB cal pl ge WESC Cpdlbll an ot [pee tel] ogy sd 
- galls AY /S: pels oVUeV: ‘a (ole YN) Ole ols clouy: C $e 
Comments: 
Allah’s feeling happy or unhappy is one of the attributes of Allah. The 

unanimous view of the pious predecessors regarding the attributes of Allah 
is that we believe in them as they are mentioned in the Qur’an and Ahédith 

Mosques And The Congregations 519 erlelasallg ne lematl il gui 

without either denying them or twisting their meaning, or giving them 
resemblance to any of the created things. 

7 o - bt Seok eee 2 
801. 1t was narrated that ‘dsl dae Gp to! Bae - Avy 

‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said: “We =: 2 4)#2 ieee tt oe one ae 
performed the Maghrib (prayer) po Say “se Pe 
with the Messenger of Allah #, <7 ail 4 
then those who went back went gz. 
back, and those who stayed, A 
stayed. Then the Messenger of 
Allah #€ came back in a hurry, BOP OL oe ee pe Mite. Bae ae 
out of breath, with his garment ~ ‘¥~ BB Bl 32) Hed as 
pulled up to his knees, and said: JS cca 5at 
‘Be of good cheer, for your Lord eg ee eee EE Pa 
lal fe GG AB B65 Ge yj ath 

has opened one of the gates of 
heaven and is boasting of you ty sbash = 98s  AKISLCH Xs cals aes 
before the angels, saying: “Look ane . 

Bb gate J 

at My slaves; they have fulfilled S585 (a3 
45535 

wred ae wpe Se 
cas) Of oe Abs 

tas (yas 

one obligatory duty and are : 

awaiting another.” (Sahih) 

6 debe cy alee Sete tye VAVOVAT/Yi teed ae ol Teepe saliul] Fortra) 

Lagrd ortiuly CYOA/Y idan! te wale dy carol nb dle by cig meogll omnes 

Comments: 

a. Staying back in the mosque awaiting the prayer is an act of great virtue. 

b. Man’s knee is not the part of body which it is unlawful to expose before 
others. 

c. Allah the Glorified, communicates such things to the angels because it was 
they who had remarked that man will make mischief and shed blood on the 
earth. 

802. It was narrated from Abu éh Jat y GIs 1455 gil 

Sa’eed that the Messenger of 
Allah #@ said: “If you see a man 
frequenting the mosques, then 
bear witness to his faith. Allah 
says: ‘The mosques of Allah shall 
be maintained only by those who 
believe in Allah and the Last 
Day.” (Da‘if) 

" At Taubah 9:18. 

or o ° 

(ql GF edytell gf ane bo ys 
JH5 2b odes ol M6 hdl Of 32 
sey J a bp du me a 
i JG glayk J gh Socal 
Ge al Sgt SY 2 ts 
[VA hgh] G91 85 

“| 
eS
