THE 

ENGLISH EUCLIDE, 

PR BEING | 
The Firſt SIX ELEMENTS 
O F 
GEOMETRY. 

vp + 

ENGLISH EUCLIDE, 
BEING 
The Firſt SIX ELEMENTS 
OF 
EFKOMEFTRYL 
Tranſlated out of the GREEK, 

WITH 
Annotations and uſeful Supplements, 

By EDMUND SCARBURGH M. A. 
Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of BUCKINGHAMSHIRE L*Priyy Seal ; 
Prebendary of SARUM; 
And Rector of Uewsr in | the County ol of .DORSETT. 

Printed at the THEATER. 1705. 

4 a4 anger 4 

4 9 * * * 

— 

Imprimatur, 

GUIL. DEL AUNE, 

Vice-Can. Ox ov. 

Marti 2, 1705. 

GEORGE 

HEREDITARY PRINCE of 

| e * Genes _ Vous, ; 
ed Dor Or Wa 1 
— 22 Gen Denn pand oe, 
N EARL Or e 5 
allele. Delmanhorſt, and K 2 5 
% Baron of Wokingham ; „ 
Generalifſimo of All Her MaicſtiesForoes 

Lord High Admiral.of ENG La. 

AND 
Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the GaarEAH. 

DENMARK, N ORWAT, « 

May i it pleaſe Tor Rovar, Hjouness, 

HIS Piece was once intended for the S9 
vice of Her Majeſty, and Your Royal 
Highneſs in the Education of A Prince, 
which was then the Hope, and Joy, and 
Glory of the'Bri2þ Nation; on whole 
Character I would enlarge, but that I fear to touch 
Al a upon 

THE: DE DICAT-FO N. 

upog ſo Soft apd Tender a 4 wa whilſt 1 endea- 
vo ui to . Memory, I rene w Yout Grief, agd 
revive again the ſorrowful Image of THaT IX Ex. 
ol 11 THAATICNHAAH 
After which, the greateſt ſatisfaction I have taken 
in Compoſing, and Finiſhing this Work, hath been 
from my hopes of having 4 proper Opportunity of 
expreſſing to the World the high Eſteem, Reſpect, 
and Veneration I have for Tour Royal Highneſs. 

Your glorious Deeds of War, and mighty Atchiev- 
ments in the Field of Battle; a Brother Reſcued, and 
a Kingdom Sav'd, are Glories proper for another Pen. 

But Your wonderful 2 

1 and Courage in preſerving 
theſe Kingdoms, Your, entire Love to our Countrey, 
and unparallel d Affection for our moſt Excellent, and 
Glorious Queen, are Vertnes, and Merits, which none, 
that Love our Crown or Countrey, can conceal; and 

I am proud to have an Opportunity to joyn in the ge- 

| : 

neral Applauſe and Celebration of Them. 
By theſe Vertuous, and engaging Arts, GREAT 

PRINCE! You have won the Common and Univerſal 
Love and Eſteem of the whole Nation; which, how- 
ever Divided in other Matters, are yet Entirely One, 
and firmly United in their juſt Eſteem, and Honour for 
Your Princely Vertues, and Merits to their Countrey. 
It ſpeaks a mighty, and powerful Charm, Ges ar 
Sin, to Unite ſuch Divided Hearts; and nothing but 
Your incomparable Vertue, and Goodneſs, and thoſe 
infinite, Obligations Nou are ſtill laying upon our 

nogu 4 Countrey, 

THE DEDICATION. 
Countrey, could ever have eſtabliſhed ſuch an Univer: 
ſal Conſent and Agreement in the Hearts of a People, 
ſo little acquainted with the pleaſures of _ Either 
in Intereſt, or Meclin. bid do Ai 

Long may Lou ve GREAT Prince! vs com- 
mon Object of all our Praiſes, and of our Prayers to 
Almighty God for the [Preſervation of ſo! valuable 2 
Life. How dear it is to us hath already publickly ap- 
peared in the Solemn Prayers and Supplications of Our 
Church, and is daily acknowledged in ſecret by the 
private Interceſſions of Many, who earneſtly beg of 
God to continue ſo Bright and Illuſtrious an Example of 
Vertue and Goodneſs amongſt us; and preſerve to an 
Age, that hath ſo few of them, the Incomparable Pat- 
tern of THE BEST or HusBanDs, THE BEST 
Or MAsrERS, and Taz Brsr Or Fries. 

A Character of Your Royal Highneſs which all Men 
do profeſſedly agree in, and of which our Family in 
particular have had the Cleareſt and the Nobleſt De- 
monſtrations, having long had the Honour and Hap- 
pineſs to attend Your Royal Highneſs, and be Eye-wit- 
neſſes of thoſe Vertues, which others Admire and Ce- 
lebrate at a diſtance. 

How unable I am, GREAT SIR! to do Juſtice to 
Your Illuſtrious Character is ſufficiently ſeen in the 
poor Attempt I have already made: but J humbly beg 
leave to aſſure Your Royal Highng/s that no Man hath a 
truer, or greater Zeal for Your Glory and Hanour; no 
Man hath a juſter Reſpe&t, and Veneration for Your 

a 2 Perſon, 

THE DEDIOGATION. 
Pana, hor does any Man ſend up more Ardent Suppli- 
catiotis to Heaven for the Enereaſe of Your Health, 
and long Continuance of THAT IM TOR tant, and 
BELOVED LIE, on which the Joy, and Glory of 
TE BEST Oy QukENS, The Happineſs of Her 

Reign and the Proſperity of Her People do ſo much 

Depend In — Man Licteuor him bo 
is, GAE AT PAIN ck, c 

Ci 1 . 10 
8 # E aw E Þ > WP TIM - 
144 a 011 e DIR 135 ALOHA SOTO 
: 
* W * = 
£% » er £ * . 9 "oh h 2 L 4 1 4 , 7 7 8 ” ” \ | ” £4 p k i 4 "x Tr 2-3 
113 AST FS 15 14 I Lt 4A 1114 42 i $3 Hs N p #1 
N 1 

a 9d eee e as 0 en gen 
| 10 21 re 36 egorriglhI bas gige 29 1 
3.0 1 Your Nee 80 

seno or mer lo . 
an E * 
Wc . Moſt Obedient, 
analy Hs dion _ Weeds 110 [ 

at Wicas 0 foil lo Ns C11. 9% 

=) 14 doi wn br 280 © Moſt Faithful, 
06H brig toni: 8, 
| | NW 9d bas Aon. 
| "in | 41 0 humble Servant, 

W ' + EDMUND SCARBURGH. 

WW ONG Prefaces how pleaſing ſoe ver to the Writer's own 
| humour, who is very apt to be favourable to his own Pro. 

duftions , yet are ſeldom agreeable to his Readers: nor 
can all his Courteſy , In/muation, and affefed ſtudy to pleaſe 
and invite, make any tolerable amends for the tedious and un- 
grateful Fatigue. eee - 

If the Piece be well perform'd, and anſwers the deſygn and in- 
tention of it, the Reader is uneaſy to be detain d from its peruſal; 
if it be not, all the plauſible Pretences and Excuſes in the World 
will never recommend it to the Approbation of a Man of Taſte 
and Judgement. N. id AF 

It were very eaſy to run out, and Haranzue the Reader in com. 
mendation of this Excellent Study, ſo highly celebrated by the An- 
cients, and ſo much in the Eſteem and Faſhion of the Age we live 
in: But this is a deſign that the bel Wits of every Age have per- 
form d to admiration, and have left no colours for any new Pre. 
tender to adorn it with; therefore waving any attempt of that 
Nature, and all the cuſtomary Modes of Formal and Ceremonious 
Apologyes, I. ſhall apply my ſelf to inform the Reader, that ſhall 
pleaſe to peruſe it, What he may exſpec?, and What he will find to 
his ſatisfaction in this following Work. 

Firſt, A plain, but I hope a juſt and exact Tranſlation from the 
Original into Our Mother Tongue, without neglecting too much 
the Turn and Idiom of the Language it was at firſt written in. 

Secondly , He will find Such Illuſtrations for the benefit of 
Younger Students, and Such Annotations annext to the moſi af. 
ficult Places, as may ſerve to clear the Authors Senſe, and explain 
it to the Capacity of the meaneſt Reader, that is never ſo little con. 
verſant in theſe Studies. . | 

Thirdly, and laſtly, He Twill ſee Our Author, The Great and 
Noble Elementator himſeſ, Vindicated from the many caption: 

b and 

THE PREFACE. 

and unreaſonable Obiections brought againſt Him by ſame Severe, 
and over Critical Commentators. 

VI have performd This, I have my deſire in Compleating 
avid Publiſhing a WoRKk, which was deſn d, and begun many 
years ago at the'Command of my much Honoured FATRHER, 
and THaT ILLUSTRIOUS PRELATE, the late Lord Bisnop 
Or SaruM. A Prelate whoſe Piety, Charity, Hoſpitality, Friend- 
ſhip, and Wonderful Attainments as well in the Politer Arts, as 
Deeper Searches in Divinity, made HIM ONE of the Glories of his 
time, who hath deriv'd a laſting Honour on THAT SEE, and left 
a moſt incomparable Example of Charity and Munificence, 70 
all his Reverend Succe ſors in That Church. A PRELATE whoſe 
Memory will be for ever BLESSED, not only in his on Drceſs, 
but wherever Piety, and Learning, and ſweetneſs of Converſation 
have any Name, and whoſe Authortty, I dare promiſe my ſet, 
will not a little recommend this U ndertaking to the World. For 
tho' his Lordſbip did not live to ſee it finſbed, yet He, in his per- 
Jef Health, highty approvd the De/xgn, and laiu his earneſt Com. 
- mands upon me 10 Compleat it. 

Mx FATHER, hoſe! name (1 preſume) is not the leaſt in the 
Regiſter of Men Learned, and Famous in theſe Studies, liud to 
have the peruſal, and Correction of the greateſt part of this Work, 
which may in ſome meaſure recommend it to the judicious Reader, 
and vindicate the Piece from the imputation of being a Com mon, 
and Uſeleſs Performance, He had the honour in his Life time to 
have the Arquaintance, and Converſation of the mot Celebrated 
Maſters of theſe Sciences, and had made ſo Large, and early an All. 
vance, and Progreſs in theſe Studies, as to deſerve that kind and 
honourable CharaGer from the Learned and Judicious M Ough- 
thred in bis Preface to his Clavis Math. © {4 Man, ſays He, of a 
* pleaſant and obligeing Temper and Converſation , of a piercing 
Mit, and penetrating Judgement; ſo admirably verſed in Ma- 
« thematical Studies, and of ſo happy and ſtrong a Memory wit hal, 
« that he was able upon any occaſiom to Repeat, and Apply every 
e Propoſition in Euclide, Archimedes, and ſeveral other Ancient 
« Maſters in theſe Studies." A Character, which not only ſpeaks 
the bigh Eſteem that excellent Author had of Him; but ſbews 

5 4 HIM 

THE PREFACE. 
HIM Zlewiſe to be no improper Perſon, upon whoſe Authority, 
and Direction, a performance of this nature might be undertaken. 

But neither did He live to ſee it finiſbd; For my many concerns, 
and unavoidable Avocations, kept me many years from purſuing 
This Work: zi at laſt 1 had a very fair Proſpect of making it 
ſerviceable to the Ever to be Lamented Duxe of GLocksrERR, 
Whoſe Death put an Other, and almoſt Final flop to this Mort; 
till being more at leiſure, and continually tirr d up by the remem- 
brance of thoſe Worthy and Excellent Perfons, that had recom- 
mended the Compleating of it, I reſolud to go thro', and Publiſh 
it to the World, having at the ſame time the Encouragement, and 
Recommendation of the The GREAT IY WALL1s, and his Learn- 
ed Friend the WokTHy D GREGORY; Men whoſe very names 
are of Virtue to keep the Work from bluſhing, and not only ſbelter 
it from Cenſure, but Recommend it to the Approbation of «Men 
of Judgement. 

For the Firſt was undoubtedly Tye GREATEST MASTER 
THis SCIENCE, that hath appear d in any of theſe later pes; 
The honour of Our Countrey, and Admiratiom of Others, whoſe 
Chara@er can never. be more full, or lively expreſſed than in that 
juſt and excellent deſcription of Him by the Learned and Judicious 
M' Oughthred; © 4 Perſon ( /ays He) adornd with all ingenu- 
ce u, and excellent Arts, and Sciences; Pious and Induſtrious, of 
A deep and diffuſrve Learning, and an accurate Judgement in all 
«* Mathematical Studies, and Happy and Succeſsful to Admiration 
in Decyphering the moſt difficult and intricate Writings.” Which 
Was indeed his Peculiar Honour, and the greateſt Argument of a 
moſt ſubtle and ſearching Wit and Judgement. 

£ for the Latter, The Learned Profeſſor of Aſtronomy, as He 
wants no Commendation to the Preſent, ſo will He not fail to 
leave a Noble and Laſting Character 10 future Ages, and Live for 
ever in his many learned Diſcoveries , and incomparable Perfor- 
mances in ASTRONOMY. 

b 2 An 

3 

KT: 

An Index of the Authors mention'd in the Annotations. 

Apollonius Pergzus. Marinus Gethaldus. a Plato. 

Archimedes. | Metius Adrian. Poſſidon ius. 

Benedictus Joh. Mydorgius. Proclus. 

Borellus. Nazaradinus. Hauer 

Bovillus. | Nicomedes. | acquet. 

Campanus. | | Orontius. Theon. 

Cicero. Oughthred. Vitellio. 

Clavius. I Pappus. | Wallis. 

Commandinus. Peletar ius. Zambertus. | 
Eutocius. | 

The Reader is deſir d to Correct theſe few Eſcapes of the Printer, 
| according to the following ER RAT A. 

Page 5. line 7. and elſewhere, for Extream, or Extreams read Extreme, or Extremes. p. 11. L 10. 7. Superficies. p. 45. 
J. 27. r. ABC. þ 48. & 30. r. Proportion. p. $3.4 11. for DH r. DG. p. 63.4. 38. r. Jeornxas, 
p. 66. l. 2 f. r. to DA, p. 68.4, 42. for ter. is, p. 8r. J. 32+ to ſtrait add line, 1 1. 1. to point add A. P. 88. L 
ee A 3 A 5 N p. 108. 4. 12. r. Parall. p. 110. J. 5. after ſub- 
tending 5. 181. J. 29. ſor diying r. dividing. p. 184. in hends dele 1. p. 186. l. 3. r. .. 204. 4. 18. r. of D. 
p. 214-4 12. lor. ee p. 224. l. 3. to hath add to. 4 : * 175 * 

THE 

—— 

—— 

THE FIRST 

ELEMENT. 
GEOMETRY 

D'EFINTF'O-N-S; 
OR 
Expoſitions of Geometrical Names, and 'Terms of Art. 

— 

DEFINITION I. 
\ Point is That of which there is no part. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

EUVCLIDE begins the Elements of Geometry in a true Elementary me- 
thod of Doctrine from the moſt ſimple Things, and Notions in Geometry to the 
more and more Compound. 

And becauſe itude the ſubject of Geometry hath not a Minimum to begin 
with, as Number hath an Unite, therefore nothing elſe could be more fimple in 
theſe Mathematical Speculations of Magnitudes, than firſt to put a Point as yoid 
of Magnitude. Which notwithſtanding is a proper beginning to enter into the 
preſent matter, as the firſt ſtep towards Geometry: and It is in ſome manner like 
to a Cypher in Arithmetic, which may be call'd an Arithmetical Point. 

The definition of a Point is plainly negative, and no otherwiſe informs us what 

a Point is, than by telling us what tis not. Yet in many Things that are in nature 
moſt ſimple Theſe kinds of Negative Definitions are ſufficiently inſtructive ; 
tho not to the Eſſence of the Thing defined, yet very well to the Uſe that is to 
de made thereof. 
So here a Point is defined by a negation of Parts. Which Definition in reſpect 
of Magnitude, That was next to be conſidered as diviſible into parts, is Inſtructive, 
or Preparatory to the right underſtanding of the Doctrine of Magnitudes ; and 
lays down what conception of a Point is hereafter uſed, or uſeful in Geometry, 
namely, To have no parts, Which is ſufficient for the preſent to a Geometrician. 
Let the Philoſophers diſpute further, as they pleaſe, about the reality of a Point, 
or the nature of an Atome. 

But now in the firſt place, we are to underſtand, that A Point made with a Pen 
or any other Inſtrument is but an imperfect, and groſs Notation of a Mathematical 
Point here defin'd by Euchide. Which is Ubſtracted from Matter, and (HG 
and only to be conceiv'd in the Mind. Yet thoſe kinds of material, viſible 
ante. a ads Sight, may be allowed for a Note of 
* a ma- 

| 

\ 

i 

1 
AJ 

1 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
a Mathematical point, which is the leaſt object of our Underſtanding in theſe 

And to go on with the name. PUNCTUM, A PoinT 1s among the Greeks 
* — N & TN. A Prict, Nate, or Mark, By Plato, Ariſtotle and other Phi- 
ophers, Znyn is taken in a ſtrict Geometrical ſenſe for an Indiuiſble Mark, or a 
Notation of an Indi ſile Thing, Which is the Tame with a Mathematical Point. But 

 Euclide names it moſt properly fue, A Stgne. That is, ſuch a Signe, as denotes 

in ſpace An Impartible Here, or There. 

Now ſpace is an Infinite, and Unmoyeable Diffuſion every way: ſuch as can af- 
ford a Locality to any one Thing without the Reſiſtency, or Ceſſion of any other. 
narram L ννν the Receptacle of all whatſoeyer is, or can be. Thus Virgil makes 
old Silettus ſing the Beginnings of Things. | an | . 

. Namgue canebat uti Magnum per Inane coaa 

Semina terrarumque, animæque, mariſque fuiſſent. 

Virgils Magnum Inane, that Immenſe, and Empty ſpace both the Philoſophers, and 
Mathematicians, put as the Primum Conceptibile, The Firſt Conceiveable in the . 
of Things. Call it ſpace Phyſical, or Mathematical. For we diſpute not here wit 
Democritus, and Epicurus, whether Space be a Thing in Nature diſtinct from Body 

ſited in Space. Only the Mathematician gives a Being to It, as in general ab- 
ftracted from any kind of Body, that may fill, or poſſeſs a Space. 

In this Univerſal Space A Point, or one is a certain Poſition without any Quantity. 

It is A Indivifible Ubz to be put at pleaſure any where. An Ub; Ubilubet. And be- 

cauſe whereſoever a Point be put, the ſame is conceived to be apgis, xa; addgeny, 
void of Parts, and Interval; therefore it is the moſt Simple, the Firſt, and Leaſt 
Thing imaginable in Space. MA du dugemirl F oyruv vow, ſays Proclus moſt 
acutely, A Point repreſents the Utmoſt nature of Things. That is, a Point is of 
a nature ſo Subtile, that it has the very Extremity of Being, or the Next to No- 

thing. So Lucretius, 
Pundtum fine partibus exſtat, 
E nininũ conſtat natur. 
But yet a Point hath ſuch a Being in Nature, how little ſoever it may ſeem, that 
from very many Inſtances it evidently ſnews it ſelf to Be. 

In the ordinary uſe of Burning Glaſſes there is volgarly taken notice of a certain 
Burning point. And ſuch a point It 1s, as proves it {elf really to be. In Load- 
ſtones it is commonly known that there are Polar Points, called North and South. 
In the deſcent of Bodies towards the Earth, and in all Parts of the Earth, while 
they every way preſſing together do fall into an Orb, or Globe, there muſt ariſe a 
reſpect to a certain Point; Inſomuch that upon this very Point the Maſs of the Earth, 

Moles Telluris | 

'  Ponderibus librata fuir immobilis beret. 
And in the like manner, what is more manifeſt to be, than the middle point in 
the Balance? Than 8 of Æguilibrium, or Equal - poiſe in every Boch And 
it is no part of the Body. For that every part of a Body is W and whatſo- 
ever is Body, has a point of Ægpuililrium. So then in every Body ſuch a Point there 
is, Which Point being no part of that Body, muſt be a meer Mathematical Point. 

A Point therefore has a Being, tho Indaviſible. Yet it is not the only Thing to 
be conceived indiviſible in Nature, But in Geometry It is the only indiviſible 
And in reſpect of this its Indiviſibility, for Illuſtration ſake, a Point in Geometry 
is compared to an Unite in number, and to an eee in Time. Both Theſe being 
alike conceived under the ſame notion of Indivifibility with a Point, tho in other 
reſpects all the Three be much different from one another. But becauſe the Indi- 
viſible natures of Unity, and Inſtant are more obvious to common — 

oint. 

Theſe do well enough illuſtrate the Indiviſible Being of a Geometri 

By the Pythagoreans, who bring all things into the Myſtery of Numbers, A Point 

is faid to be Moraes den ,,. A Monade, or Unity having, paſitien, Indeed to have 
Poſitros, or Situation is the only poſitive conception to be made of a Point: Whole Ex» 
iſtence is in its Locality : As Proclus ſays, & TW ie Exiftit tanquam in loco, 

Here, 

OF GEOMETRY. 2 
Here, or, There. But now Unity properly taken, as the principle of Nuinber, has 
nothing of Poſition. As Proclus goes on, dne » Maas, Fus. ram. And 
on this confideration Unity is «rywis dung.. more Simple than an: Indiyi 
Point, for that a Point exceeds the Indiviſible fimplicity of Unity by the addita- 
ment of Poſition: And therefore in this metaphorical Definition, by Unity is only 
to be underſtood Indiviſibility, or Vacancy of parts. So that, A Point it to be con- 
cetved ſuch a kind of Unity, ſuch a Monade, or Inatviſible Being, as in Space to poſſeſs an 
impartible Place, or Poſitron, 84 | 
And to proceed in a familiar compariſon between a Point in Geometry, and an 
Inſtant in Time, there is ſuch an Agreement in their Indiviſibility, that even Life 
it ſelf, our very Being is but a Point. For only 7+ vv, This Point of Time, The In- 
divifible Inſtant, The preſent Moment is. And what was, and what ſhall be, is not. 

Thus much of a Point. neic n The b wore, Erda du,“. Whether of Some- 
thing, or of Nothing. 
e 

Geometricians do commonly note a Point by ſome one Letter of the Alpha- 
bet. As the Point A, or the Point 8B. | 

DEFINITION II. 
\ Line is Leneth without Breadth. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

A Point was the firſt thing towards Elementary Geometry poſited in Space, and 
That without any Quantity. The next and firſt moſt ſimple Thing with Quantity 
is a Line, That is, A meer and ſimple Extenſe; or ſolely Length, In which Definition 
there is a politive notion of Length, reſtrained by a negation of the next imme- 
diate compoſition made of Length and Breadth. And herein for the preſent It con- 
fines our Imagination to one ſingle confideration of the menſuration of Magni- 
tudes, and That according to Length alone. whereby we underſtand what conception 
of a Line is ever and only to be made uſe of in Geometry, LEKNOGT ALONE, 

We may help our imagination in the conception of a Mathematical Line after 
this manner, Put a Point (I mean here a Thing, whoſe quantity is not conſidered) 
and let it be ſuppoſed to move from one place to another, Then ſhall the fame 
leave an imaginary Track only Long, which is called a Line. As if the Point A be 
imagined to move from A to B, It thall trace forth the Line, named AB, 

9 — A Y INE 

Not that hereby a Line is 4 Flux of a Point, as ſome define It: (for motion creates 
not magnitude; tho the nature of the ſeveral Drmenfions of magnitude, as abſtracted 
— may be well conceived by motion) but only by this Inſtance we do 
give ſome Idea of Length, or of that kind of magnitude, which is called a Line, not 
confidering the ſubject wherein It is. | 

And therefore, to explain further this preſent matter, we are not to conceive 
that a Line deſcribed from the motion of a Point does conſiſt of Points. For the 
motion, or flux of a Point adds not Point to Point in its progreſſion, and thereby 
conſtitutes a Line, as the links of a Chain make up a Chain : but only does by the 
continuity of its motion repreſent to our imagination a Continued Line, or Length 
8 f Lengrh atiſing from the 3 
The Conception o ari the motion, and the negation of Bre 

from the 1 of the movi 2 which is conceived ſuch, as to be void of 
Length, and Breadth, or any thing of Magnitude ; and therefore in its imaginaty 
flux cannot form any repreſentation of Breadthy but only of a pure Mathematical 

Again, foraſmuch as a Thing cannot be made of Nothing; and therefore ten 
thouſand Nothings cannot make One Thing: ſo a magnitude cannot be made of 
that Thing, which in it ſelf is no magnitude ; tho never fo many of Them 9 

* A 2 pu 

magnitude; by whi 

THE FIRST ELEMENT 

4 

t together, If therefore a Point be ſuppoſed to be put to a Point, there cannot 
—— thing elſe conceived, then that They both muſt wholely enter into one ano- 
ther, and ſo ſtill be put as one Point. For otherwiſe if they join to one another, 
they muſt join by ſome common Extreme: but a Point having no part, can have 
no Extreme, no Beginning, Middle, or End. Wherefore upon the ſuppoſition of 
Two, and ſo by conſequence of more points put together, there can ſtill nothi 
more reſult or be imagined, than a Point. Therefore whenſoever we ſuppoſe 
two diſtinct points ſome kind of interval muſt be alſo ſuppoſed to be between 
them. So that the flux of a point proceeds not from point to point; but immedi- 
ately paſſeth into Length. And therefore from the common Inſtance of a fluent 
point we are not to conceive, that a Line does conſiſt of points; or that a point is 
any part of a Line. But as every motion begins and ends where there is no mo- 
tion, ſo every Length begins and ends where there is no Length. 

But tho there be many irrefragable Demonſtrations that a Line cannot be conſti- 
tuted of Points; yet Theodoſus hath as clearly demonſtrated, that a Sphere toucheth 
a plain ſuperficies only in a point, and how then It doth not in its motion on a 
Plain trace forth a line of points, Clavius acknowledges that he hath not met with 
a ſatisfactory Explication. And therefore Fromondus his Book De Compoſitione Con- 
tinui is by him not amiſs entitled Labyrinthus. Thus the Reaſon of Man muſt ſub- 

mit to the Incomprehenſible Secrets, which by an Inſcrutable, Infinite Wiſdom, are 

planted in the Nature and Frame of Things. 

F the Application of Number to Magnitude, and the Uſe 
Thereof in the Menſuration of Magnitudes. 

But now in Diſcrete Quantity the matter is far otherwiſe. Where Mas, Monas, an 
UNITE, or Monade, tho It be as indiviſible and partleſs as a point; yet It is a con- 
ſtituent part of every number: and therefore every Number is 4 Multitude conſiſting of 
certain Units, or Monades. Wherefore it ought to be obſeryed, that in comparing 
Magnitudes with Numbers a point in Magnitudes does not anſwer to an Unite in 
Numbers; but rather to a Cypher. Which is no more a part of Number, than a point 
is a part of Magnitude. Whereas an Unite is not only a conſtituent part, but alſo the 
Leaſt Part of every number, and therefore It is the natural meaſure of all numbers, 
A Meaſure being the Minimum omnium in eodem genere. But becauſe in 3 — 
there is not a Minimum ; therefore e has no Natural meaſure. Vet here we 
ſupply a Natural meaſure ſufficiently for our uſe in conſtituting, by common con- 
ſent, ſome certain known magnitude for a meaſure, To «aps perery, A Stated Mea- 
ſure the ancient Geometricians call It. And upon ſuch a Stated Meaſure there fol- 
lows a juſt agreement between Numbers and Magnitudes. For in the menſuration 
of any magnitude, what part ſoever of a magnitude is taken by conſent for a Mea- 
ſure, the ſame truly anſwers to an Unite in Numbers. For it is in this caſe a ſup- 
poſed Minztmum and put like an Unite for the Leaſt Part to be conſidered in That 

ch ſuppoſed Leaſt Part we do agree to eſtimate the quantity of 
the Whole. As in the menſuration of any pry, 4s a Yard, or a Foot, or an Inch, 
&c, be agreed upon as a known magnitude for a Certain and a Standing Meaſure. 
And for Inſtance, let an Inch be put for the meaſure of Length. The Inch is now a 
ſuppoſed Minimum, and becomes to be of the like nature and uſe, that an Unite is 
in Numbers. For as a number has its value from the multitude of Unites which are 
numerated to be collected in It: ſo a Line or Length ſhall have its value from the 
multitude of Inches, which are numerated to be container in the ſame. As if a 
Line contain twelve Inches, or eight Inches, or four Inches, The ſame is valued ac- 
cording to 12,8, or 4. The Line in a reſpect had to an Inch, as the number in a 
reſpect had to an Unite. So after this manner The Menſuration and Eſt:mation of all 
magnitudes is made by the numeration of the Stated meaſure, as a number 1s eſtimated by 
the numeration of its Units, 

And This is the firſt and real ground of correſpondence between Numbers, and 
their mutual application to one another. Which ought to — 

OF GEO ME IT . 5 

and remembred for the common uſe that is hereafter to be made thereof through - 
out all Geometry. 9 

Therefore ſpeaking upon this matter in general, Let the Stated Meaſure of any 
kind of itude be called ThE MEASURING UNITE, or THE GEOMETRICAL UNITE, 
For very it is, and moſt requiſite, that It ſhould have ſome ſetled Name. 

DEFINITION III. 
T He Extreams, or Ends of a Line are Points, 

ANNOTATIONS. 

A Line was defined to be Length without Breadth, that is, Length alone : and 
ſo taken abſolutely without any reſpe& to Termination; which is a Secondary 
notion, and a Supervenient Mode, or Qualification of Magnitude. 

In the firft place therefore Euchde defined a line without limitation. But after- 
wards if a line be any ways determined, as Here, or There, or Any where, He tells 
us now that in the termination of a line the Extreams, or Ends thereof are under- 
ſtood to be points; ſuch as he had before defined to be void of parts. For in 
common ſenſe Length cannot be terminated by any thing having lergth, becauſe 
it will again be demanded, What limits This Length, and ſo forth infinitely. 
Therefore a line muſt be conceived to be limited by ſomething void of Length, 
and by conſequence of Magnitude, which Thing is called A Point. As for exam- . 
ple, of a limited line AB the Extreams, or Ends are the imaginary points named 

A, and B, that is as much as to ſay, that the line AB begins Here at A, and ends 
There at B. | N 

— EN ANN ↄ NNN 
So that @ Finite line is a continued Length determined by two points, Here and There, 

DEFINITION IV. 
Strait Line is That * which lies evenly us ige, nit 'g dent on 
10 the Points within It ec. phos u. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

As for Inſtance. In a line let there be taken points at pleaſure how many ſo- 

ever. A, B, C, D, E, F, &c. 
If the line be ſuch as Eu- , 
clide ſets forth by the name 
of a Strait line, then we 
are to conceive, that the whole line ar Ciru, or wares. 2 equabiliter, Lyes 
evenly, that is, juſt in one and the ſame poſition to all thoſe points: fo that from 
any point to any point there is no where made in the tract of the line any change 
of Poſition on one fide or other, upward or downward, or any various way. 
But that every imaginable part of the line does bear a like Site and Reſpect to all 
points imaginable in the ſame line. 

Whereas in a crooked line Every aſſigned part has a different reſpect of Situ- 
ation to all aſſignable points in the crooked line. Here one way, There another; 
in an infinite variety of poſitions of the One to the Other, of the Parts of the 
line to the Points, and of the Points to the Parts of the line. But in That, which 
Euclide calls a Strait line, there is to be conceived One and the ſame Equability 
throughout in the poſition of the whole, and of all its parts to every point in 

the ſame line. 
The Uſe of This Definition. 
So that firſt, if any ſtrait line be —_ lye pen enathes. iran Hags 

B C D E F 

6 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ſhall neceſſarily follow upon this uniform conſtitution of all ſtrait lines, that their 
intermedial parts muſt be congruous, that is, coincident, and every where agrte- 

ing exactly with one another, ſo that They be as one ſtrait line. 

And ſecondly, by a natural conſequence from this Definition of a ftrait line Archi- 
medes before his Books De Sphers & Cylindro does aſſume as a Common Notion, That 
A Strait line is the Leaſt of all Lines having the ſame Extreams. 
And theſe are the two ſpecial uſes made of Euclid s Definition in ſeveral Geo- 
metrical Demonſtrations. As for the Firſt, in Prop. 40. and 8. El. I. in Prop. 24. 
El. III. &c. Of the ſecond, in thoſe admirable Books of Archimedes concerning the 

' Sphere and Cylinder. 

But This Propoſition of Archimedes ſome Commentators cite for Another Defi- 
nition of a Strait Line, wherein they are much miſtaken. That Great Geometri- 
cian ſo well underſtood the ELEMENT A TO in this his moſt accurate Definition, 
that he went not about to mend It, and to give a new Elementary Definition, 
which was much below his thoughts, and preſent Matter. But from thence, as 
his Subject requir d, did aſſume this Propofition, as a natural and immediate Con- 
ſectary, and puts It for a granted Maxim, not a Definition. Hereupon therefore 

it will not be unuſeful to conſider farther of Mathematical Definitions. 

Of Definitions Mathematical and Philoſophical. 
Definitions may be taken two ſeveral ways. Firſt, there may be an Idea, Image 

or Conception in our Mind of a Thing, which we cannot expreſs to others, but 

in many words. Now to this Thing expreſſed at large we would give in brief a 
certain Appellation or a ſettled Name; ſo that whenſoever this Name is menti- 
oned, we intend thereby that the Thing be in ſuch manner conceived, as It was 
at firſt expreſſed, or as we ſay, defined. Mathematical Definitions are to be taken 
in this ſenſe. Which indeed admits of no diſpute; for that it is free for every 
man to give what Name he pleaſes to his own Conceptions. He is only afterwards 
bound to uſe the Name always in the ſame ſignification, which at firſt he gave unto It. 

Again there are many Things of which Men have a common Idea, and alſo a 
Name commonly received to ſignify every ſuch Thing. But yet upon ſearching 
more curiouſly into the nature of Things we do often require a more perfect Ex- 
planation of the Eſſence and Intrinſecal conſtitution of thoſe Things. This kind 
of Explanation 1s call d a Philoſophical Definition. Which ought to be an Ana- 
Iyfis of the Thing into the Eſſential principles of which It is compounded. As 
when we — what is Water? What is Fire? Of theſe Things there is among 
men a common Idea, I mean, of The Whole or Totum Phyſicum, and a like uſe; 
Allo in every Language a certain Name; Notwithſtanding which knowledge of 
Ours, we do by theſe queſtions require ſomething more to be inſtructed in, con- 
cerning their original conſtitution, That is, we would reſolve the Whole into 
its conſtituent parts, and lay open the ſecret Compoſition of their Natures. But 

whether the Intellect of Man can pierce ſo deep into the Intrinſic State of Things, 

as to give an Eſſential Definition of any Thing; is to me ſo much unknown, that 
altho Ariſtotle rightly teaches what That Demonſtration , which he calls aur: 
ought to be, yet 1 believe the moſt ſubtile wits in the world never fully diſcern d 
the Eſſential frame of any Thing, or the Natural eſs of Cauſes and Effects, 
whereby to be enabled to give juſt Definitions of * ings, and accordingly De- 
monltrations 44:3 in the Courſe of Nature. Our Definitions being only the Ana- 
Iyſis or our own imperfect Conceptions of Things, rather than of the Things 
themſelves. 

For to Know the Divine Mechaniſm of this material World belongs only to 
THAT Eternal, Almighty Self-Being, 76 &, rd w, xa wes vs. The very Being, The 

One, and of one only Thought, Which (The ſame with Himſelf) together Knows 

and makes all Beings. 
What Intuition into the Eſſence of Things, Spiritual Creatures may have is 
alltogether unconceiveable by Man. Certain it is, that Humane 2 

OF GEOMETRY. 7 
proceeds upon Conceptions inadequate to Nature, taking Things only by Parts, 

and from their outward Appearances. Aoyi7po da weeyuaray drapery. Is the pure 

Iambic of & Greg. Nazzanzen, Reaſoning I know to be the Droxfion of Things. Our Ratio- 
cination eds made after 3 ſtep by ſtep, to lead «10M fome kind 
of knowledge. And in obſerving what appears the Firſt, moſt Simple, and im- 
mediate Emanation of a Thing, we do from Thence determine the nature of the 
Thing in It ſelf, and diſtinguiſh It from all Others. And hereupon we form in 
wbrds a Propoſition, commonly called an Eſſential Definition. It ſerves indeed 
as well for our uſe in Reaſoning; if we can from thence as A Cauſe gradually de- 
duce all other Affections and Properties obſervable in the ſame Thing. 

Thus there are theſe two kinds of Definitions. The firſt is by Logicians called 
Definitio Nomanas, Which is of moſt uſe among the Mathematicians, who giving 
Names to their Conceptions, do in their Definitions put 4 Name for the Sebject 
of the Propoſition, and The Thing which is to be underitood by that Name is made 
the Predicate. And in This kind of Definition there is only imply d that ſuch a Thing 
is ſo Named. 

The ſecond is called Definztzo Rei, uſed generally by Philoſophers, in which the 
Subje# of the Propoſition is the Tatum Phyficum, or a Thing conceived in groſs 
under a natural compoſition, and ſignified by a certain Name: And the Predicate 
is, or ought to be the Eſſential conſtituent Parts of that Phyfical Compound. 

Thus a Mathematical Definition conſiſts of the Name and the Thing, and a Phi- 
loſophical Definition of the Thing named and the Eſſential parts of the ſame Thing. 

And now to our preſent matter. Firlt, as the Mathematicians underſtand their 
Definitions, This of a ſtrait line is with all the Reſt to be received alike by Geo- 
metricians without exception. For that with Them, as we have faid, there is 
only put or ſuppoſed ſuch or ſuch a Thing, and a Name is given to It. As here 
A Length is put, which is to be conceived to lye evenly to all its Points; and 
ſuch a Length is called a Strait Line. Now firſt againſt this Notion of Eveneſs 
in Length or an Equable interjacency of every part in a certain Length, there can 
be urged nothing as impoſſible or incomprehentible ; and therefore It is at preſent 
to paſs as a Legitimate Suppoſition. And next in calling this kind of Length a 
Strait Line, The Name 1s tree and arbitrary as all Names are. 

But again, if as Philoſophers we take the Subject of the Propoſition for a 
Thing, and here intend to define a Strait Line; as a Thing commonly known in 
It ſelf and alſo by That Name; yet to clear our Conception therein, we would 
Analyſe, or Reſolve a Strait Line into the Eſential Grounds of Rettittude, 1 lay, 
even in this Philoſophical acceptation Euclid : Definition will appear moſt accurate 
upon this very reaſon, that whatſoever Notion put by any One Philoſopher, or 
Mathematician for the Definition of a ſtrait line, or whatſoever Properties and 
Affections are attributed to a ſtrait line, They do All evidently ariſe from Euclid 5 
Definition, as from the Nature of Reftitude, and the Eſſential Conſtitution of a ſtrait 
line. For Euclid . Notion of a ſtrait line does conſiſt in the Equability of its poſition 
to all imaginable points in the ſame line. And there ariſes from This conception 
ſuch a Community, or rather Identity of Conſtitution in all ſtrait lines, that 
they being conſidered abſolutly in themſelves, A. Strait, do differ from one ano- 
ther only in Situation, and variety of Place. So that changing in our imagination 
the place of one ſtrait line into the place of another (which is called EPapuros, 
Epharmofis, or an Adaptation of one line upon an other) there follows, 

Firft, that A trait lines are Congruous to one another. 

And This is, as we have noted before, the Primary uſe of Euclid : Definition : 
Or rather, This is not ſo much to be accounted a Conſectary, as rather the ſame 
notion with Euclid . Definition, tho in different words. For to conceive (trait 
lines to be ſuch as to have every where an equable interjacency of all their parts 
to all their points; Or ſtrait lines to be ſuch as to have every where a mutual 
coun — of Themſelves, and all their parts to one another is in effect the 

Secondly, That A ſtrait line is the leaſt of all lines between the ſame pointe, | 
B 2 Which 

— 
"+ RR 
— 

8 U 

7 $g —— 1 * 
* . - _ 
— — - I — . — —— ant. 
— — — — — 

RY 
0 — 2 
— 

> — 

= . 
—_— „ 
— - — 

— 

* 8 2 — — = 
= . - - r 2 

8 HE FIRST ELEMENT 

Which notion informs not what a ſtrait line is in It ſelf; but only what It is 
in compariſon to lines not ſtrait. Archimedes makes uſe of This as a natural Con- 
ſectary from Euclid s Definition. Am, ſays Proclus, & irs ue mis i) taurns ompeetors ; 
Al run N, Zn r a aun mipd|a txerov. Becauſe a ſtrait line lyes evenly to all 
its points, for that _ reaſon It us the leaſt of all lines having the ſame Ends. For if 
any other were leſs, The firſt did not lye evenly between its Ends, a d & Ts iH ur 
ch E leu retry Ts TECROW EQUTHS- 

Thirdly, From Euclid , Definition ſays Proclur tis manifeſt, that 

Only The ſtrait line does poſieſs a Space equal to That, which # between Its points. 
Mei mw el geiun ion xamxea dieis tua n pilaty ray er aurrs onueiey. And Proclus gives 
this reaſon; For how much One point 1s diſtant from the Other, ſo much us the magni- 
tude of the ſtrait line terminated by the ſame points. Oo d ami Frempoy Tay oe 
gangs, rerum To pinths Ths el Neiac Tis C auruy megswns. This is, ſays Proclus, 
& ins vey. That 1, A line to lye Evenly between two points, us the ſame Notion as 4 
line to be equal to the Intermedial ſpace between two points. Therefore 

Fourthly, A ſtrait line is the natural meaſure of Diſtance between Point and Point, or 
Here, and There. ; 

Fifthly, A ſtrait line is Ordinate between its Extreams, en axpur ig lau, lays 
Proclus. 

Or if we take it as S* Henry Savile corrects it, lar. Then thus it is. A ſtrait 
line un ſtretched to the utmoſt between its Extreams. And therefore 

Sixthly, A ſtratt line u ſuch, whoſe Extreams cannot in our Imagination be moveable 
further from each other, preſerving the Quantity of the ſame line. 

Whereas the Extreams of any crooked line may without change of its quantity 
be further and further diduced, till the crooked line be ſtretched to a ftrait line. 

Seventhly, A ſtrait line is The only ſingular between the ſame Extreams. 

That is, there can be but one ſtrait line between the ſame points, whereas of 
crooked lines there may be infinite, Laſtly from Euclid's Definition there is ob- 
ſery'd an other Property of a ſtrait line relating to Viſion : To wit, 

Eighthly, A ſtrazt line is That, All whoſe Intermedial Parts do obviate the Extreams. 
Hs 7% fler a Ts axpus hee. As Proclus ſpeaks from Plato. And the mean- 
ing is, that if One Extream be ſuppoſed a Lucid point, and the other Extream an 
Eye, all the interjacent Parts of a ſtrait line ſhall obviate, or ftand in the way, 
and obſtruct the Radiation of the Lucid point unto the other Extream ; ſo that 
It cannot be viſible to the Eye in that place. As for inſtance, we find the Eclipſe 
of the Sun to be made by the direct interpoſition of the Moon between the Sun 
and onr Sight, All Three then lying 1n a ſtrait line. 

Theſe Notions, or Conceptions, and whatſoever other Attributes are by any 

One given to a firait line, They are only Conſectaries from Elia, Definition. 

Which for this very reaſon ſhows It ſelf to be the Primary Conception of Recti- 
tude in lines, for that It comprehends all ſtrait lines in general, whether taken 
finite, or infinite. Whereas Thoſe Other here now mentioned are Secondary, re- 
lating only to a finite ſtrait line as determined between two Extreams. And moft 
or all of Them are uſeleſs in Geometry. 

Thus have we fully ſet forth-the ſeveral notions of Mathematicians and Philo- 
ſophers concerning a ſtrait line, becauſe Many of Them have thought It worth 
their While to buſy Themſelves therein, and eſpecially two Great Men of our Age, 
M' Hobs and the incomparably Learned D* Walks, And beſides we have the ra- 
ther inſiſted upon this Argument, for that It gave us a juſt occaſion to Expound 
the Nature, and Difference of Definitions Mathematical and Philoſophical. So that 
in the right underſtanding of Them Both, our younger Students might be provi- 
ded againſt the Cavils made upon ſome of Euchd's Definitions. Laſtly, It is ob- 
ſervable, that Things, the more common They are and ſeem moſt known, are 
the molt troubleſome to be defined. For that there is in every Man One and 
the ſame anticipated Idea of Familiar Things, whereby they are better known 
within Us, than Words can make them known unto Us. The Things them- 
ſelyes ſtamping a clearer Image of Themſelves into our Imagination, than => 

* wo 

OF GEOMETRY. 9 
words can imprint. Adeo difficile eft (to ſpeak with S* Henry Savile) rem maxime 
Perſprcuam, perſpicue definare. Gage 4 rt Gas | 

A ſtrait line altho' it be no where exiſting by it ſelf, yet there is no- 
thing of a more common conception, and in more frequent practice. For the 
Diſtance of Places from one another, Land, and Sea, Heavens, and Earth, the 
height of Buildings, Mountains, Clouds, Comets, Planets, &c. is only conſidered 
and meaſured DzreAly 4 Length : which is nothing elſe, but what Euclide means by 
a Mathematical ftrait line. And thus in very many caſes of Humane Affairs this 
notion is neceſſary, and applyed to a real uſe. 

A Thread ſtretched by a Plummet, The morning Rays, and Beams of the Sun 
(tho in themſelves refracted) do in ſome manner repreſent That, which we call 
Rectitude in lines. 

DEFINITION V. 

A Superficies is That, which has length and breadth only. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

The Mathematical co ion of a Superficies, or Surface, may be thus ex- 
plained by the motion of a Line. For if a line be fu _ to move tranſ- 
verily, it ſhall trace forth a certain Length, and Breadth called a Superficies ; 

Long by reaſon of the Length of the moving line; and Broad by reaſon of the 
Motzon of the ſame line fideways. 

As if the line AB, be imagined to move 
from AB to CD, it ſhall trace forth the 
Superficies ABCD. 

Bat now from this illuſtration of the na- 
ture of a Mathematical Superficies, by the 
tranſvers motion of a line, we are not to 
conceive, That a Superficies conſiſts of an 
Aggregation of lines, for the like reaſon as 
were before given, That-a line was not * 75 
made of an Aggregation of Points. But if D 
any Ones curioſity leads him towards an inquiſition into this ſubtile Argument, 
let him read That Book under Ariſtotle's name De linezs Inſecabilibus, with his 
Commentator Pachemerius. . Alſo Sextus —_— adverſus Mathematicos, a Greek 
Sceptic Philoſopher, and of late Writers Libertus Fromundus De Compoſitions Con- 
tima, which Treatiſe he juſtly entitles Labyrinthus. 

hus Euclide proceeds from a Point to a Line, and from a Line to a Superficies. 
And as a Line was ſaid to be an Extenſe Gne way only, and Therefore can have but 
One Dimenſion, or One way of Menſuration according to Length; ſo a Super- 
ficies is an Extenſe Two Ways, which Ways are diſtinguiſhed - the names of 
Length and Breadth, and therefore a Superficies has Two Dimenſions, or Two 
Ways of Menſuration according to Length and Breadth. And this in one word 
may be called an Exeans; as a line was called Simply an ExTEnss. More- 
over a Body, or Solid, is an Extenſe three ways, (that is every way) and there- 
fore It has three Dimenſions, or three ways of Menſuration by the names of 
Length, Breadth, and Depth, or Thickneſs. And that there are no more, than 
three Dimenſions (as in this matter Ariſtotle ſays, m rea , Three are All) Ga- 
lileus does demonſtrate in the beginning of his fett Dialogue of the Syſtem of the 
World. A Book, that deſerves to live for ever with the World. 

Yet in this matter the Geometrician does — with the Philoſopher, 
that there is in Nature nothing exiſting of real magnitude but Body. Only there 
are ſeperate conſiderations of the ation of Body, which we make to our 
ſelves for our own uſe, and do, as we have ſaid, ſigniſie by the names of Length, 
Breadth, and Depth. Of which three varieties of Dimenſions every Man has natu- 
rally a clear, and diſtinct Idea. 

C Now 

10 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

Now the moſt obvions and fenfible repreſentation of a Mathematical Superficies 
is a Shadow ; And the common Extream of a Superficies partly ſhaded, and partly 
cnliphtn6d; repreſents a Mathematiea Line. Moreover the general Object of our 
Sight s only 4 very Mathemarieal Superficies Ulummated. For we fee not into 
the Body, of ſubſtance of Things. And to this Confideration aptly anſwers the 
Etymologie of the Greek name Eriftims, Apparentia, the Apparence and Surface 
of a thing. | oy | 

But father, the aſc of this Mathematical Superficies is made moſt manifeſt in 
the Eftimation, and Menſuration of wherein the Surface only is conſi- 
dered, and valued, and nothing of the Depth. Which ſhews, That the Mathe- 

matical conception of 2 cies, is alſo a ceal Notion, and of general uſe, in 

like manner as That is of a Mathematical Line. 

DEFINITION VI. 

: T He Extreams of a Superficies are Lines. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

As a Line cannot be limited by a Line; fo upon the ſame reaſons a Super- 
ficies cannot be limited by a Superficies. A point puts a ſtop to Length; but It 
cannot to Length, and Breadth. That therefore muſt limit Length and Breadth, 
that is, an Expans, or Superficies, which is ſomet hing more then a Point, yet lefs 
than the leaſt Expans. And This can be nothing elſe but a Line, which only 
Magnitude is void of Expanſion. | |; 

In the fifth Definition, a Superficies was firſt conſidered in its own nature, and 
ſimply in it ſelf, as meerly Length and Breadth, but undetermined and as infi- 
nitely diffuſed, Yet now if in a Superficies thus at large , there be a limitation 
any where ſuppoſed, the ſame, ſays Euclide, is conceived to be a Line. As if Here, 
by the line AB, If There, by CD, If Aſewbere by EF, GH, &c. Thele limita- 
tions being allways Lines, whether ſtrait or crooked, conjoin d, or not conjoin'd, 
one line, or many; for theſe conditions come not as yet to be conſidered. 

Only we are to conceive A Saperficier to be a Continuity of Length and Breadth, 
r Hs a Line n 4 Continnty of Length determinable 

onmts, 

7 Laſtly, we are to obſerve, That This Definition of the Extreams of a 

and the Third before of the Extreams of a Line are not properly to be accounted 
Definitions; alltho' They be commonly numbred among Them. For in neither of 
them is any new Geometrical Term defined: but they are only neceſſary conſe- 
quences, and common notions, Reſulting from the Definitions of a Line and a 
Superficies, For — or a Magnitude of one Dimenſion muſt be terminated 
by ſomething void or any Dimenſion: which is a Point. And Length 
and Breadth or a Magni of two Dimenſions, muſt be terminated by ſome- 
thing wanting one of thoſe Two. Which is a Line, or h without Breadth. 
As Proclus well {ays, Nav d nige v vd apugaro h, W 8 
the ſame is terminated by That, which is impartible, to wit, es It is uſed for a 
term or limit, ſo It has no magnitude, but is Impartible, tho in another 
the ſame may be a partible magnitude. As a line in reſpeR of a Seperficies, and 
a Superficies in reſpect of a Solid. And briefly, Whatſoever terminates an Other 
the ſame is leſs compound than the terminated magnitude by one dimenfion. So 
Prockes in general ſtates this matter. Td myparcy te weir pic einer Necgtery.. 
Terminant d Terminate ſuperatar mm curve f * 

DEF L. 

OF GEOMETRY. 11 
DEFINITION VII. | 1 4 
"A Plain Superfiries, or A Plane is That * which * an wins 194. 
A lies Evenly to tbe firas lines within It ſelf, n Bis nine 

* | ANNOTATIONS. 

After che definition of a Line, Fuclide defines a Strait Line, and here accordingly, 
after the definition of a Superkicies, be defines a Plain Superficies, which anſwers 
to a Superſicies in general, as a ſtrait Line to a Line in general. 

And as à {trait — was defined to lye evenly to the points which are in the 
{fame line; ſo a Plain Superficies is defined to lye evenly to the ſtrait lines which 
are in the Superſices. For that a Plain Superficies has a like —_— reſpect to 
all poſſible ſtrait lines in the ſame Plain, as a ſtrait line has to all pothible points 
in the ſame Line. 

Whereas curved ſurfaces, as a conical, and a Qindrical ſuperficies, have in every 
part a different ſituation in a reſpect to the ſtrait lines which may be ſeated in 
them: and therefore they do not lye ic Een expreſſes) in an even poſition 
to their ſtrait lines, as all plain ſuperficies do. And we are therefore to conceive 
from Euchd's Definition, that a Plain Superficies is ſuch as lyes every where ſo 
juſt, and even, that if we imagine ſtrait lines to be every way ſcated in a plain ſuper- 
ficies the ſtrait lines ſhall wholely, and in every part touch the ſuperſicies, fo as to 
lye juſt in it with a mutual agreement to one another. As Sextus, the Sceptic 
Cites p. 101. lib. 3. adverſus Geometras, Emmdey , & 1 xda900m WIG ae; 
Tis pepen amere. Planum 1d eſſe per quod circumaſa linea redta omni ex parte eidem 
congruut, And upon this natural conception of a plain Superficies, Mechanics uſe 
to apply the =_ a ſtrait Ruler to a ſuperficies, thereby to examine, whether 
that ſtrait line does in all its parts agree with, and every where touch the ſuperti- 
cies; and accordingly they judge of the exactneſs of the Plane. 

If we conceive a ſtrait line to move tranſverſiy It traces forth & Sperfictes. 
And if It move in ſuch manner tranſverily as that every point thereof deſcribes 
a {trait line; It truly repreſents to our imagination an rait Plane. 

Now the PLAN which Zulide has here defined, is the dh Pwmergaca, That 
Geometrical Seat, and noble Table, wherein the whole matter of the Firſt Six kle- 
ments, and all the admirable ſpeculations of Plain Geometry are placed, 

Of Plain Angles. - 
DEFINITION VII. 
Plain Angle is in a plain Superficies an Iuclinat ion of 
Lines to one —— together, and not = afuire 
rect /itnated One to the Other. | 1 
ANNOTATIONS. þ Youu 14 2dr lh 

- 

— — — 

A 
three letters, as the Angle A B C. Where EE 
the middle letter ever denotes the point y 5 
of Concurs of the two lines containing 
the Angle. Yet in the Notation of an | TY 

part thereof, with all Its properties, and affectiona. Whereas the Ma 

11 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ing, as the Author entitles his Lon: ; Whereas if he had rendred Euclid, he 
ſhould have ſaid, that an Angle is 4a Inclination de deux lynes Rencontrees. For Ex- 
chid's Inclination of two Concurring lines is diviſible, and menſurable ; but 4 Ren- 
contre, the Concurs of two inclining lines, being in a point is indiviſible: as the 
French Logician rightly obſerves; but hereupon he rage taxes Euclid with a 
fault of his own making, by Euchd's words, and ſenſe. And it ſeems 
ſtrange to me That the Author of a moſt Excellent Logical Inſtitution ſhould 
not advert the difference in Expreſſion and ee the Inclination 
of two Concurring Lines, and the Concurs of two Inclining Lines: for that In- 
clination manifeſtly denotes a diviſible Thing ; and Concurs an Indiviſible Point. 

Now lines are ſaid to Incline to one another, when in Each line Part after Part 

comes nearer and nearer to the Other line, that is, when The lines do continuedly 
h toward one another. | N 

An Angle is commonly ſignified by 

Angle, we are to obſerve that The Greeks 

ſay not % 1 ay. The Angle ABC, | A 
but more 3 1 2 that is, 5 B 

, Cy S tyoria. The Angle B <— nn | 

contained by the —4 AB, BC. But 

the repetition of 3 the Greeks omitt for iis Ws | 
brevity ſake. And for the more brevity [14 DT” oY 
it is tranſlated the Angle ABC, inftead B - 

of the angle contained by ABC, or ern c 
AB, BC. | RY 
In the definition of an angle Euclide er C 
puts the Simple word Kains, Cliſu, with which the Latins were not acquainted ; 
never ſaying Clinatio; but always ufing ſome compound word, as Acclinatio, Incli- 
natia, Declnatio, &c. Euchas word KA, is generally tranſlated Inclinatio, But I 
ſhould rather have choſen Accimatio, as beſt anſwering to Euclid : word wes any- 
Aag F yes Ning. For wes anvjaas Ki, is more properly to be rendred, ad 

ſe invicem Acclinatio, than Inclinatio. ſeſeque acclinat ad illam is Latine; But inclinat is 

Barbariſm. Yet in this matter Inclinatio is the word in uſe, and to the power of 
cuſtom in Speech we muſt ſubmit. 

Halide having laid down a Plain Superficies as the Platform for his 
Geometry, a Raſa Tabula aptly diſpoſed to receive any impreſſion, does begin wi 
a Plain Angle, It being the moſt Semple of all other delineations, whoſe only and 

per ſeat is to be in a plain duperficies. For tho a Line be a delineation more 

| fimple than an angle, which to its conſtituton requires Two lines, and alſo that 

a line may be in any kind of Superficies; yet a Superficies is not the neceſſary 
ſeat of a line. For if fo, it had been immethodical to have defined a Su 
after a Line. But both Line and Superficies were taken ſingly and without reſpect 
to one another, or to any place, other than That of Vniverſal Space. In which, 
firlt Euclide puts a Point. next a Line. Then a ſtrait Line. a Superficies. 
and then a Plain Superficies. In which Smooth Mathematical field the Elementator 
beging and therein firſt places a plain Angle. * lg: zi n. N * ht 
ow _ 8 8 has — (as ſome Commentators im- 
pertinently have) enumera orts of Li Superficies, of Angles, into 
which Each of Theſe might have Lage berg dmeial at Fer ery That 
manner of Doctrine is the method of Philaſophers, and ver to Them. 
Who define firſt the Science, and the Subject they Treat of 3 in, divide 
the Subject into all its ſeveral kinds and ſpecies, as They ought to do z for chat 
Philoſophers undertake to comprehend the Nature of their Subject in | 

ticiant, 

TL. 

OF GEOMETRY. 13 

paſſing over thoſe Logical Diviſions, do ſelect only what is neceſſary to their 
preſent Purpoſe. As Euclide in this place ſpecifies only thoſe Things, which are 
moſt eaſy in themſelves, and beſt ſerviceable for an entrance into Geometry. So 
the Mathematician orders the ſame ſubject in one way, and the Philoſopher in 
another: yet both equally right as to their ſeveral Ends. But Ramus, not jultly 
conſidering the difference, that ever was, and ought to be had, between the Ma- 
thematicians and Philoſophers in handling the ſame ſubject, endeavours to join 
both methods together. He therefore firſt undertakes to define Geometry as the 
Scrence he treats of, and next Magmtude as the Subeck. Then divides Magnitudes 
into Commenſurable and Incommenſurable, Rational and Irrational, and ſo forth 
in a Logical Form. Which Notions being very ſubtile, and above the capacities 
of young Scholars, are in no manner agreeable to an Introduction into Geometry, 
and the proper way of Teaching and Learning the ſame. Indeed A amus, makes a 
very ingenious excuſe for himſelf, when he ſays, Magis Logicam in Mathematics 
themate exercut , Mathematicam in ſuo pulvere ſertoque uſu tractati. To which 
I muſt return, Non igitur mirum eſt, quod tam infeliciter tractavit Geometriam. For in 
his Logical ordering of the Elements by new Definitions, by impertinent Divi- 
fions, and Subdiviſions, and in the general courſe of his Propoſitions, He has ſo 
diſordered The Elements, that you ſcarce meet with a juſt Mathematical demon- 
{tration : But only a perſwading face or ſome ſemblance of Truth, not a demon- 
ſtrative Conviction. And of all our late Transformers of Euclide, He is the moſt 
Ungeometrical in Demonſtration, how Exact ſoever in his Logical, or rather Ver- 

bal method, and diſpoſal of his Propoſitions, He may pretend to be. And there- 
fore to go on with Euclide. 

Of the Nature and Conſtitution of a Plain Angle. 

For the Conſtitution of a plain angle. Firſt, there muſt be a Kains, as Euclide 
calls it, an Inclination, Vergency, Leanmg or Tendency, of Two lines one to the other. 
By which words 1s meant, that the Two lines do one way continually approach 
nearer and nearer to one another. 

Secondly, upon this approaching there is to follow a concurſe, or meeting toge- 
ther of thoſe Two lines. 

Thirdly, this concurſe is to be in ſuch a manner, as that, upon meeting, The 
Two lines lye not & u, that is, r wh de, in a current or continued way 
towards one another, ſo as to join together in one and the ſame line; but that, after 
the point of concurſe if each line be produced in its Proper courſe, They hall Rill 
be Two lines, and depart again from one another, Otherwiſe, it may ſo be as in 
theſe following Examples. 

That a line drawn from the point A towards C, and another from the point B 

towards C may in this tract, have an Inclination, Vergency , and Tendency to 

one another, yet in their meeting at the point C make not an angle, but that 

the line AC is fo joined to the line BC that both together make one continued 

line AC B, and ſo no angle at all, becauſe that an angle does require Two diſtinct 
D 

lines. 

14 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

lines. If the lines thus meeting be Both ſtrait, then they make one ſtrait line. 
And This is c xAios, a ſtrait Inclination of two ſtrait lines to one another, 
which upon meeting become One ſtrait line. If both lines be crooked, then may 
they often make ſome One continued crooked line; as in theſe Inſtances, and the Like, 
whereof there may be infinite varieties. Therefore, in the Inclination, and Ap- 
proaching of two lines to one another, Euclide made This ſpecial Caution, for 
the conſtitution of an angle, That, at their meeting, They be not fituated ir 
U Nelas, that is in ſuch a courſe, as to be coincident, and continued one with the 
other if they be both farther produced. For this phraſe & w$«a5 x4, to lye 
ftrait-wiſe, is not only applicable to ſtrait, but alſo to crooked lines, where, upon 
meeting, their curvature remains unbroken, ay xAzous as Proclus ſays, without 
fraftion, that is, In ſuch a ſort, as that if the Two Concurring Lines be both Mill 
continued onwards in their proper courſe, they do not divert, or deviate again 
from each other, but do wn rei paſs into one another, and become one ſingle 
line continued in ſua ſpecie. The Two lines meeting in this manner are ſaid to lye 
in woes, ſtrait-wiſe to one another, and the Curyature is not by Geometricians 
conceived, to come under the notion of an angle. | 

ET eb ee, ſtrait-wiſe, was a brief, and vulgar manner of ſpeech, for ir eb ge 
| ids (as is before noted) that is, in @ ſtrait way; as recta proficiſci, To go ſtrait for- 
ward, is for recta via profciſci. And in the ſame ſenſe that the Greeks uſed r 
üs, we now ule to ſay, ſtrait @ long, ſtrait forward, tho there be ſome flexures 
and windings in the way. | 

DEFINITION IX. 

NA when the Lines containing the Angle are ſtrait, the Angle 
is called a ſtrait. lin d Angle. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

That is, when the Lines, which have to one another this mutual Inclination, 
and Concurſe, are ſtrait, then the Inclination of Thoſe Concurring ſtrait Lines is 
called a ftrait-lin'd Angle. 

Euclide did juſt before define a plain angle in general. Yet here He next takes 
notice only of Plain ſtrait- lin d angles, paſſing over, after the manner of Mathe- 
maticians, the Logical diviſion of Angles into Plain and Solid. And again omits 
the enumeration of the ſeveral ſorts of all Plain Angles : for that the conſidera- 
tion of every One of Them was beſides his ome Matter, which he had confined 
to the ſimple ſpeculation of Plain ſtrait- lin d Angles. 

Of the Variety of ſtrait- lin d Angles. 

DEFINITION X. 

AZ when a ſtrait line ſtanding upon a ſtrait line, makes the 
Conſequent Angles equal to one another, each of the equal 
Angles is a Right Angle. 

And the ſtanding ſtrait Line is called a Perpendicular to that 
Line upon which It ſtands. 

ANNOTATIONS. is 

As if the ſtrait line C A, ſtanding upon the ſtrait line | ; 
BD makes the Conſequent Angles, that is, the angles on 
each fide of CA, namely CAB, CAD, equal to one 
another, Then each of thoſe equal angles CAB, CAD, 
is ſaid to be a Right Angle. And the ſtanding ſtrait Line, ___ 
CA 1s called a 5 to the ſtrait line B D up- 
on which It ſtands. 

OF GEOMETRY. ts 
f, Theſe angles CAB, CAD, which fide by fide are conjoyn'd to one another; 
are in general (whether Equal or Unequal) called by the Greeks a i yovicy, 
and the Latines Anguli Demceps, Which I think not upaptly rendred, the Conſequent 
Angler; for that they do in order mutually follow each other. 

And further to conſider this matter Philoſophically, The Equality, of the Con- 
ſequent angles is the natural and immediate cauſe of Their Rectitude. That is, 
becauſe the ſtrait line C A ſtanding upon the ftrait line BD makes its Inclination 
both ways, Here towards B, There towards D equally, and juſt alike to the line 
BD, therefore the _— CAB, CAD, are both neceſſarily to be conceived 

ight, and the ſtanding line CA to be manifeſtly Upright to the line BD. 
Whereupon, It is by the Greeks properly called KaJres, a Cathetus, That is, a line 
juſtly ſeated, or fitted both ways equally in reſpect of the line upon which It ſtands : 
To which therefore It is ſaid to be a Normal Line. 

We may here obſerve, That the Engliſh Tongue is as happy as the Greck, by 
rendring was yea a ſtrait line, and ogy v, a right angle; whereas the Latines 
have only one word for Both, Recta linea, and Nala, angulus, which commonly 
our Engliſh Tranſlators follow, ſaying a Rgbt line, as well as à Right angle. But I Wiſh 
that our Mathematical Writers would hereafter uſe this diſtinction, according to 
the exactneſs of the Greeks; ſeeing, that our Language affords two ſuch proper 
words, as STRAIT, and R1GHrT, anſwering to de and 3:5; And always lay 
4 Strait Line, and @ Right Angle, like to ed , & e varia. 

DEFINITION XI. 

A N Obtuſe Angle is That which is greater than a Right Angle. 
A E4AB is greater than CAB. 

8 

2 — 

DEFINITION XII. 

A N Acute Angle is That which is leſs than a Right Angle. 
As EAD ts leſs than cap. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Of Euclid : three ſorts of ſtrait-lin'd angles the Right angle is made the Rule 
and Standard to know the Others by. For that the gbr is always unchangeable, 
and the ſame. Whereas the Obruſe, and Acute are capable of Increaſing, and De- 

infinitely ; and only determined by T 1s, That all Obtuſe are greater, 
and all Acute angles are leſs than a Right angle. 

Of the Quantity of a Strait-lind Angle. 

Now whereas Euclide defines an Obtuſe angle to be greater, and an Acute angle 
to be leſs than a Right angle, the Commentators have much labour d herein to 
ſtate the Quantity of a ſtrait-lind Angle. For the Quantity of an angle is eſtimated 
neither by the Length of the lines which contain the angle, nor by the duperfi- 
cies which lyes between thoſe lines, nor by the Point of Concurſe of the two 
lines. For the angle ABC is not greater than the angle D BE, but 1s ſtill the 
lame in quantity; altho the Line B A be greater than BD, and BC than ol 

D 2 an 

Arch 
ations 

16 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

and the Superficies between A B, B C, be larger than the Superficies between D B, 
B E. So that in any plain ſtrait - lin d angle the | | 
Containing Lines with the Interjacent Super- A. 
ficies may both together be infinitely increaſed : 
forward, yet the Angle remaineth the very 
ſam 

e. 

Again, for the Point of Concurs, That can- 5 
not come into the conſideration of the quantity 
of an angle, ſeeing that a Point is in it ſelf no | 
quantity. : n 
There remains then nothing more to be conſidered in an Angle beſides the In- 
clination of the concurring lines. And thus much in the firſt place muſt be ac- 
know ledg d in common Reaſon, that only That can be Eſſential to the Quantity of an 
Angle, which being altered, does alſo alter the Quantity of an Angle. Now neither 
the Length of the containing lines, nor the Interjacent ſpace being altered, does 
alter the angle, as we have already noted. But if the Inclination of the contain- 
ing lines towards one another be any way altered, the angle is likewiſe altered 
in its quantity. As if BC be conceived to moye inwardly towards BA, or out- 
wardly from It, the angle ABC will become greater or leſs. Therefore It ne- 
ceſſarily follows, that Quantity of a 22 angle muſt conſiſt in the 7 
of the Inclination of the two ſtrat which contain le. This Quantity o 

C 

ait lines 
an angle is well {aid to be, Aαννν,& yz my x\iovw. A Diſtance of Inclination. As 
Sextus the Sceptic cites It, Lib. 3. adverſus Geometras, p. 102. 

Now therefore when Euclide ſays that an Obtuſe angle is greater, and an Acute 
angle is leſs than a Right angle, It is to be inderibod that the Amplitude, or Di- 

ſtance of Inclination, is in an Obtuſe _ greater than That, which is in a Right 
: 

angle, and in an Acute angle It is leſs. 

As the Inclination of the lines BA, EA toone ano- 
ther 1s greater than the Inclination of BA, CA to one 
another. And the Inclination of the lines EA, DA to 
one another 1s leſs than the Inclination of CA, DA to 
one another. And thus from the Dilatation, or Coarfa- 
tion of the Inclination of the containing lines, One angle 1s | 
ſaid to be greater, or leſs than another. But now, How | 1 D 
This Diſtance of Inclination, as an Angular Quantity may 
be meaſured, and eſtimated, ſhall be ſhown hereafter in its due place. 

C 
E. 

A Second Conſideration of a ſtrait-lin'd Angle. 
But to illuſtrate farther, & in ſomewhat a different manner from the former, 

the nature, and quantity of a plain D 

ſtrait· lin d angle, Let us ſuppoſe any 

point, as A in a plain Superficies, and | | 

from it to be drawn Two ſtrait lines | | | : 
at any wideneſs, or Aperture, as the | | g 
lines AB, AC. Here the angle BAC | 6: 26G 
may be ſaid to be the Aperture or Di- 8 | * 
varication of the lines AB, AC, which 
contain the angle BAC, ſo drawing 11. Be | 

AD,AE, AF, AG, the angle BAD 

is the Aperture of the lines AB, A D, 

which contain the angle BAD. In 

are the Apertures, or Divarications, of 

their containing lines; Which, may 

continually be enlarged, and opened T 

more, and more inereaſing the angles till the line A H comes to lye directly with 
1a AB, 

like manner the ſeveral other angles 

OF GEOMETRY: 17 
AB making one ſtrait line HB. So that this u , or ſtrait Inclination of 
the two lines A, BA, to one another, cannot conſtitute an angle in their meet- 
ing at the point A. But furthermore if there be drawn the line Al, there is a- 
made the angle B Al, which is the Aperture of the lines A B, AI; and the 

e is in BAK; and fo continually we may 1 towards 4 B making the 

Apertures ( that is, the Angles) leſs and leſs, e approaching line be coinci- 
22282 and the ſame with A B. 2 6 

A Second Definition of a ftrait-lin'd Angle. 

Wherefore a ſtrait · lin d Angle may be ſaid to be The Aperture of two ſtrait lines drawn 
from à point, 22 5 45200 to one another. r 9 
And how the Quantity of an angle may be eſtimated by the Aperture of the 
containing lines, as well, as by their Iaclinatiom to one another ſhall be ſhewn 

A Third Conſideration of a ſtrait lind Angle. 

Moreover, becauſe theſe ſeveral Angles, or Apertures do together make up 
the whole ſpace about the point 4, from hence may ariſe a Third Conccfrtion of a 
ſtrait lin d angle, and its Quantity. For ee all angles that can be poſſi- 
bly ſtated from the point A, do together compleat the whole ſpace abuur ihe jams 

point; therefore every particular angle contains ſome certain portion ot the 
Srack ABOUT the point A. 

A Third Definition of a ſtrait lind Anole. 

Wherefore we may thus again define a plain ſtrait-lin d angle. A plain ſtrait- 
Un d angle is A Portion of a plam ſpace about a Point, contained by two ſtrait J. nes, 
. and not directiy fituated to one another. 

This AmB1T, or CixcUmCi«Ca, dees as juſtly aniwer to the nature of an 
angle, as either Inclenation, or Aperture. For as in theſe I wo conceptions, ſo like- 
wile in this Third the Quantity of an angle is not concern d either in the 
Length of the containing lines, or in the ſpace Interjacent between thoſe lines: 
but only in the ſpace Circumjacent about the angular point, Which (ircumcirca being, 
changed, as either amplyfied, or coarcted, the angle accordingly becomes Greater, 
or Leis, as It does upon the Notion of Inclination, or Aperture. And how by a 
portion of the (ircumambient ſpace about a point, the Quantity of an Angle may be 
alſo eſtimated, ſhall likewiſe be explained hereafter. 

Thus have we Three ways whereby to ſet forth the Nature, and Quantity of 
a ſtrait-lin'd Angle. Either from the conſideration of the ſpace about a J ont, or 

the Aperture of two ſtrait lines drawn from a Point, or rather with Euclide, of the 

lination of two ſtrait lines meeting in a Point. Wh ch is the moſt proper, and 
the only Notion of an angle uſeful in all Geometrical demonſtrations. 

But now after all theſe conſiderations, if it be at laſt queſtioned in what Pre- 
dicament, that is, in what Rank, or Claſſis of Things, whether in Quantitv, Qua- 
lity, or Relation an Angle is to be placed, Proclu well anſwers to this Logical, 
and Philoſophical ion, that an Angle is not ſolely in any One of Theſe: 
but upon the ſeveral conceptions, which jointly compleat the Entire Notion of 
an Angle, It does belong to all the Three. For the Geometrician ſpeculates not 
the nature of Magnitude in it ſelf, as Magnitude, like to the Philoſophers : but 
only conſiders ſome certain kinds of itudes with their demonſtrable Propri- 
etics, and Qualities, and with the mutual Relations that Magnitude may have to 
cs: Ts And ſo there is a Compound Idea of all magnitudes Mathemat cally 
conhdered. An angle has a Quantity whereby one angle is greater, or leis than 
another. It has alſo a Quality by its Form. And in the Inclination of the lines 
themſelves there is a mutual reſpeR to one another. 

E of 

Ch 
Ions 

18 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

the Definition of a Geometrician. And yet This too fignifies very little, unleſs 

Of a Term and a Figure. 
2 DEFINITION XIII. 
A Term is the Extream of a Thing. 

DEFINITION. XIV. eren 
\ _-_ is That, which is comprehended by One, or Many 

erms | 
ANNOTATIONS. 

DEF. 13. In the termination, or limitation of Magnitudes, Euclide uſes two 
ſeveral words, Tip; an End, Limit, or Extream ; and 5 a Term, or Bound. And 
here he ſays that hes, a Term is mess an Extream. Iliexs he applys to a Line, 
and alſo to a Superficies, when both Line and Superficies were at firſt laid down 
as underſtood: but ops is appropriated to a Magnitude every way determined 
and bounded. 

For when Euchde defines à Line to. be Length only, he puts there a line as an in- 
finite, or indeterminate Length. But then again when a line is conſidered as to 
be determined, he lays, that the Eudi, or nem of a Line are Points. 1 

So likewiſe in us th . 15 * ſets 1 a Superficies under the 
ſimple conception o th, reaath, that is an Expans, or magnitude of Two 
5 1 Indeterminate. But he afterward adds, That — Ex- 
zreams, or mid la of a Superficies are Lines. He does not here mean by the word 
ipal a Comprehenſion, or an entire Encloſure of a Superficies by one, or many 
Lines; for that had been to make a Figure before he had defined It: But only 
as that of a Superficies indefinite, an kxtream, Limit, or mess, as he calls it, in 
what part ſoever it be placed, Here, or There, is a Line. A Line being as a Barr 
in an indefinite Superficies, like as a Point is a ſtop in an indefinite Line, 

But bees relates to ro 5&ao,dvy, to That which is ſuppoſed way encloſed, 
As Proclus ſays, that os is aEwxn rs xwpiv, The Comprehenſion of a ſpace. For it is 
Vine iges the Bound, or Term of a Figure; not ops dba, the Bound of a Su- 
— 2 ner 5 5, the Limit of a Superfictes, T Is, or THAT way. 

And accordingly, the bounds of Lands, or Territories are properly called 2, 
but not vie. So that where the ſubject is 7> i .] or rd min dei, 
a Magnitude comprebendad, or every may terminated, as a Geometrical Figure 1s, the 
word pes is properly uſed; and not pay. So that es may be ſaid to be mya;, 
tho every Tz; ought not to be called %s. And thus much for the explication 
of Tiga; and % to make the beſt of this matter. e 

For altho it appears by Proclus, that, in his time, This was among the reſt of 
the Definitions; yet I cannot allow it to be Euclids., For firſt, it is manifeſt, that 
the Definition it ſelf is needleſs, becauſe, if it were wholly omitted, yet nothing 
that follows, is made thereby either imperfect, or obſcure. And beſides, it is no 
more a proper Geometrical word of Art, to require a Definition, than it was the 
common word, in that-time, not only among the Land-meters, or Suryeyors, 
but among all the people who had any Lands to diſtinguiſh, and a late to 
themſel ves from thoſe of their Neighbours. He might have as well efined, Tipe 
to be m an Ending, or du an Extream, as iO, to be mas. Which, as 1 
have ſaid, was no more, at that time than what every Greek underftood. Por 
both e & mipas were words of common uſe, and _ of known fignification, 
and are in fach : a ſenſe here taken. It ſeems moſt likely, that mz being before 
uſed in the Definitions of a Line and Superficies, and now bps in the Definition 
of a Figure, ſome One noted in the margin, That a4 was alſo me. And this 
afterwards came into the Text for a Definition; as the like has happen'd to many 
other Authors. For indeed, it is rather the. by-note of a Lexicographer, than 

2 

ſomething more were added to mas, for the interpretation of ier. As that ec 
18 

OF GEOMETRY. 19 

is Figs Y an enclofug Extream; which indeed may paſs for a Gloſſary Expo- 
A0 a. but aught not to be accounted a — — This 66 
was the Judgement of that moſt Learned and Renownd Gentleman & Henry 
Save, the Manificent Founder of the two Famous Mathematical Profeſſors Places, 
in the Univerſity of Qxfard, upon this ſubje& in his moſt excellent Lectures, in- 
habet Defmationts faciem. Lect. g. p. 101. | 

DE. 14. Figure is by Ariſtotle accounted the fourth Species of Quality; and 
rightly, being there taken abſtractedly for the Qualification of ' Magmitude by Termi- 
nation, or outward Form. But the Geometrician conſiders the Quantum Figuratum, 
the Magnitude Figured. So that, in every Figure, there is jointly taken 5 M- 
Myer, & 1 N. the Incloſed, and the Incloſure, or ro i, & ö 5 ., 'Termina- 

„ and Terminus, That is, the Magnitude Bounded, and the Magnitude Bounding. 
Both which together do conſtitute a Geometrical Figure. 

In general, a Figure is vie, mi aer * A Space every way terminated. 
So 98 firſt, I Space comes to be a Figure by Termmation: And next, Every Figure 
has its ſpecification from the manner of its Termination. 

The firſt diſtinction here is, of Figures comprehended by One Term only, or 
by more than One. Which Diviſion being moſt Simple, Euclide has, with great 
artifice, couched within his Definition, when he ſays, That 4 Figure is a Space 
1 by one, or many Terms. Whereas the Definition were perfect, if he 
had only ſaid, That A Figure :s a Bounded Space. But moreover, he very ſubtily 
draws in the primary difference of plain Figures from the number of their Terms, 
which are lines, One, or more than One, in order to the following Definitions of Fi- 
gures, under One term, or Two, or Three, or Four, &c. 

Thus from a Line Euclide paſſes to an Angle, and from an Angle to a Figure, 
for that an angle is in its nature between Them both. An Angle being ſome- 
thing more than a Line, e e concurring lines: yet is ſomething want- 
ing of a Figure, as not having a Compleat termination. And in that reſpect an 
Angle is but a Semifigurate. And ſo is juſtly placed between a Line and a Figure. 

Of a Circle, Circumference, Center, and Raies, Diameter and Semicircle. 
DEFINITION XV. | 

Circle is a plain Figure comprehended by One Line, which is 
called a Circumference, unto which all ſtrait lines, falling 
from One Point of Thoſe lying within the Hure are equal to one 

another. 
DEFINITION XVI. 
A NA This Point is called the Center of the Circle. 

ANNOTATIONS. 
By a plain figure, Euclide means a figure ſituated in 
a 4 fy er ſuch as he ory ar defined. 
Suppoſe then in a Plaxꝝ a Figure comprehended by 
one line BC DB, which is called the Circumference. 
And from ſome One Puint ſeated within this Figure, 
as ſuppoſe from the point A, Let the ſtrait li 
how many ſoever, as AB, AC, A D, &c. falling on 
the Circumference at the points B, C, D, be all equal 
to one another, then ſuch a Figure, ſays Ezchde, is 
a Circle. And the Point A is called the Center of It. | 
Here alſo it 1s obſervable, that the lines AB, AC, 8 
Ab, &c. may, in one word of Ciceros, * 
2 

[0 

n 
01 

Acute. As for Inſtance BAC, BAD, BAE, &c. 

THE FIRST ELEMENT 

rly, be named RA DII, RAIEs, which by Euclide are always called af i 1d ae 
Ide bs from the Center, "That is to ſay, from the Center to the Circumference. | 

And what Cicero has ſaid out of Platos Timeus, in deſcribing the Spherical fi- 
e of the World, docs almoſt word for word agree with Euclid : definition of a 
Circle, Cujus omnis extremit as paribus à medio radiis attingitur. Cic. Fragment. de Univer 
The great VIE TA ſays, Radius elegans eſt verbum Ciceronu : Which Ovid 
uſes in the ſame ſenſe, as elegantly in his Deſcription of the Sun's Chariot, ö 
Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea ſummæ 
Curvatura rote, Radiorum argenteus ordo. 

The Circle, Circumference, and Area. 

Moreover, in the conſideration of this Figure, we are rightly to diſtinguiſh 
between the Circle, the Circumference, and the Area, or the comprehended Space. 
The Circle is the Whole together, Area, and Circumference. 

The Circumference has many properties peculiar to it ſelf, and very diſtinct 
from thoſe of the Circle, as hereafter will appear. And This we may firſt ob- 
ſerve, that altho the Circumference be conceived without any breadth, yet by 
reaſon of its curvature, It 1s Concave, and Convex, accordingly as it relates to What 
lies within, and to What is without the Circle. And ſome peculiar affections of 
the Concave and Conyex Circumference, Euclide ſets forth in the 8* Propoſition 
of his Third Element. 

Of the Circumference of a Circle applyed to the Menſuration 
of ſtrait-lind Angles. 
Laſtly, it will not be immethodical in this place to take a further conſideration 

ol the properties and uſe of the Circumference of a Circle, in relation to the ſtrait- 

lind 3 before deſin d, and the menſuration of their Quantities. 
Firſt then, in an infinite plain ſpace (the ſeat of 

plain Geometry) if we ſuppoſe a Point, as A, from | 
whence every way do flow ftrait lines infinitely, or 5 if 
indeterminately, there ſhall be contained by them the 
Three ſorts of ſtrait- lin d angles, Right, Obtuſe, and E 

Here therefore for to eſtimate by ſome certain 
Meaſure the Quant:ty of an Angle, We are to conſider 
how, and by what means This infinite plain Spa A —B 
wholly poſſeſſed by plain ftrait-lind angles ſea 
about a given Point, may be brought under ſome 

Comprehenſion and Boundary capable of menſura- 

tion: and therewithal the ſtrait- lin d angles, which 
fill this Space, may be likewiſe meaſured. 

Now the Definition of a Circle eaſily leads us unto a diſcovery of the proper 
Meaſure of an Angular Quantity : and that 1t may c s 
molt fitly be found in a Circular Figure, 

For firſt, from any Point as a Center, the Cir- 
cumference of a Circle does comprehend entirely 
the undetermined circumambient Space about that 
point: and by This comprehenſion renders the 
Ambit capable of menſuration in that the Cir- 
cumference of a circle is diviſible, and ſo certainly 
menſurable. ; 

Secondly, at the center of a Circle like as at a 
Point in an infinite plain Space, may be conſtituted 
ſtrait-lind angles of any ſort, and quantity whatſo- 
ever, which are all contained by the Raies of the 
Circle. As in the foregoing Diagram, Let now the infinite plain Space 1 

OF GEOMETRY. 21 

the Angles about the point A be determined by the Circumference of any Circle, 
whoſe center is the ſaid point. And therefore foraſmuch as the circumference of a 
Circle may from any point bound an infinite plain Space unitormly round about, 
and therewithal does encompaſs all ftrait-lin'd angles conſtituted at that point, 
which taken together compleat the Same Space: and as the angles are greater, or 
teſs, ſo the parts of the viola circumference, which are intercepred by the Strait 
lines containing thoſe angles, become alſo greater, or leſs; It will appear in com- 
mon Senſe, That the Circumference of a Circle may juſtly be put as the Proper 

Meaſure of the quantity of theſe angles. Thus therefore the Meaſure of a ftrait- 
lin d angle is defined. 

Definition of the Meaſure of ſtrait-lin'd Angles. 

The Meaſure of a Strait-lin'd angle is an Arch of the circumference of a Cir- 
cle, deſcribed from the angular point as a Center, and intercepted by the ftrait 
lines which contain-the Angle. 

As the Arch BC is the meaſure of the angle BAC, and the Arch C D of the 
angle CA D, ſo BD of BAD, BE of BAE: E- D 

very Arch meaſuring the quantity of its correſpon- 
dent angle from the center A, at which point all 
ſtrait- lin d angles, Right, Obtuſe, and Acute, ol what I 
quantity ſoever, may be placed. But this menſura- 
tion of an angle is not to be taken in the ſtricteſt | 
ſenſe. For whereas it muſt be acknowledg'd, that B 
Menſura, & Menſuratum ſunt in eodem genere. The A 
Meaſure, and the Meaſured magnitude are of the ſame 
kind: yet we cannot ſay, that an Arch and an Angle 
are truly of the ſame kind. 
But becauſe tis evident, and demonſtrated, that 
Angles and Arches do mutually increaſe, and de- 
creaſe alike, ſo that if the Angle BAD be double, or triple of the Angle BAC, 
then the Arch BU is double, or triple of the Arch BC. And on the contrary, if 
BD be double, or triple of BC, then BAD is double, or triple of BAC. 
Therefore an Arch of the Circumference of a Circle ſerves aptly as the Mea- 
ſure of an Angle in all common Uſes, and Mathematical Speculations, or Geome- 
trical Practices appertaining to Aſtronomy, The Menſuration of Diſtances, Suryey- 
ing of Lands, Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, &c. 

Of the Divifion of the Circumference into certain Parts, 
and the Uſe Thereof. 

Now that theſe Arches, and by conſequence the angles at the center , which 
are meaſured by theſe Arches, might be brought under a certain yalue, and eſti- 
mation, therefore the moſt ancient Geometricians at firſt divided the Circumfe- 
' rence of a Circle into 60 parts. Afterwards It was found more convenient to 
divide the ſazeecinto fix times 60, that is into 360 parts, commonly called De- 
grees; by which an Arch of the circumference, with its correſpondent Angle 
„* —— le, we ſay, That the Angle BAC 1 — — ann 

So tha example, we ſay, t the is 30 1 
BC be — ſuch — as of which the whole circumference is divided into 360. 
Again, if the Arch BD be 60 U then the Angle BAD is accounted 60 
Legrees. In like manner, the Ankle BAE is go Degrees, if the Arch BE be a 
Quadrant, or the fourth part of the whole circumference; for go is the 
n And This particularly it the meaſure of the quantity of a Right 
;, by the ſame reaſon, the Obtuſe angle BAF is ſaid to be 120 Degrees, 
if the Arch BF be 120 of the * the Circumference, &c. — 

* us 

1 

Paw 
— 
— 

An EHE FIRST ELEMENT 

Thus the Circumference of a Circle is uſed as a correſpondent meaſure to Eu- 
cd's three ſorts of ſtrait- lin d angles, Right, Obtuſe, and Acute. 
But to take this matter into further conſideration. Of the Obtuſe angle BAF 

the meaſure is the arch B E F. Whoſe Complement to make up the whole circum- 

ference is the arch FGHB. Which arch encompaſles the remaining Space about 
the point A, and anſwers the contrary way to the adyerſe, or external Face of 
the Obtuſe angle BAF; and is indeed the meaſure of the outward angle FAB. 
For the lines BA, FA, according to Euclid s definition, make not only the Ob- 
tuſe angle BAF, which is greater than one Right angle, and meaſured by the 
arch BEF; but alſo make the contrary way the adverſe, or external angle F AB, 
which is greater than two Right angles, and meaſured by the arch FGHB, 
E 

So the lines BA, E A make the Right angle BAE, meaſured by the Qua- 
drantal arch BE, and alſo make the external angle EAB, which is equal to 
three Right angles, and meaſured by the arch E GH B. Again, the lines BA, CA 
make the Acute angle BAC, meaſured by the arch BC; and alſo make the ex- 
ternal angle CAB, which is greater than three Right angles, and meaſured by 
the arch CEGHB, But of theſe kind of angles, being uſeleſs in Geometry, 
Euclide thought not fit to take any notice. 

Paſſing therefore This over, and to return to the partition of the Circumference 
into 360 Degrees, we muſt further know, that for the more exact menſuration of 
an angle, every Degree is again divided into 60 Prime Mznutes, very ſuch Mi- 
nute into 60 Seconds; every Second into 60 Thirds, and ſo forth into ſmaller and 
ſmaller particles. For in meaſuring of Things, the more minute the Rata Men- 
ſura, the ſtated Meaſure is made, the more accurate will be the menſuration of the 
quantity of the thing meaſured. Therefore in Eſſaies of fine Gold, in the valua- 
tion of Pearl and precious Stones, we come to the hundreth part of a Grain, or 
ſometimes nearer. So in Aſtronomical calculations of the motions of the Pla- 
nets, we often make a Sexagenary ſubdiviſion of the circumference of a Circle 
into Fourths and Fifths, — the more exact ſtating the Computation of their 
Courſes, and Periods. | | 

And here obſerve, That the firſt diviſion of 360 Degrees into Minutes, cuts the 
circumference of a Circle into — ————--- 21600 parts. 

The 

OF GEOMETRY. 22 

The next of Seconds into ——— 1296000 parts. 

The following of Thirds into — — 7776 parts. 
And ſo forth continually we may proceed in ſubdiviſions by 60, which will make an 
exactneſs more than ſufficient for any common uſe. The Circumterence of a Circle 
might have been divided into any other Number of parts: As our worthy Coun- 
tryman M Henry Briggs has laid down the Form of a Decimal diviſion, and ſub- 
diviſion. But 360 was thought by the ancient Mathematicians to be the moſt 
convenient number, becauſe It admits of many ſeveral diviſions preciſely. As 

360. 180. 120. 90. 72. 60. 45. 40. 36. 30. 24. 20, 
SS HS TT ͤ ͤ hh 6% $02 19% 165 
In like manner the number 60 has theſe diviſions. 
60 36 2% If. 192. 16 
"Boks: * . 
And the choice of This number 60 before all Others, was made upon this ac- 
count, that no number can be divided into 3, 4, and 5, but 60, and the Multi- 
ples of Sixty. Which makes Computation more free from Fractions. 

Altho' theſe animadverſions may ſeem enough, or too much in this place; yet 
before we paſs from the Subject now in hand, it will be requiſite to add ſomething 
more in the behalf of Euclide; upon this account, That ſome of the late Com- 
mentators, or rather Transiormers of the Elements do cavil at this moſt accurate 
Definition of a Circle, for that t does not readily appear, ſay They, Whether 
there may poſſibly be a Figure of ſuch conditions as Euclide here lays down. And 
therefore they would rather define a Circle, from its Geneſis, or Structure, whereby 
both the exiſtence, and nature of the Figure may be declared together, after this 
manner. 

Another Definition of a Circle. 

A Circle is a Figure deſcribed in a Plane by the revolution of a 
finite ſtrait. line (as 4 ;) upon one of its extream points ( a ) being 
fixt, till the line (AB) return to the place from whence it began to 
move. 

The fixt point (A) is called the Center of the 
Circle. And The Curve Line deſigned by the 
other extream point (B) of the moving Line (AB) 
is called the Circumference. 

Now ſay They, This Definition makes it ma- 
nifeſt, that there is A Figure having a Point within, 
from whence all ſtrait lines drawn to the extremity 
thereof are equal to one another; becauſe by the con- 
ſtruction of a Circle laid down in this Lefinition, 
The ſame ſtrait line circumvolved about the fixt 
point muſt neceſſarily be every where equal to it 
Self, and therefore all the Raies from that point ſhall be equal to one another. 

This indeed is true, and molt evident. But yet it will appear upon better con- 
ſideration to be very inartificially put in this = inſtead of Euclid . Definition, 
For firſt, to except againſt Euclid : Definition, uſe it may be doubted, whether 
there may be a 3 ſo qualified as he ſets forth, ſhews, that They do not 
rightly apprehend the nature of Mathematical definitions. For to add ſomething 
more to what has been already ſaid concerning Mathematical Definitions, we are 
to underſtand that In every one of theſe Definitions there is laid down the Notion of 
ſome Thing appertaining to Geometry, under a certain Name, and Term of Art. But 
whether ſuch a Thing may really be, is not of the preſent conſideration. Only 
Euclide intends, $4, ſuch a Name, whenſoever he uſes it, we are to imagine 
ſuch a Thing; Let It be, or not be. For indeed Geometrical Definition: are only 
Suppoſitions of Things under a certain Name. 5 They are for the pre- 

2 ſent 

24 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ſent to be allowed, unleſs That, which is ſuppoſed, and laid down, has in the 
words themſelves a manifeſt contradiction, or in the conception of the Thing an 
apparent impoſſibility. This is all that the Mathematicians mean, or require in 
their Definitions : And Theſe Innovators therefore ought in the firſt place to have 
obſerved, that before Euclide makes Uſe of any Thing by him defined, he firſt 
makes evident the exiſtence of the Same. | 

As before he makes any uſe of a Right angle, or of a Perpendicular Line (a- 
gainſt which they might have had the like exception) he demonſtrates in Prop. 
It, and 12. El. I. their Being, and how to effect Them. So likewiſe concerning 
a Circle, and all other Figures here defined, nay, even a Strait line It ſelf, Fuclide 
hath ſo provided, that firſt an Aſſent ſhall be given to their Being, before any 
conſideration is had of their Uſes, and Properties. 

Again, to examine farther this Definition. It ſhews indeed the natural Geneſis, 
but not the nature of a Circle, from which the Properties and Affections of Circles 
can only be demonſtrated. For this Geneſis is no ways applicable to all thoſe de- 
monſtrations. As in the firſt place it will appear, if when a Circle is named we 
put this Definition inſtead of the Definitum a Circle (for the Definition and 4 
nitum are always convertible) and then let be examined what Properties of a circle, 
or what Propoſition in the Third Element (where the Affections of circles are 
Specially handled) can be demonſtrated from the Revolution of a ſtrait line on a 

fixed point, Which is the Primary Notion that This Definition impoſes on Us. 

Whereas Euclid , Equal lines from the Center are in all thoſe Elementary Propoſitions 
ſerviceable toward their demonſtrations. I much wonder therefore at Borellus, 
an excellent Geometrician, to allow in his Euclides Reftitutus of This Definition, 

and change Euclid into an Axiom. Which he was forced to do for the conſtant 

uſe thereof in all demonſtrations, and Wholly to lay afide his own new framed, 
and unapplicable Definition. This can be only ſaid for it, that from the Geneſis 
of a circle it doth manifeſtly follow that all ſtrait lines from the Center are equal 
to one another. But now to make This a Secondary notion derived from the 
Geneſis of a Circle, and to put the Geneſis for the Primary PUREE Definition, 
which can never be uſed as a Definition, is very abſurd, and an intolcrable Over- 
ſight in a Geometrician. 

DEFINITION XVIL 
Diameter of a Circle is a ſtrait Line drawn through the 
Center, and terminated both ways by the Circumference of 
the (Circle. 

Which alſo cuts the Circle into halves. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

As the ſtrait line BC drawn through the Center A, and terminated both ways 
by the circumference at the points B, C, is called | 
a Diameter of the Circle, | 

In this Definition three conditions are laid down 
to determine That Line, which Euclide calls a 
Diameter of a Circle. | 

I, That a ſtrait line be drawn through the Cen- 
ter. 

2. That it be both ways terminated by the cir- 5 
cumference. 

3. That it cuts the Circle into halves. 

The two former conditions, Each by Them- 
ſelves, are too general, and inſufficient to deter- 
mine the Diameter. 

For as in the Figure it appears there may be finite ſtrait lines paſſing through 
the Center, and yet not terminated by the circumference, — 9 

W 

OF GEOMETRY. 15 
nated by the circumference which yet paſs not | 

through the Center, and are called Chords or OS 4 

commonly SUBTENSES,' in ref; to the 
Arches, which they Subtend: as the ſtrait line 
EF is called the Subtenſe of the Arch EDE. 

Not any one therefore of theſe two condi- 
tions can by it ſelf determine a Diameter; But B 

both together, namely the paſſing through the Ec F 

Center, and the termination in the circumfe- 

rence do fully ſpecificate this Line, and make 

up a compleat Definition of a Diameter of a 

Circle. 

Note that here is added particularly, of a Circle, 

ſaying the Diameter of a Circle. Becauſe there are many other figures hereafter 

to be conſidered, which have alſo their peculiar Diameters, different in ſeveral re- 
ſpects, from This of a Circle. 

Now for the third condition, that the Diameter cuts the circle into halves. 
This truly is altogether needleſs, except there might be ſome other line having 
the two former conditions, which notwithſtanding did not cut the circle into 
halves; And therefore it was neceſſary to add this third condition, for the juſt de- 
termination of the Diameter of a Circle. 

There might as well have been added, That the Diameter is the greateſt line 
in a Circle. For this notion does immediately concern the Diameter it ſelf, whereas 
the other only declares how it affects the Circle. 

The truth is, They are both demonſtrable Propoſitions and in this place alike 
impertinent. But as This laſt is demonſtrated in the 15 Propoſition of the Third 
Element ; ſo Thales has demonſtrated the Other here ſubjoyn'd, as ſhall be ſhewn 
in due place. Moreover, this addition of Biſection of the Circle anticipates the 
following definition of a Semicircle, contrary to the exact method of the ancient 
Mathematicians. lt is therefore certainly none of Euckds, but ſome marginal note, 
how old ſoever it may be, that happend to be Tranſcribed into the Text. 

DEFINITION XVIII. 

Semicircle is a Figure comprehended by a Diameter, and That 
part of the Circumference of the Circle, which is intercepted 
by the ſame Diameter. | = 

ANNOTATIONS, 

As i the figure BD CB, comprehended by the circumference BD C and the 
Diameter BC, is named a Semicircle, This is 
The ſecond of Figures, made indeed by diſſimilar 
and incompatible lines, yet ſuch as are the moſt 
ſimple in their kind, a ſtrait line, and the circum- 
ference of a Circle. | 

Euclide having in the definition of a Circle ſta- 
ted a A next by the poſition of that B C 
point define a Diameter: and then from the A 

iameter a Semicircle. 

The Diameter is the ſecond ſtrait line to be conſider d in a Circle. For the 
Raies are the primary ſtrait lines, and eſſential in the notion of a Circle, wherein 
the Diameter is not at all concern d. And tho it happens, that a Radius be half 
of a Diameter; yet It ariſes not from the Diameter, as the Semicircle does from 
the Circle: but the Radius is put abſolute in it ſelf, without any reſpect to the 
Diameter, or dependence on It: And both Radius and Diameter do immediately re- 
late to the Circle; each diſtinctiy — conceptions, without 

any 

rch 
tions 

16 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

any relation to one another, | So that tho from a A Circle, Euclide uſes the 
word nuuxixAuy a Semicircle, yet from Meigs A Diameter, he never ſays » 
luigi, Or 1udNeperrers, @ Semidiameter. Which ſome modern Writers not well con- 
ſidering have, inſtead of Radius, or in Exclid s phraſe, The line from the Center, pre- 
poſterouſly uſed the word Semidzameter, as if It did ariſe from the biſection of 
the Diameter, as the primary Line; Whereas the Radius is before the Diameter 
in the natural conception of a circular . 

After the definition of a Semicircle, Proclus inſerts for a definition, That The 
Center of the Semicircle is the ſame with the Center of the Circle. Or rather he ſhould 
have ſaid, that The Center of the Semucarcumference is the ſame with the Center of 
the Circle it ſelf. For indeed the Center of the Circle may be ſaid to be alſo the 
Center of the whole Circumference, or Semacereumference, or any part thereof, when Ir is 
conſidered meerly by it ſelf, as a Line. But it cannot be ſo properly ſaid to be 
the Center of the Semicircle, or Semicircular Figure. However, This is not to 
be receiv'd as a definition of Euclidi, but an Annotation, either of Proclus himſelf; 
Or elſe ic might happen in his particular Copy of Fwchde to be transferr'd from 
a marginal Note into the Text. For it 1s found only in his Commentaries, and 
eee eee Baſi Greek Edition of 

But moreover, that Euclide is ſometimes thus corrupted, by transferring Mar- 
ginal Notes into the Text, will manifeſtly in this very place, where in 
the Baſ Greek Edition (Which as we have ſaid has not Preclus his definition of 
the Center of a Semicircle ) is put the 6. Definition of the Third Element, con- 
cerning the Segment of a Circle in general, notwithſtanding that the fame defini- 
tion is alſo found in its proper place among the definitions of the third Book. 
And we may conjecture, that Exchde having here defined a Semicircle, which is 
one kind of Segment of a Circle, ſome One noted what he had elſewhere ſaid 
of other Segments of a Circle, which by the inadvertency of a Tranſcriber was 
afterwards order d the definitions) of this Firſt Book. For every Book of 
Euclide has its peculiar ſubject different from the reſt, and is therefore accounted 
a diſtin& Element, having Definitions proper to the matter It treats of, which 

: * 

are laid down at the entrance into every Bo. 
| Of ftrait-lin'd Figures. 
8 DEFINITION XIX. 

0 Trait lin d Figures are Thoſe , which are comprehended by 

ſtrait lines. has I 
| DEFINITION XX. 

T Rilateral, by three trait lines. 

DEFINITION XXL. 

0 Uadrilateral, by four ſtrait lines. 

DEFINITION XXIL 

M“ are comprehended by more firait lues than four. 

A plain Superficies is made figurate by certain Bounds, or Terms, which incloſe 
the ſame. And therefore Ewchde hath. placed the definitions of plain Figures in 
an order anſwering to the funplicity of their Teans; ficft defining a Circle, be- 

| 15 Ing 

OF GEOMETRY. 27 
ing a Figure under One Term; next a Semicircle, a Figure under Two Terms; 
then, in order, Figures of Three Terms, Four Terms, n i 

We are here allo to obſerve the property of ſeveral words uſed in this place, 
which by degrees are properly changed from one to the other, altho the ſame 
thing be ſignified. The fumple words originally are Texppay, Lines, and me, 
Sides, between which E UucL1oDs makes this diſtinction. For ſpeaking in veneral of 
ftrait-lind Figures, he ſays, EVN alla. Strait lin d Figures, But next when 
he does divide, and fpecificate The 2 Figures, he ſays not rehganα & w 

| Quaarilmeal, or Three 

Teay Trigramma & Tetragramma, that is, Trilinea and 

_ a _ lin d Figures ; but redes & mwan Tripleura & Tetrapleura, 
is, Trilateral and Quadrilateral, or Three fided, and Four Hgures; changi 

the general word Lines into the particular name Sides. And again in the 9 

fication of Trilateral Figures , he gives to Them anew the name TAIAMNerk in 

the manner following. 
Of Trilateral Figures. 

DEFINITION XXIII. | 
.* 2 Triangle is a Figure which hath three equal 
5. 

ANNOTATIONS. \ 
That is, A ſtrait-lin'd Trilateral Figure of three equal fides, I call / % 

an Equilaters! Triangle. 
DEFINITION XXIV. 

A * Triangle is That which hath only two Sides 
equal. 

ANNOTATIONS. ., 
That is, A ftrait-lin'd Trilateral Figure of only awe equal fider, I AN 

call an Equicrural Triangle. 

DEFINITION XXV. 
A _— Triangle is That which hath the three ſides un- 
equal. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

After 
the number of their ſides into Trilateral, eral, - 
and Multilateral, Euchde begins with the Trilateral, being the firſt of all ſtrait- 
lin'd Figures. And the Trilateral Figures he divides into ſeveral Specics from 
all the poſſible changes that can be made, of their three ſides; Which is into 
three kindof Triangles. For now theſe particular Trilateral Figures he calls Tri- 
angles, And by a Triangle is to be conceived a Figure of three fides, tho' the 
word implyes three Angles; And only that Figure 1s named a 
Try which is Trilateral. For there may be a Figure, which 
has only three angles yet is not Trilateral, but comprehended 
by four lines, or more. As the Figure A B C D comprehended 
by the four lines AB, BC, CD, D A, has notwithſtanding only 
three angles at A, B, and D. For the BCD is not com- 
monly taken to belong to the Figure; * haye its reſpect B 

a 

according to 
ilat 

28 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

the contrary way wholly without the figure: And this is call d aoeJ?5, The Ar- 
row- headed Figure. There may be after this manner Triangles of five ſides, and 
fix ſides. In general ſuch kind of figures are called x«azywe, Hollow - angled Fi- 
gures. But concerning this double face of an angle we have already no- 
rice, that it is uſeleſs in Geometry. 145 

| +, Now in every T riangle we are to obſerve, and diſtinguiſh the names of Sides, 

3 f Lage, and Baſe, or Fulciment upon which the Other two fides are ſuppoſed to 

ations | ſtand. In a Triangle of three equal fides, if any one of the ſides be put for a Baſe, 'F 

x the Other two ſhall make equal Leggs. This therefore has three ſeveral changes of 3 

two equal Leggs: And ſo takes not a Name from the uy of two Leggs, which 
may be three ways variable, but from the equality of all the three fides, and is called 
an Equilateral Triangle. : nn 

In a Triangle of wo only Equal Sides, the Third Side is called the Baſe; and the 
Other Two the Equal Leggs. And in this caſe the Baſe, and Equal Leggs are de- 
termined, being only to be made one * way: Therefore a Triangle only of 
two equal Sides is ſpecially call d 1noxeais, Joſceles, or Eguicrural. 

But in a Triangle of three unequal Sides, let Any fide be put for a Baſe, the 
Other two ſhall make unequal Leggs every way: And therefore It is called - 

v rere, Scalenum Triangulum, A Lame, or Haulting triangle, ue > we, 

Undequaque claudicat, ſays Proclus. So a , and uneven way (as it is cited in 
Ade Li Adagies out of Plutarch) is Exam 6s, A Scambling way, 

4 

Moreover of Trilateral Figures. 

Magnitude, as before hath been noted, is in It ſelf indeterminate, and only by 
Termination becomes Figurate, therefore Euclide has firſt diſtinguiſhed Trilateral 
figures from the condition of their Terms in reſpect of their Equality, or Iln- 
equality to one another. : | 

And next, for the Quality of their Angles he lays down here another diſtinction, 

and denomination. As follows. 
| DEFINITION XXVI. 
| A Right angled Triangle hath a Right angle. 

| f 
ON 

B a, + * 
And ſuch a Triangle may be Equicrural, as ABC, or Scalene, as DEF, 
| DEFINITION XXVII. | 
| A N Obtuſe angled Triangle hath an Obtuſe angle. 

* « 

1 T % B Rr 

And ſuch a Triangle may be Equicrural as ABC, or Scalene as DEF, 
# | g f ; 4 | " | 'DEF I 

OF GEOMETRY. 29 
DEFINITION XVIII. 
A Acute angled Triangle hath three Acute angles. 

ue oe cnn 

And ſuch a Triangle may be Equi- 

lateral as A BC, or Equicrural as DEF, 
or Scalene as GH. 
From theſe diviſions It appears, that /_ 

there are ſeven ſorts of Strait-lind B 
Triangles. For the EQUILATERAL Triangle is Singular, and = Acute angled. 

The EQUICKRURAL may be Ryght —_— 2286 mpg fr — TT or 
Obtuſe angled as 2 

EY 

And 10 alſo may the 3 De be Right angled as ABC, or Acute 
angled as DEF, or REIT as GHI. — 

TN Fan 

= a Trang which has Three equa FS oi ne or Two equal 

angles, 2 
„ Eaclide has given no name, as he Yar go a _ which has 

Three e notes o 2 or Two e tal fide, or All Three ſides une e a Triangle 
of $4. equal angles 1s — Equilateral, and a two equal angles is 
ever Equicrual, and a Triangle of three unequal angles is ever Scalene, as will be 
ſhewn hereafter. And therefore if Triangles had received a diſtinction and name 
from the number of their Equal, or Unequal an angles, as they have from the num- 

ber of their Equal and Unequal ſides, there had been given two Names to the 
ſame thing. 

Of Quadrilateral Figures. 
DEFINITION XXIX. 

A Square is That, which is both Equilateral, and | © 4 
ectangular. | 

. — - - —ͤñ—ä—äͤä— ——— —) 

DEFINITION XXX. 

N Oblong is That, which is Rectaugu- 
lar, but not Equilateral. 

H DEFI- 

30 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

DEFINITION XXXI. 5 
A Rhombus is That, which is ARG 
| but not Reflangular. 7 

DEFINITION XXII. 

Rhomboeid is That, which having 

the oppoſite /ides and angles equal 

to one another, is neither 1 
nor Rectlangular. 5 

DEFINITION XXXIII. 

Et all other 1 Hegures | beſides Theſe Four | be 
called Trapezuutas, 0 or Tablets. 

\ 
\ ht 
\ 
\ * 25 12: 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Of Trilateral Figures, every Species has the common name of Tezyay, a Tri- 
angle. And as the Species has beſides a proper Epithete for diſtinction ſake, as 
Triangle Ezuilateral, Triangle Equicrural, * Scalene, &c. 

3 of theſe Quaarilateral —_— One only K rw is called TeTga yaw, a Qua- 
2 , and That, from its ſingu aging of all its Sides; and the Rectitude 
of all its Angles. ehe other Ah — tho they be all Quadrangular; 
yet have they not the general name of angle with an Epithete annexed as 
the Triangles have. But each Species — an other diſtin Ap — as a 
2 5 Oblong, Rhombus and Momboeid. Which three with that Figure 
Amon. Tirexyaru, a Quadrangle, and commonly tranſlated a Quadrate, or 

Square, make the four Regular Quadrilateral Figures. All the other Quadrilateral 

Figures have one Name in general Trapezium, A Tablet. 

Parallels. 
DEFINITION XXXIV. 

Arallels are ſtrait lines, which being 
in the ſame Plane, and produced in- 
fanitely either way, do neither way meet 
One with the Other. 5 
ANNOTATIONS. 

K The weed kay oth is a meer ee. term of Art, r according A 
iteral expolition of NaggAnac, is, Linee ad ſe inwicem poſite, bre 
one another. But the Geometrical Notion d Thing to be conceived X 
requires theſe four Conditions. ; 
1. Parallels are to be trait lines. 
2. They mult lye in the ſame Plane. 
For if they be in different Planes, as One in a Plane 4 The Other i * 
P 

* -Y >, * 
— * 
5 + + 

OF GEOMETRY. 21 

Plane beneath, then the ſtrait lines may be infinitely drawn forth both ways, and 
never meet, yet are They not ſuch as Euclide calls Parallels. 
| 3. They are producible infinitely both ways. | 
4. After this imaginary production both ways infinitely, (that is, indefinitely, 
or indeterminately further and further at pleaſure) They are never to 
meet together. a 

Let therefore the Plane be one and the ſame, The production free, and 
both ways infinitely, «s dr,, In inſinitum, without any reſtriction or qualifica- 
tion in the manner of the Production, and neither way let there be any Concurrence; 
Then the Strait Lines having theſe Conditions are called PARALLELS. 

In Paralleliſm therefore the Subject is Strait Lines in the ſame Plane, and the 
Attribute of theſe Strait Lines is —— — So that upon any mention of 
Parallels the Geometrical Notion to be conceived under that name of Parellels is 
Nonconcurring Strait Lines in one and the ſame Plane. 

This Definition, at preſent, only ſuppoſes ſuch Lines to be in nature, but before 
theſe kind of Nonconcurring ſtrait lines are brought into any uſe, Euclide demon- 
ſtrates in the 27**. Propoſition of this Firſt Element, that there are ſuch kinds of 
ſtrait lines (called by him Parallels) which both ways infinitely produced ſhall ne- 
ver meet, and in the 31ft. Prop. he ſhews how to draw them. 

But now in this matter of Paralleliſm there are two miſtakes made by moſt In- 
terpreters. One in reſpect of the name and tranſlation of the word na. 
The Other is in the Notion of the Thing, which is to be conceived under that 
Name and Term of Art. 

For firſt concerning the Name, many Tranſlators, Latinet, and Others, take 
Parallels to be of the ſame ſignification with Eguidiſtant lines, ſaying, Parallels, or 
Eguidiſtant lines, are &c. going then forward with Euclid : Definition; As if the 
Subject of the Definition, or the Name Parallels fignified Equidiſtant lines, and 
that geapmuay megnnn, and 2gαEl iy afronewdvay, Or ice were indifferently 
to be taken for the ſame; and that here Euckde had defined Equidiſtant lines by 
Nonconcurrency. Whereas Ewchde neither uſes the word Equidiſtant, nor by the 
word Parallels underſtands Equidiſtant lines: But only lays down the Conditions 
of ſome certain ſtrait lines: Which Lines in a Signal Term of Art he calls Paralleli. 

And becauſe the Latines have not any word, that anſwers to It, therefore the 
Greek name ought to be retained, ſaying, Lines Parallele, for yeauua racarhnns ; 
and not Linee Aquidiſtantcs. For, as we have ſaid, by the words ggaupay ae 
a, is only fignitied ygapuun 2g aun, linea adverſus lineam, Line againſt Line, 
or Line to Line. — commonly Archimedes, Apollonius, Pappus, ſometimes 
Euclide alſo, ſay, is j «> ab rw yd, when they mean, That AB is parallel to 
CD; which phraſe of » as aÞs ww , cannot in any propriety of Speech 
among the Greeks, bear the interpretation of Equidiſtant lines: Neither was it 
ſo underſtood by Thoſe ancient Geometricians. 

Again, the ſecond miftake is of Thoſe, who rightly take the word Parallels 
for 9gapuun M aun, LINE TO LINE. and meerly for a Term of Art, not as a 
common word ſignifying Equidiſtant lines, but, changing Euclid : Notion, do de- 
fine the Term Parallels by the conception of Equidiſtancy, in the place of Euchd's 
Nonconcurrency. 

So Poſdonius, as we find in the Commentaries of Proclus on this matter, thus 
defines Parallels. | 

Another Definition of Parallels. 

Parallels are ſtrait lines in one Plane, neither Inclining nor Reclining, But having 
all the Perpendiculars Ten 
unto the - +, wy _ 

But all trait lines, which make the Perpendiculars leſs, ſhall at length meet 
together, For the Perpendiculars only can determine che Altitude of ſpaces, and 
the diſtances of Lines; wherefore the 3 being equal, the * 

2 e 

32 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

the Lines are equal. But the Perpendiculars being made greater or leſs, the 
Diſtance is made greater or leſs, and they ſhall meet together that way, w 
the Perpendiculars are leſs. | 

— 

— 

cn 
ions 

a 
/ 
þ 
4 

WORE 

Thus much Poſidonius, who defines Parallels to be Equidiſtant ſtrait lines from 
the equality of all their Perpendiculars. 

But now we are next to conſider, and demand of * and his Followers, 
to what uſe the Notion of Equidiſtancy ſerves in theſe Elements. We find no- 
thing advanced by Peſdonius or Others in the Doctrine of Paralleliſm upon this 
new ition: And certainly if from Equidiſtancy any Thing had been made 
better, and more firm than from Nonconcurrency, ſuch a kind of improvement 
could not have altogether periſhed. | | 

But yet thus mach we do acknowledge, that Euclid s Nonconcurring ſtrait lines 
are Equidiſtant ; and moreover, that Equidiſtancy is the Phyſical Cauſe of their 
Nonconcurrence. But yet the Equidiſtance of Parallels is no where apply d to any 
Propoſition throughoat all theſe Elements. The only Notion of Parallels uſed oc 
uſeful in Geometry, is An unlimited produftion of ſtrait lines both ways without con- 
currence. And therefore this affection of Nonconcurrency, Euclide the great Ma- 
ſter of his Art, lays down to be only repreſented to our Imagination upon the 
naming of Parallels. But whether theſe ſtrait lines called Parallels be equidiſtant, 
or not, or what is the diſtance of Parallels, he thought not fit to conſider, becauſe 
thoſe Conſiderations ſerved to no further uſe in any of his Geometrical demon- 
ſtrations. If it be ſaid that ſtrait lines every where equidiſtant ſhall never meet, 
tis true and obvious. But this is to deſine a Geometrical Term in one ſenſe, and 
to uſe it in another: To define Parallels by Their Eguidiſtance, but ever after to 
apply them in their Noncurrence. A groſs and intolerable abſurdity in the Ma- 
t tics, or in the Definitions of any Science. | 

We are moteover to obſerve, that altho' Equidiftancing ſtrait lines be the proper 
cauſe of their Nonconcurrence, yet Equidiſtancy is not in general the adequate, or 
only cauſe of Nonconcurrence ; ſo that whatſoever lines infinitely produced ei- 
ther way ſhall never meet, the ſame are to be always equidiſtant. For on the 
contrary, it 1s certain, that in one and the fame Plane there may be two lines 
produced infinitely, which Lines ſhall never meet together, tho they be not E- 

idiſtant, but do continually approach nearer and nearer to one another. As 

Conchoidal line of Nicomedes ſerib d by Pappas in — 22. lib. Iv. Math. Collect. 
And alſo by Eutocius in his Commentary upon Prop. 1. lib. II. Archimed. de Sphera 
& Cylndro, which curved Line draws nearer continually to à certain ſtrait line, 
with which notwithſtanding it ſhall never meet. 

And becauſe this Propoſition ſeems very ſtrange, and yet may be eaſily made 
evident to any common underſtanding, without a ſtrict Mathematical demonſtra- 
tion; therefore to ſatisfy the Curious (Others may paſs it over) we ſhall here 
only explain it, referring the legitimate proof therefore to 4 and Others. 

In a plain Superficies let a fixt point be put as P: And let there be a ſtrait 
line without the point P, both ways infinite, as AB. Then from the point P 
ſuppoſe a ſtrait line PCD to make right angles with the line AB at C; and 
that the ſame line DCP be directly continued infinitely from P towards E. 

Now imagine the line DCPE to move along upon the line AB either way, 
towards A, or towards B, in ſuch manner that the point C may lye always in the 
line AB, and thereby keep the line DC, in every place, the ſame _— 

OF GEOMETRY. 32 
And moreaver let the ſame line DCPE be conceived to along through the 

. in the line DC PE 
beine C is det to the line AB: and ſecondly, that The Whole line 
DCPE is determined to the point P. 

„„ 
—_— 2414, 

CELLS 
„ IIS „„ 

A 

A 

keep C D every where at the ſame And ſecondly, e the ſtrait line 

DCPE can never come to be coincident with the ſtrait line AB; for that the 

oint P, 8 the ftrait line DC PE always paſſes, is fixed at a certain 
m 

But now It is manifeſt, that in this motion of DC PE, the point D inclines 
continually nearer and nearer to A B, making the Perpendiculars D F, DG, DH, 
&c. ſhorter and ſhorter, 

Wherefore the point D deſcribing the Conchoidal curve line DDD &c. ſhall 
never bring that line to meet with AB, tho it draws continually nearer and 
nearer to AB. 

The Point P may be called the Pole. A B the Normal Line. DCPE the Ar- 
row. The Point D the Arrow-head, which deſcribes the Conchoidal line. The Point 
C the Button which holds the line CD at the ſame length. And under theſe 
names this matter may be fitly explained, and diſcourſed of: ſo as to be cafily 
underſtood and acknowl for a certain truth : Which indeed is founded upon 
the ſubtilty of itude, being in its nature infinitely diviſible. Whereof among 
many Others this Conchoidal line is a demonſtrative Argument. 

H 3 Such 

rch 
Mios 

34 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

- Such alſo are the Ahmptotes of an Hyperbola ; As for example, let the curve 
line DEF be an Hyperbola. There is a certain point, as A, from which may be 
drawn certain ſtrait lines, A B, AC, which being infinitely produced toge- 

I 

| | 
ther with the Curve DEF, ſhall continually approach nearer and nearer to the 

ſame; yet ſhall They never meet one with the other: As Apollontus demonſtrates in 
Dy. 1. Lib. II. Of the Conte Elements, And then in Prop. 4. he ſhows moreover how 

in any two ſtrait lines making an angle an Hyperbola may be ftated, to which the 
Same lines ſhall be Aſymptoter. Theſe ſtrait lines are called Afymptores , that is, 
lines Noncomeident from this property, that altho they come nearer and nearer 
infinitely to the Hyperbolical curve line, yet ſhall they never meet with it. A 
moſt true and wonderful Myſtery in Geometry. 

And thus much for the Explication of the Definition of Parallels, and of all 
the Other Definitions of the Firſt Element of Geometry, 

Of Mathematical Propoſitions 

3 Demonſtrable and Indemonſtrable. 
ln the Mathematical Sci uſe 
D of Propoſitions called Pro- 
A Problem is a Practical Propoſition, in which Something 
is propoſed to be done. 

| : As, To find the Center of a Given Circle, 
This Propoſition is called a Problem: And it is the firſt Propoſition of the Third 

Element, 

OF GEOMETRY. 35 

Element. Where, according to the Queſtion propoſed, Firſt the Center of any 
circle is by a Geometrical Practice certainly found, and after that, the Problem 

is demonſtratively proved to be Done, or Effected, namely, that the Center of 
the Given Circle is found. 74 

A Theorem is a ſpeculative Propoſition, in which Something 
is pronounced to be True. 

As, the Diameter of a Circle is the greateſt of all ſtrait lines in the ſame Circle. 

This Propoſition is called a Theorem: And It is the 1570. Propoſition of the 
Third Element; and there demonſtrated to be True. 

For in the firſt place we are to be informed, that whatſoever in theſe Geo- 
metrical Elements 1s ed, whether in form of a Problem, or a Theorem, 
the ſame 1s either undeniably demonſtrated ; Or it is at the Firſt aſſented to from 
its own ſelf evidence without any further proof. For in all humane Reaſonings 
every argumentation muſt be grounded upon ſome Thing, which is in it (elf In- 
demonſtrable, that is to ſay, is incapable to be made more manifeſt to us from 
any other thing, than it is evident of it ſelf to every common underſtanding. 
For if there were not a power of ſelf-evidence in ſome things, which force upon 
Us an immediate Aﬀent, no rational diſcourſe, nor any demonſtration could ever 
be framed, or have an unqueſtionable Beginning. 

And therefore in this place there are premiſed ſuch general Principles, upon 
which, and the like, the Mathematician builds his Demonſtrations. 

Of Mathematical Principles. 

Of Principles in the Mathematics, ſome are Problems, ſome 
Theorems: like as the Demonſtrable Propoſitions are. 

The Problematical, or Practical Principles are called A, Petitions, or Po- 
ſtulates. Becauſe in theſe Propoſitions ſome Things are required, or poſtulated to 
be Effected, or done, without any proof of their Being, or Conſtruction; for that 
their Being, and Conſtruction is molt fimple, and manifeſt. A. 

To draw a ſtrait Line from point to point. 

The Theoretical, or Speculative Principles are called Kwaj way, Common No- 
tions as being obyious Conceptions, and generally received. For when Men 
from the particular Experience of their Senſes, have naturally an agreement in 
their perceptions, and uſe of Things, they are then by one, and the ſame com- 
mon, and innate Reaſon, alike enabled to deduce from thoſe ſenſations the ſame 
Univerſal Propoſitions; which therefore, whenſoever propoſed to Others, and 
the words underſtood, are preſently without hefitation Aſſented to. As that 

* 

The Whole is greater than its Part. 

Such kind of Propoſitions the Latine Philoſophers call Maxims, the Greek 
AEvoudite, Axioms, or Dignities, for that They are ſentences of Worth, ſo Signal, 
and ſo Dignified, as to carry their own Authority, and Credit along with them- 
ſelyes, whereby to force an Univerſal Aſſent. | 

Now Euclide thus begins the Principles of Geometry. 

: rr ²⁰ I TE aaa gn. EE 

36 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

Ihe Practical Principles Poſtulates, or Petitions. 
POSTULATE I. 
Et it be granted, From any point unto any point to draw a 
Strait Line. | 
ANNOTATIONS. 
Euclide here firſt tacitely preſumes the putting of a point any where: or jointly 
with the drawing of a ſtrait line he does alſo poſtulate the putting of a point, or 

points at pleaſure. And moreover becauſe a point put to a point is ſtill but a 
point; therefore if two points be diſtinctly put, as in this Poſtulate, then it is a 

point Here, and a point There; ſo that ſome kind of Length, or Space muſt be 

conceived to lye between Here and There, when Euclide lays, From a point to 
a point. | eels. 

| Now in the 4* Definition Euclide tells us, what kind of Length he means by 
the name of a ſtrait line: And in this Poſtulate he requires that ſuch a Length, 
as he calls a ftrait line, may be put, and join any two points together. This in- 
deed is Zquum Poſtulatum, a very reaſonable Requeſt, and as juſtly to be granted, 
as a point Here, and a point There. For between Here, a . e we may 
make infinite deviations, and By paths; yet we naturally conceive but One only 
Fw. and direct Way, and that can be nothing elſe, but what Euclide calls a 

rait line. 

Moreover we are to know, that Euclide only means a Mental Duction, or Po- 
ſition of that ſtrait line between any two points ; not a draught of the hand from 
point to point by the help of a Ruler: Which does but imperfectly imitate that 
Geometrical exactneſs, which we conceive in a Mathematical ſtrait line; For a 
ſtrait line actually never was, nor ever can be drawn. But in Practical Geometry 
ſufficient it is Pro Accurato ponere quam proxime Accuratum. And not only this po- 
ſtulated Problem; but all Geometrical Problems, whether poſtulated as Principles, 
or are from Principles to be demonſtrated , are likewiſe all ſuppoſed to be ef- 
fected in our Imagination only, without the help of our outward Senſes, or of a 
Manual operation, or any material Inſtrument. Yet the Ruler, and Compaſſes 
have always been allowed to a Geometrician ; not becauſe Geometry needs them, 
but only to aſſiſt our Underſtanding by the Mechanical conſtruction of a ſenſible 
Figure, whereby we may go the eaſier through an Intellectual demonſtration. 

And further from this Poſtulare, it is eſpecially to be obſerved, that the Exiſtence 
of ſtrait-lind Angles, and alſo of ftrait-lin'd Figures, as well as of ftrait lines 

themſelves, do naturally follow, and is here tacitely preſumed, 

For if from any point a ſtrait line may be drawn to any 

point, as from the point A to the point B: It is likewiſe as 0 
evident, that again from the ſame point A an Other ſtrait A 

line AC may be drawn to an Other point, as C: and ſo 

make an Angle, as BAC. And . it had been fri- 

moons to haye poſtulated the making of an Angle in ge- A 
neral. | 

Again, if there be put three points not directly ſituated to one another, as 
A,B, C, then by this Poſtulate, They may be joined by three B 

ſtrait lines, and ſo there is conſtituted a Figure of three | 
ſides, called a Triangle, Wherefore Euclide neither Poſtu- A 
lates, nor Demonſtrates the conſtruction of a Triangle in 
general. In like manner if there be put four points, or more 

at pleaſure; and they be all joined by ftrait lines drawn © 
from point to point, there will in common ſenſe ariſe 

Quadrilateral, and Multilateral ftrait-lin'd Figures. So that their exiſtence is evi- 

dent 

OF GEOMETRY. 37 

dent from this Poſtulate without any further demonſtrati a 
— tec any nftration of their ſtructure. 

of ſtrait- lin d Figures defi- 

ned by Euclide, as an Equi- 

lateral Triangle, or Square, 

&c. Alſo a Right Angle, | — 

Parallel line, &c. Euclide ne- 
ver makes uſe of any of 
them, till he hath firſt ma- : . f | 
nifeſted their Being, and in particular their Conſtruction. So accurate is the 
Elementator in his Method, as neither to be ſuperfluous nor deficient in any matter. 

POSTULATE IL 
T O Continue a finite Strait Line directly onward. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

After that a trait line is allowed to be drawn from any point to any point; It 
is as much, or more evident, that a Finite ftrait line, that is, a ſtrait line deter- 
mined by two extream points, may be from thoſe points conceived to be either 
way farther produced and continued at pleaſure in the fame direct courſe: And 
therefore the continuation of a ſtrait line ought in common reaſon to be granted 
as well as a ftrait line, which is the only Thing here required. 

Conſentaneous to the Second Poſtulate, This likewiſe might be added. 

To put two ſtrait Lines directly One to the Other. 

That is, to conceive two ſtrait Lines ſo ſituated to each other, that they may 
both together make one ſtrait Line. This is frequently made ule of in the Ele- 
ments. But becauſe in this caſe there are only two Given (trait Lines imagined 
to be in a certain poſition towards one another; and not any other Magni- 
tude de novo created, as in the foregoing Poſtulate there is to a Given ſtrait Line 
a New One in a direct continuation to be joined; Therefore Euclide does not po- 
ſtulate This as an Other, and diſtinct practical Principle: but upon occalion aſ- 
fumes the liberty of Poſition in Lines Given; Sometimes of one (trait Line to an 
other directly; Sometimes of One ſtrait Line upon an other, as it may belt ſuit 
to the demonſtration of thoſe Propofitions, which require ſuch an Apparatus of 
Situation toward their demonſtrations. 

POSTULATE III. 
F Rom any Center, and to any Diſtance to deſcribe a Circle. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

In the 5*. Definition Eucl:de means, that by a Circle ſhould be conceived a Fi- 
gure bounded on one ſingle Term, having within it a Point, from whence all 

it Lines drawn unto that Term are equal to one another, that is, having 
within a middle Point, which he names a Center, every way equally diſtant from 
that Term, which he names a Circumference. Now this Definition imports no 
more than that whenfoeyer he mentions a Circle, we are to conceive ſuch a kind 
of Figure, But here now Euclide farther poſtulates the conſtruction of a Circle 
4 to this Definition) to be granted him, as a Figure of an eaſie conſtru- 
ion, and very manifeſt of it ſelf to be in nature. For in order to make plain 
the formation of a Cirele, he firſt puts a point , which in relation to a Circle he 
had before, and fo does here call a Center. go ny Hp wich he ſuppoſes 
any Diſtance to be taken (Diſtance in this place is u in the common 

acceptation of the word: and therefore it is not by Euchde defined —_ 
I 

— . ß 5 — 
6 2 „ r * * _ 1 = = = 

——R——_ 

38 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
Geometrical Terms of Art) Now the natural conception of Diſtance is the ſhorteſt 
Tract between things diſtant from one another: So that the diſtance from any 
point to any point, is in common ſenſe taken by a ſtrait; and not by any crooked 
Line. And i: is already granted in the firſt Poſtulate, that from any point to any 
(how near, or how far ſoever off) a ſtrait line may be drawn. | 
Put then the Center A, and from the Point A, let be drawn 
the ſtrait line A B to ſet forth any diſtance. Now the Cen- 
ter and diſtance being thus laid down, the deſcription of a 
Circle which is the thing required to be granted, does ap- 
parently ariſe, For if we conceive the line AB to moye on 
the point A, as fixed and immoveable, till the ſame line re- 
turn to the place, from whence it began to move; then tis 
evident, that this imaginary motion of the line A B hath 
deſcribed a Circle, whoſe Center is A: and that the point B 
hath delineated the bound, or circumference of the ſame | 
Circle. For becauſe the line AB in its revolution muſt be coincident, and the 
very ſame with all the ſtrait lines that can be imagined to be drawn from the point 
A to the circumference; therefore they muſt all be equal to AB, and to one ano- 
ther, according to the definition of a Circle. | | 

Thus therefore the ſtructure of a Circle needs not any artifice, or ratiocina- 
tion to prove its Being: but it is in it ſelf ſo ſimple, and obvious, That it may be 
as juſtly poſtulated, as the Duction of a ſtrait line from point to point. For in- 
deed they are alike evident, there being in nature only two fimple Motions, the 
Strait, and the Circular, and thereby are created the moſt ſimple of all Lines, and 
Figures, a ſtrait Line, and a Circle. | 

Moreover, in relation to this intellectual conſtruction of a Circle, we may ob- 
ſerve that the Radius of a Circle, is by Ariſtotle in his Mechanics always named 
1 Yex Pure Toy xx), The Line deſcribing the Circle. Whereas Euchd s phraſe is 4 «© T8 
xivres, The Line from the Center. Ariſtotle : Appellation reſpects the Genes, and 
Euchd i the Definition of a Circle. And again, from this mee. or Circumlation 
of the Radius, in the creation of a Circle, the curve Line deſcribed, and bounding 
the Circle is call d T:g,Þtoaz, a Periphery, a name very proper to the nature of the 
Thing. For any curve Line, which by a regulated Motion returns into it ſelf, 
is ſignificantly called a Periphery, or Circumference. But it is named by Archimedes 
in his Cyclometries, ij #E4uires, as meaſuring the Circle in its Ambit round about: 
like as 3) 2J#peres, the Diameter is fo called, for that it meaſures the Circle through- 
out at its utmoſt wideneſs. Archimedes therefore calls the Bound of a Circle the 
Perimeter, in order to the menſuration of the Area of a Circle, which was his 

preſent buſineſs; And Euclide the Periphery from the manner of its Generation. 

Now anſwerable to this ſpeculative Formation of a Circle, is the Mechanical de- 
{cription thereof made by help of the Compaſſes, and firſt invented by Perdix the 
Nephew of Dedalus, as Ovid reports. Which Inſtrument with its uſe he has moſt 
accurately expreſſed, Metamorph. Lib. vir. 

Perdix ex uno duo ferrea — nodo 

Junxit, ut æquali ſpatio diſtantibus Ipſis, 

Altera pars ek pars altera "xl." ? 
Theſe three eaſy Problems, firſt to draw a ſtrait Line, Then to continue the ſame , 
at pleaſure, And laſtly to deſcribe a Circle, are the only practical Principles laid 
down by Euclide, to effect all his Geometrical Conſtructions, and all thoſe excel- 
lent and ſubtil Problems, which are demonſtrated in theſe Elements. 

Laſtly tis ſpecially to be remarked, that Euclide moſt judiciouſly choſe rather to 
make the Geneſis of a Circle to be a Poſtulate, than with ſome of our modern 
Geometricians, an uſeleſs, unapplicable Definition: the abſurdity whereof we 
have ſhewn before. 

A ſtrait Line therefore, and a Circle are the only Inſtruments of plain Geome- 
try, and the only two Things, which Euclide Poſtulates to be granted him. But 
Sud Geometry requires moreoyer to make uſe of Conc „ the Parabola, 

Hyperbola, 

r DAME'THY. 39 
Hyperbels, and Eltpſis, for the Effection of Problems of an higher, or more com- 

pound nature, than what can be perform'd by a ſtrait Line, and a Circle: which 
difference in this matter ought to be well conſidered and obſerved, 

For a foul error it is in a Geometrician (whereof ſome of our Moderns have 
been too guilty ) to undertake the Solution of ſuch kind of Problems (as the Du- 
plication of a Cube, and the like) by ſtrait Lines, and Circles, whereas they may 
be readily effected by the Conic Sections, which are as truly Mathematical, as a 
Circle, and have a Genefis, as purely Geometrical : Both arifing from fimple Mo- 
tions: the Circle being created by a mental revolution of a ſtrait Line upon a 
fixed point; and the Comic Sections from a mental Motion of a Plane cutting a 
Conical Superficies. As is ſhewn in the Conic Elements of Abolloniur. 

The Speculative Principles, Common Notions, or Axioms. 
. AXIOM I. 
T Hings equal to the ſame, are equal to one another. 

ANNOTATIONS. | 
As if A beequal to B, and C be equal to B; Then ſhall A and C be 

equal to one another. | 

Now to expreſs this briefly in Characters, commonly named Symbolt, 
or Species after the manner of Analyſts, with which to be timely ac- 
quainted is very uſeful to a Geometrician; 

Let the Sign of Equality be this = 
Then ſhall the Propoſition be thus ſignified. 
If A=Band C= B. Then ſhall A= C. ABC 
In words thus, If A be equal to Band C to B, then ſhall A be equal to C. 

AXIOM u. 
1 F Equals be added to Equals the M holes are equal. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

EHE | 
gether be equal to Cand D added together. 
In Symbols thus it is. 
Let the Sign of Addition be this + 
Then ſhall the Propoſition be thus fignified. 
If A=CandB =D, then ATB =C+D. 4 
In words thus. If A be equal to C, and B to D, then A more B (that 4 
is mare by B) ſhall be equal to C more D (that is more by D.) 

AXIOM II 
T Equals be taken from Equals, the Remainders are equal. 

9 

Os ? 

ANNOTATIONS. r 

Let A, B, be equal to C. D, and A be equal to C: then A taken 
from A, B, and C taken from C, D, ſhall leave the remainders B, D, a Ig 
equal to one another. B D 

To expreſs this in Symbols, 
Let the Sign of Subtraction be this — | 1 
Then ſhall the Propoſition be thus ſignified. 4 
. 1 and A=C, then ATB AS CT D- C, 4 

arch 
ations 

40 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
In words thus. If A more B be equal to C more D. And A be equal to C, then 

A more B leſs A (or leſs by A) ſhall be equal to C more D, leſs C (or leſs by C) 

That is, B ſhall be equal to D. 5 
7 Sho AXIOM NIV. 
17 Equals be added to Unequals, the Wholes are unequal. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Let B, D be unequal to one another, B the greater D the leſſer; 
and let A beequal to C. Then ſhall A added to B be unequal to C 
added to D. So that A, B, together is greater then C, D, together, 7 
the inequality being ſtill the ſame as before it was between B and D. 3 
To expreſs this in Symbols, 
Let the Sign of Greater be this >. 
Let the Sign of Leſſer be this <. 
Then ſhall the Propoſition be thus ſignified. + 4 
If B D, and A=C, then B+ AS DC. 1 
In words thus. If B be greater than D, and A be equal to C, then A |© 
ſhall B more A be greater than D more C. 

S 

= AXIOM V. 
Fi Equals be taken from Unequals, the Remainders are unequal. 
ANNOTATIONS. 

Let A, B; C, D, be unequal to one another, A, B, the Greater, C, D, | 
the Leſſer, and let A be equal toC. Then A taken from A,B, and C | 
taken from C, D, ſhall leave the Remainders B, D, unequal to one | 
another; B the Greater, D the Leſſer, the inequality remaining the 7 
ſame that it was at firſt. | B 

In Symbols thus it is. 4 

If A, Bc, D, and A =, C, then A, B- AC, D- C. That is, 
B>D. | 1 

In words thus. If A, B, be Greater than C, D, and A be equal to C. 3 5 
Then A, B, Leſs A ſhall be greater than C, D, leſs C. That is, B ſhall Al 
be greater than D. | W139: | r 

In theſe four laſt Axioms tis naturally evident, that Equality and Inequal: 
not changeable by Addition, or Subtraction of Equals. So that after ſuch 
tions, or Subtractions, the things are as at firſt Equal, or Unequal. 

Theſe are the general Maxims of this nature, which were thought fit by Euclide 
to be laid down in Form. Altho there be uſed hereafter ſome other Propoſitions 
of the very ſame kind: Principles indeed as evident and as neceſſary as the forego- 
ing, But becauſe they are not Primary Notions, but only manifeſt Conſectaries 
from theſe here now mentioned, or elſe that they are not of ſo general an uſe ; 
Euclide at the preſent paſſes thoſe over, and only aſſumes them upon occa- 
ſion, as the matter in hand requires. Which order is leſs troubleſome to Be- 
ginners, and therefore ought rather to be followed, than that of Clavizs, and ſome 
Others after him, who have gathered theſe kind of Principles out of ſeyeral places 
in Euclide, and do uſually pack them all together; without a juſt conſideration 
had of Principles Primative, or Derivative, more, or leſs General, . 

AXIOM VI. 
T Hings which are Double of the ſame are equal to one another. 

AXIOM 

YA 

; 
4 

OF GEOMETRY. 4 

AXIOM VI. 

T Hing which are Halves of the Same, are equal to one ano- 
Her. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

In theſe two Axioms Euclide inſtances only in the Duple, and in the Half. For 
in laying down theſe common notions, he judged it ſufficient to put the Principal 
notion in General, leaving the Conſectaries, which do naturally follow to every 
ones common underſtanding. Alſo ſuperfluous it is, and beſides too trivial, to in- 
termix with the general Principles every obvious Conſequence. For in the naming 
Double and Halt, who does not preſently conceive the ſame evident truth in 
Triples, Quadruples, Quintuples, &c. And fo in a Third, a Fourth, a Fifth, or 
any like part of the ſame thing, or of Equal Things: Which laſt alſo of Equals, Eu- 
chde could have as eaſily added, as his Commentators. But he would here intimate 
that what is ſaid of one and the ſame Thing, is alike to be underſtood of Equal 
Things; for that Identity and Equality, are to be indifferently taken, and uſed in Geo- 
metrical demonſtrations. 

The Axioms hitherto laid down are more general, and common to ſeveral Sct- 
ences : But theſe which follow are purely Geometrical. 

AXIOM VIII. 
MA Congruous one with the other are equal, 

ANNOTATIONS. 

That is, If two Magnitudes be imagined to be 3 One upon the Other, 
and after this mental application it be demonſtrated, that neither does any ways 
exceed the other; but that the Intermedial parts of the One do agree with the 
Intermedial parts of the Other, and the Extreams with the Extreams, then theſe 
Magnitudes are ſaid to be Congruous. And Geometricians do juſtly aſſume for 
a rational Principle, that Magnitudes being ſo far proved Congruous, are then to 
be concluded equal to one another. Thus Euclide is to be underſtood in the Specu- 
culative and true Geometrical uſe of this Axiom concerning Congruous Magnitudes. 

But moreover, there goes along with this Speculation a very natural, and com- 
mon Mechanical uſe of the ſame Axiom. For in the practice of Artiſans They 
Mechanically fitting one Magnitude to an other do judge by their Eye, or Hand 
how one agrees with the other, and accordingly etermine their equality. 
As in the menſuration of Magnitudes by a Foot, a Cubit, a Perch, &c. 

The like Mechanical Congruency is made uſe of in the meaſure of Liquids, of 
Grain, and the like, by Pints, Gallons, Pecks, Buſhels, &c. The equality of theſe 
kind of things being judged by congruous Veſſels, or Places, which do contain 
them. So that this Mechanical Application of ere to Magnitude is a na- 
2 and univerſal practice: And in common ſenſe Congruency is a ſtanding Rule 

uality. 

Bu! the Geometrical Congruency in this place underſtood, ariſes only from an 
Intellectual application of one Magnitude to an other: And then after ſuch an 
application there is made by argumentation a demonſtrative amy of their Con- 
gruency, both in their Extreams, and Intermedial parts, without any judgement 
taken from our outward Senſes. So that their Congruency being thus rationally 
demonſtrated, we do then from this natural and common notion of Congruency, 
conclude their Equality. As we ſhall find in Prop. 4. and 8. of the firſt Element: 
In Prop. 24. of the third Element &c. 

13 AXIOM 

4 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
3 AX IOM IX. 
T He Whole is greater than its Part. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Every magnitude is 1n it INE Vnum & Continuum, only one entire Thing: 
Neither to be called Great, or Little, a Whole, pr a Part. But becauſe magnitude 
is infinitely diviſible into ſmaller magnitudes, therefore every magnitude, tho' in 
it ſelf but one, may yet by imagination be ſuppoſed to conſiſt of cer- 4 
tain leſs magnitudes contained within the ſame, Theſe are called the 
Parts, and That the Whole, Thele parts are not really ſeparate from 
the whole; but are all united by common terms, which are con- 
ceived the End of one part, and the Beginning of the other. As let 6 
AB be put for any finite magnitude, whoſe Extreams are A, B. Now 
this magnitude AB is in It ſelf but one: yet It may be diſtinguiſu-„ 
ed into parts, as, AC, CD, DE, E B, whoſe intermedial limits 
are C, D, E; here C being the End of AC, and the Beginning of CD, 
ſo D of CD, DE, and E of DE, EB. Thus the parts are to be taken, 
and underſtood in continued magnitudes. And the ſame truth is alike | 
manifeſt in any Diſcrete, lollecttve, or Aggregate Totum, As in numbers in 
a Peck of Corn, and the like, tis naturally evident that the Whole is B 
greater than its Part. 

Moreover, it is commonly added as an Axiom by the Commentators, That 

arch 
ICations 

F The Whole is equal to all its Parts, or all the Parts are equal 
, to the Whole. | 

i 8 Yet Euclide having no occaſion to uſe theſe Propoſitions in 4 D 
[| | theſe direct Terms; but only upon ſome particular argumen- 2 

1 tation to infer ex Diagrammate, from the Diagram it ſelf, that 

„ ſuch and ſuch Parts all together are the Whole; As E, F, G, H, | 

. E | 

A are the whole Square AB CO, It ſeemed not proper to 

W place This ſignally for a diſtin Maxim among the reſt of his 

4 General, and Common Notions. * ag, 
= AX IOM X. 

A LL Right angles are equal to one another. 

: 7} . ANNOTATIONS. 

q | Truth, and Reflitude have the ſame property. For as one Truth cannot be more 
4 true than an other; ſo one ſtrait Line cannot be more ſtrait than an other: nor 
1 one Right angle more Right than an other. So NMartianus Capella lib. vi. de Nuptii⸗ 
1 Philologie & Nlercurii, ſays, Angulorum natura eke oft, Nam aut . eſt, aut An- 
| ll | guſtus, aut Latar. The Acute, and Obtuſe are here called Anguſtus, & Latus ; Quorum 

uterque ſemper eſt mobilu, ſays he, always changeable in their increaſe, or decreaſe; 

ll RR A angle, but 10 there may be a more, or leſs Obtuſe, nor 
| any Acute angle, but that there may be a more, or leſs Acute: Only the Right 
if angle Juſtus of & ſemper Idem. | , | 

1 1 F upon two ſtrait lines a ſtrait line falling, does make the in- 
f} | ternal angles on the ſame ſide leſs than t1o right angles; Thoſe 
| trait lines being infinitely produced, ſball meet on that ſide where 
il the angles are leſs than two Right angles. N 

AN- 

OF GEOMETRY. 43 
ANNOTATIONS. | 85 

Upon the lines A B, CD, let the ftrait line EF fall, making the internal angles 
BEE, DFE, leſs than two Right angles: | 3, 4 
If then AB, C D, be the ſame way produ- | 
ced indeterminately, that is, onward, and a 
onward in an undetermined free courſe , 
it is here put as a manifeſt notion, that the 
ſtrait lines A B, C D, ſhall at length meet to- 
gether towards the parts B, D. | | whe hy 5 
Tho this Propoſition be a moſt certain —— 7 
truth, yet it hath been generally excepred | 
againſt for want of the juſt Evrdence of a — 4 
Principle, tho not of the Certaznty of the Thing. But yet let us conſider that 
here are put two ſtrait lines A B, C D, under ſuch conditions, which do clearly 
ſhew that They have a T. and Inclination towards one another: And there- 
fore it may be juſtly aſſumed for a common notion, That two ſtrait lines inclin 
each to the other, and being chat way infinitely produced, ſhall at length meet to- 
gether. This is the ſubſtance of Euclid . 11. Axiom, tho expreſſed in other words 
more ſuitable to the Form of his demonſtrations. 

But here are made many Objections. In the firſt place, it has been already 
ſhewn, that there may be two Inclining lines infinitely produced, and continually 
approaching nearer and nearer to one another, which notwithſtanding ſhall never 
meet together. A thing very ſtrange, and at the firſt view hardly credible : yet 
afterwards certainly found to be true. Wherefore ſeeing that Inclination, and 
perpetual Approximation force not a Concurrence, it may be doubted, whe- 
ther the ſame may not alſo happen in ſtrait lines inclining, and continually approach- 
ing towards one another: Inſomuch at leaſt that the Concurrence of two Inclining 
ſtrait lines cannot well be admitted for an evident Principle. Beſides this, there 
are ſeveral other Objections, of which we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak here- 
after. Only at preſent, I ſay that they who have endeavoured to mend this mat- 
ter, have with much trouble, and diſturbance of Euclid excellent method taken 
great pains to little better purpole. 

AXIOM XII 

* Wo ſtrait lines do not comprehend a Space. 
ANNOTATIONS, 

If the two lines be Parallels, there is an open ſpace both ways between them, 
which is neither way boundable by thoſe ſtrait lines, for 
that parallels are Nonconcurring ſtrait lines. Again, if TY 
the two ftrait lines any where meet, there is made a 
ftrait-lind angle: But then the angular ſpace is not — 
thereby comprehended, being one way infinitely open, 

nor is it imaginable, that the ſame ſpace can again be in- 
cloſed by a progreſs of Thoſe two ſtrait lines, which con- PW 

PT 

tain the angle; unleſs there be conceived ſome Flexure, or 
Yeunee of the ſame ſtrait lines towards one another, where- 
by they being produced at pleaſure may again meet toge- 
ther. But this is to deſtroy the natural conception of Rectitude in the ſtrait 
lines themſelves. Therefore in common ſenſe there muſt naturally intervene a 

third line for the incloſing of a ſpace. 
Again, for as much as every ſtrait line does in all its parts lye Evenly to all its 
points [ Det. 4. ] therefore two diſtin ſtrait lines cannot have the ſame Extream 
points. 

lications 

— — . —ů — =_ 
=” "TIO. 7s 5 — 2 
2 wy — Y 4 
mage = he _ — — | — bh 
* — 2 a 

— 
— — 

— 

— 

—— 

4 - THE FIRST ELEMENT 

points. As let the ftrait line ABC have its extream points A, C: then the line 
ADC, having the ſame extreams (and fo beth together 
boundihg a ſpace) ſhall not be likewiſe a ſtrait line, for 
that the intermedial parts of thoſe two lines ABC, A DG, 4, 
cannot in common ſenſe be conceived to lye alike in both 9 
the lines, Evenly to the ſame points A, C, but chat the parts of the One of them muſt 
deviate from the Even, and direct Courſe, which lyes between the points A, C. 
As alſo farther according to the firſt Poſtwlate, a ſtrait line drawn from point 
to point, from A to C, can be but One, and the ſame ſingular ftrait line; and is 
there underſtood ſo to be. Or if we ſuppoſe two ſtrait lines applyed to one ano- 
ther, to have the fame extreams A, C, theſe ſtrait lines, quarenust ſtrait, muſt be 
wholly coincident with one another, ſo that they cannot intercept any imagi- 

nable ſpace. | 
Here Euclide ends the Principles. 

In the Definitions (which are by Commentators commonly accounted a- 
mong the Principles) was laid down the fubject Matter, or the particular Things 
to be treated of in the firſt Part of theſe Geomecrical Elements. | 

After the Definitions next follow the Poſtulates, and Axioms, that is, Principles 
Practical, and Speculative. Theſe are rightly called Prentzptes, as being the founda- 
tion upon which this Science builds its demonſtrations, and are in the firſt place 
made ufe of in the doctrine of thoſe Magnitades, and Figures expounded in the 
foregoing Definitions. For to ſpeak properly "Theſe Definitions are not Principles 
of common Reaſoning premiſed for demonſtration ſake ;- but in truth they are a 
ſmall part of the ample Subject of Geometry. , 

As in the Definitions of an Angle, of a Circle, of Trilateral, and Quadrilateral 
Figures, of Parallel Lines, is explained what kind of Things ate to be anderſtood 
by thoſe ſeveral Names. And thefe Things are here laid open for an Entrance into 
Geometry, as being Matters moſt fimple, and eafily to be taught, and apprehended. 
But now in purſuit of a perfect underſtanding of Them, the Poſtulates, and Axi- 
oms ſerve as Natural, and general Principles of Reaſoning, whereby we are en- 
abled to demonſtrate the manner of their Conſtruction, their Properties, and 
Affections. The contemplation whereof is the buſineſs of this firft Element of 
Geometry. | 

The Poſtulates, and Axioms, or common Notions, are clearly intelligible to every 
ones capacity, altho ſome Annotations made with Examples, and Inſtances may 
be to Beginners uſeful for Eaſe, and Illuſtration ſake. But for the Propofitions 
themſelves, there is nothing in them further, or otherwiſe to be expounded, than 
what the literal ſenſe, and common meaning of the words import. As Tertullian 
ſays upon a like occaſion, Definitionen, ac ſententra, quarum aperta eſt natura, non 

aliter Sapiunt quam Sonant, 

THF 

1 

[by Poſtul. 3.] Then from the point e where 

OF GEOMETRY. 15 

"ELEMENT. 

PROPOSITION L 
O0 N a 8  fintte ſtrait Line to conſtitute an Equilateral Tri. 
angle. 

Expoſition. Let the given ſtrait Line be as. 

Recognition. It is required on the Line AB to conſtitute an Equi- 
lateral Triangle. 

Conſtruction. The Center a, and the di- 
ſtance 4s, let be deſcribed the Circle cp. [by 
Poſtul. 3.] And again the Center s, and the 
diſtance B; A, let be deſcribed the Circle Ac E. 

the Circles cut one another, to the points 4, B, 
let be drawn the ſtrait Lines ca, cs, | by 
Poſt. 1. ] 

Determination. I ſay that the Triangle 4 zc is Equilateral. 

Demonſtration. Foraſmuch as the point a is the Center of the 
Circle zen, therefore the Line a c is equal to the Line as. | Def. 
I5. ] Again, becauſe the point 3 is the Center of the Circle ace, 
therefore the Line Bc is equal to the Line 4 B. | Def. 15. ] But it has 
been proved that the line c A is equal to the line a B; therefore each 
of the lines c 4, cs, is equal to as. But things equal to one and the 
ſame thing are alſo equal to one another, | Ax. I.] and therefore 
CA is equal to cs: wherefore the three lines c A, a B, Bc, are equal 
to one another. 

Conclu/ron. Therefore the Triangle a Eis Equilateral, and is con- 
ſtituted on the given finite ſtrait line ang. Which was to be done. 

The Practice. 

To make an Equilateral Triangle. 

Open the Compaſſes to the length of the Given line A B, and 
fixing one foot on the point A, deſcribe on either fide of the 
line AB an Arch. Again, fixing a foot on the point B, deſcribe 
on the ſame fide an other Arch cutting the former ; And from \ 
the point of Interſection C, draw CA, CB. Thus is made the , / 
Equilateral Triangle ABC. A 

By the like practice may be formed an Equicrural Triangle, 
K 

To 

ig THE FIRST ELEMENT 

To make an Equicrural Triangle. 

Open the Compaſſes to any diſtance beyond half of the line 
AB, and deſcribe Arches as before. Then from C the point 
of Interſect ion draw C A, CB, making an Equicrural Triangle 6: 

ACB. | 
| | A practical Corollary. 0 
From hence it is manifeſt, how to effect this following Problem. 
A Problem. 

By any two given Points to deſcribe a Circle, whoſe circumference ſhall paſs 
by the given Points. | | 0 $i 

Let the given points be A, B. And [by Poſtul. :.] draw- 
ing the line A B, let thereon be conſtituted an Equilateral 
Triangle ABC, [by Prop. 1.] and [by the 39. Poſtulate] 
Face 2 int C as a Center, and at the diſtance either of 
CA, or CB, a Circle being deſcribed, the circumference 
ſhall paſs by the given points A, B, for that the lines C A, 
CB, are equal to one another. | | 

How to deſcribe a Circle, whoſe circumference ſhall pafs 

by any three given points, not lying in a ftrait line, will be ſhewn hereafter, 
ANNOTATIONS. 

The being and the ſtructure of a Circle, Euclide has before poſtulated to be 
nted him, from the natural ſimplicity, and evidence of its generation. The next 
ple, and uniform Figure, is an Equilateral ſtrait- lin d Triangle; with which 

therefore the Elementator begins. Whoſe Genefis, becauſe there 1s uſed ſome Ar- 
tifice, and Compoſition in the work,. beyond that of a Circle, requires a demon- 
ſtration to prove the Triangle conſtructed to be Equilateral. And this Euclide evi- 
dently deduces from a Circle, that primary Figure already poſtulated to be al- 
lowed without any demonſtration. For Mathematicians proceed by Propoſi- 
tion after Propoſition : Firſt from certain Propoſitions as natural Principles, unto 
others as they may, with moſt facility and evidence, be deduced one from the other: 
The foregoing Propoſitions ſerving to demonſtrate the following. 

The method in all Propoſitions, Problems, as well as Theorems, is much the ſame, 
and conſiſts of certain diſtin parts. As for example, in this firſt Problem the 
parts are thus to be — gpm 

I. ThePropoſition. Which propoſes in general Terms, a Thing given, and a Thing 
required, In Theorems the Queſitum 1s a thing required to be demonſtrated as 
an undeniable truth. In Problems the Queſitum is firſt required to made, or con- 
truſted ; and then the conſtruction of the ſame is to be undeniably demonſtrated. 
As in this Problem, On à given ſtrait line to conſtitute an Equilateral Triangle. The 

ſubje& given is any finite ſtrait line in general: the thing required is an Equila- 
teral Triangle to be conſtituted upon that given line. | 

II. The Expoſition of the thing given. This Expoſitio Dati is an inſtance in ſpe- 
cial of what in the Propoſition was given in general. As in the Propoſition was 
given a finite ſtrait line in general, Then next in the Expoſition, is laid down in 
particular a finite ſtrait line, as the finite ſtrait line AB. The ule of the Expoſi- 
tion 1s to facilitate the whole matter of the Propoſition and Demonſtration, by 
ſetting it forth in a ſenſible Diagram for the readier information of the Intellect ; 
which may apply the ſame as univerſally as it was propounded ; for that the line 
AB may denote any finite ſtrait line whatever. 

III. The Hecognition of the thing required. After the Expoſition laid down in 
a ſingle inſtance, there follows in all, and only in Problems, that part which we 

call Mcognitio Queſiti, a Recognition of the thing required: The phraſe is, dd, 
Oportet. 

_—— —_ 

OF GEOMETRY. 

Oportet, In which Oportet we are reminded, what ought next to be done in par- 

ticular upon the expoſed inſtance. As upon this expoſed Datum the line AB, it 

is now required in ——_ to conſtitute an Equilateral Triangle; fo that in this 
es 

Recognition the ſides of the Equilateral Triangle are confined to the length of 
the expoſed line AB, and the like in all Problems there is included in this Gportet, 
a Confinement of the Queſitum to the quantity of the Expoſed Datum. : | 

This, which, as a diſtinct part, we call Recognition, is by Claviur annexed to the 
Expoſition, and by Daſypodrus called the firſt Letermination. Yer it cannot pro- 
perly — — either; for that the thing required is not as yet in being. But in re- 
ference to the foregoing Datum now expoſed, here is next a ſpecial Deſignation of 
what is to be, as it was before in general required in the Propoſition: And for a 
diſtinction from that part, called properly the Determination, we have named it 

Recegnitio Queſits. 

IV. The This is a Geometrical Operation made out of the Po- 
ſtulates by an intellectual drawing of ſtrait lines, and deſcribing Circles. In 
Problems the conſtruction does both effect the thing required: and alſo ſerves to 
demonſtrate the ſame to have been rightly effected. As in the Conſtruction of 
this Problem. The Equilateral Triangle ABC, is firſt tacitly conſtructed by de- 
ſcribing the Circles BCD, ACE, and drawing the lines C A, CB. Then from the 
manner of its Conſtruction the Triangle is next pronounced, and determined to 
be Equilateral. 

V. The Determination of the thing required. This Part is only a Declaration that 
the thing required is now in a ſpecial Diagram exhibited. The phraſe is A, I ſay, 
or Pronounce. As here in Hpecie the Triangle ABC (having been juſt before ta- 
citly conſtructed upon the expoſed Datum AB) is now determined, and pronunced 
to be Equilateral: Which the following Demonſtration makes Apparent. 

VI. The Demonſtration of the Propoſition. This is the glorious part of a Ma- 
thematical Propoſition, wherein is made an undeniable and indubitable proof of 
the thing * and exhibited in a particular Diagram. As here is demonſtra- 
ted, that the Triangle ABC is wy ee 

The form of Argumentation is for brevity ſake made in Enthymems ; which may 
be reduced into perfect Syllogsſms : as Cunradus Daſypodius has ſet forth the firſt fix 
Elements in a compleat Syllogiſtical form. 

VII. The Conclufjon. This is firſt particular in reference to the preſent Diagram, 
on which the Demonſtration proceeded: as, Therefore the Triangle A B C is Equila- 
teral, and conſtituted on the given line A B. So that this particular Concluſion con- 
fiſts of the Determination, and Expoſition. 

And becauſe after the ſame manner there may on any other finite ſtrait line be 
conſtituted an Equilateral Triangle, therefore from the Logical Rule of Induction, 
there is laſtly a general Concluſion deduced, that on any given finite ſtrait line may be con- 
flituted an Equilateral Triangle, which is only the Propoſition repeated as being now 
demonſtrated. Therefore in a Problem there is Gbjoined to the Concluſion, i 
ide rau. Which was the thing propoumded to be dene. And in all Theorems, me ide 
data. Which was the * to be demonſtrated. 

This is the regular courſe uſed by Geometricians in their Forms of Doctrine. 
So that in Problems there may be ſeven parts according to the forenamed Order. 
The Propoſition, Expoſition, Recognition, Conſtruction, Determination, Demon- 
tration, Concluſion. But in Theorems there can only be fix, and in this Order. 
The — Expoſition, Determination, Conſtruct ion, Demonſtration, Con- 
clufion. The different nature of Problems, and Theorems requiring ſuch a diffe- 
rence in the number, and order of their parts, and ſpecially in the diſpeſal of the 
Determination; Which part in Problems ever follows the Conſtruction: but in 
Theorems follows immediately the Expoſition. _ 

It is commonly, but improperly ſaid, that every perfect Propofition has all theſe 
parts. Whereas all Propofitions, which are rightly demonſtrated, are alike perfect ; 
For that one Demonſtration cannot be more a Demonſtration than an other : But 
thus it is, every Propoſition requires not all theſe parts. For — 

K 2 nee 

8 EHE FIRST ELEMENT 

need no Conſtruction, by adding ſtrait lines, or Circles to the Original Scheme 
of the Propolition, becauſe the Scheme it {elf is often ſufficient for the Demon- 
ſtration of the Propoſition. But where it is not, there is then ſuperadded a Con- 
ſtruction, which is only as an Apparatus, or Preparation made on purpoſe to help 
out the Demonſtration of the Theorem, and belongs not to the Propoſition either 
as any part of the Datum, or Queſitum. Now in thele Caſes, that Theorem is rather 
to be accounted more perfect than any ways defective, which is not forced to ſeck 
out a Conſtruction, for the ſetting forth of its Demonſtration. 
in, in Problems the Determination is oftentimes omitted, as being in it ſelf 
not abſolutely neceſſary, tho for the more perſpicuity it be convenient. So in 
theſe three firſt Problems the Determination is not in the Text of Euclide, yet in 
9, Io, Ir, and 12, Propoſitions, which are Problems, the Determination is ex- 
reſly ſet forth. Therefore accordingly we have inſerted in this, and the two 
REI Problems the Determination, to clear the matter for the eaſe of Begin- 
ners, that after the Conſtruction, and before the Demonſtration, there might be 
ſet forth, and determined, what by the Conſtruction has been effected, and is next 
to be demonſtrated. 
Moreover, ſome Problems have only a Queſitum, and not a Datum, upon which in 
articular to work. And fo there is neither an Expoſition, nor a Recognition to 
follow, but only a Conſtruction, Demonſtration and Concluſion, As the tenth 
Propoſition of the fourth Element, which is a Problem requiring To conftitute an 
Equcrural Triangle, Nee of the Anglet at the Baſe double to the remaining Angle. 
Here now is required to be conftructed ſuch a kind of 1 without any thing 
given. Yet notwithſtanding there is no imperfection, or any defect in this Propo- 
tion; but that it is a ſubtil and admirable Problem. Therefore we are to under- 
ſtand, that every Propoſition of the Elements is according to its nature compleat 
in it ſelf, whether it has, or needs not to have all the forementioned Parts. 

Of the DAr u in Geometrical Propoſitions. 
In Geometrical Propoſitions, a thing may be giyen four ſeveral ways: In Poſi- 

tion, In Specie or Form, In er In Propoſſtion. 

A point having no Magnitude is only given in Poſition, that is to ſay, HE RE. 
But every kind of Magnitude may be given all the four ways, jointly, or ſeverally, 
in all, or in ſome. | | 
A thing is faid to be given in Poſition, when it is reſtrained to a certain Situa- 
tion. As the Data in all Problems are: where whatſoever is given ought not, ſo 
much as in our imagination, to be remoyed from its given Situation ; but accord- 
ing to the reſtriction of the Poſition given the Problem is to be performed. 

ow on the contrary, in Theorems the Diagram of the Propofition is not 
tyed to a certain Poſition, but left as indifferent, For tho Poſition be a ſpecial 
condition in the Structure of a Problem, whereby it is to be regulated: yet in a 
Theorem it appertains not at all to the Truth, or Falfity of the Theorem : and 
therefore the Poſition of the Diagrams 1s alterable at diſcretion, Inſomuch that 
in ſome Theorems, where two things are given, there a certain Poſition of the one 
to the other, is ſometimes a means to help out the Demonſtration : And therefore 
n arbitrary poſition of the Data in Theorems, is allowed to the Demonſtrator 
for a kind of Conſtruction. As Euclide ſometimes applys Figure to Figure, ſome- 
times concelves two ſtrait lines ſo directly ſituated to one another, as to become 
one ſtrait line; with ſuch like choice and change of poſition, as may beſt ſerve to 
the demonſtration of the preſent Theorem. 

In this Problem the line AB is not only given in Poſſtion, as the Datum in every 
Problem is, but alſo tis given in Specie, being propoſed a ſtrait line, to ſpecifi- 
cate it from a crooked, ret | | 

And moreover, 'tis given in Magnitude as a finite ſtrait line, which alſo is un- 
derſtood to be ſo given under a certain Termination, that it may be compared as 

Equal, Greater, or Leſſer, than an other: and in like manner any other may be com- 

pared 

OF GEOMETRY. 

pared to it. For tis not meant to be given in ſach, or ſuch a fingular Quanti 

as of one, or two, or three Inches, or Feet, in relation to any ſtated — 2 i 
but here That is taken to be given in nitude, which is propoſed under ſome 
certain limitations, ſo that it may be ſaid to be equal, or unequal to an other 
Magnitude. Yet after ſuch an Indefinite manner the limited Magnitude is put; 
that it may be conceived to repreſent any Magnitude of the ſame kind, in any 
quantity whatſoever. As in this Propoſition when we ſay, Let the given line be 
AB, there is meant by AB any length, by what meaſure ſoever eſtimated. Whe- 
ther by Inch, Foot, &c. or not at all eſtimated by any diſtinct Quantity. So that 
in this Caſe by an Example, or Inſtance expoſed in particular, the Univerſality of 

the Propoſition, and its Demonſtration are not deſtroyed, but ſtill remain in their 
full Latitude, and general Extent. 

The Methods of Compoſition and Reſolution, as they are 
uſed by Geometricians. 

There are two ways of Reaſoning, whereby Man comes to the knowledge of 
things; And both the ways are eſtabliſhed upon the ſame Foundation, that is; 
upon the Dictates of Nature, or common Notions among Mankind. The diffe- 
rence here only is, that in one way we begin our Diſcourſes from thoſe Natural 
Dictates, and in the other we end with them; treading the ſame path forward 
and backward. Both theſe ways we thus explain. 

Ratiocination proceeding from Natural, that is, Self- evident Principles of Truth 
unto other Truths, made known to us from them, and ſo going onward by the 
help of theſe diſcovered Truths, to infer and make manifeſt Truths more remore, 
— as yet unknown, is called the Method of Compoſitzon, or Syntheſis, For that in 
this way of Reaſoning, we do from Notions moſt plain and ſimple, gather up by 
degrees Notions more intricate, and compounded : Framing out of fimple Materials 
firm, and ſtately Edifices. 

Ratiocination gong from the Suppoſition of things uncertain, whether 
Trae or Falſe, Poſſible or Impoſſible; and which by demonſtrative Conſequences de- 
duced from that Suppoſition, does neceſſarily come to a manifeſt Truth, or Falſity, 
Poſſibility, or Impoſhbility, is called the Method of Reſolution, or Analyſis, For 
that a doubtful Suppoſition is hereby reſolved into a certainty of Truth, or Un- 
truth, of Being, or not Being, ; 

If the Iſſue of our Argumentation terminates in an acknowledged Truth, then 
are we aſſured of the Being, and Verity of the 2 upon which we argued. 

And we may again take a beginning from the ſame Truth, wherein the Reſolu- 
tion reſted ; and from thence as a Principle, proceed in the Method of Compoſition, - 
making a return in the very ſame ſteps, which in the Reſolution of the Suppoſi- 
tion were traced out before: till at length we arrive at that thing, which was at 
firſt Suppoſed, demonſtrating in the common Compoſitive Method of Geometrici- 
ans the Truth of Theorems, and the Geometrical effection of Problems. Thus 
Compoſition and Reſolution, or Syntheſis and Analyſis, anſwer one another; the 
Analyſis ending where the Syntheſis begins , and the Syntheſis ending where 

— 9 Like to an Aſcent and Deſcent made in the ſame path ſtep 

Reſolution , or Analyſis, is properly the Method of Invention, and the 
_ way of diſcoyering the Truth, or Falfity of a Propoſition, in any Art or 

lence, 

Compoſition, or Syntheſis, is the Method of Doctrine, or the way of Teaching, 
and therefore in this Method from allowed Principles, all Arts and Sciences are 
uſually delivered. Like as laſting Buildings are raiſed upon ſure Foundations; 
Whereof the Doctrine of theſe Elements is a moſt perfect pattern. 

Therefore of this firſt Problem, we ſhall take a review, and nicely obſerve, by 
what Gradations of Compoſition it is to de effected and demonſtrated. 

Aud for an Entrance into this Inquiry, we are firſt to conſider what from the 

| K 3 preceding 

50 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

preceding Principles can be made uſe of, upon the given line AB, to effect this 
Problem, and conſtruct an tquilateral Triangle. 

Firſt, the given line A B being finite, there are given the ends thereof. So that 
three Things are given, two Points, and an interjacent ftrait line, Next there- 
fore we are to ſearch out, what can ariſe to our purpoſe, from theſe three Data. 
And recollecting the former Definitions, Poſtulates, and Axioms, (for in the Ma- 
thematics memory and 1 are to go together) there muſt among the reſt 
occur to our remembrance the third Poſtulate; From any point unto any diſtance to 
deſeribe a Circle. And here in theſe preſent Data aptly appear a given Point A, 
or B, and a given Diſtance, namely the ſtrait line AB given; therefore of the 
line AB taking one of the Extreams, as the Point A for a Center to a Circle, and 
the given line AB for a given Diſtance, we poſtulate a Circle to be deſcribed. 

Again, taking the point B, the other extream of the 

iven line AB for a Center, and the given line for the C 
Ho diſtance we poſtulate another Circle to be deſcri- 
bed. Tis evident, that This Circle muſt cut the former, 
for that the line AB hes wholly within both the Figures, C 
and is a common Radius to both Circles. 

Now by the mutual Interſections of theſe Circles, 
there occurs a point common to both Circumferences, 
and let it be ſigned the point C. 

Here then are three known points, A, B, C, and the line AB. What can, from 
theſe four things known, be reaſonably deduced for the making an Equilateral 
Triangle, is next to be thought on. 

The firſt Poſtulate cannot but come readily into our mind, which allows the 
drawing of a ſtrait line from point to point. So that we are prompted to draw 
from the Found point C to the given points A, B, the two ftrait lines C A, CB. 

Here at laſt is made a ſtrait- lin d Figure of three fides called a Triangle, which 
we are next to conſider of what kind, or condition it may be: and whether an- 
ſwerable to the ſolution of the Problem. 

The two Circles juſt now before deſcribed by the ſame Radius A B, and BA, 
are obvious to our conſideration, and the Idea or Notion of a Circle delivered 
in the 157. Definition, that the lines from the Center to the Circumference are all 
equal to one another. This Idea does readily lead us to infer, that the line C A 
drawn from the point C in the circumference of the Circle BCD to the point A 
the Center, is equal to the given line A B the deſcribing Radius, or the primary 
line from the Center of the ſame Circle. 

In like manner, and by the ſame means we are inſtructed to argue, that the line 
CB drawn from the point C in the circumference of the Circle A CE to the point 
N. e is equal to the given line BA, the deſcribing Radius of the Circle 

Wherefore finding that both C A and CB, are each equal to AB, we do natu- 
rally ſuggeſt to our ſelves the firſt Axiom, that things equal to the ſame are equal 
to one another, ſo that C A and CB, are equal to one another. And therefore all 
the three lines CA, AB, BC, are equal to one another, making an Equilateral 
Triangle, according to the 2 34. Definition. 

Thus in the Method of Compoſition from the third and firſt Poſtulates, from the 
fifteenth Definition, and firſt Axiom, we have fully ſet forth the Conſtruction and 
Demonſtration of an Equilateral Triangle on a given finite ftrait line. And have 
together ſhown, upon what eaſy rational Grounds and Natural Suggeſtions this 
Problem may in his way alone de invented. So the like may be done in many 
other following Problems; for that the Invention of their Conſtructions and De- 
monſtrations, is not to be far fetched, depending only upon ſome few foregoing 
* N which may at once be brought into memory, and fitly applyed to 
preſent Uſe. 

But Problems more abſtruſe and intficate, tho they may by a well exerciſed 

Geometrician be performed wholly in this Compoſitive Method, yet it is —— 

o Gr 1 
readieſt 4 to diſcover how a perplexed Problem may be extricated and effected. 
In theſe Caſes, inſtead of making our Gradations by Compoſition from the Prin- 
ciples, and other Propoſitions ariſing from them; Geometricians contrary wile or- 
der the matter after the Method of Reſolution, and in the firſt place do ſuppoſe the 
very Thing to be already done, which u propounded to be done. FacTuM PpUraNT 
QUOD FACIENDUM EST. And then they examine what can by juſt conſequence 
be deduced. from the ſame Suppoſitzon; demonſtratively inferring one thing atter 
another until they fall upon ſomething, which evidently ſhews how to effect the 
Problem, or that it is impoſſible to be effected. | 1 To 
If by legitimate Argumentations we are brought to an impoſſibility ; It is there- 
upon concluded in common reaſon, that the Problem is impoſſible to be effected, 
and that the Thing ſuppoſed is inconſiſtent with Nature. But if we meet with no 
ſuch Obſtacle, then are we aſſured the Problem is feaſible, and that from the 
Suppoſition of the thing already effected, We may by neceflary Inferences clear 
the way, and come to a certainty how to effect the ſame. „an Sn de 
And therefore to give a glympſe of Light into this Admirable Method of Reſolu- 
tian, take here an Example thereof in the Invention ot this firſt Problem. Altho 
by reaſon of its Simplicity it is readily found out in the former Method of Com- 
poſition, as we have already explained. , 

PROBLEM LI 
On a given finite ſtrait line to conſtitute an Equilateral Triangle. 
Inveſtigated by the Method of Reſolution. 7 

In all Problems we are firſt to conſider wherein the STRESS of the Problem 
does conſiſt. Therefore well pondering the nature of this Queſtion, it will appear, 
that the main matter is to find a Point without the given line, from whence two 
ſtrait lines being drawn to the ends of the given line, ſhall each be equal to the ſame. 

Now to begin, Puta factum. Suppoſe this done: and | | 
the point found let it be C, and the Triangle ABC, 
be Equilateral, having the fides C A, C B, cach equal 
to AB the given line, bi TIT & 

Having thus ſuppoſed the Thing in Queſtion : Now 
for the Solution of it, as of every Problem, there is to 
be uſed a dexterous Sagacity of Thought in ſearching 
out ſomething latent in the Queſtion, which is in ſome 
ſort known unto Us, and from whence we may by de- 
grees arguing from one thing to another, make in the end a perfect diſcovery of 
That, which-is wholly unknown. For in humane reaſoning we can attain to the 
— — of Things unknown, and under inquiry, only ſo far, as they partake of, 
and ſecretly contain within themſelves the nature of other things already known, 
from which we muſt argue; or elſe one thing could never be deduced from an other. 

And therefore this Præexiſtency of the knowledge of ſomething in the very 
things unknown, and ſought for, is the foundation of all our Ratiocinations, and 
in this Caſe thus leads Us on. | 

Becauſe the line AB is not barely ſuppoſed, as are the lines C A, CB, but is 
actually given in Poſition, and Magnitude: therefore upon this Datum, with a 
reſpe& likewiſe had to the Tenor of the Suppoſition it elf, the Force and Perſpi- 
cacity of our Mind is to be exerciſed, in bringing forth ſomething relating both to 
what is actually Given, and to what is only Suppoſed, that may open a way to- 
ward the Invention of the Thing Required. 

Now of all the ſeveral Subject Matters of Geometry, and of the Figures before 
defined, there is not as yet any of them in being beſides a ſtrait Line and a Circle: 
both which are poſtulated to have a being. Therefore from one, or both of theſe 
two we are to begin the Work. 

From a given (trait line nothing elſe can ariſe, but either the Continuation thereof 
by the Second Poſtulate ; or by its Garcumlation the Generation — - 

the 

| Fog X 

Arch 
ations 

72 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

the Third Poſtulate. It is at firſt viewenanifeſt, that the Continuation of a ſtrait 
line cannot ſerve to the framing of a Triangle. There is therefore nothing elſe 
exiſting but a Circle to help towards this matter. | 
Now we having had before an Idea of a Circle delivered to us, and ſuperadding 
the conception of a Cirele to the given ſtrait line: Let us for an Eſſay try what 
may ariſe from them both, that is, From a ſtrait line given and a Circle ſuppoſed. 

Suppoſe then by Poſtulate the third from the Center A, at the diſtance of AB 
given, a Circle to be deſcribed. It muſt now occur to our thoughts from the No- 
tion of a Circle in Def. 15. that the circumference thereof ſhall paſs by the point 
C, the end of the ſu d line AC, for that A C was ſuppoſed equal to the given 
Line AB. Let therefore be deſcribed the Circle BC D paſBbg by the point C in 
the line AC. ge | a v | 

Again, the Center B, and diſtance BA being likewiſe giyen, if we ſuppoſe a 
Circle to be deſcribed, the circumference thereof ſhall paſs by the point C, the end 
of the ſuppoſed line BC, for that BC was ſuppoſed equal to B A. Let therefore 
be deſcribed the Circle A CE paſling by the point C in the line BC. 

And becauſe the ſame point C is common to the fupp6led lines A C, BC, and 
is moreover in the — of the Circle BCD, and alſo in the circumference 
of the Circle ACE; and that the Circles B CD, A CE, have nothing common 
but their Interſection, therefore the point C is in the Interſection of the Circles 
BCD, A CE, now deſcribed. | | 

Wherefore the point C is found: And thereby the Equilateral Triangle is found. 

For the three Points A, B, C, being now known, and in Poſition given; the three 
ſides of the Equilateral Triangle are alſo given by #he- firſt Poſtulate, From any 
point to any point to draw a ftrait line. Let therefore from the point C, thus 
found, be drawn the ftrait lines CA, CB (lines only before ſuppoſed) which 
lines by Ax. 1. are equal to one another, becauſe each of them is equal to AB, b 
Def. 15. And ſo all the three ſtrait lines are equal to one another, CA, AB, BC. 

Thus the Conſtruction of an Equilateral Triangle on a given finite ſtrait line, is 
naturally found out in the Method of Reſolution. From whence does ariſe a 
Theorem, as a RuLEg or PRACTICE, how demonſtratively to conſtruct the 
ſame, as Euclide has done, in the Method of Compoſition, after this manner. 

The THEOREM deduced from this Reſolution, and teaching 
how Geometrically to effect the Problem. 

If from the ends of a gives line be deſcribed two Circles, at the diſtance of the 
given line, and from the point of their Interſection be drawn two ſtrait lines to 
the ends of the given line, there ſhall be conſtituted an Equilateral Triangle on 
that given line. | 

In the progreſs of this Problem, tho it be very eaſy, and its Invention obvious, 
ſo that it might have been carryed on in ſhort by continued Inferences withoat 
any Comment, or interwoven Obſervations: Yet here as we paſs from one thin 
to an another by ſeveral Gradations, we have thought fit to intermix ſome A 
vertiſements on 4m 25 to direct, and ſet forth, after what manner, and with what 
circumſpection Problems more abſtruſe and difficult, ought to be m in the 
Method of Reſolution: Encompaſſing in our thoughts all things le to be 
comprehended within the nature of the non by which Sagacious ſearch 
moſt wonderful and occult Truths may out of that Obſcurity, wherein they lye in- 
volved, be brought to Light, and as it were hammered out. 

Ve Silicis venis abſtruſum excudimus ignem. 

PROPOSITION IL | 
Ay Grven Point to put a ſtrait line equal to a ftrait Line 
ven. 
Let the given Point be a, and the given ſtrait line be pc. 

It 

OF GEOMETRY. F2 

It is required at the point a, to put a ftrait line equal to the 
ſtrait line Bc. | 

From the point 4, to the point B, let be drawn the ſtrait line 
AB. [ Poſt. 1.| * 

And on the line as let be conſtituted the 
Equilateral Triangle DAB. | by Prop. 1.] 

And to Da, DB, let be continued directly 
the ſtrait lines E, BF, [by Poſt. 2. | Then 
the Center B, and diſtance Bc let be deſcri- 
bed the Circle c H, | Poſt. 3. ] And again the 
Center p, and diſtance D let be deſcribed . 
the Circle dL x. [Poſt. 3.]© | 

I fay that at the given point 4, is put a 
ſtrait line AL equal to the given ſtrait line K. 
BC. 

Foraſmuch as the point s is the Center of the Circle co, there- 
fore Bc is equal to 30, | Def. 15.] Again, becauſe the point Þ is the 
Center of the Circle @Lx, therefore DL is equal to DG. [Def. Ix. ] 
Ot which pA is equal to p, | by Contr. | wherefore the remainder aL 
is equal to the remainder 3G. | Ax. 3.] But it has been proved that 
BC is equal to BG. Therefore each of the lines a L., Bc, is equal to 3G. 

But things equal to one and the ſame thing, are equal to one 
another. | Ax. 1.] And therefore aL is equal to Bc. 

| Wherefore at the given point 4 is put a ſtrait line aL, equal to 
the giyen ſtrait line Bc. Which was to be done. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

In this Problem there are three Caſes, according to the various fituatiey of the 
given point A, in reſpect to the given line BC. 

For the point A is either without the line B C, as In the Figure uſed in the 
demonſtration. | 

Or it is within the given line, or elſe at one end of it. In which laſt Caſe a Circle 
only deſcribed from the ſame end as the Center, and to the diſtance of the given 
line, effects the Problem without the conſtruction of an Equilateral Triangle. 

The Practice, 

The practice is obvious. For opening the Compaſſes to the h of the given 
line BC, and then placing one . the — point A, erst 8 
length with the other foot to L, and draw AL. This is the ſenſible and Mecha- 
nical Operation. 

But we are again to be reminded upon this occaſion, that in the pure Geome- 
trical Solution of Problems, no uſe is to be made of Ruler and Compaſſes, or of 
any outward Senſe. And moreover, that whatſoever things are given in a Pro- 
blem ought to remain in the poſition given. And according to that ſtated poſition 
of the Data, and the Tenor of the Problem, every thing is to be tranſacted in the 
Mind, as if we neither uſed our Hands, nor Eyes. And therefore by ſome of the 
Ancient Geometricians Problems are alſo called Theorems, for that their Opera- 
tions are only Speculative and Intellectual, in a ſubject wholly abſtracted from 
Matter. Yet we are to know, that they are the ſure and demonſtrative Grounds 
of Material and Manual Practices, in the Menſuration of all kinds of Magnitude 

L in 

Parch 
Cations 

54 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

in Architecture, Fortification, Navigation; In all ſorts of Mechaniſin, infinitely 
uſeful to Mankind, both for Neceſſity and Curioſity. 

PRO POSITION III. 

Wo unequal rait lines being Given, to take from the Great- 
T er a ſtrait line equal to the Leſser. 

Let the two unequal ſtrait lines given be 4B, and e; of which 
let 4B be the greater. | ö | 
It is required to take from AB the greater, a trait line equal 
to c the leſſer. | 

By the preceding Problem, let at the point a be 
put a ſtrait line à D, equal to the ſtrait line c. 

Then the Center 4, and diſtance 4 b, let be deſcri- 
bed the Circle pz x. | by Poſt. 3.] 

I fay, that from the ſtrait line a ; the Greater, is 
taken a ſtrait line AE equal to c the Leſſer. 

Foraſmuch as the point a is the Center of the Cir- 
cle DEF, therefore the line a E is equal to the line 
AD. But the line c is equal to the line AD: ſo that 
alſo AE is equal to c. [ Ax. I.] 

Therefore two unequal ſtrait lines being given, AB and c, there is 
taken from 4s the greater, a line equal to c the leſſer. Which was 

to be done. 
| The Practice. 

The practice of this is as before: * the Compaſſes to the length of the 
given — C, and ſetting the ſame off from the point A to E. 

Theſe three Propoſitions are only miniſterial Problems, and therefore here pre- 
miſed £ their general uſe through all Geometry. 

PROPOSITION IV. 

F two Triangles have two ſides equal to two ſides, each to each, 
and have an angle equal to an angle, namely that, which is 
contamed by the equal lines. | 

Then ſball they have the baſe equal to the baſe, and Triangle 

Hull be equal to Triangle, and the remaining angles ſhall be equal 

to the remaining angles, each to each, under which are ſubtended 
equal ſides. / 
Expoſition. Let the two Triangles be a Bc, DEF, having the two 

ſides AB, ac, equal to the two ſides Dx, DP, each to each, namely 

AB to DE, and ActoDF, and the angle Bac equal to the angle 
EDF. { 

Determination, I ſay, that the baſe 8c, is equal to the baſe EF. 
And the Triangle anc ſhall be equal to the Triangle pz F, and the 
remaining angles ſhall be equal to the remaining angles, each to 
each, under which are ſubtended the equal ſides, namely the angle 

ABC 

OF GEOMETRY. 55 
ABC to the angle DEF, and the angle ac to the angle pF. 
Cunſtruction. For the Triangle 4B c, being applyed to the Tri- 
angle DEF: and the point 4 
ut on the point D; and the 
rait line AB on the ſtrait 
line DE; | 
Demonſtration. Then ſhall 
the point B agree with the 
point E; for that A B is equal 
to DE. | by Suppo/ition. ] | | 
Now 43 agreeing with 
DE, Ac ſhall alſo agree with Dx, for that | by Suppoſition] the angle 
BAC, is equal to the angle EDF. | 

So that alſo the point c ſhall agree with the point ; for that 
the line ac is likewiſe equal to DF, | by Suppo/ition | 

But now alfo the point ; had agreed with the point E; fo that 
the baſe 3e ſhall agree with the baſe EF. 

For the point B; agreeing with the point E, and the point c with 
the point F, if the baſe Bc ſhall not agree with the baſe EF; Then 
two ſtrait lines ſhall comprehend a ſpace. Which is impoſſible, 

by AX. 12. 
b The * Concluſion. Wherefore the baſe zc ſhall agree with 
the baſe EF; and therefore ſhall be equal to it, | by Ax. 8.] 

So that alſo the whole Triangle anc, ſhall agree with the whole 
Triangle DE E, and therefore ſhall be equal to it, by Ax. 8.] 

And the remaining angles ſhall agree with the remaining ar- 
gles, and therefore ſhall be equal to them, namely the angle anc 
to the angle DEF, and the angle acs to the angle DFE. 

The general Concluſion. If therefore two Triangles have two 
fides equal to two ſides, each to each, and have an angle equal to an 
angle; namely, That which 1s contained by the equal lines: Then 
ſhall they have the baſe equal to the baſe, and Triangle ſhall be 
equal to Triangle, and the remaining angles ſhall be equal to the 
remaining angles, each to each, under which are ſubtended equal 
fides. Which was to be Demonſtrated. 

Annotation on the Propoſition. 

This Propoſition is the firſt Theorem, and Foundation of all Geometry, which 
therefore with the whole manner of its demonſtration, we ſhall ſpecially endea- 
your to explain. 

In a Triangle there are Seven Things to be conſidered. 

The three dides, the three Angles, and the Area, or Space comprehended by the ſides. 
Of theſe Seven here are three Things in one Triangle, namely, two Sides, and the an- 
gle contained, which are ſuppoſed equal to three the like Things in the other Tri- 
angle. And from the ſuppoſed equality of theſe Three, is demonſtrated the equa- 
lity of all the other Four, that is, of the third fide to the third fide, of Area to 
Area, and of the two other angles to the two other angles, each to its correſpon- 
dent angle. 

L 4 Anno- 

56 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
[ 4 Annotation on the Expoſition. - . 03 1 

© What Things were in the firſt part of the Propoſition Given, or Suppoſed in ge- 
neral (namely, in two Triangles two fides equal to two' der, and the contained an- 
ler equal) Thoſe are now in the Expoſition exemplyfied in the Triangles ABC, 
DEL, and in particular ſet forth: Side to fide, AB equal to DE, AC equal to 
DE, and angle to angle, BAC equal to EDF (Each to each &c.) That is, 
the two ſides in one Triangle taken A | D 
ſingly, and compared reſpectively to i 
the two ſides fingly, in the other Tri- 
angle. For otherwiſe the two ſides 
in one Triangle taken both together, 
may be equal to the two ſides in the 
other Triangle taken botii together; B 
that is, the ſumm of the two ſides in 
one Triangle may be equal to the 
ſumm * two ſides in the other | 
Triangle, and the angles contained | C 
be equal to one another: Yet from thence the other yu in thoſe Triangles 
cannot be proved equal to one another. As in one of the Triangles, if one fide 
be a, and the other be 5, which together are 7: And in the other Triangle 
if one fide be 3, and the other be 4, making alſo rogether 7: And let them 
contain equal angles, yet the 94 not in the other parts be e 
to one another. Therefore it is here ſpecially ſaid Each to Each, finguia latera fin- 

LY 

Annotation on the Determination. 

As the =, 54am did ſet forth particularly, in the Triangles ABC, DEF, what 
was in the firſt part of the Propoſition ſuppoſed, and given in general Terms: ſo 
what was in the ſecond part of the Pro — laid down in general, as to be de- 
monſtrated from what was ſuppoſed, and given in general, That is now in the De- 
termination ſpecified in the particular parts of the ſame Triangles ABC, DEF: 
and pronounced to be true. Saying, The baſe BC is equal to the baſe E E, and 

the Triangle ABC &c. Now the truth thereof is to be made good by the fol- 
lowing Demonſtration, 

Annotation on the Conſtruction. 

After the Expoſition and Determination, there often follows in Theorems a 
Conſtruction, wherein are added to the fimple Figure of the Propoſition ſome ſtrait 
lines, or Circles, or both, to make way for the Demonſtration. This Propoſition 
requires no ſuch kind of Conſtruction, having all lines requiſite to the demon- 
ſtration, laid down at firſt in the Expoſition and Determination. But here Euclide 
uſes another ſort of Conſtruction, or Apparatus towards his Demonſtration, by a 
mental Application of _ Figure to an Other : which is by — Greeks called 

ms, E pharma; an Adaptation, Appoſition, or Application of one magnitude 
to * 22 manner followng i thus re of. ag 

or riang ei ed to the Triangle DEF; and int A put on 
the point D.] It is not meant, 4 8 be made by the I of Hands 
Eyes: but by an im polition, firſt of the point A on the point D; and 
then of the line AB on the line DE, as followeth, 

Ana the ſtrait line AB on the ſtrait line DE.] In the 4. Def. Euclide tells us, 
that by a ftrait line we are to conceive ſuch a line as lyes evenly to all its points. 
So that upon this conception of a ſtrait line, if we imagine one ſtrait line to be 
placed upon another ſtrait line, we muſt alſo conceive, that no part of the one 
does any where ſwerve, or any ways deviate from the other; * on agreeable to 
this conception of a ſtrait line, we may obſerye the exactueſi of Euchd . expreſ- 

ſion, 

OF GEOMETRY. 7 $7 
ſion, how that the /mes AB, DE, which before in the Expoſition of the Propoſi- 
tion were called Sides, in relation to a Triangle, are now in reſpect of their Ap- 
plication to one another, called ſfrait Lines, not Sides, becauſe from the notion of a 
rait line it follows, that if ſtrait lines be apply d to one another, They muſt be 
imagined to be entirely coincident with one another. Thus far proceeds the Con- 
ſtruction by way of Application, or Epharmoſis. That is, firſt the imaginary poſition 
of the point A on the point D. And ſecondly of the ſtrait line AB, — 2 line 
DE. From whence by a juſt Ratiocination Euclide demonſtrates the equality of 
the two Triangles, in the Whole, and in every Part. As followeth. - 

Annotation on the Demonſtration. 

Then ſhall the point B agree with the point E, for that AB f, equal to DE. 

— firſt to — — the . the agreeing of ks pd — 
and the agreeing of their extream points. The Former is in reſpect of being ſtrait lines, 
the Other in reſpect of their equality to one another. For all ftrait lines are 
conceived to have their parts Congruous: And all equal ſtrait lines to have alſo 
their extreams Congruous. And therefore Euclide upon the Application of the 
ſtrait lines A B, DE, to one another, having preſumed from the notion of Recti- 
tude the mutual agreement of their intermedial parts; He next urges the agree- 
ment of their extream points from their ſuppoſed equality. For the extream point 
A of the line AB, being conceived to lye on the extream point D of the line DE, 
and the line AB on the line DE; if of the line AB the other extream point B, 
does not agree with the other extream point E of the line D E: then one of theſe 
mr falls ſhort of the other : ſo that one of the lines ſhall be a part of the other 

b. 
be 

And becauſe the lines AB, DE, are ſuppoſed equal, therefore the part ſhall 
equal to the whole. Which is impoſſible by the 9. Axiom. Therefore the 
point B ſhall agree with the point E: 

Now AB. agreeing with DE, alſo AC ſhall agree with DF ; for that the angle BAC 
ic equal to the angle ED F.] | 

For otherwiſe, if A C agrees not with DF; then ſhall AC fall either within, or 
without DF: ſo that one of the angles BAC, ED PF, ſhall be a part of the other. 
And becauſe the angles BAC, ED F, are ſuppoſed equal; therefore the part ſhall 
be equal to the whole. Which is impoſſible. Therefore the line AC ſhall agree 
with _ line 0 F. P __ 

So that alſo t nt C ſhall agree with t int F.] 

For the ſame — as wt that the — B did agree with the point E, 
AC being ſuppoſed equal to DF, as AB was to DE. Here again is to be ob- 
ſerved, how Euclide diſtinguiſhes between the agreement of the lines AC, D F, 
and the agreement of the extream points C and F. For from the equality of the 
angles BAC, E D E, he proves the coincidency of the lines AC, DF: And from 
the _ of the lines AC, DF, he proves the coincidency of the extream 
points C, F. 

For the point B agreeing with the point E, and the point C with the point F, if the 
baſe BC not agree with the baſe E F.] 

Then muſt BC fall either within, or without EF, ſo that the ſtrait lines B C, 
E E, ſhall comprehend a ſpace. Which by Ax. 10. is impoſſible. Therefore B C 
ſhall agree with EF. 

The ſubtil changes made in the courſe of this demonſtration are remarkable. 
Firſt, from the Definition of a ſtrait is implyed the coincidency of the interme- 
dial parts of two ſtrait lines, which are applyed to one another, namely of AB 
and DE. Secondly, from the ſuppoſed equality of two ftrait lines, is proved the 

eement of their extream points. Otherwiſe the part would be equal to the 
whole. Thirdly, from the ſuppoſed equality of two angles, is proved the coin- 
cidency of their containing lines. Otherwiſe the part again would be — to 
the whole. And laſtly, from the agreement of the two extream points B with E, C 
with E, of two ſtrait lines BC, EF, is concluded the agreement of the lines Themſelves, 

namely of BC and EF, Otherwiſe two ſtrait lines would comprehend a * 
L 3 no- 

1 

» . 
— 
— 2 — * - = — * 
1 — —— > 

_ —— — —— 
Tod 22 * 

— — 
= = 3 =_ — — 

— . a —— po d = — - — oy 

2 — — = 
= — - 
. * © — — = 
- 7 be — — * — —_ —— — — — — * js, 2 4 
— 2 «aw — — of — — on _ T © 
— — —— LA Wo — — — — 2 
V n 2 ... RNS __ — r 2 © a. * N 

OY " * # — 2 — 

Wer. * 1 

78 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

| Annotation on the Conclufion. 
We are here to obſerve a double Concluſion. The firſt particular, The other 

general. The particular Concluſion is the foregoing Determination repeated word for 

word, but ſo as being now demonſtrated; and therefore concluded true in thoſe 
particular Triangles ABC, DEF. The general Conclufion is the Propoſition it ſelf re- 
peated, and concluded with, as juſtly following upon that particular Concluſion 
already demonſtrated. | . 

For according to the Mathematical method, as before in Problems, ſo here in 
Theorems, is in the firſt place laid down the Propoſition in general terms. 

Then next, of this Propoſition | 1 | D 
there is made an Expoſitzon, and a De- 
termination in a particular Inſtance, 
or Example. An Expoſition of what 
is given: and a Determination or 
Specification of what is to be proved. 
As here in the two Triangles ABC, 
DEF, is ſet forth particularly by 
name, every Thing — and every 
Thing propoſed to be demonſtrated. As 
we have n them in the ſe- 
yeral Paragraphs, of Expoſition, and Determination. 

Now upon this Inſtance in the Triangles ABC, DEF, the demonſtration pro- 
ceeded: and therefore Euclide firſt concludes particularly, as to that Inſtance in the 
ſaid Triangles ABC, DEF. And thereupon imply ing the like reaſon in the like 
matter, He concludes by the Logical Rule of Induction, with the Propoſition it ſelf 

SH 

(© 

. in general, as at firſt it was laid down. For what is now particularly demonſtrated 

in the Triangles ABC, DEF, the ſame may be proved after the ſame manner in 
any other two Triangles, which have the ſame conditions, And therefore the 
Propoſition is in general concluded to be true. 

This is the regular form of a Geometrical demonſtration in all Theorems ; which 
we have here explained at large, once for all. 

Advertiſement. 

Thus with more Artifice than is commonly taken notice of, Euclide manages 
this Demonſtration. And indeed the nearer any Propoſition comes to a Principle, 
or an evident Truth, as this Propoſition doth, the more difficult it is to be demon- 
ſtrated ; becauſe the Medium: for the proof of ſuch Propoſitions, which are ſo near 
to Principles, can be but few, and thoſe Medwums not much more manifeſt than 
the Propoſition it ſelf. Therefore in theſe kind of Propoſitions the manner and 
management of the Demonſtration 1s more exquiſite, and requires an extraordinary 

nicety on the Maſters part clearly to demonſtrate, and a greater attention in the 

Scholar, for the right underſtanding of the ſubtilty of ſuch a demonſtration. 
Wherefore, ſome for want of due conſideration have unjuftly cavill'd at the demon- 
ſtration of this 4. Propoſition, as being in a manner Mechanical. Whereas they have 
not rightly conſidered, what in the Application of magnitude to magnitude is Geo- 
metrical, or purely Mathematical, and what is Mechanical. Toapply any Meaſure, as 
a Foot, Cubit, &c. to any other magnitude, as Carpenters, and ſuch like Artificers do, 

or in general to adapt one magnitude to another, and then from their viſble and ſen- 

ſible Congruency or Incongruency, to conclude their equality or inequality, This in- 
deed is plainly Mechanical, But in the — of this Propoſition there is 
DIP of this Bad, no we made either of mee pcs Only there is of 0 

riangles compared r an imaginary poſition of a point on a point, and a 
Araic fins on a — oe and from this mental Application the demonſtration 
takes its beginning, and by clear Ratiocination from one neceſſary Inference to 
another, proves the entire Congruency of the two Triangles, equally convincing 

Cacos, 

5 o GEOMETRY. 79 

Cecos, and Oculatos: for that here the Congruency is not enforced by any evidence 
of Senſe; but only by an Intellectual demonſtration. And the — or Ap- 
plication of one Triangle to the other, is alſo intellectual, and ily to be 
preſuppoſed, in order to the proof of their Exa# Congruency. Now if ſuch an 
Epharmoſis could juſtly be excepted againſt, then the 86. Axiom of the equality of 
Congruous magnitudes, which even Ramus himſelf allows to be maxime Geometri- 
cum, were altogether uſeleſs in Geometry, For that there muſt in ſome manner 
an Application be conceived of ſome part of one magnitude, to ſome part of an- 
other magnitude, in the way of a Conſtruction or Apparatus to the demonſtration, 
before we can proceed to demonſtrate the Congruency of all its parts, and from 
Thence to conclude the equality of the whole to the whole, by the 8. Axiom. 

Briefly then to determine in this Caſe. 

Congruency 1s a natural Rule of equality ; and the certainty of Congruency, if 
made from Senſe, is Mechanical; if by a juſt Reaſoning proved, it is truly Mathe- 
matical. Which diſtinction, if ſome of our Commentators had well obſecy'd, they 
would not in this matter have made ſuch frivolous Objections _ Euclide, nor 

committed ſuch Paralogiſms in their yain Attempts to amend his demonſtrations 
of this kind. 

PROPOSITION V. 

F Equicrural Triangles, the angles at the baſe are equal to 
one another. 

And the equal ſtrait lines being produced, the angles under the 
baſe ſhall be equal to one another. 

Let there be an Equicrural Triangle asc, having the fide An 
equal to the fide ac; and tothe ſtrait lines as, ac, let be conti- 
nued directly the ſtrait lines BD, cx, [by Poſt. 2. ] 

I fay, that the angle A Be is equal to the angle acs. 

And alſo the angle BD, to the angle BCE. 

For in the line BD, let any point be taken, as F. Then from the 

eater AF, let be taken 4 0 equal to a the leſs, [by Prop. 3.Jand 

t be joyned the ſtrait lines F c, GB, [by Poſt. I.] 

Now foraſmuch as AF is equal to a6 [by Comſtruction] and 1B 
to ac; [by Suppeſition ]. Therefore there are two lines PA, Ac, 
equal to the two lines GA, AB, each to each, and they contain a 
common angle F a d. Therefore [by — 41 the baſe Fe is equal 
to the baſe GB; and the Triangle ax e ſhall be equal to the Triangle 

403, 

4 
;, 
l 
'V 
N 
| 
. 
i 
, 
I 
A 
| 
1 
/ 
4 
i 
1 
: 
Y 

60 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

AGB, and the remaining angles ſhall be equal to the remaining 
angles, each to each, under which are ſubtended equal fides, namely 
the angle acF to the angle a BG, and the angle Ar c to the angle 
AGB. | 4 
And now becauſe the whole line A; is by Conſtructiun equal to 

the whole line 40, of which a3 is equal to ac, by Suppo/ition 
Therefore the remainder BF is equal to the remainder cs, [ Ax. 3. 
But alſo it has been proved, that xc is equal to GB. 

There are therefore the * 
two lines B E, Fc, equal to 
the two lines c 6, GB, each 
to each, and the angle BF c 
equal to the angle c GB, 
and BC is their common 
baſe; therefore the trian- 
gle B Fc, ſhall be equal to 
the triangle cG B; and the 
remaining angles ſhall be 
equal to the remaining an- W /D 8 
gles, each to each, under which are ſubtended equal ſides. Where- 
fore the angle EBC is equal to. the angle dc B. And the angle B CF 
to the angle CG. | 

Now whereas the whole angle a BG has been proved equal to 
to the whole angle Ac F, of which the angle c BG is equal to the 
angle BCE. | A Ge | 

Therefore the remaining angle aBc is equal to the remaining 
angle acB. And they are at the baſe of the Triangle anc. But 
alſo it has been proved, that the angle rc, is equal to the angle 
G B. And they are under the baſe. 

Therefore of Equicrural Triangles, the angles at the baſe are equal 
to one another. | 

And the equal ſtrait lines being produced, the angles under the 
baſe ſhall be equal to one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollary. . | 
From hence 'tis manifeſt, that of Equilateral Triangles, the three angles are equal to 

one another. 
For every fide may in order be put for a baſe, and accordingly, as in an 1 
crural Triangle, the three angles may be proved equal to one | . * 
This Propoſition ſeems very difficult to young Geometricians, by reaſon of the 
croſs interfering of the Triangles, which are compared to one another. We 

have theref d red to clear the 
which che fereetl Trnnglts oxdapered rogether, mw? ba mare —ͤ—ñ— 
Ke PROPOSITION VL * 
F tus Angles of a Triangle be equal to one another, then hall 
the fides ſubtended under. the equal. Angles be equal to one 
Let 

another. 

(1 

E 

OF GEOMETRY. = 
5 the Triangle be A3 c, having the angle 43 c equal to the an- 
e Ac B. | 

. I fay, that the fide ac is equal to the fide A B. | 

For if Ac be unequal to a B; one of them is the greater. Let the 
greater be AB. 

And from 4s the greater, let be taken B; equal 
to ac the leſs, | by Prop. 3.] and let be joyned po. 

Now foraſmuch as p is equal ac, and 8c is com- D 
mon; therefore there are the two lines Ds, Bc, e- 
qual to the two lines ac, c B, each to each, and the 
angle DBC is equal to the angle acs, (by Suppoſi- 
tion] Therefore | by Prop. 4.] the baſe De is equal 
to the baſe as; and the Triangle AB c ſhall be equal 

to the Triangle D cs, the greater to the leſs. Which B 
1s abſurd. 

Wherefore AB is not unequal to ac. Equal therefore it is. 

It therefore two Angles of a Triangle be equal to one another, 
then ſhall the ſides ſubtended under the equal angles be equal to 
one another. Which was to be Demonſtrated. 

Corollary. 

From hence 'tis manifeſt, that if the three Angles of a Triangle be equal to one another, 
1. Nag hal he Zar kna. "NR d 

ANNOTATIONS. 
Of the Converſion of Geometrical Propoſitions. 

This Sixth Propoſition is the Converſe of the Fifth. 

One Propoſition is ſaid to be the Converſe of another, when the Poſition of one 
is the Concluſion of the other; and the Concluſion of this is the Poſition ot that. 
As the fifth Propoſition puts two fides of 4 Triangle equal to one another, and thence 
concludes, that their oppoſite Angles are equal. So this ach Propoſition puts, two An- 
gles of a Triangle equal to one another, and thence concludes that their oppoſite fides are 
equal. Thus in the Converſion of Geometrical Propoſitions, the Poſitions and 

nclufions are reciprocal. 

The fifth Propoſition might have been here entirely converted, I mean in that 
latter part alſo of the Angles under the Baſe : from whoſe equality the Triangle 
may likewiſe be demonſtrated to be Equicrural , as Proclus has ſhewn. But this 
Converſion _— uſeleſs, Euclide does omit. Or rather, if the Form of this de- 
monſtration be ſtrictly examined, it will appear that the ſecond part of the fifth 
Propoſition, was not Excl:ds. But that becauſe Euclide, to prove the equality of 
the Angles at the Baſe, doth firſt prove the equality of the Angles under the Baſe ; 
This might give an occaſion to* ſome one afterward, for the ſubjoining of this 
property of an Equicrural Triangle to Faclids Original Propofition. And this 
conjecture is very probable, for that the equality of the Angles under the Baſc, 
is not made uſe of in any of the following Propoſitions. Now certainly Euclide ne- 
ver laid down an Elementary Propoſition uſeleſs in any part thereof: nor evet 

put that for one part of the Propoſition, which is only uſed as a Medium to 
prove the other. 

M Of 

62 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

Or the two kinds of Auahyſis uſed in Geometrical Propoſitions. 

The demonſtration of this ſixth Propoſition is much different from thoſe before. 
All which were made from true and known Principles, to prove other Truths un- 
known in the common Synthetical Method, but contrarywiſe this Theorem is 
wholly demonſtrated Analytically. ine 

We have before diſcourſed of the two Methods of Compoſition and Reſolution ; 
and ſhewn the uſe of the Analytical Method in the Invention and Solution of 
Eulid s firſt Problem: Now here again, we have occaſion to take more particular 
notice of a twofold: conſideration of Analyſis, not in reſpect of its Nature and 
Method in the courſe of Reaſoning, which remains the ſame in both; but of the 
different iſſue or event, that may ariſe from any Analyſis by a juſt Ratiocination. 
For if the Analyſis of a Suppoſition ends in an acknowledg d Truth, then the thing 
ſuppoſed was true. But if the Analyſis of a Suppoſition ends in a certain Untruth, 
then the thing ſuppoſed was falſe. Therefore from theſe different endings, True 
or Falſe, there are given two denominations to Analyfir. One is faid to be Con- 
ſſttructive, the other DoftruBive. | 

The Conſtructive Analyſis is ſo called, for that ending in a manifeft Truth, we 
may again upon this true foundation in the Synthetical Method, conſtruct a de- 
monſtration of that Thing, from whoſe bare Suppoſitzon the Analyſis took its begin- 
ning. And in theſe Caſes alone the Methods of Reſolution and Compoſition an- 
{ver to one another, the Conſtructive Analyſis having always a correſpondent Syn- 
theſis : So that what Truths we find out by the help of the Analytical Method, the 
ſame when ſo found we teach to others in the Sythetical Method. This Marinus 
Gethaldus has ſhewn in his admirable Books De Reſoluttone & Compoſitione Mathematica. 
And Examples thereof we may find among the Scholia in the 13". Element of 

The Deſtructive Analyſis is ſo called, for that ending in an evident Falſity, it 
deſtroys the Suppoſition, from whence the Analyſis began to argue. 

Now unto the Deſtructive Analyſis there cannot 4 made any return in the 
Synthetical Method, becauſe upon Falſity, wherein this Analyſis ends, that is, upon 
Nothing, or no Foundation, cannot be raiſed any Structure. 

Syntheſis therefore is but of one ſimple conſideration and denomination, for 
that it canonly argue from Principles of 'Truth laid down. As we muſt build upon 
ſome foundation, as well Speculatively, as Mechanically. 

But Analyſis, which may argue demonſtratively from Suppoſitions either True or 
Falſe, and ſo accordingly muſt reſt at Principles of Truth or Falſity, is therefore 
from its different ending diſtinguiſhed, and (as before ſaid) denominated Conſtructive 

and Deſtructive. SUPPOSLTIONEM penit Analyfir, aut ir. Not as 
CLavius ſays, Qua PAIN CI IA portt, aut deſtruit. For from what Suppoſition 
can the Principles be ether confirmed or deftroyed : Bur contrarily, theſe Prin- 

ciples muſt either confirm, or deſtroy the Suppoſition. 

The Conſtructive Analyſis is ſimply called Analyſis. The Deſtructive Analyfis 
is commonly called arayuy ws ad wary, en Abduttion or Redaftion to Inpeſſibility. 
Which way of Argumentation Geometricians thus make uſe of. 

If a * pn alcho' it be true, yet cannot be readily proved ſo to be: then 
They uſually 8 Suppoſe its Contradictory, and diſproving Tbit, there neceſſarily 
follows the acknowledgement of the Propoſition firſt laid down. For that of two 
ane Blk ſitions, if one be proved falſe, the other muſt be true, their 
being no Medium een Being and not Being. 

So in this ſixth Propoſition are put two Angles of a Triangle, to one another : 
and upon this Poſition it is pronounced, that '7 herr ſubtend: are alſo equal. 
But now the equality of their ſubtending fides is not here directly proved. Only 
tis urged, that if the ſides be not equal, So they mult be unequal. 

And now /uppoſmg the ſides unequal, then Euclide demonſtratively proceeds there- 
upon, and by gradual Conſequences reſolves this Suppoſition into a manifeſt impol- 

ſibility, proving, That in a Triangle, if the fides ſubtending the equal Angles be * 

OF GEOMETRY. 63 
then the whole ſhall be equal to its part: which is a manifeſt untruth; for that The 
whole it greater than its part, is a Principle of manifeſt Truth. _ 

Therefore the Suppoſition of the inequnlity of the two fides whith ſubtend the tivo 
equal Angles of a Triangle, being neceſſarily reſolved into ſuch an abſurdity, was 
not true. For Ex vero ml nifi verum, From I ruth no Untruth can follow. 

Wherefore according to the fixth Propoſition, Two Angles of a Triangle being 
equal, the fides ſubtended under rhe equal Angles, are therefore Logically con- 
cluded equal, for that it is demonſtrated, that they cannot poſlibly be unequal. 
Equal therefore they are. | | 

But in this Deſtructive Analyſis, very often the Deduction to an impoſſibility is 
Immeatate, and the abſurdity forthwith ſeen, and urged againſt the falſe poſition 
without any further Argumentation. As before we may obſerve in the Cloſe of 
the 4**. Prop. When we ſay, If the baſe BC does not agree with the baſe D E, then 
two ſtrait lines ſhall comprehend a ſpace; which Inference is immediate and con- 
tradicts the ro", Axiom. Whereupon the abſurdity is preſently diſcovered ; and 
therein that Suppoſition is immediately overthrown as untrue. And this is ſtrictly 
to be called Deduction to Impoſſibility. | 

But now again, if the Propofition it ſelf be not in the beginning of the demon- 
ftration, undertaken to be proved oſtenſively, in ſome parts thereot, as the fourth 
Propoſition is: but that in its ſtead, an Hypotheſis contradictory to the Propoſi- 
tion, is put at the very firſt (as it is in this and the next Propoſition, with many 
others) then the confequent abſurdity does not immediately appear : but after 
intermediate Inferences which are made upon that Hypotheſis 0ſtenſieely, ſtep by 
ſtep, we do fall at length into an Impoſſibility, and thereupon deſtroy the fame 
Hypotheſis, from whence we began to argue. And this is an exact Analy ſis: 
which to explain more fignally, let us review the Analyſis of this ſixth Propoſi- 
tion, and particularly obſerve the ſeveral gradations of Argumentation, made 
upon the Suppoſition. 

Tor now of the Triangle ABC if the ſides AB, AC, be not 
allowed to be equa}, notwithſtanding that their oppoſite Angles 
at Cand B were ſuppoſed to be equal: Then Mppobag them 

to be unequal, Eurlide (by the 30. Propoſition) takes from the 

greater AB a line BD equal to the leſs AC. Next (by the firſt 

Poſtulate) he draws a ſtrait line DC; and fo there is made the 

Triangle DC B. After this Conſtruction he proves (by the 

4, Propofition) that the Triangles ABC, DCB, are equal 

to one another. Hitherto the demonſtration goes from the Sup- 

poſition fairly on que, Oftenſively, proving the equality of 
the Triangles ABC, DCB. 

But here now after this Oſtenſive Proof, the next and immediate Reſult is, that 
one of theſe Triangles is but a part of the other; the Triangle DC a part of 
the Triangle ABC, and yet upon the Suppoſition is juſtly demonſtrated equal to 
the ſame. But this Equality and Inequality of the fame things being inconſiſtent 
with Nature, mult overthrow and null that Hypotheſis, which by a A demon- 
ſtration, is reſolved into this Impoſſibility; And therefore upon ſuch an Evidence 
certain it is, that of the Triangle ABC, the ſides AB, AC, cannot be uncqual, 
and therefore equal. 

But becauſe there are ſome who allow not this Apagogical method of Argu- 
mentation to be ſo ſatisfactory, as the uſual Synthetical manner of demonſtration; 
therefore to clear this matter, we ſhall for the vindication of Geometricians, exa- 
mine further the nature and force of all Demonſtrations Mathematical and Philo- 

ſophical: As we have done betore concerning Definitions Mathematical and Phi- 
loſophical. 

Of Demonſtrations Mathematical and Philoſophical, as to 
Their ſeveral ends. 

Eyery Man can reaſon no otherwiſe, than from the Ideas of out ward things, accord- 
M2 ing 

— = 
—ů — 8 
o __ 
* 8 * 

N 1 
bo * 

— * 1s 
8 

N 
( 

— — — 
— 2 

. THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ing as he receives them, and makes reflections on them. When the Ideas are the 
ſame in ſeveral perſons, then they cannot but reaſonably agree in their judge- 
ments: when they are different, as being differently received, then Men mult diſ- 
agree; tho both may argue well, according to their own Ideas and Sentiments of 
thoſe things. Beſides, for want of due Obſervations, both may happen to be in 
the wrong, and that the very Truth is much otherwiſe. For we can only afficm, 
or deny, as things are apprehended by us: whether the things do in themſelves 
agree, or not agree, one with the other. S R 

Now many things there are which ſo clearly and diſtinctly preſent themſelves 
to our common ee that they beget in us a ready and certain judge- 
ment of their Truth, or Falſity: and do ſo much urge our Natural reaſon upon 
their Self- evidence, that without any doubting we affirm, or deny. When with 
our Affirmation, or Negation, there is accordingly a real agreement, or diſagree- 
ment between the things themſelves, then is this Perception of ours true Know- 
ledge, and an immediate conformity of the Mind of Man to the apparent Truth 
of things. Theſe are then taken by us for Principles of knowledge, and ſo made 
uſe of in our common diſcourſings. 

But again, numberleſs other things there be, whoſe Truths are leſs apparent, 
and with ſearch and labour of Mind to be diſcovered; for which, we mutt, as in 

a Labyrinh, uſe a clew of Silk to find them out. This is our innate Power of 

reaſoning, or Natural Logic, whereby every Man from the fimple Apprehenſion 
of things, and thoſe clear and independent Sentiments of Humane Underſtanding, 
is enabled to diſcourſe, to hunt out and judge ſo exactly, as to acquire in many 
matters an aſſurance of Truth, and to reſt therein. For tho we are not born 
with Irrefragable Propoſitions in our Brains, as with Eyes in our Head; yet we 
come into the World with the advantage of ſuch a Mind, that from thoſe Eyes, 
and our other Senſes, by the Natural N and Power of inferring one thing 
from an other, we can and do advance our Thoughts in the knowledge of things, 
far above all whatſoever our Senſations can reach unto. 

But for a farther improvement of this our common Reaſon, Ariſtotle has, with 
great ſubtilty of Thought fram d the Inſtrument of Inſtruments; and reduced the 
the looſe and familiar Diſcourſings of Men into an infallible Art, both for the 
Form of Argumentation by Syllogiſms, as a Touch-ſtone to diſcover how truely 
or fallaciouſly they are made; and alſo for the matter thereof: having gathered 
all ſorts of Arguments under certain Heads, and digeſted them into their proper 
Claſſes, called Topics. In which he ſhews what kind of Arguments are — Pro- 
bable, and beget in us that which is called Or1x10x, the miſchievous Mother of 
Diſpute and Brangling. What again are Demonſtrative, and infallibly Convincing, 
and do pive us a Certainty of Knowledge. Of which there are two Degrees. 

For this Knowledge, or Cognition is either abſolutely perfect, and fully ſatiſ- 
fying our Intellect ; or elſe in ſome degree is leſs ſatisfactory: I mean not in the 
certainty of the Truth; but only in the manner of our Knowledge of this Truth. 
For beſides the certain Knowleage of a thing to be; we naturally deſire to know more- 
over, Why it it ſo, from the immediate conſtituent cauſe of ſuch a Being. 

To demonſtrate any thing eds, Scientifically, from its immediate Eſſen- 
tial Cauſe, is the utmoſt perfection of humane Knowledge, if we could arrive unto 
it in a thorough and Methodical Contemplation of any matter. 

This Scientifical demonſtration called by Ariſtotle aun, that is From the very im- 
mediate Cauſe by which a thing is made to be what it it, the Philoſophers pretend unto : 
but with how little ſucceſs and ſatisfaction to our Underſtanding, their perfor- 
mances are advanced, does evidently appear from the ſo many different Sects 
of Eren Philoſophers. 

Whereas the Geometrican leaves nothing diſputable, or uncertain ; tho his de- 
monſtration is very ſeldome Aun, at which he aims not with Philoſophers, but 
thinks it ſufficient ſo far to ſatisfy our underſtanding, as undeniably to demonſtrate 
7% on, the Quod fit, The thing to be; tho it appears not in the demonſtration of 
that Being, Why it is, or How it comes to be. If he had undertook this buſineſs, 

1 2 Q | - 

the Geometrician would have become as doubtful and miſerable a Diſputer, as the 
Philoſopher. | | 

But yet we may obſerve, that the Geometrician does ſometimes give a demon- 
ſtration An: as in the firſt Propoſition, | For there Euclide proves the Triangle to 
be Equilateral, becauſe the ſides thereof conſiſt of the Rays of the ſame Circles: 
which is the immediate cauſe of their equality. Neither indeed could this firſt de- 
monſtration be otherwiſe than Scientifical, or Ain; for that an Equilateral Tri- 
angle being the Figure next in nature to a Circle, in reſpect of its ſimplicity and 
uniformity, ſo that there is no other medium poſſible to intervene between them; 
therefore it could have no other production, nor any other proof thereof, than 
from a Circle. The Demonſtrations likewiſe of the two following Propoſitions are 
of the ſame kind from the ſame cauſe. | 

But generally the Geometrician takes in, evidence and certainty of being to 
be abundantly ſufficient, both for our pleaſure and contentment in theſe Specula- 
tions, wherein we have an indubitable knowledge of ſome Truths in the ſecret and 
admirable properties of Magnitudes and Numbers. Altho' the famous French Lo- 
gician, blames much the Geometricians, for being thus defective in their demon- 
ftrations: which he would have to be all Scientifical and An, and that the Ele- 
ments ought to have been ſo methodized. And this he deſpairs not of; but that 
at ſome time it may be accompliſhed. This is indeed the fullneſs ot Science, which 
only can make perfect the ſtate of humane Nature: But ſuch a knowledge it is, 
that ſeems beyond the reach of any finite Being. A chain of things (to ſpeak 
with Homer) faſtned to the foot of Foe; the frame of whoſe Links is only known to 
Him the Maker. I wiſh therefore that this French Writer had ſhewed himſelf in this 
point, as great a Geometrician as he is a Logician in others; and given ſome Specimen 
of that Perfection, which he requires in Geometry. Of which | ſha!l have but little 
hopes, till he can ſhew me how an Acorn comes to be an Oak, and not an Elm. 
But for this matter the ancient Geometricians, well exerciſed in demonſtrable 
Speculations, fully knew their own ſtrength, and contented Themſelves with the 
certainty of Truth, rather than to venture at the Cauſes of that Truth, which 
wou'd be ever lyable to diſpute. 

Euclide therefore never attempted to order theſe Elementary Propoſitions, in a 
natural dependence on one another, as the cauſes of each others Truth. Vet are 
they ſo diſpoſed, as to be ſure Guides to lead us along infallibly from one Truth 
unto an other, and in that order ſerve to prove indubitably a Thing to be, from 
the Evidence and Force of ſome thing before acknowledged, tho not as a Caulc 
of its Being; yet as a Cauſe of our neceſſary Aſſent to ſuch a Being. 

Demonſtration 7s n, can be but one in any matter, for that of the ſame thing 
there is but one only Eſſential and Immediate Cauſe. 

Demonſtration 7s in, may be very various, ſome ſhort and clear, others more 
puzzel'd and wandring about ; according to the Sagacity of thoſe, who endeavour 
to find out the readieſt and apteſt Mediums to prove the matter propoſed. So that 
many times of the ſame Geometrical Propoſition, there may be ſeveral demonſtra- 
tions: And even a total change (as many have made to no purpole) of Euclid a 
Order in theſe Elements. 

To conclude therefore concerning the Forms of Geometrical demonſtrations. 
Foraſmuch as r * is what generally the Geometrician uſes, both in the Synthe- 
tical and Analytical Method, and that in either way the proof of a Thing to be, 
is made no more Scientifically or An, than the proot of a Thing not to be; we are not 
much to prefer the one before the other; but may as the matter requires, tor facility 
and brevity, make uſe of either ; The courſe of Argumentation in both _—_ 
equally Oſtenſive, and the Mediums of the ſame Nature and Force, that is, Propoſi- 
tions already demonſtrated, or allowed Principles. Tis only walking through them 
forward or backward, ſometimes from known Truths to prove an undiſcovered 
Truth in the Synthetical Method: And ſometimes by the ſame known Truths to 
diſprove an undiſcovered Untruth in an Analytical Deduction to Impoſſibility. A 
form of Argumentation moſt proper to overthrow a falſe Poſition: and thereby to 
eltabliſh the contradictory Propoſition for a certain Truth. This 

* 7 
iS n 
1 * > 

7 - 

66 . THE FIRST ELEMENT 

This then is the glory of the Geometrician, to demonſtrate upon clear and un- 
queſtionable grounds, either Synthetically or Analytically. And beſides, it is his 
wiſdom not to adventure with the Philoſopher, at a natural and neceſſary Series 
of things, from the immediate Cauſes to their immediate Effects, in which at- 
tempt all Philoſophers have hitherto failed; but by irreſiſtible reaſoning exactly 
to perform what he undertakes, that is, to have ſuch a Maſtery over our Intellect 
as to convince. Inſomuch that every Man ſhall in reaſon ſubmit, and as readily 
yield his Aſſent, as that he knows he thinks: And before all other Sciences, this 

is the power and preference of Geometry. 
mo PROPOSITION VIE 
N the ſame ſtrait line, to the ſame two ſtrait lines cannot be 
() conſtituted two other ſtrait lines, equal each to each, at an- 
other and another point, both points ſeated the ſame way, and the 
other two lines having the ſame ends with the two firſt lines. 

For if it be poſſible, on the ſtrait line 4s, to the two ſtrait lines 
Ac, CB, let two other ſtrait lines 4 D, DB, equal X 2 

each to each, be conſtituted at another and an- 
other point, as at c and p, the points c, , ſeat- 
ed + the ſame way: And the lines A D, DB, hav- 
ing the ſame ends 4, B, with the two firſt lines 
AC, CB. So that c A be equal Da: both having 
the ſame end 4; alſo cs be equal to DB: both 
having the ſame end B. 

And now let be joyned co. 

Fir/t then in the Triangle ac. 

Foraſmuch as ac is equal to ap [by Supo- c 
ſition | therefore the angle Ac is equal to the 
angle aDc | Prop. 5. | 

But the angle Ac p is greater then the angle 
BCD, a part of the ſame angle acp. Wherefore 
the angle apc (equal to A cp) is alſo greater & 
than the angle 3 : And therefore the angle 
BDC, Being likewiſe greater than its part the 
angle ADC, is MUCH GREATER than the L 
ſame angle z cp. But again in the Triangle 8 cp. 

| Becauſe Bc is equal to BÞ | by Suppoſition] therefore the angle 
BDC, is equal to the angle 3c D. [Prop. 5. 

* But the angle BD c has been now proved MUCH GREATER 
than the angle Bcp. And it is impoſſible 70 be equal and greater 
than the ſame. 

Therefore on the ſame ſtrait line to the ſame two ſtrait lines, can- 
not be conſtituted two other {trait lines, equal each to each, at an- 
other and another point, both points ſeated the ſame way, and the 
other two lines having the ſame ends with the two firſt lines. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

T That is, on the ſame fide of the line 4 3. For if the point c lyes 
on 

D 

OF GEOMETRY. 65 
on one fide of AB, and the point p on the contrary, then two equal 
lines may be conſtituted at thoſe points, and have the ſame ends with 

the two firſt lines. As may be eaſily conceiv d, if we imagine the 
Triangle ADB, to be turned over on the other fide of the line as. 

PROPOSITION VIIL 

F two Triangles have two ſides equal to tuo fides, each to each. 
Aud have alſo the baſe equal to the baſe; then ſhall they have 
the angle equal to the angle, contained by the equal lines. 

Let the two Triangles be anc, DE F, having the two ſides as, A c, 
equal to the two fides DE, DF, each to each, that is, AB to DE, and 
Ac to DF. And let them alſo have the baſe zc equal to the baſe x x. 

I fay, that the angle pac is equal to the angle ED F. 
For the Triangle as c be- TD 

ing applyd to the Triangle 
DEF, and the point B; put on 
the point E, and the ſtrait line 
Be, on the ſtrait line x F; then 
the point c ſhall agree with 5 
the point F; for that Bc is 
equal to EF. 

Now Bc agreeing with E; 
BA, AC, ſhall alſo agree with ED, DF. For if the baſe ze ſhall agree 
with the baſe E, and the ſides B A, Ac, do not agree with the ſides 
E D, DF, but change their ſituation, as EG, GF. | 

Then on the ſame ſtrait line to the ſame two ſtrait lines, ſhall be 
conſtituted the ſame way, two other ſtrait lines, equal each to each, 
at another and another point, having the ſame ends. But they can- 
not be ſo conſtituted. | by Prop. 7. 

Wherefore the baſe Be agreeing with the baſe EF, the ſides B a, 
Ac, ſhall not diſagree with the ſides E D,; therefore they ſhall agree. 

So that alſo the angle 34 c ſhall agree with the angle EDF, and 
therefore ſhall be equal to it. Ax. 8. 

If therefore two Triangles have two ſides equal to two ſides, each 
to each, and have alſo the baſe equal to the baſe, then ſhall they 

have the angle equal to the angle, contained by the equal lines. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Advertiſement. 

Obſerye here and elſewhere, a conſtant propriety of Speech among the Greek 
Geometricians, that the ſame ſtrait lines when they relate to a Figure, are ever 
called Sides, , but when referr d to an angle contained by thoſe ſides, then 

they retain, or x the appellation of ſtrait lines, wSewy 972;upuar, not M= 
ANNOTATIONS. 

This eighth Propſition is in effect the Converſe of the fourth, in which two ſides 
of a Triangle with the contained angle, were ſuppoſed equal to the like parts of an 

other 

68 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

other Triangle; and from thence was proved the equality of their baſes, &c. Now 
here two ſides of a Triangle with the baſe, are ſuppoſed equal to the like 

of an other Triangle, and from thence is proved the equality of the angles con- 
tained by the equal fides. And to compleat the Converle, Euclide might have gone 
on, and ſaid, alſo the whole Triangle is equal to the whole Triangle, &c. as in the 
4. Propoſition. But this evidently following of it ſelf, needed not to be repeated. 

The demonſtration of this Propoſition, like as that of the 4b, depends upon 
the eighth Axiom of Congruous Magnitudes. And here alſo in this demonſtration, 
as before in the fourth, may be clearly obſerved the difference between a Geome- 
trical and a Mechanical Congruency; the Mechanical being manifefted only by 
Senſe, and the Geometrical only by the force of Reaſon, As in this 8. P tion 
the Triangles ABC, DEF, are proved to be Congruous, not from an eyidence of 
Senſe; but from the 7, Propoſition ; which is a Theorem moſt rationally demon- 
ſtrated: and indeed inſerted among theſe Elementary Propoſitions chiefly for that 

urpoſe, there being hereafter no turther uſe made thereof. | 

In the fifth and fixth Propoſitions, the parts of a fingle Triangle are compared 
to one another : Firſt, in the fifth from two equal fides is proved an equality of 
their oppoſite angles: Then in the ſixth, from two equal angles, is demonſtrated 
an equality of their ſubtending ſides. | 

In the fourth and eighth Propoſitions, are compared two Triangles to one an- 
other: and from three equal parts given in each Triangle, is demonſtrated an equa- 
lity between the two Triangles in the whole, and in every remaining part. 

Theſe four Propoſitions are the Fundamental Theorems of the Elements: And 
the Ground upon which they ſtand is the Axiom of Congruency; which Mathe- 
matical Congruency ought therefore to be rightly underſtood, according as we haye 
before declared. 

PROPOSITION IX. 
O cut a given ſtrait-lin'd angle into halves. 

Let the given ſtrait lin d angle be BA c. 

It is required to cut the ſame into halves. 

Let there be taken in the line 4 B, any point 
as D. And from the line ac, let the line AE be 
taken off equal to Ap, and draw DE. Then on 
DE let be conſtituted an Equilateral Triangle 5 
DEF: and draw AF. 

I fay, that the angle 3A c is cut into halves 
by the ſtrait line A F. 

For becauſe a p is equal ax, and aF common, | 
therefore there are the two lines Þ 4, A F, equal to the two lines E 4, 
AF, each to each; and the baſe DF, is equal to the baſe E F, there- 
lore the angle v AF, is equal to the angle E A F. Prop. B.] 
Wherefore the given ſtrait lin d angle 3A c, it cut into halves by 
the ſtrait line A F. Which was to be done. 

The Practice. 

From the point A at any diſtance whatever in the lines A B, A C, take A D equal 
to AE; then from the points D and E, with the ſame opening of the Compaſſes, 
let be deſcribed two Arches interſecting each other, ſuppoſe at the point E, having 
drawn the ſtrait line AF, the angle B AC is divided into two equal parts. 

PROPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 69 

PROPOSITION X. 
O cut a given finite ſtrait line into halves. 

Let the finite ſtrait line given be cs. | 

It is required to cut c into halves. | A 

Let there be conſtituted upon c an Equila- 
teral Triangle cas, and let the angle c AB be cut 
into halves, by the line a». | 

I ſay, that the ſtrait line cs is cut into halves 
in the point D. C B 

For becauſe c A is equal to as, and aD com- Y 
mon, therefore there are the two lines c a, ap, equal to the two 
lines Ba, Ap, each to each, and the anglec ap, is equal to the angle 
BAD: Therefore the baſe c p, is equal to to the baſe ps. 

Wherefore the given finite ſtrait line cs, is cut into halves in the 
point D. Which was to be done. 

The Practice. 

Opening the Compaſſes to any diſtance greater than half the line CB, from 
the points C and B, with the ſame 22 of the Compaſſes let be deſcribed two 
Arches interſecting one another on each fide the line CB, a ſtrait line drawn be- 

twixt the points of interſection will divide the line into two equal parts. 
PROPOSITION XL 

T O a given ſtrait line, from a point given in the ſame to draw a 
Krait line at Right angles. 
Let the givenſtrait line be as, and the point given in the ſame be c. 
It is required from the point c unto 
AB todraw a ſtrait line at Right angles. 
Let there be taken in the line ac any 
point as Þ, and to cp let there be put an 
equal line E: Then on p let be con- 

ſtituted an Equilateral Triangle FD E. c 
And draw the line c F. 

I fay, that to the given ſtrait line as from the point c given in 
the ſame, is drawn at Right angles the ſtrait line c F. 

For becauſe cp is equal to c E, and cF common; therefore there 
are the two lines c D, c E, equal to the two lines c E, cF, each to each, 
and the baſe D is equal to the baſe E F; wherefore the angle Der 
is equal to the angle Ex cr, and theſe are conſequent angles. But 
when a ſtrait line ſtanding upon a ſtrait line, makes the conſequent 
angles equal to one another, then each of thoſe equal angles is a 
Right angle. Wherefore each of the angles DcF, Ecx, is a Right angle. 

Therefore to the given ſtrait line a s, from the point c given in the 

ſame, is drawn at Right angles the ſtrait line e r. Which was to be 
done. N ” mn 

3 

5 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

The Practice, 

On each ſide of the given point C, in the line AB, take CD and CE equal to one 

another, then from the points D and E, with any opening of the Compaſſes greater 

than CD or CE, let be deſcribed two Arches interſecting each other, ſuppoſe 

at the point E, the ſtrait line EC drawn betwixt the points F and C, be 

Perpendicular to the line AB. 

This is the practice with Ruler and Compaſſes, but the readieſt way of drawing 
' Perpendiculars both in this and the next Propoſition, is by a Square. 

PROPOSITION XII. 

T O a given infinite ſtrait line, from a given point which is not 
in the ſame line, to draw a Perpendicular rait line. 

Let the given infinite ſtrait line be as, and let the given point 
which is not in the ſame line be c. 

It is required to 4B, from the point c to 
draw a perpendicular {trait line. 

Let there be taken on the other fide of the 
line 4B, any point as p. Now the Center c, 
and the diſtance cp, let be deſcribed a Circle 
E FG, Then let the line E be cut into halves x i 
in the point u, and let be joyned co, c H, cx. 5 | 

I fay, that to as, from the point c is drawn a perpendicular ca. 

For becauſe GH is equal to E, and H c common; therefore there 
are the two lines 6H, He, equal to the two lines k H, ¶Hũ c, each to each; 
and the baſe cd is equal to the baſe ce: wherefore the angle H, 
is equal to the angle HE, and theſe are conſequent angles. But 
when a ſtrait line ſtanding upon a ſtrait line makes the conſequent 
angles equal to one another : then each of thoſe equal angles is a 
Right angle, and the ſtanding trait line is called a perpendicular 
to that, upon which it ſtands. 1 

Therefore to the given infinite ſtrait line as from the given point 

, which is not in the ſame line, is drawn the perpendicular c . 
Which was to be done. 

The Practice. 

From the point C at any diſtance greater than the neareſt d 
CD, let be deſcribed an Arch, cutting the line AB at the ; 
pou H and E, then from the points Hand E, with the 
ame opening of the Compaſſes, let be deſcribed two Arches 
interſecting each other at the point I, the Ruler being laid ad 

he poi d C dra , 1 "i 

X 
PROPOSITION XIII. 

Fa ſtrait line ſtanding any ways upon a frait line makes angles, 

# ſball make either two Right angles, or angles equal to two Right. 

For let a ſtrait line as ſtanding upon a ſtrait line cp, make an- 
| gles, 

OF GEOMETRY. 51 

gles, as CBA, ABD. I ſay, that the angles c B; A, AB D, are either two 

bin angles, or equal to two Right. . 
For it the angle cs a, be equal to the angle ABD; then are they 
thro Right angles, (by the 10". Def 

hut if not, let from the point B. be drawn Bx at right n to CD. 
Wherefore BE, E BD, are two Right angles. 

Now whereas the angle CBE, is equal to the 
two angles BA, ABE, let the angle ER D be 
added in common. Wherefore the angles BE, 
E BD, are equal to the three angles BA, ABE, 
E BD. 

Again, whereas the angle DBA, is equal to 
the two angles DBE, EBA, let the angle anc _— 
be added in common. Wherefore the angles 
DBA, ABC, are equal to the three angles DBE EBA, ABC. 

But the angles CBE, EBD, were proved equal to the fame three 
angles; And things equal to one and the ſame, are equal to one 
another. Theretore alſo the angles CBE, EBD, are equal to the an- 
les D BA, ABC. 

But the angles BE, EBD, are two Right angles, wherefore alſo 
the angles DB a, a Bc, are equal to two Right angles. Therefore if a 

ſtrait line ſtanding any ways upon a ſtrait line makes angles ijt 

ſhall make either two Right angles, or angles equal to two Right. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

' PROPOSITION XIV. 

2 ” a ftrait hne, and to a point in the ſame, two frais lines not 
ng the ſame way, do make the . e angles equal to two 
A827 angles, Thoſe rait lines fall be directly placed to one another. 

For to the ſtrait line 4 Bj, and to a point in the ſame x, let two ſtrait 
lines Bc, B D, not lying the fame way, make the conſequent angles 

ABC, ABD, equal to two Right angles. I ſay, that 35 is directly 
placed to BC. 

For if BD be not directly placed to zcʒ lets x bedirectiy placed to Bc. 

Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line as, ſtands 
upon the ſtrait line c E: therefore the angles is 
ABC, ABE, are equal to two Right angles: | 
[Prop. 13. 
But alſo the angles anc, AB D, are equal to 
two Right angles | by Suppoſition] wherefore 
the angles CA, AVE, are equal to the angles + 
CBA, a BD. 

Let the common angle onA be taken away. Therefore the re- 
maining angle 4B; , is equal to the remaining angle a3 p, the leſs 
to the greater: which is impoſſible. Therefore 3E is not directly 

Placed to Bc. N 2 In 

7¹ THE FIRST ELEMENT 

In like manner may we prove, that there is not any other line 
beſides Bp. Therefore Bc is directly placed to Bp. 

If therefore to a ſtrait line, and to a point in the ſame, two ſtrait 
lines not lying the ſame way, do make the conſequent angles 
equal to two Right angles, Thoſe ſtrait lines ſhall be directly placed 
one to the other. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XV. 

F two ftrait lines cut each other, they ſhall make the Vertical 
angles equal to one another. 

For let the two ſtrait lines 4B, cp, cut each other in the point E. 

I ſay, that the angle AE c, is equal to the angle D DEB: and the an- 
gle c EB, is equal to the angle A ED. 

Foraſmuch as the ſtrait line ax, ſtands upon | 
the ſtrait line e o, making the angles cx a, AE D, & C 
therefore the angles k a, a 2D, are equal to 
two Right angles. 

Again, — — the ſtrait line v E ſtands upon 
the ſtrait line A B, making the angles A E D, DEB, 2 
therefore the angles AED, DRY, are =_ to 
two Right angles. | 
But the angles cx A, 4 ED, were e proyed equal to two Right angles. 
Wherefore the angles ct a, A E D, are equal to the angles at D, DEB: 
let the common angle a ED be taken away; then the remaining 
angle c EA, is equal to the remaining angle Br». In like manner it 
may be proved, that the angles EB, DEA, are equal. If therefore 
two ſtrait lines cut each other, they ſnall make the Vertical angles 
— to one another. Which was to be — | 

— Corollary. 

" From beats: Ges: d " ftrait lines, how 3 ſever, cut one axiather in the 
ee, to four NVBbe gli. | 

PROPOSITION XVI. 

Of: F eve „ Triangle any one fide bemg produced, the outward 
ales ts greater than either of the imward, and oppoſite angles. 

Let the Triangle be anc, and let the fide n c be produced to D. 

I fay, that the outward angle acp, is greater than either of the 
inward, and oppoſite angles CBA, Bac. 

Let ac be cut into halves in the point E; and drawing BE let it be 
continued to, ſo that E I be put equal to ; ER: And let be joynd Fc. 
Foraſmuch as ax is equal to Ee, and BR, to EF: therefore there are 
the two lines AE, E B, equal to the two lines cx, E F, each to each, and 
the angle AEB, is equal to e FEC (for they are Varig 

angles 

OF GEOMETRY. 53 
angles) Therefore the baſe'a 3, is equal to the baſe pe, and the Tri- 

angle ABE is equal to the Triangle rec; 
and the remaining angles are equal to the 
remaining angles, each to each, under 
which are ſubtended equal fides , Prop. Y 
4] therefore the angle BA E, is equal to the 74 
angle ECF. But the angle ED, is greater Fa 1 
than the angle x c r. Therefore the angle x cy 5 
is greater than the angle Bax: That is, the 
outward angle E cp, or A cp, is greater than E 
the inward and oppoſite angle BAc. ue 
In like — hde ac being produced It 
to 6, and the fide Bc being cut into halves in 
the point N: and drawing an, let it be continued to 1, ſo that Hi be 
put equal to AH: and let be joyned Ic; It will be demonſtrated as 
before, that the outward angle Bc d, is greater than the inward and 
oppoſite cBa. But the angle 3c, is equal to the Vertical angle 
ACD; therefore the angle 4 cD, is alſo greater than the angle cs a: 
And it has been proved greater than the angle Bac. Therefore of 
every Triangle any one fide being produced, the ontward angle is 
greater than either of the Inward and oppoſite angles. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. 

We Le XVII. 

iangle two angles taken together every way, are 
5 than 5. Yo Nahr angles. 

Let pk Triangle be anc. I fay, that any two angles of the Tri- 
angle ABC, are leſs than two Right angles. 
For let ge be produced to v: And becauſe 
of the Triangle azc'the outward angle a cp, 
is greater than the inward and oppoſite an- 
gle AB e; let be added in common the angle 
Ac; therefore the angles 4c D, acs, are - | 
greater than the angles azc, Bc a. But the J 8 
angles . A CD, Ach, are equal to two Right angles; therefore the 
angles ABC, BCA, are leis than two Right angles. In like manner 
we may demonſtrate, that the angles 5 Ac, ac, are leſs than two 
Right als: And alſo that the angles cas, AB e, are leſs than two 
Right angles. Therefore of every Triangle two angles taken toge- 
ther every way, are leſs than two Right angles. Which was to be 

demonſtrated. 
PROPOSITION XVIIL 
Q F every Triangle the greater ſide ſubtends the greater angle. 

HOMING Triangle be ac, having the fide a c greater than the fide 

3 AB. 

74 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

AB. I ſay, that alſo the angle AB c, is greater than the angle nc a. 

For becauſe Ae is greater than * let aD de put equal to AB; 
and let be joyned BD. 

Now foraſmuch as of the Triangle 3oc, the , 
outward angle A DB is greater than the inward 
and oppoſite angle DcB; and that the angle 
ADB, is equal to the angle ABD, (becauſe the 
the fide AB is equal to the ſide ad) Therefore z 
the angle ABD, is greater than the angle 4 CB. 
But the angle AB c is greater than the angle 'a BD, hots it 1s 
much greater than the angle Ac. Therefore of every Triangle 
the greater fide ſubtends the greater angle. Which was to * de- 
monſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XIX. 

F every Triangle under the greater angle, is ſubtended the 
O greater fide. 

Let the Triangle be AB c, having the angle A; e, greater than the 
angle nc. I ſay, that the fide ac is greater than the hde 4 4B. For 
if not, then Ac is either equal to AB, or leſs than it. : 

But Ac is not equal to as; for that then the Ag 
angle ABC ſhould be equal to the angle ac. 
But it is not equal | by Suppoſition | there- || 
fore ac is not equal to as. Neither yet is 4 

Ac leſs than as, for then alſo the angle apc ,| 

O 

ſhouid be leſs than the angle Ac B. But it is | 

not leſs [ by Suppoſition. | therefore a c is not leſs than as. And it 
has been demonſtrated, that it is not equal: therefore the fide 4 c 
is greater than the ſide as. Wherefore of every Triangle under the 
greater angle is ſubtended the greater fide. - tee was to be de- 

monſtrated. 
PROPOSITION XX. ar 

Wa every Triangle duo fides taken together any Way, are - great: 
er than the remaining ſide. 

Let the Triangle be ac. I ſay, that two fides of the Triangle 
ae taken together any way, are greater than the remaining fide. 
Namely B4, ac, than 30: and 4B, Be, than ca: and xc, ca, than 
AB. For let B a be produced to the point p, and to ca let AD be put 
equal, then let be joyned pe. | 

Now foraſmuch as Þ 4 is equal to AC, there. R 
fore the angle Ape is equal to che angle ACD, N 
But the angle Bcd is greater than the angle 
AcD: therefore the angle ꝝ c is greater than 8 
the angle A Dc. And becauſe Don is a Triangle 
having the angle 3 e p greater than the angle 3 De; and that * 

e 

OF GEOMETRY. 75 
the greater angle is ſubtended the greater fide: therefore 5 B is 
greater than Bc. But DB is equal to 34, ac: therefore za, ac, are 
greater than Bc. 

After the ſame manner ſhall we demonſtrate, that as, Be, are 
greater than Ca; And Bc, c a, than as. Therefore of every Triangle 

two fides taken together every way, are greater than the remaining 
ſide. . Which was to be demonſtrated. 8 

PROPOSITION XXI. 

F from the Ends of any one ſide of a Triangle be conſlituted 

two ſtrait lines within the Triangle : The conſtituted lines ſball 

be leſs than the two remaining /ides of the Triangle: But ſhall con- 
tain a greater angle. 

For on one of the ſides B c, of the Triangle a nc, from the ends 
B, c, let be conſtituted within, two ſtrait lines 3 D, De. 

I ſay, that BD, Dc, are leſs than za, a c, the two remaining ſides of 
the Triangle a Bc: but do contain an angle ; De greater than the 
angle BAC. A 

For let 3D be produced to E. 

Now foraſmuch as of every Triangle two 
ſides are greater than the remaining fide; there- 
fore of the triangle Bax the two fides B; A, A E, 
are greater than Be. Let tc be added intom- 
mon, therefore 8 a, a c, are greater than BE, E c. 

Again, becauſe of the Triangle ED, the two ſides c E, E D, ar 
greater than ep: let n be added in common, therefore cx, E , are 
greater than c p, DB. But Ba, Ac, have been proved greater than BE, 
EC: therefore Ba, Ac, are much greater than 8D, Dc. 

Again, foraſmuch as of every Triangle the outward angle is 
greater than the in ward and oppoſite: therefore of the Triangle c ED 
the outward angle BDc, is greater than DEC. And by the ſame rea- 
ſon, of the Triangle Bax, the outward angle 3E c, is greater than 
B AE. But BDc has been provd greater than p xc, that is, BE ; there- 
fore the angle BD c is much greater than the angle B; ac. 

If therefore upon any one fide of a Triangle, be from the ends 
thereof conſtituted two ſtrait lines within the Triangle, the conſti- 
tuted lines are leſs than the two remaining fides of the Triangle: 
but ſhall contain a greater angle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

| ANNOTATIONS. 
This tion is of much uſe in Optics concerning Viſual Rays, and An- 
ples; in that the ſame Object ſhall appear greater, or leſſer, as upon various di- 
ces, the angles received in the Eye are greater, or leſſer. And therefore in ge- 
neral "hy be noted that every Thing appears to us leſs, than it really is in 

itude. 

The like uſe of this Propoſition is made in Perſpective, Picture, and Archi- 
tecture: where Images, Statues, Columns, &c. are proportioned according — Sr 
iglus 

2 

76 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

13 heights and diſtances. Phidias his Statue of Minerva was very famous in this point, 

which ſeemed near hand ſo monſtrous to the vulgar : but ſeated in that part of 
the Temple where it was deſign d to be placed, it appear d moſt beautiful. We have 
the like example of Pictures in the banqueting Room at White Hall. Thus many 
Geometrical Propoſitions, which ſeem trivial, have excellent Ules. 

| -_ +*PROPOSITION XXII. 

F three ſtrait lines, which are equal to three given Hrait 
lines, to conſtitute a Triangle. | 3 

But any two taken every way, ought to be greater than the re- 
ma.ning line. | | 

Let three given ſtrait lines be 4, B, c, of which let any two taken 
every way, be greater than the remaining line: namely a, B, than 
c. à, e, than B, and B, e, than a. It is required to conſtitute a Triangle 
of {trait lines equal to a, B, c. Let be put a ſtrait line p E, terminated 
at D, but interminate towards E; and let DF be put equal to a, and 
FG equal to B, and GH to c. Now the Center F, and diſtance pp, 
let be deſcribed the circle D&L : And again, the Center 6, and di- 
ſtance 6H, let be deſcribed the circle H Lk: and let be joy ned k E, 
k G. I fay, that the Triangle x F, is conſtituted of three ſtrait lines 
equal to A4, B. c. 

For becauſe the point F is the Cen- 
ter of the circle k L, therefore p 1s 
equal to Fx; but FD 1s equal to a, 
wherefore alſo Fx is equal to 4. 

Again, becaule the point 6 is the 
Center of the circle HLK, therefore 
GH is equal to k: but GH is equal g—— 
toc: where fore alſo GK is equal to c; 
and Fd alſo is equal to 3. Wherefore the three ſtrait lines xx, Fd, 
GK, are equal to the three ſtrait lines 4,s,c. Therefore of the three 
ſtrait lines KF, FG, GK, which are equal to the three given ſtrait lines 

A,B, c, is conſtituted the Triangle x FG. Which was to be done. 

| PROPOSITION XXIIL 

T O a given trait line, and to a point in the ſame, to conflitute 
a ſtrait-lin d angle equal to a given ſtrait-lin'd angle. 

Let the given ſtrait line be as, and in the 
ſame let the point be 4; and let the givenſtrait 
lind angle be p R. It is required to the given 
ſtrait line a8, and in it to the point 4, to con- 
ſtitute a ſtrait . lind angle equal to the given 
ſtrait-lind angle Dc k. 

Let there be taken in each line cp, e x, any 
points; as D, E; and let be drawn the ſtrait line B 
DE, Now of three {trait lines which are equal to the three ſtrait lines 

ob, 

OF GEOMETRY. 77 
eb, DB, CE; let be conſtituted a Triangle 4 Fo, fo that op be equal 
to AE; and cE to A0; as alſo DE to FG. | | 

Then foraſmuch as the two ſtrait lines dc, E, are equal to the 
two ſtrait lines F A, Ad, each to each, and the baſe DE is equal to the 
baſe Fd: therefore the angle Dc ꝝ is equal to the angle pA d. Prop. 8. 
Therefore to a given ſtrait line A B;, and to a point in, the fame a, is 
conſtituted a ftrait-lin'd angle F as, equal to a given ftrait-lin'd an- 
gle DE. Which was to be done. 3100 

PROPOSITION: XXIV. 

F two Triangles have two ſides equal to two /ides, each to each: 
And have the angle greater than the angle, which is contained by 
the equal lines: They ſball alſo have the baſe greater than the baſe. 
Let the two Triangles be anc, DEF, having two ſides as, ac, 
equal to two ſides p E, DF, each to each, that is, as to DE; ac tops: 
And let the angle Ac be greater than the angle EDF: I fay, that 
the baſe ; c is greater than the baſe x F. 

Foraſmuch as the angle 3 a c is greater than the angle E o 5, let to 
the ſtrait line Dx, and to a point in the ſame o, be conſtituted the 
angle Ek D d, equal to the angle Bac. And to either of the lines A c, 
DF, let DG be put equal, and let be joyned dx, G F. 

Now becauſe 4B is equal to p E, and ac A 
to DG; therefore there are the two lines“ J 
BA, AC, equal tothe two lines ED, Do, each 
to each; and the angle Ac, is equal to the 
angle E D, therefore the baſe nc, is equal 8 
to the baſe E d. Again, becauſe ds is equal r n. 
to pr, therefore the angle po is equal to the angle pF, Prop y. 

hut DGF is greater than its part ꝝx GF, therefore alſo pg 6 1s greater 

than Ek F. But EF is greater than its part DF, therefore E F 
is much greater than EGF. | 

And becauſe there is the Triangle GF, having the angle EFG 
greater than the angle = 6x, and that under the greater angle is ſub- 
tended the greater fide: therefore the fide E G is greater than EF. 
But E d is equal to Bc: wherefore 3c is e than EF. 

If therefore two Triangles have two fides equal to two ſides, each 
to each: and have the angle greater than the angle, which is con- 
tained by the equal lines: They ſhall alſo have the baſe greater 
than the baſe. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXV. 
F two Triangles have two ſides equal to two fides, each to each, 
and have the baſe greater than the baſe: ſhall alſo have 
=» angle greater than the angle, which is contained by the equal 
$6517 in 1 | 
Let the two Tri 

angles be 45 c, DEF, having two hides a B, Ac, equal 
O to 

| 78 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

to two ſides v E, Br, each to each, that is, A ; to DE; Ac to Dp: And 
let the baſe Bc be greater than the baſe EF: I ſay, that the angle 
® BAC is greater than the angle EK DF. | 
) For if not, then Ba c is either equal to E DF, or leſs. But the angle 
| | BAC is not equal to the angle E DF: For 
r then the baſe z ſhould be equal to the \» 
| 5 baſe E F. | Prop. 4. | But it is not ſo [by | \ 
Suppoſition] therefore the angle Bae 
is not equal to the angle E DF. 
But neither is it leſs. For then the 
baſe Bc ſhould be leſs than the baſe E 
Prop. 24.] But it is not ſo | by Suppoſt- + 
tion | therefore the angle 3 ac is not leſs 7 ApS. 
than the angle EDF; and it has been proved, that it is not equal. 
Therefore the angle 3 ac is greater than the angle E p F. 
If therefore two Triangles have two fides equal to two fides, each 
to each, and have the baſe greater than the baſe : They ſhall alſo 
have the angle greater than the angle, which is contained by the 
equal lines. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XVII. 

IF two Triangles have two angles equal to two angles, each to 

[| each, and one ſide equal to one ſide, either THAT which is be- 

tween the equal angles, or THAT, which is ſubtended under one of 

the equal angles: They ſhall alſo have the other ſides equal to the 

$7 other ſides, each to each, and the remaining angle equal to the re- 
7 maining angle. en eee, e dead 

Let the two Triangles be A Bc, DEF, having two angles a Be, 

BCA, equal to two angles DEF, ED, each to each, that is, AB c to 
DEF, and BCA to EFD. | 

And let them have one fide equal to one fide. . | 

Firſt, the ſide between the equal angles: that is, Bc equal to EF. 
I fay, That they ſhall have the other des equal to the other ſides, 
each to each, namely az to DE; and ac to D: and the remaining 
angle g Ac, equal to the remaining angle x DF. _ | 

For if AB be unequal to Dx, one of them ſhall be the greater. 

Let 48 be the greater, and let zG be put C 
equal to ED, and let be joyned d c. Now for- 
aſmuch as BG is equal to ED, and B; e to EE, 

therefore there are the two lines 3d, xc, equal 

to the two lines E D, EF, each to each, and 
the angle dne is equal to the angle DEF; | 
therefore the baſe cc, is equal to the baſe rc ET FP 
DF. [Prop.4.] And the Triangle dB ſhall be equal to the Triangle 
DEF, and the remaining angles ſhall be equal to the remaining 
01 angles, 

OF GEOMETRY. 79 

angles, each to each, under which are ſubtended equal ſides 

Therefore the angle Be, is equal to the angle EFD. But EFD 

was ſuppoſed equal to gc A; wherefore BG is equal to 8c a: The 

leſs to the greater; which is impoſſible. Therefore as is not un- 
equal to DE, equal therefore it is. 

But alſo ; c is equal to E; therefore there are the two lines a B, 
Bc, equal to the two lines v E, E, each to each, and the angle ABc is 
equal to the angle DEF, wherefore the baſe ac is equal to the baſe 
DF: and the remaining angle hᷣAc is equal to the remaining angle Epp. 

Now again, let the ſides ſubtended under the equal angles be 
equal, as aB to DE; I ſay, that alſo the other ſides ſhall be equal 
to the other ſides; that is, ac to DF, and Be to EF: And alſo 
the remaining angle ac, ſhall be equal to the remaining angle x DF. 
For if Bc be unequal to Ex, one of them is the greater. 

Let ze (if poſſible) be the greater, and let B; H be put equal to E, 
and let be joy ned 4 H. P 

Now foraſmuch as BH is equal to Ex, and 45 to DE: therefore 
there are the two lines as, Bn, equal to the two lines Dx, E, each 
to each, and they contain equal angles: wherefore the baſe ay is e- 
qual to the baſe DF, and the Triangle AB; H: is equal to the Triangle 
DEF. And the remaining angles ſhall be equal to the remaining an- 
gles, each to each, under which are ſubtended equal ſides; therefore 
the angle BHAa is equal to E D. But EF o is equal to ha, therefore 
alſo B HA is equal to Bc A: that is, of the Triangle a j c, the outward 
angle 8 H 4, is equal to the inward and oppoſite B; c a: which is im- 
poſſible. Therefore nc is not unequal to EE, equal therefore it is. 
But alſo 4s is equal to PR: therefore there are the two lines as, Bc, 
equal to the two lines p E, E F, each to each, and they contain equal 
angles: wherefore the baſe 4c, is equal to the baſe DF, and the Tri- 
angle a Bc, is equal to the Triangle pE, and the remaining angle 
BAC, is equal to the remaining angle ED F. 7 

If therefore two Triangles have two angles, equal to two angles, 
each to each, and one fide equal to one fide, either that which is be- 
tween the equal angles, or that which is ſubtended under one of 
the equal angles: they ſhall &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

enen TEES -= 
F-# trait line falling on tuo ſtrait lines, makes the alternate 
angles equal to one another, the ſtrait lines ſball be Parallels 
one tothe iber. | g 1 
For let the ſtrait line E x, falling on the two ſtrait lines as, cp, 

make the Alternate angles A EF, EFD, equal to one another: I ſay, 
that A B is Parallel to cp. 

or if not, then 4B, e o, being produced ſhall meet either on the 
Oz parts 

arch 
ations 

80 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

parts of B, v; or on the parts of 4, c. Let them be produced and 
meet on the parts of B, D, in the point 6. Therefore of the Tri- 
angle GE F, the outward angle 4 N F 1s greater than the inward and 
oppoſite angle xd. [Prop. 16.] But it is alſo equal [by Suppoti- 
tion] which is impoſſible; therefore as, co, | 5 
being produced ſhall not meet on the parts a 102. 218% 11h 
of B, v. 2 . 
Aſter the ſame manner ſhall be — 
ſtrated, that they meet not on the pa Co 
of a, c. But meeting in neither part, — are Parallels, [Def 3s. 
therefore as is Parallel to c p 
Wherefore if a ſtrait line falling on two ftrait lines, makes the Al- 
ternate angles equal to one another, the ſtrait lines n be er. 
one to the other. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITI ON XXVIIL | 

1 F a ſtrait line falling on tu ſtrait lines, makes the outward an- 
gle equal to the inward and oppoſite on the ſame parts: Or the 
inward angles on the ſame parts equal to two Ri me the 
ſtrait lines ſhall be Palalleti one to the other. _ 

For let the ftrait line Ey falling on the two frat lines AB, CD, 
make the outward angle EHR, equal to the inward and oppoſite, 
and on the ſame parts, namely to the angle D: or the inward an- 
gles on the ſame parts, namely BGH, Hp, equal to two Right an- 
gles. I fay, that as is Parallel to cy. 

For becauſe £68 is equal to HD [by Suppo- — 
ſition and E dn is equal to the Vertical angle ac , _ 

therefore alſo 40 H is equal to np, and they EN IK 
are Alternate, therefore as is Parallel to cp. | 
Again, becauſe 30 H, GHD, are equal to 8 W 

Right angles [by Suppoſition. | 7m alſo aGH, 
sek, are equal to two Right angles; Prop. 13. J therefore 40h, 
BGH, are equal toBGH, MHD. Let BGH common be taken away, 
then the remaining angle ad is equal to the remaining angle dp. 
And they are Alternate, therefore AB is Parallel to c b. 

If therefore a ſtrait line falling on two ſtrait lines, makes the out- 
ward angle equal to the in ward and oppoſite on the ſame parts: or 
the inward angles on the ſame parts —— to two Right angles: 

the ſtrait lines ſhall be Parallels one to the other. — was to 
be demonſtrated. 

1900 

"f DV. { 5 

PROPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 6861 
PROPOSITION XXIX: iz tar 0 

JN Parallel Lines a [trait line falling doth make the Alternate 
angles equal to one another. — | 
And the Outward angle equal to the Inward, and Oppoſite on 
the ſame parts. | FF 
Aud the Inward angles on the ſame parts equal to two Right. 
For on the Parallels A B, c p, let the ſtrait line E fall, I ay that it 
makes the Alternate angles a GH, GHD equal. {A wn 

And the Outward angle x equal to HD the Inward and Op- 
poſite angle on the ſame parts. 

And the Inward angles on the ſame parts 30 n, 6 HD, equal to 
two Right angles. | 

For if the angle AH be unequal to HD; one of them is the 
greater. Let the greater be a 0 fl. f 

Now foraſmuch as 40 H is greater than 6 4p, E 
let be added in common 3H. Therefore a GH, ci wack ah 
BGH are greater than zen, HD | Ax. 4. | But | * 
AGH, BGH are equal to two Right angles | Prop, - 
13. ]; therefore 3a, Hp are leſs than two. No 

Right angles. But ſtrait lines infinitely produced from Angles leſs 
than two Right, do meet together, Ax. 11.] therefore as, cv, in- 
finitely produced ſhall meet together. But meet they do not; for 
that they are ſuppoſed Parallels; therefore A0 H is not unequal to 
GHD: equal therefore it is; And aGHn, 6HD, are Alternate angles. 

But again, aGH is equal to he Vertical angle t dB, [ Prop. 15, | 
therefore alſo EE is equal to h D The Outward angle equal to 
the Inward and Oppoſite. ule 

Let now be added in common 3H: therefore EGB, BGH are e- 

ual to BGH, GHD. But EGB, BGH are equal to Two Right angles 
(Prop, I3.] therefore allo 30, GHp, The Inward angles, are equal 
to two Right. K wy 
Wherefore a ſtrait falling on Parallel lines does make the Alter- 
nate angles equal to one another : And the Outward angle equal to 
the Inward, and Oppoſite on the ſame parts: And the Inward angles 
on the ſame parts equal to two Right. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This Propoſition is the Converſe of the two preceding; and in the three laft 
Propofitions is compriſed the Fundamental DoQrine of Paralleliſm; wherein three 
Specificative and Convertible Properties of Parallels are laid down. 

Fir, From the Equality of the Alternate angles the Lines are proved Parallels, 
in Prop. 27. | | | 
-— From the Equality of the Ontward angle to the Inward and Oppokite : 

Thirdly, From the Equality of the two Inward angles to Two Right, the Lines 
are allo proved Parallels, in Prop. 28. 

OJ 80 

8x THE FIRST ELEMENT 

So that in theſe two Propoſitions is demonſtrated, that all ſtrait lines having any 
one of theſe three properties are PARALLELS, that is, Non-CONCURKING STRAIT LINEs. 

Now the following 29". Propoſition is the Converſe of the two preceding, and 
demonſtrates, that all Parallels have all theſe three properties. 21 | 

But in this 29 . Propoſition, the firſt and main part of the Demonſtration de- 
dends wholly upon the 11. Axiom, which tho it be certainly true; yet for that 
it is lyable to — and ſome Objections may be made againſt it; this De- 
monſtration hath not clearly paſſed without ſome reprehenſion. 

For beſides what hath been ſaid before in the Annotations upon this 110. Axi- 
om, Euclide himſelf in the 17. Propofition, doth in effect demonſtrate, That two 
ſtrait lines meeting together, being cut by a ſtratt line, are drawn from angles leſs than 
two Right. And ſay they, it might be as reaſonably required of Euclide, to have de- 
monſtrated the Converſe, That two ſtrait lines drawn from angles leſs then two Right, 
ſhall meet together, which is the 110. Axiom, and aſſumed for a Principle without 
any Demonttration. | 3 ; 

Again, in the 28**; Propoſition it is demonſtrated, That if the two invard angles 
be equal to two Right, then the lines are Parallels. But alſo it ſeems as requiſite and 
reaſonable to have demonſtrated, That if the two 1nward angles be leſs than two Right, 
then the lines are not Parallels ; but at length ſhall meet together: This Suppoſition 
having no more Natural evidence then the other. There have been in all Ages 
ſeveral Attempts made to remove this ſtumbling block: But too tedious they are 
to be here examined. You may peruſe” what Proclus has ventured at in his Com- 
mentaries on Prop. 29. and what Clavize has laboriouſly perform d. What a ſtrange 
notion of Parallels Borellus has fram d in his Euclides Reſtizutus, at Prop. 14. Lib. 1. 
and what others have endeavoured herein. There are likewiſe two Tranſlations of 
Euclide into Arabic, one of Naſaradiinus printed at Rome. The other of 
never Printed, a Copy whereof is in the Oxford Library. In both of them much 
Labour is taken to clear this Matter. 91 
After theſe great Geometricians, we ſhall with pardon adventure upon this Mat- 
ter; and in lieu of Euclid : 11%, Axiom bring into the Elements the conſideration 
of the DISTANCE or PARALLELS, and their EQUIDISTANCES toward one 
another. For altho in our Annotations upon the Definition of Parallels, we have 
ſhewn, that the name Parallels ought not in Eurlid s Senſe to be Tranſlated Equi- 
3 lines; or by that name ſhould be conceived Eguidiſtant ſtrait lines, but only 

onconcurring ſtrait liner: yet we do not ſo wholly exclude the Notion of Equidi- 
ſtancy in the doctrine of Paralleliſm, but that there may be a juſt uſe made thereof; 
tho Equidiſtancy be not taken into the Definition of Parallels. 

Firſt then it is obſervable, that vulgarly Parallels are conceived to be Equidiſtant 
ſtrait lines; altho the Geometrician puts only the notion of Nonconcurrency into 
the Definition, without any regard had to the Equidiſtancy of Parallels; and this 
is done upon very good reaſon. For a Nonconcurrency in ſome ſtrait lines is a 
Notion generally uſetul throughout all Geometry: therefore Euclide among the 
reſt of his Definitions proper to his firſt Element, has laid down this Notion of 
Nonconcurrency under the name of Parallels, So that Parallels and Nonconcur- 
ring ſtrait lines may be ſubſtitated indifferently for one another in any demonſtra- 
tion, as the Definitum and Definition ought to be. But Parallels and Equidiftant 
ſtrait lines cannot be ſo indifferently taken and uſed; notwithſtanding the vulgar 
conception of them. Yet fome particular uſe may be made in Geometry of 
the Equidiſtancy of Parallels, as we ſhall ſhew; if according to the vulgar conce- 

tion it be admitted among the other common Notions, that Parallels are equidi- 
ant ſtrait lines: And ſo this to be received for a Maxim from Buchkd's Definition 
of Parallels, as he has from the Definition of a Right angle put for an Axiom, that 
all Right angles are equal to one another. 
Io proceed then in this matter, we ſhall as aforeſaid, add to Euclide only a De- 
finition of the diſtance of Parallels, and inſtead of his 11. Axiom aſſume their 
Equidiſtancy as a common Notion. 10 

— — 

10 | DEFI- 

on 

OF GEOMETRY. $4 
DEFINITION XXXV. 
The diſtance of Parallels is a ftrait line, drawn from any point 
in either Parallel, perpendicular to the other. 
As of the Parallels AB, CD, the diſtance is the ſtrait line EF, drawn from the 

point E in the line AB, perpendicular to the line CD. 
And again, the diſtance of the ſame 4 E H 'B 

2 0 the _ GH 223 * | 

e point G in the line CD, i- 

cnles o:the tine AB; and fo forth in- | 

finitely. — | 2 — 
This Notion,or Definition of diſtance © F Go. 142.28; 

is agreeable to the 4. Definition of the third Element, and to the 4. Definition 

of the fixth Element. 

AXIOM XII 
Parallels are every where equally diſtant from one another. 

That is, the Perpendiculars drawn from any point in either of the Parallels 
to the other, are equal to one another. As in the Parallels AB, CD, the line EF 
perpendicular to C D is equal to GH perpendicular to AB. So every where from 
any points in the One, the perpendiculars to the Other, are mutually equal to one 
another. | 

We have formerly ſhewn how Pofidonizs has defined Parallels from the equality 
of their perpendiculars; yet we find not what advantage was further made of that 
Definition, toward the amendment of Euclid , demonſtration, or for any other uſe 
he makes thereof in Geometry. But according to Euclid . Definition, the Notion 
of two ſtrait lines in the fame plane produced both ways infinitely, which ſhall ne- 
ver meet, is as proper and common a ſubject of Geometry, as Angles and Figures 
are, and of as general an extent, | 

Yet furthermore we acknowledge, that the Equidiſtance of theſe ftrait lines is 4 
Notion concomitant with that of Nonconcurrency, and that they matually put one 
another, as a cauſe puts the effect, and an effect puts the cauſe. So that in Parallels 
Artificers do in Architecture, and other the like matters, reſpe& their Equidiſtancy, 
as beſt ſuiting with their buſineſs : whereas the Geometrician makes uſe only of 
their Nonconcurrency. And our gteat Geometrician the Famous Savilian Profeſſor 
of Geometry in Oxford D. Walks ſays, Parallel:ſmus & Aiquaiſtantis vel idem ſunt, vel 
certe ſe mutuo comitantur. 

Seeing therefore that theſe Notions are naturally, and in common Senſe imme- 
diately conjoyn d, we do retain Euclid : Definition of Parallels, and have aſſumed 
for a Geometrical Axiom their Equidiſtancy. b 

If this may be ſo allowed, or at leaff admitted, as a more clear and obvious No- 
tion than the 11. Ax. of Exclide, then ſhall we briefly demonſtrate that troubleſome 
part of the 29. Propoſition, concerning the equality of the Alternate angles in 
Parallels, without any uſe of the 11. Axiom. 

The Demonſtration of the equality of the Alternate An- 
gles in Parallels. 

On the Parallels AB, CD, let firſt the ftrait line E E fall on AB at Right 

angles. | 
; ſay, that EF likewiſe falls on CD at Right angles; and therefore makes the 
Alternate angles _ and the outward an ual to the inward and oppoſite, 
and the two inward angles equal to two Right. For if EF falls not at Right ct 
5 g [a] 

arch 
'ations 

be drawn GD. 

8 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

gles on CD, let EI fall at Right angles on CD, [by Prop. 12.] therefore EI is 
the diſtance of the Parallels AB, CD, (Oct. 35.] Likewiſe FE falling on AB at 
Right angles, [by Suppoſition] is the di- 

' ſtance alſo of the ſame Parallels. Wherefore a2 E B 
FE, E I, are equal [by Ax. 12. that Paral. 7 mak 
lels are Equidiſtant ſtrait lines.] And becauſe 7 

equal, therefore the angles at che baſe EFI, mene 1 ——ů— 

| E1F are equal. But EI F is by Conſtru- 

ction a t angle, wherefore EFI is a Right angle, ſo that the angles at the 
baſe Ze to two Right. But they are leſs [by Prop. x7.] therefore EI is 
not at Right angles to C D, and by the ſame reaſon no other can be drawn from 
the point E beſides E F. Wherefore E F is at Right angles to CD, and alſo it is 
at Right angles to AB [by Suppoſition.] therefore all the 1 at E and F are 
Right, and equal to one another. 
Again, on ice Parallels AB, CD, let 
the ſtrait line E F fall otherwiſe at adv A G 5 B 

ture. I ſay, that it makes the Alternate I. P77 < ban. 

_— AGH, G HD, equal to one ano- 

ther. mY 5 { "4 | 

Now for the demonſtration thereof we — a | 

F N — 72 
A Lemma is a Propoſition taken in by 

— ee. 

Principal Propoſition. fur barons 

LEM 

If two Right angl'd Triangles ABC, D "EE have Per the 
right angle B, equal to 2 a 2 and a fide AB 
about tha right angle B. the fide DE, about the r angle E, then ſhall 
they have the remaining TN to the remaining Ty For if BC be 
not equal to E E, then one of ben «the . Let EF be the greater, and 
from the greater E F moo. by D 
take the line E G equal 
to B C the leſs; and let 

Foraſmuch then as 
EG is made equal to 
BC, and ED ns E Cc 
to BA, [by | | 
on] and they — | 
right angles at E and B, therefore the baſe DG tal be way obaſe ACT — 
But AC is equal to DF {by Suppolition] therefore D G 1s equal to D that 
in the Equicrural Be DGF, che angles at the: baſe DEG, DGF, are —.— 
to one N — —— — —— * right le D " 455 rae 
greater inwar Prop. 16. therefore > 
are greater than two Right ; which! N by Prop. eee the line 

is im 
BC is not unequal to EF, equal therefore they are to que another. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. i 

After the demonſtration of this Lemma, we thus further proceed to prove the 
equality of the Alternate angles in any Oblique Section. 

On the Parallels AB, CD, let the ſtrait line E F fall at adventure. 1 lay, that 
it makes the Alternate angles AGH, GHD, equal to one another: and alſo the 
Alternate angles C HG, H GB, equal to oue another. 

For from the point H to the line A B, draw a perpendicular HK As Prop. 12. 

Again, e e 8 lr bad ay 
7 1 ne 

as in the right — 45 Tri 
ere to the line G L, for that tance of the ren [Det 
35. and 

OF GEOMETRY, 8 

$5. and Ax. r2.] and HG, ſubtending the right angles at K and L, common, there- 
fore the remaining fide KG, is equal to the remaining fide LH (by the precedent 
Lemma). Wherefore there are the two lines HK, K G, equal to the two lines GL, 
LH, each to each, and they contain 

equal angles, namely Right; therefore E 

[by Prop. 4.] the angles KGH, G HL, 

are equal; that is, in the Parallels AB, 

CD, the Alternate angles AG H, GHD, A K G es, why _ 
are equal to one another. . 

Again, becauſe the angles AGH, 
HGB, are equal to two Right [Prop. 
13. J; and likewiſe CH G, GHD, are 
equal to two Right, therefore A G H, C Pe * LE D 
HGB, are equal to CHG, GHD. | 

Taking therefore away the equal Alter- 
nate angles A GN, GHD, the remain- 
ing Alternate angles CH G, HG B, are equal to one another. 
Wherefore on Parallel lines a ſtrait line falling, doth make the Alternate angles 
ual to one another, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. Now what follows in 
lide is without exception. 
Having thus demonſtrated this 29. Propoſition without the help of the 115. 
Axiom; we ſhall next demonſtrate that 115. Axiom. 

A Demonſtration of the Eleventh Axiom of Euclide. 
If on two ſtrait lines AB, CD, a ftrait line E F falling, doth make the inward 

angles toward the ſame parts EFD, FEB, leſs than two r I ſay, that the 
lines AB, C D, being infi itely produced toward the parts of B, D, where the an- 
gles are leſs then two Right, ſhall meet together. 

Foraſmuch as the angles A E. E, 4 
F E B, are equal to two Right [Prop. Day 3 
13.5 and CFE, EF D, are equal to — 

two Right, therefore theſe four are | 
equal to four Rightangles, But EFD, 
FEB, are leſs than two Right [by | 
Suppoſition ]; therefore the angles - — * 
E FC, FE A, are greater then two F 
Right. Wherefore the lines B A, | 
D al being infinitely produced toward the parts of A, C, ſhall that way never meet 
(by Prop. 17.]. If now they meet not toward the parts of B, D, then the lines A B, 
CD, are Parallels [ Def. 34.]; and Parallels have the two inward angles toward 
the ſame ow equal to two Right [by Prop. 29.]. But the angles EF D, FEB, 
are ſuppoſed leſs; and to be leſs and equal to the ſame is impoſſible ; Theretore 
the lines A B, CD, being infinitely noe nee toward the parts of B, D, ſhall meet 
her. Which was to be demonſtrated. 
otwithſtanding this, it is demonſtrable that two ftrait lines drawn from an- 
les leſs than two Right, may in ſome manner be for ever prolonged; yet ſhall 
ey never meet together. A 
For let the trait lines A B, C D, be cut by AC mak- 
ing the inward angles BAC, DCA, leſs than two 
Right. Now let AC be cut into halves, or otherwiſe 
in E: and equal to EA let be put A E, and to E C, 
CG; than draw FG. Again, let F G be cut in H, 
and * H F, let be put FB, and to HG, GD; 
then draw B D. 1 fay, that the lines A B, CB, may 
for ever de Thus prolong d, yet never ſhall they meet 
together. For if poſlible, let them meet m the point L. C 
therefore B P being cut in n ſhall be 

we — — 

ch 
IONS 

36 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

equal to BL, and K D to DL. Wherefore of the Triangle BD L the fides DL, 
LB, ſhall be equal to the third fide BD, which is unpoſhble by the 20, Propoſi- 
tion. Therefore the lines AB, CD, drawn from angles leſs than two Right, may for 
ever be prolonged, and never meet together. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

From hence it is manifeſt, that Magnitude is infinitely diviſible: and that an in- 
finite progreſs may be made in a finite Space. | pi | 

And moreover for the better underſtanding} of Euclide in this matter, we are to 
diſtinguiſh between a production of lines « deen, in inſinitum, Infinitely, and 
enaegs, Infinitier, Infinite Times. The former is an unlimited, free courſe of pro- 
longation, ſuch as Geometricians always underſtand by «s dme. The other 
here in this Inſtance is a limited and reſtrained prolongation, made ſtep by ſtep, 
and in ſuch a manner as that the ſteps are ſhorter, and ſhorter made continually, 
and the lines are approaching nearer and nearer ; yet ſo as neyer to meet together, 

PROPOSITION XXX. 

Trait lines Parallel to the ſame ſtrait line, are alſo Parallel to 
I one another, 

| Let each of the lines AB, CD, be parallel to E F: I ſay, that AB is 
parallel to cp. 

For let a {trait line q k fall upon them. nf 
Nov foraſmuch as the ſtrait line Gk falls A | — 
on the parallels a B, EF; therefore the angle R 17 1 

AGH 1s equal to the Alternate angle GE, 
[P (OP. 29. | | | ROE 8 D 
Again, becauſe the ſtrait line 6x falls on / . | 
the parallels E F, co; therefore the outward 7 K 
angle GH is equal to the inward and oppoſite ox p, | Prop. 29. 
But the angle a GH, that is, A c kK has been proved equal to HF. 
Therefore aG is alſo equal to G6 x D: and they are Alternate angles; 
wherefore 48 is parallel to cp [Prop. 27. |. Therefore ſtrait lines 
parallel to the ſame ſtrait line, are parallel to one another. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. f 211 | 
PROPOSITION XXXI. * 
T a given point to draw a Strait line parallel to a rait line 
given. 95 | l ws 
Let the given point be a, and the given ſtrait line be B c. It is re- 
quired by the point 4, to draw a ſtrait line parallel to B; c. In the 
line Bc, let be taken any point as p, and ee e 
let be joyn d ap: then to the ſtrait line oà44,— 5 . 

and to the point in the ſame 4; let be confti- 

tuted the angle Dax, equal to the angle "hs "Ig 

ADC, | by Prop. 2.3. ] and to the ſtrait line 3 ——; MC 

EA, let directly be produced the line AF. ; Ages 
Now foraſmuch as on the lines nc, E F, the trait line ap falling, 

hath made the Alternate angles EAD, apc, equal to one another; 

therefore EP is parallel to Be, [Prop. 27.]; wherefore by tlie given 

1 OF GROMBTRY 67 
int is drawn the ſtrait line E AF, parallel to the given ſtrait line pc. 
Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION XXXII. 

F every Triangle one of the ſides being produced, the outward 
angle is equal to the imwvard and 3 | 
Aud the three imward angles of a Triangle are equal to two Right. 

Let the Triangle be A Bc, and one of the ſides B c, be produced top. 

I fay, that the outward angle Ac is equal to the two inward 
and oppoſite cas, apc. And of that Triangle the three inward an- 
gles AB c, B C A, CAB, are equal to two Right. 

For by the point c, let E be drawn 
parallel to à B. Prop. 3 1.] Now foraſmuch 
as AB is parallel to cx, and on them falls 
AC; the Alternate angles Bac, ACE, are 
equal to one another. | Prop. 29. | Again, 'Y < — 
becauſe a8 is parallel to c E, and on them 
falls the ſtrait line By; the outward angle Ep, is equal to the in- 
ward and oppoſite a8 c. But it hath been prov d that act is equal 
to Bac; therefore the whole outward angle a c o is equal to the two 
inward and oppoſite Bac, ABC. 

Let the angle ac 8B be added in common, therefore the angles Ac p, 
ACB, are equal to the three angles aBc, Bac, AcB: But the angles 
ACD, ACB, are equal to two Right; | Prop. 13.|] therefore anc, Bac, 
ACB, are alſo equal to two Right. 

Therefore of every Triangle one of the ſides being produced, the 
outward angle is equal to the two inward and oppoſite. 

And the three inward angles of a Triangle, are equal to two Right. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollaries. 
1. Of an Equilateral Triangle all the three angles are given. 

For each angle is a third part of two Right angles, that is, 6o Degrees of 180; 
or two third parts of one Right angle, that is 60 of go Degrees. 

2. Of an Equicrural Triangle if one angle be given, the other two 
are alſo given. 

For the angles at the baſe are equal, and the third angle compleats, or makes up 
two Right angles, that is, 180 Degrees, or twice go. 

3. Of a Scalene Triangle, if two angles be given, the third is alſo 

given; and if one angle be given, the ſumm of the other two is 
alſo given. 

For theſe angles added to the given angle, compleat two Right angles. As if 
the given angle be 6o, the ſumm of the two is 120, which together make 
1806, or two Right angles. | 

P 2 4. Of 

E 

n : — _— 4 . F CER 
LA * > p _— 
- * a= - 5 * 0 ns 983 2 * = 

88 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

4. Of a Sealene Right · angld Triangle, if one of the acute angles 
be given, the other is alſo given. | 

For each of the Acute angles is the Complement of the other to a Right angle. 
As if one be 60 Degrees, the other is 3o, which together Compleat 90 Degrees, 
or a Right angle. 

F. Of every Multilateral Figure the inward Angles are equal to 
twice ſo many Right Angles, leſs by four, as 1s the number of 

their Sides. | 

For from any * within the Multilateral Fi 
let trait lines be drawn to every angle, then ſhall there 
be made ſo many Triangles as is the number of the Sides. 
As in a Figure of five Sides, there ſhall be five er 
which contain twice five, or ten Right angles. And of 
theſe Triangles their Vertical angles about the point with- 
in, are always equal only to four Right angles: where- 
fore the remaining angles are equal to fix Right angles, P Ws 
that is, to twice five, leſs by four. And the like in all other Multilateral Figures. 

6. Of every Multilateral Figure, the outward angles are altoge- 
ther equal only to four Right angles. 

Bt 

For each inward angle with it's outward, are together equal to two Right an- 

2 and all the inward angles are equal to twice ſo many — angles, fel by 
our as igf the number of their Sides: Therefore all the outward angles are equal 

only to four Right angles. The ſame is likewiſe manifeſt in all Quadrilateral and 
Trilateral Figures. 

ANNOTATIONS. 
A Problem. 
To divide a Right angle into three equal angles. 

From hence tis manifeſt, how to triſe& a Right angle. For let ABC be a 
Right angle, and on AB let be conftituted an Equilateral Triangle ABD. Now 
becauſe the angle ABD is two third parts of the Right angle D c 
ABC, [by the firſt Corollary}; therefore the angle DB C is one 
third of the ſame Right angle. in, let the angle ABD be 
biſected by the line BE, then ſhall each angle AB E, EBD, © 
be a third _ of the Right angle. Wherefore the Right angle 
ABC is divided into three equal angles ABE, EB B, DBC. 

Archimedes lays the foundation of his menſuration of a A B 
Circle upon the Triſection of a Right angle, and the diviſion of an Equilateral 
Triangle into two Right-angld Triangles; in each of which one Acute angle is 
known to be the double of the other, one to be 6o, the other 30 : and 
the Side ſubtending the Right angle to be alſo double of the Side ſubtending the 

lealt angle, that is, A B to be double of A E. Upon which grounds he demonſtra- 
ſtratiyely proceeds to his Immortal Glory. 11 | It 

dF GEOMETRY. 3 

If every ſtrait lin d angle, Obtuſe and Acute, could likewiſe be Geometrically 
Triſected, it would alſo be of excellent uſe. But this lyes in the ſame obſcurity 
with the Quadrature of a Circle, and the Duplication of a Ciibe; and the pre- 
tenders to the Solutions of theſe Problems have all hitherto ſhamefully miſcarry d 
in their vain attempts, and overweening opinion of themſelves. 

Laſtly, to look into the Phyſical reaſon, why the three an- C 
gles of a Triangle are equal to two Right, it may thus plainly E | 
appear. For let the lines A B, C D, be at Right angles to B D. 
if they be ſuppoſed to incline toward each other till they meet 
in the point E; then what is by this inclination diminiſhed 
from the Right angles ABD, CD B, the ſame is again reſtored | 
in the angle BE D; ſo that the three angles EBD, BDE, | 
BE D, are equal to the two Right angles ABD, CDB. B D 

| PROPOSITION XXXIII. 

Trait lines, which * the ſame way joyn equal and parallel lines, 
they alſo are equal and parallel. 

Let the equal and parallel lines be as, cp, and the ſtrait lines, 
which the ſame way joyn them be ac, Bp. I ſay, that ac, Bo, are 
alſo equal and parallel: For let be drawn 8c. Now foraſmuch as aB 
is parallel to cp, and on them falls Be, 
the Alternate angles AB c, BcD, are equal 
to one another; and becauſe aB is equal 
to cD, and Bc common: therefore the two 
lines AB, Bc, are equal to the two lines 
BC, CD, and the angle aBc is equal to the 5 3 
angle BCD, therefore the baſe A c is equal to the baſe zo, and the 
Triangle AB e is equal to the Triangle BcD, and the remaining an- 
gles ſhall be equal to the remaining angles, under which are ſub- 
tended equal ſides: therefore the angle acs is equal to the angle 
c; D. And becauſe on the two ſtrait lines ac, ; p, the ſtrait line 3e 
falling, hath made the Alternate angles A cB, cBD, equal; therefore 
AC is parallel to BD, | Prop. 27.) and it hath been proved to be alſo 
equal to the ſame. Theretore ſtrait lines, which the ſame way joyn 

equal and parallel lines, they alſo are equal and parallel. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. 

- 

A 

ANNOTATIONS. 

* Which the ſame way,] That is, from the point A to the point C, and from the 
point B to the point D: not croſs-ways from A to D, and from B to C. 

Becauſe the two (trait lines, which joyn equal, and parallel lines are here prov d 
to be equal, and parallel to one another, therefore the comprehended ſuperficies 
now found to be bounded by parallel lines, is called a Parallelogram ſpace : as follows 
in the next Propoſition, Therefore it is not properly ſaid to be a Parallelogram 
Figure, but a Parallel Space, as incloſed by parallel lines, which Space, or 
Area, is the thing conſidered in all Euclid : Propoſitions concerning — 
And a ſtrange overſight it was in Cavs ( otherwile a moſt faithful Expoſitor) to 

ive a particular definition of a Parallelogram, as a diſtinct Figure, after Euclide 

d defined all the kinds of Quadrilateral Frgures. Quandoque bonus dormitat HHomerus. 

This Theorem plainly diſcovers the natural Origin and Genefis of Parallelogram 
ſpaces, from two equal and parallel lines conjoyn d by two other ftrait lines. A 
notion yery remarkable. P 3 PROPO-. 

90 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
PROPOSITION XXXIV. 

F Paralletogram Spaces the oppoſite ſides, and alſo the opp0- 
fate angles, are equal to one another. 

And the Diameter cuts the ſame into halves. 

Let the Parallelogram be Ac, and the Diameter thereof Bc. 
I fay, that of the Parallelogram ac p B, the oppofite Sides, and alſo 
the oppoſite Angles, are equal to one another. And the Diameter 
Bc, cuts the ſame into halves. Foraſmuch as 4B is parallel to c p, 
and on them falls the ſtrait line 3c, therefore the Alternate angles 
ABC, BCD, are equal to one another. Again, becauſe the line ac is 
parallel to the line 3p, and on them falls the ſtrait line sc, therefore 
the Alternate angles acB, c Bb, are equal to one another. 

There are then the two Triangles aBc, 3 | A 
cBD, having the two angles AaBc, Bc, 9 e 
equal to the two angles BcÞ, BD, each 
to each; and one ſide equal to one ſide, 
that is, the ſide adjacent to the equal an- 
gles, namely Bc common to both. There- 
fore by Prop. 26.] they ſhall have the remaining ſides equal to 
the remaining ſides, each to each, and the remaining angle equal to 
the remaining angle: wherefore the fide as is equal to the ſide cp, 
and ac to BD: and the angle Bac to the angle Bypc. And becauſe 
the angle AB Cc is equal to the angle BcD, and the angle c Bp to the 
angle Ach; therefore the whole angle aBD, is equal to the whole 
angle acD: and it is proved, that the angles ac, is equal to the an- 
gle Dc. Therefore of Parallelogram Spaces the oppoſite Sides and 
alſo the oppoſite Angles, are equal to one another. 

I fay alſo that the Diameter cuts the ſame into halves. 

Foraſmuch as 4s is equal to cop, and 3e common, therefore there 
are two lines AB, Bc, equal to the two lines Bc, cD, each to each; 
and the angle AB e, is equal to the angle Bcp, wherefore alſo the 
Baſe ac is equal to the Baſe BD, and therefore the Triangle asc 
is equal to the Triangle 3e p: wherefore the Diameter Bc cuts the 
Parallelogram Ac p into halves. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

The name of Parallelogram Spaces, we have noted to be literally formed (as in 
common ſpeech) from the termination of Planes made by parallel lines ; and this 
name extends only to the Square, Oblong, Rhombus, and Rhomboeid : wherefore 
after the Definitions of theſe four Quadrilateral Figures, Euclide defines not a Paral- 
lelogram; for that he had then inartificially defin'd anew, what was before defined. 
But now upon this common aſſection here demonſtrated, he does comprehend un- 
der that one name the Square, Oblong, Rhombus, and Rhomboeid: ſo that what 
Properties at any time are demonſtrated upon Patallelograms in general, that is 
Parallelogram ſpaces, do alike belong to all theſe four Figures. 
 Euclide proceeds after the ſame manner in Solids, at Prop. 24. and ag. El. XI. 

where having laid down in diſtinct words a Solid comprehended by parallel Planes, 
he 

OF. GEOMETRY. or 

he next after this in one compound word, calls the ſame Solid a Parallelepipttton 
without premiſing any Definition. | | 8 

The Commentators therefore were not in this point well adviſed, WY: Wes 8 

formal Definition of a Parallelogram, as if it were a Figure of an other kind, than 
what had been already defined by Euchide. | bes } & 8 

PROPOSITION XXXV. 

| Arallelograms on the ſame Baſe, and in the ſame Parallels, 
are equal to one another. 

Let the Parallelograms be azcD, EBC, on the ſame Baſe xc, 
and in the fame Parallels ar, Bc. I ſay, that the Parallelogram 
ABCD, is equal to the Parallelogram E BCF. Foraſmuch as aBcÞ is 
a Parallelogram, therefore 4a» is equal to mc, | Prop. 34. ]; by the 
ſame reaſon alſo E F is equal to Bc: ſo that D_E 
AD is equal to Er, and DE is common; 
therefore the whole ax is equal to the 
whole v F, but alſo as is equal topc.Where- 
fore the two lines E a, AB, are equal to the 
two lines FD, Dc, each to each, and the an- 5 1 
gle FDC is equal to the angle EAR, the outward to the inward; 
therefore the Baſe E is equal to the Baſe rc, and the Triangle E as, 
is equal to the Triangle Fc. Let'D&E common to both be taken 
away: then ſhall the Trapezium 43D be equal to the Trapezium 
EGCE. Let the Triangle 6B c be added in common: therefore the 
whole Parallelogram AB, is equal to the whole Parallelogram 

— 

EB OF: wherefore Parallelograms on the ſame Baſe, and in the ſame 

Parallels, are equal to one another. Which was to be domonſtrated. 
| "ANNOTATIONS. . | 
Of Geometrical Places. 

When in Theorems, or Problems, the ſame thing may be alike in ſeveral places 
Indeterminately, then is this call d the Geometrical Place of that Theorem, or Pro- 
blem, and theſe kind of Propoſitions are call d Local Theorems, and Local Pro- 
blems. As in this 3 f. Prop. it evidently appears, that to the Parall mA BCD, 
there may be infinite other equal Parallelograms, on the ſame baſe A By in 
ſame parallel lines: ſo that of one of the patallels che whole line, as A E, infinitely 
EE is the common Place of this Equality in Parallelograms ſeated on the 

baſe: The like alſo. is on equal baſes. And moreover in Triangles on the 
ſame, or baſes; as it is demonſtrated in the 36, 37, 38, and 41. following Pro- 
poſitions; This is ſaid to be Locus planus ad lineam rettam. Likewiſe there are 
Geometrical Plane Places of the ſame nature, found in the Circumference of a 
Circle. As if it be required to draw from the ends of a ſtrait line two ſtrait 
lines, which ſhall. contain a Right angle; tis evident by Prop. 21. and 31. El. III. 
that in a Semicircle every one of the angles) is a Right angle, ſo that the Cir- 
cumference of a Semicircle, is the Geometrical Place of a Right angle, This is 
ſaid; to be Locus þ ad Circumſerentiam circuli, and the Problem called a plane 
Problem, or a Problem in loco hl. ia 
Beides theſe plane Places in ſtrait lines, and the Circumference of a Circle, there 
are allo Loct ſolidi, Geometrical ſolid Places, which admit of ſuch ſolid Problems, 
Theſe arg foundin.the nic, Sin, namely, the Pd fee and Elf 

k — — — 2 
WW — — 3 "=o * _- 

mn —— — — — — 

90 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
PROPOSITION XXXIV. 

F Parallelogram Spaces the oppoſite ſides, and alſo the oppo- 
ite angles, are equal to one another. 
And the Diameter cuts the ſame into halves. 

Let the Parallelogram be acps, and the Diameter thereof Bc. 
I fay, that of the Parallelogram Ae s, the oppoſite Sides, and alſo 
the oppoſite Angles, are equal to one another. And the Diameter 
Bc, cuts the ſame into halves. Foraſmuch as 43 is parallel to cp, 
and on them falls the ſtrait line 3c, therefore the Alternate angles 
ABC, BCD, are equal to one another. Again, becauſe the line ac is 
parallel to the line z, and on them falls the {trait line g c, therefore 
the Alternate angles Ac B, c RD, are equal to one another, 

There are then the two Triangles AB c, R | A 
cBD, having the two angles aBc, BCA, 
equal to the two angles BcÞ, cBD, each 
to each; and one fide equal to one fide, 
that 1s, the fide adjacent to the equal an- 
gles, namely Bc common to both. There- ? 
fore | by Prop. 26. | they ſhall have the remaining ſides equal to 
the remaining ſides, each to each, and the remaining angle equal to 
the remaining angle: wherefore the ſide AB is equal to the fide cp, 
and ac to BD: and the angle Bac to the angle Byc. And becauſe 
the angle aBc is equal to the angle scD, and the angle c Bp to the 
angle Ac; therefore the whole angle aBD, is equal to the whole 
angle acp: and it is proved, that the angles ac, is equal to the an- 
gle z DC. Therefore of Parallelogram Spaces the oppoſite Sides and 
alſo the oppoſite Angles, are equal to one another. 

I fay alſo that the Diameter cuts the ſame into halves. 

Foraſmuch as A5 is equal to cp, and 8c common, therefore there 
are two lines AB, Bc, equal to the two lines Bc, cD, each to each; 
and the angle anc, is equal to the angle Bcp, wherefore alſo the 
Baſe ac is equal to the Baſe BD, and therefore the Triangle ABC 
is equal to the Triangle 3e D: wherefore the Diameter Bc cuts the 
Parallelogram Ac p into halves. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

The name of Parallelogram Spaces, we have noted to be literally formed (as in 
common ſpeech) from the termination of Planes made by parallel lines; and this 
name extends only to the Square, Oblong, Rhombus, and Rhomboeid : wherefore 
after the Definitions of theſe four Quadrilateral Figures, Euclide defines not a Paral- 
lelogram; for that he had then inartificially defin'd anew, what was before defined. 
But now upon this common aſſection here demonſtrated, he does comprehend un- 
der that one name the Square, Oblong, Rhombus, and Rhomboeid: ſo that what 
Properties at any time are demonſtrated upon Parallelograms in general, that is 
Parallelogram ſpaces, do alike belong to all theſe four Figures. 

Euclide proceeds after the ſame manner in Solids, at Prop. 24. and 25. El. XI. 
where having laid down in diſtinct words a Solid comprehended by parallel Planes, 

| he 

C 

OF GEOMETRY. 91 
he next after this in one compound word, calls the fame Solid a Parallelepipetton ; 
without premiſing any Definition. | 

The Commentators therefore were not in this point well adviſed, who give a 

formal Definition of a Parallelogram, as if it were a Fi of an other kind, than 
what had been already defined by Euclide. 2 | 

PROPOSITION XXXV. 

Arallelograms on the ſame Baſe, and in the ſame Parallels, 
are equal to one another. 

Let the Parallelograms be 430 D, EHC F, on the ſame Baſe xc, 
and in the fame Parallels ar, Bc. I ſay, that the Parallelogram 
 ABCD, is equal to the Parallelogram t Bcr. Foraſmuch as aBcp is 

a Parallelogram, therefore 4D is equal to Bc, | Prop. 34-1; by the 
ſame reaſon alſo x F is equal to Bc: fo that D_E F 
AD is equal to EF, and DE is common; Fg 
therefore the whole AE is equal to the 
whole p F, but alſo as is equal topc.Where- 
fore the two lines E a, AB, are equal to the 
two lines FD, Dc, each to each, and the an- 5 3 

gle FDC 1s equal to the angle EAR, the outward to the inward; 
therefore the Baſe EB is equal to the Baſe pc, and the Triangle as, 
is equal to the Triangle Dc. Let DGE common to both be taken 

away: then ſhall the Trapezium 43 be equal to the Trapezium 
EGCF. Let the Triangle 6s c be added in common: therefore the 
whole Parallelogram ascD, is equal to the whole Parallelogram 
EB CF: Wherefore Parallelograms on the ſame Baſe, and in the ſame 
Parallels, are equal to one another. Which was to be domonſtrated. 

' ANNOTATIONS. 
Of Geometrical Places. 

When in Theorems, or Problems, the ſame thing may be alike in ſeveral places 
Jndeterminately, then is this call d the Geometrecal Place of that Theorem, or Pro- 
blem, and theſe kind of Propoſitions are call d Local Theorems, and Local Pro- 
blems. As in this 35. Prop. it evidently appears, that to the Parallelogram AB CD, 
there may be infinite other equal Parallelograms, on the ſame baſe A By in the 
ſame parallel lines: ſo that of one of the parallels che whole line, as AF, infinitely 

roduced, is the common Place of this Equality in Parallelograms ſeated on the 
ame bale: The like alſo is on equal baſes. And moreover in Triangles on the 
ſame, or | baſes; as it is demonſtrated in the 36, 37, 38, and 41. following Pro- 
poſitions; This is ſaid to be Locus planus ad lineam rettam. Likewiſe: there are 
Geometrical Plane Places of the ſame nature, found in the Circumference of a 
Circle. As if it be required to draw from the ends of a ſtrait line two trait 
lines, which ſhall contain a Right angle; tis evident by Prop. 21. and 31. El. III. 
that in a Semicircle every one of the angles is a Right angle, ſo that the Cir- 
cumference of a Semicircle, is the Geometrical Place of a Right angle. This is 
ſaid to be Locus planus ad Circumſerentiam circuli, and the Problem called a plane 
Problem, or a Problem in loco plans. "4 

Beſides theſe plane Places in ſtrait lines, and the Circumference of a Circle, there 
are alſo Loct ſalidi, Geometrical ſolid Places, which admit of ſach ſolid Problems, 

Thele are found in the Conc Sion, namely, the Parabols, Hyperbola, and 2 

-” 

irh 
ions 

97 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
They art called ſolid Places, and ſolid Problems, notwithſtanding that theſe Fi- 
gures lye in a plain ſuperficies, becauſe they have their Origin in a ſolid Figure, 
as the Cone: and are made by the cutting of a Conical Superficies with a Plane: 
2s: the Conic Elements of Apollonius thew, how theſe Figures are ſeated and created 
in a Conic Body. Prop. 115 12, 1 3. Lib. I, | ; 
There are alſo Lineary Problems differing much from theſe Solid, and Plain 
Problems, tho they be deſcribed in a ſimple plain ſuperficies; but not by a ſimple 
motion, as is the ſtrait line, and Circle. They are therefore in a ſpecial manner 
called Lineary, becauſe their folutions are effected by certain lines arifing from 
compounded, and involved motions. Such is the Helix or Spiral line of Aimed, 
the Conchoid of Nicomedet, the Linee I etragoni3entes, or Quadratricet, with divers 
others deſcribed by the Ancients, and Moderns, dee Pappus after Prop. 4. Lib. III. 
and Prop. 30. Lib. IV. - | 

Geodæſia, or the Menſuration of Plain Figures. 

Elementary Annotations. 

Upon this Propoſition, and ſome of the next following, is grounded the Do- 
Arine of the Menſuration of all Plain Figures, as to their ſuperficial Content, or 
Area; which is one ſort of practical Geometry deduced from theſe Speculative 
Elements; and of a neceſſary uſe in many human Affairs. This Doctrine is com- 
monly named Geodeſia, from the Partition and Diſtribution of Lands; it being 
one of the moſt valuable Matters handled in this part of Geometry : And with us 
particularly called the Art of Surveying. But the uſe of the word Geodefia, like as 
the word Geometria, is enlarged beyond its original fignification, and extended to 
the general Doctrine of the Menſuration of all ſorts of Figures in a plain ſuper- 
ficies. And to this uſe fully anſwers the name Epzpedometria, or Planometria, an eaſier 
word, tho Critically no- ſo proper, as being compounded of Latin and Greek. 

Now in all kind of Menſuration, whatſoever is taken for a meaſure whereby to 
eſtimate and value any propoſed quantity, the ſame muſt be certain and deter- 
mined. In Diſcrete quantity it is an Unite, which naturally meaſures all Numbers. 
In Continued quantity, as Magnitude, it muſt be a ſuppoſed Unite to meaſure Magni- 
tades. I fay ſuppoſed for that Magnitude being a quantity infinitely diviſible, has 
no indiviſible unite in it ſelf, whereby to meaſure Magnitudes, as Number has an 
indiviſible unite to meaſure Numbers. But inſtead thereof we make to our ſelves 
by mutual agreement ſome certain meaſures, as an Inch, or Foot, in every kind of 
Magnitude, which as a Geometrical unite may anſwer to an unite in Numbers, ſo 
that in Magnitudes the Geometrical meaſure is only a ſuppoſed Umte taken by Conſent. 

As ſome one {trait line is put to meaſure Lengths: And let this meaſure be called 

3 Figure to meaſure plain Figures: And let this be called the Su- 

Some one Solid Figure to meaſure Solids: And let this be called the ſolid Unite. 

The value then, or eſtimate of any Magnitude is made from the multitude or 
number of the Geometrical meaſuring Unites, which that Magnitude ſhall contain : 
Be they Lineal, Superficial, or Solid Unites, according to the ſpecies of the — 
tude, as it is either a length, a ſuperficies, or a ſolid, which is propoſed by ſome 
certain meaſure to be eſtimated. . M13; 10 eee e 
In the Menſuration of Lengths, there is no other trouble than to agree upon 
what known Length the Lineal Unite, or meaſuring Line ſhall be. Whether Inch, 
Foot, Yard, Pearch, or any other Civil' and Political meaſure, according to the 
„ of Plains witch ir ace to Lerige 
- But in the Menſuration of Planes, which is a to h and Breadth, it 
is not only a known ſuperficial quantity to be agreed upon, but alſo what == 
Rn om is moſt' proper to be the common meaſure of all 

lain Figuren 4 10 eee | 
This matter requires ſome Actifice, in regard of divers miſtakes that may ariſe 
E's in 

\ 

OF GEOMETRY. 92 
in the Management of it. For no certain rule of Menſuration can be made from 
the circumambient bounds, or Perimeter of a plain ſtrait · lin d Figure (as vulgarly 
may be imagined) becauſe ſuch plain Figures may be of equal quantity in their 
Areas, yet of very unequal Perimeters: and contrarily of equal Perimeters, yet of 
very unequal Areas. 

As for Example, let the Fi ABCD be right — and have the fide AB 
6 inches in length, and the fide BC as much in breadth: and accordingly let the 
Figure be divided by parallel lines. So now it is eaſily demonſtrated from the 
Diagram, that the four ſides of this Figure (which are its Perimeter) ſhall be 
24 inches; and the whole Area ſhall contain 36 ſquare inches: 4s is alſo found 
by multiplying 6 into 6 ; that is, by drawing the length A B into the breadth B C; 
which is the general Rule of all ſuperficial Menſurations; tor that every figurate 
ſuperficies is to be meaſured by the two dimenſions of length and breadth, 

D C 

x 

0 F 
HE BD 
Hs ml 
E 

OX 2 

A B _ "i H 

Again, let the Oblong A EE G have the fide AE 18 inches in length, and the 
fide E F 2 inches in breadth : ſo the Perimeter ſhall be 40 inches; yet the Area is 
but 3s ſquare inches, and equal to the Area of the ſquare AB CD, whole Peri- 
meter is Tos 24 inches, | 

Likewiſe let the Oblong AH I K have the fide AH 12 inches, and HI 3 inches, 
the Perimeter then ſhall be 3o inches, and the Area ſtill 36 ſquare inches. 

Again, let the Oblong AL MN have the fide AL 9g inches, and the fide LM 4 
inches, then the Perimeter ſhall be 26 inches; and the Area as 36 ſquare inches. 

CAB 6 | X T 936] 80101] : 
| vc Freise — In theſe Figures ve have the Areas equal, and the Peri- 
EOS meters unequal : But the Perimeter of the ſquare is the 
; Fermer 40. | 5 the leaſt; and in Oblongs of equal Areas with the ſquare, 
EF 2 = where they differ moſt from a ſquare Figure, that is, 
AH n b where the difference between the length and breadth is 
61 Fee 0 z the moſt, there the Perimeter is the greateſt; ind as 
2 z the difference becomes leſs and leſs, ſo the Perimeter is 
* Femme 6. leis and leſs, till in the ſquare it i the leaſt of all. 
— 4 4 

Again on the contrary, let the ſquare ABCD be as before; and let A E F G the 
Oblong, have the ſide AE 11 inches in 

length, and the fide EF, One inch ino C 
breadth, then the Perimeter is 24 inches, 8 
and equal to the Perimeter of the ſquare T | 
ABCD; yet the Area is only 11 ſquare 9 DE 4 
inches, whereas that of the ſquare is 36. IM 
Likewiſe let the Oblong A H IK have * TS 

| 

| 

L 

Areas equal all 36. 

the fide AH 10 inches, and the fide HI 2 K — 
inches; the Perimeter is again 24 inches, G 
1 Area — * inches. 2 | 

farther e Oblong ALMN 4” Sis LK 
have the 6de AL, 9. inches, and the de Loa 

* 

LM 3 inches: wherefore the Perimeter is alſo inches ; but the Area is 

— 

27 ſquare 
Again, 

. CY — 

94 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

Oblang AQP « the fide AO 8 inches, and the fide OP 4 
n —.— N inches; bug the Area za ſquare inches. 

Ns Je the bon ABST "None the fide AR. 7 inches, and the fide RS 5 
2 eber e ſtill 24 inches; hut e i 35 ſquare inches 

dj 17 36 | Ins cheſe Figures we have the Perimeters equal, and the 
Areas unequal: but the Area of the ſquare is the greateſt. 
n And ohſerve that the nearer any Rectangle comes to a 
| . ſquare Figure, that is, where the difference between the 
AH I length and breadth is the leſs, there the Recta of e- 
WOE *? | qual Perimeters are the more Capacious: ſo — 

= te difference is nothing at all, that is, where the F; 

pn” a _—_— 

Perimeteraequalesll 84: 
> T 
8 

d | there the Area is the in reſpect of all the 
LM 3 < — that are of equal Perimeters with the ſquare. 
a0 8 Upon theſe various changes in Areas and Perimeters, e- 
oP Cares qual Areas and unequal Perimeters, equal Perimeters and 

AR 7 unequal Areas, tis manifeſt that a Rule for the menſura- 

or 35 | tion of the Area or Superficial content of Parallelograms, 

(RS ; made from their Perimeters is very uncertain, and therefore 

the way of all menſuration in general, is not to be founded upon the Perimeter 
of the Figure, as any certain Rule. 

In this 357. Propoſition Euclide makes an entry into the Doctrine of Planome- 

try, and begins in the firſt place to open a way toward the Menſuration of all 

Parallelogram ſpaces : Of which there are four kinds, the Square, Oblong, Rhom- 
bus, and Rhomboeid. 

irkk then, whereas is is hore demonſtrated, that all Parallelogram ſpaces on the 
ſame. baſe, and in the fame parallels, are in their Space, or Area ena 0 one ano- . 
ther; altho it be evident 5 — their Perimeters —4 be infinitely unequa}, .ans 
Perimeter ſtill greater then another, as their angles are more and more oblique 
one than another, and accordingly woof their ſides are equally prolonged more 
and more infizately.; therefore no cortain meaſurs of the bs, rn Mb of theſe Para 
lelograms can. be taken from their unequal Perimeters. 

To clear this Matcer from ita firſt ground, we are to recolle& that a ſuperfictes 
isa Magnitude of two dimenſions taken tranſyerſly to one another, in length and 
breadth: and therefare every is to be eftimated by its pr 
length and breadth. It —_ en to Gng out the proper length and FE. h 

of theſe various Parallelograms, wherein: they may all agree for their juſt eſtima- 

— in regard thay they ave in Area: alk equal to one another: and therefore ſome 
of menkueation/according] to theip proper length and breadth ought to be 
Foe which Ghalb be tw exery[Patatlclogram the fame in quantity, and alſo com- 
mon to them all Treten bo: differing from one another in their Peri- 
U and my + Oblique) 0 their Angles. 

n en 
it, wi be wad.” ; 
— — the | 

ength ane 
brendth or the 
menſuration of 
theſe Parallelo- 

Wer 

ſpaces, ought 
1 be — | 
from their ob- | 
lique fides, As of |/- ee en, een 
the oblique Paral- A E ER 
lelogram ABE C, if AB be put for its le (note that a 

the names of length and breadth are indifferently: 

d to the 
— —— 

Figure AD 

F GRO MET RV 9 
fide BE ought not to be eſteemed its proper meaſuring breadth. For beſides that 

this falls into the former erroneoas way of meaſuring by the Perimeter, the abſur- 
dity is alſo” farther made thus manifeſt. © If of the Parallelogram ſpace ABE 
the ſide B E be its proper breadth, then likewiſe in the Parallelogram A B F G, 
having the ſame length A B, the fide BE ſhould as well be accounted the proper 
breadth thereof. Now becauſe theſe Parallelogram ſpaces are equal to one another, 
and have the ſame length AB, therefore their breadths BE, BF, ſhould allo be 
equal to one another: but BE, BE, are eaſily demonſtrated to be unequal; there- 
fore their proper breadths are not to be eſteemed by the ſides BE, BF. In ge- 
neral therefore the oblique poſition of length to breadth, is a way altogether un- 
certain and undeterminable, as being infinitely variable, and ſo unfit for any Rule 
or common Practice in theſe ſuperficial Menſurations. 

Foraſmuch then that neither from the Perimeter, nor from length and breadth 
taken obliquely towards one another, can be formed a Rule for the Menſuration 
of Parallelogram ſpaces ; it neceſſarily follows that length and breadth are only 
to be taken at Right angles each to other, a way one and the ſame unalterable, 
commonly known, and eafily practiced. And hereupon tis manifeſt, that the 
Right angl'd Parallelogram on the ſame baſe, and in the ſame parallels, is the 
Standard unto which all the other oblique angl d Parallelograms are to be referred 
for their Menſurations. As the Areas of AB E C, ABFG, &c. are all to be known 
from the Area of the Rectangle ABCD; for that any two of its fides, which con- 
rain an angle, as A B, BC, or AD, DC, being at Right angles to one another, are 
the very proper length and breadth of this Parallelogram ; one, whereof being 
drawn into the other, brings forth the Area, which in this 35. Prop. is demon- 
ſtrated to be equal to all poſſible oblique angl d Parallelograms on the ſame baſe, 
and in the ſame parallelsss. Len! 1 | | 

Therefore for the Menſuration of an oblique angl d Parallelogram, it muſt be 
reduced to its Equivalent Rectangle: And this is done by drawing from any one ſide 
a perpendicular to the oppoſite, praduced if need be. - Q 

D neee. 

1 Nr 

. _F 

83 — 793 „%%% %%% 

A py Ot Orin 

As in the oblique Parallelogram ABEC, from the fide CE, let be drawn EH 
perpendicular to the oppoſite fide AB the baſe produced. Here then E H is equal to 
CB, or DA, the oppoſite ſides of the Rectangle AB CD, for that they are parallel 
by Prop. 28. and therefore equal by Prop. 34. So that the perpendicular E H is the 
proper breadth of ABEC. And as the Rectangle AB CD is meaſured according 
to its proper length and breadth, by the baſe A B drawn into the perpendicular 
B C, ſo is the Rhomboeid A B EC meaſured by the ſame baſe A B, drawn into the 
perpendicular HE equal to BC, or AD : Likewiſe AB F G is meaſured by AB into 
KF. Thus the 1 is the only true, and common breadth of all Paralle- 
lograms on the ſame baſe, and in the ſame parallels. Therefore the Rule for the 

Menſuration of oblique angl'd Parallelograms is this. 

In oblique angld Parallelograms, the baſe, and a perpendicular to 
the baſe, from the oppolite fide, drawn into one another, give the 
Area of the Parallelogram. 

By the baſe is meant — Parallelogram taken two ways ; _ 
2 7 

_ — 
We 

— . 22 * — — 

—— ꝗ dA 
= . = * 

4 

rch 
tions 

8 

then is ſtill to be u 

THE FIRST ELEMENT 

by letting Gall a Ne 5 from the longer ſide upon its oppoſite as a baſe, 
2 — ſhorter fide upon its oppoſite as a For in the Rhomboeid AB CD 
35 perpendicular may be DE upon the baſe A B, or the perpendicular DF upon 

daſe B C. From theſe two different cadencies of the perpendicular upon the 

baſe, the Rectangles are changed both in baſe and perpendicular: yet each Rectan- 

n= equal to the ſame Rhomboeid by this 357. Prop. And the Rhomboeid is in- 
cently eſtimated by either ReCtangle. tf /" + -/ 
IT | | Di 5 2 * bee, 
4 : N 
: *. AS] 
122 
Aead. | * 
I 

£11 4 "BS 1 . 
7 (4 N., 
c 
— | | 1 33 1 {73 | 
** 

The perpendicular with its baſe; as DE with AB, or DF with BC, are called 
the Latera rea, or the upright ſides of the oblique Parallelogram, becauſe they 
make a right angled Parallelogram equal to the oblique. | 
Now for the Menſuration of a Rectangle, we are firft to know the quantity of 
its length and breadth, that is, the diſtinct quantity of two fides containing any 
of its angles. As for Inſtance of the Rectangle AB CD, we are to knows the di- 
ſtinct | arte; the lines AB and BC 

To find therefore the quantity of any propoſed length, we muſt have recourſe 

to ſome certain and known meaſure of lengths, for a Lineal unite to make an ac- 

count by the ſame. As in the fide AB, let BE be the Lineal unite, whether Inch, 
Foot, or Yard, &c. = by conſent for the Menſuration of A B. The ſame meaſure 
ed in the ſame matter, to avoid the confuſion of meaſures; and 
therefore the very ſame is to be taken in the fide BC; for the Menſuration thereof; 
and let it be BF equaito BE; and let the Figure compleated by lines parallel to 
EB, BF, be EB FG, or elſe conceive EB to pals tranfverſly the length BF, equal 
to BE, then ſhall likewiſe be traced forth the fame ſuperficial unite or meaſuring 
Plane EBFG, whereby to eſtimate the whole Parallelogram ſpace of AB CD. 

Whereas then E B, B E, are equal to one another, therefore the Figure EBF G 
is a ſquare: and if the line EB be put an inch, __ 

then EBEG is in its Area an inch ſquare; ſo that 2——— 1 
of the rectangle ABCD, if the fide AB con- | + 1 
tain E B ſeven times, that is, ſeven Lineal units, g. ee e. 
17 inches, and according to the fame meaſure | : ? 14 
the fide BC y inches, then the whole ſpace EDT 
ſhall contain 35 ſuperficial units, or ſqu are: 
inches, each of them equat to EBE G. And this J 
at once is found by Mutiplying into 5; that ie, sees F 
by drawing the length A B into the breadth B C: 1 4 #44: 485; Oh + 

The general ground of all ſuperficial Menſura- ® 005: 1. INES NE | 
tions. A ; 15 B 

Thus have we ſhewn how an oblique Parallelogram fpace, is firſt to be reduced 
to Rectangle for its Menſuration; and then how all Rectangular Spaces, Sq uares, 
and -Oblongs, muſt be meaſured by ſome certain, Square ſpace, whoſe . is a 
known meaſure of lengths. | 

Laſtly, therefore to confirm this matter, let there be put ſome known mea ſure 
of lengths, which we call the LIN EAL UNITE, and let it be the line A B, t.up- 

poſe a foot and to ALB let be put A D equal and at Right ang/es. Again, let ys 

OF GEOMETRY. 97 

be put equal to AB, and at an oblique angle, then let be compleated the Figures 
ABCD, ABFE. Therefore P "II P — 
2 — 1 1 
a on | * every Ane 

equal to AB 2 unite, or hy 2 F 

ſuppoſed foot. Yet the Rhom- wg 
bus AB FE, is not equal in A- 
rea to the Square AB CD, but A A CRITE- EIL n 
only to a part thereof, namely, 
to the Oblong AB GH by this 
35". Prop. And in this caſe the | 
varieties are endleſs; as in the 
Rhombus A B I K, which is ſtill 4 T I 
a leſs part of ABC D, and but equal to the 82 ABLM, and fo forth infi- 
quare F 

nitely ; therefore there is no certainty but in the , 

And as the Square is uſed inthe Menſuration of Planes, ſo upon the like reaſons 
the Cube is uſed in the Menſuration of Solids. And in general it is to be obſerved, 
that whatever meaſure is at firſt put for lengths, the ſame paſſeth for length, 

breadth, and depth, and forms the meaſuring Square or Cube; be the Lineal 
unite either Inch, Foot, Yard, Perch, &c. 

Thus for the Menſuration of all kinds of Magnitudes, as they are of one, or two, 
or three Dimenſions, there is in common practice conſtituted ſome certain meaſure 
conformable to each Dimenſion, And (as we muſt begin with the moſt fimple Di- 
menſion) for lengths there is firſt made an agreement upon ſome Lineal unte : next, 
to continue in a certainty of meaſure, from the ſame Lineal unite is to ariſe the 
Square unite for Planes; and from the Square unite the Cubic unite for Solids. As to 

Inſtance in 3 a Lineal Inch, or Foot, &c. from this a Square Inch, or 
Foot, &c. then laſtly, a Cubic Inch, or Foot, &c. to be the Meaſuring unite ac- 

cording to the Dimenſions of the Magnitude, which is to be eſtimated by ſuch or 
ſuch a meaſure, Inch, or Foot, &c. ſuitable to its proper Dimenſion. 

PROPOSITION XXXVI. 

Arallelograms on equal baſes, and in the ſame parallels are 
equal to one another. 

Let the Parallelograms be ABCD, EFH, on equal baſes Bc, FG, 
and in the ſame parallels A, BG. I ſay, that the Parallelogram 
A BCD is equal to the Parallelogram EFH. For let be joynd BRE, c H. 
Now foraſmuch as 8c is equal to FG | by Suppoſition]: and alſo Fo 
is equal to EH | by Prop. 34. ]; therefore R H 
BC is equal to EH; but allo they are pa- | 
rallels by Suppoſition, and BE, c, joyn 
the ſame. Now lines which the ſame way 
joyn equals and parallels, are alſo equal 
and parallel | Prop. 33. |. Therefore En, — G 
CH, are equal and parallel: therefore E; H is a Parallelogram, and 
is equal to aBcD; for it hath the ſame baſe Bc, and is in the ſame 
parallels BG, AH. By the ſame reaſon, EFO is equal to the ſame 
EBCH; fo that alſo the Parallelogram AB cp, is equal to the Paral- 
lelogram EFGH. 

Therefore Parallelograms on equal baſes, and in the ſame paral- 
lels, are equal to one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Q 3 Corollary, 

98 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

| A C 

Corollary. 

From Pence tis manifeſt, that Parallelograms on aricqual baſes; and in +thb e 

parallels are unequal to one another: on the greater bake the greater A 
on the leſs the leſs. 

PROPOSITION XXXVII. 
T Riangles on the ſame baſe, and in the fame Eu are equal 

to one another. 

Let the Triangles be anc, DB e, on the ſame baſe. Bo, and in the 
ſame parallels aD,Bc. I fay, that the Triangle ac, is equal tothe 
Triangle DB. Let Ap be produced both ways to the points E, E, 
and by 8 let be drawn BE parallel to ca, ; _ | 
and by c, CF parallel tozD: therefore each 
of theſe, E He A, DBCF, is a Parallelogram, 
and EBC4 is equal to D BCE: for they are 
on the ſame baſe Bc, and in the ſame paral- 
lels Bc, EF. And the Triangle A Bc is half 
of the Parallelogram EBA; for the Dia- 
meter An cuts the fame into halves. And the Triangle DB c is half of 
the Parallelogram pF; for the Diameter pc, cuts the ſame into 
halves: but the halves of equals are equal to one another : where- 
fore the Triangle a Bc is equal to the Triangle ph. 

Therefore Triangles on the ſame baſe, and in the ſame parallels, 
are equal to one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXXVIII 

Riangles on equal baſes, and in the ſame parallels are equal 
to one another. 

Let the Triangles be ac, DEF, on equal baſes pc, ·E F, and in the 
ſame parallels BF, 4p. 1 gay, that the Triangle AB; e is equal to the 
Triangle pE F. For let 4p be produced both g \ 3 
ways to the points 6, N, and by B let be drawn 
BG parallel to ca, and by x, FR parallel to 
DF, therefore each of theſe oc a, DEF R, is 
a Parallelogram. And 6 Bc a is equal to DEFH; | 
for they are on equal baſes Bc, E E, and in tage 
ſame parallels Br, 6H. And the Triangle anc * ME 
is the half of the Parallelogram nA; for the Diameter as cuts 
the ſame into halves. And the Triangle DEF is the half of the 
Parallelogram p= rH; for the Diameter Þ x cut the ſame into halves, 
but. the halves of equals are equal to one another: wherefore the 
Triangle a Bc is equal to the Triangle DEF. 

Therefore Triangles on equal baſes, and in the ſame parallels, 
are 18 to one another. wich was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollary. 

OF GEOMETRY. 
Corollary. 

99 

From hence tis manifeſt, that Triangles on al baſes, and in the ſame paral- 
lels are unequal to one another: on the greater the greater Triangle, on the 

leſs the leſs. 
PROPOSITION XXXIX. 

Qual Triangles on the ſame baſe, and the ſame way ſeated, 
are in the ſame parallels. 
Let the equal Triangles be AB, DBc, on the ſame baſe Be, and 
the ſame way ſeated. I fay, that they are in the ſame parallels. 
For let be joyn d 4p; I ſay, that Ab is parallel to 
Bc. For if not, by the point a let be drawn 4 E 
parallel to Bc, and let be joyn d E c: therefore the 
Triangle A Be is equal to the Triangle E Bc; for 
they are on the ſame baſe gc, and in the ſame | 
rallels zc, A x. But apc is equal to pn: there- 22 c 
ore alſo pe is equal to Ex; c, the greater to the leſs: which is im- 
poſſible. Therefore A E is not parallel to Bc. In like manner may 
we prove that no other is beſides a D: wherefore ap is parallel to Bc. 
Therefore equal Triangles on the ſame baſe, and the ſame way 
ſeated, are in the ſame parallels. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XL. 

Lau Triangles on equal baſes, and the ſame way ſtated, are 
Li the ſame parallels. 

Let the Triangles be aBc, Dex, on equal baſes Bc, CE, and the 
ſame way ſeated. I ſay, that they are in the ſame parallels. For let 

* 

be joyn d ap; I fay, that aD is parallel 1 
to BE. For if not, by the point 4 let be 5 
drawn A; parallel to ; E, and let be joyn d A | 7 
FE: therefore the Triangle A Be is equal ö 

to the Triangle E; for they are on e- pe / 
qual baſes ꝝ c, e E, and in the ſame paral- 1 

lels BE, AF. But the Triangle a Bc is equal ARYL, 

to the Triangle cx, therefore alſo the Triangle ve x, is equal to 

the Triangle Fcs, the greater to the leſs: which is impoſſible. 

Therefore 4F is not parallel to Br. In like manner we may prove 

that no other is beſides ad: wherefore 4D is parallel to BE. 
Therefore equal Triangles on equal baſes,and the ſame way ſeated, 

are in the fame pazallels. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XII. 
IF. Paraltelograms ſhalt have the ſame baſe with a Triangle, and 
be im the [ame parallek, the Parallelgram ſhall be double of the 

For let the Paralletogram Age have the ſame baſe with the 
Triangle 

ch 
ions 

100 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

Triangle E Bc, and be in the ſame parallels Bc, Ak. I ſay, that the 
Parallelogram 4 Bcp, is double of the Tri-  __ _ D 
angle x Bc. For let be joyn d ac. Now the 
Triangle AB e is equal to the Triangle Bc; 
for they are on the ſame baſe Be, and in 
the ſame parallels B; c, 4 E. But the Paral- 
lelogram 4B p, is double of the Triangle 
ABC; for the Diameter a c cuts the ſame p 8 
into halves. So that the Parallelogram 4B esp, is alſo double of the 
Triangle x Be. | 

If therefore a Parallelogram have the ſame baſe with a Triangle, 

and be in the fame parallels, the Parallelogram ſhall be double of 

the Triangle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This Propoſition compleats the Doctrine for Menſaration of plain Surfaces : 
the Foundation whereof we have fully laid down at Prop. 35**. And whereas it was 
there ſhewn, that the Rule, by which all Parallelograms on equal baſes, and in the 
ſame parallels are to be meaſured, was to multiply the baſe into the dicu- 
lar : Now here 'tis further demonſtrated, that the Parallelogram on the ſame baſe 
with the Triangle, and in the ſame parallels is the double of the Triangle: wherefore 
half of the Parallelogram is equal to the Triangle. And therefore 

To find the Area of a Triangle; 

Let a ndicalar from any angle of a Triangle to the baſe, be multiply'd into 
half the . it ſnall give the Area of the Triangle. | 185 

And foraſmuch as a Triangle is the moſt ſimple of all rectilineal Figures, there- 

fore all rectilineal Spaces may be reſolved into Triangles, and from the particular 

Triangles added together, be juſtly meafured by this 416. Propoſition. 

2 

Now to reduce any Multilateral Figure into the feweſt Triangles, note, that Toy 
Multilateral Figure may be divided into ſo many Triangles, leſs by two, as is the 
number of its Sides. As a Pentagon into 5. Triangles, leſs by 2, that is, into three 

Triangles. An Hexagon into four. An Heptagon into five. An Octogon into fix, 
&c. As theſe Figures make apparent. | 

Corollaries, 

I. For the Menſuration of any Multilateral Figure. 

Now to find the Area of any Multilateral Figure, let the Figure be divided af- 
ter the moſt convenient manner into the feweſt Triangles, and each Triangle be 
meaſured by its baſe and perpendicular, according to the ing Rule in mul- 
tiplying the perpendicular into half of the baſe; then ſhall theſe Triangles added 
together give the Area of the Multilateral Figure. For further inſtructions in theſe 
kind of Matters, recourſe is to be had to the Writers of Practical Geometry. Here 
we have only touched ſlightly on the Uſes of theſe Elementary Propoſitions. 

2, For 

OF GEOMETRY. 101 
2. For the Menſuration of a Regular Multilateral Figure. 

From hence tis manifeft, that in a Regular Multilateral Figure a perpendicular 
from the Center to any of the Sides multiply d into half the Perimeter gives the 

2 Þ eee ee. PITT 4460 WY 22 

As AB multiply d into BC DE, half the Perimeter and equal to BF, is equal 
to the Area of the Figure, that is, to the Parallelogram A BF G. For that of each 
Triangle the perpendicular A B multiply d into half the baſe gives the Area: All 
which Triangles together are equal to the whole Multilateral Figure. 

Therefore alſo the Right angld Triangle A B H, having the Side BH equal to 
the whole Perimeter BCD E FG, is equal to the ſame Multilateral Figure. 

2. For the Menſuration of a Circle. 

And as there 1s found this equality of Areas between a Regular Polygon and 
ſuch a Right angl'd Triangle; ſo Archimedes hath demonſtrated the ſame between 
a Circle and a Right ang d Triangle, one of whoſe Sides about the Right angle is 
equal to the Radius, and the other to the Perimeter of the Circle. 

L R PT c 

Now the Phyſical reaſon of this agreement between a Rectilineal Figure and a 
Circle ſeems to be, for that a Circle is, as it were, @ Regular Polygon conſiſting of infinite 
equal ſides, So that a Triangle, one of whoſe ſides about the Right angle, is equal 
to the Radius, and the other equal to the Perimeter, is in Area equal to the Circle, 
like as it is in Regular Polygons. As of the Triangle AB C, if the fide B C be ſup- 
poſed equal to the Perimeter of the Circle, then ſhall the Triangle A BC be equal 
to the Circle, as Archimedes hath demonſtrated. But how Geometrically to ex- 
hibite a ſtrait line equal to the Perimeter of a Circle, and to demonſtrate the 
ſame (as in this Inſtance B C) to be a line equal to the Perimeter, His labor, hoc opus. 

Archimedes therefore makes a further attempt toward this Matter, and in his 
wonderful Book of Spiral Lines, demonſtrates in Prop. 18. that if to the term 
of a Spiral line deſcribed by the firſt Revolution of the Genetrix, a Tangent be drawn: 
and from the Original, or Central point of the ſame be likewiſe drawn a ſtrait line 
at Right angles to the Genetrix, and produced till it meets with the Tangent, then 
ſhall rhis ſtrait line be equal to the Perimeter of the Circle, whole Radius is the 
line that deſcribes the Helix. 

But how to draw the Tangent is a work left unfiniſhed. And till a Tangent to 
an Helix be Geometrically — 2 a ſtrait line equal to the Perimeter ot a 
Circle remains unknown. h 

Archimedes having in theſe methods proceeded Geometrically toward the inveſti- 
gation of a ſtrait line equal to the circumference of a Circle, without a Pinay 

R ati 

10 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ſatisfaction, endeayours next to come to a nearneſs of equality, ſo far as it might 
be eaſily practicable, and ſufficient for common uſe. 0 

He begins with the Triſection of a Right angle, or a Quadrant of the circum- 
ſerence of a Circle (commonly ſignified by the number of 90 Degrees) ſo that each 
Segment is a third part of the Quadrant, or 3o Degrees of go, and therefore a 1206. 
part of the whole circumference, that 1s, of 360 Degrees. 

Firſt, Now he biſects this angle, and by conſequence the Arch, which maketh 
each Segment a 24. part of the circumference. Secondly, This biſected, makes 
each Segment a 48. part of the circumference. Thirdly, This again biſected, makes 
each Segment a 96. part of the circumference: In which Segment Archimedes reſts. 

Thus from the Biſections of a 12 partof the circumference thrice repeated, he 
takes a regular Polygon of 9s fides circumſcribed about a Circle. Then he de- 
monſtrates the Perimeter of this Polygon to be to the Diameter of the Circle as 22. 
to 7. almoſt, that is, to be triple of the Diameter, and moreover the overplus 
above the triple to be almoſt 4 part, or 5 parts of the Diameter: which is the ſame 
thing 0 the Diameter de divided into 7. or 20. equal parts. And becauſe 

the circumference of the contained Circle is leſs than the Perimeter of the cir- 
cumſcribed Polygon, therefore the overplus of the circumference above the triple, 
is much leſs than 4 or s of the Diameter. 

For of two unequal magnitudes the leſſer hath a leſs proportion to a third magni- 
tude, than the greater hath to the ſame. As a Groat hath a leſſer proportion to a 
Penny, than a Shilling hath to a Penny. 

Again, he takes a regular Polygon of 96 fides inſcribed in a Circle, then he de- 
monſtrates the Perimeter of this Polygon to be alſo triple of the Diameter of the 
Circle, and the overplus above the triple to be greater than ; parts of the Diameter. 

And becauſe the circumference of the Circle is greater than the Perimeter of 
the contained Polygon, therefore the overplus aboye the triple is much greater 
than 5? parts of the Diameter. 

So that Archimedes uſes, firſt a circumſcribed Polygon of 9s ſides, whoſe Peri- 
meter 1s greater than the circumference of the Circle ; and then an inſcribed Po- 
lygon = 96 ſides, whoſe Perimeter is leſs than the circumference : and from their 
proportions to the Diameter he proves the ſame a Fortiori, that the quantity of the 
Circumference is triple of the Diameter, and ſomewhat leſs than ; parts, yet ſome- 
what greater than f parts of the Diameter, being firſt divided into 70, and again 
into 71. equal parts. Limits cafily comprehended, and expoſed in the leaſt and 
feweſt numbers. 

The Moderns indeed have brought this within cloſer bounds; but in great num- 
bers more nice than neceſſary. The numbers of Aarianus Metius are for uſefulneſs 
next to thoſe of Archimedes, He ſtates the circumference unto the Diameter, as 
355 to 113, that is triple, and moreover 16 parts almoſt of the Diameter divided into 
x1 3 equal parts, and thus to be noted ih, or 3 mn; almoſt, Whereas j multiply d into 
16, makes only i: which being greater than i; is not ſo near to the juſt and preciſe 
Truth, as theſe numbers of Aarianus Metivs. But Archimedes, who in his Book en- 
titled Pſammites, or Arenarins, does by moſt artificial Calculations, beginning from 
a round ſmall Poppy-ſeed give us this vaſt number, which reduced into our De- 
eimal form of Notation, is 10000000,00000000,00000000,00000000,00000000, 
00000000,00000000,00000000. Which he demonſtrates to exceed the number of 
the Sand of the Seas, if the whole World within the Spherical Concave of the 
Stars, (which he takes to be as large as the ancient Syſtem of Ariſt archut was, and 
after two thouſand yeers revived moſt ingeniouſſy by Coperntcas) conſiſted only of 
ſuch a Maſs of Sand; He, I fay, could have come to any nearer and nearer terms 
at pleaſure, if he had thought it neceſſary or convenient. But when after all at- 
tempts and labour whatſoever, he knew the matter muſt end in a bare Approxi- 
mation, like a great and prudent Maſter of his Art, reſts within the readieſt and 
molt uſeful limits. And all the endeavours of our late Geometricians reach no far- 
ther, than proceeding in Fractrons of greater and greater numbers to bring the 

overplus above the triple to be leſſer and leſſer than ) or ;, yet ſtill to be greater 

than 

OF GEOMETRY. to 
than N. Which Archimeder hath demonſtrated to be the ſtanding limit on the othet 
fide, unto which endleſs approaches may be nearer and nearer made to very licule - 

e | 

AY PROPOSITION XLII. 

No a given Triangle to conſtitute an equal Parallelogram in 
an angle equal to a given trait. lin d angle. 

Let the given Triangle be as c, and the given ftrait-lin'd angle v. 
It is required to conſtitute a Parallelogram equal to the Triangle 
ABC, in an angle equal to the ſtrait-- x 
lin d angled. Let 8c be cut into halves 
in E, and let be joyn d AE, then to the 
ſtrait line xe, and to a point in the ſame 
E, let be conſtituted the angle cn P, e- 
qual to the angle Þ | by Prop. 23. And 
by 4, let be drawn 4 0 parallel to E c, | | 
and by c, cd parallel to EF. Therefore FEC is a Parallelogram. 

Now foraſmuch as 3E is equal to xc, therefore the Triangle 4 Bt 
is equal to the Triangle Ec For they are on equal baſes Bs, E c, 
and in the ſame parallels nc, A c. Therefore the Triangle 45 c is 
double of the Triangle A Ec. But alſo the Parallelogram PRC d is 
double of the Triangle AEC; for it hath the ſame baſe and is in 
the ſame parallels. Therefore the Parallelogram xx cd is equal to 
the Triangle 43 c, and hath the angle c equal to the given angle v. 

Wherefore to the given Triangle a Bc, there is conſtituted an e- 
qual Parallelogram Fgc6 in the angle cz Fr, which is equal to the 
angle b. Which was to be done. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This Problem concerns the Transformation of Figures one into another; and 
begins with tranſmuting a Triangle (the moſt ſimple of ſtrait lin d Figures) into an 
ual Parallelogram. And by conſequence there is imply d the like tranſmatation of 
al Rectilineal ſpaces into equal Parallelograms; for that every Multilateral Figure 
may for * be divided into Triangles. As Ewclide hath done in the follow ing 
5b. Propoſition, 

, And foraſmuch as all Parallelogram ſpaces are by the Diameter divided into two 
Triangles, therefore their four angles are equal to four Right [by Prop. 32.]. And 
becauſe the oppoſite angles are equal, [Prop. 34.] therefore if one angle of a Paral - 
lelogram be given, all the four are given, and determined. For it the giyen angle 
be Right, the other three are alſo right angles. If the given angle be Send, the 
oppoſite 1s alſo Obtuſe, and 1 to it, and the other two Acute angles are like- 
wiſe equal to one another, and together with the two Obtuſe do make, or compleat 
four Right angles. And the like again on the contrary, if the given angle be Acute: 
ſo that in one angle given, 4 am is ever to be underſtood as determined 
in all its four angles. 
-PROPOSITION XLIIL 

Fevery Parallelogram fhace the complements of the Paralle- 
() logy ams abort the — are equal to one another. _ 

Let the Parallelogram ſpace be anc, and the Diameter of the 
R 2 ſame 

r 

Iren 
MjONS 

meter thereof Ac: therefore the 

5 d parallel, and let 14, an, be ;Frodured to the points L, M. 

104 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

ſame bea e, and about 4 c let the Parallelograms be E H vc, and 
wullat are called the * be BR, , KD. I fay, that the Joe 
plement Bx is equal to the c A . 
lement x p. Foraſmuch as Arb 0 
sa Parallelogram, and the Dia- 

Triangle a 8c is equal to the Tri- 
angle AD c. Again, becauſe B&H a 
is a Parallelogram, and the Dia- + 7 
meter thereof ax: therefore the Triangle A b E is r to the Tri. 
angle AH k. By the ſame reaſon alſo the Triangle x Go is equal to 
the Triangle xyc. Now becauſe the Triangle 4 Nx is equal to the 
Triangle aHx, and the Triangle x dc, is equal to the Triangle x pe, 
therefore the Triangle a EK with the Triangle ke c, is equal to the 
Triangle aH x, with the Triangle x ec. But the whole Triangle 
43e is equal to the whole Triangle Ap c: wherefore the remaining 
complement B k, is equal to the remaining complement xD. 

Therefore of every Parallelogram ſpace the complements of the 
Parallelograms about * are equal to one e, Which 

Was „ [2 34K lg: | 

PROPOSITION: $lav. 

U No à given firait line to apply a Parallelogram equal to a 
given Triangle, in a given rail lin d angle. 

Let the given ſtrait line be ak, and the given Triangle c, and the 
given ſtrait lin d angle v. It is required unto the given ſtrait line as, 
to apply a Parallelogram equal to the given Triangle c, in an angle 
equal to D. | 
Let be conſtituted the Par 190 "pony 
lelogram BEFG equal to the 

Triangle c in the angle EB, 
which is equal to p. | by Prop. 

„ +. & { þ 
I=HInd A 17 

8 Aud let E be put directly to 
AB, and FG be produced to H. 
Then by a to either of the lines 
BG, E E, let A H be drawn paral- 
lel, and let be joyn d as. 

Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line n F falls on the parallels 4 H, E, 
therefore the angles A HF, H F E, are equal to two Right [ Prop. 29. ]; 
wherefore BHO, GFE, are leſs than two Right. But lines infinitely 
produced from angles leſs than two Right ſhall meet: therefore ns, 
FE, being produced'ſhall meet. Let them be produced, and meet 
in x: then by the point x to either of the lines x a, FH, let x L be 

here- 

OF GEOMETRY. 105 
Therefore HIL. K is a Parallelogram, and R x the Diameter thereof; 
and the Parallelograms about Hk are ac, ME, and the Parallelo- 
grams called complements ate l. x, Br; therefore Lx is equal to Br 
| Prop. 43. ]. But z x is equal to the Triangle e; therefore alſo Ls is 
equal to c. And becauſe the angle G E, is equal to aB x4, and alſo cr 
is equal to the angle p; therefore ax is equal to the angle p. 

Therefore unto the given ſtrait line as, is apply d the Pallelo- 
gram L. B, equal to the given Triangle c, in the angle ABM, which is 
equal to the given angle p. Which was to be done. 
ANN OTATIONs. 

I ic reguired unto the given line A B to apply a Parallelogram equal to the given Tri- 

angle C.] That is, to conſtitute a Parallelogram, one of whoſe Sides ſhall be the 
given line AB, and the Parallelogram be alfo equal to the giyen Triangle C. 
And let BE be' put direftly to AB] 5 — Rx 
That is, let the Parallelogram BE FG E 
be ſo conſtrued; that one of the ſides 
containing the angle E BG, equal to 

the given angle D, be put directly to 

AB the given line, unto which a Pa- | / 

rallelogtam equal to the given Trian- | — M 

ole C is required to be 2 Now | B 

this is to be thus effected. 4 | 

Produce AB to E, and to the line 

E B, and to the point B let be conſti- 

tated the angle EB G, equal to the L. 

given angle D [by Prop. 23. J. Then 

let the Parallelogram B EF G, be conſtituted equal to the given Triangle C [by 

Prop 42. ] ; And let FG the oppoſite fide to E B, be produced indefinitely toward 
H. And ſo proceeding onward according to Euclid s conſtruction in compleating 

the Diagram, and applying the required Parallelogram LB to the given line A B, 

as it is at the firſt poſited in any Situation whatſoever given. 

For note, that the Application of that Parallelogram which is required to be 
equal to the given Triangle, ought to be made ad Datam Rettam, that is, to the 
very line AB in its poſition, and not to an other line, which ſhall be put equal to 
it ; as Clavius hath in his Expoſition of this Propoſition without juſt cauſe devi- 
ated from Euclide. But afterward in his Scholion he rightly corrects himſelt, ex 
ſententia Euclidis, and there follows the general Law of Problems, that The thing 
it always to be effetted according to the Poſitron given. As in the Ule of this Problem 
it will every where be found neceſſary, and even in the next following Propoſition. 

It is farther to be obſerved, that in the Conſtruction of this Problem there are 

made four Parallelograms Equiang['d to one another, and to the whole. viz, Two 
about the Diameter of the whole, and theic two Complements. One of which, 
the Parallelogram F B is firſt [by Prop. 4a. ] conſtituted equal to the given Triangle 
C: by which means the other Complement BL, equal to the former (and there- 
fore equal to the ſame given Triangle) is apply'd to the given line AB, according 
to the full Tenor of this eminent Problem. 

Advertiſement. 

The 420. Propoſition hath ſhewed how to conſtitute a Parallelogram equal to a 
given Triangle, in an angle equal to a given angle. 

Now in this Problem there is moreover required to apply ſuch a Parallelogram 
alſo to a given ſtrait line, as well as in a given angle. That is, the given line is to 
be one fide of theapply'd Par and an angle of that Parallelogram is — 

| 3 

16 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
be equal to che given angle. And always remind, what hath been before 

that in Parallelograms, if one angle be given, all che four are given, becauſe the 
oppolite angles are equal, and the two inward are equal to two Right, by Prop. 
54: and 29. So that in this Problem the Parallelogram is three ways reſtrained. 
E In the given line the Parallelogram is confined to one certain fide. II. It is de- 
termined in Area, or Magnitude, in that it is to be equal to a given Triangle. 

© III. In the one given angle all the four angles are determined; wherefore of this 

Parallelogram nothing is left undetermined, but the other fide whereby to effect 
this Problem. ET ST. vi | 

E = . From this ca Application, or Parabeliſm of a Parallelogram to a given ftrait 

tions | line preciſely, is one of the Conic Sections named Parabola, As Apollaniur ſhews in 
| Prop. 11. Lib. I. of his Conic Elements. The ſtrait line to which the Application 

is made in the Conic Elements, is by Mydorgiur properly called the PARAM ETER. 
There is likewiſe in Prop. 28, and ay. El. VI. of Ewlide, an Application of a 
iven Parallelogram unto a given ſtrait line, and in a given angle: but beſides theſe 
eſtraints, there are added more ſtrict conditions of Defect, and Exceſs, that 
is, the Application is to be made either unto a part of the given line in a certain 
Defect, or to the given line Augmented in a certain Length, or Exceſs; which 
Conditions have occaſioned the names of Elkpfis, and Hyperbola, to the other Conic 

Sections, As Prop. 12, and 13. Lib. I. of Apollonius ſet forth. So that Euclid s three 
fold Application of a Parallelogram to a ftrait line, has afforded to us 
names for the three famous Conic Sections. Whereas more ancieily, the Parabola 
was called the Section of a Right-angl d Cone, the Hyperbela of an Obtuſe · angl d 
Cone, the Elipſis of an Acute - angl d Cone, as we find in Archimoder. But for ap- 
plying theſe three Sections in general to any one Cone of whatſoever angle, and 

accordingly moulding the old Conic Elements, Fpollonius was in his time, and ever 
ſince renowned with the Title of the great Geometrician. 

PROPOSITION XLV. 
T O a given Rectilineal ſpace to conſtitute an re Parallelb. 
gram in an angle equal to a given trait. lin q angle. 
Let the given Rectilineal ſpace be ABCD, and the given ſtrait- 

lind angle E. It is required to conſtitute a Parallelogram equal to 
the Rectilineal ſpace AB c D, 202 

in an angle equal to x. For let g _— 1 
be joyn d Ds; and let be con- 

ſtituted | by Prop. 4. ] the Pa- 22 
rallelogram FH equal to the © at 
Triangle aDB in the angle | Fw # 
HKF, Which 1s equal to x. 

Then unto the ſtrait line on, let be apply d the Parallelogram 
GM, equal to the Triangle pzc in the — GHM, which is equal 
to E, [ by Prop. 44.] 

Now fora as the angle E is equal to eachof the angles p x , 
HM; therefore FKH is equal to M-. Let x Ho be added in com- 
mon, therefore the angles Fx H, K HG, are equal to the angles k Ho, 
GHM. But the angles K N, Ho, are equal to two Right [Prop.29. ]; 
therefore alſo x H, G6 HM, are equal to two Right. Now to the ſtrait 
line GH, and to a point in the ſame n, the two ſtrait lines x N, a, 

not lying the ſame way, make the conſequent angles equal to two 
Right; therefore x H is direct to H; M | Prop. 14.]. And becauſe the 

{trait 

OF GEOMETRY. to7 
ſtrait line h G falls on the parallels x M, Fo, therefore the Alternate 
angles MHG,HGF, are equal to one another | Prop. 29. |. Let Gr. be 
added in common, therefore MHG, HL, are equal to HGF, HG. 
But the angles MHG, HL, are equal to two Right: therefore Fd is 
direct to GL [Prop. 14. And becauſe «+ is equal, and parallel to 
HG, and likewiſe HG to ML; therefore alſo x is equal, and parallel 
to ML | Prop. 30. ] And the ſtrait lines x M, FL, joyn the ſame, 
therefore K M, FL, are alſo equal, and parallel | Prop. 33.|; where- 
fore KFLM is a Parallelogram. And becauſe the Triangle AB D, is 
equal to the Parallelogram HF, and gpc to 6M, wherefore the 
whole Rectilineal ſpace AB ep, is equal to the whole Parallelogram 
KFLM. Therefore the Parallelogram x FL M is conſtituted equal to 
the Rectilineal ſpace AB ep in the angle g K M, which is equal to the 
given angle kx. Which was to be done. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

And let be conſtituted the Parallelogram F H equal to the Triangle AD B.] To effect 
this Problem, the given Rectilineal ſpace is to be divided into Triangles : and firſt 
to one of theſe Triangles there is to be conſtituted an equal Parallelogram. As here 
the Parallelogram F H is conſtituted equal to the Triangle AD B, by Prop. 42. 
But is not required as Clavius propoſes to be apply d to any certain ftrait line, tho 
the other Parallelograms are; and after this manner following. 

Then unto the ſtrait line G H, let be apply d the Parallelgram G M, equal to the Tri- 
angle D B C, in the angie G HM, which is equal to E.] Altho the firſt Parallelogram 
FH, equal to the Triangle ADB, was not confined to any given ſtrait line; yet 
the next Parall am G Mequal to the Triangle DB C, is of neceſſity to be ap- 
ply'd to the ſtrait line GH, as it lyes in a given poſition; that by this means there 
might be conſtituted from ſuch particular Par grams one entire Parallelogram 
KFLM, equal to the given Rectilineal ſpace AB CD. And fo forward, it the 
Rectilineal {pace required a diviſion into more Triangles, Parallelogram is after 
Parallelogram to be apply d to ſuch a certain ſtrait line, that makes ſucceſſively 
one common Side; and all of them are equal to one another, and the Parallelo- 
grams are together ona to the whole Parallelogram ſpace, which was required 

to be conſtituted equal to a given Rectilineal ſpace. 
Advertiſement. 
The Application of Rectilineal ſpaces to a given {trait line, if alſo the given 
angle be a Right angle, does truely anſwer to tion of Dwiſion in Arith- 

metic, For the given plain ſpace is as the Dividend in Numbers, the given ſtrait 
line as the Diviſor, and the other Side of the Parallelogram emergent from this 
Application is as the Quotient. And again, as the Diviſor multiply d into the Quo- 
tient makes up the Dividend, fo the given fide drawn into the emergent fide, gives 
the Area of the Parallelogram. 

PROPOSITION XLVI. 
'y is a given rait line to deſcribe a ſquare. 

Let the given ftrait Tine de 43. It is required on the ſtrait line 
AB to deſcribe a ſquare. To the ſtrait line as from a given point . 
the 

108 THE FIRST ELEMENT 

the ſame a; let be drawn at Right angles the line ac, and to an 
let A D be put equal: then by the point p, let DE be drawn parallel 
to ab, and by the point B; let BE be drawn parallel to ap; therefore 
ADEB is a Parallelogram : wherefore AB is equal to DE, and AD to 
BE | Prop. 33. ]. But alſo B A is equal to Ap; there- C 
fore the four lines Ba, AD, DE, E B, are equal to one | 
another: wherefore the Parallelogram A DEB is 
Equilateral: I ſay, it is alſo Right angl d. For be- » JE 
cauſe on the parallels as, D E, falls the ſtrait line | 
AD, therefore the angles BAD, ADE, are equal to 
two Right Prop 29. But BAD is a Right angle, ; | 
alſo ADE is a Right angle, and of Prallelogram | 
ſpaces the oppoſite ſides and angles are equal to one 
another Prop. 34.]; wherefore each of the oppofite angles ABE, 
BED, is a Right angle, therefore aDEB is Right angld. But alſo 
it hath been prov'd Equilateral : therefore it is a Square; And it is 
deſcrib d on the ſtrait line A3. Which was to be done. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Euclide, before he makes uſe of a ſquare, does demonſtrate the Being and Con- 
ſtruction of ſuch a Figure. And therefore hath here premiſed this problem in or- 
der toward the demonſtration of the next following Theorem, which is the firſt 
wherein ſquares are concernd, 

And according to his 29, Definition he now ſhews how to deſcribe a Figure of 
four Equal Sides, and four Right Angles on any given ſtrait line. 

Thus having demonſtrated this Figure, he does hereafter upon occaſion juſtly 
aſſume from the nature of a Square, that Squares deſcribed on equal ſtrait lines are 
equal to one another. As likewiſe that Equal Squares are deſcribed on equal ftrait lines. 
Altho' Commandinus and Clavins after Proclus, have thought fit to demonſtrate theſe 
moſt natural Conceptions : which were before as evident of themſelves, and imme- 
diately conjoyn'd in common ſenſe with the definition of a Square. 

PROPOSITION XLVIL- 

N a Right angled Triangle, the Square of the /ide ſubtending 
the Right angie, is equal to the Squares of the ſides containing 
the Right angle. — 

Let the Right angld Triangle be asc, having the Right angle 
BAC. I ſay, that the ſquare of ße, is equal to the ſquares of B A, Ac. 
For on Bc, let be deſcribd the ſquare 3 DE, and on as, ac, the 
{quares GB, Kc, and by 4a let aL be drawn parallel to either of the 
lines BÞ, CE, and let be joynd ap, Ec. 

Now foraſmuch as each of the angles Bac, B a C, is a right angle, 
and to the ſtrait line 34, and to a point in the ſame 4, the two 
ſtrait lines Ac, Ad, not lying the ſame way, make the conſequent 
angles equal to two Right, therefore c a is direct to aG: by the 
ſame reaſon alſo as is direct to an. And becaule the angle DBS is 
equal to the angle EBA, for each is a right angle, let the angle 
BA ABC 

B 

| J TE. . uy 
ABC be added in common, therefore the whole angle pz is equal 
to the whole angle PE c. And becauſe H 
the two lines DB, BA, are equal to 
the two lines CB, BF, each to each, 
and the angle DBA is equal to the K 
angle Fr Bc, therefore the baſe a Þ is e- | 
qual to the baſe rc, and the Triangle 
ABD is equal to the Triangle F8c. Std 6 

Now the Parallelogram BL is dou- | 

ble of the Triangle aBD, for they 
have the ſame baſe BD, and are in the 
ſame parallels BD, a LI Prop. 4.1. |. Al- 
ſo the ſquare 63 is double of the Tri- 
angle FBc, for they have the ſame + [F 6 

bale FB, and are in the ſame parallels FB, 6c. Now the doubles of 

equals are equal to one another; Therefore the Parallelogram BL 
is equal to the ſquare GB. 

In like manner AE, Bx, being joyn d, may be proved that the Pa- 
rallelogram L, is equal to the ſquare He; therefore the whole 
ſquare BDEC is equal to the two ſquares 6B, Re, and the ſquare 
BDEC, is deſcribed on Bc, and GB, He on Ba, ac; wherefore the 
{quare of the fide s c, is equal to the ſquares of the ſides s a, ac. 

Therefore in Right angl'd Triangles, the ſquare of the fide ſub- 
tending the Right-angle, is equal to the ſquares of the ſides contain- 
ing the Right angle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS, 

This Propoſition among Geometricians moſt famous, is ſaid to have been found 
out by Pythagoras, and the Invention publickly celebrated with a Sacrifice to the 
Muſes. Yet the hint from whence the difcovery of this Truth might firſt ariſe, 
ſeems to be very obvious. . 

For in this Figure the ſquare EFGH, is apparently double of the ſquare 
ABDC; but EFGH is deſcribed on EF, which is equal to 1 
BC, the fide ſubtending the Right angle BAC of the Equicru- vs 
ral Triangle ABC; and the ſquare ABD C is deſcribed on ei- 
ther of the ſides A B, A C, containing the Right angle BAC, of - 0 
the ſame Equicrural Triangle A B C. It is therefore hereupon 
very reaſonable to conceive, that the ſame property might like- 
wiſe belong to Scalene Right-angl'd Triangles, and give the oc- H G 
caſion of a farther enquiry into this matter. D 

Thus Geometricians often happen to diſcover a Truth, before they have framed 
a legitimate demonſtration of it: and find out their Propoſitions one way (Which 
they uſually conceal) but prove them in an other. We have an Example ot this 
kind in the Remains of Archimedes, who ſhews, how firſt he found the Quadrature 
of a Parabola Mechanically, as he calls it, and afterwards gives a Geometrical de- 
monſtration. 

Now Eucl:d demonſtration reaches in general all Right-angled Triangles, Equi- 
crural, and Scalene: and is very eaſy, natural and immediate, being framed from 
the two Fundamental Propoſitions 35 and 414: by which all plain Surfaces are mca- 
ſured, and proved to be equal, or unequal to one another. 

5 

G 

But 

| 
1. 

as 2 inches, Feet, &c. then the len 
s not expreſſible by a number of the ſame meaſure, or by any F 

For the ſquare of 4 is 16, therefore the ſquare of AB or AC, is U 5 G 

110 THE FIRST ELEMENT 
But foraſmuch as no ſquare number added to it ſelf, can make a ſquare number, 

nor any ſquare number be the double of an other ſquare number: therefore in an 

Equicrural Right-angl'd Triangle, as ABC, if the length of the ſides AB, or A C, 
containing the Right angle, be wet by the number of any known meaſure, 
th of the fide BC ſubtending} the Right angle 

flible part thereof. For the ſquare of 2 is 4, which added to 
it ſelf makes 8 the ſquare of BC, whoſe length is leſs than 3, 
becauſe the ſquare of 3 is 9. And on the contrary, if the length 1 
of BC be put 4 Inches, Feet, &c. then the length of either fade 
AB or AC is not expreſſible by any part of the ſame meaſure. 

8, and the length of the fide A B or A C, 1s leſs than 3, and ex- 
preſſible by no part or parts of BC. For tho BC be divided into 4000000 &c. of 
arts of the ſame meaſure; yet the caſe is ſtill as before, and not one of thoſe 
all meaſure AB, which will ever be leſs than 3000000 & c. of theſe parts, and 
greater than 2999999 &c. of the ſame. ; ; 

So that in an Equicrural Right-angl'd Triangle, if the fide ſibtending the Right 
angle be Rational, that is, be expreſſed in quantity by a certain Number, and Meaſure, 
then each of the other ſides is /rratonal to that Meaſure, and cannot be expreſſed 
in quantity by any number of parts belonging to the ſame. 

And becauſe every ſquare is diviſible by the Diameter into two equal and Equi- 
crural Right-angl'd Triangles, therefore if the fide of a ſquare be Rational, the 
Diameter is Irrational: and if the Diameter be put Rational, the fide is Irrational. 
And the 10h. Element of Euclide ends with a demonſtration, that the fide of a 
Square, and the Diameter, are to one another incommenſurable, that is, what- 
foeyer length any certain times repeated ſhall make up exactly, and meaſure either 

the fide, or the Diameter, the ſame tho never ſo ſmall, cannot preciſely mea- 

ſure the other, but repeated ſhall fall under, or over it. As let any length ex- 
actly meaſure A B from the point A to the point B; the ſame ſhall not preciſely 
meaſureBC, from B to C; but repeated will either come ſhort of the point C, or 
paſs beyond it. And this is meant by incommenſurable Magnitudes. For tho' 
every finite Magnitude is in it ſelf menſurable, yet all finite Magnitudes are not 
capable of the — meaſure ſo as to have their quantities ſignified by any one and 
the ſame, as appears from this 47. Propoſition. 

There are infinite other ſtrait lines of the like nature : ſome of which are the 
whole ſubject of that moſt ſubtile 10. Element. As alſo here, not only in all 
Equicrural but in all Scalene 2 Triangles, where the ſquares of the ſides 
containing the Right angle added together, make not a ſquare number, there the 

tide ſubtending the Right angle is irrational, and incommenſurable to either of 

them. 

As in the Right. angl d r 
ABC, let the ſides containing the 
Right angle be of a certain length, as 
AB 2 inches, and AC; inches; their 
ſquares are then 4, and 9, which ad- 5 
ded * make the ſquare 13. „ 2. 
wherefore the fide B C ſubtending E \ 
the Right angle is greater than 3, : 
whoſe ſquare is but 9, and leſs than 4, 
whoſe ſquare is 16, ſo that the quan- 
tity of BC, is only expreſſible by a 
ſurd number between 3 and 4,and is : 
no part, nor any poſſible fraction, that ee e 
can be made out of 3, or 4; but is call - : 
ed the Square Root of 13; andthere- 

fore irrational it is, and incommenſurable to the fides A B and AC, Andif an inch 
| were 

N. * 4 
* 

cf 

OF GEOMETRY. 111 
were divided into an hundred thouſand millions of parts, the caſe would be ſtill the 

ſame, and not one of thoſe particles ſhould exactly meaſure, and make up the 
line BC. | | | 

Again, leta Right-angl'd Triangle ABC, be 
the half of an Equilateral Triangle A CD, each . : 
of whoſe fides let be put 4, ſo that AC is 4, . : 
and BC the half of AC is 2. Now the ſquare * 
of AC is 16, the ſquare of BC is 4, and there- © 
fore the ſquare of AB is 12, or 16 leſs 4, whoſe 
fide AB is a ſurd between 3 and 4, and called 
the Square Root of 12. Vet theſe Squares are 8 
commenſurable, and the ſquare of A C is qua- &' 
druple of the ſquare B C, and the ſquare of 
AB is triple of the ſame; tho' the fide AB be |: 
irrational and incommenſurable to the other 8 
fides AC, BC. This is the Archimedean Right- 

2 2 
angl d Triangle expoſed in ſmall numbers, ſuch —_ A 
as plainly give the mutual proportions of te 
fides and ſquares, on which his Cyclometries : K 

are founded; where the ſurd fide A B he maeeees 
the Radius of his Circle. The numbers of Ar- * 
chimedes are theſe, A C 1s put 306, therefore 

BC the half of AC is 153, and the Radius 9 

AB is a ſurd, ſomewhat greater than 265. For the ſquare of AC 306 is 93636: 
and the ſquare of BC 153, is 23409; which ſubſtracted from the ſquare 93636, 
there remains 70227, which is the ſquare of AB: ſo that AB is ſomewhat greater 
than 265, whoſe exact ſquare is 20225, and only leſs than 70227, the ſquare of AB 
by two units: and therefore AB is a ſurd, ſomewhat inſenſibly greater than 265, 
the Root of the ſquare number 70225. 

Now from the fides, and ſquares of a Right-angl d Triangle, which is half of 
an Equilateral, Archimedes demonſtrates by repeated Biſections of angles, and arches, 
and _ Calculations thereupon, that a Polygon of 9s ſides circumſcribed about a 
Circle, and by conſequence that the Circumference of the Circle, is triple, and more- 
over ſomewhat leſs than j or $ of the Diameter. 

And further, upon this occaſion to declare fully the uſe Archimedes makes of 

this 47. Prop. in the menſuration of a eee 
Circle, let there be again ſuch an other * 
Right-angl'd Triangle AB C, being the * 
half of an Equilateral. And let AC ſub- 
tending the Right angle ABC, be the 
Diameter of a Circle, and ſuppoſed to 
conſiſt of 1560 equal parts: therefore : 
BC the half of AC is 780. And the fide A 
AB is a ſurd, ſomewhat leſs than 1351. 4 
For the ſquare of AC 1560 is 2433600: and the ſquare of BC 780 is 698400: 
which ſubſtracted from the ſquare 243 3600, there remains 1825200, which is the 
ſquare of AB: fo that AB is ſomewhat leſs than 1351, whoſe exact ſquare is 
1825201, and only exceeds 1825200 the ſquare of AB by a fingle unite; and there- 
wy AB is a ſurd, ſomewhat inſenſibly * 1351 the Root of the ſquare num- 

TT 1525201, - | 

Now from the Sides, and Squares of this Right-angl'd Triangle, Archimedes de- 
monſtrates, that a Polygon of g6 ſides inſcribed in a Circle, and by conſequence 
that the Circumference of the Circle, is triple, and moreover ſomewhat greater 
than; parts of the Diameter, | 

Thus far upon this 47". Prop. we have explained the Grounds of Archimedes his 
Cyclometries taken from an Equilateral Triangle, where the angles are always 
known, and the Sides may be put of any quantity at pleaſure, and out of we 

S 2 

= - 1 THE FIRST EEEMENT 

made ſuch a Night- angld Triangle of known angles and fides, that whoeyer is but 
moderately: exerciſed in the uſe of numbers, may now with caſe go forward nagh 
the reſt of Archimedes his demonſtrations, which would otherwiſe be ſomewhat 

ſcure and difficult to younger Students. For whoſe ſake alſo we have from this 
Propoſition given in brief ſome eaſy, and uſeful Notions of incommenſurable ma- 

itudes. And farther tis to be noted, that between incommenſurable magnitudes 
It is at the firſt arbitrary and changeable at pleaſure, which of them be pat Ratio- 
nal; as whether the Side, or the Diameter of a Square, But theſe are of themſelves 
in nature incommenſurable to one another, which is the apparent cauſe of their 
mutual Irrationality. But the cauſe of incommenſurability is more ſubtil, and lyes 
in the infinite diviſibility of magnitude, which hath not in nature a Minimum to 
be a common meaſure of magnitudes, as an Unite is of Numbers, 

This incommenſurability between magnitudes of the ſame kind (whereof we 
ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak more at large in the Fifth Element) is one of the 
many inexplicable Myſteries in Geometry. Habet enim Geometria miracula ſua, 

PROPOSLTION XLVIII. 

I F the ſquare of one ſide of a Triangle be equal to the [quares of 
the two remaining /ides of the Triangle, the angle contained by 
the two remaining ſides of the Triangle, is a Right angle. 

For of the Triangle AB c, let the ſquare of 8c be equal to the 
ſquares of 3A, ac. I ſay, that the angle Bac is a Right angle. For 
from the point 4 to the line ac, let be drawn at Right angles the 
line ap; and to a let at be put equal, and pc be joyn d. Now for- 
aſmuch as pA is equal to as, therefore alſo 
the ſquare of DA is equal to the ſquare of 
AB, Let the ſquare of à e be added in com- 
mon; therefore the ſquares of A, ac, are 
equal to the ſquares of BA, 4c. But the 
ſquare of Dc is equal to the ſquares of Da 
Ac | Prop. 47.) for the angle pA e is a Right 
angle; and the ſquare of Be is put equal to 
the ſquares of Ba, ac; therefore the ſquare 

of Dc is equal to the ſquare of Bc. So that alſo the fide nc is equal 
to the fide Bc. And becauſe Da is equal to aB, and ac common; 
3 therefore the two lines Þ 4, 4 e, are equal to the two lines BA, A c, and 
5 dhe baſe pe is equal to the baſe 5 * the angle pac is equal 
/ to the angle Bac; but the angle Þ ac is a Right angle, theretore 

- alfoBac is a Right angle. 

If therefore the ſquare of one ſide of a Triangle be equal to the 
{quares of the two remaining ſides of the Triangle, the angle con 
tained by the two remaining ſides of the Triangle is a Right angle. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This Propoſition is the Converſe of the precedent. And foraſmuch as here is 
er if the ſquare of ane fide be to the ſquares of the 
acher £09, then ſhall that be a Mie angled Triangle: wherefore to form a Right an- 
gled Triangle of Rational, aud Commenſura 

— 
— 
— —.⸗ꝰ8 

— — _ : 

Btu De 

| 

| 

— I Coo — 
2 + AS. & = 
—— ACA AS 
A > — * 2 . 

* . -- 

— 
3 

— 3 LEY 
"a 

—— 
i 4 * 8 — — =) = 4 * 
— ¶ - . —— — — . 
. awd AR — 
— Sefcegopgi —— 

<6 — — — > 

ſides, we are to find three ſtrait 
lines, 

ä—ͤ— — ——_- — 

— 
— — 

— 

—— 

d — — 

—— — — — 

OF GEOMETRY. 113 

lines, whoſe ver may be expreſſed in numbers of one, and the ſame meaſure 
common to all the three ſides; fo that alſo of thoſe numbers the ſquare of one ſhall 
be to the ſquares of the other two, that is, to find two ſquare numbers, 
which added together ſhall make a ſquare number according to this Problem. 

A Problem. 

From two given numbers to derive three numbers, whete the 
ſquare of one ſhall be equal to the ſquares of the other two. 

The Solution. 

Of the two given numbers the Su u of the ſquares; the DIF FERENOCE of 
the ſquares, and TwiCE THE RECTANGLE make a Right angl'd Triangle of 
Rational, and Commenſurable fades. 

In Species the Rule is thus ſet forth. Let the given numbers be A, and E: then 
ſhall Aq+Eg. Af Eg. 2 A into E make a Right angl'd Triangle of Rational, 
and Commenturable 

As to begin with 1 and 2. The ſquare of 1 is 1. The ſquare of 2 is 4. The ſum 
of the ſquares, 4 + 1 is 5. The difference of the ſquares 4— 1 is 3. The Rectangle 
is 1 multiply d into 2, which makes 2: and 2 twice taken is 4. So that the ſides of 
this Right angld ze. are 3, 4, . Where the {quare of 5 is 25, and equal to 
2 — ſquares 16, and 9, whoſe ſides are 4, and 3. This is the firſt Triangle of 

ort. 

Again, the ſecond is this. Let be given the numbers 2, and 3. Now the ſquare 
of 2 is 4. The ſquare of 3 is g. The ſum of the ſquares + 418 13. The difference 
of the ſquares 9 — 4 is 5. The Rectangle of 2 multiply d into 3 makes 6, which 
twice taken is 12. So that the ſides of this Right angl d Triangle are x, 12, 13. 
Where the ſquare of 13 is 16g, and equal to the two ſquares 144, and 25, whoſe 
fides are 12, and 5. | 

The third of theſe kind of Triangles, made from 3 and 4, is 7, 24, 25. The 
fourth from 4 and 5, is 9, 40, 41. e fifth from 5 and 6 is 11, 60, 61. and ſo 
forth infinitely. Where note, that in ſuch kind of Triangles the two greater fides 
ou ec by an unite ; and the ſum of theſe is always equal to the {quare of the 

83 THE 

114 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

1 

THE SECOND 

"ELEMENT. 

DEFINITIO NS. 2 
DEFINITION. I. x, 

E Right angl d Parallelogram is ſaid to be contained by any 
tuo of the ſtrait lines, which contain a Right angle. 

Altho' a Right angl'd Parallelogram be comprehend 
ſtrait lines, yet becauſe by Prop. 34. EL 1. the oppoſite 

encompaſſed by four 
.of Parallelogram are 

equal to one another, therefore any of the tyo ſid Meli. contain a Right angle, 
are ſaid to contain the whole Parallelogram. 1 > 7 
For AB being equal to DC, and Ay to B ier. | | Y 
A, or 

fore A B, and BC, or BC and CD, or CD, an | 

DA, and AB, are indifferently laid to contain the whole 

Right angl'd Parallelogram AB CD. EO | 
Obſerve alſo, that a Parallelogram ſpace is for bevity | 

fake, often noted by two oppoſite letters, as the Paral- | | 

lelogram AC, or DB; by either of which is ſignify d = PM hg a>" eas (a 

the Parallelogram A BCD. h | 

DEFINITION IL 

1 N every Parallelogram =. any one of the Parallelograms a- 
_ bout the Diameter, together with the two Complements, ſhall be 

called a Gnomon. 

What are Parallelogram ſpaces about the Diameter, and what are Complements, 

s before declared in Prop. 43. El. I. Now here, the two Complements with either 
of the Diagonal ſpaces, taken to- 

gether, are for brevity ſake, in one 1 
word, as a term of Art, called a "if 
GNOMON; as in the Parallelo- 88 

gram ſpace AD, the two Comple- N 
ments A G, GD, with any one of K 
the Parallelograms about the Dia- 

meter, either C G, or BG, are called 

the GRomon HLX. N MS. ra ihe 
* Becauſe this Second Element treats of the powers of ſtrait lines, and of the 
Section of ſtrait lines into ſeveral Segments, which are in power variouſly com- 

d to one another, it will be requiſite to add to Euclide theſe two following 

tions. 
DEFINITION III. 
The power of a ſtrait line is the ſquare of the ſame line. 

As on the line AB, let there be deſcribed the ſquare AB CD, then the ſquare 
ABCD is ſaid to be the power of the line AB. 

Geome- 

. OF GEOMETRY. TR 

Geometricians have with reaſc | PRE Sn 
8 uſe te ſquare ng pr 1 5 uſed the term Power, in this ſenſe, be- 
ralle 

pace that can be deſcri- C 
bed on one and the ſame line. For | 
produce the line AB, and put BEK - —F 
equal to AB; and on BE deſcribe | 
the Rhombus BEFG, 'tis mani 
that the Rhombus BEFG is l 
than the ſquare ABCD. For pro- K — 

ducing the line FG, to K, the Rhom- * 

bus BEFG is equal to the Rectangle AB HK [by Prop. 36. El. I.] which is 
Dr [by Prop. 36. ELL] which is 

| periFrion IV. 
The power of two ſtrait lines is the Rectangle contained by thoſe 
Ae Rectangle ABCD, contained by the lines AB, B C, is ſaid to be the 
power of the lines AB, BC. Becauſe here as before in a ſquare; the Rectangle is 

the greateſt Parallelogram ſpace that D 
can be comprehended by any two 

C 
and the ſame lines. For produce the i | | 
line AB, and put BE equal to AB, F 
and from the point Edraw E F equal |. 
to BC, and compleat the Parallelo- 
gram Figure; then by the ſame 
Prop. 36. El. I. the Rhomboides 
* 
8 

BE FG is —— to the Rectangle & 

AB HK, which is but a part of the Rectangle ABCD: yet the Rectangle AB C 
and the Rhomboides BE FG, are comprehended by the ſame, that is, by equ 
lines, for that B E is equal to AB, and EF to BC. Wherefore only the Rectangle 
AB Cb is ſaid to be the power of the lines AB, BC, | 

PROPOSITION I. 

F there be two trait lines, and one of them be cut into how 

many Segments ſoever, the Rectangle contained by the tuo ſtrait 
lines, is equal to the Rectangles contained by the undivided line, 
and the ſeveral Segments of the other line. 

Let there be two ſtrait lines a, Bc, and let 3 e be cut at adventure 
in the points p, E. I ſay, that the Rectangle contained by the lines 
A, BC, is equal to the Rectangles contained by 4, BD, and by 4, DE, 
and alſo by 4, Ec. * 8 

For from the point 8, let there be drawn 
BF, at right angles to Bc; and let 30 be 
put equal to 4 pro 3. I. ]: Then by the 
point 6 let GH be drawn parallel to nc. 

Again, by the points p, E, c, let there be 
drawn DK, EL, CH, els to BG. 

Now the Rectangle BH is equal to the 
Rectangles B; k, DL, EH; and BH is contain- 
ed by a, Bc, for it is contained by Gs, Bc, but GB is equal to 7 : 

gall, 

E S 

C K "© MN 

F A A 

116 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

Again, the Rectangle n; is contained by 4, BD, for it is contained 
by GB, BD, but GB is equal to 4. 3 D e 

Alſo the Rectangle DL is contained by WAY 
A,DE, for Dx, that is Bs, | Prop. 34. El. I. 
is equal to a. 

And in like manner the Rectangle E H 
is contained by 4, Ec. pl Fit: 5: 

Wherefore the Rectangle contained by '; 1 
A, B c, is equal to the Rectangles contained ck . 
by A, B D, and by 4, D E, and alſo by 4, Ec. " A 

Therefore if there be two ſtrait lines, and one of them be cut 
into how many Segments ſoever, the Rectangle contained by the 
two ſtrait lines, is equal to the Rectangles contained by the undi- 

vided line. and the ſeyeral Segments of the other line. Which was 
to be domonſtrated. 

PRO POSITION II. 

I F a ftrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangles contained by 

the whole line, and each of the Segments are equal to the ſquare 
the whole line. 

Let the ſtrait line a3 be cut at adventure in the point c. ; 

I fay, that the Rectangle contained by as, ac, together with the 
Rectangle contained by AB, Bc, is equal tothe ſquare of A B. 

For on the line as, let there be deſcribed the ſquare AD EB; 
and by c, draw cF parallel to either a D, or BE. 

Now AE is equal to AF, CE; but AE is the ſquare | 
of A B, and A F is the Rectangle contained by as, Ac; 
for it is contained by p A, Ac; but pA is equal to A B. 

Alſo c E is contained by A3, B c, for B; E is equal to 
AB; Wherefore the Rectangle contained by a B, ac, 
together with the Rectangle contained by a B, Bc, is 
equal to the ſquare of a3. D AF. 

Therefore if a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangles con- 
tained by the whole line, and each of the Segments are equal to 
the ſquare of the whole line. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION III. 

Fa ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangle contained by 
the whole, and one of the Segments is equal to the Rectangle con- 
tained by the Segments, and the ſquare of the foreſaid Segment. 

Let the ſtrait line as be cut at adventure in the point c. 
1 ay, that the Rectangle contained by as, Bc, is equal to the 
Rectangle contained by A e, e B;, together with the ſquare of c . 

For on the line en let there be deſcribed the ſquare DER, and 

produce 

— 

— 

OF GEOMET Rx. 117 
produce ED to F: Then by the point a, draw. | by Frops 31. El. I. 
AF, parallel to either c p, or BE. 

Now the Rectangle A E ĩs equal to the Rectangle A c 

AD, and the ſquare cz; and Ag is the Rectangle ] 

contained by A B, B c; for it 18 contained by 4k BE, 1 

but BE 1s equal to Bc. | | 
Again, à b is contained by a c, ca, for De is e? 

qual to cs; alſo p is the ſquare of on; wherefore — 

the Rectangle contained by AB, BC, is equal to the 6 

Rectangle contained by ac, cB, together with the ſquare of cn. 
Therefore if a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangle con- 

tained by the whole and one of the Segments, is equal to the Rect- 

angle contained by the Segments, and the _— of the foreſaid Seg- 
ment. Which was to be demonſtrated.  _ 

PROPOSITION IV. 

K a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the ſquare of the whole is 

equal to the ſquares of the Segments, and to the Rectangle twice 
contained by the Segments. 
Lt the ſtrait line a B be cut at adventure in the point c. 

I fay, that the ſquare of a is equal tothe ſquares of ac, c h, and 
to the Rectangle twice contained by Ac, . 

For, on the line 43 let there be deſcribed the 

ſquare ADEB, and draw the line BD.; Then bß WI 
the point c, let there be drawn parallel to either , b 
4b, or BE, the line cGF; and by the point . 

draw H k, parallel to a B, or op. | 
Now becauſe c + is parallel to 4 D, and there 
falls on them the line 3D, therefore the outward 
angle BG is equal to the inward and oppoſite ;- n 
BDA; but the angle BDa is equal to the angle AY 
DB 4, becauſe the ſide An is equal tothe fide ap | by Prop. 5. El. 1. }; 
wherefore alſo the angle cs; is equal to the angle cn, and there- 
fore the fide c B, is equal to the fide c | by Prop. 6. El. I.]; but c is 
equal to Gx, and cd to RR by Prop. 34. El. I.; there fore alſo G6 is 
equal to K, and the Parallelogram EB is Equilateral 
I ſay allo, that it is Rectangular. For becauſe cd is parallel to 8; x, 
and there falls on them the line cB, therefore the inward angles 
KBC,GCB, are equal to two right angles Prop. 29. El. 1. |. But the 
angle BC is a right angle | by Conſtruction |; wllarefrn the angle 
GCB is a right angle, and alſo the oppoſite angles cdx, GK B, are 
right angles | Prop. 34. El. I.]; wherefore the Parallelogram c 
is Rectangular. And it hath been proved to be Equilateral; there- 
fore CGKB is a ſquare, and it is deſcribed on the line cn. 
By the ſac reaſon alſo the Parallelogram NF is a ſquare, and it 
T 15 

FF 

—— —U—ä6ä᷑ - 

— — 
- * HS — n 

— — 
— 8 1 

LA WY 4 * - * 
P i ˙ü. ee Le LOR — 
. 8 
38 2 — — 
„ 

p _ 4 =P 3 
_- : 

* we Lene. 
— 
1 > 
= 

— 
2 TS... 
A — 2 

- 
— 
- — 

VE 
- 
— —ę 
1 * — 

118 THE SECOND ELEMENT 
is deſcribed on the line no, that is on ac; therefore H E, cx, are the 
ſquares of Ac, on, the Segments of the line 4B. _ 1 
Moreover, becauſe the Complement as is equal to the Comple- 
ment GE [by Prop. 43. El. I.], and A d is contained by the lines a c, 
cB, for that Gc is equal to cs; therefore alſo GE is equal to the 
Rectangle contained by ac, cB; wherefore 4 c, GE, are equal to the 

Rectangle twice contained by the lines A c, c: But alſo nr, c x, are 
the ſquares of ac, . 10 10 8 f | 

Therefore the four Parallelograms H, cx, Ad, GE, are equal to 

the ſquares of ac, cx, and to the Rectangle twice contained by A c, 

cB. But a ek, 40, GE, are the whole A DER, which is the ſquare 
of AB; Wherefore the ſquate of AB is equal to the ſquares of A c, c B, 
and to the Rectangle twice contained by Ac, cs. „ 
Therefore, if a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the ſquare of the 
whole is equal to the ſquares of the Segments, and to the Rectangle 
twice contained by the Segments. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Otherwiſe. 
I fay, that the ſquare of AB is equal to the ſquares of ac, cs, and 
to the Rectangle twice contained by Ac, e B. For in the ſame Figure, 
becauſe 4B is equal to Ap, therefore the angle as D, is equal to the 

angle aDB [Prop. 5. ELL |. And foraſmuch as the three angles of 

every Triangle are equal to two right angles 

Prop 32. El. L]; therefore of the Triangle ap, | — 
the three angles ABD, ADB, BAD, are equal to G 
two right. But the angle 34 is a right angle; * 

therefore the remaining angles ABD, ADB, are 
equal to one right angle, and they are alſo equal 
to one another; wherefore each of the angles 
ABD, ADB, is the half of a right angle. But the 5 . 
angle BcG is a right angle | Prop. 29. El. I.]; for T 
it is equal to the in ward and oppoſite angle at a; wherefore the re- 
maining angle cn is the half of a right angle; and therefore the 
angle con is equal to the angle cB6, and the fide e is equal to the 
ſide c | Prop. 6. El. I.]; but cn is equal to ex, and c to Bk | Prop. 
34. El. I.]; wherefore the Parallelogram cx is Equilateral. 
And becauſe the angles Bc, c BR, are right angles, therefore c is 
alſo a ſquare. And it is deſcribed on the line c B. US 
Likewiſe by the ſame reaſon, the Parallelogram + x is a fquare, 
and equal to the ſquare of ac; wherefore ax, cx, are ſquares, and 
equal to the ſquares of ac, cy. | 
Moreover, becauſe the Rectangle as is equal to the Rectangle 6 r 
Prop. 4 3. El. I.], and a6 is contained by the lines ac, cs, (for that 
cG is equal to cB) therefore alſo E is equal to the Rectangle con- 
tained by Ac, ch; wheretore aG, GE, are equal to the Rectangle 
el twice 

. OF GEOMETRY. 110 
twice contained by ac,cB; but alſo N E, cx, are equal to the ſquares 
of Ac, cB. 

Therefore H F, c k, Ac, GE, are equal to the ſquares of ac, cB, and 
to the Rectangle twice contained by ac, cs. But HE, c x, Ad, dE, are 
the whole A E, which is the ſquare of as; therefore the ſquare of 

AB is equal to the ſquares of ac, cs, and to the Rectangle twice 
contained by Ac, cB. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

| Corollaries. 
1. From hence tit manifeſt, that in Squares, the Parallelograms, which are about the 
Diameter, are alſo Squares. : | 
2. And if the fide of a Square be cut into halves, then the Complements are alſo 
Squares. And the Square of the whole line is quadruple to the Square of the halt. 

On the fourth Propoſition. 

This is a moſt remarkable Propoſition, and of excellent and various uſes: The 
Analyſis or Reſolution of a pare which, by Arithmeticians, is called the Ex- 
traction of the Square - root, wholly depends = it. But becaule all things are 
- reſolved into thoſe parts whereof they are at firſt conſtituted, it will be requiſite, 
to begin with the Geneſis or Conſtruction of every compound Square. 

The better to explain this matter, we ſhall apply to the Scheme of this fourth 
Propoſition, by the addition of E, making it A E: Then ſquare it, that is, draw 
A E into A E, thus, A4E 

ATE 
AY TAE 
＋AEN＋E7/ 

Aq+2AE+Eg 

This Geneſis of a Square exactly anſwers to Ezchd's Propoſition, and back again, 
by Analyſis, ſhews how the moſt ſimple diviſion of a Square muſt neceſſarily fall 
into theſe kinds of parts. But indeed Euciide begins with the ſquare it ſelf, and 
then reſolves it, by dividing it into any two parts, becauſe in magnitude, there is 
no Square ſingly the Firſt, as Unity is in Numbers, which anſwers to all Powers. 
And therefore dividing a line, on which a Square is deſcribed, into any two parts, 
he ſhews of what the molt ſimple that may be a Square can conſiſt. And ac- 
cordingly the practice of extracting the Square root anſwers to it. As for example. 

Every Square is encreaſed by the addition of twice the root for the Comple- 
ments, and 1 for the Diagonal Square, thus 2y + x, If there be put Ag, it is en- 
creaſed 2A + 1: So that Aq+2 A+, is the next Square. 

PROPOSITION V. 

F a ſtrait line be cut into two equal Segments, and tio unequal, 
1 the Rectangle contained by the unequal Segments of the aubole, 
together with the Square of the line between the Sections, is equal 
to the Square of half the line. 

Let the ſtrait line aB be cut into two equal Segments, at the 

int e, and into two unequal, at the point p. 

I ſay, that the Rectangle contained by 4b, bs, together with the 
ſquare of cp, is equal to the ſquare of cs. 

1 2 For 

120 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

For on the line c B, let there be deſcribed the ſquare c EP B, and 
draw the line BE. Then by the point p, let there be drawn parallel 
to either cx, or BF, the line DH, and by the point H, draw K M, 
parallel to c B, or EF. And again, by the point a, draw ax, parallel 
to CL, or B M. 

Now foraſmuch as the Complement *— 
CH is equal to the Complement Kr | ©.” 
Prop. 43. El. I.], let DM be added in 
common to both ; therefore the whole 
CM is equal to the whole v F. But c M is 
equal to AL, for that ac is | by Suppoſi- 
tion] equal to c: wherefore alſo aL is 
equal to pF. Add in common cH, therefore the whole AH is equal 
to D, DL. 

But A is the Rectangle contained by à p, p B, for that p E is e- 
qual to DB[ by Coroll. 1. Prop. 4. El. II.], and pF, DL, is the Gnomon 
N xo; therefore the Gnomon Nx o is equal to the Rectangle con- 
tained by Ap, DB. 

Again, add in common Le, which is equal to the ſquare of c; 
therefore the Gnomon N xo, and L. o, are equal to the Rectangle con- 
tained by Ab, D, and to the ſquare of cp. 

But the Gnomon N xo, and L 6, are the whole ſquare c EFB, which 
is deſcribed on the line cs; therefore the Rectangle contained by 
AD, DB, together with the ſquare of cp is equal to the ſquare of cs. 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut into two equal Segments, and two 
unequal, the Rectangle contained by the unequal Segments of the 
whole, together with the ſquare of the line between the Sections, is 
equal to the ſquare of half the line. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION VI. - 

F a ſtrait line be cut into t1o equal Segments, and to it be added 
1 another ſtrait line directly, the Rectangle contained by the whole 
with the adjuntt (as one line) and by the adjunct, together with 
the ſquare of the Half, is equal to the ſquare deſeribed on the half 

7 

and the adjuntt, as one line. 

Let the ſtrait line as be cut into two equal Segments at the 
point c, and to As, let Bp be added directly. I ſay, that the 

Rectangle contained by ap, on, together with the ſquare of cs is 
equal to the ſquare of cp. 

For on the line cp, let there be deſcribed the ſquare c EFD, and 
draw the line dz. Then by the point s, let there be drawn paral- 
lel to either cx or DF, the line 3H. And by the point u, draw 
KLM, parallel to A D, or EF: And alſo by the point a draw Ak, pa- 
rallel to c L, or D M. 

Now 

; OF GEOMETRY. >. 

Now foraſmuch as ac is equal to cs [ by Suppoſition |, therefore 
the Rectangle AL is equal to the Rectangle cn | by Prop. 36. El. 1. |. 
But c ; is equal to H | Prop. 4.3. El. I.]; wherefore 4 L is equal to 

HF. Let CM be added in common; therefore the whole AM, is 
equal to the Gnomon N xo. 

But AM is the Rectangle contained by A C B__D 
AD, DB, for that DM is equal to DB | by [| 
Corol. 1. Prop. 4. EL II. } wherefore the Gno- | — 1 

| M 
mon Nx o is equal to the Rectangle con- ; * 1 4 
tained by A D, D;. Ny 
Again, add in common La, which is e- l 
qual to the ſquare of cs; therefore the 
Rectangle contained by ap, DB, together with the ſquare of c B, is 
equal to the Gnomon N xo, and to the ſquare 1.6. 
But the Gnomon N xo, and L 6 are the whole ſquare c EFD, which 
is deſcribed on the line cp; therefore the Rectangle contained by 

Ab, DB, together with the ſquare of c B, is equal tothe ſquare of cp. 

E 1 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut into two equal Segments, and to 

it be added another ſtrait line directly, the Rectangle contained by 
the whole with the adjunct (as one line) and by the adjunct, toge- 
ther with the ſquare of the half, is equal to the ſquare deſcribed on 
the half and the adjunct, as one line. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PRO POSITION VII. 

F a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the ſquare of the whole, and 

the ſquare of one of the Segments, both theſe ſquares together 
are equal to the Rectangle twice contained by the whole, and the 
ſaid Segment, and alſo to the ſquare of the remaining Segment. 

Let the {trait line a B be cut ure in the point c. I ſay, 
that the ſquares of AB, Bc, o the Rectangle twice con. 
tained by as, Bc, and to the Iquare of ac. a A 

For on the line 4s, let there bedeſcribed the KIN 
ſquare ADE B, and let the Figure be conſtructed. - 2-5 —ů 1 

Now foraſmuch as aG is equal to GE Prop. Wy * 

43. El. I.) add in common cg: therefore the 1 

whole A is equal to the whole e: wherefore 
4 F, c E, are double to AF. But A P, e E, are the 
Gnomon k L M, and the ſquare c x; therefore the = XN 2% 
Gnomon KL M, and the ſquare cx, are double to AF. 

But the Rectangle twice contained by as, Bc, is double to aF, for 
BF is equal to Bc; therefore the Gnomon x LM, and the ſquare CF 
are equal to the Rectangle twice contained by a B, Bc. 

Again, let there be added in common HN, which is the ſquare of 
AC; therefore the Gnomon x LM, and the ſquares cF, H N, are equal 

T3 to 

2 2 
Ine 
- * 

2 2 

3 

mY 0 rn 

: —— 

"ont 7 4 

——_— * 
»” 
2 
5 E 

122 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

to the Rectangle twice contained by 4B, Bc, and to the ſquare of ac. 

But the Gnomon x LM, and the ſquares c E, HN, are the whole 
ADEB, and CF, which are the ſquares of a, Bc; therefore the ſquares 
of AB, B c, are equal to the Rectangle twice contained by as, Bc, to- 
gether with the ſquare of Ac. yy | | 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the ſquare of the 
whole, and the ſquare of one of the Segments, both theſe ſquares to- 
gether are equal to the Rectangle twice contained by the whole, 
and the ſaid Segment; and alſo to the ſquare of the remaining Seg- 
ment. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION VIII. 

I F a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangle four times con- 
tained by the whole, and one of the Segments, together with the 
ſquare of the other Segment, is equal to the ſquare deſcribed onthe 
whole, and the ſaid Segment, as one line. 

Let the ſtrait line as be cut at adventure in the point c. I ſay, 
that the Rectangle four times contained by AB, Bc, together with 
the ſquare of ac, is equal to the ſquare deſcribed on AB, Bc, as one 
line. 

For let the line AB; be produced directly to p, and let BD be put 
equal to cs; then on à p let there be deſcribed the ſquare AEF D, 
and let the double Figure be conſtructed. 

Now foraſmuch as CB is equal to By, but x c 
alſo cs is equal to d k, and BD to kx N | Prop. — 

34. El. 1.], therefore 6 is equal to x N. By the ,, M2 by, < 
ſame reaſon alſo p R 1s equal to Ro. th: a 

And becauſe cs is equal to B D, and Gk to x| EM [Ls 
KN, therefore the Rectangle cx is equal to 

the Rectangle xD; and GR to RN [Prop. 36. 
El. I. |. But cx is equal to RN (becauſe they | 12. — 

are the Complements of the Parallelogram 
co). wherefore alſo x Þ is equal to R: therefore the four Rectan- 
gles c k, k D, GR, RN, are equal to one another; and theſe four there- 
tore are quadruple to c k. 

Again, becauſe c is equal to BD, but alſo 3 is equal to px ¶ by 
Coroll. 1. Prop. 4. El. IT. | that is, to cs, | by Prop. 36. El. I.; and alſo 
becauſe cs is equal to 6k, that is, to 6 p[ by Corol. 1. Prop. 4. El. II. 
therefore c is equal to dp. 

And becauſe cd is equal to dp, and p R to Ro, therefore the Rect- 
ang AG is equal to the Rectangle Me, and PL to RF [by Prop. 36. 

But MP is equal to pL (becauſe they are the Complements of the 
Parallelogram ML); wherefore alſo a6 is equal to Rr. 

There- 

OF GEOMETRY. 113 

Therefore the four Rectangles a6, MP, PL, RE, are equal to one 
another; and theſe four therefore are quadruple to as. 

But the four Rectangles c k, k D, GR, RN, have been proved qua- 
druple to c k. | 

Wherefore the eight ReQangles which contain the Gnomon s Tv, 
are quadruple to the Rectangle A k. 
And becauſe ak is contained by AB, Bc, for xk is equal to B; o, that 
is to Bc, therefore the Rectangle four times contained by as, Bc, is 
quadruple to Ak. 

But the Gnomon s · rv hath been proved quadruple to ax; there- 

fore the Rectangle four times contained by as, Be, is equal to the 
Gnomon s Tv. | | 

Let there be added in common xn, which is equal to the ſquare 
of ac; wherefore the Rectangle four times contained by AB, c, to- 
gether with the ſquare of ac, is equal to the Gnomon s r , and xH. 

But the Gnomon s Ty, and x H are the whole ſquare at FD, which 
is deſcribed on the line a p; therefore the Rectangle four times con- 
tained by the lines as, Bc, together with the ſquare of ac, is equal 
to the ſquare of Ab, that is, to the ſquare deſcribed on as, Be, as 
one line. | 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut at adventure, the Rectangle four 
times contained by the whole, and one of the Segments, together 
with the ſquare of the other Segment, is equal to the ſquare de- 
ſcribed on the whole and the ſaid Segment, as one line. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. 

PRO POSITION IX. 
Fa ſtrait line be cut into two equal Segments, and tauo unequal, 
the ſquares of the unequal Segments of the whole line are double 
- — [quare of the half, and to the ſquare of the line between the 
ions. 1 | 

Let the ſtrait line as be cut into two equal Segments at the point 
c, and into two unequal, at the point D. I fay, that the ſquares of 
AD, DB, are double to the ſquares of ac, cp. 

For from the point c to the line as, let 7 
there be drawn at right angles cx, and let 
it be put equal to either ac, or ;; then 
draw AE, EB. And by the point p, let there 
be drawn, parallel to c E, the line DF, and 
alſo by the point x, draw FG parallel to AB. / — I N 
Then let there be drawn AF. 

Now foraſmuch as ac is equal to cx, therefore the angle x ac is 
equal to the angle arc. And becauſe the angle at e is a right angle, 
therefore the remaining angles AEC, EAc, are equal to one right 
angle | Prop. 32. El. I.], and they are equal to one another: _ 

ore 

G 

” 
— — 
4 1 
4 01 » 3 
= 2 - 
— — 
* A 6 
4 

— og 
r 9 
e 

— ad 
—— ry 

— 2 d 
* pete 
_ 1 2 
— — 

124 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

fore each of the angles A EC, EAc, is half of a right angle. 

By the ſame reaſon alſo each A dle BEC,E BC, 1s half of a 
right angle. 

Therefore the whole angle AEB is a 3 angle. | 

And foraſmuch as EE is half of a right angle, but EG is a right 
angle Prop. 29. El. I., (becauſe it is - 46; to the inward and op- 
polite ECB) therefore the remaining angle E Fe is alſo half — a 
right angle. 

Wherefore the angle EG is equal to E FG, and therefore the ſide 
E d, is equal to the fide g. Prop. 6. El. I.. | 41 

Again, foraſmuch as the angle at n is half 0 
of a right angle, and that FD8B is a right an- 
gle (becauſe it is equal to the inward and 
oppoſite E c ) therefore the remaining an- F 
gle BED, is alſo half of a right angle. rr 

Wherefore the angle at ; is equal to the 
angle DEB, ſo that alſo the fide P is equal to the fide DB (Prog. 6. 
El. I. |. 

Now becauſe ac is equal to cs, and ſo the ſquare of Ac is equal 
to the ſquare of cz, therefore the ſquares of ac, cx, are double to 
the ſquare of ac. But the ſquare of a is | Prop. 47. El. I. | equal to 
the ſquares of ac, cx | for Ac E is a right angle by Conſtruction ]; 
wherefore the ſquare of AE is double to the ſquare of Ac. 

Again, foraſmuch as EG is equal to ; and ſo the ſquare of k 
is equal to the ſquare of 6G; therefore the ſquares of EG, GF, are 
double to the ſquare of GF. But the ſquare of EF is equal to the 
ſquares of Ed, ; therefore the ſquare of E x is double tothe ſquare 
— 7 the = —_— — Ty 34. El. I; where- 

ore the eof BF is double to the ſquare 

But the Gnart of ak 1s double to the ſquare of i AC. 

Therefore the ſquares of a E, E x, are double to the ſquares of de, cp. 

But the ſquare of A is equal to the ſquares of az, E , [for arr 
15 right angle]; therefore the {quare of a is double to the quares 
of Ac, CD. 

But again, to the ſquare of AF are equal the ſquares of .aD, Dr, 
(for the angle at p is a right angle) therefore the ſquares of 4 D, 
D F, are double to the ſquares of Ac, cb. 

But DF is equal to DB, wherefore the ſquares of A v. on, are dou - 
ble to the ſquares of ac, cp. 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut into two equal Semen and two 
unequal, the ſquares of the unequal Segments of the whole line, are 
double to the ſquare of the half, and to the ſquare of the line de- 
tween the Sections. Which was to be damoniirated; 

LY 

18020 

OF GEOMETRY. its 
PROPOSITION X. 

Fa frait line be cut into two equal Segments, and to it be added 
another Strait line directiy, the ſquare of the whole, with the 
adjuntt (as one line) and the ſquare of the adjunt, theſe both toge- 

ther are double to the ſquare of the half, and to the ſquare deſcribed 
on the half, and the adjunct, as one line. 

Let the ſtrait line as be cut into two equal Segments, at the 
point c, and to A let BD be added directly. I ſay, that the ſquares 
of Ap, DB, are double to the ſquares of ac, cp. 

For from the point c to the line as, let there be drawn at right 
angles CE, and let it be put equal to either ac, or es; then draw 
AE, EB. And by the point let there be drawn, parallel to cp, the 
line E, and alſo by the point p, draw DF parallel to ch. Now be- 
cauſe there falls on the parallels E c, FD, the ſtrait line EF; therefore 
the inward angles c EE, EE D, are equal to two right angles; where- 
fore the angles FEB, EFD, are leſs than two right angles: but lines 
infinitely produced from angles leſs than two right do meet toge- 
ther; wherefore EB, FD, produced towards B,D ſhall meet. Let them 
be produced, and meet at the point d. Then draw aG6. 

Now foraſmuch as ac is equal tox, 2 
therefore the angle AE c is equal to _ 
the angle EAC. And the angle at c is | 
a right angle; wherefore each of the LS 
angles EAC, AEC, is half of a right angle. 

By the ſame reaſon alſo each of the © c No 

ys 

angles BEC, EBC, 1s half of a right 
angle. 

Therefore the whole angle AEB is a right angle. 

And foraſmuch as EBe is half of a right angle, therefore pyrG is 
alſo half of a right angle | Prop. 15. I.]; but BD is a right angle, 
becauſe it is equal to the alternate angle DE | Prop. 29. I.]; there- 
fore the remaining angle DGB is half of a right angle; where- 
fore DGB is equal to DBG. So that alſo the fide ; D is equal to the 
fide DG { Prop. 6.1. |. 

Again, foraſmuch as EGF is half of a right angle, and that the angle 
at F1s a right angle, becauſe it is equal to the oppoſite angle at c 
Prop. 34. El. I.]; therefore the remaining angle H is half of a 
right angle. Wherefore EGF is equal to EF; ſo that alſo the ſide 
GF is equal to the fide EF. 

Now becauſe fc is equal to ca; and ſo the ſquare of E c, to the 
ſquare of ca; therefore the ſquares of Ec, c a, are double to the 
ſquare of ca. But the ſquare of EA is equal to the ſquares of Ec, 

ca | Prop. 47.1. |. | | 

Therefore the ſquare of x a is double to the ſquare of ac. 

Again, 

Ig» 

— 
2 — y 

» 
en r min „ 0 
* n . 4 , „ 
8 — 0 * Re * 
n _ 
— ——_— 2 1 
— 
8 
A wy 

— 
8 n 
- * 

126 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

Again, foraſmuch as GF is equal to EF, and ſo the ſquare of o 
to the ſquare of E; therefore the ſquares of G F, E F, are double to 
the ſquare of EF. But the ſquare of EG is equal to the ſquares of 
6 E, EF. | 

Therefore the ſquare of E d is double to the ſquare of EF. But E 
is equal to c p; therefore the ſquare of E is double to the ſquare 
of cp. | 

But the ſquare of E A has been proved E F 
double to the ſquare of Ac. 

Therefore the ſquares of E A, Eo, are 
double to the ſquares of Ac, cp. 

But the ſquare of A d is equal to the "Daz 
{ſquares of E A, EG; wherefore the 8 
ſquare of A d is double to the ſquares | 
of Ac, CD. G 

But to the ſquare of a6 are equal the ſquares of AD, Do; there- 
fore the ſquares of a D, DG, are double to the ſquares of Ac, cp. 
But pd is equal to p; wherefore the ſquares of ap, DB, are 
double to the ſquares of A c, c Þ. . 

If therefore a ſtrait line be cut into two equal Segments, and to 
it be added another ſtrait line directly, the ſquare of the whole, 
with the adjunct (as one line) and the ſquare of the adjunct, theſe 
both together are double to the ſquare of the half, and to the ſquare 

deſcribed on the half and the adjunct, as one line. Which was to 
be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XI. 

| O cut a Strait line given, ſo that the Rectangle contained by 

the whole, and one of the Segments may be equal to the 
ſquare of the other Segment. 

Let the ſtrait line given be A B. It is required ſo to cut AB, that 
the Rectangle contained by the whole as, and one of the Segments 
may be equal to the ſquare of the other Segment. 

On 4B let there be deſcribed the ſquare 43D : 1 
and let ac be divided into two equal Segments at 
the point E, then draw BE: and let ca be produced 
tor, and E F be put equal to E B. Then on ax, let 
there be deſcribed the ſquare AF HH; and let dH 
be produced to x. 0 ds 

I fay, that as is cut in the point n, ſo that the 
Rectangle contained by the whole AB, and by the | 
Segment BH, is equal to the ſquare of à H, the other ;—; 9. 
ment. , 

For whereas the ſtrait line ac is cut into two equal Segments at 
the point E; and there is added to it A; therefore the Rectangle 

Con- 

B II 

OF GEOMETRY. 127 

contained by c E, FA, together with the ſquare of AE is equal to the 
ſquare of EF Prop. 6, EL. II. |. 

But EF is equal to EB; therefore the Rectangle contained by c x, 
FA, together with the ſquare of x a, is equal to the ſquare of EB. 

But to the ſquare of EB are equal the ſquares of BA, AE; for the 
angle at A is a right angle. 

Therefore the Rectangle contained by cx, FA, together with the 
ſquare of a E, is equal to the ſquares of B A, as. 

Let the common ſquare of AE be taken away. Therefore the re- 
maining Rectangle contained by c F, FA, is equal to the ſquare of as; 
and the Rectangle contained by c F, PA, is the Rectangle Fx (for ar 
is equal toFG) and alſo the ſquare of as is the ſquare Ap; there- 
fore FK is equal to 4D. 

Let the common Rectangle a « be taken away. Therefore the re- 
mainder H is equal to the remainder Hb. 

But Ho is the Rectangle contained by AB, BH (for as is equal to 
BD by Conſtruction), and FH 1s the ſquare of an. 

Therefore the Rectangle contained by as, BH, is equal to he 
ſquare of AH. 

Wherefore the ſtrait line given as, is cut in the point H, ſo that 
the Rectangle contained by the whole as, and by the Segment B R, is 
equal to the ſquare of the other Segment a H. Which was to be done. 

PRO POSITION XII. 

E Obtuſe angld Triangles, the ſquare of the /ide ſubtending the 
Obtuſe angle, is greater than the ſquares of the ſides containing 
the Obtuſe angle, by the Rectangle twice contained by one of the 
ſides about the Obtuſe angle, on which being produced a perpendi- 
cular falls; and by the line intercepted without, between the per- 
penaicular and the Obtuſe angle. 

Let AB e be an Obtuſe angld Triangle, having the Obtuſe angle 
BAC; and from the point 3; on the fide c a produced, let there be 
drawn the perpendicular BD. | 

I ſay, that the ſquare of 8c is greater than the ſquares of BA, ac, 
by the Rectangle twice contained by c a, a b. 

For becauſe c Þ is cut at adventure in the point 
A, therefore the ſquare of c Þ is equal to the ſquares 
of Ca, AD, and to the Rectangle twice contained 
by ca, AD [Prop. 4. EL II] Add in common the 
ſquare of DB; therefore the ſquares of cD, DB, are N 
equal to the ſquares of c a, A D, DB, and to the Rect- © F 
angle twice contained by c a, Ab. 

But to the ſquares of cÞ, DB, is equal the ſquare of cs (for the 
angle at p is a right angle), and to the ſquares of ap, DB, is equal 
the ſquare of as. 

B 

Uz There- 

128 THE SECOND ELEMENT 

Therefore the ſquare of cs is equal to the ſquares of c 4, as, and 
to the Rectangle twice contained by ca, Ab. 

So that the ſquare of cs is greater than the ſquares of ca, as, by 
the Rectangle twice contained by A. A D. 

Therefore in Obtuſe angl'd Triangles, the ſquare of the fide ſub- 
tending the Obtuſe angle, is greater than the ſquares of the ſides con- 
taining the Obtuſe angle, by the Rectangle twice contained by one 
of the fides about the Obtuſe angle, on which being produced a per- 
pendicular falls; and by the line intercepted without, between the 
perpendicular and the Obtuſe angle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XIII. 10 

1 N Acute angld Triangles the ſquare of the ſide ſubtending the 
Acute angle, is leſs than the ſquares of the ſides containing the 
Acute angle, by the Rectangle twice contained by one of the ſides 
about the Acute angle, on which a eee falls; and by the 
line intercepted within, between the perpendicular and the Acute 
angle. | 

Let aBc be an Acute angld Triangle, having an Acute angle at 
B; and from the point a, on the fide mc, let there be drawn the 
perpendicular AD. 

I ſay, that the ſquare of a c is leſs than the ſquares of c B, BA, by 
the Rectangle twice contained by c 3, BD. 

For becauſe on is cut at adventure in the point p, N 
therefore the ſquares of cB, BD, are equal to the : 
Rectangle twice contained by cs, BD, and to the 
ſquare of Dc | Prop. J. El. II.] Add in common 
the ſquare of ap. 

Therefore the ſquares of cB, BD, D 4, are equal : 
to the Rectangle twice contained by cs, BD, and V © 
to the ſquares of DA, Dc. | 

But to the ſquares of BD, Da, is equal the ſquare of as (for the 
angle at v is a right angle), and to the ſquares of DA, Dc, is equal 
the ſquare of Ac. | 

Therefore the ſquares of cs, BA, are equal to the ſquare of ac, 
and to the Rectangle twice contained by cs, BD. 

So that the ſingle ſquare of ac is leſs than the ſquares of cs, 34, 
by the Rectangle twice contained by cs, BD. 

Therefore in Acute angld Triangles the ſquare of the fide ſub- 
tending the Acute angle, 1s leſs than the ſquares of the ſides contain- 
ing the Acute angle, by the Rectangle twice contained by one of the 
ſides about the Acute angle, on which a perpendicular falls; and by 
the line intercepted within, between the perpendicular and the 
Acute angle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPO- 

£ = - ne, 
1 DP 4 FX Of * 2 is XN as / 
: Y £ , * I 1 # \ 26 o_ # 
"5 evet & * 9 * 4 N — 0 — — 3 
. - 9 * # 
* & 4 F 

| 

7 , „ A5 
1 
* 1 
— 1 ; p * 
hou 1 Pl — 

OF GEOMETRY. 19 

PROPOSITION XIV. 
T O conſtitute a ſquare equal to à right. lin d Figure given. 

Let the fight- lin d Figure be 4. It is required to conſtitute a 
ſquare equal to 4. 

By Prop. 45 El. I. let the Rectangled Parallelogram 8D be conſti- 
tuted equal to the right - lind Figure a. 

It therefore the line BE be equal to the line ED, then what was 
required is now done, for there is conſtituted the ſquare BD, equal 
to the right-lin d Figure 4. 

But if not, then one of the lines 
BE, E D, is the greater. Let BE be 
the greater; and let it be produced 3 
to F; and let EF be put equal 4 A 

11 

E D. Then let BF be cut into halves 
at the point q; and to the center 6, 
and the diſtance one of the lines Gs, . D 
G E, let there be deſcribed the Semi- 8 
circle BHF; and let DE be produced to n. Then let on be joyn d. 

Now foraſmuch as BF is cut into two equal Segments at d, and 
into two unequal at E,; therefore the Rectangle contained by BE, 
EF, together with the ſquare of o E, is equal to the ſquare of Gr 
Prop 5. El. II. |. But GF is equal to GH, therefore the Rectangle 
contained by BE, EF, together with the ſquare of dE, is equal to 
the ſquare of n. But to the ſquareof GH, are equal the ſquares of 
GE, EH, therefore the Rectangle contained by BE, EF, together with 
the ſquare of GE, is equal to the ſquares of GE, EH. Let the com- 
mon ſquare of E be taken away. Therefore the remaining Rect- 
angle contained by BE, E F, is equal to the ſquare of EH. But the 
Rectangle contained by BE, EF, is the Parallelogram BD, becauſe 
E F is equal to E b. | 

Therefore the Parallelogram BD is equal to the ſquare of k H. But 
the Parallelogram BD is equal to the right lin d Figure a; wherefore 
the right-lind Figure a, is equal to the ſquare of E R. 

Therefore there is conſtituted a ſquare deſcribed on E x equal to a, 
the right-lin'd Figure given. Which was to be done. 

U 3 THE 

136 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

THE THIRD 

E LEMEN T. 

DEFINITIONS. 

DEFINITION I. 

Qual Circles are ſuch, whoſe Diameters are equal; or, whoſe 
lines from the Center are equal. 
DEFINITION II. 

Strait line is ſaid to touch a Circle, 
which meeting a Circle, and being pro- 
duced, cuts not the Circle. 

DEFINITION III. 

Ircles are ſaid to touch one another, © 
which meeting together, do not cut one another. 

DEFINITION IV. 

N a Circle ſtrait lines are ſaid to be equally diſtant from the 
Center, when the perpendiculars drawn from the 
Center to the ſame lines are e 
And that line is ſaid to be more diſtant; on which 
the greater perpendicular falls. 

DEFINITION V. 
Segment of a Circle is a Figure c omprebended by a ſtrait 

line, and the circumference of the Gn Circle. N 
The frait line is called the raed, the Segment. 8 
| DEFINITION VI. 

N angle of a Segment is that which is con- 
eines by a ftrait line, and the circumference N the TA 

DEFINITION VII. 

N angle in a Segment is when in the circumfe- AN 
rence 6. a Segment ſhall be taken a point, and i 

from that point to the ends of the line, which is W—/ 
baſe of the Segment, ſhall be drawn ſtrait lines : it is 

the angle — by thoſe ſame lines. 

n 

DEFI- 

OF GEOMETRY. tir 
DEFINITION VIII. 
A NA when the &rait lines containining the angle do aſſume a 
circumference, the angle is ſaid to inſiſt upon that circumference. 

DEFINITION IX. 

Sector of a Circle is a Figure, which, when an 

angle ſhall be ſtated at the center of the Circle; 

10 comprehended by the ſtrait lines containing that an. 
le, * by the circumference aſſumed under the ſame 

DEFINITION X. 
I. Ike Segments of Circles are ſuch, which receive equal angles. Or 

in which the angles are equal to one racy 6 
That is, if the Segments of two Circles 54 
ſed like, or jo proved, then we are to allow 6 

gles in thoſe Segments to be equal. Or ard. 

the angles be ſuppoſed, or proved equal, then we bw RS 

to allow the Segments to be like to one another. 

PROPOSITION I. 
T O find the center of a given Circle. 

Let the given Circle be ac. It is required of the Circle a 2c, to 
find the center. 

Let in the Circle be drawn at adventure any ſtrait line as aB; 
and let it be cut into halves in the point v; and from p draw D 
at right angles to 4B, and produce it to E. Then . 
let cx be cut into halves in F. 1 ſay, thepoint Fr 
is the center of the Circle AB c. For if not: let 

it, if poſſible, be the point G ; and let dA, D, GB, 

8 
be j joyn d. Now foraſmuch as AD is equal to p {ou 
and Da is common; therefore there are the two & be 
lines 4 D, DG, equal to the two lines DB, DG, each — 5 

to each, and the baſe dA is equal to the baſe d B, 
for they are from the center d; wherefore the angle aps is equal 
to the * GDB [Prop. 8. El. I.] But when a ſtrait line ſtanding 
upon a ſtrait line, makes the angles on each ſide equal to one ano- 
ther, each of the equal angles is a right angle; therefore dp is a 
right angle. But alſo g 08 is a right angle | by Conſtruction]; there- 
fore PDE is equal to GDB, the greater to the leſs, which is impoſ- 
fible. Wherefore d is not the center of the Circle anc. And in like 
manner may we prove that no other point can be beſides x. 
Therefore the point p is the center of the Circle AaBc. Which 
was to be done. 
Corol- 

* — = 
r 2 mh o_ 2 * —— — — —— r * — — m— — — — — _ r 
* _= * 
. _ 4 n - — « — an ow * 2 — 
» » — 4 * vel. p yu * _— 1 . —— 5 1 * WY. * 22 . 2 7 om» —— 92 5 9 K - 1 nm #1 — * 5 - 
— E ad —— — K . * % + * > l 
- 4 — — — Pu - - —— 
* * w > 4 * — 4— — * - — — — — — 
— 
2 
8 4 1 83 = — — 
0 — —_ — a by P * — — 
_ — 
— - * * - — - — - - — _ 
—— — __ — — — - — 5 -—- — — 3 — 1 _ - = * Ts — — — 2 
— = 

Wy. — 
— 
- _ Mo : A — — 

a«__ TEES 2 

5 — 
3 ů —— 
— — — 
— 

—— ↄͤ— — — 

4 . - — * 
—— 
_ — TR 

. 
Q 

132 THE THIRD ELEMENT 
Corollary. 

From hence it is manifeſt, that if in a Circle a ſtrait line cuts @ ſtrait line into halves; 
and at right angles; the center of the Circle ts in the cutting line. 

PROPOSITION IL 

| 15 in the circumference of a Circle any two points be taken, the 

rait line joyning the ſame points ſhall fall within the Circle. 
Let the Circle be A Bc, and in the circumference thereof let be 
taken any two points 4, B. I ſay, that the ſtrait line drawn from 4 
to p falls within the Circle. For if not: let it, if poſſible, fall with- 
out, as AEB, and let the center of the Circle A Bc be taken, and let 
it be v. Then let aD,Ds, be joyn d, and let DF be produced to g. 
Now foraſmuch asD a is equal to DB, therefore c 
the angle p AE is equal to the angle DBx | Prop. 
5. El. I.]. And becauſe of the Triangle Dax, one . 
ſide A EB is produced; therefore the angle 1 

is greater than the angle paz | Prop. 16. El. I. * 
But the angle DA E is equal to the angle DBE 

BY 
Prop. 5. El. I.]; therefore DEB is greater than FL — 
D * But l the greater angle is ſubtended — 2 
the greater fide | Prop. 19. El. I.]; therefore Bp e 
is greater than DE. But DB is equal to DF, wherefore pF is greater 
than px, the leſs than the greater, which is impoſſible; therefore 
the ſtrait line drawn from a to B, ſhall not fall without the Circle. 
In like manner we may ſhew that it ſhall not fall upon the circum- 
ference : therefore it ſhall fall within. 

If therefore in the circumference of a Circle any two points be 
taken, the ſtrait line joyning the ſame points ſhall fall within the 
Circle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION III. 

1 F in a Circle a trait line drawn through the center cuts a ftrait 
ine not drawn through the center into hatves; it ſhall alſo cut 

the ſame at right angles. And if it cuts it at right angles, it ſhall 
alſo cut the ſame into halves. | 

Let the Circle be ac, and in the ſame let the ſtrait line co, 
drawn through the center, cut the ſtrait line a ;; not drawn through 
the center, into halves in the point x. I fay, that it alſo cuts the 
ſame at right angles. Let the center of the Circle ac be taken, 
and let it be x, and let E a, EB, be joyn d. Now becauſe Ag is equal 
to FB | by Suppoſition], and PE is common; therefore two to two 
are equal, and the baſe E A is equal to the baſe E B; wherefore the 
angle AF E is equal to the angle Br | Prop. 8. El. I.] But when a 
ſtrait line ſtanding upon a ſtrait line, makes the angles on each fide 

equal 

OF GEOMETRY. 145 

equal to one another, each of the equal angles 1s a right angle; 
wherefore each of the angles AF E, BF E, is a right angle. Therefore 
ep drawn through the Center cutting a B not drawn through the 
Center into halves, does alſo cut it at right angles. 

But again, let the ſtrait line cp cut the ſtrait £ 
line 4B at right angles. I fay, that it alſo cuts the 
ſame into halves: which is, that A; is equal to ( 

FB. For the ſame conſtruction being made, be- "bs 
cauſe in the Triangle EA B, EA, a line from the Ne 
Center is equal to ER; therefore the angle EA is . 
equal to the angle EBF Prop. 5. El. I.]; but e e 
the right angle A FE is equal to the right angle 5 
BFE: therefore there are the Triangles E FA, E F B, having two an- 
gles equal to two angles, and one ſide equal to one ſide, namely 
EF common to both, which ſubtends one of the equal angles: 
Therefore they ſhall have the remaining ſides equal to the remain- 
ing ſides | Prop. 26. El. I.]; wherefore A F is equal to BF. 

If therefore in a circle a ſtrait line drawn through the Center cuts 
a ſtrait line not drawn through the Center into halves; it ſhall alſo 
cut the ſame at right angles. And if it cuts it at right angles, it ſhall 
alſo cut it into halyes. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION IV. 

F in a circle two ſtrait lines not drawn through the center, cut 
one another, they ſhall not cut one another into halves. 

Let the circle be anc, and in the ſame let the ſtrait lines Ac, BD, 
not drawn through the Center, cut one another in the point E. I 
ſay, they do not cut one another into halves; ſo 
that AE be equal to xc, and BE to ED. Let the 
Center of the circle a BcD be taken, and be it E, 
and let EF be joyn d. Now foraſmuch as the - F 
ſtrait line Fx drawn through the Center, cuts a 
the ſtrait line ac not drawn through the Cen- 
ter into halves, it ſhall alſo cut the ſame at right 
angles | Prop. 3. EL III.]; therefore p EA is a 
right angle. Again, becauſe FE cuts the ſtrait line 3 p not drawn 
through the Center into halves; it ſhall alſo cut the ſame at right 
angles; therefore FEB is a right angle. But it has been proved, 
that F EA is a right angle; therefore F EA is equal to FEB; the leſs 
to the greater, which is impoſſible; wherefore ac, B; D, do not cut 
one another into halves. 

If therefore in a circle two ſtrait lines not drawn through the 
Center, cut one another, they ſhall not cut one another into halves. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

X PROPO. 

C 

e 

r 
11 

134. THE THIRD ELEMENT 
PROPOSITION. V. 

F tus circles cut one another, they ſhall not have the ſame 
Center. 

Let the two circles 4B c, cp d, cut one another in the points B, c. 
I fay, they have not the ſame Center. For, if poſſible, let E be the 
Center, and let Ee be joyn d; alſo let EG C | 
be drawn at adventure. Now becauſe E is 
the Center of the circle aBc, therefore x c 
is equal to E F. Again, becauſe E is the Cen- 
ter of the circle cp a, therefor Ec is equal © 
to EG. But it has been proveu, that xc is 
equal to EF; therefore EE is equal to Eo; 
the leſs to the greater, which is impoſſible. F 
Therefore the point E is not the Center of the circles AB c, c DG. 

Wherefore if two circles cut one another, they ſhall not have the 
ſame Center. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION VI. 

1 F two circles touch one another within, they ſhall not have the 
ſame Center. | | 

Let the two circles aBc, DE, touch one another within in the 
point c. I ſay, they have not the ſame Center. For if poſſible, let 
the Center be x, and let rc be joyned: alſo let c 
FEB be drawn at adventure. Now foraſmuch 
as E is the Center of the circle anc, therefore 
FC is equal to FB, Again, becauſe F is the Cen- 
ter of the circle ep E, therefore Fc is equal to PE. 

But it has been proved that xc is equal to FB; 
therefore FE is equal to EB; the leſs to the great- B 
er, which is impoſſible. Therefore the point F 3 
is not the Center of the circles AB e, c DE. 

Wherefore if two circles touch one another within, they ſhall 
not have the ſame Center. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION VII. 

F in the Diameter of a circle be taken any point, which is not 

the Center of the circle; and from that point do fall upon the 
carcle any ſtrait lines : the greateſt ſhall be that, in which the Cen- 
ter is; and the remaining part ſball be the leaf. Of the others the 
nearer to the line through the Center, is always greater than the 
more remote. 2 

Aud two only equal lines can from the ſame point fall upon the 
circle, on each 5 of the leaſt line. 2 TG 

: Let the circle be AB c o, and the Diameter thereof be 4 D, an 

din 

AD, 

OF GEOMETRY. 135 

A D, let be taken any point as E, which is not the center of the Circle. 
But let the center of the Circle be E; and from + let the ſtrait lines 
F B, FC, FG, fall upon the circbe ABCD. 

I fay, that the greateſt is FA, and the leaſt rp: Of the others rs is 
greater than Fc, and rc than Fd. For let BE, c E, GE be joynd. 

Now becauſe two ſides of every Triangle are greater than the re- 

maining fide | Prop. 20. El. I.]; therefore B; E, E F, are greater than 
FB; but AE is equal to B; E, therefore B; E, E F, are equal to AF; there- 
fore AF is greater than BF. Again, becauſe 
BE is equal to c E, and FE common, there- 
fore there are the two lines B; E, E F, equal to 

A 1 

he two lines c E, EF. But the angle BE F is 
'reater than the angle EF, therefore the 
aſe BF, is greater than the baſe cx | Prop. 
14. El. I.] And by the ſame reaſon ct is 
reater than FG. Again, becauſe G E, FE, 

greater than EG and EG is equal to ED; 
tlerefore GE, FE, are greater than E D. Let 
E] common be taken away, therefore the re- 

ining line d F, is greater than the remaining line ꝑ D; Wherefore 
F AIS the greateſt line, and FD the leaſt: And F is greater than xc, 
we than FG. 

lay alſo, that from the point x, two only equal lines can fall 
up the Circle a Bc, on each fide of the leaſt line FD. 

For to the line E F, and to the point x in the ſame, let be conſti- 
tutdl the angle Fx H, equal to the angle F | Prop. 23. El. I., and 
let n be drawn. Foraſmuch then as GE is equal to E, and E 
common; therefore there are the two lines dE, EE, equal to the 
two Ines HE, Æ F, and the angle EF is equal to the angle HE: 
therefore the baſe G is equal to the baſe EH Prop 4. El. I. 

I ſay, now, that from the point F there cannot fall upon the Circle 
any other line equal to F d. 

For if poſſible, let F fo fall, and becauſe Fx is equal to r, 

FH is equal to FG; therefore k is equal to FH: The nearer to the 
line through the Center, equal to the more remote: which is im- 
poſſible. | | 

Or alſo thus. Let Ek be joyn d, and becauſe dE is equal to E x, 
FE common, and the baſe dF equal to the baſe Fx; therefore the 
angle GEF is equal to the angle x EF. But the angle GEF is equal 
to the angle HE F; therefore the angle HE F is equal to the angle 
k EF: The leis to the greater, which is impoſſible. Wherefore from 
the point F any other line cannot fall upon the Circle equal to Fo; 
therefore one only. 

If therefore in the Diameter of a Circle be taken any point, &c. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

11 PR O- 

— — 
— »- 

. 99 
* - — 
. . ___wwwuwu ww . 
i SE 888 — 

— _ — 

8 1 
—  — 
— — 
— 

— EP: . 
— — 
by. 

—— 

136 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION VIII. 

F without a Circle be taken any point, and from that point be 
drawn to the Circle any ſtrait lines, of which one 15 through the 
Center, and the ref at adventure. Of thoſe that fall upon the 
Concave circumference, the greateſt is that through the Center. Of 
the others the nearer to the line through the Center, ſhall be al- 
mays greater than the more remote. 

But of thoſe lines which fall upon the Convex circumference, the 
leaſt is that between the point and the Diameter. Of the other, 
the nearer to the least line, is always leſs than the more remote 

And tino only equal lines can from that point fall upon the Circle 
on each ſide of the lea} line. 

Let the Circle be AB c, and without the Circle anc let be take 
any point as D, and from the ſame let be drawn to the Circle tk 
ſtrait lines DA, D E, D P, Dc, and let pA be through the Center. 

I fay, that of thoſe which fall upon A E xc, the Concaye cr- 
cumference, the greateſt is p a, the line through the Center. Ad 
always the nearer to the line through the AD 
Center ſhall be greater than the more re- 
mote; that is Dx, than p ;, and DF, than Dc. 

hut of thoſe lines which fall upon HL Kk d, 
the convex circumference the leaſt is DG, be- 
tween the point p and the Diameter as. And 
the nearer to p the leaſt line, is always leſs 97 

than the more remote; that is, D k than DL, FS 

and DL than H. > 
Let the Center of the Circle AB e be taken, c E 

and be it , and let be joyned ME, MF, Mc, \/ 

Mk, MIL, MH. Now foraſmuch as AM is equal, / 
to ME, let MD common be added; therefore 

AD is Equal to EM, MD. But EM, MD, are YE N 
greater than x D Prop. 20. El. Ih therefore A 

AD is alſo greater than xD. Again, becauſe ME is equal to MF, 
and MD common, therefore E M, MD, are equal to FM, MD, and the 
angle E MD, is greater than the angle F MD; therefore the baſe ED 

is greater than the baſe rp | Prop. 24. El. I.] And in like manner 
may we prove, that FD is greater than cp. Therefore pA is the 

greateſt, and DE is greater than DF, and DF than Dc. 
And again, becauſe Mx, Kk p, are greater than MD, and M6 is equal 
to Mk; therefore the remaining line xo, is greater than the remain- 
ing line 6D, ſo that dp is leſs than x p, therefore G p is the leaſt. 
And becauſe of the Triangle ML», upon one of the fides Mp are con- 
ſtituted within the ſame Triangle two ſtrait lines Mx, k D; there- 
fore MK, KD, are leſs than ML, LD | Prop. 21. El. I.]; of which Mx 

15 

OF GEOMETRY. t35 

is equal to ML; therefore the remaining line Dx, is leſs than the 
remaining line DL. In like manner we may ſhow that DL is leſs 
than DH; therefore DG is the leaſt: and PK is leſs than pL, and pL 
than DH. 

I fay alſo that two only equal lines can from the point Þ fall 
upon the Circle on each fide of the leaſt line p G. 

For to the line MD, and in it to the point u, let be conſtituted 
the angle DM B, equal to the angle K MD, and let DB be joyned. Now 
becauſe MK is equal to MB, and MD common; therefore there are 
the two lines K M, MD, equal to the two lines BM, MD, each to each, 
and the angle k MD is equal to the angle 3M D; therefore the baſe 
DK is equal to the baſe ps | Prop. 4. El. I.] 

I fay now, that from the point p there cannot fall upon the Cir- 
cle any other line equal to Dx. 

For if poſſible let a line ſo fall, and be it D x. Now foraſmuch as 
DK is equal to DN, and DK is equal to DB; therefore DB is equal to 
DN: The nearer to DG the leaſt, equal to the more remote, which 
has been proved to be impoſſible. 

Or otherwiſe, let Mx be joyned: and becauſe £ M is equal to MN, 
and MD common, and the baſe p x is equal to the baſe p x, therefore 
the angle KMD 1s equal to the angle DMN | Prop. 8. El. I.]; but the 
angle KMD is equal to the angle ;D; therefore the angle 3M Þ is 
equal to the angle x MD: the leſs to the greater, which is impoſſi- 
ble. Wherefore not more than two equal ſtrait lines can from the 
point v fall upon the Circle aBc,.on each fide of the leaſt line p G. 

If therefore without a Circle be taken any point, &e. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION IX. 

1 F within a Circle be taken any point, and from that point do fall 
upon the Circle more than two equal ſtrait — 4 , that point 
taken'ss the Center of the Circle. 

Let the Circle be a Bc, and within the ſame the point be D: and 
from p let upon the Circle ac fall more than 
two equal ſtrait lines, as D A, D B, Dc. I ſay, that 
the point p is the Center of the Circle a Bc. 
For let AB, Bc, be joyned, and be cut into, 
halves at the points E, F. And p E, p F, being 
Joyned, let them be produced to the points 6, 
k; H, I. Now foraſmuch as A E is equal to EB, 
and ED common; therefore there are the two 
lines AE, ED, equal to the two lines BE, ED, 
and the baſe Þ a is equal to the baſe pz (by Suppoſition); * 
the angle AE D is equal to the angle 3·ED: wherefore each of the an- 
gles A E D, BE D, is a right angle; n k cutting A into * 

3 oes 

F 
Avis 

_— — * D 
— Pe 
* J wn.” 0 

TS 
_— 

ah 5 
. Ian 5 or 2222 
2 — — —— — — — 

9 
— I 
ot , 
"A 1 — 
— 2 — 

Jo 
— — Fg 
— —— 

— 
—— - 

> 
— — 

* 8 - . - 
_- - — — ” 
> _ - F” mms 

— 

— — 
* 
DDr 
— X N 0 —2 
* «·˙¾ — 

S 

: — — — 3 g - 
\ * — 0 

be od, and pc greater than Ds, and DB than 

11. El. I.] and produce them to 4, E. 

138 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

does alſo cut it at right angles. And becauſe if in a Circle a ſtrait 
line cuts a ſtrait line into halves, and at right angles, the center of 
the Circle is in the cutting line; therefore in the line Gk is the cen- 
ter of the Circle ac | by Coroll. Prop. I. El. III. |. And by the ſame 
reaſon alſo the center of the Circle a Bc, is in the line yt. But the 
lines Gk, HL, have no other common point than p; therefore the 
point Þ is the center of the Circle AB c. 
If therefore in a Circle be taken any point, &c. Which was to be 
demonſtrated. | 
Otherwiſe. 

For within the Circle ac let be taken any point as D: and from 

o let upon the Circle ac, fall more than two equal ſtrait lines, as 

DA, DB, Dc. I ſay, that p the point taken is the center of the Circle 
ABC, For if not; let it, if poſſible, be E, and pz being joyned, let it 
be produced to the points F, d; then the 
line Fd is the Diameter of the Circle ABc. 
Now foraſmuch as in FG the Diameter of 
the Circle AB c, is taken a point p, which is 
not the center of the Circle, the greateſt ſhall x 

Da [Prop. 7. El. III.] But they are alſo e- 0 
qual, which 1s impoſſible: Therefore E is Fr 
not the center of the Circle apc. In like B 

manner may we prove, that no other point can be the center befides 
D: therefore Þ is the center of the Circle ABc. | 

PROPOSITION X. 
"A Circle does not cut a Circle in more points than tuo. 

For if it be poſſible let the Circle a nc, cut the Circle DEF in more 
points than two, as, B, d, F, , and BG, BH, being joyned, let them be 
cut into halves in the points x, L, and - fs; | 
from x, L, to the lines BG, BH, let be 
drawn at right angles xc, LM, | Prop. 

Now becauſe in the Circle AB e, the 

{trait line Ac cuts the ſtrait line 3 H in- TE 
to halves, and allo at right angles;there- 
fore in Ac is the center of the circle asc 
Corol. Prop. I. El. III.] Again, becauſe 
in the ſame Circle AB c, the ſtrait line 1 330 
Nx cuts the ſtrait line 8G into halves, and alſo at right angles; there- 
fore in Nx is the center of the Circle a c. But it has been proved 
to be alſo in ac, and in no other point doe the ſtrait lines ac, Nx, 
agree than in o: therefore the point o is the center of the Circle 

A BC, 

OF GEOMETRY. 129 

ABC. In like manner may we prove, that o is the center of the 
Circle DEF. Therefore of two Circles cutting one another, there is 
the ſame center o, which is impoſſible | Prop. 5. El. III.] 

Therefore a Circle does not cut a Circle in more points than two. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Otherwiſe. 

Let again the Circle anc cut the Circle DEH in more points than 
two, as, B, d, F. H, and of the Circle AB e let the ceater be taken, as 
K, and let KB.KG, KF, be joyned. Now A 

becauſe within the Circle DEF, is taken 1 
the point x, and from x do tall upon te 
Circle DEE, more than two equal ſtrait 
lines, namely, KB. K G, k F; therefore the 

int k is the center of the Circle DEF 
fProp. 9. El. III.]; but K is alfo the center 
of the Circle ABC: wherefore of two 
Circles cutting one another, there is the 

ſame center k; which is impoſlible. Therefore a Circle does not 

cut a Circle in more points than two. Which was to be demon- 
ſtrated. 

G 

PROPOSITION XI. 

F two Circles touch one another within, and the centers of the 

ſame be taken, the ſtrau line joyning their centers being 
duced, ſhall fall upon the Contact Fs he Circles. "_ 

Let the two Circles arc, 4D R, touch one another within in the 
point 4a. And of the Circle a Bc, let be taken the center F: alſo of 
the Circle A DE, the center's. I ſay, that the ſtrait line drawn from 
G to F, being produced falls upon the point a. For if not, let it, if 
pany + fall as d p R, and let A F, 40 be joyned. 

ow foraſmuch as 4 c, o F, are greater than a, 
that is, than PH (for E A is equal to FH, both be- 
ing from the center) let FH common be taken 
away; therefore the remaining line A d is great- 
er than the remaining line d H. But 40 is equal 
to GD, therefore 6D is greater than GH; the leſs 
than the greater, which is impoſſible. Where- 
fore the ferait line drawn from r to 6 being produced, does not fall 
beſide the point of Contact a, therefore it muſt fall upon it. 

If therefore two Circles touch one another within, and the cen- 
ters of the ſame be taken, the ſtrait line joy ning their centers being 
produced does fall upon the Contact of the Circles. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. 

Otherwiſe. 

- 1 5 — _ * _ 1 wy — _ — — " — - 17 ip * 2 — - Y 
; 2 2 od o 0 — TY p e 8 © ers oe, his 8 * Iz * — 1 — > - - 
—_—_— * : — — — =" _ — 2 — 2 
- — * — Sz i ATR . 4 > 0 1 — 
4 , - : : — 
1— — = - * — — —„— — 545 8 * — —— — — — _ £ 0 - - — —4 - 
lA. PF þ ä ai 2 
— 2 * — * _ — 
* * „ dl — — _ 

- - — — » . . a - = . - - 2 — — 

2 , 8 a — : - * 2 * _ 2 — OE 2 — 

— — 338 3 — OTE LR — 

140 THE THIRD. ELEMENT 
ut Otherwiſe. 

But let it fall as op e, and produce directly c yd to the point n; and 

let Ad, AF, be joyned. Now foraſmuch as as, A | 
GF, are greater than ar, and AF is equal to Fc, 
that is, to FH, let FG common be taken away; 
therefore the remaining line as, is greater than 
the remaining line GH, that is, 6D greater than 
GH; the leſs than the greater, which is impoſ- 
fible. In like manner may we prove the ſame 
abſurdity, if the center of the greater Circle 
be without the leſs. | 

PROPOSITION XIL 

F two Circles touch one another without, the frait line joyning 
1 their centers ſhall paſs through the Contact. 

Let the two Circles a Bc, ADE, touch one another without in the 
point a. And of the Circle AB c, let the center p be taken: alſo of 
the Circle Ap E the center 6. I ſay, that the ſtrait line drawn from 
E to 6, ſhall paſs through the Contact in 4. 
For if not, let it, if poſſible, paſs as Fd, 
and let AF, A0, be joyned. Now for- 
aſmuch as the point F is the center of the 
Circle AB e; therefore x a is equal to Fc. 
Again, becauſe the point 6G is the center 
of the Circle Ap E, therefore G 4 is equal to 6D. But it has been 
proved, that FA is equal to Fc, therefore PA, as, are equal to xc, 
DG. So that the whole FG is greater than FA, 40; but it is leſs 
[ Prop. 20. El. I.], which is impoſſible. Therefore the ſtrait line 
drawn from g to 6, cannot paſs otherways but through the Contact 
in a: wherefore it paſſes through the Contact. 

If therefore two Circles touch one another without, the ſtrait 

line joyning their centers ſhall paſs through the Contact. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. | 

PROPOSITION XIII. 
Circle touches not a Circle in more points than one, whether 
it touches within or without. 

For if it be poſſible, let the Circle a ; De, touch the Circle EBD, 
firſt within, in more points than one, as in x, D. And of the Circle 
ABDC, let the center d be taken: alſo of the Circle x B?d the cen- 
ter NH; wherefore the ſtrait line drawn from d to n, ſhall fall upon 
the points B,D [Prop. 11, EL III.] Let it fall as 30 H D. Now for- 
aſmuch as the point d is the center of the Circle AB De, therefore 
BG is equal to p; wherefore BG is greater than ; D, and Ba much 

greater than HD. Again, becauſe the point n is the center of the 
Circle 

9 

OF GEOMETRY. rat 

Circle EBFD, therefore pH is equal to n D. But it has been proved 
to be much greater, which is impoſſible; therefore a Circle touches 
not a Circle within, in more points than one. 
I fay alſo that neither without. For if poſſible, let the Circle 
ACK touch the Circle az Dc without, in K 
more points than one, as in a, e: and let ac 
be joyned. Now foraſmuch as in the cir- 284 
cumference of each of the Circles A B Dc, — 
ACK, are taken any two points 4a, e; the 
ſtrait line A c joyning the ſame points ſhall 
fall within each of the Circles by Pr. 2. El. 
III. z; but Ac falling within the Circle Ae, » 
mult fall without the Circle A ck; which 
is abſurd, (viz. to fall within and without 
the ſame Circle a ck:) therefore a Circle 
touches not a Circle without, in more 2 
points than one. And it has been proved that it touches not within. 
Therefore a Cirele touches not a Circle in more points than one, 
whether it touches within, or without. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XIV. 

Ke a Circle equal ſtrait lines are equally diſtant from the cen- 
ter. And lines equally diſtaut from the center, are equal to 
one another. 

Let a Circle be AB De, and in the ſame let the equal ſtrait lines be 
AB, CD. I ſay, that or are equally diſtant from the center. For 
of the Circle A Beo let the center be taken, and be it E; then from 
E let be drawn to as, ep, the perpendiculars E F, Ed, and let ax, cx, 
be joyned. Now foraſmuchas the ſtrait line EF 
drawn through the center, cuts the ſtrait line 
AB not drawn through the center, at right an- 
gles, it alſo cuts the ſame into halves | Prop. 3. 
ELIII, } wherefore 4F is equal to FB; therefore 
AB is the double of a F. And by the ſame reaſon 
alſo co is the double of c d. But A3 is equal to p 
by Suppoſition |], therefore 45 is equal to co 

Ax. .] And becauſe AE is „e to E e, therefore the ſquare of ar 
is alſo equal to the ſquare of x c. But the ſquares of A , FE, are 
equal to the ſquare of AE | Prop. 47. El. I.]: for the angle at 5 is a 
right angle. But alſo the ſquares of E d, dc, are equal to the ſquare 
Ec; for the angle at 6 is a right angle. Therefore the ſquares of 
AF, FE, are equal to the ſquares of cs, GE, of which the ſquare of 
AF is equal to the ſquare of c; for the line AF is equal to the line 
c: Therefore the remaining ſquare of FE, is equal to the remain- 
ing ſquare of E; therefore E F is W to E d. But in a Circle _ 

| nes 

© 

— 

F 

5 mm PR . 
— a | E 
ä = * 7 - 
- 7 * 
8 
— 
”-_- as —— = 
— — > — — — - . 2 ” = 

142 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

lines are ſaid to be equally diſtant from the center, when the per- 
pendiculars drawn from the center to the ſame lines are equal [ Def. 
4. El. III.]; therefore as, c p, are equally diſtant from the center. 

But now let the lines à B, e p, be equally diſtant from the center, 
that is, let EF be equal to EG. I ſay, that 4B is alſo equal to cp. 
For the ſame conſtruction being made, we ſhall : 
in like manner prove that as is the double of 
AF, and cD the double of cs. And becauſe ax 
is equal to Ex c, therefore the ſquare of A E is alſo. 
equal to the ſquare of E c. But the ſquares of xx, 
FA, are equal to the ſquare of 48, and the 
ſquares of E G, G c, are equal to the ſquare oſ xc. 
Therefore the ſquares of E F, E A, arè equal to the 
ſquares of Eo, 6c, of which the {quare of E d is equal to the ſquare 
of EF, for EF is equal to Es; and therefore the remaining ſquare 
of A F, is equal to the remaining ſquare of c: wherefore a is equal 
A to c. But AB is the double of ax, and e the double of ca; where- 
fore AB is equal to c Ax. 6. 

Therefore in a Circle equal ſtrait lines are equally diſtant from the 
center. And lines equally diſtant from the center, are equal to one 
another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PRO POSITION XV. 

N a Circle the greateſt line is the Diameter. And of the others, 
always the nearer to the center is greater than the more remote. 

| | Let the Circle be AB op, and the Diameter thereof be Ab, and the 
center E. Now to the center E let Bc be nearer, and FG more re- 
mote. I ſay, that Ap is the greateſt, and Be greater than F. Let 
from the center be drawn to Bc, Fe, the perpendiculars E, Ek. 
| Now becauſe Bc is nearer to the center, and 
FG more remote, therefore E k is greater than 
EH | Def. 5. El. III.] Let EL. be put equal to 
EH, and through L, let LM be drawn at right 
angles to Ek, and produced to N: then let be 
joyned EM, EN, E, EG. Now foraſmuch as E H 
is equal to E1., therefore Bc is equal to MN 
Prop. 14+ |. Again, becauſe ax is equal to EM, 
and DE to EN, therefore Ap is equal to ME, 5 
EN; but ME, EN, are greater than MN | Prop. 20. El. 15 therefore 
AD is greater than MN, but MN is equal tog e, therefore Ab is 
greater than Bc. And becauſe the two lines Mx, EN, are equal to 
the two lines FE, Ed, and the angle MEN is greater than the angle 
FEG, therefore the baſe MN is greater than the baſe x 6 [Prop. 24. 
El. I. J. But MN has been proved equal to Bc, wherefore 8c is greater 
than Fo. The greateſt therefore is ap the Diameter, and BC is 
greater than FG. There- 

OF GEOMETRY. 14.3. 
Therefore in a Circle the greateſt line is the Diameter. And of 

the others, always the nearer to the center 1s greater than the more 
remote. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XVI. 

Strait line drawn at right angles to the Diameter of a Circle, 
from an extremity thereof ſhall fall without the Circle: Aud 
in the place between the ſtrait Ine and the circumference, an other 
ſtrait line ſhall not fall. 

And the angle of the Semicarcle is greater than any Acute /trait- 
lin d angle; and the remaining angle is leſs. 

Let the Circle be AB e about the center b, and the Diameter be 
AB. I fay, that the ſtrait line drawn at right angles to An from the 
point 4 the extremity of the Diameter, ſhall fall without the Circle. 
For if not, let it, if poſſible, fall within as ac, and let pc be joy ned. 
Now foraſmuch as Da 1s equal to pc, 
therefore the angle DA c is equal to the IMs 1 
angle acp | Prop. 5. El. I.. But pac is N. 
a right angle | by Suppoſit ion], therefore Pg e 
ACD is alſo a right angle, where ore pac, 2 
Ac D, are equal to two right angles, which 0 | ” OTROS: | 
is impoſſible [Prop. 17. El. I.] There- - 1 
fore a ſtrait line drawn from the point 

A at right angles to a8, ſhall not fall | 
within the Circle. In like manner we 
may ſhew that it ſhall not fall upon the 

circumference; therefore it mult fall without, as ar. 

I fay, that in the place between the ſtrait line ax, and the circum- 
ference CHA, another ſtrait line ſhall not fall. For if poſſible, let it all 
as F aA, and from the point p to the line x a, let be drawn the perpen- 
dicular DG. Now becauſe 46D is a right angle, and pA is leſs than 
a right angle; therefore Ap is greater than DG | Prop. 19. El. I.. But 
DA is equal to DH, therefore DH is greater than DG, the le!s than 
the greater, which is impoſſible. Therefore in the place between 
the ſtrait line and the circumference, another ſtrait line ſhall not fall, 

I fay moreover, that the angle of the Semicircle, which is con- 
tained by the ſtrait line za, and the circumference Ma, is greater 
than any Acute ſtrait-lind angle; and the remaining angle con- 
tained by the circumference Ha, and the ſtrait line a H, is leſs than 
any Acute ſtrait- lin d angle. For if there be any Acute ſtrait- lind 
angle greater than the angle contained by the ſtrait line pa, and 
the circumference c HA, and any other leſs than the angle contained 
by the circumference c Ha; and the ſtrait line a r, then in the place 
between the circumference cH a and the ſtrait line Ak, ſhall fall a 
ſtrait line, which ſhall make one ſtrait-lind angle greater than the 

"TS angle 

14. THE THIRD ELEMENT 

angle contained by the ſtrait line Ba, and the circumference c Ha, 
and another ſtrait-lind angle leſs than the angle contained by the 
circumference CH Aa and the ftrait line A E. But ſuch a line cannot 
fall; therefore there ſhall not be any Acute ſtrait- lin d angle greater 
than the angle contained by the ſtrait line B; A, and the circumference 
CHA, nor any leſs than the angle contained by the circumference 
cHa and the ſtrait line AE. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollary. 

From hence it 1s manifeſt, that a ſtrait line drawn at right angles to the Diameter of a 
Circle, from the extremity thereof doth touch the Circle [ Def. 2.). And that a ſtrait line 
touches a Circle in one point only: Becauſe a ſtrait line concurring with a Circle in two 
points, has been proved to fall within the ſame [ Prop. 2.] 

PROPOSITION XVIL 

Rom a given point to draw a Strait line, which ſhall touch a 
F given Circle. 

Let the given point be a, and the given Circle cp. It is required 
from the point 4, to draw a ſtrait line which ſhall touch the Circle 
BCD. Let the center of the Circle be taken as E, and draw AE; then 

the center E and diſtance x a, let the Circle a F be deſcribed; and 
from the point Þ to the line EA, let pr be drawn 
at right angles, and let EBF, and AB be joyn- 
ed. I fay, that from the point 4, is drawn the 
line AB, which touches the Circle 3c D. Now 
foraſmuch as E is the center of the Circles 3e p, 
AFG, therefore EA is equal to EF, and ED to 
EB. There are then the two lines A E, E B, equal 
to the two lines FE, ED, and they contain a 
common angle at x; wherefore the baſe Dx is 
equal to the baſe as, and the Triangle p EF equal to the Triangle 
BEA, and the remaining angles to the remaining angles; therefore 
the angle EB A is equal to the angle ED: but eDF is a right angle, 
therefore EBA is aHo right; and EB is from the center. But what 
is drawn at right angles to the Diameter of a Circle from an extre- 
mity thereof does touch the Circle: Wherefore AB does touch the 
Circle. 
Therefore from the given point a is drawn a ſtrait line as, touch- 
ing the given Circle zcp. Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION XVIII. LOVER 

IH ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the center be drawn a 

ſtrait line to the Contact, that line ſball be perpendicular to the 
Tangent. „ tt | | 

Let the ſtrait line ye touch the Circle AB c in the point e; and 

of the Circle AB c, let the center g be taken; then from 5 to e let 

| | be 

— 

OF/ GEOMETRY. 14.5 

be drawn Fc. I fay, that xc is perpendicular to E. For if not; 

let from the point E, be drawn F perpendicular to DE. Now be- 
cauſe the angle FG is a right angle, there- A 

fore G6 CF is an acute angle | Prop. 32. El. I.] 
But under the greater angle is ſubtended 
the greater ſide | Prop. 19. El. I. |; therefore 
FC 1s greater than FG; but Fc 1s equal to 
FB, therefore FB is greater than FG; the 
leſs than the greater, which is impoſſible. 
Therefore Fd is not perpendicular to o. CG 1 
In like manner may we prove, that no other line can be beſides 
Fc; therefore Fc is perpendicular to DF. 
If therefore a ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the center be 

drawn a {trait line to the Contact, That is perpendicular to the Tan- 
gent. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XIX. 

Fa ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the Contact be drawn 

2 grait line at right angles to the Tangent, the Center of the 
Circle ſhall be in the ſame line. 

Let the ſtrait line Dx” touch the Circle a Bc, in the point c, and 
from c let c be drawn at right angles to DE. I ſay, that the cen- 
ter of the Circle is in the line c a. For if not, let it, if poſſible, be 
F, and let cF be joyned. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line DE 
touches the Circle anc, and from the center 
is drawn to the Contact the line Fc: where- 
fore xc is perpendicular to pt | Prop. 18. El. | 
III.]; and therefore F cx.15 a right angle; but | 
ACE is alſo a right angle [by Suppoſition ]; | 
wherefore FE is equal to ACE; the leſs to the A 

| 

greater, which is impoſſible. Therefore x is 
not the center of the Circle apc. And in like | 
manner may we prove, that no other can be E 
beſides a point in AC. | | 
If therefore a ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the Contact 
be drawn a ſtrait line at right angles to the Tangent, the center of 
the Circle ſhall be in the ſame line. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

"PROPOSITION XX. 

] Na Circle, the angle at the center is double to the angle at the 
circumference, when the angles have the ſame circumference 

for their baſe. | 
Let the Circle be ane, the angle at the center 3, and at 
the circumference 3a c; and * them have the ſame circumference 
* BC 

B is equal to the angles E AB, EBA [Prop. 

146 THE THIRD ELEMENT 
8c for their baſe. I ſay, that the angle BEC is double to the angle 
BAC. For drawing the line ax, let it be produced to F. Now for- 
aſmuch as EA is equal to EB, therefore the angle E AB, is equal to 

the angle EBA Prop. 5. El. I.]: wherefore the angles E AB, EBA, 
are double to the angle EA B. But the angle | 

22. EL I. |: therefore the angle B; E, is double 
to the angle E AB. By the ſame reaſon alſo 
the angle FE is double to the angle EAc; ö | 
therefore the whole angle BE c, is double to "Ns | 
the whole angle Bac. Again, let the angle oy 
at the circumference be declined beyond the | | 
center E, and let it be 3D c: then drawing DoE, 
let it be produced to G. In like manner may ; 
we prove, that the angle GE is double to the angle Dc; of 
which angles GER is double to GDB: wherefore the remaining an- 
gle BE c, is double to the remaining angle Dc. 

Therefore in a Circle, the angle at the center 1s double to the an- 

gle at the circumference, when the angles have the ſame circumfe- 
rence for their baſe. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXL 

TN a Circle angles in the ſame Segment are equal to one ano- 
Her. 

Let the Circle be AB cD, and in the Segment B; AE p, let the angles 

be BAD, BED. I ſay, that the angles BaD, BED, are equal to one 
another. For let the center of the Circle be 

A 
taken, and be it F; and let BF, FD, be joyned. N 
Now foraſmuch as the angle B FD 1s at the cen- * 
D 

ter, and the angle 3A D at the circumference, and 

they have the ſame circumference for a baſe 3; c p; 

therefore the angle 35D 1s double to the angle 

BAD | Prop. 20 El. III.]. By the ſame reaſon the » 

angle 3 FD is alſo double to the angle x D; there- S 
fore the angle BAD is equal to the angle BzD [ Ax.7. ] 

Therefore in a Circle angles in the fame Segment are equal to 
one another. Which was to be demonſtrate. 

© PROPOSITION XXI. 
F four ſided Figures in Circles, the oppoſite angles are equal 

to two rigbt. 

Let the Circle be AB; cp, ind in the ſame the four ſided Figure be 
ABCD. I lay, that the oppoſite angles are equal to two right angles. 
Let Ac, BD, be joyned. Now 'foraſmuch as, of every Triangle the 
three angles are equal to two Right | Prop. 32. EL I. |; therefore of 

3a | | the 

OF GEOMETRY. 147 

the Triangle A 8c, the three angles CAB, AB, Be A, are equal to two 
Right. But the angle cas, is equal to the angle BD c, for they are 
in the ſame Segment BaDc. And the angle 

ACB is equal to the angle a 0s, for they are in 
the ſame Segment ADB. Therefore the whole 7 0 
angle A Dc, is equal to the angles Bac, Ach; | g's 
let the common angle arc be added; there- | „ 
fore the angles AB c, Bac, ACB, are equal to A 
the angles aBc, aDCc. But the angles ABC, + 
BAC, ACB, are equal to two Right: therefore 
ABC, ADC, are alſo equal to two Right. In like 

manner may we prove that BAD, Den, are alſo equal to two Right 
angles. 

Therefore of four ſided Figures in Circles, the oppoſite angles are 
equal to two Right angles. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXIII. 

1 Pon the ſame rait line tuo Segments of Circles hke, and un- 
J equal, cannot be conſtituted the ſame ay. 

For if poſſible, upon the ſame ſtrait line as let two like, and un- 
equal Segments of Circles a cB, ADB, be conſtituted the ſame way: 

then let apc be drawn, and c B, BD, be joyned. 
Now foraſmuch as the Segment acBis like to 9 
the Segment AD; and like Segments of Circles A 
are ſuch, which receive equal angles Def. 1 I. El. | 
III. ]; therefore the angle 4 CB, is equal to the 
angle A DB; the outward to the inward, which is impoſſible. 

Therefore upon the ſame ſtrait line two Segments of Circles 
like, and unequal, cannot be conſtituted the ſame way. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. . 

PROPOSITION XXIV. 

Pon equal ſtrait liues like Fes of Circles, are equal to 
one another. 

For upon equal ſtrait lines AB, op, let like Segments of ale be 
AE8K,,CFD. I ſay, that the Segment AE B, is equal 
to the Segment FD. For the Segment AEB 0 
apply d to the Segment D, and the point 4 . 
upon the point c, and the line as upon op; then 
ſhall the point n agree with the point p; for that 
AB is equal to cp. Now the ſtrait line a B agreeing 5 ee 
with the ſtrait line co, the Segment AE E ſhall uo: ng 
agree with the Segment c D. For if a s ſhall agree 21 
with op, and the Segment a EE ſhallnot agree with [11 
the Segment ce ep, then ſhall it differ from ED as 3 
chop. But a Circle cuts not a Circle in more points than two, yet 

here 

C 

. 

148 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

here the Circle c Hop, cuts the Circle c g o, in more points than two, 
namely in c, 6, D, which is impoſſible | Prop. 10. EL III.]. Where- 
fore the ſtrait line 4B, agreeing with the ſtrait line co, the Segment 
AEB cannot diſagree with the Segment cFD: wherefore it ſhall a- 
gree, and be equal to it. 

Therefore upon equal ſtrait lines like Segments of Circles, are 
equal to one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXV. 
nt of a Circle being given to deſcribe unto it the Circle, 
A , which it is a Segment. 

Let the given Segment of a Circle be asc. It is required to de- 
ſcribe unto it the Circle of which asc is a Segment. Let ac be cut 
into halves in p, and from the point p let DB be drawn at right 
angles to ac, and let A; be joyned. Now then the angle 4B P is 
either greater than the angle BAD, or equal to it, or leſs. Firſt, let 
it be greater, and to the ſtrait line B; A, and to the point a in the ſame, 
let the angle 3A E be conſtituted equal to the angle 43D Prop. 23. 
El. I.], and let BD be produced to E, and Ec be joyned. Now foraſ- 
much as the angle A B E, is equal to the angle B; AE; 
therefore the ſtrait line ER is equal to the ſtrait 
line EA And becauſe A p is equal to Pe, and DE N 
common, therefore there are the two lines 4 D, £1 
DE, equal to the two lines cp, DE, each to each, 

and the angle ADE is equal to the angle c D E, 
for each of them is a right angle; therefore the 
baſe EA is equal to the baſe E c. But it has been 

proved, that E A is equal to EB, therefore EB is 
alſo equal to E c, wherefore the three lines E A, 
E B, EC, are equal to one another; therefore the 
center E, and diſtance any one of the lines x a, 
E B, E ca Circle being deſcribed ſhall paſs through 
the other points, and the Circle ſhall be deſcribed 
to the given Segment. Therefore a Segment of + D 8 
a Circle being given, there is deſcribed unto it the Circle of which 
it is a Segment. And it is manifeſt that the Segment apc is leſs 
than a Semicircle, for that E the center of the ſame falls without. 
In like manner if the angle 43 D, be equal to the angle 3A Db, and 
ſo Ap be equal to either of the lines BD, pc; therefore the three 
lines Ap, DB, De, are equal to one another, and p ſhall be the cen- 

ter of the compleated Circle; and the Segment Ac ſhall be a 
Semicircle. b 

But if the angle an, be leſs than the angle B AD, and tothe line 
BA, and to the point a in the fame an angle be conſtituted equal 
to ABD; the center {hall fall within the Segment a Bc, and in the 

1 line 

C 

OF GEOMETRY. 149 

line Bp; and the Segment ſhall be greater than a Semicircle. 
Therefore a Segment of a Circle being given there is deſcribed 
unto it, the Circle, of whichit is a Segment. Which was to be done: 

PROPOSITION XXVI. 

N equal Circles, equal angles imſiſt upon equal circumferenices, 
whether the inſigting angles be at the centers, or at the circum- 
ferences. 

Let the equal Circles be 4B c, DEF, and in the ſame let the equal 
angles at the centers be 3c, HP, and the circumferences u C,EDF. 
T fay,, that the circumference Bxc, is equal to the circumference 
ELF. For let Bc, E F, be joyned. Now foraſmuch as the Circles as c, 
DE F, are equal; therefore the lines A 
from the centers are equal: where- 
fore there are the two lines 3d, dc, 
equal to the two lines EH, HF, and 
the angle at G is equal to che angle 
at H: therefore the baſe Be is equal 1 c 
to the baſe EFI Prop. 4. EL 1. ]. And 
becauſe the angle at A is equal to the angle at D, tiecefare the 
Segment BA is like to the Segment xD: and they are upon equal 
{trait lines Bc, EF. But upon equal ſtrait lines like Segments of 
Circles are equal to one another TProp. 24. El. III.]; therefore the 
Segment BAc, is equal to the Segment EDF. But alſo the whole 
Circle anc, is equal to the whole Circle pz x; wherefore the re- 
maining Segment B; Kc, is equal to the remaining Segment E L F, and 
therefore the circumference 8 Kc, is equal to the circumference ELF. 

Wherefore in equal Circles, equal angles inſiſt upon equal circum- 
ferences, whether the inſiſting angles be at the centers, or at the cir- 
cumferences. Which was to be demonſtrated. . 

PROPOSITION XVII. 

Fe equal Circles, angles inſiſting u . equal circumſerences are 
equal to one another; whether the inſiſting angles be at 1 
centers, or at the circumferences. 

For in the equal Circles a Bc, DEF, and upon the equal circumifs 
rences BC, EF; let inſiſt the angles 86 c, EH F, at the centers q, ; and 
at the circumferences the angles A D 
BAC, EDF. I fay, that the angle 
BGCis equal to the angle EH F, _ 
the al BAC, to the angle EDF. 
For If the angle z c be equal to 
the angle E HF, t is manifeſt that »\_ 
alſo the angle 8 Ac, is equal to the 
angle EDF Prop. 20.EL III. |. But if * one of them is the . 

t 

150 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

Let the greater be 3G c; and tothe line BG, and in the ſame to the 

int 6, let be conſtituted the angle 3k equal to the angle EH 
Prop 23. EI. I.]. But equal angles inſiſt upon equal circumferences, 
when they are at the center | Prop. 26. El. III. ] therefore the circum- 
ference BK is equal to the circum- 8 

A 
ference EF. But EF is equal to Bc 
by Suppoſition |; therefore alſo Bx 
is equal to Bc; the leſs to the great- 
er, which is impoſſible; wherefore 
the angle BGc, is not unequal to B 2 
the angle EHF; therefore it is e- 

qual. Now the angle at a is the half of the angle Bec, and the an- 
vie at v half of the angle EHF Prop. 20. El. III.]; wherefore the an- 
gle at a is equal to the angle at D [ Ax. 7. |. 

Therefore in equal Circles, angles which inſiſt upon equal circum- 
ferences are equal to one another, whether the inſiſting angles be 

at the centers, or at the circumferences. Which was to be de- 
monſtrated. | 

PROPOSITION XXVIIL 

N equal Circles equal ſtrait lines take off equal circumferences, 
the greater equal to the greater, the leſs to the leſs. 

Let the equal Circles be 4B c, DE; and in the ſame let the equal 
ſtrait lines be Bc, EF, taking off the greater circumferences s Ac, 
EDF, and the leſs BGc, EHF. I fay, that zac the greater circum- 
ference, is equal to EDF the greater circumference, and 3D the 
leſs circumference, is equal to EH the leſs, For 
let the centers of the Circles be taken k, L; and 
let be joyned k B, KC; L E, LF. Now foraſmuch as 
the Circles are equal, therefore the lines from the | 
centers are equal. There are then the two lines 
BK, KC, equal to the two lines E L, LF, and the baſe 
c equal to the baſe xy; therefore the angle 3x 
is equal to the angle ELF Prop. 8. El. I.. Now 
equal angles inſiſt upon equal circumferences when 
they are at the centers Prop. 26. El. III.]: where- 
fore the circumference 3 dc, is equal to the circum- 
ference EHF. But alſo the whole Circle anc, is = 
equal to the whole Circle pz x; wherefore the re- 
maining circumference Bac, is equal to the remaining 
rence EDF. Wm e Es 
Therefore in equal Circles equal ſtrait lines take off equal cir- 
cumferences, the greater equal to the greater, the leſs to the leſs. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 8 * "4 

PROPO- 

* 

OF GEOMETRY. 
PROPOSITION XXIX. 
* equal Circles, under equal circumferences are ſubtended equal 
trait lines. 
Let the equal Circles be A Bc, DEF, and in the ſame let be taken 

equal circumferences 30 c, EHF: and let be joyned the ſtrait lines 
BC, EF. I ſay, that Bc is equal to 

A D 
EF. Let the centers of the Circles 
be taken k, L, and let be joyned 
KB,KC; LE, LF. Now foraſmuch 
as the circumference BG c, is equal \ ; 
E 1 
ö . 

151 

to the circumference EH: there- 
fore the angle BK c, is equal to the 
angle ELF | Prop. 27. El. III. And becauſe the Circles AB c, DEE, 
are equal, therefore the lines from the centers are equal. There are 
then the two lines BK, xc, equal to the two lines EL, LF, and they 
contain equal angles, wherefore the baſe Bc, is equal to the baſe E x 
Prop. 4 El. 1. |. 

Therefore in equal Circles, under equal circumferences are ſub- 
tended equal ſtrait lines. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXX. 
O cut a given circumference into halves. 

Let the given circumference be Ap; it is required to cut the 
circumference Ap into halves. Let az be joyned, and cut into 
halves in the point e, and from the point c to the line as, let be 
drawn at right angles c p, and let be joyned aD, DB. Now foraſmuch 

as AC is equal to c B, and c D common : therefore 

there are the two lines ac, e p, equal to the two 

lines 8c, CD, and the angle Ac p equal to the an- AM 
gle BCD, for each of them is a right angle; K 

therefore the baſe 4p is equal to the baſe vn [ Prop. 4. El. I.]. Now 
equal ſtrait lines take off equal circumferences, the greater to the 
greater, the leſs to the leſs (Prop. 28. El. III.]; and each of the cir- 
cumferences AD, DB, is leſs than a Semicircle; wherefore the cir- 
cumference AD is equal to the circumference Þ s. 
Therefore the given circumference 1s cut into halves. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. 
PROPOSITION XXXI. 

Na Circle the angle in the Semicircle is a right angle. But the 

angle in the greater Segment is leſs than a right: And the angle 

in the leſs Segment i greater than a right angle. And moreover 

the angle of the greater Segment is greater than a right angle: and 
the angle of the leſs Segment is leſs than a right angle. 

Let the Circle be ABD, and W thereof be Bc, and 

2 the 

Rs — —— — — « 
” 2 — 8 
- — — — ” — ” 
Nec, = — — — — 2 * — 

— Bn — _ 2 

— 
— 
— 

92 = * * —— — — 
rr —————— , 
— , 
> a — * — -_- S — 9 — — 
* — „ 
— — 
2 4 
— - — — — 
— — 

3 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

the center E. Then taking any point in the circumference as a, let 
be joyned BA, Ac, AD, DC. I ſay, that the angle in the Semicircle 
BAC is a right angle: And the angle in the Segment aBc greater 
than the Semicircle, namely, the angle apc is leis than a right 
angle: And the angle in the Segment apc leſs than the Semicircl-, 
namely, the angle aDc is greater than a right angle. Let AE be 
joyned, and Ba be produced to F. Now foraſmuch as B E ts equal 
to Ea, therefore the angle EAB is equal to the angle EBA Prop. 5. 
El. I.. Again, becauſe EA is equal to Ec, therefore the angle act 
1s equal to the angle AE: wherefore the whole angle B Ac is equal 
to the two angles AB c, Ac 3. But the angle FA c without the Tri- 
angle AB c, is alſo equal to the two angles AB c, acs | Prop. 32. 
El. I.]; wherefore the angle 34 c is equal to the angle F ac, each 
therefore of them is a right angle [Def. 10. El. I.] Therefore in the 
Semicircle Bac the angle cas is a right angle. 

And becauſe of the Triangle AB c the two an- F 
gles ABC, BAC, are leſs than two right Prop. 17. 

El. I. |, and BAC is a right angle; therefore the D 
angle AB e is leſs than a right angle: and it is in 
the Segment a Bc greater than the Semicircle. 3 K 0 

And becauſe in a Circle the Figure AB cÞ is qua- 
drilateral, and of quadrilateral Figures in Circles, 
the oppoſite angles are equal to two right angles 
Prop. 22. EL III.] Therefore the angles a Bc, AD c, are equal to two 
right angles, and AB c is leſs than a right angle; therefore the re- 
maining angle Ape, is greater than a right angle: and it is in the 
Segment AD c leſs than the Semicircle. 

I ſay, moreover, that the angle of the greater Segment contained 
by the circumference 4B ©, and the ſtrait line ac is greater than a 
right angle: And the angle of the leſs Segment contained by the 
circumference Ap e and the ſtrait line ac, is leſs than a right angle. 
This is of it felf very manifeſt. For becauſe the angle contain'd 
by the ſtrait lines ca, a, is a right angle, therefore the angle con- 
tain d by the ſtrait line c A, and the circumference AB e, is greater 
than a right angle. Again, becauſe the angle contain d by the ſtrait 
lines C 4, AF, is a right angle, therefore the angle contain d by the 
{trait line c a, and the circumference A De, is leſs than a right angle. 
In a Circle therefore the angle in the Semicircle is a right angle: 
but the angle in the greater Segment is leſs than a right angle: and 
the angle in the leſs Segment is greater than a right angle. And 
moreover the angle of the greater Segment is greater than a right an- 
gle; and the angle of the leſs Segment, is leſs than a right angle. 

| Otherwiſe. | | 

That the angle Bac is a right angle. Becauſe the angle A Ee is 

double of the angle nA E, for it is equal to the two inward and op- 

polite 

OF GEOMETRY. 153: 

polite angles | Prop. 32. EL 1. ]: and alſo the angle AEB is double of 
the angle x ac | Prop. 32. ELL |; therefore the angles AE B, anc are 
double of the angle Bac. But the angles A E B, AE c, are equal totwo 
right angles | Prop. 13. El. I.]; therefore the angle BAC is a right 
angle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollary. 
From hence it it manifeſt, that if of a Tri one augle be equal to two it ir a right. 

angle: For that its conſequent angle is equal to the ſame ; and when conſequent angles are 
equal, they are right angles. i 

PRO POSITION XXII. 

F a ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the Contact to the Cir- 

cle be drawn a ſtrait line cutting the Circle, the angles which it 
makes with the Tangent line, ſhall be equal to the angles in the at 
ternate Segments of the Circle, 

Let the ſtrait line E touch the Circle aB ep in the aint B: and 
from B to the Circle ABD let be drawn any ſtrait line as ap cut - 
ting the Circle. I ſay, that the angles which the line BD makes 
with the Tangent line E, ſhall be equal to the angles in the alter · 
nate Segments of the Circle, that is, * angle FBD is equal to the 
angle conſtituted in the Segment DAB: and the angle EBD is equal 
to the angle in the Segment p. From the point B tothe line EB, 
let be drawn at right angles the line Ba; and in the circumterence 
BD, let be taken any point, as c, and let be joyn- 9% 
ed 4D, Dc, e B;. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line 
EF touches the circle a eb, in the point ; and 
from the Contact at s is drawn the ſtrait line 
Ba at right angles to the Tangent, the center 
of the Circle a Be p is in Ba| Prop. 19. _ 
therefore Ba is the Diameter of the Circle 
ABCD; and the angle A pn in the Semicircle * 7; B 
is a right angle | Prop.31. El. III.]; therefore the remaining angles 
BAD, ABD, are equal to one right angle. But the angle any is a right 
angle; wherefore the angle ABF is equal to the angles BaD, ABD. 
Let the common angle aBD be taken away: therefore the remain- 
ing angle DBF is equal to the angle 34 D in the alternate Segment 
of the Circle. And becauſe in a Circle the Figure AB is quadri- 
lateral, therefore the oppoſite angles are equal to two right angles 
Prop. 22. EL III.]: wherefore the angles DBF, DBE, are equal tothe 
angles nab, BcD, of which Bap has been provd equal to DR; 
therefore the remaining angle D E, is equal to the m DCB in 
the alternate Segment of the Circle. 

If therefore a ſtrait line touches a Circle, and from the Contact to 
the Circle be drawn a ſtrait line cutting the Circle, the angles which 
it makes with the Tangent line, ſhall be equal to the angles in the al- 
ternate Segments of the Circle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

& 7 PROPO- 

THE THIRD ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION XXIII. 

Pon a given ſtrait line to deſcribe a Segment of a Circle which 
may receive an angle equal to a given ſtrait-lin d angle. 

Let the given ſtrait line be a B, and the given ſtrait. lin d angle be 
at c. It is required upon the {trait line as to deſcribe a Segment of 
a Circle, which may receive an angle equal to the angle at c. Now 
the angle at c, is either an Acute, or a Right, or an Obtuſe angle. 
Firſt, let it be Acute, as in the firſt Figure. And to the ſtrait 
line AB, and to the point à, let the angle 3A p be conſtituted equal 
to the angle c [by Prop. 23. El. I.]; therefore the angle 3A p is an 
Acute angle. Now from the point A to a b, let A E be drawn at right 
angles; and let as be cut into halves in the point x by Prop. 11. 

EL I. ]: then from the point x to 4s let FG be drawn at right an- 
gles, and let Gs | 

| +. 
be joyned. Now : 8 ee 
foraſmuch as AF 
is equal to FB, c A 
and ru common; 
therefore there 
are the two lines = v 
AF, FG, equal to the two lines BF, FG, and the angle Ap d, is equal 
to the angle FEB; wherefore the baſe 4 c, is equal to the baſe 30 
Prop. 4. El. I.]; therefore the center 6, and diſtance G4, a Circle 
deſcribed ſhall paſs alſo by n. Let it be deſcribed, and be it aB E, 
and let be joynd EB. Now forafmuch as from the extremity of the 
Diameter AE, namely from the point a to AE, is drawn at right 
angles Ap, therefore Ap does touch the Circle | Prop. 16. El. III.]. 
And becauſe the ſtrait line 4 p touches the Circle as E, and from the 
Contact at & to the Circle 4B E, is drawn the line as; therefore 
the angle DA, is equal to the angle A ER in the alternate Segment. 
But the angle Dd as, is equal to the angle at e | by Conſtruction |; 
wherefore the angle at c is equal to the angle a EB. Therefore upon 
the given ſtrait line as is deſcribed a Segment of a Circle AEB, re- 
ceiving an angle 4 E R, equal to the given angle at c. 

But now let the angle at c be a right angle. And again, let it be 
required upon the ſtrait line as, to deſcribe a Segment of a Circle, 
which may receivean angle equal to the right angle at c. 

Let again the angle Bad be conſtituted equal to the right angle 
at c, as in the ſecond Figure. And let as be cut into halves in the 
point F; then from the center x, and to the diſtance of either x A, or 
FB, let the Circle atB be deſcribd; therefore the ſtrait line a Þ 
touches the Circle A E B, for that the angle at a is a right angle; 
and the angle BAD is equal to the angle in the Segment ax 3: for 
being in a Semicircle, it is alſo a right angle. But the angle za D is 

equal 

OF GEOMETRY. 155 

equal to the angle at c; wherefore the angle AE in the Segment, 
is equal to the angle at c. Therefore again upon the ſtrait line a B, 
is deſcribed a Segment of a Circle az 8, receiving an angle equal to 
the angle at c. | 
But again, let the angle at c be an Obtuſe angle, and to the 
ſtrait line a B, and to the point 4, let the angle Ba D be conſtituted 
equal to c, as in the third Figure. Then to ad let an be drawn 
at right angles; and again, let az be cut into halves in the point 
F; and from F let FG be drawn at right angles to AB, and let 
GB be joyned. Becaule again, AF is equal to FB, and x common; 
therefore there are the two lines a F, F, equal to the two lines B E, 
FG, and the angle AFG is equal to the angle B&G; wherefore the 
baſe as, is equal to the baſe BG: therefore the center 6, and diſtance 
GA, a Circle deſcribed ſhall paſs alſo by s. Let it paſs as AB H. Now 
becauſe to the Diameter ax, and from the extremity thereof is 
drawn at right angles aD, therefore ap does touch the Circle a BE, 
and from the Contact at a is drawn AB; therefore the angle 3A 
is equal to the angle conſtituted in the alternate Segment of the 
Circle AHB. But the angle BAD is equal to the angle at e; where- 
fore the angle in the Segment ans, is equal to the angle at c. There- 
fore upon the given ſtrait line a B, is deſcribed a Segment of a Circle 
AHB, receiving an angle equal to the angle at c. Which was to be 
done. | 

PROPOSITION XXXIV. 

Rom a given Circle to take off a Segment, which may receive 
an angle equal to a given Mrait. lin d angle. 

Let the given Circle be anc, and the given ſtrait-lin'd angle be 
at D. It is required from the Circle Ane, to take off a Segment, 
which may receive an angle equal to the angle at p. Let be drawn 
EF touching the Circle A Be in the point s [ Prop. 17 El. III.], 

and to the ſtrait line E F, and to the point in it 4 
the line n; c: therefore the angle # Bc, is equal S 
Therefore from the given Circle aBc is taken off the Segment 

B, let the angle FB c be conſtituted equal to the 
angle at D | Prop. 31. El. I.. Now foraſmuch 

to the angle conſtituted in the alternate Seg- e 
BAC, receiving an angle equal to the given ſtrait : lind angle at b. 
Which was to be done. 1233) | 

as the ſtrait line E F touches the Circle A Bc, in 
the point B; and from the Contact at B is drawn N 

ment Bac. But the angle FBRHe is equal to the angle at p; where- 
fore the angle in the Segment 8 ac, is equal to the angle at v. 

PRO PO. 

156 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION XXV. ; 's 
Fin a Circle two ſtrait lines cut one another, the Rectangle con- 
tained by the Segments of the one, is equal to the Rectangle con. 
tained by the Segments of the other. | 
For in the Circle as cp, let the two ſtrait lines ac, BD, cut one 
another in the point E. I ſay, that the Rectangle contained by A E, 
E c, is equal to the Rectangle contained by D E, E B. If ac, Bp, paſs 
through the center, ſo that E be the center of the Circle a ; c o, then 
it is manifeſt that the lines à E, EC; DE, EB, being equal, the Rect- 
angle alſo contained by 4 E, E c, is equal to the Rectangle contained 
by DE, EB. . | | 
But now let the ſtrait lines 4 c, 
B, not paſs through the center. 
And let the center of the Circle 
ABCD be taken, and be it g, and 
from F to the ſtrait lines 4 c, DB, 
let perpendiculars be drawn d, 
FH: and let be joyned FB, Fc, 
FE. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait 
line q drawn through the cen- - 
ter cuts the ſtrait line ac, not drawn through the center, at right 
angles, it ſhall alſo cut the ſame into halves | Prop. 3. El. III.]; 
therefore a G is equal to 6c. And becauſe the ſtrait line ac is cut 
into equal parts in 6, and into unequal parts in E: therefore the 
Rectangle contained by A E, E c, together with the ſquare of EG is 
equal to the ſquare of 6c | Prop. 5. El. II.], let be added in common 
the ſquare of : therefore the Rectangle contained by AE, Ec, to- 
gether with the ſquares of E d, B, is equal to the ſquares of c, G F. 
But the ſquare of y is equal to the ſquares of EG, F Prop. 47. 
El. I.]; and the ſquare of pc is equal to the ſquares of co, G; 
therefore the Rectangle contained by AE, Ec, together with the 
ſquare of EF, is equal to the ſquare of rc. But pc is equal to FB; 
therefore the Rectangle under as, Ec, together with the ſquare of 
FE, is equal to the ſquare of rs. By the ſame reaſon the Rectangle 
under p E, E B, together with the ſquare of PE, is equal to the ſquare 
of FB. But it has been proved, that the Rectangle under ax, k c, 
together with the ſquare of g E, is equal to the ſquare of EH; there- 
fore the Rectangle under a E, xc, together with the ſquare of FE, is 
equal to the Rectangle under Dx, ER, together with the ſquare of 
FE. Let the ſquare of g E common, be taken away; therefore the 
remaining Rectangle contained by A E, Ec, is equal to the Rectangle 
contained by DE, EB. 2 96; | 18 * 2 
If therefore in a Circle two ſtrait lines cut one another, the Rect- 
angle contained by the Segments of the one, is equal to the Rectangle 

contained by the Segments of the other. Which was to be demon- 
ſtrated. PR O- 

N. 

OF GEOMETRY 159 

PROPOSITION XXXVI. l; 
F without a Circle be taken any point, and from the ſame do fall . 
an the Circle two ſtrait lines, of which one does cut the Cree the | {79 
other does touch it: The Rectangle contained by the whole Secant, | 
and the outward Segment between the point and convex circum- 
ference, ſball be equal to the ſquare of the Tangent. 

Let without the Circle a Bc be taken any point as p, and from Þ 
let the two ſtrait lines Dc a, D B, fall on the Circle AB e: and let D c 4 
cut the Circle a Be, and DB touch it. I ſay, that the Rectangle con- 
tained by 4D, Dc, is equal to the ſquare of Dp. Now DC a either 
paſſes through the center, or not. CD | 

Firſt, let it paſs through the center, and let g be the center of the 
Circle a Bc. Then let be joyned FB; therefore the angle FD is a 
right angle [Prop. 18. El. III. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line a c 
is cut into halves in F, and to it is added cp; therefore the ReQ- 
angle contained by Ap, Dc, together with the ſquare of rc is equal 
to the ſquare of FD Prop. 6. El. II.. But Fc is equal to rs; there- 
fore the Rectangle of aD, Dc, together with the ſquare of FB, is 
equal to the ſquare of FD. But the ſquare of FD is equal to the 
ſquares of F B, BD, for the angle FBD, 00 
is a right angle: therefore the Rect- 
angle contained by aD, De, together 
with the ſquare of FB, is equal to 
the ſquares of FB, BD. Let the ſquare | 
of FR (Common be taken away;there- 

D D 

fore the remaining Rectangle under F 
AD, DC, is equal to the ſquare of the 
Tangent p B. 

But now let Þ c a not paſs through * 

the center of the Circle Ac: and let the center k be taken, and 
from x to ac let be drawn a perpendicular te; and let be joyned 

EB, Ee, ED. Now the angle x BD is a right angle Prop. 18, El. III.] 
And foraſmuch as the ſtrait line E F drawn through the center cuts 

the ſtrait line ac, not drawn through the center at right angles; it 
ſhall alſo cut the ſame into halves Prop. 3. EL III.]; therefore a+ 
is equal to Fc. And becauſe the ſtrait line ac is cut into halves in 
F, and to it is added c p, therefore the Rectangle contained by ap, 
Dc, together with the ſquare of Fc, is equal to the ſquare of rp 
[Prop 6. El. II. |]. Let be added in common the ſquare of x; there- 
ore the Rectangle under à p, Dc, together with the ſquares of cx, 
FE, is equal to the ſquares of DF, FE. But the ſquare of p E is equal 
to the ſquares of Dx, FE, for EFD is a right angle; and the ſquare 
of cx is equal to the ſquares of cr, FH: Therefore the Rectangle 
contain d by Ap, dc, together with the ſquare of cx, is equal to the 

Aa ſquare 

| 
! 
|; 
j 

158 THE THIRD ELEMENT 

ſquare of x D. But cx is equal to EB; therefore the Rectangle under 
AD, De, together with the ſquare of EB, is equal to the ſquare of 
ED. But the ſquares of EB, BD, are equal to the ſquare of ED, for 
the angle EBD is a right angle: therefore the Rectangle contained 
by Ab, De, together with the ſquare of EB, is equal to the ſquares 
of EB, Bp. Let the ſquare of EHM common be taken away; therefore 
the Rectangle contained by Ap, De, is equal to the ſquare of Þ B. 

If therefore without a Circle be taken any point, &c. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. is 57 

PROPOSITION XXXVII. 

1 F without a Circle be taken any point, and from the ſame do fall 
11 % 

upon the Circle tuo Strait lines; of which one does cut the Circle; 
the other does fall upon it: and the Rectangle contained by. the 
whole Secant and the outward Segment between the point and the 
convex circumference, be equal to the ſquare of the incident line; 

the incident line ſball touch the Circle. 

Let without the Circle apc be taken any point as Dp; and from 
D let the two ſtrait lines Dc a, DB, fall upon the Circle AB e, and let 
DCA cut the Circle, and Ds fall upon it: Alſo let the Rectangle 
contained by Ap, Dc be equal tothe ſquare of DB. I ſay, that DB 
touches the Circle AB c. For let the {ſtrait line 1 
DE be drawn touching the Circle aBc | Prop. 
17. El. III.]: and let be taken r the center 
of the Circle AB c; then let be joyned FE, FB, 
FD. Now the angle FED is a right angle Prop. 
18. El. III.]: And foraſmuch as p E touches the 
Circle AB c, and DA cuts it; therefore the Rect- 
angle under AD, Dc, is equal to the ſquare of 
DE. But the Rectangle under Ap, De, is put 
equal to the ſquare of DB; wherefore the ſquare 
of DE, is equal to the ſquare of DB, and therefore DE is equal to p B. 
But Fx is equal to FB; there are then the two lines DE, EE, equal to 
the two lines DB, BF, and the baſe FD is common; therefore the 
angle DEF is equal to the angle DBF | Prop. 8. El. I. |. But pz is a 
right angle, therefore DBF is alſo a right angle. Now B being pro- 
duced 1s the Diameter, but a ſtrait line drawn at right angles to the 
Diameter, from the extremity thereof touches the Circle anc. In 
like 2 the ſame ſhall be demonſtrated, if the center were in 
AC it icli. 

I therefore without a Circle be taken any point, &c. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. 75 

THE 

OF GEOME TRT. 

THE FOURTH 

ELEMENT. 

DEFINITIONS. 

DEFINITION L 

Strait. lin d Figure" is ſaid to be inſcribed in a trait. lin d 
Figure, when every angle of the inſcribed Figure touches 
every /ide of the Figure, in hich it is inſcribed. 

DEFINITION II. | 

E a Frait. lin d Figure is ſaid tobe cir- Sg = b 

cumſcribed about a Sirait-lm'd Figure, when 
every ſide of the circumſcribed. Figure touches 
every angle of the Figure, about which it is cir- 

cumſcribed. 
DEFINITION III. . 
Strait. lin & Figure is ſaid to be inſcribed in @ _ :- 
Circle, when every angle of the inſcribed H. ** 
gure touches the circumference of the Circle. BS. 3 

— 

DEFINITION IV. 

Strait. lin d Figure is ſaid to be circumſcribed about a Circk, 
when every ſide of the circumſcribed Figure 

Fonches the etrcumperence of the Circle. A4 
© DEFINITION: V. 4 r 

J. Thewi iſe a Circle i 15 fa ad tobe mſcribed in a ſtrait- [ooh Zh ö 1 
lin d Figure., when the circumference of the 5 8 
Circle touches every | fide of the Figure, in which it is inſeribed. 1 
© DEFINITION VI. 1 1 
\ Circle is ſaid to be circumſcribed about a trait. lin d Figure, if 
when the circumference of the Circle touches every angle of j 
the Figure, about which it is circumſcribed, 1 
DEFINITION VII. 1 
Strait line is ſaid to be adapted i in a Circle, when G 1 
the 2 of the line are in the circumference : 3 
of the Circle. K | 

Aa 2 PROPO- 

10 THE FOURTH ELEMENT 

gi PROPOSITION I. 

N a given Circle to adapt a; ſtrait line equal to a given ſtrait line, 
I awhich is not greater than the Diameter of the Circle. 

Let the given Circle be apc, and the given ſtrait line, which is 
not greater than the Diameter of the Circle, be D. It is required in 
the Circle AB c, to adapt a ſtrait line equal to the ſtrait line vp. 

Let there be drawn Bc, the Diameter of the Circle a Bc. Now if 
Bc be equal to v. then that is done which 61 
was propoſed. For in the Circle aBc is a- 
dapted the line Bc, equal to the given line v. 
But if not, then Bc is greater than Þ [by 
Suppoſition]; and let there be put cx equal 
to D. Then to the center c, and diſtance c E, 
let the Circle tat de deſcribed, and let ca — 
be drawn. Now foraſmuch as the point e is 

the center of the Circle EA E, therefore ca is equal to c E, but p is 
equal to cz; wherefore allo p is equal to c a. 

Therefore in the given Circle AB c, is adapted a ſtrait line c A, 
equal to given ſtrait line D, which is not greater than the Diameter 
of the Circle. Which was to be done. | 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Becauſe the Diameter is the greateſt line in a Circle [Prop. 1 5. El. III.]; there- 
fore this proviſo, or limitation, 1s here made, that the given line, to which an equal 
line is required to be adapted in the Circle, ought not to be greater than the Dia- 

meter. 
PROPOSITION II. 

N a given Circle to inſcribe a Triangle equiangled to a given 

Triangle. „ 

Let the given Circle be A Be, and the given Triangle pz F. It is 
required in the Circle AB e, to inſcribe a Triangle equiangled to the 
Triangle DEF. Let there be drawn a ſtrait line 6 AH, touching the 
Circle 43 c, in the point a [by Prop. 17. El. III.] Then to the line 
AH, and to the point in it a, let the angle HA c be conſtituted equal 
to the angle yz r[ by Prop. 23. El. I.] PR” | | 
Again, to the line 6 4, and to the point 
in it 4, let the angle Ga be conſtitu- X 
ted equal to the angleDr®; and draw 
c. Now foraſmuch as a ſtrait line 
H AG, touches the Circle AB; c, and from 
the Contact is drawn Ac; therefore | 
the angle H ac, is equal to the angle 1 I 
ABC, in the alternate Segment of the Circle Prop. 32. El. III.]. But 
the angle H Ac is equal to the angle DE [ by Conftruction]; there- 
fore the angle a Bc, is equal to the angle DEF. By the ſame m_ 

| + 

OF GEOMETRY 12867 

alſo the angle A cs, is equal to the angle DFE; therefore the remain- 

ing angle BAC is equal to the remaining angle EDF: Wherefore the 

Triangle aBc, is equiangled to the Triangle p E F, and is inſcribed 
in the Circle a Bc. 

Therefore 1n a given Circle is inſcribed a Triangle equiangled to 
a given Triangle. Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION III. 

Bout a given Circle to circumſcribe a Triangle equiangled to a 
A given Triangle. 

Let the given Circle be AB e, and the given Triangle p EF. It is 
required about the Circle A Bc, to circumſcribe a Triangle equian- 
gled to the Triangle DEF. Let Er be produced both ways to the 
points d, H; and of the Circle aBc let the center x be taken | by 
Prop. 1. El. III.]; and let a ſtrait line x B be drawn at pleaſure. Now 
to the line x B, and to the point in it x, let there be conſtituted the 
angle BK 4, equal to the angle ERG | by Prop. 23. El. I.], and alſo the 
angle BK c, equal to the angle DFH. Then by the points à, B. c, let 
there be drawn the ſtrait lines LAM, MB N, NCL, touching the Circle 
ABc | by Prop. 17.El. III.) Now foraſmuch as LM, MN, NL, touch 
the Circle AB c, in the points A, B, c; 
and from k, the center, to the points 
A, B, c, are drawn Kk A, K B, K C; there- 
fore the angles at the points 4, B, c, |/ 
are right angles Prop. 18. El III. ,[- 
And becauſe the four angles of the 
quadrilateral Figure aMBx, are e- | > 
qual to four right angles, for that 
it 1s divided into two Triangles: (by ſuppokay a ſtrait line drawn 
from k to M, making two Triangles KAM, KRM, each of which 
have their three angles equal to two right, Prop. 32. EL I.), of which 
the angles K A M, KBM, are right angles; therefore the remaining 
angles AKB, AMB, are equal to two right angles. But the angles 
DEG, DEF, are equal to two right angles Prop. 13. El. I.]; there- 

fore the angles AKB, AMB, are equal to the angles DEG, DEF, of 

which Ax ; 1s equal to DEG: wherefore the remaining angle aMs, 
is equal to the remaining angle DEF. In like manner may be de- 
monſtrated that the angle LxM, is equal to the angle DFE; there- 
fore alſo the remaining angle ML. N, is equal to the remaining angle 
EDF: wherefore the Triangle LMN, is equiangled to the Triangle 
DEF; and it 1s circumſcribed about the Circle A xc. | 

Therefore about a gryen Circle is circumſcribed a Triangle equi- 
0 to a given Triangle. Which was to be done. hd 

Aa 3 4  ' * PRO- 

167 THE FOURTH ELEMENT 
pPROPOSTTION IV. 
1 N a given Triangle to inſeribe a Circle. 

Let the given Triangle be A Bc. It is required in the Triangle 
ABC, to inſcribe a Circle. Let the angles A Bc, Bc a, be cut into 
halves by the ſtrait lines 3D, c [by Prop. 9. El. I], and let them 
meet together in the point Dp; and frem the point p let there be 
drawn to the lines AB, Bc, C a, the perpendiculars p E, DF, DG [by 
Prop. 12. El. I. J. Now foraſmuch as the angle ABD is equal to the 
angle cBD (for that the angle a Bc 1s cut into halves) and the right 
angle BED, is equal to the right angle BrD: there are then two 

Triangles, E B D, FBD, having two angles equal , 
to two angles, and one fide equal to one fide, 
namely 8D common to both, and ſubtended 
under one of the equal angles; therefore they 
ſhall have the remaining ſides equal to the re- 
maining ſides | Prop. 26. El. I.]; wherefore p E 12 
ſhall be equal to DF. By the ſame reaſon DG 
is alſo equal to p; therefore the three lines 
DE, DF, DG, are equal to one another; where- B F © 
fore to the center p, and the diſtance any one of the lines DE, DF, 
DG, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall paſs through the remaining 
points, and ſhall touch the lines as, Bc, c a, becauſe the angles at 
the points x, E, o, are right. For if the Circle ſhall cut them, then 

to the Diameter of a Circle ſhall, from the extremity, be drawn, at 
right angles, a ſtrait line falling within the Circle, which is abſurd 
Prop. 16. El. III.]; therefore to the center p, and diſtance one of 
the lines DE, DF, DG, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall not cut the 
lines A B, B ci e A: wherefore it ſhall touch them, and there ſhall be 
a Circle inſcribed in the Triangle AB c. 

Therefore in the given Triangle ac, is inſcribed the Circle x Fd. 
Which was to be done. 6 

PROPOSITION v. 
Au a given Triangle to circumſcribe a Circle. 

Let the given Triangle be AB c. It is required about the given 
Triangle aBc, to circumſcribe a Circle. Let as, ac, 0 
be cut into halves in the points p, E [by Prop. 10. | 
El. I.], and from the points p, E, let there be drawn 
at right angles, to A B, Ac, the lines p, EFH by Prop. | 
11. El. I.. Now theſe lines ſhall meet either with- \ 
in the Triangle AB e, or in the line Bc, or without 
it. Firſt, let them meet within, at the point p, | 

and let FB, FC, Fa, be joyned. Now foraſmuch as ad is equal to 

DB, 

OF GEOMETRY. 163 
DB, and DF common, and at right angles; therefore the baſe A F, is 
equal to the baſe rs [| Prop. 4. El. I.. In like manner we ſhall 
demonſtrate, that xc is alſo equal to Fa, ſo that alſo 5 is equal 
to Fe; therefore theſe three Fa, PB, Ec, are equal to one another: 
wherefore to the center g, and diſtance, any one of the lines PA, PB, 
Fc, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall paſs alſo through the remaining 
points; and there ſhall be circumſcribed a Circle about the Tri- 
angle AB: And let it be deſcribed, as a Bc. 
But again, let Dx, EF, meet in the line 3c, at 
the point F, as it is in this Figure, and let Ar be / 

A 

| B 

In like manner we ſhall demonſtrate, that the 
point g is the center of a Circle circumſcribed a- 
bout the Triangle a Bc. 

Laſtly, let p E, EF, meet without the Triangle a nc, at the point 
F, as in this laſt figure; and let Fa, FB, Fc, be joyn'd. 5 

Now foraſmuch as aDÞ is equal to p, and yr 
common, and at right angles, therefore the baſe a + /*<| J 
is equal to the baſe rs. In like manner we ſhall de- s = 1 
monſtrate, that Fc is equal to g A; ſo that alſo re is 
equal to Fc: therefore again to the center x, and 
diſtance any one of the lines g A, FB, Fc, a Circle be- 
ing deſcribed , ſhall paſs alſo through the remaining points; and 
ſhall be circumſcribed about the Triangle asc: And let it be de- 
ſcribed as ABC. | 

Therefore about a given Triangle a Circle is circumſcribed. 
Which was to be done. 

Corollary. 

And it is manifeſt, that when the center of the Circle falls within the Triangle, then 
the angle B AC, being in a Segment greater than the Semicerele, is leſs than a right an- 
gle [ Prop. 31. El. III. J. But when it falls in the line B C, being in the Semicircle, then 
BAC ball be a right angle. And when the center falls without B C, then the angle 
BAC, being in @ Segment leſs than the Sæmicircle, it greater than a right angle. So that 
when the given angle is leſs then a right angle, then the lines DF, EF, ſhall fall 

within the Lriangle. But when it is à right angle all fall in BC: And when greater 
than a right = they ſhall fall without B C. er ” 

PROPOSITION VI. 
1 Na given Circle to inſcribe a ſquare. 

Let the given Circle be 45 c. It is required in the Circle 483 cp, 
to inſcribe a ſquare. Of the Circle A Bc, let the Diameters ac, Bo, 
be drawn at right angles to one another; and let be joyned as, B c, 
D, DA. Now foraſmuch as BE is equal to p E, for the center is Ek; 
and EA is common, and at right angles; therefore the baſe as is 

equal 

- - _ 1 - 4 > OI * —_ — md 
; 9 * » * 2 * 44 8 
—_ 1 = = 1 — 9 a” _— F ” 
. . | - 
5 
= 4 m — y + =- —— . — % _ 
** 1 2 —_ p_ < 

a + 

F ͤ——U—˙L— . . 5 

. — IE FH - 

equal to the baſe av. And by the ſame reaſon either of the lines 

> g_—_— ot 
n 

OY MUSE : 

r + +7200 = * 

ER e * LD "2 = 

monſtrate, that either of the lines 6 F, k, is parallel Ko 

164 THE FOURTH ELEMENT 

— 

drilateral Figure ABC p, is equilateral: I ſay, that A 
it is alſo Rectangular. For becauſe the line BD od 
is the Diameter of the Circle ascD, therefore 
BAD is a Semicircle: wherefore the angle BAD ,, 
is a right angle Prop. 31. El. III.. By the fame 
reaſon alſo every one of the angles a Bc, BCD,cD a, 
is a right angle: therefore the quadrilateral Fi- 
gure ABCD is rectangular. But it has been pro- | 
ved to be equilateral; therefore it is a ſquare, and it is inſcribed in 
the given Circle aBcD. i of 
Therefore in the given Circle anc, is inſcribed the ſquare Ax cp. 
Which was to be done. | | of 

PROPOSITION VII. 
APE a given Circle to circumſeribe a ſquare. 

BC, CD, is equal to either of the lines AB, Ap; therefore the qua- 

Let the given Circle be 430 D. It is required about the Circle 
ABCD, to circumſcribe a ſquare. Let two Diameters ac, BD, be 
drawn at right angles to one another; and by the points 4, B, c, D, 
let there be drawn the lines FG, GH, Hk, k F, touching the Circle 
ABCD | Prop. 17. EL III.. Now foraſmuch as FG touches the Circle 

Ap, and from E the center, to the Contact at a, is joyned EA; 

therefore the angles at à are right angles | Prop. 18. El. III.]; and 

by the ſame reaſon, the angles at the points B, c, D, are alſo right 
angles. Now becauſe AE8 is a right angle, and that 

EBG Is allo a right angle; therefore GH is parallel — 

to ac Prop. 28. EL I.], and by the ſame reaſon a c 
is alſo parallel to Fx. In like manner we ſhall de-. 

to the lineBED: wherefore G kx, GC, AK, FB, BK, are 
Parallelograms; and therefore GF is equal to HR; 
asalſoGH to Fx Prop. 34 El. I. 

Note, thus far is only proved, that the oppoſite fides, namely 

is equal to HK, as alloGH to Fx. Next is to be proved, that a 
«four are equal to one another. 

Now becauſe ac is equal to BD; but ac is equal to each of the 
lines GH, Fk; and BD is equal to each of the lines 6, HR; where- 
fore alſo each of the lines GH, Fx, is equal to each of the lines d E, 
Hk; therefore the quadrilateral Figure ? E is equilateral. 

I ſay, that it is alſo rectangular. For becauſe BEA is a Paralle- 
logram, and AE is a Tight angle; therefore à oB is alſo a right an- 
gle. In like manner we ſhall demonſtrate, that the angles at the 
points N, k, F, are right angles; therefore the quadrilateral Figure 

F GHR 

W % 

OF GEOMETRY. 165 
F6Hx- is rectangular. But it has been proved to be equilateral; 

therefore it is a ſquare, and it is circumſcribed about the Circle ß cp. 

Therefore about a siven Circle a ſquare is circumſcribed, Which 
was to be done. 

PROPOSITION VIII. 
1 a given ſquare to mnſeribe a Circle. 

Let the given ſquare be ABCD. It is required in the ſquare a BCD 
to inſcribe a Circle. Let both of the lines a B, AD, be cut into halves 
in the points E, F, and by E let there be drawn E H parallel to either 
of the lines AB, Dc [by Prop. 3 1. El. I.]; and by r, let there be 
drawn FR, parallel to either * the lines 4D, Bc; therefore every 
one of the ſpaces A k, k B, AH, HD, AG; GC, BG, GD, is a Parallelogram; 

and therefore their oppoſite fides are equal [Prop.3 34. El. I.] 
Now foraſmuch as aD is equal to AB, an 

of AD A FE 
the half is ax, and of as the half is a F; therefore | 
AE is equal to Ar; and alſo the oppoſite ſides 

are equal; therefore FG is equal to GE. In like x 4— 
manner we ſhall demonſtrate, that either of the Wo ＋ 
lines 6H, G k, is equal to either of the lines Fd, GE; . 
therefore the four lines & E, G E, 6H, & k, are equal K WC 
to one another. Wherefore to the center d, and diſtance any one of 
the lines GE, GP, GH, GK, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall alſo paſs by 
the remaining points, and ſhall touch the ſtrait lines AB, BC, CDDa, 
for that the angles at E. E, N, k, are right angles. For if the Circle 
cut the lines A B, Bc, cb, DA, then to the Diameter of a Circle a 
ſtrait line being drawn at right angles from the extremity thereof, 
ſhall fall within the Circle; which is abſurd [ Prop. 16. El. III. there- 
fore to the center d, and diſtance any one of the lines 6x, G P, d u, 
GK, a Circle being deſcribed does not cut the lines A B, Be, e D, DA; 
wherefore it ſhall touch them, and ſhall be inſcribed in the ſquare 
ABCD. 

Therefore in a given ſquare a circle has been inſcribed. Which 
was to be done. 

PROPOSITION IX. 
75 a given ſquare to circumſeribe a Circle. 

Let the given ſquare be aBcD. It is required about the ſquare 
ABCD, to circumſcribe a Circle. For the lines ac, BD, being drawn, 
let them cut one another in r. Now foraſmuch as p a is equal to 
AB,” and Ac is common; therefore there are the two lines DA, ac, 
equal to the two lines B a, ac, and the baſed e is equal to the baſe 
cBz therefore the angle Dc, is _ to the angle Bac; "VI 

tne 

= 
1 

- — mY * 
— — . tents — 
N — he * —— — 
_— 

= 
— —— 
— —¼ 

— - 

— 
Py 

K = — —ͤ — 
—_— DS. I —— — 

- ye > os a FK 
- — 

— 

1 PR 
_ — 
* — 

— yr Poem ——_ — ages yy ay 
— —_— 
= — — - = qo — — PIE — 
— 5 5 — ͤ»„— — 
_ "I — * 

2 "= — 23 > = Hs 
% 

166 THE FOURTH BLEMENT 

the angle Þ. 3 is cut into halves 145 Ac. In like manner we ſhall 
onſtrate, that every one of the angles 45 c, Ben, cDa; cut 
into halves by the lines a c, DB, And becauſe the angle DaB is 
equal to the angle A Bc; and of the angle DAB, the half is the angle 
EAB, and of the angle anc, the half is the angle 
E BA; therefore the angle EA B is equal to 90 an- 
gle EB A. So that the ſide E A is equal to the ſide 
EB Prop. 6. El. I.] In like manner we ſhall de- 
monſtrate, that either of the lines E c, ED, isequal 
to either of the lines E a, EB: wherefore the four 
lines E A; EB, Ec, E D, are equal to one another; 
therefore to the center E, and diſtance any one | 
of the lines E A, EB, Ec, E D, à Circle being deſcribed, ſhall paſs 
alſo through the remaining points, and ſhall be circumſcribed 

C 

about the ſquare a BD. Let it deſeribeũ as ABCD. 

Therefore about a given ſquare a Cirele has _ circumeribed. 
Which was to be Lone. „ 1 1 . 

nor eri N 
O conſlitute an equicrural Trian having each the 5 
at the baſe, 28 75 70 the Triangle 6 56 | id ang 
Let there be put a ſtrait line a B, and let it be cut in the point 
e, ſo that the Rectangle contained by à B, xc, be equal to the tquare 
of c [by Prop. 11. El. II.. Then to the center 4, and diſtance as, 
let the Circle 3DE be deſcnibed; ind! in the Circle x DE, let be 

adapted by Prop. 1. El. IV. Ii the ſtrait line's Þ equal to Ac, which 

is not greater than the Diameter of the Circle xD E; and let Da; Dc, 
be joyned. Alſo about the Triangle ACD let be circumſcribed the 
Circle a cb * 1 

I fay, that of theequicrural Triangle) Ba by! | T93ÞSFRQ 07 5 
each o the angles ABD;ADB, Ag as; Nl y/Eniod UTR 
angle BAD. | | bas mod; V Ida: N 

Foraſmuch as the rectangle 4 BC, is 1 5 12 i 
to the ſquare of Ac; and Ac is equal to 8 | 
BD; therefore the rectangle a B, Bc, is equal 2 
to the {quare of By. And whereas there has 
been taken a point , without the Circle ach; | 
and from the point 3, on the Circle ac. WILL 2 att) R 
have fallen the two ftrait lines Bc A, BD, whereof one does cut, and 
the other does fall upon it; and the rectangle AB, BC, is equal to 
the ſquare of vp; therefore the line b ſhall touch the Cirtle Ac 
[Prop. 37. El, III) Now ſoraſmuch as n; p does touch, and from 
the Contact at p, is drawn Dc; therefore the angle BDO is equal to 

e angle in the alternate Segment of the Circle, that is, to vAc 
If 0p. 31. El. III.] Now — vpe is equal to bac, 

let 

OF GEOME T RL. 167 
let there be added co 4, common to both; therefore the whole ; DA 
is equal to the two angles c DA, DAC, But to DA, DAC, is equal 
the outward angle z D, therefore 3D a is equal to epo: but BD ais 
equal BD, for that the fide a b is equal to 4 B33; that is DB a is equal 
to BCD; therefore the three angles B; DA, DBA, BCD, are equal to 
one another. And becauſe the angle nc is equal to the angle 3p; 
therefore the ſide BÞ is equal to the fide Dc. But Bp is put equal to 
Ac; Wherefore alſo ac is equal to co; ſo that the angle cpa is 
equal to the angle bac; therefore the angles c Da, »a c, are double 
to the angle Dac: but ;D is equal to c DA, Dac, and therefore 
BCD is double to pA c. But 3e p is equal to each of the angles B; Da, 
DBA; Wherefore. each of the angles ; DA, DBA, is double to DAB. 

Therefore there is conſtituted an equicrural Triangle av B, having 
each of the angles at the baſe double to the remaining angle. 
Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION XI. 

N a given Circle to inſeribe an equilateral and equiangled Pen- 

Tagon. 

Let the given Circle be aBcDE. It is required in the Circle 
ABCDE, to inſcribe an equilateral and equiangled Pentagon. Let 
there be put an equicrural Triangle EG a, having each of the angles 
at , H, double to the angle at F; and let there be inſcribed in the 

Circle aBcDE, the Triangle a cD, equiangled to the Triangle £6 H ; 
ſo that to the angle at may | 

F A 
be equal the angle c aD: And \ 
to either of the angles at d, R, D 
be equal either of the angles 1 n 
ACD, CDA, and therefore either | 
of the angles Ac b, e D 4, is dou- Hy, 
ble to the angle c ap. Now let / X\ 
each of the angles acD, DA, Fed 
be cut into halves by the ſtrait + U 
lines c E, DBI by Prop. 9. El. I.], 
and let there be drawn a8,Bc, cD,DE, E a. Foraſmuch then as each 
of the angles acÞ, cDa, is double to caD, and they have been cut 
into halves by the lines c E, DB; therefore theſe five angles Þ ac, 
ACE, ECD, CDB, BD A, are equal to one another. But equal angles 
inſiſt on equal circumferences | Prop. 26. El. III. |; therefore the 
hive circumferences AB, Bc, CD,DE, EA, are equal to one another. But 
under equal circumterences are ſubtended equal ſtrait lines | Prop. 
29. El. III.]; wherefore the five ſtrait lines as, Bc, c p, DR, EA, are 
equal to one another; therefore the Pentagon a4 Bc DE is equilateral. 
I fay, that it is alſo equiangular. For becauſe the circumference a B, 
is equal to the circumference Dx, let 8cD be added in common: 
Bb 2 there- 

168 THE FOURTH ELEMENT 

therefore the whole circumference a BcD is equal to the whole cir- 
cumference EDCB. And the | 
angle AED inſiſts on the cir- 
cumference aBcD; as alſo the 
angle Baz inſiſts on the circum- 
ference EDCB; therefore the 
angle BAF. is equal to the an- 
gle AED | Prop. 27. El. III.]. 
By the ſame reaſon alſo every 
one of the angles A Bc, BcD, 
CDE, is equal to each of the | 
angles B AE, AED: Wherefore the Pentagon 45 c D E is equiangular. 
But it has been proved to be equilateral. 

Therefore in a given Circle an equilateral and equiangled Penta- 
gon has been inſcribed. Which was to be done. 

PRO POSITION XII. 

A Bout a given Circle to circumſcribe an equilateral and equian- 
glied Pentagon. 

Let the given Circle be ABC DE. It is required about the Circle 
ABCDE, to circumſcribe an equilateral and equiangled Pentagon. 
Let the points of the angles of the inſcribed Pentagon be conceived 
to be aBcDE; ſo that the circumferences à B, Bc, CD, DE, EA, are 
equal. And by the points 4,B, e, D, E, let there be drawn GH, H K, KL, 
LM, MG, touching the Circle | by Prop. 17. El. III. |: and of the 
Circle ABC DE, let the center F be taken, then let FB, Fx, Fc, FL, 
ED, be joyned. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line x L toucheth the 
Circle 4BCDE, in the point c, and from the 
center E to the Contact at c, is drawn Fc; 
therefore c is perpendicular to x L | Prop. 
18. El. III.]; and each of the angles at c is 77 
a right angle: By the ſame reaſon alſo the 
angles at B,D are right. And becauſe p cx is 
a right angle, therefore the ſquare of F is 
equal to the ſquares of xc, cx. By the ſame 
reaſon alſo, the ſquare of FR is equal to the 
ſquares of FB, xx; therefore the ſquares of xc, ck, are equal to the 
ſquares of FB, Bk, of which the ſquare of rc is equal to the ſquare 
of FB; therefore the remaining ſquare of c x is equal to the remain- 
ing ſquare of nx: wherefore Bk is equal to cx. And becaule FB is 
equal to Fc, and ? x common, therefore there are the two lines n; b, 
FK, equal to the two lines c, x x, and the baſe Bk is equal to the 
baſe cx; wherefore the angle BK is equal to the angle «rc 
[Prop. 8. El. I. J. And alſo the angle xx is equal to the angle x C; 
therefore the angle BFc is double to the angle xe, and the angle 

BNC 

G 

OF GEOMETRY. 169 

BK e is double to the angle Fx c. By the ſame reaſon alſo, the angle 
cFD is double to the angle CEL, and the angle cLD is double to the 
angle CLF. And becauſe the circumference Bc is equal to the cir- 
cumference co; therefore the angle 3c is equal to the angle crp 
Prop. 17. El. III.] But the angle Bc is double to the angle k xc, 
and the angle Dc is double to the angle Lec; therefore the angle 
k Fc is equal to the angle 1. Now there are two Triangles F Kc, 
FLC, having two angles equal to two angles, each to each, and one 
fide equal to one fide, namely Fe, common to both; therefore ſhall 
they have the remaining ſides equal to the remaining ſides, and the 
remaining angle equal to the remaining angle | Prop. 26. El. I.]; 

therefore the line « c is equal to the line cr, and the angle rxc to 
the angle LC. Now foraſmuch as kc is equal to cx, therefore k I. 
is double to x c. By the ſame reaſon x ſhall be proved double to 
BK: and now becauſe BK has been proved equal to xc, and that x L 
is double to Kc, as alſo Hk to Bk; therefore H 1s equal to k I. 

In like manner every one of the lines 6 H, dM, ML, ſhall be proved 

equal to each of the lines ¶ x, KL; therefore the Pentagon Hk L, 
is equilateral. 

I fay, that it is alſo equiangled. Foraſmuch as the angle FN is 
equal to the angle FL e, and that the angle H L, has been proved 
double to the angle FK c, as alſo K LM, double to FL: therefore 
the angle ¶ K L is equal to the angle KL. 

In like manner, every one of the angles x HG, HG M, GMI, ſhall 
be proved equal to each of the angles HKL, K LM; wherefore the 
five angles GHK, HKL, K L. M, LMG, M H, are equal to one another; 
therefore the Pentagon G6 HK LM, is equiangled. But it has been 
proved equilateral; and it is circumſcribed about the Circle Ah DB. 
Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION XIIL a 

N a given Pentagon, which is equilateral and equiangled, to 
inſcribe a Circle. 

Let the given Pentagon, which is equilateral and equiangled, be 

ABCDE It is required in the Pentagon a BcDE, to inſcribe a Circle, 

Let each of the angles z D, DE, be cut into A 

halves by the lines c g, D; and from the point 4 

F, wherein the lines c F, DF, do meet, let there | : 

be drawn FB, FA, FE. Now foraſmuch as Bc , & / Ys 
is equal to cp, and cy common; therefore EO 21 

oe, e x, and the angle ze F is equal to the angle 
oc; therefore the bale z is equal to the 
baſe DF, and the Triangle z e is equal to the IS 

Triangle pe, and the remaining angles are equal to the remaining 

Bb 3 angles 

there are two lines ; c, c F, equal to two lines N 
<> 

——_— 
* 
— © 
<— — 

— 

— 4 = 

Ke b _— P 
nn n 2 — 1 » ——— 9 - 
7 = . . * 32 
4 * — —— — - 
— — > _ - -— 

_ - _ — - 
— _— — 

170 THE-FOURTH ELEMENT 

angles, under which are ſubtended equal ſides | Prop. 4. EL I. 7; 
therefore the angle F is equal to the angle DF. And becauſe 
the angle cp E is double to the angle cD Fr; but the angle DE is 
equal to the angle 4 B c, and c p F, to cg PE; wherefore the angle cBa 
is double to the angle cBF; and therefore the angle A BF is equal 
to the angle Ex: therefore the angle Ahe is cut into halves by the 
line ab. Ia like manner ſhall be demonſtrated that each of the an- 
gles B A E, A ED, are cut into halves by the lines x 4, FE. F 
Now from the point 5; to the lines A8, acc „ 
CD, DE, E 4, let be drawn the perpendiculars 
EG, FH, Fk, FL, M. Now becauſe the angle 
HCF is equal to the angle xc g, and the right 
angle FH c, is equal to the right angle FK c; 
therefore there are two Triangles Fac, FK c, 
having two angles equal to two angles, and 
one fide equal to one fide, namely xc com- 
mon to both, and ſubtended under equal an- 5 
gles; wherefore they ſhall have the remaining ſides equal to the re- 
maining ſides | Prop. 26. El. I.]; therefore the perpendicular rn is 
equal to the perpendicular Fx. | In like manner ſhall be demonſtra- 
ted, that alſo every one of the lines FL, FM, FG, is equal to either of 
the lines FH, Fx; therefore the five lines Pd, FH, Fx, FL, FM, are 
equal to one another. Wherefore to the center x, and diſtance an 
one of the lines F 6, FH, Fx, FL, FM, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall 
paſs alſo through the remaining points, and ſhall touch the lines 
AB, BC, CD, DE, Ea, becauſe that the angles at the points d, N, k, L., 
M, are right angles. For if the Circle ſhall not touch, but cut them, 
then it ſhall happen, that to the Diameter of a Circle, a ſtrait line 
being drawn at right angles from the extremity thereof, does fall 
within the Circle; which has been proved abſurd Prop. 16.ELII.. ]; 
therefore to the center x, and diſtance any one of the lines Fd, rn, 
F Ek, FL, FM, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall not cut the lines as, Bc, 
cb, DE, EA; Wherefore it ſhall touch them. Let it be deſcribed, as 
GHKLM. | | | 
Therefore in a given Pentagon, which is equilateral, and equi- 
angled, a Circle 1s inſcribed, Which was to be done. 

PROPOSLTION XIV. 

Bout a given Pentagon, which is equilateral, and equiangled, 
to circumſcribe a Circle. 

Let the given Pentagon, which is equilateral, and equiangled, be 
ABCDE. It is required about the Pentagon as cp E, to circumſeribe 
a Circle. Let each of the angles Bcd, DE, be cut into halves by 
the lines CE, DF; and from the point r, wherein the lines cs, dF, 

do 

OF GEOMETRY. | 171 

do meet, let there to the points B, A, E, be joyned the lines rs, x 4, 
FE. As it was in the foregoing Propofition ſo may it here be de- 
monſtrated, that every one af the angles cs A, BAR, AE p, is cut into 
halves by the lines FB, FA, FE. | 

Now foraſmuch as the angle z is equal 
to the angle c DR, and of the angle zoo, the 
half is FcD, and of cDE, the half is cp there- , / 
fore the angle cn is equal to the angle Dc; fo 
that the fide Ec is equal to the fide F ov. 

In like manner ſhall be demonſtrated, that 
every one of the ſides FB, FA, FE, is equal to 
each of the ſides Fc, FD. Wherefore the five 
lines F 4, FB, Fc, FD, F E, are equal to one ano- 
ther; therefore to the center x, and diſtance, any one of the lines 
FA,FB, FC, FD, FE, a Circle being deſcribed, ſhall paſs alſothrough 
the remaining points, and ſhall be circumſcribed about the Pen- 

tagon ABC DE, which is equilateral and equiangled. Let it be cir- 
cumſcribed, and be the Circle AB CDE. 

angled, a Circle is circumſcribed. Which was to be done. 
5 \PROPOSITION XV. 

N a given Circle to inſcribe an equilateral, and equiangled 
Hexagon. | 

Let the given Circle be AB CDE F. It is required in the Circle 
ABCDEB, to infcribe an equilateral, and equiangled Hexagon. Of the 
Circle ABC DEF, let the Diameter aÞ be drawn, and the center 6 
be taken. Now to the center v, and diſtance ps, let the Circle EH H 
be deſcribed, and E, cG being joyned, let them 
be produced to the points B, , and let AB. Bc, op, Gov N 
DE, EE, FA, be joyned. I ſay, that the Hexagon * r, 
ABCDE, is equilateral and equiangled. Now for- 
aſmuch as the point 6 is the center of the Circle \| -——T | 
ABCDEF; therefore GE is equal to GD. Again, x A 
becauſe b is the center of the Circle BG cn, 
therefore DE is equal to DG. But GK has been D 
proved equal to GD; wherefore o E is equal to D; 
therefore the Triangle 26D 1s equilateral, and 
the three angles E GD, p E, v EG, are Equal to one 
another. Now becauſe in equicrural Triangles, the angles of the 
baſe are equal to one another | Prop. 5. El. I., and the three angles 
of a Triangle are equal to two right | Prop. 32. El. Li, therefore the 
angle EOD is a third part of two right angles. In like manner the 
angle v ſhall be proved a third of two right angles; and „ 

tne 

Therefore about-a given Pentagon, which is equilateral and equi- 

172 THE ' FOURTH ELEMENT 

the line cd, ſtanding upon the line k , makes the collateral angles 
EGG ce equal to two right angles Prop. 13. El. I]; therefore 
the remaining angle co is alſo a third of two right angles: where- 
fore the angles ED, Dc, CGB, are equal to one another: And 
alſo the vertical angles 30A, 4 GF, F E, are equal to x GD, DGC, CGB 
Prop. 15. El. I]; wherefore the fix angles E GD, DG, CGB, BGA, AGF, 

FGE, are equal to one another: But equal angles inſiſt upon equal 
circumferences | Prop. 20. El. III.]; therefore the ſix circumferences 

AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, FA, are equal to one another. 

But under equal circumferences are ſubtended 

equal ſtrait lines Prop. 29, El. III.]; therefore */ Na 
the fix ſtrait lines are equal to one another: where- /| 3 21; 

circumference AE is equal to the circumference . 

_ ED, let there be added the circumference ABCD 55 
common; therefore the whole circumference 

FAB COD, is equal to the whole circumference 

EDC BA. But the angle FED inſiſts upon the cir- = 
cumference FAB OD, and the angle A FE upon the circumference 
EDCBA; therefore the angle AE is equal to the angle FER D Prop. 
27. El. III.] In like manner ſhall be demonſtrated, that the re- 
maining angles of the Hexagon ABC DEF, are every one equal to 
either of the angles A FE, FED; therefore the Hexagon ABC DE E, 
is equiangled. But it has been proved alſo equilateral; and it is in- 

fore the Hexagon A3 C DEF is equilateral. C SB) 
I ſay, that it is alſo equiangled. For becauſe the g oY 4 

ſcribed in the Circle ABG ο EF. n nov 2 
Therefore in a given Circle, an equilateral, and equiangled Hexa- 
gon is inſcribed. Which was to be done 

15 "Corollary. 

e- mani, tht the Jp of a inſeribed Hexagon, is equal to the Radius 
of the Circle, | | | #4 Sug aps | 

Aud if by the points A, B, C, D, E, F, we draw Tangent, #6 the Circle, there ſhall be 
carcumſcribed about the Circle an equilateral and equiaug/ed Hexagon, according to what 
hath been ſaid of the Pentagon. And moreayer, by the like as hath been, ſaid of the Pentagon, 
we ſball in a given Hexagon mſcribe a Circle, and alſo circumſcribe. gs 

Corollary 2. added. 

Becauſe. the circumference of a' Circle is greater than the Perimeter of any 
Polygon inſcribed in it; and every; fide of an inſcribed! Hexagon is equal to 
the Radius; therefore the circumference-of the Circle, being greater than the fix 
ſides of the inſcribed Hexagon, is alſo greater than the fix Radii, that is, than 
three Diameters of the Circle. | a *. wel 
It being therefore manifeſt from this Propſition of Fuclde, that the circumfe- 
rence is more than triple of the Diameter, Geometricians have in all Ages en- 
quired how much more it is. Ader onto) _ Te u 

The great Archimedes has brought it within the eaſieſt limits, and the beſt for 
common uſe. | 0 | * oh be tan 
- Therefore if we ſuppoſe the Diameter to be 5, and ſo conſequently divided 

| into 

OF GEOMETRY. 153 
into ſeven parts, then the cixcumference ſhall be more than thrice ſeven, that is; 
mary hon 21 by on ; 3 winks Diameter. 1 

ereu e circumference, compared to the Diameter, is generally taken to 
be as 22 to F this proportion (tho' 1 too great) being near eno tha truth 
for any common uſe. To which only end this Rule was given by Archimedes, who 
could otherwiſe have proceeded nearer and neaxer, to any approximation deſireable; 
but becauſe after all, the nature of the ſubject admits not of a Geometrical exact- 
neſs, and equality, That great Maſter of Geometry rightly judg d it moſt conve- 
nient, to ſtate the menſuration between the . and Diameter in the 
eaſieſt and readieft Terms, 2s a2 to 7 almoſt, So chat if the Diameter be ſuppoſed 
to be 7, as for inſtance 7 Inches, then ſhall the circumference of the Circle be Aeg 
22 Inches. And the like in Feet, Cubits, Miles, or any other meaſure. 

Advertiſement. 

We are laſtly to obſerve in this place, that the Equilateral Triangle, the Sqi 
the Equilateral Pentagon and Hexagon, are the four fimple and primitive — 
from which all other Regular Polygons do ariſe, that are mutually with a Circle, 
or with one another Inſcriptible and Circumſeriptible: therefore Baal has moſt 
accurately, in theſe four Figures, ſet forth a general method ſufficient for this kind 
of Subject, and applicable to all other regular Polygons. But of them in parti- 
cular he makes here no mention; becauſe theſe four are only requiſite to the ce 
ſideration of the five regular Platonic Bodies, wherewith Euclide concludes hi 
Elements. And befides, the reſt, as they are infinite in multitude, fo are they di- 
vided from theſe after one and the ſame manner of Conſtruction; and their De- 
monſtration is agreeable every way to what is here already ſet forth in theſe 
primitive Figures. RR bad 

Firſt then, from an inſcribed is conſtituted an inſcribed Oc n, by the 
biſection of a Quadrantal Arch [ Prop. 30. El. III.], and by drawing ftrait lines 
from the angular points of the aſcribed Square, to the points of biſection. 

Again, af there be drawn by the angular points of the inſcribed Octagon, ſtrait 
lines touching the Circle, then ſhall be conſtituted a circumſcribed Octagon, like 
as before in the Circumſcription of the Pentagon [Prop. 12. EL IV. I. Now agaj 
if the Octagonal Arch be biſected, there may, in like manner, be ueber oy 
circumſcribed, a regular Polygon of 16 ſides; and ſo forwards of 3a, of 64, &c. 
infinitely. ah 

Secondly, from the biſection of the Pentagonal Arch, may in like manner be in- 
ſcribed and circumſeribed — And from the buſection of 3 Decagonal Arch 
my — on" cixumſcribed a regular Polygon of 26 ſides, and fo forward 

40 $0, c. znfanitely. | 100 | 

Lally, from the biſaction of an Hexagonal Arch, may:be inſcribed and circum- 
{aribed a Duodecagon: And from the biſection of a — Arch, may be 
inſcribed and ciraamicribed a regular Polygon of 24 ſo forward of 48, 

of RC, inſinitel Y. : | M 
— ven Arch, there are from a 

WALLA 

Is this method . — 2 & * N 
Square, Pentagon, eragon, conſtructed 1s is Only in 
the following Propoſition 2 — a Polygon of 15 fides; which, although it 
be effected by the biſeRion of an Arch alſo; yer it is in a peculiar and different 
manner from the forementioned Polygons. For which reaſog it is ſubjoyn'd 
by Euckde to the precedent Propoſitions, to complegt this Element. 

rence A B, being the fifth part of the Circle, 

8 
2 * 

174 THE FOURTH ELEMENT 

e 6972 e 2 ROPOSLIION. XYL..... 

Na given Circle to inſcribe an equilateral and equiangled Qu;n- 

] decagon, or a Figure of fifteen ſides. | 189 8 
Let the given Circle be a BCD. It is required in the given Circle 

A BCD, to inſcribe an equilateral and equiangled Quindecagon. Let Ac 

be the fide of an equilateral Triangle inſcribed in the Circle ABD: 

and of an equilateral Pentagon let the fide be as; therefore of 

what equal parts the Circle AB cp is fifteen, of ſuch the circumfe- 

rence ABc, being the third part of the 
Circle, ſhall be five: and the-circumfe- 

ſhall be three; therefore the remaining 
Arch ge is two of thoſe equal parts. Let 
BC be cut into halves in the point x | by 
Prop. 30. El. III.]; wherefore each of the 
circumferences BE, Ec, is the fifteenth \/\ 
part of the Circle 483 cp. If therefore N V4 
drawing the ſtrait lines B; E, E c, we adapt | 
continually, in the Circle AB c, ſtrait 5 

lines equal to them, there ſhall be inſcribed in the ſame an equi- 
lateral and equiangled Quindecagon. Which was to be done. 

In like manner, as before in the Pentagon, if by the diviſions of 
the Circle, we draw Tangents to the Circle, there ſhall be circum- 
{cribed an equilateral and equiangled Quindecagon. And moreover, 
by the like as before ſaid in the Pentagon, we ſhall in a given 
'Quindecagon, Equilateral, and Equiangled, inſcribe a Circle; and 
alſocircumſeribe. 4 4h | 1 1: 

.... .. Advertiſement. 

The ada © the only derivative Polygon that Euclide thought neceſſary 
to be phe rs] after the four Primitive Figures, namely, a Triangle, a Square, a 

Pentagon, and an Hexagon: becauſe of its peculiar manner of Conſtruction, from 

the inſcription of | an - £quiateral Triangle, and „ compared together. Yet 
it may be ſaid} that a Polygen of 24 ſides might alſo have been conſtructed in the 
ſelf ſame. manner, from the inſcription of a Sqaare and Hexagon compared toge- 
ther. But we are to know, that this Polygon of 24 ſides ariſes more naturally from 
the biſection of an and then of a Duodecagon ; like as others, from the bi- 
ſection of 'a;Square, or of a Pentogon, as is obſerv d in the foregoing Advertiſement. 
And therefore Huslids judged it inartificial to take notice of it in this place, as he 
hath done of a Quindecagom, which admits of no other way of Conſtruction. 
But of the Hapragem and Nonagon, Euchde makes no mention, becauſe, as before, 
for the inſcription of the Pentagon, there was firſt to be inſcribed an Eguicrural Tri- 
angle, having the angles at the baſe double to the angle at the Vertex; and then 
thoſe angles were to be biſected: So, for the inſcription of an Hepragon, it is firſt 
requiſite to inſcribe an Equicrural Triangle having the angles at the baſe triple to 

| the angle at the Vertex; and then to divide thoſe angles into three equal angles. 

Again, for the inſcription of a Nonagen, it is firſt neceſſary to inſcribe an Equi- 

lateral Triangle, and then to divide every one of its angles into three equal angles, 

3 whereby 

OF GEOMETRY. 175 

whereby to ſet forth the Arch of a N for that thrice 3 is 9 ; wherefore 
theſe Polygon: depend upon the Triſection of an angle. But now To TRISIHCT 
any Angle, or Arch, as Euclide hath demonſtrated How To B1sECT, in Prop. 9. 
EL I. and Prop. 30. El. III. falls not within the power of the Euchd#an plain 
Geometry, whole inſtruments are only 4 ſtrait Line, and a Circle, according to the 
three ſimple Poſffulata, laid down at our entrance into the Elements. For every 
Angle cannot, by the help of a ftrait line and a Circle only, be divided into 
three equal Angles. Yet, notwithſtanding the r of ſuch a Triſection, 
Orontius and many others, not having a true and inſight into the nature of 
this matter, that 1s, nor 2 what belongs to Plain, and what to Solid 
Geometry ; what —_— Magnitudes of two Dimenſions, and what to Magni- 
tudes of three: They have after much toyl, loſt their labour and reputation, 
therein vexing themſelves with impoſſibilities. 

Ce 1 THE 

— EO—IS __— —— —— 

* 17 7 
» ———— — — 
. o * - 
. 4 

176 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

- 1th 30 

— * * 9 * 14 k. hes. 4 * * "a hu —_—— — 
, "x 7 E's : — 89 0 

rere, —— 19 a - 2 
* : : 9 . . : . « : o N . P 1 - 
, , : 
* * - #* 7 : a : 
#F 3 74 g 124 4174 { 1 4 
U 
1 . a * a * k "+ i» 
1 1 i HE i E I P 1 H 
" - . y 
4&7 

o 
J - 1 = 
1 * az , N 

, J fi PF g a 

a = . L 4 9 - 4s <4 . - * 1 * o 8 $7 £ . 
1 
bod * 4 o ” 
Do 7 . . 8 ; YT « £ PR g 
21 5 F . : tas 141 4 y ” 
* 
\ , 1 
. . : U ” : . 
a} A / . s & 4 1754 ; ; 4 * 
5 ? N — a 0 2 
F - * . y 9 = - - . * . EE 52237 1 * 4 
„ 
, 1 | 
- ” * * . . 
U : * - # © : 4 7 
N & * * 1 1 9 N ” 1 - " þ 
* 
" 9 

* - E 8 0 held — 

mY = EEE 2144674 a Sr 8 #7 70 " 
7 : 2 

H1s Element depends upon none of the foregoing, but ſands alone as an uni- 
| verſal Matheſis. It is like Metaphyſics to Natural Philoſophy : a Tranſcen- 

dent Element of pure, and prime Mathematics, and ſo much abſtracted not only 
from Matter in any Subject, but alſo from every particular kind of Subjects, ſo as 
to be equally applicable to all the Species of Quantity ; to the Sciences, Geometry, 
and Arithmetic ; and beſides, univerſally to all other things, which are capable of 
compariſon, ſuch as Force, and Power in Agents; Intention, and Remiſſion in Qua- 
lities; Velocity, and Tardity in Motions; Gravity, and Levity in Ponderations ; 
Modulation in ſounds ; Value, and Eſtimation in Things; and whatſoever elſe may 
admit of any Gradation. 

But Euclide in a Geometrical method purſues his courſe, and does accordingly 
apply this Element to Magnitudes : yet in ſuch an artificial and ſubtil Form of 
Demonſtration, that it might in general be made uſe of whereſoever in the nature 
of things, the reaſon of Man can compare one thing with an other. 

This Doctrine of Proportions cannot be well explained without the uſe of Num- 
bers; and therefore whoever intends rightly to underſtand this Element, muſt come 
furniſhed with a moderate skill in Arithmetic. We have therefore apply d Num- 
_ to the Definitions and Propoſitions , for illuſtration ſake to the younger 
Students. | 

I ſhould farther adviſe that with the Study of this Element, alſo Euclid Ele- 
ments of Numbers were together peruſed, eſpecially thoſe Propoſitions where 
Proportions are concernd. For the DoCtrine of Proportions is chiefly, or rather 
only explicable by Numbers: and what here is app yd to — was ſe- 
cretly derived from thoſe Elements, which do much further a right underſtanding 
of this. It will be at firſt ſufficient for * only to read the Propoſitions of 
thoſe Elements, and carefully to obſerve the Expoſſtion ; which may inſtruct them 
enough for their preſent uſe in this Element, without giving themſelyes the 
trouble of being convinced by Demonſtrations. 

DEFINITIONS. 
Of Part and Multiple. 

DEFINITION I 

Part is a magnitude of a magnitude, a leſs of a greater, when 
A A. be leſs meaſures the greater. 

DEFINITION II. 

Multiple is a greater of a leſs, when the greater is meaſured 
"A. Y the leſs. 

5 A Part 

OF GEOMETRY. 177 

A Part and Multiple are each a magnitude of a magnitude; a Part a leſs magni- 
tude of a greater; a Multiple a greater magnitude of a | 
leſs: both combind in a mutual feſpect to one another, *—— 

As A is faid to be a part of B C, when repeated ſome cer- Y 
tain ti as here tis thrice, It doth exactly meaſure. C 
and c the magnitade B C. | 

For a Part is here to be underſtood in a peculiar ſenſe; and not as when it is 
ſaid that the whote is greater than its part: where a part is taken indifferently 
for any portion of the whole, as a leſs quantity contained in a greater. 

But now in this place, by a Part is meant ſuch a portion of the whole, which 
repeated meaſures the whole preciſely. And again, in this reſpect the whole is 
call d a Multiple of that part, either Duple, Triple, Quadruple, &c. becauſe it con- 
tains the ſame juſt ſo many times, as twice, thrice, four times, &c. and is noted thus, 
it, &c. And the Part which ſo many times repeated, meaſures the whole, is ac- 
cordingly ſaid to be one half, or one third, or one fourth part, &c. of that whole 
or Multiple; and is noted thus, 4, 4,1, &c. 

Euclide begins with Part and Multiple as a proper foundation of the Doctrine 
of Proportions, becauſe theſe are in the nature of an Unite and a Number, by 
which only, the Meaſure, Value, and Proportion of one thing to another can be 
expreſſed. For as an Unite is a part and meaſure of every Number, and every Num- 
ber is a Multiple of an Unite; ſo in magnitudes a part is as an Unite, the meaſure 
of its Multiple; and every magnitude may as a Multiple be divided by equal par- 
titions into meaſuring parts, as Number into meaſuring Unites. Beſides, a Part 
and Multiple, not only anſwer to Unity and Number, but alſo to Numbers them- 
ſelyes. For any Number may be a part of ſome other Numbers, and theſe again 
be Multiples of the ſame. For inſtance, 2 is a part of 12, becauſe 2 taken 6 times 
meaſures, or makes 12, and is therefore a ſixth part of 12. In like manner 3 is a 
fourth part, 4 a third, 6 an half of 12. And again 12 is a Multiple of each of 
theſe : Sextuple of 2, Quadruple of 3, Triple of 4, Duple of 6. So that 2, 3, 4, and 
6; tho' — 2 a Number, yet in reſpect of 12, each being a part of 12, is as an 
Unite. For 2 is h 3 1844 4 184, 6 18; of 12, 

But again, x is not in this ſenſe a part of 12, becauſe 5 being twice taken makes 
but ro, and thrice taken makes 15, and ſo added to it ſelf doth not meaſure 12, 
but is either under, or over it. For the ſame reaſon neither 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, are 
ſaid to be a part of 12. But in this caſe ſuch a portion of any Number, or Magni- 
tude is called Parts, for that it contains ſome certain and meaſuring parts of the 
whole, but is not it ſelf a meaſure of that whole: As 8 meaſures not 12; yet 
becauſe it contains 4, a meaſure and part of 12 ſome certain times, therefore 8 is 
ſaid to be parts of 12, namely two thirds, or two third parts of 12. Likewiſe 5 
meaſures not 12, yet becauſe it doth certain times contain 1, the Monade or Unite, 
which is the common part and meaſure of all Numbers, therefore 5 is properly 
ſaid to be parts of 12, as being five Unites of 12 the whole. 

And in general Euclide hath demonſfrated in Prop. 4. El. VII. That every leſt 
Number is of every Greater either a Part, or Parts. | 

Such like Quantities both in Number, and Magnitude, are diſtinguiſhed by the 
names of Quotal, and Quantal Parts, uſually called Pars go and Pars Aliquanta. 

A Quotal part meaſures the whole: which is then called a Multiple of that part. 

* Quantal part meaſures not the whole: but repeated is either leſs or greater 
than it. 

From hence we may perceive that a Quotal part is either an Unite, or if a Num- 
ber, yet uſed as an Unite in the menſuration of the whole. And that a Quantal part 
is an Aggregate of Quotal parts, which together are not a meaſure of the whole, 
that is, make not any Quotal part thereof, 

Ce: 3 Of 

= 
* 

E 
- 
_— 
— 

= A . 2 * —— . j- * 
. wel” a= 8 

— - —_ — — 

— - - 
— —— — 

178 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Of Equimultiples. 

Moreover in Number and Magnitude, when two or more Magnitudes are equall 
Multiple of other Magnitudes, that is do equally, or equal times (jos ſays . 
dide) contain other Magnitudes, they are then call d Eg ples of their re- 
ſpective Magnitudes, or Quotal parts. As 20 and 12 are Equimultiples of 5 and 3, 
for that 20 contains four times, as likewiſe 12 does 3, ſo that how many fives 
are in 20, ſo many threes are in 12: the multitude or number of the 
parts being in both Multiples equal, vx. four in each. And therefore all Equi- 
multiples as they equally contain their Quotal parts, ſo are they again equally 
diviſible into the ſame number of Quotal : As 20 into 4 fives, and 12 into 
4 threes, which kind of Diviſion is moſt frequently uſed in the Demonſtratiqns 
of this Element. 

Of Proportions, and Proportionals. 

DEFINITION III. 

Roportion is an habitude of two Homogeneal e Magnitudes un- 
to one another, according to Quantily. 

Proportion is by Euclide called aiyes, Logos, a word among the Greeks of various 
ſignifications, and commonly Tranſlated Ratio, as ambiguous a word as the Greet. 
Cicero therefore calls it Proportio, a name properly uſed where the conſideration is 
what Portion one thing is of an other. 

Proportion therefore in general is an Habitude, Relation, or Compariſon of two 
things to one another, as of A com to B, according to ſomething, which is 
common to them both, or of which they both partake, each in ſome degree of 
compariſon toward the other. A the firſt of the two is in the ordinary way of 
ſpeaking the Antecedent , likewiſe B the ſecond is called the Conſequent, unto 
which the Antecedent is compared. The Antecedent and the Conſequent, are ſaid 
to be the Terms of the Proportion, for that in them the Proportion between An- 
tecedent and Conſequent, is bounded and terminated. = 4 

In this place Proportion is only conſidered between two Magnitudes; and there- 
fore, asall other $1 nod comparable to one another, ſo theſe are alſo to be Homo- 
geneal, that is, of the ſame kind: as a Line to a Line, a Superficies to a Superfi- 
cies, a Solid to a Solid, is to be compared according to the Dimenſions that each 
do in ſua ſpecie partake of: and therefore the compariſon is to be made according 
to Quantity, that is, as far as appertains to Quantity: not in reſpect to any Qua- 
lity, Power, Weight, Motion, Price (as Lead or Gold), or any other Eſtimation 
whatſoever. 

Neither again is Quantity here taken abſolutely, or in a Predicamental Notion, 
as a Genus to Continual, and Diſcrete Quantity, to Magnitude, and Multitude. 
But it is to be underſtood relatively, in order to ſuch a quantitative Valuation of 
Magnitude, as where the Quantity of one Magnitude is comparatively to be efti- 
mated by an other. 

In this ſenſe is Euclide to be underſtood by xam Tyhngryme, according to Quan- 
tity. For the Greeks make a juſt diſtinction between Toons, and r, between 
Quantity abſolute, as confi in its own nature, and Quantity relative, in a 
reſpect to Menſuration and Eſtimation. The Latines uſe only Quantitas for both, 
as Rectus for ws and ide; but where proper words are wanting, the ſenſe muſt 
make out the proper meaning of ambiguous words. | 

For the better underſtanding .this preſent matter, review the Annotations at 
Def. 2. EL. I. concerning the application of Number to Magnitude ; where the 
whole buſineſs about the Quantity of Magnitudes is fully explained. And further 
obſerve, that the Quantity of every number is ſhewn by the name of the num- 
ber, as Ten fignifies ſo many Unites collected into one number under that name: 

Unity, 

OE GEOMETRY. wg 

Unity, or a Monade being the only prime conſtituent part, and therefore the 
common meaſure alſo of all numbers, giving the Quantity of every number by 2 
known name in all Languages. | 1 4 to 
But the Quantity of Magnitudes doth not appear after ſuch an open manner, 
becauſe every Magnitude, be it never ſo great, or ſo little, is in it ſelf only umm 
Integrum, one Integral thing, and tho diviſible into infinite parts; yet hath no 
prime conſtituent part for a common meaſure of Magnitudes, like an Unite in 
numbers. When therefore it is asked Quantum, or quam Magnum, how much or 
. how great a thing is? The queſtion tacitely relates to ſome arbitrary meaſure com- 
monly received amongſt us, by which Magnitudes are uſually eſtimated: as an 
Inch, Foot, Cubit, or the like. And when a Magnitude is ſaid to contain a cer- 
tain number of ſuch, or ſuch a meaſure ; That then is reputed to be the quantity 
of the ſame Magnitude: but in reality it is its proportion to 1. that is, to its Geo- 
metrical Unite, and meaſure, If an Inch be put * a general meaſure of Magni- 
tudes, then the Quantity of a Yard is ſaid to be 36 Inches, becauſe it contains the 
ſtated meaſure ſo many times. In like manner a Foot is ſaid to be 12 Inches. 
But again, if a Yard asa certain length be compared to a Foot as another length; 
then a Yard ſhall be found to be triple of a Foot: and this is called the Proportion of 
a Tard to a Foot. Likewiſe in general, the quantity of any number is ever accord- 
ing to its name ſo many Unites, becauſe an Unite is the natural conſtituent of all 
numbers. As the Quantity of 12 is always 12 Unites: but in particular compariſons 
of number to number, the Proportion of 12 compared to 4, is ſaid to be triple of 4, 
or in a triple proportion; and compared to 3 is quadruple. The value of the 
Antecedent in Proportion being changeable according to the change of the Con- 
ſequent ; becauſe in ſuch particular compariſons the Conſequent is as a meaſure, 
by which the Antecedent ought to be eſtimated. For in every Proportion 1s con- 
ſidered how much the Antecedent contains of the Conſequent ; the nu. or 
Quantuplum, what Quantuple the Antecedent is of the Conſequent. For be the 
Antecedent either equal, greater or leſs than the Conſequent, it is always the 
Quantum of the Conſequent contained in the Antecedent, which gives the propor- 
tion of Antecedent to Conſequent. And as the Antecedent contains more, or leſs 
of its Conſequent, ſo tis proportionally valued in a reſpect to that Conſequent. 
As to give a familiar inſtance, if a Penny be made the meaſure of Mony; then the 
Quantity of a Shilling ſhall always be accounted 12 Pence. But the Proportion of 
a Shilling compared to a Groat, or to a Crown, or to a Pound, is in theſe divers 
compariſons of a different value; triple of a Groat, a fifth part of a Crown, a 
twentieth part of a Pound, as containing ſo much of each Conſequent. And in this 
ſenſe Proportion is ſaid to be an Habitude according to Quantity. Of 

rann? The Diviſion of Proportions. 

Proportion is either of Equality, when the Antecedent is equal to the Conle- 
quent; or of Inequality, when greater or leſs, | | m is; 
If the Antecedent be greater, then it is called Proportion of the greater Inequality, 
for that the compariſon is of the greater to the leſs. - 185 5 
If the — be the leſs, it is called Proportion of the leſs Inequality, becauſe 
the leſs is compared to the greater. Tt 110 
Moreover, becauſe there are many Homogeneal Magnitudes which are incom- 
menſurable to one another (as the fide of a Square and its Diameter); ſo that 
their mutual Proportions, or how much one contains of the other, cannot be ſet 
forth by, any common meaſure, nor be expreſſed by any number whatſoever; 
therefore in magnitudes, Proportion is again divided into Effable and Ineffable, Ex- 
preſſible and Inexpreſſible by number: and commonly called proportion Rational 
and Irrational, This fifth Element is framed with ſuch an artifice as indiflerenely 
to comprehend both. | 2 a e ay "= 
Proportion of Equality is always Rational (tho the Terms be ſometimes Irra- 
tional); or that every thing may have its equal, and be to an other in a Rational 
ys eee Bs account, 

* 
13341 . 

180 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

actount, 28 1 to 2. It is alſo the ground from whence all other P ions do 
ariſe; and a principal Subject of the preceding Elements, tho not the name 
of Proportion: As that Vertical Angles are equal to one another, the three Angles of 
Tingle are equal to two Right, &c. Beſides inſinite other ſuch like Propofitions 
all Geometry. It i alſo of a moſt general uſe in Algebra, and the 
of TI IE | 

+ Proportions of Lacquality which are Rational, are diſtinguiſhed into five kinds 
of the greater Inequality, and into as many of the lefs. 

The Varieties of Rational Proportion. 
Of Multiple Proportion, and Submultiple. 

- The moſt ſimple Proportions of Incquality, are founded in the firſt and ſecond 
Definitions of Part and Multiple. | 
Fm iſon of the one to the other, the Multiple be Antecedent and the 
Part be t. then it is called Multiple Proportzon. If the Part be Antece- 
dent und the Maltiple be Conſequent, chen it is called Sabmultiple Proportion. As 
12 compared to 4 is Multiple Proportion, and named triple: And 4 to 12 is Sub- 
multiple Proportion, and named Subtriple. The like appellation is uſed in all 
Multiple and Submukiple Proportions; as Qua 7 Sabquadruple ; Quintuple, 
Subquimtuple, &. The other Rational proportions of Inequality, are made by the 
various Compoſmions of Part and Multiple, as followeth. | 

Of Multiple Superparticular, and Submultiple Superparticular. 
Firſt, if above the exact Maltiple of the Conſequent, there remains in the Ante- 
cedent amy Quota! part of the Conſoquent, as an hatf, a third, a fourth, or a 
tefth part of the Canſoquent, (or otherwiſe thus a Seſquialteral, a Seſqui 
zl, a a part, &c.)' then the proportion is ca 
yerphas beſides the exact Multiple is a parti- 
| uent. As 13 to 4 is in Multiple Y 
„ Which is known to be fo, by dividing the greater by the leſs; 
che Quotient 34 thews 13 to contain 4 thrice, and ane fourth part of the 
4 wherefove this proportion is named triple Seſquiquartal, and is noted 
thus 34. So ro to 4 1s in ſuperparticular proportion duple ialteral 
2}, that as a;: For where the Numerator is a part, that is, a meafure of the De- 
nominator, dividing the Denommator by the Numerator, and this by it ſelf, it 
will be brought to an Unite, and the proportion plainly appear to be ſuperpar- 
ticular, as here } is reducible to 3. So in all Superparticulars the Numerator is, or 
may ever be reduced to an Unite: As 40 to 12 is 31} or 35 Triple Seſquitertial. 
— of the Terms, che leſs is compared to the greater, and 
led Submultiple Superparticular : 88 13 wog, inverted, is 4 to 13 vi. Subtriple ſeſ- 
1 and u noted thus gj, which figniftes that 4 the Antecedent, contains four 
parts of the Conſequent, conſiſting of 23 fuch equal parts. * 

Ol Multiple Superpartient, and Submultiple Süpetpartleut 

- But mom, if above che exact Multiple of the Canſequent, the Surpluſage be a 
au part of dne Conſequent, then the proportion is called Multiple Syperpar- 
8:2, dor that che Overplus is not amy quota part of the Conſequent, Go ns 
——ů— ber, nich mute a quantal part, that meaſures not the 
ole * ths B4o'3 in! wn'Malktple Superpartient: for dividing the 
d by y 'the hyp ger 27 $ to contain 3 twi 

and two thirds of the Conſequent 3: therefore-this proportion is T Dup 
ſaperbizepem, and-according'to the/Quotient'is noted 23. 80 22 to 8 is 2 for 23 
Dale ſupertriqunrtul. For in all Swperpartiencs Where the Namerator and Deno- 

minator 

OF GEOMETRY. 181 

minator happen to have a common part and meaſure, as here; have 2 to each in 
common; then are they by Diviſion to be reduced to other numbers, which are 
Prime to one another, that is, have no number for a meaſure common to them 
both: as 5 is reduced to 1. And again, by tranſverſion comparing the leſs to the 
greater, the proportion is called Submultiple Superpartient, as 8 to 3, inverted, is; 

to 8, Subduple, and is noted thus „ which ſignifies, that 3 the Antecedent, con- 

tains three parts of the Conſequent, conſiſting of eight ſuch cqual parts. 

Superparticular and Subſuperparticular. 

Now if the Antecedent be not in any manner a Multiple of the Conſequent, 
but contains the Conſequent Only once, and moreover a particular Quotal part of 
the Conſequent, then the proportion is called by the ſingle name of Superparti- 
cular : as 3 to 2 is in proportion Superparticular, according to the Quotient 13, 
which ſheweth 3 the Antecedent to contain 2 the Conſequent once, and one halt 
of two; and is named proportion Seſquialteral: ſo 15 to 12 is 1 or 1;. For the 
Numerator 3 being a quotal part of the Denominator 12, is by Diviſion reduced 
to 3, and the proportion ſhewn to be Seſquiquartal 11. So in all Superparticular 
proportions the Quotient is always an Unite with a fraction, whoſe Numerator is 
likewiſe an Unite, or reducible to an Unite. Again, by tranſverſion comparin 
the leſs to the greater, as 2 to 3, the proportion is Subſuperparticular, and — 
Subſeſquialteral, which is thus noted: ſhewing that the Antecedent 2 contains 
two parts of 3 the Conſequent. . 

Superpartient and Subſuperpartient. 

Laſtly, if as before, the Antecedent be not any ways a Multiple of the Conſe- 
quent, but contains its Conſequent Only once, and moreover jome parts (which to- 

oether meaſure not the Conſeguent) then the proportion is thereupon called Su- 

perpartient ; as 8 to ; is by the Quotient 1 3 ſhewn to be in proportion Superpar- 
tient, and particularly Supertriquintal ; that is, the Antecedent 8 contains the 
Conſequent 5 once, and moreover three parts of the Conſequent 5. So 14 to 10 
is 1144, or 1}, by diving 4 and 10 by their common meaſure 2, and this is named 
proportion Superbiquintal. So in all Superpartient proportions the Quotient 1s 
always an Unite with a fraction, whole Numerator is ever a number: and by this 
it is diſtinguiſhed from the Quotient of a Superparticular proportion, where the 
Numerator of the fraction is ever to be an Unite. 

For further, note that in this matter of fractions, whenſocver the Numerator 
can meaſure the Denominator, the ſame may divide it ſelf, and the Denomina- 
tor; and then ſhall that Numerator be brought to an Unite, and the fraction 
be Superparticular in its leaſt Terms. 

And when both Numerator and Denominator can be meaſured by an other num- 
ber, then each of them being divided by that common meaſure, the fraction will 
be Superpartient and expoled in its ſmalleſt Terms. 

Alle in all fractions, whether of Magnitudes or Numbers, the Denominator is 
ever a ſuppoſed Totum, which conſiſts of ſo many parts, as the Number of that 
Denvminator ſignifes. 

Again, to finiſh all the Varieties of Rational proportions ; the Superpartient is 
likewiſe by tranſverſion of its Terms in comparing the leſs to the greater, called 
Subſuperpartient, as 5 to 8, or ; is Subſupertriquintal : and 10 to 14, or ii 1s Sub- 
ſuperbiquintal. 

Theſe are the five kinds of Rational proportion of the greater Inequality, Mal- 
tiple, Super particular, Superpartient, Multiple Superparticular , Multiple Fuperpartient. 
To which anſwer as many of the leſs Inequality, ariſing from the tranſverſion of 
the ſame Terms, and diſtinguiſhed by adding Sb to the other Appellations. 

Now here from the Quotients you may obſerve, that all theſe kinds of Rational 
proportions ariſe from Unity, Part, _ Multiple. For' one compared to one 

makes 

— 
—— 
* 

ah. 
— — 
— = —_— — 

_— 
— 

— - 
— — 

mr .. 

* 

8 — o 
B:: eg NE IR IE 

187 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

makes proportion of Equality : One with a part to one makes Superparticular pro- 
portion : One with parts to one makes Superpartient. Again, many to one makes 
Multiple proportion: Many with a part to one makes Multiple ſuperparticular: 
Many with parts to one makes Multiple ſuperpartient, as theſe Quotients repre- 
ſent: which are alſo the Denominators or Exponents of Proportions in the man- 
ner following. | 

The Species. Superparticular. Superpartient. Multiple. 

Exponents. 13. 153. 13. 18. 13. nnn. 

nm. . 1 1. % F 

The Species, Multiple Superparticular. Multiple Supirpartient. 
Exponents, 24. 23 35. 46 $5. 64. 23 22. 34. 43 52. 
Leaft Terms. . +} J. . 1. + n 

Of the Exponent of Rational Proportion. 

Now to diſcover unto which of theſe kinds the proportion between any two 
ropoſed Terms (as between 45 and 40) ſhould be referred, we are to reduce thoſe 
Fas unto two ſuch others, which ſhall be one and the ſame Character and Ex- 
ponent, common to all poſſible Terms in that 3 and which therefore 
muſt neceſſarily be the leaſt and prime Terms of the ſame. 

How then to find out the leaſt and prime Terms of any proportion, we are to 
divide the greater by the leſs ; and tſſen the Qaotient gives the ſole and proper 
Terms of that proportion. For as the Diviſor is to the Dividend, ſo is an Unite to 
the Quotient: and as the Dividend to the Diviſor, ſo the Quotient to an Unite, Here 
therefore the Antecedent or Conſequent being brought to an Unite, the leaſt of 
Terms, the Quotient is manifeſtly the only common Exponent, and the certain 
ſtandard of any proportion that can be raiſed from Unity. Which alſo may be 
the ſame proportion in an infinite variety of ſeveral Terms. As 9 to 3, 12 to 4, 
18 to 6, t e Qgoticat 3, that is, 3 to 1, or i is the common Exponent of them 
all. So 45 to 40, 27 to 24, 18 to 16, 9 to 8. Here between theſe ſeveral Terms 
the Exponent of their proportions is the common Quotient 1 which ſhews the 

portion to be in every one Seſquioctaval. And the like infinitely in this and 
in all the other kinds of Rational proportions, the Quotient expounds and ſpecifies 
the proportion. Thus the Quotient is the Exponent of every proportion in its 
proper Quantity, Spectes, and Name, which therefore was by the Ancients called 
nog ru Nye, Proportzonts Fundum, the Fundamental proportion, or the propor- 
tion in its Fundamental Terms. Whereas then the Quotient is the Exponent of 
a Proportion, therefore the Notation of the proportion between any two Magni- 

tudes, as A and B, is in Species thus properly ſignified ©; that is, A divided by B: 
which being thus noted g, ſignifies the Quotient, or Exponent of the proportion 
between A and B. So = is C divided by D, and notes the proportion of C to D. 
And when the proportions are equal, it is thus repreſented by their Quotients, 
d: when unequal, the greater thus, 7-> 5, and the leſs thus, T 5 

Of Arithmetical Proportion. 

Laſtly, there is an other kind of Habitude between two Magnitudes or Num- 
bers xar may, according to the Hpyeroche, or Exceſs of one above the other: 
that is, according to the difference in majority, or minority between two Magni- 
tudes or Numbers. As in comparing 6 to a, or 2 to6 is conſidered, not as be- 
tore how much 6 the Antecedent contains of 2 the Conſequent, or two the Ante- 

. cedent contains of 6 the Conſequent; but how much s the greater exceeds 2 the 

leſs, or 2 the leſs is exceeded by 6 the greater: that is, what is the difference in 
majority or minority between 6 and 2, or 2 and 6. In both compariſons either 
| 5 of 

OF GEOMETRY. 18; 
of 6 the greater to 2 the leſs, or of 2 the leſs to 6 the greater, the excels, or difs 

ference is the ſame, namely 4. But now the proportion of s to 2 i triple, thres 
to one; and of 2 tos is ſubtriple, one to three: And this only kind of Habitude 
was taken by the Ancients to be azyes, Proportion. | 

But the Modern Mathematicians call the Habitude according to Exceſs, or dit- 
ference by the name of Arithmerical Proportion ; and the other defined by Euclide, 
is by them for diſtinction ſake called Geometrical Proportion: altho both be a 
plicable indifferently to Magnitudes and Numbers: Arithmetical as well to Magni- 
tudes, as to Numbers, and Geometrical as well to Numbers, as to Maguitudes. 

Arithmetical Proportion was likely ſo called, becauſe Numbers in their natural 
order of 1, 2, 3, &c. are not otherwiſe diſtinguiſhed than fram their Exceſs, or 
Difference by an Unite: therefore where the Exceſs, or Difference between two Num- 
bers, or Magnitudes is the thing conſidered, there that Habitude is ſaid to be an 
Arithmetical Proportion. But it might have been more properly called Proportion 
of Majority and Minority. 

Now in Geometrical Proportion becauſe there is conſidered how much one 
Term contains of the other, therefore the proportion between the two Terms is 
thewn in the Quotient, by dividing the greater by the leſs. 

But in Arithmerical Proportion becauſe there is confidered the difference be- 
tween the two Terms, therefore this Proportion of majority and minority, appears 
in the Remainder, by ſubtracting the leſs from the greater: Diviſion being made 
uſe of in Geometrical, and Subttra@ion in Arithmetical proportions, as the diffe- 
rent nature of theſe two kinds of Proportion do ſo require. 

DEFINITION IV. 

Mi: are ſaid to have proportion to one another, which 
being multiplied can exceed each the other. 

We have noted before, that upon compariſon of one thing to an other, the 
ſame muſt be made in a matter capable of augmentation and diminution, and of 
which the — compared together do in common participate, Now in Magni- 
tudes compared according to quantity, this Definition diſcovers when Magnitudes 
have a participation of one anothers quantities, by — property, that upon 
the ——— of themſelves they can mutually exceed each other: As the ſide 
of a Square doubled exceeds the Diameter: the Dianicter of a Circle quadrupled 
exceeds the Circumference, and theſe again multiplied can exceed the others. Now 
by this reciprocal Exceſs, and Comprehenfion of one another, it manifeſtly ap- 
pears that they fully communicate in each others Magnitudes, and theretore are 
capable of mutual compariſon according to Quantity. Whereas a finite (trait line 
multiplied never fo often cannot exceed the Magnitude of an Infinite: The angle 
of Contact in Circles, tho infinitely augmented, can never excecd the leaſt ſtrait- 
lin d angle. Theſe therefore not being to be made comprehenſive of each others 
Magnitudes by any poſſible multiplication, cannot be ſaid to have proportion to 
one another. Thus Eucliae determines in this matter. But ſome farther imagine 
that he expounds in this Definition what Magnitudes ſhould be accounted Homo. 
geneal. His words import nothing towards ſuch a ſenſe; but rather ſuppoſe that 
there are Homogeneal Magnitudes incapable of mutual proportion; and therefore 
mY us here a Touchſtone, by which to know what Homogencal Magnitudes can 

ſaid to have proportion to one another. Moreover in proportion the firſt 
conſideration is, that the compared Magnitudes be Homogeneal (a word here 
taken in that ſenſe as vulgarly underſtood): and to avoid Philoſophical diſ- 
putes (no ways ſuitable to an Elementary doctrine in Geometry) about angles, 
or other Magnitudes, what are Homogeneal, and what not, Euc/:de patles by this, 
(as elſewhere the like Controverſies) and without ſuch a conſideration, or deter- 
mination upon this point, only ſhews in „ how to diſcover when any kind 

of quantities are between themſelves capable of proportion; tho the ſame be un- 
Dd 2 known: 

184 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

known: And of ſuch, on both ſides, - capable and uncapable, we have now given 
ſome clear inſtances. | | 

It is beſides very incongruous, and againſt this whole Elementary method to 
make a Definition to be prepoſterouſly an interpretation of a word uſed before. 

DEFINITION V. 

e "7 are ſaid to be in the ſame proportion, the fir to 
be ſecond, and the third to the fourth, when according to 
any multiplication whatſoever, the Equimultiples of the firſt, and 
third compared to the Equimultiples of the ſecond and fourth, are 

either together Deficient, or together Equal, or together Exceeding 
each the other. 

Let there be four Magnitudes A, B, C, D; where A is compared to B, and C to 
D. Then let be taken any Equimultiples whatſoever of A the firſt and of C the 
third, the two Antecedents. As let E be of A, and F of C any Equimultiples, 
each of each, either duple, triple, quadruple, decuple, centuple, &c. as here they 
are duple. And again, let be taken any Equimultiples of B the ſecond, and of D 
the fourth, the two Conſequents, namely, let G be of B, and H of D any Equi- 
multiples, either the ſame as before of the Antecedents, or any other Equimulti- 
ples whatſoeyer, as here they are triple. 

A E 14. 
B_ uy 8 
C £ ils Euliugmas £2pntigh 4 
* 3. F 
| Rp. 
D_ ob þ NI 0 

Now when ever it is demonſtrated that according to any Multiplication what- 
ſoeyer, the Equimultiples E and F of the Antecedents A and C, compared to the 
Equimultiples G and H of the Conſequents B and DD, each to each, E to G, and 
and F to H; when theſe Equimultiples1 ſay are proved to be either together leſs, 
or equal, or Greater, E than G, and F than H ; then theſe Magnitudes A, B, C, D, 
are ſaid to be in the ſame proportion, A to B, as C to D. And therefore when 
in any one particular inſtance the contrary ſhall be demonſtrated, that the Equimul- 
tiple of one Antecedent exceeds the Equimultiple of its Conſequent, and the other 
exceeds not, but is either equal, or leſs; then thoſe expoſed Magnitudes are not 
in the ſame proportion, the firſt to the ſecond as the third to the fourth ; becauſe 
the agreement of the Equimultiples in a joint Defect, Equality, or Exceſs, ought 
to hold in any multiplication — rk, 

This is a general TEST, and an infallible Character of Proportional Magnitudes, 
Commenſurable, or Incommenſurable. But note, that Incommenſurable Magni- 
tudes can never have their Equimultiples equal; for then they would prove to 
be Commenſurable to one another ; Cre Incommenſurables are ſhewn to be 
proportional only from the _ Exceſs, or Defect of their Equimultiples. Where- 
as Commenſurable Magnitudes are capable both of a joint equality, and inequality, 
of their Equimultiples: And in reſpe& only to — Magnitudes the 
equality of the Equimultiples was here added, that the Definition might compre- 
hende all kind of Magnitudes; and the three forts of Equimultiples according to 
Defect, Equality, or Exceſs, might anſwer to all poſſible multiplications indiffe- 

rently, without conſidering whether the Magnitudes be either Commenſurable, or 
Incommenſurable. 
5 4 The 

OF GEOMETRY. 185 

The Notation of Proportionals is in Speczes, or Symbols thus commodiouſly 
ſignified A. B:: C. D; That is, as A to B, ſo C to D. Or thus, 3 2 f: that is, 

C 

the Exponent ? is equal to the Exponent 3, and ſhews the proportions to be 
the ſame. 

M 

After the Definition, which had now declared what Magnitudes are ſaid to be 
in the ſame proportion; there is next a name given to them. Let them be 
called Arancyer, Analogon, ſays Euclide. This word is uſed adverbially, and literally 
tranſlated is Equepropertionally : So that it is indifferent to ſay Magnitudes to be 
mn the ſame proportion, or in one word to be Equiproportionally, or Analogally, the 
firſt to the ſecond, as the third to the fourth. For Aa is a Præpoſition ot 2 
lity, and Araneyey implies ava ro Azyor: In, or of equal proportion, or the ſame 
proportion repeated. From Analogon is the abſtract A that is equality of 
proportions, which is commonly rendred Analogy, or Proportionality. 

Annotations on the Fifth Definition. 

This Definition all the Greeks received without exception, and Archimedes 
himſelf makes frequent uſe of it, as the only general and infallible ſign of propor- 
tional Magnitudes. But many of the Modern Geometricians ſtumble at it; for 
want it ſeems of a through inſpection into the bottom of this matter, which the 
Ancients better underſtood. 

Firſt, Therefore we ſhall examine upon what motives Men are commonly in- 
duced to except againſt it. Secondly we ſhall explain the nature of this Definition, 
and what was Euclid intent, and meaning, in defining proportional Magnitudes 
after ſuch a manner. Thirdly, we ſhall prove that this Definition is moſt ſuitable 
to the nature of Magnitude, and fully fatisfatory when rightly underſtood. 

Firſt then the joint, or Simultaneous Defect, Equality, or Exceſs in the Equimul- 
tiples of Antecedents, and Conſequents, which affection Euclide puts for the de- 
termining of proportional Magnitudes, ſeems to have no affinity, or conjunction 
with the uſual, and natural notion that Men have of things, which they acc 
and name Proportionals: and therefore they are ſtartled at ſuch a — 
unexpected Definition, ſo much different from the common Idea they have of 
this matter. For in all affairs wherein Men are converſant, whether concerning 
Quantities, Qualities, Powers, Actions, Motions, Value, Commerce, or other Nego- 
tiations, they do naturally judge by Number, and Meaſure, when things have between 
themſelves the ſame proportion, and when not. Where then between things com- 
pared together they find an agreement according to Number, and Meaſure, there 
ſuch are properly accounted Proportional to one another. As when A is as much 
of B, as C 18 of D, Tantum, Quantum, the one of the other, then A to B, and C 
to D, are commonly reputed to be in the ſame proportion. So that in Propor- 
tionals the Antecedents are conceived to be always EQUuiQaNTUPLES of their 
Conſequents: and this Equality to be ſet forth in number, and meaſure, 

Wherefore Men thus rationally conceiving aforehand the condition, and ſtate 
of things they call proportional, and being thus already acquainted both with 
the thing, and name, they are thereupon prepoſſeſſed in their judgements, and 
their very prænotion, or natural præcognition of things Proportional, neceſſarily 
creates in them a prejudice againſt Euclid s Definition: wherein there appears no 
relation to number, or meaſure, nor any coherence with their own Conception 
of Proportionals. 

This ſeems to have been the chief ground of the Exceptions, that are made 

Dd 3 againſt 

DEFINITION VI. 
Leniiudes that have the ſame proportion, let them be called 

ANALOGALS, or Proportionals. 

* 311: * 7 . 

186 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

againſt Eelid « Definition. For the 110. Definition of the Third Element, where 
luke Segment: of Circles are defin'd by the Equality 1 Angles which they receive, is as 
lyable to be excepted againſt as this Definition of Proportional Magnitudes; be- 
cauſe the ſimilitude of Circular Segments appears not from the equality of thoſe 
Angles: but does properly conſiſt in this, that they are the ſame, or equal 
tions of their own Circles. But then how to ſet forth, why they are the ſame, 
that is, to define like Segments of Circles Eſſentially, from the immediate, and 
formal Cauſe of their likeneſs lyes under the fame difficulties with the Definition 
of like Proportions of other Magnitudes. Wherefore in both theſe Cafes Euclide 

is conſtrained to take a ſign of the thing, inſtead of the thing it ſelf, that is, to 
give a Secondary, or Artificial Definition inſtead of the Prime, and Natural. For 
in Mathematics Definitions are not always Philoſophical, but Specially framed 
in order to their Geometrical uſes; as here Def. 5. El. V. is on purpoſe contrived 
for the Demonſtrations of Proportional Magnitudes. Vet it is to be obſerved that 
Def. x 1. El. III. (tho of the fame nature with this) is received without diſpute, 
becauſe Men being leſs converſant with the true nature of like Segments of Circles, 
than of like Proportions, come not prepoſſeſſed with any other notions of their 
pwn, but do acquieſce in what Euclide gives them to underſtand by like Segments 
of Circles, Whereas they quarrel at this Definition of Proportional Magni- 
tudes, finding themſelves diſappointed in their own thoughts and preconception 
of Proportionals. We muſt acknowledge the vulgar notion among Men to be 
moſt agreeable to the nature of Proportionality, and of all things, that can be 
eſteemed Proportionals. For number alone it is, by which in common Commerce 
the Meaſure and Value of things is moſt naturally made, and fignified : but 
where Number, and Meaſure cannot be apply'd as fit inftruments for a Mathema- 
tical proof in all ſuch things, that are really Proportionals, there for Demonſtra- 
tion ſake ſome other certain, and definitive mark is to be taken: as Euclide hath 

done in his Definition of Proportional Magnitudes, 
But where the Subject would bear it, Euclide clears this matter, and gives an 
other Definition of Proportional Numbers, tho not of Proportion it ſelf; for 
that his former Definition of proportion given in this 5. Element anſwers 
as well to Numbers, as to Magnitudes, only changing the names, and putting 
Numbers in the place of Homogeneal Magnitudes, For in both Numbers and Magni- 
tudes the Habitude is xa7s T1\ugrmm, according to Quantity, 

Now the 20. Definition of the 5. Element concerning proportional Numbers 
is very plain, and conformable to the common conception that Men have of things 
proportional, in theſe perſpicuous words. 

The Definution of Proportional Numbers. 

Numbers are Proportional, when the firſt is of the ſecond, and the third of the 
fourth, equally Multiple; or the ſame Part; or the ſame Parts. 

This Definition is moſt natural, and plainly ſhews Numbers to be proportional 
from the immediate cauſes, which make them ſo. For in equally Multiple, or the 
Jame Part, or the ſame Parts is expreſly laid down wherein the Antecedents do 
equally contain their Conſequents, that is, are each Equiquantuples of their Con- 
ſequents. Only tis to be noted, that Mwtiple is here to be interpreted in a more 

neral ſenſe than uſual, as not ſtrictly fignifying preciſely many times, or more 

once, for one number to contain an other number, as one to be exactly Du- 
le or Triple, &c. of the other; but numbers ate here underſtood to be Equally 
dultiple of others, when the Antecedents do equally, or alike contain the Quan- 
tity, that is, the numerical parts of their Conſequents, one as much, or as often 
as the other does in any manner, As either ſimply once in Proportion of Fqua- 
by: or once with a Part, or Parts in proportion Superparticular, or Superpartient: 
or elſe more than once with a Part, or Parts in proportion Multiple Superparticular, or 

Superpartient. Here therefore for a farther illuſtration of this matter, take theſe 

5 examples : 

OF GEOME TRV. 187 

examples: In which we have according to the Form of this Definition given the 
Varieties of four Rational Proportionals, both particularly in Numbers, and ge- 
nerally in Species. | 

Multiple. 

6.222 9.3. 
A. A:: 3 B. B. 

Multiple Super particular. Multiple Superpartient. 
T6 13 23a © «ik» &35- 3a IS. 
33A.A:: ib. ai A. A:: a1 B. B. 
Super particular. Superpartient. 
„ 1 
11A. A:: 11 B. . 11 A. A:: 13 B. B. 
Sub multiple. Sub ſuper particular. 
ö 9 1 . 
A. : $$ 1A. A:: IB. B. &. ? 

Thus in Multiple, Part, or Parts, taken ſometimes ſimgly, and ſometimes jointiy, 
are comprehended all kinds of Rational Proportions, and Proportionals. 

Whereas then this Definition evidently ſets forth the nature of Proportional 
Numbers, which alſo very much correſponds with the common notion of Men; 
wherein they deem things to be proportional ; it may be reaſonably demanded, 
why ſome ſuch like Definition might not have been accommodated to porpor- 
tional Magnitudes ; ſeeing that the Definition of Proportion anſwers both to Mag- 
nitudes, and Numbers? But the reaſons why ſo clear, and natural a Definition 
could not be apply d to Magnitudes, are irreſiſtibly cogent, and manifeſt to a 
Geometrician, tho not falling within the ance — e vulgar. 

And to explain this matter, we are to recollect 16. That Proportion is an Habi- 
tude according to Quantity. 20. That the Quantity of a Magnitude, or Number 
is only to be ſhewn in its reference, or proportion to ſome certain, and known 
meaſure. 3. That every Meaſure is ſome one ſimple thing: In Magnitude it is 
an Inch, or Foot, or Cubit, or any other ſtated meaſure : In Numbers it is an 
Unite; of which it naturally conſiſts; therefore as afore ſaid, every ſingle number 
carries in its very name the quantity of it ſelf; that is, its proportion to an Unite, 
the common Conſtituent, and natural meaſure of all Numbers: As the quantity 
of 9 is nine Unites ; that is, nine times one, or 9 to «: The quantity of 10 is ſo 
many Unites, or 10 to 1. And again, in compariſon of number to number, 9 
compared to 10, is nine parts of 10, or the proportion of 9g to 10. The quantity 
of 5 to 10 is an half part of 10, or 5 to 10; Every leſs number compared to a 
greater being apparently a part, or ſome parts of the greater. 

But Magnitude (tho infinitely diviſible into parts) is not, as Number, an Ag- 
gregate of certain parts. It hath no ſuch fundamental beginning, nor any Ori- 
ginal Part; No Minimum, or Geometrical Unite from which to demonſtrate in an 
Elementary method the equality, and inequality of Proportions ; as Euclide hath 
clearly delivered the whole matter in his Elements of Numbers. 

What of this kind Magnitude hath, or can have, is only arbitrary, and variable 
after the cuſtoms, and uſages of ſeveral Nations, and People, which therefore 
cannot give a natural foundation to the Geometrician, whereon to builda general 
doctrine of proportional Magnitudes upon the ſame grounds, or ſuch a kind of 
Definition —_ Multiple, Part, and Parts, on which that of numbers is ſettled, 
and Demonſtrations framed accordingly. 

And altho' there be but one True, and the ſame eſſential notion of Proportio- 
nality both in Magnitude, and Number, which conſiſts in thts, that the Antecedents 
are Equiquantiples of their Conſequents ; which in numbers is plainly, and demonſtra 
tively to be ſet forth from an Unite, the natural Mimmum of all numbers: yet in 
Magnitudes, becauſe there is not a natural Minimum, the ſame, or like method can- 
not poſſibly be uſed, Again, 

188 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Again, beſides this main impediment, founded in the very nature of Magnitude, 
there is another more invincible obſtacle of Incommenſurability among Magni- 
tudes, which renders Incommenſurable * utterly uncapable of any imagi- 
nary common Part, or that one can ever be made a Multiple of the other; and 
therefore that plain, and natural Definition of proportional Numbers can be no 
ways applicable to all Magnitudes, whereby to demonſtrate that they are propor- 
tional to one another. 

Euclide therefore is neceſſitated to ſeek for a more general Character of Propor- 
tionals, which may ſerve for all Magnitudes, Commenſurable, and Incommenſurable. 
And tho he is in Magnitudes Incommenſurable to one another deprived wholly 
of any helps from a common Part, or that one can ever be made a Multiple of 
the other; which are the fundamental inſtruments of demonſtration in the Do- 
ctrine of Numbers: yet becauſe all Magnitudes Commenſurable, and Incommen- 
ſurable, may have any Multiples of themſelves, as duples, triples, quadruples, &c. and 
ſo by conſequence any Equimulttples ; for that any two Magnitudes may each be 
alike doubled, tripled, quadrupled, &c. Therefore Euclide has recourſe to ſuch a 
Multiplication, as the only, or at leaſt the moſt commodious remedy left in this 
matter, and ſearches how far an Equimultiplication of the Antecedents, and an 
Equimultiplication of the Conſequents might contribute toward a ſure and cer- 
tain diſcovery what Magnitudes (whether Commenſurable or Incommenſurable to 

one another) are proportional, and what not, when they are compared together ; 
which proved very uſeful to his purpoſe. 

$. 1, For Euclide found demonſtratively in any four proportional numbers (and 
in no other but proportional numbers), that if the Antecedents be equally 
multiplied according to any multiplication whatſoever, and again the Con- 
ſequents be equally multiplied according to any multiplication whatſoever; 
then ſhall the Equimaltiples of the Antecedents be proportional to the Equi- 
multiples of their Conſequents in ſome one, or other proportion for ever. So 

thoſe that are once Proportionals ſhall in this manner ever be ſome Propor- 
tionals. 5 

This ſingular Power, and Property of four Proportionals, always to make from 
ſuch a multiplication other four Proportionals, is the foundation of Euclid's Defi- 
nition of proportional Magnitudes; as will clearly appear in the following 
Paragraphs. | | 

$. 2. For becauſe all proportions are either of equality, or of the greater, or leſſer 
inequality; therefore in any four Proportionals if one of the Antecedents be 
either equal to its Conlequent, or greater, or leſs; the other Antecedent 
alſo mult accordingly be either equal, greater, or leſs than its Conſequent. 
For if one Antecedent ſhould be equal to its Conſequent, and the other un- 
equal, or the one be greater, and the other leſs, it is an immediate contra- 
dition, and impoſlibility to ſuppoſe equals to be to one another in the 
ſame proportion with unequals; or the greater to the leſs to be in the ſame 
proportion with the leſs to the greater. 

g. 3. Seeing then that of four Proportionals the Equimultiples of the Antece- 
dents, and euer ee taken according to any multiplication whatſoever, 
are found to be always Proportionals ( as it ir noted in the firſt Paragraph): 
therefore the Equimultiples of the Antecedents are together equal, or toge- 
ther greater, or together leſs than the Equimultiples of the Conſequents ( by 
the foregoing qty. ). When therefore it ſhall be — — that ac- 
cording to any multiplication whatſoever the Equimultiples of the Ante- 
cedents | vx. of the fiſt, and third Terms] are together equal, greater, or 
leſs than the Equimultiples of the Conſequents [ viʒ. of the ſecond, and 

fourth Terms j, then are the —— in the ſame proportion 

to theit Conſequents, the firſt to the ſecond, as the third to the — ac- 

cording to the 5. Definition. I 

5 Thus 

O F GEO MET Rx. 189 

Thus we ſee: that Exclid's Characteriſtic perty of Proportional Magni- 
tudes is but one ſingle remove from the 1 755964 and * non Cauſe 1 
ſame, as it hath been laid down in the firſt Paragraph. For four Magnitudes are 
ſaid by Euclide to be Proportionals, when the Equimultiples of the Antecedents 
are together either equal, greater, or leſs, than the Equimultiples of their Conſe- 
quents, 8 to any multiplication. whatſoever ; Becauſe according to any 
multiplication whatſoever the Equimultiples of the Antecedents are always pro- 
portional to the Equimultiples of their Conſequents. But this intermedial Propo- 
ſition was concealed by Euclide, and in filence paſſed over: as Geometricians uſe 
to do, who are not obliged: to give the reaſon of their Definitions. They are 
only to be privately aſſured of the truth of that property, which is attributed to 
the thing: and it lyes wholly on our part either to accept it, or to make mani- 
feſt ſome unaptneſs, or inſufficiency in the uſe of it. Now for the matter in hand, 
Euclid s Definition of Proportional Magnitudes hath ſtood the tryal of about two 
thouſand: years unſhaken: and altho the Antecedents, and Conſequents multi- 
plied according to any multiplication whatſoever, ſcem in words to make this 
thing perplext, and troubleſome (as Tacguet unjuſtly calls it a Labyrinth) yet in 
uſe, and practice it is moſt plain and eaſie, as we ſhall find in the firſt, and laſt Pro- 
poſitions of the 6. Element. | 

If it be farther demanded why Eaclide did not define Magnitudes to be propor- 
tional, when the Equimultiples of the Antecedents were porportional to the Equi- 
multiples of the —— but rather when the Equimultiples of the Antece- 
dents were together either equal, greater, or leſs than the Equimultiples of the 
Conſequents, ſeeing} that this is only a Reſult of that; the reaſon is apparent. 
For to, define four Magnitudes to be proportional, when the Equimultiples of the 
Antecedents are proportional to the Equimultiples of the Conſequents, is to define 
the ſame thing by it ſelf, Ignatum per £que Ignotum; becauſe we are ſtill as much to 
ſeek how to know that theſe Equimultiples are proportional, which was the groſs 
overſight of Campanus, and Orontius in this matter. But how to know when the 
Equimultiples of the Antecedents are together either equal, greater, or leſs than 
the Equimultiples of the Conſequents, each Equimultiples being taken according to 
any multiplication whatſoever, can be readily made out, and be at once demonſtrated. 
by ſome known, Geometrical Propoſition : As may be found in all the Ancient 
Greek Geometricians, with what facility it is apply c upon any occaſion of demon- 
ſtrating Magnitudes to be Proportionals : Therefore Euchde gave this general 
Concomitant of any four 5. for an infallible Indicant, and the defini- 
tive Character of Proportion nitudes. 

And for a farther Explanation of this matter, we ſhall here give a demonſtration 
of the Fundamental Propoſition mentioned in the firſt Paragraph, upon which 
Euclid s Definition of Proportional Magnitudes is grounded, and from whence it 
doth moſt naturally ariſe. 

Of four Proportionals the Equimultiples of the Antecedents are 
proportional to the Equimultiples of the Conſequents, according to 
any Multiplication whatſoever. 

Let the four Proportionals be A.E::B.C. and let N denote any number 
multiplying the Antecedents A, B, and let n denote any number multiplying the 
Ce E, C. 1 fay, that 

| » Ain N. E in a:: Bin N. Cin. 

For let it be A. Ez: B. C. and then Alternately. Prop. 1 3. El. VII. 

2 A. B ul l 
A. B:: A in N. in N. a * 
E. C:: E ins. Cin. F Prop. 17. EL VII. 
2 But A. B:: E. C. Therefore 
A in N. B in N:: Einn, C in a. and Alternately 
% A in N. Ein a:: BinN .C inn. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Ze 

1%%᷑ HE FIFTH ELEMENT 
A Number multiply two Numbers the Prada are in the ſame proportion with the 
given Numbers, This is next to a common notion, for who naturally ſees not 
that as three to two, ſo 4 threes to 4 twurs > And upon this obvious Principle Eu- 
zlide multiplied the Antecedents by any one number whatſoever, and again the 
Conſequents by any one number whatſoever ; from whence by one, or two 
eaſie ſteps he found (as we fee) his Definition of Proportional Magnitudes. 

Thus from the very natural Power of Proportionality to make of any four Pro- 
portionals, other four Proportionals for ever; whole Antecedents therefore ſhall 
alſo ever be together either equal, greater, or leſs than their Conſequents, Ezchae 
puts this — Adjunct for the general, and next immediate Indicant of all 
Pr rtionals. | | 10 II 

<0" whether the proportions be Rational, or Irrational; the Magnitudes Com- 
menſurable, or Incommenſurable, there is this agreement in all things conceived 
to be Proportionals, that the Antecedents do equalty, or alike contain certain 
quantities of their Confequents; altho this Equalny, or Similitude cannot be de- 
clared, and fignalized by Equimultiples, or the fame Part, or the ſame Parts of the 
Conſequent, as it is in Numbers; yet in regard that Proportionality is every where 
of the ſame nature, therefore one common Property is by Euchde juſtly applied 
to all for a ſtanding Indicant of any four: Proportionals. | 

For the ſide of one Square is the ſame portion of its Diameter, that the fide of 
an other is of its Diameter, as truely and really, as if it were explicable by Part, 
or Parts, by Number, or ſome common Meaſure: So that in Magnitudes Incom- 
menſurable, there is ſomething in nature, which is Equivalent, and Tantamoumt. 
For the Square of the ſide is demonſtrated to be equal to half the Square of the 
Diameter; and therefore the ſides of all Squares are manifeſtly Equiquantuples, 
and the ſame portions of their own Diameters, and ſo in the fame proportion 
to them: the nature of Proportionality, 2 between Antece- 

dents, and Conſequents, being no ways altered 1n having the proportions either 

effable, or ineffable by number, and meaſure. For the ions, and Properties 
of Pr ionals, are the fame in Numbers, and Magnitudes, only they cannot be 
demonſtrated after the ſame manner. as”, ' | 
And therefore to require a Definition of Proportional Magnitudes ( anſwerable 
to that of Numbers) from which to demonſtrate by ſome certain meaſures in what 
manner the Antecedents do equally contain their rg — m the making of 
equal proportions, where between the Antecedents, and Conſequents there are 
in nature no ſuch meaſures, is an impoſſibility unreaſonably required of Evckde to 
make poſſible. But what is poſſible, he performs: and gives a Definition, or ra- 
ther a Definitive mark, which certainly ſhews when Magnitudes are Proportional, 
tho not Why, and in what particulars they are Proportional: and in this Caſe 
to demand of him a demonſtration of his own Definition is Inzqus mandatum, 
repugnant to the doctrinal methods of all Arts, and Sciences. It had been a buſi- 
nels proper enough for a Scholiaſt, or Commentator to illuſtrate, and as a Phi- 
loſopher, to ſet forth the cauſes of the different Definitions given by Euckde of 

proportional Numbers, and of proportional _—_— from the different Natures 

and Conſtitutions of Number, and Magnitude had been improper for the 
Elementator himſelf to ſubmit unto, 

In ſhort therefore, to ſumm up this whole and much controyerted matter. 
Foraſmuch as it hath been ſhewn, that Magnitudes are uncapable of —— made 

known, how they are in the ſame proportion to one another from any Equimul- 
auler, or the ſame Part, or the ſame Parti of the according to the Definition 
of proportional Numbers; therefore inſtead of ſuch a Primary, and Eſſential De- 
finition, Euclide laid hold of the next immediate Property that he found to ſpring 
from the natural Power of proportionability, and might produce an infallible Cha- 
racter of all Proportionals: which is thus apparently deduced, 

of 

OF GEOMETRY. 191 

Of all Proportionals, and only of Proportionals any whatſoeyer 
Equimultiples of the Antecedents, ſhall ever be Proportional to 
any whatſoever Equimultiples of the Conſequents. | 

Wherefore of all Proportionals, and only of Proportionals any what- 
ſoever Equimultiples of the Antecedents ever are together ei- 

ther equal, greater, or leſs, than any whatſoever Equimultiples 
of the Conſequents. 

And therefore where any whatſoever Equimultiples of the Ante: 

cedents are demonſtrated to be together either equal, greater, 
or leſs, than any whatſoever Equimultiples of the Conſequents, 
there the firſt expoſed Magnitudes were Proportionals : The An- 
tecedents Equimultiples of their Conſequents, each of each Equi- 
quantuple in any proportion whatſoever, Rational or Irrational. 

Thus now this general Teſt, and property of Proportionals, that by ſome of 
our Moderns hath been calumniated for being ſo remote and intricate, 1s in brief 
ſhewn to be nearly conjoyn'd with the nature of whatſoeyer Quantities are, or can 
be eſteemed Proportionals, and laid open in few words. 

If any thing yet remains of diſſatisfaction, it lyes unavoidably in the nature of 
Magnitude it ſelf, which hath no Minimum, and therefore no natural, or ſtanding 
Meaſure; where alſo incommenſurability between Magnitudes is not capable of 
any imaginable common Meaſure; or of any better evidence than what Euclide 
hath given in his Definition of Proportional Magnitudes: and not in any deficiency 
either in Geometry, or the Geometrician, | 

DEFINITION VII. 

W Hen of Eguimultiples the Multiple of the firſt ſhall exceed 
the Multiple of the ſecond; and the «Multiple of the third 

ſhall not exceed the «Multiple of the fourth; then the firſt is ſaid 

to have to the ſecond a greater proportion, then the third hath to 
the fourth. 

In Def. 5. Magnitudes were determined to be in the fame proportion, when the 
Equimultiples of the Antecedents ſhould together be either equal, greater, or leſs 
than the Equimultiples of their Conſequents, according to any multiplication 
whatſoever; and therewithal 'twas neceſſarily implied, that when it ſhould be 
found otherwiſe in any one multiplication, then thoſe Magnitudes were not in the 
ſame proportion to one another. 

Now this Definition farther declares which Antecedent hath to its Conſequent 
the greater proportion, and which the leſs. 

As for inſtance, let A 4, be compared to B 3; and C s, to B 5: then let be 
taken Equimultiples of the Antecedents A 4, and C 6; namely les E 16, 
and F 24. And again, take of the Conſequents B 3, and D;; other Equimul- 
tiples; namely quintuples G 15, and H 25, Here 16 the quadruple of the Antece- 
dent 4 exceeds 15 the quintuple of the Conſequent 3: but 24 the quadruple of the 
Antecedent 6, exceeds not 25 the quintuple of the Conſequent 5. Therefore the 
Antecedent A 4, is ſaid to have to the Conſequent B 3, a greater *** than 
the Antecedent C 6, has to the Conſequent D £ and accordingly the Quotients 
ſhew the ſame inequality of theſe proportions. For 4 to 3 is 14, or ſeſquitertial : 
and 6 to o 1s but 15, or ſeſquiquintal. 

When therefore in Magnitudes, or Numbers ſuch a dif; ent is demonſtrated 
to be between the Equimultiples of the Antecedents, and of the Conſequents in 

Ee 2 equality, 

n 

n 
8 —— 
— — W 
— — — T 

* 

wm 
1 
+ 4 —— 
* 

a 
—— 

- 
— 
— 

- 
—— - 
o 

— — DN: W222 n 2 

192 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

uality, exceſs, or defect upon any one multiplication; then as they are not in 
the ſame proportion by Def. 5; ſo this Definition expounds which Antecedent 
hath to its Conſequent the greater proportion, and which the leſs. 

But again it is to be obſerved, that Magnitudes,'or Numbers may alſo have an a- 
greement between the Equimultiples of the Antecedents and Conſequents in uality, 
exceſs, or defect, according to ſome e eee yet not according to all, as it 
is required in this matter of Proportion | wp] 
For in the former inſtance take of the Antecedents 4 and 6, the quadruples 16 
and 243 and of the Conſequents 3 and x, the triples 9 and 15. Here of the Ante- 
cedents 4 and 6, their Equimultiples 16 and 24, exceed 9 and 15 the Equimul- 
tiples of the Conſequents 3 and 5, each exceeding each, 16, 9, and 24, 15: yet the 
> ro of 4 to 3 and of 6 to 5, is not the ſame in both, as was now before 

n. 
Wherefore tho in ſome multiplications of Diſproportionals, the Equimultiples 

of the Antecedents and Conſequents may happen to agree in a joint equality, 

excels, or defect: yet if any one multiplication ſhall be demonſtrated to diſagree, 
then by Def. 5. theſe Equimultiples did not ariſe from four Proportionals; for 
the reaſon before given that Proportionals ſhall ever make the Equimultiples of 
the Antecedents proportional to the Equimultiples of the Conſequents; and be 
therewithal eicher together equal, or greater, or leſs according to any multiplica- 

4 =- 

tion whatſoever: which is the given Signal of Proportionals. 
INT © DEFINITION VII. 
A Nalogy, or Proportionality is a ſimilitude of Proportions. 

Magnitudes, which have the ſame proportion were before in Def. 6. named 
Analogals, or Proportionals, Now again in the Abſtract is here defined Analogy. 
And what in the compariſon of Magnitudes was called Equality, that in the com- 
pariſon of proportions this Definition calls Similitude: So that to have the ſame 
proportion or 5 or equal, ſignifies all one thing. Yet Euclide never uſes to ſay 
Magnitudes in Ade, or equal proportion; but always Magnitudes in the ſame pro- 
portion, or having the ſame proportion. 

This Definition therefore ought farther to be examined, which is more ſuitable 
to the ſpeculations of a Philoſopher, than of any uſe to a Geometrician, For 
firſt, in Def. 3. Euclide tells us what is proportion; next in Def. 4. what Magni- 
tudes are capable of proportion to one another; then in Def, 5. what * 
tudes are in the ſame proportion, and therewithal what are not. Again in Def. 6. 
to itudes in the ſame proportion he gives a name; and laſtly Def. 7. ſhews 
when nitudes are not proportional, where the proportion is the greater, and 
where the leſs. And thus he having finiſhed his Explanations of Proportions, 
Proportionals, and Diſproportionals; it is manifeſtly to no purpoſe to define 
again Analogy to be a ande of Proportions: which bare Definition neither 
ſhews wherein it conſiſts, nor by any ſign to know when there is between two 
proportions a ſimilitude, that ſome uſe might be made thereof in the following 
Demonſtrations. But for this end a Sign and Character of Proportionals was 
given before in Def.. Plainly then this is a ſuperfluous Definition, a remark of ſome 
Scholiaſt ſhuffled into the Text without any order, and to no uſe. The next that 
follows is likewiſe a By-note to as little purpoſe, and both evidently interrupt 
the Coherence of Euclid genuine Definitions. 

| DEFINITION IX. 
* is in three Terms at the feweſt. 

This is ſo far from being one of Eaclid s Definitions, that it is moſt clearly no 
3 Definition 

OF GEOMETRY. 193 

Definition at all. Beſides in ſtrictly ſpeaking it is not true. For Analogy is 
always in four Terms, two and two in ſame proportion, Antecedent to Ton- 
ſequent, and Antecedent to Conſequent: tho it may ſometimes be only between 
three Magnitudes, or Numbers expreſſed and expoſed : As let there be three Mag- 
nitudes A, B, C, in the ſame proportion A to B. as B to C; that is, in whatſoever 
proportion A is to B, in the ſame again is the ſelf ſame B to C. Here are in re- 
ality only three Magnitudes, but between them two proportions, and therefore 
two Antecgdents, and two Conſequents: ſo of neceſſity there are always four 
Terms in every Analogy, the firſt to the ſecond, and the third to the fourth; and 
cherefore when the Magnitudes are only three, the middle is neceſſarily under- 
ſtood to ſupply the ſecond, and third Term, and the like in Numbers. Now for- 
aſmuch as two equal proportions may ſometimes be in three, ſometimes in four 

nitudes, or Numbers, therefore equal proportions are diſtinguiſhed into 
2 Diſcrete. 

1 

f Of Continual proportion 

When Magnitudes, or Numbers in any proportion whatſoever are continued in 
the ſame proportion, by an immediate Coherence of Terms with one another, 
each intermedial being twice taken, firſt as a Conſequent to the preceding, next 
again as an Antecedent to the following, then this is called Continual proportion: 
as A to B, fo B to C, ſo C to D, and is thus noted, A, B, C, D — And the Mag- 
nitudes, or Numbers are ſaid to be e νονονν Deinceps proportionales, continu- 
edly Proportionals. ba 

Of Diſcrete Proportion. 

Again, when the intermedial Magnitudes, or Numbers are not continued, or 
twice taken, as a Conſequent, and an Antecedent, but the proportions are as A to 
B, ſo C to D (noted thus A. B:: C. D); yet ſo is not B to C; the intermedials 
B and C being diſcontinued, and ſeparated from each other in that proportion, then 
this is called Diſcrete proportion. 4 

So that a Proportion is ſaid to be continual, when the Proportions (whether 
two, or three, or more) are the ſame, and expoſed in continued Terms, As A to 
B, ſo B to C, ſo C to D: Or in numbers, as 16 to 8, 8 to 4, 4 to 2. 

And Diſcrete Proportion is, when the Proportions are likewiſe the ſame, but 
expoſed in diſcontinued Terms. As A to B, fo CtoD,ſoE to F: Or in numbes, as 
12to0 8, 6 to 4 3 to 2. 

Of Concatenate Proportions. 

There are alſo Concatenate Proportions, e M Froportiones deinceps ; when 
the proportions are different { not all the ſame, as in Continual, and Diſcrete pro- 
portions) yet are expoſed in continued Terms, ws «15 «go. As 15 to 10, Io to 6, 
6 to 3, are to be called Concatenate Proportions. 

Therefore we are carefully to diſtinguiſh between Continual Proportion, and Pro- 
portions in continued Terms. By continual Proportion is always meant the ſame, 
or equal Proportions repeated orderly in continued Terms. By the other is to be 
underſtood various, and different proportions, which likewiſe follow one another 
in continued Terms. As 4 to 3, 3 to 2 are Concatenate proportions: But 8 to 4, 
4 to 2, are to one another in Continual proportion: as 8 to 4, 6 to 3, are in 
Diſcrete proportion. 

It is farther worthy of obſervation that in Diſcrete proportion, becauſe the in- 
termedials break off one from the other, therefore an Analogy may be here be- 
tween Magnitudes of different kinds, ſo that a Line may be to a Line, as a Super- 
ficies to a Superficies, or a Solid to a Solid. But in Continual proportion, becauſe 
all the Terms from the firft to the laft are continued in the ſame proportion to 
one another, therefore they muſt all be Homogeneal, for that Heterogeneals can 
have no proportion one to an other: therefore in Continual * the 

Ee 3 erms 

8 y n — —— 
— ent. 2 — 
———_— 
—_ —— 22 182 
— — 

l 1 — 4 
* a —— 
— — Ora 

3 — * 

Nr 

— — 

2 EINE. © 
2 
— —— — 
- 

194 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Terms are either all Lines, or all Planes, or all Solids. Likewiſe in Concatenate 
proportions where the proportions are put various, and different ; yet are in Con- 
timed Terms Concatenated, as A to B in one proportion, B to C in an other, C 
to D in ſome other, there the nitudes muſt alſo for the ſame reaſon be all 

Homogeneal, like as they were in Continual proportion. 

DEFINITION X. 

| Hen three Magnitudes are Proportional, the firſt is ſaid to 
4 \ \ have to the third a Duplicate Proportion of the fer f to the 
ſecond. : 

75 8 
Let A, B, C, be three proportional Magnitudes, as A the firſt to B the ſecond, ſo 
B the ſecond to C the third. From which continuation of proportions the pro- 
portion of A the firſt to C the third is underſtood to be compounded of the two 
intermedial proportions, viz. of the proportion of A the firſt to B the ſecond, and 
of the proportion of B the ſecond to C the third: and therefore A the firſt is ſaid to 
have toC the third a Duplicate proportion of A the firſt to B the ſecond ; becauſe 
the proportion of A to B is the ſame with that of B to C, and ſo is doubled, or 
twice continued between the porportion of A the firſt to C the third. But if the 
two intermedial proportions be not the ſame, and one of them be different from 
the other, as 4 to 3 in proportion Seſquitertial, and 3 to 2 in proportion Seſqui- 
alteral, then 4 the firſt cannot be ſaid to have to 2 the third a Duplicate propor- 
tion of 4 the firſt to 3 the ſecond, as in equal proportions ; but yet in reference 
to this Definition, it is ſaid by Euclide at Prop. 23. El. VI. to have a proportion 
compounded of 4 to 3, and of 3 to 2, by which the extent of this tenth Defini- 
tion, and Euclid s meaning is plainly declared. So that whether the intermedial 

oportions be equal, or unequal, the proportion of the extremes is in general un- 
ger dood by Enclide to be compounded of the intermedial proportions: And when 
the intermedial proportions are put the ſame, then the proportion of the firſt to 
the _ is in Special called by Euclide a Duplicate porportion of the firſt to 
the ſecond. 1 

Now to illuſtrate this farther in Numbers, let the three Proportionals be 9, 3, r, 
The proportion of 9 to 1 is ſaid to be a duplicate proportion of g to 3, becauſe 
between 9, and 1 the proportion of 9 to 3, or 1 * proportion is twice conti- 
nued. For 9 is triple of 3, and 3 of 1: ſo that the Noncuple proportion of 9 
to 1 is ſaid to be triple proportion duplicated; that is, to be compounded of two 
triple proportions, which continuedly intervene between 9, and 1. 

DEFINITION XI. 

Hen four Magnitudes are proportional, the fir is ſaid to 

have to the fourth a triplicate proportion of the ala the 
ſecond: And ſo forward always more by one, as long as the Ana- 
logy ſhall be contiuued. 

Let A, B, C, D, be four proportional Magnitudes as A to B, ſo B to C, fo C to 
D, in continual proportion, then A the firſt is ſaid to have to D the fourth, a 
triplicate proportion of A the firſt to B the ſecond; becauſe between the Term A, 
and D, the ſame proportion of A to B is thrice iterated. 

_ © Likewiſe if there be a Series of five Terms A, B, C, D, E, the proportion of A the 
firſt to E the fifth, is ſaid to have a quadruplicate proportion of A the firſt to B 

the ſecond, and ſo forward in a continuate Chain the proportion of the extremes 
has its name from the number of the intermedial proportions; Duplicate from 
two, Triplicate from three, &c. which proportion of the extremes is alſo ſaid to 
be compounded of thoſe intermedial propartions. 

When 

TO, G GQ ME T RV. 195 

When equal, proportions are ontinued in, many Terms, it is uſually called P.z o- 
GRE $1$19 N, or Geometrical Erxogreſſio n. 

© DEFINITION. xu 
Omoltgal” Magnitudes are Autecedents to Antecedents , and 
1 Corſequerts, to.Conſequerts.. . al 0 

When four Magnitudes as A, E, B, C are ſaid to be Proportionals, it is farther 
requiſite to ſet forth diſtinctliꝝ the Analogs/m, or order of theſe proportional Magni- 
tudes in their 2 Terms; that is, to declare which are the Antecedents, aud 
which the Conſequents, and beſides which Antecedent belongs to each Conſequent; 
whether A to E as B to C, or otherwiſe. If it be put, as A to E ſo B to C, then A, 
and B the Antecedents are called Terms . and E and C the Conſequents 
are hkewife Terms Fomolagals that is, 2 nah or Ferms of the fame condition 
as Cdnjugate or Conſittate Pajrs in the order, and dif fition, of four Proportionals. 

The Antecedents being the Terms compared; and the Conſequents the Terms to 

which is made the compariſon. 

Now when four Magnitudes are proportional, and the Analogiſm; that is, the 
Homologal Terms are orderly ſet forth, as A. E:: B. C, Euclide ſhews in the fol- 
lowing Definitions what changes, and beſideg what akerations the four primary, 
or firſt propoſed Proportionals are capable of; ſo that the- changed, or altered 
Terms may till be proportional to one another. Thele variations are made five 

DB FINEFIOQN. XII 

Lieruate Prapartion is. a Sumpiion of the Aviecedent tg the 

KAlecedent, aud of the Cornſequent ta the Conſequent. = 
Here is made quly a . 5 in poſition af the primary Proportionals, without 

00 

the other Conſequent is called Alternate — rtion: As let the primary Proporti- 
onals be A to E, as B to C, and thus ſet fort 

0 19 2 

. 
Primary Proportienals, A. E;: B. C. 

then Meernately, CA. B:: E. C. 
1 
The Analogy between the Terms of Alternate proportion is demonſtrated in 
Prop. 16. 

DEFINITION XIV. 

Nver/e Proportion is a Sumption of the Conjequent as Antece- 
dent, to the Antecedent as Confequent. 
Here the Proportional Terms are otherwiſe changed in poſition only, the Con- 

ſequents into Antecedents, and the Antecedents into Confequents: The inward 
Terms into the outward, and the outward into the inward : As let there be again 

$411 3s - 4s 

Primary Proportional, A. E:: B . C. 
then {nverſly, „e. BD 
: FF, EF<'t &, 18. — 

We may obſerve, that in Alternate proportion only one Antecedent 1s, 
2 changed 

- 

796 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 
changed into one Conſequent, and one Conſequent into one Antecedent. But in 
inverſe proportion, both the Conſequents are made Antecedents ; and both the 
Antecedents are turned into Conſequents, whereby proportions of the greater, and 
leſs inequality are tranſmuted into one another. | 

It is likewiſe Inverſe proportion when the Terms are taken backward, or con- 
trarily, as if A. E:: B. C. It is likewiſe between the Terms inverſſy C. B:: E. A. 

The Analogy of inverted proportion is demonſtrated by a Corollary of Prop. 4. 

____.. DEFINITION- XV. 

Ompo/ition of proportion is a Sumption of the Antecedent to. 
4 gether with the Conſequent as one, tothe ſame Conſequent. 

Here now. is made an alteration of the. primary, or firſt propoſed Terms, by 
adding each Antecedent, and n as one Term, and ſo compared 
to its correſpondent Conſequent. For let here be as before, 

| | ERS 1F * F £ & + 4. 
Primary Proportionals 1 se 
then by Compoſition, CAE. E:: BC. C. 
e 5 (=20). 5 212＋4 (=16) . 4. 

| The Analogy between the Terms of "Compound proportion is demonſtrated in 
Prop. 18. | . SE 
DEFINITION XVI. 

Iviſion of proportion is a Sumption of the exceſs, wherein the 
D Antecedent exceeds the 5 — to the ſame Conſequent. 

Here again is made another alteration of the primary Terms, by ſubtracting 
each Conſequent from its Antecedent, and then each exceſs is aſſumed as an An- 
tecedent, and compared to its proper Conſequent: As let there be 

; 1088 $532 [Ride 4 
Primary Proportionals ; n A.E::B.C. 

then by Diviſſon, A—E;E* :: B=ED.C 
15 (Sic). 5: : 12—4(=8). 4. 

The Analogy between the Terms of Divided proportion is demonſtrated in 
Prop. 17; and tis manifeſt, that divided proportion muſt be of the greater in- 
equality, for that the Conſequent is to be ſubtracted from the Antecedent. 

What is commonly tranſlated Compoſition, and Diviſion of proportion, and 
called by Euclide Syntheſis, and Diæreſit, is only an addition, and — of 
Proportional Terms: an addition of each Conſequent to its Antecedent, and a ſub- 
traction of each Conſequent from its Antecedent. But Compoſition, of which we 
have made ſome mention in the Annotations on the 10 and 110 foregoing Defi- 
nitions, is taken in a far different ſenſe, and called zuyx«os, Fynleiſt, a po- 
ſition, or Commixture of Proportions one with another, and not a Syntheſis, or 
addition of the Terms to one another: As ſhall be farther explained at the 3 De- 
finition of the 6 Element. ; 

DEFINITION XVII. 

Onver/ion, or ANAS TROPHE of proportion is a Sumption of the 
Aniecedent to the exceſs, uberein the Antecedent exceeds 
the Conſequent. 2 As 

OF GEOMETRY. 97 

15. 5: : 12. 4. 
As let it be „„ 

Then by Converſion, A. A—E :: B. B=C. 
If.if—5(=r0):: 12.12—4 (=8). 

The Analogy between the Terms of Converted Proportion is demonſtrated by the 
Corollary of Prop. 19. 

Again, the Conſequent alſo might have been compared to the ſame exceſs, as 
E.A—E:: C.B—C.y. 10:: 4. 8. But this is only proportion of Diviſion 
inverted, and inverſion of proportion having been laid down before, it were in- 
artificial to repeat the ſame again as a new kind of change. For it is to be noted 
that the ſimple, or primary Proportional Terms being either compounded, divi- 
ded, or converted, may in like manner be again changed by Alternation, and 
Inverſion. As 

by Compoſition, and Alternation, AE. BC: : E. C. 
by Diviſion, and Alternation, Ar: I. c. ac. 

Again, if the Terms be only three in continual proportion, as A, M, E—, 8; 
4, 2, they may in like manner be changed, and altered, for that M the middle 
Term is both a Conſequent, and Antecedent. As 

n 

a A. M: : M. E. and 

by Compoſition, and Alternation, AM. ME:: M. E. 

by Diviſion, and Alternation, A—M. ME:: M. R & 

All theſe changes, and alterations of four Proportionals may in a view be thus 
ſet forth. 

The primary Proportional Terms. 

435 
Alternation, A. B:: E. C. 7 The primary Terms changed 
Inverſion, „„ only in poſition. 
Compoſition, AE. E:: B＋C. C.) The primary Terms al- 
Diviſion, A- E. E:: B- C. 85 tered by Addition, and 
Converſion, A. A- E: : B. B-C. Subtraction. 

Here are firſt put four primary Terms, two, and two in the ſame proportion, 
as A to E, ſo B to C, from which are made by five ways of variation four other 

eee Terms, two, and two in ſome one, and the ſame proportion to one 
another. 

But now beſides theſe, there may be put after another manner more Terms then 
four; as five, or fix, or ſeven, &c. in two diſtinct orders, with an equal number 
of Terms in each order, two, and two in the ſame proportion , from which are 
alſo made four other Terms proportional to one another, as this following Defi- 

nition declares. 
DEFINITION XVIII. 

Roportion of Equidiſtance ( commonly called proportion 7 Equa. 

lity) is a Sumption of the extremes by Subtraction of the inter- 
medial Terms; when, there being many magnitudes in one Rank, 
and others as many in an other Rank, taken two, and two in the 
fame proportion, the firſt ſhall be aſumed to the laſt in the pre- 
ceding Rank, and likewiſe the firſt to the lat in the following 
Rank. | 

18, 3 6, 9, 124 

Here is put a double Series 5 A, B, C, D, E, 
of Magnitudes, as F, G, H, I, K, 

2% 4, 8, 12,16, | 

Ft Two, 

198 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Two, and two of each Rank being in the ſame proportion to one another, A to B, 
as F to G: and again, B to C as G to H, &c. Then ſubtracting, or paſſing over the 
intermedials in each Rank, if A the fiſt be aſſumed to E the laſt, in one Rank; 
and F the firſt to K the laft, in the other Rank, this Sumption, or woes em of 
theſe extremes, A to E, and F to K, is called proportion of Equidiſtance, or o * 

Here I have adventured to give a new Name to this — — from Ewchid s 
very words Airs yes: It is commonly tranſlated ex equalztate Ratio, or ex equo 
Rgtio, Proportion of Eguality, or even proportion: but without any reaſon given 
of this interpretation to inform us what it plainly means: Aivs Ayes, ſtrictly 
tranſlated, is Ratio ex aqun. Bnt ex quo? Of what? Certainly ex equo Intervallo. For 
what can more ſuitably be underſtood by aiizs than in taking it for & iv Nacypa- 
, 6x gu Intervallo, for an equal interval, or even diſtance of the extreme Terms 
from one another. The uſe of this Definition makes this interpretation manifeſt ; 
for that the compared extremes are always taken at the ſame diſtance from one 
another, by ſubtracting an equal number of the intermedials in each Series. And 
indifferent it is, whether the other extreme from the firſt, be either the third, the 
fourth, the fifth, the fixth, or any further Term, only, for inftance, if A the firſt 
be aflumed to D the fourth in one Rank, then alſo F the firſt is aſſumed to I the 
fourth in the other, and the like in the reft : For that the Equidiſtance of the 
extremes is conſtantly to be obferved in both the Ranks; as Euchd's words imply, 
when in the Sumption of the extremes he puts the Magnitudes in each Rank to 
be equal in multitude, and ſo the aſſumed extremes, the firſt to the laſt ſhall 
ever be equidiſtant from one another in each of the Ranks. 

The Analogy between the extreme Terms of equidiſtant proportion is demon- 
ſtrated in the 220. and 234. Propoſitions of this fifth Element. 

Beſides the Phyſical reaſon why theſe extremes are Analogals, or Proportionals, 
is very apparent, in that the proportion of the two extremes in each Rank, viz. 
of A to E, and of F to K, is compounded of the fame intermedial proportions, 
and therefore in common ſenſe thofe extremes muft be in the fame proportion 
to one another, A to E as F to K. For upon a full conſideration of this matter, 
we ſhalt find, that proportion «x qua is nothing elſe, but a compariſan of two 
proportions to one another, which are each compounded of like or equal propor- 
tions, that intervene between the extreme Terms of both Ranks: which extremes 
2 ce eaſily perceived to be Proportionals, as alſo is hereafter demon- 

rated. 

And farther, this Definition of proportion ex equo (a proportion of admirable 
uſe) is derived from the 10. and 11. Definitions of Duplicate, and Triplicate 
proportion, and agrees with, them in a like Sumption of the extremes to ane 
another: and alfo 1n that the proportion of the extremes, is upon the fame ground 
ſaid to be compounded of the intermedial rtions, expoſed in continued Terms, 
% nie e 006, as axe thoſe proportions which Euclide calls compounded. And the 
only difference between them is, that in a Series of Duplicate, and Triplicate propor- 
tion the intermediate 8 are all throughout one and the ſame: whereas in 
proportion ex quo each Series may be of various proportions; which yet in their or- 
dex are the ſame. with one another, the firſt proportion of one Rank the ſame with 
the firlt of the other; the ſecond the ſame with the ſecond, &c. So that the propor- 
tions of che extremes in this 18. Definition, juſt as before in the 10. and 11. 
Definitions, are alike faid to be 2 of equal intermedial proportions. 
The agreement. between theſe: Definitions in this point is of ſpecial remark, and 
whoever ſhall ſtudiouſſy pierce into the &gth, and ſubtil Contrivances of the 5b, 
10, and 18", Definitions, wherein Euclide ſhewn a wonderful ſagacity in ſet- 
ting forth Proportional I, and the compoſition of proportions, will upon 
a juſt conſideration find, that nothing in all theſe Elements ought to be more 
worthily admired, or received with, greater eſteem ; notwithſtanding the Cavils 
of ſome modern Geometricians. 

alles is a manner of brief expreſſion uſual with the Greeks, and like to Diateſa- 
ron, and Diapaſon in Muſical Notes. | 

UQ In 

OF GEOME TRV. 199 

In this proportion ex: eque,. or of Equidiſtance, there are two Caſes. For the 
Analogal intermedial Terms of both Ranks, two, and two in the ſame tion, 
may eed either in order, one Term after the other, or elſe ſome of the Terms 
may 

taken out of order, as the two following Definitions of Ordinate, and Per- 
turbate Analogy do declare. | 

- DEFINITION XIX. 
Rainate Analogy is, when it ſhall be as Antecedent to Conſe- 
quent ſo Antecedent to Conſequent: and again as Conſequent 
to ſome other Magnitude, ſo Conſequent to ſome other Magnitude. 

i 18, 3, 6, 
Let the double Series 5 A, B, C, 

be as before, F, G, H, 
24, &, 8, 
And the Analogy be as A the Antecedent to'B the Conſequent, fo F the Ante- 

cedent to G the Conſequent: And again as B the Conſequent to Can other Magni- 
tude, ſo G the Conſequent to H an other Magnitude in a direct order. 

This orderly N in all the Analogal Terms of both Ranks ſucceſſively 
one after the other, is called Ordinate Analogy, wherein the extremes taken 
ex æqu A to C, and F to H, are demonſtrated to be proportional to one another 

In Pro . 229, : | f 

And the proportions of the extremes are each aid to be compounded of the ins 
termedial proportions taken in an Ordinate Analogy to one another. 

DEFINITION XX: 

Erturbate Analogy ts , when in the precedent Rank it ſhall be 

as Antecedent to Conſequent, ſo in the following, Antecedent 

to Conſequent: and again in the Precedent, as the Con/cquent to 

ſome other e Magnitude, ſo in the following, ſome other Magnitude 
to the Antecedent. | an | 

; 12, 4, 2.) 0 ; 12 8 = 7 
Let there be again a .- ABC||...A.B.C, 
' " oo 
double Series, as CX, F, G, X.. .. 8. 
18, 95 35 112. 9 . " 

And the Analogy be as A the Antecedent to B the Conſequent, ſo F the Ante- 
dent to G the Conſequent: And again, as B the Conſequent to C an other Magni- 
tude in a direct order, ſo X an other Magnitude to F. the Antecedent in a diſturbed 
order. From the prepoſterous: Sumption of two Terms in one of the Ranks, as 
namely here of X to E, making X the Term laſt put to become the firſt extreme, 
this Teige Np5nper, is called Perturbate Analogy : Wherein the extreme Terms tho 
taken ex equo A to C, and X to G, are demonſtrated in Prop. 23. to be propor- 
tional to one another, as well as the extremes in Ordinate Analogy. 

And the proportions of the extremes are each ſaid to be compounded of the 
intermedial proportions taken in a Perturbate Analogy to one another. 

For the intermedial proportions ot both Ranks, either in Ordinate, or Perturbate 
Analogy, are alike the fame (tho not taken in a like order); and therefore the 
extremes being alike compounded of the ſame intermedial proportions, are eaſily 
conceived to be in the ſame proportion to one another. And this is the Phyſical, 
or Philoſophical reaſon of this matter, which is Geometrically demonſtrated in 
Prop. aa. and 23. El. V. os 

2 n 

r 

200 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

In the Definitions of Ordinate, and Perturbate Analogy, Euchd's words imply 
only- three itudes in each Series, whereas they _ have been farther con- 
tinued at pleaſure, if the matter had ſo required. But he having before tully de- 
fined Proportion ex £quo in general, let the Terms be never ſo many; three Terms 
now ſufficed to ſhew in what order, or diforder the extremes might be ex gu 
taken, and aſſumed to one another, and till be either way found proportional to 
one another. For this reaſon Euclide puts only three Terms as moſt readily ſerving 
to ſet forth the two Caſes of Ordinate, and Perturbate Analogy, which may happen 
in this proportion of Equidiſtance, or Equal Interval of Terms. 

DEFINITION XXI. 

Armonical Analogy is when there being three Magnitudes, or 
Numbers, it ſhall be as the farſt to the third, ſo the difference 
between the ſirſt and ſecond, to the difference between the ſecond 

and third. 
Otherwiſe. 

Harmonical Analogy is a Sumption of the extremes to the diffe- 
rences between the extremes, and the middle Term. 

Let there be three Magnitudes, or Numbers A 4 If A be to E, as the dif- 
9 

ference between A and M to the difference between M and E, that is, if A be to 
E, as A—M to M- E, then this is called Harmonical Analogy, and ſignified after 
this manner, if A, M, E, be put as Terms of Harmonical Proportion. 

A.E::A—M.. M- E. 
6 3. 6 —4(=32). 4 — 3(=1). n 
This Analogy is called Harmonical, becauſe many Muſical Conſonancies ſuit 
often with the Terms of this Analogy, as 6 to 4, or proportion Seſquialteral is 
Diapente, 4 to 3, or Seſquitertial is Diateſſaron, 6 to 3, or Duple proportion is 

aſon. | 

T There is likewiſe Harmonical Analogy in four Terms, as A, M, N, E: zo, 12,8, 5: 

when as the firſt is to the fourth, ſo is the difference of the firſt, and ſecond to the 
difference of the third, and fourth. a 

1 E:: A—M ( : N=—E 
Jo-. 5-:+.30—12(=28)..8— 5 (=3) 

1 have added this Definition to the reſt of Euchd s, becauſe moſt Commentators 

make mention of Harmonical Proportion as worthy of Conſideration ; and for 
that it hath ſome affinity with proportion ex 

ru. 40 —— 
Clavinus in his Comments hath abundantly he forth, and explained the various 

| Properties, and mutual Correſpondencies of ——— Geometrical, Arithmetical, 

and Harmonical, whom the Studious may conſult with much profit and delight. 

PROPO- 

11 

OF GEOMETRY. 201 

PROPOSITION I. 

F there be Magnitudes how many rer Equimulti les of as 

many other Magnitudes, each of eac e le one of the Mag 
nitudes is of one, Totuple ſhall all be of all a 

Let there be magnitudes how many ſoever AB, cp, Equimulti- 
ples of as many other magnitudes E, F, each of each. I ſay, that 

Quotuple AB is of E, Totuple ſhall as, cp together, be of E, F to- 
gether. 

IfaB.E::cD.F. Then AaB.B::aB+CD-E+E. 
6 . 3::4 + | In Ca9:t 6+4/2+2 

For becauſe as is equimultiple of E, as cp is of g; therefore how 
many magnitudes are in aBequal to E, ſo many are in ep equal to F. 

Let 4B be divided into the magnitudes equal to E, namely into 
AdG, GB; and cp into the magnitudes equal to g, namely into cn, HD. 

Now then the multitude of theſe magnitudes CH, HD, contained 
in CD, ſhall be equal to the multitude of thoſe magnitudes AG,GR, 

7 in 4B | for that as, cp are by ſuppoſuion Equimuliiples 
F 
And foraſmuch as a 0 is equal x, and ch to g; therefore 40, e R 
together, are equal to E, F together | Ax. 2. If equals be added to 
equals, the wholes are equal. 

By the ſame reaſon 6B is equal to x, and Hp to ; therefore alſo 
GB, HD together, are equal to E, together | by Ax. 2. 

Wherefore how many magnitudes are in a B equal to E, ſo many 
are in AB, CD together, equal to E, E together. 

Therefore Quotuple A; is of x, Totuple ſhall 4B, ep together, be 
of E, together. 
If therefore there be magnitudes how many ſoever Equimulti- 

ples of as many other Magnitudes, each of each, &c. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

To this Propoſition anſwer in Numbers the 55. and 60. Propoſitions of the ſe- 
venth Element, which are thus compriſed, | 

PROP. V, VI. EL VIL 

If a number be a Part, or Parts of a number, and another be 
the ſame Part, or Parts of an other number, 40% both together, 

ſhall be the Jame Part, or Parts of both together, that one ws 4 

Ff 3 Thi, 

202 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

This is differently expreſſed from our preſent Propoſition, but yet to the ſame 
purpoſe, For what Euclide demonſtrates in Magnitades from Multiples, the ſame 
is in Numbers more petſpicuouſly demonſtrated from Submultiples; becauſe 
Numbers have a common Part, i Moy, The Monade, a natural Meaſure of all 
Numbers: from whence way be taken a certain and ſtanding beginning for 
the framing bf demonſtrations, much more clearly, than what can be made out 
in Magnitudes, which are wholly deſtitute of ſuch a natural foundation; there- 
fore Euclide is forced to make uſe of Multiples, for that (as we have formerly 
noted) every. Magnitude may have any Multiple of it ſelf, and all Incommenſu- 
rables may be equally l From which Equimultiplication Euclide moſt 
ingenio fly, and with admirable Artifice manageth this Element of Proportional 

agnitudes. 8 | | 

Foraſmuch therefore that equals added to equals make the wholes equal, He 
from thence proves that equal Proportions added to equal Proportions make in 
the ſumm the ſame equal Proportions __. | 

And the meaning of this Propoſition is, that if there be magnitudes never fo 
many, Equimultiples of as many others, that is, in the ſame Multiple proportion 
to as many other Magnitudes, then as one of the Antecedents 1s to one of the Con- 
ſequents, ſo all the Antecedents ſhall be to all the Conſequents. 

2B; 2D; AEF. * a 

As if A. B:: C. D:; E. F, &c. Then A.B::A+C+E.B+D+F. 

{01 u- 3% $24.2 yt $2 $> 4 636 ＋ 410. 3+2+5. 
© Euclide here in his demonſtration gives an inſtance only in duple proportion be- 
tweep two and two m 2 —— ſake: ee we may in like manner 

fily; proceed, to any further Multiple proportion vhatſoever, triple, quadrupl 
P e alſo to 8 games infinitely ; which are — — os. 
in the — CE ·˖ a. i WH 
But \Zaclide expreſſeth Magnitudes that are to one another in the ſame Mul- 
tiple proportion by Equimultiples, becauſe the word Equimultiples does more im- 
mediately denote the Antecedents to, contain an 1 number of their Conſe- 
Bent, to which they may be accordingly divided: And of ſuch a diviſion 
Eur i Greſaw he was to make a ſpecial uſe in the demonſtration of this Propo- 
ſition ; as likewiſe elſewhere. . 1 IC 4 
Now what is here ſet forth only ip Multiple proportion, the ſame is afterwards 
univerſally demonſtrated at Prop. lab, in any other kind of Proportion, both 
Rational, and Irrational. But this was premiſed to proye other Propoſitions, 
Which wete heceſfarily required towards the demonſtration of that 126. Propoſi- 
tion. Like as the 16. Propoſition El. I. 3 the outward angle of a Triangle 

0 

to be per than either of the inward and oppoſite angles, to make way for the 
roof of ſome other Propoſitions, which were requiſite to demonſtrate that the 

ame outward angle was equal to the wo inward and oppoſite angles, Prop. 32. El. I. 

: 
- 

PRO POSITION I. 

1 the firſt ze Eguimulfiplæ of the ſecond, as the third is of the 
fourth: and there be a fifth Equimnitiple of the ſecond, as a 
Auth is of. the. fourth: then the firſt and'fifth taken together ſhall 
be 1 of the ſecond, as the"third and ſirth are of the 
fourld. ny 14 IV 40497 

„Let 43 the firſt be, Equimyltiple of g the ſecond,as p E the third 
is of E the fourth: ag let there be 0 a fifth Equimultiple of c 
> :+Þ £27 ; ay, 

* 

OF GEOMETRY. 202 

I fay, that aG the firſt and fifth together taken, ſhall be Equi- 
multiple of c the ſecond, as vn the third and fixth together taken, 
is of F the fourth. 

For becauſe 48 is equimultiple of e, as Dx is of r; therefore how 
many magnitudes are in 4B equal to c, fo many are in DE equal to f. 

3 9 B 5 ©. 15 
1 — 3. 
- © $4 a 
1 
1 r 304120 ZF+2F 

A B. C:: DE. F. and 3G. c:: EH. F. Then AB BG. c:: DET EH. F. 
9.3:: 6. 2. and 6. 3:: 4. 2. Then 9 / 6. 3:: 61 4.2. 

By the ſame reaſon how many are in B d equal to c, ſo many are 
in E H equal to F. 

Wherefore how many are in the whole aG equal to c, fo many 
alſo are in the whole p H equal to p. 

Therefore Quotuple a G is of c, Totuple p f is of x. 

And therefore as the firſt and fifth together taken, ſhall be equi- 
multiple of c the ſecond, as pH the third and ſixth together taken, 
is of F the fourth. 

If therefore the firſt be equimultiple of the ſecond, as the third 
is of the fourth, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This Propoſition puts the fifth and ſixth Magnitudes to be equimuluples of the 
ſecond, and fourth: but the proportion would hold the ſame, if the fifth were 
only equal to the ſecond, and the fixth to the fourth. For in this Caſe alſo the 

firſt, and fifth together ſhall be equimultiple of the ſecond, as the third, and fixth 
rr ; 

£ — — 5g. 
C 

h— 

D 

- 8 E 2 H 

For let A B the fick be 23, and BG the fifth be 3, equal to the Conſequens 
C, 3. Alſo let D E the third be 3, and EH the fixth be 2, equal to the Confe- 

quent F, 2. 
Then ABT BG. C:: DET EH. F. That is, | 
AB+ C.C::DE+ F.. 
I2 + 3 e. 3:: 8 + 22. 
But here now tis to be obſerved, that when the fifth and ſixth Terms, B G, E. H, 
7 

arc 

104. THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

are put equal to C, E, the ſecond. and fourth, only the Conſequents are added to 

the firſt and third, AB, DE, the Antecedents; and then this will be the very ſame 

N with that, which Eurlide calls Compoſition of Proportion in Def. 14. El. V. For 

| the Conſequents C, and F are plainly added to the Antecedents, A B, D E, in that 
they are equal to BG, E H, the fifth and fixth Terms. And beſides, this Compo- 
ſition of Proportion is particularly demonſtrated hereafter at Prop. 18. and made 
a diſtinct notion, and of a different uſe from this Propoſition, which is applied 
after a more general manner, and not confined to the addition of the Conſequents 
to the Antecedents ; but admits of any other Terms whatſoever : and not only in 
equimultiple Proportion as in this place, but alſo uniyerſally in any kind of Pro- 
portion, as is demonſtrated at Prop. 24". | 

i PROPOSITION III. 
1 | F the fir be equimultiple of the ſecond, as the third is of the 
fourth: and there be taken equimultiples of the firſt and third, 

then by Equidiſtance each of the taken equimultiples ſhall be equi- 
2 each, one of the ſecond, the other of the fourth. 

Let a the firſt be equimultiple of z the ſecond, as c the third is 
p the fourth: and of a and c let be taken equimultiples EF, GH. 
I fay, that ex £quo, by equidi/tance | Def. 18. | EF is equimultiple 
of B the ſecond, as GH is of D the fourth. 

K F 

2 TY — 13 
A. a 
B 
— 
A K — A1 
C 
* — 
— 
EF GH 

A. B:: C. D. Thenexequo 2A.B::2C.D 
9.3: : 6. . Then eæ equo 18.3:: 12. 2. 

Foraſmuch as EF is equimultiple of a, as GH is of e; therefore 
how. many magnitudes are in EF equal to 4, ſo many are in Gn 
equal to c. 

Let Ey be divided into the magnitudes equal to a, namely into 
EK, KF, and GH into GL, LH equal to c. 

Now then the multitude of the magnitudes E x, KP ſhall be equal 
to the multitude of the magnitudes GI., Ln. 

And foraſmuch as | by Suppoſition] a is equimultiple of B, as c 
is of D; and EX is equal to 4, and GL to e; therefore x is equi- 
multiple of B, as d. is of D. 

By the fame reaſon x r is equimultiple of 3, as Ln is of v. 

5 Becauſe 

OF GEOMETRY. 205 

Becauſe therefore E K the firſt, is equimultiple of ; the ſecond, 
as GL the third is of p the fourth: and a fifth x x is equimultiple of 
B the ſecond, as a fixth LH of Þ the fourth; therefore E the firſt 
and fifth together taken, is equimultiple of z the ſecond, as on the 
third and ſixth together taken, is of Þ the fourth [by Prop. 2. El. V.] 

It therefore the firſt be equimultiple of the ſecond, as the third 
is of the fourth: and of the firſt and third there be taken equimul- 
tiples, then ex quo each, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

This is univerſally demonſtrated at Prop. 22. and at preſent pro- 
poſed only in multiple proportion to be made uſe of for the de- 
monſtration of the following 'Propofition. | 

PROPOSITION IV. 

F the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, that the third 
1 hath to the fourth, then according to any multiplication whatſo- 
ever, the equimultiples of the firft and third have to the equi- 
multiples of the ſecond and fourth the ſame proportion, being com- 
pared to one another. 

Let a the firſt have to s the ſecond the ſame proportion, that c 
the third hath to o the fourth: and let there be taken of a and c 
the firft and third any equimultiples E and F; and of 3; and Þ the ſe- 
cond and fourth any equimultiples d and R. 

I fay, that as E is to d, ſo is F to H. For again, of E and g; let 
be taken any equimultiples x and L; and of d and ñ any equimul- 
tiples M and N. : 

1 12 — 

pp ——_ 1 — 

22 * 0 —— 

B — | 922 

6 2 — Hi — — 

Mo — — 4 —— Nt + — * 
c . D. Then 

4211 
EQ: . K 
de” K. M:: L. R. | 
Now- becauſe E is equimultiple of 4, as F is of c; and of E and 5 
hath been taken equimultiples x and I.: Therefore | ex £quo by 
Prop. 3. ] K is equimultiple of 4, as L is of c. 
_ Likewiſe becauſe 6 is eguimultiple of , as E is of D; and of d 
and H hath been taken equimultiples i and N: Therefore ex £9u0, 
M is equimultiple of n, as N is of D. a 
Foraſmuch then that [ by Suppoſition] as a the firſt is to ꝝ the 
| Gg ſecond, 

106 THE FIFTH: ELEMENT 

ſecond, ſo c the third to Þ the ſourth; and of a and e hath been 
taken any equimultiples x and L; and of and Þ any equimultiples 
M and x: therefore [ * by the fifth Definition if x exceeds M, I 
- exceeds E, if equal, tis equal, if leſs, leſs. 
But x, L are equimultiples of x, F; and M, N of 6, H ig 
to any multiplication whatlocuer: Therefore {*by Det. 5: ] as E 
is to d, ſo is P to n. 

If therefore the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſome proportion that 
the third hath to the fourth, then &c. Wich Was to be eee 

Corollary.” (15 * | 
Of Inverſe . 

From hence tis manifeſt, that if four. Magnitudes nc 
they ſhall alſo be /rver/ly proportional. 

For if E and y equimultiples of 4 and c, the firſt and third be 
greater than 6 and Et the equimultiples of c and p, the ſecond and 
fourth; then on the contrary & and H ſhall be leſs than E and ?: and 
if E and 5 be leſs, then ſhall 6 and n be greater; if equal, equal: 

Therefore Inverſly, » ſhall be to A, 5 9 to e: the — to the 
firſt, as the fourth to the third. 

A Declaration of this fourth Produits in mn 

Shewing the equimulti ples of the Antecedents to be proportional 
to the equimultiples of the Conſequents in ſome kind of proportion, 
either of equality, or of the greater, or leſs inequality. 
4 6. 1 „ „ 6. 3 1 
renn ed, A-. 5. 
2A. 33:: 20. 3D. 24. :: 10. 4D. 24. 53: : 10. 15. 
12. 1g:: 6.10; 
Proportion Seſquitertial. Proportion of Equality. Proportion Subſeſquiquartal. 
The Antecedents A, C The Antecedents A, C The Antecedents A, C 
Multiplied by 2, and Multipli = by 2, and Multiplied by 2, and 

the — B, D the wa equents B, D the Conlequen B, D 
3 | 5 

A DR O T A 7 IONS. : 
[ * By Def. 5. ] The turning of this Definition, in which lyes the chief force of 
Euclid's demonſtration may ſeem to. che younger Students ſomewhat perplext. 
But we ought to conſider, that in all Definitions the Subject, and Prædicate are 
ſimply conyertible, and do mutually put one another. So here there are firſt four 
Magnitudes propoſed to be proportional; and their ples, taken 
according to any multiplication 8 ure ppt to be — UN — 
equal, greater, or leſs, as the Definition che con N 
re got 

r the ogup ultiples of fo * NN = to be d 1 
oh 5 5 de proportional. Thus here * Definition of 

Magnitu 
— and the Conberſe, ' or Dei are immediately turned 
upon one another in the demonſtration af; this: n * the 
hdd ad orly 15 e 

— i 

Advertiſement. 

This Propoſition ought to be of a more ſpecial Remark, than is commonly 

taken notice of. It is the principal and moſt immediate property of four Propor- 
tionals, and the ſole ground from whence Huclide raiſed his Definition of propor- 
tional Magnitudes ; as hath been explained in the Annotations on the 5*. ition. 
Where it was alſo made manifeſt, that the Primary, and Eſſential Conception of 
Proportionals conſiſts in this general notion, that the Antecedents do equally contain 
their Conſequents: How much one is of one, fo much the other is of the other. As 
to inſtance clearly and diſtinctly in this main matter. If the Antecedents be Equimul- 
tiples of their 8 each of each, as if A be triple of B, and C triple of D, 
then in common ſenſe A the firſt is to B the ſecond, in the ſame Multiple propor- 
tion, that C the third is to D the fourth. And fo again, if the Antecedents be 
any otherwiſe Equtquantuples of their Conſequents, each of each, then the firſt is to 
the ſecond in the ſame proportion that the third is to the fourth: Let the Pro- 
portion be any whatſoever poflibly can be. This Equiquantupleneſs in Numbers Eu- 
clide expreſly ſets forth in Def. 20. El. VII. But now in Magnitudes it cannot be 
expreſſed from their own natural Conſtitution (as in Numbers) wherein the Ante- 
rodents are equimultiples of their Conſequents; for that Magnitudes have no Ori- 
ginal meaſure, or Geometrical Unite, whereby to expreſs their quantities, but onl 
what is made by conſent among our ſelves. And then again there are numberle 
Magnitudes which can have no common meaſure at all to be made between them, 
whereby to expreſs their mutual proportions. Wherefore ſeeing that the Eſſential 
and Phyſical Definition of proportional Magnitudes cannot be made uſe of in Geo- 
metrical demonſtrations (as it is in Numerical) unleſs we could ſet forth wherein 
the Antecedents do equally contain their Conſequents : therefore recourſe muſt 
be had to ſome other property, which does flow from this Equz ſc, that 
is, from the Eſſence of Proportionality. Now in this 4. Propofition ſuch an im- 
mediate property of four Proportionals is demonſtrated of them: namely, that 
the equimultiples of the Antecedents ſhall be rtional to the equimultiples of 
their Conſequents, according to any multiplication whatſoever, when the four 
Magnitudes, whereof they are equimultiples are proportional, let the Magni- 
tudes be Commenſurable, or Incommenſurable, the proportions Rational, or Irra- 
tional. But how again, and by what deductions from this ſame property Euclide 
gave us an other infallible ſign of all kinds of proportional Magnitudes in the place 

of a Formal, or Eſſential Definition of Proportionals, the Annotations on the 5*. 
Definition have before fully declared. | 

PROPOSITION V. 

1H. Magnitude be equimultiple of a Magnitude, as a part de 
trated is of a part detracted, then the Remainder be equi- 
multiple of the Remainder, as the whole is of the whole. 

Let the Magnitude as be equimultiple of co, as the part de- 
traced ax is of the part detracted cx. | 
I fay, that the Remainder EA ſhall be equimultiple of the Re- 
mainder.FD, as the whole a 81s of the whole cp. 

For Quotuple AE is of cr, Totuple let E be made of an other 
Magnitude cs. | 

And becauſe 4s is equimultiple of cx, as EB is of c, therefore 
AE, E together, are equimultiple of cx, cd together, that is, the 
whole a 81s equimultiple of the _— GF, as AE is of cr | by Prop.. 

81 

208 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

All equimultiple of all, as one of one. | But az is alſo ſuppoſed equi- 
multiple of c x, as AB is of cp. 
Whereſore AB is equimultiple of each d P, and co, and therefore 
GF is equal to c I by Ax. . | 19 29005 en 
Let F common to both be taken away, therefore the Remain- 
der ac, is equal to the Remainder x. 

PA 12 E eee Gd. 

. MctMEzLIMDDZ2CG©C£©AEAT.E£AC_LCCM_Nk_IC. 6a TEC ETS)\ * n 4 8 2 1 118 
—— EF 3 * ** ws * 

* 

TR. _ 
1 a MME. „* Lac. £.c 4 
| «6 he he Sy” I TT I TY > 4 9 2 

300 Zoe 3D 30 
AB. e:: AB. CF. Then EB. F D:: AB. co. 
enn 2 :: 18. 6. 

Foraſmuch then that AE is equimultiple of c E, as E x is of dc, and 
de is equal to FD; therefore AE ſhall be equimultiple of cx, as 
EB of FD. | : | 

But az is ſuppoſed equimultiple of cx, as as of cp; therefore 
the Remainder EB is equimultiple of the Remainder Fp, as the 
whole 48 is of the whole cv. 

If therefore a Magnitude be equimultiple of a Magnitude, as a 
art detracted is of a part detracted, &c. Which was to be demon- 
ated. / 
This here in multiple proportion is uniyerſally demonſtrated at 
rop. 19. rote fur 1 
To this Propoſition anſwer in Numbers the 7". and 8. Propofi- 
tions of the ſeventh Element, only what 1s here demonſtrated 
of Multiple proportion, the like is there demonſtrated e contra 
of Submultiple proportion; for the reaſons before noted upon 
Prop. I. of this Element. | | 

PROP. VII, and VIII. EL VII. 

If a number be a Part, or Parts of a number, ſuch as a number de- 
tracted is of a number detracted; ſo alſo the Remainder ſhall be the 
ſame Part,or Parts of theRemainder,which the whole is ofthe whole. 

PROPOSITION VL 

F two Magnitudes be equimultiple of two Magnitudes, and ſome 
parts of them detracted be equimultiple of the ſame Magni- 
tudes, then the Remainders alſo ſhall be either equal to the ſame 
Mnynitudes, or equimultiples of them. 
Let the two Magnitudes aB, cÞ be equimultiples of the two 
Magnitudes R, , and the parts detracted a o, c u, be ſome equimul- 
tiples of the ſame E, x. | 

4 I fay, 

OF GEOMETRY. 209 
I lay, that the Remainders G8, an, are either equal to x, F, or 
equimultiples of tnje .. r 
Firſt let on, be equal to x. I ſay, that np is alſo equal to x; for 
to let cx be put equal. e 
A | 8 | 6 3 B 
* 407 Sr 

AB.B::CD.F,a0d 40. :: 0h. P. A if eK Then HD=F. 
1 5. 3:: 10. 2. and 12. 3:: 8. 2 3 23. Then 2=2. 

And becauſe 40 the firſt is equimultiple of E the ſecond, as c N 
the third is of x the fourth; and B a {7 is equal to E the ſecond, 
and ck a ſixth is equal to g the fourth; Therefore AB the firſt and 

Hh together, are equimultiple of E, as K H tbe third and ſixth are 
of F the fourth | by Prop. 2.]. "W 

But AB is by Suppoſition equimultiple of x, as cÞ of x; there- 
fore KH is equimultiple of x, as e D of F. Becauſe now KH, CD, 
each is equimultiple of ; therefore k f is equal toc D [ by Ax. 6. 

Let cx common to both be detracted, therefore the Remainder 
KC is equal to the Remainder xp. But xc was put equal to x; 
therefore HD is alſo equal to F. If therefore @s be equal to x, then 
ſhall Hp be equal to F. 

In like manner ſhall be demonſtrated, that if 6 z be multiple of 
E, alſo HD ſhall be as equally multiple of F. 

A » EO c 28 
— 13 
R 4 C C 8 H 2. = 
3 
AB. E:: D. F. and 40. E:: CH. F. GB = RE. Then HD = 15. 

e. e 6 6. Ia 4 4 

If therefore two Magnitudes be equimultiple of two Magnitudes, 
and ſome parts of them detracted be equimultiple, &c. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. 

This here in multiple proportion is at Prop. 24. univerſally de- 
monſtrated in all Kinds of proportion. 

Theſe few Propoſitions, which hitherto only concern mul- 
tiple proportion, are all again demonſtrated in general. But they, 
were to be premiſed as ſubſervient to many of the following de- 

13 monſtrations, 

fourth, for c is inſtead of two Magnitudes]; there- by 

* - * — - _ 

* ———— — —_ = —— 
_ — = — — * — — — — 0 * = «I 
= — — 3 — — — * 2 * 

IR 4 4 2 2 —— 1 
: * — - — - —— 
— — — — — 3 4 n 5 = _ - 7 . 
on” A — : > 7 

210 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

monſtrations, before the affections of Proportionals could be uni- 
verſally demonſtrated according to all proportions Rational and 
Irrational whatſoever. 1 1 1 | 

PROPOSITION VII. 

F Magnitudes have the ſame proportion to the ſame Magni- 

tude: And the ſame Magnitude hath to equal Magnitudes the 

ſame proportion. 

Let the equal Magnitudes be 4,s, and any other Magnitude be 
c. I ſay, that each of theſe 4, B, have the ſame proportion to c. 

And again, that c hath to each, 4 and B, the ſame proportion. For 

of 4, B, let be taken any equimultiples D, E: and of 

c any multiple whatſoever F. Whereas then v is e- 
quimultiple of a, as E of B; and that A is equal to | 

B, ietcfSic D is alſo equal to E | by Ax.6.]; T 
wherefore if D exceeds F, alſo E ſhall exceed F; if 
equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. But Dp, E are any equi- | 
multiples of a, B | zhe firſt and third], alſo F is | 
any multiple whatſoever of c [ zhe eg and Dl A 

Upon the ſame conſtruction we may alike de- 
monſtrate that v is equal to E: and therefore if x 
exceeds, it alſo exceeds E; if equal, equal; if leſs, = 
leſs. But F is any multiple of c | the firſt and | 
third; and p, k are any equimultiples of 4, s | 
[ the ſecond and fourth |; therefore as c to a, ſo | 
Cc tO B. 

Wherefore equals have to the ſame Magnitude the ſame proporti- 
on: and the ſame hath to equals, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

fore as A toc, ſos to c | Def. 5. El. V.. ET j | 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This 26. with the 8", 9%, 10, 11, and 12, Propofitions following, are taken by 
Tacguet as meer Axioms, to be received without demonſtration. They are indeed 
. truths, eſpecially in Numbers: but becauſe theſe are to be applied in ge- 
neral to Magnitudes of all forts, as Lines, Planes, and Solids, commenſurable, or 
incommenſurable indifferently; therefore being capable of a juſt demonſtration, 
they onght to be demonſtrated; as Euclide hath upon good reaſon done with an 
admirable ſubtility of Ratiocination uſed in theſe Propoſitions, and throughout 
this whole Element; which Tacquet might have well perceived, if his vanity had 
not miſlead him. And yet to help out his own method he was conſtrained to uſe 
theſe Propoſitions in the nature of Axioms, or common Notions: whereas Borellus 
alſo hath thought fit to demonſtrate them, as well as Euclide had before. 

But Borellur ke wiſe hath his failures, who is forced in his method to make his 
demonſtrations apart, ſome for commenſurable Magnitudes, ſome for incommen- 
ſurable: whereas Magnitudes, when compared together in this Elementary Do- 
RArine of Proportions and Proportionals, are not propoſed in particular, ſome- 
OO TOE LILIES 4 time; 

OF GEOMETRY. 211 

times commenſurable, ſometimes incommenſurable; but as Magnitudes in general. 
Wherefore Euclide frames his demonſtrations with ſuch artifice, as at once to com- 
prehend alike all Magnitudes commenſurable or incommenſurable, in any kind of 
proportion without reſtriction, or any mention of commenſurability, or incom- 
menſurability, to be diſtinctly conſidered. And therefore in this point Borellus his 
method is defective, and comes much ſhort of Euclid , general way of demonſtra- 
tion in this excellent Element: where the demonſtrations extend themſelves to all 
things in nature capable of proportion. 

PRO POSITION VIII. 

F unequal magnitudes the greater hath to the ſame a greater 
proportion, than the leſs; And the ſame hath to the leſs a 
greater propartion, than to the greater. 

Let the unequal Magnitudes be a B, c, and a3 the greater, | as, 5. 
c, 3J Let alſo D be any other Magnitude | as 2 

I fay, that as [5] hath to Þ [2] a greater proportion, than (3 
to D [2]. And p 2 hath to c C3 Ja greater proportion than to as| 5 |. 

Whereas AB is greater than c, let in aB be put a Magnitude 
equal to c, namely Bt | 3 |. f | 

Now the leſs of theſe two Ak, EB, being multiplied, ſhall at 
length be greater than p. 

Firſt, let ax (the exceſs of a ; above c) be leſs than EB (which 
is equal to c), and multiply az Z] till the multiple thereof be \ 
made greater than Þ | 2 |, and let this multiple of ae be FdH [4 |] | 
greater than Þ | 2]. a8 OS | 
Now Quotuple FG [4] is of AE [2 |, Totuple let Gn [6] be of 
eEB[3], and x [6] of c [3]. So that k B being Put equal to c, they 

Hall likewiſe have their equimultiples d a, k, equal to one another, 
by Ax. 6. 

And now of Þ [2] let be taken the 10 4. 
duple L 4, and the triple | 6], and, $a F | 
ſoonward more by one, till the mul- | 
tiple of v [ 2] be the firſt greater than _ | 
x [6] the multiple of c [3]. Let now x — [ 
this multiple of Þ be taken, and let 
it be x [8| the quadruple of D [2], +L_—— 
and the firſt greater than « oy ana ad os an tenet 
multiple of c [3]. So that K [6] is 
the firſt leſs than x [8]. — A | 

Foraſmuch then as x, is the firſt leſs than x the quadruple of p; 
therefore k is not leſs than mt the triple of v [ 7 either equal, or 
geater | r | 

And whereas FG is equimultiple of AE, as 6H of EB; therefore f 
the whole Px is equimultiple of the whole ay, as FG of az | by 'k 

| 

38 —— 

8Nx .. ———— 

Prop. 1. El. V.]. But £6 is equimultiple of A E, as « of c | by Con- 
ſtruction]; wherefore Fx is equimultiple of a B, as K of e; and there- | 
fore FH and x, are equimultiples of AB, and c. | 

l Again, | 

112 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Again, becauſe an is equimultiple of EB, as Kof c, and EB is put 

equal to e ¶ by Conſtruction ]; therefore GH ſhall be equal to K: 
by Ax. 6. 

0 % But ay not leſs than , therefore dH is not leſs than l, and 
FG is greater than p | by Conſtruction |; wherefore the whole F H 
is greater than D, x together. 

But v, M together are equal to x; therefore P H exceeds x; bnt k 
exceeds not x | by Conſtruction] and FH, K are equimultiples of AB, 
c, and x is any whatever multiple of 

p; therefore 4B hath to p a greater MF 
proportion, than c to D [ by Def. 7. pan E3 mn 
V.] 

I ſay moreover, that D hath a great- 
er proportion to c the leſs, than to K ere 
AB the greater. For on the lame Con- 25 
ſtruction we ſhall in like manner de- 
monſtrate, that N exceeds x, but ex- 
ceeds not FH; and that N is any multi- 
ple of p, and Fx, x, are any whatever . ————— 
equimultiples of a, c; therefore Þ hath to c the leſs, a greater pro- 
portion, than hath Þ to a» the greater. 

But again, of the unequal Magnitudes AB, c, when in the greater 
AB there is taken a Magnitude equal to c the leſs: Let AE the exceſs 
of 4B, above c be greater than ER, which is put equal to c [AE, 3; 
EB, 2J Now EB the leſs being multiplied, ſhall at length be greater 
than v. Let xs [2] be multiplied, and let q [4] the multiple of 
EB (equal to c) be greater than Þ [3]. 

And Quotuple G [4] is of ER [2 Totuple let y [6] be of at 
[z] and x [4]ofc[2] SY that E BR be- 

ing put equal to c, they ſball likewiſe | OS 
have Neb equimultiples on, x equal e I _—_ x 

to one another, by Ax. 6. And alſo 4 — s 

from the ſame Axiom it 7 follows, that *C— 

of theſe equimultiples, * Po the equi- 

multiple of Ax is greater than Gn, . 

that is, x the equimultiple 9 f BB, . N 

becauſe A k is now ſuppoſed greater CM ——.— | 

Iban E B, which 15 equal to c. For as 9'N PA 
of equals the equimultiples are e qual, 3 

fo of unequals the equimull; 15 are une the greater of the 
greater, the leſs of the leſs. E | 10 * of 
e ſhall! 188755 that R 10] 

Now after the former manner we 
and x 4 are equimultiples of az [ 5], and c [2]. | 

And as before, let of v3] be taken the multiples, till x be the firſt 
multiple of p, that is greater 25 FG (6th the multiple of az [3]. 

. Where 
ln 

OF GEOMETRY. 113 
Wherefore again, Fo [6] is not leſs than 6, and an [4] is 
greater than Þ | 3] by Conſtruction; therefore the whole FH 10], 
exceeds D, M together; that is x9]. But k exceeds not N, becauſe Pd 
being greater than H which is equal to k, exceeds not N, by Conſtru- 
ction. And FH, k, are equimultiples of as, c; and N is any what- 
ever multiple of v; therefore as | 5], hath to [;] a greater pro- 
portion, than 2] to D | 3]. by Def. 7. El. V. ; 
Wherefore of unequal Magnitudes the greater hath to the ſame 
a greater proportion, than the leſs; And the ſame hath to the leſs a 
greater proportion, than to the greater. Which was to be demon- 

ſtrated. 
ANNOTATIONS. 

In this Propoſition there are in effect four Magnitudes, whether AB, and C be 
compared to D, or D to AB, and C. For in each of theſe Caſes D is twice taken: 
and 1n the firſt as a common Conſequent to AB, and C: in the latter as a com- 
mon Antecedent to the ſame Magnitudes. 

The ſtreſs of this ſubtil demonſtration lyes in three remarkable points. Firſt, 
of the two uncqual Magnitudes AB, C, there is in the greater AB taken a part 
EB equal to C, the leſs Magnitude: ſo that the Remainder AE is the exceſs of 
AB * — C. | 

Secondly, of theſe two parts A E, EB, That, which happens to be the leſs, is to 
be multiplied, till the multiple thereof is allowed to exceed D the third Magnitude. 

Thirdly, D is to be multplied, till its multiple firſt exceeds the multiple of the 
greater part in AB, whether it be either AE, or EB. Upon theſe Conſtructions 
the demonſtration chiefly depends. 

Laſtly, note that of the two unequal Magnitudes, each may be either greater, 
or leſs than the third ; or one greater, and the other leſs. As for inſtance, let a 
Pound, and a Crown be compared to a Shilling; or a Crown, and a Shilling to a 
. bo a Pound, and a Shilling to a Crown: And the demonſtration ſerves 
alike to all. | 

Advertiſement. 

In this Propoſition are expoſed two unequal Proportions that have the ſame 
Conſequents: and again contrarily, two unequal proportions that have the ſame 
Antecedents. As 4, and :, that is, 6 to a, and 4 to 2. And contrarily }, and i. Now 
in this 8. Propoſition is only demonſtrated which in each compariſon is the greater 
proportion. But a farther enquiry may be made, in what proportion one 1s 
greater than the other. This queſtion is, De proportione Proportionum, of the pro- 
portion of Proportions, for the diſcovery whereof take theſe two Rules. 

1, Two unequal proportions having the ſame Conſequents, are to one another 
as their Antecedents. Thus; is to! as 6 to 4, or 1}, in proportion Seſquialteral, 
one greater than the other: and thus in general ſignified, =. = :: A. E. 2. 218. 12. 

2. Two unequal proportions arg the ſame Antecedents, are to one another 
Reciprocally as their Conſequents. Thus 7 is to }, as 6 to 4: That is Subduple pro- 
portion is to Subtriple in proportion Seſquialteral, ſo that ; is in ſuch a propor- 
tion greater than , and in general, 2. *::A.E.f;.%:: 18. 12. But now if the 
two unequal proportions have different Antecedents, and Conſequents, as 9 to 3, 
and 4 to 2. In this Caſe to diſcover which of them 1s the greater proportion, 
and in what proportion one is greater than the other, the Terms of theſe pro- 
portions are to be ſo changed, that the fame unequal proportions may have the 
lame Conſequents, which is called Reduction of proportions to a common Conſequent : 

and performed by this Rule. 
rn Os Hh Redu- 

x 

1 
NY 
n 0 
1 
j 
4 
i 
j 

114 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Reduction of Proportions ta a common Conſequent. 

Multiply the Conſequents into one another ; and each Antecedent into the 
others Conſequent. pf ; 

As 3 and; are brought to h and '} by multiplying the Conſequents 3 and 2 into 
one another: And the Antecedent 9 into 2 the others Conſequent; likewiſe the 
Antecedent 4 into 3 the formers Conſequent. 

Now this 8. Propoſition demonſtrates, that 18 hath to 6 a greater proportion 
than 12 to 6: and 6 to 12 a greater than 6 to 18. 

Moreover in both Caſes 'tis ſhewn by the two foregoing Rules, in what 
portion one proportion is greater than the other. Thus ; is greater than , and 
greater than 4, in the ſame proportion of 18 to 12, or 145. But the proporti 
of , and are the ſame with , and '?, which is thus demonſtrated : ; multiplied by 
2 make , and: multiplied by 3 make ;: But if a number multiply two numbers, 
the Products ſhall be in the ſame proportion with the multiplied numbers, by 
Prop. 17. El. VII. Again, of the 9 3, and 5 the Conſequents 3 and 2 
multiplied into one another, ſhall make one and the ſame common Conſequent. 
For 3 into 2, or 2 into 3 make the ſame number 6, by Prop. 16. El. VII. If two 
numbers multiply each the other, the Products ſhall be equal to one another; 
3 and; are the ſame proportions with 2, and 3. Thus the Rule for Re- 
duction of Proportions to a common Conſequent is demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION 1X. 

Agnitudes which have the ſame proportion to the ſame mag- 

| VE 2:tude, are equal to one another: And to what magnitudes 

the ſame magnitude hath the ſame proportion, they alſo are equal 
to one another. 95 

L“et each of the Magnitudes 4, x, have to c the ſame proportion. 
I fay, that a is equal to 3. For if not, then each of thoſe 

Magnitudes 4, B, ſhould not have to c the ſame propor- T 

tion [by Prop. 8. El. V.]. But each have; therefore a is 

equal to B. | 
Again, let c have to each of the Magnitudes 4, B, the | 

ſame proportion. I fay, that a is equal tos. For if not, 8. 

then c ſhould not have to a and B; the ſame proportion A 

by Prop. 8. El. V.] But it hath; therefore a is equal to . 
Wherefore Magnitudes which have the ſame propor- 

tion to the ſame Magnitude, are equal to one another. 

&c. Which was to be demonſtrated. L 

PROPOSITION X. 

0 F Magnitudes having a proportion to the ſame magnitude, 
that which hath the greater proportion, is the greater. amd 

to what magnitude the ſame magnitude hath a greater proportion, 
that 1s the leſs magnitude. | 

Let 4 have to c a greater proportion than ; to c. I fay, that 4 
a is 

OF GE OME T RV. 215 
is greater than B: For if not, then à is either equal to B, or leſs. But 
A is not equal to 3. For then each of the magnitudes 4, s ſhould 
have to c the fame proportion | by Prop. 7. El. V: |. But each of them 
have not; therefore 4 is not equal to B: neither alſo is : 
A leſs than B. For then a ſhould have to e a leſs propor- 
tion than B to c | by Prop. 8. El. V.. But it hath not; 
therefore A is not leſs than 3: And it hath been demon- 
ſtrated that it is not equal; therefore a is greater than 3. 5 | 

Again, let c have to a greater proportion than c to C 
A. I fay, that s is leſs than a. For if not: it is either A ! 
equal, or greater; but ; is not equal to a; for then c | 
ſhould have to 4 and g; the ſame proportion | by Prop. 
7. El. V.] But it hath not; therefore B; is not equal to 
A: neither allo is B greater than a. For then c ſhould 
have to Ba leſs proportion than to a | by Prop. 8. El. V.“ 
But it hath not; therefore ; is not greater than a: And it hath 
been demonſtrated that it is not equal: therefore B is leſs than a. 

Wherefore of magnitudes having a proportion to the ſame mag- 
n:tude, that which hath the greater proportion 1s the greater. &c. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XI. 

Roportions which are the [ame to the ſame proportion, are the 
ſame to one another. 

T 2 

Let A be to 8; as c to p: alſo E to F as c top. I fay, that a is 
to B, as E to F. For let be taken of 4, c, E (the Antecedents) any 
equimultiples d, H, K: and of x, p, F (/e Canſequents) any what- 
ever equimultiples L, M, N. Now becauſe it is as A to B, ſo c to p; 
and of a, c are taken equimultiples 6, H: alſo of 3, D any whatever 
equimultiples I., M. If therefore 6 exceeds L, then H exceeds i; 
and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. | Def. 5. EL V. 

Again, becauſe E is to as c to p: and of x, c are 
taken equimultiples k, H: as alſo of F, Dany whatever 
equimultiples x, M. If therefore x exceeds x, then n : 
exceeds M; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. But if n 
exceeds M, then 6 exceeds L; and if equal, equal; it 
leſs, leſs | for by Suppoſition a is to ; as c to p]; wherefore if d ex- 
ceeds L, then x exceeds x; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. But d 
are equimultiples of a, E: and L, N any whatever equimultiples of 
B, F; Wherefore as 1 to x, ſo E tor Def. 5. El. V.. 

Therefore proportions which are the ſame to the ſame propor- 
tion, are the ſame to one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

* * 
2 EY 
— 

I. M. N 

Hh 1 PRO PO. 

= 
S » CY 
— k Ag — 21 
„ ͤ —ß— . 

216- THE FIFTH: ELEMENT 

ul 10. PROPOSITION XII. 

E maghitudes how many ſoever be Proportionals : it ſhall be, 
as one of the Antecedents to one of the Conſequents, ſo all the 
Antecedents to all the Conſequents. 

Let there be Proportional magnitudes how many ſoever, 4, B, 

c, D, E, F; And asatoB,foctop, and E to F. I ſay, that as a to ;, 
ſo A, c, E, to B, D, F. 133 

For of 4, c, E (the Antecedents) let be taken any equimultiples 

G, H, k; and of 3, D, F, (the Conſequents) any whatever equimul- 

tiples L, M, N. * | 
Becauſe therefore it is as a to B, ſo c to p, and E - 

to : and there hath been taken of 4, c, E any equi- 
multiples d, H, k: and of 3, D, F, any whatever equi- 
multiples L, M, x. . 

If therefore d exceeds 1, then x exceeds M, and k 
exceeds N; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. | 

So that if Gexceeds L, then d, N, k, exceeds I., M,N; and if equal, 
equal; if leſs, leſs. 8 

But 6, and 6, H, x, are equimultiples of 4, and of 4, c, x. | For if 
there be magnitudes how many ſoever equimultiples of as many 
other magnitudes, each, of each, Quotuple one 1s of one, Totuple 
ſhall all be of all] RN 

By the ſame reaſon alſo L, and L, M, x, are equimultiples of B, 
and of B, D, F. 11 | 

Therefore it is, as 4 to B, fo 4, c, E, to B, D, F. 

Wherefore if maguitudes how many ſoever be proportionals : 
it ſhall be, as one of the Antecedents to one of the Conſequents, ſo 
all the Antecedents to all the Conſequents. Which was to be de- 
monſtrated. | 

To this Propoſition anſwers in Numbers Prop. 12. El. VII. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

What is here now univerſally proved of any kind of proportion, the ſame hath 
been before in the firſt Propofition of this Element demonſtrated only of mul- 
tiple proportions, that as one of the Antecedents, is to one of the Conſequents, 
ſo are all to all. And note, that when the Antecedents are thus annexed to An- 
tecedents, and Conſequents to Conſequents, This is called Addition of proportions; 
whoſe chief uſe is declared in this 12. Propoſition, that as one of the Antece- 
dents is to one of the Conſequents, ſo is the ſumm of the Antecedents to the ſumm 
of the Conſequents. But when Antecedents are multiplied into Antecedents, 
and Conſequents into Conſequents, then it is ſaid to be a Compoſition of Pro- 
portions: Which is of frequent uſe in the Mathematics. , 

wi> 

os 

PROPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 217 

PROPOSITION XII. 

F the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, that the 

third hath to the fourth, and the third to the fourth hath @ 
greater proportion, than the fifth to the ſixth, alſo the firſt hath 
to the ſecond a greater proportion, than the fifth to the /axth. 

Let a the firft have to 3; the ſecond the ſame proportion, that o 
the third hath to p the fourth: and c the third a greater propor- 
tion to p the fourth, than the fifth to + the ſixth. 

I fay, a the firſt ſhall have to s the ſecond a greater proportion, 
than E the fifth to g the ſixth. 

Foraſmuch as c hath to p a greater proportion than E to ; 
therefore there are ſome equimultiples of c, E, and again ſome other 
whatever equimultiples of b, F, where the multiple of c exceeds the 
multiple of p, and the multiple of x exceeds not the multiple of x 
Def. 7. El. V.] Let them be taken, and of c, E, let Gn, be equi- 
multiples; and of p, F any whatever equimultiples x, L; ſo that 6 
excceds k, but x exceeds not IL. 

Now Quotuple & is of c, Totuple let be of a: . G 
And Quotuple E is of p, Totuple alſo let x be of B. They 

Becauſe therefore it is as a to B, foctoD; and of of 
a, c are taken equimultiples M, c; and of B3, Dd, any N. X 
whatever equimultiples N, k; then if M exceeds N, alſo 
G exceeds k; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. 

Now d exceeds k, therefore alſo M exceeds N; but x exceeds not 
L | by Conſtruction], and M, H are equimultiples of 4, | the Ante- 
dents], and N, L any whatever equimultiples of 8, r | the Conſe- 
quents |]; therefore a hath to ; a greater proportion than E to f 
[Def. J. El. V.]. 

If therefore the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, 
that the third hath to the fourth, and the third hath to the fourth 
a greater proportion, than the fifth to the fixth, &c. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. | 

PROPOSITION XIV. 

F the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion that the third 
hath to the fourth; and the firſt be greater than the third; 
alſo the ſecond ſhall be greater than the fourth: c Aud if equal, 

equal, if leſs, leſs. 

Let a the firſt have tos the ſecond the ſame proportion that c 
the third hath to p the fourth; and let a be greater than c. I ſay, 
that ; is greater than p. For whereas 4 is greater than c, and there 
is an other magnitude 3; therefore a hath to ; a greater proportion 

Hh 3 than 

1 — 

* 28 2 
c — - ts * — — — - — - 

218 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 
than c tos [Prop.8. El. V.] But as 4 to 3, ſo c to p; therefore alſo 
c hath to Þ a greater proportion than c to ß. But to what magni- 
tude the ſame hath a greater proportion, | 
that is the leſs Prop. 10. EL V.]; there- 
fore p is leſs than B: ſo that B; is greater Þ——— 
than b. In like manner we ſhalt demon- C 
ſtrate that if a be equal to c, B ſhall alſo 

be equal to p; and if à be leſs than c, ſhall PT 

be alſo leſs than p. | 
If therefore the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, that 

the third hath to the fourth; and the firſt be greater than the 

third, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Euclide thought fit to demonſtrate, that in proportionals if one Antecedent 
were greater, equal, or leſs than the other Antecedent ; then one Conſequent ſhall 
be greater, equal, or leſs than the other Conſequent, But needleſs it was to prove, 
that if one Antecedent were greater, equal, or leſs than the Conſequent, the other 
likewiſe is the ſame. For that this is of it ſelf implied in the very notion of 
proportionals; where the proportions are always either of equality, or of the 

reater or leſs inequality : So that the' Antecedents are either equal to their Con- 
equents, or greater, or leſs, | 

PROPOSITION XV. 

P Arts compared to one another have the ſame proportion with 
their equimultiples. PI: 

Let as be equimultiple of c, as Dr of F. I ſay, that it is as c to 
P, ſo AB to DE. For becauſe as is equimultiple of c, as DE of E, 
therefore how many magnitudes are in 4 8 equal to c, ſo many are 
in DE equal tor. Let aB be divided into the magnitudes equal 
to c, namely Ac, GH, HB, And p E into magnitudes 4 
equal to F, as DK, KL, LE: therefore the multi- 
tude of theſe aG, GH, HR, ſhall be equal to the mul- | D 
titude of vx, KL, ILE. Foraſmuch then as A0, GH, 

HB, are equal to one another: and DK, K I, LE, are 
alſo equal to one another; wherefore as as to Dx, 
lo GHtoKL, and un to 1.8 | Prop. 7. El. V.. Equal 1 ] 

* 

magnitudes have to the ſame (or to equal magnitudes) * 
the ſame proportion. To 
And becaule as one of the Antecedents to one of © E F 
the Conſequents, ſo all the Antecedents to all the Conſequents Prop. 
12. El. VI; thereforeasaG to px, ſo a3 to DE. But aG is equal to 
c, and vx to by Conſtruction], therefore as c to F (part to part), 
ſo AR to DE (equimultiple to equimultiple). | 
Parts therefore compared to one another, have the ſame propor- 
tion with their equimultiples. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 219 

ANNOTATIONS. 

To this Propoſition anſwers in numbers 17, El. VII. «If a number multi- 

« tiplying two numbers make ſome numbers, their Products ſhall have the ſame pro- 
<« portion with the multiplied numbers. 

For let 4 multiplying two numbers 3 and 2, make 12 and 8, then the Products 
12 to 8 ſhall have the {ame proportion with 3 to 2: Both in Seſquialteral pro- 
ion, I ;. 
Theſe Propoſitions are very near to common Notions, and therefore likewiſe 
ought to be as carefully remarked, in regard of their general uſe in proportions 
between magnitudes to magnitudes, and numbers to numbers. Alſo this Prop. 170. 

El. VII. is the ground of bringing all proportions to a common Conſequent, b 
which is diſcovered what proportions are greater, or leſs one than — As 

hath been before noted upon Propoſition 8**, Which Annotations review, and fully 
conſider with relation to theſe Propoſitions. 

| PROPOSITION XVI. | 
I F four magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall alſo be alternly 
proportional. 

Let four magnitudes 4, B, c, D, be proportional, as a to B, ſoc to 
D. I ſay, that they ſhall alſo be alternly proportional, as a to c, ſo 
s to D. For of A, B, let be taken equimultiples B, F: and 

and of c, pany whatever equimultiples 6, H. Foraſmuch © 2 
then that x is equimultiple of a, as F of B; but parts have 
to one another the ſame proportion with their equimul- n 0 

tiples Prop. 15. El. V.]; therefore as a to B, fo E to p: but ö 
as A tos, ſoc to o; therefore as c to p, ſo E tor Prop. 1 I. El. V.] 

Again, becauſe 6, Hare equimultiples of c, o; therefore as c to p, 
ſo d to H: but as c to p, ſo E tor; therefore as E to x, 
ſo d to H. But if four magnitudes be proportional, and * * © 
the firſt be greater than the third, the ſecond ſhall be : 5 
greater than the fourth, and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs 1 * 
Prop. 14. El. V.]. If therefore E exceeds 6, alſo F exceeds . 
NH; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. But B, F are equimultiples of 
A, B (the firſt, and third) alſo q, H are any whatever equimultiples 
of c, v (the ſecond, and fourth): Therefore as a to c, ſos to Þ | Def. 
5. El. V. Jong 

wp e if four magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall alſo be 
alternly proportional. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

To this Propoſition anſwers in numbers Prop. 13“. EL VII. 

ANNOTATIONS. 
It is in the firſt place to be noted, that the alternation of proportions can only 
be uſed between H | magnitudes, where the four proportional Terms are 

either all Lines, or all P or all Solids, as Def. 3. EL V. declares. For magni- 
tudes of Heterogenal quantities cannot in nature admit of mutual compariſon ac- 

cording to quantity, N 
PROPO- 

210 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION XVII. 

] F compounded magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall alſo divi- 
ded, be proportional. 

Let the Compounded proportional magnitudes be AB, B E, D, DF; 
as AB to BE, ſocD to DF. I fay, that alſo divided they ſhall be 
proportional, as A E to EB, ſo cF to FD. For of AE, EB; CF,FD,let 

be taken equimultiples n, HRK: LM, MN. And of EB, FD, any what- 
ever equimultiples k x, NP. 

Foraſmuch then as 6H is equi- 

multiple of A E, as H K of EB, there- * — 7 . 1 
fore GH is equimultiple of AE, as 4 — 8 

(the whole) G6 x of the whole aB Ef np 

Prop. 1. El. V.] But GH is equi- , _ BE. 
multiple of AE, as LM of cx | by Io. 

Conſtruction]; therefore 6k is equimultiple of 43, as LM of ct 
Prop. 11. El. V.] 

Again, becaule L M is equimultiple of c F, as MN of xD, therefore 
LM is equimultiple of cr, as (the whole) LN of (the poly) co 
[ Prop. 1. El. V.] But LM was equimultiple of c F as dk of as; there- 
tore GK is equimultiple of as, as LN of cÞ | Prop. 11. El. V.]. 

Again, foraſmuch as [by Conſtru&ion | ax (the firſt ) is equi- 
multiple of zB (the ſecond) as MN (the third) of ED (the fourth): 

And alſo xx (a fifth) is equimultiple of xs (the ſecond), as ne 
(a ſixth) of FD (the fourth); therefore x (the firſt and fifth) to- 
gether, is equimultiple of ER (the ſecond), as MP (the third and 
lixth) together, is of FD (the fourth) [Prop. 2. El. V.]. 

Now becauſe it is as 4B to B E, ſo cp to DF; and of as, cp are 
taken equimultiples dx, LN; alſo of EB, FD any whatever equi- 
multiples Rx, MP. If therefore 6k exceeds Hx, alſo LN exceeds 
MP; and if equal, equal; if lefs, leſs Def. 5. El. V.]. Let there- 
fore GK exceed x, and HK common to both being detracted, then 
ſhall 6H exceed xx. But if dk exceeds Hx, alſo LN exceeds mp, 
and MN common to both being detracted, then ſhall LM exceed N p: 
wherefore if H exceed Kk x, alſo LM exceeds NP. 

In like manner ſhall we prove, that if on be equal to kx, alſo L xi 
ſhall be equal to xy, and if leſs, leſs. But d H, I. Mare equimultiples 
of AE, CF; and kx, NP any whatever equimultiples of EB, FD; 
therefore as A E to EB, ſo g, to F. 

If therefore compounded magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall 
alſo divided be proportional. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

5 ANNOTATIONS _ | 
In this Propoſition there is with great ſubtilty demonſtrated from compounded 

proportions, the Analogy of divided proportions, as Diviſion of proportion is 
Euclide defined in the 16", Definition. | 8 * a 
PROPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 221 
- PROPOSITION XVIII. 

F divided magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall alſo compounded 
be proportional. | 

Let the divided magnitudes be AE, EB; cr, FD; and as ar to 
EB, ſocFto FD. I ſay, that alſo compounded, they ſhall be propor- 
tional, as A B to BE, ſo cop to pF. 

For if it be not as as to BE, ſo cp to Dx, then ſhall it be as as 
to BE, ſo co either to a leſs than p F, or to a greater. 

Firſt, let it be to a leſs, as D d. Foraſ- 
much then that it is as AB to B E, ſo co 4 _ B 
to DG; therefore theſe compound mag- c.— r 
nitudes are proportional. So that di- 
vided, they ſhall alſo be proportional [Prop. 17. El. V. I It is there- 
fore as AE to EB, ſo c to 6D. But by Suppoſition as at to EB, ſo 
CF to FD: wherefore as cd to GD, ſo cF to FD. But cd the firſt is 
greater than cr the third; therefore alſo GD the ſecond is greater 
than FD the fourth Prop. 14. El. V.]; but alſo tis leſs, which is 
impoſſible; therefore it is not as AB to BE, ſo cp to DG. In like 
manner ſhall we prove, that op cannot be to any magnitude greater 
than DF: therefore it is as AB to BE, ſo p to DE. 

Wherefore if divided magnitudes be proportional, they ſhall alſo 
compounded be proportional. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

In this Propoſition is demonſtrated from Divided proportions the Analogy of 

Compounded proportions, as Compoſition of proportion is explained in the 1 50. 
Definition. 

PROPOSITION XIX. 

F it be as the whole to the whole, ſo a part detrafted to a part 

detracted, then the Remainder ſhall be to the Remaingder as the 
Whole to the whole. 

For let it be as the whole as to the whole cp, ſo a part detract- 

ed ax, to a part detracted cr. I fay, that the Remainder x s ſhall 

be to the Remainder + Þ, as the whole as to the whole cp. 
Foraſmuch that it is as the whole as to the whole cp, fo AE to 

CF: therefore alternly as Ba to AE, ſo Do 

to c F. And becauſe compounded magni- 4+ 4 —B 

tudes are proportional, therefore divided Abe, 1 

they ſhall be proportional: wherefore as 

BE to EA, ſo DF to Fc; and therefore alternly it is as Be to DF, 

ſoxatorc. But as at to c, ſo by Suppofition, is the whole as 

to the whole cp: therefore alſo the Remainder x ſhall be to the 

Remainder o, as the whole a s to the whole co. 

I 1 Where- 

ms THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Wherefore if it be as the whole to the whole, ſo a part detracted 
to a part detracted, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

Corollary 

Of Converſe Proportion. 

From hence 'tis manifeſt, that if compounded magnitudes be pro- 
portional, they ſhall alſo by Converſion be proportional. 
For let the compounded magnitudes be proportional as AB to BE, 
ſo cop to DEF; therefore divided, it ſhall be as A E to EB, ſo c to FD; 
And by inverſion as BE to EA, ſo pF to Fc; therefore compound- 
ed as Ba to AE, ſo Dc to cF: which is Converſion of proportion, 
according to Def. 17. El. V. For AE is the kay 4 
_ exceſs of the Antecedent 43 above the 4— + ——Þ 
Conſequent 3E: and cF the exceſs of the "nl F jo 
Antecedent co above the Conſequent dx. ths 

But this Corollary (however it hath hapned to be in this place ) 
does more properly follow the 18. Propoſition. As we have now 
ſhewn how Converſe proportion is immediately deduced from the 
Compoſition and Diviſion of Proportions, without any relation, or 
dependence on this 190. Propoſition: where the four proportional 
Terms are reſtrained, and neceflarily ſuppoſed to be all Homoge- 
neal magnitudes. Whereas in Converſion of proportion the third 
and fourth Terms may be magnitudes of a different kind, from the 
firſt and ſecond Terms, and one proportion be in Lines, and the 
other correſpondent proportion in Planes, or Solids, as the follow- 
ing Annotations ſhall farther declare. | 

ANNOTATIONS. 

This 19. Propoſition and the two foregoing have a cloſe correſpondence with 
one another, as appears by their demonſtrations; yet there is a notable difference 
to be obſeryed between them. For here is compared the whole to the whole, and 
each part of one whole to each part of the other reſpectively, ſo that theſe magni- 
tudes are put Homogeneal, according to the Definition of proportion. But in 
Compoſition, Diviſion, Converſion of proportion, each whole is ſeparately com- 
pared to a part of it ſelf, and each part to the other part of the ſame whole. So 
that the four proportional Terms may be all of the fame kind, either Lines, Planes, 
or Solids: or elſe of different: that is, the firſt and ſecond Terms, may be Li 
and the third and fourth be Planes, or Solids. As the whole A B may be a — 
magnitude, and by conſequence the parts AE, EB are Lines. But again, the 
whole CD may be either a Plane, or a Solid, and by conſequence the parts CF, 
FD are accordingly Planes, or Solids; yet it is demonſtrated, as AB to AE, a 
Line to a Line, ſo is CD to CF, whether it be a Plane to a Plane, or a Solid to 
a Solid : Which general Analogy may be uſed in Compoſition, Diviſion, and Con- 
verſion of proportion. 

But in this 19. Propoſition, the whole A B is compared to the whole C D, and 
the parts to the parts: ſo that theſe are here ſu n magnitudes, 

- 

interchangeably compared to one another. | 
3 PROPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 223 
| PROPOSITION XX. 
FF there be three magnitudes in one Rank, and as many in an 

other, taken tuo and two in the ſame wh water pf and ex quo 
the firſt be greater than the third, alſo the fourth ſball be greater 
than the ſixth; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. 

Let the three magnitudes be 4, B, c, in one rank, and D, E, x, as 
many in an other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion, as 
a to B, ſo D to E; andasBtoc,ſor tor: and ex £quo let a be 
greater than c. I ſay, that alſo v ſhall be greater than F: and if 
equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. 

Foraſmuch as a is greater than c, and there 12 9g . 6 
is a third magnitude 3; And that the greater 
hath to the ſame a greater proportion than the 
leſs Prop. 8. El. V.]; therefore a hath to B a 92 Op 
greater proportion than c to 3. But as a to , * * = - *F 
ſod to E: wherefore p hath to x a greater pro- 8 . 6 . 4 
portion than c to s | Prop. 13. El. V.] But as | 
c to B, ſor to E by inverſion; therefore p hath to E a greater pro- 
portion than F to x. But of magnitudes having a proportion to 
one and the ſame, that which hath the greater proportion, is the 
greater | Prop. 10. EL V.]: Therefore p is greater than p. 

In like manner we ſhall demonſtrate, that if a be equal to c, alſo 
D ſhall be equal to x; and if leſs, leſs. 

Wherefore if there be three magnitudes in one rank, and as many 
in an other, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

„. 

PROPOSITION XXL 

F there be three magnitudes in one rank, and as many in an 
other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion; and the 
Analogy be Perturbate: if then ex æquo the firſt be greater than 
the third, alſo the fourth ſhall be greater than the /txth; and if 
equal, equal; if leſs, leſs, 

Let the three magnitudes be 4, B, e, in one rank, and D, E, F, as 
many in an other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion. And let 
the Analogy be Perturbate, as a to x, ſo 

E to E, and as B; to c, ſo D to E: then 18 12 4 

ex quo let a be greater than c. I ſay, A: oi $5500 a3? 

that ↄ ſhall be greater than ?: and if * 

equal, equal; if leſs, leſs. * ne Wi. iS 
Foraſmuch as a is greater than c; 27.9.6 

and there is a third magnitude n; 
therefore a hath to ; a greater proportion than c to s | Prop.8. El. V.] 
But as 4 to B, ſo E to F; wherefore x hath to g greater proportion 

112 than 

24 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

than c to z. But becauſe it is as 8 to c, ſo v to E; therefore by in- 
verſion as c to B, ſox to Þ. But E hath a greater proportion than 
eto B; therefore ꝝ hath to F a great. 18 12 | 
er proportion than = to Dp. But to n 
what magnitude the ſame hath a neee 
greater proportion, that is the leſs 10 
Prop 10, El. V. ]; therefore g is leſs *©::D.E. F 
than p, and Þ greater than F: where- 27.9.6 
fore if a be greater than c, alſo ſhall 3 
be greater than F. lar oils 2: 

In like manner we ſhall demonſtrate, if a be equal to c, alſo 
ſhall be equal to F; and if leſs, leſs. 

Wherefore if there be three magnitudes in one rank, and as many 

in an other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion, &c. Which 
was to be demonſtrated. eds 

PROPOSITION XXII. 

F there be magnitudes how many ſoever in one rank, and as 
| many in an other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion; 
alſo ex æquo they ſhall be in the ſame proportion. 

Let the magnitudes how many, ſoeyer be 4, B, c, in one rank, and 
D, E, F in another, taken twoandtwo in the ſame proportion, as 4 
to B, ſo v to E; and as ; to c, ſo E to y. I ſay, that alſo ex equo 
they ſhall be in the ſame proportion, as 4 to c, ſo D to F. 

For of 4, Þ let be taken equimultiples 6, H. 

And of 3, E any whatever equimultiples k, I.: 1 
alſo of c, F any whatever equimultiples M, N. 

Fioraſmuch then that it is as a to B, ſo p to E, 70 "ag - [ok , 
and of A, v are taken equimultiples o, H: Alſo of ß ; 

B, K any whatever equimultiples x, L;; therefore 1 
it is as G to k, ſon to I. [Prop. 4. El. V. By K. L . N 
the ſame reaſon it is alſo as Kk to M, for to N. FRA 

Foraſmuch now as there are three magnitudes in one rank, 
6, k, M; and as many in another, N, L, x, taken two and two in the 
ſame proportion; therefore exequ0 if 6 exceeds M, alſo ; exceeds 
N; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs | Prop. 10. El. V.]: And c, H are 
equimultiples of A, Dv; alſo M, & any whatever equimultiples of c, P; 
therefore it is as A to c, ſo p to Def. 5. El. V.. 

Wherefore if there be magnitudes how many ſoever in one rank, 
and as many in an other, taken two and two in the ſame propor- 
tion, &c. Which was to be demonſtratd. T1 

A 5, & Node 189 

i FFP 

ANNO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 225 

ANNOTATIONS. 

When there is a Concatenation of two, three, or more proportions, as of A to 
B, of B to C, of C to D, either in the lame proportion, or in proportions diffe- 
rent from one another, then in both theſe Caſes the proportion of the extremes, 
as of A to D, is in Def. 10. and 11, El. V. ſaid to be compounded of A to B, of 
B to C, andot C to D. 

Now in this Propoſition there is put a double Series of Concatenate propor- 
tions, in each whereof the firſt Term is to the ſecond, as the firſt to the ſecond, 
and the ſecond to the third, as the ſecond to the third, and fo forth, in an Ordi- 
nate Analogy : Then the extremes in each Series taken ex quo, at equal diſtance, 
as the firlt to the third, or the firſt to the fourth, &c. are here demonſtrated to 
be proportional to one another, which is in effect to prove, that two proportions 
compounded of equal proportions are equal to one another. 

PROPOSITION XXIIL 

F there be three magnitudes in one rank, and as many in an 

other, taken tuo and two in the ſame proportion, and the Ana- 
lag be Perturbate : alſo ex æquo they ha be in the ſame pro- 
portion. 

Let the three magnitudes be 4, B, c, in one rank, and p, E, F, as 
many in another, taken two and two in the ſame proportion; 
and the Analogy be Perturbate, as a ton, ſo E to ; and as to c, 
ſo p to k. I ſay, that e quo as 4 to c, fob to F. 
Of A, B, D, let be taken equimulti- 
ples o, H, K; Alſo of c, E, , any what- mano} 
ever equimultiples'L, M,N. & han: 

Foraſmuch as 6, H are equimulti- 902 
ples of a, ;; and parts have the fame *::D.r.+r 
proportion with their equimultiples 
Prop. 15. El. V.]; therefore it is as a 
toB, ſoG ton. And by the ſame reaſon, as ꝝ to p, ſo M to N. But 
as atoB, ſor to g; therefore as d to , ſo M to N | Prop. 11. El. V. 

Again, becauſe it is as ; toc, ſo p to E; and of 3, D are taken equi- 
multiples N, K: alſo of e, ER any whatever equimultiples L, u; there- 
fore it is as H to 1, ſo k to M Prop. 4. El. V.) | 

Whereas now there are three magnitudes 6, H, L, in one rank, alſo 
k, M, N, in an other, taken two and two in the fame proportion, 
and the Analogy is Perturbate, as d to H, ſo M to x; and as i to 1, 
ſo k to ; therefore ex £quo if G be greater than L, alſo x ſhall be 
greater than N; and if equal, equal; if leſs, leſs Prop. 21. El. V.] 

But o, x are equimultiples of 4, D, and L, x; are any whatever equi- 
multiples of c, F; therefore it is as 4 to c, ſo o to r Def. 5. El. V. 

Wherefore if there be three magnitudes in one rank, and as many 
in an other, taken two and two in the ſame proportion, and the 
Analogy be : alſo ex quo they ſhall be in the ſame pro- 
portion. Which was to be demonſtrated. | 0! 
1 113 ANNO-. 

CK. M. N 

226 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

| ANNOTATIONS, 

Euclide here propoſes only three magnitudes; altho they might be i 
like as in Prop. 224. But becauſe in proportion ex equo when the Analogy is Per- 
turbate, the Geometrician never has occaſion to uſe more than three Concatenate 
Terms, or two proportions ; therefore our Elementator puts only three magni- 
tudes in this Propoſition: as taking ſpecial care to be no where in words or mat- 
ter, defective or ſuperfluous, and ever has a proſpect to what is only and gene- 
rally uſefal. Yet otherwiſe there is not any difference between Ordinate, and 
Perturbate Analogy in the Concluſions of theſe two Propoſitions; for as num 
biz. 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. taken in any interchangeable order, and added together ſhall 
always give the ſame ſumm, or multiplied into one another, make the ſame Pro- 
duct; ſo in proportion ex æquo, the Terms placed either Ordinately, or Perturbately, 
ſhall notwithſtanding ever have their extremes compounded of the ſame interme- 
dial proportions ; and therefore the extremes taken ex æquo, ſhall always be pro- 

portional to one another: as here in magnitudes, and in Prop. 14". and 224, El. 
VII. is in numbers demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXIV. 

T F the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, that the 
third hath to the fourth: and a fifth hath to the ſecond the 
lame proportion, that a fixth hath to the fourth: Alſo the firſi 
and fifth together, ſhall have to the ſecond the ſame proportion, that 
the third and /ixth hath to the fourth. 

Let the firſt a 3 have to the ſecond c, the ſame proportion that 
the third v E hath to the fourth F. Alſo let a fifth 36 have to the 
ſecond c, the ſame proportion, that a ſixth EH hath to the fourth F. 

I ay, that 4 c the firſt and fifth together, hath to c the ſecond, 
the ſame proportion, that DH the third and fixth together, hath to 
F the fourth. | I | 

A | B G | 

; 4 | 10 
— 

AB. c:: DE. F. and 3G. c:: EH. F. Then AB+BG.C::DE+EH, F. 
8 „47 4 . and 6.4: 3.2, Then 8 71 64. 4 + 3.2. 
Foraſmuch as it is as BG toc, ſo E E to r; therefore by inverfion 
as c to B6; ſo F to EH. vette | 
And becauſe it is as A B toc, ſo DE to F, and as c to B d, ſo E to 
EH; therefore e æquo as AB to B G, ſo R to RL Prop. 22. El. V.] 

Now divided magnitudes being proportional, ſhall alſo com- 

pounded be proportional | Prop. 18. El. V.]; therefore as 4 0 to Gs, 
ſo DH to HE. rt? | = 5 

711 3 | C | | LOANS ; * 11 
But alſo it is as d B to c, ſo E to ; therefore ex £quo as 40 to c, 
„5 If 

OF GEOMETRY. 227 

If therefore the firſt hath to the ſecond the ſame proportion, 

that the third hath to the fourth: and a fifth hath to the ſecond, &c. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. | 

ANNOTATIONS. 

The 25. Propoſition of this El. is the ſame with this 240, excepting that it was there 
| confined only to multiple proportions, whereas here is comprehended all kind of 
proportions whatſoever. The preſent N is expoſed in Duple, and Seſqui- 
alteral proportions added to one another: $ the firſt in Duple proportion to 
4 the ſecond; and 6 the fifth in Seſquialteral proportion to 4 — —5 where 
$ the firſt, and 6 the fifth added together, make 14 to 4, or ; that is, Triple 
Seſquialteral proportion, or 3 ;. So again, 4 the third to 2 the fourth; and 3 the 
back to 2 the fourth, are in the ſame 88 as before 8 was to 4, and 6 
to 4: And here likewiſe 4 the third, and 3 the ſixth added together, make 7 to 2, 
the ſame Triple Seſquialteral proportion, or 3i. For 7 contains 2 thrice, and 

one half of 2. This Propoſition we have here both in Speczes and Numbers, re- 
preſented after this manner. 

$0: 418:8-4& 4: fi. 

If A. B:: C. D. and 
B. B:: F. D. Then 
6 . 42: 3.2 
A+E . B:: CF. D 

8 +6 ,. 4::4+3 +2 

Note farther hereupon, that the 18. Propoſition is in ſome part, of the ſame 
nature with this 23. For there the Conſequents added. to the Antecedents, are 

as the fifth, and fixth Terms added to the firſt, and third, making alſo four other 
proportionals: As thus Appears. | 

e PF OM 

If A. Ba: CD. Then 
AT B. B::C+D.D 
9+ 3. 3 :: 6 12.2. 

Or to ſet forth more fully the agreement between the 18. Propoſition, and 
this 24. As in this form, 

I 4: sin. Bratd 
BD Br BD , They 
A&A +B.'B:: CJ. D. 

The difference here between them is, that in the 18*, only the Conſequents 
are added to the Antecedents, and together compared to the ſame Conſequents: 
but in the 24. any magnitudes, or num which are in the ſame proportion to 
the given Conſequents, may be taken; and added to the given Antecedents, are 
together compared to the ſame Conſequents. And therefore in Prop. 18. the Con- 
ſequents being ſuppoſed as the fifth and fixth Terms compared to themſelves as 
the ſecond and fourth Terms, they are always in proportion of equality : but in 
this 24. the fifth and ſixth Terms, may be taken in any proportion whatſoeyer. 

Addition 

| 

rn 
* 4 

—— P * r 
2. — — — _ - 
a — — — 

— 4 

118 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Addition of Proportions. 

Moreover, from this 24. Propoſition, the Addition of Proportions is plainly 
diſcovered: and how ſeveral proportions, which have the ſame common Conſe- 
quent, are united into one fingle proportion, by adding the Antecedents to one 
another, and making the ſumm of ,them an Antecedent to the common Conle- 
quent: As 3 to 1, and 3 tor, added together make 6 to 1, ori: That is, two 
Triple proportions, which have the ſame common Conſequent added together in 
this manner, do make Sextuple proportion. So again, 4 to 3, 5to 3,9 to 3 added to- 
gether, make 18 to 3, or 5: that is, Sextuple proportion is by addition of the An- 
tecedents made of Seſquitertial, Seſquibitertial, and Triple proportions, when they 
have ſuch a common Conſequent. | | 

But now when ſeveral proportions have ſeveral Conſequents, then for to add 
theſe together, they are firſt to be brought to have the ſame common Conſequent: 
As the proportions of 4 to 3, and of 3 to 2 cannot be added together, unleſs they 
be reduced unto a common Conſequent. We have before in the Annotations upon 
the 8*, Propoſition, given a Rule how to bring proportions to a common Con- 
ſequent, like as Fractions are brought to others of the ſame denomination. 
For the Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Diviſion of proportions, are per- 
formed after the ſame manner as in Fractions: And proportions are as properly 

noted by placing the Antecedent above, and the Conſequent beneath the inter- 

poſed ſtrait line, as the Numerator and Denominator are uſed to be in Fracti- 
ons. And therefore this particular Doctrine is to be ſought after among the 
Arithmetical Authors. 8 | 

Now in the foregoing Inſtance to bring the proportions of 4 to 3, and of; to 2, 
or 4 and] unto a common Conſequent , Firſt multiply the Conſequents 3 and 2' 
into one another; that is, 3 into 2, or 2 into 3, which by Prop. 16. El. VII. make 
the ſame number 6, and this now is to be put for a common Conſequent. Then 
multiply each Antecedent into the others Conſequent, that is, 4 into 2, making 8 
for one Antecedent, and; into 3, making 9g for the other Antecedent. Thus the 
proportions of *, and } are brought unto h and ?, the very ſame proportions as be- 
fore, and having a common Conſequent: For 4. 3::8 . 6 in proportion Seſqui- 

tertial, 13. and 3.25: 94 6 in proportion Seſquialteral, 13. 

The reaſon of this practice is manifeſt, for 4 multiplied by the ſame number 2, 
make the Products; in the ſame proportion, by Prop. 17, El. VII. or by Prop. 15. 
El. V. So } multiplied by 3, make the ſame proportion ;. 

Then of theſe two proportions , and ?, add the Antecedents 8 and 9 together, 

which make 17 the Antecedent to the common Conſequent 6, or ;;: that is, 2}, 
and named Proportio dupla ſuper quantu-partiens ſextas. 
Therefore by reduction of the proportions4 and , into a common Conſequent, 
it now appears that theſe proportions, 14 and 14 added together make 2}. The 
like practice 1s to be uſed in the Addition of all other proportions : but very little 
uſe there is made of it in the Mathematics, farther than what is ſhewn in the 18. 
and 24. Propoſitions of this Fifth Element. From whence we have taken occa- 
ſion to touch briefly upon the Addition of proportions, and in what manner it 
can be only made. But the Multiplication of proportions is more remarkable: 
which therefore we ſhall here by = way explain in a few words, for that there 
will be a neceſſity to conſider farther of this matter at the 5. Definition of the 
Sixth Element: And in this place alſo to ſhew the difference between the Mul- 
tiplication, and Addition of proportions. 

»” 

NMultipli- 

** a 
. 

OF GEOMETRY. 229 
Multiplication of Proportions. 

Multiplication-of proportions is made by multiply ing the Antecedents into the 
Antecedents, and the Conſequents into the Conſequents; whoſe Products ſhall 
make {ome certain proportion. As of the proportions 4 and 3, the Antecedents 4 
and 3 multiplied into one another, and the Conſequents 3 and 2 multiplied into 
one another, ſhall make , or Duple proportion. | 

Whereas the ſame proportion, ; and 5, added to one another make 21; as we 
have before ſhewn. So 4 and }, multiplied together make ; or }, Triple proportion. 
But added make 3, or 3 5 proportion Triple Seſquialteral. Again, } added to 5 
make ;; but multiplied together make . Likewiſe i added to 2 make; but mul- 
tiplied make 1. Thus it appears, how proportions may by Addition ariſe to be 
ſometimes greater, ſometimes leſs than by Multiplication: which is a Property 
peculiar to proportions, and ſomewhat remarkable. 

- PROPOSITION XXV. 

four magnitudes be: proportional, the greatef} and leaft are 
greater than the other tand. | 1] Ol 

Let the four proportional magnitudes be as, c b, E, ; and as ag 
to p, ſo x to F. Now let the greateſt of them be as, and the leaſt x. 
I fay, that A B, E, are greater than cp, E. 

For to E let aG be put equal; and to ; be put equal cn: fora. 
much therefore that it is as ap to cp, ſo E to F: and that Ad is equal 
to E, and CH to F; therefore as aB to cp, ſo ac to eH Prop. i I. El. V.]. 

Alſo becauſe it is as the whole 4s to the whole ep, fo the part 
detracted 4 C, to the part detracted cu: therefore the Remainder d s, 
ſhall be to the Remainder np, as the whole as to the whole c> 
Prop. 19. El. V.). But the whole as is | by Suppoſition] greater 
than the whole op; therefore alſo the Remainder d is greater than 
the Remainder Ho. 

And foraſmuch as aG is equal to k, and cn to F; therefore ag 
and F are equal to c H, and k. For if equals be added toequals, the 
wholes are equal | Ax. 2. |. 

But again, if to unequals be added equals, the wholes ſhall be un- 
equal | Ax. 4. |: Therefore if to the unequals dB, ; p be added theſe 
equals, F, A d, and E, CH, namely, E, and aG added to d the greater, 
and E, and CH to h p the leſs; then ſhall a B, and g be greater than cp, 
and k. 

If therefore four magnitudes be proportional, the greateſt, and 
leaſt are greater than the other two. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

KE Adver- 

— 3 = — — 

Ch 
ons 

cient in this matter. | 

230 THE FIFTH ELEMENT 

Advertiſement. 

- Here Ewckde ends this Element: but the Moderns have (out of Pappur) annexed 
ſeveral other Propoſitions ; which becauſe they are only manifeſt Conſectaries 
ariſing from the foregoing Propoſitions, and not of ſo frequent uſe , we have 
thought fit not to overcharge = — emen with. For Peletarius here 
very well ſays, Que (propoſittones) per ſe clare ſunt, locum tantum occupant : Ingenium etiam 
onerant, & multitudo tedium — What Euclide hath delivered is abundantly ſuffi- 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Ibis property of proportional magnitudes hath been formerly intimated in 
Prop. 3 gi and 36. El. I. where P ograms on the ſame, or equal baſes in 
the ſame Parallels, are demonſtrated to be equal ; that is, to be to one another in 
the ſame proportion of Equality. And there alſo it hath been obſerved, that of 
thoſe equal Parallelograms their Perzmeters ate unequal, and of two equal Paralle- 
lograms the longeſt, and ſhorteſt ſides, are greater than the other ſides. Now this 
Propofition demonſtrates the like Affection of four proportionals univerſally in all 
kinds of proportion, and in all kinds of magnitude, either Lines, Planes, or So- 
lids: and that in each of them the greateſt, and leaſt Terms added together, ſhall 
always be greater than the other two. | 

A SY- 

O0 F G nan E T RY. 131 

8 A ith 

$YNOPS IS 

| tees OF. THE 
PRINCIPAL FAOEQSITIONS 
* 0 EE 

FIFTH ELEMENT. 

. 1 4. Dre. 5: * r. Then 
r e ity is 15 F ATR. AT Dr. 

Prop. 2, and 24. 1211 Dre. a 
ee 0 E. B:: F. b. Then 
ATE. B:: C F. D. 

Prop. 3, 1, and 23. Proportionals ex ©quo Ordinate and Perturbate. 

Prop. 4. W © Ho 
34..99:: 2c . Þ &c. 
Likewiſe 24 $::30 . Dx 
and A «385; „% 2.7. 
Let ATE. and #=a+e 

Prop. 5, and 19. If 2. :: a. a Then 
| 1 

Prop. 15. 41 1 134. ER 
Primary Proportionals, LE & 
Corol. Prop. 4. Inverſion, E. 4: : c. B. 
Prop. 16. Alternation, 1223 8 
Prop. 17. Compoſition, ATE. E:: 3c. c. 

Prop. 18. Diviſion, A- B. E::B—C. C. 
Corol. Prop. 19. Converſion, 4. 4 E:: B. 30. 

Note farther, that Compoſition, Diviſion, Converſion of proporti- 

onals, may be again, and frequently are proportionally varied by In- 
verſion, and Alternation after this manner. 

Compoſition and Alternation, ATE. BY c:: E. 
Diviſion and Alternation, AE. B- c:: E. c. Therefore 

Compoſition and Diyifion, a TE. 3 ＋ c:: AE. B-C. by Prop. 11. 
Kk2 Thus 

23% THE FIFTH(ELEMENT 

Thus hath Euclide finiſhed his general Doctrine of Proportzons, and 
nals in magnitudes: which we confeſs is plainly ſet forth in his Elements * 
Numbers. For tho the Properties of Proportionals be alike in Magnitudes and 
Numbers yet are they demonſſrated in — Elements from more natural Prin- 
ciples, and more obvious to the commo ns of men in this matter. We have 
formerly ban yo men's the-different Pefiniridnf of propottional Magnitudes, and of 
proportional Numbers, and ſhewn the reaſons thereof for want of a natural mea- 
ſure in Magnitudes. — 3 what evidence, or what demonſtrations could 
in this Element be expected, or made from a certain meaſure between proportio- 
nal Magnitudes (as it Vin ander where there is in nature no certain meaſure? 
Nay farther, where there cannot- Hh at, or ſuppoſed any imaginable common 
meaſure. Number is only one way infinite by * A but hath its indi- 
viſible Monade for a beginning, and common meaſure, the natural inftrument of 
Demonſtration in the Doctrine of propo rtions, and accordingly made uſe of in 
the Elements of Numbers. But 22 1s on ways inknite, by Augmenta- 
tion, and Diminution. It hath not a Monade, that quid unum & 
That one and ſole meaſure of all things. What foundation it hath uſeful for 
Demonſtration in this Subject, Eurlide hath moſt ingeniouſly found out, and given 
us in the fifth Definition of . Maguitudes. And it is either plain 
Ignorance, or great Vanity in thoſe, who charge this Element of Intricacy, and 
Imperfection, which is framed b much Art, and in as clear a Manner, as the 
nature of Magnitude could adm 

The Epicheiremata, or Attem ae 2 choſe Learned Geometricians Foannes Bene- 
dilfus, Targast, Borellus, &c. in this matter I leave to be at large examined —_ 
Profeſſors of Geometry! in our Pune, and Greſbam College. b. 

* 4 

, , F 
* * ® * 5 b . 
, 
. | | f f HE, 
. : : 9 0 

, . © 0 * 1 b $ 

« 
- —- * 
| * 

E L E MEN I. 

DEFINITIONS. 

DEFINITION I. 

The ftrait- lin d Fi 5 705 are thoſe, which have their ſeveral 
angles equal, each to each , and the ſides about the co 
pong proportional. 

In the Triangles ABC, DEF, if the ſeveral angles be equal, each to each, A 

to D, BtoE, Cto F, and the ſides about the equal angles proportional, AB to 
BC, as DE to EF; BCtoCA, a EFto FD; CA to AB, as FD to DE, then 

—.— 2 

2 5 

U [| F: 46 

name. inchs Equiangled Parallelograms AD, EC, if AB be to BD EB 
to BC, then theſe are 2 like Figures: And ſo forth in all Multilateral Figures, 
or — But Equiangled Parallelograms are not always like Figures ; as it 
happens in Right-angled Parallelograms, and Equiangled Rhomboids , 
which are noe like Furs unleſs they have alſo their ſides _ the equal = 
pr But every Square is to every Square, and every Equi 
2 to every Equiangled Rhombus a like Figure: becauſe they have = 
fides in the ſame proportion of Equality to one another, 

4 Rk'q* DEFI- 

6 THE/STIXTH (ELEMENT 

DEFINITION II. 

5 Eciprocal Figures are, when in each of the Figures | 8 
Terms both Antecdeut and Conjequent. 

b . 

0 

As in the Triangle ABC, DBE, ang the Parallelpgrams Þ C, DR, if AB is 
to BE, as bag& again ÞY is to BC, then theſe are called Recprocal es. In 
which, note for diſtin@tion between Like and Reciprocal Figures, that the ex- 

treme Terms of the two proportions in Reciprocal Figures; namely the firſt Ante- 
cedent, and the laſt Conſequent, ſhall ever be in the ſame figure: whereas in like 
_ the firſt Antecedent is in one figure, and the laſt Conſequent always in 
the other. Moreover, in the foregoing Definition of like Figures, all the Angles 
are to be equal, each to each, and all the fides about the equal Angles directly 
roportional to one another. Rut it is 8 in — Figures to 
LOS the ſeveral Angles equal, but only that Angle, which is contained by thoſe 
vides which are Recyprocally; proportional to ane another. For in the other An- 
* figures may be very often unlik and not agree in equal Angles, and 
\ proportional,” as hereafter in Tria Figures the 1575. Propofition' will 
manifeſtly ſhew. | | * R 

* 
2 OE” 
1 4 {i dh 4 - 

' "2 | 
alu 
„ os * 

-- 
” 

'1 TW TEED 
44 45 

ain, note that Reciprocal Figures are ſuppoſed always equal, tho not alwa 

— or Hy and like — are commonly 33 * „and ever inch 
angled. For if like figures be. alſo qual in Area, they are as it were only the 
ſame figure ſeated in ſeveral places. 

Moreover, the Parallelograms F G, & are in this matter very remarkable Sch 

wherein the Complements A C, D Ez are equal by Prop. 43. El. I; and alſo Reci- 
procal Figures (as at Prop. 14". of this Element is demonſtrated) having the fide 
AB to the ſide BE, as Reciprocally DB is to BC. And again, the Parallelo- 
grams AD, CE, are like figures, having the fide AB to the fide BD, as EB is 
to BC in a direct proportion to one another. As is demonſtrated in the following 
240. Propoſition. | | | 

DEFINITION UI. 

A Srait Te is ſaid to be cut in'extreme and mean proportion, 
when it 1s as. the whale ta the greater Segment, ſo the 
greater Sagen to be % %/̃ [ůã rrtrt Wen 

I the line AB be divided at the paint C in fuck a proportion, that as the 

whole A B is ta the greater AC; fox the + | 

ſame AC to the leſs Segment'CB, then the h ß 

is ſaid to be cut in extreme and mean proportion, 

For that the whole line, and the leſs Segment are the two extremes, and the greater 

Segment is a mean or middle proportional Term between them. And ſo the 

whole line, the greater Segment, and the leſs are all three in the ſame continual 

proportion: Which by our incomparable M Villiam Oughtred, is juſtly ſaid to be 

Settio pent Divina, and how to effect this Section is demonſtrated at Prop. pr 
DEF I- 

3 

OF GEOMETRY. 235 

DEFINITION IV. 

He Altitude of every Figure is a'Sirait line drawn from the 
Vertex perpendicular to the Baſe. 2 T\ 

The Altitude, or Height of any thing, is vulgarly accounted to be the diſtance 
from the Top to the Bottom; and by diſtance is meant the ſhorteft length be- 
tween them, becauſe the ſhorteſt length is the only Singular, Certain, and Deter- 
minated Space between any two diſtant things. 

So the Geometrician determines the Altitude of any Figure by a Perpendicular 
from the Vertex of the Figure to the oppoſite Baſe (produced if need be); as in 
theſe expoſed Figures their Altitudes are the Perpendiculars AB, AB, &c; for that 

they are in common ſenſe, and alſo demonſtratiyely the ſhorteſt length between 
the Vertex and the Baſe. | 

A A 
\ 7 B 
Therefore when F igures are ſaid to be of the fame Altitude, we are to under- 

i 
ſtand that the Perpendiculars from their Vertex to their Baſes are equal to one 

another, and therefore may be placed in the ſame parallels. | 

For let the Triangles ABC, DEF, be of the ſame Altitude, having the Per- 
pendiculars AG, DH equal to one another. I ſay, the Triangles ABC, DEF, 
are in the ſame parallels, For let be drawn the ſtrait line AD: Then foraſmuch 
as AG, DH are equal, and at right angles to G H; therefore they are alſo paral- 
lel one to another [ Prop. 28. El. I. J. But ſtrait lines equal and parallel are 
bounded by equals, and parallels [Prop. 33. El. I.]; therefore A D is parallel to 
GH, and the Triangles ABC, DEF, are in the 

_ ROT, 

- 

A 

. bs” F 11 2 7 

Again, if the Triangles DEF, DK L, have a common Vertex D, fo by conſe- 
quence a common Altitude D H, which is a Perpendicular to their continued Baſes ; 
it is then alſo obvious, that there may be drawn by the ſame Vertical point D, a 
parallel to the oppoſite Baſes [by Prop. 31. El. I.]. 

So that in general, Triangles, and Parallelograms to be in the ſame Altitude, 
and in the ſame Parallels import the ſame thing. 

DE FI- 

2.36 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 
| DEFINITION: V. 

ke" ſome Quantities, do wit , of 1071400 
ultiplled proportions, is ſaid to be * of them. As 
1 n 56 other Seſquialte- 

ras, that's, Quantities of dhe proportions multiplied into one another do 

which is here compounded of Seſquitertial, and Seſquialteral proportions, ſcil. ; 
compounded of 1 ;, and 13. * n MEIN - 
For by this Definition whatſoever proportion ariſes from the multiplication of any 
ot her propertzons, the ſame 17 ſaid to be compounded of them: And this is in general 
the meaning of this Definition. Fl * | 
Now farther to explain the words. By the Quantities of proportions our Com- 
| mentators would have the Denominators to be underſtood : Bur it is not material 
whether by the Quantities we underſtand either the Denominators, or the groen, and 
| oxpaſed; Numbers of the proportions, or che leaſt Numbers of the fame proportions : 
For that each of theſe being multiplied together, do _ the ſame compound 
oportion, tho in different Numbers, and alſd in ſuch, as are far enough from 
— the Denominator, or the leaſt: Nemberr' of that compound proportion; as the 
foregoing Inſtances do apparently ſew: only the Arithmetical operations are 
— with more eaſe in the leaſt Numbers: othetwiſe the effects are ſtill the 
—— And the moſt proper uſe of Denomigators is to diſcern the Species of a 
proportion expoſed in any Numbert whatſoever; and to denote the name. But 
Euclide in his Elements of Numbers never mentions Denominators, or the Quan- 
tities of proportions. He only ſhews in Prop. 35. El. VII. how to bring any 
given Numbers into the leaſt Numbers in the ſame proportion with them: upon 
which Reduction all his Demonſtrations proceed: And thus much for the inter- 
pretation of the words of this Definition. 

We are next to enquire, what uſe is made thereof in theſe Elements, in regard 
that Euchde had before otherwiſe defined compound proportion, as it is compre- 
hended in Def. 10. El. V. And according to that Definition he demonſtrates in 
Prop. 23. El. VI. All equiangled Parallelograms to have to one another a proportion com- 
poannded of their ſides; And likewiſe in Prop. J. El. VIII. All Plain, or Superficial 
Numbers to, have a proportion|compounded of thuir Jides, The demonſtrations both in 
Ne and Numbers, are framed juſt after the ſame manner upon the 10". 

nition of the Fifth Element, without the leaſt uſe, or any mention of the 
multiplication of proportions according to this . Definition of this Sixth Ele- 
ment, And ſtrange it ſeems to me, nay very abſurd, ro admit that for an Ele- 
mentary Definition, which is never uſed either in theſe Elements of Euclide, or in 
the Conc of Apollontus, or elſewhere in Archimedes: but in all theſe, and other 
Geometrical Authors, Compoſition of proportion is ever taken in the ſenſe, and 
notion of Def. 10 El. V. It will not therefore be impertinent to examine how 
another uſeleſs Definition of Compound proportion, and which beſides can only 
relate to numbers, came to be ſo Ungeometrically inſerted in this place, where the 
proportions of Magnitudes are ſolely conſidered, and the uſe of numbers (as alto- 
gether improper, and alſo inſufficient for demonſtration in theſe 5. and 6. Ele- 
ments) is by Euclide ſtudiouſly ayoided, . 

3 The 

OF GEOMETRY. 237 
The moſt ancient account 1 have met with, is in Theon's Commentaries on Po- 
_ Mathematical Syntaxis, Lib. I. cap. 12, entitled Prolambanomena, where, ſays 
Ptolemey, Let from the point A be produced two lines 
AB, AG, and from the points B, G, be drawn BE, 
G D, cutting each other in F; and draw EI parallel 
to GD. 1 ſay, that the proportion of GA to AE is 
compounded of the proportions of GD to DF, and 
of FB to BE. 

Now to prove this, he introduces an other extra- 
neous line, viz. DF taken e (ſays Ptolemy) ex- 
trinſecus, or ab extra, as it were from without ; and in- 
terpoſing DF for a middle Term between G D, and 
E 1, does aſſume that the proportion of GD to El, 
is compounded of the proportions of G Dio D E, and 
of DF to EI. As a compound proportion is under- 
ſtood by Euclide in Def. 10. El. V. 

But now altho in a Series of continued Terms, this be called by Euclide a com- 
pound proportion (as he might pro arbitrio give ſuch a name to the proportion of 
the extreme Terms); Yet a queltion may be made, How doth it appear that the 

proportion of GD to El, is really compounded of the Proportions of GD to 
DF, and of DF to EI? 

In. ſatisfaction to ſuch demands, and for the explication of this place, and there- 
withal of Exclid's Definition, Theon in his Comment, Page 62, gives an other Defi- 
nition of Compound proportion in theſe words. 

A proportion is ſaid to be Compounded of two, or more proportions, when 

G 

\ 

the Quantities of thoſe 9 being multiplied do make ſome Quantity of 
n proportion. 

The uſe now that Theon makes of this Definition, is to explain Euclid : 1 0b. 
Def. El. V. and to ſhew how both agree in producing one, and the ſame Com- 
pound proportion ; as ſuppoſing his own Definition to be a more natural, and 
clearer Notion of a Compound proportion than that of Euclid :; and thereby to 
confirm the 10. Def. of El. V. He therefore with Euclide puts two proportions in 
a Series of three continued Terms. 

For (ſays he) Let AB have to CD any given proportion (as 6 to 4) and 
CD to E E any proportion (as4 to 2). I ſay, that the 

proportion of AB to E E, is compounded of the pro- 4 8 
portions of AB to CD, and of CD to EF: that is, 4 

if the = of the proportion of AB to CD be © 9 
multiplied into the Quantity of the proportion of CD z — 5 

to EF, it ſhall make the Quantity of the proportion of 
AB to EF (that is of 6 to 2.). 

For let the given Proportions be 6 to 4, and 4 to 2: then { multiplied into 4, 
make , the ſame Triple proportion with 5, which is the proportion of the firit 
Term to the third. And this Theon univerſally demonſtrates, viz. That in a 
three Terms ( ſuppoſe A, B, C), it the proportion of A the firſt to B — 
be multiplied into the proportion of B the ſecond to C the third, then the Pro- 
duct ſhall always make the ſame proportion with that of A the firſt to C the 
third. This proportion of the firſt Term to» the third, Euclide in Def. 10", El. V. 
calls a proportion Compounded of the two intermedial proportions expoſed in 
three continued Terms, vx, Of the proportion of the firſt Term to the ſecond, 
and of the ſecond to the third: and owns no other notion of a Compound pro- 
portion in the demonſtrations of Prop. 23%. El. VI. and Prop. 5. El. VIII. or 
elſewhere. , 

But becauſe in Euclid's Series of three, four, or more continued Terms, the pro- 
portion of the firſt Term to the laſt, does not ſo immediately appear to be Com- 
pounded of the Intermedial, and Concatenate proportions ; therefore 'T heon joyns 
the Philoſopher with the Geometrician, and —_ another very natural EY 

L 0 

238 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

of a Compound proportion. For in Theon's . of Antecedents into 
Antecedents, and Conſequents into Conſequents, there is manifeſtly made a na- 
tural Mixture, or Compoſition of proportions: which being thus involved into 
one another, do really produce a Compound proportion; and alſo ſuch, as he de- 
monſtrates to be the very ſame with Euclid , according to Def. 100. El. V. which 
Theon hath from his Definition thus illuſtrated, and confirmed. So that this mul- 
tiplication of proportions may well be allowed to a Commentator for a good Ani- 
madverſion, and Explication of Def. 10. El. V. as here an occaſion was given to 
eon: but by no means to ſtand ſo improperly, and uſeleſly for a Geometrical 
Definition of Euchd s, as it hath been by ſome Scholzaſt unadviſedly transferred 
into this Sixth Element. 

The next we find is Eutoczus in his Comment on Archimedes, who in Prop. 4. 
Lib. II. de Spherd, & Cylindro, propoſes to cut a Sphere ſo that the Segments may 
have to one another the ſame proportion with any given, 

In the courſe of his demonſtration he uſes Compound proportion in Euclid s 
ſenſe, according to Def. xo. El. V. and aſſumes that the proportion of RL to 
LQ ( anna] as Archimedes words it) is connected by, or (as commonly ſaid ovyxcnh ) 
is compounded of the proportions, which RL hath to LD, and LD to LQ, 

R 5 1 2— * 

Hereupon ſays Eutocius in his Comment, tis manifeſt that Compoſition of pro- 
rtions is taken as in the Elements (meaning Def. 10. El. V.) in that LB is 
interpoſed as a middle Term between RL, and LQ. For (ſays he) if between two 
Numbers, or Magnitudes, be taken any middle Term, the proportion of theſe firſt 
Numbers or Magnitudes, is compounded of the proportion which the firſt Term 
hath to the middle, and of the proportion which the middle hath to the third. 

But farther adds, that this is ſpoken aνεοοαf, ſomewhat inarticulately (or 
abruptly, as if matters were not well jointed together) S &x ” res, wes mv iel d 
mp, and not in ſo plain a manner, as fully to ſatisfy our underſtanding, (to wit) 
in the proper notion of a Compound proportion. Therefore to make Ewclid's 
Compolition of proportions more perſpicuous, he cites this other Definition of a 
Compound ay (hepa as being allo found by him in the Elements ( ſo early it 
ſeems to have been tranſmitted into this place) and demonſtrates that 

« If between two Numbers or Magnitudes, be taken any middle Term, then the 
c proportion of thoſe firſt Numbers or Magnitudes, to one another, ſhall be the 
< {ame with that Compound proportion, which is made out of the proportions 
ce of the firſt Term to the middle, and of the middle to the third, multiplied into 
< one another. | 
Nou by the demonſtration of this agreement, Eutocius intended to make mani- 

feſt, that in any three continued Terms, the proportion of the firſt to the third 

is rightly ſaid by Euclide in Def. 10", El. V. to be a Compound proportion of the 
firſt to the ſecond, and of the ſecond to the third, 

Mordover to illuſtrate this matter, he 9m ſeveral inſtances in Numbers. Let 
(ſays he) between 12 and 2, be interpoſed any number, as 4; then the proportion 
of 12 to 2, that 1s, Sextuple, is Compounded of the proportions of 12 to 4, and 
of 4 to 2, of Triple, and Duple proportions. For ; multiplied into! makes 4, that 
is , the ſame proportion with i the firſt given Terms. 

In this inſtance of Eutocius, note that the two proportions 1, and ft, are 
each of the greater inequality: and therefore the proportion 4 reſulting from 
their multiplication, is really à totum Compoſitum, a ter proportion conſiſting of 
two leſs proportions, as a whole of ſo many — 222 that is, a Sex- 
tuple proportion is here rightly compounded, and made up of a Triple, and Duple 
proportion multiplied into one another. And every Compound proportion is 
always a totum of the like nature, when the intermedial proportions are all of the 
greater inequality. — 

e 

OF GEOMETRY. 139 

But now on the contrary, in proportions of the leſs inequality it is to be noted, 
that if between 2 and 12, be again interpoſed 4 ; then ;, and 1}, multiplied into one 
another, ſhall make , or ;, a Subſextuple proportion, which is emergent from 
Subduple, and Subtriple proportions ; yet does not, as in the intermedial propor- 
tions of the greater inequality, confitt of theſe intermedials, as a whole of its 
parts; but contrarywiſe is as it were Subcompounded, and becomes to be a leſs 
proportion derived from two greater. For ; is a proportion leſs than either , 
or from both which it doth deſcend ; and the like will be ever found, when 
all the intermedial proportions are of the leſs i ty. 

Again ſays Eutocius, Let between g, and 6 be interpoſed 4; then the propor- 
tion of 9 to 6, that is Seſquialteral 15 is compounded of 9 to 4, and of 4 to 6, 
that is, of Duple Seſquiquartal, 24, and of Subſeſquialteral 3. For! multiplied in- 
1 $ makes , a proportion Selquialteral, and the ſame with , the firſt given 

erms. 

In this inſtance tis to be noted, that 4, a proportion Seſquialteral reſulting 
from ? multiplied into 3; is leſs than 4, a proportion Duple Seſquiquartal, and greater 
than 4, a proportion Subſeſquialteral. And the like will ever happen, that when 
of the intermedial proportions ſome are of the greater inequality, and ſome of the 
leſs, then the Compound proportion ariſing from them may be ſometimes greater, 
ſometimes leſs than ſome of the Components: yet it is truely made by a mixture, 
and as it were a temperature of all the intermedial proportions. For proportions 
of the leſs inequality are an allay to proportions of the greater inequality, and 
may ſo counterpoiſe one another, that the ſame proportion may from different 
mixtures be diverſly compounded. 

As again to inſtance with Eutocius in Seſquialteral tion. Let between 
6 and 4, or 5, a proportion Seſquialteral, be interpoſed 2, then; is compounded 
of 5, and ;, that is, of a Triple, and of a Subduple proportion. For 5 multiplied 
in 2 makes , a proportion Seſquialteral, and the ſame with {, the firſt given Terms. 
Thus Seſquialteral proportion is here compounded: of Triple, and Subduple pro- 
portions, which in the numbers of Eutocius was made out of Duple Seſquiquartal, 
and Subſeſquialteral proportions. 

There are therefore theſe three different Conſtitutions of a Compound propor- 
tion taken notice of by Theon, and Eurociut, as they ariſe from proportions, which 
are either all of the greater inequality, or all of the leſs, or of the greater, and 
lefs intermingled with one another: as the demonſtrations of Theon, and Eutocius 
(which may readily be found in (laviu:) have diſtinctly comprehended. 

Laſtly if all the intermedials be proportions of equality, then the proportion 
of the firſt Term to the laſt is ſaid to be compounded of a Duplicate, or Tripli- 
cate, &c. proportion of the firſt to the ſecond, according to the number of the 
8 proportions, as they happen to be two, three, four, five, or more 
indefinitely. 

But theſe four ſeveral Conſtitutions of a Compound proportion (whether it 
ariſes from proportions of equality, or of the greater inequality, or of the leſa, 
or of the greater, and leſs intermixed) may in general be at once demonſtratively 
made evident in 17 or Symbolical computation. 

For let there be (according to Def. 1%. El. V.) a Series of continued Terms, 
as A, B, C, D, E, which repreſent any Concatenate proportions whatſoever. 1 
ſay with Euclide, that the proportion of the extremes of A to E, is compounded 
4 of A to B, of B to C, of C to D, of D to E, that is, the pro- 

portions of 3, bg, 2, multiplied together, Antecedents into Antecedents, and 
Conſequents into Conſequents, ſhall make the ſame tion with that of A 
to E, as Theon and Extocius, have expounded Euclid « Definition. 

Ll 2 For 

Lal THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

Fior let the Antecedents A, B, C, D, be multiplied together, and alſo the Con- 
ſequents/B; C, D, E, after this form: Then the intermedial Antece- ' 
defits B. C, D, being expunged by the intermedial Conſequents [AB CO 
B, C, D, there only ſtands the _ of A to E, of the firſt BCDE 
Term to the laſt. In this Symbolical form is laid open at one view 

the whole Myſtery (if any there be) of Compound proportions; which Theor, 
Eutvrius, and / itellio Opticorum, Lib. I. Prop. 1 3. have laboriouſly demonſtrated. 

To conclude therefore this matter, when there are put three magnitudes, as in 
Def. o. El. V. in a continued Series compared to one another; Euchade calls the 
proportion of the firſt to the third a proportion compounded of the _—_— 
of the firſt to the ſecond, andof the proportion of the ſecond to the third. Now 
Theor explains this Definition by an other, in which the nature of a Compound 

oportion ſeemed to be made more evident: and ſhews that in Euclid Series of 
three continued Terms, ; 

«If the proportion of the firſt to the ſecond. be A into the proportion 
ce of the fe to the third, there ſhall ever be made the proportion of the bel 
© to the third. | 
Here now Theon ſuppoſes his Definition to be an obvious, and natural notion 
of a Compound proportion, by which multiplication of proportions, and their 
agreement with Euclid . Compoſition of proportions laid down in a Series of con- 
tinued Terms, he thought it a proper explanation and confirmation of Euzclid's 

Definition, which indeed we readily acknowledge, as alſo that it was the firſt real, 

and fecret ground of Def. 10*..EL. V. 

But yet Euclide found this kind of multiplication to be in no manner ſervice- 
able for demonſtrating all Compound — —— even no more than his Defi- 
nition of Proportional Numbers could be applied to Proportional Magnitudes. 
Therefore he ſubſtitutes an other of a more general, and uſeful form, as firm and 
true, tho not ſo perſpicuous. For in Def. 10, EL V. the Series of Concatenate 
proportions ſhews not ſo evidently the Geneſis, and Production of a Compound 
proportion ariſing from them, as TDheon r multiplication of proportions does moſt 
naturally, and immediately ſuggeſt to our common underſtanding. And we muſt 
confeſs that Euclid . two eminent Definitions of Proportional Magnitudes, and of 
Compound proportions, lye under the like difficult circumſtances, and that both 
are taken up at the ſecond hand upon meer neceſſity. Vet are they ſo admirably 
contriv'd for general demonſtrations in thoſe concerns, that Fuclide hath no where 
elſe given a more manifeſt teftimony of an exquiſite judgement, and through inſight 
into all the Mathematics, than in the invention of thoſe two Definitions : which 
the ancient Geometricians who had ſearched this whole buſineſs to the very bottom 
faw juſt reaſon to receive, and uſe without exception, or any endeavour to amend 
them, or deviate from Euclid s method in this matter. 

PR OPO- 

OF GEOMETRY. 141 

PROPOSITION I. 

Riangles and Parallelograms of the ſame Altitude, are to 
one another as their Baſes. 

Let the Triangles be anc, acD, and the Parallelograms xc, cx, 
having the ſame altitude, the perpendicular drawn from a to BD. 
I fay, that as the baſe Bc is to the baſe cp, ſo the Triangle anc, 
is to the Triangle acp; andthe Parallelogram Ec to the Paralle- 

am CF. 
Let BD be produced both ways EA 
to the points , L; and to the baſe MN | 
BC let be put equals how many 1 

ſoever ; c, GH. Again, to the baſe 

7 

cD, let be put equals how many / 5 

ſoever p k, KL; and let be joyned | 

AG, AH, AK, AL. . 

Now foraſmuch as cs, BG, GH, 
HG C 

are equal to one another; there- 

fore the Triangles a H, a GB, ABc, are equal to one another | Prop. 
38. El. I.]; wherefore Quotuple the baſe xc is of the baſe he, To- 
tuple is the Triangle a He of the Triangle as c. By the ſame reaſon 
Quotuple the baſe L e is of the baſe cp, Totuple is the Triangle 
ALCof the Triangle Ac p. | 

Now if the baſe ne be equal to the baſe cr., the Triangle anc 
is alſo equal to the Triangle aLc [Prop. 38. El. I.]: and therefore 
if the baſe ac exceeds the baſe c L, the Triangle a He does alſo ex- 
ceed the Triangle A Le: And if the baſe be leſs, the Triangle is alſo 
leſs | by Corol. Prop. 38. EL I.]. 

There being then four magnitudes the two baſes B c, c o, and the 
two Triangles aBc, acD: and of the baſe Bc, and of the Triangle 
ABC, are taken equimultiples (any whatſoever) the baſe He, and the 
Triangle AH c: alſo of the baſe cp, and of the Triangle ac p, are 
taken other equimultiples (any whatſoever ) the baſe c L, and the 
Triangle AL c. | 
And it hath been provd that if the baſe c exceeds the baſe 
CL, the Triangle AH c does exceed the Triangle 4 Lc: and if equal, 
tis equal; and if leſs, tis leſs. Therefore as the baſe ze is to the 
baſe cd, ſo the Triangle Age is to the Triangle a cp | Def. 5. El. V.] 

And now becauſe the Parallelogram xc is double of the Trian- 
gle ac [Prop. 41. El. I. |, and the Parallelogram xc is double of 
the Triangle Ac; and that parts have the ſame proportion with 
their equimultiples | Prop. 15. El. V.]; therefore as the Triangle 
Ae is to the Triangle a cb, fo the Parallelogram xc is to the Paral- 
lelogram CF. 

LI 3 Becauſe 

242 THE SIXTH ELEMENT ; 

Becauſe therefore it has been prov'd, that as the baſe ze to the 
baſe c p, ſo the Triangle a Bc to the Triangle Ac: And as the Tri- 
angle AB c to the Triangle a cp, ſo the Parallelogram Ec to the Pa- 
rallelogram cg: wherefore alſo as the baſe 3; c to the baſe cp, ſo the 
Parallelogram E c to the Parallelogram c | Prop. 11. El. El. V.] 
Therefore Triangles and Parallelograms of the ſame altitude are 
to one another as their baſes. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

8 TRA ANNOTATIONS. 

On this Propoſition depends the main part of this Element, as alſo the whole 
doctrine of proportions in Magnitudes throughout all Geometry: and by this 
demonſtration it plainly appears, with what facility the 5**, Definition of El. V. 

is applied nas For what is of more eaſy Conſtruction than to Duple, 

or Triple, &c. the baſe BC; and then by joyning AG, AH, to Duple, or Tri 
&c. the Triangle AB C, that is, the firſt Joyning 7 6 "ye Pie, ple, 

Term, and the third, the Antecedents. 

Again, to Duple, or Triple, &c. the baſe 8 | | | 
CD, and accordingly the Triangle ACD, 
that is, the ſecond Term, and the fourth, | 
the Conſequents, is the ſame obvious gy we 
upon ſuch like eaſy Conſtructions the de- #- 7 C 

Conſtruction. Neither is there elſe- 
where in Euclide, or Archimedes any great- 
er trouble in the multiplication of mag- 
nitudes according to Def. 5. El. V: And 

D 
monſtrations do as eaſily 3 — þ ä 1 
always readily confirmed by ſome one fingle = As here 'tis evident by 
Prop. 38%. El. I. that Triangles in the ſame parallels, (that is to ſay, of the ſame 
altitude) and on equal baſes are to one another: and therefore on unequal baſes 
are unequal; on the greater baſe the greater Triangle, on the leſs, the leſs. So 
that if the baſes be equal, greater, or leſs, one than the other; the Triangles like- 
wiſe are the ſame in any multiplication whatſoever : therefore as baſe to baſe, ſo 
Triangle to Triangle, by Def. 5**. El. V. And we ſee here that there needs no 
tryal of various or perplexed multiplications to prove this Propofition: but that 
the Analogy between the baſes, and Triangles is at once apparent by one only Geo- 
metrical Propoſition, well known aforchand, vx, Prop. 38". El. I. 

Now Tacquets confidence in this matter is — remarkable, who ſo boldly pre- 
fers his own demonſtration, which is encum with the diviſions of the Conſe- 
quents into lhe aliquot and theſe again are to be ſubtracted from the Ante- 
cedents quotzes fiers „&c. All which will undoubtedly ſeem to his Mathema- 
tical Tyrones (of whom he to have a great care) a much more trouble- 
ſome, and perplexed buſi than this plain Conſtruction, and Demonſtration of 
Euchide, which he unjuſtly accuſes of obſcureneſs and intricacy ; whereof he him- 
ſelf is moſt guilty: as will certainly appear to whoever ſhall compare both toge- 
ther. But I leave Tacquet, and Borellus with the reſt, to the correction of the Geo- 
metrical Profeſſors in our Univerſities, and Greſbam College: this ſubject being 
too large for Elementary Annotations intended only for the inſtruction of Younger 
Students. 

PRO” 

OF GEOMETRY. 24.3 

PROPOSITION II. 

F to'one fide of a Triangle a ſtrait line be drawn parallel; it 
ſhall cut the ſides of the Triangle proportionally. 
And if the ſides of a Triangle be cut proportionally, the ſtrait line 
joyning * Sections, ſball be parallel to the remaining ſide of the 
Triangle. 

For in the Triangle AB c to one of the ſides Bc, let PE be drawn 
parallel. I ſay, that as Bo is to 04, ſo cz is to E A. Let be joy ned 
BE, CD: therefore the Triangle BDE, is equal to the Triangle c 
Prop. 37. El. I.] For they are on the ſame baſe px, and within 
the ſame parallels DE, Bc. But moreover there is an other Tri- 
angle AD E: and becauſe equals have to the ſame thing the ſame 
proportion | Prop. 7. El. V.]; therefore as the triangle B; DE, is to 
the Triangle Ap E, ſo the Triangle cp is to the Triangle A DE: But 
as the Triangle BDE is to the Triangle ap E, 
ſo 3 D is to DA. For having the ſame Altitude, 
the perpendicular drawn from E to 4B, they 
are to one another as their baſes | Prop. 1. El. 
VI. ]. And by the fame reaſon, as the Triangle 
CDE is to the Triangle Ap E, ſo c E is to EA; 
therefore as 3 is to DA, ſo cE is to EAI Prop. LOSS 
II. El. V.]. * F 

But now of the Triangle A Be, let the ſides as, ac be cut pro- 

rtionally in the points p, E, that as BD to D, ſoce to Ea: and 
et be joyned DE. I ſay, that D is parallel to Bc. For the ſame 
Conſtruction being made, becauſe as BD is to DA, ſo CE is to EA: 
and as ÞD is to DA, fo the Triangle BDE is to the Triangle ADE; 
and as CE is to E A, ſo the Triangle cp E is to the Triangle AD E. 
Therefore as the Triangle BDE is to the Triangle ade, ſo the 
Triangle cp E is to the Triangle a DE | Prop. 11. El. V.]: wherefore 
each of the Triangles BD x, cÞ RE, have the ſame proportion to ADE; 
therefore the Triangle BDE is equal to the Triangle Prop. 9. 
El. V.]. And they are on the fame baſe DE; but equal Triangles 
and on the ſame baſe, are within the ſame parallels Prop. 40. El. I.]; 
therefore DE is parallel to rc. 3 

If therefore to one ſide of a Triangle a ſtrait line be drawn pa- 
rallel; it ſhall cut the ſides of the Triangle proportionally. 

And if the ſides of a Triangle be cut proportionally, the ſtrait 

line joyning the Sections, ſhall be parallel to the remaining ſide of 

the Triangle. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPO- 

244 THE SIXTH ELEMENT £723 

— 

PROPOSITION III. | 

F an angle of Triangle be cut into halves, and the ſtrait line 
cutting the angle does alſo cut the baſe: the Segments of the 
baſe ſball have the ſame proportion with the remaining /ides of the 

Triangle. | 

And if the Segments of the baſe have the ſame proportion with 
the remaining fides of the Triangle, the ſtrait line drawn from the 
Vertex to the Section, does cut the angle of the triangle into halves. 

Let the Triangle be aBc, and let the angle zac be cut into 
halves by the line ap [by Prop. 9. El. I.] I fay, that as BD is to 
Dc, ſo 3A is to ac. For by the point c let be drawn cx parallel to da 
Prop. 3 1. El. I.]; and let s a produced meet with the ſame in the 
point E. Now foraſmuch as the ſtrait line ac falls upon the paral- 
lels Ap, Ec; therefore the angle a cx is equal to the alternate angle 
CAD | Prop. 29. El. I. |: but the angle c ap is put equal to the an- 

gleBAD; therefore the angle B AD is alſo equal to the angle Ac E. 
Again, becauſe the ſtrait line Baz falls up- : 

on the parallels A D, Ee; therefore the out- 
ward angle BAD 1s equal to the inward an- 
ole AE c. And it has been prov d, that the 
angle ACE is alſo equal to the angle BAD; 
therefore the angle A c E is alſo equal to the 
angle AE c, fo that alſo the fide A is equal 
to the fide ac | Prop. 6. El I. |. And becauſe 
to one ſide of the Triangle Bcx, namely to 

Ec, is drawn parallel aD; therefore proportionally as BD to Dc, ſo 
Ba to AR | Prop. 2. EL VI.] But A E is equal to ac; therefore as 
BD to Dc, ſoBa to ac Prop. J. El. V.] 

But now let it be as BD to Dc, ſoBa to ac: and let be joyned 
AD. I fay, that the angle Bac is cut into halves by the ſtrait line 
ab. For the ſame Conſtruction being made, becauſe it is as BD to 
pc, ſora to ac: and as BD is toDc, ſo BA is to ABE: for to one 
fide of the Triangle Bc x, namely to cx, is drawn AD parallel; there- 
fore as ; A is to Ac, ſo BA is to AE: therefore ac is equal to AE 
Prop. 9. El. V.]; fo that alſo the angle AE e, is equal to the angle 
Ac E | Prop. 5. El. I.] But the angle Ak c is equal to the outward 
angle BAD | Prop. 29. El. I.]; and the angle ace is equal to the al- 
ter nate angle A D; wherefore the angle BAD is equal to the angle 
c Ap; therefore the angle Ba c is cut into halves by the ſtrait line A p. 

If therefore an angle of a Triangle be cut into halves, and the 
ſtrait line cutting the angle does alſo cut the baſe: the Segments 

of the baſe ſhall have the ſame proportion with the remaining ſides 
of the Triangle. 

*. 

And 

OF GEOMETRY. 245 
And if the Segments of the baſe have the — "mA with 
the remaining ſides, &c. Which was to be d ated. 
PROPOSITION IV. 

F equiangled Triangles the ſides about the equal angles are 

proportional: And the ſides ſubtended under the equal an- 
gles are —— —— 

Let the equiangled Triangles be A8 e, Dex, having the angle 
ABC equal to the angle pc E, and the angle ac to the angle D Ee, 
and moreover the angle Bac to the angle c DE. 

I fay, that of the Triangles anc, dc#, the ſides about the equal 

angles are proportional, and the fides ſubtended under the equal 
angles are Homologal. 

For let ac be put directly to cx, and 
becauſe the angles azc, acs, are lefs 
than two right angles | Prop. 17. El. I. 
and the angle Ac is | by Suppoſition 
equal to the angle DE e; therefore the 
angles AB c, DEC, are leſs than two right 
angles: wherefore Ba, ED produced 
ſhall meet | by Poſtulate 3.]. Let them 
be produced, and meet in the point 5. 

Now foraſmuch as the angle vc E wequal to the angle asc | by 
Suppoſition]; therefore 8 is parallel: to e > Prop 18. EL I.] (For 
that the outward angle DCE ts equal to the mrward and oppoſite 
ABC.) Again, becauſe the angle ac is equal to the angle BHC | b 
Suppoſition|; therefore ac is parallel to FE | Prop. 28. El. I 
(For that the outward angle Ae it equal to the inward and oppo- 
fite DEC:) Whenefare rac D is a Parallelogram; therefore ar is 
equal to op, and ac to FD [Prop 34. El. I.] And now becauſe of 
the Triangle FIE, to one of the fides FE, the line ac is parallel 
therefore it is 45 54 to ar, fo ze to cx | Prop, 2. El. VII But at 
is equal to cD; as therefore Ba to cn, ſo xc to ct Prop.. El. 
V. J; and alternately, as aw to Bc, fo dc to cx. 

Again, becauſe of the fame Triangle gn E, to the fide nx, the line 
ep is parallel; therefore-it is, as Be to cx, ſo D to DE | Prop. 2. 
EL VL |. But FD is equal to'ca; therefore as xc to c E, ſo ca to 
ED: Alternately therefore as Bc to ca, ſo c E to RD. 

And ſaraſmuch as it has been proved, that as an to Bc, ſo Dc to 
CE, and as n e to ca, ſo ck to ED: therefore by equality, as nA to 
ac, ſo co to DE. 

Therefore of equiangled Triangles the ſides about the equal an- 
gles are proportional: And the ſides ſubtended under the equal an- 
les are Homologal. Which was to be demonſti ated. 

Mm « Euchde 

'ch 
ions 

246 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

e Euclide here takes no notice of the Homologal fides, becauſe 
« it manifeſtly appears in the courſe of the demonſtration, that thoſe 
* ſides which are ſubtended under the equal angles are Homologal, 
and correſpondent Antecedents and Conſequents. 

PROPOSITION V. 

F two Triangles have their /ides proportional, the Triangles 
Shall be equiangled: And ſball have thoſe angles equal under 
which are ſubtended Homologal ſides. | | 

Let the two Triangles be aBc, DEF, having their ſides propor- 
tional, as AB to Be, ſo DE to EF: and as Bc to Ca, fo EF to FD: 
and moreover, as Ba to Ac, ſo ED to DF. I ſay, that the Triangle 
ABC is equiangled to the Triangle DEF: And they ſhall have thoſe 
angles equal under which are ſubtended Homologal ſides; namely 
the angle aBc to the angle DEF, and BCa to EFD, and more- 
over BAC to EDF. 1009 | 

For to the ſtrait line x F, and to the 
points in the ſame x, F, let be con- 
ſtituted the angle F E A, equal to the 
angle cBa, and the angle EFG, 
equal to the angles ca | by Prop 23. 
EL I.]; therefore the remaining an- 
gle BAC is equal to the remaining 
angle EGF: wherefore the Triangle 
ABC is equiangled to the Triangle 
GEF; therefore of the Triangles anc, . 
GEF, the ſides about the equal angles x 

: 

are proportional, and the ſides ſubtending the equal angles are Ho- 
mologal: wherefore as 4B is to Bc, ſo GE is to EF. But as AB to 
Bc, ſo by Suppoſition, DE is to EF; therefore as D E to E E, ſo & E to 
EF: Wherefore each of the lines p E, Gt, have the ſame proportion 
to EF; and therefore p E is equal to o Prop. 9. El. v. 

By the ſame reaſon, DF is equal to @r. Now foraſmuch as p + 
is equal to £6, and E common: therefore there are the two lines 
DE, EF, equal to the two lines E, KF; and the baſe DF is equal to 
the baſe. 6x; therefore the angle v R x, is equal to the angle d EF, 
and the Triangle BRF, is equal to the Triangle GE E, and the re- 
maining angles equal to the remaining angles under which are ſub- 
tended equal ſides | Prop. 8. EL I.]; therefore alſo the angle DE is 
equal to the angle GE, and EDF to EGF. And becauſe the an- 
gle DE is equal to the angle Rr, and the angle G to the angle 
ABC; therefore the angle 4 B c is equal to the angle RF. By the 
ſame reaſon, the angle a c n is equal to the angle DF E, and alſo the 

| | 1801 

angle 

G 

OF GEOMETRY. 247 
angle at A, is equal to the angle at o: wherefore the Triangle a Be 
is —_— tothe Triangle DE FE. 

II therefore two Triangles have their ſides proportional, the Tri- 

angles ſhall be equiangled : And ſhall haye thoſe angles equal un- 
der which are ſubtended Homologal fides. Which was to be de- 

monſtrated. | 
2 PRO POSITION VI. 

1 F two Triangles have one angle equal to one angle, and about 
1 the equal angles the /ides proportional, the Triangles ſhall be 
equiangled, and ſball have tho angles equal, under which are ſub- 
tended Homologal ſides. | 

Let the two Triangles be anc, Dx x, having one angle 8a c equal 
to one angle E D F, and about the equal angles the ſides proportio- 
nal, as Ba to ac, ſo ED to DF. I ſay, that the Triangle AB is equi- 
angled to the triangle DEF: And they ſhall have the angle AB 
equal to the angle p EF, and the angle acs to the angle DF x. 

For to the ſtrait line DE, and to the points in the ſame p, x, let 
be conſtituted the angle g D d, equal to either of the angles x ac, or 
EDF Prop. 23. El. I.]; and the angle DFG equal to the angle acB; 

therefore the remaining angle at-s, 
is equal to the remaining angle at : 
wherefore the triangle a Bc is equi- 
angled to the triangle pF: it is 
therefore proportional as ; A to Ac, 10 | 
GD to pF. But by ſuppoſition as Ba | © 
to Ac, ſo ED to DF; and therefore as 
ED to DF, ſo GD to DF: where fore Ka 
E D is equal to dp; and DF common... e E 
Therefore there are the two lines E D, pF, equal to the two lines 
GD, DF; and the angle EDF is equal to the angle Gyr; wherefore 
the baſe E is equal to the baſe : and the triangle pz r equal 
to the triangle Do; and the remaining angles ſhall be equal to 
the remaining angles, each to each, under which are ſubtended 
equal ſides | Prop. 4. El. I.]; therefore the angle pF is equal to the 
angle DER, and the angle at d to the angle at x. But the angle 
DFG is equal to the angle a cB; therefore the angle Ac is equal to 
the angle Dx. But the angle Bae is put equal to the angle x Dr; 
therefore alſo the remaining angle at s, is equal to the remaining 
angle at E: wherefore the triangle Ae is equiangled to the tri- 
angle DEF. 1 Ae e OF ps el 

If therefore two triangles have one angle equal to one angle, and 
about the equal angles the ſides proportional; the triangles ſhall 
be equiangled, and ſhall have thoſe angles equal, under which arc 
ſubtended Homologal ſides. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

M m 2 PROPO- 

248 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION, VIL 

F two triangles have one angle + mou to one angle, and about 

4 I other angles the ſides proportional; and have alſo each of the © 

remaining angles either leſs, or not leſs than a right; the triangles 

ball be equiang/ed, and ſhall have thoſe angles equal, about which 
are the proportional /ides. > 

Ch 
tions 

Let the two triangles be 4 Bc, DEP, having one angle equal to 
one angle, the angle Bac to the angle ED; and about other an- 
gles ABe, DEF, the fides proportional, as AB to Bc, ſo DE to EF; 
having alſo each of the remaining angles at c, x, firſt leſs than a 
right angle. 

I ay, that the triangle 4 Bc is e- A 
| quiangled to the triangle DEF: and 
4 the angle 4Bc ſhall be equal to the 
| | angle DEF, and the remaining an- 
gle, to wit, at c,equal to the remain- 

ing angle at r. For if the angle AB c 
be unequal to the angle DEF, one 
of them is the greater. Let ABC be = CE w 
the greater; and to the ſtrait line F 
AB, and to the point in the ſame B, let be conſtituted the angle 
ABG equal tothe angle DEF [by Prop. 23. El. I.] Now foraſmuch 
as the angle 4 is equal to the angled, and the angle à 30 to the an- 
gle DEF; therefore the remaining angle à C5 is equal to the re- 
maining angle DFE. Therefore: the triangle a 3d is equiangled to 
the triangle ÞEF: wherefore as 4B; to BG, ſoDE to EF | Prop. 4. 
El. VI.] But as DE to EF, ſo by Suppoſition is AB to Be: and 
therefore as AB to Bc, ſo AB to BG: wherefore A 3 has the ſame 
proportion both to 3d and gd; therefore 3e is equal to 30 [Prop. 
El. V.]: fo that alſo the angle 3d c is equal to the angle scG 
(Prop. 5. El. I.] But the angle at c is put leſs than a right angle; 
therefore alſo the angle BGc is leſs than a right angle: fo that the 
conſequent angle 4 0 3 is greater than a right angle: and it hath 
been proved equal to the angle at x; therefore the angle at r is 
greater than a right angle. But it is put leſs than a right angle: 
which is abſurd ; - wherefore the angle anc is not unequal to the 
angle D EF: equal therefore it is. Now alſo the angle at a is equal 
to the angle at v | by Suppoſition], and therefore the remaining 
=_ angle at c, is equal to the remaining angle at Fr: wherefore the tri- 
8 - angle ABC is equiangled to the triangle nE r. 

But 

OF GEOMETRY. 249 

But again, let each of the angles at c, F be put not leſs than 
a right angle. I ſay, that in this caſe alſo the triangle anc is 
equiangled to the triangle DEF. For the ſame Conſtruction being 
made, we may in like manner demonſtrate, that ze is equal. to 
BG; ſo that the angle at c is equal to the angle ; c. But the an- 
gle at c is put not leſs than a right angle; therefore 3Ge is not 
leſs than a right angle: wherefore of the triangle 3c there are 
two angles, and they not leſs than two right angles, which 
is impoſſible | Prop. 32. El. I]; there. 

XK: 
fore again the angle aBc is not un- 
equal to the angle D E, equal there. D 
fore it is. Now alſo the angle at 4 | 
is equal to the angle at Þ | by Suppo- 
ſition]: wherefore the remaining an- 
gle at c is equal to the remaining an- 2 
ple at F; therefore the triangle AB e Fey” F 

is equiangled to the triangle DEF. B | | 

If therefore two triangles have one angle equal to one angle, and 
about other angles the fides proportional ; and each of the remain- 
ing angles either leſs, or not leſs than a right angle; the triangles 
ſhall be equiangled, and ſhall have thoſe angles equal, about which 
are the proportional fides. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION VIII 1 

F in a right angld triangle from the right angle be drawn a 
dicular to the baſe, the triangles at the perpendicular 

are like to the whole, and to one another. 

Let the right angld triangle be anc, having the right angle 
BAC, and from the point a to the line Bc, let Ap be drawn perpen- 
dicular. I ſay, that each of the triangles AB D, Ape, is like to the 
whole triangle aBc, and alſo to one another. Foraſmuch as the 
angle BAC is equal to the angle 4 D B, for A 
each is a right angle; and the angle at 5 
common to the two triangles aBc, ADB; 
therefore the remaining angle Ac is equal 
to the remaining angle BaD; therefore B C 
the triangle AB c is equiangled to the tri- 
angle 45D: wherefore as Bc ſubtending the right angle of the tri- 
angle A Bc, is to Ba ſubtending the right angle of the triangle AB p, 
ſo the ſame as ſubtending the angle at c of the triangle azc, is 
to zo ſubtending the angle 3 a Þ of the triangle ABD, equal to the 
angle at c: and alſo as ac to Ap ſubtending the angle at B, common 
to the two triangles: wherefore the triangle AB is equiangled to 
the triangle ABD, and has the ſides about the equal angles propor- 

Mm 3 tional. 

250 THE SIXTH: ELEMENT 

tional; thereſore the triangle 4 Bc is like to the triangle 4B D 
Def. x. El. VI. ]. In like manner we may demonſtrate, that alſo the 
triangle ap cis like to the triangle anc: wherefore each of the 
triangles 4BD, ADC, is like to the whole triangle a Be. 365; 
.. I fay moreover, that the triangles ABD, aDc, are alſo like to 
one another. For becauſe the right angle-BD 4 is equal to the right 
angle Ap c; and alſo the angle Ba D has been proved equal to the 
angle at e; therefore the remaining angle at B is equal to the re- 
maining angle pac: wherefore the tri- q | 
angle ABD is equiangled to the triangle 

ACD; therefore as BD of the triangle aBD, * 
ſubtending the angle BAD, is to pA of the 
triangle Ape, ſubtending the angle at c art 
equal to the angle BaD, ſo the ſame ad, | 2 | 
of the triangle a BD, ſubtending the angle at , is to De ſubtending 
the angle Þ ac, of the triangle AD c, equal to the angle at B: and 
alſo ꝝ a ſubtending the right angle a ds to ac, ſubtending the right 
angle Ap c: therefore the triangle A Bo is like to the triangle a Dc. 

I therefore in a right angld triangle, from the right angle be 
drawn a perpendicular to the baſe; the triangles at the perpendi- 
cular are like to the whole, and to one another. Which was to be 
demonſtrated. bad) 1575 Hog: off 54. 

0 

Corollary. 

From hence tis manifeſt, that in a right angl d triangle the per- 
pendicular drawn from the right angle to the baſe, is a mean pro- 
portional between the Segments of the baſe. And moreover be- 
tween the baſe and either one of the Segments, the ſide adjoy ned 
to that Segment is a mean proportional. N 547 15.5 

Ty, 

* 
* 
- _ " 
PROPO- 
* 
" % | 8 
| * * * b . 

— — 

OF GEOMETRY. 25k 

PROPOSITION N. 
F Rom a given ſtrait line to take off a demanded part. 

Let the given ſtrait line be 48. It is required from as to take 
off a demanded part. Let a third part be demanded; and from 
the point 4 let any ſtrait line as A c be drawn, , 
containing with A3 any angle. And in ac 
let any point be taken as D: and to 4D let ,'_Y? 

DE, EC be put equal, and let be joyned Bc: 

then by o let be drawn DF parallel to Bc. N 
Now foraſmuch as to one ſide of the trian- 

gle apc, namely to 8c, there is drawn a pa- N 
rallel Dr; it is therefore proportionally, as 
ep to 4, ſo BF to Fa | Prop. 2. El. VI.] But cÞ is double of Þ a; 
therefore alſo ; F is double of Fa: wherefore 3A is Triple of A F. 

Therefore from the given ſtrait line à ; is taken off ar, a third part 
demanded. Which was to be done. 

PROPOSITION X. 
T O cut a given uncut trait line like to a given cut rait line. 

Let the given uncut ſtrait line be as, and the cut line be ac. 
It is required to cut the uncut line a8 like to the cut line ac. Let 
AC be cut in the points p, E; and let AB, ac, be fo put as to con- 
tain any angle, and let be joyned xc. Then by the points b, E, to 
Bc let DF, EG, be drawn parallels, and 
by p to as let DHK be drawn parallel; N 
therefore each of the figures FH, RB, is a "Fx wo 
Parallelogram: wherefore DH 1s equal to / 

FG, and HK to GB | Prop. 34. El I.] Now &© / E 
foraſmuch as of the triangle pK c to one of / / 

the ſides xc, the line NR is drawn paral- 
lel; it is therefore proportionally as cr. 
to ED, ſoxH tohD | Prop. 2. El. VI. |. But Þ * X 
KH is equal to BG, and HD to GF; therefore as cx to ED, ſo 0 
to GF. Again, becauſe of the triangle aGF, to one of the ſides E d, 
the line D is drawn parallel; it is therefore proportionally as E D 
to DA, ſo GF to FA. But it has been proved, as E to ED, fo BG 
to GF; therefore as c E to E D, ſo 3d is to GF, and as Eb is to Da, 
ſo G F is to FA. | 

Wherefore the given uncut ſtrait line as, is cut like to the given 
cut ſtrait line ac. Which was to be done. 

PROPO- 

25% THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

PORPOSITION XL 
( trait lines being given 10 find a third proportional. 

Let the given ſtrait lines be 4 3, 4 c; and be Sms: 
contain any angle. It is required unto as, ac to find a pro- 
portional. Let a B, A c be produced to the points 
D, E, and let BD be put equal to ac, and Bc be 
Joyned: then by o let px be drawn parallel 
to zc. Now foraſmuch as of the triangle apr 
to one of the ſides p E, the line z c is drawn pa- 
rallel, it is proportionally as an to B, ſo ac 
to e; but BD is equal to ac; therefore as 14 x 
is to ac, ſo Ac is to k-. f we petty 

Wherefore to the two given ftrait lines A , ac, is found cz a 
third propartional. Which was to be done. 

| PROPOSITION XII. 
T Hree ſtrait lines being given to find a fourth proportional. 

Let the three given ſtrait lines be 4, , c. It is required unto 4, 
B, c, to find a fourth proportional. Let two ſtrait lines Dx, DF, be 
put, containing any angle as EDF; and to a let DG be put equal; 
and toB, GFR, and alſo to c let pH be put equal: then on "ny 
7885 let to the ſame be drawn by the point E, the line EF para 
lel. Now ſoraſmuch as of the triangle Þ EF, to one of the lides x F, the 

a As 
e 31008 
175 GH is drawn parallel; therefore as p is to a, ſap u is to 
Prop. 2. El. VI.] But pd is equal to 4, and o E to B, and Don to c: 

therefore as 4 is to B, ſo e is to F. 
Wherefore to three given ſtrait lines 

proportional. Which was to be done. 

A, 2, c, is found u a fourth 

PRO- 

— ” 

RO PPOSTTION II 
T ind ftrait lines being given to find a mean proportional. 

Let the two given ſtrait lines be AR, BC. It is required unto AB, 

8c, to find a mean proportional. Let as, xc be put in a direct line, 

and on ac let bedeſcribed the Semicucle bg; 
then from the point s to the ſtrait line ac, let 
2D be drawn at right angles, and let be joyned 
AD, Dc. Now foraſmuch as in the Semicircle 
the angle ap c is a right angle Prop. 3 1. EI. III.], 
and becauſe in the right angled triangle 4 Dc, 3 
from the right angle to the baſe the perpendicular DR is drawn ; 
therefore DB is a mean proportional to the Segments of the baſe 
AB, Bc | Coroll. Prop. 8. El. VI. |. | | 
Wherefore to the two given lines AB, Bc, is found DB a mean 
proportional. Which was to be done. RN TTY 

PROPOSITIO N xIv. 

F equal Parallelograms having one angle equal to one angle, 
the ſides about the equal angles are reciprocally — 

Aud Parallelograms having one angle equal toone angle, and the 

ſides about the equal angles reciprocally proportional, are equal to 
one another. Pk $87 efron? 

Let the equal Parallelograms be A B, B c, having equal angles at n, 
and let Ds, BE, be put directly to one another; therefore alſo B, 
BG, are directly to one another. I ſay, that of the Parallelograms 
AB, Bc, the ſides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportio- 

nal, that is, as DB is to BE, ſo G is to f 3 
BF. Let the Parallelogram Fr be com- 

pleated. Now foraſmuch as the Paralle- : 

logram an is equal to the Parallelogram = 

Bc, and FE is an other; therefore as 4B 

is toFE,ſoBc is to FE | Prop. 7. El. V.] 

But as AB to PE, ſo DB to BE, Prop. 1. 

El. VI.] and as Bc to FE, ſo d to Br; © 8 

therefore as DB to B; E, ſo GB to BE Prop. 11. El. V.]: wherefore of 
the Parallelograms AB, Bc, the ſides about the equal angles are re- 
ciprocally proportional. 

But now let the ſides about the equal angles be reciprocally pro- 
portional, and let it be, as DB to BE, ſo d ̊ to BF. I ſay, that the 
Parallelogram as is equal to the Parallelogram nc. For becauſe as 
DB is to BE, ſo GBis to BF; and as p to BE, ſo the Paralle 
AR to the Parallelogram FE [Prop 1. El. VI.]; and as GB to BF, ſo 

n the 

24 IHE SIXTNH ELEMENT 
the Parallelogram Bc to the Parallelogram FE; therefore as AB is 
to FE, ſo Bc is to FM Prop 1 1. El. V. J: wherefore the 8 

ram 4 is equal to Parallel m 8c [Prop. 9. El. V.. 
, Therebbice ore of equ 4 Ps elegans having one angle equal to one 
angle, the ſides — the equal angles are reciprocally proportional. 

Auch Paratelegrärtis Ra viftg öne angle equal to one angle, and the 
ſides about the equal 4 inp PA i are equal 16 
one 1 wn to de er tort rated. a * 0 bar 

N g ae, 811 36 [1/61] 90 

P luis bo war <4, 
| Foraſmuch asthe Go FR {every Farallelogram are equal 
{for another 1 57 7 4275 *. N 8 by this kdl 

hape their ſides reciptocally proportional... 
Stoch 21 30 207 RO OSTTON xv. an 15 

Me 1 af having aue angle equal to one angle, the 
8 l the equal angles are reciprocally proportiamal. 

Aud triangles having one angle equal to one angle, and the ſides 

about the equal angles \reciprooally RIO are ith to one 

another. A Wy WIT Qik)! SWAN * 

Let the. qual triangles beine, 4b, e one WY Gaal 
to one 8 namely, the angle nne to the angle DAB. I ſay, that 
af the triapgles anc a R, the ſides about the equal angles are re- 
ciprocally proportional, that is, as ca is to aD, ſo EA is to 43. 
Let them be put ſo that a be dire&ly. toaD; therefore alſo E a is 
directly to 50 and let be joy ned BD, Now foraſmuch as the tri- 
angle Ah c i8 equal to the triangle x pe; and. ABD is an other; there- 
fore as the triangle c CAB is to the tri. * 
angle B AD, fo the triangle ADE is to Nee ES 4 
the triangle na v Prop. 7. El, V 9 $ 
as AB is to BAD, ſo c is to aD| 4%. uf | 
1. El. VI.), and as the triangle zap-1s_ | _ 
to B AP, ſo EA is to AB; therefore as G4 
is to a b, ſo EA is to AB Prop. 1. ELV. 1 
wherefore of the triangles anc, Ab EF, » 
the ſides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional. 
But now let the ſides of the triangles AB; c, AD E be reciprocally 
proportiot al, and let it be, as c to Ap, ſo EA to 4B. I ſay, that 
the triangle A Bc is equal to the triangle ap E. For again, BD bein 
Jo ned; 1 1s to Ap, ſo EA is to AB: and as Cals to ab, fo 
the triangle ABC is to the triangle n 4b: and as Ea is to A B, ſo the 
hs le E 0 is to the triangle B4 o; therefore as the triangle AB c 
to th . fo the triangle E 4D is to the triangle 8 Ab 
a W ereoreqah * che triangles 48 c, EA b, ns 

OF GEOMETRY. 255 

the ſame proportion to the triangle 34D: wherefore the triangle 
ABC is equal to the triangle x AD _— 9. EL V.] . 
Theretore of equal triangles having one angle equal to one angle, 
the ſides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional. 
And triangles having one angle equal to one angle, and the ſides 

about the equal angles reciprocally proportional, are equal to one 

another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XVI. 

F four ſtrait lines be proportional, the Rectangle contained by 

the extremes is equal to the Rectanglè contained by the means. 

And if the Rectangle contained by the extremes be equal to the 
Rectangle contained by the means, the four ſtrait lines ſhall be pro- 
portional. | 

Let four ſtrait lines 4 B, c D, E, F, be proportional, as 4B to cp, fo 
E to F. I ſay that the Rectangle contained by as, F, is equal to 
the Rectangle contained by c D, E. For from the points 4, c to the 
ſtrait lines A B, c D, let aG, cx be drawn at right angles, and let 40 
be put equal to x, and c H to E, and let the Parallelograms s 6, D H, 
be compleated. Now foraſmuch as AB is to cp, ſo E is to ?; and 
E is equal to c H, and F to 4G: therefore as a8 is to cp, ſo cH is to 
AG: Wherefore of the Parallelograms BG, DH, the ſides about the 
equal angles are reciprocally proporti- 
onal. But equiangled Parallelograms 
having the ſides about the equal angles 
reciprocally proportional, are equal to £— 
one another | Prop. 14. El. VI.]; there- G 
fore the Parallelogram 3 d is equal to | 
the Parallelogram v RH. Now the Paral- | _ 2 
lelogram 3 is contained by as, F; for b D 
As is equal to F: and the Parallelogram 
DH, is contained by cD, E; for c is equal to ꝝ; therefore the 
Rectangle contained by A B, F; is equal to the Rectangle contained 
by cp, E. 
nr now let the Rectangle contained by as, F, be equal to the 
Rectangle contained by ep, E. I ſay, that the four ftrait lines ſhall 
be proportional, as AB to ob, ſo E to f. For the ſame Conſtru- 
ction being made; becauſe the Rectangle under as, F, is equal to 
the Rectangle under co, E; and the Rectangle under as, E, is BG; 
for A0 is equal to F: and the Rectangle under cp, E, is DH: for cH 
is equal to E: therefore the Rectangle ; 0 is equal to the Rectangle 
DH, and they are equiangled. But of equal, and equiangled Paral- 
lelograms the fides about the equal angles are reciprocally propor- 
tional: wherefore as AB is to op, ſo c is to AG: but cy is equal 
to E, and AG to F; therefore as AB is to oo, ſo E is to F. 
Nn 2 If 

equal to the Rectangle under 3, Do. But 

276 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

If therefore four ftrait lines be proportional, the Rectangle con- 
tained by the extremes is equal to the Rectangle contained by the 
means. 

And if the Rectangle contained by the extremes be equal to the 
Rectangle contained by the means, the four ſtrait lines ſhall be pro- 
portional. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XVII. 

F three ſtrait lines be proportional, the Rectangle contained by 
the extremes is equal to 7. 4 cm of the mean. 
Aud if the Nectanzie contained by the extremes be equal to the 

Snare of the mean, the three ſtruit lines ſhall be proportional. 

Let three ſtrait lines A, B, c, be proportional, as 4 tos, ſo B to c. 
I fay, that the Rectangle contained by 4, c, is equal to the Square 
of the mean 3. Let v be put equal to s, and becauſe as a is to B, 
ſo 5 is to c; and p is equal tos, therefore as 4 is to B, ſo Dis to c 
Prop. 7. El. 1 Now if four ſtrait lines be proportional, the Re&- 
angle contained by the extremes is equal p 
to the Rectangle contained by the means; | | 

therefore the Rectangle under 4, c, is ö | 
| 
| 

; 
| 

the Rectangle under B, o, is equal to the 

Square of B, for B is equal to v; there- 3 | 
fore the Rectangle contained by a, c, is il | 
— 

equal to the Square of B. 

But now let the Rectangle contained 6 | 
by the lines a, c, be equal to the Square of 8. I ſay, that as 4 is to 
B, ſo B is to c. For the ſame Conſtruction being made: becauſe 
the Rectangle under a, c, is equal to the Square of B, and the Square 
of 8 is the Rectangle under B, D, for p is equal to B; therefore the 
Rectangle under 4, c, is equal to the Rectangle under B, Db. But if 
the Rectangle under the extremes be equal to Rectangle under the 
means, the four ſtrait lines are proportional | by Prop. 16. El. VI.]; 
therefore as 4 is to B, ſo v is to c. But n; is equal to p; therefore as 
a is to , ſo ; to c [Prop.7. El. V.]. | 

If therefore three ſtrait lines be proportional, the Rectangle con- 
tained by the extremes is equal to the Square of the mean. 

And if the Rectangle contained by the extremes be equal to the 
Square of the mean, the three ſtrait lines ſhall be proportional. 
Which was to be demonſtrated. 

4 PROPO- 

\ 

OF GEOMETRY. 257 

PROPOSITION XVIII. 

Pon a given ſtrait line, unto a given ſtrait-lin'd Figure to de. 
ſcribe a ftrait-lind Figure hike and alike ſituated. 

Let the given ſtrait line be as, and the given ſtrait-lin'd Figure 
CE-: it is required upon the ſtrait line 4B, unto the ſtrait-lin'd Fi- 
gure cx, to deſcribe a ſtrait- lind Figure like and alike ſituated. 
Let be joyned DF; and to the ſtrait line as, and to the points in 
the ſame 4, B, let be conſtituted the angle Ba d, equal to the angle 
at c: andthe angle a d to the angle cd | Prop. 23. El. I.]; there- 
fore the remaining angle c FD is equal to the remaining angle aGs: 
wherefore the triangle co is equiangled to the triangle Gaz; it is 
therefore proportionally as FD to GB, ſo Fc to Ga, and cp to as 
[Prop. 4 El VI.] Again, to the ſtrait line 3d, and to the points in 
the ſame 3, 6, let be conſtituted the angle 86 # equal to the angle 
DFE, and the angle GBH to the angle F DE: therefore the remain- 
ing angle at E is equal to the remaining angle at H: wherefore the 
triangle FD E is equiangled to the triangle GBH; it is therefore pro- 

11 
G Pe”. — F * 8 
4 
99 2 
. oY 
A > "M6 TS 

portionally, as FD to Gs, ſo Fx to GH, and ED to Hs | Prop. 4. El. 
VI.] And it has been proyd, that alſo as FD to de B, lo tc to Ga, 
and co to AB, therefore as rc to d a, ſo cp to as, and E to 
GH, and moreover ED to HB [Prop. 11. El. V.] And becauſe the 
angle c o is equal to the angle 40 , and the angle DE to the an- 
gle 86H; therefore the whole angle ct is equal to the whole an- 
gle aGH. By the ſame reaſon alſo the angle cox is equal to the 
angle 4 BH. But alſo the angle at c is equal to the angle at a, and 
the angle at E to the angle at n: therefore an is equiangled to cx; 
and hath to the fame about the equal angles the ſides proportional. 
Wherefore the ſtrait lin d Figure an, is like to the ſtrait lin d Figure 
ce [Def. 1. EL VT. |. 

Therefore upon the given ſtrait line as to the given ſtrait-lin'd 

Figure c E, is deſcribed the ſtrait-lind Fignre An, like and alike 
ſituated. Which was to be done, 

Nn z PROPO- 

258 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

PROPOSITION XIX. 

5 Ike triangles are to one another in a Duplicate proportion of 
I their Homologal ſides. 

Let the like triangles be AB Cc, DEF, having the angle at g equal 
to the angle at E, and let it be as as to Be, ſo DE to E: fo that 
Bc is Homologal to EF. I fay that the triangle anc hath to the 
triangle DEF a duplicate proportion of that which Be hath to EF. 
For to Bc, EF, let be taken a third proportional s&G | Prop. 11. El. 
VI.]: fo that it be as B; c to E, ſo E to BG: and let be joyned 6 a. 
Now becauſe it is as AB to Bc, ſo DE to EF; therefore it is alter- 
nately as AB to DE, ſo Bc to EF: but as Bc to E, ſo E to BG. And 
therefore as AB to p E, ſo EF tog | Prop. 1 I. El. V.]: wherefore of 
the triangles a BG, DE E, the ſides about the equal angles are recipro- 
cally proportional. But triangles having one angle equal to one an- 
gle, and the ſides about the equal angles reciprocally proportional, 
are equal to one another Prop. 15. El. VI. |; therefore the triangle 

A 

— 

F 

ABG is equal to the triangle DEF. And becauſe as BC is to EE, ſo 
EF is to 3G, and that if three ſtrait lines be proportional, the firſt 
to the third is {aid to have a duplicate proportion of that, which it 
hath to the ſecond | Def. 10. El. V.]; therefore z c hath to BG a du- 
plicate proportion of that, which ; c hath to EF. But as Bc is to BG, 
ſo the triangle a Bc is to the triangle aBG | Prop. 1. El. VI. |; there- 
fore the triangle ac hath to the triangle a BG a duplicate propor- 
tion of that, which pc hath to E F. But the triangle aBG is equal 
to the triangle DEF: wherefore the triangle az c hath to the tri- 
angle DEF a duplicate proportion of that, which ; c hath to EF. 
Therefore like triangles are to one another in a duplicate propor- 
tion of their Homologal ſides. Which was to be demonſtrated.. 

Corollary | 
From hence 'tis manifeſt, that if three ſtrait lines be proportio- 
nal; as the firſt is to the third, ſo the triangle upon the firſt is to 
the triangle upon the ſecond, being like and alike deſcribed: for 
that it hath been prov d, that as cs is to 86, ſo the triangle B e is to 
the triangle AB d, that is, to DEF. 

4 PROP O- 

OF GEOMETRY. 259 
- PROPOSITION XX. 
| The Polygons are divided into like triangles, equal in number: 
LA Homologal to the holes. | * 

And Polygon hath to Polygon a a N proportion of that, which 
an Homolegal ſide hath to an Homologal ſide. 

Let the like Polygons be A8 CDE, FGHK IL, and let AB; be Homo- 
logal to F G. I ſay, that the Polygons aB CDE, EGHKkL, are divided 
into like triangles, equal in number, and Homologal to the wholes. 
And the Polygon A BD E hath to the Polygon FG@HkL a duplicate 
proportion of that, which AB; hath to FG. 

Let be joyned B; E, E c, G H., LH. Now becauſe the Polygon ABC DE 
is like to the Polygon F GH KL; therefore the angle Bat is equal to 
the angle GPL; and as B A is to 4 E, ſo G is to Fr, Def. 1. El. VI.] 
Foraſmuch therefore as there are two triangles AB E, FGL, having 
one angle equal to one angle, and about the equal angles the ſides 
proportional; therefore the triangle ABE is equiangled to the tri- 
angle F61 | Prop. 6. El. VI. |, ſo that it is alſo like. 

And becauſe AB E is like to d L, therefore the angle azz is equal 
to the angle FL: But alſo the whole angle a Be is equal to the 
whole angle ru, for the likeneſs of the Polygons: therefore the 
remaining angle E Be is equal to the remaining angle LH. And be- 
cauſe for the likeneſs of the triangles ABE, FGL, it is as EB to BA, 
ſo L to d F, and alſo for the likeneſs of the Polygons it is as as to Bc, 
ſo Fd to GH: therefore by equality it is as EB toBc, ſo L to GH; 
and theſe proportional ſides are about the equal angles E Be, LH: 

therefore the triangle E nc is equiangled to the triangle LH. Prop. 
6. El. VI.] And ſo alſo like. 
\ 

BEL 

By the ſame reaſon alſo the triangle E D is like to the triangle 
LHK; therefore the Polygons aBcDE, FGHKL, are divided into 
like triangles, equal in number. 

I ſay moreover, that: the triangles are alſo Homologal to the 
wholes, that is, the triangles are proportional, and in the Polygon 
ABCDF, the Antecedents are ABE, EBC, ECD; and in the Polygon 
FGHKL, their Conſequents are FGL, LG H, LHK. 

And alſo I ſay, that the Polygon ABD E hath to the Polygon 
FGHKL, a duplicate proportion of that which an Homologal fide 
hath to an Homologal fide; that is, which aB; hath to FG For let 
be joyned ac, FH. Now 

) 

arch 
ations 

2.60 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

— 

Now becauſe for the likeneſs of the Polygons, the angle a xc is 
equal to the angle an, and as AB is to Bc, ſo F is to GH; there- 
fore the triangle a Bc is equiangled to the triangle Nn Prop. 6. El. 
VL ]: wherefore the angle nac is equal to the angle G@ Fa, and the 

angle Bc a to the angle GH es becauſe the angle BAM is equal to 

the angle Gg x: and it hath been prov d, that the angle az is equal 
to the angle FG x; therefore the remaining angle as is equal to 
the remaining angle 'F NG: wherefore the triangle AM is equi- 
angled to che triangle EN OW 111: 
In like manner ſhall we prove, that the triangle ; Mc is equiangled 
to the triangle NH: proportionally therefore it is, as à M to MB, 
ſo FN to x, and as MB, to MC, ſo xd to NH, fo that by equality 
as AN to Mc, ſo Fx to NH. But as am to Mc, ſo the triangle ams 
is to the triangle ; M e, and the triangle 4 M E to the triangle xc; 
for they are to one another as their baſes a, Mc [ Prop. I. El. VI.]. 
And as one of the Antecedents to one of the Conſequents, ſo all the 
Antecedents to all the Conſequents | Prop. 12. El. V.]; therefore as 
the triangle A M to the triangle g Mc, ſo the triangle 4 E to the tri- 
angle ER c. But as AMB to BMC, ſo Au to Mc; and therefore as 4 M 
to Me, ſo the triangle ax to the triangle Ex H Prop. 11. El. V.] 

H 

By the ſame reaſon alſo as Fx to NH, ſo the triangle Fd L to the 
triangle LH. But as AM is to Mc, ſo FN is to NH; and therefore as 
the triangle ABE to the triangle ER c, ſo the triangle FL to the tri - 
angle LH; and alternately, as the triangle A BE to the triangle 
FGL, fo the triangle Ex Be to the triangle LH. 

In like manner ſhall we prove, BD, 6 « being joy ned, that as the 

triangle ERC to the triangle L d H, ſo the triangle E co to the tri- 

angle L n k. | 

And becauſe as the triangle azz is to the triangle FL, ſo the 
triangle E R c is to the triangle Ln, and moreover the triangle x c 
to the triangle LH k; and as one of the Antecedents to one of the 
Conſequents, ſo all the Antecedents to all the Conſequents; there- 
fore as the triangle AB E is to the triangle FOL, ſo the Polygon 
ABCDE is to the Polygon FGHKL: wherefore the like triangles 
and equal in number, are alſo Homologal to the wholes. | 

And now I ſay again, that the Polygon aBcD#, hath to the Po- 
lygon HKL a duplicate proportion of an Homologal fide to an 

Homologal ſide. , For 

OF GEOMETRY. 161 
For the the triangle AB E hath tothe triangle rl a duplicate 
proportion of that which the Homologal fide 4h hath to the Ho- 
mologal fide E. For like triangles are in 4 duplicate proportion of 
their Homologal fides | Prop. 19. El. VI.]. But as the triangle a Bt 
is to the triangle FIL, ſo the Polygon AB DE is to the Polygon 
FGHK L; therefore alſo the Polygon a8cp# hath to the Polygon 
FGHKL a duplicate proportion of that, which the Homologal fide 
AB hath to the Homologal/fide FG, | H 19190 
Therefore like Polygons are divided into like triangles, equal in 
number, and Homologal to the wholes, &c. Which was to be de- 
monſtrated. * e 
Corollaries. 

1. After the ſame manner alſo in like quadrilateral Figures ſhall be 
proved, that they are in a duplicate pro- „nd 
portion of their Homologal fides. And tg.! 
ſame hath been demonſtrated in triangles. 2 ———— 
Therefore univerſally, like ſtrait lind Fi-. | 
gures are to one another in a duplicate pro- 

portion of their Homologal ſides. 3 
2. And if to aB, FG a third proportional | '\ | 
x be taken, then as is to x in a duplicate — 

proportion of that, which az hath to EG. 
But Polygon is to Polygon, and Quadrilateral figure to Quadrilateral 
figure in a duplicate proportion of their Homologal ſides, that is, of 
A to FG; and the ſame hath been demonſtrated in triangles. So 
that alſo in general it is manifeſt, that if three ſtrait lines be pro- 
portional, it ſhall be as the firſt to the third, ſo the Figure upon the 
firſt, is to the Figure upon the ſecond, like and alike deſcribed. 

Other wiſe. 

Now we will otherwiſe and ſhorter ſhew the triangles to be Ho- 
mologal. For again, let the Polygons ABC DR, FGHKkL, be put: 
and let be joy ned BE, EC; GL, LH. I ſay, that * 
as the triangle a B; E is to the triangle d, ſo Nou 
the triangle x Bc is to the triangle Lo, and 2 
the triangle x cp to the triangle L x. Now , e 
foraſmuch as the triangle 4B is like to the . 
triangle Fl.; therefore the triangle AR "rr? 
hath to the triangle rGL a duplicate pro- 

portion of that, which BE hath to dL. By 
the ſame reaſon alſo the triangle E HG hat . 

to the triangle LGH a duplicate proporti- . 

on of that, which BE hath to d; there- 
fore as the triangle aBE is to the triangle / 
FGL, fo the triangle E Bc is to the trian- e 5 

Oo gle 

dr 
"ations 

therefore as the triangle z 8c is to the tri- 

the Conſequents Prop. 12. El. V.], and fo 
Which was to be demonſtrated... 

262 THE SIXTH: ELEMENT 

gle LRH. Again, becauſe the triangle x Bc is like to the triangle 
Len; therefore the triangle zzc hath to the triangle Ln, a 
duplicate proportion of that which cz hath to HL. By the ſame rea- 
ſon alſo, the triangle Eco hath to the triangle Luk a duplicate pro- 
portion of that which c hath to HL; 
angle L GH, ſo the triangle E cp is to the trio 
angle I. H k. And it hath been proved, that as 
EBS is to LGH, ſo ABE to FGL; therefore 

as the triangle A B; E is to the triangle ? e L, ſo 
the triangle k c is to the triangle L d H, and 
the triangle x cp to the triangle LH x: And 
as one of the Antecedents to one of the 
Conſequents, ſo all the Antecedents to all 

forth, as in the former, demonſtration. 

PROPOSITION XXL 

Trait. lin d Figures like to the ſame frait-lnd Figure, are 
'J alſo like to one another. 

For let each of the ſtrait lind Figures 4, B, be like to the ftrait- 

. 

lin'd Figure c. I fay, that 4 is alſo like to B, for becauſe a is like to 
o; therefore it is both equiangled to the ſame, and alſo hath about 
the equal angles the fides' proportional [Def 1. El. VI.]. Again, 

becauſe 8 is like to c; therefore it is both equiangled to the ſame, 
and hath alſo about the equal angles the fides proportional [Def 1. 
El. VI. ]; therefore each of the ſtrait-lin'd Figures A, are both equi- 
angled to c, and alſo have about the equal angles the ſides propor- 
tional: ſo that A is alſo equiangled to B, and hath about the equal 
angles the ſides proportional; therefore 4 is like to 8. Which was 

to be demonſtrated,  _ 

PRO. 

OF GROMETRY. 205 | 

PROPOSITION XXIL, 
F Jour rait lines be proportional, the trait. lin q Figures deſcri- 
bed upon them, like and alike ſituated, ſhall alſo be proportional. 
Andi the rait lin d Figures deſcribed upon them, lite and alike 
ſituated be proportional; alſo the Strait lines ſhall be proportional. 

Let four ſtrait lines A B, CD, EF, GH, be proportional, as an to | 
ep ſo EF to a, and let be deſcribed upon as, cv, the ſtrait- lin d 
Figures K A B, L CD, like and alike ſituated by Prop. 18. El. VI.]: and 
upon EF, GH, the ſtrait lin d Figures M E, N H, like and alike ſitua- 
ted. I ſay, that it is as kA; to Le p, ſome to NH. For to A3, cp, 
let be taken a third proportional x, and to E E, Gu, a third propor- 
tional o [Prop. 11. EL VI.] Now becauſe it is as aB to c p, ſo k F 
to c R, and as CD to x, ſo d to o; therefore by equality as AB to 
x, ſo EF to o. But as AB; to x, ſo KAB to LD [ Corol. 2. Prop. 20. El. 
VI.]: and as EF to o, ſo M to NH; therefore as Kk AB is to Lb, 
ſo MF is to N H. e eee 3 

But now let it be as KAB to Lp, ſo 
MF to NH. I ſay, that it is as AB to cb, 
ſox r to d H. For let it be made Prop. i 
El. VI.], as A; to cp, ſo EF to PR: an 
upon PK let be deſcribed the ſtrait- lind 
Figure s R, like and alike ſituated to ei- N. W . 

tl 

ther of the Figures MF, NH. Now there- 
fore, becauſe it is as aj to cp 241 er 1 
PR: and upon AB, cD are deſcribed te 

ſtrait lin d Figures & 4, L en, likeahl „ \ 

alike ſituated: and upon Ey, PR the 0 99S PR 

ſtrait-lin'd Figures MF, s R, like and Alike ſituated; therefore as & a 

is to L. cp, ſo MF is to s R. But it is alſo ſuppoſed that as x An is to 

Lo p, ſo MF is to NH; therefore MF hath the fame proportion to " 
each of the Figures xu sR: wherefore x H is equal to s Prop. 9. 
El. V.] And alſo it is like to the fame, and alike ſituated by the 
Lemma: therefore the line Ga is equal to the line nh. And be- 
cauſe as ABis to c p, ſo E F is to PR;and'that PR W equal to an ; there- 

2 
- 

fore as A ; is to cD, ſoEFis to M . | 
If therefore four ſtrait lines be proportional, alſo the; ſtrait-Iin d 
Figures 288 upon them, like and alike firnated, aſl be Pro- 
rtional. | {44 * th 131 + 39 9 q 
And if the ſtrait. lid Figures deſcribed upon then, like and alike 
ſituated be proportional; alſo the ſtrait lines ſhall be proportional. 
Which was to be demonſtrated, 8Þ|© _ "RANT | + 6 0 

Deltec n Of 4 to not er 5 

00 2 Lemma. 

Arch 
ations 

264 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

3 Ac Lemma. | 
For if ftrait-lind Figures be equal, and like, that then their Ho- 

mologal fides are equal to one another ( Antecedents to Antece- 

dents, and Conſequents to Conſequents, each to each reſpectively) 
we ſhall thus demonſtrate. * 

Let the equal and like ftrait-lind 

Figures be Xn, s R; and let it be as Ha, 

to GN, ſo Rx tops (fo that Ha and re 
M 

are Homologal). I fay that xy is equal 
to HG. 

. 
PA 
a CD 
For if they be unequal, one of them \ N 

is the greater. Let x be greater than 
HG; and becauſe as RP is fo ps, fo HG 
is to GN; therefore alternately, as Rp to 5 
HG, ſo ps to GN. But Ry is greater than 8 \ 
HG; therefore ps is greater than d N; ſo —_ 
that alſo the Figure Rs is greater than the Figure x x: but alſo it 
is equal, which is impoſſible: wherefore px is not unequal to d H, 
equal therefore it is. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXII. 

" Quzangled Parallelograms have to one another a proportion 
| Jy; of therr ſides. | 

Let the equiangled Parallelograms be ac, c, having the angle 
BCD equal to the angle x cd. I ſay that the Parallelogram a c hath 
to the Parallelogram c a proportion compounded of their fides, 
that is, compounded of the proportions which nc hath to c, and 
which Dc hath to cx, (in a direct proportion, the Antecedents 8 c, 
DC, being in one Parallelogram ac, and the Conſequents c6, cE in 
the other Parallelogram F.) . ä 

For let Bc be put directly to --. 
o (making one ſtrait line BG); / _ Fol 
therefore pc is alſo directly to 

SOBRE of” H 

o [by Prop. 13, and 14. El. LI“ 9 
and let be compleated the . 82" / 
rallelogram o (by producing ,_.__ 
AD, FG till they meet in 1). pies: - F 
Now let any ſtrait line be put 

as x then let it be made as n to cd, ſo k to I.; and as Dc to cx, 
ſo L toM [Prop. 12. El. VI.]; therefore the proportions of k to 1, 
and of L to M, are the ſame with the proportions of the ſides, of gc 
tocs; and of De to ce. | 
But the proportion of x to M is compounded of the proportions 
fs. | of 

OF GEOMETRY. 265 

of k to L, and of L to M according to Def. 10. El. V. |: ſo that 
alſo x hath to i the proportion compounded of the fides (of BC 
to cd, and ot Dc to ce). | 

And becauſe it is as Bc to co, ſo the Parallelogram ac to the 
Parallelogram cu | Prop. I. El. VI.], and as Bc to ce, ſo is K to L.; 
therefore as k to L, ſo the Parallelogram Ac is to the Patallelogram 
ch [Prop. 11. El. V.] | 

Again, becauſe it is as Dc to c E, ſo the Parallelogram cx to the 
Parallelogram c E, and as Dc to cx, ſo is L to Mt; therefore as 1. to 
M, ſo the Parallelogram c is to the Parallelogram c F. 

Now becauſe it hath been proved, that as k to L, ſo the Paralle- 
logram Ac is to the Parallelogram ch: and as L to M, fo the Paral- 
lelogram c to the Parallelogram er; therefore ex £qu0 as k is to 
M, ſo the Parallelogram ac is to the Parallelogram c: but x hath 
to M a proportion compounded of the ſides : wherefore the Paralle- 
logram ac hath to the Parallelogram c x, a proportion compounded 
of their ſides. | 

Therefore equiangled Parallelograms have to one another a pro 
portion compounded of their ſides. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Therefore D C is direfily to C E.] For the angles BCD, D CG, are equal to two 
Right [Prop. 13. El. I.] As likewiſe the angles BCE, ECG; wherefore BCD, 
DCG, are equal to BCE, ECG; and BCD is [by Suppoſition] equal to ECG; 
therefore BCE is * to DCG. Let the angle BCD be added in common; 
then ſhall B C E, B CD, be equal to BCD, DCG. But BCD, DCG, are equal 
to two Right ; therefore B CE, BCD, are alſo equal to two Right: wheretore 
CD is directly ſeated: to CE [by Prop. 14. El. I.]. 

But the proportion of K to M 1s compounded of the proportions of K to L, and of L to M.} 
By Def. 10. El. V. where in any three continued Terms the proportion of the firſt to 
the third, is ſaid to be componnded of the firſt to the ſecond, and ot the ſecond to the 
third; therefore in reference to that Definition Euclide reduces the two proportions 
of the four ſides of the Parallelograms vz. of BC to CG, and of DC to CE 
into three continued Terms, into K to L and L to M, and then he proves the 
proportion of the Parallelograms to be to one another as the firſt Term K is tothe 
third M: which [in Def. 10. El. V.] is ſaid to be a proportion compounded of K 
to L, and of L to M. But theſe — were made the ſame with the pro- 
portions of the ſides of thoſe Parallelograms; and therefore the Parallelograms are 
to one another in a compound 2 of their fides. 

The like demonſtration Euclide uſcs allo in Numbers, without any mention of 
the multiplication of the Quantities of ay rtions into one another. 

For Il. in Prop. 24. and 3*. EI. VII. he ſhews how to find the greateſt common 
meaſure of any given numbers. 

II. By the help of the greateſt common meaſure he reduces any given numbers 
into the leaſt numbers, having the ſame (7 ns with them. Prop. 37. El. VII. 

III. Proportions being given in their leaſt numbers, he ſhews how to bring them 
into the leaſt continued numbers in the ſame proportions. Prop. 4d. El. VIII. 

IV. In the next following Prop. 5*. EL VIII. He demonſtrates Plane numbers 
to have a proportion compounded of their ſides, by bringing the proportions of 
the ſides into the leaſt continued numbers in the ſame proportions, the demon- 

Oo 3 trations 

266 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 
{trations both in magnitudes and numbers proceeding upon the ſame grounds, and 

jult after the ſame manner. | 8 1 
As the proportion of the Plane number 20 to the Plane number 6 ( which is 
triple Seſquitertial 33) is proved to be compounded of the proportions of their 

ſides, of 5 to 3, of BC to CG; and of 4 to 2, % D 14 
of DC to CE. Here therefore the propor- 1 | 
tions of oy ſides 5 N 3, and of 4:19 2, me = of ; | 
firſt reduced into the leaſt continued numbers 

in the ſame proportions, that 1s, into 10 to 6, 201 7 1% 
and's to 3, by Prop. 4*. EL VIII. and then 2 LEI 

the Plane 20 is proved to be to the Plane 6, as | F it 

10 to 3,that is 3 5. But 10 to; is compounded of B 5 7 e G 
10 to 6, and of 6 to 3 [Def. 100. El. V. J, which 2, — 66 — 
proportions are the ſame with thoſe of the fides K. IC. L. CM. 3. 4 E 

to z, and 4 to 2, therefore the Plane num- | 

E F 
ber 20 is to the Plane number 6, in a proportion compounded of the fides 3 to 3, 
and 4 to 2, So that neither in magnitudes, nor numbers is there any uſe of Def. 5**. 
El. VI. in the demonſtrations concerning compound er- 

Moreover tis to be obſerved from the 19. 20, and 234. Propoſitions of this 
VI. Element, that compound proportions are expreſt two manner of ways. Tor 
in this 23d. Prop. becauſe equiangled Parallelograms are not always like Figures, 
having their ſides about the equal angles proportional; therefore they are proved 
in general to have to one another a proportion compounded of their ſides, that is, 
in reality a proportion compounded of length to length, and of breadth tobreadth, 
according to their two dimenſions in length and breadth, 

But becauſe in Prop. 19 . and 20. the Triangles, Parallelograms, and other Qua- 
drilateral, and Multilateral Figures, are put for like Figures, where length is to 
length, and breadth to breadth in the ſame proportion; therefore they are proved 
to be to one another in a Duplicate proportion of their Homologal fides, which 
is in effect to ſay, that they have to one another a proportion compounded of two 

equal proportions, according to length and breadth. - h | 
Now whether the Figures be put like, as in Prop. rgih. and 20 b. or unlike, as in 
Prop. 234. yet note, that one Plane is to an other Plane in a proportion ever com- 
pounded of length to length, and of breadth to breadth: and demonſtrated to be 
ſo, by reducing thoſe two proportions into three continued Terms, and proving 
Plane to be to Plane, as the firſt Term to the third; which by Def. 10", El. 5. is 
faid to be compounded of the proportions of the firft to the ſecond, and of the 
fecond to the 350 „and in equal proportions is called a Duplicate proportion 
of the firſt to the ſecond. n 

In like manner a Solid is to a Solid in a proportion compounded of their threc 
dimenſions, according to length, breadth, and depth: And like Solids are one to 
an other in a Triplicate proportion of their Homologal fides. As from the ele- 
venth Definition of the Fifth Element is Jemonfrated in Prop. 12%, 190. El. VIII. 
Prop. 334. El. XI. | wh 

And thus much for a farther explication of the ro, and 11. Definitions of the 
Fifth Element: wherein we have had an occafion given from the ſuppoſititious 
fitth Definition El. VI. to ſhew what is Natural, what Artificial, and neceſlary tor 
demonſtration ſake upon tliis Subject of compound proportions. 1 

Moreover we are to obſerve in compound proportions, that in the 19%, and 206", 
* aforegoing, Euclide demonſtrates all like Pigures, that is, all equi- 
angled Figures, which have their ſides about their equal angles proportional [ Det. 
1. El. VI.] (whether Trilateral, Quadrilateral, or Multilateral) to have to one ano- 
ther a Duplicate proportion of their Homologal fides: and in this 234, Prop. all 
equiangled Parallelograms to have « proportion compounded of their fides : which 
is the hrſt Propoſition, where in expreſs words Furlide names any proportion to be 

Compounded. But the thing is the very ſame, and Compoſition of proportions alike 
in all theſe three Propoſitions. | 

For 

OF GEOME TR. 167 

For Planes are in quantity to be compared to Planes, according to their two dis 
menſions of length and breadth: (One way of dimenſion being called length, and the 
Tranſverſe called breadth) ſo that the proportion of Plane to Plane is truely com- 
pounded of two proportions, one of length to length, the other of breadth to 
breadth : and theſe two proportions are here in Prop. 19% 200%, and 234. alike re- 
duced (for demonſtration ſake) into three continued Terms, where the firſt com- 
pared to the ſecond, and the ſecond to the third, do anſwer to the two proportions 
of length to length, and of breadth to breadth; as upon this 234. Propoſition Com- 
mandinus, and Clavius have demonſtrated. And Euchde proves the proportion of 
theſe Planes to be to one another as the firſt Term is to the third, in a proportion 
compounded of the firſt to the ſecond, and of the ſecond to the third, that is, of 
length to length, and of breadth to breadth. 

Now in the like Figures ſpecified in the 19, and 20. Propofitions, becauſe 
length is to length as breadth to breadth in the ſame proportion; therefore theſe two 

ual proportions of length and breadth, being by Euciide reduced into three continued 

erms, do make thoſe continued Terms alſo proportional to one another, the firit 
to the ſecond, as the ſecond to the third; and therefore when theſe like Figures 
are demonſtrated to be to one another as the firſt Term 1s to the third, they are 
ſaid to be in a Duplicate proportion of the firſt to the ſecond [Def: to. El. V. J, 
which Duplicate is a proportion compounded of the two equal proportions, that 
anſwer to their lengehs and breadths, here now ſet forth in three continued, and 
proportional Terms. And like Parallelograms, as well as like Triangles, are to one 
another in a Duplicate proportion of their Homologal fides. 

But becauſe all equiang/ed Parallelograms are not always ie Figures to have the 
proportions of their lengths and breadths, reducible into three proportional Terms; 
yet the proportions of their ſides may be reduced into three continued Terms, re- 
preſenting the two proportions of their ſides, which correſpond with the propor- 
tions of their proper lengths and breadths; and the Parallelograms are proved to 
be to one another as the firſt Term is to the third: but can be only ſaid in general 
to have a proportion compounded of the proportions ot the firlt to the — 
and of the ſecond to the third; and not as in % Parallelograms, to have a Dupli- 
cate proportion of the firſt to the ſecond. 

For the meaning of this whole matter 1s, that if three, or more magnitudes be 
continuedly compared to one another, according to quantity (that is, how much 
the firſt contains of the ſecond, then how much the ſecond of the third, and how 
much the third of the fourth, &c.), and if theſe proportions be known, or prov'd 
to be all the ſame, making the Terms to be Jactefroey proportional: [as in Prop. 19, 
and 20. El. VI.] then the compound proportion of the ſirſt to the third, is ſaid 
to be a Duplicate proportion of the firſt to the ſecond, according to the expreſs 
words of Def. 1000. El. V. But if the proportions be put as unknown, or as indif- 
ferent whether the ſame, or not the ſame (as in this 23%. Propoſition ), then the 
proportion of the firſt to the third, or of the firſt to the fourth, Se. is in general 
ſaid to be compounded of all the intermedial proportions. 

Wherefore Euclid s demonſtration of this 230. Propoſition, as alſo of all the like 
compounded proportions is wholly grounded on the right underſtanding, and full 
extent of the 10. Definition of the Fifth Element, as it hath been before explained. 

Moreover we are to obſerve, that as in Def. 3%. El. V. there is only defined pro- 
portion in magnitudes; yet the ſame ſtands for proportion in numbers, mutatis mu- 
tandis, without any new Definition given; ſo in the Definitions of Duplicate, and 
Triplicate proportions ( names only proper to equal proportions, expoled in continued 
Terms) there is further to be underſtood all other compound proportions expoſed in 
continued 'Terms, as plainly appears by Euchid's demonſtrations, who no where owns 
any other Definition of a compound proportion, than what is compriſed in Def. 
x0, El. V. 

Thus the only four rugged paſſages met withal in theſe Elements are, I hope, 
made plain and ſmooth, even to the weakeſt Traveller in theſe Studies, and vin- 
dicated from the exceptions of ſome capricious Geometricians : Namely, Firſt 

Geometrical 

* 
arch 
ions 

Geometrical 

rallelogram Ed, is like to the 

268 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 
| Epharmoſes uſed in Prop. 4%. El. I. Secondly, the 2 1b. Axiom, uſed 
in Prop. 29% El. 1. Thirdly'and fourthly, the 5%, and o. Definitions of the Fifth 
Element concerning proportional magnitudes, and compounded proportions. If 1 
be not cenſured for having on theſe matters too much enlarged. 

1 

a2 1 + PROPOSITION XXIV. 

NF every Parallelogram, the Parallehgrams about the Dia- 
( meter are like lo the whole, and to one another. 

Let the Parallelogram be ABD, and the Diameter ac: and 
about the Diameter a c, let the Parallelograms be E, Hk. I fay, 
that each of the Parallelograms EG, N k, is like to the whole A3 c D, 

= 
" 

and to one another. For becauſe in the Triangle AB Cc to one of 

the ſides Bc is drawn EF parallel; therefore it is proportionally as 
BE to EA, ſo F to Fa [Prop. 2. El. VI.], Again, becauſe in the 
Triangle 4 c to one of the ſides c D, is drawn FG parallel; there- 
fore it is proportionally as cr to FA, ſo p G to Ga: but as c to Fa, 
ſo BE is proyd to be unto x A: and therefore as B E to E A, ſo Pd to 
GA [Prop. 11. El. V.]: and by Compoſition, as Ba to R A, ſo DA to 
GA; and alternately, as Ba to DA, ſo kA to GA; therefore of the Pa- 
rallelograms 4B c, EG the ſides about the common angle 84D, are 

405 is equal to the angle A Dc, and 

the angle Gra to the angle DA Pa 
Prop. 29. EL I.]: alſo the angle 
pe is common to the two Trian- 
gles AD c, A0 F; therefore the Tri- 
K 

angle apc, is equiangled to the > C 
Triangle ad F. By the fame reaſonalſo the Triangle AB c, is equian- 
gled to the Triangle AE: wherefore the whole Parallelogram as cp 
is equiangled to the Parallelogram x 6. 

Proportionally therefore it is, as ad to pc, ſo ac to dF | Prop. 4. 

proportional, And becauſe G is A. 11 * 
parallel to Dc, therefore the angle / MN 7 / 
9 3 

El. VI. J and as pc to c 4, ſo dF to FA; and as ca to c B, ſo FA to PE; 

and moreover, as C to Ba, ſo FE to EA. And becauſe it has been 

rov d, that as dc to c, ſo dF to FA; and as cA to cs, ſo FA to FE: 
whereſore by equality, as Dc to cs, ſo d ꝝ, to FE; therefore of the Pa- 
rallelograms ABCD, £6 the ſides about the equal angles are propor- 
tional: wherefore the Parallelogram 4B cp, is like to the Parallelo- 

gram EG Def. 1. El. VI.] 

By the fame reaſon alſo, the Parallelogram azcp is like to the 
Parallelogram Mx; therefore each of the Parallelograms x d, H x, is 
like to the Parallelogram az cp. But Figures like to the ſame Fi- 

gure, are like to one another [Prop f 1. El. VI. |; therefore the Pa- 
arallelogram HK. 

Therefore of every Parallelogram, the Parallelograms about the 
nm Diameter, 

OF GEOMETRY. 269 
Diameter, are like to the whole, 'and to one another. Which was 
to be demonſtrated. * © 
ANNOTATIONS. 

From hence tis obſervable, . that the Parallelograms about the Diameter, are 
like Figures having their ſides to one another directly proportional, and the Com- 
plements are equal Parallelograms, having their ſides reciprocally proportional to 
one another, Prop. 43%, El. I. Prop. 14. El. VI. Moreover either of the Comple- 
ments is a mean proportional between the Parallelograms about the Diameter, by 
Prop. 1. El. VI. and Prop. 38. El. I. which alſo are to one another in a Duplicate 
proportion of their Homologal fides. Prop. 20%. El. VI. 

Peletarius hath very well advertiſed upon the excellency of this Diagram, Hanc 
ego Figuram ſoleo vocare Myſticam. Ex ea enim, velut ex locupletsſſumo promptuario, innu- 
merabiles exeunt demonſtrationes, quod cum magna voluptate perſpiciet, qui in re Geome- 
trica ſerio ſe exercebit. FF apt | 

f PROPOSITION XXV. 

O a given trait. lin q Figure to conſtitute a like, and the ſame 
alſo equal to another given ſtrait-lin q Figure. 

Let the given ſtrait· lin d Figure, to which a like is to be conſti- 
tuted be a Be, and that to which the ſame is to be equal let be p. It is 
required to AB c to conſtitute a like Figure, and the ſame equal to v. 
To the ſtrait line 3c let be apply d a Parallelogram ; E, equal to 
the Triangle ABC, and to: cE the Parallelogram c equal to o, 
in an angle F HE, which is equal to the angle c 81 | Prop. 44. El. L.]; 
therefore Bc is direct to F Prop. 14. El. I.], and LE to EM. And 
to Bc, CF let be taken a mean proportional 

GH [Prop. 13. EL VI.], and upon GH let 
be deſcribed x H like and alike fituated 
to ABC | Prop. 18. El. VI.]. Now becauſe 

it is as Bc to GH, fo GH to CF; and if three F 
ſtrait lines be proportional, it 1s as the firſt | f | 
to the third, ſo the Figure upon the firſt to 1 np e e 
the Figure upon the ſecond, like and alike 
deſcribd; therefore as 3c is to cg, ſo ABC © 
is to x GH [ Corol. 2. Prop. 20. EL VL]. But 
alſo as Bc is to CF, ſo the Parallelogram 0 ——— MH 
BE is to the Parallelogram Ex; therefore as AB c is to x, ſo the 
Parallelogram BE is to the Parallelogram EF Prop. 11. El. V.]: 
wherefore alternately, as aBc is to the Parallelogram Bt, ſo x dH 1s 
to the Parallelogram EF. But ABC is equal to the Parallelogram 
BE; therefore alſo xd 1s equal to the Parallelogram E F: and the 
Parallelogram EF is equal to o: wherefore alſo x GH is equal to v; 
but KGH is like to ABC. | | 
Therefore to the given ſtrait · lin d Figure AB c, there is conſtitu- 
ted K GH like; and the fame alſo equal to an other given ſtrait · lin d 
Figure. Which was to be done. 

Pp PRO. 

2/770 Rs SIXTH ne 
+ "XPROPOSITION XXVIL 
IF from a Parallelogram be taken a Parallelogram like to the 
I hole, and alike ſuuated, having a common e it is about 
-#he ſame \ Diameter with the whole. _ 

® 
7 For from the Parallelogram ABCD, let be keith ParallefGgram 
; an, like to à Be n, atid alike fituated, having the angle Das com- 
— +5 mon. [I fay, that the Parallelogram as 0 is about the ſame Dia- 
meter with the Parallelogram Af. 

For if not, then if pofſible, let the Diameter of. ABCD be AH c, and 
by H to either of the lines aD; BC, let M K be drawn parallel. 

Now foraſmuch as the Parallelogram 1 D. 
ABCD is about the ſame Diameter with 
the Parallelogram x by Conſtruction; 
therefore aBcD is like to KG [Prop. 4. 
El. VI.]: wherefore it is as Da to AB, ſo 
dA to Ak [Def. I. EL VI.]. But alſo for 
the likeneſs of the Parallelograms a α 8 
E by Suppoſition]z it is as DA to AB, Fl 0A to AE; therefore 
as Ga toar, ſo G4 to Ak Prop. 1 I. El. V.]: wherefore GA hath 
the ſame proportion to each of the lines ax, 4 E; therefore ax is 
equal to 4E Prop. 9. El. V., the leſs to the greater, which is im- 
poſſible; therefore a3 cp is not about the ſame Diameter with an: 
wherefore the Parallelogram aBcp is about the ſame Diameter with 
the Parallelogram a. 

If therefore from a Parallelogram be 'taken a Parallelogram like 
to the whole, and alike ſituated, having a common angle; it is 
about the ſame Diameter E the Ane Which was to be de- 
monſtrated. | 

PROPOSITION XXVII. 

F all Parallelogram ſpaces applyed to the ſame Hrait line, 
and deficient by Parallelogram es, like and alike ſituated 
zo that which is deſcribed on the half line : The greatest is that 

Parallelogram, which is applred to the Baß, being like to the de- 
= ( deſcribed on the other hat.) 

Loet the ſtrait line be AB, and let i it be cut into halves in e; and 
to AB let be applyed a Parallelogram 4 D, deſcribed on ac an half 
of aB, and deficient by the Parallelogram Figure Ds, deſcribed on 
cB the other half of as, like and alike ſituated to 4 Dd. 

1 fay, that of all Parallelogram ſpaces applyed to as, and deficient 

| | by Parallelogram Figures, like —_ alike fituated to the defect DB, 
| the greateſt is A b. env mal 

2 For 

OF GEOMETRY. 277 
For to the ſtrait line as, let be applyed a Parallelogram a +, 
deficient by the Parallelogram Figure p B, like, and alike fituated to 
DB. I ſay, that à p is greater than Ax. 
For becauſe the Parallelogram ps is like to the Parallelogram FR, 
therefore they are about the ſame Diameter [Prop. 26. El. VI.], let 
be drawn their Diameter Ds : and the Scheme be compleated. 

Now foraſmuch as cy is equal to x = | Prop. 41. El. 1: |, let FR be 
added in common; therefore the whole c is equal to the whole 
k E: but c H is equal to cr, becauſe ac 

is equal to cB | Prop. 36. El. I. ]: and \ ; I 
therefore c is equal to KE. Let cg be | WW \ 
added in common; therefore the whole © . © 
AF is equal to the Gnomon LMN, ſo that 

alſo the Parallelogram Ds, that is, 45 
is greater than the Parallelogram A F. 

Therefore of all Parallelograms applyed © 1 
to the ſame ſtrait line, and deficient by Parallelogram Figures, like 
and alike ſituated to that, which 1s deſcribed. on the half line: The 
greateſt applyed Parallelogram 1s that deſcribed on the half, being 
like to the defect. * 

“By this full and general Concluſion Exclide ſeems to have 
* ended his demonſtration of this Propoſition: but becauſe it ad- 
© mits of two Caſes: and that only one of them is hitherto demon- 
* ſtrated, wherein the applyed Parallelogram is deſcribed on ſuch 
« a part of AB, as on A k, which is greater than the half ac; there- 
« fore ſtill there remains to conſider the ſame, where the Paralle- 
*logram is deſcribed on a part leſs than the half ac, as here on ap, 
« which (tho not abſolutely neceſſary) was likely ſupplyed by Theon, 
« or ſome ancient Scholiaſi, as followeth. _. 

Again, let 4B be cut into halves in e; and the applyed Paralle- 
logram be AL, deſcribed on the half ac, deficient by the Parallelo- 
gram LB. And again to the line 4s, let be applyed the Parallelo- 
gram AE, deficient by the Parallelogram x x, like, and alike ſituated 
to the Parallelogram Lx, deſcribed on cs the half of as. 

I fay, that the applyed Parallelogram „ 

AL, deſcribed on the half of a B, is great- \ WY KR ”\ 
_ RF 

er than the Parallelogram a x. 

For becauſe the Parallelogram EB is 
like to the Parallelogram L n; therefore 
they are about the ſame Diameter. Let 
the Diameter be ERB; and the Scheme 
be deſcribed. oh We 

Now foraſmuch as LF is equal to I. N A 2106-IE 1 
Prop. 36. El. I.], for FG is equal to 6H; therefore x1. is greater than 
EK. But FL is equal to LD | Prop. 43. El. I.]; therefore LD is greater 

| Pp 2 than 

A 
arch 
'ations 

27% THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

than RE. Add in common x D; therefore the whole 4 is greater 
than the whole AE. Which was to be demonſtrated. 5 

Ll - ANNOTATIONS. 

If a ſtrait line be cut into two ts equal, or unequal, as AB into AC, 
CB: and to either of them, as to AC be applyed any Parallelogram as AD, then 
is AD faid to be deficient by the Parallelogram DB, which in the ſame parallels 
is equiangled to it, and conjoyned by a common fide, as DC, and deſcribed on 
che other Segment CB. No this Parallelogram DB is called the defect, for that 
by ſo much the Parallelogram AD is deficient in 
compleating the Parallelogram ſpace on the whole 

deficient by the Parallelogram defect D A deſcribed 
on the other Segment A C, of the ſtrait line AB. 
And note, that as in Prop. 430. El. I. and Prop. 24. 
El. VI. a Parallelogram is divided into four Paral- 
lelograms, two whereof are ſaid to be about the 

D 3 
line A B. And on the contrary, if to the 8 15 BC 7 
be applycd the Parallelogram BD, it is ſaid to be A 
| E * 

| ae 
Diameter, and two are called Complements; ſo in N | 
this Propoſition a Parallelogram is in a manner di- | 
A C B 

vided into two Parallelograms, and one of them is 
ſaid to be deficient by the other, which is called the 

defect. And this diſtinction rightly obſerved, makes clear Eulid s expreflion of this 
Propoſition, that hath ſeemed to ſome of our Modern Geometricians to be obſcurely 

worded. But a Paralle deficient, and the defe# is as properly here ſpoken, 
and as plainly to be apprehended, as Parallelograms about the Diameter, and Paral: 
lelograms the Complements, | | ON | 

' PROPOSITION XXVIIL 

No a given ſtrait line to apply a Parallelogram equal to a 

given ReGlilineal ſpace, deficient by a Parallelogram Figure 

like to a given Parallelagram. | 
Now the given Reftilineal ſpace, to which the applyed Parallelo- 

gram ts to be equal, ought not to be greater than that applyed Pa- 

rallelogram, which is deſcribed on the half line: both defects being 
like to the given Parallelogram, namely the defef of the Paralle- 
logram deſcribed on the half line, and the defect of the Parallelo. 

gram required to be applyed, equal to the given Nectilineal ſpace. 

Let the given ſtrait line be as, and the given Rectilineal ſpace, 
equal to which a Parallelogram is to be applyed to as, let be c, 
the ſame being not greater than a Parallelogram applyed to the 
half of as: the defects of theſe Parallelograms being alike; and 
the Parallelogram to which the defect ought to be like, let be v. 

It is required unto the given ſtrait line as to apply a Parallelo- 
gram equal to the given Rectilineal ſpace c, deficient by a Paralle- 
logram Figure like to p. 

Let AB be cut into halves in the point Ex, and on EB let be de- 
ſcribed x BH, like and alike fituated to Þ | Prop. 18. El. VI.]; and 
let be compleated the Parallelogram 40. 

4. | Now 

OF GEO MET RL. 273 
Now 40 is either equal to c, or greater than it, by the determi- 
nation. KI | g 
If Aa be equal to c; then that is done which was required. For 
to the given ſtrait line AB is applyed the Parallelogram a 6, equal 
to the given Rectilineal ſpace c, deficient by the Parallelogram Fi- 
gure GB, being like to v. | 
But if aG be not equal to c; then it 
is greater: but a 6 is equal to 68 | Prop. 
36. El. I.]; therefore 631s greater than c. | 
Now by how much dn is greater than 
c, let a Parallelogram equal to that ex- C 
ceſs be conſtituted x LM N, the ſame | 
alſo like and alike ſituated to o Prop. © 
25. El. VI. |. But p is like to 6B: where- = 
fore alſokLMN is like to GB; and here 
let xL be Homologal to x G, and LM 
to GF. Ho * 
And foraſmuch as dn is equal to c, 0 
and x M together; therefore on is grea - \ V 

er than x M; and therefore the fide E G 
is greater than the fide x L, and 6 F than 
LM. Let now dx be put equal to KL, 
and Go to LM | by Prop. 3. El. I.]; and let be compleated the Pa- 
rallelogram x Go; therefore the Parallelogram dp is equal and 
like to the Parallelogram x M; but K M is like to : wherefore alſo 
GP is like to GB | Prop. 21. El. VI.]; therefore the Parallelogram 6 p 
is about the ſame Diameter with the whole @ B. Let their Diameter 
be dp; and the Scheme be deſcribed. 

Now foraſmuch as 68 is equal to c, and x M together, and that 
GP is equal to KM; therefore the remaining Gnomon yay is equal 
to the remaining Rectilineal ſpace c. And becauſe o x is equal to 
xs [Prop. 43. El. I.), let p; be added in common; therefore the 
whole 08 is equal to the whole x 3. But xB is equal to Tx, becauſe 
the ſide à E is equal to the fide ER | Prop. 36. El. I.]: wherefore alſo 
TE is equal to 0B. Let xs be added in common; therefore the 
whole Ts is equal to the whole Gnomon var: but the Gnomon 
var has been proved equal to c: therefore alſo Ts is equal to c. 

Wherefore to the given ſtrait line az is applyed the Parallelogram 
Ts equal to the given Rectilineal ſpace c, deficient by the Paralle- 
logram figure vB, which is like to the given Parallelogram Þ, for that 
PB is like to . Which was to be done. 

A E S 

Pp 3 PRO- 

ch 
MiOns 

294 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

us 1 5 | ho 39 213 nn 10,3 OF 1810 P $1115 4 
' PROPOSITION XXIX. 

"$04 ſ} 1513 7 

N Leven rait FP ere 4 Pee e 

1230 a 
Lever Rectilimeal ſpace, exceedimg 5. 4 ee er ure, 

Ike to a given Parallelogram. 

Let the given ſtrait line be. © and the: given Redtilineal ' 
equal to which a Parallelogram is to be applyed to as, let be c; 
and the Parallelogram to which the exceſs ought to be like, let be v. 

It is required to the ſtrait line;a 3 to apply a Parallelogram equal 
8 the Rectilineal ſpace c, axagcding 42 a | Parallelogram figure 
like to o. 

Let a be cut into halves ins, and on Nh let bedeſiribedithe 
Parallelogram B like and alike ſituated to D | Prop. 18. EL VI. |. 
Now to the Parallelogram Br, and the Rectilineal ſpace c, both to- 
gether let an equal Parallelogram be conſtituted Gn, like and alike 
ſituated to Þ | Prop. 25. El. VI]; therefore d is like to B+ | Prop. 

21. El. VI.]. And here let the lide KH ans ere to the — 
FL, and xd to FE. 

And foraſmuch as the Paral- * 
lelogram GH is greater than thge 
Parallelogram ; Eʒ therefore alſo | 

he ſide x H is greater than tue 
. than RE. Let FI, 
EE be produced: and FLM be | 

t equal to Kk H, and FEN to x 
y Prop. 3. El. I.], and let be 
i the Parallelogram L 
MN; therefore iN is equal, and 
like to aH. But GH is like to EL: - 
wherelore alſo MN is like to EI. 
[Prop. 21. El. VI. therefore x. 

about the ſame Diameter with MN Prop 26. El. VI.]. Let be 

awn their Diameter x x, and the Scheme be deſcribed. 

Now foraſmuch as on is equal to EL, and c together, and that 
GH is equal to MN; therefore alſo Mx is equal to E L, c. Let EI. 
common be taken away; therefore the remaining Gnomon vv is 
equal to c. And becauſe 4 E is equal to x, therefore the Paralle- 
logram aN is equal to the Parallelogram xs [ Prop. 36. El. I.]: that 
is to Lo Prop. 43. El. I.. Let Ex be added in common; therefore 
the whole ax is equal to the Gnomon v vd. But the Gnomon VYQ 
is equal to c; wherefore alſo a x is equal to c. 

Therefore to the given ſtrait line as is applyed the Parallelogram 
is, equal to the given Rectilineal ſpace c, exceeding by the Paralle- 

logram 

OF GEOME TRT. 275 

logram figure v o, which is like to v; for that EL is like to po Prop. 
24. El. VI.]. Which was to be done. 

Ane. 9. 4 
ANNOTATION S.. 

Theſe two Propoſitions the 28j%, and 290, are of admirable uſe in the Tenth Ele- 
ment of Euclide, and the Conze Elements of Apollamius, where the deficient, or E- 
liptical application made in Prop. 28", gave occafion for the name of that Conic 
Section called ELL1es1s in Prop. 130. El. I. of Apolloniui, and the exceeding, or 
„ application made in Prop. 29, occaſioned the name of that Section 
called HY ER BOL A, in Prop. the 12, of the ſame Conic Element. When there- 
fore Tacquet ſo raſhly rejects theſe two Propoſitions, as of little, or no uſe; tis ma- 
nifeſt that he had then made but a ſmall progreſs in Geometry. And thirdly, 
the Conic Section called PAR ABO LA, we TY before noted at Prop. 44. El. I. 
to be ſo named from the exact application, or Paraboliſm of a given Rectilineal 
ſpace to the entire, and whole given line preciſely, neither deficient, or exceeding. 
As we find it in Prop. 11. EL I. of Apoli ,. 

PROPOSITION XXX. ͥͥ 

O cut a given finite ſtrait line in Extreme and Mean pro- 

Let the given finite ſtrait line be as. It is required to cut the 
ſtrait line 48 in extreme and mean property: On az let be de- 
{cribed the Square C [by Prop. 46. El. I.]: and to ac let be ap- 
plyed the Parallelogram cp equal to gc, exceeding in Figure by 

AD, like to Bc [Prop. 29. El. VI.] Now Bc is a Square; therefore 
alſo A D is a Square. | 

And foraſmuch as sc is equal to cp; F 
let cx common be taken away; there- Re] 
fore the remainder BF 1s equal to the * | 
remainder aD. But it is alſo equian- © —— 

gled to the fame; therefore the ſides 
of'sF, Ap about the equal angles are 
reciprocally proportional | Prop. 14. El. 4 
VI. |: wherefore as FE to ED, ſo AE to 3 

E B. But FE is equal to ac Prop. 34. 1 

Y 4 RB 

—_ 

El. I.], that is, to AB; and ED to AE: 5 
therefore as AB to AE, fo AE to EB, But as is greater than AE: 
wherefore alſo ax is greater than x [ Prop. 14. EL V.] 

Therefore the ſtrait line 4s is cut in extreme and mean propor- 

tion in the point E; and the greater Segment is ax. Which was 
to be done. 2 f ; 

3 - Other- 

% HE sIxxE ELEMENT 

71 04 Ant 

Otherwiſe. . Mee ARIA 

Let the given ſtrait line be AB. It is e to cut the ftrait line 
AB in extreme and mean proportion. f 

Let as be cut in the point c, ſo that the Rect. 
angle under 4B, Bc be equal to the Square of ac OF ne 
: [by Prop. 1 1. El. II.]. 5 
Now foraſmuch as the e under AB, TIS 
is equal to the Square of ac; therefore as 4B is to 
Ac, fo ac is to c; [Prop. 17. EL VI.]; As there- 
fore is cut in extreme and mean — in the point c. Wich 
ieee Pilar 

* 

3 PROPOSEDION XXI 

N Right-angled Triangles, the Figure conſtituted on the /ide 

ſubtending the Right angle is equal to the Figures conſtituted on 
the ſides containing the Right angle, they being like and alike de- 
ſcribed 

Let the Right-angled Triangle. be ABC, having the right angle 
BAC, I fay, that the Figure upon Bc is equal to the Figures on BA, 
AC, like and alike deſcribed. Let be drawn the perpendicular ap. 
Now foraſmuch as in the Triangle a Bc, from the right angle at 4, 
is drawn to the baſe 3 the perpendicular ap; therefore the Tri- 
angles ABD, ADC, at the perpendicu- 
lar are like to the whole AB c, and to 
one another | Prop. 8. El. VI. |. And 
becauſe the Triangle 48 c is like to 
the Triangle aBD ; therefore as c is | 
to Ba, ſo as is to BD: and becauſe 
when three ſtrait lines are proportio- 5 D 
nal, it is as the firſt to the third, ſothe | | 
Figure on the firſt to the Figure on the | {+ 
ſecond, like and alike deſcribed] Corol. 
2. Prop. 20, El. VI.]; therefore as cs to wy 
BD, ſo the Figure on cs to the Figure on 34, like and alike deſcribed. 

By the ſame reaſon alſo, as 8c to cp, ſo the Figure on 3e to the 
Figure on Ca. So that alſo as nc to BD, Dc, ſo the Figure on Bc to 
the Figures on B 4, ac, like and alike deſcribed. But Bc is equal to 
BD, DC; therefore the Figure on Bc is equal to the Figures on s a, 
AC. 

Therefore in gas angled Triangles the Figure on the fide ſub- 
tending the right angle, is equal to the Figures on the fides con- 

taining the right ING, wn being like and alike deſcribed, Which 
was to be demonſtra 

CG 

Other- 

OF GEOMETR Y. 279 

| Otherwiſe. 
Becauſe like Figures are in a duplicate proportion of their Ho- 
mologal fides | Prop. 20. El. VI.]; therefore the figure on sc hath 
to the Figure on B 4, a duplicate proportion of that which ge hath 
to B; A. But the Square of Bc, hath to the Square of BA a duplicate 
proportion of that which 3c hath to 
BA; therefore alſo as the Figure on 
BC to the Figure on 8 A, ſo the Square 
of Bc to the Square of Ba | Prop. II. 
El. V.]. By the ſame reaſon alſo as 
the Figure on Bc to th&Figureonc a, 4 
ſo the Square of Bc to the Square of D 
ca: fo that alſo as the Figure on Bc 
to the Figures on 3A, ac, fo the Square 
of Bc to the Squares of BA, ac. But 
the Square of ; c is equal to the Squares | 
of Ba, ac [Prop. 47. El. I.]; therefore the Figure on 3 is equal t 

the Figures on BA, Ac, like and alike deſcribed. Which was to 
be demonſtrated, 

PROPOSITION XXXII. 
I; 110 Triangles having — ſides proportional to two /ides, be 

ſet together at one angle; ſo that alſo their Homologal ſides be 

parallel: the remaining ſides of the Triangles ſhall be direct ſitu- 
ated to one another. M 

S) 

ELLE TC UE EEE 

Let the two Triangles be ABC, DCE, having the two ſides as, 
Ac, proportional to the two ſides Dc, DE, that is, as AB to Ac, ſo 

Dc to DE; and let 4B be parallel to pc, and acto DR. I ſay, that 
BC is directly fituated to cx. 

Foraſmuch as a8 1s parallel to pc, and 
on them falls the ſtrait line a c; therefore 3 
the alternate angles B ac, acD, are equal 
to one another | Prop. 29. El. I. |. By the 
ſame reaſon alſo the angle cÞ E is equal 
to the angle Ac: ſo that alſo 3 Ac is 
equal to cDE. And becauſe there are 
two Triangles aBc, DCE, having one an- 

gle at a equal to one angle at Þ: and about the equal angles the 
ſides proportional, as BA to ac, ſo cp to De; therefore the Tri- 
angle ABC is equiangled to the Triangle Dcx | Prop. 6; El. VI.]: 
wherefore the angle ABC is equal to the angle v. But alſo the 
angle a cp has been prov'd equal to the angle 34 c; therefore the 
whole angle a cx is equal to the two angles Ahe, Bac. Let the 
angle Ac be added in common; therefore the angles 40 k, Ac B, 

Qq : are 

278 THE SIXTH ELEMENT 

are equal to the angles Bac, acs, cBa. But the angles Bac, Ac B, 
CBA, are equal to two Right [ Prop. 32. El. I.]; therefore alſo the 
angles 4 0 E, ACB, are equal to two Right. Now to a certain ſtrait 
line ac, and to a point in the ſame c, «x 
two ſtrait lines Bc, cx, not lying the o 
ſame way make the conſequent angles 
ACE, ACB, equal to two Right; there- 
BC is directly toc | Prop. 14. El. I.]. 
If therefore two Triangles having 
two ſides proportional to two ſides, be 
ſet together at one angle, ſo that their Homologal fides be parallel 

the remaining ſides of the Triangles ſnall be directly ſituated to 
one another. Which was to be demonſtrated. 

PROPOSITION XXXIII. | 
1 N equal Circles, the angles have the ſame proportion with the Cir- 
cumferences on which they inſiT: whether the inſiſting angles 
be at the Centers, or at the Circumferences. 
AND MOREOVER ALSO THE SECTORS (when conſtituted 

at the Centers ). 

B C - 

Let the equal Circles be AB c, DE F, and at their Centers 6, u, let 
the angles be 30 c, EH: and at the Circumferences, let the angles 
be Bac, EDF. I fay, that as the circumference Bc is to the cir- 
cumference E F, ſo is the angle BGc to the angle EHF; and the an- 
gle Bac to the angle E DF: And moreover the Sector BGc, to the 
Sector EH F. | | 
For to the circumference 3e, let in order be put equals how 
many ſoever, Ck, KL: and to the circumference E, let be put 

alſo equals how many ſoever, FM, MN, and let be joyned 6x, GL: 
HM, HN. | 

Now foraſmuch as the cir- 
cumferences Bc, CK, KL, are 
equal to one another; therefore 
the angles BGc, CGK, K GL, are 
alſo equal to one another Prop. 
27. El. III.]: wherefore Quo- 
tuple the circumference BL is 
of the circumference 3c, To- 

tuple is the angle 3d of the angle BG c. By the ſame reaſon Quo- 
tuple the circumference E x is of the circumference E F, Totuple is 
the angle ꝝ H of the angle EHF. 

If now the circumference BL be equal to the circumference E x, 
the angle 30 L is alſo equal to the angle tax Prop. 27. El. III.]; 
and therefore if the circumference BL be greater than the circum- 

7 ference 

OF GEOMETRY. 279 
ference EN, the angle 30 L. is alſo greater than the angle x HN: 
and if leſs, tis leſs. | 

There being then four magnitudes, the two circumferences Bc, 
EF, and the two angles BGc, EHF: and of the circumference Bc, 
and of the angle B6Gc are taken equimultiples, the circumference 
BL, and the angle 30 . Alſo of the circumference E E, and of the 
angle E H F, are taken equimultiples, the circumference E N, and the 
angle EHx. And it is provd, that if the circumference BL ex- 
ceeds the circumference EN, the angle 8BG@L does alſo exceed the 
angle EH N; and if equal, tis equal; and if leſs tis leſs: therefore as 
the circumference 8c is to the circumference E E, ſo the angle 3a c 
is to the angle EHF [Def. 5. El. V.] But as the angle BGc is to the 
angle EH F, ſo the angleBacis to the angle EDF * y. El. V.]: 
for each is the double of each | Prop. 20. El. III. 

And therefore as the circumference 8c is to the circumference 
EF, fo the angle BGc is to the angle EH, and the angle Bac to 
the angle E D F. N 

Therefore in equal Circles, the angles have the ſame proportion 
with the circumferences on which they infiſt, whether the inſiſting 
angles be at the Centers, or at the circumferences. Which was to be 
demonſtrated. 

Here Exchde ends the laſt Propoſition of his Sixth 
Element of Geometry. 

Qq 2 THE 

280 THE SIXTH iner 

* 

* 7 21 

5 18 74 
k 

Wald 

[ 

„„ 
ADDITAMENT 
And n morcover allo he Sade. 

2 

That 27 they have the Jams 88 . BY ou. 
une on whuch 4 it. 

1 ſay alſo, that as the 88 pc is to the circumference 
xe, ſo the Sector 3e is to the Sector EHF. For let be joyned Bc, 
ck, and in the circumferences Bc, cx, the points * 9 being taken, 
let Bx, xc, co, ok, be alſo joyned. 

Now foraſmuch as the two lines BG, GC, are nw” to the two 
lines co, Gk, and they contain equal angles; ; therefore the baſe B; c 
is equal to the baſe cx, and the nr ont 6e to the Triangle ocx 
Prop. 4. El. I.]. | 

And becauſe the circumference Bc is equal to the circumference 
ex; therefore the remaining circumference 3a c compleating the 
whole Circle ABC, is equal to the remaining circumference k ac, 
compleating the ſame Circle: ſo that alſo the angle B; x c 1s equal to 
the angle cox Prop. 27. El. III.]; therefore the Segment B; xc is 
like to the Segment cox [Def. 10. El. III.], and they are upon 
equal ſtrait lines Bc, cx: but like ents of Circles upon equal 
ſtrait lines are equal to one another | Prop. 24. EL III.]; therefore 
the Segment z xc is equal to the Segment cox: and allo the Tri- 
angle nde is equal to the Triangle c ox; therefore the whole Sector 
BGC is equal to the whole Sector c dk. 

| 5 By 

OF GEO MET R T. 18 
By the fame reaſon alſo: the Sector ox L is equal to each of the 
Sectors 6K c, 6 C8; therefore the three Sectors B&c, cn, K Gf, ate 
equal to one another. And by the ſame reaſon the Sectors us x, 
HE M, HMN, are equal to one another; therefore Quotuple the 
circumference En is of the circumference ge, Totuple is the Sector 
GB of the Sector ac. By the fame reaſon” alſo Quotuple the 
circumference N E is of the circumference E F, Totuple is the Sector 
HEN of the Sector HE F. 3 7 

Now if the circumference ; L be equal to the circumference EN, 
the Sector 30 L. is alſo equal to the Sector EH N, and if the circum- 
ference BL exceeds the circumference E N, the Sector 86L does alſo 
exceed the Sector E HN, and if leſs, tis leſss . 

There being then four magnitudes, the two circumfſerences s c, 
EF, and the two Sectors GBC, HEF, and of the circumference B e, 
and of the Sector one are taken equimultiples, the circumference 
BL, and the Sector GL: alſo of the'circumference xr and of the 
Sector HE E, are taken ęquimultiples, the circumference EN and 
the Sector HEN. And it is proved, that if the circumference BI. 
exceeds the circumference EN, the Sector B61. does alſo exceed 
the Sector N EN; and if equal, tis equal; and if leſs, tis leſs; therefore 
as the circumference Bc is to the circumference ꝝ F, ſo the Sector 
GBC is to the Sector HE F. 

Corollary. 

And it is manifeſt, that as the Sector is to the Sector, ſo alſo 
the angle is to the angle Prop. 11. El. V.] 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Theon in his Commentaries on Ptolemy's Magna Syntaxis, takes notice of this 
Additament he made to Euchd's laſt Propoſition of the Sixth Element. Here 
therefore he ſays, im di », ei mpeisy and moreover .alſo the Seftors ; which are the 
only words of Theon added to Euclid s Propoſition. For what is ſubjoyned, an 
yes mis xegois cums , when conſtituted at the Centers, muſt be ſome marginal 
note very abſurdly put in, as ſuppoſing there were an other kind of Sectors, beſides 
what are ſtated at the Center of a Circle, according to Def. 10. El. III. Indeed 
the Figures at the circumferences are not, as their angles are, in the ſame pro- 
portion with the Arches on which they infift : but theſe Figures are not called 
Sefors, neither have they any Note or Name in Geometry to give occaſion for 
ſuch a needleſs caution : An overſight too great for Theon to be guilty of. 

Qq 3 Laſtly, 

al 
fl 

. celebrated in an Ancient Greek Fpig l. 

181 THE SIXTH/ ELEMENT &c. 
Laſtly , this Additament Sectors mentioned by Theon, manifeſtly 

ſhews the error of Zambertas and others, who take the demonſtrations of theſe 
Elements to have been all ſupplyed by Then. Yet it ſeems this miſtake went 
ſo far, as that Bovillur an Eminent Geometrician of that time, writ a Select Trea- 
tiſe about it, to vindicate the Ancient Geometricians in this matter of confirming 
the n by their own ei and eſpecially Euclide for his 

Elements, ſo methodically diſpoſed, fo plainly all alon demonſtrated, and in the 
end dee with thoſe admirable 8 tions on we. ye Platonick "A thus 

:, * 4 « 

FE ZY 
1 

Db mien TDG, © Thwyess ops d, 
ness woll dn, T , dh M 
Ihe five Platonick Bodies, ſo much fam d, 
Pythagoras firſt found, Plato explain d: 

Hucliae on them Immortal Glory gain d. 

FINIS
